PUBLICATIONS DU DEPARTEMENT D’lNDOLOGIE - 86.1 



♦ 



BHATTA RAMAKANTHA’S COMMENTARY 

• * * * 

ON THE KIRANATANTRA 

* 


volume I: chapters 1-6 
critical edition and annotated translation 

Dominic Goodall 


INSTITUT FRANgAIS DE PONDICHERY 
ECOLE FRANQAISE D’EXTRfeME-ORIENT 













































/ 

















t 
































\ 



























1 




































I 































* 

































V- 




















I 
















I 



























1 


































/ 













































I 


























' V 





















\ 





































































\ 










* 












f 







€ 












-• p 










\ . 






# 








































1 














* 












































/ / 


















































_ 





































































PUBLICATIONS DU DEPARTEMENT D'lNDOLOGIE - 86.1 




BHATTA RAMAKANTHA’S COMMENTARY 

mrn mm 

ON THE KIRANATANTRA 

* 


volume I: chapters 1-6 
critical edition and annotated translation 

Dominic Goodall 


INSTITUT FRANgAIS DE PONDICHERY 
ECOLE FRANgAISE D’EXTREME-ORIENT 

























Ouvrage public par l’lnstitut frangais de Pondichery 
et 1 ! icole frangaise d'Extreme- ; )rient dans le cadre 
de leur association en indologie 


Comite de lecture 


Colette Caillat, 

Membre de l’lnstitut de France 


Frangois Gros, 

Directeur d’etudes a l’Ecole pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris 
Michael Hahn, 

Professeur a TUniversite de Marburg 
Alexis Sanderson, 

Spalding Professor of Eastern Religions and Ethics, All Souls’ College, Oxford 
Raffaele Torella, 

Professeur a PUniversite de Rome 


© Institut frangais de Pondichery, 1998 (ISSN 0073-8352) 

Ouvrage compose en “Computer Modern” et Velthuis' Devan agar! a l’aide des 

programmes 1 |;X, DT^X, et EDMAC (macros pour la realisation d’editions 
critiques, crees par John Lavagnino et Dominik Wujastyk) 

Couverture et impression : Sri Aurobindo Ashram Press, Pondicherry 























CONTENTS 


Preface ll * 

t 

Introduction 1X 

Bhatta Ramakantha II's lineage. ix 

41 A k 

Bhatta Ramakantha IPs date.. • • xm 

* • ■ • 

Bhatta Ramakantha II’s works. xviii 

* • * * 

Bhatta Ramakantha II’s style. xxviii 

The Kiranavrtti. xxx 

a * 

The Extent of the Kiranavrtti. xxxii 

Why Ramakantha wrote a commentary on the Kirana . . xxxii 

The Kiranatantra and its Place among Other Siddhantas . . . xxxvi 

* 

Is a Relative Chronology Possible?. xlvii 

Cross-references. xlviii 

Discrepant Lists of the Principles of the Universe. li 

Doctrinal Oddities. lvi 

The Structure of the Tantras. lviii 

AiSa Language . . . kev 

The Lists of Twenty-eight Siddhantas . lxxi 

An Assessment of the Internal Evidence. lxxiii 

External Evidence for the Kiranatantra’s date. lxxiv 

Sources lxxix 

The Manuscripts of Bhatta Ramakantha IPs Kiranavrtti .... lxxix 

The Manuscripts of the Tantra. lxxxiv 

Previous Editions of the Tantra. ci 

Manuscripts of the Tantra not consulted. cii 

Other Commentaries on the Kiranatantra. civ 


1 

























11 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Editorial Policies CX1 

A Stemma of the Manuscripts of the Kiranavrtti.. . cxi 

I he Relationships between the Manuscripts of the Tantra . . . cxvi 

Conventions in the Apparatus. cxxi 

Placing the Verses in the Text of the Commentary. cxxiv 


Sanskrit Text 

* iiapter One 
Chapter Two 
Chapter Three 
Chapter Four 
Chapter Five 
Chapter Six . 


1 

1 

33 
61 
91 
111 
i 37 


Translation i5y 

Chapter One. 161 

Chapter Two. 227 

Chapter Three. 261 

Chapter Four. 301 

Chapter Five. 325 

Chapter Six. 357 


Appendix I. Pratlkas for the Tantra 395 

Appendix II. Colophons in the Manuscripts of the Tantra 399 
Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 402 


Works Consulted 


419 


Index of Padas in the Tantra 


437 


Index of Quotations in the Vrtti 


451 


General Index 


455 

























PREFACE 


Though firmly convinced myself of the interest of this text, it is pleas¬ 
ant to be assured that an edition of it will meet some need, and so I 
was encouraged by rereading, while still in the throes of proof-reading 
and compiling the index, the following envoi to Brunner’s analysis of the 
Kirana (1965:327): 

Telle est la teneur de ce petit ouvrage. II fourmille 
dedications precieuses mais si desesperement laconiques 
qu'elles posent plus de problernes qu’elles n’en resolvent. 
Puisque nous ne pouvons songer a retrouver les cinquante mil¬ 
lions de gloka du texte primitif enonce par Siva, et dont celui-ci 
ne serait qu'un resume tres condense, il nous reste d’espoir de 
voir un jour surgir de la nuit un commentaire du Kirana , qui 
nous aiderait a lire ce Crayon de lumiere3>. 

The last thirty years have seen a spate of publications concerning them¬ 
selves with the Saiva Siddhanta, but this area of studies can still scarcely 
be called fashionable; indeed the ma jority of the demonstrably early tan- 
tras ol the school have not been published. That the early literature is 
still largely uncharted means that a reader can enjoy the excitement of the 
discovery of its development at first hand, not mediated through unsatis¬ 
factory secondary works. 1 Moreover it is not only in the discovery of the 
scriptures that this pioneering thrill can be enjoyed; this book concerns 
the thought of one of the most influential thinkers o the Saiva Siddhanta. 
Ramakantha II shaped and systematised many of its ideas in difficult, but, 

1 Most students of classical India must at some time be made to acknowledge that 
‘|t]he quantity and quality of the secondary literature in many areas of Indian studies 
is such that bibliographical completeness has become something that is often rather to 
be avoided than to be striven for.’ Thus the eighth of Isaacson’s Stellingen submitted 
with his unpublished thesis (*1995). 






















IV 


Ram&kantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• # t/ # 


when grasped, satisfyingly rigorous works of sastra. Although his inter¬ 
pretations of doctrine were widely adopted by later writers of the Saiva 
Siddhanta, arid although his vigorous and elegant Sanskrit prose works 
show him to have been unusually learned and clear-thinking, even by 
the standards of his (exceptional) milieu, there are, to my knowledge, no 
translations into European languages or studies oi his works (with the 
one exception of the twenty-five verse Nadakarika j. 

Furthermore there is no tradition of teaching reaching to modern times 
that has transmitted and expounded the doctrines of the classical Saiva 
Siddhanta formulated by Ramakantha II. The Tamil-speaking South is 
the only area of India in which the Saiva Siddhanta still thrives, and acre 
Ramakantha IPs influence appears gradually to have waned. South Indian 
thinkers fell under two powerful theological influences that have altered 
fundamentally the character of the Saiva Siddhanta: I 2 3 that of devotional- 
ism and that of Vedantic Advaita. Neo-Saiddhantikas continued to quote 
Ramakantha’s ingenious interpretations of particular passages and points 
of doctrine (such as the concept of karmasamya or iruvinaioppu ); but 
they no longer upheld his tenets on such fundamental issues as the nature 
of liberation or the workings and implications of initiation. Six centuries 
after Ramakantha II one thinker, Salivatlnivasi- Jnanapraka^aguru of Sri 
Lanka, attempted to reinstate much of the old Saiddhantika theology of 
the Kashmirians; but he had to battle hard to present this as consist¬ 
ent with a body of more recent acknowledged scriptures that had since 
arisen to justify the new theology, and he came to be savagely attacked, in 
particular for defending the old doctrine (now heresy) that the liberated 
soul became identical to—while remaining separate from (as opposed to 
identical with and so merged in)—Siva (sivasamyavada) ? 


I speak here of its theological character; but, perhaps in part as a result of this 

theological shift, the Saiva. Siddhanta also changed from being primarily a cult of in¬ 
dividuals striving tor personal salvation to a cult whose scriptures also (in some cases 
almost exclusively) prescribed the mode of public: worship in temples. 

3 V. A. Devasenapathi (1966:12) writes thus of JhanaprakaSa’s Tamil commentary on 
the Civananacittiyar: ‘...his interpretation sometimes makes a wide departure from 

j? 

the orthodox Siddhanta. He holds that souls at release are equal to Siva in every 

respect, a view which is interesting and ably argued but totally at variance with the 

# 

Siddhanta.Jnanaprakagar’s commentary called forth a short and sharp refutation 

from Sivajnanayogin in a work called the Sivaseunavada urai rnaruppu. .. . Sivajnana- 
yogin treats JnanaprakaSar and his commentary with undisguised contempt and says in 
the preface to his refutation that "looking for mistakes in Jnanaprakagar’s commentary 
is like trying to pick stones from cooked sand”,’ 












Preface 


v 


Largely forgotten in Kashmir, 1 Ramakantha's works gradually ceased 
to be copied in South India too. 'Thus of the once much quoted Kirana¬ 
vrtti only four lacunose manuscripts appear to survive and there is, as 
far as I am aware, no modern Saiddhantika scholar well-versed in its 
teacllings. What follows by way of an edition and translation of Bhatta 
Ramakantha IPs Kiranavrtti is therefore by no means the final word on 

■ ■ m * v 

the text. It is not only incomplete (only six out of the twelve chapters 
appear here); it is full of difficulties that may only be resolved (if at all) 
after further reflection and a great deal more reading, not only of the 
other works of Bhatta Ramakantha IP of his Kashmirian contemporaries, 
and of other Saiddhantikas, but also of the extant early Siddhantas, so 
few of which are published. 

My introduction is long, but it has much hitherto unpublished inform¬ 
ation to present that helps to set the Kirana and the Kiranavrtti in a con¬ 
text. The introduction first presents new evidence that I have come across 
about Ramakantha IPs spiritual lineage (a solitary manuscript of the work 
of a previously unknown disciple), about his oeuvre (Ramakantha IPs ex¬ 
tant works are here arranged in a plausible order of composition, and 
references to lost works are discussed), about where and when he wrote, 
and about an influential theological innovation of his expounded in the 
Kiranavrtti (his resolution of the problem of two conflicting doctrines 
concerning divine grace). The introduction next attempts to establish 
which among the many Siddhantas surviving can be proved to be early. 

1 >efining the limits of the early canon is necessary because fundamental 
changes within the Saiva Siddhanta evidently did not just effect post- 
scriptural exegetes: tantras of the Saiva Siddhanta were modified, added 
to, or wholly rewritten, often retaining the names of ancient works. After 
drawing up the small list of extant Siddhantas (most of them as yet un¬ 
published) that can be proved to predate Ramakantha II, the introduction 
discusses certain features of their structure, language, and doctrine, with 
a view to attempting a relative chronology of the early canon and locating 
the Kirana within it. There follow descriptions of the sources used and 
methods followed for the constitution of the text. 

4 Manuscripts of only the most dialectical — and therefore broadest in appeal to 
other Kashmirian thinkers—of his works survive from there: the Matahgavrtti and the 
Naresvarapariksaprakaga. The latter, perhaps because of this same dialectical quality, 
has not been transmitted in South India; indeed it appears never to be quoted in South 
Indian works. 












* 


Ramakantha’s (Commentary on the Kiranatantra 



An edition and translation of the first three out of the six chapters of 
the Kiranavrtti here presented was submitted as a doctoral thesis at the 
University of Oxford in November 1995. That thesis, from which this book 
has expanded, could not have been achieved without an enormous amount 
of help. Before ah others I should like to thank four people in particular: 
my supervisor, Professor Alexis Sanderson, Spalding Professor of Eastern 
Religions and Ethics at All Souls College, Oxford, who has been unfail¬ 
ingly generous both with his scant time and with his vast knowledge; Dr. 
Harunaga Isaacson, who from start to finish has helped and encouraged 
in every way possible and been a tireless proof-reader (though few are 
marked, his corrections—of major as well as minor flaws—pervade every 
part of the book); Dr. Jurgen Hanneder, my friend and fellow student of 
Saivism, whose stimulating company I enormously enjoyed while he was 
in England editing the Malinivijayavarttika ; and Dr. Frangois Grimal of 
the Ecole frangaise d'Extreme-Orient, for his remarkable generosity and 
kindness to me over the last years and because he suggested to me that 

-it 

I study as an allocataire de recherche at the French Institute of Pondich¬ 
erry, which, apart from its other merits, houses the greatest collection of 
Saiddhantika manuscripts in the world. 

For their kind and generous help in different ways I thank: Professor 
Albrecht Wezier o ! the University of Hamburg, who supported this en¬ 
terprise and generously placed microfilms of numerous manuscripts at 
my disposal; Professor Ramanuja Tatacarya; Dr. Anjaneya Sarma, with 
whom I had a number of enlightening discussions of tricky points of sastra; 
Dr. S. A. S. Sarma, Mr. T. Ganesan, Mr. Subrahmaniam, Mr. Sivaraja 
Dlksitar, and other staff at the Centre of Indology of the Ecole frangaise 
d’Extreme-Orient and at the French Institute of Pondicherry; Dr. Maria 
Pia Vivanti, the most recent editor of the Kirana , who encouraged me and 
procured for me a photocopy of the rare first edition of the Kirana ; Dr. 
Helene Brunner, who kindly pointed out a number of errors when I sent 
her a copy of the thesis, and with whom I have since enjoyed correspond¬ 
ing; Professor Rafaelle Torella of the University of Rome <CLa Sapienza2> 
and Dr. Paul Dundas of the University of Edinburgh, who examined the 
thesis and made many helpful suggestions for improvement; Dr. Gillian 
Evison and the staff* of the Indian Institute Library in Oxford; Dr. Jorg 
Gengnagel; Dr. Mary Heimann; Dr. Jim Benson; Somdev Vasudeva; Pro¬ 
fessor S. A. Srinivasan of the University of Hamburg; Professor Richard 
Gombrich, Boden Professor of Sanskrit at the University of Oxford; Pro- 













Preface 


V13 


lessor Ilans Bakker of the University of Groningen; Rob Adriaensen; Pro¬ 
fessor Michael Hahn of the University of Marburg; Dr. I leeraman Tiwari; 
Alex Watson; Isabelle Onians; Dr. Godabarisha Mishra of the University 
of Madras; Diwakar Adiarya of the University of Kathmandu; Ratnadcep 
Datta; my family, and other friends. 

My doctoral studies at Wolfson College in Oxford (1992—95) were fin¬ 
anced by a British Academy Award, before which I had the great priv¬ 
ilege of spending two less focussed years (1990-92) attending lectures on 
a wide variety of indological subjects at the University of Hamburg as a 
Hanseatic Scholar of the Stiftung Freiherr von Stein. An allocation de 
recherche from the French Institute of Pondicherry has enabled me to 
prepare this book for publication. 

I should also like to thank Seer-Valar-Seer Sivaprakasa Pandara- 
sannithi, twenty-third head of Thiruvavabuthurai Adheenam, who allowed 
me to borrow and photograph two manuscripts ( A 1 and A 2 ) from the lib¬ 
rary of his Adheenam, to Mr. B. P. Sharma, who, among all his other 
business, found the time to procure photocopies of manuscripts or me in 
Jammu, and the following other libraries and institutions for allowing me 
to photograph or take copies of manuscripts used in this edition: the Sri 
Vehkatesvara Oriental Research Institute in Tirupati, the Saraswati Ma¬ 
hal Library in Tanjore, the Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts 
Library in Trivandrum, the Adyar Research Library, the Government Ori¬ 
ental MSS Library of Madras, the Oriental Research Institute in Mysore 
(whose policies of providing copies of all manuscripts have now sadly 
changed), the Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute in Jammu, the 
Bodleian Library in Oxford, the Wellcome Institute Library in London, 
the Cambridge University Library, and the library of the French Institute 
of Pondicherry. 


References to the verses of the Kir ana follow my numeration for the first 

• v 

six patalas, that of Yivanti s edition ( E v ) for patalas 7-12, and that 
of the edition of Devakottai (= E D ) for the remainder o! the text. The 
pa tala numbering (continuous from 1-64) is that of the contents list of E D 
(reproduced by Brunner, 1965:311-13), 





V.l 'trfilil ;!i r irii-ft’fpn it 


































INTRODUCTION 


Bhatta Ramakantha II’s lineage 


Bhatta Ramakantha I 


■ 4 


/ 


\ 


Bhatta Vidyakantha I Srlkantha 

m # I » B a 


Bhatta Narayanakantha 

i • 1/ • a • 


Bhatta Ramakantha II 


• a 


Bhatta Vidyakantha I! 

a • v * « 


Because confusion about the various Ramakanthas persists, 5 it is worth 
reiterating that the author of the Kiranavrtti is to be distinguished from 
Rajanaka Ramakantha (fl. 2nd half of 10th century 6 ), a non-dualist, pupil 
of Utpaladeva and author of a commentary (-vivrti) on the Spandakarika 
(and possibly also of the Sarvatobhadra , a commentary on the Bhagavad- 
gTta). He is also to be distinguished from Bhatta Ramakantha I, men¬ 
tioned by Srlkantha in Ratnatraya]>arlksa 321 and 322 as the author of 
a now lost sadvrtti. Bhatta Ramakantha I was the guru not only of 
Srlkantha, but also of Bhatta Vidyakantha Id Bhatta Ramakantha IBs 

* B , 7 •« %r * * / v* * • 

See, for example, Karl Potter's perplexing entries (1983:196, 208 and 246; altered, 
but still perplexing in 1995:422 and 547) for different Ramakanthas. 

Thus N.R. Bhatt, Mat ah gap aram eSvaragama Vol.l, upodghata p.xliii. 

The evidence for this is the fourth introductory verse of Narayanakantha’s 
Mrgen dravrt ti : 

saksac chrlkanthanathad iva sukrtijananugrahayavatirnac 
chrut va srirain akan thac chi vamatakamalonmTlan aprau dh a hh as van 
grividvakanthabhattas tad idam upadisann adidcsaikada mam 

m # p * ■* * 

spastartham atra laghvim viracava vivrti m vatsa sarvopayogyam 






X 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


grandfather, of whom no work survives. His son, Bhatta Narayanakantha, 
was the author of the Mrgendravrtti , of a lost Tippanaka on Sadyojyotih’s 
Svayambhuvavrtti referred to by Ramakantha in the Narcsvarapartksa- 
prakasa ad 3:62, p.216, s and of a lost Brhattlka called the Sarannita on 
the Tattvasangraha mentioned in Aghorasiva s third introductory verse 
to his Laghutlka thereon. One more author in Ramakantha IPs lineage is 
now known: his disciple Vidyakantha II. Stein (1894:363) quotes a portion 
from what may be the sole surviving manuscript of Vidyakantha II’s only 
known work, a c< imentarv on the unpublished Mayasahgraha* called 

" ' - - 1 * ™ 1 " - 1J I M ■ — 

e venerable Vidyakantha Bhatta, a powerful sun for [causing] the blossoming of 
the lotus of Siva's teachings, after learning from the venerable Ramakantha—who was 
like SrTkaritha descended in person [to earth] to bestow compassion on men of good 
deeds—one day, while teaching the same [to me], instructed me: “My child, compose 

a short, clear commentary on this which will benefit all.” ’ 

8 r 

The edition reads ... tippake, but I know of no usage of the word tippaka and this 

plausible emendation is Jurgen Hanneder’s suggestion. (The Wellcome manuscript, 
f.93' reads °tipake .) 

9 The Mayasahgraha (sometimes simply the Maya, e.g. Tantralokaviveka ad 28:151— 
6b) is to be distinguished from the published Mayamata. From the opening prose of 
the commentary it is evident that it is a tantric work in which the same Maya, archi¬ 
tect of the asuras, instructs sages in what he was himself taught by Svayambhu, on 
the top of the Himavat mountain. Professor Sanderson (letter of 19.x.95) has been 
able to identify a number of early quotations of the work in the sole surviving in¬ 
complete palm-leaf manuscript of the Mavasangraha in Kathmandu (MS No. 1-1537, 
NGMPP Reel No. A 31/18). Maya is cited as an authority by Narayanakantha in the 
Mrgendravrtti on the kriyapada pp. 31, 69, 74, 81 (= f. 23 v[4-5] ), 86, 92 and on the 
caryapada pp. 250 (= f.52 l ’ [1] ), 251, 252; by Ksemaraja ad Stavacintamani 87, p.96 
and in the Svacchandatantroddyota ad 8:21 (= f. 23 r[1] ) and 10:488; by Jayaratha in 
the Tantralokaviveka ad 8:32c-35b (unattributed, - f. 52 r[4] ), ad 28:127c-129b (unal- 
tributed, = f. 52 r[5] ) and twice ad 28:151—6b; by Bhattotpala ad Brhatsamhita 52:41; 
by Hemadri in the vratakhanda of his Ca turvargacintamani, Vol. II, Part I. p. 138; by 
Taksakavarta on f. 85 r [/) ; and by SomaSambhu in K armak and akr am avail 1278-1299 (a 
close paraphrase of ff. 22 v[21 -23 v[2] ). (References in the Banativagurudevapaddhati are 
to the later Mayamata.) Aware only of Hemadri’s quotation and of the sole Nepalese 
manuscript Michaels (1985:73) argued that these could be used as evidence for a pu¬ 
tative historical relationship between Nepal and South India; but the text’s acceptance 
in Kashmir weakens that hypothesis. 

is as follows: ^arvatipati taught the text in a 
crore of verses to Svayambhu, who taught it in 100,000 and 12,000 to Maya, the Vaia- 
khilyas, Ahgiras, Atri, Marlci, Pulastya, Bhrgu, Pulaha, Svayambhuva, Manu, Kratu, 
and Narada, who teach it to their disciples. With the consent of those sages Maya now 
teaches a part of it the conceit intended is presumably that the knowledge was whole, 

but Maya, being the architect of the asuras, taught only what relates to pratistha) to 
his disciples (f. 57 r ^-57 v ^): 
























Introduction 


xi 


the Bhavacudamani. 10 It is clear that the work is by a disciple of Rama- 
kantlia II, and not by Vidyakantha I: its final verse is closely modelled 
on that of the Kiranavrtti (see below) and, as Professor Sanderson has 
pointed out to me, verses 6-8 of Ramakantha IPs introduction to the 
Matangavrtti are quoted in it prefaced by tatha co<^kta/$>m asmadguru- 

bhih (f. 22 r l 16 !). 

It is possible that the home town of Ramakantha's lineage was the 
town of Vij ayes vara. 11 The final verse of the Kiranavrtti tells us that 

etat svayambhur bhagavan deveSat parvatipateh 

labdhavams tapasogrena kotya (em. Sanderson; Jcotyo MS) jnanamr- 
tottamam 

samksipya laksamatrena punar dvadaSabhir jagau 
sahasrair valakhilyebhyo mahyam ahgirase ’traye 

marTcaye (em. Sanderson; marie aye MS) pulastyaya bhrgave pulahaya ca 
svayambhuvaya manave kratave naradaya ca 
jagus te ’pi svaSisyebhyah samasavyasayogatah 
bhaktebhyah pr art hay ad bhya£ ca tadicchato maharsayah 
tadekadeSam istarthasiddhibliam anakulam 

m • 

may a tadicchayaivoktam bhavadbhyah £i vam astu nah 
iti mayasarigrahe pratisthasutram samaptam. 

This portion receives commentary on f. 71 r of the Bhavacudamani . 

10 The opening verses read: 

sam astasiddh an tasudh as am u d r as amp l a van ayen d ukarabhiram ah 
jayanti vaco bhiivi ramakanthabhattasya vidye£varatulyamurtteh 

tato [’| vapta£ruta£ £aivajhanaratnanidhanatah 
bhavacudamanim vaksye vidyakantha caf sahgrahe 

• Waptagrutag £aiva° ] conj,. Sanderson; vaptah 6ruta£caiva MS • °nidhana- 
tah ] conj. Sanderson; °vidhanatah MS • °manim] conj. Sanderson; °bhidam 
MS • sahgrahe ] conj. Sanderson; sahgraham MS 

The emendations were suggested by Professor Sanderson in a letter of 12.iii.96. The 
suggestions sahgrahe and bhavacudamanim (instead of the more obvious bhavacuda- 
bhidham) appear because it is suspicious that the texf> transmitted appears nowhere to 
mention the name of the work on which it comments, and because the colophons give 
Bhavacudamani as the commentary’s title. (The final colophon on f. 7 i r t 9_10 l reads: iti 
grimahamahegvarena krtam bhavacudamanim n am a t amt ram sam apt am/ / sampurnam 
samaptam Subham astu// / /) If the emendations are correct, Vidyakantha II’s meaning 
would then be ‘I shall [now] compose [this commentary called the] Bhavacudamani on 
the [Maya-]sarigraha.’ 

There survive Nepalese manuscripts of a tantra called the Bhavacudamani whose 
colophons state that it is part of the Tantracudamani (NAK MS 5-6565 and NAK MS 6- 
1748, NGMPP Reel Nos. A 207/8 and A 989/23 respectively); but this work relates a 
discussion between Devi and Bhairava in which Bhairava is asking the questions, and 
it is not a tantra of the Saiva Siddhanta. 

11 Professor Sanderson (quoting in a letter of 12.iii.96 from his annotations to the 










XI1 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


the work was begun there and might be telling us that it was finished 
somewhere on the bank of' a river Candrabhaga: 12 

prarabdha vij ayetfan at hap ura t o masastakenadarat 

nityam cintanatah samaptim 1 3 famalamf ya candrabhaga- 
tate 14 

nit a seyam apisatlrthatapasam samarthyatah 15 sarvada 
bhuyad bhaktajanasya SagvatasivapronmTlane vallabha 

That of the Bhavacudamani is still more corrupt, but might be recon¬ 
structed thus: 

prarabdha purato 16 guror niyamatas tasyaiva fnocophaiauf 17 
sasvacxintauatah [s samaptim adhuna nit,a samamatrakat 19 

seyam 20 candrakaladharasya day ay a sarvatra sarvatmana 21 

bhaktanam purusarthabodhavidhaye 22 hh uyat sad a val¬ 
labha 22 


75° 


Jay ad rat hay am ala) identifies the place thus: ' Vijaya, \ij ayes vara, ksetra, °pura. 

9 long. 33 4S lat., on the right hank of the Vitasta. The lihga Siva \ r ijaye^vara, 
its sacred environs, and the surrounding town (the modern Vij a bror/Bijbihara). Siva 
VijayeSvara and Visnu Cakradhara (situated a mile below Vifbror on the left bank 
of the river) were considered to be the principal protectors of Kashmir. See 
taranginl 1.38; Skandapurana , Nagarakhanda (6), Adhvaya 109 (listing the name of 
Siva at each of the 68 Sivatlrthas), 13a: vijayam caiva kasrmre; NUamata 1056, 1303; 
Haracaritacintamani , chapter 10; Stein (tr.), RajatarahginT, II, pp. 463 47 

12< Your suggestion candrabhagatate is certainly possible, especially since the Candra¬ 
bhaga here might not be the Chenab to the S.E. of the valley but a river in Kashmir itself 
that joins the Vitasta below its confluence with the Sind (see Stein on RajatarahginT 
4.638). But this leaves amaiamya undiagnosed; and there is also the suspicion raised 
by reading Vidyakantha I s verse that candrabhaga is nothing to do with either river 
but conceals a reference to the digit of the moon worn by Siva (candrakala) J From 
Professor Sanderson’s above-quoted letter of 12.iii.96. 
samaptim ] ein.; samaptam R % 

1 can dr a bh aga tate ] co n j.; can dr a bh aga tad a R 

1 

’samarthvatah 1 ern.; samarthyatam R A 

* J ■/ > 

■I 

J purato ] conj.; parata MS 

1 7 

Professor Sanderson tentatively suggested that these syllables might be emended 
to ya codanat and that vij ay at as might replace the (then redundant) niyamatas. 

1 8 gagvaccintanatah ] conj. Sanderson; kascaccmtatah MS 

19o matrakat ] conj. Sanderson; patrakat MS 

20 | 

" seyam \ ern.; soy am MS 

21 sarvatmana | ern.; sarvatmanam MS 
purusarthabodhavidhaye ] conj. Sanderson; pukadarthabodhvavisayair MS 


N 


23 


vallabha ] em.; vallabhah MS 














Introduction 




xni 


Vidyakantha II might thus he saying that he too began his commentary 
‘in [Vijayapura,] the town of my teacher 5 and that he completed it after 
only a year (samamatrakat] cf. I fainakantha's masastakena). 


Bliatta Ramakantlia II’s date 


Bhatt’s pieces of evidence (op.cit., p.xliii) for the date of the lineage of 
Ramakantlia II were Narayanakantha’s quotation of Ut paladeva's Isvara- 
siddhi 55 in the Mrgendravrtti ad 1:11 and the fact that Aghorasiva, 
whose colophon to the Gotrasantati ol his Kriyakramadyotika gives the 


date 1157/8 AD (6aka 1080), 4 makes frequent references to Ramakanthah 


s 


24 The Gotrasantati appears in a volume that purports to give AghoraSiva’s 
Mahotsavavidhi section from the Kriyakramadyotika. It actually contains much else 
that is manifestly not by the hand of Aghorasiva and nothing that can be proved to 
be his. The colophons of the first two prose sections mention his name (pp. 52 and 
61), after which appear the first and third maiigala verses from Kacchapesvaras com¬ 
mentary on the Kriyakramadyotika (IFF T. 240, p. 3; IFP T. 109, p. 1), venerating a 
certain Sada^iva, a guru in KancI, and there then follows an agamavacanasahgraha on 
the topic of utsavas, attributing t he material principally to late authorities whic h in 
his doctrinal works Aghorasiva never cites, such as the Kamika, VTra, Karana, Silksma, 
Supra bhcda, Bhimasamhita, Dipt a, Ajita, Kumaratantra, Santana, Cintya , and even 
a Sakaiagamasarigraha. In places even the colophons of the tantras from which the 
work quotes have been copied e.g. from the Lalita on p.373). The section entitled 
Gotrasantati is tacked on to the end of this muddle. It does not appear in the pub¬ 
lished Prabha commentary of Nirmalamani, nor is it covered by the commentary 
of KacchapeSvara, Nirmalamani comments on the following topics: n i tv a karri i avid hi, 
pa vi t ra vi dh i, d am an avid hi, sain anvasam aya vi dhi , vi£esasam ayavidhi, nirvan adiksadhi- 
vasa vi dhi , n lr i 'an a d Iks avidh i , sain ksiptadiksa vidh i, acarya bh isckavidhi, as tra bhiseka- 
vidhi , vra toddharavidhi , antyestividhi. Kacchapesvara s commentary, as preserved in 
IFP T. Nos. 109 and 240, covers only the first three of these, but both transcripts give 
a short colophon verse at this point, and his commentary may have extended only thus 
far. 

It will be noticed that all these belong to the category of atmarthapuja. In these 
sections Aghora&va’s references are to the same scriptural authorities that he cites in 
his doctrinal works, i.e. those known also to Ramakantha’s lineage. 

Various other texts belonging to the category of pararthapuja have been published 
as parts of Aghora^iva’s Kriyakramadyotika . Not all are quite as muddled as the 
Mahotsavavidhi, but all are suspect. The Prayascittavidhi , for example, published as 
the seventh bhaga of the Kriyakramadyotika , opens with a treatment of pararthanitya- 
pujaprayascitta attributed to the A in kumatt antra (another late authority). 

The Gotrasantati itself appears to quote the Karana as an authority (p. 426: go car am 
kulam ity uktam iti krikaranasruteh ), a work apparently not known to the Kashmirian 
Saiddhantikas, but -karana- is doubtless a misreading of -kirana- here, for the quoted 








XIV 


Ramakantha ’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm * 


pada is Kir an a 39:2c. When the Gotrasantati comes to list AghoraSiva’s forebears, the 
account can be interpreted to coincide with the much briefer accounts in other works, 
and there are distinctive similarities in phrasing. Compare, for example, the following 
verses (p. 431) 

tacchisyo gaudavrsabhah grikantbasivadegikah 

t i/ * » * * * * * 

grimaddabhrasabheganadidrksato gat as t u yah 

• grikan tha° ] conj.; grikan t hag Ed. • grimaddabhra 0 ] conj. Sanderson; grim ad- 
agra° Ed. 

grlvikram a dicolega<^h^$> svaguru tve nyavegayan 
tato ddhyanagiva<^Ch^$> grim an abhavad gaudapumgavah 
astavimgatitantranam vyakhyananipuno guruh 
colegvarasya bhutva yah sabhcganam apujayat 

• colegvarasya ) conj.; colegvaro pi Ed. • sabheganam ] conj.; sabhegam mam Ed. 

t asm ad babhuva sakalagamaparadrgva guddhagayo hrdayagahkaranama- 
d hey ah 

asm at pi tarn ah apitr vyas u t agrya esa gaivadhiraja iti suprathito dharanyam 

with the concluding verses to the Dvigatikalottaravrtti IFF T. 1 76, pp. 79-80 [= P] 
collated against Trivandrum MS 4509, f. 47*d 11 ]_4g v l 1 l [— T]): 

adau givagikhajyotihsavitryakhyan guruttaman 
anugrahaya lokanam anujagraha gahkarah 

• °givagikhajyotih ] conj.; °givagikhajyautih T; LI tas P • 0 savitryakhyan guru¬ 
ttaman ] conj.; °savitrakhyan guruktamargan T; °sapitrya guruttamat P 

tebhyah siddhant as am siddhih gocaranam catustayam 
man tre^arud radevebhyah kramad bhurnim upagatam 

• ° siddhih gocaranam catustayam ] T; 0 si ddhi b h o car ah catusm iyam • °deve- 

bhyah ] conj.; °devatah T; °devavi i • bhurnim upagatam ] T; bhutim upagata LJ 

P 

tebhyah givakulad adyad utpanna gurusantatih 
grimadamardakam nama sthanam moksasya bharate 

• tebhyah ] T; U P • sthanam moksasya ] conj.; sthanamadhyasta T; 
sthanamasyasya P (Cf. Gotrasantati p.429, lines 1-2: grimadamardakam nama 
kadambadamabhusitam/ sthanam atrabhavad bhuinau bharate moksasadhanam.) 

guravas tatsamudbhuta nanagcaryavidhayinah 
golakiranapadradimathesv adhigatah pratham 

• nanagcaryavidhayinah ! T; nanacarya vidhayina P • golakiranapadradi 0 ] conj.; 
galakaranabhadradi 0 T; gollkaranabhadra U P • °mathesv adhigatah pratham ] 
era.; °mahesv adhigatah prathani T; U sv adhigataptayah pra P 

gurunam tatkulotthanam vamge grikanthatejasam 
gaucladegodbhavah grlman dhyanagivo ’bhavat 

• °tejasam J T; tejasa P • gaudadegodbhavah \ P; gomyadegodbhava P • sriman 
dhyana 0 ] era.; Grlman grimadhyana 0 T; grlmaddhyana 0 P • 'bhavat ] conj.; U vet 

T; bhavet P 








Introduction 


xv 


vidhaya colanathasya gurutvam gurusanuibhah 
grimaddabhrasabhanatham ya£ dram sarnapujayat 

• vidhaya ] T; athayam P • gurusannibliah ] Tac; gurusannibhih Tpc; 
gurusa U P • gnmaddabhra 0 ] em. Sanderson; snmadabhra 0 T; grTddaye 0 
P • sarnapujayat ] T; paryapujayat Ppc; pamapujayat Pac 

tasmad abhud dhrd aya£a h karan am ad h eyah saivadhiraja iti bhumitale 
prasiddhah 

vede vidhih, sakalaSastragan e sa jTvah, tfilpe mayah, sa Siva eva 
givagamesu 

• °gane j T; °ganaih P • jTvah tilpe ] T; jTva U ipe P 

Here both sources give the same sequence of gurus: DhyanaSiva and Hrdaya&va. 
(Though their predecessor Srlkantha is not explicitly mentioned in the Dvigatikalottara- 
vrtti, the adjective grikanthatejasam describing the gurus before them may be intended 
in part as an allusion to him.) Thereafter the accounts of his lineage seem to diverge, 
but may still be interpreted as not being contradictory. The above-cited verses in the 
Dvigatikalottaravrtti are followed immediately by 


gisyo 'sya k u n di n am ah an vayadipabh u takrsn atmaj ah grutinidhir bahu- 
rupa£arnbhuh 

pa tyadiratn aparipu rn asivagamabdhi vyakhyan i bodh apatir arn ava karn a- 

dh arah 

# 


• 6isyo ' sya ] em.; tfisyo bhya T; dsyo sa P • k u n din arn ah an vaya 0 ] T; kundiha LJ 
mabhanvaya 0 P • °dlpa° ] P; 0 dTpadTpa 0 T • 0 krsn atmaj ah \ P; 0 krsnatmaja 0 
T • purna$ivagamabdhi° ] T; U vodgamabdhf P • °nibodhapatir arnavakarna- 
dharah ] P; nabodhaparipuraiiaka U dharah ! |The last line I interpret: ‘a helmsman 
of the sea, master at teaching the interpretation of the ocean that is Siva’s scriptures, 
abounding in gems that are (the padarthas oij the Lord, [the bound soul, bonds] etc.’] 


vatf caJcre sh’va^asanesu vivid ha vrttir viGuddhatmabhih 

w * • * 

vagbhir vakyapadapram ananip unah grim oh akurottarad is u 
pujam yasya vitanvate nr pat ay a£ colendrapandyadayo 
vrttis tcna sukhagraha dvisatikakalottare nirmita 


• vrttir ] em.; vrttir TP • °nipunah ] em.; °nipunam T; U P • °pandyadayo\ 
em.; ° pamdyada-i yah~b T; °nathadayo P • nirmita ] T; kirtita P 

BahurupaSambhu is presumably intended as a synonym of Aghora^iva, whom we 
know to be of the gotra of Kaundinya from the colophon verse to his commentary 
on the Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti . That his father’s name was Krsna is new information. 
HrdayaSiva appears here to be AghoraSiva’s guru. The Gotrasantati however, calls him 
AghoraSiva’s paternal grandfather's paternal uncle’s eldest son iasmatpitamahapitrvya- 
sutagryah ), but then goes on with the next verses to identify a certain ParameSvara, 
*his [Hrdaya£iva’s] youngest brother, my father’s maternal uncle’, whom DhyanaSiva 
consecrated as a guru, as his diksaguru that at least is a possible interpretation of the 
qualification madbandhavicchedakani —(p. 432): 


matulo ’sm&tpitus tasya kanisthah p a ram e£ varah 
grlmaddhyana&venayam anugrhya guruh krtah 











XVI 


Ramakautha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


tarn vande sivatantracaksusam a ham vedadividvotkatam 

» • * */ i » 

pratyaksaikaiivarkasaktimuditani saksad anugrahakam 
a t rer an va \ ara tn am id yam am alam kail cm i vasasra yarn 

V ■ 

sviirt thasprk paramos vara bhidh am am u in madbandha viccheda kam 
tadakhyaya ksitau khyatam so nvagrhnan (con sonugraham 

mahasudhih 

» 

aghorasi van am an a m samp rad ay as a m a n vi t am 


Ed.) 


1 he name Paramesvara (as we know also independently from colophon verses in the 
parts of the Kriyiikramndyotika that are secured by the commentators, e.g. from that to 
I lie nirvunadiksa section on p. 487 of the edition with Prabhavyakhya.) was thus one of 
Aghorasiva’s worldly names, just as it was the name of the guru who initiated him (this 
is implied by tadiikhvava ksitau khyatam). This guru’s dlksa name is unfortunately not 
given here. If we are right in understanding from the above passage that Paramesvara 
was the younger brother of Hrdayasiva, then, as Professor Sanderson writes (in a letter 
of 14.V.97), This makes Aghora’s two teachers Hrdayasiva and Paramesvara and the 
wife' of his father’s father the children of a single father, who was himself a member of 
Aghora’s patriline, being the brother of Aghora’s father’s father’s father.’ 

In the concluding verses to the Tattvatrayanirnayavrtti and to the Sarvajhanottara- 
vrtti it is Sarvai magambhu whom Aghorasiva venerates as his principal teacher. The 
concluding verses to the Sarvajnanottaravrtti (IFP 47818, pp. 140-1) read: 

yas sastresu <uvoditcsu sumatir laksadvayadhyapakah 

sdmanyesu paresu capratihatadhir vakyanramanadisu 

pujam yasya vi tan rate nr pat aya£ colcndrapandyadayo 

yasyan ugraham at at ana bhagavan sarvatma.^ambhu<^.h^> svayam 

* 

so 'yarn cakara vivrtim tivagasane 'sminn etam atesativatastravidam 

* m 

hit ay a 

|/ 

a (/ vai t a va dim ad a \ sir an a bh ed asila h snm an agh orasi va des'i kakesa nn dra h 

It is conceivable that SarvatmaSambhu is no more than a synonym of Hrdayasiva. 
\\c might assume then that Aghorasiva. refers to two teachers, both close relatives: 
a. Paramesvara, who initiated him, and Paraincsvara's elder brother, whose initiatory 
name was Hrdayasiva/ Sarvatmasainblm. 

The Gotrasantati mentions Sarvatma^ambhu at the very end just before the com¬ 
position, date and extent of the work are mentioned. Its last three and a half verses 

read (p.433): 

s a r va t, m a si va p a d o bhya (sic!) asmadguruxsir an t i ka t 
etan nityadikam karma sopapattikam adarat 
srutva krivakramasyaiva dvotik a racitii m ay a 
nadajheye frikasyabde vartamane kafau yuge 
grant hat as trisahasraitf ca samvukt a paheabhih sataih 

* * A m ■ 

tides ad gurunathasya raciteyam m a va yatah 
tato 'tra gurave dosam ua grhnantu vicaksanah 

By the katapayadi system of notation, the phrase nadajheye gives us the date 1080 of 
the Saka era (ya=l, jh a = h a i), ria 8, and na—0; the vowels carry no meaning). 

A version of the crucial verse concludes the above-mentioned Priivascittavidhi too: 























Introduction 


xvn 


works. Sanderson (1985b:566 7) modified the terminus post quem (for 
which the evidence remains the same), arguing that Utpaladeva flourished 
c. 925-975 (and not c. 850-900. as Bhatt had suggested). The terminus 
ante quem was modified by Mine. Brunner who pointed out (1977:280) 
that Ksemaraja mentions Narayanakantha and his Mrgendravrtti in his 
Svacchandatantroddyota (ad 4:200 9, vol. 2. p. 130). As Torella hesitantly 
pointed out (1994:483-4), reading the fifth chapter of the Kiranavrtti re¬ 
veals that Ksemaraja's mention of the opinion of a commentator on the 
Kirana at the end of the fifth chapter of the Svacchandatantroddyota 

m 

(vol. 3. pp. 93-4) is indeed a reference to Ramakantha’s views on the ne¬ 
cessary requirement,s for a descent of salvific power; but Professor Sander¬ 
son has now shown (Goodall. 1996:xlv, note 26) that the terminus ante 
quem can be brought back still further: it has hitherto been overlooked 
that verses quoted without attribution by Abhinavagupta, the preceptor 
of Ksemaraja, in Tantraloka 8:428-4341), are the verses in which Rama- 
kantha summarises the twenty-third chapter of his commentary on the 

» t *■ 

vidyapada of the Matanga. his means that we can provisionally assume 


t asm at sarvaprayatnena vidhina sarvam a caret 
nadajileye sakasyabde vartainane kalau yuge 
d visah as mill p a n ca£a t a gran t h ai.< ca li k h i t a pu n ah 

It is clear, however, that it does not belong here, because no subject is provided to 
agree with the feminine likhita. Notice also that the work is here said to have been 

shorter by 32,000 syllables. 

V ' “ 

To conclude, we must, bear in mind that the date rests on a piece of evidence in a 
section of text that is, as will be clear from the above, by no means free from corruption 
Mid uncertainties. There is, however, nothing inherently improbable about a mid- 
twelfth-century date; indeed The king of the y,olas who for a long time venerated the 
glorious Lord of the Dabhrasabha’ (for the name Dabhrasabha see Younger, 1905:84) 
and who took Dhyanasiva as his guru (mentioned in both the Gotrasantati and the 
Dvi£atikalottaravrtti ) is likely to have been either Vikrama (r. 1118-35 Ai ) or his 
successor, Kulottunga II (r. 1135-50 ad), both of whom wished to appear closely 
connected with the Chidambaram temple (see Younger, 1995:139-41). I suppose it 
to be the latter, since the Gotrasantati mentions Vikrama by name when recording 

DhyanaSiva's predecessor, Snkantha, 

it seems appropriate that it is the king who is said to be the devotee of the Loid of 
particular temple, and not the Saiddhantika theologian, the skilled interpreter of the 
only true means to liberation, the twenty-eight scriptures. One wonders how close, from 
Aghorasiva’s perspective, t he connection of the Siddhanta was with the South Indian 
temple cult. As 1 have remarked at the beginning of this excursus, the published parts 
of the Kriyakramadyotika that deal with pararthapuja seem unlikely to have been by 

i/ ** 

AghoraSiva.) 










xv >ii Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

that Bhatta Ramakantha II flourished between c. 950 and 1000 AD. 

Thus Abhinavagupta can now be shown to have known the works 
of Ramakantha and to have held him in sufficient honour to quote 1 is 
words with approval. If, as it now seems, Ramakantha was an older and 
respected contemporary of Abhinavagupta, then we can perhaps expect 
to find more rebuttals of Ramakantha’s views in Abhinavagupta’s works, 
rather than, as I had previously expected, of Abhinavagupta’s positions 
in Ramakantha s works. Differences between the thinkers on points of 
interpretation of particular scriptural passages must be examined in this 
new light. Such a difference is their discussion of Sardhatrigatikalottara 
8:7: svapacan api dlksayet. Ramakantha’s commentary thereon 25 lays 
great stress on t lie word a pi and cites the tag a pi parvatam sirasa bhindyat 
( He might even split a mountain with his head') in order to illustrate the 
force of t;hat particle. As Jurgen Hanneder has pointed out to me, when 
Abhinavagupta cites the same passage (MalinTvijayavarttika 1:194-7). he 
pointedly omits the api. Of course either author might be responding to 
the interpretation of the other, and it is probable that there are many 
other such disagreements, where f he priority of one or other view may 
only be determinable when a relative chronology of each author’s works 
has been established. To this end the following section is a first attempt 
at a stratigraphy of the works of Ramakantha. 


Bhatt a Ramakantha Li’s works 

• • • f 


Here follows a list of Ramakantha’s extant works listed in a plausible 
order of composition inferred from cross-references (listed in the footnotes 
below) in his works: 

Commentary on Sadyojyotih’s Paramoksanirasakarika 2G 
Commentary on Sadyojyotih’s Moksakarika 27 


Commentary {-prakaSa) on Sadyojyotih’s Naresvarapanksa 28 


25 * 

1 It must be admitted that the passage is corrupt. See my attempt at a translation 
in the footnote to the translation of the commentary ad 1:10. 

2 6 f t, , 

'Cited in the NaregvaraparTksaprakaga ad 1:55, p.95; in the Moksakarikavrtti ad 
23, p. 250; in the Kiranavrtti ad 1:15.29-30. 

Cited in Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 4:50, p.98 and ad 4:59, p. 101. 

2s Cited in Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 1:26, p. 16; ad 3:17, p. 65; ad 3:19, p.67; ad 
6:47, p.195, ad 6:99-100, p. 230; in Kiranavrtti 1:15.24, 2:25.16, 2:29.22, 3:12.45-6. It 

















Introduction 


xix 


Commentary on the vidyapadn of the Matangaparame£varatantra 2 ’ 

Commentary on the Sardhatrigatikalottaratantra 30 (in which is embed¬ 
ded the Nadakarika) 

Commentary on the first twelve chapters of the Kiranatantra 3 ' 

Commentary on the remaining three padas of the MatahgaparameSvara- 
tantra 


A work attributed to Ramakantha oi ninety verses in arya metre called 
the Vyomavyapistava is transmitted in South Indian manuscripts (a num¬ 
ber of which are in the IFF in Pondicherry) together with a laghutika of 
VedajnanarsTndra. This work has been left off the list, not because its 
authenticity is doubted (I know of no evidence to confirm or deny this), 
but because Ramakantha nowhere refers to it, and so it cannot be p accd 

* i ' * * 

in order. 

With the exception of the Kiranavrtti and the Vyomavyapistava all 
the above are published. Ramakantha also cites some lost works of 
his: an Agamaviveka (ad Paramoksanirasakarika 46, p. 298—this may 
be the same as the Sarvagamapramanyopanyasa, for which see below); 
a Svayamhhuvoddyota {Naresvarapariksaprakasa ad 1:51, pp.88-9); a 


is clear that works of Ramakantha other than the Moksakarikavrtti and Paramoksa- 

nirasakarikavrtti were written before the Naresvarapariksaprakasa, because the latter 

* 

quotes an untraced verse of his ad 1:57, p.68, and another ad 3:181-2, p.273. 

29 Referred to in Kiranavrtti 1:15.21 and 1:18.22. 

3u There is little evidence for the relative dating of this work. Ramakantha quotes 
a passage of three anustubh verses of his in it (ad 4:1-2, p.45) and a prose sentence 
(ad 23:13, p. 151), but neither of these is traced, and he does not refer to any of 
his known works by name. As far as I know, no published work of his refers to the 
Sardhatri£atikalottaravrtti. The Kiranavrtti refers to it ad 12:9 and, in 3:23.30, to the 
Nadakarika (calling it the nadasiddhi). I have assumed that Ramakantha composed 
the Nadakarika as part of the Sardhatri^atikalottaravrtti , because at the point at 
which they occur in the text there is no introductory formula to suggest that they 
were an earlier composition quoted there because of their appositeness. Furthermore, 
as Filliozat (1984:226) observes, Ramakantha appears to be referring back to karikas 
17 and 25 ad SardhatrKatikalottara 12.1 with the expression iti dar&tam prak. I have 
tentatively assumed that the Sardliatri&atikalottaravitti is a relatively late work, me.rely 
because of the absence of other references to it and thus I have placed its composition 


directly before that of the Kiranavrtti. 

31 Referred to in the Matangavrtti ad kriyapada l:2-3b, p. 3. That the Kiranavrtti 
is a relatively late work is also suggested by the second half of its opening verse. 












XX 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 



tlka on Sadyojyotih’s lost Mantravarttika (Moksakarikavrtti ad verse 2. 
p.246 and ad 113, p.268, Par am oksanirasakarika vrtti ad verse 3, p. 281, 
Naresvaraparlksajnakasa ad 3:177ab, p. 170, 32 and in the Matangavrtti 
ad vidyapada 5:60c—61, p. 125 33 ); and a | Sarva- 1 agamapramanya\-upa- 

Q A ' 

The three references to the last of these are puzzling and require 
some discussion: ad Matahga 3:20ab, p. 68, Ramakantha uses the follow¬ 
ing expression: iti darsitam asmahhih sarvagamapramanyopanyase MM; 
°nyasena Kashmirian Mss) rauravavrttiviveke iti tat a evavagantavyam. 
This is typical for the manner in which Ramakantha refers to his own 

• i 

sub-commentaries on Sadyojyotih’s partial commentaries on the Raurava. 

viz. the Bhogakarika, the Moksakarika , and the Paramoksanirasakarika. 35 

* * * 

{ Compare, for example, pradarsitarn rauravavrttiviveke paramoksanir- 
asakarikasv asmahhih (Kiranavrtti 1:15.29-30) and (Narcsvaraparlksa- 
prakasa ad 1:55, p. 95) darsitam asmabhir vistarena rauravavrttiviveke 



3 ^ 

' "The attribution given here is ambiguous (tad idarn uktam mantravarttike ), but the 
Ilalf-verse is the same as that quoted in the Moksakarikavrtti ad verse 2, p. 246, where 
it is prefaced by the unambiguous ... ity uktam asmnbhir mantravarttikatTkavam. 

33TT - 1 - 

* * ciuotes a verse juefaced only by tathoktam asmabhir anyatra , 
but, as Bhatt points out in his footnote thereon, the same verse is quoted on p 33 o 
Jhanaprakasa’s Sivayogasara with the attribution tad uktam mantravarttikatTkavam . 
The same verse is quoted, again without attribution, ad Paramoksanirasakarika 57, 

p, 305. 

The label upanyasa for a commentary is unusual, but there is another Saiva work 
so labelled: NigamajhanadeSika's Sivajhanabodhopanyasa, an edition and translation 
of which is shortly to be published from the IFF by Mr. T. Ganesan. 

It is possible that these karika and the Bhogakarika and Moksakarika were origin¬ 
ally parts of a longer commentary in verse, or, as Dvivedi suggests (1983: upodg t 
p. 64) in a. mixture of prose and verse, which no longer survives, but it is also possible 
that Sadyojyotih’s Rauravavrtti was made up by a number of more or less independ¬ 
ent verse works, of which these are the only ones to survive. Bhatt {upodghata to 
Matahga vol.l, p.xlii) observes that a vrtti on the Raurava is referred to in a variety 

* V 

of works under different titles: suvrtti (Tattvasahgraha 57), sadvrtti and rauravavrtti 
(AghoraSiva’s Tattvasahgrahatika ad verse 57) and ruru vrtti (Jayaratha, introducing 
a short passage in prose, in his Tantralokaviveka ad 9:211). He further notes that m 
the anonymous commentary to the Matahga which he prints at the end of the same 
volume a verse from the Paramoksanirasakarika is cited and prefaced by tad uktam 
snmadrauravavrttisu. Bhatt is puzzled by this use of the plural and by the assigna¬ 
tion. He suggests that the verse may have been taken from the Rauravavrtti or that 
it may convey the same meaning as a passage in the vrtti , but he does not consider 
the possibility that the karika works of Sadyojyotih may themselves constitute a vrtti. 
If we assume that they do, it solves both the problem of the assignation of verses 
from the Paramoksanirasakarika to a Rauravavrtti and that of the use of the plural 
rauravavrttisu. 

















Introduction 


xxi 


(see p. 4 of Corrigenda) paramoksanirasakarikasu. The locative used of 
the karikas is confusing but the phrase can be interpreted to mean ‘in 
the viveka on [that part of] the rauravavrtti |known asj the Paramoksa- 
nirasakarika’ . A(i The reference in the Matangavrtti ad v id yap ad a 3:20ab 


might then be assumed to be to Ramakantha’s Moksakarikavrtti ad 143- 
154. because it covers much the same ground at greater length (both 
passages are about the upholders of non-Saiva doctrines and the levels 
of the Saiva universe to which they attain at dnoksa'), and it contains 
both the quotations (ad 147cd-l48ab and 148cd 150ab respectively) that 
have just been cited at this point in the Matangavrtti. Nevertheless it 
cannot be concluded that this is the passage referred to, because within it 
Ramakantha makes a further perplexing reference: etac coktam asmabhih 
sarvagamapramanye (Moksakarikavrtti ad 145cd). The third reference to 
this work— tad ctad darsitarn agamapramanyopanyasc ( Paramoksanirasa- 
karikavrtti ad 58) again occurs in a passage about the levels of liberation 
that rival thinkers reach. The most plausible explanation of this confus¬ 


ing evidence is that the \Sarva-\Agarnapramanya was a lost commentarial 
work on the Raurava by Sadyojyotili upon which Ramakantha wrote a 
sub-commentary (upanyasa) that is also now lost. Thus the reference ad 
Moksakarika 145cd should probably be translated ‘and this I have taught 
[in my commentary] on [Sadyojyotih’s] Sarvagamapramanya’. This ex¬ 
planation is borne out by Sivagrayogin in his Sivagrabhasya (pp.83-4). 
At the end of a passage discussing, as above, the destinies of rival thinkers, 
Sivagrayogin gives a lengthy verse quotation on the subject prefaced by 
the following introduction: evam sarvasiddhantasaivagamaparmena srl- 
madrauravavrttiviveke ramakanthacaryena sarvagamapramanyopayogau 
kathitau. I reproduce the quoted verses below, collated against their 
quotation—from 4c onwards—ad Pauskara 6:68-75b (in which there are 
a number of similarities) on p. 381 of Umapati's Pauskarabhasya , 37 be- 


36 When referring to something written in the icariicas themselves * ■ 

different expressions, e.g. darsitarn acaryena rauravavrttau paramoksanirasakarikasu. 
(This precedes the quotation of Paramoksanirasakarika 44 in NareSvarapariksaprakasa 
p. 47 .) Viveka is in fact the name used to refer to the Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti in 
the last line of its concluding verse: tan narayanakanthasunur akarod asam vivekarn 

sphutam. 

37 Both authors precede the passage with the same two quotations (the first attributed 
to the Sarvajnanott ara, the second ‘anyatra’) on the same theme and follow it with a 
reference to the Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti. Umapati prefaces the passage with tat ha 

ramakantacaryenapv uktam . 

■ * w • A 1/ 












XXII 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


cause this must be the passage to which Ramakantha himself was alluding 
in the three cross-references mentioned above: 

parasparavirodhena praptabadham amanatam 
sarvagamanam ahur ye tatpratiksepa ucyate 1 

saktitattve tadadvaita\m\ muktim icchanti ye sthitah 
vidycgatattve purve tatpreryam lgvaram eva ye 2 

mantre£am suddhavidyayam ye sarvajham anisvaram 
m ay ay am ye svaciddhlnam sahkrantagunam lgvaram 3 

te sthita muktibhedo 'yam suddho yarn pasudrk tatah 38 
pasau brahmatvenahur 39 ye cidvivartan anirmalan 4 

tatraiva ye prapahcan ye kriyagaktau para hi vak 
avyakte 40 ye py upadanam gunanam brahma catmanam 5 41 

tatraiva karanam tesam ye tu narayanabhidham 

* * # * t/ • 

gunaprsthe gunebhyo ye vivekoktam 42 balantaram 6 

gunesu ye 'py anekantasyadvadam 43 mulavrttisu 
buddhau bhrantya pumamsam ye 44 jnanadigunagalinam T 45 

buddhivrttau ksanadhvamsi jnanamatram tu ye bhramat 

• * • • 1 / M %/ 

ahamkrtau tu tadvrtti pranamatram 46 bhramena ye 8 

* * * X # » * 1/ 

manasJndriyavrttau ye hetumatram 47 bhramantarat 48 
indriyesv indriyany eva jhatvad atmeti 49 ye viduh 9 

og V 

"conj.; pagudrk kutnh Sivagrayogin. No thinkers have been placed in the five kan- 
cukas. Perhaps Sivagrayogin omits a portion here. 

n q / 

conj. Sanderson; brahmatvarrj ahur Sivagrayogin, Umapati. 

10 Sivagrayogin; avyaktam Umapati 
41 Sivagrayogin; brahamavadinah Umapati. 

42 conj.; vivekokti 0 Sivagrayogin, Umapati. 

43 conj.; °anckantasyadvala mulavrttisu Sivagrayogin; aneirantas syadvadas calavrtti- 
kali Umapati. 

44 Urrxa{)ati; pumamsas te Sivagrayogin. 

45 Sivagrayogin; °galinam Umapati. 

46 Sivagrayogin; pranamatma Umapati. 

47 Sivagrayogin; ye ’timatram Umapati. 

48 conj.; bhramantaram Sivagrayogin, Umapati. 

49 Sivagrayogin; jnafcva catmeti Umapati. 











• * ft 


Introduction 


xxm 


tanmatresv apyain a hur ye brahma bhutandakaranam 
himsamaithunatah siddhahr 0 pigacadipade sthitah 
bhutesu ye pi caitanyam prapyam bhutatmakam viduh 10 

itthani pratyagamam yena bhinnam prapyam vyavasthitam 51 
sarvagamanam tenoktam pramanyam avirodhatah 11 

Not all of this is transparent to me; but the following tentative trans¬ 
lation should make some dubious points clear: 


A riposte is now given to those who claim that all [other] 
traditions have no validity as means of knowledge, being re¬ 
futed by being mutually contradictory. (1) Those who hold 
that liberation is non-difference with that [sakti] are located 
in saktitattva. Those [who hold that to be liberated is to be) 
a lord subject to the command of Him are located] in Tsvara- 
tattva. (2) Those [who hold that to be iberated is to be a] 
Mantre^a who is omniscient [but] incapable of acting 52 [are 
located] in the tattva of pure knowledge (vidya). Those [who 
hold that to be liberated is to be] all-powerful [too, but] devoid 
of one’s own power o: consciousness, [in other words, one] into 
whom the qualities [of the supreme Lord] have been trans¬ 
ferred [i.e. the Pancarthika PaiSupatas, are situated] in maya- 
tattva. (3) These were the pure [i.e. Saiva] varieties of jlower] 
liberation. Next the doctrine[s] of bound souls. In the tattva 
of the bound soul are those who hold that the impure apparent 
transformations of consciousness are Brahman, (4) those who 
hold all creation [?] [to be Brahman], [and] those who hold 


50 em.; siddha Sivagrayogin; $ucldhah Umapati. 

51 Umapati; hy a vast hit am Sivagrayogin. 

52 Professor Sanderson has pointed out to me (in a letter of 14.V.97) that it is 
this sense of anf^vara that is required by the context, which distinguishes between 
Mahavratas/Kalamukhas/Lakulas, who hold that the liberated self is omniscient but 
inactive, and the Pancarthika Paiupatas, who hold that it becomes (through guna- 
sarikranti) both omniscient and omnipotent.’ This distinction and the sources for it 
are discussed in Professor Sanderson’s eventually to be published Ramalinga Reddv 
Memorial Lectures, entitled ‘The Lakulas: New Evidence of a System intermediate 
between Pancarthika Pasupatism and Agamic Saivism’ and delivered in the university 
of Madras in I >ecember 1996. For other usages of T£vaja/T£ana in this sense cf. Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasangraha 2:8, MalinTvijayottara 1:26 and (ad loc.) Malinlvijayavarttika 
l:173c-174b. 









xxiv 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 



• (6) In the gunas, which are the 
i.e. of prakrfcj], 53 are placed those who 


that i he supreme level ol speech is in |an individual’s] power of 
aci ion [cf. Nadakarika 18]. And in prakrti are those who hold 
that Brahman is the material cause of gunas and of souls. ('>) 
There too arc those io: whom the cause of these [gunas and 
souls] is called Narayana |i.c. followers of the Pancaratra|. On 
top of gunatattva are those who hold [that that which brings 

one to the highest goal is] another power called ‘discrimin¬ 
ation’ [i.e. the 

products of the root 

uphold] the [Jaina| view that accords limited truth to all doc¬ 
trines. Those who erroneously hold [that the highest reality is 
the soul, which [in worldly existence! possesses qualities such 
as knowledge 51 are in buddhi. (7) In the products of buddhi 
are those |Buddhists] who erroneously maintain |the self to 
be| no more than [a sequence of] cognitions, [each] perishing 
in an instant. In ahamkaratattva are those who erroneously 
hold [the self to be] no more than the vital breaths, which are 
the activities of that [ahamkara]. (8) Those who, because of a 
different delusion, hold [the sell to be no more than the mind 
which is] simply the cause of the operation of the faculties 
[of cognition and action] are [placed] in manastattva. Those 
who claim that it is the faculties that are the soul, because 

j f 

they are sentient, are placed in the indriyas. (9) Those who 
hold that that the Brahman that we must strive to reach is 
no more than] the cause of the gross elements, and of the egg 
[of Brahma are placed} in the subtle elements [which is their 
cause]. 55 Those who have attained powers through sanguinary 
and sexual practices, they are situated on the level of Pisacas 


53 Tfc 

Perhaps Umapati’s reading conceals something closer to what llamakantha wrote, 
for cf. PausAara 6:73c-74b: syadvadinas tv anekantam atm an am paryupasate/ 
gunanam calavrttitvad gunasiddhas tu te punah. Umapati comments (p.380): syad- 
vadinah syad asti syan nastJtyadisaptahhainginyayenanekarupam vastu vyavaharanta 
arhatah gunanam calavrttitvad aniyatasvabhavatvad an ek ant am gun at man am paryu¬ 
pasate. 

4 viz. the Naiyayikas—cf. Ksemaraja ad Pratyabhijnahrdava 8 and Pauskara 6:73ab. 

J ’In the Southern Pauskara these are identified as Smartas (6:71): bhutandakaranam 
brahmety ahus smartas tata£ ca te/ jneyas tanmatrasamsiddhah. 






















Introduction 


xxv 


m I* r* 

and the like.' And in the gross elements are those who hold 
that the state to be attained is one of consciousness that is 
of [nothing but] the gross elements. (10) Thus, since the goal 
striven for in each religious tradition differs, accordingly the 
relative] authoritativeness of all traditions has been taught 
without there being any contradiction. (11) 

There is evidence too that Sadyojyotih’s lost Mantravarttika must 
also have been a partial commentary in verse on the Raurava. for a sloka 
and a half is quoted in Vidyakantha IPs Bhavacudamani (f. 68 r l i—5 J) pre¬ 
faced by uktam ca rurusamhitamantravarttike. Furthermore we may 
deduce that Sadyojyotih commented also on the Raurava's treatment of 
mudras, perhaps on Rauravasutrasangraha 5 (the inudrapatala), and that 
this treatment too received sub-commentary by Ramakantha, for Kac- 
chapegvara’s commentary on the Kriyakram a dyotika and Nate^aguru’s 
Mrgendrapaddhatitlka both quote a portion of prose that they ascribe 
to the Rauravavrttivivcka on the mudraprakarana: )b Thus the Bhoga - 
karika, Moksakarika , and Paramoksanirasakarika (all in a nustubh metre). 


r £» _ 

’"The corresponding half-verse in the Southern Pauskara (6:70cd) identifies these as 
Kaulas. Ramakantha, however, may not have intended them here, for he places all 
other Saivas towards the top of the cosmos. It is conceivable that this is a reference to 
non-Saiva tantrics. 

P ITT _ 

Unlike almost all oilier cited verses from this work, which are in arya \Sardhatri- 
gatikalottaravrtti ad 2:6c-7b, p. 34 (two quotations: the second should begin arno°, 
sandhi for a-arna-u°); ad Sivapujastavavyakhya 31, p. 57; on p. 69 of the Prabha- 
vyakhya on the Kriya kra m a dyo t i k a; in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 3:21c 23b, 
p. 72; and in AghoraSiva’s DviGatikalottaravrtti Trivandrum MS 4509 f. 6 w ^ 12 ^-7 r ^ 1 k 
vidvavidve^anarn sa man va vis csad h arm a vi c chambhuh/ mamtran akarod v as mad a rtha- 

HZ « */ P * / ( K 

abhidhanakrd drstah )], this is in a nustubh and appears to read: om ity ekaksarain 
brahma mam tranetradilaksitam! mahadadi viscsamtam vyapakani uadain avvavami 

a • / • * * 1/ J- I A r / 

fom fa j) rot am jagat ten a matrabhih sarvate bhikarnj iti. The only other verses found 
so far attributed to a Mantravarttika that are in armsfubh appear in a Sakalagarn as ah - 
graha and are quoted in footnote 58 immediately below. 

58 I am indebted to Professor Sanderson for pointing these passages out to me 
in his letters of ll.ix.97 and 13.ix.97. in the MrgendrapaddhatitTka we read 
(IFP T. 1021, p. 105): grTmadrauravavrttiviveke (conj. Sanderson; 0 vcka MS) mudra- 
prakarane: — vyapakatvat paramesvarasyavahanasthapanasannidhanasannirodhanani 
na (°rodhanani na ern. Sanderson; °rodhanam MS) sambhavantiti bhrantinivrttaye 
vyacaste visista sthitir iti. tadanugrahakatvenabhimuklubhavo visistain (em. Sander¬ 
son: vatfistam MS) sannidhyam iti. KacchapeSvara’s quotation differs only slightly 
(IFP T. 109, p. 175): raurava vrttiviveke nmdraprakarane (° viveke rnudraprakarane 
em. Sanderson; 0 vivekaprakaran e inudraprakarane MS):— parameivarasya vyapaka- 
tvat a vah an asth apan as am nidhan asam n irodhan an i asambhavinlti (° vnu ti conj. Sander- 















XXVI 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


the Mantravarttika (in a mixture of a nustubh and arya), the Sarvagama- 
pramanya , and a commentary on the Raurava's treatment of mudras (for 
the metre of both of which we have no evidence) may either have formed 
a single metrical commentary on an ancient Raurava —of which now only 
a shortened recension seems to survive (see discussion of Rauravasutra- 
sahgraha on p.xlviii)—or were conceived as independent verse works, 
each commenting on different parts or aspects of the Raurava. That the 
Dhogakarika and Moksakarika belong closely together, however, is clear 
from Bhogakarika 2, 59 and it seems likely that Rarnakantha regarded the 
Mantravarttika as a continuation of the Paramoksanirasakarika , since he 
would be unlikely otherwise to use the future tense to refer to his com¬ 
mentary on it in the Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti ad verse 3 —iti vaksyamo 
mantravarttike ('this I shall teach [in my commentary] on the Mantra¬ 
varttika ’). 

A solitary reference in a late work, the Sivapujastavavyakhya (p. 90) 
suggests that a Rarnakantha wrote a commentary on a non-Saiddhantika 

m 

tantra, the Pihgalamata : pingalamatavrttau ramakanthenapi £ vyapinyam 
adharasaktyavasthayam sthiram. yathestasthanasahearapurvakarn puja- 
kanirupanat tu calanam' iti. 60 Though Rarnakantha does not quote from 


son; °va tlti MS) bhrantinivrttaye vyacaste visistasthitir iti. tadanugrahakatvena abtu¬ 
rn ukhibhave vi$istam samnidhyam iti. It is conceivable that Sadyojyotih’s treatment 
of mudras fell within the Mantravarttika , for three verses attributed to a work of that 
name and mentioning mudras are quoted in a Sakalagamasaiigraha (II P T. 351, p. 37, 
T. 374, pp. 2262-3 and T. 246, pp. 68-9): mantravarttike - 

vasat vas'ye phat uccate hum dvese marane ’pi ca 

m A V X • 4 ft ■ * * X 

stambhe ca vausad akarse namas sampatkaraya ca 

• * * x %/ 

svaha Saktis svadha pustir ity ete mantrapallavah 
paramlkaranam krtva mahamudrah prayogatah 
hastabhyam samsprged dlilman khadipadantakam yatah 
esa camu[r] mahamudra amgasamskarakarmmani 

• hum ] 246, 374; hu 351 • namas sampatkaraya ] 246, 374; nama U karaya 

351 • 6aktis svadha I 246, 351; tfaktisvara 374 • pustir ] 351, 374; vrstir 
246 • °pallavah ] 246, 374; °paliavam 351 • mahamudrah ] 35 i; mahamudra 
246, 374 • khadi° ] 246, 374; kadi 0 351 • esa camujr] mahamudra ahga° ] 246; 

yesam mu dr am mahamudram ahga 0 351; esa ca mudra mata mudra aha° 374 

59 rurusiddhantasamsiddhau bhogamoksau sasadhanau/ vacmi ... 

/l /"Y 

1 A quotation immediately precedes this, and so one might punctuate after pihgala - 
vrttau, but the preceding quotation (vidhis tu caialihganam... ) is introduced with 
tatha somasambhupadaih and is indeed to be found in his paddhati ( Calalihgasthapana- 
vidhi 84cd and 86-7, pp. 269-70 in the Devakottai edition and 1641ab and 1642c-1644b 
in that of the KSTS). 

















Introduction 


XXVll 


the Pingalamata, his pupil Vidyakantha \ Vs Bhavacudamani quotes from 
or refers to it no less than twenty-three times. 61 It is therefore conceivable, 
if unlikely, that Ramakantha should have written such a commentary. 62 

The chronological list of Ramakantha's works given above may well 
be inaccurate. Some authors may have cross-referenced their works after 
their composition and scribes may in some cases insert cross-references. I 
have assumed that Ramakantha's cross-references to his other works were 

* B 

put in as the works were composed, because the chronology built on that 
assumption is not contradictory. It is true that the Matangavrtti and 

the Kiranavrtti both refer to each other, but it is fair to assume that the 

• * - 

commentary on the kriyapada of the Mataiiga, in which the reference to 
the Kiranavrtti occurs, might have been written later than that on the 
vidyapada and that the writing of other works could have intervened. 63 
It should be observed that there is in fact no evidence for the relative 
priority of the Matangavrtti (vidyapada) to the SardhatriSatikalottara- 
vrtti, or of the Moksakarikavrtti to the Naresvaraparlksaprakaga, except 
that it is likely that the whole Rauravavrttiviveka, covering every part 
of Sadyojyotih’s Rauravavrtti that we know to have existed except the 
Bhogakarika, was composed at one time. 

N. R. Bhatt’s list of Ramakantha’s works 64 differs in five respects from 
that given above: firstly his does not attempt to be chronological, secondly 
he makes no mention of a ISarva-jagamaprainanyal-upanyasaj, or of a sub¬ 
commentary on Sadyojyotih’s commentary on the treatment of mudras in 
the Raurava, thirdly he enumerates the Nadakarika separately from the 
SardhatrKatikalottaravrtti, fourthly he lists separately the Rauravavrtti- 
viveka —as I have argued above, I assume that this title refers to Rama- 


V 


61 ff.4”, 8”, 20”, 21 r , 24”, 25 r , 25”, 35”, 37”, 40 r , 43 r , 43”, 44”, 50”, 53”, 53 , 

55”(reference only), 55”, 57”, 61”, 61”, 62”, 65”. 

62 ‘Naturally the Siddhanta itself recognised no hierarchy within the Saiva traditions 


but one in which it assigned itself the highest position. It criticized the nondualism 
of the left in both its metaphysical and its socio-ritual aspects. However, it did not 
go so far as to deny the authority of the non-Saiddhantika scriptures themselves. We 
have seen that it sought to colonize the middle ground of Saiva practice by propagat¬ 
ing dualistic exegesis of the SvacchandaUntra and the Net rat antra.’ Thus Sanderson 
(1995:21). The content and affiliation of the as yet unpublished Pingalamata are briefly 

presented by Goudriaan (1981:46). 

63 It might be considered relevant that the opening verse on the commentary on the 
kriyapada , yogapada , and caryapada of the Mataiiga calls itself a vivrti, not a vrtti, as 

does the commentary on the vidyapada . 

64 op. cit,, pp.xl-xli. 















4 I I 


XXV111 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* 9 


kantha’s commentaries on the Paramoksanirasakarika and Moksakar ka 
and on the lost Mantravarttika , the lost Sarvagamapramanya and the lost, 
commentary on the mudraprakarana, which (along with the Bhogakarika, 
on which Ramakantha may not have written a commentary) were inten¬ 
ded by Sadyojyotili as exegesis of the Raurava —and fifthly he includes 
a work called the Jatinirnayapurvakalayaprave£avidhi. This tract, pub¬ 
lished by Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat, 65 is composed in indifferent Sanskrit in 
anustuhh metre and claims Ramakantha as its author. This is improb¬ 
able. because the work quotes profusely from tantras that Ramakantha 
does not cite elsewhere (e.g. the Dipt a, Ajita, Prodglta and the Karana) 
and that are probably late South Indian redactions known by the names 
of lost Siddhantas (see discussion of the Saiddhantika canon on pp. xxxvi 
and following), and because the work mentions dravida liymi 
and refers to South Indian castes (verse 6). 


Bhatta Ramakantha IPs style 


A thorough investigation into Ramakantha’s style would first require crit¬ 
ical editions of his entire oeuvre; instead I give a few brief, disparate 
remarks on some prominent features of his writing. One notable idiosyn¬ 
crasy is Ramakantha’s propensity to put causal pronouns, such as yat alp 
at the ends of the clauses they govern, 66 rather than, as is more normal, at 
the beginning. Filliozat too (1985:225) thought it odd enough to u 


emark 


upon 


Eh depit de quelques formes rares, de l’ordre des mots parfois 
inattendu — par exemple le relatif <Cyena3> place a la fin de la 
subordonnee causale qu’il introduit (vers 7), ces \Nada-\kanka 
ne sont pas d une grande difficulte. 

Furthermore it is a sufficiently unusual feature of style to have been re¬ 
peatedly misunderstood and therefore mispunctuated by the editors of 

the KSTS. 67 

65 Journai Asiatique, Tome 263 (1975), pp. 103-117. 

66 c K Naretvaraparlksaprakata ad 1:4, p,12> 61 ; NareSvaraparJksiiprakata ad 1:5, 

p. 15t22] ; Matanga.vrttividya.pada p. 3 [3] ; and in Ki ranavrtti 2:19.20, 2:29.16, 3:11.1, 

3:11.7,3:17.6,3:27.5. ■ [13] 

67 e.g. NareGvaraparTksapra.ka.'fa ad 1:4, p.9 ( , ad 1:5, p. 14 and ad l.o, P- 







Introduction 


xxix 


In the terminology he uses for argument we can discern the influ¬ 
ence of his chief rivals, Buddhists: expressions typical of Buddhist logi¬ 
cians, such as viruddhavyapyopalabdhi (Kiranavrtti 4:6.3) and vyapaka- 
viruddhopalabdhi (Kiranavrtti 5:1.6), are not commonplace in the works 
oi Naiyayikas, and Ramakantha’s discussions of certain issues echo in 
both structure and phrasing those of Buddhist predecessors: compare, 
for example, Ramakantha’s attack on the notion that a gunin and its 
guna are separable entities (Kiranavrtti ad 2:25al>) with pp. 475-6 of the 
Pud gal a vinid c ay a , and compare Kiranavrtti 2:19.10 14 with Manoratha- 
nandin’s commentary on Pramanavarttika 3:23, quoted in footnote 256 
on p. 244 below. From Naiyayikas, however, he adopts some basic struc¬ 
tures of sastra, such as its division into uddeda, laksana , and parTksa (see, 
for example, Kiranavrtti 1:14.1-2, 1:23.38-40 and the introductory lines 
to each subsequent chapter). 

Distinctive also is Ramakantha’s consistency in expression when he 
comes to handle the same topics in different works. In footnotes to the 
translation I have now and again cited parallels from Ramakantha’s other 
works to passages in the Kiranavrtti. Frequently the wording is strikingly 
similar and in many cases the same authorities are quoted in the immedi¬ 
ate context. 68 This consistency is such that it is often possible to locate 
parallel passages in other works simply by locating other instances where 
verses quoted in the immediate context are also quoted. 

The sources that Ramakantha cites in the first six chapters of the 
Kiranavrtti are the following 

Other Tantras Svayarnbhuvasutrasahgraha (1:19.15 16, 1:22.10, 3:5.5, 

4:23.3, 5:8.11-12, 5:10.8, 5:13.12); Pauskara (1:10.5, 2:1.3—6, 3:20.9- 
10, 5:27.6); Rauravasutrasangraha (1:12.20, 1:13.36-7, 4:23.8- 
9, 4:24.4—5 and 1:23.12-13—the last is untraced); Sardhatridati- 
kalottara (3:23.13-14, 3:23.24-5, 6:8.12); Matanga (1:12.20, 5:8.9. 
5:10.6, 6:10.9), Mrgendra (4:17.4-5), Svacchanda (6:11.5) and 
Malinlvijayottara (1:23.29). 

Works of Other Saiddhantikas Bhogakarika (6:24.10-11); Moksa- 

karika (1:23.29-30, 4:9.6-7) and Paramoksanirasakarika (1:22.27). 

hb Cf., for example, the sequence ol arguments and quotations in Matahgavrtti ad 
vidvapada 6:99c~100b, pp. 226-30 with that in the Kiranavrtti ad 3:12a-c. 











XXX 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• i t / i 


Works of Rival Thinkers Sahkhyakarika (1:9.45-6, 1:19.3-4, 2:12.15- 

16, 2:14.10, 2:14.13-14, 4:23.13-14, 4:24.7-8, 6:19.6); Slokavarttika 
(1:14.18-19, 1:19.7, 3:9.4-7, 3:9.23, 3:9.26, 3:12.10, 3:12.28-9, 
3:12.51-2, 3:19.3-4); Tantravarttika (1:15.39-40); Prarnanavarttika 
(3:9.11-14, 3:9.30, 3:12.18-21, 4:25.4 and 11); Vidhiviveka (3:12.34- 
7); Vakyapadlya (1:10.21-2, 1:15.31-2, 1:18.19-20); [unidentified] 
Tarastotra (5:12.20-1); Vidyadhipati’s lost Manastotra (6:6.11-14). 

Sruti Rgveda (1:13.24, 3:23.20-1); Verse Upanishads (1:15.43). 

Smrti Manusmrti (6:2.12-13). 


Epics and Puranas Mahabharata (3:23.27—8, 5:12.17-18 [the latter un¬ 
traced]), Vayupurana (1:9.11-12, 1:9.34-5 [the latter untraced]). 

Works on language Dhatupatha (4:13.2, 6:26.11) 

Untraced quotations (1:9.23-4, 1:10.18, 1:18.13-14, 1:22.3-4, 3:6.5, 

3:11.4, 3:12.5, 3:12.57-8, 3:13.5, 3:14.3, 3:23.16-17, 3:23.40-1, 4:7.3, 
4:7.7, 5:9.2, 5:12.14-15 [Ayurveda], 5:28.6, 6:6.3, 6:12.12, 6:16.7, 
6:17.3-4.) 

Ramakantha’s attacks (in what are in any case extremely polemical 
commentaries, as will be remarked upon in the next section) seem most 
vigorous not when lie is discussing the positions of rival disciplines, but 
when discussing the manner in which other Saivas and Saiddhantikas have 
commented upon tantras, 9 


The Kiranavrtti 

* # 

Bhatta Ramakantha II’s influence was not restricted to the thinkers o 

■ • m m 

Kashmir of his own time; his works are also much cited by later thinkers 
in South India, in particular by the best known of the exponents of 
the early Saiva Siddhanta, Aghora^iva. AghoraSiva frequently presents 
what are identifiably Ramakantha's views, but expressed in much sim¬ 
pler (though by no means inelegant) language. Indeed there appear to 

69 See for example the discussion at the beginning of the Kiranavrtti (1:1.1-5) about 
the appropriate place to discuss the sambandha, abhidheya and prayo/'ana of the tantra. 
See also the passages from the beginning of the Matahgavrtti quoted in the footnotes 
to the translation ad loc. Cf. 1:23.15-17, 2:19.6-34. 









Introduction 


xxxi 


be few, if any, points of doctrine upon which Aghora^iva differs from 
Ramakantha, and almost all the quotations he adduces to support his 
interpretations can be found also in the works of Ramakantha. Whereas 
Ramakantha’s commentaries tend to be discursive and polemical (reflect¬ 
ing perhaps the vigorous intellectual climate of contemporary Kashmir, 
in which many schools of interpretation were vying for acceptance 71 ), 
Agliorasiva's commentaries tend to be brief, lucid expositions of an estab¬ 
lished body of doctrines. The greatest of Ramakantha’s works are perhaps 
his Nare$varaparlksapraka$a and the enormous Matahgavrtti, which has 
probably been most quoted in subsequent Saiva literature. The Kirana 
is a less encyclopaedic tantra than the Matanga and has received a much 
smaller commentary; nevertheless there are numerous quotations and ref¬ 
erences in the works of later authors that can be traced specifically to the 
Kiranavrtti. * 1 * * * * * 7 * * * 11 

• m 


70 * 

One point of difference (helpfully pointed out to me by Jorg Gengnagel' may be 
that Aghorasiva’s supreme Siva transcends all levels of the Saiva universe: see, for 
example, the opening verse to his Tattvapraka£avrtti: £ivam pranamya sattrinignttat- 
tv at i tain satiaktik&m. Having venerated Siva together with his power, who transcends 
the thirty-six principles... ’ 

1 have found no suggestion in Ramakantha’s works that he places Siva above siva- 


tattva. 

Vi 

' We have remarked above (p. xxix) on the influence on Ramakantha o! his Buddhist 
opponents. The fourth opening verse to the Matahgavrtti reveals the tendencies in the 
interpretation of his own canon against which Ramakantha saw himself as fighting: 


kai£cid vede uunitah kuladr$i tu parair nvavadrstav athanyais 

* # J V *-/ a » A 

tyaktva siddhantasiddham guruvaragaditam vartina nitah kumarge 
matango Vam yato ’tail kumativihataye yen a vrttyahkugena 

m m v v * v 

kseptuin marge pravrttas tad iha nanu vayam granthavidbhih parlksyah 

Since this elephant |i.e. this Matarigatantra] lias been led by some into the Vedic fold, 
by others into the school of the Kula, and by others into the school of Nyaya, led 
away from the path taught by the best of gurus [and] proved [to be the true one] by 
the Siddhantas [themselves), we are therefore now embarking upon setting him on the 
[right] path with this elephant goad of a commentary, in order to strike aside wrong 
views. Those knowledgeable in the scriptures should therefore (yena... tat) please 
(nanu) examine us in this ii.e. examine our commentary.]’ 

7 O’ f _ _ 

Ksemaraja (in the essay at the end of the fifth patala of the Svacchandatantrod- 

dyot a, vol. 3, pp. 93-4) reports Ramakantha’s view of karmasamya and malaparipaka 

which Ramakantha expounds in the fifth chapter of the Kiranavrtti (see translation of 

and notes to Kiranavrtti ad l:20c-22b). Below are other authors in whose works 



pp. 23-26) quotes Kiranavrtti 1:13.5, 1:13.20-23 and 2:1.14-16; AnantaSivacarya (ad 
Siddhantasaravali vidyapada 7, p. 58) quotes Kiranavrtti 3:7.1-3; the anonymous Sata- 









xxxn 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


The Extent of the Kiranavrtti 

It appears that Ramakantha did not comment on anything but the first 
twelve chapters, the so-called ‘vidyapada' of the Kirana. Nothing furl her 
survives and furthermore he asserts (f,162 r l 10 “ 11 l) so {’}yam a pi vidya- 
padali (cm.; vinyali padah R A ) punas tu snanam katividham proktam 
(Kirana 13:1a) ityadipraSnapurvam kriyadipadatrayenopayapadartha eva 
(conj.: kriyapadatrayenopayapadarthayeva R N ) pratipadyate/ tat tu su- 
gamatvan na vyakhyatam. ' I uis is the vidyapada. Now hereafter, pre¬ 
ceded by such questions as “How mai fouls : ' i> • 1 lu i• 

taught to be?”, the topic ol means ( upayapadarthah ) is set forth through 
the three padas beginning with that of the kriyapada. This remaining 
portion], however, has not been commented upon, because it is easy to 

understand.’ 


Why Ramakantha wrote a commentary on the Kirana 

It would be a cynical view of theological commentaries in Sanskrit to hold 
that, theologians would not have taken the trouble to write them, had 
they not disagreed fundamentally with the text on which they chose to 
comment. Clearly Ramakantha commented on the Kirana because it was 
regarded as an authoritative scri; >ture of the Saiva Siddhanta and because 
its ritual prescriptions, along with those of other tantras, were followed 

ratnollekhim quotes, for example, Kiranavrtti 3:13.6-9 (p. 23—without attribution) 
and plagiarises other passages of commentary (e.g. the first paragragh after sutra 
28 on p. 50 is calqued upon Kiranavrtti 3:26.6—8); AghoraSiva (e.g. Mrgendravrtti- 
dTpika ad Mrgendra 8:6, p. 226) refers to Ramakantha’s commentary ad Kirana 1:20c- 
22b. and [Salivatipuranivasi-] JnanaprakaSa’s Pauskarabhasya quotes the same pas¬ 
sage with approval (IFP T. 180, p. 165). The latter author’s Saivagamadimahatmya- 
sangraha (IFP T.372. p. 1225) quotes Kiranavrtti 1:1.12-13 and 1:10.17-20 and his 
Sivajnanabodhavrtti (pp. 23-4) quotes Kiranavrtti 1:12.7-9. His Sivayogasara (p. 119) 
refers readers to the discussion in Kiranavrtti 2:25.4-11 and his Siddhanta^ikhamani 
(IFP 10871. f. 79' ' 1-2 ') to the discussion of the destruction of the power of mala at 
the end of chapter 2 of the Kiranavrtti. Nirmalamani’s Prabhavyakhya on the Kriya- 
kramadyotika (p.63 and pp. 346-7) quotes Kiranavrtti 3:23.32-3 and 6:11.1-6:12.8. 
Sivagrayogin does not mention the Kiranavrtti by name, but he knew it and ad¬ 
opted elements of Ramakantha’s distinctive commentary on Kirana l:20c-21 in his 
Sivagrabhasya ad sutra 8, p.367 (e.g. karmasamyam tu viruddhaphalayoh karmanor 
yugapat karyaunmukhyain upakarapakarayoh samyam va/ tad uktarn “na hrsyaty upa- 
karena.. ” and later kalantaravaiad iti malaparipakasya kalo malas tasyantarah pan- 

HH> 

paka ity art hah). 








IntrodncAdon 


xxxm 


in the Kashmir valley in Ram akant ha’s day. Nevertheless there are nu¬ 
merous discrepancies between what the Kir ana teaches and what Rama- 
kantha because lie is at pains to sec consistency with all the other scrip¬ 
tures and authorities known to him of the Saiva Siddhanta—interprets it 
to teach. The most striking discrepancy concerns the doctrine of salvific 
grace { gaktipata ) and what must precede it. Most early Saiddhantika 
sources, if indeed they declare a doctrine on the subject, hold that the es¬ 
sential prerequisite for the descent from Siva of the salvific power that in 
turn must precede initiation is karmasamya , the impasse that results from 
the balance of two equally powerful, simultaneously maturing actions and 
thai blocks the soul s capacity to experienced I here were however two 
other traditions within the Siddhanta known to Ramakani ha: the view 


* • 


jr 

of Vidyadhipati that the descent from Siva of salvific power (saktijmta) 
de]lends upon nothing but Siva's will 74 and the view attributed to Sadyo- 


Thus Kir ana 1:20c 22b and Kir an a, 5 passim; Matahga vidyapacla 13:15-20; Patna- 
trayapanksa 315. This is the Saiddhantika view that is attacked in Tantraloka 13:67- 
97. Among the extant tantras of the Saiva Siddhanta that are demonstrably early I 
have found no reference to the essential prerequisites for a descent of salvific power 
in the Rauravasutrasahgraha, the Parakhya, the Sarvajnanottara, the Mrgendra . the 
Sardhatrigatikalottara , the Nisvasatattvasamhita or the [Pauskara-] ParameTvara. It is 
conceivable that it is a doctrine of the indispensability of some sort of karmasawva 
that is referred to in Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 2:21: asamstha inuktiparyanta dvi- 
karmapratirodhatah (conj. Filliozat; °vratarayata Nepalese MS)/ procyate 'sav an or 
l)andhah sukaivaiyanirodhika (Filliozat; sakaivalyanirodhatah Nepalese Ms). [The se¬ 
quence of karman\ is without beginning; it eiuls in liberation from the blocking of 
two karmans. It is taught to be a bond of the soul that blocks ultimate freedom.’ It 
should be noted, however, that there is nothing in the immediate context to confirm 
such an interpretation. Sadyo jyotih has this to sav: ki mart ham avadharyate—yavad 
ivaiji dviriipadhikarata tavat sukaivalyam na bhavaty oveti? dvikarmapratirodha- 
tah/ yato Vasyam ( Iviruj)aniradhikaranantaram ova sukaivalyam bhavatrti. Filliozat 
translates (1991a:64): ‘Comment est-il determine que taut qu’il y a cette activity des 
deux formes de karman, il n’y a pas de delivrance? “Dvikarmapratirodhatah”: parce 
que, necessaireinent, c'est apiVs <|ue les formes [de karman] sont sans activite que la 
delivrance se produit.' |'Fwo kinds of karman are defined above in Svayambhuvasutra- 
sahgraha 2:17ab: karma tad d vivid ham (Ms Ga; tad vividhain Filliozat) bhogyam 

dharmadharmatmakam pad oh. 

74 Ramakantha cites a verse of Vidyadhipati to this effect in the Moksakarikavrtti ad 

■> m V 

67c-69b: 

svatantrah gaktipato "sau halvah pak11vimoksakrt 
sapeksatve hi tasya syad agaktah parainesvarah 

‘This descent of power from Siva that releases bound souls is autonomous, for if it were 
dependent [on something else], then the Supreme Lord would not be [omni]potent.’ 








XXXIV 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * * 1/ v 


jyotih and approved by Ramakantha that it depends on the ripening of a 
soul’s innate impurity (malaparipaka). Although I have found n um erous 
passages where Sadyojyotih speaks of the ripening of impurity, in none of 
them does he clearly state that he regards that and that alone as an es¬ 
sential prerequisite for the fall of salvific power; 75 indeed he fails to make 
this clear even where there seem to be opportunities that invite an ex¬ 
position of his position on the sequence of events leading to liberation. 76 
Nevertheless it is to Sadyojyotih that the view is attributed by Kserna- 

7 5 1 

His clearest statement on the subject is probably Tattvatrayanirnaya 21 

drstv a ca tarn (ern.; tan other editions) nivrttyai yogyam yuhkte 

nrmuktaye karanam 

* *_/ lB 

bijasyeva svape parinatir ista malasya citihaneh 

‘Once he has seen that (maia is] ready to be removed, he uses his instrument [i.e. 
initiation] for releasing the soul. Just as in ay a ripens in a period of resorption of the 
universe (pace AghoraSiva], so too we require that maia ripens, [and this is possible] 
because it is devoid of sentience.’ [For the Saiva principle that only insentient things can 
be subject to transformation see Kirana 2:26ab,j Other than in the Tattvatrayanirnaya 
Sadyojyotih also outlines his view of malaparipaka in Naregvarapanksa 3:152c-154b. A 
remark on the same topic is cited by Ramakantha in the Moksakarikavrtti ad 69c-70b 
and attributed to the Bhogaprakarana : 

malaparinateh karmaksayac ca vijnanakevalitaiva tesam iti 

‘Souls become vijhanakevahns [i.e. are not fully liberated from the destruction of icar- 
man and the absence of ripening of impurity.’ But this significant statement is not 
found in the printed Bhogakarika— indeed it is not metrical—and it is probably in fact 
an interpretative paraphrase of Bhogakarika 126c-129b, where no mention is made of 
malaparipaka , but it is stated that those with maia and no karman are vijnanakevalins. 

76 

' J See, for example, Sadyojyotill’s remarks on Svayambhuvasutrasarigraha l:19ab 
(anena kramayogcna par am kevalatam gat ah): kramena yogah kramayogah purvarn 
gaktya saha yogah , tato malaksaranena yogah , tato yiyasaya, tato detfiken a, taio 
dlksaya , tato vicchinnabandhanatvena. Filliozat translates (1994:31): ‘Xramayoga 
means a union with a succession [of events]: firstly there is union with Siva s tfakti, 
then union with the flowing away of the maia, then with the desire to go, then with 
the preceptor, then with dTksa, then with the state in which the bonds are severed.’ 
Contrast this with Ramakantha’s remarks when given an opportunity to expound the 
same pada (anena kramayogena) when it occurs in Kirana 5:29a: purvarn malapari- 
pakas tat ah gaktipatas tato dlksety anena kramayogena... 'First there is a maturation 
of impurity, then a descent of power, then initiation—following this sequence... 5 








Introduction 


xxxv 


raja," Ramakantha,' 8 and Aghorasiva.' J Though Ramakantha asserts 
that such existed (Kiranavrtti 5:1 0.14-16), I have found no demonstrably 
early scriptural source that clearly propounds the doctrine of malapari- 
paka. Hi) 

Vklyadhipati’s view Ramakantha rejects outright (Moksakarikavrtti 
ad 67c -70b), but he was still faced with a glaring contradiction within 


79 


1 7 S vacch an datantroddyota 5, vol .3, p.84- 10 H h ... 6rimat khetapalacaryen a m ala - 
paripakahetukah saktipato lAiyupagatah ... 

wfn 

e.g. Nare6varapariksaprakasa ad 3:152c-154b. 

’ 9 Ratnatrayapanksollekhini ad 314 315, where he lists commentaries on the Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasangraha, the Kir an a and the Matahga as places where liberation is spoken 
of as necessarily dependent on malaparipaka. (It is of course possible that Aghorasiva 
refers here to a passage in Narayanakantlia’s lost Svayambh u vavrttitippanaka or to 
Ramakantha’s lost Svayambhuvoddyota rather than to Sadyoivotihs Svayambhuva- 

* m %Z |/ fc/ v * * fc/ 

vrtti.) 

80 It is conceivable, but unlikely, that it is alluded to with the expression yogyata (cf. 
Kiranavrtti 4:5.3) in Malinlvijayottara 1:42: 

evam asyatinanah kale kasmimscid yogyatavatfat 
saivi sambadhyate 6aktih 6ant,a muktiphalaprada 

(Cf. also 12:40-1.) One late scripture (for discussion of its lateness see pp. xliiiff), the 
South Indian Pauskara, shows evidence of a combination of both the malaparipaka - 
and the karmasamya-paksas : 4:30-36 describe various kinds of karmasamya and how 
in each instance ai6varT6akti destroys either all tire karman that is causing the blockage 
or destroys the karman on one side of the blockage. The text then states (4:37): 

karmanagan malasyapi vipake sahakarinah 
pataty unnulanT saktis tadanugraliarupini 

The commentary of UmapatiSivacarya however, following Ramakantha’s line, stresses 
that it is the maturation of impurity alone that is the essential prerequisite of a descent 
of this salvific power of Siva and not the destruction of karma that follows a blockage: 

... evan canugraharupa£aktipate inalaparipako hetuh. sarvakarmasamyam tu svavi- 
nasamatrahetuh, na 6aktipate iti vivekah. 

Dr. Harunaga Isaacson has pointed out (*1995:181 and in mislaid correspondence) 
three relatively early passages in non-Saiva contexts in which a similar notion of the 
ripening of impurity is alluded to and which may be relevant to the early history of the 
concept of malaparipaka: Sankara quotes the following 'siurti ad Brahmasutra 3.4.26: 
kasayapaktih karmani jnanam tu parama gatih/ kasaye karmabhih pakve ta to j nan am 
pravartate; the Yuktidi’pika ad Sankhyakarika 23 uses the expression . .. visayabhilasa- 
laksanakasayapacanam prati. ..; and Candrananda, explaining the at ah of Vaisesika- 
sutra 1.1.1, writes at ah 6 ah do ’pi vairagyaprajhakasayaparipakadikam gisyagunasam - 
padani hetutvenapadiSati. 

Dr. Isaacson points out that though the editor of Candrananda’s commentary, 
Jambuvijaya, ‘prints 0 kathaparipaka 0 with no variants, the Sarada manuscripts all read 
as given above, while the Jaina Nagari manuscript reads °kathaya° a.c. and °kath a° 

p.c.’. 






xxxvi Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

the tradition. The Kirana is unusual in that it devotes almost an entire 

W 

chapter ( patala 5) to karmasamya as a prerequisite for receiving Siva's 

grace and yet Ramakantha here achieves an ingenious resolution to this 

contradiction, by judiciously distorting the intended meaning of the text. 

In brief, Ramakantha maintains that a descent of power does indeed oc- 

* * * 

cur when there is a blockage of two equally powerful and simultaneous 
karmans, but that that descent of power just unblocks the blockage and 
is not salvific, unless the soul’s mala is also ripe. That ripeness alone 
is the necessary and sufficient preparation for salvific grace. The topic 
is adumbrated in Kirana l:20c-22b, and in the notes to the translation 

• f 

of Ramakantha’s commentary thereon I provide some parallels, and, with 
quotations from the Mrgendravrtti, demonstrate that the resolution ot the 
contradiction within the tradition is indeed Ramakantha’s own, because 
it appears not to have been known to his father, Narayanakantha. 


The Kiranatantra and its Place among Other 
Siddhantas 


The Kirana is one of the few demonstrably early works whose name ap¬ 
pears in lists of tlie twenty-eight tantras o: the Saiva Siddhanta. As well 
as bearing the names siddhanta, siddhantasastra, and siddhantatantra, 
as Sanderson (1992:281) has demonstrated, these texts are also variously 
called samhita , 81 agama 82 jhana, 83 and tantra. 84 According to context, I 
have generally used either the first or the last, and most common de¬ 
nomination, which is used in the colophons of all the manuscripts of 
the text. It is my impression that even the colophons in South Indian 
manuscripts of South Indian redactions of siddhantas almost invariably 
use the appellation tantra. That South Indian editors of works of the Saiva 
Siddhanta invariably speak of agamas does not stem entirely from a coy 
reluctance to refer to their scriptures with the now sullied term tantra: 
neo-Saiddhantikas writing in Tamil from 

■ 


81 e.g. in the avatarikas to Kirana 2:19c-20 and 2:20cd. 

82 e.g. Kiranavrtti 1:12.26: parame^varapramtam hy eta d agamanipam 

pram an am...; Svayambhuvavrtti p.86, lines 10-11: sivas tv agamasyaiva karta , 
agamas tu givavastujnapakah ... 

83 e.g. Kiranavrtti 3:20.7-8: sarvesam dagastabhedabhinnanarn jn an an am. .. ; 

Kiranavrtti 3:27.8-9; and Kirana 7:11a: jiianoktyapy anumantavya (‘They [viz. man- 

■ * * i 

tras] are to be known to be such from a teaching of [this] tantra [viz. from 4:10-111 ). 



e.g. Kirana 1:12a, 6:5d, 7:1 d; 


Kiranavrtti 2:1.3, 3:20.9. 

# * * 













Introduction 


XXXVll 


(see, for example, the second verse of the Civananacittiyar ) profess ad¬ 
herence to two classes of scripture: Vedas and Agamas, the latter being 
the texts recognised in their time as Siddhantas. 85 The practice of these 

85 Some might cite Tirumular as the first to do so; but his date is far from certain. 
Scholars of Tamil generally place Tirumular earlier than seems plausible given the syn- 
cretistic content of the Tirumantiram (see particulary Tantra 4, which embraces even 
Tripurasundarl and the cult of the Sricakra). Zvelebil, for instance, states without dis¬ 
cussion or authority (1975:55) that ‘Tirumular might have lived in the seventh century 
ad . This may be because he was warned off from attempting any dating by the ex¬ 
ample of Vaiyapuripillai, who was mercilessly vilified (see pp. xx-xxvii of Sivathamby’s 
introductory note to Vaiyapuripillai, 1988) by most scholars of Tamil of his day for 
his attempts in 195C to lay the foundations for a rational chronology of Tamil literat¬ 
ure. The grounds for placing Tirumular early (see Vaiyapuripillai, 1988:78, footnote 1) 
appear to be that the eighth-century poet Cuntarar venerates a certain Tirumuian, 
and the much later hagiographer Cekkilan identifies this Tirumuian with the Mulan 
who claims authorship of the Tirumantiram (stanza 68). Vaiyapuripillai suggests that 
the Tirumantiram was probably written in the first quarter of the eighth century ad 
(1988:77-8); but tentatively suggests (1988:78, footnote 1) that Cekkilan and Cuntarar 
may have referred to different Mulars and points out the Tirumantiram s apparent de¬ 
pendence on numerous late works, its mention of weekdays (790-9) and its use of what 
seemed to him ‘[vjery late’ vocabulary (some instances are cited . This last might seem 
a subjective criterion for dating, and it is one which I am quite unable to assess; but it 

must be borne in mind that Vaiyapuripillai wrote this after editing the last four and a 
half volumes of the Tamil Lexicon. 

[One piece of evidence for lateness that Vaiyapuripillai cites (ibid.), the references 
in stanza 76 to Campantar, Appar , and Cuntarar, has not been verified. Natarajan’s 
stanza 76 does not refer to them, nor can I find a stanza which does.] 

The fifth of the nine mantirams of Tirumular’s Tirumantiram , entitled Cuttacaivam 
deals principally with the four of jnana, yoga , kriya , and carya, and we find represented 
there most of the views of the four that are characteristic exclusively of the late South 
Indian Saiva Siddhanta: 

I. The view that samayadiksa, vigesadTksa, nirvanadlksa , and abhisekadiksa qualify 

initiarids respectively for carya, kriya, yoga , and jnana (verse 1450). (Sub¬ 
sequently we are also told of the functions of these different kinds of initiation 
within the yogamarga (1466) and in the jnanamarga (1476).) 

II. The view that the four are paths known respectively as dasamarga (tacamarkkam ), 

satputramarga (carputtiramarkkam), sahamarga (cakamarkkam) , arid sanmarga 
( canmdrkkam ) (1477-1506). 

III. The view that they are sequential, the lowest being carya and the highest jnana 

(verse 1455). 

IV. The view that there are four sequential phases of liberation reached by them 

(1449, 1507-1513): salokya , samipya, sarupya , and sayujya. 

Most of these ideas are to be found together in the £ataratnollekhini, p. 6: 













• » I 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * f m 


XXXV111 


twentieth-century editors has served to reinforce the artificial distinction 


nanv evarn jhanasyaiva nivrttitattvabhivyaktihetutaya kriya-( conj.; 
kriyadi- Ed.)yogacary an am anarthakyam p rap tain iti cet. bad ham. 

tathapi caryakriyayoganam vidyatattvadikramena vidya tivasalokya- 
sanupyasarupyasampadanad vara sivasayujyadayakajh an ahetut vena 

vaivarthyabhavah (conj.; vaiyarthadyabhavat Ed.; vaiyarthadibhavat 

Ed.v.L). yatha devlkalottare — 

/ «/ 


jhanotpattinimittam tu kriyacaryah praklrttitah. 
tat ha ca suprabhede— 

vogabhvasam tatah krtva jhanam tatra tadabhyaset 

Cujir % ^ a ■ ■ 1 / ■ 

tad a [jhan an d hakarain ca jhanadipena n a£aye t. 
va bo dh asahgrah e- - 

atha caryakriyapadarn yog ap ad am tathaiva ca 
j h an a pad am krarn a c cai va si van a pa ri bh a si t am 
etac caturvidham mar gam salokyadiphalapradani 

suprabhede— 


salokyam cai va samlpyam sarupyam sayujvakam tatha 


atra caryadicatustaye 5 pi dlksayah adhikarasampadakataya samye 
pi jh anapli alasayu jyarupordh vagatisampadakataya jhan en a sain a- 
p rad h any am uktam . tatha vaksyati sarigrahakarah — 


yasmat pravitatad bandhat parasamsthanirodhakat 
diksaiva mocayaty urdhvam £aivam dharna nayaty a pi. 


Most are also to be found in Sivagrayogin’s Saivaparibhasa. Thus the following two 
passages show both that samayadlksa and visesadiksa fit the initiands for carya and 
kriya respectively, and that they are known respectively as the das a- and putraka- 
(rather than satputra-) paths: p. 301: 


... samayadiksam labdhva guruna siksitan samayidharman anutisthet. 
samayidharma£ ca sivalaya£ivabhaktaparicaryadayah tripundrarudraksa- 
dharanadayas ca. asya ca samayidharmasya dasamarga iti vyavaharah. 


and p. 306: 


itth am sam ayi dh arm an usth anad visesadiksa dh ikarala bh e 

# v # 4 #• ■ 

krtva givapujagamadhyayanadip u trakadharman an u tisthet. 


visesadiksam 

m ■- m 


Hie following two show that they lead to two different levels of liberation: p. 306: 


a vam ca samayidharmah tajjanmani visesanirvanadiksadyalabhe 

k/ * «l/ ■ * *#■ 

salokvaphalam dattva janmadvavavvavadhanenaikajanmavyavadhanena 

%/ A. t v */ 1/ v v 

va mu ktim janayati. 


and p. 318: 









Introduction 


xxxix 


still erroneously supposed to exist between ‘South Indian Againas* and 
'North Indian Tantras’. 86 The term againa is indeed used by Ramakantha 
to refer to Saiva revelation, 87 just as it is by Abhinavagupta, 88 but Rama¬ 
kantha also uses it in its widespread generic sense, 89 and it cannot be said 
that he (or indeed any other author of the early Saiva Siddhanta—i.e. from 
Sadyojyotih up to and including Aghora^iva) privileges the term to refer 
either to the tradition of the Saiva Siddhanta or to particular Siddhantas. 

Of the twenty-eight tantras that are listed as scriptures of the Saiva 
Siddhanta very few are demonstrably early works. Most are South Indian 
redactions or entirely fresh compositions that were unknown to Rama¬ 
kantha and the Kashmirian Saiddhantikas. Three criteria provide certain 
proof^ 0 of the relative antiquity of a Siddhantatantra: 


eva m putrakadharman anutisthato 

4 S m 4- 

asambhavas tad a samipyaphalam 
bhavati 


vada daivavasena nirvanadiksaya 
anubhuyante ianmantare muktir 


Apart from the views on the four padas mentioned above, there are other features 
of Tirumular’s work which are also otherwise found only in the works of late South 
Indian neo-Saiddhantikas, notably the emphasis on the role of devotion and the (often 
reiterated) preeminence of Nandin, the transmitter o all knowledge (1449- he taught 
the four paths; 1478— he revealed the sanmarga ; 1542—he is one with the Lord; 1567 - 
he led the way on the Saiva path; 1583; 1597; 1610 etc.) (Compare Sivagrayogins Siva- 
jn an a bodhasan grahabhasya (avatarika to devadeva jagannatha, p. 2, and paragraph 
1.4.1, pp. 5-6) in which Nandikesvara is taught to be the Lord's favourite devotee and 
the first recipient of all knowledge. 

86 e.g. Goudriaan’s remark on the Svayambiiuvasutrasahgraha (1993:603a) dike some 
other agamas. the text indeed calls itself a tantra.’ Cf. also Brunner 1992b: 1 and 38, 
fn.l. 

87 e.g. Moksakarikavrtti ad 143c-144b: £ai vagamakhyam pramanam and ad 150c 
151b: s^ai vagam a viro d h en a . 

Sf< e.g. Tantraloka 35:16 and in the introduction to the Agamadhikara of the Isvara- 
pratyabhijnakarikavimarsinl p. 186. 

89 e.g. in the avatarika to Moksakarika 144c: nanv agamantaranam api pramana- 
tvat. .. Cf. also Tantraloka 35:1-2. 

90 Arguments for dating based on questions of doctrine, as will be shown below, 
are far from certain. Arguments based on peculiarities of vocabulary can be equally 
treacherous. Sanderson (1992:285-6) observes that the use of the expressions anavam 
malam , mavfyam malarm and karinam malam to refer to impurity and the bonds of 

*/ V * X 1/ 

primal matter and Jcarman is a feature that appears late in Saiddhantika sources and 
that it is avoided by Sadyojyotih, Narayanakantha, Ramakantha, and Aghora^iva. He 
does not suggest, however, that it can be used as a criterion for determining the relative 
lateness of a Saiddhantika work, and indeed one demonstrably early Siddhanta, the 
Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha , though it does not there employ the term mala, contains 
the half-verse maveyam anavam karniain etavad anubandhanam (2:23ab). Moreover 









xl 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


a) its being transmitted not just in South India but also in early Nepalese 

and Kashmirian manuscripts 91 

b) the existence of substantial attributed quotations by demonstrably 

early authors (i.e. up to and including Aghorasiva) that are still 
traceable in the extant work that bears the same name. 

c) the survival o: commentaries by demonstrably early authors (i.e. up 

to and including Aghorasiva). 

By applying these criteria we are left with a very short list of demon¬ 
strably early Saiddhantika scriptures. From among those whose names 
appear in the lists of twenty-eight fundamental scriptures, there re¬ 
main the Rauravasutrasangraha, 92 Svayambhuvasiltrasarigraha, 93 the 

Ramakantha does not altogether eschew this vocabulary, for see Kiranavrtti 2:29.2. 

91 The S aiva Siddhanta must once have been more nearly pan-Indian, but the 
manuscripts of Saiddhantika works that now survive are almost exclusively either from 
the four southernmost states of India or from Kashmir or Nepal. I know of only a 
handful of exceptions: a manuscript of Bhatta N ar ay an akan t ha’s Mrgendravrtti whose 
colophon (f. 139^' ) states that it was copied in Sarnvat 1776 near Rarnghat in Benares 
(Jammu, Shri Raghunath Temple MSS Library, MS No. 4387 [now in the collection 
of the Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute in Jammu|); a palm-leaf manuscript 
in an old Bengali script of SomaSambhu’s K arm a- / Kriya -kand akram a vail (Cambridge 
University Library MS Add. 1406); and a paper manuscript in Bengali script of Sadyo- 
jyotih’s Naretivarapanksa with the commentary (- prakasa of Ramakantha (Royal Asi¬ 
atic Society of Bengal, Calcutta, MS No. 1140. A small portion of the Paramegvara 
may have been transmitted in a manuscript from Saurashtra, for which see footnote 152 
on p.lxiii below.) A borderline case, pointed out to me by Diwakar Acharya, is that of 
a palm-leaf manuscript of the Brhatkalottara whose colophon, as reported by Parajuli 
(1963:54), states that it was copied in Benares but by a Saivacarya called Amrtamitra 
from Kathmandu (Yahgala) in the rule of the Nepalese King Rudradeva in 1169 ad 
(samvatsara 289). { 'arajuli does not assign it a MS number, and I have not been able 
to locate it among the films of the NGMPP.) 

Q Q g 

' “Printed under the title of vidyapada (probably in an incomplete state) with scant 
manuscript evidence at the beginning and end of the first volume of N. R. Bhatt’s 
Rauravagama. The 1 kriyapada' of the Raurava belongs to a different stratum of com¬ 
position and assumes knowledge of more tatfcvas than the so-called ‘ vidyapada , the 
Rauravasutrasaiigraha, teaches (see footnote 1 11 on p.xlix). As Brunner has pointed 
out (1992b:33 and 53, fn.126), the abrupt change of interlocutors—in the Rauravasutra- 
sarigraha 1:2 we learn that Ruru instructed the sages Bhargava, Angirasa, Atreya. 
Paulastya, and Marlci, whereas the 1 kriyapada ’ consists of the Lord’s teaching to 
Ruru—alerts the reader to this, and it is confirmed by the smooth, formulaic, and 

4/ / i 

unengaging style of the latter portion almost every speech of the Lord begins with 
at ah param pravaksyami). 

A Q 

The first three and a bit chapters of this have been published with the comment- 












Introduction 


xli 


Kir a 12 a, the Parakhya (or Saurabheya), and the N isvasata 11 vasam h i t a 95 
(under which head might be included also the Nisvasakarika and 
the Dlksottara 9 ®). The Paramesvara is known from a single ninth- 


ary of Sadvojvotih by Pierre-Sylvain Filliozat in 1991. He was unfortunately unaware 

*/ Kt m \J 4 / 

of a palm-leaf Nepalese manuscript photographed by the NGMPP, Reel No.A 30/6. 
This handsome manuscript in ‘Kutila 1 script may have escaped his attention, because 
the National Archives index-card describes it as an astronomical work (‘vi jyautisam 
80’[?]). South Indian manuscripts of the Svayambhuvatantra evidently contain the 
chapters of the Svayambhuvasiitrasahgraha mixed up amongst other material and in 
an entirely different order. Thus Svayanibhuvasutrasahgraha 2:4ab in Filliozat s edi¬ 
tion wlien quoted in the Matari gavrtti ad vidyapada 5:6 is identified by Bhatt (using 
IFP T. 39) as 33:4. See footnote 111 on p.xlix below for a discussion of the South 
Indian rearrangement of the Svayarnbhuvasutrasahgraha. 

Chapters 1—6 and 14- 5 survive in a single palm-leaf manuscript in Nandinagarl 
script kept in Mysore (MS. P 258). This is in the same codex and by the same hand 
as M y . As in the case of the Kirana and other texts in the bundle (see the description 
of M v below), the scribe has selected only portions treating doctrine and yoga for 
copying. (Mysore MS B 811, a paper manuscript in Kannada o the Parakhya , is 
an apograph of M v s text of Chapters 14 and 15 only.) The Parakhya is not much 
quoted in the works of Saiddhantikas up to and including Aghorasiva, but its early 
date is secured by the substantial quotations that appear in chapter 10 of Ksema- 
raja’s Svacchandatantroddyota , all of which are traceable in the surviving text. That 
both titles were used oi the same work is clear, for example, from Kirana 10:27d. The 
name Parakhya , however, is almost invariably used. (Narayanakantha in his Mrgendra - 
vrtti ad vidyapada 2:7 once quotes three pa das— Parakhya 4:18c-19a, M y f. 30 r ^ 15 ^— 
with the attribution yathoktam 6rim a tsaura bh eye. ) For the appropriateness of the 
name Saurabheya see footnote 156 on p.lxv below. An annotated transcription of the 
surviving chapters is being prepared for publication by the author. 

' This too is transmitted in an early Nepalese palm-leaf manuscript (NGMPP Reel 
No. A 41/14). The manuscript is not dated, but is certainly one of the earliest, and may 
be the earliest extant manuscript of a Siddhanta. Of course arguments from palaeo¬ 
graphy are treacherous, but an extremely unusual (outside Kashmir or manuscripts of 
Vedic texts) and archaic feature here is the almost consistent use of the upadhmamya. 
(The jihvamuliya is not used.) Dr. Harunaga Isaacson has pointed out to me that the 
earliest manuscript of the original Skan dap u ran a, dated by Adriaensen, Bakker and 
Isaacson to 810 AD (1994:326), only occasionally uses an upadhmanTya. Goudriaan 
(1981:34—6) presents a useful summary of the structure and contents of its text. 

These are transmitted in South Indian manuscripts (e.g. Il l* T. 17) and not in the 

Nepalese manuscript; but, as Sanderson points out (* 1996c:24), in the last verse of 

# _ 

the Guhj'asiitra (with which the Nepalese manuscript concludes) Siva invites Devi to 
ask him to go on to teach the fifth Sutra, the Nisvasakarika.' We may conclude then, 
with Sanderson, that that work too was in existence at that time. The DIksottara is 
transmitted in South Indian manuscripts appended to the NiSvasakarika and its chapter 
colophons begin iti niSvasakarikayain dlksottare. . ., but it may be a considerably later 
addition to the sufcras that form the Nepalese manuscript’s NiSvasa (these sutras may 









xlii 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m m v 


themselves not have been composed all at one time; see p.lxiv); but it is related (as 
Appendix II1 shows, the list of Siddhantas given in the DTksottara is the same as that of 
the uttarasutra of the Nisvasa) and sufficiently early to have been known to Abhinava- 
gupta, who frequently mentions the DTksottara by name (Tantraloka 1:62, 2:9, 5:L48, 
8:9, 15:458, 17:97, 18:11, 19:21, 21:61, 24:4 and 17, 28:65, 29:243). I present below two 
identified quotations that demonstrate that the DTksottara transmitted in South India 
is essentially the same text that Abhinavagupta knew. In Tantraloka 5:148b-150 we 
read: 

. . . diksottare yatha 

samharanragnimaruto rudrabinduyutan sin are t 

hrdaye tanmayo laksyam pasyet saptadinad at ha 
visph ulihgagnivan nTlapTtarak tadicitritam 

jajvallti hrdambhoje bijadlpaprabodhitam 
dTpavaj jvalito bindur bhasate vighanarkavat 

Bearing in mind that in his metrical works Abhinavagupta frequently modifies his 
sources and that the South Indian transmission is corrupt and lacunose, we may recog¬ 
nise Abhinavagupta’s ‘quotation' in the following passage from the fifth pataia of the 

DTksottara (IFP T. 17B, p. 854; T. 127, p. 32; T. 150, p. 59): 

dliyayamane vararohe bTjadTpena bodhitah 
saptaratrena pasyet a hrllaksain paramesvari 
visphulihgagnisahka£am ... 

... te yogT pitanTlany aneka£ah 

krsnaguklams tat ha cany an pas vat e raktavarnakan 

m r * * */ X, %/ * 

nijair dipitahrllaksam samharet sap tame ’hani 
jvalate hrdi padme tu nijadTpasubodhaye 
jvalate dTptavad devi hr day am nijadTpitam. 

• dhyayamane ] T127, T150; dhyayamano T17 • visphu 0 ] T127, T150; 

visnu° T17 • lihgagnisankaSam ] conj.; lihgani sahkaSa T127; lingani sank a 

T17; lihgani yam T150 • yogi ] omits T150 • °suklams ] T17; hole 6uklas 
T127, T150 • canyan pagyate ] T17; canyat pa ... ta T127; canye pagyante 
T150 • samharet ] T17; sa haret T127, T150 • °subodhaye ] T127, T150; su 

bo ... sa pasyati T17. 

Compare also Tantraloka 15:548c-9 

uktam diksottare caitaj jvalasampatasobhina 
dattena givahastena samayT sa vidhTyate 
sayujyam Tgvare tattve jTvato 'dhTtayogyata 

with its probable soure (traced only in IFP T. 127, p.42): 

jvalamalakarakaram dhyatva devam mahetivari 
dhya U madhye tu tatvavit 

punyapapain dahet tasya dhyatva deham na samGayah 

evam krte ta to devi givahastena samsmrtah (?) 

» > • * * \ / 

tivahastapradanena samayT sa vidhTyate (em.; sarvadhTyate MS) 
anena vidhina devi kuryat tasyanugraham 

sayujyam T§vare tatve bhavate (em.; bhavante MS) natra sarngayah 





Introduction 


xiiii 


century 97 Nepalese manuscript in Cambridge ( Cambridge University Lib¬ 
rary MS Add. 1049) and has recently been identified as the original 
Pauskara (known from numerous quotations by Narayanakantha, Ilama- 
kantha, Abhinavagupta, and other Kashmirian authors) by Professor 
Sanderson. 98 A later, probably South Indian, Pauskara that has received 


Ramakantha iwice quotes from the Dlksottara (in the Narc6varap a riksaprakaga ad 
3:150 arid in the Sardhatritfatikalottaravrtti ad 8:11), but neither quotation can be 
found in the transcripts of the text. 

9, The manuscript is dated with ‘samvai 252’. Bendall (1883:27) interprets this as 
being of the era of SiTharsa and therefore c. 859 ad. Professor Sanderson suggests that 
it is of the era of AmSuvarman [—Manadeva], which began c. October 576 ad (thus 
Petech, 1984:12). This would date it to c. 828 ad. [Petech (1984:21, fn. 1) may also be 
implying that this manuscript belongs to the era of AmSuvarman 

98 Its identity is clear, because some portions it transmits overlap with mater¬ 
ial said to be from the Pauskara in the Prayatfcittasamuccaya. Compare, for ex¬ 
ample, Pararne$vara (f.32 r bJ-f.32 1 'bJ in the pencilled foliation): —icaye/ iokasarnvrtti- 
raksartharn prayascittarn prakirttitam iti paramegvare mahatantre — nyaprakarane 
prayadci 11 apatalarn £ I okas catuvirrigati / / o// brahma uvaca/ gomadhyam iti kirn 
proktarn kinta proktarn £ivalayam (sic) with the Praya£cittasamuccaya (MS Add. 2833, 
f j r [ 5 J_f j v I 1 !)- lokasamvrttiraksartham prayascittarn prakirttitam// // iti puskara- 

paramegvare (sic) mahatantre samanyaprakarane prayagcittapatalam// ® // brah- 
movaca // gomadhyam iti kim proktarn kihea proktarn £ivalayam As is clear from the 
above example the colophons of MS Add. 1049 do not use the title Pauskara. They 
always refer to it simply as Par am vara, and this fact, as Professor Sanderson says (in 
a letter of 22.iii.95), ‘suggests the hypothesis that the Parame^vara taught to Brahma 
really is the original, once solitary, Rudrabheda of this name.’ By the time of the com¬ 
position of the Praya$cittasamuccaya (and the manuscript itself is as early as 1157/8 
AD |samva£ 278]) however, it had become necessary to distinguisli it with an addi- 
tional label from other ParameSvaras cited therein, such as the Pratisthaparametivara 
-48 1 ’), the Ham sap aran i eg vara (ff.54 r -56 v ), the Pahca$atikahainsaparame6vara 


57' ). the Tilakaparamesvara 'ff.57 r 58 ) and the Matahgaparamegvara (ff'.58 1 


(ff.36 
(ff.56 v 
61 r ). 

The date of the composition of the Praya^ci 11 asam u c cay a is uncertain. Post-colophon 
verses 3-8 on f. 128 r —which are perhaps not by the hand o:i HrdayaSiva, since they are 
omitted in some otherwise complete manuscripts of the text e.g. NAK MS 1-796, 
NGMPP Reel No. A 1303/26; NAK MS 1-76, NGMPP Reel No. B 133/8; and NGMPP 
Reel No. C 29/7) and, as Professor Sanderson points out (in a letter of 14.V.97 , they 
use the third person of him (post-colophon verses 1-2 use the first) and show a ‘greater 
incompetence in the handling of metre and grammar’ than the forty-five verses that 
introduced the work—relate that HrdayaSiva was the pupil of an IgvaraSiva in the 
lineage of Lambakarna, an ascetic of the Ranipadramatha of the M at t am ay u r avamSa 
who moved to Goratika and favoured King Siyaka o: Ohara. There were two Slvakas 
of Dhara, the first of whom ruled c. 863-890 ad (thus Ganguly, 1933:30-1) and the 
second came to power before 949 and was still in power in 969 ad (thus Ganguly, 
1933:36 8). The first grant of his successor, Vakpati II, is dated 974-5 AD (see Biihler, 










Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * m 


xliv 

commentaries by Umapatisivacarya" and by [Salivatinivasi-j Jnanapra- 
kasa 100 is much quoted by authors later than Aghorasiva. 101 It bears no 
relation to the original 102 It is noteworthy that none of the above is from 

1892:226 . Thus the Prayascittasamuccaya is unlikely to have been compiled before 
the tenth century and must have been finished before 1157. Professor Sanderson, in a 
letter of 19.x.95, supplied me with the references for this dating. 

Another large portion of the | Pa u skara- ] Par am e£ vara is quoted in Taksakavarta’s 
Ni tyad is an grab abhidh an apaddh ati (see Appendix III and three chapters that may 
have belonged to it are transmitted in IFP T. 249, for which see footnote 152 on p. lxiii 
below. 

"Doubts have been voiced about the authorship of this Pauskarabhasya. Umapati 
is a common name among the Brahmins of Chidambaram, and it is not certain that 
this is the work of the Umapati who authored certain of the Tamil Meykanta-sastras, 
including the Cankarpanlrakaranam , a work dated to 1313 ad. Suryanarayana Sastri 
(1930:77) points out that a Madhva work called the Nyayamrta that may belong to 
the sixteenth century is referred to on p. 519 of the Pauskarabhasya . It is furthermore 
uncertain whether it is the same Umapati who was the author also of the KuncAtahghri- 
stava and the Sataratnasahgraha. David Smith writes as though all these were the work 
of one man; but he is aware that there are apparent discrepancies in their positions 
about, for instance, the relative authority of the Vedas and the tantras (1996:116-21). 

100 The latter is unpublished, but is preserved for instance in the India Office Library 
(Keith, 1935:705-6, No. 6143), in IFP T. Nos. 110 and 180, and in numerous Grantha 
manuscripts in South India. 

101 Aghorasiva never gives a labelled quotation from the late Pauskara, but he quotes 
4:1a in his Tattvaprakasavrtti ad verse 6, and l:61c-62b ad verse 3 (both prefaced 
by yac chriiyate ), and ad verse 25, after quoting nimittam T£varas tesam upadanam 
sa bindurat , which he correctly attributes to the Parakhya (chapter 6, M v f. 33^ 131 ), 
although it also occurs as Pauskara 8:18cd, Aghorasiva goes on to quote Pauskara 
2:lied, prefaced by anyatrapy uktam , and then in one block later in the same portion 
of commentary Pauskara 2:4c-5, 2:6c-7b, and 2:11c—13b, prefaced by tad uktam. (The 
two quotations in the Bhogakarikavrtti ad verse 60 which Dvivedi attributes to the 
Pauskara do not both occur in the printed text (see footnote 78 on p. 186 below).) 
Aghora^iva’s not labelling these quotations might be accounted for if we assume that 
he was uncomfortably aware of two Pauskaras, and aware that his predecessors quoted 
plentifully from the other alone. Note that LSanaSiva quotes frequently from a Saiva 
Pauskara , but not from the South Indian text commented upon by Umapati and Jhana- 
prakaSa. 

In this South Indian Pauskara the speakers are the Lord and sages headed by 
Sanatkurnara. In the above-mentioned sources for the original [Pauskara-|Paramesvara 
the speakers are Brahma and ParameSa, as befits the titles of the work. It is true 
that there is one verse quoted in early sources attributed to the Pauskaraparamesvara 
(in the Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 2:28, p. 95, and in the Nare£varapariksapraka£a ad 
3:150cd, p. 256—here the first half only is quoted) that does occurs in the late Pauskara 
(1:90); but one such solitary instance can carry little weight, since it would have been 
easy for the composer of the new Pauskara to incorporate it, as he appears to have 






Introduction 


xlv 


the first group of ten. the Sivabhedas; all are Rudrabhedas. 10li 


done with a lot of other material: Pauskara 8:18c-19b, 8:20c-21h and 8:34e-46b, appear 
(differently ordered) in chapter 6 of the Parakhya ; Pauskara 2:51ab ~ Pararnoksani r- 
asakarika 55cd; Pauskara 2:27c-28b « SardhatriSatikalottara l:6c-7b; Pauskara 2:21ab 
~ RatnatrayaparTksa 72cd; Pauskara 2:23ab « Ratuatrayapanksa 75cd; Pauskara 2:22a. 
- RatnatrayaparTksa 73c; Pauskara 2:5ab ss Kirana 2:26ab. (This is not an exhaustive 
list of shared verses.) The direction of such borrowings is debatable, but I suspect that 
the redactor of the Pauskara is in each case the borrower. 

If the author of the South Indian Pauskara deliberately incorporated one verse at¬ 
tributed to the Pauskara in early sources, one must wonder why he did not incorporate 
others. The answer, I think, is that he was conscious that almost all other attributed 
passages treated material appropriate to a kriyapada or caryapada and had therefore 
adopted the fiction that these had been taught and that the assembled sages were now 
anxious to hear from the Lord a vidyapada (Pauskara 1:4): 


kriyacarye prasadena tavasmabhih Srute pura 
adhuna jhanapadam nu srotum i cell a garlyasT 

One other kind of evidence for relative lateness that is similarly not firmly conclusive is 
that of terminology. For some concepts the Pauskara uses the developed terminology 
of the post-scriptural Saiva Siddhanta: thus it speaks of malaparipaka, vijhanakalas 
and pralayakalas (e.g. 2:48ff and 6:2fF), terms which are not attested in other early 
Siddhantas (see p. xxxv and footnote 71 on p. 184). 

103 The only Sivabhedas from which early quotations survive appear to be the Sahasra , 
of which a patala appears in the Prayascittasamuccaya (ff.70 r -72 r ); the Kamika ) 
which Abhinavagupta quotes in Tantraloka 32:47c-48a and, according to Jayaratha, 
in 22:32cd, and which Narayanakantha quotes in the Mrgendravrtti ad kriyapada 3:7, 
and Ksemaraja ad Svacchanda 7:66. 

To lost early versions of Rudrabhedas there are many more references. Ksemaraja 
quotes from a Candrajnana in his X imarsim ad Sivasutra 1:7. Jayaratha quotes from 
anantavijayakhyat siddhanta£astrat, in the Tantralokaviveka 4:251 and this is prob¬ 
ably a quotation from the Ur-Vijaya, the first of the Rudrabhedas in all lists of the 
Siddhantas. (That the work is closely associated with Anantais clear from its ‘adisutra’ 
quoted in the tantrotpattivyakhyapatala of the Brhatkalottara (Sanderson * 1996b, 
verse 41cd; NAK 1-89, NGMPP B 24/59 ‘Kalottara’, f. 52 r [2] ): athanantegvaram devam 

sarvajhanottaregvaram/ adisutram idarn tamtre vijaye samprakirttitam.) Quotations 
from the lost Mak\\ta or Mukuta are relatively plentiful (see Dvivedi, 1983:141). I use 
the word ‘lost 7 because not one of these numerous quotations in the works of early au¬ 
thors is to be traced in the South Indian manuscripts purporting to transmit this work 
that have been collated by Mr. Subrahmaniam and Mr. Sambandhan of the French In¬ 
stitute of Pondicherry. The Prayascittasamuccaya contains patalas from the Vathula 
(ff.lll r ~127 u ). In a letter of 14.V.97 Professor Sanderson writes: 

[t]he long chapter in two parts that the Prayascittasamuccaya attrib¬ 
utes to the Vathula is found as two consecutive Patalas in the Brhat¬ 
kalottara. That is probably its source, since Kalottara = Vathula. There 
are, however, numerous small differences between the texts of the chapter 
in these two witnesses; and the Brhatkalottara is a text that has drawn on 










Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * * %/ m 


xlvi 


Other early siddhantas of importance that are not, in the canonical 
lists of twenty-eight, but which were known to the Kashmirians, are the 
Mrgendratantra , the Matahgaparamesvaratantra , and various recensions 
of the Kalottara. These proclaim themselves to be subsidiary tantras (or 
‘redactions 1 , upabheda 104 ) respectively of the Kamika , Parame$vara, and 
of the Vathula. To these might be added the Sarvajhanottara , a work 
largely ignored by the Kashmirian exegetes of the Saiva Siddhanta, prob¬ 
ably because of its explicitly non-dualist doctrine, but which appears to 
claim to be a subsidiary tantra to the Vathula, 105 has received a comment¬ 
ary by Aghoragiva 106 and is transmitted in an early Nepalese manuscript. 

numerous sources (Matanga, Raurava, Jayakhya etc.). It is possible that 
it redacted its treatment of penances from a Kalottara/ Vathula now lost, 
which, unlike the non-eclectic Kalottara recensions (Dvigatika, Sardhatri- 
gatika, Sapta£atika } Trayoda£a£atika), covered Carya in detail. 

101 The term upagama has been avoided, because it seems to appear only in secondary 
literature. (The first usage I am aware of is in the ‘Table des Agamaet Upagama' facing 
p.xix of the first volume of the IFI’s edition of the Raurava.) The term upahheda, 
however, appears widely in primary sources, e.g., Kirana 10:28, Svayambhuvasiitrasan- 
graha 5:12 (quoted in Appendix III, p. 413), Brhatkalottara tantrotpattivyakhyapatala 
16 quoted in Appendix III, p. 416), SataratnollekhinT p. 9, Suprahheda kriyapada 2:79, 
etc. The term mulagama too l have not come across in any primary source. 

105 The first verse of the work I interpret to be such a claim (NGMPP Reel No. A 43/12, 
f.T ' 1 ^): samapte vathule tantre devadevam mahe^vara[m]/ atipragnan (em.; 0 pra£nam 
MS paran (em.; pararn MS) guhyan (em.; guhya MS) prcchad bhuyah (em.; prccha 
bhuyo MS) sadananah. 

‘When the Vathulatantra was at an end, Kumara further asked* the supreme Lord, 
the god of gods, more extra, secret questions.’ 

Goudriaan (1981:39, fn.28) suggests that samapte vathule tantre may imply ‘nothing 
more than that the original tradition of the Rudragamas had been completed in the 
author's time’. This seems unlikely, because, as the table in Appendix III shows, only 
the Mrgendra and South Indian lists give the ‘ Vatula’ as the last of the Rudrabhedas. 
Furthermore the various recensions of the Kalottara share the same interlocutors, and 
these claim to be upabhedas of the Vathula. 

* prcchad is interpreted as an augmentless imperfect. 

-| A/J 

A beautiful, complete and well-preserved palm-leaf manuscript of the Sarva- 
jnanottaravrtti copied in Madurai in Grantha script is preserved in the Oriental Re¬ 
search Institute and Manuscripts Library of Trivandrum (MS 6578) and transmits all 
but the very beginning of the text. All other sources for the text are fragmentary, and 
the only other manuscript known to me that covers the first half of the commentary 

IFP 47818) starts in the same way, without mahgala verses or introductory remarks. 
Other parts survive in a number of South Indian sources, e.g. Hoshiarpur MS 5987 
(with the MrgendravrttidTpika) , IFP 39818 and 47818 and IFP T. Nos. 83 and 985. 







Introduction 


xlvii 


A case might be made for adding also the Mayasangralia, since, although 
it is not of theological significance—it would be fair to describe it as a 
pratisthatantra —it lias received a commentary by Ramakantha U s pu¬ 
pil, Vidyakantha II (see p.x and following). Manuscripts survive also of 
an old Mohacudottara , which is probably tire Mohagurottara upon which 
AghoraSiva mentions having composed a commentary (see footnote 24 on 
p. xv above). 107 

Is a Relative Chronology Possible? 

Now that a corpus of relatively early Siddhantas (or versions of 
Siddhantas) has been established using only the incontrovertible evid¬ 
ence of the existence of early commentaries, early substantial attributed 
quotations, and early manuscripts, we come to examine whether these 
can be dated relative to each other. The authors of these works of scrip¬ 
ture did not deliberately leave clues and there is little evidence to go 
on. The sorts of internal evidence that have occurred to me are these: 
cross-references; discrepant lists of the principles (tattva) with which the 
universe is structured; the structure of the tantras; oddities of doctrine; 

11)7 Two Nepalese manuscripts, a fragmentary palm-leaf one in an early Newari script 
(NAK MS ca 1622, NGMPP Reel No. B 27/18) and a complete Devanagarl one on 
paper (NAK MS 5-1977, NGMPP Reel No. A 182/2) transmit such a text-the colo¬ 
phons calling it sometimes Mohacurottara and sometimes Mohacudottara—which has 
the form of a pratisthatantra ascribed to the Agneya and taught by Skanda to In¬ 
dr a. Though the work may not have been transmitted up to the present day in 
South India, it was once well known there, for just before going to press I was able to 
identify in the paper manuscript a few of the following quotations: a Mohacurottara is 
quoted by Anantaiambhu ad Siddhantasaravali vidyapada 29 (f.2l v[b ~^) and carya- 
pada 130; on pp. 39. 99 and 100 of the Saivakalavivekavyakhya\ in a Sakalagama- 
sahgraha, IFP T. 374, p. 2265; on p. 520 of vol. 1 of the Nanavaranavilakkam; on pp. 34 
(f. 28 r[4] ), 49 (^f. 7 r t 6-71 ) and 89 of the Sivapujastavavyakhya; on pp.99, 203, 208, and 
214 of the kriyapada (volume 3) of the I^ana^ivagurudevapaddhati; and on pp. 13, 96, 
115. 155, 179, 189 of the Sivagrabhasya; a Mohacudottara is cited on pp. 134 (f.24 r[1] ) 
and 135 (f. 24 r[2j ) of the Danakhanda (volume 1) of Hemadri’s Caturvargacintamani\ 
and the PrayaScittasamuccaya , on ff. 103 u - ! 11 r , quotes the end of the text, from 
praya$cittam pravaksyami on f. 42 t [1] up to and including the final colophon on f. 47 rt2 b 
itv agneve mahatantre pratisthatantram mohacudo-(°euro 0 ac)-ttaram/ sampurnam 
(the Prayagcittasarnuccaya (f. Ill' reads °tantie mohacurottaram samaptam). 

Dwarkanath Sharma (1993:134-5) records a Devanagarl manuscript in Jodhpur 

lated vikrainasainvat 1881 of the third patala of the Jhanakanda of a Alohacorottara 

# 

(Acc. No. 40180(7 <), but this is perhaps another, unrelated work. 










xlviii 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* m 1/ p 


peculiarities of language; and positioning within the traditional lists of 
twenty-eight Siddhantas. As we shall see, none of these kinds of evidence 
is without problems. 

Cross-references 

Outside the lists of twenty-eight Siddhantas, which will be examined be¬ 
low, there is only one early tantra that cross-refers to another. 108 The 
Svayambhuva is mentioned in Rauravasutrasahgraha 3:14ab (Bhatt draws 
attention to this in a footnote ad loc, ): ye ca te guravah proktas tantre 
svayambhuve pura ... From what precedes (Rauravasutrasahgraha 3:12), 
we expect the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha passage referred to to give the 
names of eighteen transmitters of knowledge (sastravaktarah), beginning 
with Vlrabhadra and ending with Brahma. I have not however been 
able to identify the passage of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha to which 
this refers. We would expect it to be the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha's 
account of the canon of Siddhantas, but, as Appendix III shows, the 
Svayambhuvasutrasangraha does not there list transmitters of tantras. 109 
It is possible of course that the Rauravasutrasahgraha and the Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasahgraha , as their titles suggest, are indeed no more than con¬ 
densed versions of much larger works. It is also possible, however, that 
their titles are intended to suggest the common fiction that they were 
originally transmitted as vast works of intricate detail, but were sub¬ 
sequently partially lost or condensed into proportionally tiny works of 

human scale. 110 Whether or not the two sutrasahgrahas are really con- 

___ # 

* ■ 1 1 —■■ ■ ■ ■■ — ■■ ^ * r . 

108 So that others are not led astray, 1 mention what at first appeared to me to be a 
cross reference to the Vljaya in ti e Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (seven verses from the 
end of the twenty-third and last chapter, p. 69, lines 9-10 in the Mysore edition): 

tato devam sh vam dhyatva sarvatmani susamsthitam 

■ ■ 1/ § 

anantavijayoktena yajen margena margavit 

For the name Anantavijaya see above footnote 103 on p.xlv.) In fact, as the first 
and last verses of the fourteenth chapter reveal, Anantavijaya is here the name of a 

mandala. 

■ ■ 

1 he passage referred to may have been ost: the Mysore edition of the Svayam¬ 
bhuvasutrasangraha contains 734 gloka s, but its final verse claims that the text lias 
764. 

110 There seems to be evidence both to support and to cast doubt on this theory. 
On the one hand, at the end of the Rauravasutrasahgraha several verses in elaborate 
metres (see p.lxxi) explain how that text originated and became condensed to 12,000 
verses by Bhrgu (10:104), to 1200 by Ruru (10: i.05), and once again (this time without 






Introduction 


xlix 


densations of works that at one time really existed, it is plain that they 
are not condensations of the longer Svayambhuvagama and Rauravagama 
transmitted in South India. 111 In all the various lists of the twenty-eight 


specifying the number of verses) by Ruru (10:106cd): giverito viditaparaparo rurus 
cakara tantrarnavasahgraham pun ah. That this tantrarnavasahgraha is the Raurava- 
su t rasa h grab a is indicated by the immediately following phalasruti (10:107): imam 
hi yo rauravasu trasahgraham pathed anur vyapagatapagabandhanah/ vibhidya lokan 
kanakandajanmanah sa yati vai parama£ivantikam budhah. [From the point oi view of 
the developed Saiva Siddhanta this could be seen to be doctrinaOy problematic, since 
initiates should reach something better than paramatfivantikam and non-initiates should 
not read scripture.] On the other hand, the Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha gives little 
away about its ayatikrama , and one important piece of information, namely that we 
have the text as taught by Brahma to his disciples the Valakhilyas, we know only from 
Sadyojyotih s Svayambhuvavrtti ad 1:1. This might be interpreted to be a sign that 
the Svayambhuvas u trasahgraha really is a condensation of a longer work that was still 
known to Sadyojyotih. Furthermore, although all the early attributed quotations from 
the Raurava that can be traced are traced in Vie Rauravasutrasarigraha, it is surprising, 
even allowing for the fact that most of the Ran ravasu trasahgrah a is transmitted in a 
single manuscipt, how many cannot be traced. The sutras on which the Paramoksa- 
nirasakarika are supposed to comment, for instance, are nowhere to be found. 

11 ‘This is clear in the case of the Rauravasutrasarigraha in part because of differences 
on points of doctrine between the two, c.g. the number of tattvas taught in the Raurava¬ 
sutrasarigraha (unequivocally thirty according to 10:98-101) and the number required 
in other parts of the printed Raurava (see. for example, kriyapada 47:99-101, where 
they are equally unequivocally stated to be thirty-six, and kriyapada 58:22 3, where 
reference is made to three that are not included in the Rauravasu trasahgraha's list: 
jTvara, sadasiva and tfakti). The lists of the thirty-eight kalas of the brahmamantras 
are also treated differently: in Rauravasutrasarigraha 6 (just as in Kirana 62) these 
are not assigned the names that they receive in kriyapada 2— it is noteworthy that 
for the table of names of the kalas given facing p. 28 of vol. 1 of the Raurava Bhatt 
has not drawn on a single early source. Furthermore kriyapada 2 actually divides 
the aghora mantra differently from the Ra ura vas u trasahgrah a (6:8). It is true that 
there are verses of the Rauravasutrasarigraha which appear also in the kriyapada of the 
Raurava (Rauravasutrasarigraha 3:13 appear with variants and in a different order in 
kriyapada 58:43-53), but this fact cannot alone be used to argue that the Rauravasufcra- 
sahgrahq is a condensation of the larger Raurava transmitted in the South, because 
neither the shared verses nor their immediate context in either text can tell us the 
direction of borrowing. (See also footnote 92 on p.xl for differences in style and in the 
ayatikrama between the Rauravasutrasarigraha and the 1 kriyapada' of the Raurava.) 

In the case of the S vayam bhu vasu trasahgrah a, its chapters appear embedded in 
Grantha manuscripts that transmit what purports to be the Svayambhuvagama; but 
even a cursory examination reveals that its material has been clumsily shufiled with a 
different work. I present evidence below based on a comparison of the Mysore edition 
(which, after comparing a few passages, I believe to be based solely on the text of 
the work transmitted in the same codex as M y ), Filliozat’s edition of Sadyojyotih’s 








Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


i 


commentary, the Nepalese MS (NGMPP Reel No. A 30/6), and IFP T. Nos. 39 and 247. 
The Mysore edition and the Nepalese MS transmit 23 chapters and are substantially 
the same text. Sadly the Nepalese MS is missing 17 of its 53 folios (Nos. 1 3. 6-9. 
11—16, 20, and 22-4). IFP T. 39 has 58 chapters, including all that is in the shorter 
version, but disordered and mixed with other material. The following discrepancies 
prove this: 

I. Confusions about speaker and recipient:— 

According to Sadyojyotih’s commentary on 1:1, Svayambhu first venerates Siva 
(hvam pranamya paramam nidhanesam) and then teaches what he learnt (presum¬ 
ably from Siva] to his disciples, the Valakhilyas. This explains why we sometimes have 
plural vocatives (e.g. in the last verse of the last chapter, 23, o: the Svayambhuvasutra¬ 
sangraha: svayambhuvam idain viprah samaptam svastir astu vah) and sometimes a 
singular vocative referring to Brahma (e.g. 2:23d kanakandaja), reflecting that Brahma 
is faithfully reporting what he learnt from Siva. In IFP T. 39 numerous chapters begin 
with vocatives addressing Brahma (e.g. 47, p. 163 and 51, p. 190), but the redactors 
appear to confuse speaker and recipient in 54, which begins (p.223): ayutasnapanam 
vaksye thuya lain nidhaiem., niya IFP T. 39 )ne£vara, for nidhane£a is the name for Siva 
used in the first verse of the shorter recension. 

II. Structure:— 

1:1 of the S vayam bh u vasu trasangrah a is an appropriate man gal a verse for the be¬ 
ginning of a text. This first chapter appears as the 32nd in IFP . 39. where 
the mahgala is out of place. IFP T.39’s first chapter is the opening portion of 
the Svayam bhuvasu trasahgraha 's 5th, dealing with the origin of gabda and its 
division into the ten arid eighteen Siddhantas. 

IFP T. 39’s 31 (= Nepalese and Mysore 22) concludes with idanim m an as am yogam 
Grnudhvam samhitavratah . In the Nepalese and Mysore version this is indeed 
followed by a chapter on manasayoga, but in IFP T. 39 that chapter is the 45th. 

The final chapter (23) of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha concludes with 
svayambhuvam idam viprah samaptam svastir astu vah. This chapter, including 
this final half-verse, is the 47th in IFP T. 39. 

Further, more subjective arguments on grounds of the style and content of the extra 
chapters could be adduced to show that they are later, but the above shows clearly 

vJ f l/ 

that IFP T. 39 transmits a text in which disparate parts have been carelessly grafted 
together. I say carelessly, because no attempt has been made to obviate awkwardnesses 
that reveal that the arrangement of the text has been fiddled with. 

The colophons of II ! 1 T. 39 reflect confusion about the name and structure of the 
text. Some chapters are said to belong to the Svayainbhuvatantra (e.g. 58), some to 
the uttarasutra of the Svayambhuvatantra (e.g. 56}. some to the uttarasutra of the 
Svayambhuvasutrasangraha, but most to the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (e.g. 47, 50- 
55, 57) though not found in the Nepalese text. 

IFP T. 247 gives the text of the jlrnoddharapatala ascribed to the Svayarnbhuva 
(pp. 305-9), followed by the first 4 patalas of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha in the cor¬ 
rect order and correctly ascribed to the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (pp. 310-325) but 
numbers them 33-6. The colophon to the last of these (p. 325) reads: iti svayarnbhuva- 
sutrasaiigrahe adhvavidhanannama sattrimsah patalah // vidyapadah samaptah// 










Introduction 


li 


Siddhantas for which sec the table in Appendix III ) the Vijaya is placed 
first of all and the Svayambhuva. appears before the Raurava. Since they 
appear thus (for whatever reason) to reflect the chronological sequence of 
the composition of the tantras that we can establish from other evidence, 
there may therefore be some value in the lists as evidence for a relative 
chronology. 


Discrepant Lists of the Principles o the Universe 


The Saiva Siddhanta appears to have inherited the structure of its dualist 
ontology from Sankhya thinkers (or from the same sources from which 
Sankhya thinkers inherited it). Classical Sankhya thinkers held the soul 
to be the topmost principle, fundamentally different from that of matter 
and all the principles derived from matter. Those twenty-three derived 
principles are the intellect ( buddhi ); the principle of self-identity ( aham- 
kara); the eleven faculties of sense and action (the mind, the ear, skin, 
eyes, tongue, nose, mouth, hand, anus, reproductive organs, and feet); 
the five subtle elements (sound, touch, form, taste, and smell); and the 
five gross elements (ether, air, fire, water, and earth). The tantras of the 
Saiva Siddhanta modified this structure in two ways: they added prin¬ 
ciples to the top, demonstrating that the Sankhyas had correctly grasped 
the nature of only the inferior levels of the universe, and they attempted 
to place worlds inherited from older Saiva scriptures on the levels of these 
various principles ( tattva ). The latter change meant that tattva in some 


Thereafter follow (pp. 325-46} three unnumbered pa talas, the prada,ksinanama.ska,ia- 
vidhipataJa, the givasamproksanavidhipatala, and the sakalasamproksanavidhipatala 
attributed respectively to the Svayambhuva, the Svayambhuve pratisthatantre , and 
the Svayambhuva. 

Sadyojyotih’s commentary does not mention jnana, kriya , carya and yoga, nor does 
he speak of a fourfold division of the text under those heads. He discusses the first 
and predominantly theological part of the text up to and including 4:7, but his reason 
for stopping there is not that that is the end of the vidyapada, as Filliozat calls this 


portion of the text, but that the text from that point on is sufficiently straightforward 
not to require exposition: tatah prabhrtita /a/ samapteh sutranam gurusampradayad 
uktam artham alpabuddhayo ’py avadharayitum gaknuvantTty uparamyate. 

Clearly the text was amplified with originally unrelated material in the Tamil speak¬ 
ing South, and the subject matter of the whole hybrid text clumsily rearranged so that 
it could be divided into four portions treating the topics of the four padas, presum¬ 
ably because having these four as text-divisions was held to be a defining feature of a 


iuahatantra. 







Ramakantha \s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * * m 



contexts approximates to a ‘reality level' of the universe in which various 
worlds are piaced rather than a constitutive ‘principle 1 of the universe. 112 
Again the scriptures of the Saiva Siddhanta differ widely in their alloc¬ 
ations of worlds to principles, and in some cases, as we shall see below, 
no allocation is made at all. (The structure of the cosmos can affect the 
mode of initiation, because the soul’s stock-pile of actions must be puri¬ 
fied through initiation in all the worlds and in all the principles in which 
those stored actions are to bear fruit.) 

In the post-scriptural Saiva Siddhanta of the commentators a con¬ 
sensus was reached that there were altogether thirty-six principles (tat- 
tv a), five of which (|1| Siva, [2] his power ($akti), [3] Sada^iva, [4| Isvara, 


and [5] vidya) constitute the pure universe (suddhadhvan) above primal 
matter, and the remaining thirty-one of which make up the impure uni¬ 
verse (asuddhadhvan). Those thirty-one, in order of their evolution from 
the first, primal matter (maya), are: |7| limited power to act (kaia), [8] 
limited power of knowledge (vidya), |9] passion (raga), [10] time (kaia), 
[11] binding fate (niyati), 113 and then all the principles of the mature 
Sankhya listed above, but with two modifications: firstly, the Sankhyas’ 
top category, tire sou !, became that of the bound soul, because the Saiva 
Siddhanta holds the free soul to be equivalent to Siva, and secondly, that 
of matter (prakrti) became a redundant lower duplication of primal mat¬ 
ter (maya). I have stated in print (1996:xxxvi) that no demonstrably 
early extant scripture of the Saiva Siddhanta has exactly this list of prin¬ 
ciples. There is however an exception: the DTksottara , 114 Furthermore 


U2 Both translations are suggestions of Professor Sanderson. 

1 i rt 

The order of these five, the kahcukas, varies not just in the tantras, but also in 
the post-scriptural period. This is the order of the Matahga and of Ksemarajas Para- 
prave&ka (p. 6); but Bhojaraja s influential Siddhanta work, the Tattvapraka^a verse 
22), lists (in srstikrama) kaia, niyati, kaia, vidya, and raga. Aghorasiva (Tattvapra- 
kagavrtti ad verse 41) explains that the Matahga gives the pravrttikrama and that 
Bhojaraja gives the srstikrama. The same explanation (though the orders are in each 
case different) might be applied to resolve t lie contradiction between Kir ana 1:16-18 
(pravTttikrama) and 4:22, 8:125-30 (srstikrama). 

UA DTksottara 13:29-33 (IFP T. 17, pp. 994-5): 

prthivim aditali krtv a pradhanantam tu suvrate 

caturvinKati tattvam hi purusam pahcavinKakam 29 

• i 1 . 1 1 i 

sadvinKakas tu nivatih kalah saptadhiko bhavet 

■ # i * • A 

astavim^a[h] smrto rago (em.; smrtairi ragarri MS) vidya jheya 
tathapara 30 

unaviingam (em.; °viin£as MS) tu vijheyam de£ikena mail atm an a 




Introduction 


i * * * • 

ini 

the fifth chapter of the Parakhyatantra and the fourth of the Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasangraha have lists almost identical to that of Bhoja’s Tat- 
tvaprakasa , which differs from the above only in the order of the five 
kancukas (see footnote 113 above) and perhaps in that it may be includ¬ 
ing gunatattva (Tattvaprakasa 23) as well as purusatattva (Tattvaprakasa 
49). 115 The Svayambhuvasutrasangraha ( 4:34) retains only purusatattva, 
the Parakhya includes both purusa and guna as tattvas; 1 6 both texts 
deviate from the Tattvaprakasa in that they do not explicitly list Sakti- 
tattva. 117 

There is in fact no consensus in the scriptures about 1) how many 
tattvas there are; 2) what their order is; 3) exactly what they are-—in some 
cases they are better rendered ‘principle’, in others ‘reality level’ and, in 
the case of the tattva of the bound soul and the uppermost tattvas of 
the pure universe neither of these translations is adequate—and 4) which 
worlds belong in which tattvas. 

One would expect that the fewer the tattvas enumerated, the earlier 
the tantra would be. As a thumb-rule this appears to hold true. Thus 
the various lists of the Nisvasatattvasamhita (anomalous, because they 
compress twenty-four of the principles of the Sanktiyas into one) are the 
shortest, 118 the Rauravasutrasangraha and an unidentified Saiddhantika 

trimSatam (em.; trimgatas MS) £u kalatatvam kathitam hi givena tu 31 
ekatrimgad vararohe mayatatvam prakirtitarn 

dvatrimgaka (em.; dvatrimgaka MS) smrta vidya trayastrimgadhi- 
kegvaram 32 

sadagivam catustrimgat pahcatrirngac chiva smrta 

si vas sattrimgam akhyatam (em.; akhyata MS ven a paramatrnana. 

115t Aus Bhojas Aussagen kann nicht mit Sicherlieit erschlossen werden, oh er neben 
dem purusatattva auch ein avyakta- und gunatattva annimmt. Ware dies der Fall, 
miiBte man von 37 tattvas ausgehen. 1 Gengnagel, 1996:42, fn.5. 

n6 M y f.33 rl6-71 : 

hamkrtir garvake skamdhe buddho buddhau pratisthitah 
trideho(em .; trideha M v ; gunasamsthane pradhane ca pradhanakah 
pumstatve (em.; pumtatve M r ) suksmadehakhyo ragaskarndhe ca 

kamadah 

* 

(This continues directly from the passage quoted in footnote 121 on p. liv below.) 

il7 This last, however, need not be regarded as a fundamental deviation, since Siva 
and Sakti are ultimately inseparable. 

U8 The beginning of the first pataia of the Uttarasutra (f.23 v[5 ^) lists eleven— prakrti, 
purusa , niyati , Jcala, maya, vidya, T6vara, sadaAiva, dehavyapin, $akti, and Siv. a. 











liv 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


fragment transmitted in the same codex as the Paramckvara but probably 
not a part of that tantra both state that there are thirty tattvas (as against 
the canonical thirty-six) and have an almost identical list, 111 ' the Matahga 
has thirty-six, and the Mrgendra may have as many as thirty-nine. (Both 
these we have argued above, on other grounds, to be relatively late.) But 
this can be no more than a thumb-rule: in some sources the number is 
not stated and must be inferred from confusing lists in which some of 
the names may refer to tattvas but may equally refer to worlds inside 
tattvas. 120 One arguably archaic feature of the lists in the Paramegvara 
codex and in the Rauravasutrasangraha is that no attempt has been made 
to correlate lists of worlds with lists o tattvas. Elsewhere (in Kirana 

V * * 

8, Mrgendra 13, Parakhya 5, Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 4, the adhva- 
prakarana of the Sarvajnanottara , Matahgavidyapada passim) we find 
particular worlds placed in particular tattvas. 

In Chapter 8 o Kirana (the ‘ bhuvanapatala ’) not only are no worlds 
allocated to the principles of the five subtle elements and of the eleven 
faculties—in fact no tantra places worlds in these 121 —but also no prm- 

119 Parametfvara f. 44 r cf. Rauravasutrasangraha 10:98-101, pp.193-194 [=R]): 

trim£a[t] tat van i proktani ^aiiharena mahatmana 

asmi[n] mahetfvare tantre parisa\h\khya yatharthavat 1 

vikarah social a proktah da$a prakrtayas tatha 

ftp « -iii. ■ a « 

rago vidya puruso [’|tha $iva[tattvam] ca trimsakam 2 

kalo ’vyaktam guna buddhir ahahhara[s| tathaiva ca 

tanmatrani tatha pahca eta prakrtayo dasa 3 

indriyani da^aiham ca rnahabhutani panca ca 

vikarah soda£a tv ete ebhis sarvam idam tat am 4 

* ♦ ■ ■ 

• mahatmana ] MS; vibhagagah R • yatharthavat ] MS; °ya tattvatah 
R • vikarah ] R; vikarauh MS • prakrtayas ] R; prakrtayan MS • rago vidya 
puruso } tha ] MS; puruso vidya ragatattvarn R (unmetrical) • kalo ’vvaktam ] 

ern. Sanderson; kalavya— MS; kaiavyaktam R • indriyani dagaikam ] R; indriyani 
dagekah MS • sodasa tv ete \ R; £oda£a tatve MS • ebhih sarvam idam tatam ] 
conj. Sanderson; ehhi+h+sassarvam idan tanum MS; yais tu sarvam idam tatarn R 
The prose ists that follow (not in the Rauravasutrasangraha ), including an irrelevant 
list of breaths, are probably interpolated: ^rotram tvak caksur jihva (ern.: jahva MS) 
gh ran am i tij vakpani padapayupasth am an a i ti / pran apan a vyan asam anodana i ti / 
prthivy apas tcjo era.; teja MS) [f. 44") vayur akagau ceti. 

1 2 0 r 1 i , B 

Thus not all the lists given by Bhatt l upodghata to Alatariga Vol.I, pp. xlix-1) are 
entirely secure. 

I2| _ 

^ The Parakhya , however, allocates a ruling Rudra to each, and may be unique in so 
doing (f.33 r[5 - 6] ): 






Introduction 


! .v 


ciples intervene between that of ether and that of the sense of self-identity 
(ahamicara). 122 Following the eighth chapter, the sequence of the Kirana 
appears to be as follows: the formless ( niskala) , Sadasiva, i’svara, pure 
knowledge ( vidya) , primal matter, limited power to act (kaia), time (kaia), 
binding fate (niyati), limited power of knowledge ([asuddlia]vidya), at¬ 
tachment (raga), secondary matter (prakrti). the principle of the con¬ 
stitutive strands of the material world (guna), intellect ( buddhi ), the 
principle of self-identity, and the five gross elements. This yields a total 
of nineteen; but since the Kirana later professes to have thirty-six, 123 we 
must after all include the eleven faculties and the five subtle elements, 
which are mentioned in Kirana 4:23, but not explicitly said to be prin¬ 
ciples. This leaves us still one short of the desired total and we must 
therefore assume that either the purusa between raga and vidya (in Kirana 
8:125a) or the 'tfaktidvayanr placed before niskala (in Kirana 8:139d) is 
intended as a tattva. The latter is perhaps more likely (though not the 
solution that Ramakantha adopts: see footnote 76 on p. 186), for Kirana 
8:125a ( tatraiva puruso jncyah ) is placed below a list of eight Rudras that 
belong to ragatattva and so seems intended to convey that the pasu is in 
some sense situated in raga. 124 

gamdhamgo gam d hat an in at re jalado rasasam jhake 

bhanurnan rupatanmatre spargakhye (conj.; ° khyo M v ) balavattarah 

sabdakhye suksmanadakhyo vyomacarasutau parah 

tS I %/ */ 4 | 

tvagimdriye ca sarvarngo locanakhye praka&ikah 
jihvemdriye mahavaktro ghranakhye ca vilurnpakah 
dumdubhir vaci samglistah s am ad an ah karerndrivc 

m u m » • * m t/ 

payau ca turnako (conj.; vayai ca turnaka 0 M v ) rudrah padakhye rama- 
na[h] smrtah 

upasthakhye ghananamdah sanikalpo manasi sthitah (conj.; manasa- 
sthitih M Y ) 


i2J Thesc sixteen principles are singled out also in certain early sources for Sankhya 
thought as non-productive modifications (vikrti ) of the other eight material principles 
(prakrti). e.g. Mababharata 12.294.27-9 and 12.298.10-15 (translated by Franklin 
Edgerton, 1965:310 and 323). 

X 2 3 

" Kirana 22:5led: evarn samapyate diksa (Ni; diksa E D ) sattrim£at-(E D ; sattrhga 
Ni) tattvasambhava. I add Ni’s readings (from f.48 1 ^ 4 ” 5 ^) to demonstrate that this 
half-verse was not a late interpolation. 

121 The same idea, expressed with the same pada, is to be found in the adhvapra- 
karanam of the Sarvajhanottara (IFF T. 790, p.48'“^). There it is preceded by a 
description of the Rudra Raga, and followed by an overlapping, but not identical list 
of eight Rudras belonging to ragatattva. 















lvi 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Doctrinal Oddities 

It is generally true that the Tantras o: the Siddhanta follow 
the dualistic doctrine, seeing Siva, souls and may a as coeternal 
essences. Such deviations as there arc from this norm occur, 
with one notable exception, in texts that bear the names of lis¬ 
ted Siddhantatantras, but have certainly been redacted, if not 
composed, at a much later period, and in the Tamil-speaking 
region of the South: the nondualism of these texts reveals 
the influence of the South Indian Vedantic currents that af¬ 
fected the Tamil Saiva Siddhanta. The one evident excep¬ 
tion is the Sarvajhanottara. This work is cited frequently by 
South Indian neo-Saiddhantikas in support of their unscrip- 
t.ural nondualism; but temptation to assume that it too is a 
late South Indian addition is prevented by the existence of an 
early Nepalese manuscript of the text. 125 

Since writing the above, Professor Sanderson has drawn my attention (in 
a letter of 22.iii.95 to an intriguing passage in the Cambridge codex that 
transmits the Paramedvara that does not share the strict dualism that 
might be thought, to be a defining characteristic of the Saiva Siddhanta, for 
it describes the generation of prakrti from the Lord with the Upanishadic 
image of the sentient spider generating an insentient web from itself: 

cetanasyornanabhasya yatha 126 tantur acetanah 
na pravrtto 121 svabhavena, tadvad avyaktam Tdvarat 5 

iirnnanabho yatha tantu[mj srjate hy atmasamb\h\avam 
sa ten a 128 kurute jalam baddhyain\te\ yena jantavah 6 

divas tu srjate tadvad avyaktam atmasambhavam 
sa ten a kurute jalam baddhyante yena jantavah 7 

tesan tu jalabaddhanam mohitanam 129 avidyaya 
sa caiva bhagavan mokta uo id ah prakrtipanjarat 8 

12r ’Sanderson, 1991:291. 

126 * o 

" conj. Sanderson; cetanadyurnnanabhasya yata MS. (This and the following emend¬ 
ations of Professor Sanderson to this passage were suggested in a letter of 14.V.97.) 
127 conj. Sanderson; tatpravrtto MS 
128 conj.; sacena MS 
129 em °tanamm MS 

130 

conj.; bhagavam mokta MS 





Introduction 


lvii 


cakropamam viduh kalam 131 avyaktarn pindasanjnitam 
udakopamas 132 tu ksetrajnah ghatakaropama[h] £ivah 9 

ghatakrc ca yatha pindad 133 aneka\n\ bhandajatakan 134 [f.46 r 
srjen mrccakrasamyogaj 1 35 j nan am easy a tu hlyate 10 

givas tu srjate tadva\d\ visvarupam 1M> idam jagat 
avyaktakalasamyogaj l,i< j nan am easy a na hlyate 11 

Just as the insentient thread of the sentient spider does not 
come forth of itself, so too unevolved matter |does not come 
forth of itself] from the Lord. Just as a spider creates a thread 
that arises from himself and with it makes a web with which 
creatures are ensnared, so too Siva for his part (tu) creates un¬ 
evolved matter that arises from himself. With this he creates a 
net by which creatures are bound. And this same Lord is [also] 
the God who releases from their cage of primal matter these 
[souls that arej bound in the net, deluded by nescience. [The 
wise,] they know that time is like the [potter’s] wheel; primal 
matter is like the lump [of clay]; the soul is like the water; 

Siva is like the potter. Just as the potter creates a quantity 
of vessels out of a lump [of clay] from the conjunction of clay 
and the throwing wheel—and he does not lack knowledge— 
so too Siva creates this universe that is everything from the 
combination of primal matter and time—and he does not lack 
knowledge. 138 

| 

cm,; kakropamam viduh kalah m MS 

i on 

“em.; udakopaman MS. This pada is hypermetrical, but the first two short syllables 
are probably intended as equivalent to a single long. Cf., for example, Kirana 3:12a as 
transmitted in N and 8:63c in E v 's C (and most other manuscripts) and the numerous 
hypermetrical pada s in the Mahabharata beginning j an am ejayasya listed by Tokunaga 

(1995). 

1 

em. Sanderson; pindan MS 

1 A 

em.; bhandajatajam MS 

135 * 

conj. Sanderson; mrtpindacakrasamyogah MS 

em.; visvarupam Mb 

|oy _ _ _ 

em.; avyaktakalasamyogah MS 

138 r n * * 

’ This immediately follows the passage enumerating the tattvas (quoted in foot¬ 
note 119 on p. liv above), on a folio that is out of sequence (numbered 44 in pencil and 
114 in the original numeration) which is suspiciously headed by an incipit ( om namah 
sh'vaya) immediately preceding the list of tattvas. The manuscript’s date and final colo- 









Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

t l v * 


lviii 


Nor is this the only early Saiddhantika work in which we find hints of 
deviation from strict dualism: after a list of tattvas (mentioned above) in 
the Uttarasutra of the Nisvasatattvasamhita there follows the assertion 

m 

(L2rW) 

ete tatvas samakhyatas sadasivasanmdbhavah 

'These principles are proclaimed to have arisen from 
Sadasiva.’ 139 


it is of course possible that Sadasiva is only figuratively referred to as the 
source of creation, because he instigates its origination. 

Thus although the early Siddhantas are indeed generally duallistic, 
they are may not invariably have been so, and evidence of non-dualism 
in a Siddhanta, since it might be an archaic oddity or the result of late 
Vedantic influence, is therefore at best an unreliable pointer to the date 
of its composition. 


The Structure of the Tantras 


Both the Mrgendra and the Matahga are polished works of sastra in com¬ 
parison with all other demonstrably early Siddhantas. Their sophistica¬ 
tion and the fact that the organisation of their subject matter shows that 
they were conceived in four sections, each dealing with one of the four 
padas of jhana, kriya , yoga and carya, suggest that they are later com¬ 
positions than the other early works listed above. Now it is often asserted 
that all tantras are or were divided into these four sections. Brunner has 
shown that this is patently false (1992a), but she goes perhaps one step 
too far in suggesting that the group of four itself is a late conception. 
At least the names of the four occur as a group of basic topics which a 
tantra discusses, for example, in the Parakhya , where they are referred 
to as sadhanas (Chapter 15 passim), and in the Kirana , where they are 


phon to the Parame^vara are on a folio that appears originally to have been numbered 
113. Thus this portion is probably not :’rom the Pararnesvara but from another early 
Saiddhantika work or from a work close to the Saiva Siddhanta. 

l39 In the preceding reply of 13vara to the Devi (these two are the speakers in this 
section of the text a similar assertion is made (f.23 1 '^): esa srstir jagigasya sada£iva- 
samudbhava; but here the immediate context is unclear to me. (jagigasya is presumably 
an aisa form for jagadlsasya.) 












Introduction 


Six 


upayas 140 (Chapter 6 passim), and in other early sources, where they 
evidently do not apply to text-divisions. 

From among the demonstrably early Siddhantas five appear thus di¬ 
vided in South Indian manuscripts: the Matafiga, Mrgendra , Kirana , 
Svayambhuva (pace Brunner, 1992a:268, fn. 27), and the Sarvajnanottara. 
In the Matanga and the Mrgendra , as we have stated above, the di¬ 
vision seems authorial. The Kirana is however not so divided in the 

a 

Nepalese manuscripts, and, as Brunner (1992a:265) has argued, its divi¬ 
sion is plainly artificial. The somewhat complex case of the Svayambhuva- 
sutrasangraba has been discussed above (see footnote L11 on p.xlix), and 
it is clear that at least in the oldest surviving version of that text there 

4 

was no pada-division. As Sanderson has pointed out (Brunner, 1992a:262, 
note 8), there are no pada divisions in the old Nepalese manuscript of the 
Sarvajnanottara either. Brunner does however mention that Bhatt sus¬ 
pected that the work might originally have been so divided. Suspicion is 
understandable, for in South India it has been transmitted as divided into 
four padas, but the divisions are again artificial and late. In the South 
Indian manuscripts of the Sarvajnanottara that I have examined we find 
that what must originally have been the last five chapters in the Nepalese 
manuscript 141 have been moved to the beginning 142 and have been called 
the yoga- and jnanapadas. 143 The work thus begins abruptly with atah 

140 In one (not entirely clear) verse (Kirana 27:2) they are actually referred to with 
the term pada (see the discussion in the footnote to the translation of Kirana 1:13). 

These are the tantra’s only chapter (prakarana) devoted to yoga and thereafter four 
theological chapters (in IFP T. 334 entitled padarthasvariipavicara (p.4-6), svatma- 
saksatkara (pp. 7-13), bhutatmadi (pp. 13-18), and mantratantrotpatti (pp. 18-22). 

142 Thus the South Indian text ends with a chapter called therein the kamandalupra - 
karana (colophon on p. 140 of IFP T. 334). 

i j q 

This would not be clear from a glance at the Nepalese manuscript, because many 
folios are missing and many have their foliation worn away. Thirty-five folios survive. 
Folio 1 is numbered, and of the folios on which foliation is still visible the one with 
the highest number is 52, which, at the time of filming by the NGMPP, appeared 
more or less in the middle of the bundle. The five opening chapters of IFP T. 334 
appear on folios 49 (beginning f. 49 r line 5), 50, 51, 52, (5]4, and [56]. Of this sequence 
53 and 55 are missing, and [56|, on which no foliation is visible, is the last folio of 
the manuscript, on the verso of which (line 3) appears the final ‘colophon’: namah 
ca sarvajnanottara£astram etati/ <g>// Thus, if my conclusions are correct, twenty-one 
folios of the Nepalese Manuscript are missing. The first chapter of the ‘ caryapada^ (not 
clearly marked in IFP T.334) is taken in Aghora^iva’s commentary to be the siddhi- 
sadhanaprakarana (IFP 47658 p. 189, line 25: prakaranasambandha£ caryapadataya ), 
which follows the pratimaprakarana. 





lx 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * * t/ * 


par am pravaksyami yogam ekakinasya tu prefaced in some manuscripts by 
a single mahgala verse lifted from Srikantha’s Ratnatrayaparlksa: 144 After 
the ‘ vidyapada' I PP T. 334's kriyapada' begins (p. 22) with the very first 
chapter of the Nepalese manuscript, but supplanting the first six verses 
that introduce the Nepalese text 115 with a single (grandly hypermetrical) 
one stating that Saiva scripture is the essence of all sastras. 1 46 Thus the 
South Indian version omits the introduction to the tantra in which the 
stage is set. Both the Nepalese and South Indian transmissions give the 
other chapters of the work in the same order. In neither IFP T. 334, nor in 
the Nepalese manuscript are the chapters numbered, indeed in the latter 
there are few colophons, just flourishes bracketed by double dandas. 

The South Indian rearrangement of material seems secondary and in¬ 
ferior 14 ' and I am inclined to believe that it is an accidental result of bad 


144 


n am ah si vaya ktyai ca bindave 6 a£ vat ay a caj gurave ca gan e£aya kartikeyaya 
dhimate. That it originally belongs to the Ratnatrayaparlksa is probable, because 
it begins with a veneration of the three ratnas that are the subject of that work. The 
veneration of Karttikeya in the Sarvajhanottara would be odd, since it is he who poses 
the questions in the frame of the tantra. 

! lie first of these was quoted in footnote 105 on p.xlvi above. The next five are as 
follows (NGMPP Reel No. A 43/12, f.T): 


bhagavan sarvalokega sarvajna sarvakrt prabho 
sarvajha[na]mayam jh an am sarvajnanesu cottaram 

yuktam garvatni akair m antraih sarvvasidhyarth asadh an a in 
hit ay a sarvasatvan am vaktum arhasy asesatah 

bhagavan uvaca 

at hat ah sam pravaksyami sarva£astrasam u c cay am 

* m X m */ ■*/ 

sarvajhanottaran nama sarvatantrottarottaram 

madhuvat sarvapuspesu saram u[d]dhrtya nirmitam 
tac ccdarn sarva^astresu saram u\d\dhrtya Sambhuna 

• bhagavan j em.; bhagavam MS • °lokcsa sarvajna \ em.; °lokeSah sarvajhah 
MS • prabho ] em.; prabhoh MS • yuktam sarva° ] conj.; mulct am 
sarva° MS • °sadhanam \ em.; 0 sadhanah MS • hitaya ] em.; hitayah 
MS • tantrottarottaram ] era.; °tantrotarottaram MS • tac cedain ] em.; 
tahcedarn MS 

1 vrksanam saratamam (thus Trivandrum MS 6578, f. 1 r ^ 11 ; sarabhutam IFP T.334) 
pusparn samudranam ksTrasagaram/ tatha ca sarvasastranain sarabhutam sivagamam. 
(Both the pad as of the first line have nine syllables.) 

147 As far as concerns pada division, there are no very clear gains from this re¬ 
arrangement of the material. The units that form padas have not been internally 
rearranged, if the intention was that the four prakaranas of the " vidyapada' should 
be followed immediately by the deliberations on nada, its transformation into gross 
sound and mantroddhara , which constitute the next three chapters, and which might 








Introduction 


lxi 


transmission. The two manuscripts known to me of Aghorasiva’s Sarva- 
jnanottaravrtti that cover the beginning of the ‘ kriyapada' (IFF 47852 
and Trivandrum MS 6578) make clear that it was still the beginning of the 
work in Aghorasiva's time, 118 and furthermore, although the text trans¬ 
mitted of the beginning of the commentary is lacunose and corrupt and 
has embedded in it the shortened opening of the mula of the South Indian 
version (i.e. as in IFF T.334), his glosses 119 reveal that Aghorasiva had 
some version of the six verses of the opening transmitted in the Nepalese 
version that are missing in other South Indian manuscripts. 1 imagine that 
Aghorasiva treated the originally undivided Sarvajilanottara in the same 
way as the South Indian transmission treated the Kir ana, in other words, 
that he did not alter the sequence of chapters, but he regarded them as 
already grouped into padas . Once he had done this, the text began to 
be transmitted in two units—the ‘ kriyapada 1 clubbed together with the 
L caryapada and the £ yogapada ’ clubbed together with the 1 vidyapada' - 
which subsequently became accidentally exchanged. 1 am not aware of any 
South Indian sources (with the exception of the Trivandrum manuscript 
of Aghorasiva's Sarvajnanottaravrtti) which transmit material from both 
units in the correct order. 150 

I believe that there are two passages of scripture whose use in part 
accounts for Saiddhantika exegetes reading pada- divisions into origin¬ 
ally undivided Siddhantas. The first is Mrgendra 2:2 tripadartham 


have been felt to be vidyapada material, then why do South Indian manuscripts of the 
text not mark these chapters also as belonging to the vidyapada? Furthermore other 
material, such as the adhvaprakaran a describing the bhuvanakrama, now appears in 
the kriyapada (IFF T.334 pp. 56-76) which in other divided tantras (e.g. the Kirana, 
Mrgendra, and Matahga) appears in the vidyapada. 

" I he Trivandrum manuscript is complete and in order, but even if it were not so, 
this would be clear, e.g. from his using the expression vaksyati to refer forward to the 
1 jilanakanda ’ (IFP 47852, p. 1, line 15) and yogaprakaranavaksyarnanavat (IFP 47852. 
p. 2, lines 9 10), and by his discussion of padarthas , as is appropriate to the beginning of 
a tantra. In his commentary on the yogapada , placed first in South Indian manuscripts, 
Aghorasiva gives the patalika-sambandha to be with the word £uci (IFP T. 985, p. 1, 
lines 3 -4). The patalika connection is invariably with the last statement of the previous 
pataia. The word £uci occurs twice in the final verse of the preceding patala in the 
Nepalese manuscript (it is the last chapter in IFP T. 334). 

H9 e.g. of gambhuna (IFP 47852, p. 1, line 4), which does not appear in the South 

Indian text. 

150 It appears that most South Indian sources for the text transmit only the yoga¬ 
pada and vidyapada, or only the vidyapada (the portion published from Devakottai), 
presumably since that was the portion of greatest interest to neo-Saiddhantikas. 






lxii 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* ■ 4 / « 


catuspadam mahatantram. Aghora^iva quotes this as a universally ap¬ 
plicable definition both in his Sarvajhanottaravrtti (IFP 47852, p. lJ 1 * * * * * * * * lo l) 
and in his Tattvaprakagavrtti ad verse 5, p,22. It is unlikely that it was 
originally intended as a normative definition, because the author of the 
Mrgendra must have been aware not just of other important tantras that 
do not speak of and are not divided into four padas, but also of many 
tantras that have more than three padarthas , e.g. the Parakhya and the 
Rauravasutrasahgraha, which have five, 151 and the Matahga and, accord¬ 
ing to Ramakantha’s interpretation (see Kiranavrtti ad 1:13), the Kirana , 
which had six. 

The second scriptural authority is a fragment from the llr-Pauskara 
quoted at the beginning of the third chapters of the Mrgendravrtti and 
the Matangavrtti and of the second chapters of the Sarvajhanottaravrtti 
(Trivandrum MS 6578, f. 8 r ) and the Kiranavrtti: 

anantaram yat patalat sutram tantre pravartate 
vaktavyas tasya sambandhah pahcadha samavasthitah 

tantravastvatmakat sutrad vakyat prakaranat tatha 
patalac ca 

This is interpreted as an injunction to the teacher to make clear five 
connections when he comes to the beginning of a new chapter. As in 
the case of Mrgendra 2:2, though this is treated as broadly applicable by 
Saiddhantika commentators, it may not have been intended as such. 

The sautra connection is interpreted to be the connection of the 
chapter in question with certain words in the mulasutra of the tantra; 
the patalika connection is the connection of the chapter in question with 
the conclusion of the previous chapter, and so forth. Explaining the 
prakaranika connection, Ramakantha and Narayanakantha simply state 

1 Thus Rauravasutr&sangraha, 4:48, as quoted in Kiranavrtti 1:13.36-7. The ifth 

verse (and probably the adisutra) of the Parakhya (M v i.27 r '- 17 ') reads: 

padarthapahcakam siddham asmin jhane parerite (conj.; paranvite M y ) 

pa^uh prag Igvaro vidya yonir muktir ihantima 

(There was a tradition that the Parakhya had only three padarthas, and this is men¬ 

tioned by Bhatt when he records the number of padarthas of a number of tantras on 

p. xlvii of the introduction to the vidyapada of the Matanga. Brunner, aware of a tradi¬ 

tion that it had five, has attributed six padarthas to the work (1981:140, footnote 198), 

but her assertion is based on a misreading of a passage of the Ran atfivagurudeva- 

paddhati, for which see footnote 69 on p. 182.) 








Introduction 


Ixiii 


to which of the padas the patala to be expounded belongs. Now the 
fragmentary sources for the text of the old Pauskara , from which this 
prescription is drawn, show no signs that the Pauskara was originally di¬ 
vided into padas ; but the colophons in the old manuscript (and in the 
Prayascittasamuccayai reveal that it was divided not only into pataias, 
but also into larger divisions called prakaranas. 152 I assume therefore that 
Narayanakantha (or an exegete before him) knew that prakaranas were 
large text divisions in the Pauskara , and so when he came to comment on 
the Mrgcndra , whose largest text divisions are padas , he interpreted the 
prakaranika connection to refer there to padas. 153 This precedent was eas¬ 
ily followed in the commentary on the Matahga . The Kirana presents the 
first known case in which the application of the teaching of the Pauskara 
as a rule of exegesis must have generated—if it did not exist before—an 
artificial division of the text into padas. The same rule is, as we have 
just seen, applied by Aghorasiva in his exegesis of the Sarvajiianottara 
and he may have generated the pada- division there. Not all tantras, 
however, were so treated. The Sardhatrigatikalottara Ramakantha did 

7 * * 

not divide into padas , nor did he expound the five sambandhas at the be¬ 
ginning of each of its chapters, nor did Aghorasiva follow this procedure 
in his Dvigatikalottaravrt ti, nor Sadyojyotih in Ids commentary on the 
Svayambhuvasutrasangraha. Perhaps we must assume that they felt that 
such treatment was appropriate only in the case of a i mahatantra\ 

A short passage about the padas in the Vayavlyasamhita of the Siv a- 
purana gives definitions in which there is no suggestion that the words 
are applied to text divisions: 

152 e.g. f. 32 r iti paramesVare mat at ant re <C sam a^> nyaprakaran e pravaSci ttapatalain. 
IFP T. 249 contains three pataias ascribing themselves to a Paramesvara ( bhumi- 
panksana , kala£abh i m ant ran a, and grhadhikara copied from an ‘omnibus manuscript' 
(other contents not specified] from Palitana in Saurashtra. They do not appear to 
overlap with what is transmitted in the Cambridge manuscript, but the colophon of 
the first of them (p. 2) suggests that they may have belonged to the same work: iti 
paramegvaramahaiantra [sic] vastuprakarane bhumipanksanapataJah. 

153 He might also have been aware of an injunction similar to that of the Pauskara 
to be found in a non-Saiddhantika source, the Devyayamala, identified and quoted 
by Jayaratha as being a source for Tantraloka 28:400-3. There padas are explicitly 
mentioned: 

padikag catra sambandha anyah patalikah priye 
padarthaii sautravakyartha etat sambandhapancakam 
catuspat samiiita yavat tasyam pado yathoditah ... 







lxiv 


Ramakantlia’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


jhanam kriya ca carya ca yogas ceti sure&vari 
catuspadah samakhyato mama dharmas sanatanah 

pasupasapatijhanarn jhanam ity abhidhlyate 
sadadhvasuddhir vidhina gurvadhlna kriyocyate 


varnasramaprayuktasya mayaiva vihitasya ca 
mamarcanadidharmasya carya caryeti katliyate 


maduktenaiva margena mayy avasthitacetasah 
vrttyantaravirodho hi yoga ity abhidhlyate 15 ' 1 


This echoes Manusmrti 1:81a: catuspat sakalo d harm ah, of which the 
commentaries oli'er varied interpretations, but perhaps no more is inten¬ 
ded than i he notion that to be complete is to be quadrapartite. The same 
idea appears to be expressed in the following small (and not entirely clear) 


por ion from the Nisvasa, which is actually grouped into more than four 
large text units called sutras, not into padas (f.41”, line 4—after the 
colophon to the Nayasutra): 


uparistac caturtthan tu sutram arabhyate punah/ 
tatra sutratrayenoktarn boddhavyam anupurvasah/ 


mulah cottarasutra — ca/ 

guhyasutrah caturtthan tu procyamanan nibodha me/ 


tenaiva saha samyukta samhitaika prapathyate / 
n is vase ti ca namena sampurna tu tato bhavet / 


nisvasasamhita liy esa rnukhena saha samyuta/ 
paheasrotas tu ye prokta rnukhena pariklrttitah 


ten a yukta bhave\t pu\jya sa su tre su pathyate — 


The Parakhya has barely entered the discussion, because, although it 
uses the names of the padas, we are missing all that might have belonged 
to a caryapada and kriyapada. It too seems unlikely to have been divided 
into four such parts: its final colophon does not mention a pada to which 
it belongs, nor does the final chapter plainly fit any one of them; but the 
tantalizingly fragmentary (and, as transmitted, unmetrical) penultimate 


verse to Chapter (i shows that the author of the Parakhya either recognised 
the word pada to refer to such divisions of a text (and not just, as in 


154 Uttarabhaga 10:30-3. 









Introduction 


lxv 


other early sources, to four basic topics with which a tantra deals) or 
used it unconsciously in such a way that allowed it t o be so interpreted 

(f. 34 r t 1-2 l): 


vidyapadah samakhyato \ma ma pu no ma li na\ 
sampraty esa vicdryyeta muktyahvah padartho ’khilah 


155 


Although pada divisions cannot be reconstructed in the Parakhya and 
are artificial in the Kir ana, the categories after which they are named 
appear in both works (Kirana 1:13 and 6:6 7 and Parakhya 15 passim), 
and at least the topics that are appropriate to the vidyapada have been 
grouped together in both. This might be taken to suggest that both are 
relatively late, but earlier than the quadrapartite Matahga and Mrgendra. 

** * r/j 

Like those, they are both relatively Gastric in character: both Pratoda’s 
and Garuda’s speeches are not all perfunctory requests to hear points 
of settled doctrine enumerated; they are often searching questions that 
reveal real difficulties in the system, and the replies are, correspondingly, 
sincere attempts to answer them. The Kirana is sastrie also in t.hai n 1 in¬ 
frequently terse to the point of obscurity and so requires commentary. 15 / 


Aisa Language 

From the language of the Kirana it is difficult to draw firm conclusions 
about its relative date without having critical editions oi all the other early 
Siddhantas with which to compare it. Nevertheless a glance through the 

155 The portions in italics are uncertain because the tops of the letters are broken off. 

156 The interlocutors of the Parakhya, are PrakaSa (the sun) and a certain Pratoda, who 
can be identified with Vasistha, because this information is given when a passage from 
the Parakhya is quoted in Paksakavarta’s digest (f. 4(F, line 15): pratodo bhagavan 
vasistha uvaca .... This connection with Vasistha may explain the Parakhya s other 
name: since Vasistha is closely associated in mythology with Surabhi, the 'cow of 
plenty produced at the churning of the ocean, Professor Sanderson proposes (in a letter 
of 2.ix.96) that Saurabheya means ‘taught to Saurabha’, Saurabha denoting Vasistha. 

! >7 e.g. 6:19c! yenedam tad dhi bhogatah. which most ol the South Indian manuscripts 
have expanded to yenarabdham idarn vapuh/ karrnana tad dhi bhogena ksayarn ayaty 
asamgayah. Of. also the compression of ideas in 3:2 3, 3.lief and 3.22. Some of the 
images used are also obscure, e.g. 2:15b, 4:12cd, and 7:5ab. Since oui text of the 
Parakhya depends on a codex unicus and stray quotations, it too is full of obscurities, 
but it is difficult to distinguish when they are the result of poor transmission and when 

authorial. 









lxvi 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


various fragments I have had occasion to quote shouh 1 reveal that there are 
more ‘aisa’ 158 forms (i.e. characteristic of Siva’s usage of language) in other 
listed Siddhantas 159 than in the Kirana. To illustrate the profusion and 
variety of possible ai£a peculiarities, I have drawn on a list compiled by 
Professor Sanderson of the aisa deviations from the text of Bhatt’s edition 
in a Nepalese manuscript of the SardhatrKatikalottara 160 (called therein 
the Adhyustagata- rather than the Sardhatrisatikalottara), Because the 
forms are all drawn from a single late Nepalese manuscript, much of the 
bad Sanskrit is no doubt to be blamed on the transmission, and so I 
have omitted some ‘faults’ that are not confirmed by exigencies of the 

metre or of the syntax of the immediate context. The list is therefore not 
comprehensive. 

nominals of other declensions declined as a-declension nominals 

1:9b matrair dvadasabhih sthitam ; 1:9c hrasva brahma\h] 

samakhyata ; 1:14a pahca brahma (brahmahl) sivam sangam] 

158 In the Svacchandatantroddyota Ksernaraja frequently comments on oddities of lan¬ 

guage in the Svacchandatantra [Arraj (1988:101) lists the following instances: patala 1, 

p. 27; patala 4, pp. 77, 146, 242, 324; patala 5, pp.6, 52; patala 6, pp. 129, 143; patala 

7, pp. 189, 328; patala 9, pp. 31, 39, 60; and patala 10, p.546.| and uses this label 
(interchangeably with arsa and ai^vara). Ad 1:31, Vol. 1, p. 27, for instance, he states: 
prastared iti arsah pat hah/ e vain anyad a pi paramesvaravacah sadhv c va —- bh agavad- 
uktmam mitadrstibhir akalpyatvat. Though the Kashmirian text of the Kirana on 
which Ramakantha commented can be shown from the distribution of readings to have 
been much cleaned up, it still contained numerous erroneous forms that would make a 

learned man blench, and yet I have found no instances where Ramakantha declares the 

-* * 

language to be irregular because it is that of the Lord. Presumably Ramakantha and the 
Kashmirian improvers of the text before him would have justified odd usages in the same 
way as Ksernaraja did, but, while a certain number of oddities may have seemed to them 
to mark a scripture with the signature of the Lord, a profusion of them must have made 
it seem semi-literate. Ramakantha’s reticence about them suggests embarrassment. 
Many more, and more grotesque, solecisms are to be found in the non-Saiddhantika. 
Saiva tantric literature, and Ksernaraja's repeated exposure to these perhaps in part 
explains his relative lack of embarrassment in the Svacchandatantroddyota. Aghora- 
giva briefly adverts to the issue in his DvKatikalottaravrtti thus (Trivandrum MS 4509, 
f 6 r [ * * * 7 -8]) ; chandovat sutrani bhavarpti. tannyayat pu<^ml^>limgo ’tra matragabdah 
prayuktah. 

4 5 Q 

See eg. footnote 139 on p, lviii and note the gender of tattva in the other verse from 
the Nigvasa quoted on the same page and in the list of tattvas from the Saiddhantika 
fragment found in the Cambridge manuscript of the ParameSvara (footnote 119 on 
p. liv). 

160 National Archives, Kathmandu, MS. No. 5-4632, NGMPP Reel No. B 118/7. 










Introduction 


Ixvii 


l:18al) yatha hrahina[ms ?] tatha hy anga\ri!] vinyaset[a] prayatna- 
tah] 4:4.a sarvanga caiva sadyena ; 8:8b pratistham vai Sirena tu ; 
8:27c and 8:36c visuvena tu yogena ; 8:30d visuvena tu samyutam; 
8:37a yogarri tu visuvam prapya (Thus Bhatt too); 10:22a, 10:23b, 
and lL:5c visuvam; 10:25a visuvakhye (lor visuvati); 17:6a sabdam 
sparsam tyajed brahme. 


neuters declined as masculines in dual and plural 1:9c (see 

above); l:9d dlrgha hy amga\h\ sadanana (This, and other in¬ 
stances of this kind, might be classified instead as an archaic neuter 
plural in -a.); 1:14a, l:18ab, and 4:4a (see above); 7: lOab trtiye 
lokapalastram (for °stran?) astrenaikena pujayet; 8:2a ete panca 
mahatattva; 8:2cd sarvatatvas tu tatrastha drastavya sadhakotta- 
maih; 8:5a aviditva imams tattvan; 10:23a ayanau savyasavyau; 
16:15ab pahcatrimsam japel laksam prthivl\m\ va^am anayet; 18:2b 
abdams trini sa jlvati. 

# 4 l/ 


masculine singular becoming neuter singular l:14d mantroddha- 

ram idam Subham; 8:13 idam samskaram uttamam; 13:7c vama- 

9 ' t t (h / 

stham yat param bindum. (Examples of this could be multiplied, 
but in many cases they may result from accidental substitutions of 
anusvara for visarga or final - o.) 


neuter singular becoming masculine singular ll:15c-16c yo sau 

hrdisthah padmas tu adhomukhavyavasthitah/ sa vai vikasate 
padmah purakena tu puritah / urdhvasroto bhavet padmah. 

pronominals declined as nominals 7:9c purvad arabhya hrdina. 

genitive plural of an a-stem in am 10:9b aharam manujam adhah. 


anomalous declination of numerals 6:15c catvarimSaribhir laksair. 

* * 


lyap for ktva 3:led sakrjjaptena castrena mrdam grhya vicaksanah ; 

8:26d grhya catmani -hyatnatah +; 13:12a bindum [tarn] codare 
ksipya; 17:6c mano bindum sive tyajya. 


active for middle (metri causae) 3:6b sandhyam vanded anukramat ; 

8:38b jhatva mucyati rnocakah (mocati ante correctionem); 10:16d 
naiva budhyanti mohitah; 17:5d katham mucyanti bandhanat. 








Ixviii 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


middle for active metri causae) 10:17a dasadha gacchate yen a; 11:4c 

rnam ca bhavate kaso; 11; 11 c uccarayeta; 13:2 Ic srjate grasate caiva ; 
15:1 japate satatam yadi. 

incorrect verb-forms 2:8d apuryantang 8:32d manovrtya manas 

chinet ; 8:42b tattvam tattvena samdhayet. 

double sandhi 8:19a hrdayena tato "ddharam; 8:25d sadyo ’’tkrantis ca 

kidrgi ; 11:14a tato ” rdhvam ca. 

mi „ 

elision of nominative ending before iti 10:17c nadicakreti vikhyata 

(for vikhyatam?—cakra is neuter elsewhere in this chapter). 

hiatus within a pada 2:11a netram dattva tu avahya; 5:3a vairagyam 

caiva aKvaryam; 8:5a aviditva imams tat van; 13:7c miirdhni 
akranta ; 16.7c avijnaya idarn. 

hiatus obviated with euphonic ‘glide’ consonant 2:10d and 4:2d 

murdhni-m-arabhya vinyaset ; 8:12cd aprakasy+a-h ima-m-istim (for 
istir) gopanlya prayatnatah ; 20:4a trimargam tri-r-adhisthanam. 

awkward syntax 8:26ab pasavah ke ca nirdesam kathayasva ; ! 1:18b na 

bhuyo janmatam vrajet; 16:11 dasalaksam japed yas tu janah... te 

jana va£am ayanti ; 16:14cd trimgallaksam japed yas tu mandaleSo 
va£o bhavet. 

hypermetry 6:ld kavacenabliyuksanam tatha. 

I list below some of the peculiarities of the language of the Kirana. 
These are drawn from the first seven chapters of the ‘ vidyapada’ alone 
(this being the only portion lor which I have prepared a full collation). 
Even allowing for the sample being less than two thirds the length of the 
Sardhatrigatikalottara, the crop is relatively small, and so in this respect 
too the Kirana might appear closer to the relatively polished Mrgendra 
and Matahga than to other early Siddhantas. This appearance is however 
in one respect misleading because this portion of the Kirana deals entirely 
with matters of doctrine: in later portions of the text, when lists of pre¬ 
scriptions are given for rituals and the like, not only is the content argu¬ 
ably less likely to inspire the author to give of his best, but there is also 
much more scope for the use of injunctive optatives and of absolutives, 







Introduction 


lxix 


and so there we find (in E D and in the Nepalese manuscripts) a higher 
proportion o odd verbal forms 161 and many instances in which lyap has 
been used for ktv a. 2 


1 ai^a word-forms: the metrically exigent apeksya (3:3c and 3:4a) which 

Ramakantha awkwardly justifies (3:4.1); the metrically exigent 
°samopetam (for °samupetam) in 1:13c, again awkwardly justified 
(1:13.39); maycya for mayiya (2:8a and 2:11b); bravlhi in 6:22d; the 
parasmaipada forms prabudhyati and pratibudhyanti in 4:1b and 
4:3c; the use of vapuh as a noun in u for the sake of the metre in 
4:10b vapudharanam (tanudharanam has been accepted in the text 
because it is supported by Ramakantha); the use of vidyut as a 
noun in u for the sake of the metre in the text implicit in the read¬ 
ings of the Nepalese manuscripts of 5:26c (prakasya vidyuvad yati ); 
the nominative patayah used as an accusative (NTry) in 3:25d; the 
nominal (in place of the pronominal) neuter singular sukhetaram 
in 5:12b; the nominal (in place of the participial) neuter singular 
(bhavisyam) in the Nepalese reading of 6:20c; and the name tirohika 
in 5:25b (derived from the root dha via the past passive participle), 
which Ramakantha accepts without comment. 


2 Irregularities of sandhi (all but the last are instances of double sandhi ): 

7:10d nirapeksa ”navo matah (with E^/s B); 7:21a mantra ’pta- 
vakyena (with E v 's A); 5:4d procyate sopacaratah ; 163 the Nepalese 
reading of 5:6c, yatha guro grato sisyam ; 5:8c tannipatasya sah 
kalah. 

m 


3 I tiatuses are rare and occur only between padas: e.g. 6:14cd | i4d prob¬ 
ably began adrstatvat with NG 2 —the other manuscripts have either 
na with E v or have inserted the particle tuj and 7:16cd. 


lb give just one example, in Ed’s chapter 22 alone we find eight instances of the 
optative hunet (32d, 33d, 39b, 39d, 41b, 51b, 55d, 56b). 


'~eg. likhya in 23:4a and 40:5b, pujya in 23:7a, krtya in 28:3a, sthapya in 13:16d, 
14:41c. 16:26d, 21:58a, 21:60a., 21:61b, 27:8a, 33:9b, 51:12d; grhya in 47:6d; bhajya in 
51:27a; pithlkrtva in 28:4c. 

Alternatively this is to be understood as a mistakenly doubled way of saying fig¬ 
uratively 1 , using both the prefix sa- (in the sense of sah a) and the adverbializing suffix 
-tah. 








1X X 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm */ * 


4 ther awkwardnesses: some of these are not easy to categorise, because 

they are not morphological, and it is arguable that they are not aisa. 
The compound kaladyavanilaksitam , for instance, in 2:10b is pre¬ 
sumably intended to convey kaladiprthivyantam , and the phrase 
dlksitottarakale ’pi is intended to mean diksanantarakale pi. 161 
Some such awkwardnesses may be the result of the redactor (or re¬ 
dactors) having attempted an ambitiously terse, gastric style, which 
he was unable to sustain at all times with clarity. For other instances 
of compression and obscurity see footnote 157 on p.lxv above. 

5 Two lexical observations are worth making: the word gam bar a is used 

(e.g. in 6:15) to mean 'mantra'—a sense not attested by Apte 
or Monier Williams, but which is frequently met with in Saiva 
works; 165 and the word tuti , meaning a ‘moment of time' or 'time* 
(e.g. in 4:22c), occurs consistently without a r in all the manuscripts. 
Phis usage is not attested in the dictionaries and has been consist¬ 
ently ‘corrected * 1 * * * V by Vivanti to truti, even though this violates the 
metre in one instance (5:9b). The spelling Tuti’ is common enough 
in the KSTS editions and should be regarded as a variant ortho¬ 
graphy. 


Metrically the Kirana is unambitious. Excepting two tristubh verses at 
the end of Chapter 56, it contains only a nustuhh verses (the two conclud¬ 
ing verses in malinl , E D 's 64:21-2, are clearly secondary; they appear only 
in a few South Indian manuscripts and always after the final colophon) 
and in the first seven chapters, as I have constituted them, there are only 
three deviations from the standard form of the uneven pada: 2:26a (ra- 
vipula ), 3:18a ( na-vipula ), and 4:17a ( ma-vipula ). The distribution of 
readings reveals that the first two are not original; they both belong to 
a Kashmirian ‘cleaned-up' text and have been accepted because they are 
presupposed by Ramakantha’s commentary. In one instance (3:26b) the 
text that is presupposed by the readings of the Nepalese and South Indian 


164 ^ 

1 The latter case need not be problematic, il it is assumed that diksita is intended 

as a verbal noun. 

1 £* f _ 

eg. in Ramakantha’s Moksakarikavrtti ad 90; in Vidvakantha IPs Bhavacudamani 

V J m * m * f V m m mm 

f. 56' f*'h givagambarair iti gaivamantralh ; Soma£ambhupaddhati Part 1, p.285, 5:9b; 
and Malinlvijayottara 8:104cd: indradin pujayct pascal svadiksu proktaSambaraih 'em. 
Sanderson [letter of 14.V.97); sasvaraih Ed.). 











Introduction 


lxxi 


manuscripts (and that is therefore probably original) actually contains a 
grave metrical solecism. 

This metrical blandness the Kirana shares, for instance, with the 
Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (in the portion of text commented on by 
Sadyojyotih as now constituted by Filliozat there are only two deviations 
from the standard form of the uneven pada: a na-vipula in 1:1a and in 
2:16a). But not all early Siddhantas are metrically as unadventurous. 
The small portion of twenty-five verses of the [Pa uskara- J Par am c 6 vara 
cited in Appendix III, for instance, has one ra-vipuia, five na-, and three 
ma-vipuJas. 166 Apart from the higher proportion of vipulas they contain, 
the Matahga and the Parakhya invariably conclude their chapters with 
at least one summary verse in a metre other than anustubh, and the 
Mrgendra not infrequently does the same. The Rauravasutrasaiigraha 
actually has passages in arya (10:34c-36, 60c~62b, 65-68, 69c-97, 102— 

some of these are in need of repair), concludes with verses in a mixture 
of upajati , varpgastha and rucira metres (10:103-10), and its anustubh 
verses abound in variety. 16 ' 


The Lists of Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


One further piece of evidence mentioned above remains to be discussed 
and that is the fact that the Kirana is mentioned, usually as the twenty- 
fifth, twenty-sixth or twenty-seventh of the twenty-eight tantras of the 
Saiva Siddhanta. From an orthodox Saiddhantika perspective—i.e. as¬ 
suming that Siva authored them all—it need not be problematic that 
tantras from among the canon of twenty-eight should contain a complete 


166 There are, however, three reasons why such a portion cannot be taken as repres¬ 
entative of the metre of the original Pa uskara: firstly it lists names, and the awkward 
shapes of names often force a writer to metrical variety; secondly lists of Siddhantas 
and their transmitters are (more than most other portions) likely to be redacted bor¬ 
rowings; and thirdly the source of the portion is a quotation in a Kashmirian work and 
therefore likely to have been polished. 

167 na-vipulas: upodghata 10a, 16a, 20a, 1:10a, 2:1a, 2:14c, 3:2c, 3:19a, 3:23c, 4:20a, 
4:23a, 4:27c, 4:38a, 4:39c, 4:52a, 5:1c, 5:17c, 6:16c (incorrect), 10:13a, 10:14c, 10:16a, 
10:25c, 10:28a, 10:43c, 10:52a, 10:57c, 10:64a (after dropping the initial om); bfia- 
vipulas: 1:5a, 2:4c, 2:21a, 3:7c, 3:16c, 3:20a 8:8c, 10:9a, 10:12a, 10:18a, 10:4' a (incorrect 
preamble), 10:55a; ma-vipulas: 4:2c (incorrect preamble), 10:19a, 10:35a (incorrect 
preamble); ra-vipulas: 4:49a, 5:5c, 10:24a, 10:99c (hypermetrical, but the two initial 
shorts are to be counted as one syllable: see footnote 132 on p.lvii); five initial short 
syllables (!): 4:6a. 










lxxii 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm * 


list of all twenty-eight, including themselves, but I have been assuming 
that they were redacted by humans and that it makes sense to attempt a 
relative chronology of their composition. From this assumption it follows 
that the text of the early tantras which contain self-referential lists must 
in some cases have been modified, at least in the portions which contain 
the lists. Such lists could in their entirety be interpolations. Among the 
early, extant Siddhantas, I have in fact found only four which list the oth¬ 
ers: the Paramesvara, the Parana, the S vayam bhu vasu tr as an grab a, and 
the Nisvasa. Neither the Rauravasutrasahgraha nor what I have of the 
Parakhya provide such lists . 168 

Appendix III gives a comparative table of lists of Siddhantas and tran¬ 
scriptions of portions of the unpublished texts from which the lists are 
drawn. It will be clear from the table how these differ from each other and 
from the standardized list found in later Siddhantas transmitted only in 
South India, particularly for the latter eighteen works, the Rudrabhedas. 
The most common South Indian list omits, for example, the Parakhya , 
one of the very few demonstrably early listed Siddhantas that actually 
survives. Nor is it just the names and order of works that are discrepant: 
the names of the transmitters differ widely in different accounts . 166 Dis¬ 
crepancies have been mentioned , 1 but are nowhere tabulated, and are 
frequently ignored . 171 It is true that a high position on the lists need not 

1 £>Q 

The Rauravasutrasaiigraiia does however mention groups of ten and eighteen 
sastravaktin (3:11-12) without associating them with particular Siddhantas or indeed 
mentioning the names of the other Siddhantas (see p.xiviii above). The first ten may 
not be the transmitters of the Sivabhedas, but those in the ayatikrama of the Raurava- 
sutrasangraha given just before (3:6-9): Ananta, Srlkantha, Devi, NandTSa, Skanda, 
Brahma, Sakra, RcTka, Rama, Ruru. 

169 The Nisvasa f.24 r ^) explains yen a yen a srutam tan tram yen a yen avadhari tain/ 
tasya tasya hi n amen a tat tantram parigiyate. ‘Whoever heard and whoever paid close 
heed to (a particular tantra], that tantra is known by his name.’ The tenth chapter 
of the Kirana , however, gives quite different names for the numerous personages who 
transmitted the different Siddhantas, as does the \Pauskara-]Paramesvara. 

i70 E.g. by Gonda (1977:181), and by Brunner (1985:467): ‘While the list of 28 dualistic 
Tantras is almost perfectly fixed (there are variations in the order of names, especially 
within the 18; but very few as far as the names are concerned), the list of 64 is not.. . ! 

1 Thus Dyczkowski (1988:33): ‘The Siddhantagamas are sufficiently well known to 
be excluded from our present discussion.’ Bhatt’s useful table (facing p. xviii of the 
Introduction to the first volume of the Raurava) , which unfortunately misrepresents at 
least two of the Siddhantas cited in its footnotes, is usually adduced as an authority. 








Introduction 


Ixxiii 


mean that a tantra is early—it is also conceivable that later Siddhantas 
might have placed themselves at the top—but if’ we assume so, the rel¬ 
ative order the lists imply of the few listed Siddhantas that do survive 
seems not incompatible with the other internal evidence gathered here for 
relative dating. 



An Assessment of the Internal Evidence 

Relatively little emerges dearly from the above, but a few strands can 
be drawn together. The lists oi tattvas suggest an early date for parts of 
the NiSvasatattvasamhita , a relatively early date for the Rauravasutra- 

, and a relatively late date for the Nis vasa's Diksottara , the 
Mrgendra , the Matanga , the Parakhya , and the Kirana, all of which not 
only have a large number of tattvas, but also explicitly place worlds 
in them. The NiSvasa, in all respects anomalous, may share with 
the Saiddhantika fragment found in the Cambridge manuscript of the 
Paramesvara and the Sarvajnanottara a non-dualist position (or a com¬ 
promised dualism). This may or may not be an indication of relative 
antiquity. The other early listed Siddhantas are all dualist. From the 
structures of the surviving Siddhantas once again not much can be de¬ 
duced. The four-pada structure of the Matanga and the Mrgendra suggest 
that they are relatively late. The divisions of the Paramesvara into pra- 
karanas and of the Nis vasata 11 vasain hit a into sutras have no surviving 
parallels 1 ' 2 and therefore suggest, but do not prove, relative antiquity. 
Nothing can conclusively be proved from the appellation sutrasangraha 


| rj 

'“Dyczkowski (1988: Appendix (J, p.116) records that the J ay a drath ay am ai a ex¬ 
plains a division of a tantra into five sutras: in uia, guhya t naya, uttara, and uttarottara . 
Professor Sanderson, in a letter oi 14.V.97, has explained that this is taught in the for¬ 
tieth patala (dubbed brahmayamalanirnaya) of the first Satka and applies specifically 
to the texts of the Brahmayamala cycle. The same letter explains: 

Phis division of the Tantra's teachings into five Sutras is asserted by 
the Brahmayamala itself in its final verse, NAK 3-370, f. 364 7 3-4: 


hr ah m ay am ala t an t red am 
conj.; gatarn cod) 
sa takotyujj vaia[ t\ tan tra (t] 
stint am d v ad as as ah asrain 


laksapad a d h ikarnga tah (ia t ah 


sarat sara tarottaram 





a ‘ r ' 


rnatarn 


Cf. the end of the Ni§vasakarika-Diksottara , i.e. the end of the 
Ni £ v as as am hit a in the largest sense, Nis vasakarika IFP T. 17, p. 1152: 











Ixxiv 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m • t/ » 


appended to the names of the relatively short Rauravasutrasahgraha and 
Svayambliuvasutrasahgraha. The fact that the Kirana does to some ex¬ 
tent organise its material into the topics of the padas, such that at least 
the contents of the first twelve patalas make an appropriate ‘ vidyapada\ 
might be taken to suggest again that it is relatively late. The Parakhya 
too may have organised its material in such a way. or it may even have 
been formally arranged in text divisions called padas. The relative paucity 
of ai^a language again places the Kirana closer to the Matahga and the 
Mrgendra than to the others and therefore suggests (though by no means 
proves) that it was redacted at a relatively date. In the lists of the twenty- 
eight (even in its own) the Kirana is consistently placed low down and 
the Parakhya , when it appears, is consistently placed at the bottom. The 
Nisvasa is consistently placed high up. As we would expect from the sole 
cross-reference identified, the Svayambhuva appears consistently above 
the Raurava. 

Individually none of these pieces of evidence are strong, but their 
cumulative weight encourages me to assert that the Parakhya and the 
Kirana are earlier than the Mrgendra and the Matahga , but are prob¬ 
ably the latest of the extant, demonstrably early redactions of the listed 
Siddhantas. 


External Evidence for the Kiranatantra’s date 

One way of pushing back the terminus post quern of the composition ol 

the Kirana would be to find quotations in the works of authors that pred- 

* 

iti ni£vasakarikavam dlksot tare prakarane ekoriavirngatih 

«/i 1 * • • • 

patalah <g> samapto ’yam samhita iti ® idam pahca - 
sutro\j\jvalam samudayena dvadaSasahasrikain s am apt am 
nigvasakarikakhyam tantram 

[...] 

But in the case of the Brahmayamala the schema of the five Sutras 
has nothing to do with the sequence of sections seen in the Nigvasa. For 
it has no sequential divisions other than its Patalas. It seems, therefore, 
that the Jayadrathayamala understands the Sutras to be five classes of 
teaching within the otherwise unitary Tantra, in the same way that it 
claims to have four Padas though it lacks a corresponding division into a 
sequence of four parts bearing their names. 

For the four padas of the Jayadrathayamala see footnote 69 on p. 183. 








Introduction 


lxxv 


ate Abhinavagupta and Ramakantha and their immediate predecessors. 173 
Ramakantha’s occasional refutation of possible lines of interpretation 174 
might be taken to suggest that he knew of other commentaries. It would 
be particularly useful to be able to prove that Sadyojyotih, whom we know 
(from Sivadrsti 3:13) to be earlier than Somananda, knew the Kirana. As 
Sanderson has pointed out (1985a:210, note 41), Sadyojyotih appears not 
to have attacked a developed doctrine of Advaita Vedanta in his critique of 
Vedanta in the Paramoksanirasakarika^ ' 5 and this implies that he wrote 
considerably earlier than Ramakantha. Plainly he knew a Raurava , on 
which the \Sarva-]agamapramanya, Mantravarttika , Bhogakarika , Moksa¬ 
karika, and Paramoksanirasakarika commented, and the Svayambhuva¬ 
sutrasangraha, on the first chapters of which he wrote a prose comment- 

ary; but it is difficult to prove that he knew of other particular tan- 

*• 

tras, because he rarely quotes directly. Oddly he seems to have known 
the Malinlvijayottara , for Moksakarika 1-2 contain padas from the first 
chapter of that tantra, 176 and, as Professor Sanderson has pointed out to 
me, Sadyojyotih quotes Malinlvijayottara 2:60 (without attribution) ad 
Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 3:11, p. 73, line 8, 17 ' (This appears to be the 
only quotation in the entire commentary.) Unfortunately I have found no 
compelling evidence to show that Sadyojyotih knew the Kirana; although 
he refers to the division of knowledge into scriptures beginning with the 
Kamika and to the existence of upabhedas (see footnote 168 on p.lxxii 
above), and although he must have been aware of the list of twenty-eight 
scriptures transmitted in Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 5, this is of course 

1 '^Narayanakantha frequently quoted the Kirana , Srlkantha knew it— Rat n at ray a- 

vJ m f ■ X u A m r * » 

parTksa 289a = Kirana 3:26c—and Somananda referred to it—Sivadrsti 3:16ab gives a 
pratika for Kirana 3:23c. 

174 e.g. 1:1.1-2; 1:13.31-3. 

175 In his commentary on Paramoksanirasakarika 2 Ramakantha draws attention to 

v i p • 

this: nanv atra vrttikartuh parinativedantamatir evoddetyatayabhimata, na maya- 
vadamatih. ‘But here the author of the commentary [on the Raurava, i.e. Sadyojyotih,] 
intended only the transformationist Vedantic doctrine to be elucidated [and refuted], 
not the doctrine which holds [that all is] cosmic illusion.’ 

176 lb ~ Malinlvijayottara l:17d, lc ~ Malinlvijayottara 1:18a, 2b « Malinlvijayottara 
l;25d. Diwakar Acharya also noticed these parallels and pointed out to me some other 
similarities of phrasing in the two works, of which the most compelling (as evidence for 
borrowing) is that between Moksakarika 72c~73b and Malinlvijayottara l:18c-19b. 

17 ' Sadyojyotih’s use of the terms pralayakala and vijnanakala might also be inter¬ 
preted to be indications of his familiarity with the Malinlvijayottara: see footnote 71 
on p. 184 of the translation. 








Ixxvi 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m m %f m 


not evidence for his having known the scriptures on the list. (Compare 
how few listed scriptures are adduced as authorities by the Kashmirian 
Saiddhantikas of Ramakantha’s lineage.) 

Thus, aside from those in the lists of other tantras, the earliest known 
references to the Kirana are in the works of tenth-century Kashmirian 
authors. To those of writers of the lineages of Abhinavagupta and Rama- 
kantha may be added the quotations in Bhattotpala's commentary on the 
Brhatsamhita 178 (completed in Kashmir in 967 AD 1 ' 9 ) and the reference 
in Somananda’s $ivadrsti 3:16ab. it is possible that a non-Kashmirian 

* • » i 

citation, that of Ilrdaya^iva, is contemporary with these, but, as we saw 
above footnote 98 on p.xliii), his dating is uncertain. The earliest refer¬ 
ences are thus more or less contemporaneous with the date of copying of 
the earliest surviving manuscript (NJ, 924 AD. 

Sadly there is no firm external evidence that I can marshal, by which 
the Kirana might be more precisely dated. 


178 In Chapter 52 ad verses 13, 21, 23, 28, 29, 38, 41, 116 on pp. 648-702. 
179 Thus Pingree, 1981:74. 





















































































































































































































































































































































SOURCES 


Of the Nepalese manuscripts of the Kirana I have used only microfilm 
copies; the manuscripts themselves 1 have not seen. The other manuscripts 
I have seen; but I have collated them sometimes directly and sometimes 
from photocopies or from my own photographs. Only in some cases (e.g. 
that of M r ) have I worked entirely from the originals. 

The leaves of all the palm-leaf manuscripts except N 2 are pierced by two 
string holes. I state this once here and do not mention it in the individual 
descriptions. 


The Manuscripts of Bliatta Ramakantha II’s 

1 * * * f 

Kiranavrtti 

• • 

R=(R iV P(=P 1 P 2 P 3 )) 

R N Government Oriental Manuscripts Library of Madras MS D17160. 
Contains all twelve patalas of the Kiranavrtti of Bhatta Rama¬ 
kantha and of the vidyapada of the Kirana . Palm-leaf (talipot V. 
Nandinagari. Thirty-eight folios of approximately l f 7' f x 2". Eleven 
to twelve lines per side. (Complete and extremely well preserved. 
( Occasionally thin strips have broken off and the top lines of a few 
folios have lost the upper vowel matras. The left-hand string-holes 
are well-worn. The scribe has occasionally cancelled aksaras with 
short horizontal strokes above them. In line 5 of f. 145 r another hand 
with much freer, more flamboyant strokes takes over until the 2nd 
line of f. \A5 V where the first hand resumes. The same codex con¬ 
tains a number of other texts apparently in the same hand and one 
or two interspersed among them in Kannada script: D17157 Vfra- 
gaivaratnakara ; D17158 Sivaglta ; D17159 Sarvasiddhantasangraha 
with Kannadatlka: D17160 Kiranavrtti; D17161 Padmapurana and 

p I / f t ' * (F 






lxxx 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * 1/ t 


finally four folios of a Matahgaparamesvaratantravyakhya (not used 
by Bhatt). The pages of the entire codex have been numbered con¬ 
tinuously on the obverse sides with Kannada digits and then again 
by.a modern hand in Roman digits. By the beginning of our text 
the modern numerator has counted four more pages than the scribe 
so that the first leaf is numbered 121 in Kannada digits and 125 in 

Roman ones. I have used the latter because I saw and understood 
them first. 

End (f.l62 r t n l-f.l62 v t 2 l): 


U ti yuktyagamasahita vrttir iyam bha t tar am akam then a 
kai U ranavidyapade narayanakamthasununa racita/ 


prarabdha vijayesa\L I62 v ]nathapurato masasta- 
kenadaran 

nityam cimtanatah samaptam amalam ya camdrabhaga 
x syadax tada 

nita seyam apTsatirtthatapasam samartthyatam sarvada 
bhuyad bhaktajanasya gasvatatfivapronmTlan e vallabha // 


iti narayanakarnthatmajabhattaramakaznthaviracitayam 

srim a tkirana vrttau d v ad as am prakaran am 




vidyapadah 


samaptah// 



//00O// 


snguru- 


bhyo 


namah//=//=// OOOG»// 


sri basaveg varaya 


namah//=/ / 


The rest of the folio has been left blank. This manuscript embeds 
the text of the tantra in the commentary, but not always in the 
appropriate place. This is discussed below at the end of the sec¬ 
tion on editorial policies. Listed by Kuppuswami Sastri and P. P. 
Subrahmanya Sastri (1938:151) and described in a brief article by 
S. Vedantachari (1947:97—104) and in an even briefer one by S. M. 
Fazlullah (1951:212—13 ). E v reports the readings of the sutras from 
this manuscript with the sigliim A. 

IFP T. 290 Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP T. 290. This is a Devanagarl tran¬ 
script made in 1969 of R A . This I have used for orienting myself in 














Sources 


lxxxi 


the text; but I have not relied on it for reporting variants. It ap¬ 
pears in the apparatus where R v is broken or illegible. It comprises 

ninety-nine half foolscap pages. 

P, Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 47656. Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti. 

Contains only pratikas of the text of the mula. The text breaks off 

in the middle of the sixth patala. Palm-leaf (palmyra). Grantha. 

Twenty-three leaves of approximately 1 7" x l|". The hand is small 

and regular. Many of the aksaras that are ordinarily similar in 

Grantha (e.g. va and pa) are here indistinguishable. Tiny dashes 

are used (erratically ) by way of punctuation. Twelve lines to a side. 

The leaves are disordered and badly damaged and all lack varying 

amounts of text from the right-hand edges. The left hand margins 

were numbered with aksaras, a few of which are still visible. Polios 

7-9. 12. 14-15, 17-18, 21, and 23 are labelled ki, kT, ku , kr, kl, ke, 

ko. kau. kha, and khi, which means that there must once have been 

ten (or twelve if the scribe included am and ah in his alphabet, as 

he presumably included also kam and kali) leaves that preceded the 

first folio of the Kiranavrtti in this codex. Lines 5-11 on f. 23 r are 

>» * 

written in a different, larger, less tidy hand. After the vrtti follow 
three leaves which contain what the typed handlist of the IFP refers 
to as Smrtimuktaphale Sivaratrinirnaya. These are clearly not part 
of the same manuscript. They are written in a larger, scruffier hand 
that slopes more to the right and although the dimensions of these 
leaves are now approximately the same as those of the Kiranavrtti, 
they would once have been a couple of inches shorter. 

End (f. 23 u t 12-13 l): 

sarvesam parinatamalanam anugrahako bhagavan ity 
adosah atraiva pariksanta — rapigabdac chivatvavyakti- 

Wr 

hetug ca na bhavati 

This gives the last words of the commentary on 6:13 and the ava- 
tarika and a fragment of the commentary for 6:14. This manuscript, 
like P 2 , is from a private collection acquired in its entirety by Mr. 
N. R. Bhatt, and Mr. Subrahmaniam for the IFP from a village near 
Kumbakonam in Tanjore district called Gunatalapadi. 

P 2 Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 47629. Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti. 
Contains only pratikas of the text of the mula. The text breaks off 







lxxxii 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


in the middle of the sixth patala. Palm-leaf (palmyra). Grantha. 
Eighty leaves of approx. 1'3|" x l\". The hand changes in line 3 
of f. 52 r , but throughout there are five to six lines to a side. The 
first hand is large, clear and steady, the second, of the same size 
but wobbly. A dot above an aksara indicates that it has been 
cancelled. Such cancellations and other corrections are almost all 
uninked. Worm-eaten and I roken. The leaves were numbered in the 
left hand margins of the obverse sides, but only nine leaves (12. 39. 
44, |4|9, [5]0, 51, 56, 57, 58 and [5]9) have enough of their margins 
left to allow the numbers to be read. Folios 2, 3 and 4 are missing. 
A complete list of all the leaves of which little survives would be 

space consuming and tedious. The information can be gleaned from 
the bracketing in the text itself. 

Verso of final fragment (f. 84^): 

— thopasamharah evam jhana — thaivanutisthct any- 

• * t/ 

athagamavi — diti vaksyamanaprayagcittaka — rape 
nayam jhadman nityanustheyataya p — dante na 

visuddhajhanakevalitvena paramo — payavivaksayapi 
sarvesam parinatamala — 

This fragment gives the avatarika, pratlka , and part of the com¬ 
mentary lor 6:12-13. The handlist of the IFP records that this was 
No. 22 of the Gunatalapadi collection. 

p 3 Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 40042. Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti. 

# • • # 

Contains only pratikas of the text of the mula . The text breaks off 
in the middle of the sixth patala. Palm-leaf (palmyra). Grantha. 
Twelve folios of approximately 1'7" x l|". (Only the obverse of 
f. 12 is written on.) Written with sixteen to seventeen lines to 
a side in a still smaller hand than that of P lt It is worm-eaten 
in places and occasionally broken, but, compared with the other 
s n:! ' s kalian sources, it is in excellent condition. The syllables ki 
vr are written in the left hand margin of the obverse of each folio 
^ } ‘ 1 hi* 1 * t' « - r s !i not nuin bered . The Kiranavrtti commences at 
the start of the forty-fifth folio and is preceded in the same codex 
by the following texts: Kamikavidyapada , Kiranapagumayakarma - 
pat i£ak tip a t a l ah , Matahga v idy ap ade—up o dgh a tadyahahkara tat- 
tvantapatalah and Akasapatala (incomplete) Tattvaprakatfa, Tat- 
tvasahgraha } Tattvatrayanirnaya , Bhogakarika , Moksakarika. Para - 





Sources 


Ixxxiii 


moksanirasakarika, Devikalottare—naisthikanam jnanacaravicara- 

• * it • t/ 

patalah , yogapada and vidyapada of the Sarvajnanottara , Vatula- 
suddhatantra and the Siddhantaprakasika of Sarvatma^ambhu. It 
is followed by these texts: Aghorasiva's Tattvaprakasavrtti, 180 
Ta11vasangrahatlka, Ta11vatrayanirnayavrtti , and Bhogakarika- 
vrtti ; the Moksakarikavrtti o ; Ramakantha; the Nadakarikavya- 

* t * a * * * 

khya of Aghora^iva; the Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti of Rama¬ 
kantha; the RatnatrayaparlksollekhinT of Agliora^iva; the Pramaiia- 
dlpika; a Sivajnanabodhavrtti; Prasadasatslokivyakhya; Prasada- 
paramaksarJ; Sakalagamasarasangraha and wiiat the handlist de¬ 
scribes as Devatamulamantrah. This last appears to be a part 
Sanskrit, part Tamil explanation of a mantra written in six columns 
on the obverse of the penultimate folio. Altogether there are 182 
leaves, the first and last o which are blank. This vast codex 
is all copied in the same minute, meticulously neat hand. This 
manuscript (assigned the siglum A) was used by Filliozat for its 
text of the Nadakarika and commentary and briefly described in his 
introduction (1984:226) and for its text oi the TattvasangrahatTka 
(1988). He did not use it for iiis edition of the Tattvatrayanirnaya- 
vrtti (1991). 


End (f. 12 v f 12 l); 


sarvesam parinamatamalanain anugrahako hhagavan ity 
adosah atraiva panksantaraya pragnah pagaviglesahetur 
apisabdat givatvavyaktihetus ca na bhavati 


This is the same ending as that of P lt The pratika (perhaps pasa- 
vislesanarttham ityadi) has probably disappeared because of eye- 
skip. for the opening words of the commentary on 6:14 in R v 
(f. 147 v t 1 h) are diksa padaviglesahetuh. The remainder of f. 12 lias 
been left blank. 

The siglum Pf is given to the sutrapatha of the Kirana , which ap¬ 
pears as the second text in this codex (see the description of manu¬ 
scripts of the tantra below under P 3 ). 


lh0 Gengnagel (1996:23, fn. 72) mentions that he is uncertain whether further 
manuscripts of this text are available in the French Institute of Pondicherry. There are 
indeed numerous uncatalogued palm-leaf manuscripts both of the Tattvaprakadavrtti 
and of the other texts of the so-called Astaprakarana with their commentaries. 





lxxxiv 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


The Manuscripts of the Tantra 


N(=N 1 N 2 N 3 D 1 D 2 * ) 

S(M = P 3 V1V2V3V4) G(=G!G 2 G 3 ) K! A(=AiA 2 ) M(=M!M 2 M 3 )) 

N, Kathmandu National Archives MS No. 5-893. Nepal German 
Manuscript Preservation Project (= NGMPP) Reel No. A 40/3. 
Kirana. Palm-leaf (talipot). Early Nepalese 'Licchavr script. 
1 x 2 . Ninety-nine folios, of which 1-12 and 61 are now miss¬ 
ing. Iiara Prasad Sastri (1915:99) recorded only folios 1-5 and 7-9 
as missing. 3 ie contents list that SastrT mentioned (ibid ) seems 
also now to be lost; but a version of it appears at the end of its apo¬ 
graph D 1 . Six lines to a page. The reverse of each folio is numbered 
in the left-hand margin with Nepalese letter numeration. A few 
leaves have now lost their pagination. Folios 49 and 50 are both 
numbered 49. Folios 62 and 63 were swapped round at the time of 
filming. The text commences in Mie seventh patala. Dated samvat 
44 (c. 924 AD). The divisions into vidyapada , kriyapada. etc. that 

are found in South Indian manuscripts are not marked in this or in 
any of lie other Nepalese manuscripts . 181 

Beginning (f. 13T:): 


tatrapi saktim atmiya mantrah prakhyaprayanti hi! 

|7:15cd] 


End (f. 99 r l- 1 - 4 ] i 


rasarat saramrtam yatha/ uddhrtam sukhadam gubhram 
kiranam nama namatah // ® // iti kiranakhye mahatantre 
catuhsastipatalah // ® // samaptah cedam kiranakhyam 
mahatantram saptatyadhikadvisahasram iti// 0 // 

samvat 44 jesthamase likhitam idam iti // ® [+ 

2 illegible characters] // gubham a stu // Snbhakta- 

puradhivasino bhattapanditacaryyagrludayapalasomasya 

pustakam idam/ granthapramana sahasra 2 gata 7 // 

1 s 1 . 

In E d the pac/a divisions are as follows: 1-12 vidyapada, 13-30 kriyapada , 31-57 

caryapada, 58-64 yogapada. For further details of the structure and contents of the 

entire tantra see Brunner 1965. 










Sources 


Ixxxv 


All that follows the chapter colophon is scruffily written in what 
appears to be a different hand. In a similar hand to that of the 
scribe of the manuscript on the centre of the recto and verso of a 
leaf numbered 59 and placed after 99 are written 36:14 -18b followed 
by a caret mark and the number 3. These verses are indeed missing 
from f. 59 u t 3 ], no doubt because of the scribe’s eye skipping from 
pavitrakam in 36:13d to the same word in 36:18b. Described by 
Sastrl (1915:xxiv-xxvi and 99-104). 


N 2 Kathmandu National Archives MS No. 4-257. NGMPP Reel 
No. A 995/1. Kirana. Palm-leaf (talipot). Newari. Commences 
at the end of the second patala. Twelve folios (5-9 and 1 2—18) sur¬ 
vive. 32x4*4cm. Five lines to a side. Pagination is in the right-hand 
margin of the verso of each folio. There are no string holes, but a 
square space has been left in the centre of each side of each folio, 
and the centre of each such space is marked with a round spot of 
ink. The manuscript appears to be a transcript of N x . In a private 
communication Vivanti has told me that N 2 must be the manuscript 
whose readings she reported in E v with the siglum C. In her edition 
she described it thus (1975:6): 'Questo manoscritto, contenente il 
testo dei capitoli Ill. IV. V, VII e di parte dell’ VIII capitolo del 
vidyapada, e molto corotto e presenta frequenti lacune.’ 


Beginning (f. 5 r ^): 


paty anyatojalat/ sivajnanam tatha tasya saktigamrodha- 
karanam / / /fiti kilanakhye tautre dvitiyah patalah// 


End 



yamyo mrtyuharo dhata vidhata karttrsarnjnakah/ kalo 
dharmmapatir yokta vi U kayayamapriyah/ [8:96c- 
97b] 182 


Just before going to press I noticed that the verso only of what I 
suppose (on the basis of the similarity of the handwriting and shape 
of the leaf) to be f. 2 of N > (covering l:8d 4 to 1:17a 4 ) has been filmed 

18 Vivanti's apparatus (1.975:36) represents C as breaking off after 8:91, but this is in 
fact the point at which f. 18 r ends. I assume that she did not have a photograph of 

f. 18V 











I xxxvi 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


by the N 1MPP at the beginning of Reel No. E 2673/6. (There follow 
47 miscellaneous, disordered leaves in ‘Bhujimof script, many of 
which may transmit an AstahrdayasarTra, for a colophon to the first 
adhyaya of this text appears on f. 17 V W.) The readings of this leaf 

have also been recorded in the apparatus marked with the siglum 
N 2 . 



Kathmandu National Archives. MS No. 4-132. |BrhatsucIpatram 
Vol.4,1 Visaya No. 120, pp. 55-7.) NGMPP Reel No. B 117/11. 
Kirana. Paper. Newari. Clearly written and in good condition. As 


in so many late Nepalese manuscripts, errors of carelessness abound. 
The text of N 3 is extremely close to that of D 2 and they were both 
copied from the same source. I have not been able to establish 
whether or not that source descends ultimately from Nj. The qual¬ 
ity of the text it has transmitted is much poorer than that of D 1 
and N 2 , the direct apographs of N,. Dated samvat 819 (c.1699 AD). 
Mighty-three folios of 30 x 10cm with seven lines to a side. The patala 
numbers in the colophons are continuous from one to thirty-eight. 
Patala 39 is marked 49, patala 40 breaks off (in E D ’s 15a) before 
the colophon, after which the scribe leaves a large space (ff. 62"[ 4 ~ 7 ]- 
63't l_i l) and resumes with the beginning of patala 51. The chapter 
numbering and text are then uninterrupted again up to the end of 
patala 57. The text divisions into padas are not marked. (Per¬ 
haps by chance, the last patala given, 57, is the last patala of the 
caryapada in E D .) 


Beginning (f. 1 V M): 


om namah sivaya// kailasasikhalaflo N c 3 )rudham somam 
som a rd hatfekh aram 


End (f. 83 1 ’ 



rudralo+ko+ hhavet tasya tasmin yogam avapnuyat// 
11 iti kiranakhye mahatantre saptapahcaSatpatalah 
samaptah// ® // 0 // // samvat 819 kartt.ikaknkla 12 
dvadaSTkanigvan thvaku (?) sampurnnah kubhah /'/ 


D‘D 2 Kathmandu National Archives MS No. 5-4780. NGMPP Reel No. B 

172/21. Kirana. Paper. DevanagarT. Complete and in good con¬ 
dition. D 1 has evidently been transcribed from N,, but for much 








Sources 


lxxxvii 


of the manuscript marginal ‘corrections' have frequently, but not 
consistently, been made (perhaps by the scribe of D 2 ) to make the 
text closer to that of D 2 and N 3 . D 2 is the siglum of a manuscript 
in a different nagarl hand probably copied from the same source 
as that of N 3 . D 2 covers the first five patalas and the first three 
verses of the sixth. The first three folios of D 1 cover the first five 
patalas ; but this portion of the text in D"s source, Nj, must at the 
time of copying have been very badly damaged and mixed up. The 
scribe of D 2 has therefore crossed out the first three folios of I 
and replaced them with his own folios 1-5. To the .op of D"s f. 4 r 
the scribe of D 2 has added an extra line and a bit, so that the text 


reads smoothly from the portion he copied into the text of D 1 that 
has not been crossed out. D^s folios 4, 5, and 6 he has renumbered 
ka 6, kha 5, and kha 6. Thereafter the pagination has not been 
altered. From 6:4, where the text oi I)' has been left to stand, read¬ 
ings similar to those of N 3 have frequently been inserted in between 
the lines. 120 leaves of 31 x 12cm. with seven lines to a side. Both 
scribes have written the word 'ramah' followed by the folio number 
in the right-hand margin of the verso of each folio. D 1 states that 
it was copied from an old manuscript of the date of [on 1.116 

verso) ( yugayugamitasamvacchukramasaprasutam ) and dates itself 

with the phrase navahayanavacandrabde, viz. 1979 (c. 1901 ad). 
The text divisions into padas are not marked. 

Beginning of crossed out portion ol D l (f. l*9b): 


6nh/ / yatha nigadabandhanam// [3:3d| 
End of crossed out portion of D 1 (f. 3 V [ 7 )): 


yadijateh prakalpyo (D lac ; jater vikalpo D lr ) sau ekenapi 
D lc ; ekonapi D loc ) ca sarvatah [5:3cd] 


Beginning of D 2 (f. l v ^): 


om namah 6ivaya// // kailasasikhararudham etc. [1:1] 


End of D 2 (f. ka 6 




yadi jate prakalpyo sau ekenapi ca sarvatah/ [5:3cd] 

End of D 1 (f. llG^ 2 - 3 ]): 



















lxxxviii 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• * 4/ • 


uddhrtam sukhadam t ant ram kiranam nama namatah/ / 

■ • - • * * m f f 

iti kiranakhve mahatantre catuhsastih patalah// rnamgalam 
granthasamkhya ca saptatyadhikadvisahasratmika jheya om 

kiranakiranaputarn guptavarnaprabhutam yugayugamitasam- 
vacchukram asaprasu tam j j 

gurum abhijaravarnam vlksya pratnam pralckham jhatiti hi 
h arid at t ah pant hap ado [\likhac cham 1 

n a vah ay an avacan drabde tapasyan d h apakse h i m akara b h a va- 
vare saptamT nama kale/ j 

sakalakiranatantram turn am apadya nutnam dvijavarahari- 
dattah suprabhubhyo rpayasam ( unmetrical) 2 

yad atra livivibhramam yad ahhivarnamatracyutam [f. 117 r 
cyutam ca padatah padam jar ad a sod hi dab darn yatj j 
bhaved dhi gurupustakam sujaradahgavarnabhramac chiveva 
dr&dusanam sahrdavah samalocatu/ 3/ 

* * * 1 • 1/1 // 

paragunavigunagrahane mrduceto navamta ivabhavyah// 
ekadivase tanuvikalah sampannanam api namarstryatyah 4 

vidhiparipake paguna eko na ekah puro lasati/ j 
prakrtinirata sarve na ke pi kusala vidhau vihitah// 5// 

dhata sad a vidhata. nalain jagat sarupatam karttum// 
naramaninam kathah kah kalapakalavibhinnaguna ni~ 
yata// 6 // 

ksamyantu sad a. prabhavah sudhiya sudhiyo pi ksamyantu// 
sah an avi vccan akoso m ah a j j a a an a m n a vis vesam j / 7 

esa sulekhalekha kirana vidyanilayo tra sadvesa// 
jlyat su[f. 117 v \ciram kalam yavac candrarkatarakacaram 8 

nadyam patalacatuskam tadanu caturnam bhramadgalad- 
varnam 

m 

tadrg sthale sthale ca madhye satrimgayugam khandam 9 

gatir esa gurulivika tenevam tanutanur din a// 
abhyarthate tanupustim samdayani ya dalalubhih sa tat am 10 

khalavirasakaragrahanam mrdu bandhah sn eh ajalagn isam - 
parkam j / 

mastu mameti ca din a prayacate livimalinT ka' hy esa 11 

senyah si vapa th a bhaj am sarodarah suhitamvadah kiranah// 
cinvantu vido tra sarani hams a iva pay ah payodharam 12 

dhanya nepalamahl dhanvah srihemarajaguruprabhavahj 
dhanyam tadTyavidyanilayam dhanyas tadagrita lekhah 13 

dar$ayatlva danaphalarn sampadya h em a vi [ f. 118 r | bh au sv r a- 
kosasar vas vani / / 









Sources 


lxxxix 


pratisadanam viharanti virajate jane jane varani 14 

prapathatu harir harir iti dhyayatu rupam rupam guruvadana- 
samputam// 

ipsapurttir ekadine yatnayujam kila krtau nihitah 15 
vrttam idarn pamcadasakam harividusa bhavisanmude ni~ 

• * A- * m ■ 

hi tarn/ / 

pracaratu sahanugami ki ran a ki ran ai h saint at am vihitam 16 

prabhavantu sukhino nikhilah kadacid api vipan na pagyantu // 
kurvantu sajjanasahgam smaram smarairi tar am tar am 17/ 
s am apt am id am mahgalam 

(I have hesitated to conjecture improvements, because the errors 
must be authorial.) In small letters below this is written 

asya tantrasya u n a. vi mtfapatal asya grh aracan a visayaka- 
glokah katipaye varahasamhitavyakhyayam bhattotpalenapy 
uddhrta/ vastuvidyaprakarane tena tats am aye sya tantrasya 
pramanarupataya praclnatvam laksyate. 

There follow two extra folios (l v to 2 7 ) which give a contents list 
based upon the lost list of Nj which SastrT reproduced (1915:99— 
101 ), but with small variations in some of the names and with 
the following colophon (f. 2^ 1 5—b ; iti samksiptakiranatamtrapatala- 
paripatika subha samapta. 

M Y University of Mysore, (Oriental Research Institute MS P 258/10. 
(The last digit is intended to indicate the place of the text in the 
codex, but the Kirana appears to be the ninth and not the tenth. ) 
Kirana vidyapada (excepting chapter 12) and patalas 58 and 59 
(numbered 59 and 60) of the yogapada. Palm-leaf (talipot). Nandi- 
nagarl. Seven folios of 2^" x with eighteen lines to a side. The 
leaves were numbered (perhaps at the time of writing) in Kannada 
numerals in the left margins of each recto and later in Arabic nu¬ 
merals in the spaces round the string holes. I have followed the 
latter. The first verse of the text of the Kirana (f. 35 ,; I 12 I) directly 
follows the colophon to the Parakhya (for which this is the codex 
unicus) on f. 35 1 ' (labelled 35B), line 11. The penultimate folio of 
the Kirana was placed after f. 70 of the codex, was noticed by the 
second numerator to belong earlier, and was labelled 39B. The final 
colophon on f. 39 r ^~ 5 l (f. 40 in the Kannada numeration) reads iti 



xc 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


grlkiranakhye mahatantre sastipatalah // //yogapadah samaptah // 
/ /srTsadasivaya namah rsaya ucuh These last two words mark the 
opening of the South ndian Pauskara.) The whole codex is beauti¬ 
fully written in a very small, neat hand and makes an old impression. 
The Kirana is preceded in the same codex by the Tattvapraka^a- 
vrtti (ff. l-5 r ); the Prayogasara (f!. 5' ; -9 r ); Rauravasutrasahgraha 
|for chapters 5 to 10 and for half of chapter 4 of which this is the co¬ 
dex unicus ] (ff. 9 r [ 6 ]-i2 r t 15 ]); Svayambhuvasutrasangraha [for which 

5 his is the only South Indian manuscript known to me in which all 
twenty-three chapters appear in the correct order and unmixed with 
other material 183 ] (ff. 12 r t 15 ]-18^t 16 ]) ; Sardhatrigatikalo11ara (ff. 18— 
22 r ); Kalajnana 184 (f.22 v ); Mrgendrottara [=Mrgendra ] (ff. 23 r -27 r 
[f. 23 does not follow on from f. 22]); and the Parakhya (ff. 27 r -35). 
The Kirana is followed in the same codex by the Pauskara (ff. 39-48); 
Goraksaviracitaprabodha (ff. 48-50 7 ) and Yogadlpika (ff. 52 r -53 r ). 
On f. 54 u appears the colophon iti £rlmahadevaviracite astarpga- 
yogah kartikeyasamvadah muktisopanagastram saw apt a m. Then 
follows the first adhikara of Abhinavagupta’s Isvarapratyabhijna - 
karikavimartinl (ff. 54 u -71 r ). The last colophon of that work is that 
of the seventh ahnika. F. 71 v is blank. I could not identify what text 
the last folios, 72-76 r , transmit. I noticed only one colophon-like 
phrase: iti jainasamayanirakaranam (f. 72 r t 13 !). The same codex 
was used for its text of the atter chapters of the Rauravasiitrasan- 
graha (not for the first three and half) and cursorily described in 
Bhatt’s edition of the Raurava (p. xviii and p. 174). It was not used 
by Filliozat for his edition o! the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha. The 
bulk of M r ’s readings of the Kirana probably coincide more nearly 

1 ^illiozat’s assertion (1991a:xxi and 1994:xxxiv that IFP 39819 (Vi) transmits the 
whole vidyapada 'including the non-commented portion’ means only that it contains 
the first four chapters complete. The fourth chapter describes the bhuvanadhvan in 
eighty-nine verses in the Mysore edition, which is almost certainly based on M v ), 
among which Sadyojyotih comments only on the first seven. The scribe of IFP 39819 
has marked the end of the fourth chapter as the end of the vidyapada. For more 
remarks about the transmission and structure of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha see 
footnote 111 on p.xlix above. 

184 This brief, incompletely preserved text is probably another, shorter recension of 
the Kalottara; the names are used interchangeably, for example, in the colophons of 
Nepalese manuscripts of the non-eclectic recensions (i.e. excluding the Brhatkalottara). 
Thus in NAK MS pra 1114 (NGMPP Reel No. B 25/7) Kalajnana appears, e.g., on 
ff. 47*' [6 1, 103’ ,[51 , but Kalottara., e.g., on ff. 47 v [3l, 90 r , etc. 








Sources 


xci 


with the conjectured text of Ramakantha than those of any other 
independent manuscript of the mula. The text of the two patalas it 
transmits of the yogapada is written without break after that of the 
vidyapada. This codex's text of the Kirana is listed by Malledevaru 
(1987:30-1), as are most, but not all, of the other works in the codex 
elsewhere in the same volume. 


K 2 University of Mysore, Oriental Research Institute MS B 812 (listed 
by Malledevaru, 1987:30-1). Kirana vidyapada (excepting chapter 
12 ) and patalas 58 and 59 (numbered 59 and 60) of the yogapada . 
Black fountain pen on strong paper water-marked ‘Government of 
Mysore'. Kannada script. In good condition. Thirty-one folios of 
! 9.5 x 16cm with twelve lines to a side numbered in the centre of the 
top margin of each obverse. This manuscript is written clearly in 
a stylish hand with many flourishes and contains few errors. Oc¬ 
casional ‘corrections' appear in another hand and in copper-beech- 
coloured ink. it Consists of three signatures of ten sheets and one 
of two. These have been neatly bound in pale blue buckram. In 
the copper-beech ink on the first folio is written ‘28.3.07’ and be¬ 
neath that ‘30’. This may mean that it was copied between the 
28th and 30th of March 1907. K 2 is almost certainly an apograph 
of M v , and I have only occasionally included it in the apparatus to 
draw attention to particularly telling instances of shared error. It 
has been carefully copied and there are scarcely any deviations from 
M r . The colophons (short and plain in M r ) have been copiously 
interlarded with obeisances to Krsna and to Ramacandra, but give 
no information about its place or copyist. 

Beginning (f. l r t 1_3 l): 


£ri ram ay a namah/ j - sri- / / grTgurubhyo namah// - 
£n- // £rj / / at ha kiranakhyam ah at ant re jhanapadah 
prarabhyate // -&T- kailasatfikharaslnam etc. 



antestis (sic) tasya kartavya mrtasya vidhipurvika/ / -sri- 
// iti kiranakhye mahatantre sastih patalah samaptah (= 
59 in E d ) // -$ri- x2 // // yogapadah samaptah// - // - 
sri- grlkrsn arc an am a stu// - // £riramacandraya namah/ / 









XC11 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kir an at antra 

* i 4 / v 


// ... (x42 !) gnmahgalam a stuff sn hah bi me (?)// 

-grl- 

R A See description on p. lxxix above. 

Pf Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 40042. Kiranavidyapada pat alas 
1-6. Two unnumbered folios from the same codex and by the same 
hand as P 3 (q.v. above for a full description). The colophons have 
been underlined with a blue ballpoint. In the left-hand margin of 
f. l r is written kiranamulam. The first verse of the text of the Kirana 

• * m 

starts without preamble at the top of I:. l r . The text breaks off' after 
6:12 (f. 2 u I 5 1): anyatha sthitibhani U syat sthitK cokta sivagame/ 
tada U The remainder of the folio is left blank. 

Vi Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 39819. Kiranavidyapada. Com¬ 
plete. Palm-leaf (palmyra). (Irantha. This codex commences with 
the first four chapters of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (folios 1- 
9) [see footnote 183 on p.xc] followed by Sadyojyotih's commentary 
on the first patala (folios 10-22) thereof and has been used and 
described by Filliozat (1991a:xxi-xxii). Folios 1-22 have six lines 
to a side and measure 38x 3.2cm. As Filliozat (ibidem) points out, 
the portion containing the Kirana (the remaining 17 folios) once 
belonged to a separate manuscript. Its leaves have eight lines to a 
side and measure 37.5x3.5cm. Extremely fragmentary and worm- 
eaten. Detached downward strokes starting from small nodes are 
added to lengthen some vowels, e.g a and non-initial u. An initial 
long I, which is usually like a ra flanked by two small circles, ap¬ 
pears in this manuscript with a small circle to the right and one 
underneath instead of to the left. The folios are disordered and 
the left hand margins are eroded in such a way that no numera¬ 
tion is visible. The first verse of the text begins without preamble 
at the beginning of f. l r T. The final colophon reads iti kiranakhye 
mahatantre vidyapade dvadasapatalah u 185 aka grandham 415 [‘this 
comes to 415 units of thirty-two syllables'! iti vidyapadas sarnaptah 
u tey(a)vacikamanimur(a)ttitunai u pMay the murti of Devasikha- 
mani protect’|. 

185 Many Grant ha manuscripts use an elongated initial u (perhaps a simplified graph 
for an Om) as a dash or flourish before and after colophons. 














Sources 


xcin 


V 2 Sri Vehkate^vara Oriental Research Institute, Tirupati. Stock 
No. 3903 (listed by Subramania Sastri, 1956:44, Serial No. 1253). 
Kiranavidyapada only. Palm-lea (palmyra). Grant ha. The leaves 
are worm-eaten, but in relatively good condition and make a mod¬ 
ern impression. 15 folios of 9x15cm. Nine lines to a side. Incised 
but not inked. The folios were numbered in Grantha in the left-hand 
margin of each recto. While I photographed, a librarian renumbered 
them in the same place with Arabic numerals in pencil. The first 
verse of the text begins without preamble on f. 1 r 1 * 1 * J. 


End if. 15^ 6 1): 


iti kiranakhye mahatantre dvadatfa patalah samaptah 
dubham astu Subrahmanyan svahastalikhitam. 


The remainder of the folio is left blank. 


V 3 Uncatalogued. Pondicherry T P 25324. Kiranavidyapada. Palm- 
leaf (palmyra). Grantha. fourteen folios of 14^" x l~ fr with nine to 
eleven lines to a side. Numbering in blue ink in Roman numerals in 
the left-hand margin of the recto of each folio. The first extant folio 
is numbered !, but starts with 2:7b nanyatha sasya jayate), and 
there is obviously one folio missing. The tops and bottoms are badly 
worn and the leaves are full of worm holes. F.4 has snapped in the 
middle and much of it is missing. Another scribe has inserted f. 5. 
an uninked folio (V~), which repeats the text of f.4 (4:27c~5:22a) 
and must be a transcription of f.4 (not from another source) made 
after f. 4 had snapped. 

End (f. 14 ^[s-9]) ; 

iti kiranakhye mahatantre vidyapade dv ad as ah patalah/ 
u vidyapadah samaptah/ u harih om subham a stu sivaya 

nam ah. 

* 

In the letter kr the scribe writes a short vertical bar above the 

■ 

middle of the horizontal r matra. This habit could indicate that the 

<■ 

scribe was from Tirunelveli district. 186 

186 This is the suggestion of Mr. Sivaraja Dikshitar of the IFP. While in Pondicherry, 

I came across no manuscripts with this scribal habit that could be proved to be from 

Tirunelveli district; but a colophon of one, IFP 22720, referred to AgastTSvara., of whom 












XC1V 


Ramakantha J s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * V , 


V 4 1 Jncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP T. 515. Kiranavidyapada. Paper. 

Half foolscap written on the obverse sides only in blue ink with a 

fountain pen. Twenty lines to a page. Devanagarl. Complete and 

in good condition. The Kirana covers pp. 60-100 and is added on 

to the end of a text called the DaSakaryavivarana. I ’agination is in 

Arabic numerals at the top right-hand corner of each sheet. Verses 

1-1 lab are lost and have been replaced with an invocation to Visnu 

, _ 1 * * 

(I:. 60'T~®J): suklambaradharam visnum sasivarnam caturbhujam/ 
prasannavadanam dhyayet sarvavighnopatfantaye. 187 On the case 
that contains the manuscript is written ‘Copied from a manuscript 
belonging to Gurukkal, Tiruvannamalai’. The source manuscript 
was probably in Grantha, for there are numerous instances of con¬ 
fusion of ya and dha and of pa and va. The folio numbers of the 
source manuscript (from 1 to 20 r ) are written in the margin. Final 
colophon (p. 10(F 22-3 J): iti kiranakhye mahatantre dvadada patalah 
£ubham astu 

G, Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 30875. Kirana. Palm-leaf ( talipot). 
Grantha. Three damaged folios from the vidyapada of 1'2" x 2". 
Seventeen lines to a side in a tiny, more than usually cursive hand 
i hat leans to the right. The folios are intermixed with fourteen 
disordered, damaged leaves of a manuscript of the South Indian 
Pauskara (in what seems to be a different hand) and folios numbered 
65, 67-77, 79-86, 94-104, and 107-109 of an unidentified prose work 
of the Saiva Siddhanta (in what seems to be the same, slightly 
scruify hand). The first folio with part of the Kirana (numbered 67 
in the left-hand margin of the recto, though there is another 67 in 
the same codex) has the colophon to the 8th patala of the Pauskara 
(line 6). The first verse of the Kirana follows directly ( line 7) without 
preamble. Level with the beginning is written kiranamulam in the 
left-hand margin. The folio breaks off after 2:32b. The second folio 

there is a temple near Kanyakumari (roman numeration f. 41”). The same habit was 
practised by the scribe of A 2 . 

j ^ *7 r 

'This same verse is printed as a maiigala 6loka before the first verse of the Adyar 
Library edition of the Ahirbudhnyasamh ita , but it is evidently a widely popular prayer 
and is very commonly used before Saiva works as well. Prom among the manuscripts 
described in the second volume of the descriptive catalogue of the IFP (Varadachari 

1987) it prefaces, for example, 136.1, 191.9, 194.1, 194.5, 198.6, 202.1, 204.6, 220 and 
247.9. 











Sources 


xcv 


(unnumbered, because little remains to the left of the left-hand hole) 
begins with 2:34d 5 and ends with 4:28a () . The third folio (51 in 
roman numerals on the recto in the left-hand margin) begins with 
6:22d 5 ( °hi me hara and ends with 8:21c 5 . The colophons (except 
that to the sixth patala) have been underlined in blue ballpoint. 

G 2 Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 47637. Kirana. Contains the com¬ 
plete text and marks all four padas. Palm-leaf (palmyra). Grantha. 
Fragmentary and worm-eaten. 115 folios (ff. 94—208) of 10 /, xl ,/ | // . 
Nine to ten lines per side. The last four syllables of Kirana 1:1b are 
the first legible aksaras at the top of the recto of the first extant 
folio (f. 94 r ). The numeration (worn away on the first seven folios 
and on many subsequent ones) is at the top of the left-hand margin 
of the recto of each folio. 

Final colophon (f. 208 r|9 ): iti srimatkiranakhye mahatantre yoga - 
pade matrakanyadi (sic—cf. G 3 ) catussastih patalah. There fol¬ 
low (f. 208 r t lo l-f. 208 r ’W) the two verses in malini metre given in E D 
as the last verses of the Kirana , 64:21-2, and then the following: 

(f.208 v t 4 ” 7 l): 

srimahaganapataye namahj u £ngurubhyo namahj abhi- 
ramavallisahita amrtagh a tesvaraya namahj u yadrsam 
pustakan drstva tadrgam likhitam maya ahaddham va su~ 
baddham va mama doso na vidyate u tripurasundaryyai 
namah u saundare$varagurukal svahastalikhitam 

The Dvigatikalottara begins on the next folio in the same hand and 
the folio numbering continues. The colophon to the 17th patala of 
that tantra is found on f. 224 ?; followed by gubham astu. Thereafter 
there are nine badly worm-eaten blank eaves. G 2 may be from 
Tirukkataiyur or its vicinity, where there is a temple of Amrta- 
ghateSvara and his consort, Abhiramavalll. 188 In this manuscript 
na is written crushed closely together as though it were a ligature 
of consonants. When last in a ligature ya is written quite detached 
and wit'll an initial node. Final m and ma are especially difficult to 
distinguish. The handlist records that this codex was No. 30 in the 
Gunatalapadi collection. 

am grateful to Mr. T. Ganesan o the IFF for this information. 












XCV1 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


G 3 Uncatalogued. Pondicherry IFP 39802. Kirana. Palm-leaf 
(palmyra). Grantlia. Fragmentary and worm-eaten. One hundred 
and five folios (some disordered) of T7"xl'|". Six to nine lines per 
side. Badly damaged by worms, ’olios 2, 69, and 97 are broken in 
two. Much of folios 3-4, 38, 67, and 106 is missing. The first fo¬ 
lio is missing and the text commences with Kiranavidyapada 1:16a 
( tasyasuddhasya). From folio 5 numeration is in most cases still 
visible on the obverse of each folio in the left-hand margin. The ob¬ 
verse of the fifth folio has dark brown patches over which the scribe 
has not written. Instead of writing the ligature rmm with two sep¬ 
arate mas with a short vertical line between them, the scribe of this 
manuscript doubles the upper loop and adds the short vertical line 
to the top of the right hand loop. 

End (f. 106 ' ): ... ti kirahakhyc mahatantre yogapade matrkanyadi 
(sic—cl. G 2 ) catussastipatalah u yogapadas samaptah u 

There then follow (f. 106 r ( 8 l-f. 106"[ 2 1) the two verses in malinl metre 
that are 64:21-2 in E D and finally (f. lOb 1 ^ 21 ): ... —Subham astu—. 
The remainder of the 'olio is left blank. 

K, University of Mysore, Oriental Research Institute MS No. P 5060/2. 
Listed by Malledevaru (1987:30-1). 189 Kirana. Palm-leaf 
(palmyra). Kannada script. 107 folios of 40.5cmx3cm each with 
five or six lines to a side. The manuscript is worm-eaten throughout 
and ; he right hand thirds of ff. 1-57 are especially badly damaged 
or missing. Even where the leaves are not damaged, large gaps have 
frequently been left to indicate lacunae in the scribe’s exemplar. 
The legible portions that remain show that K, is much closer to the 
other Grantha manuscripts than to M v . It has been put in the same 
iex (and may be by the same hand) as a manuscript of the com¬ 
mentary of TryambakaSambhu for which see below), but although 
probably intended o supply the mula on which TryambakaSambhu 
comments, the text shows no signs of having been made to con¬ 
form to what Tryambaka^ambhu read. The obverse of each folio 

189 According to the list, MS P 5060 has three parts: 1A Kiranagama. (93 folios), IB 
Kiranagamavivrti of TryambakaSambhu (93 folios), and 2 Kiranagama (140 folios). In 
fact P 5060/2 contains two texts of the Kirana, and P 5060/1A and P 5060/IB are not 
two sections each of ninety-three folios but one section of ninety-three olios containing 
the text of Tryambaka^arnbhu’s commentary only. 











Sources 


XCVll 


is clearly numbered in the left hand margin. The scribe’s exemplar 
must have been lacunose, for he leaves many blank spaces. Fourteen 
illegible aksaras appear in the left hand margin of the first fo io and 
the first verse starts without preamble. The text ends with 64:20 
(omitting E D ’s 64:21-2) and the final colophon (f*. 107 r ^” J reads 
iti kiranakhve mahatantre LI catussastitamah patalah. There follow 

m 4/ It It I * I * 

another two and a half lines of text after the colophon which I have 
not been able to decipher and the remainder of the recto is blank, 
i he verso (again illegible to me) is written upon in five columns. 
There follows another copy of parts of the Kirana in the same codex 
(ff. 108-140) and the pagination continues uninterrupted. (See the 
fourth in the list of manuscripts not consulted below). 

The unfocussed microfilm (Film No. N-3000) 1 have of this 

manuscript is difficult to read throughout and often illegible. My 
readings of it are not reliable where they differ from those of ali 
other sources. 

A! Uncatalogued. Tiruvavatuturai (Thiruvavadudhurai Adhecnam). 
Kirana vidyapada and yogapada only. Palm-leaf (palmyra). 
Grantha script. Badly damaged by worms. Thirty-one folios 
(numbered 77-107) of l|" x 16" with eight lines to a side. (The nu¬ 
meration is not visible on 80, 83-5. 89-90, 92, 100.) Where foliation 
survives it is in the left-hand margin of the recto of each folio. The 
text of the Kirana is preceded in the same codex by the vidyapada of 
the Matanga (probably ff. 1-76, but no numeration survives) and is 
followed by the Ti'isatikalottara (IF. 108—124); the Dvitfatikalottara 
and the yogapada of the Matanga folios too fragmentary to see 
where the change-over took place—U. 125-157 ); Siddhantasaravali 
(ff. 158 r -?221, but there are only two fragments between f. 190 
and f. 213, and f. 219 and f. 221 are missing); the Nadakarikavrtti 
(f. 222 r -f. 225^ 8 -'); the Sanatkumarasamhita (f. 226 r -f. 239) The last 
two folios, f. 238-9, are in a larger, scruffier hand. Only a third of 
f. 239 remains and the verso has only three lines of writing. I found 
no colophon. The first verse of the Kirana begins without preamble 
on f. 77 r W. In the top of the left-hand margin a few illegible syl¬ 
lables probably announce that the text that begins is the Kirana. 
The topics oi certain patalas are announced in the left-hand margin, 
occasionally in an uninked hand. The vidyapada ends on f. 97 7 ’ t 8 -* 










XCV111 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

f i u ■ 


and the yogapada begins on f. 97 t, f 1 l The last colophon (f. 106") 
reads: u iti trim a t kiranak hye mahatantre yogapade limgoddharana- 
vidhis trisastipatalah u. (Most of the colophons do not give titles to 
the patalas, as this one does.) The text breaks off (f. 107 r M) after 
64:14a 3 and f. 107 u is left blank. 


A 2 Uncatalogued. Tiruvavatuturai (Thiruvavadudiiurai Adheenam). 
Kirana vidyapada only. Palm-leaf (palmyra). Grantha script. 
Twenty folios numbered 33—52) of l|" x 11-f" w ith eleven lines 
to a side. A corner of the left-hand of each folio has been eaten 
away. In spite of this damage, the manuscript makes a modern im¬ 
pression because its small string holes are barely worn and because 
of its (ugly) script. Numeration (eaten away on ff. 33-5) is in the 
left-hand margin of the recto of each folio. The scribe uses a *+’ 
to mark abbreviations o: obvious words in colophons. In most of 
the codex (but not apparently in the text of the Kirana the scribe 
writes kr in the same manner as the scribe of V 3 (q.v. above). A 
conflated text. Sometimes two versions of a pada are given side by 
side (e.g. 3:4cd and 3:13d). A 2 ’s text more frequently follows that 
presupposed by Ayambakasambhu's commentary than any other 
manuscript. The Kirana is preceded in the same codex by the Siva- 
bhaktapuja (f. l r -f. 2"l 4 J) and ten patalas of the Vatulaguddhakhya- 
tantra (f. 2"f 5 ^—f. 32"f 6 1). The Kirana is followed in the same co¬ 
dex by four patalas of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (f. 52"t 7 !— 
f. 58"^ ! ^); some unnumbered patalas ( tantravatara, bhasmasnana. 
arcanahga, arcanavidhi, prayaScitta, phalapakavidhi, krttikadipa, 
snapanavidhi, yogalaksana, acaryalaksana) of the Makuta (f. 59 r - 
?f. 162 [missing]); some patalas of the Suprabheda-Pratisthatantra 
(?f. 162—f. 180 r ‘ 7 !); the Kriyakandakramavalitika (breaks off without 
inal colophon) of TrilocanaSivacarya (f. 181 r —249" ; and seventy- 
eight unnumbered folios of the Kriyakandakramavali (also broken 
off without a final colophon) of SomaSambhu. There follows one 
blank folio. The first verse of the Kirana begins without preamble 
on f. 33 r W. 


End (f. 52't 6 ' 7 



°ved ucchistasarnbhavahf 11/ u iti kiranakhye maha¬ 
tantre vidyapade dvad<i£a patalah/ u v-idyapadas 
samaptali/ u 














Sources 


xeix 


M, Government Oriental Manuscripts Library o; Madras, 
MS R. No. 5325. Kirana. Paper. Grantha. In good condi¬ 
tion. Complete. 116 folios of 10^" x 9^" numbered (except for 
the last folio) on each side (pp. 1-230). Approximately twenty 
lines to a side. Bound in brown buckram. The text is written 
by V. Narayanasamicastiri, who wrote also M 2 , with a fountain 
pen in black ink (red for speaker indications) in a stylish hand 
with numerous flourishes. The script approximates more closely to 
printed Grantha than that of any of the other manuscripts used. 

Beginning (p. if 1-6 !): 


[in red] //&nh// 6rJr a stu //umamahegvarabhyam 
namah// //kiranagame—prathamah patalah// //vidya- 
padah// jin black| kailasa&kharaslnam [etc.] 



uddhrtam subliadam kiranam ratnamanatah [then in 
• • * * * * *■ 

red ink:] iti kiranakhye mahatantre yogapade matrka- 
nyasavidhir nama catuh(catuh° M*; tri° M“ c )sastifamah 
patalah samaptah // //yogapadah samaptah // 


There follow in black (p. 230^ 2 9 1) the verses in malini metre which 
E d gives as 64:21-2, then a contents list in red (p. 2301 10-13 ]): 


1. jhana( M“ c ; vidya° pad ah 1// 2. kriyapadah 51// 3. 

caryapadah 116// 4. yogapadah 216 


After this in 


black (p. 23QP 4 16 



m ay u rapu rlvidyam an as vaminath asi va caryasak a/ad 
agataw pustakam drstya likhitain idam jand below this 
in a mixture of Grantha, Roman and Tamil and in red 
ink| ittham V. Narayanasamicastiri 17/3/1927. 


On the next (unnumbered) side is written 'Transcribed in 1927-8 
from a Ms. of Swaminatha Sivacarya. Mylapore.’. Described by S. 
Kuppuswami Sastri (1935:7342-4). (A transcript of this manuscript, 
IFP T. 746, is held in Pondicherry.) 












c 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


M 2 Adyar Library, Madras, MS No. 39 C 8 de 314. Kirana. Feint-lined, 

* 1 

duck-egg blue paper that is water-marked ‘CONQUEROR London’. 
Devanagarl. In good condition. Complete. 315 numbered sides 
of 8"x 6^" bound in chocolate-brown buckram with ‘KIRANAGAMA 
tantra’ tooled in gold on the spine. Approximately fourteen lines 
to a side. Written with a fountain pen in black ink. Marked on first 
page in different hands ‘TR 608’, ‘(39. C. 8)’ and ‘63519’. Running 
heads in blue ink give the pada and patala number throughout. 

Beginning (p. 

frlh //SrJsarasvatyai narnah// //kiranagamatantram // 

jnanapade prathamo dhyayah// kailasagikharasinam 
[etc.] 

End (p. 314): 

iti sumatkiranakhye mahatantre yogapade matrkanyasa- 
vidhir nama catuhsastitamali patalah //samaptah// 

/ / yogapadah samaptah // 

There follow the two verses in malinl metre that are 64:21-2 in E D 
and then (p. 3l5f 2-4 l): 

//karakrtam aparadhani ksantum arhantu santah// V. 

NHr ay an agarm ana likhitam idam pustakam// 1925-6-11 

11-6-1925 

Below this is written the same signature that appears at the end of 
Mj: ‘V. Narayanasamicastiri’. Listed by Kunhan Raja (1928:192). 
(A transcript, IFP T. 401, of this manuscript is held in Pondicherry.) 

M 3 Uncatalogued. Government Oriental Manuscripts Library of 
Madras, MS R.No. 16784. Kirana. Feint-lined paper bound in 
green buckram. Devanagarl. Eighty-six folios. In good condi¬ 
tion, but copied Tom a fragmentary, disordered manuscript. The 
scribe has copied fragments in the order he found them and has re¬ 
peatedly started the pagination afresh. Sporadically another hand 
has numbered the sides in pencil. The last such number on the verso 
of the last folio is 160. Occasionally other folio numbers, presum¬ 
ably those of the exemplar, are written in the margin. On the recto 








Sources 


ci 


of the first page ' numbered 393) after the yellow endpaper is writ¬ 
ten ‘R. No. 16784 kiranagamah Transcribed from the manuscript of 
Kunnakkudimath Ramanad' and a stamp of the (Government < ori¬ 
ental Manuscripts Library, Madras, states that it was 'RECEIVED 19 
jun I962\ There follow three blank sides numbered 394, 399, 400; 
then pp. 1-17, which give the last four verses of 27 up to the end of 
36; then pp. 2-15, which give 37 to 43:22a; 1 blank side; pp. 1-14, 
which give 43:22e-51:l; 6 blank sides; pp, 1-15, which give the rest 
of 51 up to 54:16; 1 blank side (numbered 60); pp. 1-16, which give 
the rest of 54 up to 57:11; pp. 1—19, which give the rest of 57 up to 
the end. The final colophon on p. 19^ 11—1 (also numbered p. 96 in 
pencil) reads: 

iti srimatkiranakhye mahatantre yogapade matrkanyasa - 

vidhih—catussastih patalah j / 

* II ll*i • m f f 

This is followed by the malini verses that are 64:21-2 in E D and then 
harih omf / subham a stuff After a further blank side (numbered 94) 
there follows the beginning of the Kirana on p. 1 (also numbered 97 
in pencil). The text is continuous up to to 7:5 (pp. 1-16). There 
then follow pp. 1-15, which give 18 to 20; 1 blank side; pp. 1-15, 
which give 21 to 27:16; 1 blank side (numbered 144); pp. 1-16, 
which give a pavitrarohanapatala ascribed to the Kirana pp. 1-8), a 
navanaivedyapatala ascribed to the Uttarakamika (pp. 8-10), and, 
finally, an incomplete chapter beginning athedanim pravaksyarni 
diksain samayasamjnikarn / acaryah krtanityas tu krtamantradi- 

it t/ * W / 1/ I I 1/ * 

tarpanah and breaking off with tat as tasyanjalau puspam gandham 
dhupadivasitam/ nyastva [sic] sarvatmana £ambhoh pratyekam 
prarthayet sthi — (pp, 10-16). 


Previous Editions of the Tantra 

E =(E d E v ) 

E v Maria Pia Vivanti (Napoli, 1975). Edition and Italian translation 
of the first twelve chapters, the 'vidyapada\ of the Kirana . Three 
sources were used: R^, E D , and N 2 , to which were allocated the 
sigla A, B, and C respectively. 









Cll 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m i « 1/ ■ 


K d Edition of the Kiranagama published from Devakottai in 1932 by 
the Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha. The text, divided into 
four padas and printed in Grantha, is preceded by a three page in¬ 
troduction in Sanskrit and by an index of the titles of the patalas 
and is followed by an index of the beginnings of glokas and a 
suddhasuddhapatrika. From the introduction (p. 3) we learn that 
the editors, Ti. Ra. Pahcapagesasivacarya of the Sivagamapatha- 
6ala in Ammalagraharam and K. M. Subrahmanya^astrin of the 
Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha knew of the existence of a 
commentary, but had not been able to find manuscripts of one. The 
text was constituted with four manuscripts which have not been 
described. Substantive interpretable variants are occasionally given 
in footnotes without attribution to the manuscripts in which they 
occur. 


Manuscripts of the Tantra not consulted 

1 Saraswati Mahal Library of Tanjore, MS D. 15265, B, No. 1394. A 
paper manuscript in handsome Tanjore-style (i.e. with a Maha¬ 
rashtrian look) DevanagarT of the ‘ kriyapada 1 alone of the Kirana . 
The manuscript has been described by P. P. S. Sastri (1934:8435-6). 

2 The NGMPP has filmed a paper manuscript in Newari script (Reel 
No. A 149/6; National Archives of Kathmandu MS No. 4-1854) 
whose catalogue card entitles it the Kiranakhyatantra . This is in 
fact an incomplete manuscript of the Prayascittasamuccaya (the 
same that is also transmitted in Cambridge MS Add. 2883). It 
contains patalas 47, 42, 43, 44, and 46 of the Kirana (E^), but 
numbered 42, 43, 44, 45, and 46 respectively. 

3 The Brhatsucipatram (Vol. 4,1, pp. 57-8, Visayanka 121) gives a 
brief description of a manuscript that does not tally with any of 
those filmed by the NGMPP: h .. nepaliyam kagatam , devanagarl 
lipih, pahktayah 7, akarah 11 ^3 x | [sic], granthasamkhya 5300, 
patrasamkhya 83, khanditam .’ 

4 After (q.v. above) in the same codex (ff. 108-140) the text of the 
Kirana has been copied again, apparently from a different exemplar. 
The foliation continues from the previous text. F. 108 r W~f. 108 v ^ 











Sources 


■ ■ m 


cm 

give a fragmentary text of the first patala. The remainder of the 
folio is blank and none of the other chapters of the ‘ vidyapada ’ are 
given. The 'kriyapada' commences at the top of f. 109 w . The last 
colophon (f. 138 v ^) reads: iti grTmatkiranakhye mahatamtrc kriya- 
pade ekonatrimgat patalah. The last words (f. 140^ W) are those of 
30:24a (i.e. towards the end of the last patala of the ‘kriyapada'). 
The remainder of that olio is left blank. I have not incorporated 
the readings of this manuscript, because the microfilm is virtually 
illegible. 

5 IFP T. 206 begins with a single patala (No. 12) of the Kirana 
(pp. 1-2). This is followed by the first three patalas of the 
Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (pp. 3-18); Sariratmaviveka (pp. 19- 
35): Kalottarajnanakande (?) Naisthikacarah paficasastipatalah 
(pp. 36-44 ; Jnanadipikadiksottaravidhi (pp. 45-53); Kalarupapra- 
katika (pp. 54-6); Siddliantarthasamuccaya (pp. 57-111 ; Mukti- 
vivekavrtti (pp. 112-133); Siddhantaratnavalyam upacaravidhi- 
patalah pp. 134—5); Upacaravidhipatala of the Karana (pp. 135—6); 
Markandeyacaritadhyayah (pp. 137-155); GaurTsthapana (p. 1.56); 
Tripuravijaya (pp. 157-8). The last two are incomplete. 







CIV 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * l/ v 


Other Commentaries on the Kiranatantra 

Parts of three other commentaries on the Kirana have survived, ’hey 
are those of Tryambakasambhu, Simharaja, and of a certain Aghora- 
Siva. The commentaries of the latter two I have only in a single source. 
Pondicherry IIP T. 322. 'I’his las been entitled aghoraSivaviracitakirana- 
tlka and it comprises commentary on the first, second, sixth, seventh, 
ninth and tenth patalas of the vidyapada and on the first nine chapters 
(13-21) of the kriyapada. The colophons of the chapters of the kriya¬ 
pada that survive give the chapters the titles that they have in E„ 
with slight variations: snanadhikara , pujapatala, mudrapatala , agnikarya, 
knndalaksanapatala, adhivasanapatala, grhanirmanavidhi, mandaladhi- 
kara. (The twenty-first chapter is incomplete.) It is conceivable that this 
commentary is the source of these titles, which appear only in very few 
South Indian manuscripts. It is a transcription into DevanagarT on 348 
half foolscap pages (written on only on the rectos) copied from a palin-leaf 
Grantha manuscript belonging to Tiruvavatuturai Swaminatha Sivacarya. 
The exemplar (not located) is said to have been in good condition and 
1'7" x l|" containing folios 1-99. 

The colophons and other evidence that I shall present below suggest 
that the commentary on the chapters of the jnanapada is by a certain 
Simharaja, whose dlksanama may or may not have been Agliorasiva, and 
that that on the chapters of the kriyapada is the work of another au¬ 
thor, whose dlksanama again may have been Agliorasiva, but who is very 
probably not the famous bearer of that name. 

The colophon to the first pa tala of the vidyapada reads iti sri aghora- 
sivacaryaviracitayain kiranajnanakandatTkayam prathamah patalah. All 
subsequent colophons for the vidyapada substitute the name yya- 
khyanikacarya . l90 The last chapter from the vidyapada that has been 
included is followed by pages of garbled genealogy of which this is the final 
sentence p. 193^ 11 — 1 ): bhagavadattatmajodbhutakamarupegasununa 
grimada simharajena krteyam sisubodhinl iti ,<rl dvyakhyanikacarya- 
viraciteyam kiranajnanakandatTkayam balabodhinlkana samapta das ah 
(sic). The colophon for the first, patala of the kriyapada (No. 13) begins: 
srTrnadaghorasivacaryaviracitayam cintamanitikayam. The colophons for 

1J0 Mr. T. Ganesan of the IFP observed that this is used as a soubriquet for the famous 
Aghora&va. I have not found colophons that describe him thus; but in the final verse of 
the Dvi$atikfilotunavrtti he calls himself Vyakhyanibodhapati IFP T. 176. p. 80* 11 *). 








Sources 


cv 


Nos. 14, 15, 20 also use the name cintamani for the commentary, and the 
colophon to No. 16 again states that Aghorasiva is the author o the work. 

The pedestrian style oi the commentary on the vidyapada is strikingly 

'p> 

different from that of the published doctrinal works of Aghorasiva. It is 
evidently a commentary intended for beginners, as indeed he declares 
in an invocatory verse (p. I 11 ” 12 ): jagadutpattisamharakaranam para- 
mesvaram/ pranamyaham j^ravaksyami tlkam sisuvibodhinlm . Although 
the commentary on the so-called kriyapada is not prefaced by a mangala 
verse and contains no obvious marker that it is the work of a different 
author, it is less repetitive than the earlier material. Neither work can 
ever have been elegant and both have been scarred by bad transmission. I 
give below a sample of commentary on vidyapada l:7ab (p. 25^“ 12 ) which 
illustrates this: jay a java viraparispandadaksayajnanisudana jayety etat 
kriyapadam/ vlranam parispando viraparispandah vlraparispande yasmin 
daksayajhe sa viraparispandadaksayajnah/ daksasya yajrw daksayajnah 
viraparispandah casau daksayajnah ca sa viraparispandadaksayajnah/ 
athava vlrah parispando vasminaparispando vyaparam vlro visrvyah sa 
viraparispandadaksayajnah tasya sudako vinahakas tasya samhodhanam/ 

Some verses are given in the transcript in full, often contradicting the 
commentary and often garbled, and some are referred to with pratlkas. It 
cannot always be deduced how the commentator read. The transmission 
is so poor that this manuscript is valueless as an independent testimony 
of the tantra and unreliable as a witness of Simliaraja’s text of the tantra. 
My apparatus accordingly does not report IFP T.322's readings nor the 
readings presupposed by Simharaja’s commentary. 

Simharaja’s interpretation of the verses does not accord with that 
of Ramakantha, nor does he refer to Ramakantha s commentary or to 
those of others. In both Simharaja’s commentary and in the cintamani 
there are very few quotations and none identified by which they might 
be dated or pinned down to a particular region. From the attribution 
to Simharaja, from the style of the Sanskrit, and from the absence of 
any evidence of knowledge of the ideas of Ramakantha or indeed of any 
other Saiddhantika it should be c ear that Simharaja’s hala- (or sisu -) 
hodhinl on the vidyapada of the Kirana is not the work of the celebrated 
Agnorasiva. Again the pedestrian style and the absence of references to 
other sources make it unlikely that it was the celebrated Aghorasiva who 
composed the cintamanitika. Aghorasiva’s works are almost invariably 






CV1 


Ramakanthak Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


copiously cross-referenced, 191 yet he nowhere refers to a commentary of 
his on the Kirana, though he knows and cites both the Kirana and Rama- 
kantha’s Kiranavrtti (e.g. MrgendravrttidTpika ad 8:6, p.226), nor does 
the cintamanitika refer to any of AghoraSiva’s other works. 

I have gone to some trouble to prove that IFP T. 322 does not contain 
a commentary of Aghoragiva on the Kirana , because in Bhatt’s upodghata 
to the firsi volume ol the Matahgavrtti (p.xli) among unpublished works 
1 i. m: lakantha there appears the following listing: k 7. kiranagamasya 
vrttih (asya aghoratiivavyakhyapy upalabhyate;'. Other than IFP T.322 
1 here are no sources that transmit the latter work mentioned either in the 
typed hand-list of the IFP or in the card index of transcripts belonging 
to the IFP. The erroneous French translation of Bhatt’s listing gives rise 
to a further misconception (p. x): ‘7. vrtti du Kirana accompagnee d’un 
sous-coHimentaire d'Aghora^iva.' There is no evidence that the celebrated 

AghoraSiva wrote a commentary on the Kirana or a sub-commentary on 
the Kiranavrtti. 

m # 

There is recorded to have been one other palm-leaf manuscript of a 
commentary on the Kirana in the collection at Pondicherry. IFP 45959. 
mentioned in the accessions list of the IFP and in the typed handlist, is 
said to contain a Kiranavyakhya of Vyakhanikacarya, the Astaprakarana. 
and the Matahgavrtti of Ramakantha. 192 Unfortunately this manuscript 
is missing. Presumably it is this missing manuscript (and not IFP T. 322) 
that was listed as a commentary of Vyakhyanikacarya on the Kirana in the 
appendix to the second volume of the Pondicherry catalogue (Varadachari 
1987). 19i It is probable that the commentary it preserved was the Cinta- 

191 1 have however not yet found him to refer anywhere to his Dvigatikalottaravrtti 

m 

or to his Sarvajnanott ara vrtti. Both works however abound with echoes of Rama¬ 
kantha, a hallmark of the style of the true Aghora^iva, and both cross-refer, e.g. in 
the Sarvajnanottaravrtti , IFP T. 83, p. 13 [u-12] ) to AghoraWs MrgendravrttidTpika , 
and in the DvidatikaJottaravrtti, Trivandrum MS 4509, f. 4 r ^ s-10 h esa (em.; esa MS) 
ca naclasiddhis tatkaranabhutamahamayasiddhi£ ca tatrabhavata ramakamthena nada- 

m m 

karikabhir vistarena pradartita praka&ta casmabhir mrgendravrttidipikayam. 

92 It seems that Bhatt did not use this manuscript for his edition of the Matahga¬ 
vrtti. Some other manuscripts of the Matahgavrtti in the IFP, at least three in 

Tiruvavatuturai, and possibly many other accessible manuscripts in South India were 
also not used. 

133 r ii 

^ That appendix is not an exhaustive list of as yet uncatalogued manuscripts: thus it 
records that the IFP has a single manuscript of Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti containing 
12 patalas. Only R iV extends this far and so it must be concluded that this refers to 
IFP T. 290, the copy of R' v held at Pondicherry, to which I have referred above. 








Sources 


evil 


manitlka, but until it can be found again, the hope 194 cannot yet be 

#1 / 

laid to rest that a manuscript still exists in Pondicherry of an ancient 
commentary on the Kirana by the Vyakhyaniguru known to Somananda 
(see Sivadrsti 3:14). 

For the commentary of 4 ryambaka^ambhu I have three palm-leaf 
manuscripts (palmyra), IFP 47625 and IFP 47658 in Grant ha, and Mysore 
Oriental Research Institute No. P.5040/1 A+1B in Kannada script (see 
description of K, above). All are badly damaged and incomplete. Unless 
otherwise specified, I use IFP T. 1102 (a transcript of IFP 47625) to refer 
to the text of the first four chapters and IFP 47658 for chapters 5 and 6. 
(The unfocussed microfilm from Mysore is barely legible.) 

IFP T. 1102 consists of 101 pages of half foolscap paper written on 
in blue ball-point on one side only and was copied by V. Krisnamachari. 
IFP 47625. from which it was copied, is written on numbered palm-leaves 
of l'3h" x 1 . The numeration reaches 62, but many leaves are missing, 

broken and worm-eaten, a number are out of order and some no longer 
have their marginal numeration. The manuscript includes, with many 
lacunae, the text of the commentary on patalas 1-4. It was probably part 
of the same manuscript as IFP 47658, which is of the same dimensions, 
is in a similar state and comprises commentary on patalas 5-6. 

Phis commentary, referred to in its opening verse as a giguhitavi- 
vrti , is more engaging in style and content than the Cintamani or that 
of Simharaja. Tryambakasainbhu quotes from other tantras, generally 
without attribution. 195 He refers to the ko£a of ilalayudha (p.4l 16 )), and 
mentions the opinion of a certain Gangadharacarya (p. 41 ) and of a 

Pattapada (p.44t n l). He never refers to Ramakantha, nor does his in¬ 
terpretation anywhere appear to be dependent on that of Ramakantha. 
Indeed he seems to be wholly unaware of the theology of the mature 
Saiva Siddhanta as formulated by Ramakantha's lineage and by Agliora- 
Siva. In Chapter 5, for example, he gives a straightforward interpreta¬ 
tion of the text’s presentation of karmasamya without once mentioning 
malaparipaka or suggesting that there were rival opinions. This ignor¬ 
ance is all the more extraordinary because he is conversant with Ksema- 
raja’s Svacchandatantroddyota, from which he borrows without attribu- 

191 Expressed, for example, by Sanderson, 1985b:568. 

195 Among the attributed quotations are ones from the Mrgendra (pp. 33 and 40), from 
the Matanga (p. 21), the Rauravasamhita [not located] (p. 22 , and the Yogamrta (p. 9). 












* * 


CV111 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* • 4/ B 


tion ad Kir ana 1:1a, 196 and ad Kirana 1:2a!» quotes his commentary on 
Svacchanda 10:356ab, introducing it thus (IFP T. 1 i 02, p. 32l 15-17 J): tad 
uktam Srhnallalite ‘bandhatrayasamayukto vamatiaktya tv adhisthita iti/ 
asyartho ’pi yam aha ksemarajah —... Here, as elsewhere (e.g. p. 20). 


he uses the title Lalita to refer not to a South Indian Siddhanta of that 
name (which appears to exist only in stray patalas on particular rituals), 
but to the Svacchanda , the name of which in the colophons of many of 
its manuscripts is the Svacchandalalitabhairava , 197 

His text of the verses differs from that of Ramakantha, and he reports 
variant pathas. He knew of otherwise exclusively South Indian read¬ 
ings (e.g. 4:! 5a and the half verse inserted after 1:23b) and of otherwise 
exclusively Nepalese readings e.g. in 1:4a, 1:9c.). TryambakaSambhu’s 
commentary is not of use in constituting that of Ramakantha; but it 
is important for an understanding of the South Indian t ransmission of 
the tantra, as we shall see below. The readings that are presupposed by 
Tryambakasambhu's commentary or that he quotes as pathantaras have 
therefore been incorporated into the apparatus and marked with the sigla 
Try and Try 1 ' 1 . These are necessarily hypothetical: they are partly in¬ 
ferred from his commentary and partly drawn from the text of the mula 
embedded in the commentary as given in I FI* T. 1102 and IFP 47658. 


Y Qg r 

T. 1102, p. 2: tad ucyate ke mas take ela (conj.; la MS) kundalim saktis 
tasyarn conj.; 5a learn MS as an am as a uparisthiti^r ya^> sya vyapinisaman ta¬ 
rn anonman at man ah sikharasya tat kailasasikharam, Cf. Ksemaraja ad Svacchanda 
1:1a: kc murdhanye brahmabile ela sphuranti Saktis tasyarn as ah as an am uparisthitir 
vasya vyapinisaman a tman ah Sikharasya sarvadhvopari vartinah padasya tat kailasa- 
Sikharam. 

“' Professor Sanderson (in a letter of 14.V.97) informs me that this is so in all the sur¬ 
viving Nepalese manuscripts of the text, whose colophons ‘always begin iti svacchanda- 
lalitabhairave mahatantre inantrapTthe or iti svacchandalalitabhairave mantrapithe 
mahatantre ; see NAK 1-224, palm-leaf, dated 188 (ad 1068/9), f.172 1 ’^; NAK, un¬ 
numbered (cover slip: mamtrapltha svacchandahilitabhairavatantra ko tarapatra ko 182 
lip mola aksara ko nam 68), palm-leaf, undated, early, f. 183 r ^ ul ; NAK 1-43, paper, 
dated 846 (ad 1646/7), f.91 v[9] ; NAK 1-224, paper, dated 774 (ad 1654/5), L84 r[11 h 
NAK 1-177, paper, dated 785 (ad 1665/6), f. 137 u[6 ~ 7] ; NGMPP E 137/3, paper, dated 
807 (ad 1687-8), f. 108' NAK 5-4974, paper, undated, f. 135'’^; NAK 1-11, paper, 
undated, f. 171 r ^ ,J ; NAK 5-6165, paper, undated, incomplete, f. 70' ! (1 ’atala 9)7 South 

Indian sources prefer the title Svacchandalalita (e.g. IFP T. Nos. 1032 and 507). In the 
same letter Professor Sanderson also records the use in Kashmir of the titles Lalita - 
svacchanda (e.g. Kaladlksavidhi , Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute MS No. 11,47 
of 1886 -93, f. 6' lS i and Lalitasvacchandabhairava 'e.g. Kaladlksavidhi , Bhandarkar 
Oriental Research Institute MS No. 157 of 1886-92, f. 9 r ^). 






Sources 


cix 


Both are lacunose, full of copying errors, and intermittently show evid¬ 
ence of having had their mula text supplied from or conflated with another 

198 

source. 

I have found no evidence that precisely dates ' 1 YyambakaSambhu, but 
:i is probable i hat he wrote in or before the early sixteenth century. Brun¬ 
ner (1992a:267 8 and footnote 28) mentions that Vedajhanasivacarya 
II's Diksadarsa (IFF T. No. 76, p. 21) quotes a verse to the effect that 

a samhita must have four padas and ascribes it to Ramakantha’s com- 

• 1 

mentary on the Kir ana: tatha kiranavyakhyane ramakanthacaryenapy 
uktam: 


padanam pravibhagena caturdha namadheyatah 

siddlull (em.; siddhah Brunner) pradrsyatc yasmin samhita 
sabhidhlyate 


Ramakantha’s Kiranavrtti does not discuss this matter and does not con¬ 
tain this verse; but Tryanibakasambhu’s quotes it (prefaced by uktam ca) 
ad 1:13 (p. 15l 6 ' ). We may assume, therefore, that the author of the 

. quoted this passage from Tryambakaiambhu’s commentary 

but wrongly remembered it to belong to the more famous Kiranavrtti. or 

9 m J 

that the att i ibution ramakanthacaryena was added subsequently in the 
course of the transmission of the text. Dagens (1979:7) argues that the 

author of the Diksadarsa flourished in the second half ol tlie sixteenth 
century (his guru died in 1563 or 1564 ad). 


198 They sometimes have what is found in other South Indian manuscripts but 
evidently not commented upon by Tryambakasuiiibhu, e.g. in 3:14c Tryambaka- 
gambhu comments on dvisvabhavagato, but IFi> T. 1102 reads dvidhabhavagato with 

R v V,G 2 A 1 M 3 E v ,. 




















EDITORIAL POLICIES 


A Stemma of the Manuscripts of the Kiranavrtti 

The provisional stemma drawn up for the manuscripts of the commentary 
is as follows: 



If my conclusions are correct, then it means that P 3 ’s readings can be 
ignored wherever we have the testimony of Pj, because P 3 has all Pj’s 
errors together with its own; but the readings of P 2 may occasionally be 

of value for the constitution of the text even where we have the testimony 

■■ 

of P 1; because its scribe seems occasionally to have looked at another 
source close to R v . 199 I leave all P 3 ’s readings in the apparatus so that 

the evidence is there for testing its position in the stemma. 

-1 

199 Instances of P 2 ’s usefulness are a reading very close to himamakkoladisu (supported 
by parallels in the Nare^varaparficsapralra^a and the Matahgavrtti) in 3:12.25, the more 
unusual and thereore probably primary kadarthyante in 2:5.13, paratah in 4:13.2, and 
the required vyapyam in 2:19.12. 












CX11 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm %/ t 


The agreement in all the P group manuscripts in many cases of omis¬ 
sion or augmentation of passages of text is immediately striking. It could 
be argued that instances of such agreement in P are rather to be seen as 
instances of deviation in R v , but some omissions in P seem clearly erro¬ 
neous and are best explained as having arisen on account of eyeskip on 

the part of the scribe of P,, e.g. 2:17.8-11; 2:24.17-2:25.2; and 3:16.8-11. 

Occasionally P 3 has correctly modified the text of P, where that is 
erroneous—in 1:9.52, for example, P :i has corrected to 0 skandhav urdhva 0 
and P 2 has uncritically copied P/s erroneous °skandhad urdhva 0 but 
generally it is P 2 that deviates from P, because its text is conflated with 
that of a source close to R A . On every page of text there are instances 
of agreement between R v and P 2 against P, and P :j , but most cannot 
be used to prove P 2 ’s position in the stemma, since they are not demon¬ 
strably instances of shared common error, either because both readings 
are equally plausible, 200 or because the reading shared by R N and P_> is 
more plausible; 201 nevertheless there are clear instances where P 2 agrees 
with R A in error: in 1:12.3: P! and P 3 have °siddhyanabhibhavya and I' 
has written ° siddhi-anabhibhavya and corrected it to the unlikely vari¬ 
ant ° siddlianabhibhavya to read with R v ; in the following line P 2 reads 
siddhalaksano with R A against, siddhilaksano in P, and P 3 . More conclus¬ 
ive than these instances of shared error are passages omitted in P, and 
P 3 but present in P 2 and R v , e.g. 3:12.13-15. These pieces of evidence 
cannot point to vertical transmission from R ,v to P 2 , because, as we have 
seen, there are instances of omission due to eyeskip in all the P manu¬ 
scripts. Furthermore there are examples of garbled text in P_. that can 
be explained as having resulted from the conflation of the two streams 
of transmission, e.g. in 1:16.12 P 2 gives a pleonastic combination (yatha 
ghatadivat) of the readings of P,P 3 (ghatadivat) and R w (yatha ghatadi ). 

The following considerations have led me to represent P 2 as a 
manuscript copied from an already conflated source: after the hand 
changes on f.52 r t 3 J the relatively poor quality of the text and the quantity 

e.g. 1:13.8 0 bhramavad P 1 P 3 —a closer echo of the Sailkhyakarika, or 0 bhramaim- 
vad R a P 2 —a deliberate paraphrase of the Sahkliyakarika. In the preceding line the 
same problem must be resolved: harm ales ay at ah R A P*> against karmmanah k (say at ah) 
P l P3 —a closer echo of Pararnoksanirasakarika 55d. Involuntary compounding of words 
in an obvious genitive relationship with each other is more common than the reverse 
process, according to Srinivasan (1967:35- 6 , §1.4. 5 . 9 ), but the assertion is not proven. 


201 


e.g. 1:12.12 svikarakam R N P 2 against svikaram P1P3. 


L 













Editorial Policies 


* * ■ 


CX1U 


of conflation of tlie two streams of transmission appear to remain con¬ 
sistent; occasional gaps are marked even where the aksaras are plainly 
legible in P 1 (and indeed in the other manuscripts), for example jn U tv a 
for jnatva in 3:23.37 and °dy l i tmana for °dyatmana in 3:18.2; and be¬ 
cause in the portion that the scribe accidentally recopied out of context 
on 1.49' ( 2:24.11—2:25.3) two identical errors recur (2:24.14 °syamala° for 
°syad am ala R V P 1 P 3 and 2:24.16 tasya grayas for tasyasrayah R V P,P 3 ) 
that were therefore presumably already present in the source from which 
P 2 copied. I therefore posit a lost intermediary, the scribe of which must 
be responsible for the conflation and for some of the errors in P 2 . P 3 too 
has probably been copied from a copy of because on occasion (e.g. 
2:12.21 cayamaci U tu° for cay am a siddlm hetu° R V P M and 4:14.1 e U 
van for yaty evam R^PJ the scribe seems not to have been able to read 
his source even where P : is clearly legible. 

1 arrived at a prototype for this stemma by a method suggested by 
reading Bearing's Manual of Textual Analysis (1959). For each instance 
where the manuscripts of the P group disagreed I noted down their sigla. 
separating the ones that disagreed by colons, and ignoring whether read¬ 
ings had been provisionally accepted into the text. The purpose of this 
was to construct a non-directional tree of relationships. West (i 973:70-2) 
is disparaging about this sort of process; but it seemed a good starving 
point, because it obviated the well-known logical quandary that die-hard 
steminaticists face: they must build a stemma after making decisions 
about which readings are primary and which secondary and they require 
a stemma in order to make those decisions. One striking fact did emerge 
from it: there are virtually no instances where the readings of Pj are not 
shared either by P 2 or by P 3 . 

As the stemma suggests, the extant manuscripts all descend from a 
common archetype. This is clear from the instances where all the manu¬ 
scripts, including R v , share errors. 1 shall draw attention to just two here 
by way of demonstration: In 1:9.24 R iV , P 2 and P 3 (P 2 is broken here 
all transmit a hypometric pada of the verse which Ramakantha quotes. I 
discuss a tentative emendation in my notes. In 1:1.2 all (again except P 2 ) 
read the implausible varnyamana(tvad) for vaksyamanatvad. 

This relative closeness is unremarkable in view of the fact that the 
representatives of both groups of manuscripts could be from areas not far 
distant and are unlikely to be of great antiquity. Gaur (1979:12) mentions 
that in South India and Sri Lanka only a few surviving examples of palm- 









cxiv Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * */ . 

leaf manuscripts have pre-sixteenth century dates. (I can do no more than 

% 

guess at the ages of the South Indian palm-leaf manuscripts consulted.) 

The nature of the transmission might be judged to call stemmatic 
editing into question. The short life of palm-leaf manuscripts kept in 
South India suggests that the text is likely to have been copied a number 
of times in its transmission and therefore to contain a relatively plenti¬ 
ful scattering of errors. The same consideration makes it seem likely that 
some copyists of earlier manuscripts in the tradition had, like the scribe of 
P 2 ’s source, more than one exemplar before them. As Srinivasan asserts 
(1967:iii), eclecticism in the transmission means that each manuscript of 
a work must be assumed to have an uneven distribution of true, dubious 
and false readings. An editor is compelled also to work eclectically, fol¬ 
lowing a procedure little diiferent from the copyists of the manuscripts 
he consults. In the case of the Kiranavrtti the small number and frag¬ 
mentary condition of the surviving manuscripts have in any case dictated 
exactly this in many places; but even when all the manuscripts provide 
testimony, the stemma reveals no more than that there are essentially 
two groups, neither more likely to preserve the truth than the other, and 
so, unless he emend, the editor must choose between two stemmatically 
equally weighted readings. Thus, although I believe that the stemma 
presented above is a plausible model of the relationships between the re¬ 
maining manuscripts, and although putting it together was instructive, 
the stemma has not and could not have been ‘used’ in a mechanistic fash¬ 
ion to arrive even at the common archetype of the surviving manuscripts, 

let alone at what Ramakantha wrote. 

* ■ 

This conviction has obliged me to make frequent attempts to emend 
the text; indeed after reading George Kane’s persuasive defence of conjec¬ 
tural emendation (1969:155-169)—in which he underlines that an editor’s 
not challenging bad manuscript readings can do more damage to the text 
than offering unsatisfactory conjectures-—I am convinced that if I have 
erred in this, it has been on the side of caution. I have been guided by 
Srinivasan’s discussion of constituting texts whose transmission is con¬ 
taminated (outlined 1967:29—53) and have relied heavily on parallels in 
Ramakantha’s published works. 











700 Diachronic Diagram of the Relationships between the Sources for the Text of the Tantra 
















































CXV1 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* • 4/ i 


The Relations! lips between the Manuscripts of the 
Tantra 


The diagram tabling relationships between the manuscripts of the Tantra 
cannot be used to determine the Urtext in the manner that a stemma co- 
dicum that represents only vertical transmission might be. Broadly speak¬ 
ing the manuscripts fall into three groups: the Nepalese manuscripts, the 
manuscripts that attempt to give the text as commented upon by Rama- 
kantha, and the South Indian Sources. If 1 had allowed the vertical lines 
of transmission to meet at the top and had had no dotted lines (which 
indicate horizontal transmission or conflation), a tripartite stemma would 
have resulted, such that the agreement between two of the three roups 
would logically determine the text of the archetype of all three. If it had 
been my aim here to reconstruct something as close as possible to an 
Urtext (rather than simply the text as Ramakantlia had it), then this 
would have worked as a thumb-rule. It could not, however, have been 
used as a firm principle. Conflation with each others’ texts has prob¬ 
ably affected all the South Indian sources (= S)—hence the broad band 
of dots across the lines of transmission of the S manuscripts; and there 
arc occasional pointers that suggest conflation with sources outside the 
Southern transmission: certain South Indian manuscripts intermittently 
transmit Nepalese readings, e.g. in 1:11b, 1:12b, l:12d, 1:18c, 2:4c, 2:6c, 
3:5d, 3:18b, etc. In all these instances the intermediary that enabled such 
conflation was very probably the commentary of Tryaml lakasambhu. 

Within each group the manuscripts whose readings I have weighed 
with the greatest care are placed on the left, and the least significant ones 
on the right. The groups too are arranged in this way. This is reflected 
in the apparatus too, where the readings of the Nepalese group appear 
first, followed by those most influenced by Ramakantha, viz. M v , R A ' 
and, to a lesser extent, the V group. Thereafter come the readings of 
GiGaGjKiA t A 2 . I cannot map relationships between these six sources 
(neither G nor A are genetic groups). Last of all are the manuscripts 

group. Their testimony may not be valueless, but it has not 
been of use so far. I have left all their readings in the apparatus for the 
first three chapters to illustrate their low worth, and thereafter only the 
readings of are reported. 

It requires little argument to show that the N group belongs together. 
From collating chapter 7 (in which N, starts) it is clear that N, and D 1 


M 







Editorial Policies 


m * 


CXVll 

are both apographs of N*; from considerations of space I do not present 
that evidence here, but even without that it will be clear that they belong 
closely together from instances of common error (e.g. 3: lid karttrkah for 
karsakah: 3:16a pumanneva for puman naiva ) and D 1 reveals that it is 
copied from N, by repeating the date of Nps copying before giving its 
own date in the first of its post-colophon verses (quoted above in the 
description of D 1 and D 2 ). That N 3 and D 2 belong together is clear 
from frequent shared errors (e.g. 3:ld, 3:11a, 3:lld, 3:12a, 3:13d). D 2 
is possibly an apograph of N 3 , for many of D 2 's deviations from N 3 are 
interpretable as copying mistakes or obvious corrections; but there are 
occasional instances where D 2 hits upon a correction that might have 
been difficult to guess (e.g. 1:11a, 2:12c and 2:29c). 

Systematic attempts were made at some point in their separate trans¬ 
missions to make the texts of M v and of II v conform to that presupposed 
by Ramakantha’s commentary. 202 Sometimes M v and R A alone share 
Ramakantha’s text (e.g. 2:28b, 3:3b, 4:4cd, 4:9b); occasionally M v alone 
does (e.g. 2:1.2a, 2:26a) and occasionally R A alone does (e.g. 2:13cd). Ge¬ 
netically M y seems not to be related to any other extant manuscript 
(other than to its apograph, K 2 , whose relation is clear from common 
errors, e.g. in 1:9b, l:19d, 2:19a, 2:2()a, 2:20c:). R A shows signs that its 
unmodified text was genetically related to the Southern group (e.g. the 
inclusion of the South Indian half-verse after 1:23b, the inclusion of a 
South Indian version of 2:1 after the version common to NM V ). 

All members of the Southern group (S ) transmit a text that is in some 
degree conflated. That this is so is most obviously revealed by the variant 
readings that are given (usually followed with the words iti pathantaram) 
sometimes in almost all the manuscripts of S and sometimes in just a 
few and in a way that cuts across other recognisable groupings. Thus 
Vi G 2 G 3 AM give the accepted text of 2:9c as a varia lectio (P 3 V 2 V 3 V 4 
give it as the only reading) and G t conflates two versions. 'fV 2 GK 1 A 
give the accepted text of 4:7cd as a varia lectio, and a variety of different 
readings for their accepted versions of the half verse. For 4:8a GiK^ give 
as a varia lectio what most of the rest of S give as the oniy version. 
The accepted text of 4:21c is shared by M y R Ar V 4 ; something similar is 
transmitted in the other V manuscripts and in G 2 G 3 K!A, and another 

202 This seems more likely than that M v descended from a Kashmirian archetype or 
that its independent transmission preserves a text close to that of Ramakantha. 
















CXVlll 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * */ ( 


pada is transmitted (with small variations) as a varia lectio in VGKj and 
A t . As a varia lectio to 4:21d V transmits sthulasyasya nibandhanam 
and GA transmit mulasyasya nibandhanam . 

In spite of the horizontal transmission throughout the S manuscripts, 
two genetic groups can be identified, V and M. The M manuscripts 
share countless common errors (e.g. in 1:4b, l:4d, 1:11a, 1:20b, 2:21b; 
omission of 2:31a-32b) that demonstrate their relationship. The manu¬ 
scripts of V do not, but they transmit only the vidyapada and share many 
readings, some of which are found in no other manuscripts of S, e.g. in 
2:12a, 2:12b, 2:19d (shared error ), 3:5b, 3:11b, 3:21b, 4:20a, 4:23a, 4:24-5. 
Because of the degree of conflation I do not think that it is possible to 
map on a stemma the relationships between the V manuscripts. They 
may in certain instances (e.g. 3:9c, 4:23a, 4:24-5) have been influenced 
by Ramakantha’s commentary. The other manuscripts of the S group 
give intermittent signs of affiliation with each other or with V or M (e.g. 
an identical copying error in the final colophons of G 2 and G 3 , for which 
see their respective descriptions above), but the degree of conflation is 
such that no stemma seems possible. The group sigla G and A are a 
convenient way of reducing the bulk of the apparatus; they stand neither 
for hyparchetypes nor for genetic groups. 

It must be reiterated that J have done no more than attempt to con¬ 
stitute the text of the verses as Ramakantha must have read them. This 

* * 

is not to say that the text of the sutrapatha as transmitted to Rama¬ 
kantha was without its problems, or that Ramakantha’s text is likely to 
be closer to the Urtext than a text that might be constructed on the 
basis of the sutrapatha manuscripts alone. Ramakantha’s own remarks 
on textual transmission constituting the sixth, seventh and eighth of the 
introductory verses to the Matahgavrtti are worth quoting in this regard: 

pathabhedo ’tra sadhur va tadanyo va ua mulatah 
kim tv adhyetrbhramat tena tatpradardanam ajhata. 

^athaikali pustakebhyo ’sauf patho grahyo vicarya cet 
sadhur eva tu samgrahyah sadhunam api bhavatah. 

tatag ca pathabhedebhyah proddhrtaih sadhubhih padaih 
tadabhavad yuktam anyais tantram etat prakafyate. 









Editorial Policies 


cxix 


Variant readings in this work, whether good or bad, are not 
original but stem from the error of students and therefore to 
point them out is foolishness. fNow if, after reflection, one 
reading has to be selected from the manuscripts then only a 
good one must be accepted since the good ones too are found-t 
And so this tantra is published with good [or perhaps Correct’] 
words selected from among variants, and when they are not 
there [among the variants] then with others. 


It is clear then that in the Matanga , and the Kirana is certainly unlikely 
to have been different in this respect, Ramakantha often had a variety 
of readings to choose from, that he proceeded eclectically, and that he is 
likely to have emended the text conjecturally where he felt it necessary. 
(Nevertheless, only once in the first six chapters of the Kiranavrtti does 

Ramakantha make reference to a variant (ad 5:8d), and there it is to 

* • 

one which he will not allow to be significant.) Furthermore numerous 

passages in the Kir ana are so awkward for Ramakantha to interpret, that 

we can assume that they were already corrupt by the time they reached 

him. 203 Thus although in most cases what was accepted by Ramakantha 

becomes immediately clear from his commentary, it is not always what 

would have been accepted into an edition without his commentary (see, 

e.g., 1:7a; 2:13cd). 204 This is not to say that the manuscripts without 

Ramakantha’s commentary do not help in reconstructing the verses as 

Ramakantha had them. A case of their evident usefulness is in 1:11b: the 

* * 

Nepalese manuscripts are almost alone in preserving visphuraccandra- 
gekharah and this is confirmed by the gloss visesena sphurat in the P 
manuscripts. (In general it is also the Nepalese transmission—of which 
the earliest manuscript must predate the writing of the commentary— 
which has the most interesting variants.) 

Given these straightforward principles governing the constitution of 
the mula text, I have nevertheless produced a large and unwieldly ap¬ 
paratus, and this requires some defence. The arguments come under five 
heads: 

1 A relatively full apparatus seems to me to be desirable for Sanskrit, in 

which almost any string o' aksaras can be made to yield meaning. 

203 The final verses of patala 6, for example, seem viciously corrupt, and Ramakantha 
seems to interpret them in an order that none of the manuscripts, except M Y and its 
apograph, K 2 , give. 

204 These and other instances of this kind have been pointed out in the notes ad loc. 








cxx 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

*4 t/ | 


Works of sastra arc especially prone to misconstruction, not because 
they are inherently full of ambiguity, but because their correct in¬ 
terpretation depends on the familiarity of the reader with a corpus 
of related scriptural and sastric literature. Probably few readers 
today are immersed in this scholastic tradition. 


2 The text has been read and copied for use over many centuries and 

across much of the subcontinent and has been subject to revisions 
throughout its transmission. Many variants may be conscious im¬ 
provements' deliberately introduced to make the text conform to 
that assumed by a particular commentary. This makes them (in 
some cases) intrinsically interesting as the readings of manuscripts 
of a certain region or of manuscripts that are intended to accompany 
a certain commentary. 

3 It is impossible to draw up a plausible stemma that tables only ver¬ 

tical transmission between the manuscripts. This makes it often im¬ 
possible to rule out even patently erroneous readings on the grounds 
that they are not significant to tie constitution o the text. I am 
therefore reluctant to cut down the readings given in the apparatus 
by the sort of simplification that West's handbook demonstrates 

(1973:44-6). 


4 In general West addresses his remarks to would-be editors of classical 

texts and considers their particular problems. This is partiularly 
clear from the beginning of Part II which opens (1973:61): Ts your 
edition really necessary?’ It is unproblematic to provide an eleg¬ 
antly slim apparatus to a text that has been edited more than half 
a dozen times in the last two centuries, of which there are published 
collations, and the problems of whose transmission have been volu¬ 
minously discussed by other scholars—a situation in which editors 
of some classical texts find themselves: 205 but for a previously un- 


205 E. R. Dodds (1960:v) in a preface to his edition of Euripides' Bacchae 1 chosen more 
or less at random to illustrate the point) has this to say: ‘In the field of language and 
textual criticism a twentieth-century editor is unlikely to better very substantially the 
work of Elmsley and Hermann, Paley and Sandys and Wecklein, except where he is 
lucky enough to be armed with new evidence: the solid scholars of the last century 
stated all the major linguistic and textual problems of the play, and brought most 
of them as near to solution as they are likely to be brought in the absence of such 
evidenced Dodds himself reproduces the text and apparatus criticais of a previous 














Editorial Policies 


* 


CXXl 


edited work -and few Sanskrit works have been critically edited—a 
fuller apparatus is defensible. 


Thus justifiably, I think, the apparatus for the miila of the Kirana comes 
close to being a lull collation (though some sorts of trivial error have been 
expunged, for which see below). It is, furthermore, fully positive, that is 
to say that each reading, including that accepted into the critical text, is 
followed by the sigla of all the sources that have it. This adds considerably 
to its bulk, but also to its clarity in two important ways:— 


• It can be time-consuming and confusing for a reader to reconstruct 
from a negative apparatus which of twenty sources have read with 
the accepted text, particularly when many of those sources are la- 
cunose. A fully positive apparatus makes this immediately clear. 

• From a negative apparatus, particularly in editions of prose texts, 
it is often not certain exactly how much of the accept ed text is to 
be understood to have been replaced by a variant. The lemmata in 
a positive apparatus remove such uncertainties. 


Conventions in the Apparatus 


The critical apparatus is divided into four registers: 


• The bottom and fullest register reports the variants from the textus 
criticus of Ramakantha’s commentary. Each entry is preceded by 
paragraph and line number and followed by a lemma sign: ]. There 
follow the sigla of the manuscripts which read as printed. Finally 
the variants are reported, followed by the sigla of the manuscripts 
that give them and separated from one another by semicolons. A 
siglum with superscript ac (ante correctionem) marks readings of a 
manuscript before alteration (e.g. P^ ), and a siglum with a super¬ 
script c marks readings of a manuscript as altered (e.g. P^). Text 
in the apparatus bracketed by x ... x has been cancelled. Small 
repairs to the text are marked em[endation\] bolder conjectures are 
marked conj\ecture\. (The difference is of course subjective.) 


twentieth-century editor, Murray. 





















CXX11 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm m/ i 


• The register which reports the readings of the verses appears at 

the top of the apparatus (on every page but the first of the patala. 
where it is second from the top). The readings are presented in 
much the same way as in the bottom register, but they are preceded 
by the verse number and a letter to indicate to which pada they 
belong, A spot (•) separates different entries within the same pada. 
The siglum S in this register is used to mark readings that are 
shared by all except a single codex or group of codices that can be 
represented by a single siglum. Sig’a in bold face stand for groups of 
manuscripts, not for hyparchetypes. This means that I do not use 
the siglum N except to mark readings shared by all manuscripts of 
the group N that provide testimony for the patala in question. A 
single illegible syllable is signified in the apparatus with an anceps 
symbol: . Where the scribe has marked a syllable as illegible to 

him, this is represented in the apparatus with a raised dash (“), in 
imitation of a convention often used in Devanagarl manuscripts. In 
some places gaps have been left in the manuscripts and these are 
signified with a U. These might have been ignored, but they seem 
to show that the scribe was in doubt and often appear where the 
text in that manuscript is corrupt. A siglum with superscript vl 
(varia lectio) marks a reading labelled in the manuscript itself as a 
pathantara. 

• On the first page of a patala the top register lists the codices for that 
patala and mentions large lacunae. For the lacunae in manuscripts 
of the P group I have another convention: portions unreadably 
damaged or missing in P 2 are bracketed thus: []; such portions in 
Pi are bracketed thus: ( ); and in P 3 , thus: { }. When the whole 
of the text of a lemma is taken from a portion that is bracketed, 
I have not entered anything for the manuscript in question in the 
apparatus. I have done so however when the lemma only partially 
overlaps with a lacuna. In such cases I have reported the legible 
syllables, preceded or followed by a triple dash: —. 

• On any page (other than the first of the chapter) where four registers 
appear the register second from the top gives information about the 
lacunae and omissions. Thus 6 (a 2 -b 3 ) N 2 ’ would mean that N 2 was 
broken or illegible from the second syllable of the first pada of verse 
6 up to and including the third syllable of the second pada . ‘6 [a 2 - 





















Editorial Policies 


cxxm 


b 3 ] N 2 ’ would mean that N 2 had left a gap or in some other way 
marked a lacuna for the same syllables. This register is unsightly, 
but it compresses a lot of information. Almost all the South Indian 
manuscripts are extremely lacunose. 

• On any page (ot)ier than the first of the chapter) where four registers 
appear the register second from the bottom identifies quotations in 
the commentary, reports testimonia and locates passages from other 
works or references forward and back. 

In the lemmata I have attempted to reproduce the fragments of text as 
they are printed in the textus receptus. The advantage of doing this is 
that they are more easily recognisable; but there is a disadvantage too. 
Because the apparatus is positive the manuscript readings that appear be¬ 
hind the lemma sign ] are occasionally falsified. A danda or an avagraha 
might, for instance, occur in the middle of a lemma, not because they are 
to be found in the readings of the manuscripts which share the accepted 
text, but because they appear in the text as printed. The punctuation of 
the manuscripts has not been reported because it seemed rarely helpful 
and in those rare instances this might have been due to chance. Another 
instance of such falsification is the suppression of variant orthographies 
in a lemma. In the apparatus to l:12d, for example, the lemma given 
is padarthoddyo 0 . All the manuscripts that read thus write -dy- (per¬ 
haps because they do not have a convention for ddy), and many of them, 
particularly the grantha manuscripts, write rtth for rth. I have ignored 
most instances of gemination and degemination of consonants in ligature 
with semivowels (e.g. dharmma and tatva). Such divergences are repor¬ 
ted when they occur within variant readings (at least in those variants 
which deviate from the textus receptus in more than that they contain 
such variant orthographies but they are silently ignored in a lemma. 
The falsification is relatively trivial, and it removes some clutter from the 
apparatus. 

The confusion of s and £ in the Nepalese manuscripts that are direct 
apographs of N, (that is to say N 2 and D 1 ) has also not been repor¬ 
ted. These consonants are in any case frequently confused in Nepalese 
manuscripts; but in N, they are (to me) virtually indistinguishable. The 
P group manuscripts write a retroflex 1 in pralaya and parivartula and in 
some other words. No special entries have been made in the apparatus to 
report this. 











CXX1V 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Placing the Verses in the Text of the Commentary 

The text of the tantra has not been transmitted embedded in the com¬ 
mentary in P, and even in R v it may also have been supplied from another 
source (see below). Srinivasan (1967: 44-47, §1.4.5.18) discusses the vari¬ 
ous ways in which the text of the Sahkhyakarika has been transmitted 
within the text of the TattvakaumudT. He lists four procedures: 

a) citation of the whole or part of the karika before an avatarika with 

or without a lemma of the same or of different length before the 
discussion of the karika. 

b) whole or partial citation after the avatarika with or without a further 

lemma. 

c) citation of the whole karika in the centre of the page with or without 

a further lemma. 

d) no citation with or without lemmata, but an independent mulapatha 

at the end. 

R jV has followed procedure b. without extra lemmata, P may all have 
followed procedure d. with lemmata; but only in the codex to which 
P 3 belongs does an independent sutrapatha , Pf, survive (in this case 
before and not after the commentary). Srinivasan’s discussion of these 
procedures is prefaced with the assertion that it is impossible to infer 
the way in which the karikas were originally cited in the text. Bhatt’s 
policy in the first volume of the Matahgavrtti was to print the pratlkas 
followed by the verses, but in the second volume (where he was using 
only Kashmirian manuscripts) and in the Sardhatridatikalottaravrtti he 
has just the verses without the pratlkas. In the clause tantram etat pra- 
kaSyate in the eighth of Ramakant ha’s introductory verses to the Matahga 
(cited on p. cxviii above) it is implicit that Ramakantha supplied the text 
ol the verses with the commentary. Kashmirian manuscripts that I have 
seen of other texts also most commonly transmit the text of the verses 
embedded within the text of the commentary and without extra pratlkas. 

; T his is the procedure followed, for instance, in the Sarada manuscript of 
Ramakantha’s Naretvaraparlksaprakasa kept in the Wellcome Institute.) 

In this edition I have imitated the practice commonest in the Kash¬ 
mirian scribal tradition, assuming that this is most likely to have been 



















Editorial Policies 


cxxv 


the way Ramakantha himself treated the text of the tantra. Wherever a 
pratika is given in P, I have substituted it with the appropriate verses, 
verse, or portion of a verse (i.e. as much of the text of the tantra as falls 
between that pratika and the next», and I have gathered the pratikas to¬ 
gether in Appendix I. Occasionally the placing of these pratikas appeared 
to me wrong (e.g. for Kirana 5:12cd) and has not been followed. The 
footnotes to the translation draw attention to such deviations. 

I have not followed R ,Y ’s positioning of the verses, because there is 
evidence to suggest that the scribe of R N or a scribe of an exemplar 
in his line of transmission) supplied the text of the tantra from another 
source and that the version of the commentary he had before aim was one 
in which the text of the tantra had already been reduced to a series of pra- 
tlkas. The evidence is that a number of pratikas have not been recognised 
as such and have not been removed from the text (e.g. 1:18a, 2:5c, 2:10a, 
2:13a, 2:25a, 2:25c, 3:9c, 3:17c, 3:22a, 3:27e, 4:8c) and that verses have 

sometimes been wrongly placed frequently a pratika has simply been 
substituted by an inappropriately long sequence of text from the tantra, 
e.g. the pratika for 2:5ab has been replaced with the text of 2:5-6) or 
occur twice (e.g. 2:26a), sometimes even with substantial variants (e.g. 

2 : 1 ). 

Although none of the manuscripts of the commentary give the speaker 
indications of the tantra, and although it is possible that Ramakantha did 
not embed them in his commentary, I have included them. 







f 













i 




k 





























^■1 











































































SP-PT 5 RTTWII $ II 


(HWHdrf:) 



P*MI*6Rb<u| 5TR^1 (T^T) 


; tt rnr rrfwr ft <J Rpqri < w: I 


<l«r)w: 




T 



-:ST(Pfr 5^TT JPTT k»d I *-d ft H ft'=•'3!,^II P)OT:t II 




iPT^rfrRTTfdlTr dirndl 






srr^^Mftg cPTT d I i J4 M T 4» tI ftymr: U ft I wfl 3 T **T: 

^rirfd‘( 

J d J mPr *tpr 


5* 




T^T: 



Codices for the mula of the first pataia: N(— NftD - and, from 8d 1 * * 4 to 17a 4 , N 2 )M^R n S[— 
V( — P fViV 2 and, from 11c, \ 4 )G(— G 1 G 2 and, from 16a, G 3 )KiA(= A 1 A 2 ) M(— M 1 M 2 
M 3 )] E(— E\/Ed )• The siglum E is used to mark readings that are shared by all except a 
single codex (or group of codices that can be represented by a single siglum). Codices for the 
vrtti: R(=R n P(=PiP 2 P 3 ))- P- 2 ,Pi and P 3 give the muJa only in occasional pratlkas. P 2 is 
missing between 1:1.10 kirn ca and 1:9.40 mohajalam eva. This and other portions unreadably 
damaged or missing in P 2 are bracketed thus: [ ]; such portions in Pi are bracketed thus: { /; 

and in P3, thus: { }. 


1 a. ltf° ] E; dHIK° Ms 





n -0 ] 


M y R N P| V 2 Gi K, AMETry; °T<f N ; “HtTp V, 
M Vc ; Ki ; ffr M 2 M 3 • ] E; 



E; (f=TT N| c ) N 3 

lc. ^t] NM^'R^VGAM, 

: D 2 




1 (a'-b 4 ) G 2 ; (b 3 , c 7 -c 8 ) V, 


0.1 cf Rr3T ] P 3 ; —F Pi ; cTT R* 0.1 foRTT ] P1P3 ; ftTPT: R* 0.1 IT T^RT ] 

p 3 ; ...rait p' ; R" ; Pj; C^ T c T P“ c 0.3 ] R" ; "fartT 

P 0.3 mAP-M eT: ] R N ; P')=?TT 0 P 0.4 $dl-d' 0 ] conj. Sanderson ; 

fRPp” R N ; d^fT” P 3 0.5 feT ] R N ; ^ PiP 3 0.5 “fat ftcTT ] R v ; P 






























































































































vrgTPT^'df'■J 1 f••i'-l! '-li 


)[W T HHH dl djT %f%^TF^TW dcdH-^rPr4 M 1P. d'O^t 


^TT WWI^) ^ 



^oi<P hRt ^cf| I ^11HI-rl)<IU|IiH^tT dRfwPPr M«jrq*tPna I 3TT 

f|T J]4-1 dHIcM *JpT |j<?dl'Wl 4 q <rl 4 d H'lRa ol l •uj’-dd 3 Pi ^TT- 

f q-^TR-: | cT=T 


r %^rral^T 




d" 



R" -tp P I R V Jq~)fFH d cdT ^8^H|U|K]HI' d Pd ^<dP <M ^d I ^>4 H ^Srl H R 


^ijR|U|[Rq- 4dHI Pdi>l 'f: I d'slndl ; t 47P d*-dpHcd*H 



<m'lni-d<i^]H>iP<%( j y o4P4$N 


srt ^)Pi4fj|RM^[<d)Rr ^rrwl 


Rl R i)| -5^R- py ^ M d 


c 4 dl Pd' d^'dHdrRl'HlI^ [?Pdf^ fSTTpT ^TRf 



fw [^rfd 


T^HlPd T«r: pRTP RT(PrPr 


dUftff) 


TTTTFT 


pRFTitarr *pwPr i prftlwRt wifw 


^Pf ^rPr W: I 5T5To?Pf 



*T: I 3TT 


ti,d I -d < MI d I Pd Pd Pd Pill SiPdid I dl J11 Pr)d 14 4 d sqrWR" I ■ 

dVHR T Pd 1WdT ^T f|Pr ! 3TfR 



h- ^Pd m 4 cr^Pr k^Pi'^4PhPi h ^ h-a fP>dTfa%w (c*Pr ojtt^tr 


d" d^tf%?rw)f4p 


^wnwi^wrwP^Pdpn' frfe 


1.4 Testimonium: H^R cl J j^ *«*11o4*|fc1 l<(M i<«4 I 

Mrgendravrttidipika of Aghorasiva p ; 5. ^ ^ r ^ _ ^ ^ 

1.12—13 Testimonium: cP-TT Pft C u l<1 rfl TTTrTT TTRR tr 3TRPf u T ‘ Ref M d I u l^iSO" 'd*-M?i Id 


totFp 


p. 1125, lines 11-14 and IFP T. 1059, p. 33. (See also 1:10.17-20.) 
1 1 2—1 3 H1 pd Rh d RT ^duppRnFTT sfiT TS^pf^f See 1:10.17- 


1.2 drtj^d ] R N ; q^TT F 1 p 3 ; —^ P 2 1.2 ] conj .; ««4HH 0 R jV PiP 3 

1.2 SPIT?! ] P 1 P 3 ; 3T^cfcT R A 1.2-3 °T7T Tg^rf^fT %7f ] R v ; cT— Pi ; J>3W- 

frrfpp %c[ P 3 1,3 °fHRT%R ] R A Pi ; Q fWTTt P 3 1*5 tPTPFTBP ] R A Pi ; —FR P 2 ; *Kim ° 
P 3 1.5 cff^RTT 0 ] R N ; dPFHvT— Pi ; dPpMHI ° P 3 1*5 cf ]^R^ r ; orn . P 3 1*7 ] 

R^ ; om, P 1 P 3 1.7 FfpRTT ] R N Pi ; R^pTPTT P 3 1.9 PiHH^cnlPri ] R N ; 

ij] j ii-jM^— P 2 ; — Ps<H^tcTl Id Pi ; 4tR ^-[csiM^Cdirci P 3 1*9 ^Ps^ 0 ] R^Pi ; ^rf%W° 
P 3 1.10 R N Pi; —t P 2 ; fwt P 3 1.10 V&C \ cf ] R N PiP 3 ; W _^P cf 

P 2 1.10 C^T] ; om. P 1 P 3 1.11 j^ft MciPdPd ] R N ; 

Pl ; jnWM- STcfrfd* P 3 1*13 RMTWl ] R N ; f ^TWTWT 

p lP 3 1.13-14 TirfpRT oqM^<|-d <IRPTr° ] R N ; JldPirq R31T— Pi ; Jlci|r^^q rPTTM idT° 
p 3 1.14-15 °H!^c| ol| Ko^ H vr*lM4:] em. ; . 1 K°M M>^rq iq : Pl ; oqitpqM^I - 

ZTT K N ;. o ^ i ^c^Ko^H^l^ ; P 3 1.15 STWTR° ] em.; WTR: R A ' ; T^T P 1 P 3 115 RpT ] 
R N ; 3TT P! P 3 



9 


12 


15 



































































































































































































































































ST^PT 



iJ i-| j | q 4-) | ^| q q ■q q 5 *1 cl 41 S$) 41 ("4 CM M14”* I d » 41 M • 

“ttRa l"4 Hi II 

3 TT ^TTfft (HJId 4 c 1 ^ ^Jc^rhd I d 4 WMrl) 

fT^TT r-i.'i * j '-^T^p^rijq fd ^ J*1 U| I 

WT y<u4V^lfi ^ II 



ITtt d HIH H ■-H ^ f&A Pd HI ^PT Mil 


* 




vH 41 W 'H ^=M ^iRidRi^^im^ I 


2 . Before a. E insert 1T5T: 2 a. ] M v R"Pf V 2 Gi K,A 2 M,M 2 ETVy; ° 

jvj ■ 0 ^ 44,1 t'jtj 0 Ai (unmetrical) 2b. ° 1*4■»<d u I ] NM'‘ R^VjAaE/Vy; ° fa*tet"i: M y “ c Pf 
G 2 AiMiM 2 ; “ fa^aP TT V° c Gi 2 c.SPrr°] E ; ST^tT 0 N 2 d. °H^g('' ] M y R V SE V Try ; 
^fv» n" 'H^g;® E d • '‘STf^n NM y R N Pf ViGATVy ; “ffT^iT V 2 ; “STCff: MiM 2 
3b. ] D 2 M v R' v VGAM,M 2 E7Vy; »ft IT° N 3 ; '■ftroPC® Ki • °W- 

=BfT] NR ,v M y PfV 2 GAETfy; KiMjM 2 3d. t »PW* ] NM Y R N Pf V 2 GKi A 2 

E7 y y . ojprrero A,MiM 2 • °=Tr5TT ] D 2 M y R‘ v Pf V 2 GAETVy ; o: fTPrT N 3 ; "’inni: 
K t M-.'; °=TT?rer: M, 4 a. ^t41^dd i WT 0 ] E; '3PT yctdt.MlP'i 0 N7Vy w ; ^PTr^cRTf- 
'Try 4 b. NM y R JV VG,AE7>-y; G 2 ; K, ; “^fTTPl- 

jC:(sPTM 3 ) M; “PPtH'H Try vl 4d. “eiR^I ° ] NM y K N VGA 2 M 2 E7Vy; — Ki ; 

«Rfrtf« AiM i; «wfTt'r» M 3 • «tnrw] M y R. iv VGA 2 E7>y; N; -VK- K, ; 

o^rrur: (OPT M 3 ) A,M 5 ab. ) om. V 2 5 b. -Wl' 1 ' ] NM Vt R N GK 1 AjEIVy; °T- 
M yac p|AiM • »Ml£+ ] NM y R N P|GAM 3 E7Vy; °RT^f: KiMi ; OJ -TlT^ci: M 2 
5c . ^rfo ] M y R N P| G AMETVy ; =J^T° NK! 5 d. » s I Hi sfm - » ] NM y R N Pf ViG 2 Ai 
M 3 ETrv; ° frsft4~° V 2 ; “^tTrfrr&fPr 0 Gi ; 0 -=h 1 s isTTR° Ki ; °WTlsiTq«14 ° A 2 MiM 2 
• »5TW] NM y R N PfV,GK,AiETi-y; "StWVjAj; '3IW: M 6a. ] S; 

M(unmetrical) 6b. "^Ttfw® ] NM y R v VGAMEd Try ; °^rfw Ki ; E 


V 


2 (a'-b 8 ) Vu [a’-d 8 ] M 3 ; (a 3 -a 8 , b 6 ) G 2 ; (a fi -d 8 ) K 

rtf_i jSI ha . Iu6 J8 \ \7 _ A {fa 1 —q 7 \ \/_ • fpl 


1 


3 a'-d 8 ] M 3 ; (b 6 -d 8 ) V! 
5(a l -a 2 ) Ki; (a'-d 1 ) Vi 


c l —c 5 


4 'a‘-a 7 ) Vi; [c‘-c 
“ M 3 ; (c 3 -c 4 ) V 2 


M 3 ; (d 4 , d 8 ) K! 


1.18 «?i4)r<Jrd-=inJ‘: ] R N ; c 
5tT: Pi ; cTFTJr'rT: P 3 1.20 




: Pi i ' 

• ] Pji tqrdtrt r 


P 3 1.18 cTvT ] R N ; 


N 















































































































































41 <M R f4 «*il ^1 ^ r^HI ^T=T I 


'Jl^l^dH^lRl^tl^ldqr'I'URd II ^9 II 



WT MldH^Hl t 4dil c nidil'TJM^i^'T> II \ II 


4P f4 <-41 u iT g 414 *^rr !~4 P4 ^ - <TRr4"3n 

dM| 4^4t feTTW I d(Vn-Ml 14-q«d*J|: Hlu-sdt-cqAq dl-^l • d*-q i - 
FFW I - rfMT( : ^cr vd4Rf l fw 5TfTgt 3TT) s)$|qTil rT 

yq <|*j 41 <n yq <4R9IT: I ct^T WJJT^l M Pr)M < Gt-q ^T^T |“ 

^jIq^4Pd I cPTTpqHIdt <f{<I u l141 ^CRt W^Y dW qP^C cTFT 


6 c. ° v^"jdHT ° ] M^R^PlGAE^TVy; NV 2 M ; Ki ; »H^W E D 

6d. “^MrTT” ] E; o^f^cTT-Ns • ] N 3 M'R' v Pf V 2 GA 2 E7Vy; 

D 2 . og<fg-.__ Ki ; T: A t ; 0 *ffgflqT: MiM 3 ; M 2 7 a. °PT^T° ] 

E; ’ =^r^-o N 7b . °ft pt 1 il l H ] M v PfV,GAE; NTVy; «Pff5T R A '; °fw- 

5RT V 2 ; - fan i VH : K,M 7 c. vrtrnpT 0 ] M v R A 'SE7>y; *<Ti5o ° N 3 ; P>' J 

7d. «4wTT° ] E; °?mnrT° N .'°°nf^cr] NM y R N PfGK 1 A 1 ME7Yy; •RfftT: V, ; 
-JTfScn- V 2 A 2 8 a. “frFRrfrtr 0 ] _E ; ‘^l<ll|' TVy u ' 8 b.] M Y R N Pf V 2 G AM i M 2 
E Try-, N; m-i: Ki ; \1 3 ; Try vl 

• ^Nir ] NM y R N P 3 V 2 G 2 ATVy; ~<mT” Vi ; “^rTW 0 GjKiEo ; 'tjdqffl* M; 
og^ra-o E^(unmetrical) 9 a. "^ ] E; 0I Jcg' 0 N 2 ; °R^° N 3 D 2 . “RRTT- 

q-o ] £. » h^IT °N 3 9b. “Hl^'dlH ° ] NM V R ,v VGKi ATfy; “ihIvum ® Mi; ° 

M 2 M 3 ( unmetrical) • 0 dHVfT ] NR^Pf G 2 K, A 2 METry °<ihIm§ M Vc K 2 ; “cTRtW 

^vac . 03-_ y 1 . —V 2 ; »dHlH57 Gi(unmetrical); °d*il—Ai 9c. TRTTcr^yft fc 4' 0 ] 

E; fw(f? N 3 (dtJI'd (RT. 7>y)W° N Try vl 9 d. <l ri'l<t>irtl<tiyi<;f^+ ] NM 1 PfV 2 GAE 
Try, «Rtor^rgrR R N ; —*r: Vi ; Ki KiM 


8 c. 


fi / i_ r 3 c 7 ci 6 ~d 8 l Ki - (c 2 -d 8 ) Vi 

7 (a 1 -a 5 ) Vi; (c 3 -c 4 ) G 2 8 (a 1 -a 6 ) Aj; (a 2 -c°, d') Vi; (c 4 ) G 2 ; [c 7 -d T ] M 3 

8 Testimony of N 2 begins with d 4 . 

9(b a -d 7 ) Vi; (b 7 -b 8 ) Ai; (b 8 ) V 2 ; ( cl -^ 3 )^G 2w . . 

9.3 From the T of RhdH to the tR of TT 0$Hld: all upper vowel matras broken ofl in R 

V ^ 


N 


9.1 ] R N ; r^rUI Pj 9.1 cPfr^fr ] R v ; d <t\ WT«P^t P 1 P 3 ^9^1 ftr~ 

f^n ftPvldV I: ] R-^Pi ; fVfewF^?r P 3 9.2 feppiPT ] R N ; W P 1 P 3 9.2 qrJ^sT- 
or: ] R N ; P 1 P 3 9 . 2 c^] P 1 P 3 ; dr4^ R N 9.3 | ] R N Pi ;om.P 3 9.4 *0 <\& ] 
R N Pj ; cfl^ 11 ^ P“ c ; frtSTT^ P 3 9.4 M=K*iU*lT: ] R ,v Pi ; ^T^ft^TT P 3 9.4 RR^T^I ] 
R N Pi ; P 3 9.4 I* ] R v Pi ; ^ 34^ P 3 





























































































































































#T: 



d d M +1 





*TI iTO ^ TO sfdd'H I-RWf JTTOTO 'hlHWHI 





3T 


dt(J 11 Pd R-d Td^^cd I IrHI Pd : TOT cTTO dl¥ld 

fr TO) (P, f. 1® )^dHI Pd'^rifd^tdfH^cdl'd^^'H : TOTOf^TOTTO 
^dfdMH^Tdlfd I TOTOTTOt 


fTOWt^TOT(T% 1 T TOT TOTOTOTnTOTO I 

PdTOTO < d-iJH TOf: fTO mHI^H :) II ffd" 

TOTO dHI-dH^TdTPd' «lrtlH$) TOrTPT TFTOdTOT I fTOT 3TTTOT: TfT 
y d H HI-d d h U| | d) Ml TOtoTOT^: TT TOTO: (TTfTOT: TOTT)TO(^TO 
^TOT: d I d 4 H $ I d) Td'Pcd; I TOTO ^ft TOO cT%TOW I f%rT 
dTOdTO HfRSt ddd^d TOTOT TO^^TOfrTTOTOffd': II R -* II 

fw <i^h totofR (dro *o% d 3 <j h h i ^ (h hi R-h *-^1 gror- 

<<%TO i=fTO TO TO: TOTOTOTTO) 





TOTOTTO %TOfr A M) mHH frofTTOTcftTOT TOTTOTO STOTO ffc^TOT fTO 



fgld Rid I dTO grp Id Pdd I Idd M\ dUcRw J11dN HTnf-d 

TOTOSTTO d^TO I 3TTO) tTT8TTOT dTOTOTOT f^TW I ^TO fTOfOTf 


SddR-drd'dddf^d' TOW >TtW dddM^lld I dPddgdiH 


TOrfrr d *£) TOrfro Rttto T^roiTOg^TOTt TOrfro 





TO TOTOf% 


9 . 11-12 



■ vji -i 14H : Vayupurana 54:58. 


C\ k 

9.23-4 ^'drr RffT• ■ -TT gT: Source unknown. 


9.6 ] P 3 ; jrrwr 0 R ,v 9.6 °ft * *td'H ] R N ; —rPT P, ; “fR^PT P 3 9.6 Rt4M<Pl ] 

P,P 3 ; rnrrr^r tfl R N 9.7 IRV: ] PiP 3 ; JRR^rr R* 9.7 <bl*tfdt-h ] R w Pi ; 'hlMdfh 
P 3 9.8 5lftt] P 3 ; 5TTtT: R n 9.9 PiUlflf-dy 0 ] PiP 3 ; fWrFcTRT ?TJ» R N 9.9 xttj-fl-- 
T° ] Pi P 3 ; R" 9.9 »¥r^TFT: ] R N Pi ; ''rTjfT: P 3 9.9 + M$<ifd<-t| ] P]P 3 ; 

<t>IHf)<it-h 3TT R N 9.11 f^WT° ] R' v Pi ; |q ii ^ xi) ° P 3 (unmetrical) 9.12 ^kT: : ] 

p 3 ; frdfrm i: R~ 9.13 4H I WjM$ytftfa ] Pi ; 3R RTRvfrPT^ftfcT R N ; ^Tr^TfTcftfcT P 3 
9.14 cH I cg-rl^MUI I dV iT ] PjP 3 ; clHIcU-dH^Nlquil R N 9.15 cTf^fTTT ] R N ; rT 

fr upudlTi ftrviw: p,p 3 9.15 fer ftrrfiT ] R N ; ftrfec^fc^r hP^i<Hh PiP 3 9.18 
TT ] conj. ; ^TT R N P 3 9.18 H II ^ |q Pji n ° ] conj. Sanderson ; R*-Tl^*r> IdRild 
R ,v P! ; H l ^fdd TT 0 P 3 9.18-19 yTMdIy ] conj. Sanderson ; : R N ; gdtRRT: 

P,P 3 9.19 PjH l ^qdl R l T ] R-^Pi ; P 3 9.19 sTOrpif ] R W P, ; STSmTPTf P 3 

9.20 yfr IqTq^iTuq 14 1 ° ] ern. Sanderson; yrtlqTqqiTHdqi 0 R A ; fqq lqfqqiT h d u i ° PiP 3 ; 
f^n^VrfTTEIT” P 2 9.21 ] R‘ V P 3 ; 5dfsi^H P t 9.21 rTPrTTKT ftfWT ] R N ; 

rTPJTTTTdmi- p,p 3 9.22 xfwrfRdW” ] R N Pi; °ffp?dw° P 3 9.23 RfP ] R N ; T5T 
I’i ; HdH P 3 (both unmetrical) 9.23 <dq ti ] R' v ; «q<I P 3 ( perhaps unmetrical) 















































































































































































































































P^ <H H fd d IH £ W ^dddd" d TFf dT ITT Scd-dH I 

fW 3d dtW d5<dl + lP fd^HIfl-dld^Mld ddd ^Ttf^TTTfrr- 


U||po[)d ddd fhn=dT lid Tj IHH (OTlfdH ^ M t.I J M^T d I pHd I d)dT- 

zpr dd ddd dWd*FT I fw fTdddFlt Wdrfd^t TFFTOddT- 


F^Pf dfalTTt S?pi"d ^[d^T: MM Id') I f%l" 4t(dT 

fro^f: ddddfrdFd: ^w) ^Ft^ arw y^Hc)4$)RHi^H I - ddd- 


^4 fd yilifll^f S^ddT Pd-4d $ Prd d cd K d4 fd I fw 3Tl[ddTd'4">Jd 


d-dd fVre- 



oillHdi cfFT fiHIMdK.1 J Td )5tdt ddT- 


H l cddi : ddd ddT 4^41 Sd^Jcd 4d d P4 d d^fd^dTfd^dt sfd 


d I Pd i>l d I - dddy 4 fd I dpTr dFpfddTdf 

3i q-.^ i Tci i ^J rqFH l Pm (d $-5 d I 

^d^rid' 4d" oqr)d ^ dTTdnrll ffd 



fw 4cTl d^ldfd : dl^fddFJddd ^fFJ^dd fddTcFT ^ ddd^dfd 


grfd dTdTddd fjdlfd rfd id fid Id: ddTd ^FT^d dll^dl $dFdT 

ddfd dddt sfd dW) ddl" dtfP dT d^Ht^rdTP d dfd dT- 

d^stdT)^: I fdtiT vd H d -414 : d -d IM K1 M I 'Jl Pd d d P) : 



fdHI^Pd d(5TdT. 

{d)lT: (I\.f. 5 r ) d ip'll IHdd wfddfddddf"d -1 d'l (<|Pd[<d I d H 

fd ddddd d^dFFdd 


f%¥F=dd 


9.34-5 3pfrFTTT- • ^PM PH' Not traced. 


9.24 ] R N ; °Pt^ f^“ P 3 (unmetrical) 9.24 Ht ] conj .; om, R^PiPa (unmetrical) 

9.24 ^RTTT] R^; P 1 P 3 9.25 PP|TTOR] P 3 ; r^TTt R N ; ^T^TT- 

j-l |Pi 9.25 ^dlTd 0 ] R N ; °HmH 1 ^dl Pd 0 P 1 P 3 9.26 °rfV- 

ff] r n ; irfer P 1 P 3 9.26 «pmr] R N ; °3 ^t1t p 3 9.26 Trferr ] R N ; tt(trt 

p 3 9.27-28 dH4 l ^ ] R N ; p i p 3 9 * 28 ] conj.; ^Rfldl^N 

R N PiP 3 9.28 yPn^P : ] R N ; fefeT: P 1 P 3 9.28 'A HI d 1 ] conj.; yHlPcldt R N Pi ; STfcf- 

qrfeT P 3 9.29 qfe^P: ] R N ; 4141PHT: P 3 9.30 ] R ,v ; jiTcMcirq 

P,P 3 9.31 Hfe” ] R N ; P 1 P 3 9.31 o?^rw cfPT ] R N ; 

p 3 9.31 rhRIPPT ] R N ; fi HI I Hf P 3 9.31-32 ^Mi° ] R v Pi; rd i 0 P 3 9.32 - 

fe ] R N Pi ; °^fe : P 3 9.32—3 0 ft^ t ^Tfefe sfe HTfrT?PP ] P 1 P 3 ; 0 f^f 1 Tc; 1 Pa -vi <-i R A ' 

9.34 opcjui^|<)vrdlHI 0 ] PiP 3 ; ^Pd^dvrqiri 0 R v 9.36 PiH 1 d-T ] PiP 3 ; PdHIcM cTHT PT- 

9.37 °Trrr : hipt ] PiP 3 ; o 4 ihh 1 ^ii 4’ R N 9.37 * infer ] PiP 3 ; 

fe R N 9.37 VlH^T ] P 3 ; fepiTT R N 9.38-39 srf?T t\ 1 Th n 1 4 Tct ] conj. ] HTfHn'HPd R v ; 
^ i rMH I ^Pd ' P 1 P 3 9.39 rPrnT 0 ] R N Pi ; gcTTT° P 3 9.39 ^kIp^H: J R N ; 

PiPa 9.40 0 PdH4P| 1 rH ] R iV PiP 3 ; °ffefelfef P 2 9.40 -41 rf^fe ] em. ; W ^pfd 
R N ; cf STcfef P 3 9.41 PPFPrRT ] R iV ; 1" 3 



















































































































































































































































eh i H l RH^ - dTT aM - rft^T: 'RIM <lldH ^ I .-d)[: TidWT *pFT- 



^ I 

*HpTT [PTT) (P,f.2 r )^: 


Pd ^1NI Id P) d IH ST<^rfr SSdwT t^RT: I 


sref^TFqt w^rr wzfk i 


Hl^fH'hldd': tfd Idd'l dllddi: *Rf: II ?fd" I 

' T T=W ^T(f%?^T)cTSTW I 
WW I 




*RTcR 




y\ <b)UdHI•TRlf'TWRT I dddHHdm'l-?- 

3r^TfFWT(D ^ (p 2 f.5 w )f^rr *RMd: ^'fcUddidHii (fN - ) ^?Rr =r 


if) nH i r^<ji*ri[^TT dT JTfc'MH Idd Pd" Sif4d I cHfyd M Ps id]l M5ld Pid 

frHfdj& l dl'-KMI-d^^ydlddSI 4pT(Pfr^T) I J 'A I Pi Ph ' 'll Id I 


3^i|rf)rd-tRfT iTrf 


<TFT 



dT(«TT [d^RT ’jrrr -^P^dN 1 1 tr: I cTFT 
fdHI dJ-«T)ddH I Sc4d 



pJRRTT] d v4 Id 5ETR^ 



iff fa^OT- 

d i ffui HIHT- 


Mp^rdlfr SdlPd^HI 


W) «hr^l^ f^F (<t<l 1IJ I Pd Pi 3")rfi«4d I 'PI * u l fd^d] ( P 2 f.6 r ) f|r d^lcd 


ddd J||u |h Jod|dIdr^dId : '-Kd I<m 4) ty IdMlIrKd 



9.45-6 3TTT■ • -H^t: Sankhyakarika 53. 

9.42 j^I-d : TSf^fr ] P 3 ; °R^TPrT^irf^Y R v ; °R—Pi ; — P 2 

9.43 °fwPT^r° ] P ; °H$I l^d IH*|T 0 R N 9.43 ] R N ; ^t: P 2 ; ^TPt: P 3 

9.45 Q ^hWtfW ] R N ; PxP 3 ; — J 41 Ph« P 2 9*46 qT^T 0 R w ; RTJ 1 ^ 0 

P 1 P 3 ; JPJ^T 0 P 2 9.47 ] R N ; ^fciTt^l^PTJ 0 P 9,48 3TPci mi m rM 0 ] R N ; ^RT 

v5T^r^° P 2 P 3 9.48 cK 4 R^ m -o j rn ; 0 Pi ; rRP’^PT 0 P 3 9.48-49 

f?*T^r o ] R^Pi ; 0 £ ^ 11 rM«h 0 P 3 9.49 M J[4d : ] R' N ; ^ J 14R P 9.49 °TPTWT^T ] P 2 ; 
O f^ i ^^ r P 3 ; ORPPPTT^ 0 R N ; °TRPBrr— Pi 9.49 ^PPR] R N P!p 2 ; ^9tT P“ c ^Nr^pg 
9.50 fcljlV I Mi ] R N ; fk^m- P 2 ; fVr’aTFTT Pi ; fk %*h <m P 3 9.50 RWTftRP^TfTT ] 
PiPg; T ^Mrddf^ T R^ 9.50 R w ; P 1 P 3 9.50-51 °fw ] 

P 2 P 3 ; °ftTTPgfd - 0 R N 9.51 fZT HIH4HI-rl'^r° ] R ;V ; ^HIH4<HHIH (RT P 3 )^P^° 

P 1 P 3 ; ^^H I HH^ ’HIH-R^^~°P 2 9.51 ] Pi; °y ti P 2 ; 

p 3 ; R N 9.51 °U|lf5fH<Hlfd' ] R N ; 0 «ll fe r^rfR^TT P!P 3 9.52 $F*RT- 

efTr^r^RFt ] P 3 ; U dT R N ; 3P=N M dl <r?) Pi; —^<1 )r^ .-,41 ' i > 2 9.52 'J^ rj ] 

R n PiP 2 ; P 3 9.52 ] R N P 3 ; P!P 2 9.52 0 m rh0^^firrTt ] 

R n P 2 ; PiP 3 9.53 ^f^TT 0 ] P 3 ; ^PTT° R- v 9.54 R^PjPa 5 

Hi^ Y R fRR P 3 9.54 ^T^T° ] R N P 2 ; P 1 P 3 9.54 <Iy 1 Pddr4 0 ] R N ; «Tl^ I 0 

Pi ; 4)*Hlf?Mc4 0 P 3 9.54 0 ^dTd < ] P 3 ; 0 ^fd“*5 JI d dl R iV ; —fdT Pi 9.54-55 J f1uic4 MSI R*i"- 
wm } R N ; Tftw rmtPftr^TT PiP 3 9.55 eTTT 5rf^° ] R N ; cUHfR£ 0 P 9.55 H^rdin'l 
S^Tftrg^T] R N ; om. P 3 9.56 °W^H } R N ; “rfrfif P 1 P 3 9.56 RVTc^ ] P; rTUT 
R N 9.57 °y<oi| 1 til0444 R-’Mfd': ] R N ; 0 ^<pm 1 ^ 7 «i IVm^ : P 2 ; 0 f^RT: P1P3 






































































































































































































































































a 41 mi h i fcTs : i 




TT r rff?r4’ "m^i (1 <.Hh 


5T5TT 



J <-d IJ <J'''FT I= H ^ I ^ePs I 










i=PT Hid HT ftrWFT TT 3T I 

4| d d I ^ TTf: tT*f H Rt>-HI H I fad' ^JTcTPTII II 

hwt: 4 ^t: Mftftftr ^ 4 tcr: i hft wFt stentr hht- 

TM\ dcdHMI<ffpif cP4TfT 


fa m )0 d i «rr 'pirn 

■q ^ rhH' 





^ 15 l I fa rl 

3 < 04 ^TT: I dd^ HHT 

^Ifa^d-MT yI^Hd T ^i^fac 


TRcT 5T(cf) [HHT: I 

JUT HlfiW Heft HtlHFH <ft8JT 



fal d HT H^$TPT ^ 41 ^dl 4 

sTTT STTW ^fHI 



^nfrW^Md I fafa <ldfd]MIMH)4fa' : l'HHH 5 31 fa'hi4fad ■M^5l < f>d- 

u <fa|«7t|HH' Hldl*rfa*-4t <11H<;f?H' ; r jTT^^TTH^^Tt 5PT 


10 b. «STTT] E; »srrr V 2 . ST] E; S* c 2 . *nr] NM y R N Pf V]GKi am 3 e 
!>>’; q^T V 2 ; for MiM 2 10c. ifr-!T ] N 2 M v R N PfGAMETVy;<mqP : q‘N 3 D 2 ;JTq^r--- 
v, • ’ qqtn^Pr V-, . RTF: 1 E ; RTF N 2 lOd. 'XJTfcf ] E ; °mfFT N 3 • %^=TPT ] 

i J “ 

N 2 M y 'R' v PfV 2 G,AMETry; ^RRTR N 3 D 2 G 2 K, 


10 (a 1 -a 3 , c 4 -c 5 , d 5 -d 8 ) V i; (c l -c 8 , d r, -d T ) Ki; [c 3 ] M 3 ; (d 2 , d 4 ) Gi 

9.58 • -h^HH Source unknown. Quoted also ad Alararigav/ dy 5pado 3:20 and on p. 12 of 

the HetubindutJka. 

10.5 3TT?TT 0 • ■ -HHTi attributed with the expression pauskaradau by RHinakantha ad Matahga 
vidyapada 5:6, p. 108. 


9.58 0 5T^T° ] Pi P 3 ; °W^T° R N 9.60 VI y| I ffd ^ ^ I % 0 ] P 1 P 3 ; 

K N ; — <J^ J -Hdl^ 0 P 2 9.60 



y° j F ; 0 W>^d 1 y m ^1 0 R N 9.60 c ^r^PT- 
rtlftjfN ": ] R^P“ c PiP 3 ; ft^T: (or perhaps 0 <ti r-n d cQ 'ft" fa 0 : ) P 2 9.61 W^T- 

^c] R N ; —^-p 2 ; —^ Pi ; P 3 10.2 °Mlclcd"° ] R v Pi; 0 P 3 10.2 ^Y- 

] R N Pi ; P 2 ; -HHidrdlP 3 10.4 ] R; P 

10.6 f ll N ; 5^ar P 2 ; 5^-— Pi ; PI; 5^ P 3 C 10.7 ^fr° ] R ,v Pg ‘ 5 Pj T° 

P 3 10.8 y I'Jt 0 ] R' v ; him 5 P 10.8 «<ro ] R ,N P 2 P 3 j Pi 10.9 0 ] 

p ’,p . - jp^v q- 0 Pi; R n 10.10 .TTr^To ] R' V P ] P 2 ; "W U ^ P 3 


a c 
2 





































































































































































































0 

\ 


12 


15 


18 


21 


24 


Pd i>| y fd M i Pi»ld<£dH sfr Rh p£<5pd McddlH fed Id 

dT 4dlPd"$1l)Hl^d ^P^fP$fUd<Tpp)ldJleHd>yPfl 



d f I ftl M Pd ^ 'til Id I dd^di Rdd-fid- 

edilRi: I fl H (H ed *■) d ^| IrHd IH Pd dd I I df^T^: did Pied) Pddd Ri I 


dHdi qFfT T 



MHfd * M ■‘-M IMI f -^d I d 





\srwrrRrRri (W)$tr‘ srn^r [tu d^d( ptoRt (didHi w%- 
%Rr ^f^^TiTTRr^r: i t*nr ?Rr 

to (p,f.2”)5prr: arfm trqr: ^^iddl sRr % i tRt 


r. 


, 5r^Rr(dniT)or (itt i jr?)ch di sRrdnr: srj^i] (frt)TTFT fdwnr- 


eTTeTt l dddid 


W: (5r)dT(w Rrjf st^ptt^iw frRrfr: i 

S^FTT: HIHI-M)^|odMi Pd $h Ted Rl ?l d d : II ^iRr 


ITT T dlRtldr^ S *-d Pd Pd d iflTf d Pd d di fd dT^pFTTT TSI fd TPfpTSfTT- 

FdT ( R"f. 126” ) RnTdT dPd Vidl d d T f $r(f^]Rr II 


3Td yIddddd 


MdHdil fT: fidf'R<^VK<U: 


11 Before a. A 2 E d insert *PT3"FT 

g?trr N 3 E d ; TTcT gift Ai ; t>dg& M 
M 11 b. f^TJTW^T 0 ] NA 2 7Vy; 
Ki ; ( 3 " A1M3 )^° AiM 


11a 



N 2 D 2 M' , R' v PfV 2 GKiA 2 Ev'7yy; 

1 £T: ] NM^R^GjAETVy; £T PfV 2 G, ; 

« M^R^PIGE; 


(T^-- 

St: 



<•=•«,-5 0 V 2 ; —¥^T 


11 (a'-b 8 ) V,; [a 5 -b 3 ] K 


10.17-20 Testimonium: rBPT fiFWfrfP iRTpTcfr rm+ud'Mltfui . . .(See 1:1.11-12) <Kddf^l T7T- 

^rcn=r l # ^fir “9 H^rjh : arfw twnrsgyr #^5TriT fir 5V”fir t^r JidrRcfl 

fid<?>t <.y^ j -i'd+-eidM<;e^ifii<4ai4rfli^ * 1 ^fir <*d hp^i cl h t Sai vagainadimahatmya IFF T. 372, p. 1225, 
lines 11-16. 

10.21—2 3BP : - * -: VakyapadTya 2:315cd and 316cd. 


10.12 ° ] p. of^ruTfo R iv . o^rfennp p« c 10.13 Trrfir ] r" ; ^ qnfw PiP 2 ; 

grifir ^ P 3 10.13 # ftra^ g ] PiP 3 ; °fviWH 0 R N ; ®fw— P 2 10.14 °f^] 

R jV P 3 ; °^TP 2 10.14 %Tfirr^] R* Nr P5 c P 1 P 3 ; lidfidd P^ 10.15 gwjrf^-] PiP 3 ; 

gwr TTfeF R N 10.15 0 ^MHI1 mR o ] P^a ; —TRTTTIt o P 2 ; °MprfT° R N 10.16 ] 

P 2 P 3 ; ^Tg° R w ; f— Pi 10.I6 o ttw° ] R N PiP 3 ; °f 3 T^r° p 2 10.17 ] 

P 2 P 3 ; °^l'l lfHMtry: R N 10.18 5^T sfr ff i rfil ] conj. (see testimonium) ; sj^T 

sfrfir P; grr ^t^ftfir R N 10.19 °fWrr: SffKf] R N ; PiP 3 

10.19-20 °q^"RP fipTrir^Trr ] R N P 2 ; °MdHIITdddl4r^Id PiPa 10.21 3T^: ] R /V P 1 P 2 ; 
31 ?^ P 3 10.21 Vic<f^ ] R n P 2 ; VT^vPT P 3 (unmetrical) 10.24 T g ^TFCpfir ] P 3 ; 

rP^ro R^ ; T g $T— ?! 10.25 3PP ] P 2 P 3 ; om. R^ 














































































































































































































ITq- Jfllwfa[*l^lfa3 + y«^Hct': 5TTFT T- 

4 ^FT «Pd^M^ ~ dc^cMvlOr:^(T)cdIMW [FfTn^ST- 


^■(T: 41 <+>^4 d: 5mr I f^T¥] Mi^c^^d" I 


^Hdr^HTT W ^ $TFT H$ W M H II ^ II 
j%WTW M <IHdfH^y<H I 

fM'idlll^ W Ff^ll ^ II 


•n4r1-^ ^ 4»H I VII ^ Pi H'Wj'JI 4 d':HTW 5TPFT ^f?T r^T 


d ^ d - ^fpr srfwr i 3rd 


d^dl<P(4cdldir4lJ 


^T%- sfr 'dT^l^ldMI<ldl4<rh': I dsdl^ T^RT-'d'^N ^FTf^dT^q 


d<i|: RnHsHy u il' ^f-HiPscd^dl^ ^TTF^FT M41 'fl [*i ?r> *i 


cPTTM d 14 M 4>f'5I 


! ;>. xijtt JodTTd fWPT) I <1 r*-| / d *y < !h ^it, 


o^TTcT 


.-d Pd rM d d I^ I [t 3 3TfTrTr%^‘ ^liesij'H 

t d ■t.'-d d m H «f RT I T^RT ^rdT dP 


r*Fd 



W: I TT 


*rfc(i4<^IM c hcdl'Rd" dlfdd'y ■'Td]fd' H Pi^d -4■M M ■PI T 


r<Mu]dl fl4tf cd^dcdTfd'^Prfr 


dlcMMi^c4»iirdo^’i^)rM4’ 


11 Before c. M y inserts RRRFJRTR; ^*a t ■Ji ir P 3 Gi ; ^TT: V2 ; RRRTR Ev 11c. H^*P 
rFT] N 2 M y R N Pf Vi V4GK1 AME ; JJ^rTcT N 3 D 2 ; iT^TT V 2 lid. sTT-T ] £; sTT=r» N 2 

12 b. Trr° ] M y R N PfV 2 GME; HUT'’ NV 4 G“ A 2 Tly; — TT° V,A! • '■tJcT 0 ] £; 

o v 2 12c. °-jJj |£<K ] N 3 D 2 M r R ,v VAMETVy; N 2 ; G i ; —^ ^2 ; 

K, . mr ] N,M y R JV VGK,A,ME; 5T5 N 3 D-A 2 Try? 12 d. Mcinfiyl • 


30?- 


N 3 M y PfV 4 GAME D ; ® N 2 ; 4 < I «Pf d> ° D 2 ; h <; i «5 sj'l ° R N V 2 KiEv Try 

11 (d 6 -d 8 ) A 2 ; (d 8 ) ViKi (Try's readings cannot be deduced for lied.) 

11 c. The testimony of V 4 commences. . * A , 

12 (a 1 -a 2 , b‘-b 2 , b^-d 4 ) V,; (a'-a 2 , d 5 -d 8 ) A 2 ; (a 1 , a'-b', c 6 ) K,; (a'-b ) Ai; (c 


c 6 ) G 


TTR<b'JdH 


- _ _ - ■ ' ~~r~ 

ll.l «T#^Frj^] P; R N 11.1-2 'rf^ar: ] R N PiPsi 'P^: P 2 11.2 fa$N 

&TJI-1 p" Mstf: r" 11.3 fwl R N ; feR P 3 12.2 cF^^PT ] P; d^4IP=iy^d R v 

ili ^tTr-P.P. , P. 12-2-3 .^*.Pr ] R~ i ‘PfP P.P.. 12.3 •«!•- 

RT^K: R N ; P, ; °<4HI^*I: P 3 12.3 »P««jHPRR'I a? ] P 1 P 3 ; 0 T «€.1 dTRH 1 °d 

r n P c. . Tr f^H fi pnar P?/ 12.4 fRfgyrSPJft ] PiP 3 ; fR^yTOTt R N P 2 12 ; 5 

r^-Rr j ’p,P 3 ; MPdm4«tic4M R w 12.6 cFRR ] P ; dvPT R N 12.6 S'a'.'j.oHHqJ R' V P 3 I 
^Tfrc%^R Pi 12.6-7 HPTT^mr] R^PiPs iJPTPiTT^ P 2 12.7^»RRrarl^TRRT ] R; “RRTcT 

12.7 STfRRTcftfcT RcT: ] P 2 P 3 ; arfHd i dlPd— P 1 ; oRPHRiTd PiRd R N 12.8 T- 
TTRcT ] R N ; 'TTRFJR P 12.8 ^ ] R n PiP 3 ; ^ RfFJR P 2 12.9 R^TRtr^» ] 




















































































































































































































aw a^rrw 


?? 

* \ 





^Ifrng-: 



f *nfnrr 



P 2 f. 8 W ) ¥TcT 



dTcf y l^di nl'hl <<+»H I T cf iflhtiMId f^TT | Id H I d Hl[(rfT 

fTf^'l v" I'fw. I * I d a d rx| fH cd]«P: I 

2pP hP d (5fT)^l^rt)cdld I T cdH^'NHdPd - 


^ Fl uM e-H <=h PM fd Pd P^l [Si fd >M d ^ WTdf 31^TTW: 




^fr d7&^ d I U| d )l d^Tdcd^ HI HI I P^PT^^TH 




WT: 


mf^T 




d'M-Mdfd^JIdl^rdPHrM^: I Tjy~ (^ Hl^dlJIdf 



ITWTr- 


P^i^>-tii Pt^I -m adl 'jihiPi i t-dHI?m *T) Pi M Pi $i i^Hp} Hd 1 P^dn 


3r*rrat s^ff^-iin- dln-pUd 3mr^prat(p s f. 2 r XTR 

s^rdlPi dlH-Hd)f) 1 q- 




d"i>! pJ vj m : 


d“ 


rxnr ^-(m-m 1 dl h md<P t-th vttt) (p,f.3 '-)umk^kSomPh f - Hr- 





%^rrfr yPiIdTH ctt- 

^TRT gt^HTTpH’d M HI d- 


rrr^ ^r #si -m k> j rPr 

XHtd - I cT^T^HTnfw 
cdlTfl^: I THTTWtcT ^ddldH ^(T ^T-HIu|pHfd uPdJdPldd) 

RR I McQ# I TTP MR^dl fl4tf cdu4^x|cd I faoil Teh: cr^lHJHT^dl- 

' ii njd ;f;’f ; f M 1 *^dmd m<;IhT d I inanaprakasa’s Sivajfianabodhavrtti, pp. 23-4. 

12.20 SRTTcft 5*iiTiHI*rf Rauravasu trasarigraha 1:1a. 

12.20 3T*i 1 U H4-MfilM M 0 Matahgavidyapada 2 : 1 a. 


rtHdJdH 0 P 2 



12.10-11 ] P 1 P 3 ; °Tr5*— P 2 ; °^p 5“: R N 12.11 ^ RWTTTT ] PiP 3 ; ^t~ 

R A ’ 12.12 f41<+i H <PiH ] R n P 2 ; P 1 P 3 12.12 si\^\vH I fdHTSnPTlfM' ] conj . ; 

sn^uiiRH'N'HRlR R jV ; si I ^ u| vtf i fd H N HI 1 HI --- P 2 ; ^—UTSTTfdR I 1 HI— Pi ; si I U MI RlR I ^ HI 
W P 3 12.13 rdRl&dPlRl^K 0 ] R N ; —lfk^TT 0 Pi ; fdRfl?lrfV^l'f< 0 P 3 12.13 °fV- 
T^rTfRrirt": ] R N ; °f^n 7 ^d I >11 fd<t>| xThHI^: P^a 12.14 0 TPTd^T° ] P; ^ddJlRiHK- 
0 R N 12.14 °^tt>cd ld v I T rdH^dM^d 0 ] Pi ; °^^cdld^ T r^rJT° R A ' ; ^p^rdT^T 

0 P 3 12.14-15 0 ] R A PiP 3 ; °Rr^fltrR 0 

P 2 12.17 dTfT fr^T } R n PiP 3 ; d If^d-Jird I < P 2 12.18 O'td-^dHU 0 ] R a PiP 2 ; 

°4il—ddr^Hi< ° P 3 12.18 °JldMtJrdpHHI 0 ] co/ij. Sanderson ; 0 Mdl^RlHI 0 R 12.18 &T- 
WTcm^° ] conj.; f^WTcTTr ^ -0 R N ; -~f«5TT 0 P 2 ; HI ^ P 3 12.18- 

19 °f^Tfr o ] P; °fWTT° R N 12.21 ] R A ; Ref P 2 12.21 ^° ] R N PiP 3 ; 

P 2 12.21 M^mSlcdlPi ] R n PiP 3 ; —liloMlRdl P 2 12.22-23 drdd ] R N P 2 ; 

P 1 P 3 12.23-4 ^<p4cdl dftV ifT ^dodfRlrr ] R N ; om. P 12.24 VifriHd- 

cf ] R n P 2 ; yrdR^d^rd- PiP 3 12.25 0 ] R N ; d^lHil 0 P 12.25 ] 

R A PiP 2 ; °dldMH)d dldd'Hl'd P 3 12.25 ] R N ; dlddHI P 12.26 ^ddMIH 0 ] R N ; 

^)3d<|Jm 0 P 12.26 SPTTWfRfR ] P 2 P 3 ; WTWfR^ R N 


















































































































































































































































SR 



p^rrcT y hiui 4-^r 

L ’■s 

H H •TR 

3PT ( p..f.9 y )f^F cTF*J 


d *n*i^*t! ^ 






a T^rvt 





<M£R 




: I PT ^ 



cj^ef r sfr fl'+tHI'FT ( R"f. 127' ) rbt^T 


g^r)^r: p|7T^r^r i mi 

njT I PT 'QT w: TSpr^T 

M | STT(PPT H M <r» h+ n 4V-II 




dM^t ^T: RTRp WfTr?J 




cPTT 


R3J)RT 

H j-,dPHT T JTPT tt^ | yM'M^tdTMdY W: ^ ^ I 

^rhrnft^ftr: rtIstt: 1 wrprf^r fa 3 m <d j 1 ti ^ 1 11 Sir 









W. I PTT !TrT 1^7 


Hl^TcriWT 



13a. ° MPd;ll-f ° ] Si °MtsttT° N 

%2 ■ 0-444 ° V 2 ; & ^r4f rj V 4 • 

4 j M ^H" ] M v RA I * f G1E v r i >y; 4 P 
41 j iHfci h 11 ^V2G0K1A1 MKy ; 
Ed ; 4T1T Ep 


13 b. ° M KffH T ] E; °^T^T: M 1 M 2 13 c. °^t° ] 
o^Tf ] NM V SEd Try ; 0 ^TrT° R N Ev 13 d. 
fijf?fTr U T£T No; ^l j iw fd^ < N 3 D 2 ; 4Y T PJ--- Vi ; 


4p i VlP<H< l d£R V 4 ; 4PPjTd4 <\<$ A 2 ; 


13 (a 1 -a 3 ) A 2 ; [a 


3 



Kr, [a 5 -a 8 ] M 3 ; (b T -c 2 , ci^-d 8 ) Vi 


13.5 Testimonium: NT 



^ *: 

»1 * 


devapstddhati Vol.IIl, p ^ t _ 

13 7 fcj^ 144 1 j i "~mI fi'Hfj1 1 iaX Httt*4d • Ci. 

^r4xjf: arsTRf to give a metrical last pad a. 

13.8 Kiranavrtti 1:20.1-5 and 1:22c 


23b and commentary ad loc. 


27 


r TSTTT frfrdT l cRt TTR^r (sic) Isanasivaguru- 
Paramoksanirasakarika 55cd which reads 4fa 11 SJ 


30 


12 27 1 R~ ; PPPPT P 12.27 •<hH<4Tftf?r ] P i •-*rt wife R" 12.28 

V . ^ Pi p 3 . »' v ' rrrawrftfiranTc^^r I>, 12.28 5lfir- 

fTM^rdfd 


RN ; y fd P 1 P 3 ; T m Pn — P 2 ; T 



noc 

1 3 


.. 12.29 cTFST ] 

12.30 ° ari)rd 5 iT o ] P ( P 3 ; "cTrg^-sTfen"* R N I P 2 

13.4 Tspfr^ 0 ] P; HVl «? 0 R v 13.6 RcT: ] P; 

13.8 oynuM^d ° ] 


P1P3 ; d<^ 4 ' R v ; ^ cF?T P2 

13.2 ] r n PiP 2 ; ^n* p 3 — ^ - _. ■- 

q^ra- R N 13.7 ^tarocr: ] R N P 2 i p i : v ^ „ 

r n P o . . ^Hd 4 cr° PiP:< 13.8 «R1 <41<4134% ] em.; °H1*TI<4I U#R‘ ; 

13.9 o qf.tj i di^ i d^ r 0 ] R v PiP3; P 2 13.9 °5nfifr: I =r ] R N ; 

P!P 3 ; °?rfw ^ P 2 13.9 ^ydTdldrdl-^ ] R :V ; HJjflcq 101 <. P 


3 



T 


6 


9 


































































































































































































































?3 


Fpf f^TT M^cdldOlM I Tfr^Fcl "i 






7 


} 


ydifd hm-.h +mhmh 




y pH M ^ H ^ y, -M H H fd >1 cd I d 



; J I dl J| Id 


TWdH 


TT I 




dT 




■: y Id'p-d 



Tffw: TpTTTT JJd I cH d[PT- 




P,f. 10”) ^FT PlWPmir P*jrRf^nrin^r(%Tfq- Hll<Jr«l- 

: I ^HTTpr 





Prti<fy HI ’M IJI HTfM<+>| 0 ^ <| Hidoij ?hl TT5T 

T^Pp rn 3cd^dd I 




■H-fldM P*M>H<IRid ^ydrd£)*OT%T T- 


¥THIW: TTTpgr: ^ 



T: T5PT: 



I sIMM^d T jTPTd 


r 


%%fd" fcdT yiRhMdl# Sd^dxdHd TgTTr(T5T H d cj 2. d ^ d 

f w <prr 






I cPTT T" '^Id'M'-l 
y 4l jddlfdPd I rddR^rfd ^WRPfTRT W: TTTT- 

Idd I 0 ST MyHMdl)TW 


^■(mMMlIUMrH^:) TTT(TTTT1 



r, ,i 

rP "Si 



p , ^ p 'N 

M<||] 

1 d <1 

hr -H 

ill 1 cH «hd s^-M ^ 1 

■S 3 i| 1 

Id 


dnw: y Td y i - 


13.20-1 Testimonium: 3PT TOTHS':- 




K V 


iJTTT^PT?T ^ 


^^TTTW: TT^PaT: spfiT Isanasivagurudevapaddhati Vol. Ill, p. 25. 

13.20-1 ^TW^OT%T T5Wnr: Kirana 8:139-41. 

13.22-3 Testimonium: rP4T ^ -^[fWT^Pif ST'STtTFTT 

f*Pd) <y d t rK Ry aM fd*i i JRT ;l HI ^ cH K d i d^ s. Ri 7sanasivaguru d e vapaddhat i Vol. Ill, p. 26. 

: Kirana 8:138c-139a. 



5 


13.22 


13.24 fw *ft T: SHTP^ncT Rg Veda 3.62.10 


13.10 TFr^P" 

R N : 


13.12 



° ] PiP 3 ; 




13.14 * 



R /v PiP 2 ; dfcrUH P 3 

° P 2 13.12 °TPPTTr I T 0 ] R /v PiP 2 ; 0 5TrmPT o P 3 
fr° ] R jv P 1 P 2 ; °ftlH4-dN ° P 3 13.14 5rf%W ] P; STpPJW R‘ v 13.16 ] 

R N P i P 3 ; I^TvPTrpTW P 2 13.16 °4^Hl!rHI ° ] P; ° R* 13.16-7 W^r- 

r^rrfT 0 ] P 2 P 3 ; R N 13.17 °fpTTTT° ] R n PiP 2 ; °fPTT%T P 3 13.20 °RTT- 

fw* ] R N ; om. P 2 P 3 13.20 0 ] R N P 2 ; —Pa ; °rqTcf g^ & P 3 13.20 >JT- 

HHy4iT^=T ] P; om. R N 13.21 sIHhSt ^ ] R N ; sPTTT^TPFt P 13.23 °P-Mdld ] R N ; 
°Hy|ddM P 13.24-25 RTMI PJim ItR <u||rm : ] R N • HTVTWTrRT: P 2 ; HTVTW— Pi ; RT 
U <u||rHH : P 3 13.25 qfr 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 13.26 °i!lIrq<4i>ir4 0 ] R N P! ; °IH7PT- 
cTrT° P 2 P 3 13.26 ] R^PjPs; P 3 

13.26-7 y fd 4 l<J d' ] R n PiP 2 ; { A MI <J"d P 3 


13.26 °fwr] R N ; 6 feT P 
























































































































































































































































M^TTTT^r^rf^TfWRT f%nJTfrft 


did I irTr 


yPdMKd t dTTFd ([d <11MI d [l cd]dP ^P»dPd 


yfdslldldl^l ji-: | T ^ M^HmdP) (P,f.3”) dP dd 


fddT 


fP S-JdFT ddP: y Pd HI d[di]^d 

^1 1ch *nc^ )*i m ^ ^ i ci_ I d f|r 

dTM fi di Pd rd left I 


qjPudfd" 




ydl^cl I tdTd"d7cdd”R-d 


(3Td) 


I 5TR- ^ Rdt SfPpdd 

5l | H -VI«*p SdldleddlPddMigdP dTd^P y^efil fd|^ kam «?I S]fd [etd^ 

JTTj H^dl fdTjf ^fd~ °d K°d I (dPP I t^dHpf |j) 'I M MI *M dfd 

<Pd$h l £ t)t ddP^Pd M d cl d ^£fd] I P 2 f. ll v ) TdWRT T^cdfPrPs:: 

dpT v\ H <jtl i d 

TdTdt: W fd<edldl 



fdfV: fdTdT drdlTidt1d(P Pqid%)fd d<*TRTd 


ffPr yfd «dpsdi qw i fdpdT 


fifdTW dParpTI ddt d 


TKf fdrd|Hid»H]dSTd dT^dt dd ^rdc^dlMci Rt>d IddlcH'DMld£ 


^fudedsh I dP dPd%drfP (^ddl^d 

frlPrid ) d~: ddTfdPddWTdTP dT dW ^fd“: drdTfTTRT^TtdK^ 


ddT dTdT dfP Sd-d'+t[Hl](ddVd': ddTd^fd" 

d^4fd Hided dfdfcddPdd TT(ddWfd ddPdT I 



dMlddldJ (P 2 f. 12 r )dPp: TS": ddRp: dT^d^" d": dPdeT^ 


13.36-7 • • - flMIfld : Rauravasutrasangraha 4:48; cf. f%f*n f^TT ^HT < Ml J l' 

TOT: I Ternpf: W ftiPqT* quoted by Alaka ad Haravijaya 6:147. 

^ -ITW — I ■" ■ ■■ '" ^ 

13.27 WT^rr ] R 7 V PiP 2 ; om. P 3 13.27 P4<JIHI<I ° ] P 3 ; f^JTr^T 0 R N ; fTOTW— P 2 

13.28 ^Td^ l diq t 0 ] R N ; ^rfWPlt 0 P 2 P 3 13.28 TO] R n PiP 3 ; TO P 2 ^ 13.29 "^RPT 

cRTt: ] PiP 3 ; « jHHdH ePPp: R W P 2 13.29 P;2P3 ; T RN 13 ' 30 ^ T ' 

t ] r n p 2 ; bt^tt P 3 13.30-1 ^n+c^hiw ^qR%fdc^Tcr 1 arfr c^ 5 " p^~ ] P3 

cj [ HMi —srfqcTO t(d" P 2 ; 4 H'hr^T 4T fT rT^ H%M Al sft" d^5" R N 13.33 °TOtTO_] P 2 ; 
0 H Jl t P 3 ; ° H- 4 qlrM lT R N 13.36 ftWRTT ] R n PiP 3 ; ^ 1 dT: P 2 13.37 frf^T: ] 

P : P 3 ; f%fv*° R N P 2 13.37 4tPT° ] P 1 P 3 ; 0 ^TRT 0 R N P 2 13.37 ] P 3 ; °m1RT*. 

. rft p 2 ; °^fPT— Pi 13.38 fViUI ^P IJ i ] R N P 2 ; —^TT W Pi ; fe Vi '" r tiK<J|R P 3 

13.38 F^rniT] P L P 2 ; fiPbW R^Ps 13.38-39 ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 13.39 f=T- 

^ 1 R 0 ] R N PiP 2 ; rn^eMfS' 0 or perhaps Pi 1 r < 0 P 3 13.39 ] R N P 2 ; 

^fr^TT P 1 P 3 13.39 r*4l44l 0 ] P; ^&°R N 13.39-40 °6d4^° ] R^PiPa ; °S,^ C 

P 2 13.40 ] R /v P 2 ; —FT Pi ; °^PF^W^r Ps 13.40 *it ^tn° ] R* ; ^Pi 0 P 

13.41 ] R n P 2 ; —Pi; °ftpP c P° P 3 13.41 °^l5 t r>^'i ] R^PiPa; 

P 2 13.42 dW RTt ] P ; rTF7 ^PTt R N 13.44 °^Tr5': ] cm .; 0 ¥rqf R 13.44 *7: 3 3fT° ] 

em.; R 13.44 ° Hci^l4llMP4 r Q ] P 2 P 3 ; °HddW ^TPT 6 R N ; °hc1uk^hI4 ° P x 































































































































































































































m srttwjt 




< I d cd Hi rh: 






I [^] <<SI I Rf (R w f. 127 ") Jfl I W R«f >d c*J [d n : 

9 ttw h <± h < i'^rtf^rrf^r ^ i 




3TT TST: [ 


-U <?<s 'JqTT I 


^T 



^qfr wr i 


H^d ^HI<eMlf5| d^ldt^ II ?Y || 


i|<H ' W ;^T: T^TT^T^lTc^n 



f: I cTT ^T: 5 TW- 



T^c%T fl f^tcT: T^[: ^T ^t^SfT ?fcT cTPT d'MFJlOT W: 

dlI'lcl <fft SflfdW fedR hHH' R^MH^FTTcH^: d<l*-d Rdk 3 

^iRi+iRRif^ Rt^t:] i(p 2 f. 12") cr*rr 

* 

Wl 

$M*«HM^I«>dl ^ I ^fw^Trf^r- 




irH'h: I 






^ cl ^ :] I q 1R; Ph *a 1 ci ^ : I 

<4i-dRir^ <^ 1 ^: 1 ^iRi^iRd^ra 




14 . rn?T qq i-q ] NM 1 ’ ; om. RPf ; — V 1 K 1 ; 
3TR - Try 14a. R ] E ; om. M 1 M 3 ; ff M 2 
ETVy; 4f7l^* J T N 3 ; V 4 (unmet,rical) 

N 3 ; T^Rl" Ki 14d. “fTT^l E; 5 


JTRT: 

14b. 


V 2 V 4 GA!ME; ITV— A 2 ; <1JI«'4 

] n 2 d 2 m 1 'r w p|v 2 gk 1 am 

^wRC] N 2 D 2 M y R' v VGAMETry; 



E 


v 


14(a 1 7 -b 8 ) d 8 ) Vi; (a 1 -a 6 ) N 2 ; (a x -a 3 ) K x A 2 ; (c 8 -d 4 ) A 2 


13.44-45 ] R N Pi ; °Hdlc*5dl^: P 3 13.45 °^TTTcf ] P 3 ; °'TKi'tUld R jV Pi 

13.46 ] R* ; f#^v^K^T°P 2 ; —#T—^=dT° Pi ; ^I ° P 3 13.46 

°^XTfk° ] P 2 P 3 ; °drfT R N 13.47 °fWW] R N ; PjP 3 13.48 ] 

R N ; 3T5rrj° Pi; 3T*Pp P 3 13.49 <jt: ] R N P 2 ; P 1 P 3 14.1 ] R N Pi ; 

P 3 14.1 <zrn£m° ] em .; o^lWI^T 0 R* ; STT^T 0 P 3 14.1-2 *7: SfWKI#* 
T ] P; ^T: R N 14.4 ] R‘ v ; 0 fdcfNTrr Pi ; fdW ^dl^lcl P 3 

O 

7 ^r: ] conj. Sanderson ; °f^i^rd 5 f: R 14.7 •{<* 1 f^i'ni P;] R* v ; ^ <*4 1 Hm< n 1 R;l^itrj 

Pd; ^U if^lfdf^r P 3 14.8 °f^rV4'd 0 ] R N Pi ; 0 P 2 P 3 14.8-9 SPf: ] 

R N ; SWT 0 P 3 14.10-11 ] conj.; °fS xRt4^T° R A ^ ; °fecT^": 3ppT° PiP 2 ; 

0 Pr 








































































































































































































H £ 1 IH-4-,'Jd ! d d IdT Rh<U|<|dl 




?pifdj|j-l lc#Rl#f) I did I d d *-d Rl d rd #*7 


T8T: d 4 :l d I d] ( 




qTrT)®# MTdT ST 
SJIJIdddlPdcdlcMdl - 


)#T TT*d deleft T 3d d dfd - ^(£rd I d)M H l u l Pd Pd 



T- 


^ Vf 2pTd Id Pd TT I (fr 3 d I Pd dd dl d I Pd d 



P,f.4 r ) 


##fTTT d k»d I dldIPdT d£llPdPd<HlPd PPT: I fw 5 


f% 


Rft ;ih#t ^rr(wr)41 diP h d i fr dldd Hid$t[dii<ridi 



TT T(dl«-d d I Rid I Id d Pdiddl dT ^ 




Idcd^ldPtni d>dlcycddldPj|£l[dd 



Td^TT ; d' dH J-d fd Pd -Sd I 


STd 


M.dHdlfd] H^sft Sdt-dR)nd d<T>°dRild II 

^PT 1 &■di Pd f d # f^f5JFcT: II 

^ddlddld I 


wf^fr HdT G?fr Pi P^n 41 PpfRr sw 

oq PTp P i TfT T T; ; ,:i t:>;~ H M H M I 4 Rl Pd -d'TT I II 5 


MlddiPiHd(dt<^ni <d| ^|d iRcti 



P„f. 13 


V 



TFTdTT^: 



did# fRr I df#: ddPd-M fTTT W T d#": PP#- 


15. TOT^R ] N 2 M y PfV 4 GiK 1 AE D ; dPTW^T^N 3 D-G 2 ; om^R^ —STPpT— V, ; R- 

n^T=r V 2 Ev ; t’ST: M ; HWTJtTT^R' Try 15a. SRcdl ] E ; H^P-lrql MiM 2 • 5T- 

ndfSjjT] M y R^VGAETly; ^J^dsifT N 2 M; (j^sfl N 3 ; ‘’J^D 2 ; 5PJ^ Ki(unmetrical) 


15b. fdfWr] NM v R N V 2 V 4 GK,A 2 ME7Vy; pTWTt PfA, . fdfifr ] E; Pnjnr: D 

• °STJ: ] E; f^Pf: V 2 15 c. HI ifl <U I-rl WT ] N 3 D 2 M V R A F 
K i : iTHTt S^TTWt Mi(unmetrical); :<Fdt E I5d. ] E; dl J *l n 4 yui I rn <n : N 3 D 2 



15 (a T -d 3 ) V,; (c'-d 1 ) N 2 ; (c’-c 3 , c 7 -d 3 , d 5 -d 8 ) K,; (c 2 -^) A 2 ; [c'-d 8 | V 4 


14.18-19 f^Ki^ P-i Frli' ■ • ■ 4i| j-m pH Th‘£RT: Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 110. 


14.11 RcRTT 

R n PiP2 ; °R 


/V 


14.12 



« ] r v p 3 ; frrrfr Pi 14.12 o 



P,P 3 ; HH4dT R 

T: P 3 14.12 ^MHddTfT 0 ] conj. Sanderson ; dlfd » R 14.13 1 M- 
^jf|cfr ] R~ P dl^dT P, ; 4T— P 2 ; 4d^^d> P 3 14.13 arPTR” ] P 3 J «ITRR^R~Pi 

14.13 o ^mu i rnTd ] r n ; 'srrRTwfprfd-p t 14.14 for ^uiftr 0 ] R ,v ; » P 2 ; 4 diPi« 

P : , 14.15 ] Pi; ^•il I Rid <«) Td R v ; U >SJ I P<; Tm d 4 dl Tri P 3 14.17 5T ] 

R ,v P t ; om. P 3 14.17 few 3T ] P 3 ; ftRPTT R v 

P 3 14.18 opjl^IfNr ] R jV Pi ; °f^iw P 3 ; 

T P 3 (unmetrical) 14.21 R-^^T 0 ] R N P 2 ; ^^— ^1 

o^rP^ R N 15.1 Phc4 0 ] P 1 P 3 ; R v 15.2 

] P ; vrft^T R N 15.2 ] R N Pi ; Rt^ P 3 



14.18 R JV PiP 2 ; °^- 

p 2 14.19 ff5T] R N Pi ; 
P 3 14,21 °frT^ ] P 2 P 3 ; 
: 1 P ; °RTR1' : R N 15 - 2 




12 


15 


18 


21 





































































































































































































































?V9 


3 


6 


9 


15 


18 


H£l^ddd&^lcM«t> (3^RT frItT T HddlTd 



d <F<hpu| 



id^dlddil^Sif^dlJ-ld^: 




Id P^d 3rd d>d I d ddl d I ^TTf^FTTITf^r FI «h[dI d dd I d I d I d d u l (: 


W1 

C\ 



5 


^TpFnd ^ fd FTTWTfc 





I fdJ|u| 

FTMl I Pd ^ <i -HI rH'ipicdf-MMJj^: 



d N d1 d I w< 141 d 'j| d Id ^ I i ! £ >+» d fdPdd] ( P 2 f. W ) I Ph a) HI Pdd-H- 




y iJifr^d'h4*fHl 


i2 illM’tidl 



SCdCl 




cHpil dldlrHldcFIcdirdrPi^! (f^dd : d»fddI:) I 

^iPd^dfi^NKI FSTFP^T Pd cd IH d I «N I RifaTFd I Pd FI i>| d <K| ^5fTfi||-M - 

' TT 

df^lr^trl’T dT Pd^PdPFI^Hd l Hj^ddhlM I *rpT) 


d"PfH d Rl <rd H A [d I <?H H : y Pd M I dJ c) Rh ^ ^HIHHHdlJlld *T 


%TT dil Sd~ dlPftd : dPcd^d ^]rddI^ddfd<&cd IXI[<-d ^rif: H^Hdld 


cPdT JJ I^<tiI rd *-d Td (M <I dH y dilifl did )^T^Hd Rh^ : Fd4HH]*|'dId 4 $d 


cT^l ld•*l-H in I ft^'HI [<=h14-H 




dl^H^IdKIIdd 


fanner fto 


d I ^d Hi I FdT(cR"pT f%)^Tfd 4 (k^U 


15.4 °ftTPt 1 |>'J| ] R; ofirn^rrnrr R ATac 
of: ] R N ; ^ rTW— Pi ; ^ rW: P 3 

2PFT fHTjT/ir^wji ] R 


/V 


15.5 frf^r] r n Pi p 3; fr^frer p 2 15.5 
15.7-8 0 5rfrTaf Q ] R^PfPs; ^TeM ° P? c 15.8 
• '•' \ U $: P 15.9 s4 MIHH d 1 Q ° ] conj. Sanderson ; W~ 
° Pi; d) i\ H H 0 P 3 ; 0 R N 15.10 0 fewq?l P; 

-j > J 

16 : R N FVom here R N omits all that follows until the cited verse (15.32-3) starting 

15.10 SPf: ] conj.; SPJr^T P 15.10 STmfilcr 0 ] em.; ymiMd o P j P 3 ; 
STFT--- P 2 15.10 ] em. ; ^W° PjP 3 15.11 ^[HlpUdHI^II ° ] PiP 3 ; o^ihIhhH - 


P i P 2 ; *<^MH 
15.13 



P 2 15.11-12 dill’M^d lHi 0 ] Pi ; I f< ° P 3 15.12 WntPcf 

P 3 15.12 °$lc4ld ] PiP 2 ; 0 ?TTW P 3 15.13 ^n^T° ] P 3 ; Pi 

fr ] Pi ; dlfr P 3 15.14 °^r£TPP ] Pi P 2 ; 0 7T?rqTq‘ P 3 15.14 vq l^j m (h rM IH d I - 
^rr° ] en j. Sanderson ; FqrjPT^Ri ft rd IHd I I ° PiP 2 ; ^ I l J| <i| Th rM I Ri^41PjI H ij rj n ^ f w- 
^T° P 3 15.14 HTn^THT ] Pi ; ; FT 7 PP° P 3 15.15 OT PSi !-hj 4 U 1 ] em. Sanderson ; OT T£i i 
PiP 3 15.15 0 M^TR” ° ] Pi; 0 ed ^ h ° P 3 15.16 y fdH d ] crn. Sanderson; y Tel H d 
PiP 3 15.17 SIT Hi r^d: ] Pi; MdlilHHl^d: P 3 15.18 °f^: ] P 3 ; Pi 

15.18-19 °fR d^T° ] P 2 P 3 ; °^~R1T 0 Pi 15.19 df^^lHKlTdd ] P 3 ; dP hM^< hH 141 Idd 

Pi 























































































































































































































































?r ij^ i cj t| 14 *i] i t w P-q 7 ^ i v IV > 7 a i h TrPd "T^rTj’i i H q i d arfanr- 


cd" H 1d Pw sr^nr (d H | '^r)frn^(rq i R;]«Tl ^5&rq i Rc^fr 5fyr}cr}JT- 


hitFh AX^ < yffteiiy+1^1 i crat cwwi 


fw a^rdHHT MMd4d Hd'fMH^dHI^^ ( P 2 f. 15 r ) W^- 


cTT 


dilHI (| < Id *-dcd d^l^'hdifT (yqil^MiPqcq^+i'^q ddI <-h PiMd": I 

ir^-) (pj.^) ddl ^areTH iT^rai’Jic^di-jHqivi ^J^wr: 

••’if f: | y (d 'd'^T y4d<'d-HI-j ) Hdfif^il J V'-MHI |U| i q kIi )ffr 

y^Rld R m d Pti Pd 4 % wftanfr- 


(5Trf%?%T PicqHd 



i lfl +.I P<<+»IHI f*nf*r: I 



3TRT: dTTwfd^TPT r :1 y I u l Hp £ ddl < u l -H 

bu -b 


WHHIfdd Id^ T Pdd I ^44ddld II sfd I 


cTdTHT l%f%W(rd^WFT5njrdTT Mi-*qq^*iqRi^q I ^ Fr)J£- 


<J|cdHPd' ^Pd^^d :idi41di e MqiPqrT>c4di^dqd'l ddidp' q u i$ 4 cMd 
dP£*«£d4dd1^ddR T I d44d ff ^TTW ^J|H^Hd.Jyi^rddiiyi^(^- 
MH^PHvt^d l rHdxdM^ddP^KpHpcT dP^dHHUPdM^td OttilM<=h"i - 

y rt| JJ 4 U| vnTRTcT 


I od | Pd rd d ^d ■HI 



rTFTd 




21 


24 


27 


30 


33 


36 


15.21 c;Tv!d H fH tfa^d^rfi ad Maianga vidyapada 6:24ab. 

15.23-24 <fafaHrfaH PM 0ft 1M4d^ ad NaresvaraparTksa 1:22, pp. 52-56. 

15.29—30 ?fd" ydf^cf fk^ferft^r M PMlftfa<m4>lfa4>iy ad Paramoksanirasakarika 44-6. 
15.31-2 3TT^T: • ■ VakyapadTya 1:130. Quoted ad Pararno/csan/rasa/carika 44 and 

NaresvaraparTksa 1:19, p.45. 

15.36 fftf dPsldH CT T ptf-Uq 1 d 0« md.ISi ad 1:22, pp.52-6. 

15.21 ’‘ Pddir-Mcdrfg 0 ] era. Sanderson ; “fV(fd PJ C ) d, rd cd I tffV—- P 2 ; °fq^Tr^rdd P 3 

15.21 o Mi l ldddfl’jH T ] P, ; ° fa rftr ( -d.'at M <1(HIyd>I Sf ) w^cPT U rfl" P 3 what is bracketed is 
cancelled. 15.23 °fdIR:<Tlq4a.<rb 1 f<Tq ] conj. Sanderson ; “feg:— Pi; — pr^r 
fcrrfd P-2 ; ° Pd 4cd I Pd rd d'l d 3 ^rdlPdTSr— P 3 15.24 °TftWT°]^P 3 ; “Tftar 0 Pi ; 'T— 
p 2 15.25 3T q <HH - f q- ] Pi ; 3PJ^ U *n=£T P 3 15.26 y +1 SMI Pied ® ] conj. Sanderson ; 
y«hlS l fH^ ° P 3 ; ydilSI+fifcd" 0 P 2 15.27 iJcfrffTWTW ] conj. ; M Ifd P 15.28 

jpj j -%° ] P,P 2 ; »H 1 <u|^ p 3 15.29 Picdc^'i ^4d Pi ] P 3 ; Pi^ ^ r- s.dId" P 2 

15.29 P 2 ; oft^ro P 3 15.31 3TT^r: ] em. ; 3TKT P 15.31 »fwPT: ] em. ; 

pH I fm P,P 3 ; Pdd l fl — P 2 15.32 dHIH ] era.; »^P«JdlH P 15.33-4 '>ij'J|MHpH ] 

P; . jfuMPy P.«' 15.34 4,ldlPd ° ] P, ; 4*rrNr° P 2 P 3 15.35 '^Wcf ] PiP 2 ; -JPTrra; 

p 3 15.35 ° Pdydtrr ° ] PiP 2 ; '‘PdMdlUl ° P 3 15.35-36 0 <?yHmPd'S^AdK*MW ° ] conj. 
Sanderson; P 3 ) Td Pd »l il d I cH c^T» P 2 P 3 15.36 »'TfP&lT 0 ] ^ 1 ^ 2 ; 0 TlTOT“ P 3 

15.37 od | pyrdHm ] PjPj; sqrrfdcgpw P 3 15.37 ] PiP 3 ; o: ^ P 2 























































































































































































































!T*nr y<Mum 


9? 



ddiPHd u i1d 



4 

4 



\w: 



3Tdd 


dTdcd fw 4 ^9,-dl cd I cd dl fd^Plcdcl II sfd - I 



«Pd d^dd TTT |rTT: : 


^ld <^ddl^ 


cm^ dl^dd"-' FT(f cTRT dTRT ddPH)^ fc>nf% 


^rf^fT^r: I rT%T H<mPd*4ldRd>'-l^<i^d''drdd d^]pHdfl>m£ 
d Id < HIfi'r^f fdd^i (P 2 f. 16 r ) d M Td d I ed I d ednP^T «m H 5 Pd >d (J^- 

: fcw sfd - 1 cTT 





ifT: I *H'dld<iidl-d 


i dididr 7)^<y I'd^y 

Irw: I HldlMI-cl d-dedd^ 

3 - oi| i wa phtttt fd^rpJid'+.HdM I 3r(d" 

5T?rr df"i r ^rf?r i f^rat *tftpt (R"f. i28 r ) t ^rPrPf i t <r wr^rrr^\ 



I ddHfcJ dbildld : dil4'b*U||Pdfdd Pd«-d'Pi S^fdPddPd rfdW 

drdd.HN(^fd-Hd ltd’ll 


=5d% 



3TV)TT W dTd Td rd dd fi i!l d HI Pd J . I d : II 


15.39-40 P^^WTd'• • -f^RcCRf Tantravarttika 2.1.5. 

15.43 d"A4 Rr-ciH^Hlfb ei4 rTHT RTRT H^ftfcT f^THTfcT Kathopanisat 5:15cd., Svetasvataropa- 
nisat 6:14cd. and Mundakopanisat 2.2.lied. 

,i m # -Jh- •# 

15.49 iTUcft mm^X Kirana 2:6b. 

's ■ 

15.51 ir^ : K/rana l:19ad. 


15.38 PiP 2 ; P 3 15.39 3FP ] The test imony of R N resumes. 

15.39 °fT5TT ] P 2 Pg ; °PTRTT ; —T Pi 15.40 d^-d) i cH -11 ] ern.; ^Prl 

3t 1 rHdl P 3 ; ^r^iIrHdl R x (unmetrical) ; fq*<tfn iph'RT PjJunmetrical) 15.40 

ftpjf^TrqTr It em.; f^rHrMdfd R 15.41 3PJ^cf ] R /V P 2 P 3 ; 3T=pPT ^ Pi 

15.42 ^fd 1 ] R n P 2 ; ^Tdi'-m^ PiP 3 15.44 ] P; 

15.44 o^dvrlfdd ] R n P 2 ; °ci^dfdd P t P 3 15.44-5 dT^° ] R^PiPs ; °T- 
^jl'rlIdd 0 P 3 15.45 °3P^>d 0 ] R^P^a ; P 3 15.46 ] P; °dT^-R1“J 

R N 15.46 cRfT: ] R N ; cT^fP P 15.48 f ] R N P 2 ; P^a 15.48 otrrWTWT^ ] 

R"P 2 P 3 ; oqnrwrwrT Pi 15.48 ] R^ ; PjP 3 ; Pd£i*WbiH- 

RcT P 2 15.49 Hfr^rfr ] R n P 2 ; HTfpp P 1 P 3 15.50 HWtTPr: ] R N PiP 3 ; R^TTTPT: P 2 
15.50 °OTfe° ] P 2 ; 0 <tfR^lfd-° R n PiP 3 15.50 dTW ] R N P 2 ; WZW PjP 3 










































































































































































M g 7 1H v dim ,J I H T 



flH^T 'HHI’Ml"f% 



>1 Hdcd H d 5 T^kTT^T 




MdH I HTPT dHlld 


tow: i Hirrsf^r 

3T(^*^nr d’frdH I OT)r^TcT 


oqT- 





^THT 


^ j-l H+H ■*! rh Td cfcft S W'T: 

H I -M I r^T d d dvR" 7 9|dHd Id$1 Iddid R*1 d • I dSordid Hbl 1 J^ r 

f-d d>H (rf $fd I 






d - : 


d»Hldiy HIJdcd MR[HdcdH^dT I 3TcT W d^iTddd^-dl: 



cT I d>! JUIHWIWT S«TT(^r dWTT I 


'hl4cdl^lddcdd'l: f*T 

Ff irirr ^T)«hrd h i d' Tf>nr(p,f. 3 r )^rd' i ht ^ fti d i tIh ht- 


fT HH-dHI4 T “ I 3Td 



ddH dTdi'd <■ 



d^dHIuiMIHTd FFrT^T d d IH I'd M P* Ph drd Id I d&«rd Pd n^r d-cddi- 


Hld4 Wfw\ cRTT 



pf dHdI«-MH HIT fHJ-d-d^Hdifd dilfddd^ I 3^dd ^ dvdldJd^ddPM 


Pd Ph $Lz\ IH PdvM I d d.--hd 'A P J dHd W d*-d^Md I d ^ IHI (37cfT *T 


(tjTT ^fcT [3] ( p,f.I7 r ) PdMdl4Hn^r%) ( PJ.5 r ) d~ Pi^d : I T T di<*H - 

M r R' v PfV 1 V 2 GK 1 AiMEiyy; •KW N 2 ; "5?W N 3 ; °ijv4w D 2 ; °5J-- 



16a. ° 

STFCT A 2 

16 b. 3 kTT ] 


.ffT^r] M y R w Pf V i V 2 GI< t A M i M 3 E Try ; (WW NTVy" 1 ; FTRTg: 
M y R^PfV, V 2 GKiAET>y; *fiTT N 2 ; ^TTcT N 3 D 2 ; ^t=TR M 


2 


16 a. The testimony of G 3 commences. 

16(a 1 -a 2 ) K i; [a‘-b 8 ] V 4 ; (b 3 -b 4 ) V,; (b 4 -b 5 ) G 3 


16.4-5 TPr 



Kirana 1:20b. 


16.7 v i-r<f 5 T T ^trfrf see K Iran a 4: L 7 
16.10—11 drci'Tic'iist'Sy K/rana 1:19a. 


-22 


16.1 M i I H vh | TT° ] PiP 3 ; TTFT9Tl>rr o R N ; H GHIifivt I 0 P 2 16.2 ^KTTfejWpRT ] R N P 2 ; 

P!P 3 16.2 ] R"P 2 ; ZT— Pi ; P 3 16.2 ^WTTWrTRT ] em. ; 

c(ii | U | r^TrT R N ; 4<j4HHr4ld P 2 P 3 ; —c WTW Pi 16.4 0 HiqifdT ] R PJ ; QJ TKTT P* c ; °5T- 
crrfd* P,; 3 d I ^1 1 Pel P 3 16.4 °rf^TW ] R A P 2 ; 0 ftTfecPPT P { P 3 16.5 ] P; 


o^q^zrfo \in 15,5 ] R v P 2 ; °^rg7T° PiP 3 16.6 P; ^HTfg" 

3T7^ r n 16.6 TFrftrar 0 ] R n p : p 2 ; Trfw° P 3 16.6 ] P,P 2 ; ^Tf^w 

r n . : P 3 16.7 5«TT° ] P ; °^1W Q R N 16.8 ] R‘ v ; 

— <tiM'ef Pi ; P 3 ; P 2 16.8 MTdM101 d ] R N Pi P 2 ; tRtTT P 3 16.8 ftf- 

cj l dd ] R A P, P 3 ; P^ ; ftf#T P 2 flC 16.9-12 3Rf HM^lPel ] 

R A ; om. P (Pi’s eyeskip) 16.9 ^ j em .; TrPeT R A 16.12 d 1 Rqd ] P 1 P 3 ; 

^difc; B N ; W W d Ipf4 < P 2 16.12 Arnold 0 ] R N ; 01 n 1 o d 0 P 2 ; ^^I'Tlrdd 0 P 1 P 3 
16.13 °^ 0 ] R N ; P 16.13 BM^rf ] P ; R N 


3 


6 


12 


















































































































































































































































SPFT 5RTOT 



WtT%WtT: IhPt TSftfcTcdId I FfrT f4f%W ^PTT4 Pdcd I Pdd I 

f cPRT dd'4cd^d1 Sfr pFRT df4'^dl<SI Pd 0 «T: II 

dTJ d I d d Pd < <f?T $dfddMI: 4 <uid : ffFrP Pd ^4 dlTd I cT- 

dY)w^" 



FFPr Tfw^rfr 5HTTT JfJllr-HHI I 

vo 




3T: I i^d^di *Tdfd‘ — 
HHddl)?W d^dldd^ldi 




H Ff dd I d'-! d Pd : Iff?? dldc^*^ : (HMd^l^: I fflfr ffFff 3FT T^) 
^N-mi^pTlR^ | ?r 
qidcdTiidlP-$id dKj acqdd'i*TK'r>K ,J ic4d ^idMd^q^i rj^d 4iP-$- 




i 6 c. Frm^fHcr» ] E; HqY+fdMd 0 V 4 • °3cPifl ] M y V 2 V 4 E v ; < >HTRwff NP|GK,A 

ME U Try ; ^d-Yt R N 16 d. fYsTFZJTfYr 8 ] N 2 M y R iV K s Ey Try ; fYa nftd ° N 3 (unmetri- 
ca!); fY3T -fe" D 2 ; fd<JI<tPlRid 0 PfGiA 2 ME D ; fd■JJI<iflfid ® V 2 V 4 G 3 ; Pdd] I <fl — G 2 ; 
IddJIdJlTdd « A, • °RT: ] M y R N Pf V 2 V 4 Gi AMEIVy; °RW N ; “^dTT K, 17a.] 

R N VGi AE; TjYjf T— N 2 ; TPTTfT 7 S <f> H N 3 D 2 K 1 7>y; TTYw TfW¥T*T M y ; —RtW T r 


diH-l G 2 ; IijWi 7 t Jr(<aivai M,M 2 ; TTTfW 7 Iddy I 
spirr VG 1 G 3 AMiM 2 E; C . 2 ; —j M 3 

Ns ) SWEf NTry • W: ] E ; 5Pf: N 


m 3 17b. sryrrr q-! nm y r 1 '' k iTry; 

“RT^-dTJWTY ] E; ° f| M ( RPdT 


16 (c 2 , d 5 -d 8 ) G 3 ; (c 5 -d 8 ) V,; (d 4 -d 8 ) G 2 
17Testimony of N 2 breaks off after a 4 . 

17 (a'-a 8 , d r -d 8 ) V,; (a 1 -b 1 , c 4 , c 8 , d 1 ) G 3 ; (c 7 -d 2 ) K,; (d^d 8 ) Gj 


16.15 *=*PT ftftrw, rfrr'nj Tirana 3:12a. 

CV *N * 


16.15 <+il4fMr-41 HiH I ! R N P l P 2 ; U f^TT P 3 16.17 tal: ] R N ; JT- 

dTrR^W: P 2 ; P 3 17.2 f%^T° ] R N P 3 ; P 2 17.3 °fcfT 5«ff ] 

R n P 1 P 2 ; ° ft dlr^ P 3 17.3 PRt^T] P; ft i R N 17.4 5TPPT° ] R^PtPs; 9^T 

I > 2 17.4 °^ftrrr H Ft )m i Th ^ ] em. Sanderson ; °'fficifrid l STT 

P] P 2 ; ^TTrftf4Tfi H Hi P 3 ; °%^fH'TTqy rtiH \H ftld U R N 17.5 ?T ? 

=T ] R n PiP 2 ; *T P 3 17.5 ^ zm ] P 2 P 3 ; W R w 17.7 °HoU -Tlldlft^ ] R^ ; 
°Rrftft^r° P 17.7 ddiNkp ] R /v PiP 2 ; P 3 















































































































































































HiilM'h'Jdfd f [dd \'*n Rti' 'JicjH i' 


M 1 Pdd» l ^ 11 -d J * ^ TTd^T^RT I 3JcT ^dlTd wfr) dfd 

d l dd^ T 5P-TR“ d^TT 



dfrifd" pH ^ d di: WT dtHTd 

f^^>Tr1w ifmr fwrr *r ^tw: i fdft^mrrc^TTfr 


f^T T(^T: ^|dy(ddlldd>c^ildd«^H|ui^Pg k <|r'dlc+H t T>tirq i al 3TT^f 


^r(W) d(T ^do’T d Pd Pd cd I Pd P^i d 14 d Pd Pxl d d^ I T ’did fP£ 
<t, i uj di4cd I ddd I : ( P 2 f- 18 r ) I d - di'-d?j'M 'Udd t . ^~(TT *<| ■CKdK 

ui i p; pqvd i *ti *, 4*) < u i cd *i d"8rd d I u i cd i d d I Pi 

3Tdt WT dTW dT PddPdT ^NH<r«ri;: 11w <M>nfvr=r^ 

< Pd d> d^: I 3TW4* 


frriTc twt 


(4t s 4‘ fdTdrid'Tdt) Tmt s6r 


PdMdd ^ff StdlcH*-4d' TftFT(R K f. 128") dio*i«T>cdis)d 
T*T | ^|uj^ <|JdHfcffWf ^Ps,'d4 : I dTd" dldlcddifldl d - 



c4 d I dfdd rK d d <1 )^ ; 


d rfd 



sfr dld - 1 NI«T ddd^RFT | dlfT dvdtdPdT 

Mir^MidJ^d' d" TFfr S^dY d^r: I 



cTcT: 5TdT(T dWT 




d - rFd«T% 


^rsT^TrdTTdTdPdfr d^dWffsTSd *>l d rd tl pBd I Pd dd'W^iirHdi 

^ddldiR^I d~ dH^-1 ^ ^fd~ I drdd4d^ddd (df S TZ ^T q*-drddirn: 




^r^4HW (3PP 3 )^T^TMT° 

P|; ° + 



] conj. Sanderson ; 

TP U ^T^PTPT 0 R N ; 

17.8 ^fPT ] R n PiP 3 ; HTfe' P 2 17.9 ^RTPr^fT 0 ] R^; 
p 17.9 o ^P: ht ] P ; °^T ?ft R N 17.10 ftrrrwrfwf ] R N ; fa<yiwi<HifV 

pj ; f^riwrcrr feftfcfp P 3 ; f%^PTT Wlfwt P 2 17.11 JR’* ] P 2 ; ft T 
p i . Tpff; ; fk" ^TP P 3 17.11 0 f%^5rTTf^° ] conj. Sanderson; 0 <rtrM 1 J R N P 2 P 3 

17,11 °< 3 rq 1 cH'^T 0 ] conj. Sanderson\ 0 ^T^TTrR^rRJ * 0 R 17.12 J T>< ‘ U|, ^3 U1 1 R jV P 2 ; 

_ rr\\u \ p! ; <t>l <u||*tAu| P 3 17.12 h Td Pdrq [fdr*^:^ id"° ] P 3 ; m fqT ti rqI<Tl f *^^Tr ^j"° P 2 ; 

fj fc| pH r4 1 fd(SP5“° R v ; M fq x\\r*A Ii<Tlf^l1r 1 ^° Pi 17.14 ° Rtiq i*n ^ ° ] R N ; °f^PTT° P 2 P 3 
17.14 o 4l< u | ^ ] em .; ^KU I'c % T R N P 2 P 3 ; — P^ 17.14 ] R N ; ^TTWf^T 0 

P 17.15 ^TTT ] R^PiPa; OT P 2 17.16 fawfawT ] conj. Sanderson; fexft^RTT: 

Rjvp^p’ 17.16 TTTfr] R^PiP 2 ; TFT P 3 17.17 f^Twff° ] R jV P 2 P 3 ; Pi 

17.17 conj.; HpPPiS R T R n PiP 3 ; TfTFT^T P 2 17.18 « T^qJ P; 

o < | Ji|^fe ° R N 17.19 TTpT d^rdlrH^r: ] R ,v ; d^cqirH^ P 17.19 srfHnqyfl^T 0 1 

R^PiPa; 3fpi|H mujl ij ® P 2 17.20 d 'l d < 1 j iTtP ] R N Pi P 2 

] P 2 P 3 ; d^^ldld R N Pi 17.21 TFTT S^ft ] P: TPTT^ft R N 



P 


17.20 




j <U|^U1 R N p 2 

•hlHlHidl'fT PiP 3 ; 


17.22 WPT] R n P 2 ; 3WT— Pi ; ST^PPPP P 3 17.22 WJ 4 u, ^i^' i ^ 

17.23 : T?TodT 0 ] R V P 2 ; ^pH^l°di 0 P 1 P 3 17.23 <t> 1 rt 1 <Tl-*4ft" R J ^ ^ 

^Hldl-dft P 2 17.23 ] P; OT ^T° R N 17.23 °^PBdiPd ] R A P 2 ; 

Pl . o H p^ p 3 17.24 ^ ] P; R^jrT R n 17.24 ?f?T ] R ,v ; W ^ P 

17.24 1 P 2 P 3 ; R N 




























































































































































































































SPPT SPfTTWiT 

X, 



3 Nil 141 Ph srrPr *tt wi 




s 


uiiP h ^ zrrPr ^ <+>H : Hi^ ^niuiinH t 


H' ! H *-HnTrH «h 

C\ 



r dTcPTM^IIfl WcT 





yP«. 4 K '§ -ii 1 4'•;^hi'jis-Kii^i 

%tf^nc*rr t^t i zm tt^- 

^TRT 37T) ( P,f. 5 1 ’) -4^1^11 S5rffr4c^T% ( P 2 f. 19 r ) T dcSfa- 

■^ftt ^rwwr^r%i% =r ^ «i h Pf^^nrwPfRT^ ^r 1 3TcT 

Pi <M <SI I cH'^ff sfr ^FT ^TT^gJ^r ^ ^MH «v!M-M4 » 

FTcfr fa q fa *i $H IcWrf*N& 

)cTcT: <b 14 < <J| fl H *-q I < H-d i PhTp9T W. *T^T: fl M fd dl 

y|J|P44 ^nt^TFT fw^TFT ^w: 






srfa 




=r 



dTM 



5TRT- 




<t i «ttPt d • -d 1 *-d : 

dTHTd I Rr^dvcr I 3T7f: 

>f)Pl rl oij H I *fT fwddT: W Pd *fr*J rWl SdfP d^T: I 3RT TT- 

dTW HNI<M4c4d dUrMHI u l *-M I Ph 4il4<M'J|flH'-41d <<blH sqTTTT 

?pT T¥KT fd^ST: I cPTT ^TrT{^ 14) c*| dW: I 

3 T^r w.rj sir fw^rr Ph ^ mj d ^jwr i 


18a. 0 ] S ; ° 



o N 


18b.] R^Ki ; ^TrRS’?t4)fH41«Jcl N 3 ; HlfaScI fald^M-Url 


D 2 M y VGAMEo lYy, wfJil sfr E 


v 


18 (a^b 8 ) V i; (a 1 -a 7 ) G 2 ; (b'-b 8 ) G 3 


17.25 



] R n p 3 ; 



0 PiP 2 17.25 ° ] R Ar PiP 2 ; P 3 17.26 

*rrfr ^ ] R N ; ^nifa" T^fn=P^tfa^r° PiP 3 ; *nfar qyj^fa^^i ° P 2 

17.27 Q rH<*i ^9P° ] R ,% P 2 ; °rH < t>—- Pi ; °nn ai 0 P 3 17.27 4 '•' * ^ y rfnfTRFMTrf ] R A ; 

P 2 ; <m P 3 17.28 0 =T ] P ; U >T R N 

17.31 FPOTTTfaT 0 ] PiP 3 ; ^TOTTfaf 0 R iV ; ^OTTTTfar 0 P 2 17.32 R^P 3 ; ^T: 

P 2 17,32 f-d ^4 *T ] R jN P 3 ; f-d ^Mdl P 2 18.2 UWftPrT ] R N ; MIMId Pi P 2 ; Uf'tv 1 far^d 


18.2 fa^l^H ] R^PjP^Pa 


T Aiwjd P£ 


°^prr° P£ 


18.3 °^rrT° ] R n P!P 3 ; PJ C ; 

18.3 q^trqWRf ] R N P 2 P 3 ; ^TPfPTTcT P x 18.4 dr4l-ti<^: ] R^Pg ; 
a^TRfrtf P 2 18.4 *=cT^tT] R n PiP5 c P 3 ; P^ 18.5 0 ] R n P 2 ; 

Pj ; 0 fapjtrd - err<> p 3 is.7 o: R>^frTrr o ] r n p 2 p 3 ; r° Pi 18.7 °^rr- 


oqrnT ] R /v PiP 2 ; °^MPETTIT P 3 18.9 fd^i Pd^^d ] R iV PiP 3 ; faPTrqT: fapq^f 















































































































































































































1 


♦ 

* 



H £ 1 ^n=ldr^i f^TTWfrft 




: II 9q 




^TcdWRTTard’ wMt j%rfOTTfr q- f fPn P?T- 





# 

4 








dR" rio^iRi *T ^TR - -*. J l\ Rm fpT 








fa*TII ^ 


W T 4Pl|Xd d I y Rh <&cd K d 






(p 2 f. 20 


cTPT 



?TTr f : 



d^|i||d,| 4 r^H WHIUMId ^JdRp^-T^d H Id T ^RRPrf T- 
*T?r H d <Jd I d (FRTfiRrRr n^T^T4')fiTf?f II 


3t4tT 'hHIdlni drd ^yrdH’^IM'brci Wrf 



dWdd 


lSc.^TTHT] M r R N VCJ i ME ; «hMlfH NG 2 KiA 2 7>y; 

G i G 2 Ki A i ME Try ; oF i'WH N; *RWfr V 4 ; °^WT A 2 


M^dd-j^-d : N; °^>T^ ^Tf^ftffcf: R N M 3 ; 0 ^TP-ll^dH^*t»: 
diddled : A 2 ; & 4Pd ^cfFdRl$4i: 7ry; dpf dPJR^cT: 7ry w 


. o^WH o ] M v R iV PfV 1 V 2 
18 d. ] M y V G A i M! M 2 E ; 
K [ (unmetrical); ° <m <*q 1 <i h i - 


18(c ] -c 2 ) Vi; (c^d 1 , d 4 ) G 3 ; (C-c 5 ) A i; (c 4 ) G i; (c 7 -d 6 , d 8 ) G 2 


18.13-14 fVt'JT dd" • * TdHI Ofn fdvR Source unknown. Also quoted with dd-dl for fn d i Ih ad 
Matariga vidyapada 12:20-1, p.346, 

18.17 ^=r>lrd Ha <flii ^m <4 rVi: cf. Padarthadharmasarigraha p. 63, lines 15-16. 

18,19—20 TdcM*}*?) • • *<?»i<dfa<Tl Id5 : V akyapadfya 3.9.1. Also quoted ad Matariga vidyapada 

12:3-4, p, 337. 

18.21 J-||qi<+il4c4H d^dTOR^Id Kirana 4:22. 

«\ * 

18.22 rRTt^T HcT^PJtTY Chapter 12 of the vidyapada. 


18.10 W] R v P 5 P 3 ; RRf^rT P? c ; P 2 18.10 frp: ] P; Iwr R N 

18.11 0 4l'4Hlfe Tlfr ] R lV ; 0 4Vdd I <\ d'IRfd P 18.11 HWRTT: ] R"P 2 ; RWPTT P^ 

18.11 ‘dPT RtffciT ] R N ; — 4ir$dt Pi ; MPT fdHlf^dl P 2 ; dPT fddlf^d P 3 18.14 fowj ] 
P: fomr R N 18.14 fer] R /V P 1 P 2 ; ^ P 3 18.15 dlJl^drddl 0 ] R N ; MPlt— Pi 5 



iTPT^prr 0 p 2 p 3 

Rfd^l sfV ] P ; 
cf] R N 
18.19 



dld^^Jrddl 0 J R iV ; HP 

18.15 em.; °fR ;l -- d-T ^ H' V P 2 P 3 18.15-10 tpfwr- 

r^^f^nrf^PTT U R N 18.18 PJ cPRT] P; drlfd R N 18.18 ?Pff^T- 
F 5 1H3 ; ^vr^qd P 2 18.19 fpf ] R v P1P 2 ; fd^ r p P 3 (unmetrical) 
R n P 2 ; t>dlddlR P 3 18.21-22 ] R A PiP 3 ; P 2 18.22 IT- 


dTPM 14 fd fd ] R n P 2 ; — ftrfd' Pj ; PTPT U ftrfp P 


12 


15 


18 


21 




































































































































































































5r*pt ’Th 3 «!H 



3 


6 


9 


12 


d rd <*> <d l d <&: ftft^rT d?|ddd : 
Tq-PTmiJIMp^^fd-R^r: ft^H<Jd': II \\ II 
d rd I Pi ^ d I Pi 'hd I P fSrl cd »d I Pi HI J J rM Pi didTl ^ rfT 

Tfrd dI u| cd I gj ?b<P) d cd °d IH di c^PT I *T<pF d i **): 



5jd d dl~Hcd4-Ho^TtV dPbddd'bdlPild 



•d 


dlddd M J d «-d PdH'^'dd'^f'^ II I 

Vs 

dT^TT^WTWTtTJr H^cT ITT(I y Id d I ^ dKU: STW)d I^|HI 0 <1 







SFcTTPr ( R~f. 129 r ) d 



Pif^r m-uHifWd 



dW-dPl(^RpfT: ft.Pd vr$f| dd"Pf W <J) ddd'£ ffd 


ddiH^-d ddl-cl^Pni^ 




d I d I d I: fTR^fr wra 




dldldNn odTFd 



odirr: pr 



'd I cd I Pi d I (d^Tt dT d'^,M ~ Tp r )(P,f.6 r )' 

Sd I cd *-d Rdlfd d Hdd'r *RpT I d* «t>I d d> < u) «fr <=d Pi R tbd l ed I H W- 


^Trr fPr i (p 3 f. 3") 

sftl7 T ^IdrfdldJ-^ 



d R I did! 



T(p a f.2i r )8*n*r: 


19 a. cTc3T 0 ] E; cfr3" N 3 • °3"^": ] NM Y R A VGiG 2 AEv Try; °ddd G 3 (un- 

metrical); 19 b. 0 ] NM^ R 1 ^ "VGi G 2 Ki A1V1P\/ Fry', ^ ^ 0 G 3 Ed 

• °H^cr: ] E; °WU^: V 2 V 4 19 c. RW°] E ; RETT V 4 • ] N 3 M y R N VGi 

KiAMETVy; °RT^T D 2 ; 0 W P 2 19 d. H^TTfrf: ] NM V C R N VG AETVy; Rf^ftjrf: 
M Vac K 2 ; di^'jci : Ki(unmetrical); fT^TT^cf: M 


19 (b 2 -d 6 ) V i; (b 7 -b 8 ) K,; (c 6 -c 8 ) G 3 ; (d 2 -d 8 ) G 2 


19.1 dPRT^PP Kirana 4:22-3. 


19.3-4 




San kh vaka rika ! 0. 


19.7 31 J i IdP h^s) ft^-4d I Tm dI Slokavarttika Atmavada 62ab 

19.13 WZrM ih : Kiranavrtti ad 2:15. 


19.1 rfT CRT ] R N P 2 i dT: PjP 3 19.3 JUjHdfHcM 0 ] R N PiP 3 ; ^RfafacR* P 2 19.5 nRT- 

srm-° ] p 3 ; p^r— Pi; itr smr° r n p 2 19.6 ^prr ] r n p 2 ; PiP 3 19.7 3TRTttw° ] 

R N ; 3FdTPTPT° P 19.7 R ^ d 1 ^ H fd ] ern. ; <=t 1 Hd R fd R^P 2 ; fVjEn ft d f?T P,P 3 

19.10 RPTRTT: 1 K N Pi P 3 ; MNP41 P 2 19.10 P; ifHTrf R N 19.10 RPTFRlRT ] 


R, iV PiP 3 ; H \ HM \ vrnfr P 2 19.10-11 0 dTcH"^rT Q • • ] om. P 3 (eyesicip) 19.11 °rRT- 

faH l dW l ] R N ; ^rRTfxTTT-- Pi ; °cRTJ¥fr P 2 19,12 °dlrH^|| ° ] R^P, ; ofddlrM-yi' 0 

19,12 -13 °pRTR TOf ] R n PjP 3 ; 0 rHMHMI-4d P 2 19.13 rf- 


P2 


31 d I rRvqj 0 1 


> c 

n 


-H14 I ^TT 0 
Pi 


P, ; d^HW° R N ; RRPTT P 2 ; d-H^INI P 3 19.14 *ftW° ] R N P 2 P 3 ; om. 
















































































































































































































*3T)i\ * ft : I 

JTPTr^wY J . (y cr: ii i 


15 


JT^rrar 


^TT 






: 





{'H H~ H rl *1 I <J rT ^Frf II 


18 


3T*T) 3t4^T: I 


crt: ^nf^fr 1 

W W ^T HT^<£: ^4^T^Tr^p^l rQ^T fc*3 
pH<4g tT 5fT d cd <-+K $1^ d^y^^H.U-.'-lia 

<hh tt ntn* W ^ ^ wrw7 









TRTT 


q- mynKPt-h sfd f*d : II 



r Tpqrf ^fac^ldFT dHiRr: 

^Tf^r HW 



: II II 



rrwr 

so 





r i 


Tp^m: F f^T 



: II ^ 


20a.fc*r] NM^R~ViV 4 G 2 K 1 AME^y; ^ PfG,G^ »b^] 

M4 ,4fj - m 20d. oRSnrTR: ] E; ‘“JTRFRR- N 3 21 d ~ m g > " , 

D 2 oc.^ D 2 c 21b. ITW1 D 2 M y R N V G AMETby; H^T Nj ; - iki»I K. * ] 

M r,»- -V M. ; Tr,- 21 d. ] NM y P-V.y.GA.Epyi.W^r- 

Wiraidrfefiir: M.; fWngmlW^: M,; M.; W=5T *5"** 


20(a'-a 3 , d 2 -d 8 ) G 2 ; (a 1 -a 


2 d 6 -d 8 ) G 3 ; (a 7 -a 8 ) V 2 ; (b 3 -c', c 8 -d') Gr, (b 8 b 4 ) A 2 ; (c 5 d 8 ) 

* 


V, 


21 (a 1 -^) ViGa; (a‘-a 2 , d 6 -d*) G 


6 


^"...TTW: SvayamDinivasmriUHUiziM** *•*■-*• 

19.15 mRT^fr] R-Ps; RPmPRRT’ P2 19-16 ^R" 

1 ?P Pa 19.18 RI^R ] R~P 2 ; ^W^P3; 3RT; 

19.17 STR^T ]R pi p 3 20.x d^^KRRrt] P; »R^TRR1T 

on i uiilrU-o i rn . M nnM cr° p 20.1 »RfRR° ] R N ; P 20.2 *y:wr- 

RN 20.1 5nrrfT3R» 1 R D 5fTTT ^7^_ firl p. „ R.v 20.2 ] R' v PiP 2 i 

p 3 ’ 20.3 1 R^PtPa; -fN^r p 2 20.4 OT ] p; ^R R 














































































































































































* 


5PW 




3 


6 


9 


12 


fid I i\ T T^r^rRT I 

I d^ld d P*1 7l ^10 dl Rl «Mdil ^TrT: I 3TT(rl 4) rl | <0 d I 

T?T)Tr {T)U|fo$hlPrdT^c^d I 

W PsP^Pt rP^T^TT: 'fT^td TOTTW^pT I 

r'ffTPd fl d «hl Pd d «f 7- (ffF$)fTT ifrPf W: II ftp I 

dHtl-d< TfW(l"JT^PT ^T5T: cTWRT ^TrTTPTTWRr ^fP- 


5": ^1 PrhMIdl W cdfdl^ddf*T^lPfddHI^ ddiHlRjId PT:^r^WT- 

C\ 


4: i ph f ^ n f • - r -:'-- ^rfpTFTppw i ^(a^rPr 

f. 22 r )fbf f%Pf HTpT:FJ^: I ffPr I 



fjCdT r\ 

sfr 

aft^P d P-H P-d d I d I ddlcH < fr:%W ltd'll irPr I 


cPr fottzc d d Td a Pd Pd d d Td siTd Pdd t *pf i drr^: 

=r C^rrW^rpTJT TT(3 *iT>W f>^Pd I 


d“:) *PT: did did*: W PPTlI ?fPr I 


22 ab. : RH'lfT =T 'JR'RT^T | NM y SE ; °wf =T 'pr^dR’l|rf fi MI 0 =T r M: U R N (un 
metrical); fifllO T JT: fPTT 7>y; T Trv vl 


22 (a 6 -b 8 ) V i; (a 7 -b 8 ) G 3 

22.3—4 *T?T fV>l~yPP m • ■ •^TvPf: Source unknown. 

22.8 'Jicd 1 Cl 4" f^FTcf H3“fH~:FJ{r: Kir an a. 2:29cd. • 

22.10 aP ki r~tr«iifir wicht f=n%w srf^r S vayam bh u vasutrasahgraha 1:17cd. 

22.12-13 T <«i • • -<i^d Source unknown, but frequently cited, e.g., by Aghorasiva 

ad Ratnatrayapanksa 313-4 and in Sarvajnanottaravrtti , IFF P. 985, p. 3; by Narayanakantha 

ad Mrgendravidyapada 5:5, p. 136, and in the anubandba to vol. 1 of the Matanga on p.579 

* 

and in the SataratnoJJekhanr p. 82. 


22.1 H fa hY ° 1 R n P!P 

22.2 i ] R N ; 


3 ; P 2 22.1 ] P 2 P 3 ; W— Pi; 4) H1 < 1H i R N 

^r«ilRT P 2 P 3 ; —TTPi 22.2 °f^Wl ° ] R n PiP 3 ; ° U S\ ^ P 2 22.3 d"- 
] PiP 3 ; rf M4lcHH^ R n P 2 22.3 9THTT° ] R; STOPF 0 P? c 22.4 :° ] 

Pi P 3 ; ^RTf: R N P 2 22.4 Q «=hlfHR' aftT° ] cm.; ^iThR afTT° PiP 3 ; ^iThHIMP ° R N ; 
Qt tiIfo 6 HHH < ° 1*2 (both unmetrical) 22.4 sfr ] P; om. R A 22.6 Rnniril ] conj .; ^T- 
ffipTTR fT R N ; TTT^PaT^rmfrfr P x ; MK^^^xf^rHM'rat P 2 ; TT^ ^ P 3 22.6 

] R N ; P 22.6 dcnsra -0 ] P 1 P 3 ; 0 R N ; 0 P 2 

22.8 °Tnf ] P 3 ; °fTtrxfcdTx P 2 ; R N ; Pi 22.8 IVidr} ] R N P!P 2 ; 

P 3 22.8 : ] R N ; 0 fduj|' Pi ; °PfPJf P 3 ; : P 2 22.9 ] P t P 2 ; 

o^: 4 - R v 22.10 df^HN^I'RT ] PiP 2 ; df^rfiPTTFTT R^Ps 22.10 fT:%W ] R N Pi ; 

Pf%fRR P 2 P 3 22.11 ^Rfdfrfafw ] R N Pj ; fdfRW P 2 ; ^dPRdWxHP^Pd - 

fRW P 3 22.11 ^ ] P ; ?Tc^t R N 22.12 R f^T° ] P X P 3 ; T R N P 2 


/ 












































































































































































I<pqdIdI fV>< u i<jn1 


rjP m-i ^t frait wfar ijwr i.un^idiPd'MUK ^ta^RT 


m 


rPdTH d di 4 e d cd" Pd d N14 ■HT iflRuHidifa (^<n<y I T cdd 


fd - )* <d 
pHdfiT 5 





d ill p-l ^d1R 


wr oi| Koij i| H" I dill 


^d l d*-d ~ HiM^cdlMIdl TT I 3RT Udldt f^T^^TTT- 

> ,f. 22 ’’)t?tt ifrardf: *t =1 «-q i -tk i ti ■Hi ulhd^dfa^Hifafar 


Ifa - <T*d * edllPiqH'deldl ddl ddfa d<n fal d d cd d - 
$T: dddid t W Pdi Pd 'J'd '"d 4 d^ Pd^dfdd'fddlT M d Pd i d~dT >-d d dl 1 - 

srdT m Pd d 5 d ft ddPd cTdi 


fr(diw€Panrr 4iPnni t ppn d]e1<T> ddi 

%(RNf. 129" )d cd oil Phd ^ ’J IT dd Pi d" Midi i ®d d> 14 dndd I J 11 m i I did" PT- 

d'jli-dd I iF^raiddd i 'fK u i i fa (far dUrd ldi 4 4 d d r* 


Wr^W l ldidcd*-d)(P 



Rfdng] didilPfT 


u H-IPd4V4ddmc T: Pd^R | Tjj 41^44^ i^MiMi iiPc^dl 


Pd ' R t a rt: (d](p,f.-23 r ) Pddid4idd—di4': $oqcd 15 ^dd 



oi| | M | 


MdH I dP dd~ RT>f fddPd4drdIRr^: t 3TTT d[ 

TWF'dnpw p d> i 4r diy k° 444Rr ^ufadiO mi^m^imHi 

jq-(cqdj-?i Ph '/per: fw&: I 

3pir prfrr yaiddi")dMHidHd^iT: 1 


22.19 ^frT ad Kira/ia 5:12cd and elsewhere in the commentary on the fifth patala. 

22.24-5 ^3* rTfe 'di J 1 < 1 : Kir an a 6:20d. 

22.27 fd d H 4l J I fl ' Paramoksanirasakarika 55c. 


22.14 frfir ] R^PiPs; P 3 22.14 ijw fRind" ] R j!™ T 

H ^ f [ ^-o Pl p 3; J^U| | HH^ 4 U|% ° P 2 22.14 °HI 1 U|I^rrut 0 ] R N ; =T P 

22.14-15 fnst& TFTOT] P; ■CtfSTcT: I ^TT^PIT K N 22.15 ¥lRt.HMllH ° ] R~ ; 5rf^Pr- 
WTpr» P 1 P 3 ; y i r^ld l fHf R 0 P 2 22.16 0 MP<MI<tiI tTI si 0 ] P,P 3 ; “'TfdTT^PTt^» R* P 2 
22.16 oirr^PT ] P 1 P 3 ; °4jic4 °>A i <!*l d H R ,,v P 2 22.17 3RT ] R^Pi; RR” 

p,p : , 22 . 17-18 ] P; ft-^d-adr gTiadr R- v 22.18 Rt ar° 1 T } ’- P2 ; 

qrftar— P| ; 4 H I -M l tt P ° P :1 22.18 y 11 d < Id il ^'lf^'fR' ] em .; yT^fg^rTf^dr P 3 ; TrarTTfddtTT- 

pw . _ <; Td i i y 1 R id' Pi; 5 T—SK fail sirdar P 2 22.20 “darorr ] R' v PiP 2 ; "dau^i P 3 

22.22 fifl l d ' R^T] R^Pa ; —w Pi; —P6TTV IKT P 2 22.22 ilk* ] P; PJ”; 

qrfarT° R' v 22.23 T STHT 0 ] R' v PiP 2 ; H 16 I 0 P 3 22.24 ] R ,v PiP 3 ; 

14 22.24 faildcP RT] R N ; fara^-» P 22.25 faNHfq- ] R~ P 2 ; f5T^r« P 3 

22.25 fat] R"; fdt: Pi P 3 ; -RP 2 22.26 fiRSR] P; faPSR R iV 22.26 gm^ffrr° ] 

R' v PiPi ; P 2 22.26 °Tlf?R?rqT ] R v PiP 3 ; °tir*i<T>Mi P 2 22.27 faRlaP ] 

P ,. ffadrar— P-. ; ff dtar: R ;V P, 22.27 -u-m#: ] R~p 2 ; P 3 22 . 28 ^' ^ 

R w PiPP 2 22.29 ] R^P.Ps ; i our ^ 



15 


18 


21 


24 


27 


30 






















































































































































































































































































u 


G 


9 






AD 


zr?r 



W: II P II 


%W: H^kT: ST^^TcTW: TW: 

VO ^ o 



srf?T7 ^r%- <fr*r H'^-Td ^1 pH Id T d^ftTIT^T <tTH I Rid I WT Id i»H d : 







: *T: 

C\ 

J^dci I CRTS' *fT ^T fWRT^^Tfr ^TTHT^RTt 


dT TT RrTTfWffr^rRrt i>lRtiMI(P 2 f.23'’)MRKWlT H^M d ^pT 


iT^T I sprppR TT w: <61^1 W (d^l wjc|fj^M,: | #^TT:) + HI (d - 







d-.H i ^srtp-tT sfr srfTmfefT sl^c%^frwfcr: 13j- 


ftfw<cd I r«m I cij I *>)fgjwr S^'bcdHlHfi^d 


rfrr ip 5 ;' ' ••■" 7 J? '1 •'d.'JIN'HMlTlTH^d : d'H-. I M I: Slddfl <dKI - 

fw fV^ H I H dlfd I: I 






22 c. diHlfSd^: £TT] K 2 Pf V 4 G 1 K 1 A 2 E v TVy; ^TTfV N 3 )^N; ( f - 

*T: M 3 )H^T R n AiM; diHlcyd£PH V 2 ; ^THIH G 2 (unrnctrical) ; : R E D 

23b. W: ] 1 ) 2 M v R N P 3 Vi V 4 G i G 3 A 2 ETty ; ^PTW: N 3 ; fVf^T: V 2 ; f^rdPT: G 2 ; 5*T- 
3PT Ai ; fTM: Mi ; ^p*PT M 2 ; >MdW M 3 • <JW: PJcf: ] NM y R N ETty; JWPf- 


^Fi M 2 ; ->L|^W M 3 < 

cf: PfViWGA; JPTFcRT. V 4 ; TPr FJrT: Mi; JWTPJrf: M 2 ; ^M.ddd M 3 ( unrnctrical) 
• after 23b is added *ifrMrdrfh dnf^T: m i u 4T f d dPTf^S^TcT in all manuscripts except NM V 
K 2 G 2 Ki. (Try places it after 23d.) Variants: fptRTST: ] R A ’ V 1 A 1 E 'Pry ; ftr^TTfif V 2 ; 
PdclHTar: V 4 ; p4 c| 4Y ( fV* iff M 3 )ST Gi A 2 M • STTP7T f^RPTN^Tcf ] AE ; Wl dPM- 
frd*i 1 r^c^md R A ; yT^TcT fdPTdi if^tiT^ rd P| V r 4 G 1 ; -—HH I P^d id Vi 
V 2 ; STTRcT ri 1 f^y^d id M; ^vTT tPPTIf3yTRT Tty(unmetrical) 





22(c 1 -d 5 ) Vi; (c^c 7 ) M y G 3 ; (d 6 ) G 2 ; [d 4 -d 8 ] Kj 
23 [a 1 ] Ki; (b 1 ) Vi; (b 1 —b 8 ) Ki 

23 I 11 the two inserted pad as : (a 5 -h H ) G 3 ; (b s -b s ) Vi; (b z -b A ) Ai 


23.1 


WTI H ^4d PTR Kirana l:14bc. 

> 'a V, 


23.1 W y^irl ] R N PiP 3 ; 

°Hch' ^r: 1 R N Pi ; P 2 P 3 

< 6 * J * On v ^ 

] em.; °MIPId^j 0 P 3 ; 

—W Pi 23.3 ^T] P,P 3 ; 



P 2 23.1 ddlchAd ] R jV Pj P 2 ; TTdTcfiR t?W P 3 23.2 
23.2 °hRmI^° ] R N PiP 3 ; °qw° P 2 23.2 Q Mi'P(d- 

0 R n P 2 23.3 ] R n P 2 ; P 3 ; 





P 2 ; ^pfr R N 23.4 0 TfPTTW 0 ] RA ; °Tr^T° 
23.4 ogr^-uj^r ] RJvpjP 2 ; p 3 23.G 0 <r^dc4lfdilm 0 ] R^PiPa ; °T 

P 2 23.6 °4>H‘yH^r° ] R^Pg; Q ^T^T3^rr° P 2 23.7 ^HTpidlMirdil^l 0 ] 
RAP 3 ; P, ; W^T\‘fcqV I M T j df^T^TTT 0 P 2 23.7 °c^TlT° ] R; ° 

P\ 1C 23.9 H^\M] : ^T] R iV P 2 ; Pi; P 3 23.9 10 

ftr® ] R n P 2 P 3 ; °^lfddId P T 23.10 °R^dT: ] em.; °R^cT: R 


































































































































































































* 



m g < i h c h u cid i <4 ( 


^ d h [hi i fq~ ^(p 2 f.24 r )^r $i 'Hr 

m i d-n't 0+4^"^ ^Rtn 


§1%- 5!fW: WTf [iHcMcdl(*pfT 3WfcT ^)f?T 






tw ^ciT^T^wr^rr^TW^ 


ftWRT 


frfir oq | ]d£ dN<cfpn^T ^r: 5TRJWT: ^-5^ ^ 





fawn ydRfcr: I *nrfd 


fa si H <& «l Pddl 


TM 


wrdfar *ff 


frp> 


aw 


HIllfl^cdpH^': I cRTT 4t ^a*-*4°M[faP4rr>) ^T 


far 






rfrf%- Ph JI -^4 



fir 


wT 


tlT^STfa" e hHHl4) - 

„ 

f^rfar wt* ^=r ^ci i w cr^rfirfr^t 


ipTT p-M <k I [PjP ffT^lfir I cRH %^TW5Tg:: m: dwfa' I ^T sfr (rT 


1% 


^fmt) v Pd ri I 


Pm h i ki*fa*- 4 fa i Pm 3 m"fa 


f^ c<U cM H ■M'IH Id ^ fa Id I cfT TSfl Kl I «l •'H I d I fa ^ PvTd 

<hHu f r sffa «FNcdl^)TTfa : I d^MMdl 3TT %^cTRjf 


gwfw: HeNd[rd<l]t‘dcdl£ff WrQ^W ^ | * 
T dT?T fadlfa^dl^cMcHl^fa' fat spn I ^ffa 


\D 


STRPTffa 


*r<5[^] (p 



fMrfa“wfat 


23.12-13 ^ d d HI I Th ■ ■ '^Tcf Not traced. 
23.27 T dHI'* * ■ : Source unknown. 


%cP^r— P 2 23.12 srfrfw: ] R n P2P3 ; wNw Pi 
$R=3"HM l oH dT P 2 ; HTHmi^rrH-fl K N 23.15 -16 Pi^Hf4' 
P 2 23.17 faHlsiHd’ ] em. ; ^c^RcT P 3 ; ^ ^TRcT R^ ; 

teRTRWF 0 P 1 P 2 ; ^n^W° P 3 23.18 c ^t 
23.18 d<^ch ] Pi; om. P 3 ; cT^pvR R N ; 
23.20 cTHT] R^PiPa ; cRHT P 2 ^ 2 3^. 2 0 ^ R^Rcfrf^ ] R* ^ 

23.20 Id Jl^oiifdl^i'JfT It o ] em.; [ddci^ Id %T° R A ; <ti 0 P 1 ; 

Prrraojrf^rutt ^ 0 P 3 23.21 ^fdR m ] P; °strftr^r ] R A 


23.12 ^ddHIlfT ] R iV P 1 P 3 

23.13 IT^MldlcMdl ] PiP 3 ; 

af?T] R n PiP 3 ; rn^W4Tc^-“ 

—d- P 2 23.18 %^TRW° ] R N ; 
dlMH>T ] R^Pi ; °^^dlMHvi; P 2 P 3 

cR^T— P 2 
P 2 P 3 

rddo6oqpd t — P 2 ; fd Mo6®M Id 0 P 3 23.21 °^i 

23.21 T] R N P 2 P 3 ; om. Pi 23.22 ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 

sfrl R N P 2 ; ^ P 1 P 3 23.23 TfRcfr ] conj. Anjaneya Sarma ; ^fldl 
Pi ; nPt^d P 2 ; : P 3 23.23 Hciiifridt ] conj.; dTT^TfrRT ^M u i: R jV PiP 2 ; 

fe*n4w: P 3 23.23 W^J ] conj .; HTwft R 23.24 

f^Arp 2 . q-^-b|i^j|d"d" PiP 3 23.24 ^MfrRR ] R jV PiP 3 ; —ft^rf P 2 23.25 ° ] 

P; %^ct R N 23.25 °Hd^^ ] R A P 3 ; P 2 ; °H<d3~— Pi 23.25 d^HHdt ] 

R N P 2 P 3 ; d<i^MMffr Pi 23.26 RW° ] R N ; P 1 P 3 ; — P 2 23.26 J2T 

ir^l W ] 'pxP 2 ; Wr*W p 3 J ^ RN 23 * 27 ^TWgPTcHP?TT ] P 2 ; 

pN . ^ |U|ycMrKI Pi ; ^ i u i^cm U HT^T P 3 23.27 *fP ^d": ] R A P 1 P 2 ; ^fTLId"P 3 


23.22 ^Y 

R N ; 


12 


15 


18 


21 


24 


27 
















































































































































































































































fa$TT)(Pif.7 r )ddidH Idlil" d JI Id I Pi Tpf: I 

sr-FJfJTftr Vll-H I'M HI Hlf^«+>l r<»J|: II 1 

d M cdl ct>^Pn Pi -6J M dTRT Pi $1 Id-Y> d Pi d) d" Pi U'fidl'Middd 
: ^P< J 'Hp1HJil ot ll' : |Tlr^ld^ ~M ^id) I ^cd »T Pi Pi - 

f%Tf dldvl d - Puidp} STW?f^$dlddH|diaiHlld4*dt‘d ia^cdd 1 

3TT ^ Hcid , T»dPlPi Yi^l sfr ^<jcd^d I ^"(T)PT(fT 'fid I Pid *-4“- 



A Pi d oil d I 3TdT) Pi H H fl H Pd cd I cd <t>H d Pi Pi' I PTRT ^Rfw: 


^rd'di fd ill I f.<1 4 d I Hi cd l'T%: df Id 4 -4 4 Pi I 

3W HTOTWPT Hd> *. 'Jl *-d IM d SIT: I 

sfPfT: Ph^^rMR 'I^pH II ^ II 

WTTP4T sN~)fW: WrpTTTP4W^vpT: WTdT d^T^FT: 

d^JcT: TdTdtfcTjTFTt dT^ftr 5T^f%frf^r Ph d-d cH P Id I d"4 


JTdT ciai«ld dPnl <lddPlcd4‘: II 


sf?T *!>n -11 v l)■*-< u I u <iIvTiHg'' l'H' : fi' J cj l~d <. t-MI 

^fdMUI^xfl im ydf'.uiH II 


23e. “fYv: 1 NM y R^ Pf V. 1 GK 1 AM 3 ETry; »fwViM,Mj • sfPfT: ] £; 5fllF MiM 2 


23(c 1 -c 7 ) Vi; (C-c 2 , c 7 -d 4 ) Ki; (cP-d 3 ) V 2 ; (cP-d 4 ) G 3 ; (d 3 ) G 2 


23.29 Pi ;i m r +id m €t MaJinTvijaya L:19a. 

23.29 MJildi Td^d 1 TfcT: Moksakarika 72d. 

23.30 3Hd jj ?y.rf ;r h H n\ \ -h i d hi *TTfdd-iI PCW: Moksakarika 78ab. 


23.29 fP l l< l P4^ l ] P 1 P 3 ; RTR ^Stlfa^l R N ; Rddf^dT P 2 23.30 3F[W^ ] 
R"P 2 P 3 ; Ifd' Pi 23.30 M^^IIH ] R N ; H^ u l P 23.31 0 ] conj. \ sY- 

4-1 P-<j fc rf^rar■> ] P 3 ; l^rf^d^TO’ 0 P 2 ; If u fYw° R N ; 

5Rir R N 23.33 ° & I HI ffl 1 KI ] R n PiP 3 ; ''SJI^Fh^vII'-li » P 2 

R 23.35 fl<t>HdHifd I RTf ] PiP 3 ; fNiHdr<fd IT: RT^ 


3T gftr R 23.32 If* 
Pi 23.33 5TW ] P ; 
23.34 ^ - J i conj .; 

R N ; fr^rdTrPTTJ P 2 
flHWdHH ** P 2 P 3 


23.35 fOrWcf: Hdd ] em. ; flH^id^rd'H^ R N ; fFTf?^rfddd ?! ; 
23.36 fdd^dfd" ] R‘ v ; fdd-^^fd P 2 ; fd4-N^Tcf Pi ; fdd^d^fcT P 3 
23.37 Hxn^r^n^T] R n PiP 3 ; RRFcfBT P 2 23.38 M^f^ 0 ] conj .; HT xu Td ° P; H vj-d i Pd ° 
R N 23.38 ST^cfT] P; 5 T^kPT R n 23.39 ^=fcT: ] R n PiP 2 ; dl^d : P 3 23.39 


t^-] P; R N 23.40 R n PiP 3 ; P 2 

om. P 2 P 3 • °^5rw] P; 0 frTTfTtfR7° R iV 


Colophon: J 5pT° ] R^ ; 

































































































































































































r^dl *r y + ium ii ^ n 

* 

(:) 

T^RTRt T^STT# ST5TJ# y<b<u||-d<£|dMd n^T 5T- 

^f-mq(ii|g.rqid ( 


'Tn^s 3RM 


SfIMIcHI f^TT sfr^T: RbPd^r$| : 

(d fH t 1 HH41$ i»l4l^l4H *^41: II $ II 



)d^l^l dNry + ^uifiiH^ wfw: drh^ : I Fpi 

3FFrTT ^cH£r*1 1 cd ^ rl *~~4 Muriel I ( P 2 f. 26 r ) 


ejjhotiHfW qr^T: WVT HW^-k: 



Codices for the rnQla of the second patala: N( = 
V t V 2 V 4 and, from 7b, V S )G(= G 1 G 2 G 3 )Ki A(= 
for the vrtti: R(=R A P(=Pi P 2 P 3 )V 


N3D 2 and, from 33b, N 2 )M y 'R /v S[= V(= Pf 
: AiA 2 )M(= MiM 2 M 3 )1 E(= EvEd) Codices 


1 . TITTER’1 NM y Try; RW: P| Vi V 2 GiG 3 Ki A 2 ME ; om. RV 4 ; — -T: G 2 ; R- 


- A 1 

1 a. RT S RMRRI FW ] NM y R N VE K ; RtRFT: GAMEy • SrtWT: ] NM y R jV 

K v ; sflTFt* Pf V 4 GAME D ; sfTW V 2 lb, ] NM y R /v V 4 (E v ’s verse 1); fRRRT: fccT ?T^T:(T 
PfV 2 A 2 ) PfV 2 GAME D (E v ’s verse 2) 1 c. ] M K R A V 1 V 2 G 1 G 3 AM 2 M 3 E Try ; 



RTFFRP^ D 2 ; *rTRRRT PfV 4 G 2 M 


T N 3 (unmetrical); 
in 1.15 R N adds r^tllrHI Rf^RT: RT^T ftu=T 


After RSTR 






X: 1 



lemma appears in P and this is lust a repetition of the verse in the form that. Ed has it. Ev 
prints the two versions as two independent verses. 7 Yy comments on both and does not call 
either a pathantara. 


1 [a 1 -a 8 | Ki; (a 



V 1 ; (a 6 ) A 2 ; (b 7 -d 8 ) K i; (d^d 8 ) G 3 ; (d 3 ) G i; (d 8 ) G 2 


1.3—6 3PTRTT cM<ir*iici ■ • • m i Not traced. Quoted also at the beginnings of the third 
patalas of the Matangavrtti and of the Mrgendravrtti. 


0.1 U^T# ] P; 5P^T° 

yy^RcT P 2 


R 


N 


1.1 wlTR: dfhoti: 

R A ' ; P 


1.1 cl ^ ffi 


R A ; P 1 P 3 ; 





































































































V|df > M-r'Jl 



d H d fed I cR^f(l c^d I £1 ddI 'd> ST^TWWr I 
MdHIl" I I 

rr%^ ^RTepT: 4 H<I^ 1 c-H^T: yPd^ldcdlTictf^^rnrM'QyirHdi: I 

fTldf^ T^Pff^fTd^T^T I dT#^ ^ H^Rcd 3rd I (Rd I I ST^TT^T 

f^jT) MK ~=T I MdH*f rrau|yrdMI<dM-dT M Rdcdd f^TTTK dT- 

ejr^^ia^u T M 1 i4d^^ rr: dRy^dH^-H^di: i cf 

^(^d - yRddHf d[W)dIPd(d cT^dT d^P^ld : I 

•STdlfTT ST3T*h —*fT Sfft Rcd cdifddd^di: <?> ti i <n eii sj q fdT- 

Ph Pd ^ T ’TfTWc^T (P 2 f.26 v ) sfT^T: ^TnjWT: Tf- 

P4c d~ 3rd I (fddT I d di I ff) fl4$l: ^T)4«r>dl d“ Ri41 ?di*nc4'i)rh: 

fl j^T : pr RrdT tr$jf d rd I Pd d H 4Y: R>i q i <?h HI: fl*dRqdl 4" 

Rhhhh^^t ’=r r_ T dRydRR ft qR i (%r RRdd Rn ^ spjf 

dT)^TT %T RR-4dl<Rqi^>o) T Rid : I T ^l^R^R *JWT $R 



3Td" PRINT: I 


6 






WM? I 

'O 


2 . HTTFprTT 
d 14 Ki ; —Ai 


NM 1 'P?V,V«GiG 2 A a E D , ny; om. RM ; vm^pr V 2 E v ; — G 3 ; 


1.8 and 1.13 H^RpM : Kirana 1:15a. 
1.14—16 Testimonium: <iH < n u o( i§ 


T^Pffr h 4$T: H^TrTT ^ ftpf: cTOT~ P* Pa ^it 


(=*fr ^T? f^Rl") J 



j-^prq ^f?r [sic] 


Isanasivagurudevapaddhati Vol. 3, p. 2. 
1.15 tIV ; H' Rldt Kirana 1:21c. 


1.7 d^T° ] 
djTrT^T 0 R N 



cTT P 2 

R^PjP 


1.8 ° ] P ; «tlR tPMT^a’n ° Pj r ; H 151 R 5 sr>': I *ft 

^T#TT P 2 1.8 ^H41 P<TT ] R /v P 3 ; *cMl fc-i: P 2 ; ^T- 


__ Pi 1>8 d ] R^P 3 ; 5fTTtW P 2 1.9 rT& 1 <J|yPdMKHIH-dT ] conj. Hanneder; 

a^qr^fpr^rr R N ; pTOT" mP ci miRP 1 P 3 ; ^^wfr: cKttrt p 2 i-io ] 

P ; ^T° R N 1.10 °y'MumcrpJ 0 ] R- N i °M5i0 ( 3n < nt«i ° P 1.10 o fTR^rr: ] R-P 1 P 3 ; 

ofF^r; P 2 l.n MP^dlPdrd ] R N P 3 ; °q^mifqPo' P 2 ; 

R n ; ° P 1.13 Tnpr: ] R N P 2 P 3 ; y ^W : p i 1 * 14 ] RNp i p 2 ; 

1.16 irg*] P 2 P 3 ; 

#PT^TP 1.17 ] R;vp i p 3; 


pTT° ] 

P 3 


■TTFT P^ C P 3 


1.15 *T ] R N 
—pRT Pi 


Pi * 3 ; om. P ; 

1.17 %T ] R 


-~ d 1 PdPT Pi 1.12 TOW- 


^ R N 1.17 TTpRT] R lV P 

























































































































































































































fridl H 


3* 


d I P< d d d HI Prt» Py Sdt THTtfer: I 

3HlP<id<HHrbcdlcd4$fi SFf cRT: fw: II RW 

~'A I Rh rd M <1 Ri^ RtRTtT d d ^1 

Pprr cnw ^i ^4 ^mRr: 11 3 n 

f%W: F?rfer: <bdHlc4>dHldld dddPH<bH 


^Tbw fTw ff rPTT %T Rid IrHdl: II * II 

W £| I rH dl Sd IRcd I ?IT«-^ rH ^ RH-ld (cTOT dtl fH «+>^ I WZ ^cT 


Mo ; Rd -4ft" M 


*r*t>[h «hHi amid Ponded sfr i w <hi sff^H 

dT W y HI u| H Id HI Red I t\ I -M cH ^ Ph'R d eRTT pRd<*il<h - 

5TT( P a f. 27 r ) f^ ^(c^T sfH^r I 3TTf^fT7fr f^ 3H]HI jdpTWf^T- 

2 a. «f|J<(^ld ] D 2 M y VATry; FP^R^ N 3 ; “FtM-RH R N GK,E; "FFRfT M. ; FTR4T 

2 b. PhTy^l Sffr Wlfcd: ] PfViV 2 ; P<hfa I pH^IP ld : N; Rfard"- 
^PdRt fpr?r M y ; HfadrW«ft: (ofr GiK : ) fp*TcPT R /V G 1 K 1 E V ; SRP iRPfcf: V 4 ; 

H Rd d cd-H ujft (VndH(iT: M) G 2 G 3 MA 2 ED ; P* 1 Py$iiH dl R d : A x (unmetrical); in between lines 
A 2 also adds RiPy ^'iPd-HHlPdd : ; Ph Ty^Pl S<jpfcrrfcr: Try 2 c. °^?w] N 3 M y VGK 1 A 
M 3 T>y; 0 J JWic3TT R jV E ; PCTTcT D 2 ; °H*Hld Mi ; M 2 2 d. 5 Rp cTcT: 

ftpT: ] K 2 ; H^fP Rp cTcT: 

H4$IRld Rfor?: VAi ; fdfwcT faR" GKjA^ME; r 4~$THT far^RJcT: A 2 ; r 4$T: R faf- 
^TrTcT: TYy 3b. <=hr^d ] E; N • rfTT ] NM y R w VGA, M 2 M 3 Try; —K 1 ; 

RR WZT A 2 (unmetrical) ; HTT Mi 3c. fflJR ] M y R iV Pg \TV 4 GK!A 2 M, M 3 E7>y; 

N ; V 2 ; AiM 2 • ^j?r ] E ; ftw R N M“ C 3 d. ] E ; °^f4: R jV 

• W° ] E; *Tcrr° Ki 4 a. TOfe^T: ] M y R N VGKiAMsEIVy; f dTJ^^Pd^ N; 

ftr^: fjfcr: Mi; PdVJ^Pdc^ M 2 • ] E; ^fHId M 2 4 b. ] 

D J M y R J% P 3 V 2 Gi AET>y; qif-H ixy N 3 ; dTRTrTRJ V 4 G 2 Mi ; d Id Ki(unmetrical); cTFTT- 
ti 1 ^^ M 2 ; 1 ti i M 3 • m< ti 1 fri<t »h ] E; Ev(unmetrical) 4 c, m i R-h>T 

fdPdd ] R^Pf V 4 GiG 2 AME ; WT dT Pd Ph d NG 3 ; WTf^TT dPdPdd M y ; d ^ l R-HPd Pd ^t 
Vi (unmetrical); dd n j -H<H>ipHd — V 2 ; ddTffdl^rfRTf Ki (unmetrical) ; WTT d PdpHri Try 
4d. ^ ] M y R N VGAME; t^N; Ki ; T Try • fa dTcH dl : ] E ; PVM I -+H) : 

N 3 ; ftl d IcH d'l Vi 



M Y ; H^^RrRf I"(% D 2 ) : N ; Pd^dlcd Pvid 1r?TdTr R' v ; 


2 (a l -a 2 ) A 2 ; [a 3 -a 4 ] M 3 ; (b 6 -d 6 ) V x ; (d 7 -d 8 ) G 3 

3(a'-a 4 ) G 2 A 2 ; (a^b 3 ) G 3 ; (a 8 ^ 1 ) A i; (b 6 -b 7 , c 4 -c 7 ) K x ; (c 1 , d 6 -d 7 ) V 2 ; (d 3 ) G i; [d 3 -d 4 ] 
M 3 

4 a. R^ f. 130 f; commences with ^tTRItT 

4(a 2 -a 7 ) G 2 ; (a 3 ) A 2 ; (a 3 -b 8 ) Vi; (a 4 -b 8 ) G 3 ; (b 7 s c 8 )V 2 


2 cd. Testimonium: 31R if<RdIrM4;i 1 cRf: ftTd: cited thus by Narayanakantha ad 

A4rgendra.vidya.pada 5:15 and ad S’ataratnasahgraha 67, p, 76. 


4.1 Wirt+<41 FTf ] K N ; +iFh + <4I P 2 P 3 


4.3 yHlulR ] P ; ST Hfu l H W R" 


















































































































































































J 14-| <+1Ub [q r^l d I I pTl ' u l 'j dl 


3^ 


Hf 


a* W) (p,f.7 v )^ 

tpiWcT. q j r i 







I 3TT d" 


ST^HcW^dldd ^T^FcTW 

TT^r dd I M I 
fM'tfa (" H *T T^PT^T T^PPPTT Mi r TTl r PMT 


fefN" fp PdPddd^dM" pt% 





7P-TT MldddP 4 -MdlTd 

1 < \ I ' ' * ' ’ ’ ^ 

HfT^rf d' TTfpff d-. J d Pd P*i d H - 

eTTT 5PfpT- 


d H-ll dj .^HT UUI d I pT PddicdiHcdi 


d Pd P+4 d d I Pti d PdPTP : I +HIPPTT 


grr: (P^TvT 



prfr)PT 


=FT- 






HHHP J .MI'hl-rT dlddlPf 


(fr TdTTT: MdVdd^fbp 


d 


cld : 



^ftrr H# fd<t>4 cT dTSPT. I HPR 




5 . ITTT 337? ] NM V Try ; 
NM y R N VG 3 E7Vy; 

NM y ; V? c MiM 2 


am 



R; rp^g-; SE 5 a. °W*TfT ] E; “PiThtT: M 3 < 
' GiG 2 Ki AM 5b. <pW° } R ^ V G K i A M 3 E Try ; 
q 7 ] 1 pm ] s; o7 rr j TP Ki • ^prf^rr ] £; ^rrftrrr 1 


<pr- 

si 

Q 





^ 1 


5 (a 1 -a 2 ) A 2 ; (a 4 -a 5 ) G 2 ; (a 4 -a 5 , b'-b") K,; (b'-b 8 ) (V, (b ) Vi 


5.3 dPM I .£f q~ flM^T PMl-M 1 frf (Wm I^HI Kirana 1:1 Gab. 
5,8 ftTT: pm i P^ T MW *fir W<h'4cf: Kirana l:20ab 



4.6 Q rMHl^ l lrf TT ^ rr° ] H N ; °MW fW3T?m?stfwiT 


6 


3TTT- 



4.0 P; R n --- - ^ . - _ 0 A A uu ,. .- r , 

47 ] RMV, Hptti^q^PW ^ M1 ^ p s ; 1 * _ 

q-'l h. n P-> ; P.P 3 5.1 f 5 fw] 1 PP 2 ; ftpr P.Ps 5 1 OT ] R ;JRTW P 

5.2 ] P 1 P 3 ; Li^m° P‘ v ; P 2 ■ 5 ' 2 ~ 3 .^r' r ' 1 [ - ? 

P 3 ; okuPPh^^ p 2 5.3 qs mfiT 1 R*p= ; p » H8 *•» f 

DWp . H^ra-P,P 2 5.4 »Ww« ] R a, P 2 ; “WRTf- Pi; “fAfrfT^ 0 1.3 0.4 ilk'll 

g^-. 1 h N p|p 3 ■ 4.HI4I7 T T^TFT P 2 5.5 ] R V P 3 ; P 2 5.5 Hqis,£ : ] P; ' 4< a l i : 

r* 5.6 ] Pi; om. R N ; 7ii7ra^TT(=w P?« ) P=G 1 *» 5 - 6 ^; 

h”,Tp s Ww»p. 5.7 jfw: ] en,. ; jfBr- B 5.7 ^ P.. 

—IT? p, ; "TJTT7 rr? [<■■' ; I'. 5.8 ^ ] l! p T ; ^ 58 ft ! y J 

R w ; P 2 5.8 ] R N P L P 3 ; P 2 5.8 ?fA ATePT: ] con ).; 55WW' 

R 


6 






































































































































































































































































9 


12 






T 








r A~A FtH J^-ld 

qt 7 vrg' d"* < T+i1 J «h H I ^ttRt 



7 



iftT] I HF| d ! -Pf-T 

>T fafpr: I 



ddddl 




'■ 1 »T ^ d CH -M1 vrt F- 1 

y M 1 ^ 

t 

( P 2 f. 28 r 

p -s r 

M^r^M 

rdT 

r^rdHdir 

f 

■rf 5 CM 1 

PT ST^P-r: 1 FT 






H" Hldl-ddd : 



sqiWS 



IH dird I cd 









ST5TRT fdTTTT: 



* II 


mkvkt wr i 


d id I ^ H M Id dcH - 


^ I Th cd a i IN cd y I cH d I I cPT STWFq 


TOW I 

VD 


ff T?] 4 >41 HTRT 



5 c. JTRTT 0 ] E; WT 0 Pj’Mi 5 d. ] £ ; ftpTT: N 3 G 2 Ga. oqrM<ticdlcR ] NM y R ,v V 
G 2 G 3 AMETry; IH'ficd l =d Gi ; odiHdicdid Ki(unmetrical) Gcd. ] M v R N VG 2 G 3 Ki AM 
E ; fWcft (dT N ) g^KTcT dff fd (fk D~ ) T^T d (d G 1 ) d Iri Id : NG 1 Try 7. ^JldlddM ] 
NM r Pf V 4 G 3 K 1 AEd Try ; om. RGJ C ; — Vi ; HTRTT V a GfE v ; C 2 ; r^T: 

M 7 a. H TSff^T ] NM v R N Vi V 2 G 1 G 3 K 1 M|Ev Tty; R HVJdWt* PfG 2 MiM 2 Mg <: ; 
T^RTiT V 4 ; R + 3" + ^ Ai (unmetrical); R Wt^TT A 2 E D 



7 b. KTRT 1 S ; RT^T D 2 


5 fcP-c 2 ) G 3 ; (c 1 cP) Vi; (d 8 ) A 2 

6 (a 1 ) A 2 ; (a 5 -a 6 ) G 2 ; (b 5 ~b 8 ) G 3 ; (c 2 ) V 2 ; (d 3 

7 (a 1 -a 4 ) V 1 ; (a'-a 3 , b (l ) G 2 ; (a 0 ) V 2 ; (a 7 ) G s 
7 b. Testimony of V 3 begins. 


d 8 ) V 


6.1 oqrrt 



TRTW* K /ran a 1:15c. 


^SRT P 3 
P 1 P 3 ; 


5.11 



5.9 dd^nfeTrT 0 ] R v PiP 3 ; P 2 5.9 A d 1 d <hRT A ifi ^ Rj k\ A * I ^ ] P 2 P 3 ; STTf- 

WRfPT^TIT^' R v ; TTPd <t>Rf SRfl'O^ RJ — M 4> I * *H Pi 5.10 oJJ^TcT ] P 2 P 3 ; U R N 

3.10 <TW( •y *11 Pi-flH + K: 1 R W P 2 ; Twfrwrftdmnr: PjPs 5.10 S PIT^HI ] R N P,P 2 ; SPlt- 

R N ; P 5.11 H<t> l <9iH ] cm. ; SI ' <jrH^-t>K4i : 

: I dH9il <9><H R' v ; i>JtI : ITTTTTTTT: P 2 5.12 ° ] P ; *PS"° 5.13 hF- 

1 P ; mrmt U <jHHHifar R A ’ 5.13 'JRTTr: ] P 2 ; JRret i f lT HI-r| p,p. ( ; 

R w 5.14 f^TTV: ] R^’PjP:,; f%ftV 5% P 2 6.1 scmfl ] R^P 3 ; anfr P 2 ’ 

P 2 0.2 "WTanfW 1 * ] R' V P,; - BoU l fMc^ o p 2 ; 0II] . 

] R‘ v P2 ; 

om. ll y 





'jHI'H’b'i 

6.2 of^j] R w P 1 P 3 ; 

P 3 (eyeskip) 6.2 oftpiire 

mR P,I> 3 6.3ST5PKT] P 

P| c 






P 


0.3 fRTm-: ] R^PiPa; fH'.milH P5 ; fH< I fr|H 



































































































































































































3s 




t rwt r 'sn 


tcnPr RRRTRTsr ft 4ft: 



c; 


mR u IHcT 


%^TPT MHW) MpiHi^Misdi f 



fa^TT JTPft^: <frd I P<f* T. <b 1 4 <M ul Rfd - %xfr FfrFJW ( P 


^TcH I T 


4t -nTPPSf 


n- 'Ni i t r .<r=vr *nr: crat =o 

#ror lew k «wr *(rti3i')T: 


MlPr ^T *TfrRlW : I 3TT fCTFT 


*P4T 



f^rgrRr i 

ND 


3^r§:: ^fr 



HTII ^ II 


3TT fRrT H Pd (^WFTTW^:5T^r SFT)W®fW*T 

7c 1 M y R / '^PfVi V 2 V 3 G 1 G 3 K 1 AME; srfftw f^T R*fr NT>y; V 4 ) ^ 

V r , 7d. T FT^Tcfr T RtRRRi 1 M y R' v PfV 1 V 2 V 3 GK 1 A 2 ME v ; =T NI>y; 

H-VaW R RPTfR V 4 ; T «M I R Rt R RPPp? Ai(unmetrical); T «widt R E D 8a. RT- 

roir-T D. i ^imr M,M s («nmc.ric.l) • P** 1 M -~R»NVE y Try ; 3^™ CA 

r ^TK 9b EtJvTXtE 9C.1 M y R-PfV-V 2 V 3 V 4 G-G-A^ 

E.’. E/ . 3^} udH I ^ N; 4V,;P^ M^ 1 ^ G l l>y; ^ 

and then some version of the other pada. 9 d. fFT ] M' R 1 3 V,V 2 \ 3 GK 1 AMETVy I K. 
D 2 ; fi - N 3 ; ^=T V 4 


Si^-b^yvv [i’Vm. (a 3 '-a 8 ! d 1 *d^ d ) vl\^- a ^ b 3 -l> B , c 5 ’-c 8 ) ) k', ; (b 1 ) M,; [b‘] V,; (c 8 d 8 ) 
.(i 81 -^ 3,“ G.; (f-b 8 ) M« (c‘-c 8 ) V,; («•-=*) V, l( c 8 C) A a! (d 8 ^! 8 ) K. 


8.1 and 8.4—5 


TtffsrvC h r<m*T^~ Source unknown. Also cited ad Matangavidyapada 2:19, 


p. 35 and NaresVarapanksaprakasa 3:2, p. 155. 


8.2 

R N 

Pa 

P 2 


tT7 ^ f V„ 1 R w . t^o P 8.3 RT^rt-: ] R N ; RTirt-: P ; RT^: PJ‘ 8.3 1 

HWWRo P ’ 8.4 Reft T 5TftTT“ ] Ps I ^ 5rftTT° R " '• Pl ; ^ 

$r ^ RcT 5TftTT» P, 8.4 . W l f# ’ ] P.Psi »MTRTR^» R N iJ^£' 
8 5 4 4* fc r ] R-^P 1 P3; P 2 9.1 ] R^Psi 


6 

































































































































































frirft M 




ddd 



W fldhcdl-HpHdcdl^d 



d HI -d < fV R) *l SJ Pd <; i z] Rn ^ S ^^ r) I 3T7p£: 

Pd c^M I Pm <srVt fw^FT: I 3T^P sfV JfpcT) 3TTcdl 

d*MfdfV fw^Tc^^rr^r *pfT ^tV: \ 


S'Vt- 




SfT P'-JJIH't.dffP I {IV} ( P 3 f. 4 V ) $1 Id *d pH 'TPr^ ( P 2 f. 29 r ! : gFrT- 
TFT Pd^dcdl^cb^g.l'-dd^d ^ P^dtH H d T^TI -T I 3T) (Pj f. 8 r ) d" 
i^Tl d H V: fV(^cV)d Id d I Th 4d" (Pd^)v^d J ] u l^ L l Vp^TTPT 

f^rTFET fS'c^TrT I *VhlT H'raffldRpnRR' fVdT 




f^dVrwrfr ststrt Rnr)*r: i 

H 14l <H % 4 c4I rh died I ^ d Pd <d P«(1 d H 

dfdTT: sftWT: *p=qVffVW4T 11 $0 II 


W <41H «M41'-MI cd H1 dl4l<R dVt dl4ld'URdd 5 ‘d] *cd4)- 

(dT- 



wr: *r 


=T c^lcdTdd- 



E ; ZFXTKNlYy 10b. ^T^fT 0 ] M y R N Pf Vi V 2 V 3 GAME7>y; ^TTra- 

3; «nn i^idId 0 D 2 ; H H1 <y 4 Pi 0 V4 ; P 4 jq Pd 0 Ki • °H Hu dH ] M v R A SEv^ TVy ; 

Q rdw: N; ift^TR E d 10 c. (ifrPW dPE ] N M y R N Pf Vi G 1 G 2 A 1 E ; fT(sr V 3 

V 4 ) rPT: V2V3V4 ; rfPTF?T^- G 3 ; d'f**Rnr fT^T Ki ; dTfRH dlW A 2 T)y; dP+Mr(?T 
Mi ) M 3 ) cT^T: M • Ml <T>: ] NM V VGAMETVy; MTcP R A Ki lOd. °f4^VRTT ] 

D 2 M y R N VGi G 2 A 2 Ev Try ; °fdd^l N 3 ; oPdHiiPR (*PT G 3 ; ^TT: A x ; R:M 2 ) G 3 A X M ; 
ofe^aRq - : E d 


lOCa 1 , b 5 -b 6 ) G 3 ; (a 1 -a 3 ) K x ; (a l -a H ) G 2 ; (a 7 -a 8 ) A 2 ; (b 5 -d 3 ) Vi; [d 1 —d s ] K x 


10.1 3crrft RRTT^TTRPRR Kirana 1:15c. 



a c 


Ml^lld- 


9.2 ] R^P^a; ^FTR 0 P 2 9.3 ^rTHIdPW Vpt? ] em.; °RrTPdTrf: 

l-d fd P 1 P 3 ; °RRFtTW P 2 9.3 SHTtfer^T ] P ; P? 

%“ R N 9.3 ] R jV ; •-•'4 d PiP 2 ; RifHr^^d P 3 9.3-4 0 ^ dft cm ■=( 1 Pn 0 ] P; 

oujc| h dI Pm 0 R* 9.4 f4^r° ] R N ; °3?T54p PtvT: P 2 ; °5fr^rrfw° P 3 9.6 PddH^- 

^rfr l ] R N Pi P 3 ; om. P 2 (eyeskip) 9.6-7 °iqf^dlH^NEU-rt P-HT ] P 1 P 3 ; 

R N ; 0 4idHIdPiV|>ii-rKd :W P 2 9.7 Pd^drdi^ft>° ] R^P^s ; PHdd^T P 3 9.8 HdlMMxl: j 
R A P 1 P 3 ; P 2 9.8 ] P 2 P 3 ; PT— P x ; R N 9.8 dPMI^^H 0 ] 

P 1 P 3 ; cldldPMl44d 0 R N ; P 2 9.9 ] R n PjP 3 ; RiXT P 2 9.9 P^Pd 0 ] 

em. ; Hd*|Pd 0 R 10.1 IM] P X P 2 ; MIcHdl R N ; InHd) P 3 

10.1 H|4k'< ^pfp ] P; Pm^TdPfr R w ; m^TT^TPpfr P^ c 10.2 ] R N PiP 3 ; ? T<RT 

^ P 2 10.2 ] R N ; 0 =rRW° P X P 3 ; °'dTTHT^' Cl P 2 10.2-3 RPTRT ] R N ; 

H14lv“a 0 P 2 P 3 10.3 ] R N P X P 2 ; W° P 3 














































































































































































































€ o 


Hi J IH<+,Ui fd > fid Id r rVK^T! I 


I dd 



r^TR^fHT: *-d - 


^ i i\\ (p a f. 29 ,, HiH^rr 

_ -J' 

goEHT) | 

3T*T HHH ^lyfPT ST5T: 





J| ^ dd I d I 


c^H l fcHr T: M HI 4 MX SHUrH-ft sfr TT 

JI uifrd Id R dft RT JTdit fff fWOT: II W II 


fg- m 4MH I Pd"dHflMl I’d cdl P; d I d IP; cd H r\ *-q| *T>*1_ I ^ 


^-OT PhHIcJ-Kf Wc*T*pTT 
JTPTPTT: M J ■HI I': SPf>%RdW 


2RT 




ipT: frt rRTT S«J- 

TW: I ^dlPdd-. l PdPd^ wi h iTqq»V RWt *TcT: 


■Hd l d l PddT ^(^c^WTT)f^T^ I qqi-dqild 

^IHHi i u[oijPdP> S^T^JcT I'HV MpH?l ?fd~ 


f%fd>rr P^ y PdMPi P J Td' I ddld^cd 


d I d *'d <d 



11 . J| | ~-l ] NM v Try ; oni. R,; J l • VGAME; U Ki 11a. ° R*]ci. ] R A i Rv 

Trv °f 5 RcT: NM y VG,A 2 ME D ; «RHHI K, lib 12c. ] om. V 4 (eyeskiiM lib. 



VGKi A 1 M 2 M 3 E ; HI <4 -H : RP-Hdi N 3 ; Hl*Ul«-qicH-Tl D 2 ; H 141 (it M' ) <4 ^ 1 ch HI 
M y A 2 Try ; HN4Y gJ I cHHl ' R N ; RPfPit HI I cH Hi Mi 11c. “fTWTT RT ] £ ; 0 P mi 5R M y 


5H4lcH-fr _ 

■y ; hn 4Y ^JIcHHl' R N ; 

lid. Reft] E; M d" AI 3 • PhH icH^f) ^ ] D 2 M V P 3 V 3 G 3 KX AMbo Tl'y *, fd)H l*'*T^r. N 3 , 
PhM l cHH : V 2 E v ; ipilcRTi: Gi 


11 


[d 1 -d 3 ] K,; (a’-b 3 , d 5 -d 8 ) G 2 ; (a 4 -a 6 , b 6 ) G 3 ; (a s -a 7 ) A 2 ; (a 7 , b 4 -c r ) K,; (c^-d 8 ) V 


1 


11.1 d-H I R H H fl M'^TTcT Kir an a 2:2a 


10.5 » MHIT Ti y T° ] R N ; P 10.5 ] R^Pa^ 0 5rfdRTT— Pi; 

“ MldHKd l Tl ° P 2 10.5-6 »fr ^PT ] R N P 2 ; P 3 H I 0 c<41R-i111Rcq RR» ] 

jjNpjpr. ° K| | piHinicd^id ° P 2 C ; 0 dlir<!dHir«cqHei ° Ps 11.1 °WR[I R ^ ] R^PiPs! 

p 2 11.1-2 RTT: em.; ReRRidW PiP 3 ; RRT 'RTRfTRW R' v ; td 1 '!' 

Po H.2 PhH I cR ^t ] R n P,P 2 ; ^HIcR P 3 11.2 fi^cRTW^RTfrfR” ] P 3 ; #T— fffR“ 
p“ ; HTWJRTfrfR” R N ; ^Pad4 i <°dl^ l fgfR » P 2 H-3 jRRfRTT^f ] R N ; 

P,P 3 ; jRTRT^TT^- P 2 11.3-4 ] R n PiP 2 ; «^RTTRRZRT: P 3 11.4 ] 

R ; p»^ 11.4 » H l cH4 7: fdldlPd+i ] em.; °rqicqiq^HIPqdl R v ; °rRTcR3TR PRT- 

RtfR^f P 11.5 RR:° ] R- N 'PiP 3 ; ReTR P 2 11.5 siiqrdl 0 ] R v ; 5 R— Pi ; 5R—cRP 


P 2 ; 51 i^rq 1 ° P 


11 . 5-6 ^HhV^TT RtT BTTrSPJW* ] R 


N 



ipJT 0 P1P3; 

^ l cHJf JT 0 P 2 11.7 TTPf^T j P1P3; f^PT R jV P 2 H -7 ] R ;V PiP 2 ; ci-- 11 dPR 

p, 11.7 srfprfar^pr 1 R N ; srfer^" P 








































































































































































































































fSTTFT 5r?rWT 



3 


6 


HWTIT I 






HH-dcTt HNI + NHTJ 

(3TT^TT: T 7 Tfp4')rfr ^TT^fTT^: 
fa# 5«TT^TOJrfr HTrT: WT^fal dcPT 

Hdd I P?d dH ITT H H T(cd rfi Hq Pi I 3iq^H ) 1% d *~d 




3TR 



U|KR«I Pdcd Pdddcd I£lfcd I$1 Id 14 : H 4 Hdd fa ^PH^d'l <M 4dd y H $: I 

#TT Hid I diTdTcHTT it^- TFrpjdt W: y NjrP) fan# I 





HI d IH4 H )H rfvHd •'H d ^fd I d fcd>H ""d d IH d T 

-Hldl < t»l4HIHlPHdifd^-d<'hHHl41 TRT t^cddH'fbt d<]4 H'faHHI 

H l d I TPT T^dTT H#T (R ,v f. 131") d"(TT 3HI PdH H H d-.^-d 




T Rf (P 2 f. 30 1 ') 

at 

H I d I +, I d I & Pd P'dT: 









TRpjcT T^T ifat : 

: | dTT: 


RrdT 

dfar 


TTPTT Tt H) RiHi faw *W: II ^ II 


12 . WTPJ^rr^ ] N M r Try ; om. R; 4JNI4 Pf V 2 V 3 GiG 3 Ki AE; — ViG 2 ; P%T: M 
12a. R^P: RPPR^TT ] M y ; PP^fP RcPP Rrfp N(unmetrical); fl^dl^MI-Hdt R N ; I-HHI 

V; 5uf] *-jHi G1G3AME ; R^vhl *hH I Ki (unmetrical); HI Rt Dry * RT- 

RT° ] £ ; RTTP K t ; W M 3 12 b. ] £; N 3 • 0 MI Tm^ hl ] M Y R N 

VGtGsE D r JVy; ° Ji Hh^iI NE v ; OJ l! Hh <t>T G 2 Ki ; A i M ; —A 2 • RPT: ] 

N M y G K i AME 7 ry; R7T: R N V 12 c. dT ] D 2 U Y R N VK l A 2 E v Try ; ?TT N 3 ; °sftT Gi 
G 3 AiMEd ; °' J il ■Mfp G 2 (unmetrical) • h ] d I A 1 chi ] D 2 M V R A V G K i A E Try ; h I$d1 
sfUfT: N 3 ; h!^< 1 Mlrtil M 12 d. P^RT: ] GAMEd Fry] n N 3 ; <^-ri D 2 ; J J^T: M y R N 
VE v ; 1<! • «hl<j1d ] M Y R N Pf Vi V 2 V 3 G i G 3 K! AME v Try ; N; WT^ 

V 4 G 2 ; ^PT° E d • °^rfi?r^T M Y R Ar VGAM 3 E7Vy; **^il filcl I N ; MiM 2 


12 (a 1 -a 3 ) V r i; (a 1 -a 7 , d 3 ) G 2 ; (a" 1 n6 

M s 




a v , c*-c 2 ) G 3 ; (b 


b' 1 ) A 2 ; (c 5 -c 7 ) Ai; (d 4 -d 8 ) Ki; [c 7 -d 4 


12.6 : Kirana l:19cd. 

# 

12.8-9 3HlfdHHRrt>HI fsT^TTfr T H%PT 1vji<i/i;i 2:17ab. 


12.1 ] R N PiP 2 ; °3P5Tprrr P 3 12.2 °fe^T SMl-d<^d) ] P; °fn% =TRfOJcft 

R Nc ; ^PrTOJrfP R Aac ; P« c 12.2 rfrrg- | afrfr ] P; rT- 

^TTrfe^^Jrf: 3Tfr R N 12.2 ^gfT: ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 12.3 °W ] R N P 2 ; °F^T 
P^P 3 12.4 °c^lflJ±rr o ] R N ; Q ^'R'<t&rr° P 12.4 fl 4 M) 0 ] R N ; P 12.4 0 

rPr° ] R N PiP 3 ; ° ^ R’^fr ° P 2 12.4 ] P1P3 ; °Pr#WT: P 2 ; °TRr^4SPT r r: 

R A ' 12.6 ° 4 Tn"° ] R N PjP 3 ; P 2 12.7 *P&cT ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 12.9 T ftr ] 



P,P 3 ; T R N 12.9 d^HI<i ] R n Pj P 2 ; om. P 3 

















































































































































































































<i-H'Ti u cjn=i j Tncumi fVi<. u i < j'ni 


qt fwi ftf: 

H-, i m^ t ^tonf^Tcf (gfrrreprfp^ 




flnTf^nTs^wr n ^ P~i 


f^TW 


r< * 14 ^ (frt f^ 


s*tfft i f^rit fcTO 


(P, f. 8 v ) c^iPdP kw ^ fft sTd Hirva- (Hi<>r^ 





i 




;j -Vfrfn 5T^TT(^I H )FTFTCT (fTTgJ ^cff) T HIP? d I 


TrrrdT(?fPdFW prf^RJW 





d I d H Ph <£T l^iTr^^T^ 


w: wrn 

JTct Pddl^ 



I 



?3II 


ddl 



FT 


^ ^rf^rr dd^3d ^mwrrFFr 

PTT^r^ ] M v R ,v G^Ki Ev ; ^Pr NVG a G 2 AME D T>y • ‘g^F 1 M '’ R " K ' 
R .:‘df^TNV 2 G 1 G3M 1 E D 7Vy ; Hlfk(ftr V 4 )CT(r. Pf ) PfVaV^^^ G 2 M^) 

Gi(unmetrical) 13c. osrfeR ] R N Ev ; NM^VGAMEoTVy, •*% 1 

13d. ^rftctTffr ] R N Ev; wrdt: E 


13 (a'-b 3 , d 7 -d 8 ) A 2 ; (a'-b 3 , c 2 -c 3 ) K,; (a 3 -b s ) V,; (b'-b 8 , c 6 -c 7 ) G 3 ; (d 3 -d 5 ) A 


1 


12 15—16 ^rlJ-i<f T (1 Ph • * .r^M '^ : ^if^T SHnkhya>karika. 10 
13.2 <T qr^fMri^ri^: 


12 


15 


, „ on io 1-) &o 1 R" - P 12.12 ] 

SS r 'S P » .■“» -UJ! p, R- 12 13 

r&. r"pVp; ; W P3 12.13 ] R"P S ; ^‘F, 12.17 TOT*- ] PiPs; 

<hHHI f ^. r n . 4, M i r< -. p 2 12.18 RTfer ] R ,v ; Pi ; nfd P 2 P 3 12.18_Pt4 K. ] 

R «P„ . ...R-: p, ; f^:P 3 12.18 dTT^R] P; R w 12.19 ] 

conj.; ’ a«h i vn»i« r MW R"; wr-wmr Pi ; «^^ P ='’ 3 12 

!^Wp 3 l 2 .21^^1^;^UfP3 13.1 

R N .^TTWTf^Pidr P,P 3 13.2 ddlifrfd-” ] P 1 P 3 ; 'f'«'i |r3d ° R ' 


18 


21 





















































































































































































fedV-i y 


*3 


uj yH-^KIcHd^d«-4l4ldJd't>l P-Cgd]Rr I 3T{T ^T}rTRTT 


rRT d H Id d I J 'A r^jKMi ^T=T RrgjfWTT oqTTP" ^fcT dfsfcT 5TPTd 




RRRT ST<*>I Pd 4> I 4>ldl-HU<t>H T fi PHI d I I 


4^l>'J[ itcT;) 



RT^J dd4 *ft^>c%T wr d Id[R-ddId 


eddldld d 



®T 



3cdrbH 



'i.-'j'T (p 2 f. 31 ") 


^rf§^§" 'hi4 d Tied* I fd{R?h}(3iT 


d^rfr 


^T)4Pd + l Ord* 3TRt y'hl^l'hK'JijoiiPdRdvtiK'JM^H I 'js 


e hl^i'hl4 Id *><& d“ 'pfT^[TrW diMddKIdPd jM<h l ^l'hKU|<^PdP<<h 


h Pi ^ <r^t 1 'Ji t t JTT'^n^rfd R fh r jtttT st «t> i 4 [4 $1 m i 


dd M[Rh< wRf dTcT^W o^r Pd j IH d d I «W f4 Td 


’-far I 3fld" 


^dlMfi^R^Td sqfd R ?h: rr fa^hd ^fa I T d I oij rb[<fn"(4P HW' 


•Hd ! Pi •* dTH dd Rd did i d ^ I d Pd M d d I Ph Rfa 


wit 


3H^^lpTVTcTT^d'dddrH^d^dd^ W: I ^fd 


dT y 'hl^lPd^h W ift^P 5d I cd -d I cd I Rr(JTHT| (P 2 f. 32 r )c I TdT ffa dT 


14 a. 'hid IdI ] M r VGx G 2 Ki AME7>y; 37RT NG 3 ; i| I fH I d R v 14 b. fjPfddl ] M y R N 

Pf ViV2V3G2K1 AiMETVy; F^rfpJdT: N 3 ; RR-dd 1: D 2 \R ; f^TcTT Gi(unmetrical); ti ddP 
A 2 


14 (b 5 ) V i; (b 6 -b 8 ) G 3 

14.8-1 Pa’s broken portion covered less text than is missing; some must have been omitted. 


14.8 Pd r< dn: W ^Rhd : Kirana 2:17d. 

14.1* ~-a 1 -Lj tRpm 4P5I <4 ■ ji d d fn yd rt ^ ^ JpiT: Sankhyakarika 12cd. Also cited ad N aresvara 
panksaprakasa 2:15, p. 142. 


13.3 ] R v ; STTc*^ Pi; rP r-R 0 P 3 13.3 °^f^rr ] PjPa; 

0 Tr£]ftl<h! R N 13.4 Pd<lldHi ] P; Mlr^lKldi R N 14.1 H l dR-^Pd ] R N P, ; ^df^d Pd 
P 3 ; R<r— P 2 14.2 oRu^'bl^R^I 5Td>4d ] em.; ° Td l^dldd P, ; ° Pd*4<h i- 

dlPdd R lV ; °f^^4<hl^5Pf!4l yrD^ld P 3 14.2 Yt ] R N Pi ; om. P 3 14.3 <T- 
Rc^kui 0 ] P; drhi <y\ 0 R ,v 14.4 m< ni a;i« n 1 <ui 0 ] P 3 ; *hi^jy<hl^l<hl {ur° Pi ; 
^"'hl^l'TK'Ji o R^ 14.5 JdY^lcH^ ] R v ; ^^Hl^dlcR*tiH P,P 3 ; P 2 14.5 JTOT- 

WT° ] em. ; JOT1WRT 0 P1P3; JWT^T + ^W-P 0 R N 14.6 °OTR] P 2 P 3 ; °^rnjr 
RTR^ 14.6 RTRT® ] P 2 P 3 ; — m° P, ; RTRT 0 R^ 14.6 " oqfdP^I ] R^P^a; ^fdrhl 
P 2 14.7 cTTPPmrf SRT ] P1P3 ; dTdH'RlY: R N 14.8 fP RfFRR ] R^PiPa ; RRH l P 2 
14.8 RT^Tdi 0 ] P; RRJd 0 R jV 14.10 °drTd^ gWT: ] R N Pj ; 0 <Jrl^ JpJp P 3 14.11 °fY- 
OT] R jV P 3 ; oftmfWT Pt 14.11 0 
°dlrHKIdlcMirdH!dr?ITpR^r R N ; —c^T^T P 



P 3 ; 0 RTcR-MIcHIT r — ?! 










































































































































































































































vrgTFT^ 11 


r^i 4 


^Jp. I ^<P|r: 

vr^RT^ifi' scfWr hi[t ^srfwr writ: i 
dirM^ rt s&Ksryrr <rt i ^IcT ii 

cTcfr ZT RH M Pu^N I (%%: Wt 




fRTST 




*r 


; f rq- 


JTTj^r Rufaidl sR~ wftrwgr? 




• ^ [3T TrH H Pa 4H c3 H' 
R^KNI4 yr(Hl^rd¥^ 


qTrfqT 


SjI- dot|: I ti ^ M<?>g 

qiTTTT Ho - pRRd' ^fd 

tf^T1 3 h ■H-q I <|<?M l om d l 

HR": ^fVcTRR' 


•^tT 5R Hl[^l" 

3*- 


M [ J =t. H " 1 R>RR 



p5RT 


21TR 



itTRTcR 


flvqW^T: 5Tt 


\o 


PT I ^T w: I 

trrnR 


7RT ?tT: Mdil 5T 


cMHI^T T(^l cM'dl 



fa'“Jrd” 3TR <M ll 


ylrhR 



:^T]dlrH^ 


14 i. SPJffar ] E; ^rrf^Tq N 14d. HrfKl«Sd ] E; om. Gi(unmetrical) • ^Pjfa: ] 

M y R N VGKi AETVy; 41 <^fa N ; -=t l m Pd : M 15 a. 5 *rfaniWt'° ] M v R N PfV 2 V 3 GAME 
Trv\ sdwr^TWt 0 N 3 ; ocrf^faiT'’ D 2 ; otiPm-ni«il ° V 4 ; 5*T—®fT° Ki • ] 

NM y R v P s ViV 3 V 4 GsAiMEv ; *RT: STfaT: V 2 ; faHIcUfafR Gi ; fa=T: pP G 2 i *W St^T 
Kl . A 2 ; °4rr smfrr Ed ; dcH«t Try 15 b. Pjfa ] M y R N K t Ey Try ; P$^ 

NVGAMEd 



(c 2 c 5 ) A 2 ; (c 3 -d 8 ) V,; [d'-d 6 ] M 3 ; (d 2 -d 3 ) G 3 
.22 ddqrti*fa fa I *T *RT: i upper vowel m&tras mis 

/ l r* 4 \ \ * f 2 3 \ 1/ . • ( ** 4 \ A 


missing in RA for this portion 


15 (a 1 -a 4 ) V); (a 2 -a 3 ) K x ; (a 4 ) Ai 


14.13—14 SK.fd'WT* • -^^rtJF^di[ h^: Sa.nkhya,k<irika. 48. 

15.2—2 Th rM etc. Cf. Aghorasiva’s Sarvajnanottaravrtti IFP T. 85, p.6, lines 
5-6* pH1lHIy ichm IdM Iti <.rq<ird Cf. also YogasOtra 2:5: 


Pirq w I Pa <. Pq<l 1 


14.15 ° fa flu i fat ; ] R N P 2 P3i '■farfr(^ Pr )'=ra T fat ; Pi I4.i6arffa] PiP 3 ; 

R N 14.16 fad fad'l ] Pi P 3 ; fa^ ddT R ,v ; fa“ faiidl P 2 14.16 dl (1 id ] P ; 

?T>1T^ Ifa' 14.17 fat : ] P; P N 14.17 oUN+ddT dWTl^TFir ] P^a; d H\ «i ^ 

rjv 14.18 dfa.gl <ldIdDdHI^Pd] em. ; hR^i i^fa ^h! P 2 P 3 ; HLI R w ; 

iTf^TTMW- Pi 14.18 rMKIsdd l ^fr ] R N P 3 ; —^rfat l',; HMq'fafadY Pg c ) P 2 
14.21 HHHIWTR ' 1 ] P 3 ; 31—Hrl 151 Id 0 Pi I U Slid ” R N 14.21 *Tl^- 

^rd- ] R" ; Rfafa P 14.21 d'Hdd' ] P ; V: ^ R w 


21 














































































































































































































Pi pq ^ Pi Q i ch H frrft^T Hi^hhi FJZ[r|T 'hcdl iTdt ift^ 


sft^r(: i prrpr ^r^rRr i =r ^r^rrHP.f.godtra 

(P 3 f. 5 r ) I ft^‘ ijtr^RtT: I 


<1 d 5 i H •H Pm 



*TTWT *ft fW sftW faWR^T^ftW: II W II 
^«iiir^mi m iHI j m (lr]^r)wr (fc^rfw qr^iiP h tff feHl at 



•' J TT S HT Htn - : 5 R 

: H^rarwRT t f^T? 


■i^-r t-TTf^nt: i pit t Pnf^f^wqt^) htt^itt 

(P 2 f. 33 r )Hfa" HI \\ti I I cTcT: *TT- 







rTTT 


fw {^tf^TI ^ 


r r r Ff 3 T f^ 4 rfPTlW HI'd^HH^dd : 

^ <3 

H l m \ cd~ dW d Pd Pd d add'd II ^ II 

3TTrf^TpTd^vPr f^M hi i Pm t fdt h%cT 



d , Hi*+iiqi %T oJrfdfrwr: W ^Pt>d : II 

\3 

'Ttril)RPi1rq-c1^qH^ d4^ ^dlT JTRTSTpfr 'hnlR'l ftpHd dMT 

15c. °fr H'lffj'fl ]^ MMl A P 3 V] V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 A 2 Ev7yy; 'ft" N ; fijvf)(^Hi ° V 4 GiM 2 Ef, ; 

Ki; r^Hir^Hl 6 A,M • Sltarr ] NM Y R N E v Try, »cpiT SE D 15d. °^T- 
S^fpTtT; ] M y li N VG 2 G 3 Ki AMi M 3 E7i-y; °fq i^cfbici: N; KH1 J|<t: G 1 ; “ H l RiM' l dd : 
M 2 16a. RT tTT ] M V R ,V E V ; ITT W NSE u 7>y? 16b. oRcT' ] NR^VGiGjK) Ai 
M 2 Ev Try ; °y)d 0 M y G 3 A 2 MiM 3 E D • : ] NM’’R v V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 Ki AM,M >E7rv; 

l^:(T V 2 Gj ) P|V 2 GiM 3 16c.RTdc^] NM y V 1 V 3 V 4 G 3 K 1 AME D 7 Vy; R-v .’ 

RFTtc«r o P| ; RtrV V 2 (unmetrical); RKftd - G, ; HUflr^ G 2 ; RTfRv !6d. 

NM P 3 V 1 V 3 V 4 GKi AME/Vy; tiT-iI ht 1 : R‘ v ; Rirf^fRcT V 2 (unmetrical) 17a. 3HI Q ] 

S ; N * E i '“RrTRT M 2 ; ORRI^- M, 17c. RFTT ] E ; IT# NP| 

■7d. o^RiRctj:. ] M''R' v VGAM 2 M 3 E7Vy;^5Z^(fm N 3 )fTWT N; K, ; bufodH 

Mi(unmetrical) • H* ^Rnri ■ ] E ; H" M 2 ; m■ Mi(unaietrical) 

15 (c 4 

16 (a 1 

17 fa 6 



c 6 ) G 3 ; c» V 4 ; (d 2 -d 3 ) A,; (d 4 ) G 2 ; [d 6 ] M 3 

-a 3 , d 1 , d 3 ) G 3 ; (a l -c 2 ) V i; [c 3 ] V 4 

b 3 , d 8 ] M 3 ; (b 3 ) G 3 ; (c 5 -d 8 ) V,; (c T ) A 2 


15.6 RFnvPlRfT^jfT: Kir an a 1:19c 

* 

15.3 »y-HlcHc3H ] P,P 3 ; « 

^ ^ P 2 15.4 °HHTm 1 R N ; 



RJVp 



2 15.4 «si'Mi)4 ] R w P 3 ; 

P 15.7 



-=T^- Pi ; 

R" : — 


5 TT- 



Pi ; f^GTf^TPr P 3 ^ 15^.8 THt 5W RPT: ] PiP 3 ; TRt U RsTt lipTo R^ 15.8 m%7T 
° 1 H^PiPs; ^(5 +^ + ^1*4 0 P 2 (miscorrected haplography) 15.8 fT?T: ] P; 

R v 15.9 HfTTTPRra-] P; frfTWRT R N 17.1 4»H l f«{ ° ] R W P 3 ; —Rr° P, • 4iRT» p 2 
17.1 “SPfrfr] R n P,P 3 ; o^- p 2 












































































































































































*% 


vrgrFPf- ! i ; 


JTfTt >sfr I 3T^WT cfPT 

JT^T f*FTI 





| TT ^FTtfoT) clrSTftft 







Pin H'iKiTT 1 wi 


iFf «foi-NM < u lc^H f^F H^nld 


JT 






cT 3Tf«rilHI -<H I < I rj u f^ cT(P 2 f- 33 

L « 

i FiTr^ «# 






HcTt ffo 



^Trf i^r cf<^n>r ^tptt 
5 jHH^ wrf^T ?^TW^TT: 
3T=T <J 4 M ft IVI fT 

- r;r j ^ ,^j- 

H [ i| K. PT (+HI fV d d l~H r^T) 










■Hrl 1 


^FT ^TRft I 





;q~gj pH i <\ i>| 'T^pT-H d ' 4 i ^ I Pi Pi I 3 FTR"*!*- 

M I <11 rMd f 3T 'H PH PM ST W HIMI'T>i 4 cTS^Rrft 

*rr sfr d rci i ^ <h M 'Pr >j<h i <j- ri < fa ^tPt 

i fddlPd^^ SHTWcT ?f?r I W drq^q'iisjicH'r.cq+i^ 

18 a. «^r 4 -] S; °^r a,m .mw]£;flror^ 

S^T: ] NM v R iV Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 EV Try\ $d^a ViG 3 AME d 



18bc. ] ora. Gi 18b. fcfT 


18 (a l -a 3 ) Vi; (a 5 -a 6 , b 7 ) G 3 ; (a 8 -b 5 , b 8 ) Ki 

I 7.2 II"; P 17.3 “ 5 ^T» ] R"P 2 I _ 17.3 ^rt fw ] 

D P . XT M <ftu~ i l[ur R N 17.3 4 drMqxfr h^'I r^R I ] P 1 P 3 ; cTrST^rfr(rn 

W. ; U tt» 17.4 4r- ] l>, P. , 17ft R“ i TO«C P. 1 

p~p 3; 0 R N ; ^F^FkT 0 P 2 17.7 STRTWc^T 0 ] P; U TWc^T° 

R N 17.7- 8 0 < 'J\ H ld" ] R N P 1 P 2 ; ^^PTTrT P 3 17.8 3T^t° ] R N Pi ; 3TT° P 3 ; P 2 

"' ' T: ] 



17,8 o t4h 1 <ic(uj^ ] R jV PiP 2 ; 0 ^HT + ^ ^^ P 3 17.8 11 

R N ; RTlW ^rgW^TT: P(Pi’s eyeskip) 17.10 Hl ^ T RP^^T'* ] con i- 

Isaacson* cf U FIT R N 18.1 °ftw ] P ; °ft* ^TPtf cTW° ] R N 18.1 ^PRT ] 

pT ^ R» ; P 2 18.2 W] P; ««T- R N 18-2 WTftfiri ST- 



O C * 
r 2 » 


j,TnJ- ; _g^R- fTfrfET 0 ] P; >jar u R‘ Vq ‘ : )<t^“ R n is.3 st] P; ^ u R N 

18.3 eterr dA-Hn r ^r=i ] P 3 ; RE=fr R N ; *— Pi; 

p“« 18.4 cTW» ] R n P 2 ; =TR Pi; R ?3 18-5 5m I 3TV 

1 P, ■ Ufiirtld ' 5% 3PT fTrgRdHI^IrM+H' 3TFR Pi ; Md^d ffR 3PT cRT 


rr^ HI <J l rR H h HT P 2 ; MM VJ ^T U RRT R N 


9 


12 


3 


















































































































































































































































^wi'(f^l<£lH c^ rh-H I fJcfT) 

dTT 3pT i 

3HT mHJsIT: 

3TTc*TW cffWr^ HI IcH^I <U|tciHwPI: || 9q || 

\o o * 

5fmr Hd'HiT 

3TdTpl:—'bH'JIIHI ^dl ^'hlPd^bcd dW d^Tcd - sfr drd^ddl - 
tefWcTHTC Id I anr dT(P 2 f. 34 r )?TRIH- (R"f.i32«) 

=rr%>«*»i f-d «t»'fi d^cl — 





d'rdW dT Rid IcHd i M^cd Id)d ld_ 

5fT dTT: ^cdTPr: II 


dW H^JT: HI IH H I JTT^nfM?: 



*prk 


dTWTdmr sfr st^ttt^it rr aIhihii(* ff dididi jt- 





•Mldl <d 


N 


W ] 


M 


18d. ] M y R N VGAME Try ; T9]T 
19 a. srr^FTT 1 E; sftW N 3 « 


18c. ^ I pH ° ] E J HJI cH 0 i ^ j z-j , v h j.vi 3 

’^T^T^TTr: N 3 ; T9JT^RTRWr: D 2 ; : K i 19 a. J E ; STT^T N 3 • JT 

rf^° ] R n VG,G 3 K 1 AME; HcT^* N 3 ; RcT D 2 ; M y Kj c ; HHfd 0 G 2 K|7>y 

19 b. Mrl'W^ ] M y R JV VGKiAM 2 M 3 E; HW: N 3 ; RHcft D 2 ; H'dfd<* 0 MiTby 


18 (c^-e 5 ) K i; (c 6 ) A 2 


19 (a 1 -b 7 ) Vi; [a 3 -a 6 ] M 3 ; (a 8 , b 2 ) G 2 ; (b 5 ) V 3 


19.2 °TcT I 37*7 h I ^ I d is broken off in R A , but is so reported in tFP T. 290 


19.6 Hf^T: PqRrft RRT Kir an a 2:12a. 


18.6 ] em.; °TflP h c^J*H R N P 2 ; °f^'< P 3 19.1 ^4uilHI ] 

R N PiP 2 ; P 3 19.1 °^IP-d'ti ° ] R N PiP 3 ; °^|Pt 1 ° P 2 19.1-2 sfr 

] p ; er* U R n 19.2 ®>TTW ] R n PiP 2 ; °W P 3 19,2 3TV ] 
R n PiP 2*, P 3 19.3 TT%^nf%^r° ] R N P 3 ; ™^tPtRT° Pi; %^>rpTT^r o P 2 19.3 *r- 

R A Pi P 2 ; P 3 19.4 cTf^pi ^T] R /V P 1 P 3 ; P 2 19-4 f^RTrMH f ; 

P; r^HIrMHI R N 19.4 rl<^^PH ] R N P 2 ; rTC^PT PiP 3 19.4 f^dfnPd j R^PxPa ; 
?^ftrFrf P 2 19.5 sfr RFT: sR^'lT: ] em.; °xTc^f«^TT^f4>T- 

rramtfr «f*t $cn<)y: p 3; °tTc^* u mAw-- t: R n ; o TTc^r u few 

’f 

u IFP T. 290 ; °t^ij^|%P4vRT—^ c^tT: P x ; x rP^ x IWcTST- 

'JT+’>fT + ( RrfT P5 C )RrT: P 2 19.6 R^5T: FTRTFfT ] R N Pj ; R^PPT 

KFfr P 2 ; P 3 19.6 °f^pT: ] PiP 3 ; °f^raT^'4rTI^TlI^4' R N ; 

°r<PH^i5 pr )t^n'^'4 p 2 19.7 Rf^r^ro ] r n p 1 p 3; p:j c ) <> p 2 19 . 8 !^ 

5T^ocr: I T ] em.; |f: 5T^T: T ^\q| rM t \: P 3 ; ftf 

U ^cf: R v ; —^^ , MlrM'dld1P^I^|c|fcJH : Pi ; —T KJnpn|rM-dTcfl^dfcJH: P 2 

19.8 ] R n PiP 3 ; HP^^lPir<d P 2 
































































































































































































































pH 4M < ^ H t q MI qH I 

^T=qT^Mfl^T(cr I H^rht iirVl q i l%f y mnHl 

%■ | ?r ^ | oij | H <ti * M H I r \ ^ '1! d ■+< I V <ti cq Id[I (P 2 f. 34‘) 

Idd d H IdY ^1^4 Ih q H J 4"PT 









Mfl^-ld I T y*^UdMIH«h) (P, f.9*') 5TRTJI 
y HI u| pH V i d I q I Ri H"?Fr 





VVqi^ -iT^TT 





* 

* 





yTT^r^HT 






fr HHl4^llcd£MHIHfV'Y4t TRr^%rpr - 

^H4ir<ddd<MN^yc<T 

: | TIWRvfTT yfdslldt S*T sfd" I [q t>-£dl - 








(HdHUHlMd^iVd^Wsiqqdd 

b r q ^jr^r? y q <-q wi iu<i ch-a) e| hThR r ^jwnr i cTW q^-q^i 


J I d> I < H H * T^nr d ?jf>! f - -rTTv-r --. fo 4TT(P 2 f. 35'): I 



d~ 




^frr i ddfr drt>i)4dV: srerrsrR 



19.23-24 ^IcHHY oTrfeP=^fr Sr^MnVf « 


19.9 «irerf=cr ] R^PiPa ; ° PUHI I « t: P 2 19.9 SI <W H 4 <i H *>i| d f| | <jh ] P 1 P 3 ; siiqddMwjqtii^ 
rn . jp^q-; P 2 19.9-10 0 ] P; '(i^nW R* 19.10 1 1^1 ] 

P :! ; cmwr qR R N ; T^' P 2 19.10 °HHlPWr^ ] P 2 P 3 i "R^TR RjiHIcI R‘ v ; ---P^Pi 
19.1 ] ^f-y|oi||4 + ^4HNr^HI^ + |Pd<tir«(rd I ° 4 IH 4 il % ] Pi P 3 i •H t ' 4 IH'f>Hld *-mI LJ ^RtfirfSTR 

U R N ; TlHI I =il IH "til ^■MMI'<c^HI'l + lTd < hc<<lcr °4 IH +1 P 2 19.12 pR^Rpft" ] em.; Piq-rJ * 
trpfr P,P 3 ; U rfRpft R N ; fir 44HIH1 P 2 19.12 sjrctr firr^trfir ] em. ; «4i«4fiiq^<4d P 2 ; 

°q i 4*fVl4Tpjrd P 3 ; ^ I M^fi) j^4fi r Pi ; U fippfrfir R N 19.12 spsr fwrt =rp=qt ] R^Ps i 
^ fsrspTT— P! ; fwiTr^ P 2 19.13 “Jm^TcTI T ] P 3 i 0 W ■H J11 Ri fd R‘ v ; “shtot ‘ 2 


19.13 n^RT] R” ; om. P 19.14 STRWfT” ] R n PiP 3 ; om. P 2 19.14 »«fiRTTT" ] P; 
og-RTTtrraT 0 R" 19.14 fi^l4 li=(14 <ai|Pd RftiP-d I4'i' ] P; R U lit R v 19.15 0 <nI tfi ] 

^iWf 0 P 3 19.16-19 yMJftirdld • • • 'fTTHIdVlRd' ] R ,v ; Miy<tirqi%«loqHiqoq'lRq 



Pf’Vs eyeskip) 



9.18 HI trA ^ 0 ] em. ; HIH^° R v 19.19 °f^ftV ]^IFPT.290; 

■_zfr R n 19.20 STErfiT RT 0 ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 19.20 STfiTsTTcft 5«t ] em .; 

19.20- 21 Pd '■441'41° ] R‘ v P 2 P 3 ; fd ^ 0 Pi 19.21 «5N^t4T° ] R ,,v ; 
P 2 P 3 ; HRT— Pi 19.21 ° ^l=r-T fi4~ ] R N P 3 ; ■>dUlddA=r P 2 19.21 “gTcTTVt'* ] 
RNpjPj; olflV 0 P 3 19.21-22 o^TfeRTTRI R] R !V 'P 2 ; 'dWR PiP 3 19.22 Prided - 
P; Pv i dcd^R R N 19.22 ofRRfirfif'] R n PiP 3 ; ofWRTRTfirfir P 2 19.22 gWR ] 
p. R N 19.23 « 4>KHH » ] R' v PiP 2 ; o+KIRTT 4 P 3 19.23 ] R V P,P 3 ; 

ogV^T P 2 19.23 R] R^PiPsi HPi 19.24 ] P 2 P 3 I Rfi R« 


































































































































































































































fid I d 




27 


30 


33 


36 


fl £ Id'HI Id d I cH'dl S^T^lTd ^Icdldic'l 13rd |<y cj f-»-TTdd 3 [4 Id I 





i 

Huq<-^c4d ^wm«Mrr I dlddl ^HI^ldllH fdPdddd : sr^RFd 


^nfftfcT 


W <T 



S c*FtTN IHH H dl rfFq 



JT^^RTT HI4iI M\ <t>C«11-+)IVId> $c^Md4d ffd - T ST [ddlddy 3d - 


ST^TWrf^fd" TI^(P 2 f.35")(^Tf^RTl%W: I dd3i *T)44 )*i <P§dleM|J|- 

'rm W JTtT: fd£1dlcdHdI - 



i 


i h 14dr^]^j>cl: [4di44(d 


cT%T WTWdt rTHTT^rdP^^ JTrTFT f^O^T ?t[f^d I«tA < O- 


w^nr^TT t i 

*TrPr SsTFT W T f?R H> I 7 *b J :Ri d 


II n II 


3TiWT $| 14fdH d I d I fd HM dlRdl: 


19 c. ] M' R^ Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 EV Dry ; Rd 1 511 d m ^j -4 d N; h vj nd ( r4* G 3 A 1 M 1 M 2 ) HdH 511 - 

T(^A x MiM 2 ) V x GiG 3 AMEd ; TSJTWRTsfTT Ki 19d. fd<H>H<MR ] NM y R 7V G 2 E v 

Try ; ^FtT (fifT V 4 )THiR<tH PfV 2 V 3 V 4 ; fd <HiK4W.H XGGi ; —Pd di G 3 ; Pd <H>I ddd 

Ki ; dfdRHiK* A 2 MgEo ; df^THiRdi AiMiM 2 Mj c 20a. ] V 1 V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 

K 1 A 2 Try ; I <| Pci ^ N 3 (unmetrical) ; fJPfpTfrfr R iV ) I J^P D“(unmetrical)R iV ; oqi<£ (<J 
M r KS c )Pd^^ M y K 2 Gi ; «TT(«J- V 2 )ff7Pf(aj- M x ; JJ M 2 ) ^ PfVaAjM; ^fd ' R^ 
E 20 b. -qlp;d 1 : ] E; d4f^ri: M 2 M 3 


19 c. f. 133 r commences with °N" 

19(c 5 -c 6 ) R w ; (d 1 ) G 3 ; (d 2 J A 2 ; (d 8 ) Ai 

20(a 8 -b 6 , c^c 7 ) Ki; [b 2 -b 3 ] M 3 ; (c 3 ~d 8 ) Vi; [cl 1 —d 2 ] M r K 2 



19.25 ] PjP 3 ; Hl'RdWT 0 19.25-26 ' RcRpiPd I ?TpT T ^-HPdH I ] P; i^T U 

pR^tlpHI R' v 19.26 0 FferVIH IflP*f^^TRT^rt ] P 1 P 3 ; 0 Rf^prRTRT R N ; °frf ^H l cRd l — 
P 2 19.27 ®f krt] R N ; P 3 19.27 f^TTT] cm.; Jttcft R N P 2 P 3 19.27 

PrT° ] R /v PiP 2 ; °^rrf% o P 3 19.27 o ^^rR-<>] R^Pi; ° P 2 ; c 

P 3 19.28 °<ti|4H$4° ] R N ; P^^a 19.29 ^TWTTFH^TcT ] P 2 ; eTOWTcT 

R N ; ^Ruii^iT^T PjPg 19.29 °rpfn^: ] R /v P 2 ; P 3 19.30 SRiTWt ] conj .; 5T- 

R 19.31 fR-® ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 19.31 ] P 1 P 3 ; R w ; °^TF^T 

P 2 19.31 H + ml ° ] R N P! ; o p 2 p 3 19.31 ^rfqd4d =T £ ] P 1 P 3 ; ^Td4d 

R^ ; P 2 19.32 °fw: ] P 2 P 3 ; 0 f4wTrf R N 19.34 : ] PiP 3 ; — 

P 2 ; : R N 19.35-36 frf^rfI-dVcPwjH ° ] R N ; fiP^d i ^ ^rfr l^PflP^ ^ P X P 3 

19.36 °^FrT] R N Pi P 3 ; P 2 











































































































































































































'-Mg J IHd^^fci 



vc ^Tf^rrlwn^r^': f^n^r jrt jt^ii r° ii 


■jpf PbH4f JT’T: 4f^TTRi J Wa 1 'i ^ iMPi<&: I 

h n 



TIW: 




JRT)RT ^ 3 M IP k^ f*R>P-r TT T W^ '-T^R 


TT 


?W ^.mikHI 



'fr&PTT ^RW ill I'M t '"H Tr ;1 M ^ I brERT T 


cT*lT I rTrT^r <<HI-d < (*JW: T 5 TT 0^" JTcT)^r cl < 511 [d c*H 



fFT HqRT I 



f. 36 r ) I TTc T R 



cRR%Tnrfr W^TT^TT^W^: I cK^cbH 


W: 


1I nM | V< <fd'*Tf dlfd' dW ^T: y^lPddi : II ^ II 


JTR 


Hf^T H^c^dT lifted 



-^ddH I 


TT^rr M|ifiT(|Ri<|-dlHi H H Id )^rfr P <fPd Pdp^t Pi faclrq P'S! Id 5T 
| h f-i fn o=t Hh <=( 30TRTT sfci I 


-T T*1 



fen 


-RT: Ki ; 



20 c. ° fc’Tqfrr ° ] R N VGAME; °fRTRttr N; ->fRT!rfir U M v ; • 

Try ' 20 d. ] Il A 'SE; itelR N; HR: Try • %gT ] NR V Pf V 2 V 3 G AMETVy; 

fb% M v K 2 V 4 ; K, • HR HR] £; HfTH^ R v 21a.] M' R^PfGiElVy; 


c 

3 



rfrf^MT^Tcf N ; -MHM Vi ; cRRm(^TT G 2 Ki JeTT? V 2 G 2 Ki ; cirHd*TTTT: V 3 V 4 G“ C A(G 

; dr^T4T(^r Ml )*TT: M • T9p ] £; M • TTW: ] E; TIWT: N; 

thtct m 3 21 b. sfrwr ] e ; prsfr n 3 • ^twr ] s; ^t« ft d 2 ; tt^tT m 21 c. <rr- 

ymf^-o ] M r R N V ] V 3 V 4 GK 1 AEv Try ; ^ifr 0 N; Tn^rr^riV 0 Pf(unmetrical) ; Trwrftf c 
V 2 ; y 51}I r< 0 M; M^IT< 0 Ed 21 d. : 'A PdciT: ] VG 1 A 1 ME; ^^Tl^TKi) d 1 : 

NM y R N Cj 2 K i Try ; 4 ?T y fdd I: G 3 A 2 22 . Between b and c N inserts ^ i oh MldTR^^^i^- 
r?t ^rq^-d^cl cf. 23cd. 22 a. M^-rdnd“ ] NM r K N VG 2 KiEv Try ; ^q-rddd ! IiG 3 AME d 


21 (a 1 ) ViG 3 ; [b^b 2 ] M 3 ; [c 1 -d 8 ] V 4 


22 [a 1 —b 5 ] V 4 ; (a 2 -b 6 ) Vi 


6 


20.1 Hr^dI-rUf^dd ] R^PjPg; P 2 21.1 0 R^-Sd" ] P; °fc t FTT R v 21 . 1 - 

2 M l ^d ' ¥ diH l fcHI ] PiP 3 ; om. R N 21.2 °fHWT ] R n PiP 2 ; °FITfwfr P 3 21.4 °PT- 
?PT: ] R^PiPa ; ° H I rH I' d' : P 3 21.4 TTWfr° ] PjPg ; Hl^d lf^fT 0 R N ; TVjfe ° P 2 21.5 
°^T] R A P] P 3 ; P 2 21.5 ^^HiRR^dl ] R A P 2 ; ^^d'ifd'PdT PiP 3 21.5 

] PiP 3 ; dVT^TT 0 R N ; d^TTrd-° P 2 21.6 ^Tcf: ] R N P 2 ; om. PiP 3 22.1 C TT- 
4>dlfd ° ] R N P 3 ; TrW— Pi ; T 4* F-f ^drd I R ° P 2 22.1 °frfPTT ] R N P 2 ; °f1%^dMIH P 3 

22.1 ° fdft“Tfrt ~ ] R N PiP 3 ; °fd3rfWr^R" P 2 22.2 ] P; R' Vc ; 

«fdfw R Aac 22.2 ^f?T ] P; oErfwr: R N 





















































































































































































































3 


6 


^ 'flW ( 3 T|oHH) sfr dT ipr 

<i«rf*)^d1^y«ll-r1<H«<I^H 'jt: W: I 


JTW ddM I 


*THlTW: <Tr 4T JT?rr W^trt: II ^ II 

^IrHH : f^ T wf S*fP <MRhd : <t>c^ld iRT: 

\o 


fVfT TT^TW TRra f ~^Td f^-PT ^Pt P-hPd r;| '-d M-l 2 -| I ^ M M vd I - 


FSTRlT^fP sfr Hrl: 'fxr'-^cl I (?»*-G d(^ loHd iJ«tml $1 MI oH I 
3 *RTf tO(P,f.lO 
?T(P 3 f.5")fW(T: 





^(?t»dl s^prr^r ^k^wpt i ci iH- i- 

+ 1 J| J|l'd^ , (P 2 f.36 t, )R f%TFT cTtP? 

WTPT)*RTT ?T STdtHlPddl femw: M<t>l4l: I (bbdd T dSIddi^ll - 
f^TTTRTfT f%?TT)T I dTTRTTfT d' 5 ! HI f-dl c^l 5l f-d H N I cH I f^T^rftT 
f>dt oMpripJ ft>H H Ph p£: I 3TT fff^JRT: 

■d JId Idd M 

VD 

3HICH41 SH I f4<d*■«!^ I^4 $c^'-M4d II ^3 


22 . JTW ] NM y Try, om. R; rp?T: SE 22 c. ] E ; Ift? - N • HfWT: ] 

NM l 'R A 'VGK 1 AM 3 Ev7Vy; ftffW j\1 2 E d ; ftfWciT Mi . qn^fT ] M 1 'R"VGK 1 AMi 
M 3 E7Vy; TTHt N 3 ; 'TTSTT D 2 ; THTifr M 2 22 d. 5W j NR^VAAME; 

M v K 2 ; PfV,V 2 ; V 4 G! ; MHlfq G 2 7Vy; PhW J{ K, • qyjfiJ I d : ] N 

M Y IPVGAM i M 3 E v - Try ; M!g«iJ|d : M 2 ; TKJ«si <ti: E D 23 a. 3TRRT: ] E; ^ I rH I H I: 
G 3 M,M 2 • far =T toff 5Rf ] M y R‘ v SE v Try; ftvf qi-Hfti ) N 3 ; tOfM - D 2 ; ftf T 

Vid 23b. ^r^Tid : < nr rt -qd * ] M' SETVy; qvFqrT ^f?rid HdH N ; ^Rno ■ RrT: 

R N 23. HTTd TJd R ] NM y 7Vy; om. RV 4 K 1 ; WR Pf V 1 V 2 V 3 G,G 3 AE ; Spp O T d I -j d 

G 2 ; M 23 cd. ! E; ^ HI Hi -tfl JI -Lpl R i I <i I <rH -Pi (^ofT N 3 ) vrofr TS Jd NlVy^^but, cf. 

half-verse inserted between 22b and c) 


.,3 


23 [a 


-a 


M 3 ; (a 8 -!) 1 ) Ai; [b’-b 5 ] Kj; (c 2 ) A 2 ; (d 1 ) G 3 


24 [a 2 —a 4 M 3 ; (a 4 ) G 3 


22.3 ^ I-Hd'l sfr 5T W: Kirana 2:1 lbc. 


22.4 <JT: TST: ] R^PiPa ; <jtT8T: P 2 23.1 RTW ] R^PiPs ; Trat P 2 23.1 ?ffT ] R w ; 

?fff cfRT P 23.2 °9rR4?r Spr J PiP 3 ; R^ ; °4K<b: qfpRT P 2 23.2 f- 

=d-] R n P 2 ; om. P 3 23.2 aTTOOT ] R W P 2 ; 3TTOTTT P 3 23.3 <>3TTf7Tqr® ] P; 

R A 23 . 4-5 HlfriJdl-M-bM ] P 3 ; HrfrtJ'd'Nl-ti R N ; HT<dd)d l r?HT Pi; d IfvOd l Hid I 4 << P 2 

23.5 M4)Mir<JHI ] R N P, P 3 ; ydlMIdldlH P 2 23.5 fqrsTRTW; ] P^a; Rtidd l u il: R A ; ftrq-- 
mw» P 3 23.5 ST^TTST: ] P 2 P 3 ; SPJnW: R A P, 23.6 »5r^RT^ ] R^PjPj; '“iRP^vrra" P 2 
23.7 oUfdft* 0 ] P; "arfdW" R ,v 23.7 «ffr%: ] R A P,P 2 ; -fPFT^: P 3 23.7 Pfi^ l -d : ] 

R w Pi P 2 ; fWH&Idd : P 3 

































































































































































































W. I 



|^TWF5rf?r ^TRf I 

d d l wh I Pd 5 ) M oq ^ <r»cd )d"H-d i M J mid I 

Tn IddTd'Id d Id^dK^dT^fT cTT'-P-T dTFT^T'FTTdd.T T7J T F d 

pH t-M Rf I d - 

I dd^N'^T) dWT^TST^Tt SdiPqti*-q~R iq - 

T^tT oil Td R#T(P, f. 37^ d Pq d oq Ph Pd 

<t»(l|tft d&oifl dl^’HHIdrdi'i^rd I 







^dTt d" d^$1 cd Id^dl) 4d“ oqfdrfTWT- 


dijjd TTT ddl^rdfl 

H H Pd P& PTd - I d4W<R 

cfW T*rf T ^FTFT TfWFT: dl ^T%cT II II 

q- ^ ^41 dT V -Td": dddldt d I ;l Id I ^d I d^TT d -ii Psqs'i irHrSM^^id I 

srd’ dr sTR" fiH^ddcMdiit tt ^icd Id i ddw^wnr i dt-q ^4d )$rr- 


W dfd dfdc% 





T$T(Fr f. lSS^^fd 







MR 



24a-29b. ] om. G t 24a. 
rf: ] S ; TOT: N 3 24cd. ] 

A2 T^y; H ^r4 M2 


£ ; fT $U4yct>c4l4 N ; «idM v drf»^l< Ki 24)>. ^T- 
£; om. N 24c. tPt^ ] M V R N VG 2 G 3 K 1 A 1 M 1 M 3 ; 


3 


6 


9 


12 


24 (c 3 ) G 3 ; (c 5 ) A 2 

24.11-25.3 cOTJM 

The same variants are 
2:24.15 o yc^iyr4l 0 is 
reads ^ n w W ^TFT 


• • *RTM%T ] This passage is accidentally repeated in P 2 on f. 49^, 
found except that in 2:24.11-12 T#WTT is here written as in R 
written as in the other manuscripts; in 2:24.16 for q *~->i P5RT: P 2 


2-5. 
N ; in 
here 


24.1 ] R^PiPa; 0 ^HldarRl P 2 24.1 fH^: ] R v ; P 1 P 2 J f^T- Pa 24.1 3T- 

] R N P| P 3 ; R cf P 2 24.3 i&w ] R A, P 1 P 2 ; J-i R^TT P 3 24,4 T ] 

RN Pi p 3 . om p 2 24.4 0 ] R N ; R^WTT^° P 1 P 3 ; 0 P 2 24.4 °c3T- 

fefA r° ] P; q c4HHHT ° R n 24.5 ° 5 R^irrfe: P 3 ; °|Tc^ f^f R N ^ 0 sT^rpTRl > 2 
24.5 dd^M^T ] P 2 P 3 ; TcP3" T7T: R‘ v ; —T Pt 24.5 cI^I^Ich'HY ] R N ; ~ 

P,P 3 ; r|^MIWJ4lrHdT° P 2 24.7 ] R iV P 2 ; P 1 P 3 24.7 0 ] 

R N P 2 ; TTW^TTT 0 P 1 P 3 24.8 T cf^TcT 0 ] P 2 5 0 R N ; T cf^Tc ^ 0 P 3 

24.10 T 0 ] P i P 3 ; < 1 f-q 1 0 R N P 2 24.10 TT: ] R^ ; P 24.10 TT° ] H N PiP 3 ; 
TRTT 0 P 2 24.10 ° $1 H IcH I ] R N P 2 ; °^HlrH4?r PxP 3 24.10 t| c\ Rqq-i rc4 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; 
Md l Rid Id l rT ° P 2 24.11 ^TT] P ; ^TT W* R N 24.11 °T P ^]7P ] R n PiP 3 ; °g T TW^* P 2 
24.11-12 M jH^H ] R N ; — 5 fTT Pi ; ^ P 2 ; P 3 24.12 ] P; 

R N 24.13 & v^Hi | R ] P; °wjWf: R N 24.13 R^l: ] R N ; °t(wR' P 





















































































































































































































15 


6 


9 


HlldlHHd>l^ : Tid'd)d (MHI I <?H ^dfd dTT: I 

dT dTd dMdfHdlPdycW(P 2 f.37 , ')c^ dcddTSfTOHraTdd^T- 

HiRq^wi : ! ipTT d Jcm I Oild d d Id d °^| Pd Pd d fdHI I ^d : W d%- 

H <41 g l cd l <5 $l l d T^d(lcHl ffi'SJ Td I ddd^lfrd I dd: I 

fk^yf tRt dp ddf dfd hi ihi Puji i h d h 


fdd 5tM^q dd: PddTdt ddd d ddPJd: f'JpHHIdddfd ddfd- 

fd TdR J A ! -i n Hdd d H d ^ddTTfdSTdTdddr TfdJdT fdSTfd 

fV>H H d ) M I d H d I 

d*T $TRTd Td I < P J d dW grp* jry | 5^*: fEPdddT 


dTTdrfd dlWddTfdgcdTd 



dTdT: fi^dl t^d vilNHMl: 


did(r Td fddgjdr dt)^41 j id i r <Td Ph i hh i r^rfr ddrwfrngrdTd- 

^l«h<uil: I d cd^r: Py HHIHIdH^dHdfd>^»*J| dHTT- 



i" d^d 5 cm i p4<*4d (?dT: 



dRdT- 


^MHMHlRifd I 

d d ) f dt" dFd* 

5rtdd ( P 2 f.38 r )srfdddpr n^f I 3Tdd ^IdHUpH ^ I rdIPfl^fd^M 



d d HI dd: 


25ab. ] Try gives this as a pathantara to 24cd. 
R^-T: Pf ; Ri<&*^ V 1 G 2 M 2 ; V 2 ; 


V 


25a. Rng^f] M^R^VaEvTi-y; 

V 4 A 2 ; GgKjAiMaEo; 

■:f'l TT ] NM 1 'R~G 2 K 1 A 2 M 2 Ev7Vy; 3lw(=rTV. ) VGaAjM^o . wf ] 



f^Wr N ; 

Mi 

E; ypc# 


25 [a 4 -a 7 ] M 3 ; (b 3 -b 6 ) G 3 ; [b 3 -b 8 ] Ki 


24,14 ^ Iuil TTT: See /< 
25,10 TT&T 'TW: ?ftHT: cf. 


Nares v-a raparj /csa prakasa ad 1:4, p. 11. 


HIIHH * P 2 24.14 ] P; 

Pi ; ^RTTW 0 P 2 ; P 3 24.15 °ST rdttlr4 l 0 ] 

R jV ; P 24.16 dHI I H| M : ] 


0 ^I^Rd cfo 




24.14 HTKJHd ° ] R^PjPg 
24.14 ^qrfPJiY] R N ; — 

RN Pi p 3 ; ° rd~P q P 2 24.16 ^TT 

R jV P iP 3 ; rTHT ’5RPT P 2 24.17 -25.2 • • •fTTSrfd' ] R^ ; om. P(P 1 ’ s eyeskip?) 

25.2 ] R' Vc ; F4x ?T x R jV 25.4 ] R N P 2 ; T *fT Pi ; ^ P 3 

25.4 THT^fT^J R v Pi P2 5 T^fTT P 3 25.4 3jur% ] R jV PiP 3 ; ipird p 2 25.4 
^ ] R jv P 2 ? P 1 P 3 25.4 °gwr: ] R Nc P 2 ; tT^ R Nac P ( p 3 25.5 0 



5 P 2 25.5 f^J R N ; om. P 25.5 HRT: ] R N P 1 P 2 ; HTTRT: P 3 

25.6 fr^ra - R v ; Ri *«4HMi*a P 3 ; f-i «^-tipa P 2 25.6-7 V H I m Pfl4rd I ddfd-,d | u ] 1 : ] 
P 1 P 3 ] ^JTTUI 1 4nrq I *4 1 di 1 R<J|: R jV ; UHIU|ff|^rc|Kr«JRh^l<tiKU|: P 2 25.7 ] 

R iV P 1 P 3 ; P 2 25.7 0 RPJTT° ] R^PiPg; 0 P 2 25.9 ®%*ro ] 

R V PiP 2 ; p 3 25.9 ^THl] R jv P 1 P 2 ; dddfd P 3 25.10 1 P; ^rftq - q^T 

R N 


* 




































































































































































































M £ JIH fc * Pi n i m \ fwr^rTt 



I *r r^TT Irrg: I (^ff sTR^4 I Ph^ 4icopiedcqdt-q I 

rj < ^ ?t. m i fgfw 1% ^rRmvti ^ n i «b rn d j ^ i ?nr wwntr- 12 

37 cf|f^ 4cd H I'RH I"Fh < Pd cm Pd ^ d I M d *1 **4 =1 dI <41 cd < T> T(l 
tH<4d l cH<fr $TTT rTF^T =T IP=l4^*TTT: d^jqjcl d4^d XJT^nF- 

v) ri t) 4, ^ M J T d d d d P<T I dTpT rfRT did |J I I d Id 'iTPd P rq | Pi ^T# - 15 

cTcT PQ (P, f. 10 r )3PPT- 


I 

"K 

d R-H> 15 i l * 11 cddied I Pa r^q did 'iPT dI :l I d" HH) d hI *JWT: I 3TT- 

MH^KldlfH ' tf ^I^WpMi i mMUffR TI cRTT (P 2 f.38 u ) ff 

TT^f^T^r^ 511*1 *i^ IVi ttl Irl Cl RiCl*i^ II II 

(T^WfTRt fVr^T ^M*^rH<yd tdiqi^rH'sH'HT m d<i 

^dP^Pi ’ d-ld H dfdd ¥ ^TIR J mP^ITR!" S^MirHd : I 3Tt ^1T ^^T- 

^ I 

HR u ll4l GdcMW %cPTPT T I 


q- : qpvu nrqt dY s%w: fd^t ffrr hR^ ii (h i<i«?>=r - 

YP) S ^dddrdMflf fr?T^W dRP^l <I-MIr-RT ^qi^Mdqdld) 

: | 3ffr ^ PddHH*fR“ ^Td I d^idK'fidqdiql ^T- 



NM v R' v G 2 T>-y; 



VG 3 AME; T 3 ^ Ki 25d. °-H PfH fd Pd • ] M v R N 


25 c. sir . .. , _ . . . _ . „ 

P 3 V>V 2 V 4 GA 1 ME; “-ilrfjJl fir° N7Vy; — Rr^Ri 0 V 3 ; °<«IVh Rfw° Ki ; MMWl, 
frifr| ° A 2 (unmetrical) 26 a. °^ 1 ch] M Y 7Vy*, R M^ricTtl N; °^7T. 3Ywnrr(f5T5T Mi ) 

R N VGAME ; °fw RlW K, 


25(c 5 ) A,; (c 8 -d 2 ) V 3 26 [b 3 ] V 4 


25.16 <pu'ldH'WfrfM-i’ J “iJ J M <|«Iy 'fiT?r ad 1:22, p. 52. 

25.11 Hd l cM I ) R^Ps ; tTSTTcR PiP 2 25.11 “Pdctl^H ] R N P 3 ; P 2 25.11 R^- 

<HKfHf q-« ] P 2 P 3 ; R%TR—fR?q-» R N ; R%^TT^Rcq-» IFP T. 290; — fRRq-° P, 25.12 5T- 
srgwr ] R; ara’arpiR P? c 25.13 ] R N ; iTc^RW' P 25.14 R45q ] R ,v PjP 2 ; 

fl p^c ; h^3 P 3 25.15 r^'J'OR I 'll Rl ] P ; 'i'li ch* i iP h R ,s 25.15 Rd“ ] R* PiP 2 ; 
Rt P 3 " 25.18 RTsTR" ] R^PiP:, ; 5 RRR P 2 25.18 Wt ] R~P,P 3 ; fReT: P 2 

25.19 ° hR» I IR ° ] R N P|Pj ; ° Rj9Rm i P 0 P 2 25.20 ] R^Ps ; (WT P 2 25.20 T- 

RK l ^rHanfr ] P; TRT?T dPrHHT m' R‘ v 25.20 RT ] P ; RepHe^q R ;V 26.1 fit SddH : ] 
Rjvp, ; RTRfrRT P 2 ; qHdHR P 3 26.1 RVT> ] R V P 3 ; W—Pi ; WT RVT» P 2 26.1 «ft- 
■nt] R ,v P 3 ; ° pqP-d P 2 26.2 °cRT ^dl^HfdRIRT ] R ,V 'P 2 ; »cHll 51 Mr<hRTR t PiP 3 














































































































































































































row 



JTTT: I 3FW 

form : I 

oqfdRrh^dH^" 

RW ddld I 



r ^d)d wj,!Im srsrpr) 




^tT ffT {THJT^T TTT: i 


d M I i H ! f< d H ^-JT ft TTT R f^JcW: 
Rf^rcTSPT TR- RFR TTRT R far 


^ II 


ddUlc'HHHd) (P 2 f. 39 r ) *ff SHT<J Nfad K^HHTT: RRFT: R ^T- 

TTTfasTT TT{^- ddHId frTTT rd\Pd<dlRicdl)^T T*TT 4dd l vrvH^ I £ l 

*TH I d | [d H-I fH H f (R " f. 134 r )ar: I 3TT TRlfafar s^dd | T^T H^TPT 

TTRT 5T8TT RpT d HI I P-T dW: PTHTTTPrftrTKW: dpuim'l 


ifafafa 

T <fat 




snw^d fd Rrtid h m 5fr^ 


3TT 



TTTrfg^T: 3Tfr 'UfH <fl4fa4dddld <ufaf<c| cf- 

$c^dci dr sPr *T w: I 


3MTWd 


TfcTd" sTm ^(TTfJcdT'T I 
WltTRlTT^ faTT: I °dlHd>fd c[ Rd'dld - 

PTRTT fTdfafgfaT: RR d dl cd Pd H)V: I 3PT dTT^d HI I Tm fTRT 

~ ~ ~~ ' ~ •• ■ I fc ■ M ■ Ml I II MM I I ■ 

26 . IT^T 'J3T3" ] NM y Try ; om. R; IT5T: SE 26 c. d <41 ^ I 0 ] E ; d4l^l ° M,M 2 
• ° <TRn ; MT? ] M y R' v G 2 KiA 2 E v 'IVy; °?TCFHT N 3 ; '‘fT^dt D 2 VG 3 A 1 ME d 26d.fa- 
^ft] N 3 M y R N PfV 1 V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 AM,M 2 E7Vy; ftdTd D 2 V 4 Ki; fe.!M 3 • T ] E; Pr 
V 2 • firmer: ] M y R ,v Pf Vi V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 I<i AMiM 3 7Vy; rR^RT: N ; f<Of: frT: V 4 ; 

M 2 27 a. R^nrar^] M y PfViV 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 AMjEoTVy; R^3T: ST8T^ NV 4 ; W- 
^yd<) R N Ev/; STW^ KiM,M 2 27b. OT] L; fr^Tzy”' • =T f<E ] 

NM y SE D 7>y; H%^T fW R N E V 


26 (c 1 ) G 3 ; [d 2 -d 3 l M 3 ; (d 4 ) A 


1 


27 (a 8 -b 2 ) Pf 


26.6 R^PjPg; P 2 27.1 °<1PIt° ] R N PiP 

R v PiP 2 ; om. P 3 27.2 Q f^5TT (T^T ] P 3 ; R N ; < 



«rrcat° p 3 27.1 r*] 

— P! ; °fe?TT rr^f p 2 

27.2-3 %rTTP^^|^| NI Rir^ ^4^: ] Pi P 3 IFP T. 290 ; %RT—-ST: R N ; fW- 

Rr^rnWfy: p 3 27.4 RT5T: ] e/n.; TP7T 0 R 27.4 °r q i~ <^q : ] R-^Pjp^; °pqfT^TRT: P 3 

27.5 ] R^Pa ; R + rT-f ^RTT P 2 ; cf— Pi 27.5 ^PlY ] R Nc P 3 ; ZTw R /Vac ; ^T- 

: 4- P 2 27.5 ST'JT^qfdf<fti 0 ] P 2 P 3 ; STFwfRfTWr 0 R N ; — RoLffeiRcti 0 Pi 27.6 rPR: ] 

R iV ; ePPP P 27.6-9 ] R n PiP 2 ; P 3 (eyeskip) 

27.6 °^^d^ld <u[ o ] Pj ; u Tdd'l'd <u| 0 R^ ; °^|<c|KU| ® p 2 27.7 ] R^p! ; 

P 2 27.7-9 Rt $fR—°fRRTsr : ] om. P 2 27.7 R^FT: ] R v ; f^’ ; ■' fT: P[ 27.8 ^1|o<* 4 1H<=hl 0 ] 

R N ; Pj 27.8 R N ; °RRRP Pj 27.8-9 R ' ^ldPMH I >f 1 P, : Rfr^T 

U vT R* v 




























































































































































































I W M^f FT H^(HTf%T 3U<H*HT) <i^i^iqi4cqt-M 

kjHNHf -HI i'll ' Jr n "1 7 Mp'JlIH ff^r *T 4H^d< (P 2 f. 39 r )'J ; ---‘ Vy I 

3TT frnST^rT: 


*{'NM r -ll^ I 

\D 

f-VHp-f^T' d H fd IHT cT^#T: Rn^ci dW: II RV9 II 
dM I J -l l ffd: ^P^Pc^d ITH" 

5liwt^nw Pdt>^dll ^c; 



3TT HH P-IM J -lfd M<•'-< 






^ic|HH ,; F^"(ci|oij|M + f-£r jfo^r 


3TTfrTPr HHf-M 



TT i!l<MMI f'b'HHMHIU 



-d <) Hi I rH 

PfPTd ■-% 


Ti-'jh^ 7 ’• i T'" ; ow.^r'-RvT^nT' '* j rM h m =i i rn ^i i rr^rfmr ^ fldft 

fadl '•T^tST^TT d q I CM H Id I dcl-3 Hri^l 

I -d J H T'l T H H IM *i y ^ -s4 




pT^TT^ (dTpTc^JWT dd Pi I 3TcT 


27 . M Md ladl'd" ] NM V V 4 Ki ; om. R; 4^iT: M; mTdTT Pf Vi V 2 V 3 G 3 AE ; — 

Go ; Mi IdHIf? Try 27 d. tT^WT: ] E; N 3 ; cT^WT: D 2 • W": ] S ; jm N; 

V 4 28a. -^xt^T: ] NM V R N Pf V t V 3 V 4 G 2 K 1 MET>y; 'HTtm^ V 2 ; 'Rtm G 3 A 

28 b-29a. ] om. V 2 28 b. Pd Tc* dd ] U Y K N E V ; f^cT T dm N ; f%mT 5T dm 

Pf Vt V 3 G 3 K 1 AME d Try ; femf dT dT V 4 28 c. °3^df^TJ NM y R v Pf V 1 V 3 G 3 AM 1 
M 3 Ed Try ; °^dfffdT V 4 ; Ki ; M 2 ; E v • ^iPmT ] E; 

srfifT N3K1 28d. ] NM v PfViG 3 AiMEd ; R A A 2 Ey Dry ; h^ u m^ V 3 V 4 ; 

H^uiT gr Ki 29a. ] R N M y E v 7Vy; d d^RhflHI^m N ; dm d^fwdtftdK(dT Ki ) P| 
V 1 V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 K 1 AME d 29b.] R N E V ; ^WT N ; A 2 Dry )#>rdfd^lri 

M v G 2 K 1 A 2 Try ; d d' ! VG 3 A 1 M ; fd^WT ddddd E o 


27 (c 3 -c 5 ) G 2 ; (c 4 -c 5 ) K t ; Jc 8 -d 2 ] M 3 ; (c H -d 8 ) I<i 

28 (a 1 ) Ki; (a 3 , d 1 ^ G 3 ; (b -d r ') G 2 ; (b , b 8 ) I J 3 ; [c 

29 b. Testimony 


1 >) G 3 ; (b'-dn G 2 ; (b 1 , b”) PJ; lc 7 -d 3 ] M 3 

of V 2 resumes. 29c. Testimony of Cji resumes 


27.10 ST^RP] R N Pi P 2 ; STT 

29.1 


27.10 °mfdd 3TTdTdim ] R n P 2 ; °mfw mdTTdTrdW P 3 

p 3 27.10 d hj 1 ^ m 1 4 0 ] R jV Pi; dwrd^mmct 0 P 2 ; drrnm^ 0 f j 3 

T: ] P ; 4tT: R N 29.1 ] R N P!P 2 ; %d" + dT + RdTF^ 0 P 3 29.2 WT ] 

R N Pl P 2 ; om. P 3 29.2 °^m°] R N ; ®^|U|MW P 1 P 3 ; °wmd P 2 ^ 29.3 °TO° ] 
P; R N 29.4 ] R n PiP 3 ; °fr^r P 2 29.4 d^jqft^T ] ddfft^T 

R N 29.5 TfwTpT° ] R N Pi ; df^im 0 P 2 P 3 29.5 °PdrO|rdl 0 ] R a PiP 2 ; °PdrOr^ o p 3 

29.5 °tr] P; R N 














































































































































































Rid)d 



9 


12 


15 


18 


21 


iTrO^T ^ldl-d<MpUJ|d : S'-M IH-MI T^Rl Si. : TW T~ 


rftT HH^lRhO^fT Pd Rl Si : dTWpT I cTcfT Pd£ld) W f^f(P, f. 40 r )r^T 
Pd cd d H'-d dl d : I 


Sd 1 41’ TwfdT^fr sfr /dTr: srPTfar^iT 





II ^ II 


5TWT: PPO'd': dlPbfiPld': I cTRT WrFFQ tP fTcdT ^TT- 

dlPdiP^d : Pdidd | 3qrr W srp*HMM^Jdld (p^N'- 




<.|J||41(h Ph^IP d dlfllPddiKIvPxP, f- ll r ) ^r^Rr: f^TTWT M 0-d 

•T) cd I cH H (: W- 

’TpT fe PFT 

: I ^P 





I ff^ JTHW 

*TTCl^n.dPi.)U|IM : I d-HN 

dPdfd HH H9y d I *P(P 3 f. 6”)iTTfe'hi<l]*ITd': PT r > TTTT)^4 IT *Td 

dff PTpT *T^t S*P T ITd I dTdTHIP)dHdd I dt dMHpftdl- 

4 UI : PT d7*P drd PvIdTT ^pdcT I d](P 2 f. 40 

STTfT dfd - d^-P T Pd^T(rdl’-d <hP< ij IIH : I 


dWRt STdTTdft TFd': I [T <T dMlRp^dlcHp) 



T ^fTTHdlHMddd-d iPdrdddlPd Pd"dTdT-d <rdlHlddi) 


29 c. ] M Y R N VA 2 Try ; ^c^TrT^ 

Gi ) ^T* G 1 G 3 A 1 ME ; **—0 C »2 



TT N3 ; f> r T cT 



D 2 ; cf fc^T 



29 (c 1 * * * -d 1 ) Ki; (c l “C 4 ) G 2 ; (c 2 -c 3 , c 7 -c 8 ) Pf; [d 4 -d 5 ] Mj 


29.14 ■•■^pJWT See 1:22.10-15. 


29.7 ] R N PiP 2 ; < ° P 3 29.7 : ] R^ ; ° mRu|^ P 29.7 *fW- 

g-: ] R N Pii "ftre-: P 2 ; ftrr» P 3 29.7-8 5RW] P^a ; ** R Nc ; 5fff R"- ; gfd<jH P 2 

29.8 f¥^F: ] R^PiPa ; P 2 29.8 Reft ] R*P,P 3 ; orn. P 2 29.9-10 °f^XTR^t- 

T: I ^*Sf«JS< hF sfr sir: y fdfy '-M^ ] em .; s•.';••■ ' ;[X^fa" kMh — P! ; •rtr- 

W^rrPr: I ^<Sl4) J^rf^TtWRlxrfTpsT^ P 2 ; » rq^M'^i4m ~: l ?TTdt ’ P ' Spc<^ xf l Pm Tpr: ^< I Hl 

pprfanftfr ?rr: srfRftr^- p 3; ^mwrnT u fir R w 29.11 w* ] r^p,p 3 ; 

P 2 29.13 Ri^-lT-l ] R A ' ; om. P 2 P 3 29.13 'Tfra^rT ] R^PiPs ; TfTW P 2 29.14 fra - - 

V] R^PjPa; RrT: P 2 29.14 ] R' V P 2 ; ? qwi ‘ P 3 29.14 cTTPTlr T ] R N P a ; 

H-iHld P 2 29.14 r4lr*H: ] R N ; r4lr*H— P! ; oTFRT P 2 P 3 29.16 HHHditUH » ] 
R' v P 2 ; *4cHI<4tHiTIc^d-: p 3 29.16 “RTT: ] R N P 3 ; WP, 29.17 frft ] P; aff t^T R N 
29.17-18 “ dSPTnJ-» ] R^Pi P 3 ; »^ePTT P 2 29.18 =T=Xf^4T» ] R' V P,P 2 ; H~4I VTTT° P 3 
29.19 mgr %f?T ] R^PaPa ; STITd Pf ; STPR^Rt Pf c 29.19 ] R N ; 

P 3 ; P 2 29.20 T g ] R" ; cfg PiP 3 29.21 “iRT° 1 R~ ; »iRPTr P^ 








































































































































































































































*<K ; nUdfcl J [•:'fFiT 




fg-^^«T(lfiy«bl A d7 ^ J H J "raiy^hl^l) T^Tficft S^hiThRIci rTcT 

hr *" 

I 

zff sfrp |ot) |cj <u| Rt^Rld 3nrHdl S v *( i^14cq (*i*[ ("dnd u l 

3WT: cl d Icl 

fl^'jiT <t>I pH 'fiT rfra" fTrSnTTvT d* OTT: 

ar^r^rg^TWPT dcTSRT: ii 3° ii 


- 24 



.rpjf d u ^hHIi sral% ofr d“ dr^ti’M : I 

^-O C\ 


(H^T^TT 



ciwpt 



H Pd <■} r^ll u 41 cdd f W Id«nK $c<}di qai^ld 
qlT(U| (d (P 2 f. 41 r )cddl^HJ|)HlR(d I 


W cRTT 


d"FWT dl^Hf 



dd Id 


sflMI p4"3Tt 


sA HHflf%rmdIdf^TNIddT I T cdlcddl H d I d'■I $1 ^ll 4 y dv 

T^rr^ri^fr s^ M i d^rd rAr At AA fV(^ i V< Id ^I'fidU^fr 


SPT^T T8f: M HI u l Rt^ 5I d Ri-£d I Th fEFcTFAbJT AC^Tcl 

V. II 




30b.] M y R /v VGAiM,M 3 E; rTTf^TT =T ^ dfo+>^T: N; Wm ^ RcTW: Ki ; cT^TTW f 
rTFTSRT: A 2 ; drW^ N^ d r%\ 3 J : M 2 ; ^ d<4: Try 30cd. ] om. NTVy? 30c. q - - 

gyf ] M y Pf V2V3V4GK1 AME ; rT^rf R N ; ^ Vi • aPTRT^rf ] M y SE ; aRRrf^r R v 
31 a—32b. ] om. M 31a.] M y R N VGKi AETVy; W IdH Ij®cd-bIST#T N(unmetrical) 
31b. mt%] M y R N Pf ViV 2 V 3 GAE; TafWr N 3 ; STWlnJI D 2 (unmetrical); \ f 4 (un- 

metrical); r IYy • *Pf =f cRT» ] R N VGAE; d" dTf° NM y TVy ^ • °Sr- 

T: 1 M y R N VGAETVy; °f^vT: N 31 a. °d1^TdT ] M y R iV VGA 2 ETVy; °<n^dT NAi ; 
oTf^fr Ki • srrfwn:] D 2 M y R N Vi V 2 V 3 V 4 GK 1 AETVy; R^FT N 3 Pf 31 c. ] 

M y R N VGKi AETVy; N 


32 (a 8 ) V t 


30 (a 1 , b 3 ) G 2 ; (a 3 -a 7 ) A 2 

30 lc 4 -c 7 l Me fd 6 ) V. 

31 [a 3 , c^-c 3 ) G 3 ; (a 8 -b 4 ) A 2 ; (a 8 -c 3 ) K a ; (b^-b 2 ) V 3 ; (c 8 ) G 2 

29.22 tM jt TTPficr: It is not certain to which passage this refers. 

29.22 ° 5 Rnrr] r n ; ^P 2 P 3 29.24 R^rr^rr° ] R^PiPs ; RfRr+d- + TqT° P 2 29.24 

o<nRcdfd-° ] R n P]P 3 ; 0 d 1 ^rdR>l 0 P 2 29.25 ^IdlRTT 0 ] R‘ v PiP 2 ; c^T° P 3 

31.1 dpr° ] R n P 2 ; P 3 31.1 0e hllH4>l ° ] R_ jV ; 0 ^rfe^R^ 0 P 2 P 3 ^ —c^° Pi 

31.2 0 fd^ T^l r-iT-d Hf d" fd^vTT ] em.; ° Rl^cM I^ lCd*ii d I C R v ; ° (dIcHdl^ l1^cq - 

rd^^lfd^rdHiHUIM'H Id I-d <" PiP 3 ; °fd<|CMl cm dY d" fd^HT P 2 31.3 ] P; 

3 mftr^r 31.4 'Tapn^ 0 ] P 2 P 3 ; °Wrtc* 5-<> Pi; R N 31.5 

S d l dl TT ] P! P^ ; o d I dHI K T U dldl^TTdldcd Id R jV ; dT 

p 2 31,7 y H I U| Rd < ] R jV PiP 3 ; TRWfldTg; P 2 31.7 ] R w PiPa; MI ^-tTcT P 2 


6 






























































































































































































































PTT T afdw TFit JTvTSPT: 

JH I SoH I J 'J| S-jr^ I -H I M l ■4 I ‘M i e §'Jt1 M IH Tm ) '-j >• M ^ I H i M <-M 

U N f^rfRTT =T '<t»«4l r=t£<J|1?. v • W) W cPTT 'fFTt ^ 

Frsrq’ i 

•srsrr 3 v :\-c fti ^ 5 ± i h i~T(^r vwkuFIh^k:) 


r ?i'T chdcb^yni fam 



'il H II II 


d%dTt^r f^r fai h cm ^ dd ^TcrnT 

faWTT ?P4T d^T i>l Hfd 0 H 4)1 <«hH II 33 II 


d^rr ff [^(p 2 f.4r)dwf^rFTFT 



TFT ’TFT tdWTfdWd 


qd- ^TFT srfw rTRlT: : 5T#r: ^PT-T pTT- 

ywim^r i t <r ^h ifW>ly<P m FT)dMi-d<d-ddl s^nr 



<til^HNi|«l 4W fdd^rfdT ^ F4 fdti Fy Pi cM *h I d{mj fwTT^- $[TT 
H^Nt P=l ■'^pT) 04 ! jI e hc) d slM^dcdlTie^Pl *T(cT^F9 ^rf^TdTt^TWT- 


^ fm^T d«4pM«t»l)(lrMKHN dT ^iPhHId^c^d I dfV dT fSTCHI 

32 a. rT^TT ] NM y R N VGj G 2 E7>y; cprr G 3 A • T df^T eftW ] M y R N VG, G 2 AE,/ 

7Vy; Trff^Wft'N; cffed sflW G 3 (unmetrical); df^TSftW E D 32b.] M y R jV VGKi 
AE; HHyild N ; jRT RcTSni: Try 32c. ^ W^T° J M y R N VGK x AM 3 ETVy; 

^H 0 N 3 ; ^"rT^T 0 D 2 ; ^TFf Mi )^T° MiM 2 32d. iw R -0 ] E ; R N E K 

33 a, °frd ] E ; °tv* N 33 b. SRW ] E ; HM |'d F| 33 c. ° 5 TR' rT^T ] E ; °$PHt1*JT 

N| 33d. °fi <1 Mdil ] M y Pf V! V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 Ki AME7>y; N 2 )TtWW NR iV ; 

RTt^iTT^r: \ 4 • Alter 33d all sources of the mufa except N add the following verse, 

(34): Ht 5fT RT%T cTC*TcP d: (^Rf: E D ) I dTHT^r>T(RT^* T R N E V ; RTT =T V 4 ) 

(rRT V, )T: SfFrl^4<]cl II 

32(c l -d 8 ) Gi; (d 8 ) V 3 

32 c. Testimony of M resumes. 33b. Testimony of N 2 begins. 

33 (a 1 -d 8 ) Gi] (a 1 , b'-b 3 ) V 3 ; [a^-b 1 ) M 3 ; (b 2 -b 7 ) K,; (b 4 , b 6 ) V i; (b 7 , c 5 , c 7 -c 8 ) V 2 
(34) (a 1 d 4 ) Gi; [a 6 -b 2 ] M 3 ; (b 6 -b 7 , d 4 -d 8 ) V,; (c 8 -d 8 ) V 3 


32.1 ^-TRtqTiir ] R^P 3 ; P 2 32.2 fTTRT ] R^PjPa ; fTOPT P 2 32.2 

r v T q^riTTt T] R n P,P 3 ; fVffll^T P 2 32.2 WT ] R N P 2 P 3 ; U WT P x 32.2 cR4T ] 


o/n. P 2 32.4 ^FP^T^TT] R^Pa; g'gl-rl^HyHI PiP 3 32.4 


P 


32.4 °\W SPfTWTR^TT: ] R 


N 


°tW P 


2 , 



R^PiPs; 

R n P 1 P 3 ; 

P 3 33.1 <?k 4 ^ErsrrfV 0 ] P; MiHAdHdrdlRj 0 R* 33.2 Sffw rTPCTT: ] R^P;, 
fPRTT: P 2 33.2 5f#T: FTTPr ] R K ; SIitiTdOtf p, ; P 2 ; ST#T flrt x T x V P 3 

33.3 fed fgfrT ] R' v P ] P 2 ; P 3 33.4 f^ d -d d fd ] R W P,P 2 ; fd^TUlTd P 3 33.5 W- 

shrf P4^r** ] Pi P 3 ; 0 R v ; 0 P 2 33.5 0 ] R N ; P 

33.5-6 ] P| ?; °<hl « R^P^Ps 33.6 cT^fv -0 1 P 3 ; fT U Rfvj -0 R N ; P 2 





















































































































































































VKMM'ti'JdfairVii'-H faTHJTWt 


vy-rp-ncn 1 -I ^ f- V -T ?T#rfafTRT Ph HI 'hd oh Cl ^ l 3"8rM HI u l $1H d^l - 

4^t4~ h1 J H m Pt ( M h i a Pm d h t fra^rr ^mIchhi 5rc^RT^ncr 

(p 2 f. 42 r ) m P*>« Pi m <t> k <fr t f hi Per i c^m er^r?r sfr 

t^iTaw(% cFT)c^ fw nnHi e%(er§r- 

u I l \>fp T T oyrfrrPrWrTT^)(P, f. ll") 'bPy^H I 

^rfFf ^fTT(rq*)U| ct) u d I riH g < 1 h <h y c (fa <, IV')rTT(T)f 

v ij mJ ii 


33.7 ^feldH i ] R n PiP 3 ; RftfWTT P 2 33,7 WMIUI^PT ] R;^WI#P 2 ac 33.8 

] P 2 P 3 ; R N 33.8 ] P 2 P 3 i H^TTT R N 33.8 9 ot R- 

qTrf SfiRur] R N ; °RP 1 P 3 ; °Wrf ^JP P 2 33.9 5T%° ] R^PiPs ; orn. P 2 
33.9 »OT T f ] R n P 2 ; 0 ^T7WPi; °^>T J P 3 33.9 n^iv) sfV ] R N PiP 3 ; tdrHi~ 
-d j lT P 2 33.10 °^r<uimr° ] P 2 ; °RfWR‘° R N P 3 ; —WTR*° Pi 33.10 |W ] Pi; 
o ^qu r R N ; Q cd^NU|rdH 0 P 2 ; °<R^<J|cdR P 3 33.10 hHW ] P ; P 2 C ; R~ 

rTW Hc^t* R N • Colophon: cfif ] R % P 2 ; orn. Pi ; + $fci + P 3 • 0 fViP U P 0 ] P 2 P 3 ; 

_„DT° Pi ; •RhOJIlW R N • fefpT ] R N P 3 ; feftR 0 P 2 





























































































































cpmr y<b J| JiH u 311 

:) 


(3r*r srPapTR srs - )^ wwfttt^i stt w w 


TT^T^hl^TTWHT^MT: STTT^)g^TT: I HldPH'h^ <*N PelP f+iMHpM^ J - 

qprTT H H wl ^ I J IJI ^ M ; I STP^fTT 4 ! “=W I 'rH # sfV (TT)JpT 

3T#TI cT{«TT ^ 5T)^: I (P 2 f. 42”) 



RW 3 RTR I 

At rcj HHd : M l rh H P^ M n I >1 f^F PF I 

r r <Mii<idl tptt 3iF^fr st r#t fern ? n 


Codices for the muJa of the third pataia: N( — N 2 N 3 D 2 and, from 3d to 19b, D 1 )M V R N 

S[= V(= PfViV 2 V 3 V 4 )G(= G 1 G 2 G 3 )KiA(= AiA 2 )M(— M^aMs)] E(= E V E D ). Codices 

for the vrtti : R(= R V P{ — P 1 P 2 P 3 )). Portions unreadably damaged or missing in Pi are 
bracketed thus: { ); such portions in P 2 are bracketed thus: [ ]; and in P 3) thus: { }. 


1 . JTW d^R‘ ] NM v Ki ; om. RPf ; ViV2V3V4G2G3 AM 2 M 3 E ; — Gi ; it *i\ * ftj II 

3PTR” : H d. ri: It —JVRjf:-— Mi la. At efTc^T HTTcT: ] M* RA Y1V 2 V3V4G2G3K1 AMb 

7>y; RtTJcRRcTcT: N 2 Pf ; A): N 3 D 2 (unmetrical) • ylftiH ] M v R A VG 2 G 3 Ki AM 
E7Yy; ^pRP N 2 ; AlrttlH N 3 D 2 lb. °TOT] M y R N V1G3K1 AMETYy; ®HIMH NV 2 G 2 ; 

f^i 0 V3(unmetrical); iHpi (?) Pf ; H^ V 4 1 c. 1 1 J 11 <1 \ <Mil ] NVA 2 7Yy; 
'TRPTcflT TPfr M y R N E v ; <|J||WJd) TUTX G 2 ; '<l>lI<Jeft AYR: G 3 ; TTRlWl U Ai ; THT1 U 
M : M 2 ; <|J| l<iri u M 3 ; RRfr E D ; TPRlwr RT sfr E^ Id. ^oii) ^ ] N 2 M y R N 

G 2 Ev TVy; R?F^fP R N 3 D 2 ; T P |V,V 2 V 3 ; ^TfR%RT V 4 ; G 3 ; Rtfr%TAiM; 

RT^k%^R A 2 (unmetrical); Rl^iH R Ed 


1 (a J -d 8 ) Gi; (b 4 -b 8 , d 3 , d 5 d 6 ) V 3 ; [c 1 ] M 3 ; (c 3 -d 4 ) K r ; [c 6 -c 8 ] M t M 2 ; [c 7 -c 8 ] A 1 M 


0.3 TT^tW r>d <1 Kirana 1:17a. 


0.1 T^TMT 0 ] K n P 2 \ v u lcRt° P 3 o.l 3TT] R n P 3 ; rHT P 2 0.2 ] 

R n P 3 ; “rraura^nr: P 2 0.2-3 0 TRRpr] R jV PiP 3 ; RPFRTR P 2 0.3 

TTTRR 0 ] PiP 3 ; t|J'ldcR° R^ ; HHf3d|J|n4 0 P 2 0.3 °7TPafIrH i hl ] R N PiP 2 ; °7- 

RMdwirHrRl P 3 0.3 °fr ] R N PiP 3 ; om, P 2 0.3 °%f7T ] R^PjPa ; °%cf P 2 0.4 R ] 
R N P 2 ; om. P 3 






























































































































HlTTWJHf^Tf^rrrat PfiT<J|frn 


(F-f dl<|[dftc«nfddl FTT<T 3TTdW dTRT 

wnjw i 




Trwrf^rRt FTFcf rTR- ^T: 



F# Ffd" dd-c4dl fP^kW T <dd'H'F II ^T I 

S^f 5RT: I 3R| I d 14 cd P d I d F ^ dl 4 * <Pd di cd Pd Pd 

sr?r: i cTcfr fft tr<r d : f4r Tiii^rOr viiir^HM^i ^pr:, ^ 3 - 

FFTF R, Pm Pd' I TTFT(R ,V f. 135 r 



IdJdfdldl dcFT 



4ft d Id I Pd far I M)W I ffFf FTF FTFT F Hid I d : , f4F 
ddld di^TF dHd PbfHId I dlficd (P 2 f.43 r ) flT dl^i <Td +>cdIcd<=h 

Od'hldid-i |J]*ldrd ,i d'S-l4c| ^irrM^lHpcl (PhH d dn^dlPn ^r4 )F 


d^Pr-Mdd I <ldd4dld MI <*F ifu| ^rdPd Pd ST^Rp: I F?|" fdTRT ffd 

3TcT WTT dHfdl^Mdd^d FFlIV: 


MJNHdN I 

VD 


F)<f»cd FW ilryl^HdlPd HdF.1 i'AH 


F(4d^<t.cdHddlPd": STR^FT dddlPd I Fed 



deft F7T- 


2. mm jefM ] N 2 M v V 4 7Vy; om. N 3 D 2 R V ; TOR Pf V, V 2 V 3 G 2 C. 3 AE; - 
M 2a.vftftd-] S; RtfeET AiM 2 M 3 • qcdVffTR ] M y 'R' v SE7Vy; q - : 
SftWT N 3 ; IT: Htlfit D 2 2 b. &H I P< 1 £ ; RRTfr N 3 D 2 


GiK, ; tVT: 

N 2 ; IT: 



2 (a 1 -a 6 ) Gi; (b 2 -b 3 ) V 2 ; [b 6 -b 8 ] M 3 ; (b 7 ) V 3 ; (b 7 -b 8 ) V 


1 


1.1 H H *>l dl^d: Kirana 2:14d. 

1,3-4 m^d l Pd’^ddl . . -Fl^cdy d* #^7TIT Kirana 2:21c-22b. 


1.1 ST^T] R n PS c P 3 ; Pj ; —T Pi 1.1 RrRT ] R N ; om. P 1.1 3TP7W ] 

P] P 3 ; 3-11^ <^1 R iN ; 3TT3T P 2 1,1—4 Fil4"• • -$fcl ] placed after 3:1.6-7 d“ tj' h^*i f^FHT in R % 

1.1 jf^PT ] P 1 P 3 ; P 2 ; R N 1.2 3TPprf^T ] P 2 P 3 ; 37PfTT^T Pj ; 3PJ- 

Tfw R N 1.3 cTRT ] R N PiP 3 ; cPFTT P 2 1.4 dd~r4dl ] R N P 2 P 3 ; ddc4d Pi 1.4 =T ] 
R N PiP 3 ; P 2 1.5 °^PT ] R N P 2 ; °^T^TT P 3 1.6 RrT Q/P dctioi]; ] p ; qr^ ^ TrfT^q' 
R N 1.6 <lWd ] PiP 3 ; TlW R^P 2 1.7 RhR-tTd ] P ; ftp R N 1.8 rW ] R^PjP 2 ; 

P 3 1.8 ] P ; ^ R N 1.9 £KPT ] PiPa ; W ?TT R N ; 4TP P 3 1.9 dl^H ] 

PiP 3 ; dt^ic^d R N ; *fTfK%3T P 2 1.9 dl^cd ] R N P 2 P 3 ; P 2 1.9 °'<ffl^cdlcd*H ] 

R N ; 0 <fddiTrdP 1.10 PTef ] R N P 2 ; ^rdld PiP 3 1.11 ^7^7] PiP 3 ; ^f- 

P^TeP R N ; +rddd P 2 1-11 Md^dTT ] R^Pi ; ■ppif^dN P 2 ; 7'IHldl^ 1.11 ] 

R N P!P 2 ; p 3 1.11 ] R N P!P 2 ; P 3 l.ll 5r^P] R^PiPs ; 

5T?rrc^: P 2 1.12 q-rd^T^MM^^d ] R N ; P 2.1 d~ddlf^ ] R N P 2 ; dddlfd: 









































































































































































































c^fTET 



3 


HiHlRr^T-dciUHiRi I Ud.^ H<rpT—31-d^dlfdl-Hl^PHdl^fl^- 

rdIJl4)J>4rdHy U|Hd^1 ?Ji(c^T I yd'MI'bd Pd <41 cl W cj) PlslH^dd 


^TTHIdld I dW ^ A d-H-ft ofr diMvi T' , J 'JI d H <d +-d 5rrT(P 2 f.43 v )dT- 


6 


<M^lPH TtfH "4H] I ^ tl I ^ cd I *1 drHMdPd W: I 

dd^ H I PdH I'^ft SF*T Pi Pi t1 (Ph cd cl 


3Tfd H n n-d dl dcd i HT cTT: %T JdHI II ^ II 

VD \o v 

TPTf sfr dRHPddcdldJ ; j tT: 


)3dwrrr ^rPr <sP-h^P) < Hddlld i cr^rftr fw- 

ToT^'H r 4i^ M11PdHH^Id^ I <MII<flHi cf M^d! d vfl ?J>cd Pith'd P-TPi' 

s H fd I Pd H Idl Pi pH d H I <5T^pt I 3TfdH l^dl )<HI HIJII^U^dpH - 

PrcTcdTcT I cTT fETdf: 


'FW K | 

\*5 VD 

ff 41 vtf H11 W Idd^d-Ndd II 3 II 


2 c. ° HI^f-ddl ] N 2 D 2 M y R ,v Pf V 1 V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 Ki AiMEThy ; °dTWfr N 3 ; ~aTCrRt V 4 ; 
0 HimfddT A 2 •Hcqt] E; Hc*fP N 3 2d. HTcTJ:] M y R N VG 2 Ki AMEThy; 

N 2 ; HT cT" N 3 D 2 ; RTcPT G 3 3a.cff^° ] M y R N E v ; H^P 0 NPf Vj V 2 V4G 2 G 3 AME d ; 
Rfr° V 3 Thy • ofadcdM ] N 2 D 2 R^Ki A 2 ME^ ; 0 fRrP^TT N 3 ; *Rd^ M y K 2 ; °Pf- 

rTc^TT VGaGsAjEcTVy 3 b.] NM y R N Ev ; om. SE D Thy • 5PfrT: ] M y R N E v ; 

T-yfTf: N 2 D 2 ; y : N 3 3 c. ] placed after 3d and followed by the pada fd R fn n RR-f 
Pt>H in SEd; placed after 3d and followed by R H Rd T f¥r in Try • 


M y c 1<5 R N SE Try; ^^Pfej 
Thy v * • 

ME d ; dlvdMNibMH V 2 
M y R N SE 


• fir ] 

N 2 ; O^llcdH N 3 ; fhsrfc^ D 2 ; ff M y ° c K5 c ; 
dlvHHRCT ] N 2 Pf V!V 3 V 4 eVT hy; ftwrr^8P N 3 D 2 ; M y R N G 2 G 3 A 

0 fjTFTRT^W Try vl 3d.fRrpg-<> j N 2 D J N 3 ; R<[d 0 D 2 ; Rda!) 0 


2(c 1 -d 8 ) Gi; (c 7 ) K] 

Sfa'-d 8 ) G,; (a 5 -a 8 ) K x ; [c^c 5 ] M 3 ; [c 1 -^] K i; (c 4 ) V 2 ; (d 1 ) G 3 ; (d 4 -d 8 ) K a 


2.2 ^^d'lR ] R N P 2 ; IR : Pi; Qt ^H <fd P 3 2.2 0 I-Ml ^ m 1 fd rfT 0 ] R^ ; °«TI^1'J|- 
vdTddl 0 PiP 2 ; 0 <-H^ 1 J IvrlfndI 0 P 3 2.2-3 °*f)^cd 1^1 ddlJ^Icd 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; dl^cdl^JM- 

0 P 2 2.3 0 ersm*r o ] R N ; P 2.3 ] R N ; Moid4idH P 2 P 3 

2.4 °^rrdTcf I Wd'd ] P ; dT^T R N 2.5 °y I^c3'l*l ] R N ; o yi^|uPd 

P!P 3 ; °yi^HHd P 2 3.1 ] P 2 P 3 ; *T*Pp Pj ; R N 3.1 d^<W ] R n PiP 2 ; 

d wtri p 3 3.2 0 rP 0 ] R w P 2 ; 0 c*TTmr o p!p 3 3.2 o ^Prr f ] PiP 3 ; °fedT j 

R N ; 0 r< HI-cj P 2 3.2 d'^TfrT ] conj .; d*Tl$cdlfc R N ; Rl^cdd PiP 3 ; dd^Hl^cd ° P 2 

3.3 °H I ] R N P 2 ; OJ TT— Pi; °Hi^d x cT^T x P 3 3.4 °c^TcT I d^" ] R N ; °cdK^ 
P 















































































































































































*011^: 





II V II 












II * II 




4 ab. ] om 




4a.^] NsD'GiGsTVy 


vl 



V 5 -!1 


N 2 D 1 P| V 2 V 3 V 4 G i Kj E v Try' 1 



N 


3 > 



D 2 ; 



R A V j G 2 


R"Ev • < 

G 3 AME d 4b. 'CHIdrei ] N 2 D ! M r R N SE; <PlcdH N 3 ; TU IcdH D 2 ; cFFT TFT: 7Vy v/ 
4c. ] M v R w GiEv ; (<J N 2 )M)^ N 3 ) N ; l^dHIKHI ^JrdM PfVi ; 

HI ^cq i V 2 ; MI I d V3V4 ; u dI ^ d ^Tl ^ cd G 2 (unmetrical) ; i^d^ M ^cd 1 3 

G 3 (unmetrical) ; qd'Wl<lc^cd I si Ki ; l^d 4 HJ H^rdld A1M ; IJdfrH I rH cdd followed by 
Hd«W W A 2 ; 7 d^ % MVjcdld E D ; OH Try 4 d- 5 a. ] om. M y K 2 

4 d. d^ll S-^ 0 ] R A Pg Vi V2V3G3A1ME ; ^THTT&T 1) 1 A2 ; cT~ dl J I^ N 3 D 2 ; cFpfp 1 1 - 
^T° V 4 ; cPpjf— Gi ; G 2 7Vy; dVRmrvv Ki • °|^T: ] R A VG 3 K l A,ME ; 

°|^5TR N 3 D 2 ; G 2 ; |^TT A 2 TYy 5 a. °^%T ] E; °cVT N 2 • VtfTcV ] E; — 

qrf D 1 ; RtfpST VA 5 b. HNH-W ] N 2 N 3 D 2 M y R^GKiAME ; HI^Nrcj D lr i>y; RWT 
Pf (unmetricai); RFTTdfrJU Vi ; RPTTdl^f V 2 V 3 V 4 • ddY fwcT: ] NGiG 2 E v 7>y; cPJ- 
fercr: M r R N ViG 3 AM; d^fWcTT Pf V 2 ; d^fPMdl: V 3 V 4 ; dFjftWcT: E D 5c. 

TV ] N 2 D 1 M y VGi 7>y; N 3 (unmetricai); ^1R D 2 (unmetrical); RT irH^l R N 

G 2 G 3 KiAME • RPT: ] N 2 D 2 R A M y VGKi AETVy; HtV" N 3 D 2 M 5 d. TdfrT: ] E; 
TTRfrr: R^Ev • RfeRf: TSffT: ] M y R N Pf Vj V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 AME ; 4T(?T N 3 D 2 ) oC^f^Rf: 


NG: Try ; 



WT: V 


Hi Pi RiSi D*(unmetricai); f=i f--« f5st I N 3 D 2 ; Ki 


5 e- 8 d ] om. Gi 5 e. fVPrftr ] N a M y R JV VGAMEIVy; 



b 8 ) Gi 

c 6 , d'-d 8 ) Gi 


a 2 ) N 


2 


a -a 


; (d 1 
f 6 


-d 8 ) N 2 ; [d 2 ] N 3 D 2 ; [d 6 -d 8 ] D 1 
-f 8 ] D 1 ; (a 4 -b 1 , b^-c 1 , d 3 ) K,; 


[c 3 -c'‘] M 3 ; (d 5 ) G,; (e 5 -e 6 ) V 3 ; (e 6 ) 


4.2 See Kirana 1:16 fF. 

4.1 »«TT HM'dK : i¥tr ] ern. ; °RT HdHKI^WP; “HRWH d<l5s ; tr R N 4.1 PTTT^T'' ] 

R n PiP 2 ; J^rPlTraT'' P 3 4.2 P; °tW R N 4.2 ^fd"] P 2 ; yddH 

R N ; Md^d ffFT P 1 P 3 5.1 ] R w ; cf Dl <1 1 H P 5.1 'j H d f JI: ] R N P 3 ; P 2 

5.2 “Mirarg-« ] R n P 2 ; »MRtT'> P,P 3 

















































































































































































































SRiTOTTr 



3 


Tt j TT( ? TT H’WTTW HIHIcHd : "'h H I fa Hcd I Pi fd W(hr 


^TT)JT: 



NH H I: 'h<u|IM ^)(P,f. 12 r ) I W 


6 



HT^T(^cTW HtW Hi <fr# W ST^T T 

H^Pp: TftfW ltd'll 

3T^n* MI^IM<14H<1 arr(P 3 f.6 u )fdSiTPp: ^TFT^TcW: 



W 


JTW 3WT I 


'v 

flrMi cFf: fRT: II ^ II 


H rlj^'g :^'l P^t vftrr 'frd T fad I Hi JI Id d *-HH ^ <ti dvT 53T(T- 

^Tr)Fq^||^K: | WT H£IMHHI<H-d4 HHHj-H"(P 2 f.44 u )qfFT (m): 

3 ^KlilRiHlH : $dRydd Pd Ph d IPd ( T ^Rf I H- qr4rT: I cT^'d <ddHHT- 

fV)Ht <4>4 Td Id d cd I Pd Pd I Hdl|> : — 

3TRfr % ^I^HHddl : #r?fT ^fw I 


6 


3TT fPr&FcT: 


6. RTT ] N 3 D 2 M r Ki7Vy; R— N 2 ; — D 1 ; om. R; TT*1T: VG 2 G 3 AME 6a. 
cT ] E; <4'<Tcicr N 3 ; ^^rid D 2 6b. *ftrr° ] E ; *TP N 3 (unmetrical); “ PTT D 2 6c. 



M r R^PfV2V3G3M1M 2 Try i N2D 1 ; ^ 1-fcT N 3 ; in D 2 ; qi^vr^W Vi 

G 2 ; V 4 ; t>h 1 — Ki ; 'tinl ^ *1 m M 3 6 d. 0 <?> P<fe ] E ; 0( MH D 5 • <T^: ] E : 

cfj N 3 D 2 • JRT: ] NM y R N Pf Vi V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 AK 1 M 1 Mg c M 3 7Vy; fcT: V 4 M|; 

JcPT E d 



r 


6(a x -a 8 ) N 2 ; [a 1 -a 3 ] M 3 ; (c 2 -c 6 , tT-d 5 ) K t 


5.3—4 ^f^T^TTR: ad Kirana 3:7-8. 

5.5 SRtTTfw <nPi 1 P 1 Svayambhiivasutrasarigraha l:13ab. 

6'.5 3TTV1 fe • • -R: Source unknown. Also quoted in Naresvarapanksaprakasa, p.212 

ad 3:87, but with MHtH i: for ^frf^^Tf: 


5 . 2 - 3 qr^q ] p 2 p 3 ; m<h<i r n ; qrqr— Pi 5.5 fkvm: ] r n p 3 ; few p 2 5.5 w- 

WT fr] R N P^ ; ifrrfrr P 3 (unmetrical); ¥wfe P^ c 5.6 ^TtW ] P 2 P 3 ; inTO R N 5.6 

^ ] R N P 3 ; WfW fefrT P 2 5.6 WZtt W ] P 3 ; ^ 51 Ttt ; SPftT P 2 5.7 °q-- 

ZVfr: ] R jV P 3 ; P 2 5.7 qTtlw rfef ] P 3 ; qrftfw: R N ; qTtfVfefef P 2 5.8 W: ] 

R jV P 3 ; x q- X P 2 6.1 fT5T ] R ,v PjP 3 ; =T P 2 6.2 °cWII^K: ] PiP 3 ; “^MTTfT: R N ; 
c eHoq^K : P 2 6.2 °Kqr<^T ] R N P 2 ; PjP 3 6.3 ^4 tT: ] R N P 3 ; RW: P 2 

6.3- 4 °w|feRt ] R N P 2 ; °HTffeT: P 3 ; —T: P x 6.5 ] P; R N 6.5 ] 

R n PiP 3 ; 0 P 2 











































































































































































f%TORrft 



WRTT I 

\6 

*PMHlR4H*dMd I 

'■S 

d'dJHlR' W M'Rh«£ tf^T %T I^TTII V9 II 


^wwt 1% W^Y (SFTTft)^!jll^R^ (l-ddl^T-Irdl ^4 w: ^DtT 
^*IH' sfr : I W- 


fr(5RT)^ofr*4r«kd: mi^niR: ^^rftrsr^r: Rn^Td idcnr 

HH^iTm %<3TTPTTT sr ; | J^rj^yrd^fcTRT tHH*4fd4 : 3TTCft f^ 

$W*nj<T WT Sc^Jtl'Id (R* f. 135 W )WT 1 T^T^- 

TTRT 5T(P 2 f. 45 r )TTfRTf^r^W^f HId I Id <h < «l cd ^ < ill fa (^ ?JW 

df'HKHlfd'b ^nt 'Midi^cj Mdfd^T I 


cTdMIR: fw: ^vTT M^HI vjRRT: Irw: II t; || 


7, Mddl^dN ] N 2 D 1 M y Ki Try; ’sfrRMdljdN I N 3 D 2 ; om. R; WR VG 2 G 3 AE ; V%T: M 
7 a. °MTf^tFR7rW ] N 2 R iV P .3 ViV 2 V 4 G 2 G 3 Ki AMET>y ; <HlRHHfcdHI N 3 ; °HlRjHH-r^7 
D 2 ; * HI R H H Wd H\ M y V s 7b. ] M y R N Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 K 1 AMETVy ; 

N 2 ; U q-° D 1 ; <?>*-H]cf 0 N T 3 ; 0 D 2 ; Vi (unmetrical) • °*nR«n+^ ] N 2 

M v R N VG 2 G 3 AM 3 E7>y; °dlR<t>: D l ; MlRidH N 3 D 2 I<i ; 0 TrfR Rnr M 1 M 2 7c. fifil^ ] 
D 1 M yc R N VG 2 G 3 K 1 A 1 ME7Vy; ^M^N 3 D 2 ; ftifkt M Y « C ; MfW A 2 8a. ^ ] 

M y R v SETVy; °Rm TT^R N 2 D 1 D 2 ; °R J i J i ( gi^ N 3 (unmetrical) 8b. h 1 di^d ] M r R N S 
E7>y; MrrqM"d N 2 D lc ; H I^NI ^ D lac ; N 3 D 2 • TO^TT] M Y VG 2 A 2 Try ; 

WrfqT N 2 ; WWr D 1 ; —RRTT N 3 D 2 ; H^rfMT R N G 3 Ki ME ; H^W A! 8 c. cTV P I Tf^ : ] 
N 2 M y R N PfV 1 V 2 V3G2G 3 AME7yy; rPTRT— D 1 ; d^TRTfe N 3 D 2 V 4 K 1 8d.^W:] E ; 
'jRlPd M 



^a 5 ] M 3 ; [a 3 -b 3 J D 1 ; (c^-d s ) N 2 
7 ~b 4 ) Ki; (b 4 -b 3 ) G 2 ; [c 4 -d^] D 1 


7.1-3 Testimonium: faRui^ Mdddl TIH7,'^ 1 J^muii fk W ^10<j 1 3F-d1>4 1 Mt-^i 1 
H cd H l 5n^T7ffew# 5fr 4 ^M Ri^Jm fI M W-TTT^nM T ^J i Pdd 1 d rTfTSra^ sfr 

<T: y d i^m 1 Id : "T-M^1 0 <y d-d - : ftr^JcTt ’ fir °d 1 1 n h I Siddhantasaravalivyakhya ad vidyapada 

7, p. 58, lines 18-21. 


1 ] P 2 P 3 ; 5RlT° R a ; —T° Pi 

7.2 °Pr ] P ; °fT ^ R N 7.2 0 


7.1 R#TT] P; frtvr R N 7.1 TTTftT 
R N P 3 ; °3fd>d— P! ; °tfWT° P 2 

6 HI^|R° PiP 3 7.3 MclIfldlR: ] Pi ; Mdl^HlR 0 R ;v P 2 
PiP 3 ; R N ; P 2 7.3 ffRgJpd ] R N ; fawtfd 

RcTTPTfT P 3 7.4 °^cd»rd^Hl ] R^P 2 ; r TfcfpT^TPTT 0 P 3 

] R N i 



7.1 »ar^i° ] 
°] R /V P 2 ; 

P 3 7.3 ] 

7.4 RHPnft ] R^PiPs; 
— *rc*TT° Pi 7.4 RTR- 



P 7.5 TOT] R /v P l P 3 ; TO^TT P 2 7.6 ydl^l 


R N PiP 2 ; 


P 3 7.6 ] R N ; 0 fi^'dV P 

P ; R A 


7.6 o^-^ar^' ] p ; o^frcrr^r 7.6 





















































































































































































sr^rnxm; 



ny 



HT: 



fi <h i <1 


TTTtTFdfTT^Ff T WT^TTTT *jrffr T^bppqY: 'T’TH ^dHn T- 


dTT(Rf IR cd Ua p£: I HTm 





n ^ ^ y| J|*i I pH y'Jir^l'-HHMir^Hl M Id d d I fr^nf^F>4wT 5T{f>fd 


dldlcd- 



TTmdTlTT T TT TRT- 


'-*H I Id f-Tgl I dTT TT^d 




: 5Td 


■d cdi d 1 4) ^ (fT SdTfr: fr{«TcTtfd 

TVRPj f. 45*) 

T5T: 



Idd-d i 



ftpT: # r^TT sftWT: <FT W PRFf SpfT I 


flT ^dr+tcir< 

JTRpf I T 



J>|<W d I rr^- ^vp 



dW) 




^(dldl^: 


T d r.^Jddl HTT TdTfdTfT STOt I 


5IT T^cT TITT-djaII 


9 . ITW ^R"] NM K GiKjI>y; om. R; RW: VG 2 G 3 AME 9 b. WW ] £ ; RFr K] 
• SPTT] NM y R N PfV 2 V 3 V 4 G 3 ME7Vy; 5T^T: V 1 G 2 K 1 A 1 ; ftPTT A 2 


9ia ] -b^) Gi; [a ,; -a s j M 3 ; (b 2 -b 8 ) N 2 ; (b 5 ! V 


9.4- 7 R ^Ha* * *V*4 KicA^4viRTMfd1d .Sioleavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 57cd, 58ab 
and 60. Also cited ad Matangavidyapada 3:6, p. 49 and before NaresvaraparTksS. 2:1, p. 113. 


8.1 °M4-rfcT'rSI'° ] em. ; 0 #OT^ 0 R n PiP 3 ; °M4-d— P 2 8.1 °>pRF9: ] P 3 ; °^rr- 

^T: R N ; Pi ; — W: P 2 ■ 8.2 ^ j PiP 3 ; R N ; °srRW <pf$- 

P 2 8.2 g-TT^-o ] em.; gH<lvrvr4 0 R N P,P 3 ; ^TTW° P 2 8.2 °iRRt: ] P; °RRfPT- 
?fr: R N 8.2-3 VHI^I 0 ] R N P|; Ps ; SP^° Pf c ; SPTT^— Pi 8.3 d^HIdHd ] 

PiP 3 ; d^MKI^d ^ R N P 2 8.4 °rRRiTlfc'dT ] R N ; om, P a P 3 ; °cRRT P 2 8.4 ] 

R jV Pi P 2 ; 0 <ti^HWPT P 3 .8.5 °^K4ic^H ] R N ; °W^T PjP 3 ; —T P 2 8.5 ^qnftr- 

° ] R v Pi P 3 ; ^Tfw° 1 > 2 8.5 °P^rrRTRT° ] R A ; <,R l ° P 2 P 3 8.6 rf^T° ] 

R^Pi P 3 ; cT^r° P 2 8.8 drfcdl ° ] R N ; ^rdt 0 P 8.8 °RT[t: ] R N ; °TTf^ P 2 P 3 8.9 TT- 
^T° ] R w P^P 3 ; M ^ 0 P 2 r 8.9 ] R n PiP 3 ; om. P 2 9.1 i^\ ] em.; t^CTX R 

9.2 RR ] R N ; dRTfT P 3 ; —f Pj ; df^Td P^ ; RW PJ C 9.2 ] R^PiP 3 ; P 2 

9,5 °dT5^ ] R N P 2 ; °?T3sat PiP 3 9.5 ] R^PjPs; P 3 
























































































































































































P=H|i|i fWPf'T 



d~ d^dd^dl ST(Pd H f% : | 


3T^TfT %m) fdTdlciWyfllddld II ^1% 


=rrfr ^ i Pd d 1 ^<iRR«i] ydTthd ^+<>J| ^th i R*<+>i d i -d 

d l*JHd Pd H&l ujd |^t| |dH dW 





fn1(p 2 f. 46 r ) T T)crr: 


d R-d -H Td ddc4d dddl S-dfd dxrdH I 
d-^rjr^d PT^T *><jd IH d d R-d Rl : II 


srw (Ttmt) fwR[^rra] w i 

^flH^fd fd7 (PTFit: d>l <uicd || ^Rf | 

5nw)(p, f. i2 t, )TnFr 



HWTdj^FlWI drftdfd I - 

'dMHHi^uriyiHi'JdM^ i t (d - ) y h iuii(^ th'RtI HF)Fmr 1 cTtftp^f- 

ST(d I U| | d | d 1d) dT^Pd i-d d Kc*T*P: I 

dd)dHd ir|d d H d dl 5^1 dTfdt^T) ?Rf f^fr dTdW- 


q^lU||dT«TndPd I I 


^ d^ < '-<d l dHci rd l edited dxd d 

«+> < u l I d I d d I d I tdFW cTfd I d) d Pi vjRTrf: 


■v 


dvTT 


\ II 

HWfd 


dF~- 


OTnfRT[(^^)d d^ d l](P 2 f. 46 u )fV’ T^F: fFdFTT 




9 c. ^TTWPo ] 


V' D A 


R" VEv ; pFnrWRT 0 D‘N 3 D 2 GKiAiME d ; sramn^T- 
oij^ncf N 3 D 2 M v R N PfV 2 V 3 V 4 G 1 G 3 K 1 Ev1>y; ° tjfd^ l d N 2 D‘V,AME d 


A 9 Trv 


9 (c 1 -c 4 ) N 2 ; (c 1 —c 3 ) Gi; (c 4 -c 7 , d 3 ) G 2 


9.11—12 <4fV*H Pel * • -^<^1 ih *i r d f^rfd": Pramanavarttika 1:26 (with 



RefJ for ^rfRT-Hfd ). 


Also cited ad Nares vara parlies a 1:4, p. 9 and 2:4, p. 120 and Matangavidyapada, 6 : 21 , p. 152. 
9.13—14 ill P=fl^ i fc ■ • •yqir^cl Pramanavarttika 1:24. 


9.6 °^rr ] p; °^rr 
o mvRTfT p 2 


HH Rl 


9.6 °Tfrr: ] R n P 3 ; °Tfrf P 2 9.7 °R1VWI1 
9.8dTfT] R N PxP 3 ; dtfr P 2 9.8 ] P; 5 






R N PiP 3 ; °TTr^TT P 2 9.9 °^T: ] R N P 3 ; *^r P 2 

9.13 ST^fh 1 e/n.; ^PP^ - P, ; WTf ^\ 0 R^P 2 P 3 


9.12 



9.13 ^W7 



R n PiP 3 ; 
R N 9.9 

] R N Pi P 3 ; 
Pi ; V- 


u l <1Hu) R A? P 2 P 3 9.14 ] em.; aim^TRT R 9.14 ?T T Tu r H ] p :} ; 

R jV P 2 9.14 R N P 3 ; P 2 9.15 ] P; o n*tT ^ R* 9.15 rPRTP° ] 

R^PxP^; cTRl P“ C P 3 9.15 ] P,P 3 ; °f^TRl R N ; G ^FT— P 2 9.16 rToRT- 

felR 0 ] R N P 2 ; dr^TTW 0 R^Pg 9.17 W 0 ] R n PiP 2 ; fcf° P 3 9.18 ] R^P 3 ; 

0 PHIy1 41 P 2 9.18 ] P 2 P 3 ; °feT R Ar 9.18 ] P ; R^ 9.18 ] 

R ^PxP^Ps ; HTfcpfT* P^ 9.20t^Tutr] R A PxP 3 ; t^T^PH; P 2 9.21 °HT3TT ] R N ; 

P 3 ; o m^T— P X P 2 9.21 pri ] R N P 3 ; fR=£rf?r d ' j ' rhH P 2 

























































































































































































































cjrftTT SPfPnjpT 



24 


30 


'5Iddl^ : 


W W fT):?TTVT: WT 



f%¥TI sfd 


fW qfctrT 'bfdddll I 3TT ypCtT-M1JI HI <4 d NI «T1 ^ <1 T FT^wfTT 

C\L J 

cTfri I 



snTTfftrr fnV(ST]dT TrrRT i 

27 ?c^)^ HT^«h«IIM«hMHI'J|MN'H^NI 



8T: I 3T? 




Turgr: 



I dry Id $1 Idd dfd Hd l[d Id f 



4 dl <dl^d : I Wfd 


d"*} 41M d> J-d cl 


T- 

HTH3i*-d |dT- 



M^NH^N I 

W ^Trfr ^FTrff sfr <^dd TOd'lW: I 

r^ldl HdT sfr d>dd d>14 Id ^M l II II 


WW d HI I (R” f. 13G r )^'^ 



f. 47 r )T^I 



*r 


10. *PldM<1M ] N 2 N 3 D 2 M v V.,K, Try; TpPMI j<4M I D 1 ; om. RG, ; M M PfV,V 2 V 3 G 
G 3 AE; ^P": M 10a. ^TrTT gp 1 D'N 3 D 2 M y R N Pf V,V 2 V 3 GKi AMiE7>y; qiH l gJ N 2 


V 4 M 2 ; gp M 


10 be. ] om. V 4 10 b. } E; fT^T D 1 


WT- 


tRT: ] M v R /v SE7Vy; °RTMdId^ N 2 D 2 ; 0 Md!d N 3 (unmetrical); °RTM^T i: r D 1 
E ; Vi ; °^T° 


ioc. ^r° ] 


10 (a 5 -a 6 , c 6 -c') Vi; [a^-a 8 ] M 3 ; (a 7 -c 8 ) G 2 ; (d 4 -d 6 ) N 2 


9.23 

quoted ad Naresvaraparl/csa 3:2, p. 155. 

9.26 3i*i cl <1 ^fdfildi d 1 cH 1 ^?hir*d<4^dd SlokavUrttika sambandhaksepaparihara 78cd. Also 

quoted ad Nares varaparTksa 2:8, p. 130 and frequently in the Mata.nga.vrt.ti. 

9.30 h P-dJ 4" £dd dd 1 sj^- dl ^ d l _ c d PSHT: PramS.nava.rttika 4:91. Also quoted ad Naresvara- 

parTksa 2:4, p. 119. 


^icTf «fiHarm'dfd f^T§FT Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 50cd. Also 


9.24 3TT ] R Ar PiP 2 ; 3T P 3 9.24 ^dldldl^ 0 ] R jV ; ^Idldfa pZTt Pi ; 

°rd|c|l<WVlH)^^- qrp P 2 ; ®vrT^frfhfffr P 3 9.24 W=^fk ^cffcf } R N ; 

RT=McratRr P 1 P 3 ; HRHddird P 2 9.27 0 SPTTWT 0 ] R n PiP 2 ; °5PdTW° P 3 9.27 ] 

R N ; P 1 P 3 ; T-- P 2 9.28 ^TTW° ] R^PjPs; ^TV^TT 0 P 2 9.28 <dfVlHd <1 - 

fk ] P 1 P 3 ; x jkk d P-H d ff fkujro R N ; Tjt: d r^M Td i I ^ P 2 9.29 0 5Tff^rtTI rRT 0 ] 

R N ; ° M ^Trl R — Pi; °STfM7^W P 2 ; 0 IT^rlTt^rr 0 P 3 9.29 ] R^PjPa ; 

P 2 9.30 nf^Kr] Pj ; Rfeo R A ’ ; flfdfl P 2 ; P 3 9.30 °gP^TT ] em. ; 0 gJPFf P ; 

°?rd' R N 9.30 Id" 0 ] e/n.; If 0 R 10.1 °c^Tfef?T ] R' V P I P 2 ; P 3 












































































































































































^(iHdl^l Rd '^'frT'FM )c^ sft 3*M 4iH I y R<£: 1 ^ ^ r “ 

HHlNdd'c^d ^f?T ^nTWc^Tf^c^Tf^: TI^wPtT#4t- 3 

WT I ddld dfi^ +HHII<4lHHiH , J| r c|| , (i^4H<j|<j| r Hdl^)chir^d«t)- 
fd ■HI | Jjdf-M | Pm I fETFdt dT«T^- 

dtfrrg;: fbTrH H1 S^fHTfV: ddlPdaf Hdl HJIHlPId I 6 

(t^pinrrf^f |f<?'*': m) s^Rh^ ifr i d^rr ff 

s^d Wrrw fFf W ^kTiRiHI W I 




^rmr th-ftt fr M<id w: i 4lH n^ 


drfsrdt ftfr rf '<rd i'4>r hr f4 w $PdR»(cd i< hi R Hh dwtwrfr- 

W )vT srfdtff 5TW: I Wf: 

3Tf^rdt f^ dRlH-d1^41di SOCPT ^fd - 1 
3PT ^<uij hI'HT(P 2 f.47")<rt’ |^<(M^d'W’H'-^'®Mc) 

v^t w> [z zzr ^ra#^- sfr wrfa: i 


11 a. n] N 2 D 1 M v R jV Pf VxV3G1 Ki AiMETVy; tK'Jiid’f-M N3 ! 1J ; tK u ldV2(un¬ 

met rical) 1 ^rm d <hm Y4G2G3A2 lib. ^ ) H M1 ] N 2 N 3 D 2 R A G2G3 ANlEThy 5 'til H1 *t t 

M y K 2 ; cT^frfRRt V ; ST^ftf>T— Ki • RdT ] E ; RcfT: N 2 11 c. 0 ] N 2 M y R N 

Vi V 3 V 4 Gi AiE 7 >y; D 1 ; RTFfT^fF 0 N 3 D 2 ; Pf ; 0 V 2 E^ ; 

3 fR^TT— G 2 ; G 3 ; ^TTf^rfF 0 A 2 ; M 11 d. ^raifpfr ] N 2 M y R N 

Pf V3V4GK1 AMEpEv Try ; £c<t>£IHl D 1 ; HI N 3 ; ^ifpfr D 2 ; ViV 2 &d 

• ] R N VG 3 AiME; 0 ft" fr^T: N2D 1 ; °fr N 3 D 2 ; jf^rtr^T: M y ; °fr 

^PFFR 7 : GiG 2 ; A 2 ; c fr Try 


11 (a 6 -b 7 ) Gi; fb^b 7 ] M 3 ; [b 2 -b 8 ] D 1 ; [b 5 l N 3 D 2 ; (b 6 ~b 8 ) K x 
11 (c l —c 6 1 d 5 -d 8 ) Ki; (c 3 —c 4 , c 6 ) G 2 ; (c -c^) Ai 


11.4 3r^F^fr fk h ^fl h v -fPrr mvr: Also occurs in Ratnavaii Act 2, p. 39 and in 

/ 

the Suklakurukullasadhana No. 180 in Sa.dhanaina.la,) , p.365. Also quoted ad 6:16 and ad 
Matahgaviciyapada 7:49, p.249. 

10.2 0 ] R W P 3 ; — IN ; P 2 10.3 °%dR7%^ ] R N ; 

P t P 3 ; P 2 10.3 ] R'^Pi P 2 ; P 3 10.3 RT%wf^cT^r° ] 

R A PiP 3 ; P 2 10.4 dWc^ft 0 ] R N P 3 ; P ; ; 0 P 2 10.5 

] P ; d^TPJrt’ U R N 10.5 ] R /v PiP 2 ; 0 P 3 10.5 

°^pf° ] P; °<tiTK4t° R N 10.6 Q fR^: y^loHHl ] P; °fHWd'|c|I'rM'dl R N 10.6 °fTOT° ] 
ll yv PiP 3 ; °ftrgr° P 2 10.6 oJIHlfcfd ] R N PiP 3 ; 0 dHlR P 2 10.7 ?TPF^T ] P; 

R w 11.1—2 ^^1 0 • * *R0"dW 0 ] om. P 2 (eyeskip) 11.1 ] R v ; 

TT fw° PiP 3 11.1 4TW ] R w ; til <u|H PiP 3 11.2 ^dlHidi ] R Ar ; 0 dlHidl P 1 P 3 

11.3 °^7] R n P 3 ; vT Pi; P 2 11.4 arf^r^ft* ] PiP 3 ; arf^T- 

3fmfPlt R N ; MfuiH^Hf^rdT P 2 11.5 ] P ; ttiTW R N 

11.5 ] R n P 2 ; l^fRTfR 0 PjP 3 11.5 °srdfd"^r o ] R N P,P 3 ; 0 ^TcTWR^T & P 2 






















































































































































































siiTw 



oqmrt t fwr i4 Ph^ i ydRdd n ^ 11 

dT(i Hi H -M -KiI *-d ^ PuM I^14»I )Rd <Pl |^: I *T sfr SR^TT- 

c^^WrWHI'h^'hl ££t W: I 3^lPM Sfiph4.1 dd^•+.IP-rl^ld-H'- 


JT*br f^rfr! 



S'RTtd' S^dT ^r)TfRTCI M Pd d KU| I M 


yHluiy^d 


F-RT PrfWR TFWT ddd^dd 

> 

srfccT |dTcT: ^f%'cT 


^barf^t dk^dldd^Pdd'ldl^ddM'i'fcl : UPdMdT: I cTT 'JT- 

4l^^df^n=N (* facd £ &L<t><J 5,1 3"^*h'< u l*iddl)lT(^‘ 5TT)7pk ^OI-^PHcdd 

h «£)Rd d cM Tdy(or Mpt.u| Wl^cMIdlgy <bl 4 c^(P 2 f. 48 ')d" Pfl-ridd I 




3PT T TT (cf 


W <t>dlP=Kd)^4li ^RTcT 


4 3TTfl )d^^ (ST»i<H IPd cRTT T Rh .^Ph fd d l-M Td Pf)(P, f. 13")- 

Hc4d +l4rdH(P 3 f.7 r )^' HTWTI FF^ipr dWRT W ddlPd WR 


(*T fd^T)T 




FT: ^ I -M Pd Pi 


lie.] N 2 D 2 M* A 2 Try ; 3TTVTTT T §^<ld D 1 ; sqrTRT T ^ 'P-Md [ N 3 (unmetrical); T d 

W ^IHH.: (T R N ) R N E l , ; o^rPT ^cf VGA X ME D ; °qrwt Kj(unmetrical) 
Ilf. ^i4Th^I ] N 2 R n ; +KirH^I D 1 ; f*T^ (^ D 2 ) N 3 D 2 ; *K l 44d M y PfViV 2 G 
AMETVy; *l4Hd V 3 V 4 ; ^pJrfHT Ki • STdl^d ] E; y4) qcl A 2 12 a. FJRT ] E ; 

WT M • ] E; ^TTT D 1 ; ^TT N 3 D 2 12 b. ] N 2 M y R N VGKi AM 2 M 3 

ETVy; W^- N 3 D 2 ; M 2 12 c. 3Tfef ] E ; dTTfef V 4 • I^Tcf: ] E ; —JTcT: 

D 1 


12 (a 2 ) Ai; (a 6 , c 4 -c 6 ) G 2 ; (b 4 -b 8 )D l ; [c 1 —c 3 ] D 1 ; (c 3 -c 8 ) Gi 


12.5 H '■-fid i Pdddl<g^i vn n d Source unknown. Also quoted ad Naresvarapanksa, 2:1, p.115. 


11.6-7 °fT VIHJIrH + N ] P; cT LI R^ 11.9 ° df<d l ° ] R N P Y ; »mr° 

P 3 ; ° Rwm ° P 2 11.9 °fd^iqdi ] r n p 3 ; °fwr— p x \ ^Td^rndw p 2 11.10 m- 
r ] R N ; PTtrw mrwr P 12.1 fr° } R a, 'PiP 2 ; ^ P 3 12 . 1-2 m 4414^ ] 
PiP 3 ; pW R N ; j^rWrt 0 p 2 12.2 ] R n p 2 ; •f^r— p i; " o ferf%° 

P 3 12.2 smpp ] P 3 ; —JJ^r ^d^Wrdd Pj ; U R N ; rf: P 2 

12.3 0 ^cMI<il o ] P 2 ; °^p4K1 0 R N ; °^PT^d‘f ° P 3 12.6 IHI ° ] R N P 3 ; °^[TnT 0 

P 2 12.6 SrRf ] R N P 3 ; Srfw P 2 12.7 ] R N ; ^l4cdd dldd^ P 12.8 ^<H i fc ] 

R N ; d^l^'^d P 12.8 ^14fdTd ] P ; ^l^rdfafd R N 






































































































































































9 



VKilH'hUdfcl <PHIdi f^TTW^rft 


(P-d <?><:«( H I M 4lrT» 'jIP-mI^ : 

d^^ftTTf^TT H%cT I $fc1 


d ^11 I 


*T^TT ddf-M dlPlc i lcddl 4 -d'-l J l J -lld I dP-H»pT ^ ^TT 


if f4it s^rr <t>14 h i^r d4R-dyjiTd 


*TT«m 




FdHcddT d£IIH)d>cdirdf<T I dc=bi4 d(^1^1I*1 IVi<4if^TI 


CTWJ -rflf^T wr ddlfd 


r. 



^3TW I ^dfddft 


Idf^l&UIIdT^d3 tTT Iddl W ^ddlld I d'Wr^dl W f^9T: f4" 

HdddfiT dI-dI-d J Id14d<~dPd " ; M : I =T ^ 

d^(PJcT =T IPl <Pd rd I ill £d l d d I : 41 d'd I: 





Pi ^r^ifd ai<jd i d I d i q i •j'jTd *i d 


f| Pvld ill I Pi ddjcti dfdldjd^dldd II 
dTcPT^ yPd-^fd i>|odfH^I<i4f%T: I 





M I u d d oi| 11 < d SrrrSFT II ^Tcf I 


•j'~H d^d dv^)Hld u i 

Ll ^rd I cT I 3PW 
<^Td" ddl'idldldld' ^ I 




: 


W r ^d4d4>- 




IcM lU^rdfd r[ dTdTrT 


12 


15 


18 


21 


(P 2 f. 49 r ) 24 


12.10 34 H t*I -d ^r[Pd rl ^0 *! fddi H%c[ Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 77ab. 

Quoted ad NaresvaraparTksa 2:8, p. 133 and ad Mrgendra 1:9, p. 21. 

12.18-21 IrRj 41^dfy8HtJ • ■ -gdRFr Pramanavarttika 1:13-14. Also quoted ad Matari^avidya- 
pada G: 100, p.227 and ad Naresvarapanksa 2:5, p. 122. 


12.0 %%T] R^PaPa; ^T-T P 3 12.10 ] em.; 3T^T° R N P 2 P 3 12.10 

] P ; ° P-d<ftd l ^<J l : R N 12.11 PR^TT 0 ] P ; dVT R N 12.11 dlPdcqc^TT 0 ] P ; ^T- 
fHWr^T Q R N 12.12 °^PT] P; T t^TTT R N 12.12 ] P ; 3kJHT> R n 12.13 fTgTT- 

H^rd l Rfc f ] R A ; — <hcd l P< f cr Pi ; P^14 1 <J'c4 I M^hcd 1 P<Pd P 3 ; dRlP^d \<}^WH |od| IM<+>cd 1 f<Hi 

P 2 12.13 Hr^ \ % dfoOt i a 0 ] R jV PiP 2 ; P 3 12.13 ° 5 nFT° ] R N PiP 3 ; 

° 5 T° Po 12.13-15 • • Pd P^l^d Hr^PTT 0 ] R N P 2 ; om. PiP 3 (Pi’s eyeskip) 12.15*7- 

^cftfd* ] R n P 2 ; PiP 3 12.15-16 ^Ifdr^dl F t* T: ] P; R v 

12.16 ddd dT^ft^T WP5rlrq ° ] P 1 P 3 ; q h MI HI TRTt^rr^cTT LI 4 d r4' ° 

R N ; r^ldH I M f 4 ~ dT^ft^PT a|dIc^5cT'c^T 0 P 2 12.17 ^ftwr: ] R v PiP 2 ; ji d : P 3 

12.18 'fat ] R N PiPs ; frrs P 2 12.19 Hp43^llPi ] P, ; H* U ?P R N ; 

P 2 ; d^Jrhd' P 3 12.20 0 fHWiRT° ] R n PiP 3 ; °^IHR° P 2 12.21 °frrfiT:] 

rn Pi p 3 ; ojrrprf p 2 12.21 ] P; ^oqiPsqa R‘ v (unmetrical) 12.22 

] H v ; <t)[MjcdHldfq ^rjM^cdHId'JI P 3 ; —fal tirdH15^1 Pi ; ^r^TTW 

P 2 12.22 0 Mld«TT° ] R N PiPs; °J4idRT P 2 12,22 °RT%%T ] conj. ; P 2 ; °RT- 

%tjt Jpg R N ; °HRu| pP^ 12.23 d^l'-M^ifr ] R A ; d^l'- t l^t-^lpH PiP 2 ; d^^1 Ih 

P 3 12.24 OI TTTRTTT ] R n PiP 2 ; °RTJWP P 3 12.24 91^ HT^Tcf ] R" ; 
g- P 2 ; TP^TThP^ f P 3 

































































































































































































































Fjrmr v«muih 


V93 


sfr f|d *i sr! nI fk ^ T d^4iHId d^d^d mdicdH-^fhdd I 

^H q-. I p-d 4): fl 4 <-q i <5g. rjq-,f-L| TSft'fidcdld I T T 

fd^l |f: Wrpf fHHld l: 

ddrf-T^; T ^^TFd" d d -;.'-' r '\ *-^dl I 

3Rfal l Id d I ¥d1 IddxJ'h (R" f. 136")^ STF Rdd || \ 

Pd^dodlKIdldM I fTE.'1-d ff ddldldd |f: ^d> l 4fld - 

5frqMd (^fcq n «i «H ^ ^cd^F ^TTW: Itt^T ddfd fd i4) HI14 t^TF^R" 


(~i#i<r^*11 Ph di K l <?H di fdcdcdldf4d 

FTfr dfrfed^rfd^ n d FTT^r<=Tr Sd - fk^: I WR' twT’ 



d 14 d SR! fd d cd 4 ffi^d^d d<l(4 


ST(P 2 f. 49 u )nH<d144^1 HT frT: || 

FdldJdddl dldldSHlddilHdl 3TfT I 


'H J I Id 5TFP SWPffWTWf: I ffd - 1 
d41 Tdi<jq m q h i )d4'hd«ii(d Rd m i hP i %^F^rrfdff%f^rp^ fr- 

%^(P 2 f.sOOWrFRT^rd’ St Id Id I 

dl'-Mdl^'d.d d> 'Jldd dd4cdld d dI Idd Id Id Pd h -d.I rJ A Pd^ I d 1 - 

^dc^TT(IfT^Md- dl-dH I ^HldJ-d^JTTdddd dffdd M<jdrdd 

dq^i^-H q i fq(d WTfWf: I 3P^PdT d4d l d l dld f dldJ^dddl - 


12,28—9 fTVTfrr^ ^ • • * fl'R 'P^j d Sbkavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 80, Also quoted 

ad Mrgen dra ^3:l,j . 101; ad Naresvarapariksa 2:7, p. 128 and frequently in the Matangavrtti, 
12.84-7 ti Hii R; HrH «3 • • *^m i<TT m^I *<?>i : Vidhiviveka pp. 219 and 224. Quoted ad Matanga- 

vidyapada 6:100, p.229 and (second verse only) ad Naresvarapariksa 2:20, p. 116. 

12.25 ] conj .; f^diVtifq^ P 2 ; R N ; PjPa 12.25 

d^hTTrT ] R v ; ^TTcf P 12.26 1^1 <Fm ] P; °grrn%fr^ R N 12.28 ^“° ] R N P 3 ; 

P 1 P 3 ; P 2 12.29 SRPHTTp] P; u 

oofrorr 0 P 2 ; os nw° P 3 12.30 ^['-] R^P^a; 

12.31 °5lcWt° I R n PiP 3 ; °5lrf?ro 

3 S7%T p 3 12.31 ssnrr: ] R N P 1 P 3 ; amr P 2 



R 


12.29 °^r 

12.30 °bqiKi 0 ] R N P, 



P j P 2 
RIRT R N 

If p 2 12.30 ^rrr^r] R^pjP a; ^r i Th^ p 3 
2 12.31 °TC^T] R n P 2 ; —T Pi; 


I 


12.31 STrlTr ] R; WTcf: R Noc 
12.33 fcrWo ] P; R N 

R N PiP 3 ; ^TTdl-dy 0 P 2 
R^Pa; °TO™ P x 
IV 0 ] P ; qr^Tft -0 R^ 12.40 


12.32 ] 

12.35 


P IFP T.290; 0 f^l HI Pifl H Pm R a * 
%^T° ] R A Pi P 3 ; P 2 12.36 RTRTcfRf 0 ] 

12.37 } P; ^ R N 12.37 °^TT^T: ] P 3 ; W 

12.40 ] R N ; Pi P 3 ; °^tJc^>T P 2 12.40 W£T- 

R v PiP 3 ; °Tfe=q- P 2 12.40 °^Rrr° ] R n PjP 3 ; 



^r^ldi 0 P 2 12.41 ] R n P 2 ; T U P 3 12.41 o ] p 2 p 3 ; 

R V 12.41 °RTH^c;q ] p ; R^ 12.42 3T^P4T ] R N ; P,P 3 ; am V F 

12.42 ^4dKNf9 ] R N PxP 3 ; qicHdPq p- ; T jdKPq P? c 








































































































































































^P^dl^T [Vkui^tTI 


\S 


STTTOTTO Tf^T: TO TO *£TOTOTT#TOdT sf^TO Jp T^TT(^" 

5 ^ TOfd K M 4 d 4)rff d“f^f T 1d HTO fd ^>SJ ^4 Pm ^ I 4 *|H M l q - 



TOTOTOddM, (TOTTd 

J Hi v '-I TIU4TO irfr-fy-iT slPd" TO 

3TT)(P, f. 13 u ) TOlfTOTTO I 

473T TO 


TO Sddl MT Pd HI 7 UT1 f-H I Pro- 



3T^r 1% ydlJidd^r (p 2 f.5o u ) tots': 

TOTTO dl Pi Tfl 4 ^HiP^-dPi w: TO? 

^TO I 




dvRTf%%)iTTOTOX TOPd&l^d'TO I 

TOM Idl'MT d Progd Pi '&H I TOT 11 

TOT fTO? ! 'dd) | 



d" SJd d TO 



T Pd <4 I TO d WH 1 cd-i H R d d"pT I d 



TOTS’: I 


12 d. ] N 2 D‘M' R^PfV jV 2 V 3 G 3 
%cT4(R: V 4 ) V 4 G 2 ; —%RRR: Gi ; 




n 3 ) n 3 d 2 ; ^nt^>r(=TrG 2 )FJr 


•>,:dr-!!'j'• i-J-PT Ml ; + M-3d-4|^cHH M 2 ; —dd- 1 H 


13 


12 (d 1 d 5 ) Gi; (d^d 8 ) Ki; [d 3 -d 5 ] M 3 


12.46 PH P) WI y <h IVT y fn Hii h t: Chapter 2. 

12.51-2 4iH<r^4dH l dH( • * •Ifl^lMHH Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 75. Quoted ad 
NaresvaraparTksa 2:14, p. 136, 



12.43 °^Tcff MHId| W% ] R N ; °dfriddrqiqj^“ P1P3; °ddTj^^HIdJ^ P2 12.43 

O^ff R N ; w P ^ 12.44 MHW WK44'® j ^R N P 3 ; _^ 

p 2 12,44 °9Tdt TF^frfrr ] R N ; °d Pdd r^r< Pet P2P3 ; —frld Pj^P^fR Pi 12.44 0 ^ 1 ^ ° ] 
rn Pj p,, • P 3 12.44-45 °HldPtir° ] Pi; °dld^TT° R V P 3 ; °dldfdf<tilT 0 P 2 

12.45 ] R v PiP 3 ; 0 dTJ 0 P 2 12.45 °HId 1 H14 ] IP P 2 ; °RT— Pi ; 

*nr P 3 12.45 ] R N ; om. P 12.48 R N PiP 3 ; ^^diP*f 0 P 2 12.48 °H id ] 

p 3 • * °hI dfl 0 R v ; °H 1 dHI 0 P2 12.49 °fRl* ] P1P3 i °tifVi^ R N ; 

P 2 ’ 12.49 »HlPHdPd ] R N ; WTFcmd- P 12.49 ^Y: ] PrPj ;^ ^T^T: R^ 

or P 2 12.51 t>fdP? ° ] R N P 2 ; u P 3 12.52 t^HidMi dj^i4: ] R /v PiP 2 5 om. 

p 3 12.54 T] R n P 2 P3 ; dvf P x 12.55 fj R‘ v PiP 3 ; P 2 12.55 0 

RN Pl p 3 - o%f- ; p 2 12.56 °RTtFfT] P; °HtWt R* 





45 


■48 


51 


- 54 












































































































































































































ai 0 < ■4 ^ h ocnrr w i 

^^F^T(%T ^TW: Wt 5T?TW)^ II ^T I 

rK^ai W: 

JTPfT: W fdHtH : F^RlFTdT FMfTW: I 
t^T: FKI P*M : 5 TFtT: 11 ^ II 


<+>l4fd ^1 <1 <«>M f^M Kid (p 2 f. 51 r ) £ f-H-a I d-l <ti ^h'l4■H < I^-4 *1- 


^ I-cK ^ «ti Pfl^r^r^rti W: I cTcTtT fP^I^I <I<J IcHHi sfr (^"<t>14 


5rf^T i*l chi <^rhy ^tTItHHI ^IcJHIHI 



TTcwrfr >m«i w ^«thh) 


TOt^T: m ffcTT frfw ^T?r I fRi 


cTT q^?bc^ 5rfrr 4)j<4c4 ^FTT IdHrlNWT 5TRT | 

HT) ^ d M f*tT fKlPvM : 3TW?T I a^-dfshdcd <T 


13a. ft] NH. A Pf V 2 V 3 V4GM 3 E7Vy; FFT M y \ ; i AMiM 2 ; om. Ki (unmetrical) 13b. FT- 
^T° ] E; H^kT: N 2 (unmetrical) • °f^r s ^T: ] E; °fr:4^FT N 3 13c. ] E; om. 

G 3 (unmetrical) • yfl-ri: ] N 2 D’ M Y R N VGAME^ Try ; FTRJ N 3 D 2 ; 5PFtf E D 13d. 
N 2 D 1 M V R N E V ' ; WC* D 2 )^rrrFt(f^ N 3 )Pt^ N 3 D 2 ; rf?r dTTT f HldR^ VGKiA^ 
Ed ; «ji cd d d kj q RtcT: $fd d IM l ft=da R-rq§ A 2 (unmetrical); ^c*f *} q 1 sj q R-»q d : Try 


13 [^-d 2 ] K 1 ; [d 6 -d 8 ] M 3 ; [d 7 -d 8 ] D 1 


12.57—8 <h 1 d ^PT r7 i dvT• • • yei -xd H Source unknown 


Also cited ad Matangavidyapada 6:100, 


p. 229 with mc\ fq for Fi^q 

13.2 ScdT ^d : Kiranavrtti ad 3:10. 

« -t 

13.5 ^1 d-il*ij ?ti: ST^tRJ ^TT Pdf%>f $^-1 d Source unknown. Also cited ad Mataiigavidya- 


pada 3:20, p. 69. Bhatt there observes that it appears as Sataratnasangraha 14 (p. 22) and 

is attributed to the Mrgendra. In both those places the first pada reads W >I qj my <|d ^ —an 

improved' reading in which it is no longer necessary to assume a double sandhi. 

13.6-9 Testimonium: 3TT dirtied TPT srfd" d)J dcdH , 3TFfV PlHH MW, d£H STPrT **- 

rd -dd I d£^rt>rd d4»Hfd^tidldWr fiqiftld (sic.) I H^xiRhdcd ^ PJrTcdTrf T^P I 

; d idT SdTTB'drdT: , rpdld d I^ PT i Jd d d M fw^Tc^T^, T TPRT^cdTfefd I Commentary 

ad Satara tn asahgraha 14, p.23. The passage is not attributed, but prefaced by cfdT didd4*: , 

conceivably a corruption of cfdT d 1 d 1 ^ 3 TT^ 


12.57 TvTT odTH - ] R^PjPa ; 4>x}odH P 2 12.58 ] R^Pa ; P 3 13.1 Wi\ i od Q ] 

R N P 1 P 3 ; ^ 1 0<fdT° P 2 13.1 ] P; FT ^Fd^'ifd* R N 13.1-2 °TT^- 

+ %fT° ] P 2 ; T P 1 P 3 ; R N 13.3 °^T° ] R N P 3 ; °^WT: P 2 

13.5 rfr ] P; om. R v 13.6 d^ched ] R N Pi ; d^rheq P 2 ; ddTcd P 3 13.7 TrJ Q ] 
P 2 P 3 ; R N 13.7 m] R n P 3 ; om. P 2 13.7 f] R^PiPa; om. P 2 







































































































































































PhlWItTft 


M«TT VWT ffaf | ^rf^fr sqHdf^qeddfadKfaddrdd-f-i 
fa -a fifRT^m-1 =r T 7 rrr<^TfV(c^: i srg^rfr 

Ij^pt f TrT S^ETFrTT trt: I ff^T I 





T(P 2 f.5l*)0«ir«r^: I 



TTW I 

f^rwrT: r~ to fPr: trto sPr trtftot i 

^ \o 

fg^HMfd«rr *fT s^ft fro^: tt ttpttjtii ^ n 


^ 1% 7# fa I <;l FT PT dHMlfadl ftfsfdTTT (fanh 



T T) fa«F>HT $TRj 5P?qfa 'HlddfRndcdl£<: I 

SU'fcKdiffa fa^TT^TFRfr T q fceH I * I < fa ff^: I ffa I 
d d ^ I $| qq I dad rd I (d faq d d Hd dyq 4 )W I 


3 




*tt- 


RT TOfTOT dq<;xi I faded d sicd'hcjcd I d i q id^ I d I fa 



qqr <F=f am 4 fa fa *^41 w dd* h n m) fa5e h fa j>i m wTfafd 


6 


(d'rd^r^^Hfa'hHI $THT)<fa^fa-4^ig41^ OT|W^TO5ST- 


14 . d*s JT: d j n 1 NsD 2 M y Ki ; o *>s d 4 M tt ^tV N 2 ; om. R7Vy; *\ : VGAME 

14b. TT4xTt~ ofr ] M y R N SET’ry; RTkT: ¥T N • JRTCT^T j em.TVy?; ^HI-rKI N 2 D l D 2 ; 

JRTTOT Nfa ; M y SE D ; ^RT^T^f R N E V 14c. f^TOMfd*TT ] N 2 D* ; fTORMfrfa 

*TT N 3 D 2 ; 4* *T + TOlMMd't M y ; f^TTO 14 JI d'l R N V t G 2 A x M 3 E V ; fipiWdY Pf (unmetrical); 
fevrmJNd'l V 2 V 3 V 4 E d ; rTOTTrTOt G 3 ; —efr A 2 ; f^TOTOT Rrfr MiM 2 ; Try 

• *] E; om. V 4 (unmetrical) 14 d. H" ] E; f^i Ki • T^FTTR ] E; 

KrrpqjTf n 3 


1.4(a 1 -a 3 ) G 2 ; (b r> -c 6 ) Gi; (b 6 -c 6 ) Ki; (c^-c 5 ) A 


13.10 r£ RTt S^TTTm RTT: Kirana 3:23ab and 9:17cd. 

14.1 fWT TOT dTO K i ran a 2:33c. 

14.3 ^TT^rTTORr^ - .. ■ : Source unknown. Cited ad Matangav/c/yapada 3:23, p.71; by 

Aghorasiva ad Tat t vaprakasa 6; and by IVyambakasambhu ad Kir an a 3:20, p.66, lines 1-2. 

/ 

Bliati observes that it is cited [by Jhanaprakasa] in the [Siva-Jyogasara (p.49) and attributed 


to a 



r 


13.10 RTT: ] R N Pi P 2 ; n P 3 (unmetrical) 13.11 TO ] ll N ; 134 

Pi ; $TRTOTt^ P 2 ; P 3 13.11 RT1 w o ] R N P 2 P 3 ; hO^Ic^: Pi 14.2 fr- 

^v4T] R N PiP 3 ; fd^iai’ P 2 14.3 °<Ofd ] R N P 1 P 3 ; °TOcTO P 2 14.4 °f^W° ] R N ; 
°f5TO P 2 P 3 14.4 ] R N P 3 ; —T Pi ; ^ p 2 14.4 RTT^TT: ] P; HI M l ^ O 

R J,V 14.5 *fatfVc<4 ] conj.; ^fi<c44 R 14.5 °RTOTcT ] R N PiP 2 ; °RTTOTOT P 3 14.5- 
6 °fd’^TrT TOT] R N PiP 3 ; 0 fTOTlRfTOrTOr P 2 14.6 RHI^II ° ] Pi P 2 ; TO7TOTO 0 R N 
14.0 °RdTfe1>f ] R iN PiP 3 ; 'Wfe P 2 14.7 0 TO?T o ] R^PiPs; °TTOT P 2 14.7 °TTrT- 
TOf° ] PjP 2 ; R N ; «TTt rTOT 0 P 2 




















































































































































































d d I 


V9 \s 


3 


(i 


9 


rrfiT tstrP: I 

HT| c| IHd N I 

NO 


WP: ^j-RhPd M'l d d H i>l <N I HT5T 
Rfs^KT cTS^T^" ?fW ^TSrR" IN^INd^Kdd II ?!* II 

C\ '■s * 

h i'll 4: T^arr^fwcit ^rr t H^iP^dlVr rn^qf pr ?rf%7$rr- 


d P=hd! f<?H«bl IN ^ r\} 'Jt )dT d d I dd^d rH’^bdd'rd cTfir^TrT I fdT^P- 

Pd 4.111 ^ Pd d IM I cH ■*. f^T I 





HI -d <J|: 


3PT(WT)Mdii»lrdd fET^Tcdd' I 3rd 




: — <4 IN IN ^ di cd i ^ q i ^ 

;I d>d' N! M M dJ'cT Stf^T SPSHIdloHdl srfWIT: | dW 3TTd <+. J u| ot| Pd - 
T#PT *=dcT: TTcT^ d>iqd|J°dd$KlcHHI^dHd cFT^dI'rf I 

30P 'dl^'HI 5)MW (IdiKXid'jNd oircrpqT) (p, f. i4 r )Mdicdld - 

HI«hlO T ft*T ff^T STSTPr: I cRT fN I ;TH^I^(P 3 f. 

d 'H-l $1 <4 <N dl (P 2 f. 52’')rTiCd I» «[\ 


V 






sfr 7 Tq-i '■t r 'd rd 


d J Id dl SdlHJ <rdy (Hy 3?Tf: dT S^TfWT ^Fq^dd) 

H^FTcTt sfr wrtr H1H M H d ddd I d I 

'O ^ 


15 . HiMl ] NM r Ki7Vy; om. R; WT'f VGAE; t^T: M 15 a. Wf: ] E; TT- 
N 2 N 3 15 b. ] E; fRHdl N 3 D 2 15 c. fd^ci ] N ; E • 3TWT ] 

E; fT^rr N 3 D 2 15d. qrw] NVG 3 AME 0 ; qwt M y R N C n C 2 r I>y; co/ij.Ev* (un¬ 
met rical) • f^fd<M Mcf ]- N 2 N 3 D 2 M r R N GK 1 AMETry; ^ D 1 ; fddilidrl 

PfV2V3V4 ; ftrrf^Fnrw V! 16a. °tr] M K R N VGIG 3 AM!M 3 E7Vy ; N^D 1 ; 

N 3 D 2 ; G 2 M 2 16b. HNId^d 0 1 NM y R^P|V2V3V4G2G 3 K 1 A 2 M 2 M3E7>y; RW- 

d^d 0 Vi (unmetrical); did id’^ 0 Gi (unmetrical) ; H 1 M i^d <* Ai(unmetrical) ; h I <A id <1 R «• Mi 
• °dA*ffd ] M y R N SE 7 >y; °qRr^ci: N 2 D 2 ; 0 d PtN dH N 3 


15P 2 f.52 r after a 1 . 

15 [a^-a 0 ! D 1 ; (a 7 -a 8 ) G 2 ; (b 5 -c 1 ) A 2 ; (tP-d 2 ) K 1 ; (d 8 ) Gj 

16 (a^a 7 ) Gi; (a 5 ) G 2 ; - a G — b 1 ) Kj; [b 5 -b 8 ] D 1 ; (b 8 ) A 2 


14.7-8 0 d MW ] R^pjpgj 0 d W> f i! : T P 2 15.1 ^ ] R N ; om. PiP 3 ; P 2 
grPcTTW] R N P 2 P 3 ; ftftPrTP^TP Pi 15.1-2 ] R N P 2 ; o^THT 0 P 3 15.2 


15.1 #P- 

] 



PtP 3 ; fdMiHdrd' R N ; rn^oi'drdH P 2 
d IH lrM4i Pi ; (TPHTr^T: P 2 ; 

R N ; rdHI —- Pi 15.4 0 d 1 f-q ] R ;V ; 0 ^* rfPT P 2 P 3 



15.3 Jjfd'd IH frtRT ] ern.; d^ddHIrH^ R N ; fd<Jifd : 
dTT4TT?l?TO P 3 15,4 r^pj-: ] P 2 P 3 ; dNIdh 


15.5 °lwrr: ] R N Pj P 3 ; 0 PrTT P 


15.6 HTrT^] conj.; PWOT R 15.6 odlJoild^KIrHdl^HMH ] R N ; °dTJ' 6 q^MI rH I-JHI - 
PiP 3 ; dbodd^KIdHHH P 2 15.7 W° ] R A ' ; G ^TTFT P 2 P 3 15.7 °^T d^cJoqc| 0 ] 


R N P 3 ; IoCR- p 2 15.8 °TRTm" ] R n PiP 3 ; ®TRil> P 2 15.9. °fr ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 
15.10 ] R N ; Pi ; =fl^re^THTi‘JT P 2 ; <HRMI^rti: P 3 
















































































































































































^n*r<ftv<Anulddidi f^rorarft 



3^ 4 ^'drd <h H cd ^T^KWfeWTTrq^ d <y| J11 <i) ^ 0 sfr d~d7H ^ 


c^dd I d“ cf ^*>dd-m41^<t>ciiP;:*l 0 <41dlldfd d <b H ^l'®d d I ^d (c% 

^ dVPJcTPT dyd>H cddd I l~d <Vcrrf^T HTd~: I 

3PT dTrJcdTdTd' ^W?=^T dTd" T dldllrd'hlfdl: 'FkTT: d><d-d-d 
^T | ddWdcl 


fM<Hc4lP^dHIM 

R dic^lfcdPfldl: 3FTRT: II II 

31 -dd I Pd<&cd I<;dd ^dl 4dl d - dldlfcH'blddl: ^kTT: ^FT: dT^cd" R- e 

H-qf-d dd-ddl^MHrdld dK^dT: ddp I M Pdl I fn c4 d Id d d cd M d"- 

^•Tfd r^'rh <mR u I Id) s4ddd4cdlPddl I 3rfr ^ Pd H Hi $ 4 -rfl Pd I cff 

PiHcl)<£d ^dcT dy d)l4'h<U|ld yd4d sftfl^1 FddI d 4 4 c-d I ddT- 9 

dd"dTdT R <r>H l<-d 1 : dv^d'pTd’ h ddT 3Id J»d : duj<~d 1 dd < r>c'i 1 PiPg^: I 

d^Jdl dRR: W&tt ^c^dd I 

H-dlPc^dd: d^HIdddd R^m PilMlPcHdd: I 


16cd, No evidence for how Try read these padas. 16c. °f^£RlRTR ] N 2 D l M r SE; °P ^3 ~ 
FTT(^T)f N 3 D 2 ; R /V (unmetrical) 16d. ] N 2 D l M v R N Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 GA 2 M 2 

M 3 E; U rRT° N 3 D 2 ; *FR*RT° VjAiMi • c^Pfld!: ] M y R N Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 GAME ; d l fad l: 
N 2 ; RT + : + f^TdT: D 1 ; <TPf R T N 3 D 2 ; fc^i Rid I: Vi ; cRfRRT Ki 17 a. R^RriRRRiT: ] 
N 2 D 1 M y R N V 3 G 2 G 3 K l AME7Vy; H^lPcH^I N 3 D 2 V 1 V 2 ; H^lPcH'h +P+ : Pf ; d^ l Tc^^ l: 
V 4 ; RRR fcH + fR Gi • sHHTTd'W ] M Y R N VG 2 G 3 K l AMETVy; <t>H | PM PM 1 N 2 ; ^uTT- 
F^P: FCTTrf D 1 ; N 3 D 2 ; rPFT Gi (unmetrical) 17 b. R^T: ] E; R^IT N 2 N 3 D 2 

• rSMlfoM*!: ] N 2 D 1 R JV ViV 2 G 2 K 1 AiM 7 >y; P^MlPrH (f^R N 3 )^T N 3 D 2 ; ftraicM + l: M v Pf 
V 3 V 4 G 1 G 3 A 2 E 


16 [c 1 —c 4 ] D 1 ; (c 


1 



2 


16.8 TfWTRt S^?RTR Kirana 2:26a. 

# 


16.1 3pR^%Rcf ] em.; an -mSScici R v ; ^53dd^ P 1 P 3 ; 3T^RrT P 2 16.1—2 R^TrT A j 

R n PiP 3 ; P 2 16.2 R N P 3 ; RT^R— Pi; dl^l^d P 2 16.3 °^T- 

R] R N P 2 ; RPRR P 3 16,4 °rcR4>IWI: ] R™ ; °PcH4»l: P 16.4-6 dFiP^RRT ^fd - • I: ] 
om. PiP 3 (Pi ’s eyeskip) 16.6 A rfl 4cl) ] P 2 ; ^rft RffP R A 16.6 h i h i P~h^iwi : ] R N ; 
RRTrRWW: P 2 16,7 ] R N P 2 ; R P 1 P 3 16.7 ] R^ ; ^RT P 16.7 Ff: ] 

R N PiP 3 ; P 2 16.7 RfwrfR 0 ] R^PjPg ; RlWR 0 P 2 16.7 0 %RRcR° ] R A/ P 1 P 3 ; 
°%rR“° P 2 16.8 & rJ!fP] P; ^ ? U R N 16.8 °cRrfVdT ] R^Ps; °rRTfR P 2 16.8- 
11 Rfr ^ Pn^rD j4'-dUd • ■ •^cjwr ] 0/71. P (Pi’s eyeskip?) 16.10 0 f-dH131 ] e/ 77 .; °PR- 

RTRTrT R n 

•s. 










































































































































































) Pm 4 HI I <?H qm fl <H vj! I d I <4 41 WHIUIIHI ^ 3HM- 

'-Tt -h vl 7 jFJTi'iW^r I 4 ^TrTT: Sf^T^TTIT i 7 f ^tNpTT 7 ^Tf*T t 

(P 2 f. 53 r ) ^1T del'll t MdPl4d c bc4H 4 d (<T $ld M'fid : (R v f. 137' ) 


!TPP7: 




*TTT fT' s 3KTTcH^KTPt: H P<. u l IRI *-d <r4d 



dHI-Mrd TfWTRt S^dd^cRlPHI dT*r Pi 4 4 I cl I RTfT 

ddmr^rdlTl^l'tiK'eqmnM ^m' 1 (M-UIrkdI (4ddT w: I T 41'-4)^3'- 

’-d<d4H«-dl4lHlP-M M <4 ,j a <Tcd4Y ^Tt: I y |J|4R4Td^- 


«T 'frP'Hd 



sfr^r: 


^<-+14^4^41 cHT 



r^l^r^r^iiui R|Pdm4c4l)4l^<R4lPm4rm4dr4<i)rydMi 


4IRd'd'dT ffd" dr444HdrfrPrMdR4lR'd I ^4" cT 

H7TTRWT: ^fd - d d 4 H d d) 




!h ^tp^t snrtt ft ^rarv-i ifn d jt^tii ?vs ii 

4Md4 p d M>Tl d : I 

\o \o ^ 


17 c. ] N 2 D' D 2 M y R N V 2 GKi AMETby; SRiJ’T N 3 ; y P 3 V 1 ; y<hrM V 3 V 4 

• SflftTR-] D 1 N 3 D 2 M 1 ' R N Gi A 2 Bv Try ; *1-0 <R N 2 ; Pf V t V 2 G 2 G 3 AiMEp ; ST* 

71 <<-*( V 3 V 4 ; s(i «cj Ki (unmetrical) 17d. spgjgrr® 1 N 3 D 2 R V V'iG 2 Ki AETVy; SpJTSRT 0 
N 2 M y PfV 2 G 3 MiM 3 ; VJ'&TSJT° V 3 ; 5^7° V 4 (unmetrical); ^Rf” M 2 • °«fTPfrd ] 
E; »«TfW Ev 18a—19b. ] om. V ( 18a.] R N E V ; ^ T (*T: N 3 D 2 ) qpTd;(*PT 
G 2 ) NP|Vi V 2 V 3 GK, AMEdT i'y; dld^dST jfW M y K 2 18 b. cTTWl ] D 1 M y R iv Pf 

Vi V 2 V 3 GK,AjMETBy; dR^I ' N 2 ; dRdT N3D 2 • yj-'TSfcT: ] N 2 D 1 M y R N A| c 7>y; 

JjWftfd^fd - : N 3 ) N 3 D 2 ; JJ(f V 2 ) JR-dfd : Pf Vi V 2 V 3 GI<i A,ME D ; ij^d-MPd : A$ 


17 [d'-d 2 ] M 3 ; [d 1 d 8 ] D 1 ; (d‘-d 8 ) G,; (d 8 ) G 2 18 (b°) G 3 


17.1 RRT: «<iTt^Idl <i ^ 1 WTfWT: See Kirana 62 (E D pp. 171-3). 
17.5 yfiunifl S^dHHI Kirana 2:26a. 


17.1 cp^T: ] R iv PiP 2 ; RRT P 3 17.1 d" ] R N ; dcf tnr P 17.1-2 d'fKTrCFd' 0 ] 
R^PjPa; dHIIGld » P 3 17.2 ] R^PiPa; °4^dld P 2 17.3 Rf dTRf ] 

R' v P l P 3 ; H^RFfr P 2 17.3 ■ > rH4cHc4d ] R^PjPj; "rdd+r^d P 3 17.4 sft“ ] 

P; <- 4 rq f r ° R N 17.5 ■‘ Hlrll l Pidr ] R^PjPa ; «Rrdfd)RHI P 2 17.5 dPT j 
P ; R w 17.5 fdd#» ] R N ; dfg^» P,P 3 ; dfedd ° P 2 17.5-6 ] PiP 3 ; 

R v ; ^ P 2 17.6 “i-llffldl ] R^Pa; "Ulfgdt P 3 17.7 «<R=dT» ] R N P,P 3 ; 

°5T« P 2 17.7 “IrdK^d - ] P,P 3 ; °3<hw)d dVT^rftfd' R~ ; di| 1^4: 

P 2 17.7 yrWPUT 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; SrPRWT 0 P 2 17.8 diP-Sd trg- iR; ] R w ; om. P 
17.8 «MiR)U’d^ar«[T ] P,P 3 ; <-i-J-b14^JRI R w ; (tOT^tiWIT P 2 17.9 °P»l- ] P ; 
0 Pddrd R v 17.10 0 dcdTfdS’d I R!f ? -d" ] R |V ; °d ( j , r>fVyrid4Pi PiP 3 ; °dd^R*yd4Ri P 2 
17.11 yiNHfh: ] R n PiP 3 ; RddT37: P 2 


















































































































































































C|0 


ferroft 


M J l^ll dTfcPT: 



d < d1 -d < I gfTSfl'cdi HI 


H-d M I <J I cH HI ^ I ^ I Tm d ^ ill <1 < «faT(P 2 f. 53* )'<J I di I < 



dddldd d I d d d 




d SW KJ HTT(f d 



dTW s 



STd 






I 



*11JI HI <d M d H I Id didf H IdddHd fd I cH dl ^ffeMd W d - d"dfd 


mmh ilw iii 0 <mId i d^rr ff 


dvdTf 

VD V3 ^ 



Hfrr^d 



TW II ?c; 






W 1%) d H MI 'I I vrl I [d 14 d 4 f^ T T sr d%‘ HI ill 00 I 3T- 

TcdT)fdrdd I <1 ddlMldc^d I'^hl 0M^ilil S*T imw ltd'll 


dT df^T dJMdfrdHI tHlR^ 5rftT dTd"(dfd&dH 



dPT d 5P 






'dlOld : 


d d I d dl^odj rent 




sfr 

Port: II ^ 11 


ddr d 1JI i»l *J I drrfr ^AIlPi^Hill 

Tp cd 'd Id I WIT: 




18c. kit] D 1 N 3 D 2 M r R JV Gi A 2 Ev Try; %<fT N 2 ; %T: PfVi V 3 G 3 A,ME D ; V 2 ; 

Ki 18 d. af^d'IH ] E ; %f^TT N 3 19 a. ] E ; W V 2 • OlpH : ] 


G 


N M y Pf V i V 2 V 3 'GK i Ai ME Dry ; iflpHi R w ; 0)P l Pd^ l A 2 • ST%T ] D 2 M y R /v PfV 3 
Gi G 2 AM] M 3 Ev Fry ; Pit N 2 D J N 3 V 1 V 2 G 3 K 1 M 2 E 0 19 b. h) "d ^ ] XI; ^hT x I ^ N 2 ; h) 

N 3 • °fr ff ] E ; ftpfT: V 2 (eyeskip to end of 19d*) 19cd« ] om * \ 2 19c* cl ^ ^ ] 

R N E v ; ff N 2 M v 'P|V,V 3 GAME D 7 yy; N 3 D 2 ; % V.,; % 

Ki • ] E; PJKj 19d.?T^r] N 2 M l 'R N VGKiA 2 ME7Vy; !TfiIT N 3 ; 

llfT D 2 ; U £UlH A, • fwT: 1 E: IVhT D 2 G, 


19 (b 4 -c 4 ) Gi; [b 4 -5:l8b 8 ] D 1 ; (b 8 ) C, 2 ; (d 4 ) Ki 


18.4 d' ?Tdvd t-MIHId Kirana 3:20c. 


18.1 *TTfVPr: : R N P 2 ; °dTf^° P 3 18.2 0 3TrRHf ] R^PjPa ; °<T U cRTT P 2 18.2 ^T- 
^llpHd ] R^PiPa; ^TTSJTpHd P 2 18.3 ! R N ; P 2 P 3 ; ^‘^0— P x 

18.4 i R N P 3 ; °HTtr(Ar p; c ° P 2 18.4 °Pi^M ] R N ; ofv^hHd PiP 3 ; 

°frfer P 2 18.4 Q fkfk\ 3T7TXPP: ] R^P!P 3 ; °p^afOdMP 2 18.5 °dlPi^dT c ] 
R v P 2 ; °0lPri 4 =h4>Wf° PiP 3 18.5 °^dr3H ] R N ; °^‘d"4)c^H P 18.7 Hl^lOO ] R Af ; TT- 
5TftT: PiP 3 ; RTmVT P 2 18.7-8 ] R N P X P 3 ; P 2 18.8 “^TTRRt° ) P; 

j^n 18 ^ g oq K1H [ o ] R^P!P 3 ; °TRTT U P 2 18.9-10 I 3TpT- 

*• v 

rTP^TTT W ] con j.; WRfO^qT^l! f V -TOT fcf R N ; W— Pj ; WRfM 0 0 H H Pr^T PT P 2 ; 

19.1 JillPi4)0 ° ] R N PiP 3 ; J‘^irPi4iH P 2 19.1 fifll4^ 0 ] R N P 1 P 3 ; 
p 2 19,2 spny: ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 


6 











































































































































































































JTTTftr y<MU|H 


c;? 


3 


6 


m i I* 'gj h i ^ d ^ ^(Ry *ri i h ui Pm i 

f=r:e <Ph wipin' |T)^iiPi«fr sfr ^hi : ii 


rT^r (p 2 f.54 r ) TT^arr (5T %onfdMifc<<d^n>K f% 

PrfRd i»i ; l J T h^ddi r ^ tr: i srfr ^r 

f^RTpH P^ Pd d Pi d : 

n<4^Mri H^kT ^ldlCd4$ildy<|Pdd ' II II 

g^rr:)(P l f.l4 ,J ) M ' 4^ fd Id I £ d Pi t a^ctdPd°dPchHlHddl 

dW(*TWT:) '<+» < d PvH <) Jfl fa $1 *11: I rp^TTrfT T F fRld I d I £ (T) I ■ 



at-*fai«HR 



^r(f^rr)OR%(T ^awrwr 

'll'Pi ddjl'Jiididd: e~d" py | 3 tih i fa*t?T PdM'bl dd I 

Pd3Pad *Prr d^TRJdTfcl<P m H^TRd^MIddrd ?T ma 

Pl^n )F^T <*4 I H <hcd 'I I 'I IH 1dJ *1 'P-M M d M d 

rd«hn Hfrtn ^c^aonPlq ^fsp-ur i d^rr ddNi d^ti&i 




20b.] D 2 P| Vj V 3 Gi G 3 K 1 AMiM 2 Ev 'Try, q ft >=l I Rh fk cl: N 2 ; cpn ftl P^ft ^ feel : N 3 ; fr- 
fc(iftir^r4-5r&cl: (^: G 2 ) M v R a, G 2 ; g'friWf^.ft'iirftcl - : V 2 ; fti^I ftl Rift4 fk cl: V 4 M 3 E D 20 
c. ?ra^ ] N 2 M 1 'R' v VG 1 G 3 K 1 AME7Vy; cTgra - N 3 D 2 ; ^Tf^TT G 2 . HW m i HId ] N 
M r V 2 V 3 V4GiG 3 AiEv Try, R N PfV,G 2 A 2 Ed ; K,(unmetrical); 

?!RFWITWM 20d. “STf^TcT: ] M v V 2 GM, ETry ; — McT: N 2 ; N :i D 2 ; »ST^- 

Ll ^r: R A ’; 0 ti4x^Fcia : Pf (unmetrical); "Sr^rTcf: Vi ; “STTRtcT: V 3 V 4 Ki A 2 M 2 M 8 ; ' 

Ai 



20 (b 3 ) V i; (c 7 -d 6 ) N 2 


19.3 -4 ^rrfkw ■ • • : Slokavarttika codanasutra 138. Quoted ad Naresvaraparlksa 2:8 


p. 131. 

20.2 

20.3 

20.7 


^WTTtrpr: Hh 3 VI I: See Kir ana 15 (E D pp. 44-5). 

^fep#5!^T: See Kir ana 20 (E D pp.60-3). 

^ rd d cm I d d <; fVl d H Kir ana 3:18 -19 and commentary thereon 


19.3 fiir^uiHi-dd^i^q ] R^; ^ PiP 3 ; RTf^TSTRmPdW P 2 (unmetrical) 

19.4 °fr i^Mi: ] em.; f^^HI R V P 2 ; PiP 3 19.5 Td^l I 1 ° ] 

« P 2 19.6 0 Tdrad ° ] K N ; 'frftw 0 P 19.6 Vffk ^ ] R^P 3 ; om. 

P 2 20.1-3 °di^-ii<;! • • -R^T^" de^dI ° ] om, P 3 (eyeskip) 20,2 °fd^i: ] R-^ Pj ; 

: P 2 20.2-3 ° 9Pd”d l<l ° ] R ;V ; °^I<J ° V i ; °r + 1 J^TT + ^r o P 2 20.3 T- 

WHIUII ] P 2 ; R N 20.3-4 °^4dld) ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 20.5 ] 

R jV PiP 3 ; ^ld P 2 20.5 Rd><d ° ] R n P 2 ; H^T— P a ; r\ Pd il 'HI : R + ^T + ^r d f-5 d I d I - 
5 didl .. - etc. (text repeated as in 20.3-5. • • P 3 20.5 °ST < Mdrd ] R N P 2 ; °TPT P 3 

20.6 °dT^RT° ] R v PjP 3 ; °R U ^RT° P 2 20.7 RW RSRff ] R^PjPs; HWS*RP P 2 































































































































































H' i■*-! u ofci ' Pdci i q i (~=r><. u i«jtft 


m 





JJlfecf f^TW d"R 'rt HI dir" 

Maw h^ihi gwr (r 


/V 


*<dnRi 


(<^«|i|cir^H|JIMNK)^lT: S^HHvll: Rf rf d | to 


^cRwror t^di'bi<rna<^H fw^FryfroMr t ^ iM d h i t ^ t - 

0 <LM(dHK'hc^H dW *n N cM fl J-WTrT I 




5W)^r $mbt>*n*l<Nfk°4iy«h d^HKIdRcWM 



M rf r^^i^irWpHoq^cn^q Mf 4^ cd I ^ d d d ^rd Tw^ >bfl 4 ^1M- 

rdT(>r ^rf%rTfTT^icr fcMMiHaMi ^ 5r(Hc4 h~ 4hi srftf 

WT(P 2 f. 55 r )fdcd d d WT I WTwMr 5^TW ^#rf?f | 

tpT wMMwrM £W dR^l^dl 'fld>HIdH»H (MM TfT- 

fgm 

fgTWUTWrfr afr swf tfrM~ T fwdSH: I 


21 a. JjfWITOt ] N 2 M V R n VG] Ev Try, fa^HRU I dl N 3 D 2 ; fgRT H | JHd~l G 2 G 3 M 2 ; fg^TT- 
HT^rrrfr KjAi ; flJRT ^ HEJcit A 2 ; f^TTHIJIJIdl MiM 3 ; fgRT* R | t|d1 E D « iff S^ft ] 
N 2 M y R' v VG 2 G 3 K 1 AiME7>y; JffPJTNj; *G F*TT D 2 ; oiri. A 2 ( unmet rical) 21 b. 3T: ] 
conj.; %ft N 2 ; N 3 D 2 ; pRf: M r ; fV=f: K N V,G 2 G 3 AME„ lYy ; faf: PfV 2 V 3 V., ; f% 

K, ; conj. Ev, • sfRfft =T ] NjM 1 ' R^K, E v Try ; g#FT N 3 D 2 ; sftnfp^T® V ; sfr^Rr 
C j 2 G 3 A M E p 


21(a 5 -a 6 , c 3 , c 8 -d J ) Vi; (a 7 -b' ; ) Gi 


12 


15 


IS 


20.9-10 These lines of the [Pauskara-]Paramesvara as quoted by Paksakavarta on f. 4 r , lines 
6-7 (see Appendix III) read thus: Jjyw fep4 -tr hH I Z IW1 Rf*iKM | MWRT gfH< | - 

1 M d u i I p^Ti ^ y 1 fjl cl ^ I ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ H 


20.8 ^ HIH i m] R n P 2 \ sTRIHIHUIHHIH P 3 20.8 °RETTfr] R N ; rf^lfr P 2 ; °?WrfT 
P 3 ^ 20.9 ipfej-] em, R n PiP 3 ; P 2 20.9 cFT ] R' v ; cPT P 20.11 c^T- 

° ] P 2 P 3 ; c^wft"° R v 20.11 °dT: ^cPTt ] R N ; °d^ddl P 20.11 °TOT: ] 
rn . o HHv| , p 20.12 ] PiP 2 ; y^TW^TT 0 R N ; P 3 20.12 J- 

^TT° ] R jV PiP 3 ; fgj° P 2 20.12 0 ford'd ^ ] PiP 3 ; ^ R N ; °g^Tttr ^ P 2 

20.13 ^iTdcq o ] p t p 3 ; vrrRrq" U R N ; RPfoq-o p 2 20.13 5frfVt ] R iV P 2 ; x T 

^TcT cRfX i/1 (11 P 3 20.13—14 0 %cPFrfr o ] conj. ; 0 %cFI'R"©qd 0 R 7V P 2 ; 0 P 

20.14 cK^<KPlcy~4c) ] R N Pi ; °oi|y4,-rlP 2 ; 




RN Pi p 2 ; p 


P 3 20.15 

20.16 °RT%r i R N P 2 ; ^RT^PjPg 20.16 <FT4 t^T ^rYt 

srftrprr P 2 20.17 j PiP 2 ; r v ; Tf p 3 


20.15 °^JMd 0 ] R iV P 1 P 2 ; 0 

P 1 P 3 ; R<5H4 ?RtT 0 


P 3 

R N ; R# 


























































































































































































rj Hi 4 STRP 0| H 




3 


6 


<bdlfH ff^T FTcT: II ^ II 


)q•n-ql^TT %T: 'fKlfaMH«rl<<t>: 

I «H I d d ^ I ti^clfa^cic^dH«n^ic<h«iHiH'Pdlfar(: 5TT^ 




^ fa**TT)^T S«JWd : I f^RTWTT ^UI^*¥l*N«1<-*JlcH«hc^l- 

=^c) I f^T9TTtT ^ n^Tlfai^ird'Ttc^d q^fafa 


<d% 


=hri : fT^vpT 


^TdTTT^r f^KT (4r^ fa 0 vf: I rRf^ T fr^T) ^ d < ^11 ^ ■M rd <1M 
yM jrb ^TTf I 

•HHI>1: fpirf: HTOTyl HM i ^fl'-il^l J u|d 

N" ^tt(p 2 f. 55 u )^nr^TtT^trr%^T: fKifaid^ firatrr^TWT^R 


Mxifa' 5 i^cdl<y)j|ifa <: hi <u| (f|d mh c) I d^dH I 


*fPft 


^ra^iTdi i >i Tr#r t ^r 


THIH^il^l# <T TrT ^^TTW W: I 


21c. "RlRw] N 2 VGiG 3 A l Ev7>y; N 3 D 2 ; •H^WM 1 'R" c G 2 KiM| °RT%HT R"*' 

(M 3 adds RT in brackets after £R); “RTfoRR A 2 ; °RT^%R E D 21d. °eftR ?fR ] N 2 M y R N 
G,7Vy; °ffRT ?fR N 3 D 2 ; Pf Vi V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 AME; V 4 . HJR: ] 

N 2 M' R’ v V 3 V 4 7Vy; HJRT N 3 D 2 ; HJRR P|V,V 2 G 2 G 3 K 1 AME; HjfR: Gi 22 a.] E; 
RTarraWtR-(R N 3 )-~ N 3 D 2 ^ 22 b. ylPui RpT» ] N 2 M y R' v PfV 1 V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 A 2 Ev7>y; 

4 1 y I <yl (RT D 2 )JTRq- N 3 D 2 ; yPUdl RpT° V 2 Gi ; <dfJMi Rpr” KiMEd ; Hi in Hi HpT° A, 
• °RTTRR ] M v R v VG 2 G 3 K 1 A i ME7>y; ' > 3RTWTcT N 3 D 2 GiA 2 22c.RPit] N.,D 2 M y R' v 
VGAETVy; RtfR° K a ; fpfr M • R fRSR° ] PfV 2 A 2 E7Vy; R cRff” N 3 D*M y R A ' 
ViV 3 V 4 GA,M; PT8GT 0 K, • °fTRfRTR ] M y R N Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G] G 2 A 2 Ey7>y; —f N 2 ; 
OSTRTRT ■ N 3 D 2 ; »§tRcRR ViG 3 Ai ; “ftRcR KiMEd 22 d. R RT3t ] ^M^R^’PlV, 
V 2 V 3 GKiA]ME7Vy; R His] N 3 D 2 ; R RTfR V 4 ; RT#T A 2 (unmetrical) • R R y KU|[ ] 

M' Pf Vi V 2 V 3 K i M 7 ry; RTGT R R N 2 ; RTTWT R R N 3 D 2 ; R R RTTOTR R w A, E ; R RTTW: 
V 4 (unmetrical); R R RrWR(iTT: ?) G 2 ; R R RFTR: G 3 A 2 23 a.] E; jR I H 
N 3 (unmetrical); D 2 (unuietrical) 23b. RTT S'R" ] E; RTP^" M 2 : —ttr M 3 


21 (c'-c 5 , d 2 d 6 ) K,; [d 5 -d 8 ] m 3 
“ ' .G 3 ; (b 6 -c 8 ) N 2 ; (d 3 -d 8 ) G, 


22 


a -a 


M 3 ; 


23 (a 1 a 4 ) CR 



V 3 ; (a 6 -b 4 , a 8 ) K,; (a 7 -a 8 ) V i; (a 8 ) G 2 ; [b 1 ] M 


21.1 RPRPRT ] R w P 2 ; RTSJWP^’a 21.1 “HJcfpTt ] R N P 3 ; ^dPJl P, P 2 21.1 »R- 

fHRT: ] R^PjPa; “HfTTRT P 2 21.3 “PRRTRT ] R N P 3 ; — RT P, ; »?RRT^ P 2 21.3 °ar- 
RT ] Pi P 2 ; °8TPTT R A I ’ 3 21.3-4 fWHHI IcHHicd IH ° ] PiP 2 ; °fyfft>VlrWc|HI|nH<+i|^| 

R' v ; °f^rRRRRHTTcRRrfRTR P 3 21.4 “R!RR%R ] R^P-,; °c P(RH P 2 21.4 


fR ] R’ v PxP 2 ; Td P 3 21.5 “RRSR 
°ftR° P 3 22.1 «PTr» ] R^PiPj; «TTRT° P 3 
22.2 d^idd ] em . ; cTt^ - R n P 2 ; P 3 



R n PiP 3 ; °^r P 2 21.5 o^m^ro ] R^P^^; 


22.2 0 <il J11R ° ] P ; ° <TP 11 frl <4 ° R v 















































































































































































)# tTCi^d HI I <t> K HI MI «l I >1 *TtJTt $TFT dlMM^Rf I dTn 


*n>LH I <i| I pH I ^ 4 1 y <+» < U| e| }j-q ^ |UM i| H JIHIJIHIk ^TTT^T (rTT^TT- 

I dlfr ^W^fWFT Ml ''Jifd' cRT: *FPFcTJWr 



3 


rTIrfr^T M 4MI IvlH i( rft sfT) w|MI«bl <4J| <Ruim <dj *i 0 Rcq JTcT 

fffa- cPTTc% y 41 viH H 'k *ftrfrT I 


W %3rPT%^T H)(P 1 f.l5 r )<l , nir^l<JlrHHT ^<M^l 0 1M td I 

TTcft M NcHd N«hH«-d Id (P 2 f.56 r )HTT^%T H-d I *d <d kdd I'ddid'Td' 

dc^dd | 

d idfd*i4d«-d I '4j yi vji« n^i i«n 4 1: II R3 II 

cTT dTT: ^prs^frt-M fa^M^TRTT: TTHTT dld^&*odrbVI)«4lrH«h: 
ST^PT: efttr: I IdrPT d Hi ^ M cH|H d I-d :fMHIIrHdicdH I W ^TT 

y< h r<f>T?r h ^iRnnid ^ trippr - : sr^d"- 
H K i| | n* H (dkTRT I 5fmr M" 4^nt,|Hl )rn r 

^MflMHI^dl d M i y ^I: y i^dHiPfJi: I 

^-d^<H4|dl: flrdIHl sfr fard" f^rT cT*TII ^frT (P 3 f.8 r ) 


23c. ] M 1 'R/''ViV 3 V 4 G 1 G 2 AMaETVy; U N 2 G 3 ; N 3 D 2 ; 


P|V 2 Mi ; “fa^WT 0 M 


d-d | Uj ° ] M v R' v ViG 1 K ) Ev Try ; °H^|un NPfV 2 V 4 G 3 


A 2 M]M 2 E d ; '•CFTT— V 3 ; G 2 ; °*T^W‘ A,M 3 23 d. «^pjf 0 ] N 2 M y R ,N ' 

P 3 ViV 2 GiG 3 KiAMETV y; N 3 D 2 ; «f^T° V 3 V 4 ; °fP5T G 2 • “*flRnr: ] 

N 2 M 1 'R' v P|V 3 KiE; °<t)dl<Jd : N 3 D 2 ; «+rtl'd<t>: V 2 ) Vi V 2 G 3 A 1 M 1 M 3 ; “•hHI-rld: V 4 

M2 ? °^KTTJTf: (ITT* A2 ) OiG2A2 7 ry 


23(c. 1 -c 6 ) Ki; (c l ) G 2 ; [c 5 ] N 2 G 3 ; (c 8 ) V 3 


23.13-14 341 JplM MI^-HT* * -far^T f-n rf 1 ? Sardhatrisatikalottara l:6cd-7ab. 


23.1 fTfftPJfR^TTWT“ ] R N Pi; FTSP^d4-<J I + K 0 P 2 ; R^PJcf^TraTW 0 P 3 23.1 5T° ] R N P 2 ; 
jfr= P,P 3 23.2 ° AJ i r<H I ] R^PjPa; » Al l fed P 2 23.2 JIH'PTRT^ ] R a 'PiP 2 ; JIPRRR 
P 3 23.2 simt ] R N ; 5!JPT%— P, ; STRUTT P 2 P 3 23.3 VKUlPd fRT: ] P^a ; MI J ulTd I 
OT R n ; IR(RT P° c ) tu i fdW P 2 23.3 “JW ] P; »5WW” RN 23.3-4 •<rf¥r- 
fTcRT. ] RNp 1 P 2 ; »qf%- + ^ + rqT<> P 3 23.4 °Kl01u|R<di R n PiP 3 ; “VlRhOHl7«ll rTRT 

R n PiP 3 ; wftT cT P 2 23.5 fTVTc^" ] R^PjPa ; cTVc^ 



P 2 23.4 TOKrT J conj. ; ST 
P 2 23.9 5IT¥^#r o ] R' v ; 4 1 Hh^ 0 P 2 ; ^T^T#T° P 3 23.10 SW: aft^T: ] R n PiP 2 ; 
y^nrafrMT: P 3 23.10 df3^rWHdl-d :° ] conj,; I cTrT: R v ; d m df^ddT-*1 H ° 

P 23.10 ] R^PiPs ; p 2 23.11 TW° ] R^PjPa; TTRT- 



R ;V ; o Hfl d M | fci fci P 23.13 ] R ;V PiP 3 ; M P 2 23.14 34 *xi ^ ri J I cl I: ] R N Pi; 

34-d A d vjIM'RT P 2 ; 3PrrSrPTcTR" P 3 23.14 ^fcT ] P!P 3 ; om. R ;V P 2 


9 


12 





















































































































































































^MHMIl^ T(3FqF^t H^cT: fi'CcTTWT I 

'H'^^')(d^«llTl: fCTT 'A I'J'f'H M'l f4'4l II 

TTdWClfRWPTTt ST WtTWTWrfTT Sc4 4H4- 


C\ 


FTPt%T TcTrfT PTRrf*T TTT: 5TtWfw I ^(d <^1^ 

TrT|R d I'+'-lRfHd (T M^iPh drfr r<^^u,| %-) hh)R|«I : I 
Ijsr TTW f-TfodT ^p-d c[ftT Trwr H^«U d<Pr1 II 

TfacTTWrrrt ^ Rl-^H 1^41441 <rn ^Hd^l fa $1 H \H NI tJI P'1 W- 

crerWT: 


5TST ffr T(tW R -d IH 4 T^d) I 

P4tI<MI Tf^ri W TcTT MR+lfadH II ?fd" I 

wttrw^ she fast ttt: 4W: i 

4tfwr riidT h 4r mi wm t y^4d i 

wflrfr t 4114«41R 4f4 § RTt(wtii srfa 


23.19 R N f. 138^; P 2 f.56 v . 


23.16 —17 ^fcOHHMTj • • -^HMHifadl Quoted thus ad Matangavidyapada 7:45-6, p.247 and 
Sardhatrisatikalottara 1:8, p. 16. Bhatt observes that it is cited in the supposed auto¬ 
commentary on the VakyapadTya (ad 1:143). Rau includes the verse (with 3TT%'H~PTT d) in 
small type as VaAyapadlya 1:166. Cf. also Ratnatrayaparl/csa 75c~76d: 3Tfd~H i j| d d'Jitd f R#cT: 

fi^Td^Hid i mro?rr H^-dl rpp rr^rrm^mT t 4^rypHT 

23.20—1 drdIfr ■ ■ -dd^i d<;ftd Rg Veda 1.164.45. Quoted ad Sardhatrisatikalottara 1 : 8 , p. 16. 
23.24—5 PRT■ • • h fV*i?)R5dH Sardhatrisatikalottara 1:8. 

e\ ^ 

23.27—8 Vj ^ U D ■ ■ • i I {1 <iMahabharata 14.21:16. Quoted ad Sardhatrisatikalottara 1:8, p. 15. 


N 


^■?P 23.15 WVT° ] R n P 2 ; Pi ; P 3 23.15 °TT- 

tl^JMlRuD U R* v ; °<miRu|: P)P 3 ; °TTJRTf^T P 2 23.16 °VPTT ] R ;v P 2 ; 


23.15 ] R 

: ] em 

*WV- P 3 23.17 ?W] R n P 2 P 3 ; Pi 23.17 VfhdMTftv) II ] PiP 3 ; 

fvvt R N (unmetrical); 4i^dMlR4H) P 2 23.18 0 <Vlf^F> ] P 2 P 3 ; ° ^ TT fei ~ 4ifa ° R N Pj 

23.19 ] R N P 2 P 3 ; °^T Pi 23.20 ft fad I ] P 2 ; °4ftfad ; or lftfad— Pi ; 


N 


fV3TT° P 2 ; fa 1 ° P 


°Hftfad!fa P 3 23.20 fa^vf* ] R 

Vfrw: P 3 23.21 iJfT ] R N ; ^ P 23,21 fa fad I' ^-<4 fad ] em .; d>T Wi 
fadT dJIRdfacf PiP 3 ; fa fad I ^'IVftd P 2 23.21 gfPi ] P ; gfpq -0 R N 23.22 v)Mrt) I H)d< 


23.20 Hdlfaui: ] R n PjP 2 ; 

f%R N : ftr- 


f] P 

23.24 

23.26 

23.27 


^fd R N 

3?T^d ^fd ] 


23.23 °fdT: ] P; Vtwfar ] R N 23.24 i R^PiPg ; PJdf P 2 
PiP 3 ; iffwjTdfd R v P 2 23.25 fd^dVT ] R a PiP 3 ; fVdTT P 2 (unmethcal) 

°WFdt ] H A PiP 3 ; °iHI-d <1 P 2 23.27 VTfwP ] R^P, ; dtW P 2 ; Ttfadfa P 3 
3TVtTT ] P; om. R A (unmetrical) 23.28 dVtTftr d ] P; d 41 <.fa R w (unmetrical) 
23.28 ^Ifau^fadfa^ ] em .; 41ftpnft fdvRf P 2 ; VtfdW U fddl^ R^ ; vtfwrr fardfa^ 

P 1 P 3 

















































































































































































d>dHdlcddd4)dT u4dd'-ddfclP(.'*M«Tl I 



d HU M R u llid - 


cdlcHpOd^dP^-d ?fd" dP4d HI dPd<1 I 3T^ d^l-dldl^T) U^T- 
dH ^<dd: ifiRri^ ddTd&l (Pddd HKd^ (1 I 3RT ^ ^^rfd^WTHT 
^H'-dKI'^r fwr rr^%rpr dTpT I dtW ^TTT VII Jj <b d-d K J-d^ 

yjicfiR i 4 .hi^ yuidiR41^Nddddi 3r<fTRi<ji hi idi(p a f.s^w^rT 


fV(ddcd><HlPddld^MI SSTTd Id HTPrd I cd )cddHH njd Id W T ^T- 


Pd Pd" ^ d I d : ^WT^f I d I d d I ^ -d I d HU Pd U d I -^d I d -y,l $1 d~ U\ 0 <ddl 

ddl'hKtildcdd pfT dddld I 3PT W ^TT 5T(0 'Ir+Hlfa^ Id Id ■ 


cdf d 1 d <+> 4 HI uj ■(.'ddy fd’dTdt'd i H Id&^dlHdiK f| d I Pd Vl d $Tlcdl 

ddd,^~ddd dPT *TTddU-d) dddl-yd^Pd I 3PWT dT: ^<ddl«T 

ppr (Hpr?p- 3T hppt dfrfpr gw) dT ydtfd i wf: 

3T^ %^Pf Pd-dd fdnpp TdcT S^fcT I 

d'J-yi h! drT Pd^i-drddH^d i ^fw\ 


3TT I 







23.30 ^fd sfilci Nadakarika 18-20b. 

23.32-3 Testimonium: cTOT TRT “^t^T¥TT TRJwnT^rrT^T^ yuwife ” I 

Prahhavyakhya , p. 63. 

23.40—1 3T^ ^ *~h ^ * • -<4<3H i ■'Ad Source unknown. Quoted (variously with 3piP TT and 3T^*- 
T) ad MoksakarikS 153-4; Sardhatrisatikalottara 8:12, p. 69 and in the Sabarabhasya 1.2.1.4, 
p. 11, where the first word is indisputably 3T^. 


23.29 c cR° ] P 3 ; °FR"T: R /v P 2 23.29 fv*Fr\ ] em 



Pi ; <?- 


3d^r^4^1 R N ; p 2 ; ^*fil-d-d^r<^S P 3 23.29 cPRTT° ] R ;V ; dW: P 

23.30 TRffl4) ] R N ; <Hjdlv||f« 4 H P 1 P 3 ; fild^lfu^l P 2 23.30 ] FPT 3 ; 

STcfS - P 2 23.32 0 ] R N Pi ; ^WT° P 2 ; P 3 23.32 faret ] R iV P 1 P 2 ; 

ftr^P 3 23.33 «VM ladl'd Md^pPTT ] R /V P 1 P 3 ; yu|cj | Q^Pd |d<4d^dH P 2 23.33 3TW- 

tptt 0 ] PiP 3 ; 3rrrraw° R N ; ^4 >ki<j ° p 2 23.33 mum-d) ] r n p,'p 3 ; difd i fimn-tfl 

P 2 23.34 rdJIHrhHirdHPI^Hl STITT 0 ] R jV ; fV— Pi ; HTdoi’d 4iH I ^ U f^TPT^Tt STITT 0 P 2 ; 


fTR^TPhn 1 * thPh l J l ^hI P 3 
TpTFP ] R^PiPs; °fT9Prra 

R N Ps; 


23.34-5 T tTfRT ] conj.\ TTWfr K N ; g^T P 23.35 
P 2 23.35 °TTfp5-] R N PiP 2 ; °U^Tc^ P 3 23.35 
SrfRPTT Pt ‘; VlOr<d^l P 2 23.36-7 °cH HI H lyrh^l ° ] P 3 ; 

°FR^TT(VKT ° P 2 23.37 °T^rt° ] P 2 ; °M=h^4ic4 ° R N ; °T3TT° P 3 


°fV- 



23.37 

P 2 ; 


grsNY 0 ] PiP 3 ; Tf %Wt U TP° R n ; flfd'ai’4|<n 0 P 2 
23.38 ^T: ] P ; om. R N 23.38 l«r ] R N P! ; 
rt ] R n P 3 ; WrT P^Ps 23.39 ST^TT ] PiP 2 ; R N ; TTcRP P 3 

3T#T R^ ; 3T^ P 2 23.40 ] R N PiP 2 ; fr^T P 3 


R N Pi P 3 ; 




23.37 sirr- 
^T U cTT P 2 
23.39 P{- 


23.40 3T^ ] PiP 


3 , 























































































































































































































rjdld SPfTTW 



WlMdil<$l: *r4$l 1 d+> H VK: I 

(W qWTT%«r: HrMH^)'-l<hl J IM £RT ?TM I '*'M^ < 'TFT «$£\ *T- 

d'(P 2 f.57 1 ’): I c^N" 

i h u J ci i h ii ^ * 11 
Wt=T: fxrd^H Tfstrfr TFRteef: I 
^ n i «w<^i(1 <k(fwt) sfr (*umi-h<h i)«lrr ^w(m%TTf¥frfc- 

w ,- PTT r Tnp^TW: fT)(P 1 f. 15'’)c?T^r MwT J| I Id 

fw I e%c*TFTPhr *TTW I 

snr 5i hm< i^ m( linm( v fa"^'i j' fT'-r•TTt(srri 

$** 0 ST:PfPd<tlHi Tdl -H y J ^ hj 41 II II 

^r <+>44 mPut i 

's 

yfdcdlcHld^ >S H R-d & HI Td 3T>f:^T fV)^IT: Wfttfdfrifeq I d I W- 

-d! -H M [ ?r Td~qf 5d*rl I ^d l d I uj i ^d 14| <ij Id I BTd - n^TTT 

24 a. ^T^^nTfT: ] M v R ,v SETry; <51: N 2 ; j|u<^<4<di 1511: N 3 ; R^rrT^rv'^'i: D 2 

24 b. °^TRT ] M Y R N VGK 1 AM 2 E Try ; ^{W N 3 )r^T N 3 D 2 M!M 3 24 c. » <hjc4 I H ] 

M r R A V( i 3 KiAME7>y; —tJcT N 2 ; °^>Wrqi N 3 ; 0 ^Kjc3TPr D 2 ; °^Tpr G 2 25a. faftr- 
^T: ] N 2 M v R A SE7Vy; f^iw N 3 D 2 • fTFq"° ] S; fief 0 R N 25c. °fcr:W° ] M v R^ 
PfV 1 V 2 V 3 I>y; NGiG 3 A 2 M ; V 4 ; ot T— Ki ; ° t TFg‘ AiE 25 d. Hrfl-H 0 ] 

M 1 P| V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 AME ; • ’TeHT: N7>y; TeftRT R v ; Hdl^ Vi(unmetrical); MdcRR 0 G 4 
26 a. °Hmi^ ] N 2 M v R v PfV 2 V 3 V 4 GK 1 AM 1 E7>y; °R^TFrT N 3 D 2 V 1 M 2 ; OI TT U M 3 
26 b.] M v R^Ev ; ^ N 3 ) fd•fl’ mi j Id N 3 D 2 (unmetrical); ^4'r^^f ( w V 4 ; ^ 

G 3 )Rf = TWTer VG 3 AM7>y(unmetrical); mi ji r^4tddH Ed 

24(b 2 -c 6 J N 2 ; (b 2 , b 4 ) V 3 ; (c 3 -d 7 ) G l 

25 (a 3 , b -b 8 , c 4 -c 5 , c 8 ) G 2 ; (b'-b 8 , c 5 -c 8 ) K i; [d^d 8 ] K { 

26 (a 3 ) V,; [a 7 ~b 3 ] M 3 ; (a 8 -b^) N 2 G!G 2 


25c-26b Testimonium: Narayanakantha quotes this unit exactly as constituted ad Mrgendra 
13:160, p, 133. 

26.2 3Hd*riic;^l rr^;;See Kirana 3:26c-27 and commentary and Chapter 4 passim. 

24.1 °^iTT%«r: ] em.; °+K$«T R^Ps ; 0 <'4i x H^T I #Tx Wf P 2 25.1 t^pqr° ] P; 

^T° K N 25.1 R A P 3 ; P l ; P 2 26.1 Pda-rflPd ] R^P 3 ■ 

fRWT P 2 26.1 3W:WT forr: ] R N ; -~OT: Pi; ^fd l ^^N I: P 2 ; 3Hlfq i f4<H : P 3 

26.1 RR^rfd^^ldl ] R^PiP 3 ; RTT'^h)PdflHfi^Id P 2 26.2 ^TT ^ ] R N P 2 ; cTTIRT P^g 

26.2 TcHTT SH-dK^n ] R‘ v P 3 ; TcFTf 3rr-r1l<41 P 2 P 2 26.2 dlA)<^Pd I 3T7T ] R^PiPa ; 
dl^fyrdd P 2 26.2 q^TRf ] P ; TJ^STT: R N 













































































































































Hg'UH'bUdfcHp'IdNi Rh<UMrfl 


f^T(^T)5TW P^(dcdIdPd HTT:) I cT T f^Wfl^ftTI^TcR 


•HI d I cd d - * ^T^lc^d-d : dddddld H dci'-d T cf H ^ drdiI cl I«-d i u i (d I 

vji dcdi: dvU dl ^d 4 I 



R%S<R"fR fw: WT yVftftSH-dlSpRf RR: II ^ II 


?J% j^ncfr^f^rRTTcTO d *-d d ill (P=-d l"d Pd d : 'tid I I (P 2 f. 58 r ) 6 




^ htf^1R=W: I 






3H H I ["ddd W sfaRf HldldcdTd SPf: 

w sps: ^dii»|4 sfr T W rnr 

W HW#T RrW: ^WTW: 

Cs \D SO 

RRTRp $*>d H# d^Rby fd«TlfaR: 


Ff | d^cl I 


I W dd ^H)5TT oT Id <-d J ;fdd I-d '] 0 Hod I - 


MW dP^-dlcddirdldlcdirdikul^c^d- 

: ^TcfV 


PTrfr w~f4rnr: i d (Vi 'a Id d i K - r: 

o d")*-d I fd d 4 d-d I RCI $5' I 31' y fd d •£I 





HHd ^dlfti W: I 

26c. S[% ] E ; ^T° N 26d. ] M r R N SE7>y; fWrft RRfT fw: SPf: N 2 ; fwfr R^ff (R: 
D 2 ) fw: SOf: N 3 D 2 27ab. ] om. G x 27a. ] M y R N VG 2 K X AMETVy; U 

rfl*N N 2 ; N 3 D 2 ; °RR^P?frfR G 3 27b. ] NVG 3 K X AME D ; RTRR: 

snj": M y 7>y; '*<TCTW$: R V E V ; ?W“5Tr G x 27 c. R# ] E; R^ - N 3 ; R^R G 3 


26 (c: 1 -c' 1 ) Gi; (c* — c 8 ) G 2 

27[a :i -a r, 1 N 2 ; (a 8 -c\ c 4 -c H , d 3 ~d*) V 3 ; (b 6 , b 8 , c 2 ) G 2 ; (c G -c 8 ) K x 

27 R v f. 139 r begins with a 7 . 


9 


3 


27.5 RrTrT udlrfi Rff: e.g. Kir&na 2:14d and commentary thereon. 


26.3 ] R /v P 3 ; l&— Pi ; P 2 26.4 f^rT: ] R N ; P 26.4 R ^ R^RRcT ] 

P ; U R* 26.6 ^ ] R^PiPa ; P 2 26.6 fWr° ] P ; fR U TOT R N 26.6 ] 

R^P!P 3 ; »>T% P 3 26.7 ^ ) R v ; ^JR° P 2 ; R^R° P 3 26.7 MlPi^ R HMfd- 

1 3TRRfT S H-d l fcPlr^ : ] P 3 ; ™ ; W RRRRfRcRc^: ^d RflRRIIf^lRcRc^}": P x ; °R U 
3TR^T ^c^RrRgTW R N ; 0 RTlRW RRRRfRTR^: 3TRRrfRcRc^: P 2 26.8 0 R^TfR ] R N ; °RcR- 

fR P1P3 ; 0 R^RfR P 2 26.9 3TR] P1P3 ; 3TR R N ; 3TR P 2 27.1 °R ] R. 7V P 1 P 3 ; om. P 2 
27.1 °T^ 7 RRTrR 0 ] PjP 3 ; °'GI!HlcR° R v ; 0 1 J IRRTrRT 0 P 2 27.2 °Rit ] R /v PiP 2 ; °R I t 
P 3 27.2*3 °f^RRRTfT] R N P L P 3 ; ^^JRRRTRr P 2 27.4 °RiTRTT 0 ] R N ; ‘Rit^Ryi » P 
27.5 RRR] PiP 3 ; RrT R N P 2 











































































































































































tjcfr ‘1 








t’grT^r 


JTTWTHTf 



H^TRTTffT^r: II ^\9 II 

+iH i| | ^prr T ^ 








fcw: T JpHtP'<^Fr) fa H ^ M (I fa fa II 


rfrr hi < i -m *j i <+, u<i i )r-4H - ji H g ^ i h •* 'j * Pci * r^d'rai 

^Tf^TTWrfr rpftq- M <ti '"VP-TII 



27 e. ] E; P?^TWT N 3 ; U 5 lT D 2 • ] SE n ; NM v R N E v 7>y 

27f. •y + IVfiK: ] E; »SRTTT3T: A 2 


27(e 1 -e~) D 2 ; [V-e 3 ] Ki; (e x -e 3 ) V 3 ; (e 5 ) G 2 ; (f 6 -f 8 ) G* 


27.6 3T^M-r1li: ] R N ; PiPg ; ^PTT^T^TT^T P 2 27.7 i>k m <\<V } conj .; tv IXM ~: 

R 27.7 ] R iV P 3 ; P 2 27.7 ] R N ; T P 2 ; ^TT: P 3 27.8 fw° ] 

R N PiP 2 ; om. P 3 27.9 ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 27.9 ] R N P!P 3 ; 

0 ft'rf1fR P 2 • Colophon: °PufVdlili ] R N P l P 2 ; °Pufadl*Jld P 3 










































































— 














































RcTR ii < ii 

( M Pd :) 

3r*r f^TTT^p-h^ fVfrf< m ftarpf’ 3^4^ s^muii-ti <h i 


*TW dqn I 

r^rwfenTTTra’ PbH Id-d: SPT^dPd I 

\6 

t ht srfwr: d 4 j 11 Tfrwfhi \ n 

3T^TT dPvi^lPM dT fP^T T PfTF I 

:qTrqTH IH M r h \ J T ^T-i! ^ | w-q | ^ I II ^ II 

3f(T ^ m « 14 y + < ui )^n=5R=rr: stf^t i ti d fn ■*> ^ fw- 

J H «14 wl 4 H H J ' pc) i| *| M M I cH <b : I e| I <W I <?H <t» fd STflfit S^TT SpT- 


Sources for the mul a of the fourth pata/a: R- V N(= N 2 N 3 D 2 ) M v S[=V(= PfV 2 V 3 V 4 and, 
from 27c, V 2 ) G(= GiG 2 G 3 )K,A(= AiA 2 ) M 2 ] E(= E V E D ) Try. 

1 . JT^g- 3TR-] NM y K,7Vy; om. R N ; hTT: P| V 2 V 4 G 2 G 3 AM 2 E; — V 3 ; —T: Gt 
la. OtlUllHh• ] E; f#srwv 4 • oSHTT^rra - ] E; °5THTra-Ev(unmetrical) 1 b. iWr- 

*1 *n * ] N 3 hl^ R A P 3 V 2 GAM 2 ETVy j STT^ttr^R* N 2 j Pnei 1*1 rj D 2 ; 7 >ei 1 *i 1 ti ' V 4 j rVr '1 i : ’ TTf ' T 1 K 
• y^wifd ] NR a PfV 2 V 3 GAM 2 ET>y; a^vq^ M y ; SHf-fir V 4 ; afRWfTT K, lc.?] 
N 1 r IYy ; <T N 3 1) 2 ; ^ M y R N Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 GAE ; PR M 2 • RT Slf^T: ] NM y R^VsGiGsK, 
AM 2 E7Vy; Pf V 2 V 4 ; HT?rfirG 2 ld.R^Trr] N 3 M y R N Pf V 3 V 4 GK, AM 2 E7>y; 

RtR7N 2 ; H%RTD 2 ; HtWVj 2a. 3RRRf ] E; 3RW N 2 ; 3f% K, • 

M' R^Pf V 2 Vs( IAM 2 E7>y; fl z 1 fr N 2 (unmetrical) ; fifii Pm e 1 Im N 3 ; HfkfR^'fT D 2 ; Rprl - 
fTTTfq- V 4 2b. ^TV-RT] M y R N Pf V 2 V 4 GKj AM S E ; WhT N 2 D J ; =ftR N s (unmetrical) ; 
URN - Try; ?t— V 3 2c. '>^rrfP%^] M y R JV G 1 E K ; -tiK l ^< N 3 D 2 ; ° «ti i r<rd 

P|V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 AM 2 E D 7Vy; < ‘*l , Pt^<i K; 2d. THMI-Htlf^dHI'tl ] M y V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 KiA 



M 2 E ; TmftTgpnRrcT N ; ’T^TRPRRf PvMWcll R N ; T[l|^p!(Nfd<il Pf ; —Gi ; 
tl'NHW ftraRcRT G 3 (unme1.rical); PTb^'Pl ftlRRRT Thy 


a 1 -a 4 


a id , a 8 -u- ; v 3 j ya.-—a,) 02 j it; - , u -a j r\ \ 

2 (b 2 -b 5 , b 8 ) V 3 ; (b 2 ) G 2 ; (b 5 ^ 1 ) G,; (b 7 b 8 ) A, 


b 5 ) V 3 ; (a 


®—a 6 


G 2 ; [c 5 , d* 1 — d 6 ] K 


2.2-3 sfTaft SRRTT SfR^ SHf: Kirana 3:26d. 


0.1 fqRT< 0 ] R v PiP 2 ; (=1 t-dK 0 P 3 2.1 °9'g7PJ| » ] R^P^j; "STgTTWR P 2 2.2 “rRRT: ] 
R^Pi P 3 ; °5FT: P 2 


















































































































ff^dN j f%TW3rft 



u 


5THri 

~'<ZJ 

/ r 

-MlRr^<d - *b'N>f: 1 anf 5 T^pT(: 1 d^hhM 

rv f- '■v r r pv. 

f^rfvTT 

, p. 

1" 3 

1 rhotl | M «ho=l H <-N^1 


4 1 ^drcld 

1 



(^)^IHIc.HdlHd'-dlk^Hdl F^Tcf T TT PddP m I 

^ N3 


Hddik^iJ^d(mrqT dr+<ui ^r cn=*r) 


^ J cd y d $ 



i 


3f=T ld^l-d : 


6 


dddlddM 



to 7 


wn =T RTR 


<hI Pd PdcSlfrR wrf^T PR I'^ld T ; dldP=ld II 3 II 

\o o >v x 


rfry^- if ^TdrRT 



T cfr W: I 



t fd d I j i fw fprPr: II * 


3Tft «h k i Rrqrrn 


dcdld^Wd-ded 'Hddrd d d cd h I 



1VI 9 





N 




3. dddlddM ] NM y KiTVy; om. R N Pf V 4 ; dddld V 2 V 3 GAE; 

E; °Tf^ro n 2 N 3 • °H^Pd ] N 2 D 2 M y R N E^; °iHWshl N 3 ; 

GK] AM 2 E d Try 3b. qra^TV: ] M y R N V 4 AiM 2 E r rry; 

M^PRT Ki ; T— A 2 • *RTT ] E; N 3 D 2 3 c. 

• srfd -0 ] E; ST Ki(unmetrical) 3d. dVR-nFr ] N 2 R jV SE7Vy; d^TRrfT N 3 ; cPJTTRTfr D 2 ; 

M y • °fw] E; fkN 2 ; for D 2 4a. ] M^R^SETVy; ^ N 2 ; 


3 a. °dw° ] 

3 . 2 V 3 V 4 

3 V 2 V 3 G; 

dTTfdfdd N 3 




°frr N 3 ; D 2 

*Td": 


4 b. dWR^T 





M v R y S Try ; diRTRT N 2 ; d^W N 3 D 2 ♦ T 

M v R N Pf G AM 2 E Try ; T rfr^RT: N 2 ; VW: N 3 D 2 ; dAt drf: V 2 V 3 V 4 4cd. ] 

om. PfV 2 V 3 V 4 G 3 KiAM 2 Eu 7 >y; placed after 5b in N 4 c.] M r R A ’G 2 T n02 ; srfw- 
rrf^qiTR^r N 4d. ] M y R N ; PddlJ 11 TFWT fP-TpT: N 2 G 2 T 1102 ; PrTP 
N 3 ) N 3 D 2 5 a. ] E; («rf N 3 )dd-d^M N 3 D 2 • between 5a and 5b V 2 

repeats 4b. 5 b. h d ■* I ] N 2 M V R N V 2 V 3 V 4 '. I 1 G 3 K 1 AE7Yy; M d Z d I N 3 ; r T D 2 ; 

*f^T Pf {unmetrical); G 2 M 2 • after 5b N has led, and all other sources except 

M' R v I0v add a half-verse equivalent in sense 1 to 4cd (it appears to be what Try comments 
on in place of 4cd, although l' ! 1 does not give it): d 1 j *a ^ r-d <?»ki 4" pRfPT T Ptd I fwf?T: 
Variants: ° ] Pf V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 A 2 E d ; V 2 ; Pd d Pi Pdf® Gi ; PrtWTWT 0 

Ki 7>y; ° A, M 2 • Pddld T ] Pf V 3 V 4 GAM 2 E D ; PpftW V 2 ; fd%fr T 

KrTrv 

* . 


3 (b 2 -b 5 ) A 2 ; (b' 1 ) ! r 


4 (a 8 ~b 8 ) Ki; (b 2 -d 8 ) G 4 


5 (a 1 -a 8 ) Gi 


2.3 d^dwfwtfw: K/rana 3:27d 


2.3 SRf 





P- 




'iPs; P 2 2.3 °lw: ] R N PiP 3 ; °f%V P 2 2.3 c 

2.4 oqrmr° ] R A P l P 2 ; dTW° P 3 2.5 °WT] R^PjPg; °¥W P 3 


] 



'7T liM 0 


R'^l’i 1*3; <i 1 ■ww P 2 2.G 
2.6 °dRddl 0 ] R A ; G P 2 P 3 ; 0 

2.6 T-W < 0 ] R N PiP 2 ; 3^5"° P 3 




T° 


R N P 


c m 
9 1 



2 

2.5 


p«c 



0 ] P 1 P 3 ; 

■—Pi 2.6 dr^^ut ] R N P 3 ; ^ drRRTJf P 
































































































































































































0 3 


ffcW I 1 



2 f. 59 r )™ 'TTT2RTT 



i t >Td7 


' J MR I cTdT^d IdIfdfdl 3KIHH4rdKJdl) ofM<+.I P J "J| I-H TM"- 



n hhhi m ^■=r i m 



w i 


- fwr 7 d! j d Middled 



1 1 i I <J N d d I H y 'j| I < H M - 


^ PTdt) R ^rl Pi d H i mrr dlV-tf+ldHI T o*T^rrr*fri•.: v 


dTT: I T ^ eP-Tr^fT^r dIJ d d I *}R *dl fd <| J|l<J IdH MId : 

W cTefr Z d I Hi ^ <rdW# : 1 

T^rafr^PTT srsr: i 




JTW WR 


fRsTrT cFfT f| HI IH H -d HI T WT?Nl * II 

" \D 

f'T^Trfr *Rfr 






*r4$n 


dddRd)(P, f. 16 r )«h<uilcH«hi»M 



1 dTT: sn 





Tf: a 




f. 



v ) 



J Rdddl fw: I 3Rf: 




(R 


/ '4°d !'-d I'-IM^TT 



didd ^PT: I 


5 . d 3 TRT J NM' Try ; om. R A ; J I <?>s : Pf V2V3V4GK1AM2E 5 c. d <$^cd ] E; *T- 
fsPW N 3 5 cl. 'JFtTWT ] E; °^^qr N3D 2 • f 3 W] E ; *JvHJd N 2 ; d-Hi d : A 2 

6 a. STcff S-;:l T Jr ] N 2 M y R iV PfV 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 AM 2 Ev'TVy; Udlctdfd N 3 ; cTVtwPr D 2 ; geft sarr- 



I 


fw V 4 ; W- Gi ; c 
D 2 R A Ey Try; 0 d l^ N 2 N 3 ; 0 
U £ M a 


6 b. f=RRT 0 ] E 



V 


2 





f M r Pf V 3 V 4 GjG3 K1AEc ; f V 2 ; 


6(a 4 -b 5 6 ) b 

:,; (a 8 -c 5 ) G,; ( 

c 

i^_ 

6.1 ^ d^i: 

vi.^dj^ hi ran a 


5.1 srf^rfo 1 R^’P]P.; srfapfr 


° p 2 5.2 

5.3 ^sfirg-° 


ft -0 ] P 1 P 3 ; °OTTfr 0 R n P 2 
R /v P 2 ; 0 RTT° PxP 3 5.3 M^HHIdi ] P t P 3 


|rr° ] r n ; ^t^r 0 P 

R A ; <T3f° P.P 3 ; TSR^*° 


1 


5.2 

’o 5.3 °R^r 


diHHIdi R ;V P-: 


5.3 1 R N P 1 P 3 ; 


5.3 m] R^PjPa ; R* P 2 

Pi; 



or^^cdlR P 2 5.3- 4 W RfddI ] P 3 ; R^TT R N ; R"—- 
om. P 2 5.4 0 ?frnt ] R N P 2 ; °?flTxr 4)HHM P 1 P 3 5*4 ] P 2 ; °4>l <Kd"l 

U K N : °^TT— P L ; ^H dPWI 0 P 3 5.5 Pdd 1J!HdR h did 1 P 3 ; — HHiPddid P, 



■.PR d'f-ddPl R Ar ; Pd 41J d I fd Rn 41JIH P 2 5.5-6.1 ° , T ; ?J7f ^rfj* • • • °T^Rf ^TT : ] om. 

P 2 (eyeskip) 5.5-8 W ■ • M Pf'STFdTI T TT: ] R N ; Rrf: T- 

W*TT: PI P;> 6.1 M-d qrar: ] R A? ; °%f?T dT^J— l J j ; °%fFf d^TpPTRdT 

P 1 P 3 ; °RTfT: R a ’P 2 6.3 °ddddi ] R A PiP 2 ; 0 TTTT P 3 6.3 f^: ] 


P 3 6.2 

R iV Pi P 3 ; frrpg:: P 2 


6.3 h b 1 ^A \MHJ em. KaUoka; fd ^«^oi||yqNH R 










































































































































































































h | tr'^ub r^K P^i d i ai i fwrfrfl 


H-dPfl (^T sd" ^^-dcdicdii4'rK'J|i4: ^-£4 $)cd d M -d Pd) dv-d I 

R»Ta I 3i ■=Tl ^d d 

HNIrH^h srftr dP^^rn^TlWII 4 II 

srfr qTR fa%T: Ml | oHj J3I d u|Tp<"^': 

T dlddMIdlcH+cdH-t^cd dT cT^ftTPT SJ^rd' ^THTpT 3lffa> 
cd Id Wdlfd *\ * I v d Pd Pi I d d i k : 

rrnrt(P 2 f^)^ 4^fl^ld (^Pt dlcfd *1r^'diT I I 

t*rfr TT W)^nf^?rftT(P 3 f.S^P^ deft 5MT dT- 

^TWJ I rfd"^ d^TT^d^'fl <41 J| I'd Ml d&4d ^T^STWTfedT ijd~ Pd 4h : 
pTWcflirr i ^if: 

ND' 

dT d d I Td y| dl f <gr: PT n^T^PT cTf^TeT I I 


T f PO^pTrdWT HI d H Pd <1 t^TTRT ’Jd': TST: I 

3Td" Rh -a I *-d : I 

*PMMdK 


6 c. WOT] E; HldlcH<b 0 N 3 D 2 


N 


• ?tflT rTT° ] R N VGAEThy; RftT fTrf° i„ 2 , 
*rflTFR N3D 2 ; ^rftt M Y ; Srftt f K! ; $l(Ul-d M 2 6 d. ] M y R N Pf V 3 V 4 

GAETYy; °P[F 0 N 2 ; °f^T° N 3 D 2 ; °fw V 2 ; fRK° Ki ; f?TF 0 M 2 • ] 

NM y VG 2 G 3 Ki AMSE D IYy ; ^MrtTWT R n Gi MJ c E u 7a. f l^TTW ] D 2 R^E V Try; 


f^TPTP FPf N 2 ; Pd jtVt ^TTrP N 3 ; f?TTcf M y ; PpTpfr W VGi G 2 Ki AM 2 E D ; PdVpl^ - 

^ 7 N ' V * 

W G 3 7 b. ] E ; ^TT° N • OJ 5fW° ] E ; WTT° N 2 • °f^T: ] Try ; 

°few E 7 . ^Jldl jdH' ] NM V TVy; om. R jV ; TOH VGKiAE; M 2 


7 (b 5 -b 8 ) G 2 ; (b 7 -b 8 ) A 2 


7.3 h icTl5^^i^iq ^f?f qiSd" H 1 71 r Source unknown. Cf. verses with the same concluding 

formula in NyHyamanjan Vol. 1, p. 81 (84d) and p. 91 (104d). 

7.7 ddlfdVIdl pT: ?T vTfTRf Source unknown. 


6.5 ^<-i|cdlohl4di^||^: ] R N ; dc^»l^4'b<u| |<-H^$Pd' P 3 ; ^cjcdldd/hiwj'h<u| p 2 

6.5 y^d^c^H'P 0 ] R N ; ---c%TT° Pi ; ° P 2 ; ^<HHI 0 P 3 7.1 diqqHiqicHdH-qH^- 

Pjdrd TP ] R N ; dld-HIdlcM'hcdl^ 0 Pi ; d Id ^ Id IcH^TdTrT^ 0 P 3 ; d ra'd-RrdTT^f^cd' 

d^ ° P 2 7.3 m i] R v P 2 ; RTdY|£ 0 PiP 3 7.3 qi?q ] em.; dPcfd \ ° R /v P 2 (unmetri- 
cal); H l T fr c^ P 3 7.3 °Hf^W I tfh } R N P 3 ; ^P^diPd P 2 7.4 ] R N P 3 ; 

° * l {Yw^ P 2 7.5 cPdT° ] P ; r^T° R v 7.7 4Y ddlPd^ldl" ] P : P 3 ; ^r^lPd^l4t R N ; ?T- 
^P^lPd^ l 4 P 2 7.7 R ir^RTT ] P 3 ; ^RWUtfcf 0 R N ; RrTPdtfe' 0 P 2 7.8 ’jt: ] R N PiP 3 ; 

, t4‘ o p^ 


6 


6 









































































































































































•J'T'T T^rWT 



il Id ^ d dW MM II V9 II 

\0 ^ 'O -s 

d FN MlilHrttcMI^H #TT faTRPP 


ilftTRT ^ I Pd < Pd '41 , ipd<Jld-Hl sfr PW- 

Rr^rti ^ S^TpT ftT(T: WT ^r^nf^T I ^TrT trg- ^) cfcT 




rTPTTfwWc^RT <+>4U| j cHIUMdld I 3TfT cd Pd<=hKPdd-MH£|d I cT 

'N 

S'^r 'frM^TRSR) fdYcdTcfrd $1cd #R 

^l<TM pHcd Pd )ft^": I STF^ dT 5J^ft^rfr TT9TfT dfaiP-H Pd ^<J cd I d 

^TTfT 

rfr^T PPT f%T ^Tf^rf T fWT^PlI c; 

^T^rff SH -d H <j T cTjfcT: : I 

wr % fawg:: ii(U*-ddPM far hmih j i&i (p 2 f. 60 r ) sr- 

Iw^TFcT cTvT fTT{rPTT TIW rnTF^^TW tcTcP-TFTfH d d> J Id : ilft- 


7 c. 1 M l 'R N P|'’ , Vs'G' 1 , 'G^Gs'K;'A^Aj'Mj'EvEv'Ti-.v 


V l 



+T+^tfR7' n 2 ; 


41fdH"dfdW N 3 D 2 ; R R (RT V 4 ) d^PH^RM VG 3 A x M 2 (unmetrical except for V 4 ) ; ? 1 W 
srjTdRPRT G,7Vy; 3TTRP <P(R G 2 p<HR 1 HI G 2 KiA 2 E D 7 d. ] M^R^Pf vi Vj'Gj'Gj' 
G^KjPj* Aj'EvEjf TPy”'; d;p?6HdT'd4>H N 2 ; d^ctiHd^vH t N 3 ; D 2 Mj'; 

RIRPd^RR'^fP^fcfR VGKiAE D Try; Hldldld'^'dH M 2 (unmetrical) 8 a. RRpR TT?P 0 ] M v 
TYy v/ ; df^ld RT?P 0 N 2 ; d*-3d TTT 0 N 3 D 2 ; dP^d TT?P Q R N VG^G 2 G 3 Kf Ai A^M 2 E; RRT 
cld -~ Gj ; r 3 ’-’ - ; £ 1 d ° A 2 7Vy 8 c. dcKT ] D 2 M V V 2 V r 3 V 4 GA 1 M 2 E7Vy; cPRT N 2 N 3 R A 

A 2 ; cfRW Pf (unmetrical); LI W Ki • HR] M Y ; HT° N 2 V 2 V 3 G AETPy; 0 

N 3 D 2 R N PfV 4 M 2 ; om. Kj(unmetrical) • °I%T ] N 2 M y R N V 3 V 4 GK 1 AM 2 E7Vy; 
q-N 3 ; °fWrD 2 ; °f^T PfV 2 • ] M y R N VGAM 2 E7Vy; ^cf N 2 ; W N 3 D 2 ; ^ 

K! 8 d. cT^cf R f^TTVTP ] M v V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 I<i AM 2 E D ; cT^f R N 2 ; dT^cT Hfddlt?^ 

N 3 D 2 ; cT^cT cf R dTRR R N E V ; dHcTH dTHR Pf (unmetrical) ; R faRTRcP V 4 ; H^W— 

Gi ; Ref cf>T EjJ ; d^cP d" ^ ^P>PR 7>y 9a. ] E ; dT^pP N 3 D 2 • M-d^d 

d~ ] R ;V VGAM 2 E; 0 d-cl A d-rid N 2 f Pry; d^g^d^tTcT N 3 D~ ; dfrtd" T M y ; 0 dAiHA ?T: Ki 
9 b. tT^cT: M Y R N E V ; HlfcT* N 2 ; HTT^: N 3 ; R^TdT D 2 ; R^cT SE D 7>y • TfOT^: 
M v R N Ev ; Hd^TpndR NSEd Try 


7 (c 4 -c 5 ) V 3 ; (d 8 ) Ki 

8 (a 1 -a 8 ) Ki; (a 4 -a 8 , d 5 -d 8 ) Gi; (b 7 -b 8 ) A 2 


9 (a 1 -a 8 ) Gi 


8.2 ip S^fT did 1 Kirana 3:26c. 




] 


8.1 R n PiP 3 ; =PT P 2 8.1 °fRPgJ ] R n PiP 3 ; °fe£P?P P 2 8.1 

R N PiP 3 ; 3pj° P 2 8.2 T ] P 3 ; R R N ; dR - P 2 ; om. P? c 8.3 I 

R n PiP 3 ; °ddIRfdT h P 2 8.4 °d*rif5^ 0 ] R /v P 1 P 2 ; °d-n^d 0 P 2 8.4 

R N ; M l jlPddi^d l d l Q PiP 3 ; M 1 ^ 11 HTdT 0 P 2 8.5 °Rt^Tfr ] R^PjPa; Q M'ldl <Tm P 3 
8.5 °<lcdld ] R N Pi P 3 ; °<Jcdd^ P 2 9.1 ] P 3 ; Q PJF 0 R n ; °q?R; Pi; P 2 

9.1-2 SrfdT 0 ] R n PiP 2 ; om. P 3 9.2 RRRPrTW dcP° ] P 3 ; cPdM-dfddd^° R N ; —RPRR 
cTR° Pi ; dRTRRPBT R P 2 9.2 °HTM'hJld: ] conj.; «HTM4»J|d 0 R 


















































































































































































































f^rrur^rfr 


TTTS 


TTKTcH'by TTSHTW: W I J IcHdil W 


TT-nfr ^rt i w HRMi^rrfvRiTfi'jn sfr #Pvy 


(T H N IM I !>\H - 


ft, 

uhm'nI' sfr dT wr: 


«l i *-n i: 


cTTT 


fftn 


Hl^ll-d J (d 


HISlH)dH-df^ ifiRTrft fa ^ fa 


o*T ?Td'U'cd <+,: M I S| f| y i| yfa - 

r^s»,sHi q^cptrr-Hi^>-icii»ii^^d ii \ ii 

FMH 4 PV 


se^wnwr i 


V 


w fenr^T jyNt *jHdi far^ f \iP m pmm fashdi^ m hiPm (pt t- 


t: spTf ; crmT i w) si 4 |c|<iiih rurvnrnr srtrtw 


«U'd fa SH H I Pm c*f d^/1 < I <J I cH d I 'pT: JITtfRT<4 Idl'nM Pm< hI <fl Id 
^fadfasiPMUP, f. 60 u )Id ^d I S 


^)fr d ^0 J HI WSfa d^M 3 d> 1P-d difa Hj ~4 cl 


9 c. ft*, sH! ] M v R A VG i G 3 Ai M 2 E7ry; f^JT^T N; 1 C 2 ; fefaT I<x • ' fls>,vfl s 31 ] 

N 3 M v R n VGAM 2 E Try ; f^ft^T N 2 ; D 2 ; fepWiT K, • ] N 2 D 2 

M v R A 'PfV 2 V 3 GAM 3 E7>y; N 3 ; ^ V 4 9 d. Rl Hl^^ei^i K ] M v R N G i E v TYy; 

WTTTW^r N 2 ; ^RTTPSRT ffT N 3 D 2 ; RJ H l'TH4ii|l<i VG 2 G 3 K,AM,K D 10 a. HWi l ] 
M Y R v VGiEr 7>y; N 2 ; N 3 D 2 ; R^fl G 2 G 3 AM 2 E D ; RF5T— Kj 10 h. f- 

^TT° ] M y R N E v ; N 2 ; H^PTgpj 0 N 3 ; D 2 ; fSTrfrl 3 ° PfV 3 V 4 ; fTdTITR;*> 

V 2 (unnietrical) ; ^p -0 Gj ; fT^T° G 2 M 2 ; $ v ° G 3 ; Ai(urimelrical); ft 




A 2 ; S^fTcT STT° R D ; f3T7Vy 


ot| I ruin ] >: ; V 4 


c 4 ) A 2 ; (c 5 ) Ai 


10 (a 8 - b 6 ) K 


9.6-7 ^TcTWt 

p. 133. 


_r_ 

• d 3 m •'■i d : AfoksakarikS 82c-83b. Also quoted ad N a res varaparlies a 2 : 8 , 


9.4 RE4fJT4T 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; RT^PfrftRcPTRt ° P 2 9.4 sft ] R N P 2 ; <j) (R^qlPM 

PjP 3 9.4 RPTTCTX 0 ] R* v ; R P4IH WI 0 P 2 ; Rld'Mli>l ° P 3 9.6 ^HHi ] R N P a P 2 ; ^T- 
RPT P 3 9.7 fTPt] R N Pi P 3 ; WTP 3 9.9 °^T: ] R^PiPg ; °rR^T P 2 10.1 ?PJT ] 
R v : W ff P 10.1 em.; R N P 2 ; ^^zf -4 Pt P 3 10.1 ] R N P 2 ; 

°ftr— P,; °3 jrt 10.2 “firarrfr] r n PiP 3 ; °fa<JifV o P 2 10.2 ^ppttrt iTrfwrfr- 

FqTTSPt ] 1P V ; SR’-^rTfK 1 IV<fiRHW° PiP 3 ;■ 3PRTR U P 2 10.3 °f^q-] 


R iV PiP 2 ; P 3 10.3 R 



TT° ] R n PiP 2 ; 



P 3 10.5 °RRT4iJ^r 


R v p 


•JH H y fil'd 0 P 2 ; ^ rt^T° P 3 


3 


6 
























































































































































































































'A J 'Jr*T 


'9 


r^trwtt w f^dffdacl Pun ii ?o u 

y Iy)riTHl P-Hd RTR dilrtdfcl) sir Rlw: I 

cRR dRW : || ^ II 





3TcT: 'HpHHR fR NHHHIHdd 4H ; I 

IRW^TH T^" dT cTgr: FT «hl H < 6 L: 

;!. M '5T-1-4 'i v -pTT Ty^fg -7 " 



d"RT W 



PIR 



^T: 5 TWT dldR-MlIA-Kidl d"d HI * 4 >| PfhW IH ^IdId «hI ^ ..K°d IdH -d i>| 

*=r y| 0 ' h (%■ i 


31rl'Hr 



r t wp ! : ^Frar%)( p, f.i6 v ): i 


3 TTT(R' v f. 140 r )^T d H ;| d TiTTT^TFWT 11 sfd" I 

%rrfy dd,H >j 1 d Sd4Hl-'&fUcdl RcM W 








a 



^Rf) 



dddddd 


10 c. ] M v R N SET>y; Hdi>lcWI RR N 2 (unmetrical); N 3 ; RRR^TWPT- 

ft L ) 2 10 d. ] N 2 M v Try ; f^TTf^T(RpR D 2 )57T f%TT N 3 D 2 ; ^rtf^'fffrf R4RT R N SE 

11 a. ° M\ Pr n ] E; o fdciP-qci Ki(unmetrical) • *-RR ] E; WRT V 3 11 b. Q ^T ] 


N?M Y R 


y i> n 






N 3 ; °^T D 2 


11 c. “UlHwjk ] M Y R N Pf V 3 V 4 GKi AM 2 E Try ; 


13 Rmurffl N 2 ; °RTR^Rt N3 ; «R7RWT D 2 ; V 2 11 d. 3TTRT rRT ] E ; FTRT PRT 

N • d^4d : ] E; <TJ^: V 4 ; fdM4d : M 2 12a.] NPJV 2 V 3 GAM 2 E D 7Vy; RH*R2 
R^fpT M r E v ; 3TTTPf2T R N ; 3RT: yPd^H : fpT: V 4 ; ^df^Pd^H jTR K x 12b. 




] NV 3 V 4 GA 1 M 2 E d ; M^mfHcjiwrr M y R v Ev^ (= Bhagavac/gKa 5:10d); 
rf=T Pf ; PdfaHld-ddd V 2 ; U T=T-~ Ki ; PiP r dlMddP^*f: A 2 ; PdpRdlHfJdHdd Tr.v 


10 (c 4 -c 5 ) A 2 ; (cP-lla 1 ) G] 


12 (a 3 - b 2 ) N 2 ; (a 5 -a 6 ) A 2 


12.1 TTR ] P ; RR* R J 
—*TP° Pi ; 



12.1 chld^: ] R n PiP 2 ; diHIdfeL: 1\ 3 12.2 

X P 2 ; fRERtrRRt 0 P 3 12.2-3 




0 ] R J ; 

x mi x hi® t J 2 ; id&diMqHi u r 3 iz.z i s hm : ] PiP 3 ; 

R: R N ; ypdriwjd JW P 2 12.3 cTU° ] R w PiP 2 ; P 3 12.3 °fR- 

^TTIWr ° ] P; °f^l < til Pl^HI ° \i N 12.4 RftTR^3f 0 ] R* v ; R T P t P 3 ; R ^=4^0 

P 2 12.5 ^t4‘° ] P 2 P 3 ; R n 12.6 °RPJ^ ] em .; °RR^TT R1%T R' v ; 

RrPTP 1 P 3 ; °Pjr R# P 2 12.6 RR° ] R- v ; R^R°P 12.7 %RT° ] R ;v P 1 P 3 ; RRT° P 2 
12.7 ® ] R N Pj P 3 ; °wftTRT° P 2 12.8 °7>1 P+rdTcdpRTRRTR 

rdlPdrd^ R N ; o^TRT^cdfRr^TR P 3 12.9 dTMP-ldd ] P 2 P 3 ; ^Nl^dd 
12.9 ^T° ] R x ; dRT 0 PiP 3 ; P 2 


Pi P 2 ; °<blpTi + - 
0 R iV ; RPT— Pi 




























































































































































































vi i v, i h tra 







W dl TTT: II ^ II 

w fdafd srfft sR -hh^nh : 1 


w 



# *TTf: 37c*Tt Sc’T^TR'TItw: 



W: 



2 f- 61 r ) 


d^^-dc^Ki (^i <u||(^p^^oqi-tit^M < j)d 


* 

* 



Pd&Id d^ldId-di|H^ 1^1 i»lrW I cH <t>: *>Hf»dl ofT 3TqT H^ld 

?rr sfr Pi P*& vh h h <-d d 







3 T- 


fV(P^lvlH }dl Id I TTMI PT^ d d I M 3T)f)T*iH H dJ c) T fd P=-'cS,?lHcl I - 

T ^ftWITFr 




ScTrf: 




^ -d d { 




RT TOR II ^ II 


orto 



TT 




o i t\ ^ d! tr- orbr tott otrtii ?* n 


31 i| ft. HI 



^TRT I W dW 3m <. 'HI 




12 c. : ] R N E V ; d^'HlnPdd : N 2 N 3 ; RT RlTfdd : D 2 ; d-^dHpdd : 

fW: P 3 V 3 C 1 . 2 G 3 AM 2 E D Try ; d ^ m Pd d : V 2 ; d^ H Had : V 4 ; cT-- Gi ; —^TlM Pd d': K x 

tort 



N 2 M y R v P|V 3 V 4 AiEv ; TrdT N 3 D 2 ; TORTT V 2 G 2 G 3 M2 ; ^T* 4) A 2 E D ; 

Try 12d. ^Idl ] N 2 M y R jV VG 2 G 3 K 1 AM 2 E7>y; N 3 D 2 ; ^ Reft Gj • TW: ] 

NM y R 7 V VG 2 G 3 K 1 A 1 M 2 Ev ; <S»5P?P: Gi Try; T51RT A 2 E D 13 a.R] M y R yv G 2 K 1 E v ; 
T NGiAsTVy; VG 3 AiM 2 E d 13 b. RfRRT: ] M y R /v VG 1 G 3 AM 2 E Try ; R frnrpT 
NG 2 Ki 13c. ] E; ^TT & V 3 13d. TOT] N 3 D 2 VGK 1 AE d ; TT ^PT 

M y R' v Ev Try ; TOT M 2 14 ab. ] o/n. Kj 14 a. RTpT ] M y ; RR E 14 b. Tt 
RRT] M y ; OT RRT NR N E v T^y; ^OT TOR VG 2 G 3 AM 2 E D 14d. ^ftfr] M y R*' v SETry ; 
OTFt N 2 N 3 ; TPfT: D 2 • SPWd OTRf ] N7>y; TTOTdHi M y ; cyu| [d R N E V ; 

iUdPd OTTR SE 


12 (c 1 , c 7 -c 8 ) Ki; (c 2 -c 8 ) G 


i 


14 [a^-b 1 ] M 2 ; (b l -b 2 ) N 2 ; (b 2 -c 4 ) G i; (c^-d 5 ) K l5 (d*) G 2 


13 (c (> ) Ai; (d r, -d H ) 

( ' . f „6 _ ,J 5 ^ \S . /A$ 


N 


13.2 dP=< I < u l Dh&tupatha 10:139. 


13.1 JTrfr] R V PiP 2 ; rrTTcfp P 3 13.1 TR: ] R^P^g ; OP: P 2 13.2 TTTcT: ] P 2 ; TRTf: 

P 1 P 3 ; R v 13.2 ] R N ; 00 P 13.2 oRT^T* ] R N P 2 ; 0 RT^T° P 3 

13.2 FTfrcm^o ] R :V P 3 ; OTT P 2 13.3 Pd^Pd ] PdiiPd IIIIIII P 2 13.3 °?T- 

^rr° ] R /v P 1 P 3 ; °fRTTT° P 2 13.4 ] R^PjPg; °^r° P 2 13.6 °dW° ] Il^PTg; 

°dNlr*Hd! P 2 13.7 pTR: sfmTR] R N ; om. PiP 3 ; ffefPtT P 2 13.7 #1T] R^PiPg; 
RTMT P 2 14.1 OtRt I OR ] R^p : ; d^|K)d P 2 ; " URP 3 






























































































































































































y<M uid 

'O % 




?rfwr: rrm q ch ih^ ^c^rnr^r dfHi<*H--^ifq h < PhiR^ d - 

:—sfr 


cTr^ UMH44[*nl'jHI<JlcH<t> <d I dI fd 



cTPT ftl «l I c«b rt *11 ^4^^Hdld 'HWtl4'H’41'3Hlko^lHK[l^M](P 2 
f. 61")^ d J d ^ A d M dl sfr 

T(jjwi^r 





3T)t^T H-Owi-rKN [ST5T: 


H I M 141: ST^fFT 



TFFT S^P^FT ITFT 

ijt fd^i-i vjij irqR-HP-4<*>Iftufi II ^ 

'FTrdjrfd 4 rT: 5Ttrfn 

Pd<+ti <ich4hi^i: ^rrf^nrr t srtc^t«ptii ^ n 




tt ^rq - srat sfw?r: 



«-qiq(d <l<£dcd IcHH I farfa 





5rnj[WJ] tr<r w: I ^T(4‘ %*T 4cprfJT)RT I 3P-T 

15. JM | NM y 7>y; om. R N ; n?P?: SE 15 a. &T3TT SHTcFT ; 

N 2 ; 3T^r TOJRT N 3 D 2 ; sflctd 4- W 4- t-ci-ii Pf(unmet,rical); 

^ t-c ]-fl V 4 ; 3 h- t-ri; 3 : G Ki A 2 M 2 E/> Try; 3 <<t»: Ai(unmetrical) 

E v ; sfftfit SE D Try 15 b. ] M y R N Pf V 3 V 4 GKi AM 2 ElVy; Wrf N; V 

15c. ^ ] E ; ^ N • 



M y R N V 3 Ev ; 

: srr^t 


3 


iTTrf] NM y R N 


f^TT^W ] N 3 D 2 M r KiA 2 Tl-y; f^>T— N 2 ; f^wfTTrift R N ; f^- 

«ti I RT<jf r[ Pf ; R-mRuUI V2V3V4M2EV ; R + R— Gi ; R + G 2 ; r«( + lRu«w G 3 A, 

Ed 15d. 5E?#R ] E; Jlr^frH N 3 (unmetrical); ^^TTiw=T Ki • ] N 3 

M y V 2 V 4 GAE 16 a. Gi 1 1 <T r d : ] M y R N VGA 2 E7>y; 

Ki ; 'jEI<A l'lIn4d : A] ; ^i|riflfd4d: M 2 


D 2 R N P|V 3 K 1 M 2 Tl-y; 
^PT^frfTTcT: N; 5P 
M y R w V 3 GiG 




a c 
2 


• Trw ] 

n 2 d 2 

r K1M 2 

16b. 1 

id 


RASEd Try ; df^KI : N 2 ; f^RW( tT N 3 ) iHl'<^ : N 3 D 2 ; df^K: ^rl Y<2M : 


E 


v 


16 c 



E; Pd + K 0 N 


*=THT] N 2 R n V 4 M 2 E7>y; 


N 3 D 2 ; fljnm FqiTf M r P|V 2 V 3 G 1 G 2 A ; fl4PdHIVI ^TTcT G 3 (unmetrical) 16 d. Pd^lPl 

*S *'' h - 

T] M y R N AEv Try ; fw^ ?T N 2 ; Pd<t>l^l N 3 D 2 Gi G 2 M 2 Ed ; 3Tf^rt Pf V 2 V 3 ; =T 

V 4 G 3 


15(c 7 -d 8 ) N 2 ; (c H -d K ) Gi; (d 3 ) A 


16 (a J -a 2 ) Gi; (b^-c 1 ) A 1 ; (c^d 7 ) Ki 


16.2 py^dHH Kirana 3:12d. 


14.2 5ffe: 

R n PiP 3 ; 

o r H^^|^ld)rd P 2 
K N ; 


R N P 2 ; 




P 1 E 3 
14.3 ^FT 


1.4.2 



R N PiP 3 ; HTTr^r P 2 14.2 ] 

14.3 0 r^ ijldlPd ] R N P 3 ; °rR^T-— Pi ; 




°T>T: 

TT%T ^frf ) cf R N 
P 1 P 3 


P 2 14.3 ] P ; om. R ;V 

16.1 ] R N PiP 3 ; TRTTR P 2 16.1 °W: ] P 2 ; 

1 P!P 3 16.1 0 <f>dc4ld; ] P; 0 «J)drdl (FT 1 Trft - <0^ - 

16.2 STTiTWr ] R^Pj ; 5TPJ—- P 2 ; SPJ^T P 3 16.2 ] R N P 2 ; d$*H 


































































































































































































































^TfTPT^P^ard WP7T ' 


1 


Su I-cA U) Td 


^X 


C\ 


rdld-4 


wr it^ 


Hpar^-ai I d 


7 


C\ 


Cn 


X 


frrraw h m^tpt i 


srar^TT 


d"FWT 'JYH i d i 


3T^r tr^TR^TTRT: d~(fTTSTHTl IM ! : A ‘H )7TH I d y f( | tT(]> 2 f.62 r )dnTT 


^pFrT 


rRTpnjT 


5iT^rm% 


^ jI<}\(dcd |-HI m W 


w ^a=d^rs*T^TF?r(R" f. mo^^wki^i HTddod[>.diidd- 

dT T{P r ) 0 |! f H -fr 'H-H ■*^[H ■» M-MTt' 




T«ffl d I rHH I 


vrfdWfTfd" fdT dTdT: 'A J dv" T.f^l d dfd" I (3P-T d d I P-T 7 7 ^IWT- 


T T JT^ry r Td I d 4 N fd 7 fd i| MI Pd Pd 'A M : I 


W- 


f<cd 1 -^ldR I 


WcT dTcT fldloHdl M<ui Wd : 


7"c; wj | dl HI Hh d 


#¥(^) fr 'dTsrwf: 


d"FdT ^T)(P, f. 17 r 


ddWddWPT: I 


d"d-,| i^wji T^d ddT oTl'TT- 


Hrdi^TTd* dcHvddTd - ^Td 


f. G 2 V ) [^: ^ar: 


3Td 


d M d M I 

'-D 

SHdddcd Ic^l HT T^TPJR 

VO 


3 


6 


9 


12 


15 


18 


17. *PMHdN ] NM V V 4 G 2 KiAiE l> Try ; om. R A ; WR PJ'V 2 V 3 GiG 3 A 2 E k ; t*ST: Nu 
17a. 3P^7Rc3TcT ] N 2 M r R A P| V 3 V 4 C 1 Ki AE7Yy; ^~A d d cd I X 3 ; 3P3"Tc3TtT V 2 (unmetri- 

cal); ST^cR" ^TPT G 2 G 3 ; 3T%cR*: ^TTcT M 2 • 5mt HT ] M v R N V 2 V 3 'V 4 G 2 AM 2 E7Yy; 

^‘i’. ^ 

5r— n 2 ; y j 4ifii n 3 d 2 ; pf ; spajt— Gi; a^riy g 3 ; ifcrrw Ki 

E; JTTPfT ^ V 4 (unmetrical) 


17 (a 7 -a 8 ) N 2 ; (a 7 -b G ) G x ; (b 4 -b 5 ) V 3 ; (d 4 ) Ai 


16.3 W Kirana 3:27a. 

16.5 fdIVd* ^ii4 h Kirana 3:12a. 

Cv %, * 


16.3 f^TTflff 0 ] R n P 1 P 3 ; Pm^rTTf 0 P 2 16.4 c fiTT ] R N P 2 P 3 ; P, 16.5 

RTrftnT ] R^PG^; <tiP-M!r<HI P 2 16.6 0 MH<]HITm ] R N P 2 ; 0 W^J7T PjPa 16.6 ^TT° ] 

R A P 2 ; ^Tr=rr° Pi; ^>T# 0 P 3 16.7 : ] P; : R N 16.8-9 °f?rn^rn r W ] 

R A P 2 ; P 1 P 3 16.9 «d^I3fw?T: | P1P3 ; 0 rT^- R N P 2 16.10 H&m- 

■J V, v*. 

fi*r° ] R N ; W P 2 P 3 16.10-11 ^^pTirf^T ] R A P 1 P 3 ; °ifpildNI P 2 16.11 °WTd'] 
R N P!P 3 ; °HM<Jrl P 2 16.12 I ] R a PiP 2 ; TOT P 3 16.12 ^f^ddfrl ] R^PjPg ; 

P 2 16.12 ddlTH ] R Ac P 2 P 3 ; (T#T R Aac 16.12 ^?ro ] r k p 2 . sn^T° 

16.13 ] PjPa; R N P 2 16.13 °fwrq": ] R A P!P 2 ; : P 3 

16.14 JTRTRTT] R jV P l P 2 ; RP7T° P 3 












































































































































































































W srarmrR 




T fd <*>Pd fd K d -rTl SPTT: 



: II ?V9 II 






*Tf ^T*P 


fr 'twr5tt)^t ^Tn^oq^r^ptr - 

I d < IHId 'll ^ J I dj 4 ^ H H fi'^rw T^": sr- 



^TTT S'-dl'dd 



Hidl^ld,i'AIftpq'H'ill: 5TfTd 



W^T WdMH II 


4 ($ J ^ : «hTH I Id <bl d N d £1 i : I cdN" dTT( : rTT^': 'hdrdR-lc^ 

W W: I difr 



7 frf^Td ' 

ciiii^ii^j^K^n^^ f%WW3T 

\D VD -V 

3T^q^IW WHTT dPd^KI ^HlRRf: II ?q II 


W f^JdPM : 
*7 rrrrf^r 




Tr*TdT 





f.9 r )«pT3% 

STflFiPr: 



m 


%■ I 3TT M <I Id y I>4 : 


h) =r ddtfdMd 



, f. 63 r 



17 c. F^rfr ] V ; fwT M 2 
N 2 N 3 ; fcM F^TT^T D 2 ; 


fafifdfdFHK ] It N P 3 V 2 V3G2K1AM2E ; fa <fi faTCrl'F «4 I< 

v 4 ; faf Trv±kmr< g 3 

17 d. TFT^TT S^m: ST° ] It^Pf G 3 K 1 AE ; 3FFtTT(^TT: D lac ) G4IcVI 0 NM 2 : 3RfY ^FFT: ST° 



M r G1 7 V\ 






M y ; 3HHHi RTVT 0 V 2 ; ^PTrft ^TT !T* V 3 V 4 ; ^d-dl Fq~ ST° Gj ; ^FtTT *=*7: Vt 0 G 2 ; 
3H-dfdd 7>y 18 before a. M v inserts fftrlprd‘ HT tfrfT: SffaT: RT ^rrrmfmw I VPT^ 

qrfd" TTR^fw *-31 d d i Ph dfedl I 18 a. 0 d -d Id ] M Y R N V 2 V 3 GI< 1 AET 'ry ; °<;^i— N 2 ; 


N 3 D 2 M 2 ; P^ ; Id V 4 18b. 3W] M v R iV Pf V 2 'V 3 GK 1 AE ; —TdT 

N 2 ; dHN 3 ; d4)d I ) 2 (unmetrical) ; dH?d V 4 ; ^pfa" M 2 (unmetrical) 18 c. °rRlT ] £; 
tPTT N 2 N 3 18 d. TrfV^iTTT ] NM V Try ; df^Fim: R A VG 2 G 3 K 1 AiM 2 Ed ; dfg^TTT: Ev ; 
n P^diT<‘i: A 2 • ifafa*: ] NM r Gi Try; <tirdTGd: R Af VG 2 G 3 K 1 AM 2 E 


18 (c 4 -d 4 ) Gi; (c 6 , d 1 ) Ai; (G-d 1 ) K i; (d 8 ) N 2 


17.4 5 5 cj n’*%. ■ Mrgendravidyapada, 4:15. Also quoted ad Naresvarap anks a 

2:31, p. 153. 


17.3 

0 p 


17.2 ] R A ' ; VII^4 P 17.2 FTTR^nt 0 ] R A ’ ; 0 P 1 P 3 ; d < 1'dl‘qT 0 P 2 

] R N p 3 ; rpt— P, ; P 2 17.4 ^Ttpr^tfct 0 ] P 3 ; ^PP^TV 0 R N ; - r 2 

17.4 Jl^M I H ] R A P 3 ; ---XTTT^STFT Pi ; 0 41Jd n'1 WTFT P 2 17.4 HlddH ] R N PiP 3 ; 

MN^d P 2 17.5 'T^PT ] R A, P,P 3 ; om. P 2 (unmetrical) 17.6 R^TVRtW ] PiP 3 ; R^TST- 
FTW R n P 2 17.0 °RfP": ] P t P 3 ; »«$RTd; R N ; '“R^l * H P 2 17.6 : ] 

R N P 2 ; ^T=r— P, : ^‘ + r + : T4-r + : TTr^r: P 3 18.1 IPIT ] R^PiPs; IKT P 3 18.1 °f*T- 
^TT ] R A ’P 2 ; °=p^r P,P 3 18.2 RPTPJT: ] R N P 3 ; -TO: P, ; RTWT P 2 











































































































































































































M^<m+u d rcK^dNi Rh J| J|^dl 



VD 


fd <f<d H m '-d Pd fid M I PH d 



dcH&H I (drd Idd I e IH Pd fk 


d>Klf Hdrl: dTFT {I f HH PtIR edded 



ws^TVtjdii-riotjc^JsfPwr- 


<-d 11 d -'d'd 



fTeT I 


3 


3T=T ffl 41 -cf: 


sfRfP SRTT: FTTrfitWT I 


RT RfwT: VtfVtfT RT fTeT 



T%RII ^ II 


3TCT d IHI ^1 atfr^r: HWf%d%W: ^TnrrcWFcTPTT 3T^(WRTT g<T 1 

+iidled')^F^ fd Pi y nmc: ^nf%%T 



fW TRT 





TWTSfpRT fTRcRTcRT TTTW RTT: ITWT I 


19 . R/ % places the rest of the verse after pad a a, but also gives the pratjka below for the 

rest of the verse. 19 a. TTSpNT ] E; RTSpT R^ ; spR: V 4 ; RT&TRRT M 2 (unmetrical) 
• RPR° ] N 2 M v R ;V VG 2 G 3 K 1 AE ; 3RR° N 3 I ) 2 ; TTP° Gi(unmetrical) • °RRf RR ] 

M v Pf V 3 G 1 Ev 7>y; 0 TTtJP R N 2 N 3 ; °dd) R D 2 ; °TTRf %R R v ; V 2 V 4 ; 

G 2 G 3 AM 2 ED ; I <1 19b.] R%; afTRHIlHI (RT N 3 D 2 )fftW N; STTRl RRT: 

M r ; afr*m=qT(PT Pf) V 4 )W PfV 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 K 1 A ; sfRft HIIHRI 

M jlW I R V 2 ; afPHHIHI! RftTRR Gi TYy; efPRRR FTRSpftW: M 2 ; aflRT SHI I HR Icy <(Uu| p 
E d 19c. RT RfWT: ] M Y R N G 1 G 2 A 1 Ey Try ; RT RftfT 0 NV 4 ; cT^%° Pf V 2 V 3 G 3 A 2 E D ; 
cl^ffh: Ki ; d^^Pcti: M 2 • M Pen 1 d d ] M y R‘ v SE7Vy; °!»l Pm i-tH N 2 I ) 2 ; °vl fed I'd 1 - 
R N 3 19 d. RT*t° ] N 2 M y R v V 2 V 3 V 4 GAM 2 E 7 >y; RTR° N 3 D 2 ; om. Pf( unmet rical) 

20 a.] U Y K N E v Try vl (Try uncertain); RmTafTWTT f^f U RT N 2 ; 7^TrefpR(cR N 3 )fRR~ 

cRRT ( cRT N 3 )RT N 3 D 2 ; I^RfRTR^^RT(iRj Pf ) V; Gi(unmetrical); 

twtt m g 2 G 3 AH 2 e d ; uRraY«rrf rjtrrt---K i 20 b.] r n vg 2 g 3 Ki am 2 

EIVy^TVy uncertain); d^Aw^Vih'ur N 2 ; N 3 D 2 ; ^TRW ^ Ref: fWrTT M Y ; 

—R Gi 


19 

20 


d 1 —d 8 ] Ki; (d 2 ) A, 

’a 1 ] Ki; (a 8 ) I<i; (td-b 8 ) Gi; (e 2 ) Ai 


19.1 h$ dlRTR^R 0 ] R N Pi P 2 ; om. P 3 

R N ; R 


19.1 Rirrmfr] P; RTRTRfR r r n 19.2 a[- 

strr° J R JV R apRT° P 1 P 3 ; R epTcTT 0 P 2 19 . 2-3 °RrsfRRcRr o ] P; 0 cRT&fbRcRT° 
R N 19.6 RTRRR° ] R^PxPa ; RRFR° P 2 19.6 dTRT 3 R ^[ 0 ] R^PiPs; RRRT ^ 0 P 2 
19.7 fR^RaitR: ] conj .; ftifR: RPR: R 19 . 7-8 RN I Th-^H cy^cl ] R N ; HNlffl^fd Pi P 3 ; 
RTRTfR^rT P 2 





















































































































































W Hldlfa^l oq-n^T T d 14 -H IJ ll I 



^ MII Id<t>II <-d ferdTSftW cRnFfcTTIRo || 

fl4i!l rW IrH HI T WW «fT«rcr ^cWT^cddUl JT^TI 

MT d er-rl) fd iTT^-R-d- 


('Jl J lr e hl < u l irHd I ci -i ^4 U I I 

c<t> I d 1 rH <t> I: 




FTI V^q-f cq 


^Tr^TTf%lTr^: T f d^ld+nfdcdld 




N f. 141 r 



^ST T cf d ^Rt> : I rllrhH-^d 


SffwT: ^Id^ftfd' I rT(3ft 



dr^l4^lR^I srfer: fwiWT WT^fwT I 

C\ 

*qH<hidfe qwfr fe ? 'dT ^wr#irw n ^ n 


20 cd. ] om. M Y E v Try vt ; placed before 21ab in N and preceded by the following half verse: 
FTRT VlfftVdH I'dJ I Pd I: ( FqT N 2 ) HTR^RfacT R^cf 20c. imrrfwr ] R‘ Y NV 3 V 4 GK, AE D Try ; 
RP 4 lfe^° Pf V 2 ; RTRT PpfT M 2 • ^TT^T] E D ; aTTHR NPf V2V3G1G2K1 Dry ; scrrRT 

R N ; PTTPTT V 4 ; G 3 AM 2 20d. K cTc^h14JIup| ] N 2 R N Pf G 2 ; T dc^hld U of N 3 D 2 ; T 

d^hl'wS'Rdl V 2 V 3 V 4 ; < d rhP^rrrufT Gi ; dcT: ^■pahiuf) (of G 3 E D ; Rdt A£ c ) G 3 Kj AM 2 E D Try 

• °tgfr] NR v V 2 V 4 GiG 3 AM 2 Ed ; PfV 3 ; °«^f=T: G 2 K,7>y 20 e. HTTTT ] N 3 

M v R v PfV 3 V 4 G 2 AM 2 E7yy l,/ (7>y uncertain); d 1 d 1 d N 2 D 2 ; d d d 1 d V 2 G 3 Ki(unmetrical); 
Hd m Gi • tm 1 fd'tiid ] M v R N SETTy* '(Try uncertain) ; 1 [ddii N 2 ; «r> 1 rd 1 fddu N 3 D 2 


m 


SHW ] NM r R N V 2 V 3 V 4 GiG 2 AET!ry vi (7Vy uncertain) ; d i^-d PfG 3 KiM 2 20 f. fe*7- 
0 ] E; fed 1 0 V 4 • cRf: ] NR N PfM 2 ETi"y ui (7>y uncertain); dcf M r V 2 V 3 V 4 GA 


HJd 1 ] M v R N VGiG 3 AM 2 E7>y , '(7>y uncertain); fqd 1 : N 2 Ki ; P* *JcT: N 3 D 2 ; ^JcT G 


21 a. drhl4 0 1 E; dcddd 0 N 



D 


3 • j M y R N P|V 2 V 3 GK 1 AM 2 ; t u r) N7Vy; 

°^feT V 4 E • ?rfer: ] D 2 M r R^'VGiG 3 AM 2 E Try; ^1% N 2 N 3 G 2 K! 21b. qw y Pm - 
ofT] M y R^SETiy; RWTTOTT N 2 ; N 3 D 2 21c.] M y R /v V 4 E v ; VIPch^t^ Tr ( frRt 

D 2 ) NaK? 1 )FCT NKy'Ay'MS'; qwrfr Pf V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 Ki AM 2 E 

qwrfr Gi ; VlfewHWr fr(fr Try v ' )^KfH Pf vt V* 1 'Vj'G^G^G;'7>y w ; Vr%: qw Pd^ l R 
BTT Vi’ 1 ; qrwrfr 7ry 21 d. ] M r R N Pf V 2 V 3 GKi AM 2 ; PJrT( rf N 2 )HTT^T 

Pr^TT NP| v, V3 , V5 l VJ , 7>y v '; fecTT V 4 ; G^G^G^Ay'A^ 

7>y 21 after d. Ed inserts VTfer: qw fd«+>Kfd H H Pd I HI 


MJ 1 


^rrrw 



21 (a 6 ) Ai; [b l -b G ] K i; (b 5 -c 5 , d x -d 2 ) Gi 


20.1 ] R N ; ^ T P 20.1 °Vl^lrHdl T ] R N ; °V!”W7lrHHI P 20.1 

] R n PiP 3 ; p 2 20.2 5fJ|of>Ky|lcHHliMl^cl * - ^^rf|fd ] R* ; om . P 2 P 3 

20.3 °rR^rr: ] R N P 3 ; P 2 20.3 dP^IW fWdT ] R N P 2 ; om, P,P 3 20.3 ] 

R N PiP 3 ; °#eT° P 2 20.4 T ^ ] R N ; TJ P 20.5 p!" T ] P ; ^T: T R N 20.5 cT^ - - 
fwr: ] R n PiP 3 ; d^Rh P 2 20.5-6 dfehd vrfw: ] R N ; om, P 











































































































































































VK' |J-l4>udM IHrlRf %WcpTI 


9o<f 


)rfr#r sfr -MiTm-ii i ’totFt 3rfw>WHr pjff^ <t. \ d h ^Tf^rr 


N p U| fd y| c| | fa <dtI *}H M trfr^oft) fal^T I =T r[ ^TOfTPW- 

jrfr ftht vprw i Wf: 


i'll fh : ^TT^T d - 



qrfr fto^i P.f r fs r q i hh^ t w t r t cr^wf^TFT 



vftH H ^'FfvPT 



WW cPT x iT 


: <ti 14 <h d m I cici: 3 T?kT Rh^^d 


^TrT^TT^T dHtld : I 



C\ 


y RH+H<fra i l*XH l h JTRTT 5T fldifl<N l')c*Rr TP^TOI 





SOW I =T ET *l*J^fafa 





5 


fr 5PT(3fr -s^frw w i 


3RT Rp fid HI 'dJId : fllfy lc+TT)<PT I d d 

d hh ic'hcTT d fcL: fi f^-TT d I Rid) 




ci *1 'M - 


TTj|rp ^T <+ilPddd' 4>l Rb/Hf HIHHT +Hld : '<+>' |4«T fHHfrMH' dS HJ>] 



II || 


ws*r WR%^h 

Cx \D 



22 ab. ] £ ; W ^TUTM d l mR=eT 9rfwr H Idd *X-f NK j w (Try adds this half-verse onto the end 
of his pat hantara for 2 led.) 22c. die.: ] N 2 N 3 M Y R N P| V 2 K 1 / Vy; ^fe. I ) 2 ; d fd V 3 G 2 C «3 

A; ffe:* V 4 E v ; Mo; Ep • WT] N 2 D 2 M v R N Pf V 2 V 4 G 2 G 3 K t A M 2 E Try ; 


qw N 3 ; PMT V 3 22 d. «T) fa41 ] M y R N E V ' Try; ^Ppfr N; VG 2 G 3 AM 2 E/) ; 

dTf^PTT K s • fU fH h ih <jid ] NNP R ,rv VEy ; wrf^HT^cT G 2 G 3 K 1 AM 2 RD (T)*y uncertain) 

M v R N V ; WT PPW T?T NTry”' ; grpS* Jpilfd«it G 2 (unmetrical); W( JJ 

G 3 AM 2 E d ; W Hmvs- WP^PTr K, ; HWl ^ Try 23 b. ] 


23 a. 




A 2 M 2 E d 

M v R v P| V 3 V 4 G1 G3K1A 2 M 2 E /ry; 
cal); ^if^Try"' ; 


22 [a 6 -b 2 ] Ki; (b 4 -b 8 ) K i; (b 8 d 8 ) G,; fd 7 -d 8 ] V 4 



: N 2 ; 31 I Wife' : N 3 D 2 (unmetri 

• ( fcT G o A 1 ) 2 G 2 A 1 


23 (a l -b 7 ) Gi 


21.4 9TfWT: 'til <7^ T rn'rf Source unknown 



R 


N 



PiP 



P 


21.1 w^r] PiP 3 ; r n p 2 21.2 0 

21.3 rTW ] P; rTPTT 0 R* v 21.4 ^TPT^f T ] R N P 3 ; ^F*^vtTT P 2 21,4 ] R N P 2 ; 

jErfiro p 3 21.5 R^<h i R ° ] R N p x P 3 ; p 2 21.5 nrH^ 1 fr^rnt ] R N ; R^^ifrTPT 

P 21.5 drdildV 0 ] Pi; drhl^t 0 R^P 2 P3 21.6 I d di 0 fd ] R n PiP 3 ; 'til ^4^1 Old P 2 

22.1 ] R n P 3 ; P] ; P“ c )^° P 2 22.1 ] R V P 3 ; °'J?1 W-TT° 

P 2 22.1 MRuiHd J R N P 1 P 3 ; TfTqiWrT P 2 22.1 ] PiP 3 ; R N ; P 2 

22.2 ddfV^ r ] R N P 2 P 3 ; ^< 1 ^^ Pi 22.2 ^dffe: ] R A Pi ; 'tiMid: P 2 ; ^kTPTT: P 3 
22.2 flHW^ rT ] R N ; RIHr^d P 22.3 T f ] R N P 2 P 3 ; Pi 22.4 ^xPirT: ] P 2 P 3 J 

vHMcf : ( Wiy l*-Hldldrdld ^TrT: M Hj fti Pd q fdlxf WT511 g vi II 5 th H c*<l T<P-J% 

dHH Ic^ii rd'tiH ) R A 





































































































































































































































’’O 



3 


9 


) 


d^K^id^isrrfrr w ^rrwrftr ^ 

'Ji i <1 i Id ^44)^1: II ^3 II 



<1 *-h I ■-'HI M I rl t-c| | rrhH | d ^TITT: ^ 



Ppj fd > <* *ttcht- 



|'(rWT: I *TpT 

(d HI I c+1 rl «t» d 3ff%“ 


<hrllJH« 4 d rTT fd'qrd'X 1 4 \<HId I ^Rt) (P, f. 17 1 ’) ^ 5 TRJW)T f^RTT I 
fftPj ^ri^rHvll d J ■* •' 1 k d I RlRTTf,'T XRR7 T T TTT: I T 

6 IT<U| 4 , | J U ! j r 






ti r i i n 


ocf IPq I a^hHI-d ^ M<i»lIvl dldld : 

| ?Tfl7 ^JH cfl < d 



cii d rd 151 J i Rt ^!T g" adRrj: 

3RJRT %f?r 


3TT W ^KrdWr^MWPT(r: drd!ddddd^f%fT- 
fd - RT^r: I f^gJ’K: HPTFWW) 






^mP'Jjfddd'jdK fftr < Till d arptr i sfR7 ^r 

M'jid^^i'C-ddl S*|d>l <*-ddH l f| u l tT -sai <*i: 


d i fet|: 


dHIdRl (dTW- WWifril fftn 


23cd. placed after 28b in N, omitted 
T° ] D; cf° Gi • o^Tfw ] D 2 
K, 23 ef. ] om.NTty »' 23 f. 


in ’fry". 23 d. W] E; W° N., ; 'Tf’ D 2 • fT- 
M v R N l , fV 2 VsV; e GAM 2 ElVy; »^rfT N 2 N 3 V' 1 ; °<fiT— 

] E ; H<5HI SI V-2K i . qTflrUVT: ] H’ s ' V 2 V 3 



rnr * 


GAxE v ? Tty ?; ?fjP=W M r ; *j^TcW: PfV 4 ; ^MlrM4 A 2 E« ; M 2 

23 (e 3 -f 8 ) Gi; (d 7 , e ] -e 8 ) Ki 


23.3 i^ninqi^ S' vfiyiunl)!ii]vasutrasangrah a 2:9a. 1 T. Sadyojyotih’s interpretation (p.43): 

I ^ firTT ^FCTfr?TT: I ^Icd^ ^kTT tilr r +iH" I <15 r r»: ^vRTTT^T f^^rfd^Tf^Td - . I H frj <tiH IHd 1 

w wwt fn d Td h Rfjr^ i w: mfr ^Hdfcr &r*4cfrfd Pprfd - : i 

23.8—9 mrcf 191 ji Rud - * * 3 h oi| ?ti ^ fta uravasiltrasaiigraha 2:15. 

23.13—14 * * ‘H^^riifd Sankhyakarika 22. 


23.1 ^kTT ] R n PxP 3 ; ^THT P 2 23.1 ] P; Fjfcr R N 23.1 ^TTTT: ] R N PxP 2 ; ^TT 

rjfd^ ^kT: P 3 23.1 yRJlhl ] em. ; STPpfT 0 R 23.1-2 Rian^^T: 1 ] R N P 2 ; H T STg - 

.4 ^kTT° ] P 2 ; ^TT=T° R^Pg 

P 3 23.5 W ] 


23.3 R N ; P 2 P a 


R v P 2 ; °5>!«4hn P 3 23.4 ^PPTt ] R V P 2 ; 


- Px ; RT + an’ + iTT^ P 3 

23.4 FHT 

J 

R A PiP 2 ; P 3 23.5 STPpFtT ] R N PxP 3 ; 5mpfi 

•.4'>.lR^rn 7 r^[T° P 2 23.10 orqnvnd'T^id ] R n PxP 3 ; 
p 3 ; ipr«r ^rt||4: R n P 2 23.13 OTTfW I P 2 P 3 
R n P 3 ; m^SMch — i. P 2 f. 64 v ) rWrd 3rfV P 2 

Prfrr' p 2 



P 2 23.6 a^>“HI-d<rH?^ll ° ] R a P 3 ; 
°^TdrdM P 2 23.11 JpP^T: I |'ill4: ] 

R N Pj 23.14 
23.14 °^r|irn II ] R A P 3 ; °HcTT- 








































































































































































































ffrWcprft 


9o^ 


fl4 PhP d ^PTR)*i<HlrH«hH I WT^T: PpT^JcPTY 3^Iuj cK^- 

'Jid l d4d 

fa Sd^-£ddlfasr: fad ^1 r^ H Ifad : I 


15 


3vcfa HldlrHY ^4 



HI^dH II II 


H K H pf]*JM rfi 4 H I -Ml r| : P TTTFFYYt S*fW I FfTf 5 Id^'dTT 5RT 


^TSf(4^ iTm + I R Pd P4 Th Ph d H 
Ytfatfa 




fpfa: I ^TfY 


TmTsRl>i t TH PTWra - Ttrfr^MT: | 

4'cf I fd fWdfa'I^Yfadl: II ft% 


•m * '-i 'ji i Pr {rr^}^H -yj (Y ^r fYnrfw w s^^RPd 




•) 


6 


<h crd Id *i i cl *n 41 Td *i i ci Hdd: fa": I 

C\ 


far <vrTl M VII Hi I P«P1H ^4-d : II far I 

3TT H < I OTVTTd': 


9 


fa fa 'j\ fffaRTT fafa fagRT 3TW | 


24 abed. ] om. GKiAM 2 E 24 a.] M v R N VTr/'; fa* : N 2 ; fa" 3JW if- 

JRTfasP N 3 ; far JJKP HTRRfar D 2 24 b. fw° ] N 2 M v R N V7Yy ui ; ffafa N 3 ; fiRP: D 2 

• 0 fafaR‘d‘: ] M y R N V 2 V 3 V 4 ; °WRT U ?T: N 2 ; °Hftfr(fkN 3 )Y N 3 D 2 ; °Hfa?far: Pf 
Try vl 24 c. ^vc^3" ] R :V lfa V 3 V 4 ; <j>^i N 3 1)“ ; V 2 ; ^icT Try vl • HI <41 cH di ] 

M r R N VTry vl \ Hldlfa-Hfa N 2 ; HR I fW N 3 D 2 • sjtt 4* ] M v R N VN 2 Try vt ; dTTR N 3 D 2 

24d. ] NM v 'R /v P|'V 3 V 4 T>y u '; V 2 • fadfaffadH ] M r R N V; °fafp^'YH 

N Try v 1 25ab. Only thie pratfka, d 1 fal fa cd 1 fa", appears in R N . 25abed. ] nm. GK 3 A 

M 2 E 25a. fa fa mi ] N 2 M r VTry 1 ' 1 ; fafaiTri ih_ N 3 ; fafapYT 1) J • fadi ^ ] M v 'VTry vl ; 

N 2 PP 2 ; °RTF?f N 3 (unmetrieal) 25 b. cRRT ] Try f ; cf%T R N 2 (unmetrical); 
d^fad 0 N 3 D 2 ; cR^ M y ; cR^ ^ PfV 3 V 4 ; d5^fal 0 V 2 


24a. ^Rauravasufcrasa/igraha 2:19c and Svayambhuvasutrasarigraha 2:11c. 
24 b. Rauravasutrasarigraha 1:12d and Svayambhuvasutr&sangraha, 2:10d. 


24.4—5 Md u ^ 1 y dldldi: • ■ • ^q fa-TTP: Rauravasiitrasarigraiia 2:20 (Ed. reads dTfa for <fa m ) 
24.7-8 • • °94-n : Sarikhyakarika 54. Also quoted ad Naresvaraparflcsa 3:178, p.271. 


23.15 WRT: ] P; WTcf: R N 
def ] P ; cTcf R N 

24.1 cTcT afaf° 


?f5TT 

24.3 fafaRkfa ] PiP 

^^fsrfafaf ] R N ; fa" ^prfarfcf P 2 P 3 


23.15-16 R n PiP 3 ; P 2 24.1 TTR^p- 

24.1 H 1^1 Id': ] R^PiPs; R^TTcf: P 2 24.1 S*fYcf ] R^PiPs; 

P; 

P 3 


srfar° \i N 

24.6 0 


24.2-6 ct sfar dfar- • R* fafafadH ] orn. R N 
^ P 3 ; Pi; ^ p 2 ^ 24.6 fa- 





































































































































































: =Pt 4" M «t» V ui h 


?oV3 


^Tf wPTT TTTF^TTf^ ^FTTT r H 1 4 r A t^'SJd I 31TtT <9RT») 

3T frfw 




TT HTT PTTcft I 

Pg^T WpRT I 3T(P 2 f. 65 r )NWRT I W|T: 
dl 4 K H fo^Rl I 

3T0 «h I fg d ^1 d drST(<h|T^-qr (R N f. 141") fwd 
fVfd - 1 drfT d M -4 I I’d d '=TTTJ=d"g‘ ^TT I d"g 



fQ vTR Id d I d ^T-T^P^RTT fgd 4 ^ 

SHr^Fn^T (Wp rf?UW^>^T fg>T I ^RT d <4 d Id d 41 I 





d'fSr'blTd^l %q~(r Wf) I %tfd" I HK^MIc|K 5| ERrdddlddlP (T 


dTtJHT 





^ ST?T: I 


II ^5* II 


3^ * H d d Pfl <&cd M I W f|[ t^rdTITFdTPT y<t.l <l-d<<bl <U|y[^7T]7j^f- 

^rdH^HiPf^^P^ddiPd^dt i srfr f so^Tior) d^n^xdTcr i 

■(ddildd^idtdrar^idlHi % 4*1^14+1^1 (p 2 

'p4<*+41fdd<Hd g/STd^Td rU +I' cd I 



25 c. 
25 d. 
N 


«<ul el <M <-ci d ] M y R A Pf V 2 ; Id diT ? 4 d^ N ; i 

] D 2 M V R A V7Vy lf ; fdd<£ N 2 N 3 (unmetrica!) 

• °tl^] N M v R N V 2 V 3 V 4 Try vl ; °tgTT P| 


- V 3 ; ^ <Tl d 4> I <1 d d V 4 Try vl 
• ] M y R N V7>y vl ; 


25 (c 5 -c 8 ) V 3 


25.4 and 25.11 *f ,T UTT ; T fd Pramanarartti/ca, pratyaksapariccheda, 263c. 


25.1 n vjmiH d 1 0 ] R N ; dHdi 0 P 25.1 ] conj .; R A P 2 P 3 25.2 ■Hdid I 

q^P° ] R v ; ^ Tf ?^ 0 P 1 P 3 ; yddf ^^ 0 P 2 25.2 PhTyrd 0 ] R N ; fW r^° P 25.2 fk~ 
fw feVT ] R N ; fd'pTpii'd'A+45 Pd f^dT Pi P 3 ; PtfH'PitdH 3c^d f^j P 2 25.3 ] 

R N Pi P 3 ; P 2 25.5 0 fgd d 0 ] conj. Anjaneya Sarma; °f|cfPT 0 R 25.5-6 °hh i fd Td ] 

R n PiP 2 ; ^Pdld P 3 25.7 0 ] R N PiP 3 ; 0 1 < 0 P 2 25.7 fefd'cdH I ?7RT c^fT- 

^TTT ] conj. ; f^dl dcdH dl^lTd pr^TTcf P^s ; feft^T dT U ^ cj ^TFTTd R N ; P^dldcd ^PRT 
f dWTrf P 2 25.8 0 PTd"d dPrd' ] R N ; Rrd^cd ld^ (RTPT P 3 ) P 25.8 cROTTd* 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; 

ddTHTcT 0 P 2 25.9 ^rM^dird d - ] P 1 P 3 ; RRT^di' ^ R N ; flcd>ld>cdy P 2 25.11 dld l dH 

R^PiP 2 ; dlddlH P 3 25.11 fW^Td ] P; fd^Pd R N 25.11 pR^ I -d^ ] FP^g; 
fRTgJ^rTW P 2 25.12 SPpfT 0 ] R jV ; *pfT° P 25.12 a^RI-d'idil < u l 0 ] R N ; UdRTPrTTdiTT- 
Pj ; Md>KI-ddil<u|| o p 2 . P 3 25.13 °WTfir o ] R^PjPs ; P 2 

25.14 «d<Tld 0 ] R N ; ^<Plddt° P 25.14 ] P; om. R N 25.14 ^4i l ^ l l 0 ] R^PjPa; 

P 2 25.15 MS + dlPd'dcdd ] conj.-, fddSdidlPH c 4T R^Ps ; ^d^4)d1PH^c^H P^a 


25.15 f^T° ] Pi P 3 



R N P 

















































































































































































































f«ti<U|dTit 


51 m 1 )§i m *r<ji sfr ^rtiwc%T ^P&d^ 1 h 1 ^ 1 tioh«?>i ^-M^-1 «i 

f^^r^TTr ^wr fpr y+ k 1urf TTFrrrf^rd^Tl^ S'R+y (^rr^TT^n - 
fdyr ’WPR 1 f{%)(P 1 f. un+itoiRn T *k» 4 l v : 

rTMT f% 

‘ d P^ >1 ^^TFT ^41^1^'H^dH I 


IN* ^TTW^FW^T 3TPT 41 v\ Pd Id -d'd H 

^ \o 


HfdH fdviy + K (cPTT flWT I T ^(d^HIdd^Pd 


dTaw 


ifd^dcfPH rfaz dP-iP-J fdll^ndH II II 

(fw)|r 5 Rh 41 O'} ^Hd^ddl^dl *TFT d-Hid 1 + 14 +r1lP< 

gwd$d4dHiP<si T^PsrT°r 1 ^ 3 ^% 

M dJ^d Pw: ^PT Pd ^"^^tR-I d I cH diH 

^ I ^ d rH Ry &*1 «hf^H-d W Td Rhdd II 3V9 || 


26abcdef. ] om. *NTry vl 26a. °f^iM ] M y R A 'V 2 V 3 V 4 G 3 AM 2 E 7 Vy; P^TT’dR Pf (urimetri- 
cai); °^HT G 2 ; °WR K x 26b. fgjpjf 0 ] M r R JV VE v ; 2 pjd 0 G 2 AE D 7ry; 
RTT 5J^7T° Ki ; 5]^TTTrr o G 3 ; HTT 3J3J5T 0 M 2 (unmetrical) • ] R^VoEr ; 

» HJHH M r V 3 V 4 G 3 K! AM 2 E D 7Vy; Pf ; PT: G 2 26 c. WT 4 ] MM^VGsKj 

AE; ^rrW° G 3 • °5IW^* ] R N Pf V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 Ki A7>y; °STW^: M r ; °3?r^5rtr V., ; 

° 2 ?n^ M 2 26 d. ^pS* ] M y R N VGA 1 M 2 ETry; t° KiA 2 • °fdfad'dH ] VG 

KiA 2 M 2 E D 7Vy; «fafad+H M Y R w A,Er 26e. flHlPd&i ] M K Pf V 2 GK 1 AE D Try ; H^I%F 
R n V 4 E k ; dHlPda'd M 2 27abcd. ] om. NTry vl 27a. y<Jw>’dH ] Pf V 3 V 4 G 2 G 3 AM 2 
E 7 ry; M y ; R^TcPT R N ; V 2 27 c. °^W ] M Y R N PfV 2 V 4 G 2 G 3 Ki 

AM 2 E7Vy; °^T V§ • ynfisiRH ] M r R N VE K 7>y; ydfda'H G 3 AM 2 E D ; G 2 

27 d. °^PfPFT ] M y SETVy; 0 d PfRd R N 


26 (a 1 -d 2 , f 3 -f 8 ) G i; (c 7 -c 8 ) A i; (c 8 ) A 2 ; (e 1 -!' 2 , f 4 -f 8 ) V 3 ; (f 2 ) G 2 ; [f 4 -f 8 ] V 4 ; (f 8 ) Ki 
27(a l -d K ) Gi; (a 1 , a 4 -b l , c*-d 8 ) V 3 ; (a 1 -a 6 ) Ki; (b 8 ^ 1 ) Ai; (c 6 "d 5 ) G 2 ; (c u -d 8 ) Vg 

25.15-16 ff^PT ] P 3 ; : SPfiTOTt R N ; —^IH^ui 

Pi; spT^TTTwiR P 2 25.17 °RT ] R N P,P 3 ; °RT U RT^Y P 2 25.17 ] 

R N PiP 3 ; 0 ^r^T o P 2 25.17 °^rj° ] R N P 2 ; 0 ^T^t° P 3 25.18 W$}\ d 0 ] R N P 3 ; W- 
^fTW° P 2 25.18 <cq _ <>r: ] R N Pi P 3 ; ^rf^K: P 2 26.1 sfr ] R^ ; SpT cf^T Pi ; sfrr 



dnsrr p 2 ; ^fr crt P 3 26.1 0 



0 ] P 1 P 3 ; 



o RN , O 



TT° P, 


3 au.a --^^n-nv.1 - j j 11 3 ) ^ » ~tA’tx 1 ' 1 " 1 2 26.1 C '7TRTM" ] 

R n P 3 ; °WT Pi : °TOPcTcr P£ ; 0 7SPRTR P^ c 26.2 VZf f° ] R N P 3 ; ^T— Pi ; P 2 


26.2 °RNdSd^fcf ] R /v P 2 ’i °HT3"cT R 



I 


26.3 ] R N P 3 ; —dY Pi ; 5TfcqY° 


P 2 26.4 PJyTTTftT ] P; om. R N 26.4 ] R N PiP 3 ; °^T P 2 26.4 d-MI^I ° ] 

R n PiP 3 ; rFRT + T + P 2 26.5 ) R N P 2 ; Pi; qr + OT+ P 3 


18 






































































































































































6 


3 


’--FP-f 'A ' 'J I'-H 




TO - OTR'-'jfw dTFT I 

*T (<J U A 4 Hldl«hl4 ^vFTT)<JdrM <mR^I < fd d M d ^11 OTTd < OTOT- 


r<ddP^(P 2 lWp!\t OTi I ^ d 4 <h R-H^ 3HJPd OTfZ* fT 


-dT T>">4- y Ntdfa ^d - 41 (Hiid• 1 1 MHo'of *fHOT) Pi <=*i V M I'< ±t%T J; T- 


M^JdlPd OTOT°4H JH+dl^IHld «l<tidlQj|&l4)fd I 



II ^ || 


otot^t rn^ 



rftf 


pOTOT^ Pfd d 1 r M ITcd d) U M d>d d H ^ $M OTT dOTOTTpr 



3P-T SOT ^WRp: 3OT T d^Pdd-Hdl 

'•T f^TT *TfWR HTif^^OTrrr: 

N -‘ 'O \D 

OTT gf^ftw dPyPc^ddljJ^^Hdgl irbPr 1% fdPcd^ anPd^d | 

ddldld T yH-M+idrTT^^TRTfOTOTT f^OTT: T-OTRp: I W T 


fOTTT dlMM<Jcl I gPifift OTTTpOTRT f%OT dtTTOT I OTfOTf TfTWOTT 

28 ab. ] om. N Dry vl 28 b. VK>dl ^dd ] M V R A SE^ ; ■VIdvl I^dd E^ ; 5T3Td i *1 d d Try 

28 . in place of the verse R v has | fdg.P h fd R N ; r/dfdrd l Id P 1 P 3 ; ildfald P 2 28 
N and Try" 1 add the following half-verse before c: QdiP-R (Pend D 2 ) J (<T N 3 D 2 ; T N“ c ) T (5T 
D 2 ) *fPT: (T Try vt ) N 3 ) T^tTW 28 c. TTR ] NVGAM 2 E D r i>y; <T- 

W M v R /v Ev ; TTTR K x • °^FFPr 1 NM y R n G 2 Ki A 2 ETry ; 0 FRTSF° VG 3 A 1 M 2 
28 d. gr ] E ; N 3 ; D 2 • ^° ] M r R N SE Try ; N 2 ; N 3 D 2 

] E; T N 3 D 2 ’ • 

5% G 2 A,M 2 ; K, 29b. uPTfef ] M v R n VG 3 AETVy; N 2 ; i fti ll ffd N 3 D 2 ; 



29 a. R 

T ] M y R N VG 3 A 2 E Try ; RfddT N 2 ; N 3 ; Rf^T D 2 ; 


Rl + Pad G 2 ; HPl^S-d Ki ; HPl^d M 2 


28(a' -a 3 , a 7 -d 8 ) G 1 ; (a l -b 8 ) V 3 ; [a 3 -a 6 , b 1 ~b 6 , b s ] V 4 ; (a 3 -a 6 , b 4 ^ 1 ) V^; (b 3 . b 6 -b 7 : A 2 ; 
(d 4 -d 8 ) N 2 

29 (a l -a 4 ) N 2 ; (a l -b 8 ) G i; (a 5 -b 7 ) V 3 


28.1 °Wt] P 2 P 3 ; °^^R N 28.1 ^kTT° ] R^Po; ^fT° P 3 28.1 ^Z Q ] R V P,P 3 ; 
om. P 2 28.1-2 0 d^TRT^Tfedrfft: 0 j Pi; 0 H d‘l Hi d 0 R^ ; dMdl Pidd P 2 ; c dTPfTdT- 
PiddP^° P 3 28.2 °^r] R N ; P! ; P 2 P 3 28.2 °fer t] R N ; 0 fjil8L^ 0 P,P 3 ; 

°fe?T f^rdT P 2 28.3 0 HiH 0 ] conj.; R N ; °iHHlPdHlM 0 P 2 ; 0 jtHITddrro p 3 

28.3 fRTT° ] R N P 3 ; dTTFiT 0 1 J 2 28.4 °f>y141 0 ] R N PiP 3 ; 0 f^pfd 0 P 2 28.5 after 


°RTtR7Rrfcf R A places 28cd and P 2 has the following pratiica: deRifdrdlfd" 28.5 ] P ; 

R N 28.5 f^qfrl'd'wi ] R N ; TFT P 28.6 °HTMdi'ddl 0 ] R N PxP 2 ; ^fTPT^qT 0 P 3 
28.6 °d^^H ] R N PiP 3 ; ^dddipH' P 2 28.7-29.2 diU T ■ • *fgf^T : JWPl": ] 

R N ; om. P 29.1 RRfcmcT ] conj.; 5 U HPd^c) R N 29.2 fgfdV: ] conj.; fefdV: I 
f^fw: R N 29.3 HlHMvIT ] R N ; PiP 3 ; 0 5RWTT P 2 29.3 qfORd ] R^PiPa ; 

M P’JIIHH P 2 


J 







































































































































































































95>o 




ffif HI^H I ^fFT T TfT Tp<HI)''t>lflMc|K^^'M cfcTfTTRT- 

pnpTTfrc^T srftrr^fcpiT i Tbit sft *ib m i h n h i£| *n nib4><^1 

f^TT oHHM I < i»HTClT'tSfT (R w f. 142 r ) ^ ft 4^ ^ {ftftT: I T #?T(P 2 
f. 66")H H H H'tl ^ TTT TTW 

nw fP^f W: Hd-dcdlci-l ^cdd: t 
ftdTTJJr^: 5TFtrF^TKiw M-T^PT tl ^ II 

TTTTCT dr+>0(d T %Trft SH-rl^l 'd<t>l <1 ST frvTTvT: I 

Sl'TtvHI (p, f.9*)5PrntTr TId -f* <£)TtTT TrJ'^ fir<cT«fr II 

ffd" HKiq'J|<nO<i|} r H'ilH^'(|JH<+i | J<ifdiTddlili 

’ill'H fed.<ui <Jdl y <+, <u|H || 


29 before c N place 23cd and the following half-verse: Hdl^T-^fd (HdWj*y D 2 (unmetrical); 

N 3 )^mr^(^ n 3 d 2 ) N 3 )^f^(ft n 3 d 2 ) 29c. t^ra-] m v r n s 

E7>y; ^<idci N • ] E; JJ 1 T G 2 (unmetrical) • 5T^f: ] M y ’R N V 2 y 4 M 2 1 E>Try ; 

W=$ N 3 D 2 PfV 2 G 3 KiA 29 d. Pdd^c^ld ] D 2 M y 7>y; Pfcl^cdl N 3 ; Rrf^TT R N SE 


• snjRTcf: ] N 3 D 2 M Y Try; — c^cT: N 2 ; 

W: N 2 Ki ; fl4ytll (^T D 2 )^T: 5TFdTT(RT: N 3 ) 



frgc?Rr: R N SE 29e. ] M v R N Ev ; m 

N 3 D 2 ; R^ITTpv^T^f5fT Pf V 2 ; R^ftTf- 


• ^11 *n * V 2 ; R^tRTT ( UT G 3 ) *n * V 4 G 2 G 3 A 2 E£> ; tl 15 — Ai ; : 

M 2 29 f. ] N 2 D 2 7Vy; RkT N 3 ; ^f^MIdld RtHfcT M r ; 3llWld!=d ftaTRI 

R N E V ; ftwm SE D 29 all sources except NM r R N Ev Try add the following 

final half-verse: Rdl^tltf^^il ^ifchfdiVI IdRdH ^rPT 


29ic I -f 8 ) Gj; (c^c 4 , c 7 -c 8 , d 4 -e 5 ) V 3 ; (c 3 -d 6 ) N 2 ; (c 7 -c 8 ) G 2 ; (e 6 -e 8 ) Ai 


29.4 sfir ] R n P 3 ; ^fd - — Pi; PJ C )^T P 2 29.4 ] R N P 2 ; 

%^TPT P 3 29.4 Tft° ] R n P 2 ; om. P 3 29.5 °^VlHfV 0 ] R^PJP;* ; 0 ^TrlV 0 P“ c ; 

U ftr° P 2 29.6 oqiMKt 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; oil IM K 0 P 2 29.6 yf^4° ] P; 0 R w 

29.2 g^fllV ] R- V p 2 ; —^rrfr Pi ; g^ftrfr P 3 • Colophon: ] R w Pi P 2 ; 

P 3 
















































































































































wr y* {"nr ii * ii 

(^rf^TRTTcTrr:) 

spt tiwpt^ m 0 m i'^ u 4* sr?rjf WWFcTTfr ii 

ttw i 

^iRhMIdl^^airT Pi Midi T f^fcW: I 

3TT ^{TT^PMy<+><y|d«l^rr: MIH£)£o*TT: I qi'MlcH'h^ 

cTtwfwffrrr^T ftfmt 

^I r< f-H -M^Tw I MId'fpT^Pcf 'H l : STRT IrM I Hi I (3RT 
: 3T=T WPh I d)sii»lRhfa )HT^T JJW ^tlw I 

TRTt Ft|->M | M r^H oq |H : ^PTg 
oi|H<t»fa (oq|H<t)Hd *1H «T>cq I (P 2 f.67 r )*TPf W- 

^TTHTT: ^T«TcT) I ^ : I 


Codices for the mula of the fifth patafa: R N N(= N2N3D 2 and, from 10c, D 1 ) M V S[=V( = 
Pf V1V2V3V4 and, up to 22a, V 2 ) G(= G2G3) A(= A 1 A 2 ) M 2 ] E(= EvEd). Codices for the 
vrtti: R(=R' v P(=PiP 2 P 3 ))- 


1 . J| <?s <jqn ] NM V Try ; om. R ; *1 <>s : VG3 AM 2 E ; 'sTPl <>s : G 2 1 a. “HldK ] E ; 
»W Nj • °?teT] N3M y R N PfV 2 V3V 4 G2G3A 2 M2ETry; ?,«TT D 2 Vj ; <=f^afT Ai 


i (a 3 -b 5 ) N 2 


1.2 <71 s( Rt> Pi HI cl -1 ■JWT sVfefrff <f<SI Kir ana l:21ab. 

1.3 fratjiJT^T: viitI : Kirana 4:29c. 


0.1 W ] P 1 P 3 ; R^-o R N ; om. P 2 1.1 3PT ] P,P 3 ; 3TR R R N P 2 1.2 ] R; 

gtfo(gr <H)d<^thH TPTT 5gTa-:)cit p? c 1.3 ] P 1 P 3 ; C ’3RT|': R w ; 

ojTT?T5r P 2 1.3 icC|IRj' ] R N ; fcRTfe— Pi ; P 2 ; ^cmPs<t>: P 3 1.5 °«rR- 

TT° ] R N PiP 3 ; °^fw» P|; -^fRTT” P? c 1.5 ofs^j ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 1.5 T ] 

R N ; om. P 1.6 ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 1.6 “RI% ] R^Ps ; °HT^T P 2 

1.7 RTOlrf ] R" ; HPgf P 2 P 3 1.7 R ] R N P 2 ; RT P 3 1.7 Ig': ] R^PiPs I P 2 


T sqTT^rT cTrft 


















































































































^ m srf%r: fiddi tItt^rt ff?r 

^IIH-=hHdlKil : '-NI d I [d Td I dT cf JTTWr^faf%^r(Jp- 


d ^ d 


ftldHI H'-Rddcd Irfld^d 



Will ? II 

?rf%Rdddl I cRTCT MR’Jlfd'Mdldrdl - 

c^toto ^W: STrT^I cK «M H rn <TdeftPd 




dipT 




4 <d^ <(ddddrdird«|MrddlMRu|rd'4fiMt I ^TfWTR 


TfWRT S ^ d d HI %dTdHJ T)(P, f. 18") ^fw I 


dTO #? T3Tt RTTd JJ I (1|<h I rd d~) d Ihj Prfd R r -Id. l Grl )<hd I WW$- 

IW(fwdTRT ^dlP.rM*!: I 




3rt fHrfrr: w ??^Rr i ^ 

d r d Ir^ddl ft7 4%cl 

cl Hi I: *1 4 3 ^ * i el )c*l (d l )dTfe^rd^-Rfc «l T«lId U T d rfd J d 4t- 

8fl d l j11 -H I ar ffd - fi'd I i I (P 2 f. 67")^!^^^^: I 

yN|?h (HldTHr^^ci 

dTFTT 



?r#r: 



'A) fp| srfc ^TTcT: Pil^H iwil 3 II 


1 d. 



S; fWcf 


A 2 • T5ffr] N 2 M v R n VAM 2 E ; TFTt: N 3 ; Tsft: D 2 G 2 Try 
2 a. ?T#Pr ] M y R^Pf V! V 2 V 3 V|GAM 2 E Try ; ?T#r N 2 ; H#T N 3 ; H#T D 2 ; nt V 4 2 b. V- 

^f^rftPT] M y R n G 2 Ev Try; cPTTf^ U ^ N 2 ; T N 3 D 2 ; P|'G 3 A 2 M 2 ; 

V 1 V 3 V 2 V 4 AiEd ; #^ferv 2 2 c. ^Tr^-^T] N 3 D 2 M y R N PfV 2 V3V 2 V 4 Ev ; 
*rr N 2 ; m Vi ; G 2 Try ; G 3 AM 2 E D • fT ^ ^T: ] NM V R N 

VG 2 E V 'TWi HT^TT(RTA 2 ) G 3 AM 2 E d •5^*] N 2 M v R /v VG 2 E v Try; to N 3 D 2 
G 3 AM 2 E D 2d. ^TRT: ft 1 4 H fw ] M y R iV SE7>y; ^TcTFcf < I 5TJ: N 3 D 2 

2 (a 2 , a (i ) Ai; (a 3 ) G 2 ; (a 3 -a 7 ) V 3 ; (d 3 -d 8 ) N 2 


9 


12 


15 


1.8 tow ^ RT ?rto: torn" toqtor K/rana 4 : 1 cd. 

1.14 Tfrnrto %rrrw T K/rana 2:26ab. 

S 3 m 

1.8 ^ ] R jv P 2 ; f P,P 3 1.8 *W ] R^PjPa ; “'TTW P 2 1.9 RT^RtT 0 ] P; tr m i q i» 
R N 1.10 ] P 2 P 3 ; °il-«A|rl R N 1.11 “^cPlT ] R^Pa; “^rPT P 2 1.11 cT- 

] R v PiP 3 ; ora. P 2 1.12 JR - : MH^lxil+IH HT ] P ; - T f p fr ' R R" 1.13 °trWdt ] 

R n P 2 ; P 3 1.14 S^HHHI ] P 2 P 3 ; °fw: STtW: R N 1.14 felWT] R^Ps; 

orn. P 2 (unmetrical) 1.15 RT° ] R A 'P!P 3 ; PSTT'' P 2 2.3 HTJpi MM Pi 0 ] R A P 3 ; STMJfti — 

Pi ; yPJ*: W: ^ P 2 







































































































































































WT y<f7TW ?$>3 

c| |i*|od : I 3T^T *Tlpk STPfT 

fFT fly Id dd HI *-d < d ^l IR Td I 

e jtrtN 'iKi'hM: 5rtwr: i d-yr^RT # s^r: sftwr sfd - 1 far srnjwr 
: H ailVud'-d RTFfr S^rr tr5T(*h I R ^ ^NTdU'IdHd sq-p^’-i 
5TRT SqldMlfadc^d dHIklMflMdlHIdlrl I ddfa dTTcT: VlfaiHId - 

9 FT fdiw, ^lRtiMld'1 dtSTRT dfa STPpfT rlT^I>\fttR I W: d=nrfr 

Tfa yi RtiMidHi ^R^d drn rr w (drarr^T^ far fai d h i d) 

31RnHidSJ^i I d^RncId I *f|i) ^ F^FI" faffad r r>I<5 (~h - 

i2 rqrfddT y rdHiRdrdin^ dr^cdRTfFcTfar STTRp: I iRd'did di+fai 

farrdrnfar1 

• ^Middl'd I 

dM-di^ui ^i^mi' 5Tft%fri' i 

W f^=dt fd^pgr: II ^ II 

\Q \0 \0 x 

HI W ^dl W 5fr^r H-d il^dJ'IdlR-^d : I 

Tjj ^r^rdMIdl sfr TORT ^ftWTTcr: II V II 

3 . ] N 3 D 2 M y 7>y; —N 2 ; om, Il N ; H J Id H VG 3 AE ; tWTG 2 ; t^ST- 

P: M 2 3c. f^pt^TT ] U Y R N SETry; N 2 Try vt ; f=Tc^ft N 3 ; f^Rf fk^JT D 2 

3d. fdTcifr fw: ] M y R N Pf V i V 2 V 3 V| G AM 2 E Try ; f^TF: P - f?R* TTcf: N; fdctfT 

Soq^fr fr w: V 4 ; fer: Hdddi rirT: 7>y 4a.M] D 2 M y R N SE7Yy; sft^T: N 2 ; 5ft#T: 

N 3 4 b. 1 D 2 M y VGA 2 M 2 E7Vy; H^TTZ W f?TT: N 2 N 3 ; H^<ld TOT? fw^ R N ; 

J * %. ' 's 

JTOIdlf-^ U Ai 4 d. yr-TO' fflMdKd: ] N7>y; ( U im: M Yac ) sft^T: fil'd NT M M Y ; 

sft^r: fvidldA R N ; ftldNlA PfV^aA; sfR?: ferdld'^ V 2 V 2 V 4 G 3 ; HTWT: 

5ft??: P^idNiH G 2 E; citirmT^ : fvidNIH M 2 

3 (a 4 -a 5 , a 8 -b 5 ) V 3 ; (a 8 ) Ai 4 [c^c 2 ] A 4 ; (c 2 -c 6 ) V 3 ; (c 8 ) G 2 


2.5 TOfw fly Icl dvIMI'dPd'VITcl' Kir an a l:20cd. 

■s * 

2.11 ^JPT di14q Kirana 3 : 12 a. 

4 d. Testimonium: TTq - ^i ^fTTRTt • v >Tn ( Ht Ed u * ) TdTTcf: quoted ad Sataratnasari- 

graha 51-2, p. 68 . 

2.6 I ^9To^TcT S^d*: ] R A ; om. P (Pi's eyeskip?) 2.7 °7TTRT ] R jV PiP 3 ; ° H < cl - 

P 2 2.7 o ^RIc^H ] R n P 3 ; °d HH P 2 2.8 df^ld'H 0 ] R N P 2 P 3 ; dWd'l'd I ° P l 
2.8 o^FTOTMIdTcT ] R^PiPs; °?TTOTrT P 2 2.8 } R iV P l P 3 ; WfT P 2 2.9 ?l%?TdT 

] r n ; Wr dim tt m PiP 3 ; rfror ^tmrr p 2 2.10 dim 0 ] R N ; dtmdT p 2; 

diy IdT oTT P 3 2.11 ^ ] R N PiP 3 ; T P 2 2.12 yfdMIfd ° ] R N PiP 3 ; yfdMrfd'HT yfdHIfd ° 
P 2 2.12 °rfcd'fer ] R^PiP 3 ; °R-dPdd P 2 























































































































































































HfTPT^sf^rrfwnTT 


pT(R" f. 142 u )TTcft T) fTRcT(P 2 f. 68 r )cT: ST& P< Pd cT(f^FT- 

^TT)m^<4 I 3Td" ^frMH I UMlPddcd l ^^mld^TT^H l h TT- 

fT *iP^Hid^dlHl^dP<dl4cdd ^Mdd I W fdcd °d IM«b^(^pjTT 

sfr iprrr fqr^rsr PRuimdP'JiHdcl i ^rr ^r ttsit- 



^c^HqGddd -c 

iybTPT: ! W T M A RTT*M 

RJMHHdKI^-dd ScdldO^T: I 


*N 


3^'dd I T ^ dTfd dl 

'I d 'TT^Tt sfr *TT) 


3r^r^t}HdK*-d Pd Pd d d d I Pd R-d d I d I dTWWTcTTW Hld'-KM - 


tdl^-dd 


fHMIdl *PTTP ^i^fdd: fl^-HI 

cl '$y& PrhpHHId) sft* sftlTf HTTTT^: II * 

cHFR'l <4 -*l ^ d IrRd TTTTRT Yfw STfcT I 

W 1% HhiwnPiMi (cfr *RTT: ^RTHdH-i fT jf M W=^~ 

^T: 'H'HKHd^drdlrMId $dI^d cl I w^ftl¥lRbf4HR*H'l ofr dfafTJ- 

th I pq Rl d Hl^thf-d {W}(P 2 f. 68®)^Tl H d I J Pd Pd d tj^d ci 

n^^rrw: ftl^l-HHI^u^H TfrYcTIl € II 


: N 2 ; IHMIdi W U gJ(^T D 2 )cTSH^T^R-: N 3 D 2 
5 a. H^Rt] S; TOtVjA 2 5 b. ] M^R"VGA 2 M 2 EIVy; A t . 

RT ] M 1 R N G 2 Ev Try ; Rfdt VG 3 AM 2 E D 6 ab. ] om. M y 6 a. ] PfV 3 A 2 T>y; 

N 2 ; RRrtT N 3 D 2 ; RT R N E V ; R1f44 V 1 V 2 GM 2 E D ; VI; V 4 ; 

^TT— Ai 6 before c N 3 D 2 repeat their version of 4cd 6 c. : ] E ; W JJTt 

N • ftr^TTT ] M y R N VGA 2 M 2 E7Vy; ftp^TT N ; faTOTrf Ai 6 d. gFT^^T ^Ttr^rT ] 
M y R^PfVi V 2 V 3 V^GAM 2 E7>y ; l ( FTT N 2 ) ^ u & Fd d 1 1 ; h r TT N; tjHl^*^ld V 4 


5 (d 3 -d 8 ) V 3 ; (c 7 -c 8 ) Vi 


6 (a 7 -a 8 ) Ai 


4.1 PpTTcfP ] R jV P 2 

4.2 °dw° ] P; 


T TTcfr P 


; '1 PrM H& 




3 4.1-2 dTrfl ^ 0 ] P 2 P 3 5 

0 R N 4.2 °RT^4HI 0 ] P 1 P 3 ; °fFi7%T ^T° R N P 


Pi 


2 4.3-4 ^Tt 

sfr ] R N ; P 2 ; gwr: P 3 4.4 P^fftT^T 0 ] R N ; —’ST ^ H*k10 0 P : ; 

WVlOO P 2 ; ^fcf fdSlO'* 0 P 3 4.4-5 M1Mi ] R*PiP 2 ; ^ 11 <)H I H P 3 

4.5 Mrq*c|^ddd ] R N ; Sfcdd^d^cj P : P 2 ; yr^drHMd P 3 4.5 ] P ; %R N 

4.5 d^cl ] R v PiP 3 ; P 2 4.6 RT ] R v P 2 ; RTT P 3 4.8 TPT° ] R/ v ; 3TpT TTRT d 

P 1 P 3 ; 3T(V RTR° P 2 4,9 °fTTTf^T^ ] R N P!P 3 ; °fRT P 2 6.1 TTRTWTft 0 ] P; 

TTftmt R N 6.2 °t^ce|Td ] R jV P 2 ; °|^cr° Pi; °|^cf° P 3 6.2 T^grpo ] R N P 1 P 2 ; 

ST° P 3 6.3 5TFjWR=T] PiP 2 ; STTJ*^ 1° R* ; STR^iW— P 3 6.3 I ( 0 ] R^PiPa ; 

°T?ftmfT 0 Pa 


6 


9 













































































































































































































fwr sfr HldPd^idi uhi>^cNi snfPr^r 

d"dT Fd'HM Pd :l Id M Pd d Rl d’^dihl V9 || 

dHHI^PbPdHId : HI I Pd Ml d Pid £d I d d»: I 





s^tr dVrq 1 H < ji ■M'ui-- 

=r dTwfd~ t cdfti ^h 1 w dpi fd^rr 



Hr<HI'bfa$hH1Kli 4" dHlfdldI M (fj^P^4iHIfdI-M - 

T ipgT)HT(^T) ^4 oij 4 Rq d M I 5TWT 4twf?T I T^T ^ 

iTl'j if rl'l ^d'H^r *T3T frfe- 'd Id <fc^HI ^ fd 51 M fidK^d^dllddnui 

*1ddPd cTST vr4ai ^rf%T(c%T «bl4^d : HPddc^MdI <1 )^^<Md I •M'jdi 

firdT d ^Rh{d'}fN' (V-ld I 




d d KI cH Id <'x4d 5MW^»I: HTT I SpT1 

4)Hc^|dJH% Sfr 


7a. ftRt sf^] E; fi?RPr N 7b. ] E; ^1 Hb^u^y«TlpMdI N 7c. ^TTT HT° ] NM v R N Pf 
V 1 V 2 GAM 2 E7>y; <ddl ^d 0 V 3 V 2 ; d d i 0 V 4 8ab. ] om. M' 8 a. dHdI-^Pcn Pd HI d : 
HTPf] D 2 7Vy; dHH K^P^PhH Idl 4*?+dT N 2 ; dMHl^PctiPdd Idl Hcnr N 3 ; dHm-^^PdM IHHM 
R N ; d HHI d^ Pd HI d Hd Pf Vi V 2 G 3 Ai M 2 ; dfR I ^PcbfdHIcH-d V 3 V 2 V 4 A 2 E£ ; dH4ld 

PdMId PTTcT G 2 ; dHfl^P^HIdfd conj.Ev ; dfHI*JI?td PdHIdHI E D 8 b. PdHldPa,£ Q ] 
GaE^TVy; PdMldPd£'° N 2 ; fRHIdPd£° N 3 ; PdMIc) fk~ D 2 ; fWcfNpT 0 R N ; fWcTfe^f 

PfViG 3 AiE D ; fHMldf>^vr° V 2 V 3 V 2 V4A2 Ek ; PdHId : M 2 


7(b 2 -b 4 ) V 3 


8.1 —4 spTTtP• • • dt’dd Pd Cf‘. commentary ad Sataratnasangraha 59 (p. 72): ZHX fHidcdiPd Jl3 
Sh 5TTR d I pi d MHMP J M!dHdPdc3d Jj^du^d ^TWfd", T cd Pd ^ | PdHI^: I cPTT fwT sfr TTR^T 
5ft" H^rddldi Rtl': cfHT fd^TT TfTTR^fdiPr: dW fl cd I d Pd *JHTT dpH^HId - 

fiPd^dH q^pr ?rwr ^tpjpjcptt ^ettiwt «frddPdfd II 

8.7 ^icd 1 d^JtfwRTTPT P^^R ddfd : Kirana 2:29cd. 

8.9 RRTTTcR" Pd i^drf SPdTrRnJT: RdT Matahgavidyapada 10:25cd. 


8.1 fWd"° ] R n P 2 ; fw° P 3 8.1 ] em.; Hfl«nH dlfHI 0 R N ; — 

Pi; rVIH|MlH'fi° P 2 ; n^l^lfH'l 0 P 3 8.1 d t 'j' did d ] P; dV^M d* R N 8.3 fifdP^- 

diprr 0 ] conj.; fiPdP^rdl 0 R w ; fiPdP^HI 0 P 2 ; H Pd d*H l 0 P 3 8.4 ] R^P^a ; 

P 2 8.5 0 Pd5fR ) R n P 2 ; 0 5TFT Pi P 3 8.6 °|^: ] P 2 P 3 ; °^cf: R N 8.6 

^TeT ] R a PiP 2 ; 0 cT d^d P 3 8.6 d.gdi ] R n P 2 ; om, P 1 P 3 8,9 fd”Hjdn ] P ; fq ivrdd 
R ,v (unmetrical) 8.9 ^d 1 I ^fd ] R a PiP 2 ; m3: P 3 







































































































































































































r(rTTrSr) i rM <-4 JT(?T HTTP *. I <• U| H I 

Sffcr>F«r(P a f. 69 r )TRTT FTTcTT 



r STpT I fffa 


12 



dd"^ ^rpr 

jr^ldcdl^ddl spffi4cflfrl4 

^P^Pd*! ■'uird d"i^Ki);= et5t %f^r ^t: i 



HM'-lP m«hl-Jflf<u| cT%(T 


^cfterl" sfr sr^": sfrfr^Pr i 

d P?lM ld^ H*: : <bA IJ i 1 d r ' J A dd ^ril c; 

o 

*np?T <hlHl ^ ^r: STUfT cfcr ddl~4d d-.H'JI I' d<-i|4d %fd" I 

^r^rpr^cft tt di hi-mi d STdjwrs- hhhRhi*: i i^ra^tordTT 

rj rf | iffd d>!Hf4l*rPT: PM I W 5TT J J ft. *-H I fM TddldHHNdl <U| - 


rdId I 







%ftr di>i P-t^t i pt: ^rNt m sftrer:) Anur ^rr i dd i h!' ff 

^IHTj<di(ir f. 143' )dPd ^ 'PT: Wf?T(P 2 f. 69")g7TTfT- 

^PTTWRTT: dnPH-dl fd - dPlI^HHpTiPXd ^WT: 

7 TH Fd- pf?r *ff iftrr: cTW (ST3TTW I 


8 c. dfvIMMWJ ] Mdl^VGaAMaE; flTvIHIdMJ G 2 ( Try?) 
?G-! A : 'hlHW M y : fTr^RTcT: R N E v - ; FT JfTRT: V. 

p- i _ p* 


8 cd. ] om . N 

rT: ] Pf Vi V 2 V 3 V 3 G 3 A ; M 

( Dry?)\ M 2 ; cff^TH E„ 8 d. ^r4wr] V; M r R N GAM 2 E 7 >y 

M' H v V ; f |7 GAM 2 Ed ( TVy?); cf Ramakantha ” 1 


• R”: 3TT- 

+ IHRH G 2 
• ^ ] 


8 (c 2 ) Ai; (c 8 -d 3 ) V 


8.11 

8.14 

8.18 

8.22 

8.25 


12 cl Ph HI cl I cl ‘ * TT fr:%^RT St”fcT Svayam bh u va.su t rasa ngraha 
fw^^lrfl4^l 5TWT441 f5^frl^ H%cf Kirana 5:2ab. 

*<s * 

^Tdfr 3T 3T: 5Tt^T: Kirana 5 : 2 c. 
wl sit ?fr sfw: T# vftTTT: Kirana 5:10cd. 

HHrA m* HW: W rfW Hvjf Wr\ Kirana 5:1 lab. 


1:17. 


8.11 cTf^r° ] H v PiP 3 ; P 2 8.11 HtT ?T 7 Trr° ] R N ; R— P 2 ; iPTf^UK 0 P 2 ; *T- 

HHHH 0 P 3 (unmetrical) 8.12 rfTwf^M^TRI ] P 2 ; ^RfWPTT R^Pa ; — (f. 19 r )fa*imi 
Pi 8.12 °%W) R^Pi P 3 ; o^CT U R P 2 8.12 ?fir] R N PiP 3 ; om. P 2 8.14 
f^pt* ] R N Pi; °^fWT^‘ P 2 ; op^f* P 3 (unmetrical) 8,15 °TRTT° ] R N PiP 2 ; oC Rn"° P 3 

8.16 ] R /Vc P 2 P 3 ; rPT° R Nac 8.16 ^R-o ] conj.; » frKU | c4 l ?l 1 ^ R N P 2 P 3 

8.18 ^T] R N P 3 ; +^+ Pi; om. P 2 8.18 ^f: ] R; ^kT: P? c 8.18 ^rfT ] P; ^T- 
TO R A ’ 8.19 0 ] R^PiP 3 ; 3?r^T° P 2 8.20 0 ] R^PjPa; RtjW* P 2 

8.21 0 MI+fdTs<^MT ] R N ; si 4‘d d d I PiP 3 ; «MldR- 1 ^JlcU P 2 8.22 RpTT ] PiPa; 

RPm r n ; vfnr p 2 s.23 °g^rr o ] r^PiP 3 ; °rrqT° p 2 


15 


IN 


21 


24 
































































































































































































<mr y •+, > 'ji d 



30 


W T^ddl 



P" qi*-d I q c?»q I1 q d"dTdq qid d qi'tl *-d :y d *fT 


27 TTT^TW: 'H'HKHNM'H^- d rM P £ I J I d Id I ^ J d I 

*|f*^Kl TRT 





TT^r^rr JTc^^rr^TRrrrT 


W 'hd^il: ddrdd q i>| P?t»H Id WJ q>|H| 5PTT T ^ ^TWT 


$dlHfd SJflPd^ ^d dPrh: I 

d^rcj <n«Mu|: ^TTTT: 


d d d /o dcqd 5rfr(Ttwr =T dvrrfq~ST)j11HdTd : I 3T^TdT Pd^ l M I H T- 

dTcT dd^q {S!l>.Hl}dMfl^-d : #dlWWr[ I TRpF ^nt H ^-H 1 - 

3 cd i d d Tq P) *r: I 3Trf jthM p '-I M-Pd^-c^d SIT^(<W < Pd dv HdIMj i - 

f%T)d-qdq d-.dTd -M d IcHdi dl pftH I (P 2 f. 70 r )iNiPddrd <t»4 f| | Mq O^T- 

?TT: I 

e 3PT 5ifwnTPTTr#f^T d cdi d£d dddlPd dd4^)dd 

'V 

efK tt di^mn i 

X, 

^TdT d"dt(Pd r f'-T ^M'JIP )dfsrg- d~d"dd <fPTR! 'PId«-dd dddd 

ffPRft - ddHl 4.Hl-d ■(fdHMnJIdfdl^Ot-dHIIdMdld-r^ : ^PT- 

9 ^ aft^T d q d" 1 fd (P 3 f. 10 r ) ^rt fd ;l I -f 'did Hd cd H d I di^Td 


9ab. ] om. G ;1 AM 2 E 9a. ] M v R ;V VG 2 7>y; N 2 N 3 ; <t>^uil 1)2 # ^y^-. j 

NM y R A PfV 2 V|V 4 ( Try ?); 'hird Vi ; om. G 2 (unmetrical) 9 b. ftffar ] NM y R N PfVi V 2 
G 2 7Vy ; OW V*V 4 • ^TWT ] N 2 M y R /v V7>y; ^ N 3 .; Wr D 2 ; ^WP G 2 

** k ' 'n 


9 (a 2 -a 3 ) V,; (a 2 -b 4 , b 7 -b 8 ) V 3 


9.2 =Tr -{■'■ TTb •-laii Td Source unknown. Also quoted (as sruti) ad Matangavidyapada 8:103. 
p. 288 and thereafter (see note to translation). 


8.26 t^r] P; tT^- RN 8.26 Hint] R^P.Pj; dwrt P 2 8.26 ' > ^52T' > J R^P^j; 

5T» P 2 8.27 °SrFTf] ; om. P 8.28 »W: j R N PiP s ; "qRpr p 2 8.28 JTrtr« ] 
R^PJPa; iPr^-o PJ C 8.30 “fTafKfd ] P,P 3 ; »fcf ?ffT R‘ V P 2 9.1 PHfiwtr^H ] R N ; 
flHfiteOld'l PiP 3 ; UPfiwlH P 2 9.1 ] R^Pj ; P 3 9.2 ] R^PjPa; 

O'jcld Pi 9.2 0 fr»PTr° ] R~P,P 2 ; «FrRR + r+ 0 P 3 9.3 “RRT 0 ] R W P,P 3 ; “TRr: 
P 2 9.4 tidTa ° ] P; ^h! lq » R ;V 9.4 »Hlrl<h° ] R w PiP 3 ; <> 'TT^‘: fT' P 2 9.6 »qMM ] 
R A P i P 3 ; °M Kid P 2 9.6 ] R^Pa ; ITHcltflfd PiP 3 9.7 W] R N P 3 ; cKTP,P 2 

9.7 'dw] R ,v p 2 ; “P^rOllStH PiP 3 9.8 “dlHMimid • ] P!P 3 ; ’ > fq~ d^HKNdd ° R N ; 
'“RT dntTHIKIHJId » P 2 9.8 ] R^PjPs; “Tret - P 2 9.9 ^ddlTd ] R^Pj; fpr ^fflfd 

P,P 3 9.9 «4^fFr<“ ] R N ; P 2 P 3 
















































































































































































HfTPWJ'Trfr 7 f^TTPrr 



dt)PTFTdT W Stfa 


7 -ff-P 



TOFtTHT I ddT fdd" 'H^d 


d dl PJ * <£dU Ty 4»^«rU«ir^iaHNH^IHHN ^tTTFrfr f PblyNToil 


cd-d <1 f<^d<r^HI P-l *Fd<=idl Pd cTdT(df d5dd4d PchH Id Id-Md }T 


<idHd Hldd^lPch^ fMdlld Pi 0 MTH NI cM d ] ^ d d ff) J d I Id ^FT^FcT 
^ffT Tardfd* 

3ff^ -f, h h H --4T?JI di H '-d d~ dfTW gjff | 

3TT FTf^TFr: 


PTW rfr^T *TW 

(d%d"(P 2 f. 70 u )^rn^ J *-4 ' Pi d d 1 cddi) ddcd drdT«f dFdT d-IdPd - 

?ldT«rr M P-dH I %%C*r*fc I 31 ^ & H •* H f-4 d <+>HdHiy RjTdcdlPdPd 

*TRT: I 


3Td“ frr^TFT: 


«-^d lid d> d Pd: ^PT I 

(*-^HI drPddTT' d“ <jf2“: dTUT: I fT ^ FRcT I ftWfdfioCPj f.I9 1 ’)tt‘: 

ddtfd Pf cd ^ I ^I <: I TTff^- wfd - —^iP^Pud |^d^lP-d - 

dT: I W(fdyi) d)fju||U|^(adHi 'hdlPdcM^ld^fad'HI dTTfT: 

9c. HRW] S; RRW N 2 • ] £; cTc^T N 3 ; cP^cf M 2 • RW ] M v R^V 

GAiM 2 E7Vy; RW N 2 ; N 3 ; fi«fd; D 2 ; RW A 2 9 d. ] £ ; WTRT° V 4 

• ] PfV 2 V 3 V 2 G7>y;. °JTfR: N 2 ; °gfc M y R N ; ° V! ; V 4 ; $£t A; 

M 2 ; 3 ft": E(unmetrical) 


Ofc'-c 2 ) V 3 ; [d 4 -d 6 ] N 3 D 2 


9.10 RlRfddl R fir K/rana 5:1 Id. 

9.15 JHrci T ^TETtP Kiraiia 5:12cd. 


9.11 d4lR 0 1 R N PiP 2 ; cT^flfd' 0 P 3 9.11 1 p x ■ ch^upl v i d m JIH N 

R N ; IdlM'JiHdl^T P 2 ; <Tc*0^1 ELR H I \M P 3 9.13 °ciRRH ° ] em. ; °RfPT- 

R° R 9.13 flrfptrrHMrffT'd'J^' 1 R N P 2 ; fd T Pi ; f^flWRT?T fldluild 


9.13 RW^FrT 1 R N 


HRRKP?TPiP 3 ; ™pTP 2 

T\fk: 5TRT: 

P 2 

9.18 H>Hdfdl ° ] PiP 3 ; ^TuT^FfP 0 R jV ; <tR1 ° P 2 


P 3 

R N ; Jrtcdd P 2 9.16 TOfH^W: ] R^PxPa; 

^rr° ] R^Ps; °^WPf P 2 9.18 ] R N PiP 3 ; 

P; 34 jftTdT° R N 


9.15 °SJ I jtrdrcj ] P X P 3 ; °d c hrird 
3 ; qnfR": aw: P 2 9.17 °^rr- 

9.18 34 jaiH ° ] 
9.20 


R^PiPs; RH^I-dH P 2 9.21 jfr: ] em.; 
R N P 3 ; TOW P 2 9.21 °Prft: ] P 2 P 3 

R /vp iP acp 3 . oui’iffiT: P^ 9.22 fTWPfwt 0 j 

jT° ] R N PiP 3 ; Ij': T° P 2 9.23 °Wj° ] P 

P 2 P 3 


, o 5rfrt: 


R N P 3 ; jfV: P 2 9.21 

R N ; Pj 9.22 

^iWTfefR: PiP 3 

° R N 9.23 W: ] 




Rh4I-tT: ] 
i fr dw ] 
°W4I$K: ] 
9.22 I*- 
R N ; WPRT 































































































































































































WR H 

V 


24 STftFhr 'll\i fecR I "JTTjfefPT cTftpfrfV- 

TTr^RT ff?T Tg^Trfr fRM^#TT 'h*1«Pl: W*! cd ft HI fa 0 T: I 

cTcTT 





ITT <g£Hdl'££HII(fT d M I <d H H TTPTTfVddTcJTT' ^nT)rr- 

cW^TTKRft^TcTRT dfaHH TTfcT dfadvid HT 

3 srfwr: i «fFrf%^HT tt(p 2 f.7i r )Trt hhhOmi*) Tppnr 

fcTT cT^wfT(T iTTfI ^T I 

sir 

e d")fl I < I cH far^TT sr=TFT^T: H%fd" I 

^ IH rM I ^ df^" sfr 

gfR d Rd fad J THTT HI I cM i tT:^W Mdlfa I 
9 d"T HI *d *T#$TcTrfa' ^FTT ^tSTTgJ(R N f. 143 U )^T '<Pl d d fd I T<pf7 

pT d 1 Rd d t TTT I 

W($W: W ftfat Tgjrlrr 


9 e. trq* ] M v V(7Vy?); Q/T NR N E V i GAM 2 E D • ] N 

U Y Try\ ff R N SE 9f. } E; ^TcT N 3 D 2 XOa. <jld^r4iy ] M y V 2 V§V 4 GA 1 

E D TVy; <Tld^r4!3g: N 2 ; ^ 1 d^^Tf: N 3 ; ^Trn^TT^ D 2 ; ^tV^WTSf ; ^d^rMI^ Pf ; 

A 2 ) 7 t^ ViA 2 M 3 10b. I"] NM r R^PfV 2 V 3 V|V 4 Eu r J>y; ^ViGAM 2 E d 


9 (e 4 -f 2 , f 8 ) V 3 ; (f 6 -f 7 ) Ai 10 (a 8 ) V i; (a^b 7 ) V 3 


10.4 cf^fWRTfpi wfR:Fpr: Kirana 2:29cd. 

10.6 ddI <Irfl <.^rdri f~r| m^: d<l Matarigavidyapada 10:25cd. 

10.8 sft% dfpHm 1 hmT dd t FTy frf Svayambhuvasutrasangraha l:17cd. 
10.10-11 JJW frftrcfr Wl R fwr ^cr Kirana l:21bc. 


9.24 R^TTT° ] R" ; RM 0 P 2 ; P 3 9.24 f4^fWd* ] R N P 3 ; -^cT P x ; J>4nfl 

P 2 9.24 0 ferTRT ] R*P 3 ; °fcf° P 2 9.25 °rR^T ] PjP 2 ; 0 fwTdfci R' v ; 
°r*T^T P 3 10.1 tr 4 “ 0 ] R n PiP 3 ; 0 P 2 10.1 W] R^ ; °rR^T 

P 2 P 3 10.2 dffJH'^ ] R n P 2 ; dffRT P1P3 10.3 57%: ! ^PT° ] R n PiP 3 ; J*lf?b«iW 0 P 2 

10.3 °T%T ] R 7V P 2 ; °TT^r: Pi; °^TTW P 3 10.4 °fPT ] R N P 3 ; 0 ff— Pi ; 0 fp7: P 2 

10.6 %P5^f ] P; Pel <'HI^ R/ v (unmetrical) 10.8 cf%rfW^TRT ] P 2 ; dfaHfW^IUI R^Pi ; 
d^R^PT + r H- HT P 3 10.8 MdlPd 1 R N ; Hllfcld P 










































































































































































m’+i'j-ih j !--i-■ i ftt ftrrroft 





3TTT T FT rT T TFf 


T <TT HMM P* ) MI <t. 1M aft 

fT}rf -HH<1 d ffar TTT: I t^T^T sfr y*V ''-d 7 
^ aftr dT TfT dl^TH^r^d y<bm(=rn~ *rT: i i^- ?t: ^r 




fm")<TT HHMP» M IdvfaPd'd-dd H Rd I -dT^ TT: FT TfarTTrirTTTTlT 

sfmr TT I d-, H f| W-d Pd Pd d"l ST T^T: drHI^IMR- 
fTTRT <yl^n ttt (p a f. 7 1 r )rTcarmr tt 

dRdl-d' 5 FFT fT?!"TFT cl 7 d^Rld I 



ftvt st 


d^dH^ddWai^cdHF^ I TT^TT PrTrr T 



3TFT (TTT HHHKHHrWd ^r)TW=TFTTtT dP?l Pdrlcd y PdMld<h FTT- 


t TTT T^rTFT 'hHfi|J-dMp(^l (Hl^ri ^iPftiMId Tpf d pH Pd d cd 

yPdMiddPd [dT]^idrd^H i Tarfr t ftt ^Jiw<i(r t ftfr i tftp 


-dyfffT^")fr TW d)^FH‘-dPddPd'+iHHd m%fnr d^lPd^lH : 



dl-^dPd ddPddcHId y ^ rl Fd I ^ ^'d'fd OnHHH^HHN 3 TrPVh M I d -‘-d 
TWTTt 



Tf TTT T- 

H yPfM I d-. Pd Ph Ti ill Rt>y I dl <f) y d I WIT ?H d H d d d Pi T Td FTHTfr (P 2 


O Cn 


f. 72 r ) fad'd TfT TTfefTWT, d'^rt.'MFI I PdPddI dMFdl^dPd - 

frr*=Trfr T<tr arr far i dl Pd %)T tft^ 7 : i t Ttt ttttPt^tj- 


10.14 

10.22 

10.23 


SftW 3T Rfc eOflHH K/rana 5:9b. 

«* * 

RPlM-il T fir K/rana 5:lld. 

■ 

PT; a< 1 I\ ini mi 5:12cd. 


10.12 R ] K n PiP 3 ; P2 10.13 3*[«T| sfif M«tiKI-r1> ] R N ; 3¥1 «i 1 Ph Pi ; 

3 rfq- dr p 2 ; sPrsr^tfr tot^tt p 3 10.13 ^tm * 0 ] p ; r jV 10.13 °m%* ] 

R n PiP 3 ; °^rYP 2 10.14 f] R N ; °Pr P 10.15 °Trwr o ] P; °TP^r3" R N 10.15 
m~^>T ] R jV Pi P 3 ; Hf^TPTTTar P 2 10.15 °Trfr ] R^ ; °^rrfT P 10.16 ^rf: ] R N P 1 P 3 ; 
ijftr: P 2 10.17 ?rt#PT d^PT dryifld dT ] em.; rfP#PT dr^W 9TT R N ; —TP P x ; rft^T- 
Td lH^-T ffrarCTPr dT P 2 ; 9t#PP cP ^PP drRTdW P 3 10.18 i P ; 3R N 

10.19 °=PfP° ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 10.19 I ] P1P3 ; °RfeT nw:.- 

R N ; P 2 10.19 ddc£l3fd ] R N PiP 3 ; dd'r^rdfd’ P 2 10.20 0 M’flH14)f-34 ] 

P 3 ; oTPPRpT P 2 ; & ^RHI^p3dR' R N 10.21 ^ ] P ; U R N 10.21 0 HT^T° ] after this 


P 2 added and then deleted with brackets ( ^rrfr d P>lT h rlr4y Pd P$£ ddHd H^rTW) 
10.21 ®HN4iri ] em.; 0 RT^Wr o R 10.22 srfpT dF^fHdcd' yfdqT^Tfd" dl^l3 ° ] R Nc ; R- 


-i’Ji-.dd ST Td-^fh^rd d y I S' 0 R N “ C ; ^fd" cT^ Ptf^PTF#- X>TR<*lfd 
R N P 2 P.- 1 : RPT P, 10.23 0 PPrr° ] R N P 2 ; °HPrF^r° PjPa 


dT p 


10.24 ° 



10.22 RP] 

R N P 2 ; 


^ fdPHddHR PiP 3 10.24 ] P; °RHfdTpP° R N 10.26 ^PTT ] R^PjPa; 

4iMu | I P 2 10.26 °TTy HIH Pm ] R n PiP 3 ; “fNHHfM P 2 10.27 °fm] R N P 1 P 3 ; °fP* 


P 2 10.27 °fd~f T T" v rr 

10.28 apr ] p a P 3 ; 



R N P 2 ; 0 
R N 



PiP 3 10.28 rT&d"] R^P 3 ; rT— P x ; 


12 


15 


18 


21 


24 


27 











































































































































































































































H y H y <+» <U|-H 




i fk ^tttr-rw w^r. fis<MP'--t.'i 'umr«i- 


30 


:i.'i 


36 


39 




urrmr^r 


'T 





<JWT QT cp?T 8PT: W 








snr: fr»n^r(cri 


*>j r .>rs:-;; y;;f 7 rr^- 



rH<^4)(P. f.20 r )cTf*l /14H41p-l 



2' T' rj T tttRT <t»H M d M M KfHH N '-hd : 





T T V -T :1 l 


3T*T %T («i *-£(dt: ^r^T)FT 


h U ii *fr sRpf 


* 

♦ 



C\ 


*ipKRrdd<: W: II ?o || 

so \ 



, f. 72*’) 


U 







5 


fr 3>H I «-d y I^J H<M * Vil Hi Cl H 0 M I i»l I tT) 3 3 J I c=M 

N 0 



37: 




JTSTT: I 



•HHIHm?! 




W: 






I f%W 

* 

dHcd hRt dT dW q T^r ’ 


10c. Wbfit] N 2 M r R w Pf V,V 2 V S V^GjAMaETVy; wW D 1 ; ^r*-4) N 3 ; D 2 ; 

V.,G 3 •'#] N 2 D 1 M y R’ v PfV 3 V 2 V 4 G 2 7Vy; N 3 D 2 V, V 2 G 3 AM 2 E 10 

d. h!m<; ° ] NM 1 I’f V'iV 2 V 3 V|AM 2 EI>y; RtTRf U R v ; Rpm 0 V 4 G 2 ; WT* G 3 (unmetri- 
cal) • “ax: ] N 2 D 1 M v R' v V,V 2 V 3 V 2 V 4 GAM 2 E7Vy; °RT N 3 (unmetrical); »at D J ; 
“fTPT P£ (unmetrical) llabcd. ] orn. N 3 D 2 11 a. RR1% *rf?T ] N 2 D'M’ R' VGAETrv: 
RWfXT M 2 (unmetrical) 


10c. Testimony of D 1 begins. 
10(d 5 -d 8 ) M y ; [d 4 -d 8 ] R' v 


11 (a'-a 5 , b c -b 7 ) V 3 ; (a 8 ) 



} 


10.30 tfJll^llfcfd ] R N ; PiP 3 3 ; ^Tt Jl iHifrl P 2 10.31 WZT ] P,P 3 ; rfVT 

r n p 2 10.31 yrt] k n p 2 ; Pi; w^AfkirA p 3 10.32 ft ^ i R^hu i ] 

R^ Pi P 2 ; wftfP 3 10.32 ] R^PjPa; P 3 10.32-33 <R 

R n PiP 3 ; °frtrc%T P 2 10.33 R^TToCTcr ] R n P 2 ; ^rrsqfr P 1 P 3 10.33 3miV° ] R N \ y 2 ; 
Zprfk* P 3 10.33 °^rrfT] R N ; 9 Pr^P,P 2 ; °rttp 3 
P 1 P 3 ; rTOT ^ fd d t ^ 3 ^ 0 ^ R N ; ?rm^fd d 1 ^ fd J f -ri P 2 
Pi; fd P 3 10.37 o ^tt^ft o ] R^Pi P 2 ; c 

P 10.38 °^WP " 0 ] R N ; 0 ^WTT 0 PxP 2 ; 0 

^rfw p 3 10.39 srw ] p 2; srw r^ . p 3 


10.35 





TPtToq- ] 

10.36 fd : ] R n P 2 ; Rr^-~ 
P 3 10.37 ] R* ; o^r- 

r° P 3 10.39 ^dTfw: ] R N P 2 ; 
10.39 sfr^- : dT° ] P ; y'U^I 0 R N 

10.39 °f^r cfr° ] R v Pip 3 ; o frirr o p 2 10.39 ^jihi^-ftvt ] p ; °trfr =TFir^ ^rr^r 

R N 10.40 R /Vc P 3 ; “Ff Pi; U F^ R Nac ; P 2 10.40 °^r: ] R n PiP 2 ; 

°^T P 3 10.40-41 °^WWTrf: ] R‘ v Pi ; °dFM*bTHHJIHd : P 2 ; »+ T + iPTcT: P 3 
10.41 HPT^) R n PiP 3 ; jfPT P 2 10.41 fepf] P; ^RtT R N 10.41 ] R^Pa ; 

— P : ; P 2 

























































































































































































































P+1 <'ur^rfl' 



or ^ ^rfrT 



: Sfd M I i i»J RRdt TfTTRiWr- 


•dld^R^ T 3T dHc^ ^HtT cTRT ^Fit Ri^ £dl <f» & ~ 

3T«r HtT: I N~ W 





5 i-y M j I-r| «q- ^r^(R 


/V 


yGd i -iHi 







Hc^^d 


flRHIHlPd dddl' ^PcTiHIdyd-S 


fw RRW ^nt HR vfPlWR R f^ll ^ II 

R^oRRTRpfT: <t>f*K-4|qT R ddd J H' I 

\0 

MT(P 2 f. 73 r )H flT ^PT ! J -|4f)RT RTT HI ■* 11 v ^RT R* dHH HT- 

'dlPdyd^d 



j|ydi)dl^':Snr qy 'dlPdPdilN fdHT ^JII^MMtI : I 
dT«TT fdTT 'd-Hf| JHd -d <i)d <jR‘ H i U [|^ Rt(J||^MMdRPd I FTH fR- 
vnid)*)didHndbiyd 'liidi^:y d < Mci'Jii("Gyd dT n*-!fai dPi 

iRjTt HIMHUd ffd" rnrrfw: 'hPacdv*}Pi$1 Hi Pd dIdid : I dGiyd 

vdlldyc I (dldH-di dl J IM d ^cdlfd'^)^: I 3FdHT fj/d'a :Rd 1 J ll^- 


lie. fw ^rrwrar] N 2 M v 'R n Ev (Ti-y?); (il^TTW D 1 ; ftp* ^PTW^ - PfViViV^GaA 
M 2 ; — V 3 ; fHr 3T V 4 ; pTST TIRH^T G 2 ; fw ^T HTWi^T E D • ] 

M v R^SETVy; cl^ci N 2 ; *h! J i D ! lid. hR ] N 2 M v VG 3 A 2 EV ; hh ° R A A 1 M 2 E /;> Try ; 
HR G 2 (unmetrical) " ' • MP 1 ^<T R ] M y R A 'PfV 2 V 3 VlAE7>y; HlRR ^R N 2 ; M\M<\ R 

V 4 (unmetrical); HPlfdUT R ViGM 2 12 abcd. j om. N 3 D 2 12 b. ^tcHR] E; 



r: 


Pf ; r rry 


11 ((P-c 3 ) V 3 ; [d 1 -d w ] D 1 


12 [a ! -a 5 ] D 1 ; (b 8 ) G 2 ; (d f> ) Ai 


11.1 


5 ] R n P 2 ; —fT° Pi; fT U fV« P 3 
11.2 1 0 ] R N Pi; u w?i 0 P 2 



11.1 



R N ; spTTSJR’M'rdt P 
11.3 ] R A? P 2 ; 

— Pi; P 3 11.3 ] R N P 3 ; fV^PT: M Pc^RTdTT P 2 11.4 Sc*J- 

WT] R N PiP 3 ; °fRc^TR;i P 2 11.4 ] R N PiP 2 ; H^RtfV P 3 11.5 HHHIHlTd ] 

P ; flH M I Fh [cl R N 12.1 ] R^Pa ; fW p 2 12.1 jtft ] R N P 2 ; jHT RTr Pi ; 

jpfY vfr + RT+ P 3 12.2 dT ^TfcT 0 ] R A ; ^Trfd " 0 Pi ; °TPJR^ 3T ^TTFr ' 0 

P 2 ; 0 ^:R^fp5rrfR' > P 3 12.2 fw ] R n PiP 3 ; dT P 2 12.3 SPR-* ] R N P 2 J om. P1P3 
12.3 RPiT 0 ] R iV P 2 ; — Pi ; RTRT° P 3 12.3 ] conj.\ R N P 2 P 3 

12.3 HR fV° ] P 2 ; HR ftr R' V P 3 12.4 idH 0 ] P; R N 12.4 0 '■ % r ] 

R n PiP 3 ; °y<*<f>d<HI^! 4 ^l P 2 12.4 idHHlTd 0 ] PiP 3 ; ^5RfR° R A P 2 12.4 Hfd" ] R A ; 
om. P 12.5 HtRTW ^tef dRT° ] R N ; dPRRTR dd'fcfR 0 Pi ; d)HH<icl 
p 2 . ^T^ 4 .^r + ^ ddHdHT 0 P 3 12.5 °fR9pfr ] R A P! ; °f%W P 2 P 3 12.5 (WTcfP- 

R: ] R"P 2 P 3 ; vd l d^dl Pi 12.6 dfHRRT ] P 2 P 3 ; d IfH P-dH I dl R A 12.6 s rn 1 <5 ?h ©q : I 

3 RWT ] R N ; —oRpRRT P x ; ^cRTfR T^T^qt ^RRT P 2 ; IR -Hdl P 3 



6 































































































































































































































































fr dPH^-ddd df-d Td =r fi 4 di ■*>*}uii 

^RhHIdM'Htf: I d«RuIH(?T * U-dd l PdPd I ) 


(wrfq 


3 Tf^ <Tt«-^d M ^ ^ ISJ fdirlcd T 'd Odd II II 



ufi : HTRT d^lfM STT- 


JJtbd4d WRJTT(P 2 f. 73")TTtW: Jiltolcfl T SCT fwd - 1 3Tfd 


dvPd (Pd s l"d d>cd e h^ Pd *-*-^*icq Pifd") d41 1ncd Id 0'=fr 

I (P 3 f. 10") 

*T ST^rrc: sfrwr: 



Ni M I d M TnT(rgJ A d I q I SJ Rl STTfW I 

3 T^r^TsnflTrrgj acr: afr^cr tfwtii i 

(d< 511 fd)dIdl ^ TITTMuIHftlff W PT^TdTT^ T ^fsicT: 

t wnt JTT'd[ h r t q^rjf(4~ 1 

df^Pd"df fr^gJdT rd" Prfd": A <.dl I-H) II 

ffhlcUlM dKIKfHldl 

5 R«h R H<i Rd M^Ril d Ffr i Pd JI ^1 ul d fl| ( 51 TT)d d ill H Td I 


12c.°W&F*TK] D 1 M 1 R N VG 2 A 2 M 2 E v Try; °W^T N 2 ; G 3 Ai ; *FF^T^fr E D 

12 d. ] M^FVEkI o4‘l$HcdM J«rfcf N 2 D lr iVy; fWt GAM 2 E D 


12.9 ^Trfr is placed before 12cd in R v and before the pratika for 12cd in P. 


12,14—15 Ri ci 1 mi 11 sj ■ • -ftl^d RT^PTT Source unknown. 

12.17—18 ^TPflTty * * J lId : TTRT : JWPT Not traced in Mababharata. 
12.20—1 R4)RRi RfiS frlWcTw*< 0 • * • dp Pdfcl d l { Source unknown. 


12.6-7 0 ] RAP 1 P 3 ; °^mrjTTU P 2 12.8 H^T] P 3 ; <FT4t R ;v P 2 12.9 

MHhH d^Tl: ] R* ; o^- r f^ d 4 | ; P 12 .9 ^Wt: ] R N P!P 2 ; yujuf l P 3 12.10 »ftw: ] R N ; 

°fp=r° p 12.11 d^Tto^ii 0 ] R iV PiP 2 ; fprmt 0 p 3 12.12 } r n P 2; °cii^ 4 f 5 <« 

I^i ; °q l^dfrl <l 0 P 3 12.12 «>U| |y o ] RNp^. oLi||^vj o p 2 12,12 q ^WT- 

o^lVjHcd ° ] R N P i ; °^4uft c^TJHcd 0 P 2 ; o p 3 12.13 SPfnT: 5ft¥T: ] P ; 

y<h I < I : sfim: R N 12.15 3P5TTW 0 ] R N P 2 ; — Pi; « p 3 12.15 aftW ] 

R n PiP 3 ; SP7: Silddd P 2 (unmetrical) 12.16 °d?n ] PiP 3 ; °H^Tlm R N ; P 2 

12.16 ] conj . ; R 12.17 chl-dRj ] R N P 2 P 3 ; Pi 12.17 HvTRT R- 

^TTRI W] Pi ; HMRHH IH i ^ R N ; R>TTRTRWRt ^ P 2 ; RvTRT U Tm* P 3 12.18 ] 

R a P 2 ; p 3 12.18 rRt: T7RT ] R N P 2 ; rRt qTR + r+ P 3 12.20 a ft l ft4^fu | ° ] 

R N P 2 ; °^ 0 PiP 3 12.20 °rnJ|^H^|ulc( « ] em.; ° fH' i a>Hg|ul4 Q P; ° 

R N 12.20 °H^T° ] PiP 3 ; U R N ; P 2 12.20 °^PTfr ] P 2 ; 0 3fm% PjPg ; 

° 5 mzr u R N 












































































































































































HfTrw^ftTf^Tnrr ftrrwrfr 


i>i ri>i r«h < ui «h i ^ 11~< Rii ^pr^fd" dft T(rn=^rrr n ?fa 

dW df^ FT^nW ^|ri||^ 

3rfa <+1^H^-lcdldrPMH^Ppi ^Pd 


)(P, f. 20 v 



dv^WT: ?T#W dvR7TdT r iW- 


-d H I fd ^ d )Tf^cT ^T(JTW fT(P 2 f. 74 



d d I d) 


omjtnrq T WFTcT ffd" <fdl^)T^'fdlf|J-d<}d 5rf^7TRTT%TT 

ffa* fr afl u i +m <r )dHKi -ft dcfdM aw doHd 


fid "at arr: 



*f|J I fd 51 =T ^cddlrb fd$rT(H$dIrlcd a I y|dlc^ld rldId! srfWTRlW 

^qt)^TH ft cd «fr I 

3PT *p-w ^Trrrdt sf^^i^RTT^wr wjot ^r °qrw- 


^wwrrnrr dT d^r fwrr srni'fffr t dc^d^l 

FT Mid 3 Pel ^-1 Rfr> R dtsi ^ | II ^3 II 

w snr(dw JT^TTf 1 '-ndWMdidT srfwTPT 5"w h :■ dwp- 
^ *tI : I ^TRT KJ d I Hdfd - cTFT irf^fd'H aWT d d dl fd I *npT 7 STW 


• ospqr^Tcf ] N 2 D 1 M y Try ; °fdl-MHId N 3 ; ° ^ 'l ^ - 

13 b. dcR7FRf4° ] N 3 D 2 ; dFRdTHf4° N 2 ; d^H U 
H R N E V ; sfcPftiHIcHId ° VG 2 AiM 2 E d ; fo,EH I c*Pci ° 



13 a. 3Tfw° ] S ; 3Tfw N 2 
FW D 2 ; R^SE 

D 1 ; ^TFTRTrRT ?T M y ; 

A 2 ; dr^TT cTTRf^- Try 13 c. ^f] NM y R^Pf V 2 V 3 V 2 V 4 G 2 Try; FT° ViG 3 A 2 M 2 E d ; 

Ai(unmetrical) • TPf ] E ; TRT N 3 • rpd^RT ] U Y R N PfV 2 V 3 V 2 V 4 GAM 2 
ETVy; RnT^fT N 2 ; D 1 ; Hd°dl N 3 ; D 2 ; nTffToqTT V! 13d. ^P^fjH^un ] 

M y R^Pf V a V 3 V|E v ; N 2 D 1 D 2 ; M Tcti fk Hy«l! N 3 V^G 3 AM 2 ; Vlf^PjH^ui l V 4 ; 

—rTST— G 2 ; 91P*fdH y ui I E D : HfwrfdcTOW: Try 


13 [b 5 -b 8 ] D 1 ; (c 2 -d 5 , d 8 ) G 2 

13.4-5 PTT HtT^RT T % Kirana 5:1 Id. 


12.21 9|p9|Phi*J| ° ] R n P 1 P 3 ; ftrftr^TW 0 P 2 12.21 ° ^ | Rfu | ] P 2 ; U R N ; ° ^|P<u[) 

PiP 3 12.21 dft] R N ; fiT^ PiP 3 ; dT^ - P 2 12.21 ] R N P 3 ; IT* P 2 ; T— Pi 

12.22 dff ] R n P 3 ; ddlff P 2 13.1 d^HR <Th ] R n PiP 2 ; 

P 3 13.1 fi^Hdl^d ] PiP 3 ; R n P 2 13.1 Wr o ] R N P 3 ; ^4— Pi ; ^4° P 2 

13.2 ddTdt j R V P 3 ; d<Hl P 2 13.3 d - ! R N P 2 ; o/rj. P 3 13.3 ] R N P 2 ; — 

G^JH4I ° Pi ; ^gTrSJ^I-jG'dJHIl 0 P 3 13.3 ^TTdT^TT ] R N P 2 ; 0 TTdT Pi P 3 13.4 H ] 
R N ; 5T: P 13.4 afPrWr ] R n P 2 ; rf|u|<hw?-- Pi ; a4w4° P 3 13.4 dH^IH SIW ^oFT- 
4 ] R N ; ypdd h4P Pi Pa ; TTf dr[ FTR P 2 13.5 °d44dTT^T° ) R N P 3 ; °d1c^d1cldd d^T° 
P 2 13.7 3PT ] R N ; om.PiPg; WT P 2 13.8 °Ph^t^I ° ] R N ; opH^rMI ° P x ; < 

P 2 ; 0 Ph<Jt^II ° P 3 13.8 WHJ^t T] conj .; R N ; yIJJftTl P 13.9 ] R , 

°HTf4 P 2 ; °RTfd* P 3 13.9 6 JPT° ] R JV P 1 P 3 ; °3W° P 2 13.10 ] R N PiP 3 ; 

P 2 13.10 U4P] R^PiPg; P 2 13.10 ^1%r o ] R^PjPg ; 9rf^T° P 2 



N 










































































































































































































w sr^-rom 



12 


3 


fir^T WpTFpT dTf I 

41 dcdd I M sfr ST^ (d PdH P^ M H I *=?Trf < - wl'l 

3T%J IdH|<-<MHM 

^TcT TJJ ^T Ph^JIM : UhMIcHHp'^: 


ITT 5TWW? 



r TT -1(P 2 f. 74" )3TRT: 


Pd ^l I d 







diW(R N f. M^Pd-MIrd hPu^: W 3iT 

Wfd" I cT(fM I d Hd' d"-=l IVW V|JMI?ll*-4 ^pT:) 

3H I Pd di 4 fl H -41 P^c,: WdFT^hl ?* II 


'hidlP*i3^P-lPi ktW cTfsTST I 


3HlP*4: ^dlr-H'di: dJ-dM-dddddl4d 4t ^ | d M d T •' ^TT 3TT- 

H Tdrd4d ^l«4d sfT^T: did (d <1 d Icd didd d4 IN af(^ 3nfWPTT)d"- 

3 t^rd^T I ^ntiHIdlrl^i i : S^ft dT TFWT fP^Wdl'cdd 

dddld ^IdIPd W: I 

■V 


14a.fr] NR- v GAM 2 E7Vy; g° M y V • Pd^lld: ] N 2 M y R N SETVy; f^FPt: D 1 ; fr- 
STrT: N 3 D 2 14 b. 4 T#TTcR'° D 2 M y R N Pf Vi V 2 G Ai M 2 E r J>y; <h\ { I -H ° N 2 ; H rch l< I rM 0 

N 3 ; STRfCTcRT V 3 V 2 V 4 ; JflHUlcMI A 2 • °MPCtf$: ] N 2 D 1 M y R N VG 2 

G 3 AM 2 E 14c. ] NM y R^PfV 2 V 3 V|V 4 Ev Try; 

• ] DVM y R N 


D 1 ; 

Try ; 
—uT 



RmTTrR" 0 
0 TdTdJJ^: N 3 D 2 ; 

G 2 ; 00 V 1 G 3 A 1 M 2 ED ; dl'-if 0 A 2 (unmetrical) 

SETVy; °H^VT N 2 ; ofP^TRf N 3 D 2 14 d. f^: } D l M y R^SETVy; rTRT N 2 N 3 D 2 
• °^a^] E; Q ^gf^ G 3 M 2 15 ab. ] om. V 2 V 3 V§V 4 G 2 15 a. ^IHP^^pHPd ] NM y ; 

'■TTh P^^ 5 fd R N ; slid Pf ViEv ] *t>lcd f-d d Z Pci G 3 AM 2 ; "d>In Pad ^f?T Ed ; diin ri^- 

•/PhP d Try • ylrb ] N 2 D 1 D 2 ; sfl^jR M v R N Pf V 1 G 3 AM^ETVy; SHIT N 3 15b. rTr^T^" ] 
N 2 D 2 M y R N PfV l G 3 AE7>y; d^lc4 N 3 ; M 2 • ] N 3 D 2 M y R JV P|V 1 

G 3 AM 2 E7>y; dW fw: N 2 ; ^HTTFr fRrT: D 1 


14 (a L -b 4 , c 2 -c 4 ) G 2 15 (b^b 3 ) D 1 


13.11 fr^V d^P^fi’PT^r P m rf RTpTtFJl': Kirana 2:29cd, 

13.12 Sidl’d "dPfH f ^PrrffT WTTcT Svayambhu vas0trasarigrai]a 1:17c. 


13.11 flr^Td" 0 ] R n P 2 P 3 ; '«Ji‘dcd'l'° Pj 13.11 °fpr ] R N PtP 3 ; °ftV: P 2 13.11 °fdr:° ] 

rjv ; of^-o PjP 3 • of^o p 2 13.12 afr^r ] r <v PiP 3 ; afWr p 2 13.12 o f^rwr htt^- 
^rrftr] r n p 2 ; -c'nfc Pj; °f%rqrRT perm; Td^mrwR; ydloMiPd p 3 14.1 r fd^iid: ] 

R N ; ^rd^lld : P; Pporm : P^ c 14.2-3 ^TRT ] R^PiPg ; ^rTT P 2 14.3 d'PHIrlAd ] 
P 2 P 3 ; dWRfT N’d^ R N ; rf— Pi 14.3 dddMI^i ] conj. ; d^RR: P 2 P 3 ; RTPf: R N 
15.1 dPHl'dd qY ] PiP 3 ; dWRTtmt R N ; dPM^’Wf p 2 15.1-2 'dTlKP^^PHd ] P ; 
<ti!H R N 15.2 dHdl^SRT ] R N P 2 ; Pi ; dHMI^tiif^ P 3 15.3 fk- 

TtW° ] R n PiP 3 ; f%TpMT° P 2 15.4 ^IdlTd W: ] P; ^rmPdlrf R ;V 


















































































































































































3T«r ^wt - ^r ^4 ui i aor s^ara- i t rf agfaflmuH - 




W ^rfw^" tT8% ^rfer^TR^WII ^ II 
rT^fr sfr *T Hd q ed &rd h ^n m h ^ ai ^ I 


q^T) m HI -a y Htl RsRTt 


'4 -i i Pd ^bprcr 


rrt 


TT<yi^tj'Jiici ■Hypr^^dPri i 3rfr ^ 

A "(Id ■> rd'd d^ M f^rT dd Id) dR-HvId 


5T STfrfT frf^T 

4 0 M HI d I d I d 


#• fk 


EpP^ - rRT I d M Ph 3vH Pd -'I d H OT fll^dd 14 S^^ff 1% 


d" ddTq 0 d<=M (did '-Mpjpl^ 


TTT -T dPTI d M d I Pd c^rhH I =T 

rff) Pi m h 4 P< r4 i cd'rf^ii^Ji^id arr 

3THI d MrHHr^HI WT^Tfwrr^n" 11 ^ II 


fd H'dTH IdH -H d '{ >■ d ;tt ^H'^PnHIdl-ld^-m dvd^ft *£- 

RnPd r 5iid'?»d(Rird HIlPdnMdiiq drM P<^l <| )dTT f74^l^|i)d |^Hd 

d 1 -dPdcd Pd Pi d": I 


15 cd. ] om. M v V 2 V 3 V§V 4 G 2 Note also that P give no pratika for this half-verse, and that it 
has been placed here, where P give the pratfka for 16ab, because Rarnakantha’s commentary 

* « *7 

presupposes it, and because R v reads it here. 15 c. *PJT <bf\H ] R^GaAi M 2 E ; frr 

fij N; *inTl fr Pf Aj(unmetrical) ; ?TWt Pt fir V, Try • FlW ] R N G 3 AM 2 E; ^T- 
^ 8 ^ N 2 7>y; D 1 ; N 3 D 2 PfVi 15d. 'blyd ] RAPf ViG 3 AM 2 E ; (% fyd 

NTry 16ab. ] om. D 2 16a. fPJffl ] E ; cF^T M 2 • fT TvMfdid ] M r R N SE 7 >y ; 

RWTT(^T N 2 ; ST N 3 ) N 2 D'N 3 16 c. aPHMI-dd ] N 2 N 3 D 2 M V R^PfV, V 3 V 2 V,G 
AM 2 E7Vy; RTO U D 1 ; 3PTT^ RcT V 2 • flHfdfd ] M^R^SETVy; ^IH -df-di, (arg~ 
NS") N 2 ; fpd": WTT D 1 (unmetrical); flHrq <-t( (WT N 3 ) N 3 D 2 16 d. ° ] 

M v R' v PfV 1 V 2 V 3 V 2 GAM 2 E7Vy; fnV^sfST 0 N 2 D 1 D 2 V 4 ; gp WRfa ° D 2 


16 (a 2 -a 7 ) V 3 ; (b 7 -c l , c 7 -c 8 ) V,; (d 7 -d 8 ) V 2 ; (d 8 ) A 


1 


15.5 



° ] R 


N 


& p j p 3 ; <1^ T: P 2 

16.1 ^|ct|-d ° ] R N ; 0 P 16.1 °RT- 


15.5 ^4WP] R N PiP 3 ; mA uiI P 2 
15.5-6 °'hM4 v Tl 0 ] R^PjPg; °^PT: qt° P 

fkyifi Tt" ] R v ; °Trf^V^TP PiP 2 ; °RTf^ v -rj^TT P 3 16.1 Vl^dl ] R iV P 2 ; 7 T U cfp P 1 P 3 
16.1 faPi4d ] P; fRf^ntd" R s 16.2 °gtoJiid ] R^PiPs; P 2 16.2 °nd^HTrl I 

$T° ] Pi; °f^prfrr 3T° R N P 3 ; 0 P 2 16.4 dlf ] PiP 2 ; R^cTTW R^ ; 

d^a^iq Ref P 3 16.4 °^W ] R^PjPs; °?TOW 0 P 2 16.4 0 T&TrP ] R^ ; om. P 16.5 cPTT- 
Rt RpTT° ] R N P 1 P 2 ; a^HlH cRT-flR RPr° P 3 16.6 ] P ; MlT p l MHTdRfd 


16.6 Hd"HI 0 ] P ; c^d’tf 
R N PiP 3 ; 5MV 0 P 2 


0 R N 16.7 oj^Torj ] R N Pl p 2 ; ojFIW P 3 
16.8 Hqifqrqqifq ] R N ; P 2 P 3 


16.7-8 



] 


6 


(P 2 f. 75 r ) 3 


9 













































































































































































RW MW 

v 



H d 4PHT'ficTOT": H^TWr^t' S^T% 

d'iMR hI<+>H<± 1 uPl sftcznr ^dpH|^d 

nl mm diRFrrarr dnrr rR r H^d 


=r f 


?tR *T ^fvJT: <+*IHl o^TT% rf^T J^l<^MN<l)dlRifllHHI^!irr 

TTT mRti ^Nt Md'-Kd'U^'^dQldl H'M'J-qd Sc 4 !4": I cld (^ Id - 


snr cTcTfTfTTFr %WT Rf*T%)(P, f.21 r )T HNd<^H 



<K 


?r 


MdHI(<lHlRH)T HHdM HRMI«bIoH Adlfd W ^if^TtT: II 

sr^rr ^TR-(fr srd") fRR(qR 

SHTRT Rldt fpT: fR d^dRII 



5TH cd" slT^RM «d ! < :T^T>T 



"O 


5R*: I 

\3 


^7 ^mFr 


cT^fWT 




R -VI RhM t d I d) fvMH 




i 


^TcT I RTHci fk ^irrr ST;I d d H M I dHId | | fd -MT- 

IRRd ^cft ^ (^JIdIHHIdI^)rR^T(?P fedirdd^ddcdld I T T 


17 a. HlMl^ifiltrrr^arr ] D 2 M y R N VEv/ Try ; HIMMIcHI — N 2 ; dlHIdlcHIdd l^tiTT D 1 ; TtTR 
TOTVTOT N 3 (unmetrical); GAM 2 E D 17 b. rR K] D 1 N 3 D 2 M r R N V 1 

V 2 A i E v/ Try ; **R PfV 2 V 3 V 4 GA 2 ED *, W d" M 2 • ] E ; D 2 17c.] 

M y R N VGAiM 2 E; aRSTT(STRgTT N 2 ; STRc^TT N 3 ) dR fMIdl N ; SPjRr RdT fRt A 2 7>y 
17d. ] PfV! V 3 V 2 GA!M 2 ; SPIcd - R^iicHdH N 2 V 2 ; SPjR R tfdlcHd : D 1 !} 2 ; 



^TcRT N 3 ; ST^T R f ^ RcT M y ; SPjR R R Ref R jV ; ST^nT R : V 4 ; T §R: ST^’Md 
A 2 ; ST^Rj^RrE; T fR: 5PfTT ^ Try 18 a. SPpT] N 3 M y R N VG 2 AETPy; 
N 2 D 1 D 2 G 3 M 2 • IR^THNcdl^ ] D 1 M y R w SE^ Dry ; N 2 ; ^Tr^RT^TT N 3 ; 

*TT^>nT D 2 ; 51 t-d H fdc^R E^> 18 b. ^sled l*H qfi : 5PJ: ] M y R‘ v ; ^?lrd I>f cjdl^d N 2 ; 

rd'FRr} -h?T + RePT D 1 ; =T ^-HdH N s (unmetrical); ^^edi^T ddllHdR D 2 ; 3T^frdTf(^T 
E d PfV 2 V 3 GA 2 E D ; : Vi ; aT^TffeTSPf: V 2 ; ^slrdM ^Pf: V 4 ; 

^^rdlTjHi (fr M 2 )X: 5 Pf: AiM 2 ; ^ $ftdT3" ffe - : SPf: E v ; Try 


17 (a 5 -b 8 ) N 2 ; (b 8 -c 5 ) V 3 18 (a 8 ) Vi 


16.10 R n PiP 3 ; °fOlt P 2 16.11 ^edd ] R^Pi ; °lw P 2 P 3 17.1 qfk ] 

R n P 2 ; om. PiP 3 (eyeskip) 17.1 dvR: ] R N PiP 3 ; dRPT P 2 17.1 ^dt^ 0 ] R N P,P 3 ; f 
— d%° P 2 17.1-2 °^TT dTd ] R N P X P 3 ; °^T=T P 2 17.2 R%cT ] R iV PiP 2 ; RR^cT P 3 
17.2-3 dd^ridVd' ] R N ; cfcf— Pi ; T^RT T(f. 75 W )5RR P 2 ; ddlT P 3 17.4 ] R^PjPa ; 

R° P 2 17.4 °<1hiFh'< ] R N P 2 ; -d Pi ; °dtdTRtd P 3 17.4 °Mld>lcHdiR 0 ] R v PiP 3 ; 
° M [ d> l cq LI £R P 2 17.4 T ] R n PiP 3 ; df^tT: P 2 17.5 ] R N P 3 ; STRR P 2 

18.1 ] P 2 P 3 ; RtftfT?r[ R N 18.2 °rd^dRf ] R N ; c WlU3 PiP 3 ; °cdJpl<Jp|< 

P 2 18.3 “RTdTRdTfddPt ] R N P 2 ; — rfddt— Pi ; 4-RT-f dlfd iMI) P 3 18.3 ifd 0 ] 
R n P 2 ; f^vHlfe; 0 P 3 






































































































































































































Hg<iH+udr<RfrdNi 



fa fa t\ (P-^'H JI d 3vTH N M H ^1 *pTT: I f^Tt>CrHT)TRT 



f fwr tt^- i w T^rf%f^r: t><jfa ft ti 41 3 a.; -1 •; “ 


?TkT 5 THt 4 ‘ HI I cM 414 * W T%: II ?c; || 

*T ^ ^nRH'l^d cTT fd'hlfl : VI fd M <1 d I 

d^nfr hth?tt: vfr^r ^ft#r 11 ^ 11 

^Trfr sfr 41 J d d I m 4 ^jl d d4 S^MdKd : I 


ITT wfr dH-lcq W: ^TcT ^ fT: I 

cTdTfT 5m <4^1: ill fabH Id HI ^fpTcT: || » 


H 1 H *1 thcd (TFdT^l'^ll fa <1 MI ill fa Hi« +4^ I d M «l I d) I HI -VIMI y 
STSr^l MdHIdfalfaM *=^cT: (P 2 f. 76 r ) H^±41' pTTfd^TT%HRTf%'- 


18 c. ] TUTtrl T ^TrBr Try' 1 ' 18 c. SPJct ] 2 ; SOf^ N 2 • pznRT ] N 3 D 2 ; pifY N 2 ; 
W n'M^R^SE; clef Try 18 d. qWiftV W] D 1 M v R' v V 4 M 2 E v TryTry" 1 ; Tlprttt- 
«1T N 2 ; TSRYtrfrWT N 3 D 2 ; 'TcRtlt UVT PfViV 3 V^GA; TcRtltT W V 2 ; RdHlfc fr W 
E d • it: ] M v 'R ,v D 1 D 2 V 1 V 2 V 2 V 4 GAM 2 E7>y7Vy*" ; T^: N 3 ; it Pf 19 ab. ] 
fpr ?TR=fr T cT^lfHI ftTRTrTrPTRTlt 7Vy u ' 19 a. °ft ] 2; < ‘?tr N 3 19 b. Pc| ' <h l' R : ] 
D 1 M y R"V 1 Ev Try, —^TTFT: N 2 ; Pd * I ni N 3 D 2 ; ft^TT: Pf V 2 GAM 2 ; fWT: V 3 V 2 V 4 ; 
ft^TPr E d 19cd. ] om. NTly*’' 19d. 'T£T <> ] M y R N V 2 V 4 M 2 ElVy; *Tr*r° PfV iV 2 V 3 G 
A 20 ab. ] om. R‘ V M V V 4 Ev Try 20cdef. ] ora. N ; placed after 21d in V!G 3 AM 2 Ed 
• G 2 has cdefab followed by 21 and then 20cdef again. 20 a. 5ilHl ] NG 2 ; ^rrt Pf 
Vi V 2 V 3 V 3 G 3 AM 2 Ed 7Yy vl • ITT ] Pf^V, V 2 V 3 V 2 G^G 3 A 1 E D lyy-' ; Sfr# N 2 ; tTT =^ 
D 1 ; TTT t N 3 D 2 ; ffr G^ ; tdt M 2 20 b. <Tld<hl ] D‘N 3 D 2 ; dP l ddi l N 2 ; 41it|d l» 
PfV 2 V 2 G 2 A,M 2 E D 7Vy v '; tUldl ° Vi ; tf— V 3 ; tfYnPTT 0 G 3 ; — cTT'* A 2 • »'^T- 
^TT?T: ] N 2 PfV 1 V 2 V 2 G 3 AM 2 E D 7>y"'; ®wpH|«ja D 1 ; ^IdKd : N 3 D 2 ; "fRT- G 2 
20c. TKTft] M r R ,v VG 3 AM 2 E7Vy; avrft G 2 20d. ^T: ] M y VGA,ETVy; 5hW: 
A 2 M 2 20 e. °t9T: ] M y R^ ViV 2 GAM 2 E7Vy; 0 dvI pf (unmetrical); °T9T V^V 4 ; °t-— 
V 3 20 f. TTfWfT: ] M v VGAM 2 Ed 7>y; ^cjd : TTfWrT: LJ II R N ; fade!: Ev 


18 (c 7 -c 8 ) V,; (d 5 -d 8 ) V 3 ; (d 7 -d 8 ) N 2 

19 i^a'-b 1 ) N 2 ; (a 1 -a 2 , d l -d^) V 3 ; (b 4 -b 7 ) Vj; (b s -b 7 ) A 2 

20 (a 7 -b 2 ) A 2 ; b 2 -c 2 , e 8 -f 8 ) V 3 ; (b 7 -b 8 ) G 2 


18.4 "tiHld ° ] era.; ° R N P 2 ; Wi" W’ P 3 18.4 ] R^Ps ; P 2 

18.4 ^4-tR'I ° ] R^PiPs ; 'tidHtl® P 2 18.5 TT ^WT tTT I TT t^T« ] R N ; TTJWf ^ P,P 3 ; 

t^T 0 p 2 18.5 ] r ,v p 2 p 3 ; <tiit4 ° Pi 18.5 °<jl|zi • ] r n p 2 ; °tPlirrftTr° 

PiP 3 20.1 ditlfRidi ] R^Pj P 2 ; dlSnT-ddi P 3 20.1 H !^d IR ill * ° ] P,P 2 ; TSJR IP Pti ° - 
R v ; <r U dIRill4)° P 3 20.1 °fHT ] R W P 3 ; °fw» P 2 20.1 RIKIHiy ] PjP 3 ; RTKIIdldi 
R N ; HIVIKldia P 2 20.2 TdHK'YdlPRd ] R w PiP 3 ; T dTcl ' c t- n<1H I fR ' d P 2 20.2 Pd^Tdl » ]| 
R^Pi P 3 ; Pd<jrT| l ° P 2 




























































































































































w SWT 

'V 



3 



y Id rlM IM SPTT *Tf(R" f. 145 r )ftWr *pfT ny 


ytwr r(oM cTl v : i 

3TT i!l dH 4 <+» ^ y «fiId-tdi'c^OId*1 ff^T R^bm^T: 

ijw Hrft d ^d i wr ^r ^r ^rtfr %<t i 

f'T •cr-'T^ T 

^TFRTTtT: HUf^cdM pH ^ 14rl tl ^ II 

qrfT oq| h d 0 SFTT: ^1^4 r^l4d I cTcft S^hsH 

^fr[ | 


3T(*T M e h4 | J||4TMfi^lT:) 



TT^ - yi PchH I rl: 5TRJWT: I WQT STtlfif S^fd" I 

3TT ydtflcy^: 


J l dS 44N I 

tt^ - d *$J*h di'-iTritarr qfr ^ ^fp-raTii ^ 11 

21a. Hrfr] N 2 D 1 M r R N Pf V x V 2 V 2 G AM 2 E7>y; Rfr N 3 D 2 ; R^T V 4 • *TfTT HT ] R N 

M Y SETVy; qgciMi R~ N 2 (unmetrical); d$dF + -TT + R D 1 (unmetrical); 3jTdT HT N 3 D~(un- 
metrical) 21 b. W ] D 1 N 3 D 2 M y R N G 2 Ev Try ; W N 2 ; V ; 

G 3 AM 2 ; H*r ^hr Ed • %cf ] s ; N 2 ; ^ D l 21c. °^tr: ] NM v R N M 2 ET>y; 

V; °kr^ GAi 21 d. °^T>T fWr4% ] M v R N VEkTV y; °r^T?T(T N 3 ) fddl^trT 
N; ° cdlTi^dl^i — G 2 ; °OT?T ^ Trc4(cq" A 2 )^ G 3 A 2 M 2 ; °cqTvT ^ TIW Ai(unmetrical) ; 
°c^T>T T Ed 22 a. °<HH141JI: ] N 2 D 1 D' J M v R v VG 2 Try; °RRT*fmT: N 3 ; °RRT 

vrrnT: G 3 AM 2 Ed 22 b. ] M v 7yy; 5fr^: ?TOT U 3IIMR N 2 ; sftifT: qWl«iVllfH : D 1 ; 

N 3 )^ N 3 D 2 ; 5Tt^t(^T V^ C G 3 ; WR: M 2 ) ^Vldt W R w VGAM 2 E v ; sfr- 
WTT^g^cft ^RTT Ed 22 . ^ ddH ] NM y 7Vy; om.R; n^: SE 22 c. ] 

D 1 M y R^SETVy; d^fojfiiftrTT N 2 ; f iflT*fiihill N 3 D 2 22 d. ^ ] NM V R N G 2 E V 
Try ; q<Jfq PfViV 2 ; — c3W° V 4 ; G 3 A 2 (unmetrical); Ai (unmetrical) j 5TRR 

M 2 ; Ed • Rf^RTT] N 2 D 1 D 2 M y R N P| Vi V 2 E7Vy; RfRcTT N 3 ; ^TfRrfT: V 4 ; 

RfW— G 2 ; fl fPMd T: V 3 A ; RfeTcT: M 2 


aifa^c 4 ) V 3 ; [a l -a 2 l D 1 ; (b 5 -b 8 , d 3 -d 8 ) V 2 ; (c 3 -c 4 , d 8 ) Vi; (c 7 *c 8 ) A 2 ; (d 8 ) G 2 
22 (a 6 , d^) G 2 ; (a 8 , b^-c 2 , c 6 -d 8 ) V 3 ; [b*] N 3 ; (b 7 ) V i; [d^d 3 ] V 4 

22 Testimony of V 3 ends. 


20.3 ] R iV P 1 P 2 ; P 3 20.5 ^PT 0 ] R N P 3 ; P 2 21.2 oqiH^r^d ] P ; 

ot||M^r3 R N 21.2 wfrk frTRTt ] R v ; VITT Pi ; VimT^d P 2 ; VId l<4d P 3 
22.1 RTT ] Pi ; o; J^R: R N ; P 2 ; RRT P 3 





















































































































































J IVdMI IV. J 'J|dHi 






r P41 ^rftrf W ^T*ft 


rT^T T Pd4 (d : II ^ 



TFWT 




<<d H 4 -1 (4 n>| E I d (T 3 ^ 

^T^TTfMcfr 41 «1 n ^ <t> i cl H ft d"^J> ft> d Hfd HT H I PtI 0 H N : H" 






dkiW^Mid’Wi^u^p* f. 76 w )t^rrfcni: 



4TH a I r<f5[ft]'TT%T JTWT 4tfwT ^ 1 






w 


wnlt ft 

'THT T. v I Hi 



Pr- 




Pd -d : (P 3 f. n r ) 

H ?PT H THT I 



*iftmid ^fd" 74": T)8T: I 3TV 


23 a. £lfydlTU ° ] E; fPSTR^rR 
(dril*fR~: N 2 ; LI R 0«l N 3 



E; ^Teff N 2 23 b. ftTffRR: ] E; 
. E; ^FFFRcT Pf“ c 23 c. fdTt 0 ] E; fTTT° N 3 

*™r] D 1 D 2 M 1/ R w V 1 V 2 V 3 V 4 GAM 2 ET>y; TT^ N 2 N 3 Pf 23d, qrfr ] NM^R^P^vi 



E ; dHI M N 3 ; rPRT T A 2 


fd«|fd: 


v 3 v 4 u 2 £>; <4ld V 2 ; G 3 AM 2 • cTF3T=r 

D 1 N 3 D 2 M y R n P|V 2 V 3 E v Try ; Ri |frl : N 2 (unmetrical) ; Pd^fd: V x G 2 ( unmet rical) ; Pd : 
V^fd^d : G 3 A ; Rrr^Jcf: M 2 ; m^jcti E D 24ab. ] om. Try 24 a. frftcf ] M y R N 
SET 1102 ; ^frffT N^D 2 ; ^ U Pf N 3 • *T ] M y R^PJ V 2 M 2 E v ; dT 

n 2 d 2 N 3 ViT 1102 ; J*T mfiH d 1 ; w- v 3 ; rhiPh v 4 ; *rr ^nr g 2 ; ^h i h) g 3 a, : 

^TrffpT A 2 ; ^TrffPr E D 24 . RWr-J^R* ] NM y V 4 ; om. R; HWf Pa’Vi V 2 V 3 GAE; 
P*T'- M 2 ; HTTcTRTf Try 

23 [a 1 -a 2 ] V 4 ; (cM V 3 ; (c s ) A t 

24 (a 4 ) G 2 ; (a 7 -Rft b 7 -b 8 ) V 3 


24.5 a) a *i Rti Pi h i tl d i 44Rjidl i Kirann 1:21 ab. 


24.2 fPaftrTT 0 ] P 2 P 


3 ; : ddH<° R* ; 



R' v Pi P 3 ; P 2 


24.3 
24.4 ] 



PiF 


8RT: 


T° P, 

24.2 n■=«.,Pai ° ] R N p 2 p 3 ; Vc^Rt) “ Pi 24.3 

?TFiT ] P; ?tfi(d«l R‘ v 24.4 °HldPHI 0 ] R^PjP;, ; «TTcTr» P, 

R v PiP 3 ; °g«^r5 P 2 24.6 TT ] R' v P 2 ; om. P 3 24.7 = eror 
R N ; ^WT P 2 24. 7 ^T» fr ] R N P,P 3 ; HTRV P 2 24.8 

Pi; rdClHiq^tj P 2 ; ftrRrfr xkrx m xTx gtf: P 3 24.8 sr^cf] R n P,P 3 ; SRTtNt p 2 
24.9 ^Tf« ] R v P,P 3 ; p 2 24.9 ] R"P 2 ; P 3 24.9 ] R~P, ; 

P 3 24.10 ] r jv p,p 3 ; frr^Rr p 2 



R''’ ; farT r gg': 


















































































































































































































iW 'd+.'UH 


6 


9 


Id <1 H M J I d Id I HT TWTWT 

XO 





^TT 








•r wt 





TO“: I 


3 rTPTT: 



T cfWI 



HiR'KnrN'biRuii m i 


RthT^ft srfwr: df^idr^)^r i ^<r (p, f. 77 r ) 



TRT: HPHW 

fdf^H M <t> f) A)l l>» 4 R cTBT T 

iqqRi<$,dq 

^xri’ fVw srRr 1 

TOmxdH: 










, f.2r)TFr- 




24c. °TOTTO] NM y R N Pf Vj V 2 V 3 G 3 AE7>y; 0 TO~HT V 4 ; ^ G 2 ; °TOHT M 2 24d. ] 
E; Tfdd 'd ( Mddlfd N 3 D 2 ) TOT TOT N 25 a. T ] M V R N SE; T fdf(fe" 

N 3 )TTdTT RT( SIT N 2 ; TO D 1 ) 'VIfrh< (vrf%7 N 2 ; N 3 ) N ; d fd OhM*^ K Try 25bc. ] 
om. N 25b. HT] VG 2 AETTy; fTTOM v R' v ; TT M 2 * Pd ] M y R n VG 2 AiM 2 

ETry; fV^f^l A 2 25 c. ftrfmTTOT TIcft dT ] M y R^Try; dPdOd l TO I dl T PfV! ; TOT 
fTHTTOTTOt T V 2 V 3 V 4 (unmetrical); fdfTdld'ld TTT ^fd f G 2 ; froiTOTOTdt T G 3 AiM 2 (un- 

T A 2 ; d Pri 0 dTTOTTT T E D ; ^ffTTOPT TTcft =T E v 25 d. TOTf ] 
£; TOT M 2 • otrf^twr ] N 2 D* D 2 M Y R N PfVi V 3 GAM 2 E ; °TOTOT N 3 ; °y*rfw V 2 ; 

V 4 (TVy uncertain) 26 a. TOTM>iriH : T 1 ci <h ] N 3 M V R V G 2 ( Tty ?); ^TOTOTTO: 
^TORT N 2 VG 3 AM 2 E D ; TOTTOHd ^TTTO D 1 ; ^TTTOcTTOTORf D 2 ; TOldd 3R# 4»Md conj. 
Ev 26b. TO" 1 r MM ] N 2 D ] M v R v SE7Vy; &HIMH N 3 D 2 • y<blVlTO ] M y R /v SE7>y; 
TOTTW( RT N 3 ) cT N 




24 [c 1 -c 2 ] A 


1 


25 (d 7 ) V 2 


26 (a 1 ) V, 


25.7 f^fpTTwd- ^1 Fn4f4 cTprr T Pi^fci: Kirana 5:23cd. 


25.1 ] rP,Pj; cTTf^T 0 P 2 25.1 • W ] R^PjPa; ° dd l rH I° P 2 25.1 , >IT- 

^TRT T HT] P, ; TTW R N ; “HHHNHII P 2 ; °RpnHI»l ITT P 3 25.1 ° JJ|^di | ] 

R w Pi P 3 ; *«l^«hi P 2 25.2 “cTfHT'' ] R~ ; »^TdT“ P 2 P 3 25.2 ] R~ P, P ;j 

TTT P 2 25.3 RPCTT sTPr ] R^Pj ; fTPCT sTPRl PjPj 25.4 ] R' V P, ; p 2 ; 

=Wi^ P 3 25.4 ?prr« ] R n P 1 P 2 ; P 3 ' 25.4 ] R N P 3 ; P 2 25.5 

^TT] R^Pa; FlTtf^cTT P 2 25.5 5T%: ] R N P 2 ; P 3 25.5 TJcT° ] R^P^j; fT 0 P 2 

25.5 R N PiP 3 ; ^ P 2 25.7 ajlRh^Pl ] P; S TfiKUf< R w 25.7 fd^fir 0 ] R^P, ; 

Fr^fr! 0 P 2 (unmetrical); Fi^fci 0 P 3 (unmetrical) 25.8 °H W » ] P 3 ; ° R iV ; 

otTM-. p. 















































































































































































































H-t.u<jfcHp^dNI P+i 1 'J|d til 



Mirin' HHHPfHI'h'hlHl SdNIHvT^^T dd^l[rHH 


M <b]l i»l J J T1 -M rh H 

fc3T d ^ Prb d (TTtr ffdT I 

cTcfr sw^qyrrr: i ^ipp m j i h 1 hTt ht [?r%: ^ 

fiR-^rlfd I 





^rrfrr Iwg^rr srfwr: vjsi«flP mhVii ^ n 


^TFdrnt yTd«fitrd h y d i <-h [^fdT (?rf%rdVtw <bldd f%^- 

£<| I Id) ddHIgJIMKlRH^cl I fdW ’Jpf: «h<u|mJ-H«41Htlcl °-d I d Pd ■£ 


TT^ZFRp ?]fd“ HTT: I f HlyyIlHdMd dldl-dd dT dWT- 

-h P»ttPt t ^iRfrq'idHi(TT(p 2 f. 77 ® arf^r sr]Pd d 1 <cjt- 


T: 1 (r~ f. i45 v ) )fr €twrr d'ly^rddKyd^lyd^d^iH 

Pd Odld^dlPdT I 

qfr ddlcHdl TPT sfr Id 0 l^d : 

sfT fpRTdTT H y I Pd : shPd ^ d d II ^V9 || 


26c. arfn faajsir 1 M v 'R' v VG 2 E v 'iVy; srarrsra faajaafTfn n 2 ; n 3 ) faaf- 

J( fq<d Iq D'“ c ) <illfd D 1 N 3 D J (unmetrical'. ; Mallei 8'WVl( T ' A 2 ) I'lS.d f! 3 AM 2 unmetrical); 
arfn nwsr faaTT HT Ed 26d. RT ?rfwr: ] NPR^SE^TVy; RT aifitf: (fri%r: N2.N3 ) R"° 

N ; 5Tf?Fr: jR": Ed • “M^fVdV ] R^SETVy; WNdt NM y 27a. RatfRRT aTai" ] V ; 
RalcH^am N 2 N 3 D 2 R iv GAM 2 E'ft-y; R^rR^N D 1 ; RRtcRRT RT^T M v 27b. fd 0f^d : ] 
E; fdlldd : N 3 D 2 27 c. %fa-^ sft" ] R N VAG 3 M 2 E7Vy; %faVT R" N; fafa^ M y G 2 
• rd 0 dr4 ~ ] M y R N VG 2 Ai M 2 E7Vy; fddHMI N; fd'ORT^ G 3 A 2 27 d. FRHVUTh: ] N 
M y R‘ v V 2 V 4 G 3 A 2 E; WH: STTfR: P| V 3 ; RJHHlfH V,; 5rTR: G 2 ; WPT: arffT A,; 

Wl? STTR: M 2 ; STf?T: Try • shldd ] E; cdV<T Ai 


26 (d 2 ) V! 27 (a 1 -a 2 ) D l ; (c 5 ) V a 


26.3 f^ar d^ti.r*H Ma n+i-4 d aapT:R^: Kir ana 2:29cd. 

26.1 “afT” ] R n PiP 3 ; om. P 2 26.1 “aadt ] P; °ailin' 0 R N P 0<: 26.1 ITF^ 0 ] 

R^PiPa; lT?n o P 2 26.2 y<hl«ia° ] R~P 3 ; — WT" P 2 ; ifaita -0 P! 26.3 °ftV" ] 
R N P 3 ; °fta‘: P 2 26.3 ofaiPJf ] P 2 P 3 ; 0 Pd^ R w 26.4 at«iY 0 ] R^P^; agfr 0 P 2 
26.5 an; ] R^P.Pj; om. P 3 26.6 srfnatn HH«aicH°h' ] P,P 3 ; srfnatvnirirRaf U R^ ; 

aatva HciaicH— P 2 26.6 fiar ] R A Pi; fiar fcai P 3 26.6 sTfardarahr ] r n p 2 ; 

DlHti<fdTd>3 ) (UT ?“') - P 3 26.6-7 IHd ] R^Ps; Pi<Jfd.<lITd P 2 26.7 W ] 

• R N PiP 3 ; “gnaaiT 0 p 2 26.7 -aiafng ] P; nna-: nar R N 26.8 atsfr r n p 1 p 3 ; 

aafr p 2 26.8 g - alV o ] P; nntsr o r n 26.9 °antn] r ,v p 1 p 2 ; “ardc^n p 3 
26.9 a] r n p 2 p 3 ; om. Pi 26.9 5rfar° ] R N ; srfai: P 26.9 °fai^a4 srfn] P 3 ; 

°hii^ 4 Rft - R' 7 ; °w— Pi; P 3 26.10 qanfa ] R" ; —ff Pi; 11 —P 2 ; 

Lia-dfl P 3 26.10 darrar] p,; darar R^PjPa 26.10 °aTT° ] R; •aua)«i 0 Pj c 
26.li fardma 0 ] R^PiPa; fnd 0 p 2 26.11 oc *pad] R^PiPs; oc ?jfad p 2 






































































































































































































































3 


WT VT^TUl 'H 

^ 4 , 



<fl]ra d dd Id cd d I cd d I Id 0 Rjdl sfr d »-'f> d <Tl ttl dd 'H th d f I 3ff% 


<«W|^UMdl S^W *<ilP^)c||-dl^l£l H Id «l ^1 1 cH [<d rMH l ] frRT- 
f%dt dIcdKfM 1 rJ-H| d'ildd I fdHH sfr pTTTdT^ grfV- 


feRf *R-d py r^toij d d d I Pd did[d>H y \}fwA d dl Pd 

K i i J? '"Ml’ 5 ^:• 

d d dI Fd £HI cMl * ^T<*TI dcd W ^HTT: I ^fd~ I 


*r(SW> 


t f d dfdd -h h -m i Td -^>d [wn]^: srnrf^: srfw ^r ^rfsrpr 

OHT I fdidd 3cd~dd I 

T=T f^raw r)Hl^ dlfHI ffa" W 

d<y<r>d<4 f«i *il «rT: -WI <? I rd *i) frf^rT^T: II ^c; II 


(cTT d d dI Pd did •+< m ydldddH d-i^l^^J-LilcdPr fWRTfefrft^ 
S *-d d R-d d dd *PT*l'rRldiddi^'P&TdW dlddl fl^fd I ^dldfddil-d- 


PRTRT fM(P 2 f. 78 r )dlW'l Pifiddldd (T f^T #qifdoi|^ )^~ | 

dR Ptf d cd d I d d I d! d I d rM I d Ry d d>ri <*>IJ-dc |{\ # I Mid Id y Jjd" ipifrld I - 

28 abed. ] om. V 4 28 a. RP^T ] N 2 D 1 R N P|V 1 V 2 V 3 GA 2 M 2 E; cTF^T N 3 D 2 M V " ; £ 
Ai (unmetrical) ; dt-qiPi Try 28 b. qTRRT] E; 3TPHT N 2 28 c. cRpUPR fT 0 ] M v 

PfV,V 2 V 3 GA 2 M 2 E7Vy; N; d<^*HI 57° k x • “RtST: RTPT ] R JV M 2 E7Vy; 

RtWpq - N ; "Rtw Fmr M y 'P|ViV 2 V 3 GA 2 ; —-fWR A, 28 d. ] om. N 28 d. fdff- 
3TFW: ] M v 'R' v PfV 1 V 2 V 3 G 3 AM 2 E; H fa<ti^d : G 2 7H- 


28 (b 3 , c l -c 2 ) V! 


27.6 «h< 4~1 pi jj-i i cm" 1 ?ti qioqTqrq - 5RT HRT: Not traced in Pauskara, but = Sardhatrisatikalottara 
25:2cd. Cf. note ad Kiranavrtti 1:10.5. The same half-verse is quoted there and in 6:8.12. 

27.1 5i<0RiidMldrH<dcHHI ] Pj ; aT^rfwd WdlcM® R N ; -RldWWd HdlrRH l Rt P 2 ; 
3T«tfWcldNd_ fldlrHHI P 3 27.1 Pd 0T^dl SpT fl'^ddlWPd^ 6 ] R w ; fR dP^dd i rad^ » P t ; 
rd 0 r^dl STcT frrqtftrcT%» P 2 ; Pd df^d^Odd^ » P 3 27.2 fl i d l Pittd~1 ] P 2 P 3 ; =T -q^Rdd~) 
R N 27.2 'tdlPdl' 1 ] em.; '^'ilPdi'* R^Pj ; <ti<lPd5° P 3 27.2 «q^mr ] PiP 3 ; °qrTRr 
R^Pa 27.3 R ] R N P 2 ; om. P]P 3 27.3 ] RjfsJfqRtP" 27.4 ^R-H PqPh°q i d ° ] 

R n PiP 3 ; diHadv^K” P 2 27.4 “RTKp ) R ,V P,P 3 ; P 2 27.4 ttHqidPd^^H » ] 

Pi ; flHqildH^H ° R N ; <HH^IRPd-=hH — P 2 ; flH^I +3"+ fd+HMiHUiH 0 P 3 27.4 
cftftr] R w PiP 3 ; “fRMqdlPd P 2 27.6 5TT37 ] R^PjPj ; om. P 3 (unmetrical) 27.6 drT ] 

R w ; om. p 27.7 srfw ] r^Pi ; ftrR'fta p 2 ; erfrRr p 3 28.1-2 f ry ri q i Pty i 07 S^tT- 
] R^Pa ; fWRllRSrftt P, ; fa!||R iPdSI P 3 28.3 f5RRWT'> ] R w ; PyMrdo^^ i » 
PiP 3 ; HfMVItWI o P 2 28.4 qlftfdcd 0 ] R N ; ftaT 0 PiP 3 ; qtfttrT® P 2 28.4 <t> | Mjd^ - 
8TT° ] R^ ; +|W4rHd qt&TT 0 Pi ; SRI«tWfR'4 ^W 0 P 2 ; ftW” P§ ; di l THd qtsTT” P|' 

28.4 ‘JWr 0 ] P ; )JWT° R N 



























































































































































































V|gv ' P^idiMi f^TTW^rfl 



TTrRT jftgr 5^srnr^ yiyld)d i ^rt>H 


STRTfW(fTOg^r w: W%J 5TWT I I 


rHTT fe 


3T%T dTq"dPPT fdTPl Id j | rf) H%d 


31 M M <N y d ^: FTT'^fr H R+>H HT ^r%rT II ^ II 


<J# HHHRm+fdd: JflRhHIdWd) ^IrM^d ^PTHtT kt iftfST- 


?T: ^ Py rTf"<T*1T<Wt HOT ^TT f 




ddfdffly I 



=r ^ t- 


^ ^iHKcdldHimi^M<Jd ^T 3TWT cRT T^p ^T dtldT 

i^M^i^rd t ^tyw (srfr ^cM4°d6NKyfi^-d^ i 

=Hf cjr%) ^lOiHIrl ^W<^ft)^ 3T W 't.P^dld <«Md f%fbTT%T 

^Wd" •TT^T fc*T(P 2 f. 78")^Y^T%' I 

d^TT d^TcRT STf%T: ^TH d I x-dlwaPTT I 


'h^i'JII HHMKHI + HyJlH ^TrFTF^r (H-dcd J=F^dTc4 3T cTW fV- 


TSlI 1 trtT $IM^q d^TT 



PF5T rr^TTT 


29 a. ] om . N 29 ab. ] om. V 4 29 b. °dTR"° ] NM V R^Pg V 2 V 3 M 2 EV ; °HT3" V 1 G 3 
A; °dT3T Go Ed 7Vy 29 cd. ] om. Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G 3 AM 2 Ed 29 c. 3h m <5 «w h m : 'RTTT ] 
Ev' Try ; 3*^ D 1 ; 3H ifaHVIRJI Ide} N 3 D 2 ; 3TTH 4'*W VI fi JI WHT M y R N ViG 2 

29 d. gfifT 0 ] NM y R w V 1 G 2 E v Try ; ^TfWT 0 D lac 30 a. R^TT H -< cK I srf%r: ] M y V 2 V 3 V 4 
GAiM 2 EoTry; 3iRr>^<t>i fVfH>ll HT D ! N 3 D 2 ; H^H^d<l Slfm: R JV PfA 2 j H^i-cRT 5rf%>: 
Vj ; R^R^crwf^T 0 E v (unmetrical) 30 b. r«l fa 4 8 PTT ] M V R*SE Try\ R^R-^eU I- 

fk^TT D 1 ; Hurl'll' U fk^T N 3 D 2 


29 (b 7 -end) N 2 ; (b 8 -c l ) G 2 

30 (a 3 -a 4 ) Vij [b 4 -b 6 ] N 3 D 2 ; (b^-d 1 ) G 2 ; (c 2 -c 4 ) A, 


28.6 Vd^PadfaV]^ rrRf: spy y*tfadl Source unknown. 


28.5 °TTFRT] R^PiPg; °3TcRT P 2 28.5 ^pTO ] R /V P 1 P 2 ; om. P 3 29.1 °qfr<> ] 
R iV Pi P 3 ; om. P 2 29.1 cRT: ] P; cTW R N 29.2 °=PrfT ] R N P 3 ; oRRTT P 2 29.2-3 R 
dffyrw ] R N ; gfwr° p 2; d<«lyiR>H r^jftT 0 P 3 29.3 dRRT^tm 0 ] 

R N ; ddPcfHT fPyT 0 P 1 P 3 ; dd'Pd'HI I fhTT 0 P 2 29.3 VTR^cT ] P 1 P 3 ; VTRWd R N ; VRT^TR 

p 2 29.3 T ^ ] R N PiP 3 ; ^ ^ P 2 29.4 osq-RTTr^T 0 ] R N Pj ; °oqT T TTr^T° P 2 ; 
°oi||MK| 0 P 3 29.4 °fll^yM<Jd ] P; RT dHH<Jd R N 29.4 cTW cTTRt ] R N ; r R I H>dHI 
P 29.6 TJ f|r^l ] R jV ; T + J 0 P 2 ; T P 3 29.6 0 'tiled fd <. 1H15d ] em.; °^vT- 

30.1 RFFfTRT ] 


R ; =r + J+ P 2 ; 

HlPRmPFT P; °<t»!Hfd 0M 1^1 T R/ v 30.1 ^'4u|] ] R^PjPg ; 
R N PiP 3 ; rPf fTT^t p 2 30.1 H^rd' ] P 3 ; R N P 2 

] R N ; 0 ftd‘afr ^ ^ rPTT |" 0 PjP 3 ; 0 fW8RTRd- dmf 0 P 2 
R JV P 2 ; dT 3frfwr P 3 


P 2 

30.2 °f^rr dH^d ^qr 

30.2 dT 3frfwr: ] P x ; 5rH%r: 

















































































































































































































wt M'M’JH 



3 MHH'y <1 ^rerr dT m ^i m f^m?r cp=t (srcwi^^Ttdt i qr=r 

^ R^odRdifaH (spjfa dvwr ?frw rftw^ to (p, f .220 ht^t 

df^WdT THTT dtjTdTT dT Srflfr: HdPd cTPP =T STcddid: ^tr-- 


fr fFR d dl c^ di ^(dfd - 1 

R^jot|(ip I H|^dcd~dd 



ycddld^dcd 


H" HdMI^n 3 tFwt: ypdH-ipuiirHH! II 3 o || 


w: ^lf^Hd : srfwr: $ rH H HI M I 

p£^1 I fd d U I fd ^ 'Jll HT ^ Hi d H Pd f^dHIt ^ II 


T prr^T^rfwr)^^) PffpH I d I <?H d i rr^(dtr^)TTdJ?T W: TTFT- 
^TBT ?rfwr: fFcdTd" dcdHJH f^rfd - : it^d" THTT T JpotPT 


3 fcjwnr 1 

t?T- Rdlfifld : 5TFcT: ! f^I^Pf ^fd" I 

dcT^ - M<H j y<drdl L dM )fW(P 2 f. 79 r )fd ^ d I d^rbH 
e rRuIIHI S^ddfd dddfd =T '^Frdcl I ^f?T I 

RT T r^'dldldl d'Jlldi M J R M d RtSTTW JI ^d i fd%nT R I M M M f| r : 



30 c. ?rfwr: ] D 1 D 2 M v 'V,V 2 V 3 G 3 AM 2 E 7 >.y; Jfrfwr N 3 PfV, 30d. rffT^cT ] D 1 M y R v Ps 
V, V 2 V 3 G 3 AM 2 E7Vy; *61dAM N 3 ; D 2 ; V 4 ; -W G 2 • 

E; M R un fa 3T V 4 31 ab. ] om. D‘N 3 D 2 31 b. °iftrnT ] M v R N G 2 E V Try ; “fa^FT 
PfV 2 V 3 V 4 A 1 ; oi^PfTT: V,G 3 M 2 ; 'i^T: A 2 ; E D 31c. " dIfddu| » ] D'R^PJ 

ViV 2 ETVy; MlRduuil N 3 D 2 ; °yTfddul« M 1 'V 3 V. 1 GA,M 2 ; «5Trfa^lt A 2 


R— V 


°Rr*lfu[ v. 



31 d. RT NM^'R^GaEv,; RT f^"° VG 2 A 


M y R N PfV 2 V 3 E v 7>y; “frawt" NM 2 ; 

“MHlijun A 2 (unmelrical); "FT^furW E D 

Ed; R fir° M 2 ; ^ Try • fa d dfd ] D‘M y R w SE7Vy; fa^fa - N 3 D 2 
D 1 D 2 M v SE7Vy; W.d i n N 3 ; R~ 


faWrrr G ; fa r^uF ) ^ A]; 



31 (b 4 -b 5 , c 1 ) G 2 ; (c 7 -d') V, 


31.4 t?T: Pdlfald: 5TPPT: fctfa<Ifs,fa<Jc) Kirana 3:13cd 
31.6 'TfruiTfa- S^d"H W %cFTW T ^vrilrl Kirana 2:26ab. 

30.4 °STUPr] R N ; “ftdPr f P 2 ; “afa" P 3 30.4-5 HP=cr dfedWdI ] P, ; P|i-qHdd^fa) 

R-^Pa; flIWJ-d r^a4|I P 3 30.5 faWrT ] R ,v PiP 3 ; fdyiPddd 11 P 2 30.6 «Sr#fa 0 ] 
R n PiP 2 ; » P 3 30.6 “Igcd'] R W P,P 3 ; 0 !gc=r o P 2 31.1 ] R^Pj; — V— 

Pi ; P 2 31.1 fd d d id I cH d i ] conj.; fafPn^Tfndl R 31.1 W: ] PiP 3 ; PdrT: R ft 'P 2 
31.2 VTfaPyi'd ] R N ; JTcT fTOT P 31.3 fcgiHT ] R N P,P 3 ; ^cdrtiH P 2 31.6 ^ddPd ] 
R^PjPa; om. P! 31.7 fSyTRtfa" ] R n PiP 3 ; iWdldfai P 2 31.7 ] R W P 2 ; TOTR 

'TSTTPjPs 31.7 fasluil ] R w P 2 ; ffa^|u| PiP 3 31.7 °q%: ] R N P,P 3 ; -^5rfarr P 2 

























































































































































































3T^(R' V f. 146 r )J|fd^r^ r(f^ 




FF 


d flfwfH M M H JJFWT ^tlwr FFT 

fa'll ^ ^FTTK^T M y Hi S«TRT: II 


rf%" H I J l i| U|4iUd |cH >J| H g < IH 'n’J'iP'l ■' P^rl I ^ I 

^Frf^fT'JTfrfr (T)lTt y«b<«J|H II 


31.9 dlsiVI r*r-WI d~d 3JWT ^tftfcTT ?T^T Kirana 1:2lab. 


31.9 ° Id MI cH ] P 2 P 3 ; °TT?Pr R^funmetrical) 31.10 UHIH* j R N ; HHiRf: PiP 3 ; H^RT 

P 2 • Colophon: °cH'Ji ±f|T 0 ] P ; °rH^i ° R N 
















































TS* II ^ II 

i '-i i m h < r <^w t^tt 5m# re.* - or i h * h 



: THT^TTW: I 


TTW ddN | 

ir ^i^¥rpr: 5 tt^t: 

f&vjiMdfd d~ # ^rdTp-P-Fd'dI IWdT: I! ? II 

HWTft* sfr Tt"T HI I c*+> H d T fdF H%d 

'V 

WFFTT: H^TFdTT HI RM«hJ| Rl: ^T^HT II 3 II 

C\ V x 

■ - 7 T-TTTP-I y "ti J lj i ■M ^T^-TT: STFT^oTT: I 'H<WlcH<bf^ IJWT 3T- 

tTsttt 



5 Id) 


H 'hw 





^ <fdl«l"HHHp'1l<til<H T^l I cfi f<t> 1 4 


Codices or the mu/a of the sixth pataia: N(= D 1 N 3 and, up to 3d, D 2 ) M y R N S[[= V( = 
V 1 V 2 V 3 V 4 and, up to 13a, Pf) G(= G 2 G 3 and, from 23d, Gi) A(= AiA 2 ) M 2 ] E(= E v Ed) 
Codices for the vrtti: R(=R V and, up to 6:15,1, P(=PiP 2 P 3 )). 


1 . Ji <?^s dciN ] N Try ; om. M v RP| ; rr^T: Vi V 2 V 3 V 4 GAM 2 E 1 b. 0 fTITW: ] D 2 R ;V 
\ 1 GM 2 E; Q ^iTW: I)‘i\ t 3 ; °«t)KW|H' M v Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 A ('Dry uncertain) 1 c. f^vdlrl^lf-d ] 

M y P|V 2 V 3 V 4 ; NR Ar V 1 GAM 2 ET>y • ^ ] E; VTN 

°ild U V 4 (unmetrical) 2ab. ] om. A 2 2 a. fiHif 0 ] E ; 



Wt] E; <T 

^TPT 



VAiE ; HI Id D 1 ; ( d - D 2 ) N 3 D 2 ; rT&T HI I d M y ; rT^d" HIM R^ ; tfHTRT 

G 2 ; ^ fElTrf G 3 M 2 i HTRf 'Fry 2 b. ] M Y R N VGAiM 2 Try ; #T° N; 

E 2 c. : HfW ] D 1 D 2 ; P'Hil 0 dT RW R A 'P| Vi V 2 V 3 GAM 2 E7rr ; 

dt^Kd^ld N 3 ; RHtu-fl dT HW V 4 2d. dPPT ] D 1 D 2 M r R N V 3 E v TVy; °dPTT 

PfV 1 V 2 V 4 GAM 2 ED ; 0 J ifd'i'W N 3 


1 (d 2 -d 5 ) V 


1 


2 (a'-a 2 , a 5 , c 2 , c 4 , d 7 ) Ai 


2.2 ipwr stfsTTfr Kirn nil 1:21b. 


2.1 3TT] R^P 2 ; 3 TT^P,P., 2.2 °fw: ] R N P,P 3 ; “f^T: P 2 2.2 »q^W» ] p 2 p 3 ; 
“MdHldiN » R N 2.2-3 ?f5^r?f7r] R^Pj ; ^f^PT: P 2 2.3 impP: ] R^P.Pa; P 2 


























































































































•t,^iM'i,')' j />4'T-4-irarr ftvroig. i 






(P 2 f. 79 v ) WT:, 


cPTT rnTTT y I I ^ 

%^T: I T(pTTT 

JTT^rT: SPTRT ^lPd d M H I •M')Th + f'TTT I 

$i§jgf'3fV^ri d hi rbi'Ff r^id-yr: ii stPt1 
'd i Pi dq i d i °q i q j il' , iqq j i'«dirqq<rdidi , ’q i (iid' 5 i ^ d hh w i*i ^ d d 

fNdlfcKi' 




^HTdHlPuSidcdlR^ 


srfkvn dHd < : d' tmi icl i q MpldcqdiqPl'jrdHic'Tl d q Pi Ps Pt ^ d d - - 

^ftn=q- 1 W%: 

qii d : n\ 0 tdVqiK: ,J N (T: 5Tc*r I 


i 


d «h*} dl H d I d I Id d -^R": II ffd 


dWRPRftp 5 



dTdTTT: dTdTrTc^TCdfdfd' mi lei: 


= C ?TP' 


cPTT 


diddldqidd^lcd'h 


Idiiy 3 



-1 »<q i dVd.dT 


diir: PT fw 


fr^TPTT: 4~* I qdl 5P'TidIq d ddd 1 '■ 







6 


9 


12 


15 


18 


2.6-7 H Irjn : RRRT• • ■ H d l dn I fa 1 cl R• Source unknown. 

2.12-13 wt: VI 0 <RMil i: * • ■ 0 fa fa Th =1 : Mamjsmrti ^ 

2.17-18 IJWT <1 Rh eft 1 RRfT: R ffafa RgeT Kirana l:21bc. 


2.4 fafRT RTi^R ] P,P 3 ; R N P 2 2.4 tr^rf ] PjPa; RR l^rr R N ; ifaRIR 

P 2 2.4 RWT° ] R N P 2 P 3 ; R^T° Pi 2.4 °^TRRPRfa Rfa: ] P 2 ; fa Rfa R N ; 

^KRp s n fr Pit: PjP 3 2.5 ^cbH ] P 2 P 3 ; R n ; R— Pi 2.6 RTepT: ] em.; RTRR: 

R N P 2 P 3 2.6 OL HlfaH4il 1 R N P 3 ; ---ffaRR Pi; °M N Id <+>l P 2 (unmetrical) 2.7 ° 



R 


N 


fan 


2.8 



Pi; 



2.7 cfatwFRp] R n PiP 3 ; fafr^rrfa P 2 

^ H Ii^q R v ; vri i fcii^q d IP 2 P 3 2.8 Rt 0 ] H x P 1 P 3 ; fa " 0 P 2 2.8 0J T 

r n p 1 p 2 ; ^irfanrlfa^ p 3 2.8 °htihh^mh 0 ] R N PiP 3 ; °^t r^pt 0 p 2 2.9 rtrt- 

] R N P 3 ; fllHI^ivilfllHl^l 0 P 2 2.9 RfaVTRT 0 ] R iV P 3 ; — faVTTT 0 Pi 
2.9 ] PjP 2 ; 0 T2T° R N ; om, P 3 2.10 °lw: ] R N ; °fw° P 2.10 faRR- 


2.10 fafaTcR 0 ] R N P 2 P 3 ; 


HHHW P 

P 3 2.12 PTRR: ] R n P 3 ; TPT— Pi; TTTT: P 2 
^Q- H tR ° R N ; —faR° Pi ; Rfafafa: TPR° Pq 


Pi 2.11 3T ] R N PiP 2 ; dT 


] R N ; 

2.13 RTfa^ffafacT° ] ern.; R- 
UTTR: TPT° P 2 ; RR RRTR 0 P 3 2.13 0 fa H fa ylfd 0 ] 
R n PiP 2 ; » fao&far>^farH ° P 3 (unmetrical) 2.14 famw: ] R N ; fa^PTW 0 P 2.14 HWT- 
TrRT 0 ] R jv P 1 P 2 ; RHTTcRT 0 P 3 2.17 fafafat ] R N P 2 ; —fa Pi ; <tfm P 3 2.18 ffafa ]| 
R n PiP 2 ; ftfa P 3 2.19 ^cRRTT; ] R^ ; ^cRTfV° P 2.19 tfR^RTR ] P^P 3 ; tffafRRT R: 
R N ; fa<<tid RT P ( ; c ; fafafa RFR P 2 2.19 Rp?P° ] R N PiP 2 ; RJ P 3 


VI 
















































































































































































































% 

V 



f. 80 r )dV I ■*! fd I ^ l Hh q»H d c^-HT I ^ q) s H (^Trf ?j% 

21 5 T 5 T: I : 7 i ;.II*-i^ : 

Wd M d N 1 

T vxi i ^ 4 ^rftTFT ^TWR: y i Eh I JTFf: | 





y^lc*j<h: 




’sn 






3T IT?T: I 


^fr ^ sn 










*rfr Mid«d)«rfH -r r^TT s %h <f 1 arw11 3 n 

'N 

^H 'Jii^ qr^^'l .scq l» dd)4d * I 

Nyrnr^nr: ftcfr: ddld-wi^: j%d": II * II 
: t%*: H^^(Tn^Tc%^rrf%w%^wft)(p, f. 22")&npR h i 1 w- 


3 . HWPJdPd" ] NM Y V 4 Try ; om. R; *nidld P|V 1 V 2 V 3 GAE; f^T: M 2 3 a. T] E; 
dT M 2 3 b. fTWl < : ] D 1 D 2 tvT R N VG 3 AM 2 E7Vy; RFh i fl N 3 ; HW Go • RrT: ] 
E ; RcTT: D 2 3 c. ] R N ; *TRh (ct D 2 ) y^T^qi *ft D J D 2 ; ^IdTj^Wl Ht 

N 3 ; M v 7Vy; ^RT(^ R~ V 4 ) G 2 )df(<T Aj )fWT SE D ; ^TT^T c!%- 

E v 3d. Sfedf^TOTR ] M v 'V 2 ^V 4 G 2 A I M 2 E7Vy; q Wfr ^ D 1 N 3 ; 

D 2 ; sfedRtfw R N G 3 A 2 ; IwftftwT PfV 3 4a.k 

v R jV E v ; ^rrfrfd elfhoiil D 1 ; ^rf?T T c|*otn Na : RITT T 





PfVjV 2 V 3 GAEd 7>y; MIH f^T^f V 4 ; <=^ih ^d ^Ir)f-^ M 2 (unmetrical) 4b. 'jTS'- 

^T5T ] D 1 R^Vi V 2 V 3 V 4 GE7>y; ^ -d 1 cj N 3 ; U rdlvi M r ; Hid rd 1 vf K 2 ; ^Jio 6 c^ l^l PfAM 2 
• ddY^d : ] NM y R N VGE^Try; < ! dT ijrf: AM 2 En 4cd. ] om. R^Ev 4c. : 

M r Try; R^TJT^: D 1 ; FltjOTfW tf$PT N 3 ; fV^TT (fg^TT M 2 STt^T 

4 d. fw: ] M y PJ Vi V 2 M 2 7’ry ; cPT rTTS^ 5PTT^H D 1 ; cPf RT^T ^TT ^r! 

: V 3 V 4 GA ; Hell : E D 


XPF: 
SE d 
N 3 ; 



i4BT»: 



3 (a 3 -a 4 ) A,; (b 4 ) V i; (b 7 ) G 2 


3d. Testimony of D 2 ends. 


2.20 



r] R"P l P J ; 3k<h~iHI P 


2.20 «n 

2.21 ] R N P 3 




K N ; WfVwT^PT- 
P 2 3.1 5TT^: ] R^PiPa ; 


P 1 P 3 ; 0 c^rf^lq^ d rirti^PT P 2 

P 2 3.1 f] R n PjP 3 ; g’: P 2 3.2 ] R N P 2 ; PjPj 3.2 I 

] R^ ; °<+>dM^ Pj ; P 2 ; °^T%T +^TTT P 3 3.3 r^W- 

fr ] R N PiP 3 ; c^rfr P 2 3.3 ] R n P 3 ; ---ft Pi ; RP^TTT P 2 3.3 HW° ] R^Pa ; 

P l P 3 3.4 l'f? ] R N P! ; P 2 ; P 3 3.4 HTd^dlTd 1 R N P 2 ; 


PiP 3 4.1 °rcJdlf44lq '*° ] conj .; °r3d I Id t\^T° R N ; ° rd d I Ph fd VIH I ° P 2 ; 0 H b-4| fd J| q | ® 
P 3 4.1 °rfrafr° ] R N ; — aft° Pi; °TOT° P 2 ; °Rtar o P 3 









































































































































































































?'(fo 


: i n\ <\ <w ^ 


^iRl^M' TTW F^nr: 5 TtWT: I 3 P-T 



sfr or- 

fP^7; 7 


<m <1 < h PT)fr^r: i wffarr^rri': 3rr^r s^tt(p 2 f.80 u )ft R Ri 

3T%T M f] ft I *tI <1 *T 5ra": 


u M M 


fi ^ H ■U c^ I *11 Rl ^!l HIH MI 

<b d oi|T SdTfat dWTTTfa: II * II 

far *PTT ddl 




wrw dfa: 

\0 

Rti^i^HsiaKlH i HHNH m^gcrrii ^ n 

M J p^T: 




art 


JT«TFT 


■srn 



5. JTW 3dTT ] NM r Try; om. RPf ; T TT3': V i V 2 V 3 V 4 G AM 2 E 5a-6b. G 2 repeats these 
padas after 6d in a form similar to that of N. Go’s repeated padas are marked with the siglum 
G J' even though the scribe lias not indicated that they are a pa than tar a. Try probably supports 
the text as constituted for 5-6, but his commentary (see footnote to translation) also echoes the 

Nepalese version. 5 a. ] M Y R N Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G A M 2 E Try ; ; 

0 JJ l ^ldh Tr f N 3 ; ° Vi; °U i ^cdlcT G^ (unmetrical) 5 b. q in«i i Pn Hi Hid f- 

H] M Y R N V 2 V 4 A 2 M 2 E 7>y; ^fTT(jfr I) lac ) D 1 ^; d inqifafanlpM iR V x ; 

ffa[ facf Go' ; «!IHdlrifa4lPHIM PfV 3 GA x 5c. fafa Sdlfat fa ] R v PfV 2 V 3 
AETry; fa MlHd D 1 ; fa fcT U fviN 3 ; <F*dMl Jlfat M y ; fafaT JTfaT TdRT 

Vj V 4 GMo ; far Pm V]*H<d |U|'PT GJJ* (unmetrical); fa Mtffasppfa 0 Try vi i? 5d. fT ? ^M>i - 
TfafT: ] M r R N V G AM 2 E Try; Mfu^dHIH^Uf: D'Try 1 ''?; T(fa Gj' ) Riscimih^s N 3 G^ 
6a. Rfa: ^TTcT ] U Y R N V 4 M 2 EIVy; W HJd ftl Ml Ml u| j D l GS* : W 


N 3 ; PMd^ld far TO PfViV 2 V 3 GA 6b. faw far TdT RTT ] M Y R* v SE7ry; 

T ft- h%cT D 1 ; V^ l W faH%cT.N 3 ; H*—T fw R%rf 6 c. H=hd 15 !HddI ft'UW ] Kl y 'R N 

VGAETrv ; dd^l 4 )d'° N; fa^TsTRTl^KtTPT M 2 6 d. dM1 -M1 diR rj ] M y SETry; 

0 (RRT 0 N 3 ) N; dMIdd U R ,v • °llcTT ] M v PfV 2 ' V^'a G 3 E7Vy; 

N; °f3RT R N ; °t^T V 1 M 2 ; G 2 ; °|f— A t ; °|g^r A 2 



5 (c 3 ) G 2 ; (d 5 ) G 3 R n f. 146 ,; begins with 5c 1 . 

6 (b 3 -b 4 ) G 2 ; (b 2 ~b 3 ) G v 2 1 


6.3 3TT Nl 4 Ml I -r! d’SfFT: Source unknown. More of the verse is quoted in the MrgendravrttT 


4.2 f ] R N ; om. P 4.2 ^4l3dff ] Il /v PiP 2 ; 
P 2 6.1 ^ fa ] R N ; om. P 6.1 °cfcrT STRpfT 

P 2 6.1 RTF ] R n P 3 ; P 2 


vl<l d 4 Tc f P 3 4.2-3 ] R^PiPa ; ^TT° 

: ] P 3 ; °d^| jtl'I^T: afar: R N ; °dh 1 jd 1^47: 


3 


3 
































































































































































4 


TO - XWTWR 


9*9 


6 


9 


12 


15 


18 


5m 



TTfft 5yiHM^^I«WyHI*J|i!llf^|4-Mlf|«hH: 37*2Rt I 3T- 


H^1M ■•' 'T ? TT sfr ^prrt: Srhfi'MIdfd^MMKI (rTFTf r qpf-.j 

w: i arfr f T^rTRTsrRTwr- 





141 4 41 d i Pm i»i ttRw: i 'kPfr t pr4 4prf4s‘ 


cTF^T JT^TTtTTRTTMT^r M<-«M <M I^T(I < Id I A 3ftiH 

'>:^Tf: \^ft\ 


ftr^T d 



4l d [£<J I (d l -l fd <*-d I 


r> 


4 c^ot' r*i ^rhi: rvtn ^ 


<m 4ri t 4 d fd * h 4f•‘T^rn 


4 

* 


47 4 rfPTT ■HlHHf7lMlf4lMMI< 


4 did 



mr: (p 2 f.sr) 3Tcf>T^r w i 


3HTM 



■'H y IH d <4 «n 



1 h t v hn i Pv' d I ^dci i d ^ i Hri m P.m i«h dfh 


f?T> HI d I rH «h * ^Trf^T:) 



3T- 



?T ^ rPTTydi Sd4l^: HT^TTF^T 


4falrHd : <jt rpT TdI k <I k>jp-w: I cTcHT 

dlpika ad vidyapada 10:14, pp. 266-7 and ad Matarigavidyapada 12:5c-6c, p.339, where Bhatt 
observes that it appears (with some differences) in the Sabdakalpadruma (s.v. bala) attributed 
to Bharata. 

6.9 firffcrfriFJf: Kirana 2:29cd. 

6.11-14 A ^mi i • * *T *1 0 <i : 51 d <^ Probably from the lost Manastofcra, three 

verses of' which are quoted in Tantraloka 14:10 12. These are also in mattamayura metre and 
have a similar rhetorical structure. ( A Vidyadhipati is also cited ad Moksakarika 69.) 

6,4 em. ; f*JcT 3Trft PiP 3 ; R ^TcTT R N ; P 2 6.4 0 ^TTrT: ] R^Pa ; 

l J 3 6.5 T ] R /v P 2 ; om. PiP 3 6.5 ^: ] PiP 3 ; R jV P 2 6.5 ?rl%r- 

TRf° ] R N ; ?rf^TTTd'° P 6.5 -6 °T(wrfr<> ] R^P 3 ; oqjf.^p^-o p 2 6t6 3rfr ^ ] 

R A P i P 2 ; (3ffr f J/J ^ l <J d ^qfr 4 i rH^ I Pr| ffrflfM : 

3lfrfrfqpri^ffd^1 dIdI < 1 rM4! TPdTIf / fdl<HI*wlj l.Jdl-Hl ffcT: ) 3TfT f P 3 6.6 P^t^JTfeW ] 

6.7 ^ffTTErr] R A ' ; P 6.7 : ] R jV P,P 2 ; ^UP 3 



6.8 • ] R N PiP 2 ; p 3 6.9 °fPT ] R N P! ; °fpT: P 2 P 3 6.10 o grffcPTfT Q ] 

R^PiPs; °^JTfT U tFr° P 2 6.12 ] R n PiP 3 ; o p 2 6.13 ] R N P 2 ; 

om. PiP 3 (unmetrical) 6.14 °fHr|Tr o ] R N ; P 2 P 3 (unmetrical) 6.15 3 grr o ] P; 

R N 6.15 ] R /V P 1 P 3 ; °TT° P 2 6.15 3TTPT: ] R N ; 9TTP^° PiP 3 ; m 1 ^=1 Ml 

p 2 6.15 mnrr° ] r n p,p 3 ; 5mr° p 2 6.15-ie ] P 3 ; °4^qr&r 

U cc| Iojidd M| Iffl R N ; ^wSotiiyqircicJdd^MlI'Hl P! ; °bi| |d H I rd fTdd“MTTRt P 2 6.16 TT- 
^jTT° ] P; W° R v 6.16 RTTqfWr#r] P; R n 6.16 °5[f:) R N P 3 ; P 2 

6.17 H* ^ ] R‘ V P,P 2 ; T (dMI^Pd ) P 3 6.18 ^ qr McTfchl I dW ] R" ; 


p 3 ) P1P3 ; ^ Iprt IgfTrJffr: <TcRT P 












































































































































































































V 


^r i 





u 









^cdi d i J i (K qiciilRq TtW q 4<-q ^Rr>: fq I Pfci 4V- 

Slld <dddd^&^c4dldddm*d-llfi 5lHl41di Pd <41 ql vjH cd d H^«=ll- 

'Wy^l'J|fif<hK<r$dr4H^irM d h i dj 41 J d i d i «lIHI><lHi find <ldd 




^ W fiTRId'IRd \Wt rT^R: y"fll<S4>d 

c. ^ 


ir (M^dl^lRfi^r^i cqcjTfqdl 4") T (P 2 f.81 u ) [5l1«t»KI*t1 <«l dTcTT- 

ir -wd 

^r: 4 tT ^'d'^l'Hd d JI d I-H d dfVu^'M 5 ^TT ddld.l J l-jdl J 'd MdK 


+ ; I fit I T rT 5 ) Id Idl Jd I-MP J <-q ;• dRW: | FTdT P 



T.HWTJ^RT] NM y V 4 ; om. R; RWTR Pf V, V 2 V 3 GAE; rST: M 2 ; WHf Try 
7 a. nf^WPRme^ ] D lac M v R*PfViV 3 GAEJayaratha7^ RlTRRT ||W D lc N 3 ; RfwdT 
RTSR V 2 V 4 ; <H Ipm d Pd I *pJ" M 2 7 b. R^RR: ] D 1 c M y R ^ VG 3 A M 2 E J ay ar a t h a Try ; rQ~- 
R ^ I) lac ; an N3G2 7 c. 'fifdljjTR ] M r R iV VGEv JayarathaTVy; T>fdnrd { rd“ D lc ) 

D lc N 3 ; D lac ; 0 A; 0 M 2 E D • ] D’M^R^VG 

A 1 M 2 E J ay ar at h a Try ; °^VdT N 3 ; °#M A 2 7d. yffcR ] E; ffw N 3 •%] S; 

rt N 


7 (a 2 ) G 3 ; (b 1 , d 2 , d 7 ) V 3 ; (d 8 ) Ai 7^8. quoted by Jayaratha ad TantraJoka, 15:18. 


G.19-20 dl^lRhfHHian JJWT frfwt RRT l Ht$T: R ftpfT K/rana 1:21. 


6.20 Rf$T: R ftpR R^fefR ] P1P3; R%: fw MH1 Hi Id R N ; R^HRfWRt d^fdfd P 2 

6.21 ] R N P 3 ; ’J 7 RTWT— Pi; P 2 6.21 RTR^fTR atWR ] e/n. ; 

°<fcr RT U wjKp.ci at#T R A ' ; —RfTR 5TTW Pt ; RTRT%fTR MlcfilR P 2 ; dlHI^Rd 

U STTW P 3 6.21 gfifT: ] R N ; ffwr P 6.22 MlrfiHm 0 ] R A PtP 2 ; + R + P 3 

6.22 °RGfpr° ] R N P 2 ; 0 Rp5RT° PiP 3 6.22 RR° ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 6.23 °%frfr ] 

R v P 2 ; °R^Fr P 3 6.24 ] R N ; JRfTWf r Pi; JWTcRtjp P 2 ; JWTcRf T° 

P 3 6.25 °fRfR] R N ; 0 RRfR P 7.1 °dlillR 0 ] R N P 3 ; ^I'-Wlfd 0 P 2 7.1 “HRT- 
'tW] P 3 ; R /v P 2 7.1 O'fiKI-d^l ] R N P 2 ; 0 «fi’< , unRl'T^I P t ; p 3 

7.1-2 TTRTRR: ] R^PiPs; RRTRR: P 2 7.2 ] R N ; °RT^ Rfcf Rt^TRT P1P3 ; 

P 2 7.2 dry 41 I <T 0 ] R N P 3 ; RRRTRTT 0 Pi ; dry 4.1 U P 2 7.3 R f RRT° ] 
R n PiP 3 ; RJ 5n*R 0 P 2 7.3 f^] R N ; R P 2 P 3 



















































































































































































+ 





$1 H 41 i <M I fd TO dM I 

>to tot w srmrr tototoiTOtoim n q 


tlTT) gfwr: fl <1 Pi!N cd H m u| | cPfa 



TOT TOTR%- 


fdTOT <\ yl ti < R-H R-. IH" ^Ni ■MPHM-l'hlT 'Jl M ^ 16J (H M M Rt>IT - 


^ Ml J MI TOFT tffimi T) I TO" sITT f^RT TP TF4 


T TORMd I Or I M<I|P y IcTO TOFf^HN-ird) I flcTO I TOf rawtf- 


^11 4>^W IM <fTOTO f^,WmdTRrfrtT: I T ^ sft#T)(P 

f.23 r )«TT 5^T TTOTTOmTWfnsrHTTO TFT TOPTOFT TO 
TO M|JM<TOIMNIMl TOrrirofTOTOTOT TOTOTO: I TOT(P 





N f. 147 r 



TOTOTOFlTO 



f. 82 r )^P4RT 


f^T)cfwnrt mi rv^*r m 4i^ifn m) dn i£ 1y hr< TO 


TOTTOTO TOT FI H I"4J pTI.IT J 'TO W facM^(alTOTOTOIiTOTOFT TO 

iftar: RrWRT^: sfmTO}TO^TOR%TO fcT^TT^rr: I FW 


H M •M l F5l g-HI cM I rb TOTOTTOTO 5RT TOTO: I ?ITO 


8 a. rP-JT d i -4 

r i 



E; TTT TOT Vi ; flWF^ - V 4 8 b. "ifpdlH ] D 1 M Y R N VG A i M 2 E.Java- 
e>q"ljj^ N 3 ; 0 41J11h A 2 8 c. t^T 4TT ] D 1 M r V 1 V 2 V 3 V 4 EV JayarathaTry; i^4 

nwr N 3 ; 44" 4TT Il N ; TOf 4TT Pf ; ddMdi GAM 2 ; 4mv4t E D • W TRET ] D 1 
M r VEv Jayaratha; TOTT sftW N 3 ; TOT TTW R A ; T dgrhH G(unmetrical); T TTpFT AM 2 ; 


•M grh PTTT Ed ; cf TOJWT Try 8 d. HI*a to H*1 41 vfl HI let 



V2V3 V 4 Try; 


S \ r 
3 



R 


41 'J] H I d D 1 ; H i £T- ■M1 d TTTTTHTH N T 3 ; 41 itR-cV^T 41 m 1 4 cl V] ; Rffif rl d r A Tl '-d 4 cl GAM 2 Ed ; 

TOT cf Javaratha 

\3 */ 

8.4 5 II rd I -d t^&MH Source; unknown. Cf. Jayaratha ad Tantra/oka ladled: ;i led 1 H E M 

HTfdfT TTT: 

8 .11 2 HH Alpl^-dTrtl 1 rT\ TTOTTOT ?RT TOT: Sardhaf risatikaloitara 25:‘2cd; but cf. iTj’ranav'rtt/ 
5:27.6 and 1 : 10.5 and the footnote to the translation of the latter. 


8.1 TOT 0 ] R n P 2 ; m Pi ; TOT° P 3 8.1 cf4^ ] R N ; TOlfT P 8,2 TTTT° ] P ; TtTT 0 
R N 8.2 °TiTTT ] \l N ; °4)ldl^ P 8.3 ^TJ ] PjP 2 ; T J R N P 3 8.3 fTTTOTT j R A P 2 ; 

% + q- + TOT P 3 8,4 =T TOdddlfd ] R N Pt ; J TOM44lTd P 2 ; T ^ TOTOdlTd P 3 8.4 ^TT- 

TO" TO° ] R.' N P 1 P 2 ; 5 TTOT 0 P 3 8.4 cPJ ] R N P!P 3 ; ^ P 2 8.6 5TO ] P X P 3 ; ^ 

R N PiP 3 ; P 2 8.6 5 TPT ] P 1 P 3 ; 5 TTTOT TOTOT R N ; 

TOT° P 2 8.6 TTO- ] R n P,P 3 ; TOT" P 2 8.6-7 °fddl> T ] R^ ; °fTOTT° P 8.7 "TO- 

i^rof 4RTO-d ] R^P 1 P 3 ; "TOC?t TO f%TOT P 2 8.7 rTOT ] R N P 3 ; cTOT— Pi; cdbA 
P 2 8.7 "rTOIW: ] R N P 3 ; "cTOTtW P 2 8.8 fTOTOTO" ] R^Pa ; fTOTOTOTO" P 2 8.8 T- 


R N P 


8.6 




Tt° ] R N P 3 ; TOTOT 0 P 2 8.9 ] R N ; c 

8.10 f^TlslMl 0 ] P; TOTO° R n 8.10 "TrrfTTO ] R^PiPa 


PiP 


3 



o 



}> 


TOT P 2 
8.11 °y<bRu| 


TOT:] R N P 3 ; "TOTT— P\ ; "TTOTOTTOT: F 


8.11 TOT° 1 P-> : Ttm rj R jV P 


8.11 T 


cTOTOfTT: ] R^P^s ; U ^11^1 <: P 2 
P 9 


8.12 TOTtfTiTOcTOT ] R N PiP 3 ; 

















































































































































































































































V) jj rrq wzf'-rf ^prr dT fd. J d d d'1 


T y ct| Cj I i-M fd ^ i jfry ^W: I 





dT dR^dcdicddl^y^c'O^tT: S.d : I M ^ rt> 

d Wt ^ d 

5iHidldRMPdrdi' ftsrr +i ^iPn^d 

T rftar: FTTTTPT: R fd^lH'h: II ^ II 


STrf 


•T 51 Id 1 41 d I Pd^ i ll'JidrdH'^lMl^r4d ^dcd ld^ I <hddl 

?nt ^(dcd l rf T 



^nbjdT ^wr)ar: d^i 

drdid; i srfr rj Mi'M: *r fwFRT ?f?r %rr w 



rT- 



Idled<hl fwfr 4taPTT T f(P 2 f.82”)dT: 
hiR i>^rr fd n r^t Pd --73< -t,r k d *wr: i aRT 



dTTf 



W 


r- 



H'd'l ^ U d-11 P<1 d I : 

n^T: ^TTfTRt T tfPffiRH R^PdTII ?o 


9 a—13b ] om. G 3 AM 2 E C 9a. °4 N H i ] D 1 M v R iy VG a E v Try\ °9NHl N 3 9 b. £p- 
err ] NM y R A VE v Try; cTSTT G 2 • «fTR^nT ] NM y R N Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 Ey Tby; WTum V, 
9c. dly5d r ] V; ft&pfR fV° NM y R JV G 2 7Vy; fTSi3d'lfd'° conj. E v • W: ] M y R N 
V 4 Ev Try ; oj rrsf NPf ; *ftW ViV 2 V 3 G 2 9d. W: R fd^ l'WT: ] M y PfVj V 3 V 4 Ev Try; 
dHI^F-i-j v u; |-q fr D 1 ; dMI<4PH P-H11| RR N 3 ; dRRT R flW: R A ; dTTRTFR RTRr V 2 ; 

TTP^T M Rh^IH«?!: G 2 ; TTTT: Rftr^W^T: Try' ,J 10. before a G 2 inserts W- 

JMIHl^l yflK^id and V l inserts Sl^frirtlSMI^'dfddl Wn: • after b G 2 inserts 

Ud I d-41d'-I [•Midi 5T»fTT dIcHI ^T: 10 ab. ] om. Ev In R iV the 1st 5 aksaras of a 

are written and cancelled before cd, but ab are then placed after d. 10a. R^TJTT^i^c^T- 
Z ] M y R iV ViV 2 V 4 TVy v/ ; «d 1H U1 ?,*hrjeeiT‘< NPf V 3 ; \< G 2 ; y^rR^TrqiTT 

Try 10 b. dMldlfd SP#fdrTT: ] NVTry w ; dMIdl: ^R^Hl'fecfT: M y R N ; ddlfd y^Mdl: 
G 2 (unmetrical); ^R^pfT j'l'ficii: v d J f Try 10 c. R^T: ] NM V R v Pf V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 Ev TVy; ^ c h 

• 0 TT c fr T ] M y V 2 V 3 V 4 7Vy; °TTTT NPfVi ; °TPE R N (unmetrical); °TT ? ft T: 


V i 

G 2 E v 


10 d. -McT^pqrr ] D 1 M y R iV VEv Try; U ^TVT N 3 ; dd^KI G 2 


9(d 8 ) V 2 


10 (c 6 -c 8 ) G 


2 


8.14 ] R N P 3 ; P 2 8.14 


U 8^lcd 0 P 

P 2 






8.14 



PiP 3 ; om. R 


o R N . 

N : tFtpRT: 


8.14 o<TTT: ] R jV PiP 2 ; °dr: P 3 
8.14 M Ti fti ] P; fh R N 8.14 RtiHd-H^ ° ] R ;% ; Rih4^^ 0 PiP 3 ; cl° P 2 


9.1 dlHKldi 



R A 'Pi ; sIldldH P 2 ; fPFnftTT P 3 9.1 %^T ] R A ; P 9,1 °m4c4H ] 

p!P 3 9.2 t fm-rn ] R A ; t frarr o P 2 ; t wr ^terr° p 3 9.2 d-^T 0 ] 
P 2 9.3 R- fefM] R' V P 2 P 3 ; Riww Pi 9.3 ?PfT ^PTPTT ] conj.; 


R* P 2 ; 

R N PiP 3 

q-qr P! P 2 ; wr^ ^PTFTT R A ; W f -f TTR P 3 9.4 fd I rH^l ] 

ll A ; r^ PjP 3 ; fdd<ldi5d-«l P 2 9.4 cPTT R ] P 3 ; ^ U Hif-fid R N ; RTT 

%TT— Pi ; RTT R° P 2 9,4-5 $1 H ife ] P 2 P 3 .; ^MlPd WlHIdl R A ; —Rt Pi 


9.5 Rl-ciid'hl ] R N ; fd^5T 0 P 


15 


3 








































































































































































































































we 


?'<ry 


-H I^1 ^rhOn^roM^I'M<+) hTm-H ) ■>M H 0 (MdIR<HPddP|41 ^<41) R*- 

*fr Hwr =r wr: 


dfcRdT H <d IP; pel Pldcd<M Icd 'hi 

*fr sfr ?FT 



gTW W: I rTcT^ 



ftsrqr 



dMcdPy H^T)^ dI dT d $lldldd 3YRTT: y +1 Pd d I: I 



dvH W i • j - n^n p; Ph d Pd : fsrd"cd"° c rfRv3r d - !d r ->d I 


X 






'jTHRT^T 




dll '».U||ni<IMtfkf (P 3 f. 12') W *Tlfd T M j j HI ’PIId eft^T irg 


d-.^HI'^ l-iTl' 41 & fdd) dPfT: I TOT 'dfd Id-d’dcdd'b : (P 2 f.83 r ) 

—dT 4tar*TT 




dTd dqSl^lldcdlld 




t fcfr s'^y^wr ^tht 4 i^tfj(m iddTd i pr t ^wm_ 

j ; 1 ! _ : r- d d 1 <fl dT^TRI^TRIR ?f?T 



ttifa 



fdlPdPd T, 


ddld-d d 






4 4, | ■/Idy drdd d d Ted I M"d"pT(cd ~d d 


flH y I ^ l 41 d IH^I died I P^h^rT 


lae R N ; fPT^IT^TRTT^lTIH D U N 3 ; 


11 b. S^l^c^ir^ntnftr ] M Y R N VG 2 E\• Try ; H Vl'*r4 if^'l ( HT 


11a. WPT¥[^KHK ] M Y Vi V 3 Try ; D 

HHMMHkIh Pf (unmetrical) ; HHM 1^jJMWHIH V.iG 2 ; MM l<tld IH V 2 (unmetrical) 

™* E v 

D lc )trOcr d 1 ; ^firti^if^firyr^r n 3 

11 (bMP) V 3 ; (b 3 -b 4 ) Vi 

10.1 31pd h I'Jii Kirana 6:20 anti commentary. 

10.9 JTTsfr M atangavidyapada 26:63d. 

10.11 fVd pi Pds'dTfTf i W TR ! 11 £ -TnT K /ran a 6 : 6cd. 

10.12 rrfwr: f^TfeT Kirana 6:6a. 



10.1 Pi ; ^ff P 2 ; °wmn° P| ; °^F : Rf 0 P* c 10.1 m<Tl ° ] 

p 3 ; Rj v . o^tn^rf^rr^ p 2 10 . 1-2 ] r jV PiP 3 ; p 2 

10.2 °^'4r^|e(cei 0 ] PiP 3 ; ^r^fro' 0 R N ; °ciIfvicfr^T° P 2 10.3 ] R v P 2 ; om. 

lM 5 s 10.3 ^H^T: ] R N PiP 3 ; P 2 10.3 ^raPTT ] R n PiP 3 ; ^tSTPTT P 2 10.4 R- 

^T° ] R N ; rprFV° P 2 P 3 10.5 fr%^TT ] P; frfam^T WT R N 10.6 0 
—Tpp* Pi ; °fHTPrP P 3 10.6 : ] conj . Isaacson ; 0 Hirpet R 

PiP 3 ; P 2 10.6 Oon&y ] R A 'ipP 2 ; oq-((WlrH«b1 )#r^ P 3 10.7 ^iyuil*rf<l 0 ] 

R N P 1 P 2 ; <0J || 0 P 3 10.7 ^arfpr ] P; & TSf U R N 10.7 ^T^IT TT® ] P X P 3 ; d<Jd^l 0 

R N P 2 10.7 dt^T tj^r ] R^p,p 3 ; <sk° P 2 10.8 Tt^r: ] P 2 ; rVTm: R N P 3 ; —dT3T: 
Pi 






10.9 sffarr mm tpt 


R N PiP 3 ; 



p.r) 



u ^rfV° P 2 


10.9 7ft) P; R- r%^fr 1P V 10.10 T] R N P 2 P 3 ; om. Pi 10.10 °^f?f I pd'd'] P 2 I ) 3 ; 
o^pEPTTR N 10.12 gftr: ] R n PiP 3 ; P 2 10.13 °fv^rr° ] R n P 2 ; °fwfr° PiP 3 
10.13 0 fdMedd ] R N Pi P 3 ; »fTOT^f P 2 































































































































































































































^ g <J H u <J fa t f4 d I <4 f^TTWfrfr 



3T5f^rr>r w dt4r sfer 

^ I fd '• ■;• ; -i "'Ti : r H H <iI 4! J -M f 3r>^)H-,H I 4" ^ si sfr °M I - 


f^i *i I 'jTT^TT 3T 3Tr?T^riTinWF^nr I fa cl I *11<s) *11 Plr^d’MI'1 - 

^(fadcqid fm-Ni'l <44)^1 : fa> <4 I si M dd1 ^ rfTT 3dT- 






dMI MdP ;K,’ ■r^V ^FTdrfdfa d f T-T I ^(pT I 
T c^TT f^rfr^T: dddfad H-d^l: I HTT ^jj 4H H)^I<rHHi TT(d“- 

f.83 t, )^^r i ^i d uii fain d fa d d m u[| - 


6 


^n^TRT (dTH q IH j I d r d] (P 


dfad ^mTWr^TcT I dd^11 siIRic-MtrM-xii?If?t>5<t»H sTFrfwr^T- 


HH&fa [sfr dl 4td 


TV 


ycddldlcd<t>)RfalHfdird 


9 


(cK^fa )d'd'^ shr mw h i fd af-d cT^ i h Pm t 4tt 




*ff STjlTTt fa£Id iiii^viiH^d^d : farfardcl ^TTf{ 


11 c. 3T^Tc3T?T ] D lac M r R^Pf Vi V 3 Ev Try ; 3T$ncdI 4“ D lc N 3 ; U >T V 2 ; 3TsT73T R 

V 4 : 34$|cd | G«2 


H(c 4 ~d 7 ) G 2 


11.1 Testimonium: from <* 1 VI 1 Ki I d ^c-4 *rt 151 c^i d up to and including <1et 1 1 P^T (in 

12.8) is quoted (prefaced by cPJT ^qPc^uicjfTf+^ui qr^rTT TTTO^'JJ^ui! “ RR~q 14i ptl i- 

k- ■ ■ ” ) by Nirmalamani (=Nir) in his Prabhavyakhya on the Kriyakramadyotika, pp. 346-7. 
11.5 <TTT fnqff-Ji<ni ^t&TT d h d \PdPciq PjI a 1 Svacchandatantra 4:88ab. 

11.8 y >d i ^ i *\ '-"Tl'd "h 14 fasr^Si h* d 1 u Hd ^PPRfaT^Tf'd Kirana Chapters 43 and 44. 

11.11 3T*ff TT^Tr f^JT vi 1 H u i ih ^dd : diHuq r^P^dcl Quoted also ad Sardhatrisatikalottara 

1:2, p. 6. Bhatt notes (ad loc.) that it, appears as number 719 of a LaukikanyayasahasrJ. Cf. 

> 

Sabarabhasya 1 . 3 . 25 . 


11.1 3‘rfrTVII 0 ] P 2 P 3 Nir; —?1T 0 Pi ; 4lfHVI 0 R N 

11.1 ] R n P 2 P 3 ; ^dl<jdPdl Mr 

VlfTtlddHI P 2 ; 34 r^Trl IVI Hi I dd M i Nir 11.2 c 


11.1 «5fc3T] R N P 3 Nir ; °sTRT%T P 2 

11.2 3trd-dHVIrhlfcl^i ] R^PjPs; 3T^rFT I 

R; °didHT<)dlH P“ c 11.2 f^T* 



d^TT 0 ] R*P a P 3 Nir; Hr^ddl 0 Pi 11.3 0 &£' J 4'rdH ] R N P x P 3 Nir; °g P 2 11.3 °dt- 
HrT: ] R^Pa; °RtWTT P 2 11.6 c^T ] R* ; P 2 ; $ P s Nir 11.6 0 P'T^t^l'rqHi ] P 3 Nir; 
^fq^T^JlcHdi R N ; — £IrMHm Pi; P 2 11.6-7 qTcPht ® ] R N P 2 Nir; TT— 

Pi ; M IM 0 P3 11.8 0d ^3 1 51 r d'ftdrdc'-i-Tl o j j^a-' . cld *S 1 ^ |r^ i^rM^rl 0 P1P3 ; dd^’f^rdi^ - 
^*rt vi P 2 ; dd^ vTr^T^^PrT 0 Nir 11.9 ] R A P 2 Nir; cft^T: P3 11.9 H^ IHed 1 Td ] 

PNir; dqipMPd R N 11.9 ^T° ] R^PG^aNir; om. P 2 11.10 D ^tfP] PNir; °^rfr R N 
11.10 ^T7m] R N ; T^T^Wwn - P^sNir; P 2 11.10 57^:] R^PiPaMr; 

U T: P 3 11.10-11 ^Tcfr SUf VT^T Pd^1H ] PjP 3 ; ^rfr U VTW: R N ; V RT—WTVT P 2 ; *Tcft 
5^TWT: Nir 11.11 ^rTf^OTTq^TrT: ] R yv P 1 P 2 ; Vllf^>J[ h^W: P 3 Nir 11.11 t.4uqfqP^qd ] 


P ; dvRTJf U Pdf^dd R N ; T ^4^4 PdP^dcf Nir 
























































































































































































to snfpnro 



3 


6 


9 




s\r^\{\ «Tl RT"3 d 11 # 
Hll£)adl t(%>tPtt 


d d 

^ st srwrr t ^tt t ^n ^ i r%yi ^n^mr 11 ^ n 

sfraFTT snfic^r I *r*TT^) *T ST STW T dTT ^t^TT ?ft«TT: I [fik 

r-i^i^^H TTT^rTfrfd" i <Tcnr ^i< riHi ^ f^c^i^pr *r 
fT^rT dTT d^l-dR : TRTf^RTSTWt H%cf I d 131 rb M'lfd IT I dfl" fifT 


(c)RcdHd£w l Hlfa»$d ¥W> RTT^H iTidd 3T TTRTfTr ddJR- 


d^rtiH r<^ <U|IHichMC< fqrr: ^^cMlRiShuld TT I cT%T T oTT 5TFJ-- 

rh^MiRf'^' i wf df^rtw ffir 13nw chwc^fp. 


f.84 r ) I T(Sr%T fcrnsTTfirr 5T%TRr^r)4w m rWTcp Th ^ d i ?fi y i d i d h - 


filWT 1 T ^-1 ^dldfdcHHiKlRddl FtTT 4 >| H+>'-l Id I ddM 



< u| cd I d I W *jFT: 




w t 



MW)<J) d I Fh rqWTJT I T rdf i 4"d'l%: I 



fir- 


11 d. si rd I d ] M y R v Pf V 2 V 3 ; $11 d 0 N; tflcd I < Vj ; 1rd l V 4 Ev ; ^ Id Id Try 

NM y R N ViV 2 V 3 V 4 Ev' Try ; dtT Pf 12 a. fa^fa>: PTTT ] D l M v R N E v 5 



TT- 

:(m 

N“ c ) 5RTT N 3 ; farfftT PTPT PfViV 3 G a ; faHlWf^ V 2 ; f^RTaf: PSIT V 4 Try 12 b. 5taPTT 

dfa^ T Jrrf : ] PfViV 2 V 8 G a 71y; ^teTPTT: 3lfa>dM!d: N; M y R N Evi ^tSTT- 

m M Rf T ^ l TR : V 4 12 c. T ST Vi V 3 V 4 Try; T T N 3 M y E v ; TT D 1 PfV 2 G a ; T 
R N i5[E] N 3 M v R iV VG 2 E y T>y; S1W D 1 " • ^TT f ] D l M y R Af G 2 E v ; f 

N 3 ; ctTT cT V (Try uncertain) 12d. 5fTvuifdHi ] M Y R N G 2 E V ; ^fTT^TT D 1 ; TTWJlMdm 
N 3 ; *P l ^Rtli^ Pf V 2 ; Sfflvq^riTJ V 1 V 3 ; ^ftW^TR^ V 4 (Try uncertain) • y^l^l^d 
D lac M y R N VG 2 Ev ; T^TT D U N 3 (Try uncertain) 


11 In place of 1 Id— 12d Nirmalamani, like P, gives only the pratika ffcTTRr^Tf? 
12(a 3 -a 5 ) G 2 ; (c 5 ) V 3 ; (d 1 ) Vx 


12.1 <?r- 

H fd jVir 


12.1 WTf ] P 2 P 3 ; R N N/r 12.1 ^ ST] PjPa; T f R N Nir; T P 2 

amT] PiPsMr; ^kPTTfT° R N ; fTarm P 2 12.2 WTcT ?Tflr T] R; 

12.2 PdKIKi- ] R N PiP 2 Nir; fTcTT 0 P 3 12.3 T^T^tT: ] R; RfirtT: Nir 12.3 dlVI^I 0 ] 

12.3 °Hifnld crff irr ] PNir; Ml^fd rlR-Md RN 12.4 ] 


12.4 WTSTfr - ] PiP 3 Nir; TTT7TW R N P 2 12.5 f 


ro ] 

12.6 T- 


R n PiP 3 Nir; TTTtT 0 P 2 
P 3 Nir; TT R N P 2 

P,P 3 ; °TTTTIt o R n ; 0 T^TPTfT° P 2 ; °d^! 0 Nir 12.5 ^rT: ] PNir; R. N 

] PNir; T^RT R. A 12.6 M Prh^Tldel ] conj .; HfTRfm - RNir 12.6 T^TTT ] PJ^Nir; 

3T^rvr % r n p 3 12.7 °R5c^r] p 2 p 3 ; oj t— Pi ; R N \ °^c3h Nir 12.7 frr- 

TTfrr ] R Nc P 2 P 3 ; rd^T Tf R T R‘ Vac ; fa tEfdRift'S' Nir 12.7 ^lfa>HTrf^r4w ] P 2 P 3 Nir; 

U 3?r ^fa- TT^° R N ; --Pi 12,8 ^dldMd ] P a P 3 ; TTT R N 12 *8 °fTrPTT ] 

R N ; P!P 3 12.8 °^TTT ] R N P 1 P 3 ; P 2 12.9 °rTTr[ I T ff ] R N 


rRT P 1 P 3 ; °rTTrrft p 2 

12.10 =T rdmdTT: I 



1 2.9 


] 



°jrot- Pi ; ' 
P1P3 ; T rTTTT U 



3 




































































































































































































































cTPT PT%: I ^W t 



4 -f fT4 I r| 4 fefn 


T cRT: 



I >T 



TRT 



FTTT frl 4'J"^)frTy^R 



TRT^-H^T^ irr^Tft I 'J| I PH cf |] H H 4- H i' 8 J MM' H H ,J '-H M 4 I -ij - 


W 



^fttlHrAIN i\^: I 




^ cR 


^rn^ori^T} 4 3 fh H 


OTHlm 



5N 



miT: FqRT 


Wf^V T rff^f^TW m^^-rRWW I 

^(P 2 f. 84 t ')^TT'-l fi ^1 < : 

ITT z\ HiPj r -h HT d ^3TfT^ 5WRT I 

3T^wr fwf^nr^: hi i Pchi Pd i d-. r P>m i jih ii 

cT^TT% T PbPd cKI IT-jH Id PddH : f^-HT: | 



12 


15 


18 


21 


13 ab. ] perhaps omitted by Try 13 a. °R < ti ] NM' R A Vi Y^VsV^GaEy ; °fV PJ(un- 
metrical) • ] D ! M y R ;v G 2 Ev’ 5 HIT N 3 ; RT fr V 13 b. d ?ti hu y r -n 1 ji d <1 ] 

NM v R n G 2 Ev; U Ki^fTd-jPd&Pd Pf ; 3 fcf SfPd ViV 3 ; &'K 14 -J Td a Td V 2 

V 4 13 c. 3T^TVT] E; cflFEPTf N 3 • FTRT ] D 1 M Yc R* v V 4 G 3 M 2 E7ry; °W 


13 d 



D 


fipm m j 


S' . 


dwm 


HETT7T M yac ViV 2 A; °R‘ U FqTcf P? ; W V 3 ; °>PT RTT G 2 

^ “ *S. 

M y 1 i v P 3 V 2 V 3 V 4 GAM 2 E7 Yy ; Mf^WN 3 ; fwf^ftwn - Vi 

D lar 14a, cT^fR'T] D 1 M r R N Ev ; cRW ^ N 3 ; d^TMT^TvT VGA 1 M 2 E/ > 7Vy; RT*TT3T- 
?T A 2 • rVtTy r ' fW d in ] D’NP R A \'i V 2 V 3 Ev' Try; PnPa *~m i <1 N 3 ; f%f%rT Y i(unmetrical); 

^f^RTTcT G 2 M 2 ; ^Pyr^qM G 3 AE D 14 b. cRW ] E; E D • Fd d H : ftw: ] 

D 1 “ r M y R N V! V 2 \ r 3 G 3 AM 2 E\G fn^Hfct: D 1 c N 3 Ed ; =mfWcf: V 4 (unmetrical); fwf- 
?^^Fr: G 2 ; pH -MH : fa - : 7Vy 


13 (c 3 ) V 2 ; 


r 71 

c' 


Pf: (d 3 -d 4 , d w ) Ai 


14 'Testimony of !*? ends with a 2 . 


12.12 



Source unknown. 


12.18 P^^ldH^dl^HiyHJifMm^cJdl Kirana 6:6cd 
12.10 fif4»l>ul‘4 RfWT: ^Tra - Kirana 6:6a. 


12.11 1 R N Pi P 3 ; °^WT P 2 



12.11 * 

Pi ; 



V P 2 ; °r%=rP 1 P 3 



12.13 cRf: 
12.13 



] Pi P 3 ; R N 12.13 *pfT J Pi ; ( * 

mw ] R n P 3 ; HWTfT X d’x Rrf P 2 12.14 °FTafoipf ] R N 

!:« ] P [ P 3 ; Sl H fcl 5l H Tfl ^ 0 R N 12.14^"] R N ; oni. PiP 3 12.15 ] R v PiP 3 ; 


) P 3 

Pi Va 12.14 :IhRh 


° M H d M H" Po 12.10 °d%^r qrhPHoM 0 1 R <v ; PjP 3 12.16 Q Fq^r ] R jV ; 

“ s^ SO J -J J * 

wnr P 3 12.17 ] R N PiP 3 : l> 2 12.18 0 

R N 12.19 1 R* v ; 



12.20 ^cdK-M^PdPT' I R A 'P 


sCi 

& n=K 


P 1 P 3 12.20 

P 3 




P 1 P 3 


V [ j 


d^HlF-d^d P 3 






























































































































































































































TO M ctTvapT 

s 



f^TrW^fWqTII r< || 

\o ^ x o * 

[$TTT<41 j M <-M fTFT f^T5%WqT T)«t> I i»l ^ <4 N14 : I Pt> *1 1R 4) ^ 


3 


f fwrftfri FT sfr i 

?Td"r fr-H«hl'i| |: did W&: I xrw 




vji id eId 


6 


* fV<ryrHii]n4rd ^a-q h i q y i d Py d i3M[-drd i d) cTW t fr- 

;;;1 'k, i jT^h-n d ^ttpTtt 


fR^TT PTTrf I 



’HnUM^-Md'MI 5fWRtc%T MdH : fPTcT 3m 



y Npa (rl'+iHdl^dl I d]^f ^ fa i>[ <&$l H d Id H d) M 

fdI'ddt Sfr dddd -JloiiHH *<Tcft fadr^fiddlfacifa r>u]y |i|(d - 


9 


^anTTfr d^Nt yR | J|ddHl[dlH*|dl^'hl HWiTTc^RTT: I 

H <1 y I-d (TFT STST: 


jr?r? TdPi 


h i •yi Ri d u i 14 " ?r stsnfr f^ra 

'O 

faRTT sfr T fWcT 



I 



<TTII ^ II 



0 ^*rcH G 2 C l 5 c A 2 M 2 


V' 


rj Vfe- 

—Ai ; 


14c. ] R A 'Y 4 G5E; D lac ; °tTliT4)r[r4 D lr N 3 ; 

^TrfT Vi (unmetrical); ° J y fAqvrR V 2 ; —%T V 3 ; 

0 ti? 2 ^hxl *1 Dy 15 . M ^-S ^R* NVP Tlyj om. R,G 3 AM 2 Ejp 1 M *5 ’ G 2 Rv 
G 3 AM 2 E d 15a.W 6 ] D 1 ac M v R N VG 2 E v Try ; TFT 0 D lc N 3 
M v V 1 V 2 V s G 2 , IVy; °TOTr 3' <J N 3 V 4 ; R V E V 15b. ^Tanfr] M v R A E v ; ^TW 

tt n ; ^tarnr vg 2 »fer] D I M y R JV vg 2 e k ; fe-; n 3 15 a. ] ng 2 ; 



T ^StRIcT 


IV 


v R^Ev ; ^ 9 £ cq 1 d ViV 2 ; c3"--- V 3 ; dcd--- V 4 


• 3? 


M y R /v V t G 2 E v ; 


TT: N ; 3TT V 2 

H #*! " ™ 


14 (c 3 -c 6 , d 2 -d°) V 3 ; (c 4 ) Aj 

14.9 The testimony of P 2 ends with mP tuidHti 1 --- 

15 (b 4 -b 8 , (T-c 6 , d 2 -d 8 ) V 3 ; [d 3 -d K ] V 4 






14.1 ] R N P 1 ; : P 3 14.2 ferRtfr ] VAP 3 ; R N 14.2 fHr^I- 

ZT° ] P1P3; f^rr° R N 14.2-3 c _ 

U ^dH I d R jV ; °HS,H I frH4>^l I fFM^'P^KR'cT P 3 14.3 Tjf: ] R N ; TT Pi P 3 14.3 0 

nf?r] r a ’; tPit p x • ^iWhtT Pt p 3 14,4 °f 4 rii*i o j rn . 

^7T° P 2 ; 0 P 3 14.4-5 RTT^TT ] R A ; HT^HT Pi ; HRTT p 3 14.5 Ml^f^rl 0 ] 

R N ; M i qr^dTH ^ P,P 3 14.5 TFTKPrt ] R A P l P 3 ; ^IdlHiH P 2 14.7 f ] R ;V ; T P 2 P 3 
14.7 « j>4fcr ° ] R‘ v P 2 ; P 3 14.7 ] R A '; o5 aTTT° PjP 3 

P,P ;i ; R N 14.9 tFtxtrT 0 ] R A PiP 2 ; MRuiHd 0 P 3 


14.8 0 



] 




































































































































































































9Si/ o 

t 


>TfTm^3f5TTf%rrrtrr far^jraral 


itm Trarft^tsp: ^ R $i «* i P^«i cd Pt^d ^ t wft PdVd i <-a i £ - 


ifld I -rl rd al H a ^ I u ft>d M d I mA U| i T M1411H i ftw 

T ^TWRrT I ^KHl-d<t|Jdcd *T(R" f. 148 r )ft rfcfT tsi «fj| - 

fExdTcf I <d $ Pi T*&<\ £Tp=WRTTTr W Tfi 1 '4 Id !T3T t: I 




W5P^Fc[ 


^JNH«IN 

SD 


Ml^lfdlmcSfq": ffR£: fi rar&: fit sft ?trt: 

ill H < I u l IH Pd -cd cd I dJ *TT JT^f%W^r: II 9% II 

C\ + 1 


M14>| H j ^M |U|i rdtRTcSRT: I d fH I <-'41 i*| fd I y I d Rl d I - 

rH^-wMrl dfHIcy^l g^dc-UM^IM i ^farf tr WT ft^: tTHT 

H ^ 41 n=hJgjl - 

drtwrr T rfR^qw i frfit d~ d ^ Phh i r Pd -rd i!i - 


a^TRt «h I P-d <t> fr^pt: I 



IP^ «Sf»d I Pd U d tt Sit TTSrPmTrft: H^HT^TrT 



RTRT S' 


=qHT: 

vy 


3Tf^rtT RPiR-tlHdtdT STRIT: I irft I 
f^rfNt 5 ft ^d, ^ 4i I f-d 4) ^c^art 

16 . HJIdHdM ] NM y G 2 V. 1 ; om. R N G 3 AM 2 E D ; ViV 2 Ev ; W-- V 3 ; WfTf 

Tty 16 ] 0/72 . G 3 AM 2 Ed 16 a. HIJ*rfd1*rrcT ] M v R n ViG 2 E vTry; TTfT ( 7T D lc ) Frft- 
T° N; TT5RTtHTcf V 2 V 4 ; -W V 3 • °efT: ] NM V R W V]V 2 V 4 G 2 E v Tty; W V 3 
• ] M y R JV VG 2 E v 7yy; fW N 16 b. SP^rt: ] M Y R N VG 2 E v Try; V ; 

N 3 16 c. ^l^TT'TI'H 0 ] M y R N VG 2 E v ; f|-diu| wwj ° D 1 ; JH^|U|i ?M° N 3 (7ry 
uncertain) 16 d. W ] M Y R N Vi V 2 E^ Try ; ST^rtf^W: eTT: N; WT 


V 


3 


WT 



V, ; WT 



G 


3 


6 


15.1 The testimony of P 1 P 3 ends with fn«; 1 P^dcdodRfr^ d~^" T HTffT U 
16(a 1 -a 3 , d G -d 8 ) V 3 


16.7 3Tf^tr f^ - h Rjih*-=T l^ V A I d 1 Th 1 ^ : Occurs also in Ratnavafi Act 2 , p. 39 and is quoted ad 
Matangiividyapada 7:49, p, 249 and ad Kiranavrtti 3:11. 

15.1 trm] R N ; om. P 3 15.1 T HTltf ] P^,; R N 15.1 ferrf^T 0 ] conj.\ ftr- 

qTar° R N 15.2 0 ] em.; ^ 1 fd 0 R N 15.4 ] conj .; « 3 Ri ^4 

R N ' 16.1 fri t d i d ] co/ij. Isaacson ; frftd - : R N 16.1 HI^I'ffTl RtTR ] conj.; dW^fTT ^nt R" 

16.2 ^Trr° ] em.; R N 16.3 fP&TRTT ] em.; ft^W R N 16.5 ] 

conj.; 0 Pd m -mi PdRd R A 16.8 fefPTt ] cm. ; f^dl 4 R A 16.8 Here (after ) R v 

places the pratrka diHtilddif^rMifd 1 Verse 17 appears in full directly after 16 in R N . 


# 












































































































































































to 


9X9 


fTPft Jp^WfacTdgy'ti A y M Rrd ^ II ^V9 || 



6 



snTTrTjf ^H'+ici iTld* *j j UJ|H'MMvrlM | 

^<bi h' 3i'i y d m r^ jt^wH srf^r i 

cRN" ^1 0 <l-d ip H-dddl^Hf^llMd^M^rbcdlxl - 

%r arpwcfrirr t cftr: «t*Ra d i 

3tN" SP^FtTW 

’V 


TTW ddld I 

3 iimpMfr srfc %r rr <fteprr i 
^TrdN iH^Pd^dl 37 *r pit^w: fprRr: n p n 

dfd fr■+. H1 Id M 4 MIVI Pd r-ci. Pd *TW adT MiT^PTT^T^^TRi 

V ' 

5 pt 7 •■: h%cti hw i adT ^lyp-rr *t 4 »u w^fdi'P-Hi 

3 r^QRird^(d^ryr^«rtir<«lirddrdldy^l , J|nHrd T8T: 1 Ifl^l-d^ 


17 a. °^] E; 0 ^T N 3 17b.^fef] D 1 M v R N VG Ai M 2 E7>y ; *frfpRT N 3 ; ^f%PT 
A 2 (unmetrical) 17 c. pwt ] NM v 7>y; R N SE • ] D^RR^GA, 

M 2 E; °gwt^ N 3 ; T V7ry; A 2 17d. °aprfp^] M v R N VG 3 AM 2 E Tr v : 

°enrtf^TO D 1 ; °OTTf^ n 3 ; °apif^ k: g 2 is . rw ] nm^tv* 

SE 18b. NU Y K N V AiEv Try • GA 2 M 2 ; E D • 

m N 3 18c. v^ldmiH ^ 0 ] D 1 M v R N V 1 V 3 V 4 GA 2 E7>y; 0 N 


-~prec*5"° Ai ; ITT 



M 


18 d. PTT^ 1 S ; RT N 

^ j 


M 2 EI>y; fwfcf N 3 ; fWrf: A] 


om. R^ ; iT^T: 
] E; ppfTSf- 
3 ; Ml I ild IHdt 0 V 2 ; 

fpifir: ] D 1 M r R JV VG s A 2 


17 (a 1 -a 3 , a 7 -a 8 , b 2 ) V 3 ; (c 7 -d 3 ) A 2 

18 [b 8 ] A i; (c 1 ) Ai; (d 1 -^) A 2 ; (d 4 -d s ) G 2 


17.4 ^prrrpr • qrwfpr Source unknown. 

18.2-3 3Tfr ; r*n f m ^d An old example, this occurs also, e.g., in Saharabhasya 3.2.4. 


17.1 d>11MI ] conj.; d^l*^ : R N 17,2 ^Z: I ] conj .; %€t ?pf° R N 17.4 d<1dd: 

*PT*TfpT ] conj. Isaacson ; -KldM! U MH^1‘fW R N 17.7 3rt^ ] em.; 3ftcT R N 18.2 fl - - 
errct] em.; fraw: R N 





































































































































H £ < IH <*> u <s [q < r^m*n fVi j i j i nl 



WR1?I 

vo 


Ml Id NT d d Pd ^1 tTI' w w y hn Pm' i 


m4cnt 4mPn f^-Trnrii ^ n 

^Formjr fw ^TTcfRTT W 


NdKJ Ph 4" fe 


^P’-^FTFP 


cH4T fl^PH^Iuidl^Ni ^HiPifl^MI - 


w^r sfr d rfi f4>P< 


<tv 4 «-d 'Din if I Pi < Id&dl fd fr- 


Ph'tTT'HI d I fdNHI kdlfdc+IH^f 4 Pd + 1 H M I Pfl^I P-cli^ sff 



I '+iH ^ Pi d I try Pi P* Pd' I 

Pi dfd 4 J -d' l I J d ^11 Fi 'y H d ^d ^ 1 J I * i Pi 

^ fl <H Ph <d u| <P) yi Pn 4 ^ ddMI^I^l^cU'M kr| J Td<rdKdIdI'd^ 
*cSpa^T 


6 


3T%wfw ^nt ^i41^pH<rwPf: 

V3 


HpdN^fr TdT crfe vow: II Ro || 


19 . ^WFNTT ] NM y ; om. R jV 
m } E ; mTHTcTT V 2 ^T° ] 5 

7 T^ M 2 19c. ° fif=fHT° ] E; °?TRPR : 0 N 3 

FR<FVT N 3 





19 a. mTT?TT- 



™ VGAE ; p ST; M 2 ; 

srfcf* G 2 19 b. W j D 1 M y R JV VGAE7>y; N 3 ; 

M y R N SE7Vy; °RcT^r D 1 ; 
19d. cTOT ] NM v R N ViGAM 2 E7Vy; ^ V 2 V 3 V 4 • *Tjf><T ] NM y R N 

V 2 V 3 V 4 GA 2 M 2 E7>y; dMPu V, ; — <rftt Ai 20 ab. ] om. N 3 20 a. 3T%^rf^r ] 
M Y R N SEv/7>y; LJ dP'4> D 1 ; TfTdfd^" Ed( unmetrical) 20 b. ^T° ] V 2 Ed Try ; ^PX 
D l M y R N Vi V 3 GAM 2 Ev ; V 4 • ] M y R N SE7ry; D 1 20 c. tRt- 

^dp q- ] M y R N ViV 3 V 4 GAM 2 ETry; ^Pd^IRpT N ; V 2 20d. Frfe ^TW: j 

d ' H l f ? RtTTcf: D 1 ; 4Hdld iPdRlW: N 3 ; SE D 7>y • after 


M y R iV E v ; 

d SEd and 7Yy add these two padas: ^d’JII cT% RpRd* &NHNIH4P^N: The addition of this 
half-verse and the modification ol d in South Indian manuscripts postdates Aghorasiva, who 
quotes the short form of the verse ad Tattvasangraha 37 and Ratnatrayaparlksa 166 and 315. 


19 (a 6 , d 3 ) A,; (a 7 ) V 3 


20 (b 7 ) G 3 ; (c 6 , d 3 ) V 3 


19.6 SSrikhyakSrikS 67cd. 

20 b. For the compound ^NTT of. Svayam bhuvasutrasangraha 3:15a, Rauravasutrasahgraha 
4:51c, and Svacchandatantra 4:148c.. 


19.3-4 r -1 fdrdTM I d I Pcic^rFT ] conj .; PrfHdd I'M N I P^rdHI R A ' 19.4-5 al^tafT 0 ] con j .; sfpffi 

frsrr° R N 





























































































































































^rnjpr 

V 



f^mtar: PTTr^ftf^rt^Tfr tt 

^hNl'JlRf: HTT ^ fW!TW: II ^ II 

«<nrH*fuKlwl^ dMrH^lui)c| ^ | J | d I Hd ^dlftl Hdil 0>d : T TT- 
H lYd <1 dl <h I d W Htw: 8PT 





arraT 



wvr^nTT>r riw hi'TH'H 



Q'tL |^ | 3TtT 

?T^r dVldd arq - : I 


WT dcHHd <M 




JT^r: sr- 


*P-TT T 5!ITtWT^ 



*PT 




X 



"N 






W: 5Ppft 


WTT fTRTP': ^fi^T i -d rhH I 3T(R V f. 148 l ’)rnJ 

€tfsRT srirr ^npfPrr: d j-m d i ^ PRfq^rrr: i q 



My q*d i> | fW I 




d <fi Td d I u I dl ft I d I ^ Id Td d H -d d Id *4 d <-dcft"^ sfr W- 
H d <£d ill 0 i N Rd d *rbcd I >1 ftftld-d <dd ?["P ■'Hid <\ d I 

3TT ST?T: 




q|i»IHrhHI 

V3 



^TTO f^ T rTcT 


fWT dRt.rd^H T R 




21abcd. ] om. R N E V 21a. fadtBT: ] D'M V Try, f^Rt8T N 3 ; faywr V, ; V 2 V 3 GA ; 

foyf*: V.iE d I fay^T: M 2 21b. frat° ] M y SE D ' 7 Vy; ^ l <]~l D 1 ; HH<R N 3 • «fr- 

Erfwfr 3T] M v V 2 G 3 ; «F-T<dfKlfc 3T D 1 ; "WkiW N s ; “fy^TETTfr rr V, AM 2 1 Sd ; 


r gT V 3 ; 0 frgtwmfT V 4 ; »f=raiWrFr EfT G 2 7Vy 21 Before c Try reads *TBT£f 


21c. 'tilillylV: ftn|: ] M^SEoTiy 

21 d. cT fSTd ifl vrt <ti I: ] M y SE D Try v ‘ 


H : «)fd'fcn"<Fr'H1 =i -y *: (fifT: MS) y«RTy fpjcT:> 
f^idd ?nftjd^S|>? D 1 ; few btFt ?li-44| 1 . N 3 

"S 1 x w 

•TT( 5TT Ns )fef <t W HTfacT: N ; dTp=FT <=ra?T fwjrpT Try 22 . W ] NM y Try 

om. R. N ; rrw: VGA 2 M 2 E ; — A 2 22a. trfw^ ] D l M y R JV G 2 M 2 E7>y; d%j?- N 3 : 

V i V 3G3A2 i Ha \ 2 j ^rNpr V 4 ‘22 cd. ] om. 


vfT-ti 1 -4dP-r V1V2V3A; v 4 

fk^: Vi V3A1 ; V 2 ; fk^ A2 



M 


22 c. ] M v R N GETVy; 

22 d. fk% 1 M r R N V.yG i\ 1 2 E7ry; 


21 (b 6 ) V 3 ; (d 6 -d 8 ) A 


(a 2 -a 5 ) Vi; [a G -a 8 ] Ai; (b 3 -b 4 ) Ai 


21.1-2 I 'A del d I Q ] conj . Isaacson ; ^h<d ] Md«id I ° R A 
TTrRR" R A 21.4 TW^l cm. ; T£TTT&R R N 21.4 

J ■ 

21.6 °gJTWRRT ] T.290; °SJ^rT— R A 21.9 ^TFrftfd H^T° 
21.9 ° ^ y r i y i 0 ] cm .; °<; 1 ai R i^ i 0 R N 


21.3 & WTT?T 
TOTT^T] conj 

conj .; 


cTHJ ] conj . ; 



T- 

\l N 

R A 






















































































































































































«r 

% 


v|£' <P=ldMi 


\3 


(i ^ i Pm Ph ^ i Pin i i 


i|<1 cj h fi<TiT h 1 u i'T)*n^d^P) <'h1 ji ys< t>hm iiofr n 


HI^J-MTF 


^T>T T 

=r cr- 


cTCR i 

«nvid mi'J^P m fd snrnP 


’jrrf'7 


'N 


T ^ 3T^T «l I & fa 41 -tAw d ?N I d-M I fTt M IVIf^TcT 


3 d Rs £ eft h I 3 TTT 

FJkT | i|^|(i| ^rfWTTRT^' dfa £ f?T sqfirqrfT^r^' 


dT WTfi 



TtHM'hP) 


X 




H $ I < ill HI Pflit: sfTwr 



TO 




tft ctwtt nr^Ttw | i n 

TT TTfFTTTTT^TTTfT t 







ii 


23 ab. ) ora. N 23a. p: ] M y R N G 2 Ev TVy ; ?W VG 3 AM 2 Ed 23b. cHTTfr ] M r R A 
V 2 V 3 V 4 G 2 M 2 EV Try; T— Vi ; cHT G 3 (urimetrical) ; A 2 E D • ^tFh ^ 1 P d 1 ] 

M y R N V 2 Ev Try ; -fw V, ; 5Erfrmf<<t>T V 3 V 4 ; ^rfTTTfFTT: GM 2 ; 
fir^TTef: A 2 E D 23 a. SrRpfi" ] E; smprf E D • ^ftvrPT <TFT ] D 1 M r R ,v VG 2 E v Try; 


iftdl: Ai ; 



qHHrlFT N 3 ; Tt^TRTFT G 3 A]E D ; T^TmfTFT A 2 ; TTTTTFTFT M 2 23 b. d^^i ] 
M v R N V 2 V 4 E v Try; rT^W NV 3 G 3 AM 2 ; cT— Vi ; TpfTT G 2 ; TpfTP Ed ^ 

R n ViG 2 Ev ; N M Y V 4 TYy; TTKT^T: V 2 V 3 G 3 AM 2 Ed 24 a. frycdidTT TP TT^- 

H ] E( Try ?); fr^cdlTFT Tp TW D 1 ; f^rjeTT TFT TP TT^TFT N 3 ; fTJcTTTFT TP ^m(TT?T 
\p •■ j M v ; fr^JrTTrfFT TT R N ; fT^rdlvft TfFcTFT V1V3V4 \ f^JrTTTT TT^tFtTFT 

V 2 (unmetrical) ; f%pj[cdI dFT Tp TTlTFr G 2 ; frp^cd-d*TT FTT^FT G 3 AM 2 24 b. ] 

S ; M 2 • T] E; TT G 2 24 c. JT^TTT ] E; F^r^TT N 3 • frfPT: ] 

NM y R N V 2 V 4 M 2 ETVy; firfTT ViV 3 GA 2 ; ftfT™ Aj 24d. T ] NM y ; 

Tdk T ftra- R*E,/ : W TOfe fP gT SEd (TVy uncertain) 


23 (a 3 , b 2 ~b 7 , d 2 -d 3 , d G ) Vi; {b 3 —b u ) Ai 

24 (a 1 , c 7 --c y ) Ai; (b 2 , c 3 ) Vi 24d. Testimony of G! resumes 


23.9 firfpM 1 r 4^P) ^rfwr: Kirana. 5:23b 


23.1 «MI5II^Hir^ ] 
Mi^iHmf ] em .; 


conj.; 23.3 0 fTfrT° ] co/ij.; fr U R N 

ni^iyrtTl R N 


23.G 


3 


6 


9 
















































































































































































































TST W<biV\H 

'v 



THfr FT^F-d *i 41 - j1 *i | R Rr ^TdY FTF 5Tc*rsfar tR ^ - 

sicH'h Fl^T t^RT ^ | ^ I ^ R 11 F3) 4. P I di «?» FFH^Rt cFT 

; -i : ~n *i < q q d i < R q j i ii i ql i ^ fpffT s w-k i Ry ^*J|f 41 'hi d fft- 


cfr 


dT 


w^riv^n q f ; q f; r '-ii jHhmmRi : i sft 

fr^T^ FIX 5TRT FXR^RqaTFRr I 



i=n r '-m hk i R 




«r^Rr sufI 



fr 



RRt i U 



fe FT 7 } 


srfk^Rui 

ds^-q^cf* F 

T FFf%FF 




■FcT 


Rf^^Rr^HII^Fli fwfttttRt 


Rcqqi^&'-lq cfcfr SFdqi RjqsFi o^iq^d 

TTPFT'FRFTFfT ^ ^ I fd < 1 fk*»> : I 


\3 


3FsrryrTfr sauiwfl sffhi vi m i fwrFFni srftr i 

*v 

d^qnirHd : FT#FT il §<J| l FTTT F q’TFFRTF I q I «-q j q r. q | *jf<*, y | q T- 

q^did-.iqi frawr ^^vhf A siRd 'if sRr fl^Rr: stfrR i Rr^r- 

FTF^ SPFFFFRFTFTFI 


^iqnqiq I 

vo 

dfl^T c|mHirH8ldc+^U4|^<brHHI I 


XFTFf SFRjYRr^rf^TFlt dl<Rd^>/KHbiyq ^ Wt 


t ar- 


25. ™^N ] NM v V 4 Gi ; orn. R N ; TOR V x V 2 V 3 G 2 G 3 AE ; ^ax: M 2 ; TOHIf Try 
25a. crf%/T ] D 1 M v R N V 2 G 2 G 3 M 2 E TVy; dfV,£N N 3 ; xfe"(W V“ c )^ V 1 V 3 G 1 A; d 1^4 
V 4 • °ta°] NVGiEy Try; 0 fX5' M Y R jV G 3 AM 2 Ed ; fdklH G 2 25 b. °dr^t- 
Td ° ] D 1 M v c V 1 V 2 V 3 AEv Try ; dcx^ U N 3 ; drh4<Ji| pH M rac G 2 M 2 E D ; dnftH l u^ld 0 
R v G x G 3 ; ^)4wfx o V 4 (immetrical) • °<hr^HI ] N; 0 <hrMHH M y R^ SETry 


25(b 5 -d 8 ) Gi 

25 b. This is immediately followed by a version of 25cd in R K , 
occurs where 25cd is printed. 


but another version (R- vv 1 ) 


24.1 dltiitrl^1 ^ 1 mi d 1 d Kirana 6:8d. 

^ * 

24.5 gw4£fdc|ydl Kirana 2:i0d. 

24.] 0-11 4 1 ^&d<vi • • • (m ddd^ RhogaicariA'a 8. 


24.2 ■ ] conj .; fd'^dirHd) R N 24.3 4 YmTH' ] conj .; 41mHI4 R^ 24.3 °W- 

H Vc ; 0 RHd 1 fd^-11HI R ;Vac 24.7 ] conj.; R N 24.7-8 W- 

^JddH^d^lirdTd ] conj.; XgfwT rT U T ^WldTd R N 25.1 3TXWf SR^fT° ] em.; 
3TXRc4f 3TWt-° R N 25.1 °dtaiTTT ] e/n.; 0 €tWTT R N 










































































































































































M >J| 1 -M i H »-"4 j ?Tt -H I 

TT&T&tt ^T *T HTTr^FTT ^Ifcl 


^ «t»14<+»<>Jl^r f^TT ^'|J|I^MMn ^l-Hnfi| 

' ^ cTSTnt- 



TWr wr™t i 



r| -A M q I CH *11 H I #1 I -Cl <Rl 'c-'&A ~ 


■ . • ■f 3 T(R v f. 149')^: Ul'tc'1®McW f i 4 -H t llTll«£ 'Hh; 



=r <fWcT 


tillin': I 



+i cl 11 '5 € l l <rl *l i 



d 




T r HVT ?T- 


?=q~ jffqr^Trf ^r-L| ffi" cK^ch *Tcft SfT ^ c*l lei I v *1 -4 I v -1 Ml ^tSPTl 


Mp’ilP'Hdii'IHld ^TPFfrW clWI 







Ph H4 h Pm Pd d-id f h Rr g; 51 h P^d n -m i c^ra - strt m Pci m i Pdd crfwvTR^r 


Pd 4. ^ T R TT?: I *P-J Ml PddH dH&idfdd K>d IW cl I 4 rd Tm TT5T- 


JTtaf Pdc^Pd-d IR ■^'Md 'Td' I 3-wddT 

ypTH I d I -d W Ml^ldrhrdlRH4' : STHfi^TT ?fd 






IdcdHM'-i’ 

I'd! 

\ 

d 


=T 



Mdfd H v I'd": I 


cFTFM" fk" 37*4" ^det'H^d l'^-ld*dl'Hd II ^ II 

o ^ ^ 





<-d 1 d I rd •ft W 5f ^•"'•-'ii ; - : *'4 



dildd>^llfd ~^R : r dTdddillMdi' H d HI I rdR: i-j+ib-id 


I 


JfpTT $i M 4 d 11 K Pd^T 



5 ld 




frdPT: 


25 c. fTJRi- ff W g^TTf] M y R' Vv, Ev ; d -A WJrwr W =tcRT l) 1 R* ; ?nTWW W V 

Go Try ; d gfy 1 37*4" eRT N 3 (unmetrical); cT=T ( d^d AJ 1 ‘ ) 3T*-4 d dd ( ^ d d ^ G 3 ) G 3 

A, ; cf=r iT^qr( ddfd^~ A:j c ) ^ftw A 2 ; M 2 ; cHT d ^7 ^ ^WEd 

25 d. F^%TT° ] M Y K Nvt Ey ; ^dc^Hl 0 D 1 R A V G 2 G 3 AM%E D Try ; ^dr^Ml 0 N 3 ; t-dRidi 0 

25 The following 0 padas follow in all sources (in M r they are placed before 25cd), 


a c 
2 


but appear not to have been commented upon by Ramakantha, and so have been removed. 
dPd^HK i d-d TRf cP=tT fJM^cdp; l oqfirdTT: W d m-i 1 r^ci^afl": I d Mdlf’T r^’MlHrii 

jl| | pc| rp^T^TT M 4d" I Variants: a. cl Kid-d W ] M' R N Rv ; cl RdRd N ; 3 TT- 

fp rr^rtdsr V 2 ) ^rm - Vi ) VTry; dTslITd<T G 2 M 2 E D ; x wfw^Tx 

d^TFT ^ G 3 ; d"—^TrfkT^d" Ai ; d 1^1 *H1 R; < -dR" A 2 6. d R dTT g -0 ] NM V AE ; dfd 
cT^T H" R N : dTd'k ^TfV V1V2V3G3 ; df^ 5 yT \' 4 ; M R; c-d g"° G 2 ; ^ R^ ^ M 2 (immetri¬ 
cal) ; d F^ ^rfV Thy c. ^rlWnr: ] E ; ^Rs^TT N 3 d. dl^diR^d 0 ] E ; 

V 4 • o^Tpcp; ] S; °^rnr: N 3 e. °TTT ] E; °gTT E D /. H-R 13 JM ] NM r Vi 

V 3 GiE v R/>t; R A ; ddi'jul" V 2 V 4 E D ; ci^igui G 3 M 2 ; ci^ig— A x ; ci^iami A 2 

(a'-d 5 ) Gi; fa 2 , 6 l , / 6 -/ 8 ; A lf * (c 1 ^ 4 , d 1 -d 3 ; G 2 ; fe l -e 2 ; V 3 ; r/ 3 -/ s ; G 3 



25.4-5 + (in margin 

oqijRA 25.7 °Ri^ql <d^ 1 ^.'1 •aT ] em .; 
conj. /saacson ; Id a 1 mi 1 R A 
25.12 vflch<l«l' ] em.; 



R A 




25.10 ^auRdSRhdlW ] conj.; 
U ^TT R N 25.14 fkgcdl4lcRHl ] em 


25.7 d^gm ] conj.; 

R N 25.8 fdai^l ] 
°gSTT U Rd^Rdd^r R 

dlrPdr R N 


N 




















































































































































































































































































* 


TF y A <+t I U 


?*V9 


18 


3 


6 


9 


rTMT ^ l cH q q «-q l cH <-q Ph 



dvpj g'T rar g fsrnfrdT «tR4^*- 


TT 



7 j^r j j ty 'i rHr d -i i ’-q *i Wi i r*-ci q>: i 3Ti <^i i ^h ! v ltr^-c.iM 

R" W Sl^KHd f^ T xp4 T 
^ q^rsrwi'Tft 



W: 

VD 




qHq) ?r>E ^cdm^qiqqi^di^di PdedH sfr 


w 



ET vi«4lcHHI J 



cf 


r< Ri i ^ 


"N 


pH 


■•qi n i fa 



rr*Nr 


TFT H «-q i»i fm i 


fd> I 4 r-q q 4-^RI vT 3TT riVfr ^ T'lhl 



2 




I W^pfT -X o *-M I 

onfr ftfwpr u^uipnld 

fqq*isu|Idd VlHI<fa4)1 hadTaId I w HT 


d irqix dgl <- 


fT 



T=R 





fa 





fkw 




q i oh *ii cq q 




dT^r^r fa 


fa) 


SlHIdH-d^IrN 


zfT H I J| J| - 


W7 


^ Id 


dT^T favsHI^HH-fa 'H >H=h t < I ^ H M Rrl <1H 5 

3Pfar fa»HlcH«h) qfat ^TFT STddr^Td’ 

^i^mh^Vh fnrr www ^ w 



26 a. ft~g^T R~ ] M Y Try ; fiTJc% fr N ; ftgcTR# VG 3 AM 2 E D ; HTJcT ^ R A E F • 57- 
^ ] M V E V Try; WR D 1 ; Ml? N 3 ; Sfa^T R A ; ^ V^sAMj ; SE*T: V 2 V 3 V 4 ; TpsrT 
E o 26 b. 3TR# % ftr ] R A E V ; SRJ^f^W D 1 ; BRTRi^PT N 3 ; 3TR# ^ fftr M v ; 3PJ- 
cff ( xri" V 3 ) ft" far VG 3 A Try; 3TTTftr fWT M 2 ; ^PJdT -Sft Pftf E 0 ♦ ] S ; cP4T 

] 3 2 .1 i 0 ^TWTRr D 1 ; °<dft)i N 3 (unmetrical) ; °?T 

G 2 (unmet,rical) 26d. TT^TRT^ft^n" W: ] R A SETry; l^dH D l ; 

Prm N 3 (unmetrical) ; Pd^y,ftiI^3d Try vl 26ef. ] om, N 26e. ] M Y R Nvl 

Vi V 3 V 4 GA 2 M 2 ETry; ffafr R A ; ffar V 2 ; Ai iiRTW:] M y R Nvl VGi G 3 AM 2 .E7Vy; 

™w: R N ; f T^ u T ^-: G 2 • wr] M y R N R N111 VG 1 G 3 AETry; Ga(unmetrical) j 

^T: Mo 



26 (a l -e 7 ) G i; (a 1 -!; 6 ) G 2 
26 [c 7 ] Ai; (c 4 , e 8 -f 2 ) Ai; (d 7 ) V 3 

26d. R A places one version of 26ef immediately after this and another (R Avi ) in the position 
where 26ef is now printed. 

26 f. This is followed immediately by the first two verses of the seventh patala , then the 
following two lines of commentary, then a gap equivalent to one side of a folio, then the text 
resumes towards the end of the commentary on 7:2. 


25.17 wf^wrfr ] 
cm .; TfTFT^T U TfcT R N 
q d R A 


con j. Isaacson ; rn d rq d i c^Fqftr R jV 
26.5 <Pl Rncleq ] era.; U TBT R A 


25.17 ?fT fM^dPd ] 
26.8 RP-q-iqR j cm. ; 





























































































































































R g y . IH c tV J Pi < <11 'M I Pti •>. u l<|Tl1 


5«c; 

!«•••» ftNT JjHHHuft r«IM<] ct% H n 'J| q IJ11 -4 ■ W'"A T ! ! T- 

^TT ^rfr T H H VI «i H K J 4 I cBfa - d SJ ^ i ^ i •'i -J' i Tt'^rp;!" 2 f-T II f u 

(R N f. 149") U LI 


26.11 *rfV 3]wmr D/iatupatha 10:140. 






































TRANSLATION 
















CHAPTER ONE 


On the Bound Soul 1 

Having bowed to him who is free of all impurity, I shall com¬ 
pose {racyate may a) a brief (sahksepat) commentary upon 
the vidyapada in the supreme (pare) [Kirana-]£astra that is 
a ray of the sun that is Siva (givarkakirane )—[a comment¬ 
ary) that elucidates the words (padesu gamika)—ffor I have 
already taught elsewhere almost all (prayaii) |I have to say 
in the way] o a general (sadharanah) detailed (vistaratah)j 
investigation nirnayah) of the Categories (padarthavisayah) 
with recourse to reason and revelation (yuktyagamaih), fin 
order to expunge all views that are opposed to t he Siddhaiit.a 

(kr t an t a vi rnaticche d ay a 2 ). f 


Some pupil of Garuda (tacchisyah), or pupil of a pupil, relates to his 


11 ugrah am k ur vat a ): — 

After [words of] praise Garuda saw Hara, whose dia¬ 
dem is the crescent moon, seated upon a pea of 

Hn both E d and E v the chapters receive titles (the first is dubbed the pagupatala). 
They are not always appropriate, Ramakantha does not mention them, and they occur 
in very few of the colophons of the manuscripts of the tantra (set 1 Appendix II, in which 
these arc listed). I have nevertheless retained t hem as subtitles bet arise they e some 

idea of what the chapters discuss. 

2 A tentative conjecture of Professor Sanderson’s (for krtanta in this sense cf. 
Bh agavadglta 18:13). 


pupils the teaching (sastram), exactly how and what was taught (yathi 
yadrgrupam... upadistam tatha tadrgrupam) formerly, so it is said ( kila ) 
by the Lord Umapati when He bestowet! his grace on Garuda (garutmab 









162 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Mount Kailasa with Uma and addressed these words 
to Him. 3 (1) 

Now ( tu ) some people (kaitfeit) [in their commentaries! first of all 
prathamam eva) without regard to the sutras utsutram ) describe the 
nature oi the £astra and the connection between its subject and its aim. 
its subject and so on ( tatsambandhabhidheyadi ). 4 This is inappropriate 
tat... ayuktam eva), because such things will be described below by the 
sutras themselves ( sutrair eva ). 5 One might argue that (atha... cet) they 

3 • 

‘ P 2 and P 3 here give kailasasikharasln am ityadina as a pratlka. The pratikas that 
place portions of the root text are usually followed just by ityadi , and so not incor¬ 
porated syntactically into the text of the commentary. This might be taken to suggest 
that the verse occurred above and the reader is here reminded of it. Perhaps this first 
verse should be placed at the very beginning, even before Ramakantha’s opening verse. 

4 There might appear to be a disagreement between father and son on this point be¬ 
cause Narayanakantha on p. 3 of his Mrgendravrtti says that the upodghataprakaranam 
is sam ban dha bhidh eyaprayojan at an tra vatarakram anird artfan art, ham . Ramakantha 

i ft 

goes on to say that the pratijhasutra that is actually spoken by Siva himself Kirana 
l:llcd-12cd) is the appropriate place for the introduction and discussion of these es¬ 
sentials. This he refers to as the adisutra. On the opening of the Matahga Rama¬ 
kantha has this to say (p. 2): athanor ltyadi tat tan tram, kimsvarupo matahgah, 
paramegvaram api yenedam upalabhyate, kirn ca krtva, kutas ca tenaitad avaptam 
ity akanksavyavartanaya himavaty acala ityadi prakaranam. ‘What begins with the 
words athanor (2:1), that is the tantra; the passage (prakaranam) which begins with 
the words himavaty acale l:lff.) aims at removing uncertainties such as: what sort of 
a man is Matahga that he could obtain this [tantra] of the supreme Lord? and what 
did he do [beforehand] and where did he obtain it from?’ (It is in Matahga vidyapada 
2:1 that Ramakantha finds the statement of the samhandha , abhidheya , and so forth.) 

It is however also possible that because each tantra begins differently, each one 
requires different commentarial treatment. Thus there is no need to suppose a difference 
of opinion between Narayanakantha and Ramakantha. 

5 I have emended here because it is conventional to use the future to refer forward in 
the text, varnyamana(tvad) (R' v PiP 3 ) may well be the result of attraction to varnyate 
in the preceding sentence. Cf. Ramakantha’s introduction to the Matahgavrtti vidya¬ 
pada, pp. 2-3. anye tu prathamam evotsutram asya lakulamausaladibhyah ^ai vat vena 
vises am, tatrapi srotontarebhyo vamadaksinagarudabhutatantrebhyah siddhantataya 
varnayanti. tad ayuktam, sutrair evasyarthasya vaksyam an at vat. athopakrama- * 
gobhanartham avafyam eva prasahgam utpadya, utsutrataya kalakalah k ary ah. 
tad anyo ’ py anyatha bahutaram karisyatlti yat kimeid etat. tarhi sambandha- 
prayojanadlny atra vaktavyani. na. tany api yathakramarn sutrair eva vaksyamanarii 
yatah. tathapy adau pravrttihetutvena vyakhyatrbhir vacyanlti cet . satyam yadi sutra- 
karat tesam ati£ayah syat tatas tasyavyaptipariharaya te tany atra kathayeyuh ‘Now 
others at the very beginning [of their commentaries and] without regard to the sutras 




Chapter One 


! 63 


must be stated |by us commentators] at the beginning |not, just later on 

in the text itself], because they [provide] the motivation [to study the 

sastra]. [This is not so,] because there is no possibility of motivation 

|being generated! by naming them, as |there might be] in other gastras . 6 

This is because here jin this Siddhantasastra] (atra hi), from the moment 

that one [begins to] serve a guru (gurupasadanat prabhrti), one must 

ai t in all things (sarvatra) only in accordance with the guru’s command 

(guruvakyad eva) and not because of anything else, as we shall show . 7 

! 3 y saying that [Garuda] saw Him seated there, at the top (agra- 

pradetiah = sikharam) of Kailasa, this deity, who will be described 8 [as 

being] in a realm (mandala) above the worlds of Brahma and Visnu li.c. 

• * | 

in Rudraloka], is distinguished from the one who will be taught 9 to be in 
the midst of yog-ins . 10 Saying that He is with Uma (sahomaya vartate = 


(utsutrani) relate what differentiates this [book] from the Lakula, Mausala, or sim¬ 
ilar [texts] as being a Saiva (text), and from among these [Saiva texts differentiates it] 
from the other currents, tlie Varna, Daksina, Garuda and Bhuta tantras, as being a 
Siddhanta. This is wrong, for this matter will explained by the sutras themselves. If 
!i * ‘^T ruing the beginning [of the book] you must (avatfyam eva ) create 

an opportunity (prasangam utpadya) and make a great fuss irrelevantly (ufcsutrataya), 
then some other [commentator] in some other way will make even more fuss; this is all 
of no consequence. In that case [someone may suppose that at least] the connection 
l ^ ; 1 ' 1 !l It l g oc <' \p<. mi iu{<’< 1 now. No, because these too will be expounded 

m due course by the sutras themselves. You may say that commentators should teach 
them nevertheless, because they provide motivation. I bat may be so. If they should 
be superior to the author of the sutras [i.e. to Siva himself], then they should relate 
them here so as to make up for his deficiencies.’ 

Worldly tiastras nre what Ramakantha has in mind. A standard example would be 
tarkatastra., as in Matangavrtti vidyiipada, p. 3: natra tarkagastradiiv iva... 
uave not been able to locate the passage to which this refers. 

Kirana 8:89-90ab. tasmad urdhvam bhaved brahma kotitrayamitah khagaj t.ribhis 

ca kotibhir visnug caturbhiS ca harah st hi tali/ brahmandam urdhvatah kotih sthaulya- 
t ven a vyavasth it am . 

9 Kiranavrtti 1:9.48-50 and Kirana 8:121. 

■* 

’This assertion requires some clarification: which SrTkantha is speaking and from 
which Srikanthas is he being distinguished here and in 1:9.48-50, to which Rania- 
kantha here refers forward? Ramakantha s dismissal in the latter passage of Srlkantha 
the vidyefvara is clear, but whom does he mean by the one in the midst of vo gins ? The 
most probable answer is that he is the Srlkantha at the head of gunatattva , the eight 
worlds of which are called yogastaka (see Kirana 8:121), according to Ksemaraja because 
they are presided over by yogins: yoginam adhisthatrtvad yogastakam ( Svacchanda- 
tantroddyota ad 10:891). This identification is confirmed by a phrase of Ramakantha’s 
in the Matangavrni ad vidyapada 1.5:2, p. 368: grikauthanathasya gunaprakarane yogi- 
rnadhyasthatvena vaksyarnanatvat. It is this Srlkantha from whom Karttikeva hears 














164 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


jsomam]) distinguishes Him from [the ganesvaras , Nandikesvara and the 

the Sardhatrifatikalottara. The relevant passage in the Sardhatngatikalottaravrtti ad 
1:1.ab, has suffered in transmission, but the purport is clear: from each vocative of the 
verse Ramakantha makes inferences about the identity of the god and concludes (p, 3): 
tat as ca gunaparvavasthitasya foikanthanathasya sivasyaitat sambodhanam ity anena 
jnapyate, ‘And so it is made clear by this [vocative jagarpate] that this is an addiess 
to a Siva [called] Srlkantha who resides in the gun a section (of the universe].’ There 
then follows a dispute in the commentary about whether four vocatives are redundant, 
and four possible justifications for them are put forward, none of which Ramakantha 
accepts, for he declares (p.4 [7-8] ) purvaiva vyakhya yukta 'the earlier interpretation 
[i.e. that of p. 3 [1 ° 3 quoted above] is alone appropriate.’ Finally Ramakantha observes 
(p. 4^ 8-11 ]) that unlike the teacher of the Raurava, this Snkantha is not a pupil of 
An ant a, but of Siva, like Ananta himself. It is because the teacher of the Kir ana is 
described as seated on Kailasa that we know that he cannot be this Snkantha of guna- 
tattva* We can therefore assume that Ramakantha understands the Kir an a s teacher 
to be the same as the Srlkantha of the Matariga, who locates himself in vidy apada 
23:57c-58a: tatraham munisardiila lokanugrabakaranat j krtadhivasah. There [on the 
Jyotiska peak of Mount Kailasa) I have made my dwelling, tiger of a sage, for the sake 
of bestowing grace on the world.’ Ramakantha comments as follows: matarigamuni- 
gurur ayam Mkanthanathah svatmanah stbitidesam vyaparam ca dar say at i lokanu- 
grahakaranad iti. tenaham eva prapancavyaptya satyaiokad urdhvam a pi bhnvane 
lokanathataya purvapratipadito Wasthita ity arthah. 'This teachei, Lord Snkantha, of 
the sage. Matanga, reveals the place where he himself resit es and his activity [with the 
part of the text that begins] “for the sake of bestowing grace on the world". With this 
|verse| he conveys [the following] (. ..ity arthah): “It is I who am here [i.e. on Mount 
Kailasa] because of my pervasion of [lower] creation, [even t hough] I have been taught 
above [i.e. 23:45c-47] to be a Lord of the [seven] worlds [residing] in the world above 
[that of Brahma,] Satya as well.” ’ The same passage oi commentary (p. 5 1 ) makes 

clear which world this is: brahmandasyantah satyalokadyah sap fa lokah. tadurdhvam 
cordhvakatahabhittimadhyalagnam saptaJoketvarasya rudrasya bhuvanam . ‘Inside the 
egg of Brahma there are seven worlds, the first of which is Satya. And above them, 
fixed in the middle of the wall of the upper part oi the egg-shell, is the world of Rudra, 
the overlord of the seven worlds.' Thus the SnJ antha who teaches the Matanga and 
the Kirana is the lord of Rudraloka at the top of the egg of Brahma—the egg which 
contains all the worlds of the tattva of earth, the lowest of the Saiva principles—but 
while he teaches both Garuda and Matangamuni, he is seated much lower down, upon 

Mount Kailasa in our own world. 

*In fact the Svacchanda in 10:1005c-1008 describes a world in gunatattva called Su- 
carw shaped like Kailasa and the abode of [an] Umapati; but Ramakantha makes 
no reference to this—it might be ‘the same’ bJiuvana as that called Caru which 
Matangavidyapada 15:2 locates in avyaktat-attva. Ramakantha ( Mataiigavrtti ad 
vidvapada 1:4a, p. 6) allows two possible locations of Kailasa, but both are in prthivL 
tattva and in our own world: tatas tad himavadantarvyavasthitatvat kaiLisakhy amoiu- 
gikharam. yad va kagmlresu haramakutabhidhanam eva. And so because it is within 
ne [mountain range of] Himavat this is a peak of Meru called Kailasa. Alternatively 

it is a place in Kashmir called Haramakutad 




















Chapter One 


165 


1 1 

others, who are othcr| deitiejs |who might be referred to by the name 
Hara and who might be| seated on the peak of Mount Kailasa. 

Now someone ! atha... kagcit) might understand simply (eva) ‘the 
moon’ here by the word soma, following the general principle (nyayatah) 
that the conventional meaning [of a word] takes precedence ( apaliarati) 
over etymologically derived ones. That is why ( tadartham ) |the text qual¬ 
ifies this ‘Soma’ whom Garuda] saw [as) having the crescent moon on the 
headdress on His head. Furthermore [lie is called| Hara, because He takes 
( harati ) bonds from men [and takes] men to the place on high . 12 

The point [of using the word Hara] is that Tarksya saw his own 
guru [for a guru takes away bonds etc|. From this we understand that 
Garuda (asya) must have received the initiation that equips for libera¬ 
tion (nirvanadiksa), because [the text) will teach that the uninitiated do 
not have the entitlement to hear [scripture ]. 13 If the word ‘Hara’ were 
glossed according to conventional usage alone (rudhyaiva) as meaning the 
Lord of Uma, then it would be redundant, because it would add no new 
specification ( vyavacchedantarabhavat ), 14 and so it is exactly because it 
asserts [that I fara expresses] a meaning derived from its particular verbal 
root ( visistakriyayogabhidhanenaiva ) [viz. y/hr, ‘remove’] that the inter¬ 
pretation |we have advanced] is superior. 

~ -’ ~ ■ a - . _ _ | 

11 Listed, for example, in Mrgendr a kriyapad a 3:22c-23b: gun a nandimahakalagaja- 
vaktravrsabalah / skan domacan dan am an o vidyeg an ugatatvisah 

2 Cf. harati patiubhyah pas an pumso py urdhvam pad am tatas tu harah. ‘He takes 
bonds from bound souls and takes bound souls to the highest place.’ Quoted by 

Irgendravrtti ad vidyapada 1:1, p.4. 

Samayadiksa would not take the initiate to the urdhvam pa dam. Ramakantha 
must be ‘deducing’ from the use of the word ‘Hara’ that Garuda has received nirvana- 
dlksa, because although the reason he appears to give is that only initiates have the 
entitlement to hear scripture, this would not exclude the possibility that Garuda had 
received samayadiksa. Samayadiksitas would normally be entitled to hear scripture. 

The Kirana has only two verses not in a nustubh (and this phrase is not in either), 
so it is probably merely coincidental that the expression nadiksitanam gravanadhi- 
karah is an upajati pada (but cf. Mrgendravrttidlpika ad 1:1, p. U * [2] : . .. samasadita - 
dlksitaih iti, nadiksitanam gravanadhikara ity arthah . Jhanapraka^a, the author of 
the Sai vagamadimahatmyasahgrah a, understands it to be a prose paraphrase of what 
will be discussed in 10.17-20: tat ha kiranavrttau bhagavata ramakanthacarycna 'at a 
evasya nirvanadiksa sampanneti pratlyate. nadiksitanam gravanadhikara iti vaksyati ’ 
iti upakramya ‘yad avapya naras sarv a’ ity atra 'sarva iti brahmanah ksatriva.. .sarva- 

# -fe m fc/ 

padasyaniyatarthatvad iti vyakhyatam. (IFP T. 372, p. 1125 [ " _16] and IFP T. 1059. 
p. 33.) 

1 /J r 

The word somain has already told the reader that it is Uinapati whom Garuda 


sees. 













Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kir an at ant ra 

* m 


Furthermore, in the same place [in the verse] (atra ca), it is only 
through the power of his homage (pranamasamarthyad ova) that the sight 
of |Kara] is realised, and so it is not meant that having seen (drstva) 
Hara [he spoke these words preceded by praise], but rather (api tu) that 
he saw [Him] after praising Him (stutipurvam 15 ) and so (iti) the word 
stutipurvam is to be taken ( vyakhyeyam) as qualifying the verb 
does not qualify the ‘words’ [which Garuda spoke] ( vacovi&csanam) . And 
so (tatas ca) the meaning here is that Garuda said what follows [from 
verse 10] (idam vacanam vainateyo ’bravlt) after worshipping the Lord, 
who performs those particular actions [of removing bonds from men etc.] 
( vKistakarmayuktam)[. He worships Him] with the following praise of His 
deeds, starting with the slaughter of [the d ; o] Andhaka. Thus there is 

no problem [with the text). 

What |constituted] this eulogy which [took place] before [Garuda] saw 
[the Lord]? The reply to this [question] is as follows {tatrocyate): 


Victory [to you who showed] skih in split ling the 
knot 16 of the extensive shoulders of Andhaka! Victory, 
burner of the [triple] city occupied by those chiefs 
among heroes to whom a great boon [had been gran¬ 
ted]! (2) 

Victory [to you who are] fearsome, because of cutting 
off a head of [Brahma,] the overlord of all the gods! 
Victory, destroyer of the body of the god of love whose 
power is spread [everywhere]! (3) 

15 This interpretation is evidently important (presumably because the theop lany 
must be seen to be earned); Ramakantha reiterates it at 1:11.1 and Umapati- 
givacarya emphasizes the same theme in his avatarika to the opening verses of the 
South Indian Pauskara (p. 2): ... £rTkanthaparame£varat sanatkumaradayah kriyacarye 
upagrutya patyadisatpadarthasvarupanirupanatmakam jnanapadam upagrotukamas 
tatstutim eva mangalatvenabhimanyamanas tadabhimukhyam sampadayantah stuti- 
purvakam prcchanti. ‘Sanatkumara and the others, after hearing the kriya and carya 
|/;adas| from the supreme Lord, Srlkantha, [and] eager to hear the jhanapada which 
consists in a description of the nature of the six categories, starting with that of pati t 
and considering that praise of Him alone was as an auspicious preliminary [to hearing 
it|, they brought about His presence and asked Him (for the jhanapada] after [this] 

eulogy. ’ 

some versions of the mvth Andhaka had 1000 arms. The text of the verst, sug 
gests this, but it is not clear from the commentary whether Ramakantha also envisaged 
Andhaka thus. He talks of only two shoulders; but many arms might be attached to 

two shoulders. 































Chapter One 


167 


Victory, remover of the power of the Kalakuta poison 
which spoilt the body of Visnu! Victory, bearer of the 
force of the proud and turbulent river [Ganges] ! (4) 

Victory, deluder of the sages and their wives in the 
grove of the Daruvana! Victory, [you who are] fear¬ 
some because of the shaking [of the world] as a result 
of the vigorous playfulness of your dancing! (5) 

Victory, you who terrified the gods and the asuras by 
assuming your fierce form! Victory, you who showed 
a stream of blood in the mouths of the prince of the 
cruel ones, [Havana]! (6) 

Victory, destroyer of the sacrifice of Daksa through 
the ministration of VTrajbhadra]! 1 ' Victory, proud of 
your strength because of the form of the enormous 
and astonishing linga! (7) 

Victory to you who, for the sake of Sveta, destroyed 
the body of cruel Death! 1 * Victory [to you] who in¬ 
fatuated the daughter of the mountain [ f limavat] with 
love, which is the abode of all pleasures! (8) 

Victory, remover of the darkness that is the web of 
delusion and of the torment of Upamanyu! 19 Victory, 
burner of the worlds and of super-human [creation] 
from the base below the pataias upwards! (9) 

17 This interpretation of parispanda seems forced but follows the commentary. The 
Nepalese reading, vlrapariskanda (a variant spelling of -pariskanda) would translate 
more comfortably: Through your minion, VTra[bhadra]\ 

The version of the myth presupposed here is not that referred to in Mahabharata 
12.149:63, in which it is the son of Sveta (a rajarsi) who is restored to life (and in 
which Siva is not mentioned), but that of the Ur-Skandapurana (published as Skanda- 
puranasya Ambikakhanda -for the identification of this work with the original Skanda- 
purana see Adriaensen, Bakker, and Isaacson, 1994). Chapter 166 relates that the muni 
Sveta is due to die, but, because of his devotion, Siva saves him and ‘kills’ Yam a (whom 
he subsequently resuscitates). The story is related also in the Lingapurana in 1.30. 

19 According to the account of Mahabharata 13.14:86-199, Upamanyu stood for a 
thousand years on tiptoe, ate only fruit for a hundred years, then only fallen leaves, 
then only water, and for a further hundred years only wind. After this he received a 
theophany of Siva. (The story of Upamanyu's tapas and his reward by Siva is also 
related in adhyayas 34-5 of the Vayavlyasamhita of the Sivapurana.) 











168 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * l/ « 


You and you alone knew how 20 (panditah 



(vidaranam 


1 


to break 

hhcdah\) the complex knot (sannivesah = bandhah ) of 
the broad shoulders of the great demon, Andhaka. [The text has] this [in 
the| vocative: () Lord, who are thus jas above described] (tathabhuta) 
victory! And kirn ca) victory! Lord, burner of the three cities occu¬ 
pied by those chiefs among heroes who had a great boon granted them 
by Brahma (prakrsto varo brahmadatto yesam to, = pravarah). * 2] And 
[Garuda next] addresses Him (tasya sambodhanam) in His fearsome form 
(raudramurtih = bhayanakah )—[fearsome] because of the cutting off of 
a head of Brahma, the overlord of all the gods, [an episode] described in 
pnranas and in the epic and so on. 22 And |he further invokes Him thus: 
(kirn ca... iti) victory, Lord, destroyer of the body (tariram sthitih 
of the god of love (kamah — manmathah ) whose power is spread [every¬ 
where], for he seduces of the three worlds. ] I he expression] sthiti [is used 
to mean ‘body’), because [the body] is what enables enjoyment and the like 
(bhogadi 23 ) to continue. Furthermore (a pi ca) He took away ( apaharati) 
the force ( vegah [— balam]) 0 the Kalakuta poison, which is [figuratively 
called] the ruin ( dhvamsa) of the body of Visnu ( visnoh — acyutasya ), 
because it was the cause of ruining it ( tanudlivamsanahetutvat). Phis is 
related in the Vayupurana. 4 

Janardana, whose body [had been| pink and fair (rakta- 
gaurangah) was scorched and darkened krtah krsnah) by this 
poison as soon as it arose with the brightness of the fire [at 
the end of a cycle] of time. 


“Andhaka was difficult to overpower not just because of his thousand arms, but 
also because each drop of his blood that fell to the ground sprung up into a Raksasa. 
According to the version of the Haracaritacintamani (Prakaga No.5), Siva produced a 
fierce form of the Devi from his right ear, called Karnamota, who drank up Andhaka’s 
blood. 

The three asuras, VidyunmalT, Taraka and Kamala, to whom Brahma, as a reward 

for their tapas, granted three moving cities from which they held sway over the triple 

world. A more natural translation of pravarah would be ‘excellent’. 

22 _ 

itihasa usually refers to the Mahabharata, but, as von Stietencron (1969) has 
demonstrated, the myth of the cutting off of Brahma’s head is relatively late, and it is 
not actually attested there. The single attestation of the epithet bra h in agiropah art a (!) 

which Sorensen records (1904:154) has not been accepted in the critical edition of the 

Mahabharata. 

2 ^ 

“ l Perhaps ‘experience 1 and thus consumption of the results of action is rather what 
is meant; but in that case the adi may be redundant. 

Vayupurana 54:58. (Mitra’s text reads visenottisthamanena kalanalasamatvisa.) 

* • ■ ■ # / 






















































CImp ter One 


169 


lie is called balapalia, because He removes the powers (balani) of that 
[poison]. 25 [The text has] this [in the] vocative. 

And ( kirn ca) [the Lord is next addressed as] bearer of the force 
of the proud, turbulent stream of the river Ganges—[we know it to be 
the Ganges] from context, whose swift current is proud and extremely 
frightening because of its turbulence (paribhrainah = avartah). It is said 
( kihv 1 ' ) that the Lord himself bears on His head the great river, who is 
thus. No one else [does] and thus this is praise of His pre-eminence. 

And (kim ca) [the Lord is next addressed as) deluder of the sages and 
of their wives in the ascetics’ retreat (asramah — vdyanah ) in the Forest 
of Deodars (devadaruni = daruni). And in saying that, for some unknow- 


The text is suspect here, because this repeats the information of 1:9.9 10, kaia- 
kutasya vegas tain apaharatlti. 

26 The initial particle kila fits the sense well here, but Speijer (1886:311, Ij396) states 
that it is enclitic. Bbhtlingk and Roth {sub voce kila) allow that it occasionally occurs 
first, but the two examples they cite (from aged editions of the Ram ay an a and the 
Paficatantra) have little probative value. In none of the examples given in the articles 
on this particle by Emeneau (1969) and van Daalen (1988) does kila occur in the first 
place in a sentence. The reading of SbPg (kiheit krtva sv a° in place of R, v ’s kila) yields 
no sense, and it may be that the text here requires emendation, but lor the moment it 
is assumed that kila in first position is extremely rare, but not impossible. 

! >r. Harunaga Isaacson has pointed out to me (in a mislaid letter) that in his in¬ 
troduction to the first edition of the Gaiidavaho , S.P. Pandit, after speculating about 
whether the text's commentator, Haripala, was a Jain, writes thus (p.v): 

Besides the circumstance that he commented upon a Prakrit poem, and 
it is usually Jain scholars who do so—the only fact that might go to show 
him a Jain is his peculiar Jainish style, marked by such peculiarities, for 
instance, as the use of the particle kila at the head of a sentence, a use 
w inch, so far as I know, is onlv found in Sanskrit works by Jain writers. 

* * * */ hj 

An instance of such a sentence beginning with kila is to be found on p. 79, in the 
commentary on verse 263: kila parya u ka vi .^e so pa vis tavah &rTm ah adevvE nr pa varen ah hi- 

A * A * ■ tv g i/ r 1 m 

sekah kriyate antahpuravadhumadhye pradhanyasiddhaye. Unfortunately Pandit does 
not mention specific instances of this usage in other Jaina works. 

The KS I S has Narayanakantha use kila initially in the Mrgendravrtti ad yogapada 
1:54c 55b: kila niskalasvarupasya tavad bhagavatah svanijiam nirakaratve sati nlrupa - 
tvad dhyatum na sakyam. The sentence appears exactly thus in the Devakottai edition 
(ad 1:54) but for the omission of kila. Such a rare usage is liable to be purged bv well- 
meaning scribes and editors from the texts in which it occurs. 1 am aware of one 
other instance of a sentence-initial kila in a Kashmirian work of 6astra (also pointed 
out to me by Dr. Isaacson (in a letter of 5.x.97)): kila dvividho vedah— gruyamanah , 
an umiyaman a£ ca (Nyayamanjarl vol. 1, p. 631). 


















170 


Ram akant ha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• • */ m 


able ( kenapi ) reason , 27 He deludes the sages who had not conquered [the 
passions of] love, anger [and other base emotions] and their wives, praise is 
intended. Otherwise it would simply be abuse, for where is the praise [in 
that]? And victory, Lord, you who are fearsome ( bhlsana — daruna) be¬ 
cause of the shaking (viksobhah — anavasthitih) of the universe [which you 
bring about] by the exceptionally vigorous (maharambhalaksana) sport of 
your dance (nrttam), [viz.] the movement of |yourj limbs involving various 
expressive gesticulations and other [movements] ( vicitrabhinayadyatmako 
gatraviksepah) . Because of its uniqueness, [this must be a reference to] 
His sport which is |known as] the Tandava. And this is related |in the 


verse 


starting 


The earth shudders, the mountains burst, the oceans spill, the 
planets drop 28 [from their courses]... 


and ending 

May Hara protect us . 29 Here, when He dances, the triple 
world is out of control... 

The reason popularly adduced is that the ascetics had not conquered their passions 
and Siva, in response to Parvatf s encouraging him to reward them, demonstrated that 
they were not beyond base emotions when he seduced their wives. The emendation 
(from vijita 0 to avijita 0 ) is therefore necessary. The corruption can be easily explained if 
one assumes that the text has been transmitted at some point in time through Grantha 
to all the manuscripts. In much Grantha handwriting a and ka (which immediately 
precedes) are extremely similar. This is easily demonstrable: in 1:9.4, for instance, 
P 3 mistook Pi’s d ah aka he for daha a he. This confusion taken a stage further by a 
sort of haplography might easily result in the omission of the privative alpha here. 
The privative alpha is in any case, as Srinivasan (1967:40-1, fj 1.4.5.16) states and 
demonstrates, liable to get lost. 

28 ‘the birds plummet’ might have been a possible translation of 12 amanti khecarah; 
but the sinking of the planets appears to be a topos in descriptions of the Tandava, 
( f., for example, Mahimnastava 16b: padarn visnor bhramyadbhujaparigharugnagraha- 
ganam ‘The heaven (pacfam visnoh) has its clusters o: planets struck by your flailing 
arms [strong] as beams.* 

29 I have supplied no (vo would do equally well) to make this pada metrically equival¬ 
ent to the first. Hemacandra (Chan don u^asana 2.358), who calls this metre asvalalita , 
gives bha as the seventh gana which would mean that the prepenultimate syllable would 
have to be short. I could therefore adopt I Vs khacarah in the first pada and search for 
a new emendation of the last pada; but the insertion of no seems so plausible that I have 
been tempted to assume that this is simply a variant form of asvalalita. I lemacandra 
does indeed allow a variant for the seventh gana, but not the one we require (2.235.1): 
atra kccit saptamabhaganasthane jaganam icchanti. As Professor Hahn observed (in 
conversation), it is conceivable that the single ahsara that allows a variant pattern for 



















Chapter One 


171 


Furthermore ( kirn ca) He is addressed as (saw bodhanam) the one who 
terrified the gods and the demons by the assumption ( samrambhah ) of 
that fierce ( bhlsanam = ugram) form of Bhairava, 30 which is proclaimed 
in the epic and in the puranas to be sufficient (ghatate) to terrify |even] 
Uma, [in other words] by the acting out of gestures that are the terror 
of the universe. 31 Furthermore He is addressed as ( amantranam ) the one 
who showed a torrent which was blood (prapatah — sunirjharah 32 ) in the 
mouths of Ravana, the prince of raksasas (raksasam — krurajananam). 

And {kirn ca) victory to you, O Lord, who destroyed the sacrifice of the 
Prajapati 1 >aksa by despatching ( presanam = parispandah ) Vlrabhadra 

This is intended as praise [here]. 33 In other 


(virabhadrah 


virah) 


circumstances it would be reproach, because it [i.e. the disruption of a 
sacrifice] is reprehensible. 

And victory, Lord, who are superior even to Brahma and Visnu and 
the other gods ( brahmavisnvadibhyo ’pi satigaya — garvita ) because of 
the unbearable 1-rightness ( tejaso ’sahyatvam = balam ) of that particular 
form, that is to say the form of fire, ( akaravi§eso jvaiatmakah — sam- 
sthanam ) of the great, extraordinary { agcaryabhutam = adbhutarn) lihga 


this gana could have been corrupted. Such a corruption would be undetectable since no 
example of a verse following this scheme is given. Thus we might tentatively advance 
that Hemacandra wrote raganam icchanti, thus sanctioning the metrical pattern we 
have here. Whatever emendation is made to the verse here quoted, it is clear that both 
R and the codices from the P group have transmitted a hypometric pada, and this is 
a strong indication that the extant manuscripts all descend from a single archetype. 

30 * * 

P 3 alone transmits yad bhairavakaram rupam , but I do not think that this calls 
the stemma into question. The correction from Pi is not difficult to arrive at. 

■> i t _ . 

jagattrasalaksanabhinaya may be the name of a particular conventional dance- 
gesture. This is further suggested by the use of the word anukara. 

"The eva appears to mark a karmaclharaya relation in the compound. 1 know of no 
myth about Ravana that this verse could be said obviously to refer to. It is probable 
that Ramakantha thought of Siva’s crushing Ravana with his toe when Ravana shook 
Mount Kailasa. It is also conceivable that Ramakantha thought of Ravana cutting 
off nine of his ten heads and being rewarded by Siva when he was on the point of 
cutting off his tenth. ; ne might question that the verse is intended to refer to Ravana 
at all, but TryambakaSambhu also interprets it thus in a similarly unhelpful passage 
of commentary: krurajananam (°nam em.; nama IFP T. 1102) raksasanam indro raja 
r a van as tasyasyani mukhani tesu dargito 'srksunirjharo rudhirapravaho yena sa tat ha 
(IFP T. 1102, p.5 [10 ~ 12] ). 

! >aksa had failed to invite Siva to his sacrifice and so Siva was justified in destroying 











172 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm 1 / • 


which pervades all the three worlds. This is related in the Vayupurana 
and in other works: 34 

Brahma and Visnu and the other gods saw arisen from 


nowhere that astonishing linga of fire by which the entire 
verse of] moving and unmoving [beings] was pervaded. 


uni- 


And victory. Lord, you who were the destruction of the fierce body of 
death on behalf oi the great sage Sveta and (a pi ca) by whom Gaurl (- 
sailaja) was infatuated with love, which is the seat (sthanam = avasah) 
of all pleasure (ahhirateh - sukhasya). By thus saying (iti) that even the 
god of love is in His power, or that Gaurn the empress of the universe, 
desires Him, praise is intended. 

Furthermore He is addressed as ( tasya sambodhanam) the one who re¬ 
moves (harati) from Upamanyu the bodily torment induced by asceticism 
(tapojanitasanraklamah = santapah) and [who removes] that darkness 
that is the web of delusion, which consists in five kinds of misapprehen¬ 
sions ( pancavidhaviparyayatmakairr °) [and is called darkness] because o 
the predominance in it of [the guna of] tamas (tamovrttitvat). 

And what else (kim canyat)? The root of the patalas [i.e. below them] 
is the world of Kalagni, 36 above that is the world ( lokah ), [viz.| living 
beings ( bhutasamuhah ), which are of six kinds, from plants through to 
men (sthavaradimanusyantab) . 3 ' The non-world ( alokah ) is that which is 
different from [the world) ( tadvilaksanah ); [it consisists in] the eight-fold 
super-human creation from Pisacas to Brahma (pisacadipitaniahantah). 
This is taught by the Sankhyas: 39 


34 Not traced. Chapter 55 of the Vayupurana recounts the lingodhhava myth but 
does not contain this verse, nor have I come across it in the V&y&vTyasamhita of the 

' V V < 

Sivapurma, in wliich Bhatt (Matahga vol.l, upodghata p.xlv) mentions having traced 
some of the quotations attributed in the Matangavrtti to the Vayupurana. 

5 tamomohamahamohatamisrandhatarnisrasainjnah panca viparyayavi&esah. Vacas- 
patimi^ra ad Sahkhyakarika 47. 

It would be more natural to interpret patalamula to mean the narakas which are 
directly below the patalas. (For the nether reaches of the universe see, e.g., Raurava- 
sutrasangraha 4:2-3.) Ramakantha instead takes it to refer to the bhuvanaof Kalagni- 
rudra which is at the very bottom, below the narakas. 

pagumrgapaksisansrpasthavarah Vacaspatimi^ra ad Sahkhyakarika 53. 

Q Q 

brahman prajapatya aindrah paitryo gandharvo yakso raksaso paisaca ity as t avid ho 
daivah sargah. Thus Vacaspatimisra ad Sahkhyakarika 53. 

Qi Q 

Sahkhyakarika 53. Gaudapada and Vacaspatimisra read manusatf caikavidhah and 
Gaudapada reads sarnasato ’yam tridha. ! lie Yuktidlpika has tairyagyonas ca and 































Chapter One 


173 


o 



usion 


Celestial [creation] is of eight kinds, that of animals is of five 
and that of humans is of one kind. This is material creation 
in a nutshell. 

i * * 

|Siva is addressed as] burner of [all] this (creation]. This by implication 
means ity upa.laksa.nam) victory, Lord, you who perforin [the five krtyas 
of] establishment, preservation and resorption [of the universe|, 
of creatures through] existence (bhava .. and compassion. 40 

With ‘victory!' ( jayeti ) [he means that; He is victorious ( jayaty eva ) 
because it is this Srlkanthanatha whose prerogative ( adhikarat ) it is [to 
perform these tasks]. And so through these praises in the form of a eulogy 
of sixteen heroic deeds of the Lord Srlkanthanatha, [Garuda has] a vision 
of the same |SrTkantha] and not of the one recited in the lists among the 
yogins or among the vidyesvaras. This is what is demonstrated [in the 
above verses]. And this eulogy is to be found drsta) only with this many 
heroic deeds ( etavadbhir eva apadanaih), not with others too like that 
of bestowing the cakra [on Visnu] or the carrying of GaurT in half of his 
body. 11 [ The words of the verses can be interpreted in transferred senses: 

manusyaS caikavidhah. The same verse is quoted by Ramakantha in the Mataiigavrtti 

ad vidyapada l:16ab and G:93 and in the SardhatriSatikalottaravrtti ad 8:2ab. 

* 

°Cf. AghoraSiva’s TattvaprakaSavrtti ad verse 1: an ugrahas catropalaksanain 
srstyadcr a pi. ataS ca srstisthitisamharatirobhavanugrahakhyaih pancabhih krtyaih 
sarvesam atmanain bhogamoksaprada ity arthah. ‘And compassion here by implication 
refers also to creation etc. and therefore the meaning is that he gives [the opportunity 
for] the consumption of harm an and [for] release to all souls through his five activities 
known as creation, preservation, resorption, occlusion and compassion.’ 

Ramakantha’s wording here deliberately echoes that of the locus classicus, Raurava- 
sutrasangraha 1:15a, s t h itisarn raksan ad an abha van ugrah akarin ah There the word is an 
epithet of the eight vidyesvaras from Ananta to Sikhandin. (In Rauravasutrasangraha 
!: 13 they are actually called vidyamaheSvaras; sometimes [e.g. Kirana 4:10a] they are 
referred to as mantreg[var]a$ } though this is confusingly also the name of a lower class of 
being.) The reading ° adanatirobhava 0 in P looks like an explicatory gloss which makes 
more immediately obvious that this is a list of the five krtyas. Another clarificatorv 
substitution that readily suggests itself is that of srsti for sthiti , and indeed it is with 
this substitution that i appears when cited in Aghorasiva s Ratnatrayapariksollekhini 
ad verse 27, but not in the Mrgendravrttidlpika ad 1:22, p.50. 

41 

It is not clear to me whether Ramakantha means that the number of apadanas 
is significant, nor, if he docs, why. Somdev Vasudeva has suggested to me that the 
opening of the Kirana- indeed its very title—is replete with lunar symbolism (the first 
verse might even, with ingenuity, be interpreted to refer to the moon above Kail as a) 
and thus the number of apadanas might have been chosen to correspond to that of 
the kalas. It is conceivable that other numerological patterns were intended: the two- 















174 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm f/ * 


Andhaka is he who blinds and is therefore mala. 12 His broad shoulders are 
the powers that restrict higher and lower knowledge. Bondage by them 
is the restriction of souls’ [powers of] action and knowledge. The text 
addresses Him who is adept at splitting this knot by means of 111 is grace 
that takes the form of| dTksa. In this way some interpret ( vyacaksate ) 
this Ipraise] of the Lord here throughout in a secondary, transferred sense 
(gaunalaksanikaya vrttya) as praise of the functions to be performed by 

shouldered Andhaka is followed by the demons of the three cities, the cutting off of a 
head of Brahma, rendering him four-headed, and the destruction of the five-arrowed 
god of love. At this point the counting breaks down or is unrecognisable, and the only 
other obvious numerical symbol, the ten-headed Ravana, appears in eleventh place. 
The only parallels known to me of such ornamental counting in mangala verses are 
from Tamil Saiva literature. The Tirumantiram, for example, begins: 

onravan rane -y- irantavan innarul 

” 1 - * 1- “' %/ * m m 

ninrauan munrinuj nankunarntan aintu 
venranan aru virintanan elumparc 
cenranan ran iruntan unarntette 

‘One is He; two his sweet grace; in three He stood; in four [Vedas (?)] he felt; five 
[senses/ pancakrtya] he conquered; six [adhvans (?)] he spread; the seven worlds he 
pervaded (cenracan); he remains manifesting [?] (unarntu) the eight.’ 

Here the numbers have theological significance; but in this opening verse of the Civa- 
nanacittiyav, as in the Kir an a, they do not; that they are no more than ornamental is 
suggested by the fact that the counting is playfully incomplete because of the use of 
homonyms for numbers used not in the sense of the numbers they resemble: 

oru kottan iruccviyaij mummatattan nalvay ainkarattan aru- 
tarukottarnpiraiyitalittalcataiyao rarum oru varanattin ralkal 
urukdttanpotum vananki ~v- ovate -y- iravu pakal unarvor cintait 
tirukottum ayan rirumal ceivain um ooio -v- eunac ceyyun teve 

‘The god [Gane^a] will drive away the evils of the mind and make to think Ts even 

I um) the wealth of Brahma and Visnu [still] something [worth striving for]?’ for those 
devotees (unarvor) who night and day, ceaselessly, with melted, flowing love worship 
the feet of the one elephant who has one tusk, two ears, three secretions, a broad 
mouth,* five limbs, whom the one who bears the river** [Ganges], the beautiful am) 
curved line [of the crescent moon], and the flower on His high matted locks gave [as a 
son).’ 

^Because of its position in the sequence, we expect naivay to mean ‘four-mouthed’ 
(as indeed it could); but the sense required is ‘wide-mouthed’ (compare the Sanskrit 
pancamukha). 

**aru means ‘river’ here, and its other meaning, ‘six’, though not built into the 
message of the verse, continues the sequence of numerals. 

42 1 have again read with P 3 against the stemma because I assume that Pi’s error was 
sufficiently obvious for both P 2 and P 3 to see through. R v s may have a corruption of 
the slightly amplified yo ’nyam andhayatity andhako. 

































Chapter One 


175 


diksa . They must explain why one should abandon the obvious sense 
and create unobvious ones, 4 for [to do] so without any reason would be 
to confuse secondary and primary meanings everywhere and [would result 
in] total incomprehension of words and sentences. This [same idea] has 
been taught [elsewhere with the half verse): 


We do not allow passing beyond the primary meaning of a 
word without any motive for doing so. 45 

J Q 

Mythological tales such as those adverted to in the verses above do not have an 
important place in the Saiva Siddhanta, which is primarily a soteriological system, 
rryambakaiambhu in his commentary also explains the literal and immediately appar¬ 
ent meaning of the verses (which he prefaces [IFF T. 1102 , p. 3 1 10 — 11 1 ] with tavad iyarn 
[sciL stutih ?] aparavisayataya vyakriyate) before stating that the entire eulogy is to be 
understood metaphorically. (The metaphorical interpretation he prefaces [p. 32^ 10- 11 '] 
with atheyam (ein.; atha ayam MS) eva parama£ivavisayataya vyakriyate.) Rama- 
kantha accepts the interpretation that they constitute a eulogy specifically of that 
w'hich is to be performed by initiation. Tryambaka^ambhu makes no such declaration, 
but, unlike Ramakantha, he does make explicit the metaphorical interpretation he gives 
to each myth, and these are similarly soteriological: akhiletyadi: akhilasurasuranam 
Igaiiah sada£ivas, tasya giras (em.; tirasas MS) tirodhanakarikutilakhya va gaktis, 
tacchede bhayanako mahastrarupT. jaya prathitetyadi prasiddham: prathanain sar~ 
janam iti sargah; samarthyam a n ugrah arupini £ajv£i[h]; manmatho mananam j nan am 
mathnatiti tirobhavah; sthitih pal an am; vinagah samhrtir ity etani pahca sukrtani 
vasyasa tatha, jayacyuta ityadi: acyutatanur f arnanikaya]kayah, tarn a pi dhvarnsayati 
yah kalah—pratiksanam avasthantaram kalayatiti kalah—sa eva durbhedyatvat kiita 

%/ * * * i> A * v »' i*/ m 

iva kutah. tasya baiam avasthantaraprapanasaktih. tarn paramamrtasyandanena 
yoginam apaharatiti tatha. jayavartetyadi: atra sarit: sarati jagadrupe prasaratiti 
sarit mayagaktih. tasya vegah pravail ah kaladikramena jagadrupataya parinamah. 
avartam pun ah punah parivartanena cakravat paribhramam. tena atopah adambaro 
vividhavigesanavasthanam yasya tarn vidharayati nirodhayati; muktatmanam prati na 
punah samsadhayatlty art hah. jaya daruvanetyadi: dayati khandayati parasiddhantam 
iti daravah sahkhyadayas; tesam vanain samilhas; tadd ar$an an is than am ramamya- 

■■ v v r # # * / « a 

tvad udyanam van am; tatra mu nay as tatkartaras; tesam patnyo (em.; patyo MS) 
buddhayah —patati sarvatra gacchatlti patnT buddhir ucyate. tatra virnohayati malani 
karotfti tan yatharthajhaninah sampadayatlty arthah. (IFF T. 1102 p.6^^-8^). 

44 It is possible that R N transmits an amplified text here and that we should read 
with P: tair aprasiddhasya ca kalpane kim Far an am. The ca however then appears 
redundant, and 1 have therefore assumed that P's shorter reading is to be explained 
by eyeskip and subsequent 'correction 1 . 

A E _ 

The same unlabelled half verse is quoted by Ramakantha in the Matahgavrtti ad 
vidyapada 3:20, and, as Bhatt there points out, in the Hetubmdutfka (p. 12). 













176 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm 1/ i 


The creation of unobvious meanings is (eva) appropriate, because the 
subject of eulogies in such [other Siddliantas| as the Raurava 46 is the 
Supreme Siva and because having the crescent moon as His diadem and 
such is impossible, since in Supreme Siva there is no corporeality. Thus 
there is no problem (with this interpretation]. 

And what, it is asked, did Garuda say after his eulogy and after he 
then saw [the Lord]? To this question the reply [is as follows] 


Tell me, a fearful devotee, the supreme knowledge of 
Siva, on attaining which all men reach absolute re¬ 
lease. (10) 


|He is referred to as] a devotee of the Lord (sevakah — hhaktah), be¬ 
cause he is devoted [to the Lord] ( bhajatlti ) and fearful, because he fears. 
Although the danger of repeated rebirth has been removed by dlksa , nev¬ 
ertheless regular obligatory rites, those which are obligatory on particular 
occasions and other such [post-initiatory observances enjoined by scrip¬ 
ture] still have to be performed, because they are [scripturally] enjoined. 
There is fear even now [after dlksa] of repeated rebirth in case these [rites] 
should not be performed or be wrongly performed, as is taught [in the 
following half verse]: 47 


If someone transgresses the command [of Siva after receiving 
initiation] it is taught that he will become a Hisaca for a hun¬ 
dred years. 


Thus there is no problem [with the text]. And so [he says) (...iti) just 
as, out of compassion, you bestowed on me, a fearful devotee, your grace, 
called dlksa , before, so now tell me i he teaching (sastram - jnanam) which 
is associated with the omniscient Lord who is the cause o the supreme 

46 Rauravasutrasahgraha upodghata. (I am grateful to Dr. Isaacson for pointing 
out in a letter oi 5.x.97 that this is the structure of the argument, and that grlmad- 
rauravadau does not label the preceding quotation.) 

a _ _ _ 

' This is cited in the MrgendravrttidTpika ad 1:2, p. 14, and attributed to the Raurava 
but is not to be found in the printed edition. Aghora&va also cites it in the Tattva- 
sahgrahatika (ad verse 38) without attribution. Ramakantha cites it in the Matanga- 
vrtti ad vidyapada 5:Gab and ad Kirana 5:27 and in both cases attributes it to the 
Pauskara . Cf. Sardhatri£atikalottara 25:2cd: samayollanghauat proktam kravyada- 
tvarn tfatam samah. Cf. also Jayaratha’s Tantra/oicaviveka ad 23:98cd, and 14:18c-19b 
where he quotes this with samayollahghanad devi as the first pada and attributes it to 
the lost A nan d agah vara t antra. 

























Chapter < )ne 


177 


good (sarvajnasya bhagavatah srcyohetoh — sivasya) in as much as it is 
His effect and in that it is He who is attained [through it] (prapyatvena ). 48 
By the word givajriana the [teachings of the] Kaulas, Mahavratas and 
jBasupatas and] so on are excluded ( kaulamahavratadinirasah ), because, 
like those of the Vai^esikas and others, they were not created by the 
omniscient [Lord], for they do not have everything as their subject (asarva- 
visayatvena ). 49 The distinction of this knowledge of Siva from the other 
streams of the Varna, Daksina, Garuda and Bhuta tantras [is taught] by 
the word ‘supreme 5 (param). tor these, although they were created by 
Siva, are lower (aparatvat), because they are principally concerned with 
[the attainment of ] supernatural powers (siddhipradhanatvena) . 50 

An objection might be raised that (nanu. ..iti) scriptures ( jnanani) 
like the Vedas would in the same way be supreme ( parani ), [because 
they are] composed by Siva in [various lower] forms well known as 
Hari, Hara, Hiranyagarbha and others ( hariharahiranyagarbhadyatmaka- 
prasiddha£ivakrtani . 51 This is wrong, for they are not proved to have 
been created by Siva, since they teach a liberation which is other than 
the state of being Siva. For their having impurity (samalatvam) is what 


makes souls not Siva. Being devoid of this [impurity] is the state of being 


oi one who is separate and this is the condition of being Siva. And [these 
other scriptures] teach that in liberation [souls attain) a state of separa¬ 
tion [in which they are still joined] with mala (malakaivalyam) because 
they have not discerned the nature of mala ( malasvarupasyaparicchedat ), 
and it is impossible to remove what has not been discerned. [By Garuda’s 
saying] ‘tell [me] the knowledge on attaining which all men reach absolute 
release 5 , he thereby excludes the Vedas and other £ as tr as. fThc word ‘ah' 


18 Cf. 2:33.4-8 and 3:14.1. 

49 Siva alone, because he created everything, knows how to describe everything. 

50 The twenty-eight scriptures of the Saiva Siddhanta constitute the fifth stream, the 
urdhvasrotas, which, according to Saiddhantikas, issued from the uppermost face of 
SadaSiva, and which is concerned primarily with liberation. The Siddhantas may also 
teach supernatural powers (they are the subject, for example, of Kirana 50), as Raraa- 
kantha implies in 1:12.3 4 below, but black magic and the acquisition of special powers 
are, from Ramakantha’s perspective, relatively worldly and inferior pursuits. 

Of. Nare£varaparTksapraka£a ad 1:1, p. 2: anena darganantarasiddhanam hari- 
harahiran yagarbhadlnam is vara tw pi asan karat vat na preksavantah p an k say am prav- 
artanta iti darsayati. By this [word Sankara] is meant that although Hari, Hara and 
Hiranyagarbha and others arc gods (l^varatvc pi), because they are not Sankara (i.e. 
because they are not salvific] they do not engage in investigation [of truth] with [true 
vision (preksavantah). This [Sadyojyotih] will show.’ 










178 


Rarnakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


(means] (iti) ‘Brahmins, Ksatriyas, VaiSyas, Sudras and even foreigners 
and others’. 52 [But] only those entitled to hear scripture |are intended! 
(grutyadhikarina eva 53 ) [i.e. dTksi £ as |. The point at issue is that Garuda 
is entitled |to hear scripture], because the meaning of the word ‘all’ is 
restricted [by context], f 54 As has been taught: 55 


The meaning, the context, the gender and the proximity of 
another word are taught to be the factors which particularise 
the scope of general words. 


52 This is metrical and may be a quotation. 

53 

'‘ It would also he possible to take Srutyadhikarina eva as a genitive phrase agreeing 
with garutmato. The passage may be corrupt. Following JnanaprakaSa’s quotation 
(see apparatus) but emending aniyatartha 0 to niyatartha 0 } we might translate as fol¬ 
lows:.‘[But] only those entitled to hear scripture [are intended], since the meaning of 
the word “all” is restricted, because the context is [that of the question of| Garuda’s 
entitlement... ’ 

5 4 

When Ramakantha expresses views on caste elsewhere, he takes a restrictive and 
orthodox line, e.g. discussing those whom an acarya should initiate ad Sardhatri- 
Satikalottara 8:7d, p. 65: svapacan api dlksayed ity atisayarthah. apiSabdopa- 
hitasya bhavasya ‘api par vat am Sir as a bhindyad’ ltyadav iva parati£ava-(emended from 
pare ’tiSaya-)-prat ipadanar that ven a vidhivisayatvasambhavad iti Sir as a parvatabheda- 
van mlecchaSvapacadidlksanam atrapi kartavyam cveti vuktarn vyakhyatum. na tu 
kulacaryair iva balat kartavyam iti. ‘He might even inititiate untouchables (Sva¬ 
pacan). This is hyperbole. Just as in expressions like “He might even split a mountain 
with his head”, the action (bhavasya), preceded bv the word “even” (apiSabdopa- 
hitasya ), is intended to convey the exceptionally special nature (paratiSaya [of the 
diksa (and of the head?)] and so [the sentence] cannot have an injunction as its subject 
matter [as sentences in the optative can have]. Thus (iti) it would be correct to inter¬ 
pret the initiation of foreigners and untouchables might even be performed, just as the 
splitting of mountains with one’s head [might be performed]”; not as the acaryas of the 
Kula [would interpret] “it must be performed.” 1 am not happy with this translation 

and have doubts about the transmission of the text here, but Rarnakantha’s attitude 

■ * 

seems clear. His interpretation is closely echoed by AghoraSiva in his DviSatikalottara- 
vrtti (Trivandrum MS 4509, ff. Hi' ^^-16^^), where it is clear that hyperbole is indeed 
intended because the text reads sthavaran api diksayet. The stress on the word api 
in Rarnakantha’s interpretation may well have prompted Abhinavagupta to leave out 
that particle when he quoted this same pada in Malinivijayavarttika 1:194—7. 

Here Ramakantha seems to be saying that all people could be adhikarins, but the 
scope of reference of the word ‘all’ is limited by the context; in other words it cannot 

because we are talking about Sivajnana and only initiates are entitled 

to hear this. 

V akyapadiya 2:315cd and 316cd. These two half lines are also quoted in the same 
form (but with °smrti° for °sthiti°) and in the same order by Ramakantha in the 
Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 2:2, p. 22. Rail’s critical text of the Vakyapadlya reads 
Sabdarthasyanavacchedc for pada c and °smrti° for °sthiti° in pada d. 























Chapter One 


179 


And so this question is to be understood as [a request] for an understand¬ 
ing of the knowledge (£astra) of the kind described jin the above verse| by 
Garuda, who, in spite of being initiated, does not know the particularities 
of the sastra. | ft is] not [that Garuda is] knowledgeable [and asks with 
some other motive 06 ]. 

Now the reply [is introduced with] 


Addressed in this way, Hara, His moon diadem quiv¬ 
ering intensely, 57 replied: (llab) 

The Lord Srlkantha replied, His moon diadem quivering intensely 
(viscsena [= vi-|), because His head had started to shake on account 
o! His astonishment [after He had been] asked by Garuda—after the vis¬ 
ion which was preceded by the eulogy 58 —for that knowledge (gastrarn). 
because of Garuda’s displaying his ignorance about the sastra (dastravi- 
sayavivekapradartfanatah). And what He replied is taught: 

Hear the good knowledge you have asked for 59 
that gives great advancement, the great tantra 
( mahatantram ) called the Ray (~ kirana ), which 
grants supreme, eternal happiness, bestows compas¬ 
sion on all, is pure and clearly expounds the topics 
(padariha-) [of the tantra], (11c—12) 

Listen, ! shall teach (, grnucyate ) that knowledge (sastra) which brings 
about [that highest] good that is different from the fruits of all other 
sastras ( sakalanya$astraphalavilaksana£reyahsadhakam — b had ram) [and! 
which you requested to hear when you said “Tell me...” 60 This is the 
promise [of the tfastra]. And therefore, because the word bhadra itself 
serves as an auspicious beginning (mangaladyarthatvat), there is no fault 

{* c 

It is a common conceit that the questioner knows the answers, but asks that others 
too may learn, as, for example, the Devi does in the Svacch an da tantra 1 : 4 c— 7 . 

5 7 a i 

All but the Nepalese manuscripts, A 2 and TryambakaSambhu read pra- for vi-; 
but the gloss in 1 : 11 . 2 , vigesena sph uraccan dragekh arah (PiP 2 ), shows that this is how 
Ramakantha read. 

"p 'V 

5«8 * * m 

J It is possible that stutipurvadarganapurvakam (P r P 2 ) is an explanatory amplifica¬ 
tion of an original stutipurvakam (R v ), but I have assumed an accidental contraction 
to have resulted in the latter. 

59 Thus Ramakantha; perhaps more natural would be ‘You have asked a good ques¬ 
tion. Hear the great tantra that... \ 

69 Kirana 1:10. 











180 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

4 • V W 


in not using the word atha here or from [ignoring] other such [conventions), 
even though this is the first sutra [proper of the work]. 61 And it is that 
from which [arises] great advancement ( udayah), which consists in super¬ 
natural powers ( siddhilaksano ). and which is unbeatable by the powers 
[taught in] other schools [of soteriology] (mahams ca ... 



... yas mat 

mahodayarn] ). By this is taught an aim (prayojanam) of the Sastra. 
And so, because it illumines such a matter, it is taught to be called 
the ray [=Kirana\. And it is [referred to as] great, because it was au¬ 
thored by the supreme Lord. By saying that it is a tantra its authority 
as scripture] (pramanyam) is taught, because a sastra is authoritative 
as scripture] only because it is a creation of the Lord, not because it is 
unauthored [as the Mlmamsakas assert in the case of the Vedas], since 
that is impossible. For a work cannot be without (na vyabhicarati ) an 
author. 62 [The happiness which it grants] is both supreme { par am ), be¬ 
cause it pervades all objects, and imperishable (avinasvaram = amrtam), 
and thus [the use of the qualifying expression] paramrta [ -supreme and 
eternal). That happiness (sukiiam) is absolute fullness (para paripurnata), 
that is to say a becoming manifest of [innate) omniscience and omnipo¬ 
tence. That [the .<ast 2 'a] ‘gives' that (happiness] is a way of saying (ity 
arthah) that it makes it manifest, 63 in as much as it is the means thereto 
(upayafcvena). So this is another aim [of the £astra], namely liberation. 
Now the connection ( sambandhas tu) [between the topic ahhidheya) and 
the aim ( prayojana) of the sastra], which is such as exists between between 
means and end ( upayopeyatvadilaksanah) , is here plain from the context 
(arthasiddhah) . All devotees, Brahmins and the rest, it gathers to itself 


61 See below 1:12.20-1 for citations of the ‘first * 1 sutras of other tantras beginning with 
the auspicious atha. 

j? rj 

I he lapidary quality of this statement and its being followed by an iti suggest that 
it might be a quotation; but probably the iti merely marks that it is a frequently re¬ 
hearsed argument: Ramakantha often makes the point but always with slightly different 
wording, e.g. in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada l:30cd-33ab, p. 18: racana glokadivat 
kartarain na vyabhicarati yatah ; ad 3:18-19, pp. 66-7: na cakrtaka agamah sarnbhavati 
racanavattvad abhinavakaviviracitavakyavat. racana hi kartarain na vyabhicarati ; and 
ad Moksakarika 147cd -148ab: vcdadinam api racana kartaram na vvabhicarati. 

Ramakantha is at pains to stress that the text upholds abhivyaktivada , the doctrine 
that souls’ innate omniscience and omnipotence are innate and simply made manifest, 
in spite of the use here of the expression -sukhapradam, an expression which implies 
that these qualities are given to souls. Cf. footnote 186 on p. 220. 

A A 

’ The first prayojana was mentioned in 1:12.3-4, where Ramakantha glossed 
mahodayarn. 



















Chapter One 


181 


(svlkarakam = grahakam) after (pa^cat = anu) the descent of [Siva’s] 
power (sarvesam... svikarakam [— sarvanugrahakam]). But without the 
descent of [Siva’s] power, even being born as a Brahmin does not by itself 
make one a more especially entitled recipient [of salvific knowledge]. This 
is the meaning (ity arthah). 

The word ‘beautiful’ (Jubhram) [is used of the tantra,] because it has 
the beauty of [all] the four padas which are going to be taught; it is not dis¬ 
rupted and dispersed so that it is meaningless, and so this [word subhram] 
expresses the special nature of the tantra. By ‘categories’ (padarthah) is 
meant the six groups of entities that are going to be taught, st arting with 
the bound soul. By saying that [the tantra] illuminates these [categor¬ 
ies] the topic ( abhidheya -) of the tantra ( asya) is expressed. Saying [that 
it does so] ‘clearly’ (sphutam) distinguishes it from other samhitas, for 
these illuminate the categories without clarity, and therefore they do not 
render [the Kir ana] redundant (agatarthatvam). This is what is meant. 
And with this the gastra's purposes, topic, connection [between the topic 
and the aim of a sasfcra], those entitled to hear it, its scriptural authority, 
the fact that it is not redundant, and its nature 65 have all been taught. 

This is the first sutra iadisutram ), which comprises the promise [or 
first statement of the themes of the sastra], for the first sutra [of a tantra] 
is [invariably] like this (evamrupatvat), as in the Raurava: 66 


And now (atlia) the one who is without beginning, middle and 
end... 


and in the Matahga: 67 

And now (atha) the ladder of the bonds of a soul... 

[The next verse starting] ‘Souls, bonds... 5 is not [the promise of the 
gastra], because it is a subsequent sutra (uttarasutratvat), for it is the 
promise [or first statement] of other topics which were hinted at by this 
[first] sutra, as we shall show [in the commentary thereon]. 

Now some people object that the naming of the connection, [the pur¬ 
pose, the topic of the ^astra] and so on (sarubandhadlnam) is not to 

rf, instead of the conjecture svarilpaga£ar£hatva°, P 3 ’s svarupamahgaladyarttha - 
tva° were read, it might translate ‘that the meaning of its first [word] is auspicious, 
and its nature’. 

Rauravasutrasahgraha 1:1a. 

y _ _ 

Matahgavidyapaaa 2:1a. 














182 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


be done, because [lue text is] authoritative [as divine scripture]. To this 
objection someone gives answer that it should be done as in ordinary 
matters {loka iva), because it ;i.c. not naming them] might still be a 
source of doubt,. 68 1 iiis is [the] wrong [answer], because it is not proved 
that this is merely a naming [of the topic and so on] in the case of this 


sutra, as |it would be| in sZastras about [something worldly like] logic 
(tarka) or in everyday speech. This scriptural authority (etad agama- 
rupam pramanam ) was created by the supreme Lord, so ( iti ) how could 


its subject matter be doubted? For a valid source of knowledge (pra- 
manasya), in that it has the nature of a determination of the things it 
makes known (svaprameya), results in the cessation of doubt about its 
own objects (tadvisaya-). That is why [the objection] should be answered 
[by saying that this pramana itself] is an authoritative statement ( niscaya ) 
of its connections, [topic, aim] and so on [and with no other answer] (eva). 

Now {atha) what is the beauty (, gubhratvam ) of this |tantra|? Of what 
kind are the categories ( padartha ) which it has been taught to illumine? 
and how many are they? In answer [to these questions] (iti tadartham ) 

[comes| this second sutra outlining an agenda of things that are to be 
taught (pratijnasutrantaram). 


[Hear the tantra] which expounds [the topics of] pa£u, 
pa^a, pati, jnana and vicara, which is accompanied 
by the kriya and carya jpadas] and which brings the 
plenitude that comes from the fullness of yoga. 69 (13) 

"The text seems a little uncertain here. 

0 0 

J By reading six padarthas into the text here, though there are plainly three, Rama- 
kantha brings the Kirana into line with the Matahga (vidyapada 2:14-21). Rama- 
kantha is however not alone in understanding the verse in this way, for it is quoted 
as the adisutra in the Brhatkalottara's tantrotpattivyakhyapatala (f. 54 v , lines 3-4, 
Sanderson *1996b:9, verse 84) together with the following comment (85cd): catuspada- 
satpadarthajnanam atmapraka^akam. I^ana^iva is probably referring to Ramakantha’s 
interpretation of this passage in the following verse (. kriyapada part 2, patala 2, Vol. 3, 
p. 20): pa£uh pagah patih gaktir vicarag ceti pancadha/ padarthah syuh kriya carva 
sasthT saivagamodita. (The editor has not numbered this verse—properly it should 
be the third—because he supposed it to belong with the following half-verse, a line 
from the first chapter of the Parakhya marked with a following iti grlparakhye. This 
mis judgment as it is revealed to be by an examination of the sole surviving manuscript 
of the Parakhya —misled Brunner (1981:140, footnote 198).] 

The following is a more natural interpretation of the verse: ‘[Hear this tantra] which 
sets forth an investigation into knowledge (jnana) of the [three topics, namely] the 
bound soul, the bonds, and the Lord, and which is accompanied by [disquisitions on] 



















Chapter One 


183 


ritual action (kriya) and religious observances (carya) and which brings with it a wealth 
of the benefits of yoga.’ The three topics belong to the pada called jnana. Brunner 
(1992) has shown that early Siddhantas, of which the Kirana is one, were not originally 
divided into four sections named jnana, kriya , carya, and yoga, and she has pointed 
out that Ni does not mark the padas into which the Kirana has at some point been 
divided—nor indeed do the other Nepalese manuscripts—and that the division is arti¬ 
ficial, because it means that the treatment of certain topics obviously belonging to one 
pada are treated in a section of text bearing the name of another. Nevertheless, on the 
evidence of this verse (which Brunner does not quote) and of Kirana 6:5-9 (which she 
does ), it seems that we must accept that this fourfold categorisation is early, even if it 
did not at the time of the redaction of the Kirana apply to sections of a text. 

As Brunner observes, the four are in that subsequent passage referred to as upayas, 
not as padas; but there need be no difficulty with the use of the term pada here, 
because, although by the time of such agarnas as the Mrgendra and the Matariga it 
had probably come to mean exclusively the section of text in which a particular upaya 
was taught see e.g. Matangakriyapada 5:3-4, which can incidentally be found in a 
more nearly complete form quoted by Ramakantha ad vidyapada 26:63 and in Jaya- 
r at ha’s Tantralokaviveka ad 15:17), there is evidence that it need not. Indeed the 

Kirana itself, in 27:2 uses the term when speaking of what an initiate must know to 
qualify for abhiseka: 

s ambit a ya para f syaiva sekah karyo 'nyatha na hi 
sa caturbhir yatha padair jnanadikaih £ubhaih 

In a similar context in the similarly undivided Dlksottara we meet the following verse 
(7:121, IFF T. 17, p. 909 and IFP T. 127, p. 60): 

catuspatsamhii 127; samjfii 0 17 tabhijnah kalabhijnas tathaiva ca 
utsahavan sad a daksah sadhakah sa vidhiyate 

#■ * i %/ 

Professor Sanderson (in a letter dated 2.vi.90) has supplied the following passage from 
another tantra as an instance where pada must again be interpreted to mean a topic 
treated somewhere in a text, rather than a section of text which treats that topic to the 
exclusion of others \Jayadrathayainala, satka 1, patala 50:78-79b. (NAK MS 5-4650 

ff.212 r -212 v[21 )]: 

sabasrayugalenatra vidyapadah pratisthitah 
kriyapadas tathaivani bi yogakhyam pahcabhih gataih 
caryapadah sahasrena sardhena gaditab spbutam (tah MS). 

Bven though the amount of text devoted to each topic is stated, the work is not divided 
into corresponding sections. Professor Sanderson (ibid.) further suggested that such a 
notion of catuspadatva might be what is intended in Tantraloka 15:466c-467: 

etair gunaih samayukto diksitah £iva£asane 
catuspatsamhitabhijnas tantrastada^afatparah 
dagatantratimargajha acarya sa vidhiyate . 

Furthermore he argues (in a private communication of 2.vii.90) that this is another 
relatively early usage: 













184 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

i * h/ * 


The word pa^u, because it is not used of those devoid of impurity, refers 
exclusively to souls which are subject to impurity. And these, although 
they are [of course] many, are of two types, according as they have or do 
not have kala (sakalakalabhedena ). Of these those with kala are of two 
types: those with subtle bodies [consisting of the tattvas ] 70 and those with 
gross bodies. Those without kala are also of two types; namely, vijnana- 
kalas, those devoid of kala because of knowledge, and pralayakalas, those 
devoid of kala because of resorption [of the el ects of the cosmos). 71 All 

This seems to be part of a paraphrase of the Devyayamala (a Trika scrip¬ 
ture) which begins at verse 460. This is apparent from verse 469 which 
begins an analysis o the matter covered in 466c-67 with the words etair 
vakyair idam coktam. This indicates that the preceding is scripture. And 
I conclude that the scripture is the Devyayamala , since the last reference 
to a scripture was to that work in 460 and since 464-8 follow on coherently 
from the verses 460-3 which, since they form an indissoluble unity, must 
be from that source. 

This is plausible because Jayaratha quotes two other passages from the Devyayamala 
in which padas are mentioned: in the Tantralokaviveka ad 28:400-4 (see introduction 
footnote 153, p.lxiii) and ad Tantraloka 28:386c-87b: acaryam sampravaksyami sarva- 
£astravi$aradam/ eatuspatsambitabhijnah kalpaskandhe vi$aradah ... 

Visnusamhita 1:34, speaking of the vast Urtext of which the surviving Visnusamhita 
is the tiniest condensation, also speaks of the four padas of juana, kriya , carya and 
yoga. The transmitted Visnusamiiita is not divided into padas with these titles. 

For the Saiva subtle body see Aghora^iva’s Tattvasangrabatlka ad 24-5: etac 
ca kaladitrimgattattvatmakam suksmagarlram pratipurusaniyatatvena tesam bhoga- 
sadhanam . ‘And this subtle body being individual to each soul and consisting of 
the thirty tattvas beginning with kala is that by which souls achieve experience (i.e. 
consumption of Avar man] b/ioga v This account of the composition of the Saiva 
puryastaka' appears first (or at least most famously) to have been established by Rama- 
kantha in his much cited (e.g. later in the passage just quoted) and grossly distortive 
commentary on Sardhatrigatikalottara 17:4, pp. 125-6. See also AghoraSiva’s Dhoga- 
karikavrtti ad verse 7: ativahayaty at man am karma bhogcna nasayatlty ativabikah 
suksmadchah. 'The subtle body is [known as] that which carries beyond, because it 
carries the Aarman of souls beyond [into reincarnations] and destroys it by means of 
experience.’ 

7 1 r » 

The first Saiddhantika source in which we find the terms pralayakala and vijnana- 
kala is Sadyojyotih’s Svayambhuvavrtti ad 1:2 and ad 2:26 (in the second passage we 
find vijhanakevala in place of the latter). The Kirana speaks below of the kevala type of 
soul (1:23), but it does not sub-divide it into these two categories. Sanderson observes 

(*1996a:23): 

The source of the new terminology is unclear. Jayaratha in the 
Tantralokaviveka ad 10:7 considers it a Saiddhantika classification, and 
it was generally adopted in Saiddhantika. circles; but I can find no 




















Chapter One 


185 


these are bound souls. [They are) referred to by the word pasu; thus one 
topic padarthah) in this tantra t atra) is called pa$u. 

Now the bonds of impurity, karman and that derived from m ay a which 
are attached to these bound souls are of three kinds. To explain (tatha 
hi): a vijhanakala 72 is connected only to impurity; a pralayakala 73 has 
both impurity and karman , and the soul that has kala (sakala) is at¬ 
tached to the bonds of impurity, karman and that derived from maya. 
And [only] a rare [bound soul] ( kasyacit) who has destroyed all his kar¬ 
man, either by knowledge, yoga and asceticism, or simply by using it up, 
has just impurity and [the bond) derived from rnaya, because he [remains] 
with a body merely on the strength of residual traces |of karman] (sam- 
skaravasena) as with the spinning of a wheel [which continues even when 
what set the wheel in motion no longer pushes it]. 74 All this we shall 
teach. Among these (bonds] (tatra) impurity is single, [but,| equipped 
wit.]i many powers that obstruct the many souls. It, is not a tattva in ad- 


Saiddhantika scripture which uses it... 

# 

In this absence of any early Saiddhantika evidence of the classification 
1 propose the hypothesis that the source lay in the Maliiuvijayottara , the 
non-Saiddhantika scripture which Abhinavagupta took as the basis of his 
exposition of the rival Trika-based Saivism of Kashmir. For there this 
terminology is central and pervasive... 

For evidence of Sadyojyotih’s knowledge of the MalinTvijayottara see p.lxxv above. 

Note that it is the i\ lalinlvijayottar a that Ramakantha cites in Kiranavrtti 1:23.29 to 

show that the category of the vijhanakala. lias the sanction of scripture. 

_ 1 $ % 

Ramakantha here uses the word vijniiu akevaia, a common synonym, but one which 
does not break down as obviously as vijnanakala. It might be interpreted as *[a soul] 
separate [from certain fetters] because of knowledge’. 

W a 

' Ramakantha actually uses the word pralayakevalin. As above, it might be inter¬ 
preted as ja soul] separate [from certain fetters] because of resorption [of the effects of 
the cosmos back into their material cause]’. 

‘ * This contains echoes of 2 sources: The first is Par am oksanirasakarika 55cd which 

m * 

reads vjjnan ayogasannyasair bhogad va karmanah k say at. (The same verse is also to be 
found in the South Indian Pauskara as 2:5Iab with ksaye for ksayat.) Ramakantha cites 
it in the Matarigavrtti ad vidyapada 2:1, p. 23. The other verse echoed is Sankhyakarika 
67, which Ramakantha quotes in full in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 6:79: samyag- 
jnanadhigamad dharinadmaw akaranapraptau / tisthati samskaravasac cakrahhrarna- 
vad dhrtaganrah. \'acaspatimi^ra ad loc. clearly supports the reading °bljrami°, but 
the YuktidTpika and Gaudapada support 0 bhrama 0 , of w^hich °bhramana° is a synonym. 
A metrical amalgam of these two half-verses appears in the MrgendravrttidTpika ad 2:1, 
p. 59. 

7 5 j 

' ’The rare soul mentioned here is discussed again in 1:20.1-5. All the types of soul 
are discussed in the commentary on 1:22c-23b. 











186 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


dition to [and therefore separate from] (tattvantaram) the tattva of the 
bound soul, 70 because without it (tena vina) the state of being a bound 
soul (pagutva) would not be possible, [that is to say souls would not be 
linked to maia;] but it is a different entity ( vastvantaram). Karman too is 
not [enumerated as| an additional (independent] principle ( tattvantaram ), 
tor without it it would be impossible tor there to be bondage by matter 
(prakrti), since karman consists in factors that condition matter, which 
are divided into eight |kinds cailed| bhavas; cUiarma, [knowledge, dispas- 
sion, power and their opposites] ( dharmadibhavastakabhedena 77 ). \Kar- 

is infinite and something that has to be undergone ( upabhogyam ) 
as many experiences (anekapratyayatmana 78 ), because it is so various (vi- 


man 


* ► is logically subsuraable into purusatattva and there¬ 

fore vicariously included in the tattvakraina. Cf. Ramakantha’s comments ad 

* ■ 

Ma.tangavidya.pada 2:17c-18b where he subsumes the bond of mala |i.e. parfutva] into 
the topic of the paSu for the same reason: tena vina pagutvayogat. It is not clear that 
the paSu was intended as a tattva by the redactor of the Kirana; but Ramakantha 
interprets it to be so in his commentary on 8:125 (IFP T. 290, p. 129 [12 ' 151 ). Cf. also 
Kirana 2:I8c-19b, Kiranavrtti 2:19.1-5 and footnote 392 on p. 291 below. 

*7 T * * 

dharrna, jniina, vadragya, airfvarya and their opposites. See Bhogakarika 55ab adha- 

rrnaditrayam rago dharmadi ca catustayam . See also AghoraSiva’s Bhogakarikavrtti 

ad 55-64 and Sadyojyotih's Svayambhuvavrtti ad 2:12. Just as he subsumes impurity 

within pui usatatt va, so too R.amak;i i ha here implies that karman can be subsumed 

within prakrti tattva; but when the topic recurs in 2:19.1-3 he appears to include it v. 

mayatattva a position that makes it possible to account for the continued existence 

of karman through mahapralaya. In the present passage perhaps Ramakantha intends 

only to make the point that karman is a bond even though it is only vicariously to 

be placed in the tattvakraina and not to specify where in the tattvakrama it is to be 
placed. 

78 t * • 

* * means pratyaya in something close to its 
Sahkhya sense, which Aghorasiva explains in his Bhogakarikavrtti ad 60: yad ahuh 

‘bhavayanti yato hiigam tena bhavah prakTrt.it ah' iti. ta eva prakarsa vast ham praptah 
sthulena rupen i bhogyadasani apannah sam sarin am pratyayanat pra tyayah kathyante. 
tad uktam ‘pratyayayanti ksetrajnam pratyayas tena klrtitah } iti. ( As [sages] teach 
“They are known as the bhavas because they saturate ( bhavayanti) lower creation*”. 
These same [bhavas], when they achieve fullness (prakarsavastham) , reach a state of 
readiness to be experienced in gross form, and are called pratyayas , because they cause 
souls in samsara to experience (pratyayanat). This is taught [in the following passage 

of scripture]: “They are known as pratyayas because they cause the soul ( ksetrajnam ) 
to understand (pratyayayanti)”.’ 

Cf. Scihkhyakarika 52 and Vacaspatimisra ad loc.: hiigam iti tanmatrasargam upa- 
laksayati. 

(In Dvivedi’s edition both AghoraSiva’s citations are ascribed without verse numbers 
or comment to a Pauskara\ a version of the second occurs in the South Indian Pauskara 






























































Chapter ()ne 


187 


citratvat), being private (bhinnatvat) for every individual as the [many 
and different] tilings that have to be performed [by each individual]. 

The bond derived from maya, which comprises the thirty tattvas from 
kala down to earth, is both private as subtle bodies for each individual, 
and public (abhinnah) as the three hundred and ninety worlds, 79 and it is 
both private and puldie (bhinna£ cabhinnah) as the gross bodies made up 
of the elements in each world, since coarse bodies as well [as worlds] can be 
experienced by other souls too [and not just by their own souls]. This too 
we shall expound, 80 Maya too is a bond, because it is the source of bonds 
and so too is the power of occlusion manifested by [Ananta.] the Lord 
over those empowered within the realm of in ay a (mayadhikarl£varabhi- 
vyakta). This 81 group of entities is taught to comprise the second topic, 
called pasa in this sastra (atra). 

Now pati is taught to be the third topic [comprising] the Lord God 
(bhagavan... parametfvara), who will be taught. 82 as divided into two tat¬ 
tvas of Siva and Sadasiva and into the five worlds [within the latter 
together with released souls. With the word jh an a [in the verse], which 
is to be analysed as (iti krtva) that by which something is known, the 
fourth topic, gakti, is named, which in this system (atra) has (-yuktah) 
four worlds, which will be taught 83 to make up the tattva (known as 
Tsvara. [It is called jhana,| because without the control exerted by this 
£a Jrti], knowledge could not arise in men. So too [Vedic] scripture (srutir 
a pi) says ‘may he stimulate our thoughts!’ 84 

[Siva] deliberates (vicarayati) on the creation, resorption and such of 
the universe, which is [comprised of tilings that are the subjects of] both 
shared and private [experience], in accordance with the past actions oi 


as 6:124ab. I think it unlikely that AghoraSiva would have introduced what he regarded 
as a scriptural quotation with yad a huh —cf. Ramakantha’s practice, discussed in loot- 
note 455 on p. 315 below.) 

7 n 

' As Brunner mentions (1977:xvi, footnote 28) 224 is a conventional number for all 
the worlds, but it is not universally accepted. It must be supposed that Ramakantha 
accepted that this number varies from one tautra to another, for in the Matariga he 
counts 364 in and below m ay a (see the seventh of the concluding verses to Matanga- 
vrttividyapada 23 on p,516). 


8Gr>- 
81 
82 


Ramakantha will explain the Saiva cosmos in his commentary on the eighth patala. 
More literally ‘thus much’ (etavat). 

Kir an a 8:139-41. The five worlds are those of the five b rah m am an tras. 


CO 

Kirana 8:138c-139a: nivrt tis ca pratistha ca vidya Santis tathaiva ca. 
84 This is the last third of the gay a t ri recited at saridhyopasana. 




















188 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


souls, and so that collection of things (artharasih) divided into twenty- 

six woilds that make up the two tattvas of vidya and of the vidye&as 

constitutes [the topic ofj ‘deliberation’ (vicarah) here set forth as the 
fifth topic. 85 

I lie purport of what is promised is as follows: ‘Listen to this kastra. 
the vidyapada, which teaches these five topics.’ But one should not inter- 
pii t it to moan Listen to this sastra which teaches knowledge and infer¬ 
ence (anumanam = vicarah) about bound souls, bonds and the Lord,’ be¬ 
cause sastra, being |mere] sound, is not directly connected [to knowledge]. 
For knowledge is not [directly] understood from sound. It is rather mean¬ 
ing alone (a pi tv art.ha eva) [that is understood from language], fbecause 
it [i.e. language], being expressive (vacakatvena), consists in conventional 
signs of what is intended to be expressed [i.e. arthajf. 86 But knowledge 
can be inferred fiom it [i.e. from language]. If (atha) someone interprets as 
follows ( iti vyakhyayate): from context ( arthat ) [we infer] that the word 
jhana is used lie e in the sense of the sentences which are the cause of the 
knowledge of pa£u, \pasa and pati,] ( pasvadijhanahetau ) and the word vi- 
cara [is used] in the sense of those signs which are the basis of inferential 
knowledge of those [afore-mentioned topics] ( tadanumanahetau ), |to this 
we reply that.] "[because their is nu difference in the [type of] usage of 
these two [words] here, since [interpreting] in this way too ignores their 

g tj 

The tattva, of the vi dyes as is not taught in the Kirana and appears to be something 
that Ramakantha reads into the text between the tattvas of vidya and fivara. In 
other sources in which it occurs the vidyetatattva is the equivalent of 12vara. The 
Sarvajnanott ara, tor example, in its adhvaprakarana teaches (158cd, IFP T. 334, p. 72): 
\id} oidhvain tu bhaved any ad vidyesavaranam punah , and the next principle up is that 
of SadafSiva. (176c—177b, IFP 4.334, p. f3): athordhvani tu bhaved anyat sarvai2varya-- 
mayam subham/ sadativam param tatvam (em.; °h MS) tiuddhasphatikanirmalam (em • 

°h MS). ‘ ' V *’ 

In his commentary on Airana 8:133 138 Ramakantha has this to say (IFP T. 290, 
P- 131 2 6 ^)‘ tatvadlksayaip mayatatvad anantaram guddhavidyatatvam godhyainj 
bh 11 vanadiksayam tu inayabhuvanebhyah paratah saptakotimantratf catvari bhuvanani 
sodhyaaiiti/ tadanantaram ananta ityadi prag vicarapadarthatvena samgrhitam 
anantadividyesvaiatatvam tatvadiksayam tfodhyam ity anantadikramenoktain. 1 can¬ 
not work out how there come to be twenty-six worlds in these two tattvas. 

I have translated this as though it occurred after the phrase api tv artha eva 

for which it appears to be the justification. The rest of the paragraph down to 

the quotation from the Rauravasutrasangraha is not without difficulties and more 

crux marks might have been deployed, for instance to bracket the phrase gastrasva 
gabdatrnakat venananvayat (1:13.29-30). 




























Chapter One 


189 


conventional meanings, it is [therefore] better (varam) 87 t to say (... iti) 
that, it is correct that these two words refer to topics (pad art h a vis ay a t a) 
and not to anything else (eva). [And so] there are established to be five 
padarthas [in the vidyapada]. And this is taught in the Raurava : 88 


Five padarthas are proclaimed, sprung from the mouth of the 
Lords of knowledge: briefly [they are] injunction (vidhih), ac¬ 
tion (kriya) , kaia, yoga and Siva. 89 


Thus only the above interpretation is correct. Kriya [means] action, con¬ 
ditioning, |and thus refers to] initiation. Carya [means] observance, [and 
thus refers to] the performance of regular and occasional obligatory rites 
inityadikarmanusthananr 0 ). The meaning then is ‘Listen to this sastra 
which is equipped equally (tulyatvena — samam 91 ) with these two [kriya 
and carya], and which also has the two sections [of the text] which are the 
kriya jpada] and the carya[pada] .’ The promise (pratijna) of the fourth 
quarter of the verse is ‘Listen to this sastra which brings the manifestation 
of infinite benefit ( anantaphaiavirbhavah - bharah ) from being replete 
with all the necessary auxiliaries starting with pratyahara ( pratyaharady - 
ahgavaikalyena bhavanam = bhutih) of yoga, [i.e. of] that joining of the 
mind (cetasah) with that on which it meditates or of tliat meditative con- 


8 7 rri 

1 'Text may have been lost before padarthavisayataiva , for vara in and yukta (at least 
in the way I have translated them) overlap in function. 

oo _ 

Rauravasutrasangraha 4:48. Various readings might be adopted. The verse appears 
in the printed text (depending on the single source preserved in the same codex as M y ) 
thus: parardhah panca vikhyata vidyegavadanodgatah/ vidhikrive kalayogau £ivag ceti 
samasatah. Alaka’s quotation (given in the apparatus) may not be from the Raurava- 
sutrasangraha, 

89 It is difficult to see how these five padarthas concord with the five which Rama- 
kantha has won from verse 13. The only obvious point of comparison is that they 
are five, kriya and yoga sound as if they might be subsumed under the single head 
kriya, which Ramakantha will shortly present as a sixth padartha not treated of in the 
vidyapada but covered by the other three padas of the work. Is it conceivable that 
Ramakantha intended to recall only the first padas of the verse to mind and that the 
second verse-half has been supplied by a copyist? 

90 nityadikarma is to be understood in terms of the inlmamsaka classification of ritual 
activity into regular obligatory rites (nitya), rites obligatory on particular occasions 
(naSmittika), rites performed to procure desires (kamya), and forbidden (nisiddha) 
rites. The last two are not salvific for Mimamsakas. (See the verse quoted in 1:14.18- 
19.) 

91 Ramakantha is glossing the metrically exigent Prakrtic form samopetam and not 
samupetam (1:13c). 











190 


* * ^ l y on the Kiranatantra 


cent ration (samadhih) which is one-pointed and has that [on which one 
meditates] as its focus ( tadvisayah ).' The number of padas [of the entire 
work; i.e. four,] is therefore also understood, and the subject matter to 
be taught, in the three sections [of the work known as the] kriya , carya 
and yoga padas (kriyadipadatrayapratipadyas cartliah) is proclaimed to 
be the sixth topic (padartha) . This is taught in the Matahga and else- 
t re as the topic ol means (upayapadarthatvena). The proving of the 


correctness of an interpretation [arthatathatvasthitih) [by drawing] from 
one samhita is fitting regarding matters of doubt in other samhitas. be¬ 
cause they all share [Siva as| their one author, just as it would be in texts 
I sruti |and smrt 1 \ srutyadi£astresu) [in the case of which ekavakyata is 


commonly assumed], and so there is no fault [in t he interpretat ion given 
above]. Thus ‘this tfastra has four sections and speaks of six topics (sat- 
padarthabhidhayi) . 9 ^ This is wliat is expressed by this accompanying 
pratijhasutra [whose function is to outline what is about to be taught]. 

In response to this (atra) an opposing view [is introduced]: 

[Garuda spoke:] 93 


li that is so, then first of all (tavat), in order to re¬ 
move my doubts, tell me what sort of entity is this 

bound soul (pa£uh)l How is he bound? and how re¬ 
leased? (14) 

If that is so, then you have mentioned six topics as being about to be 
explained; among these (tatra) of what nature is the [category of be¬ 
ings called] paku |which have been] grouped together as the first topic? 
Its definition should now (tavat) be taught. After all (yatah) for the 
Buddhists it is of the nature of [no more than| a stream of cognitions, 
because it is at every instant perishing (dhvamsitvena). And by some of 
those versed in the Upanisads (vedantavidbhti ca) 94 it is held to be imper- 

0 m 

_ “This half-verse summary may be Ramakantha’s. Its first pada is MaUngavidyH- 
pada 1:30a and its second paraphrases Mataiigavidyapada L:29d. 

93 Whenever the speaker is indicated in this way I have translated the phrase with 
"l"' m hiai kets, because such indications are found i with variations) in the manuscripts 
of the stltrapatha only, not in those of the commentary. 

94 These would include followers of the Paiicaratra. See Nare^varapanksapraka^a 

ad 1:67, p. 106: esa ca prasango vedantavidam pancaiatranam ca samanah, tair api 

brahmam naiayanakhyayam ca parasyam prakitau jlvatmanain Iayo muktir abhyupa- 

gata yatah. ‘For [some of| those versed in the Upanisads and for followers of the 

Paiicaratra there is the same undesirable corollary, since they too hold that release is 

dissolution of the souls of creatures [respectively] into Brahman and into the supreme 
matter called Narayana/ 





































Chapter One 


191 


manent as an effect of [the cause which is] Brahma. For the Naiyayikas 
and others however it is eternal and for the Carvakas it is [composed 
o nothing but] the four elements, 95 but for the Vai^esikas and others it 
is different from those [elements]. And for the adherents of Sankhya its 
essential nature is to be sentient ( jhatvasvabhavah ) and to be inactive 
in its bound state just as in its released state. But for the Jaiminlyas 
and others 96 it both knows and is an agent. And for the Naiyayikas and 
others it is invested with nine qualities: cognition, happiness, unhappi¬ 
ness, desire, hatred, effort, dharma , adharma and samskara. and yet for 
the Sankhyas it is without qualities. Similarly for those who believe in 
human effort (purusakaravadibhih) it is [all-]powerful and independent 
and [yet] for those who believe in fate ( daivavadibhih ) it is dependent. 97 


And for Digambara [Jainas 


98 




and for those among those versed in the 


Upanisads who believe that souls come into being [rather than being for 
ever existent] it is not pervasive 99 and [yet] lor the Naiyayikas and others 
it is [all-]pervasive. 


95 Carvakas accepted only four elements, because aka£a cannot be perceived by the 
senses. (See, e.g., Tat i vopaplavasimh a 0.2.) 

"Bhattas and Prabhakaras are both contained in the term jalminiya so perhaps the 
adi refers to some Saivas including the Saiva Siddhanta. If one were to retain ajnah } the 
reading of the manuscripts, then one would have to interpret it to mean asarvajnah, 
because what is at issue here is which of the schools of thought ascribed the saktis 
of jnana and kriya to the pa£u. Mlrnamsakas did allow of some capacity to know; it 
was necessary to know at least to the extent of realising that ritual action is salvific. 
Admittedly other knowledge would be soteriologically irrelevant, but it would be a 
falsification to say that Mlrnamsakas regarded the pa£u as wholly ajha (cf. 1:15.4-7). 

97 These are probably not identifiable sects, but such opinions are topoi in discus¬ 
sions of karman. See, for example, Yajn a valkyasinrti 1.350: kecid daivat svabhavad va 
kalat purusakaratah / samyoge kecid icchanti phalam kugalabuddhayah. 'Some opine 
that the fruit [of men's actions comes about] through fate; some, because of the es¬ 
sential nature [of action itself]; some, through time; some, through human effort and 
some people of keen intellect [realise that it comes about] when there is a combination 
(of these factors]. 1 [Thus the Mitaksara; Vi^varupa and Apararka read and interpret 
differently.] 

98 Ramakantha seems to be using digarnbara loosely as a general term for Jainas. 
Professor Sanderson suggested that it is unlikely that Ramakantha knew of a doctrinal 
difference on this point from the view of the Svetambaras and pointed out that the 
paucity of donatory inscriptions suggests that there were probably not many Jainas in 
Kashmir at this time. 

"jainas held that the soul was of the same dimensions as the body that it occupied 
(see, e.g., Schubring, 1935:87). By jTvotpattivadibhih ... vedantavidbhih Ramakantha 
refers to the same group as before. The Pancaratras held that the soul was atomic, a 
view inherited by ViSistadvaita (see, e.g., YatlndramatadTpika, Avatara 8, §4, p. 104: 
sa ca [scil. jivah] anuparimanali ...). 







192 


Ra.ma.kantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* 


From learning to understand a multitude of such unfounded bad ar¬ 
guments ( anekapratisthitakuyuktyadhigamat ) 100 I am in doubt Theref¬ 
ore, in order to remove that [doubt], you should say which view among 
eso ( a M 1S compassionately favoured by the omniscient |lord| by [His 
caching it, m| this system (sarvajhenanena darsanenanugrhltah) and is 
an authoritative means of knowledge because it concords with the (Saiva) 
tradition, and [you should sayj which [view] is not compassionately 
avourec am is not an authoritative means of knowledge, because it con¬ 
flicts with the |SaivaJ tradition. Moreover [the Lord should explain) how 
i is bound, in other words ( iti ) in what manner. Is it [bound], as the 
aiyayikas and others fold, only by the body and by the organs of sense? 

; 1 f? T a, , ld ? th6rS h ° ldl alS ° by thG intellect and rest 
|o the evolutes of prakrti)? This is a [matter of| doubt. And how is it 

released/ By this is meant (iti) is it by knowledge alone, as the Sankhyas 

< others maintain. Is it by yoga, as the followers of Patanjali and oth- 

us hold, or by renunciation (sannyasena) as the Vedantins and others 

. oi by i dual action, as the followers of Jaimini maintain? This they 
express jin tlie following verseji 

If one desires liberation, one should not engage in motivated 
kamya) [rites] or forbidden acts. One should perform |only| 
one s regular and incidental [duties. But one should do so 
not m view of any reward but simply] to avoid the negat- 

ive consequences (pratyavayajihasaya) [of failing to perform 

v II 01X1 1 . 


The °ku° is a guess. I cannot account for the readings. It is conceivable that it 

(of 2 2 To Lfl IT- T Ri '"* k *« h * •» »» ‘he prefixVu- i„ such . cltcxt 
ior 25 8 ^ U( ^ aisand bhyasamulo bhranta eva ) 

^ 

s' r 3S? 

Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparih ara 110, Translation supplied bv Professor 

the verse halves are reversed ? 8 commentar y on the Slokavarttika 

- 3) ,a * l,e or<l " 111 »hich they appear here is that in which other Northern .... 

^ 2 , P .« 5; 




















































Chapter One 


193 


Thus even here there is uncertainty. And so to remove that, [the Lord) 
should teach [answers to the above questions]. 

Now [the Lord teaches] the settle I doctrine (siddhantah 10 ') for the 
removal of (those) eight doubts: 

[The Lord spoke:] 


The bound soul is eternal, has no form, is without 
knowledge, is devoid of activity and of qualities, is im¬ 
potent and [all-]pervasive. It is situated [variously 101 ] 
in the belly and at the [upper] edge of m ay a and 
in deliberation among [el ects, which can be grouped 
under the heading] experience [of accumulated kar- 
man\ and [the faculties of sense and action, which can 
be grouped under the heading] the means [to experi¬ 
ence], (15) 


By the scriptural statement here that it is eternal, [the Lord] favours (ami- 
grahah) the arguments of the Naiyayikas and others ( naiyayikadidrsta- 
hetunam) at the expense of 105 the opinions of the Buddhists and others 
(saugatadimatatiraskarena). [He] also [says] that it is without form. That 
which has solidity (kathinvam = murtih) is said to be a tactile object en¬ 
dowed with form composed of four elements. 06 [The verse says that] (iti) 
it is not of this nature and thereby, at the expense of those [Carvakas] 
who opine that sentience belongs to the elements [alone], favours the ar¬ 
guments of the Buddhists and others, who propound that it is different 


103 It is frequently unclear whether Ram ak ant ha is punning and means ‘the [view of 
the SaivaJ Siddhanta at the same time as ‘the settled view', or whether he simply 
means the latter. Cf. SrTkantha’s Ratnatrayapanksa 11: siddhanta eva siddhantah 

m * m/ A * • 

purvapaksas tatah pare. 

104 This is certainly not the most natural interpretation of the verse, but it is trans¬ 
lated to accord with the commentary. Ramakantha wishes it to describe separately the 
positions of the three different grades of soul. A visarga before a ligature beginning 
with a sibilant followed by an unvoiced consonant is not compulsory (See Wackernagel, 
1896, p.342 §287b.) and is very frequently ommitted, particularly in Grantha ortho¬ 
graphy; and thus the reading mayodarantastho, in which Ramakantha chooses to see 
a dvandva relationship between udara and anta, might more plausibly be interpreted 
as mayodarantahstho . ‘situated within the belly of rnaya ! . The redundancy of an tali 
would not be untypical of ai.<a Sanskrit. A more natural translation of the last pada 
might be ‘he deliberates on means to achieve consumption (of the fruits of his actions]'. 

105 More literally ‘with the occlusion of 1 . 

alcana is again omitted, because it does not possess spartfa. 











194 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


from them. Moreover (the verse affirms that] it is without knowledge and 
that it is devoid of action, [by which is meant that] it is devoid of |the 
kaktis of | knowledge and action in the akala states, 107 and in the state of 
|souls in] samsara (sakalavasthayam ) it has limited powers of action and 
ol knowledge]. It is thus referred to as ajha and niskriya] in the same way 
as souj) is said o be without salt [when what is in fact meant is that it 
has very little salt]. Thus the Sankhyas and others are refuted and favour 
is bestowed] on the view of the Mlmamsakas and others. But with the 
word nirgunah |divine| favour [is bestowed] on the Sankhyas’ and oth¬ 
ers’ doctrine that the soul is devoid of qualities, and the Naiyayikas’ [and 
Vaisesikas’] doctrine of the nine qualities of the soul, cognition, happiness, 
unhappiness], desire, hatred, effort, dharma, adharma and samskiira] is 
rejected. 108 And with the word 'impotent' ( aprabhuh) it is taught, as 
before [in the case of the words ajha and niskriya] , that the power [of the 
soul| is limited. |Now here divine] favour is bestowed in part (ckainsitava) 
both on those who believe in [the power ofj human effort and on fatalists 
(purusakaradaivavadinoh ) since it |i.e. the pasu] is powerful (prabhuh m ) 

■ \ m respect of various sacrificial acts like the agnistoma, the fruits 

of which, whether [directly] seen or not, can now be accumulated (a r- 
janiya- ), but in respect of the consumpt ion of [the retributive force of] 
picviously accumulated karman he is powerless ( aprabhur cvai By say¬ 
ing (that the soul is| pervasive (vyapTi (divine] favour is bestowed on the 
Naiyayikas and on others who hold that it is pervasive ( tadvyapakavadi ), 

and those who hold that the soul (jlva or pudgala) is not pervasive are 
refuted. 


J Q7 * 

That is to say the state of being without kala because of knowledge vijna.niikala.tii) 
or because of the dissolution of the universe (pra/ayaka/ata). 

These are the nine vigesagunas of the soul. 

1UJ This has been emended from prabhutvnm (P) so that the construction is parallel 
with that of the end of the sentence: pragarjitakarmabhoge tv aprabhur cva. Some 
might instead choose to emend this ending to aprabhutvam cva with the same result 
i hat the construction becomes parallel. I suspect however that the end is correct as it 
stands and i hat prabhutvam is a secondary alteration that crept in under the influence 
of the structure of the previous sentence with alpaprabhutvam. 

Instead of this conjecture one might consider idanTm arjvamana° . All the trans¬ 
mitted forms are unsatisfactory. The future passive participle fits the context and lya 
occurs in the readings ol P, and P 3 . The present passive participle perhaps fits the 

context marginally less well, but the syllables °mana° are found in the readings of all 
the manuscripts. 












































Chapter ()ne 


195 


And thus because Garuda knows from this (statement o:f the Lord| 
the doctrinal positions of all other traditions, the arguments for the proof 
of the eternality of the soul and so on are not related here[. For this 
reason they are not related] and also because they are useless ( tesam 
anupayogat), since even without these [arguments] one accomplishes the 
removal ( n i vr 11 is id dheh) even of this circle oi doubt by favouring one or 
other of two sides or by favouring the arguments put forward by one of 
those (sides] just as [removal of doubt is accomplished] in the case of doubt 
about whether something |scen in poor light or from a distance] is a post 
or a man (sthanu/mrusavisayasam^ayasya) through the assertion of some 
reliable man ‘This is a post’ (sthanur ayam ity aptavakyad iv a). Altern¬ 
atively (yadi va) the fact that the soul is established by experience is 
expressed (pratipadyate) by this [speech of the Lord, in which the various 
arguments are not related]. since arguments are useless when something is 
established by experience. An argument cannot apply (na ... sambhavati), 
for example (yaiha), to the assertion ‘This pot is round and made of iron', 
because in this case this fact is established by experience. And so, be¬ 
cause the soul as an agent of perception is also established by experience 
as something which makes manifest other things and itself (paratma- 
prakasakataya , its permanence (sthairyam) is established by experience, 
because that is how it is perceived ( tathavagamat). And so what could be 
done with [i.e. what would be the point of] reasons here? And it should 
not be said that stability (sthairyam) is [a quality] wrongly ( vibhramat ) 
superimposed on it [i.e. the soul] when it is actually momentary ]that is to 
say punctiform], like time and other things [which are actually punctiform 
and momentary and on which permanence is wrongly superimposed. This 
position cannot be held], because notions cannot be superimposed upon 
it, since it is beyond conception (avikalpatvat), for there is a contradiction 
in it performing [such an! action upon itself (svatmani kriyavirodhena ). 
This have shown in my commentary on the Matanga . It can be learnt 
in greater detail] from there. 1 * 111 Nor is it possible to prove its moment- 


1 See Ma.ta.ngcivrt.ti ad vidvapad a 6:24ab, p. 161: uanu svatmani vikalpah (Kash¬ 

mirian manuscripts; vikalpa 0 Bliatt) sthairyam aropayann utpadyate. tena naitat pra- 
sahgah. tan n a, tathavrtter atmani virodhad ity uktam. svatmany avikalpako (Kash¬ 
mirian manuscripts; svatmani na Bhatt) vikalpa iti ca. t asm at svatmany aropasam- 

hliavad grahakatnianah sthairyam avabhasamanani svasamvedanasiddham evabhyupa- 
gantavyam. Someone may object (uanu) that a notion (of self] arises superimposing 
permanence upon itself and thus the undesirable consequence [mentioned in the previ- 

















196 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kirauatantra 


arincss by means of an inference, viz. the argument of the impossiblity of 

the efficacity of what is permanent, since that [argument] too ( tasyapi ) 

is vitiated by the faults of being unproved |as to its hetu being in the 

dharmin] and by other (faults| (asiddliatvadidosadustatvat)^~ and this 

too I have shown in the commentary on the Narc^varapariksa. It can >e 
learnt from there. 

Moreover |the statement] that the soul is ‘formless’ means, as |has 
been said] before, that it is different rom the body, which has the form 
of the coarse elements that are amenable to the sense of touch and that 
are characterised as 'having form', because it |i.e. the soul] manifests 
(piakasanat ) as that which perceives those [bodies and things made 
up of coarse elements]. Thus (the contention that] the soul [is] composed 
mi lie |coarse] elements is refuted by experience itself. From this it follows 
> aftt i \ , j ■■ • lull i! does not .!!;■ !' from the elements, since it, is expenenei d 
as different also from all that arises from the elements and because it is 
established (siddhes ca) to be eternal, because it is beginningless, since 
wc perceive in every birth actions that are dependent on memory arising 
from the mental traces of experience in previous births. This we have 
d( nionsti atcd m the [coiiiiiientarial work known as the] Rauravavrttivi- 

ous sentence, viz. that worldly communication could not take place (vyavaharabhava- 
prasahgah)] does not apply, This is wrong, because this reflexive circularity is contra¬ 
dictory, as has been taught |in the verse above]. [And it has also been said that] a 
notion does not superimpose notions upon itself. Thus it must be admitted that the 
manifest permanence of the perceiving soul is established by its own experience because 
of the impossibility of a notion superimposing [notions] upon itself.’ 

Tins seemed the most economical repair to the text. The tasya refers back to 
amimana. The faults in the inference are dealt with in NareSvarapariks apraka^a ad 
1:22, pp. 52-56. According to the Sautrantikas [and post-Sautrantika Buddhist the¬ 
oreticians] to exist is to have efficacity {arthakriyakarita). Only impermanent things 
that come into being, exist and perish can have arthakriya. A posited permanent 
soul, or indeed anything posited to exist for more than one moment, would be inert 
and thus devoid of arthakriya . See Narayanakantha’s quotation in the Mrgendra- 
vrtti ad vidyapada 2:24, p. 86: arthakriyasamartham yat tad atra paramarthasat / 
asaiito ’ksanikas tasmat kramakramavirodhatah. Hulin (1980:90 points out that the 
first line is Pramanavarttika 2:3ab. and translates ‘A ce niveau existe absolument ce 
qui est doue d’efficience. Les choses non-instantan6es sont done inexistantes en tant 
qu’incompatibles avec (toute activite) progressive ou instantanee.’ 

ex con J • Cf. akhanditasamvit sa tat am evartha vagam aka t ven a bhasanat from 
Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 6:34c-35a, p. 172 [20 l 






























Chapter One 



veka [in the part which comments] on the Pararnoksanirasakarika , 114 And 
it has been taught by others too : 115 


The first movement of the organs [of speech], upward motion 
of the breath and their contact [i.e. that of the breath and of 
the organs of speech] with the places of articulation [in the 
mouth] would not be possible without previous experience [in 
former births]. 


And its having limited power and being capable both of doing and know¬ 
ing little are established as before [viz. as in the case of the soul's per¬ 
manence (nityatva) and formlessness (amurtatva)] by experience itself. So 
too its being devoid of qualities, since these [qualities] such as cognition, 
happiness and unhappiness are experienced as adventitious [i.e. they enter 
consciousness only at certain moments] (kadacAtkatvena), [and] since they 
are experienced as possessed of the opposite properties to those of the soul 
f tadviruddhadharmataya ), being objective (grahyatvena), like pots and 
the like. The entity ‘sou!' (atmatattvam } 16 ) is established by experience 

1,4 See Ramakantha’s commentary ad Pararnoksanirasakarika 44-46. Sadyojyotih’s 
Pararnoksanirasakarika are a partial commentary on the Raurava. (Two and a half 
verses that reject the views of other schools are cited from the Raurava at the beginning 
of Ramakantha’s commentary, and these must be the ones which Ramakantha takes 

A ■ 

the karikas to be expounding.) 11 is in this sense that Ramakantiia’s Paramoksanirasa- 

karikavrtti is also a Rauravavrttiviveka. (See the discussion of Rarnakantha's works in 

■ * ' * . 

the introduction, particularly pp. xx ff.) 

j g _ 

Vakyapadlya 1:130. Ramakantha quotes the same verse in the same form in the 
Pararnoksanirasakarikavrtti ad verse 44. Rail’s critical text of the Vakyapadlya reads 
sab d ah h avail am for purvavedanam (a reading which he does not report). Aghora^iva 
also quotes the verse in the form in which Ramakantha has it in the Mrgendravrtti- 
dlpika ad 6:6cd, p. 190. 

i _ 

The evatmatvam of P 2 P 3 can be explained as haplography. To support his resti¬ 
tution of this sentence Professor Sanderson (in a letter of 16.xi.93) has adduced the 
following parallels: NarcSvarapariksaprakasa p. 8: pratyartharn pratiksanam ca, .. vi- 
jnanam bhinnam eva grahakam anubhavasiddham astu nanyah ka$ cid a t in a nameti 
vaibhasikah; ibid. p. 13 (the Vaibhasika position again): nanu ca pratyartharn prati¬ 
ksanam ca bhinnam evedarn grahakarupam vijnanain asmabbih pratipaditam\ 
ibid. pp. 13-14 (the Saiva position): kim pratyartharn pratiksanam capurvo purvah 
purvottarahhyam anubhavabhyarn bhinnah ( bhinnah em. Sanderson; om. ed.; bhi- 
nna u corrigenda) ksanamatrarupavabhaso grahakah prakasata uta sarvadaivabhinna 
(corrigenda; bhimia ed. iti. tatravam sthirarupah prakakah sarvadaiva grahyopadhi- 
bhede ’py anasvadita-(em. Sanderson; an as adit a- ed.)svatmabhedah kalatraye 
’pi- • * Cf. also Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 6:34c-35b, p. 172: na grahyabhede ’pi 











198 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kir ana tantra 


as something at all times undivided, even though it is the agent of per- 


ception of many perceptible external objects (anekagrahyavisayagrahaka- 


nlpam a pi) either in sequence or simultaneously. This we have shown in 
'he Naregvarapanksaprakasa . 117 And the soui is pervasive (vyapitvam 


i - T J r UtllJ 

aP/ as T a )i because it is manifest as something separate {pratyagrupena) 


without, circumscription of space or time, but as the perceiver of those. 


Nor is it possible that the perceiver should be circumscribed by its objects, 


such as pots. This has been expressed tlius: lis 


A thing whose reality is circumscribed neither by time nor by 


place is held to be eternal and all-pervading, and so the soul 


is all-pervading and eternal. 


Ihe leasons are not stated here, in order to demonstrate that the soul’s 


existence along with all the properties [stated in the verse| is proved by 
experience alone. Vcclic scripture too teaches this : 119 


Everything s ^ lines following him alone when he shines; this 

_ I _ _ 1 11 "1* ■ m * « _ _ 


whole world shines with his light 


And thus our position is unproblematic (ity avirodhah ). And so after 


dispelling this group of six doubts about the bound soul that arise from 


several contradictory ( parasparaviruddhartha -) theological positions [that 


ai< : ''I ),,( ' | dations] of bound souls (pagudarganajanitam), the variety of 

T \ /A n 1 l y-x r h „ .. _ 1 / \ * * . * . 


positions of the soul (asya) in its different states that is firmly established 

1 VUl r j rv V *- I—. I _ _ i I T * m * 


in the [the Lord's) own doctrine is taught. The soul is situated in the 


belly and at, the edge of may a. Among these (tatra ) 120 the pralayakevalin 


grahakatma yugapad iva kramenapi bhinno 'vabhasate. api tu sarvadaiva grahyo- 

padhibhede ’py anasvaditasvatmabhedah kalatiaye ’pi... 
Narcgvarapanksaprakaga ad 1:22, pp. 52-56 

"“TanUavarttika ad Munarnsasutra 2.1.5. I have adjusted the verse to the form in 
which Ramakantha quotes it ad Naretvarapanksa 1:54, p.92, and Narayanakantha, in 
the Mrgendcavrtti ad vidyapada 6:7, p. 160. The iti has i>cen replaced to avoid ihe 
hiatus and because the sense requires it. The feminine dual vibhunityate is preferable 
and might easily have been lost because it was assumed to have been the feminine 

S1 n!“ " S y Wlth the concludin g Hi. Sastri’s text reads vibhutesyate. 

d , I" 8 , VerSC ‘ S f ° Und in thrCe 0f the verse Upanishads: Kathopanisat 5:15cd. 
bvetaJvataiopanisat 6:14cd, and Mundakopanisat 2.2.lied. 5 

mayodare. sthito (1:15.46-49) was at first omitted by P 3 (presumably because of 

eyeskip from the first to the second instance of mayodare). It was then added in the 

same hand m the bottom margin of the same folio, preceded and followed by a sequence 
of alcsaras which looks like ya. t Vciri. 














































Chapter One 


199 


is situated in the belly of may a and the vijhanakcvalin at its head tan- 
mastake = mayaprante). That is the difference [between their positions 
If this [phrase in the verse] is interpreted [as a karmadharaya] to mean ‘the 
belly of maya which is the edge’, then the qualifier adds nothing (aplialam 
eva). This is why there will be a question with regard to whether this is a 
quality that belongs to the pralayakevalin : 121 s low can it be situated in 
the belly of m ay a? ’ [Garuda will) not [ask how it can be situated] ‘in the 
belly of maya which is its edge'. The bound soul in samsara (sakalas tu) is 
an agent of experience deliberating on the means to [achieve] consumption 
(of the fruits of all past actions], [that is to say] on effects |i.c. gross 
and subtle elements] and on the faculties of sense and action (karya- 
karanadih 122 ), and so (iti) it is taught that he is situated there [among 
or at the level of the things on which he deliberates 123 ]. This [Siva] will 
teach [in verse 19]: 'Thus bound with the fcatfcva-elements... and absorbed 
by that [maya].' 

Now he destroys the doubt introduced with [the question] 'How is the 
soul bound?’ 

Kala from Siva joins this impure [soul]. (16ab) 

The word ‘this 1 is a reference back (paramargali) to the subject of the 
discussion (prakrtasya), the bound soul. The ‘impure [soul]’ is not to be 
interpreted here to mean one connected [merely] to mala. Nor does it 
refer to a sakala soul [already by definition] connected with [the tattvas] 
beginning with kala since he will be taught 124 in due course. Rather [what 
it describes is] the soul connected with mala and karman, and so this is 
the meaning: kala joins only the bound soul which is connected with maia 
and with karman. It does not join the vijhanakevalin , who is devoid of 


121 R,amakantha must mean that Garuda misunderstands mayodarajita as a karma- 

■ m 4 b'* * 

dharaya and this misconstruction of his becomes evident when he asks, in Kir an a 2:6, 
how the soul can be both all-pervasive and at the same time situated in the belly of 
maya. Ramakantha there interprets this as a question about the pralayakevalin. 

|AA _ , . _ 

“ With the adi all lower creation may be included. Ramakantha’s account of the 

* 

Saiva puryastaka ad Sardhatri£atikalottara 17:4, p. 126, includes m ah am ay a and maya 
and all the evolutes of maya. 

23 Ramakantha is exploiting the ambiguity of the locative in Sanskrit since it can 
mean both that about which someone thinks as well as where something is situated. 
12i I have emended for the same reasons as at 1:1.2 from varnyamanatvat. In 

* V 

this instance there is slight supportive evidence in the second retroflex n of R jV 's 
varn yam anatvat. 










200 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

t 


karman. And this he will teach |in verse 20, when he says]: ‘|The soul] 
consumes that which has to he consumed according to its own karman.’ 
On the strength of the use of the qualifying word alone ( visesanopadana- 
samarthyad eva) it is certain here what the nature of the vijhanakevalin 
is. And it is taught that in kala there is objectivity (bhogyatvam ), 
|t, lat, is to say] limitedness |i.e. circumscription by object,s| Therefore 
it is established both that it [viz. kala] is an effect and that it is not 
sentient, like pots and other objects ( ghatadivat ). In the fourth chapter 
he will teach its cause; but here it is just the fact that it binds the soul 
t at. is explained. And kala (sa ca)[, as has been stated above, comes] from 
Siva ]and| joins with the [pralayakala] soul (tena saha). And so because 
of this insentiency and therefore dependency (asvatantryena). the same 

ctac ca) [i.e. the fact that they bind] must be recognised to be the case 
(inantavyam) of the other tattvas that will be taught too, because they 
too are limited. This he will teach jin verse 19]: ‘Thus, bound bv the 
tattva-elements... ’ This then is the meaning: Whatever is insentient 
ionics into contact (, sambandham upayati ) with another thing only when 

n TfO \ if in i m ^ 1 1 3 1 _ , . - _ ^ ** 


(eva) it is impelled by an agent equipped with various particular (powers 
o | action and knowledge, as is the case with objects like pots (ghatadi¬ 
vat. ). So too kala and the tattvas below it ( kaladi) are insentient,’and 

^ f a __* i i -I 


therefore they too are joined with the soul only when impelled by an agent 
equipped with particular |powers of] action and knowledge. 

And this agent is Siva. And so the explanation ( nirnayah) of the 
topic pati too is (undertaken] here. This [formal argument] is not rendered 
inconclusive because of (the fact that inanimate objects might be caused to 
move by| factors like wind, since such factors are themselves (teZ aph 
incorporated into the paksa (paksartatyat).’ 2; The passage beginning 

faiaTlow'lr, W P „Tv‘°~ be ?“ I’’’ th6 '' CTy the vijMnait is dear that 

J d v, J nanak eva.lm, since realisation is irrefrangible 

This reading of P^P 3 is equivalent in sense to that of R", yat ha ghatadi but P-ds 

pleoiiastic yatha ghatadivat is in this case clearly a conflation of the two. 

t e argument is stated formally then insentient objects must be the paksa of 
ich is predicated that they do not come into contact with something else unless 
impelled by an agent equipped with powers of action and knowledge. The sadhva- 

JZ7 iL J' , S "" Pe ”1 b f “ *«'"* '"“"P"' P— of knowledge and 

actiom Their insentiency is the hetu. Ramakantha states that wind itself belongs to 

itseR b K mSeD 1 1 i e ” t l thmgS ’ thc pak?a ' and so ' b >’ th e logic of the argument, must 
itself have been impelled by some conscious agent. 









































Chapter One 


201 


‘The effect is gross and diverse’ 128 will explain (nirnayo bhavisyati) [the 
topic patj'| on the basis of an additional argument (-hetuto pi), namely 
[inference of a conscious agent| from the fact that this |universe] is an 
effect. Thus our position is unproblematic (ity avirodhah). 

Now someone may object (nanu) that kala, itself is in the first place 
unproved, so how can this agent|, Siva,] be established by his impelling 
this [fcaia]7 In response to this is taught as follows: 


The bound soul s consciousness is empowered by this 
[Jcala], the sphere [of the operation of its senses] is 
made known by vidya and it is also stained by pas¬ 
sion. And matter (pradhanam ca 129 ), which consists 
of the gunas [viz. sattva, rajas and tamas] [is joined 


128 


Kira.ua 3:12a 


j r 

This has been preferred to the reading pradhanena on slim grounds. The latter, 
as an instrumental, fits the sentence much better, and is clearly supported by the 
commentary as transmitted by P,P 3 (see 1:17.22-24) as well as being the reading of 
Pg. The former, an awkward nominative requiring the unnatural ellipsis of a verb, is 
clearly supported by the commentary as transmitted in R /V P 2 and is the reading of 

R". 


It. is clear that a scribe 


in one or other of the transmissions noticed an inconsist¬ 


ency between the sutrapatha and the commentary as transmitted to him, and that 
he proceeded to make changes to 1:17.22-24 until the commentary was made to con¬ 


cord with the verse. What is not clear is which stream of transmission preserves what 
Ramakantha read. 

• m 

The decision then is not just between pradhanam ca and pradhanena , but also 
between pradhanam and pradhanena (in 1:17.22); between casabdat and apKabdat; 
kaladlny a pi and kaladinapi; °sahitani and °sahitena (1:17.23) and finally, between ca 
sambadhyanta and sambadhyata (1:17.24). 

The reasons for accepting the version represented in each case by the first alternative 
are as follows:— 


1 pradhanam ca is the reading of the Nepalese manuscripts and therefore probably 
old and more likely to have been known to Ramakantha than a reading known 
only to South Indian manuscripts. 

2 The uncompounded verb badhyate regularly expresses 'is bound by’ and would 
perhaps more naturally have the soul as its sub ect than sambadhyate , ‘is con¬ 
nected with' (though of course this would certainly be possible), and the fact that 
both streams of transmission share the compounded verb might be interpreted 
as an indication of the original construction of the sentence. 

3 The plural sambadhyante in P (1:17.24) might be taken to be a primary reading 
which the scribe who made the changes neglected to change because of oversight. 
P,P 3 have no plural subject with which this agrees. Puzzlingly R jV has a singular 
verb. 









202 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * t/ m 


with the soul]. And the soul is bound through its 
connection with the organs [of sense and action] be¬ 
ginning with buddhi and with the army [of gross and 
subtle elements]. 110 (16c-17) 


The soul lias its consciousness empowered by means o; [a partial] im¬ 
pedance |of the action| of mala (malanivrttidvarena samarthlkrtam - 
udbalitam) by kala (kalaya -taya). This is what is taught (ctad uk- 
tam bhavati ): there must ( avasyam ) be admitted to be some limited 
(parimitah ) factor (arthah) [viz. kala] which, in the state of being of the 
sakala, obstructs ( nivarttakah ) [t,he operation of] mala, which [is in turn 
something which] blocks the soul’s [innate powers of] knowledge and ac¬ 
tion drkkriya) and which will [later] be taught, [and which can be] proved 
to exist by argument [and not just by scripture]. 131 Otherwise the limited 
(kimeidvisayasya ) awareness (samvedanasya) that we experience would be 
as impossible for souls |once trapped] in the state of the pralayakevalin as 
it is for the liberated. 1 Now first of all (tavat) it is not the soul (purusah) 
|which obstructs the occlusion of mala] because, as (demonstrated in the 


Individually the reasons are not strong, but cumulatively they have a certain force. I 
have also been swayed by a principle of Srinivasan p. 30, jjl.4.5.1)—a principle that 
should of course be applied with extreme caution: ‘Einige Male lafit sich cine Lesung 
nicht. oder nicht befriedigend, interpretieren. Ebcn dadurcli aber weist sie sich als 
primlir aus.’ 

2 '-J Q ^ 

Thus Ramakantha; what was presumably intended, however, was probably ‘And 
the soul is bound through its connection with the army of instruments [of sense and 
action] beginning with buddhi'. 

The wording of the verse is close to that of Svayambhuvasutrasangraha, 1:10: kalod- 
halitacaitanyo vidyadartitagocarah/ ragena rahji tus capi buddhvadikaranais tat ah. 
Professor Sanderson has pointed out to me that it (or the verse in the Svayam- 
bhuvasutrasahgraha) has been paraphrased in Haravijaya 6:126: kalaya kilodbalita- 
cetan as t hi tih pra ti padyamanavisavas ca vidyaya/ drdli aragarahjitam an a bh avaty ayam 
bhavadicchaya prakrtibhogabhag a null. 

131 i 

These last two attributes in the genitive [ vaksyamanasya and yuktisiddhasya] are 
next to the genitive pumsalp but they are presumably to be interpreted as describing 
mala. 


13 !2 f 

The emendation and translation of this sentence are Professor Sanderson’s (given in 
a letter of 30.xi.93). He further adduced the following parallels: Matahgavrtti ad vidya- 
pada 8:17, pp. 265-6. samalasya hi praguktasya jhatvakartrtvayor a vrtatvat pralaya- 
kevalina iva na bhoktrtvam ity avafyam tayor vyahjakena (Bhatt reads vyahjakatvena 


against most of the manuscripts) tattvadvayena bhavitavyam iti kalavidye siddhyatah 
A soul which has mala, as taught above, cannot consume [karman], because his powers 
of knowledge and action are blocked, just as is the case with the pralayakevalin , and 
so the tattvas of kala and vidya are proven, because there must be a pair of tattvas 









































Chapter One 


203 


commentary on the words ajnah, niskriyah and aprabhuh] above, it has 
not the power to do so ( pragvad a$akteh). Nor is it karman [which is the 
factor that suspends the operation of impurity so that we may experi¬ 
ence], for the same reason (ata eva) [viz. a$akteh\ , and because we cannot 
account ibr [the fact that we have pleasant and painful] experience in any 
other way [than by assuming the existence of karman ] ( bhoganyathan - 
upapattisiddheg ca). For some utterly transcendental (atyantatlndriyam) 
entity whose existence has been inferred ( samsiddhasattakam ) to ex¬ 
plain one effect ( karyantaranyathanupapatiya ) cannot (na... sakyam ) be 
claimed as the cause of another (karyantarakaranatvena); for if it could 
one would have to admit that there is also no need to postulate any other 
cause, sucli as the various faculties ( anekendriyadikaranantaraklpter apy 
ahhavaprasangat). 133 For the same reason (ata eva) [the cause of the 

which make these |powers| manifest. 5 See also Matangavrtti ad 9:16cd, p. 299: siddhe 
hi male tenavrtatvat pumsah pralayakevalavasthayam iva sukhaduhkhavedanam na 
sarnbhavatTty avaSyam tatra tadavarananivartakena bhavitavyam iti kalatattvasiddhih. 
‘For since [the existence of) mala is established, because the soul is blocked by it, 
awareness of happiness and unhappiness is not possible, as in the state of being a 
pralayakevalin, and so the tattva of kala is proved.’ See also Matangavrtti ad vidya- 
pada 9:22c-24b, p.301: etat sarvam yatah tattve kalatmake sati janati nasatv eva. 
pralayakevalyavasthayam atisuksmatvad anupalabdhrtvan (Kashmirian manuscripts; 
asarvajhatvad the rest) muktavasthayam ca nirmaiatvat sarvajhatvad ity arthah. ‘All 
this [can come about, namely limited experience], because he knows only if there is 
a tattva of the nature of kala, not if there is not, because in the state of the pralaya¬ 
kevalin he is extremely subtle and thus is not conscious of anything and in that of the 
liberated, he is omniscient, because he is free of mala.’ 

For the kimcidvisayam samvedanam of the soul in the sakala state cf. AghoraSiva’s 
TattvasahgrahatTka ad 18: yatah samsaravasthayam pumsah caitanyam na sarvavi- 
sayam drgyate. .. ‘Since the consciousness of the soul in samsara is perceived not 
to have all things as its sphere of operation.’ For the sarvavisayarn samvedanam of 
the soul in liberation cf. the same ad 23: ... drkkriyacchadanam kim apy astlty ava - 
siyate yasyabhave muktatmanarn jhatvakartrtvayor vara vat sarvavisayakatvat punah 
samsarayogo nastfti gruyate. ‘One concludes that there must be something which 
impedes the powers of action and knowledge, and it is taught in scripture that liberated 
souls, like Siva, are not again connected with samsara because their powers of action 

and knowledge have everything as their sphere of operation in the absence of this 
(impedance],’ 

Processor Sanderson ibid, takes the term sarnvedana to refer to the soul’s bhoga 
and he adduced Svayambliuvasutrasahgraha l:12ab to support this: bhogo ’sya vedana 
pumsah sukhaduhkhadilaksana . Filliozat translates ‘L’experience de cette &me est sa 
sensation, qualifiee par le plaisir, la douleur, etc... ’ 

133 

' Professor Sanderson (letter of 30.xi.93) emended and translated this last sen¬ 
tence and supported his conjecture with the following parallel passage, which he 







204 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranat&ntra, 


hIso translated, fiom Alatangavrtti ad vidy'apada 9:26 7, p. 302; yady eva in paxi- 
mitena karrnanaiva caitanyopodbalanam a stu. kirn kalayadva. tatrapy ucvatc sva- 
karmetyadi “[9:26c~27b]”. cal at, ah samksubdhan in ay a tat tv at, puinsah sarvakarma- 
vasananusaiena sukhaip ( conj. Sanderson] sukha Bhatt) duhkhani codbhiitam, nanvat. 
etad uktam bhavatL karyaikagamyanarn hi vastunam hetubhedau karyabhedabhyam 
eva siddhyatah. karmakaryat sukhaduhkharupad bhinnam eva karyarn caitanyopod~ 
balauam iti. tatas tatia bhiuucnaiva nimittena kalatmana bhavitavyam. any a t, h a sar- 
vasyaiva karmanimittatvasiddher buddhyaditattvanam apy asiddhih. karmaiva sarvani 
syat. ‘If so, then, [since it is appropriately] limited (parimitam), let (sinful and merit¬ 
orious past! action be that which invigorates consciousness. Why postulate kala? I his 
Siva answers in 9:26c-27b:[. ..) When mayatattva has been activated (samksubdhat — 

. t \ i v ■ * 

calatah ) then all that aiises for the individual m accordance with the latent impressions 
of his past at tions is pleasuie [reward] or suffering [punishmentj. What he means is this. 

! the case of entities that can only be inferred from their effects one establishes two 
separate causes from effects of two different kinds. The invigoration of consciousness 
is an effect distinct from the effect of [sinful and meritorious past] actions (Jcarznan), 
namely pleasure and suffering. Therefore it must have another cause, and that is kala. 
Otherwise one could prove that absolutely everything is the effect of [sinful and mer¬ 
itorious past] actions and so one would fail to establish the existence of [other specific 
causes] such as the tattvas of buddhi etc. Indeed everything would become karinan ' 

AghoraSiva’s TattvasahgrahatTka on verse 19 lucidly presents the same argument: 
naiia kaimanai\a kc\ alcn a tin a <ai tanyabh i vyak t, i h t asva j)hal aj a nana eva caritartha- 
tvat, karyantarahetutve pramanabhavac ca. tasvaiva ca karyantarahetutve 'bliyupa- 
gamy am ane visayagrahanadhyavasayadikarye ? pi tasyaiva hetutvam prasajyate. tatas 
ca vidyabuddhy r adTnani a pi tattvanam anarthakyaprasahgah . tatas tatt van tar as ah a- 
krtasyaiva karinano bhoganimittatvain iti yathadhyavasayadikaryanyathanupapa11va 
b i i ddh a day ah kalpyan t e, e vam p u m so jh an a kriyasak tyabhi vyak tvanya t h an upapa 11 ya 
kala siddhyatiti na kascid d os ah . ‘And it is not karman alone which in this system 
(atra) makes manifest the consciousness of the soul, because that has performed its 
function in bringing about results, and because there is no proof that it is the cause 
of other effects. And even if it were to be admitted that it were the cause of other 
effects, this would entail that it [and nothing else] would be the cause of effects such 
as the cognition of sense objects and synthetic thought, ( adhvavasaya) , and this would 
then entail the undesirable corollary that [impure] vidya and the tattvas [of the senses) 
starting with buddhi would be without a function. And so [it follows that] it is in com¬ 
pany with other tattvas that karman causes experience bhoga). And so (iti) just as 
buddhi and the others are postulated because effects such as synthetic thought cannot 
otherwise occur, so too kala is established because the making manifest of the souks 

'innate powers of] knowledge and action cannot otherwise occur. Thus there is no fault 
[in the argumentation].’ 

A more timid conjecture than that of Professor Sanderson might convey the same 
meaning, auekendiiyaditattvantaraklpter apy abhavaprasangat. 'one would have to 
admit that there is no need to postulate (as causes] the numerous other tattvas of the 
senses and so on.’ This conjecture preserves the element aditattva transmitted in RA. 
Perhaps even more of R v ’s reading might be preserved unchanged; the phrase aneka- 
dikkiiyaditat\antaia might be incorporated into the text and interpreted to mean 




































Chapter One 


205 


senses. 


invigoration of consciousness is] neither [some product of matter such as, 

the faculties ( indriyadi ) nor God; 134 but kala is that which impedes [the 

;' rrlusi " n 1)1 mala. Thus it has been stated first of all that he is first boun 
b y 4 be bond that is kala (kalalaksansna ... bandliGiia). 

Next (tad aim) the soul lias the sphere [of the operation of its senses 
(visayah = gocarah) made known by vidya. 135 Even for a soul in whom 
[the working of] mala has been stopped, there has to be a further [com¬ 
mon] iiistiument (karanantarena) for consciousness (samvittau) that con¬ 
sists in the functions of the intellect (- buddhivrttyatmaka -) that will be 
explained in due course, such as memories, creative imagination, notions 
and the like, because it is consciousness, like cognitions of the objects by 

And it is not buddhi that is the instrument [needed] here; for 
that is [among its] objects. Nor is it ahamkara or any other [faculty]. 

because they, since they will be said to be the means of other actions 

_ 

‘the numerous other tattvas (that enable the activity of the powers] of knowledge and 
action (viz. the indriyasj.’ 

The arguments for the cause of the invigoration not being God are set forth 
ad Matanga vidyapada 9:25cd-26ab, pp. 301-2: yat tuktam TSvaraSaktir eva pumsaS 
caitanyodbahkastu. knp kalayeti. tatpratiksepayocyate —tayodbalita cit. svad 
ityadi.f 25c:d 26alrj taya cid upodbalita bhavet. tato muktasyeveyam api SivaSakti- 
vyakfatvat cetanasya purusantarasya udbalaae ksama syat. parameivara^aktiyogad 
dhyaymas caiva purusab sarve muktim prasadliayanti. na ca tathabhuto ’yam bhokta. 
tato negvaraSaktyabhlvyakteti gamyatc. parimitaya kalayaiveti. ‘Now as for the ar¬ 
gument^ “Let the power of the Lord be that which invigorates the soul’s conscious¬ 
ness. What need of kala?”— in order to refute this (error the following verse 


‘9:25cd-26ab 


is taught 


. Let consciousness be invigorated by this (rfaiti). In that case this 
consciousness!, like that of a liberated soul, would be capable of invigorating the con¬ 
sciousness of another soul, because of its being made manifest by Siva’s power, and 
because of their connection with the power of the supreme Lord all souls which medit¬ 
ated |upon it] would attain liberation. But this is not the way the experiencing |soul| 

is, and so it is to be understood that (consciousness) is not made manifest by the power 
of the Lord but by limited La/a alone.' 

P. S vidyakbyayapi (understand vidyakhyayapi) dyotito suggests that this trans¬ 
mission read l:16d as M and E„ do: vidyadyotito gocarah. The garbled reading of the 
Nepalese manuscripts however reflect R"’s °khyapito and it is more likelv that they 
rather than the Southern sources, share what Ramakantha read. P 3 ’s reading further 
C< m P ^ CateS * >, ’ S trivial error, and P 2 has adopted a reading closer to R N . 

Cf. AghoraSiva’s Tattvasangrahatika on verse 13: tatas cadhyavasayasmrtiprati- 

bhapra tyaya bhedabhinna buddhir a pi yaya vidyate sa vidya. ‘And therefore vidva is 
that by means of which one is aware of thought in its various aspects such as judg¬ 
ment, memory, imagination and notions.’ Parallel text and its translation supplied bv 
I rofessor Sanderson in a letter of 30.xi.93. 
















206 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


such as the support of the body, cannot be established to be the means 
in this case too fthis has been taughtf. 13 ^ And so that instrument [that 

is needed] for [the enablement of] those [forms of consciousness] (tatra) is 
vidya. 138 Thus a further bond is established. 


Furthermore (kim ca) [the soul is] bound (baddhah — rahjitah ) by 
laga which is of the nature of attachment. The meaning is as follows: 
As foi oui attachment (rago ’bhisvahgatmakah [abhisvahgah - rag ah ]) 
to the objects of the senses ( visayavisayah) , that cannot be a property of 
the sense objects |themselves!, because it is an activity that [occurs] only 
internally (adhyatmany eva parispandatmakatvat), and because (if it were 
objective rather than subjective] this would entail that there could be no 
such thing as a person free of attachment. 139 Nor is it the quality of the 
intellect known as non-detachment ( avairagyalaksano buddhidharmah ), 
because that, being a bhava, is present |only] as a latent tendency 140 and 


2 27 r I 1 

his seems inappropriate here. What precedes it has not been stated before, unless 
Ramakantha means to refer to the general point made above in this same paragraph 
in connection with karman that an imperceptible entity inferred in order to supply the 
cat^e for one phenomenon should not be assumed to be the cause of another. 

Cf. Tattvasahgraha 12: karanena yen a bhogyam karoti ... sa vidya. tat param 
karanam. The instrument by which [the soulj experiences [objects of experience) 
is vidya. It is the supreme instrument,’ In his commentary on this verse Aghora- 
Siva quotes Ramakantha^ Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 10:4cd: agvena patha dipikaya 
vrajatityadav ivatranekakaranasadhye phale ’pi vidyaiva param karanam yatas lay a 
...janati. ‘As in [a sentence like] “He goes by [the help of] a’lamp by’the path by 
[means of a] horse , the goal can be attained by many instruments, but the supreme 
instrument is vidya alone, since it is through that that [the soul] knows;’ Cf. also 
Tantraloka 9:183: seyam kala na karanam mukhyarn vidyadikam yatha/ pumsi kartari 
si kattn psayojahUiyi yatah. 'This ka la is no. the higher instrument, as MyS an d 

the rest are; for !t 1S the causative agent in the individual agent.’ These parallels were 
pointed out by Professor Sanderson in a letter of 30.xi.93. 

| 3Q ' W V * 

Cf. AghoraSiva s avatarika to Tattvasahgraha lOcd: nanu visayaguna evabhilasa- 

hetur astu/ tan na, visayasamnidhanamatrad eva sarvasya saragatapatter vitaraga- 

bhavaprasahgat ‘Why not let some property in external objects be the cause of desire? 

That is impossible, because the undesirable consequence would follow that there would 

be noone devoid of passion, because the mere proximity of an external object would 
cause all to be impassioned. 1 

On this characteristic of the eight bhavas (referred to in 1:13.11 and listed in note to 
translation ad loc.) see Aghoragiva’s Bhogakarikavrtti ad 60: iha hi buddhau vasana- 
tvena sthita dharmadayo 'stau bhava ucyante. ‘In this system (iha) the eight bhavas 
headed by dharma reside in the intellect buddhi as latent traces.’ Cf. also Aghora- 
6iva s TattvasangrahatTka ad verse 10: nariv avairagyalaksano buddliidharma evabhi- 
lasahetur iti samkhyah, tad ayuktam vasanarupasyakaryakaratvat... ‘The Sank h\as 










































Chapter One 


207 


therefore [unlike this attachment to sense objects] is not something we 
experience directly. Nor is it a function of the intellect (napi tadvrtty- 
atmakah)] because it is not found ( tadadarganat ) in those who are free 
of attachment even when they are thinking about something as desirable 
(abhilasamyatanusandhane 'pi). Nor [can this attachment be a property] 
of karman or other factors [such as the indriyas or the Lord], just as 
the stopping of [the workings of] mala and such [cannot be functions of 
karman], as has been taught above. 141 By a process of elimination then 
raga is that which has the [quality of attachment as its] property [and it 


is 


another bond. 


Then matter 142 (pradhanam) is [also] connected [to the soul in both 
its subtle and gross forms] as the gunas of sattva[, rajas and tamas] 143 
and as the gross worlds. By the word ‘and' [in 17b] is expressed that 
{casabdat ... iti) [the tattvas] starting with kala together with those tat- 
tv as ending with earth that are about to be taught are also connected 
[to the soul in both subtle and gross form] as their own particular gunas 
and as [gross] worlds. Like the tattvas (tattvasargavat), so too the worlds 


object that the cause of desire is a quality of the intellect, namely non-detachment. 
This is wrong, because something which is a latent trace does not [directly] produce 
effects... 1 As Filliozat points out (1988:120), raga does not have the status of a tattva 
for the Sarikhyas, but is equivalent to the bhava of avairagya. [Cf. also AghoraSiva’s 
Bhogakarikavrtti ad 92c-93b.] The same arguments are discussed in greater detail in 
the beginning of the ragatattvaprakarana (vidyapada patala 11) of the Matahgavrtti. 

141 See above 1:17.2-9 vaksyamanasya yuktisiddhasya ... prathamam badhyata iti 
where it has been demonstrated, by eliminating other conceivable factors, that the 
partial obstruction of maia could only be performed by kala. 

142 For the choice of readings in this passage see footnote 129 on p.2Ql above. 

l43 P 3 ’s (and therefore probably also P^s) sattvadigunakarena has been translated. 
If the reading sattvadigunakaranatvena of R /V P 2 were accepted, it would translate ‘as 
the [material] cause of the gunas of sattva etc.’. The latter is not implausible as an 
interpretative gloss of gunatmana. The Matahga discusses avyakta and guna as two 
tattvas , and, since Ramakantha imports other structures from that tantra notably 
the six padarthas), it is conceivable that he is borrowing here too. It is not however 
necessary to regard avyakta and the gunas as separate tattvas in order to be able to say 
that the former is the material cause of the latter. Compare for instance Bhogakarika 
89cd-90ab: upadanam gunanam yat prakrtili sabhidhfyate/ avibhagasthita yasyain 
nirgacchanti giverita. ‘The material cause of the gunas is called prakrti. It is that in 
which they rest undivided and that from which they go forth. [For this to happen 
prakrti must be] impelled by Siva.’ In the Bhogakarikavrtti just before, ad 87-88ab, 
Aghora^iva quotes with approval Mrgendravidya 10:2lab: trayo gunas tathapy ekarn 
tattvam tadaviyogatah. ‘There are three gunas, but nevertheless they are one tattva 
because they are not separate. 1 










208 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


! hhuvanasargo ’pi) are in this system taught to be bonds. Next [are taught 
the instruments of knowledge and action) starting with buddhi\. These 
om prise] those instruments—well known to tiie Sahkiiyas and others—of 
the bnddhi , ahamkara and manas and the five faculties of perception and 
the five faculties of action and the army ( anikam ca ) which is the collection 
of gross and subtle elements (bhutatanmatratmakam) [which are] often 
kinds [and comprise] the rest of the evolutes [of maya] (karyantaram ). 
By connection with these [the soul] is bound. Thus sanction ( anugrahah ) 
is given to the [view of) bondage that is well known to the Safe liyas 
and others [i.e. the view of bondage as| consisting in buddhi and the rest 
[of the evolutes) in the manner that we shall teach below, 144 and not to 
that held by the Vaisesikas and others, according to which it consists in 

1 110 more than l the body and the senses. And it is for this reason [viz. 
that the bottom twenty-three tattvas are known also to the Sankhyas and 
others] that only the bonds of kala etc., which are not well known to other 
theological schools, are introduced by [pointing out] their effects, exactly 
because they are not weil known, and those [bonds] which are well known 
to them are merely repeated [by name]. And so (iff) the fault of not 
covering the topic adequately ( avyaptidosah) cannot be applied [to the 
text] simply because formal definitions of well-known principles (tesam) 
are not given here ( laksananabhidhanat ). 

1 1,1 bb iimmiu the nature of the bond of binding fate too 

(myatyatmano ’pi bandhasya) <is introduced 145 > by way of [pointing 
out] its effect. 


Then by the embrace of binding fate it is also 

bound to that [ karman] which it has itself accumu¬ 
lated. 146 (18ab) 


Then, alter the connection [ol the soul] to the products [of maya] and to 
the instruments [of knowledge and action, there follows] the connection 
(sambandhah = samslesah) to binding fate, because of which the soul 


144 


.. karyadvarenopanyasah and 


See 4:23ff and commentary thereon. 

This is enclosed in double angled brackets, because upanyasyate is a diagnostic 
conjecture supplied to complete the sense. (Cf. 1:17.30 
1:18.15: ... karyadvarenopanyastah .) 

l4(, These padas followed directly after 1:17 in R", but this is because the scribe of R" 
(or of some manuscript in the transmission in which R" stands) was adding the text 
of the sutras from another source into the text of the commentary and here failed to 
recognise tato niyatityadi (R^Pj,; to niyatyadi P 2 ) as the pratika. 















































Chapter One 


209 


is bound to the fruits of action which he has previously accumulated. 
This is the purport: the binding (niyamah) of souls to the fruits of their 
actions is not caused by [the souls’] actions, because their function, as with 
ploughing and such like [agricultural activity], 147 is solely the generation 
of their own particular fruits. 148 And it is not caused by any other of the 
principles, because there is no proof that they are the cause of any other 
effects since they are established by their own effects alone. This has 
been taught above. 149 And so. just as in the case of ploughing and such 
like there must be someone appointed [as overseer] by the king (rajani- 
yukteneva), here too there must be something which binds [the fruit of an 
action to its agent ] (kenacin niyamakena bhavitavyam). 50 This binding 
factor is another bond called binding fate ( niyatyakhyah ). And so the 
activity of this [binding factor], although it [i.e, niyati itself | will be taught 
to be a [direct] product of in ay a [and therefore higher in the hierarchy 
of creation], [takes place] subsequent to the connection [of the soul) to 
products [o in ay a | and to its instruments [of knowledge and action]. For 
this reason it has here been described afterwards. And the same is true of 
[the tattva] time, 151 Thus this exposition is unproblematic ( ity adosah). 

Now is taught what condition the soul that is bound by binding ’ate 
is in: 


Because of the effect [of maya\ which is the division 
of time he is deluded in experience by [the tattva oi j 
time. 152 (18cd) 


M7 The scribe of P 3 initially omitted tins portion ( krsyadi karm ava t ... pramanabhavad 
ity uktam a tail) because his eye skipped from the first krsya 0 to the next, but he then 
squeezed it in between lines. 

Hie inevitable result of murder may be a particular sort of hell, but the deed itself 
do£s not dictate that its result accrues to the agent. 


149 l:17.4-9, 

150 In the analogy the king may be comparable to the soul which is the agent of an 
action, and the overseer may be comparable to niyati , since his function is to ensure 
that the produce accrues to the king. 

151 Because they are direct evolutes of may a, they should have been enumerated earlier, 
but since they do not take effect until the soul is linked to the karanas, they are not 
mentioned until here. Aghorasivak Ta 11 vaprakasa vr11i ad 41 distinguishes between 
listing fcattvas in srstikrama and in pravrttikraina , and it is the latter that is followed 
here. 

152 0nly the first two syllables of this half-verse appear in the body of the text in R v ; 
the rest have been added in the margin. 







2 1 0 


R.amakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

# * */ * 


The effects connected with time which are its divisions are (categories, 
such as] \slow* and Mast’. They are not [units] o space, such as a krosa or a 
yojana , nor of counting, such as 'a hundred’ or ‘a thousand*. It is because 
of them that the soul is deluded in experience [of the consequences of his 
actions] by |the tattva of] time [as the agent] and [it is in this state that 
the soul] is bound by binding fate. For time too is a cause of experience. 
This is expressed [by some authority in the following verse]: 

Ah! at last I have got you. I do not know what I should do. 

Do I enter into [your] body? Do I drink and swallow [you]? 103 

And time i sa ca) has here been introduced by [pointing out] its effects, 1,1 
since it is not well known as a (contributory] cause of experience, al¬ 
though its nature is established by the Vai^esikas and others (svarupeua 
vaigesikadisiddho pi). As is stated [by the VaiSesikas]: 

Time is inferred from the cognitions quick and slow. 150 

And as for its qualities of eternality and so forth which they speak of—as 
[for instance in the following verse] where they say, 


Those who know time know it to be one eternal, pervasive, 
substance, different from activity, [but] the measure of all 
[things! possessed of activity. 156 


’This bizarre verse is presumably chosen to demonstrate how time too for its di¬ 
vision) must necessarily be a retributive factor in the experience of the effects of past 
actions. Perhaps we are to understand that if the romantic hero had found her sooner, 
his pleasure, his bhoga, would have been different. The verse is also quoted (with 
hlmvantlm for pibami) in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 12:20-1, p.346. 

The tu in this phrase (R A P 2 P 3 has been removed because it cannot yield sense in 
this position in the sentence. Furthermore the ca which is placed as the second element 
in the sentence can be interpreted to have an adversative force and no further particle 
is needed. The extra tu may have crept in because a scribe was under the mistaken 
impression that Ramakantha was at that point starting the clause in which he outlines 
his position in contradistinction to the rejected view. This would not be unnatural (cf. 
the sentence beginning iha tu in 1:16.7-8). 

1 ’’Cf. Padarthadharmasangraha p. 63^ 15-1 . kalah pardparavyatikarayaugapadyd - 
yaugapadyadraksiprapratyayalingah. Ramakantha may however be paraphrasing 

Vaitiesikasiitra 2.2.7. 

■■ 

Vakyapadlya 3.9.1. In Rail’s critical text eke pracaksate (’some maintain’) replaces 
kalavido viduh and the verse halves are reversed. This suits the context better, because 
the verse expresses the Vai^esika purvapaksa, as the commentator, Helaraja, points out. 





































211 


“—because it is a product of maya, as shall be taught, 157 and because 
of its division into past, future and present, those qualities (tat) are not 
accepted in this system. The way (yatha... tatha) [in which they are 
argued to be unacceptable] we have taught in the Matangavrtti 158 and it 
is to be understood from there. 

Now is taught that these [categories] starting with kala are all tattvas, 
that they are not all-pervasive and that the [connection to a] gross body 
depends on [being connected to] them. 

Thus bound with the tattva-e lements the [soul that is] 
naturally enveloped [becomes] partially equipped of 
knowledge, linked to a [gross] body, embraced by ex¬ 
perience [generated out] of maya and [thus] absorbed 
by that [maya]. (19) 

The above-taught [categories] from kala down to earth are tattvas and 
they are elements [o a composite whole] (kalas ca tab ), because, while 
being manifest, they are not pervasive, 1 )9 since, as will be taught, they 
are effects [of maya]. This is taught by the Sankhyas: 150 

That which has been made manifest has a cause, is imperman¬ 
ent, is a 1-pervading, it is active, multiform, must have a locus, 
is something from which the cause can be inferred (Jmgam), 161 
composite and subordinate. That which is not made manifest 
is the opposite. 


Ramakantha cites the same verse in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 12:4cd, p.337, in 
the order in which it appears in the Kiranavrtti , but with eke pracaksate. Later in 
the same passage Ramakantha cites VakyapadTya 3.9.76, a verse which ends with the 
formula kalavido viduh. It is conceivable that the wording of the verse quoted in 
the Kiranavrtti results from a confused association of this passage with that of the 
Matangavrtti. The confusion is a remote possibility because Ramakantha refers the 
reader to exactly this portion of the Matangavrtti in 1:18.22. 
ls7 Kirana 4:22. 

w 

1 r q 

1 Chapter 12 of the vidyapada. 

159 * 

In their avyakta state they would be merged in maya and therefore pervasive. 

160 Sari khvakarika 10. 

161 m * 

This is Vacaspati's interpretation ad loc. Causes can be inferred from effects but 
the reverse is not necessarily true. Gaudapada interprets it to mean dissoluble at the 
time of pralaya. 











212 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m 


Bound in the way described ( uktaprakarena = evam) by these Itattva-j 

elements the [soul is then a] sakala ,' 62 [that] is either a soul that has 

not yet attained an external body or one that has had its external body 

destroyed. [This is) because these [tattvasj constitute the [soul’s] subtle 

body. That is the meaning. For if these [tattvas] were all-pervasive there 

could be no subtle body. This [idea] has been taught jin the following 
half-verse): 5 


But [the notion of) a |migratory] body between [death and 
regeneration] is denied by Vindhyavasiri.^^ 


Saka ! a i C T m0nly inter P reted to mean ‘equipped with kata\tattva 
and the tattvas below it] . See for instance AghoraSiva’s Tattvaprakatavrtti ad verse 9- 

tv :rr tatk ^hutah WiM kathyante. tadyuktatvad eva casya sakala - 
tvam. By the word may a the tattvas of kala etc. are expressed, and it is exactly because 

of its connection with them that the soul is [said to be] sakala.' Ramakantha however 

tZZah to 1 ™ aila ,° f Uie W ° rd and haS thuS interpreted tattvakala- 

baddhahto mean bound by those tattvas which are elements |of the whole which is 

may a] . is interpretation allows him to take pada a. as an exposition of the sub- 

su^dtvideH t saka,a which has gross body. This sub-category is then further 
sub-divided into aprapta- and pranasta-bahyaiSariras. Cf. Ramakantha’s comments in 

the Matangavrtti ad vulyapada 2:17c-18b where he interprets the single word ksetrl 

o refer to the same sub-category: ... malakarmayukto ’pi ksetrena kaladiksityantena 

tattvasanrena sambaddho praptabahyatanrah pranastabahyatanro vasakalah. .. the 

sou also connected to mala and to karmaa is bound to the tattvas from kala down to 

arth (kaladiksityantena = ksetrena), that is to say to the body composed of the tattvas 

from [kala to earth); [such a soul) is either the sakala that has had his |gross,| external 

o y estroyed or [the sakala] that has not acquired an external body.’ This distinction 

is not clear to me, because I would expect both terms to apply to any sakala without 
a gross external bodv. 

4 / 

As Professor Sanderson has observed (in conversation), historically the word sakala 

r. , a 7,7i-, ,rom “• <■” '"■»» ** wa£ > LhStrs 

oalalst™ 1 f,ST, , T S “' T 8 '' K ‘ nr,dl,iva>s P^CSrthabhlfyn ,,J f,«„. 

patasutm 1.1, p. 5 tatra pat a nama karyakaranakhyah kalali. 

lokavartnka Atmavada 62ab. Vindhyavasin, the Sankhya contemporary of Vas- 

view that the ^T" PnnC ' Pally f °. r his denial of the migratory body, a corollary of his 
view tha the attvas making up the posited suksmatarlra were all-pervasive. Cf Yukti- 

ipika ad Sankhyakanka 39, p. 144: vindhyavasinas tu vibhutvad indriyanam bijadctc 

vr yajanma tattyago maranam tasman nasti suksmatamam. ‘But for Vindhyavasin 

because of the all-pervasiveness of the senses, birth [is held to occur| by activity [of the 

senses! in the place where the seed is, and death is the abandonment of that [movement! 

And so there ,s no subtle body.’ (See also Frauwallner, 1953:284 and 403-4). Thus 

e variant vtbhuvacina ‘b.y someone who claims the pervasiveness [of the tattvasl’ is 

per laps an astute alteration made by a scribe who was following the line of argument 
but had not heard of Vindhyavasin. argument 






































Chapter One 


213 


Bound by the fattva-elements the soul becomes connected to a gross body 
and equipped ol partial knowledge, but not when it is not bound by them. 
Thus, by introducing a further differentiation ( bhedantarapratipadanena 
in the (category of thej sakala soul, 164 it is taught that the [group ofj 
creation of creatures too ( bhutasrster a pi) 165 is a bond. Experience of 
may a —that is experience in the sense of that which is is experienced (a nu- 
hhuyate ~ bhujyate) —(experience that is| of, i.e. connected with, maya 
is (to be identified with] the delusion that consists in the erroneous belief 
that that which is not the soul is the soul, and it is with that delusion 
(hat the soul who is linked to a gross physical body is pervaded ( vyaptah 
— parisvaktah) , and once he is [thus pervaded] he comes to be full of 
that, ’ |in other words the soul] comes to be full of the erroneous belief 


1 (3 4 rn 

The category of the sakala is t bus broken down into those without gross physical 
bodies either because they just been destroyed ' pranas ta- or because they have not 
yet been attained (aprapta-) and those with gross physical bodies here mentioned. Cf. 
Ramakantha’s comments in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 2:17c-18b, p.34, where he 
interprets the word patyah to refer to this last type of sakala: ... malakarmakaladi- 
yukto 'pi sphutam krtva pakyah bahyena yathakramam kaladiksityantabhuvanajena 
sthulatarlrena yuktah sakalaviSesa eva. h..also the soul that is connected to mala , 
karrnan and the tattvas beginning with kala and that is plainly (sphutam krtva [— 
sphutam]) to be bound (pa<?yah) } [that is to say the soul] that is linked in due order to 
an external, gross body born of the worlds of the tattvas from kala to earth, [such a 
soul] is a particular kind of sakala 

The translation of this phrase assumes that Ramakantha has here made use of 
the threefold Sahkhya categorisation of groups of creation. Cf. the YuktidTpika , p. 107, 

( ommenting on ! phrase tatkitah sargah from Sari khyakarika 21: pradhanapurusayor 
hi bhoktrbhogyabhavapeksanimitto yam tattvasargo mahadadih , bhavasargag ca 
dharmadih, bhutasarga$ ca brahmadih pravartate. 'The creation of tattvas consist¬ 


ing of buddhi onwards takes place caused by the relationship between experieneer and 
experienced that exists between matter and the soul, |as is] also the creation of the 
bhavas beginning with dharma and the creation of creatures beginning with Brahma.’ 


Hence we find the first referred to in 1:17.24 with tattvasargavat, the second in 1:20.2 

.... 11 r in 1:19.9 with bhutasrster a pi. Ramakantha has 

* * * ■* * * 

already quoted Sahkhyakarika 53 in 1:9.45-6, in which the members of this last group 


are summarised. A fourth group not shared by the Sahkhyas is the bhuvanasargab re¬ 
ferred to in 1:17.24. Kumaradeva ad Tattvaprakaga 7 refers to a fivefold classification 
that adds a sarga of pratyayas (as is clear, e.g., from VacaspatimiSra’s commentary on 
Sahkhyakarika 52, this is the same as that of the bhavas for the Sahkhyas, but we have 
seen above in footnote 78 on p. 186 that Aghorasiva too distinguishes them) and for 
this he adduces as an authority a verse he attributes to the f>aivarahasva. 

lOOrriL O ' ** " 

The maya of tanmayah is probably best taken thus in the sense of pracurya rather 
than in the perhaps more common sense of vikara. Filliozat’s awkward translation ‘faite 
de cette' for the same expression in the verse quoted below from the Svayambhuva- 











214 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


that \ hat which is not the soul is the soul. The soul does not think itself 
different from the products [of may a] and the organs [of sense and action 
with which it has been equipped]. This is that delusoriness of maya, as 
we shall teach. And it has been taught in the Svayambhuv a: 10 ** 


^ hib < , ! 1 1 i tin. i it aini nation of may a, made 

blind by its own faults, and becomes full of it (yati tanmaya- 
tarn), stained in t ie experiences of [the evolutes of] maya. 


As for (tu) mala , its quality of binding, i.e. its enveloping [of the soul] ii 

the states of the pralayakevalin [and of the saicaia] ( pralayakevaladyava- 

sthayam ), just like cataracts and other such [diseases] of the eye. has 

been taught to be established with the statement that (iti) the soul is 
enveloped by its innate rnala. 


Next the bond of karrnan 


is discussed]: 


Then [the soul] experiences his entire experience, 

composed of happiness and other such [experiences] 
according to his karman . (20ab) 


Then after being connected to a gross body [the soul] experiences the fruits 
that aie happiness and unhappiness and the like in the form of bhavas and 
pra tyay as generated from the good and bad actions that he has previously 
accumulated. Thus the crea ion of bhavas (bhavasrsteh) is taught to be 
the form that the bond of karman takes. Thus even when all his karman 
has been destroyed, because he retains a body through the remainder of 
its traces, like the motion of a [potter’s] wheel [that persists even when 
that which set the wheel in motion stops pushing it], 169 he experiences 
his entire (niravasesam — krtsnam ) experience just as awareness of 
[happiness and unhappiness and so onj ( tatsamvedanamatram) . Thus 
another condition of being for the [type of soul known as] sakala has been 
taught as a bond. * 1 ' 0 And so with the above (iyafca) the entire topic of 


sutrasangraha follows the second sense, but Sadyojyotih’s remarks seem not to justify 
this. . ‘ J 

167 

Kirana 2:15 and commentary ad loc. 

I"* vayambhu vasii trasarigraha 1:14. Filliozat reads evam for ittham. 
n See footnote 74 on p. 185 above. 

170 rp i * - 

I his seems to mean that those rare beings who have no karman left to consume and 
are yet sti I equipped with a gross material body constitute this other class of sakalas. 
This category of sakala is referred to also in the Matangavrtti ad viclyapada 1:1-26, 
pp. 23-4. It is not clear to me from the above what it is that such souls do experience! 






































Chapter One 


215 


bonds has been introduced (abhihitah) in order to rebut the question. 
k How is the soul bound?’ 

Now he settles (samadhih) the question ‘How is the soul released?’ 

When [good and bad] actions have become equal be¬ 
cause of an intense descent of power [which in turn 
comes about] through the power of the maturation of 
mala, 171 the soul is initiated by his guru and becomes 
omniscient like Siva and devoid of parviscience, filled 

171 Because Ramakantha is attempting to make the Kirana's presentation of what 
precedes a descent of power consistent with Sadyojyotih’s account (and perhaps that of 
other tantras?), according to which maturation of mala is the prerequisite for a descent 
of salvific power, his commentary below requires us to take same karmani sanjate to 
refer to the equanimity of the soul towards actions that would produce good or bad 
results—an equanimity that is a psychological consequence of a descent of power and so 
a sign from which one can infer that a descent of power has taken place, thus making 
the soul fit for initiation. The descent of power in turn can only come about after 
mala has matured (kalantarava^afc). It is easy to see that this interpretation is quite 
unnatural, and what must really have been intended is plain in the light of the fifth 
patala of the Kirana , the purport of which Ramakantha again ingeniously subverts: 
when two actions become equal 'i.e. of equal strength and simultaneously ripe) they 
block each other and the soul is unable to experience. This comes about either ‘because 
of the differences in the time |that it takes each to mature]’ or ‘through the power of 
an interval of time’ (kalantarava^at). It is this blockage of karman that precedes the 
descent of power through which the soul is rendered ready to receive salvific initiation. 
The Siddhanta doctrine of this kind of karmasamya , the theory of which is outlined 
and criticised by Abhinavagupta (Tantraloka 13:67-97), will indeed also be discussed 
by Ramakantha in the Kiranavrtti on 5:9-12 and elsewhere in the fifth patala. Indeed 
this section of the Tantraloka may be based on the fifth patala of the Kirana, which, 
as far as I have been able to discover, gives a fuller account of karmasamya than any 
other Siddhanta. 

In the fifth chapter Ramakantha is forced to explain that there are different kinds of 
descents of power and that one such does indeed occur to unblock the flow of experience 
when such an impasse occurs, but that such a descent of power need not be the one that 
precedes salvific initiation, indeed it will not be the one that precedes salvific initiation 
unless the soul’s innate impurity is also ripe. 

Ramakantha’s ingenious interpretation resolves a fundamental inconsistency in the 
Saiva Siddhanta and became justly famous. Aghora^iva, as we shall see in footnotes 178 
and 182 on pp. 218 and 219 below, uses Ramakantha’s discussions of karmasamya as 
templates in all his commentaries where the issue is discussed and quotes Ramakantha’s 
distortion of this particular verse with approval ad Mrgendravidyapada 8:6 (Mrgendra- 
vrttidlpika p. 226 : vat ah same karmani ityadav api sutre kalantaragabdo maJapari- 
paka vac aka t vena karm asamyaSab d a£ co pakara pakaranim i 11 akarm ad vayasamya vac a ka- 
taya tatrabhavata ramakanthena kiranavrttau vyakhyatah. Furthermore it is Rama¬ 
kantha’s position and not that of an earlier commentator on the Kirana that is referred 














216 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


with the unfolding of the [innate] nature of Siva and [if 
he receives the less intense kind of initiation by which 
he does not immediately relinquish his physical body] 
t hen he does not [after death] continue to be involved 
in sarpsara. (20cd-22ab) 


Kala refers here [not, to time, as in verse 19, but] to mala since it blackens 
(krsnatam nayati = kalayati), that is to say it makes dirty ( malimkaroti), 
since words like kala and nil a denote particular colours. As [some author¬ 
ity] expressed [in the following verse]: 


to by Ksemaraja in his protracted discussion of the subject at the end of the fifth pataJa 
of the Svacchandatantroddyota, vol. 3, pp. 93-4: atha saty a pi karmasamye pahpakvam 
eva malain Iteccha runaddluti kairanavyakhyatrmatam atnyate. .. It is conceivable 
that the position attacked predates Ramakantha; but Ramakantha’s father. Narayana- 

' "irf 1 # 

kantha, does not appear to hold it. In his commentary both versions of what must 

precede initiation are in evidence and the contradiction is apparently unresolved— 

see e.g. Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 3:5c 6b, p. 110: tattadyonistarlropabhogabhukta- 

vicitrakarmaksayatas tatsamyad va atyutkatanialaparipakava£apravrtta£aktipatapa- 

saritamalasyavaptanugrahasya jantor nirastasamastapaAatvad avirbhntasarvarthajna- 

tva(°jnatva° Devakottai; °tattva° KSTS)kartrkasya bhuktatmanah samsarvatahetoh 

* “ * * P 

p&$utvusyabha. vac chivurupd eva bha,g&,v&n bh2ivs,ti. ‘Either because his various past 

actions have been destroyed, consumed by experience in bodies born in different births, 

or because those |actions| balance [and thus block each other], the soul attains power, 

his impurity is removed by a descent of power (gaktipata) that comes into action because 

of the exceptional force of the maturation of his impurity, and because all his bonds are 

cast off, his power to do and to know all things is revealed, and because the released 

soul has no impurity (pa£ut vasya), which is the cause of being subject to the cycle of 

rebirth, he becomes a Lord whose nature is [that of) Siva.’ But cf. Narayanakantha’s 

remarks in the Mrgendravrtti ad 8:6: nanu sad yan na muktaye ity ayuktam uktam 

saty a pi karmani tatsamyan mukter am n at at vat/ yad uktam gnmatkiran e — ‘[Kiran a 

1:20c-2lcj itif naisa dosas tathavidhasya karmanah sato pv asattvam parasparaprati- 

baddhagaktitvenaphalatvad dTksottarakarmavat. ‘Surely [what is expressed with the 

words] “for while it [viz, Jcarman] is there, it is not [conducive] to liberation” is wrong, 

because it has been handed down by tradition t at liberation comes about even when 

Jcarman still exists through the balance (and thus blockage] of that [Jcarman]. This is 

taught in the venerable Kirana [1:20c—21c] “When actions become equal |i.e. balance 

and so block each other by being equally powerful and simultaneously ripe] due to the 

power of [the passing] of intervals of time, [and] when [thereupon] because of an intense 

descent of power the soul is initiated by his guru, he then becomes omniscient like 

Siva.” There is no fault [in our position], because such actions, even though they are 

there, are [in a certain sense] not [really| there, because, like actions performed in the 

period after initiation, they do not yield fruit, since they block each other’s power [to 
produce fruit].’ 



















Chapter One 


217 


vven something that is insignificant becomes great (para- 
bhavam aknute) through contact with something great 
(mahatmanah), for (yat) [see, even) the [night] sky shines like 
the ocean of milk, when its darkness ( °kalima) is drunk up by 
the rays of the moon. 1 '' 


Hie phrase kalantaravagat [is to be interpreted to mean:) through that 
power (samarthyam = vatiah) of the transformation ( parinamah — ant- 
aram ) of that |mala (= kala)| comes the intense descent of [Siva’s] power 
(saktipatah 17,i ), and not through this power of an interval ( antara ) of kala 


[in the sense of] time |as characterised by differentiations] such as past 
and future. This is expressed by the word ‘from that’ ( tatah ). 174 For it 
is the maturation of mala alone (eva) that is the cause of the descent of 
[Siva‘s| power, as He will teach: 175 


After the blocking of the power of mala (tacchakti -) [the sou!| 
is made without desire for existence. 


and in the Svayambhuva: 1 ' 6 


When this |ma7a| is worn away, there is a desire to go to the 
supreme state, than which there is nothing higher. 


By this (tena 11 ') [descent of power] his karman, [both] that which gives 
rise to something desirable and that which gives rise to something un- 


^ r 

‘'The (untraced) quotation seems to have been adduced only to support the unprob¬ 
lematic lexical observation that kala (and cognates like kali man) can refer to colour. 

173 

' Variant expressions no doubt readily suggested themselves to the scribes, but P 2 ’s 


paramegvarag gaktinipato can plausibly be more specifically explained as a conflation 
of Pi's par am e£ varagak tip at o and gaktinipato in R v, s transmission. The form gaktini- 
pata occurs frequently in tantras, but it seems less common in Kashmirian exegetical 
literature. Both R Nl s and Pi 3 Vs readings are probably secondary: the one is an 
amplification and the other a ‘correction’ to the expression of the verse. 

174 mi 

he point appears to be that he use of the remoter deictic pronoun tatah some¬ 
how conveys the remoter sense of the phrase kalantaravagat , and thus 20d translates 
through that power of the transformation of mala' die use of the deictic pronoun 
atah might have implied that the phrase was to be interpreted in its more immediately 

obvious and therefore figuratively nearer sense, yielding a translation such as ‘through 
this power of an interval of time’. 


115 Kirana 2:29cd. 

b 

170 

Svayambhu vasu trasahgrah a 1:17cd. 

^ yy r 

rhe tena is the correlative to the vah of 1:22.5. 

V ■ 

1:22.11 must be the t asm in in 1:22.14. 


The correlative to the 


yat here 










218 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * is * 


desirable becomes |perceived by the soul as| equal, 1 ' 8 
expressed [in the following verse]: 1 ' 9 



some authority] 


He who does not take pleasure because of being helped or get 
angry at being harmed, who remains the same in the face of 
all things, that man is taught to be liberated in this life. 

178 AghoraSiva in his Ratnatrayapanksollekhinl ad 313-4 makes reference to this 
passage, among others, and makes some of the same points more clearly: ata£ 
ca punyapunyakhyaJabdena hi a hrsyaty upakarena napakarena kupyatij yah samah 
sarvabhutesu jTvanmuktah sa ucyate ’ iti nyayenopakarapakaratmakam kamiadvayam 
ucyate. tayor malaparipakavagat samyabuddhau satyam mokso bhavati, tadabhave 
tu band ha eva . na tv asvamedhabrahrnahatyadirupau punyapunyau tavoh samyam 
moksahetur iti vyakhyeyam, gastravirodhat tadrgasya ka rm as a niyasya samsarava- 
sthayam a pi sambhavat svanatfamatra eva caritarthatvat, samastakarmasamyasyapi 
vijhanakevalitvamatra eva he tu tv at, moksahetutvasam bhavat, maiaparipakasyaiva 
proktakarmasainyacihnanumeyasya dlksadv arena moksahctutvasambhavac cetyadi vi- 
starenasmabhir uktam migendravrttidlpikavam. sadhitam ca gurubhih gninatsvayam- 
bhuvakiranamatahgadivrttisv iti tato ’vadheyam. 'And so here with the word 
punyapunyakhya, by the rule u Ke who does not take pleasure etc. [as verse quoted by 
Ramakantha below]” what is meant is the two kinds of karman, [i.e. those whose res¬ 
ults are) beneficial and untoward. Liberation comes about when there is the perception 
through the power of the maturation of maia that the two are the same. When this 
is not perceived then bondage [comes about]. It is not to be interpreted to mean that 
the cause of liberation is the equal balance of meritorious and demeritorious actions 
like the performance of an a^vamedha sacrifice or the killing of a Brahmin, for that 
would contradict £astra, since that kind of equal balance of actions is possible in the 
state of samsara too and [such a balance of opposing good and bad icarman| fulfils 
its purpose (car: tar that vat) merely by mutual destruction. [The interpretation above 
would be wrong also] because only the maturation of mala, inferrable from the signs 
taught above [for which see AghoraSiva's commentary on RatnatrayaparTksa 12] that 
equality of [viz. equanimity with regard to] karman has been achieved, can be the cause 
of liberation by means of initiation, since even equal balance of all [the soul’s good and 
bad] karman [without the attendant maturation of maia] only causes the [incompletely 
liberated| state of the vijhanakevalin and cannot be the cause of liberation. This I have 
taught at length in the Mrgendravrttidipika and it has been proved by the venerable 
teacher [Ramakantha] in his commentaries on the Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha* the 
Kirana , and the Matanga. It should be understood from these [works]. 1 

*1 have not been able to find any such proof in Sadyojyotih’s Svayambhuvavrtti , 
and it is unlikely that it was to be found in Narayanakantha’s lost Svayambimva- 
vrttitippanaka, for see footnote 171 on p.21G. Presumably Aghorasiva refers here to 
Ramakantha’s lost Svayarnbhuvoddyota. 

I79 I have not been able to trace this verse, but the sentiment is ubiquitous. Twelve 
instances of the final pada, jlvanmukta sa ucyate , are listed in Thomi’s index to the 
Brhadyogavasistha, but all are incorporated into verses that are otherwise different. 
'The closest parallel in that work is perhaps 2.13.72cd-73ab: na hrsvati glayati yah sa 
Marita iti ka thy ate/ yah samah sarvabhutesu bhavi kahksati nojjhati. 

























Chapter )ne 


219 


Wiien this [equanimity with regard to /carman] has come about and not 
otherwise, then the soul is inititiated by the guru, i.e. by the Lord through 
the person of the initiating priest ( acaryadhikaranena) by means of the 
collection of mantras, 180 since without such equanimity with regard to 
action (tathabhutakarmasamatvam) the initiating priest could not be cer¬ 
tain about the descent of [Siva’s) power. Here [unlike in other places in the 
tantra, notably in 5:8] it is not to be interpreted [to mean that] equal bal¬ 
ance [and there‘ore impasse] of actions incurring opposing rewards which 
arises from [their] simultaneous maturation or from their urgency (fclvra- 
vegatvena 181 ) because the descent o' [Siva’s] power brought on by that 
[impasse of actions incurring opposing rewards] does not cause [final] lib¬ 
eration. 18J For this very reason [i.e. because that gaktipata that results 


1S0 Thus R N ; what the P manuscripts read flies in the face of Siddhanta doctrine. Cf. 
Ramakantha ad Moksakarika 96: paramega eva acaryastho mantramantregavyatiriktan 
diksayaiva mantrasadhyaya paripakvamalan puinso mocayatlty uktam. 

1 Q 1 * 4 

I have translated the reading yugapatparipakat tTvravegatvena va of P 1 P 3 on the 
strength of the parallel with vidyapada 5:11.1-4. But the reading paripakas tivra- 
vegatvam of R A P 2 might also be adopted. The sentence would then have translated 
Equality of opposing actions is not to be interpreted here to mean their simultaneous 
maturation, [and thus) their urgency.’ This version also has a parallel in 5:8.21-2. 

182 AglioraSiva’s RatnatrayaparTksollekhinl makes the same points clearly ad Ratna- 
trayapanksa 315. SrTkantha is there contradicted, because, like the Kirana, he makes 
no mention of malaparipaka and would have Siva’s salvific gaktipata follow upon a 
blockage of karman: parasparavirodhena nivaritavipakayoh/ karmanoh sanni- 
patena (°pate na Aghorasiva) saivl saktih pataty anau// viruddhaphalayor 
a£vam edhabrahmahatyadidh armadharmaru pay oh svargabrah m alokaphalayor dh arm a- 
rupavor avidrauravaphalayor va 'dharmarupayoh karmanoh sannipate sati £aivi &va- 
tvadavika 'nugrahika 6 aktir atinani na patati, tasya malaparipaka eva patagravanat. 
kintu rodhagaktir eva niyatidvarena viruddhakarmaksayartham patati. tad uktam 
grTmanmatahge (C dharmadharmavipake ’smin ” (vidyapada 13:15) ityadina dlksaya eva 
malaparipakavinabhutayah karrnaksayadvarena moksahetutvarn. yad uktam grlrnat- 
kirane anekabhavikam karma dagdhabljam ivanubhihf bhavisyad api samruddham 
yenedam tad dhi bhogatah ’ (6:20) iti. malaparipake saty anugrahikayah pat ah. ‘ “Be¬ 
cause of two actions coming together that prevent [each other from bearing] 
fruit by blocking each other the power [called] Saivl descends upon the soul.” 
[Or, in Aghora&va’s interpretation, “does not descend upon the soul”.] When two 
actions—good, such as the performance of an a^vamedha sacrifice, or bad, such as the 
killing of a Brahmin—whose fruits, such as heaven (svarga) and Brahma’s world, if 
they are two good actions, or the hell called Raurava and the hell called Avici, if they 
are bad, occur together, blocking each other’s fruit, then the power [called] Saivl that 
is compassionate and bestows Sivahood does not descend upon the soul, because it is 
taught that that [power] descends only when mala is ripe. It is rather the power of 
restraint ( rodhagaktih) that falls, through necessity* in order to destroy the opposing 









220 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

i t * * 


from the kind of equality just mentioned does not bring about final lib¬ 
eration! the descent of power [of the kind just mentioned] brings about 
the liberation of men from the impasse dependent on [the fruits] of two 
opposing actions [since a descent of power must have some liberating ef¬ 
fect], and not from any other bond, because the soul remains exactly as 

| nn 

before, as we shall show. 

And when the soul has thus been initiated by initiation that gives 
immediate liberation sadyonirvanadlksaya), then he becomes omniscient 
and omnipotent like Siva and he becomes free of the bonds that were the 
cause of the state of partial knowledge . 184 But the soul who is initi¬ 
ated with initiation that gives gradual liberation ( asadyonirvanadiksaya) 
does not again [in another life) become involved in samsara, and, when 
his [current physical] body fails, he is filled with the unfolding of [his in¬ 
nate] Sivahood]. This does] not [happen] before (na prak), because |this 
sort of initiation is] not a means of revealing [innate] Sivahood and of 
totally (, sarvatmana ) destroying bonds because of the impediment of the 
experience of [the fruits of] accumulated kannan whose effects are already 
underway ( arabdhakaryakarmabhogoparodhena) as we shall teach [in our 
commentary) on [the quarter verse] ‘[but] that [karman] by which this 
[body is sustained can be destroyed only] by experience’ (yenedam tad 
dhi bhogatah ). 185 In this system ( iha ) liberation is the revelation of [in¬ 
nate] Sivahood. It is not [characterised by] transference [of Sivahood] into 
the adept ( siddhe 186 ) or possession or the coming into being [of Sivahood|. 


actions. This is taught in the venerable Matanga with the section starting “When the 
soul has (a smin) [two actions| whose fruits are those of good and bad [action]..By 
destroying actions initiation alone, which cannot occur without the maturation of mala, 
is the cause of liberation. This is taught in the venerable Khan a: “The action of many 
existences has its seeds burnt, so to speak (iva), by mantras [in initiation]. Future 
[action] too is blocked; [but] that by which this |body is sustained can be destroyed 
only] by experience.” |Onlv) when impurity is ripe does the power that bestows grace 


descend.’ 

* According to Ramakantha’s Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 13:15-17 this can also be 

a power of the Lord. 

183 Kiranavrtti ad 5:9ab and ad 5:12cd. 

* * 

184 Sanderson (i 995:26) points out that only those on the point of death were to be 

given sadyonirvanadTksa. To substantiate this he refers to Mrgendravrtti ad kriyapada 

8:6 and 8:144, to the excursus at the end of chapter 5 of the Svacchandatantroddyota 

(vol. 3, p. 78), and to chapter 19 of the Tantraloka. 

185 Kir an a 6:20d. 

* 

186 The term siddha (also used in the same context in the Paramoksanirasakarikavrtti 
ad verse 6) would be that used by PaSupatas, Kapalikas and Kalamukhas, whose re- 

















Chapter One 


221 


This too is proved by this [verse because of the use of the expression 3iva- 
tvavyaktisampurnah |. And so in this system men's liberation is brought 
about by initiation, which is (lie work of the Lord, and not by knowledge, 
yoga and asceticism, since it is not demonstrable that these can be the 
cause of the cessation of [the activity of| bondage, since that is of a phys¬ 
ical nature like cataracts of the eye and like disorders. It is rather that 
(api tu ! [the cessation of the activity of the bonds is caused] by the work 
of the Lord called initiation with mantras as his instrument, just as [the 
cessation of the ill-effects to the eye| of cataracts and the like [is brought 
about] by the work of an eye-doctor. So it has been established that there 
is a detailed exposition ( nirnayah ) of the topics of jhana, vicara and upaya 
too here. 187 

Now comes a summary of all the rebuttals of the questions [of Garuda 
so far]: 


Thus the soul bound by the sequence [of bonds start¬ 
ing with kala] is liberated according to the sequence 
[of events starting with the maturation of mala]. The 
soul is taught to have three conditions; [that of] the 
kevala, the sakala and the pure soul. (22cd-23ab) 188 


In answer to the questions (yad uktam... tatra) [in verse 14] ‘how is the 
soul bound and how released’ jthe following response] has been taught 
(uktam): only after the sequence of maturation of mala, [followed by] the 


spectivc views on the attainment of Sivahood are outlined by the terms sankranti, aveia 
and samutpatti. As Brunner pointed out (1986: >18), the doctrines are mentioned in 
Moksakarika 129c-131b and discussed at length in Paramoksanirasakarika 6-41 and in 
the commentary thereto; but Ramakantha does not there ascribe the views to particu¬ 
lar sects. He does however ascribe the first and last in the Mataiigavrtti ad kriyapada 
8:10c-12b, p. 162. As Brunner points out (1986:519), all three are ascribed in the fifth 
pariccheda of Sivagrayogin s Gaivaparibhasa on p. 156. 

187 f « i 

This usage of nirnayah is odd and may not be correctly translated (cf. also 1:16.14 


and 1:16.16). The Nyaya definition understands a certainty reached at the end of 
a discussion. Nyayasutra 1.1.41: vimrgya paksapratipaksabhyam arthavadharanam 
nirnayah and Nyayabhasya p. 56: nirnayas tattvajhanam pramananam phalam. tadava- 
sano vadah. The topics do not seem to have been dealt with once and for all here, but 
they seem to have been placed on the agenda for eventual nirnaya. 

lHh \ have relegated to the apparatus the half line malinatvac citer moksah prapyate 
nirrnalac chivat which is inserted in R v after pada b. Although both R N and Pf have 

it, it is not commented upon by Ramakantha and not transmitted by the Nepalese 
manuscripts or by M y . 










222 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * is * 


descent of Siva’s power, [followed in turn by] equanimity with regard to 
[the fruits of| all action and the inference [by the guru] of that [saktipata] 
and |then] initiation --[only then] is th^ soul released that became a sakala 


when utterly bound by all bonds (vi^esafco baddhah 


vibaddhah ]) be¬ 


ginning with kala. And therefore [it is also to be understood that] (tatas 
ca) the vijnanakevalin or the pralayakevalin who is not bound by the se¬ 
quence [of bonds starting with kala ] (yo 7 kramena baddhah ) is liberated 
immediately (akramenaiva) merely by the descent of Siva’s power imme¬ 
diately after the maturation of their mala. This is [by implication! what 
has been taught here. 

As for the question c of what nature is the bound soul?’, [the response 
to] this too is summarised [here]. The [condition of the] kevala has been 
taught as one, in spite of there being two kinds, depending on whether 
the kevala is without kala [i.e. without the tattvas which are parts (kala) 
of maya] because of knowledge or because of [the periodic) resorption 
[of the products of rnaya back into their material cause], because there 
is no difference in their being devoid of kala and the rest ( kaladirahita - 
tvavisesat). The jeategory of the] sakala , although it has been shown 
above to have three states, is here summarised as one, because there is 
no difference in their all being connected to kala and the rest [of the tat¬ 
tvas below it]. The [category of the] pure soul is [also] summarised here 
as one although, [as taught] above, it is [really] of two kinds following 
the distinction between those disembodied and those embodied, because 
with respect to their having been initiated there is no difference [between 
them]. And so, excluding the state of [ultimate] liberation [and] following 
the [sub-|categorisation into other states, the six [categories of soul] that 
are [yet] to be purified (samskaryah) [further] are here, as in the Raurava 
and elsewhere, summarised as three[. They are six] because even the [in¬ 
completely] pure soul has to purified above the level of [Buddha] vidya . 189 


The first five of the six must comprise the pralayakevallns and vijnanakevalins (for 
which terminology see footnote 71 on p. 184 above), the sakala between incarnations 
who has only a suksmasarTra either because his gross body has been destroyed (pra- 
nastahahyasarira) or because he has not attained a gross body (aprap tahahyaSanra) 
and the sakala who has also a sthula£anra (for this sub-division see Kiranavrtti 1:19.5- 
13 and footnote 162 on p. 212). (Another division that Ramakantha must have known 
into samsiddhika, vainayika and prakrta is found in the Mrgendravidyapada 10:26-28, 
but this is probably not intended here.) The sixth probably refers to the souls that 
have received asadyonirvanadiksa as sakalas and thus, though still embodied, have 
been brought to the level of suddhavidya. These still require further purification, Cf. 


* 


































Chapter One 


223 


This is taught in the Raurava: 190 

Purification (samsleara) is necessary tor the sentient being 
(cetanasya) purified [by initiation), the embodied soul (ksetra- 


jnasya 



and the inert knower. 


Thus the soul is summarised briefly (samksepcna) as having three states 
of being and as equipped with properties such as permanence. [The com¬ 
mentator] who interprets the [assertion of the) sutra that 'the soul has 

Ramakantha’s comments in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 2:l-2b, p. 25: ... diksayam 
mayatattvad urdhvam malavicchedam yavad bandhavivrttih. tatas turdhvam kramena 
drkkriyatmakasattabhivyaktir iti nivedayisyamah. l In initiation there is the arresting 
of the bonds up to the cutting off of maia up beyond [the level of| mayatattva. But 
above that there is a gradual revelation of the [souks innate] nature, which consists 
in omniscience and omnipotence. This we shall explain below.’ Cf. also Matahga- 
vrtti ad vidyapada 10:24-5b, p.319: na cay am dlksitah sakalo py asuddhc vartmani 
sthita ity ucyate “/ 10:24~5b]” paramesvaro hy acaryadhikarano dlksalaksanaya sva- 
saktya prathamam mayam sakaryam agayarupam ca sakalam karma dhvamsayati. na 
tv anagayarupain vartamanaphalam tasya bhogenaiva ksayat. ata eva asadyonirvana- 
dlksayam na £ an rap at a ity uktam. tato dhvastamayasayasya tasyasminn a vast ban a 
eva tamah prodghatya nirmalam krtv a vidyaya yuktam karoti 
yojayatlty art hah. tatas ca£uddh avartman o mayader dhvastatvat sakalo ’py ayam 
dlksitah suddhavidyaya §ivam pasyatlti £uddhavart.mastha ity ucyate. ‘And it is [now] 
taught that the initiate, although still a sakala, is not situated in the impure path: 
“10:24-5b”] For the supreme Lord residing in the officiating acarya through his own 
power in the form of diksa first of all destroys may a with all its effects and all the 
karman [that the soul has] in the form of stock. [He does] not [destroy] the karma 
whose results are current and that is no longer in the form of stock since that can only 
be destroyed by being experienced. It is for this reason that it has been taught that 
the [external] body is not destroyed in asadyonirvanadiksa. Then, only when the soul 
is in this condition, Ins stock [karman] and [the effects of] rnaya [that are attached 
to him] destroyed, [the Lord] having removed darkness, making him pure, links him 
with knowledge, i.e. joins him with [guddha]vidyatattva. This is what is meant. And 
therefore, because maya and so on, which are the impure path, have oeen destroyed 
[for him], the initiate sees Siva through [the power of] pure knowledge ( Suddhavidyaya ) 
even though he is a sakala; thus he is taught to be situated in the pure path.’ 

Presumably Ram aka nth a envisages that these initiates still have to undergo a further 
niradhikaranadiksa in order to get beyond the level of pure vidya, as is implied by the 
term saniskarya. This is evidently necessary for the sadhakas who manage to reach 
bhuvanas in the tiuddhadhvan, for see the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 4:54c 55, p. 100: 

... tatpadaprapta a pi dTksayordhvaru susamkriyanta iti vidyctfvaravat preryatvat tesam 
a pi adhikaramalasiddhih. l .. .even those who have reached that level [of Sadasiva 
still purified upwards through initiation and so they too, because they, like vidyesvaras , 
are still subject to being directed [by Siva], are proved to have the impurity of having 
responsibility.’ 

190 Not traced therein. 


are 












224 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Miri'c conditions’ t,o be rest rictive ( niyamarthe ), being intended to reject 
other conditions, |ra’ her than being a summarised account that reduces 
the number for the sake of clarity,] that [commentator] ( tena) teaches a 
restriction (niyamah pradarsitah) merely out of ignorance ( ajhanatahi 
since (...iti) in the first place (tavat) the differentiation of the sakala 
has been taught above with a division into [three] conditions and, in the 
case of [the condition of] the pure soul (, guddhasya tu), [the differentiation 
within it] must, certainly be accepted a vasyabhyupagamanlya ). because 
it is established by reasoning. And as for the assertion that the differ¬ 
entiation of conditions within that of the kevala is impossible because 
there can be no vijhanakevalin , that too is wrong because there is no 
proof that rt, cannot exist. To explain (tatha hi): if a bond exists for 
some (soul] that is different from other bonds, then it can exist in isol¬ 
ation from those other bonds for that soul. Therefore, just as hostility 
and beating and the like are possible without fetters ( nigadavyatirekeneva 
vairadandadi) , so too mala [can exist in isolation and] is accepted by you 
too as a bond for the soul that is different from the bonds of karman and 
those derived from maya. It is not non-different as the Naiyayikas and 
others hold. 191 Therefore (tatah) [the existence of] a soul bound only by 
(mala) is possible. As for the syllogism formulated ( racitah 192 ) to refut 
this: souls for whom only mala remains are bound by the bond of kar¬ 
man too, because they are beginninglessly connected to mala, like the 
pralayakevalins 193 in that [syllogism] (tatra) the subject of which the 
characteristic is predicated (paksah) is like that in [an assertion like| ‘my 

mt ' l,ll '‘ 1 nan’, since when there is bondage through mala 

alone, then it is impossible that there should be bondage through karman 

as well. Or if it were possible, then [the subject of whom the charac- 


1 sii The Naiyayikas were referred to in 1:14.14-15 as accepting bondage only from the 

, ' anti ,ho lndr, .yas [in addition to karman]. They are alluded to here, because thev 

do not recognise the existence of mala. 

1J2 I am indebted to Mr. Anjaneya Sarma for this suggestion. (Cf. Naretvaraparlksa- 
pia as a ad 1:11, p. 33: ... bhavadbhir esa prayogah samuparacitah.) Metathesis would 
account for R s canto and for the final o of the previous word. In the syllogism 

, * .[°}. OWS , the words dharm, ™h (after malakevalino) and iti sadhyo dharmab (after 
baddba) m the transmitted text have been expunged, because they disturb the pravosa 

and seem suspiciously like scribe’s marginal glosses that have crept into the body of 

U XJkVrJ lj v> .X. m 

193 * 1 i - 

together Pr<!miS0 m 4 “ S argument would be that karman and mala invariably occur 































Chapter One 


225 


teristic is predicated! would be vitiated, because it is contradicted by its 
own words, since the [use of the true] meaning of 'only 5 (kevahi) would be 
impossible, thus [the syllogism] is wrong. As [some authority] taught [in 
the following half verse]: 

* 

Against [a syllogism] that already while being formulated is 
defeated [by self-contradiction and the like], there is no need 
to protect [one’s own poisition] with [counter-]arguments. 




ion] is also refuted by the agam as, since it is taught in the 
MalinTvijayottara and elsewhere: 194 

The Lord by his will favours those eight vijhanakevalins at 
the beginning of creation [by making them] mantresas, with 
offices to perform within the realm of maya. 

Moreover, as long as the vijhanakevalins cannot be refuted, since the argu¬ 
mentation mentioned above cannot hold, this logical ground on which the 
inference is based (hetuh) is not a valid logical ground, since it is doubt¬ 
ful whether or not it is excluded from the counter example. And until 
it has been established that it is a valid logical ground, these [vijhana¬ 
kevalins] cannot be disproved. Thus the logical ground on the basis of 
which the inference is made is not valid ( nasya hetutvam), since it is not 
proved that there is invariable concomitance [between the hetu and the 
sadhyadharma ] because of this circularity. And if it were valid for this. 

I hen ii would be valid also for the refutation of the pralayakevalins. They 
too would have to have the bonds of kala and so on, since they are [also] 
beginninglessly bound to mala, like the sakalas. Well done, [you have 
indeed] justified your own doctrine! 195 Enough then of this perseverance 
with people who raise up demons against their own gastra . 196 

| Q i ^ ( 

'' The first quarter of the following verse is MalinTvijayottara 1:19a, the second is 

Moksakarika 72d, and the third and fourth are Moksakarika 78ab. We cannot assume 

* * * * 

that this is a single verse of the MalinTvijayottara in a lost recension that Ramakantha 
knew, because he cites MalinTvijayottara 1:18c- 19b in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 
5:G, p. 106. 

195 Th is could be interpreted as a statement without irony: ‘Thus our own doctrine has 
been well justified’; but a parallel in the Naresvarapariksaprakaga (p. 31, commentary 
on 1:9) suggests that it is indeed ironical: nanv artha evaham arthajhanayor akara- 
bhedanupalambhat sadhu samarthitah sugatanayo yad amedhyakaro ’py evarn vineya- 
vin etrt ay a b hyu p aga t ah. 

] M f 

< f. Dagakumaracarita Ucchvasa 3, p. 117: naham atmavinasaya vetalotthapanam 
acareyam. I shall not raise up demons for my own destruction.’ 













226 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Now a summary of this entire chapter: 

The bound soul I have taught to be thus [i.e. as de¬ 
scribed above]. What else do you ask about? (23cd) 

In tins chapter (atra) the topic of the pa$u has been taught thoroughly 
(. prakarsatah... uktah [= proktah\), [that is to say] with its definition, to 
be thus, [i.e.| to be linked to the [other] five topics starting with that 
of the bound soul. In fact the other topics ( padarthantaranam ) arc used 
(pravrttih) for the sake of this one ( tadarthyena ). What else do you ask 
about? What is meant is this: everything that I have listed [as a topic 
to be treated| ( uddistam ) before now in this chapter (atra) I have [also) 
explained with a definition. 

Thus ends the first chapter in the commentary on the glorious Kirana 
composed by Bhatta Ramakantha, the son of Bhatta Narayanakantha. 





CHAPTER TWO 


On Primal Matter 19 ' 

Now [begins] another chapter following a question (of Garuda’s] in order 
to investigate the same topics [that have been defined in the first chapter], 
because thus much of the enquiry remains [to be answered]: 198 

|Garuda spoke:] 

The soul you have taught to have limited powers of 
knowledge and Siva to be omniscient. Tell [me] what 
is the reason for their [respectively] pure and impure 
natures. 199 (1) 

Now at the beginning of this chapter the five-fold connection in the work 
(asya) (which links every section in the exegesis of a tantra] must be 
taught. This is taught in the Pauskara: 200 

When a sutra occurs in a tantra after [the end of] a chapter, 
the connection of that [sutra] should be taught, which is estab¬ 
lished to be five-fold. [The five types o connection proceed] 

■I 11 - — ——- - — -■=—- - - - - ' 

197 The title mUyUpatala. is given to this chapter in E D and Ev (see footnote 1 on 
p. 161 above). 

1 '"The topics other than that of the pasu remain to be discussed. 

l "R N p] aces q ie y erS e immediately after praSnapurvaprakaran an tar am . The 
variant version of E/;, which R™ writes after yadvad itvadina in 2:1.15 and which Ev 
prints as an independent second verse, has here been relegated to the apparatus. P 
has no pratfka for this verse, and no manuscripts (with the exception of R ,v ) have both 
versions. TryambakaSambhu, however, (p. 28 has E D s version followed immediately 
by the first pada only of the version accepted here. 

200 Not found among the surviving fragments of the Ur-Pauskara. Also quoted in the 
beginning of the third chapters of the Mrgcndravrtti and Matangavrtti and in the 
Sarvajnanottaravrtti (Trivandrum MS 6578, f. 8 r ). See the discussion on pp.lxii ff of 
the introduction. 








228 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


from the subject matter of the tantra, a sutra, a statement, a 
section [of the tantraj and from a chapter. 


In this work, because the subject of the tantra has been promised ( prati - 

■i 4 ''" 11 " ' * 1 ' < i<i!>i 11 iL; I six padarthas, the connection among these 

[above-listed connections] ( tatra ) which pertains to that [viz. to the sub- 

1 is 1 i tatsambandhah ) is that of the investigation of those [topics] 
( tatparlksatmakah ). The connection pertaining to a sutra is with the 
word padarthoddyotaka [meaning ‘expounding the topics 7 ]. 202 The con- 
nection| with a statement is that with phrases such as ‘The bound soul is 
eternal... and so on. [The connection] vrtth a section [of the tantra| 
is that with the vidyapada, and that with the chapter is the investigation 
(parlksa) [of the topics) following immediately after [their| definition bci 

put foiwaid (laksanapratipadananantaram ). 204 In this way the connec¬ 
tions pertaining to sutra, section and topic [i.e. to the subject matter of 
the tantra] are to be supplied at [the beginning of] each chapter up to 
the end of the vidyapada. The connections pertaining to statement and 

chapter however are different in each chapter and so we will explain them 
accordingly. 

This is the purport of the question here: ^ou have taught above (prag 
uktah = pr ok tab) with the verse starting ‘The bound soul is eternal’ 205 
that the bound soul pa£uh = atma), which is endowed with eternality 
and other qualities, is empowered will; partial knowledge and therefore 
impure, accoiding to which condition it is in, whether equipped of or 
devoid of kala and so on. And fsiva, on the other hand ( ya£ casau). who 
is omniscient and omnipotent, has been taught as an example [of the way 
the released soul is| in the half-verse starting ‘He [becomes] omniscient like 


201 See Kirana 1:13. 

202 Kir an a 1:12. 

203 Kirana 1:15. 

4 

I have emended the text in accordance with Jurgen Hanneder s suggestion, because 
the readings of R and PiP 3 might be explicatory ‘improvements’ of this reading, and 
this may be what lies behind the corrupt text transmitted in P 2 . 

Ramakantha states in the Matahgavrtti at the beginning of vidyapada 3 sarvatrapi 

purvapatalopasamhare eva patalikah sambandhah truyate. ‘The connection pertaining 

to the chapter is taught to be invariably to the conclusion of the previous chapter.’ Here 

the commentary on the previous < hapter ended with this interpretation of the final half- 

verse. saivam prag uddistani atraiva ma ya laksanena pratipaditam ity arthah and these 
words are closely echoed at this point. 

205 Kirana 1:15. 
























Chapter Two 


229 


Siva’. 206 The natures of Siva and o the soul (Sivatmanoh sambandhinl 

= anayohi are [respectively! devoid of mala and bound to mala ( nirmala- 

malayukte = 6uddha£uddhe). Tell me the cause of this. By what reason 
* 

is Siva alone pure and not the soul, and by what reason is the soul alone 
impure and not Siva, since no restriction that is without cause is right? 
This is the cpiestion. 

The response to this: 

|The Lord spoke:) 


Because of the beginningless connection to mala [of 
the bound soul] I have taught that he has par¬ 
tial knowledge. Because Siva is beginninglessly free 
from impurity, He is therefore omniscient. 207 When 
something is established to have a beginning, then 
a cause is postulated ( kalpyate ). Such form[s], [re¬ 
spectively] pure and impure, are known from tradi¬ 
tion smrtam) truly to belong to these two [viz. to 
* ** 

Siva and the bound soul]. Why is crystal clear? Why 
is copper tarnished? Just as there is no cause for this 
[pair of naturally given facts], so too there is none in 
the case of Siva and the [bound] soul. (2—4) 


For just as there is no independent ( ariyat ) cause for the nature of the 
soul, because it is beginningless, so there is none for his impurity, just 


as 


[there 


is none 


for the impurity of tarnished (kalikaya saha vartate iti 


sakalikasya) copper and the like. And just as there is no independent 
( anyat) reason for the Lord's nature, since He, established by means of 
knowledge that have and that will be taught, is beginningless, so there is 
none for His purity, just as [there is none) for the purity of crystals and 
the like. For a cause is sought for a thing that has a beginning, like a 
pot or some such [physical object], since such a thing cannot otherwise 


206 Kirana 1:21. 

■ 

207 ti 

Ramakantha’s commentary does not obviously echo or exclude any of the variants 
in 2b and 2d. My choices are not entirely arbitrary. For 2d M y ’s reading is chosen 
because it is supported by Narayanakantha’s citation of the second half of the verse 
in the Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 5:15. For 2b I have no such testimonium. I have 
rejected the reading of R V MM V E (strictly speaking several readings, but they have a 
common core), because it seems to be the obvious counterpart of the rejected version 
of 2d transmitted in R N ME. N’s reading does not fit the context well and so I have 
adopted that of V. 







230 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm * * 


be accounted for (anyathasiddhyasambhavat). Such natures respectively 
of beginningless purity and beginningless impurity are known from tra¬ 
dition (smrtam) to belong in truth ( satyarthatvena = yatharthatah) to 
those two, i.e. to Siva and to the |boundj soul. That is the purport. 
And the beginninglessness of mala is also established here because of the 
beginninglessness of bondage to mala. 

Now another question with a reformulation of this [same issue] ( etad- 

anuvadena ): 

[Garuda spoke: 


For what cause is the soul again bound by bond[s] 
starting with kala ? (5ab) 


Now (hi) a cause (nimittam) in ordinary usage ( loke) is said to be of two 
kinds; an instrumental cause and a motive ( prayojanam ), just like fire¬ 
wood and such [are the nimitta in the sense of the instrumental cause] in 
cooking and so on, and feeding Brahmins and such [is the nimitta in the 
sense of the reason| for food and the like. < )f these |two kinds of cause] the 
instrumental cause for the operation upon the soul of this bondage by kala 
and the other| principle^ has been taught, namely past actions. 20 ''' You 
have [only] hinted at the motivational cause in the lialf-verse Kala from 
Siva joins this impure [soul].' 209 This is |Garuda's] meaning: a soul who 
was previously bound by the bonds beginning with kala becomes devoid 
[of them] (kevalah sampannah) through the dissolution [of the worlds], so 
iti) for what cause is he then bound again afterwards ( punar iti pa$cat)'! 
Why does the Lord not take control of and show grace to souls who are 
not bound by kala and so on ( kaladyabaddhan) at all times, as he does in a 
great resorption of the universe mahapralaya iva); 210 he does not [need to] 
wait until maturation of mala is completed, which has been taught to end 
with liberation? That is the meaning [of Garuda’s question]. [Objection: 


208 This interpretation is supported by 2:17.1-2. 

209 Kir an a l:16ab. 

* 

210 That the Lord continues to bestow grace even in mahapralaya is implied by 
Narayanakantha’s Mrgendravrtti ad vidyapada 4:15a, p. 130: jagradavasthayam iva 
svapavasthayUrn a pi malapanpakataratamyapeksaya bodhanarhan bodhayan. .. Tn 
the state of pralaya too, just as in the state of wakefulness [i.e. in a period when 
the material universe has been created], He awakens those who are worthy of being 
awakened in accordance with the degree of the ripeness of their mala.' It is clear from 
the context in which he quotes it ad Kirana 4:17 that Ramakantha considers Mrgendra 
vidyapada 4:15 to be describing mahapralaya . 





































Chapter Two 


231 


is it not the case that the motivation has in the same passage (tatra) been 
(explicitly] taught to be the experience (and thus the consumption of the 
karman] of souls: ‘Then [i.e. after being equipped with kala and so on, 
the soul] experiences his entire experience, composed of happiness and 
other such [experiences] according to his karmaik ? 211 and so there is no 
hinting (iti naksepah), 2 That is true, and it is for this very reason that 
i;his lias also been found fault with (aksiptam) 2 13 in this (question] (atra), 
because that is not the motivational cause. A motivational cause is said 
to be something which benefits [both] the agent and the one for whom 
the act is undertaken ( prayojyasya ), as for instance a beneficial effect [is 
achieved] for a physician and for the king [whom he serves] through (the 
use of | wholesome broths and the like. And [yet] this [action of binding] 
is not beneficial for the agent [i.e. Siva], because He, being complete unto 
Himself , only acts for the sake o) others. Nor [is it beneficial] for the one for 
whom the act is undertaken napi prayojyasya , because it is not beneficial 
(anartharupatvat) } since it is [either] of the nature of unhappiness and 
delusion or (ca) of what is no more than utterly transient happiness. So 
why does the Lord torment souls with this harmful thing ‘experience’ 
as well? This too is meant by [Garuda's] question and thus there is no 


contradiction 


m i 


it]. 


211 Kirana l:10ab. The cited half-verse implies that it is only when equipped with kala 
and the other evolutes of primal matter that bhoga is possible. 

212 ex conj. The unanimous reading of the manuscripts, ity anapeksah, yields no 
sense. Ramakantha first explained that Garuda asked about the motivation for further 

i * A * 

bondage. He implied that Garuda was justified in posing this question because the 
answer had only been hinted at (2:5.3-4). This he then countered by pointing out that 
the passage in which this supposed hint occurs (1:1 Gff) actually teaches the motivation 
explicitly ( prayojanain uktam eva) with l:20ab. This phrase, therefore, I understand to 
be an emphatic denial of the motivation having been merely hinted at. Thus Garuda’s 
question in 2:5ab is not merely a query about the motivation for urtlier bondage (if 
Ramakantha admitted it to be such, it would be tantamount to acknowledging Garuda’s 
inattention during the course of chapter 1), but also (as the api of the next sentence 
may be intended to convey) a refutation of the motivation advanced in the previous 
chapter. 

213 I take aksiptam here not in the sense of hinted at’ as in the immediately preceding 
passage. This is because l understand the train of thought starting with satyam to 
be a defence of the plausibility of Garuda's questions. Garuda is about to tackle the 
view that the motivation for linking souls to kala and so on after pralaya is to allow 
bhoga; he does this by providing a definition of prayojana that requires Siva too to 
gain some benefit therefrom. If it be seen as too awkward to read aksiptam in quite 
different senses in the same discussion, an emendation to tad apy utksiptam (‘that too 
is rejected), on the strength of I Vs tad apy uksiptam), might be considered. 












232 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

■ t i J ■ 


Now the second question: 

You have taught, Lord, that he is inside maya and 
that he is all-pervasive. Since he is all-pervasive, [he 
must be] everywhere; how [is it possible that he should 
also be said to reside specifically only] in the belly 
of may a? How can this be, since they exclude each 
other? (5c—6) 214 

It was taught above: 215 He is all-pervasive, situated in mayodaranta \ 216 
That is wrong, because it propounds the contradictory all-pervasiveness 
and non-pervasiveness of the soul, like the statement 'she is my mother 
and she is a barren woman’. 

[Now follows] the refutation of the first of these questions: 

[The Lord spoke:] 

The soul is bound for the sake of liberation; this [lib¬ 
eration] does not come about for him otherwise. Un¬ 
til he is linked to a body he cannot experience. His 
body is derived from may a; if he has no body (tasya 
tadabhavat ), then he cannot be liberated. Therefore 
(tena), [though already] dirty through his impotence, 
he is made [yet more] dirty by [being bound by] that 
[body] (tena). (7—8) 

Because of the rule ‘nothing that is unmixed unde3’goes change’, maia on 
its own ( kevalasya malasya) does not ripen, and, because of this, liberation 
is impossible [for a soul linked to mala alone], and so the soul is linked to 
the bondage that is experience solely for the sake of ripening [his] mala. 
And experience does not take place without the organs am! effects of kala 
and so on, which are derivatives of maya, and so (iti) there is bondage by 
these too in the form of subtle and gross bodies. Thus (.. .yatah tatah) 

214 This portion of the text is placed after 2:5b in R,^ and has been moved to where a 
pratlka for it is given in all the manuscripts of the commentary. 

215 Kirana l:15cd. 

a 

216 It is impossible to convey the necessary ambiguity of this phrase with a single 
expression in English. Ramakantha ad loc. understands this to refer to the belly and 
to the edge of maya, which he takes to be respectively the situations of the vijnana- 
kevalin and of the pralayakevalin ; but he here interprets Garuda to have misunderstood 
it to be a karmadharaya , ‘the inside that is the belly of maya’. 





















Chapter Two 


233 


liberation ( muktih = nirvrtih ) does not come about from the absence of 
a body. Because it is taught (ycna... ity uktam tena karanena 217 ) that 

nothing that is unmixed undergoes change’, the soul that is dirty merely 
because it is in a state o: bondage ( baddhatvad eva [= asvatantratvat]) is 

made [yet more] dirty by kala and so on ( kaladina 218 = tena). An example 
of this [is given|: 

Just as a garment because of being dirty is cleaned 
when [placed] in some other dirt, 219 a soul, although 
unclean, [is cleaned] in the same way situated in the 
belly of maya and also [elsewhere] (api). (9) 

Here the word antah has the sense of the word antara [and hence the 
translation ‘some other dirt’] on the strength of [the sense of] the intro¬ 
duction [to this train of thought in the concluding words of the previous 
verse] ‘dirty. , .he is made [yet more] dirty’. This then is the meaning: 
just as a garment, because of the very fact that (eva) it is dirty (malina- 
tvat = sadosatvat), [is] put in some other dirt, such as ashes or cow-dung 
[and] is [thereby] cleaned, 220 so too the same is also taught (of the im¬ 
pure soul, who is] the matter illustrated by this example ( darstantike ’py 
ucyate). Here in pada c the word api is unconventionally positioned [and 
the sentence must be interpreted as follows]: the same is true (eva in) for 
‘the soul ( atma = pudgalah), even though (api) unclean, when situated 

217 This is a gloss of the first tena of the verse. 

2 j ^ * 

This is a gloss of the second tena of the verse. 

219 r ■ * 

The natural interpretation of malantahstham would be ‘situated inside maia\ and 
it would also be more natural to take the second a pi in a concessive sense and together 
with mayodaragatah; ‘although situated in the belly of maya’ and the first api to mean 
'so too [in the case of the soul]’. Ramakantha’s commentary demands the above forced 
interpretation. 

Ramakantha probably understands the verse to refer not to ritual purification but 
to cleaning laundry with a detergent, as Tryambakasambhu does: samalam vastrani 
suddhyartham tanmalapanodanaya rajakena yatha ksarosaradimalantastham krtva nir- 
mafena varina praksalitam vi$uddhyati. (IFP T. 1102, p.36^ -7 l ) However, the sub¬ 
stances Ramakantha suggests seem inappropriate for cloth. Cf. Yajnavalkyasmrti 
l:186-7a: sosair udakagomutraih guddhyaty avikakaugikam/ sagriphalair arnsupattam 
saristaih kutapam tatha/ sagaurasarsapaih ksaumam... ‘Cloth of wool and of silk 
are cleansed by cow’s urine or water mixed with saline earth; cloth of bark with [the 
same] mixed with Bilva fruit; and a blanket of goats’ wool with [the samej mixed with 
fruits of the soap-berry tree; linen cloth with [the same] mixed with white mustard... ’ 
[The Bilva is Aegle marmelos (Linn.) Correa; the soap-berry tree is Sapmdus detergens 
Roxb.] 















234 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * * 


in the belly of maya’; that is to say ( iti) he jtoo] is cleansed when joined 
with another impurity. That is what is meant. Because of the [second 
instance of the] word api, also the vijnanakevalin, who is not in the belly 
of m ay a, is included. Someone^ might object that other impurities have 
ceased to act ( aguddhyantarasya nivrttatvat) on the vijnanakevalin and 
so purification in the manner of the example taught above is just not 
possible. This is not so, because it is possible for precisely this [reason 
which the opponent gives for it not being possible, namely] because of 
the evidence (drstatvat) of an impression ( samskarasya) conducive to the 
cessation of impurity which is left in cloths and the like by that [other 
cleansing impurity] even as it is being destroyed. The meaning of the 
example here is that without the help of some other impurity there can 
never (sarvatha na ) be removal of an earlier impurity. 

The second question too is dealt with: 

The belly of may a that has been spoken of consists 
in the tattva s from kala [down to] the earth, and the 
[soul’s] resting in it (tasmin... iayah) that has been 
taught [was spoken of] with the intention of referring 
to the subtle body. 221 (10) 

The souks resting (layah) in the belly of maya, even though [it is] all- 
pervasive, that was taught with [1:15c] vyapl mayodarantasthah 222 [was 
spoken of] with the intention of referring to the subtle body; that is 
to say (iti) that [‘resting in’] was spoken of figuratively with the sense 
of the subtle migratory body, because that is situated in maya [—the 
subtle migratory body] on which is piled the karman of that [soul to 
which it belongs]. The same [figurative usage is used] also of gross bodies 
(bhauvanasarirasyapi) . [It was| not however [spoken of) with the intention 
of referring to the soul [itself]. Thus there is no contradiction. 

And therefore also the vijnanakevalin ’s being situated above maya is 

also to be understood as intended to express figuratively his pervasion 

■■ ■ . 1 

221 R n places this verse immediately after verse 9, but all four manuscripts have the 
pratlka ‘mayodaram hityadi at the point where ! have now placed the verse. The scribe 
of R‘ v , or some scribe earlier in the same line of transmission, failed to notice this one 
when he was supplanting the pratlkas with the verses. 

222 See translation ad loc. and footnotes to the translation of the commentary ad 2:5-6 

above. 























Chapter Two 


235 


of a realm (adhvan) that will be taught [later in the text], 223 because he 
cannot be joined to a subtle body. 224 

There now follows (atha) a question intended to examine the nature 
of mala. 

[Garuda spoke:] 

You have taught that mala is beginningless. Is it de¬ 
rived from may a or is it a property also of the soul? 
or is it something else again? Tell me of what nature 
mala is. (11) 

Earlier in this work (iha) the beginninglessness of mala was taught with 
the verse beginning 'Because of the beginningless connection to mala ’; 225 
but now you should teach what this mala is in its essential nature. For 
some who follow the Sankliyas recognise mala, which envelops the qualities 
of the soul ( pumdharmavarakah 22b ), as a property of maya, which is 
the supreme material cause (mayayah... ayam = maylyah 227 ). And the 
Naiyayikas and others require mala, which is of the nature of ignorance, 
to be a property natural to the soul alone, since they hold that the soul is 
an agent of knowledge [only] through contact with the manas and [other 
contacts] such [as contact between the mind and the senses]. And those 
who espouse the tenets of the Vedanta propound that mala is maya [and 
that it is] different from the properties of the soul and not [ultimately] 
real (anartliabhutah). These are the three misconceptions on this point 
(atra) of other schools. 

First (tavat) among them (tatra) the position that mala is not real 
(avastutvam ) is refuted. 

|The Lord spoke: 


ty o 

“ This presumably refers to the /Tirana's treatment of the pure universe in 8:136ff. 

224 The vijnanakevalin has no subtle body, and so the parallelism must consist merely 

in the fact o! language again not being used literally when the vijnan ake valin is ‘located’ 

in a realm above maya. 

225 Kj ran a 2:2a. 

* 

2 2 ^ * * • o 

The P manuscripts frequently give pun as the compound form of pums, apparently 
regardless ol what consonant follows. I have found no authority allowing this sandhi. 
Renou (1961:28, §28) remarks ‘Dans les noms en ins- ou Ys tombait..., le traitement 
de la nasale est indistinct, faute de formes stires... ’ 

22*7. 

“I assume that Ramakantha read mayeyo, but when expounding the verse he himself 
used the correct form. This could however be taken as evidence that maylyo was what 

was transmitted to Ramakantha or that Ramakantha intended the text to be thus 

* * # | 

corrected. 






236 


Rarnakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


verse 


Mala is innate,--* [but] the effects of maya are an ad¬ 
ventitious impurity ( malah ). (12ab) 

Because a soul cannot in reality (paramarthatah) be born, with the word 
‘innate’ here (atra) mala is taught to be another entity |coeva | with the 
soul |and thus] established to be beginningless. And for this reason mala 
is not unreal (navastubhutah) , but real (api tu vasturupa eva), like a 
cataract or the like on the eye. This is what is said [with the above half- 

. For if it were unreal, then, because it would be for ever nullified, 
like a hare’s horn and such [like non-existent things|, that would entail 
that everything, such as initiation and knowledge, that brings about its 
cessation (etannivrttihetoh), would be purposeless. 

|Even| if that is so, there is a real ( vastubhutah) impurity (malah) 
which was taught earlier to be nothing more than (eva) the effects of 
maya. 'Phis was taught with ‘embraced by experience [generated out] of 
maya and thus] absorbed by that [maya]’. 229 So what need is there of this 
additional] putative impurity? To [rebut] this |objection| ( tadartham) [he 
states that] these effects of maya are an adventitious impurity, |that is 
to say| one that comes into being subsequent to this [original and begin¬ 
ningless impurity]. 

This is the meaning: if that is so and the eilects of maya come into 
being in order |further] to bind the soul who is [already] bound by mala 
(malinah ), then, as we shall teach, ‘[otherwise, i.e. without impurity, 
nothing |in the way of bondage] would arise for the [soul, who would 
be| beginninglessly released from impurity [and thus] also [aj Siva. And 
so. because bondage and liberation cannot otherwise be accounted for 
( bandhamoksanyathanupapattya ), mala must be admitted to be real, co¬ 
eval [with the soul] (sahajah) and different from the effects of maya. 

‘If that is so, then it must be maya itself.’ This is the opinion of those 
who hold mala to be the same as maya. 'Phis too is wrong because 


M v ’s reading has been chosen because it finds support in the pratfleas found in P. 

The same lies behind what V transmits, and it may be pedantry to put that among the 
variants, but I find no authority for the convention common in Grantha manuscripts o! 
omitting a visarga before a sibilant in ligature with a semi-vowel, though its omission 
before a sibilant in ligature with an unvoiced consonant is a recognised orthography.) 
It is possible, however, that N’s hypermetrical sahajo rnalo mat o maya° is original, and 
that the readings of TryambakaSambhu, of G1G3AME and of M' are three secondary 
attempts to avoid the metrical fault. 

229 Krrana l:19cd. 











Chapter Two 


237 


Of herself 230 maya is not taught to be the deluder, 
[since] she illumines through her effects. (12cd) 

The word no is used in the sense of denial. 231 It is not the case that maya 
of herself (svatah) performs the sullying of souls, because, since she exists 
as potential and therefore not in manifest form, she is inactive, just as 
curds and fresh butter and other] dairy produces exist |only| as potential 
in milk. As the Sahkhyas teach, * 2 ' 2 

That which has been made manifest has a cause, is imper¬ 
manent, not all-pervading, it is active, multiform, must have 
a locus, is something from which the cause can be inferred, 
composite and subordinate. That which is not made manifest 
is the opposite. 

Moreover, is the same maya that is the cause of [all] the effects starting 
with kala [the maya which you hold to be] mala, or is it some other [maya 
which you think is mala]? If it is different, then mala is quite separate, and 
so there is no dispute. But if it is the same, that is wrong. Because with 
[the word| karyat [in the verse maya has been] established to be something 
whose nature it is to be the agent of revelation (prakaSanakaxtrsvabhava 
[— prakagika 2 ™]) by means of her effects, she is therefore not understood 
to be a deluder ( mohinl), |that is to say] something whose nature it is 
to envelop, just as the sun [is not], because it cannot be proved that she 
produce effects contradictory to her own nature. That is the meaning. 

Nor is this reason unproved and this is taught |wit.h the following 
verse): 

For through the embrace of her effects ( svakarya - 234 ) 
she illuminates the consciousness of the soul. Having 

“ 30 In fact both yatah and svatah might be seen to find support in Ramakantha’s 
commentary, the former in 2:12.19 and the iatter in 2:12.12. 
i.e. not as the enclitic first person p.ural pronoun. 

232 Sankhyakarika 10. Quoted also in 1:19.3-4. 

~Professor Sanderson has plausibly suggested that Ramakantha might originally 
have written praka&ka prakaganakartrsvabhava. The lemma might easily have disap¬ 
peared through haplography. 

2 o a r 1 — ti 

' The gloss karyakaranatmana svakaryakramena (13.2-3) might with equal justific¬ 
ation be considered to support the reading kramena. 











238 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


split apart mala she effects a partial ( ekadese ) mani¬ 
festation of consciousness. 230 (13) 


Because we see that, after bringing about the cessation of [the activity ofj 
mala, she causes by her effects, instruments and so forth, a partial mani¬ 
festation of the consciousness of the soul. This is what was taught [also] 
in the section beginning ‘The bound soul's consciousness is empowered 
by this jkaJa]’, 236 and so maya [too| is proved to be the awakener of the 
consciousness of the soul through the conjunction [of the soul) with the 
same tenaiva) series of her own products that are the instruments [of the 
bound soul] and other effects. In this system (atra) it is kala that is active 
in splitting mala and it is vidya and the others [of the uve kaheukas] which 
are active in the revelation oi consciousness. This has been demonstrated 
earlier. And thus: 


She exists as an illuminatrix through her el ects and 
does not act as a deluder. (14ab) 

Since by means of her effects she is established to be an illuminatrix, 
she is not active as a deluder of the soul. She is understood to be thus, 
because one cannot prove that she has effects that are contradictory to 
her nature, as has been taught [above]. 237 And so an effect which is 
opposite to another effect is one that is generated from a cause different 
from the cause of that [other effect]. Thus an effect which is of the nature 
of darkness and opposed to an effect which is of the nature of illumination 
is produced from a cause different from the cause of light. And the effect 
which is of the nature of the delusion of the soul is opposed to the effect 
of illumination of the soul and therefore it too is produced by a cause 
other than the cause of the illumination of the soul. And so this cause 
[of the soul’s delusion] (tatkaranam) is here proved by inference from its 
specific effects to be mala which is different from maya. That is the 
purport of this restatement of the proposition [i.e. the fifth member of 

235 This reading of R N is supported only by the commentary. Original is presumably 
the reading that all other sources support: malam vi clary a cidvyaktir ekadese bhavaty 
anau |or anohj. ‘Once mala has been split partial manifestation of consciousness comes 

about in the soul.’ 

236 Kir an a 1:16. 

237 Kiranavrtti 2:12.20. 
























('hapter Two 


239 


the syllogism 


238 


and therefore it is not |a redundant repetition of] what 


has already been understood (gatarthata), and for this reason he will sum 
up with ‘It, is different [as proved] by argument’. 239 Moreover, the effects 
of the material cause ( avyaktakaryaih ) |viz.[ sattva, rajas and tarn as 
do not make this |argument| inconclusive, since they [may sometimes be 
opposed, but] arc established also [to exist] without contradicting [each 
other]. This is taught by the Sankhyas: 240 


The gunas act in overpowering, supporting, generating and 
co-operating with (mithuna) each other. 

[An objection might be raised in the following manner.] The Sankhyas 
hold that delusion is just a kind of projection (prakMavisesa eva ), of the 
nature of superimposition of the notion of self on what is not self. This 
they teach [with]: 241 

There is an eightfold division of tamas and [the same] of de¬ 
lusion ( mohasya ), mahamoha is tenfold, darkness ( tamisrab ) 
is eighteenfold, as is blind darkness (andhatamisrah). 

11 one accepts this position of the Sankhyas,] because there is then l tatah) 
no proof oi the contradiction [by the alleged effect of maya, viz. occlusion] 
of her nature [which has been taught to be to illuminate], how can the 
existence of an independent impurity be proved ( vyatiriktamalasiddhih )? 
This [idea] is wrong. 

Illumination [is expressed] by the word ‘revelation’ 

[ vyakti&abdena ) and occlusion, by the word ‘impurity’ 

( malagabdena ). (14cd) 

fi 

This is the purport: the delusion that is derived from matter ( prakrto 
: yam mohah) is not what is intended to be expressed here, since that is 
shown to exist only when [a soul is possessed of] a body. Instead (a pi 
tu) what must necessarily be accepted is that there is a distinct delusion 
expressed by the word ’mala’, which is of the nature of occlusion. [This 

Ramakantha is reading a formal syllogism into the text: pratijim = 2:12c; hetu — 
2:12d; udaharana 2:12.13; udayana (application of the hetu) — 2:13; and nigamana - 
2:14ab. 

2i9 Kirana 2:17d. 

m 

240 Sail khyakarika 12 c d. 

2 41 Sari khyakarika 4 8 . 











240 


Ramakanthas Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm m 


must, be accepted] in order to avoid the corollary of omniscience, which 
will be spoken of below 242 |as a corrollary that might follow|, because the 
soul, being by nature sentient, is all-pervading. And this [other impurity, 
viz. maia], because it occludes illumination (prakagavaranarupatvat) , is in 
opposition to ( sail a virudhyate the illumination of the soul expressed by 
the word ‘revelation’ (vyaktiSabdavacyena). And so ( iti ) the contradiction 
of her nature |by the a leged effect of may a, viz. occlusion| that proves 
[the existence of an] independent impurity is not unproved here [as was 
suggested above in 2:14.15). 243 [Someone might argue as oliows:] Let 
this mala, which is of the nature of occlusion, be a deluder [of the soul| 
because of its being the cause of ignorance; but that that which has been 
spoken of as the delusion derived from matter (prakrto mohah) should be 
a deluder (tat) is wrong, because it is the revealer of the [innate powers 
of the] soul. Such |an objection] ( iti ) is wrong (na), because (yatah) 


This revelation ( vyaktir ya) [by the effects of may a 
of the powers] of the soul is taught plainly ( sphutam) 
to be [a kind of] delusion (malah), in the same way 
as [one speaks of] the distortion produced by a lamp 
(dlpandhakaravat ). 214 (15ab) 

Just as a lamp is called ‘distortion’ ( mohah — andhakarah), although it is 
something that illumines, because where there are blue lotuses or the like, 
it causes them to appear distortedly as red lotuses or the like, so too the 
[partial] revelation [of the qualities] of the soul is said clearly sphutam eva 
krtva) to be delusion (rnohah = malah), because it manifests incorrectly 
( vipantena ) as the self, as permanent, pure and blissful in things which 
are not the self, which are impermanent, impure, and sorrowful. 245 This 

~' 2 Kimna 2:16-17 and commentary ad loc. 

1 I'lie second iti (in 2:14.21) I take to mark the end of a statement of fact established 

as the sic/dhania. 

p 

244 ‘Impurity’ and ‘like the darkness of a lamp' would be more faithful translations oi 
malah and dlpandhakaravat , but Ramakantha’s interpretation requires that they are 
not translated literally. It might seem that Ramakantha does more violence to the spirit 
of the original text in this section than elsewhere, but the text of the Lord’s reply to 
Garuda’s questions in verse 11 is decidedly odd, and some forced interpretations seem 
necessary. Throughout the speech it is difficult to discern a coherent line of thought 
and in one or two places, as here, the expressions used are puzzling. 

245 I am not certain of the translation here. We expect Ramakantha to say that the 
partial revelation of the powers of the soul caused the soul wrongly to superimpose 













Chapter Two 


24 ! 


is what has been taught: it is not just lack of knowledge (ajnanam eva) 
[that is known as delusion], for false knowledge too is delusion, and thus 
there is no fault. And for this reason 

Maya too [we have] taught to be a seductress because 
of the experience [that the soul has through her] of 
the taste of external objects. (15cd) 

In the same way ( tenaiva rupena ) we [i.e. the Lord] have taught maya 
too to be a seductress with [the section starting] ‘embraced by experience 
[generated out] of maya'. 216 The word a pi conveys that it is not just mala 
[that is said to delude]. And maya (sa) seduces by means of her effects 
by revelation (prakagali = bhogah) of the taste (rasah — asvadah) of the 
objects and instruments of experience ( visayivisayayoh). This is what is 
meant. For this reason we do not disagree with the Sankhyas on this 
point. The point of disagreement however—the impurity (malah) which 
is distinct from the delusion derived from matter—has been proved. And 
thus 


Wherever the soul (asya) is situated as a result of his 
own karman and as a result of mala , bondage arising 
from maya operates on him (tasya pravartate ) with 
good cause (sanimittam). [Otherwise] nothing [in the 
way of bondage] would arise for the [soul, who would 
be] heginninglessly released from mala [and thus] also 
[a] Siva. Therefore mala is not maya . It is by argu¬ 
ment [demonstrated to be] distinct. (16—17) 


Just as past actions (karmani) are a cause for the operation upon the 
soul (pumsah) of maya in all the worlds [in the tattvas] from kala down 
to earth, so too mala [is a cause]. If this were not so (anyatha), because the 
soul (tasya) will be taught 247 to be naturally sentient (ciddharmatvena), 
it would be Siva, since it is | innately] omniscient and omnipotent—and 
hence there would be no operation of the bonds that derive from maya. 


qualities of the self onto things which are not the self (cf. above in 2:14.11). With 
his choice of wording he is echoing Yogasutra 2:5: anityaSuciduhkhanatmasu nityaguci- 
sukhatrnakhyatir avidyeti . (Cf. AghoraSiva’s Sarvajnanottaravrtti IFP P.85, p. 
yad ah uh — an i tya£ ucidu h khanatmasu nityagucisukhatmapratipattir avid yeti.) 

246 Kirana 1:19c. 

24 ' Kirana 3:24c-25b. 

* 













242 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * * */ • 


Someone might suggest that past actions be the cause of its operation 
and that there would be no need of mala. This is not so, because then 
there could not even be those past actions, because there would be no-one 
to perpetrate them (anusthatur abhavat), since every [sou ), being free of 
maia, would be a Siva. 

The Jainas ( ksapanakah ) [may say) 'Let karman alone be posited as 
that which occludes [the power of the soul]. What need is there of mala?' 
This is wrong because one has no experience of it [i.e. of karman] as 
something that occludes (avaranatvadarganat). since it is established as 
being the cause of its own fruits alone, [as is the case with agricultural 
activities] like ploughing, and because one could [in a similarly inappro¬ 
priate way] posit karman (tasyaiva ) as the cause 248 of the illumination 
of external objects [or of any other arbitrarily chosen function] and there 
would follow the [undesirable corollary of the] non-existence of the senses 
or the like. This [line of argument] has been taught above, 249 And so for 
the operation of maya impurity distinct from karman must be accepted. 
Since that is the case, ^therefore maya is not maia3>, 250 and [thus] we 
have proved by inference ( anumanenaiva = yuktitah) how this [maia] is 
distinct from that [maya]. Thus he sums up [the discussion]. 

On this point the doubt of an opponent [is raised]: 


The effects of maya might be all [that there is in the 
way of bondage]. How [can you prove] another innate 
impurity? (18ab) 


The effects of maya beginning with kala may well be all, that is to say ( iti ) 
everything that binds ( avikalam ... bandhakam) consisting in the tattvas 
alone, 251 or it [viz. all bondage] may consist in all the worlds and creatures 

Rd reads hetukalpanena, which I have interpreted as hetutvakalpanena. The other 
manuscripts unfortunately skip to the bottom of the paragraph. 

249 Kiranavrtti 1:17*5-9. 

• • 

250 Some text has been lost here. Rd is the only witness at this point, and the scribe has 
left a large gap. Exactly how much is missing is not clear, but Dr. Harunaga Isaacson 
has suggested that a straightforward anvaya of 17c would fit well here: ta^sman na 
maya ma^>io. Nothing else in the paragraph comments on 17c and the very next 
statement expounds 17d. 

f)C 1 

The text may be corrupt here. The unusual avikalam is an unlikely gloss for 
the straightforward samastam of the verse, and furthermore we do not require an iti. 
Professor Sanderson has tentatively suggested restructuring the whole as follows: maya- 
karyam samastam ksityadikaiantatattvatmakam eva ‘All the effects of maya consisting 
of the tattvas from earth to kala\ 









Chapter Two 


243 


[in those tattvas]. This is the purport: whatever is a bond is a tattva or 
something that is fixed on the path (adJivaui) as a hhuvana or the like [all 
of which are obviously effect s of maya]. [But] you [Saiddhantikas] teach 
that 'mala is a bond just as the effects of maya are’. [But by our principle] 
this [mala] too must be [simply another effect of maya and hence] another 
tattva or another bhuvana on the path. Thus it would follow that there 
would be an extra tattva or an extra bhuvana. If it were denied that mala 
be either a tattva or a bhuvana , then its being a bond would also not be 
proved, just as [it is not proved that] a hare’s horn [is a bond]. This is 
what is taught [here]. How [then can you prove] another innate impurity? 

The refutation of this [follows]: 


That mala (tat pagutvam) 252 must isyat ) reside in the 
[bound] soul. And because the bound soul is taught to 
be situated in (- madhyagah ) the path [of the tattvas], 
mala is held to be different from that [path of tattvas 
and therefore not situated at a particular point along 
it]. (18cd—19ab) 


This is the purport: the inconclusiveness of the [above] logical ground |is 
demonstrated) by karman since [karman] does not reside in bhuvanas and 
tattvas or the like, even though it is a bond. You may say (atha) that that 
i.e. karman] is not something which can make the argument inconclusive 
because it is [in effect] situated in trie tattva of maya. 253 Our reply to this 
is that ( ucyate ) if that is the case, then this condition of being a bound 
soul also, viz. (iii) mala, [can be said to be] situated in the tattva of the 
bound soul (pa&ifcattvastham), 254 because without it souls would have no 
connection with mala (pasutvayogat), and through that it too is situated 
in the path [of the tattvas]. Thus mala, like karman , is a bond, although 
it is different in nature from the effects of maya, the tattvas, bhuvanas 
and the like. Thus there is no inconsistency. 

Someone who forcibly interprets these sutras by turning them around 
so that they are] also in [support of] the view that mala is maya through 


252 patiutva is a synonym for mala as is explicitly stated in 2:19c-20b), because it is 
bondage by mala that defines the condition of the bound soul. 

For the vicarious inclusion of karman in the tatfcvakrama see 1:13.10-13 and foot¬ 
note 77 on p. 186 above. 

254 Although the redactor of the Kir an a may not have intended the pasu to be a 
tattva, Ramakantha interprets it to be one. See Kiranavrtti 1:13.9-10 and footnote 76 
on p. 186 and footnote 392 on p. 291. 


















244 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * U « 


such divisions of the words as [in 2:12a] 'This innate impurity must be 
(syat) maya’, 255 [such an interpreter], since he is in doubt about the 
meaning of the sastra (saildigdhasastrarthah ), should be asked what the 
logical ground is for maya being mala. For otherwise [i.e. without a lo¬ 
gical ground] one cannot determine ( adhyavasatum) non-difference |from 
other entities] of an entity which is utterly beyond the scope of [percep¬ 
tion by] the senses and whose deference from other entities is proved by 
the difference of its effects [from those of other entities], such as a sense 
faculty, jlf one did so] there would follow the undesirable corollary of 
there being no difference between [all the] entities from the sense faculties 
to kala including the ianmatras. 

But surely a logical ground has been stated (for the thesis that mala is 
just maya and it is this:] ‘because there is no means of knowing (pramana- 
bhavat) the existence of an impurity different from maya'. This | logical 
ground] is wrong (na) because it is inconclusive, since that [which it seeks 
to prove] does not pervade |it]. For when the pervader [i.e. the sadhya] is 
rejected then it causes one to reject the pervaded |i.e. the hetu], 256 just as 
tree-ness [if it is refuted] causes one to reject also Simsapa-ness 25 ' [since 
being a Simsapa is a condition necessarily pervaded by the condition of 
being a tree], but some other [non-pervading condition! like pot-ness [if 
it is refuted] does not |cause one to reject Simsapa-ness], because |if it 
there would follow the logical fault of infinite regress. A means of 

255 In Ramakantha’s interpretation of the verse maya is taken in compound with 
kfiryam and is construed as belonging witli the following words in a separate statement. 

iVs readings are not often chosen where they conflict with those of the others, 
but vyapyam is unquestionably what is required. The same argument with similar 
wording is to be found in Manorathanandin’s commentary on Pramanavarttika 3:23 
[tasmat tanmatra... etc.), pp. 184-5: svabhavo vyapako dharmo nivarttamano bhavam 
vyapyam eva va nivarttayet vatha vrksatvarn sirn£apam vrksavi$esatvac chimgapavah. 

J 1/ 1/ V ■ # ■ ■ -A * 1 « ■ • M. I J , 

karanam va nivarttamanam karyam nivarttayati avyabhicaratah. na hi vyapyam 
karyam ca vyapakena karanena vina bhavatah tatsvabhavatvat tadadhinatvac ca . Cf. 
also Ramakantha’s Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 3:7, p. 51: tasya vyapakatvad vyapako 
hi nivarttamano vyapyam nivarttayati. tathasvabhavatvad vahnir iva dhumam, 
navyapako ghatadih, an avast haprasangHt. In both parallels the form nivarttamanah 
is used and not the passive. This lies behind the readings of R A and P 2 and has ac¬ 
cordingly been adopted here. This passage provides evidence that P 2 , or its source, 
conflated the P transmission with a source close to R N , but not with R A itself. 

•"J C 7 m m m • m 

“ ' vrksa iva 6im£apani is to be taken in the sense of vrksatvarn iva tfimsapatvam and 

# « # r i> > .X 

ghatadih below, in the sense of ghatatvadi. The tree in question is Dalbergia Sissoo 
Roxb. (Meulenbeld 1988:453). 



4 














Chapter Two 


2^i 5 


knowing does not pervade the existence of knowable entities (prameya- 
sattavyapakam) , because that would entail that all [beings] would be 
omniscient. And thus, because it is the case that the non-existence of a 
thing is not proved even where there is no means of knowing it (pramana- 
nirvrttav a pi), doubt alone (eva) is allowable (yuktah) on this point (atra) 
of the independent existence [of maia]; and the logical ground itself [of 
the argument outlined above, viz. pramanabhavat] is unfounded, because, 
as has been taught above, 258 there is a means of knowing the existence 
of mala as separate [from in ay a], namely (-iaicsanasya) the perception of 
effects [wrongly attributed to may a] which contradict its nature. 209 

By way of refuting this [pramana] (asya dusanatvena), it might be 
asserted that (yad api ... ity uktam) there is no contradiction in [those ef¬ 
fects] 260 residing together in one locus (sahavasthanavirodhah). because 
these two effects enter into one soul as Sivahood and bound-soul-ness. 
This assertion too is wrong, since, even if there were no contradiction by 
mutual exclusion ( parasparapariharavirodhe 'pi), there is no possibility 
that they could arise from a single cause, because, like tree and the ab¬ 
sence of tree ( vrksatadabhavayor iva) each has the form of the absence 

■ i 

of the other (itaretarabhavarupatvat). And it is this that is the [inten¬ 
ded] meaning of what we promised [to explain] ( pratijnato rthah) here. 261 
This pointing out [by the opponent with the argument in 2 : 19 - 17 — 18 ] of 
their being co-resident (sahavasthanopadarganam), even though they are 
opposed, is merely (eva) proclaiming a [non-existent] fault, because it 
does not contradict the proposition. 262 And it is not correct to say that 
bound-soul-ness also resides in souls [innately in the same way] as 3iva- 

258 Kirana 2:14 and Ramakantha's commentary thereon. 

259 One might read an avagraha: 'svabh a vaviruddhakaryopalambhalaksan asya, ‘( a 
means of knowing], namely the fact that we only perceive effects of a thing that do not 
contradict its nature.’ I have chosen not to read thus on the strength of the parallel in 
2:19.33 below. 

260 The opponent is still defending the view that mala is no different from maya 
and that it might be responsible for both prakaga and a varan a. The formula yad 
a pi. .. uktam normally refers back to an argument already stated, but in this case no 
such argument has been voiced. 

261 viz. that they cannot be effects of a single cause. 

262 Alternatively this sentence might be intended to mean The pointing out [with the 
word atmastham in 2:18c] of their being co-resident, although they are opposed, is 
intended to point out exactly this fault |in the opponent’s position, namely that they 
are not the effects of a single cause], for it does not contradict the proposition.’ But cf. 
Ramakantha’s use of udbhavyate elsewhere, e.g. in Nare$varaparlksaprakaSa, p. 114 f5 f 














246 


Ramakantlia’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


hood, because that [bound-soul-ness], being nothing but mala which is a 
separate entity i vastvantarakaramalarupatvena) , exists as something sep¬ 
arate horn the soul ( t ad vyatirik tat ay avast hitch). And [Siva] will teach 2 ®"* 
that ‘It [viz. mala] is referred to figuratively as a property because of 
its beginningless connection to the [bound] soul.’ Nor is it the case that 
their effects of illumination and occlusion do co-reside [in the soul], be¬ 
cause they are different states of the soul, like the different states of sakala 


and akala. 264 

As for the assertion that this argument [of the Siddhanta 265 ] is |shown 
to be] inconclusive (yad api... asya hetor anaikantikatvam uktam ) by the 
eye and other such |sense faculties] ( caksuradina ), because it produces 
(kurvata 266 ) opposing effects of illuminating and not illuminating or the 
like as a result of the presence or absence of such assisting factors as [good] 


light—that [assertion] is quite wrong. For when an assisting factor is 
absent, it |i.e. the eyc| is observed not to produce an effect contrary [to its 
own effect), but [simply] not to produce its own effect, because the absence 
of something cannot do [anything), since it is not a real thing (avastu- 
tvena). The sun produces light only, for owls and other such |nocturnal 
beasts], just as for men and other such [diurnal creatures]. Now this 
illuminant Jviz. the sun] ( prakagakah - 67 ), because it is extremely bright, 
dazzles t he eyes of that [ow)|, as it does [those] oi someone with weak 
eyes ( mandanctrasyeva 268 ), and does not produce its own effect |for those 


263 Kirana 2:23cd. 

m 

O'04 

Only the liberated soul enjoys total prakatfa, the effect of tivatva. It is true that in 
the sakala state the soul is affected bv the effects of both mava and mala, but Rama- 

*■ %/ j 

kantha must either mean that this cannot properly be called sahavasthana, perhaps 
because there is no a varan a when there are flashes of prakaga, or that it is the effects 
of tfivatva and of mala that cannot co-reside. 

2g5 

1 viz. that opposite effects cannot proceed from a single cause. 

200 ( 

I have corrected this to agree with caksnracfina on the assumption that it was 

attracted to the genitive of the following words in the archetype of all the extant 
manuscripts. 

Emended (from prakafah) because we require sa tu to refer to the sun, for it is the 
sun that has been introduced into the discussion as something that might be regarded 
as rendering the logical ground of Ramakantha’s argument inconclusive. 

2(> *If we were to read mandanetrasyaiva with P 2 then we might translate thus: ‘Now 
this illuminant, because it is extremely bright, dazzles the eyes of that [owl and 
because the [owl’s] weak eye [and not the sun] (mandanetrasyaiva) does not perform 
its own function, it |the sun] is spoken of in a figurative sense as something which 
does not illumine.' This interpretation is, however, less likely, because a passage in 
the NareSvaraparlksaprakata (p. 33, commentary on 1:11 suggests that Ramakantha 






























Chapter Two 


247 


creatures], and so it is spoken of in a figurative sense as something which 
does not illumine. 

[It is] not (spoken of in this way| because it creates the opposite of 
illumination, as darkness does. 269 Thus |our argument! is not affected by 
inconclusiveness. 

And so mala is proved to be a separate entity from maya, because 
of the fact, which we have stated before [and have now shown to be] 
free from all logical faults, that we perceive effects that are contradictory 
to her [i.e. maya’s| nature. Therefore enough of disputation with [the 
holders of views] that are beyond the |scope of the intended] meaning of 
the scripture. 

Next (tat), in order to demonstrate that it is proclaimed by other sam- 
hit as, synonyms are taught of mala which has thus been authoritatively 
proved |above] to be [a] separate [entity] from maya. 

And these are said to be its synonyms: impurity, nes¬ 
cience, bound-soul-ness, that which obscures, dark¬ 
ness, ignorance, envelopment, delusion. It is well- 
known from scripture to scripture (mate mate ) with 
these different synonyms, such as ignorance. 2,0 (19c- 
20 ). 

Now if it should be asked (atiia) whether this mala is well known in other 
philosophical schools, as it is in other samhitas , He teaches that it is not. 

Because of its existence the bound soul is held in this 
system (ilia) to require being bound, being purified 
and being enlightened. (21ab) 

Because of the existence of this impurity (asya malasya = tasya) the 
bound soul is held (abliimatah = [mafcah]) here, that is to say ( iti ) only 

did not regard owls as having weak eyes: nanv analokasyapi rupasya pranyantarair 
ulukadibhir grahanad alokena sahopalambho niyato nasti ... 

269 Ramakantha did not take the view that darkness is merely the absence of light, as 

m ■ 

most Naiyayikas hold, but that it is another entity, as the Bhatta MTmamsakas, who 
call it the tenth dravya, hold (see, e.g., Manameyodaya pp. 161-5). As Dr. Isaacson 
has pointed out to me, some Naiyayikas and Vai£esikas also thought of tamas as a 
substance. See, e.g., SrTdhara’s NyayakandalT pp. 32 6, especially p. 35: na ca bhasam 

abhavasya tamastvam v rd d h as am ru a tarn. 

270 Ramakantha’s commentary provides no clear support for any particular readings 
over any others and I have made choices on the basis of the distribution of readings. 













2.18 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


in this system of the supreme Lord, to require being impelled and bound 
by kala etc., and being purified by initiation, and being enlightened by 
the knowledge which is [encapsulated in the Saiva| gastra. He is not so 
[regarded| in other philosophical schools. And that is why those liberated 
according to other philosophical schools are mere bound souls, for because 
they do not know about mala it is impossible for them to cut it away. This 
is what is [in effect pregnantly) stated here. 

If that is so, then these various processes of the soul, such as having 
to be bound, must also be beginningless ( anadisthitah ) and that entails 
that they too must be further bonds. This is wrong since 

These various ( bhedah) processes ( vrttayah ) of the 
soul (fasya), such as having to be bound, which have 
been proclaimed—and not just the condition of being 
an experiencer—come into being only when there is 
impurity. (21c-22b) 

Because it is established that these processes, such as having to be bound, 
cease when mala ceases, it is proved that they are caused by mala, just 
as |from the fact that the light disappears when a lamp is removed, it 
is proved] that light is caused by a lamp. They are not each ( prthak) a 
different bond.. 

Next (tat), since thus far the thesis that mala is not a real entity and 
the thesis that it is in essence maya have been refuted, an opponent’s 
view |is| now [stated] by rephrasing that other, third question, which was 
raised with the words ( iti ) 271 ‘or is it a property of the soul?’ 

[Garuda spoke:] 

If [the soul is] thus [as above described and] it is settled 
that it requires being bound, [then] it has (asya 272 ) 

271 Kirana 2:llbc. 

■- 

272 Since the asya in this pada must refer to the soul it is odd that it should be followed 
by the expression pa£usangatah. it is tempting to accept M > \s reading inalo ’stu patfu- 
sahgatah to obviate this difficulty and to effect a neater switch of subject from that 
of the preceding pada. I do not suggest that a stu is original—it is almost certainly 
an ‘improvement’ on the original asya that is so widely attested—but it might have 
been what Ramakantha read, and M r is on occasion (e.g. in 2:26a and 2:12a) the 
only manuscript to transmit Ramakantha’s text. It might be argued in support of M y 
that astu may be glossed in 2:23.2 with kalpyate. Nevertheless I have retained the 
unsatisfactory maJo sya, because Ramakantha’s use of the word asya in 2:23.1-2 can 
















Chapter Two 


249 


mala, which is linked to the bound soul. Why then is 
this mala on the basis of reasoning not posited to be 
an [innate] property (dharmah) of the soul? (22c-23b) 


If the soul is thus, [that is to say| consisting in consciousness, and it 


is settled (vyavasthitah 


samsthitah]) that it requires being bound 


? 


then a mala which obscures it[s powers] too is posited, because the soul’s 
having limited powers of knowledge cannot otherwise be accounted for. 
Why then, if that is so (hanta farin' 273 ), let us posit on the basis of 
inference (anuinanena yuktitah) that this mala , which is ignorance, is 
a[n innate] property of the soul itself. This the Naiyayikas and Vaigesikas 
say: whatever is produced in something by some other cause does not 
[naturally] exist in that thing [prior to its being produced], just as light, 
which is produced by a lamp or the like, [does not naturally exist] in 
darkness. Now (ca) knowledge is produced in the soul by external objects 
and the instruments [of the senses] and so on (karyakaranadibhih) and 
therefore that too does not [naturally] exist in it. Thus the soul is proved 
to be essentially ignorant. How then can one prove the existence of an 
independent mala? 

[There follows the view of] the Siddhanta on this point. 

[The Lord spoke: 


It [mala] is referred to figuratively as a property be¬ 
cause of its beginningless connection to the [bound] 
soul. How then could [the soul] acquire the quality of 
ignorance, for it is [inseparably] linked to knowledge? 
(23c—24b) 


It might be as you say, if this argument were proven for us; but it is not 
proven, because on that point we hold external objects and the instru¬ 
ments [of the senses] and the like to be revealers of [innate] knowledge. 


Surely (nanu) because one experiences or does not experience know¬ 
ledge according as they are present or absent, it is proved that external 
objects and the instruments [of the senses] are the cause [of knowledge]. 
No. Ignorance in the soul [as an innate quality] is not established by 


be adduced to support it, and because Ramakantha’s use of kalpyate is more probably 
intended to show that the verb of 23b is to be supplied here too. 

273 For the use of this idiom cf. Malinlvijayavarttika 1:85a. 








250 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * */ * 


this unproved argument, because it is inconclusive, since these [objects 
and instruments] might also be revealers [rather than generators of know¬ 
ledge]. And therefore there must certainly be an independent enveloping 
thing [viz. mala] (avaranena) which has been beginninglessly bound to 
the impure soul. It is to be understood that ( drastavyah ) it is because of 
its connection with that that the soul is spoken of figuratively in author¬ 
itative texts as impure, and not because it is essentially ignorant. 

[Objection:] in that case for this very reason, doubt about the soul's 
(tatra) ignorance is appropriate, not certainty that the soul is sentient, 
by which fact (yena) [if it were true] the existence of an independent mala 
would be established. 

In response to this [the following verse] is taught: 

[Mala] is not a property ( dharmah ) of this [soul]. If it 
were a property, then transformation would become 
apparent [in the soul]. * 2 ' 1 * (24cd) 


Mala , which is of the nature of nescience, is not a property of or the special 
nature of the soul (atmanah = tasya) , because the corollary would be that 
[the soul] could not be soul [i.e. sentient], just as a pot or similar external 
object [is not soul|. And if [in order to combat this problem] it is advanced 
that the soul is that in which knowledge [rather than being innate] arises 
as inherent (samaveiam), 5 this position too is wrong, because if the soul 
at first possesses nescience as a property (tasya pur vani ajnanam prati 
dharmitve ), as is the case with pots and such like [external objects], then 
even at a subsequent time inherence in it of knowledge is impossible. But 
if it were admitted that know edge is possible in this [soul] that is of the 
nature of nescience, then clearly ( sphutam 276 eva) this [soul] would have 


■Ti 4 . 

Vs pratfka for this, tasya dharmmo ne U di is further evidence that P 3 was not 
copied directly from Pi, whose reading is quite clear here. The sense of 24cd is conveyed 
again by 25ab and, because it is not found in N, it may be an interpolation; if so, it 
was inserted early, because it is commented upon by Ramakantha. R ;V places the 
half-verses 2:25—26b here {immediately after 2;24d); they have been moved to where 
prafclkas for them are given. The pratTka for 2:25ab occurs only in R‘\ that for 2:25cd 
is in all the manuscripts. For 2:2Gcd a pratTka is given in P and in that same place R v 
repeats the entire half-verse. 

2 ' 5 This is the position of VaiSesikas and Naiyayikas. 

jfj 

It is possible that Ramakantha actually read sphutam bhavet in 24d; but what he 

has written here could have been intended as a paraphrase of the transmitted text and 
I have therefore not emended. 









Chapter Two 


251 


jto be admitted to undergo] a change of form, just as an amalaka fruit 277 
or the like |undergoes a change of i’orm| characterised by the arising in it 
of the colour yellow. This fault will be discussed below. 278 

Someone might object [with the following argumentation] (nanu): first 
[you must grant that] knowledge must be a quality ( gunah ), just as taste 
and the like are qualities, because it is not visible but is perceptible 
to people like us. And a quality must reside in a substance. And the 
locus where it resides, because |it must be] different from that (quality], 
is proved to be the nescient soul. This view too is wrong, 279 because 

Mala is not a natural property of the soul, whose nat- 

2 T 7 * * 

Phyllanthus emblica Linn. 

2 7A * 

Kirana 2:26ab and commentary. 

"'This passage (from 2:24.17-2:25.2 tad apy ayuktam. .. siddhyati) , transmitted only 
in R v , has been retained, because it is likely that P/s scribe’s eye skipped from the 
siddhyati of 2:24.17 to the siddhyati of 2:25.2, and because the sequence o arguments 
in the text as constituted appears to require that kim anyena sadhanena is a speech 
of Ramakantha's, and not of his notional opponent, as it would appear to be if the 
intervening passage were omitted as in P. Nevertheless, the passage and the half- 
verse (2:25ab) which it includes are dubious. The first phrase of the inserted passage 
is the sort of pedestrian gloss that might have been a scribe’s marginal note, the 
nirvacana that follows is either corrupt or depends on an untraceable verbal root, and 
the third phrase does not fit the context well. As has been remarked above, 2:25cd 
is a vehicle for the same thoughts as 2:24cd and one or other version is probably a 
secondary improvement on the other. Tryambakaiambhu gives 2:25ab as a pathantara 
to 2:24cd, but since the Nepalese manuscripts omit 2:24cd altogether, it is probable 
that that is secondary; nevertheless the pratJka for 24c in P and the wording of Rama¬ 
kantha's commentary in 2:24.1 Oil show that Ramakantha’s Kirana included 24cd. If we 
accept some of Pi’s readings in 2:25.4, then the text from 2:24.16 to 2:25,5 might read 
and translate smoothly as follows: . . .yas tasyagrayah sa tadvilaksanatvad ajhanarupa 
evatma siddhyati / kim anyena sadhanena? na. yo jhanasya rasader iva gunatx r e hetur 
uktas so py ayukta eva, drstantasyasman prati sadhyadharmasiddhatvat. 

And the locus where it resides, because |it must be] different from that [quality), is 
proved to be the nescient soul. What need is there of any other proof? [The response 
of the Siddhanta:] No; the argument stated for knowledge being a quality of the soul, 
just as taste and so forth [are qualities], is also wrong, because for us it is not proved 
that what the argument seeks to prove is true [even] about its example.’ 

In the face of these strong arguments against retaining R N 's extra passage it has 
been retained, 1) because an interpolator would be unlikely to end his interpolation 
with the final word (siddhyati) of the preceding sentence—a sign that immediately 
suggests eyeskip in the other sources, 2) because from its awkwardness one can infer 
that it is corrupt, but not that it is secondary, 3) because Pi’s apparently smoother 
text may have been skillfully modified after the omission, and 4) because Ramakantha 
may be glossing 2:25ab in 2:25.18-19. 












252 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• m m 


ural property is consciousness. If it were, then the 
soul would be subject to change. (25ab) 

p 

'! hat whose own nature (svabhavah = dharmah) is knowledge (jhanam 
cit) f[is called] soul (pumau) because he experiences everything!. 280 
A soul is proved to exist in every man by one’s own experience as being 
manifest both to itself and to other souls (svaparatmaprakasataya). What 
need is there of further proof? 

But an argument has been stated to show that knowledge is a quality 
[that must reside in something other than itself], like taste and other such 
qualities. That [argument] too is wrong, because for us it is not proved 
that what the argument seeks to prove is true [even] about the example, 
for entities like taste ( rasadayo hi bhavah) come into being only in con¬ 
glomerates and are destroyed only as [parts of] conglomerates. 281 Like 
the Sankhyas and Buddhists, 282 we too admit their existence as things 
which produce effects, because they are established by valid means of 


280 The intention is to reinforce the argument by a nirvacana of the word pums that 
connects it with sentiency; but it is not clear to me how the nirvacana is to be un¬ 
derstood. This may be because it is not fully explicit or because the text is corrupt 
(this portion is preserved in R v alone). From the word order it seems most likely that 
pumiti is understood as a verb meaning anubhavati and that sarvam is supplied as 
though it were implicit, I have not found a root from which pumiti could be formed. 
It seems impossible that Ramakantha should have invented his own. If the text as it 
stands is not corrupt, then it must be assumed that he followed a Dhatupatha with 
at least one elsewhere unattested root. The entire passage—from tad apy ayuktam in 
2:24.17 to siddhyati in 2:25.2 and including 2:25ab—may be an interpolation; see the 
previous footnote. 

281 i.e. taste does not exist as a separate entity—it is always part of a conglomerate 
of similarly inseparable attributes. Cf. the related passage in the Nare£varapanksa- 
praka£a ad 1:4, p. 11: ... na hi rasa dm am gunatvam asmakam sankhyanam a pi va 
prasiddham ruparasadisamudayavyatirekenanyasya kasyacid amraphalader dharmino 
r nupalambbat . at a evamrasya rasah iti bhedavyapadesali sain u dayaika desakhyapan ay a 
(conj.; °degatvakhyapanaya Ed.) vanasya dhavah gobhanah itivad upapadyate eva. 

. for taste and the like are not proved beyond question (prasiddham) for us to be 
qualities or for the Sankhyas either, because we do not perceive a separate entity that is 
their locus, such as a mango fruit, to which they belong, other than the conglomeration 
of colour, taste and so forth [of which they are a part]. I fence the expression "the flavour 
of a mango”, which indicates a difference [between the flavour and the mango which, 
according to our opponents, is the difference between dharma and dharmin ], serves 
in fact] to refer to a part of the conglomerate [of attributes that make up the whole 
mango], just like [the expression] u the Dhava tree of the forest is beautiful”.’ 

282 The arguments of this passage echo those of a section of Vasubandhu’s Pudgalavi- 
niscaya (after the eighth kogasthana of the A bhidharmakotiabhasya) , pp. 475-6. 




























Chapter Vwo 


253 


knowledge; but [we do| not [admit] the existence of something separate 
in which they reside, because you cannot see such a locus independent of 
them. How then can there be worldly usages such as 'smell resides in [the 
element] earth’? This is simply erroneous and has its roots in constantly 
reiterating wrong views (. kudarganabhyasamulah). 2s 3 Alternatively it is 
allowable ( yukta eva) if, as in the expression ‘the Dhava tree 284 of the 
forest is beautiful 1 , it is intended to refer to a particular part of a con¬ 
glomerate of particular) attributejs. 285 And so, because knowledge too 
has not been proved to be a [separable] quality, it is established that the 
soul has the form of knowledge. This is what is taught. But in that case 
(tarhi ), because we experience knowledge as transient, the soul (asya) too 
must be transient. This is wrong, bor there are two kinds of knowledge: 
that which is of the nature of mental apprehension (adhyavasayatmakam) 
and other [knowledge]. Of these two (tatra) that which is mental appre¬ 
hension we too hold to be transient, because it is a quality of the buddhi 
(huddhidharmatvena). That which is not mental apprehension is know¬ 
ledge that is of the nature of experience ( samvedanatmakam) and belongs 
to the human condition (paurusam). An absence of that is never experi¬ 
enced, because it is at all times experienced as that which perceives and 
as one. Nor is it impossible that it produces effects in sequence— all this 
we have shown at length in the NarcsvaraparTksaprakasa, and it must be 
understood from there. 286 

The soul, since it is of the nature of knowledge, has sentience as its 
own nature: it is not possible that it could have nescience, [that is to say] 


a O Q 

In this case those of Vai^esika and Nyaya. 
284 Anogeissus Lati folia Wall, (thus Meulenbeld, 1988:442) 


285 Cf. Nare£varapariksapraka£a ad 1:4, p. iT 9_i2 h katham tarhi devadattasyeccha 
ityadiko 'tra kartrtvavyavaha.ro laukikah kutarkadartianabhyasamula upahata (em.; 
°mulopahata Ked.) eva vitastavah pravahah itivad va vi£istajhanapiavahasambandhi- 
tapradar$anartho yukta eva. 

'How then do we have worldly usages that confirm that it [viz. desire) has an agent, 
such as Devadatta’s desire”. 4 hey are simply erroneous, resulting from being versed 
in the wrong schools of thought. Or, like the expression “the stream of the Hydaspes”, 
they are appropriate [and] are intended to draw attention to the fact that [desire] is 
connected to a stream of particular cognitions.’ 

r> q 

It is difficult to pick out particular passages that Ramakantha must be referring to, 
because these topics are dealt with at considerable length. For the refutation of the view 
that all things that exist produce effects and are momentary, and the demonstration 
that something can produce effects simultaneously or in series whether it is or is not 
momentary see particularly Naro6varaparTksaprakaga ad 1:22, p. 52. 














254 


Rarnakaiitha s Commontary on the Kiranatantra 

m 


mala, as a property, because if it did, then, like amalakas and such (like 
fruits], it would follow that it would change its form. To explain: 

Knowledge of one thing is made manifest ( vyajyate 287 ) 
and knowledge (tat) of another is obscured. (25cd) 

Knowledge arises of one sense object, such as colour, and (knowledge] 

of another, such as taste, although it had arisen, is destroyed Since 

this is what you hold to be the case, the soul must therefore undergo 
transformation into another form. 

What is the problem with that? [In response to this] He teaches: 

Transformation [is possible] of the insentient 

(parinamo ’cetanasya 288 ). It is not possible for 

what is sentient. (26ab) 


Whatever undergoes change is established to be insentient, like an object 

such as an amalaka fruit, and thus, if the soul is subject to change, it 

follows that it too must be insentient. And so, in order to avoid this 

corollary, the soul must definitely be accepted not to be of the nature of 

ignorance, but rather of the nature of knowledge. Thus it is proved that 

there is an impurity whose nature it is to obscure separate |from the soul] 

because otherwise [the soul] would be [at all times] omniscient. Thus the 
third question is refuted. 289 

If that is so, then the very same fault [viz. that the soul must be 

subject to change and therefore insentient] applies also to the view that 

an independent mala exists. Thus this is an objection [that applies to all 
the views] together (samuccayena):^ 0 


2 :;™ s of NM " has been adopted, and the half-verse seems thus consonant 

with the Siddhanta view that the soul’s innate omniscience is obscured by the pa^as- 

u t Ramakantha appears to take 25cd as a statement of a purvapaksa and so it is 
p^sible that puryate, the reading of S, might have been what he read.' 

This reading is found only in M y and its apograph, K 2 , but Ramakantha quotes it 

! n thlS i orm in 3:16 - 8 ; 3:17.5; 5:1.14; 5:31.6 and ad 7:9. It is also implicit in Tryamba- 

kaiambhu s commentary (IFP T.1102, p.47 [13 >). The distribution of readings strongly 

suggests that it is not original, but a metrically elegant Kashmirian ‘improvement’ (cf 
3:18a). v 

2 8Q t 

In 2 : 11 . 2-1 Ramakantha distinguished three wrong views that Garuda referred to 

in 2:11: 1) that mala is no different from maya; 2) that mala is a natural property of 

the soul; and 3) that mala is not ultimately real. He had first dealt with the last and 

the hrst of these and is here drawing attention to his having just dealt with the second. 

J am uncertain of the meaning here: perhaps instead one should read samuccave na 

and understand the statement as follows: ‘this cannot be urged [against one particular 
position] since [it applies to all] together’. 



















Chapter Two 


255 


[Garuda spoke:] 

Because of their beginningless connection to one an¬ 
other they cannot separate. [Also] because they are 
all-pervasive. If there were the destruction of its in¬ 
nate nature, then would it not itself be destroyed? 
(26c“27b) 


This connection between the soul and mala (atmamalayoh 


tayoh) 


which is characterised by the relation of enveloped and enveloper and 
is beginningless, is a particular |feature of their(?)] own nature. There 
can be no separation (nivrttih - vislesah) from it, because it is beginning¬ 
less, just as [there can be no separation] from a nature that is sentient or 
insentient. And thus there can be no liberation. And what if separation 
from it is held [to be possible]? If that is the case, since there is then 
a destruction of the [souks] own nature (svabhavasya — sahajasya). then 
the soul (tasya) itself is destroyed, [that is to say] transformation would 
take place in the form of the arising of another nature. This then is the 
same unchanged fault ( tadavastho dosah ) as was taught before to belong 
to the view that mala is not [a] separate [entity from maya). Now if it be 
said that (atha) they [viz. mala and the soul] are separated, not from their 
own natures, but from their mutual conjunction, as with an eye and its 
cataract, and so that fault does not arise, the reply is that (ucyate) this 
[kind of separation] too is impossible (so pi na yuktah ), because they are 
all-pervasive ( vibhutvata iti vyapakatvat). For separation [occurs] when 
something non-pervasive is moved away from some [other] non-pervasive 
thing to another place; but because something pervasive is present every¬ 
where, separation is not possible from anything, and thus there can be 
no liberation. And what i separation is held |to be possible] even in the 
case of such a [pervasive] thing? In that case when there is destruction 
of that innate (sahabhavinah = sahajasya ) enveloping [maia], then there 
is destruction, [which is] transformation from one form into another, also 
of the [souks] nature, [i.e.] of its state of being enveloped. Thus the fault 
is unchanged (tadavastha eva). 

The [response of the] Siddhanta to this [is as follows]: 

[The Lord spoke: 


Though this mala is all-pervasive, its power is des¬ 
troyed. By a [particular] means the power in mala 






256 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* • 1/ • 


is blocked in a particular way (icafchancit). Just as 
the burning power of fire is swiftly blocked by a man¬ 
tra, so too maia’s power ( tacchaktih ) is blocked, and 
thereby [the soul] is said to be ‘separated [from mala]\ 

(27c—29b) 

in this [speech > le] first, of all [teaches that] this [alleged fault] is not a 
fault if it refers to mala , since it is not just non-pervasive material impur¬ 
ity that is of the nature of delusion which is transformed (anyathabbavah 
= vadhah) by a [particular] means, namely initiation by mantras, for, 

mala is] all-pervasive, the power of the mala of the individual 
(anavamalasya) whose nature is to envelop [is transformed], just as the 
power of fire to burn is destroyed by a mantra]—with the expression 




in a particular way’ ( kathancid iti ) He means [in the case of ordinary 
asadyonirvanadlksa] incompletely, excluding the [destruction of the] ex¬ 
perience of past actions whose effects have already commenced jin this 
life] iarabdhakaryakarmabhogoparodhena), or (tu) completely, without 
excluding this [destruction of the effects of such karman] by the initiation 
which brings instantaneous release (sadyonirvanadiksaya) —and therefore, 
because we admit the permanence and [at the same time] the changeab¬ 
ility of mala, it is not appropriate to point out as an undesirable corol¬ 
lary that this proves the transformation oi maia’s nature into some other 
nature, since that would be to prove what is already established. This is 
what is stated here. And so, because mala changes its own nature, even 
though its essence [continues to] exist (svarupasaitve pi), as when one 
says ‘the man has been released from diseased so too [the soul] is said to 
be 'separated* |f rom mala] because of maia’s power being blocked. And 
so this assertion that there can be no separation, because of their [both, 
viz. maia and the soul] being all-pervasive 291 also does not vitiate [the 
Siddhantaj (adosah). 

Now the [alleged] fault when applied to the soul is also refuted. 

After blocking the power of that [mala], [Siva] makes 
[the soul] devoid of all the desires of [this-worldly] 
existence. (29cd) 

After blocking the power (sakteh samrodhah = saktisainrodhah) of mala 


(malasya — t asya 


tat° \ i the supreme Lord makes the soul devoid of an- 


291 Garuda asserts this in 2:2Gd. 


































Chapter Two 


257 


ger, attachment and other such passions ( krodharagadirahitah = hhava- 
nihsprhah) . And that is why it has been taught 292 that marks such as the 
lack of the passions of anger and attachment in pupils are investigated 
by gurus in order to determine [whether they have received] a descent 
of divine power, so that they may have t he right to initiation ( diksadhi- 
karartham). And therefore at that time [of saktipata] mala alone (eva) 
attains some other form, but the soul undergoes no change into another 
nature. Thus the fault mentioned before does not apply. This is what 
is taught here, for both when maia is there and when it is not there, 
that essential nature [of the soul], which is to grasp objects, exists inde¬ 
pendent of mala. How then can it be that the soul does not grasp an 
object when mala is present? This [question] is childish chatter, for if 
the soul is a grasper of objects independently of mala, how will he be 
when mala is present? But if an object is now manifest to him and was 
not manifest to him before, then how can there not be a transforma¬ 
tion of [his| essential nature? This too is inappropriate. When things 
are manifest [to someone], that is nothing other than their being made 
the object of knowledge to them ( tadvisayikaranam ). but that, it has 
been taught, is not at all times in the soul independently of mala. It is 
therefore not to be explained by the soul’s resorting to a variety of own 
natures (ato na svabhavabhedalambanagatatvat ). This and other vari¬ 
eties of false superimposition of conflicting qualities that would lead one 
to suppose transformation of an essential nature I have refuted at length 
in the Naresvarapariksaprakasa 2 9 '* and so that is to be understood from 
there. 

As for the fault that has been stated that through the cessation of its 
innate enveloping [mala] there would be a transformation of the essential 
nature o i the soul too, characterised by the cessation of the condition of 
being enveloped [and not just a transformation of maia], a response to 
this too is given (tatrapy ucyate): 


Tarnish on copper is innate, and yet by the destruc¬ 
tion of that [tarnish] the copper itself is not destroyed. 

Just as this destruction [of the tarnish] on copper 

292 See 1:22.11-15. 

have not been able to trace the passage to which-this refers. 1 Here is a refutation 
of the Buddhist view that the notion of self is falsely superimposed 1 adhyaropita) ad 
1:5, pp. 13-16, but 1 have seen no lengthy discussion of what Ramakantha speaks of 
here. 
















258 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• * */ * 


[takes place without destroying the copper] so too the 
destruction of the mala of a soul. Similarly, even when 
the husks of rice are destroyed, there is no destruction 
of that [rice itself]. (30—31b) 

Just as no transformation of copper is seen because of the removal of its 
innate tarnish, so too no transformation of the soul [takes place] because 
of the removal o mala (malanivrttyapy atmano na viicara 294 ). In this par¬ 
tial respect this serves as an example (etavatamSena drstantatvam) and 
not in other respects, because we accept that copper has the property of 
being subject to change. This is what is expressed: this differentiation 
according to whether or not mala is present is not a fundamental one. It 
is not the case that the soul, whose one essential nature is to grasp objects 
independently of mala, has some other essential nature that is not envel¬ 
oped, and that this other nature creates a [fundamental] differentiation. 
Thus because there is no transformation [of the soul’s essential nature 
into some other essential nature, the fault stated above is not entailed. 

This position has been established by valid means of knowledge and 
it is now strengthened by a further example which is also established by 
logical inference: 


When (yatha ... tatha ) the power connected with a 
poison is blocked, the poison itself is not destroyed. 
The same is the case when a soul’s mala is destroyed. 
(31c-32b) 


Because they [viz. the power of poison and maia] are [respectively] the 
causes of death and delusion, the power [in this example], which is also 
innate, stands for mala. When it is blocked, there is never any destruction 
of the poison’s colour, form or such features that constitute its nature. 
The poison [in the example] stands for the soul. In exactly the same way 
[the nature] of the soul [is not destroyed] when the destruction of mala 
takes place. 

Because this is [only] a partial example, now (adhuna) the chapter is 
concluded with another example proven by direct experience: 


294 P 1 P 3 ’s nivrttyatmano py avaryyatvalaksananivrttilaksanasvabhavantaram na 
vikara might be adopted, but there seems no strong reason for its having been cur¬ 
tailed in R v and I have assumed that it is a later, clarificatory amplificaton. 















Chapter Two 


259 


The nut of the Kataka tree 295 when thrown into dirty 
water blocks its power. What does it cast outside 
the water? [Nothing.] givajnana similarly effects the 
blocking of the power of that [mala]. (32c—33d) 296 

For [it is] just as [with] the nut of a particular tree called a Kataka (which] 
when thrown specifically into water that has some natural dirt from the 
clouds or the like (meghajadisahajakalusayukta eva jale 297 ) is observed 
to effect the blocking of the [water's] power which is |in this case] its 
dirt (kalusalaksanayah sakteh). It is not that it also casts 298 some other 
nature [of the water] isvabhavantaram) anywhere else ( anyatra = anyato) 
out from the water. It blocks just the dirt of the water (tasya), nothing 
else. That is what is meant. So too it is with the knowledge that is 
Siva (£iv a eva jhanain = tfivajhanam) —[so called] because He is the cause 
of knowledge, since He makes manifest the power of knowledge of all 
[souls]—[this] blocks the power of mala ( tasyeti malasya ) by initiation 
or by means of a descent of His divine power in order to make [souls] 
fit for that [initiation] ( tadadhikarotpadanaya) . This we have taught. 299 
Alternatively [one could interpret givajhanam in the verse as follows:] 
the knowledge that will be taught below as being invariably prescribed 
for initiates, and which is connected with Siva because he is its 
(sivasya jheyataya sambandhi) . 30 ° That knowledge gradually effects the 
complete blocking, by daily reduction of that mala which had not been 
destroyed by initiation because of the exclusion [from being blocked] of 
[the results of] past actions that have already begun to take effect. [It 
does] not [block the power] of the soul [as one might understand by the 
ambiguous use of the pronoun tasya in the verse]. 

295 Strychnos potatorum Linn, (thus Meulenbeld, 1988:431). This pada is identical to 
Manusmrti 6:67a. The same remedy is prescribed in Brh&tsamhita 54:121. 

296 A thirty-fourth verse has been relegated to the apparatus as an early insertion 
that has found its way into all manuscripts but N. It receives no commentary from 
Ramakantha. 

* i 

29 This phrase seems corrupt and requires insightful emendation, "ailing that, I have 
preferred this inadequate reading of P to R N ’s, for that seems to make still less sense. 

298 Ramakantha uses the optative, ksipet. It is conceivable that he read 33b kirn ksiped 
anyato jalat, but this reading is not attested in any of the manuscripts. 

299 Kir an a 1:21. 

« 

800 Cf. Kiranavrtti 1:10.7-8 (glossing givajnanam in 1:10b) Sivasya sarvajhasya greyo- 
hetor b hag a vat ah karyarupataya prapyatvena ca sambandhi jhanam £astram. See also 
Kiranavrtti 3:14.1. 







260 Ramakan{ha ’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

And therefore the insentience mentioned before is not a fault Ithat 
can appl y | for the soul (tasya), because it does not change it, essentia 

ota"^ T ^ ^ ** I insen ‘£nce] is “ 

ir roblem of any kind in the “ ^ 

" mpos ' d bi 


















CHAPTER THREE 


On Karman 301 

Now [there begins] another chapter preceded by questions in order to in¬ 
vestigate the categories/* * 02 And in this chapter (atra ca) the connections 
relating to the sutra, the padartha and section of the book are to be under¬ 
stood to be as before (pragvad drastavyah ) [i.e. as stated at the beginning 
of the previous chapter]. But that relating to the patala is the investig¬ 
ation into impurity not being the same as passion ( malasyaivaragatva - 
pariksatmakah) following immediately upon the proof of the existence 
of impurity independently [from maya]. And that relating to the state¬ 
ment is with the statement 30 '* ‘And it is also stained by passion'. And so 
|follows] the question: 

[Garuda spoke:] 

Being an experiencer has been taught to result from 
[being bound by] impurity. Does it not arise from 
attachment? Since 301 that [attachment] arises from 

30 'The title karmapatala is given to this chapter in E D and E v (see footnote 1 on 
p. 161 above). 

302 It may seem odd that Ramakantha does not specify which and yet uses the particle 
eva. In fact Ramakantha identifies in the course of the chapter the treatment of all five 
padarthas appropriate to the vidyapada: 3:5.6-7 paSupadartha ; 3:5.8 pasapadartha] 
3:8.9-10 patipadartha; 3:13.11 jnanapadartha; and 3:25.4 vicarapadartha. 

303 Kir ana 1:17a. 

* 

301 rag ad yato and rag ad a to are both possible and neither is confirmed by the com¬ 
mentary. A yatah appearing at the end of the clause to which it belongs is a mannerism 
of Ramakantha's (see p.xxviii); but it cannot here have been introduced secondarily 
under his influence: the yatah appears not in M v R^, which are usually close to Rama¬ 
kantha's text, but in both Nepalese and Southern manuscripts. For this reason yatah 
has been preferred. 







262 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* « * 


passion, passion should be taught 305 [as the cause o 
the soul’s condition of being an experiencer]. What 
need is there of impurity [as a cause] for this? ( 1 ) 

Surely with the section starting 'and occlusion [is expressed] by the word 
“impurity” '' 06 occ uding with respect to the soul has been taught to be 
the most important effect that proceeds irom impurity. [Effects] such as 
the condition of being an experiencer, however, are accompanying side- 
effects ( anusangikam) . As has been taught [above]: 307 

These various ( bhcdah ) processes (vrttayah) of the soul 
(tasya) such as having to be bound which have been 
proclaimed—and not just the condition of being an 
experiencer—come into being only when there is impurity. 

[So] what is this question? It might be supposed that (atha) the ques¬ 
tion means this: the condition of being an experiencer is here taught 
to be identical with the condition of being enveloped, but it is [surely] 
not [meant that it is] the condition of having a taste only for en oyment 
(bhogaikarasikatvam )? If that were intended {yady evam). then a ques¬ 
tion attaching [the existence of] passion ( ragaksej >apra£nah ) would have 
been appropriate, such as impurity alone should be taught [to be the 
cause of the condition of being an experiencer]; what need is there of 
passion? 1 but not 'what need is there of impurity?? because even when 
passion and those other [tattvas] are not there ( ragadyabhave 1 pi) [what 
is supposed to be] their effect [viz. the condition of being an experiencer] 
is present in such states of existence as that o the pralayakevalin. That 

305 Following NM y RG 2 vaktavyo has been retained. It might be considered to be 
supported by the echo mala eva vaktavyah in 3:1.6. Nevertheless a strong case can 
also be made for S ? s bhoktrtve because it might seem that Ramakantha quotes Id 
in 3:1.9 if either R v, s bhoktrtvena malena kim iti or P 2 's bhoktrtve tra malena kim 
iti were accepted). Both these versions of Id are attested in Southern manuscripts 
of the mula. I have assumed that P 1 P 3 transmit the correct text at that point: atra 
bhoktrtve malena kim iti. A literal quotation of the last pada is then not intended, 
and bhoktrtve is simply a gloss for atra. It is not impossible that scribes familiar with 
a Southern version of this pada assumed that Ramakantha had intended to quote it in 
3:1.9, and so supplied the missing syllable. It is also conceivable that the appearance of 
the reading bhoktrtve in the Southern transmission of the mula is in turn attributable 
to the influence of this gloss of atra in Ramakantha’s commentary. 

306 I<jrana 2:14d ff. 

-<* 

307 Kirana 2 : 21 c- 22 b. 

■ 
















Chapter Three 


263 


is true, but it is not the absolute non-existence of impurity that is being 
put forward here as an opponent’s view [to be demolished], when [Garuda 
asks:] what need there is of impurity as a cause of the condition of being 
an experiencer ( bhoktrtve = atra). For the [kind of] condition of be¬ 
ing an experiencer that is the state of having a taste only for enjoyment 
(bhogaikarasikatvatmakam ) has been proved to proceed from an effect 
of passion (ragakaryat), namely the same above-mentioned attachment 
(abhisvahgad eva) that we experience (drstat). And so ( iti ) the meaning 
of the question is this: ‘what need is there of positing impurity too to 
be the cause |of this condition of being an experiencer]? | fs it not the 
case that] it is passion alone 808 that is, through a causal chain (pararn- 
paryena), the cause of this (atra)?’ And so there is no contradiction [in 
the questionj. And that is why this [objection] is now replied to (atra 
samadhih) simply (eva) by the affirmation of impurity [as the cause]: 

|The Lord spoke:] 

The condition of being an experiencer, which we have 
taught, is beginningless, [because] it is caused by im¬ 
purity. (2ab) 

This condition of being an experiencer, which we have taught above, (prag 
uktam [= proktam]) is beginningless. Because it has been taught to be 
caused by impurity, and since impurity is beginningless, it too must be 
beginningless. Phis is the purport [of this half-verse]: this condition of be¬ 
ing an experiencer can be defined as a fitness ( c yogyatva° ) for experience, 

# 

and it is different from that [other condition referred to as a] condition 
of being an experiencer which arises from delusion (mohajanitat). :m It 
occurs in the pralayakala but not in the vijhanakevalin because of the 
absence [there] of karinan. Just as karman [is a cause of it], impurity 
too causes it, since it also cannot occur for a pralayakala whose impurity 
has already ripened, since he is to be favoured [with liberation) by the 

303 y « 

If Pi 1 Vs ragasyevatra were instead adopted one could translate Svhat need is there 
of positing impurity... in the same way as passion is posited, through a causal chain, 
to be the cause’. 

u)9 Ramakantha is distinguishing a fundamental bhoktrtva that results from impurity 
(mala) from the kind he defined above (3:1.9-10) to be an effect of passion (i.e. bhogaika¬ 
rasikatvatmakam bhoktrtvam). His use of rnoha here (retained because I can think of 
no reason why PiPs’s more obvious raga 0 , if it had been primary, should have been 
deliberately replaced) presumably refers therefore to passion (ragatattva) or to an effect 
thereof. 













264 


Ramakanthas Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm */ * 


supreme Lord. It is therefore next taught that desire ( abhilasah ) cannot 
be its cause: 


Desire [comes about only] when there is a body. And 
from what cause [does] that body [come into being]? 
[From passion. And thus desire cannot be the cause, 
for] passion itself (rago ’pi) becomes active because 
it is caused by that [condition of being an experien- 
cer]. 310 (2c—3b) 


And this desire comes into being when this gross body [is attached to the 
soul]. That |gross] body [comes into being] through the connection |of the 
soul] with passion and the other tattvas which make up the subtle body. 
And (tu) the cause for the activity of passion and the other tattvas is the 


condition of being an experiencer f bhoktrtvam — tat 


tan° |). How then 


(iti katham) can desire be supposed to be its cause, since passion and the 
otherf tattva]s which are the cause of desire are in turn caused by that 
[condition of being an experiencer]? Of this [he gives] an illustration: 


For just as binding a man in fetters [by way of pun¬ 
ishment] depends entirely (a-) on theft as its seed, so 

310 As is suggested by the suspicious quantity of supplied material in the translation, 
this section of the muia can barely be made to yield sense, and it is impossible to 
match beyond doubt any version of it with the interpretation that Ramakantha offers. 
The S group manuscripts omit 3:3b altogether and put 3:3d in its place. After 3:3c 
they then supply another even pada: nirnirnittam si vena kim. TryambakaSambhu’s 
interpretation cannot be reconstructed because the transmission of this portion of his 
commentary is so fragmentary; but it is clear that his text was close to that of S. 

That Ramakantha did not read with S is indicated by the word pravrttau (3:3.2); by 
the fact that P’s pratTka following the word drstantah (3:3.4) does not commence with 
the yatha of 3:3d; and possibly also by his use of the word purusasya (3:4.1). It is partly 
because of the use of this last word there and partly because I could see no plausible 
way of interpreting purusasya tu as part ol the same unit of sense as 3:3a and the rest 
of 3:3b that I have moved the words purusasya tu to immediately before 3:3c, even 
though there is no pratTka for them. This is not entirely satisfactory, because I have 
hitherto treated the pratlkas as a reliable guide to the intended positions of fragments 
0 ? the muia, and it is syntactically odd because of the juxtaposition of the particles 
tu and hi. The first consideration need not weigh heavily, because it is possible that 
Ramakantha indeed construed the purusasya tu with what follows rather than what 
precedes it, but did not feel it necessary to split the muia up here to make this explicit. 














Chapter Three 


265 


too (evam iU ) the principle of passion (ragah) is de¬ 
pendent entirely on impurity when it acts. (3b—4b) 

Just as binding a man in fetters [or imprisonment] or t!ie like applies 
pravartate) to a man depending entirely (samantat — a 312 ) on [his having 
committed aj theft, which is [as it were] the seed ( bTjabhutam) |of his 
punishment], so too passion and the other] principlejs become active [at 
the end of a phase of resorption of the universe] in the manner that has 
been taught above, 313 depending on the impurity (malam = pagutvam ) 
of a pralayakevalin. I'ow then ( iti kutah) can | the principle of] passion 
be supposed to be the cause of this [condition of being an experienccr]? 
Therefore (tat) [the sequence must be understood] thus: 

From this [impurity there comes about] in the soul 
(asya) the condition of being an experiencer ( bhoktr- 
tvam il4 ). Experience [and] the body ( tanur bhogah ) 
have other causes (anyahetujah) , for the condition of 
being an experiencer [comes about] because of im¬ 
purity ( pagutvena hi bhoktrtvam ) 315 and the bond of 
primal matter is ( sthitah ) [the cause] for the body. 316 

311 

An equally strong case could be made for tad vat, the reading of M r and most of 
the S group. Ramakantha’s gloss, tatha, has found its way into the text in R lV alone. 

31 !2 

^Hereby Ramakantha justifies the metrically expedient form apeksya, where apeksya 
is expected. 

313 Kirana 1:16 ff. 

# 

Ramakantha’s opening phrase, pagutvasahjhakan malad asya bhoktrtvam , might 
be supposed to support either bhoktrtvam (NM v 'R n GiG 2 ) or pagutvat (other Southern 
manuscripts) in 3:4c; but the ablative phrase must in fact gloss etasmat and show 
that the pronoun refers back to pa^utvam in 3:4a, and thus the commentary endorses 

bhoktrtvam. 1 liven its geographical spread, the latter reading is also more likely to be 
primary. 

3 i 3 ^ 

J These pad as (4:4d-5a: ‘Experience [and] the body ... because of impurity’) which 
are given in all manuscripts except M r and its apograph, K 2 , receive no confirmation 
in the form of a gloss or echo in Ramakantha’s commentary. This does not prove that 
Ramakantha did not have them—they seem to supply no thought that is not in the 
other padas ; but because M y elsewhere gives a text close to that of Ramakantha, it is 

■ m / 

possible that he did not read them. I have however decided to retain them, because 
M* s reading might be the result of eyeskip from one instance of bhoktrtvam to another. 

The text implicit in the various readings of V, mayatas tu tanuh sthita, might be 
supposed to be supported by Ramakantha’s mayatas tacchariram (R jV ; tu ^arlram P); 
but it has not been adopted because it may be a secondary reflection of Ramakantha’s 

w 

commentary. The wide distribution of the more awkward reading mayabandhas tanau 









266 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

4 4 €/ 4 


Experience that a bound soul has in the form of happi¬ 
ness, unhappiness and the like (sukhaduhkhadikah n ‘) 
results from karman. Not otherwise are experi¬ 
ence, the condition of being an experiencer and the 
body (-bandhanain) 318 taught [to occur] for the soul 
(asya). (4c—5d) 

From impurity, termed [in 4a] 'bound-soul-ness 1 (pa£u£va-), results the 
souPs (asya) condition of being an experiencer; from primal matter his 
body, and his experience from karman , because it is past acts a one that 
are transformed into pleasure and unhappiness. In the above (iti... atra) 
it is the direct causality jof these various factors] that has been taught 
(saksan nimittatvam) and not [indirect causality] through a sequence jof 
causes], because indirectly everything that is composed of primal matter 
depends on karman ( karrn aksip tat vat as we shall show. 319 3 * And it has 
been taught in the glorious Svayambhuva . 0 


From karman [result] bodies, objects of the senses and the 


senses. 


It has been laid down that the soul (etasya) cannot otherwise [i.e. without 
karman ] have experience, the condition of [readiness to be] an experiencer, 
and a body (tfarlram [= bandhanam] 321 ). With the above then (tad iyata) 
the topic of the bound soul has been investigated. 

Now, since the [appropriate] occasion [has arisen], [Garuda asks] a 
related (prasangat) question directed at a particular aspect of the invest¬ 
igation of the topic of bondage. 

[Garuda spoke:] 

(or tanu°) sthitah indicates that it is likely to be primary, and it is not impossible that 
Ramakantha’s phrase was intended to interpret it. 

31 ' Ramakantha’s sukhaduhkhatrnana parinamat (3:5.2 ) might be supposed to support 
sukhaduhkhatmako (R A G 2 G 3 K 1 AM), but Ramakantlia quotes the pada again in the 
accepted form in 3:6.1. 

318 Following Ramakantha this is translated as a triple dvandva; but it is perhaps more 
natural to interpret the half-verse thus: ‘Not otherwise is bondage by experience and 
by the condition of being an experiencer taught [to occur].’ 

Q 1 Q 

See commentary on 3:7 and 8 . 

3 2 0 Svayam bh u vasu trasahgrah a : 13 ab. 

321 One might expect a pratTka making explicit that s^anram is Ramakantha’s gloss of 

Tk I 5 

bandhanam, and it is possible that this is what lies at the root of R' ’s reading, but 
that would need then to be emended to bandhanam ca £ an ram. 

'V 










Chapter Three 


267 


This karman that has been taught to be the cause, 
O Lord of the gods, of experience [is not invariably 
present.] How does the body come about at the time 
of creation, [since] karman can only be accumulated 
when [the soul has] a body? (6) 


As for this karman, which has been taught [in the half-verse] starting 

‘Experience in the lorm of happiness, unhappiness etc.''* 22 to be the cause 

of experience- it is not at all times present (tan na vyapakam i. This [last 

clause] is what one must supply [to make sense of Garuda’s question] ( ity 

adhyaharah). For iyatah) immediately after [the first] total resorption 

(mahapralayad anantarain), at the time of the beginning of creation, the 

very first, experience through the body and [instruments and objects of 

the senses and| so forth (sarlradibhogah) must ( isyate ) proceed from some 

cause. [It can]not come from karman, since karman can |only| be the cause 

of subsequent [experiences]. This has been stated [by some authority in 
the following words: 

✓ 

The first body grows for the sake of the soul ( purusartha- 

mulah) '*-'•* and after that other bodies arise which have their 
origin in past actions. 


The Siddhanta[’s response 
[The Lord spokc:| 


to this 


is as fol!ows|: 


Just as impurity is beginningless, so too the soul’s 
( tasya) karman is beginningless. If it were not estab¬ 
lished that it is beginningless, how could one account 
for diversity? (7) 


For karman exists at all times for souls, since the diversity of experience 
mediated] through [different] bodies and so on could not otherwise be 

i2 2 Kir ana 3:5c. 

« 

223 f 

* This presumably means that the first body is linked to the soul in order to benefit 
th( soul. It is cuiious that the first half oi ; ?us untraced Quotation is a regular tristubii 
and that the rest is not. The 1 foi in in \\ Inch ft is Quoted in the iVaje^Vfirapai’ilvsapi'aicasa 
ad 3.87 on p.212 (with prapannah for pratipannaii) is more nearly metrically correct, 
and might instead be accepted. The discussion that follows leads one to suppose that 
the view of the purvapaksin is that impurity alone binds the pasu at the time of the 
very first creation, and that the Lord further causes the soul to be bound to a body 

m order to benefit him. In this first body the soul generates karman, from which all 
subsequent experience and karman arise. 
















268 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * ■/ * 


accounted for, for scripture tells us that even at the time of creation there 
was a diversity of births as domestic and wild beasts, as birds, creeping 
animals, plants, humans and so on. And because karman is [thus] proved 
to exist even at the time of mahapralaya. it is established that there 
must be [and always have been] an uninterrupted series (-prabandhah) of 
incarnations caused by karman that is beginningless as a stream. And so, 
because it is proven that the refutation of the notion that impurity might 
alone be the cause here of incarnation has force, 324 the view [outlined in 
the above quotation] that ‘the first body grows for the sake of the soul is 
utterly wrong. This is what is stated here. 

And this [next] verse is to refer in conclusion ( upasamhartum ) to this 
same beginninglessness of karman (asya). as in a stream, and to show 
that it has primal matter as its locus: 


Therefore karman is beginningless and so is primal 

* 

matter anti so is worldly existence. So too Siva, the 
creator of the entire universe, is established to be 
( sthitah ) beginningless. (8) 


Thus worldly existence constituted of primal matter and made up of 
the creatures and worlds in the tattvas from kala to earth ( kaladiksiti - 
paryantatattvabhutabhuvanarupah samsaro maylyah = bhavab) is de¬ 
pendent on karman , and the karman that is accumulated conversely 
(punah) is dependent on that [worldly existence]. Thus because kar¬ 
ma n and worldly existence cause each other, their beginninglessness, as 
of a stream, is proven. And because of this very beginninglessness of 
worldly existence there must be some material cause that sustains it 
(tadupadanena ) and because karman is beginningless, it must have a 
beginningless support, which is matter (prakrtyatmananadina) . (Why?] 
Because acts like ploughing are known from experience to leave traces 
in matter (prakrtisamskarakatvena) [and] because their leaving traces 
in the soul, as posited by the Naiyayikas and others, is impossible, and 
i >ecause [if they could leave traces in the soul] that would entail that 
the soul would be subject to transformation [and therefore insentient]. 


324 One could read prat in isedh asy&samarthyasi ddheh with P 3 : ‘because it is also not 
proven that the counter-refutation of the notion that impurity might alone be the cause 
here of incarnation is not valid’. 

325 Perhaps ‘to condition matter’. 

















Chapter Three 


269 


Maya is both the material cause for the soul’s worldly experience ( tad- 
bliavopadanam I and the locus for karman, and it is [therefore! also proved 
to be beginningless. And (tatha) because worldly existence, consisting 
in bodies, instruments of the senses and worlds, has been taught to be 

beginningless as a stream, its architect too, the Lord, is proved to be 
beginningless. 

Now, after that investigation into an aspect of the topic of bondage, a 

connected i prasahgat) question [is raised) aimed at investigating the topic 
of the Lord: 

[Garuda spoke:] 


You have taught earlier that Siva is the creator, omni¬ 
potent Lord ( prabho ); how is He to be known? (9ab) 

[Garuda asks this,| because only if the Lord, the creator of the universe, is 
proven to exist, is it possible to prove that He is beginningless. How can 
He be known? In the first place (tavat) not by direct perception, since 

V()U 1 111 1 d that lie is beyond the realm of the senses. This is expressed by 
the Mlmamsakas: 326 


Nor can anybody ever know him. And even if he were to 
be perceived as he really is ( svarupcna ). one would not know 
that he was the creator. Nor would this belief [that he is the 
creator] be well bunded by his claiming it, for even if he had 
not been the creator, he would say [that he had], because it 
would establish his own power. 


Nor 22 ' [can we infer a creator God], in the same way as [we infer) the 
faculty of sight and other [sense faculties| by their effects, such as the 
perception of form, by an inference on the basis that we cannot otherwise 
account for |what must be the Lord’s] effects, such as the bodies, instru¬ 
ments and worlds mentioned above, since that [body of effects) is known 

from experience to arise from the |five| elements alone. As the Buddhists 
say, 328 


Slokavarttika sainbandhaksepaparihara 57cd, 58ab and 60. 

327 rn l 

" The same nexus of ideas is discussed at greater length (and so more readily com¬ 
prehensibly) in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 3:4-6b, pp. 48-49. It is also the subject 
of the second Tan da of the Naregvarapariksaprakasa. 

328 Pramanavarttika 1:26 and 24. 

p 










270 


Ramakantha’s Commentary cm the Kiranatantra 


If something comes into being when another thing exists ( yas- 
min sati 329 ) and one posits as the cause of the former some 
entity other than the latter, then there is an infinite regress 
of causes. If by the application (° sambandliat) of medicinal 
herbs and surgical instruments and the like ($astrausadhadi ) 

John Doe’s (caitrasya) wounds are healed, then why posit Siva 
( sthanoh 33 °), who is unconnected, as the efficient agent? 

Nor [can the Lord be proved) by scripture either, because you do not hold 
that scripture is uncreated, and [a scripture] created by Him cannot be 
authoritative [about Him), because the two [i.e. Himself and His scripture] 
are interdependent. Nor do you acknowledge any other valid means of 
knowledge. Because tuere is no valid means of knowledge that proves His 
existence He cannot be known by any means—that is what is meant [by 
Garuda in 9b]. 

!f that is so, then because of this fact (ata eva ) [that He cannot be 
known] we can allow that there may be doubt on the matter of His exist¬ 
ence (etadvisayasamsayo ’stu); but how |is this further assertion reached] 
that [the creator] God does not exist, since there is no valid means of 
knowledge that disproves Him? In answer to this [Garuda’s reply] is 



Si £ 

n) u C t v 


How is it possible for Him to be a creator, since He 
lacks the means and is not embodied? U1 (9cd) 

He lacks instruments (karananam abhavah - vaikaranyaw ), and because 
of this it is impossible that the Lord created the universe. Because of His 
lack of instruments He is like a potter who has no stick, wheel, thread 


329 yesu satsu is the reading of Pandeya’s edition; but it appears in the same form 
as ttere quoted in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 6:21, p. 152 and in the NareGvara- 
pariksaprakada ad 1:4 and 1:23. In the NaresvarapariksaprakaSa ad 2:4 both this and 
the following verse (1:24) are quoted consecutively, but with yesu satsu and nu kalpyate 
for prakalpyate (na kalpyate in Pandeya’s edition). 

330 A pun is probably intended: the word might also mean ‘a post 1 . 

131 In R n this half-verse is placed immediately after 9b, but it has been moved to 
where a pratika for it appears in all the manuscripts of the commentary. The obscure 
kriyabhavad (in place of vaikaranvad, which makes the verse express the same idea as 
Slokavarttika sanibandhaksepapaiihara 50cd, quoted below) is almost certainly original 
because it occurs both in the Nepalese and in Southern manuscripts. The texts of M Y , 
R v and V, which give only the 1 vidyapada. , may all in certain places have been altered 
to conform to Ramakantha’s commentary. 




















Chapter Three 


27; 


or other instrument 332 in regard to [creating] a pot. The same [point] is 

non 

expressed by the Mlmamsakas. 

And no creator ever creates anything without means to ac¬ 
complish it. 

Moreover, having corporeal form is to be solid. Here [it means] being 
connected to a body, [and the point of the question is to imply that] 
because of the absence of that the Lord cannot be the creator [of the 
universe]. 334 The same point is expressed by the same [thinkers]: 335 

For there is no bodyless Soul who directs [the universe]; [for] 
he would be like a liberated soul. 

And so because of the [respective] non-existence and existence of means 
of knowledge that prove and disprove [Him], God is established not to 
exist. This is the position of the opponent. 

The [outline of the position of the] Siddhanta on this point (atra) is 
preceded by the refutation of [the means of knowledge] which disproves, 
since if that is not refuted, no logical ground that proves it can work, be¬ 
cause the statement of its formal proposition will be refuted by inference. 
This is stated [in the following verse]: 336 

.. .because one states a logical proof concerning a matter that 
is doubtful; a matter that is refuted is not a legitimate subject 
for a logical proof. ' 


332 The stick is for setting the potter’s wheel in motion and the thread is presumably 
for cutting the pot from the chuck of clay out of which it has been thrown. 

333 Slokavarttika sawhandhaksepaparibara 5Gcd. 

334 If Pi’s atra garirayogas tadabhavad api T6varo ’murttatvan murttavat kartta na 
sambhavatiti were adopted, it might be translated thus: ‘Here [being corporeal means 
having] connection to a body. God, since He is disembodied, because he does not have 
that, cannot be a creator like embodied souls. * 1 It is possible that Pi’s murttatvat is 
an error for muktatvat, in which case the sentence would be making in advance each 
point that the half-verse from the olokavarttika makes. 

335 Sloka vart tika saw bandhaksepaparihara 78cd. 

* J O £2 m 

1 ' ’Pramanavarttika 4:91. 

# 

Q fv <nr § § a 

'Like much of Dharmaklrti s writing this half-verse with the variants transmitted 
is open to a number o: interpretations. I have adopted the readings and interpret¬ 
ation of Manorathanandin, because, as far as I can tell from the context here and 
in the Nare$varapanksapraka£a ad 2:1, p.llG, where it is again quoted, Ramakantha 
seems to understand it in the same wav. Ramakantha’s commentaries should be not 


















272 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * V • 


[The Lord] begins accordingly (tathaivopakramyate): 

|The Lord spoke:] 

[No,] because just as time, although it is not embod¬ 
ied, is known from experience ( drgyate ) to bring about 
results, so too Siva, although He is not embodied, pro¬ 
duces effects by His will. (10) 


Of these arguments (tatra) first of all (tavat) the logical ground stated 
here to prove that He is not a creator, namely ‘because [He is| not embod¬ 
ied’, is rendered inconclusive because of time, br time (tasya), although 
it is not embodied, is well-known to be the agent of [producing] such 
things as flowers and fruits. Someone may object (atha) that time, being 
insentient, is not established to be an agent, because it is |only| a cause 
wi: h respect to its own effects, and so there is no scope for inconclusive¬ 
ness [in the above arguments). In response to this the reply is that in 
that, case (tarhi) [the logical ground is nevertheless] rendered inconclusive 
as a means of proof] by the souls of creatures like us—since the men¬ 
tion of time is elliptical here [and must be taken to comprehend souls as 
well|- -for we observe effects of the soul such as trembling of its body, even 
though the soul is not corporeal ( amurtasyapi). The example here 338 is 
aiso one in which the quality sought to be demonstrated is not proven, 

since we hold that even the liberated soul is in a position of control over 
everything. 

As for the logical ground [intended to prove that a creator God does 

n> ; exist] stated with the expression "since he lacks instruments , that too 
is not proven. To explain (tatha hi): 


Will alone is His instrument, just as [will] is held [to 
be the instrument] of a true yogin. (llab) 


[The ground is not valid,] because (yatah) He has an instrument, [namely) 
the power that is [His] will ( icchatmikaiva saktih), just as a yogin does. 


And yogins are established to exist for thinkers of all persuasions (sarva- 
vadinam) and cannot be refuted even by the Carvakas, list as [potent; 


uninteresting to students of the Buddhist logicians, because, as his use of some of 

their terminology and such quoted verses demonstrate, he regarded them as important 
opponents. 

33S 

' Here Ramakantha refers to muktatmavat in the quotation (in 3:9.26) of Sloka- 
var t tilea sain ban dhaksepaparih ara 78cd. 
















Chapter Three 


273 


gems and herbs and the like [cannot be refuted] as the effectors of cures 
from poison and [states of supernatural] possession (visagraha- 339 ). As 
they say, 


340 


■’or the power of gems, mantras, and herbs is inconceivable. 


If (atha) this being devoid of instruments is here intended to refer to ie 
absence of the senses and this is the logical ground [which proves that the 
Lord cannot be the creator], then to this too |a response] is taught: 


Although it is devoid of senses, a magnet is observed 
to draw out [iron] splinters. And even if the activ¬ 
ity [of creation of the universe] should not be [dir¬ 
ectly] observed, the effects [are seen and from them 
the Lord’s! will [which is His instrument] is known. 

(llc-f) 


In that case ( tadanim ) the logical ground is rendered inconclusive [as a 
means of. proof] by the magnet, since that is observed to be something 
which draws along with it iron splinters although it is devoid of senses. 
Here too the proof of the [existence of the] Lord (- tatsamarthanam ) bv 
objecting that [the opponent’s counterargument is| inconclusive is to be 


understood (drastavyam) in the same way ( tathaiva) as in the above- 
stated [allusion to] time. 

Then (tat), now that the disproving argument that seeks to demon¬ 
strate the non-existence [of God as creator] has been t i ms removed, a 
proof (pramanam) is taught to obviate doubt as to Tis existence: 


[The universe is] gross, diverse, [and therefore! an ef¬ 
fect, like a pot. It cannot be otherwise. And so (atah) 
there exists ( asti) some [instigating] cause. (12a-c) 


For in this [matter of| establishing the existence of the Lord [as creator] the 
opponents are the Sankhyas, the Buddhists, the Mlmamsakas, the Jainas 
and the Carvakas. For the first two among these 311 this diverse [entity]— 
that is to say iiti the universe, which was mentioned above as consisting 

339 or perhaps ‘from the clutches of poison 

The proverb occurs in the RatnavalT , Act 2, p. 39 and in a SuAdaAuriiAuiiasadhana 
(No. 180 in Sadhanamala), p. 3G5. It is quoted again ad 6:16 and in the Matahgavrtti 
ad vidyapada 7:49, p.249. 

This translates P’s tatra purvayoh instead of R N} s pur van! he, because the former 
seems more precise, since it is evidently the first two of five that are meant, and because 
it is more closely parallel to aparesam (3:12.4) 










274 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


in worlds, instruments and bodies, and having no seen creator,—which 
is required to be the subject of the argument ( dharmitvena cikirsitam ), 
is proved to be an effect, because it is either constantly transforming [as 
maintained by the Sahkhyas|, or coming into being [as maintained by the 
Buddhists]. But m ti e case of the others [viz. the Mlmamsakas, Jainas 
and CarvakasJ, because thc\ hold that ‘the universe was never not thus’, 
its parts, such as the worlds, are not proved to be thus [i.e. are not proved 
to be effects]. In reply to these (thinkers] it is proved that this |universe| 
is an effect. ( karyatvam atra) 342 by the fact that it is gross, as follows 
(...it,i): whatever is gross is an effect, like such things as pots. This 
(universe] that consists in the worlds and so on, and whose creator is not 
directly experienced, is also gross and therefore [it too is] an effect. Nor 
can the logical ground be [said to be rendered! inconclusive |as proof| by 

[the fact, of there being eternal yet gross things such as! the Lord’s body 
or the eternal Veda. This the Mlmamsakas argue: 343 

And your logical ground is [rendered] inconclusive [as proof] 
by the body of the Lord and the like ( taccharlradina). 

[This is wrong] because we hold that that [body of the Lord| and the Veda 

impel mdrient. And now that it is proved that this 
too is an effect, it is now [to be] established that this entire universe is 
dependent on a creator because of the fact that it is an effect,. |and| not 
because of the fact, of its being gross, since that pervades this [dependence 
on a creator] ( tadvyapakatvat) 345 Whatever is an effect cannot exist (na 

b) without a creator equipped of particular powers of knowledge 
and action, just as pots and such [cannot exist without such a creator). So 
too this entire universe is an effect. And therefore that too cannot 
into being (na bhavati) without a creator equipped of particular powers of 

342 / ' - ®f st ,° f a11 il is proved that that « an effect’ if we accept P’s karyatvam tavat 
a. he latter reading is possible and receives what might be interpreted to be 

C 343 Imatl ° n clause adhuna ... sadhyate (3:12.12). 

^Slokavarttika sambandhaksepaparih ara 77ab. 

345 ^^ e sarvatha here does not seem appropriate, 

If this loading of h is rni ret • In n the idea is that grossness cannot be used as the 

!! ! - mun!! ! ^h to infer dependence on a creator, because the logical ground 

( ietu) must always be that which is pervaded ( vyapya) and that which is to be inferred 

must be that which pervades (vyapaka). P 3 ’s reading, tasyendriyadyavyapakatvat also 

gives sense: because that [grossness] does not pervade the senses and the like.’ The 
se nses <11 o relatively subtle and vet are efFce’ts* 


are m every respect 



come 




























Chapter Three 


275 


knowledge and action. And so iti ) its creator, God, is established. And 
thus the three |opening| words in this [verse] (atra) do not express each 
others’ meanings [and so overlap tautologously] (nanyouyam gatarthata), 
and so there is no contradiction [in the position of the Saiva Siddhanta]. 
And it cannot be questioned that its being an effect in the same way is 
proved, as the Buddhists |do when they] say: 346 

When any fact such as compositeness ( yadrk ... sannivesadi 
is established [to exist or not to exist] according as there is or 
is not a controller, then that [existence of an agent of control] 
can correctly be inferred from that [compositeness or the like]. 

But an inference in respect of some particular thing ( vastu- 
hhede) of something well-known from some [logical ground 
(het n)| which is similar [to that in some valid argument such 
as the one outlined above just] because the wording is the 
same is not correct. 317 [It is] like [inferring the presence of] 
fire from |the presence of some] pale substance [simply because 
smoke can be called a pale substance|. 

[This objection does not hold] because it is established that every effect 
( karyamatrasya) is invariably concomitant with an agent ( kartrmatrena), 
as [we see] in the case of pots and such, just as being a product (krta- 
katvamatrasya) is invariably concomitant with impermanence (anityatva- 
matreneva). Otherwise both there and elsewhere, if one creates some 


l4l> Pramanavurtika 1:13-14. 

A* 

The hetu that is the same because of a similarity of wording alone must, in this 
context, be karyatva, the fact of being an effect. The point made by the Buddhist is 
that it is not the same kind of karyatva that is a property of a ‘natural’ mountain as 
that which is a property of a pot. 

348 mi 

The element mat ra is used here in the sense of jati and thus to emphasize that 
these are general truths. One might translate ‘an effect, merely by the fact that it 
is an effect... The point is i hat the Buddhists accept the latter invariable concom¬ 
itance (of being a product with impermanence) and Ramakantha intends that they 
should concede that the former kind of invariable concomitance must also be accepted. 
The same issue is at stake in Narcs\arapanksaprakasa pp. 122-7 ad 2:5-6. Rama- 
kantha’s idiomatic omission of the abstract-noun suffixes in the first part of the sen¬ 
tence (not karya-1va-matrasya kartr-tva-matrena) and the emendation to °matreneva 

€ m 

against all the manuscripts are supported by the parallel in the Mataiigavrtti ad vidya- 
pada 6:99c—100b, p. 227^ 6 ^—228^: visesasyalietutvat karyamatrasyaiva kartrmatrena 
dhumamatrasya vahnimatreneva , krtakatvamatrasya anityatveneva vyapteh siddha- 

^ ' m ~ once again that, because it has conflated the 














276 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• * 1/ * 


[imaginary] differentiation oi logical grounds 349 by differentiating between 
the attribute that one wishes to prove and [that oi | the example (drstanta- 
sadhyadharmahhedena) 330 then all inference will be impossible. On the 
other hand (£u), because it exists even where there is no smoke and be¬ 
cause one sees it in snow and chalk i himamakkoladisu 331 ) and the like, 
it would be wrong jto allow| that undifferentiated whiteness [avigesat 
pandutvasya ) should be the basis for the inference of fire. Nor [can the 
logical ground be rendered] inconclusive [by introducing things that are 
effects but not dependent on a creator], because all things whose creator 
is unseen, even forests, grass and the like, are included in the sub ject of 
the argument (paksikrtatvat). Nor is the ground of the argument i hetuh) 
contradictory, as the Mlmamsakas hold: 352 

And if the example [of the pot] be proved to be thus [i.e. 
dependent on a creator], then the ground (hctoh) would be 
contradictory, because having an agent that is not the Lord 
and who is perishable and such like [other qualities of the 
potter] is entailed. 

[It is not contradictory] because there is no invariable concomitance [of 
the hetu\ with something which conflicts [with the quality that is inten¬ 
ded to be proved], since (hi... yatah ) in the example of the pot or other 
such [manufactured object], with respect to the quality that it is to prove 
[namely, being dependent on an agent], the logical ground (hetuh) is es¬ 
tablished to be invariably concomitant with [that agent] being a lord, 
that is to say (°laksanena) being omniscient and omnipotent with respect 
to his own products. [This must be so,] because if he were deficient in 
any part at all one would not observe [the coming into being of] a pot. 
and because the potter’s soul is eternal, since it does not perish, and 

text of Pi with that of an independent source closer to Fff, it can occasionally prove a 
useful witness to the text. 

Q J /\ 

Here the differentiation of the hetu envisaged would be into two kinds of karyatva; 
that of effects whose agents are known from direct experience and that of those whose 
agents are not known. 

fl C n t 

i.e. by differentiating between the sadhya-dh arma of adrstakaxtrpurvakatva and 
drst akar trpur vaka t va. 

m p * * i 

fj r i . 

Once again P 2 is alone close to the accepted text, emended here because rnakkola 
is used in the same context both in the Nare£varaparlksapraka£a ad 2:6, p. 127^ ^ and 
in the Matahgavrtti ad 6:99c-100b, p. 228^ 5 b 
352 $lokavarttika sambandhaksepaparihara 80 . 









( Chapter Three 


277 


since it is that [soul] which is the agent of creation. Nor is the [logical 

ground] contradicted as proving [some quality that is] the opposite of the 

nature of the subject of the argument ( dharmisvarupaviparTtasadhanah ), 

as Mandana states: 353 

• * 


Although everything that is composite and so on 354 (san- 
nivegadimat) must have a sentient cause, how can one say that 
well-known composite things and so on have only one cause? 
Although the parts of something like a chariot are constructed 
by various craftsmen, generally one experiences that things in 
the universe which help to [bring something about] require [in 
turn] to be helped [themselves]. 


[The counter argument above is wrong,] because although the parts of 
something like a chariot are [individually] created by various craftsmen, 
they are not seen to create a chariot without the knowledge and action of 
a single master craftsman. 

Nor can one argue l napi... iti vacyam ) that the logical ground [of our 
argument] is not valid I a hetur ayam) because it is beset by [the fault of 
being] concomitant with |a quality] contradictory [to the one sought to be 
proved] (viruddhavyabhicaryakrantatvat). because [one could, using the 
same logical ground, construct the following syllogism:] ‘the world cannot 
have the Lord as its creator, because it is an effect, like pots and such like’. 
You must admit |that is wrong], because it is impossible, for just as when 
we infer fire from smoke, here [too] we proceed in conformity with the force 
of the way things are (vastubalapravrttatvena ). 355 Otherwise, even when 
inferring [the presence of] fire from smoke on a mountain or the like, 
might apply the following syllogism]: ‘Here there is fire that is not on a 
mountain because of the smoke. Wherever there is smoke, there is fire that 
is not on a mountain, just as there is in a kitchen. Now (ca) here [on 
mountain] there is smoke, and so there is fire that is not on a mountain.’ If 
it is possible everywhere to apply such like rubbishy inferences, [in which 


one 



353 Vidhiviveka pp. 219 and 224. 

354 

' The a di is difficult to interpret here. Presumably it refers to the same possibilities 
as the a di in the same compound in the quotation from the Pram an a var t tika in 3:12,19. 

J ,5 Siinilar expressions are used in the Matahgavrtti ad 6:99c-100b, p.229 and in the 
Nar egvarapariks apra k atfa (e.g. ad 2:10, p. 135 [2_3] , vas t u saktisam art hyena) after Rama- 


kantha has demonstrated to the Buddhist that even in such a familiar inference we 
cannot be certain that perceived concomitance between fire and smoke in one instance 
will apply to another one. 



















Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


•) 


78 


the logical ground is beset by the fault of being] concomitant with 
quality] contradictory [to the one that is to be proved] ( viruddhavyabhi- 
caryanumanavaskarasambhavat), then {real] inference becomes impossible 
(anumanabhava eva). This and such like faults of argument on this point 
have been refuted at length in the Na res varapanksap rakasa , 3 5 6 and so 
they are to be understood from there. 

Here |follows] an opponent’s opinion: 

What if it is kd.rtno.Ti [tli3.t is the C3.HS6 of*tli© universe]? 

^ ’bit >u li.'ivc |ml forward to be proved with this syllogism |of yours] is 
[the existence of] some agent. Let that |agent] (tac ca) be karman, which 
is accepted by both sides in the dispute, and thus this [argument of the 
Saiddhantika] is inappropriate, because the syllogism would then prove 
what is already well-established, just like the assertion ‘sound is audible’ 
(gravanah A ah da itivat). As the Mlmamsakas assert.*’' 

If one require just any cause to preside [over the creation of 
the universe, then let this role be performed) by |the fruits of 
past.] actions, since they are proved to exist for all beings. [And 

in i hat case the fault of] proving what is already established 
[vitiates the argument]. 

In response to this (atra) [the view of] the Siddhanta is: 

No, because [karman is] insentient. 358 (12d) 

This is not [a case of] pioving what is already established, because karman 

is insentient. What is meant by this is that we have not sought to prove 

here simply that there must be an agent ( kartrtvamatram ), but that there 

is an agent equipped with particular |powers of] knowledge and action. 

Why then should there be [the logical fault off proving what is already 

esi ablished because of insentient actions [being all that is :>roved|? 

I An opponent responds:] If that is so, then this [logical ground is] con- 

radict.ed because it proves the reverse of certain particular characteristics 

o! :;ie subject of the argument ( dharmivisesavipantasadhakah) . This is 
stated [in the following verse): 


es varapanksap rakasa Chapter 2. 

35 7 Sloka vart tika sain ban dhaksepa pari liar a 70 

358 


I have .split this pada, because its pratikas in the manuscripts suggest that this is 

how it should be distributed through the text. In R v it also occurs in full immediately 
after 3:12c. 















Chapter Three 


279 


Since effects are invariably concomitant with [having been cre¬ 
ated by] a creator possessed of a body, it therefore follows that 
the creat or of the universe must be embodied, since that is an 
effect. 


That view is wrong, because 


He has been taught to be differentiated according to 
the division o ' His activities [into the following forms]: 
subtle/formless ( niskalah ), coarse (sthuJah) and both 
coarse and subtle ( sakalaniskalah ) [as] Santa, Sada^iva 
and I3a [respectively]. 359 (13) 


|The view of the opponent is wrong,] because an effect can occur without 
an agent with] a body, because it has been stated 360 to be proved that 
the effect of the quivering of the bodies of the likes of us [which is an 
effect of the soul| is not dependent on a further body. And so the soul of 
a potter and the like too is proved to have three states according as he is 
empowered, ready, and engaged in activity saktodyuktapravrttatmana) 
with respect to his own products; therefore the creator of the universe too 
is inferred to have three states. This is stated [in the following verse]: 361 


An agent is field to be of three kinds: empowered, ready, and 
engaged in activity. 


Among these, being empowered means to be suitable with respect to an 
effect (karyam prati yogyatvam , and that is the subtle/formless state [in 

j£ # 

which lie is] called Santa. Being ready is the state that is both coarse and 
subtle [in which He is called Sadasiva. "That in which the activity has 


359 It is difficult to convey with just two words the connotations of the pair of terms 
sakala and niskala used to describe aspects of Siva. They mean at the same time gross 
and subtle, manifest and unmanifest, with and without parts, engaged and disengaged, 
active and transcendent, aspected and aspectless, qualified and unqualified, embodied 
and disembodied. SadaSiva’s ambivalent state is that of being ready and poised to act 
( udyukta ), between the latent potency (Saktatva) of the highest tattva and the state 
of being engaged in action (pravrttatva) in the next tattva ., that of Ha. 

360 Kiranavrtti 3:10.4-5. 

• d 

361 Attributed in the Sataratnasaiigraha (p. 22) to the Mrgeudra, but not found in 
the printed editions. (The first pada might be considered to contain a double sandhi.) 
Ramakantha’s formula of introduction (yad ahuh) implies that he did not know it as 
scripture (see footnote 455 on p,315). 












280 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


begun is the coarse state [in which He is called] I^vara. It is taught that 
this differentiation of states is based on His [different] activities ( krtyavi - 
sayah) and therefore these t iree tattvas are distinguished on the basis of 
figurative usage and not because [the distinction is] ultimately real. 'That 
is the meaning [here], as He will teach [with the following half-verse|: 362 


But in order to bestow compassion on souls, although He is 

transcendent (paro ’pi), He has lowered Himself laparatam 
gatah). 


And thus it is clear that ( -siddhih ) t he topic called Juana should also be 
examined at this point. 

[There follows) a question on this [topic]: 

[Garuda spoke:) 

How can the formless [Lord] be known? [If] He is also 

coarse (sakalah ), 363 then (tada 361 ) [He must merely be 

an ordinary] soul (pumams tada). And (tatha) the 

other [Lord], who has two natures is contradictory 

[because His two natures are] mutually [contradict¬ 
ory]. (14) 

For in this [tantra] it has earlier 'teen taught in the passage beginning h 
‘givajhana similarly [effects the blocking of the power] of that |mala|’ that 
initiates must know Siva. And yet it is not possible to know |God if he is] 
formless, because cognitions have as their objects things that have form. 
This is expressed [in the following verse]: 

You are necessarily to be approached when you have form, 
since cognition cannot grasp a formless thing. 366 

362 Kirana 3:23ab and 9:17cd. 

363 Garuda’s question makes sense because the term sakala is not just a label for the 

Lord when he is engaged in action, but also a technical term of the system (defined in 

1.22c-23) for the ordinary soul bound by all three bonds of impurity, past action, and 
that derived from primal matter. 

304 

Ramakantha’s commentary gives no clear support for bhavet, harah or tada as 

the last word. The first is the least likely, because it is unique to R v and may well 

be a secondary reflection of bhavati in 3:14.4-5. An undesirable corollary to Siva’s 

being sakala would be more clearly marked by N’s tada; but ISvarah in 3:14.4 may be 
intended as a gloss of harah. 

365 Kirana 2:33c, 

> 

3gg 

Source unknown. Cited in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 3:23, p. 71; by Narayana- 





































Chapter Three 


281 


And so because one cannot accomplish it, knowlege with 1 lim as an object 
should not be enjoined. Nor can the Lord be coarse (sakalah), because 
as a result of being embodied He would, like John Doe or anyone else 
(devadattadivat ), lack omniscience and omnipotence. Nor is an entity 
that is both coarse and formless possible, because it is impossible that 
two mutually opposed things, like a pot and the absence of a pot, should 
be present (samave£asambhavat) in one place. Thus (iii) out o this 
group of three tattvas one [viz. the niskala] should not be taught, because 
it is pointless to enjoin knowledge [thereof, for it would in any case be 
unattainable], and [the other] two [should not be taught] because their 
natures |as they have been described] are impossible.’ That is what the 
question [of Garuda] means. 

Now [the reply of] the Siddhanta [is as follows]: 

[The Lord spoke:] 


Through the power [gained] from a descent of [divine] 
power on the soul and from the power of mantras 
[in initiation] the formless 3 ' [tattva], [although it is] 
subtle, is at all times knowable (laksyate ), just as the 
effects of poison [can be brought about through the 
powder of a practitioner of mantras]. (15) 


The formless tattva (niskalatattvam 


niskalam]) is at all times know- 


able by means of the power which is omniscience and omnipotence (jhana- 
kriyatmika ) (once] freed from impurity through initiation (mantrasaktih 
= dlksa) and through a descent of power on the soul from the supreme 
Lord. In the same way the effects of poison, such as death (mrti° 368 ) and 


kantha in the Mrgendravrtti ad yogapada 54c-55b; by Aghora^iva in the Tattvapra- 
ka£avrtti ad verse 6; and by Tryambaka^ambhu ad Kirana 3:20, p. 66, lines 1-2. In his 
note on the first of these Bhatt observes that it is cited [by JnanaprakaSa] in the [5iva]- 
yogasara (p. 49), where it is embedded in a quotation attributed to a Yogasangraha\ 
but it is unlikely that that text is its source, for it there appears as a single half-verse 
in upajati metre bracketed by verses in anustubh. 

■Ramakantha’s niskalatattvam in 3:15.2 is presumably an explanation o: the neuter 
form niskalam N) in the verse. Such an explanation would have been unlikely if he 
had read niskalo with the rest of the manuscripts. The latter is parallel with sakalo 
in the next verse and therefore perhaps more likely to be secondary (cf. Srinivasan, 
1967:36-7, §1.4,5.11). 

368 This has been preferred to vikrtih , which is suspicious as a gloss for vikarah . because 
it appears neither to clear up an ambiguity nor to add any shade oi meaning. 










Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * */ * 



fever, |can be brought about] JbJ merely by the power of a practitioner 
of mantras (mantrinah) who has been initiated into the Garuda tantras 
(visadlksaguddhasya mantrinah). This serves as an example drstanta- 
tvam), because one aspect of it is that it proclaims the extraordinary 
power [of mantras] (6aktyatigayakhyapanarngatvena). But this is the [in¬ 
tended! meaning [of the verse]: if the objection ( prasnah) [of Garuda] 
is that the Lord cannot be known simply because lie is formless, then 
that would contradict with the case of] the soul, |which is also formless, 
because the soul ( tasya) —both one's own and others' (svatah paratas 370 
ca) —is [known to exist| distinct from the body and its instruments by an 
inference based upon activities of body and speech. 

If the meaning of [Garuda’s] objection (prasnarthali) is that a form¬ 
less [God] cannot be known, because the knowledge of the intellect 
(bauddhasya jhanasya) establishes [the existence of] things (vastuvyava- 
sthapakatvat) solely by grasping [their] forms, in that case it [viz. the 
objection] does no more than (ova) prove what is [already] established, 
because the Lord (tasya) is here taught to be known through the power 
of omniscience alone ( jhanasaktyaiva and not by the intellect and the 
others [of the faculties], and so there is no fault [in our position]. As 
for the corollary that was stated ( uktah ) that God cannot be the Lord 
because he is (called] ‘equipped with the kalas' (sakalatvat ), that too is 
wrong. This is taught [in the following verse 


Even though he is [called] ‘equipped with the kalas ’ 
( sakalah ), he is not a[n ordinary bound] soul, because 
he is devoid of the parts of maya. (16ab) 


This quality of being ’equipped with kalas' by virtue of His connection 
with which the Lord too is referred to as sakala is quite different [from 
that of the bound soul] and consists in a flood of all powers (sakalagakti- 
prasaratmakam). [He is] not [called thus] because he is connected with 
a body made up of the evolutes of primal matter, starting with kala. as 
ordinary bound} souls are. 'Thus, even though he is referred to with the 
word sa-kala, he (atra) is not a [mere bound] soul, because one cannot 


3 f * 

The example is odd, because it is not closely parallel to what is compared. 

3 TO r . * 1 

This bold a conjecture may not be necessary; but paramatmanag ca, the reading 
of the manuscripts, seems impossible. A more cautious emendation to paraf/nanas ca 
might work; but we expect something parallel to svatah and not to the genitive tasya. 














Chapter Three 


283 


prove [Him] to be equipped with kalas in that sense ( tathabhutasya sa- 
kalatvasyasiddhatvat). That is the intended meaning. 

Someone may object (atha): ‘How is it that these kalas that consist 
of primal matter are not posited for Him, as [they are] for a[n ordinary] 

soul, since He [too] is an agent?’ In response to that [the following verse] 
is taught: 

Because Siva is pure, the impure kalas cannot be pos¬ 
ited [to exist] in Him (atra). (16cd) 


(Why not?| Because the logical ground 


viz. that of being an agent 


(kartrtvat)] is proved [to come about] otherwise (than from being pos¬ 
sessed of impure kalas], since (yatah) these kalas that consist of primal 
matter do not < reate [the innate power oi j agency in a bound sou from 
which fact (yen a) [if it were indeed true] one would have to posit [that] 
these [impure kalas existed] in Him (atra), because one could not other¬ 
wise account for that [power oi agency of His) (tadanyathanupapattya). 

ui these kalas do not create the bound soul s power oi agency] because 
[if that were so] there would follow the undesirable corollary of [the soul’s 
being subject to transformation. That has been taught [in the section 
starting * 3 ' 1 ‘Transformation [is possible only| of the insentient’. Rather 
they free it from [the occlusion of| impurity. Now (tu) that [innate power 
of agency (kartrtvam)], once freed from impurity, acts entirely of itself 
to perform its functions. Thus, because He is by nature [beginninglessly] 
free of impurity, these kalas of this kind 372 (tathasvabhavah) cannot be 
posited [to exist] in the Lord (iisVare = [atra]). And so how can one prove 
kalas [to exist] in him from His [power of] agency? 

In that case how is he called sakala ? To |answer] this [the following 
verse| is taught: 

He has kalas that are made up of mantras. And those 
mantras are Siva. (17ab) 

The mantras that will be taught starting with sadyojata 373 that make 
up diva’s self are called kalas |which are] so to speak (iva) parts of His 

1 Kirana 2:26a. 

3 7 2 * 

“i.e. whose nature is to remove the occlusion of impurity. 

The other four o! the five brahmamantras are vamadeva, aghora, TATPURUSA, 

and Tsana. They will be examined in Chapter 62, entitled the Pancabrahmavidhi (E D 
pp. 171-3). 
















m « tary on the Kiranatantra 



in fact indivisible] power [used] lor the performance of His completely 
distinct five functions of creation, (preservation, resorption, occlusion, 
and [compassion]. He is said to be equipped with kalas (,sakalah ) because 
He is accompanied by these [parts of his power], since He then [i.e. when 
He is Sakala] accomplishes [His five] functions. 

This is what is meant [with the verse]:—it is not the position in this 
system (atra) that [the states of] sakala and \sakalaiuskala ] ( sakaladch ) 
are further transformations from the formless ( niskalat ) and that He is 
thcrcfoic othei than sentient, because that is refuted [by the half-verse 
starting 3 ' 4 ‘Transformation [is possible only] of the insentient.’ Nor [do 
the .sakala and sakalaniskala states come about] as difierentiated by ap¬ 
parent transformation ( vivartahhedena), because those forms would (then 
be unreal, since apparent transformation is [defined as] the assumption 
of unreal forms. Nor [are the sakala and niskala states of] the Lord [to 
be imagined to be othei souls in the way that Ananta and others are, 
because in the fviiva Siddhanta (atra) scripture teaches that the supreme 
Loid is just one. The distinction taught above following the differenti¬ 
ation of these states (avasthabhedena) is conventional ( kalpita eva). Mbit 
since there is in Him, from the perspective of souls that are yet to be 
purified [in initiation] ( samskaryanvapeksaya) , a distinction between his 
gross, subtle, and supreme forms according to the degree to which the 
power of omnipotence has been revealed in them and therefore a relative 
hierarchy, there is [therefore] a real differentiation among those initiated 
into the tattva s of Isvaia, Sadasiva, and Siva. Thus these three tattvas 
exist only as conventional categories. 375 

How is it then that the Lord is taught in scriptural works (&astre) to 
be five-faced and to have other forms of this kind ( pancavaktradyakarah )? 
In Older to deal with this point [He teaches] this [verse]: 


With 


376 


(mahat) 

body of His own that is presided over by pure senses. 
Until He acts in this way, there can be no sequence of 
gurus [and so on]. 377 (17e-18b) 


374 


Kira.ua 2:26a. 


I his passage is parallel to the Matangavrtti ad viclyapada 3:20. pp. 68-9. 

This is not the ideal translation, but the word is not, in Ramakantha’s interpreta¬ 
tion, to be understood to mean ‘great’, since its gloss appears to be dhyeyadyakaram. 
■ ! )r P ' 'non of these half-verses was determined by the pratJka for 17c in P. R N 






































Chapter Throe 


285 


The Lord constructs (parikalpya) a body of His own whose form is suit¬ 
able to be meditated upon and so forth with these mantras that are 

Siva's self. Tsana, [tatpurusa, aghora, vamadeva,| and [sadyojata], 

differentiated as His head etc. and presided over by the thirty-eight con¬ 
stituent parts that are subdivisions of those [mantras] (tadavantarasta- 
trimsatkalabhedena) 378 and that are its senses and so on. According to 
the Siddhanta (atra). until He bestows compassion by [His activities of] 
creation, [maintenance, and resorption] (srstyadyanugraham) in the man¬ 
ner that will be taught below 379 (vaksyamanaprakarena ----- eva m), there 
can be no sequence of gurus, sadhakas, \putrakas\ and [samayins] ( guru - 
sadhakadikramah) . This he will teach with [the half-verse 380 starting] 


'The gross [Lord] is knowable... by meditation'. This is the meaning: 
this form of Ilis own self is [artificially] contrived (. kalpitam) as a means 
for activities such as meditation that give liberation and [for those who 
seek it, before that] enjoyment [of special yogic powers]. It is not His 
ultimately real body. To explain: 

Embodied he bestows divine favour on all embodied 
souls. (18cd) 

For it is through their [having] bodies [that] kings and such ike [worldly 
potentates] are served and observed [thereupon] to bestow favour, [and] 

not when they are without bodies, because they would then be beyond 

_ / 

the range of the senses of mortals like us. That is why (iti) in the Saiva 
Siddhanta (atra) |we have been given] this teaching of the Lord's form as 
a means of worshipping [Him . 

Objection (nanu): if the Lord’s body is not ultimately real, how can 
he reside in it (kathani adhistheyam) ! And if lie resides in it ( adhisthiya- 


places them immediately after 17b, and has taih prakalpyeta in place of P’s pratlka. 
The distribution of readings shows that the text of 18a as constituted is not original. 
It is probably a Kashmirian improvement’ on the correct but metrically less elegant 
evam na kurute yavat. (Cf. 2:26a.) 

i78 Where these subdivisions are made in the brahmamantras varies in the tantras. 
Early accounts, like that of Kirana 62 and Rauravasutrasahgraha (Bhatt’s Vidvapadaf) 
6, do not assign names to the kalas ; later sources do: see, for example, Chapter 2 of the 
‘ienyapada’ of the Raurava (to be distinguished from the earlier R.a ura vasil trasarigraha) 
and Bhatt's table (opposite p. 28 in the same volume), which draws on no demonstrably 
early source. 

from here until the end of the chapter. 

380 Kirana 3:20c. 



















286 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

manam),how can it not be a body (hatham na sarlram)? In response to 
this [trie following verse] is taught: 

For just as a yogin has power to grasp and release, 
one should realise that in the same way the immanent 
Lord has [the power to] grasp and release. (19) 


Just as a yogin through his power of yoga can inhabit and abandon a 
wall or such like " 

to bestow grace 

verse 381 ]: 


[inanimate thing), even though it is not a body, in order 
on transmigrating souls—as is taught [in the following 


Merely because of the proximity of this soul, teachings stream 

i"i i h even b om walls and things ( kudyadibhyah) as he desires, 
just as from a wish-fulfilling gem. 


-in the same way the Lord too can, for the sake of bestowing grace 

inhabit and abandon a form of His on which it is possible to meditate 

( a iycyakaram ) that is a body contrived by the intellect (buddhinir- 

niitasanrabhutam), just as He can [enter and abandon] an external image 

|oi patch of bare ground] (bahyapratimadivat). Thus there is no fault fin 
our position], 1 


Moreover 


The [reality-level of the] gross [Lord] is knowable by 
means of ritual gestures, ritual diagrams, and man¬ 
tras, the activity of which accomplishes three goals 
( tridhasiddhivicestitaih ), [and] by meditation, [and] 
through the arising of all the scriptures [of the Saiva 

Sic llianta] (sarvajhanapravrttitah). ( 20 ) 


IWithl gestures' (mudrah) |are meant) particular postures of the hands 
winch w.ll be taught 382 to be places of manifestation of the Lord's power 
( tacchaktyabhivyaktisthanataya) for inviting the supreme Lord and send¬ 
ing him away and so forth. And [with] ‘ritual diagrams’ ( mandalani) [are 
" l( particular patterns of powder which will be taught 38 ^ to be the 

Slokavarttikacodaniisutra 138. In its original context this appears to be an oDnon 

en, s view which KumMa holds up to, ridicule. I, , s od „ ,h«^nta.kL.h" should 
^ lier( with approval to reinforce a point. 

82 Kirana Chapter 15. 

383 Kirana Chapter 20. 
































Chapter Three 


287 


ociis into which to invite Him and worship Him and so forth. And [with] 
'mantras' [are meant] all the mantras, starting with SADYO.JATA, [used] 
for inviting Him and so forth. Their activity is for three kinds of at¬ 
tainment, supreme], middling,] and (inferior] ( uttamadibhedena). And 
through these, as inferential marks (tair a pi hetubhutaih), this gross 
[aspect of the Lord], the [Lord at the] reality-level of "means’ ( upaya - 
tattvam is knowable (laksyate), ior since the partless Lord ( niskalasya) 
is all-pervasive and cannot therefore be invited and [sent away and] so 
forth, it would be pointless to teach |means of doing] that. 384 That this 
gross jaspect of the Lord| is knowable also through meditation has been 
shown above. 383 Similarly the gross [aspect of the Lord] is also know- 
able through the arising ( pravrttih ) of all tire scriptures (jhananam) di¬ 
vided into i Me ten |6iva-| and the eighteen |Rudra-] divisions [of the Saiva 

Siddhanta canon]. 381 ’ This is taught in the venerable Pauskara in the 
section beginning 387 

From the head [came] the Vijaya-Tantra. From the forehead 
of the great Lord came forth the Paramegvara , and from the 
mouth, the Mukhabimhaka. 


Applied to (lie lormless [Lord] these scriptural passages would be inap¬ 
propriate, because he is without division into parts. Thus this section 
[of the tantra] is to be interpreted to be devoted to [expounding that the 
Lord resorts to] forms on which it is possible to meditate, and to forms 
[that arc merely creations] of the intellect. It is not to be interpreted 
as propounding [that the Lord has] a body of subtle matter ( baindava - 
karlrapratipadakatvena) , because that is impossible for God. For it has 
been taught that a body for the likes of us is a thing that, although it 


3 8 4 

Is this perhaps a justification of the use oi the curious term upayatattva to apply 
to the gross aspect of the Lord? Perhaps R JV P 2 ’s upayatattvam and P 3 ’s upayam are 
corruptions of upasyam (cf. quotation in 3:14.3). 

[P 3 accidentally repeats text from 0 vigesah to sakala 0 (3:20.3-5). On the second 
occasion P 3 does not deviate from Pi or from R v and so its variants 3:20.4 sarva for 
te sarva and 3:20.5 ye tu for hetu°) are not in the apparatus.] 

385 See the commentary on Kirana 3:18-19. 

386 * * 

Because scriptures such ns that quoted below describe the Siddhantas arising from 

the different body parts of the Lord, it can be interred that the Lord has a gross 

aspect that is here referred to. For the ten Siva- and eighteen Rudra-bhedas of the 
Saiddhantika canon see Appendix III. 

387 /~\ m 

Quoted by Taksakavarta iri his Nityadisangrahabhidhanapaddhati, f. 4 rt6-71 . See 
App endix III. 










288 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


is insentient, enables, by intervening (vyavadhancna) [between the soul 
and its enveloping mala], the manifestation of [the soul’s innate] powers 
ol omniscience and omnipotence. For mantras and mantregas, however, 
(vidyavidycsanam tu) it enables only I he manifestation of the power of 
omnipotence, since they are [already] omniscient. But since all the Lord’s 

I JOUrlh i;t i m > nh ; manifest, it is altogether impossible that He should 
have that (sort of body], if, on the other hand, something were to become 
the body [of something else] merely by [that other thing] residing [in it], 
then everything would be the body of everything, and so there would 

be an infinite regress [of positing bodies for things]. Therefore only the 

earlier interpretation 388 is correct. 

& 

Having thus also averted the criticism that relates to the gross [aspect 
of the Lord], he now averts that which relates to the [aspect of the Lord 
which is both] gross and part less ( sakalaniskalavisayam ). 

The other deity taught, [Sadasiva,] who has both 
natures, is not formless ( niskalah ) [and yet], compared 
to the [relatively] coarse ‘body [of Isa, Siva’s coarse 
aspect], He is taught to be formless ( kalahTnah ). (21) 

Now the other, third deity, Lord Sadasiva—[other] than the pair of the 
formless [Lord] and Lsvara, [the coarse aspect of the Lord]—we have taught 
to bo ol two natures, because He is aspected and aspectless ( sakalaniskala- 
tvena) only according to perspective ( apeksabhedat kevalam) . 389 It has 
not been admitted however that he has [two] natures which conflict. For 

i[ ; | he highest] Siva (sivapeksaya) He is not aspectless, 

since His nature is to be in a state in which His powers are ready for action 
(udyuktasaktyatmakatvat ), (and so] he is called 'aspected’ (sakalah). But 
in ( onipazison with the body of Lsvara, which is more coarse (sthulataram 
bihat), because Ilis nature is to have His powers of action engaged in 

Thus there is no contradiction [in our 
positio: j|. And so the above-mentioned problem of being unknowable is 

not taught [to apply] here, as it did in the case of the formless Lord. 


action, 


a is 



Thus the Lord ( isah ) is directly [perceptible through 
the prescribed means and is thus] the basis for yoga 
for [all] practitioners of yoga. (22ab) 


Viz. that the Lord does not actually have a body, but resides at will in forms that 
are meivJy creations of men's intellect and in forms on which it is possible to meditate, 
his was explained in Kuan a 3:13 and in the commentary thereon. 





































Chapter Three 


289 


Thus, [that is to say| by having bodies that are forms on which it is pos¬ 
sible to meditate, Kvara and Sadasiva 390 are made ( samupapadyate ) the 
basis for yoga and such [like acts of meditation and worship] ( yogadi- 
karanam) directly, [that is to say] because they can be objects [of know¬ 
ledge! for the mind, since they have a form. And thus 


Neither yoga, because it would have no target, nor [ex¬ 
ercising control over] the channel[s| of the body (nadf), 
nor focusing one’s thoughts ( dharana ) [can serve to 
help one to grasp the formless Lord]. But in order 
to bestow compassion on souls, although He is tran¬ 
scendent (paro ’pi), He has lowered Himself (apara- 
tam gatah). (22c—23b) 


Since neither yoga nor knowledge are possible with respect to t he formless 
|Lord], since lie has no form which would serve as a focus, nor are making 
to go and to come and so forth ( gamagain adi) through the middle channel 
of the body or through other channels ( madhyanadyadina ) possible in the 
manner that will be taught in the section ot the text devoted to yoga, 
because that too is impossible when |the Lord is| all-pervasive, nor is 
fixing the mind on a particular spot (desabandhas cittasya = dharana), 
therefore the Lord, realising that bestowing compassion on all souls would 
[thus] be impossible, although He is aspectless, lowered himself with a 
body with a form on which it is possible to meditate, [that is to say| He 
became embodied. Thus ( iti) the motive for things being this way has 
also been stated here. 

It is not just by [taking on] this variety of bodies on which it is possible 
to meditate, such as that of Sadasiva, that He lowers himself, for [He 
also does so] with various states as mantras which express Himself and 
with various |stat.cs as mantras] which express what is expressed by othe 

L J 

mantras. This is taught [with the next half-verse 


He is in primal, unvoiced sound (nada), in almost 
gross sound ( bindu ), in [the sound of] ether, in [the 
gross sound of] mantras [that express Siva Himself], 
in [the coarser mantra-souls called] anus, in the power 


390 Note that the verse speaks only of Isa. Ramakantha adds Sadasiva without defend¬ 
ing doing so by any commentarial ploy, indeed without comment. Perhaps, because 
Sadasiva is the subject of the preceding verse, this is j 
















290 Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

[which controls those], in the seed[-syllables such as 

Om that precede the enunciation of mantras] (bija) 

in the sound units [of the seeds] ( kala ), and in the 

end[-sounds such as the final nasalization of the seed 
syllable Om]. (23cd) 391 

Among those, unvoiced sound (nadah) is the first shudder (ksobhah) 
w nch is of the nature of unmanifest sound, from the supreme power’of 

'" 1 caIIed Kundalinl . 392 A nd almost gross sound (bindut ca ) is of the 

hdlverse^buUt £ unSolv by the aUth ° r ° f the ‘antra with this 

verse, out it « unlikely that it was intended to be understood in tin- w-.v that T 

ave translated above, following Ramakantha’s commentary, 
verse w°' & ex P lains the same sequence in the Ratnatrayapariksollekhim ad 

jayate ’dhva yatah suddho vartate yatra liyate 

sa binduh paranadakhyo (em.; 0 khyah Ed.) nadabindvarnakaranam 

Itaranam iti. iaira „ado n S^Udhe^Sd^auiblndohCu! 

mayiirandaras.b/nduvad avyapade^ai pMp.apiajfiaarupo ’faaraLlf 
sutfmaivraoHal, araas ca varna akStaviyupnbhsvzh irolragrshvai sthal^bdilT 

„ Jd„ i “ h ;t * l ! lc r p f *■ bor "' “ “«**•. i"«> 4thti“ d 

ib„tr:i bc uug t b r ■ F- 

1 r«S “ “ 

of the nature nf di.e 86 P eacock - the indestructible drop (aksarabinduh) 

And syllables lin this listl a , neSS ' ln tlle |tantras| it is taught to be subtle. 

gross sound that is perceptible to the ears.’ ’ ,they arel 

13:160c-l 6 2bf PaSSage ls Nara yanakantha’s discussion of Mr gen dr a vi dyapada 

sadasive pavitrangasakaladiparicchadah 

devah sadasivo bindau nivrttyadikalesvarah 

nade dhvanipatih saktau sarvasaktimatam varah 

* * 































Chapter Three 


291 


yonir visvasya vagisah patayah paratah sivah 

sada&vabhuvane pavitrani sadyojatadini brahmani, ahgani ca sarvatmagiro- 
jvalinyadlni, sakalaniskalakhyadayag castau rudrah paricchadah parivaro yasya sa 
evamvidhah sad a£i van at hah sthitah. baindave tu sthane n i r vrt tipratistha vi dya- 
gantyakhyakaladhipaticatuskam. nadabhuvane dhvanipatir nadcgvarah sthitah. 
yathoktam nadadhikare grlmatsvatantre [Svacchanda 10:1230—31bj 
susumne$ah sthitas tatra candrakotyarbudaprabhah 
dasabahtis trinetra£ ca gvetapadmasane sthitah 
safarika£ekharah gnman pahc.avaktro inahatanuh 
iti. Saktav a pi Saktasamgraye sakala$aktimatam varisthah parameJvarah sthitah. 
atraiva ca yonir vitvasyeti nadabindvadikramcna sakalajagadutpattihetuh kunda - 

hnyakhya gaktih sthita. yathoktam srimatsvatantrc [second half is Svacchanda 
10:1264ab| 

tatra kundalinl gaktir mayakannanusarini 
nadabindvadikarn karyam tasya iti jagatsthitih 
(For a translation see Hulin, 1980:328-9.) 

The reason for citing these parallels is that they may help to decide what Rama- 
kantha teaches here, Ft is clear that there is an evolution from Kundalinl to nada, from 

* * 7 

nada to bindu, and from bindu to gross sound; but it is not clear how guddhavidya 
(identified here in t he Kiranavrtti with par am ak as a and with m ah am ay a) fits in this 
evolutionary scheme; it is not clear whether the sound-levels of nada and bindu are to 
be identified with subtle matters out of which are made worlds and bodies for souls 
in the upper reaches of the 3aiva, cosmos; and it is not clear whether the upper bindu 
described by Aghora&va above is to be identified with Kundalinl. 

* A 

Taking the last doubt first, it seems probable that this upper bindu is indeed identifi¬ 
able with Kundalinl and that it is an exceptionally subtle substance from which worlds 
and bodies in the pure patli are made, for cf. Matahgavrtti ad 3:21c-23b, p. 71 [4 ~ 5 ^: 
nanu bhogakhyam tattvam iti vaktum upakramya bindvatmano mahamayakhyasyasya 
samhit an taresu kundaJi nit vena prasiddhasya varnanam atyantabhinnatvat ‘sagararn 
gantukamasya himavadgamanopamam 

‘One might object that after having begun to teach that this is the reality-level called 
bhoga, t ins description of that which is bindu , also called the great primal substance, 
[and] known in other tantras as Kundalinl, is like going i,o the mountain Himavat when 
a man wants to go to the ocean, for it is completely different.’ 

It may seem odd that Raniakantha should have identified bmc/u here with maharnaya , 
a term which he seems usually to reserve for guddhavidya. but since, as we shall see, 
it appears to be his position that the uppermost bindu is the subtle substance from 
which all other subtle substances evolve, this need not be problematic. This upper 
bindu-tattva is in fact identified in the Matahga with bhogatattva because they are 
inseparable, but Raniakantha explains in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 3:21c-23b 

^7 [201 ri 3 7 111 ' ** ^ 

p. 71 [ J -72 l _ J that bhogatattva is made up not just of bindu but of other subtle 
matters: 

proktarn ca £rirn at pa u skarc 

bindvatmakah £ivo yatra nadatma jyotirakrtih iti 

tattvanam dravyantaratve py asya tato n a tattvantaratvam. a pi tu saha malena patu- 
tattvam iva saha binduna bhogakhyatattvam evocyate (...) 







292 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


vidya.ta.ttva.rn tv etatkaryataya tattvatvena proktam iti tatprakarana eva dartayi- 
syamali. tac ca na kevalarp bindvatrnanaiva yavac chantyadibhedena caturdha- 
vasthitam api dhyeyam tentyadipadapraptikamair Hi. svarupena tu prerakam 
jagatah tuddhavisayasya iarirader utpadakam tadupadanakaranatvena dhyeyam iiy 

arthah. avyayam ca na sarvatmana ksiradadhinyayena parinamam eti. api tu eka- 

detiena mayadivat. 

|/ 

And it has been taught in the venerable Pauskara: “Where Siva is of the nature 
o nndu, of the nature of nada arid of the form of light... ” Although the principles 
are separate substances [from Him], it is not therefore the case that He is a separate 
principle. It is rather that He is called the principle of bhoga [viz. the second of the 
top three principles of the Matanga] when He is linked with bindu, just as [the soul is 
known as) the principle of the bound soul when linked with impurity. 

Now the principle of (pure) knowledge has been taught to be an evolute of this 

\b,ndnl land) a principle. This we shall show in the chapter devoted thereto [viz to 

pure knowledge . And that [principle of bhoga] is not just to be meditated upon as 

mat e up of bindu, but also (yavat ... api) by those who wish to reach the levels of fanti 

am the others [of that list, i.e. vidya, pratistha, and nivrtti ] as “constituted in four 

parts according to the differentiation [within it] into ianti and the others. As for its 

own true nature, it is “that which impels the [pure) universe”. That means that it 

causes the pure realm of bodies and so forth to arise, |and| it is to be meditated upon 

as the material cause of that |pure universe|. And it is “imperishable”. It does not 

transform itself entirely in the manner of milk [becoming] yoghurt, but partially, just 
as primal matter and the like does. 1 ‘ J 

These other subtle matters that make up bhogatattva have the names of the worlds 
of santi, vidya, pratistha, and nivrtti. [Ramakantha identifies (in the Matanga- 

’X " V ; d X aPa 'f 3;3 , 2c-33b ’ P ' 76 ‘ ') the fifth uppermost of these worlds named 
after the kalas, that of santyatita, with bindubhuv ana.] This becomes clear in Rama¬ 
kantha s comments on the descriptions of these worlds. Commenting for instance on 
the description of the Lord in the world called Santi in Matanga 3:24ab (bantam,irtir iti 
■ yato vrtah santair mahatmabhih) Ramakantha states vrtapadena catra praptanam 

tesam anunarn tattadbhuvanatmakani fanranTti prakas'ayati. 

That the subtle matter that is Suddliavidya is an evolute of the uppermost bindu is 
clear from a sentence m Ramakantha’s Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 3:21c-23b quoted 
above and also from the passage to which he there refers forward, the avatarika to 7:24ff 

P . 240: _ a£ X ayad ,,ktar f‘ bl ‘0gatattvanirupanayain bindusvarupopasamhare yonih syad 
a saranam if, i, tad bindukaryasya vidyatattvasyapy aksarayonitvad boddhavyam na 
tu saksat tasyety ucyate:... 

Ant !. I ‘°T ^ V ! th r r , h r f ° ll0Wmg vers<;s l is taught that what was said in the description of 
the reality level of bhoga at the conclusion [of the discussion] of the nature of [supremel 

bindu [viz. that bindu] “is the source of the syllables [of mantras]” must be understood 

|to be so], because the principle of pure knowledge, which is |itself| an evolute of bindu 

of t hosTsv 1 labUJ| ’ 050 SyllablCS ’ and " 0t |bCCaUSe| tlUS lbindu is l directl >' (‘he source 

That there is also a subtle substance lower than the supreme bindu called nada is 

!, fl01 ‘ 1 , '°‘ U - a i rkS ‘ n the Matan 8 av ?tti ad vidyapada 4:54-5, p. 100, where attaining a 
world called Sadasiva in adhikaratattva is discussed: atrapi bindubhuvanad adhovarti- 

































Chapter Three 


293 


nature of an inner murmuring because of the the slight coarsening of 
that [unvoiced sound) (tasyesatsthulatantahsahjalpatnmkatvam 393 ). And 
ether here is supreme space (paramakasam) , [it is) subtle matter (maha- 
inaya) , which is the power linked to all souls, because from that alone 
comes the awareness of the arising and [dying away| ( -udayadi-) of lan¬ 
guage (sabdasya), which has as its essence unvoiced sound (nadatmanah). 
And this has been taught in the venerable Kalottara. ^ 


Down to cowherds, women, children, those who speak for¬ 
eign tongues (mlecchah) those who speak Prakrits, even those 
creatures in the water, [all) speak it always. 

This is the state of [all-]seeing speech (pagyantyavastha), according to 
those who follow other traditions. Par as [the wise have] said, 395 


But because it is without division, it is [all-]seeing [speech], 
in which sequentiality is totally withdrawn. Within itself it is 
radiant by nature; it is subtle speech that does not decay. 


And ‘mantra’ here is coarse speech, such as the Vyomavyapin, 396 which 


tvan nadatmakani bhuvanadlni . Here too, because they exist lower down than the 
world of binciu, these worlds and |bodies and) so forth are made of nada/ 

I have not found a reference in Ramakantha’s works to a bindu lower than this that 

■i 

is used as a subtle substance. We must either assume that the sound-levels of nada 

and bindu which evolve from KundalinI are to be identified with subtle substances 

# ■ 

of the same names (even though a lower subtle substance called bindu is mysteri¬ 
ously not mentioned) which then further evolve into guddhavidya , from which in turn 
gross sound evolves, or we must assume that the evolution of the subtle substance of 
§uddhavidya from KundalinI is separate from the evolution of the sound-levels (not 


subtle substances) of nada and bindu. The first alternative is more economic, is sup¬ 
ported bv the above-quoted passage from AghoraSiva's RatnatrayapariksollekhinT, and 
would appear to be compatible with the above-quoted passage from Narayanakantha’s 
Mr gen dravrtti. 

393 The syntax is odd here and it is possible that the text requires emendation; but the 
purport of the translation is probably correct, for cf. Narayanakantha’s Mrgendravrtti 
ad kriyapada 1:2: 6aktimatah prasantasya bhagavatah paravaksvarupa ya kundalinf 
saktih. tasyah saka£at nada ity anahataparadhvanilaksanali prasarah prat ham am yo 
l)hut (conj.; yad abiiut Ed tasmad a pi krainenesatsthulatam upagacchann antahsah- 
jalpatmakah sampinditavagrupatvad bindur iva binduh. 

394 Sardh a trida tikalo t tar a l:Cc-7b. 

395 Vakyapadiya 1:166; but the verse may not originally belong there. See apparatus. 

396 This is a large mantra of eighty-one padas taught by a number of Siddhantas. 

Bhatt’s upodghata to the second volume of the Matangavrtti (pp. lxxxiii -xci) discusses 
its treatment in the Matahga. 












294 


Ramnkantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm 1 / * 


designates the supreme Lord. Thus by this division of levels I avastha- 
bhedena) there are taught to be four planes (sthanani) of speech. [Vedic] 
scripture too states 397 

Those Brahmins who are wise know these four states measured 
in speech. Three are secret; they do not cause them to be 
spread abroad (nengayanti). Men speak the fourth [level of] 
speech. 

In the venerable Kalottara however, because there is no [significant] dif¬ 
ference between unvoiced sound and almost gross sound ( bindunadayoh) 
in as much as they are both subtle, speech (asyah) is said to have three 
[levels]: 398 

The coarse is called [ordinary] 'sound'; the subtle (suJcsmam) 
is composed [only] of thought; and that which is devoid of 
thought is proclaimed to be the supreme. 

In other traditions too there are taught to be three levels of speech: 

397 Rgved a 1.164.45. 

398 Sard hat ri^atikaJottasa 1:8. In his commentary thereon (which is sadly corrupt) 
Ramakantha makes the same point that two subtle levels have been collapsed into 
one, but they do not there seem to be those of bindu and nada, as they are here. 
He there appears to identify the subtle sound composed of thought with bindu 
and that which is devoid of thought with nada: yat tu.. . parainarsatmakam avi- 
bhakta(Ms.A; ° bh ah tarn Ms. A and Ed) tad vacyatadartham favibhaga^aktivisesatina- 
katvanf mayurandarasabinduvad (conj.; °pad 0 Ed., but cf. AghoraSiva’s Ratna- 
trayapanksollekhinl ad verse 22 f av) r apade£yanekamatrarupatvatah1[ kvacid bindu - 
tfabdenoktain nadarupain tat suksmam cintamayam bhavet. a^rotragrahyam tat 
paramar£ajhanarupam e van u bh a vat ah siddham ity arthah . cintaya rahitam yat 
tu tasyapi cintamayasya karanam asamjatavagvibhagabuddhlnam yad vijneyam nada 
nlpa]m eva, tat param pariklrtitam. 

‘Now the form of sound which is of the nature of discursive thought, in which what 
is expressed by it and its objects are undifferentiated, and which is sometimes called 
bindu , f - • t like a drop of the juice of a peacock’s egg, that “is the subtle [sound] that 
is composed of thought”. The meaning is that it is not audible; by experience it is 
established to be of the nature of discursive thought. “Now that form of sound which 
is devoid of thought,” which is the cause of that which is composed of thought, and 
which is to be known by those in whom awareness of the divisions of speech has not 
arisen, “that is proclaimed to be the supreme.” 1 |For tlie (Saiva?) image of the juice of 
a peacock’s egg, in which all the colours of the peacock are present but undifferentiated, 
cf. Ratnatrayapariksa 76.] 






























Chapter Three 


295 


Speech exists [as] ‘sounding’ ( ghosini ), ‘arising [in the form 
of thought, but] soundless(?)’ ( jatanirghosa ) and ‘devoid 
of sound’ ( aghosa ca). And among these (iha) ‘sound¬ 
less' ( nirghosa) is the greater of the two that have sound 
(ghosinyoh 

These hold that these [levels of speech] are necessarily (ekantatah) merely 
inseparably connected with the soul ( atmasamavetah ); but we have shown 
in the Proof of Sound 100 that because the soul (tasya) is not subject to 
transformation, they are attendants (parigrahavartinyah). And [with] 
'ami |is meant] the group of mantras and Lords of mantras (mantra- 
mantreSvaravargah) which are expressed with other mantras . 401 And 

399 Mahabharata 14.12:16. The critical text reads nityam eva in place of aghosa ca. 
Ramakantha’s reading does not appear in the apparatus. 

0 Nadakarika 18-201) (with AghoraSiva’s commentary): 
seyain avastha kaiscit padavidbhir varnyate kriyasakteh 

iha punar anyaivokta purusasamavayinl ca (Filliozat and Sardhatriteti- 
kalottaravrtti ; ca unrnetrically omitted in Ed.) vag yasmat 

v as mat piatipurusasya vaksaznavayahhavan nadaclik rani cij a ^ah do tpadakatvaiji na 

yuktam , parinamitvaprasahgat; tasrnad anyaiveyam (Filliozat [without variants]; 
tasman naiveyam other editions) atrokta. 
etad eva prapahcayati — 

avikary atrat.nioktas tacchaktis capy ato na yogyau tau 
bahudha sthatum yadva caitanyavinakrtau vikaritvat 

tat pumsakter bhinna (Filliozat; bhinno other editions) nadopadana- 

karanatvena 

* 

t asm at pratipurustit tacchakteS ca bhinna kundalinl nadakaranam siddheti. 

* * * * < 

Some linguists describe this same [speech| as an aspect of the [soul’s] 

power of action. In this system however it is taught [to be] different, because 
speech does not inhere in souls. 

Because speech does not inhere in each soul, it is impossible that [each soul) should 
give rise to (gross) sound following the sequence [of development] starting with unmani¬ 
fest sound, because the unwanted corollary would follow that the soul would be subject 

to transformation. Therefore [speech is] taught to be different [from the soul’s power 
of action| in this system. 

He [now| expands upon the same point: 

The soul is taught in this system to be unchanging, and so too is his 

power, and therefore these two cannot exist [split up] as many. Or [if 

they could,] they must then be devoid of sentience, because they would be 

subject to transformation. Therefore [primal speech], as the material cause 

dinary] sound [is] different from the soul and from his power. 

Therefore Kundalinl is proved to be the cause of sound, different from each soul ;m<l 
from his power.’ 

401 

ix. with maim us othei than thosr which make up the Lords own mantra-bodv. 









296 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

f 


• H 'l: power’ |is meant the power of the supreme Lord which presides 

over those [lower mantras]. That is why for one versed in mantras 

( mantrabhiyuktasya ) both (dvayam api) have to be propitiated, Siva and 

the |soul-[mantra—this is what is in effect stated here. And [the word 

seed here [refers to| that [syllable] which begins the mantras mentioned 

above, such as the sound Om. And the divisions [of sound] (kalfih) are 

the sound a and so forth, which are parts o seeds such as Om. Their ei 

* 

(an tail) is said to be the sound of the dot i.e. of the anusvara] ( bindu- 
nadah), [that is[ the noise perceived as something that has not yet attained 
rest and which has the form of a part of a division [of sound] that is dying 
away (vigalatkalavibhagarupah). 

The Lord resides in (gatah) these same (tan etan) particular aspects 
of mantras [using them] as His bodies, in order to bestow compassion on 
souls, because their forms are ones on which it is possible to meditate. 
And so the Lord, realising the particular kind of worship |He has received] 
i sevavifesam = upakaram) according to the relative superiority or inferi¬ 
ority of that in which He resides as a body (garlratmanadhisthcvanam 

mm t 

utkarsapakarsabhedena )—just as with the consecration of golden or sil¬ 
ver images—extends rewards to adepts in accordance with that |worship 
If this were not so, who would abandon the coarse or very coarse rituals 

that are c asy to jx rfoi in and apply himself to subtle or very subtle ones 
As they say, 

If one could find honey in an Arka shrub, why should one 
go to the mountain? What wise man would put himself to 
trouble, when the object he desires is already attained? 

For this (lie gives] an example: 

Like a yogin , He is conscious of service done to Him, 

because He is omniscient, [and] He bestows boons [ac¬ 
cordingly]. (24ab) 


The Kir an a (in 7:1-4) teaches that there arc three kinds of mantras, in which Siva, his 
6akti, and mantra-souls (aim) are expressed. 

Probably Galotropis gigantic, (Linn.) Ft. Br.ex Ait. or Calotropis procera (Ait.) 

Ft. Br. (thus Meulenbeld, 1988:252). Sen (1975) shows that the Arka plant is clearly 

what is intended in the earliest quotations of this unattributed verse (e.g. Sahara- 

bhasya 1.2.4) and that the variants (e.g. a kke and ankte) and their interpretations by 
commentators are secondary. 

























































Chapter Three 


297 


For he |viz. the yogin ] is seen to grant rewards that are appropriate, 
according as the service offered was great or small, to those who help 
him. And thus 


Because by His own will, he bestows compassion, He 
has [three aspects: these are] resorption (iaya), enjoy¬ 
ment (bhog*a), and office ( adhikara ). He is represen¬ 
ted as three-fold ( trividhahi- ] ), with different names 
according to the different functions He performs [in 
those aspects]. (24c-25b) 


Although the Lord is divided according to the bodies |he adopts] whose 
forms are such that they can be meditated upon, at the level of ultimate 
reality He is divided, in the manner stated above, as possessing the as¬ 
pects of resorption, enjoyment, and office [only] according to the different 
functions He performs (layabhogadhikaravan bhinnah vihhinnah - | tri- 
vidhah]), (and these He performs] simply because by His will alone He is 
the agent of grace and so forth. This is what is taught. This is as much 
as to say there is no [ultimate] difference in his omniscience. 

And now after an examination of the topic of ‘knowledge ’ 404 [there 
follows] an examination of the topic of ‘deliberation’ ( vicarapadartha - 



The Lord (Kvarah) urges the overlords of the lower 
mantras [to act]. As soon as they have been urged by 
Him, they create the lower universe. !0 > (25c—26b) 


The lower mantras ( vidyali ) are the seven hundred million mantras 
(mantrah) |—they are described as ‘lower’] because they stand below the 
overlords [of mantras] [and] because [those Lords are here] the subject 
[of the discussion]. Their overlords are Ananta and others, who will be 


403 It might be assumed that Ramakantha read vibhinnah against all the other sources, 
for he appears to quote arid then gloss it with the phrase layabhogadhikaravan bhinnah 
(3:25.2-3). 

404 For the definition of these see 1:13.21-7. 

405 It is possible that the nominative form pat ayah in N and Try, erroneously used as 
an accusative, is primary. The text that underlies the readings of 3:26b in N and S (and 
that is therefore likely to have been original) is unmetrical. Ramakantha’s commentary 
provides no support for the ‘improved 1 text that has been accepted, but this is the way 
Narayanakantha has it when he quotes 3:25c-26b ad Mrgendra 13:160, p.333. 

















298 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


spoken of below.These He urges. Therefore we know that] they are 
weaker than the Lord ( Tsvarat ) in respect of their power to act. That is 
expiessed here (iti bhavah). And they engage themselves in performing 
their function, creating the lower universe that is made of primal matter, 
as soon as they are commanded by the Lord (tena) to do so. and not after 
an interval of time, as mantras do. 

If that is the case, then who creates the upper universe? In response 
to this question (iti) is taught: 


In the pure path fsiva is the creator. Ananta is taught 
to be the lord in the impure [path], (26cd) 107 


In the {Hire path of the mantras and lords of mantras (mantra- 
mantrcgadhvani ), which consists of the worlds [and bodies| of the reality- 
level of [pure] knowledge and the others [above that) (vidyatattva- 
bhuvanadyatmake) , Siva is the creator. What is meant is that those 


so are 


[mantras and lords of mantras] are created by him t tatkrtah), and 
all their worlds and (bodies and] so on. Ananta [in the verse] means [the 
officiants of the lower universe] beginning with Ananta. The group begin¬ 


ning wit Ii Ananta are lords, hat is to say agents of creation and the others 

[of the five functions: compassion, restraint, maintenance, and resorption] 

(sthityadikarta — prabhuh) in the path of primal matter ( mayavartmani 
= asite ). 

Objection (atha)t how is it that He is not sole lord in the impure 
universe just as he is in the pure universe? The reply to this is (ucyate): 


Just as another man, powerful like himself, is em¬ 
ployed by a ruler of a kingdom in this world [to do his 
business], so too this [Ananta] does everything [after 
being] awakened by Siva’s power ( tacchakti -). (27a-d) 


We imagine that which we do not see to be similar to what we do see 
(drstavad adrstakaipana): just as a ruler of men in this world (atra nrpatih 
— bhumandalesSah) is seen himself to appoint ( kurvan ) his inner court— 
the group of subjects such as ministers and private priests and so on—and 
his outer court ( bahirahgam ) by sending ministers and other officials who 

4 06 

Ananta is discussed in the verses immediately below and is the subject of the next 
chapter. Ramakantha (e.g. in 3:26.7—8) takes many of the Kira.ua 's pronouncements 
on Ananta to refer to the whole group of vidyegvaras. 

4 0 7 

This is probably the most frequently quoted half-line of the Kirana. 

m 





















Chapter Three 


299 


are like him [to do so], so too in the Saiva Siddhanta (evam a trapi) there 
is no contradiction with scripture [if we allow that Siva does the same . 
With the phrase ‘awakened by His power' is expressed that compassion 
was bestowed on the group o officiants starting with Ananta while they 
were [still) vijhanakevalins , for only one who was not awakened can be¬ 
come awakened, and because this state of not being awakened has been 
taught 408 to result from [the bond of] mala. 

Now the nature of Ananta and the rest [of the eight vidyesvaras is 
describedj: 

He [like the rest of the vidyesvaras] is omniscient, and 
his body is pure. He reveals all the [twenty-eight] 
scriptures ( sarvajnanaprakagakah ). (27ef) 

In their powers of action alone this [group] is slightly inferior (kalaya 
nyunah ) to Isvara, but not in their powers of knowledge. Phis is what 
is meant. And their bodies are pure, not impure like those of the souls 
invested with office within the realm of primal matter. And they are 
teachers of all the ten [Sivabhedas] and eighteen [Rudrabhedas that are 
the] divisions of the [Saiva] scriptures, not just of some of them, as other 
teachers are. 

Thus ends the third chapter in the commentary on the glorious Kirana, 
composed by Bhatta Ramakantha, the son of Bhatta Narayanakantha. 

A mm * i * mm V t i i 


408 


e.g. in 2:19c-20 and, by implication, in 2:14.21. 





























































CHAPTER FOUR 


On the Lord 409 

Now [there follows] a further chapter preceded by a question in order to 
examine in [further] detail the topic of deliberation ( vicarapadarthasya ). 

[Garuda spoke:] 

And it is said that Ananta awakens by the might of 
Siva’s power. And 110 that awakening power is taught 
to be all-pervasive: why does it not awaken others 
[than those that it does awaken] to whom it is also 
[equally] near? If it helps only those that are ‘suitable’ 
then Siva must be [partial and therefore] possessed of 
passion (ragavan). (1—2) 

The connections in this chapter (atra) pertaining to the sutra, the topic, 
and the section of the book are to be understood to be as before. But 
that relating to the pataia is the examination of particular details [of the 
topic of deliberation] following the [general consideration of the] topic 
of deliberation ( vicarapadarthasyaivanantciram): ni That relating to the 
statement is various, [being] with statements, such as 'Ananta is taught to 
be the lord in the impure path .’ 412 And this is the meaning of the question 
here:—the group [of vidyegvaras ] headed by Lord Ananta was taught to be 
'awakened by Siva’s power ’, 413 and therefore, because the Lord’s power is 

109 The title patipafcala is given to this chapter in \] D and E v (see footnote 1 on p. 161 
above). 

410 The ca, read only in NTVy, is supported by Ram akant ha’s reference back in 5:1.8. 

The topic of deliberation was defined in 1:13.24-7 and introduced by Garuda in 
3:25c-26b, according to Ramakantha’s avatarika thereto. 

4l2 Kirana 3:26d. 

413 Kirana 3:27d. 







302 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * 1/ * 


all-pervasive, and is thus |equally] near to all, since there is no difference 
between them, all souls should have the same form as Ananta and the 
others |of the vidyetfvaras], or none of them should. And if the Lord 
makes them [vidyeivarasj according as they are suitable because ot their 
service [to Him| and so forth (sevanadiyogyatapeksayai , then there is the 
undesirable consequence that because He must then have [the passions of | 
attachment and hatred and such, He would not be God, like [ordinary] 
men. 

The [response of the] Siddhanta to this [is as follows): 

[The Lord spoke:) 


Just as the awakening of lotuses from the contact of 
the rays of the sun is not consistent—some awaken 
and others never do—and yet the sun has neither 
hatred nor affection, so too the Lord does not have 
either [hatred or affection]. Therefore ( yatah ) it is be¬ 
cause of his [suitability to hold] office ( adhikarat ) that 
Ananta (asya) is employed. He would not have a body 
(sthitih) if he were not [thus] employed. 114 Through 
the Lord’s power ( tatsamarthyat ) Ananta has omni¬ 
science, O Garuda. (3-5b) 


It is true that the [Lord’s] power is all-pervasive and that it bestows com¬ 
passion depending on [the recipients’] suitability; but one cannot infer 
[that He is subject to the passions of' attachment and hatred from this 
[power], since it is not proved that that [power] is thus [partial], since 
the entitlement to hold office ( adhikarah) of those who are entitled (a dhi- 
karinam ) is [defined by] the ripeness of impurity, [which is] here suitability 
(yogyata). It has been taught that that [power] imparts enlightenment 
[only| to those whose impurity has ripened, just as the sun awakens [only 
a lotus] that is ripe for awakening. It is from this entitlement to hold 
office, which is [this same] suitability [viz. ripened impurity], that Ananta 
is invested with duties, for it is taught that the continuance of the ef¬ 
fects that form his external body would be impossible without his being 
invested with duties. And it has not been established that acting in 
accordance with this suitability necessarily entails [being subject to] at- 

414 Or ‘His [body] would not continue’; but sthiti has been understood to have been 
used in the sense of body in Kir ana 1:3d (glossed 1:9.8). 



































Chapter Four 


303 


tachment, hatred and the like, and thus the undesirable corollary of [the 
Lord's] not being the Lord cannot here be concluded therefrom. 

Now [there follows] a question [intended] to investigate further the 
same [point] (atraiva): 

[Garuda spoke: 


If he has a body then Ananta cannot be omniscient, 
because the faculties of the senses are limited and [can 
only! grasp limited [objects]. (5c—6b) 


The statement above that ‘Ananta is omniscient and his body is pure ’ 115 
cannot I »e correct, because, by the principle taught above, being connected 
with a body that consists of limited effects and instruments is invariably 
concomitant with grasping limited [objects], and this is proved to be the 
case with all embodied creatures. Therefore [this] omniscience is refuted, 
because, since he is embodied, we see something [viz. being embodied] that 
is invariably concomitant with [limited knowing] which contradicts [omni¬ 
science] I viruddhavyapyopalabdhya 416 ), This is the meaning [of Garudas 
question]. 

But one might object that this logical ground is unproved, because 
Ananta's body is different from the bodies made up of the effects and 
instruments [derived of primal matter], since it has been taught 117 to be 
pure. On this [point] he says: 


That body [must be] made up of primal matter and 
born of the causes that are [past] actions [the fruits 
of] which remain [to be consumed]. If there is indeed 
a difference [between him and other embodied souls, 
then it must be merely that] he can hear and [see and] 
so on from a great distance. (6C“7b 118 ) 


Now (iavat) it is not possible [to argue] that the purity of his body consists 
in not being made up of [the effects of] primal matter or not being born 
of karman, since it is a body, just like the bodies of the likes of us. As 
they say, 

415 Kirana 3:27e. 

A T. £2 

Cl. Nvayabindu 2:37 for the use of this expression. (I am grateful to Kei Kataoka 
for emending the text here and pointing to the parallel.) 

417 Kirana 3:27e. 

« 

418 The text of these half-verses is found immediately after 6b in R A , but has been 
moved to where mayatmikain ityadi occurs as a pratlka in R a PiP 2 . 













304 


Ramakantha ’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• • 1 / m 


That bodies exist beyond primal matter is no more than a 
beautiful tale . 419 

fBut if [his purity is] like that of the bodies of the gods such as Brahma, 
then one must say that his [purity] is just being born of the retributive 
effects of particular actions,f 420 and so, because he is connected to such 
a [material] body, in the same way [as with Brahma and other gods], 
the difference [between him and other embodied souls] must be that of 
hearing, [seeing] and so forth from a great distance . 1 As they say, 

Wherever there is some excellence, it is there by excelling 
[something that is found] elsewhere . 421 

But [the difference] cannot be that he is omniscient, and so the logical 
ground is not unproved. That is the view of the opponent. 

Now the Siddhanta: [The Lord spoke:] 

His body is taught to consist of pure matter [and is] 
not born of past action. Because he is thus freed of 
[impure] bonds, what can stop him from being omni¬ 
scient? (7c~8b) 

According to the Saiva Siddhanta (iha) it is not proved that a body is 
necessarily composed of [the effects of] primal matter, because it has been 
taught, in the section starting in the pure path Siva is the creator ’, 422 
that it is also possible [for a body] to be composed of pure knowledge. And 
therefore this [body of Ananta] is not born of [the fruits of past] action, 
since [the residual fruits of past] actions, since they are located in in the 
sphere of primal matter, cannot exist there [i.e, in the pure path or in a 

419 Source unknown. The second pada is a stock phrase: cf. Nyayamanjarl vol. 1, p. 81 
(verse 84d) and p. 91 (104d). 

120 If, as I have interpreted, Ramakantha is enumerating different ways of understand¬ 
ing tfuddhatva, then this sentence is awkwardly elliptical as it stands. We expect the 
suggested understanding of purity (viz. vi&stakarmajatvam) to be placed not in the 
apodosis (as translated here), but in the protasis. If, however, we place it in the 
protasis, then no sense can be made of the apodosis, unless we supply some text that 
we must then assume to have been lost: ‘But if, as of the bodies of Brahma and other 
gods, [the purity of Ananta’s body] is just its being born from the retributive effects of 
particular past actions, then f... f\ 

121 Source unknown. The text of the second pada is uncertain. 

422 Kirana 3:26c. 


























Chapter Four 


305 


body composed of guddhavidya]. It is rather caused by his [being invested 
with| authority. Since lie is in the manner taught above 423 (uktena pra- 
karena — evam) free from the bonds that are made up of primal matter, 
what can stop him from being omniscient? Thus there is no contradiction 
in the position of the Saiva Siddhantaj. 

But let us allow that (a stu va ) pure matter too is a bond, since it [too 
is to be removed by initiation. Even then: 

Just as poison that is in it does not destroy the snake, 
nor does [the poison] that comes to it [from another 
snake], 424 so too the accumulation of [pure] bonds 425 
that attaches to him does not destroy Ananta. (8c— 

9b 426 ) 


For just as the poison, even though it is in his body—or the poison that 
lias been injected jinto his body] ( pratisamkrantam [ - tadgatam]) from 
another snake—is not destructive as a poison to a snake that generates 
poison, so too the accumulation of bonds which is his body does not im¬ 
pede Ananta—f [the accumulation of bonds] which is in that [guddhavidya] 
that makes his position possible (tatsthanasadhakagatah), i.e. which con¬ 
sists of that [6uddhavidya\ ( tadatmakah), since his agency through pure 
knowledge is entailed because he has the power to generate bodies], 
worlds] and such like j for the likes of us] ( garlradijanakatvaksipta-suddha - 
vi dyakar t r t va t). f 12 ' 

And so too the [other] souls invested with offices within the realm of 
primal matter, starting with VTrabhadra, are not impeded by t lie accu- 

423 Kirana 3:27. 

-K 

' Thus Ramakantha: perhaps what I offered in Hindu Scriptures (1996:354) is closer 
to what was originally intended: ‘Just as a snake’s poison that is in the snake does not 
destroy that [snake] in which it resides,.. . ’ M y ’s reading sarpam is almost certainly not 
original, but it seems likely that Ramakantha renders it in the genitive with visasrastuh 
sarpasya, just as he renders the verse’s ’nantarn with a genitive. 

125 i.e. those of his body of ‘pure knowledge’ and the impurity entailed by holding an 
office (adhilcaramaia). 

426 In R N the text of these half-verses immediately follows 8b, but it has been moved 
to where tatstham ifcyadi occurs as a pratTka in all the manuscripts. 

12 ‘This sentence seems corrupt. We expect a parallel in Ananta’s case both to the 
poison that is tatstham and to that which is tadgatam. Ramakantha intends to make 
the analogy with the snake and its poison complete by showing the circularity of 
Ananta’s relationship with bonds: he creates bonds for others but only by virtue of 
having bonds himself, and yet these bonds are not bonds for him. 















306 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


muktion of bonds made up of primal matter. This is what is stated here 
this has been taught by the teacher |Sadyojyotih|: 

Even though they are joined to the kafas , 428 they are not con¬ 
trolled by them, as the multitude of bound souls are. It is 
those [kalas], together with the bound souls, that are con¬ 
trolled by these |officiants in the realm of primal matter]. 

Ihese [officiants are therefore situated| above that [realm of 
primal matter |. 429 


If hat is so then pure knowledge too, since it is a bond, should have been 
cu off for Lord Ananta, just like [all the] other bonds. So how |does he 

f . 1 , la . VG ! ,S accumulatl0n of bonds [deriving] from it (tatah) that are 
his body ? In reply to this is taught; 


Just as a GaducT plant ( chinnodbhava ), 430 when it is 
cut off, arises [again] by [resorting to] the place whin 
was its locus (sthanagrayava£at), so too the overlord 
of mantras (mantrete) [Ananta] must perforce bear a 
body by virtue of his position. 431 (9c-10b) 


ust as a Gadin plant (gaduci = chinnodbhava), even though cut off at 

e root, resorts to the particular place which was its locus and grows 

orth again, so too [the bond of] pure knowledge of Ananta, though cut 

o , resorts to his particular position, that is to say (-laksanam) to his 

emg invested with office , 432 and grows forth again in the shape of his 

body and such. Thus on the strength of his office Ananta by force, as it 

were, bears a body, even though he might not wish it. Thus there is no 
inconsistency [in the position of the Saiva Siddhanta], 


r ' S P t ° SS13le * hat Sadyojyotih is here using kala in the old PaSupata sense to mean 

llsoTl at ?e ‘ rU 1 T ent \ and CffeCtS (S6e f0 ° tn0te 162 ° n p - 212 above )' 14 ^ Possible 
matterf 1 “““ ° f the ‘ divisions l that are the evolutes of primal 

429 Moksakarika 82c-83b. 

429 Tinospora cordifolius Miers, a plant that grows from a bulb 

rw fr ° m . the diStnbutl0rl 0f readln SS that hathavad vapudharanam 

R? rr lly G f lgent : nCOrreCt Stem - for,n of va P“s) is original, we can assume 

k u“' ha rCa<1 tanudhara ^m on the evidence of his avatarika to 4:12c-13b 

« T he w biguity of the word sthana is here exploited, for it is understood to mean 
position , office , as well as 'place’. 















































































Chapter Four 


307 


As for the inference stated to prove that his body must be born of 
past actions, that too is inconclusive. This is taught [with the following 
verses]: 


Just as a body sustained by the power of mantras can 
remain for some time and with its power 133 can reach 
some desired place, even if it has been bitten [by a 
snake] at [the appointed time of] death, so too through 
the might of Siva’s power ( tacchakti -) his body re¬ 
mains. For this reason his body is to be understood 
to be utterly pure like the lotus-leaf. 434 (10c—12b) 

>ne who is bitten by a snake at the [appointed] time of death is kala- 
dasta. The meaning is t hat [the fruits of all] his actions [to be consumed 
in this life] have been consumed. Just as such a person’s body can be 
sustained or a long time by the power of mantras alone and can survive 
and reach some desired place by the same above-mentioned souks power 
of knowledge and action, 35 so too [it is with] Ananta’s body, which is 
not born of [the retributive power of | past actions, because of a power 
of the Lord’s sakti called ‘[the power| of office’ (T£vara£aktisamarthyad 
adhikarakhya t ). 

l33 If the text of 4:12.1-4 is correctly constituted and interpreted (the syntax does 
not seem o me smooth), Ramakantha is to be understood to take mantragaktya to be 
the instrument governing vidhrtah, and tfaktitah (glossed below with praguktasyaiva 
pumsah saktya jnanakriyatrnikaya) to be the instrument of prapnoti. The author of 
the root text might have intended no more than an otiose repetition of the idea already 
conveyed by rnantra£aktya : ‘and through (that| power’. Tryambaka^ambhu does not 
make clear how he interprets the word (IFP T. 1102, p. 79^ 15-17 ^): 6anraprarabdh a- 
karmabhave ’pi mantrabalac dram jlvati Saktitah. 

434 Because it is through Siva’s power and not through the evolutes of primal matter 
that Ananta bears a body, his body is as pure as a lotus-leaf. Water cannot for a 
moment remain on a lotus-leaf and, like Ananta active in the realm of impure mat¬ 
ter. it grows in mud. The accepted version of these padas is common to the Nepalese 
and South Indian transmissions and is undoubtedly primary. Ramakantha's comment¬ 
ary, however, may appear to quote and therefore to support the secondary version: 
asamsprst&rn malair jneyam padmapattram ivamhhasa, a reformulation that makes 
the intended image explicit and incorporates BhagavadgTta 5:10d; but the apparent 
quotation forms part of Ramakantha’s own verse (4:12.5-6) and I suspect that it is 
found only in the two manuscripts most influenced by Ramakantha’s commentary pre¬ 
cisely because it derives from Ramakantha’s commentary. 

135 See footnote 433 above. 








308 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Therefore, and because of the previous argument 436 his .body is 
to be understood to be utterly untouched by the [surrounding] 
impurities, which are the bonds derived from karman and from 
primal matter, just as a lotus-leaf [is untouched] by water. 

Because even among the likes of us some rare souls are known to have 
odies that are not born of (the retributive power of] past actions , 437 
this logical ground ‘because [his body is] a body’ is shown here to be 
inconclusive. This is what is conveyed [by the above passage] 

But his body must be the locus of [limited] consciousness 
(bodhayatanam sariram ), in the same way as [the bodies] of the likes 

o us [are]. So why is it said that ‘he must perforce bear a body ’? 438 In 
answer to this, [the Lord teaches] this [verse]: 

Just as the volatile fluid [of quicksilver] (kalyah 

’.. rasah ) when [put] in the body remains in the body 

by the help of supports ( tantraih ), so too the mighty 

power of knowledge [remains in Ananta in spite of him 
having a body]. 439 (12c-13b) 


Just as the extremely volatile (atyantanavasthitah = kalane gatau sadhuh 
- a yah) fluid [i.e.] quicksilver (paratah) [when] in the body is helied by 

0 :;-~ refers 40 the ar S umen t that Ramakantha gives in his commentary 
437 See Kiranavrtti 1:13.7-8. 

438 In the case r of the likes of us > ^e evolutes of primal matter that constitute the bodv 
a 439 < r° nCeiVed ° f aS a means for acquiring limited powers of knowledge. 

It is unclear to me how this verse was understood by its author Perhans rasa 
was ,o refer to chyle, ,he volatile „„t,ie„, fluid",hat r.tolts X S 

decoction of what is eaten. It is also conceivable that alcohol was intended. Follow¬ 
ing the readings and commentary of TryambakaSambhu we might interpret: ‘Just as 

( ] r f A ' ayai [ am “ kaI P^ in [impure, i.e. not purified by vomiting, purging 
d such hke preliminaries (aiSuddhe vamanavirecanadibhir atodhite)] body is power¬ 
less (ayatfah), even when (ca) strengthened (upacitah) by medicines prepared accord- 

g o the prescriptions of alchemical science (tantrai rasayanakalpapranltausadhaih ) 
so too omniscience (\bodhah\ yugapadatesarthadyotikah = bodho mahabalah) does 

not remain (na tisthati) in this [impure (a Suddhe mayatmake)} body, [even when 
s rengthened by Siva’s power CivaSaktyupacitah ), because of the presence of impurity) ’ 

ri997 e is°i S q\ b f ? al th K rea r ding Suti?fhati is P nmar y “nnot be ruled out. Oberlies 
and in Pali & nU " ^ ^ mStanC6S ° f the USe of su ’ ^ a ^rbal prefix in the epics 










































Chapter Four 


309 


other substances that are its supporters and such ( tatkutumbadharanadi- 
bhir dravyantaraih = tantraih), 440 and remains in this [physical] body, so 
too the power of knowledge, even though mighty (mahabalo ’pi), [mighty] 
in that, because his impurity has been cut away, it has everything as its 
object (sarvarthah) , remains in Ananta’s body, assisted by the means 
of support that are the Lord’s power of will ( iccha£aktyatmakaih). This 
[then] is the purport: it is appropriate that ( upapadyate ) those whose 
innate impurity has not been cut off avicchinnamalanam have bodies 
in order [partially] to make manifest their [innate omni-]science, but not 
also those whose innate impurity has been cut oil' and who reside in the 
reality level of Igvara (I6varatattva$ritanam). And thus ( iti ) it has been 
taught that Ananta does not bear a body in order to help him to know, 
by saying (that he does so] by force ( hathatah ). 

Is this [body then] of no help at all for him? The response [of the 

Lord| is that this is not so. 

Just as great strength comes to ( yati ) weak people 
through the power of medicine, so too Ananta attains 
strength in [joining souls with] the supreme through 
the might of that [body’s] power ( tacchakti -), and, 
because he has this might, he immediately stimulates 
the matrix [of primal matter to generate from herself 
all that is material]. 111 (13c—14) 

440 The gloss alludes to Dhatupatha 10:139: tatri kutumbadharane, ‘[the root) tatri 
in the sense of supporting the family’. We expect dharana therefore to refer to an 
action, but the expression dravyantaraih seems to require that it refer to a substance 
or thing. Nor is it merely the mode of expression that is problematic here but the ideas 
themselves: does Ramakantha understand the image to come from a medical context or 
from a background of tantric alchemy such as is represented, e.g., by the (considerably 
later) Rasaratnasamuccaya? In the latter case keeping mercury in the body would have 

soteriological relevance. 

441 The reading yati of M v (alone) in 4:14a seems to be supported by Ramakantha’s 
repeated use of yati (4:14.1 and 3), and it has been retained against all other sources 
because it seems to me that it would be an odd word for Ramakantha to have chosen 
unless it were in the text before him. The evarn not only has the support of all other 
sources, but it is also apparently echoed by Ramakantha (in 4:14.1); nevertheless, I 
suspect that it is only an apparent echo and that in fact Ramakantha is supplying 

evam because it is natural in prose to supply a correlative to yatha. In 4:14b too I 

* 

have read with M v against all the other sources, assuming that pare was understood 
bv Ramakantha as a locative (the use of the nominal rather than the pronominal 
ending is optional according to Astadhjayf7.1.15~16) and that it is glossed by parasmih 











310 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm */ * 


Just as the strength of the weak increases because of the power of medi¬ 
cinal herbs and the like, so too, through the enabling of his power to act 
(kartrtvasamarthanam = samarthyam ) brought about by the power of his 
body, the Lord Ananta attains strength (baiam) in such things as joining 
souls that are to be purified to the reality level of supreme Siva ( parasmin 
chivatattve halam samskaryasamyojanadyatmakam yati). This (then] is 
the meaning: although he is omniscient, since he is slightly inferior to Siva 
in his power of action 442 and is thus incapable of such tasks as joining 
souls to be purified to this [highest reality level), his body, just like those 
of the likes of us, has to be used for manifesting just a certain amount of 
his [innate] power of action (tavato 'pi kartrtvamgasya ). 

[There follows] a question to examine another point on the same topic 
( pariksantaraya ). 

[Garuda spoke:] 


He is the one who stimulates in the lower realm [i.e. 
in primal matter and the principles that evolve from 
her]. Why must there be one who stimulates primal 
mat ter? She is of herself prone to t ransformation by 
[the very fact of her] transformation [of herself] into 
this world, since she is taught to be the matrix of 
the universe and her evolutes [are the principles that] 
start from that of limited power to act ( kaladayah ). 
As a result of [that] transformation [must there not 
follow] the destruction of everything? 443 [And yet 
if there is] no transformation, how can the universe 
[come about]? (15—16) 


But this question is inappropriate, because it has been refuted by logic 
in the [section devoted to[ the proof of God above, 444 and because an 
answer to it has been taught above when it was said What if it is karman 
[that is the cause of the universe]" No, because [karman is) insentient.’ 445 

chivatattve (4:14.2-3). 

442 Cf. the commentary ad 3:27ef, where the same point is made. 

443 What is implied is that matter herself is destroyed by her own transformation into 
the effects that are the universe, and so all will be irrevocably destroyed at the time of 
the supposedly cyclical destruction of the universe. 

444 Kirana 3:9-27 and commentary. 

445 Kirana 3:12cd. 

















Chapter Four 


311 


Then can we suppose that (atha) the question asks what need there is in 
this system atra) for an appointed [subordinate who plays the r6le ofj 
another stimulator [of primal matter]? 'That [objectionj too is inappro¬ 
priate, because it has been refuted by the passage beginning ‘Just as by 
a ruler of a kingdom in this world... ,416 Nor is it appropriate to inter¬ 
pret it to be another punah ) attack here on [the existence of] God from 
the standpoint of the Sankhyas, because the refutation of this view too 
occurred ( sambhavat ) before with the passage starting ‘|The universe is] 
gross, diverse, |and therefore] an effect’. 117 Only if that [refutation] had 
not already occurred would a further question |on these same lines] be 
appropriate, and not otherwise, because [if such a question were allowed, 
the undesirable consequence would follow [of further attacks] on kala and 
the other principles too. 418 On this point we teach that one must con¬ 
cede [that there is] another intention behind the question ( pra^narthah ) 
|and that is to reveal] the unwanted corollary that the non-existence of 
< iod is proved when there is resorption of the entire universe ( maha- 
pralayapeksayaj. For in such a resorption, since [the offices and bodies 
of] Ananta and the rest [of those ofRciants| are resorbed and the Lord 
darkens his |other] aspects, such as that as hSvara. and remains only as 
Santa and there are therefore no stimulators, primal matter, being the 
womb of the universe, is admitted to be of herself prone to transform¬ 
ation (svatah... parinaminf) because of her transformation into aspects 
that are [progressively! subtle, very subtle, arid so forth (suksmasuksma- 
taradyavasthavikarena = [ vikiirena} ), because of her readiness to manifest 
her own effects (svakaryavyaktiyogyataya), so too (yatha ... tatha) at the 
time of the beginning of creation she will [of herself] become [so trans¬ 
formed as] her effects, starting with kala. Therefore what need is there of 
supposing a stimulator of this [primal matter]? 449 

And if it is maintained that the stimulators [of primal matter] are not 
resorbed even at that time, then a total resorption is impossible (maha- 


41fi Kirana 3:27a. 

if 

447 Kirana 3:12a. 

■ 

1 ^Perhaps sambhavat and tadasambhavc might be translated differently: ‘because 
one can assume the refutation of his view by the section... ’ and ‘For if one does not 
assume [that this has been thus refuted]... \ 

1 l9 The point of the argument appears to be that if maya, as genetrix of the material 
universe, can perform the final shutting down at a rnahapralaya (for Ananta and the 
other officiants cannot remain to the absolute end), then why can she not also start it up 
without their superintendence, for both processes involve a sort of self-transformation? 










312 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


pralayanupapattih ), since there would be no difference [in this respect 
between lower resorption (pralaya) and total resorption (mahapralaya)] 
and thus the [position of the Saiva Siddhanta would be vitiated by I the 
reverse of the [above] undesirable corollary ( iti prasangaviparyayah). 

urthermore, since primal matter is prone to transformation, that 
s e, being partless, transforms in her entirety must entail that she be 
estroyed at the time of [the appearance of| her effects, just as is the case 
with milk [when transformed into] yoghurt and the like. For if she had 
parts, then, like pots and other such [effects], she would be dependent on 

some [further! ‘^'lse, and so could not be the ultimate (material) cause [of 
the universe]. 1 

And if it is maintained that she does not transform herself, then 
because she would not then be its material cause, the coming into being 

of the universe would not take place. Thus the view to be refuted [is 
given] with this pair of unwanted corollaries. 

To this the Siddhanta [responds]: 

[The Lord spoke:] 


She is insentient and that is why she has to be stimu¬ 
lated [to transform herself] for the sake of the good of 
souls. Of herself she does not transform and therefore 
[there must be an] Ananta who impels her to act. (17) 


Even at a time of total resorption she has to be directly impelled by the 
Lord into the various states that are [progressively] subtle, very subtle 
and so on, for the sake of souls, in accordance with the degree of 1.1 1 <■ 

manifestation of their kala and so forth (kaladivyaktyanugunena) . The 

meaning is that the first unwanted corollary [of the position of the Saiva 

Siddhanta] does not apply, since even then the aspects of the Lord such 

as that as Livara, are not resorbed. This is taught in the venerable 
Mrgenarar DU 


Even in sleep he remains awakening those deserving of awaken¬ 
ing, blocking those to be blocked, ripening the [retributive 
force of] the past actions of those who have [still to experience 
the fruits of] past actions, making the powers of primal matter 
ready to become manifest and seeing all things as they are. 

4:15 QU °“ e<i dS ° " " ' ol * ted P “ sas ' in * he 

























Chapter Four 


313 


[The corollary does not apply,| because it lias been taught that a total 
resorption ( mahapralayah ) is a resorption of the external effects [of primal 
matter], beginning witli [the principle of| limited power to act ( bahiranga - 
kaladikaryopasamharah), and of that same | resorption] Ananta and the 
rest [of the officiants of the material universe] are agents. 451 

Nor does the second unwanted corollary [of the position of the Saiva 
Siddhanta] apply. This is taught [with the following verse]: 

Just as the ocean changes on the surface alone from 
the force of the wind, so too primal matter, since she 
is unshakeable, is subject to change [only superficially] 
through [her evolutes,] the principles of limited power 
to act and so on. (18) 

For just as the ocean suffers transformation in the form of [the movement 
of | its waves [and does so] by the use of a limited number of its powers, not 
of all of them, so too prima! matter, since she is an aggregate of [many] 
powers, suffers transformation into her effects, starting with kata, using 
only certain of her powers, not all of them, because she is unshakeable in 
that form (tena rupena ) [i.e. in her totality]. 

Here the view of an opponent [is introduced]: 

Someone may point out that (cet) she cannot produce 
her effects if she is not shaken up. (19a) 

if her transformed powers too, like her untransformed ones, are not 
shaken, as these [transformed powers] exist inseparable [from the other 
group of untransformed powers], they [i.e. the supposedly transformed 

451 1 am not certain that this and the conclusion of the second kanda of Nare^vara- 

• * * 

panksaprakada (p. 153) can be made wholly consonant with what Ramakantha has 
to say about mahapralaya in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 3:30-2, where pralaya 
right up to $antyatTta is described, and ad Matarigavidyapada 25:53-66 (particularly 
62c-63, in which it is made explicit that Ananta attains the uttarnam padam). I 
assume that Ananta and the other vidyegvaras , who, though they officiate in the impure 
universe, actually belong to the pure path (see Kirana 8:136-7), retain their powers and 
superintend at a time of mahapralaya at least until all the effects oi maya have been 
withdrawn—thus primal matter indeed does not shut herself down, as Ramakantha had 
Garuda allege. Thereafter they may themselves be resorbed. What is unclear to me is 
how the Lord can continue to perform all the (unctions listed in Mrgendravidyapada 
4:15 in the sort of pralaya that reaches up to 6antyatita taught in Matangavidyapada 
3:32. 















314 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m 


powers| too cannot [really] be transformed, and therefore her effects could 

not be produced. So it must certainly be admitted that all |of maya. and 

all her powers] are shaken, and thus this logical ground |stated above| 
because she is unshakeable is not proven. 

The response of the |Saiva] Siddhanta to this is: 


[This] shaking of her [that is her] being impelled by 

Ananta ( tadiranam ) must take place (syat). [But 

when] this [or that particular] power [of hers] is 

stimulated, by that [stimulation] (tena’ [and not by 

the general shaking! it produces effects incessantly 1 ’■ 
(19bcd) 


1 :: 1 i T shaking that is the nature of stimulation affecting all her 

powers we do indeed accept. But (the shaking] that consists in [the pro¬ 
duction of a given] effect, is a particular shaking only of a certain particular 

power ( kasyageid eva stakteh). And thus (the above logical ground is] not 
unproven. This is taught [with the following verse]: 

She is taught to be unshakeable, because slie pervade s 

everything. She is the material cause of the universe 

The body of her effects in the universe (ad- 

hvani) are not, as primal matter [herself] is, pervasive 

[and yet] transcende it. [Since] she pervades all things 

from the principle of limited power to act downwards 

(bhavan kaladikan ), it is therefore taught that she is 
unshakeable. (20) 


Since she is all pervading, she has not been shaken in all her powers jii 
such a way that she has totally transformed herself] as her effects, and thui 
she comes to be called ‘unshakeable’. She is inferred to be the cause of tin 
universe, [and] she is in this form (tena rupena) unshakeable because sh< 

4 5 2 rn ■ ’ 

This awkward translation attempts to show one of the ways in which the vers< 
might be construed that might allow Ramakantha’s interpretation. The response o 
the Saiva Siddhanta may, however, have been intended to start not in 19b but in 20a 
Thus, ignoring Ramakantha’s interpretation, one might render 19a-20b thus: ‘Someont 
may point out that (cot) she cannot produce her effects if she is not shaken up, that 
she must be shaken, be impelled by Ananta (UdTranam). Once stimulated by him this 
power produces her effects incessantly. [This is true, but] as the [material] cause oi 
the |matenal] universe, she is |nevertheless| taught to be ‘unshakeable’, because she 
pervades everything.’ Other readings in padas b and c might also be accepted. 
















Chapter Four 


3 L 5 


remains pervading all entitities (bhavah)—so called because they come 
into >eing (bhavanti) —i.e. her effects, starting from [the principle of] lim¬ 
ited power to act. The meaning is that these arise inside her womb, in the 
manner of insects [coming into being from] ghee [while remaining inside 
it], not by the relation of effects and cause in which the effects entirely 


assume the essential nature of their cause (n a tu tadbhavabhavitvat i. 453 

It is only substances, such as clay, that are in ordinary life (Joke) seen 
to be causes of effects such as pots and the like, not their power. Why 

l .en is it taught that [her] ‘power... produces effects’?' 151 In response to 
this [the following verse] is taught: 


The power which produces her effects is called ‘ac¬ 
tion’ ( kriya ), and it is subtle. Although it is subtle [it 
transforms itself] into gross effects like the seed of a 
banyan tree. (21) 

Like the banyan seed in this world, her power too, though it is subtle, 
is established to be the producer of gross effects; it is known by the 
word parinati (‘transformative power’), and its nature is such that it 
[can never directly be known but] must always be inferred. It is not a 
substance, because substance exists even in a state where potentiality 
does not (agaktyavasthayam api). As they say, 


Power is that which effects |something]. it is not a substance, 
because they are not invariably concomitant. 455 


4 5 *31 

I his free translation of tadbhavabhavitvat conveys what I suppose Ramakantha 
intends with this phrase. The pot that arises from the clay leaving no clay remaining 
is an example of an effect and a cause in this relation. Other early Siddhantas (such 
as the Rauravasutrasahgraha and the Svayambhui^asutrasangraha) do not stress that 
the transformation of maya is partial, and Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha 2:7 uses the ter¬ 
minology that Ramakantha here rejects to speak of the relation between maya and her 
effects: tadbhavabhavino bhavah sarve mayatmakah paioh/ dvividham sadhayantlha 


purusartham paraparam. 

454 Kir an a 4:19cd. 

m 

4 5 5 

1 ’This quotation has not been traced. Its crude flatness suggests that Ramakantha 
might be quoting it because it is scripture; but Ramakantha seems to employ the 
introduction yad a huh exclusively for non-scriptural quotations (e.g. 1:14.18, 1:15.38. 
1:18.12, 16, 18, 1:22.2, 11, 1:23.26, 2:14.12, 3:6.4, 3:9.9, 29, 3:11.3, 3:14.2, 3:19.2, 3:23.15, 
39.) A possible exception is the quotation in 3:13.5 (prefaced by yad a huh both there 
and in the Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 3:20, p.69), which is identified in the $aia- 
ratnollekhim (ad 14) as belonging to the Mrgendra , but is not found therein. 














316 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Noi is it the [meie presence of assisting factors. I ecciuse we do not see 

that something witnout power iasaktasya) has an effect, even when the 

factors that assist that [power] are present (tatsahakariyoge 'pi) rims 

(the verse] ‘The power which produces her effects... ’ is well taught. Then 

how does this affect the matter under discussion? The response is as 
follows (ucyate): 


Therefore this (power of hers 456 ] (sa) should be un¬ 
derstood to be the cause of this gross [universe] in its 
entirety. (22ab) 

Thus since it has been taught that primal tatter, although she consists 

of many poweis, does not entirely transform herself, for this reason only 

some one particular power [of hers] (kacid eva saktih = sa) is [here] taught 

to be the cause of [all] gross effects in their entirety (samastyena), starting 

4 ^ ! lh< p i u i < t p le (> f | limited power to act ( kaladeh) , not some ! urtf ler 

power too. Thus the second undesirable corollary too is shown not to 
arise. 

[Is this power] directly the cause of the entire universe? The Lord 
teaches that it is not ( nety ucyate ): 


From this [cause are produced] the principles of lim¬ 
ited power to act (Jcaia), time, binding fate (sam- 
stha ~ niyatih ). From that which (h i) 457 [arises 

4 5 b 

It is probable that the author of the Kirana intended kti (and the demonstrative 
pronoun sa in this verse) to refer in this passage to maya herself, and not to a particular 

power of hers, but Ramakantha follows the latter interpretation and thus emphasizes 
that the universe is only a partial transformation of mava. 

The particle hi is often glossed with yasmat in the sense of because 1 . lelow 
Ramakantha distorts this common gloss, because he is at pains to bring the Kirana's 
statement into line with the doctrine of the mature Saiva Siddhanta, according to 
which only kaia, kala and niyati derive directly from maya, but vidya, raga, and pra- 
krti following Rauravasutrasahgraha 2:15) are held to develop from kala. The position 
of the Kir an a on this point is not made clear, lor the particle hi here is almost certain I v 
originally intended here to do no more than obviate a hiatus between a final and 
an initial vowel. Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha 2:9ab, in which the creation of these 
principles is described, is also unspecific about which derives from which. Even in 
Rauravasutiasahgiaha 2:15, which Ramakantha cpiotes below, the ablative kalatattvat 
might be interpreted to mean 'after [the generation of] the principle of kala' rather 
than from the principle of kala . The later Siddhantas known to the Kashmirians, viz. 
the Matahga and the Mrgenjdra , both clearly teach that the principles of vidya, raga 
and prakrti derive from kala (see, e.g., Mrgendravidyapada 10:9, 11, and 19 






























Chapter Four 


317 


impure] knowledge ( bodhini = aguddhavidya) there 
arises also attachment ( abhilasakrt — ragah) and [sec¬ 
ondary] matter (suksmam — prakrtih ). From that 
[last mentioned evolve] the strands of material exist¬ 
ence (gunah) and from those the principle of the intel¬ 
lect ( buddhih ); from the intellect the principle of the 
sense of self-identity (ahamkara); and from that the 
eleven faculties [of the mind, ears, skin, eyes, tongue, 
nose, mouth, hand, anus, reproductive organs, and 
feet] and the five subtle elements [viz. sound, touch, 
form, taste and smell]. 458 From these [subtle elements 
the five] gross elements [viz. ether, air, fire, water, and 
earth] come into being. The Lord creates the entire 
[universe and also that which is] below. 459 (22c-23) 

From this principal of primal matter arise directly [the principle ofj lim¬ 
ited power to act (kaia), time ( kalah = tutih ), and the above-mentioned 
binding fate (pragukta niyatir eva = samstha). This is taught in the 
venerable Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha : 

From this [primal matter arise] time and the principle^] which 
impel [viz, limited power to act and binding fate] (kaJaka/e) 1 u 

458 The mature post-scriptural doctrine is that these are faculties, not the organs 
themselves, but they are assigned the names of the organs where they are known to 
reside in concentration. See, e.g., Aghora^iva’s Tattvasahgrahatika ad verse 5 (Fil- 
liozat’s 6): nanu bhrulatotksepadlnam api kriyatvat karmendriyanantyaprasanga iti 
cet , tan na, tcsam tvagindriyavat sarvagarTra vyapaka t veil a bhyupagam a t. hastadcr eva 
bhruksepanadivyaparah. tattatsarnjna tu tattadind riyatfa k tin am tatra tatra vL4csadhi- 
sthanad ity avirodhah. 'But since twitching one’s eyebrow and such like (gestures] are 
also actions, there must result an infinitude of faculties of action? No, because they are 
held to pervade the entire body, like the faculty o r touch. Twitching of the eyebrow 
and such are activities of the faculty of the “hand” and the rest (of the list of five). 
Nevertheless (tu) they (viz. the five faculties] have these particular names because the 
powers of particular faculties reside particularly in those particular organs. Thus there 
is no contradiction [in our position].’ 

459 In the commentary below Ramakantha appears to interpret adhab to refer to the 
egg of Brahma and tags it on as an additional thing that the Lord creates. 

460 Svayam bh u vasil frasaii grail a 2:9a. The Svayam bh u vasu tr as an grab a appears here 
not to recognise the principle of nivati, just as the Sarvajnanottara and Rauravasufcra- 
s an grab a did not (see Rauravasutrasajigraha 10:98-101, quoted in footnote 1.1.9 on 
p. liv above, and the adhvaprakarana of the Sarvajnanottara, IFP T. 700, pp. 41-55); 










318 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


because in that passage (tatra binding fate too is included by the word 
kala. bodhanl [means] the above-taught [principle of limited] knowledge. 
With the word hi is expressed that abhilasakrt, [by which is meant] the 
above-taught [principle of] raga, arose from the same cause as this [know¬ 
ledge! arose hlti yasmat karanad utpanna tasmad eva . And secondary 
matter, which was taught above as the cause of the gun as also arose 

A 

from the same. By indicating |with the word hi\ another beginning (pra- 
kramantaranirdesa t) 461 [the Lord indicates that knowledge, binding fate 
and matter do] not [develop directly] from primal matter, but from a 
starting point that is an effect [of primal matter] ( karyaprakramat ), [i.e. 
from the principle of limited power to act which has been taught above. 
This is taught in the venerable Raurava: 462 

From the principle of limited power to act arose the two prin¬ 
ciples of passion and [impure] knowledge and [also] the un¬ 
manifest. 


From the principle of [secondary] matter (pradhanat) which is indic¬ 
ated by the word suksma (suksma-padopattat tattvat, pradhanat = atah) 
[arise] the three gunas of sattva, |rajas] and (tamas]. From the gunas 
(gunebhyali = tebliyah) [arises] the buddhi. The rest of the priniciples 
and other entities ( tattvadivastunah ), starting from buddhi, that are well 
known from ordinary |worldly] sciences are [merely] repeated here, so hat. 


one understand the particular ways [in which they 

J Q 

parigrahartham). This has been shown before" 
Sankhvas: 464 


exist] ( prakaravigesa - 
and is taught by the 


but in its fourth chapter, which gives the six initiator^ paths (tattva, patia, vaxna, 
bluj van a, mantra, kala ), niyati is mentioned ( S vayam bh u vasu trasahgrah a 4:27-28b, p. 9 
of the Mysore edition): mayadhah kalatattvan tu samsthitam tat padadvaye/ niyatis 
cap a re nyasmin (?) Icala vidya tat ah par ah calvary c fan j tatvani \ r esOtanj prthak 
prthak\ and accordingly Sadyojyotih has sought to read it in here see the portion of his 
commentary cited in the apparatus) and Ramakantha has followed his interpretation. 

461 1 assume that what Ramakantha means is that by the use of the word hi in the 
sense of yasmat [upacianajicaranat the Jvirana indicates that it is listing afresh sequence 
of effects which proceeds not from may a but from kala . The word prakrama might also 

be rendered with ‘level’ or ‘sequence’. 

462 Ra u ra vas u t rasahgrah a 2:15 abc. 

463 Presumably Ramakantha refers to 1:17 and his commentary thereon (in particular 
1:17.29-31), in which mention is made of some of the lower effects and it is explained 
that they are merely listed because they are well-known elsewhere. 

464 Sari khyakarika 22. 



















Chapter Four 


319 


From matter 


arises 


the buddhi , from that ahamkara, from 


that the group of sixteen, and from the five [subtle elements] 
in that group o^' sixteen [arise| the five gross elements. 


With the word ‘all’ is meant [the universe] comprising bodies, latent dis¬ 
positions, and worlds (bhutabhavabhuvanatmakam). And he also created 
what is below, (namely] the egg of Brahma that is composed of the gross 
elements (silmJabiiLhajnayam brahmandam ). 

So in this way 


The Lord, the ruler [Ananta], equipped of the powers 

0 __ 

of Siva, created the whole body of effects that are 
[composed] of primal matter in which the [relatively] 
pure and impure are mixed. (24) 

The Lord Ananta (anantegah — sah) created all this [material universe] 
out of primal, matter [but not all developed directly from primal matter; 
some developed indirectly] through intermediary stages (paramparyena). 
This [universe] is at every level (pratisthanam) ‘mixed’ with pure and 
impure officiants. The meaning is that these too are created by Ananta 
(tenaiva). This is taught in the venerable Haurava: 465 

There are overlords of different kinds, [some] beyond stain [of 
impurities] and [others] stained [by impurities]. In each world 
gods are placed by His command. 

He created it [in such a way that it is] also by its very nature mixed, both 
pure and impure. This the Sarikhyas [also] teach: 466 

Creation, from Brahma down to clumps of grass, is predomin¬ 
antly composed of sattva at the top and predominantly com¬ 
posed of tamas at its root. In the middle it is predominantly 
composed of rajas. 

On this point [the Lord introduces] an opponent’s view: 

[The entire universe is] born of the [one] source, and 
if [it is therefore of] one [nature], then how can it 

4 JT 

J Rauravasutrasangraha 2:20, 

4 66 Sahkhyakarika 54. 

















320 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

t* * 


become split because of [our] varying conceptions? 16 ' 
(25ab) 


! Tie source is primal matter, and since the universe is the same in as 


much as it is all born from that 




source 

468 


5 


it should all be of one kind 


f[each] body pure, [each] world pure 4bb Tor pure [soulsjf—that is what is 
meant. Some [of the universe], however, is impure or mixed, for impure 
souls. How can he have created it thus of two kinds, because that must 
be impossible? As they say, 


A material cause cannot give rise to something opposite to 
itself in nature. 469 


If you say that from one thing two things are divided in as much as 
they are modes of that (first thing], just as from rice cooked rice and rice 
cakes [arise], and so difference between the two different [effects] is pos¬ 
sible (nanayor virodhasambhavah) , this is wrong. This he states with the 
expression ‘because of [our] varying conceptions 1 , for [only] when there 
are varying conceptions do cooked rice and [rice cakes] arise from rice as 
two modes (odanadeh. .. dvitayatvam), [these two] being [merely] forms 
of that [rice] ( tatprakarataya). But when something has plurality [that 
has arisen] out of one thing even when there is no [suchj variety of con¬ 
ceptions, then that (nasau) is not split into [mere] forms of itself (tatpra¬ 
karataya), just as a pot does not [transform itself] as the absence of itself 
(tadabhavataya). And [according to you] there is plurality [here] without 
there being [such] a variety of conceptions; [that is to say] from what 
has been taught to be impure [arise] pure [effects] and from what is pure 
arise] impure [effects]. And so how can this [universe] too [be said to 
be] split into [mere] modes of that [primal matter]? The answer is that 
it cannot (naiveti), because here there is no [such] difference of [mere 
mode (prakarabhedabhavat) , but a difference of substance (vastubheda 


A i? |P T 

'' This is a tough half-verse, which may already have been corrupt by Ramakantha's 
time. In Hindu Scriptures (1996:370) I read yonijUm buddhibhedamg c a (assuming an 
ai£a contracted genitive plural such as that recorded on p. lxvii) and interpreted as 
follows (1996:357): 'and [Ananta created] the various states of mind of all creatures 
born of wombs. If [all| that is one ji.e. from a single source], how can it be o two kinds 
[pure and impure]?’ 

A f* Q 

Guessing at a haplographical omission: sarTram $uddham <C£uddham^> va 
bhuvanarn. The crux marks are retained, because the text remains unsatisfactory. 

169 Pram an a vart tika, pratyaksaparicch eda 263c. 
































Chapter Four 


321 


eva) such as that between a pot and the absence of a pot. Therefore the 
objection prasnah ) that k a material cause cannot give rise to something 
opposite to itself in nature' is just, lint the [reply of the] Saiva Siddhanta 
(is as follows]: 

[The answer is that] in cases [such as that] of fireflies 
[that emit light] and other such [insects which do not] 
we experience one phenomenon and its opposite (tad 
viruddham ca) 4/0 where both are effects of the same 
cause. (25cd) 


This [objection] is invalid, because jthe logical ground is] unproven, for 
we do not argue that it is because of a difference of conceptions that fa 
particular form is a particular form that is the cause of different particular 
formsf. 471 [We hold] rather that it is something that [innately] possesses 
[in potential] those particular forms (prakarina eva ) [that is the cause 
of them], because this [kind of relation of cause and effect] is directly 
experienced, dor fireflies, mosquitoes, flies and the like, even though 
t here are different perceptions of them as lumious and non-luminous (pra- 
kasaprakasarupena), there is no difference in one’s perception of them as 
all born of the one cause [of all insects, viz. that] of warm moisture, and 
therefore they are seen as [all| being subdivisions of that [single genus]. 
So too here, pure and impure [effects] arise and, even though there are 
different perceptions of them as knowledge and ignorance, [nevertheless] 
because there is no difference in one’s perception of them as [all] being 
born of the [one] source, it is correct that [the source] divides (dvidha- 
bhavo yuktah) into two forms of herself Thus, as in the case of fireflies, 
mosquitoes, flies and other such [insects], we directly experience that, 
even though the [various] forms [that arise from it] may conflict with one 
another (parasparapariharavirodhe 'pi), they can result from one material 


4 7 (3 

It is not clear from the commentary exactly how Ramakantha construed this, if 
indeed this is how he read the text. The na viruddhyate in 4:25.18 suggests that he 
might have read a negative: drstam khadyotakady; etad viruddham na. ekahctukam. 
‘Such fireflies and other [non-luminous insects] are a fact of experience. This is not to 
be contradicted. They are born of one cause.’ 

471 

The text is most uncertain here and probably corrupt. Perhaps he meant to imply 
that the example given (of rice, variously processed, dividing into forms of itself ) is an 
example of a particular prakara ol may a which, only because of conceptions about it, 
appears as various praicaras. 













322 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• * # 


cause, who possesses [in potential] these forms ( ckaprakaryupadanahctu - 
tvain ), and this [direct experience] cannot be gainsaid (na virudhyate). 
Thus there is no fault [in our position]. And so, to explain (tatha hi): 


Thus this [universe) is of varied composition and has 
[relatively] pure and impure parts. You must know 
that it arises from the powers of the [primal] cause; 
it is the effect born of the cause that is the seed. 412 
(26a—d) 


Thus, though it is caused by powers of the source that is the one 
seed, it is to be understood to be of various forms (bhiimaprakara- 
taya = bhinnasamsthanam) , existing in countless pure and impure parts 
(suddhasuddhamitapaksasthani), not divided (into totally opposed and 
mutually exclusive effects] as a pot and the absence of a pot. 

Now the subject is concluded: 

Thus these effects of that [primal matter], which [to¬ 
gether form the subtle body and as such] take resid¬ 
ence in [the various gross] bodies [into which the soul 
transmigrates], have been explained. 4 1 (26ef) 

These effects of primal matter starting with that of limited power to 
act, which, as the subtle body, take residence in this gross body (a smin 
sthulasarlre ~ vigrah e), has been taught thus, i.e. to be the subtle body 
(suksmadehataya — eva m), by the Lord. He explains how (katham ity 
ucyate ): 


Although this body of effects consisting of primal mat¬ 
ter (asitatmakam) is [full of] mutually contradictory 

a y o t . ( 

'■'Ramakantha takes all of 26cd to refer to the universe arising from primal matter, 
but it is possible that with 26d a reference is intended to mala as the reason for souls’ 
involvement in the eifects of matter, since maia was spoken of in Kirana 3:3-4 as a 
seed. 

A *7 3 t 

Ramakantha interprets the text to speak of the subtle transmigratory body here, 
and this suits the image of the chariot that follows; but it is not clear whether this is 
also what the redactor of the Kirana intended. The SardhafcrisatikaJottara (17:4c-5b) 
states unmistakably that it holds the subtle body to be composed of buddhi, ahainkara^ 
manas } and the five tanmatras, and Ramakantha has to work hard in his much quoted 
commentary on this passage to interpret the text to mean that the subtle body is 
composed of mahamaya and of all the impure principles from primal matter down to 
that of earth. 


m 

















Chapter Four 


323 


[effects], nevertheless, [since its contradictory parts 
are] totally integrated in one entity, it clearly accom¬ 
plishes the various requirements of the soul, 74 just as 
the various [disparate] parts of a man’s chariot [ac¬ 
complish what he requires]. (27-28b) 

Although they are impure and their natures mutually contradictory like 
the existence and non-existence of a pot (parasparapariharasvabhavataya 
ghatatadabhavadivat = viruddham ), nevertheless these effects of primal 
matter starting with that of limited power to act, when grafted together 
in one entity, the subtle body, clearly accomplish the aims of the soul that 
we perceive through the above-taught 470 empowering of consciousness [— 
accomplish them) by means of the various activities of the principle of 
limited power to act and of the other) effectjs. And thus the conceit is 
used (sambhavyate) that they are like the parts of a chariot when joined 
together onto the chariot. 


Thus Ananta created this means of bondage to a 
[gross] body ( dehanibandhanam ). (28cd) 


Since this is thus a means of accomplishing the soul’s aims, therefore 
the Lord Ananta created this [subtle body] whose existence is a means 
of bondage [to a gross body] (dehe nibandhanam sthitir yasya tad deh a- 
nibandhanam), since it accomplishes the soul's aims because it takes res¬ 
idence in gross bodies [in which consumption of karman is possible], [He 
does] not [do so] for any other reason (nanyatha). 

What is this aim of the soul [that it accomplishes] and how is it the 
means of bondage [to a gross body]? In response to this [the following 


verse 


is taught: 


Without a [gross] body release is not possible, [nor is] 
experience, [which is] the instructor in knowledge and 
action. 476 (29ab) 

J *-r A 

As we have seen above (1: lGff.), the various constituents of the subtle body endow 
a soul with limited faculties of knowledge and action whereby he can use up the fruits 
of accumulated past action and work towards liberation. It is through the subtle body 
that the soul is linked to the various gross bodies in which that is possible. 
i,5 Kirana l:16ff. 

m 

1 ’Perhaps more likely than this interpretation of Ramakantha’s is the following: 
Without a [gross] body there can be no liberation, [because there can be no] con- 














324 


Ramakantha s Oommentary on the Kiranatantra 


hen |t,he verse enumerates] liberation and experience, which is that which 
instructs (upadesta =guruh) [the soul] in knowledge and action, for know¬ 
ledge and action are taught by experience, since they do not arise (na) 
when there is no experience, as in the condition ol the pralayakevalin and 
such; thus this aim of man is two-fold. And this is not possible without a 
|gi n.-'sl body, for liberation is not possible wit hout maturation of impm n . 
And since this [impurity] cannot ripen all by itself {kevalasya ca), because 
of the principle that that which is unmixed cannot undergo transforma¬ 
tion, therefore they necessarily depend on a body, which is a necessary 
assisting factor in the maturation of that [impurity]. This is what is 
taught [here]. Experience too [is impossible without a body|. Since we do 
not perceive the activity of the means of experience without their having 
a locus, their dependence on a body is well-established. Thus there is no 

contradiction [in our position]. It is not just Ananta who is the creator 
in this system (atra), for 

This Siva also (ca) does, because He acts entirely as 
He wishes, since He is omnipotent. He is at peace, 

[and] bestows grace on all. Through His power [the 
suppliant may attain] all desires. (29c—f) 

The word ‘and’ here is not in its usual position ( bhinnakramah ) [for ex¬ 
pressing what is intended]; it conveys here that the supreme Lord also 
creates this [universe], not just the Lord Ananta. The meaning is that 

both are agents here, >ecause of their relationship of employer and cm- 
ployed. 

Thus ends the fourth chapter in the commentary on the glorious Kirana 
composed by Bhatta Ramakantha, the son of Bhatta Narayanakantha 



sumption [of the fruits of past actions], [no realisation of the 
action, and no teacher (guruh). r 


powers of] knowledge and 



















CHAPTER FIVE 


On the Descent of Power 4 ' 7 

Now [there follows] a further chapter introduced by a question in order 
to investigate a different aspect of the topic of bondage. 

[Garuda spoke:] 

Initiation should take place after a descent of Siva’s 
power; [but there can be] no descent, because [Siva’s 
power is] all-pervasive, (lab) 

In this chapter (atra) the connections pertaining to the sutra , the topic 
and the section of the book are to be understood to be the same as 
before. And that relating to the statement ( vakyatmakas tu) is with 
various statements, such as 'When ... because of an intense descent of 
power ... [the soul] is initiated by his guru’. 478 That pertaining to the 
patala is with the passage beginning 'He is at peace, [and] bestows grace 
on all ... ,479 And this is the meaning of the question here: what was 
taught with the words 'When .. .because of an intense descent of power 
,,. [the soul] is initiated by his guru’ is wrong, because a descent (patah) is 
invariably concomitant with [the falling object’s] not being all-pervading, 
[and this is] proved by [the falling of] such tilings as water pots and 
.Jujube fruits. 480 Being all-pervading is the reverse. Therefore, because 
we see [that it has] a property contradicting the property [of not being 
all-pervading] that must pervade it (vyapakaviruddhopalabdhya 481 ), it is 

The title gaktipatapatala is given to this chapter in E D and (see footnote 1 on 
p. 161 above). 

478 Kirana 1:2 lab. 

479 Kirana 4:29c. 

* 

480 Zizyphus Jujuba Lam. (Thus Meulenbeld, 1974:580.) 

481 For this expression, cf., e.g., Nyayabindu 2:39. 





326 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


proved that Siva's power, lacking [the property of| not being all-pervading, 
since it has [the opposite property of] being all-pervading, cannot ‘fall’. 
And this logical ground is not unproved, since it was asserted above that 
this power is all-pervading with [the words]: 482 

And that awakening power is taught to be all-pervasive. 


Nor can it be said that the logical ground is rendered inconclusive by 
[adducing the case of] primal matter. This is taught [with the following]: 

Since she is essentially and inseparably conjoined with 
Siva, she must at all times be in the bound soul, (led) 

It has been taught 483 that primal matter is the insentient power that is 


lva s 


accomplice ( parigrahavartinl gaktih) and so it would be fair to 
say that she ‘falls’ upon souls after a period of resorption ( pralayottara - 
kalam ) in the sequence [in which the development] of her effects [takes 
place], since it is her nature to transform herself. But this |power], since 
she is essentially and inseparably conjoined to the supreme Lord and is 
therefore of the nature of sentience, cannot be subject to transformation. 
This [principle] was taught |above with]: 

Transformation [is possible] o the insentient. It is not possible 
of the sentient. 484 


And so she must at all times be situated in the soul as a bestower of 
divine grace, and thus [the logical ground is] not [rendered inconclusive 
[by adducing the case of primal matter], since the logical ground has here 
been further differentiated by [the addition oi the provision of| ‘being 
essentially and inseparably conjoined with Siva’. This is what is meant 

[with the above]. 

Now if you say that her very being there (saiva sthitih) is a ‘falling’—if 
that is the case, [then] 

482 Kirana 4:lcd. 

* 

483 1 find no passage earlier in the tantra or the commentary in which an expression 
equivalent to parigrahavartinl is used of primal matter, but the poim is clear from 
second half of chapter 4 (4:15ff). That maya is insentient, however, has been frequently 

stated, e.g. in 4:1 7. 

484 Kirana 2:26ab. 

m 






























Chapter Five 


327 


[Since we teach that Siva’s] power has always been [in 
all souls], should not existence have been extirpated? 

(2ab) 

If she has been beginninglessly there, existing in all souls, then all souls 
should have been beginninglessly released through initiation, and thus the 
undesirable corrollary must follow that there would be no transmigration. 
And even if we admit the above-mentioned ‘fall 1 o power, then, he says, 

Or if it is [only at a particular] time [that she falls], 
what other (ca) [time] is there [other than the above- 
taught time of malaparipaJca]? 485 If it is [just] the time 
taught above 186 [of malaparipaka that causes the fall 
of power], then what need is there of Siva? (2cd) 

The word 'or' (va) is [there] to indicate the acceptance of the other view. 
Or [if we accept that she falls], the time [at which she does so] has been 
taught to be that of the maturation of impurity, as has been taught above 
with 


When [good and bad] actions have become equal ... through 
the power of the ripening of mala ... 487 


With the word 'and 1 (ca) [is asked:] 'what other time is taught [to be a 
time at which she falls]?’ What is meant is: Ts it that same time that was 
taught above alone that is the time of the fall of power, or [is there] another 


485 Or ‘Or [if we accept that she falls], that time [i.e. when impurity is ripe] and what 
other is taught [to be the time when she falls]?’ Ramakantha distorts the verse so 
as to emphasize his position that there are two different times at which two different 
sorts of descent of power are possible: at the time of the karmasamya that blocks a 
soul s experience a descent takes place, but one that is not necessarily salvific, and 
at that of maturation of innate impurity a salvific descent of power takes place. The 
author of the Kirana perhaps intended ‘And alternatively [if we accept that there is a 
fall,| (va) what is this time that has been spoken of? If it is the time [of karmasamya 
that is the essential prerequisite of grace], what need is there of Siva?’ or perhaps ‘Or 
if it is time [i.e. if the ‘fall’ of Siva’s power is just that at some particular point in 
time (contrasting witli sarvada) it becomes connected with a soul—or its connection 
becomes immanent rather than latent—], then what [time] is that? If it is the time 
taught above [of karmasamya], then what use is there of Siva?’ 

486 Kirana 1:20. 

p 

J Q 1 ? 

1 Kirana l:20cd. See footnotes to the translation ad loc. for a discussion of Rama- 
* 

kantha’s distortion of this section. 






328 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * * * 


one?’ One cannot interpret that because of [Garuda’s] ignorance [about 
that above-taught time his question is] about that [above-taught time of 
malaparipaka ] alone, because ignorance about it is impossible, since t 
was explained above. 488 [A further objection is raised:] as for what was 
asserted above about [a certain] time being the cause [nimittam) for a 
descent of power and the descent [being the cause] of initiation, that too 
must be wrong, because if time is held to be the cause of a descent of 
power, then why not allow that it is [also directly] the cause of initiation, 
[in which case] what is the point of postulating Siva in this system as the 
cause, by means of a descent of His power, of liberation? Let Him be 
the instigating agent [simply] in [the matter of enabling the] experience 
[of the fruits of souls’ past actions], since this was set forth in the section 
beginning ‘[The universe is] gross, diverse, [and therefore] an effect ... ’ 489 
This is the meaning of [Garuda’s] objection (prasnarthah). This group of 
objections He refutes in order: 

[The Lord spoke:] 


Words are used figuratively here: just as the soul is 
said to move, though all-pervasive, and is said to be 
perishable, though it is eternal, just as a ‘cutting’ of 
bonds is spoken of, just as Lord Siva is said to be 
‘King of mantras’, so too [here] a descent of power is 
spoken of in a secondary sense. 490 (3-4) 

Among these [objections], the assertion that ( .. . iti) ‘a fall is impossible, 
since [Siva’s] power is all-pervading’ is simply proving what is already es¬ 
tablished. For this very reason, since the literal sense is impossible because 
it is contradicted by the proof that you mentioned, we too hold that pas¬ 
sages of scripture that refer to the ‘falling’ of power express their meaning 

488 Ramakantha is justifying his unidiomatic (but not unusual in commentarial liter¬ 
ature) interpretation of ca to refer to some further unmentioned thing, by explaining 
that Garuda cannot simply be asking to have the same time explained again. 

489 Kirana 3:12a. 

* 

490The reading bhaktah proktah tfivagame in 5:4d has been assumed to be a second¬ 
ary version composed to obviate the awkwardness of N’s sopacaratah , which is either a 
hyper-adverbialization (using both the prefix sa- and the suffix tab) or a double sandhi 
of the masculine pronoun with upacaratah (cf. Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha 2:3d socy - 
ate). The Nepalese version is supported by TryambakaSambhu, by the quotation of the 
half-verse in the SataratnollekhinT ad 51-2, p. 68, and in the unrecognised quotation in 
the ^aivagamaparibhasamanjarr (2:48c-49b), which supports also the Nepalese reading 
of 5:3cd. 












Chapter Five 


329 


figuratively, just as the soul, although innately eternal and all-pervading 
(nityavyapakadharmayuktah ), is said to move and to be perishable by 
figurative usage [of the word soul] referring to the soul's body; just as the 
inactivity of the bonds upon a soul who has been initiated, [because it is] 
like a cutting [of the bonds], is spoken of as a ‘cutting 1 , but it is not really 
a splitting in two; just as, because he shines (virajate) with his mantras, 
the Lord, although he is the supreme God, is spoken of metaphorically as 
the King of mantras'. Thus there is no contradiction [in our position]. 
Next He now states the reason for this figurative sense in the use of 
the word ‘fair applied, first of all (tavat), to Siva's Varna power, 491 which 

J Q 1 _ 

Moksakarika 32c-33b and Ramakantha’s commentary thereon explain three 
aspects of the Lord s power of action: varna jyestha raudri ca svato ’bhinnapi sa 
t rid ha rodhavislesaharanair vibhinna karmabhih kriya 

a tha sthitisamraksan abha valaksan an am vyaparanam samsararodhaphalatvad rodho 

* * * * t m ■ v I • • • J. 

vamavyaparah, adanarupah samharo jyesthayah, pagaharanatmako ’nugraho 
raudryah—ity ctaih karmabhir a bhinnapi s vat ah kriyagaktir vibhinna ka thy ate, 
na paramarthatah. 

Although undivided in herself, the power of action is threefold as Varna, 
Jyestha, and Raudri, differentiated according to her functions of blocking, 
separating, and taking. 

Now among the functions of creating (sthi£i°), protecting, and occluding ( bhava° ) [cf. 
Rauravasutrasarigraha 1:15 for this terminology], the function of Varna is to block, since 
her effect is to block worldly existence [or ‘to block by means of worldly existence’?]; 
the function of Jyestha. is to resorb, that is to draw [to herself]; that of Raudri is salvific 
grace, which consists in the taking away of the bonds. Although undivided in herself, 
tiie power of action is said to be differentiated because of these actions; [she is] not in 
truth [so divided.]’ 

Saiddhantika sources are not unanimous about the functions of these powers, and it 
is not clear to me what Ramakantha understands by Varna here and by Jyestha in his 

* ■ v t/ mJ ■ * 

introduction to 5:6c-8b below. Compare the following not entirely clear) account from 
chapter 2 of the Parakhya , in which each power is allocated to a Rudra (M Y f. 28^ 10-12 ^ 
collated against its quotation on p. 60 of the £ivapujastavavyakhya [=SPV]): 

sarvain vamaty ad hah gaktya yaya sargam (M Y ; savyam vamaty udgirati 
yaya vargam SPV) t rid ha sthitam 

sasmin vama samuddista vamadevasama^rita (M r ; °samafoaya SPV) 

varno va yah samarambho (SPV; samsarambho M r ) vfparltah sva- 
dharmatah (M y ; vipantas tv asammatam SPV; viparfta svasani¬ 
mat a in SPV , viparita svayam in at am SPV ! ) 

pravrttim kurute pumsam sa vama vainakarmaga 

jyestho (conj.; jyestha M y SPV) mukhyah (M v ; mukhya 0 SPV) 
kriyarambho yo nara(M r ; naro SPV)r£hah parah sada 

sa pumsam (M Y ; pumso S3 ) jyesthaya 6aktya sa gaktir jyesthasamgata 
(M y ; ya sa ca jyesthasahgata SPV) 






330 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


is 


in fact,I beginninglessly there: 


Just as the sudden falling of a thing instils fear, so too 
the descent of power is said to instil fear of worldly 
existence. [Just as] one gets out of the way of that 

f dh arm adharm asam ara m bh o jyestho na jyesthacodika ' M y ; jyestha- 
jvesthakaco(Utah SPV) 

nanyatha jyesthahhavo /jsya pumso jyesthaphala^rayah f (M v ; anyatha 
jyesth a bh a vehhyo purnsam jyesthagunagrayah SPV) 

rukchabdavacako vyadhir nrnam ajhanalaksanah 

ya tarn dravayitum si la (M v ; sakta SPV; sa 6akti (SPV; fakti M y ) rudra- 
v&rtinl 

raudrena karinana p unis a in £as t rasrkkann am o dita (M v ; tfastradrk- 
karmamohita SPV) 

sa raudrf rudrakarmottha rudra$rayanisamgini 

Here (and in Matahgavidyapada 5:52—5 Varna is associated with control over impure 
creation, not, as Ramakantha appears to require, with creating :‘ear of worldly existence. 
It is possible that Ramakantha is using the terms of this group of powers without think¬ 
ing of functions to which they may elsewhere be assigned, but merely as successively 
stronger draughts of Siva’s power: thus here, in the context of an individual’s progress 
to liberation, Varna is correlated with distaste for worldly existence, fyestha with the 
^aJctipata that must precede initiation, and RaudrT (not mentioned here with ultimate 
liberation. In the South Indian Pauskara 8:9 we see them apparently correlated with 
the awakening of KundalinI: vama jycstha tatha raiidn sup tan a gen d rasan n i bh aj varna 
vai dandavaj jycstha raudn srhgahgavat sthita. (Umapati glosses grhgahgavat with 
^rhgasvarupavat—the comparison of Jyestha with a stick may have nothing to do with 
the image of Kir an a 5:6c-7 but be meant to suggest KundalinI rising straight up the 
susurnna. It is possible that the three powers are simply associated with different 
things at different levels: thus at the level of individuals Varna may be held responsible 
for rodha and for instilling fear of worldly existence, while on a higher level she may 
be connected with the creation of the universe. This might account for Ramakantha’s 
mentioning their cosmic functions in the above-quoted passage from the Moksakarika - 
vrtti before speaking of their effects on the soul. Their association with the first three 
of the pahcakrtya we find also in Ksemaraja’s quotation of the Anandabhairava in 
the Svacchandatantroddyota ad 10:1144-6: vam ay a visrjet sarvam jyesthaya palayet 
punah/ ran dry a lokopasamharam kurute svecchava prabhuh. From Brunner’s discus¬ 
sion of these powers (1977:117, 119) it emerges that in the context of initiation they 
are commonly associated with yet another triad: ‘Un 61oka de provenance inconnue est 
cit6 dans la plupart des manuels pour d^finir leurs fonctions respectives au moment de 
la dlksa: “Pour les actes de jonction (yoga), de disjonction (viyoga) et d elevation (ou 
d’extraction—^uddhara), les Puissances de Siva appe)6es Vama, Jyestha et RaudrT sont 
respectivement souveraines.” ’ The verse in question is quoted by Nirmalamani in his 
commentary on the Kriyakramadyotika , p. 323: vama jyestha ca raudrl ca iaktayas tu 
£i vasya hij yoge viyoge uddhare vih any ante na kutracit. 























































Chapter Fi ve 


331 


(falling object] 192 (tasmad anyatra yaty eva), so too 
the soul [goes] towards a teacher (deSikam) [in order 
to receive initiation]. 493 (5—6b) 


For just as the falling of stones and such ’ike [physical objects] is fright¬ 
ening to men, so too being joined to the supreme Lord’s power [Varna], 
although jit is a] beginningless [state], is said to be, as it were, a fall, be¬ 
cause it instills fear of worldly existence. [Next] He states the reason for 
the figurative usage of the above-mentioned word £ falh in connection with 
the power Jyestha too, since that [power] must exist before initiation. 194 


Just as a teacher awakens pupils that have fallen 
asleep in front of him with a stick, so too Siva awakens 
those asleep in the slumber of delusion with His 
power. When [a soul attains] realisation of his own 
nature, tlien it is said that [Siva’s power has] fallen. 
Therefore it is a fall of power. The [expression] ‘fall’ 
[is used because it] expresses the signs [characteristic 
of a fall]. 49 (6c—8b) 


r Because of that fear instilled by a falling object] one goes elsewhere; so too ... ’ 
493 This half-verse (Cab) is omitted by M Y and not commented upon by Rainakantha. 
Furthermore the choice of readings may seem arbitrary and the translation tendentious; 
nevertheless I believe that this is what is intended, for compare Svayambhuvasutrasah- 
graha 1:17-18: tan inpat at ksaraty asya maiam sam sara ka ran am / kslne tasmin yiyasa 
syat param nihSreyasam prati // sa dcsikam anuprapya diksavichinnabandhanah/ pra- 
yati givasayujyam nirmalo niranuplavah. ‘Because of the descent of that [power of Siva 
the soul's (asya) mala, which is the cause of rebirth, is worn away. When that [maiaj 
is worn away, there is a desire to go to the supreme state, than which there is nothing 
higher. The soul (sa) reaches his teacher ( deSikam) and, his bonds cut through by 
initiation, he becomes equal to Siva, free from impurity, free from being submerged 
again [in the ocean of samsara].' {The translation of the last word is problematic, for 
it is not attested in this sense. Apte’s only meaning for anuplava is ‘ja] follower, ser¬ 
vant’. Filliozat, following Sadyojyotih, renders it ‘sans approche en chaine [des objetsj' 
(‘without trailing behind [objects]’ in liis English translation). It seems not unlikely 
that the intended sense was that of nirupapiavah, which a number of manuscripts have 
incorporated.) 

494 See footnote 491 on p.329 above. 

95 8ab (from Therefore it is a fall ...’) is ignored in Rarnakantha’s interpretation 
and the half-verse is omitted in M Y . It is retained here, because some version of it 
is transmitted in both the Nepalese and South Indian groups; but the interpretation 
offered is far from certain, and it is possible that it formed no part of Ramakantha’s 
text. 








332 


Rannikiintha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• • t/ * 


Just as a teacher awakens with his stick only pupils, i.e. those fitted for 
instruction, not the ineducable, even though there may be no difference 
in their [all] being situated in front of him, so too, when impurity \malah 
— mohah) becomes incapable of performing its function (karyam praty 
asamarthyam = nidra) —that is to say when there is a certain ripen¬ 
ing [of impurityj the supreme Lord awakens with that same power that 
was [already| in them before ( tayaiva purvavyavasthitaya gaktya) those 
asleep who are without the knowledge that is a means of destroying it 
(tannivrttyupayasamvidvikalah 49 ®). Thus when this same [power] has, in 
accordance with [a soul's] fitness because of the ripening of his impurity, 
generated that particular knowledge that is a means of destroying that 
impurity], in a sequence starting with distaste for worldly existence, then 
it is said, figuratively, that Jyestha, the cause of this effect, has 'fallen' as 

497 

power. 

This has been taught [above with) 'After the blocking of the power 
[of mala] he [viz. the soul) is made without desire for existence.’ 498 And 
in the venerable Matanga: ‘His impurity shaken off for ever, he becomes 
dispassionate towards rebirth in this world.’ 499 And also in the venerable 
S vayarn bh u va : 500 


From the fall of that [power], his impurity, the cause of rebirth 
in this world, wastes away. When this [maia] is worn away, 
there is a desire to go to the supreme state, than which there 
is nothing higher. 


And therefore the objection |Since we teach that Siva's] power has always 
been [in all souls], should not existence have been extirpated?’ 501 does not 
damage [our position], (adusanam eva since, even though this [power] 
is at all times situated [in all souls], it brings about the extirpation of 
worldly existence only then (tadaiva), in accordance with the ripeness of 

A n c I-™ 

This conjecture is supported by the parallel tannivrttyupayasamvidrahitan in the 
derivative passage of commentary on £ataratnasangraha 59 quoted in the apparatus. 
The passage adopts also Ramakantha's ingenious interpretation of mohanidra to refer 
to malaparipaka and Ramakantha’s identification of the power involved as Jyestha. 

497 Or, reading jyes th a£ak tit vena karyahetuh paiita ity..., \ .. then it is said, figurat¬ 
ively, that the cause of this effect has “fallen” as the power Jyestha’. 

498 Kirana 2:29cd. 

p 

499 Matahgavidyapada 10:25cd. 

5100 S vayam bh u va su t rasahgrah a 1:17. 

501 Kirana 5:2ab. 




































Chapter Five 


333 


impurity in the soul (fcaira), not at any other time and for any other [soul] 
(anyatra). 502 

[Next] the third objection too is refuted: 


The time of the descent of this [power] is also [that 
of] the equal balance of [simultaneously maturing] ac¬ 
tions. 503 (8cd) 


In response to the question 'Or | ... at] that time and [at] what other is 
[she] taught [to fall]?’, 504 the reply is '[at the time of[ the equality of past 


actions also (ca).’ With the word 'and’ 
place of the word 'and’ 505 — 


or with the word tu standing in 


—is included also [the time of] the ripening of 
impurity. And with the particle eva is expressed that there is no third time 
according to the Saiva Siddhanta (atra). [It does] not [express that] the 
time stated above [—i.e. that of the ripeness of impurity—does not exist], 
because [the word eva] serves to emphasize (- avadharanatvat ) [two times] 
that are being [enumerated and] added [by the particle ca]. 505 Because the 
word ‘equal’ must refer to two things, the balance of two actions [is here 
to be understood, i.e.] their [equal] ripeness and their [equal] vehemence. 


502r fhe conjecture karanatvam [nominative] nanyadaseems necessary because the ab¬ 
lative is rendered redundant by the final yatah. 

^ AQ _ 

'There are two doubtful points in the accepted text of this half-verse. The first is 
the reading sah kalah where, in order to fit the metre, sandhi has not been applied (or 
where the pronominal sandhi has been ‘normalised')• The various readings of R N , 
G 2 , and E d are, I think, secondary attempts at improving the error away. The same 
sandhi is required by the metre in 9:16d: sakaJas tena sah £ivah (thus NEjJ), and there 
too the pada has been rewritten in different ways to obviate the difficulty (e.g. kurute 
sakalo ’pi tat M F , tada bhavati nisphalam Ed)* The second doubtful point is the plural 
karmanam accepted in place of the singular harm an as, even though the latter is found 
in all the manuscripts except those of the group V. This has been accepted because 
P quote the pada with the plural immediately below (5:8.18), and because it seems 
likely that in 5:8.29-30 (na £u samkhyakrtam iti dargayiturn punaruktih) Ramakantha 
is pointing to the difference in number between karmanam in 5:8d and karmanah in 5:9a 
in order to account for the apparent repetition in consecutive padas of the definition 
of the time of a gaktipata. 

504 Kir ana 5:2c. 

m 

505 This is the only point in the first six chapters at which Ramakantha makes ref¬ 
erence to a variant reading. The variant is not attested in any source other than his 
commentary. For Ramakantha’s policy of not reporting variants see p. cxviii. 

r 

’Ramakantha is attacking another (more natural) interpretation of the verse, namely 
that the only time when power descends is when there is a blockage in the experience 
of past actions. 
















33 ! 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * * v • 


This we will show [when commenting] on [the hall verse] '(Ordinarily] a 
more powerful past action [gives its fruit] first ../° 07 For at that time, 
we shall explain, the soul, like a love-lorn woman attracted by two lovers, 
cannot experience, drawn as he is simultaneously by [the fruits] of two 
equally powerful, opposing past actions: ‘When there is equal balance, 
liow can the soul's (tasya) experience arise?’ 508 Since this is the case, 
there would follow the undesirable consequence of the impossibility of 
worldly existence, for [all] experience would become impossible for some 
at some time in their beginningless cycle of rebirth entering into such 
an impasse caused by [the blockage of] past actions. And so in order to 
avoid that, even those who do not believe in the existence of God must 
necessarily accept the descent of the Lord’s power in such cases (atra), just 
as in the case of the love-lorn woman, or in similar cases, they must accept 
the king’s power, because there is no other way (gatyantarabhavat). 

And in this fashion (anenaiva ca rupena) the balance of two past 
actions is held, according to the 6aiva Siddhanta (atra), to be a time 
when a fall of power takes place. He reiterates this [in different words] 
in order to show that jthe balance] is not result of [an equal] number [of 
good and bad past actions]: 

The time is [that of] a balance of past action. (9a) 


For experience can never he rendered impossible by there being j merely] 
an equal number [of good and bad actions], since this creates no block¬ 
age. Because otherwise [i.e. if gaktipata can take place then, even 
without actions blocking each other], since there would be no difference 
(visesabhavat), 509 there would thus be the consequence of the descent of 
power at all times, the consumption of [the fruits of] past actions would 
be impossible, and that would contradict the passage of scripture 


Past actions [whose fruits are 
troyed. 510 


not enjoyed are never des- 


507 Kirana 5:10cd. 

* 

508 Kirana 5:llab. 

* 

509 There would he no important difference between such a moment o gaktipata and 
other arbitrarily chosen moments, since at none would actions actually block each other. 

rj 10 Source unknown. The same quarter-verse is also cited in the Matangavrtti ad 
vidyapada 9:31c-33, 13:8cd, and 13:15-17 on pp.304, 353, and 353 and cited prefaced 
by tatha ca grutih in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 8:103, p. 288, and so from that and 
from the manner of its introduction here we can assume that it belonged to a Siddhanta. 

























Chapter Five 


335 


And so this balance of actions, which is removable only by a descent ot 
power, is of the nature of a blockage of past actions—different from that 
balance of actions |which is of the nature of equanimity with regard to 
the results of all past actions] that was taught above 511 to be the sign 
from winch it can be inferred that [a soul’s] impurity is ripe. Thus there 
is no fault [in our position]. 

And how do these two [blocking actions] become [changed] through 
a descent of power? In order to answer this [He states] the following 
(tadartham etat): 


[The two blocking actions are] either destroyed or 
[rendered] unequal. (9b) 


When all the karman that remains, though the two actions block each 
other, becomes (sampadyatc) balanced (samam eva) in as much as it[s 
fruit) is in storage [for immediate experience] (avapagatatvena r)] 1 ), then, 
because there can be no other [action] [the fruit of] which is not [yet] 
in storage [for immediate experience] {anavapagatasya) and which would 
have to be protected |from being destroyed) < anurodhyasya), [these two 
blocking actions] are destroyer (k sin am bhavati) together with all the 
principles thus souls become vijnanakevalins. This He will teach below 
with ‘for when [they are] balanced, then experience is impossible'. 51,3 With 

In a footnote at the place of the last mentioned citation Bhatt draws attention to a 
similar expression of the same idea in a well-known half-verse (cited for instance in 
the Nyayakandalf on p. 634 and on p. 3 of vol. 1 of Vyoma£iva’s VyomavatT, whose 
editor, Gaurinath Sastri, identifies it as belonging to the Devibhagavatapurana ) to be 
found (among other places) in the South Indian Pauskara (2:45cd): nabhuktam ksiyate 
karma kalpakotisatair a pi; but this text postdates Ramakantha (sec the discussion in 
the introduction headed ‘The Kiranatantra and its Place among Other Siddhantas 1 ). 

111 See Kiranavrtti ad 1:20. 

m m 

51J The interpretation of this passage hinges on what Ramakantha meant by this 
expression. I have assumed that avapa is storage only for prarabdhakarvakarman (or 
perhaps for a sub-category within prarabdhakaryakarman, o! karman that is absolutely 
ripe and ready for immediate consumption). Souls who have no other karman than 
this—apart from the two blocking actions—attain the lower state of liberation of the 
vijhanakevalin through Saktipata. This is a rare occurrence (as Ramakantha probably 
intends to convey with the phrase kasmims cit puruse in Kiranavrtti 5:13.2), for most 
souls will have accrued a quantity of karman that is not prarabdhakaryakarman that 
is absolutely ripe, and such karman is therefore not ready to be stored in the ‘avapa 1 
for immediate consumption, but must be protected from being destroyed by tfaktipata 
(see 6:20d and commentary thereon). 

513 Kirana 5:lid. When Ramakantha comes to comment on this passage in context, 















336 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * m 


the words yadi va the other possibility (paksantaram) [is alluded to]— 
when, however, not all the past action remaining while the two actions 
block each other is ready for going into storage [for immediate consump¬ 
tion] ( avapagamanaya yogyam), but some may remain as the cause for 
further rebirths and so forth as well, then, while protecting that (tadanu- 
rodhena ), the descent of power renders one or other [of the two blocking 
actions] unequal [to the other], [that is to say leaves it] with its power [to 
bear fruit] unused ( apatitadaktikam 514 ) and thus, because there is [then] 
no blockage, [the fruits of] all [actions] become experienceable. This He 
will teach with ‘When |actions] are powerful and weak [relative to each 
other], no confusion [i.e. blockage] occurs/ 515 
Now the opinion of an opponent [is voiced]: 

How is this state of being balanced to be reached? (9c) 


How do these two particular actions reach this state of being balanced 
(samatvam) which consists in their simultaneously blocking each other? 
The implication [of this question] is that they cannot. The meaning is 
[that is impossible for them to do sol because [the order in which] past 
actions deliver their fruit depends on the order in which they were per¬ 
formed. The [response of the Saiva] Siddhanta to this [is as follows]: 


How can [it be brought about that] the time [required 
for the ripening of other things, such as crops,] be 
[sometimes] short and [sometimes] long? (9d) 


Time (kalah = tutih ) [required for ripening] can be both long and short. 
How can this be brought about? We must supply ‘by directly experienced 
actions, such as ploughing and [planting crops and| so fort]'?. This is the 
purport: this logical ground is rendered inconclusive by [adducing] activ¬ 
ities such as ploughing and the like, since, in the case of these, although 

they are performed in a certain sequence, sometimes a short length of time 

# 

he has distinguished three kinds of action giving rise to jati, ayu/i, and bhoga , no one 
of which by itself is capable of giving rise to experience. Accordingly he there takes 
samara in the sense of unmixed. There is no hint of this interpretation here. We 
must assume that Ramakantha was happy for the word samara to carry both the more 
obvious sense referred to here at the same time as the less obvious one he later gives. 

514 This could alternatively be understood to mean ‘without having had [Siva’s] fall 
upon it’. 

515 Kirana 5:12cd. 

* 












Chapter Five 


337 


is directly observed as quickly producing the fruit of an action performed 
later at the same time as the fruit of an action performed earlier. But 
(the time required] for [the ripening of the fruit of] an action performed 
earlier can be of long duration (ciratmakah = adhikah ). Thus, since this 
must be possible here too in the same way, this balance of two actions 
can indeed be readied. Thus there is no contradiction [in our position]. 
And so 


At the very time when this equal balance [of actions] 
that is beyond our senses (suJcsmam) thus occurs, this 
[power of Siva] quickly illuminates the [soul’s] own 
nature through that which is the power [behind the 
appearance] of the marks characteristic of enlighten¬ 
ment [viz. ripeness of impurity] (bodhacihnabalena 
va i ). 516 (9 e -10 b) 


In the same way [i.e.] as in the case of visible actions, this balance, 
which is subtle, because it is not perceptible to the likes of us, and which 
takes the form of mutual blockage, is conceivable (sambhavyamanam) in 
the case of unseen action too. At the precise moment when this occurs 
the Lord’s power by the means of initiation enlightens the soul’s true 
nature of omniscience and [omnipotence], [and she does so] through that 
which is the power [behind the appearance] of the signs characteristic of 
enlightenment, i.e. through the maturation of impurity. ' 17 This has been 
taught [above] with ‘After the blocking of the power [of mala] he [viz. the 
soul] is made without desire for existence.’ 518 And in the Matanga : ‘His 


’This is what I suppose Ramakantha has done with this problematic expression, 
but his commentary below is not quite clear to me. In Hindu Scriptures (1996:359) I 
translated 1 [and this is discernible) by means o the marks characteristic of enlighten¬ 
ment’ i.e. by signs such as devotion to Siva and detachment from worldly pleasure and 
pain. It now seems to me that 5:10ab was intended to express Tower reveals [her own] 
essential nature [discernible] through the sign that is [the soul's) enlightenment’. In 
the footnote thereto (no. 53) I wrongly stated that following Ramakantha this might 
be translated ‘this power] illumines [the soul’s) nature by means of the force [which is 
the ripeness of impurity) whose characteristic mark is enlightenment.’ 

517 I take the tena in 10.9 as the correlative to yad balam in 10.3. The three now 
familiar quotations are parenthetically inserted to reinforce once more the connection 
between a soul’s maturation of impurity and iiis reaching a state of mind beyond the 
passions of this world. The sense requires that the reader read through to dyotayati in 

10.9. 

518 Kirana 2:29cd, 

* 







338 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


impurity shaken off lor ever, lie becomes dispassionate towards rebirth in 
this world.’ 51 '* And also in the venerable Svayambhuva : 520 

When this [rnala] is worn away, there is a desire to go to the 

supreme state, than which there is nothing higher. 

And as for what has been taught with ‘When ,.. the soul is initiated 
by his guru and becomes omniscient like Siva’ 521 — it is not that there is 
: bis [phenomenon of purification through initiation] another descent 

I >ower depending on the ripening of impurity, but rather it is the very 
same, which, depending on context comes to be the cause of both [kinds of 
effects . That is vdiat. is meant ( iti hliavah) . And the particle vai is used 
in the sense of [marking] another manner |in which the descent of [lower 
can take effect], since that ot in i manner has been taught above (to be the 
way in which the descent of power operates] when that which is the power 

behind the (manifestation of the] signs characteristic of enlightenment 
is not present [i.e. when impurity is not ripened], fit has been taught 
above with] ‘(the two blocking actions are] either destroyed or (rendered] 
unequal’. 523 Thus the descent of power which has been taught in other 
scriptures to have been caused by maturation of impurity 524 is here too 
taught to be the cause of liberation by means of the sequence of [processes 
that follow culminating in] initiation. But the descent of power that this 
scripture teaches (aIra srutah) which is caused by a balance of actions 
ends either in the removal of the balance of those lactions 


or m 



’ 1 y Mat align vidyapad a 10:2 5 cd. 

Svayarnbhuvasiltrasarigraha l:17cd. 


521 


522 K‘rana l:21be (translated according to Ramakantha’s interpretation ad loc.). 

The question Ramakantha is addressing is the following: if Saktipata occurs when 
malaparipaka does and causes signs of detachment from the world and devotion to Siva, 
is it then another gaktipata which occurs in initiation and purifies the initiate and causes 
him to be like Siva? Ramakantha explains that there is no second saktipata. but that, 
depending on context, the same Saktipata brings about different effects 

r ’ 2 'Kirana 5:9b. 

m 

5 ^ 4 

. No demonstrably early surviving tantra of the Saiva Siddhanta appears to teach 
this. See the discussion on pp. xxxii-xxxvi of the introduction. Only in the Kir an a 
(l:20-22b, and chapter 5 passim) and in the Matanga (13:15-22b) are the essential 
prerequisites of salvific grace discussed and (ignoring for a moment Ramakantha’s in¬ 
terpretation) both tantras plainly teach karmasamya, not malaparipaka , to be essential. 
Furthermore it is clear from Abhinavagupta’s arguments in Tantraloka 13 that the po¬ 
sition regarded as characteristic of the 8aiva Siddhanta in Ramakantha’s own time was 
that, karmasamya was the essential prerequisite of salvific grace. 


















































Chapter Five 


339 


destruction in the manner taught above. Thus there is no contradiction 
with other scriptures, since they do not teach this particular. 525 

Hut then let both these cause liberation? In this way too there would 
be no contradiction. This might be so if there were a clear teaching 
explaining that, like maturation of impurity, balance of actions too were 
the cause o‘ this [liberation]; but He has taught that that |balance of 
actions] is the cause of a descent of power whose fruit is only the removal 
of the balance of actions, not [the cause] of anything else. And He will 
teach for when [they are] balanced, then experience is impossible’. 526 
|And this power removes the blockage] because it is established even in 
wor dly treatises that it results in the removal of the balance of past 


525 


But examine Matanga 13:15-20: 


dh arm adh arm a vipake ’srnim s t ulako ty upalaksi te 
niyatis tatsamuddharad yada patyati karmanl /15 

same bhoktus tad a tasya yugapac capy asambhavat 
gunyavat samsthita yasman nirapeksaiva laksyate /16 

samanadharmavyaparah kasto Vam syat suduskarah 

i/ 'M m m • m *./ ■ # 

yugapat sukhaduhkhabhyam yoktum pum gakyate katham /17 

etasminn an tare kartur yasav uddhara£Ihiu 
protsarya niyatim vegat svavirycnatibh urina /18 

ksctrajnarn vasayet pa^cat krtva bhogaparanmukham 
nan ay as an mahaghorad asm at samsarasagarat /19 

asti katfeid upayo 7 nyo yen a samtyajya A'iibisam 
prapyatc paramam saukhyam yat tatpadam anirmitam /20 

A tentative translation of this (disregarding Ramakantha’s commentary) follows: 
AVhen good and bad actions mature | simultaneously) and are seen to be [as though 
balanced) on the fulcrum of a pair oi scales, [and] when [thereupon] the principle re¬ 
sponsible for binding the soul to the accumulated fruits of his past actions niyatih) 
because it draws [the soul] out from that (bondage of past action] sees [the fruits of] 
the two actions of an experiencer to be equal, and because they cannot then both arise 
[to give experience] simultaneously, niyati is seen to stand [inactive], as if non-existent, 
since she has nothing [which could cause her to bind the soul to the fruit of one ac¬ 
tion rather than the other| (nirapeksa). This extremely difficult impasse, in which the 
activities [of the two opposing past actions] are the same (samanadharma-) must result, 
for how can the soul simultaneously be linked to happiness and unhappiness? At this 
time, that power of the creator whose nature it is to ‘draw out’ (uddhara£IlinT) pushes 
niyati aside by force with her great strength and leaves her traces in the soul, after 
first rendering him dispassionate towards [all worldly) experience, towards this terrible 
ocean of worldly existence with its manifold troubles. Is there any other means by 
which one may leave impurity behind and attain that eternal [lit. ‘uncreated’] state 
that is supreme bliss?’ 

526 Kirana 5:lld. See footnote 513 on p.335 above. 

















340 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


actions, as we shall show. 52 ' Nor is it appropriate that a descent of power 
set in motion to remove a blockage that has arisen should remove also 
impurity, in which no blockage has arisen, for that would result in the 
undesired consequence of liberation for all souls without distinction, since 
all would attain the removal of impurity. But surely just as you require 
the descent of power caused by the maturation of impurity to destroy 
through initiation also actions in which no blockage lias arisen, so too 
the descent of power that has been caused by balance of actions will 
accomplish through the same [initiation] the destruction also of impurity 

fe * 

in which no blockage has arisen; and thus this unwanted corollary does 
not arise. No, because it is not established that those [actions] are ones for 
whom" nothing has arisen to block them. For impurity is a contributory 
cause in giving experience of [the fruits of] past actions, since without 
the uninterrupted presence of ignorance ( avidyanubandham ) there could 
be no experience, just as [there is no experience] for the liberated soul. 
Thus if that [impurity] is altered, then those [actions] are ones for whom 
something has arisen to block, and so their destruction is possible. It is 
not the case that the absence of blockage of action is in a similar way 
a contributory cause to the. continued existence of impurity, in such a 
way that upon their destruction that [impurity] could not continue to 
exist and thus its destruction would be supposed because of its being 
something for which something had arisen to block it. Because it has 
been established that |irnpurity] is beginningless, even i; one accept that 
it might be destroyed without there having arisen any blockage in it, 
the above-stated undesired corollary [of liberation for all souls without 
distinction] would follow. Thus, because of these three arguments, it 
must be conceded that this descent of power is different [from that which 
follows upon maturation of impurity and is salvific] and it causes only the 
removal of blockage of actions, and so there is no contradiction [in our 
positition]. 

Now from what cause can two mutually blocking actions arise simul¬ 
taneously? To this (iti) the reply is: 

The particular action that is stronger gives [rise to 
the] experience [that is its retribution] first; the other 
[does so] afterwards (punah). (lOcd) 

527 Kiranavrtti ad 5:12cd. 












Chapter Five 


341 


Although a soul has many actions, good and bad, that particular ac¬ 
tion which is stronger in power because of its maturing through the help 

m 

of some other action or some other factor ( karmantaradyupakara -) and 
because its impetus is powerful ( tivravegatvena) gives its [retributive] ex¬ 
perience first, even though it may have been performed afterwards, just 
as is the case with agriculture and such like [worldly realms of activity]. 
And others too have taught 528 ‘the fruit of [actions] whose impetus is 
strong [is brought about] soon.' But the other one (tasmad any ah) gives 
its [retributive] experience afterwards (punar iti pascat ), either after some 
removal of the obstacle of another action or after the recovery of its own 
power. And what then? To this the reply is: 

How will that experience [that should arise] come 
about for the soul when that balance exists? (llab) 

And since that is the case (evam ca sati), when through some cause or 
other two good or two bad actions become equal, either through [unequal] 
ripening or because of [unequal] intensity of impetus, how can there be 
experience for that soul, simultaneously drawn by two mutually blocking 
actions? It cannot arise, and therefore one must inevitably concede the 
existence of a descent of power in this Saiva Siddhanta (atra) for the 
obviation of [such] blockage. This has been taught above, 529 

Surely in that case there would be the undesired consequence that the 
descent of power must occur at all times, because all actions are balanced, 
since they must mutually block each other, or they all accomplish nothing 
more than their own particular fruits. [With the next verse] it is taught 
that this is not the case: 

Or rather past action that is mixed 5 * 0 brings about 
[results]. For if it is [all of] the same [kind], then 

528 It is not clear whether what follows is a literal quotation; it is not expressed in 
metre and the view seems not distinctive. 

529 Kiranavrtti 5:8.22-8. 

■ • 

530 I have suggested (1996:359, footnote 54) that ‘mixed' was probably intended by 
the author to mean ‘of mixed strength’, but that Ramakantha, perhaps partly in order 
to fight off possible criticism that the text is repetitious, here introduces three kinds of 
karman of which there must be a mixture before experience is possible. The translation 
of this unit of text offered in Hindu Scriptures is probably closer to what was originally 
intended (1996:359-60): ft is mixed action that generates [experience], for if it is 
equal, then there can be no experience. And it should be explained that one past 
action has to be more powerful (than the others], otherwise there can be no happiness 










Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm V * 


[there can be| no experience. And [so] one extra [kind 
of action] must be admitted [to be present]; otherwise 
there cannot be happiness and unhappiness (sulchet- 
aram° 31 ). (11c—12b) 


For action that brings about the soul's experience is of three kinds: that 
which gives birth, that which gives length of life, and that which gives [par¬ 
ticular] experiences; not that which gives [particular] experiences alone, 
or that which gives length of life [alone], since there can be no experi¬ 
ence without a particular birth. Nor can that which gives birth alone 
[generate experience], for, without those [other] two, experience would be 
impossible, since the soul would die immediately after his birth. When 
action is [of | the same [kind], unmixed with any kind different from itself— 
only that which gives [particular! experiences, only that which gives length 
of life, or only that which gives birth—then experience is impossible, and 
so there must be some additional ( adhikah ) kind of action there that is 
different jin kind]. Where there is the kind of action that gives [particu¬ 
lar] experiences, it must be admitted that there must be [in addition] that 
which gives birth. Or where there is the latter [then it must be admitted 
that there must also be] that which gives [particular] experience, and so 
forth. Otherwise, because of the impossibility of experiencing happiness 
and unhappiness, even though there should be such action |i.e. a partic¬ 
ular kind of action unmixed with any other kind! the soul (tasya) would 
become a vijhanakevalin. Thus the undesirable corollary of the descent of 
power occurring at all times because of actions blocking each other does 
not apply, since they never do block each other [in that way]. 


Because [he is] linked to actions which are [relatively] 
stronger and weaker, no confusion [i.e. interruption of 
experience] arises. (12cd) 

The descent does not effect [total] destruction [of all past action] for 
every soul in whom ( yatrapi puruse 532 ... tatrapi) there arises a bal¬ 
ance of two actions that block each other and have come up [for 

or unhappiness.’ TryambakaSambhu too (IFP 47658, f. 8 r ) understands mitfram in the 
sense of ‘of mixed strength’. 

531 For sukhetarat —an ai£a use of the nominal ending instead of the pronominal one. 

532 Against all the sources I ha^e moved yatrapi puruse from before 5:12cd to after it, 
because this seems to be required by the sense. 


* 

















Chapter Five 


343 


fruition] simultaneously, because it excludes [from destruction] other ac¬ 
tions (karmantaranurodhatah) in the manner that has been mentioned 
above. 033 Rather [it effects] the greater strength of one of them and the 
weakness of the other, and so blockage ( virodhah — vyakulatvam) does 
not arise. This same manner of avoiding confusion between past action 
that would entail long life and that which would not is taught in the 
Ayurveda too: 534 

By the use of bitumen, or by Siva's grace, or by the use of 
Ajasatra 535 decline 536 can be stopped; not otherwise. 

And it is spoken of by Narayanabhatta in the Nidrastotra and else¬ 
where. 537 And it has been shown in the Mahabharata : 538 

For men slipped into cavities, and for those sunk in the ocean 
or those held by robbers, you are their supreme refuge (gatih). 

And even by the Buddhists in such places as hymns of praise to Tara: 539 


533 Kiranavrtti 5:9.10-14. 

i * 

534 Source unknown. 

Unknown. Perhaps we should emend P 3 ’s reading to ajasyantra 0 . This could 
be understood literally to refer to goat’s entrails or might be the name of a herb. 
According to Apte s.v. antram), there is a medicinal plant called variously antri. 
ajantri, chagalantrl which is ‘used against colic or wind in the stomach’. Under the entry 
aja-antrl Apte explains the name (‘ajasya antram iva antram tadakaravatl manjarj 
vasyah ’) and says that it is the ‘pot-herb Convolvulus Argenteus, Nllabuhna\ Also 
conceivable is the meaning ‘a sacrifice of a female goat’. 

K Q _ 

ksaya might be used in the sense of any disease, but Ramakantha’s introduction 
to the verse implies that it deals with the effect of some particular disease on length of 
life. ‘Decline’ is the translation offered by Meuienbeld (1974:458-9) in his appendix of 
technical terms. 

I'lie New Catalogus Catalogorum does not list a Nidrastotra. Narayanas are so 
common that it is impossible to be certain whom Ramakantha is referring to. The 
New Catalogus Catalogorum (Volume 10, p. 74) lists an Argalastotravivarana, a KTlaka- 
stotravivarana and a DevikavacastotratTka (Stein 227, 228, 231) as works of a Narayana¬ 
bhatta that ‘may be on parts of Devlmahatmya’. That they appear in Stein’s catalogue 
suggests that they may be Kashmirian. Perhaps the same author wrote a Nidrastotra - 
vivarana. If so, we might translate 'and it has been spoken of by Narayanabhatta [in 
his commentaries] on the Nidrastotra etc.’ It is perhaps more likely that Ramakantha 
would thus only refer to (and not quote) prose commentary. 

538 The quoted verse does not occur in the critical edition. 

F rt ——— 

Not traced among the published hymns to Tara. 










344 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* m m 


You who quell the danger of lions, elephants, ire, snakes, 
thieves, fetters, the ocean, and demons, 540 you who steal the 
radiance of the rays of the moon, goddess Tara, homage to 
you! 


How then does that [blockage] arise? In response to this lie states 


Because of the absence of relative strength or weak¬ 
ness he attains to that state. 541 (13ab) 


When, while the two actions block each other, in a certain rare soul 
(kasmimg cit puruse) all other action becomes equal, i.e., devoid of relative 
strength and weakness, in as much as it is [all) in storage [for immediate 
consumption], then confusion does not arise, for it has been taught 042 
that all | his actions] are then destroyed through the descent of power 
because of the impossibility of there being any other action to be excluded 
from destruction. Thus the soul, his actions destroyed, then attains to 
that state, i.e. the state of the vijnanakevalin spoken of above [in the 
commentary] on [the quarter verse] 'if it is [all of] the same [kind], then 
[there can be] no experienced 11 Thus this is then the object of the descent 
of power. That is what is meant [with the above half verse]. 

And is it the case that (atha ...kim), just as this descent of power 
viz. that which unblocks balanced actions] has been taught above to be 
subtle, 544 being beyond the realm of the senses of the likes of us, or rather 
inferrable [only] through its removal of disease and such like—[is it the 
case that] that [other descent of power, caused by maturation of impurity] 
taught above is just the same (tathaiva), or is it not? In response to this 
is taught 


540 This is a standard list in a standard order of eight perils from which Tara rescues. 
Cf. the Tarastuti of Candradasa (Bauddhastotrasangraha pp. 86-7). in which the same 
list appears in the same order, a stanza being devoted to each peril (stanzas 2-9). 
Ramakantha quotes this because to admit any kind of divine intervention is to admit 
the possibility of interference with a soul s karmic deserts. 

511 The text is uncertain here, tat s than am in 5:13.4 may be a pratika, and so I have 
assumed that Ramakantha read with N 3 D 2 . 

542 Kiranavrtti 5:9.7-10. 

543 JCirana 5:lid. 

544 Kirana 5:9e teaches that the balance is not amenable to the senses, but does not 

a * 

state explicitly that this is so also of the $aktipata that then occurs. 









Chapter Five 


345 


That descent is to be understood to be the same (ifci). 
Extraordinary’ * 1 * * 4 devotion arises in the soul [who has 
received it]. (13cd) 


That descent of power taught above that occurs at the time of the matur¬ 
ation of [the soul's] impurity is to be understood to be thus ( evam — iti ), 
i.e.j as being confined to particular souls. For one who has it acquires 
extraordinary devotion, as has been taught above: ‘After the blocking of 
the power [of mala\ he (viz. the soul] is made without desire for exist¬ 
ence ,’ 5 ' 16 and in the venerable Svayambhuva [in the half-verse| beginning 
‘When this [mala] is worn away, there is a desire to go ... \ 547 


Now of those two times 
maturation of impurity | 518 


i.e. that o> balance of action and that of 


That time [of malaparipaka ] alone is ‘skillful’ [and is 
the time of the descent] of power: it is [the time in 
which there is] compassion for the soul. (14ab) 


That |time| that was spoken of above (i.e. that of the maturation of impur¬ 


ity] is the time of the descent of power. It is skilled ( kugalah = nisnatah) 
since it is then that the soul is shown compassion (anugrhyate = pari- 
grahah [= parigrhyate]). And so that time is that in which there is com¬ 
passion for the soul atmaparigrahah). Therefore the Lord waits for that 
same [time] for that [bestowing of grace] ( tatra ) and not for any other . 549 


Siva waits for the time called the ‘hole in time’, be¬ 
cause of [the soul’s] beginningless bondage by action. 

And the Lord Siva knows that [time]. (14c-15b) 

'*vilaksana could conceivably have been intended to mean ‘distinguishing sign’, 

1 1 tough it is not attested in the dictionaries in this sense or with this gender. Tryamba- 
kaSambhu reads bhaktivilaksanah and glosses it (IFF 47658, f. 8 V ^) bhaktya vilaksyate 
yas sa bhaktivilaksanah. 

546 Kiran a 2: 29cd. 

•* 

547 

1 Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha 1:17c. 

5 4 S _ _ 

Ramakantha is of course distorting the intended sense by identifying in the text 
now one oi he two times at which a descent of power is possible and now the other, 
even though the text speaks only of one. 

549 ex conj. We require the subject supplied in PiP 3 , but their bhagavanyah does not 
give good sense. It could be an error for bhagavan n any ah (‘the Lord and no other 1 ), 
but nanyam reinforces the preceding tarn eva. 













346 


Ramakantlia’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


According to the Saiva Siddhanta ( atra ), He waits for that time as be¬ 
ing the cause of the descent o power—j that time which is] that of the 
blockage of action, known by the expression ‘the hole in time' because of 
the impossibility in it of the experience that comes from the beginning¬ 
less total bondage (samyag bandhah [=sambandiiah]) of action. Through 
the descent of power those [actions] can be unblocked or destroyed; not 
otherwise. [It is] because the Lord knows [this to be] so [that He waits]. 

Now liow is it that He waits for that time for the destruction of actions 
but not for a time when they do not block each other. In response to this 
is taught 

Just as someone awaits a certain particular time when 
[shooting at] a moving target, and he knows that time, 
so too Siva awaits the time of balance [of actions]. 

(15c—16b) 

For just as an exceptionally well-trained archer, such as Arjuna, does 
not at all times cut down with his own arrows the welter of arrows and 
other weapons that issue from the enemy, but does so only when (yada 
... tasminn eva kale) they approach to destroy his own body, because 
they are in opposition to the [fruits of] action which would give him 
length of life, [and he does so then] precisely (eva) because they block, 
just so does the Lord too await that balance that is a blockage of actions 
for [bestowing] a descent of power, |and He does so] exactly because they 
block, for experience is impossible at that time. That is what is taught 
[with the above]. |He does] not however [await] a time when they do 
not block each other, because experience is then possible because o the 
absence of blockage. But if this were not admitted, then 


Because of the absence otherwise of balance of action, 
liberation [from the bond of action] would be simul¬ 
taneous [for all]. (16cd) 

Otherwise, because of the absence of blockage, the undesired corollary 
would follow that all souls would simultaneously receive a descent of power 
and therefore release from their actions, [i.e.] the state of being of the 
vijhanakevalin. Therefore, in order to avoid that [corollary], balance of 
action must be stated to be the cause of this [kind of descent of power 
that destroys or unblocks actions] atra). Thus there is no contradiction 
in our position ].'’ 50 


The root text is not distinguishing between occasions when Saktipata occurs or 



















( Chapter Five 


347 


If tliat is so, then the time of the maturation of impurity is awaited 
by the Lord for (bestowing] compassion and not also a time in which that 
is not mature. What is the reason for this? In response to this is taught 

If this time ( kramah ) is denied, then there should be 
no dependence on means and instruments [for accom¬ 
plishing liberation]. (17ab) 


If this time (kalah — kramah) were not awaited lor [the bestowing of 
salvific] grace, then there could not be dependence on means, such as 
a guru, and instruments, such as initiation, for [the attainment of] that 
[grace] (atra). The meaning is that the consequence would then be that 
all souls should simultaneously receive grace. And so to avoid that, there 
must necessarily be some cause [of grace]. That, just as in the case of 
cataracts on the eye and such like, has been taught to be the maturation 

of the impurity. Thus there is no fault [in our position], 

« 

And now He refutes the fourth question too . 551 


The active agent ( prabhuh ) in this [bestowal of grace] 
you must understand to be Siva. How could time be 
thought to be the active agent? Being the active agent 
depends on being essentially sentient. Since time is 
insentient, it is not the active agent. (17c—18b) 


What was said above 552 —‘Let time alone be the cause of liberation; what 
need is there of positing Siva here as the cause of a descent of grace?’— 
is inappropriate, because there are different ways oi being the cause of 
something. For time is the occasion that gives rise to it (nimittam ... atra) 
no more], since it is insentient, just as the new moon day or the like 
|is the occasion that gives rise] to a [new moon] sacrifice or the like; but 
the agent is the Lord, just as the brahmin [is the agent] in the new moon 
sacrifice, since He is sentient. And it is wrong to infer as a corollary the 
absence of an agent simply because one has admitted the existence oT an 



indeed between kinds of liberation here. Ramakantha is forced to interpret the un¬ 
specified niuktih here to refer to liberation only from the bond of action because he 
understands the text here to be talking specifically of a 6 ak tip at a that is caused by 
karmasainya, and that cannot cause ultimate release unless a soul’s impurity happens 
to be ripe at the same time that his experience is blocked by balance of actions. 

551 1. e. that of Kir an a 5:2d. 

v 

552 The objection was raised in 5:2cd. 




















348 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * */ m 


occasion, for the two do not exclude each other ( virodhabhavat ). Now 
if another agent were admitted, that would be correct. This point that 
the agent and the occasion that give rise to an effect are not mutually 
exclusive is stated with an example: 

[Siva is the agent of the awakening of souls] just as the 
sun is ( syat ) the active agent in the awakening of lo¬ 
tuses, provided the [appropriate] time is at hand. Nor 
does opening occur in them without [the appropriate] 
time. Nevertheless it is the sun that is ordinarily (as- 
min loke ) called the awakener of lotuses. And [even] 
if the [correct] time is that [of the state of] readiness, 
it is still [only] figuratively [spoken of as] that which 
illuminates. 553 (18c—20b) 

And in the case of that which is illustrated by the example He teaches: 

Thus, although that time is [that of] a balance o' ac¬ 
tion, nevertheless the Lord remains ( samsthitah ) the 
active agent, according to the Saiva Siddhanta (atra), 
of the descent of power. (20cdef) 

Because bound souls, like blind men or the like, cannot be the agents of 
[their own] release from bonds, because they are powerless, and because 
the bonds, being insentient, like cataracts and such like afflictions, cannot 
themselves remove themselves from the bound souls, therefore it has been 
taught that it is the Lord alone who, like an eye-doctor or the like, de¬ 
pending on a particular restricted moment, is capable of being (yuktah) 
the agent of liberation. Thus there is no fault [in our position]. 

According to the Saiva Siddhanta (atra), since power is the agent 
of awakening of many souls, the problem is entailed of the unwanted 

Phis last half-verse has not been translated in Hindu Scriptures because I then 
judged that its absence in M r R N V 4 Try and lack of obvious support in Ramakantha’s 
commentary justified its omission in Ev. It now seems to me that the distribution of 
readings makes it likely that some form of the half-verse is original, but I am not certain 
that it was in Ramakantha’s text. If I have constituted and interpreted it correctly, 
it is essentially a reaffirmation that time is not the agent of awakening, and so might 
have been thought repetitious and expunged from the Kashmirian text or retained but 
judged by Ramakantha not to require commentary. (Its absence in sources that usually 
transmit a text close to that on which he commented can be used to argue both ways.) 


























Chapter Five 


349 


corollary that [power must bc| plural. This an opponent might advance 
(iti parabhiprayah). 

You may question (cei) how it is that this [power] 
awakens many although she is one. (21ab) 

But the response to this is ( siddhantas tu): 

There is no fault although [she awakens] many: it is 
not impossible, because she is all-pervading. (21cd) 

Because she is all pervading, there is no reason why this [single] power 
cannot nevertheless (api) help many, and so (yatah ... tatah) this is not 
a fault. 

And now the matter of the [preceding] section is drawn together (atha 
prakaranarthopasarnharah): 

Thus I have taught above in this scripture the imper¬ 
ceptible union [of the soul] with power. (22ab) 

Thus the descent of power has been taught above, that is to say (iti) 1 
have taught it in this scripture (atra) [in such a way that] no questions 
about it remain (sarvapra£na$unyah). 

Here [Garuda] raises a related question: 

[Garuda spoke:] 

And if initiation occurs through [the soul’s] being thus 
linked to His power, [then why is it that] even after 
initiation we see [that souls suffer] occlusion? 051 This 
power must cause occlusion, if the soul (tasya) does 
not attain the bliss [of liberation through it]. Let the 
Lord [if He really liberates] arrange it so that the soul 
(asau) does not change. (22c-24b) 

If initiation, i.e. that grace which is the cause of liberation of a soul [comes 
about] by means of a particular connection with the Lord's power that 
is distinguished by [being preceded by] this sequence of events (anena 
kramena = eva m), then occlusion, in the form of transgressing the rules 
of the cult and such, could not occur, since [the soih must continue to 

(TF J 

' J What Garuda refers to with ‘occlusion’ is lapsing from the observances of the cult, 
nitiates should surely only lapse if the right knowledge in them is occluded. 







:;50 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

# i v i 


have] union with His power after initiation too. And yet it is observed, 
and so what was said above—‘When ... because of an intense descent of 
power .. .the soul is initiated by his guru' 555 —is after all wrong, since it 
is not established that the descent of His power is the cause of [salvific] 
grace, because there is no invariable concomitance such that the latter 
comes into being when the former is present. And if you maintain that 
it is the cause of [salvific] grace, then let that Lord—He who is Lord over 
His own property, that is to say Lord over the descent of power 556 —act in 
such a way that the soul does nor change, that is to say does not engage 
in activities that are caused by occlusion {tirobhavahetusu). That is the 
meaning [of Garuda’s question]. And yet (na ca) I le does not act in such a 
way, since we observe even then [after initiation! that the soul engages in 
activities caused by occlusion, and therefore the descent of power cannot 
be the cause of (salvific) grace. This is the position of the opponent. The 
view of the Siddhanta on this is: 

[The Lord spoke:] 

This [initiation occurs] by Siva’s will, not among 
souls who are in darkness. That [power which oper¬ 
ates among souls in darkness] is called ‘the occluding 
power’, because she creates darkness. 05 ' This [salvific] 
power does not descend in order to occlude, because 
its nature is to bestow grace. (24c—25) 


Now according to the Saiva Siddhanta (ih a tavat) this salvific power 
[of initiation] (sa tfaktir anugrahika) does not occur (samsthita) —with 
this [from Garuda’s question] we must construe [the Lord’s reply] (iff 
sambandhah )—among souls who are in darkness, that is to say among 
souls whose impurity has not ripened. Nor can that initiation be per¬ 
formed for them by acaryas out of greed, ignorance and so forth, because 


555 Kirana L;21ab. 


556 


This parenthetical etymologisation of svamlis absent in R‘ IV Following R svaml 
would refer to gaktipata. This seems less natural than that it should refer to the Lord, 
and the omission may be the result of an eyeskip. 

,57 In Hindu Scriptures (1996:361) I translated This [power that descends before ini¬ 
tiation operates] at Siva’s will among souls who are in darkness. It is not this [power 
that is called ‘the occluding power’, because she creates darkness, [but another facet of 
Siva’s power].’ I stated that this translation followed Ramakantha, because I was then 
attempting to construe R N ’s reading tasya in 25.1 instead of PiP 3 ’s na sa. This has 
painfully brought home to me how easy it is when not making a full translation of a 


N 


commentary to delude oneself that one is following it. 










































































Chapter Fi VC 


351 


/ 

it is taught that it occurs by Siva’s will. They cannot have knowledge 
of it, and so [it is clear that) this [initiation] would be -ruitless [if per¬ 
formed) for those without the required qualifications (anadhikarinam), 
jus! as Vedic initiation is for Sudras. For those, however, it is taught that 
there is another ‘occluding power which at that time [while they are in 
darkness] creates darkness. For this [salvific power] cannot descend in or¬ 
der to occlude, because its nature is to bestow grace. Thus (iti) what was 
said above- ‘This power must cause occlusion, if the soul (tasya) does 
not attain the bliss [of liberation through it]’ 558 —is, to start with (tavat), 
unproven. 

If [what you say is] so, because her nature is to bestow grace, how 
then does she not bestow grace on all? In response to this is taught 


Because the time is at hand, she illuminates the 
[soul’s] self. (26ab) 

Because that time of the maturation of the impurity of a given soul is at 
hand, she illuminates that soul’s (tasyaiva) self. This lias been taught with 
‘After the blocking of the power [of mala] he [viz. the soul] is made without 
desire for existence.’ 559 And so that too [i.e. the supposed problem that, 
since it is her nature to be compassionate, she should bestow grace on 
all] is not a fault. And as for [the objection] ‘how can that power remain 
even after initiation as a cause of occlusion’, that too is wrong, since 

After illuminating [the soul’s self] that power that 
awakens souls departs like lightning. >6U (26cd) 

Alter accomplishing at that moment the awakening of the soul, which 
is the destruction of its impurity, that power rapidly (acirenaiva kalena) 
departs like lightning, [that is to say] ceases from that activity [of awaken¬ 
ing]. The purport is that this fact (arthah) is established by the rule of 
life (nyayasiddhah) that ‘that which has been done cannot be done again’. 
But after initiation she still remains presiding in a general way over the 
soul (tasya) until liberation is attained. And so (iti) there is not the 

558 Kir an a 5:23cd. 

m 

559 Kirana 2:29cd. 

560 The text of 5:26c implicit in the readings of the Nepalese manuscripts (praica^ya 
vidyuvadyati) is almosi certainly original, but not correct, because to satisfy the metre 
vidyut has been treated as a noun in u. The various other readings result from attempts 
to obviate this difficulty. 












352 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm */ * 


fault that the descent of power is not invariably concomitant with grace 
(anugraham prati ). 

But even if this is so (evam a pi) there is the fault of the corollary 
that initiation is not invariably concomitant with liberation, because we 
observe occlusion after it. In response to this is taught 


If a particular soul (ayam) is completely or [incom¬ 
pletely] in darkness 061 even though initiated, he may 
reach a station [of office as a flesh-eating demon or the 
like] somewhere in [which there may be one of] two 
kinds of darkness. (27) 


fNow someone not initiated, although completely in darkness, has initi¬ 
ation performed. It is of such a person that the verse speaks (tasyety 
iik£am)f. 562 If a soul (ayam), though fully initiated should at some 
time 563 through some divine or human obstacle be completely or (ca) 
incompletely—|tliis we understand] from the word va—in darkness, then 
in both kinds of darkness 561 he attains the fruit of transgressing the rules 
o the cult [by being born] in some womb of flesh-eating demons or the 
like (kvacid iti kasmimscit kravyadayonyadau). This is taught in the ven¬ 
erable Pauskara. 5 


If someone transgresses the rules of the cult [after receiving 
initiation], it is taught that he will become a Pi^aca for a 
hundred years. 


561 Thus Ramakantha. It seems likely from the distribution of variants, however, that 
sarvatinanaivayam is original; but even if the va were authorial, it would be more 
natural to interpret 27ab to mean ‘Or if, in spite of being initiated, the soul were to be 
completely occluded... 1 

50J Perhaps we should emend here to adlksitavat sarvatmana... and translate 
‘Someone may be initiated even though he is completely in darkness, like the uniniti¬ 
ated.’ If Ramakantha were still understanding tirohita to mean k with one’s impurity 
unopened’ (as in 5:25.1), then his position would be that initiation could not be valid 
for such a non-initiate (5:25.3-4). If he here understands darkness once again to reier 
to the transgression of the rules of the cult (as in 5:24.2 -3), then adlksitas tavai is again 
problematic, because a non-initiate would not have to follow the rules of the cult. 

563 Alternatively the kadacit may convey remote possibility. 

Le. both complete and incomplete darkness. It is possible that what was meant by 
the author of the verse was a two-fold darkness occluding the powers of both knowledge 
and action and that the phrase was intended as a locative absolute. 

060 See footnote 47 on p. 176 above. 





























Chapter Fi VC 


353 


This is however not the case (na tu ) when all transgressions of the rules 
of the cult have been destroyed by rites of expiation that will be taught 
below. 566 In order to express this ( iti) the word kvacit is used. 567 
What [happens] then? To this the reply is: 


According to the Saiva Siddhanta (ihai there arises in 
a soul situated there the same trace [from initiation]. 
When he has that, the soul attains unqualified liber¬ 
ation. (28) 


‘There’ ! tatra) [means] in a place for the experience of the fruits of trans¬ 
gressing the rules of the cult, i.e. |as the offspring of] a flesh-eating demon. 
Even when lie is living in the body of a PiSaca or the like, the same trace 
( vasana ) [arises] in an initiate who transgressed the rules of the cult. That 
same trace that is the cause of devotion to Siva and such in those who do 
not transgress the rules of the cult manifests itself. And then that soul, 
through his connection with the trace left by his having been initiated, 
alter experiencing the fruits of the expiation ol those [transgressions of 
his], which, as in the case of the fruits of rites performed to accomplish 
particular desires (kamyavat), are an obstacle to the attainment of the 
fruit of initiation, attains liberation, the fruit of initiation. This is '.aught 
in some other scripture|:° 68 


One who has been purified by expiations is proclaimed to have 
attained the pure state (gatih Buddha). 


For to explain: 

[A soul] may become occluded [though initiate;Is by 
this sequence; [but] it would entail the utter point¬ 
lessness [of the sequence], if the same (sa) liberation 
did not [eventually] come about. (29) 

First there is a maturation of impurity, then a descent of power, then ini¬ 
tiation. If one who became initiated following this sequence and somehow 

566 Kirana Chapters 43-4. 

5e7 It seems from this that Ramakantha is extracting two meanings out of kvacit by 
avrtti. He has glossed it once with kasmimScit kravyadayonyadau, and he appears now 
to understand it in the sense of ‘in particular circumstances’ or ‘occasionally’. 

568 Not traced. 









354 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• * m 


became occluded by darkness did not att ain liberation, the fruit of initi¬ 
ation, after experiencing the fruit of transgressing the rules of the cult, 
then it would follow that the sequence of initiation were pointless. And 
that is not possible, since it is something that the Lord performs, and so 
for this reason it must necessarily be admitted that the soul then attains 
liberation. And so the fault of the undesired corollary that even initiation 
might not invariably produce its result does not apply. 

But i! the descent of power or receiving initiation is |always| the same 
in intensity], how is it that only some are at a later point in time occluded 
and others not. To this the reply is given: 

[Siva’s] power is [said to be] slow or very slow with 
the intention of referring to its balancing the activity 
[of the ripening of the soul’s innate impurity] ( karma - 
samya vi vaksaya ). 569 (3 Oab) 

The soul whom a weak or very weak divine power or initiation 
approaches—[said to be weak] because there is an awareness ([here re¬ 
ferred to as] a desire to express, because it is the cause of a desire to 
express) that it equals (i.e. is [appropriately] weak or extremely weak) the 
activity of the ripening of impurit y ( karmana malaparipakalaksanena )— 
such a soul (tasya [30.3]) does (eva) become linked to transgressions. But 
for the soul on whom [what is referred to as] an intense or extremely 
intense power falls—[so called] because there is a desire to express the 
fact that it balances an intense or extremely intense activity of ripening 
of impurity—for such a soul (tasya) transgression is in no way possible. 
This is the purport [of the above half-verse). Thus one must understand 
that salvific power is [figuratively speaking] the cause of transgressions, 
because it is figuratively said to be weak [or intense etc.]; not otherwise. 
This is taught [with the following]: 


It is not however the case that such a power is subject 

to transformation, as milk is, because the power of 
& 

Siva is differentiated [only nominally] by the nature of 
its functions. It is a ladder for Brahmins and others 
and it clearly liberates. (30—1) 

' Ramakantha is again distorting the text here; what the redactor probably intended 
was with the intention of referring to the [speed of attainment of a] mutual blockage 
of (two simultaneously ripe] actions. 5 












Chapter Five 


355 


It is not however possible that salvific power should itself (eva) become 
occlusion ( tirol)havatmatam gacchati), because it is only (eva) because of 
the nature (sthitih — samsthanam) of its functions that the Lord's power 
is many ( bhedam p rapt a), not in the primary sense. This has been taught 
[above with] 


He has been taught to be differentiated according to the divi¬ 
sion of His activities [as] Isa, Sada^iva, Santa. 570 

And therefore, like the Lord, it too is not subject to transformation. As 
las been taught [above], Transformation [is possible] of the insentient. 
It is not possible for what is sentient.’ 571 And, because it is the cause 
of moving upwards, it is [said to be] a ladder (sopanapanktih — nisreru) 
for Brahmins and the other estates going to the supreme state known 
as liberation. Thus the teaching ‘When .. .because of an intense descent 
of power .. .the soul is initiated by his guru’ 572 is indeed well expressed 
(suktam). And so the fifth chapter is concluded. 

Thus ends the fifth chapter in the commentary on the glorious Kir an a 
composed by Bhatta Ramakantha, the son of Bhatta Narayanakantha. 


5 0 Kir an a 3: "1 3cd. 

571 Kir an a 2:26ab. 

# 

’ “ Kir an a 1:2 lab. 



























































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































* 


























































































































































































































































































/ 






































































































































































































































































































































































































































































CHAPTER SIX 


On the Function performed by Initiation 573 

Now another chapter, preceded by questions, |is begun) in order to ex¬ 
amine she topic of means upayapadarthasya parlksartham). 574 [Garuda 
spoke): 

You have taught that Siva bestows compassion on all, 
that he is the supreme cause. 575 Now the twice-born 
estates 576 are [hierarchically ranked relative to each 
other as] inferiors and superiors. If the purificatory 
rite [of Saiva initiation] were also thus [i.e. like the 
Vaidika rites of the twice-born, affecting only caste or 
body], then would its result not be similar? 577 And 
if (va) the purificatory rite is the same [as orthodox 
Vaidika purificatory rites], then how can it be that 

r 

The title dlksakarmapatala is given to this chapter in E D and E v see footnote 1 
on p. 161 above). 

I he topics were enumerated and characterized in the commentary on 1:13. The 
upayapadartha is, according to Ramakantha (1:13.43-5), to be expounded in the sub¬ 
sequent three padas y and the vidyapada is properly to be devoted to the investigation 
of the other five topics (1:13.27-8). 

c Though it is odd Sanskrit, I have retained the masculine paramakaranah and trans¬ 
lated it as a karmadharaya, I suspect that the neuter form is a secondary correction. 

Thus Ramakantha’s text, as is clear from 6:2.4-5 (see footnote to the translation 
ad loc.); dvijadayas tu is, however, more likely to be primary, both because of the 
distribution of readings and because Garuda is responding to the expression dvijadi- 
varnanifrenl in the conclusion of the previous chapter (5:31c). 

577 Thus Ramakantha’s interpretation (6:2.9-15); the translation offered in Hindu 
Scriptures (1996:362) conveys what was more probably intended: ‘If the purificat¬ 
ory rite [of Saiva initiation] were also thus [i.e. unequal], then would the result not be 
similarly [unequal]?* 







358 


f 

Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• • */ * 


the state they attain (-gaiih) [from a Vaidika rite] is 
inferior and [from the rite of initiation into the Saiva 
Siddhanta] superior? 5 (1—2) 


Here the connections relating to sutra, topic, and section are to be under¬ 
stood to be as before. Now that relating to statement is with numerous 
statements, such as with ‘W hen. ..the soul is initiated by his guru’. 579 
That which relates to the patala has been shown in the conclusion of the 
previous chapter. And this is the meaning of the question here: now it 
has been taught that the supreme Lord, after (pa^cat — ami 580 ) the mat- 
uration ol their impurity, takes hold of ah souls as objects to be purified. 
Among those the three—not one 581 —twice-born estates are jhierarchic¬ 
ally ranked as] high, middle, and low, like cows, gavayas, donkeys and 

so on, according to ordinarily authoritative [non-Saiva] treatises, simply 

/ 

(eva) because that is their nature by birth, as is taught [in some authority 
on dharma]: 


Since Brahmins, Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas have a first birth from 
their mother and a subsequent one from Vedic initiation, they 
are therefore called twice-born. 582 


And the body of their forty-eight purificatory rites, such as the rite at 
the conception of a child, enjoined in ordinarily authoritative |non-Saiva] 
treatises are held by those who know the Veda to have effect on their 
caste only, their fruit being the obviation only of falling [from caste 
on their body, as Manu says, 


or 


The purification of the body that cleanses when the soul has 
passed on and in this world is to be performed by means 
of oblations that attend conception and gestation (garbhair 


578 Thus Ramakantha’s interpretation (6:2.19-21); it is possible that the question was 
intended as it is translated in Hindu Scriptures : ‘And if (va) the purificatory rite is the 
same for them [all|, then how is the status of some inferior and of some superior?’ 

579 Kir ana 1:21b. 

ip 

58 Ramakantha is unpacking extra meaning from sarvanugrahakah . 

F Q 1 

Presumably Ramakantha adds this because by convention expressions meaning 
‘twice-born’ can be used to refer specifically to Brahmins. If this is why he adds 
naikah, then it can be assumed that Ramakantha did not read dvijadayas in 5:1c, for 
that would inevitably have meant more than one estate, but dvijatayas. 

582 Source unknown. 


































































Chapter Six 


359 


homaih , by the birth rite, by the rite of tonsure, and by the 
tying on of the girdle [at Vedic initiation 583 


And therefore this purificatory rite called initiation, because it is a puri¬ 
ficatory rite, must also be the same, that is to say must have effect on 
caste or on the body. And so will not the fruit [of initiation] be merely 
like that (of Vaidika rites, i.e.j bestowal of grace on that [caste or body]? 
[This is a rhetorical question: what is meant is that | there will be nothing 
[of that kind). And so there is a contradiction with that scriptural state¬ 
ment 'When... the soul is initiated by his guru, he becomes omniscient 

5 s4 qq ia t i s the meaning. Since this purificatory rite is similar 
to a Vaidika one, then how is that the state they attain (garih) from a 
Vaidika rite is inferior, and [the state they attain] from this [Saiva rite 
of initiation] superior? It cannot be. This is the (meaning of Garuda’s 
question. Now the correct view (siddhantas tu): 

[The Lord spoke:] 


like Si 


lva 


[Initiation] is held to be not a rite of purification of 
caste nor a purification of the body, [but] of the soul. 

(3ab) 

This purificatory rite is held to be not of caste or of the body but is 
of the nature of salvation ( anugrahatmakah ) for the sentient soul alone, 
because that is what scripture teaches (tathasruteh). and so it is not to 
be imagined to be otherwise merely on the grounds of similarity [with 
Vaidika rites), i lierefore this fault does not apply. Now to those who 
postulate that this [rite] too, while being a purificatory rite that, since it 
is a purificatory rite, has effect on caste or on the body, must [also] assist 
the soul in some unseen way, just as rites such as that of sraddha [assist] 
one's father and grandfather etc., to those He teaches 


If [it purified] one’s caste ( jateh) r then, as soon as a 
single individual is initiated, all [individuals of that 

n o o m _ 

Manusmrti 2:26. llamakantha’s quotation is arguably distortive. Medhatithi, 
followed by most other commentators, (see pp. 204-8 of vol. 1 of Dave’s edition, in 
which the quoted portion is 2:26c-27b) construes the first line with the previous half- 
verse (vaidikaih karmabhih punyair nisekadir dvijanmanain) and the second line with 
the subsequent half-verse baijikam garbhikam caino dvijanam apamrjyate) and un¬ 
derstands samskara to be a collective singular referring to all the rites: elavacanam 
sanrasamskara iti samudayapeksam. 

584 Kir an a l:21bc. 












360 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm %f m 


caste] should be initiated. Therefore it cannot be said 
to be [a purification] of the caste, nor is it taught 
to be [a purification] of the body, since that is insen¬ 
tient. [Instead] it is taught to be [a form of] grace [be¬ 
stowed] on the soul [alone] (cidrupanugrahah ). [Thus] 
the Lord is compassionate to all. (3c-4) 

Since caste is something that is in all souls without distinction, if the 
purificatory rite were performed intending the release of one soul, there 
would be the undesirable consequence that all souls would attain release. 
Now the purificatory rite has been taught to be fruitless for the body, 
because, although this corollary would not be entailed since bodies are 
separate or separate souls, the body is insentient. But what i i athai this 
purificatory rite were to act on the sentient [soul] through that [body]? 
Our response is ( ucyate) that, i; that were the case, there would be no 
contradiction, since we have taught that it bestows compassion on the 
sentient. 585 

[There follows] a question intended to investigate further this same 
issue (atraiva): 

[Garuda spoke:] 

Because [the Lord is] the agent of grace to all, He 
must bestow grace, O Lord, [even] on children, ba¬ 
bies, and on those who are committed to enjoyment 
(-bhoginam). 58(> And that [grace] precedes the puri¬ 
ficatory rite [of initiation]. 587 Since it is taught in the 

585 1 am not convinced that Ramakantha should here be conceding this point. Perhaps 
we should read yady evam virod hah? The asmabhih here means Siva, not Ramakantha, 
reminding us of the fiction that the attacks in the commentary are put in the mouth 
of Garuda and the responses in the mouth of Siva. 

,Sb The Nepalese manuscripts have a quite different text of 6:5. Tryambaka- 
Sambhus commentary contains almost as many echoes oi the Nepalese text as of 
that supported by Ramakantha, and it is therefore difficult to decide how he read 
(IFP 47658, f. 15^ 5-7 ^): fie dev a punar bhattarakasya sarvanugrahakatvat sarvesam 
s t rf£ u dramu rkh e^apan dit an am anugrahakag 6i vas tasmat b ala ball £a bhogi n am bala£ 
gigavo, balitfa mu rkh a, bhogino rajadayafi—tesam apy anugrahaprasado moksah 
jcarttavyas; sa ca samskarapurvakah (em.; °purvaicam MS) sainskaro dlksakhyah purvo 
yasyasav anugrafiafi katham bhavati, baladfnan diksottaram anustheyakarmrnanu- 
stfiane [ jsamarttfiatvat. 

587 The natural (and no doubt originally intended) sense of 6:5d would be And that 
[grace] is dependent on the purificatory rite [of initiation].’ (Thus also Tryambaka- 








Chapter Six 


361 


tantra that liberation is possible through the puri¬ 
ficatory rite [of initiation] alone, then [the enjoined] 
methods of approach such as rituals, knowledge, reli¬ 
gious observances and [yoga] ( kriyajnanavratadlnam ) 
must be useless. 588 ( 5-6) 

Sambhu, for whose commentary see the previous footnote.) 

• ^ ^ ses an issue that had implications for the practice of the cult, and 

so a range of views can be discovered, both in the works of the exegetes and among the 
Siddhantas. In the Pauskara-Parame^vara we find the view implied that initiation could 
su ice for liberation even for those capable of following post-initiatory observances and 
that such observances of the cult should be followed to keep up external appearances 
(Cambridge Parame^vara MS Add. 1049 |=P], f. 32 T collated against Cambridge Praya£- 
cittasamuccaya MS Add. 2833 [=PrS], f. 7 r ^ 3 “ 5 )): 

eko (PrS; P illegible) 'pi samhitamantro bhaktya japto vijanatam (P; 
°janata PrS) 

na£ayaty a^u papani (papani PrS; pani P) sarvany evavicaratah 

varninah guddhajatTya[h\ 6ivadiksa- (P; givadhvara- PrS) -vigodhitah 
vimuktah sarvapapebhyah (PrS; °bhyo P) tivajnanaparag caye (em.; 0 varat 
ca ye PrS; P illegible) 

lokasamvrttiraksartham praya£cittani prakirtitam 

But such a view must soon have been judged to be unsatisfactory because it gives so 
much importance to initiation and so little to subsequent practice that it must have 
seemed to encourage laxity, indeed elsewhere in the Pauskara-Paramegvara we find it 
acknowledged that post-initiatory knowledge, yoga and observances do serve to liberate 
(f, 62 r ^ 2-3 ’, text and translation quoted from Sanderson, * *1996a:43): 

jnanato yogataJ caiva caryatag ca vimucyate 

jnanadlnam tu samarthyam tantram (em. Sanderson; tantram MS) vina na 
vidyate 

ba}abaligavrddha(em. Sanderson; °vrddija° MS )stribhoginam sarujas tatha 

jnanadibhir na mokso ’ sti. tasmad (em. Sanderson; tasma MS) diksaiva 
mocanT 

'One is also liberated by knowledge, Yoga and observance. But knowledge!, Yoga] and 
[observance] have no efficacity without the ritual [of initiation]. What is more, children, 
simpletons, the aged, women, hedonists ( bhogin -) and the sick do not need knowledge], 

Yoga] and [observance] to attain liberation [but achieve their goal through initiation 
alone]. So it is initiation that liberates.’ 

Among the latest of the demonstrably early Siddhantas, in the Matanga , the Kirana, 
and the Parakhya we find fuller discussions of the issue and more developed doctrines. 
For the position of the Matanga see footnote 607 on p. 371 below. The most natural 
interpretation of the Kirana’s teaching (in 6:7ff) is that the upayas are post-initiatory 
means of securing the liberation that initiation has made possible: diksa is essential 
for ultimate liberation, but in ordinary initiation (asadyonirvan adlksa) residues of the 
bonds of maya, karman and mala remain and these must be worn away to achieve the 




362 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * t/ * 


fruit of initiation by observing the samaras, the cult's rules of post-initiatory observ¬ 
ance. The four upayas are what constitute post-initiatory observance. Their perform¬ 
ance insures that the fruit of initiation is attained after death. Because humans are 
various in temperament and ability, all are suited to different upayas, and so they fulfil 
the requirements of the cult by following different upayas after initiation. Each upaya 
can independently lead to final release. (The position that initiation is salvific but must 
be followed up is reiterated in Kirana 47:11-14, where it is compared to a planted seed 
that only comes to fruit if watered and protected.) 

The position of the Parakhya is similar (15:3-4, f. 35 7 ^ -5 ^): 


pratoda uvaca 

ekaikasya pradhanatvani sadhanasyojyadarsiiam 
bodhadinam upayanam katamo muktisadhanam 

prakatfa uvaca 

dTksa tavad iyam mukhya yena tanmidacodita 
caturnam aingata prokta tasyam evopayogatah 


Pratoda spoke: “Each of the means has been shown to be of prime importance. Which 
of the means of knowledge, [action,] etc. is the means to liberation?" Prakaga spoke: 
“Now it is initiation that is important, because it has been taught to be the basis for 
those [others]. The four are taught to be auxiliaries, because they are used only when 
that [initiation has been performed].” ’ In the Parakhya, however, it is not clear to 
what extent the upayas can function independently (the text of the entire discussion is 
confusingly corrupt), and it is implied more than once later in the text that jhana and 
kriya are of greater importance than the other two (e.g. 15:13-16, f. 35 r ^ 9 *): 


na tatra tatvasairiSuddhih samaptir hastadanatah 

* * A ■ 

tavanmatra yada sa syat tada dTksa na moksada 

tenopayah paro (em.; para M Y ) dlksa jhanenatha (com.; jhanekatha M v ) 
kriyadina 

kevalatvena na jhanain dr^yate phalasadliakam 

v jp- 

yata[h| strlbhaksavijhane tatsukham (conj.; tanmukham M ) na 
kriyo<^j^>j h i t am 

jnanapeksa kriyapy evam jhanapurva yatah kriya 

a to jhanakriye dve ’pi phalopayasamagate 
caryayogav api proktau citkriyanugatav api 


‘There is no purification of the tattvas in that [knowledge], since accomplishment |of 
that purification (?)] is achieved by the laying on of the [£iva-|hasta [in initiation]. If it 
consisted in just that [viz. in gnosis], then initiation would not be salvific. Therefore the 
supreme means is initiation, together with knowledge or with action and the rest (?). 
Knowledge by itself is not seen to produce results, since, when [external experiencable 
objects such as] women and food are cognised, enjoyment of them is not possible without 
action. So too action depends on knowledge, for action is preceded by knowledge. 
Therefore both knowledge and action come together as the means to attain fruits (?). 
And carya and yoga are taught to be subsidiary to (?) knowledge and action? 
































































Chapter Six 


363 


For in the Saiva Siddhanta (ill a) the Lord grasps all souls after (iha 
hi... sarvesam... pascat... grahakah = sarvanugrahakartrtvat) the mat¬ 
uration of their innate impurity as objects to be purified [through ini¬ 
tiation], from among those [mentioned in the verses as being fit], in 
accordance with [the legal sense given in] a work of secondary authority 


(smrteh ), 'a “child” is one up to the age of sixteen’, 589 a child is taught to 
be one who has not attained the age for intensive practice of the discip¬ 
lines o’ grammar, hermeneutics, and epistemology (padavakyapramana- 
Sastrabhyasakalah) , 590 The ‘baby’ (baligah) [mentioned in the verse] is 


5sy The source of this particular pac/a has not been traced (see the remarks in the 
apparatus), but it gives what is a standard legal definition of a bala. Cf., for example, 
Naradasmrti 1:31c: bala a sodaSaj jneyah and Astarigahrdaya SarTrasthana 3:105a: 
vayas tv a sodagad balarn. 


090 This could have been translated ‘the age for intensive practice in the disciplines of 
Vyakarana, Mlmamsa, and Nyaya’; but it is clear that Ramakantha does not mean the 
soteriologies associated with the schools that have specialized in these areas. Rama¬ 
kantha effectively redefines ‘child’ to mean juvenile; furthermore, it is implied in 6:6.) 5- 
16 that, even though they may not yet be intensively studying these disciplines, Rama¬ 
kantha envisages that these juveniles are already learning them. Ramakantha’s re¬ 
strictive interpretations of baliga and bhogin (below) are in the same spirit, because he 
is adamant that initiation can only take place when the guru can discern the signs (of 
devotion to Siva and distaste for worldly existence) from which a salvific tfaktipata can 
be inferred to have taken place. Sanderson (*1996a:46) contrasts Ramakantha’s posi¬ 
tion with that of Ksemaraja ad Svacchanda 4:87c-88b (balabalisa vr ddhastnbhogabhug- 
vyadhitatrnanam/ esarn nirbTjika dTksa samayadivivarjita). baliso murkhah. vrddho 
7 uusthanasamarthah . bhogabhug upanatabhogaikasakto py ayatasaktipato diksva cva. 
a nye tv alasyopahato ’yarn na pa tram, a to bhogabhug apathyaparag casau vyadhitaS 
ceti yojavanti. vyadhito dwlcikitsyah. Sanderson translates (ibid.) ‘[Here] -balisa- 
means “simpleton” [rather than “infant”]. “The aged” (-vrddhak are [not all above a 
certain age but only those whom senescence has rendered] incapable of performing [the 
prescribed rites]. By - bhogabhug - he means “those who are completely attached to the 
good things of life that have fallen to their lot” but are nonetheless worthy of initiation 
because [the Guru has evidence that] Siva’s power has descended on them. But there 
are other [commentators] who sav that such victims of sloth could not be beneficiaries 
[of this power] and therefore construe [-bhogabhug- with - vyadhita-, taking the two as a 
Karmadharaya compound meaning] “those who are both addicted to [the consumption 
of unhealthy foods and sick ". By - vyadhita - he means [sick] “without easy remedy”.’ 

Sanderson observes (ibid,: 53) 


Both the interpretation of bhogabhuk in the Svacchanda rejected by 
Ksemaraja and Bhatta Ramakantha’s reading of bhogin in the Kirana 
passage proceed from a refusal to accept that Siva would ever show his 
favour in ways that would demonstrate his own omnipotence at the ex¬ 
pense of the faith of individuals .. . that the benefits of religion come 







364 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

# • * */ * 


not [here] one still younger, because such a one could not be initiated: he 

would be disqualified ( anadhikaritvat) because it would be impossible I for 

% 

the guru| to determine whether the soul jof so young a child] had received 


Siva’s grace. It is rather that baby’ is used to refer to someone who is like 
a baby in that, like women and Sudras and the like,’ 91 he is unfit [even 
to learn the disciplines of grammar, hermeneutics and epistemology | let 
alone practice them]. And one committed to enjoyment ( bhogl ) does not 
mean ‘one fixated upon pleasure’, because such a one would be unfit :'or 


only to those who can be seen to merit them through their actions and 
dispositions. It is for the same reason that Bhatta Ramakantha takes the 

X ■ v * * 

children of the list to be juveniles who have readied the age of reason 
and the simple-minded ( balitfah) to lie not the simple-minded but those 
such as women and Sudras who are excluded from the education of the 
scholar. The first cannot receive seeded initiation because they are not 
vet ready for the study that it entails and the second cannot receive it 
because they can never undertake that study. But both are conscious, 
autonomous agents capable of displaying the Saiva virtues. 


Ksemaraja, however, is content to accept tin 1 evidence of the scriptures, 
both Saiddhantika and non-Saiddhantika, that Siva may wish to favour 

v t/ 

those such as children, simpletons and hedonists, who either cannot 
demonstrate their spirituality or who have none to show. In the case 
of the hedonist Bhatta Ramakantha has merely his conviction that Siva 

* * ■ * 1/ 

cannot wish to liberate such people, because they are void of virtue. 
The non-dualist can counter this with the argument set forth against the 
Saiddhantikas by Abhinavagupta in Tantraloka 13.95 102 that none of 
the conventional signs of spirituality, such as detachment ( vairagyam ), 
disgust for worldly pleasures ( hhoga- vai rasyani) , virtue (dharmah) and 
wisdom (vivekiia), is the inevitable concomitant of the descent of Siva’s 
power. But there is the problem of evidence. 


My interpretation of Ramakantha’s view differs from the above in one particular, for 
which see the next footnote. Ramakantha’s position on what is legitimate evidence for 
gaktipata will be made clear in his commentary on 6:1 Id—12 below. 

591 Sanderson, as is clear from the passage cited in the preceding footnote, has adopted 
the reading of R A P 2 —following which one may interpret 1 “baby” is used to refer to 
those unfit to learn the disciplines of..., such as women and Sudras’—and this may 
indeed be preferable. It becomes clear, however, in 6:11.1-5 that those of the category 
of the ‘baby’ are still capable of carva, and that there are others weaker still who are 
incapable even of that discipline. This weakest category, according to 6:1 i a, is headed 
by women. I 11 support of Sanderson’s interpretation one might argue that Rama¬ 
kantha’s interpretation of 6:11a may not be straightforward (he may be understanding 
the text to refer to diseased and elderly women) and that, unless one adopt R A P 2 , 
Sudras, who would fit in well here, are nowhere accounted for. 












































Chapter Six 


365 


initiation, because his innate impurity could not have ripened. This has 
been taught [above]: 592 

After blocking the power of that [mala], [Siva) makes [the soul] 
devoid of all the desires of [this-worldlyj existence. 

The venerable Vidyadhipati too has said this: 593 


Surely it must be true that (kila nunam) those who [still] crave 
pleasure, that which generates earthly existence, cannot have 
been impelled by your power. Can they be said to have crossed 
to the other side of a terrible great ocean who cross when their 
bodies have been swallowed by sea monsters? 


Rather what is meant is one who has learnt the disciplines of grammar, 
hermeneutics, and [epistemology], and attained the age for intensively 
practising them, but who does not practise them because of the distrac¬ 
tions [of the exercise] of power, such as a king. Such the Lord must 
favour, when their innate impurity is ripened, with that grace of His that 
is a descent of His power. And this (tathabhutah) grace precedes the 
rite of purification that is initiation, in other words ( ity arthah) it is the 
cause [for it] that was taught above. 94 And therefore by the scriptural 
statement 595 ^When... because of an intense descent of power... the soul 
is initiated by his guru and becomes omniscient like Siva’ it is taught in 
this scripture (atragaine [—tantre]) that there should be liberation for all 
by initiation alone, just as there lias been taught to be [liberation] for 
children and others. Thus the means of knowledge, [ritual action, yoga, 
and [observances] that were taught to be performed in the time after 
initiation must be pointless for us, because it has been established that 
children and such, who, since they have no training in [the disciplines 
of] grammar, hermeneutics, and epistemology, are unfit for knowledge 
and the other means in this system too (ihapi), att ain liberation through 
initiation alone (samskarad eva ). Thus the objection (praSnah) is that 


592 Kirana 2:29cd. 

* 

' Phis is very probably from the lost Mana- or Pramana- stotra y three verses of which 

are quoted by Abhinavagupta in Tantraloka 14:10-12. The latter verses have a similar 

rhetorical structure, use similarly fanciful imagery, and are also in mattamayura metre. 

594 See, e.g., ad 1:20-1. 

595 Kir an a 1:21. 

# 







366 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m m * 


we too should not observe this performance of rituals, [the pursuit of] 
knowledge and the others, which does not accomplish any aim for the 
soul. 

The [reply of the Saiva] Siddhanta: 

[The Lord spoke:] 

The Lord bestows grace on people, O Garuda, exactly 
to suit the way they are: (7ab) 

The Lord, upon examining the ripeness of their impurity, bestows grace 
on all souls exactly in accordance with the way they are, both those 
who have been educated in [the disciplines of] grammar, hermeneutics, 
and [epistemology], and those who are otherwise, such as ‘children’. The 
meaning is that He does not reject those unfit for knowledge. To explain: 

some people are suited to ritual in this [system] (atra); 
for them release [from the consequences of wrong 
deeds is to be accomplished] accordingly. Others are 
suited to knowledge; and others again to religious ob¬ 
servances (caryayogyah ). For each of these the Lord 
(tena) has taught a [means of] liberation [from the 
consequences of wrong deeds and they are to achieve 
it] accordingly, 5 ,6 after they have been joined [through 

——^^^a—— ■ m ■r — p 

’A natural interpretation of these lines would be that each upaya can, after ini¬ 
tiation, independently lead to final release; but Ramakantha’s remarks below (par¬ 
ticularly 6:8.9-14) make clear that he is reluctant to understand them in this way. 
Subsequent verses (particularly 6:9-13) support an important part of Ramakantha’s 
position with regard to the four padas, because they emphasize that dlksa is still in¬ 
dispensable as the prime cause of liberation and that the upayas are post-initiatory 
means which serve only to ensure that the fruit of dlksa, is attained immediately upon 
the soul s body’s death, because they wear away the prarabdhakaryakarman and the 
residues of the bonds left undestroyed by an ordinary asadyonirvanadiksa. Abhinava- 
gupta distorts this considerably when he 'quotes’ our passage (in Tantraloka 15:18) 
firstly by omitting the subsequent explanation that reveals that the upayas are all 
conceived of as post-initiatory means that constitute the samayas, and secondly by 
supplanting kriya 0 with diksa°\ 

jnanayogyas tatha kecic caryayogyas tathapare 
dlksayogya yogayogya iti $nkairane vidhau. 

By this means Abhinavagupta has the text support a gnostic position that external 
ritual initiation is just one of a number of possible paths to final liberation. In fact 























































Chapter Six 


367 


initiation] to the Lord (isayojanat ), 597 (7c-8) 

From among those who attain liberation in the form of identity to Sadasiva 
in this way, [that is to say] as taught in the chapter on initiation ( diksa- 

this is a position that is expounded in one other prestigious Siddhanta, the Matahga, 
in vidyapada 26:63, which will be cited in the notes below, and in kriyapada 1:1-2: 

athatah sampravaksyami diksavidhim anuttamam 
sangam samasatah sarvam anunam anukampaya 

yesam adhyavasayo \sti na vidyam praty aJaktitah 
sukhopayam idam tesarn vidhanam uditam guroli 

Tor those who do not have the intellect for [the means called] vidya, because they are 
weak, this instruction :rom the Lord [about diksa is an easy means [to liberation).’ (The 
latter verse is o course adduced by Abhinavagupta, in Tantraloka 15:8, in support of his 
position.) Ramakantha (Matahgavrtti ad vidyapada 26:63. p. 569) explains that what is 
actually meant is that for Saivas, those who realise that knowledge alone cannot remove 
mala and thus bring about liberation, as thinkers of other persuasions who do not know 
of the physical obstruction that is mala maintain, the Lord has taught this easy means 
of accomplishing it called diksa: yesam moksahetutaya (em.; nioksatuhetutaya Bhatt) 
jhanam prati buddhir era nasti , dar^anantaraparidrstadravyatmakamalakhya,bandha- 
nivrttav uktanayena gaktyabhavad iti yuktitah tesain Saivanam mo k say a sukhopayam 
etad diksakhyam sadhanam uditam iti vaksyamah. 

i »/ » ft/ * 

The reason for Ramakantha not wishing to follow a natural interpretation of the text 
of the Kirana here can be found earlier in the same passage of commentary (Matahga- 
vrtti ad vidyapada 26:63, p.567): moksas £u cat us t ay ad asm at samuccitad eva; 
naikasmat. 'But [ultimate] liberation [can be acheived] only from this group of all four 
[of the post-initiatory means] altogether, not from [just] one [of them].' Thus here 
Ramakantha has the Kirana teach that a certain kind ol ritual, meditative practice 
or religious observance can remove the evil consequences of particular transgressions. 
He is forced to admit that the text teaches that some are suited to particular upayas^ 
but does not make clear here whether he understands that they should follow only the 
particular upaya to which they are suited. It is implied that this is not the case at least 
with jhana, for he explains below (6:8.5-7) that those especially suited to jhana are 
a car y as, Ramakantha’s position may be consistent, if we assume that he understands 
that recipients of as a dyon irvan ad iksa are ordinarily bound to the performance of all 
the upayas, but that those capable of no more than kriya have their obligations to 
perform all but kriya and carya removed in initiation and that those suited only to 
carya have their obligations to perform all other upayas removed in initiation. 

()ne might understand Ramakantha’s gloss Kaniyojanat (6:8.9) as intended to sup¬ 
port another interpretation: 'because the Lord has so enjoined’; but I have not un¬ 
derstood it in this way because Ramakantha appears to require the interpretation I 
have here given when he refers back to the passage in his commentary on 6:23c-24. 
TryambakaSambhu’s gloss too (though his understanding o r the whole is quite different) 
supports the accepted interpretation of this word (IF; J 47658, f. 17 r ^): ...yojanam 
kriyate paradhamni, tasinad Kayojanad eva saksan moksas sayujyarupo bhavati, na 
tu kriyadinety artthah. It is possible, nonetheless, that Ramakantha intended one 
interpretation here but used the other later on. 





368 






Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


prakaranenokta — tathaiva ), some, ‘children 5 and those absorbed [in the 
exercise of power] (bhoginah), are, according to this system (atra), fit 
only for worship (kriyayam yagatmikayam ), which is divided into recita¬ 
tion and external and mental [ritual], in the time after initiation, not for 
knowledge. But, one might object that (nanu) there can be no suitability 
for ritual without knowledge, [forj as they say, ‘And after discerning, one 
performs 5 . 598 This is true, but that knowledge, because it is |only| that 
[knowledge] which is required for [the performance of] ritual, has as its 
object only a part of the £astra, and is thus said to be nothing but kriya, 
and there is no contradiction [in our position]. 

Those others, i.e. different from those mentioned above (proktebhyo 
’nye [= anye] )h >99 who are skilled in grammar, hermeneutics, and epistem¬ 
ology, are, because of their fitness for knowing and interpreting [scripture 
and pondering its meaning, acaryas invested with the entitlement and 
duty to pursue [the means of] knowledge (jhane ... adhikriyante). This 
is the meaning. Others, who were mentioned [with the expression] ‘ba¬ 
bies’, and who are unfit even for ritual, because of their fitness tor carya 
alone, which consists in the following of religious observances, such as the 
krcchra and candrayana fasts and the like, are invested with the entitle¬ 
ment and duty [to perform these] (adhikriyante). Thus after initiation 


(t hksan an t aram 


Tsaniyojanat 600 


itfayojanat]), in the way that the 


Lord (bhagavata = tena) taught the release from the consequences of 
wrong deeds for those invested with the duties of performing kriya , jhana 
and the others by the performance of regularly and occasionally obligat¬ 
ory rites, ‘in exactly that way they should accomplish it’—this is how the 
sentence should be completed (ity adhyaharah). 601 (Itherwise 


If someone transgresses the rules of the cult [after receiving 
initiation], it is taught that he will become a PiSaca for a 
hundred years. 602 

598 Source unknown. 

599 Hamakantka takes the anye rather emphatically, in order to make the point that 
the categories of persons to whom Garuda referred are not meant. 

600 For an alternative interpretation see footnote 597 on p. 367 above. 

601 By understanding pratyavayaphalcbhyo moksah and by supplying tais tath- 
aivanustheyah Ramakantha distorts the natural sense of the Lor i s speeTi, namely 

4 # |/ i * # 

that souls attain ultimate liberation by these means. 

602 Sardhatrtfatikalottara 25:2cd, but see also footnote 47 on p. 176, in which an almost 
identical verse is discussed. 














































Cha])ter Six 


369 


The meaning is that these are not released from the consequences of wrong 
deeds and omissions {pratyavayaphalebhyah). Thus we have first refuted 
the fault [imputed, namely] that knowledge and so forth are to be per¬ 
formed by all [without distinction, since they are [in fact] enjoined accord¬ 
ing to souls' entitlement and duty ( yathadhikaram ); as for the objection 
[implicit in 6:6] ‘for what purpose are they performed?’—in reply to that 
He teaches 


Initiation is held to be a prerequisite (Jcaranam) 
for the [further] means [to liberation], which are 
knowledge [ritual action, observances,] and [yoga] 
(jnanadTnam). By initiation alone there need not be 
liberation/ 03 It is the [subsequent] means which de¬ 
termines that. 004 (9) 


Phe text is not making the heretical assertion that initiation is not salvific but 
stressing that initiation entitles and binds normal initiates (i.e. those who have re¬ 
ceived asadyonirvanadlksa) , to certain religious practices. Initiation followed by the 
performance of enjoined observances is salvific. Only those incapable of following those 
observations have their obligations to do so ritually removed in initiation. The accep¬ 
ted reading of 6:9a conveys the same sense as Yivanti's emendation, which Brunner 
has twice suggested (review of E v and 1992:270) is wrong. What Vivanti conjectures 
(dlksayaivavimoksah syat) is, I think, also possible, and its purport is in fact supported 
by Ramakantha’s commentary, although Brunner asserts the contrary. 

604 If it were assumed that Pi's version (in 6:9.3; of the pratlka for 6:9d were correct, 
then we might translate: ‘Where [it is required that] there is something that curbs 
[bondage that has not been removed by initiation], it is the [post-initiatory] means [that 
does so].’ Pi’s reading is awkward and is found in very few sources (it is presupposed 
by G 2 S reading and is given as a pathantara bv TryambakaSambhu); it might therefore 
be argued that it is more unlikely that Pi's text has been altered to support it than 
that the text of the other manuscripts has been altered to support the reading common 
to almost all sources of the muJa. 

It has been remarked above (see footnote 6()7 on p. 371 that Abhinavagupta achieves 
his interpretation of the Kirana partly by omitting this portion, Kirana 6:9-12. A glance 
at the apparatus reveals that this is exactly what most of the South Indian manuscripts 
do. It is difficult to know whether this is a deliberate or accidental corruption of the 
text. It will be noticed that the reading of 6:8d in the same manuscripts— moksam 
tenaiva yojayet —could be taken to account for an eveskip because of homoioteleuton to 
the prakatfayet of 6:13b. The South Indian transmission of the Siddhantas was certainly 
guilty of deliberate and substantial redaction to improve the clarity and structure of 
the text. It is my impression that scribes of the Nepalese transmission tended to copy 
uncritically exactly what they thought they read, unworried by occasional patches of 
gibberish, so that the text of the tantra developed in Nepal much as the message 
does in a game of Chinese whispers. South Indian scribes, however, in addition to 









370 


Ramakantha’s Comment ary on the Kiranatantra 

f f iS a 


Knowledge and the others are not pointless, because it lias been taught in 
this [scripture! (atra) that they are means; it is just that because they have 
been taught to be preceded by initiation, release from bondage cannot be 
an effect [created] by initiation, because that alone cannot accomplish 
this. Rather ‘it is the [subsequent] means which determines that’. That 
[post-initiatory means], i.e. that of knowledge, [action] and the others 

— sah) is the means that curbs, i.e., the cause that cuts away 
(viccheclako hetuh = upayo niyamakah ), [the bonds] for those certain 
people (tesam kesancid eva ) for whom this cutting away (vicchedatmako 
niyamah) in order to liberate from bonds has not been [entirely] achieved 
through initiation. To explain: 



Because He is compassionate to all, [the Lord] taught 
those means. Why did He not teach [just] the one 

copying errors, have had a tendency to introduce motivated alterations. Many instances 
of substantial motivated change in the South Indian transmission could be adduced 
(e.g. the addition of a half-verse after 1:23b [to give a patalika sambandha with the 
following chapter]; the South Indian readings at the beginning of the second pat ala; 
the South Indian version of 6:20); but I have so far found none in the Kirana where the 
purport has been deliberately distorted, with the possible exception of the omission 
here of 6:9-12. Whether deliberate or no, it suited the purpose of the thinkers of 
the devotional South Indian school of neo-Saiddhantikas, who were compromised by 
the gnosticism of Advaita Vedanta. Late South Indian notions about the four padas 
have been sketched above in a discussion of Tirumular (see introduction, footnote 85 
on p. xxxvii). Most of these were evidently shared by Nigamajhanade&ka who writes, 
at the very end of his S i vajnanabod h op any as a: dasamargasatputramargasaharnarga- 
sa n m argaih vapn tim sampadaye t. janin an t arakr tatfivabh aktaradhanasukrta visesa- 
jiaripakcna prathainata eva kriyacaryayogapadarthanusandhanam vinaiva jhanapada- 
bhyasena nib eyas am sarnpadayati. ‘One should achieve Siva’s favour by the das a-, 
satputra saha-, and sat- paths [i.e. those of carya, kriya, yoga and jhana respectively]. 
[Alternatively] by virtue of the ripening of particular good deeds—propitiating Siva 
and his devotees [and so forth]—performed in previous lives, [some] may straight away 
(prathainata eva), without performing what is taught in the kriya, carya and yoga 
padas, attain the highest good by the practice of [what is enjoined in] the jnana- 
pada. The same author’s unpublished Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha, a 
collection of quotations from scripture chosen to substantiate and illustrate the second 
half of the Sivajnanabodha (the text is divided into an attack on parapaksas and a 
defense of the svapaksa of the Saiva Siddhanta) quotes Matanga vidyapada 26:63, and 
thereafter Kirana6:7-8 (IFP T. 317/2, p.1116). Clearly he has in mind the non-dualists’ 
interpretation of both passages, and he quotes the Kirana passage in the form that it 
appears in the South Indian manuscripts that omit 6:9 12. Thus it is likely that he 
had before him the shortened version, without the portion that would have conflicted 
with his interpretation. 

























('hapter Six 


371 


means? Because [scripture elsewhere teaches] other¬ 
wise. (10) 


For in this system (iha hi) the grace—consisting in the cutting away of 
a soul's impurity and the rest [of his bonds] and in the revelation of his 
innate Sivaliood—which the Lord does not completely bestow through the 
kind initiation that grants non-immediate release (asadyonirvanadiksa), 
because, for the reason that will be taught below , 605 it excludes from being 
destroyed the experience of the fruits of past actions which have already 
started to take effect—[this grace] is to be bestowed ( kartavyah ) by Him 
accordingly 606 through His teaching. And that is why knowledge and so 
1)11 nrc l ); oclairned as means for cutting away that amount of impurity and 
such that has been left [undestroyedj by initiation. [Therefore,] using these 
means, initiates must gradually, day by day, accomplish the destruction of 


impurity and the rest [of the bonds] and the manifestation of [their innate] 
Sivahood in such a way that there is no obstruction of past actions whose 
fruits have begun to take effect. But they do not depend on any other 
causal factor for the destruction of such bondage and the manifestation 
of | innate] Sivahood. [But] if [all] this were not [as] intended by the 
supreme Lord, then why did He not just teach the one means, called 


initiation? Because (yad iti yasmat) with such scriptural passages as 
‘liberation or [supernatural pleasures are to be achieved] by the group 
of four (means together ]’ 607 He taught otherwise, [i.e.,] that there are 


605 

Kirana 6:18-21 and commentary ad loc. 

006 

tathaiva could be understood to mean sarvatmana. 

00 T 

Matahga vidyapada 26:63d. The verse from which this is quoted is problematic for 
Ramakantha: 

v » 


sadatfivapadam yogac caryato vatha diksaya 
prapyate cittabhedena rnokso vatha catustayat 


A natural interpretation is that the four can be independent means to liberation and, 
since kriya is here equated with initiation, this allows the non-dualists to assert that 
even the Siddhantas allow that ritual is not essential: k The state of Sadafflva is at¬ 


tained by yoga, or by carya or by initiation, by a certain kind of knowledge, or by 
I all] four.’ Briefly what Ramakantha does with this is to explain that sadasivapada 
refers (by upalaksana) to all worlds beyond maya and that sadhaicas who so desire 
can attain particular ones by particular kinds of yoga or carya appropriate to them, 
or by initiatory rites that link them with particular worlds; but ultimate liberation 
is to be attained by all four (understood then as post-initiatory means for recipients 
of asadyonirvanadiksa that constitute the samayapasa. The va after moksah Rama- 
kantha interprets to mean ‘or [supernatural pleasures may also be accomplished by 










372 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


all four] . Ramakantha here refers to this passage, because his commentary thereon 
emphasizes the indispensabihty of all four padas for attaining liberation: moksas tu 
catustayad asm at samuccitad eva; naikaikasmat. bhogo veti veuSabdarthah. ' tat ha 
hi caryayogayos tavaj jhanam vina anusthanam eva nopapadyate. na hy ajhate ’rthe 
yogahsamadh,hcarya va prag ukta sambhavati. jhanam api ca dravyatvan maladTnam 

an hanam nachksakhyam vyaparam vin a tebhyah pmpso moksam kartum ksamam 
ity uktarn guddhavidyaprakarane (7:74ab)— ' ‘ 


tasman inantrakriya mukhya segvan bhuktimuktida iti. 


atodiksaiva moksahetur iti. jhanadlnam cacaryasamskaradvarena diksayam viniyoga- 
darganat. yad vaksyati diksaprakarane (kriyapada 5:3c-4b) 

\ id yap ad ai thaku^alah kriyapadagatakramah 
yogapadakrtabhyasag caryapadanu vartakah 

gurur diksam prakurvita iti 

kevalam asadyonirvanadiksayarabdhakaryanam karmanam anupaksayat tadbhogopa- 
rodhen a, maJamayiyayor api paiSayoh sarvathanapadhvamsitatvena em Sandcr- 

DhaU) ^^y^bhivyaktatvad diksottarakalam 

J -,, d ’ ,!‘! , hfL apacayakramena pratyaham tesam pat an am vicchittih, Sivatvasva 
cabhivyaktih knyate^yatharabdhakaryanam karmanam na bhogavirodho (em. Sander- 

S vZnivrttihT d t 0 haU) Jayate ' nIP ' Ca P ^ nKm P unah Prarohah, vyaparantarena 
va mvrttih, tivatvasya vyaparantarena vabhivyaktir iti bhavaty eva catustayad diksa- 

jnanader yathasvam (em. Sanderson; yatha sva° Bhatt) vyaparabhedan muktir iti 
suktam mokso va catustayad iti. 

Modifications are drawn from Sanderson’s quotation of the passage (*1996a-39-40) 
which he translates as follows {ibid.Al~2): V h 

‘Liberation, however, comes from all four, from these in combination rather than 

“’’i an01 7 ° f tb T' The W r d ^ “° r ” lneanS “° r the “joyment (of a chosen 

attaining th . ^ t u 0 ^-'m° f ^ ^ &h ° bc ado P ted as the means of 

attaining the goal of the Sadhaka]. 

‘Let me explain [what he means by these four combined). Neither ritual (carya) nor 

neXTvo^/[^ Ct t Se r th T knowled S e - For if the teaching has not been understood, 
neither \oga, [that is to say] immersion ( samadhih ), nor the afore-mentioned ritual is 

possible. Moreover, because Impurity and the other bonds are material, it is impossible 

r knowledge to liberate the soul from them without the help of action that we call 
pu r (T know ledge § 1615011 KaS 1 vid y a P^ 7,] the chapter on 

Therefore the ritual of the Mantras is greater [than any human actionh 

With the Lord [as its agent in the person of the officiant] it bestows both 
liberation and the enjoyment [of paradise] [74ab], 

‘So it is initiation that causes liberation. [The same] also [follows] from the fact that the 
now edge[, meditation| and |the discipline (carya)J are seen [in our scriptures] to have 
initiation as their sphere of application by virtue of [their role in| the training of the 
officiant [who performs it], as Siva will say in | kriyapada 5,] the chapter on initiation 

The officiant ( guruh) may perform the initiation [only] if he is skilled 
in the doctrines of the Vidyapada, has mastered the procedures of the 


































Chapter Six 


373 


several means. Therefore this is what we understand [from the Lord’s 
teaching here]: knowledge and the others are means towards [achieving] 
that grace which is not achieved by initiation. And thus the assertions 
that ‘[the enjoined] methods of approach such as rituals, knowledge, and 
religious observances ( kriyajnanavratadinam) must be useless' 60 * and that 
’liberation is possible through the purificatory rite [of initiation] alone ’ 609 
are shown to be unfounded and, because they are for those with a special 
[limited] entitlement and duty, he teaches that they state what has already 
been established: 

[The initiating teacher] should cleanse away the ob¬ 
ligations [to perform what is enjoined for ordinary 

Kriyapada, has thoroughly practised [what is taught in| the Yogapada 
and adheres to [the rules prescribed by] the Caryapada [3c—4]. 

Mf Sivahood is not made manifest through initiation alone, that is because unless it is 
the form of initiation that bestows immediate release [in death] (aSadyonirvanadiksaya ), 
it does not destroy those past actions whose elfects are already active, and so also desists 
from eliminating entirely the bonds of Impurity and Maya], leaving something of them 
in place] in order to allow the experience of the fruition [of those actions). So (anabhi- 
vyaktatvat ) it falls to knowledge], meditation, the discipline! and [regular worship] after 
initiation to remove [the remnant of| those bonds by gradually diminishing them, day 
by day, and bring about the revelation of [the soul’s] Sivahood, so that the experience 
[of the fruition] of those past actions whose effects are already active is not impeded. 
Once destroyed the bonds cannot arise again. No other operation [but that of initiation 
completed by this post-initiatory discipline] can destroy them; and no other operation 
[than this] can reveal [one’s] Sivahood. So it is that liberation comes about from the 
four factors of initiation, knowledge], meditation] and [the discipline], as the result of 
the specific functions of each. Thus our text has rightly declared: “Liberation is the 
result of the four, or [enjoyment]”.’ 

It is Ramakantha’s attitude that Abhinavagupta attacks at the beginning of 
Tantraloka 15: he starts with the following purvapaksa (15:lc-2b): tatra dlksaiva 
bhoge ca muktau cayaty upayatam/ svayam samskarayogad va tad an gam tat pra- 
dargyate. Jayaratha explains ... dlksaya samskare kite yogajnanadav adhikaro jay ate 
yena bhuktimukti syatam. tad iti evarn bhuktimuktyupayatvad dbctoh. The emphasis 
on initiation being the means towards bhoga as well as moksa and the fact that Abhi¬ 
navagupta next cites a verse from the Suksmasvayambhuva (a text of which only this 
quotation is known) and later (in 15:8) also Matahga kriyapada 1:2—both of which 
llamakantha cites in the Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 26:63—suggest that Abhinava¬ 
gupta may have had this passage of Ramakantha’s commentary in mind. 

608 Kirana 6:6cd. 

609 Kirana 6:6a. 








374 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * 1 / « 


initiates] (samayan) 610 from women and other such, 
because they are incapable [of fulfilling those obliga¬ 
tions]. That is no fault, because they are ignorant; 
(llabc) 

Now it has been said that 'babies’ are suited to carya because of their 
extreme ignorance; but for those who, although they have knowledge, are 
utterly incapacitated [to perform what is enjoined) because of illness or 
old age -the elderly, the diseased, women 611 and such—the acarya should 
purify by initiation all [obligations to follow) the means of kriya , jnana, 
carya, which are [here] spoken of with the word samaya ('rules’) because 
it is enjoined that they must at all times be performed. This the Lord 
has taught somewhere [with the following verse]: 

For them initiation is ‘seedless’, devoid of [the obligations to 
follow] the rules of the cult and such . 612 

But it is not to be supposed that it is denied here (atra) that they are 
rules, because it will be taught 61,3 that [the evil consequences of] those 
[transgressions] such as abusing God or the guru or the fire, which are di¬ 
vided into ordinary, venial, and gross transgressions, are to be destroyed 
by reparatory rites such as krcchr a and candrayana fasts. And there¬ 
fore, even when jnana, kriya and the others are not performed by these 
on grounds of extreme weakness (ajnatvad ity atyantasaktivaikalyena), 
there is no transgression (dosah pratyavayatmakah) on their part. By 
the word ‘and’ are included also those who performed them before but, 
due to weakness, cease to perform them. For those too there is no fault, 
since ‘those entitled and bound to [some enjoined] action are those with 

£[ 1 A 

The obligations to follow jhana, kriya, carya and yoga are held to be a further 
bond (samayapaga) that for ordinary initiates can only be removed by observing them. 

It is possible that Ramakantha does not intend women in general here; see foot¬ 
note 591 on p. 364 above. 

/i i n 

Svacchanda 4:88ab (quoted above with Ksemaraja’s interpretation in footnote 590 
on p. 363). Ramakantha may have been deliberately imprecise about the source of this 
quotation, not simply because it is not from a Siddhanta, but because the immediate 
context contradicts his position, for the preceding half-verse (also quoted above on 
p.363) includes also the baia, the baliga and the bhogabhuk as candidates for ‘seedless’ 
initiation (nirbyadrksa.) 

613 * 

Kirana Chapters 43 and 44. The tesam in this sentence seems inappropriate; 
perhaps the text here is in need of some emendation. 








































Chapter Six 


375 


fadequate] means (a rthi). capable, knowledgeable, and not excluded [on 
some other ground] by sastra .’ 614 This He teaches: 

If they had understanding ( jnatvat ) it would be a 
great sin. Therefore these [ignorant ones] attain lib¬ 
eration [just] through initiation, because they have 
devotion [to the Lord]. Those who are capable [of per¬ 
forming what is enjoined for ordinary initiates] are not 
to have their obligations cleansed away [in initiation]. 

To them [the initiating teacher] should reveal [those 
obligations], (lid—12) 

Here ‘understanding’ is [to be interpreted] as ‘capability’, as He goes on to 
say (yathaha) that [the rules are] not to be cleansed away by initiation for 
those who are capable of [performing] them. Rather [the acarya] should 
explain them to be [duties to be] followed at all times. And so those who 
are capable of performing regular [and occasional] obligatory action and 
do not do so incur great sin, i.e. [-laksanah), [the obligation to perform] 
reparatory rites—not those who are incapable. What regular duties do 
they then have? Such things as attendance on God, the guru, and His 
devotees, either in a worldly manner 615 or in a manner enjoined by [the 
corpus of] Sivadharma [texts] , 616 as much as they are able, either them¬ 
selves or by sending sons, servants and so forth. And this accomplishes for 

This is quoted also in the Sardhatrigatikalottaravrtti ad 1:2, p. 6. Bhatt there 
observes that it is No. 719 of a LaukikanyayasahasrT (Bombay, 1935—not available to 
me at the time of going to press). Other formulations of the same idea are well known, 
e.g., in the Sabarabhasya on 1.3.2., cited, with another version of the proverb, in Apte’s 
"collection of popular Sanskrit maxims’ (1957: Appendix E, p. 55). 

pi ^ 

i.e. following £ruti and srnrti, for cf. Matangavrtti ad vidyapada 4:49-50, p. 98: 
grutyadivihitena (Kashmirian MSS; srutau vihitena Bhatt) givadharmoditena va vid- 
hina Itfvaropasanaiva karyeti pratTyate. 

616 These are unpublished with one exception: the Sivopanisat printed in 1933 by the 
Adyar Library on pp. 324-78 of their quaintly titled Un-published Upanishads. Its 
inclusion there is anomalous, for its plain diction and versification (in a nustubh) char¬ 
acteristic of unambitious Puranic or tantric writing, its avowed affiliation to the Siva¬ 
dharma corpus (proclaimed in !;5—8), and its very opening phrase ( kailasasikharasinam ) 
reveal that its author was not really aiming at any Upanishadic style. 

In South India two texts from this corpus are commonly transmitted: the confus¬ 
ingly named Sivadharmagastra (e.g. in IFP T. Nos. 32, 72, 514, 779 860, 887, and 912) 
and the $ivadharmottara (e.g. in IFP T. Nos. 72, 75, 281, 510). Numerous other 
texts of this genre are transmitted in early Nepalese manuscripts, notably in two 
large palm-leaf codices held in Cambridge hiiversity Library: MS Add. 1645 and 










376 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * V * 


them what is brought about [for others] by the above-mentioned means 
of jnana, kriya and the rest. For (yatha) He teaches [that they receive 
initiation] ‘because they have devotion' (bhakt iyoga £ ah 617 ). Otherwise, 
because one would not be able to discern in them devotion and such, 
which is an effect of the descent of Siva’s power, because oi their utter 
stupidity, as with animals, they would not be entitled to receive initi¬ 
ation. And it is wrong to infer the descent of Siva's power on them from 
their sons or others asking that they be initiated, because the locus [of 
devotion] is different. For smoke in a Dhava tree 618 does not cause one to 
infer fire in a Khadira tree 619 as its cause. And the descent of power has 
been taught to be the cause of devotion and such, but not of becoming 
a suppliant [begging for initiation], especially not [when this becoming a 
suppliant is] in a different locus, since this can be proved to be dependent 
on the influences of affection alone. As they say , 620 

One should urge someone one loves to the religion. 

It is not right to in er from this [that) a descent of Siva’s power [has taken 
place], because there is no necessary concomitance. 21 Because they are 

MS Add. 1694. MS Add. 1645 is complete but for a few folios and was written in 
1136 ad (dated sam vat 256 on f. 247 ). It begins with the Sivadhaxma£astia (12 

adhyayas, some of whose colophons are of the form iti $ivadharma$astre nandike£vara- 
proktayam samhitayam. .., e.g. f. 5'f. 6' 2 ~ ) and is followed by the Sivadharmottara 
(ff. 38 r -87' ; 12 ad hy ay as ), the Si vadh armasahgraha (i f. 87 r -132 r ; 12 adhyayas), the 
Sivopanisat (ff. !32 r ~150 r ; 7 adhyayas ), the Um am ah egvarasarn vada ff. 150 U -18(F; 22 
adhyayas), the Uttarottaramahasamvada (ff. 180 1 -201 i ; 9 adhyayas), the Vrsasarasari- 
graha (ff. 201^—238^; 24 adhyayas) and the Dharmapuirika (if. 238 v -247 1 '; 16 pataias). 
Texts of the Si vadh arm a preach devotion to Siva for pious laity. Their teachings 
may derive from Saiva tantras—they share, for instance, such tantric features as the 
pancastaka . the list of Saiva ksetras divided into five groups of eight (Sivadharma 12, 
J FI > T. 32, pp. 147-8), though not correlated with tattvas, as in the Kirana 8:1094) and 
in the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha (4:46ff, p. 11 ) —but, since they are intended for non- 
initiates, their doctrines and ontology are different. Thus the Sivadharmasahgraha’s 
second verse (f. 87' ^) begins sadvimsaya pradhanaya mahadevaya dhlmatc , thus im¬ 
plying that the text recognised the existence of only the twenty-five tattvas of the 
Sahkhyas with Siva as the twenty-sixth and that it upheld some sort of non-dualist 
position. 

617 

ex cony 

618 Anogeissus Latifolia Wall, (thus Meulenbeld, 1988:442). 

619 Acacia catechu Willd. (thus Meulenbeld, 1974:538). 

620 Source unknown. 

621 As Sanderson observes (*1996a:54) with reference to this passage, ‘For Bhatta 
Ramakantha the inevitable absence of clear indications of fitness in such persons is 

• v 

















































Chapter Six 


377 


proved to have [a certain level of] understanding, in contradistinction to 
animals, because of their having devotion [towards God), and because, if 

proof that the scriptures did not intend them to be initiated. But in pointing this out 
he discloses how his opponents got round this problem, namely by claiming that the 
Descent of Power can be inferred from the fervour of the requests of others that initi¬ 
ation be performed ... Abhinavagupta uses just this argument to ustify the practice 
of initiating the dead, who are obviously even less promising as sites of evidence than 
young children and simpletons ... 1 

Ramakantha’s polemical tone here is thus partly accounted for by the fact that he was 
attacking an abuse that was practised at the time in Kashmir and that was condoned 
by the non-dualists. Sanderson (1995:30, footnote 70) refers to three passages from the 
Tantraloka in which Abhinavagupta speaks of inferring that an initiand has received 
Saktipata from the requests of others (14:20-2, 19:4-5b, and 21:9c-llb), The last of 
these reads: 

ban dim bh a ryasuhrtp u tragadh abhyarth anayogatah 
svayani tadvisayotpannakarunabalato pi va 

Kr * * ■/ M m JL 

vij hat at an in u kh ay a t aSa k t ipa t amSadh arm an ah 
gurnr diksam mrtoddhanm kurvita Sivadayinim 

Sanderson translates (*1996a:50): A Guru may perform the Siva-best owing initiation 
that rescues the dead [from the hells| for any [deceased person] whom he knows to 
possess one of the degrees of saktipata through either of the following means: because 
of fervent requests from the person’s kin, wife, friends or son or because of the intensity 
of the pity that he himself feels for the person.’ 

Jayaratha's commentary ad loc. responds to Ramakantha’s objections: evam 

v w A ■ ■ 

evam vidhanam esam bandhvadigadhabhyarthanadvanyathanupapattya avataSakti- 
patatvarn niScitya mrtoddharhn diksam guruh kuryad ity atra tatparyam. 
bandhvadlnam ca taduddidhTrsaparataya prarthanadayo jay am an ah param es vara^akti- 
patamula eva, na sneh am at ram filah , sarvatra tathadarganayogat. na catra vyadhi- 
karanatvam doso yad ay ask ant kvogolakasp an dan ad i vad bhinnadesany api karanebhyah 
karyani bhavanti drgyanted 

i/ i m %/ 

Sanderson translates (ibid.-.b 1): 'So for such as these a Guru should perform 
Mrtoddharadlksa, once he has determined that gaktipata has come to them, reasoning 
that such [phenomena) as the fervent requests he has received from their kin and others 
would not occur if it had not. Moreover, when the requests and the like of kin and 
others arise through intense desire to save [the dead) they must originate in a descent of 
the power of Paramesvara, not in mere affection, for we do not see such [affection] in all 
instances. Nor does the fact that they[, the requests and the inferred descent of power,] 
have different loci constitute a defect [in this position], ’or there are effects which are 
seen to come about from their causes even though the effects are in a different location, 
as is the case with such phenomena as the motion of a ball of iron and a magnet. 1 

As evidence that this mrtoddharadlksa was common practice in Kashmir Sanderson 
{ibid.) adduces Ksemendra s satirical remarks on the motives of widows who have the 
ceremony performed for their deceased husbands in DeSopadcsa 8:50c and Narmamala 
3:43. 



378 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

*4 */ m 


they were utterly incapable, they could not perform anything enjoined 
by gastra, [not even devotion], it is right that they should [instead at 
least 622 ] always perform such things as [reciting] hymns of praise about 
the Lord, obeisances, and attendance [upon images of the Lord and upon 
the guru), just as lay followers (upasakanam) do, who have not received 
initiation. Thus there is no contradiction [in our position]. Because it has 
been taught that these are not to perform jhana and the others, therefore 
the objections raised above -[namely] that ‘[the enjoined] methods of ap¬ 
proach such as rituals, knowledge, and religious observances (kriyajnana- 
vratadinam ) must be useless ’ 623 and that ‘liberation is possible through 
the purificatory rite [of initiation! alone’ 624 —are inappropriate with ref¬ 
erence to these [i.e. the incapable], because they prove what has already 
been established. 

Now He concludes: 

Thus he should reveal all [the means of] knowledge, 
[ritual, religious observances,] and [yoga] to those cap¬ 
able of them. Otherwise there would be a break in 
continuity, and continuity is what is taught in the 
Saiva tradition. If there were no continuity, there 
would be nothing. And that is why this injunction 
exists. [Thus the Lord is] compassionate to all [also] 
because of His wish to teach the means that constitute 
the religion. 625 (13—14) 


022Thi s i s probably what is intended, but it is possible that the argument is now 
more pointed than Ramakantha meant it to be: perhaps we should instead translate 1 
‘and because they cannot perform what is enjoined by tfastra, since they are utterh 
incapable, it is right that they should [instead] always perform only such things as . . . ' 

623 Kirana 6:6cd. 

624 Kirana 6:6a. 

A 

620 The second half of this verse may have been intended to mean ‘And so this in¬ 
junction exists because he is compassionate to all, [and this expression is used] with 
the intention of referring to the means [that he provides] for maintaining continuity’ or 
‘And so this injunction exists because of the [Lord’s) desire to teach means to maintain 
continuity (sthityup ay a vi va ksaya ), since He is compassionate to all.’ Ramakantha does 
not analyse the compound, but he does seem to take the half-verse as a separate state¬ 
ment and as a reaffirmation of the Lord’s being compassionate to all (in answer to the 
implied doubt of Garuda’s in 6:5), but, in order that this affirmation seem not repetit¬ 
ive. he implies (with the api in 6:14.9) that 6:14d provides a new reason for saying it: 
we know that the Lord bestows grace in the descent of salvific power before initiation 
and in initiation and even, as Ramakantha mentions below (6:14.7-8), once the soul has 











































( 'hapter Six 


379 


To the one suited to knowledge the acarya should reveal jhana as [the 

to be at all times followed, but to the one suited to ritual action. 


means 



means 


he should reveal kriya and so forth. And that [initiate] should practice 
|the means revealed to him] accordingly. Otherwise, because of the failure 
to perform [what is enjoined], there would be a break in the continuity, 
[that is to say in] what is taught in the scriptures ( againavihitayah ) to be 
what must regularly and [occasionally] be performed. And once such a 
break in continuity had come about, ‘there would be nothing’, that is to 
say the fruit of initiation would not follow immediately [upon the initiate’s 
death] because it would be superseded by [the need forj reparations, which 
will be taught later [in the tantra]. For this reason (tena karanena [= 
tena]), namely that (ifci) it would be superseded by the obstacle of [the 
need fori reparations, this injunction to the effect that [the means ofj 
knowledge and the others must invariably be followed exists, since they 
are beneficial to souls (purusarthatvena). But when they do not follow 

, then souls (tesam) experience the result of [the need for] 
reparations. Now at the end , 626 when they are then in that state of 
being [of the vijhanakcvalin) in which they are separated [from the bonds, 
except from some residual impurity] because of their purified power of 
knowledge (visuddhajhanakcvaUtvena). grace comes from the Lord, since 
even that [small] amount of impurity [that still remains for them] cannot 
remove itself, because it is [insentient] substance. In this way the Lord 
does bestow compassion on all whose impurity is ripened [and lie does 
so] also because of His desire to teach the means ;01 release] that are the 
practices o r the Saiva religion. Thus there is no contradiction 
position ]. 627 

[There follows] a question further to investigate this same issue (at- 
raiva): 

[Garuda spoke:] 

Now initiation is for the sake of removing bonds and 
[revealing innate Sivahood, and yet] it is said (kila) 


m our 


become a vjjnanakevalin , but he also shows his compassion to all in teaching the means 
that are the Saiva religion (|nitjdidyanusfchanatinaka-]sthiti-[njpa-]upayaviva]csaya). 

This could mean after they have experienced the negative consequences of their 
sins and omissions or after they have correctly followed the means taught to them. 

627 Ramakantha states this here not because what he has just said answers any par¬ 
ticular problem, but because lie has now dealt with the nexus of objections, implied 
and explicit, in Garuda s question of 6:5-6. 















380 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mrn */ * 


that it is ‘performed’.' 1 "” And yet no removal is seen. 
Since it is not seen, tell me how [it happens). (15) 


Initiation is not the cause of the removal of bonds nor, [as is implied] 
through the word api, is it the cause of revealing [soul’s innate] Siva- 
liood , 629 because it is [simply] an action, just like the actions recognised 
by other schools [as having only a limited and temporary result], such as 
performing a Jyotistoma sacrifice or killing a Brahmin. And the bonds 
of past actions cannot be separated [from the soul] by initiation, because, 
since [their results are] to be experienced in other bodies, we see them to 
be far removed from that [initiation] in place and time, just as cutting 
down distant soldiers or the like with a sword [is impossible ]. 630 This is 
the meaning of the question. Now the Siddhanta: 

[The Lord spoke:] 


It is proven that the destruction of the bonds can 
be brought about by stunning them. And that is 
achieved by well-established mantras ( gambaraih ), for 
[the powers of] mantras are unthinkable, as [we com¬ 
monly experience when they effect such supernatural 
things as] the destruction of physical poison. (16) 


The destruction of the bonds of wrong actions is [brought about] by means 
of stunning [them ]. 631 Since acts that stun the bonds, namely reparations 


C28 Ramakantha gets two objections out of this question; that initiation cannot be as 
it has been represented, because it is an action [and no actions block the effects of other 
actions], and because we see no removal. It is possible therefore (though he does not 
make this explicit) that he understands the kila in the sense ‘it is false that’. What 
was perhaps originally intended, however, was ‘Now it has been said that (kila) this 
initiation [reading dlksa va with N] is performed for the sake of removing bonds.’ 

629 From this point to the end of the text there remains only the testimony of R N . The 
text is therefore less secure and requires more repair. Numerous footnotes hereafter 
mark (with ex conj.) where the text as translated has been repaired by conjectural 
emendation. 

The point here appears to be that everything that we ordinarily classify as an action 
generates its own fruit but cannot have the effect of destroying the fruits of other past 
actions. Kriyatvat is a conjecture, but it seems to be this hetu that Ramakantha 
attacks in 6:16.3-4 below. 

030 ex conj . The nominative and the elision of ‘is impossible’ have been adopted on the 
assumption that the construction is intended to be parallel with viileso na sanibhavet. 

ex conj. (Isaacson in a letter of 19.xii.97). It is conceivable, however, that the 
nominative should be retained and that Ramakantha is interpreting ‘the stunning of 
the bonds of wrong actions is their destruction’. 


631 
















































Chapter Six 


381 


( pagastobhakarma 632 prayagcittatmakam), have been taught, you have 
therefore accepted (bhavatam siddhah ) the destruction of wrong actions, 
and so (yena... tena) your first logical ground to prove this (atra) is in¬ 
conclusive. This is the meaning [of the verse ]. 633 And it is also unproven, 
since initiation is not an action , 634 for it is taught that it is the power of 
the mantras made manifest by the activity of the acarya that is [called| 
initiation. And because ol 'he unthinkable power of mantras, which are 
proved beyond doubt ( samyak siddhanam [= samsiddhaih] . just, as the 
destruction of poison and so on 635 is possible [through the use of the cor¬ 
rect mantras|, so too is this removal of bonds and other such [feats]. Thus 
there is no logical fault. In everyday life too people say ‘For the power of 

gems, mantras, and herbs is inconceivable .’ 636 The second logical ground 
too is inconclusive, He teaches: 


Just as some distant person is brought under one’s 
control 63 ' simply by the calling of their name, so too 
the destruction of [the fruits of] actions [is brought 
about] in the Saiva Siddhanta (iha) by principal man¬ 
tras. (17) 


Here [it is stated that] (atra) a lover or some such thing, even though 

far away, can be seen to be procured with the help of particular mantras 

(sadhyamano drstah 638 ) merely by her name being proclaimed . 639 And 

actions that bode ill 640 [can conjure forth] fruits and flowers and the like 
before their time ( akala eva . 


fi ^2 

ex con]. 

633 

It is demonstrated that there are actions, namely rites of reparation, that do in 
fact cancel out the fruits of other past actions. 

634 

ex conj. 

635 * t 

" ex conj. The insertion of a ksa is the most economic repair. Confusion in the 
transmission with vis ay a is frequent where visa occurs (see apparatus to Kirana 2:32a, 
3:15d, 6:16d, 6:27b). 

Quoted above ad Kirana 3:11. See footnote ad loc. 

tl37 In Hindu Scriptures (1996:364) I translated ‘is made to appear 5 ; but, as Dr. Isaacson 
has pointed out to me (letter of 19.xii.97), Ramakantha appears to take the first part 
of the verse to refer to magical subjugation : va.sTkarana), in which a mantra, inflected 
by the inclusion of a person’s name, is used to gain power over that person, especially 
in amatory matters (hence the gloss karninyadir arthah in 6:17.1). 


638 


ex conj. 


6 3 0 

ex conj. Alternatively R ’s tannamnah might be retained and the following word 
emended to sanjortanamatrena. 

640 

ex conj. I am not certain that the passage is rightly understood. Properly it is 

11 ^ an d s u c 1 1 11 i d i are portentous, but tlie word order would seem 







382 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * t/ # 


As they say, 


Untimely fruits and Mowers, untimely cold and heat, untimely 
speed in [the current of] rivers presage great danger. 641 

In the same way a soul’s own action [the fruit of] which is to be experi¬ 
enced in anot her body can be brought before him [in this life] before its 
time by the power of mantras and will thus be destroyed at that very 
moment because of its having being consumed. Thus there is no fault at 
all [in our position on this point]. 

[There follows] another question on the same issue (atraiva). 

[Garuda spoke:] 


If, Lord, all the bonds are removed by initiation, then, 
once the accomplishment of that object is attained, 
how can the body remain? (18) 


If by initiation all the bonds of action etc. were cut away, then initiates 
would not have a body, because there would be no cause for it to remain, 
and yet it is seen to remain. Therefore the teaching of scripture that 
initiation destroys all the bonds, just like [if it were to exist] a passage 
of scripture (enjoining that] ‘he should besprinkle with fire 1 , 642 cannot be 


strange if we were to correct to a^u bhasucakas ca, and karmabhih would then be oddly 
unqualified, this latter problem could be remedied by assuming a haplological omission 
of kai£cit (in t he sense of ‘exceptional’) after the ca. Interpreting the text as it now 
stands, we may assume that Ramakantha meant that certain exceptional acts produce 
ill effects that presage them before they have even taken place. Presumably Rama¬ 
kantha supplies an extra example because he wishes the text to counter the argument 
(that mantras cannot separate a soul from bonds because they are separated in time 
and place) by showing that the logical ground is inconclusive. But 6:17, which should 
describe a parallel phenomenon that proves this inconclusiveness, gives, according to 
Ramakantha’s interpretation, an instance wiiere again mantras are alleged to produce 
an effect and, in this case, on something that is separated in place alone. In the parallel 
instance that Ramakantha supplies it is actions, not mantras, that produce effects and 
on things separated both in place and time. 

ex conj. Dr. Isaacson suggested this emendation (in a letter of 19.xii.1997) and 
pointed out a similar verse-ending to Mahabharata 4.41.21: veclayanti mahad b hay am. 
The source of the quotation is not known. 

d 9 . 1 * Ii • 

y “This is a stock example of a non-sensical injunction and is to be found, Tor example, 
in the Sabarabhasya (3.2.4). It is not scripture, hence the insertion ‘[if it were to exist]'. 
Some might prefer to expunge °sruti° in 6:18.3 on the grounds that it has been carelessly 
supplied in the course of transmission under the influence of the immediately preceding 
occurrence of the word. 


641 
















Chapter Six 


383 


authoritative, because [it teaches something that is| contradicted by direct 
perception and other means of valid knowledge. This is the position of 
the opponent. Now the Siddhanta: 

[The Lord spoke:] 

Just as the potter’s wheel still turns, sustained by 
its momentum, when the making of the pot has been 
achieved, so too this body remains. (19) 

For the turning of the wheel has as its purpose the making of a pot. Just 
as the turning of the wheel, because of its momentum, is seen to continue 
even when that has been accomplished ( sampannayam — jatayam), so too 
the body of initiates, even though they have had all their bonds of action 
and the rest destroyed in an initiation that grants immediate liberation 
(sadyonirvanadiksayam), remains for some little amount (kiyantam) of 
time. Thus the logical ground 'because there would be no cause for [the 
body to remain]' 613 is rendered inconclusive, since it is not proved that 
something produced by a [particular] cause cannot exist at that time [i.e. 
at the time when that cause is no longer in existence], and therefore 
the above-mentioned scripture that teaches the fruit of initiation is not 
rendered invalid by [this] contradiction. [Others] say the same thing: 

He remains with his body retained because of the power of 
impetus, just as the spinning of a potter’s wheel [continues 
after its task is accomplished]. 644 

With regard to initiation that does not give immediate liberation ( asadyo- 
nirvanadiksavisaye ), however, this logical ground does not disprove [scrip¬ 
ture], since it is [itself] not established, because there is no scripture to 
the effect that all bonds are destroyed [thereby]. This He leaches [with 
the following]: 

The action of many existences has its seeds burnt, 645 
so to speak (iva), by mantras [in initiation]. Future 

643 ex conj. The resemblance in Nandinagarl of tta, bha, and ta is sufficient to account 
for the diplographic nimittatabhavad. 

644 Sahkhyakarika 67cd. (Briefly discussed in footnote 74 on p. 185 above.) 

j r ^ 

In Brunner’s review of E v (1979:140) she commends Vivanti for correctly restoring 
the text of this verse, which transmitters of the text in South India had expanded 
(from four to six padas) for the sake of clarity. The South Indian expansion postdates 
Aghora^iva, who quotes the short form in the Tattvasangrahatika ad verse 37 and 






384 


Ramakantha s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


[action] too is blocked; [but] that by which this [body 

■ 1! f destroyed only] by experience. 

[Only] when the body collapses, [does the soul attain] 
libeiation. Otherwise [initiation] which gives immedi¬ 
ate liberation ( sadyonirvanada ) may also be effected 
by mantra-souls ( anubhih ) that are eternally estab¬ 
lished, and therefore they link [souls] to Siva. (20-1) 

Now (tavat) in the initiation that grants immediate liberation (. sadyonir- 
vanadlksayam) it is [here] taught that ( ity uktam) all previously accu¬ 
mulated actions without exception ( sarvany eva) are destroyed through 
experience before their time even without producing their [ordinary, ex¬ 
pected! fruit, (phalaprasavenapi 646 ) by the power of the mantras. But in 
the initiation which docs not grant immediate liberation ( asadyonirvana- 
diksayam), because the soul wishing to receive immediate liberation is not 
entitled to it (sadyomumuksor anadhikarat) , the mantras are not 647 used 
to destroy the soul's body, but rather to protect it, because 648 that body 
of past actions by which this body is sustained ( arahdham) and the way 
in which it is sustained, 649 that can be destroyed only by experiencing, 
not by this [power of the mantras]. As for that body of action called ‘fu¬ 
ture’ because it is io be performed after initiation, it is taught [here] that 
(• • - ity uktam) that is blocked by this |power of the mantras], because it 
lacks the strength to leave traces of itself (from which results would spring] 

(samskararamhhasamarthyahhavadvarena), 650 since actions |in order to 

in the RatiiatrayapariksollekhinT ad 166 and 315, and it postdates the compilation of 

t le Sataratnasangraha,, in which the short form appears as sutra 88. In one detail 

however, Yivanti s restoration is not correct: we must read dagclhabljam in compound 

and understand it as a bahuvrlhi. Admittedly only one manuscript has this; but it 

■s supporter by the commentaries of Ramakantha and TYyambakaSambhu and bv the 

commentary on Sataratnasangraha 88 (p. 91), and the expression has parallels in other 

tantras: Svacchamla 4:148c, Svayambh u vasiitrasangraha 3:15a and Rauravasutrasan- 
graha 4:51c. 


646 

647 


ex conj. (Isaacson) 
ex conj. 


648 - mi 

X conj .^ The most natural gloss of (the otherwise unglossed) hi is yasmad, which 
64 ( ^ ext 111 palaeographicaUy resembles. 

1 his translates yatha ca, a suspect phrase because it does not seem to make good 
S g 5 * e and has no independent correlative. It should perhaps be expunged. 

Ramakantha presumably excludes such future action as the failure to observe the 
enjoined rules of the cult, the upayas, because if all post-initiatory action had its effects 
blocked, there could be no rebirth as a PiSaca such as is mentioned in 5 27 






























Chapter Six 


385 


have their results] must leave traces in matter ( prakrtau ). 651 And so all 
actions without exception (sarva eva... karmavisesah are rendered such 
that their seeds are burnt with regard to [their capacity to affect] the 
initiate by the power of the mantras; they do not again become fit to 
keep their traces (tatsamskarapatratam yanti 652 ). And in initiation that 
grants immediate liberation, 653 although these ]actions] are destroyed be¬ 
cause of the power of the propitiated mantras, it is taught that i he oody 
remains sustained, as with the spinning oi the [potter’s] wheel. Thus the 
fault that the body should die absolutely immediately after initiation does 
not apply [in either case]. 

[There follows] a question on this: 

|Garuda spoke:] 

Why is there not even a little of that sign of [the fact 
that] someone [has been] released from bonds? [If you 
say that] it can be seen through [the presence of] the 
sign of devotion [to the Lord] (bhakticihnena), [that 
is wrong because] it is nowhere [stated] clearly [that 
it is] also (ca) a sign [of having being released from 
bonds]. [And] where it is clearly seen, there too it is 
not invariably concomitant [with being freed from the 

bonds]. 654 ( 22—23b) 

If that is the case, although [the soul is still] unreleased through the initi¬ 
ation that does not grant immediate liberation from the bond oi actions 

65 ‘The ity uktam could be taken closely with this last statement instead of with the 
entire sentence about future action, in which case Ramakantha may be referring back 
to his commentary on Kirana 3:8. 

652 It is conceivable that the initiand be described as a patra ior the traces of his 
actions; we might then emend to yati. 

653 ex corij. If the privative a- were retained, Ramakantha wou be contradicting 
himself, for the soul who has received the initiation that does not grant immediate 
release is sustained in his body by prarabdhakaryakarwan (see Kiranavrtti 1:22.21-5; 
2:33.6-9 and 6:19.2-7), not by the impetus of the'bonds that held him before initiation. 

654 This interpretation of Ramakantha’s (6:23.1-6) of the first three padas of this 
awkward passage now seems more natural to me t an the one that I forced upoi 
text in Hindu Scriptures (1996:364): ‘Why does one not see the slightest sign of [the fact 
that] someone [has been] released from bonds ? [You may say that it can be recognised] 
when there is the sign of devotion (to the Lord] (bhakticihne). That is wrong (na) 

The intended sense of the last three padas, however, is more likely to have been h .. and 
[in any case] that sign [of devotion] is sometimes not clear, and where it is clearly seen, 
there too it is not constant [or ‘not invariably concomitant 5 ].’ 








386 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * * 


that give experience in this body, since he is released from the other 
bonds of impurity etc., why does one not observe even a little the sign 
[that he has been released], i.e. the qualities of omniscience and so forth 
that cannot not accompany [release]. Because one docs not experience 
this [sign], it is not proved that he is then released roin bonds, just as 
the destruction 655 of a covering over a lamp established by other means 
[than direct perception] is not [in fact] proved [if one does not actually 
see it|. Thus the scripture teaching the fruit of initiation is once again 
[rendered] invalid, because it is contradicted by another means of know¬ 
ledge |viz. by direct perception]. That is the meaning of |part of] the 
question. 

Nor should it be said that the soul (asau) is seen to have been re¬ 
leased from bondage by another external sign, namely that of devotion, 
because this is nowhere taught to be a sign also (ca) of a soul released from 
bondage, but rather only (eva) of a soul linked with a [salvific] descent of 
power. And even where, in a soul who has had a descent of power, that 
sign is ‘clearly’ I sphutam ca krtva) seen, there too it is not invariably con¬ 
comitant lasya vyahhicarita) [with the soul’s being freed from his bonds], 
as has been taught above with the section beginning ‘This power must 
cause occlusion... ,6j6 So how is it that this inconstancy is taught? Since, 
because one sees no sign that the soul is totally released from bondage, it 
is unproven, [therefore] the above-mentioned fault applies. 657 This is the 
first question. Now the second. 


That union of the soul ( tasya ) [with the Lord] which 
has been spoken of above is necessarily dependent on 
grasping. 6 ,lS Grasping hold of the soul (tasya) is im¬ 
possible, because it is all-pervasive and also incorpor¬ 
eal. How can there be this great inconsistency on this 
point? Tell me. (23c-24) 


655 ex conj. 

656 Kirana 5:23b. 

If 

' i.e. the fault explained i 
about the fruit of initiation is 


mmediately above (in 6:23.4-5) that scriptural teaching 
rendered invalid as a a means of knowledge by direct 


perception. 

The initiating priest with the help of mantras ritually removes the soul from the 
body of the initiand in order to purify it. See SomaSambhu’s nirvanadiksavidhi , verses 
5ff (Brunner, 1977:168ff). 












Chapter Six 


387 


What was taught above, 659 ‘liberation... after they have been joined 
|through initiation] to the Lord', is inappropriate, since only one whom 
one can grasp (grahanaw), that is to say accurately discriminate (par- 
icchedatmakam) by means of direct perception and can take to oneself 
(svlkaratmakarn ca 6,)0 \grahanam]) by t---t 661 —only such a one can be 
joined’ (tasya yojanam 602 sambhavati), ust as some Devadatta [can be 
joined in company with| a king or the like. And yet (ca grasping and 
taking to ourselves the soul arc not possible for the likes of us, because it 
is all-pervading, just as [the likes of us cannot grasp and take to ourselves| 
the Lord and other entities), because they too are all-pervading]. Thus 
joining is impossible. And if you argue that they are possible by way of 
the body, as was taught above 66 * with ‘[that was taught] with the inten¬ 
tion of referring to the subtle body' ? That too is not a possible response, 
because [the fault would be) just the same (tatha). that is to say (iti) 
that it too [viz. the subtle body| cannot be grasped by the likes of us, 
because it is incorporeal, just as [primal matter] when in its state of lat¬ 
ent capacity to produce effects (karyadaktyavasthavat). The meaning is 
[that is impossible! because it is extremely subtle. With the words 664 ‘and 
also' (api ca) another unstated logical ground is added, namely ‘because 
of the unseen [retributive power oi past action]’. For, if the soul could 
be grasped, dying and so on would not be possible for souls, because 
their relatives and ] friends and] so forth would not release them on their 
deathbed. And so, according to this system iatra), grasping by the likes 

6r ' 9 Kirana. 6:8d. (See footnote 597 on p. 367 above.) 

000 t 

ex conj. In the next sentence it is grahana and svTkara that are mentioned, and 

this pair is repeated in 6:26.2. 

00 ^ ^ 

The sense Ramakantha intends with yuktya is unclear because the gloss, if it is 
indeed a gloss, is unclear. If we were to assume that esikaya were intended (the root 
. nvul), then the phrase might be rendered ‘because of a desire to take 

hold of (adanaisikaya = yuktya) \ But ! suspect that the phrase conceals a more serious 
corruption (than e for ai). Since Ramakantha (immediately below and in 6:25.15-16 
and 6:26.2) seems to be distinguishing two kinds of grasping—sense perception and 
laying hold of—we might expect yuktya to be used in contrast with pratyaksena in 
the line above. We might then render it with ‘by laying hold of’. The following word 
might supply an instrument: adanendriyena ‘by means of the organ of grasping [i.e. 

the hand] 1 , 

662 „ 

ex conj. 

663 Kirana 2:10d. 

* 

G G 4 

ex conj. If a pi cety atraivanuktarn were retained, we might translate ‘With the 
words l and also’ in this same [verse] ... ’ 










388 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m t i/ • 


of us is prevented ( vyavartyatc ) by the unseen [retributive power of past 
action] itself. As they say, 065 


This subtle transmigratory body, which is the abode of the 


sense faculties, is not perceptible to the sense faculties of the 
powerless, 666 just as demons are not, because of the unseen 


[retributive power of past action 667 


that accomplishes souls’ 



Accordingly there is a great inconsistency, since initiation, which lias been 
taught to be the sole means of attaining the supreme goal of souls, is 
impossible, because joining [in initiation with higher tattvas] and so forth 
is impossible, because it is utterly impossible for the soul to be grasped. 
This is the meaning of the second question. Now the [answer of the Saiva] 
Siddhanta given to refute the first objection [is as follows]: 

[The Lord spoke:] 

That sign [viz. of omniscience and omnipotence is 
not observed; but there is another sign, and that is] 
the absence of doubt about those actions enjoined to 
bring about an end of the vestigial traces |of impurity 
and primal matter]. 668 (25ab) 

665 Bhogakarika 8. 

5 This is interpreted thus by Aghora^iva ad loc.: nasmadipratyaksah, a pi tu yogi- 
pra tyaksagamyah . 

'The immediately preceding half-verse (Bhogakarika 7cd)—which Ramakantha 
must have had in mind—speaks of the inexorable progress of the faculties of the subtle 
body from birth to birth to experience the fruits of karman: yoner yonyantaram capi 
yati purnbhogasiddhaye. AghoraSiva’s commentary thereon actually construes this with 
8a (‘because of the unseen [retributive power of past action] that accomplishes souls’ 
goals ) and takes 8bcd as a fresh statement. lore, for Ramakantha's argument too, 
only 7c-8a seem relevant, since he is at this point discussing holding on to (rather then 
merely perceiving) the soul, and it is conceivable that 8bcd were added in the course 
of the subsequent transmission by someone who recalled the verse. 

Q 

The insertions in square brackets required by Ramakantha’s translation show that 
he is in difficulty here. His text of the Kir an a, judging from the insecure evidence 
of the one remaining manuscript of his commentary, from here until the end of the 
chapter appears to have been both difficult to interpret and substantially different 
from what is transmitted in the independent manuscripts. The end of chapter 6 is 
arguably irreparably corrupt not only in Ramakantha’s commentary, but also in the 
tantra itself. TryambakaSambhu’s text and interpretation from 6:25 are quite different 

(f 22"[ 2 - * 5 * 7 )); 


















Chapter Six 


389 


This is the meaning: it has first been taught that the past action that 
provides the experience to be endured in this body is not to be destroyed 
in initiation which grants non-immediate liberation. And we understand 
that the cutting away of impurity and of the subtle body cannot be total, 
because experience is impossible without impurity and the instruments 
and effects [derived from primal matter]. The cutting away, because it 
blocks from being destroyed that experience [that belongs to this body], 
is rather [partial, leaving the soul] with a part, that is to say with vestigial 
traces [of impurity and of the subtle body]. It is therefore not even proved 
that [all] other bonds are totally cut away in that [initiation] (tatra), and 
so, because innate Sivahood can therefore [still] not be revealed, that sign 
of omniscience and [omnipotence and] so forth is not seen’—t liis [last 
group of words] must be supplied—because the traces of impurity and 
[the effects of primal matter still | remain. But as for the assertion that 
no other sign of the soul ( tasya ) [that has received initiation] is observed, 
that is wrong, 669 because there is an absence of doubt (vikalpabhavah — 
avikalpana) about those regularly and occasionally obligatory actions that 
are not forbidden that have been explained above [and] that comprise [the 
post-initiatory means of] knowledge, rites, observances [and yoga], [which 

tac cihnam (em.; — nvaham MS) vasana nistha tatkarmany avikalpanam 
tatrasthasya kathan n ait at svalpenapy anumlyate 

pagamuktasya vigista<^m^> cihnan nast<gjt^>y etan na. tasya pagamuktasya 

tavad evan cihnam: vasana givagniguru visay a bhaktir; dvitiyah ca (conj.; dvi- 

tiyasya MS) cihna<^im^> nistha brahmacaryaharalapanadibhig (conj.; brucaryya- 

haralapavadibhig MS) garirayantranam j nistha yaf tatha (conj.; ta U a MS) 

trtiya<^m^> cihnam: tatkarmany avikalpanam ten a given a pranltam karmma 

sna<^na^>rccanadi tatravikalpanam vigvasah, Aetuvicararahitata. kim bahuna? 

tatrasthasya gurusannidhanasthasya givagasanavaktari gurau gugru<^sa^>naratasya 

atlvakrstyasahasyaitat (conj.; atTvakastasahasyaitat MS) pagamuktacihnam kathan 

nanumlyate? api iu svalpenapi murkhenapy anumlyata ity artthah, pagamuktasya 

£u£rusanasaictisam bhavat. 

• * * -■ 

atha yad uktam yatra kutracit sphutan drstam tatrapi vyabhicariteti tasyottaram 
aha 

adau maddhye ’vasane ca taccihnam yadi puskalam 
vyabhicarah kathan tasya vasanahitacetasah 
vasanapi kriyamula sapi mantranuga bhaved iti. .. etc, 

669 ex conj. The api from tad apy ayuktam has been expunged on the grounds that it 
is not appropriate and could easily have slipped in because the phrase is a stock idiom. 







390 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

i I l/ | 


are enjoined] for the purpose of the final destruction (a ntyo vinasah 670 - 
nistha) of what has been called "the vestigial traces' (vasanety uktam) that 
are just parts left behind by this |not immediately liberating] initiation 
of those two [bonds] of impurity and the derivates of primal matter / 1 ' 1 

The soul’s 1 asya) having discriminatory knowledge of [the necessity 
of| the performance [of the post-initiatory observances] exactly as they 
have been enjoined [by scripture ] 672 is [thus] a sign that is invariably 
concomitant witli release, even if it is only partial [rather than complete], 
from bonds. Otherwise it would be impossible [for the initiate] to be like 
that [he. to be without the discriminatory knowledge to be able to perform 
post-initiatory rites]. And so the stated fault does not apply, because it 
is not proven that the soul has not been released from bondage because 
of the absence of that [sign of omniscience and so forth]. 

The Lord [now] refutes the second question too: 


And [if it were impossible to grasp it because of its 
all-pervading-ness] how could this [nature of the soul] 
be in the body? [Yet] it is inferred [to be there be¬ 
cause of one’s self awareness and] also (api) because 
of movement. (25cd) 6 ' 1 

£» rv 

ex conj. Dr. Isaacson suggested this emendation (in a letter of 20.xii.97) as a 
possible solution to the problem that the text as read by R v had Ramakantha unchar¬ 
acteristically provide two glosses for nistha: anto vinasah (6:25.8). Another conceivable 
solution might be to assume that Ramakantha’s text read tac cihnarn vasananisthanta- 

cj * # • • ( 

karmany avikalpana (with an awkward pada-break) and that vina^ali could then be a 
single gloss for nisthantah. 

w I assume that lihga is here used to refer to the evolutes oi primal matter and that 
this is an echo of Sahkhyakarika 10, where that which is vyaktam is defined as being, 
among other things, lingam. The expression is not unproblematic. See translation of 
and note on Kiranavrtti 1:19.3-4, where this karika is quoted. 

672 

ex conj. 

u R gives two versions of this half-verse (one placed immediately after 25ab l and 
the second is followed by a further six pad as found in all the manuscripts but not 
commented upon by what is preserved of Ramakantha’s commentary. It is possible 
that this is because our record is fragmentary, but it is also possible that these did not 
form part of Ramakantha’s text. They contain two instances of vasana which it would 
be difficult to understand in the sense in which Ramakantha chose to interpret the 
word in 6:25a. Indeed I suspect that Ramakantha would not have given this particular 
obscure and forced interpretation o 6:25ab if he had also had before him these six 
padas. (That is not to say that he would not have chosen another equally obscure 
and forced interpretation.) M y , which usually stays close to the text on which Rama- 




















Chapter Six 


391 


If the meaning of this logical ground [of Garuda’s] is that grasping of* 
the soul is not possible because it is all-pervading, then how can this 
all-pervading nature of this soul be inferred because of self-awareness 
(svasamvedanena) —and so ‘grasped’—as being in the body, i.e. [having 
its powers] made manifest through the effects and instruments [derived 
from primal matter]? And [how can it be) purified by [the post-initiatory 
means of] knowledge, yoga, [ritual,] and [observances]? What is meant 
is that this logical ground is therefore inconclusive. And (tatha) [this 
all-pervasive nature ( vyapakam svarupam)] is also inferred, [and in that 
sense] ‘grasped’, |as located in the body (tanustham)] in [the case of] 
other soul[s], just as in [the case of] one’s own soul , 674 by movement, that 
is to say actions of body and speech and other such [indications] which 
are marks by which this [presence in the body of the all-pervasive soul] 
can be inferred ( tallingena). By this too the logical ground is rendered 
inconclusive, and by [the case of] ether too. This He states: 

Just as ether, though it is all-pervading, can be 
grasped through sound, [which is the quality pecu¬ 
liar to that element,] just as [the power of] poison 
[though] incorporeal is grasped by the power of man¬ 
tras, so too the nature of [the soul] which consists in 
its powers [of omniscience and omnipotence] can be 
[grasped and thus] expressed. (26a-d) 

Since ether has been taught above to be an effect [of primal matter], it 
cannot be all-pervading, and so here [what is meant is that], although in 
comparison to the other elements it is widely diffused, it is grasped by 
the quality particular to it, namely sound, and is taken hold of by yogins. 
In the same way (yatha ... tathaiva), according to this tradition, grasping 
hold of the initiand[’s soul| by the power of mantras takes place. Since 
the soul can be purified (samskaryatvasambhavat), union [of the soul in 
initiation with a higher tattva] is not impossible. As for the assertion that 

kantha comments, here garbles the order of half-verses by placing the extra six padas 
before 25cd, and this might be taken as further, though faint, support for the notion 
that Ramakantha's text might have deviated from what the surviving manuscripts 
transmit. 

g 7 4 jf 

' ex conj. (Isaacson in a letter of 20.xii.97). There are thus now three all-pervasive 
entities of which Ramakantha proves that they can be grasped—one’s own soul, those 
of others, and ether—hence the use of the expression tenapy anaikantikah immediately 
below (6:25.18). 









392 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm V • 


the grasping hold of the initiate cannot be done by means of the subtle 
body, because that is incorporeal and because it is not perceptible by the 
likes of us because of the unseen [retributive force of past action), that 
too (viz. that first logical ground ‘because it is incorporeal ] is rendered 
inconclusive by the example of the grasping hold of the power of poison, 
even though incorporeal, by the likes of us, using the power of mantras. 
Just as the power that brings death (maranagaktih) and that is expressed 
by the word ‘poison’ is grasped by the likes of us, so too the nature (gunah) 
that consists of knowledge and action and that is expressed by the word 
‘soul’, and also the entity which is a means to the accomplishment of 
the experience [of the fruits of past action] and that is expressed by the 
expression ‘subtle body’ are grasped hold of and initiated (samskriyate) 
by the power of mantras taught in the [Saiva] tradition. Therefore the 
fault that initiation is impossible because joining is impossible does not 
apply. 

Now He teaches what the nature is in this system (iha) o the mantra, 
by whose power [this is achieved]: 


Mantras and their souls, (mantranavah) are to be un¬ 
derstood, O Garuda, [to be related to each other] 
by the relation that exists between what denotes and 
what is denoted. 675 (26ef) 

f... the specialist in mantras (mantri), his speech concealed , 676 ... f just 
as mantras are those which denote and are called by the name mantra, 
so too their souls are distinguished as the entities that are denoted by 
themf... f 677 

675 This half-verse is omitted in the Nepalese manuscripts (which also read 26d differ¬ 
ently) and it is possible that their chapter ending is original and that what Rama- 
kantha and the other manuscripts have is an amplification intended to make the 
patalikasambandha clearer between chapters 6 and 7. 26ef is given twice (with vari¬ 
ants) in the sole surviving manuscript of the commentary, once after 26d above, and 
once here. Thereafter there follow the first two verses o: : the seventh chapter, then a 
large blank space, then two fragmentary lines of commentary (beginning mantri gupta- 
bhasano ) which, despite their position, appear to belong to the end of chapter 6 ( and 
have accordingly been included here), then a patch of blank space equivalent to one 
side of a folio, and then the text resumes towards the end of the commentary on 7:2. 

67f> An allusion to Dhatupatha 10:140: matri guptabhasane. The rest of the sentence 
is either lost or too corrupt to interpret. 

' ! t is possible that this was the last remark of this chapter and that we are missing 

only the colophon. 

































APPENDICES 


















































APPENDIX I 


Pratikas for the Tantra 

in the Manuscripts of the Vrtti 


1:1a Id RK<frRfld fdcd I Rd I 


P,P 


3 


1:2a 'Jidcd l R 


P,P 


p« ) H wl rtj I Hi P 


1:11a -H rh ?cdTR 


P 3 

SRRdcdlRi P 


1:11c d^dRcdlRd P 


1:13a P 




Rf) RT 


1:14a *T- 

cTRH'f^fr 


PDWl^lR P (P, follows this with a O', in place of which P 3 writes 


a +) 


1:16c rPT'R-Tf"! d“d d '-T S’^-i | R p 


1:18a cicfl IRdoicd i R 


R v P 3 ; cTrfr RddcdlRd P 

<-d di d I d •& sJcdlRd P 


1:18c ^TddcdlRt p.p 


!:19a IT5RI 


cTFTO 


fd 




Rr p 


d” 


-2 V -rj P 1:22c POT dvdlRdcdIR| P,P 




(ot 


3 


l:23e WttW 

<5 L 

2:2a aHlRdH^FP- 


^ I Rd cd I Rd P 2:5a RhR?)R h d IdcdIR P,P 3 ; RRfd 10 d d = ?b d 3FiddlRj| 

ScdiR P 2 (momentary cyeskip to 2:5.2). 2:5c R d id i*-ddd 

R 
P 
P 


2:7a d fid c4 Id cd l Rd P; d<tdd4 Idl'd PTfR P“ c 2:9a dR <~>A IR 
2:10a d Idld <. $lcdlR R 2:11a cd d M iRdcl: yR RjcdlR 

2:12c OTdT 


2:12a Opd ■‘-d I Rd cd I Rd P, ; d Pd-*-d I R r>t| I d P , P 


dt H I R'll rd I R P 2 P 3 ; HId I cd d I dffkd I KJ | R P, 


2:13a W ScdlR 


R 


2:14a fWdT 5T4>IR^14icd IR P 


ST fcdlR i ’ 


2:14c ST^TST ^cdlR P 


2:15c OTd! 


3 j 


mwr—p 


2:15a °d Rrt>difrd IR P,P 3 
2:16a d"d* cl d cd IR P 2 ; Od" d^cd l R P 



P 3 : 

V / 


2:18a 


didi^pRTdHdiRd p 


2 : 18 c ‘ 3 TT'- ;:; d • dl -drrfd i : ’ 


2:19c d Ml ;l l 







































































































396 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm M * 


rFm i fir p 


cdTK P 


P 


2 


2:22c 


2:21a ddflddldlPdcdlfe p ; ddflddldlPd— Pi; — 
2:21c dli'dlPd^Tld stcdlTd P,P 3 ; T + f + ’y iPdd TR *cdlfd 

2:24c cT- 



2:23c 3^ IrMd lid P 


RT M d-dlfd P,P: 2 ; 
2:25a Pd^H M d I cd I Pi H 


RFd 


dPi'led i P; P“ c ; 


2:25c udiI<-H 


w trorf ^ u fV P 


2:26ab T- 




frWFT dcdlPd P ; TfWTRT sfReT: Mld^dd'F-T R RWR R w (The entire 


half-verse occurs for the second time here in R A .) 


P 


2:27c PTRI i RtcdT Id S' 


2:29c <fr)F4T d 


2:30c RIT^T ^Trfe%cdTfd‘ P 2 P 3 ; d$'Jl I RT— P, 


2:26c dd'l^cd I Pd 


P 


2:31c foWdf^T- 



d~lcd I Pd P 2:32c (9xt ^T)ddvffrlFlcdlPd P ; <6THdi 
3:1a <j>cd J -HHd d?dT(Pd)P 3:2a 

fdnndci'iifqrdiP; PoP* : —PtcdiP; P 




P 


cd"l Pd P“ c 
3:2c 31- 


1 


3:3c ff dl^PdcdlPd 


P 


3:4c 



R P 


3:6a d d 4 • ; 4.- d -d l I'd P>P 


3:7a 


d I Pi Pi cd I Pi P,P 3 ; Rd M I dlcd I Pd P 


3:8a d FHI Pd cd I Pd P,P 


3:9a Pdd : Tirfcd I Id P 

r : 3 <6~d I Pi HTif? P, 


R 


3:9c t^^'-TrldcdlPi P,P 
3:10a RRT dTTrT dcRTpd P 


3 5 



P“ c ) cdlfe P 

db 

i P-Hcd I pc P, 


3:11c ITFdTfiredTT 



P,P 


1 A 3 5 


3:11a 


3:12a FRT fdf^rwfd^TTfd’ P,P 3 : Rid 

Cv 1 ° ' C\ 



Cd I Pi P 


2 


3: L2d 3RR dPdfd P; RRR W rtldddd R. 


N 


3:12<1 


R d d H pH i d" R V P 2 P 


3 ? 



P i 


3:13a RTRRRT 



P 


3:14a Pd oiTR rfd~ P 


3:15a H^PlPrcdiP; P 


3:16a W- 


diablMlcdTpST P 


3:16c l~d J-H M cd I Id cd I Pd P, 


Pratika missing for 



R 

P 


N 


3:17c y dir^lcd |Pi P 2 P 3 ; Mdir^dcdlPd P L ; ildh^d 

3:18c jidd -jd^P-lcdlP; P 2 P 3 ; did— P t 3:19a d^ldcd I (d 

3:21a P^dddlddd ^cdlPd P 3 ; 


3:20a d^ld r J 



P,P 


— dTjcf ?cd I Pd I’,; 5cdlP; P 2 

3:22c dVfr d cd I Pd P,P 3 ; RIT! d I d cd I Pd P 2 

P, ; d I dPd P-^cd I Pd P 2 ; 


3:22a Uddlyi d^Tlfd R 



P 


3:23c d Idfd*d d'-dyf'd 
3:24a dTRt WpT 


P,P 


3 i 


dT- 


P, 


3:24c ? 



dcdlld P,P 



P'j c ) d^dvt^cd i fdld P 2 3:25c s/y l ^cd iPd P 2 P 


3:26c V|^dl - 


























































































































































Pratikas for the Tantra in the Manuscripts of the Vrtti 


397 


F4Tft P 
fk R 


3:27a 



P 2 P 3 ; qin=?TT— P, 


3:27e HETT fc4T- 


4:1a (W PjjM? P 

4:6c d 14 I r J-rt. f d -4 I f4 


4:3a Wc4Tk P 


4:5c P]P 

Pd c4 I Ts P, 



N 


P,P 2 ; JTPTRR- 


4:7c 31 ^41 Th d4 ftc4lft P^; ill<£4 ^Fh-H 1Pir4IPd P 

'‘O 


4:8c dc*4ftc4lft R 
P : P 3 ; E^E3T#RETftr P 
ftcT s!c4lft P, 


4:10c 



4:9c P^4 c4 | k P 

4:12c cR%wftcT 3c4lft P,P 2 ; cldd dH 


4:13c E4c4lP4 P,P 


4:15a $ <«hftfdd 5c4"T 


< 



PjPs; it p 2 

4:18a 414ft 4 lift .-4IO P 4:19a dT8T®4T ETF 

\6 \o 


P,P 3 ; 3T%— 






7 



iiTtf'M' 'TiT^PT.’f! 4 ft ft P 2 ; dli£1 ,5 >4T 'hlM'TttJ 4(4(4 P 


Pi; 


4:19b m- 


dt F4T d4lP4c4lPi P[P 2 ; afftY d4lP4c4l 

4:21a dcEn"ftE7rfT%c4Tft P,P, 


T P 


3 


4:22a ETR 



4:20a ^fticdlPd P 


4:22c 


ddd ICdl^Y $C4 I ft P1P3; dddlcl (f.64' )—H c4 I (4 P 


<r p 

4:24a 



^rrftr P 


4:25a 41 Pd ■ 3 HToM IR P 


4:25c fE 



P,P 3 ; fE: <T4Jld'dftddPdc4 f fa P 


2 


4:26a IRfftcd1 


P 


1J -4 Hh r~i41 f^S P 4:27a sraftc4 I Pf P 4:28c 

rTFdTft <-M I Pi P, 



4:26c 


5“ p.Ps; 


<4’H I f^aPH Pel R 



4:29c ITcT%c4 I Pi 


P 


5:1a 5TftrqTd I ft <-4Tft P 


5:2a ftj d cd I Pi <dd p4 P 


3 i 


5:1c Ol 4 f4' ddddHlPi'-4'ft P,P 

*i-» 1 

5:2c ^TTrfr 4 (d P 0 



WPW 4 rM i P 


WTTcT P 


5:3a Pi ; dH^K'ulc^lR P 2 P 

5:6c JI ^^ c4 i P 


5:5a 


5:8c •tFvT 7 ' • ;;r : ; r % i 


5:9a d r4 4^4 4TTrT ^ frl R 5:9c sTl ,J l 4T M Ri 4T T] M H Yi 

amr %f^r p.p,; aw tfr p. 


N 


5:9c ^rt-Tlrt W— P 


ddc4- 


•rTcT 4ft -l I j-u Ph (h p,p 


5:9d -^dlPd'h^Pd: WW R v ; ~4d I - 


f^4)d Pi: ^FT— P, ; 1(441^^ : d>4 Id Id P 2 ; om. P 


E8RIP4Wrfe P,P 3 ; E4- ?T%R Td^-11 Pi P 


3 


5:10c Enfthft 41 Pd d> F- 


5:9e 


2 


c4Tpf PiP :! ; ^THTTSTT RTfdRT S^TTK P, 


5:11a 4Mc4 ddlrMlId P,P 


3 


5:11c ItW 4c4T— P, ; Pd P*4 P 2 ; fw ^c4lPf P 


ft <t> --4 d ■H'd 4 - v nf 4 <-4 I Pi P 


5:13c W ERT ^r4114 P,P 


3 } 


5:12c 
WT TPT 


^rQTR P s 


5:14a W 114 Wlfr P 5:14c 





?r 





































































































































































































398 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m m 1/ » 


cd I Hi P1P 3 ; H d IId d> ■d d d~«-dI Idcd IId P 2 5:16a d51) nlcd I Id P 2 ; 
d >^51 i q I rq 1 Id P s 5:16c 3Td I d l P 5:17a —9died I Id P; ; 

•iTTdPTWTTdf'-d IId P 2 ; dlMI d d I'^PTPTai<-q I Hi P 3 5:17c ST>JT%c^T- 
P 2 P 3 5:18c PpT dfTcT Hcd I Pd P[P 3 ; PpT d>IHdW H cd I fd' P 2 
5:20a ^ q nj q | cd 1 Pd P 5:21a TT^tT dHlcd'lfd' P 5:21c «T|i«il*l - 
M 1 cd I Pd P,P,; -HT + dlcd'lfd' P 3 5:22c ^'^P^ddld I Pd^Tri 

P, ; ^Hfifi41J11 Pdcdlfd P 2 P 3 5:24c fd 0 -H M JId HI Rh I Hi P 


5:26a 



Pr P 


5:26c M<t>l¥d I fd R PjPs; TOW qnTV- 


rdlTd P 2 5:27a Pfe ddlcd-ll ^IcdlTd PiP 3 ; PlT ddlcHdl %— 


P 


ftd r1Fj?J | pf P,P 


3 1 


fPdrfF^cd 


5:29a 


3T%%c^rrfr p,p 3 ; sht srdild p 


5:30a ^F5T d-dd (cdlld P,P 3 ; 


d-dd^cdlTd Pc 


5:30c P MH Pled I Id P 2 P 


6:1a fPTPTTJT- 


SHITT i cd iPd' P,P 3 ; ddlddld'b: sft^T: ^dliT^Pr: P 


6:3a P 


d Id P rd |fp P 6:3c dPr dldP'>dTfp P 6:4c PPRil fS 4.dcd I fd" - 


<-q 1 fq P 


6:6c di Pd cd d I Id P 2 ; d cd l'Pd P 


6:8c PTPT 


<\d I fdcd I fd' P 6 : 9 c fldl^U£d>x$cd I PdcdlPd P,P 3 ; ddldd^: dT^- 
rd I Pied I Id P 2 6 : 10 a fld d i ^ cdrfV P 2 ; Pi d i 4 i rd I Id P 3 6 : 10 d 

$1 cd I Pd cd I Pd ~ R N P 2 P 3 6 : 12 a irp smifd + facdlfd P,P 3 ; Xij pRT— 
P 2 6 : 16 a HIH^cMirdddlfd' R N 






















































































































APPENDIX II 


Colophons in the Manuscripts of the Tantra 

Where groups of manuscripts share the same colophon, differing only in 
details of punctuation, I have grouped them together and not noted these 
details. 


1 . fadT N»<uil<pMH£ldH WT: TCtT:il ?ll N 3 ; II fafa faTUTTW 

SPUT: T TCcT:il ?ll D 2 ; far f -r, ’ orpfa Hq I d fa STW: TcFT: 

— 3 HTII—fa' II—’ST — II fafa fawnfa H&ldfa SPT- 


M 


* 


fa- 


fa - 


IT: <T£cT: II fall— 3 sft‘ — 'ill^lN W: II K 2 ; fad" faRffa> i *J|1fa} R^ldfa 

fad" Wfawwfa R £"rd'fa" SHUT: T- 


fd<JIMI^ SW: VZrT. I P£G 2 ; 


2FT: V^G^.Ms; fafa ffawiW JTfRffa' 5TW: 'PTTTT: V 

faHd Pti J 'J|I J fa— Q • fafa fa| hP cdi v 'JTF&T Hfildd 3RrH<dSFT: d 


2 i 


S"td 


T t?- 


dT: II— II Ki; 3" fad falHd(fa J ui I fa R ril'd fa RWW: <TCdr: I A 2 ; fa?T 


fafafarwrfa Rriidfa aw: qzpr: wra": n m,m 2 ; fa?r farrffawrfa 


R^ld-d tat 'TWTT: aW: II E; 


2 . 


fad - fdrwrfa dfa fernr: rztt: n n n 2 d 2 ; fad - Rvoji rfa dfa 


ffa1<M : <TdcT:ll ^11 N 3 ; fad" fanwfa dffafa K, )dfa ffaffacT V, ; fa 


K, fa: fa A,) RZPT: M i 'PfV 1 V 4 G 2 K 1 A 1 M 3 ; —’fall—II ^fa fanJTTW 
RljTTTfa ffaffa: MdH : II fa'll—fa"—II faTFTWTPT W: II fafi^l'l'i - 


WRd"ll—II faTTfll 5JWFJII Rtf-oAR*^ II far— K 2 ; fad - fawfa 


ifafaqZcT: V 2 ; —cT: V 3 ; fad - faWT— Gi ; fad - [faun fa JTfTrFfa 
RFTTfedW: dddf: G 3 A 2 ; fafa fe^nfa Rriidfa ffaffa: RddH TTW: 


Mi ; far ffaTWffa R?jTdfa fTFPTfa ffaffa: T^rT: II WFT: II M 2 ; fad 


fafafarrOTTW H^ld-d ffaTTTPT RIRIHdHl 



dd II E 

















































































































































Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 



3. 

N,) 

11 = 



•i; -f \y-y tjj > 7 ^ rj <-f| q : q^dT : II 0 II N 2 ; ^fd" R<U||^o£) d%- ( 

; 11= II <uif/p^t H^ld^l dd)i|: qdcT: 


d: qzdf: II 3 || N 3 D 


= II M 1 ; — II dfll—eft'll—dt—dY— II r<MU|K°i| H^ld^ cTdYq: 

q^T:||—dY dY— II dtdTTH-H d I Rid I <4 W: II spdqdgqi-dY- dY 


K 2 ; fRT R J >J|I J oi| gdld : qZdf: PfG 2 M 3 ; qfd fo<U | Hpi| W%T- 


iT^ dd 1 d : qzdf: mhih : V^Ma; f%WTW H^ldR p= 4 dldMiH : 

ipftd': 


V 2 ; ffd - fYrrcirp^- r^r— v 2 ; ffq dl H IcM^i Hpt| 



q^rr: v 4 ; fYrwrw jt£rf% 



G 


3 j 



d^ldd Rdl M : K, ; T sYr fa J'WrvY J T^TcF%' cTdY^ qzdf: q A x ; 7 


3 - ?fd“ Ph<U||*S JTfTcF^ <h «3 R dl d d i H : IT A,; ^fd - dfr r fcfr v u 11 ^ 


d^rd-q fcKIIMK di d M'd H dO d : II E 


4 


II si' Nv^dpsq - ffY drpr: qdTT: II N 2 D S 


farwns^ 


drPY: qZTT:il * II N 3 ; 11=11 ffd 
v ; f%rcmw d^TcT^T dddY: 




d^TrP% T£dr: 11 = II 

d" fa < y 11 , 'p4| 


?? 


* » 


V,; 


: V 2 ; rfd fa<U||Jod H^ldR — V 3 ; qfd - fafWR^ - q | l dR dT- 


dr»4d^df: ; ffd - f%WP^ d^rd'H d^Y: d^dT: A^KjA, ; — G { ; ^fd - 

fdTWT^T d^Td^d fddlTd I d ddd >4 M Z H : I T G 2 ; ^fd“ fdR'U| | foij JTfTd^d 


M fd d d rd - 


3 “ A.>; 


31 


T 3 ° I ^Id 





H o I rf ^ II 



\D 


q^df: HdTdT: II 


M 


21 


5 Id 



ndrn^r d^ld-d R<JldR dfddddi-d Od: E 

^ SO 


5. 


II Sfd" fa rrJJT 7 ^ 


d^d - qdd": qzdr: II II N,D 2 



fqi i U| | ^pij 


f cfY qd if: q^dr: 11 * 


D 


®ll II M 


Y 


- f 1 l<t)< 



?fd" h ^ i d d qd^r: qzrT: 11 

m: q^dr: PfVjVaA,; - 


II 




q< J IJ i 1 ^ M d d : q^dT: V 2 ; sfd' dlfd^ 'J| |W ddTd^d q^Tf: q^T: I V 


4 5 


q ^t?r f4,JU|IJoij drild*d fcKINK qw: q^dT: TGj; T ^fd - fd iTU| I ^ 


Maid'd sfiRhqid qw: q^dT: t G 3 ; 3 " i ?fd" fqrrwr^Y d^ld *0 


^lRr>MldMdd : q^T: I T A 2 ; ifd" fdiWrw q^ld'O Md-H : MdH : dHIH : II 



2 



d i d fr+! J u11 <°q JTSTrFd' fcKJIHI^ STfftMJ d H <!H : W: E 


6 . 


Yq fd >j u 11 w d'T qgr: qirdn D 1 ; 11 ^frr R ;tv 1 f^t d^d - q^^iqd- 

dS"—II II M v ; TT ( om. V^Gj ) 


df: II \ II N ,; II II ^td 
































































































































































































































































Colo])hons in the Manuscripts of the 7antra 


401 



Tgr: qzrr: v,v 3 v 4 G l ; ^kt fwiw 

'NSIHiH : V,; I §f?T PfiTunW Hgld-} PddJIMK TST: ^Zrf: I G,; T ffd 


Ph 1 *J! I fell iTfFFf T3rT: ^ G 3 ; T ^fcT ^Hd foWHSET H^ld^ 

^F: T£rT: F Aj ; F 3T I ^fcT Pd> J '41 J ^4 HSld-d 4)^14^ ^F: TStT: F 
A 2 ; ?fd~ f%WT^ H^ld-J FF: FFcT: ddlH : M 2 ; ?pT <J ITW 

d$id^ fd< j i m id fPsrrwT^T: ^rsr: E 






















































Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


402 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


The ten Sivabheda 

1 

03 

C* 

o3 

*>», 

; id 

X 

i 

03 

q 

03 

-hL> 

'US 

Karana 

■ 

Kamika 

Cintya 

Ajita 

Yogaja 

Sahasra 

Suksma 

* 

Dipt a 

Suprabheda 

A inhuman 

* 

g 

* ^ 

V} 

o3 

q 

«cd 

Xn 

lu4 

Kamika 

Yogaja 

Acintya 

«/ 

Karana 

■ 

Ajita 

Dip t a 

Suksma 

» 

Sahasra 

Am^uman 

* 

Suprabhedaka 

Svayambhu va 

Kamika 

Yogodbhava 

Acintya 

Karana 

■ 

Ajita 

Dipt asahjh aka 

Suksma 

* 

Sahasra 

AmSuman 

* 

Suprabha 

IG 

LS 

V) 

tetj 

CJ 

'G 

G 

ft 

G 

G 

IG 

'G 

^5 ; 

Kamika 

Yogaja 

Cintya 

Karana 

ip 

Ajita 

Dlpta 

Suksma , 

4 

Sahasra 

Am£umat 

4 

Suprabha 

Airgendra 

Kamika 

Yogodbhava 1 

Acintyaka 3 

Karana 

■ 

Ajita 

Dlptakhya 

Suksmaka 

Sahasra 

Am^umat 

4 

Suprabhit 7 

03 

CO 

led 

XO 

* u 

Kamika 

Yogada 

Divya 

Karana 

Ajita 

Dlpta 

Suksma 

« 

Sahasra 

A inhuman 
Suprabhedi 

G 

tb 

-G 

"Us i 

G- 

U 

'Co 

Kamika 

Yogaja 

Cintya 

Makuta 

«- 

A m3 u mat 

4 

Dlpta 

Suksma 

«■ 

Sahasra 

Ajita 

An ant aka 6 

OJ 

q* 

03 ! 

» — . 

Kamika 

Yogaja 

Acintya 3 

Karana 

Ajita 

Sudlptaka 4 

Suksma 

* 

Sahasraka 

Suprabha 5 

Am^umat 

4 

No. 

•^CNCQ'tiOCNOOO'/O 

?—i 


d 

TJ 

QJ 

.—i 

23 

G 

t-> 

G 

Pi 

c 

0) 

QJ 


b0 

* 

0> 

o 

X 

H 


i 

03 

03 

U3 


$ 


u 

G 

|R3 

.VI 


5? 


-Q 

£ 

G 

'G 

*-* 

CO 


lire 

s 

u 

'q 

03 

cx 

03 

q 

»o8 

>q 


03 

q 

<D 

6® 


03 


XO 


03 

s 

XO 

<P 


03 

q 

03 

tnj 


d 


d 


i 

xo 


eti 

g' 


G 

>> 

iG 


G 

C 


£ > CO < 


oj 


cC 

h* 

> 

cfl KO 


I 


o3 ' 

flj '« 

-A O 

• — >_ 

> Z ft 


CP 

So £ 

G 

t~, 

iG 

ft 


g 

> 


X 1 


*5 p A} 

tfl tn s . 

>a «? S QJ 

^ c 


g 4g rt 
> 2 


> tk£J 

co '< 


G 

h* 

> 

NjO oj 
CP 


? E > 5 

d 2 12. 'Sb 

* led ■ ' h "< """O 

> Pu, £ D 


cd 

u* 

03 

03 x/3 
CO OJ 
io3 


d 


g > e 

G* 'w 


£ 

G 


jft ^ tG 

_ f|^ 

> "Z, ft cc 


nj 

g ,52 

s* > 


rit 

-C 
£ 

. >> 

SK iG 


G 


-- > iG 

> T. -Ti> 


03 

# 

i£ 

ft 


G 
-G 

U5 

c 

G 
* 

KO 


03 

q 

03 

5 


o 


G 

s* 


oj 

o3 

> 

xo 

a; 

e 

a} 

icd 


oo 

cd d 

16 

ppl 

xo x 
xO O 


> CL £; Oh 


G 

xo 

CJ 


aj 

d 


d xo 

F*- 


d d 

.3 g 

> 


*—< laj 
> Oh 


tiC 

TJ 

O 

u 

PU 


H CN CO ^ 


CJ 

X 

t-i 

OJ 

> 

OJ 

CP 

M 

a3 


o3 

s 

MX 

r^ 1 

G 

< 


■+o 


fl3 

»G 

‘s 1 

oj 
o3 

-t-3 

1 5* — 

"O ■ 
G 

CO 


o3 

OJ 

3 

o3 

t-i 

Cu 

G 

CO 


s* 

lf^ 


icti 

G 

G 


o3 

to 

o3 

a 

S-C 


to 

fH 

cG 


rQ QJ 


,2, 

i —i 

-G 


05 


G 

ps 

13 

'Co 

QJ 


Oj 


G 


’ 03 

4-) 




04 


cfl 


Cd 

o3 

-q 


s-j 


o3 

G 

03 

L, 


hC 

G 

CO 


G ~ -1 

•'G T3 
^ G 

^ O 

. a 

G QJ 


°5 ^ 03 2 

<0 !fl ‘ ^ 


w 

QJ 


C/J 

Gj 


G 




G 
bO c 

o .G 


G 


'M 

X 


Cu Cu -s 

>- CJ O Q in H 


tN Cn 


iO CD 


G 5 

ft '5b 

s ^ 

co ^ 

00 








































































Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


403 




d ^ 
d 3 

c 

c d 

■ 

> 




g 

kd 








cd 

Sfc._ 

*C 



cd 

40 

d 


d 


X 

id 

i-M 

"b 

id 

43 

id 

1—« 
hC' 

id 

d 

O 

;d 

J-H 

i« 

G 

cd 

ed 

E 

rt* 

o 

c 

J-HI 

-■ 

d 

0 

X! 

> 

kt 

d 

> 

cd 

U 

OQ 

O 

A 

Mh 

cn 

cri 

CO 


cd 

J—S 

d 

> 

H/3 

CD 

£ d d 

C - 73 - c 

cd P ^ 

ks ^ J_ 

id id — 


cd $ 

fG g 

S I 

g , S 

^ cd E 

g* -C 


cd 

> 


(d 


C 

ho 

'< 


a g -■ c 

* = -* a 

G icd 


ed 

,5 «J 

ICS Jm 
iC TJ 
*Z? cd 
S G id 


rt 

G 


id 


^ -5 ^ x ioj 

- c ^ t 

-Q 


'bb 

G X 


- ed cd j 


CO 


o 

G L 
id d 


d 

d 

£ 


i i j ^ j ■ ?—t ivv cy . 


d 


fd 


d 

i 2 

d 


d 




cd 

40 








Sh 




,53 

£ 





d 

cd 


X 

id 

d 

d 


icd 

44 

/O 

IB 

d 

40 



d 

40 

■m 

4*i 

id 


43 

> 

-hT 


d 

Cu 

L 

cd 

|<F-H 

d 

d 

C 

X 

G 

d 

S 

Lh 

G 

k> 

xs 

G 

bO 


id 

o 

E" 

C 

cd 

23 

-X 

d 


4C 

X3 

■Tb 

40 

X 

40 

> 

* pBNl 

d 

iG 

1 > 

d 

Pi 

icd 

CO 

> 

HH 

d 

u 

G 

^5 

c 

S-H. 

CU 

"d 

X 

02 

G 

cd 

CO 

k 

id 

'cn 

CO 

2 ; 

j-i 

5 


d 

xn 

<J 

. £ 


cd 

G 

£ 

5 2 

•rv 03 cd 

*»P G G 
^ "O 
g 3 X 


cd 


:d 

“ 

icd 

40 

c 

d 


I 

cd X 

xs cd 

E’x 

« 2 

(_• td 


G 

£ 


^ oc w ^ O 


> <d 

«* £ o 
3 g 

cd **2 

> CO Oh nei 


cd ,£> 

^k TO 


- id ^ 

§5 3 * 

u “C «H h 

id l— id 

US O > CJ 


cd 

k. 

X , 
cd ?d 


td 


cd ed 

c G 


o> 

cd ^ 

g* X! 

C 2 G 
b£) ,3 id 

i< > K 


^ led « 


> 

rd 

k 


cd 


00 


■ .!£ £ cd d cd 

^ T3 “5 h ^ -G 

S .§ § | -g 


cd 


id 


* *■ 
CN 



g '5b .G x 

X 


G G id cd 
lid O G- X 


> 

k 


> U ^ D J oq to 'CO UC > 


td 

to 


icd 


d 

k 

X 

cd 

pCj 

-fl 

cd 

u. 


cd 

a 

icd 


cd 

J2 

cd 

E 


cd 


d 

> 

d 

|G 

cd 

+-=• 

3 

d 

cn 

"d 

t-H 

X 

^5 

O 

d 

» p 

G 

td 

d 

40 

! bb 

d 

cd 

G 

d 

C 

id 

bO 

X 

o 

d 

C 

3 

G 

d 


c 

G 

X 


X 

40 

> 

d 

d 

cd 

id 

k-i 

> 

cd 

o 

id 


o 

Do 

"d 

X 

CO 

c 

d 

OQ 

Ih 

cd 

CO 

2 


cd 

k 

cd 

> 

KO 

a 


cd 


— Jed 


cd 

X3 


£) 

cd 


cd 


cd co 

g 

-G > -q 
cd P-^j ^ 


cd 

> 

3 


a 


G T3 


C 

lid 


G 

icd 3 cd £ 


id 

> 


3 x -2 o 

G *”• G f~ C lOj 1 ™ 

X § lid id |G bC ,ca w 


st* cd S id 

k 

3 


k 

id 


cd o 

, CM 

cd cd 
h G- 


td 

>> 

^ \ 


GO CO O > !' 


^ > L" 

" M / 


, G 
cd d 


cd 

u 


r-Q 

cd cd 


r - .. cd 
Oh H ue hO CO 


ID 


cd 

£ 

* 

s 

id 


3 

s 


£M 


cd 

>3 


id 

13 




ed 

43 

X 

X 


cd 

G 

led 

"g 

td 


id td 

X X 
G td 

c id JG 

* P"^ » - 


cd 

x: 

£ 


Cm H 

G cd 

| S3 

cd u* 

> 


cd 

r - " 

cd 

t-H 

3 


cd 

.i 


Ci 


cd 

H 

cd 

Ui 


cd 


cd 

v. 


(N 

CN 


cd J5 -t: ~d 


GOGOCOOCQcO>Od-=^ UJ h-3'< 


QJ 
G 2 
bC cd 


in so f 


oocio»—i n co d* in to s oc 

— ■—' !N CN M CN CM CN CN CM 


bO 

G 

cn 


X 

(h 

cd 13 


cs 


cd 


cd 


tH 

x: 


cs 


cd 

cd 


B* 

M* 

X 


CS 


cd 

R 

cd 


cd 

cq 

13 

iM 

<! 


4-4 

40 

cd 

-B 

DQl 

cd 

Jo 

Ir 4 


cd 


C/3 

Jm 

red 

X 




CN C*0 


cd 

CTJ 

cd 

T3 

a> 

B 

a) 


cn 

cd 


o 


<J 

13 

G 

* rH 


Jo 

OJ 


a* 

CO 

cd 

IS 

■fs* 

cd 

& 

fed 


o 

G 

cd 


g 

led 


X 

o 

a 

o 

ej 


c 

a 


CD 

cd 


Jf 

cd 

O 


45 

cd 

-G 

OJ 

3 

3 

ed 

3- 

cd 

G 

!cd 

»G 

CD 

CD 

cd 

Sh 

4G 

a 

hG 


cd 

hG 

3 

CD 

CD 

o 

a 

CD 


G 

cd 

2 

cd 

40 

Q 

tS 

Q 

>» 

o 

X 

o 

3 

(H 

CG 

G 

O 

u 

CD 

cd 


led 

4G 

X 

X 

c3 

w 

"cd 

(H 

cd 

CG 

v 

CD 

cd 

o 

(h 

CJ CM 

fG « 


CM 


cd 


~cd 


cd 

£ 


W 

cd 


cd 

£ 

# -- 

cd 

G 

id 

Sh 

£ 

O 

43 


CD 

3cV 

iG 03 
'Cd c 

Ih 


cd 

fG 


cd 

> 

G 


lO 


G 

43 43 

* - 3 

X cd 

r4 !x 

io 

G iG 

_, ^ 

f 3 co 

bO^ 

G ^ 

CD 


O 

CD 

s, 

# 

Jo 

a 

C^) 

B 

C 

cd 

3 

OJ 

CD 

<u 

Id 

Cu 

G 

O 

4G 

CD 

3 

4G 

H 

lH 


40 

40 

cd 

-G 

Cd 


cd 

-G 

404 

G- 

cd 

TS 

^4 

'Co 

a> 

43 


F^d 

Id 

s 

> 

4 

bO 

.3 

CD 

X 

G 

O 

CJ 

a 

CD 

CD 

cd 

(h 

5 

'cd 

0) 

s 

cd 

Sh 

I^S 


bC 

G 

CD 


CJ 

43 
G 

* 

d 


o 1 
Sh 

3 


4*J 

led 



bC 

G 

CD 


X 

Sh + j 

3 G 


CD 

*cd 

Ih 

g 

'CD 

3 

ed 

Sh 

led 

Oh 

Cf> 


X 

G 

cd 

CD 

Sh 

<G 

CD 

cd 

»H 

g 

'CD 

CL) 

S 

id 

*o 

red 

c* 

CD 

43 


X 

QJ 

CD 

Sh 

G 

> 

O 

Sh 

CD 

Sh 

cd 

cd 


cd 

h-J 

CD 

fG 

X 

G 

cd 


CM 


cd 


"cd 


cd 

"3 

icd 

> 


<N 


cd 


ed ed 


'bb £ 

° S 

Sh Cd 

P4 H 

00 Oi 


cd ^ 
G- 

«3 2? 
.G ^ 

US jd 

a> cd 

43 G 

H < 

o o 

CM CM 


cd 

Sh 

3 

cd 


CJ 

43 

O 

cd 

|H 

G 

cd 

CO 

CM 

CM 


CJ 

Sh 

<J 


G 

O 

"cd 

Sh 

H 

CJ 

CD 

cd 


CJ 

jd 

CD 

43 

CD 

CJ 

cd 


(h 

CJ 

cu 

ed 


3 

■G 


Id 

Jo 

3 «5 


GJ 

bO 

CD 

G 


cd 

G 


CJ 

Sh 

CJ 

CD 

G 

G 

cd 

3 


2; G 

it 

^ X 

CD w 
CJ 
CJ 

Sh 

G 

O 

CD 

G 
cd 

X 

G C 

M O 

fG X 

o 

CD 

G 


G 

o 

CO 

>> 


Sh 

o 


.3 


CD 

GJ 

CJ 

Sh 

G 

O 

CD 

G 

it 

X 

G 


CQ 

"cd 

43 


CJ 

cd 


43 


G 

O 

CO 

"cd 

G 

i- PP^I 

x 

G 

rH 

rt 

M 


CJ 

43 

40 

X 

CJ 

G 

cd 

3, 

X 

a> 

CJ 

40 


x 































404 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* 4 %/ • 


Sources for the table 

The Kirana 

* 

This is drawn from Chapter 10, which recounts in two phases the trans¬ 
mission of the Siddhantas. Some of the names are varied the second time 
that they appear listed. The same column also covers the two lists of the 
Ajita in kriyapada 1:35-60 and 1:106—111. Both differ from that of the 
Kirana only slightly; indeed the first passage is plainly calqued upon that 
of the Kirana , for it reproduces not only the order o; the tantras, but also 
the names (or synonymous variants) of the various transmitters. 24 


The Mrgendra and the Uttara-Karana 

The Mrgendra's list is drawn from caryapada l:43c~47b. It is the 
same as that of Bhatt’s 'Table des Agama et des Upagama’ (facing 
p.xix of the first volume of the Raurava) except that his list puts the 
Parametiv&ra in twenty-sixth place, with the result that all the works 
from the Svayambhuva to the Sarvokta are one number higher in his or¬ 
der. The footnotes to his table lead the reader to infer that his list is 
common to the extant recensions of the Ajita , the Purva- and Uttara- 
Karana. the Karnika , the Cintya , the Makuta , and the Suprabheda. As 
we have seen immediately above, the Ajita's lists are not the same, nor 
has the Uttara-Karana been correctly represented, as the final column, 
drawn from Uttara-Karana l:6c-9, shows. Nevertheless most South In- 

w * 

dian sources do have Bhat.t's list, and it came to be adopted in later 
works, e.g. the Sivatattvaratnakara (1:1:59c -62) and the Saivaratnakara 
(1:59—62b), which gives the same verses and attributes them to the VTra- 
tantra. 


The Nisvasatattvasamhita 


From the first pataia of the Uttarasutra ( f. 24 r f 3 5 1) 


.25 


24 That the extant Ajita is of relatively late date is argued by Sanderson (1992:291, 
fn. 42). The deviations of the two lists of the Ajita (unless they are very trivial, such as 
Parame£abhasita for Paramesa, Sahasrakhya for Sahasraka, Makuta for Makuta, etc.) 
are given in the footnotes marked Ajita 1 and Ajita 2 . 

J Found with the aid of Goudriaan’s invaluable summary of the contents of the 
manuscript (1981:35-6). 

























Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


405 


kamikam yogadan divyam karanam ajitan tatha 
dlptam suksmam ca sahasram 26 am^uman 27 suprabhedi ca 

anantam 3iva3astran tu daSadha pariklrtitam 
punas castada^air bhedai rudrena pariklrtitam 

vijayam prathama[n te]san nisvasan tadanantaram 
svayambhuvarn ata3 caiva vathulan tadanantaram 

vlrabhadram iti khyatam rauravam makutan tatha 
virasan candrahasan ca jrianam ca mukhabimbakam 

prodgltam lalitam caiva siddha[m] santanam eva ca 
sarvodgltam ca vijneyam kiranam parame^varam 

The last three of these verses are incorporated (as verses 27-9) into 
the tantravatarapatala of the Diksottara (IFF T. No. 17B, pp. 819-37; 
No. 150, pp. 43-51; No. 127, pp.8-10), and the same order, if not the 
same forms of the names, is given for the whole list of twenty-eight: 

sarvakamikam 28 ity eva provaca bhagavan Sivah 18 

yogodbhaveti 29 rudrena punar eva praklrtitam 
fdevyayanam 30 yadaf jnanam acintyeti 31 praklrtitam 19 

karanam bhagavan brahma ajiteti janardanah 
dlptabheti tathagnig 32 ca vayuh suksmeti vai punah 20 

sahasramgeti dharmaya amSuman iti bhaskarah 

* *S rn # 

suprabhas 33 candrama prokto dasatantraprakasakah 21 

siva^aktim adhisthaya vibhinnam vai punah sthitam 34 
da^adha namabhedena lokanam hitakamyaya 22 

evam eva 35 surah sarve &ivajnanasya paragah 36 

oz? _ 

sahasram ] em.; sahasram MS (unmetrical) 

‘2 7 — i — 

" am^uman j em.; asumam MS 
28o kamikam ] 17, 150; kamika 127 

29 yogodbhaveti ] conj lokodbhaveti 17; lokodbhavati 127, 150 
devyayanam ] 17, 127; devyayanam 150 
31 acintyeti ] conj.; ajiteti MSS 
J2 tathagniS ] conj.; yathagnis MSS 
33 suprabha^ ] 127, 150; suvratah 17 
34 sthitam ] conj.; sthitah MSS 
35 eva ] 150; eti 17, 127 
3(5 paragah ] em.; paragah MSS 




106 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * * v * 


avatarah 37 punas 38 caiva bahudha parikirtitah 39 23 

asyaiva jnanamukhyasya £ivajnanasya sampratam 
fbhedam astatararn 40 j proktam tatha 41 stada3adha punah 24 

astada^avidhair bhedaih tatra bhedaih 42 punah sthitah 

• t i • X • « 

ajagama suvarlokabhuvarlokakramagatah 43 25 

tasya bheda bhavanty ete 44 sarnjha ca pariklrtyate 
rsibhis tatra kalpajnaih viditam tantram 45 uttamam 26 

viiayam 46 prathamam tesam ni^vasam tad 4 ' anantararn 

%J t/ i X • i i • 

svayambhuvam atas caiva vatulam tad anantararn 27 
vlrabhadram iti khyatam rauravam makutam 48 tatha 

4/ ■ ■ I i 

visaram 49 candrabhasam' J ° ca inanam ca inukhabim- 
bakam 51 28 

prodgltam lalitam caiva siddham 52 santanam eva ca 
garvodgltam 53 ca vijneyam kiranam paramesvaram 29 

Tsvarah prathamah prokto devl ca tad anantararn 
brahma ca sanmukhas caiva vlrabhadras tathaiva ca 30 

i i 

nandl^varo mahakala usanatS 54 candramas tatha 
brhaspatih samakhyato dadhlcih kaca 5rj |vasavahf 31 

3 'avatarah ] 127, 150; avataram 17 
38 punaS ] 17; purai 127, !50 

39 parikirtitah ] conj .; pariklrtitam 17; pariklrtanam 127, 150 
40 astataram ] 17, 127; astottaram 150 

*4 • | * f * ■ * 

u tatha° ] 17; atha° 127; maya 0 150 
42 tatra bhedaih j 17; U 127, 150 

i i) _ 

' suvarlokabhuvarlokakramagatah] 17; bhuvarlokam bhuvarlokam samasatah 127, 
150 

44 ete ] 17, 150; eva 127 
45 tantram ] 150, tat ram 17, 127 
46 vijayam ] 17; vijaya 127; vijayah 150 

4 7 t 

'ni^vasam tad ] 17; ani^vasad 127; niSvasad 150 
4H makutam ] 17; makutam 127, 150 
49 visaram ] 127, 150; vimalam 17 
50 candrabhasam ] conj.] candrabhagam MSS 

51 jnanam ca rnukhabimbakam ] conj.] jhanam ca mukhabalakam 17; mukham 
vatulakam U 127; mukham vatulakam tatha 150 
52 siddharri ] 127, 150; siddha 17 
53 ^arvodgItam ] 17; sarvodgitam 127, 150 

E. A 

usana^ ] conj.] TSanam 17, 150; TSanaS 127 
55 dadhlcih kaca 0 ] conj.] devlvlkaca MSS 


















Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


407 


lalita caiva candas ca Santapanis 00 tathaiva ca 

■ • x. ■ 

sanatkumaro visnuS ca parame^vara 37 eva ca 32 

vijayam T^varajnanam devya ni^vasasamhita 58 

brahma svayambhuvam 59 caiva kumaro jheya vatule (!) 33 

virena vlrabhadras tu nandl rauravam eva ca 
* 

makuteti mahakalo 60 fvisannaram 61 u3annasa 62 f 34 

candramas 63 candrabhasan 64 ca jhanam cangirasas 65 tatha 
dadhlcir mukhabimbam 66 tu prodgitam kaca 67 eva ca 35 

lalitam lalita devi candah siddham 68 tathaiva ca 

• • * * * 

santanam fnasapanih f)9 f syat 6arvodgTtam ca 70 visnuna 36 

kiranam brahmana caiva parame^ah' * 1 paramesvaram 72 
ete tantravarah 73 purvam sivajhanasya paragah 37 

te capy anye mahabhagah kumaradyah 74 SacTpatih 
mantrasiddhas tatha canye rsaya£ ca tapodhanah 38 

mantrabhedapranetaro mantrakalpakaras tatha 
ebhir eva Sivajnanam sthapitam vasudhatale 39 

Some lapses of language and metre here may be authorial, but the trans¬ 
mission is bad, and more emendation is doubtless required; the syntactic 

56o panis J em.\ °panl 17; °parm 127, 150 

°' parame^vara ] em.; paramesvaram 17, 127; parameSvara 150 
5S0 samhita ] em.; °sarnhitam 17; °samjnitam 127, 150ac; °samhitam 150pc 
59 svayambhuvam ] em.; svayambhuvaS MSS 
60 rnahakalo ] 127, 150; mahakalam 17 
visannaram ] 17; viSannaram 127, 150 
62 uSannasa ] 127, 150 (metri causae?); uSanasa 17 
63 candramaS ] 17, 150; candra 127 
61 candrabhasan ] 17; candrabhasaS 127, 150 
cangirasas J 150; cahgirasam 17; ca Sirasam 127 

1 dadhlcir mukhabimbam ] con/.; dadhlcl mukhabhinnan 17; dadhl mukhabhinnas 
127; dadhlcl mukhabhinnas 150 
b 'kaca ] conj.; kavacam MSS 
candah siddham 1 con/.; dandahastam MSS 

i * * * J I * I « 

naSapanih ] 17; nasipani 127; naSivani 150 (cf. 32c above) 

PBjp 

SarvodgTtam ca ] 17; Sarvodgitam tu 127; sarvodgltam tu 150 

71 

caiva parameSah J conjr, caiva parameSe 17; caivamumeSe 127; caivamumedve 150 
(or hypermetry could be avoided by emending to: caiva umeSah) 
parameSvaram ] 17, 150; parameSvarah 127 
' 3 tantravarah ] 127, 150; tantrah 17 
74 kumaradyah ] 127, 150; kramadyah 17 











Ramakantha J s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m • 4 / • 


structure of the whole is unclear: from 33 to the end there is only one 
(otiose) finite verb syat in 36c) and the names of the transmitters appear 
both in the instrumental (33b, 34a, 34d. 36d, 37a) and in the nominative 
(33cd, 34bc, 35abcd, 36abc, 37b). The remaining forty-four verses of the 
chapter explain which gods and sages were initiated into the systems of 
which tantras and relate the numbers of mandalas and mantras taught 
by each text. 

The [Pauskara-(Paramesvara and the Srlkanthlya-Samhita 

This is the list of the twenty-eight Siddhantas given in the [ Pauskara- 
]Parame£vara (=P) as quoted by Taksakavarta (f. 4 r [ 6 l-f, 5 7 '[ 9 1) collated 
against the version of the same verses preserved in the Srikanthiyasamhita 
(=S) as quoted again by Taksakavarta (f. ll r l 10 l-f. llW 7 l) t 

murdhnas tu vijayam jnanam 75 lalatat parainesvaram 76 
netrebhyag caiva nisSvasam jnanarajam anuttamam 77 1 

sravanabhyam ca prodgitam 78 mukhac ca mukhabimbakam 
grlvaskandhat tatha siddham 79 santanam 80 kaksadesatah 2 

vaksaso narasiniliam 81 tu stanabhyam candrasamjnakam 
hrdayad vlrabhadrakhyam agneyam jatharodbhavam 82 3 

svayambhuvam nabhidesat parsvabhyam visaram tatha 
rauravam prsthadesat tu tantrajam 83 katide^atah 4 

lingat kiranasamjnam tu lalitam coruyugmatah 
janubhyam saurabheyam tu 8 ' 1 

From this point the texts of the SrTkanthiya and the Pauskara diverge. 
The Srlkanthlya continues with the first ten of the list: 

75 vijayam jnanam ] P; vijayatmanam S 

76 parameSvaram ] S; parainesvaram P 

"jnanarajam anuttamam ] P; jnanarajanam uttamam S 

INp Q ^ 

°bhyam ca prodgitam ] S; °bhyam athodgitam P 

Q 

grlvaskandhat tatlia siddham ] P; skandhayos siddhasahjnas tu S 
80 santanam ] S, Ppc; kartaram Pac 

Q I _ - 

narasimham ] P; narasimhas S 

g2_ 

“agneyam jatharodbhavam ] S; a U yam jatharat tatha P 

00 - 

tantrajam J P; vimalam S 

saurabheyam tu j em.; saurabheyas tu S; saurabheyam P 


























409 


* 


Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


sikhagrat kamikam tat ha 

Sikhaya 85 yogajam caiva jihvayaS 86 cintyasanjnakam 
makutam mukutaj jatam bahubhyam arnSumams tatha 

* » » i/ * i / « m 

locanatritayad dipt am suksmam kanthad vinirgatam 
dantebhyas caiva 87 sahasram hastayor ajitam tatha 

padayor anunamakhyam tantram taraganodbhavam 
yo p]nyah parataro bhedah sivasastrasya 88 pathyate 

sangrahas sa tu vijneya rsidevaganagira [?] 

The Pauskara however proceeds with 

Sivasyatra purabhavat 

astadasavidha jneya jrianasyotpattiyuktayah 5 

vyakhyakale gurus tv eta jnanotpattlh pradarsayet 
jnanaprakasakan 89 devan fhrnmantrainf sivadehatah 6 

jnanaih samam sahotpannan 90 kathayed 91 anupurvaSah 
anadirupo (f. 4 V ) bhagavan vijayasya prakasakah 92 7 

snrupah 94 paramesasya 94 nissvasasya daSaksarah 
prodgltasya tu bhadrakhyah prasamo mukhasamjninah 95 8 

binduvyapT tu siddhasya santateh 96 givasadhakah 
saumyas ca narasimhasya candrasyanantasamjnitah 9 

sarvatma vlrabhadrasya vyoma 97 cagneyasamjninah 98 
svayambhuvasya" nidhanas tejaj^ 100 ca visarasya tu 10 

8 , Sikhaya | em * gikhavam S 

v M * V f 

jihvaya^ ] em jihvayam S 
dantebhyas caiv'a ] conj dantair eva ca S 

Q Q 

sastrasya ] con/.; °mantrasya S 
890 prakaSakan ] em.; °prakasakad P 
90 sahotpannan ] em.; sahotpannah P 

9 kathayed ] conj.; kathayad P 

9 prakasakah ] conj.; prakaSitah P 
^ nr up ah ] em.; Srlrupam P 

g ^ 

paramesasya ] em.; paramesasya P 
95 praSamo mukhasamjninah ] conj.; praSapo mukhasamjnitah P 

g g _ * 

santateh ] conj.; santano P 

q y 

vyoma ] conj.; vyomaS P (perhaps the latter is original). 

98o samjninah ] conj.; °samjnitah P 
"svayambhuvasya ] em.\ syavambhuvasya P 
100 tejaS j conj.; tejaS (cf. vyoma/vyomaS in the line above.) 











410 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


brahmanego rauravasya sivakhyo makutasya tu 
jkiranakhyo devatapi l0l f lali[tasya]layas tatha 11 

prakago 102 ’pi devapatis saurabheyasya klrtitah 
ity astadaSa mantavya jnanaprakaSayuktayah 12 

tantrarthams tu tatha devah jnananam avatarakan 
acaryah kathayet prajnah Sisyaya tu sumedhase 13 

anadirupad vijayam bhagavan parameSvarah 
Srirupatah parameSam 103 usanah praptavan munih 14 

da^aksarat tu ni^vasajs tato de|vlm upagatah 
prodgTtam caiva bhadrakhyat kacah sampraptavan rsih 15 

praSaman mukhabimbam tu dadhlcah praptavan munih 
binduvyapyahvayad devat 104 siddham candeSam agatam 16 

lebhe Sivakhyat santanam munir vai .4amsapayanah 
narasirnham 105 tatha saumyan nrsimhah praptavan punah 17 

bhadram sarvatmadevat tu virabhadras tu labdhavan 
(f. 5 r ) anantac candrasamjnam tu brhaspatir avaptavan 18 

agneyam praptavan vyomnah skando devas tathanalah 
svayaiiibhuvam tu nidhanad brahma vai samavaptavan 19 

tejaspates tu visaram lebhe devah prajapatih 

rauravam brahmane^anan nandT^ah 106 praptavan munih 20 

tantrajam tu ^ivakhyanan mahakalas 107 tu praptavan 
vidyalayat tu lalitam 108 bhairavah samavaptavan 21 

kiranam devapitrto lebhe samvartako munih 
saurabheyam devapater dharmo devah samaptavan 22 

iti jhanavata[rag ca] yuktayo ’stada^oditah 
catuspanca^ad evam tu 109 guruna tantrayuktayah 

101 

kiranasya devapita would give the required sense, but it is unmetrical. 
l02 praka£o ] em.\ praka^e P 

103 

' parame^am ] em,; paraml^am Ppc; paratlSam Pac 
104 devat ] em.; devan P 

10a narasirnham ] Ppc; narasimhe Pac 

106 * 

nan^ah ] con/.; prandl^am P (cf. Kirana, 10:25ab). 

107 mahakalas ] em.; mahakalat P 

108 lalitam ] conj.; vilayam P 

109 tu ] conj.; tvam P 



































Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


411 


vyakhyakale tu Sisyanam vyakhyeyas tu sumedhasam 23 

tiier verses listing the twenty-eight Siddhantas are quoted from the 
Srikanthiya-Samhita by Jayaratha ad Tantraloka 1:18 (=TAV) and 
by Taksakavarta (f. lO^ 1 ' 2 - 1 to f. lr^) in his Nityadisangrahabhidhana- 
paddhati (=N): 

srotasy Qrdhve 110 bhavej jnanam Sivarudrabhidham dvidha 111 

■ yogajam cintyam 113 makutam 114 cam^umat 115 
punah 

dlptarn suksmam tu sahasram ajitanantakam tatha 116 
3ivabhedah samakhyata rudrabhedams tv iman chrnu 117 

vijayam parameSam ca ni^vasodgltam eva ca 118 
mukhabimbam ca siddham ca santanam narasimhakam 119 

* i * * 

candrahvam 120 vlrabhadram ca agneyam ca svayambhuvam 

visaram rauravahvam ca 1 ' 21 vimalam kiranam tatha 

* * • « 

lalitam saurabheyarn ca tantrany ahur 122 maheSvari 
astavimgatibhedas tu 123 urdhvasrotovinirgatah 124 

A complete transcription of the Srlkanthlya-Samhita’s account of the 
Saiva tantric canon discovered by Professor Sanderson in Taksakavarta’s 
manual lias been appended to Hanneders as yet unpublished thesis 

(*1996:188-220). 

ll0 srotasy urdhve ] TAV; srotobheda N 
nio bhidham dvidha ] TAV; “khyajam pura N 
n2 kamikam ] N; kamajam TAV 

113 * 

v yogajam cintyam ] TAV; yojikam citryam N 
1I4 makutam ] em.; maukutam TAV; nakutam N 

]15 cam^umat ] TAV am^uman N 

116 

diptam suksmam tu sahasram ajitanantakam tatha] N; dlpta... ntaram punah 

TAV 

11 ‘ rudrabhedams tv iman chrnu ] TAV; rudrabhedah chrnu priye N 

paramefSam ca ni^svasodgltam eva ca ] em.; parame^am ca ni^vasodgatim eva ca 
N; caiva nihgvasam madgltam parame^varam TAV 

11 ’narasimhakam ] TAV; narasaimhikam N 
120 candrahvam ] N; candramgum TAV 

p J J * # 

rauravahvam ca ] N; rauravah panca TAV 
122 tantrany ahur ] TAV; tantrahyahur N 

1 2 3 o 

“ vim^atibhedas tu conj.; “vim^atibhedarn tu ] N; °vim^atir ity evam TAV 
124 “nirgatah ] TAV; “nirgatam N 








412 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


The Jnanapahcasika 

This is the shortest of the recensions of the Kalottara. Its list below was 
pointed out to me by Professor Sanderson (f. Fl 6-9 !); 

kamikam yogajam cintyam karanam cajitam tatha 

dipt am suksmam ca sahasram amgumat, 125 suprabham daga 

SivabhedajhJ samakhyata rudrabhedas tatah param 
vi J ayam paramesvaram 126 n i hs v as o d git, as a hj h akam 

piodgltam mukhabimbam tu siddham santanam eva ca 
nrsunham candica viram svayainbhu ranravam 

makotam kiranam^ 2 ^ caiva lalitanT 23 vlrasam param 
rudrabhedah samakhyata da^astadasa 129 corddhvagah 130 

' lie Svayambhuvasutrasangraha 

1 1 st ii li Mysore edition of the Svayambhuvasutrasangraha i p. 15) 

is given below, collated against Mysore MS. P 258 (f. 13 W I 7 — 12 J). ( ,n ; dch 

that edition must have been based (the relevant leaf of the Nepalese 
manuscript is missing): 

evam eva sivajhanam vibhinnam da^adha punah 
tathastada^adha bliuyo bhedantaravisarpitam 

kamikam prathamam tesarn yogodbhavam atah param 
acintyam karanam jnanam ajitam dlptasamjhakam 

bliedantaram 131 tatha suksmam sahasram aparam viduh 
am^uman suprabham caiva da^abhedam at all ^ 32 param 

vijayam pra^ hamam tatra nisvasam aparam tatha 

i 26 S - haSram anl ^ umat 1 emr ’ sahasramma«u(su ante correctionem)ma+t+ MS 

paramesvaram ] em.; parameSvaryam MS 
127 kiranam 1 cm - kirinam MS 

12 g * * * 

* J em.; tvalitam MS 

] em.; da^astada^a MS 

lao urd hva gah refers to the emergence of tfie Siddhantas from the uppermost face of 
Sada^iva (cf. urdhvasrotovinirgatam at the end of the passage above), 
bhedantaram ] M K ; thedantaram Ed 
132 atah ] M y ; ata Ed 






























Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


4 i 3 


svayambhuvam athagneyam 133 virabhadram sarauravam 
makutam visaram caiva candrahasam atah param 

* * * ■ i 

mukhabimbakam anyac ca prodgltam 134 lalitam tat ha 
siddham santanasaminam ca 3arvode;Ttam nrsimhakam 

* « W • O m ■ t 

kiranam parame^am ca tantrabhedasya sangrahah 

evam etac chivajhanam vibhinnam bahudha punah 
upabhedena bhedanam asya samkhya na vidyate 
bhedantarani sarvani mahanti na mahanty api 

Isanagiva’s list 

Sandwiched between quotations (both correctly attributed to the 
Svayambhuva ) of the opening and concluding portions of the above pas¬ 
sage there is a quite different list in the Iganasivagurudevapaddhati (Vol. 3, 

pp. 5-6): 

atra svayambhuve— 

ekam eva Sivajnanam vibhinnam dasadha punah 
tathastada^adha bhuyo bhedantaravisarpitam 

iti/ tadyatha— 

i 

kamikam yogajacintyakaranany ajitam tat ha 

dlptarn suksmam sahasrarn capy amsuman suprabliedakam 

^ivabhedasamakhyani tantrany evain da^a kramat 
vijayam caiva nih^vasam prodgltam paramesvaram 

agneyam mukhabirnbam ca svayambhuvam atah param 

rauravam makutam caiva kiranam lalitam 135 tatha 

• * * * • * 

candrajhanam virabhadram siddham santanikam tat ah 
^arvodgltam ca vimalam vatiilam cety anukramat 

rudrabhedodbhavany eva tantrany astadasaiva hi 
esam bhedopabheda^ ca tattatprakaranany api 

i nn , , 

athagneyam ] M ; athasteyam Ed 
134 prodgltam ] Ed; prldgitam M r 

| rt p* 

J lalitam ] em.; Iambi tarn Ed 






414 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

i * */ * 


subahunity ato ’smabhir nirdisyante na namabhih 
upabhedena bhedanam asya samkhya na vidyate 
bhedantarani sarvani mahanti na mahanty api 

iti| svayambhuve—... 

The following lists of ten Sivas and then of eighteen Rudras in Svac- 
chanda 10:1196-99 have not been tabulated, but it is not difficult to 
recognise in them lists of the Sivabheda and Rudrabheda: 

omkare^ah sivo diptah karanesah dase^akah 

• * x * * ♦ > 

suSiva3 caiva kalesah suksmarupah sutejasah 

sarvas ca daSamah prokta urdhvantam samvyavasthitah 
rudra£ castadasa bahis tesam narnani vai srnu 

• * > B i * 

vijayas tv at ha nihSvasah svayambhus cagni-vlrarat 
rauravo rnukuto visara6 candro bimbah pragltavan 

lalitah siddharudraS ca santanah 3arva eva ca 

* * 

para6 ca kiranas caiva paramesvara eva ca 

Professor Sanderson has kindly supplied me with his tentatively ed¬ 
ited transcript (*1996b) of two chapters of the Brhatkalottara (the siva¬ 
bheda- and the tantrotpattivyakhya- pataias) which list the twenty-eight 
Siddhantas, allocate them to parts of the body, report whether they 
were divided into several or transmitted in only one 1 bheda\ provide the 
names of their transmitters, and record what are purportedly the adi- or 
mula-sutras of each. One might expect the Siddhantas to be listed here 
in the same order as in the other Kalottara text, the Jhanapahcadika ; 
but it lists them differently and in more than one order, probably be¬ 
cause these chapters are a redaction of a patchwork of snippets rorn 
other sources, among them the Kirana and the Pauskara. (Sanderson has 
demonstrated elsewhere (* 1996c: 14—16) that two substantial passages of 
the Brhatkalottara are modified borrowings.) Thus £ivabhedapatala 8-16 
« Kirana vidyapada 10:4-12b , and the first listing of the Rudrabhedas 
too follows the order of the Kirana , but the verses themselves, in which 
they are allocated to parts of the body ( tantrotpatti ° 5c—13 i, appear to 
be a redaction of the corresponding verses of the Pauskara (see verses 1-5 
above), modifying the order and adding the information about divisions 
of the works: 
























Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhantas 


415 


murddhato vijayam jatam lalatat paramesvaram 5 

netrebhyaS caiva nigvasam trikhandam nirgatam pura 
Sravanabhyam athodgltam dvikhandam bhuktimuktaye 6 

trim^atprakaram vijneyam mukhac ca mukhabimbakam 
triskarndharn tu tatha siddham grlva [ m ] £ abhyam samut- 

thitam 7 

■ 

dvikandam caiva samtanam kaksadesad vinirgatam 
ekabhedam narasimham vaksadeSad vinirgatam 8 

stanabhyam candrahasakhyam dvibhedam nirgatam 136 

vibhoh 

■ 

hrdayad 137 virabhadrakhyam tad dvibhedam praeaksate 9 

agneyam vathu ahvam 13 * yat jatharad ekabhedakam 
svayambhuvam nabhide^ad bhedaikena 13 ^ visarppitam JO 

visaram par6vayo[r] jatam dvibhedam sivakayatah 
rauravam prsthadesat tu bhedaikena vyavasthitam 11 

makotam katito jatam tribhedam tac ca 3amkari 
ekabhedam tu kiranam prajanat 140 tu vinirgatam 12 

kucayugmat tu lalitam siddhamtam tad dvibhedajam 
dvibhedam saurabheyan ca janubhyam paramesthinah 1.3 

In the lext listing die redactor of the Brhatkalottara has again borrowed 
from the Pauskara (tantrotpattivyakhyapatala 31c-36 « Pauskara 6-1 lb 
above and tantrotpattivyakhyapatala 37-8 ^ Pauskara 21c-23b above), 
but has here retained the order ol the Pauskara and not adjusted it to 

■ Since the Brhatkalottara reproduces the lists now of 
the Kirana, now of the Pauskara, it has not been tabulated. The principal 
interest o the Brhatkalottara s account of the canon is the inclusion of 
the text of the adisutras. )nly three out of twenty-eight, are to be found in 
the listed Siddhantas that have reached us: Svayambhuvasutrasahgraha 
1:5 (verse 73), Rauravasutrasaiigraha 1:1 t 78c-79b), and Kirana 1:13 (84). 

'nirgatam ] em. Sanderson; nirmatam MS 
'hrdayad ] em. Sanderson ; hangrlvad MS 

138 — i — i 

vathulahvam ] em. Sanderson ; vathalahvam MS 
bhedaikena ] em. Sanderson ; bhedekena MS 
0 prajanat ] em. Sanderson ; prajanam MS 









416 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

i i t/ « 


For the Agneya , which it identifies with the Vathuia 141 both in 90b and 
in 10a (quoted above), it gives as the adisutra Sardhatritfatikalottara 1:5 
(shared also by other recensions of the Kalottara ). One other tantra's 
adisutra we would expect to find is that of the Parakhya transmitted in 
M v (quoted in footnote 151 on p. Ixii above); but what the Brhatkalottara 
gives (92-93b) is not to be found: 

athavyaktam mahalingam purusatitavacakam 

inanam sivatmakam suksmam sarvvaviinaptikaranam 

U • ft • ■ *J A • 

adisutram idam jneyarn saurabheye parahvaye 


It is possible then that the Brhatkalottara knew of another Parakhya , and 
this is suggested by another passage in the same tantrotpattivyakhya- 
patala in which upabhedas are discussed (verses 16-30). Some tantras 
are here allocated a list of named upabhedas (verses 16-18b): 

upabheda hi bahava[h] kathyante legato maya 

viiayalml vrsabham raudram mohanam padmasaminakam 

<7 1 / L * J ■ * * ■ * x • v 

vijayarn pancadha khyatam saptadha parame^varam 

pauskaram hamsa matangam yaksinl vamadevakam 

# 

dadhlcih sap tarn am jneyarn prafisthaparamesvaram 142 


In the case of the Nisvasa three subdivisions of the work are given (verses 

18c-19b): 


nihsvasam triprakaram tu trikandan tu vidhiyate 

i I A * mm 1/ 

nisvasa karika caiva uttara tritayam smrtam 143 

|/ « m • 


Otliers are said not to have upabhedas at all but are held to have been 
transmitted undivided (verses 27-30b): 


141 The identification receives indirect confirmation from the tabulated lists, which, 
with the exception of those of the Mrgendr a and of I^anaSiva, give either one or 
the other. Furthermore, AghoraSiva too in his Dvigatikalottaravrtti makes this iden¬ 
tification: he borrows (Trivandrum MS 4509, f. 3 7 ^ 8 ! with few modifications, 
Ramakantha’s Sardhatrigatikalottaravrtti ad l:4cd (which begins with a nirvacana of 
Vathufa), supplanting the phrase £ as tram eva prasiddham. tasmat prakrtibhutat with 
t amt ram iti prasiddham parame6am yac chastram agucyarn kalottarain tasmat pra¬ 
krtibhutat. ... 

■- 

142 I chose this example because we know a number of these Paramegvaras to have 
existed from patalas quoted from them in Hrdaya&iva’s Praya$cittasamuccaya (see foot¬ 
note 98 on p. xliii above). 

13 The anomalous use of uninflected ‘quote-forms’ is perhaps ‘authorial’. 






























Appendix III. The Twenty-eight Siddhnntas 


417 


tatha svayamb]iuva[mj jneyam bhedaikena vyavasthitam 
visaram 144 keSaran caiva visaran ca dvidha matam 

m 

rauravam ekabhedam tu makotan tu tribhedakam 145 

• > 

makotam brahmaplthan ca tat ha nirvanasamjnakam 146 

I i x * • * v 

ekabhedam tu kiranam 147 dvibhedam lalitam matam 

• m * mm* 

lalitam bhuvanakhyan ca dvibhedam lalitam sthitam 

• 1/ * * * 


[and finally] 

saurabheyam 148 parakhyam ca dvividham ca parahvayam 

This last half-verse may mean then that the redactor(s) of the 
Brhatkalottara knew of two parts of a Parakhya or of two independ¬ 
ent works, one known as the Saurabheya and the other as the Parakhya. 
The adisutra it quotes might then be assumed to belong to the one not 
transmitted in M v . 

Other lists might have been included, 119 but this appendix was com¬ 
piled primarily to tabulate the lists in demonstrably early Siddhantas, not 
to give a comprehensive list of lists. 


144 visaram ] em. Sanderson] visaram MS 

145 tribhekadam ] em. Sanderson ; tribhedajam MS 

14 b nirvana 0 ] em. Sanderson ; nirvana 0 MS 

147 tu kiranam ] conj tu kiranakhyam MS; kiranakhyarn conj. Sanderson. Cf. verse 
12 quoted above. 

148 saurabheyam ] em. Sanderson ; saurabhedam MS 

149 For example that in 3:108-27 of the Pratisthalaksanasarasainuccaya (ed. Babu 
Krsna Sarma. 2 Vols. Kathmandu: Nepala Rastriyabhilekhalaya, 1966 and 1968). 
i his list is incorporated into Dvivedi’s table (1983:91-3), but with certain inaccuracies 
that make it impossible to determine the entire sequence. It appears to be most similar 
to the list of the Kir ana. I have not found a copy of the text. 
























WORKS CONSULTED 


Abbreviations 


il-'l Institut Frangais d indologie (misnomer used in old publications) 
IFF Institut Frangais de Pondich6ry/French Institute of Pondicherry 
KSTS Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 
NAK National Archives of Kathmandu 
NGMPP Nepal German Manuscript Preservation Project 

T Transcript 


Manuscripts of works other than the Kirana 


kalottara non-eclectic recensions (i.e. excluding the Brhatkalottara) . NAK 

MS pra 1114, NGMPP Reel No. B 25/7. Palm-leaf, NagarT. Also NAK MS 5- 
4632, NGMPP Reel No. B 118/7. Paper, DevanagarT. 

KRIYAKANDAKRAMaval! of Soma^ambhu. Cambridge University Library 

MS Add. 1406. Palm-leaf, old Bengali script. 

kriyakramadyotikavyakhya of KacchapeSvara. IFP T. Nos. 109 and 240. Paper 

transcripts in DevanagarT. 

JNANAPANCASIKA (a recension of the kalottara) NAK MS 5-4632, NG¬ 
MPP Reel No. B 118/7 (entitled kalottaratantra). Paper, DevanagarT. 

diksottara IFP T. Nos. 17B, 150, and 127. Paper transcripts in DevanagarT. 

dvisatikalottaravrtti of AghoraSivacarya. Trivandrum MS 4509. Paper, Tanjore 

style DevanagarT. Also IFP T. 176, a paper transcript in DevanagarT. 

naresvarapar.Tksaprakasa of Ramakantha. Wellcome Institute Or. MS a 415. Pa- 

« * * 

per. Sarada script. )escribed (as a manuscript of the naresvariparIksa in 
DevanagarT) by Wujastyk (1985:113). 

nityadisangrahabhidhanapaDDHATI of Taksakavarta. Bodleian MS Stein Or.d.43 

* 

(codex unicus). Paper, Sarada script. 

nisvasakarika IFP T. 17 (A and B) Paper transcript in DevanagarT. 

NISVASATATTVASAMHITA NAK MS 1-227, NGMPP Reel No. A 41/14. Palm-leaf, early 

Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script. Described by Hara Prasad Sastri (1905:lxxvii and 
137-140). 









420 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* 9 V * 


parakhyatantra Oriental Research Institute of Mysore, MS P 258, ff. 27 r -35 (codex 

unicus). Palm-leaf, NandinagarT. See description of M* in the section of the 
introduction entitled ‘Sources’. 

PARAMESVARATANTRA Cambridge University Library MS Add. 1049 (codex unicus). 

•^aim-leaf, early Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script. Described by Bendall (1883:27-8). 
Also IFP T. 249, paper transcript in D e van agar!. 

PAUSKARABHASYA of [Salivatipuranivasi-j Jnanapraka^a. M P ['.Nos. 110 and 180, pa¬ 
per transcripts in Devanagarl. 

prayascittasamuccaya of Hrdaya^iva. Cambridge University Library MS Add. 2833. 

I ’aim-leaf, early Newari script. Copied in Bhaktapur in the reign of Ananda- 
deva and dated 1157/8 ad (samvat 278). Described by Bendall (1888:550-1). 
Also NAK MS 4-1854, NGMPP Reel No. A 149/6; NAK MS 1-76, NGMPP Reel 
No. B 133/8; NAK MS 1-796, NGMPP Reel No. A 1303/26 (paper manuscripts 
in Newari script); and NGMPP Reel No. C 29/7 (paper manuscript in Deva- 
nagarl). . 

BRHATKALOTTARA NAK MS 1-89, NGMPP Reel No. B 24/59. ‘kalottara’. Palm- 

leaf, Newari script. 

See also Sanderson *1996b. 

bhavacOdamani Described by Stein (1894) as MS No. 5291 of the Shri Raghunath 

Temple MSS Library in Jammu (now in the collection of the Shri Ranbir Sanskrit 

Research Institute in Jammu). Paper, Kashmirian NagarT (codex unicus). (A 

* 

commentary on the mayasangraha by Ramakantha IPs only known pupil, 
Vidyakantha II.) 

bhavac Op am anita ntra NAK MS 5-6565 and NAK MS 6-1748, NGMPP Reel 

Nos. A 207/8 and A 989/23. Paper, Newari and Devanagarl scripts. 

mayasangraha NAK MS 1-1537, NGMPP Reel No, A 31/18 (codex unicus). Palm- 

leaf, Newari script. 

mrgendrapaddhatitTka of Nate^aguru. IFP T. 1021. Paper transcript in Deva- 

nagarT. 

mrgendravrtti of Bhatta Narayana. I described by Stein (1894) as MS No. 4387 of 

the Shri Raghunath Temple MSS Library in lammu (now in the collection of the 
Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute in Jammu). Paper, Devanagarl. Copied 
samvat 1776 near Ramghat in Benares. 

mohacOdottara NAK MS ca 622, NGMPP Reel No. B 27/18. Palm-leaf, Newari 

(Bhujimol). Also NAK MS 5-1977, NGMPP Reel No. A 182/2. Paper, Deva- 
nagarl, 

vyomavyapistava of Bhatta Ramakantha i with the commentary (laghutTka) of 

VedajnanarsTndra. IFP T. 128. Paper transcript in Devanagarl. 

sakalagamasangraha IFP T. Nos. 246, 351, and 374. Paper transcripts in Deva¬ 
nagarl. 

Sivajnanasiddhisvapaksadrstantasangraha of NigamajhanadeSika. IFP T.317, 

Part 2, pp. 968-1118. Paper transcript in Devanagarl. 





















Works Consulteii 


421 


SIVADHARMA TEXTS (SIVADH ARM AS ASTRA, SIVADHARMOTTARA, SIVADH ARM ASA N- 

GRAHA, SIVOPANISAT, UM AMAHESVARASAMVADA, UTTAROTTARAM AHASAM VADA, 

VRSASARASANGRAHA, dh armaputrika) Cambridge University Library 
MS Add. 1645 (dated 1136 AD (samvat 256)) and Cambridge University Library 
MS Add. 1694, Both palm-leaf, early Newari script. Also (for the first of these 
texts) IFF T. 32, a paper transcript in Devanagarl. 

SAIVAGAMADIMAHATMYASANGRAHA of [Salivatipuranivasi-] Jnanapraka^aguru. 

IFP T. Nos. 372 and 1059. Paper transcripts in Devanagarl. 

S arva j na NOTTA rata n tra NAK MS 1-1692. NGMPP Reel No. A 43/12. Palm-leaf, 

early Nepalese ‘Licchavi’ script. Described by Sastri (19< 5:lxxiv-lxxv and 85-6). 
Also IFP T. Nos. 334, 760, and 985, paper transcripts in Devanagarl. 

sarvajnanottaravrtti of Aghora&vacarya. Oriental Research Institute and 

Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum MS 6578, palm-leaf (palmyra manuscript 
from Madurai in Grantha script (listed by Bhaskaran, 1986:6 . Also IFP 39818, 
palm-leaf (palmyra) manuscript in Grantha script; IFP 4781.8 and IFP 47828, 
paper manuscripts in Grantha script; Hoshiarpur MS 5987, palm-leaf (palmyra) 
manuscript in Grantha script; and JI !> T. Nos. 83 and 985, paper transcripts in 
Devanagarl. 

sardhatrisatikalottara adhyustasata- in the colophons). NAK MS 5-4632. 

NGMPP Reel No. B 118/7. [entitled kalottaratantra). Paper, Devanagarl. 

SIDDHANTASIKHAMANI of Salivatipuranivasi- JhanaprakaSaguru. IFP 10871, ff. 71 r - 

122'. Palm-leaf (palmyra) manuscript in Grantha script. 

SVAYAMBHUVATANTRA IFP T. Nos. 39 and 247. Paper transcripts in Devanagarl. 

svayambhuvasOtrasangraha NGMPP Reel No. A 30/6. NAK MS pam 348 vi 

jyautisam 80. Palm-leaf, early Nepalese l Kutila’ script. Also M Y (see description 
of manuscripts of Kir an a). 


Printed Sources 

ajitagama, ed. N. R. Bhatt. 2 Vols. Publications de TIFI No. 24. Pondicherry: IFI, 

1964 and 1967. 

ABHIDHARMako^abhasya of Vasubandhu, ed. P. Pradhan. Tibetan Sanskrit Works 

Series vol. 8. Patna: K.P. Jayaswal Research Institute, 1967. 

astaprakarana, ed. KrsnaSastrl. Devakottai: Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha, 

1923 (tattvaprakaSa, tattvasangraha, tattvatrayanirnaya, with the 
commentaries of Aghora^ivacarya) and 1925 (ratnatrayapariksa, BHOGA- 
rarika, nadakarika with the commentaries of AghoraSivacarya, and moksa- 
karika and PARAMOKSANIRASAKARIKA with the commentaries of Rama- 

•i 

kantha II). 

-, ed. Vrajavallabha DvivedT. Yogatantragranthamala Vol. 12. Varanasi: Sam- 

purnananda Sanskrit University, 1988. 




422 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

f i t/ * 


AST A NG ah RDAYA of Vagbhata with the commentaries (sarvangasundarA) of Aruna- 

datta and (AYURVEDARASAYANA) of Hemadri, collated by Anna MoreSwara 
Kunte and Krsna Ramacandra Sastri Navare and cd. Hari^astri Paradakara 

« ■ * 4 4 ■ 

Vaidya. Jaikrishnadas Ayurveda Series No. 52. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Ori- 
entalia, 1982 (reprinted from the Bombay Nirnaya Sagar Press edition of 1939). 

AHIRBUDHNYASAMHITA , ed. Pandit M. I). Ramaniyacarya. Adyar Library Series Vol. 4. 

Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1916. 

Is A N as I va G u ru de va pa DDH ATI of I^anasivagurudeva, ed. T, Ganapati Sastri, 4 Vols. 

Delhi: Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, 1990. (Reprinted, but with a new intro¬ 
duction by N. P. Unni, from Trivandrum Sanskrit Series Nos. 69, 72, 77 and 83, 
Trivandrum, 1920, 1921, 1922, 1925.) 

ISVARAPRATYABHIJNAKARIKA of Utpaladeva with the commentary (-vimarsinT of 

Abhinavagupta, ed. Mukund Ram Sastri, vol. 1, and Madhusudan Kaul Sastri, 
vol, 2. KSTS 22 and 23. Bombay, 1918 and 1921. 

rgveda. See Muller 1877. 

m 

kathopanisat. See Limaye and Vadekar 1958. 

m ■ 

KARMAKANDAKRAMAVAL! of SomaSambhu, ed. Jagaddhar Zadoo. KSTS 73. Srinagar, 

1947. 

See also somasambhupaddhati and Brunner 1963, 1968, 1977. 

kiranatantra, ed. Ti. Ra. PancapageSaiivacarya and K. M. Subrahmanyaiastrl. 

Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha Vol. No. 16. (—E^) Devakottai, 1932. 

-, For the vidyapada only see Vivanti (—E v -) 1975. 

KRIYAKRAMADYOTIKA of AghoraSivacarya with the commentary (prabhavyakhya) 

of Nirmalamani, ed. Rama^astrin and Ambalavanajhanasambandhapara^akti- 
svamin. Chidambaram, 1927. 

See also mahotsavavidhi. 


GAUDAVAHO of Vakpati. The Gaiir/avaho, A Prakrit Historical Poem by Vakpati, ori¬ 
ginally edited by Shankar Pandurang Pandit, re-edited for the second edition by 
Narayan B. Utgirkar. Bombay Sanskrit and Prakrit Series No. XXXIV. Oriental 
Research Institute 1927. 


caturvargacintamani of Hemadri, Vol. I (danakhanda), and Vol. II vrata- 

kiianda), Part II, ed. Pandita Bharatacandra Siromani. Kashi Sanskrit Series 
No. 235. Varanasi: Chaukhambha Sanskrit Sansthan, 1985 (reprint of the edi¬ 
tion of the Asiatic Society of Bengal of 1871 and 1878). 


CIVANANACITTIYAR of Arulnandi. In MEYKANTACATTIRAM (mulam uzn urai-y-urn), ed 

■ 9 * \ f ^ 

* 

Kuci-Nakalinkamutaliyar. ennai: Srlniketana-v-acciyantiracalai, 1897 Kali- 
yuga 4999). 

CHANDONUSASANA of Hemacandra, ed. H. D. Velankar. Singlii Jain Series No. 49. Bom¬ 
bay: SinghI Jain Sastra Siksapltha, 1961. 


JATINIRNAYAPURVAKALAYAPRAVESAVIDHI. See FlLLIOZAT 1975- 

m 





















Works Consulted 


423 


j aiminisutra with the commentary (bhasya) of Sabarasvamin and the sub- 

commentary of Kumarila Bhatta, ed. Tirthahalllgramabhijanasubbagastrin. 
Ananda^ramasamskrtagranthavali No. 97. 5 Parts. Poona: Anandairama Press, 
1929-34. 

NanAVARANAVILAKKam of Kurunanacampanta-mamacariya-cuvamikal with the com¬ 
mentary (mapadiyam) of Velliyampalavanacuvamikal, ed. by 25th head of 
Tirukkayilaya parampara.it tarumapura atlnarn, Cuppiramaiiiya tecika hana- 
eampanta paramacariya cuvamikal. 2 Vols. Dharmapuram, 1957 and 1959. 

tattvakaumudI. See Srinivasan 1967. 

tat tvatRAYAnirnaya of Sadyojyotih with commentary (-vrtti) of AghoraSivacarya. 

In ASTAPRAKARANA. 

* * * 

See also Filliozat 1991b. 

TATTVAPRAKASA of Bhojaraja with commentary (-vrtti) of Aghoragivacarya. In 

ASTAPRAKARANA. 

• • * 

TATTVASANGRAHA of Sadyojyotih with commentary (-tIka) of Aghorasivacarya. In 

ASTAPRAKARANA. 

■ * ■ 

See also Filliozat 1988. 

tattvopaplavasimhA of JayaraSi. See Franco 1987. 

taNT RA VARTTIK A of Kumarilabhatta, ed. Jangadhara Sastrl. Benares: Vidya Vilas 

Press, 1882-1903. 

tantraloka of Abhinavagupta with commentary (-vivkka) of Rajanaka Jayaratha, 

ed. Madhusudan Kaul Sastrl. KSTS 23, 28, 30, 35, 29, 41, 47, 59, 52, 57 and 
58. Bombay and Srinagar, 1918-38. 

tarastuti of Candradasa: see bauddhastotrasangraha. 

tirumantiram of Tirumular: see Natarajan 1991. 

dasakumaracarita of Dandin, ed. and trans. M. R. Kale. Bombay, 1925. 

dhatupatha. The numeration of N, L. Westergaard’s text has been followed: pp. 61*- 

84* in Boiitlingk 1887. 

naresvaraparTksa of Sadyojyotih with commentary (-prakasa of Bhatta Rama- 

kantha, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Sastrl. KSTS 45. Srinagar, 1926. 

nadakarika of Bhatta Ramakantha with the commentary of Aghorasivacarya. In 

ASTAPRAKARANA. 

* f- * 

See also Filliozat 1984. 

naradasmrti, ed. and trans. Richard Lariviere. 2 Parts. University of Pennsylvania 

Studies on South Asia Vols. 4 and 5. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 
1989. 

nTlamata, ed. K. de Vreese. Leiden: Brill, 1936. 

nyayakandalT of SrTdhara with three sub-commentaries, ed. J. S. Jetly and Vasant G. 

Parikhu. Gaekwads Oriental Series No. 174. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1991. 






424 


Ramakantlia’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


nyayadarsana comprising the nyayasOtra with the bhasya of Vatsyayana, the 

VARTTIKA of Uddvotakara, the tatparyatika of VacaspatimiSra and the VRTTl 
of ViSvanatha, ed. Taranatha Nyayatarkatirtha and Amarendramohan Tarka- 
tirtha, Calcutta Sanskrit Series No. XVIII. Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing 
House, 1936. 

NYAYABINDU of 1 IharmakTrti with the commentary (-tIka) of Dharmottara, ed. 

Theodor Stcherbatsky. Bibliotheca Buddhica VII. Petrograd, 1918. 

nyayamanjari of Jayantabhatta with a tippanI (nyayasaurabha,) of the editor, ed. 

K.S. Varadacharya. 2 Vols. Oriental Research Institute Nos. 116 and 139. 
Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1969 and 1983. 

nyayabhasya of Vatsyayana. See nyayadarsana. 

nyayasutra. See nyayadarsana. 

padarthadharmasangraha See prasastapadabhasya. 

paramoksanirasakarika of Sadyojyotih with commentary (-VRTTl) of Bhatta Rama- 

kantha. In ASTAPRAKARANA. 

• * * * » 

parapravesika of Rajanaka Ksemaraja, ed. Mukunda Rama ShcLstri. KSTS 15. Srin¬ 
agar, 1928. 

pasupatasOtra with the commentary (pancarthabhasya) of Kaundinya, ed. 

Ananthakrishna Sastri. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series No. OXLII ’. Trivandrum: 
The Oriental Manuscript Library of the University of Travancore, 1940. 

pauskaragama, jnanapada with the commentary ; -bhasya) of Umapati^ivacarya, 

ed. Ambalavanavalajnanasambandhapara^aktisvami. Chidambaram, 1.925. 

-, ed. [without commentary] Pandit K. Ramachandra Sarma. The Adyar Lib¬ 
rary Pamphlet Series No. 50 (reprinted from the Adyar Library Bulletin , Vol. 58, 
1994). Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1995. 

pratyabhijnahrdaya of Ksemaraja, ed. lagadlsa Chandra Chatterji. KSTS 3. Srin¬ 
agar, 1911. 

pramanavarttika of Dharmaklrti with the commentaries svopajnavrtti) of the 

author and f pramanavarttikavrtti) of Manorathanandin, ed. Ram Chandra 
Pandeya. Delhi: Motilal Banarsi Das, 1989. 

prasastapadabhasya of Pra&astapada with the commentary (nyayakandalT) of Sri- 

dhara, ed. VindhyeSvari Prasad Dvivedin. Reprint: Sri Garib Dass )riental 
Series 13. Delhi, 1984. First published Benares 1895.) 

See also nyayakandalT. 

bhog AKA RIKA of Sadyojyotih with commentary (-VRTTl) of AghoraSivacarya. In 

ASTAPRAKARANA. 

* * ■ 

brhatsamhita of Varaliamihira with the commentary (vivrti) of Bhattotpala, ed. 

Sudhdkara Dvivedf. 2 Parts. Vizianagaram Sanskrit Series No. 12, Vol. X. Ben¬ 
ares: D. J. Lazarus &; Co., 1895 and 1897. 

See also Bhat 1981 - 2 . 
































Works Consulted 


425 


bauddhastotrasangraha compiled by Janardan Shastri Pandeya. Delhi: Motilal 

Banarsidass, 1994, 

brahmasutrabhasya of Sankara, [No editor accredited!. Works of Sankaracarya in 

Original Sanskrit, Vol. III. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985. 

matangaparamesvaragama, vidyapada, with commentary -vrtti of Bhatta Rama- 

kantha. ed. N. R. Bhatt. Publications de 1'IFI No. 56. Pondicherry: IFI, 1977. 

matangaparamesvaragama, kriyapada, caryapada and yogapada, with the 

commentary (-vrtti) of Bhatta Ramakantha up to KRIYAPADA 11:12b, ed. N. R. 
Bhatt. Publications de 1 IFI No. 65. Pondicherry: II L 1982. 

MANUSMRTI with tlie MANUBHASYA of Medhatithi, ed. Ganganatha Jha. Bibliotheca 

Iridica No, 256. 2 Vols. Calcutta: Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, 1932 and 
1939. 

-with nine commentaries by Medhatithi, Sarvajnanarayana, Kulluka, 

Raghavananda, Nandana, Ramacandra, Manirama, Govindaraja, and Bharuci, 
vol. 1, ed. J.H. Dave. Bharatiya Vidya Series Vol. No. 29. Bombay: Bharatiya 
Vidya Bhavan, 1972. 

mayamata, ed. and trans. Bruno Dagens. 2 Parts. Publications de 1 11 I No. 40. Pon¬ 
dicherry: IFI, 1970 and 1976. 

MAHABHARATA, ed. V. Sukthankar, with the cooperation of S.K. Belvalkar, A. B. ( la* 

jendragadkar, V. Kane, R. D. Karmarkar, P. L. Vaidya, S. Winternitz, R. Zim¬ 
merman, and other scholars and illustrated by Shrimant Balasaheb Pant Prat- 
inidhi. (Since 1943 ed. S. Belvalkar). 19 Vols, Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute, 1927-1959. 

mahimnastava, ed. and trans. Norman Brown. Poona: American Institute of Indian 

I 

Studies, 1964. 

mahotsavavidhi ascribed to AghoraSivacarya’s kriyakramadyotika. Printed (as 

the sixth part thereof) by Mayilai-Aiakappa Mudaliyar (no editor accredited). 
Madras (Cintatiripettai): Civananapotayantracalai, 1910 (Kaliyuga 5011, 2nd 
edition). 

(The 1974 edition of the South Indian Arcaka Association is not merely a reprint; 
many fresh errors were generated in resetting the text. I have not seen a copy 
of the first edition.) 

manameyodaya of Narayana, ed. with translation by C. Kunhan Raja and S. S. Surya- 

narayana Sastri. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1933. 

malinIvijayavarttika of Abhinavagupta, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 31. 

Srinagar, 1921. 

See also Hanneder *1996. 

malinTvijayottaratantra, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 37. Srinagar, 1922. 
mundakopanisat. See Limaye and Vadekar 1958. 

•i * m 

mrgendratantra, vidyapada and yogapada, with the commentary (-vrtti) of 

Bhatta Narayanakantha, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 50. Srinagar, 
1930. 







420 Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

MRGENDRAGAMA [= MRGENDRATANTRa), KRIYAPADA and incomplete CARYAPADA 

with the commentary (-VRTTl) of Bhatta Narayanakantha, ed. N R Bhatt 
Publications de 1’IFI No. 23. Pondicherry: IFI, 1962'. " 

MRGENDRAVRTTlDlPlKA of Aghoragivacarya. ed. Na. Krsnagastrin and K. M. 

Subrahmanyan astrin. Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasahgha Publication No. 12. 
Devakottai: Sivagamasiddhantaparipalanasangha, 1928. 

MOKSakarika of Sadyojyotih with commentary (-VRTTl) of Bhatta Ramakantha. In 

ASTAPRAKARANA. 

* * « 

YAtTndramATAdIpika of Srlnivasadasa, ed. and trans. Swann Adidevananda. Madras: 

Sri Ramakrishna Math, 1949. 

YAJNAVALKYASMRTI of Yoglsvara Yajiiavalkya with the commentary (mitaksara) of 

VijnaneSvara, ed. Narayan Ram Acharya. 5th edition. Bombay, 1949. 

with the commentary (balakrIda) of ViSvarupacarya, ed. T. Ganapati Sastri. 

Trivandrum Sanskrit Series No. 74. Trivandrum: Government Press 1921 and 
1922. 

yuktidipika ed. Pulinbehari Chakravarti. The Calcutta Sanskrit Series No. XXIII. 

Calcutta: Metropolitan Printing House, 1938. 

YOGAVASISTHA of Valmiki with commentary (vasisth amah ARAM ayanatatparya- 

prakasa) of AnandabodhendrasarasvatT, ed. Wasudev Laxman Sastri Pan^Tkar, 
3id edition revised and re-edited by Narayan Ram Acharya with the co-operation 
of Sastrimandal. 2 volumes. Bombay, 1937. 

yogasOtra of Patanjali with the commentaries (bhasya, tattvavaisaradI, and 

yoga v arttikA) of Vyasa, Vacaspatimi^ra, and Vijnanabhiksu. ed. Narayana 
Misra. Benares: Bharatiya Vidya Praka^an, 1971. 

RATNAPARlKSA of Srlkantha with commentary (-ullekhini) of Aghoraiivacarya. In 

ASTAPRAKARANA. 

* * • 

RAI'navalI of Srlharsadeva. See Kale 1921. 

ra.iataranginI of Kalhana, ed. M. A. Stein. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass 1988 (reprin¬ 
ted from the Bombay edition of 1892). 

See also Stein 1900. 

RAUravagama, ed. N. R. Bhatt, Publications de 1’IFI No. 18. 3 Vols Pondicherry 

IFI, 1961, 1972 and 1988. 

lingapurana, ed. VTrasimhaiastrin and Dhlranandakavyanidhi. Calcutta: VangavasT 

Steam l^ress, 1890 (Saka 1890). 

vakyapadIya of Bhartrhari. See Rau 1977. References to the supposed autocom- 

mentary are to the first volume of Carudeva Sastrl’s edition with excerpts from 

the commentary of Vrsabhadeva. Lahore, 1939 {vikvama.sa.mvat 1991). 

VAYUPURANA, ed. Rajendralala Mitra, Bibliotheca Indica, 2 Vols. Calcutta 1880 ai d 

1888. 

visnusamhita, ed. M. M. Ganapati Shastri. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series No. LXXXV. 

Trivandrum, 1925. 


































Works Consulted 


427 


vaisesikasOtra of Kanada, with the commentary of Candrananda. ed. Muni Sri 

Jambuvijayaji. Gaekwad Oriental Series 136. Baroda.: Oriental Institute, 1961. 

See also Isaacson *1995. 


vyomavati of Vyomasivacarya, ed. Gaurinath Sastri. 2 vols. M.M. SivakumaraSastri- 

Granthamala vol. 6. Varanasi: Sampurnananda Sanskrit University, 1983-4. 

SATARATNASANGRAHA of UmapatUivacarya with an anonymous commentary (-UL- 

LEKHlNl), ed. Pancanan Sastri. Arthur Avalon’s Tantrik Texts XXII. Calcutta, 
1943. 


SABARABHASYA See J AIM INIS UTRA. 


SivajnanabodHavrtt i of [Salivatlpuranivasi-jJnanaprakaSacarya, ed. M. Muttuk 

kumaracuvami Civacariya. Published and given a preface by Nallur Ta. Kailaca 
pillai. 1920 (Kaliyuga 5021). 

sivajnanasiddhi of Aruliiandi: see civananacittiyar. 


sivatattvaratnakara o! Basavaraja of Keladi, Vol. 1, ed. Narayanaswamy Sastry. 

Oriental Research Institute Publications Sanskrit Series 108. Mysore: Oriental 
Research Institute, 1964. 


sivadrsti of Somanandanatha with the commentary (-vrtti) of Utpaladeva, ed. 

Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 54. Poona, 1934. 

siva fu ran A, ed. RamatejaSastrin Pandeya. Benares: Panditapustakalaya, 1963 (sam- 

vat 2020). 


SlVAPUJASTAVA of JnanaSambhu with an anonymous commentary (VYAKHYA ), ed. 

K. M. Subrahmanya^astrl. SivagamasanghaprakaSitagranthasahkhya 19. Deva- 
kottai: Sivagamasarigha, 1935. 


siva yog asara of [ Vlnaganadesast:; a^alivatlpurani vasi-J Jhanapraka^a. Transcript in 

the IFP of the edition (with the same author’s siva yog aratna) of Muttuk- 
kurnaracuvami Civacariar, printed in Paruttitturai Kalanitiyantiracalai by 
Nallur Ta. Kailacappillai, 1929 (Kaliyuga 5030). 

sivasutravimarsinT of Ksemaraja. Edition with no title page and no information 

about editor, publisher, place, or date of publication. 

sivagrabhasya of Sivagrayogin, ed. Krsna^astrin. Kumbakonarn, 1921 (Kaliyuga 

5022. 


SIVOPANISAT. Printed (pp. 324-378) in Un-published Upanishads, ed. the Pandits of 

Adyar Library under the supervision of C. Kunhan Raja. Adyar Library Series 
Vol. 14. Madras: Advar Library and Research Centre, 1933. 

4/ */ r J 

See also above under manuscripts of SIVADHARMA texts. 


# 

saivaparibmASA of Sivagrayoglndrajhana^ivacarya, ed. H. R. Rangaswamy Iyengar 

and R. Rarnasastri. (iriental Research Institute Series No. 90. Mysore: Ori¬ 
ental Research Institute, 1950. 


SAl vaKaLAVIVEKA of Siva^n-Nigamajhanamuni with the commentary (vyakhya) of 

Ganapatibhatta, ed. (with translation into Kannada) by Brahmaj>rr Ke° Slta- 
rama Somayajin. Manonmamgranthamala No. 16. Bangalore: Sri Manonmanl- 
granthamalaprakatanamandirain, 1966. 








428 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

i i *-■ % 


s aivarat n A K A Ra of Jyotirnatha, Vol. I, ed. C. N. Basavaraju. Oriental Research In¬ 
stitute Series No. 180. Mysore: Oriental Research Institute, 1992. 

_ i 

saivagamaparibhasamanjarT of Vedajnana. See Dagens 1979. 

SLOKAvArttika of Kumarilabhatta with the commentary (nyayaratnakara- 

vyakhya) of ParthasarathimiSra. ed. and rev. SvamT Dvarikadasa SastrT. 
Varanasi: Tara Publications, 1978. 

svetasvata ro panisat . See Li maye and Vadekar 1958. 

■- 

SARVAJNANO'PTARA 1‘vidyapada’ only], ed. with Tamil translation and commentary by 

Po. Muttaiyapillai. Devakottai, 1923. 

SANKHYAKARIKA. See YUKTIDIpika and SlIARMA 1933 (with commentary of Gauda- 

pada) and Srinivasan 1967 (tattvakaumudT). 

sAdhanamala, ed. Benoytosh Bhattacharya. 2 vols. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 

Nos. 26 and 41. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1968 (reprinted from first editions 
of 1925 and 1928). 

SARDHATRISATIKALOTTARAGAMA with commentary (-VRTTI) of Bhatta Ramakantha, 

ed. N. R. Bhatt. Publications de 1’IFI No. 61. Pondicherry: IFI, 1979. 

SIDDHANTASARAVALI of TrilocanaSivacarya with the commentary (vyakhya) of 

AnantaSivacarya, published in five parts in the Government Oriental 
Manuscripts Library Bulletin Vol. 17.1, pp. 29-68 (ed. A. A. Ramanathan and 
T. H. Viswanathan); Vols.17.2, pp. 1-48; 18.1, pp. 1-64 and 19.1, pp. 53-84 (ed. 
R. K. Parthasarathi and T. H. Viswanathan); Vol. 19.2 pp. 1-48 and Vol. 20.2, 
pp. 49-71 (ed. T. H. Viswanathan, P. G. Seetharaman and R. Ganesan). Madras, 
1965-1968. 

supra bh ED ag am a, printed by Mayilai-Alakappa Mudaliyar (no editor accredited). 

Madras (Cintatiripettai): Civahanapotayantracalai, 1908 (Kaliyuga 5009). 

SOMASAMBHUPADDHATi, ed. K.M. Subrahmanya^astrin. Devakottai: Sivagama- 

siddhantaparipalanasangha, 1931. 

See also Brunner 1963, 1968, 1977 and karmakandakramavalT. 

/ « # 

skandapuranasya ambikakhanda, ed. Krsnaprasad BhattaraT. Kathmandu, 1988. 

STAVACINTAMANI of Bhatta Narayana with the commentary (-vivrti) of Rajanaka 

Ksemaraja, ed. Mukunda Rarna Sh^stri. KSTS 10. Srinagar, 1918. 

SVACCHANDATANTRA with the commentary (-UDDYOTA ) of Rajanaka Ksemaraja. ed. 

Madhusudan Kaul Sastri. KSTS 3 , 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, and 56. Bombay 1921-35. 
svayambhuvasutrasangraha, ed. Venkatasubrahmanya^astrl, Mysore, 1937. 

—- with the vrtti of Sadyojyotih, see Filiozat 1991. 

HARACARTi ACINTAMANI of Rajanaka Jayadratha, ed. Pandita Sivadatta and Ka^inath 

Pandurang Parab. Kavyamala 61. Bombay, 1897. 

HARAVIjaya of Rajanaka Ratnakara with the commentary (-tIka) of Rajanaka Alaka, 

ed. Pandit Durgaprasada and Ka^Inath Pandurang Parab. Kavyamala 22. Bom¬ 
bay, 1890. 

hetubindutTka of Bhatta Areata with the sub-commentary entitled aloka of 

Durveka Mi^ra, ed. by Pandit- Sukhlalji Sanghavi and Muni Shri Jinavijayaji. 
Gaekwad’s Oriental Series No. CXIIL Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1949. 







































































Works Consulted 


429 


Secondary Material 

Adriaensen, R., Barker, H.T., and Isaacson, H. 1994. ‘Towards a Critical Edition 

of the Skund&purana? in Indo-Iranian Journal Vol. 37, pp. 325-331. 

A PTE, Vaman Shivaram. i 957. The Practical Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Revised 

and Enlarged Edition. Poona. 

Arraj, William James. *1.988 (unpublished doctoral dissertation). The Svacchan- 

datantram: History and Structure of a Saiva Scripture, Volume One. Chicago, 
Illinois: Department of South Asian Languages and Civilizations. 

Barker. See Adriaensen. 

Bendall, Cecil. 1883. Catalogue of the Buddhist Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Uni¬ 
versity Library, Cambridge. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

--. 1888. ‘Notes on a collection of MSS. obtained by Dr. Girnlette, of the Bengal 

Medical Service, at Kathmandu, and now deposited in the Cambridge University 
Library, and in the British Museum.’ in The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society 
Vol. 20, pp. 549-54. 

Bh ASK ARAN, T. and K. Visweswari Amma, 1986. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit 

Manuscripts in the Oriental Research Institute and Manuscripts Library, 
Trivandrum. Vol. IV (Sa-Ha). Trivandrum: University of Kerala. 

Bhat, M. Ramakrishna, ed. and trans. 1981-2. Varahamihira’s Brhat Samhita. 2 

Parts. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Bohtlingk, Otto and Rudolf Roth, 1855-75. Sanskrit-WOrterbuch. 7 Vols. St. 

Petersburg. 

Bohtlingk, Otto. 1887. PAnini s Grammatik herausgegeben, iibersetzt, erl&utert und 

mit verschiedenen Indices versehen. Leipzip: Verlag von H. Haessel. 

BrhatsOcipatram. See Parajuli. 

* 

Brunner, HeRne, ed. and trans. 1963, 1968, 1977. Somagambhupaddhati. 3 vols: 

Premidre Partie. Le rituel quotidien dans la tradition sivaite de Linde du Sud 
selon Somasambhu; Deuxierne Partie. Rituel Occasionnels dans la tradition 
givai'te de llnde du Sud selon Sornagambhu I : Pavitrarohana , Damanapuja et 
Prayagcitta; and Tioisierne Partie. Rituels occasioned dans la tradition givaite 
de Linde du Sud selon Somagambhu II : dlksa, abhiselca, vratoddhara, antyesti, 
graddha. Publications de 1’IFI No. 25. Pondicherry: IFI. 

-. 1965. ‘Analyse du Kiranagama\ in Journal Asiatique Vol. CULM I, pp. 309- 

328. 

- 1979 Review of VlVANTI 1975 in Indo-Iranian Journal Vol. 21, pp. 139-42. 

-. 1981. ‘lJn chapitre du Sarvadartfanasamgrafia: le Saivadai\<ana< in Tantric and 

Taoist Studies in honour of R. A. Stein. Vol. 1 ed. Michel Strickmann. Melanges 
Chinois et Bouddhiques Vol. XX, pp. 96-140. Brussels. 

-. 1985. ‘On the Threefold Classification of Saiva Tantras’ in R. N. Dandekar 

and P. D. Navathe t ed.) Proceedings of the Fifth World Sanskrit Conference , 
Varanasi, India: October 21-21, 1981 , pp. 464-474. New Delhi: Rashtriya 
Sanskrit Sansthan. 









430 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm %J t 


. 1986. ‘The PaSupatas as seen by the Saivas 1 in Wolfgang Morgenroth (ed.) 
Sanskrit and World Culture. Proceedings of the Fourth World Sanskrit Con¬ 
ference of the International Association of Sanskrit Studies Weimar May 23-30 , 
1979, pp. 523-520. Berlin: Schriften zur Geschichte und Kultur des Alten Ori¬ 
ents 18. 

. 1992 a. ‘The Four Pad as of Saivagamas' in The Journal of Oriental Research , 
Madras. Dr.S.S. Janaki Felicitation Volume Vols. 56-72. 1986-92, pp. 260-78. 
Madras: Kuppuswami Sastri Research Institute. 

■- 1992b. Jhana and Kriya: Relation between Theory and Practice in the 
Saivagamas’ in Teun Goudriaan (ed.) Ritual and Speculation in Early Tan- 
trism: Studies in Honor of Andr6 Padoux , pp. 1-59. State University of New 
York Press. 


BOHLER, G. 1892. ‘The Udepur Prasasti of the Kings of Malva’ in Epigraphia Indica 

Vol. 1, pp. 222-238. Calcutta: Superintendent of Government Printing. 

VAN Daalen, Leendert A. 1988. ‘The Particle kila/kira in Sanskrit, Prakrit and the 

Pali Jatakas' in Indo-Iranian Journal Vol. 31, pp. 111-137. 


Dagens, Bruno, ed. and trails. 1979. Le Borilege de la doctrine givaite — £aivagama~ 

parihhasamahjari de Vedajhana. Publications de 1TFI No. 60. Pondicherry: IFF 


Das, Rahul Peter, ed. and trans. 1988. Das Wissen von der Lebensspanne der 

BUume—Surapalas Vrksayurveda mit einern Nachtrag von G. Meulenbeld zu 
seinem Verzeichnis ‘Sanskrit Names of Plants and their Botanical Equivalents’. 
Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien Nr. 34. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag. 


Dearing, Vinton Adams. 1959. A Manual of Textual Analysis. Berkley: University 

of California Press. 


Devasenapathi, V. A. 1966. Saiva Siddhanta as expounded in the Sivajhanasiddhiyar 

and its six commentaries. Madras University Philosophical Series No. 7. Madras: 
University of Madras. 


Dodds, E.R.. ed. 1960. Euripides Bacchae. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

DvivedT, Vrajavallablia. 1983. Luptagamasamgraha Part II Yogatantragranthamala 

Vol. 10. Varanasi: Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya. 

Dyczkowski, Mark S. G. 1988. The Canon of the Saivagama and the Kubjika Tantras 

of the Western Kaula Tiadition. New York: State University of New York Press. 

Edgerton, Franklin. 1965. The Beginnings of Indian Philosophy. London: Allen and 

Unwin. 


Emeneau, M. B. 1969. ‘Sanskrit Syntactic Particles— Kil a, Khalu, Nunam' in Indo- 

Iranian Journal Vol. 11, pp. 241-268. 

Fazlullah , S. M. 195 i. ‘A Rare Work of Sri Ramakantha, the well-known Kashmirian 

f > r 

Author' in Proceedings and Transactions of All-India, Oriental Conference Thir¬ 
teenth Session: Nagpur University October 1946. ed. H. L. Jain and Agha Hyder 
Hasan Abidi, pp. 212-13. Nagpur. 

Filliozat, Pierre-Sylvain, 1975. ‘Le droit d’entrer dans les temples de Siva au 

XL siecle 1 [Edition and translation of JatinirnayapurvakalayapraveSavidhi] in 
Journal Asiatique Vol. CCLXIII, pp. 103-117. 































































Works Consul ted 


431 


. ed. and trans. 1984. Les Nadakarika de Ramakantha : in Bulletin dc l’Ecole 

• * 

Franqaise d’Extreme-Orient 73, pp, 223-225. 


. ed. and trans. 1988. l Le Tattvasamgraha Compendium des Essences 17 de 
Sadyojyoti 1 in Bulletin de LEcolc Frangaise d’ExMme-Oricnt 77, pp. 101-163. 
(I do not follow Filliozat s verse numeration). 

. ed. and trans, 1991a. Le Tantra de Svayambhu , vidyapada, avec 1c coin- 
men ta ire de Sadyojyotih. Geneva: Librairie Droz S.A. 

See also Filliozat 1994 below. 


. 1991b. l Le Tattvatrayanirnaya <CLa Determination des Trois Essences^ 
de Sadyojyoti avec le Commentaire d’Aghorasivacarya’ in Bulletin de l’Ecole 
Fran gaise d’ExtrGme-Orient 78, pp. 133-58. 


■ ■■—. ed. and trans. 1994. The Tantra of Svayambhu vidyapada With the comment¬ 
ary of Sadyojyoti . Kalamulaiastra Series 13. Delhi: Indira Gandhi National 
Centre for the Arts and Motilal Banarsidass. [Where page and line references 
are given, they are to the 1991 edition.] 

Franco, Eli, ed. and trans. 1987. Perception , Knowledge and Disbelief A Study of 

Jayaradi’s Scepticism. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien Nr. 35. Stuttgart: Franz 
Steiner Verlag. 


Frauwallner, Erich. 1953. Geschichte der indischen Philosophic. Volume 1. 

Salzburg: Otto M idler Verlag. 


Ganguly, G.C. 1933. History of the Par am £r a Dynasty. 

No. XVII. Dacca: The University of Dacca. 


Dacca University Bulletin 


Gaijr, Albertine. 1979. Writing Materials of the East. London: The British Library. 

Gengnagel, J5rg. 1996. Maya, Purusa und Siva. Die dualistiche Tradition des 

Sivaism us nach Agh oraJi vacaryas Ta 11 vaprakasa vrtti. Beit rage zur Kenntnis 
sudasiatischer Sprachen und Literaturen 3. Wiesbaden: Harassowitz. 

Gonda, Jan. 1977. Medieval Religious Literature in Sanskrit. History of Indian 

LiteratureVol.il, 1. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 


Goodall, Dominic. *1995. An Edition and Translation of the First Chapters of 

Bhatta Ram akant ha’s Commentary on the 'Vidyapada' of the Kiranagama. (Un¬ 
published doctoral thesis submitted to the University of Oxford.) 

- 1996. Hindu Scriptures. London: Phoenix and California University Press. 

Goudriaan, Teun and Gupta, Sanjukta. 1981, Hindu Tantric and £akta Literature. 

History of Indian Literature Vol. II, 2. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 

Goudriaan, Teun. 1993. Review of Filliozat 1991 in Journal of the American 

Oriental Society 113, pp. 6Q3a-605a. New Haven, Connecticut. 

Gupta, Sanjukta. See Goudriaan 1981. 

Hijlin, Michel, trans. 1980. Mrgendragarna: sections de la doctrine et du yoga, avec 

la vrtti de Bhattanarayanakantha et la dTpika d’Aghoraiivacarya. Tiaductiom 
introduction et notes. Publications de 1TF! No. 63. Pondicherry: IFI. 















432 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* m * 


Hanneder, Jurgen. *1996. Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation. An Edition 

and Annotated Translation of Malini£lokavarttika I, 1-399 , (Unpublished doc¬ 
toral thesis submitted to the University of Marburg; shortly to be published in 
the Groningen )riental Series.) 

Isaacson, Harunaga. 1994. See Adriaensen. 

*1995. Materials for the study of the Vaitfesika system. (Unpublished doctoral 
thesis submitted to the University of Leiden.) 

Kali;. M. R., ed. and trans. 1921. The RatnavalT of Sri Harsa-deva. Bombay. Reprin¬ 
ted in Delhi: Motilal Barnarsidass, 1984. 

Kane, George. 1969. '(Conjectural Emendation’ in Medieval Literature and Civiliz¬ 
ation. Studies in Memory of G.N. Garmonsway ed. D. A. Pearsall and R. A. 
Waldron, pp. 155-69. London. 

Keith, Arthur Berriedale, 1935. Catalogue of the Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in 

the Library of the India Office, Volume If, Brahmanical and Jaina Manuscripts. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

K UN HAN Raja, C. (1 dreetor) 1928. A Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 

Adyar Library , Part II, Madras. 

Limaye, V. P. and Vadekar, R. D., ed. 1958. Eighteen Principal Upanisads Vol. 1. 

Poona: Vaidika SamSodhana Mandala. 

w ■ A 

Malledevaru, H. P., ed. 1987. Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts Volume 

XV, Agama and Nighantu. Oriental Research Institute Series No. 163. Mysore: 
Oriental Research Institute of Mysore. 

Meulenbeld, G. Jan. 1974. The Madhavanidana and its Chief Commentary, 

Chapters 1-10. Leiden, Brill. 

———. 1988. See Das 1988. 

Michaels, Axel. 1985. ‘On 12th-13th Century relations between Nepal and South 

India' in Journal of the Nepal Research Centre, Vol. VII, pp. 68-73. 

Monier-Williams, Monier. 1899. San skri t - English Dictionary. Oxford, Clarendon 

Press. 

Muller, Max, ed. 1877. The Hymns of the Rig Veda in the Samhita and Pada texts. 

2 Vols. 2nd Ed. London: Triibner. 

Natarajan, B., ed. and trans. 1991. Tirumantiram, A Tamil Scriptural Classic. 

Madras: Sri Ramakrishna Math. 

Oberlies, Thomas. 1997. ‘Pali, Panini and “Popular” Sanskrit’ in Journal of the Pali 

Text Society Vol. XXIII, pp. 1-26. 

Parajuli, Buddhisagara, ed. 1963 (Nepalese year 2020). BrhatsucTpatram Vol. 4,1. 

Kathmandu: Vlrapustakalaya. 

m 

Petecii, Luciano. 1984. Mediaeval History of Nepal (c. 750-1482). 2nd Revised 

Edition. Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estrerno Oriente. 

Ping ree, David. 1981. Jyotihgastra: Astral and Mathematical Literature. Wies¬ 
baden: Harassowitz, 
































































Works Consulted 


433 


Potter, Karl H. 1983 and 1995. An Encyclopaedia of Indian Philosophies, Vol. 1. 

Bibliography (2nd and 3rd revised editions). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Rau, Wilhelm, ed. 1977. Bhartrharis Vakyapadiya. Die Mulakarikas nacli den Hand- 

schriften herausgegeben und mit einem Pada-index versehen. Abhandlungen 
fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes, Vol. 42, part, 4. Wiesbaden: Komissionsverlag 
Franz Steiner. 

Renou, Svouis, 1961. Grammaire Sanscrite. Second, revised edition. Paris: Librairie 

d’Amerique et d’Orient. 

Sanderson, Alexis. 1983. Review of Michel Hulin's Mrgendragama: sections de 

la doctrine et du yoga, avec la vrtti de Bhattanarayanakantha et la dipika 
d'Aghoragivacarya. Traduction, introduction et notes (see under Hulin 1980) 
in Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 46, pp. 161-62. 

-. 1985a. ‘Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir’ in The Category 

of the Person , ed. Michael Carrithers, Steven Collins, and Steven Lukes, pp. 191— 
216. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

-. 1985b. Review of N. R. Bhatt’s Matahgaparamcsvaragama (Kriyapada, 

Caryapada et Yogapada), avec le commentaire de Bhatta Bamakantha q.v.; 
Idem, B.auravottaragama: Edition critique, introduction et notes, (see above un¬ 
der MATANGAPARAME&VARA.) in Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African 
Studies 48, pp. 564-68. 

-—. 1992. 'The Doctrine of the MalinTvijayottaratantra' in Teun Goudriaan (ed.) 

Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honor of Andre Padoux , 
pp. 281-312. State University of New York Press. 

-. 1995. Meaning in Tantric Ritual’ in Essais sur 1c rituel III . Colloque du 

centenaire de la section des sciences religieuses de PEcole Pratique des Hautes 
Etudes sous la direction de Anne-Marie Blondeau et Kristofer Schipper. Louv¬ 
ain, Paris: Peeters. 

-. * ! 996a. Bhatta Ramakantha, Matahgavrtti ad kriyapada 1.1-3b, Critical 

Edition , Translation and Commentary. (Unpublished draft.) 

-. * 1996b. Edited transcription of the Sivabhedapatala and Tantrotpatti - 

vyakhyapatala of the Brhatkalottara (from NAK MS 1-89, NGMPP 
Reel No. B 24/59. (Unpublished draft.) 

-. * 1996c. ‘History through Textual Criticism in the Study of Saivism, the 

Pancaratra and the Buddhist Yoginltantras’. Paper delivered at the interna¬ 
tional colloquium ‘Sources and Time’ held in Pondicherry in 1997, organised by 
the Ecole frangaise d’Extreme-Orient and the French Institute of Pondicherry. 
(Unpublished draft.) 

Sastri, Kara Prasad, 1905 and 1915. A Catalogue of Palm-leaf and Selected Paper 

Mss. Belonging to the Durbar Library Nepal. 2 Vols. Calcutta: Baptist Mission 
Press. 

Sastri:, S. Kuppuswami, 1935. A Triennial Catalogue of Manuscripts Collected dur¬ 
ing the Triennium 1925 6 to 1927-8 for the Government Oriental Manuscript 
Library, Vol VI, Part 1, Sanskrit. Madras. 





















434 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


SASTRl, Kuppuswami and Sastri P. P. S. 1938. An Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit 

Manuscripts in the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library , Madras , Part I. 
Madras. 

Sastri, P. P. S. 1934. A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the 

Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji’s SarasvatT Mahal Library, Vol. XVIII. Srirangam: Sri 
Vani Vilas Press. 

Sastri, S.S. Suryanarayana, 1930. The Sivadvaita of Srikantha. Madras: University 

*/ 

of Madras. 

Scrubbing, Walt her. 1935. Die Lehre der Jainas nach den alten Quellen dargestcllt. 

Grundrifi der Indo-arischen Philologie und Altertumskunde Band III, Heft 7. 
Berlin and Leipzig: Walter de Gruyter & Co. 

Sen, Nilmadhav, 1975. ‘A Note on akka—a Ghost Word in Sanskrit’ in 

Vish vesh varan an d Indological Journal , Vol. 13, Part II, pp. 284-292. Hoshiapur. 

Sharma, Dwarkanath, 1993. ed. Catalogue of Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts 

(Jodhpur collection) Part XXIV Rajasthan Puratana Granthamala No. 168. 
Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute. 

Sharma, liar Dutt, ed. and trans. 1933. The Sankhyakarika: ISvarakrsna’s Memorable 

Verses of Samkhya Philosophy with the Commentary of Gaudapadacarya . Poona 
Oriental Series No. 9. Poona: The Oriental Book Agency. 

Sivathamby, Karthigesu, 1988: see Vaiyapuripillai 1988. 

Smith, David, 1996. The Dance of Siva: Religion, art and poetry in South India. 

Cambridge Studies in Religious Traditions 7. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 


Sorensen, S. 1904-25. An Index to the Names in the Mahabharata, London. 
Speijer, J.S. 1886. Sanskrit Syntax. Leiden. 


Srinivasan, Srinivasa Ayya, 1967. VacaspatimNras Tattvakaumudi. Ein Deitrag zur 

Textkritik bei kontaminierter Uberlieferung. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 
Nr. 12. Hamburg: Cram, de Gruyter & Co. 


Stein, M. A. 1894. Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Raghunatha Temple 

Library of His Highness the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir. Bombay. 

1 / 

“ “• 1900. Kalhana s Rajatarahgini A Chronicle of the Kings of Kasmir translated, 

with an introduction , commentary and appendices. 2 vols. Bombay (reprinted 
in Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1989). 


von Stietencron, H. 1969. ‘Bhairava' in XVII. Deutscher Orientalistcn Tag vorn 

21. bis 27. Juli 1968: VortrSge. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenl&ndischen 

(i('M'II m1m{ i Suppleinenta 1, Icil 3, pp.863—871. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner 
Verlag. 


Subramania Sastri, N. (curator) 1956. An Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit. Telugu 

and Tamil Manuscripts (Palm-leaf and Paper) in the Sri Venkateswara Oriental 
Research Institute Library, Prepared under orders of the Board of Trustees , 
Tirumala-Tirupati Devasthanams , Tirupati. Tirupati: Sri Venkateswara Ori¬ 
ental Research Institute. 












































Works Consulted 


435 


Thomi, Peter, 1985. Brh a dyoga vasis tha (Vasisthamaharamayana) Pad a-Index. 

Wichtrach: Institut ftir Indologie. 

Tokunaga, 1995. 'Statistic Survey of the Sloka in the Mahabharata' in Memoirs of 

the Faculty of Letters , Kyoto University No. 34. Kyoto. 

Torella, Raffaele, 1994. "On V am an ad at t a 5 in Pandit N.R . Bhatt Felicitation 

Volume , ed. P. S. Filliozat, S.P. Narang and C.P. Bhatta, pp. 481-498. New 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Vadekar, R. D. see under Limaye, V. P. 

VAIYAPURIPILLAI, S. 1988 (second revised edition, with an introductory note by 

Karthigesu Sivathamby). History of Tamil Language and Literature. Madras: 
New Century Book House. 

Varadachari, V. 1987. Catalogue descriptif des manuscrits II, Mss. 116-275. Public¬ 
ations de llFI No. 70.2. Pondicherry: IFI. 

Vedantachari, S. S. 1947. ‘Kiranagamavrtti (Another Rare Work o^ Sri Ramakantha, 

the Well-known Kashmirian Author)’ in Adyar Library Bulletin 11, pp. 97-104. 

VlVANTl, Maria Pia, ed. and trails. 1975. II “Kiranagama”, Testo e traduzione del 

< Vidyapada^> . Supplcmento n.3 agli Annali: voi.35 (1975), fasc.2. Napoli: 
Istituto Orientale di Napoli. 

Wackernage> m Jakob, 1896. Altindischc Grarnmatik: I Lautlehre. Gottingen: Dand- 

enhoek und R.uprecht, 

West, M.L. 1973. Textual Criticism and Editorial Technique. Stuttgart: B.G. Teub- 

ner. 

Wujastyk, D. 1985. A Handlist of the Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Lib¬ 
rary of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine , Volume 1 . London: 
The Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine. 

YOUNGER, Paul. 1995. The Home of Dancing Sivan—The Traditions of the Hindu 

Temple in Ci tarn bar am, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 




















































































INDEX OF PADAS IN THE TANTRA 


Some variant padas, mostly those whose beginnings differ from those of the 
accepted versions, have also been included and marked ‘vJ\ 


3 T 

3T$H h il4:9c vl 

cd I d TT PW 4:18c 

HT 4:17a 

3TsR^T>T W StTf Sfkf 6:11c 
STsTcffTvr SPf: 5:18b 

3r$TFPpjRTT W: 2:24b 
3TcT: ^PT 4:12a 

3PTT S^T^T: ildR di: 4:17d vl 
dl^cdlcd^ TT 6:15d 
'Vlff'd>i •-d "d v ) r d l ci^ 5:13a 

3Tfvi<h-dddH-dld 5:12c 

V\ >s 

3Tfd<*iK1 IdtilJil SFT 4:4c 
SH-ri: SlT^T: sftfT: 4:15a vl 
3H»rlfdH dlddi: 4:17d vl 
3t*l'Tl^T’ *T ^wtlcl 4:5d 
31d'dfd Tt TFPT 4:14b 

"V 

3H-dl S*=qT: TTTTT': 4:17d 
31dlR<b4dM-'MN ° 5:14c 
31 d I R «H^H H -d H ° 5:14c vl 

V 

31dlR HH + RUPI 3:2b 

3HlRHH^?r>cdm 2:2c 
31 d IR H Hd *'fd' 2:17a 


31 d IRHH fl --qTcr 2:2a 

>S 

3ldlRq|Jl4)Plcdld 2:23c vl 


3T%^rdRdi Tt 4" 6:20a 
3RpT di H dldd 5:29a 
3Rt^T fTR^' % 5:9e vl 
3P=q^TT T fl^d <H 5:12b 

3R*PJT FTPT 6:13c 

3P=qR?T Ri tll^dH 2:25d vl 

3i vp p-H <-d fd 0 Rdd 2:25d 

3pRvi' dldf aiR 4:2a 
3T^W irfR fi'dldl 5:17c vl 


3TdNldcdHcdHI 5:16c 
3TfrrdTTTddd1 dcMIH 3:2c 

*S 

3TfvpTRT?T Ri - 3:1b 

*\ 

3PJ^- ff ftrT TTT 6:27b 
3t R'tiR vnJir'ti'fd’ 4:16d vl 

3hR<|| I<JId^ 2:20a 

31 111 *cd I R^Pl q ij d^ 6:11b 
3T91WdT dTT TUT 4:13d 
3T5pf: Yfprr S'Rdd 2:9c 

31 ill Tr^l R^l 1 '!! 6:18a 
31df^$i 4:12a vl 

31^dlR: ^dt Jl«l: 4:23b vl 
3Tfer ^Tcf: diRld' 3:12c 






























































































438 


Ramakantha’s (Jommentary on the Kiranatantra 

m * V * 


3TT 

3TRFT: fa - T TFf SFt 2:23a 
3TRFT: in fci M <Jcl vl ad 2:33 
STTcFTT d^ld 2:23d vl 
^IcHHl S^TTf^TR^rRT 2:23c 

V 

<*FCHdi frf^TTFTT: 5:28d 
3TTcFW dcM5[c4 FTRT 2:18c 

^iRm-cd TTT PF4,H 2:3a 
armfr t t $f 3:iie vl 
3TFPp9RW^: FTRT 5:29c 

aTTFl" OT 4^4d: 4:lld 

s^i'jysW'i; r 3:24c 

$^4 Trap 3W 3:11a 
ffT FTW fF*JdPFv4£ 3:13d vl 

t 

TTVTFT 2:3c 

tfTFTTT FT FTfr: vl ad 4:18 
t?T: F4lf5l4: SIFT: 3:13c 
t^Tfr STRTfiHJMIF 3:25c 

T 

SliTSPrW fr^cdldHT 4:20a 
T^TcT FT rdOP^I 5:25b 
■dldl^l SRTTTFT 5:3a 

TT^T Pd dHTTITr 4:18b 

■v 

TTTT: F fTTTFTT: 6:9d 
3FTT[:| FH1UIIF F" 6:9d vl 
TP i m i^y, Pr^ ' I'd - : 2:28a 
TTHTm iH^cJdl 6:6d 

dlldlFcl STFiPfPpFT: 6:10b 

it^T: TFTTfFTTP T 6:10c 
TTcF^Tr <+> 0 cd Fl 2:13d 
TtT^TT H4c4uf): 2:13d vl 


Od.P-Hvj 'TF ■:■': FTTT vl ad 4:28 
rrchP-F ^dfr TTTF 2:25 c vl 

1 T^>Pf-H-4FdId 4:27d 

IJ <tiPfF-o4vrt|cl 51 MH 2:25c 
TTTT FTP dfFT FT 5:21a 
lT%FTfT T d4d : 6:3d vl 
Ttw ?T»f: 4:29c 
FFRTcdH l'fjtcdF 3:4c vl 
lidFHI4F4 'T^cdTcT 3:4c vl 

IJdFHKFM Fl^>c4d 3:4c 

TTd" FTlPr cJWcd'F' 5:20c 

XT*? ^FT RdT sfl^t 6:8c 

^ 51 Prbfd MIdl sfT 5:4c 

trq' 5lR6FFI4ld: 5:22a 

OR FW FFMc4F 5:9e 

'Td' -=6H 1(^4^: FT 1:22c 

ITT 5) MI(ddi F^F 6:13a 

ITT d^XdiFdMild 5:22c 

ITT F'^TjjTTF IF^lT 4:11c, 4:14a vl 

ITT dT4«6HI44: 1:19a 

ITT dPsi^lFFMIdF 4:26a 

ITT T TTTT 3:18a vl 
II4F15T: fFTT: FT8TTT 3:22a 

fT: TT1' 1:11a 
qTFFcFFTfr^T 4:26e 
qr^FTT^T 4:28c 
nTFFT T T^WfT 6:8c vl 
ITT T^cTFT^T 3:4a 
ITT FFrerr: 2:32b 
itt frrr ^pjfT sfr 3:i0c 

Tt y ■ TT! h F 4 8RT 5:15d 
FTT FTT^T: fFTfr: 6:18d 
TTfTfcTTTcP FcP 2:28b 


















































































































































Index of Padas in the Tantra 


139 


dvr$nd^*cdM 2:24a 

W cTSfl’ F 6:24d vl 

^■T rTW JTjfPTT 5:11b 
^Hd^'lP* *7 6:24d 

2:6d 

4T*T 4i 0 fd %7T 5:21b 

<bdo4l SdWT 6:5c 

^Ff 3;9d 
%>T ^JdddH 3:12d 

^ H": 5:20d 
<t>yu|f4<H|^d ff 5:8d vl 
di'HUIT rT% vfPTT vl ad 6:20 

diH^II d ^ 5:8d 
3 t4cT: d^-jp-yRT: 3:5d vl 
^r4cr: Wf: 3:5d 

4iMdH-ifwaPTT 5:30b 
5PTF1T 4t sffcpfT: 5:10c 

^rtWRTfsW 3:7b 

V, 

diMbiid" cpfr Hc^lH - 3:6c 
'bHIdJdfdMfwdH 2:10b 

'V 

dHl$ld wfk 3:21d 

Ffw HTTP 2:23b vl 

qJTrTt ofT dHddl HT W 5:20a 

% 

dtdHMiy H'hlPH'bH 2:4b 
dHplfdcilfdd^pTl 4:3c 

ND 

°4iiyMir^d^lH'd l:8d 
*jriTW iW: fcppT 4:20b 

FT fpTT 4:22a 
^FTW 4:2Id vl 

°^rpfy PlfdHiP$d : l:18d 

°diMHIHlPH'bl PcT: 2:12b 
dildPH^J Mdldcl 3:1 Id 
dd^d yd1y£)' 3:1 Id vl 
^TPT dT3TPTfd-rw 4:26(1 

V 


d.IdI d P*f: 5FRT fHT%: 6:21c 

''dTRHddPdHlfgdi: l:18d vl 
°d>i<-f cTrTJH^ • l:18d vl 
^TRT trg- Hpd'^TTcf: 5:14a 

% va 

oddH^ddHId^ 1:4b 
'blHP^'JlfHfd yl*H 5:15a 

^TWd’KT Sfr H IP*d : 4:11b 
dilHI'HldVIldd: l:20d 
I'Hd dilHHloHM 0 1:18c 
dTFT sfV 4FWT m %7T 5:20a 

■V 

di'lrfl Sfr 1:18c vl 

^TRTT dT H" ^ ^T: 5fTwt 5:2c 
fd7 f^Tcd 'M d"l ^rtld 2:33b 

*-v 

PbPdvr;): H4Pdr^d : 2:1b 

Ph Py vr;! cd P^ d P-il d : 1:21 d 

PhPy 'djl Id IcH41H Id : 2:2b vl 

PbPy 5uI H'd 1 Pdd : 2:2b vl 

^$H^d: 1:19b 

PhPy rdl SFp HdlPdd : 2:2b 

PbPdfH-d ^d^<l 2:5a 
PbH^l^n I^Th 1:23d 
fdTcTFFcT: !Tf«Tf?r 4:1b 

PfT tv tpsct H^ld H5TH 1:12a 
«+Tl^A>n di^nT 1:14b 

5»cft S^r: Hss'dl Her: 2:18b 

di 14 Ph ^-6 .dT 3:10d 
SfHi" 3:18c 
fTSrT MiHfliydH 3:10b vl 

fT?^- 3ffMnw 2:33a 
Str^FT '3TTRT 3:26b 

dd *1 d I f^rH dJrl 3:13d 
f' - M ""TFPKPT 5:31b 
^icdl d -^ei,PbH (MPT 2:29c 

ffc# HNIcHdi 4 Tt4h; 4:24c 




















































































































































440 


Rain akantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


fVii| I ifl J 4| 1: 6:7c 
TOT: 5^: 1:23a 
^ 1-HlHH 1:1a 

*TpT *T 5:17b 

t ^rr ^ 2:28b vl 

2:29d 

ti iF* h^* 4: 6:21c vl 

1 ^ I 4:21b 

B6Aj|d4|lflH)4dd 1:13c 

6:6c 

PbdlHMId^rdM 4:9c vl 
°^trrlwrH^TW l:5d 
Sf^l■H Id Irdfi•Vl: vl ad 6:20 
fW 2:32d 

afbir *4T tn-HH-H 5:9b 

V 

yl^dcHRuillHH) 5:30d 
8TTHT SHIT: HI Id44:19b 

w 

w I cl n A Ri ^ I 1 cl vl ad 1:23 

V 

rr 

jpiddaPdR*) 3T 2:11c 

JJWT frfWcfr *P?T 1:21b 

Jj*4<myd : fillHId 5:6c 
JJ^cTr^erT 1:11c vl 

JT^TIWFfr 6:27c 
STf’JT ifTSTT 3:19d 

iTt^T SpT % 3:19b 

°^nrl^TPTSfTdT 6:6d vl 

i| 1 ih J I ^d MIM^ 6:8b 

f^^Rhfd^ll44^ 6:26d vl 

TT tRt 2:25a 
sfTwr: 6:4c 

PFHI 41 ^ U £: Sfmr: 6:4c vl 


%cHHI T ^'\rA| cl 2:26b 

4 d<ylld <M cd d : 2:13b 

ff WfaFfT^T 3:3c 

^fdidlcHIdJH-^rd 5:13b vl 
%vTT Ri, -A) £ d | xrg^T 4:9c 

^ 'V 

0 f^T: 5:14d 

0 f^£ < T>*}rdrd'd'Jtd 4:6d 

'V, 

'ddHirHHr'd'blR'Jil 4:15d 
r’:T r I’ r: '?H r : iPlaii 4:16a 
^rdlvH cFfl^d: 6:4b 
^ ^.<vH^IHJ ° 1:6c 
37*4 «51Hd dl 4J H ° 1:5a . 

W? =JrfiTfTT»r o 1:5c 
Midin*£tdl*^"° 1:9c 
^3nr 'HddHmaT'' 1:3c 
'Jtd Mdi^'nidtiPd 0 1:4a vl 
WT ydldl^ill o 1:2c 

f^WETFcTtHT 0 1:9c vl 
3PT dl i M P ^ o 1:7a 
3 Tm' ^fdf'Hd'ly 6 1:8a 
^nTriWfJWl^r 0 1:3a 

n 'A I 1 r| d i : 4 a 

vji <41 vs d -H ^ i Rd ° 1:7c 

1:2a 

^dld^H^lcTl9 ® 1:4c 

Idlfl » 1:8c 
1:6a 

4 H -y d --d N ° 1:9a 
'Jildldi d4Td^d! 6:19a 
vjI Id I d IH»5 Pd WTfl 6:18c 

TI 'TTT fHTcr: ] vl ad 6:21 
^rq Igl'PI JT^T^H^cT 6:lld 

Slid did fdqi4d 4:8b 


































































































































































Index of Padas in the Tantra 


IH■MW J -JIMdT di-4 6:8a 
sJHIdldl^MIdHIJT 6:9a 

5 lHIClt JTfT^cT 6:lld vl 

$TW 4>K>WHfc*Fr 4:26c 
ipTr EFdTW: W 6:27f 

cT 

cT fHWT wr*fi MW 2:29c vl 
rrfwjg dlddlPd&l 6:25a 
dRlj^KM-cl T vl ad 6:25 
d SPffRTW 6:13b 

cT^fWT: vtRai'l'i 4:19c vl 
d^0>M Idd) PtRf: 3:27d 
d^$#r: P^idcl g^T: 2:27d 
d^ddlvl ^ cTcSnr: 2:30b vl 
d'x^y ^TpJ i Pvy^q : 5:15b 
^ sfr W Pvi d fd £d 5:16a 
dcT: 4.lddU|T S’wfw 4:20d vl 

cTcT: ■h i C'S'ti <jir«*4 1:20a 

ddT PdgId'H&HId' 1:18a 
dc'+i^Udlddirddl 6:25b 

dcdil4 f^XTfT^R’T 4:26f 

drbl4*bir<4.l srfPfT: 4:21a 
rTc&nTTvT ^ dcSHT: 2:30b 
dcaffor sfr T cTcSPT: 2:3 !b vl 
dfd _ 7 T 4 T T : d ’ 5:25a vl 

d 4 fd gJV" %cTcT 6:25c vl 
cHT fwirT’W df4|» 5:28a 
ddlPM oilfOdlPl'clT 6:23b 
cTWTSTdTcW: 9T93T: 2:21a 

SD 

doH |H ] 4 d -dT?T 4:5a 
drBT fdT *TgcT 4:8c 
•:v»JMHfdJ|^(d 5:13b 
cTcWT HmrWJI^rd 5:13b vl 
dVT di<RT fT fdl*A 5:24a 


cTOT d^PbdPldTcr 2:29a vl 
cmTWTT ^1* 5TfcT 5:6b 
cT^TT T dflT 8fWr®T 2:32a 

cP-UdlP?: f^PT: ^icft 3:8c 
cT^I-dlPd T ^ I^IVd' 4:3d 

cT^TT TSTrd^W 3:4a vl 
cPTlfT snjr^sr: 5:20e 
d^rrlr vnwr: sfrart 5:i9c 
d^l^drdfir^ail 4:27c 

'O 'v 

cmi^d^lfM ^ 6:24b 
cmr d^R-i f^RTR; 6:19d 

cfVT ddinrH^H: 3:13b 
dwfr fT^ ttW 3:27c 

d4$lfd T eft" W: 4:4b 
d4%3fT: Hdl'S'jid^ 6:7b 
ddHIdTvl fd^Pd: 2:8b 
d^HTdTvT vl ad 2:33 

T f%f%rRTrar 6:14a 

«S. 

cf5T AFT gn4d: 4:1 Id vl 
%ff>4T 4:25b 
cT^TT: 9T9RT9W: 4:9b 
d^TT d - 4:8d 

d^fbfy PrtrTsr: WTTcf 5:28c 
d<J ' ?f4 T 6:23d 

dl^ifWff^rTTTfr 5fT 5:5c 
ci g^c?) 4 ei m IVcd ^ 6:17d 
d id R'dTcf 2:29a 

d^cM^cdMIM^T 3:4a vl 
di^dld ^ngocnr 3:19c 

d^TWt 4:13b 

d^lKpdH girFr 4:29f 

d Is^diKi: dicTRW: 4:16b, 4:18d vl 
T-rdfnt S*-d^cJdr: 3:4d 
cf^Wp % ^ tw 6:25c 























































































































































442 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

m 


^fr 4:12 c 

dfvnidfd fT: ^TRT: 5 : 8 c 

cT^nq-; l:19d 

ddld/Hd^d-M - : 1:16c 
d4) ^ HI T<flJ-d-dTrT 2:26 c 

V 

W 1^1*^ Id: HTTcT 5:8a 

V, 

df*iin?>ni ?prit 4 : 22 c 

dTHIddinidi qiiT 3:8a 
•: '-ii 4 q ird d 5:6a 
d I q<?)I<;^ 11 anforr 4:23c 

dT-HIdlfb) frvId«T 5 : 8 a vl 

dfdi-Hitn JT^fp 2:17 C 

dfHH-d^ PFT: sfrtrr: 2 : 10 c 
dtnnTWKW 4:8a vl 

cTW tmf T vntc% 2:24c 

dTSiV W for *focT 2:27b 

v 

^T7=q- HfwrftFTgrwr 5:13d 
^R~ *fof: q^^dr: 2 : 21 d 

TFT: STd^ct 3:4b vl 
cTFq- Jf *pdd 6 : 5 b vl 

51T*drt IdJ IKll: vl ad 4:20 
d 'f-n i 1:16a 

d^ld 915Wrt>cdld 4:8a 
dlqvTl Jj^H^ld: 3:18b 
fo"<f<hK<Mfdd: 2:19d 
^HN: ST^dcl 5:23b 
frTThfnJdiO 51%: 5:23c 

f^rrtvn'd j I d H i HT 5:24c 

f^Tt^raJIdl H%cT 5:29b 

V 

fdThTTTFT WT W 5 : 25 c 
^ d -VI Hti Id 41 r) d 1:21a 

^TccT qTTrT: 5 : 9 a 

d - d - iT^TT: ford||c*l <bI: 3 : 17 b 

d*i 'TiirTi »T d'suRri 5:19a vl 


drrd 4 gib 041 ■ 6:4a 
fFT divt ITHTVJd' 6:4d vl 
^HlWd'dcdld 2:8c 

V 

T-T T^r «TTrf 6:12a 

^ n?i <=i <-Ti mi<d i: 6:21d 
^=7 ^f<dHMIfd 3:26a 
cR" 4:14c 

ddi'-HM a«hl«4|d 5:26b 

>iv, 

^RFT fW7: fTW: 6:14b 
^aiTt MimiPi 4:23e 
gfdifd^T ff 6:7d 

adir^i 9rftf fgiT 3:17c 

V. 

'‘Wlffldlddi'liy^ 1:6b 

3:20b 

fpJT^T 3:25a 
J*T: FJeT: l;23b 
c^TTrqT qf?FT: 2:1a vl 

' Tqi'-l rfgF rT: RtW 2:11a 

0 ^ani5irdHli)M 1:7b 

gi>4dnffVgwf*r : 6:20b 

°Jrftldl^<lijfd^f l:6d 
< N cil ^TFMTrf: 3:25b 
5^8nrr irfw:■y'l j i d: 6:12b 

*T ■RYsT: 'RTTcT 6:9c 
^tSTT «hl <U|fi| 6:9b 

fTarrfr f%dcf fw 6.-i5b 
^stt grfr t fiTf^di 5.-22d 

^arnu: 5lf*d|j|d: 6:12b vl 

sf^Hdlyu|i| 6:3d 

'N 

^rfWdldidilH - sfr 5:23a 

^tfSTdt sfV fd <I P$d : 5:27b 

|TWl- ^Fd^tetlfd 6:17c 

f 3 ?^ qKFTTW: 3:10b 

6:22c 







































































































































































Index of Padas in the Tantra, 


4:25c 

STCwt T PnWiH: 3:21b 
^STTRT Id-HlUT: HI I'd 6:21a 

<f)d<hI S'-dM-dKd : 5:20b 
f^TTR^T ^ ^Tt G:lc 
P^ IPddu| Pd *\m\] 5:31c 

fpTPWTcft 3:14c vl, 3:21a vl 

f^fw SpT fdTbm^ 5:27c 
fSHTHIdoIdl qT 5^fr 3:21a, 3:14c vl 
f^VTVT^T'JT m S^fr 3:14c 


tr4- 2:23d 

W[d R-d fifr 4:10c vl 


T diH-dlfcdRldl: ^kTH 3:16d 
T T dilHIdd fTT 5:19a 
^ ^ fVg- ^J^rfT^T 6:22d 

^ ^ V 

T 'dlcl4 JIlPllHI 6:3a 


T d PmMd l Pi dT d" 2:29a vl 

* I \ 

•T d’HbT^luft SGtRt 4:20d 


•T Rul Middled Id 5:25a 
d" Id&Rl 5rTTT sR=Hd 4:13a vl 

"N, 

W fTfs - : STHTT I - 5:17d vl 

sd -D 

T ^cdlcdid" dT 6:15d vl 
T fd"dT I jfwr: 4:29a 
d" Rid I O' Rrt fnifd": 4:4d 
T srfwr: 5:30c 

T v('rrrPd Redid N]X>: 4:29b 
dTHT ill did I ^dd^ 4:28b 
d r r-r ’TTd'dP^vPl' 4:28a 

V 

T d y I'd') T *frrpffr 2:7d 
TTSprr dil'ddidf %7T 4:19a 
TTSt K T mTOTT 3:22d 


° 3:23c 


^TT^TOT Nddd^d 3:12b 
TFJP-IT HTHT "fi' '-FT 2:7b 
'TF^RTTHT fdfaR5&LH 3:5e 


sTTR^ rPU?T cf: f^FTR - 6:21d vl 
facM <r>l4<r>0 ^ 4 cl 4:19d 
RrcqY S’^T^r PddUi : 5:3d 

NS 

fWcrf^^TW: 5:8b 
Rrrid'l T l^iJcdTr: 5:1b 
pH 41 dl vnrrr 5:5a 

Ri Rh d <Tir<^dd cTdT 2:3b 

PdRHdHHdl^ 2:1c 
PHdddl^dilRl ^ 4:6b 
RTWrRr ^Trfr S8TTRT 4:6a 
Rr^fb: 3:27b 

Rl’dld *T Idd l Phi Id : vl ad 4:5 
Rrqtrfr dl-wr fniRr: 4:4d vl 
i-lRriX'd fildd Rnn vl ad 3:3 

V, 

Pd'M H: fdTrT 5TfT: 2:1b vl 

Rf^Hcd fM f5T%- 2:2d vl 

Pd d id cd i P^'cS, d HI l 3:16c 
Rt^uT: fT drM - fCT: 3:14a 
PdHiH 3?T^TT 3:15 c 

Rrf^fr Pdjjuh ssrg-; i : i5b 
HIMIdflHdlMlirr 5:17a 
^HlRldJlPd: W16:2d 

IPddiddl fHidl: 6:ld 
^dlPddidPd: 4i^nT5:9d 

T 

W cFJXTdWpJT ^ 4:23d 
Hpi^dMH^y^: 6:5d vl 
iTcPT: STHTrERTP 3:25d vl 
TPid Rf ddl ddl 5:24d vl 
4 Ri d Ri ; ■■! --d d 5:7d 



























































































































































4-1 1 


Ramakautha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Wl^^TCTrWl' 3:25d 
9 41 d di F9TETT 1:12(1 

'-I <\ 4 rj fn 41 *-HTTT 4:12b vl 

7Ffr W fw 4:3b 

V 

WT T^": 5:18d 
H < t fq ^-^rq I d 2:6c 
9TI-^d^9dH 1:12b 

9p"J||H : h% 7T 2:24d 

-v 

mP^IIH) sfw: jftwr: 2:26a vl 
’Tfwnfr S^ddHl 2:26a 
r -PT S^-mdi W: 3:23b 
wmTRTW dlPddl: 2:20b 
T?p=T dHHdUd 2:19c vl 
TSJ^%T % Hi<f.cdH 3:5a 

Wrm%T?'' 1:13a 
^<u|tc|HwiJ|: 2:18d 

9TH7: 1:23c 

9i»lPdH-f 1 Hdf S$T: 1:15a 
Tsrr: JtfftfrfTTRTr 3:15a 
Mlill^dl W STtlfif 5:4a 
q bTd£H 6:22a 

Trsrfg-sr-rjn^ dr 6:15a 
M i ^ I fd'! HTcSTT: 6:16a 

qH^lP^d-Ml 9TFcT 2:21c 

qHIHdd^l^ f 3:23a 
MHlild HTT[; ] 2:32b vl 

'THHTH d I Id d I d 1:22b vl 

T^Ml THarT: 2:30d 
jwnjrr 5:24d 

T^ri't-T k-r THT 4:17b 
9'd H fd> I <H (d 6:19 c 

STTWr strfw^T 2:14c 
9<td^d 91% IddJrdd 5:26c 
nfrfbT dTFTT 2:32d vl 


sraH sfr T dc87T: 2:31b 
SP4FT T rpilcHdT 1:17b 

S3 

ST4FFT HUllrHdl 1:17b vl 

1*7 <?> *7 Hoh 4:2b vl 

^ % 

rrrrfwr ^ ht srfwr: 4:ic 
snjcg' f^F ^HdH 5:17d 

5i H l H cH l d^ 5:18a 
STHT^ - fsiTT ^T: 5:17c 
ST^rT: ^ 3:3b 

Tq Ricq 15 h lH l*11H 6:10a vl 

SJ^pTlR^ 5:3b 

STdN- ^TTf?T vl ad 4:18 

' a ^ -*1 <.: 1:11b vl 

rrnrwr q'nrT rTPT 6:23c 
5TTTT c)q H" 'Jiirl'frl 6:4a vl 

'O 

91 y1 FJfHl pm d f^rFR- 4:11a 

'*v 

MI '-H d fdTTFTlf^W vl ad 1:23 
5lT^r StrFcr% mrf 4:15a 
5Ttwr: W : WT: 3:13a 

C\ 

54tWT: gwt ST VIIHd 5:22b 
iflfli Hi J I Pi q *^1H H 3:6b 

"S 

rfmrfdH 6:lOd 

91fhi cFT T?T rtsi 6:6b 

ST^TI 3;26d 

Sfmrt HTHTTRT: 5:5d 
STtart HdKld 2:19a 
ifTlTt ^J^ldl HTT 5:22b vl 
91 -dd WlHdKd: 5:4d 

97 

t -PkT ^fRT^rl^T 2:32c 
9 kT^T T f97 H%cT 6:2b 

T 

* iT^TH < Idd HdW 1:2b 

T^lHIcHI <bHlP4HI 2:5b 



































































































































































































Index of Pad as in the Tantra 


"dHd^fd'-IIdd 1:8b vl 

dgdlH'-ddlM: WTcT5:21c 

SH-dHd p 4:9a 
dlHdlfpHIHinHIH 6:5b 

'v 

fpf: TifT sfr Pd^H: 3:21b vl 
flj \m 4| '4 d d £9: 4:12b 

4:23b 

d£llPd<MU|Hl<6 0 1:17c 

\D 

I J H19s^d" 3:21c 
«ftV MT jt *cl T PhH 4:2b 
dVO fpjSrPPT I" 5:10b 
-41 -fbrw MTfHcTTTfcr 4:22d vl 

41 Pm Hi fU ; - TTfcT 4:22d 



H7RPT HP Hi d -HI 1:10a 

HfwnfPT r^MMlH 6:12b vl 


HWRTP 



VT^WF^TT <J2iT 1:11c 
HPd ’-d<Pi 6:20c 


H^rT^JT^cn 1:18c! vl 

Hdtf^irfPT 147 H%7T 5:2b 
HTWT: 4Twr: fw-TTH 5:4d vl 
HFTRPTTfPirr^TT^r 4:20c 


°ir^: fk^X HP H7T 2:20d 

HTTP! w P #Tcjp i f 2:22b 

I *><-d PT PPPW 3:2a 

n'l?j>cq (-inn : 41 <t>-h 3:1a 

H I ijicd SP H H -r PbH 3:id vl 

HtHPfTrPdT: Pi: 5:10d 
HtiTHl^cdH-HHH 3:5f 

PHT ^ fd'b^d : 1:20b 

H|4l J tl441»llrM'b: l:15d vl 

SO 

HtntTnrftf^nT^r: l:15d 


P 

H --d (i -s h» i q i (Vy^q : 5:4b 
H-di>lfNI P PcfdT 3:15b 
IPP5TWT PIT 4:10c 
H-dlTcH4)1: ^TcTPRTPr 3:1 ( 3, 

ippptp fH^spr 2:28d 

H^H^d < 1 14*11 5:30b vl 
IRT H'ddll ?rfwr: 5:30a 
“H-HHP^PdHIilM 1:3d 
HTT fdTPT Pd £] PliH 2:13c 



1 IP 1:: -' vTPPW: 2:19b 


HHI-d :PT 


HPh H'-dH'Jfl fipcnT 2:2b vl 

V 

HIh r<=lIfil^ hT: vl ad 1:23 
n ’ 7;;"vr r • 2:8d 

i t r:.r 7 t f rj ^T^rpf r 2:22a 

iTrTT SWFT WrT 2:19c 


no 


HTTP f^i'HIcH'b: 2:lld 
PTP SPT WTTTTT: 2:22d 
Hdrrpr fdfnr: RTTcT 6:24c 

HIHIHilH HHP-j IPHT 2:18a 


HTdT 



MlmI 2:12c vl 


Mlddl-d cldPHIdl 3:5b vl 
Mldld'ldM'bM'ilH 4:7d vl 
MldlrMdi 5TTIT dP 0 4:6c 

MTdT Ht MlPodl 3T-TTT 2:12c 
MTdTpT MlPsHI 'TtW 2:15c 
Hldl'-dd HdfdHT 3:8b 
MI d N -PRIHl fPtRT: 3:5b 
MTdTHl'iIdP 1 ^*: 1:19c 
MI d I d I: 'J| f4nr 4:15b 

V 

3:16b 


JTFTT 



^TT 2:15c vl 


445 









































































































































































446 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


dl«Pt d d^fd'W 2:8a 

Humr sfAUd^Fft sfr * *rr 2:iib 

d PT^-T 4F4T cTFiT 2:16c 
H l 4ui % 4c4)WP; 2:10a 

dPUlJ mY sfr H^T 2:9d 
fipsr 5:11c 

dPtidldlT'd 4T47TPT l:10d 

Jjiqij- ?r 4KJ44I 2:7a 
JpapT 4T4 dI *ai| | P< 1:14c 

\3 

^T^fmcf: l:22d 

3:20a 

1:5b 

4 H C'RT f^WT 4:21(1 vl 

JTtST cT%T ^) 'Jl ^d 6:8d vl 

PTH fci 4 HI 4~H d I d 6:8d 

V. 

H I5c4" d" H fV^d I 2:14b 
“d'l^'dlHddligT 1:9b 
“•^rdd^fdMIdd' 1:8b 


4* 

4cT: ^Nlcy'hlfifl'fiT 2:12d vl 
4cf: 4PPJT dP£7ST 2:13a vl 
4<T: aiPbdd': Sfrfwr: 5:31a 
4cT: Hdd^fisHld 2:13a 


i|d^-d+-4 T •M'xipT 2:7d vl 

'O 

4cft SddsP'PWt 5:25d 

*HT rT3f fwTFCTTW 2:1.6a 
W 4>Pa d H' 5:15c 

W 4>HacMd I «TrT 6:17b 


W 4ddfl sJTddT Sfr 3:10a 
W *JTT SJPTT P1 d 5:6c vl 


4 4I j d 4 I PpfT STfwr: 2:28c 
W 44T VTRrdfT 6:19b 


44T 2:31a 

n O C\ 

ZTOT cHT fdPd’j ft" 2:4< 


ip-TT %K*Fd' T7 T: 4:12d 


WRTf^TrTFdW 3:7a 
W Pdd^4Pdd 3:3d 
4PT ^WTWTdlW vl ad 4:22 
44T HHlPpHd-il 5:3 c 

'o si 


44T ^nusHi'ld" 3:27a 
W ^'Mdld'pW 4:13c 


44T d-4 Td v-Zl 4 2:3 I d 


W dPlfaOT odIW 4:20c 
W ddM^I^TlUllH 6:6a vl 

W ddfcmw: 6:16d 

V\ 

1Yi t fj('HH* h' tild 4:3a 
tnn d4l'l- ; JFr 2:9a 

*S 

W fKl'lHldl dcTT 3:11b 
q^TTWP dT^mr d4?r 5:24b 

'v 

iilPld': 5Tfwr: 3:19a 
dddl^l dTT: 1:10c 

^TTT "W % H (4?iMH 5:7c 

'S 

WiTrT: fill 4 d f%d" 5:2d 
^rfY- Vd Id W 4dif^Td' 6:3c 
^rfr rfpq- T frffd - : 5:23d 
■'rfY clHCj hh^cih vl ad 6:25 

S 3 % 

irfY fTOTT 6:18b 
dPT Hi^11: ^TTcT 4:7a . 

V m 

irfr dfwrd m Wi 5:29d 

\ 3 i ^ • 

* « . 

j fY" WT 4PPT 5:27a 

"w 

q-fg- f-n |H}[1 undent 2:25b 

V 

’Mddc'Tid 443:6a 


srnj: 4:29c vl 
•M4J d 114 *T dPd^P 3:7c 
4 <1 df^d“4": Tii4h 4:27a 

4<14 dP-4d': 411)41 2:22c 
4<r4 W l^fdldcf 1:14a 

4sidl'd' a4WgcT 2:30c 
4p-H' < Mc^ WT 5:9f 






















































































































































































Index of Pad as in the Tantra 


TT^T d ^ Pt> d IH ^ fa 4:14a 
A|14 ^(] i filfa T 2:7c 


dld4d T 3:18a 
AHd^P-dPdfdldd^ vl ad 6:21 

dPbd : 4><r'-dcl iTTT: 2:23b 


T^TVT 5 


^ ST 5TWiT *T falT 6:12c 
far +4) f-yi W H ■ £f J*l ° 6:5c vl 


^Tfafa TT 


d d 1 fTVI dTf: TRT: 5:26a 


fafa T% faw: 6:20d 

t ttt fafapTTrrrefa 6:7a 

1:13d vl 

dfal^fdH <ld^H 1:13d 
fapldi faddiKUIH 3:22b 

dWT WTT^Pir: 3:24a 
TTfa T 3:22c 


TH '-f <~i i cj i (u| vl ad 6:10 

i||j A|f-H I fv t i j i 4 j-T vl ad 4:5 

■v 

■Ml J d Id Id ddiTPl" far 4:2c 

Tlfanr ,:-r ir 4:25a 
fafa Vl 4 Td 8TWPT 4:14d 

fa Sdldlrdl cTTT fair: 2:1a 

T 

rmdrd Vldcfa 3:4b 

Mdfadd-HdF 4:2d vl 

<ldsid1 r«NW4l 4:2d vl 

TTfafat" T M i4dd 4:4a 

rrTf^rr T %?F*T 5:18c vl 

im'dl-KJlP^ddddl 4:2d 

•U'J>r Tiw^Tfr 1:17a 

TTTjt sfa d Tvl IMt 1 cdTcT 3:3a 

% 

TPTt sfa 1:17a vl 


vT 

rTTMld ifddd Idl'd' 3:24d 

qii|fjj|^ ; vJ ad 2:33 
FrsfaT dtq | did' 3:20c 
0 rfrWFft^r^T^FT l:9d 

sR-^*-M^fcRT: 5:19d 



g'Pf-xj | fw: <t>Pa n 5:12a 

V 

d*fal ST cpTT fw 3:Id 
'i i t t, j 1 IPT 4 : 7d 

qddd : dfidi dfar 5:5b 

\0 ^ *v 

d | xWcTR^ fa d d 6:27c 


dl^dd^Rt.4) JJW: 6:27d 

d Idfal Idl'd l-^id 4:18a 
T l d * 1 1P-T ffaTTWT v] ad 6:25 
TPTdT -jtiqrl 5:28b 


dlddllljdfad: vl ad 6:25 
PcfdiTT: yPdddfa 5:19b vl 


Pd + KIrH-falill: fTRT 4:16c 
(q<hl0 T mi 4:16d 
Pdddd': VI Pd 9 <1 d 5:19b 


ofciqi' 'jf-i’llddiH 1:13b 

fT^TTWpTTTrrdT: l:16d 
Pd <1 Idil Pd d J11 dT: l:16d vl 
F-TM'i P-cibcI f4nT 4:0 d 

K fw w: 5:3d vl 



ffa^cdldbd 


6:24a 


fr^cdlvl rdd(4er 5:21d 

W TTT i»l<RT 6:27a 

fd dT^T THWTRT 2:27c 


rd^cfad^l«<fa 2:29b vl 

W TTFTW 3:14d 

°ld<?4 4:25d 

Id d'g.H Rid irHdid^ 4:27b 

fd d fg d P-atRt: 2:6d vl 
















































































































































* 







fa 71 ' J o fr T^rfai^d vl ad 4:28 

V, 

fdfdv sfr fcrfpn% 5:27c vl 
Pq ^: PTifz^r: d^Rld 2:4a 
PdRiia 5% dr^dTf 2:29b 
PdsHl T fWdcT: 2:26d 

o 

f^Nt sfr T fTW G:15c 
fdMdlfdlddlJId: 2:lod 

PddH'-dP- J =Ht ?rfwr: 2:31c 

fdT^rr^^jTSPdT: 1:11b 
3<^rdid 3:9c 

C\ -v 

3Pd>d dPT ^(jdl 3:7d 

scrf?*>4| 1UrI^ H : aim: 2:15a 

^PdPlfh: *T df*d: 2:17d 

\3 

srfvRTT: dPd JTFd vl ad 6:25 

oqifdcd ^ W 5:12d 

-odlfiHcdM f«T?T 5:12d vl 
5d'm cd I rH d'dd' 2:6a 

sdrwg - cd^rr f^fr 2:5d 

sqTqTTT d~ ^ fddcr 3:lle 
S4IM) dTdtdTFtmr: 1:15c 

^dldPhdldm ° 6:6c vl 

ST 

STfWT: dT qii <.«!i vl ad 4:18 

?ri¥: gw fd'dKHl 4:21c vl 
srfdT: Pd d -d d 0 vl ad 4:22 

srfdi d U3 M dl PvRTFT 5:7b vl 

V 

5ffMHW ?rfwr: 5:20f 
SrfcbMIdN qt&pfcl 4:29f vl 
STT^md I ^ d £1 <HT 5:1a 
?l Pti91d d dlWT 4:29f vl 

: 3:23d 

Wf**! I <?H Id JI ~ci, fd 5:13b vl 
SI Pm 4.1 rdfdTTT m 5:30a vl 
srf^TH 2:33d 




5: 



SlRTTm^Tf^Wdlcr 6:16c 


S1WTT rrfddl: W 6:10d vl 

urn-Trrr fv T q T H -^rr : 2: 7 C v j 


fgt 3:11c 
^TTWT td ti t<{ 4:7c: vl 

1:3b 

fw: W cW 5n^T: 3:9a 
fW: T’l'H'hK'Jl: 6:1b 
fsrddM cTOT dW 2:33c 
fsi'd ;l I d 9T dT 1:10b 

fi'iqrqocifV.M* : |:22a 

C\ 

Pi'M^lPfbMdldN 4:1a 



ftldHl H^-HdcdId 5:1c 

N 

fsr dwfr -T pfr *fdT 2:17b 

Psidl Sfr 4l^(d$lld(M 5:7a 
si^dlPdHd cT^T 4:7c 

^ 3:17d 

5TS1S]< tnqr^cr: 2:3d 


i T ^- 2:ld 
Sj^l^l^dddd 4:26b 

StdfT fdTd - : qvrr 3;26c 

d^t 2:9c vl 
sTR" dflddH 1:1 Id 
5ftWl H M i ddddr^rT 6:12d 
STTWT7 dlW ddiTcd^ 2:21b 

d" 

“HT^Tdr^r l:2d 
'H'HI'O T Mdfddl 1:22b 

'O 

d PH: wr sfq- SRt: 6:16b 

dddiK: SITfDFfT iRf: 6:3b 
H‘fd)K: d4^lfd9m 6:2c 
dfdiRuld iTfWT: PdTcT 6:6a 

S 3 v 



m 



































































































































































































































449 


HHhlO 5ft" fa? HnT 6:2a 
ffanTT dT fPTfaTFT 6 : 2 c vl 

o?p=-riH 4 HJ|Rrf l: 7 d 



VC fa" fat 3:9b 

VC fa slH^fbcdld 

H 4.HI Sft" WFrTCT 3:14b 

si 

HdtHl sft" ^Hl?ft 3 : 16 a 
fTfrT 4 WW 4 : 91 ) vl 

fT T TFTRTcfr TRTT 3:1 c 
FT T W- ! - : 4 : 7 c vl 




H" W HT4TR 

C\ 

fT -41 fa <11 ft 4 ■‘4 fa " 6 2 : 20 c 

far far srfa" htht 5 : 18 c 


nr 



SlftT sffaR" 4:13a 


*T<T JTrfaTffacT'T 4 : 26 b vl 

WrffarrJp-TifT dT 6:21b 

faftftnr rF-rfar 2:i6d 

*rfafffafafa i:i 4 d 


VC Tra" sTm" : 5 : 13 c 

H H 4 )I HHtfa 5 : 16 b 

4 Hr 4 dcfa" J l *-n H 5 : 9 c 
rrfa" far fa fan": 5 : 11 a 


rm 



6 : 11 a 


HHI d I Id ftr : i v -dTHT : 16 b 


H" Hldl«rlHd: 



2 : 5 c 


far faftr ny id i:20c 
far faj 1 fd41' H" f^" 5:lld 
°HJ-d-'dTgWd" THT: l: 17 d 
tifaW ffa <nCl(a far 5 : 21 b vl 

°fafafafarrw 1: 4 d 
nfau fafafar 4 :id 
fair: >ifa5 3 : 27 e 

fair: vc ftrfa n^r i : 2ic 

fallfa fat HcdlH 4:5c 

” 'S 


fl dllrd nrgT^TT 4:5b 
fl 4 5 I cd IcMiH y 4 : 3:24b 

faclfdd fa?W: 2 : 2 d vl 
falTH M 4i I HI «b: 3:27f 



d: ,5: 



fafa SffT rTcT: ffad": 2 :d 

Hdfa ffacTT fat 5 :Id 


r ^ 


HdHlHI: tr: 4 : 23 f 

fafd" nTW: ffacf: 3 : 8 d 


efagTTf^c^RT 6 : 5 a, 6 : 10 a 

ffappj^fl^rr^r: 4 : 29 e vl 
Hd^TOTfdT: afar: 6 : 1 a 
ffafaW^r: HTRT: 4 : 29 e 

si ^ 

famnpi: ftrd": 6 : 4 d 
Hdlddl^di spr>T 1 : 12 c 


frfajUT^cfar 6 : 14 c 
; • '"d'ffarr fafa: vl ad 4:29 


fafw H" Ifa dfar 6 : 6 b vl 


fay i fa tffam; 3 :i 8 d 
fafanrr + HI ft fa: 4 : 18 d 


fl<H : HI I-H HI HI M I ° 2 : 12 a 
frfwsfa far 2 : 27 a 
fl^'dl 1 fafan" far 2 : 30 a 
H^fa sfafafr JTRrT 0 2:12a vl 

fl^Hl far fat HWT 0 2:12a vl 

fTT T fa‘d d Pd f'-hdM 5 : 31 d 

S 3 v. 

fTT cT^": fa" |^TT 3 : 2 d 

HI ft 1 facT vl ad 6:25 

S 3 -s 

HI 7 ' 3 fafa fad" vl ad 4:20 

V 

HT ftH H d fd d'H' 5 : 3 Id vl 
fTT fair: Myfafadt 5 : 26 d 

v o 

fTT fafa: fafdl fa 4 : 19 c 


^ 'N 



\ 



:*fl "d'd-.T 4 TT[: 3 : 5 c 


H ftrsTd ?rftT 

si 

HFWTfa: 4:7b 



vl 


































































































































































450 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


SFTTdijr| 5 : 7b 

5:6d 

g^TCT" ^nroj- ST^TT 4:‘23a vl 
gw PddPd<bKdd 3:15d 

v\ ^ 

TRlt J1'J||^d«fr 4:23a 
gWS £ Td d y d I 2:10d 
jgwrfT vq df <b 14 HT 4:21c vl 
d^Pdd-tFFT 4:28d 

FT: JHT: 3:6d 

HP sfr dTfcTF13d vl ad 2:33 
FtF F)Hl4$)mH 1:1b 

V 

S^r^ddld^l: 4:24a 
; ' ;i -dPdd TT: 1:1 d 
FdTd MI PH : shPdddd 5:27d 

FdTFTI rH I W Jl^Pd 5:13b vl 
’■d i h d I jIT CFTF 4:10a 
fdMI^ddiill^d 4:9d 

folded icMddi STWT: 5:2a 
fPTcrrafr«Tr FcT: FTFT 4:20f 
f»4FT •'-Fil'ddlddd 4:21d 

P'-'ddT T47rf7raI dildid 2:14a 

fTdPd^lfbl fcldlJFT 6:13d 
f^TcTT STTlt sfTRT: 5FT: 3:26d vl 
fejrfr Hld'ldl *ff*FT 2:6b 

Nb 

If^dl SffP d ^rMd qaiH 2:6c vl 


fiij . •; : ;; : g TytfTJft 6:14d 

lqpqq'ti qn4n 3:12a 

4)1 d IH ?3WfT 4:21c 
u,y, fd q dM 4:2Id vl 

«-j h F l J-T SR'H -dd : 4:22b 

6:25d 

WilRlpnT 6:23a 
FTT^" ^ <$\T4 d 2:15b 

: 2:16b 

^#^TTfr %f^TFT vl ad 4:18 

^cf: n>i«M 2:12d 

'Ref fWTTiT 4:15c 

R 71 J "' ""THrdd : 4:29d 
RcfT T fV^rdKifHId^ 4:17c 

ftf T def 6:22b 

J^MHluqHHldd 6:25d vl 

g'lddrdl^l 5:10a 

RTc^TRf dcH^cd RTef 2:18c vl 

WTlf drT sfr fFyi-dcl 1 : 18 b 

f 

^ddd^dKUIH 4:10b 

f^T^lrTT^t: 1:1c 

^RTftFT 5fr ^r^T: 3:lld 



































































































































INDEX OF QUOTATIONS IN THE VRTTI 


34 

313v(-HI ^ fa wcj 14): 1:9.34 

WWT 6:17.3 
3T?TFT^t ddldd: 6:17.4 

argrrvrft sarn^ 5 * 4746 : 24.11 

*S, 

3lpHHI fatcT 6:18.2-3 

V 

ff rrfapqvql 9dld i IHTTT: 

3:11.4, 6:16.7 
31 5:12.15 

STVIlil^T^I'HlMM 0 1:12.20 
34*4 t 4T S^Tfcl-Mtui-d ° 1:12.20 
3H-d4 dcddHIrHdH 2:1.3 

C\ -s 

3Hdr^>ld£ldd 1:15.39 

3F fd rd I fd ^ :^TH IcHd 2:15.2 
31 -ft«tKR h I 3 dI Hi 0 3:12.29 
3{^J|^,lfd H H ill IH 1:23.30 

3T%W^ra" ^rjfrl 3:12.10 

1:19.7 

34-dv^HJ|rll: 4Tf*4T: 3:23.14 
3i -41 >-ii i fawpspr» 2:14.10 
3T^- fg^r 3:23.40 

o 

34^: 54374«i f^T^T 1:10.21 

3r4f srat f4gpr viihuiim'^w : 
4v4wf4f^T?T 6:11.11 

^rfWJW qw^fT 3:23.16 


343PT’T ^jfMaidl 3:9.26 
3|&r44iWl %g-; 1:9.45 
•344H1 f*J7 ^JWT: 3:9.14 
344J£TfT |W 3:9.7 

34T 

34l37RdiKd fr*TH'l £ 91H): 3:14.3 

dTcTT: 3:23.13 
34T'5TFf4H^HIr4l*9 1:10.5 
34RT: qpnjrfq^TFT: 1:15.31 
3TKfr % q^q'4Tf7T: 3:6.5 

34T 9143|i^dsi!4T: 6:6.3 

HI-MiydWt Sf: 1:19.15 
W tFf PH-MlMlild 6:12.12 

'V 

wswr4w HTarrTfr 3:23.41 

3T 

37^4 fl rd Td 311H : 4:24.7 

qr 

q.^ Td^flp ofd41 Ft 4:23.8 
diHIdld sfr ar^TT: 4:9.6 
d.4d<a SlTtrifur 3:5.5 
qr4fc4: 4rd34T3nqTTT 3:12.52 

V 

diHtrd^qidfd 3:12.51 
dil-dl>4 W 4434RTR; 5:12.17 

qrnT: 4!l0<fiHiK: 6:2.12 


3451437 d" 4:23.9 


4 































































































r 


452 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


ill f I 1 d 4H 3:12.57 

S 3 

dddrdldd >JlJ|d: 3:12.58 

4, I H f ; H f: 1:18.17 

for ^ rffolf 6:6.13 

d IfH P-d d I f| I ■HI Id 1:22.10, 



5:10.8. 5:13.12 


TT 


J||2f$fA'Jlld'ti4 0 6:2.13 

IJ^T Tffor fdffdT ^dPrl 3:23.21 

4tfwT 'did fddNl' 3:23.27 



d cd I Pi dlddP' (ddl Hdlfd 3:23.20 
d'^HT: <+> <. (d 41 d di I fdl J? 1:22.4 
dRTpT iTft dHP=cT frmr: 1:9.23 
Pd-ddl T%r w 3:23.25 
fforw r^rrfrr 1:18.13 
dddf-dlPl 1:23.12 


5lHIHIdlcHdl 1:23.13 

z\ I ^ rTOT H ' f 6:8.4 


cdfo $dMMRvr 4:13.2 
cfd I Rd'l; ^ 3:12.28 

d^r4d 3:9.12 
d *d d H-d I rH d>I c^d I d_. 2:1.5 

fo^T d ^ci.-d I 0 1:15.40 
dfdH IdlrliKrdHI 5:8.11 
rP^d" HI-dJ-MdTpT 1:15.43 

cRrtrfr d" 41 Ph 41: 3:23.28 
d <-H I (dTi I Hi Pi 4:23.3 
dHKPi HidiirdH'd 4:23.14 

d'l Pddl 521 d’STdT cPTT 2:14.14 
Pd&fd finbl<di!lld 6:19.6 


d" rd^fTM i Td" PldfM: fori 
6 : 6.11 

ddi Pdd7Pddil dTflT 6:11.4 

fddddHHId-dPd^ dHT 1:9.24 

dH^Pddt fT^FTR- 5:12.18 

d'JlPd srrar: 3:12.37 
^SlH*d5t'd 1:9.35 

d 

fddt dT T: y dl d d I d 1:13.24 

V 

W 

d didlPdddl^ili dFTcT 3:12.5 
d d %fddrft $n^T 3:9.4 

d d d^dd^lHI 3:9.6 
T d" didt 3:9.23 

T cTHT l^nRTRPT 1:23.27 

^ NO - 


Cn 'v 


d* rnf%: TRf° 3:12.21 

dcT y41 vjHI( dKH 1:9.58 

V 

d - ^vic^ychRui 1:22.12 

dnt Hildld 5:9.2 
dlPdd HHuidd 2:8.1, 4-5 
Pdrd^Pd Pddi fTdtd- 1:14.18 
fdr*m di f7>J ^tnT 1:18.19 
fd^rtjt 1:9.12 

J PH dd'IdilMd 3:19.4 

■V. 

HlMIdld fd J '4HT 4:25.4, 11 



HdHId 2:1.6 
Hdd^yiydldldl: 4:24.4 
• '■ ~'X: W PdHlIdl: 1:13.36 
HM^dl^Sldillld 6:24.10 


Ifddl S^dil l: 4:23.13 
srfwrfir f+ m^ i:i8.i4 
yPd^dPd^illld: 



























































































































































































Index of (Quotations in the Vrtti 


453 


5:28.6 

jfun - : 1:10.22 

W^TSnffWT ^f 6:2.7 

5 ii$juii : r ^mm i:io.i8 


if 

ddMHffl SglW: 2:14.13 

%^T: 4:24.5 

if 

ifBf iTfnfTW 4:26.11 

'•O 

Jfwf f jflfdVIM: 4:24.8 
ifRJcf: SPfJff ^ffff: 6:2.6 

*!M«lfr^«tif^=f: 1:9.46 

-MI -MI vr^ft'od dtid! J d I: A d,4if 4:17.5 

"O ■v 

ifrat^ : 4:7.3 

m^ra" f^ftr rf^Tf 3:20-9 

C\ ^ ’v 

iffarmf =r srdffcr 1:14.19 
ifrat dTif ddSidM 6:10.9 


if 


£T?T Ph T« d Pm d^TST^fT: 1:22.3 
if: fPT: 1:22.13 

d ft-H -H Pf Hdrdd 3:9.11 


ffTfeT d-dddi rTT 1:19.16 
qT dd 1 Rf V'ldl 4:7.7 

T 


^T4Jd'’-rar dTRT° 3:12.36 


d ?t> °d i-d dd 2:1.4 

dWTHTH T^f»f: HTfif 4:9.7 

dHp^ - A Id£dd' 3:12.20 


1:23.29 

r^Hd^m-dlS: 1:13.7, 1:22.27 
fdrf^f: f%dT diHIdljf) 1:13.37 
PdlVld' ift^nFCT 3:20.10 
rdd«ri^dHHui 1:9.11 

C\ 

°ifnfIT5iff%T%nr 1:18.20 


W 


5rfwr: dTTTdf if 4:21.4 

V|*|<y*: SPJW 3:13.5 
VlfviPhT^TIRdfilRR 5:12.21 
VI 4-d I d '-fTf?if£d' a =fRr 3:9.13 

'V 

PldTfmT*rrgj 5:12.14 


fT 

ifdPT^f R > -xd d 5:8.9, 5:10.6 
dfcrrd- kdd dd 1 &fd : 3:9.30 
frfkdvnfd' d<y*d 3:12.19 

df>)dVliniHrH4H 3:12.34 

**n 

dddlfd^HIrMlrtiH 5:27.6, 6:8.12 
fldidird^dl tRt: 1:23.29 


dlddd M J d-dH 1:19.4, 2:12.16 

^ * 

fffg: dl'd'nfdCTlJ 0 3: 12.18 
HI H HI d PfdTfra" 1:15.32 
HJdT 5FS? ffd" sfTwrq; 3:23.24 

fd-f.-dvKiird^dldd: 3:23.17 

f-d .tdU| I'-M cif sfr 3:9.5 

fdTT S'-dl' t -d dTdd-dld'-dJdM 4:17.4 

W 

$R«ihRrvind9>njidHM ° 5 : 12.20 

^dddfdrdHodlfH 1:19.3, 2:12.15 



















































































































































































































GENERAL INDEX 


Abala, 165 

Abhidharmakosabhasya , 252 
abhidheya , xxx, 162, 180-182 
Abhinavagupta, xviii, xxxix, xlii, 

xliii, xlv, lxxv, lxxvi, xc, 

178, 185, 215, 338, 364- 
367, 369, 373, 377 
his quotation of Ramakantha, 
xvii 

Abhiramavalll, xcv 

a bhiseka, xxxvii, 183 

abhivyakti , 180, 220 

Abhrasabha, see Dabhrasabha 

Acacia catechu , 376 

acaryas , 178, 183, 184, 219, 223, 350, 

367, 368, 372, 374, 375, 
379, 381 

Acintya , 402, 405, 412, 413, see also 

Cin tya 

action, see karman or kriyasaktl or 

kriyapada 

adharma , 191, 194, 219, 330, 339 
a bhava, 186 

adhikara (aspect of Siva), 297 
adhikaramala , 223, 305 
adhikarasakti , 307 
adhikaratattva , 292 
adhvan, liv, lv, lxi, 188, 235, 

243, 314, 317, see 

also guddhadhvan and 
aguddhadhvan 

initiatory path, lxiv, 174, 243 
bhuvana 318 


kaia-, 318 
mantra-, 318 
pada-, 318 
tattva-, 243, 318 

varna-, 318 

« * 

Adhyustasatakalottara , lxvi 
adisutra , xlv, lxii, 162, 181, 182, 

414-417 

Adriaensen, xli, 167 
Advaita Vedanta, see Vedanta 
Adyar Library, vii, xciv, c, 375 
Aeqle marmelos , 233 

i/ 7 

‘Agamas’ and ‘Tantras’, see under 

Siddhantas 
Agamaviveka, xix 
Agastlsvara, xciii 
aged initiates, see elderly 
AGHORA, xlix, 283, 285 
Aghorasiva, x, xiii, xvii, xx, xxv, 

xxxiv, xxxv, xxxix-xli, 
xliv, xlvi, xlvii, lii, lix, lxi- 
lxiii, lxvi, lxxxiii, civ-cvii, 

173, 176, 184, 186, 187, 

197, 203-207, 209, 212, 

213, 218, 219, 241, 281, 

290, 291, 293-295, 317, 

383, 388 

instances of his dependence on 
Ramakantha, xxx-xxxii, 
178, 184, 206, 215, 218, 

219, 290, 416 
lineage of, xiii-xvii 


455 


456 


Ramakantha s Com hi cn t ary on the Kiranatantra 


Agneya, xlvii, 403, 408-411, 413, 

415, 416 

identified with Vathula, 416 
agni, see fire 

Agni (tantravataraka), 405, 414 
agnistoma, 194 

ahamkara (principle of self-identity, 

garva, hanikrti), xxii, xxiv, 
li, liii-lv, 205, 208, 317, 
319, 322 

Ahirbudh nyasam hit a, xc i v 
Aindras, 172 

air, see vayu 

ai^a language, lviii, lxv-lxx, lxxiv, 

189, 193, 320, 342 
aiSvarya (a bhava), lxviii, 186 
Ajasatra (a herb?), 343 
Ajita, xiii, xxviii, 402-405, 409, 411— 

413 

ajhana. (a bhava), 186 

akala (partially bound soul), 184. 

194, 246, see also kevala, 
vij n an a ka la , pralayakala 
akasa. (ether), li, liv, lv, 290, 317, 

391 

subtle sound (parama-), 289, 
293 

aksaras , 292 
Alaka, 189 

alchemical science, 308 
alcohol, 308 
alpha privative, 170 
arnalaka, 251, 254 

am a vasva , see under moon 

Ammalagraharam, cii 
Amrtaghate^vara, xcv 

Amrtamitra (Nepalese Saivacarya). 

xl 

Amguman, 402, 405, 409, 412 
Amgumat, xiii, 402, 411, 412 
AmSnvarman era, xliii 
Anadirupa ( tantravataraka ), 409, 

410 


anaisvarya (a bhava), 186 
Anala, 403 

Anala (tantravataraka), 410 
Anandabhairava , 330 
Anandagah varatan tra, 176 
Ananta, xlv, Ixxii, 164, 173, 187, 

284, 297-299, 301-314,’ 

319,320,323,324,409,410 

AnantaSivacarya, xxxi 
Anantaka, 402, 411 
AnantaSambhu, xlvii 
Anantavijaya 

, « 1 1 ^ ^ - Svayambhuva- 

sutrasahgraha, xlviii 
alternative name of Vijaya , xlv, 

xlviii 

anavam malam , xxxix 
anceps, cxxii 
Andhaka, 166, 168, 174 
an dha tarn isra ,239 
angamantras, 291 

Ahgiras, x 

Arigirasa, xl, 407 
Anjaneya Sarma, 224 
Anogeissus Latifolia , 253, 376 
anugraha, see compassion 
Anunamakhya, 402, 409 

anus (payu), li, liv, 317 

i • ) ^ 1 xxv, xxvi, xxviii, lxx, 

lxxi, 165, 281, 375 
ap, see water 
apana, liv 
Apararka, 191 

apographs, Ixxxvi, xci, cxvii, cxix, 

cxxiii 

App ar, xxxvii 

apparatus criticus, cxi, cxvi, cxviii- 

cxxiii 

negative, exxi 
positive, exxi 
Apte, lxx, 343, 375 
archer, 346 

Aigalastotravivarana, 343 























































General Index 


457 


Arjuna, 346 
Arka, 296 
Arraj, lxvi 
arrows, 346 

arsa language, see aisa language 

ar t h akri yakari ta, 196 

Arulnandi, xxxvi 
« 

arya metre, xxv, xxvi, Ixxi 
ashes, 233 
Astadhyayi, 309 
A s t a h rd ay as arlra, 1 x xx v i 
A s tan gah rd ay a , 363 
Astaprakarana , lxxxiii 
asuddhadhvan (impure path), lii, 

223, 298, 301 
asuras, x, 167, 168 
atfvalalita metre, 170 
asvamedha , 218, 219 
atmarthapuja , xiii 
A trey a, xl 
Atri, x 

augmentless imperfect, xlvi 
avairagya (a bhava), 186, 206, 207 
ave£a (of Sivahood), 221 
Avici, 219 

avrtti (reading twice), 353 
avyakta , see prakrti 
Ayurveda, xxx, 343 

‘babies’, balisa. (class of initiate), 

360, 361, 363, 364, 368, 374 
Dacchae, exx 
Bahurupa^ambhu, xv 
Bakker, xli, 167 
bala, see children 
Balabodhinl , civ-cvii 
balance of action, see karmasamva 

* v 

balisa, see ‘babies’ and simpletons 

banyan seed, 315 

bark, cloth of, 233 

Benares, xl 

Bendall, xliii 

p 

Bengali script, xl 


bhutasarga (of the Sahkhyas), 213 
Bhadra , 403, 410, see also VTra, 

Vlrabhadra 

Bhadra (tantravataraka), 409, 410 
Bhagavadglta , ix, 161, 307 
Bhairava, xi, 171, 410 
Bhaktapur (town in Kathmandu 

valley), lxxxiv 

bhakti (devotion), iv, xxxix, 167, 

337, 338, 345, 353, 363, 
375-378, 385, 386, 389 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti¬ 
tute, cviii 
Bhargava, xl 

Bhaskara (tantavataraka), 405 
Bhatt, ix, xiii, xvii, xx, xxvii, xl, 

xli, xlviii, xlix, liv, lix, 
lxii, lxvi, lxvii, lxxii, lxxx, 
lxxxi, xc, evi, cxxiv, 172, 
175, 195, 202, 204, 281, 
285, 293, 335, 372, 375, 
403, 404 

Bhattotpala, x, lxxvi, lxxxix 
Bhavacudamani , xi, xii, xxv, xxvii, 

lxx 

bhavas (group of eight ;, 186, 206, 

207, 213, 214 

bhavasarga (of the Sahkhyas), 213, 

214 

Bhunasamhita, xiii 
bhoga (aspect of Siva), 297 
bhogabhuk , see hedonists 
Bhogakarika , xx, xxv-xxix, xxxiv, 

lxxv, lxxxii, 186, 207, 388 
Bhogakarikavrtti , xliv, lxxxiii, 184, 

186, 206, 207 
bhogatattv a, 291, 292 
bhogin , see hedonists 
Bhoja, lii, liii 
Bhrgu, x, xlviii 
Bhujimol, lxxxvi 
Bhuta (srotas), 163, 177 





458 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


bhuta (gross elements), xxiv, xxv, li, 

lv, 187, 191, 193, 196, 199, 
202,208,269,317,319, 391 
bhutasarga (of the Sahkhyas), 213 
bhuvanas (worlds), li-liv, lxi, lxxiii, 

163, 164, 167, 168, 170, 

172, 174, 187, 188, 207, 

213, 219, 223, 230, 241- 

243, 268, 269, 274, 290- 

293, 298, 319, 320, 371 
initiatory path of, 318 
bhuvanasarga , 208, 213 
blja (seed-syllables), 290 

Bijbihara, see Vijaycsvara 

Bilva, 233 

Bimba, 403, see also Mnkbabimba 
Bimba (tantravatar aka ), 414 
bindu, lx, 289-294 
bhuvana, 292 
ultimate, 292, 293 
Binduvyapin ( tantravataraka), 409, 

410 

bitumen (£ilajatu), 343 
black magic, 177 

blockage of action, see karmasamya 

blood, 167, 168, 171 

bodies, 168, 185, 192, 196, 206, 210, 

212, 232, 233, 239, 264- 

267, 269, 274, 279, 282, 

287-289, 302-305, 308, 

309, 319, 320, 324, 329, 

346, 380, 382 
according to Jainas, 191 
Ananta’s, 299, 302-311 
Ardhanartevara’s, 173 
bain (lava-, 287 
Brahma’s, 304 
Death's, 167, 172 
first body, 267, 268 
gross, 184, 187, 196, 208, 

211-214, 216, 220, 222- 
224, 232, 234, 264, 267, 

272, 279, 282, 285, 303, 


305, 307-309, 317, 322- 
324, 358-360, 365, 366, 
382-386, 389-391 
the Lord’s, 271, 274, 279, 282, 
284-289, 295-297 
Love’s, 166, 168 
of subtler matters, 291—293, 
298, 299, 304 
Pi3aca’s, 353 

subtle, migratory, 184, 187, 

199, 212, 232, 234, 235, 

264, 322, 323, 387-389,392 
Visnu’s, 167, 168 
Bdhtlingk, 169 

bound soul, see patfupadartha , 

purusatattva, pralayakala, 
sakala, vijnanakala 
Brahma, xliii, xliv, xlviii-1, lxxii, 

163, 164, 166, 168, 171, 

172, 174, 213, 219, 304, 

405-407, 410 

cutting off of his head, 174 
egg of, xxiv, 164, 317, 319 
Brahmas, 172 
brabmacarya , 389 

lir e 

brah m am an t ras , xlix, 187, 283, 285, 

291 

Brahman, xxiii, xxiv, 190 
BrahmaneSa ( tantravataraka ), 410 
Brahmasufcra, xxxv 
Brahmayamala , lxxiii, lxxiv 
Brahmins, xliv, 178, 180, 181, 230, 

294,347,354,355,358, 380 
killing of, 218, 219 

Brh adyogavasisth a, 218 
Brhaspati, 406, 410 
Brhatkalottara , xl, xlv, xlvi, xc, 182, 

414-417 

Brhatsamhit&i x, lxxvi, 259 
Brunner, vii, xvii, xxxix, xl, lviii, lix, 

lxii, lxxii, lxxxiv, cix, 182, 

183,221,330,369, 383,386 


* 
































General Index 


459 


buddhi (intellect), xxii, xxiv, li, liii- 

lv, 175, 192, 202, 204- 

208, 213, 253, 282, 286- 

288, 317-319, 322, 367 

buddhidharma, 206, 253 

Buddhists, xxiv, xxix, xxxi, 190, 

193, 196, 252, 257, 269, 

272-275, 277, 343 

Sail tr ant ikas, 196 

Vaibhasikas, 197 

• * 

Btihler, xliii 

cakamarkkam, see sahamarga 
eakra of Visnu, 173 

mm t 

Cakradhara, xii 
caksuh , see eye 
Calcutta, xl 

Calotropis gigantia , 296 
Calotropis pi'ocera , 296 
Cambridge University Library, vii, 

xl, xliii, Ivi, lxiii, Ixvi, 

lxxiii, cii, 361, 375 
Cam pan tar, xxxvii 
Canda (t antra va tar aka ), 407 
l ande^a ( tantrava taraka) ,410 
Candrananda, xxxv 

Can dra . Can drah va , (lan drasam - 

• * • 

jha(ka), 403, 408-411 
Candra, Candramas (tantrava- 

taraka) , 405-407, 414 
Candrabhaga, xii 
Candrabhasa , 403, 406, 407 
Candradasa, 344 

Candrahasa , 403, 405, 412, 413, 415 
('andrajnana, xlv, 403, 413 
candrayana fast, 368, 374 
Cahkarpanirakaranam , xiiv 
canmarkkam , see sanmarga 
carp u t tirarn arkkam , see sa t put- 

ram arga 

Caru (bhuvana), 164 
Carvakas, 191, 193, 272-274 


carya -pada, - u pay a (means of [en¬ 
suring liberation through] 
observances, discipline, 
vrata), xxvii, xxxvii, 
xxxviii, xlv, xlvi, li, Iviii, 
lix, lxi, lxiv, Ixxxiv, 166, 

182-184, 189, 190, 361, 
362, 364-374, 378, 389, 
391 

cataracts, 214, 221, 236, 255, 347, 

348 

Caturvargacintamani, x, xlvii 
Cekkdan, xxxvii 
chalk ( makkola ), 276 
Chandonugasana, 170 
chariot, 277, 322, 323 
Chenab, xii 

Chidambaram, xvii, xliv 
children (baia), 293, 360, 361, 363- 

366, 368, 374, 377 
legal definition of. 363 
Chinnodbhava, see GaducI 
chyle, 308 

clntamani, see under gems 

* 

CintamanitJka, civ-cvii 

# # * 

Cintya , xiii, 402, 404, 409, 411, 412, 

see also A cintya 
Civananacittiyar, iv, xxxvii, 174 
clay, Ivii, 271, 315 
Colas, xiv-xvii 
colic, 343 

colour, 216, 217, 251, 252, 254, 258, 

294 

common error, cxii, cxvii, cxviii 

compassion ( anugraha ), x, 173, 176, 


179, 

192, 

219, 

280, 

284 

285, 

289, 

296- 

-299, 

302 

345, 

347, 

351, 

352, 

357 

360, 

370, 3 

78, 379 



conflation, cxii, cxiii, cxvi-cxviii 
conjectural emendation, cxiv, cxix, 

380 

Convolvulus Argenteus , 343 




460 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * 4/ * 



copper, 229, 257, 258 
cowherds, 293 
cows, lxv, 358 
dung of, 233 
urine of, 233 
creation, see srsti 

/ * m h 

crystal, 229 
Cuntarar, xxxvii 
Cuttacaivam , xxxvii 

van Daalen, 169 
Dabhrasabha, xiv, xv, xvii 

Dadhlca, 410 
Dadhici, 406, 407 
Dagens, cix 
daiva, xxxix 

daivakaravadin, 191, 194 

Daksa, 167, 171 

Daksina (srofcas), 163, 177 

Dalhergia Sissoo, 244 

Daruvana, 167, 169 

Dasakaryavi varan a, xciv 

Dasaksara (tantravataraka), 409, 

410 

Dasakum aracarita, 225 
dasamarga, xxxvii, xxxviii, 370 
Da^esaka (t ant r avatar aka), 414 
Dearing, cxiii 

death, 167, 172, 212, 216, 220, 258, 

281, 307, 366, 379, 387, 
392, see also Yarna 
dehavyapin (a tattva), liii 
Deodars, 169 

descent of power, see saktipata 
Desopadesa. , 377 
detergent, 233 
devadaru , see Deodars 
Devakottai, vii, lxi, cii, 169 
Devapati (tantravataraka), 410 
Devapitr ( tantravataraka) , 410 
Devasenapathi, iv 
Devasikhamani, xcii 


Devi, xi, xli, xlii, Iviii, lxxii, 168, 

179, 406, 407,410 
DevTbhagavatapurana , 335 
Devikalottara , xxxviii 
Devikavacastotratika , 343 
D e vim ah atm va, 343 
devotion, see bhakti 
Dcvyayamala, lxiii, 184 
Dhara, xliii 
dharana, 289 

dharma , Ixiv, 191, 194, 219, 330, 

339, 358, 364 
a bhava, , 186, 206, 213 
Dharma ( tan travataraka) , 405, 410 
Dharmaklrti, 271 

Dharmaputrika (Sivadharma), 376 
Dhatupatha , xxx, 252, 309, 392 
Dhava, 252, 253, 376 
DhyanaSiva, xv, xvii 
Digambaras, 191 

diksa (initiation), iv, xxxiii, xxxiv, 

xxxvii, xxxviii, lii, 165, 

175, 176, 178, 189, 215, 

216, 218, 220-223, 236, 
248, 256, 257, 259, 281, 

284, 305, 325, 327, 328, 

330, 331, 337, 338, 340, 

347, 349-354, 357-363, 

365-392 

abhiseka xxxvii 
after death, 377 
asadyonirvana -, 220, 256, 361, 
366, 367, 369, 371, 373, 

383-385, 389 

bhuvana-, 188 
rnrtoddhara 377 
niradhikarana- , 223 
nirblja- (seedless), 363, 374 
nirvana-, as preparation for 
sanmarga, xxxvii-xxxix 
sablja- (seeded), 364 
sadyonirvana 220, 256, 383- 
385 






























































General Index 



samaya-, xxxvii, xxxviii, 165 

%/ /I / 

tattva-, 188 
Vedic, 351, 358, 359 
visesa-, xxxvii, xxxviii 
Diksadarsa, cix 

DTksottara, xli-xliii, lii, Ixxiii, 183, 

403, 405 

! ■ i pta (tantravataraka), 4 4 
Dipta, xiii, xxviii, 402, 405, 409, 

411, 412 
DTptabha, 405 

diseased, sick (initiates), 361, 363, 

364, 374 

dispassion, 186, 332, 338, 339 
Divya, 405 

*/ r 

Diwakar A chary a. xl, lxxv 
Dodds, cxx . 
donkeys, 358 

lL / f 

double sandhi, lxviii, lxix, 279, 328 
dravida hymns, xxviii 
Dvigatikalottara , xlvi, xcv, xcvii 
Dvisatikalottaravrtti , xiv, xv, xvii, 

xxv, lxiii, Ixvi, civ, cvi, 

178, 416 

Dvivedi, Vrajavallabha, xx, xliv, 

xlv, 186, 417 
Dvczkowski, lxxii, Ixxiii 

mJ it 

ear (srotra), li, liv, 290, 317 
earth (prthivl, etc.), li, lii. liv, 164, 

187, 207, 234, 241, 242, 
253, 268, 317, 322 
Edgerton, lv 

egg, see under Brahma and peacock 
elderly, aged (initiates), 361. 363, 

364, 374 

elements 

gross, see bhuta 
subtle, see tanmatra 
elephant, xxxi, 344 
elephant goad, xxxi 
elixir, 308 
Elmsley, cxx 

V / 


emendation, see conjectural einend- 


Emeneau, 169 
ether, see akasa 
Euripides, cxx 

eye (caksuh, netra , locana ). li, liv, 

lv, 214, 221, 236, 246. 247, 
255, 269, 317, 347 
eye disease, see cataract 
eye-doctor, 221, 348 
eyebrow, 317 

eyeskip, lxxxiii, lxxxv, cxii, 175, 198, 

251, 265, 350, 369 


faculties of sense and action, see in¬ 


dr iy as 
Fazlullah, lxxx 
feet (pada), li, liv, 317 
Filliozat, xix, xxviii, xxxiii. 


xxxiv, 


xc, xcii, 203, 207, 213. 214, 
295, 317, 331 

fire I tejas, etc.), li, liv, 168, 171, 172, 

256, 275-277, 317, 344, 
376, 382 
abuse of, 374 
fire-wood, 230 

fireflies, 321 
flies, 321 

foreign languages, 293 
foreigners, 178 
Frauwallner, 212 


GadiicI, 306 
Gajavaktra, 165 

gandba (property of smell), li, lv. 

253, 317 


GaneSa, lx, 174 
; anesan, xx. xcv, civ 
ga n es varas , 164 
Gangadharacarya, cvii 
Ganges, 167, 169, 174 





































462 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Garuda, lxv, 161, 163-166, 168, 173, 

176-179, 190, 195, 199, 
221, 227, 230-232, 235, 
240, 248, 254-256, 261, 
263, 266, 267, 269, 270, 
280-282, 301-303, 310, 

313, 325, 328, 349, 350, 
357, 359-361, 366, 368, 
378,379,382,385,391,392 
Garuda (srotas), 163, 177, 282 
garva, see ahamkara 
GaudadeSa, xiv 

m * 

Gaudapada (commentator on 

Sahkhyakarika ), 172, 185, 
211 

Gaildavaho , 169 
Gaurl, 172, 173 
Gaurlsthapana, ciii 
gavayas, 358 
gayatrT, 187 
gems, 273, 381 

wish-fulfilling (cintamani), 286 
Gengnagel, xxxi, liii, lxxxiii 
glide consonants, Ixviii 
goats 

entrails of, 343 
sacrifice of, 343 
wool of, 233 
gold, 296 
Gonda, lxxii 

Goraksaviracitaprabodha , xc 

Goratika, xliii 

* * 

Gotrasantati , xiii-xvii 
Goudriaan, xxvii, xxxix, xli, xlvi, 

404 

Grantha script, xliv, xlvi, xlix, 

lxxxi, lxxxii, xcii-xcix, cii, 

civ, cvii, 170, 193, 236 
grasping, faculty of, see hand 
grass, 319 

GuducT, see GaducI 
gunas, xxiv, 201, 207, 239 
gunasankranti, see sahkranti 


Gunatalapadi, lxxxi, lxxxii, xcv 
gunat&ttva, xxiv, liii—lv, 163, 164, 

207, 317, 318 

guru, ix, xi, xiii-xvii, xxxi, li, 163, 

165, 215, 216, 219, 222, 

257, 284, 285, 324, 325, 

338, 347, 350, 355, 358, 

359, 363-365, 372, 375,377 
abuse of, 374 

Hahn, 170 
Halayudha, cvii 
hamkrti , see ahamkara 

i > ^ » 

Hamsaparam e^vara, xliii 
Pahca£atika -, xliii 
hand (A^ara, hasfca), li, liv, 317, 387 
Hanneder, x, xviii, 228, 411 
haplography, 170, 197 
Kara, 161, 165, 166, 170, 177, 179 
Haracari tacin tamani, xii, 168 
Haramakuta, 164 
Hara vij ay a , 2 0 2 
Hari, 177 

Haridatta a scribe), Ixxxviii 

Haripala, 169 

hasta, see hand 

hearing, faculty of, see ear 

hedonists ( bhogin, bhogabhuk) 

360, 361, 363, 364, 368 
374 

Helaraja, 210 
hells, 377 

Hemacandra, 170, 171 

Hemadri, x, xlvii 

Hemarajaguru, Ixxxviii 

heresy, iv 

Hermann, cxx 

Hetubindutlka, 175 

• * 

hiatus, Ixviii, lxix, 198 
Himavat, x, 164, 167, 291 

himsa , xxiii 

i * 

Hiranyagarbha, 177 
homoioteleuton , 369 





























General Index 


463 


honey, 296 

horizontal transmission, cxvi, cxviii 
Hoshiarpur, xlvi 

Hrdaya^iva, xv, xvi, xliii, lxxvi, 416 
Hulin, 196, 291 

hyparchetypes, cxviii, cxxii 
hypermetry, Ivii, lx, xviii, 236, 407 
hypometry, 171 

icehagakti , 272, 309 

IFP MSS, vi, vii, xiii, xiv, xvi, 

xix, xxv, xxvi, xxxii, xli, 
xlii, xliv-xlvii, 1, Hi, Iv, lix- 
lxiii, lxxiii, lxxx-lxxxiii, 
xc, xcii-xcvi, xcix, c, ciii- 

cix, 165, 171, 175,183,186, 
188, 233, 241, 254, 307, 
317, 342, 345, 360, 367, 
370, 375, 376 

impurity, .see mala 

India Office Library, xliv 

Indra (Sakra, Sacipati, etc.), xlvii, 

lxxii, 407 

indriyas (faculties, instruments, 

senses, organs, karana), 
xxii, xxiv, liv, lv, 174, 192, 
193, 199, 201-205, 207- 
209, 212, 214, 224, 232, 

238, 241, 244, 249, 266, 

267, 269, 270, 272-274, 
282, 285, 303, 306, 317, 

323, 388 

of action, xxiv, li, 208, 317 
of sense, xxiv, li, 191, 208, 235, 
242, 244, 246, 249, 250, 

269, 303, 344, 388 
initiands, xxxvii, xxxviii, 377, 385, 

386, 391 

initiates, 165, 178, 223, 259, 280, 

284, 329, 338, 349, 352, 

353, 374, 379, 390 

initiation, see diksa 


instruments of sense and action, see 

indriyas 

interpolation, lv, lxxii, 250-252 

iron, 195, 273 
irony, 225 

iruvinaioppu, iv, see also 

karmasamya 

Ma, 279, 288 

Isaacson, iii, xxxv, xli, 167, 169, 176, 

242, 247, 380-382, 384, 
390, 391 
Tsana, 283, 285 
I3ana3iva, xliv, 182, 416 

Isana&vagurudevapaddhati , x, xxxi, 

xlvii, lxii, 402, 413 
LSvara, 280, 288, 289, 297, 299, 309, 

311, 312 
-padartha, lxii 

-tattva, xxiii, xlii, lii, liii, lv, 
188, 284 

Isvarapratyabhijnakarikavimar&nl , 

xxxix, xc 
Igvarasiddhi, xiii 
I6vara6iva, xliii 

Jaimini, 192 
Jaiminlyas, 191 
Jaina NagarT, xxxv 
Jaina style, 169 

Jainas, xxiv, xc, 169, 191, 242, 273, 

274 

Jambuvijaya, xxxv 
Jammu 

Shri Raghunath Temple MSS 
Library, xl 

Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research 
Institute, vii, xl 
Janamejaya, lvii 

Janardana, 168, 405 

jat a, see matted locks 

J at in i rn ayap u r vakal ay apravesavi dhi , 

xxviii 




464 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * */ ■ 


Jay ad r a t h ay a m ala, 

183 


xii, lxxiii, lxxiv, 


Jayakhyasamliit a, xlvi 

V V ■ J 

Jayantabhatta, 192 

w t ■ ' 

Jayaratha, x, xx, xlv, lxiii, 176, 183, 

184, 373, 377,411 

jih va , see tongue 
jih va in u liya , xli 

Jhana (a Siddhanta), 403, 406, 107 

jhana 

a bhav a, 186 
a clhya va say a t in aka , 253 
panrizsa, 253 

Jhanadipika, ciii 
jhan a m arga, xxx vi i 


jhanapa da, see \ddyapada 
jhanapadartha , 182, 187, 221, 261, 

280, 297 


Jnanapahcagika, 402, 412, 414 
Jnanapraka£a, iv, xx, xxxii, 



165, 178, 281 

jhanasakti (omniscience, power of 

knowledge, sarvajhatva ), 
lvii, 174, 180, 194, 202- 

205, 223, 249, 252-254, 
259, 275, 278, 281, 282, 

288, 297, 299. 302, 303, 

307-309, 324, 337, 352, 

386, 388-392 
Jodhpur, xlvii 
Jujube, 325 
Jyestha, 329-332 

v I t ' 

Jyotiska, 164 
J vo t is tom a. 380 


Kaca (t an travatar aka). 406, 407, 

410 

Kacchape^vara, xiii, xxv 
Kailasa, cviii, 162-165, 171, 173 

kala 


38 parts of the brahmaman fras, 
. xlix, 283-285 
digit of the moon, xii, 173 


entirety of instruments and ef¬ 
fects, 212, 306 

in group of santi, vidya , etc., 
291, 292 

in the sense of niyati , 318 

initiatory path. 318 

limited power to act, Hi, lv, 

lxx, 175, 184, 185, 187, 

194, 199-208, 211-213, 

221, 222, 225, 228, 230- 

234, 237, 238, 241, 242, 

244, 248, 268, 282, 310- 

318, 322, 323 

-padartha, 189 

parts of maj'a, 212, 222, 283. 
306 

sound division, 290, 296 
Kaladiksa vidhi, cviii 
Kalagnirudra, 172 
Kalajhana, xc 
Kalakuta poison, 167. 168 
Kalamukhas, Kalamukhas, xxiii, 

220 

kalapadartha , 189 
Kalarupaprakasika , ciii 
kalatattva (time), lii, liii, lv, lvii, 

195, 198, 207, 209, 210, 
216, 217, 272, 273, 316- 
318, 336 

Kale£a (tantravataraka), 414 
Kalottara, xlvi, xc, 290, 294, 

412, 414, 416, see also 
Adhyust asatakalo t tar a , 

V W M 

Brhatkalottara , Jiiana- 
p a h cati ka , K a 1 aj hana, 

Sap tasa tikakalo t tar a, 

Sardh atrisatikalo t tar a, 
Trayo d asa£a tikakalo t tar a , 
Vat hula 

identified with Vat hula, xlv 
- jhanakanda , ciii 
Kamadeva, see Love 
Kara ala (as u ra ), 168 




















General Index 


465 


Kamika , xiii, xlv, xlvi, lxxv, lxxxii, 

402,404, 405, 409, 411-413 
Uttara ci 

kamvakarma. 189 

|/ ' 

Kan cl, xiii, xvi 

kancukas , lii, liii, 238 

Kane, George, cxiv 

Kannada script, xli, lxxix, Ixxx, 

lxxxix, xci, xcvi, cvii 
Kanyakumari, xciv 

Kapalika, 220 
kara, see hand 

Karana. xiii, xxviii, ciii, 402, 405, 

412, 413 
Purva-, 4( 4 
Uttara -, 402, 404 
karana , see indriyas 

i * 

KaraneSa f tantravataraka), 414 

KarmakandakramavalT , x, xl, see 

* * 

also K ri yak an d akram avail 

V • * 

and Somaiambhu 
karmam maJam, xxxix 
karman (past action), xxxiii-xxxvi, 

xxxix, lii, 168, 173, 184- 
187, 191, 193, 194, 199, 
200, 203, 204, 207-210, 
212-220, 222-224, 230, 

231, 234, 241-243, 256, 
263. 266-269, 278, 280, 
303, 304, 307, 308, 310, 
312, 323, 324, 327, 328, 
333-347, 373, 380-385, 

387-389, 392 
avapagata-, 335, 336 
avuhprada - (which gives length 

of life), 336, 342, 343, 346 
bhogaprada - (which gives ex¬ 
periences), 336, 342 
future, 220, 383, 385 

jatiprada - (which gives birth), 

336, 342 

performed after initiation, 216, 
384 


prarabdha - (by which this body 
is sustained, that has 
already begun to take ef¬ 
fect, etc.), 259, 307, 335, 
366, 371, 373, 384, 385 

vicarious inclusion in tat- 





tvakrama, 186, 243 

(balance of action), 
xxxi, xxxiii, xxxv, 


IV 


xxxvi, cvii, 215, 210, 218, 
219, 327, 333-335, 337- 
342, 344-348, 354 


Karnamota, 168 

i * ^ 

Karttikeya, see Skanda 



lr, v, x, xn, xxx, xxxi, xxxm, 

xl, xli. lxxvi, 164, 185, 191, 
377 

Kashmirian manuscripts, cxvii, 

cxxiv, 195, 203, 375 
Kashmirian transmission, lxvi, lxx, 


lxxi, 254, 285 

Kashmirians, iv, v, xiii, xxxix 

xlvi, lxxvi, 217 



K at aka nut, 259 
Kataoka, Kei, 303 

Kathmandu, xj 

NAK, x, lxvi, 




U, Cll 


Kathopanisat , 198 
Kaulas, xxv, 177 
Kaundinya, 212 
Kaundinya gotra, xv 
Keith, xliv 

kevala (partially bound soul), 184, 

221, 222, 224, 225, 230, 
see also akaia, vijnanakala, 
pralayakala 
Khadira, 376 

kiia, position in sentence, 169 
KTlakas t o travi varana, 343 

4 * 

K ir an a ( tan tra va t a raka ), 414 
Kir ana, iii, v-vii, xiv, xvii, xxxi 

xxxvi, xli, xlv, xlvi, xlix, 
lii, liv, lxii, lxxi, lxxii, 





466 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* * 1 / * 


lxxiv, lxxv, cxix, cxxi, 
cxxv, 162-164, 173, 174, 
176, 177, 179, 181, 182,* 

184, 186, 187, 199, 201, 

211, 214-220, 226, 228- 
232, 235, 236, 238-241, 
245, 246, 248, 251, 259- 

262, 265, 267, 280, 281, 

283-288, 296, 298, 299, 
301-305, 310, 311, 313, 
315, 316, 322-328, 330, 
332-339, 344, 345, 347, 
350, 351, 353, 355, 358, 

359, 363, 365, 371, 373, 

374, 378, 381, 385-388, 
403,404, 406,410-415,417 
other commentaries on, civ-cix, 

215 

date of, lxxiv-lxxvi 
Italian translation of, ci 
language of, lxv, lxvi, lxviii, 
lxxiv, cxix 

metre in, lvii, lxx, lxxi, 165 
MSS of, xli, lxxix, lxxxii- 
lxxxvi, lxxxix-ciii, 370 
padas in, lviii, lix, lxi, lxiii, 
lxv, lxxiv, lxxxiv, 183, 361, 
362, 367, 369, 370, 378 
tattvas in, liv, lv, lxxiii, 186, 

188, 243, 316, 318, 376 

Kiranavrtti, v, vi, ix, xxviii, xxix, 

xxxv, xxxvi, xl, lxii, cix, 

cxix, 163, 186, 211, 215, 
220, 222, 238, 242, 243, 
259, 279, 291, 308, 335, 
340,341,343,344,385,390 

extent of, xxxii 

its influence, xi, xvii, xxxi, 
xxxii, cvi, cix, 290 
manuscripts of, lxxix, Ixxxi, 
Ixxxii, cvi, cxiv 
place of composition of, xi 


position in Ram akant ha’s 
oeuvre, xix, xxvii 
references and quotations in, 
xviii-xx, xxix, xxx 

kitchen, 277 
Kratu, x 

krcchra fast, 368, 374 
Krisnamachari, V. (a scribe), cvii 
Kriyakandakram avail, xcviii, see 

also Karmakandakrama- 

* £ 

vali and Soma^ambhu 
K riyakan d a Jcr am a valTtTka , xcviii 
Kriyakramadyotika , xiii, xvi, xxv, 

xxxii, 330 

kriya -pada, -upaya (means of |en¬ 
suring liberation through 
ritual] action, rites), xxvii, 
xxxii, xxxvii, xxxviii, xl, 
xlv, li, lviii, lx, lxi, lxiv, 
lxxxiv, 166, 182-184, 189, 
190, 285, 361, 362, 365- 
374, 376, 378, 379, 389, 391 
kriyapadartha , 189 
kriyasakti (power of action, omnipo¬ 
tence), xxii, xxiv, 174, 180, 
194, 202-205, 223, 275, 
278, 281, 284, 288, 295, 
307, 324, 337, 352, 388, 
389, 391, 392 
of may a, 315 
of the Lord, 288, 329 
of the Vidye^varas, 299, 310 
krosa , 210 

Krsna, xci 
■ ■ * / 

father of Aghora&va, xv 
Ksatriyas, 178, 358 
Ksemaraja, x, xvii, xxiv, xxxi, xxxv, 

xli, xlv, lii, lxvi, cvii, cviii, 

163,216,330, 363, 364, 374 
Ksemendra, 377 
ictva, lxvii, Ixix 

Kula, xxxi, 178 
Kulottunga II, xvii 







































































General Index 


467 


Kumar a, see Skanda 
Kumaradeva, 213 

Kumarataii fcra, xiii 
Kumarila, 286 
Kumbakonam, lxxxi 
Kuncitanghristava, xliv 

KundalinI, cviii, 290, 291, 293, 295, 

330 

Kunban Raja, c 
Kunnakkudimath, ci 
Kuppuswarni Sastri, xcix 
Kutila script, xli 

ladder, 181, 354, 355 

laitv, lay followers, 376, 378 

laksana (category of Nyaya), xxix 

Lakulas, xxiii, 163 

Lalita , xiii, 403, 406-408, 410-413, 

415 

name for Svacchandatantra, 
cviii 

Lalita (tan tr avatar aka ), 414 
Lalita (tantravataraka), 407 
Lali t as vac chan da( hh airava) f name 

of Svacchanda), cviii 

Lambakarna, xliii 

• ¥ 

lamp, 206, 240, 248, 249, 386 

LaukikanyayasahasrT, 375 

laundry, 233 

lay followers, see laity 

laya (aspect of Siva), 297 

lemmata, cxxi-cxxiv 

liberation, iv, xvii, xxxiv, xxxv, 

xxxix, 165, 177, 180, 192, 
203, 205, 216, 218-222, 
230, 232, 233, 236, 255, 

263, 285, 323, 324, 328, 

330, 338-340, 347-349, 

351-355, 361, 362, 365- 

369, 371-373, 375, 378, 

383-385, 387, 389 
from blockage of karman, 
xxxiii, 220 


from karman , 346, 347 
from pratyavaya , 366 
levels of, xxxviii, 347 
lower states of, 335 
of rivals, xxi, xxiii, 177 
phases of, xxxvii 
Licchavi script, lxxxiv 

light, 195, 198, 238, 246-249, 292, 

321 

lightning, 351 
linen, 233 
lihga , 171, 172 
Lingapurana, 167 
lihgodbhava, 172 
lions, 344 

lotus-leaf, 307, 308 
lotuses, x, 240, 302, 348 
Love, god of, 166, 168, 172, 174 
lunar symbolism, 173 
lyap , lxvii, Ixix 

Madhva, xliv 

Madras, see also Adyar Library 
Government Oriental MSS Lib¬ 
rary, vii, lxxix, xcix-ci 
University of, xxiii 
Madurai, xlvi 
magnet, 273, 377 

Mahabharata , xxx, lv, lvii, 167, 168, 

295, 343, 382 
npahabhuta, see bhuta 
Mahadeva (author of Muktisopana- 

^astra?), xc 
Mahaganapati, xcv 
Mahakala, 165, 406, 407, 410 
mahamaya, 199, 291, 293, 322 
mahamoha, 172, 239 
mahapralaya, see under • pralaya 
mahatantra, !i, lxii, lxiii, 179 
Mahavratas, xxiii, 177 
Mahim nastava, 170 
Mahotsavavidhi , xiii 
maithuna, xxiii 



468 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


makkola, see chalk 

Makota , 403, 412, 415 

Makuta, 402, 403, 405, 406, 409- 

411, 413 

Makuta, xlv, xcviii, 403. 404, 407 
mala (impurity), xxxiv, xxxvi, 161. 

174, 177, 184, 185, 199, 
202, 203, 212-217, 220, 
223-225, 229, 232, 234- 
236, 238-242, 246, 247. 
254-260, 262, 263, 267, 
268, 280, 281, 283, 288, 
292, 299, 302, 308, 309. 
327, 331-333, 338, 340, 
347, 350-352, 365, 367, 
371, 379, 386, 389 
adhikara-, 223, 305 

as name for other bonds, xxxix, 
233, 234, 236 

beginninglessness of, 230. 235. 
263, 267, 340 

blocking of the power of, xxxii, 
217, 256, 259, 280, 365 
cause of further bondage, 248, 

262, 263, 265, 266, 322. 
332, 340 

cause of the operation of mat¬ 
ter, 241, 242 
causelessness of, 229 
identity with matter refuted. 

236, 237, 239 245, 247, 
248, 254, 261 

identity with passion refuted, 
261, 262, 265 
-kaivalya, 177 

many powers of, 185 
Naiyayika view of, 235 
nature thereof not discerned, 
177, 248 

not property of soul, 249-251 
254 

partial obstruction of, 202, 205 
207 


power of, see under sakti 
reality of, 235, 236, 248. 254 


ripening of, see malaparipaka 



ya view of, 235 
‘splitting’ of, 238 

synonyms of, xxxix, 216, 243, 
247 

traces thereof left after initi¬ 
ation, 388-390 
Vedanta view of. 235 
vicarious inclusion in 
tvakrama, 186, 243 
malaparipaka (maturation ofimpur 




xxxi, xxxu, xxxiv- 
xxxvi, xlv, evii, 215-222 

230, 232, 302, 324, 327 

328, 332, 333, 335, 337- 

340, 344, 345, 347, 351. 

353,354, 358, 363, 365, 



malini metre, lxx, xcv, xevi. xcix-c 



vijayavarttika, vi, xviii, xxiii 
178,249 

Malinlvijayottara, xxiii, 

lxx, lxxv, 185, 225 

Malledevaru , xci, xevi 
Manadeva era, xliii 
Manameyodaya, 247 
manas (mind), xxii, xxiv, li, liv, lv 

lxviii, 208. 235, 

322 



, 317 



n n 


a, xxx, 365 
mandalas, xlviii. 286, 408 



andanamigra, 277 
mango, 252 
Maninatha, 168 


manonmana, cviii 

Manorathanandin, xxix, 244 271 

mantrapTtha, cviii 

mantras, xxxvi, xlix, lxx, lxxxiii. 

187, 188, 219-221, 256, 
283, 285-290, 292, 293. 
295-298, 306, 307, 318, 
372,380-386, 391, 392, 408 
















































General Index 


469 


blocking fire, 256 
body made of, 284, 285, 295 
destruction at poision by, 381 
expressing Sakti, 296 
expressing 3iva, 289, 296 
expressing souls, 296 
initiatory path of, 318 
King of, 328, 329 
power of, 273, 281, 282, 380- 

382, 391, 392 
propitiated, 385 

Mantravarttika , xx, xxv, xxvi, 

xxviii, lxxv 

Mantravarttikatlka, xx 

mantre£as, xiv, xxii, xxiii, 173, 219, 

225, 288, 295, 298, 306,see 

also vidyegvaras 

mantrin, 282, 392 

mantroddhara , lx 


Manu, x, 358 

/ # 

Man u hh asya, 192 

m 

Manusmrti, xxx, lxiv, 259, 359 

maranasaJcti, 392 

# 

Marlci, x, xl 

Markande vacant a , ciii 

•i # V 

Matanga, ix, xvii, xix, xx, xxvii, 

xxix, xxxi, xxxiii, xxxv, 
xliii, xlvi, liv, lxxxii, xcvii, 

7 * 

cvii, cxix, exxiv, 162, 164, 

172, 181, 183, 186, 187, 

190, 195, 205, 218, 220, 

292, 293, 313, 330, 332, 

337-339, 367, 370 

anonymous commentary on, xx 
date of, lxxiii, lxxiv 
language of, lxviii, lxxiv 
metre in, lxxi 

padarthas in, lxii, 182, 190 
padas in, lviii, lix, lxi, lxiii, lxv, 

lxxiii, 183, 361, 371, 373 
tattvas in, lii, liv, 207, 291, 292, 
316 

Matangamuni, 162, 164 


Matahgavrtti, v, xi, xviii-xxi, xxv, 

xxvii-xxxi, xli, lxii, evi, 
cxi, cxviii, exxiv, 162-164, 

172, 173, 175, 176, 178, 

180, 185, 187, 195-197, 

202-204, 206, 207, 210- 
214, 220, 221, 223, 225, 

227, 228, 244, 269, 270, 

273, 275-277, 280, 284, 
291-293, 313, 315, 334, 
367, 373,375 

MattamayuravamSa, xliii 

mattamayura. metre, 365 
matted locks, 174 

matter, see bindu, mahamaya, 

maya, nada, nivrtti, 
prakrti, pratistha, Santi, 
vidy a 

maturation of impurity, see 

malaparipaka 

Mausalas, 163 
Maya, x 

maya (primal matter), xxiii, xxxix, 

lii, liii, lv-lvii, 185-187, 
199, 205, 208, 209, 211- 

214, 222-225, 231, 232, 

234- 237, 239-247, 255, 

265, 266, 268, 269, 280, 

282, 283, 298, 299, 303- 

308, 311-313, 315-323, 

326, 361, 371, 388-391 

adventitiousness of, 236 
as revealer not deluder, 237, 
238 

as seductress, 240, 241 

beginninlessness of, 268 

belly of, 193, 198, 199, 232-234 

dependence on karman, 266 
edge of, 232 

identity with impurity refuted, 

235- 238, 241-245, 247, 

248, 254, 261 

locus of karman, 304 






























470 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm */ ■ 


partialness of transformation 

of, 292, 313, 315, 316 

pervasiveness of, 314 
ripening of, xxxiv 
stimulation of, 309-311, 314 
subtlety of, 387 
Mayamata, x 
Mayasangraha, x, xi, xlvii 
maylyam rnaiam, xxxix 

Medhatithi, 192, 359 

medicine, medicinal herbs, 270, 308- 

310,343 
memory, 196, 205 
mercury, see quicksilver 
Meru, 164 
metre, Ixx 

of Siddhantas, xlviii, lvii, Ixviii, 
lxxi 

of the Kir ana, lvii, Ixx-lxxi 

Meulenbeld, 244, 253, 259, 296, 325, 

343, 376 

Meykan ta-gastras , xliv 
Michaels, Axel, x 
microfilm, lxxix, xcvii 

milk, 237, 292, 312, 354 
Mlmamsa, 363 

Mlmamsakas, 180, 189, 19 , 194, 

269,271,273,274,276,278 

Bhatta, 191, 247 

• * 1 f 

Prabhakara, 191 

Mlmamsasutra , 198 

mind, see manas 

Mitaksara , 191 

Mitra, Rajendralal, 168 

mleccha , 178, 293 

moha, 172, 239, 240, 263, 332 

Moh a euro t tar a, Moh acudo t tar a, 

Mohasurottara xv, xlvii 

moksa, see liberation 1 
# * 

Moksakarika , xviii, xx, xxi, xxv, 

xxvi, xxviii, xxix, xxxix, 
lxxv, lxxxii, 180, 219, 221, 
225, 306, 329 


Moksakarikavrtti , xviii-xxi, xxvii, 

xxxiii-xxxv, xxxix, lxx, 

lxxxiii, 330 
Monier Williams, lxx 
moon, xii, 161, 165, 173, 174, 176, 

179, 217, 344 
new (amavasya), 347 

sacrifice on the occasion of 
347 

mosquitoes, 321 

mountain, x, 164,167,170. 178, 275, 

291, 296 

mouth, li, liv, 167, 171, 174, 317 
Mrgendra , xxix, xxxii, xxxiii, xlvi, 

xc, evii, 165, 215, 222, 230, 
279, 290, 297, 312, 313, 

315, 402, 404,416 

date of, lxxiii, lxxiv 
language of, Ixviii, lxxiv 
metre of, lxxi 

padas in, Iviii, lix, Ixi-lxiii, lxv, 
lxxiii, 183 

tattvas in, liv, 207, 316 
Mr gen d rapad dh a ti tJka , xxv 
Mrgendravrtti, ix, x, xiii, xvii, 

xxxvi, xl, xli, xliv, xlv, lxii, 

162, 165, 169, 196, 198, 

216, 220, 227, 229, 230, 

281, 293 

Mrgen dravrt tidfpika , xxxii, xlvi, 

evi, 165, 173, 176, 185, 197, 
215, 218 

Mrgendrottara , see Mrgendra 
M u dr aprakaran a (Rau rava vrtti ), 

xxv-xxvii 

mu dr as, xxv-xxvii, 286 

Mukhabimba(ka), 287, 403, 405- 

408, 410-413, 415 
Mukhasamjnin , 409 
mukta, see under Siva 
mukti, see liberation 
muktipadartba , lxii, lxv 
M u k tisopan as as tra, xc 






































General Index 


471 


Muk tivi vekavrt ti , ciii 

*■ * 

Mukuta ( tantravataraka ), 414 

Mukuta , see Makuta , Makuta , 

Makota 

# 

‘ mulagama\ xlvi 
mulasutra, see adisutra 
Mundakopanisat , 198 
Murray, cxxi 
mustard, 233 
Mylapore, xcix 
Mysore, xlviii-1, xc, 318, 412 
Government of, xci 
Oriental Research Institute, vii, 
xli, lxxxix, xci, xcvi, cvii 

M y (—Mysore MS P 258), xli, xliv, 


xiix. 

liii, 

lv, 

lxii, 1 

xxix, 

lxxxiv, 1 

xxxix 

-xci, 

xcvi, 

cxvi, 

, cxvii. cxh 

189, 

221, 

229, 

236, 

248, 

254, 

261, 

262. 

265. 

270, 

305, 

309, 

329 

331, 

333, 

348, 

362, 

390, 

412, 

413, 416, 41 

7 


nada, lx, 289-294 
blmvana, 291 

Nadakarika , iv, xix, xxiv, xxvii, 

lxxxiii, xcvii, cvi, 295 
Nadasiddhi, see Nadakarika 
Nade^vara, 291 
nadi (channel), 289 
naimittikakarman (occasional oblig¬ 
atory rites), 176, 189, 368, 
375, 389 

Naiyayikas, xxiv, xxix, 191-194, 

224, 235, 247, 249, 250, 
268, see also Nyaya 
their nine qualities of the soul, 
194 

Nanavaranavilakkam , xlvii 
Nandin, Nandl^a, NandT^vara, 

Nandike^vara, xxxix, lxxii, 

164, 165, 406, 407, 410 
Nandinagarl, xli, lxxix, lxxxix, 383 


Narad a, x 
Naradasmrti , 363 
narakas, 172 

Narasiinha ka), 403, 408-411, 415, 

see also Nrsimha(ka) 
Narayanakantha, ix, x, xiii, xvii, 

xxxv, xxx vi, xxxix-xli. 
xliii, xlv, lxii, Ixiii, Ixxv, 

162, 165, 169, 196, 198, 
216, 218, 226, 229, 230, 
260, 281, 290, 293, 297, 
299,324,355 

Narayana, xxiv, 190, see also Visnu 
Narayanabhatta, 343 
Narayanasamicastiri (a scribe), 

xcix, c 

Nare£varapariksa, xviii, xxxiv, xl, 

196,198 

Na res varapa nksapra kasa , v, x, 

xviii-xxi, xxvii, xxviii, 
xxxi, xxxv, xliii, xliv, 

cxi. cxxiv, 177, 190, 192, 
196-198, 224, 225, 245, 
246, 252, 253, 257, 267, 
269-271, 275-278, 312, 

313 

Nairn am ala, 377 
Na^apani, 407 
NateSaguru, xxv 

neo-Saiddhantikas, iv, xxxvi, xxxix, 

lvi, lxi, 370 

Nepal, x, xl, lxxxviii, 369 
Nepalese letter numeration, lxxxiv 
Nepalese manuscripts, x, xi, xxxiii, 

xl, xli, xliii, xlvi. 1, lvi. lix- 
lxi, lxvi, lxix, lxx, lxxix, 
lxxxiv, lxxxvi, xc, cviii, 
cxvi, cxix, cxxiii, 179, 183, 
201, 205, 221, 251, 261, 
270, 360, 369, 375, 392, 
403, 412 

netra, see eye 
Netratantra , xxvii 









472 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Newari script, xlvii, Ixxxv, lxxxvi, 

• ■ 

Cll 

NGMPP, x, xi, xli, xliii, xlv, xlvi, 1, 

lix, lx, lxvi, Ixxxiv-lxxxvi, 
xc, cii, cviii 

Nidhana, 409, 410 
Nidrastotra , 343 
Nigamajhanade^ika, xx, 370 
Nih^vasa (tan tr avatar aka ), 414 
Nihgvasa , 402, 412, 413, see also 

Nig vasa 
mlabuhna , 343 
Nllamata , xii 

Nirmalamani, xiii, xxxii, 330 
nirnaya (category of Nyaya), 221 
nirvacana , 251, 252, 4 6 
nisiddhakarman (forbidden rites), 

189, 389 

Niskala (Siva' , lv, 279, 281, 284, 

287,288 

Nig vasa, xxxiii, xli, xlii, liii, lviii, 

lxiv, lxvi, lxxii-lxxiv, 402, 
405, 406, 408-411, 413, 
415, 416, see also Nihgvasa 
-samhita, 407 
Nigvasakarika , xli, lxxiii 
Ni tyadisangrah a. bh i d h an apad dhati , 

xliv, 287, 411 

nityakarman (regular obligatory 

rites), 176, 189, 368, 375, 
389 

nivrtti , xxxviii 

biuvana, 187, 291, 292 
subtle matter, 292 
niyati 

tattva binding fate), Hi, iii, v, 

208-210, 316-318, 339 
a power of the Lord, 219 
non-initiates, xlix, 352, 376 
nose, li, 317 

Nrsimha (tantravataraica), 410 
Nrsimha(ka), 403, 412, 413, see also 

Narasimha( ka) 


numerological patterns, 173 
Nyaya, xxxi, 221, 253, 363 , see also 

Naiyayikas 
Nyayabhasya , 221 
Nyaya bin du , 303, 325 
Nyayakan dalT, 247, 335 
Nyayamanjarh 169, 192, 304 
Nyayanirta, xliv 
Nyayasutra , 221 

occlusion, 193 

after initiation, 349-352, 386 
effect alleged of maya, 239, 240 
effect of mala, 202, 205, 239, 
240, 246, 262, 283 

one of pahcakrtya ( tirobhava ), 
173, 284 

tirobhavasakti , see under gakti 

ocean, 170, 217, 291, 313, 331, 343, 

344, 365 

churning of, lxv 
waves of, 313 
Om, xcii, 290, 296 
OmkareSa ( tantravataraka), 414 
omnipotence, see kriyagakti 
omniscience, see jnanagakti 
organs of sense and action, see in¬ 
dr iyas 

orthography, lxx, cxxiii, 193, 236 

owls, 246, 247 

Oxford 

Bodleian Library, vii 

Pad art h adharmasahgrah a, 210 
padarthas , lxi, lxii, 161, 166, 179, 

181-183, 189, 226, 228, 
261, 325, 357, 358 
definitions of, 183-190 
padas , xxxvii-xxxix, li, lviii-lxv, 

lxxiv, lxxxiv, xcv, cii, 166, 

181-184, 188-190, 228, 

270, 357, 366, 370, 372 ,see 

also upayas 








































General Index 


473 


pad as 

initiatory path of, 318 
Padiri ap u ran a, 1 xxix 
Paisacas, 172 

Paitryas, 172 

%/ * 

Paley, cxx 

Pali, 308 
Palitana, lxiii 

palm-leaf, see talipot and palmyra 
palmyra, lxxxi, lxxxii, xcii, xeiii, 

xcv-xcviii, cvii 

pancakrtya (five functions), 173, 

174, 284, 298 
Pancapagesasivacarya, cii 
Pancaratra, xxiv, 190, 191 
Pa n ca r thabh asya ,212 
pan cas taka ,376 
Pancat antra, 169 
pancavaktra form, 284, 291 
Pandit, S.P., 169 

Pandyas, xvi 

Para ( tantravataraka ), 414 


Parakhya (Para), xxxiii, xli, xliv, 

xlv, lxv, lxxii, lxxxix, xc, 
182, 329, 403, 416, 417, see 
also Saurabhcya 
date of, lxxiv 
language of, lxv 
metre of, lxxi 
MS of, xli 

padarthas in, lxii, 182 
padas in, Iviii, lxiv, lxv, lxxiv, 
361, 362 

tattvas in, liii, liv, lxxiii 
paramakasa (a subtle matter and 

sound-level), see tinder 


* 







Paramesa, 404, 407, 409-411, 413, 

see also Paramegvara 
P aramegvara (tantrava tar aka ), 414 
Parame^vara 

a tantravataraka, 407, 410 


a name of AghoraSiva, xvi 
guru in Aghora&va’s lineage, xv 
Paramesvara , xxxiii, xliii, liv, lvi, 

Iviii, lxvi, lxxii, lxxiii, 287, 

361, 402-404, 406, 408, 
412, 413, 415, 416, see also 
Pararnesa and Pauskara , 
Ur- 



manuscript of, xl, xli, Iviii, lxiii 
metre in, lxxi 

quoted fragments from, xliii, 
xliv, 408 

recensions of, xliii, xlvi 
relationship with Southern 
Pauskara , xliv 
structure of, lxxiii 



r 


cu 


xvm-xxi 


xxv, xxvi, xxviii, xxix, xlv, 
xlix, lxxv, lxxxiii, cxii, 185, 

197, 221 


Para in oksa n i rasakarika vrtti , xix- 

xxi, xxvi, lxxxiii, 197, 220, 
221 


Parapravesika. lii 
pararthapuja , xiii, xvii 
parlksa (category of Nyaya), xxix 
parinama (transformation, parinati , 

vikara ), xxxiv, lx, 175, 

217, 256-258, 284, 292, 
295,313,315,326,354, 355 

impossible of what is sentient, 
250, 254, 255, 268, 283, 
284, 295 

impossible of what is unmixed, 
324 


of maya, 310-312 

partialness of, 313, 315, 316 
Parthasarathimi^ra, 192 
Par vat!, 170 
ParvatTpati, x 

pagapadartha, 182, 187, 188, 261, 

266, 269, 325 
passion, see ragatattva 







474 


Ramakantlm’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm m 


passions, 170, 257, 302, 337 
pasupadartha, lxii, 182-185, 188, 

190, 226, 227, 261, 266 
Pa^upatas, xxiii, 177, 212, 220 
Pagupatasutra, 212 
pasutattva, see purusatattva 
pagutva , see mala 
pasyantT, 293 
patala, see cataract 
patalas , 167, 172 

Patarijali (of the Yogas utras ), 192 
patipadartha , 166, 182, 187, 188, 

200, 201, 261, 269 
Pattapada, cvii 
Paulastya, xl 

Pauskara , Southern, xxi, xxiv, xxv, 

xxxv, xliii-xlv, xc, xciv, 

166, 185, 186, 330, 335 

Pauskara , Ur-, xxxiii, lxiii, lxxii, 

186, 227, 361, 414, 415, see 
also Paramesvara 
manuscript of, xliii 
metre in, lxxi 

quoted fragments from, xxix, 
xliii, xliv, lxii, 176, 227, 
287, 292, 352, 408, 409 
relationship with Southern 

Pauskara, xliv, xlv 

* * * 

structure of, lxiii 

Pauskarabhasya of Jhanapraka^a, 

xxxii 

Pauskarabhasya of Umapati, xxi, 

xliv’ 

payu , see anus 
peacock's egg, 290, 294 
Petech, xliii 

photocopies of manuscripts, lxxix 
photographs of manuscripts, vii, 

lxxix, Ixxxv 

Phyllanthus emblica , 251 
physician, 231 
Pihgalamata , xxvi, xxvii 
Pihgalamatavrtti , xxvi 


Pingree, Ixxvi 

Pigaca (flesh-eating demon), xxiv, 

172, 176,352,353,368,384 
planets, 170 

poison, 167-169, 258, 273, 281, 305, 

380, 381, 391, 392 

Pondicherry, see IFP 
possession, supernatural, 273 
post-initiatory means, see upavas 
post-initiatory observances, see 

samayas 
potter, lvii, 270 
his stick, 271 
his thread, 271 

his wheel, lvii, 185, 214, 271, 

383, 385 
Potter, Karl, ix 

power, see ai$varya, icchasakti , 

jh an a£a kti , kriyasak ti , 

gakti, Saktipadartha , 

gaktipa ta, Sakti ta 11 va, 

siddhi 

power of action, see kriyasak ti 
power of knowledge, see jhanasakti 
Prabhavyakhya , xiii, xvi, xxv, xxxii 
pradhana , see prakrti 
PragTtavan (tan tr avatar aka ), 414 
Prajapati, 410 
Prajapati Daksa, 171 
Prajapatyas, 172 
Prakaia, lxv, 362, 410 
Prakrit, 169, 293 

prakrti (matter, avyakta, pra¬ 
dhana ), xxiv, li-liii, lv-lvii, 

164, 186, 190, 192, 201, 
202, 207, 239, 268, 316- 
319, 385 

prakrtis , liv, lv 

pralaya , 211, 231, 310, 312, 313, 326 
mail a-, 186, 230, 267, 268, 311- 
313 

pralayakevalin , pralayakala. xl v, 

lxxv, 184, 185, 194, 198- 























General Index 


475 


200, 202, 203, 214, 222, 
224, 225, 232, 262, 263, 
265, 324 

Pramanadlpika, lxxxiii 
Pramanastotra, see Manastotra 

f * 

Pramanavarttika , xxix, xxx, 196, 

244,269, 271,275,277, 320 

prana, liv 

Prasadaparamaksari, Ixxxiii 
Prasadasatglokivyakhya, lxxxiii 
Pra^ama ( tantravataraka) , 409, 410 
pratijnasutra, 162, 182, 190 
pratlkas, lxxxi, lxxxii, cv, cxxiv, 

cxxv, 162, 208, 232, 234, 
236, 250, 251, 264, 266, 
278, 369 

pratima (image), 286 
pratistha 

bhuvana , 187, 291, 292 
subtle matter, 292 
Pratisth alaksanasarasam u ccaya, 

r w mm 4 / 1 

417 

Pra tisth a.par am es vara, xl i i i 
pratisthatantra , xlvii, li 
Pratoda, lxv, 362 
Pratyabhijnahrdaya , xxiv 
pratyayas , 186, 214 
pratyayasarga (of the Sahkhyas), 

213 

pravrttikrama (o: tattvas), 209 
prayagcitta reparatory rites, re¬ 
parations, expiation), xiii, 
xliii, 353, 374, 375, 379- 
381 

Prayascittasainuccaya (of Hr day a- 

Siva), xliii-xlv, xlvii, Ixiii, 

cii, 361, 416 

Pravascittavidhi , xiii, xvi 

•Id* / / 

prayojana , 230, 231 

of 3astra, xxx, 162, 180-182 
preservation of universe, see sthiti 
primal matter, see rnaya 


Prodgita , xxviii, 402, 403, 406- 410. 

412, 413 

prthivT , see earth 
Pudgalavinigcaya , xxix, 252 
Pulaha, x 
Pulastya, x 

pumsavana (rite at the conception of 

a child), 358 
pure soul, see suddha 
purging, 308 

purusakaravadin , 191, 194 
purusatattva (pasutattva), xxii, 

xxiii, liii-lv, 186, 243, 291 
puryastaka, 184, 199, see also under 

bodies (subtle) 
putraka, xxxviii. xxxix, 285 
pu trakama.rga, see satpu tramarga 

quicksilver, 308 

ragatattva (passion), lii-lv. 201, 

202, 206, 207, 261-265, 
301, 316-318 

rajas, 201, 207, 239, 318, 319 

Rajatarangini, xii 

Raksasas, 168, 171, 172 

Rama, Ixxii, xci 

Ramakantha I, ix 

• * * 

Ramakantha II, v, xxiv, xxv, 

xxxi, xxxiii-xxxv, xxxix, 

11 ♦ * | i * • i * * • 

xl, xlm, Iv, lxn, lxni. 
lxvi, lxix, lxx, lxxv, lxxix, 
lxxxiii, xci, cv, cvi, cviii, 
cix, cxiii, cxiv, cxvi-cxix, 
cxxi, cxxiv, cxxv, 161— 

164, 166, 171-173, 175- 
180, 183, 185-187, 189- 
192, 197, 198, 200, 201, 
205, 206, 210, 211, 213, 
215, 218-223, 225, 226, 
228-231, 233, 235, 237, 
239, 240, 244-254, 257, 
259-266, 271, 272, 275 


7 








476 


Ram akant ha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


277, 

279- 

281, 

284, 

286, 

289, 

291- 

293, 

295, 

297- 

299, 

301, 

304- 

-309, 

313, 

315, 

316, 

318, 

320 

-322, 

324, 

329- 

331, 

333, 

335, 

337, 

338, 

343, 

344, 

348, 

350, 

352, 

355, 

357, 

358, 

360, 

363, 

364, 

366, 

367, 

369, 

371, 

373, 

374, 

376- 

382, 

384, 

385, 

387, 

388, 

390 

392,416 




date of, xiii, xvii, xviii 


rasa, 308 

tanmatra (property of taste), li, 
lv, 251, 252, 254, 317 
Rasaratnasamuccaya, 309 
r as ay an a, 308 

i/ ' 

RatnatrayaparTksa, ix, xxxiii, xlv, 

lx, Ixxv, 193, 218, 219, 294 
Ra tn a travap ariksol 1 ckh i n 1 , xxxv , 

lxxxiii, 173, 218, 219, 290, 
293, 294, 384 
Ratnavail, 273 
Rau, Wilhelm, 178, 197, 210 


his influence, iii, iv, xxx-xxxii, 
xxxv, 178, 182, 184, 202, 
206, 215, 261, 262, 265, 
270, 307, 332, 373, 391 
ingenious or distortive inter¬ 
pretations of, xxxiii-xxxvi, 


lxii, 

164, 

165, 

178, 

180, 

182, 

186, 

188, 

189, 

193, 

199, 

207, 

212, 

213, 

215, 

218, 

232, 

233, 

240, 

243, 

265, 

266, 

290, 

294, 

305, 

314, 

316 

-318, 

322, 

323, 

327, 

328, 

332, 

333, 

335- 

339, 

341, 

345, 

347, 

352- 

354, 

357- 

-359, 

363, 

364, 

366- 

368, 

371, 

372, 

374, 

380, 

382, 

388, 390 


lineage of, v, 

ix-xi, 

/ 

xiii, 

xlvii, 

lxxv 

, lxxv 

i, cvii, 

216 



oeuvre of. v, xviii-xxii, xxv- 
xxviii, xxxii, xxxv, 197, 


RaudrI, 329, 330 

Raurava, xx, xxi, xxv-xxvii, xlvi, 

xlix, li, Ixxiv, lxxv, xc, cvii, 

164, 176, 181, 189, 197, 

222, 223, 318, 319, 403, 

405-408, 410-413, 415 
printed L kriyapada\ xl, xlix, 

lxxii, 285, 404 
Sadvrtti thereon, ix 
-sutrasangraha, xxv, xxix, 
xxxiii, xl, xlviii, xlix, lxxii, 

xc, 172, 173, 176, 181, 188, 
285, 315, 318, 319, 329, 

384, 415 
date of, lxxiii 
metre in, lxxi 

MSS of, xlix 
padarthas in, lxii, 189 
structure of, xxvi, xl, xlviii, 
xlix, Ixxiv 

tattvas in, xl, xlix, liii, liv, 


218 

style of, xxviii-xxxi, xxxix, 
lxvi, Ixix, lxx, 187, 192, 
193, 245, 261, 271, 275, 
315, 377, 390 

Ramakantha, Raj an aka, ix 
Ram ay ana., 169 
Ram ghat, xl 
Ram n ad, ci 
Ranipadramatha, xliii 


316, 317 

Raurava (t an tr avatar aka ), 414 
Raurava (a hell), 219 
Rauravavrtti. xx-xxviii 

m * 

Rauravavrttivivcka, xx- xxviii, 197 

Ravana, 167, 171, 174 

Rclka, lxxii 
■ * 

Renou,235 

reproductive organs (upastha), li, 

liv, 317 







































General Index 


477 


resorption, see samhara, pralaya , 

I ay a 

Rgveda, xxx, 294 
rice husks, 258 

ripening of impurity, see inalapari- 

paka 

Roth, 169 

Royal Asiatic Society of Bengal, xl 
rucira. metre, lxxi 

Rudrabhedas, xliii, xlv, xlvi, lxxii, 

287, 299, 402-417 
Rudradeva (Nepalese king), xl 
rudraksa, xxxviii 

m 

Rudraloka, 163, 164 
Rudras, xiv, liv, lv, 291, 329 
Balavattara, lv 
Bhanumant. lv 
Buddha, liii 
Dundubhi, lv 
Gandhanga, lv 
G han an an da, lv 
Hamkrti, liii 

m m f 

Jalada, lv 
Jyestha, 329 
Kalagni, 172 
K am ad a, liii 
Mahavaktra, lv 
Pradhanaka, liii 
PrakaSaka, lv 
Raga, lv 
Ram ana, lv 
Rudra, 330 

Suksmanada, lv 
« * 

Suksmadeha, liii 
Saiikalpa, lv 
Sam ad an a, lv 
Sarvariga, lv 
Tiirnaka, lv 
Trideha, liii 
Vamadeva, 329 
Vilumpaka, lv 

rules of the cult, see sam ay as 
rupa (form), li, lv, 252, 317 


Ruru, xl, xlviii, xlix, lxxii 
Saharabhasya, 296, 375, 382 

gab da, see also vak 

tamnatra (sound), li, lv, lx, 
lxvii, 188, 278, 290, 291, 
293-295, 317, 391 

SacTpati, see Indr a 

Sadasiva, lviii, 187, 279, 288, 289, 

291, 355, 367, 371 

bhuvana , 291, 292 

faces of, 177, 412 

guru of Kacchapesvara, xiii 

-tattva, lii, liii, lv, 188, 223, 284 

sadhaka , 183, 223, 285, 371, 372 

Sadhanamala , 273 

sadhanas (name for pa das), lviii 

Sadvrtti , see under Raurava 
* 

SADYOJATA, 283, 285, 287, 291 
Sadyojyotih, x, xviii, xx, xxi, xxv- 

xxviii, xxxiii-xxxv, xxxix 
xli, xlix-li, Ixiii, lxxi, lxxv, 

xc, xcii, 177, 184-186, 197, 
214, 215, 218, 306, 318,331 
sahamarga, xxxvii, 370 
Sahasra, xlv, 402, 405, 409, 411, 412 
Sah asra ka . 402, 404 
Sahasramsa, 405 

Saiddhantikas, v, xiii, xxix, xxx, 

xxxiii, xxxix, xli, lxi, 
lxii, lxxi, lxxvi, 177, 243, 
278, 364, see also neo- 
Saiddhantikas 

Saiva Siddhanta, iii-v, xi, xxx, 

xxxii, xxxiii, xxxvi, xxxvii, 


xxxix 

, xl, 

xlv, 

xlvi. 

xlix, 

li, lii, 

lvi, 

i < * • 

Ivm, 

lxxi, 

xciv, 

cvii, 

175, 

177, 

191, 

215, 

275, 

284- 

-287, 

299, 

304- 

306, 

312- 

-314, 

316, 

321, 

333, 

334, 

338, 

341, 

346, 


348,350,353, 358, 363, 370 








478 


Ramakantha's Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

* # l/ * 


Sa i vagam a dim ahatmyasahgraha, 

xxxii, 165 

Sai vagam ap a ri b h asam ahjarl , 328 

Sai vakalavivekavyakhya , xlvii 

Saivaparibhasa , xxxviii, 221 

S a i varah asya ,213 

Sai varata akara, 404 

sakala (fully bound soul), xv, 184, 

185, 194, 199, 202, 203, 
212-214, 221-225, 246 
aprap ta bahyagarlra, 212, 213, 
222 

jjranastababyaJarlra , 212, 213, 
222 

Sakala (Siva), 279-284, 288, 290, 

333 

S akal again asah grah a , xiii, xx v, 

xxvi, xlvii 

Sakalagamasarasahgrah a, Ixxxiii 

Sakalaniskala, 279, 284, 288, 291 
Sakra, see Indra 

gakti (power), xxxi, 205, 282, 284, 

286, 288, 295, 296, 298, 

299, 301, 302, 307-309, 

313, 315, 316, 319, 324- 

326, 328, 348, 354, 355, 

363, 365, see also iccha- 

gakti, jnanagakti , kriya- 

gakti, gaktipadartha , tfakti- 

pata, saktitattva. 

adhikara-, 307 

expressed by mantras, 289 

mar ana-, 392 
• * 

of dirty water, 259 
of maia, xxxii, 255, 256, 259, 
280, 365 

of mantras, 281, 282, 307, 381, 
382, 384, 385, 391, 392 
of mantrin, 282 
of maya, 185, 312-316, 322 
of poison, 258, 392 
of yogin , 286 
prabodhika , 301, 326 


tirobhava- (occlusion), 187, 
349, 355, 386 
saktipadartha , 182, 187 
gaktipata (descent of power), xvii, 

xxxiii-xxxvi, 181, 215-217, 

219, 220, 222, 257, 259, 
281, 325, 327, 328, 330, 

331, 333-336, 338-342, 

344-350, 352-355, 363- 

365, 376-378, 386 

saktitattva , xxii, xxiii, xxxiv, lii, liii, 

lx, 291 

salokya , xxxvii, xxxviii 
salt, 194 
samana, liv 
s am an a, cviii 

s am ay as rules of the cult, post- 

initiatory observances), 
176, 349, 352-354, 361- 
363, 366-371, 373-375, 

384, 389-391 
samayin , xxxviii, 285 
sambandha 

between abhidheya and pra- 
yojana , xxx, 162, 180 182 
of Saiva exegesis, Ixi-lxiii, 227, 
228, 261, 301, 325, 358, 

370, 392 
Sambandhan, xlv 
gambara, lxx, 380 

samhara (resorption), 173, 187, 284, 

285, 298 

samTpya , xxxvii-xxxix 
Sam^apayana (tantravataraka), 410 
samsara (worldly existence), xxiv, 

186, 194, 199, 203, 216, 

218, 220, 268, 269, 329- 

332, 334, 339, 363 
samutpatti (ol Sivahood). 221 
Samvartaka (tan tr avatar aka) , 410 
Sanatkumara, xliv, 166, 407 
Sanatku m arasam hit a, x c v i i 































General Index 


179 


Sanderson, x-xii, xiv-xvii, xxii, 

xxiii, xxv-xxvii, xxxvi, 
xxxix, xli, xliii-xlv, lii, lvi, 
lix, lxv, lxvi, lxx, Ixxiii, 
Ixxv, cvii, cviii, 161, 182- 

184, 191, 192, 197, 202- 

206, 212, 220, 237, 242, 

361, 363, 364, 372, 376, 

377, 404, 411, 412, 414, 

415, 417 

sandhyopasana , 187 
Sandys, cxx 

Sankalpanirakarana, .see Cankarpa- 

nirakaranam 
Sankaracarya, xxxv 
Sankhyakarika, xxx, xxxv, cxii, 

cxxiv, 172, 185, 186, 211- 
213, 237, 239, 318, 319, 

383, 390 

Sarikhyas, xxiv, li-liii, lv, 172, 175, 

186, 191, 192, 194, 206- 

208, 211-213, 235, 237, 

239, 241, 252, 273, 274, 

311, 318, 319, 376 

sankranti (of Sivahood), xxiii, 221 
sanmarga, xxxvii, xxxix, 37!! 
Sanmukha, see Skanda 

mm * 

3anta, 279, 311, 355, see also under 

Siva 

Santana (t antra'vat araica), 414 
Santana, xiii, 403, 406-408, 410- 

413, 415 

Santanika, 403, 413 
3antapani (tantravataraia), 407 
Santati (= Santana), 409 
ganti 

bhuvana , 187, 291, 292 
subtle matter, 292 
gantyatlta, 292 
Sapindus detergens . 233 
Sapta£atikakalottara , xlvi 
Sarada (script), xxxv 


Saranniga (lost commentary on the 

Tattvasahgraha ), x 
SarasvatT, c 

Sardhatrigatikalottara , xviii, xix, 

xxix, xxxiii, xlv, xlvi, lxvi, 
lxviii, xc, 164, 176, 178, 
184, 199, 293, 294, 322, 
368, 416 

language of, lxvi-lxviii 
structure of, lxiii 

Sard hat rigatikalottaravrtti , xix, 

xxv, xxvii, xliii, cxxiv, 

164, 173, 290, 295, 375, 
416 

sarga, see srsti 
Sarfra tm avi veka, ciii 
sarupya, xxxvii, xxxvi ii 
Sarva (tantravataraka), 414 
Sarvagamapramanya , xxviii 
Sarvagam apramanyo pa nyasa, xix 

xxvii 

Sarvajhanottara , xxi, xxxiii, xlvi, 

lvi, lix-lxi, Ixxiii 
MSS of, lix, lx, Ixxxiii 
padas in, lix, lxi, lxiii 
tattvas in, liv, lv, 188, 317 
Sarvajnanottaravrtti , xvi, xlvi, lxi, 

lxii, cvi, 227, 241 
Sarvasi d d h antasahgraha, 1 xxi x 
Sarvatman (tantravataraica), 409, 

410 

Sarvatma^ambhu, xvi, ixxxiii 
Sarvatobhadra (commentary on the 

Bhagavadgita), ix 
SarvodgTta , 403, 406, 407, 413 
$arvokta , 403, 404 
Sastri, Gangadhara, 198 
Sastrl, Hara Prasad, ixxxiv, lxxxv, 

lxxxix 

Sastri, Gaurinath, 335 
Sastri, P. P, S., cii 
Sataratnasahgraha, xliv, 332, 384 




































480 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 


Sataratnollekhini, xxxii, xxxvii, 

xlvi, 315, 328 

satputramarga , xxxvii, xxxviii, 37u 

Satsahasrikakalottara, see Brhat- 
* * 

kalottara 

sattv a, 201, 207, 239, 318, 310 
Satyaloka, 164 

Saumya ( tantravataraka ), 409, 410 
Saundaresvaragurukal (a scribe), 

xcv 

Saurabha, lxv 

Saurabheya , xli, lxv, 403, 408, 410, 

411, 415, 417, see also 
Parakhya 
Saurashtra, xl, lxiii 
Sautrantikas, see under Buddhists 
sayujya , xxxvii, xxxviii, xlii, 331 
scales, pair of, 339 
Schu bring, 191 
sea monsters, 365 
self-identity, see ahamkara 
Sen, Nilmadhav, 296 
senses, see indrivas 
Sharma, Dwarkanath, xlvii 
sick initiates, see diseased 
Siddhantas 

‘agamas’ and ‘tantras’, xxxvi- 
xxxix 

ai£a language in, lxv-lxx, lxxiv 
cross-references in, xlviii-li, 
lxxiv 

doctrinal oddities in, lvi-lviii, 

1 i * * 

ixxm 

lists of, xxxvi, xl, xlv, xlvi, 
xlviii, xlix, li, Ixxi-lxxiv, 
lxxvi 

metre in, lxx-lxxi 
order of tattvas in, li—lv, lxxiii 
quadrapartite structure of, 
xxxvii-xxxix, li, lviii-lxv 
lxxiii, lxxiv 

Skldha , 403, 406-413, 415 

Siddhan taprakatfika, lxxxiii 


Siddhantaratnavail, ciii 
Siddhantarthasamuccaya , ciii 
Siddhantasaravali, xxxi, xlvii, xcvii 

Siddhan tasikhamani, xxxii 

■ * 

Siddharudra ( tantravataraka ), 414 
Siddhas, xxiii 

siddhi (supernatural powers), xxiv, 

177, 180 

sight, faculty of, see eye 
Sikhandin, 173 
Silajatu, see bitumen 
silk, 233 
silver, 296 

Siniha , 403, see also Nr- and Nara- 

simha(ka) 

Simharaja, civ, cv, cvii 
simpletons, 361, 363, 364, 377 
SimSapa, 244 
Sind, xii 

£i$uhitavivrti, cvii. see also 

Tryambaka^ambhu 
Siva, iii, iv, x, xii, xv, xxxi, xxxiii - 

xxxvi, xli, 1, lii, liii, Ivi, Ivii, 


lxvi, 

lxxi. 

, 161 

-164, 

167, 

168, 

170, 

171, 

173, 

176, 

177, 

181, 

187, 

190, 

199- 

201, 

203- 

-205, 

207, 

|F 

215- 

217, 

219, 

220, 

222, 

223, 

227- 

231, 

246, 

256, 

259. 

268- 

270, 

272, 

279, 

280, 

283, 

285, 

f 

288, 

289, 

292, 

296, 

298. 

if 

299, 

301, 

304, 

307, 

308, 

310, 

319, 

324- 

331, 

336 

-338, 

343, 

345- 

347, 

350, 

351, 

353, 

354, 

357, 

359. 

, 360 

, 363 

365, 

370, 

372, . 

376, 405 



-aJava, xxxviii 

*/ / 

-hasta, xlii, 3G2 

-hood (tfivatva), 177, 219-221, 
245, 246, 371-373, 379, 
380, 389 






































































General Index 


481 


liberated soul, 177, 216, 236, 
241, 242 
-padartha, 189 

parama-, xxxi, 176, see. also 
Santa 

tantravataraka, 414, see also 
Sivakhya 

-tattva, xxxi, lii-liv, 187, 284, 
310, 376, 384 
£iva (— sakti ), liii 
Siva bh aktap uja, xcvii i 
Sivabhedas, xlv, Ixxii, 287, 299, 402- 

417 

Sivabodhasahgraba , xxxviii 
Sivadharma , 375, 376 
Si va d h arm as ah grab a, 376 
Si va d h arm as as t ra ., 375, 376 
Sivadharmottara , 375, 376 
Sivadrsti , lxxv, Ixxvi, evii 

g in # 

S i vagam asi d d h ant ap ari palan a- 

sarigha, cii 

Sivagrabhasya , xxi, xxxii, xlvii 
Sivagrayogin, xxi-xxiii, xxxii, 

xxxviii, xxxix, 221 

givajhana, 176-178, 259, 280, 405- 

407, 412, 413 
Sivaj hana bod ha , 370 
S i vaj h an a b o d h as ari grab a b h asya , 

xxxix 

Si vajhanabodbavrt ti , lxxxiii 
of Jnanapraka^a, xxxii 
S i vaj h an a bod bo panyasa , x x, 370 
Si va jhan asiddbis vapaksadrs tan t a - 

sahgraha, 370 
Sivaj nan ayogin, i v 
Si vajh an as id d h i , see Ci va h a n a ci 11 i- 

yar 

t/ 

S i ■va k I lv a (tan tra va t araka ), 410 
Sivamahimnastava, see Mahimna- 

stava 

Sivaprakasa Pandarasannithi, vii 
Si vap ujasta vavyakhya, xxv, xxvi, 

xlvii, 329 


Sivapurana , lxiii, 167, 172 
Sivaraja Dikshitar, xciii 
Si vara trinirnaya , Ixxxi 
Sivasadhaka ( tantravataraka) , 109 
Si vasamavada-urai-maruppu , i v 

vasam ya va d a , iv 

(/ / 

Si va s u travi m ardi n l , xlv 

Si va tatt vara tnakara, 404 

Sivathamby, xxxvii 

Sivayogasara , xx, xxxii, 281 

Si vopa n isa t (Si vadb arm a), 375, 376 

Slyaka of i liara, xliii 

Skanda (Kumara, Karttikeya, San- 

mukha, etc.), xlvi, xlvii, 
lx, Ixxii, xc, 163, 165, 406, 
407, 410 

Skandapurana 

commonly printed version, xii 
Ur-*, xli, 167 


skin, see tvak 

Slokavarttika , xxx, 192, 212, 269- 

272, 274, 276, 278, 286 

Smartas, xxiv 
smell 


faculty of, see nose 
property of, see g and ha 
Smith, David, xliv 
smoke, 275-277, 376 
Smrtimuktaphala , Ixxxi 
snake, 305, 307, 344 
snana, xxxii 
snow, 276 
soap-berry, 233 
Soma, 165 

Somananda, lxxv, Ixxvi, evii 
SomaSambhu, x, xxvi, xl, xcviii, 

386, see also Karma- and 
K riya-kan dak ram a vail 
Sorensen, 168 
sound 

tanmatra, see gabda 

subtle substance, see nada, 

bindu, akasa 

/ 















482 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

• * *s * 


South Indian manuscripts, v, xix, 

xxx vi, xl-xlii, xliv-xlvi, 
xlix, lix-lxi, lxv, Ixx, lxxii, 
lxxxii, lxxxiv, xc, civ, evi, 
cviii, cix, cxiii, cxiv, cxvi, 
cxvii, cxxiii, 201, 205, 261, 
262, 265, 270, 369, 370, 
375, 383, 403 

Spandakarika, ix 

sparga (property of touch), li, lv, 

lxvii, 193, 196, 317 
speaker indications, exxv, 190 
speech, see vak, gab da 
Speijer, 169 
spider, Ivi, Ivii 

web of, lvi, lvii 
splinters of iron, 273 
sraddha , 359 
Sri Lanka, iv 
Srlcakra, xxxvii 
Srldhara the VaiSesika), 247 
SrTharsa, xliii 

Snkantha, x, lxxii, 163, 164, 166, 

173, 179 

author of the Ratnatra.ya- 
parlksa , ix, lx, lxxv, 193, 
219 

guru in AguoraSivacarya’s lin¬ 
eage, xv, xvii 

SrIkanthTva , 402, 403, 408, 411 

■ • */ * * * * 

Srinivasan, S.A., cxii, cxiv, cxxiv, 

170, 202, 281 

Srlrupa (tantr avatar aka ), 409, 410 
grotra , see ear 

srsti (creation), 173, 273, 277, 278, 

284, 285, 298, 330 

celestial, 172, 173 

created universe, 319 

human, 173 

of animals, 173 

time of, 267, 268, 311 

srstikrama (of tattvas), 209 

StavacAntamani , x 

* * 


Stein, x, xii, 343 

stemma, cxi-cxiv, cxvi, cxviii, exx 
sthiti (maintenance, preservation), 

173, 284, 285, 298 

von Stietencron, 168 

Stryehnos potatorum , 259 

su- as a verbal prefix, 308 

Subrahmaniam, xlv, lxxxi 

Subrahmanya Sastri, P. P., lxxx 

Subrahmanya^astrin, K.M., cii 

Subramania Sastri, N., xciii 

subtle elements, see tanmatras 

Sucaru (bhuvana), 164 

suddha (pure soul , 221-224, 320 

£uddhadh\'an (pure path), lii, 223, 

235,290,291,298,304,313 

Su dip taka (= Dipt a), 402 

Sudras, 178, 351, 364 

^uklaJcuruJcudasadhana, 273 

Suksma, xiii, 402, 405, 409, 411, 412 

Suksmarupa (tantr avatar aka ), 414 

Suksmasvavambhuva, 373 
« */ f 

sun,lxv, 161, 302, 348 
Suprabha, 402, 405, 412 
Suprabheda ( Suprabhedi , Supra- 

bhit), xiii, xxxviii, xlvi, 

402, 404, 405 

Suprabhedapratisthatantra , xcviii 
Surabhi, lxv 

surgical instruments, 270 
Suryanarayana Sastri, xliv 
Su^iva (tantravataraka), 414 
susurima, 330 

i # 

Susumnesa, 291 
Sutejasa (tantravataraka ), 414 
sutra (as text-division), Ixxiii 
Svacchanda , xxvii, xxix, xlv, lxvi, 

cviii, 164, 179, 291, 363, 
374, 384, 414 

SvacchandalaU ta(bhairava) (name 

of Svacchanda), cviii 
Svacchandatantroddyota, x, xvii, 

xxxi, xxxv, xli, lxvi, evii, 


















General Index 


483 


163, 216, 220, 330, 363 
gvapacas , xviii, 178 
Svat antra, see Svacchanda 
Svayambhu, x, 1, 414 
Svayambhu, 403, 412 
Svayambhuta, 403 
Svayambhuva (tantravataraka ), x 
Svayambhuva, li, lix, lxxiv, 402-411, 

413, 415 
Suksma 373 

S vayam bh u vas u trasangrah a, xxi i i, 

xxix, xxxiii-xxxv, xxxix, 
xlvi, xlviii, Ixiii, lxxii, lxxv, 
202, 203, 214, 217, 218, 
266, 315, 317, 331, 332, 
338, 345, 384,402,412,415 
language of, 328 
manuscripts of, xl, xli, xc, xcii, 
xcviii, ciii 
metre of, lxxi 

South Indian redaction of, xli, 
xlix, 1 

structure of, xlviii—1, lix, lxxiv, 
xc 

tattvas in, liii, liv, 316-318, 376 
Svayambhuvavrtfci, x, xxxv, xxxvi, 

xlix, 184, 186, 218 
S vayam bh u vavrt titi ppan aka , x, 

xxxv, 218 

Svayambhuvoddyota , xix, xxxv, 218 

Sveta, 167, 172 

of Mahabharata, 167 
Svetambaras, 191 
S ve t as va t aro pani sa. t , 198 
Swaminatha Sivacarya, xcix 
syllogism, 224, 225, 239, 277, 278 

tacarnarkkam, see dasamarga 
Taksakavarta, x, xliv, lxv, 287, 408, 

411 

talipot, lxxix, Ixxxiv, lxxxv, lxxxix, 

xciv 


tain as, 172, 201, 207, 239, 247, 318, 

319 

Tamil, iv, xxxvi, xxxvii, xliv, li, lvi, 

Ixxxiii, xcix, 174 
Tamil Lexicon, xxxvii 
tamisra , 172, 239 

Tandava, 170 

# * ' 

Tanjore 

district, lxxxi 

Saraswati Mahal Library, vii, 

■ i 

Cll 

-style Devanagari, cii 

tanmatras (subtle elements), xxiii, 

xxiv, li, liv, lv, 186, 199, 

202,208,244, 317, 319, 322 

Tantra (name of a particular 

Siddhanta), 409 

Tantracudamani, xi 

■ * • 

Tantraja , 403, 408, 410 
Tantraloka , xvii, xxxiii, xxxix, xlii, 

xlv, Ixiii, 183, 184, 206, 
215, 220, 338, 364-367, 
373, 377, 411 

Tantralokaviveka, x, xx, xlv, 176, 

183, 184 

‘Tantras’ and ‘Agamas’, see under 

Siddhantas 

Tantravarttika , xxx, 198 

tantrics, non-Saiva, xxv 

tapas, 167, 168 

Tara, 343, 344 

Taraka (asura), 168 

Tarastotra, xxx, 343 

Taras t u ti of Candradasa, 344 

tarka^astra, 163 

tarnish, 229, 257, 258 

taste 

faculty of, see tongue 
property of, see under rasa 
TATPURUSA, 283, 285 
Tattvakaumudl, cxxiv 
Tattvaprakada, lii, liii, lxxxii, 213 




484 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

p * */ • 


Tattvaprakasavrtti, xxxi, xliv, lii, 

lxii. Ixxxiii, xc, 173, 209, 
212, 281 

tattvas, xl, 184, 207, 212, 213, 376 
initiatory path of, 318 
order of, li-lv, 209, 316-319 
Ta11vasangrah a, xx, lxxxii, 206 
BrhattTka thereon, x 

4 4 

Tattvasahgrahatlka, xx, lxxxiii, 176, 

184, 203-206, 317, 383 
tattvasarga (of the Sahkhyas), 213 
Ta 11 vatrayanirnaya, xxxiv, lxxxii 
Tattvatrayanirnavavrtti. xv, xvi, 

4/ p. .fcr P * r ¥ 

lxxxii i 

Ta 11 vopaplavasinih a, 191 
tejas, see fire 

Tej as (taj] tra va tar aka) , 409, 410 
temple worship, xvii 
theft, 264, 265 
theophany, 166, 167 
thieves, 344 

Thiruvavadudhurai Adheenam, see 

T i ru vavatuturai 

■ 

Thomi, 218 

T ila.kap a ram vara , x 1 i i i 
time, 191, see also kalatattva 

ofgaktipata, 257, 327, 328, 332- 
334, 337, 345-348, 351 
of creation, 267, 268, 311 
tirobhava . see under occlusion and 

J 

sakti 

Tirukkataiyur, xcv 
Timmantiram , .see Tirumular 
Tirumular, xxxvii-xxxix, 174, 370 
Tirunelveli district, xciii 
Tirupati, Sri VerikateSvara Ori¬ 
ental Research Institute, 

• » 'A*# 

VII, xcm 

Tiruvannamalai, xciv 

m m J 

Tiruvavatuturai, vii, xcvii, xcviii, 

civ, cvi 

Tokunaga, Ivii 

tongue (jihva), li, liv, 317 


Torella, xvii 
touch 

faculty of, see tvak 
property of, see spars a 
transformation, see parinama , 

vivarta 

transgressions, 367, 374 
Travodasasatikakalottara , xlvi 

1 / J 

Trika, 184, 185 
1 xilo cana£i vacar y a, xcviii 
tripundra , xxxviii 
Tripura, 168 

Tripurasundarl, xxxvii, xcv 
Tripuravijaya , ciii 
Trigatikalottara. , xcvii 
tristubh, lxx, 267 

Trivandrum, Oriental Research In¬ 
stitute and MSS Library, 
vii, xiv, xxv, xlvi, Ix-lxii, 

lxvi, cvi, 178, 227, 416 
TryambakaSambhu, xcvi, xcviii, civ, 

cvii-cix, cxvi, 171, 175, 

179, 227, 233, 236, 251, 

254, 264, 281, 307, 308, 

328, 342, 345, 360, 361, 

367, 369, 384, 388 . 
tuti (variant orthography of truti), 

lxx 

tvak (skin, touch), li, liv, 317 
udana , liv 

Udayapalasoma (Nepalese Saiva- 

carya), lxxxiv 

uddega (category of Nyaya), xxix 
UdgTta, 403, 411, 412, 415 
Uma, 162, 163, 165, 171 
Uniamah esvarasam vada 

(Sivadbarma), 376 
Umapati, xxii, 161, 164,-165 
Urnapatisivacarya, xxi-xxiv, xxxv, 

xliv, 166, 330 
uninitiated, 165, 352 
untouchables, 178 

























































General Index 


185 


upabheda , xlvi, lxxv, 413, 414, 416 
upadbmaniya , xli 
' upagama\ xlvi 


upajati metre, Ixxi, 165, 281 
Upamanyu, 167, 172 
Upanishads, xxx, Ivi, 198 


upastha, see reproductive organs 
upayapadartha, xxxii, 190, 221, 357 
npayas, lix, 183, 361, 362, 366, 367, 

384, see also pad as 
upavatattva , 287 
urdhvasrotas, 177, 411, 412 


Urtext, cxvi, cxviii, 



U S an as , 406, 407, 410 
Utpaladeva. ix, xiii, xvii 
U t tarot taramahasam va da 

(Si vadh arm a ) ,376 


VacaspatimiSra, 172, 185, 186, 211, 

213 

Vaibhasikas, see under Buddhists 

m * 

vairagya (a bhav a), lxviii, 186 

Vai^esikas, 177, 191, 2( 8, 210, 247, 

249, 250, 253 

their nine qualities of the soul, 
194 

Vaisesikasutra , xxxv, 210 
Yaisvas, 178, 358 

Vaiyapuripillai, xxxvii 

va k (speech), 197, 294, 295 
activity of, 282, 391 
aghosa, 295 

as material cause of gross 
sound, 295 
coarse, 293, 294 
composed of thought, 290 
four planes of, 294 

ghosinl, 295 

jatanirghosa , 295 
para, xxii, xxiv, 293 
pasyauti , 293 


three levels of, 294 
Vakpati II, xliii 

VakyapadTya , xxx, 178, 197, 210, 

211, 293 

Valakhilyas, x, xlix, 1 

Varna, 329-331 

Varna (srotas), 163, 177 

VAMADEVA, 283, 285 

vam$astha, Ixxi 
* 

Varadachari, xciv, evi 
Varaha[mihira], lxxxix 

varna 

# 

initiatory path of, 318 

vasikarana, 381 

■ * 

Vasistha, lxv 

* * ' 

va st u vidya, lxxxix 
Vasubandhu, 212, 252 
Vasudeva, Somdev, 173 
Vathula , xlv, xlvi, 403, 405, 415, 416 
identified with Agneya, 416 
identified with Kalottara , xlv 
Vatula (Vatula, Vatula), xlvi, 403, 

406, 407, 413 

Vatulasuddha, lxxxiii, xcviii 
VayavTyasamhita, lxiii, 167, 172 
Vayu ( tantravataraka ), 405 
vayu (air), li, liv, 290, 317 
Vayupurana , xxx, 168, 172 
VedajnanarsTndra, xix 
\edajnana^ivacarya II, cix 
Vedanta, iv, Ivi, Iviii, lxxv, 192, 235, 

370 

parinati -, lxxv 
Vedantachari, lxxx 
\edas, xxxi, xxxvii, xli, xliv, 174, 

177, 180, 187, 198, 274, 
294, 358 

vertical transmission, cxii, cxvi, exx 
vetala, 225 

vicarapadartha , 182, 188, 221, 261, 

297, 301 

vidhipadartha, 189 































486 


Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra 

mm */ * 


Vidhiviveka , xxx, 277 
vidya 

1/ 

a^uddha- (limited power of 
knowledge), lii, lv, 201, 
202, 204-206, 238, 316-318 
bhuvana, 187 
kala 

bhuvana , 291, 292 
subtle matter, 292 
-pada, -upaya (doctrine, means 
of [ensuring liberation 
through] knowledge, 

jhanapada ), xxvii, xxxii, 
xxxvii, xxxviii, xl, xli, xlv, 
li, lviii-lxi, lxiv, lxv, Ixviii, 
lxxiv, lxxxiv, xcvii, 161, 

166, 182-184, 189, 228, 
261, 270, 357, 361, 362, 
365-374, 376, 378, 379, 
389, 391 

-padartha , lxii 

Buddha-, xxii, xxiii, xxxviii, lii— 

lv, 188, 222, 223, 292, 293, 
298, 304-306 
synonym of mantra, 297 
Vidyadhipati, xxx, xxxiii, xxxv, 365 
Vidyakantha I, ix, xi 
Vidyakantha II, ix-xiii, xxv, xxvii, 

xlvii, lxx 

Vidyalaya, 410 
vi dyam ah va ras , 173 
vidyetfatattva , xxii, 188 

vidyegvaras, xi, 163, 173, 188, 223, 

298, 299, 301, 302, 313, see 

also mantregas 
VidyunmalT (asura), 168 
Vij°bror, see Vijaye^vara 
Vijaya, xlviii, li, 287, 402, 405-413, 

415 
Ur-, xlv 

Vijaya (tantravataraka), 414 
Vijayapura, see Vijaye^vara 
VijayeSvara (in Kashmir), xi-xiii 


vijhanakevaJin , vijhan akaia, xxxiv, 

xlv, Ixxv, 184, 185, 194, 
199, 200, 218, 222, 224, 
225, 232, 234, 235, 263, 
299, 335, 342, 344, 346,379 
Vikrama (Cola), xiv, xvii 

vikrti s, lv 

* * 

Vimala ( Vimalakhya) , 403, 408, 

411, 413 

Vindhyavasin, 212 
viparyayas (of the Sarikhyas), 172 
vipulas (deviations from the stand¬ 
ard form of the uneven 
pada), lxx-lxxi 
Vlra (tantravataraka), 407 
VTra, xiii, 403, 404, 412, see also 

Bhadra , VTrabhadra 
Vlrabhadra, xlviii, 167, 171, 410 
VTrabhadra , 403, 405-409, 411, 413, 

415, see also Bhadra , VTra 
VTraj a, 403 

Vlrarat ( tantravataraka ), 414 
Virasa, 403, 412 
Virasa, 403, 405 
Visannara . 407 

Visara, 403, 406, 408-411, 413, 415 
Visara (tantravataraka) , 414 
visarga before sibilant in ligature, 

193, 236 
vitfesagunas, 194 
ViSistadvaita, 191 

Visnu, xciv, 163, 167, 168, 171, 

172, 174, 407, see also 
Narayana 
cakra of, 173 
Visnusamhita, 184 

« m- * * 

Vi^varupa, 191 

Vitasta (Hydaspes), xii, 253 

Vivanti, vii, lxx, lxxxv, ci, 369, 383, 

384 

vivarta (apparent transformation). 

xxii, xxiii, 284 
vomiting, 308 






























General Index 


487 


vrata, see carya 
Vrsa, 165 

Vrsasarasangrah a (vad h arm a), 

376 

Vyakarana, 363 
Vyakhyaniguru, cvii 
Yyakhyanikacarya, cvi 
vyana, liv 

i/ * 

Vyoman (t an tr avatar aka), 409, 410 
Vyoma&va, 335 
Worn avail, 335 

4 / * 

Vyomavyapin (a mantra), 293 
Vyomavyapistava , xix 

Wackernagel, 193 

water (ap, etc. , li, liv, lvii, 167, 233, 

259,293, 307,308, 317, 325 

water-marked paper, xci, c 

Wecklein, cxx 

weekdays, xxxvii 

Wellcome Institute, vii, cxxiv 

West, cxiii, cxx 

wheel, see under potter 

widows, 377 

wind, 167, 200, 313 

in the stomach, 343 
women, 293 

as objects of enjoyment, 362 

barren, 224, 232 

inability to follow observances 

of cult, 361, 364, 374 
love-lorn, 334 
wool, 233 

Yajnavalkyasmrti, 191 
Yaksas, 172 

Yama, 167, see also death 
Yangala (name of Kathmandu), xl 
Ya tin dra in a tidTpika , 191 

yoga, 286, 288, 289 

marga, xxxvii 
Patanjala, 192 


-pada, -upaya (means of (en¬ 
suring liberation through) 
yoga, means of med¬ 
itation), xxvii, xxxvii, 
xxxviii, xli, li, lviii, lix, lxi, 
lxiv, lxxxiv, xcvii, 182- 

185, 189, 190, 221, 288, 
289, 361, 362, 365-367, 
369-374, 378, 389, 391 
-padartha, 189 
Yogada , 405 
Yogadlpika xc 

Yogaja ( Yogodbhava ), 402, 405, 

409, 411-413 
Yogamrta ., cvii 
Yogasarigraha, 281 
Yogas a r a, see Sivayogasara 
yogas taka, 163 
Yogasutra , 241 
yoghurt, 292, 312 
yogic powers, 285 

yogin , 163, 173, 175, 272, 286, 296, 

297, 391 

yojana ., 210 
yonipadartha , lxii 
Younger, xvii 

Yuktidfpika , xxxv, 172, 185, 212, 

213 

Zizyphus Jujuba , 325 
Zvelebil, xxxvii 












Errata 



p.vi, line 32: for 1 Rafaello' read ‘Raffaele’. 

p.xvii, footnote 24, penultimate line: for ‘ pararthapuja ’ read pararthapuja'. 

p.xxi, footnote 37, line 4: for ‘ ramakantacaryenapy' read 4 ramakanthacaryenapy 

p. xxiv, line 13: for ‘knowledge’ read ‘knowledge,’. 

p.xxviii, footnote 67: lor ‘p,9^ 4 ^ read p.9‘ 15 ^’. 

p.lxiii, footnote 152, line 1: for ‘<sama»' read i <sama»’. 

p.lxviii, lines 16-17: remove ‘11:18b ua bhuyo janmatam vrajet ;’ (bhuyo 
to be construed as a compound). 

p.cxix, line 31: for ‘five' read ‘four’. 

p. 17, apparatus, line 5: for ‘(15.32-3) 1 read ‘(15.39-40)’. 

p. 31, line 11 (1:23.38): for M | R ° read with P SUdlR 

p. 119, apparatus, 3rd register, line 4: for W read WT. 

p. 145, line 6: for Q fT^:fal<c3' Q read ftBfcT 0 . 

p. 177, footnote 51: replace the erroneous translation of the portion quoted from 
the Narcsvarapariksaprakasa ad 1:1 with the following: ‘By [using] this word 
“Sankara”, Sadyojyotih] shows that, although Hari, Hara, Hiranyagarbha and 
other such |figures) known in other theological schools are gods, because they 
are not Sankara [i.c. because they are not salvific], people of sense do not occupy 
themselves with investigating them.’ 

p. 197, footnote 116, line 5: for ‘ vaibhasikall read ‘vaibiiasiicali’. 

p.225, line 7: for ‘poisition’ read ‘position’. 

p.226, line 7: for ‘bound soul’ read ‘bonds’. 

p. 379. line 3: for ‘kriya 1 read ‘kriya,’. 

406, lines 8, 9 and 15: for ‘tad anantaram’ read ‘tadanantaram’. 

jj. 412, line 17: for ‘evam eva’ read ekam eva’. 

p. 428, line 35: for ‘Filiozat’ read ‘FilliOZAt’. 

p. 430, line 7: for ‘56-72’ read ‘56-62’. 

p.430, line 23: for ‘Berkley’ read ‘Berkeley’. 

p. 433, line 32: for ‘B 24/59.’ read ‘B 24/59).’ 

p. 469, column 2, s.v. maya: for ‘beginninlessness’ read ‘beginninglessness’. 


Addendum 

The following is missing from the list of works consulted: 

UTTARAKARANAGAMA Madras (Cintatiripettai): f avahanapotayantracalai, 1928 (Kali 

yuga 5029). 















































Supplementary List of Errata 

;, br a number of the following improvements I am grateful to Professor Torella.) 
p.iii, line 11 : for ‘d’espoir’ read Tespoir’. 
p.vi, line 26: for ‘Ecole’ read ‘Ecole’. 
p.xvii, line 6 : for ‘hesitantly’ read ‘has'. 

p.xlvii, footnote 107, line 16: for ‘on ff. 103'-111'Y read ‘on ff. 103 v -lll' of the 
Cambridge manuscript,’. 

p. 1 , last line: for ‘ adhvavidhanannama sattrinisah' read ‘adhvavidhanan nama sattrhngah 
■ ■ ■. ■ ■ 

mm * # 

p. lx, line 1 : for ‘tu prefaced’ read ‘tu, prefaced’. 

p.lxxiv, line 22 : for ‘terminus post quern’ read ‘terminus ante quern 1 , 
p.cxviii, line 27: for ‘transmission constituting’ read ‘transmission, constituting 5 , 
p. cxviii, line 28: for ‘ Matahgavrtti' read ' Mat an gavrtti 
p. cxx, line 22 : for partiularly’ read ‘particularly’. 

p. 22 , line 0 (1:17.17): the emendation to H lc*-p?>cq is (in plan’ of PPcfM <4 K) is 
unnecessary. 

p.48, line 13 (2:19,21): in place of Mfcl Ml ° read, with P 2 P 3 , 

p.48, line 13 (2:19.21): for read °^<;IVl£Mq^q. 

p. 169: add the following to the end of footnote 26: ‘Note that an initial kila appears 
also on p. 11 of Jayantabhatta’s Agamadambara (prose following verse 20 of 
act 1 ) and that the editors, unfamiliar with the usage, suggest (in footnote 3 ) 
that some text might have been lost before it (Agamadam bar a of Jayant abhatta. 
ed. V. Raghavan and Anantalal Thakur. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute, 1964).’ 

p. 187, line 24: for 
(vicarayati)’. 

p, 188, line 3: for ‘[the topic of] ‘deliberation' (vicarah)' read ‘[the topic of] ‘setting 
in motion’ (vicarah)’. 

p. 189: add to the end of footnote 87: ‘Professor Torella (letter of 23.V.98) suggests 
that the intended sense of the cruxed passage is different: “ce qu’on veut dire ici 
est que tout en accept ant la seconde interpretation (evarn a pi) on a toujours a 
faire avec dcs categories (quoique entendues differeinment), et leur nombre aussi 
ne change pas. 

p.205, line 13: for ‘that is [among its] objects.’ read ‘that is its object.’. 

p.230: add to the end of footnote 210 : ‘Note that the text and translation of this 
passage (2:5,5-9 mahapralaya iv a ... tad apy aksiptam atra) are uncertain.’ 

p.236, line 12 : for ‘[Even] if that is so, there 5 read ‘If that is so, [then the possibility 
may be considered that] there’. 

p. 240, line 2 : for ‘corrollary’ read ‘corollary’. 


Siva] deliberates (vicarayati) on’ read ‘[Siva] sets in motion 


n 1 


]). 245, line 23: for ‘proclaiming a [non-existent] fault , 5 read ‘proclaiming a non-existent 
fault, 5 . 






















2 


Supplementary List of Errata 


p, 245: delete footnote 259. 

f*\ 

p. 245: replace footnote 262 by: ‘ As Professor Torella has pointed out to me (letter 
of 23.V.98), the term adosodbhavana is Dharmaklrti’s, defined in two different 
ways in his Vadanyaya (Dharmaklrtis Vad any ay ah, ed. and transl. Michael Tor¬ 
sten Much, Veroffentlichungen der Kommission fiir Sprachen und Kulturen Sti- 
dasiens Nr. 25, Wien: Verlag der osterreichischen Akadernie der Wissenschaften, 
1991, pp. 21 and 23).’ 

p. 255. line 18: for ‘is not [a] separate [entity from may a].' read ‘is not separate [from 
the soul]. 1 . (The fault to which the text refers is that expressed in 2:24c-26b.) 

p. 259, line 20: for ‘because he is 1 read ‘because He is’. 

p. 353, line 5: for ‘(iha) there’ read ‘(iiia), there’. 

p. 395, line 17: for m^I fccMi % read e!I IV 

p. 425: replace the erroneous entry for the Mahabharata with the following: 

‘mahabharata, ed. V. S. Sukthankar (1927-43) and S.K. Belvalkar (from 1943) 
with the co-operation of Shrimant Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi, R. N. Dandekar, 
S.K. De, F. Edgerton, A. B. Gajendragadkar, P. V. Kane, R. D. Karmakar, V. G. 
Paranjpe, Raghu Vira, V. K. Rajavade, N. B. Utgikar, P. L. Vaidya, V. P. Vaidya, 
II. D. Velankar, M. Winternitz, R. Zimmerman and other scholars and illustrated 
by Shrimant Balasaheb Pant Pratinidhi. 19 Yols. Poona: Bhandarkar 1 Oriental 
Research Institute, 1927-1959. 

p.435, line 3: for ‘Tokunaga , 1 read ‘Tokunaga, Muneo,’. 

p.457, column 2, line 15: lor £ (tantavataraica) 1 read (tantravaiaraka)’. 


Addendum 

The following is missing from the list of works consulted: 

SIVAjnanABODHOPANYASA of Nigamajhanadesika, edition and translation being pre¬ 
pared by Mr. T. Ganesan of the French Institute of Pondicherry. 












































































































