Chennai 


on, 


Arya Samaj Charitable Foundati 


T 


a 


L. 


a 


ars 
ion b 


T 


ae 
OARA 
pa Savy 


ZS" 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


MANDUKYA UPANISAD 


With the Karika of 
GAUDAPADA 
and the Commentary of 
SANKARACARYA 


Translated by 
SWAMI GAMBHIRANANDA 


213 3 
ADVAITA ASHRAMA 


5 Denr Enratty Roap 
CALCUTTA 700014 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Published by 
Swami Ananyananda 
President Advaita Ashrama 
Mayavati Pithoragarh Himalayas 


All Rights Reserved 
First Edition, July 1979 
6M 


Set and Printed in India 
By B. B. Chandra 
ORIENTAL PRINTING HOUSE 
35-1A Huzuri Mull Lane 
Calcutta 700014 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


PREFACE 


__ The Māņdūkya Upanisad and Karika, with the 
-English translation of the commentary of Sri Sankara- 
carya, is the third in the series to be published by us, 
-after the Aitareya Upanisad and the Mundaka Upanisad. 
This is to be followed very soon by the Prasna 
Upanisad. These four Upanisads together constitute 
Volume Two of Eight Upanisads by the same author. 

In the translation of the commentary, the words 
‘quoted from the text by Sankaracarya are given in 
italics. These are followed by commas and the English 
«equivalents. Informative explanatory footnotes have 
‘been added wherever necessary. 

This Upanisad derives its name after its seer 
Mandika, and belongs to the Atharya-Veda. Though 
‘it is the shortest of the principal Upanisads, having 
only twelve passages, it presents the quintessence of the 
‘entire Upanisadic teaching. It analyses the whole gamut 
-of human consciousness, in the three states of waking 
‘(jagrat), dream (svapna), and dreamless sleep (susupti). 
It asserts unequivocally that the ultimate Reality is 
_non-dual (advaita) by adopting a unique method of 
‘investigating the three states of human consciousness, 
‘and proclaims the mahdvakya (sacred dictum): 
-ayamatma brahma (this self is Brahman). 

This Upanisad provides a symbol for the meditation 
on, and the relization of, the supreme Reality ; and 
that symbol is the mono-syllable AUM, the word of all 
-words, comprising three sounds A, U, M, whose philo- 
-sophical implications are elaborated in the text. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
vi 


The language of this Upanisad is compact and 
concise. Hence the need of a Karika (expository 
treatise) by no less a person than’ Sri Gaudapada, the 
paramaguru (spiritual teacher’s teacher) of Śrī Sankara- 
carya. The Acarya considered it necessary to write a 
bhasya (commentary) on the Karika also, because of 
its lucid exposition of the text, apart from a commen- 
tary on the Upanisad proper. It can be said that the 
Karika is one of the earliest attempts to systematize 
the teachings of the Upanisads on rational lines. As 
such, it is looked upon as an authentic treatise on the 
Advaita Vedanta. 

We earnestly hope that, with the publication of the 
present separate edition of this very important 
Upanisad, it will reach a wider circle of readers and 
arouse in them a genuine interest in the subject- 
matter and help them to have correct idea of the 
Advita Vedanta philosophy, which presents Truth, 
without any consideration for creed, sect colour, race, 
sex, or belief. 


Mayavati PUBLISHER 
1 July 1979 


°T 


Y A dl ham 


. PRONUNCIATION 
Sounds like Sounds like 
a oinson dd 
ST a ain master dh dh in godhood ` 
i iinif n nin under 
i ee in feel t French t 
u win full th th in thumb 
ü oo in boot d thin then 
r somewhat between dh theh in breathe here 
r and ri no 
e ain evade pp 


AMAA 4 4 3 2 3 S,9,2 Aa 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


KEY TO TRANSLITERATION AND 


ai yin my 

o o in over 

au ow in now 

k k 

kh ckh in blockhead 
g g (hard) 

gh gh in log-hut 

Tie Ss 

c ch (not k) 

ch chh in catch him 
jj 

jh dgeh in hedgehog 
ñ n (somewhat) 

tt 

th th in ant-Aill 


“MAAN 23) 4 < 34 G Q q 24 G4 Gaga a 


ph ph in loop-hole 
bb 

bh bh in abhor 
mm 

y 

r r 

11 

v in avert 

š sh 

s sh in show 
ss 

h h 

m m in hum 

h half h in huh! 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 


Ananda Giri 

Aitareya Upanisad 
Aitareya Aranyaka 
Apastarnba Dharma-Sitras: 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
Chandogya Upanisad 
Bhagavad Gita 

Íša Upanisad 

Jabala Upanisad 

Katha Upanisad 
Kausitaki Upanisad 
Kena Upanisad 

Manu Samhita 
Maitrayani Upanisad 
Mandtkya Upanisad 
Mahabharata 

Mundaka Upanisad 
Muktika Upanisad 


Narada-Parivrajaka Upanisad’ 


Prasna Upanisad 
Svetasvatara Upanisad 
Taittiriya Upanisad 
Taittirlya Aranyaka 
Taittiriya Brahmana 
Taittiriya Sarnhita 
Yajur-Veda 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


MANDUKYA UPANISAD 
AND KARIKA 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


š% ag athe: TATA Sar 
ug aaa: | 
saya cated sag: II 

eae < Seal gesar: 
afa a: qar RANT: 

afa weet aR: 
aa at qag | 


34 srrfeq: ma: mf: UI 


Om ! O gods, may we hear auspicious words 
with the ears; while engaged in sacrifices, may 
we see auspicious things with the eyes ; while 
praising the gods with steady limbs, may we 
enjoy a life that is beneficial to the gods. 


May Indra of ancient fame be auspicious to 
us ; may the supremely rich (or all-knowing) 
Pisa (god of the earth) be propitious to us; 
may Garuda, the destroyer of evil, be well 
disposed towards us; may Brhaspati ensure 
our welfare. 


Om! Peace! Peace! Peace! 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


MANDUKYA UPANISAD 


CHAPTER I 


AGAMA-PRAKARANA (ON THE VEDIC TEXT) 


AMM Wass Fa a ugi 


ay aarm Aaaa AASTA 
Trie A RRT A FTL 
aaga f aa: era <srqfšreqr 
fanr aatan: et serah: IRI 


Commentator’s invocation: (1) I bow to that 
Brahman which after having enjoyedi (during the 
waking state) the gross objects by pervading all the 
human objectives through a diffusion of Its rays? of 
unchanging Consciousness that embraces all that moves 
or does not move ; which again after having drunks 
(during the dream state) all the variety of objects, 
produced by desire (as well as action and ignorance) 
and lighted up by the intellect,4 sleeps while enjoying 


1 Enjoyment consisting in witnessing the various mental moods 
of happiness, sorrow, etc. 


2 The individual souls that are but reflections of Brahman on 
the intellect. 


3 i.e. haying merged all in the unrealised Self. 


4 Existing only subjectively in the form of mental moods or 
impressions of past experience. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


4 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. I 


bliss and making us enjoy through Maya ; and which 
is counted as the Fourthi from the point of view of 
Maya, and is supreme, immortal, and birthless. 

(2) May that Fourth one protect us which, after 
having identified Itself with the universe,2 enjoys 
(during the cosmic waking state) the gross objects 
created by virtue (and, vice) ; which again (during 
the cosmic dream state3) experiences through Its own 
light the objects of enjoyment that are called up by 
Its own intellect ; which, further (in sound sleep or 
cosmic dissolution), withdraws promptly all these 
into Itself; and which lastly becomes free from 
all attributes by discarding every distinction and 
difference. 

Introduction: “The letter Om is all this. Of this 
a clear exposition (follows)” (Ma. I. i. 1). These four 
Chapters (of the Karika) that sum up the quintessence 
of the Vedantic ideas are commenced with the text, 
“The letter Om is all this” etc. Accordingly, the con- 
nection, subject-matter, and utility (of this treatise) 
need not be separately dealt with. The connection, 
subject-matter, and utility that pertain to Vedanta 
itself should fit in here also.4 Still they ought to be 


1 Not possessed of the three states of waking, dream, and sleep. 

2 The cosmic gross body of Virat. 

3 As identified with the cosmic subtle body of Hiranyagarbha. 

4 The present book comprising the Upanisadic text and the 
Karika of Gaudapada forms a sort of a treatise on the Vedanta ; 
and hence the four anubandhas or interconnecting elements— 
viz adhikari, the person competent for study, sambandha, con- 
nection, e.g. that between the book and the subject-matter, visaya, 
subject-matter of the book, viz unity of the Self and Brahman, 
and prayojana, utility, viz liberation—are the same in both cases. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ma. 1] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 5 


riefly stated by one who wants to explain a treatise. 
In this connection it is to be noted that by the very 
fact that a scripture, (whether it be Vedanta or a treatise 
on it), reveals the spiritual disciplines conducive to 
the goal ; it becomes endowed with a subject-matter ; 
and from this fact it becomes indirectly possessed of a 
distinct relationship, a subject-matter, and utility.1 What 
again is the objective in view? That is being explained : 
Just as the normal state of a man, afflicted by disease, 
consists in his getting cured of the disease, similarly the 
normalcy of the Self, stricken with identification with 
misery, is regained through the cessation of the phenom- 
enal universe of duality. The end in view is the 
realisation of non-duality. Since the phenomenal world 
of duality is a creation of ignorance, it can be eradicated 
through knowledge ; and hence this book is begun in 
order to reveal the knowledge of Brahman. This fact is 
established by such Vedic texts as: Because when there 
is duality, as it were, (then one smells something, one 
sees something”, and so on) (Br. II. iv. 14); “When 
there is something else, as it were, then one can see 
something, one can know something” (Br. IV. iii. 31) ; 
«But when to the knower of Brahman everything has 
become the Self, then what should one see and through 
what, then what should one know and through what ?” 
( Br. II. iv. 14.) 


1 We are concerned primarily with knowledge and its result and 
not with books. The result aimed at is liberation which follows 
from the realisation of the non-difference of the Self and Brahman, 
and not from mere scriptures. Still the scriptures express that 
non-difference, and knowledge does not dawn without the help of 
scriptural deliberation. Thus as indirect means to knowledge, the 
scriptures become connected with the subject-matter. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


6 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. i 


That being so, the first chapter, devoted to a deter- 
mination of the meaning of Om, is based on (Vedic) 
traditional knowledge and is an aid to the ascertain- 
ment of the reality of the Self. The second chapter is 
concerned with rationally proving the unreality of that 
phenomenal world of duality, on the cessation of which 
is attained non-duality, just as the reality of the rope 
is attained on the elimination of the illusion of a snake 
etc. imagined on it. The third chapter is there to 
establish rationally the truth of non-duality, lest it, too, 
should be negated by a similar process of argument. 
The fourth chapter seeks to refute through their own 
arguments all the un-Vedic points of view that are 
antagonistic to the truth of non-duality established by 
non-dualism, and that remain involved in this unreal 
duality by the very fact of their mutual antagonism. 

How again does the ascertainment of the meaning of 
Om become an aid to the realisation of the reality of the 
Self? The answer is: From such Vedic texts as, (That 
goal which all the Vedas with one voice propound, 
which all the austerities speak of, and wishing for which 
people practise Brahmacarya)—it is this, viz Om” (Ka. 
I. ii. 15), “This medium is the best” (Ka. I. ii. 17), 
“O Satyakama, this (Om) is verily Brahman, (superior 
and inferior)” (Pr. V. 2), ‘‘Meditate on the Self as Om” 
(Maitra. VI. 3), “Om is Brahman” (Tai. I. viii. 1), “Om 
indeed is all this” (Ch. IT. xxiii. 3), it follows that just as ` 
the non-dual Self, notwithstanding the fact that It is the 
supreme Reality, can still be the substratum of all such 
illusions as the vital force, like the rope etc. becoming 
the substrata of the snake etc., similarly it is but Om 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ma. 1] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 7 


that appears as all the ramifcations of speech that 
have for their contents such illusory manifestations of 
the Self as the vital force etc. And Om is essentially the 
same as the Self, since it deno tes the latter. And all the 
illusory manifestations of the Self, such as the vital force 
etc., that are denoted by the modifications of Om, do 
not exist apart from their names, in accordance with 
the Vedic texts: “All that is modification exists only in 
name, having speech as its support” (Ch. VI. i. 4), “All 
this phenomenal creation of that Brahman is strung 
together by the thread of speech and by the strands of 
names”, “All these are but dependent on names”1, and 
so on. Hence the Upanisad says, “Om iti etat aksaram 
idam sarvam—the letter Om is all this.” 


cifras wt anen wš wager 
RR wae ca) sm eared TEAST 
gq lII 

1. The letter Om is all this. Of this a clear 
exposition (is started with): All that is past, 
present, or future is verily Om. And whatever 
is beyond the three periods of time is also 
verily Om. 

As all these objects that are indicated by names 
are non-different from the names, and as names are 
non-different from Om, so Om is verily all this. And 
as the supreme Brahman is known through the rela- 


tionship subsisting, between name and its object, It, 
too, is but Om. Tasya, of that, of this letter, viz Om, 


1 Names make empirical dealings possible for objects. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
8 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 1 


that is the same as the supreme as well as the inferior 
Brahman ; upavyakhyanam, a clear exposition, as show- 
ing its proximity to Brahman by virtue of its being a 
means for the attainment of Brahman ; the expression, 
“is to be understood as started with”, has to be sup- 
plied after “clear exposition” to complete the sentence. 
Bhiitam, the past; bhavat, the present ; bhavisyat, the 
future ; iti, these, that is to say, whatever is circum- 
scribed by the three conceptions of time; sarvam 
oñkarah eva, all this is but Om, in accordance with 
the reasons already advanced. Ca yat trikaldtitam, 
and whatever else there is that is beyond the three 
periods of time, that is inferable from its effects but 
is not circumscribed by time, e.g. the Unmanifested 
and the rest ; tat api, that, too, is oñkarah eva, verily Om. 
Though a word and the thing signified are the same, 
still the presentation in the text, “The letter Om is 
all this” etc., was made by giving greater prominence 
to the word. The very same thing that was present- 
ed through an emphasis on the word is being indicat- 
ed over again with a stress on the thing signified, so 
that the unity of the name and the nameable may 
be comprehended. For otherwise, the nameable hav- 
ing been grasped as dependent on the name, the doubt 
may crop up that the identity of the nameable with 
the name is to be taken in a secondary sense. And 
the necessity of understanding their identity arises 
from the fact that once this identity is established, 
one can by a single effort eliminate both the name 
and the nameable to realise Brahman that is different 
-from both. And this is what the Upanisad will say 
in, “The quarters are the letters of Om, and the letters 


: 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Ma. 2| MANDUKYA UPANISAD 9 


are the quarters” (Ma. 8). The Upanisad adverts to 
the topic in, “All this is surely Brahman” etc. 


Ua ATE ARTA AT ASAT AGEL URI 


2. All this is surely Brahman. The Self 
is Brahman. The Self, such as It is, is posses- 
sed of four quarters. 


Sarvam etat, all this, all this that was spoken of as 
but Om; is brahma, Brahman. That Brahman that 
was indirectly spoken of is being directly and specifi- 
cally pointed out as, “Ayam atma brahma, this Self is 
Brahman.” In the text, “This Self is Brahman”, the 
very Self that will be presented as divided into four 
parts is being pointed out as one’s innermost Self by 
the word “ayam, this”, (accompanied) with a gesture 
of hand.1 Sah ayam atma, that Self that is such, that 
is signified by Om and exists as the higher and lower 
Brahman ; is catuspat, possessed of four quarters, like 
a (karsapana) coin, but not like a cow.2 As the Fourth 
(Turiya) is realised by successively merging the earlier 
three, starting from Visva, the word pada (in the text) 
is derived in the instrumental sense of that by which 


1 By placing the hand on the heart. 

2 The word pada may mean either foot or quarter. The second 
meaning applies here. A karsapana is divisible into sixteen 
smaller units. Four of these form a quarter, and eight form a 
half karsapana. The smaller coins lose their individuality in the 
bigger ones as it were. So Visya merges in Taijasa, Taijasa 
in Praja, and Prajna in Turīya. The word “quarter” is not 
used in any physical sense. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable ona anor Chennai 
10 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 2 


something is attained, whereas in the case of the Turiya 
the word pada is derived in the objective sense of that 
which is achieved. 

The Upanisad shows how the Self can be possessed 
of four quarters : 


amima aera: qara ARAE: Se 
JAMAT: qaq: TF: UZ 

3. The first quarter is Vaišvanara whose 
sphere (of action) is the waking state, whose 
consciousness relates to things external, who 
is possessed of seven limbs and nineteen 
mouths, and who enjoys gross things. 


He (Vaiśvānara) who has the jāgarita, waking state, 
as His sthāna, sphere of activity, is jagaritasthanah. 
He who has His prajña, awareness, bahih, outside, 
directed to things other than Himself, is bahisprajñah. 
The idea is that Consciousness appears as though 
related to outer objects, owing to ignorance. Similar- 
ly, He has seven limbs. For completing the imagery 
of Agnihotra sacrifice contained in, “Heaven is verily 
the head of that Vaigvanara Self, the sun is His eye, 
air is His vital force, space is the middle part, water 
is His bladder, and the earth is His two feet” (Ch. 
V. xviii. 2), the Ahavaniya fire has been imagined 
as His mouth (Ch. V. xviii. 2). He that is possessed 
of these seven limbs is saptangah. Similarly, He is 
ekonavimgatimukhah, possessed of nineteen mouths— 
the (five) senses of perception and the (five) organs of 
action make up ten, the vital forces—Prana and the 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ma. 3] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 11 


rest—make up five, and (there are) mind (thinking 
faculty), intellect, ego, and mind-stuff. These are mouths, 
since they are comparable to mouths ; that is to say, they 
are the gates of perception. Since through -these 
entrances, Vaigvanara, thus constituted, enjoys gross 
objects,—viz sound and the rest, therefore He is sthiila- 
bhuk, an enjoyer of the gross. He is called vaisvanarah, 
because He leads in diverse ways all (vigva) beings (nara) 
(to their enjoyment). Or Vaigvanara is the same as 
Vigvanara ; He is called Vaisvanara (all beings) since 
He encompasses all beings by virtue of His being non- 
different (in reality) from the Self (i.e. Virat) comprising 
all the gross bodies. He is the prathamah padah, the first 
quarter.1 He gets this precedence, because the knowledge 
of the succeeding quarters is contingent on His knowl- 
edge. 

Objection: The topic under discussion being the 
possession of four quarters by the Self as referred to in 
the text, “This Self is Brahman” etc., how is it that 
heaven and the rest are presented as the head etc. ? 

Answer: That is nothing incongruous, inasmuch as 
the intention is to show that the entire phenomenal 
universe and the world of gods, together with this (gross 
cosmic) Self, contribute to the constitution of the 


1 The first step to the knowledge of Brahman. 

2The gross cosmic world, as constituting Virat, is the first 
quarter. The subtle cosmic world, as constituting Hiranyagarbha, 
is the second quarter. The cosmic world in its causal state (of 
ignorance) as constituting the Unmanifested, is the third quarter. 
That, again, when it is freed from all states of cause and effect 
and exists merely as the substratum of all, as Existence-Knowl- 
edge-Bliss, is the fourth quarter. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
12 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 3 


four parts.2 If the presentation is made in this way, 
non-duality stands established on the removal of the 
entire phenomenal world, and the Self existing in all 
beings is realised as one, and all beings are seen as 
existing in the Self.1 And thus alone will stand affirmed 
the meaning of the Vedic text: He who sees all beings 
in the very Self and thə Self in all beings etc.” (IS. 6). 
Otherwise, the indwelling Self, as circumscribed by one’s 
own body, willalone be perceived, as It is by the 
Sa:znkhyas and others ; and in that case the specific state- 
ment, made by the Upanisads, that It is noa-dual (Ma. I. 
7; Ch. VL. ii. 1), will have no distinctiveness, for there 
will be no difference from the philosophy of the Samkh- 
yas and others. But asa matter of fact, it is desirable 
to find all the Upanisads in accord in propounding the 
unity of all the selves. Therefore it is but reasonable 
that, having in view the identity of the Self (as Visva) 
In the individual physical context with the Self as Virat 
(i.e. Vaisvanara) in the divine context, the former should 
be mentioned as possessed of seven limbs comprising 
such physical constituents as heaven etc. And this is 
confirmed by the logical grounds (for inferring unity) 
that is implied in “your head would have dropped off if 
you had not come to me”2 (Ch. V. xii. 2). 


* of Baa aaah TAT | 
aaa q <qTT<T=maí=s Manu 


2 Six Brahmanas, who approached Aévapati, used to worship 
particular limbs of Vaisyanara as Waigvanara Himself. Aéva- 
pati pointed out their mistakes and said that unless they had 
come to him for rectification, their head, eye, life, etc. would 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Ma. 4] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 13 


This identity (of Vigva) with Virat is suggestive of 
the unity (of Taijasa and Prajfia) with Hiranyagarbha 
and the Unmanifested (respectively) as well. And this 
has been stated in the Madhu-brahmana (of the Brha- 
daranyaka Upanisad): “(The same with) the shining 
immortal being ‘who is in this earth, and the (shining 
immortal) corporeal being (in the body). These 
four are but this Self)” etc. (II. v. 1). As for the unity 
of the Self in sleep (Prajfia) and the Unmanifested, 
it is a patent fact because of the absence of distinc- 
tions.1 Such being the case, it will become proved 
that non-duality follows on the dissipation of all 
duality. 


SMS: Tas THe AR- 

A 
gne fata: TR: 11811 

4. Taijasa is the second quarter, whose 
sphere (of activity) is the dream state, whose 
consciousness is internal, who is possessed of 
seven limbs and nineteen mouths, and who 
enjoys subtle objects. 


have been destroyed. But if the individual and Virat are not 
the same, it is unreasonable to say, for instance, that from the 
mistaken worship of heaven (that is only the head of Virat) as 
Virat Himself, one’s own head should drop off. The statement 
becomes reasonable only if the individual and Virat are the same, 
so that the head of the one can be the head of the other. 

1 The individual sleeps by withdrawing all distinctions into 
himself, and in dissolution the Unmanifested, too, withdraws 
everything into itself. The “Unmanifested” means here the “inner 
Director” (Ma. 6), ruling from inside all. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
14 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 4 


Taijasa that has the dream state as his sphere of 
activity is svapnasthanak. The consciousness of the 
waking state, though it is a state of mental vibration, 
is associated with many means, and it appears to be 
engrossed in external objects, and thus it leaves in the 
mind the corresponding impressions. Under the im- 
pulsion of ignorance, desire, and (past) action, the 
mind, thus possessed of the impressions like a piece of 
painted canvas, makes its appearance (in the dream 
state) just as in the waking state, but without any 
external means. In line with this is the statement, 
«(When he dreams), he takes away a little of (the 
impressions of) this all-embracing world (the waking 
state)” (Br. IV. iii. 9). Similarly, in the Upanisad of 
the Atharva-Veda, after introducing (the subject) 
with “All senses become one in the highest deity, the 
mind”, it is said, “here in this dream state, the deity 
(the mind) experiences greatness” (Pr. IV. 5) The 
mind is antah, internal in relation to the senses. He 
whose prajña, awareness in dream, takes the forms 
of the impressions in that. (antah, internal) mind, is 
antah-prajriah, aware of internal objects. He is called 
Taijasa (luminous), since he becomes the witness of 
the (modes of) cognition that is bereft of objects and 
appears only as a luminous thing. As Visva is depend- 
ent on objects, he experiences the (modes of) 
gross cognition, whereas the awareness that is 
experienced here consists of mere impressions ; and 
hence the enjoyment is subtle. The rest is common 
(with the earlier paragraph). Taijasa is the second 
quarter. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Ma. 5] MANDCUKYA UPANISAD 15 


a Oat A s= Tq aT + === GT ge 
qq GIT! BGT hA: se CATR 
AAG ANTS: TTA: TR: UKI 


5. That state is deep sleep where the 
sleeper does not desire any enjoyable thing 
and does not see any dream. The third 
quarter is Prajña who has deep sleep as his 
sphere, in whom everything becomes undiffer- 
entiated, who is a mass of mere conscious- 
ness, who abounds in bliss, who is surely an 
enjoyer of bliss, and who is the doorway to the 
experience (of the dream and waking states). 


Since sleep, consisting in the unawareness of Reality, 
is a common feature of the two states (of waking and 
dream) where there are the presence and absence 
(respectively) of perceptible gross objects, therefore 
the adverbial clause, “Where the sleeper” etc.,1 is used 
in order to keep in view the state of deep sleep. Or 
since sleep, consisting in the unawareness of Reality, 
is equally present in all the three states, deep sleep is 
being distinguished (by that clause) from the earlier 


1 That is to say, the portion ‘‘does not desire any enjoyable 
thing” etc. occurring in the clause “Where the sleeper” etc. ; for 
the portion “does not’’ etc. distinguishes deep sleep from other 
two states which have the common feature of unawareness. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


16 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 5 


two states.1 Yatra, in which place or at which time ; 
suptah, the sleeping man; na pasyati, does not see ; 
kam cana syapnam, any dream; na kamayate, does 
not desire ; kam cana kamam, any enjoyable thing— 
for in deep sleep there does not exist, as in the two 
earlier states, either dream, consisting in the percep- 
tion of things otherwise than what they are, or any 
desire2—this is tat susuptam, that state of deep sleep. 
He who has got this state of deep sleep as his sphere is 
susuptasthanah. He is said to be ekībhūtah, undiffer- 
entiated, since the whole host of duality, that are diver- 
sified as the two states (of waking and dream) and are 
but modifications of the mind, become non-discernible 
(in that state) without losing their aforesaid charac- 
teristics, just as the day together with the phenomenal 
world becomes non-discernible under the cover of 
nocturnal darkness. As such, conscious experiences, 
that are but vibrations of the mind in the waking and 
dream states, become solidified as it were. This state 
is called prajñanaghanah, a mass of consciousness, 
since it is characterised by the absence of discrimina- 
tion. It is a mass of consciousness like everything 


1 Since by the use of the portion “does not see any dream” that 
is to say “does not have any false perception of Reality”, the other 
two states of dream and waking can be eliminated, the addition of 
the portion “does not desire any enjoyable thing” may seem to be 
redundant if we follow the first interpretation. To obviate this 
difficulty the second explanation is introduced. Non-perception 
being a common factor of the three states, sleep can be distin- 
guished by the absence of desire. 

2 Thus either of the adverbial portions—viz absence of false 
perception and freedom from desire—can be used for eliminating 
the earlier two states. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Ma. 6] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 17 


appearing as a mass by becoming indistinguishable 
under nocturnal darkness. From the use of the word 
eva, merely, it follows that there is nothing of a sepa- 
rate class other than consciousness. And he is Gnanda- 
mayah, full of joy, his abundance of joy being caused 
by the absence of the misery involved in the effort of the 
mind vibrating as the objects and their experiencer ; but 
he is not Bliss itself, since the joy is not absolute. Just 
as in common parlance, one remaining free from effort 
is said to be happy or dnandabhuk, an experiencer of joy, 
so this one, too, is called @nandabhuk, for by him is 
enjoyed this state that consists in extreme freedom from 
effort, in accordance with the Vedic text, “this is its 
supreme bliss” (Br. IV. iii. 32). He is cetomukhah, 
since he is the doorway to the consciousness of the 
experiences in the dream and waking states. Or he is 
called cetomukhah, because consciousness, appearing as 
empirical experience, is his doorway or entrance leading 
to the states of dream and waking. He is called prdajiah, 
Prajiia, conscious par excellence, since in him alone is 
there the knowledge of the past and the future and of 
all things. Even though lying in deep sleep he is called 
Prajiia (conscious) because of his having been so earlier 
(in the two former states of dream and waking) ; or he 
is called conscious, since he alone is possessed of the 
peculiar characteristics of mere (undiversified) conscious- 
ness, whereas the other two have diversified knowledge 
as well. Prajña, as described, is the third quarter. 


wat uq dst wiseaiey ait: we 
RETAN fe HATA NRN 


Ma. 3 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


18 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 6 


6. This one is the Lord of all; this one is 
Omniscient ; this one is the inner Director of 
all ; this one is the Source of all ; this one is 
werily the place of origin and dissolution of 


call beings. 

Esah, this one (this Prajfia), when in his natural 
state; is surely sarvegvarah, the Lord of all, of all 
diversity inclusive of the heavenly world ; and contrary 
to what others believe in, He (the Lord of all) is not 
something intrinsically different from this one (that is 
Prajna), as is borne out by the Vedic text, “O good- 
looking one, (the individual soul conditioned by) the 
mind is tethered to (that is to say, has for its goal) the 
Vital Force (which is Brahman)” (Ch. VI. viii. 2). This 
one, again, in his (state of) immanence in all diversity, 
is the knower of all; hence esah sarvajfiah, this one is 
Omniscient. Esah, this one, is; antaryami, the inner 
Controller ; this one becomes the Director of all beings 
iby entering inside (antar). For the same reason! he 
gives birth to the universe together with its diversities, 
cas described before ; and hence esas yonih, this one is 
the Source ; sarvasya, of all. And since this is so, there- 
‘fore this very one, is hi, certainly ; prabhava-apyayau, 
the place of origin and dissolution ; bhūtānam, of 
call beings. 


i GAUDAPADA’S KARIKA 
RY 
Sad WT AafeI— 


1 Since Prajna is Lord, Omniscient, and inner Director (in 
this identity with Brahman). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


I. 2] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA | 19 


Pertaning to this, here are these verses : 


Atra, with regard to the subject-matter dealt with ; 
ete slokah bhavanti, here occur these verses : 


aR fent Gece Sre: | 
TARRAT HTST OH Ua aT Ga: 11911 
1. Višva experiences the external things 
and is all-pervading ; but Taijasa experiences 
the internal things; similarly, Prajfia is a 
mass of consciousness. It is but the same 
entity that is thought of in three ways. 

The purport of the verse is this: The transcendence 
of the three states by the Self, Its unity, purity, and 
unrelatedness (to anything) are proved by the fact of 
Its existence in the three states in succession and of Its 
being interlinked by memory as ‘I’. This is borne out 


by the illustration of the prcat fish and others in the 
Vedic texts.1 


TARA A E ITE: | 
arama q g sretferar tS Aa: NRI 
2. Višva is met with in the right eye which 


1 “As a great fish swims alternately to both the banks (of a 
tiver), eastern and western, so does this infinite being move to 
both these states—the dream and waking states” (Br. IV. iii. 18). 
“As a hawk or a falcon flying in the sky becomes tired, and 
stretching its wings is bound for its nest, so does this infinite being 
run for this state, where falling asleep he craves no desirés and sees 
no dreams” (Br. VI. iii. 19). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
20 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [L. 2 


is his place of experience. But Taijasa is inside 
the mind. Prajfia is in the space within the 
heart. In three ways he exists in the body. 


This verse aims at discovering how all the three, 
starting with Visva, are experienced in the waking state 
itself. Višva, the witness of gross objects is primarily 
experienced1 in the daksina aksi, right eye, that is his 
mukha, mouth (or place of experience) ; and -this is in 
accordance with the Vedic text, “This being who is in 
the right eye is named Indha” (Br. IV. ii. 2). He who is 
Indha or Vaiśvānara, possessed of effulgence—the Virat 
Self (identifying Itself with the cosmic gross body) that 
is within the sun—and he who is the (individual) Self 
(i.e. Višva) in the (right) eye are identical. 

Objection: Hiranyagarbha is different, and different 
also (is the soul that) is the knower of the body and 
senses, that exists in the right eye as the controller of 
the eyes, that is the cogniser, and that is the master 
of the body. : ; 

Answer: Not so, for in reality no difference is 
admitted, in accordance with the Vedic text, “One 
effulgent being hidden in all creatures” (Sy. VI. 11), 
and the Smrti texts, “O scion of the Bharata dynasty, 
know me, again, as the knower of the bodies and 
senses in all the bodies” (G. XIII. 2), “Indivisible, and 
yet existing in all beings, as though divided” (G. XIII. 
16).2 

1 By the adepts in meditation. 


2 Virat is essentially identical with Hiranyagarbha and, so is 
the “knower” with them both. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


I. 2] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 21 


Though Višva exists equally in all the organs, he is 
specially referred- to as existing in the right eye, for in 
the right eye is noticed the faculty of perception at its 
best. The soul, with its abode in the right éye, perceives 
some form; and then closing the eyes and recollecting 
that very form sees it manifested, manasi antah, inside 
the mind, in the form of impressions as in a dream:1 
As it is the case here, so is it in dream. ‘Therefore, 
though Taijasa is within the mind, he is really the same 
as Vigva. On the cessation of the activity called memory, 
Prajiia, sitting a@kase ca hrdi, in the space within the 
heart, becomes free from the diversity (of objects and 
their perceiving subject) and continues to be a mere 
mass of consciousness, for then there is no functioning 
of the mind.2 Perception and recollection are merely 
vibrations of the mind; in the absence of these, there 
is mére existence in an unmanifested state, in the heart, 
in identification with the vital force, as is said in the 
Vedic text, “It is the vital force indeed that engulfs all 
these” (Ch. IV. iii. 3). Taijasa is the same as Hiranya- 
garbha because of existing in the mind, as is declared 
by the Vedic texts : “(Being attached, he, together with 
the work, attains that result to which his) subtle body or 


1 This is how Taijasa is met with in the waking state. And 
Visva and Taijasa are the same ; for the same entity that sees as 
Viéva, recollects as Taijasa. 

2 This is how Prajna is met with in the Waking state. When the 
mind ceases to act, the same entity assumes the characteristics of 
Prajna. 

3 Taijasa is conditioned by the individual mind, and Hiranya- 
garbha by the cosmic mind. But the individual and cosmic minds 
are the same ; and so Taijasa and Hiranyagarbha, conditioned by 
them, must be the same. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


22 MANDUEYA UPANISAD m. 2 


mind (is attached)’: (Br. IV. iv. 6), “This Purusa, 
identified with the mind,2 (and resplendent, is realised 
within the heart)” (Br. V. vi. 1), and so on. 

Objection: The vital force is a manifested (i.e. 
perceptible) reality in a sleeping man ; and the organs 
merge into it How can the vital force be unmani- 


fested ? 

Answer: That is no defect; for an undifferentiat- 
ed thing is characterised by absence of any distinc- 
tion of time and space. Although the vital force appears 
to be differentiated so long as (individual) identifica- 
tion with Prana persists (among those who think them- 
selves to be intimately connected with the different 
portions of the vital forces), still, since the self- 
identification with any special feature, as condi- 
tioned by the body, is absent in the vital force during 
deep sleep, the vital force is then surely undifferen- 


1 Hiramyagarbha, as possessed of the power to act, is the soul 
within the subtle body (Jifga) ; and linga is equated with mind in 
the Vedic text. Therefore Taijasa and Hiranyagarbha are the 
same. 

2 Hiranyagarbha is but a special manifestation of Purusa 
identified with the mind. And Taijasa’s chief adjunct is mind. 
Therefore they are the same. 

3 People sitting by a sleeping man clearly perceive the activities 
of the vital force (Prana). And an additional argument proving 
that Prana is a manifested entity is provided by the fact that the 
organs become identified with it in sleep. ‘‘Unmanifested’’ means 
“devoid of the limitations of time, space, and things”. Prana is 
not so in deep sleep. 

4 They may think, “This is my Prana’, “That is his”, and so 
on. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


T. 2] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 23 


tiated.1 Just as in the case of people identifying them- 
selves with individualised vital force, the vital force be- 
comes unmanifested after death, similar, too, is the un— 
manifestedness in the state of absence of distinctions (im 
deep sleep) in the case of those who identify them- 
selves with the vital force, and similar also is its poten- 
tiality to produce effects. And the witness in the state 
of unmanifestedness and deep sleep is the same (Con- 
sciousness).2 Moreover, since the individuals who 
identify themselves with limitations, or witness those 
states, appear as identical. with the Unmanifested, 
the foregoing attributes, “in whom everything becomes 
undifferentiated”, “who is a mass of consciousness”, 
etc., become appropriate with regard to hims (i.e. Prajna 
in deep sleep, identifying himself with Prana) And 
there is also the reason adduced earlier.4 

Objection: Why should the Unmanifested be called 
Prana (Vital force) ? 

Answer: Because of the Vedic text, “O good- 
looking one, (the individual soul, conditioned by) 
the mind is surely tethered to (that is to say, has for 
its goal) Prana” (Ch. VI. viii. 2). 


1 Though to others it may appear to be manifested, to the 
sleeping man it is unmanifested, because for him Prana is them 
unassociated with any particular time or space. 

2 Consciousness underlines the two entities conditioned by the 
unmanifested states on the divine and human planes. 

3 Not only are the sleeper and the Unmanifested one from the 
standpoint of absence of distinction, but they are also one even 
when conditioned by limiting adjuncts. 

4 The unity of the entity manifested on the divine and human 
planes. , 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


24 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [I. 2 


Objection: In that text the word Prana means 
Brahman that was introduced as Existence in the 
sentence, “O good-looking one, all this was but Exist- 
ence (Brahman) in the beginning” (Ch. VI. ii. 1). 

Answer: That is no valid objection, for Existence 
was assumed there in a state of latency. Though in 
that sentence the Existence-Brahman is called Prana, 
still that Existence (-Brahman) is called Prana as well 
as Existence without ruling out the state of Its being 
the source of the emergence of individual beings. 
Had the seedless (non-causal) state of Brahman been 
meant, the text would have declared, “Not this, not 
this” (Br. IV. iv. 22, IV. v. 15), “From which speech 
turns back” (Tai. II. 9), “That (Brahman) is surely 
different from the known, and, again, It is above the 
unknown” (Ke. I. 4), and so on, as it is also stated by 
the Smrti, “It is called neither existence nor non-exist- 
ence” (G. XIII. 12). If Brahman in Its seedless (non- 
causal) state be meant there, then the individuals that 
merge in It in deep sleep and dissolution cannot rea- 
sonably re-emerge, andi there will be the possibility 
of the freed souls returning to take birth again, for in_ 
either case, the absence of cause is a common factor. 
Besides, in the absence of any seed (of wordly state) 
to be burnt by the knowledge (of Brahman), know- 
edge itself becomes useless. Hence Existence is referred 
to as Prana (in the Chandogya Upanisad) and It is 
spoken of as the cause in all the Upanisads by assum- 
ing It (for the time being) to be the seed of others. 


1 If anybody can re-emerge from sleep or dissolution, çon- 
ceived of as nothing but identity with the pure Brahman, then. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


45] MANDUEKYA UPANISAD 25 


And it is because of this that It is referred to by elim- 
inating Its causal state in such Vedic texts as: ‘“Super- 
ior to the superior Unmanifested” (Mu. II. i. 2), “From 
-which speech turns back” (Tai. II. 9), “Not this, not this” 
(Br. IV. iv. 22), etc. The supremely real state, free from 
-causality, relation with body etc., and modes of waking 
-etc., of that very entity that is called Praja, will be 
spoken separately in its aspect as the Turiya (Fourth). 
“The causal state, too, is verily experienced in the body, 
inasmuch as an awakened man is seen to have sucha 
recollection as, “I did not know anything (in my deep 
-sleep).” Hence it is said, “Tridhā dehe vyavasthitah— 
existing in three ways in the body”. 


frat R wege fred ase: stars | 
AAAI Tera ANT FATT 11311 
3. Visva ever enjoys the gross: Taijasa 
-enjoys the subtle ; and similarly Prajfia enjoys 
‘bliss. Know enjoyment to be threefold. 


eye wad frat qf g Sera 
amaA TAT Hat Far aft Tt lgi 
4. The gross satisfies Vigva, and the subtle 


satisfies Taijasa. And so also joy satisfies 
Prajiia. Know enjoyment to be threefold. 


The two verses need no explanation. 


fag crag agisd era as sal dq: | 
Rapti seg < ys a RA UII 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


26 MANDUKYA UPANISAD m. > 


5. He who knows both these—viz the: 
enjoyment that there 1s in the three states, and 
that which is declared to be the enjoyer there—- 
does not become affected even while enjoying. 

Trisu dhamasu, in the three states, of waking and the- 
rest; there is but one bhojyam, object of enjoyment, 
that appears in triple form, known as gross, subtle, and 
bliss. And the entity, known by the names of Viéva,. 
Taijasa, and Prajiia, is prakirtitah, declared to be the 
one bhoktā, enjoyer, because of his recognition (i.e. 
persistence of memory in all states) through the single- 
concept of “I am that’, and because of his common: 
feature of being the perceiver. He who veda, knows ;. 
etat ubhayam, both these, as diversified multifariously 
into enjoyers and the things of enjoyment ; sah, he ; na 
lipyate, dees not become affected ; bhuñjanah, even while- 
enjoying, because all that is enjoyable belongs to a single- 
enjoyer. For nothing is added to or deducted from: 
one’s nature by one’s own objects (of enjoyment or 
awareness) as in the case of fire ; for fire does not lose 


or gain (in its essential nature) by consuming its owm 
fuel. 


ma: TAA aar ATT: | 
wa saa TORT qeq: TAA NEL 
6. It is a well-established fact that origina- 
tion belongs to all entities that have existence. 
Prana creates all (objects); Purusa creates 


separately the rays of Consciousness (that are 
the living creatures). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


I. 6] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 27 . 


Prabhavah, origination, in their respective apparent 
appearances consisting of names and forms created by 
ignorance ; saryabhūtānām, belongs to all entities, to the 
different modes of Višva, Taijasa, and Prajña ;—satam, 
to all those that exist.1 It will be said later on, “A 
barren woman’s son does not take birth either in reality 
or through Maya” (Karika, III. 28). For if birth really 
belongs to nonentities themselves, then Brahman, which 
is beyond all empirical relations, will be left without any 
ground of cognition,2 and may be equated with nonentity. 
But as a matter of fact, it is seen that the snake and 
such other things, created by ignorance, and sprouting 
from the seed of Maya, and appearing as a rope etc., 
have their existence as the rope etc. (which are their 
substrata). For nobody perceives anywhere a rope- 
snake or a mirage if there is no substratum. Just as the 
snake surely had its existence as the rope before its 
illusory appearance as the snake, so also all positive 
entities, before their manifestation, had certainly 


1 Exist in their own substratum on which they are superim- 
posed. In the sixth paragraph of the Upanisad, in “this one is 
verily the place of origin”, it was said that Prajña is the source of 
the phenomenal world. The question now is: “Is he a producer 
of entities or nonentities ?” The answer is that he produces entities 
which are a sort of reflection of Reality and are true so long as 
their substratum is kept in view. 

2 Logical ground of inference. If the effect is true, the cause 
can be inferred to be so; but if the effect is non-existing, the 
cause will be equally so. The inference with regard to Brahman 
will be like this: “This world is produced from Existence 
(rahman), for it is a superimposed thing like the snake on a 
rope.” 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


28 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [L. 6 


existence in the form of their cause, Prana.1 And it is 
therefore that Upanisad, too, says, “All this (that is in 
front) is but Brahman” (Mu. II. ii. 11), “In the beginn- 
ing this universe was but the Self” (Br. I. iv. 1). Prazahk 
janayati, Prana creates, sarvam, all. Purusah janayati, 
Purusa creates; prthak, separately; cetomsun, the 
rays of Consciousness, that issue out (from Purusa) 
like rays from the sun, that are the modes of the 
intelligence of Purusa who is by nature Consciousness, 
that are comparable to the reflections of the sun on 
water, and that appear divergently as Visva, Taijasa, and 
Prajna in the different bodies of gods, animals, and 
others ;—(Purusa creates) all these rays of Consciousuess 
that possess the characteristics of living creatures, that 
differ from what has assumed the appearance of objects, 
and that are similar (to Purusa) just as the sparks of fire 
(are to fire), or the reflections of the sun on water (are 
to the sun). But Prana, or the Self in the causal statė, 
creates all other entities2"as shown in the Vedic texts : 
“as a spider (spreads and withdraws its thread)” (Mu. 
I. i. 7), and “as from fire tiny sparks fly in all directions” 
(Br. II. i. 20). 


RAR seat art Aged ae T: | 
CARAS qfeeq=sfs=feqar Ill 


7. Others steeped in cogitation about 


1 Prana is Brahman considered as an unknown entity but 
identified with Existence and serving as the source of all. 
2 Existing in the form of objects. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
1.7] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 29 


creation consider origination as an exuberance 
(of God), while by others it is imagined that 
creation is comparable to dream or magic. 


Srsticintakah, people steeped in thethought (or theories), 
of creation ; manyante, consider; that creation is a 
vibhati, exuberance, (a demonstration of the superhuman 
power), of God. The idea implied is that for people 
who think of the supreme Reality there is no interest in 
questions regarding creation, (which is illusory) as is. 
declared in the Vedic text, “Indra (the Lord), on account 
of Maya, is perceived as manifold” (Br. II. v. 19). For 
those who observe a magician throw up a rope into the 
sky, ascend it with arms and vanish out of sight, and 
engage in a fight in which he is cut to pieces and falls to 
rise up again, do not evince any interest in deliberating. 
on the reality of the magic and its effect conjured up by 
him. Similarly, analogous to the spreading out of the 
rope by the magician, is this manifestation of deep sleep, 
dream, and so on ; comparable to the magician, up the 
rope, are the Prajña, Taijasa, and the rest in those 
states ; and different from the rope and the man who has. 
climbed up it is the real magician. Just as that very 
magician stands on the ground, invisible because of his. 
magical coyer, similar is the supreme Reality called 
Turiya. Therefore the noble people, aspiring to libera- 
tion, evince interest in the contemplation of that Turiya 
alone, but not so in that of creation that serves no 
purpose. Hence these theories are advanced only by 
those who cogitate about creation. This fact is stated. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


30 MANDUEKYA UPANISAD [I. 7 


in svapnamayasaripa, of the same nature as dream and 
magic.1 


Sara m: fetes ast afa: | 
OTSA AA Aeset ERT: MCI 
8. With regard to creation some have the 
firm conviction that creation is a mere will of 
the Lord. People engrossed in the thought of 
time (to wit, astrologers) consider that birth 
of beings is from time. 


Srstik, creation, is icchamdtram, a mere will; prabhoh, 
of the Lord, because His will is unfailing. A pot, for 
instance, is a mere thought, and it is nothing beyond 
thought. Some think that creation is from time alone. 


wand Breas mer fate ATA | 
TAT STATA STS AT VIET lR 
9. Some others say that creation is for the 
enjoyment (of God), while still others say that 
it is for (His) disport. But itis the very nature 
of the Effulgent Being, (for) what desire can 
One have whose desire is ever fulfilled ? 
Others think that srstik, creation, is bhogartham, 


1 This differs from the Vedantic position in believing that dream 
is true so faras it reflects the phenomenal realities of the waking 
state, and that the incantations etc., conjuring up magical illusions, 
are themselves empirically true, though the magic is false. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Fpundat ay, Sev, | 
(legs 


“Ma. 7] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 31 


for the sake of enjoyment; (and) kyidartham, for the 
“sake of disport. These two views are refuted by “‘devasya 
-esah svabhavah ayam, of the Effulgent Being this is the 
nature’’! etc., where reliance is placed on the argument 
from the nature (of God). Or all the points of view2 are 
refuted by asserting, ““Aptakamasya ka sprha, what desire ` 
-can One have whose desire is ever fulfilled ?” For apart 
‘from the fact that the rope etc. are constituted by 
-natural ignorance,3 no cause can be ascertained for their 
Appearing as snake etc. 


UPANISAD 


The fourth quarter which follows in order has to be 
‘stated ; hence this is presented (by the Upanisad) in 
“nantah-prajnam, not conscious of internal object” etc. 
‘Since It (i.e. Turiya) is devoid of every characteristic 
that can make the use of words possible, It is not 
‘describable through words ; and hence the (Upanisad) 
-seeks to indicate Turiya merely through the negation of 
attributes. 


Objection: In that case It is a mere void. 

Answer: No, for an unreal illusion cannot exist 
-without a substratum ; for the illusion of silver, snake, 
human being, mirage, etc., connot be imagined to exist 


1 Nature, otherwise known as Maya, is without any beginning 
‘hough it is directly perceived. This being so, no motive should 
ibe searched for. 

2 Presented in the verses 7 and 8, and the first line of verse 9. 

3 Ignorance about the rope etc. that are the substrata of the 
‘illusory things like snake etc. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
32 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 7 


apart from the (corresponding) substrata of the mother 
of pearl, rope, stump of a tree, desert, etc.1 

Objection: In that case, just as a pot etc. that hold. 
water etc. are denoted by works, so also Turiya should 
be specified by (positive) words, and not by negations, 
for It is the substratum of all such illusion as Prana etc. 

Answer: Not so, because the illusion of Prana and. 
the rest is unreal just as silver and the rest are on the 
mother of pearl etc. For a relation between the real 
and the unreal does not lend itself to verbal represen- 
tation, since the relation itself is unsubstantial. Unlike 
a cow, for instance, the Self, in Its own reality, is not an 
object of any other means of knowledge ; for the Self is. 
free from all adventitious attributes. Nor like a cow 
etc. does It belong to any class ; because, by virtue of 
Its being one without a second, It is free from generic 
and specific attributes. Nor is It possessed of activity 
like a cook for instance, since It is devoid of all action. 
Nor is It possessed of qualities like blueness etc., It. 
being free from qualities. Therefore It baffles all 
verbal description. 

Objection: It will, in that case, serve no useful pur- 
pose like the horn of a hare and such other things. 

Answer: Not so; for when Turiya is realised as. 
the Self, it leads to the cessation of craving for the 
non-Self, just as the hankering for silver ceases on. 
recognising the nacre. For there can be no possibility 
of such defects as ignorance, desire, and the like, after 


1 Since an illusion is perceived as soaked in the idea of exis— 
tence, it cannot have non-existence as it basis. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Ma. 7] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 33 


the realisation of Turiya as one’s Self. Nor is there any 
reason why Turiya should not be realised as identical 
with one’s Self, inasmuch as all the Upanisads aim at 
this conclusion, as is evidenced by the texts, ‘‘Thou art 
That” (Ch. VI. viii-xvi), “This Self is Brahman” (Br 

II. v. 19), “That which is the Self is Truth’ (Ch. VI. 
viii. 16), “That which is directly and immediately Brah- 
man” (Br. III. iv. 1), “That which is inside and outside 
and is without birth” (Mu. II. i. 2), “All this is but the 
Self” (Ch. VII. xxv. 2), and so on. This very Self, that 
is the supreme Reality but has false appearances, has 
been spoken of as possessed of four quarters. Its 
unreal form has been dealt with, which is a creation of 
ignorance and which is analogous to a snake superim- 
posed on a rope, and consists of the three quarters that 
are related (mutually) like the seed and its sprout. 
Now, in the text beginning with, “nantahprajnam, not 
conscious of the internal world”, the Upanisad speaks 
of the non-causal, supremely real state, comparable to 
a rope, etc., by way of eliminating the three states, 
comparable to the snake etc. (superimposed on the 
rope etc.). 

AIS A aS AR A HSITsSSTT A eT 
CIEE | ESCM TAS AAAI POTTS 
Pare SAI Med fra ed Vga a 
a oat a fara: lvl! 

7. They consider the Fourth to be that 
which is not conscious of the internal world, 


1 By way of cause and effect. 


Ma.-4 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
34 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 7 


nor conscious of the external world, nor con- 
scious of both the worlds, nor a mass of con- 
sciousness, nor simple consciousness, nor un- 
consciousness; which is unseen, beyond 


empirical dealings, beyond the grasp (of the 
organs of action), uninferable, unthinkable, 
indescribable ; whose valid proof consists in 
the single belief in the Self; in which all 
phenomena cease ; and which is unchanging, 
auspicious, and non-dual. That is the Self, 


and that is to be known. 

Objection: The start was made with the premise 
that the Self is possessed of four quarters. Then, after 
the presentation of the three quarters, it has become 
evident that the fourth is different from those three 
that are conscious of the internal world, and so on; 
and hence the negation through “not conscious of the 
internal world” etc. becomes futile. 

Answer: Not so; for as the true nature of the rope 
is realised through the negation of the illusions of a 
snake etc., so the very Self, subsisting usually in the 
three states, is sought to be established as Turiya in 
the same way as is done in the case of the text “That 
thou artı (Ch. VI. viii). For if Turiya, whose char- 
acteristics are dissimilar to those of the Self in the three 
states, be really different (from the Self), then 
owing to the absence of any means for realising Turiya 

1 This positive statement is interpreted not literally, but figura- 
tively to mean that “Thou’’, which is the individual soul, is 


identical with “that”, which is God, when both are bereft of 
conditioning factors. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ma. 7] MANDUKYA UPANISAD 35 


the scriptural instruction would be useless or Turiya 
will be reduced to a nonentity. On the view, how- 
ever, that like the rope, imagined variously as a snake 
etc., the Self, too, though one, is imagined in the three 
states to be possessed of such attributes as conscious- 
ness of the internal world etc., there follows the cessa- 
tion of the phenomenal world of misery simultaneous- 
ly with the valid knowledge, arising from the nega- 
tion of such attributes as being conscious of the internal 
world ; and therefore there remains no need to search 
for any other means of knowledge or any other dis- 
cipline (like constant thinking) for the realisation of 
Turiya. This is similar to what happens in the case 
of the knowledge of the rope where the elimination 
of the snake from the rope occurs simultaneously 
with the discrimination between the rope and the 
snake.1 On the contrary, by those who hold the view 
that in the act of knowing a pot, for instance, an instru- 
ment of knowledge engages in some other activity 
in addition to the removal of darkness (from the pot 
etc.), it may as well be held that in the matter of split- 
ting wood, the act of splitting engages in doing some- 
thing to one of the two parts in addition to remov- 
ing the adhesion of the two members.2 On the other 


1 Since along with the discriminating knowledge of the form, 
“This is a rope and not a snake”, the cessation of the snake 
comes simultaneously, one need not search for a separate result 
to issue out of the direct perception of the rope, or for any other 
means of its knowledge, or any other aid to it. 

2 The objection was: “The result of applying an instrument of 
knowledge to any object is the revelation of the object and not 
the mere removal of any illusion created by darkness or “‘ignor- 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


36 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 7 


hand, if it is true that the instrument of knowledge, 
engaged in separating a jar from the darkness (cover- 
ing it), fulfils its goal by merely removing the unwant- 
ed darkness, just as the act of cutting, aiming at liqui- 
dating the sticking together of the parts of the wood 
to be split, fully serves its purpose by separating the 
two limbs, then the knowledge of the jar emerges 
immediately ; and it is not achieved by any instrument 
of knowledge. Just as it is here, so in the case of 
Turiya the instrument of the knowledge, that is no- 
thing but a valid knowledge arising from negation 
and intended to separate such ideas as ‘conscious 
of the internal world” that are superimposed on the 
Self, has no other action on Turiya, apart from elimi- 
nating the unwanted attributes like “conscious of the 
internal world” ;1 for simultaneously with the cessation 
of such attributes as “conscious of the internal world”, 
there comes about the eradication of the difference 
of the knower, (the known, and the knowledge). So 
also it will be said, ‘duality does not persist after 
knowledge” (Karika, I. 18), for knowledge (as a 
mental state) does not continue for a second moment 
following that of the cessation of duality. Should it, 


» 


ance The answer is: “An instrument of knowledge fufils its 
purpose by removing the darkness of ignorance from its object. 
The revelation comes pari passu, as a matter of course. If the 
instrument of knowledge is supposed to serve the additional 
purpose of adding a fresh feature, like revelation, to its object, 
then one may as well argue that the cutting of wood aims not 
only at removing the adhesion of the two parts, but also at adding 
something to either of the two parts.” 

1 Turiya is self-effulgent and does not require to be illumined 
by any instrument of knowledge. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Ma. 7] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & K À RIK À 37 
however, continue, it will lead to infinite regress result- 
ing in non-cessation of duality.1 Therefore the con- 
clusion arrived at is that all evils, such as “conscious- 
ness of the internal world”, superimposed on the Self, 
cease simultaneously with the application (that is to 
say, birth) of the instrument (of illumination) that) ig 
nothing but a yalid knowledge arising from negation 
(of duality). 

By the phrase, ‘‘ndntah-prajijam, not conscious of 
the internal world”, is eliminated Taijasa. By “na 
bahisprajfiam, not conscious of the outside world”, 
is eliminated Visya. By “na ubhayatah-prajiam, nat . 
conscious of either” is ruled out the intermediate state 
between dream and waking. By “na prajaanaghanam, 
not a mass of consciousness” is denied the state of deep 
sleep, for this consists in a state of latency where every- 
thing becomes indistinguishable. By “na prajnam, 
not simple consciousness? is denied the awareness of 
everything simultaneously (by a single act of san7 
sciousness). By “na aprajñam, not unconsciousness” is 
negated insentience. 

Objection: Since attributes like “conscious of the 
internal world?” are ‘perceived as inhering in the Self, 
how can they be understood to become non-existent 


by a mere negation, like the snake disappearing from 
the rope ? 


1 If the knowledge, calculated to eliminate duality, persists after 
serving its purpose, some other knowledge will be needed to 
eliminate it. That other knowledge will again require a third for 
a similar purpose, and so on. To avoid this contingency, the 
final knowledge must be assumed to be self-immolating. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


38 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 7 


The answer is: Since like the imaginary diversities 
— such as a snake, a line of water, etc., superimposed 
on the rope—the above states (appearing on the Self) 
mutually rule out each other, though they are in 
essence one with the witnessing Consciousness, and 
since the witnessing Consciousness in Its essence 
is unchanging in all the states, it follows that the 
witness is true. 

Objection: It changes (i.e. disappears) in deep 
sleep. 

Answer: Not so, for one in deep sleep is cognised 
(as soaked in Consciousness) ;1 and this is borne out by 
the Vedic text, “for the knower’s function of knowing 
can never be lost” (Br. IV. iii. 30). 

And just because It is so, It is adrstam, unseen.2 
Since It is unseen (i.e. unperceived), therefore It is 
avyavaharyam, beyond empirical dealings; agrahyam, 
beyond the grasp, of the organs of action ; alaksanam, 
without any logical ground of inference, that is to say, 
uninferable. Therefore It is acintyam, unthinkable. 
Hence It is avyapadesyam, indescribable, by words. 
It is eka-atma-pratyaya-saram, to be spotted by 
the unchanging belief that It is the same Self that 
subsists in the states of waking and so on. Or the 
Turiya that has for Its sara, valid proof, eka 
atmapratyaya, the single belief in the Self, is the 
eka-atmapratyaya-sara. And this is in accord with 


1 One rising from deep sleep says, “I slept soundly, and I was 
not aware of anything”. This memory would not be possible 
unless the state was witnessed with the help of Consciousness so 
as to produce the necessary impressions. 


2 Not the object of any sense of knowledge. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ma. 7] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 39 


the Vedic text: “It is to be meditated upon as the 
Self” (Br. I. iv. 7), 


The attributes, such as “conscious of the internal 
world”, belonging to the possessors, of the states (viz 
Vigva, Taijasa, and Prajfia), have been negated. In 
“‘prapancopasamam, the one in whom all phenomena 
have ceased”, etc. are being denied the attributes of 
the states. Hence It is Santam, unchanging ;1 sivam, 
auspicious.2 Since It is advaitam, non-dual, free from 
illusory ideas of difference ; therefore manyante, (they) 
consider, It to be ; caturtham, the Fourth, being distinct 
from the three quarters that are mere appearances. 
«Sah atma, that is the Self ; sah vijrieyah, that is to be 
known”—this is said to imply that just as the rope is 
known to be different from the snake, the chink on 
the ground, or the stick, superimposed on it, similarly, 
that Self is to be known (as different from the super- 
imposed states)—the Self that is presented in the sen- 
tence “That thou art” (Ch. VI. viii-xvi), and that has 
been spoken of by such texts as ‘He is never seen, but 
is the witness” (Br. III. vii. 23), “for the vision of the 
witness can never be lost” (Br. IV. iii. 23), etc. This 
(knowledge of the Self) is spoken of from the standpoint 
of the previous state of ignorance, for on the dawn of 
knowledge, no duality is left. 


1 Free from love, hatred, etc. 

2 Absolutely pure ; supreme Bliss and Consciousness in essence. 

3 The Self, defying all description, cannot be known objectively. 
But since in the state of ignorance, one understands, knowledge 
as having objective reference, the text follows that trend of 
thought here as well. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
40 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [I. 10 


GAUDAPADA’S KARIKA 

Here occur these verses (of Gaudapada) : 

Raa: TAG ATA ITA: TIE: | 

aaa: adami Sagal Ag: SAA? Ugo! 

10. The inexhaustible non-dual One is the 

ordainer—the Lord—in the matter of eradi- 
cating all sorrows. This effulgent Turiya is 
held to be the all-pervasive source of all 


entities. 

Niyrtteh, in the matter of the eradication ; sarva- 
duhkhanam, of all sorrows, represented by Visva, Taijasa, 
and Prajna ; the Self that is Turiya is isanah, the 
ordainer. The word prabhuh, Lord, is an explanation of 
z§anah. The idea is that He is the Lord capable of 
ordaining the cessation of sorrow ; for sorrow ceases as 
a result of His knowledge. (He is) avyayah, inexhaust- 
ible, that is to say, does not deviate from His nature. 
Why is this so? Because He is advaitah, non-dual. He 
who is this devah, effulgent One, who is so called because 
of His self-effulgence ; who is turzyah, the Fourth ; is 
smrtah, held to be; vibhuk, all-pervasive (source) ;1 
sarvabhayanam, of all entities. 

For determining the true nature of Turiya, the generic 
and specific characteristics of Visva and the rest are be- 
ing ascertained : 

meia aT STITT | 
` 
TA: BIOS at at qS st fetta: 9911 


1 Turiya is vibhu, because the different (vividha) states issue (bha- 
yanti) from Him—A.G. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


NX. 12] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & K ARIK À 41 


11. Those two, viz Višva and Taijasa, are 
held to be conditioned by cause and effect. 
Prajfia is conditioned by cause. But both 
these do not exist in Turiya. 

Karya, derived in the sense of anything produced, 
-means the state of being the effect. Karana, derived in 
the sense of anything that acts, means the causal state. 
Those two, viz viéya-taijasau, Visva and Taijasa, as 
-described earlier ; isyete, are held to be ; karya-kdrana- 
baddhau, bound by, comprised within, the seed and fruit 
‘states, consisting in the non-apprehension and misap- 
prehension of Reality. But Prajiia is bound by the 
-causal state alone. The non-apprehension of Reality 
alone is the cause of bringing about the state of Prajfia. 
“Therefore tau dvau, both these two—the causal and the 
resultant conditions, the non-apprehension and misap- 
-prehension of Reality ;—na sidhyatah turtye, do not exist, 
that is to say, are not possible, in Turiya. 


aaa < a st Get ATT ATT | 
oa: fore aha Ga qq AEs AT IRRI 


12. Prajña comprehends neither himself nor 
-others, neither truth nor falsehood. But that 
‘Turiya is for ever everything and the witness. 


How, again, is Prajna conditioned by the causal 
‘state, and how are the bondages of non-apprehension 
-and mis-apprehension impossible in the case of Turiya ? 
Since unlike Visva and Taijasa, Prajfia na samvetti, 
does not apprehend ; kim cana, anything, any external 
duality that is different from the Self and is born of 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


42 MANDUKYA UPANISAD Tal: 


the seed of ignorance ; therefore he is conditioned by 
the darkness of non-perception of Reality that is the seed: 
of false perception. Since tat, that ; Turiya is sada, for 
ever ; sarva-drk, all (sarva) that there is as well as a. 
witness (drk), there being nothing beside Turiya ; 
therefore Turiya has not the seed consisting in non- 
perception of Reality. And just because of this there 
is absence in Turiya of false perception resulting from- 
non-perception ; for in the sun, that is ever resplendent, 
there cannot be any possibility of the opposite darkness- 
or shining in any way other than that of the sun, in 
conformity with the Vedic text, “for the vision of the 
witness can never be lost” (Br. IV. iii. 23). Or Turiya is. 
said to be the “‘sarva-drk, seer of everything” for ever,. 
because it is but Turiya who, by existing in all beings- 
during the dream and the waking states, seems to be the 
seer of everything. For the Upanisad says, ‘There is- 
no other witness but this” (Br. III. viii. 11). 


BIA TMA: TATA: | 
AIRA: ma: ATA Ta <+ fat NRI 


13. Non-perception of duality is common: 
to both P:ajña and Turiya. Prajña is endued 
with sleep that is a causal state. But in Turiya 
that sleep does not exist. 


This verse is meant to remove the doubt arising from 
another source. “The non-perception of duality being: 
similar, why should Prajña alone be conditioned by 
causality and not Turiya ?”—this doubt that may arise: 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


I. 14] MANDÜKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 43 


is being refuted. The reason is that Prajña is bija-nidra- 
yutah ; nidra, sleep, consists in the non-perception of 
Reality, and that itself is the bija, seed of the birth of 
the cognition of varieties ; and Prajfia is yutah, endued 
by this bijanidra, sleep that is a causal state. That sleep, 
consisting in the non-perception of Reality, na vidyate, 
does not exist ; ‘urzye, in Turiya, because of his being by 
nature a constant witness. Therefore in Him there is. 
no bondage of the causal state. This is the purport. 


CAAA AAAA | 
a fat ta <q cared ga qsafš< Pasa: 119911 
14. The earlier two are endued with dream 
and sleep, but Prajfia is endued with dream- 
less sleep. People of firm conviction do not 
see either sleep or dream in Turiya. 


Svapna, dream consists in false perception, like that 
of a snake on a rope. Nidra, sleep, has been spoken 
of as darkness, consisting in non-perception of Reality. 
By these two—dream and sleep—are endued Visva 
and Taijasa; and this is why they have been referred 
to as conditioned by the states of cause and effect 
(Karika, I. 11) ; whereas Prajfia is conditioned by sleep: 
alone, unassociated with dream ; and hence he has been 
referred to as conditioned by the causal state. Niscitah, 
those with firm conviction, the knowers of Brahman ; 
na pasyanti, do not see, both these in Turiya, these 
being of an opposite nature, like darkness with regard 
to the sun. Therefore it has been said that Turiya is 
not conditioned by the states of cause and effect. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


44 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [I 15 


It is being shown when one becomes firmly rooted in 
‘Turiya : 


Tea: tact FART AAAS: | 
ait oat ater Guta qaqaq 119511 


15. Dream belongs to one who sees falsely, 
and sleep to one who does not know Reality. 
When the two errors of these two* are remoy- 
ed, one attains the state that is Turiya. 


Svapnah, dream ; comes to one grhnatah, cognising ; 
-anyathd, falsely ; ‘like the cognition of a snake on a 
rope, in the states of dream and waking. Nidra, sleep ; 
—belonging to one ajdnatah tattvam, not cognising 
Reality ;—is equally present in all the three states. 
Dream and sleep being the common features of both 
Viśva and Taijasa, are treated as one. Since in these 
two states sleep is of secondary importance owing to 
the predominance of false perception, the error (in 
these states) is equated with dream. But in the third 
state the error takes the form of sleep alone, consisting 
in non-perception of Reality. Therefore when tayok, 
of these two (Visva-Taijasa and Prajiia), existing in the 
states of effect and cause ; viparydse, the two errors, 
consisting in false perception and non-perception, and 
constituting the two bondages in the states of effect 
and cause ; ksine, are eradicated on the cognition of the 
supreme Reality; then one asnute, attains ; turzyam 
padam, the state of Turiya. The idea is that, as he 


1 Višva and Taijasa constitute one factor and Prajna the other. 
This is why “‘tayohk, of these two” is used in the dual number. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
I. 16} MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 45 


does not perceive both kinds of bondage, he becomes. 
firmly rooted in Turiya. 


srat Gait sar sis: TAR | 
Seana TAI TET IRI 
16. When the individual, sleeping under 
the influence of beginningless Maya, is awak- 
ened, then he realises the birthless, sleepless, 
dreamless, non-dual (Turiya). 

This one, the jzvak, the transmigrating individual 
soul, that is suptak, asleep ; while seeing in both the 
(waking and dream) states such dreams as “This is my 
father”, “This is my son”, “This is my grandson”, “This. 
is my field”, “These are my animals”, “I am their 
master”, ‘I am happy, miserable”, “I am despoiled by 
this one, and I have gained through this one”, and 
so on, under the influence of sleep that is but Maya 
whose activity had no beginning and which has the 
two facets of non-perception of Reality or the causal 
state, and false perception of Reality. Yada, when by 
a most gracious teacher, who has realised the truth 
that forms the purport of the Upanisads, he (the in- 
dividual) is awakened through the teaching, “Thou 
art not a bundle of causes and effects, but ‘Thou art 
That’ ”, then that individual understands thus. How? 
(Thus) : (He knows the) ajam, birthless, which is called 
so since in It there is no external or internal mutation, 
starting with birth, that positive objects are heir to ; 
the idea is that It is externally and internally devoid 
of all mutations that phenomenal objects are subject 
to. (He knows the) anidram, sleepless (Turiya), since in 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


46 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [I. 16 


It there is no sleep or the causal state, consisting in the 
darkness of ignorance that is the cause of birth and 
so on. Since that Turiya is sleepless, therefore (he 
realises) It as asvapnam, dreamless, false perception 
(svapna) being based on non-perception (nidra). Since 
It is sleepless and dreamless, therefore the individual, 
tada, then ; budhyate, realises the birthless, non-dual 
Turiya as his Self. 


sass ate Aaa Raia TART: | 
WTAE Bead WATTS 112911 
17. Itis beyond question that the phenom- 
enal world would cease to be if it had any 
existence. All this duality that is nothing but 
Maya, is but non-duality in reality. 


If one is to be awakened by negating the phenom- 
enal world, how can there be non-duality so long as 
the phenomenal world persists ? The answer is: Such 
indeed will be the case yadi prapaficah vidyeta, if the 
world had existence. But being superimposed like a 
snake on a rope, it does not exist. Na samsayah, there 
is no doubt ; that if it had existed, nivarteta, it would 
cease to be. Not that the snake, fancied on the rope 
through an error of observation, exists there in reality 
and is then removed by correct observation. Not that 
the magic conjured up by a magician exists in reality 
and is then removed on the removal of the optical 
illusion of its witness. Similarly, māyāmātram idam 
dvaitam, this duality that is nothing but Maya, and is 
called the phenomenal world; is paramarthatah, in 
supreme truth ; advaitam, non-dual, just like the rope 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ma. 8] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 47 


and the magician. Therefore the purport is that there 
is no such thing as the world which appears or dis- 
appears. 


fanent fafraca aferat afe Sth | 
was TA gÀ Bea a PIA 1194 
18. Diversity would disappear if it had 
been imagined by anyone. This kind of talk is 
for the sake of (making) instruction (possible). 
Duality ceases to exist after realisation. 
How can such fancies as instruction, instructor, and 
the instructed disappear? To this the answer is: 
Vikalpah, diversity; vinivarteta, would discontinue ; 
yadi, if ; it had been kalpitak, imagined ; kena cit, by 
anybody. Just as this phenomenal world is analogous 
to magic or a snake superimposed ona rope, so also 
such fancies as the differences of the instructed and so on 
are there upadesat, for the sake of instruction; hence 
.ayam yadah, this talk—of instructor, instruction, and 
instructed—is for the sake of instruction. When the 
effect of instruction is accomplished, jñate, on the 
realisation, of the supreme Reality ; dvaitam na vidyate, 
.duality ceases to exist. 


UPANISAD 
CISTARMISAAISMISeATA Wel AAT AAR 
TST AHL SH HAN ZÑ NCI 
8. That very Self, considered from the 
standpoint of the syllable (denoting It) is Om. 
Considered from the standpoint of the letters 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
48 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. & 


(constituting Om), the quarters (of the Self) 
are the letters (of Om), and the letters are the- 
quarters. (The letters are) : a, u, and m. 


Sah ayam atma, that very Self, that was equated with: 
Om in “This Self is possessed of four quarters” (Ma. 2), 
by giving predominance to the object denoted (by Om),—. 
that very Self ; adhyaksaram from the standpoint of the 
syllable, (is Om) when explained with emphasis on the 
syllable. Which again is that syllable? That is being. 
stated : Onkarah, it is the syllable Om. That syllable 
Om, while being divided into quarters, is adhimatram.. 
exists on letters as its basis. How? Those which 
constitute the quarters of the Self are the letters of Om- 
Which are they ? They are the letters a, u, and m. 


Sareea AMÀS JAAT MASSAN- 
eee ks PAARE wat s us 
ntl 


9. Vaigvanara, having the waking state as. 
His sphere, is the first letter a, because of (the 
similarity of) pervasiveness or being the first. 
He who knows thus, does verily attain all 
desirable things, and becomes the foremost. 

With regard to these, specific relations are being: 
established. He who is vaisvanarah, Vaisvanara (Virat) ; 
jagaritasthanah, with His sphere (of activity) as the 
waking state,l is akarah, a ;—prathama matra, the 

1 The Self in the gross individual context (viz Visva) is identical. 


with the Self in the gross cosmic context (viz Vaigvanara or Virat).. 
Similarly, itis to be understood that Taijasa is identical with 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Ma. 10] MĀŅDŪKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 49 


first letter, of Om. Because of what similarity? That 
is being said: Aptek, because of pervasiveness. Apti 
means pervasiveness. By the sound a is pervaded all 
speech, according to the Vedic text, “The sound a 
is indeed all speech” (Ai. A. II. iii. 7. 13). Similarly, by 
Vaisvanara is pervaded the whole universe, according 
to the Vedic text, “The head indeed of this Self, that is 
Vaisvanara, is heaven” etc. (Ch. V. xviii. 2). And we 
said that the word and the thing denoted by the word are 
the same. That which has adi, precedence, is said to be 
Gdimat, first. As the letter called a is the first, so also is 
Vaisvanara. Because of this similarity Vaisvanara is 
identified with a. The fruit attained by a knower of this 
identity is stated: Apnoti ha vai sarvan kaman, he surely 
attains all desirable things ; ca bhavati adih, and he be- 
comes the foremost, among the great ; yah evam veda, 
who knows thus, knows the identity as stated. 


amen TH fetter mAN- 
ft g 3 Tada ARAA walt ATTA, FS 
wate a gs S< goll 


10. He who is Taijasa with the state of 
dream as his sphere (of activity) is the second 
letter u (of Om); because of the similarity of 
excellence and intermediateness. He who 
knows thus increases the current of knowledge 
Hiranyagarbha, and Prajña with the Unmanifested, the difference 
lying only in the sphere of manifestation. This identity is 


suggested by the indiscriminate use of these terms in the present 
and following texts. 


Ma.-5 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
50 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 10 


and becomes equal to all. None is born in his 
line who is not a knower of Brahman. 


He who is taijasah, Taijasa ; svapnasthanah, with the 
state of dream as his sphere ; is the dvitiya matra, second 
letter ; wkarah, u, of Om. Because of what similarity ? 
That is being said: Utkarsat, because of excellence. 
‘The letter u is, as it were, better than the letter a; so 
also is Taijasa better than Visva. Ubhayatvat va or (this 
is so) because of intermediate position. The letter u 
occurs between the letters a and m; and so also is 
Taijasa intermediate between Vigva and Prajna. (Taijasa 
‘is u) because of this similarity of being related to both. 
The result attained by the knower is being stated : 
Utkarsati ha vai jfanasantatim, he heightens, that is to 
say, increases, the current of his knowledge ; ca bhavati 
samanah, and he becomes equal—he does not become 
an object of envy to his enemies, as he is not to his 
friends. Asya kule, in his line; yak evam. veda, who 
knows thus ; na bhavati abrahmayit, none is born who is 
not a knower of Brahman. 


gear: at Fada qr Raat 
fafa g ar sz AE vate a gs Sa (19911 

11. Prajña with his sphere of activity in 
the sleep state is m, the third letter of Om, 
because of measuring or because of absorption. 
Anyone who knows thus measures all this, 
and he becomes the place of absorption. 


He that is prajfiah, Prajña ; susuptasthanah, with the 
state of sleep as his sphere, is makarah, the letter m ; 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


I: 19] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 51. 


which is trtiyé mātrā, the third letter ; of the syllable 
Om. By what analogy? That is being said: This is 
the analogy here—mitek, because of measuring. Miti 
means to measure. As barley is measured by the vessel 
called Prastha, so are Višva and Taijasa measured, as 
it were, because of their entry into and coming out ‘of 
Prajña during dissolution and origination. Similarly, 
` too, at the end of the pronunciation of the syllable Om 
and at the time of its fresh pronunciation, the letters 
a and u seem to enter into the last letter m to come out 
again from it. Va apitek, or because of absorption. 
Apiti means getting merged or united in. At the time 
of the pronunciation of Om, a and u seem to get merged 
into the last letter m. Similarly, Vigva and Taijasa 
merge into Prajiia at the time of sleep. Because of this 
analogy also there is the identity of Prajña and the letter 
m. The result attained by the man of knowledge is 
stated : Minoti ha vai idam sarvam, he measures all this, 
universe, that is to say, he knows its reality ; ca bhavati 
apitih, and he becomes the place of absorption, of the 
universe, that is to say, the Self in Its causal state. The 
mention of subsidiary results here is by way of praising 
the primary means. 


GAUDAPADA’S KARIKA 


Here occur these verses (of Gaudapada) : 


Tsss=rreqfFst8rraTarfsararesaen=q | 
HAEATA =a = 19811 


19. When the identity of Višva with the 
letter a is intended, (that is to say) when 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


52 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [I. 19 


Vigva’s identity with a letter is apprehended, 
the similarity of being the first, as well as the 
similarity of all-pervasiveness, emerges in view. 

When the identity visvasya, of Visva ; with a, with the 
mere letter a, is intended, then, according to the reason- 
ing adduced ; samanyam, the similarity ; of being the 
adi, first ; is seen as utkatam, obvious. This is the idea. 
The clause “when the identity with a is intended” is 
explained by méatrasampratipattau, which means “when 
Vigva’s identity with a alone is apprehended”. After 
“apti-samanyam eva ca, the similarity of all-pervas- 
iveness”, the word “‘utkatam, (is seen as) obvious” is 
understood because of the use of “ca, and”. 


AAAS SET SIS VHT 
AAT TT SATS TATA 11301 
20. In the matter of comprehending Taijasa 
as identified with u, that is to say, when 
Taijasa’s identity with a letter is apprehended, 
the similarity of excellence is clearly seen, 
and intermediacy also is equally clear. 
Taijasasya utya-vijñane, in the matter of knowing 
Taijasa as the letter u, when it is intended to be identifi- 
ed with u; utkarsah, excellence; drSyate, is seen ; sphutam, 


clearly. This isthe meaning. Ubhayatvam, intermediacy, 
is also clear. All this is to be explained as before. 


ARTS WAS AMAA THEA | 
HAI q SITATA = UR 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
I. 23] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 53 


21. In the matter of Prajiia’s identity with the 
letter m, that is to say, when Prajfia’s identity 
with a letter is apprehended, the similarity of 
being a measure is seen to emerge plainly, 
and so also does the similarity of absorption. 

The idea is that, in the matter of Prajiia’s identity with 


the letter m, measurement and absorption are excellent 
points of similarity. 


fag mag mee ami afa afaa: | 
< ya: AMAT AT Tra ACTA: RAM 
22. He who knows with firm conviction, 
the common similarities in the three states is 
a great sage, worthy of adoration and saluta- 
tion by all beings. 


Sah, he; who nigcitak, having the firm conviction, 
«This is certainly so” ; vetti, knows ; in the three states, 
mentioned above; tulyam sāmānyam, the common 
analogies spoken of ; becomes in the world a knower of 
Brahman and is pujyah, adorable ; and vandyah, worthy 
of salutation. 


ST TAS IBAA ASAT | 

ART ga: Met ATA fae TÑ: 119311 
23. The letter a leads to Višva ; so also the 
letter u leads to Taijasa ; and the letter m, 
again, leads to Prajña. With regard to one 
freed from letters, there remains no attainment. 
Akarah, the letter a; nayate, carries ; him who, after 
resorting to Om, meditates on it by identifying the 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
54 MANDÜEKYA UPANISAD [1.23 


quarters of the self with the letters of Om through the 
foregoing common features ; viśvam, to Višva ; makes 
him attain Višva. The idea is that he who meditates on 
Om with the help of a, becomes identified with 
Vaisvanara (Virat). Similarly, ukarah, the letter u ; takes 
him faijasam, to Taijasa. And makarah, the letter m ; 
punah, prajfiam, to Prajfia. The verb “leads” is to be 
understood from the use of the word “ca, and”. But 
when m, too, disappears, then owing to the destruction 
of the causal state, amatre, with regard to the one freed 
from letters (and parts); na vidyate, there does not 
remain ; any gatih, attainment.1 


UPANISAD 


SATA Aisa: TISAI: RSSa CANIS 
STAT SAMARAS = us S RM 


afa AMET AT SAAT II 


12. The partless Om is Turiya—beyond all 
conventional dealings, the limit of the nega- 
tion of the phenomenal world, the auspicious, 


1 A represents the gross universe, the waking state, and Vigva; u 
represents the subtle universe, dream, and Taijasa; and m 
represents the causal state, sleep, and Prajna. The earlier ones 
merge into the latter ones. In this way everything is reduced to 
Om. While engaged in this meditation of Om as all, there flashes 
in the aspirant’s mind the teacher’s instruction that everything is 
but the absolute Brahman. Then all the phenomenal world, 
merged in Om, disappears in Brahman, and there remains no goal 
to attain. Though the meditations in the three stages relate to the 
same Om, the results are different in accordance with the emphasis 
laid on its constituents. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ma. 12] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 55 


and the non-dual. Om is thus the Self to be 
sure. He who knows thus enters the Self 
through his Self. 


Amatrah, that which `has no matra, part—the part- 
less Om; becomes but the caturthak, Fourth, Turiya, 
merely the absolute Self ; which is avyavaharyah, beyond 
empirical relations, because of the disappearance of 
names and: nameables, that are but forms of speech 
and mind; prapaficopasamah, the culmination of phenom- 
enal existence ;1 sivah, the auspicious ; advaitak, non- 
dual. Evam, thus ; Om, as possessed of the three letters 
and as applied by a man with the above knowledge, 
is atmā eva, verily identical with the Self, possessed of, 
three quarters. Yah evam.veda, he who knows thus ;` 
samvigati, enters; dtma@nam, into (his own supreme) 
Self ; dtmana, through (his own) Self. The knower of 
Brahman, who has realised the highest truth, has entered 
into the Self by burning away the third state of latency ; 
and hence he is not born again, since Turiya has no 
latency of (creation). For when a snake superimposed 
on a rope has merged in the rope on the discrimination 
of the rope and the snake, it does not appear again to’ 
those discriminating people, just as before, from the: 
impressions of the past sticking to the intellect. To those 
men of renunciation who are possessed of dull or average 
intellect, who still consider themselves aspirants, who 
tread the virtuous path, and who know the common 
features of the letters and the quarters (of Om and the 
Self) as presented before, (to them) the syllable Om, 
when meditated on in the proper way, becomes helpful 


) 


1 The ultimate limit of the negation of the world. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
56 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [Ma. 12 


for the realization of Brahman. In support of this 
it will be said, “The three inferior stages of life” etc. 
(Karika III. 16). 


GAUDAPADA’S KARIKA 


Just as before, here occur these verses : 


MS Tea Ag ATAT + ANA: | 
Stet Treat aar + aaf Rada IRLI 
24. One should know Om, quarter by quarter ; 
(for) there is no doubt that the quarters (of 
the Self) are the letters (of Om). Having 
known Om, quarter by quarter, one should 
not think of anything whatsoever. 

Because of the aforesaid similarity, the quarters are 
the letters, and the letters are the quarters. Therefore 
vidyat, one should know ; onkaram, the syllable Om ; 
padagah, quarter by quarter. This is the meaning. 
When the syllable Om is known thus, na cintayet, 
one should not think of ; kim cit api, anything what- 
soever, serving any seen or unseen purpose ; for he has. 
got all his desires fulfilled. 


gosta TA Ta: OTT wel FAA | 
TA faye twa ee Fa IRKI 
25. One should concentrate one’s mind on ` 
Om, (for) Om is Brahman, beyond fear. For a 
man, ever fixedin Brahman, there can be no 
fear anywhere. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


3. 26] _ MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA S 


Yunjita, one should concentrate; cetah, the mind ; 
pranaye, on Om, as explained, which is essentially the 
supreme Reality; for pranavah, Om; is brahma 
nirbhayam, Brahman beyond fear ; because for one who 
is ever fixed init, na bhayam vidyate kvacit, there can be 
no fear anywhere, in accordance with the Vedic text, 
«The enlightened man is not afraid of anything” 
(Tai. II. ix). 


TOT IAL AR AALS TL: GIA: | 
AASTASES: ASAA: URAL 


26. Om is surely the inferior Brahman ; 
and Om is considered to be the superior 
Brahman. Om is without cause, without 
inside and outside, and without effect ; and 
1t is undecaying. 

Pranavah, Om ; is both the superior and inferior Brah- 
-man. When the quarters and letters disappear, from 
+he highest standpoint, Om becomes verily the supreme 
‘Self that is Brahman. Therefore itis apurvah, without 
-any cause preceding it. There is nothing inside it that 
is of a different class ; therefore it is anantarah, without 
inside. Similarly, there is nothing existing outside ; 
-therefore it is abahyam, without outside. There is no 
-aparah, effect of it; therefore it is anaparah, without 
effect. The idea implied (as a whole) is that it is coex- 
tensive with all that is inside or outside ; it is birthless ; 
and it is a mass of Consciousness, homogeneous like a 
dump of salt. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
58 : MANDUKYA UPANISAD [L. 27 
`` 
aia Aa RRAN T | 
ga R a STAT ARGS AATA URSI 
27. Om is indeed the beginning, middle, 

and eñd of everything. Having known Om in. 
this way indeed one attains immediately; 
Gdentity with it). 

Just like the magician and others, (Om is the) begin-- 
ning (adi), middle (madhya), and end (anta)—the 
origination, continuance, and dissolution ; sarvasya, of 
all—of the whole phenomenal universe, consisting of 
space and the rest which originate like a magic elephant, 
a snake superimposed in a rope, a mirage, a dream, etc. 
(from the magician and the rest). Evam hi, in this way 
indeed ; jfatva pranavam, having known Om, that is the 
Self and that is comparable to the magician and the rest ;- 


vyaśnute, one attains ; identity with the Self, at that very: 
moment. This is the idea. 


smd dat fea wae gR ERITA | 
agarang Acar set + MAT Rc 


28. One should know Om, to be God seated 
in the hearts of all. Meditating on the all-per- 
vasive Om, the intelligent man grieves no more.. 

Vidyat, one should know; pranavam, Om; as: 
i§varam, God ; existing hrdi, in the heart—the seat of 
memory and perception ; of all living beings. Matva,. 
having meditated on (i.e. realised) ; the sarvavyapinam;, 
all-pervasive ; onkaram, Om, that is the Self beyond 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


I. 29] MANDUKYA UPANISAD & KARIKA 59 


the wordly state ; dhirah, the intelligent man ; na socati, 
does not grieve ; for no cause of grief can be possible 
(then) in accordance with such Vedic texts as, “The 
knower of Self transcends sorrow” (Ch. VII. i. 3). 


AÀA BHATT: RA: | 
serat ARA š+ < gAAT TA: IRRI 
29. The Om, without measures and possess- 
ed of infinite dimension, is the auspicious 
entity where all duality ceases. He by whom 
Om is known, is the real sage, and not so is. 
any other man. 


Amatrah, (Om) beyond measures, is Turiya. Matra, 
derived in the sense of that by which anything is measur- 
ed, signifies dimension ; that which has infinite (ananta) 
dimension is anantamatrah, the idea is that its extension 
cannot be determined. It is Sivah, auspicious, holy, be- 
caus eof the negation of all duality. Sah yena, he by 
whom ; onkarah, Om, as explained ; viditah, is known ; 
is a munih, sage (lit. a meditator), because of his medi- 
tating on the supreme Reality ; but na itarah janah, not 
any other man, though he may be learned in the serip- 
tures. This is the idea. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


CHAPTER Il 
VAITATHYA-PRAKARANA (ON UNREALITY) 


In consonance with such Vedic texts as, “One indeed 
without a second” (Ch. VI. ii. 1), it has been said that 
duality ceases to exist after realisation (Karika, I. 18). 
That is, however, only a scriptural assertion. But this 
falsity can be confirmed even through reasoning. This 
is why the second chapter commences : 


qaei adaa AIT SATS AT ATT: | 
AREA Ararat Maas STAT 1121 
1. The wise declare the falsity of all objects 
in a dream because of the location of the 


objects inside (the body) and because of 
(their) contraction. 


The state of the vitatha, unreal, is vaitathyam, un- 
reality, or falsity. Of what ? Sarvabhavanam, of all 
objects, both external and internal; that are perceiv- 
ed svapne, in dream. (This is what) manisinah, the wise 
people, adept in the use of means of knowledge ; ahuk, 
say. The ground of falsity is being stated ; antahsthanat, 
because of existence inside ; because of those (bhavah, 
things) having their sthana, place; antah, inside the body ; 
for (bhavah), objects such as elephants or mountains, 
are perceived there and not outside the body. Therefore 
they ought to be false. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 2] MANDUKYA KARIKA 61 


Objection: This ground of inference (viz existence 
within) is invalidated by the perception of (real) jars etc. 
within a house etc.1 

In answer to this objection it is said: samvrtatvena 
hetund, by reason of their contraction, that is to say, 
because they are confined within a small space. For 
mountains and elephants cannot possibly exist within the 
limited space inside the nerves in the (dreamer’s) body. 
A mountain does not surely exist within a body. 

Objection: It is not tenable that the things seen ma 
dream have a limited space inside (the body) ; for one 


sleeping in the east is seen as though dreaming in the 
north. 


Apprehending such an objection the text answer : 


ATA HTS TAT BRITA TAT | 
sexs 8 TARR a ER IRI 


2. Besides, one does not see places by 
going there, for the time is not long enough. 
Moreover every dreamer, when awakened, 
does not continue in that place (of dream). 

One does not dream by going anywhere outside the 
body ; for as soon as one goes to sleep, one sees as 
though one is dreaming in a place eight hundred miles. 
away from the body that can be reached in a month 


only. Not that there is sufficient time to reach there 
and come back. Hence adirghatvat ca kalasya, inas- 


1 So “existence within” is no valid ground for inferring that 
a thing is unreal. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


62: MANDÜKYA -UPANISAD [II. 2 


much as the time is not long, the dreamer does not go 
to a different place. Moreover pratibuddhah ca vai 
sarvah, every dreamer, when awakened ; na vidyate, does 
not stay, in the places dreamt of. Should one go to a 
different region in dream, one should wake up in the 
region of one’s dream. But this is not a fact. A man 
sleeping at night, sees things as though in the day time. 
And when the dreamer comes into contact with many, 
he should be acknowledged as such by those whom he 
meets. But he is not apprehended thus ; for if they 
really contacted him, they would say, “We noticed you 
there today.” -But this is not so. Therefore he does not 
go to a different place in dream. 

Things seen in a dream are unreal because of this 
further reason : 


START WaT ae AJARA | 
Ass 
aes Sat 8 ITA eqe ATG: RTARTA ZI 

3. Besides, the absence of chariot etc. is 
heard of in the Upanisad from the standpoint 
of logic. They say that the falsity arrived at 
thus (by logic) is reiterated by the Upanisad 
in the context of dream. 

Ca, besides; abhāvah, non-existence ; rathadinam, 
of chariots etc. ; srityate, is heard of in the Upanisad, 
in the text, “There are no chariots, nor animals to be 
yoked to them” (Br. IV. iii. 10); nydyapiirvakam, 
from the standpoint of logic. They, the knowers of 
Brahman, ¿huk, say; that the vaitathyam, unreality ; 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


AI. 4] MANDUKYA KARIKA 63 
Praptam, arrived at ; through such reasons as existence 
inside the body, contraction etc. ; is prakāśitam, revealed 
by the Upanisad, which reiterates that fact while engag- 


ed in establishing (the soul’s) Self-effulgence ; syapne, in 
dream, 


STRATA Y Qasi TATRA BALL 
aa FA TaT AA Azada RER lgl 


4. As the dream objects are unreal in a 
dream, so also, because of that very reason, 
the objects in the waking state are unreal. But ` 
objects (in the dream state) differ because of 
existence inside (the body) and because of 
‘contraction (in the dream). 


The proposition (major premiss) to be established 
is the unreality of objects seen in the waking state. 
“Being perceived” is the ground of inference (middle 
term). And the illustration (in confirmation) is “like 
an object seen in a dream”. And the assertion of the 
presence of the middle term in the minor term is made 
‘thus : Yatha tatra svapne, as (objects “‘perceived”) there 
in a dream, are false ; so also are they false jagarite, 
in the waking state; the fact of “being perceived” 
‘being equally present. And the concluding reiteration 
is : Tasmat jagarite smrtam, therefore falsity is admitted 
of objects in the waking state as well. The dream 
object bhidyate, differs, from the object of the 
waking state; antahsthanat, because the former is 
confined within; and samyrtatyena, because of being 
contracted. And the common features in both the states 
care the facts of being perceived and being false. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
64 MAWDUKYA UPANISAD [H. 5- 


ATTRA GHATS =n: | 
Fam fe aaa SASA SAAT IIKI 
5. Inasmuch as the diverse things are: 
(found to be) similar on the strength of the 
familiar grounds of inference, the wise say that 
the dream and the waking states are one. 
Samatvena, inasmuch as there is similarity ; bheda- 
nam, of the diverse things; prasiddhena eva hetuna,. 
on the strength of the familiar ground of reference,. 
` viz that things (in dream and waking states) are equally 
either the perceiver or the perceived ;1 therefore the- 
discriminating people speak of the sameness of the 
states of waking and dream. This is only a corollary 
of what was arrived at on earlier grounds. 


anara FAA THATASH TAIT | 
Aad: Gem: aedisfraat ga fara: NÅN 
6. That which does not exist in the 
beginning and the end is equally so in the 
present (i.e. in the middle). Though they are 
on the same footing with the unreal, yet they 
are seen as though real. 

The different things noticed in the waking state are 
unreal, for this additional reason that they do not 
exist in the beginning and at the end. A thing, for 
instance a mirage, yat, which ; na asti, does not exist ; 
adau ante ca, in the beginning and at the end; tat, that ;. 


1 On the logical ground of “being perceived”. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 7] MANDUKYA KARIKA 65 


does not exist even in the middle. This is the ascertained 
truth in the world. So also these different things, seen 
in the waking state, are indeed unreal they being 
vitathath, sadrsah, similar to, (on the same footing with), 
unreal things, like the mirage etc., on account of their 
non-existence in the beginning and at the end. And 
yet avitathah iva laksitah, they are perceived as though 
real, by the ignorant who do not know the Self. 

Objection: The assertion that the things seen in the 
waking state are unreal like those seen in the dream 
is wrong, since objects of the waking state, for instance 
food, drink, vehicles, etc., are seen to fulfil some purpose 
by assuaging hunger and thirst and moving to and 
fro, whereas dream objects have no such utility. There- 
fore it is a mere figment of the brain to say that the 
objects of the waking state are illusory like those of 
dream. 

Answer: That is not so. 

Objection: Why ? 

Answer: Because : 


adan dai eae ANTR | 
THREAT fisqa GS Š BAT : lll 
7. Their utility is contradicted in dream. 
Therefore from the fact of their having a 
beginning and an end they are rightly held to 
be unreal. | 
Saprayojanata, the utility, that is noticed (in the 
waking state), of food, drink etc., vipratipadyate svapne, 


is contradicted in dream. Fora man who has got his 
hunger appeased and thirst quenched by eating and 


Ma 6 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
66 MANDUKYA KARIKA HQI. 7 


drinking in the waking state, as soon as he goes to 
sleep, feels as though he is afflicted by hunger and 
thirst and is fasting for a whole day and night. This 
is similar to his case when, after getting full satisfac- 
tion in dream from eating and drinking, he wakes up 
to feel hunger and thirst. Therefore the objects of the 
waking state are seen to be contradicted in dream. 
Accordingly, we are of opinion that their unreality like 
that of dream objects is beyond doubt. Hence from 
the fact that they possess the common feature of having 
a beginning and an end, they are rightly held to be 
unreal. 

Objection: From the fact of the similarity of the 
diverse things in the dream and the waking states, it 
is wrong to assert that the diversities seen in the waking 
state are illusory. 

Counter-objection: Why ? 

Opponent : Because the illustration is inapplicable. 

Counter-objection: How ? 

Opponent: For the very same objects seen in the 
waking state are not experienced in dream. 

Counter-objection : What are they then ? 

Oppponent: One sees something novel in a dream. 
One thinks oneself to be possessed of eight arms and 
sitting astride an elephant with four tusks. Similarly, 
too, one sees other grotesque things in a dream. That 
being dissimilar to any other unreal thing must be 
true. So the analogy is inapt. Hence it is illogical to 
say that the waking state is false like dream. 

Vedantist: Thatis not so. The uniqueness that is 
supposed by you to be seen in a dream is not so by its 
own right. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 8] MANDUKYA KARIKA 67 


Opponent: How is it then ? 


aya enaa fe aa enifa | 
aaa Pad wea waste Barer: ICI 

8. The unique attribute is a mere appear- 
ance of the experiencer in a particular state, 
as it is in the case of the dwellers in heaven. 
This he experiences by going there, just as one, 
well informed, does in this world. 

Apirvam, the novel attribute ; hi sthanidharmah, is a 
mere quality (dharma) of (sthani) the man in a certain 
state, viz the experiencer in the state of dream; yatha 
svarganivasinam, as it is with the dwellers of heaven, 
Indra and others. As they have such attributes as the 
possession of a thousand eyes, and so on,1 similarly is 
this a novel attribute of the dreamer ; but it is not there 
by its own right like the real nature of the seer. Tan, 
these, the unique things of this kind that are creations 
of his mind ; ayam, this one, the man in that state, the 
dreamer ; preksate, sees ; gatva, by going, to the dream 
state. As iha, in this world ; susiksitah, a man well 
informed about the way leading to another region, goes 
along that way to that other region and sees those 
objects, so is the case here. Hence just as the appear- 
ances of things in certain states, such as a snake ona 
rope or a mirage ina desert, are unreal, similarly the 
novelties experienced in a dream are merely appearances 
of the dreamer in that state; and therefore they are 
unreal. Accordingly, the analogy of the dream is not 
inapplicable. 


1 Men, who become gods, get such experiences. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


68 MANDUKYA KARIKA HII. 8 


The assumption that in the illustration of dream we 
are in the presence of some unique entities has been 
demolished. Now the Karika again proceeds by way of 
dilating on the similarity of objects of the waking and 


dream states : 


MTA Aaa Berd AAT 
RAA gE qasaq: nl 


9. Even in the dream state itself, anything 
imagined by the inner consciousness is unreal, 
while anything experienced by the outer con- 
sciousness is real. (But) both kinds of things. 
are seen to be false. 


Svapnayrttau api, even in the dream state; anything 
experienced antascetasa, by the internal consciousness, 
anything called up by our fancy ; is asat, unreal; since: 
it ceases to be perceived the moment after being imagin- 
ed. In that very dream again, whatever, for instance a. 
pot, is grhītam, perceived ; bahiscetasa, by external con- 
sciousness, through the eye etc., is sat, real. Thus, 
though it is definitely known that dream experiences are: 
false, still a division of true and false is seen there. 
Nevertheless, vaitathyam drstam, unreality is perceived, 
for both kinds of things, be they imagined by inner or 
outer consciousness. 


TARTU SAAT RRT AT | 
aR daw IAAT: 112011 
10. Even in the waking state, whatever is. 
imagined by the inner consciousness is false 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 12] MANDUKYA KARIKA 69 


and whatever is perceived by the outer: con- 
sciousness is true. It it reasonable that both 
these should be unreal. 


It is reasonable to say that both the (so-called) true 
and false are unreal, for they are equally imagined 
either by the internal or external consciousness. The 
remaining portion is as already explained. 


The opponent says : 


wate tat Saat waa | 
F UAL s= AAT at q aut Paes: 11221 
11. If all objects in both the states be 


unreal, who apprehends these objects and who 
is indeed their creator ? 


Yadi, if ; there be vaitathyam, unreality ; bhedanam, 
for the objects; sthdnayoh, in the two—waking and 
dream—states ; then kah, who; is it that budhyate, 
cognises ; efdn, these, that are imagined inside and 
outside the mind ; and kah vai tesam vikalpakah, who 
is indeed their imaginer, creator? The idea implied 
is this: If you do not want to adopt a theory of the 
non-existence of the Self, (and want to posit some- 
thing behind phenomena), then who is the support of 
memory and knowledge ? 


(The answer is) : 


HMAAICAAISSCHIMAICAT SS: ATANT | 
< us qed Harare AANA: IRI 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
70 MANDUEYA KARIKA [H. 12 


12. The self-effulgent Self imagines Itself 
through Itself by the power of Its own Maya, 
The Self Itself cognises the objects. Such is 
the definite conclusion of Vedanta. 

Svamayaya, through Its own Maya; devah ātmā, 
the self-effulgent Self, Itself ; kalpayati, imagines ; Its 
own atmanam, self ; in the Self ; as possessed of different 
forms to be spoken of later, just as snakes etc. are 
imagined on rope etc. And in the very same way It 
Itself budhyate, cognises ; those bhedan, objects; iti, 
such ; is vedantaniscayah, the definite conclusion of 
Vedanta. There is nothing else (but the Self) as the 
support of cognition and memory ; nor are cognition 
and memory without support as is held by the Nihilists. 
This is the idea. 

While imagining, in what way does the Self do so? 
This is being answered : 


Pea =rafësrar= | 
faia IRRA ca aed sqa: 119311 
13. The Lord diversifies the mundane 
things existing in the mind. Turning the mind 
outward, He creates the well-defined things (as 
well as the un-defined things). Thus does the 
Lord imagine. 

(Prabhuk, the Lord) ; vikaroti, diversifies ; aparan, 
the non-transcendental, mundane ; bhavan, objects 
such as sound and other unmanifested objects ; vyava- 
sthitan, existing ; antagcitte, inside the mind, in the 
form of impressions and tendencies. And bahiscittak 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Il. 14] MANDUKYA KARIKA Th 


(san), having the mind turned outward; (the Lord 
diversifies) niyatān, things well-defined, such as the 
earth etc., as also aniyatan, not well-defined, that exist 
so long as the imagination lasts ; similarly (He diversi- 
fies) such things as mental desires by making His mind 
turn inward. Evam, in this way ; prabhuh the Lord, 
God, that is to say, the Self ; imagines. ' 

The assertion that everything is a subjective creation 
like dream is being questioned now. For unlike the sub- 
jective creations, to wit, desire etc., that are circumscribed 
by the mind, the external objects are mutually determined. 


That doubt is unreasonable, for— 


Ramar f asag grates À ate: 1 
aR usq Q aa AA qTeregs: Mell 

14. Things that exist internally as long as 
the thought lasts and things that are externally 
related to two points of time, are all imagin- 
ations. Their distinction is not caused by 
anything else. 

Cittakalah hi ye antah tu, things that exist internally 
as long as the thought lasts ; those that are determined 
by their thought and those that have no time for deter- 
mining them apart from the time for which their thought 
lasts are cittakalah, existing as long as the thought lasts. 
The idea is that they are apprehended only during the 
time of their imagination. Dvayakālāh, those that are 
possessed of two times, i.e. related to different times, 
that are mutually determined. As for instance, “He 
stays during the milking”, which means that the cow is 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


72 MANDUKYA KARIKA [IL 14 


milked as long as he stays, and he stays as long as the 
cow is milked ; “This one (present before us) lasts as 
long as that one (that is not present.” Thus external 
factors mutually determine each other. They are thus 
related to two points of time. But whether they be 
subjective, lasting for the time of the thought, or objec- 
tive, related to two points of time, they are all but 
fancies. The fact that external objects have the distinc- 
tion of being related to two points of time has no other 
reason but that of being imagined. Here, too, the 
illustration of dream fits in. 


STAT UF ASRS GET g< F Š afè: | 
aT g< 8 ae ANIRAA IIKI 


15. Those objects that appear as obscure 
inside the mind, and those that appear as vivid 
outside, are all merely created by imagination. 
Their distinction is to be traced to the differ- 
ence in the organs of perception. 


The fact that things in the mind, called up by mere 
mental impressions, have an obscurity, while externally, 
as objects of the sense of sight etc., they have a vivid- 
ness, (that fact) is not due to the existence of the objects 
themselves ; for this distinction is noticed even in dream. 
To what is it due then? This is caused by the difference 
in the organs of perception. Hence it is proved that the 
things of the waking state are as much a creation of 
imagination as the dream objects. 


What isthe root of imagining that the personal 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
1. 16] MANDUKYA KARIKA 73 


sand external objects are mutually related by way of 
causation ? The answer is: 


Site erat Ta” oat Aa RTTA | 
rere EIEEEI areata este: 19811 


16. First He i imagines the individual (soul) 
and then He imagines the different objects, 
external and personal. The individual gets his 
memory in accordance with the kind of 
‘thought impressions he has. 


Like the fancying of a snake in a rope, He pirvam 
-kalpayate, first imagines ; on the pure Self that is devoid 
-of such characteristics ; jivam, the individual, that is a 
bundle of causes and effects expressing themselves 
through such beliefs as “I act ; and mine are the (result- 
ing) sorrows and happiness”. After that, for his sake, 
He (the Lord) imagines different objects, such as the 
~vital force and so on; bahyan adhyatmikdn ca eva, 
both external and personal ; dividing them into action, 
instruments, and results. What is the reason for that 
imagination? That is being stated. The individual 
‘that is imagined: by (the Lord) Himself and is himself 
capable of imagination, gets a memory, yathdavidyah, in 
accordance with the kind of thought impressions that 
the individual is possessed of ; that fact is alluded to by 
tathasmrtih, he is possessed of that kind of memory. 
Hence from the apprehension of some fancy as the cause, 
‘there follows the apprehension of the result ;1 from 
that (awareness of causal relation) follows the memory 


1 If there is eating and drinking, there follows satisfaction ; 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
74 MANDUKYA KARIKA (Ul. 16 


of the cause and the effect, and from that follows their 
apprehension, as well as the awareness of the action and’ 
accessories that this apprehension of causality leads to, 
and the awareness of the different results following from 
those actions etc.1 From their awareness arises their 
memory; and from that memory again arises their 
awareness. In this way He imagines diversely the 
things, both personal and external, that are mutually 
the causes and effects. 

In the previous verse it has been said that the imagin-- 
ing of individuality is the root of all other imaginations. 
Through an illustration is being shown what that 
imagining of an individual soul is due to : 


afakaat aT IER fanaat | 
aima Raae Aa: 112911 


17. Asa rope whose nature has not been: 
well ascertained is imagined in the dark to be 
various things like a snake, a line of water, 
etc., so also is Self imagined variously. 


As it happens in common experience that a rajjuk,. 
rope ; that is anifcita, not well ascertained, in its true 
reality as “This is so indeed”; is vikalpita, imagined. 


if eating drinking are absent, satisfaction is wanting ; from this the 
fancy follows that eating etc. are the causes of satisfaction. 

1 From the above awareness follows memory on another occasion; 
from that arises the awareness of the need of action with regard to 
similar factors that are supposed to lead to satisfaction ; from that 
follows cooking, getting of rice, and producing the results 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 18] MANDUKYA KARIKA 15 


variously, in hazy darkness, as a snake, a line of water 

or a stick, just because its real nature has not beet 
determined ; for if the rope had been ascertained earlier 
in its own essence, there would not have been such 
imaginations as of a snake etc., as for instance, there is 
no such imagination with regard to the fingers in one’s 
own hands. This is the illustration. Similarly, the Self 
is imagined to be an individual creature or the vital 
force etc., just because It has not been ascertained in Its 
true nature as pure intelligence, existence, and non- 
duality, and as different from such evils as cause and 
effect that are the characteristics of the world. This is 
the conclusion of all the Upanisads. ` 


faamai aa Waa Ra fafradc | 
WAN aad AARNA: 11911 
18. As illusion (on the rope) ceases and the 
rope alone remains when the rope is ascertain- 


ed to be nothing but the rope, so also is the 
ascertainment about the Self. 


As on the ascertainment that it is rajjuk eva, nothing 
but a rope, all the imaginations disappear and there 
remains the rope alone without anything else, so also 
from the scriptural text, “Not this, not this” (Br. IV 
iv. 22), establishing the Self as devoid of all worldly 
attributes, there dawns the light of the sun of realisation 
which leads to this atma-viniscayah, firm conviction 
about the Self, viz “All this is but the Self” (Ch. VII. 

xxv. 2), (the Self is) “without anterior or posterior, 
` without interior or exterior” (Br. II. v. 19), “He exists 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
76 MANDUKYA KARIKA [II. 18 


internally and externally, and hence He is birthless” 
(Mu. II. i. 2), “Undecaying, immortal, undying, fearless” 
(Br. IV. iv. 25), “One indeed without a second” (Ch. 
VI. ii. 1) 

If it be a well ascertained truth that the Self is but 
one, why is It imagined as so many infinite things like 
the Vital Force etc. that constitute phenomenal ex- 
istence? To this hear the answer : 


TRATAN ATL aa eT | 
FAT TS SIS Far Aaa: ATA UE 
19. (This Self) is imagined to be the infinite 
objects like Prana (the Vital Force) etc. This 
is the Maya of that self-effulgent One by which 
He Himself is deluded. 

Esa maya, this is the Maya; tasya devasya, of that 
self-effulgent Self. As the magical spell, created by the 
magician, makes the very clear sky appear as though 
filled with leafy trees in bloom, similar is this Maya of 
the self-effulgent One, by which He Himself seems to 
have become influenced like a man under delusion. It 


has been said, “My Maya is difficult to get over” (G. 
VII. 14). 


aor gÍ TRR Hate < afz: | 
TOT sft Moers < AST: lloll 


20. Those who know Prana! consider Prana 


1 Hiranyagarbha or immanent God. This is the view of the 
worshippers of Hiranyagarbha and of the Vaiszsikas. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


II. 22] -MANDUKYA KARIKA 77 


(to be the reality that is the cause of the world). 
The knowers of the elements consider the 
elements to be so,t the knowers of qualities 
(gunas) cling to the qualities, and the know- 
ers of categories swear by them.? 


ara gfe TAA fear ete ates: | 
Am fa atafaat tar eft = afa: Rall 
21. The knowers of the quarters (viz Visva, 
Taijasa, and Prajña) consider the quarters to be 
the cause. The knowers of sense-objects* con- 
sider the sense-objects to be so. According to 
the knowers of the worlds, the worlds con- 


stitute reality." And the worshippers of the 
gods stand by the gods. 


aan af S= fat aan af < afz: | 
aaa = aa aisafatea < aR: IRRI 
22. The Vedic scholars ascribe reality to the 
Vedas, while the sacrificers® ascribe this to the 


1 The Lokayata materialists swear by the four elements— 
earth, water, fire, and air. 

2 The Samkhyas hold to Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, that are 
the constituents (gunas, lit. qualities) of Prakrti, 

3 The Saivas hold to the Self, ignorance, and Siva as the 
sources of the world. 

4 The followers of Vatsyayana and others. 

5 The Paurdnikas understand the earth, the intermediate 
world and heaven to be realities. 

6 Like Baudhayana. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
78 -MANDUEYA KARIKA lH. 22 


sacrifices. Those acquainted with the enjoyer 
consider it to be the reality,! whereas those con- 
versant with the enjoyable things? consider 
them to be so. 


gen afi sas: we eft = aR: | 
We af AAs gfe < TT: 1RN 
23. People conversant with the subtle con- 
sider reality also to be so, while others dealing 
with the gross considerit to be so. The wor- 
shippers of God with forms consider reality as 
possessed of forms,’ whereas those who swear 
by formlessness* call it a void. 


=T Efe mA fast sft =< alee: | 
aar gA arefiat yaaa aR: URI 
24. The calculators of time (the astrol- 

ogers) call it time. The knowers of the direc- 
tions consider them real. The dabblers in 
theories? accept these to be so. And the 
knowers of the universe consider the (fourteen) 
worlds to be so. 


1 The Samkhya view is that the Self isan enjoyer but not am 
agent of work. 

2 The cooks. 

3 e.g. Siva or Visnu. 

4 The Nihilists. 

5 That the metals, mantras, etc. hold in them the secret of 
immortality. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
JI.. 27] MANDUKYA KARIKA 79 


T gf aA RR = aR: | 
Frafafa frafaet sha il < aR: IRKI 


25. The knowers of the mind? call it the Self, 
‘whereas the knowers of intelligence? take it for 
the reality. The knowers of ideas? consider 
them to be the reality. And the knowers of 
‘virtue and vice‘ attribute reality to them. 


TARIR sae qe fast Efi ATT | 
TRANE ZAE Sf AIT 1/REII 


26. Some say that reality is constituted 
by twenty-five principles, while others speak 
-of twenty-six. Some say that it consists of 
thirty-one categories,’ while according to 
others they are infinite. 


aiaa: TEUART Stet TR: | 
AGATA SAT! TUTATA IRNI 


1 À class of materialists. 

2 A class of Buddhists. 

3 The Buddhists who swear by subjective ideas without corres- 
-ponding external things. 

4 The Mimamsakas. 

5 Purusa (the conscious individual soul), Pradhana or Prakrti 
(Nature), Mahat (intelligence), Aharnkara (egoism), the five subtle 
elements, five senses of perception, five organs of action, five 
-sense-objects, and mind. This is the Samkhya view. 

6 The above 25 and God according to Patañjali. 

7 The Pasupatas add raga (attachment), avidya (ignorance), 
„niyati (fate), kalakala (divisions of time), and Maya (cosmie 
illusion) to the above 26. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


80 MANDUKYA KARIKA {il. 27 


27. Adepts in human dealings say that the 
people (that is to say, people’s pleasures) are- 
the real things. People conversant with the 
stages of life hold those to be the reality. The 
grammarians hold the view that words belong- 
ing to the masculine, feminine, and neuter 
genders are the reality ; while others know 
reality to be constituted by the higher and 


lower (Brahmans). 


afefifa gaa wa eft < aie: | 
fala Raa: at Sg g AAT RCI! 

28. People conversant with creation call 
creation to be the reality. The knowers of 
dissolution call it dissolution. The knowers of 
subsistence call it subsistence. All these ideas. 
are for ever imagined on the Self. 


(20-28). Prana means Prajfia, the Self in the state of 
latency. Everything else, ending with subsistence, is only 
His product. And similarly all other popular ideas, 
conceived by every being, like a snake etc. on a rope, 
are mere imaginations on the Self that is devoid of all of 
them ; and these are caused by ignorance consisting in. 
the non-determination of the nature of the Self. This is- 
the purport (of these verses) as a whole. No attempt is 
made to explain each of the words in the verses starting: 

with the word Prana, since this is of little practical value 
and since the meanings of the terms are clear. | 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


II. 30] MANDUKYA KARIKA 81 


a Wa eae S aad ag Tea | 
š arate @ AESA qana. TBAT TALIRI 
29. Anyone to whom a teacher may show a 
particular object (as the reality) sees that alone. 
And that thing, too, protects him by becoming 
identified with him. That absorption leads to 
his self-identity (with the object of attention). 


To be brief, yasya, anyone to whom ; a teacher or any 
other trustworthy person; dargfayet, may show; any 
bhavam, positive object, enumerated or not, from among 
such things as Prana and the rest, by saying “‘This is 
verily the reality” ; sak, he (that instructed man) ; pasyati, 
sees; tam bhavam, that object, by identifying it with 
himself either as “I am this” or “This is mine”. Ca, and ; 
sah, that, that object that was shown; ayati, protects : 
tam, him, that seer ; asau bhitva, by becoming one with 
him, with that aspirant; that is to say, that object 
occupies his attention to the exclusion of all others and 
keeps him confined within itself. Tadgrahah, state of 
being taken up with that, absorption in it under the idea, 
“This is the reality”. That absorption, samupaiti tam, 
approaches him, viz the acceptor (of the thing) ; that is 
to say, it culminates in identification with him. 


AWe: Tae wee | 
ust at SZ ada Hea ASANA: 130l 
30. Through these things that are (really) 
non-different (from the Self), this One is 
presented as though really different. He who ` 


Ma. 7 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
82 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IL. 30 


truly knows this grasps (the meaning of the 
Vedas) without any hesitation. 


Etaik, through these, viz Prana, etc. ; aprthagbhavaih, 
through these things that are non-different, from the 
Self ; esah, this One, the Self ; Jaksitah, is pointed out, is 
believed in by the ignorant; prthak eva iti, as though 
really different, just as a rope is considered to be diverse 
imaginary things like snake etc. This is the meaning. 
The idea is this: Just as to the discriminating people, 
the snake etc. do not exist apart from the rope, so also 
Prana etc. have no existence apart from the Self. And 
this is in accord with the Vedic text, “All these are (but) 
the Self” (Br. II. iv. 6). Yak veda, he who knows; evam 
thus: ftattvena, truly;—knows from- Vedic texts and 
from reasoning, that all things imagined on the Self are 
unreal apart from the Self, like the snake imagined ‘in 
the rope, and knows that the Self is transcendental and 
untouched by illusion ; sah, he; kalpayate, (is the same 
as kalpayati), grasps, the meanings of the Vedas in their 
respective contexts ; avisankitah, without any hesitation ; 
he understands that a certain passage means this anda 
certain other means that. For a verse of Manu says, 
“None but a knower of the Self can understand truly 
the purport of the Vedas ; none but a knower of the Self 
can derive any benefit from the valid means of know- 
ledge”,1 (Manu, VI. 82). 

It is being stated that the unreality of duality that 


1 This is Ananda Giri’s interpretation of the word Kriyaphala, 
where Kriya (action) stands for any valid means of knowledge ; 
and its phala (result) is the knowledge of Reality ; for even kriya 
in the sense of Vedic rites etc. is meant to serve the purpose of 
illumination by purifying the aspirant’s heart. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IL. 31) MANDUKYA KARIKA 83 


is established logically is also derived from the valid 
evidence of Vedanta : 


EART AAT EÈ Tea TAT | 
an Rra ae JaA ag: 113211 


31. Justas dream and magic are seen to be 
unreal, or as is a city in the sky, so also is 
this whole universe known to be unreal from 
the Upanisads by the wise. 


Svapna-māãye, dream and magic, though unreal, being 
constituted by unreal things, are considered by the non- 
discriminating people to be constituted by real things. 
Again, just as gandharvanagaram, an illusory city in the 
sky—appearing to be full of shops replete with vendable 
articles, houses, palaces, and villages bustling with men 
and women—is seen to vanish suddenly before one’s 
very eyes ; or just as the syapnamaye, dream and magic ; 
drste, that are visible to the eye; are unreal; tathd, 
similarly ; idam viśvam, this whole universe, this entire 
duality ; drstam, is viewed ; as unreal. Where? That is 
being stated. Vedantesu, in the Upanisads, as for 
instance in, “There is no difference whatsoever in It” 
(Br. IV. iv. 19; Ka. II. i. 2), “The Lord on account of 
Maya is perceived as manifold” (Br. II. v. 19), “This 
was but the Self in the beginning—the only entity” (Br. 
II. iv. 17), “In the beginning this was indeed Brahman, 
one only” (Br. I. iv. 11), “It is from a second entity that 
fear comes” (Br. I. iv. 2), “But there is not that second 
thing” (Br. IV. iii. 23), “But when to the knower of 
Brahman everything has become the Self” (Br. IV. v. 15), 
and so on. (This is known) vicaksanaik, by those whe 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
84 MANDUKYA UPANISAD UL 31 


are better acquainted with things, by the enlightened. 
This view is supported by the following Smrti text of 
Vyasa: “(This universe) is viewed (by the wise) as 
(unreal) like a chink on the ground that a rope appears 
to be in darkness, or as always (unstable) like a bubble 
on rain water, devoid of bliss and ceasing to exist after 


dissolution. 
< RAA < NaRa Tal a < ATT! | 
a gage Š Get FAT THAT RR 
32. There is no dissolution, no origination, 


none in bondage, none striving or aspiring for 
salvation, and none liberated. This is the 


highest truth. 


This verse is meant to sum up the purport of this 
chapter. If from the standpoint of the highest Reality, 
all duality is unreal, and the Self alone exists as the 
only Reality, then it amounts to this that all our dealings, 
conventional or scriptural, are comprised within the 
domain of ignorance, and then there is na nirodhah,. 
no dissolution, nirodha being the same as nirodhana, 
stoppage. Uftpattih, origination. Baddhah, one under 
bondage, a transmigrating individual soul. Sadhaka, 
one who strives for liberation. Mumuksuh, one who: 
hankers after liberation. Muktah, one who is free from 
bondage. In the absence of origination and dissolution, 
bondage etc. do not exist. Iti esa paramarthata, this is. 
the highest truth. How can there be absence of origina- 
tion and dissolution? The answer is: Because of the 
absence of duality. The non-existence of duality is 
established by various Vedic texts such as, “Because 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II.: 32] MANDUKYA KARIKA 85 


when there is duality, as it were” (Br. II. iv. 14), “(He 
goes from death to death) who sees difference as it were 
in It” (Br. IV. iv. 19; Ka. II. i. 10). “All this is but the 
Self” (Ch. VII. xxv. 2), “All this is but Brahman” (Nr. 
U. 7), “One without a second” (Ch. VI. ii. 1), (“This 
Brahman, . . . ), and this all are the Self” (Br. II. iv. 6, 
IV. v. 7). Origination or dissolution can belong only to 
a thing that has existence, and not to one that is non- 
existent like the horn of a hare. Nor can the non-dual 
have either birth or death. For it is a contradiction in 
terms to say that a thing is non-dual and yet has birth 
and death. And as for our empirical experience of Prana 
etc., it has been already stated that it is all a super- 
imposition on the Self like a snake on a rope. Fu: such 
a mental illusioni as the fancying of a rope for a snake 
does not either originate from or merge in the rope.2 
Nor does the rope-snake originate in the mind and 
merge there,’ nor does it do so from both (the rope 
and the mind).4 Similar is the case with duality which 
is equally a mental illusion, for duality is not perceived 
in a’state of concentration or deep sleep. Therefore it 
is established that duality is a mere figment of the brain. 
And therefore it has been well said that since duality 
does not exist, the highest truth consists in the non- 
existence of dissolution and the rest. 


1 A creation of the ignorance subsisting in the mind. 

2 For the birth or death of an illusion is equally illusory. If 
these be objectively real, the snake should be perceived by all who 
see the rope. 

3 For if birth and death are only subjective, the snake should 
not be perceived outside. 

4 For it is not experienced as such. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
86 MANDUEKYA UPANISAD [II. 32 


Objection: If such be the case, then the scriptures 
have for their objective only the proving of the non-: 
existence of duality, not the proving of the existence 
of non-duality, the two objectives being contradictory. 
And as a result, one will be landed into Nihilism, 
inasmuch as non-duality has no evidence in its support 
and duality is non-existent. 

Answer: Not so, for why should you revive a point 
already dismissed with the statement that illusions, 
like that of a snake on arope, cannot occur without a 
substratum ? 

To this the objection is raised thus : The rope that is 
supposed to be the substratum of the illusion of the 
snake is itself non-existent, and hence the analogy is 
irrelevant. 

Answer: Not so, for even when the illusion dis- 
appears, the non-illusory substratum can continue to 
exist by the very fact of its being non-illusory. 

Objection: The non-dual (substratum), too, is unreal 
like the snake fancied on a rope. 

Answer: It cannot be so, for just as the rope con- 
stituting a factor in the illusion (of snake) exists as an 
unimagined entity even before the knowledge of the 
non-existence of the snake, so also the non-dual (Self) 
exists, since as a last resort It has to be assumed to be 
non-illusory. Besides, the being who is the agent of the 
imagination cannot be non-existent, since his existence 
has to be admitted antecedent to the rise of the illusion.1 


1 The Self has to be assumed as the substratum of the illusory 
appearance of duality ; It survives all illusions as the witness of 
the disappearance; and as a matter of course It precedes the 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 32] MANDUKYA KARIKA 87 


Objection: But if the scriptures do not deal with the 
Self as such, how can they lead to a cessation of the 
awareness of duality ? 

š Answer: That is no defect, for duality is super- 
imposed on the Self through ignorance, just as a snake. 
is on a rope. 

Objection: How ? 

Answer: All such conceptions, as “I am happy, 
miserable, ignorant, born, dead, worn out, embodied ; 
I see ; I am manifest and unmanifest, agent and enjoyer 
of fruits, related and unrelated, emaciated and old, 
and I am this and these are mine,”—are superimposed 
on the Self. The Self permeates all these ideas, for It 
is invariably present in all of them, just as a rope is 
present in all its different (illusory) appearances as a 
snake, a line of water, etc. Such being the case, the 
knowledge of the nature of the substantive (Self) has 
not to be generated by scriptures, since It is self-establish- 
ed. The scriptures are meant for proving something that 
is not already known, for should they restate something 
that is already known they will lose their validity.1 
Since the Self is not established in Its own nature owing 
to the obstacle of such attributes as happiness that are 
superimposed by ignorance, and since the establishment 
in Its own reality is the highest goal, therefore the 
scriptures aim at removing from the Self the ideas 


illusion, Therefore there can be no question of Nihilism even on 
the supposition that the Self is not presented positively by the 
Upanisads. š 

1 Consisting in presenting something not known otherwise and 
not sublated later. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


88 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IL 32 


of happiness and the rest, by generating with regard to 
It the ideas of not being happy etc. through such texts as 
“Not this, not this” (Br. IV. iv. 22), “Not gross” (Br. 
IJI. viii. 8) etc. Unlike the real nature of the Self, the 
attributes of unhappiness etc. are not invariably present 
in consciousness simultaneously with such attributes as 
happiness etc. ;1 for if they were persistently present, no 
alteration could be created by the superimposition of 
attributes like happiness etc., just as there can be no 
coldness in fire possessed of the specific characteristic of 
heat. Therefore it is in the attributeless Self that the 
distinct characteristics of happiness etc. are imagined. 
And as for the scriptural texts speaking of the absence 
of happiness etc. in the Self, it is proved that they are 
merely meant to remove the specific ideas of happiness 
etc. from It. And in support of this is this aphorism of 
those who are versed in the meaning of scriptures: “The 
validity of the scriptures is derived from their negation 
of positive qualities from the Self.” 


The reason for the preceding verse is being adduced : 


1 If the absence of happiness etc. are natural] to the Self, why 
should they not accompany every perception of the latter? The 
answer is: The Self may reveal Itself, and yet the opposition 
between Its absence of happiness etc. and Its empirical modes of 
happiness etc. may not become patent owing to the influence of 
human ignorance. 


2 This is a quotation from Dravidicdrya. The idea is this: 
“Though words may not have any positive meaning with regard to 
Brahman, the validity of the scripture is well established ; for the 
words, that are associated with negation and are well known as 
denoting the absence of those qualities, eliminate all duality from 
the Self.” 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


TI. 33] MANDUKYA KARIKA 89 


ara caf ceuin] < afer: | 
WaT esa ENET ET 113311 


33. This Self is imagined to be the unreal 
things and also to be non-dual; and these 
perceived things are also imagined on the non- 
-dual Self. Therefore non-duality is auspicious. 

In (such illusions as) “This is a snake”, “This is a 
stick”, “This is a streak of water”, etc. the very thing cal- 
led rope is imagined to be such unreal things as a snake, 
a streak of water, etc., and also as the one real thing— 
the rope; similarly, the Self is imagined to be such multi- 
farious unreal things as Prana etc. which do not exist. 
‘But this is not done from the standpoint: of reality, for 
nothing can be perceived by anybody unless the mind 
is active, nor can the Self have any movement. And 
things, perceivable to the unsteady mind alone, cannot 
be imagined to subsist in reality.1 Therefore though 
‘the Self is ever of the same nature, It alone is imagined 
to be such unreal things as Prana etc., and again as 
existing in Its own nature of non-duality and absolute 
Reality. It is supposed to be the substratum of every- 
thing, just as a rope is of the snake etc. And those 
perceived entities, too, viz Prana and the rest, are 
imagined on the Self alone that is non-dual and absolute 
Reality, for no illusion can be perceived that is without 
a substratum. Thus since non-duality is the substratum 


1 “Diversity perceived on the motionless Self cannot be fancied 
to have real existence” is the interpretation according to Ananda 
‘Giri who takes “motionless” as the synonym of pracalita, that in 
which motion is absent. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


90 MANDUKYA UPANISAD HI. 33 


of all illusion, and since this non-dulity is ever un- 
changing in its own nature, advayatd, non-duality ; is 
Siva, auspicious, even in the state of illusion. But the 
illusions alone are evil, for they generate fear like that 
from the snake seen on a rope for instance. Non-duality 
is free from fear ; hence that alone is auspicious. 


AAMT TAF TAT HAA | 
q 4s aren RARA aAa fag: geil 
34. This world, when ascertained from the 
standpoint of the Self does not continue to be 
different. Nor does it exist in its own right. Nor 
do phenomenal things exist as different or non- 
different (from one another or from the Self). 
This is what the knowers of Truth understand. 


Why, again, is non-duality auspicious 2 Inauspicious- 
ness is to be found where there is diversity or, in other 
words, where there is difference of one thing from 
another. For idam, this, the manifold phenomenal 
world, consisting of Prana, etc. ; when ascertained 
atmabhavena, from the standpoint of the supreme 
Self, the non-dual and absolute Reality ; does not 
continue to be nana, multiple or different in substance, 
just as an illusory snake has no separate existence when 
it is found out with the help of a light to be identical 
with the rope. Besides, this world never exists svena, 
in its own nature, in the form of Prana etc. because 
of its having been imagined like a snake on a rope. 
Similarly, the objects, called Prana etc., are not distinct 
from each other in the sense that a buffalo exists as 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


II. 35] MANDUKYA KARIKA 91. 


something different from a horse. Accordingly, just 
because of the unreality (of duality) there is nothing 
that can exist as non-separate from one another or 
from the supreme Self. The Brahmanas, the knowers 
of the Self ; viduh, realised, the supreme Reality ; iti, 
thus. Hence non-duality is auspicious, for it is free 
from the causes of evil. This is the purport. 

The perfect realisation, as described above, is being 
extolled ; 


ñ oa AS ` 3, I 
FERÀ api exe: ARSA: II3kII 
35. This Self that is beyond all imagination, 
free from the diversity of this phenomenal 
world, and non-dual, is seen by the contempla- 
tive people, versed in the Vedas and unafilic- 
ted by desire, fear, and anger. 


Munibhik, by the constantly contemplative people, 
by the discriminating ones; from whom have been 
removed for ever attachment, fear, envy, anger, and 
all other faults; yedaparagaih, by those who have under- 
stood the secrets of the Vedas, by the enlightened souls ; 
by those who are ever devoted to the purport of the 
Vedas ; drstah, is realised ; ayam, this Self ; which is 
nirvikalpak, devoid of all imaginations ; and which is 
prapaficopagamah : prapaiica, is the vast expanse of the 
variegated phenomenal world, and the Self in which 
there is the upasama, total negation, of this, is the 
prapancopasama. And therefore It is advayah, without 
a second. The idea is that the supreme Self is realisable 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


92 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [II 35 


only by the men of renunciation who are free from 
blemishes, who are learned, and who are devoted to 
the secrets of the Upanisads, but not so by the logicians 
and others whose hearts are tainted by attachment 
etc. and whose philosophies are enamoured of their 
own outlooks. 


weed ARAA qis wate | 
agi AAT ASAPH HATA, 11341 
36. Therefore, after knowing it thus, one 
should fix one’s memory on (i.e. continuously 
think of) non-duality. Having attained the 
non-dual, one should behave in the world as 
though one were dull-witted. 


Since non-duality is auspicious and free from fear 
by virtue of its being by nature devoid of all evil, there- 
fore viditvaé enam, having known it; evam, thus ; yojayet 
smrtim, one should fix one’s memory ; advaite, on non- 
duality; one should resort to one’s memory for the 
realisation of non-duality.1 And having comprehended 
that non-duality etc., having realised directly and 
immediately the Self that is beyond hunger etc., birth- 
less, and above all conventional dealings, after attain- 
ing the consciousness, “I am the supreme Brahman”, 
lokam acaret, one should behave in the world ; jadavat, 
like a dull-witted man, that is to say, without advertising 
-oneself as “I am such and such”. 


1 Even after knowing the import of the Upanisad, there is 
need of continously revolving in one’s mind those ideas so that 
they may become firmly rooted. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
JI. 37] MANDUKYA KARIKA 93 


It is being stated as to what should be the code of con- 
duct according to which he should behave in the world : 


Raga Raae AATE u= = | 
Forder Raefa Aaa 11351 
37. The mendicant should have no appreci- 
ation or greetings (for others), and he should 
be free from rituals. He should have the body 
and soul as his support, and he should be 
dependent on circumstances. 


Giving up all such activities as appreciation or greet- 
ing ; that is to say, having given up all desire for external 
objects and having embraced the highest kind of formal 
renunciation, in accordance with the Vedic text, “Know- 
ing this very Self, the Brahmanas renounce (... and 
lead a mendicant life)” (Br. HI. v. 1), and the Smrti 
text, “With their consciousness in That (Brahman), 
their Self identified with That, ever intent on That, 
with That for their supreme goal” (G. V. 17). Cala.. 
changing, is the body, since it gets transformed every 
moment ; and acala, unchanging, is the reality of the 
Self. Whenever perchance, impelled by the need of 
eating etc., one thinks of oneself as “I” by forgetting 
the reality of the Self that is one’s niketa, support, 
one’s place of abode, and that is by nature unchanging. 
like the sky, then the cala, changing body, becomes his 
niketa, support. The man of illumination who thus has. 
the changing and the unchanging as his support, but 
not the man who has external objects as his support, 
is the caldcalaniketa. And he bhavet, should be; 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
94 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IL 37 


yādrcchikah, dependent on circumstances ; that is to 
say, he should depend entirely on strips of cloth, 
coverings and food that come to him by chance for the 
maintenance of the body. 


TAA SSA Ta SSA g ATA | 
THAR RATATAT WaT NCI 
38. Examining the Reality in the context of 
the individual and in the external world, one 
should become identified with Reality, should 
have his delight in Reality, and should not 
deviate from Reality. 


The external entities such as the earth, and the personal 
entities such as the body, are unreal like the snake 
imagined on a rope or like dream, magic etc., in accord- 
ance with the Vedic text, “All modification exists only 
in name, having speech for its support” (Ch. VI. iv. 1), 
and the Self is that which exists within and without, 
that is birthless, without cause and effect, without any 
inside or outside, full, all-pervasive like space, subtle, 
motionless, attributeless, partless, and actionless, as is 
indicated in the Vedic Text, “That is Truth, that is the 
Self, and That thou art” (Ch. VI. viii-xii)—drstvd, 
having seen, the Reality in this way ; tattvibhitah, (one 
should) become indentified with Reality ; tadaramah, 
(one should) have one’s delight only in the Self, and not 
in anything external like one lacking in realisation, who 
accepts the mind as the Self, and thinks the Self to be 
changing in accordance with the changes of the mind, 
or at times accepts the body etc. to be the Self and 
thinks, “I am now alienated from reality that is the 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai. 


T. 38] MANDUKYA KARIKA 95 


Self” ; and when at times the mind becomes concentrat- 
ed, who thinks himself to be united with Reality and in 
peace under the belief, “I am now identified with 
Reality”. The knower of the Self should not be like 
that, because the nature of the Self is ever the same, and 
because it is impossible for anything to change its 
nature ; and one should be for ever apracyutah, unwaver- 
ing from Reality under the conviction, “T am Brahman”, 
that is to say, he should ever have the consciousness of 
Reality that is the Self, in accordance with such Smrti 
texts as “(The enlightened man) views equally a dog or 
an outcast” (G. V. 18), “(He sees who sees the supreme 
Lord) existing equally in all beings” (G. XIII. 27). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


CHAPTER IH 
ADVAITA PRAKARANA (ON NON-DUALITY) 


In the course of determining the nature of Om (in 
Chap. I) it was stated as a mere proposition that the: 
Self is the negation of the phenomenal world, and is. 
auspicious and non-dual. It was further said that 
“duality ceases to exist after realisation” (Karika, I. 
18). As to that, the non-existence of duality was 
established by the chapter ‘On Unreality’ with the help: 
of such analogies as dream, magic, and a city in space, 
and through logic on the grounds of “being perceived”, 
“having a beginning and an end”, and so on. Should. 
non-duality be admitted only on the authority of scrip- 
ture (and tradition), or should it be accepted on logical 
grounds, too? In answer to this it is said that it can be 
known on logical grounds as well. The chapter ‘On 
Non-duality’ starts to show how this can be possible. 
It was concluded in the preceding chapter that all 
diversity, comprising the worshipped, worship, and so: 
on, is unreal and the absolute, non-dual Self, is the 
highest Reality ; for— 


STAT at gat ars aef TAT | 
TS at STTS HIT: GA: 11211 
1. The aspirant, betaking himself to the 
devotional exercises, subsists in the condition- 
ed Brahman. All this was but the birthless. 
Brahman before creation. Hence such a man is. 
considered pitiable (or narrow in his outlook). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
HL 2] MANDUKYA KARIKA 97 


Upāsanāśritah, is a worshipper who resorts to upasana, 
devotional exercises (like worship and meditation), as 
the means of his liberation, under the belief, “I ama 
worshipper, and Brahman is to be adored by me. Though 
I now subsist jate brahmani, in the conditioned Brahman, 
I shall through my devotion to It, attain ajam brahma, 
the unconditioned Brahman, after the fall of my body. 
Prak utpatteh ajam Sarvam, before creation all this, 
including myself, was but the birthless Brahman. 
Through my. devotional exercises I shall regain that 
which I essentially was prak utpatteh, before my birth, 
though, after being born, I now subsist Jate brahmani, in 
the conditioned Brahman.” The dharmak, aspirant ; 
upasanasritah, who betakes himself to such devotional 
exercises ; since he is cognisant of such as partial Brah- 
man, tena, for that very reason ; asau, that man ; smrtah, 
is considered ; krpanah, pitiable, limited (Br. III. viii. 10), 
by those who have seen the eternal and birthless Brah- 
man ; this is the idea. And this is in accord with the 
following text of the Upanisad of the Talavakara section. 
“That which is not uttered by speech, that by which 
speech is revealed, know that alone to be Brahman, and 
not what people worship.as an object” (Ke. L 5). 


STT ER AATA AAA TAA | 
T a rad fara Gata: IRN 


2. Hence I shall speak of that (Brahman) 
which is free from limitation, has no birth, and 
is in a state of eqipoise ; and listen how noth- 


Ma. 8 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
98 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 2 


ing whatsoever is born in any way, though it 
seems to be born. 


Since on account of one’s failure to attain the birth- 
less Self, existing within and without, one becomes 
limited by thinking oneself through ignorance to be 
unworthy, and since on that account one comes to 
believe, “I am born, I subsist in the conditioned 
Brahman, and having recourse to Its worship I shall 
attain (the unconditioned) Brahman”, atah, therefore ; 
vaksyami, I shall relate; akarpanyam, freedom from 
misery, limitlessness, the birthless Brahman ; for that 
indeed is a source of limitation, “where one sees another, 
hears another, knows another. That is limited, mortal, 
and unreal” (Ch. VII. xxiv. 1), as is asserted in such 
Vedic texts as “All modification exists in name only, 
having speech for its support” etc. (Ch. VI. iv. 1), 
Opposed to this is that which has no limitation, which 
is within and without and is the birthless Brahman, 
called the Infinite, on realising which there is cessation 
of all misery caused by ignorance. I shall speak of that 
freedom from limits. This is the purport. That thing is 
ajati, birthless ; samatadm gatam, established in a state 
of equipoise, poised. Why ? Since It has no inequality 
of parts. Anything that is composite is said to evolve 
when its parts undergo loss of balance. But since this 
thing is partless, It is established in equilibrium, and 
hence It does not evolve through any change in any 
part. Therefore, It is birthless and free from misery. 
Hear yatha, how; samantatah, in all respects ; kimcit, 
anything, small though it be; na Jayate, is not born ; 
though jayamanam, it may (seem to) be born, like a snake 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


III. 3] MANDUKYA KARIKA 99 


from a rope, in consequence of perception under ignor- 
ance. Hear the secret how It is not born—how Brahman 
remains unborn in every way. This is the idea. 

The promise was, “I shall speak of Brahman which 
has no birth and which is free from limitation.” Now 
it is said, “I shall.adduce the reason and the analogy 
for proving this” : 


arar ARTIS AST RTA: | 
qera inian 13 
è , 

3. Since the Self is referred to as existing 
in the form of individual souls in the same way 
as space exists in the form of spaces confined 
within jars, and since the Self exists in the 
form of the composite things just as space 
exists as jars etc., therefore in the matter of 
birth this is the illustration. 


Hi, since ; atma, the (supreme) Self; is subtle, partless, 
and all-pervasive akagavat, like space ;—since that very 
supreme Self that is comparable to space, uditah, is 
referred to ; jivaik, as existing in the form of individual 

. souls, the individual knowers of the bodies etc. ; iva, 
in the same way; ākāśavat ghatakasaih, as space is 
referred to as existing in the form of spaces circum- 
scribed by jars. Or the explanation is: As space is 
(uditah) evloved in the form of spaces within the jars, 
so also has the supreme Self evolved as the individual 
souls. The idea implied is that the emergence of indi- 
vidual souls from the supreme Self that is heard of in 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
100 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 3 


the Upanisads is comparable to the emergence of the 
spaces in the jars from the supreme space ; but this is 
not so in any real sense of the term. Just as from that 
space evolve composite things like jars etc., so also 
from the supreme Self, that is comparable to space, 
emerge the composite things like the earth etc., as well 
as the bodies and senses that constitute the individual, 
all of them taking birth through imagination like a 
snake on a rope. This fact is stated in ghatddivat ca, 
and like a jaretc.; It is evolved samghataih, in the 
form of composite things. When with a view to make 
the fact understood by people of poor intellect, the 
birth of creatures etc. from the Self is referred to by the 
Vedas, then jatau, with regard to birth, when that is 
taken for granted ; etat nidarganam, this is the illustra- 
tion, as it has been cited in the analogy of space etc. 


TTRY TAG TRINGA AAT | 
SH daha aeta gga lgl 


4. Just as the space confined within the 
jars etc. merge completely on the disintegra- 
tion of the jars etc., so do the individual souls 
merge here in this Self. 


Just as the spaces within a jar etc. emerge into being 
with the creation of the jar etc., or just as the spaces 
within the jar etc., disappear with the disintegration of 
the jar etc., similarly, the individual souls emerge into 
being along with the creation of the aggregates of 
bodies etc., and they merge here in the Self on the 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ill. 5] MANDUKYA KARIKA 101 


disintegration of those aggregates. But this is not so 
from their own standpoint. 

The next verse is by way of an answer to those 
dualists who argue, “If there be but one Self in all the 
bodies, then when one of the souls undergoes birth 
or death or enjoys happiness etc., all souls should share 
in these ; besides there will be a confusion of the actions 
and their results.” 


TARA ETH TNT ATTA | 
Ta ged Tawar: Garey ki 
5. Just as all the spaces confined within 

the various jars are not darkened when one of 
the spaces thus confined becomes contaminat- 
ed by dust, smoke, etc., so also is the case 
with all the individuals in the matter of being 
affected by happiness etc.’ 


Yathd, just as; ekasmin ghatakage rajodhimadibhih 
yute, when one of the spaces confined in a jar is polluted 
by dust, smoke, etc. ; na, not; sarye, all the spaces, 
confined within the jars etc., are defiled by that dust or 
smoke etc. ; tadvat, just like that ; jīvāh, creatures ; are 
not affected by sukhadibhik, by hapiness etc. 

Objection: Is not the Self but one ? 

Answer: Quite so. Did you not hear that there is 
but one Self which like space inhabits all the aggregates 
(of body and senses) ? 

Objection: If the Self be one, It will experience 
happiness and sorrow everywhere. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
102 MANDUEKYA UPANISAD [HI. 5 

Answer: This objection cannot be raised by the 
Samkhyas. For a follower of the Samkhya philosophy 
cannot surely posit happiness, sorrow, etc. for the soul, 
inasmuch as he declares that joy, misery, etc. inhere in 
the intellect. Moreover, there is no valid ground for 
imagining that the Self, that is Consciousness by nature, 
has any multiplicity. 

Objection: In the absence of multiplicity, the 
(Samkhya) theory that Pradhana (i.e. Primordial 
Nature) acts for others (viz Purusas, the conscious 
souls) has no leg to stand on. 

Answer: No, since whatever is accomplished by 
Pradhana cannot get inseparably connected with the 
Self. If it were a fact that any result in the form of 
either bondage or freedom inhered in the souls separate- 
ly, then the supposition of a single Self would run 
counter to the (Samkhya) theory that Pradhana acts 
for others, and therefore it would be logical to assume 
a multiplicity of souls. But as a matter of fact, it is 
not admitted by the Samkhyas that any result, be it 
bondage or freedom, that is accomplished by Pradhana, 
can inhere in the soul ; on the contrary, they hold that 
the souls are attributeless and are pure consciousness. 
Hence the theory, that Pradhana acts for others, derives 
its validity from the mere presence of the Self, and not 
from Its multiplicity. Therefore the fact that Pradhana 
acts for others, cannot be a logical ground for inferring 
the existence of many souls. And the Samkhyas have no 
other proof to validate their theory that each soul is 
different from all others. If it be held that Pradhana by 
itself undergoes bondage or liberation by virtue of the 
mere presence of the supreme One (viz God), and that 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
HI. 5] MANDUKYA KARIKA 103 


God becomes an occasion for the activity of Pradhana 
by the mere fact of His existence which is the same as 
pure Consciousness, and not on account of any specific 
quality, then the assumption of a multiplicity of souls 
and the rejection of the meaning of the Vedas are the 
results of mere stupidity.1 

As for the view of the Vaisesikas and others who 
assert that desire and the rest inhere in the soul, that, 
too, is untenable ; for the impressions (of past experi- 
ences) that generate memory cannot remain insepar- 
ably located in the Self that has no location. And since 
(according to them) memory arises from a contact 
of the soul with the mind, there can be no fixed, tenable 
tule regarding the rise of memory; or there will be 
the possibility of the rise of all kinds of memory simulta- 
neously. Moreover, the souls that are devoid of touch 
etc. and belong to a different category cannot logically 
come into contact with the mind etc. Furthermore, 
it is not a fact, though these others believe in it, that 
qualities like colour or such categories as action, genus, 
species, or inherence exist independently of the sub- 
stances. If they were absolutely different from sub- 
stances, and if desire etc. were so from the soul, those 
qualities etc. would not have any reasonable relation 
with substance, (nor would desire etc. have any relation 
with the soul). 

Objection: It involves no contradiction to say that 
categories that become associated from their very birth 
can have the relationship of inherence. 


1 This refutes the view of those Sarnkhyas who believe in one 
God as well as in a multiplicity of souls. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
104 MANDUKYA UPANISAD (UT. 5 


Answer: Not so ; since the eternal Self exists before 
‘the ephemeral moods like desire, no theory of con- 
genital inherence can be logically advanced. If on the 
contrary, desire and the rest are supposed to have an 
inseparable relation with the soul from their very birth, 
then there arises the possibility of their becoming as 
everlasting as the quality of vastness that the soul 
possesses (even according to the Vaisesikas). And 
-that is not a desirable position, for that will lead to 
the conclusion that the soul has no freedom from the 
bondage (of desire etc). Besides, if the relationship 
of inherence be different from a substance, then one 
has to posit another relationship for its being connected 
with the substance, just as much as such a relationship 
(viz conjunction) is assumed in the case of substance 
and quality (by Vaisesikas). 

Objection: Inherence being an eternal, inseparable 
connection, there is no need of positing another rela- 
tionship to connect it (with a substance). 

Answer: In that case, since entities that are con- 
nected through the relation of inherence remain eternally 
joined, there can be no possibility of their being separate. 
Alternatively, if the substances and the rest be absolutely 
disparate, then just as things possessing and not possess- 
‘ing the attribute of touch cannot come in contact, so 
also those substances etc. cannot become related (with 
such categories as relation, qualities, etc.) by way of 
possession that is implied by the sixth case.1 Besides, 
if the Self is possessed of such qualities as desire etc. 

1 We cannot say for instance, “This thing is related to that 


colour through inherence”, which in ordinary parlance is express- 
ed by saying, “This thing has that colour.” 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
TII. 6) MANDUKYA KARIKA 105 


that are subject to increase and decrease, It will be open 
to the charge of being impermanent like the bodies and 
the fruits of actions. - And the other two faults of Its 
‘being possessed of parts and being subject to mutation, 
just like the bodies etc., will be unavoidable. On the 
‘other hand, if on the analogy of the sky, appearing to be 
blackened by dust and smoke attributed to it through 
ignorance, it is supposed that the Self appears to be 
‘possessed of the defects of happiness and sorrow gener- 
ated by such limiting adjuncts as the intellect that are 
‘superimposed on It through ignorance, there remains no 
illogicality in Its possessing bondage, freedom etc. in 
‘an empirical sense. For all schools of thought, while 
admitting the (relative reality of) empirical modes of 
behaviour originating from ignorance, deny their 
absolute reality. Therefore the imagination of the 
multiplicity of souls that the logician resorts to is quite 
uncalled for. 

It is being shown how, through ignorance, there can 
‘be the possibility, in the same Self, of that same variety 
of actions that becomes possible on the assumption of 
a multiplicity of souls : 


TERETA fired a4 qa 8 | 
SHINS + Harsha qasqu fora: el 


6. Though forms, actions, and names differ 
in respect of the difference (in space created 
by jars etc.), yet there is no multiplicity in 
space. So also is the definite conclusion with 
regard to the individual beings. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


106 MANDUKYA UPANISAD ul. 6 


As in the same space there is a (supposed) difference 
ef dimensions such as smallness and bigness in respect 
of the spaces enclosed by a jar, a water bowl, a house,. 
etc., so also there is a difference of functions such as 
fetching or holding water, sleeping, etc., and of names. 
such as the space ina jar, the space ina water bowl, 
the space in a house, etc., which are all created by those 
jar etc. ; but all these differences are not surely real that 
are implied in conventional dealings involving dimensions- 
etc. created in space; in reality akasasya na bhedah asti, 
space has no difference nor can there be any empiricah 
dealing based on the multiplicity of space unless there be 
the instrumentality of the limiting adjuncts. Just as it 
is the case here, so also jivesu, with regard to the souls, 
that are created as individual beings by the conditioning: 
factors of the bodies and are comparable to spaces. 
enclosed by jars; this nirnayah, definite conclusion, has. 
been arrived at by the wise after examination. 


TATRA TETE ARTUA TAT | 
Jara: GET Stat Aaaa aar Ut 


7. As the space within a jar is neither a 
transformation nor a part of space (as such), 
so an individual being is never a transfor- 
mation nor a part of the supreme Self. 


Objection: The experience of difference with regard 
to those spaces in the jars etc. follows a real pattern. 


Answer: This does not accord with fact, since 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


HI. 8] MANDUKYA KARIKA, 107 


ghatakagah, the space within a jar ; na vikarah, is not 
a transformation, of the real space, in the sense that 
a piece of gold ornament is of gold, or foam, bubbles, 
and ice are of water ; nor is it avayavak, a part, as for 
instance the branches etc. are of a tree. Yatha, as; 
the space in a jar is not a transformation of space in 
that sense ; tathd, similarly, just as shown in the illus- 
tration ; jivah, an individual being, that is comparable 
to the space within a jar; is na sada, never ; either a 
transformation or a part @tmanah, of the supreme Self, 
that is the highest Reality and is comparable to the 
infinite space. Therefore the dealings, based on the 
multiplicity of the Self, must certainly be false. 
Inasmuch as the experience of birth, death, etc. 
follows asa consequence of the differentiation among in- 
dividuals created by the limiting adjuncts constituted by 
the bodies, just as the experience of the forms, actions 
etc. are the results of the ideas of difference entertained 
with regard to the spaces within jars etc., therefore the 
association of the soul with such impurities as suffering, 
consequences of actions, etc. is caused by that alone, 
but not in any real sense. With a view to establishing 
this fact with the help of an illustration the text goes on: 


aa wate aera WT Aled Ae: | 
TAT WAFSTATATATSA RR AV: CII 
8. Just as the sky becomes blackened by 
dust etc. in the eyes of the ignorant, so also the 
Self becomes tarnished by impurities in the 
eyes of the unwise. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
108 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 8 


Yathā, as, in common experience ; gaganam, the 
sky ; bhavati, becomes ; malinam, blackened, by cloud, 
dust, smoke, and such other impurities ; balandm, to 
the non-discriminating people ; but to the truly dis- 
criminating people, the sky is not blackened ; tathd, 
so also abuddhanam, to the unwise, to those only who 
cannot distinguish the indwelling Self, but not to those 
who can distinguish the Self ; atma, the supreme Self, 
the knower and the innermost; bhavati, becomes ; 
malinah, tainted ; malaih, with impurities—the impuri- 
ties of mental defects and results of action. For a 
desert does not become possessed of water, foam, 
wave, etc. just because a thirsty creature falsely attrib- 
utes these to it. Similarly, the Self is not blemished 
by the impurities of suffering etc. attributed to It by the 
ignorant. This is the idea. 
` The same idea is being elaborated again : 


aut Guy Fa Tea | 
feat aa arate: Us 
9. The Self is not dissimilar to space in the 
matter of Its death and birth, as well asits going 
and coming, and existence in all the bodies. 
The idea implied is that one should realise that in 
the matter of birth, death, etc., the Self in all the bodies 


is quite on a par with space confined in a jar, so far as 


its origination, destruction, coming, going, and motion- 
lessness are concerned. 


Gara: Maca STAT haar: | 
oT aaa ar ARAR RR Igo 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
HI. 11] MANDUKYA KARIKA 109 


10. The aggregates (of bodies and senses) 
are all created like dream by the Maya of the 
Self. Be it a question of superiority or equality 


of all, there is no logical ground to prove their 
existence. 


Samghatah, the aggregates. of bodies, etc., that are 
analogous to the jars etc., are like the bodies etc. seen 
in a dream and like those conjured up by a magician ; 
and are @tma-mday4-visarjitah, produced, conjured up, 
by the Maya, ignorance, of the Self; the idea is that 
they do not exist in reality. Though there may be 
Gdhikya, superiority, of the aggregates of the bodies 
and senses of the gods and others in comparison with 
those of the beasts and others, or there may be samya, 
equality of all ; still Hi, since ; there exists ma upapattih, . 
no valid ground, no possibility, for them—there is no 
reason establishing the existence of these things; there- 
fore they are created by ignorance alone—they do not 
exist in reality. This is the meaning. 

(Upanisadic) texts that go to establish the fact that 
the reality of the non-dual Self is proved on the evidence . 
of the Vedas, are now being referred to : 


area fŠ 3 lea aena A | 
Jarr Tat Sita: GF AAT AAT ARTA: 119911 
11. Ithas been amply elucidated (by us) on 
the analogy of space, that the individual liv- 
ing being that conforms to the soul of the 
sheaths, counting from that constituted by the 
essence of food, which have been fully dealt 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


110 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 11 


with in the Taittiriya Upanisad is none other 
than the supreme Self. 

Rasadayah, the essence of food etc., that is to say, 
the layers of covering constituted by the essence of 
food, the vital force, etc. which are comparable to 
the sheaths of swords, as the preceding ones are more 
and more external in relation to the earlier ones ;— 
these have been vyakhyatah, fully dealt with ; tait- 
tiriyake, in a part of the Upanisad of the Taittiriyaka 
branch (Tai. II. i-vi). That which is a@tmd, the soul, 
the inmost entity ; tesa@m, of them, of all the sheaths ; 
because of which (soul) the sheaths come to have exist- 
ence ; is called jzvah, the living being, since it is the 
source of animation. It is being said as to what it is. 
It is parah, the supreme Brahman Itself, that was in- 
troduced earlier in the text, “Brahman is truth, 
knowledge, infinity” (Tai. II. i)—the Brahman from 
which, it was stated that, through the Maya of the 
Self, emerged like dream or magic (Karika, III. 10) 
(first) space etc. and then the composite things called 
the sheaths counting from the one composed of the 
essence of food (Tai. II. i). That very self sampra- 
kasitah, bas been held forth, by us as analogous to 
space in the verses beginning with “Since the Self is 
referred to as existing in the form of individual souls 
in the same way as space” (Karika, III. 3). The idea 
implied is that the Self is not to be established by the 
mere human intellect just as much as It cannot be by 
the imagination of the logicians. 


gatgate gare W aa sar | 
gng s Ts AATSSAIN: THA: IRI 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
TI. 13] MANDUEKYA KARIKA 111 


12. As it is demonstrated that space in the 
earth and the stomach is but the same, simi- 
larly in the Madhu-Brahmana the supreme 
Brahman is revealed as the same with refer- 
ence to the different dual contexts. 


Moreover, prakasitam, it has been revealed ; dvayok 
dvayoh, with reference to the different dual contexts 
—the superhuman and the corporeal—that the “shin- 
ing, immortal being” dwelling inside the earth etc. as 
the knower, is but Brahman, the supreme Self, that 
is everything (Br. II. v. 1-14). Where (has this been 
revealed) ? That is being stated : The word madhujnana 
is used in the sense of that from which is known madhu, 
nectar, the cause of immortality, called the knowledge 
of Brahman which leads to blissfulness ; so it means 
-the (chapter called) Madhu-Brahmana (of the Brhada- 
ranyaka Upanisad) ; in that Madhu-Brahmana. Like 
-what ? Yatha, as, in the world ; the same akasah, space; 
is prakasitah, demonstrated to exist, through inference ; 
prthivyam udare ca eva, in the earth and the stomach ; 
similar is the case here. This is the purport. 


AAA AAA TAT | 
arated Aa Fa aed fe AASTAA_ 112311 
13. The fact that the non-difference of the 
individual and the supreme Self is extolled by 
a statement of their identity, and the fact that 
diversity is condemned, become easy of com- 
prehension from this point of view alone. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
112 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 13: 


The fact that ananyatvam jivatmanah, the non-differ- 
ence of the individual soul and the supreme Self, as- 
certained through reasoning and the Vedas; is prasasyate, 
praised, by the scriptures and Vyasa and others ; abhe- 
dena, by a reference to (the result consisting in) the 
identity of the individual and the supreme Self ;1 and the 
fact that the perception of multiplicity, that is common 
and natural to all beings and is a view formulated by the 
sophists standing outside the pale of scriptural import, 
nindyate, is condemned, by the knowers of Brahman as. 
well in such texts as, “But there is not that second” (Br. 
IV. iii. 23), “It is from a second entity that fear comes” 
(Br. I. iv. 2), “When he makes a very little difference, 
then he is subjected to fear” (Tai. IL vii. 1), “... and 
this all are the Self” (Br. II. iv. 6, IV. v. 7), “He who- 
perceives here multiplicity, as it were, goes from death. 
to death” (Ka.II.i.10); zat yat, all that, that has been said 
(thus); evam hi samanjasam, becomes thus easy of 
comprehension ; that is to say, becomes logical from this 
point of view alone ; but the perverted views, cooked up- 
by the logicians, are not easy of comprehension ; that is. 
to say, they do not tally with facts when probed into. 


Starch: ARA weed: eather 
HATA Wot aera fŠ ++ AST 19911 
14. The separateness of the individual and 
the supreme Self that has been declared (in 
the Vedic texts) earlier than (the talk of) 


1 “He who knows the supreme Brahman becomes Brahman?” 
(Mu. III. ii. 9). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
III. 14] MANDUKYA KARIKA 113 


creation (in the Upanisads), is only in a secon- 
dary sense that keeps in view a future result 
(viz unity); for such separateness is out of 
place in its primary sense. 


Objection: Since prak utpatteh, earlier even than the 
Upanisadic texts dealing with creation; prthaktvam 
jivatmanoh, the separateness of the individual and the 
supreme Self ; prakirtitam, has been declared ; by the 
Vedas, in the portion dealing with rites and rituals, in 
various ways in conformity with the variety of desires (of 
individuals), in such words as, “desirous of this”, 
“desirous of that”, and the supreme Self, too, has been 
declared in such mantra texts as, “He held the earth as 
well as this heaven” (R. X. cxxi. 1), therefore, in case 
of a contradiction between the sentences of the portions 
on knowledge (i.e. Upanisads) and rites (i.e. Samhita and 
Brahmana), why should unity alone, standing out as the 
purport of the portion on knowledge, be upheld as the 
reasonable one ? 

To this the answer is: Tat prthaktvam, that separate- 
ness ; is not the highest truth ; yat, which ; is prakirtitam, 
declared ; prak, earlier in the portion on rites, before the 
Upanisadic texts dealing with creation occur, to wit, 
«That from which all these beings take birth” (Tai. III. 
i, “As from a fire fly tiny sparks” (Br. II. i. 20), “From 
this Self that is such, space was created” (Tai. II. i. 2), 
«That (Self) saw (i.e. deliberated)” (Ch. VI. ii. 3); “That 
(Self) created fire” (Ch. VI. ii. 3), etc. What is it then? 
It is gaunam, secondary like the separateness of the 
infinite space and the space within a jar. And this state- 
ment is made by keeping in view the future result, as in 


Ma. 9 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
114 MANDUKYA UPANISAD mI. 14 


the sentence, “He cooks food.” For the texts, speaking 
of difference, can never reasonably uphold it in any 
literal sense, inasmuch as the texts dealing with the 
multiplicity of the Self only reiterate the diverse ex- 
periences of beings still under natural ignorance. And 
here in the Upanisads, too, in the texts speaking of 
creation, dissolution, etc., the one thing sought to be 
established is the unity of the individual and the supreme 
Self, as is known from such texts as “That thou art” 
(Ch. VI. viii-xvi), «(While he who worships another god 
thinking), ‘He is one, and I am another’ does not know” 
(Br. I. iv. 10), etc. Therefore the reiteration of the 
perception of multiplicity is made by the Vedas in this 
world in a secondary sense only, placing their reliance 
on the future demonstration of unity that is left over as 
a task to be accomplished in the Upanisads at a later 
stage. Or the explanation is this: The declaration of 
unity has been made in “One without a second” (Ch. 
VI. ii. 2) earlier than that of creation introduced in such 
texts as “It (the Self) deliberated”, “It created fire” (Ch. 
VI. ii. 2-3). And that, again, will culminate in unity in 
the text, “That is truth, That is the Self, and That thou 
art” (Ch. VI. viii-xvi). Therefore the separateness of the 
individual and the supreme Self that is met with (in the 
Upanisads) anywhere in any sentence must be taken in 
a secondary sense, as in the sentence, “He cooks food”, 
for the thing kept in view here is the unity that will be 
established in future. 


Objection: Even though everything be birthless and 


1 Where food stands for the ultimate form that the things 
being cooked will assume. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 15] MANDUKYA KARIKA 115 


one without a second before creation, still after creation 
all these surely have got birth, and individuals, too, are 
different. 

Answer: This is not so, for the Vedic texts dealing 
with creation have a different object in view. This 
objection was refuted earlier also by saying that, just 
like dream, the aggregates are created by the Maya of 
the Self, and that the birth, difference, etc. of individuals 
are analogous to the birth, difference etc. of the spaces 
within jars (Karikas, III. 9-10). (Since falsity of these 
have already been dealt with) therefore, taking that very 
reason for granted, some Vedic texts dealing with 
creation are being adduced here, from amongst the texts 
dealing with creation, difference, etc., with a view to 
showing that they are meant for establishing the oneness 
of the Self and the individual beings. 


marisma: Great ARST | 
SUT: SSAA AT AS? BATT 119811 
15. The creation that has been multifari- 
ously set forth with the help of the examples 
of earth, gold, sparks, etc., is merely by way 
of generating the idea (of oneness) ; but there 
is no multiplicity in any way. 
Srstik, the creation ; ya, which; codita, has been 
expounded, revealed ; anyatha, in different ways ; mrt- 


loha-visphulinga-adyaih, with the help of such illustra- 
tions as earth, gold, sparks, etc.;1 sah, that, all that 


1 Ch. VI. i. 4-6 ; Mu. II. i. 1. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


116 MANDUKYA UPANISAD mI. 15 


process of creation ; is an upayah, means ; avataraya, for 
engendering, in us the idea of the oneness of the individ- 
ual and the supreme Self. It is just like the story of the 
organs of speech etc. becoming smitten with sin by the 
devils, that is woven round a conversation with Prana, 
where the intention is to generate the idea of the pre- 
eminence of Prana (Ch. J. ii; Br. 1. iii, VI. i. ; Pr. 2). 

Objection: That, too, is unacceptable.1 

Answer: No, since the conversations of Prana etc. 
are related divergently in the different branches of the 
Vedas. If the colloquies were true, we should have met 
with a uniform pattern in all the branches, and not with 
heterogeneous contradictory presentations. But, as a 
matter of fact, divergence is met with. Therefore the 
Vedic texts setting forth the interlogues are not to be 
taken literally. So also are to be understood the sen- 
tences dealing with creation. 

Objection: Since the cycles of creation differ, the 
Vedic texts dealing with the interlogues, as well as with 
creation, are divergent with relation to the respective 
cycles. 

Answer : Not so, since they serve no useful purpose 
apart from generating the ideas already mentioned. Not 
that any other purpose can be imagined for the Vedic 
texts speaking of colloquies and creation. 

Objection: They are meant for meditation with a 
view to attaining self-identification. 

Answer: Not so, for it cannot be a desirable end 
to be identified with quarrel, creation, or dissolution. 


1 The anecdotes of Prana are real. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
II. 16] MANDUKYA KARIKA 117 


Therefore the texts expressing creation etc. are meant 
simply for generating the idea of the oneness of the Self, 
and they cannot be fancied to bear other interpretations. 
Therefore na asti, there is not, any bhedah, multiplicity, 
caused by creation etc. ; kathamcana, in any way. 

Objection: If in accordance with such Vedic texts as 
“One only without a second” (Ch. VI. ii. 2), the supreme 
Self, that is by nature ever pure, intelligent, and free, be 
the only realityin the highest sense and all else be 
unreal, then why are there such instructions on medita- 
tions in the Vedic texts as, “The Self, my dear, should 
be seen”! (Br. II. iv. 5), “The Self that is devoid of sin 
...(is to be sought for)” (Ch. VIII. vii. 1), “He should 
resort to self-absorption” (Ch. III. xiv. 1), “The Self 
alone is to be meditated upon” (Br. I. iv. 7) etc. ; and 
why are the rites like Agnihotra enjoined ? 

Answer: Hear the reason for this : 


HARTA SAAS: | 
wae SAJET III 
16. There are three stages of life—inferior, 
intermediate, and superior. This meditation 
is enjoined for them out of compassion. 
The word āśramāh, meaning stages of life, indicates the 


people belonging to them—the people competent for 
scriptural duties, as well as the people of different castes 


1 The remaining portion is: “heard of, deliberated on, and 
meditated on”. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
118 MANDUEYA UPANISAD [HI. 16 


following the righteous path—for the word is used in a 
suggestive sense. They are trividhah : of three kinds. 
How? Hina-madhyama-utkrsta-drstayah, people possess- 
ing inferior, medium, and superior power of vision ; that 
is to say, they are endued with dull, medium, and fine 
mental calibre. Iyam upasana, this meditation, as well 
as rites ; wpadista, has been instructed ; tadartham for 
them, for the sake of people of dull and medium intellect 
who are affiliated to the stages of life etc., and not for 
the people of superior intellect having the conviction 
that the Self is but one without a second. (This is done) 
by the kind Vedas, anukampaya, out of compassionate 
consideration, as to how people treading the path of 
righteousness may attain this superior vision of unity, as 
set forth in such Vedic texts as, “That which is not 
thought of by the mind, that by which, they say, the 
mind is thought of, know that to be Brahman, and not 
this that people worship as an object” (Ke. 1. 6), “That 
thou art” (Ch. VI. vii-xvi), “The Self alone is all this” 
(Ch. VII. xxv. 2), etc. 

The perfect knowledge consists in the realisation 
of the non-dual Self, since this is established by scrip- 
tures and logic, whereas any other view is false, it 
being outside the pale of these. A further reason that 
the theories of the dualists are false is that they are 
based on such defects as likes and dislikes. How? 


ARRENE SRA ARAT Ee | 
et Ara at a Aad gil 
17. The: dualists, confirmed belivers in the 
methodologies establishing their own conclu- 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


III. 18] MANDUKYA KARIKA 119 


sions, are at loggerheads with one another. 


But this (non-dual) view finds no conflict with 
them. 


Dyaitinah, the dualists—who follow the views of 
Kapila, Kanada, Buddha, Arhat,1 and others ; niścitāh, 
are firmly rooted; svasiddhanta-vyavasthasu, in the 
methodologies leading to their own conclusions. Think- 
ing “The supreme Reality is this alone, and not any 
other”, they remain affiliated to those points of view, 
and finding anyone opposed to them, they become 
hateful of him. Thus being swayed by likes and dislikes, 
consequent on the adherence to their own conclusions, 
parasparam virudhyante, they stand arrayed against 
one another. As one is not at conflict with one’s own 
hands and feet, so also, just because of non-difference 
from all, ayam, this, this Vedic view of ours consisting 
in seeing the same Self in everyone ; na virudhyate, is 
not opposed; taih, to them, who are mutually at conflict. 
Thus the idea sought to be conveyed is that the perfect 
view consists in realising the Self as one, for this is not 
subject to the drawbacks of love and harted. 

It is being pointed out why this view does not conflict 
with theirs : 


stad Taal f ad daz SEN | 
gaasi sara a we IRCI 
18. Non-duality is the highest Reality, since 
duality is said to be a product of it. But for 


1 Viz the Sarnkhyas, Nyāya-Vaiśsşikas, Buddhists, and Jainas. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
120 MANDUKYA UPANISAD DI. 18 


them there is duality either way. Therefore this 
view (of ours) does not clash (with theirs). 


Advaitam paramarthah, non-duality is the highest 
Reality ; hi, since ; dvaitam, duality, heterogeneity ; is 
tad-bhedah, a differentiation, that is to say, a product, 
of that non-duality, in accordance with the Vedic 
texts, “(In the beginning there was Existence alone)— 
One without a second... It created fire’ (Ch. VI. 
ii. 2-3), and in accordance with reason also ; for duality 
ceases to exist in samadhi (God-absorption), uncon- 
sciousness, and deep sleep, when the mind ceases to 
act. Therefore duality is called a product of non- 
duality. But tesam, for those dualists ; there is nothing 
but dvaitam, duality ; ubhayathd, from either point of 
view, from the standpoints of both Reality and unreality. 
Though those deluded persons have a dualist outlook 
and we the undeluded ones have a non-dualist outlook 
in conformity with the Vedic texts, “The Lord, on 
account of Maya, is perceived as many” (Br. II. v. 19), 
“But there is not that second thing (separate from It 
which It can see)” (Br. IV. iii. 23) ; yet tena, because of 
this reason (because of the falsity of dualism) ; ayam, 
this our point of view ; na virudhyate, does not clash, 
with theirs. This point can be illustrated thus : A man 
sitting astride an elephant in rut does not goad his 
animal aginst a madman standing on the ground and 
challenging him by saying, “I am also seated on an 
elephant in opposition ; drive your animal against me”, 
just because he has no inimical feelings towards the 
latter. Thus, since in reality, the knower of Brahman is 
the very Self of the dualists, tena, hence, because of this 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
AMI. 19] MANDUEKYA KARIKA 121 


‘reason ; ayam, this, this outlook of ours ; na virudhyate, 
-does not clash ; with theirs. 

When it is asserted that duality is derived from non- 
duality, someone may entertain the doubt that on that 
round duality, too, is real in the highest sense. There- 
fore it is said : 


aaa fad ATATA ASAT | 
aad femal R seqarqa AST EM 
19. This birthless (Self) becomes differen- 
-tiated through Maya, andit does so in no other 
-way than this. For should It become multiple 
in reality, the immortal will undergo mortality. 


Hi, since ; that which is the highest Reality ; bhidyate, 
-differentiates ; mayaya, through Maya ; like the moon 
-seen as many by a man with diseased eyes, or like a 
‘rope appearing diversely as a snake, a line of water, . 
.€tc., but not so in reality, for the Self has no parts. A 
„composite thing can get transformed through a change 
in its components, as earth gets modified into jars etc. 
“Therefore the idea conveyed is that the partless ajam, 
‘birthless (Self) ; differentiates, na kathaficana, in no 
way whatsoever ; anyatha, other than this. Hi, for ; 
tattvatah bhidyamane, should (It) become multiformed 
in reality ; that which is naturally amrtam, immortal ; 
„ajam, birthless ; and non-dual ; vrajet martyatam, will 
undergo mortality, like fire becoming cold. And this 
reversal of one’s own nature is repugnant, since it is 
-opposed to all valid evidence. The birthless, undecaying 
Reality that is the Self, becomes multiple through Maya 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
122 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 19: 


alone and not in reality. Therefore duality is not the 
highest Truth. 


aaa ara ARa ate: | 
c. N 
Aad GMAT arad Achat BHAAAA lRON 

90. The talkers vouch indeed for the birth 
of that very unborn, positive entity. But how 
can a positive entity that is unborn and im- 
mortal undergo mortality ? 

But as for those vadinah, garrulous people, talking 
of Brahman ; who, while interpreting the Upanisads, 
icchanti, vouch for ; the jatim, birth, in a real sense ; 
ajatasya eva, of the very birthless One, of the immortal. 
Reality that is the Self. If the Self be born as they hold,. 
It esyati martyatam, will undergo mortality, of a certain- 
ty. But that Self being by nature a bhayah, positive 
entity ; that is ajatah, unborn ; amrtah deathless ; katham 
how ; can It undergo mortality ? The idea is that It wilt 


in no way reverse Its nature to embrace mortality (that 
individuals are subject to). 


a Was A aA TANT | 
TAER a PASARAAA UR 
21. The immortal cannot become mortal. 
Similarly the mortal cannot become immortal. 
The mutation of one’s nature will take place 
in no way whatsoever. 


Because, in this world, the amrtam, immortal ; na 
bhavati, does not become ; martyam, mortal ; similarly,. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
III. 22] MANDUKYA KARIKA 123 


the mortal does not become immortal. Accordingly 
anyathabhavah prakyteh, the mutation of one’s nature, to 
become anything other than what one is ; na katham cit 
bhavisyati, will not take place in any way whatsoever, 
just as fire cannot change its heat. 


RUG AI UTS Weel AAT | 
RATA BA TATA PARAS: IRRI 
22. How can the immortal entity continue 
to be changeless from the standpoint of one 
according to whom a positive, immortal object 
can naturally pass into birth, it being a prod- 
uct (according to him) ? 

As for the disputant, yasya, according to whom; 
svabhavena, naturally: amrtah bhavah, an immortal 
positive object; gacchati martyatam, attains transmi- 
gratoriness, takes birth in reality : tasya, for him ; it is a 
meaningless proposition to hold that entity to be natural- 
ly immortal before creation. Katham, how ; can that 
entity ; be amrtah, immortal ; tasya, for him : kytakena, 
inasmuch as it is a product? Being an effect, how will 
that immortal stha@syati, continue to be; niscalah, un- 
changing, immortal by nature? Jt cannot remain so 
by any means. At no time can there exist anything 
called unborn for one who holds the view that the Self 
has birth ; for him all this is mortal. Hence (from this 
standpoint) we are faced with the negation of freedom. 
This is the idea. 

Objection: For one who holds the view that the Self 
does not undergo birth, the Vedic passages speaking of 
creation can have no validity. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


124 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 22 


Answer: It is true that there are Vedic texts support- 
ing creation, but such passages have some other point in 
view ; and we said that it “is only by way of generating 
the idea” of unity (Karika, III. 15). Though the objection 
was disposed of, the contention and its refutation are 
adverted to here again merely with a view to allaying 
the doubts as to whether the passages dealing with 
creation are favourable or opposed to the subject-matter 
that is going to be dealt with : 


Vaasa arsft GSAT TAT AR: | 
fated grag < agate AAT 112311 


23. Vedic texts are equally in evidence 
with regard to creation in reality and through 
Maya. That which is ascertained (by the 
Vedas) and is supported by reasoning can be 
the meaning, and nothing else. 


Sama śrutih, (texts speaking of creation) are equally in 
evidence: srjyamane, with regard to a thing being 
created ; bhiitatah, in reality ; vā, or; abhitatah, through 
Maya, as is done by a magician. 

Objection: Of the two possible meanings—primary 
and secondary—it is reasonable to understand a word 
in its primary sense. 

Answer: Not so, for we said earlier that creation 
in any other sense is not recognised (in our philos- 
ophy), and it serves no purpose. All talks of creation, 
in the primary or secondary sense, relate only to creation 
through ignorance, and not to creation in reality, as 
is denied in the Vedic text, “It is co-extensive with all 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
JII. 24] MANDUKYA KARIKA 125 


that is within and without, and has no birth” (Mu. II. 
i. 2). Therefore that which is niscitam , determined, by 
the Vedas as one without a second, birthless, and 
immortal ; ca, and ; is yuktiyuktam, supported by reason- 
ing ; tat, that, alone ; bhavati, becomes, the meaning of 
the Vedic text, and not anything else. This is what we 
said in the earlier verses. 

It is being shown as to what kind of Vedic categorical 
statements are met with : 


dg arate areararieedt Ararat 1 
AATAATAY AAT ATAAT STAG 8 S: UVM 
24. Since it is stated (in the Vedas), “There 

is no diversity here”, and “The Lord, on ac- 
count of Maya, (is perceived as manifold)”, 
“(the Self) without being born (appears to be 
born in various ways)”, it follows that He is 
born on account of Maya alone. 


If creation had taken place in reality, the diverse 
things should have been real, and there should not have 
been any text showing their unreality. But, as a matter 
of fact, there is the text, “There is no diversity here 
whatsoever” (Ka. II. i. 11), which purports to deny 
the existence of duality. Therefore creation, that has 
been imagined as a help to the comprehension of non- 
duality is as unreal as the interlogue of Prana (vide 
Karika, III. 15) ; for this creation is referred to by the 
word Maya, indicative of unreal things, in the passage, 
«The Lord, on account of Maya (is perceived as mani- 
fold)” (Br. I. v. 19). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


126 MANDÜKYA UPANISAD MI. 24 


Objection; The word Maya implies knowledge. 

Answer: True. But even so it is nothing damaging, 
since sense-knowledge is accepted as a kind of Maya, 
it being a product of ignorance. So mayabhih (in Br., 
II. v. 19) means “through different kinds of sense- 
knowledge”, which are but forms of ignorance, as is 
proved by the Vedic text, “Though unborn, It appears 
to be born in diverse ways” (Y.XXXI. 19). Therefore 
sah, He, the Self ; jayate mayayd tu, takes birth through 
Maya alone, the word tu being used to add emphasis, 
and to imply “through Maya to be sure” ; for other- 
wise) birthlessness and birth in various ways cannot 
be reconciled in the same thing like heat and cold in 
fire. Besides, from the fact that the realisation of unity 
is a fruitful thing as mentioned in the Vedic text, “What 
sorrow and what delusion can there be in one who 
realises unity” etc. (Is. 7), it follows that the unitive 
outlook is the definite conclusion of the Upanisads, 
and this view is supported by the fact that in such texts 
as “He goes from death to death who sees multiplicity, 
as it were, in It” (Ka.II.i.11), the idea of heterogeneity, 
implied by creation etc., is condemned. 


SATE Gara: ARER | 
at eda Toe Tee ARA IRKI 
25. From the refutation of (the worship of) 
Hiranyagarbha, it follows that creation is 
negated. By the text, “who should bring him 
forth ?” is ruled out any cause. 


Sambhavah pratisidhyate, creation (i.e. the created 
ee 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
qIL. 25] MANDUKYA KARIKA 127 


things), is negated ; sambhiiteh apavadat, because of the 
‘denial of the worship of the Majestic One1 (Hiranya- 
garbha), in the text, “They enter into blinding darkness 
who worship Hiranyagarbha” (Is. 12). For if Hiranya- 
garbha were absolutely real, there would not have been 
any denunciation of His (worship). 

Objection: The denunciation of (the worship of) 
Hiranyagarbha is meant for bringing about the com- 
bination of worship with rites (vindsa), as is known from 
the text, “They enter into blinding darkness who are 
engaged in (mere) rites” (Jš, 9). 

Answer: It is true that the condemnation of the 
Meditation on (or worship of) Hiranyagarbha is meant 
for enjoining a combination of the meditation on the 
Deity, viz Hiranyagarbha, with rites, referred to by the 
word vindga (lit. the destructible), Still, just as rites, 
‘called yina£a, are meant for transcending death consisting 
in the natural tendencies engendered by ignorance, so 
also the combination of the meditation on gods with the 
rites, that is enjoined for the purification of the human 
‘heart, is calculated to lead one beyond the death con- 
sisting in a twofold hankering for ends and means, into 
-which the impulsion, engendered by the craving for the 
results of works, transforms itself. For thus alone will 
a man be sanctified from the impurity that is the death 
characterised by the twofold hankering. Therefore this 
avidya (lit ignorance), characterised by a combination 
-of the meditation on gods with-rites, aims at leading one 
beyond death. Thus indeed does the knowledge of the 
oneness of the supreme Self arise inevitably in one who 


1 The Deity that is possessed of full majesty (sam-bhuti). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
128 MANDUKYA UPANISAD Hi. 25 


becomes disgusted with the world, who is ever engaged 
in the discussion of the Upanisadic truths, and who goes- 
beyond death that is but (a form of) avidya (or ignorance): 
characterised by the dual desire (for ends and means). 
Thus, as compared with the pre-existing ignorance, the 
knowledge of Brahman, leading to immortality, comes- 
as a successor to be related with the same person ; and 
therefore (in this sense) the latter is said to be combined 
with the former, Accordingly, since the worship of 
Hiranyagarbha is meant to serve a purpose different 
from that of the knowledge of Brahman leading to- 
immortality, the refutation of the worship of Hiranya- 
garbha is tantamount to its denunciation, and this is so- 
because it has no direct bearing on emancipation, 
though it is a means of purification. Thus from the 
condemnation of the worship of Hiranyagarbha it. 
follows that He has got only a relative existence ; and 
hence creation, (as symbolised by Hiranyagarbha and)- 
called immortality stands negated from the standpoint. 
of the absolutely real oneness of the Self. 

Thus since it is the individual soul itself ; created by- 
ignorance and existing through ignorance alone, that: 
attains its natural stature on the eradication of ignorance,. 
therefore “Kah nu enam janayet, who should again. 
bring him forth ?” (Br. III. ix. 28-7). For none jndeed’ 
creates again a snake, superimposed on a rope, once- 
it is removed through discrimination. Similarly none 
will create this individual. The words, “kak nu, who- 
indeed”, being used with the force of a covert denial, 
karanam pratisidhyate, is ruled out any cause. The 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


TII. 26] MANDUKYA KARIKA 129 


idea is that a thing that was created by ignorance and 
thus disappeared has no source of birth, in accordance 
with the Vedic text “From nothing did It come out, and 
nothing came out of It” (Ka. I. ii. 18). 


a qq ae A areata figà aa: | 
CAAT AT SSTSST TATRA IREI 


26. Since by taking the help of incompre- 
hensibility (of Brahman) as a reason, all that 
was explained earlier (as a means for the know- 
ledge of Brahman) is negated by the text, 
“This Self is that which has been described as 
‘Not this, not this’ ”, therefore the birthless 
Self becomes self-revealed. 


The Upanisad thinks that the Self, presented through 
a negation of all attributes in the text, “Now, therefore, 
the description (of Brahman): ‘Not this, not this’? 
(Br. II. iii. 6) is very difficult to understand ; and from 
that point of view whatever was vyakhydtam, explained, 
as a means adopted again and for the sake of establish- 
ing that very Self—all that it again and again nihnute, 
negates.1 By showing in the text, “This Self is that 


1 Vide Br. II. iii. 6, III. ix. 26, IV. ii. 4, IV.iv. 22, and IV.v.15. 
Brhadaranyaka, TI. iii, starts with, “Brahman has but two forms— 
gross and subtle” etc. And at the end of the section it is stated, 
“Now, therefore, the description (of Brahman) : ‘Not this, Not 
this’’’. But though explained once, the Self is very difficult to com- 
prehend. Hence the Upanisad adopts other helps to present the 
same entity and then negates them with “not this, not this’’, so 


Ma. 10 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


130 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 26 


which has been described as not this, not this” (Br. III. 
ix. 26) that the Self is imperceptible, the Upanisad 
negates, by implication, all that is perceptible, has 
origination, and is comprehended by the intellect.1 Be- 
ing afraid lest people, not cognisant of the fact that any- 
thing presented as a means for establishing something 
else has only that other thing as its goal, may jump to the 
conclusion that one must cling as firmly to the means as 
to the end itself, the Upanisad nihnute, refutes (the idea 
of the reality of the means) ; agrahyabhavena hetund, by 
taking the help of the incomprehensibility (of the Self) 
as a reason. This is the purport. As a result of this, 
the reality of the Self that is co-extensive with all that is 
within and without and is ajam, birthless ; prakasate, 
gets revealed, by Itself, to one who knows that the means 
only serves the purpose of the end and that the end has 
ever the same changeless nature.2 

Thus the definite conclusion arrived at by hundreds 
of Vedic texts is that the reality of the Self that is co- 
extensive with all that exists within and without, and is 
birthless, is one without a second, and there is nothing 


that the absolute Brahman alone may be comprehended as the 
only Reality. 

1 The imperceptible Brahman cannot be the supreme Reality 
if perceptible things, too, are equally real. Therefore the truth of 
Brahman implies the unreality of duality. 

2A superimposed tling has no reality of its own just likea 
snake imagined on a rope. Similarly, all phenomenal things like 
specific attributes that are denied in Brahman, have no existence 
by the very fact of being negated. It is a mistake to think that the 
negated counterpart of this negation must also be true. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


WI. 27] MANDUKYA KARIKA . 131 


besides. It is now said that this very fact is established 
by reason as well : 


a fe AAT IA S= Ag aaa: | 
TAT Te TET Set TA FE STAT RII 
27. Birth of a thing that (already) exists 
can reasonably be possible only through Maya 
and not in reality. For one who holds that 
things take. birth in a real sense, there can 
only be the birth of what is already born. 


With regard to the Reality that is the Self, the appre- 
hension may arise that, if It be incomprehensible for ever, 
It may as well be non-existent. But that is not correct, 
for Its effect is perceptible. As the effect consisting in 
janma, birth (of things) ; mayaya, through magic ; follows 
satah, from (the magician) who exists ; so the effect in 
the form of the birth of the world, that is comprehended, 
leads one to assume a Self existing in the highest sense, 
that like the magician is the basis for the Maya con- 
sisting in the origination of the world; for it is but 
reasonable to think that like such effects as elephants 
etc., produced with the help of magic, the creation of the 
universe proceeds satak, from some cause that has exis- 
tence, and not from an unreal one. But it is not 
reasonable to say that from the birthless Self there can 
be any birth tattvatah, in reality. Or the meaning is this : 
As the janma, birth ; as a snake etc.; satah, of an existing 
thing, a rope for instance ; yujyate, can reasonably be ; 
mayaya, through Maya, but not fattvatak, in reality ; 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


132 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 27 


similarly, though the Self that ex ists is incomprehensible, 
It can reasonably have birth in the form of the universe 
through Maya like the illusion of a snake on a rope; but 
the birthless Self cannot have any birth in the real sense. 
Yasya, as for the disputant, who holds that the unborn 
Self, the supreme Reality ; jayate, undergoes birth, as the 
universe, he cannot make such an absurd assertion that 
the birthless passes into birth since this involves a con- 
tradiction. Hence he has to admit perforce that jatam, 
what is already born ; jayate, takes birth, again ; and 
from this predication of birth from what is born will 
follow an infinite regress. Therefore it is established that 
the Reality that is the Self, is birthless and one. 


BAA ALA AH AAG AT FST | 
AAA A ARIAT AAT ashy Tra RCI 


28. There can be no birth for a non-existent 
object either through Maya or in reality, for 
the son of a barren woman is born neither 
through Maya nor in reality. 


For those who think everything to be unreal, janma na 
yujyate, there can be no possibility of birth, in any way; 
asatah, of a non-existent object ; mdyaya tattvatah va, 
either through Maya or in reality, for such is never our 
experience. For bandhyaputrah, the son of a barren 
woman ; na jayate, never takes birth; either through 
Maya or in reality. Hence the theory of nihilism is 


entirely out of place in the present context. This is the 
idea. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


III. 30] MANDUKYA KARIKA 133- 


How, again, can there be birth for the existent through 
Maya alone ? That is being explained : 


IT Sel ITE Vega HAAT Wat! | 
AAT TAA Vega AAT Aa: IRRI 
29. As in dream the mind vibrates, as 
though having dual aspects, so in the waking 
state the mind vibrates as though with two 
facets. 

As the snake imagined on a rope is true when seen 
as the rope, so manas, the mind, is true when seen as 
the Self, the supreme Consciousness. As like a snake 
appearing on a rope, the mind spandate, vibrates ; 
svapne, in dream ; mayaya, through Maya ; dvayabha- 
sam, as if possessed of two facets—the cogniser and 
the thing cognised ; tathā, just like that ; jagrat, in the 
waking state ; manas, the mind ; spandate, vibrates, as 
though vibrates ; mayaya, through Maya. 


aed < gan Aa: Lal ANT: | 
et FT ART TAT AAA GAA: 1130 
30. There is no doubt that in dream, the 
mind, though one, appears in dual aspects ; so 
also in the waking state, the mind, though 
one, appears to have two aspects. 
Na samgayah, there is no doubt; that just as the snake 
is true in its aspect of the rope, so the manas, mind ; 
that is but advayam, non-dual in its aspect of the Self 
from the highest standpoint ; dvayabhasam, appears to 
have two aspects ; svapne, in dream. For apart from 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
134 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 30 


Consciousness, there do not exist two things in dream 
—elephants and so on that are perceived and eyes. 
and the rest that perceive them. The idea is that the case- 
is similar in the waking state also; for in either state: 
there exists only the supremely real Consciousness.1 

It has been said that it is the mind alone which, like a 
snake on a rope, appears as an illusion, in dual roles. 
What proof is there as to that? The text advances. 
(inferential) proof on the basis of agreement and differ- 
ence. How? 


wie ga aka | 
waa GATS BF ANTA 11321 
31. All this that there is—together with all 
that moves or does not move—is perceived by 
the mind (and therefore all this is but the 
mind) ; for when the mind ceases to be the 
mind, duality is no longer perceived. 


“Idam dvaitam, this duality, as a whole ; that is mano- 
drśyam, perceived by the mind; is nothing but the mind, 
which is itself -imagined (on the Self)”—this is the 
Proposition. For duality endures so long as the mind: 
does, and duality disappears with the disappearance 
of the mind. Hi, for ; manasak amanibhaye, when the 
mind ceases to be the mind, when, like the illusory 
snake disappearing in the Tope, the mind’s activity” 
stops through the practice of discriminating insight and. 


1 The mind fancied on Consciousness through ignorance, 
vibrates on the supremely real and constant Consciousness in: 
either state. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
TII. 32] MANDUKYA KARIKA 135 


renunciation, or when the mind gets absorbed in the 
state of sleep ; dvaitam na upalabhyate, duality is not 
perceived. From this non-existence is proved the un- 
reality of duality. This is the purport. 

How does the mind cease to be the mind? This is 
being answered : 


SIRISISEIC EI Taser aT | 
aaa TET AT ATATATS TEAS Zl 


32. When following the instruction of 
scriptures and the teacher, the mind ceases to 
think as a consequence of the realisation of the 
Truth that is the Self, then the mind attains 
the state of not being the mind; in the absence 
of things to be perceived, it becomes a non- 
perceiver. 


Atmasatya, the Truth that is the Self, that is com- 
parable to the reality of earth as stated in the Vedic 
text, “All modification (of earth) exists in name only, 
having speech for its support. Earth alone is true” 
(Ch. VI. i. 4). Atmasatya-anubodha, is the realisation of 
that Truth of the Self that follows from the instruction 
of scriptures and the teacher. Yada, when ; as a conse- 
quence of that, there remains nothing to be thought of, 
and the mind na samkalpayate, does not think, as fire 
does not burn in the absense of combustible things; tada, 
then, at that time; yati amanastam, it attains the state of 
ceasing to be the mind. Grahyabhave, in the absence of 
things to be perceived; tat, that mind; agraham, becomes 
free from all illusion of perceptions. This is the idea. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


136 MANDUKYA UPANISAD HHI. 33 


If this duality be false, how is the truth of one’s own 
Self realised ? The answer is: 


Heats Aa TATA TA | 
Faas feasts AJA 11331! 

33. They say that the non-conceptual know- 
ledge, that is birthless, is non-different from 
the knowable (Brahman). The knowledge 
that has Brahman for its content is birthless 
and everlasting. The birthless (Self) is 
known by the birthless (knowledge). 


The knowers of Brahman pracaksate, say; that 
absolute jidnam, knowledge ; that is akalpakam, devoid 
of all imagination (non-conceptual) ; and is therefore 
ajam, birthless ; is jfeyabhinnam, non-different from 
the knowable, identified with Brahman, the absolute 
Reality. And this is supported by such Vedic texts 
as “for the knower’s function of knowing can never 
be lost” (Br. IV. iii. 30), like the heat of fire ; «“Knowl- 
edge, Bliss, Brahman” (Br. III. ix. 28. 7) ; “Brahman is 
truth, knowledge, infinite” (Tai. II. i. 1). The phrase 
brahma-jieyam, is an attribute of that very knowledge 
and means, that very knowledge of which Brahman 
Itself is the content and which is non-different from 
Brahman, as heat is from fire. By that ajena, unborn, 
knowledge, which is the very nature of the Self 
vibudhyate, is known—It knows by Itself; the ajam, 
birthless Reality, that is the Self. The idea conveyed 
is that the Self being ever a homogeneous mass of 
Consciousness, like the sun that is by nature a constant 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
MII. 34] MANDUKYA KARIKA 137 


light, does not depend on any other knowledge (for Its 
wevelation), 

It has been said that when the mind is divested of 
ideation by virtue of the realisation of the Truth that is 
‘Brahman, and when there is an absence of external 
‘objects (of perception), it becomes tranquil, controlled, 
and withdrawn like fire that has no fuel. And it has 
further been said that when the mind thus ceases to be 
ithe mind, duality also disappears. 


frea weet fafa ara: | 
TE St g AAA JJS + TATA! l3 
34. The behaviour that the mind has, when 

‘It is under control, free from all ideation, and 
full of discrimination, should be particularly 
noted. The behaviour of the mind in deep 
‘Sleep is different and is not similar to that (of ` 
the controlled mind). 

Pracarah, the behaviour ; that there is ; manasah, of 
that mind, nigrhitasya, of that which is (thus) under 
control ; nirvikalpasya, of that which is free from idea- 
tion of all kinds; dhimatah, of that which is full of 
discrimination—sah, that behaviour ; vijfeyah, is to be 
particularly noted ; by the Yogis. 

Objection: In the absence of all kinds of awareness, 
the mind under control behaves in the same way as the 
‘mind in sleep. Hence the absence of awareness being 
the same, what is there to be particularly noted ? 

With regard to this the answer is: The objection 
in untenable, since the behaviour of the mind susupte, 
an deep sleep ; is anyah, different ; the mind being then 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


138 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 34% 


under the cover of the darkness of delusion arising from: 
ignorance, and it being still possessed of the latent ten-- 
dencies that are the seeds of many evil actions. And the- 
behaviour of the mind under control is surely different, 
since ignorance, the seed of evil activities, has beem: 
burnt away from that mind by the fire of the realisation: 
of the Truth that is the Self, and since from that mind! 
has been removed the blemish of all afflictions. Hence: 
(the sleeping mind’s behaviour) na tatsamah, is not like 
that behaviour (in the controlled state). Therefore it is: 
fit to be known. This is the meaning. 

The reason for the difference of behaviour is being; 
stated : 


lad fe gaa qfsrqald a stad | 
dea faa AG TATAE HAAR: IBKI 


35. For that mind loses itself in sleep, but: 
does not lose itself when under control. That. 
very mind becomes the fearless Brahman, pos-: 
sessed of the light of Consciousness all around... 


Hi, since ; susupte,1 in deep sleep ; tat, that, the mind! 
together with all its tendencies and impressions that 
are the seeds of all such mental modes as ignorance: 
(egoism, attachment, etc.) liyate, loses itself, attains a 
seed state of potentiality that is a kind of darkness andi 
non-differentiation ; but when that mind is nigrhitam, 
withdrawn, through knowledge arising from discrimi-- 
nation ; na liyate, it does not lose itself, it does not attain: 


1 A different reading is susuptau. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
Ill. 36] MANDUKYA KARIKA 139- 


the seed state of darkness ; therefore it is reasonable 
that the behaviours of the sleeping and controlled minds 
should be different. Tat eva, that very mind ; becomes. 
the supreme non-dual brahma, Brahman Itself ; when (in 
its absorption in Brahman) it is freed from the dual taint 
of being the subject and the object that are the creations. 
of ignorance. Since this is the case, therefore that very 
mind becomes nirbhayam, fearless ; for then there is no 
perception of duality that causes fear (Br. I. iv. 2). 
Brahman is that quiescent and fearless entity, by know- 
ing which one has no fear from anywhere (Tai. II. ix). 
That Brahman is being further distinguished ; Jñäna 
means Knowledge, Consciousness, that is the very 
nature of the Self ; and Brahman that has that Knowl- 
edge as Its ¿lokah, light (expression), is jñanalokam, 
possessed of the light of Knowledge. The meaning is. 
that it is a homogeneous mass of Consciousness ; 
samantatah, all around ; the idea implied is that, like 
space, It is all-pervasive without a break. 


HSA AACA AAT APATHY | 
Gated Gast ATA: FAST 11341 
36. Brahman is birthless, sleepless, dream- 
less, nameless, formless, ever effulgent, every- 
thing, and a knower. (With regard to It) there 
is not the least possibility of ceremony. 
Having no cause of birth, Brahman coexists with all 


that is inside and outside ; and It is ajam, unborn ; for 
we said that birth is caused by ignorance as in the case 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


140 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HILL 36 


of a snake on a rope ; and that ignorance is stopped on 
the realisation of the truth of the Self according to 
instruction. As It is birthless, It is anidram, sleepless. 
Sleep is the beginningless Maya characterised by ignor- 
ance. Since he (man) has awakened into his own real, 
non-dual nature that is the Self, therefore he is asvapnam, 
dreamless. And since his name and form are a creation 
of the state of non-waking, and they are destroyed on 
waking up like the illusion of a snake on a rope, there- 
fore Brahman cannot be named by any word, nor can 
It be described as having any form in any way ; thus It 
is also anamakam ariipakam, without name and form, 
as is stated by the Vedic text, “From which speech 
turns back” (Tai. II. iv, II. ix). Moreover, It is sakrt 
vibhatam ever illumined, constant effulgence by nature, 
since It is devoid of non-manifestation, consequent on 
non-perception, and manifestation, contingent on wrong 
perception (as in the case of an individual). Realisation 
and non-realisation (of Brahman) are as day and night 
(of the sun2), and the darkness of nescience is ever the 
cause of non-manifestation. Since this is absent from 
Brahman, and since Brahman is by nature the light 
that is eternal Consciousness, it is but reasonable that 


! fn an individual, Brahman is said to be hidden when it is not 
perceived as “J”. And when a false Perception arises in the form 
“T am an agent” etc., Brahman is said to be manifest. When these 
two ideas are absent,Brahman Temains as the Self-effulgentReality. 
2 True it is that non-realisation precedes and realisation succeeds 
instruction. But they do not belong to Brahman. The sun is 
supposed to be subject to day and night, because people fancy the 
sun to rise and set. But in reality the sun has no night or day, 
Similarly, Brahman has no realisation or non-realisation. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
JII. 37] MANDUKYA KARIKA 141 


It should be constantly effulgent. Hence, too, It is. 
sarvajñam : sarya, all, as well as, jña, a knower, by 
nature. With regard to this Brahman of such character- 
istics there can be na upacarah, no ceremony (practice) 
as others have, e. g. concentration of mind etc. that are 
different from the nature of the Self. The idea is this = 
As Brahman is by nature eternally pure, intelligent, 
and free there can be no possibility of anything to be 
done katham cana, in any way whatsoever after the: 
destruction of ignorance. 

The reason is being adduced for establishing name- 
lessness etc. mentioned above: 


aaa: aa fararag era: | 
GAMA: TEAS: ATAATA: 1131 


37. The Self is free of all sense-organs, and 
is above all internal organs. Itis supremely 
tranquil, eternal effulgence, divine absorp- 
tion, immutable, and fearless. 


The word abhilapah, derived in the sense of that by 
which utterance is made, means the organ of speech 
expressing all kinds of words. That which is vigatah 
devoid of that, is sarvabhilapavigatah, devoid of the 
organ of speech. Speech is here used suggestively. 
So the meaning implied is that It is free of all organs. 
Similarly, sarva-ciniad-samutthitah: The word cinta 
derived in the sense of that by which things are thought 
of, means the intellect ; from that samutthitah, risen 
above ; that is to say, devoid of the internal organ ; for 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


142 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [{I. 37 


the Vedic text declares, “Since It is without Prana, with- 
out mind, pure, and superior to the high immutable” 
(Mu. II. i. 2). Being devoid of all objects, It is supra- 
Santah, absolutely tranquil ; sakrjjyotih, everlasting light, 
by virtue of being by nature the Consciousness that is the 
Self; samādhih, divine absorption, being realisable 
through the insight arising out of the deepest Concen- 
tration (samādhi). Or It is called samādhi, because It is 
the object of concentration. Acalah, immutable ; and 
therefore abhayah, fearless, since there is no mutation. 
Since Brahman Itself has been described as divine 
absorption, immutable, and fearless, therefore, 


Tal a aa ahaa aa a fe | 
AAA aT MAATA AAT TAT 1131 


38. There can be no acceptance or rejec- 
tion where all mentation stops. Then knowl- 
edge becomes established in the Self, and is 
unborn and poised in equality. 


Tatra, there, in that Brahman ; vidyate, there exists ; 
na grahah, no acceptance ; na utsargah, no rejection ; for 
acceptance or rejection is possible where mutability or 
the possibility of it exists. These two are incompatible 
here with Brahman, for nothing else exists in It to 
cause a change, and Brahman Itself is without parts. 
Therefore there is no acceptance or rejection. This 
is the idea. Yatra, where ; cinta, thought (mentation) 
na yidyate, does not exist. How can there be acceptance 
and rejection where no mentation is possible in the 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


gI. 39 MANDUEKYA KARIKA 143 


absence of the mind ? This is the idea. As soon as there 
«comes the realisation of the Truth that is the Self, tada, 
then, in the absence of any object (to be known); jñanam 
knowledge ; becomes Gtmasamstham, established in Self, 
like the heat of fire in fire. It is then ajati, birthless ; 
_gatam samatam, poised in equality. 

The promise that was made earlier, “Hence I shall 
-speak of Brahman which is free from limitation, is with- 
-out birth, and is in a state of equipoise” (Karika, III. 2), 
-and that has been fulfilled with the help of scripture and 
‘reasoning, is concluded here by saying, “unborn and 
‘poised in equality”. Everything else, apart from this 
-realisation of the Self, is within the sphere of misery, as 
is declared by the Vedic text, “O Gargi, he, who departs 
from this world without knowing this Immutable, is 
miserable” (Br III. viii. 10). The meaning sought to be 
conveyed is that by knowing this, one becomes a Brah- 
iman (knower of Brahman) and has one’s duties fulfilled. 


Though the supreme Reality is such, yet 


STMT 8 ATA gaa: aANT: | 
Trad Frat sees wag Sr: 113811 
39. The Yoga that is familiarly referred to 
‘as without any touch with anything is difficult 
to be comprehended by anyone of the Yogis. 
For those Yogis, who apprehend fear where 
-there is no fear, are afraid of it. 
Asparsa-yogah nama, this is -familiar as the Yoga 
without any tough, since it has no relation, indicated 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


144 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 39 


by the word touch, with anything ; vai, (this is how it is} 
referred to, well known in all the Upanisads. It is- 
durdaršah, hard to be seen ; sarvayogibhih, by all those 
Yogis, who are devoid of the knowledge imparted in the 
Upanisads. The idea is that it is attainable only through. 
the effort involved in the realisation of the Self in accor- 
dance with instruction. Yoginah. the Yogis ; who are 
bhayadarsinah abhaye, perceivers of fear in this fearless 
(Brahman), the non-discriminating ones who apprehend: 
the destruction of their personality, which fact becomes. 
the cause of their fear ; (they) asmat bibhyati, are afraid 
of it, thinking this Yoga to be the same as the disinte- 
gration of their own individuality, though in fact it is 
beyond all fear. - 

But for those to whom the mind and the sense-organs 
etc., that are imagined like a snake on a rope, have no: 
existence in reality when considered apart from their 
essence that is Brahman—for those who have become 
identified with Brahman—comes fearlessness ; and for 
them naturally is accomplished the everlasting peace 
called emancipation that is not dependent on any other 
factor, as we declared earlier in “there is not the least 
possibility of ceremony” (Kārikā, III, 36). But for the 
other Yogis who are still treading the path, who are en- 
dued with inferior or medium outlook and think of the 
mind as something different from the Self, though asso- 
ciated with It—for those who are not possessed of the 
realisation of the Self that is the Truth— 


aaa Pea aa | 
SUNT: TATA Meas F ll2oll 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
III. 41] MANDUKYA KARIKA 145 


40. For all these Yogis, fearlessness, the 
removal of misery, knowledge (of the Self), 
and everlasting peace are dependent on the 
control of the mind. 


Sarvayoginam, for all Yogis ; abhayam, fearlessness ; 
is manasah nigrahayattam, contingent on the control of 
the mind ; and so also is dukkhaksayah, the removal of 
misery. For there can be no extinction of sorrow for 
the non-discriminating people so long as the mind, 
brought into association with the Self, continues to be 
disturbed. Moreover, (for them) the knowledge of the 
Self, too, is contingent on the control of the mind. 
Similarly, aksaya šantih, the everlasting peace, called 
liberation, is also certainly dependent on the control of 
the mind. 


RIG ATMA HSA | 
Haat Raeez RART: 18211 


41. Just as an ocean can be emptied with 
the help of the tip of a blade of Kuga grass 
that can hold just a drop, so also can the 
control of the mind be brought about by ab- 
sence of depression. 

Even the control of the mind comes about aparikhe- 
datah, from the want of depression ; for those Yogis who 
unrelentingly and without depression persist with a 
diligence like that involved in trying to empty an ocean; 
kuśāgreņa ekabinduna, with the help of the tip of a blade 


Ma.11 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
146 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 41 


of Kusa grass that can hold only a drop. This is the idea. 

Is diligence alone, that knows no depression, the 
means for controlling the mind ? The answer is being 
given negatively : 


weet Radara PARTAR: | 
GAIA GA AA AIT HAY SARAT BRI 


42. With the help of that proper process 
one should bring under discipline the mind 
that remains dispersed amidst objects of desire 
and enjoyment; and one should bring it under 
control even when it is in full peace in sleep, 
for sleep is as bad as desire. 

Being armed with untiring effort, and taking for aid 
the means to be stated, nigrhniydt, one should bring 
under discipline, concentrate on the Self Itself ; the mind 
that remains viksiptam, dispersed; amidst objects of 
desire and their enjoyment. This is the meaning. More- 
over, Jaya means that in which anything gets merged, i.e. 
sleep. Though the mind be suprasannam, very peaceful, 
i.e. free from effort ; Jaye, in that sleep ; still “it should 
be brought under discipline”—this much has to be sup- 
plied. Should it be asked, “If it is fully at peace, why 
should it be disciplined ?” the answer is : “Since layah, 
tatha, sleep is as much, a source of evil ; yatha kamah, 
as desire is.” So the idea implied is this : As the mind 
engaged in objects of desire is to be controlled, so also 
is the mind in sleep to be disciplined. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


III. 44] MANDUKYA KARIKA 147. 


Which is that process? That is being stated : 


Ea CATR BUTT ATA | 
Ost Taga oid sq g Teas lI9311 
43. Constantly remembering that everything 
is full of misery, one should withdraw the mind 
from the enjoyment arising -out of desire. 
Remembering ever the fact that the birthless. 
Brahman is everything, one does not surely 
perceive the born (viz the host of duality). 
Anusmrtya, remembering, the fact that ; sarvam, every- 
thing, all duality that is created by ignorance; is dukkham, 
full of sorrow ; one nivartayet, should withdraw, the 
mind ; kamabhogat, from enjoyment prompted by desire, 
from the objects of desire ; one should withdraw with. ` 
the help of ideas of renunciation—this is the meaning. 
Anusmrtya, remembering the fact, from the instruction 
of scriptures and the teacher, that ajam, the birthless, 
Brahman ; is sarvam, everything ; na eva tu pagyati, one 
does not certainly perceive ; the host of duality that is ` 
opposed to Brahman ; for duality ceases then. 


x : 
A atA afe Aga: | 
aami AAAA < ATAT, evil 
44. One should wake up the mind merged 
in deep sleep; one should bring the dispersed. 
mind into tranquillity again; one should know 
when the mind is tinged with desire (and is in 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


148 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 44 


a state of latency). One should not disturb 
the mind established in equipoise. 


Thus with the help of the dual process of renunciation 
and practice of knowledge, one sambodhayet, should 
wake up, the mind ; merged Jaye, in deep sleep ; one 
should engage it in the discriminating perception of the 
transcendence of the Self. The word citta has the same 
meaning as manas, mind. Samayet punah, one should 
again make tranquil, the mind ; that is viksiptam, dis- 
persed, amidst desire and enjoyment. When the mind of 
a man, who is practising again and again, is awakened 
from deep sleep and is withdrawn from objects, but is 
not established in equipoise and continues in an inter- 
mediate state, then vijaniyat, one should know, that 
mind ; to be sakasayam, tinged with desire, in a state of 
latency. From that state, too, it should be diligently led 
to equipoise. But when the mind becomes samapraptam, 
equipoised, that is to say, when it begins to move toward 
that goal ; na vicdlayet, one should not disturb it, from 
that course ; or in other words, one should not turn it 
back toward objects. 


aes Fer FEAT WaT | 
feed aeaaeae: 


wedi 


45, One should not enjoy happiness in that 
state; but one should become unattached 
through the use of discrimination. When the 
mind, established in steadiness, wants to issue 
out, one should concentrate it with diligence. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
III. 46] MANDUKYA KARIKA 149 


The sukham, happiness ; that a Yogi gets while trying 
to concentrate his mind, na asyadayet, he should not 
enjoy ; that is to say, he should not get attached tatra, 
there, to that state. How should he behave there? He 
should become nihsaùgah, unattached ; prajñaya, through 
the discriminating idea. He should think, “Whatever 
happiness is perceived is a creation of ignorance, and 
it is false.” He should also withdraw his mind from that 
kind of attraction for joy—this is the purport. When 
having been withdrawn from the attraction for happiness, 
and having attained the state of steadiness, the mind be- 
comes nigcarat, intent on going out ; then withdrawing 
it from those objects with the help of the above-mention- 
ed process, one ekikuryat, should concentrate it—in the 
Self Itself ; prayatnatah, with diligence. The idea is that 
it should be made to attain its true nature of Conscious- 
ness alone. 


aT x vlad fai a < feet gar 1 
afar feet AB TART El! 


46. When the mind does not become lost 
nor is scattered, when it is motionless and does 
not appear in the form of objects, then it 
becomes Brahman. 


Yada, when ; the cittam, mind ; brought under control 
through the aforesaid process; na liyate, does not 
become lost, in sleep ; and also na ca punah yiksipyate, 
does not, again, become dispersed, amidst objects ; and 
when the mind becomes aninganam, motionless, like a 
lamp in a windless place ; anabhasam, does not appear 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


` 150 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [HI. 46 


in the form of any object, imagined outside ; when the 
mind assumes such characteristics, then it nispannam 

: brahma, becomes Brahman; or in other words, the mind 
then becomes identified with Brahman. 


eT Med afer GATT | 
OS Fat aAa TIA vii 
47. That highest Bliss is located in one’s 

own Self. It is quiescent, coexistent with lib- 
eration, beyond description, and birthless. And 
since It is identical with the unborn knowable 
(Brahman), they call It the Omniscient 
(Brahman). 


The above-mentioned Bliss, which is the highest 
Reality, and which consists in the realisation of the 
Truth that is the Self, is syastham, located in one’s own 
Self ; santam, quiescent, characterised by the absence of 
all evil ; sanirvanam, coexistent with cessation, i.e. liber- 
ation ; and it is akathyam, indescribable, as it relates to 
an absolutely unique entity ; it is uttamam sukham, the 
highest happiness, it being unsurpassable and open to 
the vision of the Yogisalone. It is ajam, unborn, unlike 
objective happiness. And since this happiness, in its true 
nature of omniscience, is identical ajena, with the 
unborn ; jfeyena, with the thing to be known ; therefore 
the knowers of Brahman paricaksate, call it ; sarvajfiam, 
the omniscient one, Brahman Itself. 

All such ideas—e.g. the control of the mind and so 
on, creation resembling the evolution of forms from 
earth and gold, and meditation—have been spoken ah 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


HI. 48] MANDUKYA KARIKA 151 


as means leading to the realisation of the supreme 
Reality as It is in Itself; but these have not been spoken 
of as supremely true in themselves. The absolutely 
highest Truth, however, is : 


q ahaa sila: daaise a fra | 
uqg wet aa fafa IAR 118I 
48. No individual being, whichsoever, takes 
birth. It has no source (of birth). This 
(Brahman) is that highest Truth where noth- 
ing whatsoever takes birth. 


Na jivah kah cit, no individual being whichsoever ; 
that is a doer or an enjoyer ; jayate, is born; by any 
means whatsoever. Hence for the Self that is naturally 
unborn and non-dual, na vidyate, there does not exist ; 
any sambhavah, source, cause (for undergoing birth). 
Since there does not exist for It any cause, therefore no 
individual being, whichsoever, undergoes birth. This is 
the meaning. As compared with the truths mentioned 
earlier as the means, etat, this one ; is uttamam satyam, 
the highest Truth ; yatra, where, in which Brahman, that 

` is Truth by nature; na kiñcit jayate, nothing whatsoever, ` 
not even a jot or tittle, is born. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


CHAPTER IV 
ALATAS ANTIPRAKARANA 


(on QUENCHING THE FIRE BRAND) 


Non-duality was advanced as a premiss in course of 
determining the meaning of Om ; it was proved to be 
true on the basis of the fact that the differences found in 
things external are unreal ; it was again directly deter- 
mined with the help of scriptures and reason in the 
chapter on non-duailty ; and that non-duality was 
summed up in the concluding remark, “This is that 
highest truth” (Karika, III. 48). The realists and the 
nihilists are opposed to that unitive outlook that is the 
import of the scriptures. And it has been hinted that 
their philosophy is false, since their outlook is affected 
by such vitiating factors as attachment and aversion 
arising from mutual opposition. And the philosophy 
of non-duality is extolled inasmuch as it is not subject 
to such mental perversion. Now begins the chapter 
on quenching the fire-brand, in order to show in 
detail how those are partial philosophies owing to 
their mutual recrimination, and then, after rejecting 
them, to sum up by proving the truth of the 
philosophy of non-duality with the help of the 
method of difference (consisting in their rejection1). 

1 Instances of the application of the metho ds of agreement and 
difference are: ‘Whatever is a Product is impermanent”, and 


“Whatever is not impermanent is not a Product”. When both the 
methods can be applied to a case, all doubts about the truth of 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 1] MANDUKYA KARIKA 153- 


Now while on this subject, this first verse is meant as a 
salutation to the promulgator of the school of non- 
duality by identifying him with non-duality itself. For 
it is desirable to worship one’s teacher at the commence- 


ment of a scripture so that the result aimed at may be 
achieved. 


maA TATEN MTATA | 
aaa Caged Tee RRI AT 11 
1. I bow down to the One who is the chief’ 
among all persons, who has known fully the 
souls resembling (infinite) sky, through his 
knowledge that is comparable to space and is 
non-different from the object of knowledge. 


Akagakalpa is that which is slightly different from 
space, that is to say, resembling space. So jfianena 
akasakalpena means by a knowledge that is com- 
parable to (infinite) space. What purpose is served 
by it? (He knows) dharman, the souls. Souls of what 
kind ? The souls that are gagana-upaman, comparable 
to the sky. There is another qualification of that very 
. knowledge: The knowledge that is jmeyabhinna, non- 
different from the objects of knowledge, viz the souls 
—just as heat is from fire, or light is from the sun. He 
who sambuddhah, has completely realised; dharman 
gaganopaman, the entities that are comparable to 


the general proposition is set at rest. In the present case, non- 
duality, presented by scripture and proved to be a possibility by 
logic, is confirmed by showing the hollowness of others. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


154 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 1 


the sky ; jrieyabhinnena jñanena, through the knowledge 
that is non-different from the object of knowledge— 
that is comparable to space and is non-different from 
the Self that is to be known. He indeed is the Lord 
called Narayana. Tam vande, Him I salute ; dvipadim 
varam, the best among the bipeds, that is to say, the 
‘Supreme Person among all persons, that are suggested 
by the word “biped”. Under the garb of this saluta- 
tion to the teacher, it is suggested that the purpose of 
this chapter is to establish, through a refutation of the 
opposite views, the philosophy of the supreme Reality 
that is devoid of the distinctions of knowledge, know- 
.able, and knower. 

Now for extolling the Yoga taught in the philosophy 
-of non-dualism comes a salutation to it : 


HAMA g ATH adaga fea: | 
ARARSA facet TAAA, RII 
2. Ibow down to that Yoga that is well 
known as free from relationships, joyful to all 
beings, beneficial, free from dispute, non- 
contradictory, and set forth in the scriptures. 
Asparśa-yogah is that Yoga, which has no sparsa, 
touch, relationship with anything at any time ; it is of 
the very nature of Brahman. To the knowers of 
Brahman it is vai nāma, indeed so named ; that is to 
say, it is well known as the Yoga, free from all rela- 
tionships. And it becomes sarva-sattya-sukhah, a bliss 


to all beings. Some Yoga, as for instance austerity, 
may itself be sorrowful, though it is distinguished as 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 3] ' MANDOKYA KARIKA 155 


ameans leading to extreme happiness, But this one is 
not of that sort. What then ? It is joyful to all beings. 
Similarly, in this world, a particular kind of enjoyment 
of objects may be joyful but not beneficial. But this one 
is joyful as well as hitak beneficial, since its nature is 
ever unchanging. Moreover, it is avivadah ; that in which 
there is no dispute by embracing two sides, for and 
against, is avivadah, free from dispute. Why? Because 
it is, in addition, aviruddhah, non-contradictory. The 
Yoga of this kind that has been degitah, instructed, by the 
scriptures ; tam, to that; aham namami, I make my 
salutation. I bow down. 

How the dualists contradict each other is being stated: 


ara aR area: Pree R | 
sagena eT aged? TAA, URI 


3. For some disputants indeed postulate 
the birth of a (pre-)existing thing. Other wise 
ones, while disputing among themselves, pos- 
tulate the birth of what does not pre-exist. 


Kecit eva vadinah, some disputants, viz the samkhyas ; 
icchanti, postulate ; jatim, the birth; bhitasya, of an 
existing thing ; but not so do all the dualists, for there 
are apare, others, viz the Vaisesikas and the Naiyayikas ; 
who are dhirah, wise, that is to say, proud of their 
wisdom ; and who while vivadantah, talking contrari- 
wise ; postulate the birth abhitasya, of a non-existing 
thing. The idea is that they want to conquer each 
other through disputation. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
156 MANDUKYA UPANISAD UHV. 4 


Now is being shown what is virtually asserted by 
them as they refute each other’s point of view by talk- 
ing contrariwise : 


ad + stad feted aa sae | 
Rasen aaa enak Š yu 


4. A thing that already exists does not pass 
into birth ; and a thing that does not pre-exist 
cannot pass into birth. These people, while 
disputing thus, are really non-dualists, and 
they thus reveal the absence of birth. 


“Kim cit, anything ; that is bhūtam, pre-existing ; na 
j@yate, does not pass into birth, just because it exists, 
as itis in the case of the Self’—while speaking thus, 
the holder of the view that the effect does not exist 
before its birth,1 refutes the view of the Samkhya who 
says that the effect, pre-existing in the cause,2 takes 
birth. Similarly, the Samkhya, too, while speaking thus, 
“Abhitam, the non-existing ; na eva jayate, can never, 
be born, because of the very fact that it does not 
exist”—efutes the birth of a non-existing thing as held 
by those who believe in the non-existence of the effect 
before production. While vivadantah, talking contrari- 
wise; these advayah,3 non-dualists—for these really 
walk into the camp of the non-dualists by refuting each 
other’s view about the birth of the pre-existing or the 


1 The Naiyayika who would virtually subscribe to the view 
that something comes out of nothing. 
2 The effect remaining involved in the cause. 
Another reading is “dvayah, dualists”. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 6] MANDUKYA KARIKA 157 


non-pre-existing ; khyapayanti, reveal, by implication ; 
the ajatim, absence of birth itself. 


Ea OTE TA, | 
Raam a q: ariaa faa uki 


5. We approve the birthlessness that is 
revealed by them; we do not quarrel with 
them. (O disciples), understand this (philos- 
ophy) that is free from dispute. 


By saying “Let this be so”, we simply anumodāmahe, 
approve ; the ajatim, birthlessness ; taih khyapyamanam, 
revealed by them, thus; we na vivadamah, do not quarrel; 
taih sardham, with them ; by taking any side for or 
against, as they do in regard to each other. This is the 
idea. ‘Therefore, O disciples, nibodhata, understand ; 
that philosophy of the highest Reality that is avivadam, 
beyond dispute, and is approved by us. 


Seas THT ARa a Arle: | 
Saat Gat TA Aa STAAL 1R 
6. The talkers verily vouch for the birth of 
an unborn positive entity. But how can a 
positive entity that is unborn and immortal 
undergo mortality ? 


Vadinah, the disputants—all of them, whether holding 
the view of the prior existence or non-existence of 
the effect. This verse was commented on earlier 
(Karika, I. 20). 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


158 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 7 
< wae Tel q Aaa q3T | 
IRATA s BA sqa Aaf ls! 
7. The immortal can not become mortal. 
Similarly, the mortal cannot become immortal. 


The mutation of one’s nature will take place 
in no way whatsoever. 


SRSA TET Tat Teale AAT | 
Tee He VTA ATS: (¿l 
8. How can the immortal entity continue 
to be changeless from the standpoint of one, 
according to whom, a positive immortal entity 
can naturally pass into birth, it being a prod- 
uct (according to him) ? 

The verses already explained earlier (Karika, III. 
21-22) are quoted here in order to show the confirma- 
tion of birthlessness that is revealed through the mutual 
dispute of other schools of thought. 

Inasmuch as one’s nature, even in the ordinary sense of 
the term, does not change, (far less can the supreme 
nature change itself). It is being shown what that nature 


Is: 
feet aA AEST SAT = AT | 
sata: Oa RAT enr = sterfs ar 181 
9. By the word nature is to be understood 
that which is permanently acquired, or is = 
intrinsic, instinctive, non-produced, or un- 
changing in its character. 7. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 10] MANDUKYA KARIKA 159° 


Samsiddhik means complete attainment, and anything. 
resulting from that is samsiddhiki, as is the nature of 
the successful Yogis who are endowed with such occult 
powers of becoming at will subtle like atom and so on. 
In the case of the. Yogis, that nature does not change 
either in the past or the future ; it remains as it is. 
So also svabhaviki, intrinsic, that which follows from 
the very nature of things, as for instance, such charac-- 
teristics as heat or light in the case of fire etc. That 
nature also does not change according to place or time.. 
Similarly, sahaja, instinctive, born with oneself, as for 
instance, such activities as flying in the sky in the case 
of birds. Any other behaviour, too, is natural, ya 
akrta, that is not produced, by anything else, as for 
instance the tendency of water to flow down. And 
anything else, ya na jahati svabhavam, that does not 
change its character; sd, all that; vijfeya, is to be known,. 
in this world; as prakrtih, nature. The idea sought to: 
be conveyed is this: when the nature of empirical 
things, that are falsely imagined, does not change itself, 
what need can there be to point out that the natural 
immortality of the intrinsically birthless ultimate real- 
ities, is not subject to mutation ? 

What constitutes that mature, whose change is. 
assumed by the disputants ? And what is the defect in. 
such an assumption ? The answer is this : 


TCA RT: aa Fat: STATA! | 
TARAA TAAT II9oll 
10. All souls are intrinsically free from old 
age anddeath. But by imagining senility and 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
160 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 10 


death, and being engrossed in that thought, 
they deviate from their nature. 


Jara-marana-nirmuktah, free from all physical changes, 
starting with Jarz, old age, and (ending with) marana, 
death. Who are they? Sarve dharmah, all entities, i.e. 
all the souls, Svabhavatah, by nature. Although the 
souls are intrinsically so, yet icchantak, thinking, as 
though thinking, imagining; jara@maranam, old age and 
death, for the Self, like the imagining of a snake on a 
Tope ; they cyavante, fall, that is so say, deviate, from 
their own nature ; tanmanisaya, because of that thought 
—thought of senility and death, that is to say, because 
of the defect of being engrossed in that kind of 
thought. š 

The Vaišesika points out how the Samkhyas, hold- 
ing the view of the pre-existence of the effect in the 
<ause, talk illogically : 

BRU TAF SY BOT TET TTA | 
wea ast Ret feat sal sa 220 

11. The cause must undergo birth according 
to one who holds that the cause itself is the 
effect. How can a thing be birthless that takes 
birth, and how can it be eternal when it can 
be subject to (partial) disintegration ? 

The disputant, yasya, according to whom ; karanam, 
the cause itself, (existing) in the form of materials like 
earth ; is the karyam, the effect, that is to say, evolves 
into the effect ; tasya, from his point of view ; karanam, 
the cause, e.g. Pradhana or (Primordial Nature), though 


É 


h. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 12] MANDUKYA KARIKA 161 


itself unborn ; jayate, undergoes birth, as the effects like 
Mahat and the rest. This is the idea. If Pradhana is 
Jayamanam, born, as Mahat and the rest ; katham, how, 
is it said by them ; to be ajam, birthless? For it is a 
contradiction in terms to say that a thing is unborn and 
yet has birth. Moreover, they say that Pradhana is 
eternal, at the same time that it is bhinnam, split up 
(transformed), partially. Fora composite thing, a jar 
for instance, that is subject to partial disintegration, is 
not seen to be eternal in this world. This is the idea. 
The meaning sought to be imparted is that it involves a 
contradiction on their part to say that a thing may be 
broken up partially and yet be birthless and eternal. 
For elucidating the same idea it is said : 


ROMERA: BAAS AE | 
STATA, 3 RATTI Š =° ATT IRI 
12. If (according to you) the effect be non- 

different from the cause, then on that account 
the effect, too, is birthless.. And if that be so, 
how can your cause be still eternal, it being 
non-different from its effect which is subject 
to birth ? 

Yadi, if ; it is your intention to hold that there is 
ananyatvam, non-difference, of the effect ; karanat, from 
the cause, that is birthless; then from that it follows 
that karyam ajam, the effect is birthless. This is a fresh 
contradiction in your view that a thing is a product and 
yet birthless. Besides, there is this additional contradic- 


tion. If the effect and the cause are non-different, 


Ma. 12 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
162 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 12 


katham, how ; can te, your ; karanam, cause ; that is 
non-different karyat jayamanat, from the effect that is 
subject to birth ; be yet dhruvam, eternal? For one half 
of a hen cannot be cooked, while the other half is 
reserved for laying eggs. 


A N A 
BATS IA TA EAA AA F | 
SATS AAATAS + AET ERA 112311 


13. That disputant has certainly no support- 
ing illustration who holds that the effect is 
produced out of an unborn cause. If the pro- 
duced effect is held to be born out of another 
born thing, that, too, leads to no solution. 


That disputant, yasya, according to whom ; the effect 
jayate, is produced ; ajat, from an unborn thing ; tasya, 
for him ; na asti vai drstantah, there is absolutely no 
illustration (in support). The idea is that, in the absence 
of any supporting illustration, it stands, proved by 
implication that nothing is born of the unborn. On the 
other hand, if it is held ja@yamanasya, with regard to 
the produced effect ; that it comes jatat, from a born 
thing ; then since the latter must come out of another 
born thing and the last one, again, from another born 
thing, na vyavastha prasajyate, there will be no solution 
at all; or in other words it will lead to an infinite 
regress. 

By the Vedic text, “But when to the knower of 
Brahman everything has become the Self (then what. 
should one know and through what ?”) (Br. II. iv. 14), 
it has been said that from the highest standpoint there 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 15] MANDUKYA KARIKA 163 


is no duality. Taking its stand on this, the (next) 
verse says : 


daR: wë Sqraqrfzeq: HSA = | 
Sats HA qah: =s AT 19911 
14. How can beginninglessness be declared 
for cause and effect by those (disputants) ac- 
cording to whom the effect is the origin of the 
cause and the cause is the origin of the effect? 


The disputants, yesam, according to whom ; the pha- 
lam, effect, the aggregate of body and senses; is the adih, 
source ; hetoh, of the cause, of merit etc. ; and similarly, 
the hetuh, cause, merit etc.; is the ¿dih, source; phalasya, 
of the effect, of the aggregate of body and senses ;— 
thus while positing a beginning for the cause and the 
effect by the very assertion that these are mutually the 
sources and products of each other ;1—katham taik 
upavarnyate, how can it be asserted by these very people; 
that the cause and effect are beginningless? In other 
words, this is self-contradictory, for the Self that is 
eternal and unchanging can neither become the cause 
nor the effect. 

How do they make a contradictory assertion? That 


is being shown : 
datas: wë Sqrarfšeq: BSA = | 
IT SI= aaa JATA JAAT 194i 
15. Just as a father may be born of a son, 
so also may birth be a possibility according to 


1 Merit and demerit result from embodiment ; and embodi- 
ment results from merit and demerit. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
164 MANDUKYA UPANISAD HV. 15 


those (disputants) who admit that the effect 
is the source of the cause and the cause is the 
source of the effect. ; 

Those who assert that the cause originates from the 
effect, which is itself produced by the cause, get involved 
in a contradiction that is on a par with that implied in 
pituh janma putrat, the birth of father from a son. 

If it be contended that the contradiction, pointed 
out above, cannot be reasonably advanced, we say, 


Gast SHAT BATT | 
Tas TEATS ATTA 119811 
16. If there be a possibility of cause and 
effect, you should have to find out a sequence. 
For should they originate together, there can 
be no causal relation as between the two horns 
of a cow. 

Sambhave, if there be a possibility ; hetu-phalayoh, of 
cause and effect ; then tvayd, by you ; esitavyah, has to 
be found out; a kramah, sequence, with regard to 
origination—viz that the cause precedes and the effect 
succeeds. This is necessary for this further reason : 
yasmat, since; yugapat sambhave, should there be a 
simultaneous origin, of the cause and effect ; there will 
be asambandhah, want of relationship, through causal- 
ity, as in the case of the two horns of a cow growing 
together on the right and the left. 

How are they unrelated ? That is being stated : 


TAg: Ga S dg: RR | 
afte: ea dg: maaa AÀ 119811 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 18] MANDUKYA KARIKA 165 


17. If your cause has to come out of an 
effect, it can have noright to recognition. How 
will a cause, that is not established as such, 
produce a result ? 


Utpaddyamanah san, if it has to originate; phalat, from 
an effect, that is still to be born, that is itself yet without 
any existence ;—having been born from an effect that is 
non-existent like the horn of a hare ; hetuh, the cause ; 
na prasidhyati, has no right to recognition; does not 
have any birth. Katham, how ; your hetuh, cause ; that 
is yet to be endued with substance, and aprasiddhah, is 
not established as such, like the horn of a bare ;. 
utpadayisyati phalam, will produce a result? For it is 
not seen anywhere that two things that depend for 
existence on each other, and are analogous to the horns 
of a hare, are connected causally or in any other way. 
This is the idea. 


afe tat: merfeafg: noA teat | 

a Gara Te EART 11C 
18. If the subsistence of the cause is depen- 
dent on the effect, and the subsistence of the 
effect is dependent on the cause, then which of 
the two has existence earlier, with relation to 
which the other may emerge ? š 
If, even after the dismissal of any causal relation be- 
tween the (so-called) cause and the (so-called) effect by 
pointing out the defect that they cannot be interrelated, 
it is contended by you that the cause and the effect 
subsist by mutual interdependence, then tell me which 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


166 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 18 


one among the cause and the effect pre-exists, depending 
on which the succeeding one may emerge into being. 
This is the idea. 


BUA BAHAI qq: | 
wa fë aaa qƏ<errfq: RAT gel 
19. Your inability to answer this will amount 
to your ignorance, or there will be a falsifica- 
tion of the sequence (asserted by you). Thus 
indeed is highlighted in every way the absence 
of birth by the learned ones. 


If you think that you have no answer, then this 
asaktih, inability, of yours ; will amount to the fallacy 
of aparijfanam, want of knowledge of reality, i.e. 
ignorance ; athava, or there will be ; kramakopah—kopa, 
reversal, falsification, of the krama, sequence, spoken of 
by you, consisting in mutual succession in the sense that 
the effect derives its subsistence from the cause, and the 
cause derives its subsistence from the effect. This is the 
meaning. Evam, thus, from the fact that any causal 
relation between the cause and the effect cannot be 

_ substantiated; ajatih, the absence of birth, the non-emer- 
gence of everything ; paridipita, has been highlighted ; 
buddhaih, by the learned people, the disputants who 
speak of the defects of each other’s point of view. 

Objection: We spoke of the causal relation existing 
between the cause and the effect, whereas you resorted 
to a mere quibble that it is like the birth of a son from 
a father, that there is no such connection between the 
two like the two horns of a cow, and soon. Not that 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 20] MANDUKYA K Á RIK Á 167 


we asserted the production of an effect from a cause 
that did not exist or the derivation of a cause from a 
non-existing effect. What did wë say then? It was 
admitted by us that causality is the kind of relation 
existing between the seed and sprout. 

With regard to this the answer is : 


SPATS HUTCH eTA: star TTT fe T: | 
a fŠ amaraq Ëq: frat arr ert IROI 
20. What is known as the illustration of the 
seed and the sprout is ever on an equal footing 
with the (unproved) major term. For an 
illustration that is as unproved as the major 
term is not applied for establishing the relation 
of the major term with the minor term. 


(This is but begging the question, because the sup- 
porting) drstantah, illustration ; that is biankurakhyah, 
known as that of the seed and the sprout ; is sddhya- 
samah, on an equal footing with my major term (that 
has still to be proved). This is the idea. 

Objection: Is it not a matter of experience that the 
causal relation between the seed and the sprout is with- 
out a beginning ? 

Answer: Not so, for it is admitted that the earlier 
ones have their beginning like the succeeding ones. Just 
as a new sprout born now out of a separate seed has a 
beginning and another seed born out of a separate 
sprout has also a beginning by the very fact of succession 
in birth, similarly the antecedent sprouts as well as the 
antecedent seeds must have a beginning. And thus 
since each one of the whole chain of seeds and sprouts 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


168 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 20 


has a beginning, it is illogical to assert eternality for 
any one of them. So also is the case with regard to 
causes and effects. If now it is argued that the chain 
of causes and effects is without a beginning, we say, no; 
for any unity of such a series cannot be upheld. For 
apart from the causes and effects even those who talk 
of the beginninglessness of such a series do not certainly 
vouch for a unitary entity called either a chain of seeds 
and sprouts or a procession of causes and effects. 
Therefore it has been well said, “How can beginning- 
lessness be declared by them for cause and effect ?” 
(Karika, IV. 14). Thus since your view involves an 
illogicality from a fresh point of view, we are not really 
avoiding the point at issue. This is the idea. Moreover, 
hetuh, an illustration ; that is sadhyasamah, as unproved 
as the major term ; is not applied by those who are 
adepts in the use of the valid means of proof (i.e. in- 
ference) ; sadhyasiddhau, in the matter of establishing a 
relation between the major term and the minor term 
(in a syllogism). This is the meaning. The “‘illustration”’ 
is to be understood here by the term hetuh (lit. middle 
term), for an illustration substantiates the ground of 
inference, and the illustration is under discussion and 
not the middle term. 

It is being shown how birthlessness is highlighted by 
the wise : 


garaakaraasia: TRATTA | 
TATA eS FAL BT Ga + Tae RVI 
21. The ignorance of the precedence and 
succession is a pointer to beginninglessness it- 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 22) MANDUKYA KARIKA 169 


self. For if it be a fact that a thing takes birth, 
why is not its cause apprehended ? 

And the fact that there is pirvaparaparijnanam,. 
ignorance of the precedence and succession, of the cause 
and the effect; is paridipakam, a pointer; ajateh, to 
birthlessness. If an entity takes birth, katham, why ; its 
piirvam, antecedent cause ; na grhyate, is not grasped 7 
By one.who perceives a thing undergoing birth must 
also be perceived, as a matter of necessity, the originator 
of that thing ; for the begetter and the begotten are 
inevitably inter-related. Therefore that is a pointer to: 
birthlessness. 


<q aT Tet arsh a AREA SIT | 
eae aquaistt a fara ITR URI 


22. A thing, whatsoever it may be, is born 
neither of itself, nor of something else, (nor of 
both together). Nothing whatsoever is born 
that (already) exists, does not exist, or both 
exists and does not exist. 


For this further reason nothing whatsoever takes. 
birth, since a thing that (supposedly) undergoes birth, 
na jayate, is not born; svatah, of itself ; paratah, of 
another ; va, or, of both. Nothing takes birth that is 
sat, existing; asat, non-existing; or sat-asat, existing and 
non-existing. There is no possibility of birth for it in 
any way. To illustrate: Asa jar does not come out of 
that very jar, so nothing, that has not itself come into 
existence, can be born svatah, out of its own form by 
itself. Nor does it ao paratah, from another, as 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


170 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 22 


something different from that another, just as a cloth is 
not born of a pot or a cloth from another cloth. Similar- 
ly a thing is not born both out of itself and another, just 
as a jar or a cloth is not born out of a jar and a cloth, 
for this involves a contradiction. 

Objection: Is nota jar produced from earth anda 
son born of a father ? 

Answer: True, the ignorant have such notions and 
use such words as “It exists”, “It takes birth’. Those 
very words and notions are examined by the discrimi- 
nating people as to whether they are true or false, 
inasmuch as things called a jar, a son, and so on, which 
are contents of words and notions, are found on ex- 
amination to be reduced to mere words, as is declared in 
the Vedic text, «(All modification are but names) 
dependent on speech” (Ch. VI. i. 4). Ifa thing already 
exists, then just because it exists, it does not pass into 
birth like earth or a father. Ifa thing does not exist, 
then by the very fact of non-existence it does not 
undergo birth like the horn of a hare etc. If it is both 
existent and non-existent, then also it does not take 
birth, as it is impossible to have a thing that is self- 
contradictory. Hence it is established that nothing 
whatsoever is born. As for those (Buddhists) who 
assert that a product is nothing more than the mere 
act of birth, and by whom it is held accordingly that 
actions, accessories, and results are but the same ident- 
ical entity and that things are momentary, they are far 
out of the reaches of reasonableness, because (accord- 
ing to this theory) a thing cannot be apprehended as 
“This is so”, since it ceases to exist for a second mo- 
ment immediately after being perceiyed, and because 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
LV. 23] MANDUKYA KARIKA 171 


memory of a thing perceived earlier becomes impos- 
sible.1 

Besides, by asserting that the cause and the effect are 
without beginning, you admit perforce that the cause 
and effect are without birth. If you ask, “what do 
you mean ?” the answer is : 


Sq ASTR: HS ATT TAT | 
ated frat Tet TT ales AER IRRI 


23. A cause is not born of a beginningless 
effect; nor does an effect naturally come out 
(of a beginningless cause). (Cause and effect 
are thus birthless): for a thing that has no 
cause, has certainly no birth. 


Anadeh, from the beginningless, effect; hetuh na 
jayate, the cause is not born. For you do not certainly 
mean that from a beginningless effect, that is not born, 
the cause derives its birth. Nor do you mean that the 
phalam, effect; also gets its birth svabhavatah, naturally, 
without any reason ; anadeh, from an unborn cause that 
is beginningless. Accordingly, you virtually admit the 
birthlessness of cause and effect by asserting that they 
have no beginning. Hi, for ; yasya, anything for which ; 
Gdik, a cause ; na vidyate, does not exist, in this world ; 
tasya, for that thing ; na vidyate, cannot exist ; adih, the 
birth, mentioned earlier ; for birth is admitted for a 
thing that has a cause and not for a causeless one. 


1 There is no possibility for either recognition or memory 
unless the idea of identity lasts for some moments. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
172 MANDUKYA UPANISAD UV. 24 


An objection is being raised again in order to 
emphasise what has already been said : 


Seed: UARAN SAAN: | 
GIST TAA AAT (RII 


24. (We have to admit) that knowledge has 
its objects, since a contrary supposition leads 
to an annihilation of duality. And the exist- 
ence of objects, as supported by the opposite 
systems of thought, is also admitted from the 
fact of the experience of pain. 


Prajfapti means knowledge, perception of sound ete. 
That knowledge is possessed of a nimitta, cause, i.e. 
object. So sanimittatvam means the fact that it has an 
object—it has objective reference apart from its own 
subjective existence. This is what we admit. Perception 
of sound and the rest cannot be contentless, for it is 
related to objects. Anyatha, otherwise (in the absence 
of objects) ; there would result a void, dvayandgatah, as 
a consequence of the annihilation of duality, consisting 
in a variety of experience of sound, touch, blueness, 
yellowness, redness, etc. This is the meaning. Nor can . 
it be said that duality, consisting in a variety of experi- 
ences, does not exist, for this is a matter of direct 
perception. Accordingly, from the fact that duality is 
perceived, paratantrastita, existence as held by the scrip- 
tures of other schools, that is to say, existence of external 
objects, apart from their knowledge, as held by the 
books of opposite schools ; mata, is admitted. For the 


nature of knowledge being G that of mere, 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV..25) MANDUKYA KARIKA 173 


illumination, it cannot have any variety amounting to a 
mere natural diversification within itself unless there is 
that variety in the corresponding objects, e.g. blueness, 
yellowness, etc., just as a crystal can have no variety 
unless it comes into relation with such limiting adjuncts 
as blueness etc. This is the idea. The external objects, 
as held by the opposite systems, have existence because 
of the further reason of samklesa, (lit. suffering, which 
is the same as samklegana, causing of suffering; so it 
means) pain. Pain arising from a burn etc. is a matter 
of experience. If, apart from knowledge, there were 
nothing externally present to cause a burn for instance, 
pain would not have been experienced. But as a 
matter of fact, it is experienced. Therefore, from this 
fact, it is admitted that there is an external object. 
For there can be no pain in knowledge as such, since 
this is not the case elsewhere.1 
As to this the reply (of the subjectivist) is : 


sera: aaia 3262313181 
aimerai TT RMI 
25. In accord with the perception of its cause, 
knowledge is supposed to be based on external 
objects. But from the standpoint of reality, it 
is held that the external cause is no cause. 


It is true that yuktidarsanāt, in compliance with the 
perception of its cause, as for instance, the experience 


` 1e.g. where the body j Š in actual contact with fire. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


174 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 25 


of duality and pain ; isyate, it is posited, by you; that 
sanimittatvam prajnapteh, there is an external object for 
knowledge. Now hold fast to your position that external 
objects are the basis of experience, since it is seen to 
have a cause. 

Opponent: Tell me what follows from that. 

The answer is : By us isyate, it is held; that nimittasya 
animittatvam, the cause—a jar or anything else that is 
assumed to be the basis of experience—is no cause 
at all ; it is not the basis, the cause, of variety. 

Objection: Why? 

Answer: Bhūtadarśanāt, from the standpoint of 
reality, that is to say, of the ultimate Reality. For 
unlike the existence of a buffalo independently of a 
horse, a jar does not exist apart from clay after being 
recognised as clay that it really is, nor does a cloth 
exist apart from the yarns, nor the yarns apart from 
the fibres. Thus if the reality is pursued successively 
till words and notions cease, we do not perceive 
any external occasion for knowledge. This is the 
meaning. 

Or the phrase may be abhiitadarsanat (and not bhiita- 
darSanat) in which case the meaning is : Abhitadarganat, 
on account of finding the external object to be unreal s: 
animittatyam isyate, it is not admitted to be the cause 
(of knowledge), just as a snake seen on a rope is not. 
Besides, the cause is not a cause, since it is the content 
of an erroneous perception ; and as such, it ceases to 
be so when the error is removed. For to the people in 
deep sleep, divine absorption (samadhi), or liberation, 
where there is no erroneous perception, there can be no 
knowledge of any external ae except (the conscious- 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 26] MANDUKYA KARKA 175 


ness of) the Self. Nor is a thing perceived by a madman 
perceived to be such by others who are in their senses. 
Hereby is demolished the arguments based on percep- 
tion of duality and experience of pain. 


fri a dered” aah qaa < | 
ore fe RA ATERT: PR REN 


26. Consciousness has no contact with 
objects ; so also it has certainly no contact with 
appearances of objects. For according to the 
reasons adduced, an object has no existence, 
and an illusory object is not separate from the 
awareness. ! 


As there is no external object, therefore the cittam, 
consciousness; na spysati, does not come in contact with ; 
artham, object, anything acting externally as a support ; 
nor does it come in contact with arthabhasam, any 
appearance of object, for it is as much a form of con- 
sciousness as a dream; hi, for; yatah, in accordance 
with the above reasoning, arthah, an object ; is abhitah, 
non-existent, even in the waking state, just as a dream: 
object is; Na, nor is ; arthabhasah, an illusory object ; 
prthak, different, from the consciousness ; it is con- 


1 We are dealing here with the Buddhist view. A.G. explains 
citta as sphurana, Self-emanation, shining. The act of knowing 
implies an object to be known, but consciousness, thought of as 
shining like the sun, needs no object. Besides, the sun and its 
shining are the same, though in common parlance a distinctiom 
is made between them, 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


176 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 26 
sciousness alone that appears as objects like the jar 
etc. as it does in a dream. 

Objection: In that case, the appearence of con- 
sciousness, in the form of a jar for instance even when 
there is no jar etc., must be a false perception. And if 
this be the conclusion, you should point out the 
(corresponding) right knowledge somewhere (to make 


this error possible). 
With regard to this, the answer (of the subjectivist) is : 


fa a qar Ri darag Fag | 
afafira anata: aa ver aAA 12911 


27. Consciousness does not ever come in 
contact with external objects in all the three 
states. There being no external objects how can 
there be any baseless false apprehension of it ? 


Cittam, consciousness ; na sada sam§prsati, does not 
ever touch ; any nimittam, cause, external object ; trisu 
adhvasu, in all the three states (of past, present, and 
future). Should it come in contact with any object at 
any time, that will be non-erroneous absolute reality, 
and in relation to that true perception, the illusive 
perception of a jar, where there is no jar, will be a false 
perception. But there is no contact of consciousness 
with any object at any time. Therefore katham, how ; 
bhavisyati, will there be ; tasya, for that consciousness ; 
viparyasah animittah, any false apprehension that has 
no object to support it ? The idea implied is that there 
is no such thing as false knowled t all. Rather it is 


BÉ 


k. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 28] MANDUKYA KARIKA 177 


the nature of consciousness that even in the absence of 
jar etc. it appears like those things. 1 

The text starting with, “In compliance with the percep- 
tion of its cause, knowledge” (IV. 25) and ending with 
the previous verse, which represents the view of the 
subjective idealists among the Buddhists, is approved by 
the teacher (Gaudapada) in so far as it refutes the view 
of those who believe in external objects. Now he 
makes use of that very argument (of the idealists) as a 
ground of inference for demolishing their own points of 
view : 


aaa arad Fart Pre st sat | 
x ` 
qa Teed 4 strÍq A + nafa Š qaq IRCI 
28. Hence consciousness has no birth, and 
things perceived by it do not pass into birth. 
Those who perceive the birth of that conscious- 
ness, may as well see footmarks in space itself. 
Since from the standpoint of reality, we also approve 
the view of the subjective idealists that consciousness 
appears as a jar even though there is no such jar etc., 
therefore it also stands to reason that consciousness 


appears to be born even though there is no such thing 
as birth. And therefore the cittam, consciousness ; na 


1 Those who in a case of illusion, hold the theory of anyatha- 
khyati, appearance of a real thing in a wrong way, believe that an 
illusion pre-supposes a true perception somewhere. But the 
subjectivists say that an error does not imply an earlier true knowl- 
edge, for an illusion and the objects in an illusion are all appear- 


ances of consciousness. 


Ma. 13 3 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


178 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 28 


jayate, does not pass into birth ; just as much as citta- 
drsyam na jayate, the things perceived by consciousness 
have no birth. Therefore ye, those, the idealists, who : 
pasyanti, perceive ; the jatim, birth ; tasya, of that con- 
sciousness, along with its momentariness, sorrowfulness, 
voidness, non-selfhood, etc.—thereby presuming to per- 
ceive through that very consciousness the nature of con- 
sciousness that defies all perception—te, they, those 
idealists ; pasyanti, see ; padam, the footprint, of birds 
etc. ; khe vai, in space itself. That is to say, they are 
bolder even than the other dualists. As for the nihilists, 
who, while perceiving the non-existence of everything, 
assert thereby the voidness of their own philosophy, they 
are even bolder than the idealist,1 inasmuch as they want 
to have the sky itself in their grasp. 

Through the above reasons it is established that Brah- 
man is one and has no birth. Now the present verse is 
meant for summing up, in the form of a result (of the 
discussion), what was presented in the beginning as a 
proposition : 3 


Aad AIS AAN: ANRA: | 
TRAIT a Ba Fstaaqfersafsr NRI 


29. It is the birthless that (according to the 
disputants) takes birth. Since birthlessness is 


1 It is through perception that the all-round voidness is proved- 
But how will perception itself be annulled ? Not that perception 
can annihilate itself, for the simple reason that perception and its- 
negation cannot coexist. Besides, if you talk of absolute nihilism, 
you affirm the non-existence of view as well. 


£ 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 30] MANDUKYA KARIKA 179 


its very nature, therefore the transmutation 
of (this) nature can take place in no way 
whatsoever. 


It is imagined by the disputants that the unborn 
consciousness, which js nothing but Brahman, takes 
birth ; therefore it is the ajatam, unborn ; that Jayate, 
takes birth. Yasmat, since, ajatik, birthlessness ; is its 
very prakrtih, nature ; tatah, therefore ; anyathabhavah, 
transmutation, birth ; prakrteh, of that nature, which 
is essentially unborn ; na katham cit bhavisyati, will not 
take place in any way. 

Here is another loophole discovered in the view of 
those who hold that the soul has the worldly state (i.e. 
bondage) and liberation in any real sense : 


MATA =I GTA T NaN | 
Adeaa Alea Aer st AA 113011 


30. Moreover, if the world be beginningless 
its termination will not be achieved. And 
there will be no eternality for liberation that 
has a beginning. 

Samsdrasya anadeh, of the world (i.e. bondage) that 
has no beginning, no definite non-existence in the past ; 
antayattvam, termination; na setsyati, will not be achiev- 
ed, with the help of reasoning ; for, in common experi- 
ence, nothing is seen to have an end that has no 
beginning. FoF j 

Objection : It is seen that the continuity of the serial 
relation between the seed and the sprout. breaks (though 
it has no beginning), 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
180 MANDUKYA UPANISAD QY. 30 


Answer: Not so, for this was refuted by pointing 
out that a series does not constitute a single substance 
(Karika, IV. 20). 

Similarly, na bhavisyati, there will be no ; anantata, 
everlastingness ; even moksasya, of liberation, that has 
a beginning, that originates at the time of the acquisi- 
tion of illumination ; for such is not the case with 
jars etc. 

Objection : Since like non-existence brought about by 
the destruction of a jar etc., liberation, too, is not a sub- 
stance, therefore our point of view is free from defect.1 

Answer: On that assumption? your proposition that 
liberation has existence from the standpoint of ultimate 
Reality will fall through. Besides, it will have no 
beginning just because it will be non-existent like the 
horn of a hare, 


Mead FT FATS TAATASHT TAT | 
Raa: Gear: aas s= oferta: 13211 
31. That which does not exist in the be- 
ginning and the end is equally so in the middle. 
Though they are similar to the unreal, yet 
they are seen as though real. 


aan agi ead farted | 
Tae fess ae Š GAT: UR 


1 Non-existence brought about by destruction has a beginning 
but no end, and non-existence is not a substance just as much as 
liberation is not. 

2 If liberation is non-existe: 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 34] MANDUKYA KARIKA 181 


32. Their utility is contradicted in dream. 
Therefore from the fact of their having a 
beginning and an end, they are rightly held 
to be unreal. 

These two verses, that were explained in the chapter 
‘On Unreality’ (Karika, II. 6-7), are quoted here in con- 
nection with the non-existence of bondage and liberation. 


aa Tat BIT GT HTT TATE | 
Eais AAD š start exe Fa? 113311 
33. All entities are unreal in dream, since 
they are seen within the body. How can there 
be the vision of creatures within this narrow 
space here ?? 
The topic raised in “But from the standpoint of reality 


it is held that the external cause is no cause” (Karika, 
IV. 25), is being elaborated by these verses. 


a g Fed TAT HTT ATTEN | 
fart A Aaf Bat q ER 113911 


1 In this way the verse indirectly aims at proving the falsity of 
all. If falsity in dream follows from the fact that things are seen 
inside the body, then all things even in the waking state must be 
false, since they are seen within the body of Virat. And if falsity 
of dream objects follows from the fact of their being seen within 
a place that is not adequate for them, then things of the waking 
state must be false since they, though naturally associated with 
space and time, are still seen in Brahman that has no space and 


time.—A.G. £ 
í 


€ 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


182 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 34 


34. It is not proper to hold that dream 
objects are experienced by reaching them, 
since the requisite time involved in the journey 
is lacking. Moreover, nobody, when awake, 
continues in the place of dream. 

The idea implied is that there is no going over to 
any other place in dream, for the time required for and 
the distance involved in coming and going, as validly 
settled in the waking state, aniyamat, have no corre- 
sponding fixity, in the dream state. 


RATA: we cues dag A TTT | 
má sf affare + ara lek 


35. Haying conferred with friends and others 
(in dream) one does not get confirmation when 
awake. And whatever one acquired in dream, 
one does not see it after waking up. 


Sammantrya, having deliberated ; mitradyaih saha, 
with friends and others (in dream) ; one na prapadyate, 
does not get confirmation, of that very deliberation 
when pratibuddhah, up from dream. And yat kim cit, 
whatever, gold etc. ; grhitam, was acquired ; he does 
not get after waking.1 For this reason, too, one does 
not go to a different place in dream. 


1 An alternative meaningis: To the man of illumination 
(pratibuddhak) there is no consciousness of anything except 
Brahman. So what may appear to others as his eating, drinking, 
etc., does not appear to himself t or he thinks, “I do not 
do A (G. V. 8).—A i 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 37] MANDUKYA KARIKA 183 
AA ATA: MA: TAT EST<T( | 


< Ce 
FAT BARAT AA PERT HA BEI 
36. Moreover the body in a dream is.unsub- 
stantial, since another body is seen (to exist). 
As it is the case with the body, so is every- 
thing perceived through consciousness and is 
(therefore) unsubstantial. 

And the kayak, body; that is seen syapne, in dream; to 
be walking about ; is avastukah, uasubstantial; anyasya 
prthak dargandat, since another (sleeping) body, as distin- 
guished from the one in the state of dream, is seen 
separately. As the body seen in dream is unreal, so all 
things seen through the mind even in the waking state 
are unreal, for they are all equally perceived through 
consciousness. The significance of the topic under 
discussion is that the waking state also is unreal, since 
it is similar to the dream state. 

Things are unreal because of this further reason : 


aeae: KA LAT | 
Tegang Tea srerrafaafasaq 1391 
37. Since a dream is experienced like the 
waking state, the former is held to be the 
result of the latter. In reality, however the 
waking state is admitted to be true for that 
dreamer alone, it being thecause of hisdream. 
Grahanat, since dream is experienced ; jagaritavat, 


like the waking state, as characterised by the subject- 
object relationshi fore dream isyate, is held ; 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
184 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 37 


taddhetuh, as having that waking state as its source ; 
that is to say, dream is a product of the waking state. 
Taddhetutvat, since dream has that waking state as its 
cause ; that jagaritam, waking state ; is sat, true ; tasya 
eya, for that dreamer alone ; but not so for the others, 
just like the dream itself. This is the implication. As a 
dream is true to a dreamer alone, so far as it appears 
like objects of common experience having existence, 
similarly the waking things that appear like existing 
objects of common experience are true to the dreamer 
alone as conceived of by him to be the cause of his 
dream. In reality, however, just like dream objects, the 
things of the waking state, too, are not objects of 
common experience to all, nor have they existence. 
This is the purport. 


Objection: Even though the objects of the waking ` 


state be the prototypes of those of the dream state, 
they are not unsubstantial like dream ; for dream is 
extremely changeful, whereas the waking state is seen 
to be steady. 

Answer: This is truly so to the non-discriminating 
people, but to the man of discrimination nothing 
whatsoever is known to have origination. Therefore— 


SAREA MATET 
T RA SRA BATA 11311 
38. Since origination is not a well-estab- 
lishedfact, it is declared (by the Upanisads)that 
everything is birthless. Moreover, there is no 


origination, in any way whatsoever, of any 
non-existing thing from isting one. 


di 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 39] MANDUKYA KARIKA 185 


Utpadasya aprasiddhatvat, as origination is not a well- 
established fact ; so in the text, “‘co-extensive with every- 
thing within and without and birthless” (Mu. II. i. 2), 
it has been udahytam, declared, by the Upanisad in effect 
that ; sarvaim ajam, everything is birthless ; or in other 
words, the (birthless) Self is everything. And your fur- 
‘ther conjecture that the unreal dream originates from 
the real waking state is also untenable. For in this 
world na asti sambhavah abhitasya, there is no origina- 
tion of a nonentity ; bhatat, from a real thing ; for a 
nonentity, like the horn of a hare, is not seen to 
originate in any way whatsoever. 

Objection: Has it not been said by yourself that 
dream is a product of the waking state ? So how is it 
said that origination is not a well-recognised fact ? 

Answer: As to that, listen to what we mean by the 


causal relation (between them) : 


aaant ESAT AA TAL TH | 
sees gs=ar = RA = TAR NRR 
39, Having seen some unreal thing in the 
waking state and being emotionally affected, 
one sees it in dream also. And having even 
seen some unreal thing in dream, one does not 
see it in the waking state. 

Drstva, having seen ; jagarite, in the waking state ; 
asat, an unreal, illusory thing, like a snake imagined on 
a rope; and becoming tanmayah, emotionally affected 
by its thoughts ; one paśyati, sees ; svapne, in dream, 
also ; by -— he duality of subject and object as 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
186 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 39 


in the waking state. Similarly, unless one resorts to 
imagination, one, drstvad, after having seen ; asat, an 
unreal thing ; svapne api, even in dream; na pasyati, 
does not see (it); pratibuddhah, when he is awake. From 
the use of the word “ca, and”, it follows that, in a 
similar way, one does not sometimes see in dream some- 
thing that one had seen in the waking state. In this 
sense the waking state is said to be the cause of dream 
but thereby it is not implied that the former is real. 

In reality, however it cannot be established that 
anything has any causal relationship in any way what- 
soever. How ?- 


TAAIE UATE TAT | 
Ta Cada Aer ASTANA: 119011 
40. There is no unreal thing that has an 

unreality as its cause, similarly there is no 
unreal thing that has a reality as its cause. 
Moreover, there is no existing thing that has 
another existing thing as its cause. How can 
there be an unreal thing that is produced out 
of something real ? 


Na asti asat, there is no unreal thin g; asaddhetukam ; 
that has an unreal thing for its cause—e.g. an unreal 
thing like a castle in the air that has an unreal thing like 
a hare’s horn as its cause. Similarly, na asti sat, there 
is no such existing entity ; a jar for instance ; that is 
asaddhetukam, the product of an unreality—a hare’s 
horn for instance. Tathā, s sti sat, there is 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 41] MANDUEKYA KARIKA 187 


no existing thing, a pot for instance, that is a product of 
another existing thing; a jar for instance. How can 
there be any possibility of an unreality being produced 
out of a reality ? Besides, there is no other kind of causal 
relationship possible or imaginable. So the idea implied 
is that, to the discriminating people, causal relationship 
of anything whatsoever is really an un-established fact. 

Again it is said by way of removing any surmise about 
the causal relationship between the unreal waking and 
dream states : 


Roata sag aL ATA, FERN | 
anr aA faaan were 112211 


41. As some one,owing to lack of discrimi- 
nation, may in the waking state, be in con- 
tact with unthinkable objects, fancying them 
to be real, so also in dream, one sees the 
objects in that dream alone, owing to want of 
discrimination. 


Yatha, as ; some one ; viparyasat, owing to want of 
discrimination; may imagine jagrar, in the waking state; 
as though one is in touch with acintyan, unthinkable, 
objects, like a snake etc. imagined on a rope etc. ; 
bhiitavat, as if they were real ; tatha, so also ; syapne, 
in dream; viparyasat, owing to want of discrimination ; 
he fancies as though visualising dharman, objects, like 
elephants etc. that is to say, he sees them there in the 
dream alone, and not as the products of the waking 


state. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


188 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 42 


TAT ATAT AN RATATAT ATA | 
MAg thar JATA ATT 11221 
42. Instruction about creation has been 

imparted by the wise for the sake of those 
who, from the facts of experience and adequate 
behaviour,'vouch for the existence of substan- 
tiality, and who are ever afraid of the birth- 
less entity. 


For those who upalambhat, because of perception ; 
and samdacarat, adequate behaviour, e.g. proper obser- 
vance of duties pertaining to castes and stages of life— 
for those who, because of these two reasons, astivastutva- 
vadinam, resort to the declaration of existence of sub- 
stantiality—for the sake of those who are earnest in 
their effort, who are faithful, but who are possessed of 
an inferior kind of discrimination ; that jatih, birth 
(creation) ; desita, has been inculcated ; buddhaik, by the 
wise, by the non-dualists. That creation has been preach- 
ed as a means to an end (for generating firm dis- 
crimination) under the idea: “Let them accept it for 
the time being. But in the course of practising Vedanta, 
the discriminating knowledge about the birthless and 
non-dual Self will arise in them spontaneously.” But 
they have not done so from the standpoint of ultimate 
truth. And this is so because those non-discriminating 
people (for whom such instruction is meant) are devoted 
to Vedic conduct, while, Owing to their dull intellect, 
they are sada, ever; afraid; ajatek, of the birthless entity; 
apprehending that this will lead to their annihilation. 

1 Proper response to human sii 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 44) MANDUKYA KARIKA 189 


This is the idea. It was said earlier, “that is merely by 
way of generating the idea (of oneness)” (Karika, Ii. 15). 


ATA ATATERAT earl À | 
RAT + Sessea AASA sere II9311 


43. For those who being afraid of the Un- 
born deviate from the true path by relying 
on their experience of duality, the faults aris- 
ing from acceptance of creation will not bear 
fruit ; and the fault, too, will be insignificant. 


And ye, those, who thus; upalambhat, relying on 
perception, as well as adequate behaviour ; ajateh trasa- 
tam, being afraid of the unborn entity (i.e. the Self); 
and declaring that duality exists, viyanti, deviate, from 
the non-dual Self, that is to say, they accept duality— 
in the case of those people who are afraid of the Un- 
born, but are faithful, and tread the righteous path, 
jatidosah, the faults arising from the perception of 
origination ; na setsyanti, will not attain fruition, for 
they are treading on the path of discrimination. Dosah 
api, should there be any dosah, defect that is calcu- 
lated to debar their complete enlightenment ; that api, 
even ; alpah bhavisyati, will be insignificant. 

Objection: As perception and adequate behaviour 
are valid proofs, things comprised in duality do exist. 

Answer: Not so, for perception and adequate 
behaviour are not universally true. How they are not 
so is being shown : 

SUSUR eT ! 
TSERTE TERA TRG TAHA IIƏ2II 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


190 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 44 


44. Asan elephant conjured up by magic 
is called an elephant by depending on percep- 
tion and adequate behaviour, so from the 
facts of perception and adequate behaviour a 
thing is said to be existing. 

As mayahasti, in illusory elephant conjured up by 
magic ; though non-existent in reality, is yet certainly 
perceived, just like a real elephant—people behave to- 
wards it in this world just as with a real elephant, and 
call it an elephant because of such attributes of an 
elephant as being capable of being bound, ridden upon, 
etc.—similarly upalambhat samacarat, because of per- 
ception and right conduct (with regard to them); ucyate 
vastu asti, it is said that duality, consisting of diversity, 
does exist. Therefore the purport is that the facts of 
being perceived and dealt with rightly cannot be the 
tests establishing the existence of a thing. 

What again is the absolutely real thing that is the 
substratum of all unreal ideas of creation and the rest 7 
The answer is : ? 

TARTE FRI Tea AÌT F | 
SCA AATA MTA IB XII 

45. It is Consciousness—birthless motion- 
less and non-material, as well as tranquil and 
non-dual—that has the semblance of birth, 
appears to move, and simulates a substance 
(possessed of qualities). 


That which being birthless has the semblance of birth 
is jatyabh@sam, as for insta i 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 46] MANDUKYA KARIKA 191 


“Devadatta has birth”. That which appears as though 
moving is calabhasam, as in the case, “That very Te, 
datta goes”. Vastu is a substance that can have attrib- 
utes ; that which simulates that is vastvabhasam, as for 
instance in the illustration, “That very Dandia is. 
fair or tall”. Devadatta appears as though taking birth 

as though he moves, and as if he is fair or tall, raven 
in reality he is birthless, changeless, and immaterial. 
What is it that answers to these characteristics? It is. 
vijnadnam, Consciousness. It is śãntam, quiescent, being. 
devoid of birth etc. And therefore It is also advayam,. 
without a second. This is the meaning. 


ue a aaa Rra Sat AAT: TAT: | 
Aa faata a Fated ATTA wal 


46. Thus Consciousness has no birth, thus. 
are the souls considered to be birthless. Those’ 
who know thus indeed donotfallinto calamity. 


Eyam, thus, in accordance with the reasons adduced ;, 
cittam na jayate, Consciousness! does not undergo birth; 
evam, thus ; are dharmah, the souls; smrtah, considered; 
ajah, birthless ; by the knowers of Brahman. The plural 
in dharmāh (souls) is used metaphorically, since the 
non-dual Self Itself appears to be different in accord- 
ance with the difference of bodies. Those who, after 
renouncing all cravings for external things, vijānantah 
evam eva, know thus indeed ; that the Consciousness, 
free from birth etc., is the non-dual reality that is the 
Self ; na patanti, do not fall again; viparyaye, into 
AD catamity, into the sea of the darkness of ignorance ; 


1 “Citta ie. Brahman.” —A.G. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
192 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 46 


as is confirmed by the text of the Vedic verse, “What 
delusion and what sorrow can there be to the one who 


realises unity ?” (IS. 7). 
In order to dilate upon the above-mentioned realis- 


ation of the Seif, the text goes on : 


BAH eHRUaAS aera TAT | 
agaa RTE area TAT II9911 

47. As the movement of a fire-brand 
appears to be straight or crooked, so it is the 
vibration of Consciousness that appears to be 
the knower and the known. 

Yatha, as; in common experience, it is seen that alata- 
spanditam, the movement of a fire-brand ; rjuvakrddika- 
bhasam, appears to be straight, curved and so on; !tatha, 
similar, is grahanagrahakabhadsam, the appearance as the 
perception and the perceiver, that is to say, as the object 
and the subject. What is it that appears ? Vijfanaspandi- 
tam, the vibration of Consciousness, as it were, it being 
set in motion by ignorance, for the unmoving Con- 
sciousness can have no vibration, as it was said earlier, 
“‘birthless, motionless” (Karika, IV. 45). 


SAHA SlddalaTaast FAT | 
AC AAAS TAT II9CII 
48. As the fire-brand, when not in motion 
becomes free from appearances and birth, so 
Consciousness, when not in vibration, will,be 


free from appearances 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 50] MANDUKYA KARIKA 193 

Yathā, as ; that very aldtam, fire- 
ananam, when not in motion, when it does not undergo 
birth to become Straight etc. in shape, it remains anā- 
bhasam ajam, free from appearances and birth; tatha, so; 
‘Consciousness, that vibrates through ignorance, will, on 
the cessation of ignorance, become aspandamanam, free 
from vibration, consisting in birth etc.—will remain free 
from appearances, birth, and vibration. This is the 
meaning. 

Moreover, 


brand; aspanda- 


HOT STATA FATT STATA | 
q adiseaa Aaaa sata Š ysis 


49. When the fire-brand is in motion, the 
appearances do not come to it from anywhere 
else. Neither do they go anywhere else from 
the fire-brand when it is at rest, nor do they 
(then) enter into it. 


Alate spandamane, when that very fire-brand is in 
motion ; the appearances of straightness, crookedness, 
etc. do not come to be in it; anyatah, from anywhere, 
outside the fire-brand ; this is what is meant by ma anya- 
tobhuvah, non-adventitious. Na, nor; do they go out 
anywhere else ; tatah nispandat, from that fire-brand 
when it is at rest. Na te alatam pravisanti, nor do they 
enter into the fire-brand, that is motionless. 


Furthermore, 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
194 MANDÜKYA UPANISAD [LV. 5@ 


50. They did not issue out of the fire-brand 
by reason of their unsubstantiality. With 
regard to Consciousness also the appearances 
must be of a similar kind, for as appearance 
there is no distinction. 

Te, they, the appearances ; na nirgatah alatat, do not. 
issue out of the fire-brand, like something out of a house; 
dravyatva-abhaya-yogatah, because of their being devoid. 
of substantiality, that is to say, because of unsubstan- 

lality, the phrase being construed thus : The quality of 
a drayya, substance, is dravyatva; the absence of that. 
is dravyatvabhava ; and yogatah means by reason of.. 
Entry is possible for things and not for those that are 
notso. The appearances of birth etc., vijfidne api tathaiva 
syuh,in Consciousness also must be thus alone; abhasasym 
avigesatah, for appearance is equally present. 

It is being shown how they are similar : 


FASTA AAMA F ARTET ATTA: | 
a saa Raga fara femes Š ke 
a faved AAA KAATAA: | 
ERARUS TARSAT: AST Q KRM 
51. When Consciousness is in vibration, the 
appearances do not come to It from anywhere. 
else. Neither do they go anywhere else from: 
Consciousness when It is at rest, nor do they 
(then) enter into It. 
52. They did not issue out of 
by reason of their unsubstan 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 53] MANDUKYA KARIKA 195 


are ever beyond comprehension, being with- 


out any relation of cause and effect (with 
Consciousness), 


Everything with regard to Consciousness is similar to 
that of the fire-brand ; Consciousness has this one dis- 
tinction that It is ever unmoving. It is being pointed 
Out as to what causes the appearances of creation etc. 
in the motionless Consciousness : Yatah, for; te, these; 
are sada eva acintyah, ever beyond comprehension ; 
karyakaranata-abhavat, in consequence of the absence 
of any logical connection of cause and effect (between 
the appearances and Consciousness), they being of the 
nature of non-existence. Just as the ideas of straightness 
etc. are perceived in the fire-brand, although the ap- 
pearances of straightness etc. are unreal, similarly the 
ideas of creation in the Self, that appear even though 
there are no creation etc., must be false. This is the 
purport as a whole (of the two verses). 

It has been established that the Reality, that is the 
Self, is one and unborn. Now according to those who 
imagine causality, 


Z= ZAA Sg: RAA si f | 
FAAAAATA aT Batt MIAA 531! 

53. A substance can be the cause of a sub- 
stance, and one thing can be the cause of 
another different from itself. But the souls 

ide neither as substances nor 
mt from other things. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


196 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 53 


Dravyam, a substance, syat hetuh, can be the cause ; 
dravyasya, of a substance ; anyat anyasya, one thing can 
be the cause of another ; but that very thing cannot be 
its own cause. Nor is a non-substance seen in common 
experience to be independently a cause of anything.1 
Na upapadyate, nor is it logical, in anyway whatsoever; 
that dharmanam dravyatvam anyabhavak va, the souls 
should be considered either as substances or as some- 
thing different from other things, under which possibility 
alone could the Self become either a cause or an effect.2 
Thus since the Self is neither a substance nor different 
from anything,’ It is neither‘the cause nor the effect 
of anything. This is the meaning. 


eg a frat ante sÀ + sas | 
ag gaari shared aAA: nky 


54. In this way the external entities are 
not the products of Consciousness ; nor is 
Consciousness a product of external entities. 
Thus the wise confirm the birthlessness of 
cause and effect. 

Evam, thus, according to the reasons adduced ; 
Consciousness is the very essence of the Self that is 


identical with Consciousness. Hence dharmāh, exter- 
nal entities ; na cittajah, are not the products of Com- 


1 Quality; action, genus, etc. can be causes through the sub- 
stances in which they inhere. 

2 For causality presupposes differ 

3 The Self being all-pervasi 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


M 55] MANDUKYA KARIKA 197 


sciousness ;1 na cittam dharmajam, nor is Consciousness 
a product of external entities. For all entities are the 
mere appearances of that which is essentially Conscious- 
ness. Consequently, an effect is not produced from a 
cause, nor is a cause from an effect. In this way the 
knowers of Brahman, praviganti, enter into, affirm : 
hetuphalajatim, the birthlessness of cause and effect. 
The idea is that they arrive at the non-existence of cause 
and effect. 

It is being pointed out as to what will happen to those 
who cling to cause and effect : 


S ` 


SITES TEƏTQSIS TTS Sel gq: | 
sañu gaard +qrfëq gamelge: IkkI 


55. Cause and effect'spring into being so 
long as there is mental preoccupation with 
cause and effect. There is no origination of 
cause and effect when the engrossment with’ 
cause and effect becomes attenuated. 


Yayat, as long as’; hetuphalavesah, attention is riveted 
en cause and effect, under the idea, “I am the producer 
of the causes called virtue and vice ; merit and demerit 
belong to me; and I shall enjoy their fruit by being 
born sometime and somewhere among the host of 
creatures”—as long as causality is superimposed on the 
Self, as long as the mind is preoccupied with it ; favat 
hetuphalodbhavah, so long do cause and effect, merit 

nd demerit and their effect, arise—are active without 
isi eaning, When the engrossment 


eme Self. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


198 MANDUKYA UPANISAD UV, 55 


with cause and effect, that springs from ignorance, is 
removed through the realisation of non-duality as stated 
before, like the removal of the possession by evil spirit 
through the power of incantation and medicines, then 
that engrossmentksine, being attenuated ; na asti hetupha- 
lodbhavah, there is no origination of cause and effect. 

What is the harm even if there is the origin of cause 
and effect? The answer is : 


FASTA: TARAAGIAT: | 
after Gamers TATE = TIAA KRII 
56. As long as there is mental preoccupa- 
tion with causality, so long does the worldly 
state continue. When the engrossment with 


causality is exhausted, one does not attain the 
worldly state. 


Yavat, as long as; the mental preoccupation with 
causality is not removed through perfect illumination ; 
tavat, so long ; samsarak, the worldly state ; persisting 
unimpaired, remains ayatah, outstretched, that is to say, 
continues for long. But again hetuphalavese ksine, when 
the engrossment with causality is attenuated ; na prapa- 
dyate samsaram, one does not attain the worldly state ; 
for then there is no cause for it. j 

Objection: As there is nothing else apart from the 
unborn Self, how can it be said by you that there are 
such phenomena as the origin and destruction of caus 
and effect as well as of the worl 

Answer: Listen : 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


HV. 58) MANDUKYA KARIKA 199 


SIT Arad s Mae AT aa a | 
2 Ly 
aaa Te TATA ATA a KSI 
57. Everything seems to be born because of 
the empirical outlook ; therefore there is noth- 
ing that is eternal. From the standpoint of 
Reality, everything is the birthless Self; there- 
fore there is no such thing as annihilation. 
Sarvam jayate , everything is produced ; samvrtya, by 
samvarana, concealment, consisting in empirical outlook 
within the domain of ignorance. Tena, therefore; within 
the range of ignorance, na asti vai §asvatam, there is 
surely nothing that is eternal. Hence it has been said 
that the world, characterised by origin and destruction, 
remains outstretched; hi, because; sadbhavena, from the 
standpoint of the highest Reality ; sarvam ajam, Every- 
thing is the birthless Self. Since there is no creation, tena, 
therefore ; na asti vai, there is surely no ; ucchedah, anni- 
hilation, of any cause, effect, etc. This is the meaning. 


gat a gf sad Tied Q st TAT | 
wea mraq aot ar < ara q fa IKEI 
58. The entities that are born thus are not 
born in reality. Their birth is as that of a 
thing through Maya (magic). And that Maya 
again has no reality. 


Ye dharmah, the entities, souls and other things, 
whi are born, are imagined to be born ; fe, 
is kind ;—the word “iti, of this 


his kin 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


200 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 5& 


kind” indicates the empirical- outlook mentioned earlier 
(IV. 57); so the meaning is, “The entities; that are of 
this kind, are born thus owing to (concealment through} 
the empirical outlook;’’—te, they ; na jāyante, are not 
born ; tattvatah, in reality. And as for the janma, 
creation through the covering of the empirical outlook; 
tesam, of those—of those entities, mentioned above; the 
birth is to be understood mayopamam, like that occur- 
ring through Maya (magic). So it is to be understood 
as similar to magic. 

Objection: Then there is an entity called Maya. 

Answer: Notso, Sa ca maya na vidyate, and that 
Maya does not exist; the idea being that the term 
relates to something non-existing. 

It is being shown how their birth can be compared 
to magical birth : 


FAT maang TATA AASR <: | 
aval feat q eset assay ASAT KSI 


59. As from a magical seed grows a sprout 
equally illusory—it being neither eternal nor 
destructible—just so is the logic (of birth or 
death) applicable in the case of objects. 


Yatha, as; mayamayat bijat, from a magical seed, of a 
mango for instance ; jayate, grows, ankurah tanmayah, 
a sprout (of equal substance), equally illusory ; asau, 
that one, the sprout; being na nityah, not eternal ; na ca 
ucchedi, nor destructible—simple because it has no exis: 
ence; tadvat, just so ; is the yojand, reas 
birth and death, Ghar i 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
V. 61-62] MANDUKYA KARIKA 20k 


The idea is that, from the standpoint of logic, there can 
be no real birth or death for the objects. 


ANY, AAT MANAT ATT | 
qa ant < aded fraaeaa area Ngo 
60. With regard to all the birthless entities. 
there can be no application of the words eter- 
nal and non-eternal. No categorical ‘state- 
ment can be made with regard to an entity 
where words do not apply. 


But from the standpoint of absolute truth, sasyata-. 
§a§vatabhidha, the terms eternal or non-eternal; na ajesu' 
dharmesu, do not apply to the birthless entities, the 
souls, whose essence consists in a mere eternal and. 
homogeneous Consciousness. This is the meaning. The 
term varnah, derivatively means those by which things: 
are described and it signifies words. Yatra, where with 
regard to which (souls), words do not apply, so far as. 
their description or revelation is concerned; tatra, there; 
na ucyate, is not uttered ; any vivekah, categorical state- 
ment, that “This is so indeed”, or in other words that 
«Jt is either eternal or non-eternal”, as is declared in the: 
Vedic text, “From where speech returns” (Tai.II.iv.1). 


gar area sane Fart aA ATT | 

qar AANI fad sete ATT NRR 

rd aA A AMA: | 
SMA WER 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


202 MANDUKYA UPANISAD HY. 61-62 


61. As in dream Consciousness (cittam) 
vibrates as though having dual functions, so 
in the waking state Consciousness vibrates as 
though with two facets. 

62. There is no doubt that Consciousness, 
though one appears in dream in dual aspects; 
so also in the waking state, Consciousness, 
though one, appears to have two aspects. 

That the absolute Consciousness, that is really non- 
dual, becomes an object of speech, is due only to the 
activities of mind, but not so in reality. The verses 
-were explained earlier! (Karika, III. 29-30). 

For the further reason, duality, describable by words, 
does not exist : 


ame ae fy a aug RATA | 

HOSA CATS SÀ AAAA ATL AST ERI 

AARET A freed qq: aH | 

GAT AERA SAE IYI 

63-64. Thecreatures—be they born from 
<ggs or from moisture—that the experiencer 
of dream sees for ever as existing in all the ten 
directions, while he is roaming in the dream- 
land, are but objects of perception to the con- 
sciousness, of the dreamer, and they do not 


exist apart from that consciousness. Similarly 


1 The words manah is substituted here by cittam (mean 
‘Consciousness in the Vedantic, 2 
verses 64-67, citta means empii 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


AV. 65-66] MANDUKYA KARIKA 203 


this consciousness of the dreamer, is admitted 


to be only an object of perception to that 
dreamer. 


Svapnadrk, one who sees a dream ; caran, while mov- 
ing ; svapne, in dream, in the place seen in a dream ; 
yan jivan sada paśyati, all the creatures that he ever 
notices ; diksu vai dasasu sthitan, as existing in all the 
ten directions ; viz andajan, those born from eggs ; 
svedajan, those born from moisture. 

Objection: Be that so, what follows therefrom ? 

The answer is ; Te, those creatures; are the svapnadrk- 
cittadr§yah, objects of perception to the consciousness 
of the experiencer of dream. Therefore na vidyate, they 
do not exist; tatah prthak, separately from the consci- 
ousness of the dreamer. It is consciousness alone that 
is imagined as the diverse creatures. Tatha, similarly ; 
even tat, that ; syapnadrkcittam, the consciousness of the 
„experiencer of dream; is idam tad-drgyam eva, merely an 
object of perception to that dreamer. Therefore there 
is no separate existence for such a thing as conscious- 
‘ness apart from the dreamer. This is the idea. 


quad srrafšs š ag fear! . 
HOSA CATAL ars [aaaf maT RII 


srmmfšrasmofkrreq + fret qq: 7% | 
an qaesaias TARTAR NEE 
65-66. The creatures—bé they born from 
eggs or from moisture—that the experiencer 
akingstate sees for ever as existing in 
s while he is roaming in 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


204 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 65-66 


the places of the waking state, are but objects. 
of perception to the consciousness of the man 
in the waking state, and they do not exist 
separately from that consciousness. Similarly, 
this consciousness of the waking man is ad- 
mitted to be only an object of perception to 
the waking man. 

The creatures visible to a waking man are non-different 
from his consciousness, since they are perceived through: 
consciousness, just like the creatures perceived by the 
consciousness of a dreamer. And that consciousness. 
again, as engaged in the perception of creatures, is non- 
different from the experiencer, since it is perceived by’ 
the experiencer, like the consciousness in the dream state.. 
The remaining portion has already been explained. 


s aAA & fe agedifa area 1 
SATIA THAT ge ISI 
67. They are both perceptible to each. 
other. (If the question arises), “Does it exist?” 
the answer given is “No”. Both of them lack. 
valid proof, and each is perceived merely 
because of a prepossession with the other. 

Te ubhe, both of them—consciousness and the creatures- 
—knowledge and its modifications—these two; are anyo- 
nyadrsye. objects of perception to each other. For the 
thing that is called knowledge is what it is in relatig 


to its objects, such as the creatures ; an ect 
perception, such as the creat I 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


TV. 69] MANDUKYA KARIKA 205 


knowledge ; consequently, their awareness is mutually 
determined. Hence it is also asserted that nothing what- 
soever, be it knowledge or the things perceived through 
knowledge, exists. When it is asked, “Kim tat asti iti, 
does it exist ?’’ ucyate, the answer made, by the discrim- 
inating man is, “na, no.” For in dream neither an 
elephant nor a knowledge having elephant as its content 
exists. So also, in the waking state, these do not exist 
in the eyes of the discriminating people. This is the 
idea implied. How? Since ubhayam, both knowledge 
and the objects of knowledge; are Jaksanasinyam, 
devoid of laksana, anything whereby they can be estab- 
lished, that is to say, they are without valid proof. 
Either is grhyate, perceived ; tanmatena eva, merely be-. 
cause of a prepossession with the other. There can be- 
no knowledge of the pot by setting aside the idea of the 
pot, nor can there be any comprehension of the idea of 
the pot by discarding the pot. The meaning implied is 
that in the case under discussion no distinction, of one 
being the knowledge and the other its object, can be 
made between the two. 


qr aait Sat aad fasts = | 
aor star ent qa vated a vated = ICI 
68. Asa creature seen in a dream under- 

goes birth and death, so also do all these 
creatures appear and disappear. 
gar anait flat saq asà = | 
aa aa aafed a aA FNRI 
jured up by magic 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


206 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 69 


undergoes birth and death, so also do all 
these creatures appear and disappear. 


gar ffet stat stat asf ar | 
aa Slat eat Ga Aafed A Hafler F 119011 


70. Asa creature produced through medi- 
cines and charms undergoes birth and death, 
so also do all these creatures appear and 
disappear. 

Mayamayah, means one that is created by a magician; 
and nirmitakah, means created by medicines, charms etc. 
As egg-born creatures and others, created in dreams or by 
magic and incantation, take birth and die, so also do: 
such creatures as human beings who are non-existent and. 
are merely imagined on Consciousness. This is the idea. 


a aasraa cia: HASA a fad | 
Egat ae =a feta sat Ise! 

71. No creature whichsoever has birth, 
there is no source for it. This is that highest 
truth where nothing whatsoever is born. 

It has been said that the birth, death, etc. of creatures. 
within the range of empirical existence are like those of 
the creatures in dream etc., and that the highest truth is 
that where no creature undergoes birth. The remaining 
portion was explained before (Karika, III. 48), 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 73] MANDUKYA KARIKA 207 


72. This duality, possessed of subject and 
object, is a mere vibration of Consciousness. 
And Consciousness is objectless ; hence It is 
declared to be eternally without relations. 


All dvayam, duality ; grahya-grahakayat, possessed of 
subject and object; is cittaspanditam eva, surely a vibra- 
tion of Consciousness. But from the ultimate standpoint,. 
cittam, Consciousness, that is nothing but the Self, and 
accordingly it is nirvisayam, without objects. Tena, as a 
consequence of that, because of Its being without 
objects ; It it kzrtitam, declared ; to be nityam asangam,. 
ever without relations; as is known from the Vedic text, 
“For this infinite being is unattached” (Br. IV.iii.15-16). 
Anything that has its objects becomes connected with: 
those objects. As Consciousness is objectless, It is 
unrelated. This is the purport. 

Objection: If the unrelatedness of Consciousness 
follows from the fact of Its being without objects, then 
there can be no freedom from relation, since there exist 
such objects as the teacher, the scripture, and the taught- 

Answer: That is no defect. 

Objection: Why? 

The answer is : 

aisha =feqqeíəeqr Wasa ATE | 
- c 
CRAP MAST ARA TATAR: 119311 

73. That which exists because of a fancied 

am pirical gitlook does not do so from the 
D te Reality. Anything that 
rength of the empirical 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


208 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [t V. 75 


outlook, engendered by other systems of 
thought, does not really exist. 


An object, a scripture for instance, yah, which ; exists 
kalpitasainyrtya, because of a fancied empirical outlook 
(i.e. on the strength of empirical experience), it being 
called so because it is samvrti, an empirical outlook, 
that is kalpita, imagined, as a means for the attainment 
of the highest object. Anything that exists by virtue of 
this, asau na asti, that has no existence ; paramarthena, 
from the standpoint of the absolute Reality. It was 
-said earlier, “Duality ceases to exist after realisation” 
(Karika, I. 18). And anything that syāt, may exist ; 
_paratantrabhisamyrtya, on the strength of the empirical 
outlook engendered by the other systems of thought; 
that thing paramarthatah, when considered from the 
-standpoint of the highest Reality; na asti, does not exist, 
to be sure. Therefore it has been well said, “Hence it 
is declared to be without relations” (Karika, IV. 72). 

Objection: On the assumption that scriptures etc. 
have only empirical existence, the idea itself that some- 
thing is birthless will be equally empirical. 

Answer: Truly so. 


sat: RATAA RATAA ATS | 
qatar FIAT STA g A: legl 
74. Since in accordance with the conclusion 
arrived at in the scriptures of the other schools, 
the soul undergoes birth from the empiri 
point of view, therefore 1 
fancied empirical vi 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 75] MANDUKYA KARIKA 209 


dualists that) the soul is birthless ; but from 
the standpoint of absolute Reality, it is not 
even birthless. 


Kalpitasamvrtya, in accordance with the empirical 
outlook, fostered with the help of scriptures etc., the 
Self is said to be ajah, unborn. But paramarthena, from 
the standpoint of the highest Reality ; na api ajah, It is 
not even unborn. For what is birthless paratantrabhini- 
spattya, from the standpoint of the conclusions arrived 
at by other schools of thought; (is said to be so because) 
sah, that thing ; jayate, undergoes birth ; samvrtya, as a 
matter of empirical experience. Therefore the imagin- 
ation that the Self is birthless does not pertain to the 
absolutely real Entity. This is the idea. 


aaRS at aa a fae | 
ANT < RAA fsrfsfšrqt a STATS SKII 
75. There is in evidence a (mere) craving 
for false objects, (though) no duality is in exist- 
ence there. Realising the non-existence of 
duality, one becomes free from craving for 
false things, and one does not undergo birth. 


Abhinivesah means persistent fondness. Sinceno object 
exists, therefore there is in evidence a mere persistent 
infatuation for duality that is non-existing. Dvayam na 
vidyate tatra, duality does not exist there. Since a 
fondness for unreality is alone the cause of birth, there- 
ore sah, he ; na jayate, does not undergo birth who 

i i ealised; dvayabhayam, the non-existence 

me nirnimittah, free from cause, 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


210 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 76 


IRT TMs SSAA | 
sz A sae Frei ges HS Sq: NSRI 


76. When one does not perceive the super- 
ior, medium, and inferior causes, then Con- 
sciousness ceases to have births. For how can 
there be any result when there is no cause ? 


The highest causes are those duties which are enjoined 
in relation to castes and stages of life, which are per- 
formed by people free from hankering for results, which 
lead to the attainment of the states of gods and 
others, and which are purely virtuous. Those that are 
mixed with irreligious practices and lead to birth among 
men etc., are the middling ones. And the inferior causes 
are those particular tendencies that are known as irre- 
ligious and lead to birth among animals etc., Yada, 
when after the realisation of the reality of the Self, that 
is one without a second and free from all imagination ; 
one na labhate, does not perceive ; all those causes— 
superior, intermediate or inferior—that are fancied 
through ignorance, just as the dirt seen in the sky by 
children is not perceived there by a discriminating man; 
tada, then ; cittam, Consciousness ; na ja@yate, is not 
created, in the shape of gods and others. that constitute 
the superior, medium, and inferior results. For when 
there is no cause, no effect can be produced just as no 
corn will grow unless there are seeds. 

It has been said that conscious 
the absence of causes. 
the birthlessness of Ci 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


VI. 78] MANDUKYa KARIKA 211 


afre Fave qTsa<=qfSt: AASEN | 
SMA Cate rei f A: SoN 


77. The birthlessness that Consciousness 
attains when freed from causes is constant and 
absolute ; for all this (viz duality and birth) 
Was perceptible to Consciousness that had 
been birthless and non-dual (even before). 


Anutpattik, the birthlessness, called liberation, that 
Comes; cittasya animittasya, to Consciousness that is 
causeless, that has become free from all the causes of 
birth called virtue and „vice, as a consequence of the 
realisation of the ultimate Truth ;—the birthlessness that 
is of this kind is for ever and under all circumstances 
Sama, constant, without any distinction ; and advaya, 
absolute. And this state ajatasya, belongs to the birthless, 
to Consciousness that had been birthless even before; (it 
belongs) sarvasya, (to Consciousness) that had been all, 
that is to say, to the non-dual Consciousness. Since even 
before the rise of knowledge, tat, all that—viz duality 
and birth ; was cittadrgyam, an object of perception to 
Consciousness; therefore the causelessness of the unborn 
non-dual Consciousness is ever the same and absolute, 
not that sometimes it is subject to birth and sometimes 
not. It is ever of the same nature. This is the meaning. 


qans Ri deat 8c TTA | 
Tas TASHA TAWX |S 


e causelessness that is 
ing any cause sep- 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


212 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 78 


arately, one attains the state of fearlessness 
that is free from sorrow and devoid of desire. 

Since duality does not exist in accordance with the 
reasons adduced, oneagnute, attains; the abhayam padam 
state of fearlessness, that is free from desire, sorrow,etc. 
and is without ignorance etc.;that is to say, one is never 
reborn ; buddhva, after having realised ; animittatam 
satyam, causelessness as the truth, of the highest order ; 
and anapnuvan, (after) not getting, that is to say, not 
accepting; prthak, separately; any hetum,cause, that may 
lead to birth among the gods and others (that is to say), 
after having renounced the desire for all external things. 


ariana a aa | 
aTi & gA fag fafrade sn 
79. Since owing to a belief in the existence 

of unrealities, Consciousness engages Itself in 
things that are equally so (i.e. unreal), there- 
fore when one has realisation of the absence of 
objects, Consciousness becomes unattached 
and turns back. 

Abhiatabhinivesah consists in a conviction that duality 
does exist even though there is no such thing. Since 
from this infatuation, which is a kind of delusion creat- 
ed by ignorance, tat, that Consciousness, that imitates 
the unreal ; pravartate, engages ; sadrge, in a similar 
thing ; therefore when sak, anyone ; realises the non- 
existence of that object of duality, his Concio pi S 
becomes nihsangam, unattached, to it; 
turns back, from the objec 
the belief in unrealitie 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 81] MANDUKYA KARIKA 213 


Ramena frre f qar frà: | 
fuer: <t fe Jei TATARE Coll 
80. For then to the Consciousness, that has 

got detached and does not engage (in duality), 
there follows the state of inactivity. Since that 
is the object realised by the wise, therefore 
that is the real equipoise, and that is birthless 
and non-dual. 


Of the Consciousness nivrttasya, that has desisted, 
from objects of duality; and apravrttasya, does not engage 
in any other object because of the realisation of the 
absence of any such thing; there follows niscala sthitih, 
a state of motionlessness, that is of the very nature of? 
Brahman. Hi, since ; sak visayah that is the object of 
vision—this state of continuance of knowledge as Brah- 
man that is anon-dual mass of homogeneous Conscious- 
ness ; buddhanam, to the wise, who realise the supreme 
Reality; therefore, tat, that state; is the highest samyam, 
equipoise, without any differentiation ; and it is also. 
ajam adyayam, birthless and non-dual. 

That which is the object of vision to the wise is being 
shown again : 


aAa eT wala ez | 
Gaara Gal Far gT: IERI 
81. This becomes birthless, sleepless, dream- 
inous. For this Entity is ever 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
214 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 81 


That becomes prabhatam svayam, fully illuminated by 
Itself, and It does not depend on the sun etc. ; in other 
words, It is by nature self-effulgent. Eşah, this ; dharmah, 
entity, called the Self, that is possessed of such charac- 
teristics ; is sakrt-vibhatak, shining once for all, that is 
to .say, ever effulgent ; dhatusvabhavatak, by the very 
nature of the thing (that is the Self). 

It is being shown why this supreme Reality, though 
spoken of thus, is not grasped by ordinary people : 


Sere fret gE frat ae | 
FS BA F FAA FAN MATAR] 112211 


82. Because of His passion for any object, 
whatever it be, that Lord becomes ever covered 
up easily, and He is at all times uncovered 
with difficulty. 


Since asau bhagavan, that Lord, the non-dual Self, 
that is to say, the Deity ; sukham avriyate, is easily 
covered; grahena yasya kasya ca dharmasya, by the eager- 
ness to grasp, because of the false belief in the reality of 
an object, whatever it be, that lies within duality—for 
the covering follows from the perception of duality, and 
it does not require any additional effort,—and since It is 
vivriyate, uncovered, revealed ; duhkham, with difficulty, 
the knowledge of the Supreme Reality being a rarity ; 
therefore It is not easy to be understood, though spoke: 
of by the Upanisads and the teachers in vari 
is pointed out by the Vedic te 
ful, and its receiver is 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable “ellas, Chennai 
IV. 83] MANDUKYA KARIKA 215 

When the passionate attachment of the learned to 
even such subtle ideas as the existence of the Self or Its 
non-existence becomes a covering of the Lord—the 
Supreme Self, what wonder is there that the passion in 
the shape of the intellectual preoccupation of the dull 


Should be much more so? The next verse goes on to 
show this : 


afta arate aR aa are AT gq: | 
qA aA ATM: 1123 
83. By asserting that the Self “exists”, “does 

not exist”, “exists and does not exist”, or 
again “does not exist, does not exist”, the non- 
discriminating man does certainly cover It up 
through ideas of changeability, unchangeabili- 
ty, both changeability and unchangeability, 
and non-existence. 


Some disputant accepts the idea that the Self asti, 
exists. Another, viz the believer in momentariness of 
things, avers na asti, It does not exist. Another half- 
believer in momentariness, the naked one (i. e. Jaina) 
who speaks of both existence and non-existence, asserts, 
asti na asti, It exists and does not exist. The absolute 
nihilist says, na asti, na asti, It does not exist, It does 
not exist. Of these states, that of existence is calak, 
changeable, it being different from such impermanent 
things as a jar,1 and the state of non-existence is sthirah, 
rception is inconstant ; the perceiving soul is 
reacts to it diversely, being, according to 
happy and sometimes sorry with 


bject of pe 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
216 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 83 


changeless, is being ever constant.1 The state of both 
existence and non-existence, is ubhayam, of either kind, 
since it relates to both the changeable and the changeless.2 
And abhavah, relates to an absolute non-existence,3 
Baligak, means a fool, a non-discriminating man. Each 
one of the fools, whether calling the Self existing or not; 
eva, surely ; dyrnoti, covers up, the Lord; calasthira- 
ubhaya-abhavaih, by ideas of changeability, unchangea- 
bility, both changeability and unchangeability, and non- 
existence—which all belong to the four alternatives, 
The idea implied is that when even a learned man who 
has not realised the supreme Truth is but a fool, noth- 
ing need be spoken of one who is naturally stupid. 

Of what nature, then, is the supreme Reality, by know- 
ing which one gets rid of stupidity and becomes enlight- 
ened? The answer is: 


MERATH Tey Tahal ASST: | 
WTA š ES T ATH lcg 
84. These are the four alternative theories, 
through a passion for which the Lord remains 
ever hidden. He who sees the Lord as un- 
touched by these is omniscient. 


Etah catasrah kotyah, these four alternative theories, 
viz “It exists”, “It does not exist”, and so on, that have 


1 According to those who deny the existence of a perceiver 
apart from the intellect etc., the denial remains constan 
existence is changeless. 

2 The view of the Jainas. 

3 The view of the nihilistiod 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
IV. 85] MANDUKYA KARIKA 217 


been already mentioned and that are the conclusions- 
arrived at by the scriptures of the dogmatic disputants ; 
grahaih yasam, through the acceptance, through the: 
Conviction arising from the realisation, of which alter- 
natives ; bhagavan, the Lord ; remains sada ayrtah, ever 
covered ; to those Sophists alone, Sah, be, the reflective: 
Sage ; yena, by whom; drstah, has been realised ; that 
Lord who, though remaining covered to the sophists, is 
really asprstah abhik, untouched by these—these four: 
alternative theories of existence, non-existence, etc.—he: 
who has realised the all-pervasive Being found and 
Presented in the Upanisads alone ; sah, that sage ; is 
sarvadrk, omniscient ; or to put it otherwise, he is the 
truly enlightened man. 


TA Maat Beet ATES TEAST | 
HATTA fara: THs CK 


85. Does one make any effort after having 
attained omniscience in its fullness and having 
reached the non-dual state of Brahmanahood, 
that has no beginning, middle, and end ? 


Prapya, having attained ; sarvajfiatam krtsnam, omnis- 
cience in its fullness ; and having reached the advayam: 
brahmanyam padam, non-dual state of Brahmanahood, 
as indicated in the Vedic text, “He (who departs from 
this world after knowing this immutable Brahman) is a 
Brahmana (i.e. a knower of Brahman)” (Br. III. viii. 10), 

i eternal glory ofa Brahmana (i.e. a knower 
increases nor decreases through 


e) anapannadimadhyan- 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
218 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 85 


tam, has no beginning, middle, or end—that is to say, 
origin, continuance, and dissolution ; kim zhate, does one 
make any effort; atah param, after this, after this 
attainment of the Self? The idea is that any effort be- 
comes useless in accordance with the Smrti text, “He 
has no end to achieve here either through activity or 
through inactivity” (G. III. 18). 


foro frat ae ea: TEA Sea | 
qa: saaan AEA Ast 1A 
86. This is the modesty of the Brahmanas, 
this is their tranquillity, and this is their natu- 
Tal self-restraint resulting from spontaneous 
poise. Having known thus, the illumined man 
gets established in tranquillity. 


This continuance in the state of identity with the Self 
is the natural vinayak, modesty ; vipranam, of the Brah- 
manas. This is their humility, and this is also ucyate, 
called ; their prakrtah śamah, natural mental tranquillity. 
Damah, self-restraint, too, is this only ; prakrtidantatvat, 
because of (their) spontaneous poise, Brahman being by 
nature quiescent. Eyam vidvan, having known thus, 
known Brahman as naturally tranquil; the vidvan, enlight- 
ened man ; vrajet, should attain, that is to say, remains 
established in ; samam, tranquillity, that is spontaneous 
and that is the very nature of Brahman. 

Thus since the philosophies of the so 
conflict with each other, they | 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 87] MANDUKYA KARIKA 219 
attraction and repulsion. Accordingly, 
Philosophies, After having proved this fact by their own 
logic, the Conclusion arrived at was that, being free 
from all the four alternatives, the most perfect phil- 
osophy is the naturally tranquil philosophy of non-duality 
which does not engender such faults as attachment etc. 


Now the following text starts to show our own process 
of arriving at truth : 


aag MRi = ge strafed | 
aag Meri < ag strafed IESI 


87. The ordinary (waking) state is admitted 
to be that duality, co-existing with things of 
empirical reality and fit to be experienced. 
The objectless ordinary (dream) state is admit- 
ted to be without any object and yet as though 
full of experience. 


they are false 


` Savastu, empirical existence, is that which coexists 
with a real (empirical) thing ; similarly sopalambham, 
is that which coexists with experience. That is dyayam, 
duality, that is the source of all behaviour, scriptural 
and other, and that is characterised by the subject- 
object relationship. It is Jaukikam, the ordinary state, 
or in other words, the state of waking. The waking state 
is isyate, admitted, to be such in the Upanisads. That 

hich is avastu, unsubstantial, there being an absence 
I istence as well; which is sopalambham, 
f things, as it were, though 
is isyate, admitted in 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
220 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 87 


the dream state ; to be suddham, pure, objectless, subtler 
than the gross objects of the waking state ; and it is 
laukikam, ordinary, being common to all beings, 


Sarg < Saa way | 
aM S = AAA az ae: TANTA ICCI 
88. It is traditionally held that the extraor- 
dinary is without content and without experi- 
ence. Knowledge, object, and the realisable 
thing are for ever declared by the wise. 


That which is avastu, unsubstantial ; ca, and anupa- 
lambham, without experience, or in other words, that 
which is devoid of the subject and the object; is smrtam, 
traditionally held to be; Jokottaram, beyond the 
ordinary and therefore super-normal; for while the 
ordinary consists of the subject and the objects, in it 
there is an absence of these. It is the seed of all activity, 
that is to say, it is the state of deep sleep. That (mental 
State) is called jñanam, knowledge, by which is known 
in succession the supreme Reality together with Its 
means (of realisation), the ordinary, the objectless. 
ordinary, and the extraordinary. The Jfieyam, object of 
knowledge ; comprises all these three states, for logically 
there is no object (of knowledge) over and above these,. 
the objects fancied by all the sophists being verily inclu- 
ded in them. Vijfeyam, the object of realisation, is the 
supreme Reality that is called the Fourth, that is to say; 
the non-dual and birthless Reality that is th 
this, ranging from the ordinary toa 
prakirtitam, is declared, s 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 89] MANDUKYA KARIKA 221 


the wise, by the seers of the summum bonum, by the 
knowers of Brahman. 


am < ARA sa wan fates =a | 
adaa fe ata aaa era: ce! 

89. When after the acquisition of the knowl- 
edge (of the threefold object) and the knowl- 
edge of the objects in succession, the supreme 
Reality becomes self-revealed, then there 
emerges here, for the man of supreme intellect, 
the state of all-pervasiveness and omniscience 
for ever. 


Jñane (vidite), when (after) knowledge—knowledge of 
the ordinary etc—is acquired; and jfeye trividhe 
kramena (vidite), when (after) the knowable things of 
three kinds are known in succession—viz first the gross 
ordinary, then when these are not present, the object- 
less ordinary, and in the absence of that again, the 
extraordinary ; and then when the three states are elim- 
inated and the supreme Reality, the Fourth, non-dual, 
birthless, fearless vidite, has become known, svayam, of 
Its own accord ; then mahadhiyah, for the man of great 
intellect ; bhavati, there emerges ; iha, here, in this 
world; sarvajnata, the state of being all and the knower, 
sarvatra, for ever ; since his realisation relates to what 
transcends all the universe; that is to say, if It is known 
ever lives him. For unlike the knowledge of 
e is no appearance or disappearance 
man who has realised the 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
222 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 89 


From the fact that the ordinary state etc. have been 
presented as objects to be known successively, some 
one may conclude that they have real existence. Hence 
it is said : 


Sagara ARATTA: | 
dae ARGIARI VA: 118 oll 


90. Things to be rejected, realised, accepted. 
and made ineffective are to be known at the 
very beginning. From among them, the three, 
excepting the realisable, are traditionally held 
to be only fancies resulting from ignorance. 


The heya, rejectable, are the three states counting. 
from the ordinary. That is to say, just like the denial 
of an illusory snake on the Tope, waking, dream, and. : 
sound sleep are to be denied as having any existence: 
in the Self. The jfieya, thing to be known (realised), 
in this context, is the supreme Reality, free from the: 
four alternatives (Karika, IV. 83). The apya, acceptable 
are the disciplines, called scholarship, the strength aris-- 
ing from knowledge, and meditativeness,1 that are to 
be accepted by the monk after discarding the three kinds. 
of desire (for progeny, property, and worlds). Pakyani, 
those that are fit to be rendered ineffective—the blemishes. 
viz attraction, repulsion, delusion, etc., called passions. 
(kasayas). All these, viz those that are to be Tejected,, 
known, accepted, and rendered ineffective, are to be 


1 Br. III. v.1: “Therefore the knower of Br. 
known all about scholarship, should try i 
which comes of knowledge ; havi 
as well as scholarship, he b 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 91) MANDUKYA KARIKA 223: 
vijiteyani, known well; by the monk; agraydanatah, in the 
beginning as (his) means. Tesam, among those, among. 
the things to be rejected etc.; smrtah it is held tradi- 
tionally, by the knowersof Brahman; that vijfeyat anyatra,. 
apart from Brahman alone that is to be realised, that 
is the ultimate Reality ; there is upalambhah, a mere: 
imagination of perception, owing to ignorance, with 
regard to all the three, that are rejectable, acceptable, 
and fit to be made ineffective. They are not, however, 
admitted to be true from the highest standpoint. 
But from the ultimate standpoint : 


THAISSHASHAT: Ta TAT TATA: | 
R a fŠ aate SI Fara FFST< 118 QI 


91. All the souls should be known as natu- 
rally analogous to space and as eternal. 
There is no plurality among them anywhere, 
even by a jot or tittle. 


Sarve dharmah, all the souls; jfieyah, are to be known}. 
by those who hanker after liberation ; to be prakrtya, 
by nature, akdsavat, analogous to space, in point of 
subtleness, freedom from taints, and all-pervasiveness ; 
and (to be) anadayah, eternal. Lest any misconception: 
of diversity be created by the use of the plural number, 
the text says by way of remoying it, nanatvam, plurality; 
na vidyate, does not exist; tesam, among them; kvacana,. 
; : kim cana, even by a jot or tittle. 

Is being objects of cognition, that,, 
ith empirical experience but 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


.224 MANDUKYA UPANISAD {IV. 92 


araar: THAT aa TAT gaam: | 
aca wafa arfea? ASAA FA ERI! 


92. All the souls are, by their very nature, 
illumined from the very beginning, and their 
characteristics are well determined. He, to 
whom ensues in this way the freedom from 


the need of any further acquisition of knowl- 
edge, becomes fit for immortality. 


Since just like the ever effulgent sun, sarve dharmah, 
all the souls ; are prakrtya eva, by their very nature ; 
adibuddhah, illumined from the very beginning ; that is 
to say, as the sun is ever shining, so are they ever of the 
nature of Consciousness, (therefore) there is no need 
for ascertaining their character; or in other words, their 
nature is ever well established, and it is not subject to 
such doubts as to “whether it is so or not so”. As the 

` sun is ever independent of any other light, for its own 
sake or for any other, so yasya, he, for whom, for which 
seeker after liberation, bhavati, there occurs, in his own 
soul ksantik, a freedom from any need of further acqui- 
sition of knowledge—either for himself or for others ; 
evam, thus in the way described above ; sah, that man 
kalpate, becomes fit ; amrtatvaya, for immortality ; that 
is to say, he becomes able to attain liberation. 

Similarly, there is no need for bringing about tran- 
quillity in the Self. This is being pointed out : 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 94] MANDUKYA KARIKA 225 


93. Since the souls are, from the very be- 
ginning tranquil, unborn, and by their very 
nature completely unattached, equal, and non- 

ifferent, and since Reality is (thus) birthless, 
uniform, and holy, (therefore there is no need 
for any acquisition etc.). 


Since sarye dharmah, all the souls ; are adisantah, 
tranquil from the beginning, always peaceful ; and 
anutpannah, birthless; Prakrtya eva Suniryrtah, completely 
detached by their very nature; Sama-abhinnah, equal and 
non-different ; and since the reality of the Self is ajam, 
birthless ; sīmyam, equipoised (uniform) ; viśīradam, 
holy ; therefore there is no such thing as peace or liber- 
ation that has to be brought about. This is the idea. 
For anything done can have no meaning for one that 
is ever of the same nature, 

Those who have grasped the ultimate Truth, as describ- 
ed, are the only people in the world who are not piti- 
able; but the others are to be pitied. This is being stated: 


Aai 8 š arfa AS Arai qar | 
HEAT: PRIRA ST: GT: 118 
94. There can be no perfection for people 
who have proclivity for multiplicity, tread for 
ever the path of duality, and talk of plurality. 
Hence they are traditionally held to bepitiable. 
are bhedanimnah, they have a proclivity 


ty—that is to say, confine them- 
t they? Prthagvadah, 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
226 MANDUKYA UPANISAD QV. 94 


those who talk of a multiplicity of things, or in other 
words, the dualists. Tasmat, therefore they are smrtah, 
traditionally held to be ; krpanah, pitiable; since na asti, 
there is no; vaisaradyam, perfection; tesam sada vicaratam 
bhede, for those who are ever roaming about in duality, 
that is to say, for those who ever persist in the path of 
duality conjured up by ignorance. Consequently, it is 
proper that they should be objects of pity. 

The next verse says that the nature of the supreme 
Truth is beyond the ken of those who have not the 
requisite expansion of heart, who are not learned, who 
are outside the pale of Vedanta, who are narrow- 
minded, and who are dull of intellect. 


aa aaa g Š Aaa GARAT: | 
š fŠ Gh ASTER Gla A Aad ERII 


95. They alone will be possessed of unsurpass- 
able knowledge in this world, who will be firm 
in their conviction with regard to that which 
is birthless and uniform. But the ordinary 
man cannot grasp that (Reality). š 


Ye kecit, those who, perchance ; even though they be 
women ; bhavisyanti, will become ; suniścitāh, firm in 
conviction ; with regard to the nature of the ultimate 
Reality, aje samye, that is birthless and uniform ; te hi 


loke mahajñan 5 a 


and nobody, no othe 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


IV. 97) MANDUKYA KARIKA 227 
<an dip into, that is to Say, grasp ; fat, that thing, viz 
their path and their content of knowledge—the nature 


of all beings, who is a Source of bliss to all, and who 
has no goal to reach” (Mbh. $a. 239, 23-24), 


TG ETT wag aah | 
at T Fae aag Aa == LISI 
96. Itis traditionally held that the knowl- 
edge inhering in the birthless souls is unborn 
and non-relational. Since the knowledge has no 
objective relation, itis said to be unattached. 


Since isyate, it is traditionally held ; that the Jrianam, 
knowledge ; ajesu dharmesu, inhering in the birthless, 
Steady, souls; is ajam, birthless, steady ; like light and 
heat in the-sun; therefore that knowledge which is 
asamkrantam, unassociated with any other object ; ajam 
isyate, is said to be unborn. Yatah, since, jñanam, the 
knowledge ; na kramate, does not relate, to any other 
object ; tena, because of that reason; it is kirtitam asan- 
gam, proclaimed to be non-relational like space. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
228 MANDUKYA UPANISAD . [IVA 97 


97. Should there occur any change for any- 
thing, however slight it may be, there can 
never be any non-attachment for the non-dis- 
criminating man;' what need one speak of the 
destruction of covering for him ? 

If, in accordance with the other schools of disputants, 
Jayamane vaidharmye anumatre api, it be admitted that 
there is origination for any object, inside or outside, 
however insignificant that origination be ; then na asti, 
there can be no ; asangatd, non-attachment ; sada, for 
ever ; avipascitah, for that non-discriminating man. Kim 
uta, should one say that there is no; avaranacyutih, 
destruction of covering ? 

Objection: By asserting that there is no removal of 
covering, you lay yourself open to the charge of accept- 

` ing a covering for the souls as your own conclusion. 

To this it is answered, “No”. 


TTA: aa Tat: EARST: | 
Sgt JAAN YRT #s=T= g ATAT: ll8 ¿ll 
98. No soul ever came under any veil. They 
are by nature pure as well as illumined and 


free from the very beginning. Thus being 


endowed with the power (of knowledge), they 
are said to know. : 


Sarve dharmah, all the souls ; alabdhavaranah, never 
had any veil, any bondage of ignorance et j 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
° 221 MANDUKYA KARIKA 229 


say, they are free from bondage ; and they are prakrti- 
nirmalah, intrinsically pure ; buddhah tatha muktah, illu- 
mined and also free ; ādau, from the beginning ; since 
they are by nature ever pure, illumined, and free. If 
they are so, why is it said that they budhyante, know ? 
The answer is: they are nāyakāh, masters, have the 
power, of learning ; that is to say, they are by nature 
endowed with the power of knowledge. This is just like 
Saying, “The sun shines”, though the very nature of 
the sun is constant ‘effulgence ; or like Saying, “The hills 
stand”, though it is the very nature of the hills to be 
perpetually motionless. 


FR w fe Ga aa ag afim: | 
A ` 
S TATA aed sas TATA lge 

99. The knowledge of the enlightened man, 
who is all-pervasive, does not extend to. 
objects; all the souls, also, like knowledge (do 
not reach out to objects). This view was not 
expressed by Buddha. 

Hi, since ; jñanam, the knowledge ; buddhasya, of the 
enlightened one who has realised the ultimate Reality ; 
tayinak, of the all-pervading one, of the one who has no 
interstices like space, or of the one who ‘is either ador- 
able or intelligent ; na kramate, does not extend to; 
other dharmesu, objects ; that is to say, his knowledge 
is ever centred in (or identified with) the soul like light 
in the sun. Tatha, similarly, like knowledge itself ; 
ah, all the souls ; do not extend to other 
e souls being analogous to (all- 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
230 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 99 


that was introduced in “through his knowledge that is 
comparable to space” (Karika, IV. 1), is this knowledge: 
that is analogous to space, that does not reach out to 
other things, and that belongs to the enlightened one- 
who is all-pervasive by virtue of his identity with knowl-- 
edge itself. Like the reality of the Self that is but Brah- 
man, they are unchanging, immutable, partless, eternal, 
non-dual, unattached, invisible, unthinkable, beyond. 
hunger etc., as is said in the Vedic text, “for the vision. 
of the witness can never be lost” (Br. IV. iii. 23). That 
the nature of the supreme Reality is free from the dif- 
. ferences of the knowledge, the known, and the knower 
and is without a second, etat, this thing; na bhdsitam, 
was not expressed; buddhena, by Buddha; though a near 
approach to non-dualism was implied in his negation of 
outer objects and his imagination of everything as mere 
consciousness. But this non-duality, the essence of the 
ultimate Reality, is to be known from the Upanisads. 
only. This is the purport. 

At the end of the treatise a salutation is uttered in. 
praise of the knowledge of the supreme Reality : 


gaaei area AMEA | 
FEAT TAMA AGA FATAL 1120011 

100. After realising that State (of Reality) 

that is inscrutable, profound, birthless, uni- 

form, holy, and non-dual, we make our obeis- 

ance to It to the best of our ability. 


Durdargam, that which can b 
that is to say, inscrutable, Itbe 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
V. 100] MANDUKYA KARIKA 231 


alternatives of existence, non-existence, etc. (Karika, 1V. 
83) ; and hence atigambhiram, profound, unfathomable 
like an ocean ; to the people lacking in discrimination. 
Ajam, birthless; samyam, uniform, visaradam, holy. 
Buddhya, having realised, having become identified with ; 
this kind of padam, State ; that is andndtyam, non-dual- 
ity; namaskurmah, we make our obeisance, to that State ; 
yathabalam, to the best of our ability ; by bringing It 
within the range of empirical dealings, though It defies 
all relative experience. This is the idea. 


ae q Ufa ATI sa 
fafarsraa repeat 
samaa A AASI 11211 


PIC PUrCe CRIS COCO CCCOIBINGSECS 
WATTS RARAN THE | 
aroge TAA aa aged 
aed Garaget TAAA TATAAS URI 


qraitat sara faaat ee u3u 


alutation by the commentator : 


wn to that Brahman which, though birth- 
through Its inscrutable power ; 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 
232 MANDUKYA UPANISAD [IV. 100 


which, though ever quiescent, appears to be in motion ; 
which, though one, appears to be multiple to those 
whose vision has become perverted by the perception of 
diverse attributes of objects; and which destroys the 
fear of those who take shelter in It. 

` 2. salute by prostrating myself at the feet of that 
teacher of my teacher,1 the most adorable among the 
adorable, who, on seeing the creatures drowned in the 
sea (of the world), infested with sea~-monsters undergoing 
incessant births and deaths, rescued, out of compassion 
for all beings, this nectar, which is difficult to be 
obtained even by gods and which lies in the depths of 
the ocean, called the Vedas, which (Vedas), he stirred 
up by inserting the churning rod of his illumined 
intellect. 

3. I offer my obeisance with my whole being to 
those sanctifying feet—the dispellers of the fear of 
transmigration—(feet) of my own teacher, through the 
light of whose illumined intellect was dispelled the 
darkness of delusion enveloping my own mind, who 
destroyed for ever my fear of appearance and disap- 
pearance in this terrible sea of innumerable births, and 
having taken shelter at whose feet others also get 
unfailingly the knowledge of the Upanisads, self- 
control, and humility. 


1 Gaudapada, 


the teacher of Govi 
Sankara. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


INDEX TO ` 
UPANISAD AND KARIKA 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


INDEX TO SLOKAS 
MANDUKYA UPANISAD 


aag 
UG a US Faz 
RTEA aè- 

5 ARTA: 
TAR AIR 
aq Bal 4 FA BT 


— 
Nu — o o @ = N 


4 
En 
a 


; 1 
8 
CART ATS a 


£ tel Seer et 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


INDEX TO SLOKAS 


GAUDAPADA’S KARIKA 


ARAFA Ae 
BN aad AR, 
at: BARI 
FASTA ARAA, 
AET] qam 
TAA Brol 
A AAC 


sera FEA 
agi Tat fe 
Qa 8 g: 


Ill. 


33 
23 
74 


AAA Tea: Aa: 
ae aai fe 
AMT Weta 
ayaa 
AAMSIAAAA 
FATA: J 


| Had RIA 


AAAA < 
FAA Cl ASH 
aaa 
FARSI LST 
BAA ARAL SA 
ale acter 
AAA 
RIAN 8 A 


39. 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


238 MANDUKYA KARIKA 

aaa HI. 16 faqe IV. 26 
zama Tat: afte: I. 8 faan IV. 72 
SUTRAS IV.. 38 seraeufagad: Iv. 10 


SAF sge HI 41 amaA nA IV. 66 


sod ERATA. HI. 42 Aam: ard aq TH. 14 


aren ma fam à L 24 gaeaf I. 20 
RAJARAM, I. 12 fag amg Tq 22 
mam L 11 fy amg aged N 5 
aa IV. 12 atoning fa L 2 
PRT AQ S Hea IV. ‘11 za adaga UL 43 
aS aft RR H. 24 eaim IV. 100 
mega weg IV. 84 z zaag IV. 53 
we + ë Gea IV. 99 SARA HI. 12 


mada: Ul. 38 Q sË sa: IL 48 


33 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


a fare sI 
s Waa qe 


a aad gii Tel 
ARIE TETRA 
aay Bagg 
armaa aE 
arma aqi 
ARGTET HATA, 
AIRES TA 
fae qaq: 
faa a qar fad 
free 
fad: agaat 
ARa qar Wat 
faegfafiTaen: 
ae Ae fet araa, 
qq [3316 Sele 


INDEX TO TEXTS ' 


52 
21 


aR IAA 
WY gai KET 
FORTATA: IAL 
IRER fafa: 


Ag eA ara: 


qaaa qel 
BICKCITC (bE 
ais sÀ 
ma Aaa 
Ye aan fa 
arma efeaat 
TARA WA 

aa af data: 
aaa frend 
aeai ST 
aū awa Fa 
arai fad Baa 
fora: ae dary 
Bere ARH Ra: 
qar ffet sia: 
qai Valet aera 
FAT ATA AA, 
qar AA Sita: 
Fal STT Sita: , 
Fal aÀ SaaS 


JASE TERA 
JA 4 wat ÈA 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai 


240 


zal a Əla fad 
af ect: Toa fate: 
FTF: 


gaa mà Aa: 
aStet s=fSqqager 

a wd Baa 
waren fe 4 BT 
SISA SARA 

A sale 
waa et Bed qa. 
AoA: Mg: 
aU AT, 
Ese Afaa, 

Ña aa à 
aaa sa. 
fast feat aa 
fry saa <a 
taeraa 
fal ë gae fe 
dara: 
Aar af Aafia: 
aq auai 
Fang’ g aafia 
auaf Acta 
T fe a Sis 
aaa Aai 


33 


III. 


MANDUEYA KABIKA 


agra: aca HI. 16 
aa Baga IV. 16 
apa Ill. 25 
dae aad qa INA i 
aag sat aig ee 2) 
ifion: HI. 37 
ai aai an aÑ IV. 33 
WA M < IV. 87 
akka erat IV. 9 
gate fae Iv. 82 
gq aft senqa; IL 23 
aieka afta: II. 28 
ag aad ei l 
=m ar oe arf IV. 22 
ACARI ETA IL 5 
askea IV. 64 
aS FAC, At IV. 63 
ea I. 14 
ecard Fat eS H. 31 
eA aA: Ge 2 
SA AAG: PA: IV. 36 
amaai Ter HI. 22, IV. 8 
aterm iW. 17 
wer avai aai I. 47 
Sga amsik: IV. 23 


ai: FS Fi 


Digitization by Arya Samaj Charitable Foundation, Chennai : 
“ae 
an 


7 
: 


À i aby Aa Samai Chale Fotmdation, Chennai " — 


Ni <° se eee 
y 99 he a 


