SOUTH ASIA RESEARCH 
MANU’S CODE OF LAW 


A Critical Edition and Translation of the 


Manava-Dharmasastra 


PATRICK OLIVELLE 


With the editorial assistance of 
Suman Olivelle 


MANU’S CODE OF LAW 


SOUTH ASIA RESEARCH 


SERIES EDITOR 
Patrick Olivelle 


A Publication Series of 
The University of Texas South Asia Institute 


and 
Oxford University Press 


THE EARLY UPANISADS 
Annotated Text and Translation 


Patrick Olivelle 
INDIAN EPIGRAPHY 


A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, 
and the Other Indo-Aryan Languages 


Richard Salomon 


A DICTIONARY OF OLD MARATHI 
S. G. Tulpule and Anne Feldhaus 
DONORS, DEVOTEES, AND DAUGHTERS OF GOD 
Temple Women in Medieval Tamilnadu 
Leslie C. Orr 


JIMUTAVAHANA’S DA YABHAGA 
The Hindu Law of Inheritance in Bengal 


Edited and Translated with an Introduction and Notes by 
Ludo Rocher 
A PORTRAIT OF THE HINDUS 
Balthazar Solvyns and the European Image of India 1740-1824 
Robert L. Hardgrave, Jr. 
DIVINE TESTIMONY 
A Study and Translation of the Rajasthani Oral Narrative of Devnarayan 


Aditya Malik 


MANU’S CODE OF LAW 


A Critical Edition and Translation of the 


Manava-Dharmasastra 


PATRICK OLIVELLE 


With the editorial assistance of 
Suman Olivelle 


OXFORD 


UNIVERSITY PRESS 


2005 


OXFORD 


UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Oxford New York 
Auckland Bangkok Buenos Aires Cape Town Chennai 
Dares Salaam Delhi HongKong Istanbul Karachi Kolkata 
KualaLumpur Madrid Melbourne Mexico City Mumbai Nairobi 
Sao Paulo Shanghai Taipei Tokyo Toronto 


Copyright © 2005 by The University of Texas Center for Asian Studies 


Published by Oxford University Press, Inc. 
198 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10016 


www.oup.com 
Oxford is a registered trademark of Oxford University Press 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of Oxford University Press. 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Manu (Lawgiver). 
[Manavadharmasastra. English & Sanskirt] 

Manu’s code of law : a critical edition and translation of the Manava-dharmasistra / 
Patrick Olivelle ; with the editorial assistance of Suman Olivelle 
p. cm. — (South Asia research) 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 978-0-19-517146-4 
1. Manavadharmasastra. 2. Hindu law—-Sources. 3. Law— 
India—Sources, 4. Law—India—History. I. Olivelle, Patrick. 
II. Olivelle, Suman. 

HIE. Title. IV. Series: South Asia research (New York, N.Y.) 
KNS127.3.A4 2004 
294.5'94—dc22 2003070152 


Preface 


It was in 1991, soon after I joined the University of Texas, that I first thought about 
preparing a critical edition of the Manava-Dharmasastra. | first envisaged it as a 
collaborative project between me and my colleague Richard Lariviere, who had then 
just completed the first-ever critical edition of the Naradasmiyti. Little did I realize 
that it would take a dozen years to complete the project, nor did I have any idea how 
complex, labor-intensive, and time-consuming it would be. I am glad that I did not 
have the foresight to know then what I know now in hindsight; if I did I would 
never have undertaken it. 

Over these past thirteen years many individuals and institutions have helped 
me in numerous ways; without their help this work would never have been com- 
pleted. At the end of this long road, I now have the pleasant task of expressing my 
gratitude to all of them publicly. First and foremost, Suman Olivelle has been a full 
partner in the editorial work for the past seven years. She collated most of the manu- 
scripts, learning eight different scripts in the process; proofread the entire document 
several times; and in general kept this complex project involving several collators 
organized. Richard Lariviere took on major administrative responsibilities over the 
years; although he could not collaborate directly in this edition, he has assisted this 
project in ways too numerous to mention. Albrecht Wezler read several chapters of 
my translation and gave valuable and insightful criticism and suggestions. During 
the eight months that I spent at Harvard in 2000-01, Stephanie Jamison gave un- 
stintingly of her time and knowledge and helped me work through obscure passages 
of the text. During the same period Michael Witzel also assisted in a variety of ways 
in coming to terms with this difficult text and in the dating of some manuscripts. 
Several of my students helped me in collating the manuscripts: Don Davis, Robert 
Fulton, Robert Goodding, and Mark McClish. Other students assisted the project in 
numerous ways: Stephen Lindquist, Lisa Edwin, and Roger Conant. David Brick 
helped with the Dharma Parallels, and Elliott MacGregor with the Pada Index. Ludo 
Rocher, Anne Feldhaus, and Gregory Schopen read the introduction and gave valu- 
able comments and suggestions. Wendy Doniger, Martha Selby, and Dominik Wu- 
jastyk provided guidance especially in medical and gynecological matters. Officers 
of the American Institute of Indian Studies were immensely helpful in obtaining 
manuscripts: Pradeep Mehendiratta, Madhav Bhandare, Venugopala Rao, and Jag- 
dish Yadav. Likewise, Karan Singh, Arlo Griffith, Cynthia Talbot, Ulrich Kragh, 


vi Preface 


Anne Feldhaus, and V. L. Manjul obtained manuscripts from Jammu, Orissa, Ra- 
jasthan, Calcutta, and Nagpur. Allen Thrasher was very helpful in giving me access 
to the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. at the very beginning of this project, 
and Mammata Misra helped with the reading of difficult passages of an Oriya 
manuscript. 

Many institutions assisted me in various ways. The Smithsonian Institution, 
the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the University of Texas gave gen- 
erous grants, without which this edition would never have been completed. The 
Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute in Pune obtained numerous manuscripts and 
did a pilot collation of a few manuscripts under a grant from the Smithsonian. I want 
to thank especially Dr. S. D. Laddu, who supervised that collation. 

Finally, a big thank you to my daughter, Meera, who has endured this project 
that has absorbed both her father and mother both during her high-school years and 
through her four years of college! Thanks also to Cynthia Read and Theodore 
Calderara of the Oxford University Press, New York, who, as usual, have supported 
this project enthusiastically. 

This is a long and complex volume with several scripts and fonts. I produced 
the camera-ready copy, and even with the most careful attention and proofreading 
there are bound to be errors for which I beg the indulgence of the readers. 


Austin, Texas P.O. 
June, 2004 


Contents 


Abbreviations ix 
INTRODUCTION 3 
I. Authorship and Composition 5 
If. Sources of Manu: The Traditions of dharma and artha 41 
III. The Work of Redactors 50 
IV. Nature and Purpose of the Treatise 62 
V. Manu and the Later dharma Tradition 66 
Note on the Translation 71 
TRANSLATION 75 
Editor’s Outline 77 
Chapter 1 87 
Chapter 2 94 
Chapter 3 108 
Chapter 4 124 
Chapter 5 138 
Chapter 6 148 
Chapter 7 154 
Chapter 8 167 
Chapter 9 190 
Chapter1o 208 
Chapter 11 215 
Chapter12 230 
Notes to the Translation 237 
CRITICAL EDITION 351 
Introduction to the Critical Edition 353 
I. Editorial History and the Need for a Critical Edition 353 
IL. Sources for the Critical Edition 354 
Ill. Genealogy of Manuscripts 370 
IV. Constitution of the Texts 374 
Note on the Critical Edition 381 


vii 


viii 


Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 
Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 
Chapter 9 


Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 
Chapter 12 


Notes to the Critical Edition 


Appendices 


983 


383 
403 
447 
504 
558 
594 
613 
659 
746 
810 
837 
889 


914 


Appendix I: Fauna and Flora 


Appendix II: Names of Gods, People, and Places 


Contents 


985 


Appendix III: Ritual Vocabulary 


Appendix IV: Weights, Measures, and Currency 


Bibliography 


Pada Index 


999 
Dharmasastric Parallels 


1035 


Index to the Translation 


1009 


1111 


993 


988 


997 


GobhGr 
haplo 
Har-A 
Har-G 
Hem 
JaiGr 
JAOS 
JB 
JIP 
Jnw 
KatSr 
KB 


Abbreviations 


Aitareya Brahmana 

Aitareya Aranyaka 

Aparaditya, Apararka com. on YDh 
Apastamba Dharmasitra 
Apastamba Grhyasitra 
Apastamba Srautasiitra 
Kautalya’s Arthasastra 

A Svalayana Grhyasitra 

A §valayana Srautasiitra 
Aitareya Upanisad 
Atharvaveda 

Baudhdyana Srautasitra 
Baudhayana Dharmasitra 
Bharuci 

Bhagavad Gita 

Bhavisya Purdna 

Bohtlingk and Roth, Sanskrit-Worterbuch 
Brhaspati Smrti 
Brhadaranyaka Upanisad 
critical apparatus to the edition 
Chdandogya Upanisad 
Devannabhatta, Smirticandrikad 
first hand 

Gautama Dharmasitra 
Govindaraja 

Gobhila Grhyasitra 
haplography 

Haradatta, com. on the ApDh 
Haradatta, com. on the GDh 
Hemadri, Caturvargacintamani 
Jaiminiya Grhyasitra 

Journal of the American Oriental Society 
Jaiminitya Brahmana 

Journal of Indian Philosophy 
Jimutavahana, Dayabhaga 
Katyayana Srautastitra 

Kathaka Brahmana 


RV 
Sab 
SankhGr 
SB 

sh 

ST 

TB 

TS 

TU 
VaDh 
VeS 
ViDh 
Vij 

Vis 

vl 
VkhGr 
WZKM 
WZKS 
YDh 
ZDMG 


Abbreviations 


Khadira Grhyasitra 

Kathaka Samhita 

Kashi Sanskrit Series 

Kulltka 

Kumiarila, Tantravarttika 

Laksmidhara, Kytyakalpataru 

marginal addition 

Madhava, Pardsaramddhaviya 
Mahabharata 

marginal correction 

Manava Dharmasdastra 

Medhatithi 

Manirama 

Maitradyaniya Samhita 

Monier-Williams, Sanskrit-English Dictionary 
Narayana 

Nandana 

Narada Smrti 

Northern Transmission of the MDh 
omission, omitted 

Paraskara Grhyasiitra 

Purva Mimamsd Siitra 

Ramdyana 

Ramacandra 

Raghavananda 

Reveda 

Sabara’s commentary on PMS 
Sankhdyana Grhyasitra 

S atapatha Brahmana 

second hand 

Southern Transmission of the MDh 
Taittirtya Brahmana 

Taittirtya Samhita 

Taittiriya Upanisad 

Vasistha Dharmasitra 

Vedanta Sitra 

Visnu-Darmasitra 

Vijfianesvara, Mitaksard com. on the YDh 
Visvesvara, Bdlakrida com. on the YDh 
variant reading 

Vaikhanasa Grhyasitra 

Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Morgenlandes 
Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde Siidasiens 
Yajnavakya Dharmasastra 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morganldndischen Gessellschaft 


MANU’S CODE OF LAW 


This page intentionally left blank 


Introduction 


The pre-eminent position of the Mdnava Dharmasastra (MDh) among the ancient 
Indian treatises on dharma was clearly established by the 5th century CE and pos- 
sibly as early as the 3rd. Compliments are most meaningful when they are given by 
one’s peers. Sometime toward the middle of the first millennium, Brhaspati, one of 
Manu’s successors and himself a composer of a Dharmasdastra, pays Manu the ulti- 
mate compliment: Manu is the authority, and any text contradicting Manu has no 
validity.! A couple of centuries earlier, Vatsyayana, the author of the Kamasitra 
(1.1.5-10), refers to the origin of the MDh in words reminiscent of the first chapter 
of the MDh. And Yajfiavalkya (1.4), another author of an early Dharmasdstra, 
places Manu at the head of his list of the authors of Dharmasastras. 

The fame of Manu did not diminish through the next fifteen centuries right up 
to the time when the administration of law was taken over by the colonial power 
Britain. More commentaries—nine are extant—were written on the MDh than on 
any other Dharmasastra. Even though in some areas of dharma—legal procedure 
(vyavahara), for example—other texts, such as those of Narada and Katyayana, be- 
came prominent, the MDh nevertheless remained pre-eminent throughout the long 
and distinguished history of Dharmasastric literature during the Middle Ages. I had 
to examine closely several prominent texts for citations from the MDh for this criti- 
cal edition. It is clear that the MDh is by far the most cited Dharmasastric text in the 
medieval Nibandhas. 

The fame of Manu, however, had spread outside of India long before the arri- 
val of the British. The first king in the Buddhist myth of origins codified in the 
Aggafiiasutta’ is called Mahasammata. The figure of this first king becomes identi- 
fied with that of Manu in the Buddhist countries of Southeast Asia, especially 
Burma and Thailand, where the Buddhistic law codes are ascribed to Manu.? 

It is no surprise, then, that the first text on dharma that Sir William Jones, the 
great pioneer of Sanskrit studies, chose to translate into English in 1794 was the 
MDh. Its translation opened for the first time the world of non-European law and 
religion to a western audience. Georg Biihler’s translation and study, which has re- 
mained the standard for over a century, appeared in the famous Oxford University 


1. See below, pp. 69. 

2. For a detailed study of this myth, see Steven Collins, “The Discourse on What is Pri- 
mary,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 21(1993): 301-93. 

3. For discussions of this issue, see Lingat 1973, 266-72; Steven Collins and Andrew 
Huxley, “The Post-Canonical Adventures of Mahasammata,” Journal of Indian Philosophy 
24(1996): 624-48; Steven Collins, “The Lion’s Roar on the Wheel-turning King: A Response 
to Andrew Huxley’s ‘The Buddha and the Social Contract’,” /bid., 422-46. 


3 


4 Introduction 


Press series, Sacred Books of the East, edited by Max Miiller, in 1886. With the es- 
tablishment of Indo-European linguistics and the discovery of the Sanskrit of the 
Vedas as one of the earliest extant members of the family of languages to which 
Greek, Latin, and most modern European languages belonged, there was excitement 
even among non-Indologists about the cultural heritage of ancient India. During the 
critical 19th century, which set the agenda for much of scholarship on ancient India, 
the MDh was for better or for worse the lens through which most European scholars 
viewed India’s past. Nietzsche, for example, regarded the MDh as a life-affirming 
representation of the Aryan religion, in contrast to the nay-saying Buddhism.‘ Pas- 
sages from this text are found in every collection of readings given to students of 
Indian culture, history, or religion in western universities. 

Fame invites controversy, and in India itself during the 20th century Manu be- 
came a lightning rod for both the conservative elements of the Hindu tradition and 
the liberal movements intent on alleviating the plight of women and low-caste and 
outcaste individuals. For the latter, Manu became the symbol of oppression. His 
verses were cited as the source of legitimation for such oppression, even though the 
same or similar passages are found in other and older documents. The first confer- 
ence by untouchables at Yeola under the leadership of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar in 1935, 
in which it was resolved to reject Hinduism, passed a resolution with the title “To 
the Untouchable Community: A New Message of a New Manu.” Within a month a 
group of young untouchable men gathered in Nasik to burn a copy of Manu cere- 
monially.° Even the prominent women’s rights advocate, Madhu Kishwar, had to do 
battle with Manu.® Kishwar refers to the burning of copies of the MDh in the pre- 
cincts of the Rajasthan High Court on March 25, 2000, and observes: “The 
protesters believed that the ancient text is the defining document of Brahmanical 
Hinduism, and also the key source of gender and caste oppression in India.” 

In spite of all the attention, including burning, that the MDh has received over 
the past two centuries, the study of the text itself has been neglected. More heat, lit- 
eral and metaphorical, has been generated than light. Until now, even a close ex- 
amination of the numerous extant manuscripts of this work, manuscripts written in 
nine scripts and spread all over the Indian subcontinent, has not been undertaken. 
Without taking any position about the social value of the MDA, I would hope that 
we would take the trouble to read the text with the attention it deserves before we 
praise, condemn, or burn it. I also hope that this translation and study will be of 
some help in understanding this controversial but important document from India’s 
past. 


4. For a fine examination of the influence of India and the MDh on thinkers such as 
Schegel, Schopenhauer, Hegel, Nietzsche, and others, see Wilhelm Halbfass, India and 
Europe: An Essay in Understanding, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1988. 

5. See Eleanor Zelliot, “The Psychological Dimension of the Buddhist Movement in 
India,” in Religion in South Asia: Religious Conversion and Revival Movements in South Asia 
in Medieval and Modern Times, ed. G. A. Oddie, pp. 119-44 (Columbia, Missouri: South 
Asia Books, 1977). The burning of the MDh was advocated also by other reform activists, 
such as E. V. Ramasami: see M. R. Barnett, The Politics of Cultural Nationalism in South 
India (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976), p. 37. 

6. “Manu and the Brits,” Hinduism Today, January—February 2001, pp. 56-59. 


Introduction 5 
]. AUTHORSHIP AND COMPOSITION 


Scholars traditionally have regarded the composition of the MDh as a gradual proc- 
ess at the hands of anonymous and successive compilers, editors, and copyists last- 
ing for several centuries, the same sort of agentless process that many have thought 
lies behind the composition of the great epic Mahabharata. These compilers and 
editors, we are told, did nothing more than gather together proverbial sayings, moral 
maxims, and legal axioms that were floating in the mouths of people and handed 
down from generation to generation. The composition of the text is thus divorced 
from authorial intent and agency and from social, political, and economic context. 
The first to propose such a hypothesis was E. Washburn Hopkins (1885, 268): 


I draw the conclusion that the Castram [MDh] was in great part collated 
between the time when the bulk of the epic [MBh] was composed and its 
final completion, that previous to its collation there had existed a vast 
number of sententious remarks, proverbial wisdom, rules of morality 
etc. which were ascribed, not to this treatise of Manu at all, but to the 
ancient hero Manu as a type of godly wisdom. These I conceive to have 
floated about in the mouths of the people, not brought together but all 
loosely quoted as laws or saying of Manu and these sayings were after- 
wards welded into one with the laws of a particular text [sect?] called 
the Manavas—a union natural enough, as the two bodies of law would 
then bear the same title, although the sect had no connection with Manu 
except in name... . According to my theory, these Manu-verses found 
in the Manava treatise were simply caught up and drawn from the hear- 
say of the whole Brahman world, keeping their form after incorporation 
with the Manavas’ text. 


In the introduction to his influential translation of the MDh, Btihler agreed 
substantially with the hypothesis of Hopkins. Biihler (1886, xc) thought that the 
composers of both the MDh and the Mahabharata drew on a common stock of 
Spruchweisheit that, at the hands of the teachers of specialized schools, had spread 
to all legal topics. Modern scholarship by and large has accepted this view regarding 
the creation of the MDA, as well as of other ancient legal documents. Lariviere 
(2003, 3) expressed this widely shared view: “I doubt whether such texts as the 
Naradasmrti or the Manusmrti were composed by a single individual.” Hiltebeitel 
(2001, 5) cites Gitomer’s view regarding the composition of the Mahabharata, a 
view that is common with regard to ancient Indian textual formation in general: 
“epic textual growth and redaction proceeded in an unconscious, mechanical 
fashion.” 

I want to challenge this view regarding the composition of ancient texts in 
general and of the MDA in particular. This vision of composition in the case of the 
Mahabharata has recently been rejected, rightly I believe, by several leading epic 


7. David Gitomer, “King Duryodhana: The Mahabharata Discourse of Sinning and 
Virtue in Epic and Drama,” JAOS 112 (1992): 225. 


6 Introduction 


scholars.® That there were proverbs and legal maxims, principally composed in 
Sloka verses, outside of fixed texts is beyond doubt. Indeed, it is probably such verse 
maxims that are cited by the authors of Dharmasitras to support their judgments 
rendered in aphoristic prose, often with the introductory remark: athapy udaharanti 
— “Now they also quote.” The term uddharanti probably means that these verses 
were recited by experts when questions about some point arose or when circum- 
stances warranted.? It would have been natural for authors of texts in almost any 
field, but most especially those, such as the Dharmasastras, dealing with morality 
and human relationships, to draw upon these maxims. Indeed, the example of the 
Dharmasitras indicates that they clearly did so. These verse maxims, however, are 
easily detectable in the Dharmasiitras, because they are surrounded by the author’s 
own prose. In the metrical SGstras it is more difficult to separate the cited maxims 
from the author’s own composition. Let me offer a couple of examples of such 
maxims in the MDh: “When an older person comes near, the life breaths of a young- 
er person rise up, and as he rises up and greets him, he retrieves them” (2.120). This 
must have been a proverbial saying concerning respect for older persons; it is cited 
by Patafijali and given twice in the Mahabharata." The verse at MDh 4.57 is like- 
wise clearly a proverbial saying about inappropriate actions: “He must not sleep 
alone in an abandoned house, awaken a sleeping superior, speak with a menstruat- 
ing woman, or go to a sacrifice uninvited.”!! 

The authors of legal treatises clearly drew upon such maxims—and, indeed, 
on previous scholarship—in composing their texts. My point, however, is that the 
composition of these texts did not happen as an unconscious and gradual accumula- 
tion at different hands and at different times and places; these texts were authored 
by individuals with clear authorial intent. They gave their texts a particular struc- 
ture; they argued for particular positions in law and morality; they disagreed with 
other experts, both their contemporaries and their predecessors; and they had par- 
ticular social, economic, and political axes to grind. In all this they are not much 
different from modern authors. 

The unitary authorship of the MDh was proposed over a century ago by 
Biihler (1886, xcii), who answered the objections of the proponents of a gradual 


8. See Alf Hiltebeitel, Rethinking the Mahabharata: A Reader’ s Guide to the Education 
of the Dharma King (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001); Madeleine Biardeau, cited 
by Hiltebeitel, p. 165 (“I prefer to suppose the creation of a sole Brahman of genius”). James 
Fitzgerald offers a more complicated compositional history, with a final Gupta redaction (see 
Hiltebeitel 2001, 25-6). 

9. Indeed, as one of my students, David Brick, has pointed out, the term smtiin its earli- 
est usage may have referred precisely to such memorable maxims to which attention (ssti) is 
drawn in particular circumstances and which, of course, reside in the collective memory of 
the community at large or, in the case of law or grammar, in the memory of a community of 
experts. The citation of a maxim (”ydya), now mostly in prose, is also a feature of later me- 
dieval texts. For a collection such maxims, see Appendix E of V. S. Apte’s The Practical 
Sanskrit-English Dictionary. 

10. Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya on Panini 6.1.84 (Kielhorn, II: 58); MBh 5.38.1; 13.107.32. 
Especially in the case of Patafijali, it is more likely that he would cite a well-known saying to 
illustrate a grammatical rule than a verse from a specialized text. 

11. For a historical analysis of this verse and its vedic precedents, see Jamison 2000. 


Introduction 7 


textual evolution, objections based on such criteria as the contradictions in the ex- 
tant text. My argument for the unitary authorship of the MDh is based primarily on 
the structure of the text, a structure that has thus far gone unnoticed, perhaps be- 
cause it was obscured by the chapter divisions to which the text was subjected, 
probably at the hand of a redactor, after its initial composition. I do not propose that 
the original text of the author, whom I will call “Manu” for convenience, has re- 
mained unaltered through the ages. Through a form of higher textual criticism, I will 
propose that certain sections are later additions (see part IID reflecting ongoing re- 
dactoral activities. Indeed, when these additions are removed, the structure ] have 
uncovered becomes more transparent. My argument, then, is that such a unique and 
symmetrical structure could not have been given to this text except by a conscious 
plan created by a single gifted individual. A deep structure that runs through the en- 
tire book-—a structure that is not apparent at first glance and that remained unde- 
tected even by the commentators—could not have simply happened over time as the 
text was being put together by different individuals separated by centuries. If not by 
an individual, then it must have been composed by a “strong chairman of a com- 
mittee” with the help of research assistants who carried out his plan. 


I.1 The Structure 


The manuscript tradition of the MDh divides the text into 12 adhydyas (lessons or 
chapters). This appears to be an old division; it is followed by all the commentators. 
I believe, however, that this division is not original. It was probably imposed on the 
text when it was subjected to a revision that added several sections (see part IID, 
most notably the table of contents given at the conclusion of the first chapter.'* Al- 
though several of the chapters follow the natural sequence of topics, a close reading 
of the text shows that they are artificial divisions. The chapters also contain different 
topics that the author, as I will demonstrate, intended to be separate: ch. 2 contains 
the sources of dharma, rites of passage, and the duties of a student; the duties of a 
king are spread over chapters 7, 8, and 9; the single topic of judicial procedure and 
the grounds for litigation is spread over chapters 8 and 9; and ch. 9 contains the 
final discussion of the king’s dharma and the dharma of Vaisyas and Stidras. More 
importantly, however, the division into chapters obscures the latent and deeper 
structure of the text, a structure that spans the entire corpus and must go back to the 
author himself. 

Manu uses the technique of “transitional verse” to mark the conclusion of one 
subject and the beginning of another. Here is an example (2.25): 


esa dharmasya vo yonih samasena prakirtitd | 

sambhavas casya sarvasya varnadharman nibodhata \i 
I have described to you above succinctly this source of the Law, as also 
the origin of this whole world. Learn now the Laws of the social classes. 


12. Note the parallel imposition of chapters onto the Arthasastra discussed by Scharfe 
1993. 


8 Introduction 


This verse marks the transition from the two introductory topics, creation of the 
world and the sources of dharma, to the main body of the text, the dharma of the 
four varnas. Such a technique is unique to Manu; it is not used in the Dharmasitras 
and sparingly, if at all, in the later Dharmasastras. Note also the use of the verb 
nibodhata in most transitional verses; this manner of expression becomes a signa- 
ture of Manu. This device was, I believe, an innovation conceived by Manu and 
provides an insight into the plan he had for his book. By following the trail of these 
transitional verses, we can uncover the overall plan and structure of the MDh. The 
chart below presents schematically the structure that emerges through this method 
together with the transitional verses at the beginning and/or end of topics, verses 
that provide the clues to uncovering that structure. 

The structure that emerges from tracing the transitional verses consists of four 
major divisions of uneven length and importance: 

1) Creation of the world. 

2) Sources of dharma. 

3) The dharma of the four social classes. 

4) Law of karma, rebirth, and final liberation. 
Obviously, the main section in terms of both length and importance is the third, 
dealing with the four varnas. The other three are presented as a preamble, an intro- 
duction, and a concluding postscript. The preamble and the introduction are men- 
tioned at the end of the second section (2.25) in the transitional verse that also 
introduces the central third section on the four varnas. The third section is men- 
tioned also at its conclusion (12.1) in the transitional verse that also introduces the 
final section on karma." 

The central third section has two major sub-divisions, the first called 
dharmavidhi (rule relating to dharma) and the second called prdyascittavidhi (rules 
relating to penance). These two sections—3.1 and 3.2 in the chart—are mentioned 
only once, at the conclusion of the first of them (10.131): “I have described above 
the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law of the four classes. Next, I will explain 
the splendid rules pertaining to penance.” !4 

The first subsection (3.1) called dharmavidhi is the longest in the entire book 
and is further subdivided into two: rules of action in normal times (ana@padi karma- 
vidhih) and rules of action in times of adversity (@padi karmavidhi). These two sub- 
divisions—3.1.1 and 3.1.2 in the chart—are also introduced just once in the 
transitional verse at the conclusions of the first of them (9.336): “I have described 
above the splendid rules of action for the social classes outside times of adversity. 
Listen now to the rules for them in the proper order for times of adversity.” 


13. After the final section, there is a transitional verse (12.107) that introduces the secret 
doctrine of Manu’s treatise. I think this verse as well as the section on the secret doctrine is a 
later addition: see below part III, chapter 12. 

14. Manu may have found a precedent for this division of the book in one of his primary 
sources, the Gautama Dharmasitra, Gautama (19.1) begins his section on penance with the 
statement that he has completed his discussion of the varnas: “The Law pertaining to the so- 
cial classes and the Law pertaining to the orders of life has been stated” (ukto varnadharmas 
casramadharmas ca). 


Introduction 9 


THE STRUCTURE OF MANU 


1) SARVASYA SAMBHAVAH [Origin of the World] 1.1-119 
2) DHARMASYA YONIH [Sources of Dharma] 2.1-24 
esd dharmasya vo yonih samdsena prakirtita | 
sambhavas cdsya sarvasya varnadharmdn nibodhata \l_ 2.25 
Ihave described to you above succinctly this source of the Law, as also the origin of this whole 
world. Learn now the Laws of the social classes. 


3) CATURVARNYASYA DHARMAH [Dharma of the Four Varnas] 2.25—11.266 
3.1) DHARMAVIDHIH [Rules Relating to Dharma] 2.25—10.131 


3.1.1) Anapadi Karmavidhih [Rules of Action in Normal Times] 2.26—9.336 
3.1.1.1) Brahmanasya Caturvidhah Dharmah [Fourfold Dharma of a Brahmin] 2.26—6.97 
esa vo ‘bhihito dharmo brahmanasya caturvidhah | 
punyo ‘ksayaphalah pretya rajidm dharmam nibodhata | 6.97 
I have explained to you above the fourfold Law of Brahmins, a Law that is holy and 
brings imperishable rewards after death. Listen now to the Law of kings. 
3.1.1.2) Rajfiah Karmavidhih [Rules of Action for King] 7.1 — 9325 
eso ‘khilah karmavidhir ukto rdjfiah sandtanah | 
imam karmavidhim vidyat kramaSo vaiSyastidrayoh \\ 9.325 
I have described above in its entirety the eternal rules of action for the king. What 
follows, one should understand, are the rules of action for the Vaisya and the Sidra in 
their proper order. 
3.1.1.3) Vaigya-Siidrayoh Karmavidhih [Rules of Action for Vaisyas & Siidras]9.326-36 
eso ‘ndpadi varndnam uktah karmavidhih Subhah | 
Gpady api hi yas tesam kramasas tan nibodhata Wl 9.336 
I have described above the splendid rules of action for the social classes outside times of 
adversity. Listen now to the rules for them in the proper order for times of adversity. 


3.1.2) Apadi Karmavidhih [Rules of Action in Times of Adversity] 10.1-129 
esa dharmavidhih krtsnas cdturvarnyasya kirtitah | 
atah param pravaksyami prayascittavidhim Subham \| 10.131 
T have described above the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law of the four classes, Next, I will 
explain the splendid rules pertaining to penance. 
3.2) PRAYASCITTAVIDHIH [Rule Relating to Penance] 111-265 


caturvarnyasya krtsno’ yam ukto dharmas tvaydnagha | 

karmanam phalanirvrttim Samsa nas tattvatah param \| 12.1 

You have described this Law for the four classes in its entirety, O Sinless One! Teach us accurately 
the ultimate consummation of the fruits of actions. 


4) KARMAYOGASYA NIRNAYAH [Determination of Karmayoga] 12.3116 
sa tan uvaca dharmatmd maharsin manavo bhrguh | 
asya sarvasya Srnuta karmayogasya nirnayam | 12.2 
Bhrgu, the son of Manu and the very embodiment of the Law, said to those great seers: “Listen to the 
determination with respect to engagement in action.” 


4.1) KARMANAM PHALODAYAH [Fruits of Action] 12.3-81 
esa sarvah samuddistah karmandm vah phalodayah | 
nathSreyasam karmavidhim viprasyedam nibodhata \\ 12.82 
T have declared to you above all the fruits arising from actions. Listen now to these rules of 
action for a Brahmin, rules that secure the supreme good. 


4.2) NAIHSREYASAH KARMAVIDHIH [Rules of Action for Supreme Good] 12.83-115 
etad vo ‘bhihitam sarvam nihSreyasakaram param | 
asmad apracyuto viprah prapnoti paramdm gatim \| 12.116 
I have explained to you above all the best means of securing the supreme good. A Brahmin 
who does not deviate from them obtains the highest state. 


10 Introduction 


There is a fourth level of division in section 3.1.1 on rules for normal times. 
This section has three further sub-sections. The first—3.1.1.1 in the chart—is called 
brahmanasya caturvidhah dharmah (“The Fourfold Dharma of a Brahmin’) and its 
conclusion (6.97) also introduces the next subsection—3.1.1.2 in the chart—dealing 
with the king: “I have explained to you above the fourfold Law of Brahmins. . . . 
Listen now to the Law of kings.” The third subdivision—3.1.1.3 in the chart—deals 
with the remaining two varnas, the Vaisya and the Siidra; it is introduced at the con- 
clusion of the section on kings (9.325): “I have described . . . the eternal rules of ac- 
tion for the king. What follows . . . are the rules of action for the Vaisya and the 
Siidra.” 

The final postscript dealing with karma, rebirth, and liberation, which is in- 
troduced in 12.1, also has two subdivisions: the first (12.3-82) is on the fruits of ac- 
tions (karmandam phalodayah) and the second (12.83-115) is on achieving the 
highest bliss (naihSreyasah karmavidhih). These two are introduced in the transi- 
tional verse at the end of the first subsection (12.82): “I have declared to you above 
all the fruits arising from actions. Listen now to these rules of action for a Brahmin, 
rules that secure the supreme good.” 

An objection may perhaps be raised to my analysis, because the transitional 
verses I have identified above are not the only verses that introduce a topic. This is 
no doubt true, but all such verses simply signal the passage to a new topic within the 
broad structure I have outlined. In these verses, Manu does not say that he has fin- 
ished one topic and is about to begin another; rather, with a few exceptions I will 
consider below, they simply indicate the new topic. Here is an example (2.89): 

ekadaSendriydny Ghur yani pirve manisinah | 
tani samtyak pravaksydmi yathdvad anupirvasah | 

I will explain precisely and in their proper order the eleven organs 

described by wise men of old. 


This is part of a long list that uses the word pravaksydmi to introduce a new topic." 
There are other verses using this term that both introduce a new topic and mark the 
end of the previous topic, in a manner similar to the transitional verses I have listed 
within the structure. In each of these cases, however, the topics are not broad themes 
but specific sub-themes within the structure I have identified. Verse 5.26 is an ex- 
ample: 
etad uktam dvijatinam bhaksyabhaksyam aSesatah | 
mamsasydtah pravaksyami vidhim bhaksanavarjane \\ 
I have described above completely what foods are forbidden and what 
permitted to the twice-born. I will now explain the rule on eating and on 
avoiding meat. 


Here the author introduces the minor topic of meat-eating after his long dis- 
quisition on permitted and forbidden foods. Most such verses occur in the long sec- 
tion dealing with the eighteen grounds for litigation (vyavaharapada). At 8.214 the 


15. Variants of the verb include vaksyami and sampravaksyami. These introductory 
verses are found at: 2.89; 3.22; 3.124, 169, 266 5.57; 7.1, 36 8.61, 119, 131, 229;9.1; 10.25; 
11.211; 12.30, 39. 


Introduction 11 


passage is from the non-delivery of gifts to the non-payment of wages; at 8.218, 
from the non-payment of wages to breach of contract; at 8.266, from boundary dis- 
putes to verbal assault; at 8.278, from verbal assault to physical assault; and at 
8.301, from physical assault to theft. In the section on inheritance, at 9.56 there is a 
transition from the discussion of the relative importance of the seed (man) and the 
womb (woman) in procreation to the dharma of women in a time of adversity. At 
11.99 there is a transition from penances for drinking liquor to those for stealing 
gold. 

There is another group of verses that uses the verb nibodhata, the verb of 
choice in the transitional verses within the structure I have identified. Beyond such 
transitional verses, however, Manu uses verses with this verb to mark the passage 
from one minor topic to another. Thus at 2.68 the transition is from the rite of vedic 
initiation to the duties of an initiated student; at 5.100, from the purification follow- 
ing a death for those of the same ancestry (sapinda) to the purification for other in- 
dividuals (asapinda); at 5.146 from purification to the dharma of women; at 6.86, 
from ascetics (yati) to holy retirees (vedasamnydsika); at 9.25, from the duties of 
husband and wife to a discussion of children; at 9.103, from the duties of husband 
and wife to partition of inheritance; at 9.148, from partition among children by 
wives of the same caste to that among children by wives of different castes; at 
9.220, from partition of inheritance to gambling, the last ground for litigation; at 
11.71, from the list of sins to the penances for their expiation; at 11.248, from 
penances for public sins to those for secret sins.'© The verb \sru is used a few times 
in introductory verses: at 3.286 the transition is from the five sacrifices to the 
livelihood of Brahmins; at 5.110, from bodily purification to purification of articles; 
and at 11.180, from penances for sinners to penances for those who associate with 
them. 

Taken collectively, all these other uses of transitional verses merely indicate 
smaller subdivisions of the text. They uniformly refer only to the topics dealt with 
just before and just after the verse. With regard to such transitions Manu is not con- 
sistent in his use of verses; sometimes he uses them, but most often he does not. 
Such usages, however, do not impinge on the broad structure I have outlined above. 
Those verses stand out from the rest both because of their consistency and because 
they refer back not to the topic immediately preceding them but often to a broad 
theme introduced hundreds of verses before. In the case of the duties of the king, for 
example, introduced at 6.97 and concluded at 9.325 there are 960 verses that inter- 
vene; and in the largest section within the text, the dharma of the four varnas, there 
are 2415 verses between its introduction at 2.25 and its conclusion at 12.1. No text 
that grew “in an unconscious, mechanical fashion” can account for such a deliberate 
structure. 


The dharma of a Brahmin 


The largest portion of the central section on the four varnas is devoted to the four- 


16. At the following places, nibodhata simply introduces a minor topic or is an invitation 
to the audience to be attentive: 1.68, 119:2.1; 3.20, 183, 193; 9.31; 12.53. The verb Vsru is also 
used in similar contexts: 1.4, 60 


12 Introduction 


fold dharma of a Brahmin encompassing much of chapter 2 and all of chapters 3-6. 
This section is explicitly organized around the four asramas.'” All the traditional 
material, however, could not be contained within the scheme of the four G@sramas, 
especially the sections on the childhood rites of passage, rules of a bath-graduate 
(sndtaka), and holy life styles falling outside the dramas of forest hermit and wan- 
dering mendicant. Manu, however, attempts to squeeze these within his overail 
asrama structure. 

Chapter 4, on the snataka, is sandwiched between chapters 3 and 5, dealing 
with various aspects of a householder’s life. We see the difficulty Manu had with 
blending the sndtaka into the @srama framework when we look at the beginnings of 
chapters 3 and 4. chapter 3 begins quite naturally with the return home of a student 
who has completed his vedic studies. The author deals with the selection of a bride 
and marriage, with a long disquisition on the various kinds of marriage. Much of the 
material dealt with in chapter 3, including the sraddhas, however, is organized 
around the five great sacrifices. For Manu, what distinguishes the householder and 
what makes him the epitome of religious life is his daily commitment to the five 
great sacrifices. Then, at the beginning of chapter 4, Manu has to repeat this within 
the context of the arama system: after dwelling at the teacher’s house during the 
first part of his life, a man should return home, get married, and lead a house- 
hoider’s life during the second part. The fifth chapter is introduced with a question 
from the seers to Bhrgu about how a Brahmin could be subject to death. This opens 
the way to a discussion of permitted and forbidden foods and means of bodily puri- 
fication. The theme of the four a@ramas is taken up again at the beginning of chapter 
6: after living as a householder a man may become a hermit and live in a forest; and 
again at 6.33: after living the third part of his life as a forest hermit, he should be- 
come a wandering mendicant during the fourth and final period of his life. 

Even though this section (3.1.1.1) is explicitly said to deal with the dharma of 
Brahmins, a close examination shows that Manu is here following a practice com- 
mon in ritual texts. They describe fully the ritual procedure only for the archetypal 
rite of a group of related rites; the description of the other rites (ectypes) consists of 
pointing out only those ritual elements unique to each and different from the arche- 
type. For Manu, the dharma of Brahmins constitutes the archetype, and he describes 
it fully. Mutatis mutandis these rules are applicable to all varnas. Indeed, within this 
section itself Manu often points out how the dharma is modified for other varnas. 
For example, under initiation he points out the different times for the different 
varnas, the different ways of manufacturing the girdle, different kinds of staffs, and 
the like (2.41-7). Likewise, he enumerates the kinds of marriages and the number of 
wives permitted for the different varnas (3.13). Manu is often explicit about the ap- 
plicability of the rules in this section to all four varnas. At 5.57, for example, he says 
that the rules on purification are applicable to all four varnas. This principle of 
descriptive parsimony permits Manu to deal with the other varnas, especially 
Vaisyas and Stidras, briefly. Only the dharmas specific to them are discussed. 


17. For the history of this institution, see Olivelle 1993. 


Introduction 13 


The Rules for a King 


As I will note below (II.2), the section devoted to the king, statecraft, and law in the 
MDh is disproportionately large in comparison to Manu’s predecessors within the 
expert tradition of dharma. The disproportion becomes even more striking when we 
take into account the fact that this section deals with matters specific to the king and 
the ksatriya class, whereas the section on the Brahmin includes issues common to 
all varnas. 

A close reading of the section on the king reveals that Manu organized his 
material around a simple structure in three parts. The first part, spanning 7.1-142, 
deals with the origin of the king; the organization of the state machinery, including 
the appointment of officials; the construction of the fort; the king’s marriage; the 
conduct of foreign policy, including war; and finally taxation. It appears that 
Manu’s narrative scheme here envisages a new king occupying a virgin territory. He 
is unmarried, he has to settle the land and build a capital, and he has to organize the 
state apparatus. This structure suited Manu’s purpose well, because it enabled him 
to discuss all the points associated with statecraft. Real life, however, is quite an- 
other matter; most kings would gain a kingdom either through inheritance or con- 
quest. In either case there would be pre-existing cities, forts, and a state 
bureaucracy. 

In the second part, Manu changes his narrative scheme to span a single day, 
from the morning when the king wakes up until nightfall when he goes to bed. 
Manu squeezes into a single day the description of all the duties of a king spread 
over 182 verses. The morning routine extends from 7.145 to 7.215; the afternoon 
routine from 7.216 to 7.222; and the evening routine from 7.223 to 7.226. This part 
concludes with the king going “to bed at the proper time and rise up refreshed.” 

The third part deals with the justice system and comprises the 18 grounds for 
litigation (vyavaharapada, often translated as “Titles of Law’). After dealing briefly 
with the organization of the court, Manu arranges his material on law and the dis- 
pensation of justice under the 18 grounds for litigation, commonly called titles of 
law (8.47~9.251). The issues relating to evidence and the interrogation of witnesses 
are dealt with not separately but under the first ground for litigation, the non- 
payment of debts. This appears to have been a convention borrowed from the artha 
tradition, to which Manu is indebted for the material relating to the king (see II.2). 

Manu’s organization of the 18 vyavaharapadas is based on a few clear princi- 
ples and, I believe, is superior to the structure given to them in any other text. 
Manu’s structure is significantly different from that of the extant Arthasastra, as 
well as from the other two major Dharmasdastras, Narada and Yajiiavalkya. The 
chart below presents the organization of the vyavahdrapadas in the four texts. 

The three Dharmasastras have rndddna (“non-payment of debt”) as the first. 
This is only to be expected, because disputes regarding debts, both personal and 
commercial, must have been the most common reason for litigants to come before a 
court. It is also within the context of this first ground for litigation that these authors 
deal with judicial procedure, including rules of evidence and the examination of 
witnesses. Only the Arthasdstra departs from this practice; it begins the discussion 


14 


Manu 


1. madana: non- 
payment of debt 


2. niksepa: deposits 
3. asvamivikraya: sale 
without ownership 


4. sambhityasamutthd- 
na: partnerships 


5. dattasyanapakarma: 
non-delivery of gifts 


6. vetanddana: non- 
payment of wages 

7. samvidvyatikrama;: 
breach of contract 

8. krayavikraydnuSaya: 
cancellation of sale or 
purchase 

9. svamipdlavivdda: 
disputes between 
owners and herdsmen 

10. simavivada: 
bound-ary disputes 

11. vakpdrusya: verbal 
assault 

12. dandaparusya: 
physical assault 


13. steya: theft 
14. sdhasa: violence 


15. strisamgrahana: 
sexual crimes against 
women 

16. stripumdharma: 
law concerning 
husband and wife 


17. vibhaga: partition 


18. dyiitasamahvaya: 
gambling and betting 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 


The Organization of vyavaharapadas 


Arthasastra 


*stripumdharma 18. law 
concering husband and 
wife 

ddyavibhdga: partition 

vdstuvivdda: property 
disputes 


samayasydnapakarma: 
breach of contract 


rndddna: non-payment 
of debt 


aupanidhikam: deposits 


ddasakarmakalpa: rules 
regarding workers 

sambhityasamutthdna: 
partnerships 


vikritakritanusaya: 
cancellation of 
purchase or sale 

dattasyanapakarma: 
non-delivery of gifts 

asvamivikraya: sale 
without ownership 


sGhasa: violence 


vakparusya: verbal 
assault 
dandapdarusya: physi- 
cal assault 
dyittasamahvaya: gam- 
bling and betting 


prakirnaka: miscella- 
neous 


Yajfiavalkya 


mddana: non-payment 
of debt 


upanidhi: deposits 
dayavibhaga: partition 


simdvivada: boundary 
disputes 
svdmipdlayivada: dis- 
putes between owners 
and hersmen 
asvamivikraya: sale 
without ownership 
dattaGpraddanika: non- 
delivery of gifts 
kritd@nuSaya: cancel- 
laion of purchase 


abhyupetydsusriisa: 
breach of contract of 
service 
samvidvyatikrama: 
breach of contract 
vetandddna: non- 
payment of wages 


dyiitasamahvaya: gam- 
bling and betting 


vakparusya: verbal 
assault 


dandaparusya: physi- 
cal assualt 


sdhasa: violence 


vikriyasampraddna: 
non-delivery after sale 


sambhityasamutthana: 
partnerships 


steya: theft 


strisamgrahana: sexual 
crimes against women 
prakirnaka: miscella- 
neous 


Narada 


imddana: non-payment 
of debt 


niksepa: deposits 
sambhiiyasamutthana: 
partnerships 
dattdpradanika: non- 
delivery of gifts 
abhyupetyasusritsa: 
breach of contract of 
service 


vetanasydnapdkarma: 
non-payment of wages 
asvamivikraya: sale 
without ownership 


vikriydsam pradana: 
non-delivery after sale 


kritanusaya: cancel- 
lation of purchase 


samayasyadnapakarma: 
breach of conventions 


ksetrajavivada: land 
disputes 


siripumsaniyoga. tela- 
tions between husband 
and wife 

ddyabhaga: partition 


sdhasa: violence 


vakparusya: verbal 
assault 


dandaparusya: physi- 
cal assault 
dyittasamdhyvaya: gam- 
bling and betting 
prakirnaka: miscella- 
neous 


18. This term is not given in the Arthasastra but the topic is treated at the very outset. 


Introduction 15 


with marriage and the partition of the paternal estate. The reason for this appears to 
be stated in the opening satra: “All legal transactions begin with marriage” (vivaha- 
piirvo vyavahdrah: AS 3.2.1). The other convergence in these lists is vakparusya 
(verbal assault) and dandaparusya (physical assault), which always go together, 
with sahasa (violence) coming very close. Other than these, the order of the lists 
diverges markedly, making it clear that there was no traditionally fixed order for the 
vyavaharapadas. The order of enumeration in the MDh, therefore, was probably the 
creation of Manu himself, and we get a glimpse into his systematic way of thinking 
also in his arrangement of these topics. His arrangement, I think, is far superior to 
and more systematic than any of the others and can be presented schematically: 

A. Individual and group disputes (= 1-10) 

B. — Criminal law (= 11-15) 

C. Personal law (= 16-17) 

D. Public order and safety (= 18) 

Manu begins with disputes between individuals and between groups. Such 
disputes must have been the most common reason for litigation and cover the first 
ten grounds. The first nine for the most part deal with individual disputes, with the 
possible exception of the fourth, on partnerships, where the dispute is between an 
individual and a partnership of which he is a member. Likewise, disputes in the 
seventh, on breach of contract, may happen between individuals and between an 
individual and a corporate body. Disputes over boundaries—the tenth— can happen 
between individual land owners, but the typical dispute discussed by Manu concerns 
boundaries between villages. 

The next category is criminal law, involving verbal and physical assault, theft, 
robbery/violence, and sexual crimes. Unlike in modern law, however, lawsuits for 
such crimes were not initiated by the state but by the injured parties. 

The third category is personal or family law. The first ground for litigation 
under this rubric is disputes between a husband and a wife, although much of what 
is discussed relates to laws and conventions governing marital relationships. The 
second and clearly the more significant is the partition of inheritance. It is in these 
two topics that there is often an overlap with material covered under marriage, espe- 
cially in chapter 5. This was probably inevitable when the dharma tradition incorpo- 
rated strictly legal matters and, therefore, had to deal with marriage and family in 
two places, under proper conduct (@cara) and law (vyavahdara). 

The final category is gambling and betting. One would have expected Manu to 
present rules for the orderly conduct of these practices, as is done in other texts.!9 
Manu, however, was strictly opposed to gambling and betting. For him, these areas 
of social practice should be suppressed rather than regulated. It is, therefore, natural 
for him to follow his brief discussion of gambling with the important topic of the 
“eradication of thorns” (kantakasodhana), that is, the suppression of criminal ac- 
tivities, especially theft, in the kingdom. This is a topic found in all artha and 
dharma texts, but it falls outside the grounds for litigation. Litigation, according to 
ancient Indian jurisprudence, is initiated by private individuals; the king and his 
officials are explicitly barred from initiating law suits. The eradication of thorns, on 


19. See, for example the A pastamba Dharmasittra, 2.2512—4. 


16 Introduction 


the other hand, is one of the principal duties of a king; it is a police activity and falls 
outside the judicial process. Nevertheless, Manu sees the eradication of thorns and 
the suppression of gambling as part of the same administrative process. 

The section on the duties of the king concludes with this pithy statement typi- 
cal of Manu (9.324): “Conducting himself in this manner and always devoted to the 
Laws pertaining to kings, the king should direct all his servants to work for the good 
of his people.” 


The Rules for Vaisyas and Siidras 


Manu’s discussion of Vaisyas and Siidras, the last two of the varnas, is extraordi- 
narily brief. Eight verses are devoted to the VaiSya and just two to the Sidra. Even 
granting that, according to the ritual principle of parsimony I have discussed earlier, 
much of the material for these two classes was included in the discussion of the 
Brahmin, one would have expected something more than just ten verses. 

The reason for this brevity is unclear, but I think it must be understood within 
the context of the socio-political motives behind Manu’s composition, an issue | 
will address later (1.4). Simply put, Manu’s interest lay not in the lower classes of 
society, which he considered to be an ever-present threat to the dominance of the 
upper classes, but in the interaction between the political power and Brahmanical 
priestly interests, interests that were under constant threat ranging from the ASokan 
imperial polity to the foreign invasions around the turn of the millennium. 


On Sin and Penance 


The methodical approach demonstrated in the sections on Brahmin and king is evi- 
dent also in the chapter on sin and penance (prdyascitta).* Manu begins the topic 
with a discussion on the efficacy of penance, on whether penance can actually re- 
move sins. After justifying the efficacy of and the need for penance, he divides his 
inquiry into two sections: public sins (11.55-189), which occupy much of the discus- 
sion, and private or secret sins (11.227). 

Manu first presents the major classifications of sins: 1) the five grievous sins 
that cause the loss of caste (mahdpdataka: 11.55-9); 2) a large group of secondary 
sins that also cause the loss of caste called upapdataka: (11.60—7); and 3) four further 
classes of sins (11.68~-71) that cause a man a) to be excluded from caste 
(jatibhramsakara), b) to become mixed caste (samkirnakara), c) to be unworthy of 
receiving gifts (apatrikarana), and d) to be impure (malavaha). He concludes the 
classification of sins with this transitional verse: “Listen now attentively to the spe- 
cific penances by which all these sins individually enumerated above may be re- 
moved” (11.72). 

Manu then goes on to discuss the appropriate penances for each of the catego- 
ries of sins: 1) the first four of the grievous sins (11.73-108), 2) secondary sins 
(11.109-24), and 3) the four further classes of sins (11.125-6). Finally, he turns from 


20. There are, of course, some inconsistencies and extraneous material in this chapter. I 
will deal with them later in part IH. 


Introduction 17 


sins personally committed to association with sinners who have become outcastes as 
a result of their sins, a category that forms the fifth grievous sin (11.181-90). Manu 
introduces the last discussion with the transitional verse: “I have described above 
the expiation for all four kinds of sinners. Listen now to the following expiations for 
those who associate with outcastes” (11.180). The mention of the four kinds of sin- 
ners has caused some confusion. Grievous and secondary sins make two. The third 
category consists of four sins, but the penances for the four are dealt with in two 
verses. I think Manu viewed the first ((a@tibhramSakara) as one class and presented 
the penances for it in a single verse (11.125). He appears to have viewed the other 
three as forming a single class, dealing with their penances in a single verse (11.126). 
So, we have four categories of penances relating to the sins listed previously. The 
attempt to come up with four sinners as indicated in verse 11.180 may have led a 
redactor to insert the four offenses listed in 11.127~79. | will deal with these 
interpolations more extensively below (IID. 

The discussion of penance for publicly known sins concludes with two crisp 
statements. First: “No one should transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and 
under no circumstances should anyone abhor those who have been cleansed” 
(11.190). There follows an excursus containing miscellaneous items on sins and pe- 
nances, which is clearly an interpolation. Manu concludes the section on penances 
for public sins with the transitional verse (227), which also gives the penances for 
private sins: “By these observances should twice-born persons cleanse themselves 
of public sins; they may cleanse themselves of secret sins, however, through ritual 
formulas and burnt offerings.” 

When we take out the accretions in this chapter, the clear and impressive 
structure of the original composition emerges. That this section on penance con- 
cludes the central portion of the treatise dealing with the dharma of the four 
yvarnas——number 3 in the structure I have outlined above—is evident in the opening 
verse of the last chapter: “You have described this Law for the four classes in its 
entirety, O Sinless One! Teach us accurately the ultimate consummation of the fruits 
of actions” (12.1). 


On karma 


Chapter 12, dealing with actions and their consequences, as well as with the attain- 
ment of ultimate happiness beyond the realm of rebirth, is quite different in style 
and substance from the rest of the book. I am not willing to call this chapter a later 
addition; sufficient evidence does not exist to draw that conclusion. The entire 
chapter is taken up with the theme of action (karma), both the consequences of good 
and bad actions (karmavipdka) and the final triumph over action and the attainment 
of the supreme good beyond the process of rebirth. Broadly this discussion falls into 
two sections, the one dealing with the fruits of action (12.3-81) and the other dealing 
with actions leading to the supreme good (12.83-106). These two sections are di- 
vided by Manu’s signature transitional verse (12.82): 


esa sarvah samuddistah karmanam vah phalodayah | 
naihsreyasakaram karma viprasyedam nibodhata \\ 


18 Introduction 


I have declared to you above the fruits arising from actions. Listen now 
to these rules of action for a Brahmin, rules that secure the supreme 
good. 


This chapter has also undergone redactorial interventions, which I will address be- 
low in the section on the work of redactors (see III). 


1.2 Author, Title, and Date 


Most modern scholars know the work of Manu under the title Manu Smrti. In the 
introduction to his influential translation, Biihler uniformly uses the title Manu- 
smyti. The term smyti is often used by scholars as a general term to cover all the 
Dharmasdastras composed in verse, which are called “metrical smtis.” “Manusmrti” 
is the term used also by Kane (1962-75) in his encyclopedic work on Dharmasastra, 
by Lingat (1973), and by Dave (1972-84). The exceptions are the editions of 
Mandlik (1886) and Jolly (1887), both of whom give the title as Mdnava- 
Dharmasastra. 

It is unclear when the word smiti came to be used to designate Dharmasastras 
composed in verse and in particular the MDh.?! In the manuscripts, the colophons at 
the end of each chapter and at the end of the entire work refer to it as 
mdnavadharmasastra. The title of sastra is confirmed by the self-references found 
in the MDA, which repeatedly calls itself sastra.” It is, therefore, clear that the 
original title of the work, the title by which it was known to the manuscript tra- 
dition, was mdnavadharmasastra. The title manusmrti appears to have been a rather 
late innovation. 

The colophon at the end of each chapter reads: mdnave dharmasastre 
bhrguproktayam samhitayam, that is, the Dharmasastra of Manu as arranged or 
compiled by Bhrgu. The use of the term sanzhitd is clearly intentional and connects 
the MDh to the sanmhitas of the Veda. It also hints at the possibility that there may 
be other samhitds of Manu’s work than that of Bhrgu.? 

The MDh (1.58) presents a textual history of itself, ascribing the original trea- 
tise to the creator, the Imperishable One (avyaya, 1.57) and the Self-existent 
(svayambhi, 1.3, 6). According to the MDh, the creator taught this treatise to his 
son, Manu, and he in turn taught it to his pupils, including Bhrgu. It is Bhrgu who 
becomes the spokesman and recites the treatise to the gathered seers. The view that 
the creator should have produced a text for the governance of his creatures is found 
also in other texts. In the Mahabharata, Bhisma recounts the beginning of the 
world, the Krta age, when everything was perfect and laws were unnecessary. When 


21. Medieval authors who cite the MDh and other DharmasSastras are of little help, be- 
cause they simply say “manuh” or “ydjitavalkyah.” The earliest datable use of the term 
manusmuyti that I find in the manuscripts is in the colophon of the ms. NNg dated 1503 CE. 

22. See 1.58, 59, 102, 104, 118, 119; 11.243; 12.107, 126. 

23. The significance of Bhrgu in the formation of the Mahabharata has received consid- 
erable attention both from Sukthankar, the chief editor of its critical edition, and a series of 
subsequent scholars. For an overview, see Hiltebeitel 2001, 105-18. 


Introduction 19 


things began to deteriorate, however, the creator composed a treatise in one thou- 
sand chapters dealing with the three areas of human enterprise (¢rivarga), including 
dharma (12.59.29). 

Later tradition picks up on the theme of sanrhitd in the sense of editions of the 
original text of Manu. At the very beginning of the Ndradasmirti, it is said that Manu 
Prajapati created a text containing 1080 chapters and 100,000 verses. Narada 
abridged it to 12,000 verses; the latter was further abridged by Markandeya, which 
was further condensed by Sumati Bhargava to 4,000 verses.» The tradition that the 
original composition of Manu was subjected to repeated editorial revisions and 
abridgments appears to have been old. Medhatithi, the 9th-century commentator on 
the MDh (on 1.58), refers to Narada’s statement that the original composition in 
100,000 verses of Prajapati, the creator, was abridged by Manu and others. The 
Skandapurana has preserved the tradition that there are four versions of the original 
treatise, those edited by Bhrgu, Narada, Brhaspati, and Angiras.* 

My own close examination of the MDh and its exquisite structure makes me 
agree with Biihler (886, xcii) that the text we have under the title 
Manavadharmasastra ascribed to Bhrgu is not an edition or version of a preexisting 
text but an original composition. I further believe that this text was authored by a 
single individual or at least by a strong chairman with a committee of research as- 
sistants. The kind of deep structure, so subtle yet so clear, that I have discovered in 
the MDh makes it impossible to have been composed either through unconscious 
accumulation or through a series of editorial interventions spanning long intervals of 
time. It was conceived and put together by a single individual with extraordinary 
ability and a systematic mind. 

The eponym “Manu,” of course, is not the name of the historical author of this 
text. The name, however, was an astute choice. The Taittiriya Samhitd (2.2.10.2) 
records what appears to have been a proverbial saying: “Whatever Manu has said is 
medicine.” It is possible that numerous legal maxims were handed down ascribed to 
Manu, some of which, as Biihler (1886, Ixxv-xcii) has pointed out, are recorded in 
the Mahabharata. Further, Manu was regarded not just as the first human being but, 
at least according to one tradition, as the first king?’ With the rise of urban centers 
and large kingdoms in northern India around the middle of the first millennium BCE, 
the significance of royalty with regard to various aspects of social life appears to 
have increased. In religion, leaders of new sects and ascetic communities were given 
royal pedigrees, including the Buddha and the Mahavira. “King as teacher” is a mo- 
tif in the Upanisads, where numerous significant doctrines are ascribed to kings. 


24. The motif of a large treatise composed in illo tempore and subsequently abridged for 
the use of humans is a recurrent one in Indian literature. Such claims are made for their tex- 
tual histories by the Kdmasittra (1.1.5-10), and Ayurvedic texts (Susrutasamhita, Sitrasthana, 
1.3). See also the Ndtyasastra (1.15-24), whose origin is ascribed to Brahman. 

25. Lariviere (1989, II: 2) has shown that this passage did not belong to the original 
Naradasmrti. Bihler also had entertained this view, which he later rejected (Biihler 1886, 
xvli, n. 2). Jolly (1885, 44) also takes this to be part of Narada. Given that this section of the 
NSnr is referred to by Medhatithi, it must have been an old tradition. 

26. Cited by Jolly (1889, 274) in the introduction to his translation of the Brhaspatismrti. 

27. For a survey of the myths surrounding the figure of Manu, see Biihler 1886, lvii—Ixii. 


20 Introduction 


With the rise of devotional religions toward the end of the first millennium BCE, we 
have the figures of Rama and Krsna, the divine avatdras, who are kings and not 
Brahmins.” Historically, the rise of the Maurya empire and the overwhelming pres- 
ence of Asoka and his imperial reforms must have loomed large. That a treatise on 
dharma with universal application should be ascribed not just to any king but to the 
first king, therefore, should come as no surprise. The clear intent was to make the 
work more authoritative by connecting it to both the sage responsible for the famous 
proverbial sayings and to the first king of humankind. The historical and political 
reasons for the writing of this text makes this ascription even more significant. I will 
examine these reasons presently. 

I have used “Manu” here as a shorthand term for the historical author of the 
MDh. The name of this author is unknown, as are any details of his life: his date, his 
geographical location, influences that may have shaped his life and thought, and a 
host of biographical questions that would shed light on the text itself? The most we 
can say is that he was a learned Brahmin from somewhere in northern India. Some 
of the socio-political influences that shaped his thought and that perhaps motivated 
the writing on the book, however, may at least be surmised by looking at the possi- 
ble date of its composition.” 

With regard to the dating of the MDh we do not fare much better. Its relative 
chronology, however, has widespread scholarly consensus. The MDh was undoubt- 
edly composed after the Dharmasitras; it shows clear advances in thinking on 
many fronts, especially in the sections relating to statecraft, royal functions, and ju- 
dicial procedure. These were probably borrowed from the artha tradition (see I].2). 
The MDh is older than any of the other metrical Dharmasastras, especially the four 
old ones ascribed to Yajfiavalkya, Narada, Brhaspati, and Katyayana. Biihler has 
discussed the relative chronology at length in the introduction to his translation of 
the MDh, and I will not repeat all his arguments here. A couple of observations will 
suffice. Unlike the later texts, Manu has very little to say about documentary evi- 
dence in a court of law; he does not use the later word for a document, /ekhya, refer- 
ring to such documents by the terms karana and desa (see IJ.2). Manu is also less 
concerned with ordeals as means of proving the guilt or innocence of an accused. 
The term divya, which becomes common in later texts, is absent; Manu uses instead 
the word Sapatha, which he uses both for an ordeal proper and for an oath (8.109- 
16).3! The MDh, therefore, occupies the middle position at the point of transition 
from the prose and scholastic Dharmasitras to the metrical Dharmasastras ascribed 
to authoritative divine beings.*2 


28. See Olivelle (1993, 61) for a discussion of this issue. 

29. Jayaswal’s (1930, 51) conclusion that the “real author” of the MDh was Sumati 
Bhargava on the basis of the NSm evidence, and that it was a Sunga code is speculative and 
without firm evidence. 

30. Another issue that cannot be fully resolved is whether the text was composed orally. 
That scholars in ancient India learned their texts by heart and that instruction involved memo- 
tizing is beyond doubt. However, | think that the M@Dh was originally composed in writing, 
especially in view of the mention of manuscripts at 12.103. 

31. I will discuss below (V.1) the influence of the MDh on the later Dharmasastras. 

32. The dating of the four extant Dharmasittras is also problematic. In my earlier work 


Introduction 21 


Setting an absolute chronology is a more difficult task. After analyzing all the 
data available to him, Biihler (1886, cxvii) concluded that the MDh must have 
existed by the 2nd century CE. and that it must have been composed between that 
date and the 2nd century BCE. Both Kane, in his monumental History of Dharma- 
Sastra (1: 344), and Lingat (1973, 96), in his influential study, broadly agree with 
Biihler’s dating. Jayaswal (1930, 29) has gone the farthest in narrowing the upper 
and lower limits of the MDh. He considers it to be a work of the Sunga period 
during a time of Brahmanical revival after the ASokan reforms. Jayaswal places the 
MDh during the last 170 years before the common era, but thinks it was written 
closer to the upper than the lower limit. 

The issue is whether these upper and lower limits can be further refined and 
narrowed through internal and external evidence. The lower limit is totally depend- 
ent on internal evidence and on the relative chronology of the MDA and other an- 
cient texts, especially the Dharmasiitras. For the upper limit we have a few pieces 
of external evidence. 

Given my arguments for the unitary authorship and composition of the MDh, 
we can take more seriously than in the past the few internal references within the 
text that would help us determine a lower limit. In his discussion of mixed classes, 
Manu (10.44) refers to several ethnic groups that are identifiable. They are 
Yavana, Kamboja, Saka, Pahlava, and Cina. These are all viewed by Manu to be 
Ksatriyas who have fallen to the level of Siidras by neglecting rites and failing to 
honor Brahmins properly. Given that they are considered in some sense Ksatriyas, it 
is clear that Manu viewed these peoples as having military power and political 
authority, although he found them less than exemplary. Yavana, a common Indian 
term for Greeks and for north-western border people of Greek heritage, is already 
used in Asokan inscriptions and by Panini (4.1.49) and does not help us in 
narrowing the date. The same is true of Kamboja; the term is already found in 
Panini (4.1.175). The term Pahlava, an Indian formation from the middle Persian 
pahlav (Parthian), although absent in both Patafijali and the Dharmasitras, does not 
help much in narrowing the lower limit of the MDh. 

The Sakas were the central Asian tribes who conquered parts of Persia and the 
northwestern parts of the Indian subcontinent. Their appearance in this region can 
be dated to around the middle of the 2nd century BCE. The first Saka king in India 


(Olivelle 2000, 9-10) I placed Apastamba in the first half of the 3rd century BCE and 
Gautama toward the middle of that century. I still think this is reasonable, but because of my 
further exploration of the semantic development of the term dharma (Olivelle, forthcoming a 
and c), | am inclined now to place them somewhat later. The earliest literary reference to the 
Dharmasitras as a class of literature is in Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya: (dharmasitrakarah) in 
1.1.47, 5.1.119. The word dharmasastra already occurs in Katyayana’s Varttika on Panini 
1.2.64 (39). 

33. Even this piece of internal evidence is not altogether reliable. The verse in question 
comes at the end of the section dealing with mixed classes. This section contains several dis- 
courses, some repeating what was stated in earlier discourses. Some doubt, therefore, is cast 
on the authenticity of the later discourses; they may have been the result of redactors at- 
tempting to incorporate different interpretations of the mixed classes and to take into account 
new ethnic groups. Lingat (1973, 94) also considers the verse in question to be an interpola- 
tion. 


22 Introduction 


proper, Maues, has been dated from 94 BCE to 22 BCE. It is difficult to estimate 
when the presence of the Sakas as a military or political elite would have drawn the 
attention of an Indian scholar like Manu. They are absent in the Dharmasitras in 
general and significantly in the parallel list of mixed varnas in the Gautama 
Dharmasitra (416-28), which contains the word Yavana. We do have, however, 
the mention of Saka in the compound sakayavana by Patajijali (on Panini 2.4.10). 
So, the word must have been in circulation by the middle of the 2nd century BCE. 
Interestingly, we have the progression from yavana in Panini, to yavana and Saka in 
Patajijali, to yavana, Saka, and cina in the MDh and the Mahabharata. 

The reference to the Chinese with the word cina is problematic. The term is 
not used by Patafijali or the Dharmasitras. The word was probably derived from a 
central Asian language and is related to the Qin (Chin) dynasty (221-206 BCE), 
which, although short lived, was the first to unify China. The term itself, however, 
may have been older, because the Qin was a state in Northwest China prior to that 
time with strong trade connections with Central Asia. The term “China,” like 
“India” itself, is not a term of self-identification by the Chinese. The term came 
back to China probably from India via Buddhist monks and texts.** When a people 
known as cina came to be known in India is difficult to estimate. The term’s ab- 
sence in the earlier literature, however, makes it likely that it could not have been 
known before the ist century BCE. It was during this time or a little earlier under the 
Han dynasty that Chinese trade with the west began to flourish.* 

This date also fits well with the broad relative chronology of texts belonging 
roughly to this period. Patafijali probably lived in the middle of the 2nd century BCE. 
He is the first to use the expression drydvarta with reference to the middle country 
of north India. The term is found also in the Dharmasiitras of Baudhayana and 
Vasistha. All three define the region in almost identical words.* Significantly, the 
expression is absent in the older Dharmasitras of Apastamba and Gautama. The 
MDh is clearly posterior to Patafijali, Baudhayana, and Vasistha. A lower limit of 
the ist century BCE, thus, fits with this relative chronology as well. 

External evidence for the upper date of Manu comes from sources several 
centuries later.’ Thus, for example, we have possibly the earliest citation of the 


34. I thank the many colleagues who responded to my e-mail request for information on 
cina. The migration of the term back into China and into Japan (under the form Shina) has 
been studied by Joshua A. Fogel in “The Sino-Japanese Controversy over Shina as a 
Toponym for China” in his book The Cultural Dimension of Sino-Japanese Relations: Essays 
on the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1995), pp. 66-76. 
There he cites the work of a Chinese scholar, Su Zhongxiang, who argues that cina may be 
related not to the Qin but to the ancient state of Jing. The issue becomes even more complex 
when the possibility of a southern route to India via Assam is considered. However, the MDh 
appears to place the cina, as well as the other foreigners, in the northwest. 

35. Parallel to the MDh, we find the use of cina in the MBh along with the terms saka 
and hina: see 2.23.29; 2.47.19; 3.48.2135.19.15; 5-72.14;6.10.65; 12.65.13; 12120.15. We 
also have the compounds cinapatta and cinabhimija in AS 2.11114. 

36. For a discussion of this point, see Olivelle 2000, 10. 

37. Unfortunately, inscriptional references to the MDh do not appear until at least the 6th 
century CE. Biihler (1886, cxiii) refers to the Vallabhi inscriptions of Dhruvasena I etc., which 
date from 526 CE. For a survey of the inscriptional evidence, see Hopkins 1885. 


Introduction 23 


MDh in Sabara’s commentary on the Parvamimdmsdsitra (6.1.12), where MDh 
8.299 is cited with the simple evam smarati. Sabara is generally dated to the 5th 
century CE. The clearest reference to the MDh in the early classical literature comes 
from the play Mrechakatika of Siidraka. In Act IX, the judge notes that according to 
Manu a Brahmin is exempt from capital punishment; he should be sent into exile 
instead.?8 The date of Siidraka, however, is not certain, but the consensus appears to 
place him broadly during the Gupta period, although some make him a contempor- 
ary of Kalidasa. Kalidasa’s date is also controversial, but the 4-5th centuries CE is 
probably the best we can do. He does not refer to the MDh directly. His description 
of the penance of following a cow in the Raghuvamsa, however, appears to be based 
on the MDh 11.109-17. In a special way, RaghuvamSa 1.89 is clearly an adaptation 
of Manu 11.112.°9 

The Kamasiitra (1.1.5-10), in presenting its own mythical origins, claims that 
the creator, Prajapati, produced a treatise of 100,000 chapters dealing with the three 
aims of life. The dharma portion of this treatise was made into a separate edition by 
Manu Svayambhi.” All this recalls the introductory verses of the MDh. If we place 
the Kamasitra roughly in the 3rd century CE, then the fame of the MDA must have 
reached some prominence by that time. 

The relationship between the MDh and the Mahabharata has been a topic of 
discussion ever since Hopkins’s (1885) study. Hopkins (1885, 268) concluded that 
the MDh was put together “between the time when the bulk of the epic was com- 
posed and its final completion.” Biihler, after a lengthy discussion of the parallel 
passages in the two works, concluded that the MDh has not drawn on the Mahabha- 
rata and that both drew on the same stock of “floating proverbial wisdom.” The ref- 
erences and citations collected by Hopkins, I think, make a compelling case that the 
author(s) of the epic knew of and drew upon material from the MDh. It is more 
likely, I think, that a narrative epic would draw on expert sastras for its discussions 
of legal matters than the other way round.*! The issue for dating the MDh, however, 
is the date of the Mahabharata itself. The latest estimate is by Hiltebeitel (2001, 18- 
20): “I suggest, then, that the Mahabharata was composed between the mid-second 
century BCE and the year zero.” He also suggests that the epic was written by a 
committee or team over a relatively brief period of time spanning “at most a couple 


38. ayain hi patakt vipro na vadhyo manur abravit [| rdstrdd asmat tu nirvasyo vibhavair 
aksatair saha |] Act IX, verse 39. This provision is found in the MDh 8.380. 

39. The MDh 11.112 reads tisthantisv anutisthet tu vrajantisv apy anuvrajet {| asindsu 
tathasita niyato vitamatsarah || The RaghuvamSa 1.89 reads: prasthitayam pratisthethah 
sthitadydm sthitim dcareh | nisannadyam nisiddsyam pitambhasi piber apah || Some of the 
divergence is caused by the fact that in the Raghuvamsa Dilipa is told to follow just a single 
cow, the divine Nandini, whereas in the MDh the penitent follows a herd of ordinary cows. 

40. prajapatir hi prajah srstvd tasam sthitinibandhanam trivargasya sddhanam adhyd- 
yandin Satasahasrendgre provaca | tasyaikadesitkam manuh svayambhuvo dharmadhikari- 
kam prthak cakara | 

41. Biihler is quite skeptical about the citations, because they do not exactly replicate the 
verses of the extant MDh. I think the differences and confusions can easily be ascribed to the 
team of workers engaged in the epic enterprise. The work of committees often creates confu- 
sions, misquotations, and misidentifications, especially in a work of such enormous propor- 
tions. 


24 Introduction 


of generations.” Fitzgerald offers a more conservative view, acknowledging several 
redactions, the last taking place during the Gupta period.”” If we accept that the 
MDh was known to the writers of the Mahabharata, then, even with a more conser- 
vative dating than Hiltebeitel’s, the MDh must have been in existence by about the 
and century CE. 

Scholars as far back as Jolly thought they had found what appeared to be a 
solid piece of external evidence in ASvaghosa, a Brahmin convert to Buddhism, 
who is generally assigned to the 1st-2nd centuries CE. A work ascribed to him, the 
Vajrasitci, repeatedly cites the MDh by name.* Johnston had already cast serious 
doubts on the authenticity of this work, calling it “a clever piece of polemics argu- 
ing against Brahman claims” and concluding that it “shows no trace of ASvaghosa’s 
style or mentality.” A close examination of the Vajrasiici supports Johnston’s con- 
clusion. It is probably a quite late Buddhist polemical pamphlet against Brahmins 
and cannot be dated even close to the 2nd century CE. 

All this, unfortunately, does not permit us to narrow the dating as much as we 
would like. There is a further piece of evidence, however, that may help us in estab- 
lishing a more secure lower limit. At MDh 8.213 a fine of “one Suvarna” is assessed 
for the non-delivery of a gift. At MDh 8.361a man who talks with a woman after he 
is explicitly forbidden to do so is fined “one Suvarna.”* Now, fines in the MDh is 
assessed in currency and there is no reason to doubt that Suvarna here means a gold 
coin. At MDh 8.393 a man who fails to feed a vedic scholar at a rite is forced to give 
twice that amount of food and a gold Masaka. Here also I think the reference is to a 
gold coin.” [t is significant that the Arthasdstra, which has a section on the minting 
of copper and silver coins, does not refer to the minting of gold coins.” There is 
also no unambiguous reference to gold coins (as opposed to gold articles and orna- 
ments) in the Arthasastra.* There is a scholarly consensus that the minting of gold 
currency did not take place until the Kushans. P. L. Gupta (1969, 28) notes with ref- 
erence to the Gupta king Vima Kadphises that “his most notable contribution is the 


42. See Hiltebeitel 2001, 25-26. 

43. See Jolly 1885, 44; Jayaswal 1930,26; Kane (1962-75) I: 330. The false ascription of 
this text to ASvaghosa is perpetuated in the recent study by Sarla Khosla, Asvaghosa and his 
Times, New Delhi: Intellectual Publishing House, 1986. 

44. E. H. Johnston, ASvaghosa’s Buddhacarita or Acts of the Buddha (1936; reprint, 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1984), II: xxii. As Johnston observes, the Chinese translation as- 
cribes this text to Dharmakirti. See also de Jong 1988. 

45. At MDh 8.220 the fine imposed on a man breaking an agreement is said to be 
catuhsuvarndn sanniskan, which I have taken to mean “6 Niskas each weighing 4 Suvarnas.” 
Commentators, however, take the fine to be cumulative: 4 Suvarnas and 6 Niskas. In any 
case, it appears that here also a fine assessed in gold coins is meant. A fine of 6 Niskas is also 
imposed at MDh 8.284. 

46. The first two occurrences are in sections about whose authenticity there cannot be 
any doubt. They are solidly within the discussion of the eighteen grounds for litigation 
(vyavadhapada), which must go back to the original composition. Verse 8.393, on the other 
hand, occurs in what I call an excursus, and it is likely to come from later redactoral activi- 
ties. 

47. See D. C. Sircar, Studies in Indian Coins (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1968), p. 78. 

48. This supports the possibility that Manu may have borrowed some of his material 
from the Arthasastra; see section I1.2 


Introduction 25 


introduction of extensive gold coins for the first time in India.’ Vima Kadphises 
probably reigned the end of the first and beginning of the second century CE. 
Vima’s successors also issued gold coins; and so did the Guptas.*! If this was the 
first time that gold coins were minted in any numbers in India proper, then lower 
limit for the composition of the MDh must be pushed further forward to at least the 
2nd century CE. It is unlikely that the socio-political conditions during which the 
MDh was composed reflects those of the indigenous Gupta empire (see 1.4). If this 
hypothesis is accepted, the likely period for the composition of the MDh would be 
2nd—3rd centuries CE. Indeed, this corresponds to the date of 3rd century CE 
assigned to the MDh by the great Indian scholar of epigraphy and numismatics, D. 
C. Sircar (1968, 52). 


I.3 Narrative Structure and Composition 


Manu introduced two major innovations in comparison to the previous literature of 
the dharma tradition. First, he composed his text entirely in slokas. Second, he set 
his text within a narrative structure that consists of a dialogue between an exalted 
being in the role of teacher and others desiring to Jearn from him. 

Late vedic texts, especially the early prose Upanisads, regularly cite verses in 
support of statements and viewpoints. It appears that these verses were somehow 
viewed as having greater authority and, therefore, able to lend greater support to the 
author’s views, much like citations from scripture. The Brhadaranyaka Upanisad, 
for example, frequently cites supporting verses with the introduction tad esa sloko 
bhavati (“In this connection there is this verse”).** The significance of these verses 
in the eyes of the authors is indicated by the fact that they write commentaries on 
some of them, as in Brhadaranyaka 1.5. We see this practice continued by the 
authors of the Dharmasitras.™ They also present verses as providing support for or 
confirmation of views they have already presented in prose and introduce them with 
athapy udaharanti (“Now, they also quote”), indicating that these verses were well- 
known sayings that experts would cite in support of a particular practice or view- 
point.°> In the later Dharmasiitras, however, we find increasing use of verses not 


49. There were gold coins issued by the Graeco-Bactrian kings of the north-west and the 
Scythian dynasties. It is, however, unlikely that fines would be assessed in a coin that must 
have been rare in the Indian heartland. 

50. See H. Kulke and D. Rothermund, A History of India (London: Routledge, 1986), p. 
81. 

51. “The coins of these Gupta emperors are known chiefly in gold. They issued gold 
coins so profusely that a contemporary poet has allegorically termed the phenomenon ‘rain of 
gold’” (Gupta 1969, 52). 

_ 52. For a study of verses in the vedic corpus, see Paul Horsch, Die vedische Gdtha- und 
Sloka-Literatur. Bern: Francke Verlag, 1966. 

53. See 2.2.334.3.145 4.4.6, 7, 8. See also CAU, 3.112; 5.2.4 5.10.9; 5.24.5; 7.26.2; 8.6.6, 

54. The exception is Gautama. For a discussion, see Olivelle 2000. 

55. See ApDh 1.19.15; 1.25.9; 1.31.23; 1.32.23; 2.9.13; 2.13.6; 2.17.7. At 2.23.3 two verses 
are cited with the introduction atha puradne Slokav udaharanti (“Now, they quote a couple of 
verses in a Purana”) indicating that such verses may have been found in the genre Purana, 
although this probably does not refer to any extant Purina. See BDA 1.1.8 1.2.11, 15, 1731.7. 


26 Introduction 


simply as citations but integrated into the composition.® This strategy is used with 
increasing frequency by Vasistha, the author of the latest Dharmasiitra; chapters 
25-7, for example, are completely in verse. 

It appears that during the last few centuries prior to the common era Slokas 
had assumed an aura of authority, and proverbial wisdom was transmitted as memo- 
rable verses. The logical outcome of this tendency was for authoritative texts them- 
selves to be composed in verse, lending authority to the text by its very literary 
genre. We see this already in some of the earliest Buddhist texts, such as the an- 
thologies of the Suttanipdta and the Dhammapada and in the verses of the Jdtakas. 
The same process was probably responsible for the fact that the early prose 
Upanisads, such as the Brhadadranyaka and the Chandogya, are followed by a series 
of Upanisads composed entirely in verse, such as the Katha, the Mundaka, and the 
Svetasvatara. 

The parallel between the older and the later Upanisads is true of the dharma 
literature as well. Whereas the earlier texts are in prose with verse citations, the later 
ones are composed entirely in verse. The first such text was that of Manu. His use of 
verse for the composition of his Dharmasastra, therefore, must have been part of a 
deliberate plan to lend the kind of authority to his text that would come only through 
this literary genre. We have, of course, the parallel examples of the epics 
Mahabharata and Ramayana composed in verse and claiming religious authority. 
This move away from prose to verse continues especially in religious compositions 
such as the Puranas. In what could be regarded as expert traditions, however, the 
picture is mixed. The artha and kama traditions continued to produce prose works, 
as did the ritual, philosophical, and grammatical traditions. The dharma tradition 
followed the trail blazed by Manu; all later Dharmasastras are written in verse, 
prose entering the tradition only in commentaries and medieval digests (nibandha). 

The second innovation in the composition of the MDh is its narrative struc- 
ture. The Dharmasitras are not only written in prose but are also presented as 
nothing more than scholarly works.*’ There is no literary introduction; the author 
gets right down to business. He presents his material in a straightforward manner, 
and on points of controversy and debate he presents opposing viewpoints. All this is 
eliminated by Manu. Here the real author is presented not as a scholar but as the 
primeval lawgiver, the Creator Svayambhi, and his intermediaries, his son Manu 
and the latter’s disciple Bhrgu. The !aw is promulgated authoritatively; there cannot 
be any debate, dissension, or scholarly give and take. 

An anonymous group of seers approaches Manu and asks him to teach them 
dharma. Manu accedes to their wishes. He narrates the creation of the world up to 
the emergence of human society hierarchically arranged into the four varnas. Then 
he asks his pupil Bhrgu to teach them the rest (1.59), reminding me of a busy profes- 
sor letting his graduate assistant do the dirty work of teaching an undergraduate 


1.8.23, 25, 53; 1.10.6, 23; 1.11.16, 14; 1.21.2; 2.1.6,17, 21; 2.2.26 2.3.14 16, 19, 31, 45; 2.4.1, 10, 
14, 18; 2.5.4, 7, 9; VaDh 1.22, 38; 2.6, 27, 30, 31 41, 48; etc. 

56. For a discussion see Olivelle 2000, 6—7. For such verses, see BDh 1.10.24 1.19.8; 
2.6.32-42, . 

57. In this they parallel the older ritual texts, the Srautasitras and the Grhyasitras. 


Introduction 27 


class. Bhrgu takes up the task in earnest; the rest of the book is the oral teaching of 
Bhrgu. The seers reappear only twice—once at the beginning of chapter 5 when 
they ask how Brahmins can be subject to death, a question that leads to a discussion 
of food practices, purification, and duties of women; and a second time at the begin- 
ning of chapter 12 when they ask Bhrgu to teach them the effects of actions (Karma). 
The narrative structure given prominence at the opening of the text fizzles out; there 
is no conclusion to the narrative. A similar structure is found in the Pavcatantra, 
where the original setting—VisnuSarman’s instruction of princes in statecraft and 
policy under the guise of animal stories—is lost sight of in the conclusion. 

We have no way of knowing all the reasons for Manu’s strategy of departing 
from the tradition of textual composition found in the earlier dharma tradition. The 
tradition of dialogue where a teacher instructs a pupil, a son, or a king goes back to 
the Brahmanas and the Upanisads. The literary structure of these dialogues, how- 
ever, places these individuals within human history. The transition into divine in- 
struction is found already in the Chadndogya Upanisad, where we have the 
instruction of Narada by Sanatkumara (7.1) and of Indra and Virocana by Prajapati 
(8.7). Nevertheless, I think the example of the Buddhist texts was also a likely fac- 
tor. Hiltebeitel (2001, 167) has argued that the Mahay4na literature, especially the 
Lotus Siitra, offers a parallel to the narrative structure of the Mahabharata. For the 
first time in India, the words of a single charismatic individual were taken as the 
sole fountain of authority in a religious tradition. The doctrine of buddhavacana, 
that the sole form of textual authority is the words of the Buddha, governed the pro- 
duction of texts both in the early forms of Buddhism and in the Mahayana.* All 
texts begin with the preamble “Thus have I heard,” placing the text in the mouth of 
the Buddha and making the function of the “author” merely that of a transcriber or 
re-teller of what he had heard. The narrator narrating what he had heard and placing 
his narrative in the distant past is also at the heart of the Mahabharata structure.” 

Although its narrative structure is much simpler, the same is true of the MDh 
as well. We have here five layers of “telling,” “hearing,” and re-telling. At the most 
remote level, we have the creator himself soon after his creative activity composing 
a treatise and reciting it to his son Manu (1.58). Manu is the first “hearer.” He 
transmits it to Marici and the other sages (1.58), who form the second tier of 
“hearers.”” At Manu’s command, one of these sages, Bhrgu, teaches the seers who 
had come to Manu with the mission of learning dharma. Bhrgu’s first word (1.60), 
significantly, is “Listen” (srizyatam). This group of seers, still placed in illo tem- 
pore, constitutes the third tier of “hearers.” The narrator of the entire text makes 
only a fleeting and implicit appearance in the very first verse of the text: “As Manu 
was seated, absorbed in contemplation, the great seers came up to him, paid him 
homage in the proper manner, and said to him.” Here we have the voice of the 


58. For an interesting study on ancient instructions on how to “produce” a new Buddhist 
text, see Gregory Schopen, “If You Can’t Remember, How to Make it Up: Some Monastic 
Rules for Redacting Canonical Texts,” in Bauddhavidyadsudhakarah: Studies in Honour of 
Heinz Bechert on the Occasion of his 65th Birthday, ed. P. Kieffer-Piilz and Jens-Uwe 
Hartmann, Indica et Tibetica 30 (Swisttal-Odendorf, 1997), pp. 571-82. 

59. C. Minkowski, “Snakes, Sattras, and the Mahabharata,” in A. Sharma, ed., Essays 
on the Mahabharata (Leiden: Brill, 1991), 384—400; Hiltebeitel 2001. 


28 Introduction 


narrator introducing the first group of characters; then he becomes silent except for 
two other fleeting appearances to introduce the seers’ further request at 5.1-2 and to 
introduce Bhrgu’s final discourse at 12.2. Evidently the narrator himself, who at one 
level can be identified with the historical author of the text, heard the text presuma- 
bly from the seers; or he has been eavesdropping on Bhrgu’s instruction of the seers. 
This narrator is the fourth “hearer.” There is then the implied fifth “hearer”, that is, 
all those who listen to or read this text, including modern scholars. The last verse of 
the book, possibly part of an interpolated section (see III), is directed at this audi- 
ence: “When a twice-born recites this Treatise of Manu proclaimed by Bhrgu, he 
will always follow the proper conduct and obtain whatever state he desires.” 

Although mediated by a series of tellers and hearers, the ultimate authority of 
the text lies in its original promulgator, the Creator himself.” Paralleling the Bud- 
dhist doctrine of buddhavacana and doing one better than that, the MDh grounds its 
authority (pramdna) on the svayambhivacana, the words of the Self-existent One, 
the very ground of creation. This appeal to a single source of authority stands in 
sharp contrast to the traditional source of authority for and means of knowing 
dharma, namely the Veda supplemented by traditional texts (smyti) and the conduct 
of the virtuous (@cdra).*! Indeed, the MDA itself presents the latter doctrine when it 
discusses the sources of dharma in chapter 2. There is thus a disjuncture between 
the narrative structure of chapter 1 and the body of the text. The author is a tradi- 
tional pandit, and his habitual methods of reasoning, argumentation, and public 
presentation take over in the substantive parts of the text. One may ignore the ref- 
erences to “that is the teaching of Manu” or “so said Manu,”® which are peculiar in 
a text that was composed by Manu’s father and perhaps edited by Manu. The whole 
text, after all, constitutes the “sayings of Manu.” But such self-referential statements 
occur also in other Sanskrit texts. More revealing are the following. 

“Whatever Law Manu has proclaimed with respect to anyone, all that has 
been taught in the Veda, for it contains all knowledge” (2.7). This assertion is 
strange within a text that is Manu’s own composition. It appears that the author is 
trying here to reconcile the authority of Manu with the authority of the Veda as the 
source of dharma. “Tradition holds that the various groups of ancestors are the sons 
of all the seers headed by Marici, seers who are the children of Manu, the son of 
Hiranyagarbha” (3.194): why ascribe to tradition (s#tah) a view when the creator 
himself is the speaker? “Because of discipline, on the other hand, Prthu, as well as 
Manu, obtained a kingdom; Kubera, lordship over wealth; and the son of Gadhi, the 
rank of a Brahmin” (7.42). Here Manu, along with other traditional heroes, is treated 
in the third person. “Bed, seat, ornaments, lust, hatred, behavior unworthy of an 


60. We, of course, have parallels in other religious traditions for divinely authored law, 
such as the Pentateuch in the Jewish tradition and the Koran (and derivatively, Sharia) in 
Islam. 

61. This contrasts even more with the “community standards” (sG@maydcdrika) espoused 
in the ApDh (1.1.1-2). 

62. We find similar forgetfulness in other texts as well. See, for example, Brhaspati’s 
reference to the contradictions in the MDh cited below in section V.1. 

63. iti manor anuSasanam: 8.139, 279; 9.239; abravin manuh, manur dha: 3.150, 222; 
4.103; 5.41, 131; 6.54; 8.124, 168, 204, 242, 292, 339;9.158, 182; 10.63, 78. 


Introduction 29 


Arya, malice, and bad conduct—Manu assigned these to women” (9.17). Again, 
Manu appears here in the third person. At 2.16, moreover, a view is ascribed to 
Bhrgu, even though Bhrgu is the narrator! There are also verses that appear to be 
commentaries on a previous verse, making it likely that the verse on which the 
comments are based has been incorporated into the text from a different source.“ 

The author of the MDh does not, indeed cannot, openly present diverse opin- 
ions of scholars both due to metrical reasons, as Biihler (1886, xciii) has already 
pointed out, and because it would violate his narrative structure; how can the creator 
present diverse opinions on points of law? Yet, the pandit mentality is hard to sup- 
press, and our author repeatedly forgets his narrative and engages in ordinary schol- 
arly give and take (see IJ.1). The most obvious is the expression ifi cet (“if you argue 
thus”), which marks an objection or a doubt, occurring at 9.122; 10.66, 82; 12.108. 
At 8.140 we have a particular interest rate set by Vasistha, and at 8.110 an appeal to 
the practice of former sages and gods with reference to the legitimacy of oaths. 
The author sometimes refers to the opinions of others with the common iti kecit 
(“some say”). At 3.53 the opinion of some that a bull and a cow are given as a bride 
price at a seer’s type of marriage is refuted; at 3.261 the author refers to different 
customs regarding the disposal of ancestral offerings; and at 9.32 he introduces two 
opinions about the person to whom a son belongs, the biological father or the 
husband of the mother. 


Contradictions in the MDh 


The text of the MDh as it has come down to us contains numerous contradictory 
statements. This feature has drawn the attention not only of modern scholars® but 
also of ancient commentators. The author of the Brhaspati Snuti, a text written a few 
centuries after the MDh, had the same problem with Manu. In his section on niyoga 
(levirate), Brhaspati comments (1.25.16): 


uktva niyogo manund nisiddhah svayam eva tu | 

yugahrasdd aSakyo ’’yam kartum sarvair vidhanatah \\ 
Manu has prescribed leviratic union, and then he himself has forbidden 
it. Because of the shortening in each age, no one can carry it out in ac- 
cordance with the prescriptions.” 


Brhaspati provides a traditional solution to the problem; the contradictory rules 
apply to different ages. So there is no true contradiction. 

Modern scholars cannot accept the traditional hermeneutical solution. Many 
have seen these contradictions as proof that the text had multiple authors over a long 
period of time; the contradictions represent changing customs and norms. Biihler 


64. See for example, MDh 3.174; 4.147-9, 195-6, 254-6. 

65. There are also historical references: MDh 8.110, 116; 10.105-8. 

66. For further discussion and other viewpoints, see Biihler 1886, xcii-xcv; Doniger 
1991, xliv—lviii. 

67. The “shortening” has multiple meanings: the ages themselves become shorter in du- 
ration, the life span of humans become correspondingly shorter, and their proclivity to virtue 
also becomes weaker (See, MDh 1.83-84). 


30 Introduction 


(1886, xcii—xciii), the first scholar to posit the unitary authorship of the MDh, sought 
to answer these critics. His answer was two-fold: 


Thus in weighing the value of the argument drawn from the occurrence 
of contradictory passages, two circumstances, which mostly have been 
left out of account, must be kept in mind: first, that it is a common habit 
of Indian authors to place conflicting opinions, supported by authorities 
of equal weight, side by side, and to allow an option, or to mention 
time-honoured rules, legal customs, and social institutions, and after- 
wards to disapprove of them; and secondly, that, as our Smrti is in any 
case a recast of an earlier Sitra, that fact alone is sufficient to account 
for contradictions. 


The second point is based on Biihler’s assumption of a pre-existing Manava 
Dharmasitra and must be ignored (see II.1). In my view, the author’s work cannot 
be limited to that of an editor; even though he used older sources, as all authors do, 
he created a new work, and one would have to assume that a good author would 
seek to avoid contradictions, especially contradictions that sit side by side. Biihler’s 
first point, however, is well taken. Manu was unable to demarcate various views 
with the traditional iti followed by the name of the authority both because the trea- 
tise was composed by the creator and because it was difficult to incorporate such 
attributions into a verse composition. The various views are here woven into the 
very fabric of Manu’s narrative.® 

Manu does, indeed, cite conflicting opinions.’ This is demonstrated by the 
fact that sometimes he ascribes differing views to different factions. So, for exam- 
ple, the conflicting opinions about the relative superiority of the seed and the field in 
determining the person to whom a son belongs are stated clearly (9.32-44). 
Although stated less clearly, two views on primogeniture are presented at MDh 
9.105~-110 and 9.111f. Here the presence of the particle va (“or,” “or rather’) at the 
beginning of 9.111, indicating an alternative that the author himself prefers, shows 
that we are dealing with two opinions.” The clearest attribution of opinions to 
authorities is found at 3.16: 


According to Atri and the son of Utathya, a man falls from his caste by 
marrying a Sidra woman; according to Saunaka, by fathering a son 
through her; and according to Bhrgu, by producing all his offspring 
through her. 


A clear example of an apparent contradiction where two viewpoints are juxta- 
posed is found at 9.97—-100: 


68. See my discussion below (p. 44~—46) of the three views presented in MDh 5.612. 

69. See the various opinions on lawful marriages (3.23-6), on meat eating (5.28-56), 
levirate (9.57-70), division of property and primogeniture (9.105-56), whether brothers 
should live together or separately (9.104—11), and shares of a son by a Stidra wife (9.150—5). 
See also Manu’s denunciation of bride-price at 9.98-100 and its acceptance at 8.366, 369; 
9.93-7, 204-5. 

70. For this use of va as the preferred option, see Paul Kiparsky, P@mini as a Variationist 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1979). 


Introduction 31 


971f, after the bride-price has been paid for the girl, the man who paid 
the price dies, she should be given to the brother-in-law, if she consents 
to it. 98Even a Siidra should not take a bride-price when he gives his 
daughter; for by accepting a bride-price, he is engaging in a covert sale 
of his daughter. 


99 That after promising her to one man, she is then given to another— 
such a deed was never done by good people of ancient or recent times. 
100The covert sale of a daughter for a payment under the name “bride- 
price’”—-we have never heard of such a thing even in former genera- 
tions. 


We see here that verse 97 assumes the payment of a bride-price, a view rejected in 
the very next verse. In verse 99, likewise, the bride-price is assumed; the father 
takes money from one man and then gives the girl to another, thus getting two 
payments. The next verse again inveighs against the practice of bride-price. One 
cannot but assume that Manu is here deliberately pairing the two views.”! 
Contradictory positions on marrying a Sidra woman are, likewise, placed side by 
side at 3.13—4: 


13A Sidra may take only a Sidra woman as wife; a Vaisya, the latter 
and a woman of his own class; a Ksatriya, the latter two and a woman of 
his own class; and a Brahmin, the latter three and a woman of his own 
class. 4Not a single story alludes to a Brahmin or a Ksatriya taking a 
Siidra wife even when they are going through a time of adversity. 


Here, we may have not merely a juxtaposition of views but Manu actually siding 
with the latter view. From the verses that follow, it becomes clear that Manu did not 
approve of a Brahmin marrying a Sidra, even though this view is backed by ancient 
authorities who permit hypergamous marriages to all classes. 

We may be able here and in other instances to distinguish two voices of 
Manu, the legal and the moral, which may also have contributed to apparent contra- 
dictions. As a jurist he has to deal with the reality of social life and accepted cus- 
tom; he has to decide whether certain actions are legal or not. It is apparent that he 
accepted upper-class men marrying lower-class women, even Sidra women, as a 
social fact. At 9.149-57, for example, in dealing with the practical matter of dividing 
the paternal estate, Manu states what share the son born of a Siidra wife should re- 
ceive. Nevertheless, dharma is not just law but also right living, and when he uses 
the moral voice Manu often contradicts what he may have said within a legal con- 
text. Even today, for example, opposition to birth out of wedlock (the moral posi- 
tion) can exist side by side with legal and social provisions for the welfare and legal 
status of illegitimate children. We see such a bifurcation in Manu’s discussion of 
permitted foods (5.4-26), where meat-eating is taken for granted. His discussion of 
food at an ancestral offering (3.267-72) also presupposes meat. His discussion of 


71. We see a similar juxtaposition of views at 9.122—26. The first view permits seniority 
among sons born to wives of equal status, whereas the second view denies this and treats all 
of them equally. 


32 Introduction 


permitted foods, however, is followed by a long statement about the evils of meat 
(5.27-55). Clearly, Manu here is not so much contradicting himself as providing two 
sets of guidelines, the one traditional that includes meat, within which he provides 
rules on permitted and prohibited animals, and the other reflecting the new morality 
of vegetarianism. The moral tone is clearly brought out at the end of Manu’s long 
discussion on food (5.56): 


There is no fault in eating meat, in drinking liquor, or in having sex; that 
is the natural activity of creatures. Abstaining from such activity, 
however, brings great rewards. 


The most famous instance of contradiction is Manu’s position on leviratic 
union (niyoga), that is, the fathering of a son by a younger brother upon his dead 
brother’s widow,” a contradiction already noted by Brhaspati. Niyoga was a long- 
established practice in India and is recorded in all the Dharmasiitras. Manu himself 
presupposes this practice, for example, in his discussion of partition (9.143-7, 190). 
At 9.57-63, moreover, he not only admits this practice but also lays down rules as to 
how it should be carried out. In the very next breath, however, he opposes this prac- 
tice vehemently (9.64—8). This contradiction does not lend itself to an easy resolu- 
tion, but I think here also Manu is talking in two voices. He acknowledges the 
traditional practice, provides rules for its proper implementation, and deals with the 
legal rights of children born from such a union. Nevertheless, he abhors this custom 
and calls it a bestial practice. He also preaches chastity to young widows; they do 
not need children to attain happiness here or in the hereafter (5.158-60): 


Aspiring to that unsurpassing Law of women devoted to a single hus- 
band, she should remain patient, controlled, and celibate until her death. 
Untold thousands of Brahmins who have remained celibate from their 
youth have gone to heaven without producing offspring to continue their 
family line. Just like these celibates, a good woman, though she be son- 
less, will go to heaven when she steadfastly adheres to the celibate life 
after her husband’s death. 


One other reason for apparent contradictions is the practice of using the best 
argument to win a debate. We see Krsna using this sort of argumentation in the 
Bhagavad Gita; you should do this for reason X, and if not for that then for reason 
Y, even if X and Y are incompatible. Thus, with reference to the question “To 
whom does a son belong?” Manu clearly sides with those who argue that a son be- 
longs to the husband of the mother, just as the crop belongs not to the owner of the 
seed but to the owner of the field (9.41-55). Manu, however, dislikes obtaining chil- 
dren through surrogate fathers—a practice recognized within the doctrine of the 
twelve kinds of son (9.158-60)—as demonstrated by his denunciation of leviratic 


72. Although it is generally the younger brother, an older brother begetting a son on a 
younger brother’s widow is also recorded (see MDh 9.62). In the absence of a brother it is 
possible for a close relative to be appointed for fathering a son. That this practice was 
extended beyond the context of a person dying without issue is made clear in MDh 9.137, 
where niyoga is permitted even when a husband is impotent or sick. 


Introduction 33 


union. All except the natural-born son, that is, a man’s own biological son through 
his legitimate wife, are viewed by Manu as surrogates. Within this context, the ar- 
gument that a son belongs to (or takes after) the biological father, that the seed is 
stronger than the field because different plants and trees grow in the same field from 
different seeds, is a convenient argument, and Manu uses this at 9.181: “Those who 
are designated here as sons because of congruity but who are born from another 
man’s seed belong only to the one from whose seed they were born and to no one 
else.” 

In both ritual and legal texts, there are often two sets of rules, the one primary 
(kalpa) and the other secondary (anukalpa). The primary rules are seen as the nor- 
mal and the normative. In times of emergency and when it is impossible to follow 
the primary rule due to lack of resources or ability, it is permitted to follow the sec- 
ondary mode. Frequently, the secondary mode is associated with what has come to 
be known as the “Law in times of adversity” (Gpaddharma). Sometimes, as at 3.147, 
Manu clearly identifies the primary and the secondary methods. Indeed, at 11.30 
Manu condemns a man who follows the secondary rule when he is able to follows 
the primary: “When someone, though able to follow the principal mode, yet lives 
according to the secondary mode, that fool will obtain no reward for it after death.” 
The two modes, however, are not always so clearly distinguished, and in those 
situations the differing rules may seem to be contradictory. 

A major reason for apparent contradiction, as well as for the many non- 
sequiturs, that we detect in ancient Indian texts such as the MDh is the technique of 
text production that I will call “anthologizing.” Hacker (1961, 80) refers to the 
“practice of juxtaposition, which is a primitive method of redaction, caused by the 
desire to do equal justice to different traditions.” In anthologizing, the author opts to 
place material drawn from different sources side by side without much editorial in- 
tervention or any serious attempt at reconciling differences among these textual ex- 
tracts.” I think the anthologizing technique without editorial comment is most 
evident in texts composed in verse; in prose compositions, such as the 
Dharmasitras, we see greater use of ascriptions and authorial intervention either to 
accept or reject various views presented in the textual extracts. When textual ex- 
tracts are presented in an anthological format, not only do contradictions among the 
sources of these extracts become apparent; it is also difficult to interpret a particular 
verse within the context of the surrounding verses which may come from different 
sources. 

A final reason for apparent contradictions may be found in the frequent use of 
hyperbole in didactic literature. Early western scholars of the Vedas encountered 
what they perceived as a problem: the vedic hymns take different gods to be the 
highest. This went against their monotheistic presuppositions, as also against com- 
mon logic. How could several gods in a pantheon be supreme at the same time? 
Max Miiller coined the word “henotheism” to account for this phenomenon. A quick 
glance at the royal panegyrics (prasastis) of a millennium later is instructive. All 


73. Doniger (1991, lv) also thinks that Manu presents the traditions he has inherited, 
“juxtaposing conflicting views and then adjudicating between them.” Manu, however, juxta- 
poses far more frequently than he adjudicates. 


34 Introduction 


kings, from petty chieftains to Gupta emperors, are eulogized as conquerors of the 
whole world. One would hardly expect the panegyrist to be accurate—he is a petty 
king, a tributary to king X; he managed a couple of small-scale victories! That 
would hardly do. Neither can you go to god X and say “You are in the third rank 
below Y and Z. And by the way, will you give me a thousand cows?” Even in the 
Catholic faith, where theological orthodoxy takes center stage, devotees of the 
Virgin or St. Jude do not give theologically accurate descriptions of the powers of 
their favorite saint; hyperbole is the norm. The vedic poets were no exception. This 
form of rhetoric was recognized as an alankara, a poetic ornament, in Sanskrit aes- 
thetics under the name atisayokti, hyperbole. In hyperbole, the literal is the enemy 
of the true. As Gerow observes, a hyperbole contains a falsity but is so framed as to 
open the door to a deeper truth: 


A “skyscraper is so tall they had to put hinges on the two top stories so 
to let the moon go by” [Carl Sandburg]. But of course it is not a falsity 
that is capable of being detected in truth tables; for the falsity, the ‘ex- 
aggeration’ is only apparent, only for effect. For the lie in the hyperbole 
is so framed as to conceal a greater truth, and a truth urgently required 
by the context; as these skyscrapers are the tallest things that man ever 
built.” 


The use of hyperbole in religious and didactic literature is clearly different 
from its use in poetry. There is, however, one thing in common; neither can be taken 
at face value or read literally without distorting the language, misunderstanding the 
meaning, and producing interpretive monstrosities like “henotheism.” In religious 
literature we have statements that giving a cow to a learned Brahmin is worth one 
thousand horse sacrifices, or bathing in a particular river is better than bathing ten 
thousand times in the Ganges at Benares. In attempting to inculcate the virtue of 
abstention from meat, Manu (5.53) says: “A man who abstains from meat and a man 
who offers the horse sacrifice every year for a hundred years—-the reward for their 
meritorious acts is the same.” In praising the life of a vedic student, Apastamba 
(1.4.29) says: “A student who totally dedicates himself in this manner accomplishes 
in that very state all the rites carrying rewards, as well as those that pertain to a 
householder.” An ascetic text wishes to promote the importance of giving food to 
ascetics: “Even if a man gives the entire earth, it would not equal the merit of pre- 
paring almsfood and giving it to a mendicant.’”’ No one expects such statements to 
be taken literally; they are meant to eulogize certain lesser known practices and to 
recommend their performance. Likewise, in didactic and legal literature a sin or 
crime or a virtue or a good act is said to be the worst or the best. “Lack of generosity 
is the gravest sin; generosity is the highest austerity,” says Baudhayana (BDh 
1.10.6). And Manu (4.224-5): 


The gods once evaluated the food of a miserly vedic scholar and that of 
a generous usurer and pronounced the two to be equal. Prajapati came 
74. E. Gerow, Indian Poetics (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1977), p. 242. 


75. Cited in Yadava Prakasa, Yatidharmasamuccaya, ed. P. Olivelle (Albany, NY: State 
University of New York Press, 1995), 6.314. 


Introduction 35 


up to them and said, “Don’t make equal what is unequal. The food of 
the generous man is cleansed by the spirit of generosity, whereas the 
other food is defiled by the lack of generosity.” 


When the topic is generosity, even a usurer is said to be better than a miser. 
But when the topic is usury, it is a sin worse than even abortion: “Usury and abor- 
tion were once weighed in a balance. The abortionist rose to the top, while the usu- 
rer trembled” (BDh 1.10.23). It is impossible to think that these authors intended 
their statements to be taken as literally true, just as it is not possible to think that 
there is a device in the skyscrapers to let the moon pass. As in literature and poetry, 
so in religious, didactic, and legal literature hyperbole is simply a literary device. 
Failure to recognize this can only cause serious misinterpretation of texts. So, it is 
not a contradiction when Manu (9.14-6), in warning husbands to guard their wives, 
waxes eloquent on the evil tendencies inherent in women: 


They pay no attention to beauty, they pay no heed to age; whether he is 
handsome or ugly, they make love to him with the single thought, “He’s 
a man!” Lechery, fickleness of mind, and hard-heartedness are innate in 
them; even when they are carefully guarded in this world, therefore, 
they become hostile towards their husbands. Recognizing thus the 
nature produced in them at creation by Prajapati, a man should make the 
utmost effort at guarding them. 


and in urging men to respect women, he eulogizes them (9.26-8): 


On account of offspring, a wife is the bearer of many blessings, worthy 
of honor, and the light within a home; indeed, in a home no distinction 
at all exists between a wife (stri) and Sti, the Goddess of Fortune. She 
begets children; and when they are born, she brings them up—day in, 
day out, the wife, evidently, is the linchpin of domestic affairs. Off- 
spring, rites prescribed by Law, obedient service,* the highest sensuous 
delights, and procuring heaven for oneself and one’s forefathers—all 
this depends on the wife. 


and warns against abusing them (3.568): 


Where women are revered, there the gods rejoice; but where they are 
not, no rite bears any fruit. Where female relatives grieve, that family 
soon comes to ruin; but where they do not grieve, it always prospers. 
When female relatives, not receiving due reverence, curse any house, it 
comes to total ruin, as if struck down by witchcraft. 


That some texts fall into the literary genre of hyperbole is not merely a modern and 
anachronistic interpretation is demonstrated by an observation made by the com- 
mentator Medhatithi. Commenting on MDh 1.107, which says that the Law in its 
entirely is given in this text of Manu, Medhatithi remarks: “Therefore, to obtain the 
knowledge of the Law there is no need to refer to any other texts. This is an hyper- 
bolic eulogy.” 


36 Introduction 


I do not propose that a// apparent contradictions in the MDh can be resolved 
in these ways. Authors, even modern ones, do contradict themselves occasionally. 
Further, the work of redactors down the centuries, which I discuss below (III), can- 
not be completely detected. Changing norms and mores may have prompted some 
of them to introduce opinions at variance with those expressed in the original text. 


Language and Meter 


There is nothing remarkable about the language of the MDh; it is mostly simple and 
classical Sanskrit. The meter is the traditional s/oka. There are, however, some lin- 
guistic and metrical peculiarities that are of interest for the history of both the lan- 
guage and the text. 

In language, the area of greatest interest is the vocabulary. I will draw atten- 
tion to the technical use of the two terms desa, as documentary evidence, and 
pravasayati, as the execution of a criminal (see II.2). These terms do not occur in 
any other dharma text and were probably borrowed from the Arthasastric vocabu- 
lary. Manu also uses the word avicadrayan frequently. I think the usual meaning 
given to it, “without hesitation,” is correct in many contexts; it probably was used in 
the sense of “not giving something a second thought.” There are contexts, however, 
especially within criminal justice, when it may have a more technical meaning of 
inflicting a punishment without any judicial inquiry or process.” 

A term not given in any standard Sanskrit dictionary is bhaktaka, found at 
MDh 7.126. It appears that even some scribes had problems with this term and 
changed it to the common vetana; but the critical edition has adopted the former for 
strong reasons, including the support of ancient commentators. It was probably a 
technical term for a particular kind of wages given to a class of people in royal 
service. It is derived in all likelihood from “food” or “rice” in the sense of the mod- 
ern Indo-Aryan word bhat “rice” and referred to wages paid in rice or other food- 
stuffs, a meaning attested also in inscriptions.” 

Another term with possible Prakritic influence is ya@pya, found at 9.4 with the 
meaning “to be reprimanded or censured.” Here also the scribes have introduced the 
easier term vacya. How yadpya came to acquire this meaning is unclear, but we have 
modern Indo-Aryan terms such as jabo “worthless, contemptible” in Nepali and 
zabar in Assamese.” 

Manu also uses the interesting term pracara, which, as Scharfe (1993, 195~ 
200) has demonstrated, means not land or pasture but activities, especially in the 
Arthasastric vocabulary. In addition to the evidence presented by Scharfe, the mean- 
ing of “activities” is apparent in the juxtaposition of pracdra and cestita at MDh 
7.153 and 155. The old meaning of pracdra was forgotten early on; even Katyayana 


76. See, for example, MDh 8.283; 9.270, 280. 

77. D.C. Sircar’s Indian Epigraphical Glossary (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1966) p. 
49, gives bhaktagrama as a village granted to someone for his maintenance and bhaktaddya 
as revenue in the form of rice. 

78. See R. L. Turner, A Comparative Dictionary of the Indo-Aryan Languages (London: 
Oxford University Press, 1969), 10476. For other occurrences of this term, see GDh 1323; 
19.2; BDh 3.10.2;VaDh 15.19. 


Introduction 37 


(884), in commenting on MDh 9.219, takes it to mean gopracdra, the grazing 
ground for cattle; this interpretation is followed by most medieval commentators. 

Occasionally we come across sandhi irregularities, especially double sandhi 
resorted to for metrical reasons: see 3.47b; 11.59d; 12.59d. 

In most verses Manu follows the typical Pathya form of the Sloka meter; only 
occasionally does a Vipula form intervene (see, for example, 9.196-7). 
Nevertheless, on several occasions we have hypermetric pddas, most frequently the 
first and the third; hypermeter never occurs in the second or fourth pddas, which 
maintain their regular iambic cadence. Hypermetric third pddas are found in 3.10, 
270, 284; 11.118; 12.32, and hypermetric first pddas in 2.156; 6.93; 8.133; 9.121, 225; 
10.35; 11.199, 249 (also 3.228 in most mss.). In all these instances, we have several 
variant readings where scribes have attempted to rectify the meter. In verse 2.201, 
both first and third padas are hypermetric. There and in 2.156, I think, the paddas are 
only apparently hypermetric. These pddas read: 


parivadat kharo bhavati (2.2014) 
paribhokta krmir bhavati (2.201¢) 
na tena sthaviro bhavati (2.156a) 


I believe that bhavati in these verses should be pronounced in the Prakritic manner 
as bhoti with just two syllables. When so pronounced, the meter becomes a perfect 
Pathya.” Manu uses the word bhavati frequently even as the final word of the first 
or third pddas, and the meter scans without having to use Prakritic pronunciation.” 
This may point to the fact that such hypermetric verses were actually common prov- 
erbs, where Prakritic influence is more likely, cited by Manu, and not his own com- 
position. 

Other metrical irregularities are encountered occasionally. At 5.163 we have 
pdada-c ending in loke bhavati with a wrong cadence This irregularity appears to 
have prompted several scribes to correct it with the reading sd bhavel loke and all 
editors to adopt this reading. At 9.238b we have possibly a case of double sandhi. 


I.4 The Socio-Political Background 


If we assume that the MDh was composed during the first couple of centuries CE— 
and I think this is a plausible assumption—then we may be able at least to speculate 
about the social and political environment of the author and perhaps the motivations 
for its composition. Recently similar questions have been raised with reference to 
the Mahabharata, especially by Hiltebeitel (2001) in his new and significant book. 
Fitzgerald (2004, 120-1), in the introduction to his translation of the Santi Parvan, 
also sees the epic as a response to the times not too favorable to Brahmanical 
privilege: 


79. See the similar metrical problems created in the Katha Upanisad 3.5,6, 7, 8. The 
reading of bhoti in these passages was first suggested by L. Alsdorf, “Contributions to the 
Textual Criticism of the Kathopanisad,” ZDMG 100 (1950): 621-37. 

80. See MDh 3.50, 275; 5.163; 6.80; 8.164; 9.22, 173, 302}; 10.92; 11.383 12.72. 


38 Introduction 


It seems fair to conjecture that the emergence of the Mauryan empire 
generally and Asoka’s dharma campaign in particular were profound 
challenges to many pious brahmins; and that these events may well have 
been a strong stimulus to the creation, development, redaction, and 
spreading of the apocalyptic Mahabharata narrative. This narrative de- 
picted violent resistance to the kind “illegitimate” political power that 
the Nandas, the Mauryans, and Asoka must have represented to some, 
and it depicted a restoration of proper, brahmanya kingship, which un- 
dertakes to use violence for the protection and support of brahmins. 


I think the socio-political environment that prompted the composition of the 
great epic was not too different from that of the MDh. The time frame and the geog- 
raphy are more or less the same, and the authors of both works probably came from 
the class of educated and somewhat conservative Brahmins intent on protecting the 
rights and privileges of their class. They were composed after the collapse of the 
Maurya empire in the 2nd century BCE. The last Maurya emperor, Brhadratha, was 
assassinated by Pusyamitra, who inaugurated the Sunga dynasty.®! Historical mem- 
ory considers Pusyamitra to have been a Brahmin, and his dynasty was viewed as 
partial to Brahmin interests. The last Sunga was assassinated around 73BCE. There 
followed the short-lived Kanva dynasty, also partial to Brahmin interests, that col- 
lapsed in 28 BCE. Roughly during this period, the north-western border region of the 
subcontinent was ruled by Greek-Bactrian kings. Although the history is somewhat 
murky, around the turn of the millennium, possibly a bit earlier, a new political 
force, the Sakas of Central Asian origin, emerged in the north-western borders and 
swept across the north-western region of India proper. The Sakas were displaced by 
the Kusanas, also from Central Asia, who extended their empire well into the 
Gangetic heartland. 

We can isolate at least three socio-political elements that provide the back- 
ground to the composition of the MDh. 1) The major element is certainly the histori- 
cal reality and especially the historical memory of two or three centuries later of the 
Maurya state and especially of the Asokan political, social, and religious reforms.” 
Asoka was certainly a Buddhist; whether he was anti-Brahmanical is debatable. One 
thing that his reforms did was to displace the Brahmin from his privileged position 
within the social structure. The special relationship between the political power 
(ksatra) and the religious establishment (6rahma) was broken. The Sanskrit com- 
pound sramana-brahmana used frequently by Asoka in his inscriptions indicates 
that his social philosophy envisaged a dual class of religious people worthy of re- 
spect and support: the newly formed ascetic communities and the old Brahmin class. 


81. The historical accuracy of a “Sunga dynasty” has been cast into some doubt recently 
based on numismatic evidence by Shailendra Bhandare in his presentation to the conference 
“Between the Empires” held at the University of Texas at Austin, April 10-12, 2003. 

82. That such a memory continued to exist long after the demise of ASoka and the 
Maurya empire is demonstrated by the Buddhist literature devoted to Asoka. See John Strong, 
The Legend of King Asoka: A Study and Translation of the Asokavadana. Princeton: Prince- 
ton University Press, 1983. 


Introduction 39 


His prohibition of animal sacrifices,** furthermore, undercut the very raison d’étre 
of Brahmanical privilege: the Brahmin’s ability to perform sacrifices for the well- 
being of society and for the furtherance of royal power symbolized principally in the 
royal horse sacrifice. The very creation of a Brahmanical genre of literature dedi- 
cated to dharma was possibly due to the elevation of this word to the level of 
imperial ideology by Asoka (see II.1). 

2) To add insult to injury, the Mauryas, as well as the Nandas who preceded 
them, were considered at least within Brahmanical historical memory as Siidras. 
The usurpation of Ksatriya royal privileges by Siidras and the ensuing suppression 
of Brahmins are presented as the sure signals of the corrupt times of the Kali age. 
Such a political situation creates the mixture of varnas (varnasamkara), the most 
serious social and moral corruption within Brahmanical ideology. 

3) Finally, there was the contemporary political reality. There were the foreign 
invasions first in the border regions of the northwest and then within the heartland 
that established foreign rule (Parasher 1991). If we are correct in thinking that the 
MDh was written during the Kushana period, then Manu was faced with almost a 
new Maurya rule with the added dimension that these were also foreigners, Mlec- 
chas. The Kushanas ruled a wide swath of northern India, and they also favored 
Buddhism. 

Reading the MDh one cannot fail to see and to feel the intensity and urgency 
with which the author defends Brahmanical privilege. A major aim of Manu was to 
reestablish the old alliance between brahma and ksatra, an alliance that in his view 
would benefit both the king and the Brahmin, thereby reestablishing the Brahmin in 
his unique and privileged position within society. We hear the repeated emphasis on 
the inviolability of the Brahmin in his person and in his property. He has immunity 
from the death penalty, from taxes, and from the confiscation of his property. The 
king is advised repeatedly that a Brahmin’s property is poison. Stealing a Brahmin’s 
gold is one of the five grievous sins, and the death penalty is imposed on the perpe- 
trator. Devotion to Brahmins is a cardinal virtue of kings: “Refusal to turn back in 
battle, protecting the subjects, and obedient service to Brahmins-——for kings, these 
are the best mean of securing happiness” (7.88). The reason why foreign ruling 
classes, such as the Greeks, Sakas, Persians, and Chinese, have fallen to the level of 
Siidras, once again, is their lack of devotion to Brahmins: “By neglecting rites and 
by failing to visit Brahmins, however, these men of Ksatriya birth have gradually 
reached in the world the level of Stidras” (10.43). 

Brahmanical privilege is threatened from two quarters: the Sidra, within 
which class Manu often lumps all the lower classes of society, and the Mlecchas. 
Now, it is true that even the Dharmasitras contain passages that are anti-Siidra. It is 
taken for granted that the sole duty of Siidras is to serve the upper classes; penalties 
for killing a Sidra are much less than for killing people of the upper classes; like- 
wise, penalties are increased for guilty Siidras; the list could go on. Yet we also see 
that Siidras acted as cooks in Brahmin households. Apastamba (2.28.11, 15) even 


83. See Rock Edict 1: hidd na@ kichi jive Glabhitu pajohitaviye; Sanskrit: iha na kaScit 
jivah Glabhya prahotavyah. The term prahotavya has clear reference to Brahmanical sacri- 
fice. 


40 Introduction 


says that one may learn aspects of dharma from Sidras. There is a virulence in 
Manu’s rhetoric vis-a-vis Siidras that appears to indicate that there must be a subtext 
to it. How could the lowest class of society with little access to material resources 
pose such a threat to social order and to Brahmanical hegemony? The fear of the 
Sidra contrasts sharply with Manu’s view of Vaisyas. These are dealt with in a dis- 
passionate and straightforward way. Why were Vaisyas, who are depicted as agri- 
culturists and traders, that is, people with resources, not a threat to the brahma- 
ksatra alliance that Manu was attempting to forge and strengthen? At one level, I 
think, historical memory is at work here; Siidras were once in power and posed a 
real threat to Brahmanical hegemony, and history can always repeat itself. There is 
also the belief highlighted in the Mahabharata with the story of Parasu-Rama that 
there are no true Ksatriyas in the world any more; they are all Siidras.™ 

“Sidra” for Manu, I think, is often a code word; it identifies the enemy and it 
encompasses a wide cross-section of society, both past and present. It evoked the 
memories of bad old days; it heightened the anxiety that what happened under the 
Mauryas could be repeated. I also think that there was a contemporary threat to 
Brahmanical supremacy not so much from political power but from rival religious 
establishments, especially the Buddhist and the Jain monks. I think Manu includes 
these within his code “Stidra.” The connection between Siidras and non-Brahmani- 
cal ascetic sects is drawn by Manu himself. In his advice regarding a Brahmin’s 
residence, Manu (4.61) says: 


na Sitdrardjye nivasen nadharmikajandavrte | 

na pasandijandkrante nopasrste ’ntyajair nrbhih \l 
He should not live in a kingdom ruled by a Sidra, teeming with un- 
righteous people, overrun by people belonging to heretical ascetic sects, 
or swamped by lowest-born people.® 


Here we have a clear juxtaposition between a kingdom ruled by a Sidra king anda 
region populated by pdsandins, a generic term that refers to heterodox ascetics, 
principally Buddhist and Jain, by lowest-born people, and by unrighteous men. In- 
deed, Manu’s instruction (9.225) to the king about cleansing his kingdom of danger- 
ous people includes men who belong to heretical sects (padsanda). The strength of 
Buddhism in the northwestern regions during this period and the patronage offered 
to them by what for Manu were Mleccha kings may also have influenced the con- 
nection between heretic and Siidra/Mleccha. 

Alongside Siidras, we have the Mlecchas. Manu is cognizant of the regions 
occupied by the foreign barbarians, for at 2.23 he defines the areas outside the cen- 
tral Aryavarta as the region of Mlecchas. Manu, however, does not have much to 
say about the Mlecchas in the rest of the book; his focus is on the Siidras. Or, is the 
code “Sidra” meant also to encompass these other outsiders as well? Note that at 


84 See also 10.129 (against Siidras accumulating wealth); 8.22 (against having too many 
Siidras i in a kingdom); and 3.178 (against Brahmins who do ritual work for Sidras). That 
some Siidras (possibly foreign ruling classes) were wealthy is hinted at by Manu’s adage at 
11.34 that a Stidra’s power lies in wealth. 

85. According to a variant reading, he should not live in a region overrun by ascetic or- 
ganizations or groups (pdsandigana). 


Introduction 41 


10.44 Manu presents the Mleccha groups such as Yavana, Saka, and Cina as sunk to 
the level of Siidras, although they were Ksatriyas by birth. 

The ideology that drives Manu, I think, explains the plan of his book. As we 
will see (II.2), he devotes 1034 verses (38.6%) to the discussion of the Brahmin and 
971 verses (36%) to matters relating to the king; these two take up 74.8% of the en- 
tire text.86 Manu’s agenda is two-fold: he wants to tell Brahmins how to behave as 
true Brahmins devoted to vedic learning and virtue, and he wants to tell kings how 
to behave as true kings, devoted to Brahmins and ruling the people justly. For this 
agenda he brings the authority of no less a person than the Creator himself, who is 
presented as the absent author of the text. 


II. SOURCES OF MANU 


The Traditions of dharma and artha 


The MDA presents itself as a Sastra both in the prelude to the work at 158-9 and in 
the colophons that conclude each chapter: iti madnave dharmasastre. The term sastra 
has no exact parallel in English (see IV). It may refer to a system or tradition of ex- 
pert knowledge in a particular field, that is, to a science. It refers especially, how- 
ever, to the textualized form of that science, that is, to an authoritative compendium 
of knowledge signaling a breakthrough achievement within the history of that tradi- 
tion and serving as a point of reference to subsequent investigations within that 
tradition. To use Pollock’s (1989b, 301) felicitous expression, Sastras are “cultural 
grammars” that both reflect and regulate practice (prayoga). Examples of such 
written Sastras are found in almost every field, such as grammar, medicine, politics, 
erotics, dramaturgy, and poetics.®’ A Sdstra may present new material and present 
the material in new ways; but essentially it is a crystallization of a long tradition of 
accumulated knowledge. Consequently, the author of any sastra drew on materials 
from his predecessors. The MDh was no exception. 

Given the elasticity of the concept of dharma and its broad semantic compass, 
the MDh drew on not one but at least two expert traditions: the one relating the 
dharma proper and the other centered on artha, viz., statecraft, polity, and the legal 
process. 

An identifiable expert tradition of reflection, teaching, and textual composi- 
tion focused on the broad and somewhat ill-defined field represented by dharma 
existed in India for a period of at least three to four centuries prior to the composi- 
tion of the MDh. The earliest texts of this tradition, composed in prose aphorisms, 
were the Dharmasiitras. The four extant texts of this tradition, the sitras ascribed 
to Apastamba, Baudhayana, Gautama, and Vasistha, contain the names of numerous 
other experts and their conflicting views on a variety of issues. This evidence points 

86. The percentage will be even higher if we exclude what I believe are sections that are 
later interpolations (below part III. 
87. A lucid and penetrating study of the idea of sa@stra is given in Pollock 1989a. 


88. For the edition and translation, with a discussions of their dates, see Olivelle 1999b 
and 2000. 


42 Tntroduction 


both to a vibrant and contentious intellectual tradition and to a rich literature, much 
of which, unfortunately, is now lost. The composition of the MDh has to be located 
within this tradition. 

That a similar expert tradition relating to artha existed prior to the MDh is 
also certain. It is, however, more difficult to delineate the early history of artha, be- 
cause only one text that has any claim to antiquity, Kautalya’s ArthaSsdstra, has sur- 
vived. It is clear that for his discussion of statecraft and law in chapters 7-9 Manu 
depended on the artha tradition; much of this material has no precedent in the older 
Dharmasitras. 


IJ].1 The dharma Tradition 


It is impossible to determine with any degree of accuracy the early chronology of 
the expert tradition on dharma. The term itself is very old, occurring in the R gveda 
and other early vedic texts. Its precise meaning within those contexts, especially in 
the hymns of the Rgveda, is not altogether clear.*? That some speculation about 
rules of ethical behavior, conventions regarding social conduct, and the judicial 
process should have taken place during the vedic times is clear.” What is less clear 
is when an identifiable expert tradition came into being. Some of the dates proposed 
by Kane (1962-75) and others for the Dharmasiitras, | think, are far too early. 

As I have shown elsewhere (Olivelle, forthcoming-a, -c), dharma was not a 
central term in the ritual or theological vocabulary of the middle and late vedic 
texts. It occurs less frequently in the Brahmanas and Upanisads than we would have 
predicted for a term that was to become the central concept of Indian civilization. Its 
semantic range is also restricted, occurring mostly within the royal vocabulary and 
relating to the king’s function of maintaining law and order in society. The term 
does not play a central role even in the post-vedic ritual texts, the Srautasitras and 
Grhyasitras. My hypothesis is that the term gained popularity and was given a new 
theological definition when it was taken over by the new religions emerging in the 
Gangetic valley, especially by Buddhism; dharma became the central concept 
within these religions, defining the essence of their theology and way of life. The 
term was given even a greater boost when it was made the defining concept in the 
political ideology of the Maurya empire, certainly by Asoka and possibly by his 
father and grandfather, in the first half of the third century BCE. 

I think that the Brahmanical focus on the same term should be seen against 
this background and as a response to its appropriation by their rivals for religious 
authority and political patronage. After ASoka no one could ignore the term. 

If this time-line is correct, then the earliest Brahmanical works on dharma 
could not have been composed long before 300 BCE, most probably after that date. 


89. For the best study thus far of the early history of the term dharma, see Horsch 1967. 
A collection of studies on the history of dharma in various intellectual and religious traditions 
and in different time periods is being edited by me and is forthcoming in the Journal of 
Indian Philosophy. 

90. See, for example, Stephanie Jamison’s several studies on the vedic precedents of 
Dharmasastric prescriptions: 1997, 1998, 2000. 


Introduction 43 


That still leaves roughly three, may be even four, centuries for the tradition to de- 
velop and mature before we come to Manu; that is a long period of time. It need not 
take, as some early Indologists appear to assume, two hundred years for anything 
new and significant to come about in ancient India. 

The first products of Brahmanical reflections on dharma were closely con- 
nected to the vedic sakhds. After the composition of the middle and late vedic texts, 
literary activities of the sakhds focused on the ritual, both on the solemn vedic sacri- 
fices (Srauta), which were probably becoming increasingly rare, and on the more 
common domestic rites (grhya). These productions adopted the aphoristic sutra 
style that was in vogue. It was natural for the Brahmanical scholars to apply the 
same genre to its literature on dharma, a term that also had ritual connotations 
within Brahmanical thought. Collectively, the Srauta-, Grhya-, and Dharma-sitras 
were included in the new category of texts, the Kalpasitra.”! It is, however, unclear 
whether every Dharmasitra was attached to a Kalpa. In the post-Mauryan period, it 
appears that the production of knowledge within Brahmanism with its strong apolo- 
getic dimensions became less confined to sakhds. The sitras of a particular Sakha 
was authoritative only within its confines. The post-Mauryan world brought theo- 
logical and political challenges that needed united efforts rather than the splintered 
responses of the Sakhd system.” The notion of a single dharma for all Brahmins 
was taking hold; several developments within the dharma tradition itself bear 
witness to this. 

One such development related to sacred geography. As Jayaswal (1930, 29- 
32) has observed, the origin of the notion of Arydvarta probably goes back to the 
time of Pusyamitra, the founder of the Sunga dynasty, in the middle of the second 
century BCE, and possibly coincided with his realm (but see above fn. 81). 
Aryavarta was the region where Brahmins followed the dharma in an exemplary 
manner and where correct Sanskrit was spoken. The practices of this regions 
become normative for all. This concept does not occur in the early Dharmasitras of 
Apastamba and Gautama, appearing for the first time in Patafijali’s Mahabhdsya 
and the Dharmasiitras of Baudhayana and Vasistha.® It is taken over and expanded 
by Manu, with the addition of further and more restricted sacred geographies 
labeled brahmavarta, brahmarsideSa, and madhyadesa (MDh 2.17-24). More 
importantly, as we have seen, it was this period following the Maurya political 
ideology—an ideology that displaced the Brahmins from their privileged position 
and placed them on an equal footing with other religious virtuosi, the Sramanas— 
that saw a re-assertion of the unique position of the Brahmins and their special 
relationship to the king and the political authority. The symbiotic relationship 


91. It is unclear when the term Kalpasitra first came to be used with reference to these 
three classes of texts. BOhtlingk and Roth do not give any reference in their dictionary. 

92. Later Mimamsa developed the theory that texts of each sakhd is authoritative with 
respect to all sakhds, thus providing the basis for the supra-sakhd@ Veda. This theory is ar- 
ticulated in the maxim sa@khantaraddhikarananydya or sarvasakhdpratyayanydya, and pre- 
sented in the Purva-Mimamsdsittra, 2.4.9. See, Kane (1962-75) IV: 453. 

93. See, Patafijali on Panini 2.4.20 and 6.3.109; BDh 1.2.9 VaDh 1.8-12. For a 
discussion of these passages, see Olivelle 2000, 10. 


44 Introduction 


between brahma and ksatra was being reestablished.4 This was the time, as 
Hiltebeitel (2001) and Fitzgerald (2004) have shown, that saw the creation of the 
two epics, a new genre of literature in India with a universal and supra-sakhda 
appeal. 

One Dharmasitra that was conceived as a Sastra with a universal application 
and unattached to a sakhd was the Gautama Dharmasiitra. Unattached as it was to a 
larger Kalpasttra, Gautama’s siitra may have been conceived as a true Sastra in the 
manner of Panini's grammar, another sdastra that was not confined to a particular 
Sakhd. As 1 have argued elsewhere (Olivelle, 2000), Gautama is not the oldest 
extant Dharmasitra. It shows clear signs of a maturing tradition, especially in its 
handling of legal procedure. I have also shown (Olivelle, forthcoming-b) that 
Gautama exerted strong influence on Manu; the numerous textual parallels between 
the two texts could not be accidental.» It is clear that the Gautama Dharmasitra 
was an important source in the composition of the MDh. | will present here just two 
examples of Manu’s dependence on Gautama. 


MDh 2.6 GDh 1.1-2 
vedo 'khilo dharmamiilam snutiSile ca vedo dharmamulam tadvidam ca 
tadvidam | MDh smrtisile | 
The root of dharma is the entire The root of dharma is the Veda, and 
Veda, and the tradition and practice the tradition and practice of those 
of those who know the Veda. who know the Veda. 


The dependence of Manu on Gautama here is evident; the addition of (a)khilo in 
pada-a and the change in word order in pdda-b convert the prose into a sloka. What 
is less clear, however, is whether the satra of Gautama itself is a prose rendering of 
a verse original. No other dharma text has a formulation quite like this. 

One of the most significant parallels occurs in the section on impurity caused 
by the birth of a child. The vulgate version of the MDA 5.61-2 contains two verses, 
and they are supported by most manuscripts: 

yathedam Sdvam aSaucam sapindesu vidhiyate | 

janane 'py evam eva syan nipunam suddhim icchatam \\ 61 |l 
sarvesadm Sdvam GSaucam matdapitros tu siitakam | 

sitakam matur eva sydd upasprsya pita Sucih \\ 62 \l 

As this period of death-impurity is prescribed for those who belong to 

the same ancestry, so the same holds true at a birth for those who desire 

perfect purity. Death-impurity affects all, but birth-impurity affects only 

the mother and the father. The mother alone is subject to the period of 

birth-impurity; the father becomes pure by bathing. 


94. Gautama is explicit: “The Brahma united with the Ksatra upholds the gods, ances- 
tors, and human beings” (brahma ksatrena prktam devapitrmanusydn dharayati). 

95. See, for example: GDh 1.28 =MDh 5.143; GDh2.11= MDh 2.101; GDh 2.46 = MDh 
2.73; GDh10.36-7 = MDh 8.30; GDh 12.15-7 = MDh 8.337-8; GDh 12.30, 34-5 =MDh 
8.153; GDh 1237 = MDh 8147-8; GDh14.22 = MDh 5.81; GDh 15.16 = 3.150; GDh 15.18 = 
MDh 3.158; GDh 28.1-3 = MDh 9.104-5. See also the use of the term uddhdra for both the 
preemptive share of the oldest brother in partitioning ancestral property and the king’s 
preemptive share when dividing war booty: MDh 7.97 and GDh 10.21. 


Introduction 45 


In the critical edition, the padas given in bold are retained and the rest is omitted, 
resulting in a single verse: 


janane ‘py evam eva syan matapitros tu sittakam | 

Siitakam matur eva sydd upasprsya pita Ssucih ll 
The same holds true at a birth. The birth-impurity, however, affects only 
the mother and the father. The mother alone is subject to the period of 
birth-impurity; the father becomes pure by bathing. 


The first half-verse of 61 was probably introduced by a later editor into the text of 
Manu. The likely reason for its introduction was the intervention of verse 60, which 
defines sapinda, between verses 59 and 61, thus breaking the natural continuity be- 
tween the latter two. The significant padas a-b of verse 59 define the period of im- 
purity at the death of a relative: dasaham savam Gsaucam sapindesu vidhiyate —“a 
ten-day period of death-impurity is prescribed for those who belong to the same an- 
cestry.” If this verse came immediately before, then evam in the phrase janane ’ py 
evam of verse 61 becomes clear; the period of impurity after a birth is the same as 
that after a death. The intervention of verse 60 prompted a later editor to insert 
padas a-b of verse 61, making the connection between 61 and 59 explicit. A similar 
commentarial intrusion occurs in the parallel passage of the Vasistha Dharmasitra 
(4.16-22) between sitra 16 (which is identical to Manu 5.59 pdadas a-b) and siitra 20 
(which is identical to Manu 61 pddas c-d). But in Vasistha, because the commen- 
tarial portion is in prose, the connection between the verses 16 and 20 remains trans- 
parent. 

Both Manu and Vasistha, however, are dependent on Gautama 14.146. This 
section of Gautama on impurity begins with the determination of the time of impu- 
rity following a death (4.1-12). The section begins: sa@vam GSaucam dasardtram 
anrtvigdiksitabrahmacarinam sapindanadm—“‘there is a ten-night period of death- 
impurity for those belonging to the same ancestry, except an officiating priest, one 
consecrated for a sacrifice, and a vedic student”—a provision that parallels Manu 
5.59 and Vasistha 4.16. This section in Gautama concludes (4.13) with a brief defini- 
tion of sapinda. Then Gautama (14.14-6) deals with impurity resulting from the 
birth of a child, two causes of impurity generally treated together in the Sdstras: 


janane ‘py evam | The same holds true at a birth. 
matapitros tat | It affects the father and the mother. 
matur va | Or just the mother. 


It is evident that Gautama is giving here three opinions regarding impurity resulting 
from childbirth. The first treats it exactly the same as impurity resulting from a 
death. The second restricts it to the parents of the newborn child. The third restricts 
it even further to just the mother. That these were opposing views is made clear in 
the parallel version of Vasistha (4.20~2), which adds reasons for the three opinions 
(given below in italics): 

janane ‘py evam eva syan nipunadm Suddhim icchatam | 

matapitror va bijanimittatvat | 

matur ity eke — [after which a verse is cited in support of this view] 


46 Introduction 


The same holds true at a birth for those who desire perfect purity. 

Or it affects the father and the mother, because [the birth] is caused by 
the seed. 

Or just the mother, according to some. 


The same three opinions are found in Manu 5.61~2, but they are difficult to discern 
because of the expansion of an original single verse into two. When we look at the 
single verse of the critical edition, we see the same three opinions clearly stated: 


janane ‘py evam eva syan 
matapitros tu sitakam | 
sutakam mdtur eva syad upasprsya pita Sucih ll 


Stripped of their commentarial accretions, the textual dependence of both 
Manu and Vasistha on Gautama becomes clear. 

The inquiry into the possible connections between the MDh and the Dharma- 
sutras has a long history. It was Max Miiller, in a letter to one Mr. Morley on July 
29, 1849, who suggested for the first time that the MDh may have been a recast in 
verse of an ancient prose Manava Dharmasiitra. The hypothesis received strong 
support from Georg Biihler (1879-82, 1886), the renowned translator of the four 
Dharmasitras and of the MDh in the influential series Sacred Books of the East. 
Even though there was a Manava ritual tradition and we have a Srauta- and a 
Grhya-sitra of the Manavas, there is no evidence that a Manava Dharmasitra ever 
existed. After strong opposition from Jayaswal (1930) and especially from Kane 
(1962-75, I: 143-49, 317)), the hypothesis of an early Manava Dharmasiitra has 
been largely abandoned by scholars (Lingat 1973, 89). Whether the author of the 
MDh belonged to the Manava tradition, however, is unclear; there does not appear 
to be any direct link between the MDh and the ritual sitras_ of that tradition. That 
there was a connection between the MDh and the Maitrayana sakhd, to which the 
M§anava tradition belongs, appears more likely and has been recently argued by 
Jamison (2000). The MDA, as I have attempted to show, was an original work of a 
gifted author; it was neither a recast nor a text that evolved through numerous and 
progressive accretions. However, it is also clear that Manu used the material found 
in the Dharmasitra tradition, especially the text of Gautama, in composing his text. 


Il.2 The artha Tradition 


Unlike the Dharmasiitras, the MDh devotes a proportionately larger segment to 
matters relating to statecraft (rajadharma), law, and legal procedure (vyavahara), 
topics generally viewed as falling within the purview of Arthasdstra. The 
Apastamba Dharmasitra, for example, devotes 83 (6%) of its 1364 sutras to state- 
craft and law, and the Gautama Dharmasiitra 115 (1.8%) of its 973 sutras. The 
MDA, on the other hand, allots 971 (36%) of its 2680 verses to statecraft and law, 


96. The Dharmasitras deal with sons and inheritance separately, whereas the MDh in- 
cludes this topic within its section on legal procedure. If we include these sections, still 
Apastamba’s section rises to only 115 sitras (8.4%) and Gautama’s to 162 (17.7%). 


Introduction 47 


only slightly smaller than the section devoted to the Brahmin, which consists of 
1034 verses (38.6%). The difference shrinks even further when we account for the 
fact that much of what is discussed in the section on the Brahmin (chapters 2~6) ap- 
plies equally to other twice-born individuals. The MDh thus represented a watershed 
in the development of the expert tradition of dharma, as it co-opted material that 
belonged to the expert tradition of artha. 

The tradition of artha, then, is a second textual source in the composition of 
the MDh. Although only one treatise of the artha tradition has survived, the one as- 
cribed to Kautalya, it refers to opinions of several other schools, including one re- 
ferred to as Manava. What, if any, connection there was between the artha school of 
the Manavas and the author of the MDh is impossible to determine.?’ What is clear, 
however, is the connection between some verses of the MDh and the extant 
Arthasastra.* Given the problems inherent in the dating of these two texts, it is not 
possible to assert with high degree of confidence who is borrowing from whom. I do 
agree with Kangle, however, that it is most likely that at least sections of the 
ArthaSsdstra are older than Manu and are the source for some of the passages and 
vocabulary I will discuss below.” The vocabulary analysis does not support Jolly's 
(1923) and Fezas’s (1996) contention that the AS is contemporaneous with the late 
smyti texts of Yajfiavalkya and Narada. !© 

We find a close parallel, both textual and with regard to vocabulary, between 
MDh 8.52-7 and Arthasastra 3.1.19, especially in the use of the term desa for docu- 
mentary evidence (italicized in the translation): 


Manu 


apahnave ‘dhamarnasya dehity uktasya samsadi | 
abhiyokta dised desam karanam vanyad uddiSet \| 52\ 
adesam yas ca diSati nirdiSyapahnute ca yah | 

yas cadharottardn arthdn vigitan nadvabudhyate \l 53 || 
apadisyGpadesyam ca punar yas tv apadhavati | 

samyak pranihitam cartham prstah san nabhinandati \\ 54 \i 
asambhdsye saksibhis ca dese sambhdasate mithah | 
nirucyamdnam prasnam ca necched yas capi nispatet \l 55 |l 
brithity uktas ca na brityad uktam ca na vibhavayet | 

na ca pirvaparam vidyat tasmdd arthat sa hiyate \l 56 | 
jidatarah santi mety uktva disety ukto disen na yah | 
dharmasthah karanair etair hinam tam api nirdiset \| 57 | 


97. Jayaswal (193, 23) thinks that there was no connection, because opinions contrary to 
those ascribed to the Manavas in the Arthasdstra and the MBh are recorded in the MDh. 

98. For discussions of the relationship between the two texts, see Sternbach 1959, 1963; 
Derrett 1973, 114, 1976-78, I: 120-39. 

99. For the dating of the AS, see Trautmann 1971, 185-86; Kangle 1964, and 1963-65, III: 
80-83. See also my earlier comments (I.2) about the absence of reference to gold coins in 
the AS, making it likely that it is earlier than the MDh. 

100. For example, the AS does not use the term divya for ordeal or lekhya for a legal 
document, terms common in the YDh and NSm. 


48 Introduction 


52When the debtor, told in court to pay up, denies the charge, the 
plaintiff should produce a document or offer some other evidence. 
53 When the plaintiff produces something that is not documentary evi- 
dence [or a false document]; produces and then disavows it; does not re- 
alize that his earlier points contradict the ones he makes subsequently; 
54states his case and then backs away from it; does not acknowledge 
under questioning a point that has been clearly established; 55 secretly 
discusses with witnesses a document which is prohibited from being 
discussed; objects to a question clearly articulated; retreats; 5¢does not 
speak when he is ordered “Speak!”; does not prove what he asserts; and 
does not understand what goes before and what after—such a plaintiff 
loses his suit. 57When a plaintiff says “I have people who know,” but 
when told “Produce them” does not produce them, the judge should de- 
clare him also the loser for these very reasons. 


Arthasastra 


(a) nibaddham vadam utsrjyanyam vadam samkramati, (b) piirvo- 
ktam paScimendrthena ndbhisamdhatte, (c) paravakyam anabhi- 
grahyam abhigrahydvatisthate, (d) pratijfidya desam nirdisetyukte na 
nirdi§ati, (e) hinadesam adesam va nirdigati, (f) nirdistad desad 
anyam deSam upasthdpayati, (g) upasthite dese 'rthavacanam 
naivam ity apavyayate, (h) saksibhir avadhrtam necchati, (i) asam- 
bhdsye dese sdksibhir mithah sambhdasate, (j) iti paroktahetavah \\ 
3.1.19 


(a) When someone casts aside the plaint as recorded and moves on to 
another plaint; (b) does not make a point made later accord with what 
was stated before; (c) after challenging an unchallengeable statement of 
the opponent, remains (stubborn); (d) promises to produce a document, 
but when told “Produce it,” does not produce it; (e) produces a defective 
document or something that is not documentary evidence [or a false 
document); (f) puts forward a document different from the document 
specified; (g) denies a significant statement in the document he has put 
forward, saying “It is not so”; (h) does not accept what has been ascer- 
tained through witnesses; (i) secretly discusses with witnesses a docu- 
ment which is prohibited from being discussed; (j) these are the reasons 
for loss of suit. 


Both the passages contain the obscure and obsolete word desa. As I have shown in 
the notes to the translation of MDA 5.53-5, this was probably an ancient term for 
documentary evidence presented in a court of law, a term that was later displaced by 
the more common lekhya. Manu's discussion is longer and includes items not noted 
by the Arthasastra; but the connection between the two passages is unmistakable. 
The closest parallels are Manu 52-3 and AS (d)-(f), Manu 54 (pdadas c-d) and AS 
(g), and Manu 55 (pddas a-b) and AS (i). As Kangle (1964) has pointed out, it is 


Introduction 49 


only in this passage that Manu uses the term dharmastha for a judge; elsewhere, he 
consistently uses the term pradvivaka. 

Kangle (1964) gives further examples of textual parallels. The definition of 
sahasa (robbery) is nearly identical in the two, and it is obvious that Manu has bor- 
rowed this either from Kautalya or from another text of the artha tradition: 


sahasam tv anvayavat prasabham karma yat krtam \I 

niranvayam bhavet steyam hrtvapavyayate ca yat || MDh 8.332 
When an act is committed with force and in the presence of the victim, 
it is “violence”; when it is committed outside his presence, it is “theft,” 
and so is an act that someone commits and then denies. 


sahasam anvayavat prasabhakarma niranvaye steyam apavyaya- 
ne ca \l AS 3.17.1-2 
When an act is committed with force and in the presence (of the victim), 
it is “violence”; when it is committed outside his presence, it is “theft,” 
and also when it is denied. 


Another significant parallel in the vocabularies of the MDA and the AS is the 
term pravdsayet. Its normal meaning is to send someone into exile. As I have shown 
in the note to MDh 8.123, Manu frequently uses this term in its technical Artha- 
Sastric meaning of putting someone to death; the term may have been used first as 
an euphemism for executing (“getting rid of”) a criminal, a kind of euphemism 
common in even modern military vocabulary.'°! There is also the unusual term 
prakrta for an appointed official of the king, a term that is likely borrowed from the 
Arthasastric vocabulary. ! 

The most important influence of the artha tradition on the MDA is the incor- 
poration of the “Grounds for Litigations” (vyavaharapada). Legal matters were 
dealt with in a disorganized manner in the Dharmasitras. Hence, it is highly un- 
likely that the organizing of the material under 18 vyavahadrapadas was accom- 
plished within the dharma tradition. It is much more probable that this classification 
was achieved by the scholars of the artha tradition, law and legal procedure being a 
central focus of their labors. The author of the MDh probably borrowed this classifi- 
catory system, as well as the material presented within it, from the artha tradition. 
The classification of the vyavahdarapadas in the MDh and the extant Arthasastra, 
however, are so different from each other that it is unlikely that the former borrowed 
from the latter. The first two vyavaha@rapadas in the Arthasastra, for example, deal 
with the rules governing the relationship between husband and wife and the parti- 
tion of property, whereas in the MDh family law is treated last. The Arthasastra, 
moreover, has as the final category the “Miscellaneous” (prakirnaka), which is 


1o1. See MDh 8.123, 332; 9.242, 289. For the Arthasdastra references, see 1.18.21, 4.13.8, 
20; 11.1.33, 47; 12.4.4. See also Kangle’s comment on 4.13.8. Kangle correctly interprets this 
term to mean execution. Indeed, Medhatithi (on 8.284) calls this meaning an Arthasastric us- 
age (arthasastraya). Given the double meaning of the term, it is unclear which of the two is 
applicable in some places: see, for example, MDh 7.124;10.96. See also 9.242d where both 
Bharuci and Medhatithi gloss pravdsana with vadha. 

102. See my note to the translation of MDh 8.11. 


50 Introduction 


absent in the MDh but found in the later DharmaSdstras, such as those of 
Yajhavalkya and Narada. !3 

The Dharmasitras deal with the relationship between husband and wife, the 
classification of sons, and the partition of property within their sections on marriage. 
The MDh is the first text to include these discussions within the section of judicial 
procedure and litigation, clearly indicating the influence of the artha tradition. This 
is, moreover, one reason why the MDA deals with matters relating to family and 
women in two places, once under marriage in chapter 5, and again under the 16th 
vyavahdrapada in chapter 9.1% 


TI. THE WorK OF REDACTORS 


After it leaves the hands of the author, every text assumes an independent life. This 
is especially true in the case of texts published before the advent of printing. These 
pre-modern texts continue their life as they are copied by hand, read, studied, inter- 
preted, and commented on by succeeding generations of scribes, readers, and schol- 
ars. It is this after-life of a text that a critical edition uncovers through the collation 
of manuscripts and presents to the reader in its critical apparatus. This aspect of a 
critical edition is as important as its better known feature of attempting to recon- 
struct the text as composed by the author. !® 

Both these aspects—the original text and the after-life—laid out in the text 
and the critical apparatus of the edition presuppose that changes are introduced into 
the author’s text by those responsible for its after-life. Some of these changes are 
inadvertent, such as scribal errors and misreadings; others are deliberate, such as the 
different but equally cogent and intelligible readings found in different recensions 
and the additional verses found in numerous manuscripts. These changes introduced 
into the text and detectable through the examination of the extant manuscripts and 
commentaries can be identified and moved to the critical apparatus, thus restoring 
the text. The manuscript and other evidence we possess, however, often do not 
cover the entire period from today to the time of the author. In the case of the MDA, 
we pick up the textual history midstream, at least several centuries after its compo- 
sition. 

Native scholars as far back as Bharuci challenged the authenticity of individ- 
ual verses. Bharuci, for example, rejects the authenticity of 9.93, calling it a verse 


103. See above p. 14 for a comparison of the vyavahdrapadas in these four texts. 

104. For other parallels between the MDh and AS see: MDh 7.99, 101 and AS 1.4.3 (see 
Scharfe 1993, 46-7); MDh 7.105 and AS 1. 15.60; MDh 7.205 and AS, 6.2.6-12; MDh 7.161 and 
AS. 7.4.4-7; MDh 8.87-101 and AS 3-1134-37; MDh 8.242 and AS 3.10.24 MDh 8.279 and 
AS 3.19.8, MDh 8.299-300 and AS 3.3.8-9; MDh 9.153 and AS 3.6.17; MDh 8.224 and AS 
3.15.14, MDh 8.159 and AS 3.169; MDh 8.332 and AS 3.17.1-2; MDh 8.367 and AS 4.12.3; 
MDh 9.271 and AS 4.11.9; MDh 9.277 and AS 4.10.1; MDh 9.280 and AS 4.11.7; MDh 9.282 
and AS 2. 36.26-7; MDh 9.2945 and AS 8.1.19; MDh 1114 and AS 3.14.37; MDh 11.14 and AS 
3-14.37. 

105. For a discussion, see the Introduction to the Critical Edition in Part IT of this book 
under “Constitution of the Text.” 


Introduction 51 


from another sti. Medhatithi also records this opinion: kecid Ghuh amdnavo ’yam 
Slokah. Clearly there were ongoing debates with regard to the authentic text of 
Manu. We also find that scribes or scholars introduced deliberate changes into the 
text. At 9.299, for example, the reading @rabheta tatah kadryam sanicintya guru- 
laghavam is deliberately changed in the manuscripts of the ST into gurulaghavato 
jfiatvd tatah karyam samdcaret. 

If the later tradition of readers and copyists introduced changes, it is fair to as- 
sume that earlier generations did so too. Any such changes that were taken over by 
the extant manuscript tradition cannot be identified by the normal methods em- 
ployed in the critical constitution of texts. These methods are thus called “lower 
criticism”; they are dependent on extant manuscripts, citations, commentaries, and 
the like. The text constituted by these methods can only be an approximation to the 
original text as written by the author. 

I agree with Lariviere’s (1989, xii) hypothesis that the Dharmasdstras_contin- 
ued to expand with the addition of new materials “until a commentary on the 
collection was composed. A commentary would have served to fix the text, and the 
expansion of the text would have been more difficult after that.” Because I consider 
the MDh to have a single author, I take these emendations as produced by redactors 
working on the original text. Such activities were made more difficult after the text 
was “fixed” by early commentators such as Bharuci and Medhatithi, but they did not 
cease completely. Changes after that period, however, were limited to the addition 
of individual verses and minor changes in the wording of verses detectable through 
“lower criticism.” 

Methods of identifying early changes undetectable by manuscript evidence 
fall into the category of “higher criticism” and are not as sure-footed as methods 
employed in “lower criticism.” In the former some amount of conjecture is inevita- 
ble. In Biblical studies higher criticism has been used profitably especially with re- 
gard to the Pentateuch, but there the criticism was used not to construct the original 
text of the author but to uncover the sources he used in constructing his text. It has, 
therefore, been called “source criticism.” 

Biihler’s 4886, Ixv-lxxiv) attempt to separate the ancient portions from later 
additions within the MDh was, likewise, an exercise in source criticism. His aim 
was to distinguish the passages going back to his hypothetical Ma@nava Dharma- 
sutra from those added by the editor of the versified version. His criteria were 
somewhat crude. He accepted sections that had parallels in other Dharmasitras as 
part of the ancient sutra, and took sections without such parallels to be the work of 
the editor. 

My aim is different. Mine is not a source criticism but a criticism aimed at 
identifying possible additions and interpolations into the text composed by Manu 
between the time of its composition and the earliest manuscript and other evidence 
that we possess. The criterion I use is based on Manu’s overall plan for and organi- 
zation of his work, which I have outlined above in detail. We saw that Manu is care- 
ful to let his reader know that he has completed one subject and is moving on to 
another through “transitional verses.” The structure of his work shows that Manu 
had a very methodical mind and a systematic work plan. It is highly unlikely, I 


52 Introduction 


think, that he would have introduced extraneous material right in the middle of his 
carefully crafted plan, thus ruining the work’s organization. In the following exami- 
nation of the entire text, | will follow Manu’s organizational scheme and identify 
sections that fall outside that scheme. 

Most, if not all, extraneous material is found at the interstices of his plan, at 
the junctures between two topics. Clearly, it was easier to introduce new material at 
these fault lines than within the discussion of a given topic. In the translation, I have 
identified these passages as “Excursus”; even if someone does not accept my con- 
tention that these are interpolations, they must at best be viewed as parenthetical 
statements. Even though I think that the chapter division is a later innovation, in the 
following discussion I will follow the chapter sequence for easy reference to the 
text. 


Chapter One 


Why would a treatise on dharma begin with the story of creation? Biihler (1886, 
Ixvi) in fact remarks: “The whole first chapter must be considered as a later addi- 
tion. No Dharma-siitra begins with a description of its own origin, much less with an 
account of creation.” Long before Biihler, the 9th-century commentator Medhatithi 
expressed a similar concern: 


Where did we start? And where have we ended? He [Manu] was asked 
the dharmas prescribed in the sastras, and he indeed promised to ex- 
plain them. To then describe the world in its unmanifest state is both 
irrelevant and serves no human purpose. This truly exemplifies the 
common saying: “Asked about the mango trees, he talked about the 
Kovidara trees.” With regard to this matter, there is neither an authori- 
tative basis nor does it serve any purpose. Therefore, this entire chapter 
should not be studied. ! 


There is, however, a cogent defense of Manu’s introductory statements found 
in the first chapter. 1 have already dealt with why Manu begins with the origin of the 
text, thereby investing it with supreme authority. Why he gives an account of crea- 
tion is less obvious. I think the clue is found in the manner the first account of 
creation ends (MDh 1.31): “For the growth of these worlds, moreover, he produced 
from his mouth, arms, thighs, and feet, the Brahmin, the Ksatriya, the Vaisya, and 
the Stidra,” evoking the conclusion of the creation story in the Purusa Hymn 
(Rgveda 10.90). The seers questioned Manu not simply about dharma but about the 
dharmas of all social classes (1.2: sarvavarndndm dharman). I think the creation 
account is intended to show how the four varnas came into being; they are not con- 
tingent and temporary social phenomena but part of the very fabric of creation. 


106. Medhatithi on MDh 1.5: kva asthah kva nipatitah | Sastroktanipatitadharmdn prstas 
tan eva vaktavyatayda pratijidya jagato 'vyakrtavasthavarnanam aprakrtam apurusartham 
ca | so "yan satyo janapravadah “amrdn prstah koviddran dcasta” iti | na ca@smin vastuni 
pramdnam na ca prayojanam astity atah sarva evayam adhyayo nddhyetavyah | 


Introduction 53 


The clarity of Manu’s presentation is obscured at this point by three 
“excursus” containing a quite superfluous second account of creation (1.32-41), a 
classification of fauna and flora (@.42-50), and an account of cosmic cycles (1.51- 
57).!°7 1 believe these are interpolations introduced at the interstice between creation 
of the varnas and the composition of the sa@stra @.58). In the second account of 
creation, for example, we have humans coming into being in verse 39, while the 
human race divided into the four classes already appear in verse 31! 

If we eliminate the intervening 26 verses, we see an elegant transition from 
the creation account culminating in the production of the four varnas to the 
composition of the treatise by the Creator and its transmission to Manu, culminating 
in Manu’s instruction to Bhrgu to transmit it to the sages thereby publishing it to the 
world: 


For the growth of these worlds, moreover, he produced from his 
mouth, arms, thighs, and feet, the Brahmin, the Ksatriya, the Vaisya, 
and the Sidra. (1.31) 

After composing this treatise,'° he himself imparted it first only to 
me according to rule; and J, in turn, taught it to Marici and the other 
sages. Bhrgu here will recite that treatise to you in its entirety, for this 
sage has learnt the whole of it completely from me. (1.58-9) 


As the initial dialogue between the seers and Manu ends (1.4) with Manu’s 
command “Listen!” (sriyatdm), so the entire preliminary narrative ends (1.60) with 
Bhrgu’s command “Listen!” 

At this point we should have expected Bhrgu to get on with his task and to ex- 
pound the dharmas of the varnas. That, however, is not the case. Here at this inter- 
stice between the introductory material and the body of the text, there are five 
“excursus” containing an account of time and cosmology (61-86), the occupations 
of the varnas (87-91), and the excellence of Brahmins (92-101); a eulogy of Manu’s 
treatise (102-10); and a table of contents (111-18). This material takes up the rest of 
chapter 1. Most scholars have taken the table of contents to be a later addition. I 
think this entire section represents redactorial interventions and is quite out of place 
here. Even though the origin of the sa@stra and its transmission to Manu and Bhrgu 
had already been stated, the eulogy of the treatise ascribes its composition not to the 
creator but to Manu himself (1.102). This section ends with the instruction of Bhrgu 
(1.119): “Just as, upon my request, Manu formerly taught me this treatise, so you too 
must learn it from me today.” This duplicates Bhrgu’s command “Listen!” and does 
not have the same force or elegance. I think the authentic voice of the author is 


107. Hacker (1978) also has drawn attention to the discrepancy between the first and the 
second account. My argument does not exclude the possibility that some verses in the first 
account, especially 28-30 dealing with the repeated creation, are also interpolations, as 
argued by Hacker 1978. Another point worthy of note is that the Samkhya terminology, 
dominant in the first account, is totally absent in the second account of creation. 

108. The introduction of this treatise appears to be abrupt, but it was actually introduced 
at the very beginning 1.3: “For you alone, Master, know the true meaning of the duties con- 
tained in this entire ordinance (vidhdna) of the Self-existent One, an ordinance beyond the 
powers of thought or cognition.” 


54 Introduction 


heard in this imperious “Listen!” which is repeated in the two other answers to the 
seers’ queries at 5.3 and 12.2 later in the text. 

If we place the first verse of chapter 2 immediately after verse 60 of chapter 1, 
we see the smooth transition from the preliminary narrative to the body of the text 
that the author accomplished: 


tatas tatha sa tenokto maharsir manund bhyguh | 

tan abravid rsin sarvan pritatmd Srityatam iti \l 

vidvadbhih sevitah sadbhir nityam advesaragibhih | 

hrdayenabhyanujridto yo dharmas tam nibodhata \l 
When Manu had spoken to him in this manner, the great sage Bhrgu 
was delighted; he then said to all those seers: “Learn the Law always 
adhered to by people who are erudite, virtuous, and free from love and 
hate, the Law assented to by the heart.” 


Here we have two signature expressions of Manu: sri#yatam (“listen”) concluding 
the first verse, and nibodhata (“learn”) concluding the second. | think these two 
verses followed each other in the original composition of Manu, the first concluding 
the preamble and the second opening the main body of the work.!” 


Chapters Two to Seven 


I find few if any identifiable interpolations in the central chapters of the book, 2-7. 
It may well be that the opportunity and/or the impulse to add new material were 
present at the beginning and in the concluding chapters. 

Suspicion was already raised by Biihler (1886, Ixvii) regarding the first eleven 
verses of chapter 2. I think his doubts about verses 6-11 are unfounded; he considers 
these to be repetitions. We would have to eliminate a lot of verses throughout the 
text if we were to eliminate all duplications and repetitions; an author surely has the 
right to repeat and reiterate. So, for example, Manu deals with women both in his 
treatment of marriage and household life (chapters 3-5) and under grounds for 
litigation (chapter 9). The only doubt I have focuses on verses 2-5 of chapter 2 that 
deal with desire. This section stands outside the flow of the discussion in the rest of 
the chapter. The kind of certainty I have with regard to the interpolations I have 
identified in the first chapter, however, is lacking here. 

The second passage identified by Biihler is 2.88-100. This deals with the con- 
trol of organs and includes an enumeration of the eleven organs. I agree with 
Biihler’s (1886, Ixvii) assessment that this passage “interrupts the continuity of the 
text very needlessly, and has nothing whatsoever to do with the matter treated of.” 
Although such assessments often contain a heavy dose of subjectivity, in this par- 
ticular case it is backed by textual evidence. The Bhavisya Purdna contains much of 


109. Note further that, for example, the term yuga occurs in the sense of a world age 
only in these interpolated sections of the first chapter (1.68f) and in an interpolated section of 
chapter 9 (9.301—2). In the other places where the term occurs, it has the meaning of a new 
birth or a succeeding generation (10.42, 64), even though these sections are also not above 
suspicion. 


Introduction 55 


the early chapter of the MDh (Laszlo i971; Sternbach 1974). Bhavisya 1.2.5-27a-b 
reproduces the entire section on the student MDh 2.69-87. Immediately after this 
section at 1.2.27c-d, the Bhavisya gives the verse MDh 2.101, thus omitting the sec- 
tion 2.88—100, precisely the passage that we have suspected of being an 
interpolation (Sternbach 1974, 7). It is a possibility that the author of the Bhavisya 
had before him a copy of the MDh in which this section was missing. 

Furthermore, the very wording of verses 2.87 and 2.101 indicates that they 
probably followed each other in the original text; the transition here is smooth, with 
verse 101 picking up the word japa from verse 87: 


japyenaiva tu samsidhyed brahmano ndatra samSayah \ 
kurydd anyan na va@ kurydn maitro bradhmana ucyate \l 2.87 || 
purvam sandhyam japams tisthet savitrim GrkadarSandt | 
pascimam tu samdsita samyag rksavibhavanat \\ 2.101 || 

Only by soft recitation does a Brahmin achieve success; on this there 
is no doubt. Whether he does anything else or not, a Maitra, they say, is 
the true Brahmin. 

At the morning twilight, he should stand reciting softly the Savitri 
verse until the sun comes into view; at the evening twilight, however, he 
should remain properly seated until the Big Dipper becomes clearly 
visible. 


Medhiatithi also, commenting on 2.88, appears to consider this section an appendix 
(pariSista) to the section on twilight worship and lacking injunctive force 
(arthavadda). 

On the whole, however, these central chapters are remarkably free of tamper- 
ing or interpolations. One may quibble about this verse or that, but there is no sure 
way of determining the authenticity of individual verses.!!° 


Chapter Eight 


I think there are several identifiable interpolations within this chapter. I will list 
them first and offer explanations for my decisions: 20-2 (Stidras as legal interpret- 
ers), 27-9 (property of minors and women), 30—40 (lost and stolen property), 386- 
420 (miscellanea). 

Chapter 8 begins with the king entering the court to adjudicate a law suit. This 
is in keeping with Manu’s penchant for placing his discourse in concrete situations, 
as, for example, discussing the king’s duties by following him through a regular day 
from getting up in the morning to going to bed at night (7.145-226). So here Manu 
places his discussion of the system of justice within the context of the king coming 
into the court. After enumerating the 18 grounds for litigation (vyavahdrapada; 4~ 
8), he opens his discussion on legal proceedings. In this section he deals with a) the 


110. I also think that verses 3.171-5, which look very much like a commentary explaining 
several technical terms, are either parenthetical remarks or interpolations. The theme of 
individual alongside whom one should not eat, introduced in verses 169~70, is continued after 
the interruption in verse 176. 


56 Introduction 


judges, who substitute for the king (9-11), b) the demands of Justice that the law be 
administered impartially (12-9), and c) the beginning of the trial proper with a brief 
summary of judicial conduct and reasoning (23-6, 41-6). This admirable structure is 
marred by three “excursus.” The first (20-2) is a diatribe against a king employing a 
Sidra to interpret the law, a topic having little to do with matters at hand, coming 
between sections (b) and (c). Likewise, section (c) on judicial conduct and reason- 
ing is cut in two by the intervention of some totally extraneous material having to do 
with property: the property of minors and women (27-9) and stolen and lost 
property (30-40). These matters have little to do with litigation or court 
proceedings. Indeed, once we remove these two “excursus” the section on judicial 
conduct reads smoothly: the judge should infer the truthfulness of litigants and 
witnesses by their external demeanor (25-6), find out the special laws of the region, 
caste, and family of the litigants (41-2), never initiate a law suit suo moto or try to 
suppress an action brought before him (43), apply correct judicial reasoning (44-5), 
and stick to the norms recognized by the cultured elite but only if they are not in 
conflict with those of particular regions, castes, and families (46). 1 think it is most 
probable that the three sections I have identified—verses 20-2, 27-9, and 30-40— 
are the work of later redactors. 

The rest of the chapter moves smoothly and there are no obvious interpola- 
tions that interfere with the flow of the text. The next interpolation comes right at 
the end of the chapter after the section on sexual crimes against women. This 
“excursus” contains a motley group of topics including the control of trade, ferries 
and tolls, and the occupations of the varnas, topics that have nothing to do with the 
administration of justice or law suits and belongs to chapter 7 that deals with state 
administration. This section is so out of place and so obviously the work of redac- 
tors that it is unnecessary to argue the point at length. It is also instructive that this 
long section of 35 verses comes at the end of the chapter, indicating that the addition 
was made after the MDh was subjected to the chapter division. 


Chapter Nine 


This chapter addresses the last three grounds for litigation: marital law, inheritance, 
and gambling. The sections on marital law and inheritance are remarkably free of 
obvious redactoral interventions. As I have already noted, the section on gambling 
and betting does not regulate this practice but rather seeks to abolish it. For Manu 
gambling and betting are a social curse and the source of many social ills. Although, 
following tradition, Manu lists it under grounds for litigation, in his eyes it is prop- 
erly a police function. This naturally leads to the final topic under the duties of a 
king, namely the eradication of thorns, that is, the elimination of social parasites. 
Unlike law suits, which are brought before the king by private litigants, the eradica- 
tion of thorns is to be initiated by the king himself and his officials. 

Immediately after the section on gambling (221-8), we should have expected 
some concluding statement wrapping up Manu’s discussion of the 18 grounds for 
litigation. And we find precisely such a statement in verse 250: 


udito ’yam vistarasSo mitho vivadamdnayoh | 


Introduction 57 


astadaSasu margesu vyavaharasya nirnayah \l 
I have described above in great detail how lawsuits brought by litigants 
and falling within the eighteen avenues of litigation are to be decided. 


After this Manu turns his attention back to the king and his duties with the statement 
(251): 
evam dharmydani karyani kurvan samyan mahipatih | 
desan alabdhanil lipseta labdhams ca paripdlayet \l 
Carrying out properly in this manner his duties flowing from the Law, 
the king should both seek to acquire territories not yet acquired and 
protect well those that have been acquired. 


after which he proceeds with the subject of the eradication of thorns (252): 


samyan nivistadesas tu krtadurgas ca sastratah | 

kantakoddharane nityam Gtisthed yatnam uttamanm || 
After properly settling the country and building a fort according to tex- 
tual norms, he should direct his maximum effort constantly at the eradi- 
cation of thorns. 


This admirable and methodical discussion is marred and interrupted by two 
section that have little to do with the subject and that have all the marks of redacto- 
rial activity. 

The first comes between the conclusion of the section on gambling (228) and 
the closing statement on judicial procedure (250). This section (229-49) of 21 verses 
contains various materials dealing with punishments and grievous sins, topics that 
are dealt with elsewhere in the book. The natural flow of Manu’s discourse is re- 
stored when we eliminate this section. 

The next “excursus” (294-311) deals with various subjects including the con- 
stituents of a kingdom and the activities of the king, topics belonging to chapter 7. 
This interpolation is inserted between the section on the eradication of thorns (252- 
93) and the statement that closes this section (312). This statement finds its natural 
place immediately after verse 293; the intervening verses makes the closing state- 
ment out of place. 

The final “excursus” (313-23) instructs the king never to offend a Brahmin 
and comes between the closing statement on the eradication of thorns (312) and the 
concluding statement that brings the entire section on the king to a close (324-5). 
Again this interpolated section stands out like a sore thumb next to the finely flow- 
ing narrative. See how the flow is restored once this section is eliminated: 


In this and other ways should the king, always alert and tireless, sup- 
press thieves within his own realm and even in others. (312) 

Conducting himself in this manner and always devoted to the Laws 
pertaining to kings, the king should direct all his servants to work for 
the good of his people. (324) 

I have described above in its entirety the eternal rules of action for 
the king. What follows, one should understand, are the rules of action of 
the Vaisya and the Siidra in their proper order. (325) 


58 Introduction 


Chapter Ten 


Chapter 9 concludes with the transitional verse that introduces the section on 
apaddharma (the law in times of adversity): 


eso ’ndpadi varndndm uktah karmavidhih subhah | 

apady api hi yas tesam kramasas tan nibodhata || 
I have described above the splendid rules of action for the social classes 
outside times of adversity. Listen now to the rules for them in the proper 
order for times of adversity. 


Chapter 10, however, begins with a long discourse on mixed varnas (1-73) that ap- 
pears to have little to do with how one must act in a time of adversity. 

At first sight, this section also appears to have resulted from the work of later 
redactors who were unable to understand how Manu could have omitted a discus- 
sion on mixed classes.!!! Nevertheless, I think this section is part of the original 
treatise. For Manu, I think, a time of adversity was not just a temporary emergency 
but also a permanent state of affairs, given the decadent state of contemporary soci- 
ety. This enduring period of adversity is signaled by the intermixture of the varnas 
giving rise to several intermediate and lower castes (jati). This was probably the 
reason why Manu deals with the mixture of varnas at the start of his discussion of 
apaddharma. 

Other reasons also support this conclusion. The initial request (1.2) of the 
seers that prompted the narration of the text included the dharmas of not just the 
four varnas but also of those that are in between:!!2 


bhagavan sarvavarnadndm yathavad anupirvasah | 
antaraprabhavanam ca dharman no vaktum arhasi \\ 
Please, Lord, tell us precisely and in the proper order the Laws of all the 
social classes, as well as of those born in between. 


It would be unlikely that a methodical writer like Manu, having introduced this issue 
at the very beginning, would fail to address it in the body of his text. There is no 
other place in the text that deals with mixed varnas. 

Furthermore, the Gautama Dharmasitra, which was one of the sources Manu 
used (see IJ.1), has a similar section on mixed varnas (4.16-28). Likewise, the 
ArthaSsastra (3.7.20-37) treats this topic in the course of its discussion of sons. With 
these examples in his own sources, it is unlikely that Manu would have neglected to 
treat this topic. 

There are, however, not one but three discourses on mixed classes, and they 
are not always in agreement. Some suspicion, therefore, may be directed at the sec- 
ond and third re-tellings of the origin of the mixed classes.' 


iui. Sharma (1990, 225), indeed, considers the entire chapter 10 to be a later interpolation 
carried out about the 5th century CE This is pure speculation, and there is no evidence 
internal or external for such a conclusion. 

112. See also MDh 2.18, which also speak of antardla, those born between the four 
regular varnas. 

113. Also to be noted is that the term bahya with reference to excluded groups or out- 


Introduction 59 


The rest of the chapter flows smoothly, and I see no section that raises suspi- 
cions of redactory intervention. 


Chapter Eleven 


Chapter 10 concludes with the transitional verse that introduces the new topic of 
penance (MDh 10.131): 


esa dharmavidhih krtsnas cdturvarnyasya kirtitah \ 

atah param pravaksyami prayascittavidhim subham || 
I have described above the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law of 
the four classes. Next, I will explain the splendid rules pertaining to 
penance. 


One would have expected Manu to open the topic of penance immediately, that is, at 
the beginning of chapter 11. That, however, is not the case. We have to wait until 
verse 44 for the introduction of penance. Bharuci, the earliest commentator on 
Manu, also saw this as a problem. Bharuci begins his commentary on chapter 11 
with the objection that after promising to deal with penance we should have ex- 
pected Manu to begin this chapter with verse 44. 

When he finally gets to penance, Manu is as usual lucid and methodical. He 
begins with a clear and succinct introductory verse (44): 


akurvan vihitam karma ninditam ca samacaran | 

prasajams cendriyarthesu prayascittiyate narah || 
When a man fails to carry out prescribed acts, performs disapproved 
acts, and is attached to the sensory objects, he is subject to a penance. 


Then he discusses the significant issue of whether penance does any good. Can a 
person erase sins through penance? He devotes the next eight verses to this discus- 
sion, and concludes in the affirmative (54): “Therefore, one should always do pe- 
nances to purify oneself; for individuals whose sins have not been expiated are born 
with detestable characteristics.”!!4 After this Manu proceeds to a methodical treat- 
ment of sins and their respective penances (see I.1). 

Before we come to this lucid presentation of penance, however, there is a long 
(43 verses) section dealing with a gamut of topics unrelated either to penance or to 
each other. First is a section on occasions for giving and begging (1-26) followed by 
verses dealing with times of adversity (27-30), the power of Brahmins (31-5), and 
sacrifices (36-43). I am convinced that this entire section added at the beginning of 
the chapter represents not the original work of Manu but the supervening activities 
of redactors. 


castes is found only in these later sections dealing with mixed classes: 10.28, 29, 30, 31, 39, 
62. This term is unique to the MDh, except for what appears to be a citation of MDh 10.62 in 
ViDh 16.18. 

114. In this case also, Manu is probably following the example set by Gautama (19.3-10), 
who introduces his discussion with the explicit statement: “With regard to this [i.e., penance] 
people raise the question: Should (a sinner) perform a penance or not” (tatra prdyaScittam 
kuryan na kuryad iti mimamsante). 


60 Introduction 


The discussion of sins and the appropriate penances for them takes up verses 
55-126. Manu then turns from personally committed sins to association with out- 
caste sinners, within which he deals with both excommunication from caste and re- 
admission to it (181-9). The entire section on penance concludes with the nice and 
pithy statement (190): 


enasvibhir anirniktair nartham kimcit samdacaret | 
krtanirnejanams caiva na jugupseta karhi cit \l 
No one should transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and under 
no circumstances should anyone abhor those who have been cleansed. 


At the interstice between the sections on penances for sins (73-126) and asso- 
ciation with outcaste sinners (181-9), however, we have a long interruption that is 
attributable to redactorial activity. This “excursus” (127~79) deals with penances for 
a) injury to living beings, b) eating forbidden food, c) theft, and d) sexual offenses. 
As I| have already noted (1.1), the reason or opportunity for this interpolation is 
probably to make up the four sins that Manu mentions in his transitional verse intro- 
ducing the topic of association with sinners (180): “I have described above the 
expiation for all four kinds of sinners. Listen now to the following expiations for 
those who associate with outcastes.” These four kinds of sinners, however, were 
already presented in the previous authentic segment of the text on the classification 
of sins. There follows a long excursus of 126 verses (191-247) containing miscella- 
neous expiations for a motley list of sins and infractions. Although it is not possible 
to dismiss this entire section as an interpolation, yet I think the entire discourse on 
penance would have come to a fine close if it ended with verse 190: “No one should 
transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and under no circumstances should 
anyone abhor those who have been cleansed.” The suspicion that what follows is 
redactoral reworking is strengthened by the very first verse of the long excursus 
(191): “One must not live together with people who have killed children, women, or 
those who come to them for protection, or with people who are ingrates, even if they 
have been purified in accordance with the Law.” This is obviously an attempt to 
modify the provisions of the previous verse. 


Chapter Twelve 


Chapter 12 poses unique problems because it is so very different from the rest of the 
work. It begins with the seers making one final request of Bhrgu to teach them the 
law of karma. One is tempted to see this entire chapter as deriving from the work of 
redactors. There is, however, no clear evidence that it did not belong to the original 
work of Manu; we cannot detect the breaks in the line of discussion that we detected 
in other interpolated passages or the violation of the structure that Manu has laid 
out. 

Broadly this discussion on karma falls into two section, the one dealing with 
the fruits of action (3-81) and the other dealing with actions leading to the supreme 
good (83-106). These two sections are divided by one of Manu’s signature transi- 
tional verses (82). It is after these two central sections of the chapter that one begins 
to suspect redactorial intervention. At the conclusion of the section on actions lead- 


Introduction 61 


ing to the supreme good there is what appears to be the usual transitional verse 
(107): 
naihsreyasam idam karma yathoditam aSesatah | 
mdnavasydsya Sastrasya rahasyam upadisyate || 
This is the totality of activities leading to the supreme good as pre- 
scribed. The secret doctrine of this Treatise of Manu will now be taught. 


There follows a section (108-15) on how to resolve matters relating to dharma 
that are not covered by Manu’s treatise. The language of this verse is quite different 
from all the other transitional verses. The passive verb upadiSyate is not found else- 
where; Manu prefers the active nibodhata and pravaksydmi. The expression 
yathoditam in the first line is also absent in other transitional verses. The expression 
mdnavasastra is also uncharacteristic. Although the issue of how to resolve matters 
not covered by the text is addressed at the conclusion of the Dharmasiutras as 
well,!!5 nowhere are these rules called rahasya. My best guess is that the text of 
Manu concluded with the closing verse 116: 


etad vo ‘bhihitam sarvam nihsreyasakaram param | 

asmdd apracyuto viprah prapnoti paramam gatim || 
I have explained to you above all the best means of securing the su- 
preme good. A Brahmin who does not deviate from them obtains the 
highest state. 


The “excursus” on secret teaching contains material such as the legal assembly 
(parisad), however, that is found also in the Dharmasitras and thus has some claim 
to authenticity. One possibility is that this section formed the concluding statement 
of Manu and that the introductory verse was put there by a not very competent re- 
dactor, especially because the word rahasya does not occur in the body of this sec- 
tion. Nevertheless, the concluding verse 116 appears out of place after this section, 
because it refers back to the major theme of this chapter, namely, the attainment of 
the highest good (nihsreyasa), which was the topic covered by verses 83-106. If 
verse 116 came directly after 106 it would have provided a fitting and elegant con- 
clusion to the entire book. 

As it is, this verse is followed by another “excursus.” It appears that a redactor 
wanted to bring back the voice of Bhrgu, because this section begins with Bhrgu 
reflecting on the origin of the text (417): “In this manner, the blessed god, desiring to 
do what is beneficial for the people, revealed to me in its entirety this highest secret 
of the Law.” There follow several verses recommending the contemplation of the 
Self with a strong Advaita tinge. The final verse in the extant text is an eulogy of the 
text itself where the voice is not that of Bhrgu but of a third person (126): “When a 
twice-born recites this Treatise of Manu proclaimed by Bhrgu, he will always fol- 
low the proper conduct and obtain whatever state he desires.” This entire section is 
in all likelihood a later addition to bring the text to a close. I for one think that 
Manu’s original closure is much better; it is strong and pithy, without unnecessary 
emotion. 


115. See ApDh 2.29.13-15; GDh 28.48-51. 


62 Introduction 


In total, then, the sections I have identified as possible interpolations through the 
activities on one or more redactors contain 329 verses. Out of a total of 2680 verses 
in my critical edition, those verses amount to just 12% of the text. 


IV. NATURE AND PURPOSE OF THE TREATISE 


The year was 1794. The renowned orientalist William Jones published his English 
translation of the MDh and made the Dharmasastra tradition of India known to the 
rest of the world for the first time. This translation was not spurred simply by schol- 
arly interest; it had also a practical purpose. In 1772 Warren Hastings, the British 
Governor General, had proposed a plan for the administration of justice in which the 
Hindu law based on DharmaSdastra was to play a key role. British judges needed 
access to the original legal texts of India to implement the British policy of 
“administering native law to the natives” (Rocher 1969). So was born what Lariviere 
(1989) has called a “well-intentioned misunderstanding.”!® 

What is the relationship between the provisions of the Dharmasastras, such as 
the MDh, and real law administered by courts in India down the centuries? Lariviere 
(1997), 98) presents three positions held by scholars since the time of Hastings: a) 
the Dharmasdstras are concerned with real law, b) they are merely pious wishes 
with no political sanction, and c) they are purely panditic commentaries with no re- 
lation to custom. Beyond the administration of law, the issues also relate to the link 
between Dharmasastra and the social life in India through the centuries. Lariviere 
(1997b, 97) asks: “What is its relationship to ‘law’? Does it represent the law of the 
land? What is its value for the history of Indian society? What does this literature 
tell us about how people actually lived?” 

Lariviere (1997b, 98), contrary to accepted wisdom, has boldly articulated his 
position: “I believe that the dharmasastra literature represents a peculiarly Indian 
record of local social norms and traditional standards of behavior. It represents in 
very definite terms the law of the land... . What I mean is that the whole of the 
dharma corpus can be viewed as a record of custom.”!!” I am in broad agreement 
with Lariviere, but with some caveats. The Dharmasdastra represents an expert tra- 
dition and, therefore, presents not a “record” of custom but a jurisprudential, or in 
Indian terms, a Sastric reflection on custom. Custom is taken here to a second order 
of discourse. 

The relation between Dharmasdstra and real life—whether it is law, social 
norms, or morality —can best be analyzed, I think, by taking the self-presentation of 
Dharmasdastra as a Sastra seriously and asking the broader question: What is the 

116. Scholars have questioned the position accorded to Manu by early Indologists and 
the British administrators. Doniger (1991, xi) asks: “Were the British right to privilege 
Manu? Did they do it to advance their own interests, or because they found that this text was 
really in use?” More recently Dirks (2001, 34) has taken an extreme, and for me an untenable, 
position about the position of the MD/ and it British appropriation. As I have shown in this 
introduction, the treatise of Manu had attained the preminence and prestige that few texts in 


India did long before the arrival of the British. 
117. This view has been strongly defended and extended further by Wezler 1999b. 


Introduction 63 


connection between Sdstra and practice? Pollock’s (1989a, 1989b) fine studies on 
the nature and history of Sastra have done much to illuminate this uniquely Indian 
form of discourse. Pollock (1989a, 18) offers the following definition derived from 
native reflections on the term: “sa@stra was thought of generally as a verbal 
codification of rules, whether of divine or human provenance, for the positive and 
negative regulation of particular cultural practices.” Toward the end of this study 
Pollock identifies the question at the heart of the relation between Dharmasastra 
and real life (1989a, 25): “It is the task of the cultural historian to determine what 
precisely may be the relationship between the learned discourse identified (or 
generically identifiable) as S@stra and the actual cultural practices of traditional 
India.”!!8 

It is impossible to deal with this issue in detail within the limits of this intro- 
duction. Nevertheless, I think it is important at least to sketch the outlines of a solu- 
tion in order to grapple with the nature and purpose of Dharmasdastra. Pollock 
(1989a, 25) himself presents some thoughts on the possible relationship between 
Sdstra and practice: “(1) Sastra could be viewed as offering a real blueprint for 
practice; (2) as merely describing, ex post facto, a cultural product and thereby ex- 
plicating its components for the benefit of a cultivated public; (3) as providing, in 
the guise of normative injunctions, something like a standard of taste and judgment 
to critics, that is, as defining the ‘classic’; (4) even as functioning in some cases to 
‘invent’ a tradition; () as constituting, in the hegemonic manner of high cultures 
elsewhere, practices as ‘sciences’ for theoretical or actual control; (6) or—last in 
order but perhaps first in importance—as endowing a practice with status, legiti- 
macy, and authority directly conferred by any ‘Vedic’ charter, something most 
Sastras aspire to become” (my numbering). Clearly, these are not mutually exclu- 
sive characteristics. Indeed, several of them may and often do coexist in the same 
Sastra. 

The native reflections on sastra come closest to #1 and some elements of #6. 
That is, Sastra is viewed as in some sense eternal and providing the pre-existing 
blueprint for a particular practice. This is clearly so for the pre-eminent Sastra, the 
Veda, and its relationship to the vedic ritual. Jayanta, in his Nydyamajijari,!!° ex- 
tends this to all sa@stras: “All these sciences have existed, like the Vedas, from the 
beginning of time; when people ascribe them to one or another author, they are 
merely acknowledging someone who has sought to give them concise or detailed 
expression.” Clearly, the MDh presents itself as just such an eternal Sdstra, even 
though its present shape was given by Manu and Bhrgu. Vatsyayana in his 
Kamasiitra (1.3.1-10), likewise, affirms the priority of Sastra over practice 
(prayoga). There are people who perform a practice without knowing the corre- 
sponding sastra, but that practice would not have existed without the norms pro- 
vided by the sa@stra. So, courtesans practice the art of love without studying the 
Kamasutra, handlers of horses and elephants do so without knowing the Sastras 


n18. Pollock answers some aspects of the connection between sastra (theory) and 
prayoga (practice) in other articles: 1989b, 1990, especially 1985, where he discusses in 
greater detail the priority of theory over practice. 

119. Cited and translated by Pollock 1989a, 23. 


64 Introduction 


dealing with these animals, and Brahmins speak Sanskrit without necessarily 
knowing Panini. Manu (10.56) himself insists that even Candala executioners, who 
could hardly expected to learn S@stras, should carry out there task yathasastram, in 
accordance with Sastric provisions. Yet, Vatsyayana insists, these rule-governed 
activities would not have existed but for their respective Sastras: prayogasya ca 
durastham api Sastram eva hetuh “The Sdstra alone, however removed it may be, is 
the cause of practice.” He concludes the discussion with an example: tathdasti rdjeti 
dirastha api janapada na marydddm ativartante tadvat etat “As people in the 
provinces do not transgress the bounds, knowing, ‘The king is there’, so it is in this 
case.” !20 As the absent king is the reason for people far away to observe the bounds 
of law and propriety, so the sastra, though unlearned, is the reason why people en- 
gage in rule-bound activities. 

At a philosophical level, one may argue whether rules come before practice or 
practice before rules. Does grammar come before language, or vice versa? The 
question, however, is not rules and practice but codified rules in sastras and prac- 
tice. From a historical point of view, it is evident that such codes are posterior to the 
practices from which the rules are derived, and this is reflected in #2 of Pollock’s 
list and in Lariviere’s view of Dharmasdstra as codifying custom. This, however, is 
only one part of the question. It deals with the origin of sastra. 

The second, and for us the more important question, is how a sastra, once it is 
produced, relates to ongoing practice. I take a Sdstra to be the outcome of an expert 
tradition; it is both a repository of received knowledge and a tool of instruction. 
Many authors no doubt attempted to write Sastras; only the successful ones, those 
that the later tradition found worth preserving in the form of memorizing and copy- 
ing, have survived. Lariviere (1997b, 98) attributes the disconnect between the pro- 
visions of Dharmasdstra and lived reality to the obfuscation created “by the fact 
that the idiom of all the dharma literature is one of eternality and timelessness.” 
This is no doubt true; but I think the disconnect not just in Dharmasdastra but in all 
SGstras lies deeper in the very nature of a Sastra. All Sastras represent a meta- 
discourse; they deal with reality but always once removed. They are blueprints, but 
you cannot construct a building with them! 

Let us take the Vedas, the pre-eminent sastra. You cannot perform a vedic 
sacrifice properly even if you know them all by heart. Take the Srautasitras, the 
treatises that are supposed to fill this vacuum. They provide just a skeleton; a vedic 
priest knowing just the Srautasitras would be totally lost in the nitty-gritty of the 
ritual activities. Take grammar, the queen of the sdstras. Knowing Panini back- 
wards and forwards will not permit someone to speak or read Sanskrit. Knowing the 
Carakasamhita or the Susrutasanhitd will not make someone a good doctor. The 
native tradition itself admits this character of S@stra with its emphasis on a live 
teacher to impart Sastric knowledge and its tradition of commentaries that elucidated 
the sa@stras and frequently updated and modified their content. 


120. Doniger’s translation “In the same way, even citizens far away from the king do not 
step across the moral bounds he sets” does not account for the “iti” or capture accurately 
Vatsyayana’s reasoning here. Doniger, Kama Satra (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002), 
p. 14. 


Introduction 65 


Sastras exercised control over practice not directly but through the mediation 
of experts (Sista), who were instructed in the §@stras in their youth and who, as 
adults, continued to read, reflect, and debate the sastras among themselves.!2! If we 
take the case of drama, playwrights and directors would not be able to engage in 
their craft merely by knowing Bharata’s Ndtyasdastra; they would have been in- 
structed in the specifics of their craft by their teachers. Yet, their professional life 
and work would bear the stamp of the great Sastra, which they learned from their 
teachers and from which they drew inspiration and guidance. Manu (7.54) insists 
that the king’s ministers should be s@stravidah, experts in Sastra. It is the sdstra that 
makes a Sista. But the sastra provides only a skeleton; it is the sista, the expert, who 
provides the living guidance in a variety of human activities. 

Turning to Dharmasastra, the experts were the Brahmins knowledgeable in 
these treatises, Brahmins whom the MDh calls dharmapdathaka (12.111). Although it 
is possible that passages from the Dharmasastras may have been cited in courts of 
law, these texts did not have a function similar to civil and criminal codes of modern 
states within the administration of justice. The administration of justice is mediated 
by the expert judges, who are conversant both with the s@stras and with the laws 
and customs of the particular region, caste, guild, or family involved in the dispute. 
The Dharmasdastras never pretend to present all the laws and norms that govern the 
behavior of people. Manu (8.41) clearly spells out the extra-Sastric knowledge re- 
quired to judge lawsuits: “A king who knows the Law should examine the Laws of 
castes, regions, guilds, and families, and only then settle the Law specific to each.” 
There certainly is more to law than what is given in the Sastra, and it was unwise of 
the British to equate Dharmasdastra with Hindu law. 

It is equally unwise to consider DharmasSdastras as “purely panditic commen- 
taries” with no relation to law or real life, just as it is silly to consider Panini as 
having no relationship to spoken Sanskrit or the Carakasanhitd as having no con- 
nection to the practice of medicine or the NdtyaSdstra as having nothing to do with 
the production of plays. The relationship of sa@stra to practice in all these areas is 
more nuanced than envisaged by either of these extremes. !7 

Turning to the MDA, it is clear that it seeks to present itself as an eternal 
document parallel to the Vedas and composed by the creator himself. Its 
“hegemonic” character is evident in its aim to present a blueprint for a properly or- 
dered society under the sovereignty of the king and the guidance of Brahmins. Al- 
though it presents the “should” more often than the “is” and may occasionally 


121. The etymologies of the two terms also support their connection: sa@stra is derived 
from the verbal root Vsd@s (to train, teach, educate) with the suffix tra giving the meaning of 
“an instrument of training,” while sista is the past participle, ‘a trained or educated” person. 
One can, thus, think of sastra as the instrument for creating a Sista. 

122. Maxwell (1989, 10) dwells on the disconnect between si/pasastra and actual speci- 
mens of iconography and architecture, citing D. D. Kosambi: “The traditional Sanskrit books 
on architecture and iconography are contradicted by the specimens actually found.” Maxwell 
may be correct in his assessment that those who wrote the s@stras were not practitioners of 
the craft. This is certainly true in si/pa, and probably also in other s@stras such as medicine. 
This may parallel the modern distinction between the creative artists, whether in literature, 
music, or fine arts, and the critics. 


66 Introduction 


engage in pious wishes and wishful thinking, the amount of detail it presents with 
regard to diverse areas of human activity—titual, food, marriage, inheritance, adop- 
tion, judicial procedure, taxation, punishment, penance—shows that it was not di- 
vorced from reality. The long literary tradition of Dharmasdastra, the longest such 
tradition in India spanning over two millennia, shows that the sdstras were used 
continuously in the education of young Brahmins and perhaps even princes. It was 
this training in the Dharmasdastra that the Brahmins selected as judges, lawyers, and 
arbiters brought to their judicial reasoning, deliberation, and judgments. '!7 

The purpose of a central document such as the MDA is multifaceted and hard 
to pin down. First, there are the aims of the author when he undertook the project. 
These are impossible to discern except when they are reflected in the composition 
itself (see I.4). Second, there are the purposes to which the text was employed by 
succeeding generations of scholars, readers, and politicians. These are bound to be 
varied depending on time, place, and the varying goals of the individuals and insti- 
tutions concerned. As a Sastra, however, and the premier Dharmasdastra in Indian 
history, we can discern some of the roles it may have played both in learned dis- 
course and in everyday life. The MDh was clearly not a “how to” book; it was nei- 
ther a Handbook of Manners nor a Law Code, although it contains aspects of both. 
Its connection with lived reality was not immediate but mediate. I have identified 
two significant aspects of this mediation. First, a central s@stra such as this would 
have been used in the instruction of budding scholars, principally young Brahmins; 
it must have been part of the standard curriculum for aspiring dharmapdathakas in 
Brahmanical colleges such as ghatikdsthdnas in southern India.'% Second, it was a 
point of reference for the ongoing scholarly conversations, debates, and literary pro- 
duction in the field of DharmasSastra (see V). Some of these debates and interpreta- 
tions may indeed sound panditic pedantry. But they also had a serious and often 
practical purposes. After all, many of the medieval Nibandhas and commentaries 
were commissioned by kings and others were carried out under royal patronage. 


V. MANU AND THE LATER DHARMA TRADITION 


The composition of new Dharmasdstras appears to have flourished in the four or 
five centuries following the composition of the MDA, that is, approximately 300- 
600 CE. Most of these are now lost; we only have fragments of them cited in 
medieval commentaries and Nibandhas. Only three have survived in more or less 
complete form: those ascribed to Visnu, Yajiavalkya, and Narada. Two others, 
Brhaspati and Katyayana, have been reconstructed on the basis of medieval 
fragments by Rangaswami Aiyangar and P. V. Kane. 


123. On the existence of professional lawyers who gave advice to litigants, see Jayaswal 
1930, 288-92. 

124. See C. Minakshi, Administration and Social Life under the Pallavas (Madras: Uni- 
versity of Madras 1938), pp. 186—212; K. A. Nilakantha Sastri. The Colas (Madras: University 
of Madras 1955), pp. 629-33. Sastri shows that Dharmasdstra was part of the curriculum in 
colleges such as Ennariyam and Tribhuvani. 


Introduction 67 
V.i1 Manu and the DharmaSdstras 


Manu was a pioneer, and he set the standard for the literary activities of his succes- 
sors. All followed Manu in composing their works in verse. Visnu is the only ex- 
ception, but this text was a recast of an original sutra composition; indeed, the entire 
first chapter, which is clearly the work of the redactor, is in verse. Both Visnu and 
Yajfiavalkya follow Manu in the introductory frame of their works. Like Manu, 
Visnu begins with the story of creation. It is the Earth personified as a woman who 
requests the creator, Visnu, to teach her dharma (ViDh 1.48): “Tell me, Eternal One, 
the dharmas of the social classes and orders of life” (varndndm asramdndm ca 
dharman vada sandtana). Yajitavalkya’s frame is brief. The sages approach 
Yajfiavalkya in Mithila and ask him to teach them dharma (YDh 1.1): “Tell us com- 
pletely the Laws of the social classes, of the orders of life, and of others” 
(varndsrametaranam no brithi dharman aSesatah). In all these we hear the echo of 
the early verses of the MDh. After Manu, the sastra is no longer simply a scholarly 
production as in the Dharmasitras but a teaching by a god or an exalted being. 

The influence of Manu on the later literature, I think, runs deeper. I have al- 
ready made reference to the tradition of several redactions (sanzhita) of the original 
composition of Manu, that of Bhrgu being only one. The third extant Dharmasastra, 
that of Narada, is explicitly viewed by the tradition to be just such a redaction! 
The text proper is preceded by an introduction in prose that claims to be part of the 
text itself, although rejected as a later addition in Lariviere’s (1989) critical edition. 
Irrespective of its provenance, this introduction claims that the text is a segment of 
an abbreviation of Manu’s original work carried out by Narada. Clearly, the con- 
nection to Manu must have been an old one. 

Yajnavalkya (1.4) places Manu at the head of his list of the authors of 
Dharmasastras, the first such list in existence. Yajfiavalkya’s dependence on the 
MDh has been considered in detail by Kane (1962-75, I: 430) and I agree fully with 
his conclusion:!* “The correspondence of Yajfiavalkya’s words with the text of 
Manu is in most cases very close, so much so that one cannot help feeling that Yaj. 
had the Manusmrti before him and purposely made an attempt to abridge the some- 
what loose expressions of Manu.” Indeed, the abridgment and the tighter organiza- 
tion of the material are the main features of Yajflavalkya. He has between 1003 and 
1010 verses depending on the recension, as opposed to the 2680 in the MDh. We 
have clear examples of Yajiavalkya making a single pithy verse out of several pro- 
lix ones of Manu:!27 


kusitladhdnyako va syat kumbhidhanyaka eva va \ 

tryahaihiko vapi bhaved asvasthanika eva va | 

caturndm api caitesam dvijanam grhamedhinam | 

Jyayan parah paro jneyo dharmato lokajittamah || MDh 4.7-8 


125. See above, p. 19. For a discussion, see also Lingat 1973, 91, 100-1. 

126. See also Jayaswal 1930, 59; Lingat 1973, 99. 

127. For other parallels and condensations, see YDh 3.26 (= MDh5.103-4); YDh 3.27-8 
(= MDh 5.93-8). See also MDh 5.8-9 and YDh 1.170; MDh 5.24-5 and YDh 1.169. 


68 Introduction 


Let him be a man who stores grain sufficient to fill a granary; a man 
who stores grain sufficient to fill a jar; a man who has sufficient grain to 
last three days, or a man who keeps nothing for the next day. Among all 
these four types of twice-born householders, each should be recognized 
as superior to the ones preceding it and better at winning the heavenly 
world, according to the Law. 


This rambling discussion is abridged by YAjiiavalkya to a single condensed verse 
using the same technical terms: 


kusitlakumbhidhanyo va tryahiko ’ Svastano ’pi va \ 

Jived vapi Silonchena Sreyan esam parah parah \\ YDh 1.128 
Let him be a man who stores grain sufficient to fill a granary; a man 
who stores grain sufficient to fill a jar; a man who has sufficient grain to 
last three days, or a man who keeps nothing for the next day. Or let him 
live by gleaning. Each later mode is superior to the one preceding it. 


Note the compression of the two verses of Manu 4.85-6 into a single con- 
densed one in YDhA 1.141: 


na rdjnah pratigrhniyad ardjanyaprasititah | 

sunacakradhvajavatam veSenaiva ca jivatam || 

dasa siindsahasrani yo vahayati saunikah | 

tena tulyah smyto raja ghoras tasya pratigrahah \| MDh 4.84-85 
He must never accept gifts from a king who is not from a royal lineage; 
from people who operate abattoirs, oil-presses, or taverns; or from peo- 
ple who gain their living by keeping brothels. One oil-press equals ten 
abattoirs; one tavern equals ten oil-presses; one brothel equals ten tav- 
erns; and one king equals ten brothels. 


pratigrahe sitnicakridhvajivesyanaradhipah | 

dusta daSagunam purvat purvad ete yathakramam \| YDh 1.141 
With regarding to accepting gifts, each later one of the following is ten 
times worse than each preceding in due order: butcher, oil-presser, tav- 
ern keeper, prostitute, and king. 


Yajfiavalkya also introduced a new organization of the Dharmasastric mate- 
rial, dividing it into three broad chapters (adhydya) dealing with proper conduct 
(acara), law (vyavahdra), and penance (prayascitta). To some degree this division 
was already accomplished by Manu; but the division is not as clear in the MDh and 
these topics are subsumed under the overall plan of the book that we examined. The 
threefold division introduced by Y4jiiavalkya became standard in later 
Dharmasastric literature. Yajniavalkya, then, represents both an abridgment of the 
MDh and several key advances in the developing genre of Dharmasastra. 

As Jolly has already discussed in detail,!8 Brhaspati follows the MDh so 


128. Jolly 1889, 271-5. See also Kane (1962-75) I: 328-30. Lingat (1973,104) observes 
that “Brhaspati follows the Manu-smrti very closely. He considers it as the highest authority. 


Introduction 69 


closely that it appears likely that he had a copy of the MDh before him while he 
composed his text. Several verses of Brhaspati are actually commentaries on pas- 
sages of the MDh. Indeed, later tradition recorded in the Skanda Purana (Jolly 1889, 
274) takes Brhaspati as one of the redactors of Manu. Brhaspati pays the ultimate 
tribute to Manu and his authority:!2 


vedarthapratibaddhatvat pramanyam manoh smrtam\ 
manvarthaviparitd tu ya smytih sd na Sasyate \\ 
Manu, however, is the authority, the tradition declares, because he is 
firmly anchored to the meaning of the Vedas. Any siti opposed to the 
tenor of Manu is not approved. 


Katyayana is probably later than all the authors we have discussed. Kane 
(1962-75, I: 496) ) thinks that Katyayana took Narada and Brhaspati as his models. 
It is also clear that the MDh was also close at hand while he was writing. Kane 
(1962-75, I: 499) has pointed out numerous places where Katyayana refers to or 
cites the opinions of Manu. Like Brhaspati, Katyayana also appears to comment on 
verses of the MDh. In his discussion of women’s property, for example, Katyayana 
(895-901) has seven verses explaining the technical terms for the six types of such 
property, technical terms that are given without explanation in MDh 9.194. 

In some sense, we can extend what Lingat (1973, 104) says about Brhaspati to 
all the authors of Dharmasdastras subsequent to Manu—they are all commentators 
on the MDA, which is their exemplar and model. They are certainly not commenta- 
tors in the traditional sense; but their works can be viewed as commentaries in the 
sense that they are drawing inspiration from and responding to the work of Manu. It 
is certainly at the back of their minds and perhaps in front of their eyes as they tried 
to both emulate it and to surpass it. Brhaspati, however, was prescient in his obser- 
vation that no other sti will ever measure up to, much less surpass, the s@stra of 
Manu. This is demonstrated by the influence of Manu on the medieval production of 
texts on dharma. 


V.2 Manu and Medieval Literature 


From around the 8th century CE, the literary activities of legal experts turned from 
the production of sastras to commenting upon them. Some of the earliest such 
commentaries were on the MDh, Bharuci’s (assigned to the 7th century by Derrett) 
and Medhatithi’s (9th century) being the oldest surviving ones. Altogether nine such 
commentaries have survived, the most on any single Dharmasastra. 

Probably by the 1oth or 11th century a new genre of literature enters the pic- 
ture. These literary productions are called Nibandha. They differ from commentar- 
ies in that they are not tied to a single text and explore the topics of dharma ina 
systematic way. Although original compositions of authors whose names are re- 
corded, the Nibandhas consist for the most part of citations from older Dharma- 


He refers to it and quotes it often, and in many contexts he seems to be merely a commentator 
on Manu.” 


129. Aiyangar, Samskarakanda, 13; Jolly 1889, XX VIL, 3. 


70 Introduction 


Sdstras. Some Nibandhas are voluminous, such as the Krtyakalpataru of Laksmi- 
dhara and the Caturvargacintamani of Hemadri. Several of these texts were produc- 
ed under royal patronage. 

One gauge of the influence of the MDh on these medieval authors is the fre- 
quency of citations, especially when compared to other Dharmasastras. As a pilot 
project I compared the citations of the MDh in three well-known Nibandhas, four 
Kandas of Laksmidhara’s Krtyakalpataru (KKT)'™ Jimitavahana’s Dayabhaga 
(Db) and Madhava’s Paragaramadhaviya (Pm)'3! with those of the other major 
dharma texts. I give below the statistics: 


KKT Db Pm 
Manu 589 101 621 
Apastamba 141 4 86 
Gautama 54 20 107 
Baudhayana 101 19 109 
Vasistha 114 7 123 
Yajiiavalkya 324 41 461 
Visnu 207 45 145 
Narada 384 41 309 
Brhaspati 342 64 316 
Katyayana 447 47 333 


Only in the Vyavahdrakdanda of the KKT and the Pm are the citations from the 
three texts dealing solely with vyavahdra greater than those from Manu. In the KAT: 
Narada 342, Brhaspati 301, Katyayana 411, and Manu 288. In the Pm: Narada 282, 
Brhaspati 243, Katyayana 262, and Manu 190. 

The centrality of Manu to the dharma tradition, then, is not simply because it 
was given prominence by western Orientalitsts, as some have charged. Long before 
Sir William Jones entered the scene, Manu was the dominant voice on dharma for 
close to two millennia. 


Manu has cast a long shadow over the literary activities of experts in the dharma 
tradition from the early centuries of the common era right up to medieval and mod- 
ern times. It is fitting, then, that, by chance or by design, the Ma@navadharmasastra 
was the first legal text to be translated into a foreign language. 


130. The Kandas are: Brahmacari, Grhastha, Rajadharma, and Vyavahara. 
131. Although strictly a commentary on the ParaSarasmrti, for all intents and purposes 
this is clearly an independent work more akin to a Nibandha. 


Note on the Translation 


The Italians say “traduttori traditori’”—translators are traitors—and with some justi- 
fication. It is simply not possible to capture the full import of a statement when ren- 
dering it into another language, especially a language separated from the original by 
a cultural and temporal chasm. Such are Sanskrit and English. Yet, translation is not 
only possible; it is also a cultural imperative. One can become less of a traitor by 
understanding the cultural, historical, and linguistic world of the source text and the 
target language, and this I have attempted to do. 

Mine is not a “literal” translation but, hopefully, an accurate one. Literal 
translations, often requiring frequent parenthetical intrusions, may serve the func- 
tion of a crib for those who know the original Sanskrit; they offer little to the reader 
without access to the original. If this was simply a translation to accompany the edi- 
tion, I could have presupposed a certain knowledge of Sanskrit in my readers. This 
translation, however, is intended for a general readership. 

Several Sanskrit terms cause special difficulties in translation, some because 
of their wide semantic range and others because of difficulties in determining their 
precise meanings. The first and the most obvious is dharma. In general, I have 
translated the term as “Law.” Although dharma means both more and less than law 
in contemporary usage, I think “Law” can accurately capture a wide slice of its se- 
mantic spectrum, especially if we take into account the use of “law” in such con- 
texts as natural law, divine law, law of gravity, and Jewish law. In some contexts, 
however, “Law” does not make sense. In 8.12f, for example, dharma is better trans- 
lated as “Justice”; in other contexts it means “merit” (see 4.238; 7.79; 8.83; 1123; 
12.19); in 11.129-30 adharma means sin (see 11131 where papa, “sin,” is used). 

Guru is another difficult term. In a few cases it refers to the teacher (2.131, 
231), but most frequently it does not. The general meaning is that of an elder, fre- 
quently the father, who deserves special respect. A good example of the multiple 
meanings of this term occurring in a single verse is 2.205. This term is context sen- 
sitive and I have translated it by a word that approximates its contextual meaning. 

In most contexts danda means punishment. Frequently, however, especially 
when used with dapyah (“should be made to give’), it means a fine (e.g. 8.297). The 
two terms j#ati and bandhu are often used interchangeably for a relative. They are 
also used, however, with technical meanings. Then j/dti refers to paternal relatives 
and bandhu to maternal relatives. The term indriya may refer to the senses, but in 


71 


72 Note on the Translation 


some contexts this is misleading; in the context of controlling the senses, for exam- 
ple, the stomach and the sexual organs are also included. Within the context of 
caste, sadrga appears to indicate not simply someone who is similar to another but 
also one of the same caste, although it may also suggest a broader meaning of some- 
one of the same station or status. The term antya indicates a person of a low caste. 
Most frequently such a person is below a Sidra (see 8.68, 385); he is sometimes the 
same as an outcaste or Candala and sometimes distinguished from the latter (see 
11.176). The Sanskrit uses many terms for a Brahmana and a Ksatriya. Attempting to 
duplicate these would have created confusion to the reader. [ have used “Brahmin” 
and “Ksatriya” uniformly, except when dvija is used. This term in the MDh 
regularly refers to a Brahmin, but not always. In some contexts the meaning is 
ambivalent. I have, therefore, translated it as “twice-born.” The term vadha 
normally means killing and is used for judicial execution. But frequently the term 
refers not to killing but to physical violence or corporal punishment. 

Consistency in translation is often achieved at the expense of accuracy. I have 
not tried to be consistent beyond reason in translating a particular word. I have al- 
ready referred to the various nuances of dharma. A good example of different 
meanings of the same word is dasyu. In many contexts the word means a bandit, a 
lowlife, or a low-born person (5.131; 7.143; 8.66). In other contexts, the term has a 
technical meaning, referring to a particular mixed caste (10.32, 45). 

Departing from the usual practice, I have translated also the additional verses 
given in the critical apparatus to the edition so long as they are attested in a signifi- 
cant number of manuscripts; these are given in the endnotes and signaled by a plus 
(+) sign in the translation. I have also given the alternate translations of the text if 
we follow variant readings, again limiting myself to significant variants that both 
affect the meaning and are found in a large number of manuscripts. These, as well 
as explanatory notes, are signaled by an asterisk in the translation. 

There are nine commentaries on Manu. They are described in the Introduction 
to the Critical Edition, pp. 381-83. These represent the native tradition’s own 
attempts to understand and to interpret the text. They forms an integral part of the 
life of Manu within India and are significant even if we may disagree with them 
with regard to the original meaning of a particular verse. I have, therefore, cited 
their views extensively in the notes. 

Finally, I have been asked by friends and colleagues, including one reviewer 
of this work for Oxford University Press, to spell out my philosophy and methodol- 
ogy of translation. This is something I find difficult to do, even though volumes 
have been written precisely on this topic.! One can present qualities—deep knowl- 


! See, for example, the recent volume edited by Enrica Garzilli, Translating, Transla- 
tions, Translators from India to the West. Harvard Oriental Series, Opera Minora, 1. Cam- 
bridge, Mass., 1996. Sheldon Pollock, writing in the same volume (p. 112), expresses the 
feelings of real translators when confronted by armchair philosophers of translation: “Years 
ago I had the privilege to attend a conference with George Steiner, whose landmark book, 
After Babel, had just been published. The entire panel of philosophers and theoreticians 
agreed that, yes, translation was really quite impossible. The fine translator from the Dutch, 


Note on the Translation 73 


edge of the two languages, of the literary genre of the source text, of its cultural and 
historical background, and so on—that a good translator should possess. But we 
know of many atrocious translations made by very competent scholars. Reading a 
good translation is like listening to a fine pianist playing a difficult piece of music. 
He or she makes it look easy. When the reader does not notice that the original is a 
difficult text; that the translator had to struggle many hours and sleepless nights with 
a single line; that sometimes he despaired of ever making sense of a passage—then 
the translation has achieved its purpose. To discuss the process of translation is as 
counterproductive as to discuss how sausage is made; neither is a pretty sight. In 
both cases the proof is in the final product. A good translation should stand alone as 
a good piece of literature within the language of the translation. This is goal we as- 
pire to but never fully realized; the umbilical cord that binds the translation to the 
original text is difficult to sever. 


the late James Holmes, was there, and he looked at me, and I at him, in the secure knowledge 
that we were going to go home and somehow do the impossible. . . . translation is as philo- 
sophically problematic, stylistically individual, and practically hard as life, and as we keep on 
living we keep on translating, with the inevitable singular imperfections that define being 
human.” 


This page intentionally left blank 


TRANSLATION 


This page intentionally left blank 


Editor’s Outline 


CHAPTER ONE 


Prologue 1.1-4 

Creation 1.5-31 

Excursus: Second Account of Creation 1.32-41 
Excursus: Classification of Fauna and Flora 1.42-50 
Excursus: Cosmic Cycles 1.51-57 

Transmission of the Law 1.58-60 


Excursus: Time and Cosmology 1.61-86 
Excursus: Occupations of Social Classes 1.87-91 
Excursus: Excellence of the Brahmin 1.92-101 
Excursus: Treatise of Manu 1.102-110 
Excursus: Synopsis 1.111-119 


CHAPTER TWO 


The Law 2.1-24 


Excursus: Desire 2.2-5 
Sources of Law 2.6-11 
Knowledge of the Law 2.12-13 
Contradictions in Law 2.14-15 


Competence to Study the Law 2.16 
The Sacred Land 2.17-24 
Consecratory Rites 2.26-67 
Childhood Rites 2.29-35 
Vedic Initiation 2.36-64 
Time for Initiation 2.36-37 
Failure to be Initiated 2.38-40 
Insignia-I 2.41-47 
Food 2.48-57 
Sipping 2.58-62 
Insignia-II 2.63-64 
Shaving Ceremony 2.65 
Consecratory Rites for Women 2.66-68 
The Student 2.69-249 


77 


78 


Editor's Outline 


Instruction 2.69-75 
The Syllable OM 2.76-84 
Soft Recitation 2.85-87 
Excursus: Control of the Organs 2.88-100 
Twilight Worship 2.101-103 
Vedic Recitation 2.104-107 
Persons Competent to Receive Vedic Instruction 2.108-116 
Salutation 2.117-133 
Precedence 2.134-139 
Teacher 2.140-163 
Vedic Study 2.164-172 
Observances 2.173-190 
Begging and Daily Duties 2.182-190 
Conduct towards the Teacher 2.191-218 
Teacher’s Teacher and Other Instructors 2.205-206 
Members of Teacher’s Family 2.207-217 
Rules of Conduct 2.219-249 
Mother, Father, Teacher 2.225-237 
Non-Brahmin Teachers 2.238-242 
Life-long Student-I 2.243-244 
Conclusion of Study 2.245-246 
Life-long Student-II 2.247-249 


CHAPTER THREE 


Marriage 3.1-66 


Conclusion of Study 3.1-3 
Selection of a Bride 3.4-19 
Prohibition of a Sidra Wife 3.14-19 
Types of Marriage 3.20-44 
Sons from Different Types of Marriage 3.36-42 
Marriage Rite 3.43-44 
Sexual Union 3.45-50 
Purchasing a Wife 3.51-54 
Honoring Women 3.55-59 
Marital Harmony 3.60-62 
Degradation of Families 3.63-66 


The Householder 3.67-286 


Great Sacrifices 3.68-121 
Ancestral Offerings 3.82-83 
Divine Offerings 3.84-86 
Bali Offerings 3.87-93 
Honoring Guests 3.94-120 

Ancestral Offerings 3.122-286 


Editor’s Outline 79 


Number of Invitees 3.125-126 

Quality of Invitees 3.127-149 

Unfit Invitees 3.150-182 

Persons Who Purify Those Alongside Whom They Eat 3.183-186 

Invitations 3.187-191 

Classes of Ancestors 3.192-202 

Preparatory Rites 3.203~213 

Principal Offerings 3.214-223 

Feeding the Brahmins 3.224-246 

Rite for the Newly Deceased 3.247-248 

Conclusion of the Meal 3.249-257 

Concluding Rites 3.258-265 

Food at Ancestral Rites 3.266-272 

Times for Ancestral Rites 3.273-284 
Conclusion 3.385 


CHAPTER FOUR 


The Bath-Graduate 4.1-260 
Right Livelihood 4.2-12 
Observances 4.13-18 
Study 4.19-20 
Ritual Duties 4.21-28 
Reception of Guests 4.29-32 
Rules of Conduct—I 4.33-39 
Relationship with Women 4.40-44 
Voiding Urine and Excrement 4.45-52 
Rules of Conduct—II_ 4.53-83 
People from Whom Gifts May Not Be Accepted 4.84-91 
Morning Duties 4.92-94 
Vedic Study 4.95-100 
Suspension of Vedic Recitation 4.101-127 
Rules of Conduct—III 4.128-161 
Avoiding Violence 4.162-169 
Following the Path of Righteousness 4.170-179 
Family and Social Relations 4.180-185 
Accepting and Giving Gifts 4.186-194 
Hypocrisy 4.195-200 
Using What Belongs to Others 4.201-204 
Unfit Food 4.205-225 
Gifts and Their Rewards 4.226-237 
Accumulating Merit 4.238-246 
Acceptance of Gifts and Food 4.247-256 
Old Age and Retirement 4.257-260 


80 Editor's Outline 


CHAPTER FIVE 


Prologue 5.1-3 
Forbidden Food 5.3-25 
Eating Meat 5.27-56 
Bodily Purification 5.58-109 
Death or Birth of a Person Belonging to the Same Ancestry 5-58-99 
Death in a Distant Region 5.74-77 
Overlapping Period of Impurity 5.79 
Death of Significant Others 5.80-82 
Periods of Impurity for Different Classes 5.85-87 
Impurity from Touch 5.85-87 
Libations for the Dead 5.88-91 
Funeral Path 5.92 
Instant Purification of Kings 5.93~99 
Death of a Person Belonging to a Different Ancestry 5.101-104 
Means of Purification 5.105-109 
Purification of Articles 5.111-133 
Statutory Purity of Things 5.128-133 
Purification of the Body 5.134-145 
Law with Respect to Women 5.147-167 
Lack of Independence 5.147-150 
Duties towards Husband 5.151-166 
Funeral 5.167-168 
Concluding Statement on the Householder 5.169 


CHAPTER SIX 


Forest Hermit 6.1-32 


Time and Procedure 6.2-4 
Mode of Life 6.5-28 
Great Sacrifices 6.7-11 
Food 6.12-21 
Austerities 6.22-24 
Homeless Ascetic 6.25-28 
Conclusion 6.29-32 


Wandering Ascetic 6.33-85 
Qualification 6.35-37 
Initiation 6.38-41 
Mode of Life 6.42-49 
Begging and Food 6.50—60 
Yogic Meditation 6.61-85 

Conduct 6.66—69 
Breath Control 6.70-71 


Editor's Outline 81 


Meditation 6.72-75 
Meditation on the Body 6.76-78 
Final Goal 6.79-85 
Vedic Retiree 6.87-97 
Superiority of the Householder 6.87-90 
The Ten-Point Law 6.91-93 
Retirement 6.94-96 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


The Law for the King 7.1-226 
Origin of the King 7.2-35 
Punishment 7.14-31 
Proper Behavior 7.32-35 
Cultivating Virtue and Learning 7.37-53 
Appointment of Counselors 7.54-59 
Appointment of Officials 7.60-62 
Appointment of an Envoy 7.63-68 
Constructing the Royal Fort 7.69-76 
Marriage Tipe 
Appointment of Chaplain and Priests 7.78-79 
Collectors and Supervisors 7.80-81 
Devotion to Brahmins 7.82-86 
War and Warrior Ethic 7.87-98 
War Booty 7.96-97 
Policies for Good Government 7.99-113 
Organization of the State 7.114-126 
Governance of Villages and Towns 7.114-119 
Supervision of Officials 7.120-124 
Wages 7.125-126 
Taxes and Duties 7.127-139 
Adjudicating Lawsuits 7.140-141 
Protection of the Subjects 7.142-144 
Morning Routine 7.145-215 
Meeting with Counselors 7.147-155 
Constituents of the Circle 7.156-159 
Political Strategy—I  7.160-180 
War 7.181-200 
Conduct in Victory 7.201-205 
Political Strategy—II 7.206-215 
Afternoon Routine 7.216—-222 
Evening Routine 7.223-225 


82 Editor's Outline 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


The Justice System 8.1-9.251 
Court 8.1-3 
Grounds for Litigation 8.4-8 
Legal Proceedings 8.9-46 
Judges 8.9-11 


Pursuit of Justice 8.12-19 

Excursus: Sidras as Legal Interpreters 8.20-22 
Judicial Conduct and Reasoning—I 8.23-26 
Excursus: Property of Minors and Women 8.27-29 


Excursus: Lost and Stolen Property 8.30-40 

Judicial Conduct and Reasoning—II 8.41-46 
Grounds for Litigation—I Non-payment of Debts 8.47-178 

Qualification of Witnesses 8.62-72 

Assessing Testimony 8.73-78 

Questioning of Witnesses 8.79-102 

Excusable False Testimony 8.103-106 

Failure to Give Evidence 8.107 

Signs of False Testimony 8.108 

Oaths and Ordeals 8.109-116 

False Testimony 8.117-118 

Punishment for Perjury 8.120-123 

Varieties of Punishment 8.124-130 

Weights 8.132-137 

Fines 8.138-139 

Rates of Interest—I 8.140-144 

Pledges 8.145-149 

Rates of Interest—II 8.150-157 

Surety 8.158-162 

Validity of Transactions 8.163-169 

Impartiality of the King 8.170-175 

Recovery of Debt 8.176-177 

Conclusion 8.178 
Grounds for Litigation—II Deposits 8.179-196 
Grounds for Litigation—III Sale Without Ownership 8.197-205 

Fraudulent Sales 8.203-205 
Grounds for Litigation—IV Partnerships 8.206-211 
Grounds for Litigation—-V Non-delivery of Gifts 8.212-214 
Grounds for Litigation—VI Non-payment of Wages 8.215-218 
Grounds for Litigation—VII Breach of Contract 8.219-221 
Grounds for Litigation—VIII Cancellation of Sale or Purchase 8.222-228 
Grounds for Litigation—IX Disputes between Owners and 

Herdsmen 8.229-244 
Safety of Herd 8.230-236 


Editor's Outline 83 


Damage to Crops 8.237-243 
Grounds for Litigation—X Boundary Disputes 8.245-266 
Boundary Markers 8.246-251 
Settling Boundary Disputes 8.252-266 
Grounds for Litigation—-XI Verbal Assault 8.267-278 
Grounds for Litigation—XII Physical Assault 8.279-301 
Personal Injury 8.279-287 
Damage to Property 8.288-289 
Injuries Caused by Vehicles 8.290-298 
Corporal Punishment 8.299-301 
Grounds for Litigation—XIII Theft 8.302-343 
Suppression of Thieves 8.302-303 
Obligation to Offer Protection 8.304-313 
Punishment of Thieves 8.314-343 
Grounds for Litigation—XIV Violence 8.344-351 
Permissable Violence 8.348-351 
Grounds for Litigation—XV Sexual Crimes Against Women 8.352-385 
Sexual Crimes against Married Women 8.352-363 
Male Sexual Assault 8.364-368 
Female Sexual Assault 8.369-370 
Adultery 8.371-385 
Excursus 8.386-420 
Miscellanea 8.386-397 
Control of Trade 8.398-403 
Ferries and Tolls 8.404—409 
Occupations of Social Classes 8.410-420 


CHAPTER NINE 


Grounds for Litigation—XVI Law Concerning Husband and Wife 9.1-103 
Guarding the Wife 9.2-21 
Elevation of Wife to Husband’s Status 9.22~24 
Importance of Wife 9.26-30 
To Whom Belongs a Son? 9.32-56 
Levirate 9.57-70 
Contract of Betrothal 9.71-73 
Absence of Husband 9.74-76 
Repudiation of a Wife 9.77-84 
Seniority among Wives 9.85-87 
Marriage of Daughters 9.88-103 
Grounds for Litigation—X VII Partition of Inheritance 9.104-220 
Primogeniture 9.105-110 
Partition and Seniority 9.111-119 
Seniority of Leviratic Sons 9.120-121 


84 Editor's Outline 


Seniority among Sons of Different Wives 9.122~-126 
“Female-Son” and Her Sons 9.127-140 
Adopted Son 9.141-142 
Leviratic Sons 9.143-147 
Sons by Wives of Different Castes 9.149-157 
Twelve Types of Sons 9.158-185 
Alternative Heirs 9.186-191 
Women’s Property 9.192—-200 
Disqualification from Inheritance 9.201-203 
Partition of Non-ancestral Property 9.204-209 
Miscellaneous Rules of Partition 9.210-219 
Grounds for Litigation—X VII Gambling and Betting 9.221-228 
Excursus: Types of Punishment 9.229-249 
Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 9.235-247 
Conclusion of Grounds for Litigation 9.250-251 
Eradication of Thorns 9.252-323 
Excursus; Constituents of a Kingdom 9.294-297 
Excursus.: Activities of the King 9.298-311 
Excursus on Brahmins 9.313-323 
Conclusion of the Rules for Kings 9.324-325 
Rules of Action for Vaisyas and Siidras 9.326-335 
Rules for Vaisyas 9.326-333 
Rules for Siidras 9.334-335 
Conclusion of the Law Outside Times of Adversity 9.335 


CHAPTER TEN 


Rules for Times of Adversity 10.1-130 
Mixed Classes 10.1-73 
The Four Classes 10.1-7 


Mixed Classes: First Discourse 10.8-14 
Mixed Classes: Second Discourse 10.15-23 
Mixed Classes: Third Discourse 10.24-45 
Occupations, Residence, and Dress 10.46-50 


Candalas and Svapiicas 10.51-56 

Further Discourse on Mixed Classes 10.57-61 

Advance to Higher Classes 10.62-73 
Occupations of the Four Classes 10.74-80 
Occupations in Times of Adversity 10.81-129 

Brahmins 10.81-94 

Ksatriyas 10.95-97 

Vaisyas 10.98 

Siidras 10.99-100 

Further Occupations for Brahmins 10.101-114 

Acquisition of Property 10.115-120 


Editor’s Outline 85 


Livelihood of Siidras 10.121-129 
Conclusion 10.130-131 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


Penance 11.1-266 
Excursus: Occasions for Giving and Begging 11.1-26 
Excursus: Miscellaneous Topics 11.27-43 


Times of Adversity 11.27-30 
Power of Brahmins 11.31~35 
Sacrifices 11.36-43 
Justification for Penance 11.44-54 
Categories of Sin 11.55-71 
Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 11.55-59 
Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 11.60-67 
Further Categories of Sin 11.68-71 
Penances for Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 11.73-108 
Killing a Brahmin 11.73-90 
Drinking Liquor 11.91-98 
Stealing Gold 11.100-103 
Sex with an Elder’s Wife 11.104-107 
Penances for Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 11.109-124 
Killing a Cow 11.109-117 
Other Secondary Sins 11.118 
Student Breaking the Vow of Chastity 11.119-124 
Penances for the Remaining Categories of Sins 11.125-126 


Excursus: Penances for Injury to Living Beings 11.127-146 
Homicide 11.127-131 
Killing Animals 11.132-142 
Injuring Vegetation 11.143-145 
Excursus: Penances for Eating Forbidden Food 11.147-161 
Excursus: Penances for Theft 11.163-170 
Excursus: Penances for Sexual Offenses 11.171-179 
Association with Outcastes 11.181-190 
Excommunication 11.183-186 
Re-admission 11.187-189 
Excursus: Miscellanea on Sin and Penance 11.191-247 
Types of Generic Penance 11.212-222 
Observances by the Penitent 11.223-227 
Four Means of Expiaton 11.228-247 


Further Means of Expiation 11.249-266 


86 Editor's Outline 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


Action 12.3-115 
The Fruits of Action 12.3-81 
The Inner Selves 12.12-15 
The Process of Rebirth 12.16-23 
The Three Attributes 12.24-52 
Sin and Rebirth 12.54-81 
Actions Leading to the Supreme Good 12.83-106 
Excursus: Secret Teaching 12.108-115 
Conclusion 12.117-126 
Excursus: Summation 12.117-126 


CHAPTER ONE 


PROLOGUE 


+!Manu was seated, absorbed in contemplation, when the great seers came up to him, 
paid homage to him in the appropriate manner, and addressed him in these words: 
Please, Lord, tell us precisely and in the proper order* the Laws of all the social 
classes, as well as of those born in between;:* “for you alone, Master, know the true 
meaning of the duties contained in this entire ordinance* of the Self-existent One, an 
ordinance beyond the powers of thought or cognition.”* 

4So questioned in the proper manner* by those noble ones, that Being of 
boundless might paid honor to all those great seers and replied: “Listen!” 


CREATION 


“There was this world*—pitch-dark,* indiscernible, without distinguishing marks, 
unthinkable, incomprehensible, in a kind of deep sleep all over. “Then the Self-existent 
Lord appeared—the Unmanifest manifesting this world beginning with the elements,* 
projecting his might, and dispelling the darkness. 7That One—who is beyond the 
range of senses; who cannot be grasped;* who is subtle, unmanifest, and eternal; who 
contains all beings; and who transcends thought—it is he who shone forth* on his 
own. 

®As he focused his thought with the desire of bringing forth diverse creatures 
from his own body, it was the waters* that he first brought forth; and into them he 
poured forth his semen. ?That became a golden egg, as bright as the sun; and in it he 
himself took birth as Brahma, the grandfather of all the worlds. 

10“The waters are called “Nara”; the waters, clearly, are the offspring of Nara. 
Because his first sojourn (ayana) was in them, tradition calls him “Narayana.”* That 
cause which is unmanifest and eternal, which has the nature of both the existent and the 
non-existent—the Male produced from it is celebrated in the world as Brahma.* 

1 After residing in that egg for a full year,* that Lord on his own split the egg in 
two by brooding on his own body. “From those two halves, he formed the sky and the 
earth, and between them the mid-space, the eight directions, and the eternal place of the 
waters.* 

“From his body, morevoer, he drew out the mind having the nature of both the 
existent and the non-existent; and from the mind, the ego—producer of self-awareness 
and ruler—as also the great self (12.14), all things composed of the three attributes 
(12.24), and gradually the five sensory organs that grasp the sense objects. “By 
merging the subtle parts of these six* possessing boundless might into particles of his 


87 


88 Chapter 1 


own body, moreover, he formed all beings. ‘Because the six parts of his physical 
frame become attached (d-Sri) to these beings, the wise call his physical frame “body” 
(Sarira). *The great elements enter it accompanied by their activities, as also the mind, 
the imperishable producer of all beings, accompanied by its subtle particles. 

From the subtle particles of the physical frames of these seven males* of great 
might, this world comes into being, the perishable from the imperishable. “Of these, 
each succeeding element acquires the quality specific to each preceding. Thus, each 
element, tradition tells us, possesses the same number of qualities as the number of its 
position in the series.* #4In the beginning through the words of the Veda alone, he 
fashioned for all of them specific names and activities, as also specific stations.* 

2“The Lord brought forth the group of gods who are endowed with breath and 
whose nature is to act, the subtle group of Sadhyas, and the eternal sacrifice.* From 
fire, wind, and sun, he squeezed out* the eternal triple Veda characterized by the Rg 
verses, the Yajus formulas, and the SAaman chants, for the purpose of carrying out the 
sacrifice. “Time, divisions of time, constellations, planets, rivers, oceans, mountains, 
flat and rough terrain, “austerity, speech, sexual pleasure, desire, and anger—he 
brought forth this creation in his wish to bring forth these creatures.* 

To establish distinctions among activities, moreover, he distinguished the 
Right (dharma) from the Wrong (adharma) and afflicted these creatures with the pairs of 
opposites such as pleasure and pain. ?”7Together with the perishable atomic particles of 
the five elements given in tradition, this whole world comes into being in an orderly 
sequence. 78As they are brought forth again and again, each creature follows on its own 
the very activity assigned to it in the beginning by the Lord. Violence or non- 
violence, gentleness or cruelty, righteousness (dharma) or unrighteousness (adharma), 
truthfulness or untruthfulness—whichever he assigned to each at the time of creation, 
it stuck automatically to that creature. °°As at the change of seasons each season 
automatically adopts its own distinctive marks, so do embodied beings adopt their 
own distinctive acts. 

3\“For the growth of these worlds, moreover, he produced from his mouth, arms, 
thighs, and feet, the Brahmin, the Ksatriya, the Vaisya, and the Sidra. 


Excursus: Second Account of Creation 


32“Dividing his body into two, he became a man with one half and a woman with the 
other. By that woman the Lord brought forth Viraj.* “By heating himself with ascetic 
toil, that man, Viraj, brought forth a being by himself—know, you best of the twice- 
born, that I am that being, the creator of this whole world. 

3Desiring to bring forth creatures, I heated myself with the most arduous 
ascetic toil and brought forth in the beginning the ten great seers, the lords of creatures: 
%Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Pracetas, Vasistha, Bhrgu, and 
Narada. They, in turn, brought forth seven other Manus of immense energy (1.61— 
62); the gods and the classes of gods; and the great sages of boundless might; *”Yaksas, 
Raksasas, Pisacas, Gandharvas, Apsarases, Asuras, Nagas, Sarpas, and Suparnas; the 
different groups of ancestors (3.192-201); “lightnings, thunderbolts, clouds, rainbow 
streaks, rainbows, meteors, storms, comets, and the manifold heavenly lights; 
pseudo-humans,* monkeys, fish, birds of various kind, farm animals, wild animals, 


Chapter 1 89 


humans, predatory animals, and animals with incisors in both jaws (5.18 n.); “worms, 
insects, moths, lice, flies, bugs, all creatures that sting and bite, and immobile 
creatures of various kind. 

“Tn this manner through ascetic toil, those noble ones brought forth at my 
command this whole world, the mobile and the immobile, each creature in accordance 
with its activity. 


Excursus: Classification of Fauna and Flora 


#27 will now explain to you exactly which type of activity is ascribed here* to which 
type of creature, and also their relative order with respect to birth. “Those born from 
placentas are farm animals, wild animals, predatory animals, animals with incisors in 
both jaws (5.18 n.), Raksasas, PiSacas, and humans. 

“Those born from eggs are birds, snakes, crocodiles, fish, and turtles, as well as 
other similar land and aquatic animals. 

“Those born from warm moisture are creatures that sting and bite; lice, flies, 
and bugs; those born through heat; as well as other similar creatures. 

46“Those born from sprouts are all flora propagated through seeds or cuttings. 
Those that bear copious flowers and fruits and die after their fruits mature are “plants” 
(osadhi); “those that bear fruits without flowers, tradition calls “forest lords” 
(vanaspati); and those that bear both flowers and fruits, tradition calls “trees” (vrksa). 
8Various kinds of shrubs and thickets and different types of grasses, as also creepers 
and vines—all these also grow from either seeds or cuttings. “Wrapped in a manifold 
darkness caused by their past deeds (12.8-9), these come into being with inner 
awareness,” able to feel pleasure and pain. “In this dreadful transmigratory cycle of 
beings, a cycle that rolls on inexorably for ever, these are said to represent the lowest 
condition, and Brahma the highest. 


Excursus: Cosmic Cycles 


“After bringing forth in this manner this whole world and me, that One of 
inconceivable prowess once again disappeared into his own body, striking down time 
with time.* °*When that god is awake, then this creation is astir; but when he is asleep 
in deep repose, then the whole world lies dormant. “When he is soundly asleep, 
embodied beings, whose nature is to act, withdraw from their respective activities, and 
their minds become languid. “When they dissolve together into that One of immense 
body, then he, whose body contains all beings, sleeps tranquil and at ease. Plunging 
himself into darkness, he lingers there for a long time together with his sense organs 
and ceases to perform his own activities. Then he emerges from that bodily frame. 
‘6When, after becoming a minute particle, he enters, conjoined, the seminal form of 
mobile and immobile beings, then he discharges the bodily frame.* 

5“Tn this manner, by waking and sleeping, that Imperishable One incessantly 
brings to life and tears down this whole world, both the mobile and the immobile. 


Transmission of the Law 


°8After composing this treatise,* he himself in the beginning imparted it according to 
rule to me alone; and I, in turn, to Marici* and the other sages. °*Bhrgu here will relate 


90 Chapter 1 


that treatise to you completely, for this sage has learnt the whole treatise in its entirety 
from me.” 

When Manu had spoken to him in this manner, the great sage Bhrgu was 
delighted. He then said to all those seers: “Listen!” 


Excursus: Time and Cosmology 


61-62There are six further Manus* in the lineage of this Manu, the son of the Self- 
existent One: Svarocisa, Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, Caksusa of great energy, and the 
son of Vivasvat. Possessing great nobility and might, they each have brought forth 
their own progeny. ®These seven Manus of immense energy, with the son of the Self- 
existent One at their head, gave rise to and secured* this whole world, the mobile and 
the immobile, each in his own Epoch (2.61 n). 

“Righteen Nimesas (“winks”) make a Kastha (“second”), thirty Kasthas a Kala 
(“minute”), thirty Kalas a Muhiirta (“hour’),* and thirty Muhirtas a day-and-night. 
The sun divides the day and the night, both the human and the divine. The night is 
meant for creatures to sleep, and the day to engage in activities. 

For ancestors, a month constitutes a day and a night, divided into the two 
fortnights. The dark fortnight is the day for engaging in activities, and the bright 
fortnight is the night for sleeping.* ©’For gods, a year is a day and a night and their 
division is this: the day is the northward passage of the sun, and the night is its 
southward passage. 

68Listen now to a concise account of the duration of a day-and-night of Brahma 
and of each Age in proper sequence. “The Krta Age is said to last 4,000 years. It is 
preceded by a twilight lasting 400 years and followed by a twilight of the same length. 
”For each of the three subsequent Ages, as also for the twilights that precede and 
follow them, the first number of the thousands and the hundreds is progressively 
diminished by one.* 7'These four Ages, computed at the very beginning as lasting 
12,000 years, are said to constitute a single Age of the gods.* ”The sum total of 
1,000 divine Ages should be regarded as a single day of Brahma, and his night as 
having the very same duration. “Those who know this propitious day of Brahma 
lasting 1,000 Ages, as also his night with the same duration—they are people who 
truly know day and night. 

74At the end of that day-and-night, he awakens from his sleep; and when he has 
woken up, he brings forth the mind, which is both existent and non-existent. “The 
mind, driven by the desire to create, transmutes the creation. From the mind is born 
ether, whose distinctive quality is said to be sound. “From ether, as it is being 
transmuted, is born wind—powerful, pure, and bearing all odors—whose distinctive 
quality is thought to be touch. 7”From the wind, as it is being transmuted, is produced 
light—shining, brilliant, and dispelling darkness—-whose distinctive quality, 
tradition says, is visible appearance. From light, as it is being transmuted comes 
water, with taste as its distinctive quality; and from water, earth, with smell as its 
distinctive quality. That is how this creation was at the beginning. 

The divine Age mentioned previously as lasting 12,000—that multiplied 71 
times is here referred to as an “Epoch of a Manu” (1.71 n.). ®The countless Epochs of 


Chapter 1 91 


Manus, as also creation and dissolution—the Supreme Lord does this again and again 
as a kind of sport. 

51In the Krta Age, the Law is whole, possessing all four feet;* and so is truth. 
People never acquire any property through unlawful means. *By acquiring* such 
property, however, the Law is stripped of one foot in each of the subsequent Ages; 
through theft, falsehood, and fraud,* the Law disappears a foot at a time. 

®In the Krta Age, people are free from sickness, succeed in all their pursuits, and 
have a life span of 400 years. In the Treta and each of the subsequent Ages, however, 
their life span is shortened by a quarter.* The life span of mortals given in the Veda, 
the benefits of rites, and the power of embodied beings—they all come to fruition in 
the world in conformity with each Age. 

There is one set of Laws for men in the Krta Age, another in the Treta, still 
another in the Dvapara, and a different set in the Kali, in keeping with the progressive 
shortening taking place in each Age.* ®Ascetic toil, they say, is supreme in the Krta 
Age; knowledge in Treta; sacrifice in Dvapara; and gift-giving alone in Kali. 


Excursus: Occupations of Social Classes 


®’For the protection of this whole creation, that One of dazzling brilliance assigned 
separate activities for those born from the mouth, arms, thighs, and feet. *To 
Brahmins, he assigned reciting and teaching the Veda, offering and officiating at 
sacrifices, and receiving and giving gifts. To the Kgatriya, he allotted protecting the 
subjects, giving gifts, offering sacrifices, reciting the Veda, and avoiding attachment 
to sensory objects; “and to the Vaisya, looking after animals, giving gifts, offering 
sacrifices, reciting the Veda, trade, moneylending, and agriculture. ‘A single activity 
did the Lord allot to the Sudra, however: the ungrudging service of those very social 
classes (10.7480). 


Excursus: Excellence of the Brahmin 


2A man is said to be purer above the navel. Therefore, the Self-existent One has 
declared, the mouth is his purest part.* Because he arose from the loftiest part of the 
body, because he is the eldest, and because he retains the Veda,* the Brahmin is by 
Law the lord of this whole creation. “For, in the beginning, the Self-existent One 
heated himself with ascetic toil and brought him forth from his own mouth to convey 
divine oblations and ancestral offerings and to protect this whole world. What 
creature can surpass him through whose mouth the denizens of the triple heaven always 
eat their oblations, and the forefathers their offerings (7.84)? 

* Among creatures, living beings are the best; among living beings, those who 
subsist by intelligence; among those who subsist by intelligence,* human beings; and 
among human beings, Brahmins—so the tradition declares. ° Among Brahmins, the 
learned are the best; among the learned, those who have made the resolve;* among 
those who have made the resolve, the doers; and among doers, the Vedic savants.+ 

°84 Brahmin’s birth alone represents the everlasting physical frame of the Law; 
for, born on account of the Law, he is fit for becoming Brahman. *For when a Brahmin 
is born, a preeminent birth takes place on earth—a ruler of all creatures to guard the 
storehouse of Laws.* 1°This whole world—whatever there is on earth—is the 


92 Chapter 1 


property of the Brahmin. Because of his eminence and high birth, the Brahmin has a 
clear right to this whole world. The Brahmin eats only what belongs to him, wears 
what belongs to him, and gives what belongs to him; it is by the kindness of the 
Brahmin that other people eat.* 


Excursus: Treatise of Manu 


10To determine which activities are proper to him and which to the remaining classes 
in their proper order, Manu, the wise son of the Self-existent, composed this treatise. 
103 1t should be studied diligently and taught to his pupils properly by a learned 
Brahmin, and by no one else.+ 

104When a Brahmin who keeps to his vows studies this treatise, he is never 
sullied by faults arising from mental, oral, or physical activities; he purifies those 
alongside whom he eats (3.183-86), as also seven generations of his lineage before 
him and seven after him; he alone, moreover, has a right to this entire earth. 

106This treatise is the best good-luck incantation; it expands the intellect; it 
procures everlasting fame;* and it is the ultimate bliss.+ 17In this, the Law has been 
set forth in full—the good and the bad qualities of actions and the timeless norms of 
proper conduct—for all four social classes.* 

108Proper conduct is the highest Law, as well as what is declared the Veda and 
given in traditional texts. Applying himself always to this treatise,* therefore, let a 
twice-born man remain constantly self-possessed. When a Brahmin has fallen away 
from proper conduct, he does not reap the fruit of the Veda; but when he holds fast to 
proper conduct, tradition says, he enjoys its full reward. "Seeing thus that the Law 
proceeds from proper conduct, the sages understood proper conduct to be the ultimate 
root of all ascetic toil. 


Excursus: Synopsis 


M Origin of the world [1.6-110]. 
Rules for consecratory rites [2.26-67]. 
Observance of the vow [2.69-139]. 
Service [2.140-244]. 
The most excellent rule regarding the final bath [2.245-46]. 
12Marrying a wife [3.4-19]. 
Characteristics of the different types of marriage [3.20—44]. 
Rules regarding the great sacrifices [3.67-121, 285-86]. 
The timeless ordinance on ancestral rites [3.122-284]. 
'3Characteristics of the different occupations [4.2-12]. 
Observances of a bath-graduate [4.13-257]. 
Permitted and forbidden food [5.4-56]. 
Purification [5.57—-109]. 
Cleansing of articles [5.111-145]. 
M4__aw pertaining to women [5.147-168]. 
Hermit’s life [6.1-32]. 
Renunciation* [6.33—-85]. 
Retirement* [6.87—96]. 


Chapter 1 93 


The entire Law pertaining to the king [7.1-226]. 
Adjudication of lawsuits [8.1-46]. 

M5Rules concerning the questioning of witnesses [8.62-123]. 
Law with respect to husbands and wives [9.1-102]. 
Law on partitioning of estates [9.104—-219]. 
Gambling [9.221-228]. 
Eradication of thorns [9.232-293]. 

6Conduct of Vaisyas and Siidras [9.326-335]. 
Origin of mixed classes [10.1-73]. 
Law in times of adversity for social classes [10.81-129]. 
Rules on penances [11.44-266]. 

"The three passages into the transmigratory cycle resulting from action 

[12.1-81]. 

Final bliss [12.83-106]. 
Examination of the good and bad qualities of actions, 

'8The timeless Laws of regions, of hereditary groups, and of families. 
Laws of heretical ascetic groups and guilds.* 

All that Manu has set forth in this treatise. 


11Just as, upon my request, Manu formerly taught me this treatise, so you too must 
learn it from me today. 


CHAPTER TWO 


THE LAW 


TLearn the Law always adhered to by people who are erudite, virtuous, and free from 
love and hate, the Law assented to by the heart.* 


Excursus: Desire* 


?To be motivated by desire* is not commended, but it is impossible here to be free 
from desire; for it is desire that prompts vedic study and the performance of vedic rites. 
3Intention is the root of desire;* intention is the wellspring of sacrifices; and intention 
triggers every religious observance and every rule of restraint—so the tradition 
declares. ‘Nowhere in this world do we see any activity done by a man free from desire; 
for whatever at all that aman may do, it is the work of someone who desired it.* By 
engaging in them* properly, a man attains the world of the immortals and, in this 
world, obtains all his desires just as he intended.+ 


Sources of Law 


The root of the Law is the entire Veda; the tradition and practice of those who know 
the Veda; the conduct of good people; and what is pleasing to oneself.* 7?Whatever Law 
Manu has proclaimed with respect to anyone, all that has been taught in the Veda, for it 
contains all knowledge.* *After subjecting all this* to close scrutiny with the eye of 
knowledge, a learned man should apply himself to the Law proper to him on the 
authority of the scriptures; *for by following the Law proclaimed in scripture and 
tradition, a man achieves fame in this world and unsurpassed happiness after death. 

10Scripture”’* should be recognized as “Veda,” and “tradition” as “Law 
Treatise.” These two should never be called into question in any matter,* for it is from 
them that the Law has shined forth. “If a twice-born disparages these two* by relying 
on the science of logic, he ought to be ostracized by good people as an infidel and a 
denigrator of the Veda. 


Knowledge of the Law 


"Veda, tradition, the conduct of good people, and what is pleasing to oneself—these, 
they say, are the four visible marks of the Law. “The knowledge of the Law is 
prescribed for people who are unattached to wealth or pleasures; and for people who 
seek to know the Law, scripture is the highest authority.* 


94 


Chapter 2 95 


Contradictions in Law 


M4When there are two contradictory scriptural provisions on some issue, however, 
tradition takes them both to be the Law with respect to it; for wise men have correctly 
pronounced them both to be the Law. “After sunrise, before sunrise, and at daybreak— 
the sacrifice takes place at any of these times; so states a vedic scripture.*+ 


Competence to Study the Law 


164 man for whom it is prescribed that the rites beginning with the impregnation 
ceremony and ending with the funeral are to be performed with the recitation of vedic 
formulas—no one but he is to be recognized as entitled to study this treatise.* 


The Sacred Land 


17The land created by the gods and lying between the divine rivers Sarasvati and 
Drsadvati is called “Brahmavarta”—the region of Brahman.* 'The conduct handed 
down from generation to generation among the social classes and the intermediate 
classes of that land is called the “conduct of good people.” 

1K uruksetra and the lands of the Matsyas, Paficdlas, and Sirasenakas constitute 
the “land of Brahmin seers,” which borders on the Brahmavarta. 2°All the people on 
earth should learn their respective practices from a Brahmin born in that land. 

21The land between the Himalaya and Vindhya ranges, to the east of VinaSana 
and west of Prayaga, is known as the “Middle Region.” 

2The land between the same mountain ranges extending from the eastern to the 
western sea is what the wise call “Aryavarta’”-—the region of the Aryas. 

2sThe natural range of the black buck is to be recognized as the land fit for 
sacrifice; beyond that is the land of foreigners.* 

**Twice-born people should diligently settle in these lands; but a Sidra, when he 
is when starved for a livelihood, may live in any region at all. 


5] have described to you above succinctly the source of the Law, as 
also the origin of this whole world. Learn now the Laws of the social 
classes. 


CONSECRATORY RITES 


2°The consecration of the body, beginning with the ceremony of impregnation, should 
be performed for twice-born men by means of the sacred vedic rites, a consecration that 
cleanses a man both here and in the hereafter. *’The fire offerings for the benefit of the 
fetus, the birth rite, the first cutting of hair, and the tying of the Mufija-grass cord*— 
by these rites the taint of semen and womb is wiped off from twice-born men. Vedic 
recitation, religious observances, fire offerings, study of the triple Veda, ritual 
offerings, sons, the five great sacrifices, and sacrifices—by these a man’s body is made 
“brahmic.”* 


96 Chapter 2 


Childhood Rites 


The rule is that the birth rite of a male child* must be performed before his umbilical 
cord is cut; he is fed gold, honey, and ghee* to the accompaniment of vedic formulas. 

2°One should see to it that the child’s naming ceremony is performed on the tenth 
or the twelfth day after birth, on a day or at a time that is auspicious, or under a favor- 
able constellation. *4For a Brahmin, the name should connote auspiciousness; for a 
Ksatriya, strength; for a Vaisya, wealth; and for a Stidra, disdain. °*For a Brahmin, the 
name should connote happiness; for a Ksatriya, protection; for a Vaisya, prosperity; 
and for a Sidra, service. “For girls, the name should be easy to pronounce and without 
fierce connotations, have a clear meaning, be charming and auspicious, end in a long 
final syllable, and contain a word for blessing.* 

4In the fourth month, one should perform the ceremony of taking the child out 
of the house; and in the sixth month, the feeding with rice, as also any other auspicious 
ceremony cherished in the family. 

SThe first cutting of hair, according to the Law, should be performed for all 
twice-born children in the first or the third year, in accordance with the dictates of 
scripture. 


Vedic Initiation 


Time for Initiation “For a Brahmin, the vedic initiation should be carried out in 
the eighth year from conception; for a Ksatriya, in the eleventh year from conception; 
and for a Vaisya, in the twelfth year from conception. *’For a Brahmin desiring 
eminence in vedic knowledge, it should be carried out in the fifth year; for a Ksatriya 
aspiring for power, in the sixth year; and for a Vaisya aspiring for a spirit of enterprise, 
in the seventh year. 


Failure to be Initiated “For a Brahmin, the time for Savitri* does not lapse 
until the sixteenth year;* for a Ksatriya, until the twenty-second; and for a Vaisya, 
until the twenty-fourth. “If, after those times, any of these three has not undergone 
consecration at the proper time, he becomes a Vratya (10.20—23), fallen from Savitri 
(2.38 n.) and spurned by Aryas. “Even in a time of adversity, a Brahmin should never 
establish vedic or matrimonial links* with such people, unless they have been cleansed 
according to rule. 


Insignia: I “Students should wear the skin of a black antelope, a Ruru deer, or a 
male goat, and clothes of hemp, flax, or wool, according to the direct order of classes. 

“For a Brahmin, the girdle should be made with a triple cord of Mujfija grass, 
smooth and soft; for a Ksatriya, with a bowstring of Mirva hemp; and for a Vaisya, 
with a string of hemp. “When Muifija grass is unavailable, they should be made with 
KuSa grass, the ASmantaka plant, or Balvaja grass.* One should wrap the girdle around 
the waist three times and make one, three, or five knots.* 

“For a Brahmin, the sacrificial cord is made with a triple strand of cotton thread 
twisted upwards;* for a Ksatriya, with strands of hemp; and for a Vaisya, with woolen 
strands. 


Chapter 2 97 


4A Brahmin, according to the Law, is entitled to a wood-apple or Palasa staff; a 
Ksatriya, to a banyan or Khadira staff; and a VaiSya, to a Pilu or Udumbara staff. In 
terms of length, a Brahmin’s staff should reach the hair; a Ksatriya’s the forehead; and a 
Vaisya’s the nose. “Every staff should be straight, without blemishes, pleasing to the 
eye, not liable to alarm people, with the bark intact, and undamaged by fire. 


Food “Taking his chosen staff, he should worship the sun, walk around the fire 
clockwise, and go on his begging round according to rule. *An initiated Brahmin 
should beg placing the word “Madam” at the beginning; a Ksatriya, in the middle; and 
a Vaisya, at the end.* The very first time, he should beg from his mother, his sister, 
or his own mother’s sister, or from some other woman who would not snub him. 

‘After collecting as much almsfood as he needs without guile,* he should 
present it to his teacher, purify himself by sipping some water, and eat it facing the 
east. °*Facing the east while eating procures long life; facing the south procures fame; 
facing the west procures prosperity; and facing the north procures truth.*+ °A twice- 
born should always eat food after sipping* some water and with a collected mind; after 
eating also he should sip water in the proper manner and rub water on the orifices.* 

“He must always revere his food and eat it without disdain. When he sees the 
food, he should rejoice, look pleased, and receive it joyfully in every way. For when 
food is revered, it always bestows strength and vigor; but when it is eaten without 
being revered, it destroys them both. 

56He must not give his leftovers to anyone, eat between meals,* engage in 
overeating, or go anywhere while he is sullied with remnants.* °’Eating too much 
harms his health, reduces his life expectancy, impedes heaven, hinders merit, and is 
despised by people; therefore, he should avoid it. 


Sipping ‘8A Brahmin should sip water at all times with the part of the palm linked 
to Brahma, Prajapati, or gods, but never with the part linked to ancestors.* They call 
the flat surface at the base of the thumb the part linked to Brahma; the base of the 
fingers, the part linked to Prajapati; the finger tips, the part linked to gods; and the area 
beneath these two,* the part linked to ancestors. 

He should first sip water three times, then wipe his mouth twice, and finally 
rub water on his orifices, body, and head (2.53 n.). “A man who knows the Law and 
desires to become pure should always do the sipping in a secluded place, using water 
that is not warm or frothy, employing the appropriate part of the palm, and facing east 
or north. @A Brahmin is purified by water reaching the heart; a Ksatriya, by water 
reaching the throat; a Vaisya, by water taken into the mouth; and a Sidra, by water 
wetting the lips. 


Insignia: IZ When the right hand is raised, a twice-born man is called 
“upavitin’’—wearing the cord in the sacrificial mode; when the left hand is raised, he is 
called “prdcinavitin’’—wearing the cord toward the east; and when it is worn around the 
neck, he is called “nivitin’—wearing the cord down.* 

When the girdle, antelope skin, staff, sacrificial cord, or water pot is damaged, 
he should throw it in water and take a new one with the appropriate ritual formula. 


98 Chapter 2 


Shaving Ceremony 


‘The rule is that for a Brahmin the shaving ceremony* is to be performed in the 
sixteenth year; for a Ksatriya, in the twenty-second; and for a Vaisya, in the twenty- 
fourth (2.38 n.). 


Consecretory Rites for Women 


For females, on the other hand, this entire series should be performed at the proper 
time and in the proper sequence, but without reciting any vedic formula, for the 
purpose of consecrating their bodies. 

For females, tradition tells us, the marriage ceremony equals the rite of vedic 
consecration; serving the husband equals living with the teacher; and care of the house 
equals the tending of the sacred fires.*+ 


6[ have explained above the initiatory rite of twice-born men, a rite 
that signals a new birth and is sanctifying. Learn now the activities 
connected with it. 


THE STUDENT 


Instruction 


“After initiating a pupil, the teacher should at the outset train him in purification, 
proper conduct, fire rituals, and twilight worship. 

When the pupil is ready for vedic recitation, he should sip water in the 
prescribed manner, dress in light clothing,* bring his organs under control, face the 
north, and join his palms in “brahmdfijali’—then should he be taught. 7!At the 
beginning and at the end of a vedic lesson, he should always clasp his teacher’s feet and 
recite the Veda with joined palms—tradition calls this “brahmdfijali,’ the vedic 
joining of palms. He should clasp his teacher’s feet by crossing his hands, touching 
the teacher’s right foot with his right hand and the teacher’s left with his left. 

73When he is ready for vedic recitation, he should say to the teacher, “Teach, Sir 
(bho)!”, without being lazy at any time; and when commanded “Stop!”, he should 
cease.* “At the beginning and at the end of vedic recitation, the student should always 
recite the syllable OM. If it is not recited at the beginning, the Veda slips away; if it is 
not recited at the end, the Veda wastes away. When he is seated on sacred grass with 
the tips toward the east, cleansed by the purificatory blades of grass,* and purified by 
controlling his breath three times—then he becomes competent to recite OM. 


The Syllable OM “The phonemes “a,” “u,” and “m’—Prajapati extracted these 
from the three Vedas, as also “bhi,” earth; “bhuvah,’ mid-space; and “svar,” heaven. 
77Also from the three Vedas, Prajapati, the Supreme Lord, squeezed out foot by foot 
the Savitri verse:* “That... .” 

*By softly reciting this syllable and this verse preceded by the Calls during the 
two twilights, a Brahmin who knows the Veda wins the merit of reciting the Veda 


Chapter 2 99 


itself. “By reciting these three one thousand times outside the village, a Brahmin is 
freed from even a grievous sin within a month, like a snake from its slough. Someone 
who is a Brahmin, a Ksatriya, or a Vaisya by birth invites the censure of good people 
by cutting himself off from this verse and from the timely performance of his rite.* 

®1The three inexhaustible Great Calls preceded by OM and the three-footed 
Savitri verse should be recognized as the mouth of the Veda. When a man recites this 
verse tirelessly for three years, becoming wind and assuming an ethereal form, he 
reaches the highest Brahman.* ®The highest Brahman is the monosyllable OM; the 
highest ascetic toil is the control of breath; nothing is higher than the Savitri; and truth 
is better than ascetic silence. “Offering ghee while seated, offering oblations while 
standing*—all such vedic rites perish. The syllable (aksara) OM should be recognized 
as imperishable (aksara);* it is Brahman, it is Prajapati. 


Soft Recitation The sacrifice consisting of soft recitation is ten times better 
than the sacrifice consisting of prescribed rites—a hundred times, if the recitation is 
done inaudibly; and a thousand times, if it is done mentally. The four types of 
cooked oblations* along with the sacrifices consisting of prescribed rites—all these are 
not worth a sixteenth part of the sacrifice consisting of soft recitation. *’Only by soft 
recitation does a Brahmin achieve success; on this there is no doubt. Whether he does 
anything else or not, a Maitra,* they say, is the true Brahmin. 


Excursus: Control of the Organs 


88s his organs meander amidst the alluring sense objects, a learned man should strive 
hard to control them, like a charioteer his horses. 

5} will explain precisely and in their proper order the eleven organs described by 
wise men of old: “ear, skin, eyes, tongue, and the fifth, nostrils; anus, sexual organ, 
hands, feet, and speech, listed by tradition as the tenth. °'Of these, the five in order 
beginning with the ear are called the organs of perception; and the five beginning with 
the anus, the organs of action. °**Know that the eleventh is the mind, which, by virtue 
of its own distinctive quality, belongs to both groups. So, by mastering it, one 
masters both those quintets. 

By attachment to the organs, a man undoubtedly becomes corrupted; but by 
bringing them under control, he achieves success. “Desire is never quenched by 
enjoying desires; like a fire fed with ghee, it only waxes stronger. Between a man 
who obtains all these and a man who gives them all up—giving up all desires is far 
better than obtaining them all. °°Corrupted as these organs are* by sensory objects, one 
cannot bring them under control as effectively by abstinence as by constant insight. 
Vedas, gifts,* sacrifices, constraints,* and ascetic toils—none of these is ever 
successful for a man with a corrupt heart. 

When a man feels neither elation nor revulsion at hearing, touching, seeing, 
eating, or smelling anything, he should be recognized as a man who has mastered his 
organs. Of all these organs, however, if a single one slips away, through that his 
wisdom slips away, like water through the foot of a skin.* }°By bringing the full range 
of his organs under control and by restraining his mind, a man will achieve all his 
goals without having to shrivel up his body through yoga. 


100 Chapter 2 


Twilight Worship 


101At the morning twilight, he should stand reciting softly the Savitri verse until the 
sun comes into view; at the evening twilight, however, he should remain properly 
seated* until the Big Dipper becomes clearly visible. °*When he stands reciting softly 
at the morning twilight, he banishes any sin committed during the night; and when he 
sits at the evening twilight, he removes any taint contracted during the day. A man 
who neither stands at the morning twilight nor sits at the evening twilight should be 
excluded like a Sidra from all rites of the twice-born. 


Vedic Recitation 


104Intent on carrying out the ritual of daily recitation,* he should go into the wilderness 
and, controlled* and composed, recite at least the Savitri verse near a place of water. 

16Rules regarding the suspension of vedic recitation (4.101-27) have no bearing 
on Vedic Supplements,* on daily vedic recitation, and on ritual formulas used in fire 
offerings. '°The daily vedic recitation is not subject to suspension, for tradition calls it 
a sacrificial session consisting of vedic recitation; it is a meritorious rite at which the 
vedic recitation takes the place of the burnt oblation and the factors causing a 
suspension act as the oblatory exclamation Vasat.* 

107When someone, after purifying and controlling himself, performs his vedic 
recitation for a year according to rule, that recitation will rain milk, curd, ghee, and 
honey on him every single day.* 


Persons Competent to Receive Vedic Instruction 


108K indling the sacred fire, begging almsfood, sleeping on the floor, and doing what is 
beneficial to his teacher—a twice-born who has undergone vedic initiation should do 
these until he has performed the rite of returning home.* 

1°The son of his teacher, a person who offers obedient service, a person who has 
given him knowledge, a virtuous person, an honest person,* someone close to him,* a 
capable man, someone who gives him money, a good man, and one who is his own*— 
these ten may be taught the Veda in accordance with the Law. !!°He must never impart 
instruction to anyone who has not requested it or who has requested it in an improper 
way; for in this world, a wise man, though learned, should conduct himself like an 
idiot.* “A man who imparts in violation of the Law and a man who requests in 
violation of the Law——of these two, the one or the other will incur death or enmity. 

™2Po not sow knowledge where there is no merit or money, or at least 
proportionate service; you don’t sow good seed on brackish soil. ‘Even in a time of 
dreadful adversity, a vedic savant should rather die with his knowledge; let him not 
sow it on barren soil. 

™4Vedic knowledge came up to the Brahmin and said,* “I am your treasure. 
Guard me! Do not hand me over to a malcontent. I shall thus become supremely 
strong. 1“A man you know to be honest, restrained, and chaste—only to such a 
Brahmin should you disclose me, as to a vigilant guardian of your treasure.’”’* 

N6}f, however, a man learns the Veda without permission by listening to 
someone who is reciting it, he is guilty of stealing the Veda and will go to hell. 


Chapter 2 101 


Salutation 


1l7He should greet first* the person from whom he received knowledge—whether it is 
the knowledge of worldly matters, of the Veda, or of the inner self. "8A well- 
disciplined Brahmin, although he knows just the Savitri verse, is far better than an un- 
disciplined one who eats all types of food and deals in all types of merchandise, 
though he may know all three Vedas. 

119He should not sit on a bed or seat occupied by a superior, and he should rise 
from the bed or seat he is occupying before he greets such a person; °for when an older 
person comes near, the life breaths of a younger person rise up, and as he rises up and 
greets him, he retrieves them.* '7'When someone is conscientious about greeting and 
always renders assistance to the elderly, he obtains an increase in these four: life span, 
wisdom, fame, and power. 

12When a Brahmin is greeting an older person, he must state his name after the 
greeting, saying, “I am so-and-so.” !When greeting people who are ignorant of the 
greeting containing the proper name, as also any woman, a wise man should simply 
say “I.’’* 14When he uses the greeting containing his own name, he should say “bho” at 
the end; the meaning of “bho’’* contains the essential meanings of all proper names— 
that is the tradition handed down by the seers. 1*In greeting a Brahmin, he should say, 
“May you live long, gentle Sir!”; and at the end of the name, he should pronounce “a” 
and prolate the previous syllable.* 1A learned man should not greet a Brahmin who 
does not know how to return a greeting; he is no better than a Stidra. 

27When he meets a Brahmin, he should ask him whether he is doing well 
(kuSala);, a Ksatriya, whether he is all right (andmaya); a Vaisya, whether his property is 
secure (ksema); and a Sidra, whether he is in good health (Grogya). 1A person 
consecrated for sacrifice should not be addressed by name even if he is younger; a man 
conversant with the Law should address such a person using the words “bho” or “Sir” 
(bhavat). He should address a woman who is another man’s wife and who is not a 
blood relative of his using the words “Madam,” “Dear Lady,” or “Sister.” He should 
rise up and say, “I am so-and-so” to his maternal and paternal uncles, fathers-in-law, 
officiating priests, and elders who are younger than he. '°'He should honor a maternal 
aunt, a wife of a maternal uncle, a mother-in-law, and a paternal aunt as he would his 
teacher’s wife; they are equal to his teacher’s wife.* 

12-The feet of his brother’s wife of the same social class, he should clasp every 
day; but the feet of the wives of his paternal and maternal relatives,* only after 
returning from a journey. Towards a sister of his father and mother and towards his 
own older sister, he should behave as towards his own mother; but the mother is more 
venerable than they. 


Precedence 


S4Among fellow citizens, people with an age difference of ten years are regarded as 
friends; among fellow artisans, people with an age difference of five years; among 
vedic scholars, people with an age difference of three years; and among blood relatives, 
only people with a slight age difference. 

188A 10-year-old Brahmin and a 100-year-old king, one should know, stand 
with respect to each other as a father to a son; but of the two, the Brahmin is the father. 


102 Chapter 2 


S6Wealth, kin, age, ritual life, and the fifth, knowledge—these are the grounds for 
respect; and each subsequent one carries greater weight than each preceding. *”Among 
persons of the three classes, one who possesses more of and to a higher degree these 
five grounds is more deserving of respect; and so is a Sidra who is in his nineties.+ 

138One should give way to people in vehicles or in their nineties, the sick, people 
carrying loads, women, bath-graduates, kings, and bridegrooms. “?When such people 
encounter each other, however, a bath-graduate and a king are to receive greater honor; 
but when a king and a bath-graduate encounter each other, the king pays honor to the 
bath-graduate. 


Teacher 


“40The twice-born man who initiates a pupil and teaches him the Veda together with the 
ritual books and the secret texts* is called “Teacher.” 4A man who teaches a section of 
the Veda or else the Vedic Supplements (2.105 n.) for a living is called “Tutor.” “The 
Brahmin who performs the rites beginning with the ceremony of impregnation 
according to rule and nourishes with food is called “Elder.”* “The person who, after 
he has been chosen by someone, sets up the sacred fires and performs the cooked 
oblations and sacrifices such as the Agnistoma offering on his behalf is called here his 
“Officiating Priest.” 

444He should consider the man who fills both his ears* faithfully with the Veda 
as his father and mother and never show hostility towards him. The teacher is ten 
times greater* than the tutor; the father is a hundred times greater than the teacher; but 
the mother is a thousand times greater than the father. “Between the man who gave 
life and the man who gave the Veda, the man who gave the Veda is the more venerable 
father; for a Brahmin’s birth in the Veda is everlasting, both here and in the hereafter. 
“4’7”When, through lust for each other, his father and mother engender him and he is 
conceived in the womb, he should consider that as his mere coming into existence. 
“48But the birth that a teacher who has fathomed the Veda brings about according to rule 
by means of the Savitri verse—that is his true birth, that is not subject to old age and 
death. 

149 man who assists someone with vedic knowledge, be it a little or a lot, is 
also acknowledged here as his elder in recognition of that assistance with vedic 
knowledge. 

Rven a younger Brahmin who brings about the vedic birth of an older 
individual and trains him in the Law proper to him becomes his father according to the 
Law. '!The child sage, son of Angiras, gave vedic instruction to his fathers; and 
having excelled them in knowledge, he called them “Little Children.” *They became 
infuriated and raised the issue with the gods. The gods convened and told them: “The 
child addressed you properly. *8An ignorant man, surely, is the child, and the man 
who imparts the Veda is the father; for they address an ignorant man as ‘Child’ and a 
man who imparts the Veda as ‘Father’.” 

5!The seers have established this Law: “In our eyes, only a vedic savant is an 
eminent man”; eminence does not come from age, gray hairs, wealth, or kin. “°For 
Brahmins, seniority depends on knowledge, for Ksatriyas on valor, and for Vaisyas on 
grain and wealth; for Sidras alone does it depends on age. *A man does not become a 


Chapter 2 103 


“senior” simply because his hair has turned gray. Gods call a man with vedic learning a 
“senior,” even though he may be young. 

’Like an elephant made of wood, like a deer made of leather, is a Brahmin 
without vedic learning; these three only bear the name. '8As fruitless as a eunuch* 
with women, as fruitless as a cow with a cow, and as fruitless as a gift given to an 
ignorant man, is a Brahmin ignorant of the Veda. 

189A man who wishes to promote the Law should instruct creatures about what is 
best without hurting them, employing pleasant and gentle words. Only a man whose 
mind and speech have been purified and are always well-guarded acquires the entire 
fruit of reaching the end of the Veda.* !*'Though deeply hurt, let him never use cutting 
words, show hostility to others in thought or deed, or use aberrant language* that 
would alarm people. 

17 et a Brahmin always shrink from praise, as he would from poison; let him 
ever yearn for scorn, as he would for ambrosia—!“for, a man who is scorned sleeps at 
ease, wakes up at ease, goes about in this world at ease; but the man who scorned him 
perishes. 


Vedic Study 


164A twice-born whose body has been consecrated following this orderly sequence 
should gradually amass the riches of ascetic toil consisting of vedic study* while he 
resides with his teacher. !A twice-born should study the entire Veda together with the 
secret texts (2.140 n.), as he carries out the various observances and special ascetic 
practices enjoined by vedic injunctions. A Brahmin planning on undergoing ascetic 
toil should simply recite the Veda constantly; for vedic recitation is recognized here as 
the highest ascetic toil for a Brahmin. 1”’When a twice-born, even while wearing a 
garland, performs his vedic recitation every day according to his ability, he is surely 
practising the fiercest ascetic toil down to the very tips of his nails. “When a Brahmin 
expends great effort in other matters without studying the Veda, while still alive he is 
quickly reduced to the status of a Sidra, together with his children. 

1 According to a scriptural injunction, the first birth of a Brahmin is from his 
mother; the second takes place at the tying of the Mujfija-grass girdle (2.27 n.), and the 
third at the consecration for a sacrifice. Of these, the one signaled by the tying of the 
Muifija-grass girdle is his birth from the Veda. At this birth, the Savitri verse is said to 
be his mother, and the teacher his father. !”'The teacher is called the father because he 
imparts the Veda, for a man does not become competent to perform any rite until the 
tying of the Mufija-grass girdle. ‘Such a man should not pronounce any vedic text, 
except when he offers a funerary oblation, for he is equal to a Sidra until he is born 
from the Veda. 


Observances 


173 After he has undergone vedic initiation, he is to be instructed in the observances and 
then taught the Veda in the proper order and according to rule. “The very same skin, 
cord, girdle, staff, and garment prescribed for him after his initiation* are prescribed for 
him also during the observances. 


104 Chapter 2 


Bringing all his organs under control, a vedic student living with his teacher 
should observe these restrictions in order to increase his ascetic toil. Every day, after 
purifying himself by bathing, he should offer quenching libations to gods, seers, and 
ancestors; worship the gods; and put firewood into the sacred fire. ”He should avoid 
honey, meat, perfumes, garlands, savory foods, women, all foods that have turned 
sour, causing injury to living beings, 'rubbing oil on the body, putting collyrium on 
the eyes, using footwear or an umbrella, lust, hatred, greed, dancing, singing, playing 
musical instruments, “gambling, gossiping, slander, lies, looking at and touching 
women, and hurting others. 

18He should always sleep alone and never ejaculate his semen; for when he 
voluntarily ejaculates his semen, he breaks his vow. '!When a Brahmin student 
ejaculates his semen involuntarily in sleep, he should bathe, worship the sun, and 
softly recite three times the verse: “May the virile strength return again to me. . . .” 


Begging and Daily Duties ‘He should fetch a pot of water, flowers, cow 
dung, loose soil, and Kusa grass—as much as required—and beg for food every day. 

18H aving made himself pure, a vedic student should gather almsfood every day 
from the houses of persons who do not neglect the Veda or sacrifices and who have 
distinguished themselves in the activities proper to them. 'He should not beg from 
his teacher’s family or from the families of his paternal or maternal relatives. When 
houses of other people are unavailable, however, he may beg from these, avoiding 
those listed earlier when those listed later are available.* When the kinds of persons 
mentioned above are not available, he may beg from the entire village after purifying 
himself and curbing his speech; but he should avoid heinous sinners.* 

Having fetched firewood from afar, he should stack it above ground;* and 
using that firewood, he should make offerings in the fire diligently morning and 
evening. 

1871f he fails to beg food or to put firewood into the sacred fire for seven nights 
without being sick, he should perform the penitential observance prescribed for a 
student who has broken his vow of chastity (see 11.119-24). 

1888 ubsisting on almsfood every day, a votary should never eat a meal given by 
one person; tradition says that for a votary subsisting on almsfood is equal to a fast.+ 
18When he is invited, however, he may freely eat at an offering to the gods while 
keeping to his vow, and at an offering to ancestors, conducting himself like a seer; 
doing so does not violate his vow. Wise men sanction this activity only for 
Brahmins; this kind of activity is not commended at all for Ksatriyas and Vaisyas. 


Conduct towards the Teacher 


11When he is ordered by the teacher—or even when he is not—he should apply himself 
every day to vedic recitation and to activities beneficial to his teacher. 

Bringing his body, speech, organs of perception, and mind under control, he 
should stand with joined palms looking at his teacher’s face. He must always keep 
his right arm uncovered,* comport himself properly, cover himself well,* and, when 
he is told “Be seated,” sit down facing the teacher. 

41 his teacher’s presence, his food, clothes, and apparel should always be of a 


Chapter 2 105 


lesser quality than his teacher’s. He should wake up before his teacher and go to bed 
after him. 

15He must never answer or converse with his teacher while lying down, seated, 
eating, standing,* or facing away; he should do so standing up if the teacher is 
seated, approaching him if he is standing, going up to meet him if he is walking 
towards him, running after him if he is running, 1”’going around to face him if he is 
turned away from him, coming close to him if he is far away, and bending down if he is 
lying down or standing at a lower level. 1°8In his teacher’s presence, he should always 
occupy a lower couch or seat; and, within his teacher’s sight, he must not sit as he 
pleases. 

Even out of sight, he must not refer to his teacher by just his name or mimic 
his walk, speech, or mannerisms. 2Wherever his teacher is slandered or reviled, he 
should either cover his ears or go someplace else.* 7°'By slandering his teacher, he 
becomes an ass; by reviling him, a dog; by living off him, a worm; and by being 
jealous of him, an insect. 

202When he is far away or angry, he must not pay his respects to his teacher; nor 
should he do so in the presence of a woman. When he is riding in a vehicle or seated on 
a chair, he should greet his teacher only after getting down. 7°He must not sit down 
with his teacher in such a way that the wind blows from the teacher towards him or 
from him towards the teacher; nor should he talk about anything out of his teacher’s 
hearing. ‘He may sit by his teacher on a cart drawn by an ox, horse, or camel; on a 
terrace or a spread of grass;* or on a mat, rock, bench, or boat. 


Teacher’s Teacher and Other Instructors In the presence of his teacher’s 
teacher, he should behave towards him as towards his own teacher; and he must not 
greet his own elders* unless he is permitted by his teacher. 

26He should always behave in the very same manner towards his vedic 
instructors and his own blood relatives, as also towards those who keep him from what 
is unrighteous and who teach him what is beneficial. 


Members of Teacher’s Family *’Towards distinguished persons, as well as 
towards the teacher’s Arya sons* and the teacher’s own relatives, he should always 
behave just as he does towards his teacher. 

208 teacher’s son who teaches him—whether that son is younger than or of the 
same age as himself, or even if he is only a student of the ritual—is entitled to the same 
respect as his teacher. He must not massage the limbs of his teacher’s son, assist him 
at his bath, eat his leftovers, or wash his feet. 

2l0The teacher’s wives of equal class should receive the same honor as the teacher, 
but wives of unequal class should be honored by rising up and greeting them. 7'He 
must not apply oil on his teacher’s wife, assist her at her bath, massage her limbs, or do 
her hair. **Anyone who is over 20 and able to distinguish between the attractive and 
the unattractive* should not greet here a young wife of his teacher by clasping her feet. 
213}¢ is the very nature of women here to corrupt men. On that account, prudent men are 
never off guard in the presence of alluring young women. 2“For an alluring young 
woman is capable of leading astray not only the ignorant but even learned men under 


106 Chapter 2 


the sway of anger and lust. 75He must not sit alone with his mother, sister, or 
daughter; the array of sensory organs is powerful and overpowers even a learned man. 
216A young man may freely pay his respects to the young wives of his teacher, however, 
by prostrating himself on the ground according to rule and saying: “J am so-and-so.” 
2!/Recalling the Law followed by good people, he should clasp the feet of his teacher’s 
wives upon his return from a journey and greet them every day. 


218As a man discovers water by digging with a spade, so a student, offering obedient 
service, discovers the knowledge contained in his teacher. 


Rules of Conduct 


2194 student may shave his head or keep his hair matted; or else he may keep just his 
topknot matted. 

He should never let the sun rise or set while he is asleep in a village. “If the sun 
should rise or set while he is asleep, whether deliberately or inadvertently, he should 
fast for one day while engaging in soft recitation.* “If, after he had been asleep at 
sunrise or sunset, he does not perform the penance, he becomes saddled with a great 
sin. After purifying himself by sipping water and becoming self-possessed, he 
should worship both twilights every day, softly reciting the prescribed formula in a 
clean spot and according to rule (2.103). 

»3If he sees a woman or a low-born man doing something conducive to welfare, 
he should do all of that diligently, or anything else that he is fond of. 4Some say that 
Law and Wealth are conducive to welfare; others, Pleasure and Wealth; and still others, 
Law alone or Wealth alone. But the settled rule is this: the entire triple set* is 
conducive to welfare. 


Mother, Father, Teacher 7*Teacher, father, mother, and older brother—these 
should never be treated with contempt especially by a Brahmin, even though he may be 
deeply hurt. *°The teacher is the embodiment of Brahman; the father is the 
embodiment of Prajapati; the mother is the embodiment of Earth; and one’s brother is 
the embodiment of oneself. ??’The tribulations that a mother and a father undergo when 
humans are born cannot be repaid even in hundreds of years. 

8He should do what is pleasing to these two every day, and always what is 
pleasing to his teacher. When these three are gratified, he obtains the fullness of ascetic 
toil. *°Obedient service to these three is said to be the highest form of ascetic toil. 
Without their consent, he should not follow any other rule of conduct.* “°For they 
alone are the three worlds; they alone are the three orders of life;* they alone are the 
three Vedas;* and they alone are called the three sacred fires. *'The householder’s fire 
is clearly the father; the southern fire, tradition says, is the mother; and the offertorial 
fire is the teacher—this is the most excellent triad of sacred fires. 

32, householder* who does not neglect these three will win the three worlds; 
and, shining with his own body, he will rejoice in heaven like a god. **He obtains this 
world by devotion to his mother, and the middle world by devotion to his father; but 
he obtains the world of Brahman only by obedient service to his teacher. **When 
someone has attended to these three, he has attended to all his duties; should someone 


Chapter 2 107 


not attend to them, all his rites bear him no fruit. So long as these three are alive, he 
should not follow another rule of conduct;* taking delight in what is pleasing and 
beneficial to them, he should always render them obedient service. “Whenever he 
undertakes any mental, verbal, or physical activity for the sake of the next world 
without inconveniencing them, he should inform them of it. 

237When these three are gratified,* a man has done all he has to do. This is the 
highest Law itself in person; all else is called subsidiary Law. 


Non-Brahmin Teachers 8A man with faith should accept fine learning even 
from a low-caste man; the highest Law even from a man of the lowest caste; and a 
splendid woman even from a bad family. “’One should take ambrosia even from 
poison; words of wisdom even from a child; a good example even from an enemy; and 
gold even from filth. “°Women, gems, learning, Law, purification, and words of 
wisdom, as well as crafts of various kinds, may be accepted from anyone. 

241In a time of adversity, the rules allow a man to study the Veda under a person 
who is not a Brahmin; and, as long as he is studying, he should walk after that teacher 
and serve him obediently. “If he desires to attain the highest state, a pupil should not 
live all his life with a teacher who is not a Brahmin or who is a Brahmin but not a vedic 
scholar. 


Life-long Student: | 


3If he wishes to live with his teacher’s family all his life, however, he should 
diligently serve the teacher until he is freed from his body. When a Brahmin 
obediently serves his teacher until his body comes to an end, he goes immediately to 
the eternal abode of Brahman.* 


Conclusion of Study 


Knowing the Law, he must not give any present to his teacher beforehand; but when, 
with his teacher’s permission, he is ready to take his final bath, he should present the 
teacher with a gift according to his ability— *“land, gold, a cow, or a horse; or at least 
an umbrella or footwear; or grain, vegetables,* or clothes—and thus gladden his 
teacher. 


Life-long Student: II 


*7If his teacher happens to die, he should maintain the same conduct towards his 
teacher’s son possessing the right qualities—or towards his teacher’s wife, or towards a 
person belonging to his teacher’s ancestry (5.60 n.}—as he did towards his teacher. 
*8If none of these is available, he should end his life by serving the sacred fire 
faithfully, standing during the day and seated at night (6.22 n.). When a Brahmin 
lives the life of a vedic student in this manner without breaking his vow, he will go to 
the highest station and will not be reborn on earth again. 


CHAPTER THREE 


MARRIAGE 


Conclusion of Study 


1He should carry out the observance relating to the three Vedas at his teacher’s house, 
an observance lasting thirty-six years, or one-half or one-quarter of that time, or else 
until he has learnt them. 

After he has learnt in the proper order the three Vedas* or two of them, or at least 
one, without violating his chastity,* he should undertake the householder’s order of 
life. >3When he has returned in accordance with the Law proper to him and received his 
vedic inheritance from his father, he should be honored at the outset with the gift of a 
cow, as he sits on a couch wearing a garland.* 


Selection of a Bride 


‘After he has taken the concluding bath with his teacher’s permission and performed 
the rite of returning home according to rule, the twice-born should marry a wife 
belonging to the same class and possessing the right bodily characteristics. 

5A girl who belongs to an ancestry (5.60 n.) different from his mother’s and to a 
lineage* different from his father’s, and who is unrelated to him by marriage,* is 
recommended for marriage by a twice-born man. 

6He should avoid these ten families when contracting a marriage alliance, even 
though they may be prominent and rich in cattle, goats, sheep, money, and grain: 
"families negligent about rites, deficient in male issue, without vedic learning, and 
with hairy bodies, as well as families prone to hemorrhoids, tuberculosis, dyspepsia, 
epilepsy, leukoderma, or leprosy. 

®He must not marry a girl who has red hair or an extra limb; who is sickly; who is 
without or with too much bodily hair;* who is a blabbermouth or jaundiced-looking;* 
°who is named after a constellation, a tree, a river, a very low caste, a mountain, a bird, 
a snake, or a servant; or who has a frightening name.+ !°He should marry a woman who 
is not deficient in any limb; who has a pleasant name; who walks like a goose or an 
elephant; and who has fine body and head hair, small teeth, and delicate limbs. 

NA wise man must not marry a girl who has no brother or whose father is 
unknown, for fear that the Law of “female-son’” may be in force.* 

PAt the first marriage, a woman of equal class is recommended for twice-born 
men; but for those who proceed further through lust, these are, in order, the preferable 
women.* 8A Sidra may take only a Sidra woman as wife; a Vaisya, the latter and a 
woman of his own class; a Ksatriya, the latter two and a woman of his own class; and a 
Brahmin, the latter three and a woman of his own class. 


108 


Chapter 3 109 


Prohibition of a Sidra Wife “Not a single story* mentions a Brahmin or a 
Ksatriya taking a Siidra wife even when they were going through a time of adversity. 
When twice-born men foolishly marry low-caste wives, they quickly reduce even 
their families and children to the rank of Siidras. 

‘According to Atri and the son of Utathya, a man falls from his caste by 
matrying a Sidra woman; according to Saunaka, by fathering a son through her; and 
according to Bhrgu, by producing all his offspring through her.* !”By taking a Stidra 
woman to bed, a Brahmin will descend along the downward course; and by begetting a 
son through her, he falls from the very rank of a Brahmin. *When such a woman plays 
the leading role in his divine, ancestral, and hospitality rites, gods and ancestors do not 
partake of them, and he will not go to heaven. “No expiation is prescribed for a man 
who drinks the saliva from the lips of a Sidra woman, who is tainted by her breath, and 
who begets himself in her.* 


Types of Marriage 


20Listen now in brief to these eight types of marriage for all four classes, some 
beneficial both here and in the hereafter, and some not. 2!They are the Brahma, the 
Divine, the Seer’s, the Prajapatya, the Demonic, the Gandharva, the Fiendish, and the 
Ghoulish, which is the eighth and the worst. Which of these is lawful for which class, 
their respective merits and defects, the merits and demerits of each with respect to 
procreation—I will explain all this to you. 

The first six in the order enumerated should be considered lawful for Brahmins; 
the last four for Ksatriyas; the same four, with the exception of the Fiendish, for 
Vaisyas and Stidras.* ‘The first four, sages say, are recommended for Brahmins; the 
Fiendish alone for Ksatriyas; and the Demonic for Vaisyas and Siidras. >The tradition 
recorded here, however, considers three of the last five as lawful and two as unlawful; 
the Demonic and the Ghoulish should never be carried out. The two marriages 
proclaimed earlier, the Gandharva and the Fiendish, whether undertaken separately or 
conjointly,* are viewed by tradition as lawful for Ksatriyas. 

2”7When a man dresses a girl up, honors her, invites on his own a man of learning 
and virtue, and gives her to him, it is said to be the “Brahma” Law. ?8When a man, 
while a sacrifice is being carried out properly, adorns his daughter and gives her to the 
officiating priest as he is performing the rite, it is called the “Divine” Law. When a 
man accepts a bull and a cow, or two pairs of them, from the bridegroom in accordance 
with the Law and gives a girl to him according to rule, it is called the “Seer’s” Law. 
3°When a man honors the girl and gives her after exhorting them with the words: “May 
you jointly fulfill the Law,” tradition calls it the “Prajapatya” procedure. When a girl 
is given* after the payment of money to the girl’s relatives and to the girl herself 
according to the man’s ability and out of his own free will, it is called the “Demonic” 
Law. **When the girl and the groom have sex with each other voluntarily, that is the 
“Gandharva” marriage based on sexual union* and originating from love. *When 
someone violently abducts a girl from her house as she is shrieking and weeping by 
causing death, mayhem, and destruction, it is called the “Fiendish” procedure.* 


110 Chapter 3 


34When someone secretly rapes a woman who is asleep, drunk, or mentally deranged, it 
is the eighth known as “Ghoulish,” the most evil of marriages. 

SGiving a girl away by simply pouring water is recommended for Brahmins, 
while among the other classes it may be done through mutual love. 


Sons from Different Types of Marriage ~*°Brahmins, listen now as I describe 
accurately all that Manu has said regarding the merits of each of these marriages. 

374 son who is born to a woman married according to the “Brahma” rite and who 
does good deeds* rescues from evil* ten generations of forefathers before him and ten 
generations after him, with himself as the twenty-first; %a son born to a woman 
married according to the “Divine” rite rescues seven generations before him and seven 
after him; a son born to a woman married according to the “Seer’s” rite, three before and 
three after; and a son born to a woman married according to “Prajapatya” marriage, six 
before and six after. 

From all four types of marriage beginning, in order, with “Brahma” are born 
sons who are eminent in vedic knowledge and respected by cultured people. ““Endowed 
with beauty, spirit, and virtue,* possessing wealth and fame, furnished with every 
delight, and righteous to the highest degree, they will live a hundred years. “But in the 
others—the remaining wicked types of marriage—are born sons whose speech is cruel 
and false and who hate the Veda and the Law. 

“From irreproachable marriages are born children beyond reproach; from 
reproachable marriages are born children inviting people’s reproach.* Therefore, a man 
should avoid reproachable marriages. 


Marriage Rite “The consecratory rite of taking the hand in marriage is prescribed 
only for brides of equal class. The following should be recognized as the procedure for 
the rite of marriage when brides are of unequal class. “When marrying an upper-class 
man, a Ksatriya bride should take hold of an arrow, a Vaisya bride a goad, and a Sidra 
bride the hem of his garment. 


Sexual Union 


Finding his gratification always in his wife, he should have sex with her during her 
season.* Devoted solely to her, he may go to her also when he wants sexual pleasure, 
except on the days of the moon’s change.* 

“The natural* season of women, according to tradition, consists of sixteen 
nights, together with the other four days* proscribed by good people. “Of these 
nights, the first four as well as the eleventh and the thirteenth are disapproved; the 
remaining ten nights are recommended.* 

48Sons are born when he has sex on even nights, and girls on odd nights. 
Desiring a son, therefore, he should have sex with his wife on even nights during her 
season. “When the man’s semen is dominant, it turns out to be a boy; when the 
woman’s is dominant, a girl: and when both are equal, a hermaphrodite or a twin boy 
and girl. When both are weak or scanty, no conception takes place.* 

‘Regardless of the order of life in which a man lives,* if he avoids women dur- 
ing the forbidden nights and during the other eight nights,* he becomes a true celibate. 


Chapter 3 111 


Purchasing a Wife 


514 learned father must never accept even the slightest bride-price for his daughter; for 
by greedily accepting a bride-price, a man becomes a trafficker in his offspring. °*When 
relatives foolishly live off a woman’s wealth—slave women, vehicles, or clothes— 
those evil men will descend along the downward course.* 

Ata “Seer’s” marriage, some say, the bull and cow constitute the bride-price. 
That is totally false. Whether the amount is great or small, it is still a sale.*+ When 
the women’s relatives do not take the bride-price for themselves, it does not constitute 
a sale. It is an act of respect to the women, a simple token of benevolence. 


Honoring Women 


If they desire an abundance of good fortune, fathers, brothers, husbands, and brothers- 
in-law should revere their women and provide them with adornments. 

‘6Where women are revered,* there the gods rejoice; but where they are not, no 
rite bears any fruit. °’ Where female relatives grieve, that family soon comes to ruin; but 
where they do not grieve, it always prospers. *°When female relatives, not receiving 
due reverence, curse any house, it comes to total ruin, as if struck down by witchcraft. 

If men want to become prosperous, therefore, they should always honor the 
women on joyful occasions and festive days with gifts of adornments, clothes, and 
food. 


Marital Harmony 


Good fortune smiles incessantly on a family where the husband always finds delight 
in his wife, and the wife in her husband. 

6lKor, if the wife does not sparkle, she does not arouse her husband. And if the 
husband is not aroused, there will be no offspring. When the wife sparkles, so does 
the entire household; but when she ceases to sparkle, so does the entire household. 


Degradation of Families 


®3By contracting aberrant marriages, by neglecting rites, and by failing to study the 
Veda, respectable families quickly come to ruin;* as also by disregarding Brahmins. 
“By practicing crafts, by engaging in trade, by having children only from a Siidra wife, 
by dealing in cattle, horses, and vehicles, by engaging in agriculture, by entering a 
king’s service, °by officiating at sacrifices of people at whose sacrifices one is 
forbidden to officiate, and by denying the efficacy of rites, respectable families fall into 
disrepute; as also those families bereft of vedic knowledge.* 

When they are rich in vedic knowledge, however, even poor families attain the 
status of “respectable family” and achieve great fame. 


THE HOUSEHOLDER 


°’A householder should perform the domestic rites in his nuptial fire according to rule, 
as also the five great sacrifices and the daily cooking. 


112 Chapter 3 


Great Sacrifices 


8A householder has five slaughter-houses: fireplace, grindstone, broom,* mortar and 
pestle, and water pot. By his use of them, he is fettered. “To expiate successively for 
each of these, the great seers devised the five great sacrifices to be carried out daily by 
householders. 

The sacrifice to the Veda is teaching; the sacrifice to ancestors is the quenching 
libation; the sacrifice to gods is the burnt offering; the sacrifice to beings is the Bali 
offering; and the sacrifice to humans is the honoring* of guests. “If a man never fails to 
offer these five great sacrifices to the best of his ability, he remains unsullied by the 
taints of his slaughter-houses in spite of living permanently at home. Gods, guests, 
dependents, ancestors, and oneself—-when someone does not make offerings to these 
five, he has breath but no life at all. 

The five sacrifices are called Ahuta, Huta, Prahuta, Brahmya-Huta, and Prasita. 
“The Ahuta—“not offered in the fire’—is soft recitation. The Huta—‘‘offered in the 
fire’—is a burnt offering. The Prahuta—“‘offered by scattering’”—is the Bali offering to 
beings. The Brahmya-Huta—“offered in Brahmins’—~is the worship of Brahmins. The 
Prasita—“consumed’—is the quenching libation to ancestors. 

He should apply himself here* daily to his vedic recitation and to making 
offerings to gods; for by applying himself to making offerings to gods, he upholds this 
world, both the mobile and the immobile. An oblation duly consigned to the fire 
reaches the sun; from the sun comes rain; from rain, food; and from food, offspring.* 

7As all living beings exist dependent on air, so people in other orders of life* 
exist dependent on the householder. Because it is householders who sustain people in 
all three orders of life every day by giving them knowledge and food, the householder 
represents the most senior order of life.* This is the order that must be shouldered* 
assiduously by anyone who desires undecaying heaven and absolute happiness, an 
order that cannot be shouldered by people with feeble faculties. 

%Seers, ancestors, gods, beings, and guests seek favors from the householder, 
which a wise man should grant them. *'He should duly honor the seers by private vedic 
recitation, gods with burnt oblations, ancestors with an ancestral offering, humans 
with food, and beings with a Bali offering. 








Ancestral Offerings *®He should make an ancestral offering every day with food 
or water, or even with milk, roots, and fruits, gladdening his ancestors thereby. He 
should feed at least a single Brahmin for the benefit of his ancestors as part of the five 
great sacrifices; at this,* he should never feed even a single Brahmin* in connection 
with the offering to the All-gods. 


Divine Offerings From the oblation to All-gods* that has been cooked, a 
Brahmin should offer portions in the domestic fire to the following deities every day 
and according to rule: ©first to Fire and to Soma; then to both of them together; to the 
All-gods; to Dhanvantari; ®to Kuhii—the goddess of the new moon; to Anumati—the 
goddess of the full moon; to Prajapati; to heaven and earth together; and finally to 
Svistakrt—Fire who makes the offering flawless. 


Chapter 3 113 


Bali Offerings In this manner, having offered the burnt oblation properly, he 
should make the Bali offerings to Indra, Death, Lord of the waters (Varuna), and 
Moon, together with their attendants, making the offerings clockwise in the direction 
of each quarter. "He should make an offering by the door, saying: “To the Maruts!”; by 
the water pot, saying: “To the waters!’’; and by the mortar and pestle, saying “To trees!” 
®He should make a Bali offering to Sri—the goddess of prosperity—by the head of the 
bed; to Bhadrakali—the auspicious black goddess—by the foot of the bed; and to 
Brahman and the Lord of the house in the middle of the house. 

He should throw into the air a Bali offering to All-gods, as well as to beings 
that roam during the day and to those that roam at night.* “In the back house,* he 
should make a Bali offering to Sarvannabhiiti*—the power of all food. The remainder 
of the Bali oblation he should offer towards the south for the ancestors. °*He should 
also gently place on the ground offerings for dogs, outcastes, dog-cookers, persons 
with evil diseases,* crows, and worms. 

When a Brahmin honors all beings in this manner every day, he takes on a body 
of effulgence and goes by the direct route to the supreme abode. 





Honoring Guests “After completing in this manner the Bali offering, he should 
feed a guest before anyone else and give almsfood to a mendicant student of the Veda* 
according to rule. By giving almsfood, a twice-born householder obtains as much 
merit as he does by giving a cow to a poor man* according to rule. 

%He should garnish* some almsfood or a pot of water and present it in 
accordance with the rules to a Brahmin who knows the true meaning of the Veda. 
“Divine and ancestral oblations of ignorant men come to naught when the donors offer 
them foolishly to Brahmins who are the equivalent of ashes.* %Oblations offered in 
the fires that are the mouths of Brahmins, fires set ablaze by knowledge and ascetic 
toil, rescue a man from danger and from grievous sin.+ 

When a guest arrives, he should offer him a seat and water and give him food as 
well according to rule, after garnishing it according to his ability.+ °When a Brahmin 
resides without being treated with respect, he takes away all the good works of even a 
man who lives by gleaning ears of grain (4.5 n.) or who makes daily offerings in the 
five sacred fires (3.185 n.). !°'Some straw, a place on the floor, water, and fourth, a 
pleasant word of welcome—at least these are never wanting in the houses of good 
people. 

12°Tradition defines a guest as a Brahmin who spends just one night. He is called 
“guest” because his stay is brief.* A Brahmin living in the same village or on a 
social visit cannot be considered a guest even when he comes to a house which has a 
wife or even sacred fires.* !*When foolish householders become attached to other 
people’s cooking, the result is that after death they are born as the cattle of those who 
gave them food.+ 

1054 householder must never turn away a guest led there by the sun in the 
evening; and whether he arrives at the proper time or not, he should not let him remain 
in his house without food. Nor should he eat anything that he does not serve his 
guest. Honoring (3.70 n.) a guest* leads to wealth, fame, long life, and heaven. 


114 Chapter 3 


07Guests of the highest status should receive the highest treatment with respect 
to seat, room, bed, accompanying them as they leave,* and paying honor to them; 
those of equal status should receive equal treatment; and those of inferior status should 
receive inferior treatment. !°If another guest arrives after he has completed the offering 
to All-gods, however, he should provide him also with food according to his ability; 
but he need not make a fresh Bali offering.* 

1094 Brahmin must not advertise his family and lineage for the sake of a meal; for 
the wise call a man who flaunts these for a meal “an eater of vomit.” 

HOA Ksatriya is not called a “guest” in the house of a Brahmin; nor is a Vaisya, a 
Siidra, a friend, a relative, or an elder.* ‘If, however, a Ksatriya comes to his house 
fulfilling the conditions of a guest,* he may freely feed him also after the Brahmins 
have finished their meal. "2Even when a Vaisya or a Sidra arrives at his house 
fulfilling the conditions of a guest, he should show kindness and feed him along with 
his servants. ‘8Even when others, such as his friends, visit his house out of mutual 
affection, he should make as special a preparation of food as he can and feed them along 
with his wife.* 4Newly married women, young girls, the sick, and pregnant 
women-—these he may feed without hesitation right after* the guests. 

'5When a fool eats before he gives food to these persons, as he eats he is unaware 
that he is being eaten by dogs and vultures. 1°Once the Brahmins, the dependents, and 
the servants have finished their meal, only then should the husband and wife eat what 
is left over. "”After he has honored (3.70 n.) the gods, seers, humans, ancestors, and 
the guardian deities of the house, the householder should eat what remains. !!8A man 
who cooks only for his own sake eats nothing but sin; for the food prescribed for good 
men is this—eating the leftovers of a sacrifice. 

™9He should honor a king, an officiating priest, a bath-graduate, an elder, a 
friend,* a father-in-law, and a maternal uncle with a honey-mixture* when they visit 
him after the lapse of one year. !°The rule is that a king and a vedic scholar should be 
honored with a honey-mixture when a sacrifice is about to take place, but never outside 
the context of a sacrifice. 


"1When the evening meal is cooked, the wife should make a Bali offering without 
reciting vedic formulas. This is called “offering to All-gods,” and it is prescribed both 
in the evening and in the morning. 


Ancestral Offerings 


12 After he has offered the sacrifice to ancestors,* a Brahmin who possesses a sacred fire 
should perform the monthly ancestral rite called the “supplementary offering of rice 
balls’* on the new-moon day. “The wise call the monthly offering to ancestors the 
“supplementary offering,” and it should be performed diligently using the 
recommended kinds of meat (cf. 3.266—72). 

?4Who are the Brahmins to be fed at this rite and who are to be avoided? How 
many? And with what kinds of food?—I will explain all that completely. 


Number of Invitees ‘Even if he is rich, he should feed two at an offering to 
gods, three at an offering to ancestors, or one at either offering; he should not indulge 


Chapter 3 115 


in feeding a large number. #°A large number is detrimental to five things: offering 
proper hospitality,* doing things at the right place and the right time, carrying out 
purifications, and finding Brahmins of quality. Therefore, he must not try to get a large 
number. 


Quality of Invitees '’This rite for the deceased performed at the new moon is 
well Known by the name “ancestral offering.” When a man is devoted to it, the same 
non-vedic rite for the deceased benefits him always.* 

28Donors should present a divine or ancestral offering only to a vedic scholar; 
what is given to such an eminently worthy Brahmin yields abundant fruit. He 
should feed even a single learned man at each rite to gods or ancestors rather than a lot 
of men ignorant of the Veda; he reaps thereby copious fruit. °He should search far and 
wide* for a Brahmin who has mastered the Veda; such a man is the proper recipient of 
divine and ancestral offerings, and tradition calls him a “guest.” "For when one man 
who knows the Veda is gratified there, in terms of the Law he is worth all the men 
ignorant of the Veda who may eat there, be they in their millions. '*Divine and 
ancestral offerings should be given to a man renowned for his knowledge, for hands 
smeared with blood cannot be cleansed with more blood. “8A man will have to eat as 
many red-hot spikes, spears, and iron balls as the rice balls that someone ignorant of 
the Veda eats at his divine or ancestral offerings. 

134Some Brahmins apply themselves to knowledge, some to ascetic toil, others 
to both ascetic toil and vedic recitation, and still others to ritual activities.* “He 
should diligently present divine offerings only to those who apply themselves to 
knowledge, but he may present ancestral offerings to any of the four according to rule. 
6Between a man whose father is not a vedic savant but whose son has mastered the 
Veda and a man whose father has mastered the Veda but whose the son is not vedic 
savant, }°’the man whose father is a vedic savant should be considered as superior.* 
The other deserves honor for the sake of venerating the Veda. 

138A friend must not be fed at an ancestral offering; he is to be courted with 
presents. A twice-born who is deemed neither friend nor foe is the one who should be 
fed at an ancestral offering. ’’When a friend takes center stage* at his divine or 
ancestral offerings, he reaps no fruit from them after death. “When a man foolishly 
strikes up friendships by means of an ancestral offering, that lowest of twice-born, 
using ancestral offerings to make friends, will fall from heaven. 'Such a sacrificial 
gift is ghoulish and twice-born people call it “feeding-one-another.” It remains in this 
very world, like a blind cow in a single stall.* 

142 As a sower reaps no harvest when he sows his seeds on barren soil, so a giver 
ears no reward when he gives his oblation to a man ignorant of the Veda. 8A 
sacrificial gift given to a learned man according to rule makes both the givers and the 
receivers partake of its rewards both here and in the hereafter. 

14He may, if he so wishes, honor a friend at an ancestral offering but never a foe 
even if he is quite handsome;* for an oblation is fruitless in the hereafter when it is 
eaten by an enemy. He should make every effort to feed at his ancestral offering either 
a scholar of the Rgveda who has mastered that Veda, or an Adhvaryu priest who has 
mastered that vedic branch, or a scholar of the Samaveda who has learnt it completely. 


116 Chapter 3 


M46When any one of these is received with honor and eats the ancestral offering of 
someone, his ancestors up to the seventh generation derive unending satisfaction. 

“47This, clearly, is the primary method in presenting divine and ancestral 
offerings. What follows, on the other hand, should be considered a secondary method 
that has always been followed by good people. “8One may feed the following: 
maternal grandfather, maternal uncle, sister’s son, father-in-law, teacher, daughter’s 
son, son-in-law, and relative, as also one’s officiating priest and a person for whom one 
officiates as a priest. 

497A man who knows the Law must never probe into the qualifications of a 
Brahmin at a rite to the gods; when he undertakes an ancestral rite, however, he should 
diligently probe into his qualifications.+ 


Unfit Invitees °Brahmins who are thieves, fallen from their caste, or impotent,* 
or who follow the livelihood of infidels—Manu has declared these unfit to participate 
at divine or ancestral offerings. *'Men who have matted hair, who do not recite the 
Veda, who are bald-headed,* who are gamblers, and who officiate at sacrifices offered 
by groups of people—these also must not be fed at an ancestral offering. Physicians, 
temple priests, meat sellers, and those who live by trade—these should be avoided at 
divine and ancestral offerings. 

3A servant of a village or a king; someone with bad nails or black teeth; 
someone who opposes his teacher or has abandoned the sacred fire; an usurer; 
4someone suffering from consumption; a cattle herder; a man who sets up a 
household before his older brother (cf. 3.171); someone who neglects his ritual duties* 
or hates the Veda; a man who sets up a household after his younger brother; someone 
linked to an association;* a performer; a vedic student who has broken his vow of 
chastity; a husband of a Sidra woman; a son of a remarried woman (9.175 n.); a one- 
eyed man; someone who lets his wife’s paramour live in his house; **someone who 
teaches for a fee, as also the person taught by such a teacher; a pupil or teacher of a 
Sidra; a man of uncouth speech; a son of an adultress (3.174); a son of a widow 
(3.174); *’someone who repudiates his father, mother, or teacher without good reason; 
someone who has established vedic or matrimonial links with people fallen from their 
caste; *8an arsonist; a poisoner; someone who eats from the son of an adulteress; a 
seller of Soma; a seafarer; a panegyrist; an oil-miller; a suborner of perjury; ’someone 
who wrangles with his father; a gambler; a man who drinks liquor; someone with an 
evil disease (3.92 n.); a heinous sinner (2.185 n.); a hypocrite; a poison vendor;* 
1someone who manufactures bows and arrows; a lover of one’s sister-in-law (3.173); 
a treacherous friend; a man who lives by gambling: someone whose teacher is his son; 
lan epileptic; someone with scrofula or leukoderma; a slanderer; an insane person; a 
blind man; and someone who scoffs at the Vedas—these persons should be avoided. 

1€2A trainer of elephants, oxen, horses, or camels; an astrologer by profession; a 
bird breeder; a combat trainer; someone who breaches canals or takes delight in 
obstructing them;* an architect; a messenger; a tree planter; “someone who uses dogs 
for sport; a professional falconer; a man who rapes virgins; a cruel man; someone who 
adopts a Siidra occupation; a man who officiates at sacrifices of corporate bodies;* 
someone lacking in proper conduct; an impotent man (3.150 n.); someone who is 


Chapter 3 117 


always asking for things; a farmer by profession; a club-footed man; someone 
condemned by good people; a man who keeps sheep or buffaloes; a husband of a 
woman who has had a man before (5.163 n.); someone who carries corpses—these 
persons should be diligently avoided. 

167At both divine and ancestral offerings, a man who is wise and the highest of 
the twice-born should avoid these lowest of the twice-born, men of despicable conduct 
alongside whom it is unfit to eat. 8For a Brahmin who does not recite the Veda 
becomes extinguished like a grass-fire, and he should not be given a divine offering; no 
one pours an offering in the ashes (3.97 n.). 

169] will explain in full detail the fruit a donor reaps in the hereafter when he feeds 
at a divine or ancestral offering a man alongside whom it is unfit to eat. !?What is eaten 
by Brahmins who do not keep to their vows, by people such as those who set up a 
household before their older brothers, and by other individuals alongside whom it is 
unfit to eat—all that is undoubtedly eaten by fiends. 

*171When someone gets married or begins to perform the daily fire sacrifice 
before his older brother, he is to be considered a Parivettr—‘a man who sets up a 
household before his older brother’; and that older brother is a Parivitti—-‘a man who 
sets up a household after his younger brother.” A man who sets up a household 
before his older brother, a man who sets up a household after his younger brother, the 
woman who marries such a man, the man who gives her away, and, fifth, the priest 
who performs the wedding—they all go to hell. ’*When a man has a lustful affair with 
the wife of his deceased brother, even if she has been legally appointed for leviratic 
union (9.57—70), he should be considered a Didhistipati*—“lover of his sister-in- 
law.” }”4Two types of sons, Kunda and Golaka, are born from someone else’s wife. If 
her husband is alive, he is a Kunda—‘son of an adulteress”; and if her husband is dead, 
he is a Golaka—‘son of a widow.” !”These two creatures, born in someone else’s field 
(9.33), make the divine or ancestral offering given to them futile to the donor both here 
and in the hereafter. 

YoWhen a man alongside whom it is unfit to eat looks at persons alongside 
whom it is fit to eat as they are taking their meal, the foolish donor fails to reap the 
reward of feeding as many of them as have been looked at by that man. !”’When a blind 
man looks at them, he destroys the fruit of feeding ninety of them; a one-eyed man, 
sixty; a man suffering from leukoderma, one hundred; and a man with an evil disease, 
one thousand. !’When a man who officiates at sacrifices of Siidras touches the 
Brahmins with a limb of his, the donor fails to reap the fruit of giving non-sacrificial 
offerings to as many Brahmins as have been touched by that man. !”When even a 
Brahmin learned in the Veda greedily accepts anything from such a man, he quickly 
comes to ruin, like an unbaked clay pot in water. 

18What is given to a seller of Soma turns into excrement; what is given to a 
physician turns into pus and blood; what is given to a temple priest perishes; what is 
given to a usurer lacks stability; *'what is given to a trader has no effect either in this 
world or the next; and what is given to a twice-born man born to a remarried woman is 
like an oblation offered in ashes (3.97 n.). The wise declare that the food given to 
other evil men enumerated above (3.150—66), men alongside whom it is unfit to eat, 
turn into fat, blood, flesh, marrow, and bone. 


118 Chapter 3 


Persons Who Purify Those Alongside Whom They Eat 'Brahmins 
who purify a row of eaters defiled by someone alongside whom it is unfit to eat—listen 
to a complete enumeration of such Brahmins, who purify those alongside whom they 
eat. '*4Men of preeminence in all the Vedas and in all the expository texts,* as also 
descendants in a line of vedic scholars, should be regarded as persons who purify those 
alongside whom they eat. 'An expert in the three Naciketa* fire altars; a man who 
maintains the five sacred fires;* a man who knows the Trisuparna verse; a man who 
knows the six Vedic Supplements (2.105 n.); a son of a woman married according to 
the “Brahma” procedure (3.27); a man who sings the Jyestha Sdmans; 1a man who 
knows the meaning of the Veda, as also one who teaches it; a vedic student; a man who 
has given a 1,000;* a 100-year-old man-—these should be regarded as Brahmins who 
purify those alongside whom they eat. 


Invitations +’When an ancestral offering is about to take place, he should duly 
invite the kind of Brahmins mentioned above, a minimum of three, either on the 
preceding day or on the very day of the offering. 

188When a twice-born has been invited to an ancestral rite, both he and the person 
performing the rite should constantly keep themselves controlled and refrain from 
vedic recitation; for the ancestors stand by those twice-born who have been invited, 
follow them like the wind, and sit by them as they sit.+ 

1901f a Brahmin who has been invited to a divine or ancestral offering according to 
rule becomes delinquent in any way, that evil man will become a pig. If someone 
invited to an ancestral offering has a sexual encounter with a Sidra woman, he will 
assume all the sins committed by the donor of that offering. 


Classes of Ancestors ‘The ancestors are the primeval deities*—they are free 
from anger, devoted to purification, and always chaste; they have laid down their arms; 
and they are highly exalted. From whom do they all originate; who should be 
worshipped and according to what specific rules—isten to an account of all that. 

Tradition holds that the various groups of ancestors are the sons of all the seers 
headed by Marici, seers who are the children of Manu, the son of Hiranyagarbha (1.34— 
35). >Somasads, the sons of Viraj, are known in tradition as the ancestors of the 
Sadhyas. Agnisvattas, the sons of Marici, are widely known in the world as the 
ancestors of the gods. !°Barhisads, the sons of Atri, are known in tradition as the 
ancestors of Daityas, Danavas, Yaksas, Gandharvas, Serpents, Raksasas, Suparnas, 
and Kinnaras. The ancestors of Brahmins are called Somapas; of Ksatriyas, 
Havirbhujs: of Vaisyas, Ajyapas; and of Stidras, Sukalins. !°’Somapas are the sons of 
Kavi; Havismats, the sons of Angiras; Ajyapas, the sons of Pulastya; and Sukalins, 
the sons of Vasistha. ”°Anagnidagdhas, Agnidagdhas, Kavyas, Barhisads, Agni- 
svattas, and Saumyas—these should be regarded as the ancestors only of Brahmins. 
00]t should be understood, however, that these principal classes of ancestors we have 
enumerated have also here countless sons and grandsons. 

201From the seers were born the ancestors; from the ancestors, the gods and 
demons;* and from the gods, the whole world, the mobile and the immobile, in due 
order. 


Chapter 3 119 


2022 ven some water offered to them with a generous spirit* using vessels made of 
silver or inlaid with silver leads to an imperishable reward. 


Preparatory Rites Ancestral offerings are far more significant for twice-born 
persons than divine offerings; for, according to tradition, a divine offering is a 
preliminary rite confering vigor upon the ancestral offering. °*He should perform at the 
outset an offering to gods, which provides protection to ancestral rites; for fiends 
plunder an ancestral offering lacking such protection. *°He should seek to begin and 
end an ancestral offering with offerings to gods; it should never begin or end with 
offerings to ancestors. Should he, instead, seek to begin or end with offerings to 
ancestors, he will quickly come to ruin together with his offspring. 

206He should daub a clean and secluded area with cow dung and carefully make 
that area slope towards the south; 7°’ancestors are always gratified by offerings made in 
places that are clean, secluded, in the open, and by the water’s edge.+ 

208On separate seats properly arranged and spread with sacred grass, he should 
seat the Brahmins after they have sipped water.* After seating those irreproachable 
Brahmins on their seats, he should honor them with fragrant perfumes and garlands, 
beginning with the ones associated with the divine offering. 

2\0Having brought water and sesame seeds along with purificatory Kusa blades 
for them, the Brahmin should make an offering in the sacred fire with the collective 
consent of those Brahmins.* 244At the outset he should offer to Agni, Soma, and Yama 
oblations that confer vigor, and then satisfy the ancestors by offering them sacrificial 
food according to rule. #If a sacred fire is not available, however, he should offer the 
oblation simply in the hand of a Brahmin; for Brahmins who have seen the vedic 
formulas declare that the sacred fire is a twice-born. 

213They call these highest of twice-born men the ancient* gods of the ancestral 
offering, free from anger, totally serene, and devoted to invigorating the world. 


Principal Offerings He should perform in the fire the entire series of rites so 
that they end in the south;* pour water on the ground with his right hand; make three 
balls from the remainder of the sacrificial food with a collected mind; face the south 
and lay them down following the same procedure as at the pouring of water; 2!offer 
those balls in accordance with the rules, while keeping himself ritually pure; wipe his 
hand on those blades of sacred grass as the share of those who partake of leavings;* 
21”sip some water; turn around towards the north; control his breath slowly three times; 
worship the six seasons and the ancestors while reciting ritual formulas; 7!8once again 
pour the remaining water gently near the balls; smell those balls with a collected mind 
in the order they were laid down; 2’remove a small portion from each ball in the proper 
order; and get those seated Brahmins to eat them first according to rule. 

~OIf his father is alive, however, he should lay down the balls only for the 
preceding ancestors; or he may get his own father to eat the ancestral offering like one 
of the Brahmins.* “If his father is dead but his grandfather is alive, on the other hand, 
he should first recite his father’s name and then his great-grandfather’s. “*Manu_ has 
declared that either his grandfather may eat that ancestral offering or he may freely 
perform it on his own with his grandfather’s permission. 


120 Chapter 3 


3 After pouring water mixed with sesame seeds along with purificatory Kusa 
blades into their hands, he should offer a piece of those balls to each, saying, “Svadha 
be to them!” 


Feeding the Brahmins ~Carrying with both his hands and by himself the 
vessel heaped with food, he should set it down gently in front of the Brahmins while 
thinking of his ancestors. “When food is brought without being held with both 
hands, evil-minded demons forcibly snatch it away. Keeping himself ritually pure 
and with a collected mind, he should set down on the ground properly the side dishes,* 
such as sauces and vegetables; milk, curd, ghee, and honey; 7’various kinds of foods 
and delicacies; roots and fruits; and delicious meats and fragrant drinks. 

8After bringing all these, he should dish them out gradually with a collected 
mind and keeping himself ritually pure, pressing all the side dishes on them.* °He 
must never shed a tear, become angry, tell a lie, touch the food with his foot, or flip it 
around. “°A tear makes the food go to ghosts;* anger, to enemies; a lie, to dogs; 
touching with the foot, to fiends; and flipping around, to evil-doers. 

31He should give ungrudgingly anything that the Brahmins may wish. He 
should narrate vedic disputations; it is pleasing to the ancestors. “At a rite for 
ancestors, he should make them listen to recitations of the Veda, legal treatises, 
stories, epic narratives, Puranas, and ancillary texts.* “%He should cheerfully gratify 
the Brahmins and feed them at a leisurely pace, pressing on them repeatedly the main 
and the side dishes. 

24He should diligently feed a son of his daughter at an ancestral offering, even if 
he is only a vedic student; place a goat’s wool blanket* on each seat; and scatter sesame 
seeds on the ground. “°At an ancestral offering, three things confer purity: daughter’s 
son, goat-wool blanket, and sesame seeds; and three things are commended: 
purification, absence of anger, and doing things unhurriedly. *¢All the food should be 
very warm, and they should eat it in silence; and even when the donor inquires about it, 
the Brahmins should not comment on the quality of the sacrificial food. *”As long as 
the food is warm, as long as they eat it in silence, and as long as they do not comment 
on the quality of the sacrificial food, the ancestors partake of it. *®What is eaten 
wearing a turban on the head, what is eaten facing the south, or what is eaten wearing 
sandals, is undoubtedly eaten by fiends. 

2A Candila, a pig, a cock, a dog, a menstruating woman, or a eunuch must not 
look at the Brahmins while they are eating. “What is seen by any of these during a fire 
offering, the giving of a gift, a ritual feeding, or a divine or ancestral oblation, becomes 
inefficacious. “!A pig spoils with its breath, a cock with the waft from its wings, a dog 
with its gaze, and a low-caste man with his touch. #?If someone is lame or one-eyed, 
lacks a limb, or has an excess limb, he should also be removed from that place, even if 
he is a servant of the donor. 

243Should a Brahmin or a mendicant come there for food, he should honor him 
according to his ability with the permission of those Brahmins. 

*44Mixing all the varieties of food together, he should drench it with water and 
deposit it in front of the diners after they have finished their meal, scattering it on the 
ground. “The remnants of food and what has been scattered on the sacred grass are the 


Chapter 3 121 


share of those who have died before their initiation or committed suicide,* and of 
young women of the family. *°The fragments fallen on the ground at an ancestral 
offering are declared to be the share of all the deceased servants who have not been 
dishonest or crooked. 


Rite for the Newly Deceased For a deceased twice-born, he should perform 
the rite without the Sapinda offerings; omitting the offering to gods, he should feed the 
ancestral offering to one person and lay down one rice ball.* *8Once the rite of Sapinda 
has been performed for him in accordance with the Law, his sons should offer the balls 
exactly in the above manner.* 


Conclusion of the Meal After eating an ancestral offering, if someone gives 
his leftovers to a Sidra, that foolish man will fall down head first into the Kalasiitra 
hell. “If a man who has eaten an ancestral offering gets into bed with a Sidra woman 
that day, his ancestors will lie in her feces during that month. 

He should ask them “Have you eaten well?”; when they are sated, he should 
give them water for sipping; and when they have sipped water, he should give them 
leave to go, saying “Please, stay around!’** "Immediately thereafter, the Brahmins 
should simply say to him: “May there be Svadha!”, for the exclamation “Svadha” is 
the highest benediction in all ancestral offerings. 

253Then, after they have finished eating, he should inform those Brahmins of the 
leftover food and, with their permission, do exactly as they instruct. 

254t an offering to ancestors, one should say, “Have you eaten well?”; at a cow- 
pen offering,* “Was it well cooked?”; at an offering for prosperity,* “Was it 
delicious?”; and at a divine offering, “Was it tasty?” 

The afternoon, Darbha grass, proper preparation of the location, sesame seeds, 
liberal outlay, proper preparation of food, and excellent twice-born men—these are 
what ensures success at ancestral rites. °*Darbha grass, purifier, forenoon, sacrificial 
foods of every kind, purifier, and what was stated above*—these should be regarded as 
what ensures success at divine rites. *”’Food of sages,* milk, Soma, meat, food 
without elaborate preparation,* and natural salt are, by their very nature, called 
“sacrificial food.” 


Concluding Rites *8After he has dismissed those Brahmins, he should make 
himself pure and collected, control his speech, turn towards the south, and implore his 
ancestors for these favors: >*‘May donors amidst us thrive, may the Vedas and 
progeny! May the generous spirit never abandon us! And may we have a lot to give!” 

2°Immediately after he has laid down the balls in this manner, he should feed 
them to acow, a Brahmin, a goat, or the fire, or else throw them in water. 76'Some 
perform the laying down of the balls towards the east;* others feed them to birds or 
throw them in fire or water. 

The wife who is wedded according to the Law, devoted to her husband, and 
intent on worshipping the ancestors may eat the middlemost of those balls in the 
proper manner, if she wants to have a son. 7°She will give birth to a son endowed with 
long life, fame, intelligence, wealth, progeny, righteousness, and goodness. 


122 Chapter 3 


264 After he has washed his hands and sipped some water, he should prepare food 
for his paternal relatives; give that well-garnished food to his paternal relatives; honor 
(3.70 n.) also his maternal relatives;* *®let the scattered fragments remain until the 
Brahmins have been dismissed; and then perform the domestic Bali offering—that is 
the settled Law. 


Food at Ancestral Rites 71 will explain exhaustively the types of sacrificial 
food that are efficacious for a long time and those that are efficacious in perpetuity, 
when they are offered to the ancestors according to rule. 

27By offering sesame seeds, rice, barley, beans, water, roots, and fruits 
according to rule, ancestors of men rejoice for one month;* by offering fish, for two 
months; by offering the meat of the common deer, for three months; by offering sheep 
meat, for four months; by offering here the meat of birds, for five months; 2by 
offering goat meat, for six months; by offering the meat of the spotted deer, for seven 
months; by offering the meat of the Ena antelope, for eight months; by offering the 
meat of the Ruru deer, for nine months; *by offering boar or buffalo meat, they are 
satisfied for ten months; by offering rabbit or turtle meat, for eleven months; ?”and by 
offering beef, milk,* or milk-rice, for one year. The satisfaction from the meat of a 
Vardhrinasa horn-bill lasts for twelve years. 7The Kalasaka herb, MahaSalka 
crustacean, the meat of the rhinoceros and the red goat, and honey, as well as every type 
of sage’s food (3.257 n.) are efficacious in perpetuity. 


Times for Ancestral Rites **When someone mixes any kind of food with 
honey and offers it on the thirteenth day of a fortnight during the rainy season and 
under the Magha* constellation, that also is clearly inexhaustible. 7”“‘Would that a 
man be born in our family who would offer us milk-rice with honey and ghee on the 
thirteenth day during the elephant’s eastern shadow.”* Whatever a man gives 
properly, with a generous spirit, and according to rule, in the other world it becomes 
eternal and inexhaustible for his ancestors.+ 

2”6The lunar days in the dark fortnight beginning with the tenth but excluding the 
fourteenth are commended for ancestral offerings; the other days are unlike these. 7”7As 
the later fortnight is better for an ancestral offering than the earlier fortnight,* so the 
afternoon is better than the forenoon. 7”When a man performs them on even days and 
constellations, he obtains all his wishes; whereas when he worships the ancestors on 
uneven days and constellations, he obtains distinguished children. 

2He should carry out the ancestral offering tirelessly, correctly, and according to 
rule until its completion, wearing the sacrificial cord over the right shoulder and under 
the left arm, carrying blades of Darbha grass in his hand, and performing each rite so as 
to end in the south (3.214 n.). He must not perform an ancestral offering at night— 
for the night belongs to fiends—or during the two twilights, or soon after sunrise. 

81Following this procedure, he should perform here an ancestral offering three 
times a year—in the winter, in the summer, and in the rainy season—but the five 
sacrifices, every day. 


282The rule is that the fire oblation at an ancestral rite must not be offered in the ordinary 
fire. A twice-born man who maintains the three sacred fires shall not perform an 


Chapter 3 123 


ancestral offering except on a new-moon day. “Even if a Brahmin simply satiates his 
ancestors with water after he has bathed, he obtains thereby the full reward of 
performing an ancestral rite. 

24The fathers, they say, are the Vasus: the grandfathers are the Rudras; and the 
great-grandfathers are the Adityas—this is an ancient scriptural statement.* 


Conclusion 


He should become a man who always eats “residue” and who always partakes of 
“ambrosia.” “Residue” is what remains after people have eaten, and “ambrosia” is the 
leftovers of a sacrifice. 


286] have explained to you all the rules relating to the five sacrifices. 
Listen now to the rules relating to the livelihood of Brahmins. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


THE BATH-GRADUATE 


After spending the first quarter of his life at his teacher’s, a twice-born man should 
marry a wife and spend the second quarter of his life at home.* 


Right Livelihood 


"Except during a time of adversity, a Brahmin ought to sustain himself by following a 
livelihood that causes little or no harm* to creatures. 7He should gather wealth just 
sufficient for his subsistence through irreproachable activities that are specific to him, 
without fatiguing his body.* 

4Let him sustain himself by means of “true” and “immortal,” or by means of 
“mortal” and “fatal,” or even by means of “truth-cum-falsehood”; but under no 
circumstances by means of the “dog’s life.” °Gleaning and picking* should be 
considered the “true”; what is received unasked is the “immortal”; almsfood that is 
begged is the “mortal”; and agriculture, tradition says, is the “fatal.” Trade is the 
“truth-cum-falsehood,” and he may sustain himself even by that. Service is called the 
“dog’s life’; therefore, he should avoid it altogether. 

7Let him be a man who stores grain sufficient to fill a granary, a man who stores 
grain sufficient to fill a jar,* a man who has sufficient grain to last three days, or a man 
who keeps nothing for the next day. Among all these four types of twice-born 
householders, each should be recognized as superior to the ones preceding it and better 
at winning the heavenly world, according to the Law.* °One of these may engage in the 
six activities; another may live by three; yet another by two; and a fourth may subsist 
through the sacrificial session of the Veda.* 1A man who lives by gleaning and 
picking should be totally dedicated to the daily fire sacrifice and always offer only the 
sacrifices at the new- and full-moon days and at the solstices. "He must never follow a 
worldly occupation for the sake of livelihood, but subsist by means of a pure, upright, 
and honest livelihood proper to a Brahmin. 

"One who seeks happiness should become supremely content and _ self- 
controlled, for happiness is rooted in contentment and its opposite is the root of 
unhappiness. 


Observances 


'Subsisting by one of these means of livelihood, a twice-born who is a bath-graduate 
should follow these observances, which procure heaven, long life, and fame. 

“He should perform diligently the daily rituals specific to him prescribed in the 
Veda; for, by performing them according to his ability, he attains the highest state. 


124 


Chapter 4 125 


He must never seek to obtain wealth (artha) with excessive passion,* through 
forbidden activities, when he already has sufficient wealth, or from just anyone even in 
a time of adversity; ‘nor shall he be passionately attached to any of the sensory objects 
(artha) out of lust, but using his mind he should stamp out any excessive attachment to 
them. 'He should forsake all pursuits (artha) that interfere with his vedic recitation, 
eking out a living* some way or other, for that recitation constitutes the fulfillment of 
all his obligations. "He should comport himself here in such a way that his attire, 
speech, and mind are in harmony with his age, occupation, wealth (artha), learning, 
and family background. 


Study 


very day, he should explore the treatises*——those that aid in the quick development 
of one’s mind, those that facilitate the acquisition of wealth, and those that promote 
well-being—as well as ancillary texts* of the Veda; “for, the more a man studies 
treatises, the more he comes to understand and the more brightly shines his 
understanding.+ 


Ritual Duties 


21He must never fail to offer every day and according to his ability the sacrifices to 
seers, gods, beings, humans, and ancestors (see 3.70 f.). 

22Some individuals who are experts in the sacrificial science and free from 
striving offer these great sacrifices incessantly in just their organs. “Others offer breath 
in speech and speech in breath every day, recognizing that the sacrifice reaches its 
inexhaustible consummation in speech and breath. *4Still other Brahmins offer these 
sacrifices daily through knowledge alone, recognizing by the eye of knowledge that the 
execution of those sacrifices is rooted in knowledge.* 

A twice-born man, moreover, should always offer the fire sacrifice at the 
beginning and end of each day and night; the new-moon and the full-moon sacrifice at 
the end of each fortnight; *¢the new-harvest sacrifice at the end of each harvest;* the 
seasonal sacrifices at the end of each season; an animal sacrifice at the end of each half- 
year;* and Soma sacrifices at the end of each year. 7A twice-born who has established 
the sacred fires, if he wants to live a long life, must never eat a new crop without 
offering the new-harvest sacrifice, or meat without offering an animal sacrifice; for his 
sacred fires crave for the new crop and meat and, if they have not been honored with an 
offering of the new crop and an animal oblation, yearn to eat his very lifebreaths. 


Reception of Guests 


2°No guest should stay at his house without being honored with a seat, food, and a bed, 
or with water, roots, and fruits, according to his ability. °°He must never honor the 
following even with a word of welcome: ascetics of heretical sects; individuals 
engaging in improper activities, observing the “cat vow,” or following the way of 
herons (4.195-6); hypocrites; and sophists. >!At rites for gods and ancestors, he should 
honor (3.70 n.) individuals who have bathed after completing the Vedas, vedic 
learning, or vedic vows,* who are vedic scholars, or who are householders, but avoid 


126 Chapter 4 


individuals different from these. °2As far as he is able, a householder should give to 
those who do not cook* and share with all beings without causing hardship to himself. 


Rules of Conduct: I 


33]f a bath-graduate is tormented by hunger, he may request money from the king, from 
a client at whose sacrifices he officiates, or from a resident pupil, but from no one 
else—that is the settled rule. “If he has the capacity, a Brahmin bath-graduate should 
never torment himself with hunger or, if he has the means, wear dirty or worn-out 
clothes. 

He shall keep his nails clipped, his hair and beard trimmed, and himself 
restrained; wear white clothes; remain pure; and apply himself every day to his vedic 
recitation and to activities conducive to his own welfare. “He shall carry a bamboo 
staff, a waterpot filled with water, and a broom of sacred grass, and wear a sacrificial 
cord and a pair of bright gold earrings. 

3’He must never look at the sun as it rises or sets, when it is eclipsed or reflected 
in water, or when it is in the middle of the sky. He must not step over a rope to which 
a calf is tied, run in the rain, or look at his reflection in water—that is the fixed rule. °A 
mound of earth,* a cow, a god, a Brahmin, ghee, honey, and a crossroads—he should 
circumambulate these clockwise, as also notable trees. 


Relationship with Women 


“Though aroused, he must never have sex with his wife after the onset of her menstrual 
period, or even lie on the same bed with her; ‘for when a man has sex with a woman 
besmirched with menstrual blood, his wisdom, energy, strength, sight, and life-force 
waste away. “When he avoids a woman besmirched with menstrual blood, his 
wisdom, energy, strength, sight, and life-force* will wax stronger. 

He must never eat with his wife or look at her while she is eating, sneezing, 
yawning, or seated at ease; “nor should the Brahmin,* if he wants energy, look at her 
while she is applying collyrium to her eyes or oil on her body, or when she is 
undressed or giving birth.+ 


Voiding Urine and Excrement 


“He must never eat food wearing just a single garment; bathe naked; or urinate on a 
road, on ashes, in a cow pen, ““on plowed land, into water, onto a mound* or a hill, ina 
dilapidated temple, onto an anthill, “into occupied animal holes, while walking or 
standing, by a river bank, or at the top of a hill. “He must never void urine or 
excrement facing the wind, a fire, a Brahmin, the sun, water, or cows. 

“Restraining his voice, remaining steadfastly attentive,* covering his body, and 
wrapping his head, he should ease himself after strewing the ground with sticks, clods, 
leaves, or grass. During the day, he should void urine and excrement facing the north, 
at night facing the south, and at the two twilights in the same way as during the day. 
>1Under a shadow or in a place that is pitch-dark, a Brahmin may do so during the day 
or at night facing any direction he pleases, as also when he fears for his life. 


Chapter 4 127 


'2When someone urinates towards a fire, the sun, the moon, water, a twice-born 
man, a cow, or the wind, his wisdom perishes.* 


Rules of Conduct: II 


*3He must never blow on a fire with his mouth; look at a woman when she is naked; 
throw anything filthy into a fire; warm his feet over it; “place it under his bed: step 
over it; place it by his feet; hurt living creatures; “eat, travel, or sleep during the time 
of twilight; scribble on the ground; take off his own garland;* ‘deposit urine, 
excrement, sputum, blood, poison, or anything smeared with filth in water; sleep 
alone in an abandoned house; awaken a sleeping superior;* speak with a menstruating 
woman; or go to a sacrifice uninvited.+ 

58Within an enclosure for the sacred fire, in a cow pen, in the presence of 
Brahmins, during his vedic recitation, and while eating, he shall keep his right arm 
uncovered (2.193 n.). °°He must never prevent a cow from suckling her calf or report it 
to anyone. When he sees a rainbow in the sky, he should wisely refrain from pointing it 
out to anyone. 

He must never reside in a village full of unrighteous people or where diseases 
run rampant;* go on a journey alone; stay long on a mountain; “or live in a kingdom 
ruled by a Siidra, teeming with unrighteous people, overrun by people belonging to 
heretical ascetic sects, or swamped by lowest-born people. 

®He must never eat anything from which the oil has been extracted; eat beyond 
capacity; eat very early in the morning or very late in the evening; eat again in the 
evening after taking his meal in the morning; “undertake useless activities; drink water 
from his cupped hands; eat food placed on his lap; be in any way inquisitive; “dance; 
sing; play a musical instrument; clap; whistle;* make noises when sexually excited; 
wash his feet in a brass vessel at any time; eat from a broken plate or from one that 
looks repulsive to him; “or use footwear, a garment, a sacrificial cord, an ornament, a 
garland, or a waterpot previously used by others. 

°7He must never travel with draft animals that are untrained, hungry, or sick, or 
that have broken horns, bad eyes, damaged hoofs, or deformed tails. °He should 
always travel with ones that are well trained and swift and possess good marks, color, 
and appearance, without driving them too hard with the whip. 

He should avoid the morning sun, the smoke from a funeral pyre, and broken 
seats. He must never cut his nails or hair:* bite off his nails with his teeth; crush 
clods of earth; tear off grass with his fingernails; or engage in activities that are fruitless 
or have unpleasant future consequences. 7!A man who crushes clods, tears off grass, or 
bites his nails will quickly come to ruin, as also an informant and one who neglects 
purifications. 

He must never engage in a combative discussion or wear a garland outdoors.* 
Riding on the back of cattle is altogether reprehensible. "He must not enter an enclosed 
village or house by any passage other than the door; and at night, he should keep far 
away from the foot of any tree. 

74He must never play with dice; fetch his sandals by himself; eat while lying in 
bed; eat anything placed in his hand or on a seat; “eat anything containing sesame after 
sunset; sleep here naked; or go anywhere while he is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.). 


128 Chapter 4 


He should eat with his feet wet, but never go to sleep with wet feet; by eating with 
wet feet, he obtains a long life. 

”7He must never enter a place difficult of access and hidden from sight; look at 
urine or excrement; cross a river swimming; “or, if he wishes to live long, step on hair, 
ash, bones, shards, cotton seeds, or chaff. 

He must never live in the company of outcastes, Candalas, Pulkasas, fools, 
arrogant men, lowest-born people, or Antyavasayins. ®He must never give a Sidra 
advice, leftovers, or anything offered to the gods; teach him the Law; or prescribe an 
observance to him. ®'Whoever teaches him the Law or whoever prescribes an 
observance to him will plunge along with him into that darkness called Asamvrta. 

®2He must never scratch his head with both hands together; touch his head while 
he is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.); or take a bath excluding the head. *He should 
refrain from pulling the hair or striking the head;* and after taking a bath including the 
head, he should not apply oil to any part of his body. 


People from Whom Gifts May Not Be Accepted 


'4He must never accept gifts from a king who is not from a royal lineage; from people 
who operate abattoirs, oil-presses, or taverns; or from people who gain their living by 
keeping brothels. One oil-press equals ten abattoirs; one tavern equals ten oil-presses; 
one brothel equals ten taverns; and one king equals ten brothels. A king, tradition 
tells us, is equal to a butcher who operates ten thousand abattoirs; to accept a gift from 
him is a horrendous deed. 

87When someone accepts a gift from a king who is greedy and who deviates from 
the provisions of the authoritative texts,* he will go in turn to these twenty hells: 
88Tamisra, Andha-Tamisra, Maha-Raurava, Raurava, Kalastitra-Naraka, Maha-Naraka, 
8Samjivana, Maha-Vici, Tapana, Sampratapana, Samghata, Sakakola, Kudmala, 
Pitimrttika, *Lohasanku, Rjisa, Pathin, Salmali, Nadi, Asipatravana, and Loha- 
caraka.* 

“Knowing this and yearning for well-being after death, Brahmins who are 
learned and vedic savants do not accept gifts from a king. 


Morning Duties 


*He should wake up at the time sacred to Brahman* and reflect on matters relating to 
Law and Wealth, on the bodily discomforts (4.3 n.) they cause, and on the true mean- 
ing of the Veda. 

After getting up and answering the call of nature, he should perform the 
purifications and, with a collected mind, stand for a long time engaged in soft 
recitation during the morning twilight and, at its proper time, also during the evening 
twilight (2.101-3). “Because they performed their twilight devotions for a long time, 
the seers obtained long life, wisdom, fame, renown, and eminence in vedic knowledge. 


Vedic Study 


On the full-moon day of Sravana (July-August) or Prausthapada (August— 
September), a Brahmin should commence his annual course of study according to rule 


Chapter 4 129 


and intently study the Vedas for four and a half months. *In the forenoon of the first 
day of the bright fortnight of either Pusya (December—January) or Magha* (January— 
February), a twice-born should perform the rite of terminating his vedic study outside 
the village. 

* After performing in this manner the rite of terminating his vedic study outside 
the village in accordance with the authoritative texts, he should suspend recitation for 
two days and the intervening night, or just during that single day and night. *After 
that time, however, he should recite the Vedas intently during the bright fortnights and 
all the Vedic Supplements (2.105 n.) during the dark fortnights. 

He must never recite indistinctly or in the presence of Siidras. After reciting the 
Veda during the last part of the night, he must not go back to sleep even if he is worn 
out. ! In accordance with the aforementioned rule, he must recite the metrical sections 
of the Veda every day; outside a time of adversity, a twice-born must intently recite 
both the metrical sections of the Veda and the Brahmanas. 


Suspension of Vedic Recitation 


101Anyone engaged in vedic recitation should always abstain on the following 
occasions when vedic recitation is to be suspended, as also should anyone engaged in 
teaching vedic recitation to students in the prescribed manner. 

12When the wind becomes audible at night or kicks up the dust during the day— 
experts in recitation regard these as two occasions for suspending vedic recitation 
during the rainy season. When there is lightning, thunder, and rain,* and when there 
is a shower of large meteors, Manu has enjoined the suspension of vedic recitation 
until the same time the following day. !“It should be noted that vedic recitation is to 
be suspended only when these occur after the fires have been kindled, and also when 
clouds appear out of season. When a noise erupts* in the sky, when there is an 
earthquake, or when halos surround the heavenly lights—even if these happen in 
season—one should know that vedic recitation is to be suspended until the same time 
the following day. !°When lightning and the rumbling of thunder occur after the fires 
have been kindled, however, the suspension of recitation lasts as long as the heavenly 
lights are visible; if the other event also occurs, then the recitation is suspended at 
night as during the day.* 

107Those who want to adhere strictly to the Law should suspend vedic recitation 
permanently in villages and towns and wherever there is a foul smell. '®Vedic 
recitation is to be suspended in a village where there is a corpse, in the presence of a 
Sidra, at the sound of weeping, and near a gathering of people. 

10°Tn water, in the middle of the night, after voiding urine or excrement, when he 
is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.), or after he has eaten an ancestral offering, a man 
should not even review it in his mind. “After accepting an invitation to an offering on 
behalf of a newly deceased person, a learned twice-born should not recite the Veda for 
three days, as also during the period of birth-impurity (5.58 f.) affecting the king and 
during an eclipse. ‘As long as the smell and stain of an offering on behalf of a newly 
deceased person lingers on the body of a learned Brahmin, he should not recite the 
Veda. 


130 Chapter 4 


™l2He must not recite the Veda lying down, putting his feet up, or squatting with 
a band tied around his waist and knees;* after eating meat; after eating any food given 
by someone in a period of birth-impurity (5.58 f.); "Swhen there is fog; at the sound of 
arrows; during both twilights; on the new-moon day; on the fourteenth day of a 
fortnight; on the full-moon day; and on the eighth day of a fortnight. “The new-moon 
day destroys the teacher; the fourteenth day destroys the pupil; and the eighth and full- 
moon days destroy the Veda. Therefore, he should avoid them altogether. 

MSA twice-born must not recite during a dust storm, when the horizons have 
turned crimson, at the howling of jackals or the cry of dogs, donkeys, and camels, and 
when he is seated in a row.* 

1l6He must never recite the Veda near a cemetery, in the outskirts of a village, in a 
cow pen, wearing the same clothes he had on during sexual intercourse, or after 
accepting something at an ancestral offering. "”After accepting anything at all, whether 
animate or inanimate, given at an ancestral offering, he should suspend vedic 
recitation; for the hand of a twice-born, tradition tells us, is his mouth. 

"8 After robbers have raided the village, after a turmoil caused by fire, and after 
anything out of the ordinary has happened, he should know that vedic recitation is to 
be suspended until the same time the following day. 

"The suspension, tradition tells us, lasts for three nights both after 
commencing and after concluding the annual course of study; for a day and a night, 
however, on the eighth day of a fortnight and on the final night of every season. 

120He must never recite the Veda while he is on a horse, tree, elephant, donkey, or 
camel; in a ship or vehicle; on arid land; ‘during an altercation or a brawl; in the midst 
of a military unit or a battle; soon after eating; when he has indigestion; after vomiting 
or having an acidic belch; !*without obtaining the consent of any guest of his; when 
there is a strong wind; when blood is flowing from his body; or when he has been 
wounded by a weapon. 

123He must never recite Rc-verses or Yajus-formulas within earshot of Saman 
chanting, after reciting the conclusion of a Veda, and after reciting an Aranyaka.* 
224The Rgveda is connected with the gods and the Yajurveda with humans; but the 
Samaveda, tradition tells us, is connected with ancestors. Its sound, therefore, is 
impure. '>Knowing this, learned men recite first the extract of the triple Veda daily and 
in the proper order and then the Veda.* 

P6When a farm animal, frog, cat, dog, snake, mongoose, or rat passes in 
between,* he should know that vedic recitation is to be suspended for a day and a 
night. 

27These alone are the two occasions for suspending vedic recitation which a 
twice-born should diligently avoid every day: when his place of recitation has not been 
cleansed and when his body has not been purified.* 


Rules of Conduct: II 


8The new-moon day, the eighth day of a fortnight, the full-moon day, and the 
fourteenth day of a fortnight—on these days, a twice-born who is a bath-graduate 
should always remain chaste, even if his wife is in her season (3.45 n.). 


Chapter 4 131 


125He must never take a bath after eating, when he is sick, in the dead of the night, 
regularly with his clothes on,* or in an unknown body of water. 

130He must never tread deliberately on the shadow of these: god,* elder, king, 
bath-graduate, teacher, reddish-brown cow,* and a man consecrated for a sacrifice. At 
midday and midnight, after eating an ancestral offering containing meat, and during 
both twilights, he should not tarry at a crossroads. *He must not step deliberately on 
used bath-powders, water from a bath, urine, excrement, blood, phlegm, spittle, or 
vomit. 

He must not consort with an enemy, a friend of an enemy, an unrighteous 
person, or a thief—as also with another man’s wife; “for there is nothing in this world 
as sure to shorten a man’s life as consorting with someone else’s wife. A Ksatriya, a 
snake, and a learned Brahmin—however feeble these may be, he must never treat them 
with contempt, if he wants to prosper; for when a man treats these three persons with 
contempt, they will reduce him to ashes. A wise man, therefore, should not treat these 
three with contempt. ”He must not hold himself in contempt for his past failures; he 
should pursue prosperity until death, never deeming it too difficult to achieve. 

138He should say what is true, and he should say what is pleasant; he should not 
say what is true but unpleasant, and he should not say what is pleasant but untrue— 
that is the eternal Law.* He should call a lucky thing “Lucky”; or rather he should 
call everything “Lucky.”** He should never start a senseless feud or an argument with 
anyone. 

140He must never travel very early in the morning, very late in the evening, at 
high noon, with an unknown person, alone, or with Siidras. 

“1He must not ridicule people who have too few or too many limbs, who are 
uneducated, who are very old, who lack beauty or wealth, or who are of low birth. 

42When a Brahmin is sullied with remnants (2.56 n.), he must never touch with 
his hand a cow, a Brahmin, or a fire; nor, if he is healthy, should he look at the 
heavenly lights in the sky while he is impure. “If he touches any of these while he is 
impure, he should always touch his organs and all his limbs with water, and his navel 
with his palm.* !Unless he is sick, he must not touch his orifices without a good 
reason, and he should refrain from touching the hair on any of his private parts. 

“He should apply himself to auspicious rites and good conduct, control his 
self, subdue his senses, and tirelessly perform soft recitations and fire offerings every 
day.+ “°No misfortune befalls those who apply themselves to auspicious rites and 
good conduct, control their selves evey day, and perform soft recitations and fire 
offerings. ‘7It is the soft recitation of the Veda that he should tirelessly perform every 
day at the proper time-—for this is his highest Law, they say; others are called 
secondary Laws. '8By reciting the Veda constantly, by performing purifications, by 
engaging in ascetic toil, and by showing no hostility to any creature, he gets to 
remember his former birth. When, while recalling his former birth, a twice-born 
recites the Veda,* by that constant recitation of the Veda, he obtains unending bliss. 
0He should always make Savitra and pacificatory offerings on the days of the moon’s 
change (3.45 n.) and always worship the ancestors on the eighth and the day following 
the eighth of each fortnight.* 

SlUrine, water from washing the feet, remnants of food, and dirty water—he 


132 Chapter 4 


should dispose of all these far away from his house. %*Voiding excrement, adorning 
oneself, bathing, brushing the teeth, applying collyrium, and the worship of gods—all 
these should be done only in the morning. 

3He should visit gods and righteous Brahmins; the ruler for the sake of 
protection; and elders on the days of the moon’s change (3.45 n.).* “He should greet 
elderly persons, offer them his seat, pay them obeisance with joined palms, and follow 
behind them as they leave (3.107 n.). 

55He should tirelessly follow the root of the Law, namely, the conduct of good 
people, which is well set forth in scripture and tradition and is closely tied to the 
activities proper to him (1.107 n.)— for by good conduct he obtains long life; by 
good conduct he obtains the kind of offspring he desires; by good conduct he obtains 
inexhaustible wealth; and good conduct neutralizes unlucky marks.* *’A man of evil 
conduct becomes an object of reproach in the world, is always miserable, is afflicted 
with disease, and lives a very short life. **Even if he has no lucky marks at all, a man 
who follows the conduct of good people, who has a generous spirit (3.202 n.), and 
who is free from resentment, lives a hundred years. 

159He should carefully avoid all activities that are under someone else’s control, 
and diligently pursue those that are under his own control. ‘Whatever is under 
someone else’s control—that is suffering; whatever is under one’s own control—that 
is happiness. He should know that this, in a nutshell, is the definition of suffering and 
happiness. '°'He should diligently engage in those activities that give him inner joy 
and avoid those that do not. 


Avoiding Violence 


162He must never cause harm to his teacher, instructor, father, mother, elder, Brahmins, 
cows, and all who are given to austerities. He should eschew infidelity, denigrating 
the Vedas, disparaging the gods, hatred, arrogance,* pride, anger, and harshness. 

1¢tHe must not raise a stick against another person or bring it down on anyone in 
anger, except a son or a pupil; these he may beat in order to discipline them (8.299). 
L61f a twice-born merely threatens a Brahmin with murderous intent, he will meander 
in the Tamisra hell for one hundred years. 1If he strikes him deliberately in anger with 
even a blade of grass, he will be reborn in evil wombs* for twenty-one births. ‘If a 
man foolishly draws blood from the body of a Brahmin who is not attacking him, he 
will experience intense suffering after death. A man who draws blood will be eaten 
by others in the next world for as many years as the number of dust particles from the 
earth that the spilled blood lumps together (see 11.208). 

10° wise man, therefore, must never threaten a twice-born person, strike him 
even with a blade of grass, or draw blood from his body. 


Following the Path of Righteousness 


™A man who is unrighteous, who has gained his wealth dishonestly, and who always 
takes delight in causing injury will never achieve happiness in this world. Even 
when he has been brought low as a result of his righteous conduct, let him never turn to 


Chapter 4 133 


unrighteous ways, seeing how quickly the fortunes of unrighteous and evil men are 
reversed. 

11 ike the earth,* practicing unrighteousness does not produce instant results in 
this world; but turning around gradually, it cuts off its perpetrator by his roots. /If not 
himself, then his sons; if not his sons, then his grandsons—an unrighteous act once 
committed never fails to repay its perpetrator. “Through unrighteous ways a man first 
prospers; then he experiences good fortune; next he vanquishes his opponents; but in 
the end he is destroyed root* and all. 

™SHe should always take delight in speaking the truth, in following the Law, in 
conforming to the Arya ways, and in purifying himself. With his speech, hands, and 
stomach controlled, he should discipline his disciples* according to the Law. He 
should abandon any activity relating to Wealth or Pleasure that is in violation of Law, 
and even activities sanctioned by Law when they will result in future unhappiness or 
are repugnant to the world (2.224 n.). 

177He must never conduct himself in a fickle manner with his hands, feet, eyes, or 
speech; follow crooked ways; or show hostility to others in thought or deed. The 
path trodden by his fathers, the path trodden by his grandfathers—let him tread along 
that path of good people; no harm will befall him when he travels by that path. 


Family and Social Relations 


Officiating priests; family priests; teachers; maternal uncles; guests; dependents; 
children; the aged; the sick; doctors;* paternal, affinal, and maternal relatives;* 
18father; mother; sisters; brother; son; wife; daughter; and slaves—he should not get 
into arguments with any of these. 'By forswearing arguments with them, he is freed 
from all sins; and when he is conquered by them,* the householder conquers all these 
worlds. 

18The teacher is the ruler of Brahman’s world; the father, of Prajapati’s world; 
the guest, of Indra’s world; the officiating priests, of the world of gods; ‘the sisters, 
of the world of Apsarases; maternal relatives, of the world of the Visvedevas; affinal 
relatives, of the world of the waters; and the mother and maternal uncles, of the earth. 
The children, the aged, the feeble, and the sick are to be regarded as the rulers of 
space. His older brother is equal to his father, and his wife and son are his own body. 
1SHis slaves are his own shadow, and his daughter is the object of supreme 
compassion. When he is assailed by any of these, therefore, he should always bear it 
without losing his temper. 


Accepting and Giving Gifts 


8E ven if he is qualified to accept gifts, he should avoid becoming addicted to that 
practice, for by accepting gifts his vedic energy is quickly extinguished. !®’Without 
knowing the procedure prescribed by Law for accepting things, a wise man should 
never accept a gift even if he is racked by hunger. 

188When an ignorant man accepts gold, land, a horse, a cow, food, clothes, 
sesame seeds, or ghee, he is reduced to ashes like a piece of wood.* 1°Gold and food 
burn up his life-force; a cow and land, his body; a horse, his sight; clothes, his skin; 


134 Chapter 4 


ghee, his energy; and sesame seeds, his offspring. When a twice-born neither 
engages in ascetic toil nor recites the Veda and yet loves to receive gifts, he will sink 
along with the donor, as a man would sink in water along with his stone float. ??!An 
ignorant man, therefore, should fear any kind of gift; for by accepting even a trifling 
gift, an ignorant man sinks like a cow in the mud. 

12A man who knows the Law should not give even water to a twice-born 
observing the “cat-vow’, to an evil man observing* the “heron-vow,” or to one who 
does not know the Veda; for an object of value given to any of these three, even if it 
has been acquired in accordance with the rules, affects both the giver and the receiver 
adversely after death. As a man making a crossing with a stone float sinks in the 
water, so will the ignorant beseecher and the ignorant donor sink to the bottom. 


Hypocrisy 


1A man who always displays the banner of righteousness and yet is greedy and 
deceitful, who deludes the world, who is given to violence, and who beguiles 
everybody should be viewed as one who observes the “cat-vow.”* A twice-born who 
goes around with downcast eyes but is cruel,* given to furthering his own ends, 
crooked, and being falsely sanctimonious, is a man who is observing the “heron-vow.” 
197Brahmins who observe the “heron-vow” and those who display the marks of a cat fall 
into the Andha-Tamisra hell as a result of that evil act. 

8 After committing a sin, he must never perform a penitential observance under 
the pretext that he is doing it as a meritorious act, thus covering up his sin with his 
observance and deceiving women and Siidras. Such Brahmins are denounced by 
vedic savants both here and in the hereafter, and that observance, carried out covertly, 
goes to the fiends. 

200When someone earns his livelihood by wearing the insignia of a religious 
profession* to which he does not belong, he takes upon himself the sins of those 
belonging to that religious profession and is reborn in the womb of an animal. 


Using What Belongs to Others 


201He must never bathe in a reservoir that belongs to someone else. By doing so, he 
will be tainted with a portion of the evils committed by the man who constructed that 
reservoir. When a man uses someone’s vehicle, bed, seat, well, garden, or house 
without permission, he gets a quarter of the owner’s sins. 2°°He should always bathe in 
rivers, natural ponds,* lakes, pools, and springs. 

2044 wise man should always practice the central virtues and not busy himself 
constantly with the secondary observances. A man falls when he devotes himself to the 
secondary observances while neglecting the central virtues.*+ 


Unfit Food 


205A Brahmin must never partake of food* at a sacrifice offered by someone who is not 
a vedic scholar or who officiates as a priest for a large number of people, or at one 
offered by a woman or an effeminate man (3.150 n.). °When such persons offer an 


Chapter 4 135 


oblation, it is unpropitious for virtuous people and disagreeable to gods; therefore, he 
should avoid it. 

207He must also never eat the following: food given by someone who is drunk, 
angry, or sick;* food contaminated with hair or insects or touched deliberately with the 
foot; *8food looked at by a murderer of a Brahmin,* touched by a menstruating 
woman, pecked by a bird, or touched by a dog; “food smelled by a cow; in a special 
way, food given after a public announcement; food given by a group or by a prostitute; 
food that is despised by learned men; ?food given by a thief, a musician, a carpenter, a 
usurer, a man consecrated for a sacrifice, a miser, a prisoner, a shackled man,* 7a 
heinous sinner (2.185 n.), a eunuch, a promiscuous woman, or a hypocrite; food that 
has turned sour or is stale; food of a Stidra; leftovers* (2.56 n.); 2!2food given by a 
physician, a hunter, a cruel man, someone who eats leftovers, or an Ugra; food of a 
woman impure by reason of childbirth; food served at a meal where someone sips water 
during the meal; food given during the ten days of impurity resulting from a birth;*+ 
213f90d given without respect; meat procured capriciously (5.27); food given by a 
woman without a husband; food of an enemy, the chief of a town,* or an outcaste; 
food someone has sneezed upon; 2food given by a slanderer, a liar, a trafficker in 
rituals, an actor, a tailor, an ingrate, *°a blacksmith, a Nisada, a theatrical performer, a 
goldsmith, a basket-weaver, an arms merchant, *!*those who raise dogs, liquor 
merchants, a washerman, a dyer, a heartless man, someone who lets his wife’s 
paramour live in his house 7!7or who condones a paramour, or someone who is bossed 
by his wife in every way; food of persons during the first ten days after a death in their 
family; food offered to a newly deceased person,* and unappetizing food. 

218The food of a king robs his energy; the food of a Sidra, his eminence in vedic 
knowledge; the food of a goldsmith, his life-force; and the food of a leather-worker, 
his fame. 7°The food of an artisan destroys his offspring, and the food of a dyer, his 
strength. The food of a group or of a prostitute cuts him off from the worlds. #°The 
food of a physician is pus; the food of a promiscuous woman is semen; the food of a 
usurer is excrement; and the food of an arms merchant is filth. 7"The food of those 
others who have been listed in order as people whose food is unfit to be eaten—the 
wise declare that to be skin, bones, and hair. 

221f someone eats the food of any one of them* unintentionally, he should fast 
for three days; if he eats intentionally—as also when he consumes semen, urine, or 
excrement—he should perform an arduous penance (11.212).+ 

223 learned twice-born must never eat cooked food given by a Siidra who lacks a 
spirit of generosity (3.202 n.). If he is without sustenance, he may accept from such a 
man only raw provisions sufficient for a single day.* 

24The gods once evaluated the food of a miserly vedic scholar and that of a 
generous usurer and pronounced the two to be equal. #°Prajapati came up to them and 
said, “Don’t make equal what is unequal. The food of the generous man is cleansed by 
the spirit of generosity, whereas the other food is defiled by the lack of generosity.” 


Gifts and Their Rewards 


~6He should tirelessly make sacrificial offerings and give gifts every day in a spirit of 
generosity; for, when done with a generous spirit and using justly earned wealth, they 


136 Chapter 4 


become inexhaustible.+ ??’Finding a suitable recipient, he should practice daily the 
Law of giving comprising sacrificial offerings and gifts, according to his ability and 
with a cheerful heart.+ *When he is asked, he should give ungrudgingly at least some- 
thing, for one day he may encounter that special recipient who will rescue him from 
all.* 

2°One who gives water obtains satiety; one who gives food, inexhaustible 
happiness; one who gives sesame seeds, the kind of offspring one desires; one who 
gives a lamp, the finest eyesight. 2°One who gives land, obtains land; one who gives 
gold, long life; one who gives a house, superb dwellings; one who gives silver (ripya), 
peerless beauty (ripa); one who gives clothes, residence in the same world as the 
Moon; one who gives a horse (aSva), residence in the same world as the Asvins; one 
who gives an ox, bounteous prosperity; one who gives a cow, the summit of the sun; 
232one who gives a vehicle or bed, a wife; one who gives security, lordship; one who 
gives grain, eternal happiness; and one who gives the Veda (brahman), equality with 
Brahman.* “°The gift of the Veda far exceeds every other gift, whether it is the gift of 
water, food, cows, land, clothes, sesame seeds, gold, or ghee. 

234With whatever disposition a man makes a particular gift, he will be received 
with honor and obtain that very thing* with the very same disposition. **When due 
respect is shown in accepting and in giving a gift, both the receiver and the giver go to 
heaven; but when the opposite happens, both go to hell. 

He must not flaunt his austerities, lie about a sacrifice* he has performed, 
revile Brahmins even though aggrieved, or brag about a gift he has given. *7A sacrifice 
is lost by telling a lie about it, austerity by flaunting it, longevity by reviling 
Brahmins, and a gift by bragging about it. 


Accumulating Merit 


238Gradually and without hurting any creature, he should pile up merit (dharma) like 
termites an anthill, so as to secure an escort in the next world; “for in the next world, 
neither father nor mother stands by him as his escort; nor does son, wife, or relative. 
Only merit stands by him. “Alone a creature is born, and alone it dies. Alone it enjoys 
the fruits of its good deeds, alone also the fruits of its evil deeds. **'While his relatives 
discard the dead body on earth as if it were a piece of wood or a clod of earth and depart 
with averted faces, his merit accompanies him. ?To secure an escort, therefore, let him 
gradually pile up merit every day; for with merit as his escort, he will cross over the 
darkness that is difficult to cross. “*The escort quickly leads that man, who is devoted 
to the Law (dharma) and whose sins have been erased by ascetic toil, to the next world, 
glittering with an ethereal body. 

4H e should always build relationships with people of the highest possible rank 
and avoid anyone of a lower rank, if he wants to raise his family to a higher rank. “By 
going to people of the highest possible rank and by avoiding those who are lower, a 
Brahmin achieves distinction; by doing the opposite, he is reduced to the level of a 
Sidra. 

74° man who adheres to these observances—a man who is resolute in his 
undertakings, who is gentle and controlled, and who does not associate with people of 


Chapter 4 137 


cruel conduct or cause harm to anyone—wins heaven by controlling himself and 
giving gifts. 


Acceptance of Gifts and Food 


4’Fire wood, water, roots, fruits, food spontaneously given, honey, and the gift of 
freedom from fear (6.39 n.)}—he may accept these from anyone. *48Prajapati has 
determined that almsfood that is brought and presented without being requested 
beforehand may be accepted even from a man of evil conduct. “If a man spurns such 
almsfood, his ancestors will not eat from him for fifteen years, and the sacred fire will 
not convey his offerings. 

250Bed, house, KuSa grass, perfumes, water, flowers, gems, curd, grain, fish, 
milk, meat, or vegetables—these he should never reject. >'He may accept a gift from 
anyone for the purpose of supporting his elders and dependents and honoring gods and 
guests; but he may not use it to gratify himself. 

52A¢ a time when his elders have passed away or he is living at home without 
them and he is seeking a means of sustenance, he may always accept gifts from good 
people. 

23 sharecropper, a friend of the family, and one’s cowherd, slave, and barber— 
among Siidras, these are the ones whose food is fit to be eaten, as also a person who has 
presented himself.* 

4He should present himself accurately in all this: what sort of a person he is, 
what sort of work he wants to perform, and in what manner he will serve that person. 
255A man who misrepresents himself to good people is the worst sinner in the world; he 
is a thief, a man who steals his very self. >All things are founded on speech; speech is 
their root; and from speech they proceed. A man who steals speech is guilty of stealing 
everything. 


Old Age and Retirement 


*7After he has freed himself according to rule from his debts* to the great seers, 
ancestors, and gods, he should hand over everything to his son and live in complete 
equanimity. **Living alone in a secluded place, he should always reflect on what is 
beneficial to himself; for, by reflecting alone, he attains supreme bliss. 


>] have explained above the invariable means of livelihood for a 
Brahmin householder, as also the splendid set of observances for a 
bath-graduate which enhances his spirit (3.40 n.). When a 
Brahmin, knowing the vedic teachings, follows this mode of life, he 
frees himself always from sins and is exalted in heaven. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


PROLOGUE 


‘After they had heard the Laws of a bath-graduate described in this manner, the seers 
said this to the noble-minded Bhrgu born from the fire:* “How, O Lord, does Death 
prevail over Brahmins, who know the vedic teachings and follow the Law specific to 
them described in this manner?” 

’Bhrgu, the embodiment of the Law and the son of Manu, said to those great 
seers: “Listen to the fault because of which Death seeks to kill Brahmins.” 


FORBIDDEN FOOD 


‘Death seeks to kill Brahmins because of the failure to recite the Vedas, the dereliction 
of the rules of proper conduct, laziness, and faults with respect to food. 

Garlic, leeks, onions, and mushrooms are foods forbidden* to twice-born 
persons; and so is anything growing in an impure medium. ‘He should scrupulously 
eschew the following: the red sap of trees; juices flowing from incisions on trees; Selu 
fruit; cow’s colostrum: 7Krsara porridge, Samyava cake,* milk-rice, or cake prepared 
for no good reason; meat of an unconsecrated animal (5.27-57); food offered to 
deities; and sacrificial oblations. 

The milk of a cow within ten days after giving birth; milk of camels, single- 
hoofed animals, and sheep; milk of a cow that is in heat or has lost its calf; °milk of all 
wild animals except buffaloes; and milk of women—these he should eschew, as also 
anything that has turned sour. Among foods turned sour, he may eat curd and all curd 
products, as well as the extracts of wholesome flowers, roots, and fruits. 

He should eschew all carnivorous birds, as also those that live in villages; 
single-hoofed animals, except those explicitly permitted;* plovers; !Kalavinka 
sparrows; Plava herons; Hamsa geese; Cakra sheldrakes; village fowl; Sarasa cranes; 
Rajjuvala fowl; Datyiha waterfowl; parrots; mynahs; “birds that feed by pecking: 
web-footed birds; Koyasthi cranes; birds that feed by scratching with their feet; birds 
that catch fish by diving; meat from a slaughter-house; dried meat; “Baka egrets; 
Balaka ibis; Kakola ravens; Khafijaritaka wagtails; fish eaters; village hogs; and every 
kind of fish. 

154 man who eats the meat of some animal is called “eater of that animal’s meat,” 
whereas a fish-eater is an “eater of every animal’s meat.” Therefore, he should eschew 
fish. “The Pathina and the Rohita fish may be eaten when they are used in an offering 
to gods or ancestors; Rajiva, Simhatunda, and SaSalka fish may be eaten at any time. 


138 


Chapter 5 139 


17He must never eat those that wander alone; unknown animals or birds, even if 
they are listed among those that are permitted; as also all animals with five nails.* 
18Among animals with five nails, they say, the porcupine, the hedgehog, the monitor 
lizard, the rhinoceros, the tortoise, and the rabbit may be eaten; as also animals with 
incisors in only one jaw,* with the exception of the camel. 

ISBy eating mushrooms, a village hog, garlic, a village fowl, onion, or leek 
intentionally, a twice-born falls from his caste. If he eats one of these six unwittingly, 
he shall perform the Santapana or the ascetics’ lunar penance (11.213, 219). If he eats 
any of the others, he shall fast for one day. 7'To cleanse himself of what he may have 
eaten unwittingly, a Brahmin should perform at least one arduous penance (11.212) 
each year; but he is cleansed of what he has eaten intentionally through the specified 
penance. 

“To perform sacrifices Brahmins may kill sanctioned animals and birds, as also 
to feed their dependents; Agastya did that long ago. “For, at the ancient sacrifices of 
seers and at the Soma offerings* of Brahmins and Ksatriyas, the sacrificial cakes were 
prepared with the meat of permitted animals and birds. 

24Any nonforbidden food or delicacy infused with oil* may be eaten even if it is 
stale, as also any leftovers from a sacrificial oblation. ®Though they have not been 
infused with oil, however, dishes made with barley or wheat, as well as milk 
preparations, may be eaten by the twice-born, even if they have stood for a long time. 


26] have described above completely what foods are forbidden and 
what permitted to the twice-born. I will now explain the rule on 
eating and on avoiding meat. 


EATING MEAT 


2”7He may eat meat when it is sacrificially consecrated, at the behest of Brahmins, when 
he is ritually commissioned according to rule, and when his life is at risk.* 

8Prajapati created* this whole world as food for lifebreath; all beings, the 
mobile and the immobile, are nourishment for lifebreath. "The immobile are food for 
the mobile; the fangless for the fanged; the handless for the handed; and the timid for 
the brave. The eater is not defiled by eating living beings suitable for eating, even if 
he eats them day after day; for the creator himself fashioned both the eaters and the 
living beings suitable for eating. 

3\The sacrifice is the reason for eating meat”—this, the tradition says, is the rule 
of gods. Doing it for any other purpose is called the rule of fiends.* **When a man eats 
meat—whether it was purchased, procured by himself, or offered by someone else— 
after making an offering to gods and ancestors, he does not become defiled. “Except in 
atime of adversity, a twice-born man who knows the rules must never eat meat in 
contravention of the rules; if he eats meat in contravention of the rules, after death he 
will be eaten forcibly by those very animals. *“In the afterlife, the sin of someone who 
hunts animals for profit is not as great as that of a man who eats meat procured 
capriciously. If a man refuses to eat meat after he has been ritually commissioned 


140 Chapter 5 


according to rule (5.27 n.), after death he will become an animal for twenty-one 
lifetimes. °°A Brahmin must never eat animals that have not been consecrated with 
ritual formulas. Abiding by the eternal rule,* however, he must eat those that have 
been consecrated with ritual formulas. 

‘If he gets the urge, let him make an animal out of butter or flour; but he must 
never entertain the desire to kill an animal for a futile reason. “When a man kills an 
animal for a futile reason, after death he will be subject in birth after birth to being slain 
as many times as the number of hairs on that animal. 

The Self-existent One himself created domestic animals for sacrifice,* and the 
sacrifice is for the prosperity of this whole world. Within the sacrifice, therefore, 
killing is not killing. 4°When plants, domestic animals, trees, beasts, and birds die for 
the sake of a sacrifice, they will in turn earn superior births. “The honey-mixture 
(3.119 n.), a sacrifice, an offering to gods or ancestors—at no other occasion than 
these, Manu has declared, may animals be killed. When a twice-born man who knows 
the true meaning of the Veda kills animals for these purposes, he leads himself and 
those animals to the highest state. “Whether he lives at home, at his teacher’s, or in the 
wilderness, a twice-born man who is self-possessed must never, even in a time of 
adversity, carry out a killing that is not sanctioned by the Veda. “When a killing is 
sanctioned by the Veda and well-established in this mobile and immobile creation,* it 
should be regarded definitely as a non-killing; for it is from the Veda that the Law has 
shined forth. 

‘If someone, craving his own pleasure, harms harmless creatures, he will not 
find happiness anywhere while he is still alive or after death. When someone has no 
desire to tie up, kill, or cause pain* to living creatures and seeks the welfare of all 
beings, he obtains endless bliss. ““Whatever a man contemplates, whatever a man 
undertakes, whatever a man takes a liking to*—all that he obtains without effort, when 
he does no harm to any creature. 

48One can never obtain meat without causing injury to living beings, and killing 
living beings is an impediment to heaven; he should, therefore, abstain from meat. 
“Reflecting on how meat is obtained and on how embodied creatures are tied up and 
killed, he should quit eating any kind of meat. °°When a man refrains from eating meat 
like a goblin, except when the rules prescribe it,* he is loved by the world and is not 
tormented by diseases. 

‘!The man who authorizes, the man who butchers, the man who slaughters, the 
man who buys or sells, the man who cooks, the man who serves, and the man who 
eats——these are all killers. 5*There is no greater sinner than a man who, outside of an 
offering to gods or ancestors, wants to make his own flesh thrive at the expense of 
someone else’s. 

583A man who abstains from meat and a man who offers the horse sacrifice every 
year for a hundred years—the reward for their meritorious acts* is the same. “Even by 
living on pure fruits and roots and by eating the food of sages, a man fails to obtain as 
great areward as he would by abstaining completely from meat. 

55“Me he (mdm sa) will eat in the next world, whose meat (7dn1sa) | eat in this 
world’—this, the wise declare, is what gave the name to and discloses the true nature 
of “meat” (mdmsa).* 





Chapter 5 141 


5°There is no fault in eating meat, in drinking liquor, or in having sex; that is the 
natural activity of creatures. Abstaining from such activity, however, brings great 
rewards. 


°7{ will now explain the purification after a death, as well as the 
purification of things, precisely and in their proper order for all four 
classes. 


BODILY PURIFICATION 


Death or Birth of a Person Belonging to the Same Ancestry 


58Someone who has teethed, someone younger, or someone who has had his first 
cutting of hair* (2.35)—when any of these dies, all his relatives become impure; the 
same is prescribed after the birth of a child. °A ten-day period of impurity following a 
death is prescribed for those who belong to the same ancestry; alternatively, that period 
may last until the collection of bones,* or for three days, or for a single day. 

©The relationship based on common ancestry* stops with the seventh 
generation; the relationship based on offering libations,* on the other hand, stops only 
when someone’s birth and name are no longer remembered. 

®lThe same holds true at a birth. The birth-impurity, however, affects only the 
mother and the father. The mother alone is subject to the period of birth-impurity; the 
father becomes pure by bathing [verse number 62 omitted in critical edition].+ ®On the 
contrary, it is after spilling his seed that a man is purified by simply bathing; the 
impurity resulting from a seminal relationship adheres to him for three days.* 

“Those who touch the corpse are purified in ten days, but those who offer 
libations in three.* ©A pupil who performs the funerary rites of his deceased teacher, 
on the other hand, is on a par with those who carry a corpse* and is purified in ten days. 

After a miscarriage, a woman is purified after the same number of days as the 
months of her pregnancy. A menstruating woman becomes wholesome by taking a 
bath after her menstrual flow has ceased. 

6”When males die before the first cutting of their hair (2.35), tradition tells us, 
the impurity lasts a single night;* but when they die after the cutting of their hair, 
purity is considered to be restored after three nights. “When a child under two dies, its 
relatives should decorate its corpse and lay it down* in a clean spot outside the village; 
the ceremony of collecting its bones is omitted. “Neither the consecration with fire nor 
the offering of water is done for such a child; after leaving it behind in the wilderness 
like a piece of wood, one should keep the observances* for just three days. Relatives 
should not offer libations of water for a child under 3; they may do so optionally if it 
has teethed or if its naming ceremony has been performed. 

71When someone who had been a fellow student dies, tradition prescribes the 
observances for one day. In the event of a birth, the purity of those related through 
offering libations (5.60 n.) is considered to be restored after three days. The relations 


142 Chapter 5 


of unmarried women are purified in three days, but her siblings* are purified exactly 
according to the prescribed rule.* 

For three days* they are to eat food without artificial salt, bathe by immersion, 
abstain from eating meat, and sleep separately on the floor. 


Death in a Distant Region “The above set of rules concerning impurity after 
death is prescribed only when a death has occurred close by; when it has happened far 
away, kinsmen and relatives* should know that the procedure is as follows. 

When someone living in a far-away place dies and one hears of it within ten 
days of his death, one becomes impure only for the remainder of that ten-day period. 
“6If one hears of it after the lapse of ten days, one becomes impure for three days; but if 
it is after a year, one is purified simply by bathing. ” When a man hears about the death 
of a paternal relative or the birth of a son after the lapse of ten days, he becomes pure by 
immersing himself in water with his clothes on. When a child or someone belonging 
to a different ancestry* dies in a far-away place, one is purified instantly by immersing 
oneself in water with one’s clothes on. 


Overlapping Periods of Impurity “If during one ten-day period of impurity 
another death or birth occurs, a Brahmin remains impure only until the end of the 
initial ten-day period. 


Death of Significant Others *At the death of one’s teacher, they prescribe a 
three-day period of impurity; and at the death of the teacher’s son or wife, the settled 
rule is a day and a night. *'One becomes impure for three days at the death of a vedic 
scholar living near by,* and for two days plus the intervening night at the death of 
one’s maternal uncle, pupil, officiating priest, or maternal relative. *At the death of a 
king, anyone residing within his realm* remains impure that day from dawn to dusk or 
that night from dusk to dawn (4.106 n.). At the death of someone who is not a vedic 
scholar, a vedic savant, or an elder,* one remains impure for a full day. 


Periods of Impurity for Different Classes ®A Brahmin is purified in ten 
days, a Ksatriya in twelve, a Vaisya in fifteen, and a Sidra in a month.* “One should 
not prolong the days of impurity or postpone one’s fire rituals; while performing that 
rite, even a uterine brother (5.72 n.) becomes immune to impurity.* 


Impurity from Touch ™When someone touches a Divakirti,* a menstruating 
woman, an outcaste, a woman who has given birth, or a corpse—as also a person who 
has touched any of these—he is purified by bathing. ®°At the sight of an impure person, 
he should make himself ritually pure by sipping water and then softly recite the Solar 
formulas according to his capacity, and the Pavamani verses to the best of his ability. 
8’7After touching a human bone, a Brahmin is purified by bathing if the bone was 
greasy, but simply by sipping water, touching a cow, or gazing at the sun, if the bone 
was dry. 


Libations for the Dead A votary* shall not offer a libation until he has 
completed his vow; but once he has completed his vow and offered the libation, he is 


Chapter 5 143 


purified in just three days.* ®Libations are omitted in the case of people born through 
capricious caste mingling;* those living in ascetic orders; suicides; ®and women who 
have joined heretical sects, roam about at will, harm their fetus or husband, or drink 
liquor. *'By carrying his own deceased teacher, tutor (2.141), father, mother, or elder, a 
votary (5.88 n.) does not break his vow. 


Funeral Path °A dead Sidra should be carried out through the southern gate of the 
city, and a twice-born person through the western, the northern, or the eastern gate, as 
appropriate.* 


Instant Purification of Kings The taint of impurity does not affect kings, 
votaries, and those engaged in a sacrificial session; for they are seated on the seat of 
Indra and are ever one with brahman.* “Instant purification is prescribed for a king on 
the seat of majesty—the reason for this is that he is seated for the protection of his 
subjects—*as also for people killed in a riot or battle, by lightning or the king, or in 
defense of cows or Brahmins, and for anyone the king wants.* 

*Soma, Fire, Sun, Wind, Indra, the Lords of wealth and water, and Yama—the 
king is the embodiment of these eight guardians of the world (see 7.4). °’The lords of 
the world abide within the king, and no period of impurity is prescribed for him; for it 
is the lords of the world who both bring about and erase purity and impurity in mortal 
beings.* 

*®When a man is killed in battle with upraised weapons according to the Ksatriya 
law, the settled rule is that for him both sacrifice and purification are accomplished 
instantly.* 


*After completing the required rite,* a Brahmin is purified by touching water, a 
Ksatriya his conveyance (7.75 n.) or weapon, a Vaisya his goad or reins, and a Stidra 
his staff (see 8.113). 


100] have explained to you above, O Brahmins, the purification in the 
case of people belonging to the same ancestry (5.60 n.). Listen now 
to the purification after death in the case of all those belonging to 
different ancestries. 


Death of a Person Belonging to a Different Ancestry 


101] a Brahmin carries the corpse of a twice-born person unrelated to him by ancestry as 
if he were a relative, or if he carries a close (2.109 n.) relative of his mother, he is 
purified in three days. !If he eats their food, on the other hand, his purification takes 
ten full days; but if he neither eats their food nor stays at their house, it takes just one 
day.+ If someone willingly follows a corpse, whether it is that of a paternal relative 
or of someone else, he is purified after he has bathed with his clothes on, touched the 
fire, and eaten some ghee. 

104When one’s own people are present, one should never let a Sidra carry a 
Brahmin’s corpse, for a sacrificial offering defiled by a Siidra’s touch does not lead a 
person to heaven.* 


144 Chapter 5 


Means of Purification 


15K nowledge, austerity, fire, food, earth, mind, water, smearing with cow dung, 
wind, rites, sun, time*—these are the agents of purification for embodied beings.+ 

106Purifying oneself with respect to wealth, tradition tells us, is the highest of all 
purifications; for the truly pure man is the one who is pure with respect to wealth, not 
the one who becomes pure by using earth and water. 

107|_earned men are purified by forbearance; those who do forbidden things, by 
giving gifts; those who commit secret sins, by soft recitation; and pre-eminent experts 
in the Veda, by ascetic toil. !°8What needs cleaning is cleansed by using earth and 
water, a river by its current, a woman defiled in thought by her menstrual flow, and 
Brahmins by renunciation.* !The body is cleansed with water, the mind by truth, the 
elemental self (12.12-13 n.) by learning and austerity, and the intellect by knowledge. 


NJ have explained to you above the determination with regard to 
bodily purification. Listen now to the determination with regard to 
the purification of different kinds of articles. 


PURIFICATION OF ARTICLES 


{The wise have determined that metal objects, jewels, and anything lapidary* are 
cleaned with ash, water, and earth. |!*When they are unstained,* gold vessels are 
cleaned with water alone, as also the aquatic, the lapidary,* or any silver article that is 
unembellished. '°Gold and silver issued from the union of fire and water; they are best 
cleaned, therefore, using their very sources. !The cleaning of copper, iron, brass, 
pewter, tin, and lead is done using as appropriate alkali, acid, and water. 

M15\]] liquids,* tradition tells us, are cleaned by straining;* solids, by sprinkling 
water; and wooden articles, by planing.+ 

NéPuring a sacrificial rite, sacrificial vessels are rubbed with the hand; the 
Camasa-cups and Graha-ladles, on the other hand, are cleaned by washing:* !’the 
Caru-pots, Sruk-spoons, and Sruva-spoons are cleaned with warm water, as are Sphya- 
swords, Sirpa-winnows, Sakata-carts, pestles, and mortars. 

'8The rule is that large quantities of grain or clothes are cleaned by sprinkling 
them with water, whereas small quantities are cleaned by washing them with water.+ 
19Skin and wicker are to be cleaned the same way as cloth; and vegetables, roots, and 
fruits, the same way as grain. }°Silk and wool are cleaned with saline earth, goat’s 
wool blankets (3.234 n.) with ground Arista fruit, fine fabric with Bel fruit, and linen 
with yellow mustard. 'A discerning man should clean conch and horn, as well as 
articles made of bone and ivory, the same way as linen, or else with cow’s urine or 
water. Grass, wood, and straw are cleaned by sprinkling water on them, a house by 
scrubbing it or by smearing it with cow dung (5.105 n.), and earthenware by firing it 
again [verse 123 is omitted].+ !4Scrubbing, smearing with cow dung, sprinkling, 
scraping, and letting cows stay in it—by these five means a plot of land is purified.+ 

Anything that birds have pecked, cows have sniffed, or hair or insects have 
fouled, or over which someone has shaken* or sneezed, is cleaned by spreading some 


Chapter 5 145 


earth over it. Whenever anything is being cleaned, one should keep applying earth 
and water until the smell and stain are gone from the article smeared with a foul 
substance. 

127Gods invented three means of purification for Brahmins: being unaware that 
something is impure, sprinkling it with water, and getting it verbally declared as 
suitable.* 


Statutory Purity of Things 


l8Water collected on the ground is pure if it is sufficient to slake the thirst of a cow, is 
uncontaminated with foul substances, and has the right odor, color, and taste. The 
hand of an artisan is always pure, as are goods displayed for sale; the almsfood received 
by a student is always ritually clean—that is the settled rule. “°A woman’s mouth is 
always pure; so is a bird when it makes a fruit to fall, a calf when it makes the milk to 
flow, and a dog when it catches a deer. *'The meat of an animal that has been killed by 
a dog or some other predator, or by a Candala or some other lowlife, is pure—that is 
the judgment of Manu.+ 

132A] orifices above the navel are ritually clean; those below are ritually unclean, 
as are the foul substances that shed from the body. 

133Flies, droplets of water,* shadows, cows, horses, rays of the sun, dust, earth, 
wind, and fire—these should be regarded as ritually clean to the touch. 


PURIFICATION OF THE BODY 


4To purify oneself after voiding urine or excrement and to clean any of the twelve 
bodily impurities, one should use a sufficient amount of earth and water. Body oil, 
semen, blood, marrow,* urine, feces, ear-wax, nails, phlegm,* tears, discharge of the 
eyes, and sweat-—these are the twelve impurities of man. 

1864 man intent on purifying himself should apply one lump of earth on the 
penis, three on the anus, ten on one hand,* and seven on both. '’This is the 
purification for householders. It is twice that much for students, three times for forest 
hermits, and four times for ascetics. “8After he voids urine or excrement, he must sip 
water and touch the orifices with water (2.53 n.); he must do so every time he prepares 
to recite the Veda or to eat his food. 

199A man who desires bodily purification should first sip water three times and 
then wipe the mouth with water twice; but a woman or a Sidra sips and wipes just 
once. §iidras who abide by the proper mode of conduct should shave their heads once 
a month, follow the rules of purification laid down for Vaisyas, and eat the leftover 
food of twice-born persons. 

141Drool spattering from the mouth does not make someone sullied if it does not 
fall on his body; nor does hair from the beard getting into the mouth or anything stuck 
between the teeth. “*Drops falling on a man’s feet while he is pouring water for 
someone else to sip are to be considered similar to water on the ground and do not 
make him ritually impure. “If a sullied person touches a man carrying something in 
his hand, he becomes pure by sipping some water without laying that thing down.* 


146 Chapter 5 


MAfter vomiting or purging, one should bathe and consume some ghee; after 
eating food,* one should simply sip some water; and after sexual intercourse tradition 
requires one to take a bath. “After sleeping, sneezing, eating, spitting, telling a lie, 
and drinking water, as also when one is about to recite the Veda, one should sip some 
water even though one is already ritually pure. 


146] have explained to you above all the rules of purification, as well 
as the cleaning of articles, applicable to all the social classes. Listen 
now to the Law with respect to women. 


LAW WITH RESPECT TO WOMEN 


Lack of Independence 


47Even in their own homes, a female—whether she is a child, a young woman, or an 
old lady—should never carry out any task independently.* “As a child, she must 
remain under her father’s control; as a young woman, under her husband’s; and when 
her husband is dead, under her sons’. She must never seek to live independently. 1°She 
must never want to separate herself from her father, husband, or sons; for by separating 
herself from them, a woman brings disgrace on both families.* 

0She should be always cheerful, clever at housework, careful in keeping the 
utensils clean, and frugal in her expenditures. 


Duties towards Husband 


!The man to whom her father or, with her father’s consent, her brother gives her 
away-——she should obey him when he is alive and not be unfaithful to him when he is 
dead. The invocation of blessings and the sacrifice to Prajapati are performed during 
marriage to procure her good fortune; the act of giving away* is the reason for his 
lordship over her. In season and out of season, in this world and in the next, the 
husband who performed the marriage consecration with ritual formulas always gives 
happiness to his woman. 

4Though he may be bereft of virtue, given to lust, and totally devoid of good 
qualities, a good woman should always worship her husband like a god. >For 
women, there is no independent sacrifice, vow, or fast; a woman will be exalted in 
heaven by the mere fact that she has obediently served her husband.&°A good woman, 
desiring to go to the same world as her husband, should never do anything displeasing 
to the man who took her hand, whether he is alive or dead. 

After her husband is dead, she may voluntarily emaciate her body by eating 
pure flowers, roots, and fruits; but she must never mention even the name of another 
man. '*Aspiring to that unsurpassed Law of women devoted to a single husband, she 
should remain patient, controlled, and celibate until her death. ©’Untold thousands of 
Brahmins who have remained celibate from their youth have gone to heaven without 
producing offspring to continue their family line. Just like these celibates, a good 


Chapter 5 147 


woman, though she be sonless, will go to heaven when she steadfastly adheres to the 
celibate life after her husband’s death.* !©'When a woman is unfaithful to her husband 
because of her strong desire for children, she is disgraced in this world and excluded 
from the husband’s world.* 1No recognition is given here to offspring fathered by 
another man or begotten on another’s wife; nor is it taught anywhere that a good 
woman should take a second husband. 

163When a woman abandons her own husband of lower rank and unites with a 
man of higher rank, she only brings disgrace upon herself in the world and is called “a 
woman who has had a man before.”* 'By being unfaithful to her husband, a woman 
becomes disgraced in the world, takes birth in a jackal’s womb, and is afflicted with 
evil diseases (3.92 n.). 

165 woman who controls her mind, speech, and body and is never unfaithful to 
her husband attains the worlds of her husband, and virtuous people call her a “good 
woman.” !°By following this conduct, a woman who controls her mind, speech, and 
body obtains the highest fame in this world and the world of her husband in the next. 


Funeral 


167When a wife who has conducted herself in this manner and who belongs to the same 
class as her husband dies before him, a twice-born man who knows the Law should 
cremate her with his sacred fire and sacrificial implements. %After he has given his 
sacred fires to his predeceased wife at her funeral, he should marry a wife again and 
establish anew his sacred fires. 


CONCLUDING STATEMENT ON 


THE HOUSEHOLDER 


16° accordance with these rules, he should never neglect the five sacrifices; and, 
marrying a wife, he should live at home during the second quarter of his life.* 


CHAPTER SIX 


FOREST HERMIT 


+After living this way in the householder’s order according to rule, a twice-born bath- 
graduate should duly live in the forest, controlling his self and mastering his organs.* 


Time and Procedure 


2When a householder sees his skin wrinkled, his hair turned gray, and his children’s 
children, he should take to the wilderness. *Giving up village food and all his 
belongings, he should go to the forest, entrusting his wife to his sons or accompanied 
by her. 

“Taking with him his sacrificial fires and the implements required for his 
domestic fire rituals, he should depart from the village to the wilderness and live there 
with his organs controlled. 


Mode of Life 


Using various kinds of ritually clean sage’s food (3.257 n.), or vegetables, roots, and 
fruits, he should continue to offer the same great sacrifices (3.68-70) according to rule. 
He should wear a garment of skin or tree bark;* bathe in the morning and evening; 
always wear matted hair; and keep his beard, body hair, and nails uncut. 


Great Sacrifices ’He should give Bali offerings and almsfood to the best of his 
ability with whatever food he eats and honor those who visit his hermitage with water, 
roots, fruits, and almsfood. 8He should be always diligent in his vedic recitation; 
remain controlled, friendly, and collected; be always a giver and never a receiver of 
gifts; be compassionate towards all creatures; °offer the daily fire sacrifice in his three 
sacred fires according to rule, without neglecting the new-moon and full-moon 
sacrifices at their proper time: and offer the constellation-sacrifice,* the sacrifice of 
first fruits (4.26), the seasonal sacrifices, the Turayana sacrifice* and the Daksayana 
sacrifice,* in their proper sequence. With ritually clean sage’s foods that grow in 
spring and autumn and that he has gathered himself, he should offer separately the 
sacrificial cakes and oblations of milk-rice according to rule. 


Food After he has offered that most ritually clean oblation of forest produce to the 
gods, he may avail himself of what remains, as also of salt that he has manufactured 
himself. 

3He may eat vegetables growing on land or in water; flowers, roots, and fruits 
coming from ritually clean trees;* and oils extracted from fruits. “He must avoid 


148 


Chapter 6 149 


honey, meat, the Bhauma plant, mushrooms,* the Bhistrna plant, the Sigruka horse- 
radish, and the Slesmataka fruit. 

45In the month of Asvayuja (September—October), he must throw away the sage’s 
food that he had previously collected, as also vegetables, roots, fruits, and old 
garments. 

16He must never eat anything grown on plowed land, even if it has been thrown 
away by someone; or flowers and fruits* grown in a village, even if he is in dire straits. 

He may eat food that has been cooked with fire or ripened by time; he may use a 
grindstone or use his teeth as a mortar; he may clean up immediately* after eating or 
maintain a supply of food sufficient for a month, six months, or a year. 

Having gathered food to the best of his ability, he may eat it at night, during 
the day, at every fourth mealtime, or at every eighth mealtime;* or he may maintain 
himself during the bright and dark halves of the month according to the lunar rule 
(11.217), or eat boiled barley-gruel once at the end of each half month; or he may 
subsist permanently on just flowers, roots, and fruits that have ripened by time and 
wilted on their own*—abiding by the Vaikhanasa doctrine.* 


Austerities ~He should roll on the ground or stand on tiptoes all day; spend the 
day standing and the night seated,* bathing at dawn, midday, and dusk; “surround 
himself with the five fires* in the summer; live in the open air during the rainy season; 
and wear wet clothes in the winter—gradually intensifying his ascetic toil. “Bathing at 
dawn, noon, and dusk, he should offer quenching libations to ancestors and gods, and 
engaging in ever harsher ascetic toil, he should inflict punishment* on his body. 


Homeless Ascetic After depositing his sacred fires in his body* according to 
rule, he should become a sage without house or fire, subsisting on roots and fruits, 
making no effort to obtain pleasurable things, remaining celibate, sleeping on the 
ground, showing no attachment to any place of shelter, and making his home at the 
foot of a tree. 

“He should beg for almsfood just sufficient to sustain life only from Brahmin 
ascetics and from other twice-born householders living in the forest. Or, while 
continuing to live in the forest, he may collect almsfood from a village and eat eight 
mouthfuls, receiving the almsfood in a leaf-cone, in a potsherd, or in the hand. 


Conclusion 


°To attain the full perfection of his self,* a Brahmin living in the forest must pursue 
these and other observances, as also the various Upanisadic scriptures, "and, to 
enhance his knowledge and ascetic toil and to purify his body, also those pursued* by 
seers, Brahmins, and householders.* 

310r he may set out in a north-easterly direction and, subsisting on water and air, 
walk straight on steadfastly until his body drops dead. °*When a Brahmin has 
discarded his body through any one of these means employed by the great seers, freed 
from sorrow and fear, he will be exalted in the world of Brahman. 


150 Chapter 6 


WANDERING ASCETIC 


After spending the third quarter of his life this way in the forest, he should cast off 
his attachments and wander about as an ascetic during the fourth.* “*When a man goes 
forth as an ascetic after he has moved from order to order, offered sacrifices, subdued 
his senses, and become worn out by giving alms and oblations, he will prosper after 
death. 


Qualification 


Only after he has paid his three debts (4.257 n.), should a man set his mind on 
renunciation (1.114 n.); if he devotes himself to renunciation without paying them, he 
will proceed downward.* °‘Only after he has studied the Vedas according to rule, 
fathered sons in keeping with the Law, and offered sacrifices according to his ability, 
should a man set his mind on renunciation; “if a twice-born seeks renunciation 
without studying the Vedas, without fathering sons, and without offering sacrifices, he 
will proceed downward (6.35 n.). 


Initiation 


38Only after he has offered a sacrifice to Prajapati at which all his possessions are given 
as the sacrificial gift and after he has deposited the sacred fires within himself (6.25 n.), 
should a Brahmin go forth from his home as an ascetic. 

Worlds of resplendent energy await a vedic savant who goes forth from his 
home as an ascetic after bestowing freedom from fear* on all creatures. “Because that 
twice-born has not been the cause of even the slightest fear to creatures, he has nothing 
to fear from anyone after he is freed from his body. 

4'After departing from home with a cloth for straining water, the sage should 
wander about, ignoring the sensual delights presented to him. 


Mode of Life 


*®To achieve success, he must always wander alone, without any companions; 
recognizing that success comes to the solitary man, he will forsake no one and no one 
will forsake him. “He should live without fire or house, enter a village to obtain food, 
be dispassionate, keep no store,* and remain a silent sage and mentally composed. “A 
bowl, the foot of a tree,* a ragged piece of cloth, a solitary life, and equanimity towards 
all—these are the marks of a renouncer.* 

“He should long neither for death nor for life, but simply await his appointed 
time, as a servant his wages.*+ “He should place his foot on a spot purified by his 
sight,* drink water purified by a cloth, speak words purified by truth, and follow a 
conduct purified by the mind. 

“’"He must bear harsh words with patience; never treat anyone with contempt; 
never start a feud with anyone merely for the sake of this body; “*never show ire at 
anyone who is irate with him; bless those who curse him; and never utter an untrue 
word scattered across the seven gates.* 


Chapter 6 151 


“Taking delight in what pertains to the self, he should remain seated without 
longings or sensual attachments. With himself as his only companion, he should walk 
about here, seeking felicity.* 


Begging and Food 


He must never try to obtain almsfood by interpreting portents or omens, by his 
knowledge of astrology or palmistry,* by giving counsel, or by engaging in debates. 

51He should never visit a house crowded with ascetics, Brahmins, birds, dogs, or 
other beggars; “and always go about with his head and beard shaved, with his nails 
clipped, carrying a bowl, a staff, and a water-pot, and without causing harm to any 
creature. 

His bowls must be non-metallic and undamaged; and tradition says that they 
are to be cleaned with just water, like Camasa-cups at a sacrifice (5.116). “A gourd, a 
wooden bowl, a clay bowl, and a wicker bowl—Manu, the son of the Self-existent 
One, has proclaimed these as the bowls of ascetics. 

He may go on his begging round only once a day. He must not be overly 
attached to getting a lot; for when an ascetic is overly attached to almsfood, he becomes 
attached also to sensual objects. An ascetic should go on his daily begging round 
only when the smoke has cleared, the pestles are at rest, the embers are extinguished, 
the people have finished their meal, and the dishes have been put away. 

’7When he receives nothing, he must not become dejected; when he receives 
something, it must not make him elated. He should gather food just sufficient to 
sustain his life and become free from attachment to his belongings.* He should hold 
anything received with a show of reverence in total disdain; even an ascetic who has 
freed himself is shackled by what is received with a show of reverence.* By eating 
little and by spending the day standing and the night seated (6.22 n.) in solitude, he 
should pull his organs back as they are being drawn away by sensory objects. “By 
restraining his organs, by stamping out love and hatred, and by ceasing to harm 
creature, he becomes fit for immortality. 


Yogic Meditation 


®He should reflect on the diverse paths humans take as a result of their evil deeds; on 
how they fall into hell; on the tortures they endure in the abode of Yama; “on how they 
are separated from the ones they love and united with the ones they hate; on how they 
are overcome by old age and tormented by diseases; “on how the inner self departs 
from this body, takes birth again in a womb, and migrates through tens of billions of 
wombs; “and on how embodied beings become linked with pain as a result of 
pursuing what is against the Law and with imperishable happiness as a result of 
pursuing the Law as one’s goal. 

‘By yogic meditation, he should also reflect on the subtle nature of the highest 
self and on its appearance in the highest and the lowest of bodies (6.73). 


Conduct Though decked in finery,* he should pursue the Law in whichever order 
he may live, treating all creatures alike; an emblem does not accomplish the Law.* 


152 Chapter 6 


6’Although the fruit of the Kataka tree makes water clear, yet the water does not become 
clear by mere mention of its name. 

To protect living creatures, he should walk always—whether at night or during 
the day-—only after inspecting the ground even at the cost of bodily discomfort. To 
purify himself of killing living creatures unintentionally during the day or at night, an 
ascetic should bathe and control his breath six times. 


Breath Control Controlling the breath* even three times according to rule while 
reciting the Calls and the syllable OM is to be considered the highest type of ascetic 
toil for a Brahmin. 7‘As the impurities of metallic ores are burnt away when they are 
blasted in a furnace, so the faults of the organs are burnt away by suppressing the 
breath. 


Meditation 7He should burn away his faults by suppressing his breath, his taints 
by concentration, his attachments by the withdrawal of senses, and his base qualities 
by meditation. “Through the practice of meditation,* he should discern the course of 
this inner self through the highest and the lowest of creatures (6.65), a difficult course 
to grasp for persons with uncultivated minds. 

74When a man possesses right understanding, he is not fettered by actions; but 
when he lacks understanding, he enters the transmigratory cycle. ”By ceasing to harm 
living creatures, by withdrawing the organs from their attachments, by performing 
vedic rites, and by practicing fierce austerities, individuals do attain that state* here on 
earth. 


Meditation on the Body “Constructed with beams of bones, fastened with 
tendons, plastered with flesh and blood, covered with skin, foul-smelling, filled with 
urine and excrement, infested with old age and sorrow, the abode of sickness, full of 
pain, covered with dust, and impermanent——he must abandon this dwelling place of 
ghosts.* When a tree falls from a river bank, the bird leaves the tree; when he 
abandons this body in like manner, he escapes the alligator’s painful grasp.* 


Final Goal ”Consigning his good deeds to people he likes and his evil deeds to 
people he dislikes, he attains the eternal Brahman through the practice of meditation. 
8°When by the passion of his spirit he frees himself from attachment to every object of 
passion,* then he wins eternal happiness both here and in the hereafter. *'When he 
gives up all attachments gradually in this manner, freed from all the pairs of opposites, 
he comes to rest in Brahman alone. 

®Everything prescribed here is contingent on meditation; for no one ignorant of 
the highest self can reap the fruits of his rites. ’He should practice the soft recitation of 
vedic texts relating to sacrifice, gods, and self, as also those named “Vedanta”’*—this 
is the refuge of the ignorant, as indeed of the learned; this is the refuge of those who 
seek heaven, as of those who yearn for the infinite. 

SIf a twice-born lives as a wandering ascetic following the above sequence of 
practices,* he will cast off his sins in this world and attain the highest Brahman. 


Chapter 6 153 


86] have explained to you above the Law pertaining to self-controlled 
ascetics. Listen now to the ritual discipline of vedic retirees (1.114 
n.). 


VEDIC RETIREE 


Superiority of the Householder 


87Student, householder, forest hermit, and ascetic: these four distinct orders have their 
origin in the householder. *8All of these, when they are undertaken in their proper 
sequence as spelled out in the sacred texts, lead a Brahmin who acts in the prescribed 
manner to the highest state. Among all of them, however, according to the dictates of 
vedic scripture,* the householder is said to be the best, for he supports the other three. 
As all rivers and rivulets ultimately end up* in the ocean, so people of all the orders 
ultimately end up in the householder. 


The Ten-Point Law 


*'Twice-born men belonging to all these four orders must always observe the ten-point 
Law diligently. °*Resolve, forbearance, self-control, refraining from theft, performing 
purifications, mastering the organs, understanding, learning, truthfulness, and 
suppressing anger: these are the ten points of the Law. *Those Brahmins who learn the 
ten points of the Law and, after learning, follow them, attain the highest state. 


Retirement 


*When a twice-born man has followed the ten-point Law with a collected mind, 
learned the Vedanta according to rule, and freed himself from debt (4.257 n.), he may 
retire (1.114 n.). Casting off the inherent evil of rites by retiring from all ritual 
activities, being self-controlled, and reciting the Veda, he should live at ease under the 
care of his son. 

*>When a man retires from ritual activities in this manner and, free from 
attachments, devotes himself completely to his duties, he erases his sins by this 
retirement and attains the highest state. 


*1 have explained to you above the fourfold Law of Brahmins, a 
Law that is holy and brings imperishable rewards after death. Listen 
now to the Law of kings. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


THE LAW FOR THE KING 


TT will explain the Laws pertaining to kings—how a king should conduct himself, how 
he came into being, and how he can attain the highest success. 


Origin of the King 


2A Ksatriya who has received the vedic consecration* according to rule has the 
obligation to protect this whole world in accordance with the norms; *for when people 
here were without a king and fleeing in all directions out of fear, to protect this whole 
world the Lord created the king “by extracting eternal particles from Indra, Wind, 
Yama, Sun, Fire, Varuna, Moon, and the Lord of wealth.* 

‘Because the king was fashioned out of particles from these chiefs of the gods, he 
overpowers* all beings by reason of his energy. *Like the sun, indeed, he burns eyes 
and minds; no one on earth can bear to gaze upon him. 7He is Fire, he is Wind, he is the 
Sun, he is the Moon, he is the King of the Law [Yama], he is Kubera, he is Varuna, and 
he is the Great Indra—by reason of his power. 

8A king, though a mere child, must never be treated with disrespect, thinking he 
is just a human being; for it is a great deity who stands here in human form. When 
approached recklessly, a fire burns only that single man, but the fire that is the king 
burns his family, together with all his livestock and wealth. 

10A fter examining truthfully the task to be accomplished, his own strength, the 
time, and the place, he assumes in turn every aspect* in order to fully implement the 
Law; “he, in whose* benevolence lies Padma, the goddess of prosperity, in whose 
valor lies victory, and in whose anger lies death—for he is made from the energies of 
them all.* 

The man who in his folly hates him perishes without doubt; for the king makes 
up his mind to destroy him quickly.* “When the king issues a Law favorable to those 
he favors or unfavorable to those out of favor, therefore, no one should transgress that 
Law.* 


Punishment 'For the king’s sake, the Lord formerly created Punishment,* his 
son—the Law and protector of all beings—made from the energy of Brahman. “It is 
the fear of him that makes all beings, both the mobile and the immobile, accede to 
being used* and do not deviate from the Law proper to them. 

leThe king should administer appropriate Punishment on men who behave 
improperly, after examining truthfully the place and the time,* as well as their strength 
and learning. ‘7Punishment is the king; he is the male; he is the leader; he is the ruler; 
and, tradition tells us, he stands as the surety for the Law with respect to the four orders 


154 


Chapter 7 155 


of life. Punishment disciplines all the subjects, Punishment alone protects them, and 
Punishment watches over them as they sleep—Punishment is the Law, the wise 
declare. “When he is wielded properly after careful examination,* he gives delight to 
all the subjects; but when he is administered without careful examination, he wreaks 
total havoc. 

lf the king fails to administer Punishment tirelessly on those who ought to be 
punished, the stronger would grill the weak like fish on a spit; *4crows would devour 
the sacrificial cakes; dogs would lap up* the sacrificial offerings; no one would have 
any right of ownership; and everything would turn topsy-turvy.* “The whole world is 
subdued through Punishment, for an honest man is hard to find; clearly, it is the fear of 
Punishment that makes the whole creation accede to being used (7.15 n.). “Gods, 
demons, Gandharvas, fiends, birds, and snakes—even these accede to being used only 
when coerced by Punishment. 24All the social classes would become corrupted, all 
boundaries would be breached, and all the people would revolt, as a result of blunders 
committed with respect to Punishment. ™Wherever Punishment, dark-hued and red- 
eyed, prowls about as the slayer of evil-doers, there the subjects do not go astray—so 
long as its administrator* ascertains correctly. 

6The proper administrator of Punishment, they say, is aking who speaks the 
truth, acts after careful examination (7.19 n.), is wise, and has a masterly grasp of Law, 
Wealth, and Pleasure. ”7When a king administers Punishment properly, he flourishes 
with respect to the triple set (2.224 n.); but the king who is lustful, partial, and vile is 
slain by that very Punishment. 2°For Punishment is immense energy, and it cannot be 
wielded by those with uncultivated selves. It assuredly slays a king who deviates from 
the Law, along with his relatives; *then he oppresses the fort, the realm, and the 
mobile and the immobile world, as well as sages and gods dwelling in mid-space.* 
‘Punishment cannot be justly administered by someone who is without assistants, 
who is foolish or greedy, who is irresolute (1.97 n.), or who is attached to sensual 
objects. *!Punishment can only be administered by someone who is honest and true to 
his word, who acts in conformity with the Treatises, who has good assistants, and who 
is wise. 


Proper Behavior *Within his realm, he should act in accordance with the rules; 
upon his enemies, he should impose harsh punishments; towards his friends and loved 
ones,* he should behave without guile; and to Brahmins, he should show compassion. 
33When a king behaves in this manner, though he may eke out a living by gleaning, his 
fame spreads in the world like a drop of oil on water. **When a king, with no control 
over himself, behaves in the opposite way, his fame contracts in the world like a drop 
of ghee on water. 

®The king was created as the protector of people belonging to all social classes 
and orders of life who, according to their rank, are devoted to the Law specific to 
them.* 


86] will explain to you precisely and in their proper order all that he, 
along with his deputies, should do as he protects his subjects. 


156 Chapter 7 


Cultivating Virtue and Learning 


After getting up in the morning,* the king should pay his respects to learned 
Brahmins who are experts in the triple Veda and follow their admonitions; “and every 
day he should render assistance to old and upright Brahmins who know the Veda, for 
even fiends always honor a man who renders assistance to the elderly. 3%Even if he is a 
disciplined man, he should always learn the rules of discipline from them; for a 
disciplined king never comes to ruin. 

“Because they lacked discipline, numerous kings came to ruin along with their 
possessions; and because of discipline, even those residing in the forest* gained 
kingdoms. *'Because he lacked discipline, Vena came to ruin; and so did King Nahusa, 
Sudas Paijavana, Sumukha, and Nimi. “Because of discipline, on the other hand, 
Prthu, as well as Manu, obtained a kingdom; Kubera, lordship over wealth; and the 
son of Gadhi, the rank of a Brahmin.* 

From experts in the three Vedas, he should learn the triple Veda, the timeless 
science of government, logical reasoning, and the philosophy of self; and from the 
common people, commercial enterprises.* 

“Day and night he should strive vigorously to subdue his organs; for when he 
has subdued his own organs, he is able to bring his subjects under his control. 

‘He must strenuously steer clear of the vices that result in grief: the ten 
stemming from pleasure and the eight arising from wrath; “for when a king is addicted 
to vices stemming from pleasure, he is cut off from Law and Wealth, but when he is 
addicted to those arising from wrath, he is cut off from his very life. 

“Hunting, gambling, sleeping during the day, disparaging others, women, 
liquor, music, song, dance, and useless travel—this is the set of ten stemming from 
pleasure. *8Slander, violence, hostility, envy, resentment, plunder, verbal abuse, and 
physical assault—this is the set of eight arising from wrath. 

“Wise men identify the root of both these sets, and it is greed. He should 
diligently overcome it; for both these sets originate from it. °°Drinking, gambling, 
women, and hunting—one should recognize these four in the order enumerated as the 
most harmful of the set stemming from pleasure. *'Physical assault, verbal abuse, and 
plunder—one should recognize these three as always the most harmful of the set 
stemming from wrath. °*Within the latter group of seven, which run rampant 
everywhere, a self-composed man should recognize that each preceding vice is more 
perilous than each subsequent.* 

Between vice and death, they say, vice is far worse; a man given to vice sinks to 
the very bottom (6.35 n.), whereas a man free of vice goes to heaven after death. 


Appointment of Counselors 


The king should appoint seven or eight counselors.* They must be individuals who 
are natives of the land,* well-versed in the Treatises, brave, well-accomplished,* and 
coming from illustrious families, individuals who have been thoroughly investigated. 
Even an easy task becomes difficult when undertaken by a single individual, 
especially if he has no associates; how much harder a kingdom yielding great revenue? 


Chapter 7 157 


He should confer with them daily on general matters relating to alliance and 
war, and about the state,* revenue, and security, as also the pacification of 
acquisitions.* °’After ascertaining their views about his affairs,* first from each 
individually and then from al] of them as a group, he should do what is in his best 
interest. 8From the most distinguished and sagacious Brahmin among them, 
however, the king should seek the most important counsel, the one relating to the 
sixfold strategy (7.160). Trusting him completely, he should always entrust all his 
affairs to him and proceed with any task only after reaching a decision jointly with 
him. 


Appointment of Officials 


He should also appoint other officials.* They must be individuals who are honest, 
intelligent, steadfast, and able to collect revenues properly, individuals who have been 
thoroughly investigated. “He should appoint as many tireless, clever, and wise men as 
are required to carry out his obligations, “employing the brave and the clever amongst 
them, individuals coming from illustrious families, in financial affairs; the honest in 
mines and factories; and the timid in the interior of his residence.* 


Appointment of an Envoy 


He should also appoint an envoy. He must be an expert in all the Treatises; able to 
grasp a hint, bearing, or gesture;* be honest and clever; and come from an illustrious 
family. A man who is loyal, honest, and clever; who has a sharp memory and knows 
the right time and place; and who is handsome, fearless, and eloquent—such a man is 
recommended as a king’s envoy. 

The army depends on the official; the enforcement of order, on the army; the 
treasury and the realm,* on the king; and alliance and its reverse on the envoy. For an 
envoy is the one who forges an alliance; and he is the one who splits allies apart. An 
envoy does the kind of work that splits people apart. 

*7By means of concealed hints and gestures, he should decode the bearing, hints, 
and gestures of the rival king with the help of seducible men* in his service and 
uncover his plans with the help of his servants.* 

After finding out all the plans of the rival king accurately, he should take* the 
kinds of measures that would prevent damage to himself. 


Constructing the Royal Fort 


He should settle in a region that is dry, abounding in grain, populated mainly by 
Aryas, healthy,* beautiful, with submissive neighbors, and providing a comfortable 
living. 

0A fortress secured by a desert, a fortress with an earthen rampart, a fortress 
surrounded by water, a fortress protected by a forest, a fortress guarded by soldiers, and 
a fortress protected by a hill—finding safety in such a fortress, he should settle in a 
fort.* 71He should try his very best to find safety in a hill fortress; for the hill fortress, 


158 Chapter 7 


because of its numerous superior features, is the most excellent of them. Animals, 
creatures living in holes, and fish find safety in the first three of them; and monkeys, 
humans, and gods in the last three, respectively. As their enemies do not harm these 
when they have found safety in a fortress, so his foes do not harm a king who has found 
safety in a fortress. 

“One archer positioned on a rampart can fight off a hundred, and one hundred can 
fight off ten thousand. On account of this, a fortress is most excellent.*+ It should be 
well supplied with weapons, money, grain, conveyances,* Brahmins, artisans, 
machines, fodder, and water. 

7©At its center, he should have a house built for himself, a house that is spacious, 
secure, and bright, suitable for all seasons, and provided with pools and groves.* 


Marriage 


” After establishing his residence there, he should marry a wife who belongs to the 
same class, has the right bodily characteristics (3.8-10), comes from a prominent 
family, is charming, and possesses beauty and fine qualities. 


Appointment of Chaplain and Priests 


78He should also appoint a chaplain and choose his officiating priests. They are to 

perform on his behalf the domestic rites, as well as those requiring three sacred fires.* 
The king should perform various sacrifices accompanied by generous sacrificial 

gifts; and to acquire merit, he should distribute luxuries and money to Brahmins. 


Collectors and Supervisors 


®He should employ trusted officials to collect annual taxes from his realm, strictly 
follow tradition in his dealings with the population, and behave like a father towards 
his people. 

8!He should appoint perspicacious supervisors of various kinds to oversee 
different areas, and they should inspect all the activities of the men responsible for his 
affairs. 


Devotion to Brahmins 


®He should pay honor to Brahmins who have returned from their teacher’s house; for 
this is the inexhaustible treasure deposited with Brahmins decreed for kings. Neither 
thief nor enemy can steal it, and it never perishes. Therefore, the king should deposit 
this inexhaustible treasure with Brahmins. 

“It never spills, it never falls, it never perishes at all—an offering made in the 
mouth of a Brahmin is far superior to oblations made in the fire. ®A gift to a non- 
Brahmin brings an equal reward; to a Brahmin by name, a double reward; to one who is 
advanced in vedic study, a thousandfold reward;* and to a man who has completely 
mastered the Veda, an infinite reward. ®°For, whether the reward a man receives after 
death is large or small is contingent on his spirit of generosity (3.202 n.) and on the 
excellence of the recipient.+ 


Chapter 7 159 


War and Warrior Ethic 


§’When challenged by rivals—whether they are stronger, weaker, or of equal strength-— 
as he protects his subjects, a king must never back away from battle, recalling the Law 
of Ksatriyas. Refusal to turn back in battle, protecting the subjects, and obedient 
service to Brahmins—for kings, these are the best mean of securing happiness. ® When 
kings fight each other in battles with all their strength, seeking to kill each other and 
refusing to turn back, they go to heaven. 

When he is engaged in battle, he must never slay his enemies with weapons 
that are treacherous,* barbed, or laced with poison, or whose tips are ablaze with fire. 
*'He must never slay a man standing on the ground,* an effeminate man (3.150 n.), a 
man with joined palms, a man with loose hair, a seated man, a man declaring “I am 
yours,” “a sleeping man, a man without his armor, a naked man, a man without his 
weapons, a non-fighting spectator, a man engaging someone else, %a man with 
damaged weapons, a man in distress, a badly wounded man, a frightened man, or a 
man who has turned tail—recalling the Law followed by good people. 

When a man is killed in battle by the enemy as he turns tail frightened, he takes 
upon himself all the evil deeds committed by his master;* while any good deeds that 
aman killed as he turns tail has stored up for the hereafter, all of that his master takes 
from him. 


War Booty Whatever a man wins—chariot, horse, elephant, parasol, money, 
grain, livestock, women, all goods, and base metal-—all that belongs to him. A pre- 
emptive share,* however, should be given to the king-——so states the vedic scripture;* 
and the king should distribute among the soldiers anything that has not been won in 
single combat.+ 


8] have set forth above the eternal Law of warriors without elabora- 
tion. A Ksatriya must never deviate from this Law, as he kills his 
enemies in battle. 


Policies for Good Government 


*The king should seek to acquire what he has not acquired, preserve diligently what he 
has acquired, augment what he has preserved, and distribute what he has augmented on 
worthy recipients.* These he should recognize as the four means of securing the 
goals of man (2.224 n.); and he should execute them properly and tirelessly every day. 
101What he has not acquired, he should seek to acquire with military force; what he has 
acquired, he should preserve with vigilance; what he has preserved, he should augment 
through profitable investments; and what he has augmented, he should distribute 
through gifts.* 

1@He should keep his military force in constant readiness,* constantly display 
his might, constantly guard his secrets, and constantly probe his enemy’s weaknesses. 
103The whole world stands in awe of the man who keeps his military force in constant 
readiness; it is with military force, therefore, that he should subdue all creatures. He 
should always act without guile and never with guile; and, guarding himself well at all 


160 Chapter 7 


times, he should detect the guile employed by his enemies. He must not let the 
enemy discover any weakness of his, but discover any weakness of the enemy; he 
should hide his limbs like a tortoise* and conceal his own weak points. 

106He should ponder over his affairs like a heron, dart off like a rabbit, snatch like 
a wolf, and attack like a lion.* 

107As he thus engages in conquest, he should bring under his control all the 
adversaries he encounters by the use of the strategies beginning with conciliation.*+ 
1081f, after the employment of the first three strategies, they still do not submit, then he 
should undoubtedly subdue them by military force and in due course bring them under 
his control. Among all four strategies beginning with conciliation, experts always 
recommend conciliation and military force for the enhancement of his realm. 

N0As a weeder plucks the weeds and protects the corn, so the king should protect 
his realm and kill his adversaries. !!!When a king in his folly oppresses his own realm 
indiscriminately, he is soon deprived of his kingdom and his life, along with his 
relatives. As living beings destroy their lives by oppressing their bodies, so kings 
too destroy their lives by oppressing their realms. 

13He should observe this rule always in managing his realm, for when his realm 
is well managed,* the king prospers* with ease. 


Organization of the State 


Governance of Villages and Towns !!4He should station well-supervised 
constabularies in the middle of two, three, and five villages, as also in the middle of 
one hundred villages for the protection of his realm. '°He should appoint 
superintendents responsible for one village, for ten villages, for twenty villages, for 
one hundred villages, and for one thousand villages. 

'6When troubles* arise in a village, the superintendent of that village should, in 
due course, report them personally to the superintendent of ten villages, and he in turn, 
to the superintendent of twenty village. |’The superintendent of twenty villages 
should report all that to the superintendent of a hundred villages, and he in turn should 
report them personally to the superintendent of a thousand villages. 

"8The superintendent of a village shall avail himself of the food, drink, 
firewood, and the like that the villagers are required to supply daily to the king. '°The 
superintendent of ten villages shall enjoy benefits from one “family”;* the 
superintendent of twenty villages, from five “families”; the superintendent of a 
hundred villages, from one village; the superintendent of a thousand villages, from one 
town. 


Supervision of Officials !°Their activities pertaining to the villages, as well as 
those undertaken by each individually,* should be overseen vigilantly by another loyal 
officer of the king. 

®1fn each city he should appoint a general manager of all affairs, a man of high 
stature* and fierce appearance, like a planet among the stars. 

He should always make the circuit of all those officials personally and 
investigate their conduct within their jurisdictions* thoroughly through resident spies; 
for the king’s officials, appointed to protect the people, often become swindlers 


Chapter 7 161 


seizing the property of others—-he must protect his subjects from them. !When these 
evil-minded men extort money from people who have business* with them, the king 
should confiscate all their property and send them into exile.* 


Wages He should fix* a daily allowance for women in the royal service and for 
menial servants in accordance with their rank and duties. }°One Pana should be given 
as maintenance* for those at the bottom and six Panas for those at the top, as also a set 
of clothes every six months and one Drona of grain every month. 


Taxes and Duties 


The king should levy taxes on traders after taking into consideration the price of 
purchase and sale, the distance of transport, maintenance* and other expenses, and the 
cost of security. 

28The king should always assess taxes in his realm after careful consideration so 
that both he and those who do the work get their fair reward. As leeches, calves, and 
bees eat their food a little at a time, so a king should gather annual taxes from his realm 
a little at a time. °Of livestock and gold, the king shall take a one-fiftieth share;* and 
of grains, an eighth share, or a sixth or twelfth. *'He shall also take a sixth share of 
trees, meat, honey, ghee, perfumes, herbs, condiments, flowers, roots, fruits, *"leaves, 
vegetables, grass, skins, cane, earthen vessels, and everything made of stone. 

S3Even at the point of death, he shall never extract a tax from a vedic scholar, nor 
shall a vedic scholar living within his realm languish from hunger. When a vedic 
scholar languishes from hunger within the domain of a king, before long his own realm 
will also languish from hunger. '°After ascertaining the man’s learning and conduct, 
he should provide him with a means of subsistence consistent with the Law and protect 
him in every way, as a father his own natural son (9.166). When such a person 
practices the Law every day under the protection of the king, it augments the king’s life 
span, wealth, and realm. 

187He should make the common people in his realm who live by trade pay at least 
something annually under the rubric of a tax. ’The king should make artisans and 
craftsmen, as also self-employed* Siidras, contribute one day’s work each month. 

18°He must not cut off his own root and that of others through excessive greed; 
for by cutting off his own root, he does harm both to himself and to them.* 


Adjudicating Lawsuits 


“After he has tried a lawsuit,* the king should be both harsh and gentle; a king who is 
both harsh and gentle earns high esteem. 

41When he becomes tired of trying lawsuits filed by people, he should install on 
that seat a leading minister who knows the Law, is wise and self-disciplined, and 
comes from an illustrious family. 


Protection of the Subjects 


Arranging in this manner for the discharge of all his obligations, he should protect 
these subjects with care and vigilance. “When bandits abduct from his realm subjects 


162 Chapter 7 


screaming for help, while he and men in his service stand by—he is surely dead, he is 
not alive.+ For a Ksatriya, the protection of his subjects is the highest Law; the 
enjoyment of the specified rewards* binds the king to this Law. 


Morning Routine 


M“5He should rise in the last watch of the night (4.92 n.), perform his personal 
purifications with a collected mind, make the fire offering, pay his respects to 
Brahmins, and enter his splendid assembly hall. 

146Standing there, he should greet all his subjects cheerfully and then dismiss 
them. After dismissing all his subjects, he should confer with his counselors. 


Meeting with Counselors '47Climbing up to a hilltop or a terrace, retiring to a 
solitary spot, or withdrawing to a wild area or a bare tract, he should confer with them 
unobserved.* “®When common people, as they conspire, do not discover a king’s 
plans, he will enjoy the entire earth, even though his treasury is empty. 

“Idiots, the dumb, the blind, the deaf, animals, old people, women, foreigners 
(2.23 n.), the sick, and the crippled—he should have these removed when he confers 
with his counselors. He should pay special attention to this, because these wretched 
people and animals, but women in particular, betray secret plans. 

15S14t midday or midnight, when he is not tired or worn out, he should reflect on 
these matters either in consultation with his counselors or alone—on Law, Wealth, and 
Pleasure (7.100), and on how they may be acquired all together when they are in 
mutual opposition; on giving his young girls in marriage; on protecting his young 
boys; on dispatching ambassadors; on tying up the remaining loose ends of his 
undertakings;* on the activities* within the women’s quarters; on the conduct of his 
spies; “on the entire eightfold agenda,* as also the set of five,* meticulously; on the 
affection and disaffection towards him; on the activities in the circle of neighboring 
kingdoms;*+ '°on the activities of the buffer king;* on the conduct of the power- 
hungry king; and on the activities of the neutral king and, with great diligence, of the 
enemy king. 


Constituents of the Circle 156The above constituents, in brief, form the root of 
the circle of neighboring kings; eight others also have been enumerated, bringing the 
total, according to the tradition, to twelve.* /”There are also five others and they are 
called official, realm, fort, treasury, and army. These are enumerated with reference to 
each of the above, the total coming to seventy-two.* 

158He should recognize that his immediate neighbor is his enemy, as also anyone 
rendering assistance to the enemy; that his enemy’s immediate neighbor is an ally; and 
that the one beyond these two is neutral.t !59He should prevail over them by 
conciliation and the other strategies (7.107 n.), employed both separately and 
collectively, and by valor and policy. 


Political Strategy: I ‘He should constantly think about the sixfold strategy: 
forging alliances, waging war, marching into battle, remaining stationary, pursuing a 


Chapter 7 163 


double stratagem,* and seeking asylum. ‘After forging an alliance or waging war,* he 
should carefully examine the state of affairs and adopt the tactic of remaining 
stationary, marching into battle, pursuing a double stratagem, or seeking asylum. 

162-The king should realize that there are two ways to forge an alliance, to wage 
war, to march into battle, to remain stationary, to pursue a double strategem,* and to 
seek asylum. ‘°He should know that there are two kinds of alliance: the one is when 
both parties march together into battle with the same objective—it is of immediate 
significance; the other is its opposite—and it looks to the future.* 'Tradition records 
two types of war: the one is waged on one’s own and for one’s own ends, whether it is 
at a proper time or not; the other is occasioned when an ally has initiated the 
offensive.* Marching into battle is said to be of two types: the one is undertaken 
alone when an urgent situation has suddenly arisen; the other is undertaken in coalition 
with an ally. !Tradition records two types of remaining stationary: the one is 
undertaken when he is gradually weakened either by fate or due to his past deeds; and 
the other is undertaken as a favor to an ally. ’Experts in the relative merits of the 
sixfold strategy present two types of the double stratagem: the one is when the army 
remains stationary and the other is when the ruler remains stationary, for the success of 
his undertakings (7.160 n.). 'Tradition records two types of seeking asylum: the one 
is intended to attain his objective when he is harassed by enemies; the other is to gain 
renown among good people.* 

1©When he is convinced that his future dominance is certain and that any 
immediate disadvantage is slight, then he should resort to an alliance. “When he 
believes that all his subjects are exceedingly content and that he himself is 
overwhelmingly powerful, then he should consider waging war.* ?”7*When he believes 
in his heart that his own army is in high spirit* and prosperous and that the opposite is 
true of his adversary, then he should march into battle against his enemy. !”When he is 
weak in terms of mounted units* and infantry, then he should diligently remain 
stationary, while gradually appeasing the enemy. “When the king believes that the 
enemy is stronger in every respect, then he should divide his army in two and 
accomplish his objective (7.160 n.). “When he has become extremely vulnerable to 
his enemy’s forces, then he should quickly seek asylum with a strong and righteous 
king. Should that king keep both his own subjects and the forces of his enemy in 
check, he should always serve him like a teacher with all his strength. “Even in that 
case, however, if he notices a liability resulting from his asylum, he should, even in 
that condition, resort to the good war* without hesitation. 1””A politically astute king 
should employ all the strategies in such a way that his allies, neutrals, or enemies do 
not prevail over him. 

He should probe closely into the current status and the future shape of all his 
undertakings, as well as the positives and the negatives of all his past undertakings. 
When a man knows the positives and the negatives with respect to the future, takes 
quick decisions with respect to the present, and knows the remaining loose ends of his 
past undertakings, he will not be overpowered by his enemies. 

18He should arrange everything in such a way that his allies, neutrals, or enemies 
never prevail over him—that is political strategy in a nutshell. 


164 Chapter 7 


War = !8! When the king launches a military expedition against the realm of an enemy, 
he should advance at a measured pace towards the enemy’s fort according to the 
following plan. 

18The king should start a military expedition during the auspicious month of 
Margasirsa (November—December), or towards the months of Phalguna (February— 
March) or Caitra (March-April), depending on the shape of his armed forces. Even at 
other times when he foresees certain victory, he should undoubtedly declare war and 
launch the expedition,* as also when a calamity has struck the enemy. 

164He should first make the necessary arrangements for his home territory, gather 
provisions for the expedition according to rule, secure a base for military operations, 
deploy spies suitably, 'secure the three types of roads,* and inspect the six divisions 
of his army*—-and only then march in battle formation at a measured pace against the 
enemy’s fort.* 

186He should be extremely vigilant about an ally who is secretly in league with 
the enemy, as well as about someone who has returned after going over to the enemy’s 
side; for such a man is a very dangerous foe. 

18’He should march along his road arrayed in one of the following battle 
formations: staff, wagon, boar, crocodile, needle, and eagle.* He should deploy his 
troops in the direction from which he expects danger; always set up his own camp 
arrayed in the lotus formation;* !®°post the commander-in-chief and the general of the 
army in every direction;* designate the direction from which he expects danger as the 
frontal direction; deploy on all sides platoons of reliable soldiers with whom signals 
have been arranged, who are adept both at holding their ground and at pressing an 
attack, and who are fearless and unwavering; 'deploy a small group to fight in close 
quarters and freely spread out a large group; send them into battle arrayed in the needle 
(7.187 n.) and the thunderbolt* formations; !fight with chariots and horses on level 
ground, with boats and elephants in marshy lands, with bows in areas covered with 
trees and shrubs, and with swords and shields on flat land; and deploy men from the 
lands of the Kurus, Matsyas, Paficalas, and Siirasenas, as well as tall and agile men, on 
the front lines. After arraying the troops in battle formation, he should rouse them 
and inspect them closely; and he should monitor their behavior even when they are 
engaged in combat with enemy troops. 

After laying siege to the enemy, he shall remain stationary—he should 
plunder his realm; constantly ruin his supplies of fodder, food, water, and fuel; 
1%6demolish reservoirs, ramparts, and moats; launch surprise assaults* against him; 
frighten him at night; '°’foment sedition among the seditious; keep close watch over 
enemy activity;* and when omens are propitious, fearlessly launch the attack with the 
determination to win. 

1°8He should strive to triumph over his enemies through conciliation, gifts, and 
fomenting dissension, employed collectively or separately, but never through war. 
Victory and defeat in battle are uncertain for the two combatants; he should, 
therefore, avoid war. When the aforementioned three strategies fail, then let him, 
always on guard, pursue war in such a manner that he will triumph over his enemies. 


Conduct in Victory 2!After the victory, he should pay homage to gods and 
righteous Brahmins; grant exemptions; and issue proclamations of amnesty.* 


Chapter 7 165 


After ascertaining the collective wishes of them all, he should install there a 
relation of the enemy king and draw up a treaty; 2°make the Laws commonly held 
among them authoritative; and honor the new ruler, together with his chief officials, 
with precious gifts. °*When carried out at the appropriate time, the unwelcome seizure 
of desirable property and their welcome distribution are both commendable. 

205All activities here depend on divine and human dispensations. Of these, 
however, the divine is inscrutable; action is possible only with respect to the 
human.*+ 


Political Strategy: IT 20Alternatively, he may leave after diligently working 
out an alliance with him,* recognizing that ally, gold, and land are the three rewards.* 
20? After taking into consideration the foe at his heel and his rescuer from the rear* 
within the circle of kings, he should secure the rewards of his campaign from his 
opponent either as ally or as foe. 

208A king does not prosper as much by getting gold and land as by securing a 
firm ally who, although currently weak, has future potential. 2A man who knows the 
Law and is mindful of favors received, whose subjects are content, and who is loyal, 
steadfast in his undertakings, and agile,* is commended as an ally. 

210The wise consider a man who is intelligent, brave, clever, generous, mindful 
of favors received, and steadfast, and who comes from an illustrious family, to be a 
very dangerous foe. #'Conduct worthy of an Arya, sound judgment with regard to 
men, valor, compassion, and constant generosity*—these represent the qualities of a 
neutral. 

212For his own well-being, a king may abandon without hesitation even a land 
that is safe and always yields abundant crops and on which livestock thrive. 7A man 
should save his wealth for a time of adversity, save his wife even at the cost of his 
wealth, and always save himself even at the cost of his wife and wealth. 7!4When he 
sees every kind of adversity rising up fiercely in unison, a wise man should employ all 
the strategies collectively and individually. ?"The one who employs the strategies, the 
goal to be achieved through the strategies, and all the strategies in their entirety— 
relying on these three, he should strive for his own success. 


Afternoon Routine 


216A fter conferring about all this with his counselors in this manner,* he should do his 
exercises and take his bath at midday, and go to his private quarters to take his meal. 

217There he should eat food that has been thoroughly examined by servants who 
are completely loyal, Knowledgeable about time, and incorruptible, while reciting 
ritual formulas that remove poison.* ?!8He should cleanse everything with antidotes 
that neutralize poison* and always carefully wear on his body gems that counteract 
poison. 7!Women who have been thoroughly examined and whose clothing and 
jewelry have been searched shall wait on him attentively with fans, water, and 
perfumes. 

0He should take similar care of his vehicles (7.75 n.), beds, seats, and food, as 
well as of his bath, grooming, and all his ornaments. 


166 Chapter 7 


“1 After his meal, he should relax in his private quarters with his women, and 
after relaxing, once again turn his attention at the proper time to his affairs. Dressed 
in his regalia, he should again inspect his armed forces, all his conveyances, and his 
weapons and trappings. 


Evening Routine 


After performing the evening twilight worship, he should arm himself and receive 
reports in his inner chambers from secret informants and spies about their activities. 

224 After withdrawing to another secure chamber and dismissing those people, he 
should again enter his private quarters to take his meal escorted by women.* After 
eating something there once again while he is being entertained with music, he should 
go to bed at the proper time and rise up refreshed. 


26 king should follow this schedule when he is healthy; but when he is unwell, he 
may delegate all this to his officials. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


THE JUSTICE SYSTEM 


Court 


™When the king is going to try a case, he should enter the court modestly accompanied 
by Brahmins and counselors who are experts in policy.* *Seated or standing there, 
dressed in modest clothes and ornaments, and raising his right hand,* he should look 
into the cases of the plaintiffs °every day in accordance with the standards of the region 
and those specified in the legal texts, lawsuits that fall individually* under the 
eighteen avenues of litigation. 


Grounds for Litigation 


4Of these, (i) the first is non-payment of debts; (ii) deposits; (iii) sale without 
ownership; (iv) partnerships; (v) non-delivery of gifts; 5(vi) non-payment of wages; 
(vii) breach of contract; (viii) cancellation of a sale or purchase; (ix) disputes between 
owners and herdsmen; °(x) the Law on boundary disputes; (xi) verbal assault; (xii) 
physical assault; (xiii) theft; (xiv) violence; (xv) sexual crimes against women;* ’(xvi) 
Law concerning husband and wife; (xvii) partition of inheritance; and (xviii) gambling 
and betting. These are the eighteen grounds on which litigation may be instituted in 
this world. 

®’These are the areas in which, for the most part, disputes among people arise; and 
the king should decide their cases based on the eternal Law. 


Legal Proceedings 


Judges °When the king does not try a case personally, however, he should appoint a 
learned Brahmin to do so.* ‘Entering the main court itself accompanied by three 
assessors, he should try the cases brought before the king, either seated or standing. 
"The place where three Brahmins versed in the Vedas and a learned officer* of the king 
sit, they call the court of Brahman. 


Pursuit of Justice '!2When Justice (dharma), pierced by Injustice (adharma),* 
comes to the court for redress and the court officials do not pluck out that dart from 
him, then they are themselves pierced by it. 'A man must either not enter the court or 
speak candidly; by refusing to speak or by speaking deceitfully, he commits a sin. 
“When Justice is struck by Injustice, and Truth by Untruth, while the court offcials 
remain idle onlookers, then they are themselves struck down. Stricken, Justice surely 
strikes back; defended, Justice defends. Therefore, never strike at Justice, lest Justice, 


167 


168 Chapter 8 


stricken, wipes us out. ‘Lord Justice is truly the bull (vrsa), and a man who impedes 
(alam) him the gods call a low-born (vrsa-la). Therefore, one should never trample 
Justice. ‘Justice is the only friend who follows a man even in death; for all else 
perishes along with the body.* 

18One-quarter of an Injustice goes to the perpetrator, one-quarter to the witness, 
one-quarter to all the court officials, and one-quarter to the king. “The king, on the 
other hand, becomes sinless, the court officials are freed, and the sin falls squarely on 
the perpetrator, when a man deserving condemnation is condemned. 


Excursus: Sudras as Legal Interpreters 2°Let aking, if he so wishes, get 
someone who is a Brahmin only by name to interpret the Law, or even someone who 
simply uses his birth to make a living, but under no circumstances a Sidra. 2'When a 
Sidra interprets the Law for a king, his realm sinks like a cow in mud, as he looks on 
helplessly. The entire realm, stricken with famine and pestilence, quickly perishes, 
when it is teeming with Siidras, overrun by infidels, and devoid of twice-born people. 


Judicial Conduct and Reasoning—I ~Ascending the throne of justice with his 
body covered and his mind composed, he should pay homage to the guardian deities of 
the world and open the trial. “Paying attention only to these two—what is and what is 
not in accord with the provisions of polity (artha), and what is and what is not in accord 
with the Law (dharma)—he should try all the cases brought by litigants in the order of 
their social class.* 

He should discover the internal disposition of men by external signs—voice, 
color, expression, bearing, eyes, and gestures. “Inner thoughts are discerned by the 
bearing, expressions, gait, gestures, and manner of speaking, and by changes in the 
eyes and face. 


Excursus: Property of Minors and Women “The king should protect the 
estate inherited by a child until he has returned home after his studentship or until he is 
no longer a minor.* 

28The same protection must be extended to barren women, women without sons 
or bereft of family, women devoted to their husbands, widows, and women in distress. 
Tf their in-laws (2.132 n.) usurp their property while they are alive, a righteous king 
should discipline them with the punishment laid down for thieves. 


Excursus: Lost and Stolen Property “Any property that is lost and without 
an owner* should be kept in deposit by the king for three years. Before the lapse of 
three years, the owner can claim it; after that the king may take it. ‘A man who claims 
“This is mine” and, when questioned according to rule, identifies its physical appear- 
ance, number, and the like correctly, is the owner and deserves to have that property; 
“but if he is ignorant of the exact place and time when it was lost and its color, physi- 
cal appearance, and size, he deserves a fine equal in value to that property. 

The king may take one-sixth of any lost property that is recovered, or else one- 
tenth or one-twelfth, calling to mind the Law practiced by good people. *4Lost property 
that is recovered shall remain in the care of competent officials, and the king should 
have any thieves caught in connection with its disappearance executed by an elephant. 


Chapter 8 169 


35When a man states truthfully in regard to a treasure-trove “This is mine,” the 
king may take one-sixth or one-twelfth of it. If he lies, however, he should be fined 
one-eighth of his wealth or, after reckoning the value of the treasure, a smaller portion. 

3”When a learned Brahmin finds a treasure-trove that had been buried by his 
ancestors, however, he may take the whole of it; for a Brahmin is the supreme lord of 
all.+ **When the king discovers an ancient treasure-trove buried in the ground, he 
should give one-half of it to Brahmins and deposit one-half in the treasury; “the king, 
by proving protection, is entitled to one-half of all ancient treasure-troves and of 
minerals in the ground, for he is the supreme lord of the earth. 

“The king must restore to individuals of all classes any property of theirs stolen 
by thieves; if the king retains it for himself, he incurs the sin of its thief. 


Judicial Conduct and Reasoning—II “He who knows the Law should 
examine the Laws of castes, regions, guilds, and families, and only then settle the Law 
specific to each. 47Even men living far away endear themselves to the world when they 
stick to the activity specific to each and carry out their specific activities. 

48Neither the king nor any official of his shall initiate a lawsuit* independently; 
nor shall he in any way suppress an action brought before him by someone else.* 

“As a hunter traces the location of an animal by the trail of blood, so a king 
should trace the location of justice by deductive reasoning. “When he is conducting a 
judicial proceeding, he should pay close attention to the truth, the object of the suit, 
himself, the witnesses, the place, the time, and the appearance.* 

46He should ratify the acknowledged practices of virtuous men and righteous 
twice-born individuals, if such practices do not conflict with those of a particular 
region, family, or caste.* 


Grounds for Litigation: 1 Non-payment of Debts 


4”7When a creditor petitions for the recovery of his money from a debtor and the facts are 
established,* the king should compel the debtor to return the money to the creditor. 

48He should constrain the debtor and force him to pay, using any means by which 
the creditor may recover his money. “Money loaned may be recovered by invoking the 
Law, by litigation, by cunning, by traditional strategies,* and fifth, by force. °Should 
a creditor recover his money from the debtor on his own, he must not be prosecuted by 
the king simply for recovering his own money. 

>If a man denies that he took a loan when it has been established by evidence, he 
should compel that man to return the money to the creditor and in addition impose a 
small fine proportionate to his means. 5*When the debtor, told in court to pay up, 
denies the charge, the plaintiff should produce a document* or offer some other 
evidence. 

When the plaintiff produces something that is not documentary evidence; 
produces and then disavows it;* does not realize that his earlier points contradict the 
ones he makes subsequently;* states his case and then backs away from it;* does not 
acknowledge under questioning a point that has been clearly established;* secretly 
discusses with witnesses a document which is prohibited from being discussed;* 
objects to a question clearly articulated;* retreats;* >°does not speak when he is ordered 


170 Chapter 8 


“Speak!”’; does not prove what he asserts; and does not understand what goes before 
and what after—such a plaintiff loses his suit. °’When a plaintiff says “I have people 
who know,”* but when told “Produce them” does not produce them, the judge should 
declare him also the loser for these very reasons. 

8If the plaintiff fails to present his case, he is subject to corporal punishment and 
a fine in accordance with the Law; and if the defendant fails to respond within three 
fortnights, he loses the case in the eyes of the Law.* 5°The amount that one man falsely 
denies and the amount that the other falsely claims—the king should impose a fine 
equal to double those amounts on those two men ignorant of the Law. 

“When aman is summoned to court by a creditor and denies the charge under 
questioning, he may be convicted through the testimony of at least three witnesses 
given in the presence of the king and Brahmins. 


$![ will now explain what sorts of individuals creditors may call as 
witnesses in lawsuits and how they should be made to speak* the 
truth. 


Qualifications of Witnesses Householders, men with sons, natives of the 
region (7.54 n.), Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Siidras, when they are called by the plaintiff, 
are competent to give testimony, and not just anybody, except in an emergency. 
Trustworthy men of all social classes may be called as witnesses in lawsuits, men 
who know the Law in its entirety and are free from greed; individuals different from 
these should be excluded. 

Individuals who have a stake in the suit; individuals close to the litigants; their 
associates and enemies; individuals with a criminal record; the very sick; and men of 
ill repute—these must not be called as witnesses. ©The king may not be called as a 
witness, nor should the following: an artisan; a performer; a vedic scholar; an 
individual bearing the insignia of a religious profession (4.200 n.); one who has 
severed all attachments; a totally subservient individual; a reprehensible person;* a 
bandit; a criminal; an old person; a child; a single person;* an individual of the lowest 
birth or with impaired organs; *’someone in distress; an intoxicated or insane person; 
someone tormented by hunger or thirst, or suffering from fatigue; a lovesick or angry 
person; and a thief. 

68For women, women shall give testimony; for the twice-born, twice-born 
individuals of equal rank; for Siidras, upright Siidras; and for the lowest-born, those of 
the lowest birth. “Anyone who has personal knowledge may give testimony for 
litigants when the event has taken place inside a house or in the wilderness, or in a case 
involving bodily harm.* “When there is no one else, even a woman, a child, an old 
man, a pupil, a relative, a slave, or a servant may give testimony. 

“He should recognize the trembling in the voices of children, old men, and sick 
persons, as also of individuals with deranged minds, when they give false testimony.* 

He must not investigate* the witnesses in all cases of violence, theft, sexual 
crimes, and verbal and physical assault. 


Assessing Testimony “When witnesses are in disagreement, the king should 
accept the testimony of the majority; when they are equally divided, the testimony of 


Chapter 8 171 


those distinguished by superior qualities; and when men with superior qualities are in 
disagreement, the testimony of Brahmins. 

Testimony is valid when it is based on what the witness himself has seen or 
heard. When a witness speaks truthfully with respect to that, he does not suffer any loss 
of merit or wealth. “If, in a court of Aryas, a witness says something deceitfully 
contrary to what he has seen or heard, after death he will plunge headlong into hell and 
suffer the loss of heaven. 

76When a person, even though he is not listed as a witness* in the plaint, has seen 
or heard anything pertaining to the trial and he is questioned during the trial,* he also 
should testify in accordance with what he saw or heard. 

7Even one man free from greed may be appointed as a witness, but never 
women, even if they are many and honest,* because the female mind is unsteady; nor 
even other men tainted with defects. 

78Only what witnesses testify to in a forthright manner should be accepted as 
valid in a trial; anything different that they may testify to deceitfully for the sake of the 
Law has no validity.* 


Questioning of Witnesses “When the witnesses have gathered in the court, the 
judge should examine them in the presence of the plaintiff and the defendant, exhorting 
the witnesses in the following manner:* 


80What you know about any mutual transaction between these two 
individuals pertaining to this lawsuit—state all that truthfully; for you are 
the witnesses in this matter. “If a witness speaks the truth when he 
testifies, he will obtain magnificent worlds, as well as unsurpassing fame 
here below; such speech is honored by Brahman. “If he speaks an untruth 
when he testifies, he will be bound tightly by the fetters of Varuna and lie 
helplessly for one hundred lifetimes; therefore, he should speak the truth 
when he testifies. ®By truth, the witness is purified; by truth, merit is 
increased. Witnesses of all social classes,* therefore, should speak only 
the truth. “For the self alone is the witness of the self; the self, likewise, 
is the refuge of the self. Do not disdain your own self, the supreme 
witness of men. “Evil doers undoubtedly think “No one sees us”;* yet 
gods see them clearly, and so does their own inner self. Heaven, earth, 
waters, heart, moon, sun, fire, Yama, wind, night, the two twilights, and 
the Law—these know the conduct of all embodied beings. 


®7In the presence of gods and Brahmins* and in the forenoon, the judge, after purifying 
himself, should ask the twice-born individuals, who have purified themselves and are 
facing the north or the east,* to give truthful testimony. He should question a Brah- 
min, saying “Speak”; a Ksatriya, saying “Speak the truth”; a VaiSya, with a reference to 
cows, seeds, and gold;* but a Sidra, with a reference to these sins that cause loss of 
caste.* 


The worlds to which tradition consigns a murderer of a Brahmin, a killer 
of a woman or child, a betrayer of a friend, and an ingrate—those worlds 
will be yours, if you testify falsely. °Whatever good deeds you have done 


172 Chapter 8 


since birth, dear man, all that will go to the dogs, if you testify 
dishonestly. “I am all alone’—should you think like that about 
yourself, good man; there dwells always in your heart this sage, who 
observes your good and evil deeds! *This god, Yama the son of Vivasvat, 
dwells in your heart. If you have no quarrel with him, then you do not 
have to go to the Ganges or the Kuru land.* Naked, blind, shaven- 
headed, and racked with hunger and thirst, a man who gives false 
testimony will have to go to his enemy’s house carrying a skull-bowl to 
beg for almsfood. “If anyone gives a false answer when questioned at a 
judicial investigation, in blind darkness that sinner will fall headlong into 
hell. °°A person who goes to a court and testifies to what is contrary to the 
facts or to what he has not seen is like a blind man, eating fish along with 
the bones. When his discerning Ksetrajfia, “the knower of the field” 
(12.12-3 n.), remains unperturbed as a man is giving testimony—gods 
know of no man superior to him in this world. Listen, my friend, to an 
orderly enumeration of how many relatives of his a man kills* when he 
gives false testimony in a particular case. *He kills five by false 
testimony concerning livestock; ten, by false testimony concerning cows; 
one hundred, by false testimony concerning horses; and one thousand, by 
false testimony concerning a human being. ”He kills the born and yet to 
be born by giving false testimony concerning gold; and he kills all by 
false testimony concerning land-—-never give false testimony concerning 
land. False testimony concerning water,* they say, is similar to that 
concerning land; the same is true of false testimony concerning the sexual 
enjoyment of women and concerning all gems, whether they are aquatic or 
lapidary (5.111-2 n.).+ ™After taking careful note of all these evils 
resulting from false testimony, tell the truth forthrightly just as you saw 
or heard.* 





10’He should treat Brahmins who are cattle herders, traders, artisans, performers, 
servants, or money lenders, just like Stidras.+ 


Excusable False Testimony ‘When aman, even though he knows the truth, 
gives evidence in lawsuits contrary to the facts for a reason relating to the Law, he does 
not fall from the heavenly world; that, they say, is divine speech. When telling the 
truth will result in the execution of a Stdra, Vaisya, Ksatriya, or a Brahmin, a man 
may tell a lie; for that is far better than the truth. 

105Such persons, performing the highest expiation for the sin of false testimony, 
should offer to the goddess Sarasvati oblations of milk-rice dedicated to the goddess 
Speech. '°Alternatively, such a person may offer an oblation of ghee in the fire 
according to rule, reciting the Kismanda formulas, the verse to Varuna: “Untie, Varuna 
..., or the three formulas addressed to water.* 


Failure to Give Evidence ‘’When aman who is not sick fails to testify for 
three fortnights in cases pertaining to debts and the like, he becomes liable for the 
entire debt and is fined one-tenth of the total.* 


Chapter 8 173 


Signs of False Testimony ‘When an illness, a fire, or the death of a relative is 
seen to afflict a witness within seven days of his testimony, he should be compelled to 
pay the debt and a fine. 


Oaths and Ordeals '°When two persons are litigating matters for which there are 
no witnesses and the judge is unable to discern the truth, he should discover it even by 
means of an oath.* Great sages, as well as gods, have taken oaths to settle a case. 
Vasistha* also made an oath before King Paijavana. 

111A wise man must not take an oath falsely even with regard to a trifling matter; 
for by taking an oath falsely, he comes to ruin here and in the hereafter. "Taking an 
oath is not a sin causing loss of caste when it is made in connection with lovers, 
marriages, fodder for cows, or firewood, or to protect a Brahmin.* 

13He should make a Brahmin swear by the truth; a Ksatriya by his conveyance 
(7.75 n.) and weapons; a Vaisya by his cattle, seeds, and gold; and a Sidra by all the 
sins causing loss of caste.* 

114A |ternatively, he may make the person carry fire, stay submerged in water, or 
touch separately the heads of his sons and wife. “When the blazing fire does not burn a 
man, the water does not push him up to the surface, and no misfortune quickly strikes 
him,* he should be judged innocent by reason of his oath. “Long ago when Vatsa was 
accused by his younger brother, Fire, the world’s spy, did not burn a single hair of his 
because he told the truth.* 


False Testimony Every case where perjured testimony has been given should 
be declared a mistrial, and any judgment rendered there should be annulled. 

"8Testimony given through greed, delusion, fear, friendship, lust, anger, 
ignorance, or immaturity is considered false. 


119] will explain in order the specific punishments for a person who 
gives false testimony for any one of these reasons. 


Punishment for Perjury For giving false testimony through greed, he should 
be fined 1,000;* through delusion, the lowest fine (8.138); through fear, double the 
middle fine; through friendship, four times the lowest fine; '*'through lust, ten times 
the lowest fine; through anger, three times the highest fine; through ignorance, a full 
200; and through immaturity, just 100. !These are said to be the punishments for 
false testimony prescribed by the wise in order to prevent the miscarriage of justice and 
to arrest injustice. 

23When individuals of the three classes give false testimony, a righteous king 
should first fine them and then execute them; a Brahmin, on the other hand, should be 
sent into exile.* 


Varieties of Punishment !24Manu, the son of the Self-existent One, has pro- 
claimed ten places upon which punishment may be inflicted. They are applicable to the 
three classes; a Brahmin shall depart unscathed. }*They are: genitals, stomach, tongue, 
and hands; feet are the fifth; and then, eyes, nose, ears, wealth, and body. 


174 Chapter 8 


26He should inflict punishment on those deserving punishment only after he has 
fully ascertained the proclivity,* as also the time and place, accurately, and considered 
carefully the ability of the criminal and the severity of the crime. !?”7Unjust punishment 
shatters* his fame and destroys his reputation in this world, and it is also an obstacle to 
heaven in the next; therefore, he should avoid it completely. When a king punishes 
those who do not deserve to be punished and neglects to punish those who deserve, he 
brings great infamy upon himself and he will also go to hell. 

He should employ first the punishment of verbal reprimand; next a public 
denunciation; third, a fine; and finally, corporal punishment. “°If he is unable to 
restrain them even with corporal punishment, then he should impose on them all these 
four.* 


1] will explain fully the terms spread across the world relating to 
copper, silver, and gold for use in commercial transactions among 
people. 


Weights The fleck of dust seen when the sun shines through a lattice is called 
Trasarenu,* the primary weight. One should know that eight Trasarenus make one 
Liksa in weight; three Liksas, one Rajasarsapa; three Rajasarsapas, one Gaurasarsapa;* 
MS4six Gaurasarsapas, one middling Yava; three Yavas, one Krsnala; five Krsnalas, one 
Masa; sixteen Masas, one Suvarna;* “°four Suvarnas, one Pala; and ten Palas, one 
Dharana. 

One should know that two Krsnalas weighed together make one silver Masaka, 
Weand sixteen Masakas, one silver Dharana, as also a Purana. A copper Karsika, 
however, should be known as a Karsapana, or simply Pana; ’’ten Dharanas, as one 
silver Satamana; and four Suvarnas, as one Niska in wei ght. 


Fines ®Tradition has determined 250 Panas as the lowest fine; 500 Panas should 
be considered the middle fine; and 1,000 Panas, the highest. If the debtor admits 
that he owes the debt, he ought to be fined 500; but if he denies, twice as much—that 
is Manu’s decree. 


Rates of Interest: I ‘A money-lender may assess the rate of interest decreed by 
Vasistha (cf. VaDh 2.50) for the increase of capital and charge 1.25 per cent per month. 
41 Alternatively, he may charge 2 per cent, keeping in mind the Law followed by good 
men; for by charging 2 per cent he does not become guilty of a sin involving money. 
He may charge exactly 2, 3, 4, or 5 per cent interest per month, according to the 
descending order of the classes.* 

M43]f a pledge together with any profits it may yield has been furnished, however, 
the creditor shall not receive any interest on the loan; nor shall the pledge be alienated 
or sold because the time has lapsed.* “*He must not make use of a pledge by force; if 
he makes use of it, he forfeits the interest and must reimburse the owner the original 
value of the pledge. Otherwise, the creditor becomes guilty of stealing the pledge. 


Pledges Neither a pledge nor a deposit is liable to forfeiture due to the passage of 
time; they may be recovered even after they have been held for a long time.* The 


Chapter 8 175 


owner never loses his title to anything enjoyed through his benevolence, or to cows, 
camels, draft animals,* horses, and animals delivered for breaking in. 

147When an owner looks on silently as something is being enjoyed by others in 
his presence for ten years, he is not entitled to recover it. “If something is enjoyed 
within his own locality* and he is neither mentally incapacitated nor a minor, he loses 
any legal right to it; the user is entitled to that property. 

49Pledges, boundaries, assets of minors, open deposits, sealed deposits, 
women, and the possessions of the king and of vedic scholars are never lost on account 
of enjoyment. 


Rates of Interest: II 4°When a foolhardy man makes use of a pledge without the 
consent of its owner, he shall refund half the interest as compensation for that use. 

8lInterest on a loan shall never exceed twice the principal when fixed at one time; 
and on grain, fruits, wool, and draft animals, it shall not exceed five times.* %?An 
interest rate set above the legal limit is exorbitant and cannot be enforced; that is called 
the path of usury—he is entitled to only 5 per cent. 

He must not charge interest beyond one year or an unauthorized rate. 
{Authorized forms of interest are] cyclical interest, periodic interest, contractual 
interest, and interest paid by manual labor.* 

4When someone is unable to repay a debt and wants to redo the contract, he 
should first pay the accrued interest and then renew the evidentiary instrument. “If he 
cannot come up with the money at that time, he should renew the instrument; he is 
obliged to pay as much interest as is due.* 

¢When someone has entered into a contract accruing cyclical interest with a 
specified place and time, he shall not obtain its reward if he disregards that place and 
time.* 

1S7When experts in sea voyages capable of forecasting profits with respect to 
particular places and times fix an interest rate, that is exactly the rate for repayment. 


Surety When a man stands here* as a surety to produce someone and fails to 
produce him, he must pay the man’s debt from his own funds. 

9A gon is not obliged to pay a debt related to being a surety, vain gifts,* 
gambling debts, what is owed for liquor, or any remaining portions of fines and duties. 
160The above rule applies only to someone who stands as surety for appearance; when a 
man who has stood as surety for repayment dies, even his heirs can be compelled to pay 
it.* 

16tWhen someone who was a surety other than for repayment dies and the 
circumstances under which he became a surety are fully known, on what grounds can 
the creditor later demand payment of the debt? !If the money had been consigned to 
the surety and he has sufficient money, the rule is that the consignee should pay the 
debt from his own funds.* 


Validity of Transactions ‘Transactions carried out by persons who are 
intoxicated, insane, distressed, or totally subservient, by children or the aged, or by 
unauthorized persons, are invalid. Agreements, even if they are well substantiated, 
are void if their provisions are contrary to settled Law based on established usage.* 


176 Chapter 8 


16 fraudulent mortgage or sale, a fraudulent gift or receipt, and wherever deceit 
is detected—all that must be annulled. 

166Tf the person who took the loan is lost and the loan was used for the family, it 
should be paid by the relatives from their own funds even if they are living separately 
after the partitioning of the estate.* 1°’A transaction carried out for the benefit of the 
family even by someone totally subservient, whether it is in one’s own or in a distant 
region, must not be rescinded by his superior.* 

16What is given under the threat of force, what is enjoyed under the threat of 
force, and any document prepared under the threat of force—all transactions executed 
under the threat of force Manu has declared to be null and void. 

16°Three suffer for the sake of others: witnesses, surety, and family;* but four 
prosper: Brahmin, moneylender, merchant, and king. 


Impartiality of the King ‘A king must never take what he ought not to take, 
even if he is impoverished; nor must he forgo what he ought to take—be it an amount 
ever so little—even if he is rich. “By taking what he ought not to take and by 
eschewing what he ought to take, the king’s weakness is broadcasted; and he comes to 
ruin here and in the hereafter. By taking what is due to him, by bringing together the 
social classes,* and by protecting the weak, the king enhances his power;* and he 
prospers here and in the hereafter. 

73. ike Yama, therefore, the ruler should lay aside his own likes and dislikes and 
follow Yama’s pattern of behavior (9.307), suppressing his anger and mastering his 
organs. 

’4When a king foolishly judges cases in a manner contrary to the Law, his 
enemies will soon bring that evil man under their dominion. When he controls love 
and hatred and looks into cases in accordance with the Law, his subjects follow him, 
like rivers the ocean. 


Recovery of Debt 'When a debtor reports a creditor seeking to recover a debt on 
his own initiative, the king should compel him to pay the money to the creditor and in 
addition a fine equal to a quarter of the debt. 

774 debtor belonging to the same or a lower caste should settle with his creditor 
even through manual labor (8.153 n.); but a debtor who is superior should repay it in 
installments. 


Conclusion  !78[n this manner, the king should adjudicate equitably lawsuits filed 
by litigants, lawsuits whose outcome is based on witnesses and evidence. 


Grounds for Litigation: II Deposits 


179 \ wise man should entrust a deposit to a man who is born in an illustrious family, 
has an impeccable character, knows the Law, speaks the truth, has a large following, is 
wealthy, and is an Arya. 

1804 man should recover an article in exactly the same condition as when he 
deposited it in the hand of another person—as the delivery, so the recovery. 

1812When a man refuses to hand over a deposit to the depositor upon request and 
no witnesses are available, the judge should do the following outside the presence of 


Chapter 8 177 


the depositor. He should have spies of proper age and appearance actually deposit gold 
with that man under some pretext and then get them to request it.* 18If he returns it in 
the same manner and condition as deposited, then there is nothing to the charges that 
the adversaries have brought against him. If, however, he does not duly return that 
gold to them, he should be arrested and compelled to return both*—-that is the fixed 
rule of the Law. 

18 An open or a sealed deposit should never be returned to a next-of-kin. In the 
event of a mishap, they both perish; although if there is no mishap, they do not 
perish.* '6When he gives them of his own accord to the next-of-kin of a deceased 
depositor, neither the king nor the depositor’s relatives should press charges against 
him. 

187One should seek to obtain that article by friendly means, without resorting in 
any way to subterfuge; or, after probing closely into the character of the depositary, he 
should settle the matter peacefully. 

188That is the rule for the settlement of all open deposits; in the case of a sealed 
deposit, he is in the clear, unless he has removed something from it.* "He is not 
obliged to return a deposit that is stolen by thieves, washed away in a flood, or burnt 
up in a fire, unless he had removed something from it. 

Using all the investigative methods as well as vedic oaths, the judge should 
examine anyone accused of appropriating a deposit or of demanding a deposit that has 
not been made. !!A man who does not hand over a deposit and a man who requests the 
return of a deposit he has not made—both these should be punished like thieves and 
fined an amount equal to the deposit. ”2A man who has appropriated an open deposit, 
as well as a man who has appropriated a sealed deposit—the king should compel both 
without distinction to pay a fine equal to its value. !If a man appropriates the property 
of others by fraudulent means, however, he and his accomplices should be put to death 
publicly using diverse modes of execution. 

When a man makes an open deposit having a specific quality and quantity in 
the presence of the community, it should be acknowledged to have that very quality 
and quantity; if someone testifies falsely with regard to it, he ought to be punished. 
MIf a deposit is given or received privately, then it should be returned privately—as 
the delivery, so the recovery.* 


Thus shall the king make judgments regarding property that has 
been handed over as an open deposit or entrusted out of affection as a 
sealed deposit, without maltreating the person holding the deposit. 


Grounds for Litigation: HI Sale Without Ownership 


17When a man who is neither the owner nor authorized by the owner sells someone 
else’s property, the king should not let that man, a thief pretending not to be a thief, 
offer testimony;* and the man should also be fined—if he did it in the owner’s 
presence, he should be made to pay a fine of 600; if he did it outside his presence and 
has no excuse, his liability is the same as for theft.* 

When a gift or sale is made* by someone other than the owner, it should be 
considered null and void in accordance with the firm principle of legal process.+ 


178 Chapter 8 


200In a case where a man is seen to enjoy something without any evidence of legal 
title to it, title is the proof of ownership and not enjoyment—that is the settled rule. 
20lWhen a man acquires some property through a sale* in the presence of the 
community, he obtains that property with a clear title through legal purchase. 7If, 
however, the initial seller* cannot be produced but the property is cleared by the public 
purchase, he must not be punished; he is released by the king and the man who lost the 
property gets it back. 


Fraudulent Sales 20It is improper to sell one commodity mixed with another, a 
flawed product, or something that measures less than claimed, located far away, or is 
concealed. 

2041f a man shows one girl to the bridegroom and gives another, the groom may 
marry both for the same price—so has Manu decreed (3.53 n.). ?When a man gives a 
girl who is insane, suffers from leprosy, or has lost her virginity, he should not be 
punished if he has disclosed the defects beforehand.+ 


Grounds for Litigation: 1V Partnerships 


20If one officiating priest chosen for a sacrifice quits his work, his partners should give 
him a share proportionate to the work he has performed.* 7” If a priest quits his work 
after the sacrificial fees have been distributed, he should receive the full share but get 
someone else to complete the work. 

208At a ritual where sacrificial fees are specified for each component, the priest 
performing a given component should receive the specified fee or all should share the 
entire fee.* “At the establishment of the sacred fires, the Adhvaryu priest should take 
the chariot, the Brahman priest the steed, the Hotr priest the horse, and the Udgatr 
priest the cart used for the purchase of Soma. 7!Among all the priests, half of the fee 
goes to the principals; one-half of that to those in the next rank; one-third of that to 
those entitled to a third; and one-quarter of that to those entitled to a quarter.* 

24\Men who carry out their activities in this world by forming partnerships 
should allocate shares by applying these principles. 


Grounds for Litigation: V  Non-delivery of Gifts 


2122When someone has pledged a monetary gift to a man who begs in order to fulfill the 
Law but who later does not follow through, he is not obliged to deliver that gift.* 74If 
that man proceeds to enforce payment out of pride or greed, however, the king should 
fine him one Suvarna to atone for that theft. 


2147 have described above accurately the non-delivery of a gift that 
accords with the Law. Next, I will explain the non-payment of 
wages. 


Grounds for Litigation: VI Non-payment of Wages 


215When a servant who is not sick fails to perform his stipulated work out of pride. he 
should be fined eight Krsnalas, and he should not be paid his wages. 2!*If he was sick, 


Chapter 8 179 


however, he should perform the work stipulated at the outset after he has recovered his 
health; and he should receive his wages even if a very long time has elapsed. *!”Whether 
he is sick or well, if he does not have the stipulated work carried out, he should not be 
paid his wages, even if only a small portion of the work remains undone. 


2181 have described above completely the Law relating to the non- 
payment of wages. Next, I will explain the Law relating to persons 
who breach a contract. 


Grounds for Litigation: VII Breach of Contract 


2!9When a man belonging to a village, region, or corporate entity enters into a contract 
truthfully and then breaks it out of greed, the king should banish that man from his 
realm.* “°He should arrest that man who has violated the compact and fine him 6 
Niskas, each weighing 4 Suvarnas, and a silver Satamana.* 

lI this manner, a righteous king should apply the rules of punishment to 
individuals who violate compacts within a village, caste, or association. 


Grounds for Litigation: VIII Cancellation of Sale or Purchase 


222 After buying or selling anything, if someone here regrets his decision, he may return 
or take back that article within ten days. After ten days, however, he may neither 
return nor make someone return; if someone does take back or return, the king shall 
fine him 600 (see 8.120 n.). 

224When a man gives away a defective girl without disclosing her defects 
(8.205), the king shall personally impose on him a fine of 96 Panas. °When a man 
maliciously asserts that a girl is not a virgin, he should be fined 100 (see 8.120 n.) if 
he cannot demonstrate her defect. “The ritual formulas of marriage are applicable only 
to virgin girls and nowhere among any people to non-virgins, for they are excluded 
from the rituals prescribed by Law. %’The ritual formulas of marriage are a sure sign 
that she is the wife, and learned men should recognize that they reach their completion 
at the seventh step.* 

~8After a given transaction has been completed, if someone here regrets his 
decision, the king should place him on the path of the Law in accordance with the 
above rules. 


Grounds for Litigation: IX Disputes between Owners and Herdsmen 


“91 will explain accurately and in strict accordance with the Law the 
disputes between owners and herdsmen over transgressions with 
respect to farm animals. 


Safety of the Herd 23°During the day the liability for their safety lies with the 
herdsman, and during the night with the owner, provided they are at his house; 
otherwise, the herdsman becomes liable. 

231When a herdsman is paid in milk, he may milk the best cow out of ten with the 
consent of the owner; that is the payment for an uncompensated herdsman. 


180 Chapter 8 


If an animal is lost, is ravaged by worms, is killed by dogs, or perishes in a 
dangerous place because of inadequate effort, it is the herdsman who must pay 
compensation. “If an animal is seized by robbers, the herdsman is not required to pay 
compensation, provided he raised the alarm and informs his master at the proper time 
and place. 

24When animals die, the herdsman should give their owners both ears, skin, 
tails, bladders, tendons, and yellow bile,* and point out their distinguishing marks. 

25[f goats or sheep are cornered by wolves, however, and the herdsman fails to 
come to their assistance, the herdsman shall be culpable for any that a wolf may attack 
and kill. “As they are roaming the woods while being kept under check in a single 
group, if a wolf pounces upon and kills one, the herdsman is not culpable for that. 


Damage to Crops 237An open field extending one hundred “bows” or three rod’s 
throws* shall be left around a village; three times as large around a town. *If farm 
animals damage unfenced crops within that area, the king must not punish the 
herdsman for that. 

29QOne should erect there a fence over which a camel cannot look and cover every 
hole through which a dog or pig could poke its head. 

40When damage is done to a fenced field* alongside a road or at the edge of a 
village, a fine of 100 (see 8.120 n.) should be imposed if a herdsman was present; if 
the animals are without a herdsman, they should be impounded. When damage is 
done in other fields, one and a half Panas should be assessed for each animal; and in 
every case, the owner of the field ought to be compensated for the crop—that is the 
fixed rule. 

242Manu has declared that a cow within ten days after giving birth, bulls, and 
animals dedicated to gods are not subject to punishment, whether they are attended by 
a herdsman or not.* 

28For an offense committed by the owner of a field, the fine shall be ten times 
his share; half that amount, if the offense was committed by the servants without the 
knowledge of the owner.* 


244 righteous king should follow these rules with regard to 
transgressions committed by owners, by animals, and by herdsmen. 


Grounds for Litigation: X Boundary Disputes 


*45When a dispute arises between two villages with respect to a boundary, the king 
should ascertain the boundary in the month of Jyestha (May—June) when landmarks are 
most clearly visible.* 


Boundary Markers 246He should establish boundary trees: banyan, pipal, 
KimSuka, cotton-tree, Sala, palm, and trees with milky sap; 7as also thickets, 
different kinds of bamboo, Sami, creepers, mounds, reeds, and thickets of Kubjaka. In 
this way, the boundary will not disappear. 78Reservoirs, wells, ponds, and waterways 
should be constructed at the intersection of boundaries, as also temples of gods. 
4°Seeing that in the world controversies constantly arise due to people’s 
ignorance of boundaries, he should also have other concealed boundary markers 


Chapter 8 181 


ensconced—stones, bones, cow’s hair, chaff, ashes, potsherds, dried cow dung, 
bricks, coal, pebbles, and sand. %'He should also have other similar substances that the 
soil would not decay over time ensconced as hidden markers at the intersection of 
boundaries. 


Settling Boundary Disputes ~By means of these markers, the king should 
ascertain the boundary between two litigants, as also by continuous prior possession 
and by a watercourse. “If doubt persists even after seeing the markers, the resolution 
of a boundary dispute will have to rely solely on witnesses. 

254Witnesses to a boundary should be questioned about the boundary markers in 
the presence of the village communities and the two litigants. *°In accordance with the 
unanimous decision regarding the boundary they render upon questioning, he should 
make a record of the boundary, as well as of all their names. *°°Putting earth on their 
heads, wearing garlands and red clothes, and being made to swear each by his good 
deeds (8.90), they shall render a truthful decision. ®”When they render a decision in the 
above manner, they remain untainted as truthful witnesses; but when they render a 
contrary decision, they should be fined 200 (8.120 n.). 

28When witnesses are unavailable, however, four villagers resident in the 
vicinity, after making themselves ritually pure, should determine the boundary in the 
presence of the king. ™*When native inhabitants (7.54 n.) of neighboring villages are 
unavailable as witnesses to a boundary, however, he may even question* the following 
men who roam the forest: hunters, fowlers, herdsmen, fishermen, root-diggers, 
snake-catchers, gleaners, and others who inhabit the forest. *'When, upon 
questioning, they identify a particular landmark at the intersection of the boundaries, 
he should establish it as the landmark between the two villages according to the Law. 

262[t should be recognized that the determination of boundary markers between 
fields, wells, reservoirs, gardens, and houses depends on the evidence of neighbors. 
631f neighbors give false evidence when people are litigating boundary markers, the 
king should impose the middle fine (8.138) on each of them individually. 

e4If someone appropriates a house, reservoir, garden, or field through 
intimidation, he should be fined 500; the fine is 200 if it was done inadvertently 
(8.120 n.). 

265When it is impossible to ascertain the boundary, a king who knows the Law 
should apportion land between them on his own on the basis of utility*—that is the 
settled rule. 


266] have described above the entire Law relating to decisions 
regarding boundaries. Next, I will explain how cases of verbal 
assault are to be decided. 


Grounds for Litigation: XI Verbal Assault 


267For assailing a Brahmin, a Ksatriya ought to be fined 100, and a Vaisya 150 or 200; 
but a Sidra ought to suffer corporal punishment (8.120 n.). 8A Brahmin should be 
fined 50 for abusing a Ksatriya, 25 for abusing a Vaisya, and 12 for abusing a Sidra.+ 


182 Chapter 8 


2°For a violation by a twice-born against a person of the same social class, the fine is 
12; the fine is doubled when extremely foul language is used. 

201f a once-born man hurls grossly abusive words at twice-born men, his tongue 
shall be cut off, for he originated from the lowest part.* *“If he invokes their names and 
castes with disdain, a red-hot iron nail ten fingers* long should be driven into his 
mouth. ?”If he arrogantly gives instruction on the Law to Brahmins, the king should 
pour hot oil into his mouth and ears. 

2731f a man arrogantly makes false statements about someone’s learning, country, 
caste, occupation, or physical features, he should be fined 200.* ?“If a man calls 
someone “one-eyed,” “lame,” or some other similar name, he should be fined at least 1 
Karsapana, even if what he says is true. 

241f a man hurls accusations* at his mother, father, wife, brother, child, or elder, 
he should be fined 100, as also a man who fails to give way to an elder. 

276In cases involving a Brahmin and a Ksatriya, a discerning king should impose 
the following punishment: the lowest fine on the Brahmin and the middle fine on the 
Ksatriya (8.138). 7”On a Vaisya and a Sidra also, exactly the same punishment,* 
except the cutting of the tongue, should be imposed according to their respective 
class—that is the firm conclusion.+ 


281 have described above accurately the rules concerning the 
punishment for verbal assault. Next, I will explain how cases of 
physical assault are to be decided. 


Grounds for Litigation: XII] Physical Assault 


Personal Injury 27>When a lowest-born man uses a particular limb to injure a 
superior person, that very limb of his should be cut off—that is Manu’s decree. If he 
charges with his hand or with a stick, his hand ought to be cut off; if he strikes with his 
foot in anger, his foot ought to be cut off. “If a low-born man attempts to occupy the 
same seat as a man of a high rank, the king should brand him on the hip and send him 
into exile or have his buttocks slashed. “If he arrogantly spits at such a person, the 
king should cut off both his lips; if he urinates at him, his penis; and if he breaks wind 
at him, his anus. “If he grabs him by the hair, the king should cut off both his hands 
without a second thought, as also if he grabs him by the feet, the beard, the neck,* or 
the testicles. 

284 One who bruises the skin, as also one who draws blood, is to be fined 100; 
and one who wounds the flesh, 6 Niskas. One who breaks a bone, however, should be 
sent into exile.* *For injuring any kind of tree, a fine should be imposed 
proportionate to its utility—that is the fixed rule. If someone strikes humans or 
animals in order to inflict pain, the king should impose a punishment proportionate to 
the severity of the pain. 

287For doing severe harm to a limb, and likewise to vigor* and blood, a man 
should be compelled to defray the expenses of the recovery or to pay a total fine.* 


Damage to Property 7*When someone damages the property of another, whether 
it is deliberate or inadvertent, he should pay reparation to the other and give an equal 
amount to the king. 


Chapter 8 183 


?8°In the case of leather, leather utensils, or wooden or clay products, the fine is 
five times their value; so also in the case of flowers, roots, and fruits. 


Injuries Caused by Vehicles 290With respect to a vehicle, its driver, and its 
owner, they posit ten exemptions; in other cases punishment is decreed. 7?!When the 
nose-rope snaps; when the yoke breaks; when the vehicle skids to one side; when it 
slides backwards; when the axle of the vehicle breaks; when a wheel breaks; 2°*when 
bindings, halters, or reins snap; and when the driver cries out “Get out of the way!”—in 
these cases Manu has declared that there should be no punishment. 

2°3When the vehicle veers off due to the driver’s incompetence, however, and it 
results in injury, the owner should be fined 200; but if the driver is skilled, then it is 
the driver who ought to be fined; and if he is unskilled, all the riders should be fined 
100 each. 

25In a case where the driver kills living creatures when his path is obstructed by 
farm animals or a vehicle,* the punishment shall be enforced without hesitation. “If a 
human being is killed, he becomes immediately subject to the same liability as a thief; 
half that much for a large animal, such as a cow, elephant, camel, or horse.* 7°7For 
injuring a small farm animal, the fine is 200; for a beautiful animal or bird, 50; for a 
donkey, goat, or sheep, five Masas; and for killing a dog or a pig, one Masa. 


Corporal Punishment *°When they misbehave, a wife, son, slave, pupil, or 
uterine brother* may be beaten with a rope or a bamboo strip °on the back of their 
bodies and never on the head. If he beats them in any other way, his liability is the 
same as for theft. 


501] have described above completely how to decide cases of physical 
assault. Next, I will explain the rules for deciding the punishment 
for theft. 


Grounds for Litigation: XIII Theft 


Suppression of Thieves 302The king should exert utmost effort at suppressing 
thieves. Suppressing thieves will expand both his fame and his realm; for the king 
who gives security is always worthy of worship, and his sacrificial session* will 
continuously expand with the granting of safety (6.39 n.) as its sacrificial fee. 


Obligation to Offer Protection 304A sixth portion of everyone’s merits goes 
to the king who protects; a sixth portion of their demerits likewise goes to him when 
he fails to protect. °°When one studies, sacrifices, gives gifts, and performs worship, 
the king takes a sixth portion of it as his share by providing proper protection. 

S°By protecting creatures according to the Law and by putting to death those 
who merit execution, the king offers day after day sacrifices with sacrificial fees of one 
hundred thousand. 

*”When a king gathers levies, taxes, duties, gifts, and fines without providing 
protection, he will immediately go to hell. *8They call a king who gathers a sixth 


184 Chapter 8 


portion as levy without providing protection “one who gathers al! the filth of the entire 
population.” °° When a king disregards proper bounds, is an infidel, is rapacious, fails 
to provide protection, and is predatory, one should know that he is headed along the 
downward course.* 

310He should strenuously suppress the wicked by three means: imprisonment, 
shackling, and diverse forms of corporal punishment (8.320 n.);* 3!for by suppressing 
the wicked and by gratifying the virtuous kings are always purified, just as twice-born 
men by sacrifices. 

3!2The king should always forgive litigants, children, the aged, and the sick who 
may insult him, if he wants to do what is beneficial to himself. He who bears 
patiently when those in anguish insult him will be exalted in heaven for it, but he who 
does not forgive because of his royal status will go to hell for it. 


Punishment of Thieves *4A wise thief, with his hair loose, should go to the 
king* confessing his theft: “I have done this. Punish me,” % and carrying on his 
shoulder a pestle, a club of Khadira wood, a spear with both ends sharpened, or an iron 
rod. 

316Whether he is punished or released, the thief is released from the theft; but if 
the king fails to punish him, he takes upon himself the thief’s guilt. °’7The murderer of 
a learned Brahmin (4.208 n.) rubs his sin off on the man who eats his food, an 
adulterous wife on her husband, a pupil and a patron of a sacrifice on the teacher, and a 
thief on the king. °*=When men who have committed sins are punished by kings, they 
go to heaven immaculate, like virtuous men who have done good deeds. 

3194 man who steals a rope or a bucket from a well or tears down a place for 
distributing water should pay a fine of one Masa and restore that article. °°A man who 
steals more than ten Kumbha-measures of grain is subject to corporal punishment;* 
even in lesser cases he should be fined eleven times the amount and made to restitute 
that property to the owner. **'The same goes for articles sold by weight. When it is 
more than 100 of gold, silver, and the like, and of the most excellent clothes, he is 
subject to capital punishment;* *??but when it is more than 50, his hand ought to be 
cut off. In lesser cases, on the other hand, the king should set a fine of eleven times the 
value of the property. 

323For abducting men from illustrious families and especially women, and for 
stealing gems of great value, a man merits the death penalty. 

34For stealing large farm animals, as also weapons and medicine, the king 
should set a punishment after taking into account its time and purpose;* >in the case 
of cows belonging to Brahmins, the cleaving of the heel;* and for stealing farm 
animals, half his foot should be cut off immediately. 

%6For stealing thread, cotton, liquor-yeast, cow dung, molasses, curd, milk, 
buttermilk, water, grass, °’vessels made of bamboo or cane, any kind of salt, clay 
vessels, earth, ash, **fish, birds, oil, ghee, meat, honey, other animal products, 
%%other similar kinds of food,* boiled rice, and all kinds of cooked food—the fine is 
twice the value of the stolen property. *°For flowers, green grain, shrubs, creepers, 
trees, and small quantities of unhusked grain, the fine is 5 Krsnalas. *'For husked 


Chapter 8 185 


grain, vegetables, roots, and fruits, the fine is 100 if it is committed outside the 
owner’s presence, and 50 if it is committed in his presence (8.332 n.). 

332When an act is committed with force and in the presence of the victim, it is 
“violence”; when it is committed outside his presence,* it is “theft,” and so is an act 
that someone commits and then denies. 

333When a man steals these articles after they have been prepared for use, the king 
should fine him 100,* as also a man who steals fire from a house. 

34The king should deprive a thief of the very limb with which he commits a 
crime against men, to serve as a deterrent. 

335A king should never fail to punish even his father, teacher, friend, mother, 
wife, son, or personal priest when they deviate from the Law proper to them. “In a 
case where an ordinary person is fined 1 Karsapana, the king should be fined 1,000— 
that is the fixed rule.* °”With respect to theft, the liability for a Sidra is eight times; 
for a Vaisya, sixteen times; for a Ksatriya, thirty-two times; *8and for a Brahmin, 
sixty-four times, or fully 100 times, or twice sixty-four times; for he knows whether it 
is good or bad.* 

3°Roots and fruits from trees, wood for a fire, and grass to feed cows—Manu has 
declared that these do not constitute theft. 

*40If a Brahmin desires to obtain money from the hands of a man who takes what 
is not given—even if he does so by means of officiating at that man’s sacrifices or 
teaching him-——that Brahmin is equal to a thief. *!When a twice-born is on the road and 
his provisions are exhausted, he ought not to be punished for taking two roots or two 
stalks of sugar-cane from the field of another man. 

342When someone ties up those that are not tied, releases those that are tied, or 
takes away a slave, horse, or carriage, his liability is the same as for theft.* 


38, king who undertakes the suppression of thieves in this manner 
obtains fame in this world and unsurpassing happiness after death. 


Grounds for Litigation: XIV Violence 


“4If a king desires to obtain the seat of Indra and inexhaustible and imperishable fame, 
he should never ignore even for a moment a man who perpetrates violence.* A man 
who perpetrates violence should be considered far more evil than someone who is 
offensive in speech, who steals, or who assaults with a rod.* 6A king who condones a 
man who engages in violence is quickly brought to ruin and becomes the object of 
hatred. 

*’The king must never release violent men who strike terror in all creatures 
eyeing either friendship or a large monetary gain. 


Permissible Violence *®Twice-born men may take up arms when the Law is 
thwarted or when the vicissitudes of time bring calamity upon twice-born classes. 
3When aman kills in accordance with the Law to protect his life, in a conflict over 
sacrificial fees,* or in defense of women or Brahmins, he remains untainted. 

35°When an assailant attacks with the intent to kill—-whether he is an elder, a 
child, an old person, or a learned Brahmin—one may surely kill him without 


186 Chapter 8 


hesitation. *In killing an assailant, the killer incurs no fault; whether it is done openly 
or in secret, wrath there recoils on wrath. 


Grounds for Litigation: XV Sexual Crimes Against Women 


Sexual Crimes against Married Women 352When men violate the wives of 
others, the king should disfigure their bodies with punishments that inspire terror and 
then execute them* (8.6 n.; 8.284 n.); *°for such violations give rise to the mixing of 
social classes among the people, creating deviation from the Law that tears out the very 
root* and leads to the destruction of everything. 

354When a man carries on a conversation secretly with another man’s wife, he is 
subject to the lowest fine (8.138) if he has been previously accused of similar offenses. 
3551f someone who has not been previously accused engages in such conversation for a 
good reason, however, no guilt attaches to him, for he has committed no transgression. 

356[f a man converses with the wife of another at a sacred ford, in a wild tract, in a 
forest, or at the confluence of rivers, he is guilty of adultery. *’Doing favors, dallying, 
touching the ornaments or clothes, and sitting together on a bed—all this, tradition 
tells us, constitutes adultery. 2°8When a man touches a woman at an inappropriate place 
or permits her to touch him—all such acts done with mutual consent, tradition tells us, 
constitute adultery. 

35%In the case of adultery, everyone other than a Brahmin merits the death 
penalty; women of all four classes are to be guarded always with the utmost care. 

3&Mendicants, bards, men consecrated for sacrifice,* and artisans may converse 
with women, unless they have been explicitly banned.* °tA man should never 
converse with women* when he has been forbidden to do so; when someone speaks 
after being forbidden, he ought to be fined 1 Suvarna. 

3®The above rule does not apply to wives of traveling performers or to wives 
who earn a living on their own,* for such men get their women to attach themselves to 
men and, concealing themselves, get them to have sexual liaisons. °*When someone 
engages in secret conversations with such women, as also with female slaves serving a 
single master and with female wandering ascetics, he shall be compelled to pay a small 
fine. 


Male Sexual Assault *%*A man who defiles a virgin against her will merits 
immediate execution. When a man of equal status defiles a willing virgin, however, he 
is not subject to execution.* 3°No fine should be imposed on a virgin who falls in love 
with a man superior to herself; but if she makes love to a man inferior to herself, she 
should be put under restraint and confined to her house. When a man of inferior 
status makes love to a superior woman, however, he merits execution; if he makes love 
to a woman of equal status, he should pay a bride-price* if her father so desires. 

3If a man arrogantly violates a virgin by force, two of his fingers* should be cut 
off immediately, and he should also be fined 600. *A man of equal status who defiles 
a willing girl shall not be subject to the cutting of his fingers, but he should be 
compelled to pay a fine of 200 to deter repetition. 


Female Sexual Assault 3If a virgin violates another virgin, she should be 
fined 200, pay three times the bride-price,* and receive ten lashes. °° When a woman 


Chapter 8 187 


violates a virgin, however, her head ought to be shaved immediately—alternatively, 
two of her fingers should be cut off—and she should be paraded on a donkey. 


Adultery °%7'Whena woman, arrogant because of the eminence of her relatives and 
her own feminine qualities, becomes unfaithful to her husband, the king should have 
her devoured by dogs in a public square frequented by many. *?He should have the 
male offender burnt upon a heated iron bed; they should stack logs and burn up that 
villain there. 

373When a convict is accused again within a year, the fine is doubled; likewise 
when a man has sex with a Vratya* or a Candala woman. °When a Sidra has sex with 
a guarded or unguarded woman of a twice-born class—he loses a limb and all his 
possessions, if she was unguarded. If she was guarded, a Sidra loses everything;* °%a 
Vaisya is imprisoned for a year and all his property is confiscated; and a Ksatriya is 
fined 1,000 and his head is shaved using urine. >If a Vaisya or a Ksatriya has sex with 
an unguarded Brahmin woman, the Vaisya is fined 500 and the Ksatriya 1,000 (see 
8.120 n.). °”If any of these two has sex with a guarded Brahmin woman, he should be 
punished in the same way as a Sidra or he should be burnt with a straw-fire. 972A 
Brahmin who has forcible sex with a guarded Brahmin woman should be fined 1,000; 
for sex with a willing partner, he should be fined 500. 

3”Shaving the head is prescribed as the death penalty for Brahmins; but the other 
social classes are actually subject to the death penalty. *°The king should never put a 
Brahmin to death, even if he has committed every sort of crime; he should banish such 
a Brahmin from his kingdom along with all his property, without causing him hurt. 
381There is no greater violation of the Law on earth than killing a Brahmin; therefore, a 
king should not even think of killing a Brahmin. 

38If a Vaisya has sex with a guarded Ksatriya woman or a Ksatriya with a 
guarded Vaisya woman, both ought to receive the same punishment as a man who has 
sex with an unguarded Brahmin woman.+ *When a Brahmin has sex with those two 
types of guarded women, however, he should be compelled to pay a fine of 1,000; 
likewise, when a Ksatriya or a Vaisya has sex with a Sidra woman, the fine is 1,000. 
384For sex with an unguarded Ksatriya woman, a Vaisya is fined 500, but a Ksatriya 
has his head shaved using urine or is levied the same fine. When a Brahmin has sex 
with an unguarded Ksatriya or VaiSya woman or with a Sidra woman, he shall be fined 
500, but 1,000 for sex with a lowest-born woman.* 


[Excursus] 


Miscellanea * The king in whose capital there is no thief, no adulterer, no person 
who uses offensive speech, no person who uses violence, and no person who commits 
physical assault, will attain the world of Indra.* 9*’The suppression of these five within 
his territory secures for the king paramountcy among his peers and fame among his 
people. 

388/f the patron of a sacrifice gets rid of an officiating priest or an officiating priest 
the patron when both are capable of performing the rite and are untainted by any fault, 
each is fined 100. 


188 Chapter 8 


389° mother, father, wife, or son ought never to be abandoned. Anyone who 
abandons these when they have not fallen from their caste shall be fined 600 by the 
king. 

8When twice-born men living in hermitages* are arguing with each other about 
any duty, the king should never pronounce on the Law, if he cares for his own welfare. 
391 Accompanied by Brahmins, the king should first pay them due reverence, pacify 
them initially with soothing words, and then teach them the Law specific to them. 

32When a Brahmin fails to feed his two worthy neighbors—the one living in 
front of his house and the one behind—at a festival attended by twenty Brahmins, he 
ought to be fined 1 Masaka. **When a vedic scholar fails to feed another virtuous vedic 
scholar at auspicious rites, he should be compelled to give twice that amount of food 
and a gold Masaka. 

394A blind man, an idiot, a cripple, a man over 70, and someone who takes care 
of vedic scholars—no one should compel these to pay any tax. 

°%The king should always honor* vedic scholars, the sick and the afflicted, 
children, the aged, the poor, men from illustrious families, and Aryas. 

396A washerman shall wash clothes thoroughly and gently on a smooth cotton- 
wood board. He must not use some clothes to carry the other clothes or let others wear 
those clothes.* 

397A weaver receiving thread weighing 10 Palas must return cloth weighing 1 
Pala more; if he does otherwise, he should be compelled to pay a fine of 12.* 


Control of Trade 398When men who have experience in offices for levying duties 
and expertise in all types of merchandise have fixed the value of each commodity, the 
king should take one-twentieth of that. *’When someone exports goods that are 
designated a royal monopoly* or that are forbidden out of greed, the king should 
confiscate all his property. °When a man bypasses an office for levying duties, buys 
or sells at forbidden times, or falsifies the enumeration of goods, he should be fined 
eight times what he tried to hide. 

“After investigating the provenance of every commodity, its destination, and 
how long it is held by the vendor, as well as gain and loss, he should fix the sale and 
purchase prices. “?*Every five days or every fortnight the king should publicly fix the 
prices of commodities. 4°All balances, measures,* and weights should be stamped 
with the proper mark and should be re-inspected every six months. 


Ferries and Tolls “A vehicle should be assessed 1 Pana at a ferry; a porter’s 
load, half a Pana; an animal or woman, a quarter Pana; and a porter without a load, one- 
eighth of a Pana. “>Vehicles loaded with goods should be assessed a toll according to 
the value of the goods; empty vehicles and porters without loads should be assessed 
some small amount. 

46For Jong voyages the toll should correspond to the place and the time. It 
should be understood that this applies to voyages along rivers; for sea voyages, there is 
no set rate (8.157). 


Chapter 8 189 


407Women over two months pregnant, wandering ascetics, sages, Brahmins, and 
those wearing the insignia of a religious profession (4.200 n.) should not be forced to 
pay tolls on a ferry. 

408Whenever anything within a boat is damaged due to the negligence of the 
boatsmen, it is the boatsmen who should pay reparation collectively, each according to 
his share. 


4091 have described above how to decide a lawsuit brought by 
passengers in a boat relating to the negligence of boatsmen on the 
water; when it is an act of god, there shall be no punishment. 


Occupations of Social Classes “The king should make Vaisyas pursue trade, 
moneylending, agriculture, and cattle herding, and make Siidras engage in the service 
of twice-born people. 

4114 Brahmin should support a Ksatriya or a Vaisya who is starved for a 
livelihood out of compassion and employ them in activities proper to them. *If a 
Brahmin makes twice-born men who have undergone vedic initiation do slave labor 
against their will through greed and to show off his power, the king should fine him 
600. “"3He may, however, make a Sidra, whether he is bought or not, do slave labor; 
for the Stidra was created by the Self-existent One solely to do slave labor for the 
Brahmin. 

“4Rven when he is released by his master, a Sidra is not freed from his slave 
status; for that is innate in him and who can remove it from him? “There are seven 
kinds of slaves: a man captured in war, a man who makes himself a slave to receive 
food, a slave born in the house, a purchased slave, a gifted slave, a hereditary slave, and 
aman enslaved for punishment. 

“l6Wife, son, and slave—all these three, tradition tells us, are without property. 
Whatever they may earn becomes the property of the man to whom they belong. 

“174 Brahmin may confidently seize property from a Sidra, because there is 
nothing that he owns; for he is a man whose property may be taken by his master. 

418The king should strenuously make Vaisyas and Sidras perform the activities 
specific to them; for when they deviate from their specific activities, they throw this 
world into confusion. 

“Every day the king should pay attention to his administrative centers,* 
conveyances (7.75 n.), daily income and expenditure, mines, and treasury. #?°When 
the king thus brings to a satisfactory conclusion all these legal matters, he gets rid of 
all sins and attains the highest state. 


CHAPTER NINE 


Grounds for Litigation: XVI Law Concerning Husband and Wife 


‘For a husband and wife who stay on the path pointed out by the 
Law, I shall declare the eternal Laws for both when they are together 
and when they are apart.* 


Guarding the Wife 2Day and night men should keep their women from acting 
independently; for, attached as they are to sensual pleasures, men should keep them 
under their control. *Her father guards her in her childhood, her husband guards her in 
her youth, and her sons guard her in her old age; a woman is not qualified to act 
independently (5.147-9). 

4A father is reprehensible,* if he does not give her away at the proper time; a 
husband, if he does not have sex with her at the right time (3.45 n.); and a son, if he 
fails to guard his mother when her husband is dead. °Women in particular should be 
guarded against even the slightest evil inclination, for when they are left unguarded, 
they bring grief to both families (5.149 n.).+ Seeing that this is clearly the highest 
Law of all social classes, even weak husbands strive to guard their wives; “for by 
carefully guarding his wife, a man guards his offspring, his character, his family, 
himself, and the Law specific to him. 

The husband enters the wife, becomes a fetus, and is born in this world. This, 
indeed, is what gives the name to and discloses the true nature of “wife” (j@ya@)—that he 
is born (jdyate) again in her.* °For, a wife bears a son resembling the man she loves; to 
insure the purity of his offspring, therefore, he should carefully guard his wife. 

10No man is able to thoroughly guard women by force; but by using the 
following strategies, he will be able to guard them thoroughly. "He should employ her 
in the collection and the disbursement of his wealth, in cleaning, in meritorious 
activity, in cooking food, and in looking after household goods.* *When they are kept 
confined within the house by trusted men, they are not truly guarded; only when they 
guard themselves by themselves are they truly well guarded. 

Drinking, associating with bad people, living away from the husband, travel, 
sleep, and staying in the houses of others—these are the six things that corrupt women. 
“They pay no attention to beauty, they pay no heed to age; whether he is handsome or 
ugly, they make love to him with the single thought, “He’s a man!” Lechery, 
fickleness of mind, and hard-heartedness are innate in them; even when they are 
carefully guarded in this world, therefore, they become hostile towards their husbands. 
Recognizing thus the nature produced in them at creation by Prajapati, a man should 
make the utmost effort at guarding them. '’Bed, seat, ornaments, lust, hatred, behavior 
unworthy of an Arya, malice, and bad conduct—Manu assigned these to women.* 


190 


Chapter 9 191 


18No rite is performed for women with the recitation of ritual formulas—that is 
well-established Law. “Without strength or ritual formula, women are the untruth’*— 
that is the fixed rule. !%There are, likewise, numerous scriptural passages recited in the 
sacred books. Listen to a sample of these* intended to expose the true character of 
women. *°Here is an illustration of it:* “May my father keep from me the seed that my 
mother, roaming about unfaithful to her husband, craved!” 7!When a woman 
contemplates anything harmful to her husband in her mind, this is said to be a 
thorough expiation of that infidelity.* 


Elevation of Wife to Husband’s Status *When a wife unites with her 
husband according to rule, she takes on the qualities he has, like a river uniting with 
the ocean. “Aksamala, a woman of the lowest birth, when she united with Vasistha— 
as also Sarngi with Mandapala—became worthy of great respect.* "These and other 
women of low birth attained high status in this world by reason of the eminent 
qualities of their respective husbands. 


25] have described above the splendid conduct of a husband and wife 
commonly practiced in the world. Next, listen to the Laws that 
pertain to progeny, Laws that bring happiness here and in the 
hereafter. 


Importance of Wife On account of offspring, a wife is the bearer of many 
blessings, worthy of honor, and the light within a home; indeed, in a home no 
distinction at all exists between a wife (stri) and Sri, the Goddess of Fortune. ?”She 
begets children; and when they are born, she brings them up—day in, day out, the 
wife,* evidently, is the linchpin of domestic affairs. “Offspring, rites prescribed by 
Law, obedient service,* the highest sensuous delights, and procuring heaven for 
oneself and one’s forefathers—all this depends on the wife. 

294 woman who controls her mind, speech, and body and is never unfaithful to 
her husband attains the worlds of her husband, and virtuous people call her a “good 
woman” (= 5.165). “By being unfaithful to her husband, on the other hand, a woman 
becomes disgraced in the world, takes birth in a jackal’s womb, and is afflicted with 
evil diseases (= 5.164). 


31Listen now to this holy disquisition, profitable to all, carried out 
by virtuous people and by great ancient sages with regard to a son. 


To Whom Belongs a Son? “It is acknowledged that a son belongs to the 
husband; but scripture is divided with respect to the sire—some argue for the man who 
fathered the child, others for the “owner of the field.”’* 

Tradition holds that the woman represents the field and the man the seed; all 
embodied beings spring from the union of field and seed. “Sometimes the seed is 
preeminent, at other times the female womb; but when both are equal, that offspring is 
greatly esteemed.* 


192 Chapter 9 


[FIRST OPINION] “Between the seed and the womb, the seed is considered 
dominant, for the offspring of all creatures is marked by the characteristics of the seed 
(10.70—2). “When someone sows a particular kind of seed in a field prepared at the 
proper time, the very same kind sprouts in that field displaying its own qualities. 
3’This earth, indeed, is called the eternal womb of creatures; yet the seed, as it 
develops, does not manifest any of the qualities associated with the womb. “Even 
when different kinds of seeds are sown by farmers in the very same plot at the right 
time, they are seen in the world to sprout differently, each according to its nature. 
Vrihi-rice, Sala-rice, mung beans, sesame seeds, beans, barley, garlic, and sugar- 
cane—all these sprout according to their seed. “For one kind to be sown and quite 
another to be produced—that is simply impossible. Whatever kind of seed is sown, 
that same kind sprouts forth.* 


[SECOND OPINION] “A wise and well-trained man, therefore, possessing knowledge 
and discrimination* and desiring a long life, should never sow his seed in the wife of 
another man. “In this connection, those who know the past relate verses sung by Wind 
showing that a man must never sow his seed in someone else’s wife. “When someone 
shoots an arrow at the vitals of an animal that has already been pierced, his arrow is 
wasted; in like manner a seed is wasted when discharged in someone else’s wife.” 
“Even as those who know the past regard this earth as the wife of Prthu, so they say 
that a field belongs to the man who cleared the stumps and the deer to the man who 
owns the arrow.* 

SWife, self, and offspring—that is the full extent of “man.” Brahmins, likewise, 
prociaim this: “The husband, tradition says, is the wife.”* “Neither sale nor dismissal 
cuts the wife loose from her husband; this we consider the Law established formerly by 
Prajapati. “Once is a partition made; once is a virgin given away; once is it said “T 
give’’-—-these three are done only once each. 

48As in the case of cows, mares, female camels, slave women, female buffaloes, 
female goats, and ewes, the sire does not own the offspring, so is it also in the case of 
women. “When men who have seeds but no fields sow them in someone else’s field, 
once the crop has grown they do not receive any of the harvest. Even if a bull fathers a 
hundred calves on someone else’s cows, the calves belong to the owner of the cows; the 
bull has spilled his semen in vain. *'Likewise, when men without fields sow their seed 
in someone else’s field, they create profits for the owner of the field; the owner of the 
seed reaps no fruit. 

“If an agreement* has not been reached between the owner of the field and the 
owner of the seed with respect to the fruit, the owner of the field clearly reaps the profit; 
the womb is mightier than the seed. **When a field is handed over by contractual 
agreement to someone for sowing the seed, however, we see in the world that both the 
owner of the seed and the owner of the field receive shares from it. “When a seed, 
carried by flood or wind, sprouts in someone’s field, it belongs solely to the owner of 
the field; the sower does not reap its fruit.* 

This is the Law with regard to the offspring of cows, mares, slave women, 
female camels, female goats, ewes, female birds, and female buffaloes.* 


Chapter 9 193 


°°[ have described to you above the relative importance of the seed 
and the womb. Next, I shall explain the Law pertaining to women 
during a time of adversity. 


Levirate ‘Tradition holds that for a younger brother, the wife of his older brother is 
the same as the wife of an elder;* and for an older brother, the wife of his younger 
brother is the same as a daughter-in-law. “Except in a time of adversity, if an older 
brother has sex with his younger brother’s wife or a younger brother with his older 
brother’s wife, they become outcastes, even if they have been duly appointed. 

“If the line is about to die out, a wife who is duly appointed may obtain the 
desired progeny through a brother-in-law or a relative belonging to the same ancestry 
(5.60 n.). ©The appointed man should smear himself with ghee, approach the widow 
at night in silence, and beget a single son, never a second. “Some who are 
knowledgeable in these matters, seeing that this leaves the purpose of the couple’s 
appointment unfulfilled in terms of the Law, endorse begetting a second son in such 
women.* When the purpose of his appointment to the widow has been fulfilled 
according to rule, however, they should behave towards each other as an elder and a 
daughter-in-law. “If, on the contrary, the appointed couple disregard the rules and 
behave lustfully with one another, both become outcastes, he as a molester of a 
daughter-in-law, and she as a violator of an elder’s bed. 

&Twice-born men should never appoint a widowed woman to another man, for 
in appointing her to another man, they assail the eternal Law.* ©The nuptial formulas 
nowhere mention appointment, nor do injunctions relating to marriage sanction the 
remarriage of widows. “This Law of beasts, despised by learned twice-born men, was 
extended to humans also during the reign of Vena (7.41—2 n.). “He was a preeminent 
royal sage, who once ruled the entire earth and, his mind overcome by lust, created the 
intermixing of classes. “Since that time, good people denounce anyone who is 
senseless enough to appoint a woman to have children after her husband dies. 

“If the husband of a virgin dies after their betrothal, her brother-in-law should 
take* her in the following manner. “Obtaining* her according to rule, as she is dressed 
in white* and devoted to pure observances, he should have sex with her once every 
time she is in season (3.45 n.) until she bears a child. 


Contract of Betrothal “After giving away a virgin to someone, a prudent man 
must never give her away again, for in giving what has already been given, he becomes 
guilty of a lie with respect to a human being (8.98). “Even after he has accepted a 
virgin according to rule, he may reject her if she is found to be dishonorable, diseased, 
or defiled,* or if she had been given deceptively. “If a man gives a virgin with defects 
without revealing them, one may break the contract with that evil man who gave the 
virgin (8.205, 224~7).* 


Absence of Husband “A man should provide for his wife before he goes away on 
business, for even a steadfast woman will go astray when starved for a livelihood. “If 
he provides for her before going away, she should live a life of restraint; but if he leaves 
without providing for her, she may maintain herself by engaging in respectable crafts. 


194 Chapter 9 


76A wife should wait* for eight years when her husband has gone away for a 
purpose specified by Law, for six years when he has gone for learning or fame, and for 
three years when he has gone for pleasure. 


Repudiation of a Wife For one year let a husband tolerate a wife who loathes 
him; after one year, he should confiscate her inheritance and stop cohabiting with her. 
If a wife commits a transgression against her husband who is deranged, drunk, or 
sick, deprived of her ornaments and belongings, she should be cast out for three 
months. “If a wife loathes a husband who has become insane, fallen from caste, or 
impotent (3.150 n.), who is without semen,* or who has contracted an evil disease 
(3.92 n.), she must neither be abandoned nor deprived of her inheritance. 

S°When a wife drinks liquor or is dishonest,* cantankerous, sick, vicious, or 
wasteful, she may be superseded at any time by marriage to another wife. "A barren 
wife may be superseded in the eighth year; a wife whose children die, in the tenth; a 
wife who bears girls, in the eleventh; but a foul-mouthed wife, at once. “If a wife is 
sickly but affectionate and rich in virtue, he may marry a wife to supersede her with her 
consent; she should never be treated with disrespect. 

8If a wife who has been superseded storms out of the house incensed, however, 
she should be locked up immediately or repudiated in the presence of the family. 

If, after she is forbidden, a wife drinks liquor, albeit at festivals, or visits shows 
and fairs,* she should be fined 6 Krsnalas. 


Seniority among Wives “If twice-born men marry women of their own class as 
well as others, the order of their class determines their seniority, as also how they are 
honored and where they reside. Among all these, only the wife of equal class may care 
for her husband’s physical needs* or participate in his daily rites prescribed by Law, 
never a wife belonging to a different class. “If he foolishly gets another wife to carry 
these out while a wife of equal class is available, he becomes exactly like a Brahmin- 
Candala described by the ancients. 


Marriage of Daughters When there is a suitor who is eminent, handsome, and 
of equal status, one should give the girl to him according to rule, even if she has not 
attained the proper age.* Even if she has reached puberty, a girl should rather remain 
at home until death; one should never give her to a man bereft of good qualities. 

For three years shall a girl wait after the onset of her puberty; after that time, she 
may find for herself a husband of equal status. ?4If a woman who has not been given in 
marriage finds a husband on her own, she does not incur any sin, and neither does the 
man she finds. °*A girl who chooses a husband on her own must not take with her any 
omament coming from her father or mother or given by her brothers; if she takes, it is 
theft.* 

*A man who takes a girl after she has reached puberty shall not pay a bride-price, 
for the father has lost his ownership of her by frustrating her menses.* 

*4A 30-year-old man should marry a charming girl of 12 years, or an 18-year-old, 
a girl of 8 years—sooner, if his fulfilling the Law would suffer. °A husband marries a 
wife given to him by gods, not from his own desire. He should always support that 
good woman, thereby doing what is pleasing to the gods. 


Chapter 9 195 


%Women were created to bear children, and men to extend the line; therefore, 
scriptures have prescribed that the Law is to be carried out in common with the wife. 

“If, after the bride-price has been paid for the girl, the man who paid the price 
dies, she should be given to the brother-in-law, if she consents to it. °Even a Sidra 
should not take a bride-price when he gives his daughter; for by accepting a bride-price, 
he is engaging in a covert sale of his daughter. ’That after promising her to one man, 
she is then given to another*-—-such a deed was never done by good people of ancient or 
recent times. ©The covert sale of a daughter for a payment under the name “bride- 
price”—-we have never heard of such a thing even in former generations. 


101Fidelity to each other should be observed until death’—this should be recognized 
as the highest Law between husband and wife put in a nutshell. A husband and wife, 
after they have completed the marriage rite, should always work hard so as to prevent 
them from being unfaithful to each other and thus being split apart.* 


103] have described above the Law concerning husband and wife 
based on love, as well as the way to obtain offspring in times of 
adversity. Listen now to the Law of inheritance. 


Grounds for Litigation: XVII Partition of Inheritance 


104A fter the father and mother have passed on,* the brothers should gather together and 
partition the paternal inheritance evenly; for they are incompetent while those two are 
alive. 


Primogeniture ‘The eldest alone, on the contrary, ought to take the entire 
paternal estate, and the others should live as his dependents just as they did under their 
father. 

106As soon as the eldest is born, a person becomes a “man with a son” and is 
released from his debt to the ancestors (4.257 n.); that son, therefore, is entitled to the 
entire amount. Only that son to whom he passes on his debt and through whom he 
obtains immortality is born through the Law; others, they say, are born through lust.* 

'08The eldest brother should look after the younger ones as a father his sons; and 
they should behave towards their eldest brother as towards their father, in accordance 
with the Law. !t is the eldest who makes the family prosper, the eldest who brings it 
to ruin; the eldest receives the highest honor in the world, and the eldest is never treated 
with disrespect by good people. !!°When the eldest behaves the way the eldest should, 
he is like a mother, he is like a father; but when he fails to behave the way the eldest 
should, he should receive the same honor as a relative. 


Partition and Seniority ‘'!!They should either live together in this manner, or 
rather, separately with a desire for merit. Living separately increases merit; therefore, 
the act of separation is meritorious.* 

12The preemptive share of the eldest is one-twentieth, as well as the best item in 
the entire estate; the middle son gets one-half of that; and the youngest, one-quarter. 
13The eldest and the youngest shall take what has been prescribed; the shares of the 


196 Chapter 9 


sons other than the eldest and the youngest are the same as that of the middle son. 
1M4Within each category of property, the first-born shall take the finest item, as well as 
anything exceedingly special and the best out of each ten. ‘When the brothers are 
equally accomplished in what they do, there is no preemptive share out of each ten; a 
little something should be given to the eldest, however, as a token of respect. 

6Once the preemptive share has been subtracted in the above manner, the rest 
should be apportioned in equal shares. If, on the other hand, the preemptive share has 
not been subtracted, the apportioning of shares should be carried out as follows: !”the 
eldest son gets a double share; the son born next gets one and a half; and the younger 
ones gets a single share each—that is the settled Law. 

8From their shares, however, the brothers shall give individually to the 
unmarried girls—one-quarter from the share of each. Those unwilling to give will 
become outcastes. 

MA single goat, sheep, or one-hoofed animal left over after the distribution 
should never be divided; the rule is that a single goat or sheep Jeft over goes to the 
eldest. 


Seniority of Leviratic Sons  '!2°Ifa younger brother begets a son on the wife of 
the eldest, then the division is equal—that is the settled Law. '!That the principal 
should become the subordinate is impossible according to the Law; in procreation, the 
father is the principal. Therefore, one should allocate a share to that son in accordance 
with the Law.* 


Seniority among Sons of Different Wives 1'22How is the partition done 
when the youngest son is born to the seniormost wife and the first-born son to the 
juniormost wife? If such a doubt arises, !“the first-born* should take one bull as his 
preemptive share; thereafter, the other inferior bulls* are taken by those junior to him 
according to the seniority of their mothers. The eldest son born to the seniormost 
wife, on the other hand, shall take fifteen cows together with a bull; thereafter, the 
others receive shares according to seniority of their mothers—that is the fixed rule. 

25 Among sons born uniformly to wives of equal status, seniority is not based on 
their mothers; they declare seniority to be based on birth. !In the Subrahmanya* texts 
also, tradition tells us, it is the eldest by birth who makes the invocation. Tradition 
also tells us that even between twins in the same womb seniority is based on birth. 


“Female-Son” and Her Sons ?’A man without a son should make his daughter 
a “female-son’”* in the following manner: “The child this girl bears will be the one who 
performs my ancestral rites.”’+ 

128In ancient times, Daksa himself, the lord of creatures, made “female-sons” in 
the above manner for the multiplication of his lineage. After adorning them and with 
a joyful heart, he gave ten of them to Dharma, thirteen to KaSyapa, and twenty-seven to 
King Soma.* 

130A son is the same as one’s self, and a daughter is equal to a son; while she 
stands there as his very self, how can someone else take his property? 

'1Anything that is part of a mother’s separate property* becomes the share of her 
unmarried daughters; and the daughter’s son shall take the entire property of a man 


Chapter 9 197 


without a son. The daughter’s son shall indeed take the entire estate of the father who 
is without a son, and he shall offer two rice-balls, one to his father and one to his 
maternal grandfather. *°The world does not recognize any difference between a son’s 
son and a daughter’s son with respect to the Law, for both the father of the one and the 
mother of the other sprang from his own body (9.139). “If, however, a son is born 
after a “female-son” has been appointed, the division in that case is equal; for a woman 
has no claim to primogeniture (9.120—1 n.). 

1SIf a “female-son” somehow dies sonless, the husband of that “female-son” 
shall indeed take the property without hesitation. ’°When a daughter, whether she is 
appointed or not, bears a son by a man of equal status*—by that son his maternal 
grandfather becomes a man who has a son’s son, and the latter shall offer him the rice- 
ball and inherit his property. 

137Through a son a man gains the worlds; through a son’s son he obtains eternal 
life; but through the son’s grandson he attains the crest of the sun. *The Self-existent 
One himself has called him “son” (putra) because he rescues (ia) his father from the 
hell named Put. ’The world does not acknowledge any difference between a son’s son 
and a daughter’s son, for a daughter’s son also rescues him in the hereafter, just like a 
son’s son (9.133). 

“0The son of a “female-son” shall offer the first rice-ball to his mother, the 
second to her father, and the third to her father’s father.* 


Adopted Son When a man’s adopted son is endowed with all the fine qualities, 
he may indeed inherit his estate, even if that son has been obtained from a different 
lineage. “?Under no circumstances shall an adopted son inherit his biological father’s 
lineage or estate. The offering of the rice-ball is consequent upon inheriting the lineage 
and estate; so when a man gives a son for adoption, the son’s obligation to perform his 
funerary rites comes to an end.* 


Leviratic Sons The son of an unappointed woman and a son fathered by a 
brother-in-law on a woman who already has a son—neither of these is entitled to a 
share; the former is born to a prostitute and the latter is born of Just. “If the rules have 
not been followed, a male born even to an appointed woman is not entitled to inherit 
the paternal estate; for he was begotten by an outcaste (9.58, 63). 

SA son born to an appointed woman shall inherit it, just as a natural son; that 
seed and its issue belong by Law to the owner of the field (9.48~—51). The man who 
keeps* his deceased brother’s property and wife should produce an offspring for his 
brother and hand over the brother’s property to him. 

M47When an unappointed woman obtains a son either through her brother-in-law 
or someone else, that son, born through lust, is not entitled to the estate; he is said to 
have been wrongly begotten. 


“8These should be recognized as the rules for partition when the 
wives belong to the same caste. Listen now to the rules regarding 
sons of the same man born to several wives belonging to different 
castes, 


198 Chapter 9 


Sons by Wives of Different Castes ‘If a Brahmin has four wives in the 
proper order, tradition lays down the following rule regarding partition among sons 
born to those wives. ™°The plowman, the stud bull, the vehicle, the ornament,* and 
the house is to be given to the Brahmin as his preemptive share, as well as one share 
from the best property.* 'The Brahmin shall take three shares of the inheritance; the 
son by a Ksatriya wife, two shares; the son by a Vaisya wife, one and a half shares; and 
the son by a Siidra wife, one share. 

152A ]ternatively, a man who knows the Law may divide his entire estate into ten 
shares and carry out a partition consistent with the Law according to the following rule: 
3the Brahmin shall take four shares; the son by a Ksatriya wife, three; the son by a 
Vaisya wife, two; and the son by a Sidra wife, one. “Whether he has a proper son or 
no son at all,* the Law requires that he give no more than one-tenth to a son by a Siidra 
wife. 

55The son of a Brahmin, Ksatriya, or Vaisya by a Sidra wife does not share in 
the inheritance; his only property is whatever his father may give him. 

156A }ternatively, when all the sons of a twice-born man are born from wives of 
equal class, after giving a preemptive share to the eldest, the rest should take equal 
shares.* 

1574 Sidra, however, has only a wife of his own class; no other wife is prescribed 
for him (3.13) . All the sons born to such a wife, even if there are a hundred of them, 
shall receive equal shares. 


Twelve Types of Sons 1 *Of the twelve types of sons that Manu, the son of the 
Self-existent, has decreed for men, six are both relatives and heirs and six are relatives 
but not heirs.* 4A natural son, a son begotten on the wife, a son given in adoption, a 
constituted son, a son born in secret, and a son adopted after being abandoned—these 
are the six who are both relatives and heirs. A son born to an unmarried woman, a 
son received with marriage, a purchased son, a son born to a remarried woman, a son 
given in adoption by himself, and a son by a Siidra wife—these are the six who are 
relatives but not heirs. 

161A man gains the same distinction* by crossing the darkness with the aid of 
bad sons as he does by crossing the water with the aid of bad boats. 

1¢21f a natural son and a son begotten on the wife are heirs to the estate of the same 
man, the one whose paternal estate it is shall take it, and not the other.* !°The natural 
son is the sole master of his father’s wealth; nevertheless, so as not to be unkind, he 
should provide maintenance for the others. When the natural son divides the paternal 
inheritance, he should give a one-sixth or one-fifth share of the paternal property to the 
son begotten on the wife. ©The natural son and the son begotten on the wife receive 
shares of the paternal estate; but the other ten according to their order share in the 
lineage and the estate.* 

16When a man fathers a son by himself through his own duly wedded wife, he 
should be recognized as a natural son—the principal son.* *”’When a wife of someone 
who is dead, impotent, or sick bears a son after she has been appointed in accordance 
with the Law specific to her, tradition calls him a son begotten on the wife. ®When 
during a time of adversity a mother or a father joyfully gives their son in adoption with 


Chapter 9 199 


the ceremonial pouring of water, a son belonging to the same class as the recipient, he 
should be known as a son given in adoption. When someone installs a boy of equal 
class as his son, a boy who knows right from wrong and is endowed with filial 
qualities, he should be recognized as a constituted son. ‘When in someone’s house is 
born a son whose father is unknown, he is a son born in secret within the house; and he 
belongs to the man whose wife gave birth to him. '7}When a boy has been abandoned 
by his mother and father or by one of them and he is taken by someone as his son, he is 
called a son adopted after being abandoned. ”*When an unmarried girl gives birth to a 
son secretly in her father’s house, one should call him by the name son born to an 
unmarried woman, the offspring of an unmarried girl belongs to the man who marries 
her. “When a pregnant woman is married off, whether her condition is disclosed or 
not, the child in the womb belongs to the man who marries her and is called son 
received with marriage. *When someone purchases a boy directly from his mother and 
father so he may have a child, whether that child is of the same class or not, he is his 
purchased son. When a woman who has been abandoned by her husband or is a 
widow marries again* and begets a son of her own will, he is called son of a remarried 
woman. ‘Such a woman or one who has gone away and returned, so long as she has 
not been deflowered, is fit to perform the marriage ceremony once again with her 
husband according to the rite of remarriage.* ?7”)When someone who has no mother or 
father or who has been abandoned without cause offers himself up to a man, tradition 
calls him a son given in adoption by himself. ’®When a Brahmin fathers a son by a 
Sidra woman out of lust, tradition calls him a Parasava (10.8), because while still able 
(parayan) he is a corpse (Sava). 

The son a Sidra begets by a slave woman or by a slave woman married to a 
slave* may take a share with his father’s permission—that is the settled Law. 

18The eleven sons enumerated above beginning with the son begotten on the 
wife—wise men call these the surrogates of a son necessitated by the possible 
interruption of rites (9.166 n.). '8'Those who are designated here as sons because of 
congruity but who are born from another man’s seed belong only to the one from 
whose seed they were born and to no one else (9.35-40). 

182]f among several brothers born to the same father one gets a son, Manu has 
declared that through that son they all become men who have sons. !If among all the 
wives* of the same husband one gets a son, Manu has declared that through that son 
they all become women who have sons.* 

184Tn the absence of each superior son each son inferior to him is entitled to the 
estate; but if several of them are of equal rank, all of them share the estate. The sons 
inherit the father’s estate—not the brothers, not the fathers. The estate of a man who 
has no son, however, is inherited by his father or by his brothers. 


Alternative Heirs '!86To three water is offered; to three rice-balls are given; and 
the fourth offers them—there is no room for a fifth.* 18’The closest relative of a person 
belonging to the same ancestry shall take his property; beyond such a relative, a man 
belonging to the same family, the teacher, or a pupil.* When none of these is 
available, pure and disciplined Brahmins learned in the triple Veda share the estate; in 
this way, the Law is not hurt. °The king must never take the property of a Brahmin— 


200 Chapter 9 


that is the rule; but, in the absence of any heir, the king may take the property of 
persons belonging to the other classes. 

10When a man has died childless, a son should be procured for him through a 
man of the same lineage, and any estate the deceased may have should be handed over 
to that son. "When two individuals fathered by two men litigate over the property 
held by the wife, each shall take the estate of his own biological father to the exclusion 
of the other.* 


Women’s Property ‘When their mother dies, all the uterine brothers and sisters 
should divide the maternal estate equally among themselves. If those sisters have 
any daughters, one should joyfully give them also, as is proper, something from their 
maternal grandmother’s property. 

Tradition presents six types of women’s property: what a woman receives at 
the nuptial fire, what she receives when she is taken away, what she is given as a token 
of love, and what she receives from her brothers, mother, and father. What she 
receives subsequent to the marriage and what her husband gives her out of affection—— 
upon her death that property goes to her children even if her husband is alive. 

196In a “Brahma,” “Divine,” “Seer’s,” “Gandharva,” or “Prajapatya” marriage, the 
property of a woman is awarded to her husband alone, if she dies childless. In a 
“Demonic” or a subsequent form of marriage, on the other hand, any property given to 
a woman is awarded to her mother and father, if she dies childless (see 3.20-34). 

'8Any property given somehow to a woman by her father goes to the unmarried 
Brahmin daughter, or to that daughter’s offspring.* 

1°Women must never alienate* common property of the family or even her own 
private property without the consent of her husband. 

200Any ornaments wor by a woman while her husband was alive shall not be 
partitioned by his heirs; if they do, they fall from their caste. 


Disqualification from Inheritance *'!The following receive no shares: the 
impotent (3.150 n.), outcastes, those born blind or deaf, the insane, the mentally 
retarded, mutes, and anyone lacking manly strength.* 77It is right, however, that a 
wise man should provide all of them with food and clothing according to his ability 
until the end; if he does not, he will become an outcaste. “If, on the other hand, any of 
these, the impotent and so forth, somehow want to have wives and do have issue, their 
offspring is entitled to a share. 


Partition of Non-ancestral Property ™If the eldest acquires any assets after 
his father’s death, a share of it goes to his younger brothers, provided they are pursuing 
their studies. 2If all of them are uneducated, however, and they acquire assets by their 
own labor, then the division is equal, given that it is not part of the paternal estate— 
that is the fixed rule. *°°Assets that someone acquires through learning, on the other 
hand, belong to him alone, as do presents from friends, wedding gifts, and anything 
given with the honey-mixture (3.119 n.). 

20’If one of the brothers, quite able to live by his own activity, does not want any 
property, he may be stripped of his share after giving something for his maintenance. 


Chapter 9 201 


8If one of them earns anything by his own labor without utilizing the paternal 
property, he need not share it against his will, as it was acquired by his own effort. 

20If the father recovers any missing ancestral property, he need not share it with 
his sons against his will, as it was acquired by himself. 


Miscellaneous Rules of Partition 2!°If parties to a partition again live 
together and subsequently undertake a new partition, then the division is equal; 
primogeniture is inoperative there. 

2111f the oldest or the youngest among them is debarred from the distribution of 
shares or if either of them dies, his share is not lost.* *!*Having assembled together, the 
uterine brothers, as well as reunited brothers and uterine sisters, should jointly divide 
it equally among themselves.* 

213When the eldest defrauds his younger brothers through greed, he shall no 
longer be the eldest. Stripped of his share, he should be punished by the king. 2!4All 
brothers who pursue improper activities are unfit to inherit the property. The eldest, 
morevoer, must not establish his own separate property without first giving to his 
younger brothers. 

2151f prior to partition the brothers undertake a joint enterprise, on no account 
shall the father give unequal shares to his sons. 

216A son born after partition shall inherit the entire paternal property; or, if he has 
brothers who have reunited, he shall share it with them.* 

217The mother shall receive the inheritance of a childless son; and if the mother is 
also dead, the father’s mother shall inherit that property. 

218If something is uncovered after all debts and assets have been divided 
according to rule, it shall be divided equally. 7A garment, a vehicle, an ornament, 
prepared food, water, women, and security measures are declared to be exempt from 
partition.* 


220] have described above the division of property and the ritual 
procedure for sons* beginning in due order with the son begotten on 
the wife. Listen now to the Law pertaining to gambling. 


Grounds for Litigation—-X VIII Gambling and Betting 


221The king shall suppress gambling and betting within his realm; they are the two 
vices of rulers that devastate a kingdom.* 222Gambling and betting amount to open 
theft; the king should make constant effort at eradicating them both. 

223When it is done with inanimate things, people call it “gambling”; when it is 
done with living beings, on the other hand, it is known as “betting.” 

224The king should have anyone who engages in or facilitates gambling or 
betting executed, as also Stidras wearing marks of twice-born men. 225He should 
quickly banish from his capital gamblers, performers, entertainers,* men belonging to 
heretical sects, individuals engaging in illicit activities, and liquor vendors. 226When 
these clandestine thieves remain in a king’s realm, they constantly harass his decent 
subjects with their illicit activities. 


202 Chapter 9 


227In a former age* gambling was seen to create great enmity; therefore, an 
intelligent man should never engage in gambling even for fun. 228When a man engages 
in it openly or in secret, the kind of punishment to be imposed on him is left to the 
discretion of the king. 


Excursus: Types of Punishment 


229When a Ksatriya, a VaiSya, or a Sidra is unable to pay a fine, he should acquit 
himself of the debt through work; a Brahmin, on the other hand, should pay it off in 
installments. 

230The king should punish women, children, the insane, the elderly, the poor, 
those without guardians, and the sick with a lash, a cane, a rope, and the like. 

231When those appointed to adjudicate lawsuits, inflamed by the heat of 
money,* undermine cases brought by litigants, the king should confiscate all their 
property. 232He should put to death those who forge royal edicts, corrupt the 
constituents of the realm,* or kill women, children, or Brahmins, as also those who 
give aid to his enemies. 

233Whenever something has been adjudicated and a judgment issued,* he should 
recognize it as executed according to the Law and not bring it back again.* 234If an 
official or a judge settles a case wrongly, the king himself should settle it and fine him 
1,000 (8.120 n.). 


Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 235A murderer of a Brahmin, a man 
who drinks liquor, a thief, and a man who has sex with an elder’s wife—all these men 
should be considered individually* as guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste 
(11.55 n.). 

236]f any of these four fails to perform the penance, the king should determine for 
them a punishment, both corporal and pecuniary, that accords with the Law. 237For sex 
with an elder’s wife, the man should be branded with the mark of a vagina; for drinking 
liquor, with the sign of a tavern (11.93 n.); for stealing, with the figure of a dog’s foot; 
and for killing a Brahmin, with the figure of a headless man. 238These wretched men-— 
with whom one is not permitted to eat, to participate at a sacrifice, to recite the Veda, or 
to contract marriages—shall roam the earth, excluded from all activities relating to the 
Law. 239Branded with marks, they shall be forsaken by their paternal and maternal 
relations; they should be shown no compassion and paid no reverence—that is Manu’s 
decree. 

240]f they do perform the prescribed penance, on the other hand, the king should 
not brand the higher classes* on the forehead, but make them pay the highest fine 
(8.138). 241For these offenses, the middle fine should be imposed on a Brahmin, or he 
should be exiled from the realm along with his property and belongings. 242When 
others commit these sins, however, they deserve to have all their property confiscated, 
if they did them thoughtlessly, or to be executed,* if they did them willfully.+ 

243A good king must never take the property of someone guilty of a grievous sin 
causing loss of caste; if he takes it out of greed, he becomes tainted with the same sin. 
244He should offer that fine to Varuna by casting it into water, or present it to a 
Brahmin endowed with learning and virtue. 245Varuna is the lord of punishment, for 


Chapter 9 203 


he holds the rod of punishment over kings; and a Brahmin who has mastered the Veda 
is the lord of the entire world. 246When a king refrains from taking the fines of evil- 
doers, in that land are born in due course men with long lives; 247the farmers’ crops 
ripen, each as it was sown; children do not die; and no deformed child is born. 


248]f a man of a lower class deliberately torments Brahmins, the king should kill him 
using graphic modes of execution (9.279 n.) that strike terror into men. 249A king 
incurs as great a sin by releasing someone who ought to be executed as by executing 
someone who ought not to be executed; but he gains merit by its proper exercise. 


Conclusion of Grounds for Litigation 


2501 have described above in great detail how lawsuits brought by 
litigants and falling within the eighteen avenues of litigation are to 
be decided (see 8.3). 


251Carrying out properly in this manner his duties flowing from the Law, the king 
should both seek to acquire territories not yet acquired and protect well those that have 
been acquired.* 


Eradication of Thorns 


252After properly settling the country and building a fort according to textual norms, 
he should direct his maximum effort constantly at the eradication of thorns.* 253By 
protecting those who follow the Arya way of life and by clearing the thorns, kings 
devoted to the protection of their subjects reach the highest heaven. 254When a king 
collects taxes without suppressing thieves, on the other hand, it will cause an upheaval 
in his realm and he will be cut off from heaven. 255When his realm, sheltered by the 
power of his arm, is made secure, it will always thrive, like a regularly watered tree. 

256The king, using spies as his eyes, should identify the two kinds of thieves 
who steal the property of others: those who operate overtly and those who operate 
covertly. 257Of these, the overt cheats are those who live by trading in various 
merchandise, and the covert cheats are people such as thieves and bandits of the wild.* 

258Bribe-takers, frauds, cheats, gamblers, those who live by adjuring good luck, 
fortunetellers,* 5%high officials and physicians who act crookedly, those engaged in 
exhibiting their artistic skills, skilled prostitutes—26°people such as these should be 
recognized as open thorns on his people’s side, and others, the non-Aryas wearing Arya 
marks,* as operating in secret. 261After identifying these through honest undercover 
agents practicing those same occupations and instigating them through mobile agents 
posted in various spy establishments, he should lure them into his power. 262After 
publicizing accurately the crimes they have committed in their respective activities, the 
king should duly punish them, each in proportion to his capacity and his crime. 263For 
without punishment, it is impossible to suppress the crimes of evil-minded thieves 
who prowl the land in secret. 

264Assembly halls, water-booths, sweetmeat-shops, brothels, taverns, restau- 
rants, crossroads, memorial trees, fairs, theaters, 265dilapidated parks, wild tracts, 


204 Chapter 9 


artisans’ workshops, abandoned houses, groves, and parks——266the king should have 
these types of places patrolled by mobile and stationary squads and by mobile agents* 
in order to interdict thieves. 

267By means of clever former thieves who had been their associates and 
companions and who are adept at their various activities, he should identify and 
instigate them. 268Under the pretext of attending a banquet, seeing Brahmins, or 
watching feats of valor, they should assemble these people in one place. 26°Those who 
do not gather there and those who have become suspicious of the source,* the king 
should forcibly attack and kill, along with their friends and paternal and maternal 
relatives (2.132 n.). 

270A righteous king must never execute a thief unless he is caught with the 
stolen goods; if he is caught with the stolen goods and the tools of his trade, the king 
should execute him without hesitation. 27!1He should also execute every individual 
within any village who gives food, implements, or shelter* to thieves. 

272When individuals appointed to guard the provinces* and rulers of border 
districts who have been summoned remain uninvolved during raids, he should 
promptly punish them like thieves. 273When a man who gains his livelihood by the 
Law deviates from the conventions of the Law, the king should make him also suffer a 
punishment, for he has deviated from the Law specific to him.* 274When a village is 
being raided, a dike is being breached, or a highway robbery is taking place, whoever 
fails to hasten there with help according to his ability should be banished along with 
his belongings. 

275Those who rob the king’s treasury, those who act contrary to his interests, and 
those who conspire with his enemies—he should inflict diverse kinds of capital 
punishment on them. 

276When robbers cut through walls and commit theft at night, the king should 
cut off their hands and impale them on sharp stakes. 277After the first offense, he 
should have two fingers* of a pickpocket cut off; after the second, the hands and the 
feet; and after the third, he ought to be executed. 278Those who provide fire, food, 
weapons, or shelter (9.271 n.), and those who receive stolen goods—the king should 
punish* these like thieves. 

279Someone who breaks a reservoir should be killed by drowning or clean 
execution;* or else, he should repair it and be made to pay the highest fine (8.138). 
280He should kill without hesitation those who break into the treasury, the armory, or a 
temple, and those who steal elephants, horses, or chariots.* 

281Someone who steals water from a reservoir constructed long ago or cuts off its 
water intake should be made to pay the lowest fine (8.138). 282Anyone who drops filth 
on a royal highway, except in an emergency, should pay a fine of 2 Karsapanas and 
promptly clean up that filth;* 283but if it was an individual with an emergency, an old 
man, a pregnant woman, or a child, that person merits a reprimand and should be made 
to clean it up—that is the settled rule. 

284Any physician guilty of malpractice is subject to a fine, the lowest in the case 
of non-humans and the middle in the case of humans (8.138). 285Anyone who destroys 
a bridge, a flag, a pole, or a statue should repair the entire damage and pay a fine of 500 
(8.120 n.). 


Chapter 9 205 


286For adulterating unadulterated substances, and for breaking or improperly 
boring gems, the punishment is the lowest fine.* 287If a man deals with equivalent 
commodities as if they were unequal, even if he does so in terms of value, he shall 
receive the lowest or the middle fine.* 

288He should locate all prisons along the royal highway where people will see 
the criminals, grieving and mutilated. 

289He should promptly execute (8.123 n.) anyone who breaches the rampart, fills 
the moat, or breaks the gates. 

290For all types of black magic, a fine of 200 should be imposed, as also for 
root-witchcraft (11.64 n.) when done by an unrelated person, and for various types of 
sorcery. 29! Anyone who sells infertile seed corn or jacks up the price of seed corn,* or 
who destroys boundary marks, shall be executed with mutilation.* 

292A goldsmith who operates dishonestly, however, is the most wicked of all 
thorns, and the king should have him cut to pieces with razor knives. 

293For stealing agricultural implements, weapons, and medicine, the king 
should impose a punishment taking into account the time and the purpose.* 


Excursus: Constituents of a Kingdom 24Lord, official, capital, realm, 
treasury, army, and ally—these seven basic constituents are said to form a complete 
kingdom.* 

295Among these seven basic constituents of a kingdom in the order enumerated, 
a grave evil affecting each preceding one must be considered the more serious. 296In 
this world, a kingdom is propped up by the seven limbs like a tripod* and no single 
one of them is superfluous, because of their mutual dependence on the special quality 
of each. 297For each limb is specially suited to carry out specific tasks; the one that 
accomplishes a particular task is said to be the most important with respect to it. 


Excursus: Activities of the King 298-9By means of spies, by a display of 
strength, and by engaging in enterprises, he should identify his own and his enemy’s 
relative strength and ascertain the relative gravity of all the adversities and evils 
affecting his enemy and himself; and only then should he embark on any operation. 
300[ndeed, he must embark on his operations repeatedly, though repeatedly exhausted; 
for Fortune devotes herself only to a man who embarks on his operations. 

301Krta-age, Tretd-age, Dvapara-age, and Kali-age—the king’s activities 
constitute all these; for the king is said to be the age. 392When he is asleep, he is Kali; 
when he is awake, he is Dvapara; when he is ready to undertake operations, he is Treta; 
and when he is on the march, he is Krta. 

303The king should follow the energetic activity of Indra, Sun, Wind, Yama, 
Varuna, Moon, Fire, and Earth.* 304As Indra showers rain during the four months* of 
the rainy season, so the king, following the Indra-vow, should shower delights upon 
his realm. 395As Sun extracts water through its rays during the eight months,* so the 
king should constantly extract taxes from his realm; for this is the Sun-vow. 36As 
Wind moves about infiltrating all creatures, so the king should infiltrate with his 
mobile spies; for that is the Wind-vow. 307As Yama, when the time has come, holds 
friend and foe alike in his grip, so the king should hold his subjects in his grip; for that 


206 Chapter 9 


is the Yama-vow. 308As we see people bound with fetters by Varuna, so the king 
should capture criminals; for that is the Varuna-vow. 309When his subjects are as 
delighted in him as are people when they see the full moon, that king is observing the 
Moon-vow. 3!0When the king is always inflamed and ablaze against evil-doers and 
crushes evil rulers of border districts, tradition calls it the Fire-vow. 3!!The Earth 
supports all creatures equally; when a king supports all creatures in the same manner, 
he is observing the Earth-vow. 


312[n this and other ways should the king, always alert and tireless, 
suppress thieves within his own realm and even in others.* 


Excursus on Brahmins 3!3Even in the face of the deepest adversity, he must 
never anger Brahmins; for when they are angered, they will destroy him instantly along 
with his army and conveyances (7.75 n.). 3!4They made the fire a consumer of 
everything, the ocean undrinkable, and the moon to wane and wax*—who would not 
be destroyed when he angers these? 3!5When angered, they could create other worlds 
and other guardians of the world, they could convert gods into non-gods—who would 
prosper when he injures these? 3!6The worlds and the gods always exist by taking 
refuge in them, and their wealth is the Veda—who would injure them if he wishes to 
live? 

317Whether he is learned or not, a Brahmin is a great deity, just as Fire is a great 
deity, whether it is consecrated or not. 3!8Even in cemeteries, the Fire, full of energy, 
is never tainted; and when it is offered with oblations at sacrifices, it flares up again. 
319Similarly, even if they engage in every undesirable act, Brahmins should be 
honored in every way; for they are the highest deity. 

320When a Ksatriya becomes haughty in any way in his behavior towards 
Brahmins, the Brahmin himself must become their controller, for the Ksatriya sprang 
from the Brahmin. 32!Fire sprang from water, Ksatriya from Brahmin,* and metal 
from stone; their all-pervasive energy is quenched when confronting their own source. 
322The Ksatriya does not flourish without the Brahmin, and the Brahmin does not 
prosper without the Ksatriya; but when Brahmin and Ksatriya are united, they prosper 
here and in the hereafter. 

323A fter giving to Brahmins the money collected from all the fines and handing 
over the kingdom to his son, the king should meet his death in battle. 


Conclusion of the Rules for Kings 
324Conducting himself in this manner and always devoted to the Laws pertaining to 


kings, the king should direct all his servants to work for the good of his people. 


325] have described above in its entirety the eternal rules of action for 
the king. What follows, one should understand, are the rules of 
action for the Vaisya and the Sudra in their proper order. 


Chapter 9 207 
RULES OF ACTION FOR VAISYAS AND SUDRAS 


Rules for Vaisyas 


326After undergoing initiatory consecration and getting married, a Vaisya should 
devote himself constantly to trade and to looking after farm animals; 327for, after 
creating them, Prajapati handed over to the Vaisya the farm animals, and to the 
Brahmin and the king, all creatures. 

328°T don’t want to look after farm animals’—-a Vaisya should never entertain 
such a wish, and when there is a willing Vaisya, under no circumstances shall anyone 
else look after them. 329He shall acquaint himself with the relative values of gems, 
pearls, coral, metals, threads, perfumes, and condiments. 330He should be 
knowledgeable about sowing seeds, the good and bad qualities of farmland, all the 
various ways of weighing and measuring, 33!the desirable and undesirable properties 
of goods, the good and bad aspects of regions, the probable profit and loss of 
merchandise, and how best to raise farm animals. 332He should be well-informed about 
the wages to be paid to servants, the different languages of people, the manner of 
storing goods, and the procedures of buying and selling. 

333He should make the utmost effort at making his assets grow in accordance 
with the Law and diligently distribute food to all creatures. 


Rules for Siidras 


334For the Siidra, on the other hand, the highest Law leading to bliss is simply to 
render obedient service to distinguished Brahmin householders who are learned in the 
Veda. 335When he keeps himself pure, obediently serves the highest class, is soft- 
spoken and humble, and always takes refuge in Brahmins, he obtains a higher birth. 


CONCLUSION OF THE LAW OUTSIDE TIMES OF 
ADVERSITY 
336] have described above the splendid rules of action for the social 


classes outside times of adversity. Listen now to the rules for them 
in the proper order for times of adversity. 


CHAPTER TEN 


RULES FOR TIMES OF ADVERSITY 


Mixed Classes 


The Four Classes ‘Devoted to their respective activities, the three twice-born 
classes should study the Veda; but it is the Brahmin who should teach them, not the 
other two—that is the firm principle. 2The Brahmin must know the means of 
livelihood of all according to rule, and he should both teach them to the others and 
follow them himself. 

3Because of his distinctive qualities, the eminence of his origin, his observance 
of restrictive practices, and the distinctive nature of his consecration, the Brahmin is 
the lord of all the classes. 

4Three classes—Brahmin, Ksatriya, and Vaisya—are twice-born; the fourth, 
Sidra, has a single birth. There is no fifth. 

5In all the classes, children born in the direct order of class* to wives who are of 
equal class and married as virgins should be recognized as belonging to the same class 
by birth. “Sons fathered by twice-born men on wives of the class immediately below 
theirs are considered only “similar,” disdained as they are due to their mother’s defect. 

7That is the eternal rule with respect to those born from women of the class 
immediately below. The following should be recognized as the righteous rule with 
respect to those born from women two or three classes below. 


Mixed Classes: First Discourse 8From a Brahmin man by a Vaisya girl* is 
born a son called Ambastha; and by a Stidra girl, a Nisada, also called Parasava. 9From 
a Ksatriya man by a Siidra girl is born a son called Ugra, who is cruel in his behavior 
and in his dealings, a being with the physical characteristics of both a Ksatriya and a 
Sidra. 

104 Brahmin’s children by the three lower classes, a Ksatriya’s by the two lower 
classes, and a Vaisya’s by the one lower class—tradition calls these six “low-born” 
(10.46 n.). 

UFrom a Ksatriya man by a Brahmin girl is born a Sita by caste; sons of a 
Vaisya by Ksatriya and Brahmin women are a Magadha and a Vaideha, respectively; 
and from a Sidra by Vaisya, Ksatriya, and Brahmin women are born respectively an 
Ayogava, a Ksattr, and a Candala, the worst of all men—so originate the intermixture 
of classes. 

3s when there is a difference of two classes in a birth, tradition calls them 
Ambastha and Ugra if the difference is in the direct order, in like manner they are Ksatr 
and Vaideha, if it is in the inverse order. The sons of twice-born men by women of the 


208 


Chapter 10 209 


class immediately below theirs that have been enumerated in their proper order—they 
are given the name “Promixate,” because of their mother’s defect.* 


Mixed Classes: Second Discourse “From a Brahmin man by an Ugra girl is 
born a son called Avrta; by an Ambastha girl, an Abhira; and by an Ayogava girl, a 
Dhigvana. 

‘6From a Sidra man are born in the inverse order three “low-borns”: Ayogava, 
Ksattr, and Candala, the worst of all men. !”Three further “low-borns” (10.46 n.) are 
born in the inverse order: from a Vaisya man, a Magadha and a Vaideha; and from a 
Ksatriya man, a Sita.* 

18From a Nisada man by a Sidra woman is born a Pulkasa by caste; a son born 
from a Sudra man by a Nisada woman, tradition tells us, is a Kukkuta. A child born 
from a Ksattr man by an Ugra woman is said to be a Svapaka; and from a Vaidehaka 
man by an Ambastha woman, a Vena. 

20When children fathered by twice-born men on women of equal class do not 
keep the observances and have fallen from the Savitri (2.38 n.), they should be called 
by the name Vratya (2.39). 24From a Vratya of the Brahmin class are born the evil- 
natured Bhrijakantaka, the Avantya, the Vatadhana, the Puspadha, and the Saikha. 
“From a Vratya of the Ksatriya class are born the Jhalla, the Malla, the Licchivi, the 
Nata, the Karana, the Khasa, and the Dravida. “From a Vratya of the Vaisya class are 
born the Sudhanvan, the Acarya, the Karusa, the Vijanman, the Maitra, and the 
Satvata.* 


Mixed Classes: Third Discourse 24By adultery among the classes, by 
marrying forbidden women, and by abandoning the activities proper to them, arise the 
intermixture of classes.* >I will enumerate completely those who are of mixed origin, 
born in the direct and in the inverse order and mutually connected. 

6Siita, Vaidehaka, Candala, the worst of men, Magadha, Ksatr, and Ayogava— 
"these six beget children similar in class to themselves by women of their own class, 
by women of their mother’s caste, and by women of higher castes.* As from two of 
the three classes is born a child that is one’s own self—being born from a woman of his 
own class because of the contiguity—so the same process applies to excluded men.* 
2°These same men beget on each other’s wives large numbers of excluded children even 
more vile than they and despicable. “Just as a Sidra man begets an excluded child 
from a Brahmin woman, so also an excluded man begets from women of the four 
classes a child subject to even greater exclusion. 

‘Having sex in the inverse order, excluded men beget children subject to even 
greater exclusion, the low-born beget low-born children, generating as many as fifteen 
classes. °2On an Ayogava woman—a Dasyu man begets a Sairandra, who, although not 
a slave, gains his livelihood as a slave, is skilled at adorning and personal attendance, 
and lives by trapping animals; a Vaideha man begets a Maitreyaka, who has a sweet 
voice, eulogizes men constantly, and rings the bell at dawn; *4and a Nisada man begets 
a Margava, that is, a Dasa, who lives by working on ships and whom people living in 
Aryavarta (2.22) call a Kaivarta. ®By Ayogava women, who are non-Aryas, wear the 
clothes of the dead, and eat despicable food, are born severally these three low-borns.* 


210 Chapter 10 


°6From a Nisdda man is born a Karavara, who works on leather; from a Vaidehaka, an 
Andhra and a Meda, both of whom dwell outside the village. On a Vaideha woman-— 
a Candala man begets a Pandusopaka, who deals in bamboo; and a Nisada man begets 
an Ahindika. “On a Pulkasa woman, a Candala man begets a Sopaka, a wicked man 
who gains his living as an executioner and is despised by good people.* A son born 
to a Nisada woman by a Candala man is an Antyavasayin, who operates in cemeteries 
and is despised even by excluded people. 

“These castes arising from intermixture and described above according to their 
fathers and mothers—whether they conceal their caste or are open about it—-should be 
recognized by their respective activities (10.57).* 

“The six types of sons born to women belonging to one’s own or the class 
immediately below have characteristics of a twice-born; but tradition regards all the 
“delinquent-born” (10.46 n.) as having the same characteristics as Sidras. “By the 
power of austerity and semen, in each succeeding generation* they attain here among 
men a higher or a lower status by birth. 

‘By neglecting rites and by failing to visit Brahmins,* however, these men of 
Ksatriya birth have gradually reached in the world the level of Stdras—*Pundrakas, 
Codas, Dravidas, Kambojas, Yavanas, Sakas, Paradas, Pahlavas, Cinas, Kiratas, and 
Daradas.* “All the castes in the world that are outside those born from the mouth, 
arms, thighs, and feet—whether they speak foreign or Arya languages—tradition calls 
Dasyus. 


Occupations, Residence, and Dress “The “low-born” among the twice-born, 
as well as those that tradition calls “delinquent-born,”* should live by occupations 
despised by the twice-born—*to Siitas, management of horses and chariots; to 
Ambasthas, medicine; to Vaidehakas, taking care of women; to Magadhas, trade; “to 
Nisadas, fishing; to Ayogavas, carpentry; to Medas, Andras, Cuficus, and Madgus, 
hunting wild animals; “to Ksattrs, Ugras, and Pulkasas, trapping and killing animals 
living in burrows; to Dhigvanas, working in leather; and to Venas, playing drums. 

These should live by memorial trees and in cemeteries, hills, and groves, well- 
recognizable* and living by the occupations specific to them. 


Candalas and Svapacas 51Candalas and Svapacas, however, must live outside 
the village and they should be made Apapatras.* Their property consists of dogs and 
donkeys, “their garments are the clothes of the dead; they eat in broken vessels; their 
ornaments are of iron; and they constantly roam about. 

3A man who follows the Law should never seek any dealings with them. All 
their transactions shall be among themselves, and they must marry their own kind. 
“They depend on others for their food, and it should be given in a broken vessel. They 
must not go about in villages and towns at night; they may go around during the day 
to perform some task at the command of the king, wearing distinguishing marks. They 
should carry away the corpses of those without relatives—that is the settled rule. 
*°They should always execute those condemned to death in the manner prescribed by 
authoritative texts and at the command of the king; and they may take the clothes, 
beds, and ornaments of those condemned to death. 


Chapter 10 211 


Further Discourse on Mixed Classes *’An unknown man without the proper 
complexion,* born from a squalid womb, a non-Arya with some measure of Arya 
features—one should detect such a man by his activities (10.40). Un-Arya conduct, 
harshness, cruelty, and the neglect of rites reveal in this world a man who is born from 
a squalid womb. *?He will possess the character of either his father or his mother, or of 
both; a man born from an evil womb is never able to conceal his nature. “If he is the 
result of a mixed union, even a man born in a prominent family will undoubtedly 
partake of his parents’ character to a greater or a lesser extent. 

Wherever these “delinquent-born” (10.46 n.) individuals, who corrupt the 
social classes, are born, that realm quickly comes to ruin together with its inhabitants. 


Advance to Higher Classes For excluded individuals, giving up their life 
without artifice* for the sake of a Brahmin or a cow, or in the defense of women or 
children is the means for achieving success. 

®Abstention from injuring, truthfulness, refraining from anger,* purification, 
and mastering the organs+—this, Manu has declared, is the gist of the Law for the four 
classes. 

“[f an offspring of a Brahmin man from a Sidra woman were to bear children 
from a superior partner, within seven generations the inferior attains the superior caste; 
6a Siidra thus attains the rank of a Brahmin, and so does a Brahmin the rank of a 
Siidra*—one should understand that this rule holds good also for offspring born from 
a Ksatriya or a VaiSya man. 

66[f it be asked: who is superior? A child born accidentally to a Brahmin man by a 
non-Arya woman or a child of a non-Arya man by a Brahmin woman? °’This is the 
resolution: a child born to an Arya man by a non-Arya woman becomes an Arya by 
reason of his attributes, while a child born to a non-Arya man by an Arya woman is a 
non-Arya. Neither of these should be permitted to receive vedic initiation—that is the 
settled Law; the former because of the inferiority of his birth and the latter because he 
was born in the inverse order of class. As a good seed sprouting ina good field grows 
vigorously, so a child born to an Arya man by an Arya woman is worthy of receiving 
all the consecratory rites. 

Some wise men extol the seed, others the field, and yet others both the seed and 
the field. In this regard, the settled rule is as follows. 7!A seed planted in a bad field 
dies midstream; a field without seed also is just bare land. By the power of the seed, 
children born from animals became seers, receiving honor and acclaim; therefore, they 
extol the seed (9.32-55). 

The creator evaluated a non-Arya who acts like an Arya and an Arya who acts 
like a non-Arya and declared: “They are neither equal nor unequal.” 


Occupations of the Four Classes 


“Brahmins who are established in that whose source is the Veda* and are devoted to 
the activities specific to them should duly live by the six occupations in their proper 
order: “teaching and studying, offering sacrifices and officiating at sacrifices, and 
giving and accepting gifts are the six occupations of a highest-born person. 


212 Chapter 10 


Of these six activities, however, three provide him with a livelihood: 
officiating at sacrifices, teaching, and accepting gifts from a completely pure person. 

“From the Brahmin, three Laws are suspended with respect to the Ksatriya: 
teaching and officiating at sacrifices, and the third, accepting gifts; “the same are 
suspended also with respect to the Vaisya—that is the settled rule; for Manu, the 
Prajapati, has not prescribed these Laws with respect to these two. 

Use of arms and weapons has been prescribed as the livelihood for the Ksatriya; 
and trade, animal husbandry, and agriculture for the VaiSya. Their Law, however, is 
giving gifts, studying, and offering sacrifices. ® Among the activities specific to each, 
the most admirable are: studying the Veda for the Brahmin, protecting the people for a 
Ksatriya, and trade alone for the Vaisya. 


Occupations in Times of Adversity 


Brahmins *Whena Brahmin is unable to earn a living by means of the activities 
specific to him given above, he may live by means of the Ksatriya Law, for the latter is 
the one right below him. “If it be asked: what happens if he is unable to earn a living 
by either of these two means? Taking up agriculture or cattle-herding, he should earn a 
living by the occupation of a Vaisya. 

83 Brahmin, or even a Ksatriya, who earns a living by the Vaisya occupation, 
should try his best to avoid agriculture, which involves injury to living beings and 
dependence on others.* **People think that agriculture is something wholesome. Yet it 
is an occupation condemned by good people; the plow with an iron tip lacerates the 
ground as well as creatures living in it. 

When someone, deprived of livelihood, is forced to abandon this strict 
adherence to the Law, he may sell goods traded by Vaisyas to increase his wealth, with 
the following exceptions. He should avoid condiments of every kind; cooked food; 
sesame seeds; stones; salt; farm animals; human beings; *’every type of dyed cloth; 
cloth made of hemp, flax, or wool even if they are undyed; fruits; roots; medicines; 
88water; weapons; poison; meat; Soma; all types of perfume; milk; honey; curd; ghee; 
oil; bees-wax;* molasses; Kusa grass; *all wild animals; fanged animals; birds; 
liquor; indigo; lac; and all one-hoofed animals.+ 

An individual engaged in agriculture may freely sell pure* sesame seeds that he 
has cultivated himself, provided they are to be used for purposes relating to the Law 
and have not been stored for long. “If someone uses sesame seeds for purposes other 
than eating, anointing the body, and giving as a gift, he will become a worm and 
plunge into the excrement of dogs together with his ancestors. 

By selling meat, lac, or salt, a Brahmin falls immediately from his caste; by 
selling milk, he becomes a Sidra in three days; “but by selling here the other 
commodities deliberately, a Brahmin is reduced in seven days to the rank of a Vaisya. 

Condiments may be bartered for condiments—but never salt for condi- 
ments*—-cooked food for uncooked food, and sesame seeds for an equal amount of 
grain.* 


Ksatriyas 5A Ksatriya who has fallen on hard times may earn his living by all the 
above means; but under no circumstances should he even think of living by a superior 


Chapter 10 213 


occupation. “If a man of inferior birth out of greed lives by activities specific to his 
superiors, the king shall confiscate all his property and promptly send him into exile 
(8.123 n.). °’Far better to carry out one’s own Law imperfectly than that of someone 
else’s perfectly; for a man who lives according to someone else’s Law falls 
immediately from his caste. 


Vaisyas When a Vaisya is unable to sustain himself through the Law proper to 
him, he may live by the occupation of even a Sidra, refraining, however, from 
forbidden acts; and he should discontinue it when he is able. 


Siidras *Whena Sidra is unable to enter into the service of twice-born men and is 
faced with the loss of his sons and wife, he may eam a living by the activities of 
artisans—that is, the activities of artisans and various kinds of crafts the practice of 
which best serves the twice-born. 


Further Occupations for Brahmins *!A Brahmin firmly committed to his 
way of life and unwilling to follow the Vaisya occupations may pursue the following 
Law when he is languishing through lack of a livelihood. A Brahmin who has fallen 
on hard times may accept gifts from anybody; that something pure can be sullied is 
impossible according to the Law. !°By teaching, officiating at the sacrifices of, and 
accepting gifts from despicable individuals, Brahmins do not incur any sin, for they 
are like fire and water.* 

104When someone facing death eats food given by anyone at all, he remains 
unsullied by sin, as the sky by mud. !Ajigarta, tormented by hunger, went up to his 
son to kill him; and he was not tainted with sin, as he was seeking to allay his hunger. 
106Vamadeva, a man with a clear vision of what accords with and what is against the 
Law, finding himself in dire straits and trying to save his life, wanted to eat dog’s 
meat, and yet remained unsullied. ’Bharadvaja, a man of great austerities, when he 
and his sons were tormented by hunger in a desolate forest, accepted many cows from 
the carpenter Brbu. }°Visvamitra, a man with a clear vision of what accords with and 
what is against the Law, when he was tormented by hunger, came to eat the rump of a 
dog, taking it from the hand of a Candala.* 

Accepting gifts, officiating at sacrifices, and teaching—among_ these, 
accepting gifts is the worst and the most reprehensible for a Brahmin with respect to 
the hereafter. "°Officiating at sacrifices and teaching always pertain to those who have 
undergone consecratory rites, whereas accepting pertains even to a lowest-born Siidra. 
1114 sin committed by teaching or officiating at a sacrifice is removed by soft recitation 
and oblations, but a sin incurred by accepting a gift is removed only by discarding it 
and performing ascetic toil. A Brahmin without a livelihood may even glean or pick 
single grains (4.5 n.) from anywhere; gleaning is superior to accepting gifts, and 
picking single grains is superior to even that. 

™3When Brahmin bath-graduates are in dire straits and want wares or money, 
they should petition the king; it he refuses to give, they ought to abandon him. 

14Unplowed land is less tainted than plowed land; and among a cow, a goat, a 
sheep, gold, grain, and cooked food, each preceding one is less tainted than each 
subsequent. 


214 Chapter 10 


Acquisition of Property ‘Seven means of acquiring wealth are in accordance 
with the Law: inheritance, finding, purchase, conquest, investment, work, and 
acceptance of gifts from good people. ‘The ten means of livelihood are: learning, 
craft, employment, service, cattle-herding, trade, agriculture, fortitude,* begging, and 
lending on interest. 

1174 Brahmin or a Ksatriya must never lend money on interest; to pursue 
activities dictated by the Law, however, he may lend to an evil man at a small 
interest.* 

"8Rven if a Ksatriya collects 25 per cent as his share (7.130 n.) during a time of 
adversity, he is freed from that taint by protecting his subject to the best of his ability. 
19The Law specific to him is conquest, and he must not turn back in the face of 
danger;* when he protects Vaisyas with his weapons, he may collect a levy in 
accordance with the Law: from Vaisyas, a one-sixth share of the grain crop and a duty 
of one-twentieth on other commodities, with a minimum of 1 Karsapana; and from 
Siidras, artisans, and craftsmen, the contribution of their services (7.128-32). 


Livelihood of Siidras “Jf a Sidra desires to eam a living, he may serve a 
Ksatriya, or he may seek to earn a living by serving even a wealthy Vaisya. !He 
should serve Brahmins for the sake of heaven or for the sake of both, for when he has 
the name “Brahmin” attached to him,* he has done all there is to do. *’The service of a 
Brahmin alone is declared to be the pre-eminent activity of a Sidra, for whatever other 
work he may do brings him no reward. 

4They* must allocate a suitable livelihood for him from their own family 
resources, taking into account his ability and skill, and the number of his dependents. 
225They should give him leftover food, old clothes, grain that has been cast aside, and 
the old household items. 

26A Sidra is not affected by any sin causing loss of caste, nor is he entitled to 
any consecretory rite. He has no qualification with regard to the Law, but he is not 
prohibited from following the Law.* !?’Those who know the Law and yearn to follow 
it, however, incur no sin and receive praise when they imitate the practices of good 
men, without reciting any ritual formulas; for a Sidra obtains this world and the 
next without enduring disdain to the extent that he imitates the practices of good men 
without giving way to envy. 

Even a capable Sidra must not accumulate wealth; for when a Sidra becomes 
wealthy, he harasses Brahmins. 


Conclusion 


180] have described above the Laws for the four classes during times 
of adversity; when they are properly followed, people attain the 
highest state. 


131] have described above the entire set of rules pertaining to the Law 
of the four classes. Next, I will explain the splendid rules pertaining 
to penance. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


PENANCE 


Excursus: Occasions for Giving and Begging 


1A man seeking* to extend his line; a man preparing to perform a sacrifice; a traveler; a 
man who has performed the sacrifice at which all his possessions are given away; a man 
who begs for the sake of his teacher, father, or mother; a student of the Veda; and a sick 
man—these nine should be known as “bath-graduates,” Brahmins who are beggars 
pursuant to the Law. Gifts must be given to these destitutes in proportion to their 
eminence in vedic learning. 

3To these Brahmins food should be given along with the sacrificial fees; to 
others, it is said, cooked food should be given outside the sacrificial arena.* 4The king 
should bestow all sorts of precious gifts on Brahmins learned in the Veda according to 
their merits, as well as fees for the purpose of sacrifices. 

5When a married man marries another wife after begging for the expenses, his 
reward is only sensual pleasure; the resultant offspring belongs to the man who 
defrayed the expenses.+ [verse 6 of the vulgate is omitted in critical edition] 

7A man who has sufficient resources to maintain his dependents for three years, 
or someone who has more than that, is entitled to drink Soma. 8If a twice-born man 
who possesses less resources than that drinks Soma, he will not reap its reward, even 
though he may never have drunk Soma before.* 9When a man of means gives to 
outsiders while his own people live in misery, that is counterfeit Law, dripping with 
honey but poisonous to taste. “If a man does anything for his welfare after death to the 
detriment of his dependents, it will make him unhappy both when he is alive and after 
he is dead. 

"While a righteous king is ruling, if a man offering a sacrifice finds that his 
sacrifice is interrupted for want of a single item, he may, especially if he is a Brahmin, 
take that article from the house of a Vaisya who has a large herd of animals but has 
failed to perform rites or to drink Soma, in order to complete the sacrifice.* “He may 
freely take two or three items from the house of a Sidra; for a Sidra has nothin g todo 
with sacrifices. “He may also take it without a second thought even from the house of a 
man who has a hundred cows but has not established his sacred fires or from that of a 
man who has a thousand cows but has not offered a sacrifice. "He may also take it from 
aman who is always a taker* and never a giver, if he refuses to give it; thus his fame 
will spread and his merits will increase. 

Likewise, when a man has not eaten during six mealtimes (6.19 n.), at the 
seventh mealtime he may take from someone who performs no rites, keeping to the 
rule of leaving no provisions for the next day,* !and taking it from his threshing floor, 
field, or house, or from any place where he can find something. If the man questions 
him, however, he should confess it to him. 


215 


216 Chapter 11 


8A Ksatriya must never take anything belonging to a Brahmin; if he has no 
sustenance, however, he may take what belongs to a Dasyu or a man who neglects his 
rites. When a man takes money from evil persons and gives them to the virtuous, he 
makes himself a raft and carries them both* to the other side. 2°The wise call the wealth 
of those devoted to sacrifice the property of gods; the possessions of those who do not 
offer sacrifice, on the contrary, is called the property of demons. 

14 righteous king should never punish such a man,* for it is because of the 
Ksatriya’s foolishness that the Brahmin is languishing with hunger. “After finding 
out who his dependents are and inquiring into his learning and virtue, the king should 
provide him with provisions for a righteous livelihood from his own house. “After 
providing him with a livelihood, he should protect him in every way, for by protecting 
him the king receives from him one-sixth of his merits.* 

24A man who knows the Law should never beg money from a Sidra to perform a 
sacrifice; for when the patron of a sacrifice begs in this way, after death he is reborn a 
Candala. *If a Brahmin begs money for a sacrifice and does not devote all of it for that 
purpose, he will become a Bhasa-vulture or a crow for one hundred years. 

26If a man seizes what belongs to a god or a Brahmin out of greed, in the next 
world that evil man will live on the leftovers of vultures. 


Excursus: Miscellaneous Topics 


Times of Adversity 27Ifhe is unable to perform the prescribed animal and Soma 
sacrifices, he should offer as an expiation the Vaisvanara oblation at the turn of the 
year.* 

?8When during a normal time a twice-born follows the Law according to the 
mode for a time of adversity, he will not receive its reward after death—that is 
indisputable.* All the gods, the Saddhyas, and the great Brahmin sages, afraid of 
death during times of adversity, created a substitute for the rule. When someone, 
though able to follow the principal mode, yet lives according to the secondary mode, 
that fool will obtain no reward for it after death. 


Power of Brahmins *A Brahmin who knows the Law shall not inform the king 
about any matter; solely with his own power should he chastise men who do him 
harm. **Between the king’s power and his own, his own power is far more potent. A 
twice-born, therefore, should punish enemies solely with his own power, “and make 
use of vedic texts of Atharva-Angirasa—that is indisputable. Clearly, speech is the 
Brahmin’s weapon; with that a twice-born should strike down his enemies.+ 

344A Ksatriya overcomes his adversities by the power of his arms; a Vaisya and a 
Siidra, by means of wealth; and a Brahmin, through soft recitation and sacrifices. °A 
Brahmin is called the creator, the chastiser, the teacher, and the benefactor; one should 
never say anything unpleasant to him or use harsh words against him. 


Sacrifices *A girl, a young woman, an uneducated man, or a fool should never act 
as the officiant at the daily fire sacrifice, nor should a man who is in great anguish or 
who has not undergone initiatory consecration; *’for, when these perform the offering, 
both they and the person to whom the fire sacrifice belongs fall into hell. Therefore, 


Chapter 11 217 


only a man who has mastered the Veda and is an expert in the vedic rituals should be an 
officiant. 

38When a Brahmin fails to give a horse dedicated to Prajapati as a sacrificial fee at 
the rite for establishing the sacred fires in spite of having the resources to do so, he is 
reduced to the level of one who has not established his sacred fires. °°A man who has 
mastered his organs and has a spirit of generosity (3.202 n.) may perform other 
Meritorious acts; but under no circumstances should he offer sacrifices here with 
inadequate sacrificial fees. *?Organs, honor, heaven, life span, fame, offspring and 
livestock—a sacrifice with inadequate sacrificial fees destroys all these; a man with 
inadequate resources, therefore, should not offer a sacrifice (11.7-8).+ 

“If a Brahmin who has established his sacred fires abandons his fires 
deliberately, he should perform the lunar penance (11.217) for one month; for it is 
equal to killing a hero.* 

“Those who perform their daily fire sacrifice by obtaining money from a Sidra 
are considered reprehensible among vedic savants, for they are the officiating priests of 
Siidras. “Stepping with his foot on the heads of these ignorant men who serve the fires 
of Siidras, the giver crosses over difficulties. 


Justification of Penance 


“4When a man fails to carry out prescribed acts, performs disapproved acts, and is 
attached to the sensory objects, he is subject to a penance. 

“The wise acknowledge a penance for a sin committed unintentionally; some, 
on the basis of vedic evidence, admit it even for a deliberately committed sin. “A sin 
committed unintentionally is cleansed by vedic recitation, whereas a sin committed 
deliberately through folly is cleansed with various types of penance. “7When a twice- 
born, either by fate or by what he did in a previous life, finds himself in a condition 
requiring the performance of a penance, he should not associate with good people 
before performing that penance.*+ 

48Some evil men become disfigured because of the bad deeds committed in this 
world, and some because of deeds done in a previous life. “A man who steals gold gets 
rotten nails; a man who drinks liquor, black teeth; the murderer of a Brahmin, 
consumption; a man who has sex with his elder’s wife, skin disease; a slanderer, a 
smelly nose; an informant, a smelly mouth; a man who steals grain, the loss of a limb; 
aman who adulterates grain, an excess limb; °!a man who steals food, dyspepsia; a 
man who steals speech,* smelly breath; a man who steals clothes, leukoderma; and a 
man who steals horses, lame legs.+ [verse 52 omitted in critical edition] In this way, 
as a result of the remnants of their past deeds,* are born individuals despised by good 
people: the mentally retarded, the mute, the blind, and the deaf, as well as those who 
are deformed. 

“Therefore, one should always do penances to purify oneself; for individuals 
whose sins have not been expiated are born with detestable characteristics. 


Categories of Sin 


Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste Killing a Brahmin, drinking liquor, 


218 Chapter 11 


stealing,* and having sex with an elder’s wife—they call these “grievous sins causing 
loss of caste”; and so is establishing any links with such individuals (11.181-2). 

56A lie concerning one’s superiority,* a slander that reaches the king’s ear, and 
false accusations against an elder are equal to killing a Brahmin. “Abandoning the 
Veda, reviling the Veda, giving false testimony, killing a friend,* eating unfit food or 
forbidden food*—these six are equal to drinking liquor. Stealing deposits, men, 
horses, silver, land, diamonds, or gems, tradition tells us, is equal to stealing gold. 
‘Sexual intercourse with uterine sisters, unmarried girls, lowest-born women, and the 
wives of a friend or son, they say, is equal to sex with an elder’s wife. 


Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste “Killing a cow; officiating at the 
sacrifice of an individual at whose sacrifice one is forbidden to officiate; adultery; 
selling oneself; forsaking one’s teacher, mother, father, vedic recitation, sacred fire, or 
son; “an elder brother permitting a younger brother to marry before him; a younger 
brother marrying before his older brother (3.171); giving a girl in marriage to or 
officiating at a sacrifice of either of these; “deflowering a virgin; usury; breaking the 
vow;* selling a reservoir, park, wife, or son; “remaining as a Vratya (2.39); 
abandoning a relative; giving instruction as a paid teacher; receiving instruction from a 
paid teacher; selling proscribed commodities; “supervising any kind of mine; 
constructing large equipment; injuring plants; living off one’s wife; sorcery; root- 
witchcraft;* “cutting down live trees for firewood; undertaking activities solely for 
one’s own sake; eating reprehensible food; “remaining without establishing the sacred 
fires; acting like a woman;* non-payment of debts; studying fallacious treatises; living 
a corrupt life; engaging in vices;* stealing grain, base metals, and livestock; sex with 
women who drink; killing a woman, a Sidra, a Vaisya, or a Ksatriya; and being an 
infidel—these are secondary sins causing loss of caste. 


Further Categories of Sin “Making a Brahmin cry, smelling liquor or 
substances that should not be smelt, cheating, and sexual intercourse with a man-—— 
tradition calls these sins that cause exclusion from caste.* 

“Killing donkeys, horses, camels, deer, elephants, goats, sheep, fish, snakes, or 
buffaloes—these should be known as sins that cause a man to be of a mixed caste 
(10.8-45). : 

Accepting wealth from despicable men, trade, serving a Stdra, and telling 
lies—these should be recognized as sins that make a man unworthy of receiving gifts. 

“Killing worms, insects, or birds; eating anything that has come into contact 
with liquor; stealing fruits, firewood, or flowers; and lack of steadfastness—these 
make a man impure. 


“Listen now attentively to the specific observances by which all 
these sins individually enumerated above may be removed. 
Penances for Grievous Sins Causing Loss of Caste 


Killing a Brahmin 7A man who has killed a Brahmin should construct a hut and 
live in the forest for twelve years, eating almsfood and making the head of a corpse his 
banner, in order to purify himself. 


Chapter 11 219 


“Or, if he so wishes, he may make himself a target for armed men who are 
cognizant of his state. Or, he may throw himself headlong three times into a blazing 
fire. Or, he may offer a horse sacrifice, a Svarjit sacrifice, a Gosava sacrifice, an Abhijt 
sacrifice, a ViSvajit sacrifice, a Trivrt sacrifice, or an Agnistut sacrifice. “Or, to rid 
himself of the Brahmin’s murder, he may walk one hundred leagues* reciting one of 
the Vedas, eating little, and keeping his organs under control. “Or, he may present to a 
Brahmin learned in the Vedas all his possessions, or wealth sufficient to maintain a 
person, or else a house with furniture. Or, he may walk upstream along the 
Sarasvati,* subsisting on sacrificial food. Or, he may recite three times softly one 
Collection of the Veda, while limiting his food. “Or, after getting his hair shaved, he 
may live in the outskirts of the village, in a cowshed, in a hermitage, or at the foot of a 
tree, taking pleasure in doing what is beneficial to cows and Brahmins. ®°Or, he may 
duly give up his life for the sake of a Brahmin or a cow; one who protects a cow or 
Brahmin is freed from the murder of a Brahmin. “Or, he becomes freed from it by 
fighting at least three times in defense of a Brahmin, by recovering all the property of a 
Brahmin, or by losing his life for the sake of a Brahmin. 

®2Thus always remaining steadfast in his vow, collected in mind, and chaste, he 
rids himself of the Brahmin’s murder at the end of the twelfth year.* 

8Or, he is freed from his sin by proclaiming it in a gathering of the gods of earth 
and the gods of men and participating at the bath concluding a horse sacrifice.* *The 
Brahmin is said to be the root of the Law, and the Ksatriya its crest; therefore, by 
broadcasting a sin at a gathering of theirs, he becomes purified. °By his very origin, a 
Brahmin is a deity even for the gods and the authoritative source of knowledge for the 
world; the Veda clearly is the reason for this. When even three of them who know the 
Veda declare an expiation for sins, it is sufficient for their purification;* for the speech 
of the learned is a means of purification. 

8’By resorting to any one of the above procedures with a collected mind, a 
Brahmin will rid himself of the sin of killing a Brahmin by means of his self-control. 

88One must perform the same observance for killing a fetus whose sex cannot be 
identified, a Ksatriya or a Vaisya who is engaged in a sacrifice, or a woman soon after 
her menstrual period;* *for bearing false testimony; for assailing an elder; for stealing 
a deposit; and for killing a woman or a friend. 

This purification is enjoined for killing a Brahmin unintentionally; for killing 
a Brahmin deliberately, there is no prescribed expiation. 


Drinking Liquor °!Ifa twice-born man in his folly drinks liquor, he should drink 
boiling-hot liquor; when his body is scalded by it, he will be released from that sin. 
Or, he may drink boiling-hot cow’s urine, water, milk, ghee, or watery cow dung 
until he dies. “Or, he may eat only broken grain or oil-cake once a day during the night 
for a full year, wearing a garment of hair, keeping his hair matted, and carrying a 
banner,* in order to remove the guilt of drinking liquor. 

Liquor is clearly the filth* of various grains; sin is also called filth. Therefore, 
Brahmins, Ksatriyas, and Vaisyas must not drink liquor. *It should be understood 
that there are three kinds of liquor: one made from molasses, another from ground 
grain, and a third from honey. Just as drinking one of them is forbidden to Brahmins, 
so are all.* *Intoxicants, meat, liquor, and spirits* are the food of demons and fiends; 


220 Chapter 11 


they must not be consumed by a Brahmin, who eats the oblations to the gods. ?”’When 
a Brahmin is intoxicated, he may tumble into filth, blabber vedic texts,* or do other 
improper things. “If the brahman* resident in a man’s body is drenched with liquor 
even once, his Brahmin nature departs from him and he sinks to the level of a Sidra. 


*| have described above the various expiations for drinking liquor. 
Next, I will explain the expiation for stealing gold. 


Stealing Gold 100A Brahmin who has stolen gold should go up to the king, 
proclaim his deed, and say: “Lord, punish me!” !°!Taking the pestle, the king himself 
should strike him once. A thief is purified by being put to death or, if he is a Brahmin, 
solely by ascetic toil.* 

121f a twice-born wants to rid himself of the sin of stealing gold by means of 
ascetic toil, however, he should carry out the observance prescribed for killing a 
Brahmin, living in the wilderness and dressed in tree bark (6.6 n.). 


1034 twice-born should eliminate the sin resulting from stealing by 
means of the above observances. The sin of having sexual 
intercourse with an elder’s wife, on the other hand, he should 
remove by means of the following observances. 


Sex with an Elder’s Wife !°4A man who had sex with an elder’s wife should 
proclaim his crime and lie down on a heated iron bed, or embrace a red-hot metal 
cylinder;* he is purified by death. Or, he may cut off his penis and testicles by 
himself, hold them in his cupped hands, and walk straight towards the south-west 
until he falls down dead. Or, he may perform the Prajapatya penance (11.212) for one 
year with a collected mind, carrying a bed-post, dressed in tree bark (6.6 n.), wearing a 
long beard, and living in a desolate forest. Or, he may perform the lunar penance 
(11.217) for three months, keeping his organs under control and subsisting on 
sacrificial food or barley gruel, so as to remove the sin of sexual intercourse with an 
elder’s wife. 


108Men guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste should 
eliminate their sin by means of the above observances, but men 
guilty of a secondary sin causing loss of caste should do so by 
means of the various observances given below. 


Penances for Secondary Sins Causing Loss of Caste 


Killing a Cow 109A man guilty of a secondary sin causing loss of caste by killing 
a cow should drink barley gruel* for a month and live in a cow pen with his hair shaved 
and wrapped in the skin of that cow. !°During two months,* he should eat a small 
amount of food without artificial salt at every fourth mealtime (6.19 n.), bathing with 
cow’s urine, and keeping his organs under control. ‘During the day, he should follow 
those cows,* remain standing, and inhale their dust; at night, after attending to them 
and paying them homage, he should remain seated on his haunches. '!*When they 


Chapter 11 221 


stand, he should stand behind them; when they walk, he should also walk behind 
them; when they sit down, he should likewise sit down, self-controlled and free from 
rancor.* When a cow is sick, is threatened by dangers from thieves, tigers, and the 
like, has fallen down, or has got stuck in mud, he should free her with all his strength.* 
1l4When it is hot, raining, or cold, or when the wind is blowing strong, he must never 
find shelter for himself without first providing it for the cow to the best of his ability. 
15When a cow is eating from his own or another’s house, field, or threshing floor, or 
when the calf is drinking milk, he must not inform anybody of it. 

'6When a man who has killed a cow follows cows in this manner, in three 
months he rids himself of the sin resulting from killing a cow. "After he has duly 
completed this observance, furthermore, he should give ten cows along with a bull or, 
if that is impossible, all his possessions to those who know the Veda. 


Other Secondary Sins '!8The very same observance should be performed by 
twice-born men who commit any secondary sin causing loss of caste, with the 
exception of a vedic student who has broken his vow of chastity, in order to purify 
themselves; alternatively, they may perform the lunar penance (11.217). 


Student Breaking the Vow of Chastity '°A vedic student who has broken 
his vow of chastity should offer at night a one-eyed donkey to Nirrti at a crossroads, 
employing the ritual procedure of a cooked oblation.* 

20 After offering the oblations in the fire according to rule, he should finally offer 
oblations of ghee to Wind, Indra, Teacher, and Fire, reciting the verse: “May the 
Maruts. . . .” ?!Vedic savants who know the Law declare that when a twice-born votary 
ejaculates his semen intentionally he breaks his vow. When a votary breaks his vow 
of chastity, the vedic energy within him enters these four: Wind, Indra, Teacher, and 
Fire.* 2When he has committed this sin, he should wear the skin of a donkey and beg 
food from seven houses, proclaiming his deed. !%4Subsisting on the almsfood obtained 
from them once a day and bathing three times a day, he is purified in a year. 


Penances for the Remaining Categories of Sins 


™25Someone who has committed any of the acts that cause exclusion from caste (11.68) 
should perform a Santapana penance (11.213) if he did it deliberately, and a Prajapatya 
penance (11.212) if he did it inadvertently. 

"eFor committing acts that cause a person to be of a mixed caste or that make a 
person unworthy of receiving gifts (11.69—70), the purification is to perform the lunar 
penance (11.217) for one month, and for those that make a person impure (11.71), the 
purification is to drink hot barley gruel for three days. 


Excursus: Penances for Injury to Living Beings 


Homicide !”One-fourth the penance for the murder of a Brahmin is prescribed by 
tradition for the murder of a Ksatriya; one-eighth for the murder of a virtuous* Vaisya; 
and one-sixteenth for the murder of a Sidra. 

L8if a Brahmin kills a Ksatriya unintentionally, however, he should give one 
thousand cows and a bull to purify himself.* Or, he may perform during three years 


222 Chapter 11 


the observance prescribed for killing a Brahmin, keeping himself controlled, wearing 
matted hair, living far away from the village, and making his home at the foot of a tree. 
1904 Brahmin who kills a virtuous Vaisya should perform the same observance for one 
year, or give one hundred cows along with a bull. !One who kills a Sidra should 
perform the same vow completely for six months, or give ten white cows along with a 
bull to a Brahmin. 


Killing Animals '°For killing a cat, a mongoose, a blue jay, a frog, a dog, a 
monitor lizard, an owl, or a crow, aman should perform the observance for killing a 
Sidra. Alternatively, he may drink milk for three days, or walk a distance of one 
league (11.76 n.), or bathe in a river, or recite softly the hymn addressed to the waters 
(8.106 n.). 

Ror killing a snake, a Brahmin should give an iron spade; for killing a 
castrate,* a load of straw and a Masa of lead; for killing a boar, a pot of ghee; for 
killing a partridge, a Drona of sesame seeds; for killing a parrot, a 2-year-old calf; and 
for killing a Kraufica crane, a 3-year-old calf. “For killing a ruddy goose, a Balaka 
flamingo, a Baka heron, a peacock, a monkey, a Syena hawk, or a Bhasa vulture, he 
should give a cow to a Brahmin. !’For killing a horse, he should give a garment; for 
killing an elephant, five black bulls; for killing a goat or a sheep, a draft ox; and for 
killing a donkey, a 1-year-old calf. 8For killing wild animals, he should give a milk 
cow if they are carnivorous, and a heifer if they are non-carnivorous; for killing a camel, 
one Krsnala. For killing a licentious woman belong to any of the four classes, he 
should give a leather bag, a bow, a goat, and a sheep, respectively.+ If a twice-born is 
unable to expiate the killing of snakes and the rest by giving gifts, to remove the sin he 
may perform one arduous penance (11.212) for each. 

M41For killing one thousand creatures with bones or a cart-full of boneless 
creatures, he should perform the observance for killing a Sidra. “For killing creatures 
with bones, he should give a little something to a Brahmin; when he kills boneless 
creatures, he is purified by controlling his breath. 


Injuring Vegetation ‘For cutting down fruit trees a person should recite softly 
one hundred Rc verses; so also for cutting down shrubs, vines, creepers, or flowering 
plants. 

M44For killing any kind of creature growing in food stuffs, condiments, fruits, or 
flowers, the purification is to consume ghee. 

145For needlessly tearing out cultivated plants or ones that grow spontaneously 
in the forest, he should follow a cow for one day, subsisting on milk (11.109—15). 


\46Through these observances a man should remove all sins he has 
committed deliberately or inadvertently by causing injury. Listen 
now to the observances relating to eating food that ought not to be 
eaten. 


Excursus: Penances for Eating Forbidden Food 


“When someone drinks Varuni liquor inadvertently, he is purified only by 
undergoing vedic initiation. If he drinks it intentionally, no penance is prescribed; its 


Chapter 11 223 


penance ends in death—that is the settled rule.* “°If someone drinks water that has 
stood in a vessel for keeping liquor or an intoxicant (11.96 n.), he should drink milk 
boiled with Sankhapuspi plant for five days. “If he touches, gives, or receives 
according to rule an intoxicant, or drinks water left over by a Sidra, he should drink 
water boiled with KuSa grass for three days. If a Brahmin who has drunk Soma, 
however, smells the odor coming from a man who has drunk liquor, he is purified by 
controlling his breath three times while submerged in water and then consuming ghee. 
51Persons of all three twice-born classes ought to undergo re-initiation if they 
inadvertently consume urine or excrement, or anything that has come into contact with 
liquor. 

S2Shaving, girdle, staff, begging, and the vows are dispensed with in the rite of 
re-initiation of twice-born men. 

'31f someone eats the food of individuals whose food is not to be eaten or the 
leftovers of a woman or a Sidra, or consumes forbidden meat,* he should drink barley 
gruel (11.109 n.) for seven days. *4When a twice-born drinks anything turned sour or 
pungent decoctions, even though they may be pure,* he remains ritually impure until 
it has been excreted.* 

S]f a twice-born consumes the urine or excrement of a village pig, a donkey, a 
camel, a jackal, a monkey, or a crow, he should perform the lunar penance (11.217). 
156He should perform the same observance after eating dried meat, the Bhauma plant, 
mushrooms (6.14 n.), the meat of an unknown animal (5.17), or meat from a slaughter 
house. 

'’The hot-arduous penance (11.215) is the purification for eating the meat of 
cammivorous animals, pigs, camels, cocks, humans, crows, or donkeys. 

158]f a twice-born student who has not performed the rite of return eats food given 
at a monthly ancestral rite, he should fast for three days and remain in water for one 
day. !°If someone observing the student vow eats honey or meat in any way, he should 
perform the standard arduous penance (11.212) and complete the remainder of his vow. 

10}f someone eats anything that has become impure from the mouth of a cat, 
crow, rat, dog, or mongoose, or that has been contaminated by hair or insects, he 
should drink a decoction of the Brahmasuvarcala plant. 

1614 person who desires to remain pure should never eat unfit food (5.5 n.); he 
should vomit any such thing that he has eaten inadvertently or purify himself quickly 
with the various methods of purification. 


16.1 have described above the various rules pertaining to the 
observances for eating food that ought not to be eaten. Listen now to 
the rules pertaining to the observances that remove the sin of theft. 


Excursus: Penances for Theft 


168A Brahmin who deliberately steals grain, cooked food, or money from the house of 
someone belonging to his own caste is purified by performing the arduous penance 
(11.212) for one year. For stealing men, women, a field, a house, or water from a 
well or a tank, tradition prescribes the lunar penance (11.217) as purification. 

16Tf he steals articles of little value from the house of someone else, to purify 
himself he should return the stolen goods and perform the Santapana penance (11.213). 


224 Chapter 11 


166For stealing food or delicacies, as also a vehicle, a bed, a seat, flowers, roots, or 
fruits, the purification consists of consuming the five products of the cow.* 1°7For 
stealing grass, wood, trees, dried food, molasses, clothes, skins, or meat, he should 
abstain from food for three days. ‘For stealing gems, pearls, coral, copper, silver, 
iron, brass, or stone, he should subsist on broken grains for twelve days. '°For 
stealing cotton, silk, wool, a single-hoofed or double-hoofed animal, a bird, perfume, 
medicinal herbs, or a rope, he should subsist on milk for three days. 


Through these observances, a twice-born should remove a sin 
incurred by stealing. The sin incurred by having sex with a woman 
with whom sex is forbidden, on the other hand, he should remove 
by means of the following observances. 


Excursus: Penances for Sexual Offenses 


'7\Jf a man has sexual intercourse with his uterine sisters, the wives of a friend or son, 
unmarried girls, or lowest-born women, he should perform the observance prescribed 
for sex with an elder’s wife (11.55). 

171 he has sex with his sister—the daughter of his father’s or mother’s sister-—or 
the daughter of his mother’s uterine brother, he should perform the lunar penance 
(11.217).* 1A wise man must not take these three to be his wife. Marriage with them 
is forbidden because they are blood relatives, and anyone marrying them proceeds 
downward (6.35 n.). 

“lf someone ejaculates his semen in non-human females, in a man, in a 
menstruating woman, in any place other than the vagina, or on water,* he should 
perform the Santapana penance (11.213). ‘If a twice-born has sexual intercourse with 
aman or a woman in an ox-cart, on water (11.174 n.), or during the day, he should 
bathe with his clothes on. 

VOlf a Brahmin has sex with Candala or lowest-born women, or eats food or 
accepts presents given by them, he falls from his caste if he does it inadvertently and 
becomes equal to them if he does it intentionally. 

The husband should keep an adulterous wife confined in a single room and 
make her perform the observance* prescribed for a man who has sex with another man’s 
wife. If she commits adultery again when solicited by a man of the same caste, 
tradition prescribes an arduous penance (11.212) and a lunar penance (11.217) as the 
means of her purification.+ 

The sin that a twice-born commits in a single night by having sex with a Stidra 
woman he removes in three years by living on almsfood and performing soft 
recitations every day. 


180 have described above the expiation for all four kinds of sinners.* 
Listen now to the following expiations for those who associate with 
outcastes. 


Association with Outcastes 
181When someone associates with an outcaste by officiating at sacrifices, by teaching, 


and by contracting marriages—but not by occupying the same vehicle or seat or by 
eating together—in one year he himself becomes an outcaste.* 


Chapter 11 225 


18When a man forges links (2.40 n.) with any one of these outcastes, he should 
perform the same observance prescribed for that man in order to purify himself of his 
linkage with him. 


Excommunication In the evening of an inauspicious day and in the presence of 
his blood relations, officiating priests, and teachers, the rite of offering water to the 
outcaste should be performed by the relatives belonging to his ancestry (5.60 n.) 
together with his relatives by marriage. A slave woman* should overturn a pot filled 
with water with her foot, as for a dead man;* and they, along with his relatives by 
marriage, shall observe a period of impurity for a day and a night. They should 
suspend conversing or sitting together with him, giving him his inheritance, and even 
ordinary interaction with him. !°The rights of primogeniture are also suspended in his 
case, along with the preemptive property owed to the eldest; the preemptive share of 
the eldest should go to a younger brother of his with the highest qualities. 


Re-admission '°’After he has performed the penance, however, they should bathe 
in a sacred body of water and, along with him, throw into it a brand-new pot filled with 
water. !8°After he has thrown that pot in the water and entered his own house, he should 
participate in all the activities of the relatives just as he had done before. 

18These same rules should be adhered to also in the case of women who become 
outcastes; but they should be provided with clothes, food, and drink, and permitted to 
live near the house. 


19°No one should transact any business with uncleansed sinners; and under no 
circumstances should anyone abhor those who have been cleansed.* 


Excursus: Miscellanea on Sin and Penance 


1One must not live together with people who have killed children, women, or those 
who come to them for protection, or with people who are ingrates, even if they have 
been purified in accordance with the Law. 

1™When any twice-born men have not been taught the Savitri verse according to 
rule (2.38 n.), one should make them undergo three arduous penances and have them 
initiated according to rule. One should prescribe the same when twice-born men who 
have followed wrong occupations or neglected the Veda seek to perform a penance. 

When Brahmins have acquired wealth through a reprehensible activity, they 
are purified by giving away that wealth and by engaging in soft recitation and ascetic 
toil. *°A man is freed from the sin of accepting gifts from a bad individual by softly 
reciting the Savitri verse three thousand times with a collected mind and by subsisting 
on milk for a month while remaining in a cow pen. When that man, emaciated by the 
fast, returns from the cow pen and remains bowing down, they should ask him: 
“Friend, do you seek equality?” !’Saying “Truly” to the Brahmins, he should scatter 
some grass for the cows. At that place made holy by the cows,* they should perform 
his re-admission. 

M8If someone officiates at a sacrifice of Vratyas (2.39), performs the funeral of 
outsiders, or carries out a rite of sorcery or an Ahina sacrifice, he is purified by doing an 
arduous penance (11.212) three times. 


226 Chapter 11 


1 When a twice-born has forsaken someone who has come to him for protection 
or has misused* the Veda, he removes that sin by subsisting on barley for one year. 

20°When a man has been bitten by a dog, a jackal, a donkey, a carnivorous animal 
of the village, a man, a horse, a camel, or a pig, he is purified by controlling his breath. 

Rating at every sixth mealtime (6.19 n.) for one month, reciting a Vedic 
Collection, offering daily a Sakala oblation—these are the means of purification for 
individuals alongside whom it is unfit to eat. 

202When a Brahmin deliberately gets onto a camel-cart or a donkey-cart, he is 
purified by bathing naked and controlling his breath. “If someone in distress 
discharges his bodily waste either without water or in water,* he is purified by bathing 
with his clothes on outside the village and then touching a cow. 

2For neglecting the daily rites prescribed by the Veda and for breaking the vow 
of a bath-graduate, the penance is fasting. 2°When someone says “Hum’”* to a Brahmin 
or addresses a superior as “you,”’* he should bathe, fast the rest of the day, and placate 
that person by paying him obeisance. If he strikes such a man with even a blade of 
grass, throttles his neck with a cloth, or defeats him in an argument, he should placate 
him by prostrating himself on the ground. ?°’By wanting to hurt a Brahmin, a man 
goes to hell—if he threatens him, for one hundred years; if he strikes him, for one 
thousand years. 78As many particles of dust the blood of a twice-born lumps together, 
for so many thousands of years will the man who spilled it live in hell (4.168). 2°For 
threatening, he should perform an arduous penance (11.212); for striking, a very 
arduous penance (11.214); and for spilling a Brahmin’s blood, both an arduous and a 
very arduous penance. 

210For the removal of sins for which no expiation has been specified, one should 
fix a penance after taking into consideration both the type of sin and the strength of the 
sinner. 


2117 will describe to you the means whereby a human being may 
remove sins, means employed by gods, seers, and ancestors. 


Types of Generic Penance 7A twice-born practicing the Prajdpatya penance 
should eat in the morning for three days and in the evening for three days, eat what is 
received unasked for three days, and abstain from food during the final three days. 

213Subsisting on cows’s urine, cow dung, milk, curd, ghee, and water boiled 
with KuSa grass, and fasting during one day*—tradition calls this the Sdantapana 
penance. 

214A twice-born practicing the Atikrcchra (very arduous) penance should eat as 
before (11.212) one mouthful a day during the three three-day periods and fast during 
the final three days. 

2154 Brahmin practicing the Taptakrcchra (hot-arduous) penance should drink 
hot water, hot milk, hot ghee, and hot air during each three-day period and bathe once 
with a collected mind. 

216When a man, controlled and vigilant, abstains from food for twelve days, it is 
called the Paraka penance, which removes all sins. 

217He should decrease his food by one rice-ball a day during the dark fortnight 
and increase it likewise during the bright fortnight, bathing three times a day— 


Chapter 11 227 


tradition calls this Candrdyana (the lunar penance). ?!8This same procedure in its 
entirety should be followed when a man, with his mind controlled, performs the lunar 
observance with its middle shaped like a barley corn, beginning it on the first day of 
the bright fortnight.* 

219 man practicing the lunar penance of ascetics should eat each day at noon 
eight rice-balls from the sacrificial oblation, controlling his self. #°A Brahmin should 
eat four rice-balls in the morning with a collected mind and four after sunset—tradition 
calls this the lunar penance of children. 

22\1f a man eats thrice eighty rice-balls from the sacrificial oblation in any manner 
whatsoever during one month with a collected mind, he obtains residence in the same 
world as the Moon. 

22This observance was practiced by the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, and the 
Maruts, along with the great seers, to free themselves from all evil. 


Observances by the Penitent 7°He should offer a burnt oblation every day by 
himself, reciting the Great Calls; and he should practice abstention from injuring, 
truthfulness, abstention from anger, and honesty. *4He should enter water with his 
clothes three times during the day and three times during the night, and under no 
circumstance may he speak with women, Siidras, or outcastes. “He must remain 
standing during the day and seated at night or, if he is unable, lie down on the ground 
(6.22 n.). He must remain chaste and devoted to his vow, paying homage to teachers, 
gods, and Brahmins. He should recite softly the Savitri verse and the purificatory 
texts* every day to the best of his ability, remaining diligent in this way with respect 
to all observances carried out for the purpose of a penance. 


27By these observances should twice-born persons cleanse themselves of public sins; 
they may cleanse themselves of secret sins, however, through ritual formulas and burnt 
offerings. 


Four Means of Expiation ~8A sinner is freed from his sin by declaring it 
publicly, by being contrite, by performing ascetic toil, and by reciting the Veda; 
during a time of adversity, also by giving gifts. 

~9To the extent a man on his own publicly acknowledges an infraction of the 
Law he has committed, to that extent is he freed from that infraction, like a snake from 
his slough. 

23°The more his mind abhors that evil deed, the more his body is freed from that 
infraction; "for when a man is contrite about a sin he has committed, he is freed from 
that sin. “I will never do so again’”*—by this forswearing he is purified. “*Having thus 
contemplated in his mind the consequences his actions have on his afterlife, he should 
always pursue wholesome activities with his thoughts, speech, and body. “If a man 
commits a reprehensible act, whether it is inadvertent or deliberate, he must not 
commit it a second time if he wants to be freed from it. 

4If someone’s mind is not at ease with respect to a particular act he has 
committed, he should practice ascetic toil for it until his mind is assuaged.* All 
happiness here, whether divine or human, has ascetic toil as its root, as its middle, and 
as its end—so have wise men who saw the Veda declared. *°Knowledge is the ascetic 


228 Chapter 11 


toil for a Brahmin; protection, for a Ksatriya; trade, for a VaiSya; and service, for a 
Stidra. 2’Solely by ascetic toil do well-disciplined seers, subsisting on fruits, roots, 
and air, observe the three worlds together with their mobile and immobile creatures. 
238Solely by ascetic toil do medicines, antidotes, spells, and the various divine 
conditions become effective; for ascetic toil is the means by which they become 
effective.* What is difficult to cross, what is difficult to obtain, what is difficult to 
enter, what is difficult to do—all that is accomplished by ascetic toil, for it is difficult 
to prevail over ascetic toil. “Persons guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste, as 
also others who have committed misdeeds, are freed from their sins simply by ascetic 
toil vigorously carried out. ** Insects, snakes, moths, animals, birds, and immobile 
creatures attain heaven by the power of ascetic toil. “?Whatever sin people commit 
through their mind, word, or body—with ascetic toil as their only wealth, they quickly 
burn off all that simply by ascetic toil. “°The denizens of heaven accept the offerings of 
a Brahmin purified solely by ascetic toil, and they fulfill his desires. *“*Prajapati, the 
Lord, created this Treatise solely by ascetic toil; the seers, likewise, obtained the Vedas 
by ascetic toil. “Thus did the gods proclaim this grandeur of ascetic toil, as they 
observed the sacred origin of this whole world from ascetic toil.+ 

Reciting the Veda daily to the best of one’s ability, performing the great 
sacrifices, and forbearance quickly destroy sins, even those rising from grievous acts 
causing loss of caste. “’As a fire by its energy burns up in an instant a piece of kindling 
placed in it, so a man who knows the Veda burns up all sins by the fire of his 
knowledge.+ [verse 248 of the vulgate has been eliminated in the critical edition] 


Further Means of Expiation *°Controlling the breath sixteen times while 
reciting the syllable OM along with the Calls, when it is performed every day, purifies 
even the murderer of a learned Brahmin (4.208 n.) within one month. 

250Rven a man who has drunk liquor is purified by reciting softly Kutsa’s hymn 
“Burning away our evil ...,” the triple verse of Vasistha “To welcome the Dawn... ,” 
the Mahitra hymn, and the Suddhavati verses. 

2514 man who has stolen gold, on the other hand, becomes instantly stainless by 
reciting softly the Asyavamiya hymn and the Sivasamkalpa formulas. 

524 man who has had sex with an elder’s wife is freed from his sin by reciting 
softly the hymns Havispantiya, “No anxiety, no danger... ,” and “This, yes, this is 
my inclination ...,” and the Purusa hymn. 

253 man who wants to remove grave or slight sins should recite softly during 
one year the verse “May we remove . . . ,” and the verse “Whatever offense. . . .” If a 
man has accepted a forbidden gift or has eaten reprehensible food, he is purified in three 
days by reciting softly the Taratsamandi hymn. *°A man who has committed many 
sins is purified by reciting the Somaraudra hymn and the three verses “Aryaman . . .” 
while bathing in a river. >A sinner should recite softly the seven verses “Indra. . .” for 
half a year; but if someone commits a reprehensible act* in the water, he should subsist 
for a month on almsfood. *”A twice-born removes even a grave sin by offering 
oblations of ghee during one year while reciting the Sakalahomiya formulas or by 
reciting softly the verse “Adoration. ...” 

8A man guilty of a grievous sin causing loss of caste should follow cows with a 
collected mind; he comes purified by subsisting on almsfood and reciting the Pava- 


Chapter 11 229 


mani verses for one year (11.109-17). ”°Or, if a man, being ritually pure, recites three 
times a Vedic Collection in the wilderness and cleanses himself by means of three 
Paraka penances, he is freed from all the sins causing loss of caste. If a man, self- 
controlled, fasts for three days while bathing three times a day and reciting the 
Aghamarsana hymn three times, he is freed from all the sins causing loss of caste. 7/As 
the horse sacrifice, the king of sacrifices, removes all sins, so the Aghamarsana hymn 
removes all sins. 

©°F ven if he has slaughtered these three worlds and even if he has eaten food of 
anyone at all, no sin taints a Brahmin who retains the Rg-veda in his memory. “If a 
man recites three times with a collected mind the Collection of the Rg-veda, the Yajur- 
veda, or the SAama-veda, along with the secret texts (2.140 n.), he is freed from all sins. 
264As a clod dissolves quickly when it falls into a large lake; so all sins become 
submerged in the triple Veda. ©The Rg verses, the primary Yajus formulas,* and the 
diverse Saman chants—these should be known as the triple Veda. A man who knows it 
is one who knows the Veda. *The primary tri-syllabic Veda,* upon which the triple 
Veda is based, is another secret triple Veda. A man who knows it is one who knows the 
Veda.+ 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


“You have described this Law for the four classes in its entirety, O Sinless One! Teach 
us accurately the ultimate consummation of the fruits of actions.” 

2Bhrgu, the son of Manu and the very embodiment of the Law, said to those 
great seers, “Listen to the determination with respect to engagement in action.” 


ACTION 


The Fruits of Action 


3Action produces good and bad results and originates from the mind, speech, and the 
body. Action produces the human conditions—the highest, the middling, and the 
lowest. 

4One should understand that the action of the embodied self—action that in this 
world is of three kinds, has three bases, and contains ten characteristics—is set in 
motion by the mind.* 

5Coveting the property of others, reflecting on undesirable things in one’s mind, 
and adhering to false doctrines are the three kinds of mental action. SHarshness, 
falsehood, slander of every sort, and idle chatter are the four kinds of verbal action. 
7Taking what has not been given, unsanctioned killing, and sex with another’s wife are 
given in tradition as the three kinds of bodily action. 

8A man experiences the good and bad results of mental actions in his mind 
alone; those of verbal actions, in his speech; and those of bodily actions, in his body 
alone.+ 9On account of faults resulting from bodily actions, a man becomes an 
immobile creature; on account of faults resulting from verbal actions, he becomes a 
bird or an animal; and on account of faults resulting from mental actions, he becomes a 
man of the lowest caste. 

0The rod of speech, the rod of mind, and the rod of action—a man in whose 
intellect these are kept under control is said to be “triple-rodded.”*+ “When a man has 
laid down these rods with respect to all creatures and brought lust and anger under 
control, he thereby secures success. 


The Inner Selves The one who makes this body act is called Ksetrajfia, “the 
knower of the field”; the one who does the actions, on the other hand, the wise call 
Bhiitatman, “the elemental self.” Another inner self innate to all embodied beings 
bears the name Jiva, “individual self,’ by whom are experienced all the pleasures and 
pains in succeeding births.* 

“These two—Mahat,* “the Great,” and Ksetrajfia, “the knower of the field’”— 
united with the elements, remain pervading the one who abides in creatures both great 


230 


Chapter 12 231 


and small.+ “From his body innumerable forms stream forth, which constantly set in 
motion the creatures both great and small. 


The Process of Rebirth ‘When evil men die, another firm body is produced for 
them from the same five elemental particles,* a body designed to suffer torments. 
After experiencing there the torments of Yama with that body, they merge into those 
very elemental particles, each into its corresponding particle.* 

8A fter paying for the sins resulting from attachment to sensory objects, sins that 
lead to misery, he is freed from taint and approaches the same two beings of great 
power.* *Unwearied, these two jointly examine his merits and sins, linked to which 
one secures happiness or suffering here and in the hereafter. 

0If he acts righteously for the most part and unrighteously to a small degree, 
enveloped in those very elements, he enjoys happiness in heaven. “4If, on the other 
hand, he acts unrighteously for the most part and righteously to a small degree, 
abandoned by those elements, he suffers the torments of Yama. “After enduring the 
torments of Yama, Jiva, “the individual self,’ becomes freed from taint and enters 
those same five elements, each into its corresponding particle. 

Seeing with his own intellect those transitions of this Jiva, “the individual 
self,” resulting from righteous and unrighteous conduct, let him always set his mind 
on righteous conduct. 


The Three Attributes *One should understand Goodness, Vigor, and Darkness 
as the three attributes of the body,* attributes by which Mahat, “the Great,” remains 
pervading all these existences completely. 

>When one of these attributes thoroughly suffuses the body, it makes the 
embodied self dominant in that attribute. °Goodness is knowledge, tradition tells us; 
Darkness is ignorance; and Vigor is passion and hatred. These are their pervasive forms 
that inhere in all beings. 

27 Among these—-when someone perceives within himself a condition full of joy, 
a sort of pure and tranquil light, he should recognize it as Goodness; when it is full of 
pain and causing anguish to himself, he should understand that it is Vigor, irresistible 
and constantly drawing embodied beings; “when it is full of confusion, with an 
unclear object, unfathomable by argument, and indiscernible, he should recognize it as 
Darkness. 


%°} will explain to you completely the fruits arising from all these 
three attributes—the highest, the middling, and the lowest fruits. 


3\Vedic recitation, ascetic toil, knowledge, purification, the control of the organs, 
righteous activity, and contemplation of the self—these mark the attribute of 
Goodness. **Delight in undertaking activities, resolve,* taking up improper tasks, and 
constant indulgence in sensual pleasures—these mark the attribute of Vigor. *Greed, 
sloth, lack of resolve, cruelty, infidelity, deviation from proper conduct, habitual 
begging, and carelessness—these mark the attribute of Darkness. 

“These, in brief and in the proper order, should be known as the marks of all 
these three attributes located in the three times. An act about which a man is ashamed 


232 Chapter 12 


after he has committed it, while he is committing it, and when he is about to commit 
it—a learned man should recognize all that as the mark of the attribute of Darkness. 
36An act by which a man seeks to win wide fame in the world and is not disappointed 
when he fails to win it—one should recognize it as the mark of the attribute of Vigor. 
3?What a man seeks to know with all his heart and is not ashamed to perform, at which 
his inner being rejoices—that is the mark of the attribute of Goodness. 

*8Pleasure is said to be the mark of Darkness; Profit, of Vigor; and Law, of 
Goodness (2.224 n.). Each later one is superior to each preceding. 


Which of these attributes leads to which types of cyclical 
existence—I will briefly state them in due order with respect to this 
entire world. 


“Those who possess Goodness become gods; those who possess Vigor become 
humans; and those who possess Darkness always become animals—that is the 
threefold course. “4One should recognize, however, that this triple course based on 
attributes is itself threefold, namely, lowest, middle, and highest, depending on the 
specific type of action and knowledge within each. 

“Immobile creatures, worms and insects, fish, snakes, creeping animals, farm 
animals, and jackals—these constitute the lowest course related to Darkness. 
Flephants, horses, Sidras, despised foreigners, lions, tigers, and boars—these 
constitute the middle course related to Darkness. “Caranas, Suparnas, hypocritical 
men, fiends, and ghouls—these constitute the highest among the courses related to 
Darkness. 

“Jhallas, Mallas, Natas (10.22), men who live by vile occupations,* and people 
addicted to gambling and drinking—these constitute the first course related to Vigor. 
4°Kings, Ksatriyas, royal chaplains, and professional debaters and soldiers—these 
constitute the middle course related to Vigor. #7Gandharvas, Guhyakas, Yaksas, divine 
attendants, and all the Apsarases—these constitute the highest among the courses 
related to Vigor. 

‘Hermits, ascetics, Brahmins, divine hosts in celestial chariots, asterisms, and 
Daityas—these constitute the first course related to Goodness. *Sacrificers, seers, 
gods, Vedas, celestial lights, years, ancestors, and Sadhyas--these constitute the 
second course related to Goodness. “°Brahma, creators of the universe (1.34~—7), Law, 
Mahat (12.14), and the Unmanifest—the wise call this the highest course related to 
Goodness. 





5l{ have declared above everything coming from the three kinds of 
action—the entire transmigratory cycle affecting all beings, a 
threefold cycle which contains a further threefold division. 


Vile and ignorant men attain evil transmigratory paths by their attachment to the 
senses and by their failure to follow the Law. 


33Which kind of womb this Jiva, the “individual self,” attains in due 
order within this world through which kind of action—listen to all 
of that. 


Chapter 12 233 


Sin and Rebirth Those who commit grievous sins causing loss of caste first go 
to dreadful hells during large spans of years; upon the expiration of that, they reach the 
following transmigratory states. 

A murderer of a Brahmin enters the wombs of a dog, a pig, a donkey, a camel, a 
cow, a goat, a sheep, a deer, a bird, a Candala, and a Pulkasa. 

564 Brahmin who drinks liquor enters the wombs of worms, insects, moths, 
birds that feed on excrement, and vicious animals. 

°7A Brahmin who steals enters thousands of times the wombs of spiders, snakes, 
lizards, aquatic animals, and vicious ghouls. 

584 man who has sex with an elder’s wife enters hundred of times the wombs of 
grasses, shrubs, creepers, carnivorous animals, fanged animals, and creatures that 
commit cruel deeds. 

Vicious individuals become carnivorous animals; those who eat forbidden 
food become worms;* thieves become cannibals; and those who have sex with lowest- 
born women become ghosts. 

A man who forges links with outcastes, has sex with someone else’s wife, or 
steals what belongs to a Brahmin becomes a Brahmin fiend. 

S14 man who steals gems, pearls, corals, or any of the various precious 
substances out of greed is born among goldsmiths.* By stealing grain, one becomes 
arat; by stealing bronze, a ruddy goose; by stealing water, a Plava coot; by stealing 
honey, a gnat; by stealing milk, a crow; by stealing sweets, a dog; by stealing ghee, a 
mongoose; “by stealing meat, a vulture; by stealing fat, a Madgu cormorant; by 
stealing oil, a cockroach; by stealing salt, a cricket; by stealing curd, a Balaka 
flamingo; “by stealing silk, a partridge; by stealing linen, a frog; by stealing cotton 
cloth, a Kraufica crane; by stealing a cow, a monitor lizard; by stealing molasses, a 
flying fox; “by stealing fine perfumes, a muskrat; by stealing leafy vegetables, a 
peacock; by stealing various kinds of cooked food, a porcupine; by stealing uncooked 
food, a hedgehog; “by stealing fire, a Baka heron; by stealing household utensils, a 
mason-wasp; by stealing dyed clothes, a francolin partridge; *’by stealing a deer or an 
elephant, a wolf; by stealing a horse, a tiger; by stealing fruits or flowers,* a monkey; 
by stealing a woman, a bear; by stealing water, a cuckoo; by stealing vehicles, a camel; 
and by stealing farm animals, a goat. “If a man steals anything at all belonging to 
some one else by force or eats an oblation before the offering has been completed, he 
inevitably becomes an animal. 

Women also, when they steal in the above manner, incur guilt; they become the 
wives of the very same creatures. 

*When people belonging to the social classes deviate from their respective 
occupations outside a time of adversity, they go through evil cyclical existences and 
end up as servants of the Dasyu* people. 7‘;When a Brahmin deviates, he will become 
an Ulkamukha ghost eating vomit; a Ksatriya will become a Katapitana ghost eating 
filth and corpses; a Vaisya will become a Maitraksajyotika ghost feeding on pus; and 
a Siidra who deviates from the Law proper to him will become a Cailasaka ghost. 

The more that people addicted to sensual pleasures indulge in sensual 
pleasures, the more their proclivity to them grows. “By repeatedly engaging in these 
sinful actions, these men of little understanding undergo torments here in various 
births—“tossing about in dreadful hells such as Tamisra; the hell Asipatravana and the 


234 Chapter 12 


like; being tied up and cut up; “various kinds of torture; being eaten by crows and 
owls; being burnt by hot sand-gruel; the unbearable tortures of being boiled in vats;* 
“taking birth constantly in evil wombs full of suffering; being assailed by cold and 
heat; terrors of various kinds; “repeated residence in different wombs; being born 
agonizingly; being wrapped up in painful ways; doing servile work for others;* “being 
separated from relatives and loved ones; having to live in the company of evil people; 
earning and losing wealth; winning friends and enemies; old age, against which there 
is no remedy; being assailed by illnesses; various afflictions; and death itself, which is 
impossible to overcome. 

81When a man engages in any act with a certain inner disposition, he reaps its 
fruits with a body corresponding to that disposition. 


82] have declared to you above all the fruits arising from actions. 
Listen now to these rules of action for a Brahmin, rules that secure 
the supreme good. 


Actions Leading to the Supreme Good 


8Vedic recitation, ascetic toil, knowledge, controlling the senses, refraining from 
causing injury, and service of the teacher—these are the highest means of securing the 
supreme good. 

4A mong all these splendid activities, a particular activity has been declared as 
the best means for a man here to secure the supreme good. Among all these, tradition 
holds the knowledge of the self to be the highest; it is, indeed, the foremost of all 
sciences, for by it one attains immortality.* 

86One should understand that acts prescribed by the Veda are always a more 
effective means of securing the highest good both here and in the hereafter than the 
above six activities. *7All these activities without exception are included within the 
scheme of the acts prescribed by the Veda, each in proper order within the rules of a 
corresponding act. 

88Acts prescribed by the Veda are of two kinds: advancing,* which procures the 
enhancement of happiness; and arresting,* which procures the supreme good. *An 
action performed to obtain a desire here or in the hereafter is called an “advancing act,” 
whereas an action performed without desire and prompted by knowledge is said to be 
an “arresting act.” °By engaging in advancing acts, a man attains equality with the 
gods; by engaging in arresting acts, on the other hand, he transcends the five elements. 

°\A man who offers sacrifices within himself attains absolute sovereignty when 
he sees equally himself in all beings and all beings in himself. °**Leaving behind even 
the acts prescribed above, a Brahmin should apply himself vigorously to the 
knowledge of the self, to inner tranquillity, and to vedic recitation. This, indeed, is 
the consummation of one’s existence, especially for a Brahmin; for only by achieving 
this does a twice-born accomplish all he has to do, and never otherwise.* 

*The Veda is the eternal eyesight for ancestors, gods, and humans; for vedic 
teaching is beyond the powers of logic or cognition (1.3 n.)—that is the settled rule. 
*The scriptures that are outside the Veda, as well as every kind of fallacious doctrine— 
all these bear no fruit after death, for tradition takes them to be founded on Darkness. 


Chapter 12 235 


*®All those different from the Veda that spring up and then flounder—they are false and 
bear no fruit, because they belong to recent times.* 

The four social classes, the three worlds, and the four orders of life, the past, the 
present and the future—all these are individually established* by the Veda. Sound, 
touch, visible appearance, taste, and, the fifth, smell, are established by the Veda 
alone;* their origin is according to attribute and action.* *The eternal vedic treatise 
bears all beings; it is the means of success for these creatures; therefore, I consider it 
supreme. 

1004 man who knows the vedic treatise is entitled to become the chief of the 
army, the king, the arbiter of punishment, and the ruler of the whole world. !'As a fire, 
when it has picked up strength, burns up even green trees, so a man who knows the 
Veda burns up his taints resulting from action. A man who knows the true meaning 
of the vedic treatise, in whatever order of life he may live, becomes fit for becoming 
Brahman while he is still in this world. 

105Those who rely on books are better than the ignorant; those who carry them in 
their memory are better than those who simply rely on books; those who understand 
are better than those who simply carry them in their memory; and those who resolutely 
follow them are better than those who only understand. 

104For a Brahmin, ascetic toil and knowledge are the highest means of securing 
the supreme good; by ascetic toil he destroys impurity and by knowledge he attains 
immortality. 

105Perception, inference, and treatises coming from diverse sources—a man who 
seeks accuracy with respect to the Law must have a complete understanding of these 
three. The man who scrutinizes the record of the seers* and the teachings of the Law 
by means of logical reasoning not inconsistent with the vedic treatise-—he alone knows 
the Law, and no one else. 

107This is the totality of activities leading to the supreme good as 
prescribed. The secret doctrine of this Treatise of Manu will now be 
taught. 


Excursus: Secret Teaching 


108Tf it be asked: what happens in cases where specific Laws have not been laid down? 
What “cultured” Brahmins state is the undisputed Law. Those Brahmins who have 
studied the Veda together with its supplements in accordance with the Law and are 
knowledgeable in scripture, perception, and inference,* should be recognized as 
“cultured.” 

"0A }ternatively, when a legal assembly with a minimum of ten members, or 
with a minimum of three members firm in their conduct, determines a point of Law, 
no one must question that Law. ™!A man who knows the three Vedas, a logician, a 
hermeneut, an etymologist, a specialist in Law, and three individuals belonging to the 
first three orders of life—these constitute a legal assembly with a minimum of ten 
members.* 2A man who knows the Reveda, aman who knows the Yajurveda, and a 
man who knows the S@maveda—these should be recognized as constituting a legal 
assembly with a minimum of three members for settling doubts regarding the Law. 


236 Chapter 12 


'3When even a single Brahmin who knows the Veda determines something as the 
Law, it should be recognized as the highest Law, and not something uttered by 
myriads of ignorant men. Even if thousands of men who fail to follow the 
observances, who are unacquainted with the Veda, and who merely use their caste to 
eam a living, come together, they do not constitute a legal assembly. !When fools 
enveloped by Darkness declare something as the Law, though they are ignorant of it— 
that sin, increased a hundredfold, stalk those who declare it. 


N16] have explained to you above all the best means of securing the 
supreme good. A Brahmin who does not deviate from them obtains 
the highest state. 


CONCLUSION 


Excursus: Summation 


"7In this manner, the blessed god, desiring to do what is beneficial for the people, 
revealed to me in its entirety this highest secret of the Law. 

'™8With a collected mind, a man should see in the self everything, both the 
existent and the non-existent; for when he sees everything in the self, he will not turn 
his mind to what is contrary to the Law. "All the deities are simply the self, the whole 
world abides within the self; for the self gives rise to engagement in action on the part 
of these embodied beings. 

201 et him deposit space within his spaces;* the wind within his motion and 
touch; the highest fire within his digestive organ and eyes; water within his fluids; 
earth within his physical form; the moon in his mind; directions in his ears; Visnu 
in his stride; Hari* in his strength; Fire in his speech; Mitra in his organ of evacuation; 
and Prajapati in his organ of procreation. 

12The ruler of all, more minute than even an atom, resplendent like gold, and to 
be grasped by the sleeping mind—he should know him as the supreme Person. 
123Some call him Fire, some Manu the Prajapati, others Indra, still others Breath, and 
yet others the eternal Brahman. ™This one, pervading all beings by means of the five 
forms (12.16), makes them go around like a wheel through birth, growth, and death. 
125When a man thus sees by the self all beings as the self, he becomes equal towards all 
and reaches Brahman, the highest state. 

126When a twice-born recites this Treatise of Manu proclaimed by Bhrgu, he will 
always follow the proper conduct and obtain whatever state he desires. 


1.1 


1.2 


1.3 


1.4 


15 


NOTES TO THE TRANSLATION 


CHAPTER ONE 


Additional verse before verse 1: “To the Self-existent One, to Brahman of boundless 
energy, I pay homage, as I set out to promulgate the diverse and eternal Laws pro- 
claimed by Manu.” This verse is widespread in both the manuscript tradition and 
among commentators and introduces the narrator’s voice explicitly and in the first per- 
son, although he appears implicitly in 1.1, 4, 60; 5.1, 3; and in 12.2, where he introduces 
the three interlocutors within the treatise: the seers, Manu, and Bhrgu. Govinda identi- 
fies the narrator as a pupil of Bhrgu, whereas Narayana, Raghavananda, and 
Ramacandra think that it is Bhrgu himself. 


precisely and in their proper order: the expression yathdvad anupirvasah occupying 
either pada-b or pada-c in introductory verses is common in Manu: see 2.89; 5.573 
7.36; and the similar one in 8.229. 


those born in between: namely, the mixed classes dealt with at 10.8—73. 


Two additional verses: “Likewise the origin and destruction of the entire mass of 
creatures: those born from placentas, eggs, warm moisture, and sprouts; as well as the 
settled decision regarding all practices and rites with respect to time and appropriate- 
ness—please tell all of that completely.” 


ordinance (vidhana): probably refers to the “treatise” (f@stra) on dharma that 
Svayambhii composed and taught to Manu: see 1.58. Commentators give diverse ex- 
planations. Medhatithi, followed by Narayana, Kullika, and Raghavananda, takes 
vidhadna to be the Veda and interprets svayambhuvah as in apposition to vidhanasya, 
giving the verse a strictly Mimamsic interpretation: the Veda is self-existent, therefore 
eternal and without an author (apauruseya). Medhatithi gives “vedic injunction” 
(vidht) as another possible meaning of vidhana. Govinda glosses simply with sdastra. 
Ramacandra takes vidhdna to mean “creation” and to be in apposition to asya sarvasya 
(“of this whole creation”), which is also the interpretation of some scholars cited by 
Medhatithi in his comments on 1.11. The latter interpretation is doubtful because the 
question of the seers concerned not the universe but the dharmas of social groups. 


beyond the powers of cognition: the expression aprameya probably has a technical 
meaning: the contents of this treatise cannot be known through the normal means of 
knowledge (pramana), principally perception and inference. See the very similar ex- 
pression at 1.5 and 12.94. 


in the proper manner: Biihler, following Medhatithi and Kulliika, takes the adverb 
samyak (in pdda-a) as qualifying Manu’s reply (in padda-c): “replied in the proper 
manner.” I follow Govinda and Ramacandra. Within slokas generally the each pada 
tend to be a syntactic unit; unless the context is compelling, therefore, I follow the 
pada syntax. 

There was this world: the initial words a@sid idam clearly indicates the beginning of a 
story (cf. for example, the story of Nala), here the story of creation; my translation 
seeks to capture this style. Biihler translates more literally: “This (universe) existed in 


237 


238 


1.6 


1.7 


1.8 


1.10 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 


the shape of Darkness. . . .” Commentators note the anomaly of Manu’s describing the 
process of creation when the question related to dharma. The answer, I think, lies in 
the structure of Manu’s text. The account of creation ends, as in the Purusasiikta (RV 
10.90), with the creation of the four varnas (1.31). If | am right that 1.32-57 is an inter- 
polation (see Introduction, p. 53), then the Creator’s composition of the treatise 
containing the varnadharmas (1.58) is directly related to his creation of the varnas. For 
a detailed study of the cosmology presented in the first chapter of the MDh, see Hacker 
1959, 1961; Lane 1981. 


pitch-dark: the expression tamobhiitam may also be a reference to the cosmic attribute 
(guna) of darkness (tamas) within Samkhya philosophy (see 12.24—49). There is, how- 
ever, a clear resonance with the Nasadiya hymn (RV 1.129), which also describes the 
initial state of the cosmos as “darkness hidden by darkness”: tama dsit tamasd giilham. 


beginning with the elements: | take the compound mahdbhitddi as qualifying “this 
world” (idam.). Medhatithi, Raghavananda, and Ramacandra read mahdabhiitadivrttau- 


jah as a compound (Bahuvrihi). The translation would then be: “Then the Self-existent 


Lord, whose power exerts itself upon the elements and the rest, appeared —the Un- 
manifest manifesting this world and dispelling the darkness.” If we follow 
Medhatithi’s reading avyaktam for avyaktah, the translation would be: “. . . appeared, 
manifesting this unmanifest world. . . .” 


beyond the range .. . grasped: most mss. and commentators read atindriyagrahyah, 
taking atindriya (“what is beyond the senses”) as manas. The translation would then 
be: “who can be grasped by the mind.” Medhatithi gives a further interpretation based 
on the compound being adverbial (avyayibhdva); the meaning being that he is grasped 
by going beyond the senses, namely, by yogic knowledge. Govinda accepts atindriya 
as mind, but takes the compound to mean atindriyena manas& grahitum asakyah, 
“unable to be grasped by what is beyond senses, i.e., by the mind.” The compound 
then would be atindriyagrahyah. 


shone forth (udbabhau): commentators give various explanations: Medhatithi: 
udbhiitah Sariragrahanam kytavan; alternatively, with the normal meaning of shining, 
svayamprakdaga asit. Govinda: Sariram jagraha. Narayana: avirbhatah. Kulltka: ma- 
hadadikdryariipatayd pradur babhitva. Raghavananda: pradur dsit. Nandana: vyakto 
babhiiva, Ramacandra: utpannah. 


it was the waters: for the creation of the world through the golden egg floating on the 
primordial waters, see $B 11.1.6. 


The waters .. . “Narayana” : the three terms indicate three levels of word formation in 
Sanskrit. “Nara” is the most simple and means “man.” “Nara” is something related to 
or proceeding from Nara. Finally, Narayana is a patronymic derived from Nara, al- 
though here derived from Nara and ayana, meaning way, sojourn, or refuge: “the so- 
journ of Nara.” 


Additional verse: “Narayana is higher than the Unmanifest; and the egg came into 
being from the Unmanifest. These worlds and the earth with its seven continents are 
within the egg. ” In this verse and in verse 11, “unmanifest” (avyakta) probably refers 
to the primordial stuff (prakrti) from which, according to Samkhya cosmology, the 
manifest creation was produced. 


1.10~1 These two verses appear to be either interpolations or a parenthetical remark linking 


1.11 


Brahma with the cosmic waters and with Narayana, an epithet associated with Visnu. 
The beginning of verse 12, “in that egg” (fasmin ande) connects it syntactically with 
verse 9, which introduced the golden egg. 


Brahma: the sandhi in brahmeti makes is difficult to decipher whether the original is 
the masculine brahmd or the neuter brahman. Narayana clearly takes it as the mascu- 
line, others are unclear. Biihler translates the term as “Brahman.” 


1.12 


1.13 


1.16 


1.19 


1,20 


1.21 


1.22 


1.23 


1.25 


1.32 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 239 


full year: most commentators take parivatsaram this to be a simple year, in accordance 
with SB 11.1.6.2. Kulliika, however, takes it to be a year of Brahma (see 1.68—73), and 
Ramacandra, 1000 years. 


place of the waters: the reference is probably to the Milky Way, which is regarded also 
as the bright ocean of heaven in vedic cosmology. See Witzel 1984. 


these six: the reference is unclear. Nandana sees here a reference to the list given in the 
preceding two verses. He lists the six as great (self), ego, mind, subtle elements 
(tanmatra), and the organs of cognition and action. Raghavananda and Ramacandra: 
mind and the five senses. Medhatithi and Kulltika: ego and the five subtle elements. 
Govinda: great (self) and the five subtle elements. The five elements rising from the 
mind are given at 1.75-8, which section, however, probably forms part of a later addi- 
tion (Introduction, p. 53). The exact meaning of “six” remains unclear, but mind and 
the five elements are the best candidates because they are again referred to in verse 18. 


seven males: the term “male” (purusa), as all commentators acknowledge, is used 
metaphorically, possibly echoing the image of the body of Purusa in the RV hymn 
10.90. The meaning of “seven,” once again, is unclear. It probably refers to the six al- 
ready mentioned, with the addition of the Creator, particles of whose body combines 
with those six to create the world (verses 16-7). 


Of these... in the series: the order of the series is: ether, air, fire, water, and earth. The 
distinctive quality of each is sound, touch, visibility, taste, and smell, respectively. 
Ether has only the first; air has the first two (its own and that of ether); fire, the first 
three; water, the first four; and earth, all five. See 1.75-8. 


stations: the meaning of the term samstha is unclear. Biihler translates “conditions,” 
again with an unclear meaning. Narayana takes it to mean the different levels of crea- 
ture, that some are birds, others trees, etc. Most other commentators take it as referring 
to the various occupations of castes, such as making pots in the case of potters. 
Nandana is alone in taking it to mean physical appearances (riipdni), gods having one 
and humans another. Ramacandra takes it to mean marydda, that is, the boundaries 
existing within the three worlds. I detect a contrast between “specific activities” 
(prthak karmdni) of pada-b and “specific stations” (prthak samsthah), and Govinda 
may be right in seeing ritual obligations in the first and ordinary worldly or profes- 
sional activities in the second. 


The Lord ... sacrifice: the syntax of the verse is unclear and commentators offer vari- 
ous interpretations. Medhatithi says that ca of pdda-a should come after devandm, and 
he connects pranindm with karmadtmandm, takes the genitive as having the sense of 
purpose, and interprets the verse to mean: “And for the sake of living beings devoted 
to rites, the Lord created the group of gods, the subtle group of Sadhyas, and the eter- 
nal sacrifice.” The meaning of karmdtmandm is unclear (see its parallel use at 1.53). 
Many commentators take this to mean that these gods are in some essential way con- 
nected with rites. Govinda, however, thinks that it refers to their being a subsidiary 
element (a/iga) of a rite, a very Mim4msic interpretation. Cf. ApDh 1.11.3 about gods 
who were originally humans (#anusyaprakrti). 


squeezed out: the term dudoha evokes the image of milking a cow. Each Veda is 
drawn out from each deity, the Rgveda from fire, the Yajurveda from the wind, and the 
Samaveda from the sun. This cosmogonic story is found in the AB 25.7. 


he brought forth .. . these creatures: these words conclude the creation of the physical 
universe, and they echo nicely the beginning of the story at 1.8. 


I think this second account of creation (1.32—41) is an interpolation. The original dis- 
course on creation ended at verse 31 with the creation of the four varnas. I think in the 
original text verse 31 was immediately followed by the section on transmission of the 
dharmasSastra (1.58-60). See Introduction, p. 53. 


240 


1.39 


1.42 


1.49 


1.51 


1.56 


1.58 


1.61 


1.63 


1.64 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 


pseudo-humans: the term kimnara refers to mythical animals/humans, sometimes de- 
picted as having the body of a man and the head of a horse. The term is also connected 
to the older kimpurusa, possibly relating to barbarians in the jungle or “wild men.” See 
Smith 1994: 255-6. 

Variant reading: “birds of various kind, lions, tigers, boars, predatory animals.” 

here: the particle iha simply means “here,” but in different contexts can mean “here, in 
this world” or “here, in this treatise.” Professor Albrecht Wezler in a personal commu- 
nication expressed his belief that ‘ha often implies a reference to the generally ac- 
cepted view about something, as for example in 1.79 and 2.143, 149, 166. Com- 
mentators usually take the term to mean “here, in this world” or “here, in this book,” 
i.e., the treatise of Manu. 


inner awareness: for a detailed analysis of the concept of antahsamjiia, see Wezler 
1987; Schmithausen 1991. In brief, this term is used by our author to explicitly reject 
another opinion prevalent at the time and expressed in Puranic texts that plants lack 
both external and internal awareness. See also GDh 8.2 where the same expression 
occurs. 


disappeared . . . with time: the reference is to the end of time, when the Creator with- 
draws everything into himself. Most commentators interpret “striking down time with 
time” as destroying the time of creation with the time of dissolution. These two times 
are conceived as the times when the Creator is awake and asleep. 


When .. . bodily frame: the subject of this verse, as also that of the preceding one, is 
unclear. Biihler and commentators take it to be the individual human self. Then, these 
verses would describe the reemergence of individual humans after their dissolution at 
the end of time. Commentators and Biihler interpret the final pada differently from me: 
“then he assumes a (new) corporeal frame.” This is quite unnecessary, and the verb 
vimuiicati generally means to give up rather than to assume (Doniger 1991, xv). I think 
this clause parallels the conclusion of verse 55; in both instances the individual self 
emerges from or discharges the bodily frame (mérti) of the Creator into which he had 
been merged. 


treatise: clearly a reference to the primordial form of Manu’s own treatise, which was 
introduced at 1.3; see the note to it. 


Marici: he is the first of the ten seers that Manu procreated, listed at 1.35, Bhrgu being 
the ninth in the list. They are viewed here as both his sons and his pupils. 


six further Manus: in the Indian cosmological tradition, each Kalpa, which is the larg- 
est time span and is considered a day of Brahma, contains 14 units called Manvantaras 
(“Manu intervals” or epoch), each presided over by a different Manu. There are 14 
such epochs within each Kalpa, or a day of Brahma. This roughly translates into 
12,000 divine years or 4,320,000 human years. Within each Manvantara there are 
other units called Yuga (Age). The seven Manus listed here are the first seven; the 
other seven are given diverse names in the Puranas. See Kane, 1962-75, v: 686-93. 
The temporal extents of a Kalpa, Manvantara, and Yuga are given by Kane, 1962-75, 
i: 68~73, 79-80. 

secured: commentators take dpuh (literally, “obtained”) to mean “protected” or 
“governed.” There must be an implicit reference here to the image of a king “taking 
possession of’ newly conquered territory; hence the extended meanings of protecting 
and governing. 

Muharta: this is the basic division of a 24-hour day. It is 48 minutes long. Kala, the 
Indian minute, therefore, is 1.6 minutes; and a Kastha approximately 0.05 seconds. In 
legal and ritual literature, however, the term Muhiirta is frequently used with a more 
generic meaning and refers to a specific time during the day or the night. Auspicious 
times for significant activities, such as marriage, are also called Muhiirta. 


1.66 


1.70 


1.71 


1.81 


1.82 


1.83 


1.85 


1.92 


1.93 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 241 


For ancestors .. . sleeping: the day and night are here inverted, as are most things re- 
lating to ancestors, the bright constituting the night and the dark the day. The reason is 
ritual, because offerings to ancestors are offered during the dark half of the month 
(waning moon) when the ancestors are awake. See 3.277. 


For each . . . by one: Tret&: 3,000 years, with twilights of 300 years each; Dvapara: 
2,000 years, with twilights of 200 years each; Kali: 1,000 years, with twilights of 100 
years each. The total for all four Ages comes to 12,000 years. 

These four .. . of the gods: Medhatithi and most other commentators interpret this 
verse differently, taking 12,000 not as the sum total of years within four Ages, but as 
the number of such four-Age periods that constitutes one Age of the gods. This inter- 
pretation is rejected, I think rightly, by Kulltika. My interpretation is also supported by 
verse 79, where 12,000, mentioned without qualification, must be assumed to be years. 
The confusion is created by the repetition of erat in both half-verses. I think the repeti- 
tion is purely rhetorical: “This, which has been enumerated . . . ; this 12,000—period is 
called an Age of the gods.” 


four feet: various identifications are offered. Medhatithi: the four principle priests of a 


sacrifice, or the four varnas (so also Nandana), or the four GSramas, or the four kinds 
of speech (RV 1.164.45). He is clearly unable to make up his mind! Medhatithi, as well 
as Narayana, Kullika, and Raghavananda, also take them to be austerity, knowledge, 
sacrifice, and gift giving mentioned in 1.86. “Four” is clearly a whole and sacred num- 
ber, and here may also refer to the four feet of an animal, indicating firm footing and 
stability. 

By acquiring: commentators are sharply divided over the interpretation of the term 
dGgamat. Kulliika is right here in seeing a carryover (anuvtti) of “through unlawful 
means” (adharmena) from the previous verse. Other commentators are off the mark 
when they take gama to mean either the Veda or a Sastra. 


theft, falsehood, and fraud: it is possible that Manu intended to ascribe each of these 
vices to each succeeding Age: theft to Treta, falsehood to Dvapara, and fraud to Kali. 
This is the interpretation offered by Ramacandra, but Kulliika explicitly rejects it. 


by a quarter: note that in Sanskrit both quarter and foot have the same word pdda. So, 
we have a clear parallel between the loss of a foot (Law) and the loss of a quarter of 
the life span (humans). 

progressive Shortening .. . Age: all the commentators, as well as Btihler, interpret the 
compound yugahrasadnupirvasah to mean “in keeping with the shortening of the 
Ages.” According to this reading, the different dharmas for the Ages are caused by the 
decrease in their length. I think this is less likely. I prefer to connect hrdasa (“shorten- 
ing”) with the human life span; indeed, the same term was used with regard to human 
life in verse 83. According to my reading, the meaning is: “in keeping with the pro- 
gressive shortening (of the human life span) in each Age.” Alternatively, the “shorten- 
ing” or decrease may have a broader meaning, including the Ages themselves, the 
human life spans, as well as the feet of dharma (cf. 1.81; this being Raghavananda’s 
interpretation), each of which diminishes with each succeeding Age. On verse 85, see 
Lingat 1973, 184. 

Aman... purest part: the reason for the relative impurity of the lower half is given at 
5.132. Govinda appears to take both parts of this verse as the words of the Self-existent 
One. 

retains the Veda: the term dhdrana means both carrying and retaining in memory. This 
statement is more powerful than it may first appear, because at a time when the Veda 
did not exist externally in manuscript form it could exist in the world only within the 
memory of Brahmins who had learnt it. The Brahmin is thus the receptacle of the Veda 
in the world. 


242 


1.96 


1.97 


1.99 


1,101 


1.103 


1.106 


1.107 


1.108 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter I 


those who subsist by intelligence: the reference here is to higher animals, such as dogs 
and jackals, who know to take shelter when it rains and to go after food and water. 
This contrasts with plants, which are antahsamijfia; see 1.49 n. 


made the resolve: my interpretation of the expression krtabuddhayah is supported by 
Govinda and Kullika. Govinda refers to samkalpa, i.e., the firm and publicly stated 
intention to perform a particular rite. Others take the expression to mean persons who 
have properly understood the Veda. It may also refer to persons whose minds are culti- 
vated. See also 7.30, where akrtabuddhi refer to someone who is irresolute. 


Additional half-verse: “There is no being in this world that is higher than those who 
know Brahman.” 


aruler ... of Laws: the parallel with the birth of a king is obvious. A king is born in a 
particular region to protect the treasures (property) of a particular people. A Brahmin, 
on the other hand, rules over all and the treasure he protects is dharma itself. 


The Brahmin . .. people eat: if the whole world belongs to the Brahmin de jure, then 
whatever he eats cannot but be his own. So, as Medhatithi points out, even when a 
Brahmin eats someone else’s food as a guest, he is actually eating his own food. A 
principle such as this is invoked as a justification for stealing or taking forcibly the 
property of Sudras, or even of other individuals, in order to perform a sacrifice: see 
11.11-15. This ideology appears to be based on the principle that property is intended to 
be sacrificed. Indeed, the transaction between humans giving to the gods in sacrifice 
and the gods sending rain to produce crops is embedded in vedic thought. Given that 
Brahmins are closely connected with the offering of sacrifice, they can claim owner- 
ship of all property—at least at the level of ideological rhetoric. 


Additional verse given after verse 103, or 104, or 105 in different manuscripts: “A 
Brahmin who desires heaven should study this Law Treatise constantly, just as he does 
the Veda.” 


Variant reading: “it procures fame and long life.” 


Two additional verses: “It bestows wealth, fame, long life, merit, heaven, and libera- 
tion; retaining the Law Treatise in the memory is equal to retaining the Vedas.” 
“Simply by retaining the Treatise in the mind, a man will not die childless or endure 
evils in this world, and he will become the equal of good men.” 


In this . . . social classes: here we have a clear distinction made between dharma 
(“Law”) and acdra (“proper conduct” or “normative practice”). It is clear that much of 
the material in the legal texts is drawn from Gcara rather than vedic precept, in spite of 
the oft-repeated statement that the Veda is the root of the Law; and 1.110 strongly sug- 
gests both that dharma proceeds from G@cdra and that this is distinct from what is pre- 
scribed in the Veda: see Lariviere 1997b. For a detail discussion of this topic, see 
Wezler 1999 (especially pp. 101-13). Commentators and translators have taken the 
three elements here (Law, good/bad qualities of actions, and proper conduct) as three 
separate items (A and B and C). I think Wezler is correct in taking the last two 
(qualities of action and proper conduct) as explicating Law (A: B and C). The central 
position of Gcdara is reiterated in the subsequent verses. For a similar statement on the 
centrality of good conduct, see 4.155~6. 


to this treatise: the term asmin (“in/to this”) is taken by most commentators and trans- 
lators as referring to proper conduct. Although that is the obvious choice as the antece- 
dent, given the proximity, I think that the word refers back to the treatise of Manu, just 
as it does in verses 107 (and later in verse 118). See also the repeated use of idam 
(“this”) to refer to the treatise in verses 102, 103, 104, and 106. Coming immediately 
after the word smdrta, this pronoun implies that Manu is the preeminent smrti: see 
2.10. 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1 243 


1.114 Renunciation (moksa), Retirement (samny4asa): the Sanskrit term moksa literally means 
liberation. Manu, however, attaches a technical meaning to the term, using it as a 
synonym of renunciation and the fourth order of life dedicated exclusively to the 
search after personal liberation. The term moksa has the same meaning when used in 
the common compound moksadharma, which is a section of the MBh and a distinct 
topic in medieval legal digests (nibandha). Manu makes a clear distinction between 
this renunciatory asceticism and the life of a vedic retiree, which he designates as 
samnydsa (see 6.86 n.). This term, which is the common word for renunciation in later 
literature, is never used by Manu with that meaning. Biihler’s “(manner of gaining) 
final emancipation and (of) renouncing the world,” and Doniger’s “Freedom, and 
renunciaton” ignore the technical use of these two terms here and in ch. 6. For a more 
detailed study, see Olivelle 1981. 


1.117-8 Examination of ... and guilds: these three topics are not found at the end of the 
MDh, although aspects of these are dealt with in different parts of the treatise. Their 
absence raises significant questions about the relationship of the synopsis to the text. 
The synopsis was clearly written at a later date and inserted into the MDh; but the lack 
of these topics suggests the possibility that the author of the synopsis may have been 
working with a somewhat different text than the extant version of the MDh. Note also 
that most of the vyavah@rapadas are not listed in the table of contents. 


CHAPTER TWO 


2.1 the Law assented to by the heart: | have taken padda-c as an independent clause. Others 
take it as a syntactic unit with the preceding; it is the erudite people who assent to the 
Law in their heart. Taking it as a separate clause, however, makes the Law something 
that all people acknowledge in their hearts, paralleling the “what is pleasing to oneself” 
(dtmatusti) of verse 2.6. See also 4.161, 11.234, and12.35 for the elaboration of the 
same theme; what offends one’s conscience is against the Law. 


2.2 This section on desire (2.2—-5) is out of place here. Biihler (1886, Ixvii) takes it to be 
spurious. At the very least this section appears to be parenthetical within the larger dis- 
course on the sources of the Law. 


motivated by desire: Thieme (1931, 31), commenting on VaDh 1.6, takes the expression 
akamatmd to be not “someone free from desire” but a person who does not act freely 
and at his own pleasure but in a controlled manner and in accordance with the norms. 
This would then be synonymous with niyatatmd, “a man who is self-controlled.” 
Thieme also thinks that in this context kama should be taken as part of the ¢rivarga, the 
three aims of humans: dharma, artha, kama—lLaw, Wealth, and Pleasure. In this pas- 
sage of Manu, however, kama appears to have the clear meaning of desire. 


2.3 Intention is the root of desire: most commentators, as also Biihler, take the compound 
samkalpamilah as possessive (Bahuvrihi). I think this is the right interpretation. This 
is also the understanding in the version given in the BhP 7.50: samkalpdaj jdyate 
kamah. The word miila, although it can be masculine, is used throughout by Manu as a 
neuter noun. If it were a dependent determinative (Tatpurusa) compound the reading 
should have been sammkalpamilam. Only Nandana, who records the reading mitlam, 
takes it as Tatpurusa. Doniger’s translation “Desire is the very root of the conception 
of a definite intention” also takes the compound as Tatpurusa. See 4.24, where we have 


244 


2.4 


2.5 


2.6 


2.7 


2.8 


2.10 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 


a similar Bahuvrihi in the feminine: ja@namilam kriyam; and 4.12, where we have 
both a Bahuvrihi and a Tatpurusa. 


the work of someone who desired it: Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kulliika take tat tat of 
pada-d as correlatives of yad yad of pada-c. This appears to be the natural way to in- 
terpret the syntax, and it is followed by Biihler. The translation would then be: “it is 
the work of desire.” I think, however, that the second tat forms a Bahuvrihi compound 
with kKdmasya with the meaning “one who has the desire for it.” This eliminates the 
awkwardness of desire actually doing some work, unless Desire is here personified. 
This awkwardness makes Biihler give a labored translation: “it is (the result of) the 
impulse of desire.” Supporting my view is the nice parallel of tatka@masya of last pada 
with akamasya of the first pada. Further, the intervening kimcit, to which yad yad re- 
lates, makes the case for taking both tat tat as correlatives weaker. 


in them: the precise antecedent tesu is unclear. Biihler, following Govinda, Kulltka, 
Raghavananda, and Ramacandra, takes these to be “prescribed duties.” Doniger and 
Dave, following Medhatithi: “desires”; Narayana: “sacrifices”; Nandana: “studying the 
Vedas, and other such activities.” The closest antecedent appears to be the activities 
listed in verse 3: sacrifices, observances, and restrains. 


Two additional verses: “When a man, his mind blinded by desire, behaves improperly 
with regard to objects of desire, he goes to hell and does not reap their rewards 
{probably of rites]. Optional rites taught in the Veda and traditional texts and carried 
out according to rule, therefore, advances prosperity in this world and not its opposite.” 


The root... oneself: the first half of this verse parallels GDh 1.1-2 (vedo dharma- 
miilam; tadvidam ca smrtisile) and appears to be a versification of the latter. As Biihler 
(1886, 30) notes, the distinction that commentators seek between “practice” (sila) and 
“conduct” (acdra) may be misplaced. The two probably mean more or less the same, 
the first being taken from GDh and the latter from other sources, such as VaDh1.5 
(Sista@cdra). Indeed, at 1.12 only four sources are listed with saddcdra and without Sila. 
On the close connection between Manu and the GDA, see Introduction, p. 44. For 
further elaboration of “what is pleasing to oneself,” which is not simply one’s pleasure 
but rites that give a sense of satisfaction, see 4.161, 11.234; see also 12.35 for similar 
ideas regarding one’s conscience as a guide for what is right and wrong. 


for it contains all knowledge (sarvajfianamayo hi sah): most commentators and inter- 
preters take the pronoun sah as referring to the Veda. I think this is correct. Kullika 
and Nandana, however, take it as referring to Manu. The translation would then be: 
“for he embodies ail knowledge.” 


all this: the referent is unclear. Medhatithi: “all that is to be known” (sarvam jrieyam); 
Narayana and Raghavananda: “treatise of Manu”; Govinda and Kulliika: “all kinds of 
treatises” (sarvam Sdstrajatam); Nandana: “Veda and the other sources of Law”; 
Ramacandra: “the entire Law” (sarvam dharmam). The word nikhila clearly resonates 
with vedo ’khilah of verse 6, which lends support to Nandana’s interpretation. 


“Scripture”: it is significant that Manu felt the need to define Sruti. Biihler (1886, Ixvii) 
takes this to be a sign that this section is a later addition. See, however, 12.95, where 
Manu speaks about vedabdahyah Srutayah (“scriptures outside the Veda”). All this may 
be a sign that the term sruti had not become a synonym of Veda by the time of Manu. 
Note that the authors of the early Dharmasiitras never use Sruti within the context of 
the sources of dharma. The first to do so is Vasistha (VaDh 1.4). 


These two... any matter: most mss. and commentators read sarvarthesv amimamsye, 
a reading adopted in the critical edition. But a substantial number of mss., as well as 
the Bhavisya Purana (7.55), read sarvarthesu mimdmsye. The translation would then 
be: “These two should be examined in all matters.” This reading is strongly defended 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 245 


by Raghavananda and follows the common meaning of mimdmsd as vedic exegesis. 
The meaning then is this: the principles of vedic exegesis should be applied to these 
two sources of the Law in every matter. This is an appealing interpretation, even 
though the manuscript tradition does not support the reading. Could the negative for- 
mulation of the next verse have influenced the reading of this? See 12.106 where the 
use of logical argumentation (tarka) is a significant way to determine the Law. The 
only other occurrence of mimdmsd in Manu is at 4.224, and there it is used with a 
positive meaning. 

2.11 Variant reading: “these two roots by relying.” 

2.13 authority: the term pramdna has epistemological implications. Beyond mere authority, 
it indicates the means of cognition (see 1.3 n.). There are other meanings of knowing 
the Law, such as observing the conduct of virtuous people (perception); and even 
logical argument (inference: see 12.106). Among all these means, sruti, which falls 
under “verbal authority” (sabda) in the enumeration of pramdnas, is the highest. 


2.14-5 When there ...a vedic scripture: here we have a basic principle of vedic exegesis. 
When two vedic injunctions contradict each other, both are authoritative; such a con- 
tradiction gives rise to an option. An example of such an option is given in verse 15. 
Some vedic passages prescribe the morning fire offering (agnihotra) to be performed 
just before sunrise, and others after sunrise. One has, therefore, the option to follow 
either rule. A contradiction, however, gives rise to an option only when the two in- 
junctions are of equal force (see GDh 1.4). If one of them is weaker (e.g., a traditional 
text) and the other stronger (e.g., an explicit vedic text), then the stronger prevails. The 
expression samayddhyusite is unclear. Biihler, following Kullika and Raghavananda, 
translates: “when neither sun nor stars are visible.” Medhatithi takes it to mean dawn in 
general and refers to the opinion of some who take it to mean the time of twilight when 
the night is over but the sun has not yet risen. Nandana takes it as the time when the 
sun has partially risen (uditanudite sirye). Ramacandra cites a long passage from 
Katyayana, who defines samayddhyusita as the time of the morning when stars are in- 
visible but the sun is not yet seen (tathd ca prdtahsamaye naste naksatramandale | 
ravir yavan na drSyeta samaydadhyusitam ca tat |/). 


Two additional verses : “Sages see the scriptures and remember the traditional texts. 
Therefore, authoritative persons have promulgated on earth that both these are 
authoritative. We see transgressions of the Law and violence by eminent persons; 
when a foolish man of later times sees that and follows it, he will perish.” The last 
verse follows GDh 1.3. 


2.16 Aman... this treatise: the implication of this rule is to exclude all women, as well as 
Sidras and other lower castes. The significant term here is mantraih (“with the recita- 
tion of vedic formulas”), because women’s samskdras are performed without the 
recitation of mantras: see 2.66—7. 


2.17-23 This section contains elaborations and further classifications of the original concept 
of Aryavarta first encountered within the legal tradition in BDA 1.2.9 and VaDh 1.8-12, 
and recorded also by Patafijali (on Panini 2.4.10 and 6.3.109). In these sources the ex- 
tent of the Aryavarta corresponds to the “middle region” of Manu (1.21), and this re- 
gion coincides with the natural range of the black buck. The meaning of brahma in 
Brahmavarta is unclear. Only two commentators explain the term. Narayana: brahma- 
vartate ‘nuvartate yatra, which leaves the meaning somewhat in doubt; although it 
probably means the Veda, which would be my first choice also. Nandana glosses with 
dharma. 


2.23 foreigners: often translated “barbarians,” mleccha refers to individuals and groups that 
do not belong to the mainstream of society represented by the four varjas as envisaged 
by Brahmanical theologians. They include foreigners, as well as tribal and other 
groups not forming part of the accepted society. Their speech is different (see 10.45), 


246 


2.27 


2.28 


2.29 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 


they tend to live in geographically distinct areas (see 2.23), and sometimes they are 
coupled with Siidras (12.43). See Parasher 1991. 


tying of the Mufija-grass cord: the reference is to vedic initiation (2.36f), at which the 
tying of the girdle around the boy’s waist is a central ritual element (2.43). 


body is made brahmic: all commentators take this to mean that the body is made fit for 
union with Brahman, all, except Medhatithi, repeating the same gloss: brahma- 
praptiyogyd (“fit for attaining Brahman”). That this was not a unanimous view is evi- 
denced by Medhatithi, who gives two opinions of other interpreters. One of these takes 
brahma in this expression to be the Veda. The meaning would then be that the man’s 
body is made fit for learning and reciting the Veda, or a fit receptacle for the Veda (see 
1.93 n). There is, I think, much to commend this interpretation. The other interpreta- 
tions are clearly influenced by Vedantic thinking. Further, it is difficult to see how, 
within a Vedantic view, the body can be made fit for attaining Brahman! This passage 
clearly relates to verse 26 that spoke of consecrating or perfecting (samskara) the body 
and must carry a similar meaning. The term brdhmiya does not occur elsewhere in 
Manu. 


mate child: the specification relates to the phrase “to the accompaniment of vedic for- 
mulas” (mantravat). For girls, the same ceremony is performed without such formulas 
(cf. 2.16 n; 2.66). Commentators also note that the specification “male” also excludes a 
napumsaka, children of indeterminate sex, such as hermaphrodites. 


fed gold, honey, and ghee: clearly, the baby is too young to feed him any of these 
things. A small mixture is placed within the mouth. Further, gold is obviously not fed 
to the child. Either a piece of gold is placed in the mouth or, as some commentators 
explain, the ghee and honey are touched with gold before being placed in the baby’s 
mouth. Some Grhyasatras (SGnkhGr 1.24.3; ParGr 1.16.4) state that these are fed with 
a golden spoon or from a golden vessel, while others include gold dust in the mixture 
(ASGr 1.15.1). 


2.31-3 Fora Brahmin... for blessing: Kulluka gives the following examples for the four 


2.38 


2.40 


2.43 


classes: Subhasarmd, balavarmd, vasubhiti, dinaddsa. For girls irrespective of class: 
yasodd, devi, suvadand, mangaladevi, subhadrd. 


Savitri: the Savitri verse is frequently used as a metonym for the rite of initiation, the 
imparting of this verse constituting a central element of it. 


sixteenth year: we must assume on the basis of the statement in verse 36 that all ages 
are counted from conception rather than from birth. 


vedic links: these refer to any type of ritual relationships, such as officiating at an ini- 
tiation or a sacrifice, teaching, studying, and the like. 


When Muifija ... Balvaja grass: the plural kartavyah (“they should be made”), accord- 
ing to the commentators, indicates that many girdles are intended. Thus the three subs- 
titutes are meant for the three classes, respectively. According to this interpretation, the 
statement “When Muiija grass is unavailable” must implicitly mean when any of the 
standard material for the three classes is unavailable. Narayana sees mujfija as elliptical, 
the full form being muiijadi (“Muiija etc.”): mufijddyalabha ity ddipadam luptam dras- 
favyam. 


One should wrap . . . five knots: the Sanskrit is very terse and elliptical. The major 
problem in interpretation is the first word trivrta (“threefold”). Most commentators 
take it as an adjective qualifying granthind (“with a knot”), supported by the fact that 
both are in the instrumental. Biihler translates: “a single threefold knot.” Jha appears to 
take it separately: “triplicated”; Doniger also: “triple-ply.” The connection with the 
knots appears to make little sense, because the number of possible knots are clearly 
given. Biihler is forced to give a convoluted explanation: “seems to mean that each of 


2.44 


2.49 


2.51 


2.52 


2.53 


2.56 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 247 


the strings of the girdle shall first be knotted, and the three knots be afterwards tied to- 
gether in one.” The fact that the cord is made combining three strings (Doniger’s 
triple-ply) is already stated in verse 42. I think that in the second half of verse 43 Manu 
is making a transition from the girdle’s manufacture to the way it is worn; hence the 
mention of the knots. Within this context, trivrta probably refers to the number of 
times the cord is wrapped around the waist before tying the knots. This is precisely the 
meaning given to it by Narayana: sd ca maufji trigunavalita trivrt@ kafau_ trir 
vestanena dharyd. For this custom of wrapping three times, see SankhGr 2.2.4 ApGr 
4.10.11. The commentators are unanimous that the number of knots are not specific to 
the three classes; because the particle vd (“or”) is used, they see here a simple option, 
some noting that one should have the number of knots customary in one’s own family. 


twisted upwards: most commentators take this to mean that the strands are twisted to 
the right. The Sanskrit #rdhva may, however, mean also the north. Nandana comments 
that the person places the strands on his left palm and twists them upward with his 
right palm. Both, however, may be correct, in that the strands are twisted upwards and 
towards the right of the person performing the task. Doniger’s “put on above (the right 
shoulder)” is off the mark; the discussion here is about the manufacture rather than the 
manner of wearing; and the term is vrta and not dhrta. 


placing ... at the end: the set formula for requesting almsfood is: “Madam, give food” 
(bhavati bhiksam dehi; see BDh 1.3.16), which is how a Brahmin would say it. A 
Ksatriya would say “Give, Madam, food” (bhiksém bhavati dehi and a Vaisya, “Give 
food, Madam” (bhiksGm dehi bhavati). The formula implies that it was the housewife 
who normally distributed food to students and mendicants. 


without guile: commentators and translators connect this syntactically with the presen- 
tation of the food to the teacher. The translation would then be: “After collecting as 
much almsfood as he needs, he should present it to his teacher without guile.” Medha- 
tithi says that the student should not cover delicious items with inferior ones when he 
presents the food to the teacher. I think, however, that the expression refers rather to 
the manner of collecting food; for example, he should not hide any food that may make 
the donor think he has less food than he actually has. The major reason for this inter- 
pretation is that the expression occurs in the same foot of the verse as the other term 
qualifying begging, namely, “as much as he needs” (ya@vadartham). In general, each 
foot of a verse tends to form a single syntactic unit (see 1.4 n.). 


truth: the precise meaning of stam is unclear. Medhatithi gives three alternatives: truth, 
sacrifice, and the fruit of sacrifice, i.e., heaven. Narayana gives the first two, and the 
rest of the commentators take it to mean truth. Govinda, however, equates truth with 
immortality (amyta). There is a slight possibility that the original reading was amrtam, 
with the elision of the initial vowel due to sandhi; thus ’mrtam may have been changed 
to stam. But this reading is not found in any manuscript. 


Addtional verse: “For twice-born persons, scriptures prescribe eating in the morning 
and in the evening; one should not eat in between. This practice is equal to a fire sacri- 
fice.” 

after sipping (upasprsya): Biihler translates: “after performing an ablution”; Doniger: 
“after he has washed.” Both interpretations are wrong. The commentators uniformly 
take the term to mean sipping water, and they are correct. Here we are dealing not with 
washing or bathing but with the ritual sipping of water before and after a meal, as de- 
scribed in verse 60. The same term upasprset occurs also in verse 58, where the 
meaning is clear, and Biihler translates it there correctly as sipping. See 3.208 n. 


orifices: they are eyes, ears, nostrils, and mouth. For the procedure, see 2.60. 


eat between meals: the meaning is that he should not eat between the two main meals 
taken in the morning and in the evening (see the verse added after 2.52). Medhatithi 
agrees with this, but gives another possible meaning: one should not eat again after 


248 


2.58 


2.59 


2.63 


2.65 


2.67 


2.70 


2.73 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 


interrupting a meal by getting up. He also cites the view of some who interpret the 
term antard to mean that a man should hold the plate in the left hand and eat with the 
right. According to this interpretation, the provision forbids eating food without 
holding the plate in the left hand. 


sullied with remnants: the word ucchista is a technical term for the state of impurity 
resulting from the remnants of food attached to lips and fingers after eating. The same 
term is used for food that remains after someone has eaten (leftovers), which are also 
impure because they have come into contact with one’s saliva. The extended meaning 
of the term covers also impurities caused by other bodily functions, such as after 
voiding urine or excrement. See Olivelle 1998b. 


part of the palm .. . ancestors: the area of the palm used to pour water into the mouth 
during sipping bears the technical name firtha, literally a ford on a river. As a tirtha on 
a river is where water comes into contact with the body, so the various parts of the 
palm are the firthas through which water enters the mouth and the body. 


beneath these two: according to the commentators, this is at the bottom of the thumb 
and the index finger. 


When the right .. . cord down: the sacred cord is worn over the left shoulder and under 
the right arm for rites connected with gods and on most other occasions (see 8.2 n.). To 
wear it in this manner, one raises the right hand to pass the cord under it. The cord is 
worn over the right shoulder and under the left arm (a pattern called prdacindvita in- 
volving the raising of the left arm) at ancestral rites, and over the neck like a garland (a 
pattern called nivita) in rites involving humans, such as sexual intercourse, sacramen- 
tary rites, and going to the toilet. Another mode of wearing it (“suspended or tied 
below”) is given in BDh 1.8.10. The commentator Govinda explains this as tying it 
below the navel when engaged in activities such as applying oil on or massaging the 
body. See BDh 1.8.7-9; TS 2.5.11.1; Kane 1962-75, ii. 287-97. 

shaving ceremony (kesanta): this tite of passage relates to the first shaving of the beard 
of a teenage boy. The rite is also known by the name Godana (“gift of cow”), because 
it involved giving a cow to the teacher. 


For females . . . fires: this verse contradicts the previous one where all the consecra- 
tory rites (samskara) were supposed to be performed also for women. Similar contra- 
dictions abound in Manu (see Introduction, pp. 29-36). On the initiation of women, 
see Kane 1962-75, 11. 293-95; Schmidt 1987, 25. 


Two additional verses: “He should perform these together with her: cooking the vedic 
oblation, establishing the sacred fires, offering all the sacrifices, and acts such as eating 
the oblations. Every day the wife should tend the sacred fire, carrying it out in the eve- 
ning, and offer the daily offering of Bali.” 


dress in light clothing: commentators give diverse interpretations. Medhatithi: dhauta- 
vasdh, “washed clothes”; Narayana: svalpavasah, “minimal clothing”; Govinda: asthi- 
lavasanah, “not heavy clothing,” which is given by Medhatithi as an alternate 
interpretation, the reason offered being that when the pupil is being punished, heavy 
clothes will prevent him from feeling the pain! Kullika and Raghavananda: pavitra- 
vasah, “clean clothes”; Nandana: anulbanavastrah, “not excessive clothing.” 

When he .. . should cease: for the reading adopted in the critical edition and my inter- 
pretation of this verse, see my note to this verse in the critical edition. I take “Teach, 
Sir” to be uttered by the pupil and “Stop” to be uttered by the teacher. That the first is 
said by the pupil is supported by TU 3.1-6; GobhGr 2.10.38; Oldenberg 1886-92, 
I: 67 n. The ambiguity of the Sanskrit verb adhihi, which means “recite,” makes it 
possible to ascribe it to the teacher. Biihler, following the reading of the vulgate, 
translates: “But to him who is about to begin studying, the teacher, always unwearied, 
must say, Ho, recite!” For the term bho, see 2.124. 


2.75 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 249 


cleansed . .. grass: these are blades of grass carried in the hands or twisted around the 
fingers to form a purificatory ring. The GDh (1.48) specifies that the various organs are 
touched with blades of Darbha grass. Medhatithi, Narayana, and Govinda agree with 
this, whereas Kullika and Raghavananda take this to mean carrying the blades in the 
hands. The Sanskrit pavitra can also refer to various purificatory texts and rites (see 
11.226), and Nandana prefers this meaning. 


2.76-7 The phonemes . . . Savitri verse: these phonemes are the constituent parts of the sylla- 


2.80 


2.82 


2.84 


2.86 


2.87 


2.96 
2.97 


ble OM, the initial “o” being dissolved into the two simple vowels “a” and “u.” The 
three terms for the three spheres of the cosmos are referred collectively as vydhyti (call 
or utterance) and are considered sacred sounds. Each of these triads, as well as each 
foot of the three-footed Savitri verse, is viewed as the essence squeezed out (the San- 
skrit evokes the milking of a cow) from each of the three Vedas, respectively. See 1.23. 
Variant reading: “milked these from the three Vedas.” 


timely... rite: Medhatithi and Govinda take this as a reference to initiation (see 2.38— 
40), and other commentators as referring to such daily and obligatory rites as the fire 
sacrifice and twilight worship. I prefer the latter interpretation, because the context is 
the recitation of the Savitri rather than its initial imparting at initiation. 


highest Brahman: here we have a subtle, and in Sanskrit imperceptible, transition from 
brahman as Veda (in verse 81) to brahman as the absolute being or state (in verses 
82-4). 


Offering ghee .. . standing: the reference is to a twofold division of rites within the 
vedic exegetical tradition. The term juhoti refers specifically to the offering of ghee in 
the sacred fire (homa) carried out while the priest is seated on his haunches. The term 
yajati refers to the offering of other substances in the fire (y@ga) while the priest re- 
mains standing. 


The syllable... imperishable: here again we have a play on the double meaning of the 
Sanskrit term aksara, which can mean both a syllable and something imperishable. 
The aksara par excellence in both senses is the syllable OM, which is both a syllable 
and the absolute Brahman. 


four types of cooked oblations: probably four of the five great sacrifices that involve 
cooked food: offerings to gods, ancestors, beings, and human guests (3.70). 


Maitra: most commentators take this term in its usual sense to mean a man who does 
good to all and harms none; all translators follow this interpretation. Biihler: “he who 
befriends (all creatures) is declared (to be) a (true) Brahmana.” Raghavananda, how- 
ever, proposes an interesting interpretation: mitra (friend and the deity Mitra) is the 
sun, and maitra is a man devoted to the sun, i.e., to the Savitri verse, whose deity is the 
sun. Thus maitra means a man who constantly recites the Savitri, an interpretation fit- 
ting the context, which is an eulogy of this verse. Especially in view of the fact that 
this verse probably was followed immediately by verse 101 (on the possibility that 
verses 88-100 were interpolations, see Introduction, p. 54), this interpretation of 
maitra fits nicely with the discussion of the twilight worship of the sun in verse 101. 


Variant reading: “Strongly attached as these sense organs are . . .” 


gifts: some commentators take the term ty@gdh to mean renunciation (samnydsa- 
dharmah). Medhatithi takes it as either gifts or giving up even permissible things, such 
as honey and meat. 


constraints: for the kinds of observances falling under the rubric niyama, see 2.175-7, 
and 4.204 n. 


2.99 foot of a skin: the simile is a water bag made of an animal skin. If any one of its feet is 


250 Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 


not properly sealed, water will spill through it, just as one’s wisdom will slip away 
through a single organ that is not properly mastered. 


2.101 Wariant reading: “he should remain always seated . . .” 


2.104 ritual of daily recitation (naityakam vidhim, literally, “the daily ritual’): the term 
naityaka is used here by Manu, however, with specific reference to the daily vedic 
recitation. See, for example, its use with this meaning in verses 106; and in verse 105 it 
qualifies svadhyaya (“vedic recitation”). 


controlled: Medhatithi, Narayana, and Govinda gloss niyatah with sucth, “pure.” In 
verse 107, however, we see both these terms used, indicating that they are not used as 
synonyms by Manu; see also 3.258. 


2.105 Vedic Supplements: the six such supplementary sciences: pronunciation (stksd@), meter 
(chandas), grammar (vydkarana), astronomy (jyotisa), and ritual (kalpa) 


2.106 The daily .. . Vasat: this verse is a very brief allusion to a long passage in the SB 
11.5.6.8 and cited in ApDh 1.12.3, where this theme is fully developed. A sacrificial 
session (sattra) is a sacrifice where the officiating priests and the patrons are the same 
individuals and which lasts a long period of time. 


2.107 every single day: Manu may be using the word nityam intentionally, paralleling 
naityaka (see 1.104 n.), which is used to qualify sva@dhydya (“vedic recitation’). 


Variant reading: “When a twice-born, after controlling himself, performs . . .” 


2.108 rite of returning home: the rite of samdvartana, which includes a ritual bath, concludes 
the period of studentship (see 2.245; 3.4). For a description of this rite, see Kane 1962- 
75, ii: 405~15; Heesterman 1968. This verse appears to signal the transition from the 
duties of the student to his relationship to his teacher. 


2.109 an honest person: the term Sucih could also mean a pure person (Olivelle 1998b). 
Given that all the terms in this verse refer to internal dispositions or relationships to the 
teacher, I have opted for honesty. 


someone close to him: the term Gptah indicates a close, often blood, relationship. See 
5.101; 11.171. 


one who is his own: commentators offer various interpretations of the term svah. 
Medhatithi and Ramacandra: a son; Medhatithi and Govinda: a boy one has initiated; 
Narayana, Kullttka, Raghavananda and Nandana: a relative. 

2.110 idiot: all the commentators interpret the term jada to mean a man who cannot speak 
(mitka). 


2.114 Variant reading: “Vedic knowledge said thus to the Brahmin .. .” 


2.114-5 Vedic knowledge ... treasure: these two verses appear to be modifications of the 
two verses in the Tristubh meter in VaDh 2.8—9. See also Nirukta 2.4. 


2.117 greet first: most commentators take this to mean that the student should greet the 
teacher before he greets anyone else. Medhatithi and Govinda, however, interpret 
“first” (parvam) to mean that the student should greet the teacher before the teacher 
greets him. 


2.120 for when an older . .. retrieves them: this was probably a common proverbial saying. 
It is cited also by Patafijali on Panini 6.1.84. 


2.123 When greeting ... simply say “I” : Medhatithi and Govinda explain that this refers to 
people who do not know Sanskrit and are thus unable to grasp the meaning of an 
elaborate greeting. In such cases, one simply says “I greet you” (abhivddaye ' ham), the 
word “T” (ahant) in the verse being an allusion to this form of greeting. 


2.124 


2.125 


2.131 


2.132 


2.137 


2.140 


2.142 


2.144 
2.145 


2.158 


2.160 


2.161 


2.164 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 251 


bho: this is an interjection commonly used in addressing someone. It is especially 
common in greetings between teacher and pupil, both using this particle to address 
each other. It connotes both respect (“Sir”) and endearment (“my dear”). It is viewed 
as containing the essence of all names, because it can be used in place of any proper 
name. Govinda gives the full form of such a greeting: bhadrana@maham asmi bho, “J 
am named Bhadra, bho.” 


he should say . .. prolate the previous syllable: there has been a lot of controversy re- 
garding both the exact reading of this verse and its interpretation. For a detailed expla- 
nation, see my note to this verse in the critical edition. 


teacher’ s wife (gurupatni): I am not certain whether guru here refers specifically to the 
teacher (see Note on the Trans., p. 69). In verse 142 guru is defined as the father. In 
verse 133, however, we have a clear comparison with the mother, and it seems unlikely 
that Manu would have used this roundabout way to refer to his own mother or step- 
mother. 


paternal and maternal relatives: the distinction between jfdti and sambandhin (also 
bandhava) is not always clear. Sometimes the terms refer in general to relatives; but 
when they are used together the terms appear to have more specific meanings, the for- 
mer referring to paternal relatives and the latter to maternal relatives. The latter term 
can also refer to relatives by marriage. See 4.179 n., 5.74, and Note on the Trans., p. 69. 


Addtional verse: “Even a Sidra who follows the prescribed Law and practices the Law 
every day ought to be honored always by people of all classes.” 


secret texts: the term rahasya probably refers to the Upanisads and perhaps also to the 
Aranyakas. 

“Elder” (guru): the term here is clearly applied to one’s own father. For other mean- 
ings of this term, see Note on the Trans., p. 69. 


Variant reading; “who pierces both his ears . . .” 


greater: the Sanskrit term gaurava, literally “heaviness” or “gravitas,” also refers to 
the state of being a guru (“elder”). At one level then, the meaning is that the mother is 
a thousand times more a guru than the father, who was presented as the guru par ex- 
cellence in verse 142. 


According to an interesting variant reading in the parallel passage in BhP, the transla- 
tion is: “As fruitless as a woman with women,” which nicely parallels the next com- 
parison of a cow with cows. This is a significant reference to lesbian relationships in 
ancient India: see also 8.369—70. 


reaching the end of the Veda: commentators offer diverse explanations of the expres- 
sion veddntopagatam. Most take veddnta to mean the Upanisads and the entire ex- 
pression as a reference to the fruit of Upanisads, which is final liberation (moksa). | 
follow Nandana’s interpretation. A teacher is supposed to have studied the entire Veda, 
that is, gone to its very end. The fruit of such learning is obtained only by a man who 
purifies and guards his mind. It is possible that both meanings are implied here. 
Medhatithi takes anta to mean siddha and explains the expression to mean the fruits of 
various rites established in the Veda. 


aberrant language: all the commentators take alokyam to mean speech that prevents 
one from attaining heaven. | prefer to see Jokya as something common or usual among 
people, and its opposite as something aberrant or uncouth. I think the verse refers to 
the use of foul language. 


ascetic toil consisting of vedic study: the meaning of the expression brahmdadhi- 
gamikam tapah is unclear. All the commentators, except Nandana, take it to mean 


252 


2.174 


2.184 


2.185 


2.186 


2.188 


2.193 


2.195 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 


austerities that are prescribed as connected with or conducive to the study of the Veda. 
Biihler gives a somewhat different interpretation: “cumulatively perform the various 
austerities and the vows prescribed by the rules (of the Veda).” J follow Nandana in 
seeing the study of the Veda itself as the ascetic toil of students, as clearly stated in 
verses 166~7. Being the very first verse of this section, it is natural to see here a 
reference to the central element of a student’s life; the practice of other observances 
and austerities is dealt with in the very next verse. 


The very same ... initiation: Biihler places “student at the initiation” within paren- 
theses, because the words are missing here. I believe, however, that the phrase krtopa- 
nayanasydsya (“for one who has been initiated”) is carried over into this verse by the 
common practice of anuvrtti. 


He should not .. . are available: this sentence is extremely elliptical, and my transla- 
tion, just like Biihler’s, is explanatory rather than literal. For paternal and maternal 
relative (jnatibandhu), see 2.132 n.; 5.74 n. 


heinous sinners: the technical term abhisasta probably refers to public sinners or 
socially ostracized people. Acts making someone a heinous sinner are given at ApDh 
1.24.6—-9 and VaDh 23.14. 


above ground: the word vihayasi literally means in the sky. Clearly this is an idiomatic 
expression meaning above ground or on an elevated space. Indeed, a variant recorded 
in BAP and Laksreads grhopari (“on top of the house/roof”). 


Two additional verses: “Almsfood shall not be counted as ‘other people’s cooking’ [cf. 
3.104], nor does almsfood constitute the acceptance of a gift. Almsfood is equal to 
drinking Soma; therefore, he should subsist on almsfood. Almsfood that is pure in its 
origin, that has been sprinkled with water, and that has been offered in the fire—each 
mouthful that he eats from such almsfood is equal to a sacrifice.” 


right arm uncovered: the literal meaning of uddhrtapdnih is that he should have his 
hand raised. Most commentators rightly take “hand” (pai) here as meaning “arm” 
(bahu). Raising here, as in the context of wearing the sacrificial cord (cf. 2.63 n), 
means raising the (right) arm when wearing the upper garment or shawl. It goes over 
the left shoulder and under the right arm, thus leaving the right arm and shoulder un- 
covered. Incidentally, this is precisely the way Buddhist monks are depicted as wear- 
ing their robes when they were in the presence of the Buddha. Uncovering the right 
shoulder appears to have been a mark of respect (8.2 n.). 


cover himself well: the critical edition has adopted the reading susamvrtah. Medhatithi 
interprets this to mean controlling speech, mind, and eyes (vaimanaScaksubhir 
niyatatma). But this was already stated in the previous verse. He gives the opinion of 
some that it refers to covering the body with a garment (vastrendcchdaditaSarirah); and 
this interpretation is followed by Raghavananda and Kulliika. See 11.109 where the 
term is used with the same meaning; and 7.102, 104 where we have the extended 
meaning “cover” in the sense of keeping well guarded (“under wraps”). If we follow 
the alternate readings susamyatah, the translation is: “keeping himself well con- 
trolled”; and samdahitah: “self-possessed.” 


standing: if we take this literally and in conjunction with not sitting or lying down, 
then the student can never speak with the teacher! Only Medhatithi and Raghavananda 
note this problem. The latter explains that the student should not speak “standing far 
away.” Medhatithi, rightly I think, explains that the student should not speak while 
standing in one place. This agrees with the statement in verse 196 that when the teacher 
is standing the student should walk towards him when he wants to speak. Doniger’s 
“standing with his face turned away” does not work because we have a sa (“not”) be- 
fore each word. 


2.200 


2.204 


2.205 


2.207 


2.212 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 253 


Wherever ... else: given the context and especially the statement in verse 201 directed 
at the pupil, those doing the reviling are most likely his fellow students living at the 
teacher’s house, who may occasionally say nasty things about their teacher, rather than 
evil people out in the world (so Medhatithi). 


ona cart... spread of grass: all the commentators divide the long Dvandva com- 
pound go’ Svostraydnaprasddaprastaresu into two section: first a Tatpurusa section: 
go’ Svostrayadna which combines with the rest as Dvandva. Medhatithi recognizes that 
this is an odd way to dissolve the compound and explains that it is impossible for two 
men to ride on the bare back of an ox. He further explains that yukta (“yoked”) is 
dropped from the compound, just as we drop it in dadhighata (curd pot), when it 
should be dadhiyuktaghata “pot containing curd.” If we take each item in the com- 
pound separately, then the translation would be: “He may sit by his teacher on an ox, 
horse, camel, cart, terrace, or a spread of grass.” See ApDh 1.8.12. 


his own elders (svan guriin): this is a wonderful example of the multiple meanings of 
the term guru (see Note on the Trans., p. 69). The term is used five times in the verse, 
four times as teacher and once as elders, meaning one’s own father and other senior 
relatives. 


Arya sons: in all likelihood “Arya” here refers to the three twice-born classes. This 
would exclude any son born to a Siidra wife of the teacher, something implied here in 
spite of its condemnation at 3.14—9. On the number of wives permitted to a Brahmin, 
see 9.149-151. I follow Medhatithi, Narayana, Govinda, Kullika, and Nandana in tak- 
ing Arya as qualifying the teacher’s sons. Some take Arya as referring specifically to 
sons born to Brahmin mothers. The reading preferred by Medhatithi is guruputre 
tathdcarye, according to which the translation would be: “Towards distinguished per- 
sons, as well as the teacher’s son who has taught him. . . .” This is quite out of place, 
because that eventuality is the subject of verse 208. 


the attractive and the unattractive: the literal meaning of gunadosau is “good/quality 
and bad/fault,” and many commentators accept a moral meaning. I think Medhatithi is 
correct in connecting this with sexual attraction: “The ‘good’ and ‘bad’ meant here are 
the pleasures and pains arising from sexual love, also the beauty and ugliness of 
women.” The reference may simply be to boys old enough to be sexually attracted to 
the young wives of the teacher. 


2.220 for one day ... recitation: the recitation is of the Savitri verse. Several commentators 


2.224 


2.229 


specify that when he is asleep at sunrise he should fast that day, and when he is asleep 
at sunset he should fast that night. They follow GDh 23.21 “Someone who is asleep at 
sunrise should stand during that day, remaining chaste and without eating any food; 
while someone who is asleep at sunset should stand during that night reciting the 
Savitri verse.” A similar provision is given in ApDh 2.12.13-4; BDh2.7.16; VaDh 
20.4-5. Medhatithi, however, disagrees because day (dinam) is specified. He sees here 
an option: a strong person may do it during the night; others can do it during the day. 


triple set (trivarga): commonly called purusdrtha (7.100), the three aims or goals of 
human existence, this classification of the three areas of human enterprise is mentioned 
by Manu at 7.27, 151; 4.175; 12.38. See also 2.13, 112; 4.92, 176; 6.64; 8.75. For a study, 
see Malamoud 1982. 


other rule of conduct: the meaning of dharmam anyam is not altogether clear. Only 
Medhatithi comments on this, saying that the student should not undertake any relig- 
ious activity that would hinder his service to his parents and teacher. Examples include 
going on pilgrimage and fasting. Manu may also have in mind a student becoming an 
ascetic before getting married, a common theme in Brahmanical literature. 


254 


2.230 


2.232 


2.235 


2.237 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 2 


three orders of life: some have taken this as evidence of a primitive structure of three 
asramas. Within the context of the student, who is already in the first Grama, the three 
must refer to the remaining three to which he aspires. See Olivelle 1993, 109. 


three Vedas: Raghavananda further specifies that the father is the Rgveda, the mother 
is the Yajurveda, and the teacher is the Samaveda. 


householder: it is anomalous to bring in the householder within the section addressed 
to a student. Govinda says that this simply indicates that these duties are incumbent 
also on the householder. Medhatithi tries to explain away the problem by saying that it 
is only as a householder, when his parents are old, that a student needs to look after 
them. It is more likely that this is an indication that these verses were incorporated here 
by Manu from a different source and a different context. 


another rule of conduct: the Sanskrit has the elliptical anyam. This is probably a short- 
hand for anyam dharmam of verse 229, which is also the interpretation of Govinda and 
Kulliika. 


When these three are gratified: the Sanskrit is again elliptical frisv etesu. Here also I 
detect a shorthand for these three being gratified, as we see in verse 228. 


2.240 Variant reading; ‘‘as well as irreproachable crafts, may be accepted . . .” 


2.243-4 Ifhe wishes ... Brahman: these two verses are connected to the section on life-long 


2.246 


3.2 


3-3 


3-5 


students at 2.247~9, and it is somewhat of an anomaly for the verses concluding the 
life of a student (245-6) to intervene. Logically, it would have been better for 243-4 to 
come immediately before verse 247. 


Variant reading: “a cow, a horse, an umbrella, footwear, a seat, grain, vegetables . . .” 


CHAPTER THREE 


three Vedas: the Sanskrit veddn is in the plural denoting simply that there are more 
than two. The reference to the three Vedas in the first verse makes it clear, however, 
that the reference here is to the three Vedas. 


without violating his chastity (aviplutabrahmacaryah): the Sanskrit is vague and can 
refer to any rules or vows associated with studentship. I think, however, that brahma- 
carya here refers specifically to his vow of chastity, which is also the interpretation of 
Medhatithi and Govinda. See ApDh 2.21.8 ata eva brahmacaryavan pravrajati, “from 
that very state |i.e., studentship], remaining chaste, he goes forth,” where brahmacarya 
has the same meaning within a similar context. 


When he has ... a garland: the first half of this verse is quite obscure and commen- 
tators interpret it in widely different ways. Most gloss pratitam with khyatam, 
“renowned/famous,” and this interpretation if followed by Biihler and Doniger. 
Medhatithi takes it to mean “inclined to enter the householder’s state.” I think Nandana 
is correct in taking it as referring to the student’s return home from his teacher’s house. 
The compound brahmaddaya also is variously explained. Many take it as a Dvandva: 
the Veda and the inheritance; or as meaning “the inheritance that is the Veda.” 
Nandana thinks that the student takes money from the father to give the teacher his fee. 
Biihler takes this as referring to the Madhuparka (honey mixture, 3.119 n) that the 
teacher gives his student upon completion of his studies. 


lineage: the term sagotra refers to a family line that is connected to a single ancient 
teacher as a common ancestor. The definition of this relationship is quite vague and 
often confused in the literature: see Kane 1962-75, ii. 479-501. Gotra is connected to 
another ancient Indian kinship category called pravara based on having the same 


3.8 


3.12 


3-14 


3.16 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 255 


ancestral seer. Each gofra may have several pravaras. “Connection of gotra and 
pravara may be stated thus: Gotra is the latest ancestor or one of the latest ancestors of 
a person by whose name his family has been known for generations; while pravara is 
constituted by the sages or in some cases the remote ancestor alone” (Kane, 1962-75, 
ii. 497). Two persons related through the one or the other are not permitted to marry 
each other. 


unrelated to him by marriage: for the reading amaithuni and its possible meaning see 
the note to this verse in the critical edition. The vulgate reading is maithune, whose 
meaning is unclear. Biihler, following most commentators, translates: “is recommend- 
ed to twice-born men for wedlock and conjugal union.” Nandana, who reads amaith- 
uni, interprets it to mean a woman who is a virgin (aksatayoni), which is the interpreta- 
tion also of Doniger. 


without or with too much bodily hair: this provision goes against the other which 
requires a girl to be given in marriage before puberty. “Without hair” (a/omikd) refers 
frequently to a pre-pubescent girl who has no pubic hair, often called nagnika (BDh 
4.1.11; VaDh 17.70). On the prohibition of sex with a “girl without hair,” see ParGr 
2.7.9 (ajatalomnim). For a long description of the bodily characteristics of a girl, see 
ApGr 1.3.11-8. For a discussion of the verses dealing with factors that disqualify a 
woman, see Sandahl 2001. 


jaundiced-looking: several commentators take pingaldm as referring to red eyes, an 
interpretation followed by Biihler. Nandana thinks that the term can refer to either eyes 
or skin, and Narayana takes it as referring to reddish yellow color. 


Additional verse: “He should not marry a woman who is too fat, too lean, too tall, too 
short, or too old; who is deficient in any limb; and who is fond of quarreling.” 


A wise man... in force: the major disagreement among interpreters centers on the 
compound putrikadharmasankaya. Narayana, Kullika, and Raghavananda divide this 
compound thus: putrikd-adharma-Sankayda. Biihler and Doniger follow this division. 
The translation would then be: “because of the fear (the she is) a ‘female-son’ or (of 
committing) a sin.” The first fear is generated by the absence of a brother and the 
second by the absence of the father (she may be related to the prospective husband or 
born illegitimately). I follow the interpretation of Medhatithi, Govinda, and Nandana, 
who divide the compound thus: putrika-dharma-Sankaya, “because of the fear that the 
Law of ‘female-son’ may be in force.” In this interpretation, the absence of either a 
brother or the father may give rise to this fear. The first is obvious. As Medhatithi 
points out, when the father is absent it is not possible to find out whether the girl has 
been appointed as putrikd. On this institution, see 9.127—140. This custom was very old 
and discussed at length with Iranian parallels by Schmidt 1987. See VaDh 17.16 citing 
RV 1.124.7; the same interpretation of this RV verse is given by Yaska, Nirukta 3.5. 


preferable women (varah): because manuscripts regularly omit the avagraha, the 
reading of kramaso varah is ambiguous; it could also be kramaso (a)varah. Medha- 
tithi, Narayana, Govinda, and Kulliika take it as varah, with the gloss sresthah 
(“best”). Raghavananda, Nandana, and Ramacandra read avarah, meaning either lower 
or of lower caste. Because the preferable wives in terms of varna are given later in the 
list, I think the reading without avagraha is more plausible. See the note to this verse 
in the critical edition. 


story: the reference must be to stories of ancient people, whose behavior may be 
viewed as providing legitimation for taking a Sidra wife. For such stories, see 7.41; 
10.105-8. 

by producing . . . through her: I follow Medhatithi, Govinda, and Nandana in inter- 


preting the rather ambivalent compound tadapatyatayd. Literally, it means “by means 
of the state of his being a man-with-children through her”; in other words, he has 


256 


3.19 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 


children only through the Sidra wife. This interpretation is supported by the statement 
in 3.64. Others take it as referring to a son’s son; so a man falls if he gets a grandson 
through a Sidra wife. This interpretation is given in some interpretive verses of the 
Bhavisya Purana cited by Narayana. Both the Bhavisya and Narayana also think that 
these are not the views of the respective seers, but injunctions that apply to people who 
belong to their lineages (gotra). So, for example, a man belonging to the lineage of 
Atri falls from his caste simply by marrying a Sidra woman. This is quite implausible. 


begets himself: on the theme of a husband begetting himself as his son through his 
wife, see Olivelle 1993, 41-6. 


3.23-6 It is very clear that these four verses contain differing opinions about the legitimacy 


3.26 


3-31 


3.32 


3-33 


3-37 


3.40 


of the ten types of marriage. These ten were ingrained in the tradition, and Manu could 
not simply ignore them. Here, I think, Manu gives three views of different authorities. 
In the normal manner of Brahmanical disputation, the views to be rejected are given 
first (piirvapaksa) and Manu’s own view is given last in verses 25 and 26; the word 
tha, namely “here in this treatise” (see 1.42 n.), supports my conjecture. Commenta- 
tors, however, attempt to reconcile these conflicting views. 


conjointly; that is, when the two have become lovers first according to the Gandharva 
mode, and then the man abducts the willing girl from her father’s house. 


When a girl is given: all the commentators, except Ramacandra, divide the compound 
kanyapraddnam as kanya + Gpraddnam, Medhatithi glossing d@nayanam and the others 
svikdram, The word Gpraddna is not noted in any dictionary. The problem is created 
by the gerund dattva, whose subject, according to normal Sanskrit syntax, should be 
the same as the subject of the verb or verbal equivalent of the main clause. Here, it is 
clear that the subject of dattvd is the prospective bridegroom. In this context, dividing 
kanyapradanam as kanya + praddnam (“giving away the girl”) will not work. The 
commentators have resorted to reading the word @praddnam (“receive”) rather than the 
more common praddnam (“giving away’). Either the commentators are correct in re- 
cording this uncommon word, which I very much doubt; or, more likely, kKanyapra- 
dana is a frozen form that Manu uses for the giving away of the girl after the payment 
of the bride-price by the groom. 


based on sexual union: all the commentators, except Narayana, interpret the term 
maithunyah to mean that this sort of marriage is conducive to sexual love. Medhatithi 
explains: maithunaprayojano maithunah, tasmai hito maithunyah (see Panini 5.1.5). 
Accordingly, Biihler translates: “has sexual intercourse for its purpose.” I agree with 
Thieme (1963, 197) that the meaning here is that the marriage springs from or is found- 
ed on their act of sexual intercourse. Thieme points to Panini 4.3.53 explaining the de- 
rivative as tatra bhavah. 


“Fiendish” procedure: on the Indo-European parallels to this form of marriage, espe- 
cially the Roman abduction, see Watkins 1994a, 425. 


does good deeds (sukrtakrt): all the commentators interpret this to mean “if (yadr) he 
performs meritorious acts,” an interpretation followed by Biihler. It is also possible 
that such a son was viewed as naturally prone to doing good deeds. Such natural pro- 
pensities of sons resulting from their parent’s marriages are assumed in verses 39-42. 


Jrom evil: Medhatithi and Kullika take the term enasah as a reference to the evil state, 
i.e., hell. Others, followed by Biihler, think that it refers to sins (papa). 


beauty, spirit, and virtue: 1 take the compound rifpasattvaguna to contain three sepa- 
rate items (following Kullika and Raghavananda) and interpret sattva to mean “spirit” 
in the sense of energy and intelligence (Raghavananda: bala). Biihler translates: 
“Endowed with the qualities of beauty and goodness,” which is the interpretation of 
Medhatithi, Narayana, and Nandana. 


3.42 


3-45 


3.46 


3.47 


3-49 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 257 


inviting people’ s reproach: the exact syntactical relation of the genitive nrndm is not 
altogether clear. Govinda and Kullika, followed by Biihler, connect it with praja 
(“offspring”) of pdda-b; this seems to me improbable. Ramacandra connects it with the 
implicit praj@ of pdda-c: nindita praja bhavati nrndm, which is also the interpretation 
of Doniger: “Blameworthy progeny comes to men from blameworthy (marriages).” I 
think the term is connected to ninditd in the sense of a partitive genitive: “blamed 
among men,” that is, they are treated with contempt in the world. 


during her season: the “season” for the wife is the days of the month when she is fer- 
tile, which were thought to be the days following her menstrual period. During that 
time a husband was obligated to have sexual intercourse with his wife. ApGr 3.9.1 rec- 
ommends even days from the fourth day (that is, the day when the period of menstrual 
impurity ends with the wife’s bath) to the sixteenth following the start of the menstrual 
flow. See also 3.46-8. 


moon’s change (parvan): the new moon, the eighth day after the new moon, the full 
moon, and the fourteenth day after the full moon. See 4.128. 


natural (svabhavika): Medhatithi and most other commentators say that an illness may 
prevent menstruation at the normal time and certain foods, such as ghee, may increase 
the flow or bring it before its normal time. The time given is not simply the natural but 
also the standard or the typical. 


together with the other four days (caturbhir itaraih sardham); Biihler, following the 
interpretation of most commentators, translates: “including four days which differ 
from the rest;” so also Doniger. This is a laborious rendering of itara, which in its nu- 
merous occurrence in Manu, always points to a contrast with the previous (see 1.70, 
82, 1014; 3.35, 41, 77, 113,137, 182, 276; 4.225; 8.379; 9.102, 107, 156,162, 181, 189, 191, 
242; 10.1, 2, 93 11.3; 12.106). The obvious meaning of itara forces us to take these 
four days as “other” and, therefore, outside the 16 days mentioned in pada-b. Inter- 
preted this way, the period of stu lasts for 20 days. This is precisely what Nandana says 
in his comments on verse 50, namely that the period beginning with the 21st day from 
the onset of menses is outside stu. 

It is clear that verses 46-50 are a commentary on the expression ytukdlabhigami 
syat (“he should have sex with her during her season”) of verse 45. The commentary 
spells out what is meant by tu and further demarcates the days when sex is permitted. 
The term ;tu covers a longer period of time than the period when sex is enjoined; for 
example, it begins at the onset of menses, establishing a clear beginning to the season. 
But during the four days of the menstrual period, even though it is technically ;tu, he is 
not permitted to have sex with his wife. 


Of these . . . recommended: this verse is as obscure as the preceding. The commen- 
tators and translators take the “first four” to refer to the four days of menstruation. 
Then we have only 12 days remaining, and excluding the 11th and the 13th, there are 10 
nights when sex is permitted. This appears to be the view also expressed in the YDh 
1.79. I think, however, that this is erroneous. The 16 days, as we saw in the previous 
note, excluded the days of menstruation. Further, the word td@sa@m (“of these”) is in the 
feminine, agreeing with the 16 nights (ra@tryah, feminine), whereas the other four 
“days” (ahobhih) is neuter. It seems, further, unnecessary to repeat that the four days 
of menstruation is forbidden, when it was already stated clearly in verse 46. According 
to my interpretation, the first four must refer to the first four nights after the menstrual 
period. So, the prohibited nights are the four days of menstruation, the first four days 
after that, and the 11th and 13th days of the menstrual cycle. For further support of this 
interpretation, see note to verse 50. For other forbidden days of the month, see 4.128. 


When the man’s . . . takes place: this statement supports the previous one that one 
should have sex on even nights. Govinda cites an Ayurvedic text to the effect that the 


258 


3-50 


3-52 


3-53 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 


female seed diminishes during even nights and increases during odd nights. For an ex- 
tended discussion of this topic, see Carakasamhita, Sarirasthana, 8. 


Regardless . . . man lives: all the commentators take this statement literally and have 
some trouble in explaining it. Govinda goes to the extreme in thinking that this provi- 
sion even permits a renouncer whose son dies to have sex with his former wife twice 
during her season without breaking his vow of chastity. Kulltika takes this provision as 
referring to forest hermits. I think the meaning is more simple. Irrespective of his 
aSrama, even a householder can be a brahmacarin if he follows this rule. See similar 
expressions at 6.66; 12.102. 


during the other eight nights: most commentators take these eight nights to be part of 
the 16 nights of the rtu, an interpretation followed by Biihler and Doniger. Under this 
interpretation, as the commentators clearly state, sex is permitted only on two nights, 
excluding these eight plus the six forbidden nights out of the 16-night season. I think 
the word anya here, just as itara in verse 46, contrasts these eight nights to the nights 
of rtu mentioned earlier (20, if my interpretation of verse 46 is accepted). Then the rule 
is very simple. A man who has sex with his wife only to produce offspring and not for 
lust should be considered a celibate. During the last eight days of the cycle (outside the 
above 20) the wife is infertile. During the four days of menstruation, she is both infer- 
tile and unclean. During the first four days after menstruation and on the 11th and the 
13th, he is forbidden to have sex. All this accounts for 18 days. He should have sex 
outside these 18 days; that is, during the 10 days, which is precisely what is stated in 
verse 49. This interpretation has the added benefit of accounting for the 28-day men- 
strual cycle. The only commentator who appears to support my interpretation is 
Nandana, whose language is, however, somewhat unclear. But he makes this 
significant remark about the eight days: ekavimSiprabhrtindm stor akdlatvad astasv ity 
uktam, “the statement ‘during eight’ is made because the nights beginning with the 21st 
is a period outside the season.” 


When relatives .. . course: relatives, as Medhatithi clearly points out, are the woman’s 
father and the like, and not her in-laws. The context is the prohibition of a bride-price. 
It is unclear whether ndriydndni is a Tatpurusa or a Dvandva compound. Among the 
commentators, Govinda, Kulliika, Nandana, and Ramacandra support a Dvandva, 
whereas Medhatithi, Narayana, and Raghavananda assume a Tatpurusa, as do Biihler 
and Doniger. I have taken it to be a Dvandva; it appears pleonastic to say the vehicles 
belong to the women when the entire verse is dealing with the property of women. I 
follow Govinda and Nandana in taking n@ri to mean “women,” i.e., slave women. For 
slavery in ancient India, see Bongert 1963. The sentence is clumsy, but I think we are 
justified in taking the three words of pdda-c as separate items illustrating “woman’s 
wealth” (stridhana). For studies on slavery in ancient India, see the bibliography in 
Silk 1992. 


Ata “Seer’s” ...a sale: there is a diversity of opinion regarding the exact meaning of 
this verse. The majority of commentators (Medhatithi, Nardyana, Govinda, Nandana, 
Ramacandra) think that Manu is prohibiting the giving of a cow and a bull to the 
bride’s parents. They recognize that this contradicts the provisions of verse 29. 
Govinda says that the latter is the view of others (paramata), which Manu rejects. 
Kullika, on the other hand, disagrees with this interpretation. According to him, what 
Manu rejects is the designation of sulka for this gift of a cow and bull. He recalls that 
in verse 29 Manu uses the expression dharmatah, which he interprets to mean 
dharmartham, “for the sake of the Law.” This cow and bull are to be used for ritual 
expenses. The term sulka, on the other hand, refers to gratuities that the parents keep 
for their own enjoyment. This, according to Kulltka, is what Manu objects to. Ragha- 
vananda basically agrees with Kulltika, except that he takes the second half of the 
verse also to be part of what “some say.” I think Kullika is right. Verses 51-4 appear 
to constitute a single argument against bride-price. Verses 51 and 52 lay down Manu’s 


3.56 


3-63 
3.65 


3.68 


3-70 


3-75 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 259 


point of view. In verse 53, I think, we have a possible argument against such a view. 
The opponent cites the example of the Seer’s marriage where a bride-price in the form 
of a cow and bull is clearly recognized. Manu rejoins, saying that this is untrue. That 
gift does not constitute a true bride-price (su/ka). The reason is spelled out in the next 
verse (54): when the relatives do not keep the bride-price for themselves, then it does 
not constitute a sale; so it is not really a bride-price. Manu uses the word sudka only 
three times (5.51, 53, 54) and always with a negative connotation. 

That the bride-price was a common practice in ancient India is evident even from 
Manu’s own statements elsewhere in his treatise. For example, at 8.204—5 the giving 
of a girl to her husband is viewed as a sale, and it is indeed listed under the third 
vyavahdrapada, sale without ownership (see also 8.224). At 9.93, 97 also the bride- 
price is presupposed, although at 9.98, 100 he again condemns it. The sale of the girl is 
explicitly recognized in MS 1.10.11, where adultery on the part of the wife is condemn- 
ed because she is cheating her husband who has bought her. See Thieme 1963, 208. 

Two additional verses: “In this connection, those who know the past relate verses 
sung by Yama. ‘Given that even another man should not be sold, how much more 
one’s own offspring. When a human being wants to get money by selling another 
human being, in the hereafter he will live on that person’s urine and excrement.” 


Where women are revered: following Kulliika and Govinda, I take yatra (“where”) to 
stand for yatra kule (“in which family”), an interpretation supported also by the paral- 
lel reading of verse 57 tat kulam (see also verse 60). The word pitjyante (“are revered”) 
implies—just as in the case of divine p#ja—not just a mental attitude but outward ex- 
pressions of honor, as illustrated in verse 59. See 3.70 n. 


Variant reading: “respectable families fall into disrepute.” 


by officiating . .. vedic knowledge: Kulliika and Nandana take pada-d as qualifying 
kulani, an interpretation followed by Biihler and Doniger. Accordingly, the translation 
would be: “Those families that are bereft of vedic knowledge quickly come to ruin by 
officiating at sacrifices. . . .” Under this interpretation, as Nandana explicitly states, we 
would have the absurd conclusion that if a family is not bereft of such knowledge, then 
it will not come to ruin even by engaging in these activities. I think this is mistaken. By 
engaging in activities spelled out in verses 64 and 65 any family will come to ruin; and 
then Manu adds a further provision in pdda-d:: even without doing the above, a family 
comes to ruin if it is bereft of vedic knowledge. See the parallel in pdda-d of 63, where 
also an added reason is given for the ruin of families. Variant reading: “respectable 
families quickly come to ruin.” 


broom: the term upaskara can refer to any type of household utensil; so Medhatithi: 
grhopayogi bhandam kundakatahddi (“a vessel used in the house such as a bowl or 
frying pan”). Kulltika agrees. Ramacandra: “winnowing basket”; Narayana and Ragha- 
vananda: “broom.” The only other place where this term occurs is at 12.66, where also 
the meaning is unspecified. In the current context, however, it may be preferable to 
take it as referring to a specific household item, such as a broom, rather than to a vague 
category, because all other items listed are specific. Given that this tool is supposed to 
cause harm to living beings, broom is a better candidate than the other items suggested. 


honoring: especially when it entails hospitality, honoring (pad) always entails giving 
of food etc. This connection between pitjd and feeding is reflected in the manuscripts, 
which often give the variant bhojayet (“he should feed”) for pijayet (“he should 
honor’): see 3.106, 264. For piija, see Thieme 1939, 105-23. 


here (iha): no commentator explains this word. Biihler and Doniger see it as a refer- 
ence to the man’s current order of life (@Srama). I think this is wrong; in Manu, tha re- 
fers regularly to this world or to this treatise (i.c., Manu). That the term in this verse 
refers to this world is supported by the use of idam (“this”) to refer to this world. The 


260 


3.76 


3-77 
3.78 


3-79 


3.83 


3.84 


3.90 


3.91 


3.92 


3-94 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 


meaning is that when he is devoted to these activities in this world, he supports this 
world containing mobile and immobile beings. For the meaning of the term, see 1.42 n. 


from food, offspring: Biihler, I think, has misunderstood this passage, translating: 
“therefrom the living creatures (derive their subsistence),” although such a meaning 
may also be implied here, given the context of the very next verse. The thrust of the 
passage, however, is the chain of causation that brings about children, and the main 
source of this image, I think, is the doctrine of five fires (paficagnividya) found in the 
Upanisads (BrU 6.2.9-16; ChU 5.4-10). This verse appears to have combined the view 
that fire sacrifices reach the sun and bring down rain and the more specific doctrine of 
the re-birth process entailed in the passage to the sun and back to the earth: the dead 
person when cremated goes to the sun as smoke, returns to earth as rain, becomes ab- 
sorbed into plants, and when eaten becomes semen and finally a child. 


Variant reading: “so people in all orders of life.” 


most senior order of life: translators generally render jyestha as “most excellent” or 
“best.” I think, however, that Manu is here playing with the word jyestha, which is also 
the term for the oldest brother (see 9.105—10). The eldest is supposed to look after his 
younger siblings like a father. Manu applies this image to the @sramas. The house- 
holder supplies food and knowledge to the others; so he is comparable to the oldest 
brother. See also 1.93 where the Brahmin is called the eldest among the varnas. 


shouldered: here again Manu is playing with the word samdhdrya. In the previous 
verse he uses dhdryante with reference to the householder supporting people in other 
orders. Now, he uses samdhdrya with the double meaning of “undertaking/assuming” 
and “bearing” the heavy burden of a householder’s life. It is the householder who 
through his five daily sacrifices supports the entire cosmos. 


at this: namely, at the daily ancestral offering forming part of the five great sacrifices, 
At other types of srdddhas, such as the monthly parvanasrdddha, Brahmins are invited 
to represent the All-gods (3.209). See, Kane 1962-75, iv: 403. 


Variant reading: “he should not feed anything to a Brahmin.” 


From the oblation to All-gods: the description of this rite in the 3.84—92 parallels its 
description in SGikhGr 2.14: see Gopal 1962. 


being that... night: the SankhGr 2.14.16 specifies that he throw an offering in the 
evening to those that roam during the night, and in the morning to those that roam 
during the day. 


In the back house (prsthavastuni): Biihler’s translation “In the upper story” and 
Doniger’s “In the upper part of the house” are off the mark; so are the dictionaries of 
B-R and M-W that assign this meaning to the compound citing this verse of Manu. 
Back of a house is not at the top but the rear (as opposed to the front). The expression 
must be an euphemism for the lavatory, like the English “out-house.” In the context of 
this rite, SaakhGr 2.14.15 has anugupte deSe, clearly referring to the “privy.” The 
GobhGr 1.4.10 uses the term adhivarcam, which the commentator Bhattanarayana ex- 
plains mitroccadranapradesah (“place for voiding urine”). 


Variant reading: “Sarvatmabhiti.” 


evil diseases: the term pdparoga, which recurs frequently in Manu, does not refer 
simply to a serious sickness. The disease is regarded as the consequence of sins com- 
mitted in previous lives (see 11.48-53). Evil diseases are generally viewed as skin 
diseases of various types. 

to a mendicant student of the Veda: opinion is divided as to the syntax of this sentence. 
Medhatithi first takes bhiksave as qualifying brahmacdGrine, which is the interpretation 
I have followed. He gives an alternate opinion that takes the two words separately. 


3-95 


3.96 


3-97 


3.98 


3-99 


3.102 


3.103 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 261 


This is also the view of Narayana, Kullika, and Raghavananda, followed by Btihler 
and Doniger: “to an ascetic and to a student.” However, this would require the copula- 
tive ca (“and”) to be placed after brahmacdrine rather than after bhiksdm, as 
Medhatithi points out: casabdas casthdne vrttanurodhdd brahmacdrine ceti pathi- 
tavyam. Govinda takes brahmacd@rine as qualifying bhiksave: “to a mendicant who is 
celibate.” 


to a poor man: for the reading gam dattvagor yathavidhi of the critical edition, see the 
note there. The reading found in most editions and followed by all translators is gam 
dattva vidhivad guroh, and according to this, the translation would be: “by giving a 
cow to his teacher according to rule.” 


garnish: the term satkrtya can also mean “having honored,” which is the interpretation 
of Medhatithi and Govinda. Then it refers to the Brahmin, who is to be so honored. 
The expression satkrtya vidhipiirvakam occurs also at 3.99, where both these com- 
mentators take it to mean garnishing or an elaborate preparation of food. The past par- 
ticiple satkrtam occurring at 3.264 in a similar context also means garnishing. See also, 
3.126; 9.129. 


equivalent of ashes: sacrifices are offered in a fire set ablaze. The mouth of a Brahmin 
is often compared to such a fire, and his fire is ablaze only through vedic knowledge 
(3.98). Feeding an ignorant Brahmin is like offering a sacrifice in ashes; both are 
equally futile. See 3.168, 181, VaDh 3.10. 


Four additional verses: “When someone gives to an unworthy man and fails to give to 
a worthy man, he loses both wealth and merit by his failure to discriminate between 
the worthy and the unworthy. What is given according to rule to a deserving person 
who has come in the proper way and at the proper time yields the highest reward both 
in this world and in the next. Twice-born persons acquire wealth lawfully through the 
proper acceptance of gifts, through conquest, and through trade, in that order. If he de- 
sires an imperishable reward, he should give to a virtuous man whatever is most 
desirable in the world and whatever is most cherished in his house.” 


Two additional verses: “A man obtains the same—and even a more excellent—reward 
by feeding a Brahmin as he would by offering an oblation in the fire according to rule. 
The reward of the latter is destroyed for the performer through a mistake in the ritual 
formula or by a wrongly made oblation or fire offering, and that of the former by doing 
it without a spirit of generosity.” 


He is called . .. is brief: here we have a phonetic etymology of “guest” (atithi) derived 
from combining “a” from anitya (“brief”) and “tithi” from sthiti (“stay”). Identical 
verse at VaDh 8.7. 


A Brahmin . . . sacred fires: that there is a problem with this verse is evident because 
the identical verse at VaDh 8.8 has a very different second half syntactically separated 
from the first half and identical with MDh 3.105 cd. First, the word sa@mgatika is some- 
what unclear. Medhatithi thinks it is a gregarious man fond of telling wonderful and 
hilarious stories. Similar interpretations are given by Govinda, Kullika, and 
Raghavananda. Clearly, the commentators are unsure of its meaning. I think Biihler is 
right in following the lead of Narayana and taking it to mean someone who visits a 
house on some business or for some social purpose. | think it refers specifically to a 
friendly social visit; see samgata used in the sense of “friendship” at 3.140. There is 
also much dispute regarding the meaning of the last pada. Medhatithi has the most 
elaborate explanation: a) when he is away and his wife and fires are at home, then a 
guest should be honored; b) when he is away accompanied by his wife and fires, then 
also he must honor a guest, even though he is not at home. I think the meaning is 
probably more simple: a man described in the first half is not to be regarded as a guest 
even when he comes to a house that is “a complete house,” i.e., with both wife and 


262 


3.104 


3,106 
3.107 


3.108 


3.110 


3.111 


3.113 


3.114 


3.119 


3.122 


3.126 


3.127 


3.130 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 


fires. The implication is that when his wife is away, the husband should not be expect- 
ed to entertain a guest. 


Additional verse: “When a householder thrives constantly on someone else’s food, all 
his sacrifices, gifts, ascetic toil, and learning will belong to the owner of the food.” 


Variant reading: “Feeding a guest.” 


accompanying them as they leave: the host is expected to accompany the guest from 
his house some distance as he leaves. Apastamba (2.9.2—4) is specific: “If a guest has 
come in a carriage, he should follow him as far as the carriage; others he should follow 
until they give him leave to return. If a guest forgets to do so, he may turn back at the 
village boundary.” 


he need not... offering: the assumption is that the guest has arrived after the family 
members have eaten and the food is over. Fresh food has to be cooked for the guest. 
Generally, after cooking food one has to perform the Vaisvadeva and Bali offerings. 
This provision calls for the omission of these offerings in the event of a second cook~ 
ing of food. 


elder: most take guru here to mean “the teacher,” whereas Narayana takes it to mean 
“the father.” Given that relatives are listed separately, the meaning here favors the 
teacher. See Note on the Trans., p. 71. 

fulfilling the conditions of a guest (atithidharmena): Medhatithi gives three such con- 
ditions: that he has exhausted his provisions; that he lives in another village; and that 
he arrives at mealtime. Nandana adds that he should be an unknown person. 


with his wife: commentators note that this does not indicate that she eats at a time dif- 
ferent from the husband’s, because according to verse 116 the husband and wife eat to- 
gether after the rest of the household, a practice rejected later at 4.43. Wife is 
mentioned because guests other than close friends do not eat alongside the wife. 


right after: the meaning, according to Medhatithi, is that these should be given their 
food as soon as the guests have started to eat; that is, they do not have to wait until the 
guests have completed their meal, unlike other members of the family. 


All the NT manuscripts read agra eva in place of anvag eva adopted in the critical edi- 
tion. According to that reading, the translation would be: “these he may feed without 
hesitation even before the guests.” 

a friend: Biihler, following Medhatithi, Govinda, Kulltika, Raghavananda, and Rama- 
candra, translates priya as “son-in-law.” Narayana and Nandana take it as referring to a 
friend. 

honey-mixture (madhuparka): this drink presented to an important guest is made by 
mixing honey into curd, milk, or water. See A pDh 2.8.5-8. 

sacrifice to ancestors: this is a vedic (Srauta) sacrifice called Pindapitryajiia: cf. AsSr 
2.6-7. 

supplementary offering of rice balls: this refers to the monthly ancestral offering 
(Sraddha), which is not a Srauta but a smdrta rite, that is, a rite that is only enjoined in 
the traditional texts, especially the Grhyasiitras, and not the vedic texts. 

offering proper hospitality (satkriya): Medhatithi and Ramacandra take this as refer- 
ring to special preparation of food, which agrees with the usage of sarkrtya: see 3.96 n. 
This rite... him always: this verse is very obscure, and I am not sure whether even the 
commentators have understood it. It may be that the pretakrtyd of pdda-a refers to the 
vedic (srauta) offering for the dead, whereas the “non-vedic (lit., ‘worldly’) rite” refers 
to the smdrta ancestral rite (Srdddha): see 3.122 n. 


search far and wide: most commentators interpret diérdd eva parikseta to mean that 


3.134 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 263 


one should look into even the remote ancestors of that person, an interpretation fol- 
lowed by Biihler and Doniger. | think this is farfetched. I follow Narayana 
(diiragr@mastham) and Burnell in taking dérat as referring to distance rather than to 
kinship. 

Some Brahmins ... ritual activities: Medhatithi and Narayana take these four kinds of 
individuals as representing the four orders of life: ascetic, forest hermit, vedic student, 
and householder, respectively. 


3.136-7 Between aman... as superior: the commentators and translators alike take these 


3.139 


3.141 


3.144 


3.149 


two somewhat elliptical verses as referring to a father-son pair. In one case the father 
is learned and the son ignorant, and in the other the son is learned and the father is ig- 
norant. The conclusion is that the ignorant son whose father is learned is superior to 
the learned son with an ignorant father. But this would contradict the statement of 
verses 133 and 142 that one should not invite an ignorant man (here the son) to a rite. 
According to my interpretation, the verses are speaking about two men who are as- 
sumed to be learned. The question is who is better: the one whose father is learned but 
whose son is ignorant, or the one whose father is ignorant but whose son is learned? 
Manu comes down in favor of the former. 


When a friend takes center stage: the compound mitrapradhdnani is not altogether 
clear. Most commentators take it as referring to striking friendships through extending 
invitations to ancestral and divine rites. Accordingly, Biihler translates: “chiefly for the 
sake of (gaining) friends.” See, however, 3.18 where tatpradhanani refers to a Sidra 
wife's participating at a rite performed by her Brahmin husband. See also 4.243; 12.46. 


Such a sacrificial ... same stall: variants of this interesting verse are found in ApDh 
2.17.8 and MBh 13.90.39, both in the Tristubh meter probably indicating an earlier 
version. In the ApDh, as well as in some recension of the MBA, the reading is pisdca- 
bhiksda, “almsfood of ghouls.” The simile is also different; instead of a blind cow in the 
same stall, the point of which is unclear, we have a cow who has lost its calf and is 
roaming around the corrals (Sa@ldntare gaur iva nastavatsa). The meaning appears to be 
that the cow remains in the corral and does not go out to the pastures. Comparing the 
sacrificial fee (daksind) to a cow is common in the vedic literature, principally because 
the paradigmatic sacrificial fee is a cow. 

handsome: Biihler and Doniger, following the commentators, take the term abhiriipam 
to mean someone well qualified. I cannot understand how abhiriipa can be taken to 
mean vidvat or gunavat, as the commentators do; and Narayana’s gloss uktabhimata- 
rifpasdlinam is an example of a clever pandit stretching a word beyond recognition. 
The simple meaning of the term is “handsome,” and it is used with precisely this 
meaning by Manu at 9.88. Indeed, among the qualities of an invitee to an ancestral of- 
fering listed by Gautama (GDh 15.9—-10) are youth and beauty (riipa). 

Additional verse: “Of these, some defile those alongside whom they eat, as others pu- 


rify those alongside whom they eat. I will now describe those alongside whom it is un- 
fit to eat, the lowest of twice-born who are unfit to be invited to an ancestral rite.” 


3.150-2 J think that these verses are taken from a source different from that of the long list 


3.150 


which follows. The two lists are somewhat repetitive, and kitava (“gambler”) is actu- 
ally listed twice (151 and 159), which has prompted some scribes to change it tokekara 
fearing tautology (punarukti), as explicitly stated by Nandana. See also those who sac- 
rifice for pifgas paralleling gana of 163; and kliba (“impotent”) at 150 and 165. 


impotent: the term kliba has been subject to widely different interpretations. It probab- 
ly did have a range of meanings, and in different contexts may have assumed some- 
what different meanings. In general, it refers to males who are in some way sexually 
dysfunctional or deviate from the cultural constructed notions of masculinity. Such in- 
dividuals include the impotent, the effeminate, transvestites, hermaphrodites, and the 


264 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 


like. This term does not refer to castrated eunuchs; I think the term sandha indicates 
such a person, although there is scholarly disagreement even with regard to this. A 
verse of Katyayana cited in the Dayabhdga (5.8,) gives a definition of kliba: “If a 
man’s urine does not foam, if his stool sinks in water, if his penis has no erection or 
sperm, he is called kliba.” 


3.151 bald-headed: all commentaries take the term durvala to mean bad skin; so also Biihler. 


Doniger (reading durbala) translates as “weakling.” Bad skin or weakling does not fit 
with the rest of the terms; they all refer to classes of people. “Bald-headed” here may 
refer to kinds of ascetics, just like “matted hair.” 


3.154 neglects his ritual duties: a wide variety of opinions exist with regard to the meaning 


of the term nirdkrtih, Medhatithi listing no less than five possibilities. Medhatithi, fol- 
lowed by Kullika, Raghavananda, and Ramacandra, prefers the meaning “a man who 
neglects the five great sacrifices”; so also Biihler. Narayana: “one who neglects his 
vedic recitation”; and Govinda: “one who repudiates the Vedas and the like.” Nandana 
cites verses from Devala and Katyayana, the former taking him to be a man who has 
learnt and then forgotten the Veda, and the latter taking him to be a man who has set 
up his sacred fires but then failed to perform the rituals due to laziness. The term also 
occurs in GDh 15.18. 


linked to an association: the precise meaning of gandbhyantarah is quite unclear. 
Narayana: “a village headman,” with which Nandana appears to agree. Kullika and 
Raghavananda think it means someone who has embezzled money from a corporation. 
The term literally means “one who is within (or intimately connected with) a corporate 
body.” No other legal treatise has this term; the closest parallel I have come across is 
GDh 15.18, where, within a similar list of people unfit to be invited, it lists ganapresya 
“a servant of a corporation.” I think a similar person may be intended here. 


3.159 poison vendor (rasavikrayin): the term rasa may refer to any liquid, such as milk and 


sugarcane juice, and also to poison, generally also a plant extract. Medhatithi and 
Nandana opt for poison, whereas others take it to be sugarcane juice, sugar or other 
sweets, and milk. The context, I think, supports poison. 


3.163 breaches ... obstructing them: the meaning, as Medhatithi clearly explains, is that 


such a person cuts the side of a public water course to divert water to his own field. 
Obstructing them may have the same purpose or, because the term ratah is used, may 
indicate a man who takes perverse delight in obstructing the free flow of water. 


3.164 officiates ... bodies (gananam yajakah): Narayana and Nandana, rightly I believe, take 


gana to refer to a group of individuals (see verse 154). The meaning here cannot be 
much different from that of verse 151 (ydjayanti ca ye piigan); both refer to someone 
who officiates at a sacrifice collectively financed by a group. The GDh 15.16 has the 
expression gramaydjaka with a very similar meaning. Other commentators take gana 
to refer to a particular class of deities, such as Ganapati, an interpretation followed by 
Bitihler and Doniger. 


3.171-5 It is likely that these verses, which constitute a commentary on five technical terms 


used in verses 154—69, are a later interpolation to the text. At the very least, they con- 
stitute a parenthetical remark. Their intrusion also breaks the natural continuity 
between verses 170 and 176-82. 


3.173 Didhisitpati: this and the related term agredidhisiépati have been subjected to different 


interpretations. In many texts these two form a pair, and the meaning appears to be a 
man who marries a woman whose younger sister is already married and a man who 
matries a woman whose older sister is still unmarried, respectively. See, ApDh 
2.12.22; GDh 15.16; VaDh 1.18; 20.9~10. Manu gives here a very different meaning to 
didhisipati. | agree with Biihler that Manu takes these two terms as synonyms, because 
173 is clearly a commentary on the term agredidhisipati of verse 160. 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 265 


3.184 expository texts: explained by the commentators as the Vedic Supplements (2.105 n.). 


3.185 three Naciketa: Bodewitz (1985, 8-10, 25) has shown that this term refers not to par- 
ticular fires but to the building of a special fire-altar bearing the name of Naciketas, the 
central figure in the Katha Upanisad. 


five sacred fires: the three mentioned at 2.231, as well as the hearth fire (@vasathya) 
and the hall fire (sabhya). 


3.186 given a 1,000: when the number is unspecified, cows, the paradigmatic gift, are under- 
stood. Nandana, however, interprets it to mean either feeding a thousand Brahmins or 
giving 1,000 Suvarnas (gold coins: 8.135). For numbers in the context of fines, see 
8.120 n. 


3.189 Additional verse: “Gods, together with the hosts of ancestors, would eat that food, 
making the Brahmin their mouth; therefore, he should not neglect it.” 


3.192 primeval deities (purvadevatah): from the statements in verses 194-9 it is apparent that 
these “ancestors” are not the immediate forefathers of a person but mythical ancestors 
who originated at the very beginning of creation, identical with the great seers of the 
creation account (1.34-37; see also 3.201). Gods themselves are the creation of these 
seers. In verse 201, however, ancestors are called the sons of seers, but there 
“ancestors” may be used more restrictively with reference to the specific ancestors of 
various beings spelled out in verses 196-9. 


3.201 Variant reading: “from ancestors, the gods and humans.” 


3.202 with a generous spirit (Sraddhaya): the Sanskrit terms sraddadhdna and Sraddhd are 
often taken as referring to “faith.” In the early literature, however, these terms are 
closely associated with hospitality and generous giving. Greed and envy are given as 
the opposites of fraddhd at VaDh 6.8; 8.9. See also MDh 4.224-5, where Sraddhd of 
the generous usurer is contrasted with the asraddha of the miserly scholar. For 
Sraddhda as generosity, see Jamison 1996, 176-84; Hara 1979, 1992; Kohler 1973. 


3.207 Additional verse: “He should offer it diligently at Vyatipatas, at solstices, at solar and 
lunar eclipses, and at equinoxes.” Vyatipata is an astronomical point when the sun and 
moon are in opposite courses, the sum of their longitudes being 180°. 


3.208 after they have sipped water: commentators interpret the compound upasprstodakan as 
both sipping water (@cantdn) and bathing (snatdn). Within the context of eating, the 
verb upa vsprs generally refers to the ritual sipping of water: see 2.53 n. 


3.210 collective consent of those Brahmins: the expression anujfidto brdhmanaih saha is 
quite unusual. The straightforward way to interpret the syntax is to relate brahmanaih 
saha with the verb kuryat; the translation would then be: “with (their) consent, the 
Brahmin should make an offering in the sacred fire together with those Brahmins.” 
Clearly, this is not the way the rite was performed; therefore, the commentators are 
forced to read a lot into the word saha. Medhatithi comments: brahmanair anujiidtah 
kuryad iti sambandhah | saha sarve yugapad anujfiam dadyuh (“permitted by the 
Brahmins, he should make—that is the syntax; ‘with’, i.e., all should give their permis- 
sion simultaneously”). In some way, therefore, saha should be related to anujfiatah, in 
a way similar to sahodita (“collectively stated”). 


3.213 ancient: Medhatithi reads the nominative puratandh, followed by Mandlik and Jha. All 
other commentators and the critical edition read the accusative purdtandn, which gives 
a better meaning and is the lectio difficilior. See 3.192 where ancestors are called 
puirvadevatah. Medhatithi himself gives the alternative accusative reading, which he 
evidently prefers. If we follow the nominative reading, the translation should be: “the 
ancients call these the gods of the ancestral offering.” 


3.214 end in the south: the term apasavyan is obscure and is variously interpreted by 


266 


3.216 


3.220 


3.226 
3.228 


3.230 


3.232 


3.234 


3.245 


3.247 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 


commentators. See the attempt by ST to change the reading to prasavyam (“towards 
the left”). Medhatithi, followed by Govinda, Kulliika, and Raghavananda, takes it as a 
synonym of daksinasamstha, that is, performing any series of actions so as to termi- 
nate towards the south. Narayana and Ramacandra think it means wearing the sacrifi- 
cial cord over the right shoulder (pracinavita; see 2.63 n); this is also Vijfianesvara’s 
interpretation of the term at YDh 1.232. Nandana sees in it a reference to a hand gesture 
(hastamudra). Kangle regularly translates this term in the Arthasdstra as “leftwise,” 
ie., anti-clockwise (AS 1.20.4; 13.2.24; 14.2.38; 14.3.84). 


those who partake of leavings (lepabhagin): these are the three ancestors beyond the 
third generation, i.e., the great-great-grandfather, and his father and grandfather. 


If his father ... Brahmins: why would the son perform an ancestral offering if his 
father is alive? The father would normally do this. Here perhaps we have evidence of 
retirement, when the property is divided during the father's lifetime and the son be- 
comes the head of household and the chief ritual performer. Variant reading: “or he 
may feed his own father at the ancestral offering.” 


Variant reading: “he should first set down on the ground the side dishes.” 


pressing ... on them: 1 follow the interpretation of Narayana and Nandana. The word 
guna here must mean side dishes (vyafijana), which is its meaning in verses 226 and 
233. All the commentators interpret the parallel in 233 in this manner, and it is unlikely 
that the term would have a different meaning here. Medhatithi, Govinda, Kulliika, and 
Raghavananda interpret the phrase in this verse, however, to mean: “proclaiming all 
their qualities.” This is followed by Biihler and Doniger. 


ghosts: the term preta generally refers to newly deceased persons, but here it probably 
has an extended meaning of malevolent spirits. Several commentators gloss with 
pisdca, “ghoul.” 

ancillary texts: the meaning of khila is unclear, but the probable reference, according 
to commentators, is to ancillary texts of the Veda, such as Srisiikta, legends, etc. A 
significant variant reads puranany akhildni, according to which the translation would 
be: “. . . epic narratives, and all the Puranas.” 


goat's wool blanket: the term kutapa is ambiguous and medieval authors assign up to 
eight meanings to it: midday, vessel of rhinoceros horn, woolen blanket, silver, Darbha 
grass, sesame seed, cow, and daughter’s son. See Kane 1965-75, iv: 376-7. 


committed suicide: the term ty@gindm occurs only once more in Manu, at 5.89 
(dtmanas tydgindm) referring to suicides. This is the interpretation given here also by 
Narayana and Ramacandra. Various other interpretations are offered: Medhatithi, 
Raghavananda and an alternate opinion quoted by Kulliika: “those who abandon a 
teacher and the like”; Nandana: “renouncers” (so also Doniger). Kulliika, as also 
authors quoted by Medhatithi, join this word with kulayositém and interpret: “those 
who have abandoned women of good family,” which is followed by Biihler. See VaDh 
11.22-4. 


For a deceased .. . rice ball: the language of this verse is terse and compact, which has 
led to both variant readings and variant interpretations. Many mss. and commentators 
read Gsapindakriyakarma. The translation would then be: “Until the rite of Sapinda 
(has been performed), at an ancestral offering for a newly deceased twice-born he 
should feed one person omitting . . .” (so Biihler). Under this interpretation, the particle 
@ would govern the accusative, a feature not encountered elsewhere in Manu, who 
regularly uses the ablative (2.22, 38,108, 167, 171, 243,244; 3.279; 4.137; 5.88; 6.31; 
9.89; 10.64; 11.104). 

The second half of the verse is also compact, a lot of information being implied. 
The word adaivam (singular) says both that a single Brahmin is fed and that he does 
not represent the gods (Vaisvadeva). So, only one Brahmin representing the newly de~ 


3.248 


3.251 


3.254 


3.256 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 267 


ceased is fed; all others are eliminated. This type of sraddha is technically called 
ekoddistasraddha, an ancestral offering intended for a single person. Such rites are 
performed until the rite of Sapinda (or Sapindana or Sapindikarana) is performed, usu- 
ally on the 12th day after death. This rite makes the newly deceased “share in the rice 
balls” offered to the three preceding generations of deceased and thus formally consti- 
tutes him as an “ancestor” (ptr). On ancestral rites, see Kane 1962-75, iv: 334-551. 


above manner: verse 247 dealing with the newly deceased is a parenthetical comment. 
Manu now picks up the thread of his argument by saying that after the Sapindana the 
ancestral offering is carried out precisely in the manner described before the interrup- 
tion. 


Please, stay around: Biihler, following Medhatithi’s explanation of abhitah, translates: 
“Rest cither (here or at home).” I think both read too much into this polite invitation to 
leave. That abhitah caused some problems is evident in the variant reading invented: 
bho abhiramyatam (“Sirs, do stay”). In polite discourse one does not ask a guest to 
simply leave; so we have here the euphemistic “stay,” which really mean “go.” A 
similar example is found in my mother tongue, Sinhala. When guests leave they say 
“we'll come.” 


is 


cow-pen offering: generally called Gosthisraddha, this is one of the twelve types of 
ancestral offerings listed in medieval sources. Kane (1962-75, iv: 381-2) gives the 
following description: “The Gosthi-sraddha is one which is performed when a man be- 
comes enthusiastic owing to talk about Sraddha or when many learned men gather 
together at a sacred place and, finding it impossible to have separate cooking arrange- 
ments for each, pool their resources for collecting Sraddha materials and perform si- 
multaneously sraddha for the pleasure it affords to themselves and for the gratification 
of the pitrs.” 


offering for prosperity: called Abhyudayasraddha, these ancestral offerings are per- 
formed on joyous occasions, such as the birth of a son. 


Darbha ... stated above: this verse is quite unclear. The repetition of pavitra (lit. 
“means of purifications”) has been interpreted differently. The first one is taken to 
mean purificatory texts taken from the Veda, as well as purificatory blades of Kusa 
grass (3.210). The second poses greater problems, because it is unclear whether it 
stands alone or is syntactically connected with what follows. Biihler opts for the latter, 
translating: “and those means of purification, mentioned above.” I have followed 
Medhatithi and Nandana in taking yac ca piirvoktam as a separate category (see the 
similar expression beginning with yac ca in verse 257). The placement of ca after yar 
clearly indicates that this is a separate entry. I think we should take one pavitra as re- 
ferring to purificatory KuSa grass and the other to purificatory texts. 


3.257 food of sages (munyannani): the designation for a variety of food items that are in 


3-259 


some way uncultivated (see 6.12—21), the most common being nivara, a kind of wild 
rice. 


meat, food without elaborate preparation: here again we have the expression mdmsam 
yac canupaskrtam (see 3.256 n.). Commentators and translators take anupaskrtam as 
qualifying mamsam, although there is no unanimity about the meaning of the former 
term. Medhatithi and Ramacandra: not forbidden; Narayana: not prepared with spices 
(which appears to be Govinda’s interpretation also: anatitiksnam); Kullika and Ragha- 
vananda: not smelly or rotten. See 5.112; 7.98; 10.62 n. Following the pattern of verse 
256, however, I think yac cdnupaskrtam is a separate category in this list. 


Additional verse: “May we have an abundance of food! May we obtain guests! May 
there be people who beg from us! May we never have to beg from anyone!” 


268 


3.261 


3.264 
3.267 
3.271 


3-273 


3-274 


3-275 


3-277 


3.284 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 3 


towards the east: following the vulgate reading parastat (“after”) Biihler translates: 
“Some make the offering of the cakes after (the dinner).” The critical edition has 
adopted the reading purastat (either “before” or “toward the east”). Clearly this verse 
gives alternative procedures of performing the rite. It is unclear, however, whether 
purastat refers to the direction (as I have taken it) or to the temporal sequence 
(“before”). My interpretation is supported by verse 215 giving the standard procedure, 
according to which the rice balls are offered toward the south. Here we have an alter- 
nate procedure. 


Variant reading: “feed also his maternal relatives.” 
Variant reading: “ancestors of men are satisfied for one month.” 


beef, milk (gavyena payasa): I take each word in this list to represent one item, an in- 
terpretation supported by Raghavananda and authors cited by Medhatithi. Given that 
the three preceding verses contain exclusively the meat of various animals and the sec- 
ond half of this verse also deals with meat, it is likely that here also we are dealing 
with meat, with milk and milk products (which are generally cow’s, in any case) acting 
as substitutes for cow’s meat. Most commentators, including Medhatithi, however, 
take gavyena as an adjective qualifying payasd. The translation would then be: “by of- 
fering cow’s milk”; so Biihler and Doniger. This interpretation is probably influenced 
by the later abhorrence of cow’s meat. 


Magha: this is the 10th of the 15 constellations (naksatra). Nandana takes it as refer- 
ring to the Magha month, roughly corresponding to January—February. Others take this 
phrase to refer specifically to the 13th day of the dark half of the month of Bhadra 
(August-September) within the rainy season, when a particularly important ancestral 
offering named Mahalayasraddha is offered. The legal literature developed intricate 
rules regarding the dates and times for the performance of ancestral offerings. For de- 
tails, see Kane 1965-75, iv: 369-77. 


elephant’ s eastern shadow: this day is also called Gajachaya. As Kane (1965-75, iv: 
371 n) has shown, medieval authors interpret this word differently, some even taking it 
literally: one should perform the offering in the shadow of an elephant (so 
Raghavananda). Most, however, interpret it astronomically: it is the 13th day of 
Bhadrapada (August--September) when the moon is in the Magha constellation and the 
sun in the Hasta constellation. See also Vijiianesvara and Visvariipa on YDh 1.218. 
Medhatithi, Narayana, and Ramacandra take it to mean late afternoon when the 
shadow of an elephant is cast towards the east. 


Six additional verses: “When a man performs an ancestral offering on the first day of 
the fortnight, he obtains handsome sons; on the second day, daughters; on the third, 
horses; on the fourth, small animals; on the fifth, splendid sons; on the sixth, success in 
gambling; on the seventh, success in agriculture; on the eighth, success in trade; on the 
ninth, one-hoofed animals; on the tenth, a lot of cloven-hoofed animals; on the elev- 
enth, money and sons excelling in vedic learning; on the twelfth, gold, silver, and 
money; on the thirteenth, superiority over relatives; and on the fourteenth, bad off- 
spring. All his ancestors who have been killed by the sword in battle are gladdened. A 
man who performs an ancestral offering on the fifteenth day obtains an abundance of 
things that his heart loves and those specified for people who perform it on the first 
days of a fortnight, as well as all his desires.” 


later fortnight, earlier fortnight: a lunar month begins on the new-moon day. The first 
or earlier fortnight (piarvapaksa) is when the moon is waxing, and the later (apara- 
paksa) is the fortnight of the waning moon. 


Variant reading: “this is the eternal scriptural statement.” 


4.1 
4.2 


4.3 


4.5 


4.7 


4.8 


4.9 


4-15 


4.17 


4.19 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 269 


CHAPTER FOUR 


After spending .. . at home: see parallels at 5.169; 6.1, 33. 


little or no harm: Medhatithi interprets droha not as injury (himsa), because, according 
to him, not causing injury is already prescribed, but as vexation (kheda). The prohibi- 
tion here, according to Medhitithi, is against begging, which is annoying to the donors. 
So one should avoid begging altogether or, if that is not possible, beg as little as 
possible. 

without fatiguing his body: according to Medhatithi, this refers to trade and service, 
two activities that cause fatigue. 


gleaning and picking: Medhatithi gives the following distinction between the two. 
Gleaning (uficha) is gathering up ears of corn that have fallen on the ground when 
farmers take their harvest to their homes or granaries. Picking (Sila) is gathering up 
ears of corn that have fallen to the ground from the plants in the field either before or 
after the harvest. The major difference is that the former is collected along the road and 
the latter in the field. See 10.112. 


to fill a granary ... jar: commentators understand these to mean individuals who have 
grain sufficient for a certain period of time, just like the last two kinds of persons. One 
who has a granary-full is taken by different commentators to mean a man who has 
grain sufficient to last three years, one year, or twelve days. One who has a jar-full is a 
man who has grain sufficient to last one year, six months, or six days. 


better at winning ... the Law: | follow the commentators. Biihler translates: “through 
his virtue to have conquered the world more completely.” Although such a meaning is 
possible, I think the commentators are right in relating these means of livelihood to the 
worlds that the individuals will obtain after death. 


One of these .. . of the Veda: commentators offer different and contradictory explana- 
tions (see Biihler’s comment on this verse). I think Govinda is correct in relating these 
to the six occupations of a Brahmin (see 10.75). Three activities are studying, offering 
sacrifices, and giving gifts; two are the first two of these; and one is studying, which is 
here referred to as brahmasattra (2.106 n.). Biihler, however, thinks that the latter 
refers to teaching, which is also the interpretation of commentators. 


with excessive passion: the meaning of prasangena is unclear. Medhatithi, Govinda, 
and Kulltika take it as referring to activities that people are attached to, such as singing 
and music (thus probably connecting this term implicitly with karmand). Biihler fol- 
lows this interpretation. | think Narayana and Nandana are right in taking it to mean 
excessive passion. See the similar use of this term at 2.93; 4.186; 8.368; 9.5; 12.52. 
This meaning also fits with the repeated use of words derived from pra Vsaiijj in the 
next verse. 

eking out a living: the term ydpayan could also mean “supporting his family,” which is 
the interpretation of most commentators. However, note the Pali y@peti and the Bud- 
dhist Sanskrit ydpayati regularly used with regard to eking out a living especially by 
begging. 

treatises: the term Sastrani may refer also to the Vedas, which are often referred to 
simply as the sdstra, and this interpretation is supported by the use of the singular in 
verse 20. Commentators, however, take the term as referring to other treatises, includ- 
ing epics, Puranas, Dharmasastras, and treatises on logic, grammar, Mimamsa, astrol- 
ogy, and medicine (Medhatithi, Govinda, Nandana, Kullika); or simply the fourteen 
fields of knowledge (vidyGsth@ndni): four Vedas, six Vedangas, Purana, Nyaya, 
Mimamsa, and Dharmasastra. On Sastra, see Pollock 1989a. 


270 


4.20 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 


ancillary texts: Medhatithi takes these to be texts that facilitate the understanding of 
the Veda, such as etymologies, grammar, and exegesis. Others take the term as refer- 
ring to a specific class of explanatory texts. 


Additional verse: “After learning thoroughly a book (astra), however, he should study 
it repeatedly. He should not disfigure a book or throw it away after studying it.” 


4.22-4 Some individuals ... rooted in knowledge: the ritual tradition, often under the influ- 


4.26 


4.31 


4.32 


4.39 


4.42 
4.44 


4.46 


4.49 


4.52 


4.55 


4.57 


ence of ascetic ideologies, reinterpreted ritual activities providing many substitutes for 
actual ritual acts. The offering of food in the breaths (prdndgnihotra) in the act of eat- 
ing is one of them. See ChU 5.19-24; Bodewitz 1973. 


at the end of each harvest (sasyante): Biihler, following most commentators, translate: 
“When the old grain has been consumed.” This may well be true, given that the old 
crop may have been consumed by the time the new crop was harvested. However, the 
parallel with all other terms in this list supports Narayana’s and Nandana’s interpreta- 
tion that the reference here also is to a calendrical time, that is, the end of the harvest 
when the new crop is brought in. 


Variant reading: “at the beginning of each half-year.” 


after completing the Vedas ... or vedic vows: most commentators take vedavidyavrata 
as three separate categories. The first refer to those who have only learned the Veda by 
heart; the second to those who have mastered its meaning; and the third to those who 
have completed the vows associated with vedic study, such as living with the teacher 
for a certain number of years, even if they have not mastered the Veda. 


those who do not cook: namely, vedic students and ascetics. Medhatithi objects to this 
interpretation, because giving to these have already been enjoined (3.94). He thinks 
that the reference here is to the poor and common beggars. 


mound of earth (mrd): the meaning is obscure. Most commentators take it as a mound 
of earth artificially created. It may then refer to some kind of memorial mound. Some 
mss., as well as Ramacandra, connect the first two words and read myrdazigam, a type 
of small drum. 


Variant reading: “his wisdom, prosperity, fame, sight, and life-force.” 


nor should a Brahmin: Biihler takes this verse as a general statement about not looking 
at women; I think it is continuation of 43 and refers specifically to the wife. 


Additional verse: “A wise bath-graduate should not come near and look at another 
man’s wife when she is naked; and he should avoid secret conversations with someone 
else’s wife.” 


onto a mound: { have taken citya@m to mean some kind of memorial mound, as in verse 
39. Commentators, however, take it as referring specifically to a fire altar 
(abandoned?) made with bricks. 


remaining steadfastly attentive: generally prayata means to be or to make oneself pure 
(so Biihler) and ready for a ritual act. That cannot be its meaning here; there is no puri- 
ficatory rite before voiding urine or excrement, which are by definition polluting ac- 
tivities. Commentators are hard pressed to find a meaning. 

When someone . . . perishes: this verse directly relates to verse 48. The intervening 


verses, therefore, must be either an interpolation or given parenthetically. Several mss. 
and Jha actually place this verse immediately after 48. 


take off his own garland: Medhatithi comments that one should get someone else to 
remove it from one’s neck. The reason is unclear; it may have been thought to be in- 
auspicious to remove it by oneself. 


awaken a sleeping superior: see Jamison’s (2000) detailed analysis of this expression 


4.60 


4.64 


4.69 


4.72 


4.83 


4.87 


4.90 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 271 


derived from MS 3.4.5. The two variants in the manuscript tradition—sreyadmsam and 
Sayanam—are related to the two words in the vedic precedent: sreydmsam visuptam. 
According to the variant reading, the translation would be: “awaken sleeping man.” 


Additional verse: “He may freely go to a sacrifice to pay reverence or to witness it. He 
should not go from house to house to obtain secrets without a good reason.” 


diseases run rampant: Kullika and Raghavananda take birgam as qualifying vaset and 
meaning “long.” Biihler accordingly translates: “nor (stay) long where diseases are en- 
demic.” I think Govinda is right in taking it to mean atyartham and connecting it with 
vyadhibahule. 


clap; whistle: the precise meanings of the terms @sphotayet and ksedet are unclear. The 
former refers to a noise made through a limb. Commentators give the following possi- 
bilities: clapping or striking the floor with the palm, slapping the arms, cracking the 
finger joints. The latter term refers to a noise made with the mouth. Commentators 
give the following range: grinding the teeth, growling like a lion, whistling with the 
fingers in the mouth. 


never cut his nails or hair: commentators offer diverse interpretations. Most take it to 
mean that he should not cut them himself but have them cut by a barber. Some think 
this forbids the man to cut them before the appropriate time. These interpretations are 
unsatisfactory; if this was the meaning Manu could have said it more straightforward- 
ly. The odd expression here is not the lack of a causative but the use of the verb Vchid. 
The Dharmasitras regularly use the verb Vvap for cutting hair (see ApDh 2.3.6; BDA 
1.5.7; 2.2.44, etc.; VaDh 24.5). At VaDh 24.5 Vket is used for cutting the nails. Manu 
uses Nkip (4.35; 6.52) with regard to the proper maintenance of hair, nails, and beard. 
The only other place where chindydt is used is in ViDh 71.44: na dantair nakhalomdani 
chindyat, “He must not break his nails or hair with his teeth.” This provision is given 
by Manu in pada-d. Manu uses this verb regularly for cutting off some part of the 
body, such as hands, feet, and lips for punishment (8.282, 283; 9.277). I think what is 
prohibited here is the cutting of hair and nails by means other than the proper tools 
(nail clippers, scissors). We see that in the very next verse the same verb is used to for- 
bid breaking off grass with one’s fingers. 


wear a garland outdoors: commentators interpret the expression bahirmalyam to mean 
that he should not wear a garland either over his hair or over his clothes, an interpreta- 
tion followed by Biihler and Doniger. I think it is wrong. The same expression occurs 
in GDh 9.32 with the addition of perfume: bahirgandhamalya. It makes little sense to 
say that one should not wear perfume over the clothes! The prohibition, I think, con- 
cerns wearing these ostentatious adornments in public. See the very similar prohibition 
at A pDh 1.32.5. See also BDh 2.6.9. 


refrain from... head: it is unclear whose hair and head are meant. Medhatithi gives 
two interpretations. According to the first, the injunction is general, including one’s 
own as well as that of others. The second is based on the context, which deals with 
one’s own body; so the prohibition affects only one’s own hair and head. Pulling the 
hair of others and striking their head is, of course, forbidden by other injunctions. The 
meaning then is that one should not pull one’s hair or strike one’s head in anger. 


deviates . . . texts (ucchastravartinah): the word ucchdstra, as far as I know, occurs 
only here and in the parallel passage in YDh 1.140. The dictionary definitions of the 
expression in B-R (“ausserhalb der Gesetziicher tibertrentend”) and M-W (“deviating 
from or transgressing the lawbooks”) are based solely on these passages. The term 
ucchastra parallels utkula (“cast out of the family”) and may mean someone who has 
left the Sastras. Or it may parallel utpatha or unmdrga (“bad or wrong road”) and may 
mean a man who follows a wrong Sastra, for example, Jain or Buddhist scriptures. 


Variant reading: ““Lohadaraka.” 


272 


4.92 


4.96 


4.103 


4.105 


4.106 


4.112 


4.415 


4.123 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 


time sacred to Brahman: Medhatithi defines this as the last watch of the night (about 
three hours), and most other commentators agree. Narayana simply identifies it as the 
dawn (usas).Govinda (on BDh 2.17.22) defines it as the final period (about one hour 
and twelve minutes) of the last watch of the night, a watch being one-twelfth of a day 
or a period of three hours. On muhirta, see 1.64 n. 


Pusya ... Magha: the meaning of Pusya in uncertain, some commentators taking it to 
mean a constellation (naksatra) and others taking it as the Pausa month (December— 
January). The latter is the time indicated by ParGr 2.112.1 and KhGr3.2.26. Given that 
the period lasts for four and a half months, I take the specification in the last pada to 
refer to both alternatives. The first alternative (December—January) is followed when 
one begins the study in Sravana and the second when one begins in Praustapada. 
Biihler understands this verse differently: “When the Pushya-day (of the month, 
Pausha), or the first day of the bright half of Magha has come, a Brahmana shall per- 
form in the forenoon the Utsarjana of the Vedas.” 


lightning, thunder, and rain: commentators note, rightly I think, that the suspension 
takes place only when these three occur together (see verse 106). During the rainy sea- 
son, it is likely that one or the other of these may occur every day. 


noise erupts: the general interpretation of the commentators is that nirghdate refers to 
some sort of atmospheric noise different from thunder. The same interpretation is 
given by the commentators of YDh 1.145. At GDh 16.22, however, Maskarin interprets 
the term to mean a lightning strike. 


When lightning . . . during the day: this and verse 104 appear to be commentaries on 
verse 103. The term sajyotih (see also 5.82 and GDh 16.31; VaDh 13.37) means that the 
suspension lasts as long as the sun is visible (i.e., until nightfall) if the event happened 
during the morning twilight, and as long as the stars are visible (i-e., until daybreak) if 
the event happened during the evening twilight. The expression “the other event” 
(Sese) refers to the third event listed in verse 103, namely, rain. The meaning is that if 
all three occur together, then, irrespective of whether it happens during the day or the 
night, the provision of verse 103 applies and the suspension lasts until the same time 
the following day (akalika). 


squatting . .. knees: the term avasaktikd refers to the band of cloth tied around the 
waist and over the knees so as to make it easier for a person to remain in the squatting 
position. It is unclear why this position is forbidden, but it may have something to do 
with a similar custom among ascetics. The band used by them is called yogapatta, and, 
as the name suggests, it was used during yogic practice. 


seated in a row (panktau): Medhatithi, Narayana, and Raghavananda connect this word 
with the crying of dogs etc. The translation would then be: “when a pack of dogs, don- 
keys, or camels are crying out.” The particle ca coming after pariktau, however, makes 
this interpretation unlikely. I have not seen the word pavkti used with regard to animals 
in the Dharma literature. 


after reciting the conclusion . .. Aranyaka: my translation follows the obvious syntax 
of the sentence; but it is supported only by Nandana. Medhatithi, followed by most 
other commentators, takes the second half-verse as a separate clause with an implicit 
prohibition against reciting another vedic text. Govinda and others specify that this pe- 
riod of suspension lasts for a day and a night. According to this interpretation, the 
translation would be: “. .. Sdman chanting; and after reciting the conclusion of a Veda 
or after reciting an Aranyaka (he should not recite any other text for a day and a 
night).” The meaning of “conclusion of a Veda” (vedasya antam) is also unclear. Some 
take it to mean the Upanisads, an interpretation supported by the mention of Aranyaka; 
others take it to mean the end of any vedic text (see also 2.160 n.). 


4.125 


4.126 


4.127 


4.129 


4.130 


4.138 


4.139 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 273 


Knowing . . . then the Veda: this verse is quite obscure and has been subject to two 
widely differing interpretations. Medhatithi and, following him, most other commen- 
tators take trayiniskarsa as referring to the “essence of the Veda,” namely the syllable 
OM, the Calls (vyahyti), and the Gayatri verse. The translation would then be: 
“Knowing this, learned men recite daily and in due order first the ‘essence of the 
Veda’ and thereafter recite the Veda.” My problem with this interpretation, which is 
followed by Biihler and Doniger, is that there is a non sequitur from the previous 
verse, on which this is clearly a commentary. The only way it can be connected to the 
preceding is by taking the initial recitation of OM as in some way breaking the con- 
nection with the impure recitation of the Samaveda. I think, however, that the term 
niskarsa refers to the “extract,” probably the first lines, of each Veda. These are recited 
first before the actual recitation of the particular Veda of his branch. Narayana and 
Nandana give still another interpretation, taking niskarsa to be the “nature” of the three 
Vedas spelled out in the previous verse. The translation would be: “Knowing this na- 
ture of the triple Veda, learned men recite daily and in the proper order the early Veda 
first and then the later Veda.” The meaning is that one first recites the Rgveda, then the 
Yajurveda, and finally Samaveda. 

passes in between: the meaning is that an animal passes either between the teacher and 
the pupil, or between a group of reciters, while they are engaged in vedic recitation. 


These alone .. . purified: both Biihler and Doniger have missed the point of this verse 
by misunderstanding the crucial word nityam. As the commentators point out, this re- 
fers to the suspension of the daily vedic recitation (svadhydya), which is one of the five 
great sacrifices. At 2.105 we have the statement that “Rules regarding the suspension 
of vedic recitation have no bearing . . . on daily vedic recitation.” Thus all the rules 
given above apply only to vedic study and recitation that are outside svddhydya. This 
verse, however, specifies that on these two occasions even svadhydya is to be sus- 
pended. 


with his clothes on: bathing with one’s clothes on (savds@) is prescribed for particular 
observances and as a purification for various types of offenses (11.174, 123). Here the 
prohibition pertains to doing it on a regular or daily basis. 


god: this must surely refer to the shadow cast by an image of a god. 


reddish-brown cow: the term babhru here appears to refer to be a cow, although 
Medhatithi thinks that it may also refer to the Soma plant and others take it as a general 
term applying to any reddish-brown animal. The term also means a particular kind of 
mongoose (see BDh 1.19.6). 


eternal Law: this is the first time that the common expression dharmah sandtanah oc- 
curs in the Dharma literature. Indeed, it is missing in the Dharmasiitras and in the ViDh 
and the YDh. The expression occurs again in 9.64; for similar expressions, see 7.98; 
9.325; and 10.7. 


A lucky thing . .. Lucky: the first half of this verse is very obscure, with a difficult and 
possibly elliptical syntax. The only other places in the Dharma literature that the term 
bhadra occurs within a similar context are GDh 9.20 and ApDh 1.31.12. In the former, 
we have the statement that one should call an unlucky thing lucky (abhadram bhadram 
iti); and the latter states that one should not call a lucky thing lucky but use other terms 
such as holy and auspicious (na bhadram bhadram iti brityat | punyam praSastam ity 
eva britydt). The parallel of these two texts to our verse is unmistakable. Medhatithi 
follows the GDh and sees an implied negative in the first bhadra (it should be 
abhadra) and the second bhadra he takes as illustrative of the actual words that should 
be used, namely kalydna, mangala, siddha, etc. If we follow his interpretation, the 
translation should be: “He should call an unlucky thing by a lucky name, or he should 
just say lucky.” Narayana, on the other hand, whose interpretation is favored by 


274 


4.143 


4.145 


4.149 
4.150 


4.153 


4.156 


4.163 
4.166 


4.172 


4.174 


4.175 


4.179 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 


Biihler, finds an implied negative abhadra in the second clause: “He should call a 
lucky thing lucky, or he should just call an unlucky thing lucky.” What is clear is that 
the context of this verse is the advice in verse 138 that one should not say something 
unpleasant even though it may be true. This is basic politeness and underlies several of 
the rules in the GDh 9.1922 and ApDh 1.31.11. I think the commentators are right in 
detecting an implied abhadra in this statement; most likely this should be in the second 
clause. Even without that, however, we can interpret the statement to mean that one 
should call not only what is good and auspicious but everything, good or bad, by a 
term denoting auspiciousness. Note also that in verse 138 we have two positives in 
pada-a, followed by positive-cum-negatives in the next two padas. 


he should... with his palm: an alternative translation, favored by Btihler and Doniger, 
would be: “he should always apply water with his palm on his organs, all his limbs, 
and his navel.” 

Additional verse: “Gold, sandal wood, vermilion, the five products of the cow (11.166 
n.), concrete bile, panic seed, mustard seed, and honey are said to be auspicious.” 


Variant reading: “former birth, recites the Veda again.” 


He should . . . fortnight: Nandana acutely observes that this verse is a commentary on 
verse 145 containing the injunction to perform fire offerings (juhuydt). In fact, verses 
147-9 comment on the injunction to perform soft recitations (japet) of verse 145; after 
which Manu turns to the fire offerings. 


He should .. . moon’s change: \ have followed the sequence of the pddas in the verse. 
This is also the interpretation of Medhatithi and other commentators. Biihler and Doni- 
ger, however, take the days of the moon’s change as applicable to all these visits, 
which I think is mistaken. 


unlucky marks: Medhiatithi gives the example of a black mark (tilaka) on the shoulder 
that foretells poverty and other such misfortunes. 

Variant reading: “hypocrisy.” 

in evil wombs: Medhatithi takes the compound pdpayonisu to be Tatpurusa: papanam 
yonisu. He and other commentators, however, interpret it as referring to the wombs of 
various animals rather than those of evil men, which is Doniger’s interpretation: “in 
the wombs of evil people.” Biihler takes papa as “sin” and gives a torturous transla- 
tion: “in the wombs (of such beings where men are born in punishment of their) sins.” 
I take the compound as Karmadharaya. 


Like the earth (gaur iva): Medhatithi and, following him, Govinda and Kulliika see a 
double simile here, the one based on similarity (s@dharmya) and the other on dissimi- 
larity (vaidharmya). In the former case, the comparison is with a cow; in the latter, it is 
with the earth (also bearing the epithet cow). Like the earth—and unlike a cow— 
unrighteous conduct does not bear fruit immediately but only with the passage of time. 


root: commentators take “root” to mean home, fields, wealth, family, and progeny. 
The meaning, obviously, is that his destruction is total and leaves no trace behind. 


disciples: all the commentators take Sisydn in its etymological meaning “those who 
ought to be disciplined,” meaning the wife, children, servants, and the like. They cite 
8.299 in support. It is clear that Manu is playing with alliteration here: Sisyan Sisyat. 
doctors: like the English term “doctor,” vaidya can refer to both a very learned person 
and a medical doctor, although most commentators opt for the former. 


paternal, affinal, and maternal relatives: the commentators make a very clear distinc- 
tion between the three terms: jfiati, “paternal relative”; sambhandhin, “relative by mar- 
riage”; and bandhava, “maternal relative”: see also 2.132 n. 


4.181 


4.188 


4.192 
4.195 


4.196 


4.200 


4.203 


4.204 


4.205 


4.207 


4.208 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 275 


when he is conquered by them: the critical edition has adopted the reading etair jitah. 
Biihler, following the reading efaih jitaih, translates: “by suppressing (all) such 
(quarrels).” 


ignorant man: most commentators take avidvdn to mean simply an ignorant man. 
Narayana takes this term in its participial sense with the procedure mentioned in the 
previous verse as its direct object: “a man not knowing the procedure for accepting 
gifts.” 

Variant reading: “to a Brahmin observing.” 


Additional verse: “When a man always raises the flag of righteousness as if it were the 


flag of gods, but conceals his sins, his is called the ‘cat’s vow’. 


cruel: the term naikrtika can mean both cruel and dishonest, generally meaning a vile 
person. 


insignia of a religious profession: the term lingin is ambiguous. It refers to a person 
who bears a distinguishing mark or emblem. Generally, this refers to the emblems of a 
religious professional, such as a vedic student, a forest hermit, or an ascetic. Medha- 
tithi and Narayana, correctly I think, take it with a broad meaning, whereas Govinda 
and Kulliika restrict it to a vedic student. 


natural ponds: literally, ponds “dug by the gods” (devakhdtesu), so as to distinguish 
them from the reservoirs built by humans and forbidden in verse 201. 


secondary observances (niyama), central virtues (yama): these two are technical terms 
denoting the first two steps in the eightfold path of Yoga. It is, however, more likely 
that the terms here refer to two sets of observances, yama being central virtues such as 
non-injury and niyama being outward religious rites such as twilight-worship (so 
Govinda). YDh 3.312-3 gives ten virtues falling under these two categories. 


Two verses cited by Medhatithi have been incorporated into the text of Manu by sev- 
eral mss.: “Compassion, forbearance, truthfulness, non-injury, self-control, not desir- 
ing, meditation, serenity, sweetness, and honesty are the ten central virtues. 
Purification, sacrifices, ascetic toil, gift giving, vedic recitation, restraining the sexual 
organs, observances, fasts, silence, and bathing are the ten secondary observances.” 


Other mss. give two different verses spelling out the contents of yama and niyama. 
“Not injuring, speaking the truth, chastity, honesty, and not stealing—these five are the 
central virtues and the observances. Not being angry, obedience to the teacher, purifi- 
cation, eating moderately, and vigilance—these five are called the secondary obser- 
vances.” 


A Brahmin must never partake of food: here begins Manu’s discussion of “unfit food,” 
as well as persons whose food is unfit to be eaten, both of which are technically called 
abhojydnna (4.221): see Olivelle 20022. 


someone ... Sick: Medhatithi gives two possible interpretations. The first takes this to 
refer to someone who is currently intoxicated etc.; the other takes this as referring to 
people who are habitually such (ba@hulyena). Under this interpretation the translation 
would be: “by someone who is a drunkard, quick tempered, or sickly.” 


murderer of a Brahmin: the Sanskrit term bhriinahan has two meanings: a killer of a 
fetus (abortionist) and a killer of a learned Brahmin. The VkhGr (1.1), giving the defi- 
nitions of eight types of Brahmins in terms of their learning, defines a bhriina as a 
Brahmin who has mastered the Veda, set up the ritual fires, and offered a Soma sacri- 
fice. See Kane 1962-75, ii. 131,148 n., 334; iii. 612 n. 1161. The Dharma literature uses 
the term with both meanings. At GDh 21.9 it means an abortionist, while at BDh 
1.18.13 it clearly refers to a murderer of a Brahmin. At other places it is impossible to 
tell which meaning is intended. Indeed, both meanings may be intended in many of 


276 


4.210 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 


these passages; VaDh 20.23, in fact, gives both definitions of the term. This term ap- 
pears also at MDh 8.317 and 11.248. See also Saksena 1936; Wezler 1994; 


a prisoner, a shackled man (baddhasya nigadasya ca): the problem here centers around 
nigada, which is a noun meaning a chain for binding the feet. To get it to mean a per- 
son so fettered, commentators have to see it as a substitute for nigaditasya (Nandana) 
or nigadabaddhasya (Narayana). Kullika takes the genitive nigadasya to function as 
an instrumental, and Nandana in fact says that the correct reading should be baddhasya 
nigadena. Under this interpretation, followed by Biihler, we have a single category 
here: “someone bound by chains.” I think, however, that nigadasya is the lectio diffi- 
cilior, and the final ca supports taking these as two separate entries. Medhatithi inter- 
prets baddha as referring to a man who is kept under arrest only by a judicial sentence 
(vagmatravaruddhah), and nigada as referring to a man actually in shackles. The for- 
mer, as Ramacandra says, may refer to someone under house arrest. Given the unlike- 
lihood of such people being able to actually distribute food, the prohibition must refer 
to food given by the family or household of such a man. Medhatithi also gives the 
variant visadasya (“of a poisoner”) for nigadasya. 


4.211 food of a Sidra, leftovers (Sidrasyocchistam eva ca): most commentators take these as 


separate entries. Raghavananda and Govinda, however, connect the two: “the leftovers 
of a Sidra.” Medhatithi shows unusual inconsistency, interpreting this expression here 
to mean “leftovers of a Siidra” but in his comments on it under verse 223 takes the two 
as separate entries. Given the frequency of genitive nouns with an implied annam 
(“food”) in this list, I think it is appropriate to take the two as separate. Also in verse 
218 we have the prohibition of eating a Stidra’s food (si#drdnnam). All this confusion 
apparently led some to amend the last pada to read ucchistam aguros tathd (“the 
leftovers of anyone but the teacher/elder”), a reading recorded by Medhatithi. 


4.212 food given ... birth (anirdaSam): some connect this syntactically with satikannam, 


4.213 


“food of a woman during the first ten days after childbirth.” This is quite unlikely. 
Medhatithi takes anirdaSam to refer to the milk of a cow during the first ten days after 
giving birth (see 5.8). The variant reading parydydnnam (for parydcantam) is inter- 
preted by Vijfianesvara (on YDh 1.168) as food specific to someone else, as when a 
Sidra gives food specific to Brahmins and vice versa. But Nandana, who has the alter- 
nate reading of this verse, says that it means food obtained on a rotational basis. 


Additional verse: “When different honor is paid to Brahmins of equal status or equal 
honor to Brahmins of unequal status, any gift given on such an occasion should not be 
accepted; nor should a gift be given in such a manner.” I follow Laksmidhara’s expla- 
nation of this elliptical verse. 


chief of a town: the meaning of nagarin is not altogether clear. Most commentators 
take the term to mean a leader or chief of a town; some, however, take it as referring 
simply to a town dweller. This category is absent in the parallel discussions of food in 
other Dharma texts, although towns and villages are looked down upon: ApDh 1.32.21; 
GDh 16.45. 


4.217 food of persons .. . newly deceased person (anirdasam ca pretannam): most commen- 


tators take the first word as qualifying the second and see here a single category. 
Biihler thus translates: “nor food (given by men) whose ten days of impurity on ac- 
count of a death have not passed.” I follow Narayana and Ramacandra in taking the 
two words as referring to two different categories, even though the placement of ca is 
awkward (possibly due to meter). Further, it is difficult to see how pretdnna could 
mean food given by a person impure by reason of a death in his family; its obvious 
meaning is “food offered to a newly deceased person.” The term anirdasam, moreover, 
occurs in verse 212 with reference to a single category. 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 277 


4.222 food of any one of them (anyatamasyannam): Medhatithi and Govinda think that, even 


4.223 


4.226 


4.227 


though this prescription (governed by the genitive) refers directly to food given by un- 
fit individuals (parigrahadusta), nevertheless, because of the context, the penance 
should be performed by anyone eating food that is unfit for other reasons, such as 
touch, time, and nature (kdladusta, samsargadusta, svabhavadusta). Kullika, how- 
ever, rejects this argument and takes the prescription to affect only the first category 
(parigrahadusta). 


Additional verse: “He should not eat during an eclipse of the moon or the sun; but 
when their eclipse is over, he may eat after bathing. When they set before the end of 
the eclipse, he may eat after he has seen them the next day.” 


who lacks a spirit of generosity (aSraddhinah): if we accept the reading of the majority 
of mss., asraddhinah, the translation should be: “a Siidra who neglects his ancestral 
rites.” 


Three additional verses: “Learning, bravery, ascetic toil, virgin, person at whose sacri- 
fice one officiates, pupil, and inheritance—what is acquired through these are the 
seven kinds of ‘white’ wealth; gains from these are also of the same type. Usury, agri- 
culture, trade, craft, service, ministration, and a man for whom one has done a favor— 
what is obtained from these is called ‘spotted’. Bribery, gambling, theft, coercion, de- 
ception, violence, and fraud—what is acquired through these means is called ‘black’.” 
The term “virgin” in the first verse probably refers to bride-price. 


Two additional verses: “When a Brahmin accepts a gift and uses it for wrongful 
ventures, one should not give him anything, even though he may be a worthy recipient. 
When a man accepts gifts from everywhere and accumulates them without using them 
for purposes dictated by Law, one should not honor that thief.” 


4.228 from all (sarvatah): the meaning of “all” is unclear. Medhatithi, Narayana, 


4.232 
4.234 


4.236 


4.243 


4.249 


4.253 


4.257 


Ramacandra: sins; Nandana: suffering (duhkha); Kullika: things that lead one to hell 
(narakahetu); Raghavananda, Govinda: faults (dosa). 


Variant reading: “one who gives the Veda, the eternal Brahman.” 


that very thing (tat tat): the commentators correctly point out that “that very thing” 
tefers not to the article given as a gift but the corresponding reward listed in the above 
verses. 


lie about a sacrifice: most commentators simply take this phrase to mean that a person 
who has performed a sacrifice must not tell a lie. Biihler and Doniger follow their in- 
terpretation. The whole point of this verse, however, is that people should not boast 
about or exaggerate religious activities they have undertaken. I think Raghavananda’s 
interpretation is correct; the meaning must be that one should not tell a lie about a sac- 
rifice one has performed, most probably by exaggeration. 


Additional verse: “Neither the Vedas that he has recited nor the treatises that he has 
studied go where he is going; merit alone follows him.” 


Additional verse: “He should avoid even what is given spontaneously by a physician, 
an ingrate, a surgeon, a usurer, a eunuch, or an unchaste woman.” 


a person... himself: commentators take him to be a Sidra who has fallen on hard 
times and has voluntarily entered another man’s service. It is unclear whether such a 
man becomes a slave or merely a servant or worker. 


debts: fundamental religious obligations of a Brahmin were presented within Brahma- 
nical theology as “debts” (see Malamoud 1972). The theology of debts arose quite 
early, and three debts are recorded already in the TS 6.3.10.5: “A Brahmin, at his very 
birth, is born with a triple debt—of studentship to the seers, of sacrifice to the gods, of 
offspring to the fathers. He is, indeed, free from debt, who has a son, is a sacrificer, 


278 


5.1 


5-5 


5-7 


5.11 


5.17 


5.18 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 4 


and who has lived as a student.” The SB (1.7.2.1-6) adds the debt of hospitality to men, 
bringing the theology of debts into closer alignment with the five great sacrifices. The 
obligation to marry, to perform sacrifices, and to beget offspring was used by Brah- 
manical theologians against the ascetical ideals of anti-ritualism and celibacy (6.35). 
For a discussion of the debts and their relation to asceticism, see Olivelle 1993, 46-53. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


born from the fire: although Bhrgu is said to be a son of Manu (1.34), other accounts of 
his origin record his birth from the fire. See AB 3.34; Brhaddevata 6.97-9,; MBh 
1.5.216*. 


forbidden: the Dharma literature makes a clear distinction between abhaksya, foods 
forbidden because of their very nature, and abhojya, foods that have become unfit for a 
variety of reasons: given by an unfit individual, touched by an impure person or ani- 
mal, contaminated by an impure substance, or gone stale or bad due to time, a topic 
dealt with at 4.205—25. I translate the former as “forbidden” and the latter as “unfit.” 
On this distinction and the dietary restrictions in Dharma literature, see Olivelle 2002a, 
2002b. 


Krsara porridge, Samydva cake: Krsara appears to be a dish made with milk, rice, and 
sesame seeds. Samyfva is a sweet cake made with flour, milk, and ghee. 


single-hoofed . . . permitted: there is no text that permits the eating of any single- 
hoofed animal. It may well be that this exception is made in view of the horse-sacrifice 
during which horse meat is consumed by the priests. Such an exception, however, 
would be unique in the Dharma literature (Olivelle 2002b). Another possible interpre- 
tation is to take the two terms anirdista and ekaSapha as two separate items, in which 
case the translation would be: “animals not explicitly mentioned; single-hoofed ani- 
mals; plovers.” See VaDh 14.44 where animals not specifically indicated are forbidden. 


animals with five nails: this is an ancient and widespread rule forbidding the eating of 
animals with five nails or claws, with the exception of some. Here seven such excep- 
tions are listed, whereas the standard rule contains only five exceptions. The general 
formulation of this rule is: “The five five-nailed animals may be eaten” (pafica paiica- 
nakhah bhaksyah) meaning that five-clawed animals other than those enumerated are 
forbidden. This is an example of the so-called parisamkhyd injunction, which is a pro- 
hibition couched as an injunction. Thus, the intent of the rule is to prohibit five-clawed 
animals, not to enjoin the eating of the five listed animals. Accordingly, someone may 
avoid eating all five-clawed animals, even those listed, without violating this injunc- 
tion. The forbidding of animals with five “nails” may indeed be a residue of the pro- 
scription of cannibalism, since human beings are among animals with five nails. See 
ApDh 1.17.37; GDh17.27; BDh 1.12.5; VaDh 14.39. For a detailed study, see Jamison 
1998. 


animals with incisors in only one jaw: literally “those with a single row of teeth,” the 
reference is to animals that have incisor teeth only on the lower jaw; cows, goats, and 
sheep are examples. These are the paradigmatic farm animals whose meat may be 
eaten. The opposite of these are animals with incisor teeth on both jaws. Haradatta and 
Govinda (on BDh 1.2.4) give as an example the horse, while Maskarin’s (on GDh 
17.28) example is a man. In the Purusa Hymn (RV 10.90.10) also animals with teeth on 
both jaws are associated with the horse. Other examples include donkeys and mules, as 
well as dogs, cats, and most carnivorous animals. See Smith 1994, 244; Olivelle 
2002b. 


5.23 
5.24 


5.27 


5.28 


5.31 


5.36 
5-39 


5.44 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 279 


Variant reading: “For, even at ancient sacrifices and at the Soma offerings.” 


infused with oil: many commentators interpret this verse to mean the following: “Any 
non-forbidden food or delicacy may be eaten even if it is stale after mixing it with oil.” 
Medhatithi realizes the syntactical problem of taking snehasamyuktam as part of the 
main cause and qualifying tat. Nevertheless, he feels forced to accept this indirect 
meaning, because otherwise, according to him, the separate mention of the sacrificial 
oblation would become pointless. This interpretation is followed by Biihler, Doniger, 
and all other commentators, except Narayana and Nandana. I follow these two. The 
clear meaning is that food prepared with oil does not become stale; leftovers of a sacri- 
ficial oblation, on the other hand, even if it is not made with oil, is by definition not 
subject to becoming stale. The parallel passages in YD 1.169 and ViDh 51.35 support 
this interpretation. 

He may eat .. . at risk: this verse opens the discussion on eating meat with a broad and 
general statement giving four occasions for eating meat. The discussion ends with 
verse 56, which is again a broad statement attempting to reconcile the opposing view- 
points given earlier. These two verses bracket the discussion, which, I think, contains 
two views. The first (28-30) defends the traditional position regarding meat eating; 
that is the natural order of creation established by the Creator himself. The second po- 
sition (31-55) proposes the ethic of vegetarianism and non-injury, strongly condemn- 
ing killing and eating meat outside very restrictive parameters established by the needs 
of the vedic sacrifice. Manu does not tell us explicitly his own view. It is, however, the 
traditional method to give the view of an opponent or the view to be refuted first 
(puirvapaksa) and the view of the author himself last (uttarapaksa). If this holds good 
here, then Manu must have favored the restriction of meat to sacrificial occasions. This 
is supported by the fact that Manu dispenses with the first view in three verses, 
whereas he devotes 25 verses to defending the second view. 

Commentators explain the term niyuktah (“ritually commissioned”) as referring to a 
person who is undertaking a rite such as an ancestral offering and the “honey mixture” 
(madhuparka: 3.119 n.). This is distinguished from sacrificial consecration (proksita) 
listed earlier. The latter refers to vedic sacrifices, while the former refers to non-vedic 
rites, The term niyukta is also used at 5.35. 


created: the term akalpayat appears to have a double meaning here. On the one hand, 
Prajapati created the whole world to serve as food for lifebreath, or for living creatures 
(see 5.39 where srsta is used). This echoes the creation motif of the Brahmanas and 
Upanisads. On the other hand, the term also has a prescriptive meaning; Prajapati des- 
ignated this world as food for lifebreath (see the similar meaning of akalpayat at 1.87- 
8). 

rule of gods, rule of fiends: possibly, we have here a double entendre. On the one hand, 
saying that the rules are divine or fiendish indicates the goodness of the one and the 
evil of the other. On the other hand, we can take vidhi as the manner of acting: thus, 
gods eat meat only during vedic sacrifices, whereas Rakgasas are well-known as 
always relishing blood and meat. 


Variant reading: “Abiding by the eternal Law (dharma).” 


The Self-existent .. . for sacrifice: this statement refutes the claim made in verse 28 by 
the defenders of meat eating that Prajapati created the whole world as food for living 
beings. 

well-established . . . creation (niyatasmim$s caracare): Medhatithi and Govinda inter- 
pret niyata to mean “without beginning” (anddi); the sacrificial killing has existed in 
the world always. This may be related to the fact that other types of killing, such as 
those sanctioned by Tantra, are recent customs. The “beginninglessness” of sacrificial 
killing is related to the timelessness of the Veda itself, which is the basis of dharma. 


280 


5.46 


5-47 
5.50 


5-53 


5:55 


5.58 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 


Therefore, ethical norms of ahimsd that contradict the Veda cannot be part of dharma. 
Biihler, following Kullika, interprets this verse differently: “Know that the injury to 
moving creatures and to those destitute of motion, which the Veda has prescribed for 
certain occasions, is no injury at all.” I think this is a misinterpretation of the locative 
asmins caracare; it is syntactically connected to niyatd and not to himsd. Further, the 
expression cardcara normally refers to the whole world as such and not to individual 
creatures (see 1.57, 63; 3.75; 7.29; 11.237). 


tie up, kill, or cause pain (bandhanavadhaklesan): I follow Govinda and Kulltika, who 
take this as a Dvandva compound of three members. Medhatithi and Raghavananda 
take bandhanavadha + kleSa as Karmadharaya: “pains consisting of tying up and kill- 
ing” (bandhanavadhd eva klesah), which is followed by Biihler and Doniger. 


Variant reading: “on whatever a man fixes his mind.” 


except when the rules prescribe it (vidhim hitva): Biihler takes hitvad as “disregarding.” 
The meaning then is that he disregards the rule that he should eat meat at a sacrifice 
and the like. I think this is mistaken. The meaning, as Medhatithi points out, is that he 
does not eat meat except according to the rule. Because of the multiple negatives in 
this sentence, the comparison inherent in the simile pisdcavat “like a Pisaca” is also 
unclear. J think it means that he acts unlike a Pisaca, who eats anything and everything 
(see 5.31). 

The fact that this verse caused problems to readers and scribes is evident in variants 
recorded. Some, including Hemadri and Laksmidhara, take the verse in a negative 
manner, reading yas tu bhaksayate in padda-a; taking loke ’ priyatam (with an avagraha 
rendering it negative); and eliminating na in pdda-d: vy@dhibhi§ caiva pidyate. 
According to this traditional interpretation, the translation would be: “When a man eats 
meat disregarding the rules like a goblin, he is hated in the world and becomes 
afflicted with diseases.” 


reward for their meritorious acts (punyaphalam): I follow Govinda and Kullika in 
taking this as a Tatpurusa compound. Medhatithi rejects this and takes it as a Dvandva: 
punyam ca phalam ca punyaphalam | sama@hdradvandvah | sastisamase hy asam- 
arthyam. 


Me he... nature of “meat” : the belief that the food a person eats may in turn eat him 
appears to have been old. Such sentiments are expressed in the vedic literature with 
reference not only to animals but also to plants and grains: JB 1.43; SB 12.9.1.1. Here 
Manu gives a phonetic etymology of the Sanskrit term for meat mdmsa, the two sylla- 
bles of which mean “me” (mdm) and “he” (sa). See Smith 1994, 253. 


Someone who has teethed ... of hair: the meaning of “younger” (anujdte), literally 
“born after,” is unclear. Medhatithi and most other commentators take it to mean 
someone younger than a child who has teethed, an interpretation that has led to one 
scribe (ms. Tj') emending the text to dantajate adante ca. Nandana takes it as referring 
to a boy who has undergone vedic initiation. Needless to say, all these explanations are 
unsatisfactory. A possible clue to the meaning may be found in verse 70 where a child 
who has teethed is juxtaposed with a child whose naming ceremony has been per- 
formed. If the naming ceremony is considered some kind of birth, then the unusual 
term anujata may refer to it (Nandana’s view is based on taking the term to mean an 
initiatory birth). Commentators also point out that the full ten-day period of impurity is 
observed only when someone who has undergone vedic initiation dies. At the death of 
a child who has undergone the hair-cutting ceremony, the period is three days (see YDh 
3.23); for a child who has teethed, one day; and for a baby who has not teethed, purity 
is restored immediately. Biihler connects anujate with krtacide and translates: “When 
(a child) dies that has teethed, or that before teething has received (the sacrament of) 
the tonsure.” This is unlikely because of the ca after both anujdte and krtacade. 
Doniger translates: “When a child dies when he has just got his teeth, or after he has 


5-59 


5.60 


5.61 


5.63 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 281 


his teeth”; though novel and interesting, I do not see how that meaning can be derived 
from the Sanskrit. 


until the collection of bones: according to the ViDh 19.10, this takes place on the fourth 
day after death. 


comunon ancestry: the Sanskrit term sapinda refers to a group of close relatives, but 
there is great controversy in the tradition with regard to both its meaning and the extent 
of the group covered. One interpretation takes pinda (lit., “round lump”) to mean a 
bodily particle and sapinda to mean people who through birth have bodily particles in 
common. Another interpretation takes pinda to mean the balls of rice offered to an- 
cestors and sapinda to mean people who are connected through these ancestral offer- 
ings. In general, the relationship extends to six generations before and after the father 
and five generations before and after the mother. See BDh 1.11.9; Jolly 1885, 168-74; 
Kane 1962-75, ii. 452-78. 


relationship based on offering libations: the term samdnodaka refers to a broad and ill- 
defined group of extended relatives. Some take it as comprehending the seven genera- 
tions of ancestors beyond the seven comprising “common ancestry”: see Vijhanesvara 
on YDh 2.136. 


This single verse was expanded in some manuscript traditions into two verses, which 
are found in all editions and translations. According to this reading, the translation 
would be: “As this period of death-impurity is prescribed for those who belong to the 
same ancestry, so the same holds true at a birth for those who desire perfect purity. 
Death-impurity affects all, but birth-impurity affects only the mother and the father. 
The mother alone is subject to the period of birth-impurity; the father becomes pure by 
bathing.” For a detailed discussion, see the note to this verse in the critical edition and 
Introduction, pp. 44-46. 


After the expanded two verses, some manuscripts give two additional verses: “In both 
cases, during ten days one does not eat food from that family; further, giving gifts, ac- 
cepting gifts, sacrifice, and vedic recitation are suspended. When a boy is born, one 
may freely accept on that day a gift of gold, grain, a cow, a garment, sesame seeds, 
sugar, and ghee.” 


On the contrary ... three days: the meaning of this verse and its connection to the rest 
of this section are quite unclear. Several commentators take the second half as refer- 
ring to begetting a child on a woman who is not one’s wife or on a remarried woman. I 
think that this verse should be taken within the context of the differing opinions re- 
garding the impurity affecting a father and mother mentioned in the previous verse. 
This verse appears to be contradicting the view expressed in the final phrase of the 
previous verse, namely, that after a birth the father is purified by bathing. The oppo- 
nent here says that a father is purified by bathing alone only after having sex; when a 
child is actually born, he has to observe a period of impurity lasting three days. See 
VaDh 4.21, where also the connection of the new-born child to its parents is described 
as based on semen: bijanimittatvat. This interpretation makes sense of the otherwise 
incongruous insertion of sexual intercourse within a passage dealing with birth and 
death. The author may also be alluding to the view on the three births of a man ex- 
pressed in the AU (2.1-3), namely, that the emission of the semen by the man into the 
woman constitutes his first birth, and the actual birth of the child constitutes the sec- 
ond. If this holds true, then the author of this view is arguing against the earlier view, 
saying that a bath alone purifies after his first birth (emission of semen: see the added 
verse after 5.144) but not the second, which is the topic of discussion here. If we fol- 
low the reading of the ST (api for abhi-), the text makes even a stronger connection 
between the birth impurity and the death impurity given in verse 60: “the impurity re- 
sulting a/so from a seminal relationship adheres to him for three days.” 


282 


5-64 


5-65 


5.67 
5.68 


5.69 


5-72 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 


Those who touch .. . in three: the Sanskrit for “ten days” is extremely prolix: “one day, 
one night, and three times three nights.” Nandana correctly calls this uktivaicitryam, 
unless, of course, we are misunderstanding this strange calculation. “Those who touch 
the corpse,” I think, refers to those close relatives who actually participate in the fu- 
neral, rather than to any person who may happen to touch a corpse, because of the 
context; this also parallels the statement about the pupil in the very next verse. The ex- 
pression “those who offer libations” (udakaddyinah), as the commentators point out, 
probably refers to the class of relatives who are required to offer water to the deceased 
(samdnodaka): see 5.60 n. 


those who carry a corpse: the commentators Govinda, Kulliika, Raghavananda, and 
Nandana take this as a reference to persons of common ancestry (sapinda), whereas 
Medhatithi, Narayana, and Ramacandra think that the expression simply refers to per- 
sons who actually carry a corpse. I prefer the former explanation, because it is super- 
fluous to say that a pupil who carries a corpse is similar to those who carry a corpse! 


Variant reading: “tradition tells us, purity is restored in a single night.” 


lay it down: the meaning of the verb nidadhyuh is not altogether clear. Most commen- 
tators interpret it to mean “bury”; this is also the understanding of YDh 3.1, where this 
verse is recast as: @nadvivarsam nikhanet. The image of leaving the body behind like a 
piece of wood found in the very next verse, however, raises the possibility that, ac- 
cording to Manu, the body was actually left on the ground rather than buried. Customs, 
of course, may have changed over time. Indeed, Vijfidnesvara, citing this passage (on 
YDh 3.2-3), says that it should not be understood literally; one should bury the child in 
the wilderness and return without sorrow, just as one would after throwing a stick 
away. 


keep the observances: most commentators, followed by Biihler, interpret the verb 
ksapeta to mean that one should observe three days of impurity (@fauca). The term, 
however, normally means fasting or undertaking a religious observance (see 4.222). 
Medhatithi says that the person should remain secluded without participating in regular 
activities: udasyeta Sastracoditam vy@param na kurydt. Such a meaning is possible: 
see the use of ksapana as “waiting” in GDh 18.15. and as “interruption of study” in 
ParGr 2.12.4. The three days of impurity is clearly indicated here, but the term may 
directly refer to the kinds of observances associated with mourning: see below 5.73, 
and A pDh 2.15.5—10; GDh 11.24—42. 


The relations ... prescribed rule: the verse is quite obscure and a slightly variant ver- 
sion occurs in BDh 1.11.5 with akrtavivahanam for asamskrtanam. It is possible that 
the verse is taken from a source which may have provided a different context for un- 
derstanding it. So, for example, the context here or in BDh does not permit us to under- 
stand what the meaning of “according to prescribed rule” means. Commentators offer 
different views, mostly guesses. According to the majority, the reference is to a period 
of three days, which is the same as the period for the relatives given in the first half of 
the verse and makes no sense. Nandana takes it as referring to the standard 10 days, 
which is also the view of some authors cited by Medhatithi. Most commentators also 
take the verse as referring to women who have been betrothed but not given in mar- 
riage and understand “relatives” (bandhavdah) as her future husband’s relatives. I see 
no reason to take these women as betrothed but unmarried. Although ba@ndhava in its 
restrictive use does refer to relatives by marriage, it has frequently a wider application 
(see 2.132 n.). Here the straightforward meaning, | think, is that when an unmarried 
woman dies, her relatives (maternal and paternal; possibly sapindas) are impure for 
three days, whereas her siblings (and one must assume also her parents) remain impure 
for the standard statutory period of 10 days. 


siblings: commentators here give diverse interpretations of sandbhayah (literally, 
“those connected by the same navel”): those belonging to the same ancestry (sapinda), 


5-73 


5-74 


5.78 


5.81 


5.82 


5.84 


5.85 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 283 


paternal relatives, and brothers (sisters?). At verse 84, where the verse recurs, they 
give different meanings: sons etc. (putrddi), those belonging to the same lineage 
(sagotra), and those belonging to the same ancestry (sapinda). Clearly, this term must 
have the same meaning in both contexts. I think it refers to either the “uterine” 
(brothers and possibly sisters) or, more likely, to the immediate family, including the 
parents. 


For three days: commentators, as well as Biihler and Doniger, take this as referring 
specifically to bathing rather than to all the observances mentioned here. The parallel 
passages in VaDh 4.14 and YDh 3.16 clearly indicate that all the observances connected 
with mourning are carried out during three days. 


kinsmen and relatives: most commentators take the two terms sambandhi and ban- 
dhava as referring to relatives by common ancestry (sapinda) and by reason of offering 
libations (samd@nodaka): see 5.60 n. Narayana, Nandana, and Ramacandra, however, 
take bandhava as referring to paternal relatives. These two terms have wide applica- 
tions, although in their restrictive usage, the former refers to relatives by marriage and 
the latter to maternal relatives (see 2.132 n.; 4.179 n.). Elsewhere, however, samban- 
dhin refers to maternal relatives (2.132). 


achild ... ancestry: in the expression bale deSdntasthe ca prthakpinde ca the number 
of persons enumerated is uncertain. Medhatithi takes all three terms to be in apposi- 
tion: “when a child living in a far away place and belonging to a different ancestry 
dies.” Others see two categories: a child and an adult belonging to a different ancestry. 
When these die in a distant land, one is purified by bathing. The repetition of ca 
(“and”) makes the latter interpretation more probable. 


vedic scholar living near by: Medhatithi gives several meanings of upasampanna, in- 
cluding someone living with a person and someone endowed with virtues. He also says 
that dictionaries give this as a synonym of dead (srta). This verse parallels GDh 14.22, 
which also has Srotriye copasampanne. The term cannot mean “dead”; the term 
samsthite of verse 80 governs all these phrases (anuvrtti). The term is taken by many 
commentators as referring to someone living in one’s house. Medhatithi also gives the 
view of some who connect Srotriya with mdatula (“a vedic scholar who is one’s mater- 
nal uncle”), because the latter is redundant as it is comprehended by the term bdndhava 
(“maternal relatives”). This is quite unlikely; bandhava probably has a wider meaning 
here, thus making the special mention of the uncle not superfluous. 


realm: for a discussion of visaya as the realms of a king, see Scharfe 1993, 118-9. 


someone who is... or an elder: this half-verse is very obscure and commentators give 
contradictory explanations. First, I agree with the commentators that the term upasam- 
panne must be understood here from the preceding verse; this is somewhat problematic 
because two half-verses intervene, but without that term this injunction would require a 
period of impurity whenever a non-vedic scholar dies, which is absurd. Commentators 
are also divided about the final pada. Govinda, Kullika, and Raghavananda connect 
the two words: “an elder (or teacher) who is a vedic savant.” Narayana and Rama- 
candra take the words as separate, while Medhatithi connects anicdne with asrotriye, 
and take gurau separately. Nandana reads tathdgurau, thus reading agurau (“a vedic 
savant who is not an elder’). In the parallel at YDh 3.24 also, the words guru and 
aniicdna are taken as separate entries. | think the testimony of Yajfiavalkya, Medha- 
tithi, and Narayana is compelling; this verse contains three categories of individuals at 
whose death the period of impurity lasts for a single day. 


while performing . . . to impurity: for the view that ritual and royal (5.93-7) obligations 
take precedence over the observance of impurity, see GDh 14.45-6; YDh 3.27-9. 

Divdkirti: the meaning of this term (literally “calling or declaring during the day’) is 
unclear. Most commentators take it to mean a Candala. Ramacandra is alone in taking 


284 


5.88 


5.89 


5.92 


5:93 


5-95 


5-97 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 


it as a barber, a meaning rejected by Medhatithi, who cites MBh 12.136.106, where its 
meaning is clearly a Candala (see also MBh 12.136.110). The form divakirtya occurs 
also at GDh 16.19 and VaDh 13.11. The term may refer to the fact that these individuals 
were expected to go about only during the day and to announce their presence. Fa-hien 
during his travels in India (99-414 CE) notes this practice: “When they [Candalas] 
enter the gate of a city or a market-place, they strike a piece of wood to make them- 
selves known, so that men know and avoid them, and do not come into contact with 
them.” A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms, tr. J. Legge, reprint of 1886 ed. (New York: 
Dover, 1965), p. 43. 

votary: the term Gdisti is a hapax in the ancient Dharma literature, except for the cita- 
tion of this very verse in ViDA 22.87. All commentators take it as a synonym of 
brahmacdarin (“vedic student”). See the similar use of vratin at 2.188; 5.91,93; 11.121, 
224. 

Variant reading: “he becomes impure for three days.” 


born through capricious caste mingling: the meaning of the compound wthdsamkara- 
jatandm is obscure, and commentators offer interpretations mostly based on taking it 
as constituting two separate categories: vrthajatandm and samkarajatandm.. The sec- 
ond is generally taken to mean children born through caste intermixture. For the first 
there is a variety of interpretations. Medhatithi : those who do not honor gods, ances- 
tors, or human (yo na devdn arcayati na pitin na manusydn iti = AB 7.9); or those who 
remain outside the orders of life. Narayana: effeminate or impotent men (k/iba); 
Govinda and Kulliika: those who, for the most part, have given up their dharma; 
Raghavananda: those who give up the five great sacrifices. The expression evokes the 
vedic expression anaddhdpurusa of the AB (7.9), who is defined there in exactly the 
same words as that of Medhatithi. The anaddhGpurusa probably means a “good-for- 
nothing fellow.” See Olivelle 1993, 50. I have taken vrthdsamkarajatandmas referring 
to a single category and assumed vrthd as meaning “wantonly” or “wrongly.” This sort 
of caste mixture would be different from the anuloma ones permitted in 3.12—3. See 
the similar use of vrth@mamsa at 4.213 and 5.34, and vrthdkrsarasamyavam at 5.7. 


as appropriate: all the commentators interpret yath@yogam to mean that a Vaisya is 
carried through the western gate, a Ksatriya through the northern, and a Brahmin 


through the eastern. Variant readings: “according to number”; “according to class”; 
“according to honor.” 


for they ... with brahman: commentators, rightly I think, see an implied “respectively” 
in the second half-verse. The meaning is that the king is seated on Indra’s throne; 
whereas vedic students and those performing sacrificial sessions are united with 
brahman. The meaning of brahman is also unclear. Medhatithi, Govinda: attaining the 
state of Brahman (brahmatva); Narayana, Kullika, Raghavananda: pure like Brahman; 
Nandana: having the very nature of dharma. Given that the context is a student and a 
sacrificer, I think it is more likely that brahman here refers to the Veda and vedic rites 
in which these two are immersed. For a discussion of the statutory purity of certain in- 
dividuals, see Olivelle 1998b. On the king, see also von Stietencron 1997. 


for anyone the king wants: the meaning, as most commentators note, is that a person 
delegated by the king to carry out his duties, such as his chaplain or judge, is also sub- 
ject to instant purification in order for him to carry out his official functions. This ap- 
pears to be an extension of the king’s own instant purification. The principle 
articulated here is that rules of impurity and the like are overridden by the require- 
ments of public office and ritual obligations. Note that the term sadyahsaucam is car- 
tied over (anuvytti) into this verse from the previous one. 


for itis... mortal beings: the reading of the last pada has caused numerous problems 
to scribes and commentators, resulting in a large number of variant readings. One way 
to understand the final compound lokeSaprabhavapyayam is to connect prabhava with 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 285 


Sauca, and apyaya with GSauca. Thus, gods are viewed as the ones who bring about 
purification and eliminate impurity. 


5.98 both sacrifice .. . instantly: all the commentators, as well as Biihler and Doniger, see a 
sandhi in tatha@Saucam (tatha + aSaucam). The meaning they derive is not very differ- 
ent from mine; they take G@Saucam samtisthate to mean that the period of impurity is 
completed, i-e., concluded (Medhatithi glosses: sama@ptim eti). I have never seen, how- 
ever, the expression sadyah Gsaucam. It is much better to disregard sandhi and see here 
two separate words tathd saucam (this is how Burnell takes it). Thus we get two posi- 
tive acts, sacrifice and purification (yajfia, Sauca) that are accomplished by death in 
battle. 


5.99 After completing the required rite (krtakriyah): Medhatithi says that the rite is bathing, 
because no other ritual has been prescribed. The completion of the required rite is 
obligatory on all classes. See also the parallel prescriptions for the four classes within 
the context of a judicial oath at 8.113. 


5.102 Additional verse: “If, out of affection, a person of a lower class touches a person of a 
higher class who is in a period of impurity-——or a person of a higher class similarly 
touches a person of a lower class—he is purified in accordance with the time of impu- 
rity prescribed for the person whom he has touched.” 


5-104 When one’s... heaven: “one’s own people” (svesu) is taken by most commentators to 
refer to either relatives or persons of one’s own class. The term, however, usually re- 
fers to persons belonging to one’s own household. The cremation is considered the 
final sacrifice (antyesti) of the deceased; this is the context of the statement in the last 
clause regarding the “sacrificial offering.” 


5.105 Knowldge .. . time: “smearing” (upafjana) refers specifically to daubing an area with 
cow dung (see verses 5.122, 124; and 3.206); “food” refers to special penitential foods, 
such as milk and roots, or possibly to fasting (YDh 3.31 nirdhdrah); “time” means the 
passage of the statutory period of impurity discussed earlier. Variant reading: 
“austerity, fasting, earth.” 


Additional verse: “When earth, leaves, grass, and wood are touched by a Candiala, a 
lowest-born, a dog, or a crow, the rule is that they are made pure by the touch of Soma, 
sun, fire, and wind.” 


5.108 What needs .. . renunciation: a point worth noting in this proverbial saying is that all 
the instruments of purification (muddy water, fast current during the rains, menstrual 
flow, and the ochre garment of a renouncer) are all dirty colored. This verse recurs 
with some variations in VaDh 3.58; ViDh 22.91; YDh 3.32. 


5111-2 Jlapidary: all the commentators, followed by Biihler and Doniger, take the term 
aSmamaya here as referring to articles made of stone. I think this is mistaken. The two 
verses, 111 and 112, are related; the first telling us how to clean certain articles when 
they are stained, and the second when they are unstained. We should expect to find the 
same or similar articles in the two lists; and we do. Stone implements would be out of 
place here amidst precious articles. Of the metal objects in 111, gold and unembellished 
silver are singled out in 112; and I think abja and afmamaya of 112 parallels mani and 
asmamaya of 111. That the tradition recognized two types of precious stones, the one 
aquatic (e.g., pearls, corals) and the other stone (e.g., sapphire, ruby, diamond), is clear 
from what Manu says at 8.100 (where also we find the expression sarvesv asma- 
mayesu). The term mani is probably a generic term for precious gems; here it means 
pearls while in 9.329 it is opposed to pearls and must mean stone gems. 


unstained: | think the word nirlepam qualifies all the articles listed in this verse. Stain, 
often in concert with smell, refers to staining with impure substances such as urine and 
excrement: see 4.111; 5.126. 


286 


5.115 


5.116 


5.118 


5.122 


5.124 


5.125 


5.127 


5.131 


5-133 


5-135 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 


Variant reading: “All substances.” 


straining: commentators offer a variety of interpretations of the term utpavana. Me- 
dhatithi: pouring out a small amount of the polluted liquid, using, according to some, 
two blades of KuSa grass (so also Govinda, Kullika, and Raghavananda), or filling the 
pot containing the polluted liquid with clean liquid of the same kind until the pot over- 
flows (so also Ramacandra); Narayana: straining with a cloth. Variant reading: “by 
skimming.” 

Additional verse providing a definition of “solids” in verse 115: “Beds, seats, vehicles, 


39 


things tied with hair, and clothes are declared to be ‘solids’. 


During ... by washing: Biihler, following Kulltka, translates: “At sacrifices the puri- 
fication of (the Soma cups called) Camasas and Grahas, and of (other) sacrificial ves- 
sels (takes place) by rubbing (them) with the hand, and (afterwards) rinsing (them with 
water).” The syntax of the verse, however, makes this interpretation untenable, and 
commentators such as Narayana and Govinda explain it correctly. Regarding the 
cleansing of implements during a sacrifice, see the detailed account in BDh 1.13.11-32. 


Additional verse (in some manuscripts after 126 or 128): “Clothes that are new or that 
have been purchased or washed are to be purified by sprinkling water or by burning 
incense over it, but those that are dirty by washing.” 


Verse 123 of the vulgate has been expunged from the critical edition: “Earthenware 
that has come into contact with liquor, urine, feces, phlegm, pus, or blood cannot be 
purified by firing it again.” 

Additional verse: “Each drop of water when sprinkled purifies an area as large as a 
cow’s hide irrespective of whether the ground has been swept or not, so long as one 
does not notice any stain on it.” 


shaken: the meaning of avadhiita is not quite certain. Medhatithi: something over 
which someone has blown with the mouth or shaken a cloth. Narayana and Govinda 
agree with the second view of Medhatithi; Nandana also has a similar meaning but re- 
fers to the flapping of a chicken’s wings. I think something like this must be intended. 
Kullika and Raghavananda (followed by Biihler and Doniger): what someone has 
touched with the foot. 


Gods .. . as suitable: for a detailed study of these significant verses on statutory purity 
that, interestingly, includes ignorance as one reason for the purity of something, see 
Olivelle 1998b. 


Two additional verses: “Fire is pure; wind that blows outdoors is pure; water in a se- 
cluded place is pure; and a road is pure for traveling. Goats and horses are pure at their 
mouths; cows are pure at their backs; Brahmins are pure at their feet; and women are 
pure all over.” 


droplets of water: the meaning of viprusah is not altogether clear. Medhatithi and 
Govinda take it as referring to tiny droplets perceptible only to the touch. Narayana 
and Ramacandra: very tiny drops even when they are impure, or droplets falling on the 
feet when sipping water (see 5.142); Kulltka, Raghavananda: droplets of spit coming 
from the mouth (see 2.141). Given that the same term viprusah is used at 5.141 for spit, 
I think Kullika’s interpretation is correct. 


marrow, the inclusion of marrow in this list is anomalous. All others are substances 
that commonly ooze out of the human body; I cannot imagine marrow oozing out un- 
less someone is seriously wounded. Most commentators ignore the word. 
Raghavananda takes it as the fat in bones (asthigatasnehah). Kullika, following 
Govinda, comments: Stromadhye pinditasnehah. Biihler appears to understand this 
gloss to mean “(the fatty substance of the) brain.” But how would the brain ooze out 


5.136 


5.143 


5.144 


5-147 


5.149 
5.152 


5.160 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 287 


unless there is a serious head wound? Could majjan refer to oily residue on the skin 
after sweating? 
Variant reading: “urine, feces, mucus of the nose, ear-wax, phlegm.” 


on one hand: within the context the meaning is clear: “one hand” refers to the left 
hand, with which the person applied the earth and water to the penis and anus. All pu- 
rifications below the navel are carried out using the left hand. Variant reading: “‘on the 
left hand.” 


Ifa sullied ... thing down: a similar provision is given at GD/ 1.28. In the other par- 
allel passages (BDh 1.8.27-31; VaDh 3.43) the person is required to lay down the thing 
he is carrying. The commentators are of little help in understanding this provision. My 
view is that the context is a meal, and the man is carrying dishes for serving the guests. 
During this time if one of the diners, who is by definition sullied with remnants of food 
on his hand, happen to touch the man serving, the latter need not put the dish down 
(which he carries in his left hand) but simply sip some water. 


after eating food: all the commentators interpret this within the context of vomiting. 
Medhatithi: if after eating one vomits or purges on the same day; Govinda, Kulltka: if 
immediately after eating one vomits (no mention of purging (Raghavananda cites 
Govinda on this); Nandana: if immediately after eating one vomits or purges. Biihler 
and Doniger appear to follow Nandana. Medhatithi, however, records the view of some 
who take the eating of food (bhuktva) to be an independent event. I have preferred to 
follow the latter interpretation, although it is possible to see a connection between 
vomiting/purging and eating, especially because the former are past participles (vanto, 
viraktah) and the latter is a gerund (bhuktva). Given the distance between the two 
(pada-a and pdda-c), and because paddas generally constitute discreet units, I prefer to 
take pdda-c as containing a distinct provision, just as pada-d. 


Even in their... independently: this and the following verse have become cause 
celebre in anti-Manu rhetoric, even though these or similar provisions are encountered 
in numerous other legal texts: GDh 18.1-2; BDh2.3.44-6; VaDh 5.3; ViDh 25.13; YDh 
1.85—6. Similar sentiments are expressed later by Manu (9.2-3). Clearly, Brahmanical 
law saw women as eternal minors to be guarded and protected by their male relatives. 
Other and more positive depictions of the role of women and their relationship to 
males, however, are found in Manu, but are mostly ignored by modern critics (see 
Introduction, p. 35). The term svatantra (“independent”) has specifically legal 
connotations. In Narada (NSm 1.29-30), for example, the term is taken to indicate a 
person who can undertake actions that are legally binding, such as sales and contracts. 
He says specifically that a king is independent (svatantra) and his subjects non- 
independent (asvatantra); a teacher is independent, and his pupil is not; a head of a 
household is independent, and the women, children, and servants are not. 


both families: that is, her natal family and that of her husband. See 9.5. 


act of giving away: this is a significant observation about the centrality of the giving 
away (alienation; pradanam) by the father with respect to the husband’s authority over 
his wife. The term sv@mya, which J have translated with the broad “lordship,” can also 
mean ownership; this term is regularly used with regard to someone’s legal ownership 
of property (see 8.197—205). A factor that is implicit in this statement regarding 
“giving away” may be the ancient custom of bride purchase, alluded to at 8.204. If 
marriage is a sale, then ownership is transferred from the previous owner (father) to the 
new owner (husband). 


Just like... death: this and the following verses are clearly directed both against the 


custom of levirate (s/yoga: see 9.57—70) and against a woman’s own desire to have 
children, perhaps through re-marriage. The term “good woman” (sa@dhvi) is probably 


288 


5.161 
5.163 


5.169 


6.1 
6.6 


6.10 


6.13 


6.14 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 5 


used with a pregnant meaning: a woman who is always faithful to her husband (see 
verse 165). 


Variant reading: “excluded from the next world.” 


a woman who has had a man before: the technical term parapiirva is often taken as a 
synonym of punarbhi (“a remarried woman”). I think the former term has a broader 
application than punarbhii, although the former comprehends the latter. The term 
parapirva probably refers to a woman who has had a sexual relationship with another 
man under any circumstances. Narada (NSm 12.45—-52) makes a sevenfold classifica- 
tion of parupiarva, calling three of them punarbhi and four svairinit (“wanton or 
unchaste woman”). 


In accordance . . . of his life: this concluding verse of the section on the householder 
who is a bath-graduate nicely recapitulates the subject. Note that the last half-verse 
here is identical with the second half-verse of 4.1, thus bracketing the section with this 
repetition. See parallels at 6.1, 33. 


CHAPTER SIX 


Additional verse before verse 1: “Hereafter I shall explain the Law pertaining to the 
hermit’s order of life, as well as the rules regarding the gathering of roots and fruits of 
the forest and their relinquishment.” 


After living ... his organs: see parallels at 4.1; 5.169; 6.33. 


bark: the term cira, related to the Buddhist civara, can refer to both a tattered garment 
or cloth (so Medhatithi) or a garment manufactured from strips of tree bark or grass (so 
Narayana, Ramacandra). Govinda, Raghavananda, and Kullika give both possibilities, 
and Nandana specifies a garment made of KuSa grass. Other texts refer to valkala 
(BDh 1.13.12-3; YDh 2.180, 246). Emeneau (1962) has clearly demonstrated that the 
reference is not to garments made directly from tree bark but to those probably woven 
out of fibers from the inner bark of certain trees. It would clearly have been difficult to 
make garments directly out of the other bark of trees. 


constellation-sacrifice: a sacrifice, also called Naksatresti, that is offered to the lunar 
mansions and described in TB 3.1. 


Turdyana sacrifice: the first of a series of yearly sacrifices performed on the full-moon 
day of Phalguna (February—March) or Caitra (March-April). See AsSr, Taq. Variant 
reading: “Uttarayana sacrifice.” 

Daksdyana sacrifice: another in the series of yearly sacrifices. This sacrifice is per- 
formed both on the Full-moon and the New-moon. For a description, see Eggeling’s 
introduction to SB 2.4.4 (p. 374). 


flowers... trees: Biihler takes medhyavrksodbhavani as a separate item and translates: 
“flowers, roots, and fruits, the productions of pure trees”; so also Doniger. Of the 
commentators, only Govinda offers an opinion, and he takes this compound as quali- 
fying puspamilaphalani of pada-b. | agree with this interpretation, both because of the 
lack of a ca after the second compound and because I cannot think of any products of 
tree other than flowers, roots, and fruits, excepts perhaps leaves and sap. It also paral- 
lels nicely snehams ca phalasambhavan of padda-d. 


Bhauma plant, mushrooms (bhaumani kavakani ca): most commentators take the for- 
mer as qualifying the latter, and following them Biihler translates: “mushrooms grow- 
ing on the ground.” As Medhatithi observes, given that all types of mushrooms are 


6.16 
6.18 


6.19 


6.21 


6.22 


6.23 


6.24 


6.25 


6.29 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6 289 


forbidden, it is superfluous to specify ground mushrooms here. Both Medhatithi and 
Bharuci, our two oldest commentators, take the two as separate items. The meaning of 
bhauma is uncertain, however. The manuscript of Bharuci’s commentary is torn at this 
point, but Medhatithi is probably citing Bharuci when he identifies the plant as 
gojihvika, which Jha identifies as cabbage. The identical expression occurs also at 
11.156, which Medhatithi explains as mushrooms growing on the ground; clearly he has 
forgotten the (better!) explanation he gave at 6.14. , 


Variant reading: “roots and fruits.” 


clean up immediately (sadyahpraks@likah): the meaning is that the hermit cleans his 
bowl immediately after eating, leaving nothing for the next time. Such a man does not 
maintain a store of provisions, but lives from day to day. 


he may... eighth mealtime: the standard mealtime for a normal human being is twice 
a day in the morning and in the evening (see 2.56 n.). Eating only at night (i.e., even- 
ing) or during the day implies that he skips one meal. Eating every fourth mealtime 
means that he skips three meals; when one eats every eighth mealtime, one skips three 
days and eats in the evening of the fourth. 


wilted on their own: Biihler, following Kulliika, translates svayamSirnaih: “fallen 
spontaneously”; so also Doniger. Narayana explains: phaldnkurddijananasaktihinatam 
praptaih (“reached a state where they are unable to produce fruit or sprouts”); Govinda 
and Ramacandra agree. I think the latter is the more likely meaning, also because fal- 
ling cannot apply to roots. 


Vaikhdnasa doctrine: the term Vaikhanasa is frequently used to refer to forest hermits. 
The term also refers to the doctrine or treatise of the sage Vikhanas (see BDh 2.11.14). 


spend the day standing and the night seated:: surprisingly, no commentator or tran- 
slator has understood the correct meaning of the technical expression sthandsanda- 
bhyam viharet. It refers to a religious observance during which the person has to 
remain standing during the day (without sitting down) and seated during the night 
(without lying down). The VaDh (24.5) clearly specifies that this observance involves 
standing during the day and sitting at night: sth@n@sanasilo ’has tisthed ratrav Gsita. 
See ApDh 1.25.10; GDh 22.6; BDh 2.2.10; 4.7.17. The same expression recurs in Manu 
at 11.224. For this ascetic/penitential practice, see also 11.111. 


the five fires: the hermit sits in the middle of four blazing fires at each cardinal point, 
with the summer sun scorching overhead as the fifth fire. Note the connection to the 
five ritual fires: see 3.185 n. 


inflict punishment:: beginning at least with Burnell, translators have rendered the term 
Socayet uniformly as “dry up.” Although emaciating the body through fasting may also 
be intended, I think the term has a broader meaning of causing severe pain to the body. 


depositing the sacred fires in his body: Brahmanical theology of renunciation presents 
the abandonment of rites and ritual fires as a process of internalization. The technical 
expression for the ritual process by which this internalization is accomplished is called 
“depositing the fires in one’s body/self” (@tmasamdropana). Its procedure is patterned 
after the vedic custom of depositing the fires either in the fire-drills or in the body 
when a sacrificer has to undertake a journey. He brings back his fires either by pro- 
ducing a fire using the drills or by blowing on to an ordinary fire. The BDh (2.17.26) 
gives a simple form of this rite: the ascetic breathes in the smell of each fire, reciting 
the vedic formula “With that body of yours worthy of sacrifice” (TB 2.5.8.8). After this 
rite the ascetic carries the fires in the form of his breaths. 


Variant reading: “For the purification of his self.” 


6.30 pursued: the term sevitah has the meaning of both practicing religious observances and 


studying scriptural texts. | attempt to capture this double meaning with “pursue.” 


290 


6.33 
6.35 


6.39 


6.43 


6.44 


6.45 


6.46 


6.48 


6.49 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6 


Brahmins, and householders: several commentators, as well and Biihler and Doniger, 
take these to be in apposition: i.e., Brahmin householders. The natural way to read the 
three nouns is to see three separate categories here. 


After spending ... during the fourth: see parallels at 4.1; 5.169; 6.1. 


proceed downward (vrajaty adhah): going downward here and in other similar contexts 
(see 6.37; 7.53; 11.173) probably implies both fall from caste (sociologically, going 
down the social ladder) and going down to the netherworlds (cosmologically). See the 
similar expression at 11.153, where it means that the food eaten has gone down, i.e., 
been excreted. 


freedom from fear (abhaya): the meaning is that the ascetic assures all creatures that no 
harm will come to them from him. This is commonly referred to as the “gift of safety” 
(abhayaddna), and it is also associated with a king after his conquest of a new region 
(see 7.201). He is supposed to assure the safety of the people living there. Verse 4o 
picks up this theme of “fear” with reference to the ascetic’s afterlife. 


keep no store (asamcayika): the vulgate reading is asamkusuka, which has been inter- 
preted to mean “firm of purpose” (Biihler) or “unwavering.” 


A bowl, the foot of a tree: the Sanskrit kapdla here probably means simply a begging 
bowl (see 6.53), although the term can have the meanings of a skull (so Doniger) and a 
potsherd (so Biihler). Foot of a tree is presented as the ideal lodging place for an as- 
cetic (6.26). 

renouncer: although the term mukta means literally “a liberated man,” it is used here in 
the same way as moksa (see 1.114 n.) to refer to a wandering ascetic. Biihler’s “one 
who has attained liberation” and Doniger’s “one who is Freed” are, I think, overly lit- 
eral. The discussion here is about asceticism and ascetics, not about liberation and lib- 
erated individuals. 

his wages (nivesa): according to the vulgate reading nirdesam, the translation would be 
“as a servant his orders.” 


Three additional verses: “A mendicant should wander about during the eight months of 
summer and winter; compassionate towards all living being, he should live in one 
place during the rainy season. He must not travel on a sunless road or step on un- 
inspected ground; and he should always perform his rites using well-strained water. He 
should utter words that are true, harmless, inoffensive, without deceit, not harsh, com- 
passionate, and not slanderous.” 


purified by his sight: the meaning is that he should look at the spot where he is about to 
place his foot, lest he trample to death any living creatures such as ants and worms (see 
6.68). This must have been a value and custom common to most ascetic communities; 
Jain ascetics carry a broom to sweep the ground in front of them lest they step on a tiny 
insect unintentionally. 


seven gates: the meaning was obscure even to the commentators, who give a variety of 
interpretation, many of them educated guesses. Medhatithi and Govinda relate them to 
the triple set (2.224 n.) in different pairs: Law-Wealth, Law-Pleasure, Wealth-Pleasure, 
Pleasure-Wealth, Pleasure-Law, Wealth-Law, and finally the three together. This is 
truly far-fetched, as is the opinion of some given by Bharuci, according to whom the 
seven refer to the seven grammatical cases. Narayana: the five senses, mind, and ego. 
My own view is that they refer to the seven openings of the head: two eyes, two nos- 
trils, two ears, and mouth, which are the major organs of perception and communica- 
tion. This interpretation is recorded as the view of some by Medhiatithi and Bharuci. 


Taking delight . . . felicity: commentators have failed to appreciate the contrast drawn 
here between being seated and walking (vicaret). The first refers to yogic posture and 


6.50 


6.57 


6.58 


6.66 


6.70 


6.73 
6.75 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6 291 


meditation, as Kullika has rightly pointed out. Walking must refer to the actual act 
rather than living in this world (samsdra) as some commentators explain. The life of 
the ascetic is split between sitting in meditation and walking about, especially to beg 
for food, which is the very next topic. See the use of vicaret again in verse 52. 


palmistry: the term arigavidyd has a broader meaning than palmistry, although this 
must have been the principal form. It can include the interpretation of other physical 
characteristics and marks. 


belongings: the term mdatrd has acquired somewhat of a specialized meaning in ascetic 
vocabulary. It refers to the meager possessions of an ascetic, especially his garment, 
bowl, water-pot, and staff. Note the interesting juxtaposition of -mdtra at the end of the 
compound in pada-c with the meaning “only or merely” and mdtrd in the sense of the 
meager articles of an ascetic in pada-d. 


with a show of reverence: it is unclear who shows the reverence. Medhatithi thinks that 
it is the donor; others think it is the ascetic himself who shows reverence to the giver. 
Biihler appears to follow the latter interpretation, which is the most plausible gram- 
matically. Ascetic literature, however, warn the ascetic to fear honors bestowed on him 
by ordinary people and to shun such honors as if they were poison, and recommend 
that he welcome disrespect as if it were ambrosia: see 2.162 with reference to a student. 


Though decked in finery (bhisita): the vulgate reading is désita, following which 
Biihler translates: “though blemished (by a want of the external marks),” and Doniger 
“even if he is flawed (in that duty).” 


an emblem... Law (na lingam dharmakaranam): literally, “an emblem is not the cause 
of dharma.” Biihler takes dharma as merit, but that would result in the term being used 
with two different meanings in the same verse. The meaning, I think, is that wearing an 
ascetic emblem does not ipso facto mean that the man is following the Law. In the very 
next verse the emblem appears to be compared to a Kataka fruit, which is believed to 
have the property of making turbid water clear. But the fruit has to be immersed in the 
water for this to happen. Likewise, an emblem itself will not make an ascetic virtuous; 
he must live according to the Law of which the emblem is merely an outward sign. 


Controlling the breath: the definition of what constitutes a single control of breath is 
given in a verse cited by commentators and found in VaDh 25.13: “When someone re- 
cites three times the Gayatri verse together with the Calls, the syllable OM, and the 
Siras formula while controlling his breath, it is called ‘control of breath’.” 


Variant reading: “Through the practice (yoga) of knowledge.” 


that state: the meaning of tat padam is not altogether clear. In all likelihood, the phrase 
refers to the highest state of the liberated self, namely the state of Brahman (see 6.79, 
81, 85). 


6.76—7 Constructed... ghosts: the human body is here compared to a house, a common 


6.78 


image in ascetic literature. The ascetic has, of course, abandoned his house, but he still 
carries his body with him. This imagery invites the reader to regard the house, com- 
monly perceived as offering safety and shelter, as a place of torment and danger. The 
expression “dwelling place of ghosts” (bhitavasa) carries a double meaning; bhata can 
mean both ghost and element. Indeed, the body is composed of elements, but it is, at 
another level, the abode of impure and dangerous ghosts. See Maitri Upanisad, 3.4. 


When a tree... painful grasp: | think commentators and translators alike have failed 
to understand this simile, which, I must admit, has been cast in turbid syntax. All take 
the tree falling from the bank and the bird leaving the tree as two independent similes. 
That is very unlikely, given that the first foot concludes with vrksa (“tree”), and the 
second foot begins with it, indicating that the latter picks up the theme of the former. 
Further, they take graha (which I think means alligator rather than shark) only with the 


292 


6.80 


6.83 


6.85 


6.86 


6.89 
6.90 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 6 


giving up of the body in the second half of the verse. I think the last foot is connected 
to both the simile and the ascetic giving up the body. The meaning then seems to be 
that a bird flying off before the fall of the tree escapes the alligator’s grasp in the river. 
Likewise, when an ascetic abandons the body before its natural fall at death (which is 
here compared to the fall of the tree), he escapes the grasp of the alligator, probably 
Yama (6.61). This fits nicely with the theme of the preceding verse, namely, that an as- 
cetic must abandon the body voluntarily. Variant reading: “he escapes from the painful 
village.” 


by the passion .. . object of passion: Manu is clearly playing with the double meaning 
of bhdva, which means both the inner disposition of the spirit and external objects, es- 
pecially those that are the object of passion. 


those named “Vedanta” ; Medhatithi takes vedadntabhihitam to mean what has been 
called Vedanta; thus he should softly recite the Upanisgads. Others take it to mean what 
has been stated in the Vedantas; thus he should softly recite what the Upanisads rec- 
ommend. Nandana and Ramacandra think that this is OM. I prefer Medhatithi’s inter- 
pretation because yat of pdda-d, | think, clearly refers back to brahma of pdda-a. 


sequence of practices: some commentators take kramayogena as a reference to yogic 
and other practices enjoined on the ascetic. Others take it as a reference to the obliga- 
tion to go through the first three @framas or to pay his three debts before he undertakes 
the life of a wandering ascetic. Biihler accordingly translates: “A twice-born man who 
becomes an ascetic, after the successive performance of the above-mentioned acts.” 
The verb, however, is parivrajati (which means to wander about, and by extension live 
the ascetic life) rather than pravrajati (which refers to the initial departure from home, 
and thus to the initiation into asceticism). 


Listen... vedic retirees: this verse signals the passage to a different topic. Throughout 
his work Manu uses similar verses to signal the transition from one topic to another 
(see Introduction, p. 7). In the table of contents given in the first chapter, moreover, 
Manu clearly indicates that he has two separate topics in mind. The sequence of topics 
at 1.114 (see note to it) is t@pasyam moksam samnydsam eva ca. The term samnydsa 
signals a topic different from moksa; nowhere else in this list does Manu use two terms 
to refer to a single topic. Sammnydsa refers to the life of Vedasamnyasikas, which is the 
subject of the last section of chapter six that opens with the above verse. Many com- 
mentators, such as Kullika, consider Vedasamnyasika to be a lower type of renouncer. 
I think that commentators, such as Govinda and Bharuci, who take them to be a type of 
householder are right. Manu’s discussion, furthermore, confirms that he considers 
Vedasamnyasikas to be retired householders who aspire to holiness without resorting 
to the two types of asceticism that he had described earlier. A similar use of the term 
with reference to retirement of an aged Brahmin occurs in the Mdnava Srautasitra, 
8.25: see Sprockhoff 1987. In what follows, Manu appears to be saying: “I grant that 
ali these four dramas can lead a person to the highest state. Nevertheless, the house- 
holder is the best and chief among them, and as such it is unnecessary to leave the 
household life in old age. 1 give now this alternative way of leading a holy life in old 
age in one's own house.” Manu reserves the term samnydsa for this institution; within 
this context the term means retirement rather than renunciation. 


Variant reading: “according to the Veda and the smtis.” 


end up: most commentators take samsthiti as a reference to the fact that persons in the 
other G@Ssramas must get their sustenance from the householder, even though this is not 
strictly true in the case of a forest hermit. The image of the rivers flowing into the 
ocean, however, evokes another image: that of the rebirth process as described in the 
BrU 6.2.9—14 and the ChU 5.1-9. After death all beings go through the transformations 
of smoke, rain, and plants, and finally end up as the semen of a householder before 
taking birth in the womb of his wife. 


7.4 


75 


711 


7.12 


7-13 


7.14 


7-15 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 293 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


vedic consecration: all the commentators take bra@hmam samskaram as a reference to 
vedic initiation. Nandana is the only one who gives the royal consecration (abhiseka) 
as one alternative, alongside initiation. As Biihler indicates, the royal consecration is 
clearly what is intended here, because that is what makes a man a king along with the 
obligation to protect his subjects. 


Indra... . lord of wealth: these are the eight guardian deities of the cardinal points, 
beginning with Indra in the east and ending with Kubera, the lord of wealth, in the 
north. 


overpowers (abhibhavati): Medhatithi glosses durniriksyamukho bhavati (“he becomes 
one whose face is difficult to be gazed upon”), which is supported by the comparison 
with the sun in the very next verse. Kullika glosses atisete (“surpasses”), which is 
followed by Biihler, using tejasd@ as an instrumental of comparison. I think Medhatithi 
is on the right track, but the meaning is probably broader: overpower and overwhelm 
due to both his majesty and his power. 


every aspect (vi$varupam): the aspects he assumes are indicated in the next verse: be- 
nevolence, valor, anger. Commentators also say that he can be a friend one minute and 
an enemy the next. I also think that, in light of his comparison to the sun in verse 6, 
that the old meaning of visvariipa (Bodewitz 1985) as dazzling or brilliant (like gold 
and the sun) may resonate here also. 


he, in whose: | am assuming (contra Biihler) that yasya of this verse is the correlative 
of sah of verse 10 rather than that of pada-d of this verse. First, the three aspects given 
in verse 11 seem to be an explication of “all aspects” of verse 10. Second, the presence 
of the causal hi (“for”) in pa@da-d makes it very likely that this pada gives the reason 
why the king is all that he stated to be in verses 10 and 11. See the very similar con- 
struction in 2.7. We see the last pdda with a hi giving the reason for what was stated in 


the earlier pddas in 8.37, 39, 270, 338, 417; 9.144. 
of them all: namely, the eight gods from whose particles he was created. 


to destroy him quickly (@suvinasaya): I follow Medhatithi and Govinda in connecting 
asu with vindsaya. 1 think the two words form a compound. The fact that the two 
words are in the same pdda also supports the syntactic connection between the two. 
Others take dsu as an adverb modifying the verb: “he quickly makes up his mind” (so 
Biihler and Doniger). 


When the king .. . that Law: the verse is not altogether clear. I think Medhatithi is cor- 
rect in taking dharma here as a royal decree or edict rather than as simply dharma, 
which, as Bharuci points out, comes not from the king but from the sastras. Medhatithi 
gives examples of such decrees: “There is a wedding in the minister’s house, and all 
should gather there.” Against those in disfavor: “No one should associate with this 


” 


man. 


Punishment (danda): it appears that Manu begins the discussion of punishment by per- 
sonifying it. Punishment is the son of the Lord made from Brahman’s energy. But by 
verse 32 he passes on imperceptibly to its common meaning of punishment imposed by 
the king. 


accede to being used: verses 22 and 23 make the meaning of the unusual expression 
bhogaya kalpante clear. Different beings open themselves to being used (literally 
“enjoyed”) by others; one can think of the chain of food and eaters. In a socio-political 
context, moreover, “being used” may refer specifically to the king’s enjoyment of his 
subjects’ wealth through taxes and duties. 


294 


7.16 
7-19 


7.21 


7.24 


7.25 


7-29 


7.32 


7-35 


7-37 


7.40 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 


the place and the time: that is, when and where the crime was committed. 


after careful examination (samiksya): the reference is probably to a judicial inquiry. 
Medhatithi correctly observes that this phrase relates to what was said in verse 16 
(aveksya tattvatah). The two verses bracket this brief discussion of the proper way to 
inflict just punishment. 


lap up (avalihyat): this makes sense because the term /avis refers specifically to ghee 
that is poured into the sacred fire. 


topsy-turvy: commentators adharottaram take to mean that the lower castes would 
usurp the roles and privileges of upper castes. 


revolt: | take the term prakopa here to mean revolt or tumult among the populace, a 
meaning common in the AS (see, e.g., 1.18.1; 1.19.28). 


administrator: the term netd (literally “leader”; see verse 17) must refer to the king 
who actually administers punishment. See the use of pra Vni with reference to inflict- 
ing punishment in verses 19-20, 31, and again in verses 26-7; and we have the simple 
verb ni in verse 30. 


as well as . . . mid-space: another translation would be: “as well as sages, gods and 
those who dwell in mid-space.” 


friends and loved ones (suhrtsu snigdhesu): so Bharuci, Narayana, and Kulltka. How- 
ever, Medhatithi takes this as a single category: “friends who are dear to him”; that is, 
where friendship is not based on some ulterior motive as in the case of an ally. 


The king ... to them: this verse concludes the section on the creation of the king to be 
the protector of the people, a section that began with verse 3. The connection to the 
latter verse is clearly established by the use here of the word srstah echoing asyjat of 
verse 3. 


devoted to .. . them (dharme nivistanaém): Medhatithi offers another possibility with an 
elided “a”: dharme (a)nivistanam. The translation would then be: “people . . . are not 
devoted to the law specific to them.” 


After getting up in the morning: note that the entire section on the duties of the king is 
structured to encompass a single day in the life of the king. Other materials, such as the 
appointment of officials, organization of the state, and political strategies, are all pre- 
sented, sometimes quite artificially, within that overall structure. The artificiality of the 
structure is apparent, because at 7.145 Manu returns to the morning duties of the king, 
possibly because so much material (108 verses) had intervened. This is followed by the 
afternoon routine (7.216—22) and the evening (7.223~26). Note that this structure par- 
allels the AS 1.19.6-25, which recommends that the king develop a routine for the day 
and the night. He is asked to divide the day and the night into eight parts each and to 
perform specific tasks during each period. For example, during the first part of the day 
he reviews matters of defense and revenue; during the second, he looks into the affairs 
of the citizens; and during the third, he takes his bath and the midday meal. Likewise, 
during the first part of the night he interviews secret agents. This admonition of the 
AS, perhaps, was the inspiration for the structure that Manu gives to this central sec- 
tion on the duties of a king (ra@jadharma). 


those residing in the forest: the reference is probably to the Pandava brothers of the 
MBh. They recovered their kingdom after the great war. I thank Professor Albrecht 
Wezler for this insight. Commentators ignore this point and take the term as referring 
simply to poor persons. 


7.41-2 Vena came ... rank of a Brahmin: these are well-known stories from ancient lore. 


Vena was a king notorious for his evil conduct. He prohibited sacrifice and, conse- 
quently, was killed by Brahmin ascetics with their spells. Among the many legends 


7-43 


7.52 


7:54 


7-56 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 295 


surrounding the figure of King Nahusa is one where he wanted to obtain Indra’s wife 
and was therefore cursed to become a snake. Sudas Paijavana (the son of Pijavana) is a 
king named in the Rgveda. The famous seers Vasistha and Visvamitra were his priests. 
Sudas killed Vasistha’s son and, abandoned by Visvamitra, comes to ruin. No informa- 
tion appears to be available on Sumukha. Nimi, too impatient to wait for Vasistha, 
started a sacrifice on his own and dies under a curse by Vasistha. Prthu is the son of 
Vena produced posthumously by Brahmins by churning Vena’s body. He ruled the 
earth justly, and for this reason the earth is named Prthvi, the wife of Prthu. Both 
Kubera and Visvamitra (the son of Gadhi) came to their respective positions because 
of ascetic toil (tapas). Kubera, the guardian of the north, became the lord of wealth, 
and Visvamitra, originally a Ksatriya, rose to the rank of a Brahmin. 


From experts .. . enterprises: this verse lacks a verb and, as Bharuci and Medhatithi 
point out, the verb adhigacchait (“he should learn’) is carried over (anuvrtti) from 
verse 39. In this case, it is likely that the verses 40-2 are either interpolations or at best 
a parenthetical comment. Their intervention probably necessitated some scribes and 
commentators, including Medhatithi, to change vidya to the verb vidydt. This verb is 
used frequently by Manu but always in the sense of “one should know” (when Bhrgu is 
imparting some knowledge: e.g., 2.149; 7.50, 100) or “one should discover” (as when a 
king should learn the weakness of his enemy: 7.105). It is never used in the sense of 
learning from a teacher or studying. 


Variant reading: “rampant everywhere, a man should recognize that each preceding 
vice is more perilous to himself than each subsequent.” 


counselors: this term sacivdn occurs only once elsewhere in Manu (7.120), where also 
it refers to a very high official. The term occurs only once in the AS (in the verse 1.7.9). 
Given that Manu deals with amdtyas (government officials) in a later section (7.60-2), 
it appears that he uses saciva as the equivalent of mantrin in the AS (counselors or the 
highest kind of ministers). See Scharfe 1993, 125-37. In the MBh (15.14.11) 
Yudhisthira’s four brothers are called his sacivas, indicating the high rank of officials 
bearing that name. 


natives of the land: the meaning of mauldn is unclear. Commentators take it to mean 
people whose ancestors were in royal service. This is followed by Biihler and Doniger. 
The term is used in the AS (2.33.8; 7.8.27; 9.2.1-3, 14; 10.1.7; 12.1.28) always with ref- 
erence to the first of six classes of troops; and the term is translated by Kangle as 
“hereditary.” Within that context that indeed may be the meaning, even though it may 
also refer to the fact that these soldiers are native inhabitants of the original territory of 
the king (miila). The term maula is used by Manu in two other places (8.62, 259), both 
in the context of competent witnesses. The meaning of “hereditary” makes no sense 
within those contexts. I think that in all three instances maula refers to native or origi- 
nal inhabitants of the locality as opposed to newcomers; that is, people with deep roots 
in the region. In this sense, it may also imply “hereditary,” because the ancestors of 
these people were inhabitant of the region. 


well-accomplished: the exact meaning of labdhalaksa is unclear. Skill in the use of 
weapons is highlighted by commentators; but the term probably means more than this 
and includes accomplishment in various undertakings, including ministerial posts and 
past battles. 


State: all the commentators, except Nandana, state that sthana consists of the army, 
treasury, fort, and territory. I have not been able to find this term used technically in 
the AS. 


pacification of acquisitions (labdhaprasamanani): this is a topic of the AS (1.1.15) and 
dealt with extensively at AS 13.5.1-24. The pacification of newly won territories is 
done both through reconciliation and kindness and by means of force. The king is 


296 


7-57 


7.60 


7.62 


7.63 


7-05 


7.67 


7.68 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 


supposed to publicize the vices of the defeated king, contrasting that with his own 
virtues and piety. 

about his affairs: Biihler and Doniger, possibly following Kullika, connect the word 
karyesu with pada-d: “do what is (most) beneficial for him in his affairs.” I think it is 
syntactically connected to what precedes, because this term concluding that clause as 
correctly pointed out by Govinda; the king seeks advice about his affairs. 


officials (amatyan): this is a generic term used with reference to all high ranking gov- 
ernment officials (see Scharfe 1993, 132), especially those below the level of mantrin 
(“counselor”). Revenue collection is, of course, one of the principal duties of such of- 
ficials. Within the state organization envisaged in the AS, there was a special official 
called Samahartr (precisely the same word used here by Manu) who was the revenue 
collector: see Scharfe 1993, 157~9. Note the parallel between this verse on the ap- 
pointment of amdtyas and verse 54 on the appointment of counselors, both verses 
ending in supariksitan. 


employing . .. his residence: 1 have a feeling that there is something wrong with this 
verse. Bharuci, for example, says that the brave are chiefs of the armed forces, even 
though the army is not mentioned here. Also, paddas a, c, and d, form nice self-con- 
tained units; this structure is violated in padda-b, which, as it stands, forms a syntactic 
unit with pdda-a. The initial tesam (“among them”) looks suspiciously like a com- 
mentarial introduction to this verse, a comment that found its way into the root text 
(but see 8.4 where the initial tesam has a similar meaning). One candidate for emenda- 
tion is daksan, which is found also in verse 61. If we read dande in its place following 
the ST mss., and replace tesam with Sucin, we would have four self-contained pddas. 
The repetition of Sucin in pada-c makes this emendation somewhat problematic, but 
both Bharuci and Medhatithi take the statement about mines and factories to be an ex- 
ample of artha, which they take to mean “activities relating to income and expendi- 
ture.” See also the parallel passage of ViDh (3.16—21), where those employed in mines 
are called dpta. With this type of emendation, the verse would read: “appointing the 
honest to financial affairs, the brave from illustrious families to the army; the honest to 
mines and factories; and the timid to the interior of his residence.” 


hint, bearing, or gesture: the AS (1.15.7-9) gives only two: ifigita (“hint”) and akdra 
(“bearing”), and defines the former as non-normal movement or gesture (anyathd- 
vrttih), and the latter as “putting on an expression” (@krtigrahanam), explained by 
commentators as unnatural facial expressions, such as paleness. All three terms clearly 
refer to the ability of the envoy to interpret properly the signs that may betray the inner 
thoughts of the rival king. 


realm: according to Scharfe (1993, 124) rastra may also have a more restricted mean- 
ing, referring to “incorporated states with some degree of autonomy.” See also 7.122 n. 


seducible men (krtyesu): most commentators and all translators have missed the tech- 
nical meaning of kytya within the vocabulary of political science. Biihler, for example, 
translates “with respect to the affairs” and produces a forced translation of the verse. In 
the AS (see 1.16.24) krtya means a person in the enemy king’s service who is open to 
being seduced. Nandana correctly detects this meaning: svardjnd bhedyesu para- 
paksasthitesu purusesu (“among men in the service of the enemy who can be induced 
to break with their king”). See Scharfe 1993, 213-4. 


servants (bhrtyesu): the ST mss. read here also krtyesu. The translation would then be: 
“his plans with the help of seducible men.” 


he should take: the subject of the verb Gtisthet is unclear. Is it the ambassador, whose 
activities were the focus of the preceding verses, or the king? Bharuci, Govinda, 
Raghavananda, and Nandana take the subject to be the ambassador; and I would tend 


7-69 


7-70 


7:74 


7-75 


7.76 


7.78 


7.82 


7.84 
7.86 


7.90 


7.91 


7-94 


7:97 


7-99 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 297 


to agree. Narayana, Kullika, and Ramacandra take it to be the king, who finds all this 
out through his envoy. Medhatithi’s commentary on this verse is missing. 


healthy (anavilam): I follow the interpretation of Bharuci, Govinda, Kullika, and 
Raghavananda. The meaning, according to these, is that the region is free from both 
disease and from other harmful things, such as mosquitoes, snakes, vicious animals, 
and the like. Narayana, Nandana, and Ramacandra take the term to mean a region free 
from mixed castes. 


A fortress... by a hill: on the different kinds of fortresses and their relative merits, see 
AS 2.3.1-35. 


Variant reading: “a fortress is enjoined.” 


Additional verse: “Even the top of the Mandara mountain devoid of soldiers is not 
commended. A fort with soldiers, Manu the son of the Self-existent One has declared, 
is the best kind of fort.” 


conveyances: the term vahandni is difficult to translate because it includes vehicles 
(carts, carriages, chariots), as well as draft animals, beasts of burden, and riding horses 
(cavalry). 


provided with pools and groves: | follow the interpretation of Medhatithi and Nandana. 
Others understand this as referring simply to water and trees. 


domestic rites .. . fires: the distinction here is between the domestic rites (smmdrta) that 
are described in the Grhyasiitras, and the solemn vedic rites (srauta) that require the 
three vedic fires (2.231). 


Variant reading: “for this is called the inexhaustible treasure of kings deposited with 
Brahmins.” 


Variant reading: “to the teacher, a thousandfold reward.” 


Two additional verses: “When an article is given to a worthy recipient at the proper 
place and time, according to rule, and in a spirit of generosity—that is the accomplish- 
ment of the Law. This alone is the highest and the complete Law laid down for a 
king—he should obtain wealth through victory in battle and donate it to the twice- 
born.” 


treacherous: most commentators take kita as referring to be a weapon concealed in a 
wooden exterior. 


a man standing on the ground: the implication is that the soldier, in this case the king, 
is fighting on a chariot or a mount. 


master: see Scharfe 1993, 106 for the use of bhartr with reference to the king. On the 
loyalty to the king, see Hara 1994-95. 


preemptive share: the term uddhdra is used also with reference to the extra share re- 
served for the oldest brother in partitioning ancestral property (see 9.112-7). It appears 
that in the division of war booty also, the king, as the chief, received a share of the best 
pieces before the rest was divided among the soldiers, as also the best item from the 
booty won by individual soldiers in single combat. See also GDh 10.22. 


vedic scripture: Medhatithi and other commentators cite AB 3.21: after his victory over 
Vrtra, Indra demanded his preemptive share: uddhdGram ma uddharata. 


Additional verse: “He should distribute the gains among his servants; he alone should 
not take them all. The king should be satisfied with the mere title and the parasol.” 


The king .. . worthy recipients: this verse has the hallmarks of a proverbial saying. In 
the Paficatantra (I, verse 2) there is a very similar statement with regard to a merchant 
and his ambition to become rich. See the parallel in AS 1.4.3; Scharfe 1993, 46. 


298 


7.101 
7.102 


7.105 


7.106 


7.107 


7.113 


7.116 


7.119 


7.120 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 


Variant reading: “he should distribute to deserving people.” 


He should keep . . . readiness: the phrase nityam udyatadandah syat is quoted in AS 
1.4.5 and ascribed to “Teachers,” making it likely that this is also a proverbial saying. 


hide his limbs like a tortoise: a variant of this verse is cited in AS 1.15.60. The simile 
may be a comparison of the five avigas of counsel (mantra) to the five afgas (four feet 
and head) that the tortoise withdraws into the shell. The five limbs of counsel are given 
as: means for commencing operations (karmanam Grambhopdyah); provision of men 
and material (purusadravyasampad), distribution of place and time (desakdlavibhaga), 
remedies for setbacks (vipattipratikdra); and success of the undertaking (karyasiddhi). 


He should ponder . . . like a lion: Bharuci has a long comment on these similes: “Just 
as naturally in order to catch a mass of fish who are safe in their water-fort the ‘heron’ 
finds an effective means to take them by employing meditation, after dedicating him- 
self to the task, so the king should not be despondent realizing that if one employs 
abundant thought on one’s affairs even aims very difficult to achieve are attained. Just 
as the ‘hare’, because its body is small, is able to double back from even a host of 
enemies, so even one who has no allies and so cannot withstand when his feudatories 
are enraged against him and have risen in all quarters, may seal up his fort and fly from 
it in search of a suitable refuge. Just as a ‘wolf’ intending to take the cattle, finds out 
the keeper’s negligence and snatches them, so one should not give up one’s hope of 
taking what appears to be the object of careful protection, for the time will come when, 
like a wolf, he will be able to make his snatch. And just as the ‘lion’ strikes even large- 
bodied creatures like the elephant and so on, overcoming them by employing his might 
and power, so the king should not fear, thinking that the enemy’s force is large. For 
something of large size but weak in spirit is sometimes struck down by a small creature 
which is large in spirit” (Trans. Derrett). In his commentary on this verse, Medhatithi 
has plagiarized Bharuci. 

strategies beginning with conciliation: the four strategies are conciliation (s@man), 
gifts (ddna), fomenting dissension (bheda), and war (yuddha, vigraha). See 7.198—200. 


Additional verse: “He should not place his trust in an untrustworthy person; nor should 
he place excessive trust in a trustworthy person. Trust is the source of danger; it cuts 
him off even by his roots.” 


managing ... well managed: | take samgraha in this context as relating to the manage- 
ment or governance of the king’s realm, which is the topic of the very next section. 
Medhiatithi glosses with raksavidhdnam, which deals with only one aspect of manage- 
ment. Govinda, Kulliika, and Nandana also gloss with raksana. See MBh 12.88.1 where 
samgraha is juxtaposed with gupti, the latter referring specifically to protection and 
the former, I think, more generally to good governance that would bring satisfaction to 
the people. 


prospers: on the term edhate, see Thieme 1958. 


troubles: Govinda and Kullika take dosa to mean thefts and other such crimes. Nara- 
yana takes it as referring to agitations among the people and the like (janavidravddin). 
The term literally means “faults” and can refer to any types of adversities or problems 
arising within a village. 

“family” : the term kula is interpreted by Medhatithi to mean a segment of a village, 
known in some regions as hatta and in others as usta. Narayana cites a saying that a 
kula consists of two halas, a hala being an area of land that can be plowed by eight or 
six oxen. The latter view is adopted by Govinda, Kullika, Raghavananda, and 
Ramacandra. Nandana thinks it is the share of one cultivator. 


undertaken by each individually (prthakkaryani): the meaning could also be “activities 
pertaining to individuals.” 


7.121 


7.122 


7.124 


7.125 


7.126 


7.127 


7.130 


7.138 


7-139 


7.140 


7-143 


7.144 


7-147 


7-153 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 299 


high stature: commentators uniformly take ucchaihsthanam to mean a person coming 
from an illustrious family or who is in some way eminent. I think that it may well refer 
to the physical stature or height rather than the social or moral standing of the individ- 
ual, especially in juxtaposition with his fierce appearance. 


within their jurisdictions (rastresu): this is a significant use of the term ragtra to refer 
to an administrative unit within the state (rdjya): see 7.65 n. 


people who have business: commentators generally take karyikebhyah as referring to 
people who have lawsuits pending. The reference is then to the bribery of judges. The 
term could also have a wider meaning, including other matters requiring official sanc- 
tion. In that context, this provision may include bribery and kickbacks. 


send them into exile: the term pravasanam can also mean the infliction of capital pun- 
ishment (see 8.123 n.). 


He should fix: for a discussion of the relative wages of the different officials in royal 
service, see Scharfe 1993, 135. 


maintenance: the critical edition has adopted the reading bhaktakam in preference to 
vetanam (“wages”) found in most editions and mss. For a discussion of this unusual 
term, see Introduction, p. 36. 


maintenance (bhakta): I think this term means more or less the same that bhaktaka of 
the preceding verse and must refer to the expenses of maintaining himself and his em- 
ployees. I think Nandana has it right when he explains: karmakarddibhyo deyam 
(“what has to be given to the workmen and the like’). Biihler and Doniger take the 
term literally as meaning “food.” 


share: on bhdga as a technical term for the king’s share of any produce, occurring al- 
ready in the Asokan inscriptions, see Scharfe 1993, 160, where further literature is 
given. 

self-employed: most commentators take the expression @tmopajivisu to mean Siidras 
employed as manual laborers. This may well be the case; but the expression has a 
wider application, as seen in its use with regard to wives who earn a living on their 
own, possibly as prostitutes, at 8.362. 


He must not... to them: most commentators see an implicit “non-gathering of taxes” 
in the context of cutting off his own root. That is, by being too lenient with taxation a 
king cuts his own root, whereas by excessive taxation he cuts off the root of his tax- 
paying subjects. Biihler follows this interpretation. I think Nandana is correct in seeing 
excessive greed as the cause of cutting his own root and that of others. “Root” is the 
wealth produced by the people that supports both the citizens and the king. Excessive 
taxation cuts this common root. 


lawsuits: although the term kdryam may have a broader meaning, such as business or 
affairs (Biihler), 1 think that here and in the next verse it has the technical meaning of a 
lawsuit (see 8.8). The mention of “that seat” in verse 141 indicates a judicial proceed- 
ing at which a deputized minister is presiding. 

Additional verse: “Fire, flared up by the anguish of the people’s oppression, does not 
turn back until it has burnt up the king’s family, wealth, and life.” 


specified rewards (nirdistaphala): the reference is to the taxes a king collects, which 
are considered to be payment for the protection provided by the king. 


Climbing .. . his counselors: for a discussion of the place where the king should meet 
with his counselors, see Sternbach 1972. 


tying up .. . undertakings (karyasesam): the reference is to past activities where some 
aspects may not have been completely carried out and need further attention. See 7.179. 


300 


7-154 


7155 


7.156 


7-157 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 


activities: on the meaning of the term pracara, which has been subject to much misun- 
derstanding, see Scharfe 1993, 195-200. He has demonstrated that the term does not 
refer to a piece of land or a region but to activities. See 9.219 n. 


eightfold agenda (astavidham karma): there is no consensus among the commentators 
as to the identity of these eight. Many cite a verse from USanas that lists eight activities 
of a king: income (adana), expenditure (visarga), dismissal (praisa, e.g., of bad offi- 
cials), preventing (#isedha, e.g., wrong activities on the part of officials), propounding 
the correct meaning (arthavacana; others interpret the term to mean resolving difficult 
points of Law), resolving lawsuits (vyavahdrasya ceksanam), punishment (danda), and 
prescribing penances (suddhi). Medhatithi offers two other lists. First: undertaking 
what has not been done (akrtdrambha), carrying out what has been done (k7tdnu- 
sthdna), enhancing what has been carried out (anusthitaviSesana), reaping the fruit of 
the activity (karmasamgraha), conciliation (saman), sowing dissension (bheda), 
bestowing gifts (dana), and using force (danda). This explanation is preferred by 
Nandana. Second: trade (vanikpatha), building bridges and dikes (udakasetu- 
bandhana), building forts (durgakarana), keeping them in repair (krtasya tatsamskdara- 
niyamah), trapping elephants (hastibandhana), constructing mines (khanikhanana), 
settling uninhabited lands (SiinyaniveSana), and clearing forests (d@ruvanacchedana). 


set of five (paiicavargam): most commentators explain this as a reference to the five 
kinds of spies employed by a king: deceiver (kdpatika, the meaning of this word being 
unclear), fallen ascetic (udGsthita), householder in distress (grhapati), trader in distress 
(vaideha), and one wearing the insignia of a hermit (ta@pasavyaitjana). For a discussion 
of the various types of spies, see Scharfe 1993, 204-39. Narayana, Nandana, and 
Ramacandra prefer a different set, identical with the five limbs of counsel (7.105 n.). 


circle of neighboring kingdoms (mandala): ancient Indian political science envisaged, 
perhaps somewhat artificially and geometrically, kingdoms as forming circles around 
any given kingdom. The neighboring kingdoms constitute natural enemies; the king- 
doms beyond the immediate neighbors constitute the enemy’s enemies, and thus one’s 
own natural allies; the kingdoms beyond these constitute the ally’s natural enemies, 
and therefore one’s own enemies; and so on. See Scharfe 1993, 105-17. 


Two additional verses: “In the forest he should place forest-dwellers such as ascetics 
and foresters. He should establish a series of spies who are quick, in order to discover 
the activities of his enemies. He should uncover those dispatched by his enemy using 
the same kinds of spies as those deployed by the enemy-—whether they are mobile 
spies or resident spies, secret agents without the outwards marks of secret agents.” 


buffer king: this is a king whose realm stands between the king and the kingdom he 
intends to attack. 


The above constituents . . . twelve: the constituents (prakrtayah) must be four in order 
to come up with the total of twelve. Scharfe (1993, 108) appears to take the constitu- 
ents as the seven listed in AS 6.1; but it is likely that Manu considers them to be the 
four encircling kingdoms listed in verse 155. On the “root” of the circle, called “womb” 
(mandalayoni) in the AS, see Scharfe 1993, 107-8. The “eight others” are identified by 
the commentators as the eight other kinds of surrounding kingdoms listed by 
Kamandaki (Nitisdra, 8.16—7). Four in front beyond the enemy: ally (mitra), enemy’s 
ally (arimitra), ally’s ally (mitramitra), enemy’s ally’s ally (arimitramitra). Four in the 
rear: foe at the heel (parsnigraha), rescuer from the rear (@kranda), supporter of foe at 
the heel (parsnigrahdsdra), and supporter of rescuer from the rear (Gkranddsdra). For 
these terms, see 7.207 n. 


There are also .. . seventy-two: each of the twelve listed in the previous verse has five 
constituents, thus bringing the total to 60 (see AS 6.2.28, which calls these 60 


7.158 


7.160 


7.161 


7.162 


7.163 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 301 


dravyaprakrtayah, “material constituents”). Together with the previous twelve (called 
rajaprakrtayah, “constituents of kings” in AS 6.2.28), the total comes to 72. 


Additional verse: “When a neutral and powerful king is located along a long and un- 
controlled path that a king desiring conquest and seeking the contro] of the circle of 
kings has to take, he is called the buffer king.” The verse is somewhat unclear. 


double stratagem: the meaning of dvaidhibhdvam in Manu is unclear. The explanation 
given in verse 167 indicates that the strategy consists of separating the army from the 
king. How this was carried out and the strategy behind it are unclear. Most commenta- 
tors say that the king divides his army in two, which is also the explanation given in 
7.173. I prefer the view of Bharuci, followed by Medhatithi and Govinda, according to 
which this strategy calls for pursuing war and peace at the same time. Govinda thinks 
that he pursues war with one opponent and peace with another. This appears to be the 
basis for the description of the strategy in the AS 7.7: the king obtains troops from one 
neighbor promising him part of his treasury and wages war on another neighbor. The 
description in verse 167, however, points in another direction. The king pursues peace 
and diplomacy, while surreptitiously preparing for war. That may be the reason for 
separating the army (or part of the army) from the king, so he can give the appearance 
that he is not preparing for war. In verse 167, the meaning may not be that the army 
stops in one place and the king in another (so Biihler), but that the king remains sta- 
tionary, while the army is on the march (or vice versa). Here the term sthiti may indeed 
be a synonym of dsana (remaining stationary after suspending military operations); the 
AS 7.4.2 gives sthdna as a synonym of dsana. The division of the army into two (7.173) 
may also envisage such a strategy: one part remaining stationary, giving the impression 
that war in not imminent, while the other launches a surprise attack. 


After forging . .. war: the reading of the critical edition (see note there) is samdhdya 
ca vigrhya ca. Bharuci gives a very clear and succinct explanation: samdhadydsanam 
vigrhyasanam samdhdya yanam vigrhya yanam va karyam viksya prayuiijita | tatha 
dvaidham samSrayam eva ca, “After forging an alliance, he should suspend opera~ 
tions, and after waging war, he should suspend operations; after forging an alliance, he 
should march into battle, and after waging war, he should march into battle—he should 
carefully examine the state of affairs and adopt these tactics. Likewise, the double 
stratagem or asylum.” If we follow the vulgate reading (samndhim vigraham eva ca), 
the translation would be: “He should carefully examine the state of affairs and adopt 
the tactic of suspending operations, marching into battle, forging an alliance, waging 
war, pursuing a double stratagem, or seeking asylum.” 


to pursue a double stratagem: the vulgate reads dvividham (“of two kinds”) for dvai- 
dham (“double stratagem”), following which Biihler and Doniger omit double 
stratagem from the list, giving only five rather than the six strategies. See, however, 
that in explaining these twofold divisions, the double stratagem is listed in verse 167. 


two kinds .. . to the future: this verse has been subject to different interpretations. 
Biihler (also Doniger) follows Kullika and takes tadatvdyatisamyuktah as qualifying 
samdhih, and translates: “An alliance which yields present and future advantages, one 
must know to be of two descriptions.” I follow Bharuci, Narayana, and Govinda in 
taking that clause as referring to the two kinds of alliance. I also think that Bharuci and 
Govinda (who is more explicit) are correct in taking the immediate significance 
(taddatva) as relating to an alliance where the allies march together, and the future sig- 
nificance as relating to its opposite. Most take -karmd at the end of the compound 
samdnayanakarma as referring to the activity of marching into battle. I think yana- 
karma is a Dvandva and the compound means an alliance where the allies march to- 
gether (samdGnay@na) and have the same object (samdanakarma, here karma possibly 
drawing on its grammatical meaning of object). The opposite of this would be allies 
who march into battle separately to further different objectives. In this case, the 


302 


7.164, 


7.168 


7.170 
7.171 


7.172 


7.176 


7.183 


7.185 


7.187 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 


alliance has no immediate significance but is undertaken with a long-term strategy in 
mind. 


an ally has initiated the offensive (mitrena caivapakrte): the critical edition adopts the 
reading mitrena accepted by Bharuci, Govinda, and Nandana, and also noted by 
Medhatithi. The second kind of war, as Bharuci clearly points out, is initiated when an 
ally has attacked one’s enemy, who has been rendered vulnerable thereby. The prefer- 
red reading of Medhatithi, followed by other commentators and recorded in the major- 
ity of the NT mss., is mitrasya. Following this reading, Biihler translates: “(that waged 
to avenge) an injury done to a friend.” So also Doniger. 


Tradition records ... good people: the variant readings and the diverse interpretations 
indicate the difficulties posed especially by the second half of this verse. Medhatithi 
sees sadhusu as syntactically connected with samsrayah, meaning that the king should 
seek asylum with only virtuous kings; this is implausible. Nandana reads s@dhubhih 
and interprets the clause to mean that the second type of asylum is intended to avert 
future calamities (bhavisadanarthaparihaGrartham). Bharuci reads the negative avya- 
padesa and appears to say that even an evil man may seek asylum so as not be singled 
out as evil among good people (sd@dhusu). The term vyapadesa also means fraud or 
faudulent strategy; the meaning then may be not merely to gain renown among good 
people but as a fraudulent strategy to be counted as a fine king. 


Variant reading: “then he should wage war.” 


When he believes . . . spirit: most commentators connect bhavena with hrstam. Biihler 
translates accordingly: “When he knows his own army to be cheerful in disposition.” 
The principle of keeping a pada as a syntactic unit makes it more likely that bhavena 
should be connected adverbially with manyeta, an interpretation favored by Narayana. 
Govinda (with the gloss paramarthena) and Kullika (with tattvatah) also probably fa- 
vor the adverbial meaning. 


mounted units: on vdhana, see 7.75 n. The reference may be to horses, beasts of bur- 
den, vehicles, and the like. But the opposition to bala, which here refers to foot sol- 
diers, indicates a division of the army consisting of mounted units (cavalry, elephants, 
chariots). 

good war: commentators explain suyuddham by referring to the Ksatriya martial ethic: 
in victory one gets to enjoy the kingdom/spoils, and in death one goes to heaven. 


launch the expedition: even though the verb yaya can stand alone (see verse 181), I 
think the term yatram should be understood here (anuvrtti) from the previous verse, 
although most commentators have not noticed this. Only Govinda and Ramacandra 
mention ydtram. 


three types of roads: most commentators explain this as dry land (j@fgala), wet land 
(aniipa) and forests (dfavika). Narayana prefers villages, wilderness, and hills. 


six divisions of his army: most commentators list elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, 
general, and workmen. Nandana prefers the sixfold division given by Kamandaki 
(Nitisara 16.6): hereditary troops, hired troops, troops from guilds, ally’s troops, alien 
troops, and foresters. This same list is given in AS 9.2.1. 


and only then... enemy’ s fort; note that p@da-d of this verse is identical with the final 
pada of verse 181, which opened this section on preparations for a military expedition. 
This repetition indicates the closure of this small sub-section. 


staff... eagle: in the staff formation the army is arranged in a line with the field gen- 
eral (balddhyaksa) in the front, the commander in chief (sen@pati) at the rear, and the 
king in the middle, with the flanks protected by elephants and horses. This is used 
when danger is expected from all sides. In the wagon formation, used when there is a 
threat from the rear, the front is narrow like a needle and the rear is broad. In the boar, 


7.188 


7.189 


7.191 
7.196 


7-197 


7.201 


7.205 


7.206 


7.207 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 303 


used when danger is perceived from the flanks, the front and the rear are narrow and 
the middle broad. In the crocodile, used when danger is expected from the front and 
the rear, the front and the rear are broad and the middle is narrow. In the needle, used 
when an attack is expected from the front, the army is arranged in a thin and long for- 
mation. The eagle formation is similar to the boar, except that it has longer wings ex- 
tending outward on the flanks. For a detailed discussion of these and other military 
formations, see AS 10.5-6. 


lotus formation: in this formation the king is placed in the middle for protection, and 
the various units spread out in semi-circles extending from the center in all directions. 


post... in every direction: since this is physically impossible, commentators explain 
that by the commander-in-chief and the general are meant all their subordinates. In 
other words, these two chief officers are responsible for guarding all the directions. 


thunderbolt: in this formation, the army is deployed in three separate units. 


launch surprise assaults: the meaning of the verb samavaskandayet is not altogether 
clear. Most commentators appear to indicate something like commando raids. Nandana 
cites Naighantakas who take avaskanda and sauptika as synonyms; the meaning then 
is attacks on sleeping troops. 


enemy activity (tatkrtam): the precise antecedent of tat (“his”) is unclear. Medhatithi 
and Nandana take it to be the enemy king: one should especially keep watch over what 
the enemy himself may do to foment sedition in one’s own ranks or to establish contact 
with the enemy’s allies to his rear. Other commentators take “his” as relating to the se- 
ditious people in the enemy ranks. 


After the victory ... amnesty: all these activities refer to what the king must do within 
the conquered territories. So, the gods and Brahmins are those local to those territories. 
“Exemptions” (parthdra) refer to tax holidays of varying lengths granted to Brahmins 
and other significant individuals of the conquered lands. Amnesty is the freedom from 
fear (abhaya): see 6.39 n. 


All activities .. . to the human: this philosophy is clearly opposed to the “passive” ide- 
ology insisting that everything is determined by either fate (daiva) or by one’s own 
previous actions (karma). See AS 6,.2.6—12, which is a close parallel to this verse. For 
further discussion of this topic and a somewhat diffferent interpretation of the 
expression vidhdne daivamanuse, see Rocher 1977-78. 


A few mss. give here fifty additional verses. Their length precludes them from being 
translated here. 


alliance with him: given that this strategy is an alternative to war, the alliance must be 
with the enemy king. 


recognizing .. . rewards: the parallel passage in AS 7.9.1 reads: samhitaprayane mi- 
trahiranyabhimilabhandm uttarottaro labhah Sreyadn, “When marching off after 
making an alliance, among the gains—ally, money, land—each subsequent one is bet- 
ter than each preceding.” This is exactly the opposite of Manu’s view expressed in 
verse 208. The AS 7.9.2 says that land is the best because an ally and money can come 
from it, and money the next, because an ally can come from it. 


the foe at his heel... rear: these are technical terms for certain kingdoms constituting 
the circle (see 7.154 n.). “The foe at his heel” (pdarsnigrdha) is the king to his imme- 
diate rear, who by definition is an ally of his enemy, whom he is attacking and there- 
fore is located to his front. The enemy can call on the foe at his heel to attack him from 
the rear. When this happens, the attacking king can call on the king located to the rear 
of the foe at his heel; this king, being the immediate neighbor of his foe, is his natural 
ally. He is called “rescuer from the rear” (&kranda). This term literally means “cry for 
help”; evidently, when a rear attack took place, the king could send word (cry for help) 


304 


7.209 


7.211 


7.216 


7.217 


7.218 
7.224 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 7 


to this ally, who would attack the former from his rear. On these terms, see the detailed 
study by Scharfe 1993, 111-6. 


agile: the meaning of laghu is unclear. Several commentators take it with a negative 
connotation, namely weak. Under this interpretation we have to accept an implied api 
(“even”), as Narayana and Biihler do. The meaning would then be: “even a weak ally 
is commended.” I think Nandana is correct in taking laghu to mean a person who does 
things quickly (laghukari). Govinda’s gloss daksa (“clever”) also probably applies to 
laghu. This positive interpretation is supported by the use of /aghu at 7.193 with refer- 
ence to front-line soldiers. 


generosity (sthaulalaksyam): Kullika cites a verse from a work on synonyms that lists 
this term with others for generosity. This interpretation is followed by most commenta- 
tors. Govinda explains the term as “acute perception” (séksmadarSitvam): see the use 
of laksa at 7.54 n. 


After conferring . . . in this manner: these words connect this section on the afternoon 
routine with the section on the king’s morning routine and his conferring with his 
counselors (7.147). It is to be assumed that the intervening sections on political strate- 
gies and war constituted the topics of the king’s consultations with his counselors. 


There he should . . . remove poison: several interpretations of this verse are offered by 
commentators. First, Govinda and Kulliika detect an implied krtam (“made”) in the 
first half-verse. Following them, Biihler translates: “food (which has been prepared) by 
faithful, incorruptible (servants).” I think this is quite unnecessary; the instrumentals in 
the first half-verse, as Medhatithi has correctly pointed out, are syntactically connected 
with supariksitam (“thoroughly examined”). The other difficulty in the verse is the 
syntax of the final instrumentals mantrair visapahaih. Narayana, Govinda, and Kulli- 
ka connect these with supariksitam. Biihler, accordingly, translates: “which has been 
well examined (and hallowed) by sacred texts that destroy poison.” Medhatithi ex- 
plains that the king should recite these mantras over the food. Although this is possi- 
ble, the simplest way to construct the last pada is to take the instrumentals as 
indicating the recitation of the mantras while or right before the king eats. This is quite 
a common use of the instrumental within ritual settings with reference to the sacred 
texts to be recited while a ritual action is being performed. The expression &mabhii- 
taih, which I have translated “completely loyal,” means literally persons who are (like) 
one’s very self. The expression “knowledgeable about time” (kalajiia) has been ex- 
plained as servants who know which course to serve at what time during the meal. 
Medhatithi explains the term as servants who know what foods and drinks are to be 
given at what age and under what conditions. 


Variant reading: “with liquids that neutralize poison.” 


escorted by women: the reference is probably to female guards rather than to servants 
(so Biihler and Doniger). For a description of the various female guards posted around 
the king, something already noted by Megasthenes, see Scharfe 1993, 152-3. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


who are experts in policy (mantrajiiaih): Medhatithi asks what noun this adjective 
qualifies. He argues that it cannot qualify counselors (mantrin), because that would be 
a tautology, for mantrins are by definition (and name) supposed to know mantra. He 
concludes that it must qualify “Brahmins” of the previous pdda. This interpretation is 
followed by Ramacandra, whereas Nandana thinks it qualifies both the counselors and 
the Brahmins. My translation leaves this issue as vague as the Sanskrit. 


8.3 


8.6 


8.9 


8.11 


8.12 


8.17 


8.24 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 305 


raising his right hand (panim udyamya daksinam): all commentators take pani 
(“hand”) to mean bdhu (“arm”), which is reasonable. The reason for raising the right 
arm, however, in unclear. Medhatithi thinks it is meant to draw attention and to dis- 
allow a question. Govinda, Nandana, and Raghavananda take it to mean that the king 
should have his right arm uncovered. Nandana gives the opinion of some who take it to 
mean that he should be wearing his sacrificial cord (yajfiopavitin; see 2.63 n.). I think 
the answer may be in this direction. In ritual contexts (and legal proceedings are quasi- 
ritual), the right shoulder and arm are always left uncovered. See 2.193 n. for this prac- 
tice within the context of a vedic student. 


individually (prthak prthak): Kulltka takes the terms to be syntactically connected with 
pasyet (“he should look into”) of the previous verse; and this interpretation is followed 
by Biihler and Doniger: “Daily (deciding) one case after another.” J think this is quite 
unwarranted; Bharuci, Govinda, and Ramacandra (and possibly also Medhatithi) are 
correct in connecting them with nibaddhani (“connected with”). The principle of each 
pada being in general a syntactic unit argues in favor of this. The meaning is that any 
lawsuit brought before the court should fall under one or the other of the eighteen 
grounds for litigation spelled out below. For a detailed explanation of this, see 
Vijfianesvara’s commentary on YDh 2.5-8. 


sexual crimes against women: usually the expression strisamgrahanam refers to adul- 
tery. I have given it a broader definition, because under this ground for litigation are 
included a wide variety of crimes against women, including rape. 


When the king . . . to do so: for a more detail account of ancient Indian legal proceed- 
ings, see AS 3.1. 


officer (prakrtah): this is an unusual word. Medhatithi and Narayana gloss this with 
adhikrtah, which is the reading in most mss. and commentaries. The term prakrta, like 
so many works in this section of Manu, is derived from the Arthasastra vocabulary. 
This term occurs twice there with the meaning of officer or minister of the king (AS 
2.7.10; 2.8.24). The term clearly has the same meaning here. It may well be that pra- 
krta is related to the common term prakrti, which refers to the constituent parts of a 
kingdom but especially to the ministers (see 7.157). We have a similar usage in the 
commentary on KatSr 14.3.2. See the use of the verb prakurvita as “appointing” at 
MDh 7.60. 


pierced by Injustice: the image here is of Justice that is pierced by a dart, which is 
Injustice itself, and which the court is obliged to remove. Bharuci and Medhatithi, 
however, give a different explanation. Justice is pierced by a dart when a judge decides 
wrongly and permits a miscarriage of justice to occur in his court. If the other officials 
of the court let it go unchallenged, then they are themselves wounded by this dart. 


Justice ... with the body: here the meaning of dharma shifts imperceptibly from jus- 
tice to merit. See the more explicit image of relatives who abandon the dead man at 


4.238-43. 


Paying attention .. . social class: the meaning of the first half-verse is unclear and 
commentators offer educated guesses. The main problem is the meaning of arthd- 
narthau and its relationship to dharmddharmau. All take kevalau as qualifying only 
dharmddharmau. Govinda gives the most plausible explanation, which is followed by 
Bihler: “Knowing what is expedient or inexpedient, what is pure justice or injustice.” 
Doniger: “Recognizing both what is profitable and what is not profitable, and what is 
intrinsically just and unjust.” I am not convinced that the commentarial explanations or 
the translations have grasped the intent of the text. One possible avenue of interpreta- 
tion is offered by a parallel in the NSm (Ma 1.31): dharmasastrarthaSastrabhyam avi- 
rodhena margatah | samiksamano nipunam vyavaharagatim nayet // Here the king or 
judge is required to conduct the judicial proceedings in such a manner that they do not 


306 


8.27 


8.30 


8.37 


8.39 


8.43 


8.44 


8.45 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


conflict with the provisions of either the Arthasastra or the Dharmasastra (see also YDh 
2.21). I think it is likely that in this verse of Manu artha and dharma stand for 
Arthasastra and Dharmasastra, or at least to the provisions of Artha (which may in- 
clude also local conventions, customs, etc.) and Dharma. In verse 8.41, which comes 
immediately after the two excursus that may be interpolations, there is again the in- 
struction to examine the Laws of castes, regions, guilds, families, and the like, all of 
which may fall under artha. See NSm (M4 1.24) where vyavahdra (recognized stan- 
dards of behavior) takes precedence over dharma. If this interpretation is right, then 
there is no need to see kevalau as qualifying only dharma@dharmau in opposition to 
arthdnarthau. We may connect ubhau and kevalau together: “only these two,” refer- 
ring to both compounds. 


no longer a minor: males reach majority at age 16 and females at 12: see AS 3.3.1; NSm 
1.31. 


Any property .. . without an owner: all the manuscripts and commentators read pra- 
nastasvamikam as a compound (see note in the critical edition). Accordingly Biihler 
translates: “Property, the owner of which has disappeared.” The use of the term pra- 
nasta with reference to the owner is awkward; in the following verses (32, 33, 34) the 
term is uniformly applied to lost property and not to a lost owner. The parallel] in the 
GDh (10.36) clearly shows that the reference is to lost property whose owner is un- 
known: “If someone finds lost property whose owner is unknown, he should disclose it 
to the king.” Here we have the uncompounded form pranastam asvdmikam, which, I 
think, is what Manu’s verse also read in the original (see Introduction, p. 44 for 
Manu’s dependence on Gautama). It was probably changed to pranastasvamikam, 
because the former would make the foot hypermetric with 9 syllables (for hypermeter 
in Manu, see Introduction, p. 44). It may also be that the original versified form was 
pranastasvamikam, which would have the same meaning as the prose. My translation 
follows this emendation. 


Additional verse: “When a Brahmin discovers a treasure-trove, he should inform the 
king quickly. He may enjoy whatever the king gives him. Failure to inform makes him 
a thief.” 


supreme lord of the earth (bhiimer adhipatih): for the economic consequences of this 
conception of kingship, see Scharfe 1993, 240. Note also the parallel with the last pada 
of verse 37 where the Brahmin is called sarvasya adhipatih (“the supreme lord of all”). 


initiate a lawsuit: Medhatithi interprets this to mean that the king should not instigate 
others to bring lawsuits against people whom he dislikes or from whom he hopes to 
obtain fines. It is a common principle of ancient Indian jurisprudence, however, that all 
lawsuits are initiated by private individuals and not by the state. 


nor Shall he... someone else: Medhatithi records the opinion of some that takes artha 
here to mean money. The meaning then is that he should not take for himself money 
brought to him except within the parameters of the Jawsuit. The clear intent is to avoid 
bribery of court officials. 


As a@ hunter... reasoning: the term nayati (“lead”) is here used, I think, in an interest- 
ing way, deliberately juxtaposing it to anumana (“inference”) and echoing its connec- 
tion to nydya (“logic”). The term padam may have a double meaning: the path and the 
location. With the first meaning, the hunter follows the track of the wounded animal 
along the trail of blood; and the judge by inferential reasoning proceeds along the path 
of justice. With the second meaning, the hunter finds the place where the animal has 
fallen by following the trail of blood; and the judge determines where justice lies by 
inferential reasoning. 


appearance: the meaning of r#pam is unclear and commentators offer educated 
guesses. Medhatithi takes the term to mean the nature (svabhdva) of the lawsuit; the 


8.46 


8.47 


8.49 


8.51 


8.52 
8.53 


8.54 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 307 


judge should see whether it is serious or not (gurulaghutvam). Kulluka, Raghavananda, 
and Nandana offer similar explanations, taking rapa as svarupa, | think their inter- 
pretation is reasonable, although in a very similar passage of AS 3.1.15 riipa is used 
with regard to the appearance of an item subject to a legal transaction (e.g., debt) noted 
in the document drawn up for the transaction. Bharuci gives a completely different and 
somewhat fabulous interpretation of the verse relating it to heaven and celestial beings, 
an interpretation that Medhatithi ascribes to “others.” 


He should .. . or caste: commentators offer two interpretations, depending on the 
syntax of the genitive desakulajdtindm. Bharuci and Medhatithi connect it with the 
verb prakalpayet and take aviruddham independently with the implication that they are 
not opposed to sruti and smyti. The translation would then be: “The practices of virtu- 
ous men and righteous twice-born individuals that are not in opposition (to Veda and 
tradition) the king should establish (as the law) for regions, families, and castes.” I 
have followed the more reasonable interpretation offered by Narayana, Kulltka, and 
Raghavananda. This interpretation also fits with what was said in verse 41 with respect 
to honoring the laws and customs of different regions and groups. 


facts are established: for the meaning of vibhdvitam in this context, see its use in verse 
51. 


by traditional strategies (Aacaritena): most commentators cite the custom of the creditor 
fasting at the door of the debtor until he pays up. 


Additional verse: “If the debt owed is admitted, he should be fined 500; but if it is de- 
nied, the fine is doubled—that is Manu’s decree.” 


document: on the meaning of the obscure word desga, see Introduction, p. 48. 


When the plaintiff .. . disavows it: this statement parallels AS 3.1.19: pratijfid@ya desam 
nirdiSety ukte na nirdiSati, hinadesam adesam va nirdi§ati, nirdistad desa@d anyam 
deSam upasthdpayati, upasthite deSe ’rthavacanam naivam ity apavyayate | “after 
promising documentary evidence, when told ‘Produce it’, does not produce it; or pro- 
duces a deficient document or something that does not constitute documentary evi- 
dence; presents a defective document; when the document is presented, denies a 
statement whose meaning is transparent, saying ‘It is not so’.” I think Kangle’s ren- 
dering of pratijfidya as “after making an affirmation” is incorrect. Some of the ele- 
ments of the AS passage, I believe, is understood in Manu’s verse, which appears to be 
a very condensed version. Especially the second pdda appears to echo the last phrase 
of the AS. If this is correct, then the commentators and translators of this verse have 
misunderstood it. Biihler translates: “who retracts his statements.” Clearly nirdisya 
here must refer to the production of the documents rather than to a previous statement 
he may have made. The meaning, if we follow the AS, appears to be that after produc- 
ing the document the man denies what is clearly stated in it. The term hinadesa proba- 
bly refers to a mutilated document; that is, a document in which crucial sections are 
missing or unreadable. The parallel term adesa is probably a document that is legally 
inadmissible because of a fatal defect, for example, without the names of the witnesses 
to the original transaction. 


does not realize .. . subsequently: this parallels AS 3.1.19: piirvoktam pascimendrthena 
nabhisamdhatte, “what is said earlier does not agree with points made later.” I think 
Kangle’s rendering of n@bhsamdhatte with “does not corroborate” is not accurate. 


states his .. . from it: this parallels AS 3.1.19: nibaddham vadam utsrjyanyam vadam 
samkramati, “he abandons the dispute set down and passes over to another dispute.” 


does not acknowledge . . . established: although not an exact parallel, Manu’s state- 
ment is possibly based on n AS 3.1.19: saksibhir avadhytam necchati, “does not concede 
a point determined by witnesses.” 


308 


8.55 


8.57 
8.58 


8.61 


8.66 


8.69 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


secretly ... being discussed: all commentators and translators take dese in this passage 
to mean a place. Accordingly, Biihler translates: “Or who converses with the witnesses 
in a place improper for such conversation.” The parallel passage in AS 3.1.19 reads: 
asambhasye dese saksibhir mithah sambhdsate, translated by Kangle: “talks secretly 
with witnesses in a place where no conversation is allowed.” This is quite an unusual 
shift in meaning within this single passage of the AS, a passage where dega occurs six 
times, all in the sense of documentary evidence (or witness, according to the other in- 
terpretation), We also have the parallel upasthite deSe right before asambhdsye dese. 1 
think here also desa must mean a document. I am also not sure whether asambhdsya 
can actually refer to a place rather than to a person with whom conversation is forbid- 
den or a thing about which it is forbidden. The term mithah occurs at 8.80, 109, 178 
with the meaning “together with” or “mutually.” Only Nandana and Medhatithi ex- 
plicitly take the term to mean “secretly.” Others either do not comment or take it to 
mean “together with,” i.e., with the witnesses. 


objects .. . articulated: the meaning of this phrase is not altogether clear. Most com- 
mentators take it to mean that the man does not want to answer a question put to him. 
Medhatithi, following Bharuci, thinks that the man buys time by leaving the court on 
some business rather than answer the question. Bharuci further thinks that the question 
is posed not to him but to the witnesses. 


retreats (nigpatet): Bharuci thinks that the man leaves the court alleging urgent busi- 
ness, thus stopping the proceedings. This interpretation is followed by other commen- 
tators and Biihler. Medhatithi, however, takes this to be the same as the backing away 
from the lawsuit mentioned in verse 54. 


Variant reading: “I have witnesses.” 


If the plaintiff .. . of the Law: for a discussion of the time limits for the plaintiff and the 
defendant to file their responses, see AS 3.1.27—33. 


should be made to speak: all the commentators take va@cyam to be the gerundive of the 
simple verb vac. Biihler (and Doniger) follows them: “and in what manner those 
(witnesses) must give true (evidence).” I think the section on the questioning of wit- 
nesses (8.79-102) clearly indicates that the issue is not about witnesses speaking the 
truth but how the court must induce them to speak the truth. In this light, I think we 
must take vacyam as the gerundive of the causative vacayati; the confusion is created, 
unfortunately, because in the case of this verb the gerundive forms of the simple verb 
and of the causative are the same. 


a reprehensible person: most commentators take the term vaktavyah to mean a person 
of bad repute or evil conduct. Bharuci, on the other hand, thinks it refers to persons 
with physical disabilities (agavyasanah) or people with skin diseases, such as lepers 
(kustyadih). This interpretation is also mentioned by Medhatithi. See, however, the use 
of vaktavyatd as legal culpability at 8.230. 


a single person (ekah): all the commentators take this to mean that one should not call 
a single witness (so also Biihler; see verse 60). This is implausible, because the term 
occurs within a long list of individuals who are disqualified from being witnesses be- 
cause of some disability. The term ekah may, within this context, refer to what we 
would call a “single person,” that is, an individual who lives on his own and is not part 
of a larger household, either his own or of an extended family. Indeed, a single witness 
is permitted in verse 77, although this is admittedly a proverbial saying. 


in a case involving bodily harm (Sarirasyaiva catyaye): most commentators interpret 
this to mean physical hurt or death (see this view explicitly stated in verse 72). 
Narayana takes it to mean a case where the death penalty may be imposed. Medhatithi 
cites an opinion which takes the expression to refer to a situation where without such 


8.71 


8.72 


8.76 


8.77 


8.78 


8.79 
8.83 


8.85 


8.87 


8.88 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 309 


testimony the case would fail or there would be a mistrial; and the following verse 
dealing with the absence of regular witnesses, in this view, picks up the same theme. 
This appears to be the view of Bharuci also. 


He should recognize .. . false testimony: interestingly, all the commentators interpret 
this verse correctly, but none of the translators. Biihler translates: “But the (judge) 
should consider the evidence of infants, aged and diseased men, who (are apt to) speak 
untruly, as untrustworthy, likewise that of men with disordered minds.” The issue is 
not whether what they say is uniformly untrustworthy (then, there is no point in calling 
them as witnesses), but how the judge can tell when they are giving false testimony. 


investigate: the meaning is that the judge should not look into factors that would dis- 
qualify a witness (see 8.64—7) in these kinds of cases. Anyone is permitted to testify. 


not listed as a witness: the term anibaddha probably refers to witnesses not listed in 
the original plaint and response by the plaintiff and the defendant. In later legal texts, 
listed witnesses are called kyta (“appointed”), whereas those not on the original list but 
called later as witnesses are called akrta (“unappointed”). See NSm 1.129. 


during the trial: Biihler takes tatra (lit. “there”) as referring back to what the man has 
seen or heard: “is (afterwards) examined regarding it.” So also Doniger and Burnell. 
The correlative tatra, however, must refer back to yatra of the dependent clause; and 
the latter refers to the lawsuit, as acknowledged by the commentators. 


Even one man... and honest: clearly tradition found this verse somewhat difficult; 
hence the many variants. A variant reading accepted by Medhatithi and Govinda read: 
“But one man who is greedy cannot be a witness.” Another variant: “But (even) one 
greedy man may be a witness.” 


anything different... no validity: Biihler, following Kulliika, translates: “(depositions) 
differing from that, which they make improperly, are worthless for (the purposes of) 
justice.” So also Doniger and Burnell. They connect dharmartham syntactically with 
aparthakam. | follow Medhatithi, Raghavananda, and Ramacandra in connecting 
dharmartham adverbially with the verb vibriyuh; the meaning being that they tell a lie 
for a higher purpose (so also Derrett and Jha). This point is spelled out in verses 103-4, 
where also we have perjury committed for the sake of the Law (dharmatah). Such false 
statements are made, for example, if the life of the defendant is at stake. For a long list 
of indicators that point to false testimony, see NSm 1.175-8. 


following manner: on the speech by the judge to the witnesses, see Rocher 1964. 


of all social classes (sarvavarnesu): the locative makes the meaning unclear. It could 
be “witnesses from among all the social classes” (as I and others have taken it) or 
“with reference to all the social classes.” The last interpretation is offered by Govinda 
and Kullitka; the meaning then would be that the witness should bear truthful testi- 
mony in cases pertaining to people of all social classes. 


No one sees us: clearly for exigencies of meter, iti, which should come at the end of 
the quotation, is given in the middle: pasyatiti nah. 


In the presence of gods and Brahmins (devabrahmanasamnidhye): commentators and 
translators take deva here to mean images of gods. This may well be the case. But deva 
can also refer to the king (see 7.8; 11.83), and we have an exact parallel in 8.60: 
nrpabrahmanasamnidhau, where the questioning of the witness is done in the presence 
of the king and Brahmins. 


Variant reading: “the judge should ask the twice-born individuals, who have ritually 
purified themselves, and are clean and facing the north or the east.” 


with a reference to cows, seeds, and gold (gobijakaficanaih): Nandana explains, cor- 
rectly ] think, that a VaiSya is made to touch these substances before testifying; and 


310 


8.92 


8.97 


8.100 


8.101 


8.102 


8.106 


8.107 


8.109 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


this is precisely what is stated in verse 113. Alternatively, the judge may have uttered 
an imprecation about the man’s cows etc. Most commentators, however, make 
patakaih coming at the end of the verse do double duty with regard to both Vaisyas 
and Siidras. According to this interpretation, the judge tells a Vaisya that by bearing 
false witness he incurs the same sin as he would by stealing gold, killing or stealing a 
cow, and the like (see 8.98—100). I think this is rather far-fetched. See also ViDh 8.19- 
23. 

but a Sidra . . . caste: the critical edition has adopted the reading ebhih i in preference 
to sarvaih. Following the latter reading, Biihler translates: “a Sadra (threatening him) 
with (the guilt of) every crime that causes loss of caste.” The reading sarvaih may have 
crept into this verse under the influence of the reading of the parallel passage in verse 
113. In verse 88, however, ebhih is not only supported by better evidence but makes 
better sense. The long section 89-101 is thus addressed to a Stra witness. 


then you do not... Kuru land: if the witness has no quarrel with Yama, the god of 
death and the judge of the dead, then there is no need for him to visit the Ganges or the 
land of the Kurus to expiate his sin. 


kills: the term hanti is probably used metaphorically here. Medhatithi, Narayana, 
Govinda, Nandana, and Kulliika take it to mean that he sends the relatives to hell. 
Raghavananda: he makes them to be reborn in animal wombs. Medhatithi and Kulltka 
present another view according to which the man incurs a sin equal to his killing a 
certain number of his relatives. 


concerning water: the reference is unclear. Medhatithi and Kullika take it as a refer- 
ence to reservoirs, wells, and the like. Nandana: ponds (abdhi). In discussing the paral- 
lel passage in GDh 13.18, Watkins (1994b, 725-6) thinks that the reference may be to 
“the right of way of aquae ductus.” See the reference to breaking and obstructing water 
courses at 3.163. 


Addtional verse: “(False testimony) concerning honey and ghee is similar to one con- 
cerning livestock; that concerning vehicles is similar to one concerning a horse; that 
concerning silver and clothes, as well as grain and the Veda, is similar to one con- 
cerning a cow.” 


Bharuci states that the first eight verses (89-96) are addressed specifically to Siidras; 
verse 97 is generic; and the last five verses (98-101) are applicable to all witnesses. 
Bharuci must have included the extra verse after verse 100, because without it we have 
only four verses. 


Variant reading: “tell everything forthrightly just as you saw or heard.” 


Additional verse: “Those who have turned away from the Laws specific to them, live 
on the food of others, and yet aspire to the twice-born status—these too he should treat 
like Siidras.” 


addressed to water: these are the three verses (RV 10.9.1-3): Gpo hi sthda, “Waters, you 
are refreshing.” See Appendix III.3. 


of the total: the meaning of sarvatah is unclear. It could be of the total amount under 
litigation (Bharuci, Govinda, Narayana, Nandana, and Ramacandra), of the fine that 
would be owed to the king by the losing party (a view cited by Medhatithi), or of the 
debt (Kulltika). Medhatithi himself thinks that the word is merely a metrical filler 
(Slokapitrana). 


oath: Manu uses the term Sapatha for both an oath and an ordeal. In later legal texts, 
such as the YDh, ViDh, and NSm, we find the technical term divya for an ordeal. This 
term must have entered the legal vocabulary somewhat late, because it is not found in 
any of the Dharmasiitras, in Manu, or in the AS. 


8.110 


8.112 


8.113 


8.115 


8.116 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 311 


Vasistha: this is an interesting lapse on the part of the author of our text. He evidently 
forgot his literary setting: it is Manu speaking through his pupil Bhrgu. Bringing in a 
historical episode such as this would not be expected of Manu, the father of Vasistha 
himself (see 1.35). We find similar lapses at 8.116 (example of Vatsa) and at 8.140 with 
a reference to a rule instituted by Vasistha. The story in this verse probably refers to 
RV 7.104.15. Vasistha was accused of being a fiend who had eaten his own sons. He 
cleared himself by an oath that if it were true he should die that very day. 


to protect a Brahmin: some commentators take brahmandbhyupapattau to mean “as a 
favor for a Brahmin” (so Biihler and Doniger). I follow the obviously correct interpre- 
tation of Nandana, Govinda, Kullika, and Ramacandra; abhyupapatti is used unambi- 
guously as defense in 8.349 and abhyavapatti in 10.62. 


He should make . . . of caste: see 8.88 n. and, for a discussion of similar legal language 
in other Indo-European languages, Watkins 1994b, 720. See the parallel prescriptions 
for the four classes within the context of purification at 5.99. 


When the blazing . . . strikes him: the procedures for various ordeals are described in 
NSm 20. In the fire ordeal, eight circles are drawn on the ground. Seven banyan leaves 
are tied to the palms of the person undergoing the ordeal and a hot iron ball is placed in 
his hands. He must carry it through the circles and drop the ball at the designated 
place. If his palms are not burnt, he is declared innocent. In the water ordeal, an arrow 
is shot from a medium-sized bow. The person undergoing the ordeal must remain sub- 
merged in the water until a fast runner brings back the arrow. The third ordeal listed 
here is actually an oath; if his family does not suffer any mishap soon (during 14 days, 
according to commentators), he is innocent. 


Long ago .. . told the truth: Vatsa was accused by his brother of being the son of a 
Sidra woman and thus not a pure Brahmin. Vatsa went through fire to prove his pedi- 
gree. See Paficavimsa Brahmana 14.6.6. 


8.120 fined 1,000: when a simple number is stated, the term Pana is understood within the 


8.123 


8.126 


context of fines (see 8.138). A Pana was a copper coin widely used in ancient India 
(8.136). See also 3.186 n. 


When individuals . . . into exile: “the three classes” here refer to the three classes below 
the Brahmin. The major difficulty in interpreting this verse lies in the distinction be- 
tween pravasa (prescribed for the three lower classes) and vivdsa (prescribed for 
Brahmins). Biihler, Doniger, and Burnell take both to mean “banish”; the difference 
then being that Brahmins are only banished, whereas the others are both fined and 
banished. This is the interpretation offered by Narayana, Kullika, and Raghavananda. 
Medhatithi and Govinda take vivdsa to mean depriving of clothes, i.e., making him na- 
ked. Medhatithi thinks that it may also mean depriving him of his house. I think all 
these are mistaken. The correct interpretation is offered by Bharuci and Nandana, both 
significantly representing the southern tradition, The term pravdsayet here has the 
same meaning as parallel statements in the AS (1.18.16; 11.1.33, 47; 12.3.4; 12.4.4; 
12.5.23; 13.4.29); it refers to execution. The variant reading pramdpayet for pravdsayet 
recorded at 9.289 also supports this conclusion. Indeed, Medhatithi (on 8.284) calls 
this meaning an ArthasaStra usage (arthaSastraya). Like the modern military-inspired 
term “liquidate” or the more common “get rid of,” pravdsayet may have been an 
euphemism for imposing the death penalty. This meaning of the term is supported by 
the very next section (8.124—30) that deals with corporal punishment. The only other 
time that vivdsa is used (9.241) it means exile, where also it deals with Brahmins who 
should be sent into exile without confiscating their property. 


proclivity: most commentators take the term anubandha to mean repetition (punah- 
punahkaranam), that is, whether the man is a habitual criminal. Bharuci cites this 
view, but he contrasts it to his own, which takes the term to mean the reason for the 


312 


8.127 
8.130 


8.132 


8.133 


8.134 


8.142 


8.143 


8.145 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


crime: vayain punar anubandham aparadhakdranam dcaksmahe. Both these interpre- 
tations are also given by Medhatithi. Variant reading: “after he has fully ascertained 
(the severity of?) the crime.” Rocher (1954) has demonstrated that anubandha refers to 
the criminal propensities of the accused individual, that is, the likelihood that he will 
be a repeat offender in the future because of his past behavior patterns. In my transla- 
tion that appeared in Oxford World’s Classics series (Olivelle 2004) prepared before I 
had access to Rocher’s study, I translated the term as “motive”. 


Variant reading: “Punishing those who do not deserve to be punished shatters.” 


If he is unable... these four: it seems strange that when the most severe punishment 
fails to deter a criminal, he would use all four together, namely that he would use also 
the weaker punishments. There appears to be something here that we fail to under- 
stand, and commentators offer no help. 


This verse is omitted in several southern mss., and not commented by Bharuci. Medha- 
tithi says that some doubt its authenticity (see note in critical edition). Although I have 
included it in the critical edition, its authenticity is subject to serious doubt. 


Trasarenu: the term trasa means something moving or quivering, and renu means a 
speck of dust or pollen. The term refers to the smallest visible particle of matter, often 
regarded as having the mass of three atoms. For a longer discussion of weights and 
measures, see AS 2.19 and the helpful notes of Kangle. For definitions of the weights 
and measures given in the following verses, see Appendix IV. I have refrained from 
translating these terms, because they are as much technical terms as our foot, yard, or 
mile; their common meanings have no bearing on their technical usage. 


Liksa, Rajasarsapa, Gaurasarsapa: although these are technical terms for different 
weights, the terms themselves originally had other meanings. Liksa: literally the egg of 
a louse, hence a tiny weight. Rajasarsapa: a black mustard seed. Gaurasarsapa: a 
white mustard seed. 


Yava, Krsnala, Masa, Suvarna: the literal meaning of Yava is a barley corn, Krsnala is 
a small seed of the plant Abrus Precatorius (0.122 or 1.875 grams), and Masa is a bean. 
Suvama literally means gold, but in this context refers to a measure of weight. 


He may charge .. . classes: this verse is also found in VaDh 2.48. Verses 141 and 142 
give somewhat higher rates of interest than the traditional rate of 1.25% per month (or 
15% per annum). This figure is given in both VaDh 2.51 and GDh 12.29. Do these 
verses of Manu and Vasistha reflect the later practice of a higher rate of interest, which 
is considerably more than the traditional one? See also verse 152 where 5% is assumed 
as the standard rate. 


nor shall the pledge . . . time has lapsed (kalasamrodhat): the meaning appears to be 
that the time for redeeming the loan has passed. This can happen when the interest on 
the loan equals the amount of the loan (payment then becomes double the original 
loan). Indian law stipulated that when this happens the interest on the loan stops (see 
8.151; this rule is called da@mdupat in modern times). Even when this happens a pledge 
cannot be alienated. Some commentators take this as applying to pledges that are not 
used, whereas others take it as applying to pledges that are used by the creditors; 
pledges that are not used may be forfeited, as clearly stated in YDh 2.58. 


Neither ... a long time: Medhatithi takes this not as law but friendly advise and gives 
a very different interpretation, taking kalatyayam to mean “long lapse of time” (rather 
than “forfeiture due to time”) and avaharyau to mean “liable to appropriation” (rather 
than “recoverable”). The verse instructs the depositor not to let his pledge or deposit 
remain too long, for after a long time the man holding the pledge or deposit may think 
that it is his and appropriate it. This view, also shared by Bharuci, Govinda, and Nan- 
dana, seems improbable, given that verse 149 clearly states the inalienability of pledges 
and deposits. 


8.146 


8.148 


8.151 


8.153 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 313 


draft animals: most commentators take vahan as qualifying afva; accordingly, Btihler 
translates “a riding-horse.” I think Medhatithi is correct in taking vahan as a separate 
item; he takes it to mean an ox. This is also the view of Nandana. Lists generally have 
separate items; rarely do we find adjectives qualifying just one item in a list. 


within his own locality: Bharuci gives two possible meanings of visaya: within one’s 
sight (caksurvisaye) or in one’s own country or region. The latter interpretation is fol- 
lowed by Medhatithi and Govinda; and the former by Narayana, Kullika, 
Raghavananda, and Ramacandra (ji'dnavisaye or darsanavisaye). Nandana, correctly I 
think, takes it to mean a place where it is possible for the owner to stop his property 
being used by the other (nivdranayogye dese). 


Interest . . . five times: “twice the principal” means that the interest should not exceed 
the amount of the loan, so that the repayment (loan plus interest) is twice the original 
amount of the loan. Likewise, for grain etc., the interest would be four times the loan; 
the repayment then being five times. The phrase “when fixed at one time” (sakrd 
ahitd), according to some, means that the whole of the interest is payable at the end of 
the loan period; this would then not apply to loans where the interest is paid in install- 
ments, for example every month. Medhatithi and Bharuci take this phrase to mean that 
the loan is still with the man who originally took out the loan and that it has not been 
transferred to a third party. Medhatithi also thinks of the possibility that the man may 
have renewed the loan after it reached double, the new loan including the original loan 
plus the accrued interest (8.154). Both when the loan is transferred to a third party and 
when the loan has been renegotiated the interest continues to grow. 


He must not charge ... manual labor: ali the commentators take the verse as a syntac- 
tic unit with the negative na governing the second half of the verse as well. According 
to this interpretation, the four types of interest given in the second half are also prohib- 
ited. All the translators follow this interpretation. Biihler: “Let him not take interest 
beyond the year, nor such as is unapproved, nor compound interest, periodical interest, 
stipulated interest, and corporal interest.” I think this is mistaken. These four forms of 
interest are explicitly authorized in GDh 12.345, a text that Manu follows closely, and 
also in NSm 1.87, a text that follows the MDh closely. It is inconceivable to me that 
Manu would depart from this tradition or that Narada would have misunderstood Manu 
in such a fundamental way. Laksmidhara (Laks 12.281) cites this verse of Manu 
immediately before NSm 1.87 without noting any contradiction between the two. I 
think what we have in this verse is broken syntax. The second half-verse is syntactic- 
ally independent of the first-half. The problem is the correlative yd at the end of the 
second-half, making it a dependent clause. My feeling is that the second half has been 
taken from a different context and woven into this verse; we have lost the main clause 
to which this was originally attached. 


The cyclical rate is a kind of compound interest calculated, for example, monthly 
but payable only at the end of the loan period together with the principal (see Lariviere 
1989, II. 59). The periodic rate is generally payable each month (GDh 12.29). The con- 
tractual rate is variable, either above or below the normal rate of interest, depending on 
the reliability of the person taking the loan. Manual labor is probably connected with 
indentured labor, the interest on the loan being deducted from the daily wages. On the 
question of debts in ancient India, see Kane 1962-75, iii. 414-61; Chatterjee 1971. 


8.154-5 When someone ... as is due: these two verses probably refer to cyclical interest. 


When at the end of the loan period the debtor is unable to repay the debt along with the 
accrued interest, he has the option of paying the accrued interest and renegotiating the 
contract for the principal. Verse 155 is somewhat obscure; it appears to be a rider on 
the previous verse and deals with a situation when the debtor is unable even to pay the 
accrued interest. The intent appears to be that the new debt instrument must include the 
accrued interest, if the debtor cannot pay off at least part of it at the time of the new 


314 Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


loan. That the debtor should at least pay a small amount is the view of several authori- 
ties, including Narada, cited by Medhatithi. 

8.156 When someone ... place and time: Medhatithi and, following him, Govinda, Kullika, 
and Raghavananda, understand cakravrddhi literally as interest accrued on a “wheel,” 
i.e., when a person is traveling. Following this interpretation, Bihler translates: “He 
who has made a contract to carry good by a wheeled carriage for money and has 
agreed to a certain place or time, shall not reap that reward, if he does not keep to the 
place and the time (stipulated).” It seems to me very unlikely that Manu would use this 
technical term in this verse with a meaning so very different from the one in verse 153. 
Further, it is quite out of place to talk about payment for carrying goods within a sec- 
tion devoted to interest rates. I follow the reasonable explanation of Narayana. Bharuci 
also states clearly that according to this rule the creditor cannot enforce the payment of 
the interest if he fails to show up at the appointed time and place. 


8.158 here (iha): given that the literary setting of this entire section is the court, it makes 
sense to take “here” to mean here in this court. Biihler’s “in this (world)” does not fit 
the context: see 1.42. 


8.159 vain gifts: commentators take vrth@danam to mean money promised to others either 
frivolously or for illegitimate purposes (to prostitutes, for example). The compound, 
however, may also be dissolved into vrtha-adadnam, which would refer to loans taken 
out for illegitimate purposes. 


8.160 The above rule .. . to pay it: there are three kinds of sureties: a) for appearance, i.e., 
that the man will appear either at the time stipulated to pay the debt or in court; b) as a 
guarantor of the debtor’s trustworthiness; and c) as a guarantor of payment (see YDh 
2.53). This rule exempts the heirs of only the first two kinds of sureties from the obli- 
gation to repay the debts for which the latter stood as surety. 


8.161-2 When someone ... his own funds: these two verses are rather obscure. The question 
and answer format is also quite unusual for Manu, leading to the possibility that these 
verses have been taken over from a different source and context. Commentators take 
niradistadhana as a surety to whom money had been entrusted by the debtor so that the 
surety may pay off the debt in the event that the debtor is unable. This, however, 
makes no sense; why would the debtor take a loan if he has money to put in escrow 
with the surety sufficient to pay off the debt? The lack of context for this verse makes 
its interpretation difficult. The term niradista appears to be a hapax; it does not occur 
elsewhere in Manu or in any other Dharma text. The best sense I can make of this 
verse is that the debtor has given a collateral to the surety as assurance of payment. 
This collateral may have become part of his wealth that the heirs inherited. In this case, 
the heirs are bound to repay the debt from their inheritance. 


8.164 contrary to... usage: | follow Medhatithi. Here Manu takes Law (dharma) to be 
based on convention (vyavahdra): see 1.107 n. Others see two separate items here: 
“contrary to Law and/or to settled usage [or, established judicial convention].” 


8.166 If the person... estate: the term nasta has been variously explained: dead, gone 
abroad, absconding, etc. If the loan was used for the benefit of the entire family, then 
the relative (here probably the brothers or the heirs of the family) must pay the debt 
even if the family estate has been divided and they are now living separately. 


8.167 Variant reading: “must not be questioned by his superior.” 


8.169 family: Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kullika (followed by Biihler) take ku/am to mean 
judges, which, I think, is a forced interpretation of the term. Clearly the verse is a pro- 
verbial saying taken from elsewhere. 


8.172 by bringing together the social classes: the compound varyasamsargdat has caused 
enormous problems for the understanding of the verse. Some have substituted dharma 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 315 


for varna (supported by Burnell); others have inserted the negative particle varnasam- 
sargat. Commentators give diverse and contradictory explanations. Given that the two 
other activities are duties performed by the king, I think this also should be something 
that the king does. On the face of it, varzasamsarga means confusion of classes, 
something the king is sworn to prevent. I think samsarga here may be used in close to 
its etymological meaning: combining and bringing together, not in a sexual sense 
which would cause the intermixing of classes, but in a broader sense. Here we can take 
it either as supporting the proper functioning of classes within the broader social 
structure or, more restrictively, as referring to the cohesiveness of each class within it- 
self (which is preferred by Medhatithi). 


enhances his power: we have a similar stretching of the meaning here of samjdyate 
(“born together”; see the numerous variants of this also); its parallel with khydpyate of 
the previous verse makes it clear that the meaning is that his strength is not just born 
but broadcast. 


8.181-2 When aman... request it: the syntax of these two verses is quite confused. That 
must be one of the reasons for the rearrangement of the verses by several commenta- 
tors (see note to the edition). Medhatithi is correct, I think, in seeing these two verses 
as forming a single sentence; he rearranges the verses to give some syntactic coherence 
by placing verse 182 after the first half of 181, and placing the second half of 181 last. I 
follow Medhatithi’s explanation. The translations of Bumell, Biihler, and Doniger, 
separate 181 from 182 creating quite a confused meaning. 


8.184 both: namely, the gold that was deposited by the judge and the original deposit that 
resulted in the lawsuit. 


8.185 In the event... they do not perish: “both” here refer to sealed and open deposits. The 
point of the second half of the verse is unclear. We can readily understand the risk the 
man takes, because if the next-of-kin dies without delivering the deposit, the original 
depositor has the right to claim it. The last statement “and if there is no mishap, then 
they do not perish” is so obvious, I cannot understand why it needs to be stated, espe- 
cially because the second half of the verse is intended to give reasons why the deposit 
should not be given to a next-of-kin. Stephanie Jamison (personal communication) 
thinks that this half-verse may be a proverbial saying that has lost some of its punch in 
this context. 


8.188 That is the rule ... from it: the phrase “That is the rule” cannot clearly refer to the pre- 
vious verse. I think this verse refers back to verse 180, which states that a deposit 
should be returned in the same state in which it was deposited. An exception is made in 
the case of sealed deposits, because the man holding the deposit has no way of know- 
ing what the original condition of the deposit was. If this connection between verses 
180 and 188 is correct, then the intervening verses (with the possible exception of 187) 
are either interpolations or given parenthetically. 


8.195 as the delivery, so the recovery: note that this phrase, occurring also in verse 180, 
brackets nicely the entire discussion of deposits. 


8.196 open deposit, sealed deposit: | take the terms niksipta as a synonym of niksepa, an 
open deposit, and upanihita as a synonym of upanidhi, a sealed deposit (see 8.185). 
Manu is here recapitulating these two kinds of deposits in this closing verse. Biihler 
does not recognize the technical nature of the two words and translates: “a deposit or a 
friendly loan”; so also Doniger. 


8.197 the king should not . . . offer testimony: the meaning of this half-verse is not altogether 
clear. Most commentators say that such a man should not be permitted to become a 
witness in any lawsuit (so Biihler). This seems somewhat of a strange beginning to the 
section of sale without ownership; we would have expected a statement about what 
concrete steps should be taken regarding such a person, as indeed stated in the very 


316 


8.198 


8.199 


8.201 


8.202 


8.205 


8.206 


8.208 


8.210 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


next verse. Raghavananda takes the verse to mean that in a court case on the matter 
this man should not be allowed to call witnesses in his defense; in other words, the 
king can issue a summary verdict. This is quite an appealing interpretation. Professor 
Wezler (personal communication) has suggested another alternative. In any lawsuit 
filed by the original owner to recover his property from the current owner, the man 
who sold the article without ownership cannot be permitted to testify; he is after all a 
thief, though he may not consider himself to be one. Clearly, this verse is a very pithy 
statement with a whole lot left unsaid. 


ifhe did it... for theft: the meaning of anapasarah (“has no excuse”) is unclear. Many 
commentators take it to mean that the man has not received it through some means, 
such as purchase, from a son or relative of the owner. Narayana, who reads anavasa- 
rah, takes it to mean “at an improper place and time,” which would add to the serious- 
ness of the crime. For the meanings of sGnvaya and niranvaya (in or outside the 
presence), see 8.332 n. If the sale was done in the presence of the owner, there can be a 
presumption of tacit permission; hence the lesser fine. Most commentators erroneously 
take the two situations as referring to a relative and a non-relative, respectively, an in- 
terpretation followed by all the translators. 


Variant reading: “When a purchase or sale is made.” 


Additional verse: “Someone who engages in a sale without ownership unknowingly 
should be punished in the above manner; if he does it knowingly, however, he ought to 
be punished like a thief.” 


through a sale: Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kullika take the term vikrayat as referring to 
the market place (so also Biihler). Raghavananda and Nandana take it as referring to 
the seller. In any case, the meaning is that a purchase made at a public sale is evidence 
of title. 


initial seller: the meaning of the term miilam has been subject to dispute. Govinda and 
Nandana take it to mean the original value of the article. The meaning then is that if the 
price cannot be produced in the court because the original seller has disappeared, then 
the man who purchased it should not be punished. Other commentators, however, take 
mila to mean the man who sold the article. This interpretation is supported by verses 
of BrSm (1.12.5—6) that provides the full context, verses cited by Vijfianesvara on YDh 
2.170. In either case, the fraudulently sold article is restored to its rightful owner, and 
the purchaser is left high and dry: caveat emptor. 


Three additional verses: “Someone who makes Vaisyas and other twice-born persons 
accept forbidden food or drink ought to be punished with the lowest, middle, and the 
highest fines, respectively. In the case of a Sidra, the fine is 54 Panas; and the king 
should send those who made them eat it into exile. A person who uses a young cow, an 
animal belonging to a god, an ox, or a stud bull as a beast of burden should be subject 
to the lowest fine; if any is killed, the highest fine.” 


Ifone ... performed: it is significant that Manu deals with priestly partnerships as the 
model (prakyti) for other kinds of commercial partnerships. I think this indicates an 
older period when priestly speculation centered mostly around priestly matters. In the 
NSm (3.1-11) and YDh (2.259-65), commercial partnerships are given first as the 
model and priestly partnerships later. 


Ata ritual... entire fee: most commentators take this verse as a question to which the 
answer is provided in verses 209-10; so also Biihler. I see no indication that this is a 
question, and the following verses do not appear to provide a real answer. 


Among all the priests . . . to a quarter: the principal priests are the four mentioned in 
the previous verse. Next in rank are Maitravaruna, Pratiprasthatr, Brahmanacchamsin, 
and Prastotr; then come Acchavaka, Nestr, Agnidhra, and Pratihartr; and finally, 
Gravastotr, Netr, Potr, and Subrahmanya. According to Medhatithi, assuming the total 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 317 


to be 112, the shares distributed are: 56, 28,16, and 12. According to others, assuming 
the total to be 100, the shares distributed are: 48, 24, 16, and 12. See Kane 1962-75, v: 
1329-30. 

8.212 gift: within this ground for litigation, it is apparent that the term datra, literally 
“given,” has a technical meaning. It does not refer to what has been given, as the term 
implies, but to a gift that is pledged but not yet delivered. This pledge appears to have 
been legally binding so that the potential recipient was able to move a court to enforce 
payment. 


8.219 When aman... from his realm: the contract dealt with here is not a private one but 
pertains to a corporate body. When a contract is made with the stipulation that all those 
who belong to that corporate entity will do something, then each individual is bound 
by it. Here the corporate entities are a village, a region (group of villages), and a corpo- 
ration (traders, artisans, sect). See NSm 10.1; YDh 2.190f. Some interpret the compound 
gradmadeSasamgha as a corporation located in a village or region (so Biihler). The term 
satyena is also interpreted by some to mean an oath: see 8.113 where a Brahmin has to 
swear by the truth. 


8.220 fine him... Satamana: some commentators think this passage contains three punish- 
ments: four Suvarnas, six Niskas, and one silver Satamana. 


8.227 seventh step: the reference is to the seven steps that the bride and groom take around 
the sacred fire during the marriage ceremony. The implication in all these verses com- 
ing within the context of the cancellation of a sale or purchase is that marriage is pre- 
cisely such a transaction where the bride is sold by the father and bought by the future 
husband (see my note on bride-price at 3.53). The reasoning here appears to be that 
once the seventh step is taken, the transaction is ritually complete and cannot be an- 
nulled. 


8.234 yellow bile (rocana): this appears to be a yellow pigment prepared with the bile of 
cows. Yet, Medhatithi takes it to be a powder found in the horns of cows: gorocanam 
gavam Srhgesu carnam bhavati. 


8.237 one hundred ... throws: for these measurements, see App. IV 


8.240 a fenced field: because of the ambiguous sandhi, the reading could either be parivrte 
(“fenced”) or (a)parivrte (“unfenced”). Bharuci supports the negative; Medhatithi 
gives both alternatives; while the other commentators support the positive. The parallel 
at GDh 12.21 (pathi ksetre ’ nd@vrte) supports the negative, but the rule there places the 
blame equally on the herdsman and the farmer. Although generally Manu follows the 
GDh, I think here Manu has deliberately introduced a different rule. He dealt with un- 
fenced fields in verse 238 and introduced fencing in verse 239. And in 241 he refers to 
“other fields,” which can only refer to unfenced fields (it would be odd to refer to 
fenced fields as “other”) in contrast to the fenced ones of verse 240. 


8.242 Manu has .. . herdsman or not: commentators explain that the bulls meant here are 
those released at certain festivals or rituals, such as the Vrsotsarga. Animals dedicated 
to gods are temple cattle and the like. It is unclear whether the punishment concerns 
the animals themselves (beating, impounding) or their owners. Possibly the former, be- 
cause at least in the case of temple cattle there are no human owners. 


8.243 For an offense . . . of the owner: the meaning of this verse and its relation to the con- 
text that deals with owners and herdsmen are quite unclear. Most commentators take 
bhaga (“share”) as the tax that the owner of a field owes to the king; for this meaning 
of bhaga, see 7.130 n. Under this interpretation, the offense must involve the wrongful 
impounding or injuring of animals that have wandered into his property. Bharuci, on 
the other hand, takes this to be a dispute between an owner of a field and his tenant 
farmers. If the owner damages the crops, then he is fined ten times his share of the 
crop; whereas, if his servants do the damage unknown to the owner, then the fine is 


318 Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


half that amount. This interpretation has the benefit of simplicity, but the problem is 
that it introduces a different and new topic into the discussion. 


8.245 when landmarks . . . visible: commentators note that during this month, which is be- 
tween spring and the rains, the land is parched and the grass is dried up. Hidden land- 
marks can be seen most clearly during this time of the year. 


8.259 question: on the word anuyufijita as a technical term of judicial interrogation, see 8.79. 


8.265 on the basis of utility: commentators point out that a smaller piece of land may be 
more productive than a larger parcel. Likewise, a reservoir may be more useful to one 
village (for example, it has no other water source) than to the other (which may have 
other sources). 


8.268 Two additional verses: “Between a Ksatriya and a Vaisya the punishment to be im- 
posed is the same as that between Brahmin and Ksatriya; the punishment for Ksatriya 
or Vaisya abusing a Sidra is that for a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya or Vaisya. The 
punishment imposed on Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, and Siidras is higher or lower just as for a 
Brahmin, with the exception of verbal reprimand—that is the settled rule.” 


The first verse is somewhat unclear, but the intent appears to be this. Mutual abuse 
between Ksatriyas and Vaisyas is treated in the same as that that between Brahmins 
and Ksatriyas. So, a Ksatriya abusing a Vaisya = a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya (fine of 
50); a Vaisya abusing a Ksgatriya = a Ksatriya abusing a Brahmin (fine of 100). The 
second half of the first verse is very unclear. 1 think what it states is this. A Kgatriya 
abusing a Sidra = a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya (25); a Vaisya abusing a Sidra = a 
Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya (50). The reading of the last foot is uncertain. Some manu- 
scripts read: “with the exception of monetary fines”; and others: “with the exception of 
corporal punishment.” 


8.270 If a once-born . . . lowest part: a once-born man is a Sidra. The implied background of 
this harsh punishment is the creation myth of the Purusasiikta (RV 10.90), which has 
become a root metaphor in the Dharma literature. The twice-born here probably refers 
specifically to Brahmins, who were born from the mouth (speech). When a man born 
from the feet uses speech to abuse a man born from the mouth, he loses his right to the 
tongue, the organ of speech. 


8.271 ten fingers: for the measurement, see App. IV. 


8.273 Ifaman... fined 200: there are several points that are unclear in this verse. First, does 
it apply to all or only to Stdras? Commentators are divided, but I think Bharuci and 
Medhatithi are right in taking it as applicable to all. Second, is Sariram an adjective 
qualifying karma or is it an independent entry? I think Medhatithi, Raghavananda, and 
Nandana are right in taking the two as independent entries. Others take them as refer- 
ring to “bodily activities” or to “bodily consecration” such as vedic initiation. I also 
follow Medhatithi in taking sariram to mean bodily features, especially in the light of 
what is stated in the very next verse. 


8.275 hurls accusations: commentators give different meanings of the word dksdrayan. See 
8.354-5, where it clearly refers to accusations; here the term possibly refers to accusa- 
tions relating to crimes or sins. 


8.277 exactly the same punishment: when a Vaisya abuses a Sidra or vice versa, the punish- 
ment is the same as for a Brahmin abusing a Ksatriya or vice versa. See the added 
verses after 8.268 and the note to it. 


Additional verse: “By telling an outcaste ‘You’re an outcaste!’, or a thief ‘You’re a 
thief!’, a man by his speech becomes as sinful as they; and if his accusation is false, he 
becomes twice as sinful.” 


8.283 Variant reading: “by the feet, the nose, the neck.” 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 319 


8.284 sent into exile (pravasyah): this term can also mean imposing the capital punishment 


8.287 


8.295 


8.296 


8.299 
8.303 


8.309 


8.310 
8.314 
8.320 


8.321 


8.324 


(see 8.123 n.). Medhatithi gives this as a possible meaning, following the ArthaSastra 
usage of the term: pravdsanam arthaSastrapravrttya maranam nirvdsanam va. 


vigor (prana): the meaning is not altogether clear. Medhatithi glosses with balam 
(“strength”). The vulgate has the easier reading vrana (“wound”). In any case, a griev- 
ous wounding and the shedding of blood are clearly intended. 


total fine (sarvadandam): Bharuci, Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kullika explain that if 
the injured man does not accept the payment for his medical expenses, then that 
amount should be added to the usual fine and both paid to the king. Narayana thinks 
that this should be done if the perpetrator does not want to pay the medical bills. Nan- 
dana says that the perpetrator should either pay for the full recovery or give to the vic- 
tim also a sum equivalent to the full fine he owes the king. Nandana also mentions the 
possibility that sarvadandam (sarvasya dandam) may mean taking all the man’s 
wealth as a fine, possibly when the man is too poor to shoulder the full medical ex- 
penses of his victim. I consider this to be the most natural explanation. 


In a case... vehicle: Medhatithi and Nandana take the instrumental pasubhih and 
rathena as the instruments of killing: “the driver kills living creatures by means of 
animals or vehicles when his path is obstructed.” Others, correctly I think, take the in- 
strumentals as the agents of obstruction. The meaning, I think, is that the driver kills 
the animals or bumps the vehicle that is obstructing the path. 


Ifa human... horse: most commentators take this, correctly I think, as referring to a 
vehicle accident. Narayana and Nandana, however, think that the section on vehicle 
accidents is over and that this is an independent statement regarding killing humans 
and animals. 

Variant reading: “a wife, son, slave, servant, or uterine brother.” 


his sacrificial session: on the sattra, see 2.106 n. Here the reign of a king is compared 
to a sacrificial session of long duration at which the gift of safety to his subjects is con- 
sidered equal to the sacrificial fee. See also 8.306. 


Variant reading: “fails to provide protection, is predatory, and untrue, one should 
abandon him.” 


Variant reading: “imprisonment, fines, and diverse forms of corporal punishment.” 
Variant reading: “A thief, with his hair loose, should run to the king.” 


corporal punishment: the term vadha in the legal literature is used both for corporal 
punishment, including mutilation and amputation, and for capital punishment. It is of- 
ten difficult to tell from the context which is meant. In this verse, given the amount 
stolen, I think corporal punishment is meant. In the next verse, on the other hand, 
capital punishment is clearly meant, because verse 322 gives lesser forms of corporal 
punishment. 


The same goes ... capital punishment: 1 think there is broken syntax in this verse, 
which may be piecing together pddas from different contexts. In NSm 19.32, for exam- 
ple, pada-a is placed in a different verse and only a fine is prescribed for stealing arti- 
cles sold by weight; examples include ghee and other liquids. I have taken pdda-a as 
syntactically connected with the previous verse, and pada-b with the second half of the 
verse. See Madhava’s citation of this verse that replaces the first half-verse with that 
from NSm 19.34. “more than 100” must refer to weight in the case of gold, etc., and to 
pieces in the case of clothes, as pointed out by Medhatithi. 


time and purpose: the meaning appears to be this. If an article was stolen when it was 
urgently needed (e.g., stealing a weapon during a time of war), the theft becomes more 
serious. Likewise, the purpose served by the article may make the theft more severe, 
such as stealing the medicine of a sick man. See also 9.293 n. 


320 Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


8.325 in the case ... of the heel: this half-verse has been subject to much misunderstanding 
resulting in several emendations (see the note in the critical edition). One interpretation 
takes sthiirik& (supported by the variant n@sikd) as the nose. Following several com- 
mentators, Btihler translates: “for piercing (the nostrils of) a barren cow.” M-W give 
“nostrils of a barren cow” as the meaning of sthirikd, while B-R gives the alternative 
reading charika with the meaning “Kuhschnauze.” 1 think these interpretations are 
mistaken; within a section dealing with stealing, there is no reason to introduce the 
mutilation of animals. Lariviere (1983) and in his translation of NSm 19.40 has cor- 
rectly identified sthitrd as the Achilles tendon; and sthirikd cannot be other than a 
synonym for it. See also Turner 1966, I: 13775 where sthiira is related to thuri meaning 
“heel” in the Dardic languages Phaltra and Shina. 


8.329 other similar kinds of food (anyesam caivamadinam adyanam): Biihler, Burnell, and 
Doniger follow the alternative: caivamddindm madydndm, and translate: “other things 
of a similar kind, spirituous liquor.” 


8.332 in the presence .. . outside his presence: this verse is clearly a versification of AS 
3.17.1-2: sahasam anvayavat prasabhakarma | niranvaye steyam apavyayane ca | 
Kangle translates this passage accurately: “Forcible seizure [or better, violence] is a 
deed of force in the presence (of the owner). In the absence (of the owner) it is theft, 
also in case of denial.” A similar versification of the first stra is found in Katyayana: 
sahasa yat krtam karma tat sahasam udahrtam | sGnvayas tv apaharo yah prasahya 
haranam ca yat |{ “A deed done with violence is called ‘violence,’ as also a seizure in 
the presence (of the owner) and a forcible seizure.” In all these texts, the aim is to de- 
fine sdhasa “violence.” Within this context, it appears that the Arthagastra tradition 
coined the technical terms anvayavat and niranvaya for thefts and robberies committed 
in the presence or outside the presence of the owner. The term sdnvaya used by Manu 
in 8.198 and 331 appears to be a synonym of anvayavat created possibly for metrical 
exigencies. Although robbery is more serious than theft, yet in 331 theft (in the pres- 
ence of the owner) is considered the lesser offense, possibly because it may imply an 
implicit consent, especially if the person taking the article is known to the owner. 
These two technical terms appear to have fallen into disuse within the Dharma tradi- 
tion; NSm (14.1), for example, which defines sdhasa in words reminiscent of Manu and 
the AS, does not use these terms. For the meaning of anvaya, see Kangle 1965, III: 229. 
For a discussion of sGhasa in the Dharmasastras, see Rocher 1976b. 


The reason for inserting this verse here is unclear. A definition such as this should 
have been given in the section on sa@hasa (8.344), as it is done in both the AS' and the 
NSm. Medhatithi thinks that the following rules deal with robbery rather than theft. It 
is more likely, however, that Manu inserts this verse to explain niranvaya and sdnvaya 
that were used in the previous verse. Indeed, we can detect that this verse is a paren- 
thetical statement, because the next verse (333) uses the pronoun efani (“these”), refer- 
ring back to the articles mentioned in verse 331. 


8.333 Variant reading: “the king should impose on him the lowest fine”: see 8.138. 


8.336 Ina case... fixed rule: this is quite a significant rule. If taken at its face value, it im- 
plies that even the king was not above the law! Commentators point out that in the case 
of the king, the fine should be thrown into water (9.245). Medieval authors evidently 
found the fining of the king hard to swallow; both Laksmidhara and Devannabhatta 
change the reading from raja to the genitive rajfidm or rdjftah (with janah of the pre- 
vious pada understood). The meaning then would be that people connected to the king, 
such as those mentioned in the previous verse, are subject to this rule. 


8.337-8 With respect... good or bad: the penalty is calculated on the basis of the value of 
the stolen goods. In general, the principle is that lighter penalties are assessed for peo- 
ple of higher classes. But here a different principle is enunciated, a principle more in 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 321 


keeping with the penances, where the severity of the penance for the same offense in- 
creases for those of higher classes. These two verses appear to be versifications of 
GDh 12.15-7. Biihler, following Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kullika, takes the last 
clause as applying to all the individuals mentioned. The presence of hi (“for”), how- 
ever, makes it clear that this clause applies specifically to a Brahmin, for he is suppos- 
ed to know the law. The parallel passage in GDh 12.17, on the other hand, makes a 
more general statement that a learned man should be punished more severely. 


8.342 When someone ties .. . as for theft: clearly these acts must have been viewed as not 
real theft, otherwise there is no reason to insist that they should be viewed as theft. The 
first two acts fit this category well; the reference is probably to untying someone else’s 
cattle so they may get lost, or tying up (i.e., impounding) another’s cattle in one’s own 
property, possibly to make use of them. Several commentators take hartd to mean “one 
who steals” with reference to slaves etc. This is implausible, because if it were real 
theft, then there is no need to insist that they are equivalent to theft. Narayana probably 
has it right when he says that the reference is to someone taking away a slave, horse, or 
carriage for his own use without authorization. 


8.344 violence: the distinction between violence as s@hasa and physical assault (dapda- 
pdrusya, 8.279~301) is not readily apparent from their treatment in Manu. In the AS 
(3.17), on the other hand, sdhasa is clearly defined as forcible seizure of property, in- 
cluding robbery; whereas physical assault does not involve taking the other’s property. 
The NSm (14) includes both simple violent acts and robbery under this heading. 


8.345 someone who is... with a rod: clearly, these three individuals refer to those guilty of 
offenses under the previous three grounds for litigation. 


8.349 ina conflict over sacrificial fees: this provision provides an interesting historical note. 
Conflicts, either between priests or between priests and patrons, over sacrificial fees 
must have been a common occurrence for it to be noted by Manu; even more interest- 
ing is that violence within this context is condoned. 


8.352 execute them (pravasayet): for the meaning of this term, see 8.123 n. Commentators 
uniformly take it to mean banishment; and so do the translators. This is certainly pos- 
sible, but see verse 359 where the death penalty is imposed on all except Brahmins for 
adultery. The disfigurement or branding, according to commentators, include cutting 
off the nose, penis, testicles, and the like. See also 9.248 where almost identical words 
are used for graphic and diverse modes of execution that drive terror into men. 


8.353 root: the meaning is unclear. Commentators take it to mean rain that supports life, rea- 
soning that the mixing of castes leads to the cessation of sacrifices, which in turn leads 
to drought and starvation. See SB 11.1.6.24, where also the absence of rain is associated 
with dharma. 


8.360 men consecrated for sacrifice (diksitah): this is the understanding of all commentators 
and translators. Then this category is somewhat anomalous, because the others deal 
with individuals who generally visit houses and must come in contact with house- 
wives. It is possible that here diksita refers more broadly to holy men of diverse relig- 
ious sects. See, for example, MBh 1.80.25; 15.17.3, 9: vanavdsdya diksitah; MBh 
1.205.30: brahmacarydya diksitah. Also at MBh 13.10.8 and Ram 5.3.28 the term ap- 
pears to include various kinds of holy men rather than strictly persons consecrated to 
perform a sacrifice. 
unless .. . banned (aprativaritah): I follow Medhatithi and Nandana (so also Doniger); 
the statement about forbidding such conversations in the next verse favors this inter- 
pretation. Others take the term to mean “without being hindered,” an explanation fol- 
lowed by Biihler. 


8.361 Variant reading: “A man should never converse with other people’s wives.” 


322 Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 


8.362 to wives ... on their own: the fact that the compound ndtmopajivisu is masculine has 
caused some problems to commentators. Many take the compound as referring to the 
husbands who live off the earnings of their wives. Accordingly, Biihler translates: 
“This rule does not apply to the wives of actors and singers, nor (of) those who live on 
(the intrigues of) their own wives.” Note the difficulty Biihler has in finding a genitive 
within the locative construction! I think Nandana is right in taking this as referring to 
prostitutes; the masculine ending can be justified because it qualifies d@resu, which is 
grammatically masculine. The point of the rule appears to be that husbands of such 
women may use scriptural provisions against adultery to blackmail other men. 


8.364 execution: I have followed Medhatithi in taking vadha to mean the death penalty. 
Govinda and Kulliika (followed by Biihler) interpret the term as simply corporal pun- 
ishment, such as the cutting of sexual organs. See 8.320 n. 


8.366 bride-price: 1 do not think that this provision forces the man to marry the girl he has 
violated. It simply means that he should pay reparation to the father in the form of the 
bride-price that he would have otherwise received at her wedding. See verse 369 where 
even another woman who violates a virgin has to pay a similar price. 


8.367 two of his fingers: the cutting of two fingers is prescribed for any deflowering of a 
virgin short of sexual intercourse. The reason is probably that the violator used his fin- 
gers for the sexual act. See verse 370 where a similar punishment is prescribed also for 
a woman who violates a virgin. The AS (4.12.3) specifies that the middle and index 
fingers are to be cut off. 


8.369 Variant reading: “pay twice the bride-price.” 


8.373 Vrdtya woman: the meaning is unclear. Medhatithi gives several possibilities, includ- 
ing prostitute, wanton woman, unmarried woman, etc. Others take her to be the wife of 
a Vratya, that is, a twice-born who has not been initiated at the proper time (2.39). 


8.374 loses everything: that is, he loses all his property, as well as his life. 


8.382 Additional verse: “If a Brahmin has sex with a guarded Ksatriya or Vaisya woman, he 
should not be subject to the urine punishment (8.375), but he should be made to pay the 
highest fine.” 


8.385 lowest-born woman (antyajastriyam): most commentators identify such women as 
Candalas. Narayana specifies washerwomen, leather workers, dancers, basket makers, 
fisherwomen, and the like. 


8.386 The king .. . world of Indra: the five crimes referred to here are actually the five 
grounds for litigation (8.11-5), all involving some degree of violence. 


8.390 living in hermitages (aSramesu): I follow Bharuci, Medhatithi, and Nandana in taking 
dsrama here as referring to hermitages of ascetics. The context clearly calls for extra- 
ordinary individuals engaged in a dispute; otherwise the king would not take such pre- 
cautions. The AS (1.19.31-2) also recommends that the king should decide matters 
relating to ascetics only in the company of his Purohita, because otherwise these as- 
cetics might direct their anger at him. Other commentators take Grama to mean orders 
of life; and this is followed by Doniger and Biihler, who translates: “If twice-born men 
dispute among each other concerning the duty of the orders.” 


8.392 the one living in front of his house and the one behind (prativesya, anuvesya): the 
meaning of these two terms are unclear, although they certainly refer to close neigh- 
bors. I follow Medhatithi, who explains the former as grhabhimukhah and the latter as 
prsthato vasan. Bharuci, however, rejects this explanation and prefers to see the two 
words as simply referring to close neighbors. Other commentators take the first to be 
the immediate neighbor and the latter to be the one next to him. 


8.395 honor (sampijayet): Biihler translates: “treat kindly”; but the term does not mean that. 


8.396 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 8 323 


Many commentators interpret correctly that honoring (pi#j@) implies giving money and 
food: see 3.70 n. 


He must not . . . those clothes: Biihler, following Kullika, translates: “he shall not re- 
turn the clothes (of one person) for those (of another).” But why would one require a 
tule for that? The point of this verse is to lay down minimum ethical standards on 
washermen. They are not to tie up a load of clothes within a cloth that has been given 
for washing (e.g., a large piece of cloth such as a sari or a sheet). This is the interpreta- 
tion of Medhatithi and Nandana. The meaning of the final phrase is clear: he should 
not rent out clothes that have been given for washing! 


8.397 A weaver . . . fine of 12: only Govinda and Raghavananda offer an explanation. The 


weight of the yarn would have increased in the process of making the cloth, with the 
addition of starch. The fine of twelve is interpreted either as money (Pana), or as 
twelve time the weight of the cloth, or else as a twelfth part of the yarn. 


8.399 royal monopoly: on the technical term prakhydta, see Wezler 2000: 496-501. This 


term occurs with a related meaning also in the AS 9.6.31; 11.1.28, and with a somewhat 
broader meaning at AS 5.2.49. For a similar provision see VaDh 19.14-6. 


8.403 balances, measures: I follow Bharuci and Medhatithi in taking the compound tuld- 


8.419 


9.4 


9-5 


9.8 


9.11 


9.17 


mdnam as a Dvandva listing two items: balance and measure. Others take it as refer- 
ring to only weights; so also Biihler. 


administrative centers (karmantan): I follow Medhatithi, Govinda, and Narayana. 
Biihler, following Kullika, translates: “the completion of his undertakings”; similarly 
Doniger and Burnell. 


CHAPTER NINE 


when they are together .. . apart: Manu provides here different rules by which married 
people should live when they are together and when they are somehow apart, either 
temporarily, as when the husband is away, or permanently, as when the husband or 
wite dies. See 9.74f for rules when the husband is missing. 


reprehensible: the term yadpya is quite unusual. Many mss. have converted this to the 
easier vacya, which is also the reading of the vulgate. For a discussion of the term, see 
Introduction, p. 36. 


Additional verse: “When the wife is guarded, the offspring becomes guarded; and 
when the offspring is guarded, one’s own self becomes guarded.” 


The husband .. . again in her: this is a variant of a verse in AB 7.13. For a discussion of 
the son as one’s very self born again in the wife, see Olivelle 1993, 41-6. My transla- 
tion of jayatvam (lit., “state of being a wife”) is non-literal; but the abstract noun in 
Sanskrit does carry a pregnant and multivalent meaning, indicating both the nature of a 
wife and the etymology of “wife.” For a discussion of this usage in Brahmanical lit- 
erature, especially the Upanisads, see my note to BrU 1.2.1 in Olivelle 1998c, 488. 


household goods: for a study of the significant term p@rindhya in early vedic literature, 
see Jamison 1997. Initially the term referred to the goods that a bride brings with her 
after her marriage; the term itself probably referred to something tied on a wagon 
(traveling box). The connection to the wife probably came through the carriage used to 
covey the new bride to the groom’s house. 


Bed... to women: note the close parallel between this verse and the assigning of the 
various duties to different classes at 1.87~91. Variant reading: “lust, hatred, dishonesty, 
malice.” 


324 


9.18 


9.19 


9.20 


9.21 


9.23 


9.27 


9.28 


9.32 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 


Without strength . . . untruth: 1 think this may have been viewed by the author as a 
vedic citation; see the beginning of the very next verse. In TS 6.5.8.2 we have a very 
similar passage: tasmat striyo nirindriya addyddir api papdat puinsa upastitaram 
vadanti “Therefore, women are without strength and without inheritance, and they 
speak more submissively than even a poor man”). For papa as poor, see Rau 1957, 32- 
4. See also BDh 2.3.46. 


a sample of these: for the adopted reading Gkrtim, see the note to the critical edition. 
The alternative reading is niskrtih/niskrtim, which is adopted by all previous editions. 
On the basis of this reading, Biihler translates: “hear (now those texts which refer to) 
the expiation of their (sins).” 


Here is an illustration of it: the text cited is found in SankhGr 3.13. The exact 
reference of “of it” is unclear. Most take it as a reference to the penance indicated in 
the previous verse; but we have seen that it is an erroneous reading. Medhatithi and 
Nandana, correctly I believe, view this as a reference to the true character 
(svalaksanya: 8.19) of women, of which the cited text is illustrative; and this seems to 
be the view also of Bharuci. 


When a woman . . . infidelity: all the commentators, except Medhatithi and Bharuci 
(who are silent on this point), think that the expiation is carried out by the son rather 
than by the woman who committed the sin. 


Aksamala .. . respect: Aksamala, better known as Arundhati, was the wife of the sage 
Vasistha. Although textual sources give her a high pedigree, the commentators state 
that she was born in a low caste but attained a high status because of her marriage to 
Vasistha. Madanapala was an ascetic who was barred from celestial worlds because he 
had failed to father sons. He then became a Samgi bird and mated with the female 
Sarngi, Jarita. The children born from this union excelled in their knowledge of the 
Veda (MBh 1.220-—5). 


Variant readings: “brings them up—with regard to each of these, the wife”; “brings 
them up—for the sake of joy, the wife.” 


obedient service: the term Susriisd usually refers to the service rendered by a person of 
lower rank to one of higher rank, especially by a pupil to his teacher. The meaning here 
is uncertain; some commentators take it as referring to hospitality and others to taking 
care of the husband’s physical needs. The latter is supported by the more explicit 
statement in 9.86. 


It is acknowledged . . . of the field: the critical edition has adopted the reading kartari; 
the vulgate reads bhartari, which is tautological and Biihler has to labor hard to find 
meaning here: “They (all) say that the male issue (of a woman) belongs to the lord, but 
with respect to the (meaning of the term) lord the revealed texts differ.” But, of course, 
the passage says nothing to resolve any disputes about the meaning of “lord” (hus- 
band). The question, rather, centers on what happens when the sire (Xartr) is different 
from the husband (bhartr). The first half-verse is rather elliptical: pa@da-a gives the 
consensus opinion that a son belongs to the husband; pdda-b introduces the dispute, 
which centers around the man who fathers the son but who is not the husband; and the 
second half of the verse spells out the two positions in this dispute briefly. Arguments 
in support of the first position are given in verses 36—40, and arguments for the second 
position in verses 41~55. It is clear that Manu is here following the classical Indian 
form of argumentation, presenting first the opinion of the opponent (piarvapaksa) and 
then the opinion of the author (uttarapaksa). The traditional enumeration of 12 sons 
(see 9.166f.), where gitdhotpanna, ksetraja, kanina, and sahodha are all fathered by 
men other than the husband, indicates that the second opinion was the stronger one 
within the legal tradition. Derrett cites J.-P. Vernant, Myth et pensée chez les Grecs 
(Paris, 1969), pp. 97f., for Greek sources on this controversy. 


9.34 


9.40 


9.41 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 325 


Sometimes .. . esteemed: note that Manu uses the term visista to refer to the social 
eminence of the father and the mother in this verse; when both are eminent, you get 
eminent children. In the very next verse, however, he uses ufkrsta to refer to the bio- 
logical superiority of the seed (father) vis-a-vis the field (mother), from which socio- 
logical conclusions, such as to whom the son belongs in reality, are drawn. 


For one kind... sprouts forth: it appears to me that there is a lacuna here. The argu- 
ment for the dominance of the seed should have included sociological conclusions 
from the biological observations given here. See, for example, VaDh 6.8—9, where 
precisely such conclusions are drawn. The suspicion of a lacuna here is strengthened 
by the beginning of the second argument in verse 41; this verse begins with tat 
(“therefore”), but the statement in it is unrelated to the previous verse, which supported 
quite the opposite view. 


knowledge and discrimination: commentators explain jidna and vijidna in widely 
different way, indicating educated guesses. Medhatithi: Vedanga (vedic supplements) 
and worldly sciences (logic, fine arts, etc.); Narayana and Ramacandra take them to re- 
fer to Dharma and to worldly matters, respectively; Kullika: Veda and Vedanga; 
Raghavananda: gruti and smrti; Nandana: worldly knowledge and scriptural/textual 
(Sastra) knowledge. 


9.43-4 When someone shoots ... owns the arrow: the examples reinforce the notion that a 


9.45 


9.52 


9.54 


9.55 


9.57 


9.61 


virgin belongs to the person who first deflowers her, assumed here to be her husband. 
This is true with a virgin field as with a virgin girl. So, the first king, Prthu (after 
whom is name pythivi, Earth), who tilled the ground took possession of the entire earth; 
kings coming after him do not have such a claim. So also a man who first clears the 
forest has claim to it. The image changes with the hunt, but here too the one who first 
wounds the unwounded (virgin) animal lays claim to it. The Sanskrit term kha, which I 
have translated “vitals”, literally means hole; Biihler translates as “wound.” I want to 
thank Professor Wezler for suggesting that the meaning might be the vital or mortal 
parts of the animal (marman), the parts at which a hunter will shoot an arrow. Shooting 
another arrow at the wound created by the first arrow does not make much sense. Note 
also the interesting parallel between arrow, the implied plow, and the penis. 


Wife, self. . . is the wife: vedic texts call the wife one half of the husband: TS 6.1.8.5; 
SB 5.2.1.10; AA 1.2.5. For a discussion, see Olivelle 1993, 42, and above 9.8 n. 


agreement: beyond the agreement that the owners of the field and the seed may reach, 
the reference here is to leviratic union, where the biological father is officially appoint- 
ed (niyoga) to raise a son for the woman’s husband, a topic that immediately follows 
(8.57-70). 

When a seed .. . reaps its fruit: the simile here is of a sower in a neighboring field. If 
some of the seeds he sows are carried by the wind or by a stream of water (probably in 
a paddy field) to an adjacent field, the crop that is produced from those seeds belongs 
to the owner of that field and not to the man who sowed the seeds. Variant reading: 
“the owner of the seed does not reap its reward.” 


This is the Law . .. buffaloes: this is a rather strange and unexpected ending to the ar- 
gument. It elevates a simile, already given in verse 48, to the level of a proposition. 
See my earlier comments about possible lacunae in this section: 9.40 n. 


wife of an elder: it may well be that here the term guru (see Note to the Trans., p. 69) 
refers specifically to the father, because in the absence of the father the eldest brother 
becomes a surrogate father to his younger siblings (9.108). 


Some who .. . such women; commentators cite a proverb: aputra ekaputrah, “A man 
who has one son is a sonless man.” The reason evidently is the danger that a single son 
may die before he himself can father a son to continue the line, thus defeating the very 
purpose of the appointment. 


326 


9.64 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 


Twice-born men . . . eternal Law: this and the following verse contradict the opinion 
on levirate just expressed in verses 57-63. This contradiction was already noticed by 
Brhaspati (BrSm 1.25.16), cited by Nandana in his commentary: “after prescribing the 
levirate, Manu himself forbids it” (uktv@ niyogas manund nisiddhah svayam eva tu). 
He ascribes this to the shortening of the Yugas and the inability of contemporary men 
to carry this out in accordance with the rules. I think that here also Manu may be en- 
gaging in an argument with an opponent, whose view is given first and then refuted 
(see 9.32 n.). Manu’s own view appears to be that levirate is morally reprehensible in 
the case of a widow; the only allowance he makes is when the husband dies after the 
betrothal (8.69-70). 


9.69-70 take (vindet), obtaining (adhigamya): the meaning of these two terms in this context 


9.70 


9.72 


9.73 
9.76 


9.77 


9.79 


9.80 
9.84 


9.86 


9.88 


is unclear. All the commentators gloss with words that mean “marry”: vivdhayet, 
parinayet, udvahet and vivahya, udithya. My translation leaves the vagueness of the 
terms intact; clearly this is part of the rite of appointment rather than a true marriage, 
because the man is allowed to father just one son for his deceased brother. 


dressed in white: the social meaning of colors is one area where cultural perceptions 
may be diametrically opposed. White here may indicate the color of the wedding dress 
in the west, but in India it is the color of mourning prescribed for the girl who has lost 
her husband. 


defiled (vipradusta): the meaning is probably that the girl has been deflowered. For 
other occurrences of this term with the meaning of moral corruption, see 2.97; 11.176. 


Variant reading: “one may annul that gift of the virgin by that evil man.” 


A wife should wait: Medhatithi astutely observes that the text does not say what she 
should do after the lapse of the time specified. Manu, indeed, cannot say more because 
he was against the re-marriage of widows (5.157-62). Medhatithi cites various opin- 
ions, including the one which permits her to remarry after that time, which is the inter- 
pretation that best suits this context and is explicitly stated in NSm 12.97-102. Nandana 
is the only commentator who agrees with this. Others say that after this time the wife 
should go in search of her husband, citing VaDh 18.76. 


stop cohabiting with her (na samvaset): Medhatithi observes that samvaset cannot take 
the accusative, forgetting that it does take the accusative when it means to have sex 
with someone. Both Medhatithi and Bharuci, followed by Narayana and Ramacandra, 
nevertheless, object to the interpretation that the husband should banish her from the 
house. Bharuci, Govinda, Kulliika, Nandana, and Raghavananda take samvaset to 
mean cohabit. 


without semen (abija): Medhatithi says that both kliba and abija refer to a napumsaka, 
a term that can also mean someone who is not fully a man, such as a hermaphrodite. 
Others are even less helpful. Clearly, the reference is to some sort of sexual dysfunc- 
tion different from impotence. 


Variant reading: “When a wife drinks liquor or behaves badly.” 


shows and fairs (preksasamajau): the meaning of samdja is unclear. It probably refers 
to some sort of fair or public event that attracted crowds, something looked down upon 
even by the third-century BCE emperor, ASoka (Rock Edict 1). See Ghosh 1973, 56. 


husband's physical needs: these appear to exclude sex, which is separately listed at 
9.28. Commentators offer the examples of preparing and serving food. 


not attained the proper age: most commentators take apraptdm (lit., “not reached”) to 
mean that the girl has not reached the minimum age of eight years. This appears far- 
fetched to me, because there must be a clear point of arrival when one speaks of 
“reaching.” The probable meaning is that she has not reached puberty (supported by its 
mention in the very next verse). I think the first half of the verse implies that a suitor 


9.92 


9.93 


9.99 


9.102 
9.104 


9.107 


9.111 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 327 


has come asking for the girl’s hand. Within this context one can understand the second 
half: one should give the girl to such a suitor even if she is below age. 


Several manuscripts place an additional verse after the first half of verse 88, thus cre- 
ating two verses with a different syntax. I give here the translation of the two with this 
rearranged order: “When there is a suitor who is eminent, handsome, and of equal 
status, a wise father should give him the girl fearing the onset of her menstruation. For 
when a menstruating girl remains, the giver is tainted with sin; one should give the girl 
to him according to rule, even if she has not attained the proper age.” 


if she takes, it is theft: variant reading: “if she takes, she is a thief.” According to a 
significant variant given by Bharuci and Medhatithi, it is the groom who becomes a 
thief if he accepts these ornaments: “if he takes it, he is a thief.” 


Aman who ... her menses: Bharuci thinks that this verse is out of place here and is an 
interpolation, a view recorded also by Medhatithi. 


That after promising .. . to another: several commentators explain, correctly I think, 
that “promising” here refers to the contract made with the man who gave the bride- 
price. 


Variant reading: “from being unfaithful and to remain attached to each other.” 


have passed on: the ambiguity of the term a@rdhvam, which literally means “beyond, 
after,” has given rise to different interpretations. That the reference is clearly to the 
death of the parents is indicated by the last pada: “they are incompetent while those 
two are alive.” Jimitivahana, in his influential Dayabhdga (1.46), says that Manu uses 
the word “after” rather than “deceased” to indicate that the partition can take place 
anytime the father’s proprietary rights lapse as a result of his becoming an outcaste, 
abandoning all worldly desires (e.g., becoming an ascetic), or dying. 


Only that son .. . through lust: for the vedic theology that posits the son as the source 
of the father’s immortality, see AB 7.13; VaDh 17.1-5; Olivelle 1993, 41-6. 


They should . . . meritorious: clearly, living separately is the preferred option of Manu. 
The particle vd, which generally means simply “or,” is here used with the more spe- 
cific meaning of “or rather,” indicating not just an option but the preferred option. On 
this use of vd, see Scharfe 1993, 272-4; P. Kiparsky Some Theoretical Problems in 
Panini’ s Grammar (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1982). The in- 
crease of dharma takes place because each brother as the head of a separate household 
will have to offer separate sacrifices and other rites. 


9.120-1 Ifa younger... the Law: the issue here is the share of a son born through a leviratic 


union. Should he, as the heir of the eldest brother, receive the preemptive share re- 
served for the eldest? The answer given is no; and the argument is that the biological 
father of the son is the “principal” and not the biological mother, through whom the 
son’s connection to the eldest brother is established. Therefore, the leviratic son (i.e., 
the nephew) should receive the same share as all brothers. See a similar situation in 
9.134 with regard to the “female-son.” 


9.123 first-born: all the commentators, except Nandana, take the compound parvajah to 


mean “born to the first (i.e., seniormost) wife” (piirvasyam jdtah). This interpretation 
is followed by Biihler. I think Nandana is correct; the parallel passage in GDh 28.14 
(note that Manu follows Gautama closely) reads jyestha (“eldest”) leaving no ambigu- 
ity. 

inferior bulls: given the ambiguous sandhi of (a)pare ’jyesthavrsah, most commenta- 
tors omit the avagraha and read the positive jyesthavrsah. Biihler, accordingly, trans- 
lates: “the next best bulls,” followed by Doniger, a meaning that is hard to extract from 
the Sanskrit. I think Bharuci and Medhatithi are correct in seeing an avagraha here and 
reading the negative ajyesthavrsch, “inferior bulls.” 


328 


9.126 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 


Subrahmanya: this is the name of a ritual invocation addressed to Indra inviting him to 
partake of the Soma. See AB 6.3. 


9.127 female-son: the term putrikd, which is a feminine construction from putra (“son”), has 


generally been translated as “appointed daughter,” an institution that is also found in 
other Indo-European cultures. This translation is somewhat misleading, because, as 
Jolly (1885, 147-9) has pointed out, she is not merely the one who produces a son for 
her father but is actually a “son” in her own right. Many legal texts list her 
immediately after the natural son and before other kinds of sons (see 8.158—60). See 
also verse 130 about her right to inherit the paternal estate. Although somewhat 
awkward, I have opted for “female-son” to highlight the fact that she is truly a son who 
is female. For an examination of this institution in India and elsewhere, see Schmidt 
1980, 30-75. See also The Law Code of Gortyn (ed. Ronald F. Willetts. Berlin: de 
Gruyter, 1967, pp. 23-7 and 45-7), a 5th-century BCE text from Crete, which devotes a 
substantial section to the “heiress,” that is, a daughter who inherits the paternal 
property in the absence of sons. 


Additional verse: “I will give to you in marriage the brotherless girl adorned with fin- 
ery with the provision that the son she bears will be my son.” This is VaDh 17.17. 


9.128-9 In ancient times ... King Soma: this story of Daksa’s daughters is told in MBh 1.70 


9.131 


9.136 
9.140 


9.142 


9.146 


9.150 


(it is unfortunate that van Buitenen translates the technical term putrikd here as 
“puppets”). The term satkrtya, which I have, following Kullika, translated “after 
adorning them,” can also mean simply “after honoring” (see Biihler and Doniger; it is 
unclear whether it is the grooms or the girls who are honored). I think the act of em- 
bellishing is implied by this term, something one would do to a daughter who is about 
to get married. See my note 3.96 n. 


separate property: the technical term yautaka refers to any kind of separate property 
remaining within the umbrella of common property or carved out of it. See 9.214, 
where the yautaka refers to the separate property of the oldest brother. 


Variant reading: “bears a son of equal status.” 


the second... father’s father: Bharuci and Medhatithi record variants according to 
which the second rice-ball is offered to his biological father (see 9.132). The reading of 
the last pdda as well as its meaning are uncertain. If we follow one reading, the third 
rice-ball would be offered to his biological father’s father; this interpretation is follow- 
ed by Biihler. It also appears to be the meaning of the parallel passage in BDh 2.3.16. 
Medhatithi, Narayana, Kullika, Raghavananda, and Nandana, however, take the final 
pdda to mean that the third rice-ball is offered to the mother’s father’s father. This in- 
terpretation is based either on the reading tatpituh pituh, where tat in the compound is 
taken as tasyah (“her”), or on the reading (adopted in the critical edition) of tu pituh 
pituh, where tasyah (“her”) for pdda-c is taken as governing this pada also. I have 
followed this interpretation, even though it would exclude the biological father alto- 
gether. I think that BDh 2.3.16 also could be interpreted in this way by taking tasydh of 
its pada-c as governing also pitamaham of pada-d. The view expressed here appears to 
be different from that expressed in verse 132, where rice-balls are offered to both the 
mother and the biological father. 


The offering ... to an end: the second half-verse is elliptical. The meaning, however, 
is clear and my translation reproduces the meaning without attempting to be literal. 


keeps: the verb bibhryat means to keep, in the sense of both carrying away for oneself 
and keeping safe (taking care of), and it is related to the term for husband (bhartr). For 
a study of the connection between the two terms, see Thieme 1963, 466. 


ornament: the exact reference is unclear, given that a family would have more than one 
ormament. Medhatithi gives the example of the father’s ring. 


9.154 


9.156 


9.158 


9.161 
9.162 


9.165 


9.166 


9-175 


9.176 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 329 


one Share from the best property: the meaning is unclear. Medhatithi and Kulltka say 
that the property is divided into shares and the most excellent of these shares is given 
to the eldest. Nandana takes it to mean that the most excellent items of the property is 
divided into shares and the best of these given to the eldest. 


Whether he has . . . no son at all: several interpretations are offered by Medhatithi. If 
we take the “proper son” to be a son by a Brahmin wife, then the man may have sons 
by other wives. In this case also, the son by a Sidra wife must get only one-tenth of the 
property. If the man has no son at all, that is, no son from a wife of an upper class, and 
the son from a Sidra wife is the only son he has, then too he must give that son only 
one-tenth of the property. The rest of the property should be divided by the next of kin, 
following the method for a man who dies without issue. 


When all the sons .. . equal shares: this appears clearly to be an alternative (prefer- 
able? see 9.111 n.) to the intricate rules spelled out earlier, even though Medhatithi ob- 
jects strongly to this interpretation. 


relatives but not heirs (adayadabandhavah): the issue is whether the negative suffix 
governs only the first member of the compound or both. Narayana and Nandana opt for 
the latter: the last six are neither heirs nor relatives. This appears to be the view of 
Medhiatithi also, although his wording is somewhat unclear (itare viparitah, “others are 
the opposite”). The parallel passage in GDh 28.33, however, makes it very clear that 
these six kinds of sons do share in the lineage (gotra) of their father. 


Variant reading: “A man gains the same result.” 


If a natural son... . not the other: the verse is obscure. Some commentators assume 
this situation. A husband who is impotent gets a son through appointment (niyoga); 
after that his impotency is cured and he fathers a natural son. In this case, the natural 
son inherits the estate of his father, not the son begotten on the wife. Something like 
this appears to be the intent of the verse, especially in light of what is said in verses 163 
and 164. Narayana and Nandana take ekarikthin as heirs to an undivided estate. They 
contemplate a situation where one of two brothers dies while the estate is undivided, 
and the living brother produces a son for the deceased brother by appointment on his 
widow. The question is whether the latter son can claim more than one share, because 
he is the leviratic son of the dead brother and the biological son of his uncle. At face 
value, this is an attractive interpretation; but what is said in the subsequent verses ap- 
pears to contradict it. See the parallel at 9.191. 


but the other ten .. . and the estate: this verse is once again not altogether clear. Many 
interpretations are offered by commentators. The most probable is the one offered by 
Bharuci and Medhatithi: the sons enumerated later inherit the estate in the absence of 
those enumerated earlier (9.184). This appears to be a version of the so-called ob- 
structed inheritance (sapratibandha): Jolly 1885, 176. See YDh 2.132. 


principal son (prathamakalpika): following the general view of the commentators, 
Biihler translates: “the first in rank.” Thieme (1963, 477) likewise translates: “der den 
ersten Rang hat.” But why would Manu need to say that he is the first in rank when he 
is in fact listed first in rank? I think the meaning here is that the natural son is the stan- 
dard son, the son in the true sense of the term (commentators gloss mukhya, which can 
have a similar meaning), whereas other sons are in some way secondary or substitutes. 
Indeed, in verse 180 the eleven other sons are in fact called substitutes (pratinidhi). See 
the identical wording with regard to principal and secondary rules at 11.30. 


marries again (punar bhiutva): for an examination of this phrase and the term punar- 
bhit, see Thieme 1963, 445-60. 


the rite of remarriage: translators and commentators take paunarbhavena as qualifying 
the husband (bhartra). Accordingly, Biihler translates: “she is worthy to again perform 
with her second (or first deserted) husband the (nuptial) ceremony.” Thieme (1963, 


330 


9.179 


9.182-, 


9.186 


9.187 


9.191 


9.198 


9.199 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 


445) has shown that paunarbhavena refers instead to the special rite of remarriage. The 
BDh 4.1.16 leaves no doubt about this, using the expression paunarbhavena vidhina 
“following the procedure of a second marriage.” On the legal provisions for women to 
leave their husbands and on the remarriage of women, see Lariviere 1991. 


a slave woman married to a slave: the expression ddsaddsi has been subject to much 
misunderstanding. Biihler translates it literally as “female slave of his slave.” Rocher 
(2002) has demonstrated conclusively that dasa and dasi, although literally “slave 
man” and “slave woman,” refer in fact to a Sidra man and woman, respectively. In 
other words, ddsa here is a synonym for Sudra. In the present context, the Sidra has 
fathered a son either by an unmarried Sidra woman (dasi) or by a Sidra woman mar- 
ried to some other Sidra man (i.e., not to the father of her son). 


3 Ifamong several brothers... women who have sons: _ variants of these provisions 
occur also in VaDh 17.10-1 and ViDh 15.41—-2. The connection between the two verses 
is not altogether clear. The second clearly refers to a polygamous marriage. Wezler 
(1998) disagrees with Jolly’s suggestion that the former may refer to a polyandric mar- 
riage of several brothers to a single wife, as exemplified in the marriage of the five 
Pandava brothers in the MBh. Wezler suggests that when one brother has a son all his 
other brothers also become “men who have sons,” because through that son they are all 
freed from the debt to their father of bearing a son to continue the line. Likewise, the 
common wives are relieved of the burden of bearing a son for their common husband. 
At a linguistic level, moreover, a man can claim “I have a son” when his father gets a 
grandson, just as a woman can claim “I have a son” when her husband gets a son. 
Vijnanesvara (on YDh 3.227) cites a verse that he ascribes to Manu, which has a very 
similar thrust: bahiindm ekakaryanam sarvesam Sastradharinam | yady eko ghdteyet 
tatra sarve te ghatakah smytah // “If among many men pursuing the same task, all of 
whom are bearing weapons, one kills, tradition says that all of them are killers.” 
Variant reading: “If among several wives.” 

To three... for a fifth: the three are father, grandfather, and great grandfather. These 
are the three to whom the standard monthly ancestral offering (pdrvanasrdddha) is of- 
fered. The person who is obliged to make the offering, that is the son, is the fourth. A 
fifth individual whether grandson or great great grandfather does not enter into this rit- 
ual picture. When the grandson becomes the offerer, his father becomes one of the 
three and the father’s great grandfather falls out of the picture. 


The closest... a pupil: l have followed the cogent argument of Biihler in his note to 
this verse with regard to the meaning of sapindat as referring to the deceased. Here, as 
in verse 185, the ones mentioned later become heirs only in the absence of the ones 
mentioned earlier (see 9.165 n.). The term sakulya (“belonging to the same family”) is 
defined in BDh 1.11.10 as “those who share in separate oblations,” that is, distant rela- 
tions who do not share the rice-balls offered at an ancestral offering. See Kane 1962—- 
75, lit: 746-7. 

When two . . . of the other: at issue here is a woman married consecutively to two men 
who have each fathered a son. The men are dead and their estates are in the hands of 
their common wife. In this case, each son inherits the estate of his biological father. 
See the parallel at 9.162 and the note to it. 


Any property .. . offspring: the verse is unclear and has been subject to different inter- 
pretations. Most commentators interpret it to mean that, when a Brahmin has wives of 
different classes, the property of a wife of any class goes to the daughter by the Brah- 
min wife. The phrase “to her offspring” is also ambiguous; it can mean children in 
general, sons in particular, or, in the view of most commentators, daughters in particu- 
lar. 

alienate: Buhler, Jha, Derrett, and Doniger, following Kullika and Raghavananda 
(dhanasamcayam), take nirhara to mean hoarding. Biihler, nevertheless, notes that 


9.201 


9.211 


9.212 


9.216 


9.219 


9.220 


9.221 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 331 


Narayana and Nandana’s explanation as “expenditure” (vyaya) is preferable. The latter 
is probably the interpretation also of Bharuci, even though Derrett has chosen to 
translate nirharet as “hoards.” The term may mean something broader than simply ex- 
penditure, however, and may include other types of alienation. Although this term 
does not occur elsewhere in Manu, it is used in VaDh (19.14) with the probable mean- 
ing of the exportation of goods from the capital city of a kingdom.. 


lacking manly strength: commentators uniformly take the term nirindriyah to refer to 
persons lacking a limb or an organ. So, Biihler “deficient in any organ.” This condition 
is generally referred to by the term vikalendriya, however, rather than nirindriya. Pur- 
ther, persons lacking an organ (though not a limb) were already listed as blind and 
deaf. The only other place nirindriya occurs is at 9.18 (see note to it and the citation 
from 7S), where it clearly refers to manly strength, perhaps with a sexual nuance. 


his share is not lost: that is, his share has to be reserved for his own heirs; it cannot be 
divided among themselves by his brothers. 


Having assembled .. . among themselves: the verse is ambiguous and commentators 
offer varying explanations. See also Jimitavahana’s Da@yabhdga 11.5.32—4 and 
Rocher’s comment there. The antecedent of the pronoun tam (“it”) is unclear. The pro- 
noun cannot refer to the share of the eldest or the youngest mentioned in the previous 
verse, because that share is not meant to be divided by the brothers. I think that either 
verse 211 is a parenthetical remark and “it” refers to the joint property mentioned in 
verse 210; or these verses are taken from diverse sources and do not form part of a sin- 
gle argument. The lost context is largely responsible for the lack of clarity and for the 
various interpretations offered by the tradition. See Biihler’s note to this verse for these 
interpretations. 

A son born... with them: the context is a child born to the father after he has partition- 
ed his estate among his sons. That child will inherit the father’s portion of the divided 
estate and any other property the father may have acquired after the partition. 


A garment... from partition: Vijfianesvara (on YDhA 2.118-9) explains that garments, 
vehicles/mounts, and ornaments that have been used are not subject to partition; they 
are taken by the person who regularly used them. “Women” probably refers to slaves 
or servants. Prepared foods are sweets, pickles and the like. Most manuscripts and 
commentators read yogaksemam pracaram ca. Biihler, following Vijnianesvara, trans- 
lates these as “property destined for pious uses or sacrifices, and a pasture-ground.” 
The critical edition has adopted a reading which restores the compound: 
yogaksemapracaram, which is also the reading of Bharuci (for more detail, see my 
note in the critical edition). Scharfe (1993, 195-200), in a close semantic study of the 
term pracdra, has clearly shown that it does not mean land or pasture but activities 
(see 7.153 n.). One can think of watchmen, fences, and the like. These must be contin- 
ued undisturbed by the partition. 


ritual procedure for sons: Buhler, following Kulliika, translates: “the rules for allotting 
(shares) to the (several) sons, those begotten on the wife and the rest.” I think this 
makes no sense; why would the natural son (aurasa) be left out if Manu wanted to 
speak about the procedures for partitioning? I think Narayana is right in taking this to 
mean the ritual procedures for establishing these kinds of sons; then we can understand 
why the natural son is left out, because he is not created by any ritual procedure as in 
the case of leviratic or adopted sons. 


The king ... a kingdom: interestingly, Manu does not deal with disputes arising from 
gambling and betting at all. He merely gives a moralistic disquisition about the evils of 
gambling. See the very different way this section is constructed in NSm 17. Brhaspati 
(cited by Madhava in his Parasaramadhaviya, 3.393) perceptively says that Manu for- 
bids gambling while others permit it. Variant reading: “vices of rulers that destroy 
kings.” 


332 


9.225 


9.227 


9.230 
9.231 
9.232 


9.233 


9.235 
9.240 
9.242 


9.247 
9.251 


9.252 


9.257 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 


entertainers: the critical edition has adopted the reading kerdn. Its meaning is not alto- 
gether clear. If we see it as related to the verb kridati, then a meaning such as a public 
entertainer (jugglers, magicians, etc.) may be possible. Variant readings include kelan 
(again with an unclear meaning), kriirdn (vicious persons), and cauran (thieves). 


In a former age: this may be a reference to the calamities that struck the epic heroes 
Yudhisthira and Nala as a result of their addiction to gambling. 


Variant reading omits “those without guardians.” 
inflamed by the heat of money: the image is of passion for money through bribes. 


constituents of the realm (prakrti): see 9.292 for the six constituents. In the present 
context, however, the reference may be more specifically to the ministers, as explained 
by Raghavananda and Ramacandra. 

adjudicated and a judgment issued (tiritam cnuSistam): different interpretations are 
offered for these two terms. Asaha@ya (on NSm Ma 1.56) takes firita to mean a unani- 
mous verdict of the court, and anuSista to be the judgment and punishment ordered by 
the court. Most commentators of Manu agree with this interpretation. Nandana, how- 
ever, cites Katyadyana (495), according to whom firita is a summary judgment issued 
by the properly authorized official and anusista a judgment based on testimony. 


not bring it back again (na tad bhityo nivartayet): Biihler translates: “and not annul it.” 
That, however, ignores bhijyas (“again”). I follow the understanding of most commen- 
tators. The meaning appears to be that the king should not retry cases that have already 
been settled; this may also refer to matters settled by the former administration in 
newly conquered territories. 


Variant reading: “should be punished individually.” 
Variant reading: “not brand all the classes.” 


to be executed (pravasanam): the term could also mean exile or banishment. [ think the 
argument here goes something like this. A Brahmin should be given the middle fine of 
500 Panas (if he does it thoughtlessly?) or sent into exile without the confiscation of 
property (if done deliberately?). In the case of others, their property is confiscated if 
done thoughtlessly (and then exile as in the case of the Brahmin?), and they are exe- 
cuted, if they did it deliberately. The contrast between vivasa (exile) and pravdsa 
(execution) is also found in 8.123 (see the note to this). Bharuci and Medhatithi also 
interpret pravasa here as vadha (“execution”), and the variant pramdGpanam (“killing”) 
in Devannabhatta also supports this meaning. 

Additional verse: “When a king inflicts punishment in this manner, he gains merit and 
obtains worlds won by good works—that is Manu’s decree.” 


Variant reading: “the farmers’ crops ripen in the prescribed manner.” 


Carrying out... been acquired: this verse takes us right back to the rajadharma sec- 
tion of chapter 7. Manu has clearly embedded his section on legal procedure (vyava- 
hara) squarely within this treatment of the duties of a king, which concludes at verse 
9.324. 

eradication of thorns (kantakoddharana): see the parallel kantakasodhana (“clearing 
thorns”) in verse 253. The word “thorns” here is a technical term for every type of 
criminal and anti-social person (9.259—60) within the kingdom. Here Manu returns to 
the theme of the general duties of the king, after the long disquisition on legal proce- 
dure that occupied all of chapter 8 and much of chapter 9. 


bandits of the wild (atavya or atavika): here terms are used with two different mean- 
ings. At a positive level, they refer to tribes inhabiting forest and wild regions. In the 
AS such people are used as spies (1.12.23, 13.15), and the king makes alliances with 
their chiefs (1.18.7) and settle such people in royal forest (2.2.5). The second meaning 
is negative; such people are viewed as bandits who plunder the country (AS 2.1.36). 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 333 


9.258 fortunetellers (bhadrapreksanika): the reading adopted by the critical edition is based 
on the reading of Medhatithi. Most mss. divide this compound: bhadras ceksantkaih. 
In either case the meaning is not altogether clear. Biihler, following Kullika, takes 
bhadra to be “sanctimonious hypocrites” and the second term to be “fortunetellers.” 


9.260 non-Aryas wearing Arya marks; the reference clearly is to low-caste or tribal people 
attempting to pass off as Aryas by assuming clothing or other marks normally associa- 
ted with Aryas, e.g., the sacrificial cord. For a detailed study of the meaning of non- 
Arya, see Deshpande 1999. 


9.266 patrolled by ... mobile agents: mobile and stationary squads refer to regular police 
and army units employed in internal security. Mobile agents work for the secret serv- 
ice, which employs besides the mobile agents also agents resident in spy establish- 
ments that are stationary. For a study of secret agents, see Scharfe 1993, 204-39. 


9.269 suspicious of the source: the meaning of the expression mélapranihita is unclear. I 
have taken mila to be the source of their invitation to attend the events listed earlier, 
that is, former associates of the thieves and the like. 


9.271 implements, or shelter: commentators and translators alike take the compound bhanda- 
vakasadah to mean those who “grant them room for concealing their implements” 
(Biihler). See, however, the parallel expression Sastr@vakasadan at 9.278, which is in- 
terpreted by most to mean those who provide weapons and shelter. The two com- 
pounds must be constructed alike. The parallel] passage in AS 4.11.9 also include giving 
them shelter (vasa). 


9.272 provinces: for the meaning of rd@stra as incorporated states with a fair degree of auto- 
nomy, see Scharfe 1993, 124. 


9.273 When aman... specific to him: commentators explain this as referring especially to 
Brahmins who function as priests or obtain gifts. It could also refer to royal officials 
who act improperly (see 7.123-4; 9.259). 


9.277 two fingers: Narayana, Kulliika, and Raghavananda take the two to be the thumb and 
the index finger, while Nandana takes them to be the index and middle fingers. See 
also the cutting of fingers in the case of sexual intimacy at 8.267. 


9.278 Variant reading: “the king should execute.” 


9.279 clean execution (Suddhavadha): this is another instance of Manu employing 
Arthasastra terminology. This expression is not found in any other Dharma text. It oc- 
curs only in the AS: 4.9.2; 4.10.16; 4.11.2, 15,26. At AS 4.11.1 we have the expression 
citro ghatah, “colorful execution,” that is, killing that involves various forms of tor- 
ture. The very next sé#tra, 4.11.2, has the expression suddhavadha, which must, there- 
fore, be contrasted with citravadha. A neat and clean execution is probably what is 
meant. Several commentators of Manu interpret the expression to mean decapitation, 
which is quite probable. At AS 4.11.26 Suddhavadha is contrasted with klefadanda, 

“painful punishment,” which must mean something close to citravadha. See 9.291 n. 


9.280 elephants, horses, or chariots: in all likelihood, the reference is to those owned by the 
king. A parallel passage in AS 4.11.7 explicitly refers to king’s elephants, horses, and 
chariots. 


9.282 Anyone who drops . . . that filth: for the royal highway (rdjamdrga), see Scharfe 1993, 
159; AS 2.4.1, 4. On the prohibition against throwing rubbish or filth on a royal high- 
way, see AS 2.36.26-7. 


9.286 For adulterating . . . lowest fine: 1 have followed the majority of commentators in 
taking bhedane with maninam, “breaking of gems.” The syntax, however, is not very 
clear; the obvious way to take it is with dravyandm (so Narayana). But given the con- 
text of business transactions, this seems unlikely. 


334 


9.287 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 


Ifa man deals .. . middle fine: as Derrett (trans. of Bharuci, note on 9.287) observes, 
this appears to be an arcane rule that has not been well understood. The meaning, as 
explained by Medhatithi, appears to be that the man barters commodities that should 
be bartered as equal (e.g., one measure of rice for one measure of sesame seeds; see 
this principle articulate in 10.94) in an unequal manner either directly or in terms of 
price. That is, he buys one commodity at one price and sells the other at a different 
price. Biihler, following Narayana and Kullika, translates: “But the man who behaves 
dishonestly to honest (customers) or cheats in his prices.” This appears improbable. 


9.291 jacks up the price of seed corn (bijotkrasta): the meaning is unclear. Several commen- 


9.293 


9.294 
9.296 


tators explain that the man actually pulls up sprouting seed from the fields in order to 
sell more corn! Others think that the man gathers up seeds already sown and sells it 
again (so Buhler). | wonder how this was possible. I follow the clear explanations of 
Bharuci and Narayana; such price hikes may have been associated with sowing times 
(Narayana: bijakale) when there may be a shortage of seed corn. 


executed with mutilation; the term vikyta appears to be a synonym of or a parallel to 
citra and kleSa in the AS, all indicating that the execution of the criminal is preceded 
by torture and mutilation (see 9.279 n.). 


the time and the purpose: Medhatithi explains that stealing agricultural implements is 
more serious during times of cultivation; likewise medicine when someone is sick and 
weapons during a time of war. See also 8.324 n. 


Variant reading: “are said to form a kingdom of seven constituents.” 


like a tripod: all translators take tridanda to mean “a triple staff,” that is, three sticks 
tied together; this is an emblem of certain kinds of ascetics. The commentators are not 
altogether clear, but Medhatithi at least appears to understand that the simile is based 
on the three components of the tridanda supporting each other. This is not the case in a 
triple staff with three sticks tied together. What keeps the three together is not each 
other but the binding. Manu is cleverly playing with the terms ¢ridanda and vistabdha, 
the latter being an old term for the tripod of a Brahmin. He carried his water pot tied to 
it, and when the tripod was planted on the ground the pot hung from the middle. When 
the tripod is thus standing on the ground, each foot supports the others; if you take off 
one, the entire tripod would fall. This is the point of the simile. For a detailed discus- 
sion of tridanda and the tripod in the ascetic history of India, see Olivelle 1986~87, I: 


42-52. 


9.303 The king ... and Earth: these eight guardian deities of the directions are the gods from 


whose particles the king was initially created (see 7.4); the only difference is that Earth 
is here substituted for Kubera. The king must, therefore, imitate the activities of these 
deities. 


9.304-5 four months, eight months: the monsoon rains come during the summer season; ide- 


9.312 


9.314 


ally the rainy season is depicted as lasting four months. Here, Indra, the god of rain, is 
said to rule over these months. The remaining eight months constitute the dry season 
when the sun shines and extracts water from the earth. 


In this and... in others: clearly, this concluding verse is directly connected with verse 
293 and what preceded it. The intervening sections had little to do with the eradication 
of thorns. I suspect that they are an interpolation; so also, in all likelihood, the section 
on Brahmins that follows (9.313—23). 


They made the fire... wane and wax: these are well-known legends recorded in the 
MBh concerning great Brahmin sages. Bhrgu cursed Fire to be an omnivore when he 
claimed to have the right to take Bhrgu’s wife (MBh 1.6; 12.329.43). When the Ocean 
refused to come when called, Vadavamukha cursed him to become undrinkable and 
made him salty with his sweat (MBh 12.329.48). Because Moon, to whom he had given 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 9 335 


27 of his daughters in marriage (see 9.129), favored one and neglected the others, 
Daksa cursed him to wane and wax (MBh 9.34.40—67, 12.329.45—-6). 


9.321 Ksatriya from Brahmin: this doctrine is articulated already in the BrU, 1.4.11, which 
calls brahma (the priestly power) the womb of the ksatra (the ruling power). 


CHAPTER TEN 


10.5 in the direct order of class (4nulomyena): given that the wife belongs to the same class 
as the husband, this specification makes little sense within the context of this verse. It 
may well be stated here, in the manner of siifra texts, so as to govern what is stated in 
the verses that follow (6-10), namely the marriage of higher-class men to lower class 
wives. 


10.8 girl: the term kanyd (lit., “virgin”) may actually be a shorthand for a girl properly 
given in marriage (kanydddna). The reference then would be to sons born from a legal 
marriage to these wives and not merely a son born from a liaison: so Govinda and 
Kullika, citing YDh 1.92. Medhatithi, on the other hand, takes kanyd as a mere 
synecdoche (upalaksana) for any woman. For a detailed study of the development of 
the mixed-caste systems through intermarriage, see Brinkhaus 1978. For a critical 
study of mixed castes in the legal texts, see Aktor 1999. 


10.13-4 When there ... mother’s defect: these two verses say nothing new and are probably 
interpolations. Indeed, I think that the final word of verse 12, jayante varnasamkarah 
(“so originate the intermixture of classes”), was meant as a fitting close to the discus- 
sion. Also the name Anantara given to a son born from a wife of the next class is dif- 
ferent from Sadrsa (“similar”) given in verse 6. 


10.16-7. Froma Sidra .. . a Sitta: these verses and this entire second discourse on mixed 
classes is suspect. These verses basically repeat what has been stated in verses 11-2. 
Further, the term apasada is defined here as sons born in the inverse order, whereas 
earlier in verse 10 it is defined as sons born in the direct order. The last phrase here is 
elliptical. From a Vaisya man by Ksatriya and Brahmin girls are born Magadha and 
Vaideha; and from a Ksatriya man by a Brahmin girl is born a Sita (see verse 11). 


10.21~3 Frona Vratya ...Satvata: many of these are ethnic and tribal names. This passage 
appears to be an attempt to account for ethnic groups within the ideology of caste in- 
termixture (see 10.43-5). See a similar attempt in GDh 4.21. 


10.24 By adultery ... classes: here we begin yet another discourse on mixed classes, a sec- 
tion that is also quite suspect. Note the final pdda of this verse: jd@yate varpasamkarah, 
which parallels the final pada of the closing verse of the first discourse (10.12). 


10.27 by women of their mother’s caste... higher castes: this half verse is very obscure and 
elliptical. The numerous variant readings testify to the attempts by the tradition to 
understand it. See Biihler’s note and Brinkhaus 1978, 38f for different explanations and 
interpretations. Note the interesting use of varna with reference to mixed classes and 
even outcastes. A similar usage is found at 10.31. 


10.28 As from two .. . excluded men: once again we have an elliptical verse. The meaning 
appears to be this. From a woman of two of the three upper classes (that is, from a 
Brahmin and a Ksatriya woman), a Brahmin begets a son that is his own self (9.8 n.). 
The phrase Gnantarydt svayonyam is elliptical containing an argument supporting the 
above claim. The meaning is that even a Ksatriya woman can be counted as “a woman 


336 


10.35 


10.38 


10.40 


10.42 


10.43 
10.44 


10.46 


10.50 


10.51 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 10 


of his own class” because of her contiguity (see 10.6). The term bahya to indicate an 
outcaste is quite unusual in the early Dharma vocabulary. In Manu, the term is found 
only in these sections (10.28, 29, 30, 31, 39, 62). It does not occur in any other Dharma 
text, except ViDh 16.18 (which is merely a citation of MDh 10.62), or in the AS. 


By Ayogava .. . these three low-borns: the question here is whether “these” (ere) refers 
to the three mentioned previously in verses 32—4, or the three listed in the very next 
verse. Bharuci, Govinda, and Kulliika, and possibly also Medhatithi and Raghava- 
nanda, opt for the former; this interpretation is followed by Biihler and Doniger. I fol- 
low the latter interpretation, favored by Narayana and Nandana. If we follow the 
construction of these verses, we see that the lists contain one kind of woman and sev- 
eral kinds of men (32, 35, 37). The mother of children listed in verses 32—4 is listed at 
the beginning in verse 32 (Gyogave). Further, if we do not take verse 35 as relating to 
verse 36, then we have to supply within the latter verse all the mothers, which is ex- 
actly what Biihler (within parenthesis) and Doniger (in a footnote) do, following the 
commentators who prefer the first option. Variant reading: “By Ayogava women, who 
wear the clothes of the dead.” 


Sopaka ... good people: the term Sopaka may be a Prakrtic form of the Sanskrit 
Svapika (10.19,51). The meaning of the expression milavyasana is unclear. Bharuci, 
Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kulliika take it as referring to a public executioner. 
Narayana, Nandana, and Ramacandra (who also gives the other meaning) take it to 
mean a man who digs for roots. Biihler, following B-R, translates: “who lives by the 
occupation of his sire,” which appears very unlikely. See also the equally difficult ex- 
pression mitlakarma at 11.64 n. 


activities: Aktor (1999, 272) appears to take the term karma to mean “work,” i.e., oc- 
cupation. That is clearly implicit. See, however, the use of the same term in the sense 
of “what someone normally does” in verse 46. The activities that reveal a non-Arya 
man are listed in verse 58. 


in each succeeding generation: the term yuge here is interpreted by Medhatithi, 
Narayana, Raghavananda, Nandana, and Ramacandra as referring to the process of re- 
birth; whereas Kullika takes it literally as referring to world ages. The former is cor- 
rect, because in verse 64 the term yugdft is used unambiguously as referring to births. 


Variant reading: “by trespassing against Brahmins.” 


Pundrakas . . . Daradas: these are clearly ethnic names. Codas and Dravidas were eth- 
nic groups of the south (Dravidians). Kambojas were a group in what is today north- 
western Pakistan; Pahlavas (Parthian) = Persians; Yavana = Greeks; Cina = Chinese. 


low-born (apasada), delinguent-born (apadhvamsaja): the distinction between these 
two categories is not altogether clear. In this verse, the low-born appear to indicate 
mixed-caste individuals born in the proper order of classes (higher man and lower 
woman). This is also the meaning of the term in verse 10. In verse 17, however, those 
born in the inverse order (lower man and higher woman) are designated low-born. The 
delinquent-born here appear to indicate precisely such individuals born in the inverse 
order. 


kinds of clothes and other marks that would identify their castes. See the punishment 
of low-caste men wearing the marks of Aryas at 9.260. 


Apapdatras: this is a term used frequently in the Dharmasiitras, especially by Apas- 
tamba (1.3.25; 1.16.30; 1.21.6,17; 2.17.20). Apastamba juxtaposes it with abhisasta 
(“heinous sinner”) at 1.3.25, with patita (“one fallen from caste”) at 1.21.6, and with 
dogs at 1.6.30; 2.17.20. The BDh 2.2.13 and VaDh 20.16, in a very similar passage, also 


10.57 


10.62 


10.63 


10.65 


10.74 


10.83 


10.88 


10.89 


10.90 


10.94 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 10 337 


juxtapose the term with outcastes; and BDh 1.21.15 with Siidras. Apastamba (1.21.6) 
appears to identify apapdtra as people who have committed certain kinds of sins that 
make a person sordid (asucikara). It appears that this term in its early usage referred to 
certain individuals excluded from society because of some serious lapse. The term fell 
into disuse in later Dharma vocabulary; it does not occur in the YDh, ViDh, or NSm; 
and in Manu also this is the only verse where it occurs. Biihler prefers Medhatithi’s 
interpretation of this word: when an apapatra eats food from someone in a vessel, that 
vessel should be thrown away. See also the mention of broken vessels in verses 52 and 
54. Another interpretation is that the food should not be placed in vessels that they hold 
in their hands but either placed on the ground or held by someone else. 


without the proper complexion (varnapetam): all the commentators and translators take 
this compound to mean a man who is without or outside the social classes. This makes 
little sense, because the question at issue is how to identify a man who looks more or 
less like an Arya. I think varna here means color or complexion. That color of skin and 
hair was used as an identifier of a Brahmin is evident from the interesting remarks of 
the grammarian Patafijali (2nd cent., BCE), who describes a Brahmana as “white in 
color, of pure conduct, with hair that is yellowish or reddish brown.” See also 9.260 n. 


without artifice: see 3.257 n. for the other usages of the term anupaskrtah by Manu. It 
clearly refers to anything that is not overly crafted (in cooking, in embellishment, etc.); 
and here it means that the man does this with a pure and simple heart, without expec- 
tation of any reward. 


Variant reading: “truthfulness, not stealing.” 


Additional verse after the first half of verse 63 and syntactically connected with it: 
“ancestral offerings, hospitality, gift giving, honesty, fathering children by their own 
wives, freedom from envy.” 


so does a Brahmin the rank of a Sidra: the meaning is not altogether clear. According 
to Medhatithi, the offspring of a Brahmin man from a Sidra woman (i.e., a Parasava) 
will become a pure Siidra in the seventh generation by marrying Sudra women. 


that whose source is the Veda (brahmayonisthah): the meaning is quite uncertain. 
Govinda and Kullika: persons devoted to the contemplation of Brahman. Narayana 
and Raghavananda: persons born from a Brahmin father and mother. Bharuci thinks 
that it means the same as svakarmany avasthitah. Nandana offers, in my mind, the best 
explanation, taking brahmayoni as a Bahuvrihi compound (“that whose source is the 
Veda”) referring to dharma (see 2.25). So the compound refers to a man who is firmly 
established in the Law. 


dependence on others (paradhinam): commentators point to the dependence on plows 
and animals. This may, however, refer to the condition of a tenant farmer. If a Brahmin 
or a Ksatriya has fallen on hard times, it is unlikely that he has his own farm to culti- 
vate. 


bees-wax: the term madhu simply means honey, but given that honey (ksaudra@) is al- 
ready mentioned, commentators interpret this to mean madhiicchista or bees-wax. 
Although the interpretation is labored, it may be correct; in a parallel passage, the YDh 
3.37, in fact, lists bees-wax (madhiicchista) right next to honey. 


Additional verse giving further items: “tin, lead, copper, all kinds of metal articles, 
tails, skin, bones, fat, tendons, and concrete bile.” 


pure (Suddhan): most commentators take this to mean unadulterated with other kinds 
of seeds or refuse. Nandana, however, takes it to mean white sesame seeds, black ones 
being implicitly prohibited. 


Variant reading: “but never salt for sesame seeds.” 


338 Notes to the Translation: Chapter 10 


10.103 like fire and water: water (specifically flowing water in rivers) and fire are viewed as 
pure by definition. See 9.318 where fire is said to be undefiled by burning a corpse. 
The VaDh 28.1 cites a proverb: “A woman is not polluted by a lover, a Brahmin by 
vedic rites, water by urine and feces, and fire by the act of burning.” Variant reading; 
“for they are like fire and the sun.” 


10.105-8 Ajigarta... hand of aCandala: the story of Ajigarta is told in the AB 7.13-6, al- 
though there the father did not intend to eat the son. The plot must have changed over 
time. The story of Vamadeva eating dog’s meat is told in the MBh 13.94—5. The story 
of Bharadvaja is told in Sa€yana’s commentary on RV 6.45.31. Visvamitra’s story is the 
most famous and is told in the MBh 12.139. 

10.116 fortitude: the meaning of the term dhrtif within the context of livelihood is unclear. 


Commentators take it to mean being content with little; but that is hardly a way to ob- 
tain a livelihood. 


10.117. A Brahmin... small interest: this appears to be a versification of VaDh 2.40, 43. 
10.119 Variant reading: “he must not turn back in battle.” 


10.122 when he has the name “Brahmin” attached to him (jatabrahmanasabdasya): the 
meaning appears to be that when a Sidra serves a Brahmin, that name attaches to him; 
e.g., “he is a Brahmin’s servant.” By some extension of the name, he can call himself a 
Brahmin! 


10.124 They: the antecedent of taih is not certain, but it must refer to Brahmins who employ 
Siidras. 


10.126 he is not prohibited . . . the Law (na dharmat pratisedhanam): commentators explain 
that Siidras are not prohibited from doing some acts prescribed by Law, such as bath- 
ing, performing the five great sacrifices, and the like. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


11.1-2 A man seeking: Manu ended the last chapter saying: “Next, I will explain the 
splendid rules pertaining to penance.” Instead of penance, however, he spends 43 
verses on unrelated topics, turning to the subject of penance only in verse 44. I believe 
that the first 43 verses are interpolations. Bharuci himself saw the problem. He begins 
his commentary on Chapter 11 with the objection that after promising to deal with 
penance we should have expected Manu to begin this chapter with verse 44. Bharuci’s 
defense of Manu is rather lame. 


11.3 sacrificial arena (vedi): technically this is the area measured out and consecrated for a 
vedic sacrifice and containing the three vedic fires. The meaning appears to be that if 
these individuals come to beg while a sacrifice is taking place, they should be given 
food and a sacrificial fee, as if they were priests. 


11.5 Additional verse: “Aged parents, a virtuous wife, a son, and a pupil, Manu has pro- 
claimed, should be supported even if they have committed a hundred transgressions.” 


The vulgate gives here the following as verse 6, which is eliminated in the critical edi- 
tion: “A man should give wealth to Brahmins who know the Veda and live in solitude 
according to his ability; he will thus attain heaven after death.” 


11.8 even though . . . before: the critical edition (see note there) has adopted the negative 
form apitasomapiirvah. Most commentators accept the positive form, followed by 
Bihler and Doniger. The translation would then be: “though he may have drunk Soma 
before.” The commentators explain that the prohibition affects only Soma sacrifices 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 339 


undertaken voluntarily and not the very first one, which is prescribed (Medhatithi: ane- 
na prathamayajiiasyavasyakartavyatam darSayati). Under the positive interpretation, 
the final api (“even though”) does not make much sense. One should have then expect- 
ed a word such as cet (“if”): the Soma sacrifice does not yield fruit (someone has 
drunk Soma before. I think the negative is the original. The rule prohibits even a man 
who has not drunk Soma before from performing a Soma sacrifice if he does not have 
sufficient resources to maintain his family. A fortiori, of course, a man who has already 
drunk Soma is forbidden to perform it also. My interpretation follows Bharuci. 


1111-2 While a righteous ... complete the sacrifice: opinion is divided over who actually 


1.15 


11.16 


11.19 
11.21 


11.23 


11.24 
11.27 


11.28 
11.33 


11.40 


11.41 


11.47 


takes the property from the Vaisya. Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kullika, following the 
syntax, say that it is the sacrificer himself. Narayana, Nandana, and Ramacandra, how- 
ever, taking a cue from the mention of the king, think that it is the king who should 
confiscate the property. The term dharer (literally, “take”) is also ambiguous; it can 
mean either steal or take (perhaps by force). Medhatithi thinks that there is no restric~ 
tion as to the method of appropriation: it could be begged, stolen, or taken by force. 
Kullika: by theft or force. Govinda: by theft. Verse 17 appears to imply theft. For a 
justification of such an act, see 1.100-1. 


aman who is always a taker: Bharuci cites an opinion that takes dddnanitya as a tech- 
nical term referring to a money lender. 


the rule... next day (asvastanavidhana): the meaning is that he should take only suffi- 
cient food to last just that day. This rule is often associated with certain types of ascet- 
ics: see 4.7. 

both: that is, the man from whom he takes and the man to whom he gives. 


such a man: that is, the man referred in verses 16—7. This reference makes the authenti- 
city of the intervening verses suspect. 


one-sixth of his merits: this is viewed as the “tax” the king obtains from him, as from 
other religious professionals, for providing protection. On the rates of taxation, see 
7.127-39; on the king obtaining one-sixth of the merits of his subjects by protecting 
them, see 8.304-5. 


Variant reading: “Under no circumstances should a man beg money from a Sidra.” 


turn of the year: the new year begins on the first day of the bright fortnight of Caitra 
(March-April). 
Following the NT reading, Biihler translates: “that is the opinion (of the sages).” 


Additional verse: “For, doing that in accordance with the scriptural provisions, he ob- 
tains the highest state. That is the most fierce of all weapons; it cannot be averted by 
enemies.” 


Additional verse: “When the food is inadequate, it burns up the realm; when the ritual 
formulas are inadequate, it burns up the officiating priests; and when the sacrificial 
fees are inadequate, it burns up the man consecrated for the sacrifice—there is no 
enemy equal to the sacrifice.” 


killing a hero (viraha): inGDh 15.6 and VaDh 1.18 a man who extinguishes his sacred 
fires is called simply “a killer of a hero” (virahd). The meaning clearly is that by extin- 
guishing the fire he has killed a hero, fire being the hero among the gods. This is 
spelled out in the TS 1.5.2: “Clearly, he is a slayer of the hero of gods who extinguishes 
the fire.” Manu, however, says that extinguishing the fire is equal to the killing of a 
hero. Within this context, the hero may not be the fire itself but some other man. Most 
commentators take it to be the son. 


When a twice-born . . . that penance: this appears to be an introduction verses 48-53, 
which deal with evil diseases and deformities believed to be caused by either fate or by 


340 


11.51 


11.53 
11.55 


11.56 


11.57 


11.62 


11.64 


11.66 


11.68 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 1] 


sins committed in a past life. Such “sins” are different from the sins actually commit- 
ted that were the subject of verses 45-6. 

Additional verse giving a popular etymology of prdayascitta, (“penance”): “prdyas is 
said to be ascetic toil, and citta is called the firm decision. Tradition says that 
prayascitta consists of ascetic toil and a firm decision.” The decision probably refers to 
the resolution not to commit that sin again. 


steals speech: this appears to be an early indictment of plagiarism. It is interpreted as 
plagiarism by Narayana, while Raghavananda appears to say that the man actually 
writes his name as the author of a book authored by someone else. Ramacandra takes it 
to mean a man who steals books. Biihler says that Govinda and Kulltka interpret this 
to mean a man who steals the Veda by eavesdropping on someone reciting it (see 
2.116), but the editions of these two commentators do not contain a commentary on this 
verse. 


Additional verse given as 52 in Biihler’s translation but omitted in the critical edition: 
“A man who steals a lamp becomes blind; and a man who extinguishes one becomes 
one-eyed. By causing injury, a man becomes frequently sick; and by not causing in- 
jury, a man becomes free from sickness.” 


Variant reading: “as a result of the special property of their past deeds.” 


drinking liquor, stealing: it appears that drinking liquor becomes a grievous sin only 
when done by Brahmins: see GDh 2.20. Stealing is also a grievous sin when it in- 
volves the gold of Brahmins: see 11.57, 100. 


A lie concerning one’s superiority: that is, falsely claiming a superior status either by 
birth or with respect to other attributes such as learning and virtue. 


killing a friend: the term vadha can mean both killing and causing physical harm (see 
8.320 n.). As in verse 11.89, I think the seriousness of the crime argues for taking the 
term as killing. 

unfit food or forbidden food: the compound garhitanddya, as Narayana points out, 
must refer to the two well-known categories of food that should not be eaten: abhojya 
(“unfit food") and abhaksya (“forbidden food”): see 4.205 f., 5.4 f., 5.5 n., and Olivelle 
2002A. 


breaking the vow (vratalopanam): Medhatithi and Narayana take this to mean the 
breaking of any vow undertaken. Given the seriousness of the offense, however, I 
think Govinda, Kullika, and Raghavananda are correct in taking this to be the breaking 
of the vow of chastity by a vedic student. This is confirmed by its inclusion in the sec- 
tion on penances for these sins (11.119 f.). 


root-witchcraft: the meaning of expression milakarma is quite unclear. The commen- 
tators are unanimous in taking it to mean some kind of witchcraft by which another 
person is brought under one’s power (vasikarana): see 9.290 where the meaning is 
clearly some form of witchcraft. In the Kama Saitra (4.1.9) a class of women is 
designated as miélakdrikd, and at 6.2.56 a reference is made to milakarma. The 
reference appears to be to some form of magic potion made with roots to win the love 
of a woman; this is the interpretation of the commentator Yasodhara. See also AV 
4.28.6 where milakrt (“root-cutter”) is in apposition to krtyakrt (“witchcraft-maker’). 
This is also the meaning ascribed to the expression in B-R. 


acting like a woman (strainyam): all the NT mss. and editions read steyam (“stealing”). 


living a corrupt life; engaging in vices (kauSilyam vyasanakriya): all the editions, in- 
cluding Jolly’s read kausilavyasya ca kriyd. Biihler translates this as “practicing (the 
arts of) dancing and singing.” 


cause exclusion from caste (jatibhramSakaram): it is unclear how exactly this differs 


11.76 


11.78 


11.81 
11.82 


11.83 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 341 


from “falling from caste” (pdataka). Clearly it is a lesser sin than the latter. The com- 
mentators offer no help. It is possible that this sin did not result in the formal excom- 
munication of the sinner (see 11.183-6); it may have resulted merely in social 
ostracism within the caste. 


one hundred leagues: a yojana is a distance of approximately 9 miles or 14.5 kilo- 
meters. The total distance he walks comes to about 900 miles. 

walk ... Sarasvati: Narayana says that the penitent starts from Prabhasa and goes up 
along the river bank to Plaksasravana. 

Variant reading: “by fighting three times in defense of a Brahmin.” 

Thus .. . twelfth year: this verse is directly connected with verse 73 and appears to 
ignore verses 74~81, casting doubt on their authenticity. 

by proclaiming .. . horse sacrifice: “gods of earth” are Brahmins, and “gods of men” 
are kings or, more generally, Ksatriyas. Medhatithi, Govinda, Kulliika, and 
Raghavananda think that the gathering is for the purpose of a horse sacrifice. 


11.86 for their purification (tesam pavanaya): Narayana, Govinda, and Kulliika take “their” 


11.88 


11.93 


as referring to the sinners. The syntax of the verse, however, suggests rather that the 
antecedent is “sins.” This verse appears to be a general statement about the efficacy of 
penances for various sins determined by an assembly (parisad) of Brahmins: see 
12.108-12. 


One must... menstrual period: the implicit understanding here is that the fetus is that 
of a Brahmin (see GDh 22.13). The argument is that a fetus without developed sexual 
organs will turn out to be a male. The VaDh 20.24 says that the fetus can be turned into 
a male through the power of pre-natal rites such as the pumsavana (“quickening a male 
child”). Aborting such a fetus, therefore, is equivalent to murdering a Brahmin (always 
assumed to be male, because the murder of a female does not carry the same sanction). 
A Ksatriya or a Vaisya, when they have been consecrated for a sacrifice (diksita) is 
considered a Brahmin at least in some ritual traditions: see ApSr (10.11.5—-6): brah- 
mano vd esa jayate yo diksate; tasmad rajanyavaisydyv api bradhmana ity evdvedayatt. 
“A man who is consecrated for a sacrifice is indeed born from the Veda. Therefore, 
even a Ksatriya or a Vaisya, it has been taught, is a Brahmin.” The VaDh 20.34 speci- 
fies that he is engaged in performing a Soma sacrifice. A woman soon after her men- 
struation is called by the technical term Gtreyi, which is given an interesting 
etymological spin in VaDh 20.35-6. The woman is in her fertile period (3.46—-50) and 
killing her is tantamount to killing a future Brahmin. Here there is the added possibility 
that the woman is pregnant. For a detailed study of this provision, see Jamison 1991, 
213~23; Wezler 1994. 

banner: in BDh 1.18.18 the banner is specified as suradhvaja, literally “liquor banner.” 


Commentators on Manu specify a drinking cup. It may well have been that liquor tav- 
erns in ancient India advertised themselves with a special banner. See 9.237. 


11.94 filth: Manu plays on the word mala, which can mean any filthy or putrid substance 


11.95 


(here fermentation being equated with putrefaction) and also the filth of sin (see 11.72, 
102, 107 for the latter meaning). 


It should .. . so are all: the issue here appears to be whether all kinds of liquor are for- 
bidden or only certain kinds. Liquor made from grain was explicitly forbidden in verse 
94; this verse extends that prohibition to all three kinds. The VaDh 20.19 appears to 
single out liquor called surd as particularly pernicious and prescribes a lighter penance 
for drinking non-surd kinds of liquor (see next note). Commentators are divided about 
the meaning of mddhvi, the third type of liquor. Some take it as derived from honey (a 
kind of mead), whereas others think that it is made from the flowers of the Madhuka 
tree (see next note). 


342 


11.96 


11.97 


11.98 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11] 


Intoxicants, liquor, spirits: there appears to be a distinction made here between liquor 
(sura) and intoxicant (madya). The latter has probably a broader meaning, whereas 
surd is more specific and viewed as more pernicious (see 11.95 n.). Kulltika cites a 
verse from Pulastya that lists eleven types of madya, and calls the twelfth, surd, the 
worst kind of intoxicant. Kullika himself thinks that the three kinds listed in verse 95 
are surad, whereas the other nine kinds are madya. The meaning of “spirit” @sava, lit- 
erally, pressing or distillation) is unclear; commentators call it a variety of madya; 
given its name, it may refer to some type of wine or distilled liquor. 


blabber vedic texts (vaidikam udaharet): most commentators take this to mean that an 
intoxicated Brahmin may not be able to pronounce vedic texts correctly or may recite 
them when he is impure. I think Nandana is correct in thinking that an intoxicated 
Brahmin would recite the Veda in the presence of people who are forbidden to hear it. 


brahman: the term is used with a double entendre here. On the one hand, brahman is 
the Veda residing in the Brahmin’s memory; on the other hand and closely related to 
the first meaning, it is his Brahmanical nature (bra@hmanya) that makes him a Brahmin 
(see 1.93 n.). 


11.100-01 A Brahmin . . . ascetic toil: there is something amiss in these two verses. The king 


takes the pestle, which has not been introduced in the first verse. Traditionally, the 
thief was supposed to take the pestle with him (see 8.315). Then, in the last half verse, 
the thief is purified by being killed. Given that the thief is a Brahmin, we must assume 
that the king kills him. But this would go against the general prohibition of the death 
penalty in the case of Brahmins. Finally, a Brahmin is said to be freed from the sin by 
ascetic toil alone. The verses are garbled; I assume that sections of these verses have 
been taken from different sources and condensed here. See the parallel at 8.314—5. For 
purification of sins through the death of the sinner, see Wezler 1995. 


11.104 metal cylinder: the meaning of the term sérmi is not altogether clear. It is certainly a 


cylindrical object made of metal. Most commentators take it to be a metal image of a 
woman (striprakyti or pratima). At ApDh 1.28.15, however, the criminal is said to enter 
it (praviSya), which points to something, such as a column, that is hollow. Only 
Nandana identifies it as a column (sthiid). The recent study by Falk (2001) has cast 
much light on the history of the term s#rmi. Falk demonstrates that originally the term 
referred to a clay cylinder with openings at both ends for casting metal, that is, a primi- 
tive furnace. Such a cylinder was about the size of a human being; it could be both em- 
braced and entered. The obsolescence of this kind of metal casting and the subsequent 
loss of the original meaning may have changed the term’s meaning to that of a female 
figure, especially within the context of this penance for sexual misconduct. 


11.109 barley gruel: the statement yavan pibet means literally “he should drink barley.” 


Medhatithi observes that a secondary meaning must be intended, because it is not pos- 
sible to drink barley seeds. Some take it to mean drinking barley mixed with water. 
Others think “barley” is used figuratively to indicate a product made with barley, 
namely, barley gruel. Medhatithi and most commentators prefer the latter. 


11.110 During two months: although the connection between this and the preceding verse is 


not altogether clear, it appears that the two months mentioned here are in addition to 
the one month mentioned in the previous verse. Thus, the entire penance lasts for three 
months, as made clear in verse 116. 


11.111 follow those cows: much is implied here. The vow consists of attending to cows during 


three months. During the day the man follows the cows into the pasture or the forest; 
brings them back to the cow-pen in the evening; attends to all their needs; and sits in 
the cow-pen by their side during the night. For a literary description of this observance, 
see Kalidasa’s RaghuvamSa (1.88-95; 2.1-75). On the ascetic practice of standing 
during the day and remaining seated at night, see 6.22 n. 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 343 


11.112 free from rancor (vitamatsarah): the meaning of matsara in this context is unclear. 
Narayana glosses with krodha (“anger”), Medhatithi with lobha (“greed”), and 
Kullika with anudvignahrdayah (“with an unagitated heart”). Medhatithi further 
explains that the term is merely illustrative; the man should free his mind from faults 
such as passion. 

11.113 Variant reading: “he should free her using every means.” 


11.119 cooked oblation: the procedure for cooked oblations (pakayajiia) is given at the very 
beginning of most Grhyasitras: see S@ikhGr 1.1. 


11.120-2 After offering ... and Fire: “Teacher” is an epithet of Brhaspati, the teacher of the 
gods, also identified with the planet Jupiter. See the parallel passage in GDh 25.1-2: 
“So, they ask: “Into how many does a student who has broken his vow of chastity en- 
ter?”—“Into the Maruts with his breaths; into Indra with his strength; into Brhaspati 
with the splendor of his vedic learning; and into just the Fire with everything else.” 


11.127 virtuous (vrttasthe): commentators explain vrtta as the specific duties, especially the 
proper means of livelihood, of each class. Bihler, following Narayana and Kulltika, 
takes the adjective as qualifying the Sidra. This is unlikely, both because the term oc- 
curs in the same pdda as the VaiSya (padas normally form syntactic units) and because 
the same expression is used with clear reference to a Vaisya in verse 130. Medhatithi, 
Raghavananda, and Ramacandra (possibly also Nandana) take it as qualifying all three 
classes. 

11.128 Variant reading: “he should give one thousand cows and a bull after performing the 
vow properly.” 

11.134 castrate (sandha): the same provision occurs at GDh 22.23. Most commentators gloss 
with napumsaka (9.79 n.). The term, however, is often distinguished from kliba and re- 
fers specifically to an eunuch. Medhatithi gives four kinds of sandha: aretas (one who 
is without seed), v@taretas (one who has windy seed, 9.79 n.), apravrttendriya (Sha: 
one without an erection; could it mean one whose sexual organs are not fully devel- 
oped?), and ubhayavyanjana (one with male and female sexual organs). Raghavananda 
gives a different four: kytrima (artificially castrated), akrttima (natural, i.c., born with- 
out the sexual organs), ubhayavyafijana (one with male and female sexual organs), and 
sadrsendriya (one with organs that only resemble?). All the commentators appear to 
take this provision as referring to humans. Haradatta, commenting on GDA 22.23, 
however, cites an opinion according to which the reference is to castrated animals. 
Coming, as it does, right in the middle of a list of animals, in this verse the term cer- 
tainly could refer to a castrated ox. 


11.139 Additional verse: “When someone kills unintentionally a woman belonging to one of 
the three classes in the proper order [i.e., Brahmin, Ksatriya, or Vaisyal, he should per- 
form the observance for killing a Sidra i irrespective of her class.” 


11.147 When someone . . . settled rule: commentators take Varuni to include liquor made from 
honey (madhvi) and molasses (gaudi) and to exclude that made from grain: see 11.95 
n., 96 n.). Biihler (see his long note to this verse) thinks that the term is another name 
for sura. Most commentators (except Medhatithi, Bharuci, and Nandana) take the sec- 
ond half of the verse to mean that even if someone drinks liquor intentionally a pen- 
ance resulting in death should not be prescribed (see Wezler 1995). Biihler’s translation 
follows this interpretation, although in his note he correctly disagrees with it. See the 
very similar use of anirdesya and pradndntika in the GDh 20.15 and 21.7 (the latter pas- 
sage ascribing the view to Manu). 


11.153 forbidden meat (mamsam abhaksyam ca): most commentators and all translators take 
abhaksyam (“forbidden”) as qualifying meat. Only Raghavananda and, perhaps, 
Ramacandra take abhaksyam as a separate category, referring to forbidden foods (see 
5.5 n.). The presence of ca (“and”) after abhaksyam supports the view that we are 


344 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 


dealing with two items here. Further, at 5.31 f. Manu condemns the eating of any kind 
of meat. The parallel phrase in pdda-a, on the other hand, supports taking abhaksyam 
as qualifying mdmsam; so also does the listing of forbidden animals in verses 155-6. 
Under the latter interpretation, the ca would join the two phrases with the verbs 
bhuktva and jagdhvd, even though it comes at the end of the phrase rather than after 
the first word. 


11.154 even though they may be pure (medhyani): that is, even though the substances in their 


natural state may be fit for eating. Commentators explain medhydni as apratisiddhani 
(‘not explicitly forbidden”). Nandana reads amedhyadni, positing the sandhi 
pitvamedhydni. The translation would then be: “When a twice-born drinks anything 
turned sour, pungent decoctions, or even impure substances. .. .” 


until it has been excreted: the GDh 23.23and VaDh 23.30 use the term nispurisibhava 
for the total evacuation of the bowels. According to GDh 23.24, this happens in three 
days, whereas the VaDh implies seven days. 


11.166 five products of the cow: milk, curd, ghee, urine, and dung. 
11.172 If he has sex... lunar penance: the first half-verse is somewhat confusing. The next 


verse makes it clear that we are dealing with three women closely related to a man; if 
we take bhaginim (“sister”) as a separate category, there will be four. The likely expla- 
nation is that “sister” here is used with reference to the first cousin, a common practice 
in India; and this term is qualified by both paitrsvaseyim and mdtur svasriyadm. The 
next verse further shows that the context is marriage and not just a sexual encounter. 
These two verses appear to be directed at cross-cousin marriages common in southern 
India. For the meaning “close relative” for Gpta, see 2.109; 5.101; 9.290. The difficulty 
of the term may have been responsible for the variant tanaydm found in vulgate 
editions and many mss. 


11.174 If someone .. . on water: the sandhi of purusa udakydyam is ambiguous. It could be 


the locative puruse or the nominative purusah. Only Bharuci prefers the former; all 
other commentators (and translators) take it to be a nominative. I have followed 
Bharuci, because the context calls for illegitimate individuals and locations. Further, 
the very next verse also mentions homosexual intercourse. If we follow the others, the 
translation would be: “If a man ejaculates his semen in non-human females, in a men- 
struating woman. .. .” Most also take jale to mean in water. Bharuci takes this to mean 
“on water,” that is, in a boat or ship. I think Bharuci is right; in the very next verse the 
connection between an ox cart and water clearly indicates that we are dealing with ve- 
hicles. Commentators explain that this rule applies only to sex with female animals 
other than cows, because sex with a cow is considered equal to violating an elder’s bed 
(gurutalpa): see GDh 22.36. 


11.177 observance: adultery by a man is counted among the secondary sins causing loss of 


caste (upapdtaka) in 11.60. The penance for such sins is given in 11.118: either the lunar 
penance (11.217) or the cow-vow described in 11.109~17. For adultery as a crime, see 


8.332-59. 


11.178 Additional verse: “When wives of Brahmins, Ksatriyas, or Vaisyas have sex with a 


Sidra, they are purified if they do not bear any children, not otherwise.” 


11.180 / have... four kinds of sinners: Nandana and Ramacandra take “four” as referring to 


the four social classes. Govinda and Kullika take the four to be the four kinds of sin- 
ners listed immediately before: those guilty of killing, eating forbidden food, stealing, 
and sexual offenses. This, however, excludes the major categories of sins that were 
dealt with in the early sections of this chapter. If my hypothesis that the previous four 
sections (11.127-79: which I have called “Excursus’’) are interpolations is right (see 
Introduction, p. 59-60), then the four sinners refer to the categories mentioned in 
11.55~-71. The problem is how we come up with four. The grievous and secondary sins 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 345 


causing loss of caste (mahdpdtaka and upapataka) make two. | think the third is sins 
that cause exclusion from caste (j/atibhramSakara: 11.68). Three other sins are 
enumerated in 11.69—71; but I think Manu thinks of these three as a single large 
category, because when dealing with the penances for them he deals with them 
together in a single verse (11.126). 


11.181 When someone ... an outcaste: the syntax of this verse is not straightforward. Bharuci, 
Medhatithi, Kullika, Raghavananda, and Ramacandra explain that one becomes an 
outcaste when one associates with an outcaste for one year by using the same vehicle 
or seat or by eating with him; if he establishes ritual or marriage connections, on the 
other hand, he falls immediately. This is the view expressed also in ViDh 35.3-5. To 
arrive at this meaning, one would have to syntactically connect na tu of pada-d with 
pada-c; and further ignore the unnatural position of na tu at the end of the phrase 
rather than at the beginning. Scharfe (1993, 44-6) rightly objects to this interpretation. 
He takes the ablatives in the second half-verse to be connected with patati (“he falls”), 
indicating the activities that he is barred from. Scharfe offers the following translation: 
“A person having dealings with an outcast within a year loses the right to offer sacrifi- 
ces [for others], teach the Veda, and enter into marital alliances, but not the right to 
ride, sit, or eat [with others].” There are, however, several problems with Scharfe’s 
translation. First, when the ablative is used with patati, the word in the ablative always 
indicates the state from which he falls rather than some specific activity: MDh 10.97 
patati jatitah (“falls from castes”); MBh 13.131.24-5 patati brahmayonitah (“falls from 
the Brahmin birth’). I have found no example in the Dharma literature where patati is 
used with an ablative in the way Scharfe assumes here. Second, Scharfe assumes that it 
is permissible for people to associate with an outcaste in ordinary social dealings, such 
as traveling in the same vehicle and sitting and eating together. But such interactions 
are explicitly forbidden a few verses later at 11.185. 

I think Narayana, Govinda, and Nandana are correct in reading the verse the way it 
is written. A man falls within a year if he continues to maintain ritual or matrimonial 
relations with a fallen man, but not if he maintains only casual contact. This interpre- 
tation is supported by the context in which this verse is cited in VaDh 1.20-2. In siitras 
20-1, Vasistha lists the five mahdpdtakas, the last of which he describes as: 
“associating with outcastes either through vedic instruction or through marriage” 
(patitasamyogah brahmena vd yaunena va). In the next sitra he cites this verse in 
support of his position. Clearly, the words yajanadhyapanad yaundt of the verse must 
relate to and have the same meaning as brdhmena va yaunena vd of the previous sittra. 
For both Vasistha and, in his eyes, this proverbial saying, only connections of a serious 
nature with an outcaste makes a man an outcaste, not ordinary day-to-day contact. 

It appears that the author of ViDh was responsible for the new interpretation. It may 
well be, as Scharfe notes, that customs had changed and that serious connections with 
an outcaste was thought to bring about immediate exclusion from caste. The ViDh, 
which appears to be a commentary on this verse, had the freedom to say exactly what 
he wanted in his si#tras. The commentators of the verse, however, had a more difficult 
time, because the syntax of the verse clearly did not support such an interpretation. 


11.183 Variant reading: “together with his relatives by marriage outside the village.” 
11.184 A slave woman: the term da@si may refer simply to a Sidra woman: see 9.179 n. 


Variant reading: “A slave woman should then (or always) overturn a pot filled with 
water, as for a dead man.” 


11.190 No one .. . cleansed: this verse appears to conclude Manu’s discussion of penance. 
The excursus on miscellaneous matters relating to penance (verses 191-247) appears to 
be an interpolation. Verse 208 is a repetition of 4.168. Indeed, the very first verse of 
this excursus (verse 191) appears to be a commentary listing exceptions to the provi- 
sions of verse 190. 


346 Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 


11.197 made holy by the cows: the verse is elliptical. The place is made holy only if the cows 
actually eat the grass given by the penitent. The acceptance of the grass by the cows is 
viewed as a sign that the man has freed himself from his sin. 


11.199 misused: the term viplavya has a very broad meaning. Most commentators take it to 
mean that the man has divulged the Veda to an inappropriate person. Medhatithi gives 
several possibilities: reciting the Veda at a time when recitation is forbidden (see 
4.101f), interfering with someone who is properly reciting it, and reciting the Veda 
uninvited for monetary gain. 


11.203 without water or in water: “without water” means that the man did not have water with 
him to perform the normal purification after voiding urine or excrement; and “in wa- 
ter” means that he voided it into water. 


11.205 Hum, you (humkara, tvamkara): it appears that “Hum” was an exclamation or curse 
hurled at someone in anger. When addressing a superior one should not use the infor- 
mal singular tvam but an honorific term such as bhavan or the plural ya@yam (yusmad) 
much like the tu/vous of French and other Romance languages. 


11.208 Variant reading: “As many particles of dust the blood lumps together on earth.” 


11.213 Subsisting . . . one day: commentators point out two procedures. The man may subsist 
on the listed substances during one day and fast the next; or he may subsist on one of 
the six substance for a day during six days and fast on the seventh. 


11.217-8 He should decrease ... bright fortnight: the standard lunar penance begins on the 
full-moon day, when the penitent eats fourteen mouthfuls. He decreases the food by 
one mouthful a day, fasting completely on the new moon day. The intake of food is 
similarly increased by one mouthful a day during the fortnight of the waxing moon. 
Here the month is shaped with the middle narrow (fasting on the new moon) and the 
two ends are broad (fourteen mouthfuls at the beginning and the end). The alternate 
procedure with the middle broad and ends lean (like a barley corn) begins on the new- 
moon day with a total fast; the quantity of food is increased by one mouthful a day dur- 
ing the first fortnight until the full moon, and then decreased during the second 
fortnight. For a detailed description, see BDh 3.8. 


11.226 purificatory texts: commentators identify these variously as the Aghamarsana, the 
Pavamani verses, the Purusa hymn, the Asyavamiya, and the like (see App. IIfl.2). 
Clearly the term referred in general to vedic texts viewed as particularly purifying. 


11.231 Variant reading: “He should never do so again.” 


11.234 If someone’s mind .. . assuaged: the meaning is somewhat unclear. The commentators, 
rightly I think, explain that if after someone has performed a penance for a particular 
sin, he still has a heavy heart, he may continue to perform the same penance until his 
mind is at ease. 


11,238 Solely by . . . effective: the term vidya can refer to any type of knowledge or learning; 
but in this context, I think it must refer to charms or spells that are effective against 
sicknesses, snakes, and the like. Medhatithi glosses bhitavisesddivisaya, which may 
refer to knowledge of either elements (so Jha) or various ghosts and spirits. The ChU 
(7.1.2) lists bhiitavidya and sarpavidya in a list of sciences. Medhatithi explains “divine 
conditions” as the yogic powers to become very small and the like. Others take it to 
mean becoming like the gods or reaching the world of various gods. I think Medhatithi 
is on the right track; all these items refer to various medicines, spells, and the like em- 
ployed in ritual settings. The point of the verse is that without tapas these means can- 
not be properly acquired. The term prasidhyanti can mean “become effective” (so 
Narayana and Nandana) and “acquired” (other commentators and Biihler). In the very 
next verse (239) sa@dhyam is used with reference to accomplishment. I think here also 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 11 347 


the meaning must be that these means become effective, that is, accomplish the objec- 
tive, only when those who employ them perform the appropriate austerities. 


11.245 Additional verse: “Chastity, ascetic toil, burnt offering, eating a little pure food at the 
proper time, and freedom from passion, hatred, and greed—the Self-existent One has 
proclaimed these to be ascetic toil.” 


11.247 The vulgate editions and most manuscripts add here a verse, which is 248 in Biihler’s 
translation: “Thus I have described to you above penances for sins in accordance with 
the rules. Listen next to the penances for secret sins.” This verse is omitted in the criti- 
cal edition. 


11.256 a reprehensible act (aprasastam): most commentators take this as referring to voiding 
urine or excrement in water. Medhatithi, Bharuci, and Govinda, correctly I think, take 
it to mean sexual intercourse. This may be carried out in water or on water, i.e., in a 
boat. See 11.174 n. and 11.175. 


11.265 primary Yajus formulas: according to Bharuci, these are the formulas found in the 
Yajurveda Samhita and not those given within the Brahmanas; according to Medhatithi 
and Govinda, the “chief ones” (mukhyGni). The alternate reading, supported by most 
commentators and mss., is anyani: “Yajus formulas that are different (from the Rc).” 


” 


11.266 tri-syllabic Veda: that is, the syllable OM, which consists of the phonemes “a,” “u, 
and “m.” But see the different explanation in the additional half-verse below. 


Additional verse: “I have described to you above all the set rules with regard to pen- 
ance. Listen now to the rules of action that secure the supreme good” (cf. 12.82). 


Two additional half-verses: “Next, I will describe the highest rules relating to cyclical 
existence.” And: “By taking the Brahmanas and the Kalpas separately, the Veda is 
called by tradition threefold.” 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


12.4 One should... by the mind: the genitive dehinah has been understood differently by 
commentators. Govinda and Kullika, and following them Biihler, take it as an adjec- 
tive qualifying tasya, just like the other genitives in the sentence. The meaning then is 
that action is “connected to the body.” The term dehin as meaning “he who possesses a 
body,” i.e., the embodied self, is so ingrained the Samkhya philosophical tradition 
within which Manu operates, that it is unlikely to have a different meaning here; we 
find the term used with this meaning at 12.13. Further, in the previous verse only one 
kind of action is connected with deha, the other two are connected with speech and 
mind. The confusion is created by the numerous genitives in the sentence with some- 
what different syntactical functions. “Three kinds”: highest, middling, and lowest; 
“three bases”: mind, speech, and body (although, Medhatithi inverts these two lists); 
“ten characteristics” are the three kinds of mental action, the four kinds of verbal ac- 
tion, and the three kinds of bodily action listed in 5-7. 


12.8 Additional verse: “A man should abandon the path of ten actions—three kinds per- 
formed with the body, four with speech, and three with the mind.” 


12.10 The rod of speech . . . triple-rodded: the critical edition has adopted the reading ni- 
yatah in place of the vulgate nihitah. If we follow the latter, the translation would be: 
“a man in whose intellect these are firmly fixed.” The rods then would have a positive 
significance. But in the very next verse (12.11), rod is viewed as something that should 
not be used, giving it a negative meaning; the same negative meaning is apparent in the 
three verses added in several mss. I think this is correct; rod means the use of mental, 


348 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 12 


verbal, and physical actions to harm other creatures. “Triple-rodded” (tridandin), or 
triple-staffed, is an allusion to a Brahmanical renouncer who carries a triple-staff or a 
tripod (see 9.296 n.). If we take the three rods as tied together (restrained) to form the 
triple-rod (or triple-staff), then we can see how niyata (restrained, controlled) makes 
sense within this simile. This verse also occurs in ascetic literature and is probably bor- 
rowed by Manu from such a source. Variant reading: “the rod of mind, and the rod of 
body.” 

Two additional verses: “When they are not well guarded, the rod of speech destroys 
the intelligence; the rod of mind, the highest state; and the rod of action, the three 
worlds. One should practice silence with respect to the rod of speech, and fasting with 
respect to the rod of action; but with respect to the rod of mind, the control of breath is 
enjoined.” 

Third additional verse.: “A Yogin should carry the bodily triple staff and not the one of 
bamboo: he should carry according to rule the one consisting of speech, body, and 
mind.” 


12.12-3 The one who... succeeding births: these verses contain several technical terms: 


ksetrajiia refers to the spirit that observes the body and its activities as if they were a 
field (ksetra); bhatdtman is a term that is less clear (see also 5.109), but probably refers 
to a self made of material elements but which acts as a center of consciousness; jiva 
generally refers to the individual self within the body and identical with ksetrajfia. 
Here Manu appears to be making a distinction between the two. 


12.14 Mahat: in Samkhya philosophy this term refers to the intellect (buddhi). 


Additional verse: “The highest Person, however, is another. He is called the Highest 
Self, the Lord, who, entering the three worlds, bears the Unmanifest.” 


12.16 five elemental particles: earth, water, air, fire, and ether, which constitute the normal 


earthly body of a human being. 


12.17 After experiencing .. . corresponding particle: this verse is extremely unclear. Biihler 


admits that the interpretation of Medhatithi and others, which he follows, assumes that 
the verse is ungrammatical. Given that verse 18 flows directly from verse 16, it is pos- 
sible that this verse has been taken from a different source with a different context, 
making it difficult to understand its original meaning. On the meaning of vibhdgasah, 
see bhagasah in verse 22. 


12.18 two beings of great power: commentators identify these differently: Medhatithi, 


Raghavananda: Great One (mahat) and the Knower of the field (ksetrajfia); Narayana: 
individual soul (jiva) and the Highest Self (paramdatman); Bharuci, Govinda, Kullika: 
Great One and Highest Self. I favor the first interpretation, because they are mentioned 
in verse 14. 


12.24 body: I take atman here to mean body, the same way as it did in verse 12. In the very 


next verse (25), deha (“body”) appears to be used as a synonym. 


12.32 resolve (dhairyam): the sandhi @rambharucitadhairyam makes it possible also to read 


adhairyam, and this reading is preferred by all the commentators. Biihler, following 
this reading, translates: “want of firmness.” I have preferred to take dhairyam (without 
sandhi coalescence with the previous word) because resolve and firmness is actually an 
attribute of vigor. In verse 36, for example, seeking to win fame and not giving way to 
disappointment are given as characteristics of vigor; and in verses 46 kings, royal 
chaplains, and soldiers are said to possess the attribute of vigor, and these individuals 
clearly have resolve and firmness. The virtue of dhairya here also contrasts nicely with 
adhrti (lack of resolve) of Darkness in the very next verse. 


12.45 Variant reading: “men who live by the use of arms.” 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 12 349 


12.59 Variant reading: “those who eat impure food become worms.” 


12.61 goldsmiths: some, including Medhatithi, interpret the term hemakartr as referring to a 
particular species of bird. 


12.67 Variant reading: “by stealing fruits or roots.” 


12.70 Dasyu: this term can refer to a particular ethnic group (10.32), or barbarians ( (10.45), 
or simply bandits (7.143). 


Variant reading; “servants of their enemies.” 
12.76 Variant reading: “the dreadful tortures of being boiled in vats.” 


12.78 being wrapped ... for others: Bihler translates: “imprisonment in fetters hard to bear, 
and the misery of being enslaved by others.” I think the second half of this verse deals 
with childhood, as the first half did with birth; the following two verses likewise deal 
with various vicissitudes of life and finally with old age, sickness, and death. The 
wrapping must refer to the swaddling of infants, and servile work to serving the 
teacher during studentship. 


12.84-5 Among all these ... immortality: it could also be that verse 84 is a question to 
which 85 provides the answer. I think that these two verses may be interpolated, be- 
cause verse 86 directly flows from 83, and the rest of this section deals with the cen- 
trality of the Veda and vedic rites. 


12.88 advancing, arresting: this is a well-known division of activities enjoined by the Veda. 
The advancing (pravrtta) acts prolong samsaric existence by procuring heaven or bet- 
ter births. These activities include all rituals and moral/immoral acts. The arresting 
(nivrtta), on the other hand, are intended to suppress the advance of samsaric existence 
and to bring about liberation. These include pursuit of knowledge, meditation, and re- 
nunciation. For a study of these two concepts, see Bailey 1985. 


12.91-3. Aman who... never otherwise: just like verses 84-5 (see note to them), these also 
look suspicious. Verse 94 and the rest of this section dealing with the Veda quite natu- 
rally connect with verses 88-90 dealing with vedic rites. 


12.95-6 The scriptures ... to recent times: the reference here must be to scriptural texts of 
traditions such as Buddhism and Jainism, which were gaining in popularity and power 
during the time when the MDh was composed. A common variant for “scriptures” 
(Srutayah) of the critical edition is smrtayah (“traditional texts”) found in many manu- 
scripts and editions. 


12.97 established: Bharuci, Nandana, and Raghavananda take the term prasidhyati to mean 
“known from the Veda.” This is followed by Biihler. Medhatithi, Govinda, and Kullii- 
ka take it to mean receiving the authority from the Veda. See the similar use of prasi- 
dhyati at 11.238 and my note to it. 


12.98 Variant reading; “are born from the Veda alone.” 


their origin... and action: this pada has numerous variants and the reading is uncer- 
tain. Medhatithi says that he found a great many variants which he did not cite. 
Medhatithi take gunakarma as a Karmadharaya compound, and following this inter- 
pretation Biihler translates: “(their) production (is) through the (Vedic rites, which in 
this respect are) secondary rites.” This is a labored interpretation. I think gunakarma is 
a Dvandva compound. For the various interpretations offered by commentators, see 
Biihler’s note to this verse. 


12.106 record of the seers (arsa): the meaning is not altogether clear. Most commentators take 
the term to mean the Veda. Narayana thinks it refers to the smrtis. 


12.109 knowledgeable in scripture, perception, and inference (Srutipratyaksahetavah): Buhler, 
following Kullika, translates: “are able to adduce proofs perceptible by the senses 


350 


12.111 


Notes to the Translation: Chapter 12 


from the revealed texts.” I think Medhatithi is right in taking this to be a Bahuvrihi 
compound, although admittedly somewhat unusual. For Dvandvas used as Bahuvrihis, 
see Wackernagel 1957-78, II-1, 280. See verse 105 where these three sources of knowl- 
edge are viewed as essential for a man who knows the Law. 


A man who... fen members: the difference between hetuka and tarkin is unclear. 
Commentators take the latter to mean a Mimamsika. The term nairukta refers to a spe- 
cialist in the Nirukta, the science of explaining words that is much more than mere 
etymology. The first three orders, according to most commentators, are student, house- 
holder, and hermit. Some, however, think that they are student, householder, and wan- 
dering ascetic, both because a hermit is not allowed to enter a village and because in 
Gautama (GDh 3.2) the hermit is listed last. 


12.120 spaces: the reference probably is to bodily cavities. 


12.121 Hari: generally, this is an epithet of Visnu. Given that Visnu is already mentioned, the 


epithet probably refer to Indra, as pointed out by several commentators. A common 
variant reads “Hara,” i.e., Siva. 


CRITICAL EDITION 


This page intentionally left blank 


Introduction to the Critical 
Edition 


I. EDITORIAL HISTORY AND THE NEED FOR A CRITICAL EDITION 


The MDh was the first Indian legal text to be introduced to the western world 
through the translation of Sir William Jones in 1794. A few years later, 1813, the 
first printed edition of the Sanskrit text was published in Calcutta, with a revised 
edition appearing in 1830. The two early European editions were published by G. C. 
Haughton in 1825 and by Loiseleur Deslongschamp in 1830. Three major events in 
Manu scholarship followed each other in quick succession: the publication of the 
text with eight commentaries by V. N. Mandlik in 1887, Jolly’s edition the same 
year, and Biihler’s translation in 1886. The Sanskrit text of the MDh has been 
published in various editions far more frequently than any other legal text. On the 
whole, Jolly’s (1887, v) assessment that most subsequent editions “are on the whole 
nothing but reprints of the two earliest Calcutta editions” holds good even for those 
published in more recent times. 

All the editions of the MDh, except for Jolly’s, reproduce the text as found in 
the manuscripts containing the commentary of Kullika. I have called this the 
“vulgate version.” Indeed, Jolly (1887, xiv) distinguishes his work from the other 
editions with the remark that “the fundamental difference between all previous 
editions on the one hand and the present text on the other hand consists of its 
independence of Kullika.” It was Kulltika’s version that has been translated 
repeatedly: Jones (1794), Burnell (2884), Biihler (1886), and Doniger (1991). The 
exceptions are the edition and translation by Jha (1920-39), which was based on 
Medhatithi’s commentary, and by Derrett (1975), which was based on Bharuci’s 
commentary. The belief in the authenticity of Kulliika’s text was openly articulated 
by Burnell (1884, xxix): “There is then no doubt that the textus receptus, viz., that of 
Kullika Bhatta, as adopted in India and by European scholars, is very near on the 
whole to the original text.” This is far from the truth. Indeed, one of the great 
surprises of my editorial work has been to discover how few of the over 50 mss. that 
I collated actually follow the vulgate in key readings. 

Derrett (1975, I:28) as he edited the commentary of Bharuci from a single ex- 
tant manuscript expressed what I think was a collective wish of the scholarly com- 
munity: “A critical edition of Manu is as much a desideratum as was that of the 
Mahabharata or the Ramdyana, as Jolly’s beginning was only a beginning.” My 
hope is that this edition will fill that desideratum. 


353 


354 Introduction to the Critical Edition 
IJ. SOURCES FOR THE CRITICAL EDITION 


This critical edition of the MDh is based on a systematic search of manuscripts, the 
collation of 53 manuscripts and of citations by 12 authors, the examination of 38 
other manuscripts, and the close reading of 9 commentaries. Although the MDh 
shares numerous verses in common with the Mahabharata and other Dharmasastras, 
I have not used them in constituting the text. I wanted to remain strictly faithful to 
the manuscript tradition of the MDhA and to avoid a hybrid edition. The only 
exception has been the section containing portions of the MDh in the Bhavisya 
Purana, because I consider the parallel passage in the Bhavisya to be a citation. 


II.1 Description of the Manuscripts 


The following are the manuscripts used in the critically constituted text. They are 
introduced by a siglum. The initial letter in small caps indicate the scripts: B = Ben- 
gali; G = Grantha; M = Malayalam; N = Old Nagari; s = Sarada; T = Telugu; W = 
Newari; no letter is appended when the script is Devanagari. The two following let- 
ters identify the current location of the manuscript. A final superscript digit is added 
if there are multiple manuscripts from the same location. 


Be! Banaras Hindu University. Ms. No. B 1843. Descriptive Catalogue 
Samskrit Manuscripts in Gaekwada Library, Bharat Kalabhavana Library and 
Samskrit Maha-Vidydlaya Library, Banaras Hindu University. Ed. Rama Sankar 
Tripathi. 1971, p. 384. Serial number 7/3916. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 26.7 x 13.2 cms; 155 folios; 10 lines on a page; 29 
aksaras on a line; complete. Dated Samvat 1850 [= 1793 CE]. Verses are numbered. 
Carefully written, but with frequent haplography. Occasional marginal comments 
explaining words. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 

ay: BT FT 1850 Faragle 7 Ys AAT 

BBe? Government Sanskrit College, Benares. Ms. No. 12846. A Descriptive 
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts Acquired for and Deposited in the Govern- 
ment Sanskrit College Library, Sarasvati Bhavana, Banaras, during the years 1791- 
1950. Ed. Kuberanath Shukla. Vol. IIT. Banaras, 1956, pp. 100-01. 

Palm leaf [written with ink]; Bengali script; 15.3 x 3.3 ins. 75 folios; 10 lines on 
a page; 72 aksaras on a line; complete. Carefully written. A photocopy was used. 
The colophon occupies two lines but is difficult to decipher. 


Be’ Banaras Hindu University. Ms. No. B 1844.Descriptive Catalogue 
Samskrit Manuscripts in Gaekwada Library, Bharat Kalabhavana Library and 
Samskrit Mahda-Vidydlaya Library, Banaras Hindu University. Ed. Rama Sankar 
Tripathi. Banaras, 1971, p. 384. Serial number 7/3907. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 38.5 x 20 cms; 70 folios [but folios 1-10, 36, 51 miss- 
ing]; 10 lines on a page; 40-45 aksaras on a line; incomplete [contains only 2.70 — 
8.347]. No date. Some pages damaged and torn: carefully written by several hands. 
A photocopy was used. 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 355 


Bo Bombay University Library. Ms. No. 945. Descriptive Catalogue of the 
Samskrta and Prdkrta Manuscripts (Bhagvatsinghji Collection & H. M. 
Bhadkamkar Collection) in the Library of the University of Bombay, Book I (Vol. I 
& II: Parts I-ID. Ed. G. V. Devasthale. Bombay, 1944, p. 343. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 8.25 x 4 ins; 152 folios; 9 lines on a page; 33 aksaras 
on a line; complete [folio 93 missing containing 8.223-42]. Dated Saka 1672 [= 
1750 CE]. Carefully written. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


Te 1672 Waleed HiitHagaaentaer sé gerasy eared sheer 
TT UA TT we wars 


BCa__ Asiatic Society of Bengal. Ms. No. 5218.A Descriptive Catalogue of 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Collection under the care of The Asiatic 
Society of Bengal. Ed. Haraprasad Shastri. Vol. III: Smrti Manuscripts. Calcutta, 
1925. Serial No. 1852. 

Palm leaf [written with ink]; Bengali script; 36.25 x 4.4 cms; 142 folios; 5 lines 
on a page; 56-61 aksaras on a line; complete [but the Chapter 1 is so torn that I was 
unable to collate it]. Dated Saka 1462 [= 1540 CE]. Much damaged. A microfilm was 
used. Colophon (as given in the catalog): 


PAA THT: 1462 F og7 Il fost wear Bware Gyo aT gery 
| yt weqeaasy aes ave To arore || fafeegrracer wer weae- 
Afar | aed fewsar aa agate +++ aar ll seq saa | at 


Purana 7H: | faker fwareay ake sary | ghewg ate 
H ated Far We || 


Ho Panjab University, Hoshiarpur. Acc. No. 799. Descriptive Catalogue of 
Manuscripts of the VVBISIS Collection, Panjab University. Ed. B. R. Sharma. 
Hoshiarpur, 1975, p. 26. Serial No. 322. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 23.5 X 11.3 cms; 174 folios; between 9 and 12 lines on 
a page; 29 aksaras on a line; complete [first folio torn containing 11-5]. Dated 
Samvat 1763 [=1707 CE]. Carefully written; verses are numbered. A photocopy was 
used. Colophon: 


aad 1763 AT AN YAATAASAMIATa ST Basler 7 aaAtqaied 
[3 letters unreadable] 4 ea foRaafae areaz 9 [several letters unreadable] 
gy ware Il are 


Hy Osmania University, Hyderabad. Acc. No. B 23/7. A Catalogue of the 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Osmania University Library. Ed. A. Sharma et al. Hy- 
derabad, 1964, p. 35. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 20 x 13 cms; 181 folios; 9 lines on a page; 25 aksaras 
on a line; complete. No date [catalog assigns it to 18th century]. Neatly but some- 
what carelessly written, with frequent omissions of vowel signs. A photocopy was 
used. No colophon. 


Jm Sri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute, Jammu. Ms. No. 636. Descrip- 
tive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Shri Ranbir Sanskrit Research Institute. 


356 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


Ed. M. M. Patkar. Vol. 2. Jammu, 1973, p. 422. Serial nos. 373, 374, 379. Contains a 
commentary in Hindi. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 34 x 21 cms; 565 folios; written with a broad pen and 
having varying numbers of lines on a page and aksaras on a line; complete. No date. 
Folios containing 8.54-94; 9.14~-18; 9.283—85; 10.45-5q 12.66~126 are missing. A 
photocopy was used. No colophon because the last pages are lost. 


Jo! Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Jodhpur. Ms. No. 8599. 
A Catalogue of Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Rajasthan Oriental Re- 
search Institute. Ed. Padmashri Muni Jinavijaya. Part II (A). Jodhpur, 1964, p. 32. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 28.8 x 15.6 cms; 138 folios; 10 lines on a page; 35 
aksaras on a line. Carefully written; verses are numbered. A photocopy was used. 
Colophon: 


aan aqafear |! 


Jo? Maharaja Mansingh Pustak Prakash, Jodhpur. Acc. No. 898. Contains 
the commentary of Raghavananda Sarasvati. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 12 x 27 cms; 249 folios; 12-13 lines on a page; 42 
aksaras on a line in the section containing the text. Dated Samvat 1595 [= 1538 CE]. 
Carefully written. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


GA 1595 AY aparate 14 Yor fofeder ger: | wepanaeed agqueg 
aa: | fraqrrarartcrsetarert fesftacrsere [last letters unclear] 


wKt! National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 4.713. 

Paper; Newari script; 121 folios; 29 x 9.5cms; 9 lines on a page; 35 aksaras on 
a line; new hand from folio 31b (3.242); frequently “1” for “r’ and vice versa; confu- 
sion between dental and palatal sibilant (Nepali way of pronouncing?). No date. A 
microfilm was used. Colophon: 

aaa gers oe ager fofact war | afe gange or aa at + 

aad 


Kt? National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Mss. No. 2.59. Contains the 
commentary of Kulltka. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 290 folios; 40 x 16.5 cms; 11-14 lines on a page; 55 
aksaras on a line; clearly written; complete. No date. First 11 folios contain an 
anukramanikd up to the 7th adhydya. A microfilm was used. No colophon. 


wKt> National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 1.1266. 

Palm leaf written with ink; Newari script, with occasional Devanagari; 110 fo- 
lios; 29.5 X 9 cms; 6 lines on a page; 60 aksaras on a line; Incomplete; ends at 
12.118. No date. A microfilm was used. Frequent scribal errors, especially metathe- 
sis and confusion between dental and palatal sibilants, dental and retroflex nasals; 
“TY? and “r.” 

NKt* National Archives, Katmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 411. 

Palm leaf [written with ink]; Old Nagari script; 206 folios; 25 x 5 cms; 5 lines 
on a page; 45 aksaras on a line; first page [up to 1.4c] missing; complete. Dated 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 357 


Samvat 1239 [= June 10, 1182]; written in Varanasi. Some lacunae, indicating that 
the scribe’s exemplar was defective. A microfilm was used. Colophon [very faint; 
this is an approximation]: 
we & tage Ferniaeritsraergeaere || FAT 1239 ATIT- 
sate 7 ge | SQ arHerscaatyere ATA oq ghee BE Y= 
arte | age Fert: FH vag sapurowainrter | 


BKt® National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 5.336. 

Palm leaf; Bengali script with Newari influence; 36.5 X 5 cms; 130 folios; 5 
lines on a page; 65-75 aksaras on a line; complete; frequent marginal additions and 
corrections; many lacuna indicating that his exemplar was defective; frequently 
writes “y” for “j”; “n” for “d’”. A microfilm was used. Closely related to wKt®. Colo- 
phon: 

7 388 Mita Ble eet 


wKt® National Archives, Kathmandu, Nepal. Ms. No. 1.1283. 

Palm leaf; Newari script; 64 folios: 7 lines on a page; 48-50 aksaras on a line. 
First 6 folios not the MDh, which starts at 2.179c [so Chapters 1 and 2 up to 178b are 
missing]; again 2.187-207 are omitted; incomplete [ends at 8.8]. A microfilm was 
used. Closely related to wKt?. 


La! Panjab University Library, Lahore. Acc. No. 5112. Catalogue of the 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Panjab University Library. Vol. 1. Lahore, 1932, p. 97. 
Cat. No. 466. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 24 x 10.3 cms; 111 folios; 10 lines on a page; 40 
aksaras on a line; complete [folios 5, 14, and 109 missing]; numerous marginal 
glosses and correction. The catalog and library card attached to the ms. give the date 
as Samvat 1507 [= 1450-51 CE], even though I do not find a date in the ms. itself. 
The last page, however, is now missing, and it may have contained the colophon 
with the date. A photocopy was used. 


La? —— Panjab University Library, Lahore. Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manu- 
scripts in the Panjab University Library. Vol. 1. Lahore, 1932, p. 97. Cat. No. 470. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 20.3 x 17 cms; 67 folios; 22 lines on a page; 19 
aksaras on a line; incomplete [ends at 8.5]. No date. A photocopy was used. 


Lo! Welcome Institute, MS Indic 8 1192 
Paper; Devanagari script; 9.5 X 25 cms; 9 lines on a page; 25 aksaras on a line; 
complete. A microfilm was used. No colophon. 


Lo? _ British Library [India Office], Ms. No. IO 2337. Catalogue of the San- 
skrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. J. Eggeling. Part I. Vedic 
Manuscripts. London: 1887, p. 367. Cat. No. 1257. 

Paper; Devanagari script [Bengali influence]; 257 folios; 25 x 13.1 cms; 10 lines 
on a page; 30 aksaras on a line; complete. A microfilm was used. No colophon. 


Lo} British Library [India Office], Ms. No. Burnell 527. Catalogue of San- 
skrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. A. B. Keith. 


358 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


Vol. II. Oxford, 1935, p. 360-61. Cat. No. 5285. Contains the commentary of 
Raghavananda Sarasvati. 

European paper [watermarked Dorling & Gregory, London, 1875]; Devanagari 
script [Ch. 12. in a different hand]; 355 + 20 folios; 124.4 x 8.8 cms; 20 lines on a 
page; 23 aksaras on a line; complete. Date given in a note on the fly-leaf as A. B. 
[AD?] 1876 in Tanjore. A microfilm was used. No colophon. This ms. was used by 
Jolly with the siglum R1. No colophon. 


Lot _ British Library [India Office], Ms. No. IO 1407-10. Catalogue of the 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. J. Eggeling. Part I. 
Vedic Manuscripts. London: 1887, p. 367-68. Cat. No. 1264-67. Contains the com- 
mentary of Medhatithi. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 31.3 x 13.2 cms; ms. in four parts with 253 [adhydyas 
1-3],190 [adhydyas 4-7], 186 [adhydyas 8, 10, 11], and 55 [adhydya 9] folios; 10 
lines on a page; 45-50 aksaras on a line; incomplete [Ch. 12 is missing]. First three 
parts dated Samvat 1845-46 [= 1789-90 CE], and the last part dated Samvat 1865 [= 
1809 CE]. This ms. was used by Ganganath Jha in his edition of Medhatithi. A mi- 
crofilm was used. This ms. was used by Jolly with the sighum Mq. 


Lo*® British Library [India Office], Ms. No. Burnell 522-23. Catalogue of 
Sanskrit and Prakrit Manuscripts in the Library of the India Office. Ed. A. B. Keith. 
Vol. Il. Oxford, 1935, p. 359; Cat. No. 5281. Contains the commentary of 
Medhitithi. 

European paper [watermarked Charles & Thomas, London, 1879]; Devanagari 
script; 26.3 X 20.1 cms; ms. is in two parts with 246 and 196 folios; 23 lines on a 
page; 26 aksaras on a line; incomplete [only chapters 1-8; verses 9.52-58 inserted 
after 8.58]. According to a note on folio 1, this is a copy of Lo*. A microfilm was 
used, 

GMd' Adyar Library, Madras. Ms. No. VB 135. Descriptive Catalogue of 
Sanskrit Manuscripts. Ed. E. R. Sreekrishna Sarma. Vol. 13: ViSvabharati Collec- 
tion. Madras, 1976, p. 134. Cat. No. 730E. 

Palm leaf; Grantha script; 39.5 X 3.5 cms; 112 folios; 8 lines on a page; 48 
aksaras on a line. Complete. Good handwriting with few mistakes [handwriting 
changes at 3.21; then at 3.282; and goes back to original hand at 4.32]. Very small 
letters sometimes difficult to read; ms. is broken at the ends and moth eaten; so 
some letters missing. No date. A photocopy was used. Ms. belonged to one 
Dharmasivacarya. Colophon [faint, letters broken and difficult to read; the follow- 
ing is an approximation]: 

ae: s% stegaaaa aH: ef 3% sftretaradt fioag ate ahe- 

FUL BCAA [two aksaras broken] BHT: SvT [several aksaras 
bn eM eae a et Pree ee 


aMat apfer, art 3% 
oMd@ Adyar ee tia Madras. Ms. No. 33A20. A Catalogue of the Samskrit 


Manuscripts in the Adyar Library. Madras, 1926, p. 102. 
Palm leaf; Oriya script; 77 folios; approximately 37 x 3.6 cms; 4 lines on a 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 359 


page; 60 aksaras on a line. Incomplete [ends at 4.258, after which are the words 
bhrgusamhitah samaptah. A photocopy was used. 


Md? Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ms. No. D 2664. 
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental 
Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ed. M. Rangacarya. Vol. V: Dharma-sastra. Madras, 
1909, Pp. 1957. 

Paper; Telugu script; 31.3 x 20 cms; 122 folios [244 numbered pages]; 20 lines 
on a page; 19 aksaras on a line; complete. No date [appears modern]. Subject head- 
ings are placed at the top of pages; frequent glosses explaining words. A photocopy 
was used. No colophon. 


tMd* Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ms. No. D 2665. 
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental 
Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ed. M. Rangacarya. Vol. V: Dharma-sastra. Madras, 
1909, Pp. 1957. 

Palm leaf; Telugu script; 42.5 x 3.5 cms; 8 lines on a page; 70 aksaras on a line; 
complete. No date. This ms. begins on folio 83 of a larger composite ms., the first 
82 folios containing another work [= Ms. No. 2616]. Several times the scribe leaves 
lacunae showing break or illegibility of the scribe’s exemplar; shows also his 
faithfulness to the original, since often the break is just one syllable [cf. 2.108 111, 
178; 3.114, 118, 194, 250, 265; 4.151]. At 1224, the scribe gives 10.109—11191, 
indicating that his exemplar probably had folios mixed up and not in proper order. A 
photocopy was used. Much of the colophon is torn. The end of the Sloka is legible: 
mama doso no vidyate [see under wKt']. 


GMd* Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ms. No. D 2670. 
A Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental 
Manuscripts Library, Madras. Ed. M. Rangacarya. Vol. V: Dharma-sastra. Madras, 
1909, p. 1958. 

Palm leaf; Grantha script; 42 x 3.5 cms; 133 folios; 7 lines on a page; 60 
aksaras on a line; complete. No date. Carefully written by at least two scribes; in 
good condition. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


af: 3% gprreg afeaaeg stead warere aa: sited Afrara- 
Ferefverr TA: 


GMy Government Oriental Library, Mysore. Ms. No. 3899. A Descriptive 
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Government Oriental Library, Mysore. 
Ed. H. R. Rangaswami lyengar and T. T. Srinivasagopalachar. Vol. HU: 
Dharmasastra. Mysore, 1944, pp. 97-98. Cat, No. 82. 

Palm leaf; Grantha script; 30.6 x 3 cms; 146 folios; 7 lines on a page; 43 
aksaras on a line; complete. No date. The ms. is moth-eaten and, especially at the 
beginning and end, torn; sometimes marginal glosses on words. A photocopy was 
used. Colophon: 


gery eave: | aqeqrcergeny || efe: 3% apr: aakrartorsegr 


NNg = Nagpur University Library, Ms. No. 1510. Catalogue of Sanskrit Manu- 


360 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


scripts in the Nagpur University Library. Ed. V. W. Karambelkar. Nagpur, 1958, p. 
325. 

Paper; Old Nagari; 22.5 x 12.5 cms; 133 folios [first folio containing 1.1-12 
missing]; 11 lines on a page; 36 aksaras on a line; complete. Dated Samvat 1560 [= 
1503 CE]. Carefully written by one Purusottamaka, but with numerous marginal cor- 
rections in first and second hand. A photocopy was used. Colophon [partly torn]: 


wre 2685 || fer || waite shad 15600 at Tae Te 
[broken] Tey ayrarar fear attra wae Usa ASE TL [broken] 


qragoairerctegaesrarasy fey [broken] TIT WaTTM ATT 
amas aqegtafeacy ll Ae [broken] HoaTTAeT | 


sfferonmerar ad oRyotareq il af il tl aff ll aageetestar 
qaqa? | weet fated art aest ours Il arear yetee 
SET alaet feat war | ate Beery ar AA aT FT cra |! AT II 


oOr = Orissa State Museum, Ms. No. Dh/785. An Alphabetical Catalogue of 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Collection of the Orissa State Museum, Ed. N. Mishra. 
Part I. Bhubaneswar, 1973, p. 179. Cat. No. 1703. 

Palm leaf; Oriya script; 157 folios; 4 lines on a page; 65 aksaras on a line; com- 
plete. No date. Carelessly written with frequent scribal errors. A microfilm was 
used. Colophon: 


ate Toys at HH aret 4 clad | [broken] Year Ed [broken] | 
yar: eat + rata ae are aig II 


sOx' Bodleian Library, Oxford. Ms. No. Sanskrit e. 64. Catalogue of 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library. Ed. M. Winternitz and A. B. Keith. 
Vol. IT. Oxford, 1905. Cat. No. 1484. 

European paper; Sarada script; 15 X 22 cms; 128 folios; 23 lines on a page; 21 
aksaras on a line; complete. Date 1857 CE; different hand from folio 90a. The manu- 
script was bought by Bodleian from Eugen Hultzsch in 1887. This is a copy of ms. 
sPu° [Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 355 of 1 875-76] and 
was probably made for Hultzsch. Frequently sOx! gives the marginal corrections 
found in sPu° (see 5.85b). At 8.85 there is a lacuna in sPu® and filled in sh incor- 
rectly; this is replicated in sOx!. The ms. is still useful because it contains several 
sections that are currently missing or torn in the original sPu®; the copy was, there- 
fore, made before the original was damaged. A microfilm was used. Colophon: 


GAC 34 SPaatier 7 Tet: 10 BAT || SEO ATT | 


Ox? ~—_ Bodleian Library, Oxford. Ms. No. Sanskrit c. 32. Catalogue of 
Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Bodleian Library. Ed. M. Winternitz and A. B. Keith. 
Vol. II. Oxford, 1905. Cat. No. 1483. 

European paper with watermark; Devanagari script; 25.4 x 37 cms; 155 folios; 
15 lines on a page; 22 aksaras on a line; complete. Dated November 27, 1789; scribe 
Lala Mahatab Rai. The copy was made for Sir William Jones and acquired by the 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 361 


Bodleian in 1833. Contains an interlinear translation by Jones partly into Latin and 
partly into English. A microfilm was used. 


Ox? —_ Bodleian Library, Oxford. Ms. No. Max Miiller memorial c. 33. A 
Catalogue of the Manuscripts Purchased for the Administrators of the Max Miiller 
Memorial Fund. Ed. T. R. Gambier-Parry. Oxford, 1922, p. 55. Contains the com- 
mentary of Medhatithi. 

Indian paper; Devanagari script [with some Bengali influence]; 33.75 x 13.75 
cms; 394 folios; 12 lines on a page; 46 aksaras on a line; incomplete; carelessly 
written; verses of chapters 8 and 9 mixed up, the following being omitted: 8.1-14, 
47-9, 59-61, 133-8, 147-89, 198-364, 384-420; 9.1-50, 60-137, 164-234, 247¢- 
336; and chapters 10-12. No date but appears not too old. A microfilm was used. No 
colophon. 


NPu! Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 237 of 1879-80. 
Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts Library De- 
posited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. Sharma. Vol. VII, 
Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 981. 

Country paper; Old Nagarl; 28.75 x 12 cms; 141 folios; 9 lines per page; 36 
aksaras on a line; complete. Date Samvat 1646 [= 1589 CE]. A photocopy was used. 
Colophon: 

ame gerae Sher ater ear get: | dares: edie quot + 

fe ll at 1646 aT Hreaprafe au at ae afermgeareter Sdrea- 

rat] dceetPikeosdtarga terres fottad wer gees faery [2] 

cra gee resrions || feeq Il & ll weamraeq || -step- 

aear 2709 


Pw Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 208 of A/1881-82. 
Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts Library 
Deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. Sharma. Vol. 
VII, Part IH. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 982. 

Country paper; Devanagari script; 28 x 12.5 cms; 110 folios; 10 lines on a page: 
38 aksaras on a line; complete. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 

are amet aaa || BA Hag II 

Pu Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 151 of 1895- 
1902. Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts 
Library Deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. 
Sharma. Vol. VII, Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 985. 

Country paper; 26.25 x 11.25 cms; 118 folios; 12 lines on a page; 31 aksaras on a 
line; complete. Date Samvat 1681 [= 1624 CE]. Colophon: 


HA 1672 MANTIS AAlesar GASES 


Pu‘ —_ Jayakar Library, University of Poona. Ms. No. 1537. Descriptive Cata- 
logue of Manuscripts Available in the Jayakar Library, University of Poona. Ed. S. 
G. Mahajan. Poona, 1986. Vol. 1 Cat. No. 544. 


362 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


Paper; Devanagari script; 29 x 12.5 cms; 101 folios; 11 lines on a page; 35 
aksaras on a line; complete. Appears to follow Pu? closely, possibly a copy. 


PuS —_— Bharatiya Itihdsa SamSodhana Mandala, Pune. Ms. No. 52/401. 
Bharata-Itihasa-SamSodhana-Mandalastha-Hastalikhitagranthdnukramanikd. Ed. 
H. G. Khare. Pune, 1960, p. 203. Contains the commentary of Govindaraja. Clearly 
a copy of Pu’. 

Paper; Devanagari script [but with many features of the Old Nagari]; 28.5 x 13 
cms; 10 lines on a page; 41 aksaras on a line; complete. No date. Very carelessly 
written; from folio 29b written by a different hand; numerous verses omitted. A 
photocopy was used. Colophon: 

BE Jet VSIA salar || fretted | 

sPu® Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 355 of 1875-76. 
A Catalogue of the Collections of Manuscripts Deposited in the Deccan College 
with an Index. Ed. S. R. Bhandarkar. Bombay, 1888, p. 93. Contains an anonymous 
and brief commentary. 

Birch Bark; Sarada script; 106 folios; 22 lines on a page; 27aksaras on a line; 
complete [last page lost, ms. ends at 12.120; thus, any colophon that may have ex- 
isted is lost]. No date. A photocopy was used. 

This ms. was used by Jolly in his 1887 edition using the siglum K, and by 
Biihler in his 1886 translation (see p. cxxxv, note 2). Jolly comments: “The last por- 
tion, from XI.218 onwards, has been partly lost.” Although there are sections torn, 
much of the last section can be read. It is unclear whether the last page with any 
colophon was extant when Jolly examined this ms. Unfortunately, some of Jolly’s 
readings from this ms. listed in his variants are wrong when compared to the origi- 
nal (e.g. 1.66, 80, 92; 5.60, 64, 65, 67; 11.90; Jolly says 2.79 is omitted when it is 
present); either Jolly or a collator of his has misread the Sarada. 


Pu’ Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 239 of 1879~8o0. 
A Catalogue of the Collections of Manuscripts Deposited in the Deccan College 
with an Index. Ed. S. R. Bhandarkar. Bombay, 1888, p. 138. Contains the commen- 
tary of Govindaraja. 

Paper; Devanagari script [but with many features of the Old Nagari]; 29 x 12.5 
cms; 250 folios; 13 lines on a page; 42 aksaras on a line; complete; verses are num- 
bered. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 

cater sfteted wd sfpitfesrcttasattca a¢ | eeu awgasy a cad 

3 oO M3 N 

The last page containing the rest of the colophon is lost. The last page of the 
ms. contains some extraneous material; this page is probably from a different ms., 
the paper and handwriting do not match the rest of the ms. 

Pu® Bharatiya Itihdsa SamSodhana Mandala. Ms. No. 46/78. Bharata-Itiha- 
sa-Samsodhana-Mandalastha-Hastalikhitagranthanukramanikd. Ed. H. G. Khare. 
Pune, 1960, p. 202. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 28 x11.5 cms; 71 folios; 14 lines on a page; 60 aksaras 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 363 


on a line; complete. Dated Samvat 1810 [= 1754 CE] Clear handwriting; very few 
corrections. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


ATaad 1810 AAAS Pw FwWare FZAHe | 


Pu? Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 650 of Visrama. 
Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts Library De- 
posited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. Sharma. Vol. VII, 
Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 9896. Contains the commentary of Govindaraja. 
Clearly a copy of Pu’. 

Country paper; Devanagari script; 25.5 x 11.9 cms; 228 folios [but many folios 
missing]; 10 lines on a page; 38 aksaras on a line; incomplete [first 13 folios miss- 
ing; begins at 1.64 and ends at 7.56; folios containing verses 2.178c—194; 2.202-07; 
3.02-224 4.107%-5.37 missing]. No date. A photocopy was used. No colophon. 


Pu'® Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Pune. Ms. No. 105 of 
Visrama(i). Descriptive Catalogue of Manuscripts in the Government Manuscripts 
Library Deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ed. H. D. 
Sharma. Vol. VII, Part II. Pune, 1996. Cat. No. 993. Contains the commentary of 
Medhatithi. 

Country paper; Devanagari script; 28.5 x 12.5 cms; 453+8 folios; 12 lines on a 
page; 40 aksaras on a line; incomplete [contains chapters 1-6 and 10-12]; 8 folios in 
the beginning contains table of contents. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


aarea Fafayrer: || Gr wag || Sawar: ZA wag | TH II 


Tj! Sarasvati Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ms. No. B. L. 270. A Descriptive 
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati 
Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ed. Vidyasagara P. P. S. Sastri. Vol. XVIII. Sriranjam: Sri 
Vani Vilas Press, 1934. Cat. No. D 17880. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 26.5 x 10.4 cms; 225 folios; 7 lines on a page; 30 
aksaras on a line; complete; verses are numbered with chapter headings; very 
clearly and carefully written; chapters 4—6 written in a different hand without chap- 
ter headings or verse numbers; Ch. 7 returns to the original scribe with chapter 
headings and numbers. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


sfataaanterar werg |) ater II 


Tj Sarasvati Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ms. No. B. L. 271. A Descriptive 
Catalogue of the Sanskrit Manuscripts in the Tanjore Maharaja Serfoji’s Sarasvati 
Mahal Library, Tanjore. Ed. Vidyasagara P.P.S. Sastri. Vol. XVIII. Sriranjam: Sri 
Vani Vilas Press, 1934. Cat. No. D 17881 

Paper; Devanagari script; 30.7 x 11.5 cms; 83 folios; 11-13 lines on a page; 49 
aksaras on a line; complete; verses are numbered; many scribal errors. Date Samvat 
1858 [= 1801 CE]. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


aad 1858 || wihraporddrarar desta ser il quae |! 
farereq | 


Tr! University of Kerala Oriental Manuscript Library, Trivandrum. Ms. No. 


364 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


7878. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manuscripts Li- 
brary, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 215. 
Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12504. 

Paper; Devanagari script; approximately 26 x 11 cms; 124 folios; 9 lines of a 
page; 40 aksaras on a line; incomplete [ms. ends at 12.98, final folios missing]; nu- 
merous marginal corrections by a second hand probably using a NT ms [see 9.161, 
162, 166, 167, 205, 225, 251, 235, 243, 257]. No date. No colophon. A photocopy 
was used. 


Tr? — University of Kerala Oriental Manuscript Library, Trivandrum. Ms. No. 
9648. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manuscripts Li- 
brary, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, No. 215. 
Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12511. Contains the commentary of Ramacandra. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 256 folios; 10 lines on a page; 40 aksaras on a line; 
complete; subject index at the end of ms. No date. No colophon. A photocopy was 
used. 


MTr? University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms. 
No. L89A. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manu- 
scripts Library, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, 
No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12502. 

Palm leaf; Malayalam script; 90 folios; 10 lines on a page: 52 aksaras on a line; 
incomplete [ends at 11.162a, although given as complete in the catalog]; neatly and 
legibly written; verses numbered; written in several different hands; in margins the 
topics treated in the corresponding verses are given. Date Malayalam era 1057 [= 
1882 CE] according to the catalog. No colophon. A microfilm was used. 


MTr‘ University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms. 
No. 14704. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manu- 
scripts Library, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, 
No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12502. 

Palm leaf; Malayalam script: 92 folios; 10 lines on a page; 55 aksaras on a line; 
complete; good condition; neat and legibly written; verses unnumbered; chapters 
unnumbered; complete. No date. A microfilm was used. Colophon has many verses 
on a variety of topics and finally ends with: 

area Jere ae avest foftad war | afe gmage ar aa ata 7 

feat || Ame Tee | 

MTr® University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms. 
No. L320. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University 
Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit 
Series, No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12509. Contains the commentary of 
Bharuci. 

Palm leaf; Malayalam script; incomplete [the ms. begins at 6.9 and, although it 
contains the last verse 12.126, the final page is lost and the commentary on the last 
verse is incomplete]. No date. 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 365 


I have used a color photograph of the original Malayalam ms. Two Devanagari 
copies of the original appear to have been made in Trivandrum, one for Derrett and 
used in his edition [now deposited in the Library of the School of Oriental and Afri- 
can Studies, London] and the other probably for Dave’s edition. I have examined 
both copies, which often diverge from the original. 


MTr® University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. Ms. 
No. 13002. Alphabetical Index of Sanskrit Manuscripts in the University Manu- 
scripts Library, Trivandrum Ed. K. Raghavan Pillai. Trivandrum Sanskrit Series, 
No. 215. Trivandrum, 1964. Cat. No. 12501. 

Palm leaf; Malayalam script; 179 folios; 8 lines on a page; 39 aksaras on a line; 
complete; carelessly written with numerous scribal errors; worm-eaten and dam- 
aged; from verse 5.86 written by a different hand; complete. No date. No Colophon. 
A microfilm was used. Colophon: 


wae THT Hecarpral feaaHy | Hef qtanest at Aad Teas 
[| sffepwrrer ae: sfteeqera aH: aterm aH: BAA |! 


Wa __ Prajfia Pathasala Mandala, Wai, Ms. No. 2840. Descriptive Catalogue 
of Sanskrit Manuscripts. Ed. Laxmanshastri Joshi. Part 1. Wai, 1970, p. 360. 

Paper; Devanagari script; 29.5 X 12.7 cms; 128 folios; 10 lines on a page; 36 
aksaras on a line; complete. No date. A photocopy was used. Colophon: 


aaeale set SrpatSa: YA Yard 


Other Manuscripts: In the course of preparing this edition, I examined manu- 
scripts other than the ones used in critically constituting the text. To use all the mss. 
I had obtained would have been unwieldy and unnecessary. Just as taking multiple 
samples of the same puddle of blood from a crime scene does not provide better 
evidence, so having more manuscripts of the same genealogical branch does not 
enhance the edition. My method was then to collate a significant number of mss. 
fully thus creating a reliable genealogy. Then I collated only the third chapter of all 
the remaining mss. This gave me reliable clues with regard to the genealogy of each 
ms. Thereafter, I collated fully only those mss. that I thought held out hope of giving 
new data. I give below the 37 mss. that were not considered for the critical edition 
after the collation of chapter three: 


Benares: Banaras Hindu University, Ms. No. C 5452. Bengali script with 
Kulltika’s commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

Benares: Banaras Hindu University, Ms. No. B 1844. Devanagari script. Fol- 
lows NT-x. 

Benares: Banaras Hindu University, Ms. No. B 4403. Devanagari script with 
Kulliika’s commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

Benares: Government Sanskrit College Library, Sarasvati Bhavan, Ms. No. 
12881. Bengali script. Follows NT—x. 

Benares: Government Sanskrit College Library, Sarasvati Bhavan, Ms. No. 
13545. Devanagari script. Follows NT-x. 

Jammu: Shri Raghunathji Temple, Dharmartha Trust Council. Ms. No. 2578. 


366 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


Devanagari script with Kulltka’s commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 23493. Devanagari 
script. Follows NT-x. 

Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 3038. Devanagari 
script. Follows NT—x. 

Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 36614. Devanagari 
script. Follows NT=x. 

Jodhpur: Rajasthan Oriental Research Institute, Ms. No. 4519. Devanagari 
script. Follows NT-x. 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. E 725/1. Newari script. Follows 
NT-x. 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 3.575. Newari script. Follows NT-x. 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.2188. Newari script. Follows NT-x. 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 2.276. Devanagari script with Kulltika’s 
commentary. Follows NT—y (vulgate). 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. missing; Reel No. E-1351/5. Devanagari 
script. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 3.10. Devanagari script. Follows 
NT-x. 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.1876. Devanagari script. Follows 
NT-y (vulgate). 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.7757. Devanagari script. Follows 
NT-y (vulgate). 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 3.178. Devanagari script with a Nepali 
commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. missing; Reel No. G 23/3. Devanagari 
script. Follows NT-x. 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. missing; Reel No. E 1430/36. De- 
vanagari script. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 2.159. Devanagari script, with Nepali 
commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

Katmandu: National Archives, Ms. No. 5.1514. Devanagari script. Follows 
NT-x. 

London: British Library [India Office], Ms. No. OR 2151. Devanagari script 
with Kullika’s commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

London: British Library [India Office], Ms. No. San Ms IO 236. Devanagari 
script with Kulltka’s commentary. Follows NT-y (vulgate). 

London: British Library [India Office], Ms. No. San Ms. 3235. Devanagari 
script. Follows NT—x. 

Madras: Government Oriental Manuscripts Library, Ms. No. 2672. Grantha 
script. Follows NT-x. 

Oxford: Bodleian Library, Chandra Shum Shere, Ms. No. b (87) (1). Bengali 
script. Follows NT—x. 

Oxford: Bodleian Library, Max Miiller memorial, d. 45. Devanagari script. 
Follows NT-x. 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 367 


Oxford: Bodleian Library, Max Miiller memorial, d. 46. Devanagari script. 
Follows NT-x. 

Oxford: Bodleian Library, Sanskrit d. 134. Devanagari script. Follows NT-x. 

Paris: Bibliotheque Nationale, Ms. No. 810. Bengali script. Follows NT-x. 

Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 53 of 1883-84. De- 
vanagari script. Follows NT-x. 

Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 53 of 1883-84; New 
No. 430. Devanagari script, with Kullika’s commentary. Follows NT-x. 

Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. Ms. No. 52 of 1883-84, New 
No. 3. Devanagari script. Follows NT-x. 

Trivandrum: University of Kerala Oriental Manuscripts Library, Trivandrum. 
Ms. No. 22039. Follows ST. 

Wai: Prajiia Pathasala Mandala, Ms. No. 2841. Devanagari script. Follows 
NT-x. 

Wai: Prajfia Pathasala Mandala, Ms. No. 2842. Devanagari script. Follows 
NT-x. 

There were some other manuscripts that I tried every possible way to obtain but 
without success. The most significant among them are four Sarada manuscripts lo- 
cated in the State Archives in Shrinagar, Kashmir: 1. Ms-No. 2355, Acc. No. 914, 
Kashmiri paper, 127 folios; 2. Ms-No. 2356, Acc. No. 1594, Kashmiri paper, 93 fo- 
lios, with Kullika’s commentary; 3. Ms-No. 2357, Acc. No. 1817, Kashmiri paper, 
128 folios; 4. Ms-No. 2358, Acc. No. 2169, 317 folios, with Kulltika’s commentary. 
The unsettled situation in Kashmir made it impossible even for highly placed offi- 
cials to acquire copies of these manuscripts. The ones with Kullika’s commentary 
are probably modern and not very significant. These mss. are listed in the Catalogue 
of the Sanskrit Manuscripts published in 1989 as a Xerox copy publication by the 
Research and Publication Depart, Jammu & Kashmir Government, in Shrinagar.! 


I1.2 Commentators 


There are nine extant commentaries on MDh. They are, in approximately chronolo- 
gical order: Bharuci, Medhatithi, Govindaraja, Narayana, Kullika, Raghavananda, 
Nandana, Ramacandra, and Manirama. Many of these authors are older, some by 
several centuries, than the oldest manuscripts we possess. Their readings, therefore, 
are invaluable in establishing the critically constituted text. 

Some of the commentators, especially Bharuci, Medhatithi, and Narayana, are 
especially useful, because they note variant readings they found either in manu- 
scripts or in the oral tradition. I have noted these as [patha]. 

Bharuci, Rjunitaksard. He is the oldest commentator. Derrett (1975, I: 10) 
places him 500-600 CE, whereas Kane (1962-75, i: 569) opts for 800-850. The 
dates are educated guesses, although it is clear that Bharuci is earlier than 


1. I want to thank Ernst Pretz for obtaining this information for me during one of his 
visits to Shrinagar. 


368 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


Medhatithi. Only a single incomplete and damaged ms. of the commentary in 
Malayalam script is extant (see ms. MTr*). It was edited and translated on the basis 
of a faulty Devanagari transcript by Derrett (1975). I obtained a color photograph of 
the original Malayalm ms. through the kindness of Professor Albrecht Wezler. 

Medhatithi, Manubhdasya. His is the most celebrated and the longest commen- 
tary. Kane (1962-75, i: 583) places him 825-900 CE. Medhatithi gives the most de- 
tailed commentary and notes the largest number of variant readings he encountered. 
The use of this commentary to constitute the critical edition is complicated by the 
fact that all the mss. we have are derived from a “new edition” prepared by King 
Madana. He is said to have gathered defective copies from various regions and pre- 
pared a hybrid restoration (jirnoddhdra; cf. Jna 1920-39, I: ix-ix). This edition is 
clearly defective; several citations from Medhatithi found in later commentaries are 
missing in it. 

Govindaraja, Manutika. Kane (1962-75, i: 663) places him 1000-1100 CE. 
The commentary is rather brief and was plagiarized by Kulliika. References to him 
by Jimtitavahana and Laksmidhara indicate that he was held in high esteem. If the 
recent dating of Jimtitavahana by Rocher (2002, 24) to the beginning of the 12th 
century is accepted, then we may have to place Govindaraja in the 11th century. 

Narayana, Manvarthavivrtti. Also called Sarvajfia Narayana, little is known 
about him. Kane (1962-75, i: 1190) places him prior to 1400 CE. Buhler (1886, 
cxxix) thinks that the order of the authorities listed by Raghavananda places 
Narayana after Kullika. Narayana gives numerous variant readings, and his 
commentary has proved quite useful for the edition. 

Kullika, Manvarthamuktavali. Kane’s (1962-75, i: 756) characterization as 
“the most famous of all commentaries on Manu,” J believe, is not due to its 
antiquity or excellence but because it has had the good fortune of being printed 
repeatedly and used by such influential translators as Biihler. The root text attached 
to Kullika’s commentary has become the “standard” or the vulgate, also because of 
repeated printings. The commentary of Kullika would today be considered a 
plagiary of Govindaraja, even though Kullika has the temerity to criticize him on 
numerous occasions. Biihler places him in the 15th century as does Jolly (1887, xii), 
whereas Kane (1962-75, I: 759) dates him to about1250 CE. | think Buiihler and Jolly 
are correct in their assessment of Kulltika as a relatively late commentator. 

Raghavananda, Manvarthacandrika, Little is known about this author. He was 
an ascetic belonging to the Samkarite Sarasvati order. He states that he follows the 
opinions of Medhatithi, Govindaraja, Kulliika, and Narayana. Kane (1962-75, i: 
1210) says that he must be later than 1350 CE. 

Nandana, Nandini. This is a short commentary, and Nandana probably came 
from the south. He is especially significant, because he generally follows the read- 
ings of the Southern Transmission. Biihler’s (1886, xxxili-xxxv) identification of 
Nandana with Nandapandita, the author of the commentary on Visnusmiti, is mis- 
taken; Nandapandita lived in Benares, and Nandana is clearly from the south. He is 
especially conversant with the Arthasastra (see his correct interpretation of prava- 
sayet as execution at MDh 8.123) and cites Kautilya by name in his commentary on 
MDh 7.119. See Derrett 1975, I: 33. 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 369 


Nothing more than the names are known of the last two commentators, Rama- 
candra and Manirama. They must be rather recent authors. Dave assigns 
Manirama to between 1630 and 1660 CE. 


11.3 Testimonia 


The MDA begins to be cited from Sabara onward more frequently than any other 
Dharmasastra. These citations, for the most part much older than most of the extant 
mss. and commentaries, constitute another significant body of evidence for consti- 
tuting the text. In the early days of this project I envisaged these citations to be cru- 
cial for decisions regarding original readings. At the end of the project, however, the 
significance of the citations has diminished; they have been useful mostly as cor- 
roborative evidence. The use of these sources is handicapped by the lack of criti- 
cally edited texts of these works. It appears that frequently the modern editors have 
simply substituted the vulgate version of Manu they knew for the readings they 
found in the mss. See, for example, 11.249 where editions of Vij and Dev reproduce 
the reading of the vulgate Manu, a reading found in just five mss. I have used 14 
major writers spanning about 900 years, from the 5th to the 14th centuries, as well 
as the citation of long sections of the MDh in the Bhavisya Purana (see Laszlo 1971; 
Sternbach 1974). 


Sabara (5th cent. CE), commentary on the PMS. 

Samkara (8th cent. CE), commentaries on the VeS, BrU, TU, and BAG. 
Kumirila (9th cent. CE), Tantravartika com. on Sabarabhdasya. 
Visvariipa (9th cent. CE), commentary on the YDh. 
Vijhanesvara (12th cent. CE), commentary on the YDA. 
Aparaditya (13th cent. CE), commentary on the YDh. 
Jimttavahana (13th cent. CE), Dayabhaga. 

Haradatta (13th cent. CE), commentaries on ApDh, GDh. 
Laksmidhara (13th cent. CE), Krtyakalpataru. 

Hemadri (13th cent. CE), Caturvargacintamani, 
Devannabhatta (13th cent. CE), Smticandrikd. 

Madhava (14th cent. CE), Parasaramadhaviya. 


II.4 Editions 


Except for Jolly’s (1887), all previous editions of MD/ are based on either selected 
mss. or on previous editions. Jolly (14887, v) comments that “the numerous Indian 
editions are on the whole nothing but reprints from the two earliest Calcutta edition, 
published in 1813 and 1830.” Nevertheless, I have used five editions that are com- 
monly used by scholars not so much to use them as evidence for the critical edition 
but to distinguish its readings from those of previous editions. They are: Mandlik 
(1886), Jolly (4887), Jha (4920-39), KSS (1970), Dave (1975-84). 

The one exception is Jolly’s edition (see IV.3). I have given the readings of the 
mss. used by Jolly as supplementary to the manuscript evidence gathered by me 


370 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


whenever I was not able to identify and make use of the manuscripts he used. These 
mss. are given within brackets, e.g. [Jolly M R]. The following is the list of Jolly’s 
mss: M! = India Office, Ms. Nos. 1551-52; M? and M‘ = Haug’s collection; M? = 
my ms. Lot; M® = private ms. of Jolly; M° = ms. in Royal Library, Berlin; M’ = pri- 
vate ms. of Jolly; M’ = a ms. from Deccan College, Pune; M? = a ms. from Deccan 
College, Pune; M = siglum used for reading common to all mss. of Medhatithi; Me 
= readings attested by the commentary of Medhatithi [these two ways of reference 
are very confusing]; G or G' = ms. from Deccan College, Pune; G* = ms. from Dec- 
can College Pune; Go = Govindaraja’s commentary; N = ms. with Narayana’s 
commentary discovered by Biihler and dated Samvat 1544 (= 1497 CE); R' = my ms. 
Lo’; R? = Anquetil’s copy now in Bibliothéque Nationale, Paris; R* = ms. from Dec- 
can College, Pune; Ra = Raghavananda’s commentary; Nd! (Nd) = a private ms.; 
Nd? = modern ms. of chapters 8 and 9 in Grantha script from Burnell’s collection in 
the India Office; Ndd = Nandana’s commentary; Gr = a Grantha ms. of Burnell. 
Mandlik notes the mss. in which he found additional verses given in his edition. 
These mss. are given the following alphabetical sigla, which are noted in the critical 
apparatus: 4 (Asiatic Society, Calcutta, with Kullika’s commentary); ® (Ujjain); @ 
(Ujjain, with Ramacandra’s commentary); 7, 4, ¥, TF (Prayag); © (Khandva, with 
Medhatithi’s commentary); ST, 4 (Miraj); 27 (Satara); ¢, 3, S (Pune); @ 
(Ahmadabad); (Indore); 7 (Calcutta, Asiatic Society); | (London); & (Calcutta 
printed edition, with Kullika’s commentary); 7 (Miraj, with Raghavananda’s com- 
mentary); T (Baroda, with Kulltika’s commentary); 7 (Jaipur, with Raghava- 
nanda’s commentary); 1 (Madras, with Nandana’s commentary); 7, < (Pune); & 
(Jaipur), T (Mandlik’s own ms., with Narayana’s commentary); 2 or & (Aste). 


III. GENEALOGY OF MANUSCRIPTS 


It is not possible to constitute a text such as the MDh purely through the classical 
editorial methods dependent on isolating independent manuscript traditions. The 
MDh was too widely known to permit the existence of totally isolated and inde- 
pendent traditions. As Jolly (1887, xvi) observes: “The great celebrity of the Code 
appears to have guarded it against sweeping alterations, so that the text has re- 
mained essentially the same nearly in all Commentaries, however widely distant 
from one another as to the time and locality of their composition.” In the process of 
collation it became apparent that all extant mss. of the MDh are at some level hy- 
brid; over time readers and scribes appear to have changed the readings of one tra- 
ditions according to those of another. It is, therefore, impossible to isolate different 


2. Most, if not all, of our mss. have above-line or marginal corrections made by 
subsequent readers. A good example is Ho at 11.208 where a reader has recorded the variant 
mahitalat and noted vd pathah. The best example, however, is Tr', which belongs to the ST. 
A reader who was familliar with the NT has gone through this ms. and corrected the ST 
readings to NT ones. If these mss. were later copied, then it is likely that the marginal and 
above-line corrections would have been incorportaed into the copies, creating hybrid mss. 
Indeed, in the colophon to ms. nPu!, the scribes explicitly exhorts the reader to consult other 
mss. and to correct his copy accordingly: aparam pustakam viksya Sodhaniyam sad@ 
budhaih. 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 371 


recensions of the text, if we mean by “recension” versions that had a more or less 
independent life. 

Nevertheless, a close reading of the mss. makes it possible to establish clear ge- 
nealogies. At the broadest level, the mss. divide into two groups: a Southern Trans- 
mission [ST] consisting for the most part of southern mss. written in Grantha, 
Telugu, and Malayalam scripts, and a Northern Transmission [NT] that comprehend 
most mss. from other parts of India and in northern scripts. The following Stemma 
Codicum, where Z* represents the hypothetical archetype of all extant mss., pres- 
ents the genealogical tree of the mss. schematically. Given the large number of mss. 
used in this edition, it is impractical to identify within the Stemma the mss. falling 
within each genealogical branch; they will be listed in the following discussion of 
those branches. 


Z* 


xX* Yy* 


Nt-x* Nt-y* 


Ill.1 Southern Transmission 


The ST is represented by the following mss.: cGMd' rMd? tMd* cMd@ cMy, Tr' mTr4 
mTr mTr®. Most mss. written in the southern scripts of Grantha, Telugu, and 
Malayalam appear to fall under ST, although there are exceptions. Tr!, which is 
written in Devanagari, follows the ST; it is probably a Devanagari copy of an origi- 
nal in a southern script. The ms. mTr?, on the other hand, although written in the 
Malayalam script, follows NT; it is probably a Malayalam copy of a northern origi- 
nal. 

A careful scrutiny of the critical apparatus shows the frequency and consistency 
with which the mss. of the ST display unique readings. The following are a few ex- 
amples: 3.44c-d arataar yaar Gg avtepeer ded; 3.77a Tat ATaeTPTaT, 3.134 
crassa; 3.180a-b ames anffter ae same wad; 3.189 aga weet; 3.211a 
aPaIArt FT; 3.214a wert Par J; 3.263: qd fade; additional verses after 3.275; 
omission of 4.44, 46, 47; at 4.70a7 aeret yatta; 7.129b acearitesverar:; 8.79a 
aferreraty; 8.82b aretiz:; additional verse after 8.100; 8.403b ad Tftaafed; 9.50d 


372 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


are grrdfted, 9.299c-dyeomadt area aa: wr THTatq; 10.65d fearenraat wa; 11.9d 
areara ferftad; 12.16a IMA; 12.56d seit. A distinctive feature of the ST is the 
use of mdasefor masi of the NT: cf. 2.344, 7.198d, 8.245. 

In many instances the ST has preserved older and better readings. For example, 
the spurious verse 11.248, which is expunged in the critical edition, is omitted in all 
the mss of ST. Likewise, the reading fror at 7.164 recorded in all the ST mss. is su- 
perior to fraer found in all but a handful of NT mss. At 3.39 ST has preserved the 
older sarrift:, and at 9.19 the reading an@fe4, which is superior to frepct: of NT. 
Again at 7.67 the superior reading and the Jectio difficilior tg is found in all ST 
mss. but in only a few NT ones. At 3.114b only the ST has preserved the older read- 
ing s-1% attested to by all the older commentators, and at 3.95b the very rare word 
am: 

Nevertheless, the ST has not been insulated from corruption and hybridization; 
it is, therefore, not possible to follow its readings in all instances. I have already re- 
ferred to its use of the more common locative mdse(from mdsa), whereas most NT 
mss. have preserved the older and less common msi (from mas). The ST has a ten- 
dency to “correct” ambiguities, as when it changes mfr (“hand”) to the more appro- 
priate amg (“‘arm’’) at 4.58, where a man has to raise his arm rather than simply the 
hand (but see 2.193). At 7.129 also unanimously has corrected the more difficult 
araex reaading to the more common arite with the thematic ending. 

A limited number of readings are shared by ST and NT-y [i.e., the vulgate], in- 
dicating some historical influence of NT-y on the ST. See, for example, 3.47, 234, 
240, 273a. 


IIll.2 Northern Transmission 


Most mss. written in northern scripts belong to the NT. These scripts include Ben- 
gali, various forms of Nagari, Newari, Oriya, and Sarada. Examination of the read- 
ings unique to the ST clearly points also to the distinct transmission of the NT mss. 
The NT has two branches: NT-x, which is the older and the main branch, and 
NT-y, which I call the “vulgate,” because this is the version represented by most 
printed editions of the MDh and the one accompanying the commentary of Kullika 
in most mss. 


NT~—x (Northern Traditional): This branch of the NT constitutes the largest single 
group of mss. covering all the northern scripts. It is represented by the following 
mss.: Be'sBe? Be? Bo nCa Ho wKt! wKt? nKtt nKt® wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo4 
Lo? nNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pus sPus P? Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa. 
In the early chapters Jo? follows the NT-x, but from about chapter seven it agrees 
more with NT-y. Given the hybrid nature of most mss., especially of those 
belonging to the NT, however, several of the above mss. show the influence of NT- 
y. The examination of the readings unigue to NT-y shows the distinctive 
characteristics of NT-x. 

The NT-x is followed by most major commentators: Medhatithi, Govindaraja, 
and Narayana. The exceptions are Kulltika and Manirama, a very late commentator 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 373 


known to us only from the flawed edition of Dave, and possibly Raghavananda? and 
Ramacandra. 

The only modern printed edition of the MDh that follows the NT-x, as far as I 
know, is that of Jolly (14887). The root texts contained in Jha’s edition of Medha- 
tithi’s commentary also by and large follows NT-x, because this is the text found in 
all the extant mss. of that commentary. 


NT-y (Northern Vulgate): Of the mss. used in this edition, the NT—y is repre- 
sented by the smallest group of mss.: Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? Tj? mTr?. The only ms. in 
a southern script to follow this tradition, indeed the NT as a whole, is mTr>. Given 
its late date, it is likely that the ms. was copied either from a printed copy or a ms. of 
the vulgate. From about chapter seven, Jo? frequently follows the vulgate. 

The transmission represented by NT-y is the least faithful and contains the 
greatest number of corruptions and deviations from what must be presumed to be 
the old readings based on the evidence of NT-x and ST. Although I cannot be 
certain of this, it appears probable that this version arose in the late medieval period, 
possibly under the influence of Kulliika himself or those under the influence of his 
well-known commentary. The reason for this is that mss. of Kullika’s commentary 
invariably contains the NT-y as the root text. 

In numerous places the NT-y has unique readings different from either the 
NT-x or the ST. Even more numerous are the instances where the NT-y has 
readings shared by a few NT-x mss. (clear cases of hybridization) but different 
from the majority of NT-x mss. The following is a sample: 2.11; transposition of 
verses 2.225 and 226; 3.77, 81, 85, 88, 163a, 267c, 278c, 283c; 9.147, 169; 10.20, 28; 
11.1284. 

Manirama follows the NT-y readings most times, although not consistently; he 
probably commented on a hybrid ms. For example, at 3.77 he records the NT-y 
reading vartante, whereas at 3.81 he has the old reading sraddhena. Kulltika’s case 
is even more difficult. As I have noted, his commentary is nothing more than a pla- 
giarized version of Govindaraja’s lesser known commentary. In many places, there- 
fore, the root text presupposed by Kullika is the NT-x, because that is the text on 
which Govindaraja commented. Nevertheless, Kulltka frequently departs from that 
and appears to be commenting on a text close to, if not identical with, the NT~y. 
This may explain the reason why the NT-y is given as the root text in mss. 
containing Kullika’s commentary. 


The Vulgate and Printed Editions: The presence of Kullika’s commentary may 
be the reason why the NT-y entered the printed tradition; many early printings of 
the MDh, such as the first (1813) and the second (1830) Calcutta editions (the latter 
reprinted by Jibananda in 1874), contained Kullika’s commentary as well. It is the 
northern vulgate that is given also in the edition of Loiseleur Deslongchamps (Paris, 
1830). I say “the printed tradition,” because it appears that as mss. were copied from 
each other and thus established genealogies, so the printed versions of the MDh 


3. Considered by Jolly (1887, xv) to have followed Kullika rather than the older 
commentators. 


374 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


were for the most part nothing but reprints of earlier versions. This is true of 
editions that most Sanskritists use even today, such as that of Mandlik (1886), the 
ones printed by the Nirnaya Sagar Press (Bombay, 1946 with many reprints), by the 
Kasi Sanskrit Series (Varanasi, 1970), and the latest edition with 9 commentaries by 
Dave (Bombay, 1972-84). It is surprising how few mss. contain some readings 
adopted by most printed versions: see 2.11, 96; 3.78, 85, 88, 163, 253, 283; 8.172: 
11.111, 120, 245, 249, 252; 12.10, 28,70, 76, 82, 98, 104. In one instance (7.86) the 
reading of these editions is not supported by a single manuscript I have used. 


IV. CONSTITUTION OF THE TEXT 


All the mss. and commentaries of the MDh contain basically the same text. The ad- 
ditional verses found in some can easily be detected. There are no major recensions 
of the MDh giving longer or shorter versions of the text, as, for example, in the case 
of the two epics. The constitution of the text, therefore, boils down to the editorial 
judgment as to which of two or three competing readings has great claimer to be ac- 
cepted as the original. 


IV.1 Editorial Principles 


I give below some general principles that have guided the constitution of the text 
and the selection of reading: 

1. At the most general level, a reading supported by the ST and NT is adopted in 
the critical edition. Any variants restricted to a limited range of mss. must have been 
introduced by a scribe or reader. Clearly the vast majority of the readings in the 
critical edition fall under this rule. 

2. Readings supported by the ST and NT-x are adopted in preference to those 
supported only by NT-y. The superiority of the former transmissions is clearly es- 
tablished by a close scrutiny of the critical apparatus. They are the ones, moreover, 
that are recorded in the medieval literature used as external testimonia in this edi- 
tion. They are also supported by the vast majority of the early commentators. 

3. In cases where the ST and the NT have different readings, or where the ST 
and the NT-y have readings different from NT-x, the determination of the original 
reading becomes a lot more difficult. It is not possible to formulate a general and 
rigid principle that can be applied in all these instances. I have analyzed each case 
separately, taking into account the evidence provided by the commentaries and tes- 
timonia, the general sense of the text, and parallel passages within the MDh. 

4. The most significant editorial principle is that of lectio difficilior. It is easier 
to explain how a more difficult reading is changed to an easier one than the other 
way round. The difficulties may be of different sorts. Some are orthographic; 
scribes often fail to comprehend a complex combinations of consonants or a strange 
looking form created by sandhi. More frequently, however, the difficulty is either in 
the term, which is unusual or obscure, or in the resultant meaning. Scribes and read- 
ers generally tend to change these to easier and more comprehensible forms. 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 375 


5. In only a handful of instances have I rejected the nearly unanimous readings 
of the mss. in favor of the reading attested by the commentators. For example, at 
3.217d, every genealogical branch of the mss. record mantravit. I have opted for 
mantravat that has the support of all but one commentator. 

Departing from normal editorial practice, I have articulated my reasons for 
adopting a particular reading in the endnotes. Whenever I have selected a reading 
supported by only a minority of mss., such as at 5.61-62 and 8.57, I have explained 
my reasons fully in an endnote. At 8.57, for example, the old commentaries of 
Bharuci and Medhatithi clearly show that the reading should be iti, even though it 
violates grammar. Precisely for this reason, it is also the lectio difficilior. 1 think 
these notes will be useful to readers as they weigh the options themselves; they can 
know, rather than guess at, the reasons why I have adopted a particular reading and 
the kinds of mss., commentarial, and testimonial support it has. 


IV.2 Testimonia and Commentaries 


At the initial stages of this project I had hoped that the collation of citations of the 
MDh in major medieval legal texts would provide a valuable source for determining 
correct readings. Most of these texts, after all, are older by several centuries than the 
extant mss. of the MDh. These testimonia, however, have proved much less useful 
than I had anticipated. A major drawback is the very editions of these texts; they are 
not critically edited and I can never be sure that the reading given in an edition goes 
back to the author or has been introduced by the editor. The MDjA is a well-known 
text; some editors probably knew much of it by heart. They were thus prone to in- 
troduce “correct” (i.e., vulgate) readings in place of what they perceived as corrupt 
readings of their mss. Thus, for example, I found that the same verse of the MDh 
cited in different places in the same text had different readings. Taken cumulatively, 
nevertheless, these external testimonia did provide an external check on the read- 
ings. It was also a welcome surprise to discover that many of the medieval legal di- 
gests regularly followed the readings of the Southern Transmission. 

The other non-manuscript evidence I have relied on are the commentaries, es- 
pecially the older ones of Bharuci, Medhatithi, Govindaraja, and Narayana. I will 
deal below [IV.3] with Jolly’s argument that commentaries alone can supply us with 
the correct readings of the text. Taken together with the mss., however, the com- 
mentaries provided the most significant check on the selection of readings. Several 
problems, nevertheless, emerged. First, Bharuci’s commentary exists only for 
chapters 6-12 and in a single mutilated manuscript. Its edition by Derrett depended 
on a Devanagari transcript of the Malayalam original, a transcript which Derrett 
himself acknowledges to be faulty. [ have used a photocopy of the original Malaya- 
lam ms. for this edition, but even then I cannot be sure that the readings preserved in 
this ms. faithfully represent Bharuci’s own readings. 

Second, all the mss. of Medhatithi’s commentary go back to a reconstruction 
made under the patronage of the 14th-century king Madana. This reconstruction was 
based on fragmentary or defective originals. The absence of a verse in the current 
mss. of Medhatithi, for example, cannot be taken as evidence that it was lacking 


376 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


also in the original commentary. We see many instances where other commentators, 
such as Govindaraja and Kulltika, refer to the commentary of Medhatithi on a par- 
ticular verse which is lacking in the extant mss. For example, all the mss. of 
Medhatithi omit his commentary on 9.182-201; yet Kulliika refers to his comments 
on these verses showing that his ms. of Medhatithi contained comments on these 
verses. Likewise, Raghavananda refers to a reading of Medhatithi on 7.132, although 
his commentary on this verse has not survived. Thus, when the commentary on a 
particular verse is lacking in the mss. or editions, we cannot assume that Medhatithi 
did not recognize that verse as authentic. It may simply have been lost in the trans- 
mission (Bihler 1886, cxxvi). 

To complicate matters further, we do not have a reliable critical edition of this 
commentary; even the one done by Jha is defective. I have found that in many cru- 
cial readings the ones given by Jha differ from the ones I find in the original mss. 
Indeed, sometimes the old versions given in Mandlik’s edition are more faithful 
than Jha’s. To give just one example, the editions give Medhatithi’s reading at 
adopted in the critical edition. 

The only editions we have for the other commentaries are the very imperfect 
one of Mandlik, and the even more flawed one produced recently by Dave. 


IV.3 Jolly’s Edition 


Jolly (1887) raises a fundamental question regarding editorial principles for consti- 
tuting the MDh. Explaining his dependence almost exclusively on mss. containing 
commentaries and his reluctance to use mss. containing only the text of the MDA, 
Jolly (1887, xi) notes: “It is sufficiently obvious that MSS. of the text alone are of 
very inferior value generally for deciding questions of verbal criticism in a work of 
established authority such as the Code of Manu, on which copious Commentaries 
explaining nearly every word of the text were composed at an early period and care- 
fully handed down to posterity.” It is, of course, obvious that all our extant mss. 
come from periods much later than those of the early commentators, such as 
Bharuci, Medhatithi, and Govindaraja. There are, however, problems with the prin- 
ciple articulated by Jolly. First, it is not true that “nearly every word of the text” has 
been explained by commentators; I estimate that up to 50% of the words are not 
commented on or at the most simply listed. Given the fact that we do not have a 
critical edition of a single commentary, it is difficult to know for certain the reading 
of a term given in the commentary when there is no explanation attached. I have 
found frequently that readings in my mss. of Medhatithi differ from those given in 
the editions of Jha and Dave. 

Second, it appears that Jolly often takes the reading found in the root text at- 
tached to a commentary in the mss. as the reading of that commentator; this is mis- 
leading, because frequently the root text in these mss. do not follow the readings 
presupposed in the commentary. It is clear that scribes inserted readings into the 
root text from their memory. At 3.114c, for example, Jolly records no variants and 
takes the reading of the root texts to be that of Medhatithi and Govindaraja. Here he 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 377 


has failed to read the commentary itself, for both clearly record their reading as 
anvak and gives agre, the reading in most mss. and adopted by Jolly, as an alternate 
reading they found in their sources (patha). Likewise, at 3.140a Jolly reads 
Srdddhani following the root text, which he ascribes to Medhatithi, whereas the 
commentary itself clearly reads srdddhena. At 3.220c, my ms. Pu!® containing 
Medhatithi’s commentary reads sraddhe, whereas the commentator himself clearly 
read Sraddham. At 8.314, likewise, the mss. Lo* Lo’ give the reading dhavata, while 
Medhatithi’s commentary clearly shows that his reading was dhimata, and at 8.380 
they read vyavasthitam whereas Medhatithi’s explicit gloss shows that his reading 
was api sthitam. Only those readings that can be supported by the explanations 
given in a commentary, therefore, can be accepted as the readings of that commen- 
tator. 

My experience in editing this text has been that a large number of mss., in- 
cluding those of the text alone, taken together with the commentarial evidence is the 
best method to constitute the text. 

The text constituted by Jolly was a great advance over the then extant editions. 
His dependence on just 18 mss. containing commentaries.4 supplemented by five 
mss. of the text only, however, makes his editorial decisions not always correct and, 
even when correct, not supported fully by the evidence. Jolly does not present a 
Stemma Codicum in his edition. The present edition, I believe, is an improvement 
on Jolly’s version, although not drastically different from it. My discovery of the 
Southern Transmission, of which Jolly was unaware, has given me an important and 
independent check on the readings presented in the northern mss. 

Jolly also appears not to have read and noted down variants carefully even in 
the manuscripts he collated. In numerous instances, I find that Jolly does not record 
important variants found in numerous manuscripts, some found even in the manu- 
scripts he had access to, such as the Sarada: see, for example, 2.80c, 198b-c, 220; 
3.110a, 228c; 5.64a, 64d, 65b, 65c, 67b. 


IV.4 Critical Edition and Critical Apparatus 


In the post-modern and post-colonial rhetoric, the value and the rationale for criti- 
cally editing texts have come under scrutiny. Some reject the entire enterprise as a 
relic of the “indological” past; “indology” itself has become a dirty word associated 
with colonial collaborators. For me, indology is nothing more and nothing less than 
the study of India, just as biology is the study of life forms; it does not carry any 
ideological baggage.> 

Much of this criticism of critical editions is based, I believe, on ignorance, 


4. Nine of these 18 are mss. of Medhatithi, all of which go back to the 14th-century 
reconstruction and are, therefore, not independent sources, 

5. This is not the place to defend indology. Others have done it better and more 
extensively than I can within the confines of this introduction: see W. Halbfass, “Research 
and Reflection: Responses to My Respondents,” in Beyond Orientalism: The Work of 
Wilhelm Halbfass and its Impact on Indian Cross-Cultural Studies, ed. E. Franco and K. 
Preisendanz (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1997), pp. 1-25. 


378 Introduction to the Critical Edition 


misinformation, and misunderstanding of both the process and the aim of critically 
constituting ancient texts. It is not true that the editor looks at the different readings 
before him or her and selects one that he or she thinks is the original. Although it is 
impossible to remove the subjective altogether and it is true that editing is more an 
art than a science, yet a good editor abides by accepted principles in selecting read- 
ings and constituting the text. What is even more important, unlike the reader of an 
anthropological construction of native categories, societies, and value systems who 
has no way of checking whether that is the only construction that can be made from 
the data, the reader of a critical edition is provided with all the information that the 
editor himself or herself used and, therefore, can come up with different conclu- 
sions. This information concerning the variant readings found in the mss. is pro- 
vided in perhaps the most important and also the most neglected element of a 
critical edition: the critical apparatus. 

The aim of a critical edition is, no doubt, to establish a text as close to the origi- 
nal written by the author as the extant evidence permits.® This is often merely the 
editorial horizon towards which we march determinedly but which we never reach. 
After it leaves the hand of the author a text begins a life of its own in the hands of 
readers, commentators, and copyists. Over this after-life of a text the author has no 
control; but it is, nevertheless, as much a part of the text as the labors of the author 
that brought it into being. The richer a text is and the more it becomes part of a 
culture and society, the richer its after-life will be. And the MDh has been a text that 
has occupied a central position in the culture and intellectual life of India for close 
to two millennia; it has had a rich after-life. The aim of a critical edition is not 
merely to reconstruct the original text but also to document its after-life. Just as at 
an archeological dig the archeologists do not throw aside all the earlier layers to get 
at the oldest stratum, so the editor does not throw away all the changes and 
accretions to get at the original text. The story both at the dig and of the text is told 
not just in the oldest stratum but at every stratum. The documentation about the 
after-life of the text is found in the critical apparatus, which provides information on 
all the significant variant readings, additions, and omissions found in mss. and 
citations and on the readings and the interpretations provided by the various 
commentators. The critical apparatus provides the textual history of the MDh. 

Unfortunately, most readers pay scant attention to the information found in the 
critical apparatus. One reason for this is the very nature of such an apparatus: often 
the significant variants and interpretations are buried among other less significant 
ones and simple scribal errors. To remedy this at least partially, I have selected the 
most important variants and translated them in the notes to my translation. The 
reader of the translation, thus, will be able to see how the text would read if we fol- 
low different versions. 

A critical edition, however carefully and painstakingly carried out, is limited by 
the available data: manuscripts, testimonia, commentaries. Any additions and 


6. When there is no identifiable author, as in the case of the epics, then the goal is to 
reconstruct the oldest version of the text that can be discovered on the basis of extant 
evidence. See Sukthankar’s comments in the introduction to the Adiparvan of the MBh, pp. 
iil, IXXXVi. 


Introduction to the Critical Edition 379 


emendations carried out between the author’s original and the beginning of the ex- 
tant manuscript tradition are beyond the scope of a critical edition. Thus, it has been 
called “lower criticism” to distinguish it from “higher criticism,” which depends on 
a close reading of the text and the acumen of the scholar. Higher criticism aims at 
disclosing different sources and layers within a text, layers that may be older and 
younger. It is this sort of criticism that discovered the four sources of the Penta- 
teuch: J (JHVH), E (Elohim), P (Priestly), and D (Deuteronomic). A critical edition 
is not the place to undertake this sort of criticism. I have attempted to identify latter 
additions to the MDh using higher criticism in my general introduction that precedes 
the translation. 


This page intentionally left blank 


Note on the Critical Edition 


Given the inevitable complexity of the critical apparatus to an edition involving 
over 50 manuscripts, citations from medieval texts, and commentaries, it may be 
helpful to spell out some of the conventions J have used. 


1. 


The sigla that identify the mss. are given in the Introduction to the Edition 
I1I.2: Description of the Manuscripts. The initial letter in small caps indicates 
the script. A notation within brackets added after a siglum apply only to that 
ms. The notation [cor to] indicates that the original reading of the ms. is the 
same as that of the critical edition, but that it was subsequently corrected to 
the variant reading recorded in the critical apparatus. The notation [but cor] 
indicates that the original reading of the ms. is the variant recorded but that it 
has been subsequently corrected to the reading in the critical edition. 
Abbreviations: mic = marginal correction; ma = marginal addition; fh = first 
hand; sh = second hand. 


In citations from medieval texts, the abbreviation v/ (varia lectio) indicates a 
variant reading in the mss. recorded by the editors. In the commentaries, the 
notation [patha] indicates that the reading is given by a commentators as a 
variant reading he had encountered in his sources. 


I have added end notes to explain some of the editorial decisions I have made. 
Such notes are signaled by an asterisk after the verse number in the critical 
apparatus. The end notes normally refer to a specific pada. When the note 
pertains to an additional verse found in some mss. after a particular verse, this 
is indicated by an “x” after the verse number. 


In order not to overload the critical apparatus thereby undermining its very 
purpose, I have omitted obvious scribal errors, especially when these errors 
are confined to a single ms. I have noted the absence of an anusvdra only 
when the absence affects the syntax; scribes often forget the anusvara dot of 
the northern scripts. Unintentional omission of anusvdras is less common is 
southern scripts where the anusvdra is written after the letter. Scribes also 
omit the visarga frequently, especially when it occurs before a sibilant. This is 
markedly so in southern mss. I have not noted these variants unless they affect 
the syntax. Although I have noted avagrahas in the edition, they are 
uniformly omitted in the variants given in the critical apparatus; mss. hardly 
ever note avagrahas. 


381 


382 Note on the Critical Edition 


5. [have recorded the variants found in the mss. used by Jolly in his 1887 edi- 
tion. These mss. are given within brackets with Jolly at the beginning. Thus 
[Jolly Gr] refers to the ms. Gr in Jolly’s edition. The sigla of these mss. are 
given in the Introduction to the Edition II.4: Editions. 


6.  Anasterisk after a word in the edition indicates that the reading is uncertain. 


[eras aT: ] 


ATASTTATAAANTTT HET: | 
wager TRIS TaTTAGTT 12 
WTTAAAMAT TATATTTAT: 
TATA FT TATA aHAERT URI 
caval ger ater Reraer enya: 
TRAATATET BAATATAASTAT US Ut 


Initial folios are missing in the following mss: NKt' containing verses 1-4b; NNg con- 
taining verses 1-12; Pu? containing verses 1-64. The folios containing the first chapter is so 
mutilated in sCa that I was not able to collate it. 

Before verse 1 the following verse is added in Be! BBe? Bo Ho wKt! wKt? BKé La! Lo! 
Lo} oOr sOx! nPu! Pu® sPuS Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tr? Go Na Rn Re: 


a) La! wera [but mc fh] — d) Ho ara: 
1.* Pada-b cited by Vis1.2 — a) Pu’ °HraTaT? — c) cMd? aftrtet — d) Be! Bo Jm 
Pu! Wa “ate; La? “gait 
2.* Padas b-d lacuna in Ho — c) Ox? seer; oOr WAT 
Two additional verses in Be! Ho wKt! wKt? La! Lo? Md? tMd* GMd@ GMy Tr? mTr* 
mTr°; both commented by Nd. The first half-verse of 1 and second half-verse of 2 in sOx' 
sPu®, and the second verse in oOr: 
RMS T aa Haas REry | 
yaar oder sara yer war 1121 
arr + dar aratar 7 fate | 
METERS aaa THAT: RI 
1. a) La! “oat — b) wKt! wK aa F Ae; Lo? See ; Tr? “sgt; Ho Tea; 
Lo? “fgét:; cMd5 adds a further half-verse arr ai aaTaeyyadar: — c) 
MTr‘ MTr® [folly Nd] BeTeT — d) Be! HoWAs FHA TAT; mTr*mTr® Beak; cMd> 
arate; Lo? areata; Md? om TST; Nd Re support Sear 
2. a) wKO ararerrgaaar, La! arate autat [but me]; Ho Tr? avarice; 
wKt! satel J; GMy om FT — b) Ho wKt! wKt} La! [me to] Te? wraterafacre, 
TMe@ aarerifafcts — c) wKe8 wargd gar; sOx! sPu’ Tr? [Jolly Nd] Re Tart 
Bar; oOr WHT BAT: Lo? “ars TF APT T; Lal “ars wT; wKt! wKe) “wre 
mare; sOx! FarareT 
Omitted in Wa — a) Be! Hast TET; Md} BA; GMy wet — b) wPu! eyaT — 
c) Bo acca —~ d) Hy ort 


383 


384 Chapter 1 


a a: geet aman vercah: | 
reyarareat areaty Redisgerant ater Weil 
STARS TATA | 
smaaiatser sgatia ada: Ut 

at: SRAETaeh ASTI | 


nersenfe git: mrgeetterrtga: Ug 
asaradtfexnsareyr: Ges: Tata: | 
SAS eT: TUT SAAT Ii 


afc eat apn acicteefrare: USM 
sat Ane Zhe Att sat Ft aA: | 
aT sae yet AT ANTI: SHA: Nol 


4. a) Pu8 Stet ae; Lot oMy Tj? TSeTT — b) Lo? “Prats; sOx! sPus “frdtsr — c) 
Pud Pu’ seqaranfacraratt; mTr° Me [patha] Teyararsfacar aM; rMd3 1Md‘ wegararr — d) 
Wa Starear srerarfater 

5. Omitted in oOr. Padas c-d cited by Sam on VeS 1.2.19— a-b) BhP 2.9 Taree 
at Taree — b) aKt> [but mc] Wa “ara wkt! “weferd —c) BhP 2.9 afasaa- 
at a d) BAP 2.984er:; nKtt Tata: 

6.* a-b) BAP 2.10 0c: & Wart Wert — b) Me appears to prefer the reading 
wore as qualifying $4 — c) Me [patha] HeTAATATANT:; La? GMy BhP 2.10 Yarhy; Re 
appears to read HEeryaile: [as adjective of AH]; sOx! sPu’ Fatt: — d) BAP 2.10 Vifera- 
STATS: 

7.* Cited by Sam on BU 1.4.6 — a) NPu! @taTa’ ; Be! pBe? Bo Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} 
BKt> La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo? GMd! oMd? tMd?3 tMd4 GMd? sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pu? sPu® Pu? Pus 
Pu! Tj? Tr! mTr# MTS Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave &t2aTe!: [this section torn in GMy] — 
c) cMy aaa, nK¢ “HaT gat, wk “Rar — d) Md & wart et TAT; Bo Ho Hy Jm 
Jo! Kt? rMd? tMd4 GMy nPu! Pud Pu? Tj? Tr! Mandlik Jolly KSS& Ua; Pu a oF ea; BhP 
2.11 ayer: 

8 a) MTroafaeara; ake sete: — b) Hy sOx! sPu® mst: — d) BBe? Bo Hy Jo! Lo! 
Lo’ oMd? Tj! mT? KP Ku Rn aisaar ; La? Tj? disrrar’; Me Go Na Re support 427; cMd° 

wag 

9. »b) BAP 215 TaTeTATeTeES fet — c) nKt* La! BAP 2.16 afeeseT; BBe Ho Tj? 
afereret — d) Md} aeaftarre: 

10.* Omitted in Lo? — a) sOx! aTe; nKtt Te — c) Jo? La! Lo! [mc] Ox?cMd? Tj! mTr! 
Wa Hat cer ar: Ya [Lal tees; Wa at Fa]; wKt! aeer seat [om AT] 

Additional verse in Be! [ma] TMd* GMd sOx! sPuS mTr* mTr°: 


Chapter 1 385 
TARA eT TAHT | 
ater: T Feat ate qalfer steer Ue Vi 
aeaas a wTargtacar aacaey | 
SAAT ATT AavsAale PFET Ue Akl 
amt a Teor g fra yr a fae | 
wey caret Pegrareraar ear aT TPT Ue Bll 
TRAeHAAT Aa: AqaaIAHA | 
AAAATATSHARTTAAATTT 2 YI 
Aerdaa BATT aarer Sapir wT | 
frearnt odtafir aa: weaferarftr a ei 


ARTI: SAHA aAHaAaH | 
aerated ora: wafer a aes | 
d) sOx! sPu’ aufgars afest 
A further verse in sOx! sPu® [very faint and difficult to read]: 
aeaart: gout cararg: cactifree: | 
TAMARA aATIASs Tay || 
11. Be! transposes 11 and12 — a) BKt aareet > rMd3 “wort — a-b) wKt! Prerary- 
He ATT Barra — b) Pul? fret qarcqay; sOx! sPuo Stay FE — c) Pu! afegre:, 
nK¢t afefere: — d) Ox? walfe; Jo? Lo? Tj! fae 
12. a-b) BhP 2.210G & WTae aaa rE F— c) BhP 2.202 ARTI UI 
13.* a) BAP 2.22 7THSTRAT FT UNF; sOx! sPuo AATAWSHATGAT [this is Me’s gloss]; 
tMd3 deat; Tr? om F; La! & ae ; La! Tj! Tora, wKt! @HSraT; wBe* Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? 
wKt} oMd? nNg sOx' Ox? nPu! Pud sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
aeorat T; Lo} eat F— b) Tj! + PR; eke Pet — c) BAP 2.23 ARTA; Be! fearea- 
tr: cMy fearearer’ ; Pud Pu? feaparet amt: Me feaitsret a [unclear whether root or gloss] 
— d) BAP 2.242} arett erate 8; 1Md4 “wrarere BI; Lo! “erage; mT? g 
14. Omitted in Tr? — a-d) BAP 2.23 Be AEM TAT UITATIP TTS | HECPaIae aT 
coerer Bar g Il — : Kt? Lo? Jolly eae ; Pu'? agaeter ; Be! Bo Sgétet ; +Md! 
agaeicet ; Hy Sesaetar’; wPul sedaetar’ ; Lo? “aeiferraa; cMy "i 
Additional half-verse in oe 1Md?: 
aaa aaa TAS Weer Tar II 
45. a) Td} aT — b) Ox3 fae; Jo! ar; wKt! f€ — c) BhP 2.24a0THa Zeta, 
Ho wKt! Lo! Lo! [but cor] Pu’ Pu’ Jetafr; rMd4 Feta; Bo nKt* nPu! Ter; Lo? TeT- 
Afr; Mad? efestfer — d) nKe aT; BhP 2.25 7 
Additional verse in TMd* MTr‘ MTr°; ma sh after 14 in Lo?: 
dota caret a car yafeta a | 
cate Peart aferery | 
b) mTr*@ear_ Wet [rest of the verse omitted] — d) tMd* “act Ferrera; Lo? rMd4 


gerd 


386 Chapter 1 
qa aT THOTT ATT | 
iy eas aaarter Pret ie gil 


qe | 


aeqelaran; qeATTSTATETPT aR 
aearextitrengeret aft svt: N29 
aattagttet Wath Aether Ge BAT: | 


waraaat: Tat: ATAHTHTATT ULC 
aare 7 AAT Jearnt AEtrarz | 

ail a eeabphag eak a 
AIT ToT aaTaTattey IT: aT: | 

at at arafererarat & & aTagt: BI: Roll 
aaat g a anni eatfr t qrepre | 
aay varal quawera Pe R21 
Sara A saat aaa wfirar wy: 
SATAT TTT NT Bat eT SATA UR A 


Additional half-verse in Lo? TMd* GMa: 
afaanfastaier facaer safer || 

16. a) BhP2.26adaTaaaT: FRAT; +d? +Md4 ATA’; mTrSaaa; Lo? ARPA; 
TMd3 om GAT; Be! sOx! after HATA jump to FEAT in 17a omitting 16b-d and 17a [haplo] 
— b) Hy Toren’; Bo wont’; nKe ararrcafid? — c) Lo! afracmret” [bur 
me]; Md? Md? afaaairet; Me [patha preferred by Me] ‘aTatfit: — d) BhP 2.27 [gives here 
two padas] ony frat art weather fafegery 

17. a) Bo aaa; Hy aaa: 7Md* aaar —b) Pu 10 qereartaray Lot Lo’ nNg 
Ox? Pu? Put mTr? MeMandlik Jha Dave “waar ; cGMy "eret Frouprafer; BAP 2.28 
“spatter — d) La! Md? afer’; nk afertt’; Be! Bo afert’; rma! aeifter: 

18 a-d) BhP 229nea ofa yay anteater act faye | ator ae wi 
agerpante & aor: — b) oMd? Pu!? adaifr: — d) Bo “pega; Md‘ “pea T 

19. a) Lo? garat — ¢) wKt! “HTT; NB “ATATE: [but me fi) — d) Kt? qaarear; nKt! 
aHael ; Hy THIS ; Bo EIU; Tj! “areraenrt; oMdS “ererararay 

20.* Before verse 20 TMd? and GMd? insert verse 27 — a) GMd> yore wKt! Tr? 
MTS Ja — a-b) oMy Saresrer TAA TIT: GE: — b) GM) Tea; wKe! Fees — 
c) Bo rMd3 Tj! arafeenaat — d) cMy a; Pu! ayer: 

21. Cited in Sam on VeS 1.3.28 — a) Bo Waa T;Jo* Lo Tj! a g; Be! wKt! sKt nPul 
Pud Pu? & &; Tr? om®; sBBe TMd? GMS aah — b) wKt! wath; oOr om ; Tj! T — c) 
Td} 1Md! tata — d) [Jolly G R] aatered; Md‘ gaateat 7 

22,* a) BhP 2.42 BAA SAAT. MT 1! HATHA; rMd* SAAB; Be! om FT; Lo? nPu! q; 
sOx! NNg Sarat; Md? area — b) La! 2arAgs; Bo BAT; BAP 2.43 2feat; +Md? om 
wy; La? fey: — c) BAP 2.43 qarat TH UST; Ho om7; BBe? Pu’ [but cor] Te TT; Tr? 





Chapter 1 387 


sya FT aay AaTaay | 

gate warts aren RSI 
Sey BHA AAT WateTAy | 
ata: ammisery aarter frrarfir at UR vt 
aa ara tat aa art a mea a | 
gfe wast daat aerate: sot: Rell 
ent g frase aateat acted | 
dea: Fasarahr: wat: USM 
sregt araT fears agratat g ar: Sar: 
arte: arifire af wraergar: RII 
ag wir aera age wt Ty: 

@ aaa aT WT FIA: YT: AT: URC 


eer, 1Md4 aeary — d) Ke? aerate 
23. GMy omits padas a-b — a) sOx! sPuS afvargerr; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? [mc to] Kt? nK¢é 
Lo? oMd? Tj! Tj? Tr? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “fare — a-b) BhP 2. 43 aca Ae TAr- 
anit yet we ATT — b) Ho SA Fat — c) cMy gels — d) Be! “wart; cMy “eT 
Additional verses in TMd* cMd?: 


d) Md‘ Heresy — e) tMd4 & Bearer — f) rMd4 “arert 

24. a) 1Md! are: ares ; Md} 1Md4 cMy “Prat Te: Jo? “Rrafirear Te °Reratr; Ox? 
“freed — b) La? Lot JerReTaT — c) Hoaee: APRA; La? aRar; wPul apres Ber 

25, a) TMd? GMd GMy MTré mTrS panes Ue aT [mTr4 Tro ao: ata]; NK! AT; 
Tr? aay ae, Kt? ters — a-b) BhP 2.45ert ard car ard ue aft wege — b) cM 
oMy Ox? [but cor] MTr4 mTreert HreraPrerat — c) BAP 2.46 FAT UIT; HytMd} Baar — 
d) BhP 2.46 fagefatren: wrr:; rMd3 geefteecttr: 

26. Omitted in Wa — a-d) BAP 2.46uateat fete waot a carga | gagvarfe- 
Fags: sorta ararsra || —- a) BBe* Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? nKt Lo? Lo? oMd? Ox? nPu! 
Pu2 Tj! T? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4; Hy Jo! Kt? oMd? oOr nPu! mTr3 faaepret [Nd and 
Re support this reading]; Me Rcfaadera supported also by the glosses of Go and Ku fearier 
— b) K? wKt) ake eretaas; Md? frraaq; wKkt! feetaay; Ox? afar —- c) Be! 
“grorepaat:; Lo! “atsreparr: 

27. Cited by Sam on VeS 4.2.6— a) Kt? om Seat; La! avat; Hy aedt, Tr? aa; 
Md ait; Ho ATA cor to WaT, wKt! Tey, GMy afearar; Ox? ATs; Hy feathreit — b) Hy 
ZITAT, MTPesratar; Ox? esrreateat; tMd3 earearat; rMd4 FT AT: — c) BAP 2.48 ate: 
aahre Fz; Be! sOx' sPuo afafeatae ad; mTr® aeefrs — d) Be! ‘dar, wKt “ge: 

28. a) Jm Tj! Fd; sKt? aa; wKt! Lo! watftr, Bo aferer, La! aférg — a-b) BhP 2.48 


S? 





388 Chapter 1 


fente aget antrataarsa | 
aay atsqaTeant aaeT SET URS 


aagiegradd: aaa | 

cafe carahiaerd aur eatitr afta: zoll 
wert g fart qeaageraa: | 

Tat aber der ge a Pradaq ig eil 
fer Feaetat Feast FousyaT | 

sett ant aeat a Rrmemard Ty: RI 
TEs F T eas Jour awe | 

a at frarer ader arent feorereat: UB SII 
we wot: Rage auedrar qgaeyz | 

ud soTarager wedtafear sar usw 


aepe TTT wt agdt F IT —b) Lo! wZew; Ke BIH; wKe wkd BI — c) Tr? HF 
— d) BAP 2.49 Gsaart 
Additional half-verse in GMd@ [partly moth eaten]: 
afreandfag ad moreferpcraey |! 

29. a) La! fearfea; cMy feeds — b) Lo} nPul Te amteantgar ; BhP 2.49 wt Fea 
— c) BhP 2.50 Farag at; Md} AeeT, oOr HIATT, BBE wKt} La! Lot “sret; Ox? 
Pus Pu’ “arent; Md? “aengif; Wa ‘cenit; Pul? “seat — d) Ho GMd) GMy Pw Tj! Tr? mTr4 
aaa wanfiadt [coMd5 & aaeaa |; La? adeste ; mT at Ss; Hy Jol Kt? Lot Pul? 
mT MT rt Tro feat; Wa faaitt; Jo? nNg “feared; cMy “fearet 

30. a) Bo La! aug’; mT Turt; BhP 2.50 Far & fest; Pul? aerg fesT’; Bo La! 
Tr? festa: — b) wKt! Dave Sata g TH; BhP 2.50 BaAaTATAT, Pul? “ohh; wKe 
“geet — d) Tj! Far; Md? aa, NNg PesgThr 

31. a) BhP 2.51 BIHEAE; kt om J; Lo? Ox Pu’ Pu’ FT; La? fagart — c-d) BhP 2.52 
seer war arat sergest sara — d) mT? oma; La! gq; Te Peastag 

Additional verse in wKt’: 

ART TST: Ate aTeKAT ahaa: Sa: | 
sera g fast ser: BE: TeTt St yaT II 

32. a) NKtt Peas; La? Parerat — b) Tj! Wa WaT — c) nPu! sey, rMd? ae ATT; 
tMd* GMy BAP 2.5978 J; oOr sOx! sPuo Tea FT; mTro aTFaT. | — c-d) wKt! Hea 
aARgaeaa AY: 

33. a) GMy Sor; Tro “gsereg; mTr? “Gore Tet; TMd* om J — c) La! aearaT: 
aaSrortt, nKt} pada reads THATS, mTr® aay feraTey, M3 ararfearer; Kt? feerer; td! 
freer ardex — d) Md! carert; 1M? fester: rMd? ay 

Additional half-verse after 33b in GMd>: 

arat fcr [torn] aere ar fesinerar: | 
34. Cited by Hem 1.242 — b)BBe? Bo TMd? nPu! agate; Ox? [Jolly Nd] agerxt; Lo! T 


Chapter 1 389 


aire gout yor aga | 

wee aes Ty ATAAeT 7 NZI 
Ud ART TAIRA: | 
dardatarmrarar Aediantratsrar: USE ll 
PACAP WHAT ALATSATT | 
arrearage gt Te PATITT URN 
fagasatrara techy aT | 

vet Pratcaga sidteearrarer 1 URC 
frrarisrceas frat fegars | 


WPA IAs ASarIsd: UF 
cli ie TRAE AH MT | 


ad a age erat a gaftary voll 


qepe — c) mTr4 “ga — d) Lo? “fedex; Lo! tMd4 aar:; Wa @aiT; BhP 2,60-62 parallels 
Manu 1.34-5 but with significant variants. 

35. Cited by Hem 1.242 — a) Jo wefeafeeet: Jo? WAPI; Lo? oMd? Wa “fea; 
nKt* La! rMd? sOx! sPuS nPul Hem fete — b) Md! Jae; Tro GaSe: HA; Tr? HT — c) TP 
grace — d) Be! Hy 33 

36. Padas c-d omitted in BBe — a) BhP 2.62 Ucar Uhre, Lo! Lo’ Tar; Be! 
BBe? Ho Kt? nKtt Lot Lo? sOx! Pu’ sPu® Pu! Tr? [Jolly G M‘] 4epa; nPu! Fer; TM} Haba; 
Bo 4qg; Tr? aug — b) oMy “areas; tMd3 oMd5 Trt wTr6 “arergae BhP 2.62 

“garg? ; td} “ayetftaora: — c) nKtt fave; tMd? data; GMd> “Prararier — c-d) BhP 
2.63 FY earqtieeamisga peda — d) Be! Hetthar’: sOx! sPuS Hedtafadt; La? “offer 
fraasra:; Lo? “Prdtsrar: 

37. a) NKtt GMy Tj! “wetter; Ox} “wiftar — d) wT re fraaa, Ty! Peet; Te gaa. 
OL. In place of padas c-d, BhP 2.64 gives four padas: 7AM frgorr a agar ta urd | 
aMTAT T Herster wast fara TT | 

38. a) BhP 2.65[does not have pada-b] eeredsaf-rrry; Bo after pada-a adds: Ta- 
aTeaeaigert —b) mT’ oifea— c-d) BAP 2.65 Ta eeerT Desifsatasfest wry 

39. ma in Lot — a) BAP 2.66 FARIA, TM} fee TACIT; Lo? Tj! 
"UATSrL — b) BAP 2.66 AeeraT — c) oMy mTr Fererearararetar — c-d) BhP 2.66 THT 
aT RAAT wet —~ d) Pule “uadifeary 

40. a) NKt?1Md3 GMd? Tj! FRY; Wa et: Hy lacuna at Tee; BK Pus Pu? “oer 

| — b) Bo Ho Lo? Md? Ox? Pu gerrgratrar: [Pu “feta; Bo Ho “fare; tMd3 Geert 
SETAE, BhP 2.67 yee ; NKft Lo? GMd> sOx! Tj! Tr? BAP 2.67 “HEU mTr* 
“eB — c) La? at 

Additional verse in TMd* GM@ Tr’; given after verse 42 in wKt! La!, and after 44 in 

wKt?: 








aereEy Taras Tat TIP | 


390 Chapter 1 
waadht af afreteneserahr: 
PAUTST AMAT TS STATA AT US 21 
aat g aaa wt yarns sfeery | 
adr asRrmeant saat a sear yal 
was ATT aera: | 
cater a fagrara ATTATAT HATTAT: US ZA 
asa: aT: AUT AwT Ac: THe: | 
aa Aareraht eresaretaaht T USS 
CATT STATS TRTARASAHITT | 
PATA Teaetenkaataary USN 
sfasarena: ad Storareencifetr: | 


AIT: HHATHAT TETSIHTTT: USS 


wagt wrest sarghr way || 
a) oMd> aarat aa — b) wKt! wKt La! cMdS aeircaferteraet [wKke! aeitea fer] — 
c) Tr? om Target, wKt! La! aeiteat, wKe} seiteet; TMd4 BaresT; cMd> aragst —d) 
Tr aah wears; M4 arg marad; oMds wary wats; wKt! wKt La! 
aetyererareradg [wks © Pury] 
qi. b) Md afeant we — c) wKe! aerast; Tr? agra — d) aKe afte 
42. a) Tr? AUT; Lo! Lo? Lo’ cMd® cMy Tj! wat; Md} argat ae — b) Tj! “arf; Ma? 
“fas afdat — c) BhP 2.69 putuenhr aad; Md? aa Ft at; wKe! Tfearenhy, wke} 
alfearereay; cMy “arent — d) Tr? wart; cMd5 TAT 
43. a-d) BhP 2.6971 Set Bread sees gaferer: | fara arqareaa ware 
wegen: || — a) nNg rata — b)tMd3 “itraea: — c) Lo! Md‘ fearaiey — d) Hy MAP 
oMd> GMy NNg MTP? MTr4 Polly M'-2-4-7-8-9 Nd] aqeara; Tj? Jolly R] ata, rMd* Aq- 
vara, La? argurer 
44.* a) BhP 2.70 feaeg AVSsT: AAT; rMd4 aesuraferr: TI; cMy nNg Teor: a — 
b) TMd4 agTaTcerea eSTT:; wKt} GMd! 49; Tr? ta; Lo* Tj! 408r:; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? wKt} BKt? La? Lo? oMd? GM@ GMy sOx! Ox? Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tj? Ferra eT: — 
c) BhPa.rivatantt artis, iMd? garter — d) oOr rerrfer wafer a; Wa STETAT ; NK 
“sTeTEsTY 


45.* a) 1Md3 Saat; Md? “Hates — b) BAP 2.71 ForifeerpAeQUMT: ;oOr +Md4 Forrepr- 
nf, My arreaeraferay; 1M? garregeraferen:; Md gare; aT Hea: — c) 
TtMd3 GMd GMy MTr* sero & WT sat; Te sored; nKt' GMy BhP 2.72 SHIT AIT: 
Be! Ho NNg Pu’ Pu? Wa Me Ku ST#a; Lo? “sate; Pu!? “stat — d) oOr afepfaeardtgar 

46.* a) Bo sqamedae: aa; Hy Jm Jo! K? wKt Kt La! Lo® GMd! oMd? rMd? rMd4 
GMd GMy Tr! Tr? MTr3 MTr4 mTr® BAP 2.72 Na Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave SfSs3T. BITERT:; 
Md? SPRSTETET: ; Hy a4 — b) mTr* uTratst’: Ho sftasrs” — c) Tr? sitter: nKtt 
aftrr:, 1Md3 “grep — d) BAP 2.73 arTfaerTsM:;, Md? “Hae; TMd4 HSTRAT: 


Chapter 1 391 
HT: wyatt Fa AIT: SAAT: | 
ghar: oferta qarenrad: STAT: Ieotl 
trayet g fafeer ata quoned: | 
AAHMSCETAT WATAT aceT Va aT UCI 
ara agen aftear: wrega4r | 
TAM Aaa FaTaaAteray: Use il 
Vag Waal Tella: AAaTear: 
ars rare rer aaaarkafr 4 oll 
wa ad & Aes at afr: 
ATA WT: Bey BIT HSTT Uk VU 
wal & tat aah ate Ded sag | 
aat catatea arearent aar ad ata ue Il 
aay cafe g mer eater: aificr: 


oe 


oe 


47. Omitted in BKt’; padas c-d omitted in Ox! sPu® — a) Tr? ATJ™T:; cGMy sat b) 
Kt? om, wKe Bf: — c) nPul gferer:; wKt! woareer; Hy Bfecda — d) nKe RETA; Jo! 
“ea: wir! ea; Md} “eDTaET 
48. Cited by Laks 14.111 — a) Lo® NNg Tj? JS; Tr? Feet Feat; Be! Bo Ho La! Lo! 
Lo? Lo’ nNg sOx! nPu! sPuoé Pu® Pu!? Tj! Tr [Jolly M47 Ku Nd] 4; Pu? Pu? Volly G] g 
faster — a-b) Laks Warraa sere Freer: ofaitftar: — c) mTr? mTré ats ; Lo’ sfraaprvs: 
oMd “aret’. tMd4 sOx! sPuS “eee; Pus Pu’ “esreda — c-d) Pu’ saan TOT Steer: 
oftantfiar: — d) Ox? waraTate age:; NKE Fea, TMd3 Gea 
Additional half-verse in NKt’: 
yard aes des: gait: | 

49. a) wKt! TAeTTaASAT, oOr aTAAT; Md? TTT — b) wKt! BK HAaTZAT — c) wKt! 
FTAA, Bo AAA — d) Jo? Lo} Tj! POAT ATT: 

50. a) BAP 2.75VaTaeted; oOr Pub ‘axaey — b) BAP 2.75 WET: Bert, Md? cMd> 
GMy PulmT rt mT ro oReastfaar: — c) BAP 2.77 aT TAT; wKt! BKé sOx! sPuS “dete — d) 
Bo La? Lo! tMd3 GMd> GMy mTr? Na Prey, Tj? aaa : Wa arfiett; Lo? rMd3 “art; Tr? 
“ara 

51. a) Lo? Tj! Volly RJ UE T ae Fd; aBe? Urea: Pud Pu? das a, Tj! TSE; Ket 
qc: — b) BhP 2.78tsgteye Tey, M3 FIT afr ; nPul afer; oMy Tr? afer. Tj! 
afer ; Md? oetat — c) BhP 2.78 faery: FT WATCH; oMd? wT 

Additional verse in La!: 

rad waar: wera seez | 
wee TAY Wee Teta |I 

52. b) Bo afed; Kt? Tj! aea; wkt! afte — c) Te aa; sOx! sPu® Tr? aafe; Hy fare, 
Lot eafta — d) nK¢e! ara; Tr? Prft@afer, Hy Pfifer; oOrsOx! sPus Pu’ [Jolly G] rotae 


392 Chapter 1 


eariat Pradet waar werrrater tk 31 
Bry west sat area | 
aat Bayar ger eafate Frater: ly vi 
aaa g aarbrer Fat ferofe ateaz: 
TW et Hed BT adtaerafa Alaa: Wel 
aaatret year at ereg ake T | 
wafaaed ayeetay alt fysaer NY sl 
wa a wears ad ara | 
asttaata ater warcafe arert: ikl 
aq Wet g Fal Aa eaaarfac: | 
fatragmearra atteardieas Fahy UGC 
Vasa WW: Wet wakrere4aard: | 


a 
4 
| 
ni 
7 
2 


N&R 


53. a) wKt} afereg wane eet; Hy gofT; Be! Bo Ho wKt! nKt La? rMd3 GMd5 Pu!? 
eafata; BhP 2.80eftfe us; La! afta eer, Ox? FT; nPul Ger J; sOx! sPuo mT ger T; 
wKt! eraet [om ]; Hy Kt Jo? oMd? Jolly [who gives no variants] J; BK Tet — b) BAP 
2.80 Waa: BAIA: — c) cMy aT RAT — d) TMd3 ApS ; sOx! sPuo Aa Lo! 
sooner fer ees fer 

54. a) Lo! gieq; Pud Pu’ (Jolly G] gta — b) Jo* Lot Tj! Tr? wat — c) tMd4 Tar 
ad — d) BhP 2.81 afte areas oMd Fga: 

55. a) La! Lo? nNg oOr sOx nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu’ Tr? [Jolly G] BhP 2.82 Gott Far 
SAT; oOr TAT afe BAT; NK! La? waTgeT — b) Keeferefea, Pul? afer — c) BhP 2.82 7 
ad Bet; sOx! sPuo + WT ABE 

56. Omitted in 1Md3 — a) Lot Lo’ dal ; wKt Md? NNg ear ; BAP 2.83 FeteaT- 
er; Be! “Araay; wKt! nKt4 BK “aTgaet — b) mTr4 mTr$ atst;-7Mdé tr; Wa BIT; Lo? 
nPu! BY; Bo Tj! SITY; skKt> ATT; sOx! sPus ATEPAe ; Jo! om Aa; Be! Guy; wKe 
1Md* Md? GMy at — c) Lo? warfare; La? & arfarfer; cMd> mTr° Volly Nd] Heer cay; 
sOx! sPus ayteetat — d) Md! “eter afatiasead; akd a yore; TP? ferpeter 

57. a) Td‘ aur &; TMd3 aT — b) BAP 2.8484 TTATY:; oMd? Terae:; Hy TET — 
d) wKt! sareafe; sOx! sPuo aaraafe; GMd! arent 

58 Cited by Mddh 1.106 — a) oMd? 4; Wa @catel; Td? Beara, Md} Pratar — c) 
Ox? faferrerear’ ; tTMd3 fafeaarear — d) cMd> arérar : Lo! tMd4 Mddh “eae: Jo? =I 
aera 

59. Cited by Apa 4 — c) 1Md? WagTd; Bo BT; Tj! Hy — b) La! “Rrcarewst” — c) cMd> 
Fay oe; wKt! Fear aye; Md? AesPT — d) wK? Lo? Lo? sOx! Ox? sPu? Tr? Lolly M4 G 
R Nd] Re Toa; K? cMy AalfIs; Bo “Hatha TTT 

Additional half-verse in TMd* GMa: 


aqtrager wy getgara & II 


Chapter 1 393 


THATUT S aatteat Aefetyar wT: | 
aMadigttaary Sarcar srarkatea tg ott 
AYR At: TST Aas | 
Geared: TAT: TAT: TAT ASTATAT Fete: NE LI 
rarifrrahatrear array tae | 
UGTA Aetaay fraearga war 7 Ue Ril 
waryara: Ba Arar yftacrer: | 

SY Ssrat aaPraqearenganrraey le Zl 
fra aa uret a aror Rarg at: eer | 
Pareeat Fed: STENT F Aaa: Ev 
serie Rome gat araqefee | 

TER: AMT YaTAT Tears He: NEL 


a) Md4 gfgaageor 
60. a) La? asiter — b) Te Aetfaaar; nKe Feftar; Lot weft AQaT, cMdé Herta 
aa; wKt! [but cor] “aT — c) Bo aaa — d) La? aedfeqaarafa; Lo! aearcat 


61.* a) BhP 2.108 FAT: RATATAT; sOx! sPu’ Pul? Tr? aay; Tr? “yateer — b) La? 
Sa; Be! TSarr:; wKt! TeTal — c) Tr? om SAT:; GMd! tMd4 taTeaT — d) Be! nKt! La! [cor to] 
La? Lo? Md‘ nNg sOx! Ox? Ox3 nPu! Pu2 Pu‘ sPu® Pu’ Pu!? Tr? Wa Rn Jolly FeTeartihy- 
atre:; Tj! Fesre:; Ox} afedtere:; Bo Fetaat: 

62. a) Lo? wrfe mTr® eran’, wKt! Kt? La! La? Lo® sOx! nPu! sPuo “gpa; 
nKti “osaraftrer; wk) “osdtrfter; Lo! Lo? Pw Pu’ “weiter; Bo Jo! cMd! rMd? rMd‘4 
GMd> GMy Ox? Tr! mTr4 MTr®° WaMandlik Jha KSS Dave “apg — b) BBe? TAaT, Bo 
Ox? aTaat; tMd3 GMy MTr* mTro aTaay, Hy taraeraT— c) cMd! wapser; Hy Pud Berra; 
Be! Herds: 

63. a) Hy tMd? sOx! sPuo Pul? eay; tM? Yara — a-b) GMy Yara wAaeaaT 
ae — c) MTrS & & — d) Md? “Heeger | NK! * year =r ; Be! nPu! mTr3 “apart; 
Bo Lo! “ager” 

Additonal half-verse in Lo? TMd4 GMd MTr°: 

Somat wea wararafssard | 
b) oMdS auras tarae:; MTeo Gare Prater 

64.* Parallel in BhP 2.86-8 but in a greatly expanded version. — a) nPu! fafrar; La! 
art aT — b) Tj! HTS; Lo? arte; TMd3 Brereweareeqan:; Bo Hy Kt? nKtt BKt® La! La? Lo! 
Lo? 0Or Pv Pué Tr? MTr? Har:; Lo? HIT — c) BBe’ Im Jo! Kt? oMd? TMd3 TMd4 GMy Ty} 
Tr! mTr’mTr° Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Prreror, cMd5 Rrer:-er; Bo “Meas; Lod AHTT, 
TMd$ cMd' mTr® Hea; Tr! (but cor] aEAT Bet — d) GMd! cMe AraseRAs; Tv “WT 
atta 7; Ho La! Lo? GMd! cMd° cMy sOx! Pu? sPuS Tr? Na [patha] Re Jolly aTataT; Ho TAT: 

65. a) Kt? OF; Lo? war, Kt? Rasa; La? ay — b) cMd! arguetfeay; sOx! sPu® 
aaa; Ho® aad; nKt Lo? “aaa: Hy “afaae:; aK “tar — c) Tr? ate — d) nK¢ ted; 


394 Chapter 1 


fer teaedtt ara: sferrnteq werat: | 
SHISTAE: HOT: YH: CANTT Wa geil 
ea Ueaedt af ofemraat: ga: | 
HeeataTat UT: STEMI WE ll 
Mae F AMS ATAMT AAA: | 
Ue BAT T wAeAyaTT USC 
aerate: agarfr autor cepa BT | 
wet Arawedt Sear Seater aurferer: geil 
Ey arag aaeanrg a Pry | 

TH adet AEA ath T hyo 
TAA RASMAATaTAT AGH | 

UAT FEMA FaTAT BTAT Wo VM 
afrart gat g weer ata | 
wae aradt urea T rll 

de Wraeared wat yaaetis: | 


Md} atert 

66. a) oOr 43; rMd‘4 f83; Pu? feat; Md! faq; aK rMd? ATe; sOx! sPu® ATaT: — b) 
Lo? Pu! Wa “aa — c) Lot “MeTeaeS:; Jo! RINT:; Pu? “eaTe:; Jo! Lo® Burt: — c-d) cMd$ 
ye: por: — d) Ox3 ys; Pul? yew:; wKt! wat 

67. a) sOx! sPuS @at; Wa 2a; Lot Lo’ @@; Pu!® area; BBe? Hy La! af: — b) Im 
afaart ; Md? “AERTS: cMd! “arr: qaedar: — d) Ox3 ary; Md afar afer 

68.* a) Jo! Tae; Ke area; wKt? tMd3 arerorey eta; Lo? at; 1M? etaresy; wPul Pu? 
Pu? Pu’ fevaTeet; Bo etareet — b) TMd* GMd5 GMy MT rtm Tro aot Bera; Bo AAMT 
TATNT:; BhP 2.92 AAMT FElTd — c) BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? wKt} BKt® Lo! Lo® Lo? Md} 
tMd* GM@ GMy Tj! Tj? Tr! MTP? mTr4 [Jolly M* R Nd] BhP 2.93 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave J 
—d) Tr wAaT TUTAAT: [see6gd]; La! “aera; BhP 2.93 Ae 7 

69. b) TMd? autat TaTHPMTAT ZT; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La? oMd? Tj? Tr? Jolly 
Ff Ga; Ox? FT Sa — c) Ho Wa om Heat — d) Bo Seared; M4 Gea Tet; wKe teapy, Jo! 
Hea; NNg [but cor fr] Pul? “Fafer:; rMa? “fate 

7o. a) La! weery — b) wKt! “eater a; sOx! “ay ufry — c) Tj! waTITaA; wKet 
wart; cMy weary — d) oOr om 

7. a) wKt La? aaa ; Lo’ dé — b) rMd4 “earerrerrag s +Md? war: — c) M3 
“gee — d) Md) ThA 

72, a) Jo? La? Lo! nPu! Tj! mTr6 t— b) Tj! Te gee; Pu? “aetar — c) BK TAT; 
Lo! arerpery ; GMd! “asrét att; rMd3 “a@afteres — d) Pu! ataar; Jo! KKS aad; Jm Jo! 
K¢ La! Lo! nPu! Tj! KKS UP; BAP 2.99 Ure=re, oOrursahae 


Chapter 1 395 


utr a aradta aserrafaet wat: tle dil 
wer Asafa TEA: wiergers | 
witgqayx Yatt At: AAT MV! 

Wa: Ofte faged atarart fergqaerar | 

HHT ATT ACA TET Ber WoT fag: Moai 


arene fread wirerde: Yer: 
Tas AT: TT SAM Aa: Mel 


arate fagaterg fackray waaay | 
HAVA ANAT ACTS NI 


aaa Araeaerera Nest 


73, Padas c-d omitted in Pu? — a) GMy a; Lo’ afg; Pu!? agt; nPul ae; Wa der; Bo 
Ho nNg Ox ae; wKt! sOx! sPu® Tr? BAP 2.99 wage ; BKtS agerfer — b) wKt! BKé La! 
Lo? Ox? ater; Tr? “efie: — c) Lo! Tj! q—d) Te “afafeer 

74. a) BhP 2.100 TaSaY FaTsAt-cMd> TeM; Lot Lo’ ate] — b) Pud Pu? Pu? aA — 
c) oOr BAP 2.1019 Gee; Lo? sfergyeer; TM! vfcraeereg — d) oOr BateaeTaTay 

75. a) Pul? aaecater; oOr T aor — b) Jo? Lo! Lo? Pu!® Tj! Volly M! 2-789] a1, 
sOx! “HTT — c) Bo aTerat; GMd! Md} GMé& areprait; BAP 2.102% 9s stags — d) wKt! 
sOx! sPuo aed; Tj? ated; Md? Sear 

76. a) Md‘ areprarea; BhP 2.102 fagerg — b) aK cer er; rMd4 at TeTTE — d) 
tMd} GMa? GMy mTr4 MTr® cer erator fag: [TM d3 GMd? MTr° eaar; cf. 75d]; Lo! agent: 
nNg adeqet; +Md4 cer eat Hy af; Bo “quires: ; Tr a: 

77. Padas c-d omitted in Wa — b) Hy fartfray; Lo? Md} cMy “Proper ; BKt tTMd? 
oMy Pu? wHtgqe: — c-d) BhP 21043erad fafraigerer ear fag: — c) Hy alfaecrad; 
BK at Sear 

78.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu? — a) BBe? Lo! Lo’ Tj! Tr? Na Re Siar; sBe satay 
qT, TMd3 Satferat FT; TMd4 GM@ GMy Tr? mTrosafecift — a-b) BAP 2.1047eHTaft faaat- 
orarat Start: afar ge:; Md‘ pater eat — b) cMy Wed; BKe “RET: STaT:; GMd> Pus 
“qurcTT:; BBe? Bo wKt! wKt} Lo! oMd? “qorferar:; GMd! rMd3 “qurerar:; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
nKtt Lo? Lo’ Lo* NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pud sPuo Pu? Pul® Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha 
KSS Dave “aT: @yaT:; Pu? “AT: [rest om] — c) Md} GMy Tr‘ MTr® Nd eraet — d) M3 


geared: 
Additional verse in Tr?; commented by Re: 
qrapigreneata Tee | 
oT TFT TST ARAKI | 


79. Folio containing verses 79-100 missing in La! — a) Bo aa; Hy 1Md3 aEe 


396 Chapter 1 


Aaah At: Aa va TI 
mletradeged TAS TA: FA: NColl 
aqgurearsa mt: wer da Fa AT | 
eA 


a lem 
aim: adraratagararge: | 

Ha aalsyg caar qar Rafer aaa: le sl 
aaa Boy | 
Isp Ste WaT IAIRTT le vl 
Tey PPT TATAATAT sTasay | 

wey BT TA BEATS: UCI 
aT: We HART Aaa ATT eIT | 


b) BAP 2.106 BY Stats Wr; nNg @ tararafed gr; ra} “w faa sresr |r, nKet 
afaay; KS daar, Md? Tj! dad — c) cMy dea; Md? aaa; Bo FT 

80. a) td} “creator — b) Lot tMd3 NNg Ox} Wa @f; Jm Ofte: nKe SATE; TM 
Wa aerate — c) Md) Mehr Facwea — d) Lol Teast; Wa Teale; BAP 2.112 AS TET 
fer 

81.* Pidas a-b cited by Apa 1012 — b) Lo* Ox} aTft; cMd! act — c) TMd4 AIRE: ; 
Na [patha] arerat arr; mTr3 Hore; rMd3 anit arf ag’; GMd! wear AT — d) La? oOr 
BhP 2.113 Aquat yada; Pule “argeur fe arqvat:; Hy Kt? mT? KKS warafaade, oMe 
“caraferrad; wKe! “cara yada; 1Md4 “carxada [copy unclear] 

82. Padas c-d omitted in mTr*; a more extensive version in BhP 2.113-5. Cited by Apa 
1012 — a) tMd‘ eft atart, tMd3 Md? “ary at:; GMy HTS — b) GMy Fear; Ox? 
qed; Ke? oft, Tre “gafea:; Be! Bo La? “Sifta:; Md! nKet “fee: — c) Lo* Lo? Ox 
aie’; TMd3 de; Bo Wifey ; sOx! sPuS Afareraara ; Hy WRarraarar — d) wKt! 
savater 

83. Omitted in GMy [haplo]. Cited by Apa 1012 — a) NNg Tj! aRMT:; Bo fraaar- 
abag’; cMd! adftarr aq; Apa rateParg — b) Pu? “garth” — c) md} Md? BhP 2.115 
pd; nKt Ha; Im Jo! KP oMd? Tr} Mandlik Jha KSS Dave GU, Pu2 aa; Hy stl; Ku Go 
gloss J: supports ¢ [others do not comment] — d) Hy Jo! Kt? oMd? Tj? mTr? KSScAaTaT- 
eater, Md? way; Jo! Tear:; NK e lacuna at Wear: 

84. A longer version given in BAP 2.116-7 — a) nKf lacuna at Félth — b) GMy “HTEaT- 
sat — c) cMd5 way: mTr* mTr® aaey oMy gaa ; Bkté “at; MTr? om Mle — d) 
oMy ware HAUT [cf pada b]; Tr? TAT 

85. Cited by Dev 1.27 — b) TMd? TA J a; Hy arreat — c) Bo Tr? pag; Lo? “att; 
La? {rT; sOx! sPuo “gt erat — d) Tr Beary ; oMd! Bway ; mTrS away; BP 2.118 
arestg: >wKktt "arate; sOx! sPus “Saar: 


Chapter 1 397 


at aatagaraae seat BT cell 
wearer 7 wher qerf a aergfe: | 
FAAS FUEHAHIIT ic vil 
RATA GAT ATT TUT | 

amt wfaae Ba Tea UCI 
TAA TT aaa T | 
famramath a ahreer wate ceil 
WAT TAT aaREAAAT T | 
atrerr edie a aarer sfaa wT Ie oll 
Tear TF yseT Ty: wT aarfaa | 
TAMA AMAT PATAATAAT US 2 
wea artemar: geo: aftatiee: | 


86. Cited by Hem 3/3.657; Dev 1.27 — a) Jm nKt* sOx! aa:; Dev [vl] TT: G:; Le 
ange; cMd! Haat; Hy “Gt — b) Lo! wrrgyzad [but mc]; oOr Dev HAART FT; Hem 
aaqyaay — c) Bo oOr sOx! sPuo BAP 2.119Fa aE ; Tr? qatar — d) nKtt GMd! tMd3 
oMd' GMy Tr! Hem getter weit 

Re omits verse 86 and comments on the following in its place: 

Tel Pasty wre Far T ates grey | 

sear arora: as: afegr: aya: Il 
Additional verse in Pu: 

poaeara: woreraat wate + | 

grat oft tar Horay wfaftecr: 1 

87. a) BAP 2.120 WAST TRV; Md} adeT GF TeTeT; cMd> NNg nPul aeerarer 
ater [ef. 93]; sOx! sPuo J alex, Tr? g weer — b) Lo! gert werate:; Tj! ¢ wet ; BAP 
2.120 T rere — c) GMy BhP 2.120 TREN? — d) Tr gaaeateastoe:; Ty? 
quantity ; Be! “HeTTT; Wa wera 

88. Omitted in BKt [haplo]. Cited by Laks 1.8-— a) Lo? GMd! Tj! Tr? “ot aTeaaT: Pu? 
“ea — b) Ho Pu? om ats — c) NK! La? “wet — d) Wa HeTAT 

89. Cited by Laks 1.8; Madh 1.396 — a)cMd! SSIAT Wet — a-b) BhP 2.122 TATAT 
Tet User TIaT— c) wKt! nKt Md? BAP 2.122 fava wataKe “afer a; Hy 
Jm Jo! oMd@? GMy mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “afr; sBe Kt? wKt “afew — d) BAP 
2.122 asat ahaer J; tM} Tr? Polly Nd] afsarernratacrad; Md‘ aframt; sBe? Bo Ho 
Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? BK® Lo! Pud Pu? Pu? Tj? mTr? Wa Volly G Ku] Go Ku Mandlik KSS Dave 
aaract:; sOx! aarfeetct; cMd> cMy aarfaare, wKe} wAaTfee: 

90. Cited by Laks 1.8-9; Madh 1.416 — a) wKt! WT — c) TMd3 nPu! Tr? arferacer, 
oMy aferesret; Hy aftrager; Pu’ Pu? Tj! wefte— d) Tr? after 

91. Cited by Laks 1.9— a) cMy Uaraa, rMd4 Ue Ua; Tr? waa — b) BAP 2.124 BY 
arr watery; xPul aarfeate; ako after — d) Bo IMARTaT; wKe “TAEEeHt; BhP 
2.124 “organ: 





398 Chapter 1 


TATRA ET Fa ETAT US Rll 
TAATFIRASASINS TATAT IMC | 
aaearer ater etal ATT: TT: USI 
a f& een: argend wraateasaad | 
TABATA AAMT T TAT USVI 
aaa aarafer center frist: | 
weather tat flac: fe year aa: Au 
yerar sifirt: steer: sTfirat gfeacttfas: | 
Graney AT: AST ALT AAMT: STAT: USE 
areamrgy w frarat faacq Haga: | 
FATT wat: BAT salarfea: lel 
aka farmer aftetter aad | 


g2. a-d) BhP 2.125 Feuer Far MS AHS FGA | aeTeft Brae HS aa wy: 
— c) TMd? GMdS sOx! nPu! sPuS “erat; Be! Ho Jo? wKt! nKt* Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® Ox} Pui Tj! 
Tr? VJolly M3“ G] Re Tet;7Md3 GMa GMy MTré MTr® [Jolly NdJaTet — d) Lot Fa Ae; 
Be! Tr? Re aya: Hy aT 
93. a-b) BAP 2.126ceAyeTG feet oer sce Afeast afer: — c) Md} atetarcrenter; 
NNg MTr'wTré ade F TT; Ke lacuna at TIATSTET; Wa TATE; BHP 2.126747 — d) 
cMy aed 
94. a) BhP 2.1278 Fer Terr ys — b) Jo! avecafeal; BhP 2.127 TIT - HESS — 
c) BAP 21278eTATha Beat: Pul worse fares; Md} seHearfaareney; mTr> “wea- 
ferarery; nNg “poarfeaareary; oMdS “aefearenr: cMy “qroarrarena; sOx! sPu® “aera; 
Bo area — d) BAP 2.127eeenht FT, 1Md3 aseTex FT; sOx! sPuo Tr? T 
95. a) BAP 2.128 3rafet FT FATE — b)1Md? fafaat’; Jo? “ara:; NNg “Sart: — c) 
wKt! pearfy facta; rd ta — d) wKB yaatiar, nPu! aaafia, Lo? Td:; nKt is torn 
after this verse until the end of Ch. 1 
96. a) Bo XS: — b) cMy wifert:;, 1Md4 geasfifer:; cMy afasttfaa: — c) cMy afer; 
Td} ae; GMy ae — d) GMa TY FT AAMT: ; Lo? HTS, TM? STeTUITTAT; Tr? Set: 
97.* Padas c-d torn in nKt*; pada-d omitted in Ox? — a) Jo! Terry; Bo Ho nNg Pu? | 
— c) Md? paafeg — d) rMd? ater ; BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} Lo! Lo? Lo3 
TMd3 GMd nPu! Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr? mTr® Mandlik Jha KSS Dave werater: ; Tj! seratfer: 
(but cor); Pul® serater: 
Additional half-verse in Lo? GMd! tMd* cGMd> GMy Mandlik [®, T: 
sete: 1 Ad a fefafes feet | 
b) GMy 7 wer 7 facate; rMd4 qeach 
Additional verse in Mandlik [€, 3]: 
aor + gertiaisattay sty frac | 
amfrentasraer qorafer TeeTey || 





Chapter 1 399 


a fe aakigerat genet sere Ue cll 
wert saat f grea | 

PAC: TAA THSTT TAT NZI 

ad & mammeang afeefaoonrdirary | 
Searitraraag ad J aramid goon 
AAT TIM Yow A aed wt aatla T 
ARMS ASE YStaA Hat TAT: UL Vil 
wer aifeaaret gar aT: 

caayat Aas WeaTABTITT U2 o Rl 
fagur TeMtaqaedel WAAC: | 

Berar vane aE aergT Fahad leo Rl 
Ze areata arent: saaaa: 


98. Omitted in Pu? — a-d) BAP 2.131 34 foyer uss oatifie werd | seos: ad- 
frat of wererat TT — a) Jo? BKtS Lo} sOx! sPuo Tj! Tr? seafereaT — c) sOx! sPus “TAT 
— d) GMd? seTyara; BK Bey 

gg. Cited by Apa 281 — a) rMd4 war; wKe! sTaATAe; Apa STI F — a-b) BAP 
2.132 4 aft sTaareg gente sac — b) Jo? Lo! “araftsrad; Lo} “camara — c) 
BhP 2.132 Yar FAATAT; Ho ASAHI; Apa [viet yaTeT — d) Lo? HaHa; mTr? TeT- 
STeeT 

100, Cited by Apa 282 — a) Be! Bo Ho Kt? La* Lo! tMd? GMd sOx! sPu® Pu’ Pu? Pu’? 
Tj! Tr? Apa [vl] 444; BhP 2.133 84 FF aal; GMy Welag — b) BAP 2.133 afewheaeghadt- 
Tae, Pul? “adhered — c) BhP 2.133 FAT BTaAAS; Be! Jo! wKt3 La? Lo! Lo® Lot Ox} GMy 
nPul Pulo KSS Aceaar; tMd4 Apa Sat — d) oOr Trarrensela; Bel as a, TP? eat 
ae; Md! wert; mT arenréfer 

101. a-d) BAP 2.134 aH Tevit yes faeafe + gaa | Hout Bioeter yoigae 

— a) TMd4 aa, NNg waa [but cor fh| — b) Kt? TET; Ho Seed; Pul® Tet; BBe* 
ae c) Hy Lo! Tj! wee ; La! ara [but me sh], BKtS 2fet — d) Pu? srt 

102. a) Tr! adem; BK aela ws fa; tMd4 GMd5 GMy safes; wKe faders — b) 
Hy Jm Jo! K? oMd@? Tj? MTP [Jolly M'*789) Mandlik KSS TIATAAIaeT:; Bo FATT — c) 
sOx! sPuo Pul? eat” — d) Wa Bea 

103. Cited by Vij 1.3; Dev 1.10 — a) oOr fagut; Tj! war —b) Tr "qernarac:: mTr® 
aermuad: — c) Dev fasier; wKO “spr amar; BAP 1.71-2 BAT aH — d) BAP 1.71-2 
agar va fe; Tr? erat 

Additional verse in La! nPu!; given after 104 in GMd! GMd> Tr‘, and after 105 in Tr? 
MTr°®; cited by Dev 1.9: 

we tary eareatre ar | 
aeraeet start frac eatfesar |I 
a) La! aur f€; Tr? ger Praerer” — b) La! adaneaagert — c) La! arereer cere 


° 


400 Chapter 1 


AAaaeer BAIT fers 2 08 
Gare we ater AA AA TTA | 
gRrftafr daar peeratshr atsefer le oki 
Tf eee Terre ghar | 

Se wer aaatsg Prag TET leogil 
afirersfaoarar qorarat a ery | 
aguiatt anarararass WTA: 2 oil 


104. Pu’ ma. Cited by Dev 1.10 — b) Hy wKt? BKt Md? GMd NNg sOx! sPuf BAP 1.75 
Dev ara; Ke aifarr — c) Tj! “Star; oMy “Seat: — d) BhP 1.75 [vl] Bae 
105. a) TMd4 Garfer FE & seat; cMy Tj! ofex; cMy aay; akt® aera — a-b) BAP 
178 4 Ta: adardg addttfafr — c) BAP 1.78 9f8dt aw aetaat — d) Mads Prey 
garter a; Jo? Tj! Bearatt 7 at; Be! “HT; wPul Heer 
10 c) Lo $4; BBe Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? La! Lo! oMd@? Ox? Tj? Tr mTr? Ra Mandlik 
Biihler KSS aarerarqeafs — d) Jo? La! Lo? Lo? GMd> sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! 4tae; mTr® Lolly 
R Nd] 73a; Bo Md} FRITH; oOr AIEEE TE 
Additional verse in La! Lo? TMd* GMd> GMy mTr# MTr°: 
at aera ger eaqatrertey | 
are wdanerer sarat ares gar | 
a) La! Lo? at; GMy et; tTMd4 aarer” — b) La! fret; La! eit’ — c) rMd4 
aor ; Lo? arene ; La! adam — d) Lo? Sareereorera4r; GMy aar 
Additional verse in Lo? GMa mTr* mTr°; padas c-d in Md’: 
rad arverr areifre weefer | 
Temes sreser ate: aT aT Tee || 
a) MTro aur Ararat aATTTeP— a-b) coMd? Praetararend aripuaftreater — b) 
Lo? arigregttereter 
Additonal verses in Lo’; verses 1-2 given incMd) and verses 1 a-b and 3 a-b in Md’: 
HS: AGAMA MST ATT FST: | 
Temlat Wat: Meal TAT FqureT: 11211 
erarerer tarer oer: ofa: | 
waa dereaay atereatae car 1121 
qa afar cerarguey fea | 
aaa srerrt Pad eriftresar 11311 
+ RATTRAY Ut: | 
o¢ sree agedt afeaac: bel 
Se Jaot sete wea He | 
Afeereafie Stet Teresa THT 14 | 
1. a) TMd? Heeq A — a-b) OMe ARTATSAIHAIATAST AETET eer — e-d) 
oMd SMT Tessa STAT TEUTAT: 
2. a) GMd> @aeT — b) cMd5 are: a PeaaTaat: 
107. Omitted in Hy — a) wKt} afeaer ; Lo? aferar: Pu’ atfearenrdt [but cor; Kt? Md4 
“art, Te “Rasrre; Lo? Tj! Volly R) Rae: sat — b) oMe qoretter afer; tMd4 “aT 


’ 


Chapter 1 401 


Tae: WAT eet: yer: HTT wT | | 
qeraeaaa Bt freq earatetatheat: UZ 
aranieagat fast + tameryt | 
MT F AI: AeA: ULM 
aaa TET wer Frat Tey | 

AAT ATT THAME STG: TTT U2 oll 
wear aq aearfaraa 7 | 
qaaarrae Bearer a ae farz ie 2 gil 
araRerrt Ba frarertt a wey | 
Herald Te ATHeT WT APTTT WP 2 2M 
adtat cant ta eraser aah a | 

wea wT ker aw gear Qhaaae a lee sil 
cant amet ART Feareaats T | 

Tas ata erator a fatrotry ie 2 vl 


[Jolly R] Bftort— c) cMy aaaraft — d) oOrsKtS BAP 1.80 “areas; Te aaa: 

108. a) Jo? La? Lo? Lo! My Tj! Tj? BAP 1.819741; GMeé THAT — b) BAP 1.819 aT 
wert — c) oMy ‘afererat; cMd’ mTr4 aférera; 1Md3 “aférerar; Lo? “afererdt; mT 1S 
“afar; Pu’ “=a; Bo wKt? La! [but me sh] La? Lot Lo’ Ox? nPu! Pu!® Tj? Wa BAP 1.81 
k °° ° 

109. Padas a-b and c-d transposed in oOr — a) Tr? ={ct — b) Pul® wouPHdd — c) 
TMd4 ° Sor fedam:; Lo’ om g; La! fF [but me sh]; BhP 1.817 — d) nKt! aqut Rory, La! 
aye; mTrs Hear STE; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Ke? wKt} BKt La! Lo? oMa@ 1Md? cMy 
Ox? Tj! Tj? MT [JollyKu R] Mandlik KSS “woUraaT 

no. a) Bo Vaararedt — b) cMdS afer: 

1. a) BAP 1.85 Prateneq azar [vl ser] — b) sOx! sPu® FeHTR; BhP 1.85 “fafepa- 
[Vl “faftrear:] — c) BAP 1.86 ATAAPTATARE:; Pu wpaTarrae 7; wKt! weraaty; mTr4 
uTr$ “aret; *Md3 aR — d) BAP 1.86e1amer Tey Fater:; Tj! Sree; sOx! sPuo mTr*Na 
TAHT I; Be! STAHET TT [sic]; Pu! fate oz; Lot faker: 

112, Padas b-d ma fh in NNg — a) GMy BhP 1.87 erafesr ; Hy Lo® Tj? arapeer — b) 
oMy feraterétat 4; Hy om J — c) La! NNgsOx! sPuS Tr? RoW; TMd? HET oMy 

*feraar — d) sOx' sPuS TET ; BAP 1.88 eT ; tMd? GMd GMy arnt Tj? wet; Pul? 
“word; Jo! Kt? eerer APA: 

113. Pada-a ma fh in NNg — a) sOx! sPuo Gara; Kt? grat; Hy actrwert — c) Tr 
weatet; Ke wersey; 1M d* om ait T— d) Pus gegfeta; Pu’ [bur cor] Pu’ ghsra; 
BAP 1.89 [vl] Ufsra; oOr om T 

114. a) Kt? “@t; BAP 1.90 [vl] @PreTet — b) cMd° BAP 1.90 [vl] HT: GRIT Ta 
Lo! que Flea — c) Be! Kt? Md? Watt F; BAP 1.90 [vl] TAT Blae:; Ox? Areas — d) 


402 Chapter 1 
areata a at eftgeartr | 
franrenrt qa a Hvar 7 aTerTT Ue gull 

tT qatar a ava | 
armraet a antat srararafater ar ie ei 
aararad ae Per etenraz | 
Fraeret stort a aorataattermny le 2 
areata Sorat Weararr | 
weet wreskagmarag: ie ecil 
WISAMHASSET FT Tet Aya | 
ANS TATTT AAHMATTT US LSI 


Ul gtr Arte eiaet wat afeara4r 
TTATS ATT: 


BKtS om 7; Tr? BAP 1.90 [v1] fafrera: 

115. Pada b-d omitted in La’; verses 115 and 116 transposed in Kt. Cited by Bh at 9.2 — 
a) BAP 1.918f@t afaurt T— b) BAP 1.91 [vl] at: — d) Lo! sOx shy Tr? Suecprat feat 

116. Pada-a omitted in La? —- a) GMy “aret — b) TMd? 7a: — c) Tr? areas — d) 
TM? sraParet feater; oMd? ae 

u17. TMd¢ ends the chapter after 117b — b) Kt? ake? fafeer, wke! wane, Md} wteTS 
—c) Lo! Feyae; La! oOr MT1® BAP 1.95 +5048; TMd? GMd GMy MT TT 

118. a) Bo Ho Lo? GMd! +Md? GMd> NNg MTr? MTrBAP. 1.98 STfererateareaatsy; Te 
“sarfeerafer — a-b) Pu! aratqeuatsnftaata aaa — b) Wa om Borat; Md 

“eat ata T; Ho om; BhP 1.98 “anba &t Jt — c) BAP 1.99 darrafercorat 7; oOr sOx! 

sPuS TITS [sPuS me sh to WARS }; Lot NNg Ox? Pu!® Wa [Jolly M347} amafts’; Bo Jo? 
wKt} BKtS Lo! Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Grave ; [Jolly M! 2-4] grafts’; sBe? sOx! sPu® [but mc sh] 
“ar. Ti? eat a — d) BAP 1.99 carat Smarhery:; Tj! [but cor] “ARTP:; BK “aT: 

ug, b) GMy aT JST AT: Fe; Joé HyeaT; 7M 3 FAT AT: — c) BK SEER tMd? 
wary, Lo! “care; Lot Lod “arer 

Colophon: Jo! sf armatt weratearr:; Be! Lo! sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Te sara; 
Lo? Tj! arma; oOr wk} Fy; Lo? sOx! sPue Wa “Srenefearat; Be! sBK® Lo! td} nPu! 
om Fyarerar afearar; wKt! wKt} La! My oOr om Sears; Tr? wy STATA Teer 
waa; Lal gfteatr west; wKt! qfteway arr weray, Bel ager: wearaT; Wa saga 
TTT, Neg SPT RAPT eT, wKt! eftessar ATT yeraT, Pu! qHeteraereroratrest ATT weT- 
HY; NNg Pu? gaa: SATE: 


[Tectatsearz:] 


faafx: afea: afahtermgrhih: | 
eqaagarar at ated Prater ei 
BATHAT TA NARA A AASTITHTAAT | 
ara f& aaera: sane afte: Ri 
aay: BAT Ft ga: THe: | 
gat seme at dacs: BAT: U3 
warmer fear etfrg ara Ae ahr | 
wate ged hr aacarrer ate sil 
AT TRVATATAT TRICATATHTHAT | 
TATAH AAAS TATSTATAATTT UG I 


1, Verses 1-17b missing in Pu’. Cited by Hem2/1.10; Dev 1.13; Madh 1.80 — a) Bo 
frafe:; mTr’ @fad; La? afear, Ma? fafa — by Tr? “Bf”; rMd3 “Sa” — c) Be! “ara — d) 
Bkt> arrested; M3 Get at; Tr! eet FT; Wa Fraverd; Tr? Pratferar, Md? GMd°> GMy Tr! 
aged, nKt ager 

2. Padas c-d omited in Tr’. Verses 2-4 referred to by 5 am on BU 1.4.17: AAT 7 war 
waft: wrmaegqerdte — a) La! Bara [but me sh]; Bo BRTCATAT; 1Md3 SPATSAAT; cMy 
yareat — b) BhP 7.497 FereaHraar; Tr? “greater; tTMd? GMd5 oMy Tr! mTr’mTr® 
“arr: — c) MTrt dates: — d) La! wAaees [but me sh], K2 ds SPT aT 

3. Omitted in TP. Padas a-b cited by Sam on BhG 64 — a) Tr! We; Md? Nd FS; 
1Md? @rat & — a-b) BhP 7.50 CHRISTI BAT waren wader: — b) La? Aya: — c) 
Lo! gathy Frerar: eat: — d) Pu? deus: 

4. Padas c-d cited by Sam on BU 4.4.5 and BhG 64— a) BAP 7.51 BMaraet feeareers 
—— b) Ho La? GMd! tMd3 rMd4 GMd@ GMy Tr! MTr4 Beahara; mT rs Hah — c) cMd! om 
first 4%, Wa GA, Be! BBe Bo oMd? Pus Wa Sam on BU and BhG Bet FF [Sam on BhG 
Sriratigam ed. reads BEI Sq]; Tr! BAP7.51 HIT — d) wk ° SpTRTET 

5. b) Bo TescaeAaHat; Md} “arrest; Lal “aedtepat — c) aK Taraepfe- 
arate; nPul qar; rMd4 “aferd Be; oMeé “atts; rMd? tMd! Pul? Wa [Jolly !2-7-8-9] 
“ape; Tr! aad 

Additional verses in Lo? GMd!' tMd* GMd° GMy Tr mTr4mTr® Mandlik [®, 7] KSS;, 
first verse only in La!: 

wag BAT Hasecse: | 
wee aaa Tee Ba argd |e! 
aeng afresh aaregaanftar | 


403 


404 Chapter 2 


aasfaet arty afeatte a afgare | 
AIRAT SATA aT TEM 

a: sPreeearkraat waar afta: | 

a aasfieat at adarraar f a: wen 
ad g anand fifa arraaa | 
afarmaradt fran caret fafearer F cl 
afaergred atagtrste ara: | 

ge atftaarmtit ter ae Fas Ue I 
afeeg dat faaat aiarer g & cafe: | 

a ware armat sat f Pret tigoll 


asad a Ot saarererarg feat: | 
a aghrtitearat araat aafreaw: ue etl 


ret pte vate sae st faced 11211 
1. a) Lal FaGde; mTr aga; cMd Hety — b) mTrtTr® * ged; La! “aaa: 
— d) Lo® Mandlik KSS Teme + TPAC; Lal 7 Be de urgqd; cMd! cMy aenorsdet 
2. a) TMd* GMd° Kss Tere — c) La! cMd! GMy 4a — d) Md‘ & farsa; 
Lo? Md! Mandlik KSS frvaa: 

6. Cited by Vis 1.75 Vij 1.254; Apa 82; Hem 2/1.17; Har-A 1.1.3; Dev 1.5; padas a-b 
cited by Apa7 — a) Bo fae; TMd? “Rawr; coMd "eer — a-b) BhP 7.52 Porras 
earcegferstie ada a — b) Md} ayfaea: La! Vis “atch; Tj! “ates; Lo? “aftee; Bo afgar; sOx! 
afgat — c) La? arvana; La! arareta; BAP 7.52 Carareay ary — d) Apa “gai aafe- 
cepfesttesat [vl afteerar}, La! “Rete [but me sh]; Vij aT 

7. Cited by Vi 1.7; Hem 34.207, 3/3.476 — c) Be! Vis aatfafeat; oOr aafea; Tr! 
wale; wKe at fated, cMd adtafedt ters”; cMy Fat; Wa Faq — d) Bo At; TPS 

8 a) La! watftr aaa” [but mc sh]; sOx! nPu! sPuo 7; cMd? f8; BhP7.53 TAA; 
Md} agaete — b) cMy afta; BAP 7.53 fAPard;, cMd> AequeraT — c) Ho STOTAT ; pCa La! 
cMd! GMy nPul “smear; Tr? grata; BAP 7.53 -aTerrd: nKt gery — d) rMd4 rer; 
Lo} Tj! @a4; BAP 7.53 Paar 

9. Cited by Hem 2/1.14— a) Lo4 Byayfad; Pul adage’ — b) Tr! ef eater; wKt 
“fearefe ATAa:; BhP 7.54 faeaqet Ae:; NNg AMAT: — c-d) BAP 7.549 VE Tet BAS afer 
THASHany [vl MAAS ] —~ d) Hy AA; Tj? ge: 

10.* Pada-d omitted in Ox? — a) BAP 7.55 [vl]eat faster — b) wKO GMy Sere; 
1Md3 “aera ef: — c) Bo Ho wKt! La! La? Lo! [but me shi] Lo? LottMd3 Ox? Tj! T? 
MTr’ MTr® BhP7.55 Rn wary Aratey; Tr! “ae; sOx! sPuo Tr? “AT — d) BK Pet, mM} 
fare: 

uu. Cited by Vis 3.222;Dev 1.4; Madh 1.12, 2.424 — a) nKtt Wa “HI; Im Jo! Kt? 
MTP Mandlik KSS Dave ¢ 48; BhP 7.56% dt; Hy wKt! ¢ Wd; TMd4 GA A; Ox? T SH; 
Pu? ¢ Ha; Pul? ¢qa; Volly N] dgwa — b) cMy eqareqeaerAa:; Lo! "RPTATS, GMA 
“STeAPTaT AC; TM! “aera AT; Ox3 “ora; Lo? oOr Pu® mTr° BhP 7.56 [vl] Dev “aT 


Chapter 2 405 


aq: wife: wana: wer a Perares: | 
Udeag aes WE: ATATAT TAAIPT Ne RMI 
sleet start free | 

edt Rares war qet afer: 12 31 
afisd g art eg at aatgat eat | 
sarafe fe at eat aenpt afifahe: ew 


sReasge ta aaareghar ar | 
ada ada aa zdhr Seat afer: lea 
freaftarnar aartentear fafer: | 


TM@ Tr! “sraTae:; Bo oOr nPu! fest: — c) GMy “Ardfesfat; nKeé “feeerat — d) Be! me to 
adeng ferent: [cf. 103d]; nK¢ afer; oOr daha: 

12, a)NNg MTr‘ mTr® fer: eafer:;7Md4 eafeareterare:; oOr FATA: — b) sBe aReT 
fir’; aK faftresat — c) BAP 7.57 afer faur:; Md4 are; Ox a1g:; Lotarg: — d) oMé 
watt; GMd! sreor 

13. a) La! wKkt! “@ragy at [Lal at ] — a-b) BAP 7.58 Tat wafeur artery 
aster — b) Hy Jo! ef; Pu? erated; pBe? cMd! 1Md} mTr4 “stat — c) cMy a; Lo! 
frarer — d) BP 7.58 7a Tere TEA; [Jolly M'2-8-9] sraTeL, Pu! gare, GMy Twat; tMd4 
Te; GMd> WaT 

14. Cited by Dev 1.15-6 — a) TMd? fase, Wa “SY — c) TM? Tr! MTré mT e6 SHTaAY- 
fect erat, wKke! f at; aK aeil; Md? ater — d) wKe ateet; Ma? aRaA; Tj! aT 
wet 

15. Cited by Dev 2.426; Madh 1.288 — a) TMd? sfeargfec — b) cMd’ aHaregfed; Tr! 
anarfatire, +Md3 aaaatid; Lo! ararega; wKkt! eraaregitrdt — c) mTr3 weer — d) nNg 
aaast 

Additional verses in La! Lo? GMd! tMd4 GM@ Tr! mTr* mTr®° Mandlik [®, 1, ¢] KSS, 
first verse only in GMy Madh 1.12; the second verse in Dev 1.7 [this is a versification of ApDh 


2.13.7-9]: 
afta wearer aaa: arte g car asfers | 
were ware: wr afr 11211 
ateataseay set HEdt ated TUT | 
aader wat: ddigeratisas: IRI 

1. a) La! ast waafer— b) rMd4 Fre [lacuna] tt _— -fer:; oMd> Madh FT; KSS 
aareqra; La! Mandlik Taryd, cMd! GMy @fer, mTr? mTr®° eafer:— c) Lo? cMd! 
TMd! KSS aeaTeHAT HAT: — d) GMd> wrATeer:; Lo? rMd* Mandlik KSS WATT, 
GMd> GMy MTr‘ mT ro ae; Tr! wferet; Md! wPafe; Madh wife; GMy fee: 

2. a) La! Mandlik a — b) La! Lo? Md‘ Mandlik KSS Fe: Bcerat; Tr! are- 
aecar — c) La! S€ Fez; Lo? GMd! Tr! asst: — d) Lo? Mandlik KSS Atercq- 
avatar: [Mandlik KSS “ae |; oMd!' eétercrrerss:; Tr! tetercargar aer:; TMd*4 
Heraaist:; Dev Hewaesisae:; mTrt mT Gara: 


406 Chapter 2 


mer greases estat ae HEART Ne sll 


areachiqugensataeseaey | 

a tatafta ear warad sereter lel 
aaa FT ATA: THAT: | 
ana Ararat FT Aarne TAT Necil 
QVAT TART SITET: YLAATST: | 
UT Fetes Ft Agadtaaeae: 1221 
TART AMG: | 

et eg afta freq qRreat adarrar: tRoll 
fexafieaatter aonaasrarate | 
Terr wane Heresy: walla: WR VN 
aT agary t yatar agarg wary | 


16. Cited by Sam on BU 4.5.15 [pada-d also repeated at end of 4.5.15]; Vij 1.3; Apa 14 
Dev 1. 1 — a) Bo Ho Apa Dave frtaatfe:; Ho “are; BhP 7.59 [vl] Dev [vl as in ex] “ard; 
tMd4 “ATRT; oOr “ARS — b) Hy “eat — c) TMd4 areata; Tr! “Raat; Wa “fereeret, 
BKt 1Md3 ‘feresretfer Fat — c-d) BAP 7.59 afore HATE eg wT TAT F [vi Ig] — d) 
Vij ptePere [vl as in ed] 

17. Cited by Apa 5; Hem 2/1.24; Laks1.46; Dev 1.17 — b) Lo? “eats; Apa ‘aateat- 
aAdt — c) Hy Jm Pu! a@a ; BAP 7.60 aaa PART — d) Jm araratad, cMy setad; La? 
oMd areirad; Hy saat; sOx! sPue "at faggar:; nPu!l raead 

18 ma in Tj2. Cited by Apa 19; Laks 1.46; Madh 1.134 — a) NKt4 GMd5 NNg Tr! affer- 
#31; Lo? Md? cMy Tj! Tr BAP 7.61[vl] Apa afte; Pues; Bo FATAE:; wKt! Tr? era: 
— b) Apa TRaaTeTATT:;, Be! Trea; Tr? areas, — c) tMd3 erator — c-d) nPul autat a 
aarae Bead war Tet: — d) Md} Laks HATA: T ST 

19. Cited by Apa 5; Laks 1.46; Hem 2/1.25; Dev 1.17 — a) Pu? Sa; MT! Saar; Tj? 
Aer; cGMd! Area — b) Be! BBe Ho Jo? La? wKt! cMd! oMd? tMd? GMd sOx! nPu! 
sPu’ Tr! Tr? Jolly Go R Nd] DevTUTSH:; BK THIST:; BBe? TATHT:; Hem TAPS: Jo? 
NKt* tMd? cMy Tj! Tr! BAP 7.62 3a: TMd* GMdS GeAA:; BKE La! Ox? Pub Pu’? Tr? Wa 
Apa TAAT:; Lo* Lo* Lo’ NNg Ox? Pw? Dev [vl] sue nPul aeasr: — c) Lo? Tj! 
[Jolly R] Ut; wKt Tay; wNg Tetaai, Lo? ° Far; Lo? Tj! [Jolly R] ear — d) Jm arata- 
ate’; nPul “aatfeaere:; Bo Lo} oM@ Ox? BhP 7.62 Dev AAI; MTP ART 

20. Cited by Laks 1.46 — b)ocMy “areenst — c) Bo @e; Hy BA; wKt 5 TRF; Lo! 
feet; Pud Pu? Pu? Rreteq; Md? rMd4 GMd5 GMy Tr! MTr? MTree, BAP 7.63 Perera; 
oMd! erat — d) nKt aaa: 

21. Cited by Apa 5; Laks 1.46; Hem 2/1.25; Dev1.18 — a) BCa Kt? nKtt Lo? Lo* Lo® 
TMd# oOr sOx! Ox? Pu’ sPu’ Pu? Pu Tj! [Jolly G R] Hem anied; Te Na anteat; Me Ku Go 
support Hf — b) BBe? “AaaTEft — c) Tr? wears; Be! yatTreT — d) [Jolly G)a afar: 


Chapter 2 407 


water Fretted feger: url 
HTT a BA FT ENA: | 

@ wat aterat sat Heageaa: Ie: USI 
Uatesataal Sa TATA: | 

garg aferserar Pavaheetite: wv 
wat ater at aif: ware sata | 
era aaer aoterateratersr UG I 


ates: aah: qafieatiaerary | 
wre: WAST: Wat: WT AT T UREN 
TMS AM ASSAM aa: | 

aire mie Sat fora Rll 


22. Cited by Apa 5; Laks 1.46; Hem 2/1.25; Dev 1.18 — a)wKt! wKt? oM@ NnNg Tj? 
aysrer; Md‘ gataT — b)pBe? Jo? wKt! nKt Lo? Lot oMd? oOr Ox? PuS Pu’ Pu? Tj! Tr? Wa 
[Jolly M G R] Dev Jha Dave 8E3T°T; cMy THaTT; Tr! oPrar:, rMd4 ofart — c) sOx! sPu° 
“arrat — d) La? frifderad; Ke “at; cMd! sOx! sPuS Tr? Laks “ad veered; Apa ae: 
wate: 

23. Cited by Apa 5;Laks 1.46-7; Hem 2/.25; Dev 1.18;padas c-d cited by Vis 1.2 — 
a-b) BAP 7.66 Hed TT POT APPT rer aerac:; Lal Poa HAT aa aed F asa: — 
b) Bo Ft; GMy Bay FF — c) Apat Bait aferay Fa; Tr! at; Lo? 7; Lo’ Ht; cMd> GMy 
mTr‘ arfrayr; La? Lo? Tj! [Jolly R] BAP 7.66zfert — d) Be! wKt! sKt® Lot rMd? Pub Pu? 
Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? Re Hem Dev “STRAT; aMd! GMy Laks 3; Me Go Na Nd Mr suport XA: 

Additional verse in GMd: 

argaer teat aferear + faad | 
a Gwean fata aratadierae: II 

24. Cited by Apa 6; Laks 1.47; Hem 24.25; Dev 1.21— a-d) BhP 7.67 Calfaet FAT- 
aarrprita [vl data] fester: | aferenierr Paterest gftrenferer: — a) nPul ax’; Lot 
“SAA [but me]; nKtt 2a; Bo FAT — b) Jo? AIAPTT” — c) BBe? [but cor] wKe vKtt 
La! Lo* Lo®oOr Ox} Pud Pu? Pu? Wa Apa Laks Jha Dave aferedterar, La? Lo? Lo? Md? 
aferpferer: Bo Ho sOx! Ox? sPuS Tj! [Jolly R Nd] aferapeatatte: Tr aftaaferBag 
fra’ — d) oMy faaafeer ; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? La! sOx! sPu® Pu’ Tj? Jolly FF: [see8.411b note] 

25. Cited by Hem 2/1.25 — a) oOr Hem UT; Lo! me to ATS; Jo? om AT; wKt! rMd3 
Md cMy Tr &; sOx! sPuS at — a-b) BAP 7.68 neared eter seater — b)Hem 
aararceafid: fee; La? warty; Bo nNg Tj? s@ifaar:; wKt sOx! sPuo Tr! wetfier: — c) 
Md’ My FAaeaTET; Bo Jo? Lo? GMy sOx! sPu® Tj! [Jolly R] ate; all commentators read 
adex — d) BAP 7.68 aaras & faa; Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G]aaaais ; nKe Tr! “ater: 

26. Cited by Dev 1. 36, — b) GMy Tr! mTr* BhP3.167 Dev N@ °aeorahea Be! wKt! 
nKt bKt La? Tr? darefer 

27. Cited by Vij 3.253; Apa 25; Dev 1.36; padas c-d cited by Vif 1.13; cited with pratika 
area: by Sam on BU3.1.1 [intr.]; expanded version of padas a-b inBhP 3.2.3 — a) T? 


408 Chapter 2 


SAT Fades Ya: | 
AeA aaa Tale Peat aT: URCN 
we atrataregat areet fereftae | 
waa wat arer eormyartary W281 
ATAaT BAT FT slat aeT BAT | 
ger feat age ar aarr ar aorta Uz oll 
APeT Teer Va arrest Tonteaay | 
oIET GH YET F FOAL UR LU 
WAT ATT SMa Taeaaeareaey | 


Serer gfteta Yaar TergTAT ZRII 
eatnt gaternge Pervert aatecy | 


at cMy mms’; LoS wet; Wa “éasafe” — b) Be! Bo Ho La? 1M@ Ox? Tj! Tr! TP 
ae’. ;oMd5 GMy “ta; PuS Pu’? {cor to] Pu? Vij Dev “ZEr ; Pu!® “ES; ; wKkt *aEr Tr! 
ABBY — c) MTr? uTr4 afte; Ke afar; nKt ma; Loe mits. vKE Pu? aT; TMd3 

GAY, wKt! Bat; wNg [but cor fi] 3a; sOx! Fat — d) oOr “AAR ASaA; nKE CATATASAG; 
oMd “at aftysad; Dev “anrrastter 

28. Padas c-d omitted in oOr. Padas c-d cited by Vis 1.50;Madh 1.346; pada- -d cited by 
Sam on BU 3.1.1 [intr.] — b) Pu faa’; pul? Rafaa’; Bo “safaa®: wKt! “Asratad:, 
oMd! “fee amat:; BKt’ BAP 3.334: — c) Hy Ox? Pu® Tr? Wa om war — c-d) BhP 3.4 
Teraaer aeftt sehr frat ag: — d) La? areas; Te? sera; Tj? areft + 

29. Padas a-b cited by Hem 3/1.326; Dev 1.49 — a) BhP 3.4 B4ATeaT;, GMd> -GRTAT- 
wat, Dev “areqat — c) wKt! sat; Bo Ox? aver — d) Tj! feet; Hy Pu! BAP 3.5 [v1] 
“aftr; Tr? “affare 

30. Cited by Dev 1.52; Mach 1.440; padas a-b cited by Vif 1.12— a) TMd? * gar; Pus 
Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] 7; nKt aT — b) BAP 3.5 expanded version:efafrezearer wRra | gresarray 
ust; Bo Vis avert; Tr! ara; Tr? atf — c) cMy FT; Jo? Lo? sOx! sPu Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly R] 
yaaieht [Me Re have Jef but unclear whether it is simply a gloss; Nd Ku read ferit]; Be! 
gEd; BAP 3.6% — d) BhP 3.64 

31 Cited by Apa 27; Dev 1.53-4; Madh 1.441; padas b-d omitted in nPu! and pada-d in 
sOx! sPu® [both haplo] — a) Bo La? oMd? GM@ oOr Pu Pu’ Pu? Pu!® Tr? Apa [vl as in ed.] 
AGEL, Tr? Fe; Me? aTAOTEAITT;, Bo “oreMTeT, Lal! “oreitety — a-b) BAP 3.89FSX art 
fawer Braarifer ote — b) Wa Uail wereafad [cf. 3.32b]; Ox? Pu’ tat soaafad — c) 
Ho aer TF at Aw; Tr? Geagw [cf. 3.32c] — d) BKtS om J; BBE Jo? Pul? Tj! Wa BhP 3.9 
aT; oMd cagyyfeacr, wke! ermfeact [but cor]; Lo? yaad 

32. Omitted in Be!; padas a-c omitted in sOx! sPu® and pada-a nPu'; padas a-b and c-d 
transposed in Ca. Cited by Vis 1.13; Dev1.54;Madh 1.441 — b) Pu® creat; wKt! atenfead: 
mT? aAfarary — c) cMy afte’; La! Tr? gf; wKt! aft [but cor]; nCa wt — d) Hy wKt 
Ox? Vis Jolly Fea’; wKe! a" 


Chapter 2 409 


ayer dehantearaaftatahreraadg U3 31 
age are ader Rrantteract yerg | 
WSsaat AA Tas ARS HF URI 
qeret faondtar adarta ata: | 
waase TAT at Star yferataary WRI 
TaeAse Edit Teas | 
TareeHagr Ua Tate araar Paar: UREN 
qaaqdaaraer art farer way | 

Tat aorta: oS teetehhsey Zl 
aT Weare atarer arfastt arierada | 
ar aaa aaaedter aghtarfaar: uRcii 


We Tes Taser warts: | 
afastafaar qe wararifatisar: Wael 


33. Cited by Apa 27; Dev 1.55;Mddh 1.441 — a) oOr SICICEm — b) oOr feererer 
aaret, Tr? denerf, Tr! free; nNg BAP 3.11 SPF — c) GMd oOr Tr? Apa ATF eT; wKt! 
1Md3 H¥FeT — d) Ho “aAfad; tMd4 “eas 

34. Pada-d omitted in Ox? and ma in Lo‘. Padas a-b cited by Dev 1.55;Madh 1.442; 
padas c-d by Dev 1.57 — a) La! GMd tMd3 1tMd4 GMd@ GMy Pu! Tr! mTr4 mTr® Polly M1-2- 
318-9 Me Nd] ara wal; 1Md3 der — b) BAP 3.12 carerat Ad FAT; oMd! GMy Gprasr 
—~) GMd! GMd3 GMy Tr! mTr4 mT roared; Md} ot — d) BKe La! nPu! BAP 3.1398; Ho 
[Jolly G] aeatte; Tr? ee; Tr! Bo 

Additional verse in La!: 

areerrer aera ager ofteRresa: | 
qafiorraresy eearateentt: | 

35. Cited by Hem 3/3.742; Dev 1.58; Madh 1.605— a) MTr* ate; cGMd GMy aa 
1Md? ate; cMd fesrétat; *Md! festa | — b) BAP 3.14edarryyaar: — c) Lot Paci; Ox3 
fect at— d) BAP 3.146der Berar; cMy Ata eA; NNg Pul? Tr? “AISA 

36. Cited by Hem 3/1.112, 3/3.746; Madh 1.446 — a) Hem 3/1.112 t€% 3; mTr4 mTr® 
“weet a ada; coMd “wet gapdta; Hem 3/3.746 AT BAP — b) Lo? cMd! “weitere — 
c) TMd3 wWHepTEsry; BAP 3.16 Us and adds a pada afer fatifesrq — d) BAP 3.17 
graarseasht wate, and adds a pada: dearer gaaTfeae 

37. Padas c-d omitted in Pu’, Cited by Hem 3/3.748-9; Dev 1.68-9, Mddh 1.446; padas 
a-b cited by Apa 31 — a) Pu? sara; BhP 3.16 TAA — c-d) BAP 3.17 with addtional 
padas: TORT Tar Met: Mey Horas | aris Serer ates Horsey || — d)rMd? cMdS 
Tr! areca, My aaerenRrar 

38 Cited by Hem 3/3.751; Dev 1.72;Madh 1.446 — c) nKt* BAP 3.18 Baar: are [om 
aT] 

39. Cited by Madh 1.446; padas c-d cited by Madh 1.544 — a) BhP 3.1997 we I a 





410 Chapter 2 


aergafitraarate fF safer | 

May artes aaTATATy TENT: ae Wsoll 
BUOMALAATEAT A AAT ARTA: | 
aettcaregyery arrorettarferetter aT Ws etl 
ast Braet see erat fer Aaa | 
atrerer g atdt sar terer qorareadt ie 2 


TSAO G ada: RAHA: | 
Faget afta fat: asafata ar its ail 


wsrq{; Lo! way wet; rTMd? Tj? Tart — c) Md gear — d) BAP 3.19 4 & Weer: 
[vl areredaee Het]; TMd3 waecaraie” 

40.* Omitted in Jo? Lo® Tj! [Jolly R Nd]. Cited by Apa 13, 68; Dev 1.73; Mddh 1. 446 —_— 
a) BAP 3.207 areafregdeg;cMy Faegafarey” — b) TMd? GMd) GMy Tr! mTr4 Tro “Gefe 
Hwarat; oOr omfe; Tj? Dev T— c) Te aera; Ho a1; Lot HTS; Ox? ATS ar ; BhP 
3.20 Her ATT Avi Het AA]; Lo! AAT; Bo afer; sOx! aria; cMy Arey; wKe! ART 
— d) Jm Jo! Kt? BKtS Pu’ Pu’ [cor to] Pu? Tr? Dev Mandlik Jha Dave 4auvaTaea; Ke 
areas Ad Lolly also gives this reading but corrects it in the corrigenda]; La! Lo! Lo* Lo® 
tMd3 tMd‘4 GMd> GMy oOr nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj? Tr! mTr? mTr° Yolly M] Nd [patha] 
Mandlik Jha Dave 310: AE; wKtt Tr? ater: Fafa; NNg Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Fer 

41. Cited by Apa 57; Mddh 1.446; padas c-d by Dev 1.75 — a) Ho por Tj! aarftar Bo 
wKt! deareatfy, Tr? “Seaeahy; tM} “asrerarert; cMy “wen; La! “aearfer; Ke “aver 
— b) BAP 3.217eraefaat FT; GMy Terarfeot — c)sOx! sPuo aaear ; Kt? aarear ; Tj! 
aeeary ; Lo? Lo? BhP 3.22 adtearg ; nKt “waryar; Bo Jo? Lo? Lo? Lo* cMd! rMd* 
GMdS Ox? Ox} nPu! Tj! T? Tr! mTr4 mTr> Wa Apa Dev Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “Ter 
— d) Ke “eitrfeanty; Tr? etarfeenre 

42. Cited by Vif 1.29; Apa 58; Dev1.79; Madh 1.447 — a) Tr? Vif TICAAT; Be! GMy 
Pu? *e2T — b) GMy Ht; wKe Teer: — c) BK om J; BAP 3.2374; nPul! Tj! Ah; Lo? 
aisif; sOx! sPuS s; Pu? sat — d) sOx! sPuS Tj? [Jolly Go] ant Apa [vl] a ; Tj! ae 

43. Cited by Apa 58; Dev1.80; Madh 1.447; pada-c cited by Kum 1.3.9 — a) Tr? 
qerary; La! rMd? Pu!® Dev [Jolly M '2-7-8- ] gaaratd; Be! Bo Ho wKt! nKft BKt® La! Lot 
oMy NNg sOx! Ox} sPuS Pu? Tj! Tj Tr! Tr? BhP 3.24Apa Dev SAAT; TMd3 THAT; Me 
clearly sees a plural here: TETIAYITTAATA; so also Go Ku Mr — b) Ld GATeAHTATA TTT: ; Jo! 
[but cor] Kt? Jolly Saar [the vast majority of my mss. have the reading adopted, 
although Jolly gives no variants]; Dev [vl as in ed] BATA . Md? “aeast:; sOx! sPu® Apa 
[vl] “facast:; Bo “aeat:; Lot fea; Lod “eat: Ox3 “seat: — c) Tr Taq; Bo 
aft; Be! afataet — d) Bo La? Te Wa BAP 3.247 

44.* Cited by Apa 58; Dev 1.80; padas a-b cited by Kum 1.3.9;Har-A 1.15.1, and pada-a 
by Vig 1.29— a) wKt® Vis "aad — b) Be! 1™d3 foment, Tr? Jaq — c) Jo? Lo? Md? 
[Jolly R] Apa [vl] ar ; Pul°areaqua; Tj! “ara; sKe Fat — d) ne Bo Ho wKt! La? 


Chapter 2 411 


watt Aeaarengt afar arearfarr | 
Yoatgrat set qeerashear ate: Sy 
wateray ARTEL FS: BT: WATT: | 
merearat tat: Brg arate fear: ie gu 
aaa F at ea: arerastar: | 
TISTEM JU AeTASAS IAT: US 
wfeeitad sSeqIesT T UST | 
wafer ater atRet aarfakr Ws ci 
wae aeryrattar fasire: 

WA T WAS Fe_ AaGAeT Ive il 
arate aT waa at Argar afrat Forz | 


Lo? Lo? Md? GMd> GMy sOx! nPu! Pud sPu® Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! mTr4 Volly G R Nd] “aaa; Ox? 
“wast, BCa Hy Jm Jo! La! Lo! Kt? wKt} nKtt oMd? NNg oOr Tj? BhP 3.25Dev Mr Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave “&fras — After verse 44 TMd3 GMa! insert 2.63 

45. Cited by Apa 57; Dev 1.77; Madh 1.447 — a) Pu? Tj! aT@qvit; GMy aTalet; La! [but 
cor| nPu! fact, wKt! &@ ; rMd} “grerar — b) BAP 3.26aTeerfed afraeq [hypermetric] 
and adds Guret Fata RAAT; GMd! te apaeranfet, cMy efit; Bo BKtS Lo? TMd4 wNg Tr! 
Tr? Apa a2; Hy aeeaT ; TMd3 “@nfeat — c) Be! wKt! wKt? Lo? Lo? oMé& 1M? Ox? Pud Pu’ 
Pu? Pu! Tj! Te? Wa toate’; Ox? date; Md Tr! Apa teIsIS’; cMy eTAIZ; Lo! Gradig” 
me to Feary ; nPul fresitg’; GMy Tr! Sait; sOx! sPuS Tr? 44; BAP 3.27 adds: TIPIATTAT 
fe — d) BAP 3.27 Weric-Herarel and adds: aAcséfer aftq4; Lo} qverHefet; Bo Lo? TMd3 
Tj! mTr? Apa qertefa, Lot aar 

46. Cited by Apa 57; Dev 1.78; Madh 1.448 — a) Lo! Lo‘ Pu!® [Jolly Nd] area; 
Lo® Ox} [Jolly M] Sarawtt [Me gives this as his first reading; but gives et-TeHyT as an 
alternate; both forms recorded also by Rn] — b) mTr* mTr® Brat qe:; Md! oOr Tat: — c) 
tMd? “afrar— d) wKt! nK¢ ararfetent; Ox} area, Wa fasta; Ox? fae: 

47.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu. Cited by Apa 57;Mddh 1.448 — a) Pu? ZestaTet — b) Ke 
GAT: OS GAT; Ma? BVT; BKE yest ares BhP 3.29eateror, ater, Tj! ad 
aafat:; Be! Ox} gait: — c) Ho “eet; Tr? “are: — d) GMy acqa; Be! BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? wKt nKt* La! La? Lo! Lo? oMd? Md GMd@ GMy oOr sOx! sPuo Tj! T? Tr? mTr? 
Tr? MTrS BhP 3.30 Madh N@Rc Jolly treat aT 

48. Cited by Apa 60; Dev 1.108; Madh 1.451; pada-a cited by Vis 1.29-—— a) Apa afey’; 
BhP 3.30 Wa Aad; Lo? “wend: Te “yeilferd — b) cMy “BATT — c) BAP 3.31 
aRye aur Tet — c-d) oMy THAT TT Fer aera aiff — d) Bo Sat; pCa BKkt® 
oMd? oOr Ox? Pu Pu’ Pu!® BAP 3.91 S87; Pu? “SET 

49. Cited by Dev 1.108; Madh 1. 453 — a) 8Ca oMd? oOr Ox? Pul® BAP 3.31 “Seay ; 
Bo Say ; sOx! sPuo “egy” — b) Tj! “oftar; sBe? Tr? “addr — d) Wa Sea; cMd Puk 
Tr BhP 3.3283027; Md‘ waefraar 


412 Chapter 2 


Rrata Pratt ert ar Set a Parsee loll 
TAT F TAN WaAArAT | 

Pree qeasetareraer sree: Bre: Uk ei 
age TEST ye saret serge: | 


ee N&R 
sTer fast fermarareeared: | 


Wat arrears: ale T AIT WER 
wag PermraragEaay | 
qq wag welaer after Aaa: eS 


50.* Cited by Apa 59 [also Apa 60 but there ascribed to the BhP} Dev 1.109 — b) tMd4 
ART; nK¢ Ft adds GUT — c) Ox? Pus Pra aed? Pret: aCa KO Pul? Prete; BAP 3.33 
Het [vl Hea]; Ca WA Pret; Tr? Dev WTAT— d) HoT; Pus Fat, GMy A; TMd? a; Pu’ Pu? 
Ts; cMy aifearad; sBe Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La? Lo! sOx! Ox? Pu sPuS Pu’ Pu’ Pu? 
Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly G Ku] Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ATaataq 

51. Cited by Apa 61; Laks 1.119; Dev 1.113; Madh 1.454 — a) Pul®° @aTa eT; Madh 
“ear, BhP 3.34 ear adr #7; sBe? nCa Hy wKt! BK oMd? oOr Ox? Pud Pu? Pu? Pu’? 
Go Ku Rc ASST, Bo TAT, NK AKA; wKt! FT Bet — b)oMd? oOr Laks Bagaaaraat — d) 
Be! me to Wat: Pa: 

52. Cited by Apa 61, Dev 1.115, 2.599; Madh 1.377 — a) Ox? aTget; NKt! myer; cMy 
yErhl — b) GMy He— c) tMd3 TaFa, Pu’ Tr! yew; Lo? Yar — d) nKtl ae YErh; oOr 
Pu? yah 3a; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! oMd? sOx' Ox? sPuS Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TE GEES; 
oMy Saga; Md‘ sage 

Additional verse in GMd! tMd* GMd> GMy oOr sOx! nPu! sPuo Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr® Re 
Mandlik [&, €] KSS; cited by Dev 2. 609; Laks 3.224: 


a) mTr*# omits pada-a; “OMe grafgardtare® — b) sOx! sPuS eqferafed; Tr? 
apfetfad; Laks tafafic — c) sOx sPuS ager ot Hate; Tr? Re Mandlik 
arae; cMd! Laks eraafe — d) Tr! erent 
Additional verse in GMa»: 
safeer Bat ear Taare TAS | 
saamarcedd aaa || 
53. a) Jo! feat; BAP 3.36fesit wsT{— b) GMd* Pret ameregemarféc: — c) Lot nNg 
Tj! qe; La! [but mc] cMy Ox “afaerake:; oMd! “safRererRaht — d) Ho FT 
54. Cited by Laks 3.225; padas a-b cited by Dev 1.114 — a) BAP 3.3705 Fafa 
— b) cGMd! “aeAAe ; nKtt tMd? GMy sOx! Ox? sPuo mTr4 MTr® [Jolly Mi? 389] waaAG ; 
Tr? “eaaH@ ; Jolly Me] PATHE; My “edad; Md? Pus “aera — c) Tr! gat- 
wet; oOr wets — c-d) BhP 3.37-8 expanded reading: aafarcer BAS weteeafs wrea | 
attr adisdtafeta aqerdtet — d) Md? aftaeta adel; Laks ceteearaRrareer, trMd4 
Pud aac:; GMa Nd weer 


Chapter 2 413 
Ufa gat Prer sent a aah | 
sghta J aqme aes NYG 
ASS BARATATAT A AAATaART 
qT tae Fata dRee: zara 4s ll 
AIRE ae 
agra areas aera Ik oll 
aart foredikta Perera | 
Baar at aT fasoT Harargy UGC 
ae ater ahi serara | 

HOST Sat frst TATE: KSI 
Rrramay: yt fF: casera Fez | 
afr aa eatafacreanrt Bie wa T ligoll 


55. Cited by Dev 1.114 — a) Bo oft Hert Prev; Ox? gfsrat; sOx! goers; Pu? afer; 
BhP 3.387487 — b) Pul Taye [but cor]; BhP 3.38 [vl] TSA; Ho BK tS TMd3 rTMd4 
GMd5 GMy Pw Pu? Pu? Tr! Tro Tafa; sOx! sPue Tr? Prazsfer — c) Lo} Tj! a; BKf Lo} 
Lo* cGMd! rMd3 GM & sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa Re Devage ; tMd4 rah GM y 
aftenyad — d) Dev “art g feafer aa; Pu’ Pu’ Pu Pu! “afefer 

56.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by 4pa61; Laks 1.123; padas c-d cited by Dev1.115 
— b) Md “araredtaraerey; Apa STMAAAATATT; BKO “ATETIed aa; La! Ox? “arenet 
aor [La! me to “enemas J; Bo Ho wKt! La? Lo! GMé@ cMy [Jolly R Nd] BAP 3.39. ATaIT- 
watery ; sOx! sPue “aTETeeA eT; Be! Hy Jo Jo? Kt Lo Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa Laks Mand- 
lik Jolly | KSS “arene aar ; Tr! mTr4 “seared Ta; wKe “arrest Ta ; BCa NKtt Ox? 
Pu Pu? ateest Tar; wKt! Md? ara; Lo? ort — c) Lo} Tj! tater ; Lo! tarearars; 
Bo taraart, Ke? dares; Lo! ert 7; Nd appears to read SAA for wert — d) rMd3 
gaatheac pars, mT! miro aac 

57. Cited by Apais6; Dev 1.115, 2.614 — a) wKt! Tea — b) TMd? tMd4 
oMdS GMy Tr! epeafeit; Ho “ater — c) Tr! arrer ares” — d) Tj! ger aah’, Ox? “ast- 
ad 


4 


58 Cited by Hem 3/2.991; Dev 2.253 — a) cMy sTartfaycdeitr; kt) sTarert; nKt* La! 
Tr faut; Pu? fare — b) mT rt mT ro BST freryt; tMd? sOx! fret; Lo! “aerayy ; cMy 
“ae ST — c) Md? tsaseRrerea; Tj! “feererat; Ho nKt La? GMd! rMd‘ oMd’ cMy 
NNg sOx! sPu® Pu!® Tr! “aareereat — d) Bo afta; BK Lot tMd4 oOr Ox? AS; Tr 835; 
nKe fat 

59. b) Lo! Md? GMy Tf Tr! [Jolly R] sat; wKt! Lo? Tj! det; BBe Ho aTaH; [Jolly R] 
at — c) nKé Ba: wKt! “FSU; La? oOr “Fert — d) Lo? 227; PuS Pu? 2a; Pu? 2ar; nKtA 
aa 

60. Cited by Apa 40; Hem 3/2.992 — a) Hem Fx: a1araey:; wKt! TMd4 GMy nPu! Pud 
Pu’ Pu? Apa “ateq:, cMd! “star: — b) tMd? fg; cMd! fextsarad?; Hem Reaper; Tr? 
wyST TdT — c) Ho Ta; Be! Bo Jo? La! La? Lo? Lo? GMd5 Ox? nPu! Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tj! mTr? Wa 


414 Chapter 2 


aT AeA ethery | 

ary: TATA STT TYTTAT: NEL 
Sater: wad far: avontheqd ya: | 
aeasfe: mfr gH: cali Teal 
wae afer congadigert fas: | 

aay orftaarcidt faetdt eusasat ie 31! 


Fao psqadts Brg | 
are wren ferretter agtarentr AaTaT UE vl 
Haet: Trezr at qramrer faeftae | 
Taya seer Fa dag: USUI 

\ 


sateen g art ethorraragagraa: 
Seer’ TAET TUT THAT NEEM 


Apa Me areata — d) La? BRA 

61. Cited by Hem 3/2.983; cited with pratika HTEURY: by Vis 1.20— a) Pul? “tether” 
— b) cMd! tMd? “arRragarfter nif, Hem “agers eta:; oMé efact —c) cMd! 
aire Premrareraa” — d) nKtt “Beare; Md! mT 4 mTr® Hem Aad: ART; NPu! “ager: 

62. Omitted in Pu. Cited by Hem 3/2.985; Mddh 1.221 — a) cMd! fasegeate eqihy:; 
nKt! ear, Md‘ yea; Tr? afer; Ho wrafen:; mTr‘ft — b) Be! “Rr; Madh afer — 
c) Pul® Rrafraieg; Tj? Reerenfieg; 1Ma? “Reereanfieg, wKe mitra’; Ox? 
mifsraifger; Lo! Lot cMd! Tr? “atftrar — d) tMd4 cMdS cMy gerahrerda: [sic] 

63.* Placed after 2.45 in tMd3, Padas a-b cited by Har-A 1.15.1 and pada-a byVis 1.29 
— a) nNg @férrt — b)oOr BAP 3.78 Har-A [but vl as in ed] Ja:; GMd! GMy mTr* mTrge:; 
oMd> srt: — c) La! [but 7 struck off] BhP 3.78084 Wetarstct; cGMd! tMd3 tMdé GMy Tr! 
MTr‘ Tro wet G wrdbredtctt; Be! sBe? Bo Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt} Lo! Lo} Lo’ oMd? Pu Tj! 
Tj? Lolly M34] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave T&X oT ardtett; pCa NK BK Lo? Lot nNg 
sOx! Ox? Ox? 0Or nPu! Pu? Put Pud sPu® Pu? Pu? Pul® Tr? Wa [Jolly M' 239 GN R] Jolly 
aet ordivarditct [Pul? “artic Wa “ata]; oMd artic’; Ho wKt! wet orettaretett 
[wKt! “dtt] — d) nKtt om Fadtct; Md? Pa, Be! sOx! sPu® Fret; cMd? GMy Tr! Frefte; 
TMd? frac; Tr! er; cMd’ ateasit; Bo “asstd; BAP 3.78 afaa; rMd? OAT 

64. Cited by Apa 59; Dev 1.85; Madh 1.451 — a)nKt' Fama — b) nKe pHvEy: — 
c) Lo} 9TeT; Bo Ho La! tMd3 918; Apa Wer; TMd! wreafeaterty; Lot Tj! fare — d) oOr 
aetarataaterd:; Md* Wa Dev Jeter; Be! Md? MTr? Fetarah; BBE wKt! nKt! Lo} 
+Md3 gMy Ox? [cor to] Tj! Tj? BAP 3.79 Apa [vl] Fafad; Lo Apa Wad:; TMd4 FE: BCa 
ewifad; Me Rn Re Go support 444d; cf. similar range of variants at 3.217 and the note to it. 

65. Cited by Apa 67; Hem 3/3.778; Dev 1.167; Madh 1.457-8 — a) mTr’ BhP 41 [vl] 
dart — b) sPu’ averer feet’; sOx! arvarer g feet’; Wa starr — d) TMd? arte: BAP 4.1 
saferes, Lot aftrar 

66. Cited by Apa 30; Dev 1.60 — a-d) BhP 4.2 AHaAHT Bar Hat Aor Yer Aetr 
cepred: paexr sarees fear: || — a) cM@ aaa; aK aaferar: sOx! [but mc] 





Chapter 2 415 


aarieer far: eftort deent afte: ca: | 
afeaar yt arat qeratsfraftiear lige 
uy stl faordtaritvarafrar fare: | 
saree: grt: stant Prater llecil 
sada ae: Bret Rrerrataarfee: | 
aranaert a aes T NSS it 
PATA TAMAGT TS: | 


TaoafSpasearean ogatar Kratz: ivoll 
TANS AaTA TF ast Yet Wt: Aar | 


sPu® [but me] TP epreay — b) rTMd4 “aTBRerTa: —c) Kt La! Ox3 Pud Wa KSS depres — d) 
Ox? om TAHT; Tj? “wres waa 
Additional verse in GMd°: 
grarsed otras wer cesar: | 
veto verges Prt enfergarsttr | 
67. Cited by Dev 1.61; padas a-b cited by Vif 1.15; Apa 908 — a) La? dae; Wadar- 
feast — b) GMd! tMd‘ Apa Dev aitvarafrem: ay: [Ng gives this in margin with fe ar 918:; 
cf. 2.68b];BhP 4.3 TTT: Bfa: — c) BAP 4.3 radar a Lé Tr! qe; cMd! yet Far; Wa 
arat — d) Lo® rMd3 Ox? nPul Tarrat; wKt? Lo} Tj! Terf; cMy Terk; a ae BhP4.3 6 
aif’; Be! BK sOx! sPu® Tj! [Jolly N R] “afefemar; Bo ° offer oMd! “fra: 
Additional verses in GMd! tTMd‘* Tr! mTr*mTr®; second verse alone in Tr? Mandlik [@] 
and commented by Re: 
ae Tailed Bal VenATaag T | 
ae water: sat efor werontgar 1121 
afperrer sPyaT araysraaaa ZT | 
art vaar sfafed afsent a teraz 11 
1. d) Tr! afar weror fear; mT! efatet: rMd4 aterarear 
2. b) Tr! sHqat ; GMd! 1Md4 avatar ; mT rt mTr eeaitaratata— c) cMd! are 
Tea; mT Tr Bret Ger; Tr! pret Tey: —~ d) Tr? Mandlik sfa wr a Afeas; mTr® 
om T, Tr & alfa 
68. a) BhP 44 [with added pada] UT & @Hfret aery fRardiat Hera: Tr! fess 
— b) nKtt “ARH; Bo nPu! Tr? “aTaateey; Kt? ararPrey; wKke) fafir — c) oMy serra; 
Tr! eases; NK et mT? ger; Ke Ger; BhP 4.4 7: — d) BhP 4.5 [with added pada] @farT- 
fart c& wyatt wera; Wa Pretec; Ox? frateat; nNg Patera: 
69. Cited by Vis 1.15 pada-a cited by Vij 3.259— b) BAP 4.5 TAT ataATeatq; Ox3 
Prearesstt — c) Hy Tr T 
70. Cited by Apa 34; Laks 1.244; Dev 1.136 — a-d) BhP4.6-7 [with added padas] STeaT- 
wy wRearaarard Saxe: | Teatoay Perrarat fatscttsa: | wyararedetenrr: g- 
HAT: gtatton: tI — a) Tr! peerrrereT Lo? HTPATaTa,; Tj! “aToparatr, La? ay — 
b) Apa errakea:; Tr? "a — c) sOx' sPu° aT ; Me [patha] fepezareit — d) Lo avft- 
ava; NNg Ox} acifegar: 





416 Chapter 2 


aet eeaaeay a gasses: Sag: Wo 2M 

aera eee We: 

wart Bat: Sear sergr | aferT: WAM 
\ 


TAA ye Perrone: 
srefter at gtr qarfacasheate aearq Woz 


TAIT: WT Hatararaet WAT | 
wmacrtiad ot aeearer Paafkis tox! 
: Ufaaata ofa: 
TTOTATA RAR: eee athRTeAEHT Mok Il 
Ta UYET TA wT mata: | 
qereraeg wa: cake aw og 
Bra wa g aa: WE WaRaged | 


71. GMd! rMd4 transpose padas a-b and c-d. Cited by Dev 1.136; Laks 1.244, padas c-d 
cited by Apa 34 — a) Lo} Tj! wearer; cMd! faert FT — b) Ox3 Tat, BhP 4.8 Tat — c) 
Bo TMd4 HE; cGMy HTT, cGMy “era; TM} “star — d) Tr! af wer 

72, Omitted in Pu> Tj?. Cited by Vis 1.26 Apa 55; Laks 1.244; Har-A 1.5.22; Dev 
1.103; Madh 1.300 — a) K¢ @eqar s NK eT; Me [patha] farrerar’ — b) Lo? “Tea. 
+Md3 “sfeur; NKt? GMd! @at — c) Ho wKt! sBK® TMd3 GMdd Pu? Pu? Tr! Laks weer; Be! 
wKt nKt yeeeqt; Be? ateat— d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Har-A Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 

73.* Cited by Apa 34; Laks 1.244; Dev 1.142; Ma@dh 1,136 — a) Tj’ * ATO; Lo? “ATT q; 
only sBe? GMd! tMd3 GMd? GMy Ox? Tr! Wa [Jolly N Nd] N@read “ATE qe Fret’; others 
read “HT g qertar [N@ gives TS: as kvacit pdthah; for my conjectural reading see end- 
note]; BBe? qari —b) Md) aaa; wKO “afee: — c) Be! eaefter; cMd! arefttzr: Apa 
anfefer — d) Tr! “feet; Bo Madh aaa; Lo’ cMd! BRB; Tr? area; Ho BhP 4.10 AAT 

74. Cited by Laks 1.244; Dev 1.136; pada-c cited by Vis 1.15 — a) Lot oMd? nPu! mT1* 
wTr? BhP 411 [vl] Tere: 1TMd4 ster; NK ¢ WTa:; Bo Lo* Ox} FatT; La? ara; 7d ear 
aay” — b) Tj! “ataeh; Jo? Lo? Tj! [Volly R] ada: — 0) wKe 1Md4 aaa’; Md? wane’, 
oMd! aac; TMd?3 Pud Pu’ Pu? “ar wet — d) Lot [but cor] Pu’ Pu? Pu? yeearea; xNg 
aeetded; sBe’ Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} La! [but cor] oMd Ox? Tj? Dev Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave faatrata; nPu! faster 

75. * Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 1.244; Dev 1.135 — a) Ox RET ; [Jolly M'] 
OIT ; Jolly [conjecture citing B-R sv and GDA 1. 50] TEST ; nPu! qroate: agar’: ; Lot Ox3 

°orefter: oMy weifat; Ke? ata — b) Laks Waa; Ho Sanh, Tr? wRa-; Ox 5 fier — 
c) Be! “arafeafiy.; Bo “arafeahr: — d) BhP 4.137 goede 

76. Omitted i in Pu’. Cited by Apa 33; Dev 2.377 — a) KP HHTeRaT Hea; NK ATT; 

Lo? Ox? Pu? Pu? at]; Ho aT — b) Kt? Fase — c) rMd3 Apa [vl] raf IeaET; (Jolly N] 
*aarfeedee; wKt! Tr! Wa [Jolly Nd] Apa Faeaee; GMy “Fafsaez; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt} BK La! La? Lo! Lo? Ox? Pu Tj! Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “3a3- 


wgeq; sOx! sPuo “aay both cor to “saegeE; BhP 414 “say, frter:; cf. VaDh 55.10 


Chapter 2 417 


aerate: Ahersar: Teast TaTAAT: M9 
Waa wT wT arefaghaary | 
eeaadatatet sqrt gore Woecil 
Weep atetaters fas: | 
Aeasaaat Aare caters We tl 
Teerat feta: wre aw fear caer | 

Ma AAS RUE ad 
STrEaaRaa AETATSTASaAT: | 
Paver Sta anfrstt Rae weit Ber Ue 2 
asectaseaeaar wr aateaated: | 

a wa TERA aque: AAAAarT Ue 2Ml 
Warae We Hal ATTA: TC aT: | 


77. Omitted in Pu5; padas a-b and c-d transposed in rMd°. Cited by Apa34; Har-A 
1.1.10; Dev 2.377; Madh 2.52— a) sOx! sPuo Ut 7, Wa { UA; BE Ho wKt} Apa [vl] Feet; 
Apa [vi}fesrer:; wkt! fawer — b) wKe sTeneger; Tj? WeAged; Te wWexged: — c) Apa [vl] 
sitar?’ ; +Md3 aféeparem: — d) Pu! Wa “afts 

78. Cited by Vis 1.22;Apa 50; Dev 2.392-3 — a) TPUeaeAAT; Tj! °Fat; oMd> “Fa; 
Be? Apa [vl] Hat; Bo Lo? Tj? ¢ — b) Kt? GMd’ cMy Pu’ Te “Yet; Apa YHA — c) Jo? 
BKt> La! Lo? nPu! Tj! BAP 4.16 Vis Apa AeAaeAAaGT [NPu! SAA] 

79. Cited by Apa 1220; Dev 2.400 — b) Tt taferay, Jo? “taPiay; nPu! (Est — c) Lo! 
TETRATATAT; NNg Weare ; wKt! BKtS La! [mc] ara — d) oMy wraarfere’ ; Md eratar- 
fefé?; Tr! aaanPHe. ako APaE ; [Volly Be] ear arfefe 

80.* Padas a-c cmikeds in Pu? — a) Ox? varatfarsgen:; nPul wad; Tr? Taare; wKt! 
Lo! agar; cMy Waraear, rMd4 wararar, Be} Waerat [but me]; TMd3 AaAaAt — b) Lo? oOr 
Tj! ero fH; GMd! q; Lo! frarar;r Md} SUT — c) BBe? Bo sCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? Tr! 
mTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave weraf — d) Tj! “Prfecttenter amgygy; Lo? Lolly R] 
Ratgotir fF amg; cMd5 “Raféor; Lal Wa Prifeot; mT ro © Petetat, oMy mTr* * Paferar; 

uw? Patear [but mc}; Md‘ Na [patha] “Prtett; Ho ata; cMd aregy 

81. Cited by Vis 1.15; A4pa33; Laks 3.99; Dev 1.135, 2.361; padas a-b cited by Apa1246 
—a) Be! fare ; cMd° “acer — b) nNg HeTecat— c) Ho wKt} Tj! Pratey; Jo? oMe# rMd3 
TtMd* GM@ Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tj! Wa [Jolly G R Nd] Dev1.135 [vl], 2.361 Laks ViDh 
55.15 Watt — d) rMd4 cMd@ Tr! mTr* BAP 4.20 Vis Dev1.135 fasrar; Te fastay, Lot Apa 
[vl] STEM; wKe serATE; Ho Ta 

82. Cited by Dev 2.378; Mddh 1.286 — b) wKt? TMd? [but cor] “aaa: — c) Bh [ad 
12.90] TKeT; *Md4 TeATHAe; GMd> Tr! MTr°Nd Dev Madh TAA, Re TREAT, Tr TeAT- 
mate, 1Md? sears — d) Tj! argafceaayiaary, Md‘ argetor afar; nNg aTg:et:; GMd! 
alg; nKtt Madh “eer afcart; Hy aafcrars; nPu! Bo BAP 4.21 Dev Satay 





418 Chapter 2 


aes at atta atarcarer fafirera ie 3 


aha vat afer qeterefetiear: | 
TAC AT HT gat Aa ToTae: lc vi 
faRreassrraat Bret aah: | 


TUY: ASAT: Aeat AAT: Sa: UCI 
Y aeqaracant faferasraataar: | 
at F aaaHeT wot aefer Treaty leg 
waa g afte aait art sare: | 
gales ar HaHa AAT Tae Ici 
great fraar frreaverhty | 
aaa aaaterse frarerecda atrary lcci 
Taraaiterareargatter yet Aether: 
83, a) TMd4 “et — b) BBe? Be? Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt? BK Lo! Lo? Lo? oMd? Tj? Ku 
° . . 
Re Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave WTaTaT:; tMd4 mTr* art — c) Lo? arfasareeagz; M3 FE 
wel — d) Pu’ feeftere 
Additonal verses in La’; first verse in Dev 2.369; Mddh 1.270;cf. BDh 4.1.28: 
aearete ayorat arerat rear ae | 
Pr: TSqTTaMIT: STOTT: F SAT 11211 
afatt ta tarr gear gfe ge | 
war age sar: war maha T RI 
1. a) La! ayorat — c-d) La! omits all after T8q 
84. Cited by Laks 3.99 — a) La! me to7RaFT; Bo GMé 4; cGMy Faeaedy, Tr! afewy, 
Pu! afeast; tM} afeedt — b) GMy fe:; sBe? Be? far — c) Jm Jo! Kt? BK Mandlik 
KSS Heat TER, Lolly Ku R] Go werenert, Tj! xee T a; BBe? cGMy mTr* mTr°Nd were 
at, Lo Hat FT Ad; BAP 4.23 HAC TAB; TM? Hae Tee; OMA. Ox? Here Wreat; TMd* Far 
-— d) Lo? Lo? GM@ Tj! Tr! mTr* mTr® [Jolly N Nd] BAP 4.23 3@1T 
85. Padas a-b cited by Dev 2.497 — a) Md} a4aarss ; Lot fattragit AT soMd5 “sora 
aait, Ho oat fe faferer — a-b) BAP 4.24 faferaareeer tery Soar fafsrera— c) Tj! watz; 
BhP 4.25 RUgeyyr:,; TMd* Zr — d) Be! Bo Ho Jm wKt! wKt3 nKt? La! GMd! GMd® cMy 
sOx! sPu® Pu!® Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr® Volly M!?-8- R] VaDh26.9 Feel; Lot Md3 TMd? Ox? 
(Jolly R] Aa; Md4 Ae Sa; Md? AMS Act:; Ho AMAT TT: NPul Spat: 
8. b) BAP 4.25 faftrasar aParat:; cMy ‘aareqafearar: — c) Md? ad; Pul? “gar — 
d) La? @reT; nPul drser 
87. Cited by Sam on VeS 3.4.38 and on BU 1.4. 15; Laks 3.103; padas a-b cited by Dev 
2.497 — a) Tr? seater; La? wae THAT; BAP 4.26 TUM; La! fF [but mc]; nKt* Tj! afer, Hy 
afer, Md} dfs; Laks, nNg ayeag — b) Ho cM Hat; GMa area Fart: — 
c) Md Batears BDatgr; Tj! gaifterrn, Be! Lo @ataera at — d) Md? areal. Tj? aver 
sad 
88. a) Jo? Lo? GMy [Jolly R] f€ seat; rMd? faexat; Tj! aeear — b) Ng Ferry 
— c) Md! wauferde; nNg feree — d) Md? Perea; Te arfsrt 





Chapter 2 419 


anf wary wae perraaaydar: cS 
at crrrgt Rrar after tar wat | 


aret seater arate aart SAAT UZ ol! 


qaifeatr waar atardtergyaa: | 
HATIMN USAT WRATstier Tat Ue Vii 


Ualag Aa HT CAPA | 
afataa fractal waa: wSaat TT AU 
Shoat wage sora | 
atraret 7 aaa aa: fata Prater ie 3h 
TA ST: BATA ATT | 
shrar poate wer vara Ne vi 
way MIgaTeaaty wa BHI | 
wera arteantt fakrera ue 4 tt 
a ear aaret aregqaeaaan | 


faery wget oar arta fre: Set 


89. b) Tj! TF; BKt> Md? GMé& GMy 94; Jo? nNg Fetz:; sOx! sPu fersatr: — c) Jo? 
Lo} Tj! Wa aft aarfer sear 

90. ma sh in Ox2. Cited by Apag82 —~ a) TMd? Tj! Tr! tr; Md} FaETT — b) Pul? 
[Jolly M'2-8] arfeasfer @; Jo? Lot NNg Ox? [Jolly M4] afer; kt @fer— c) Kt? “Ter; Lo! 
“ger; Lo} Teit; sOx! sPuS Apa ‘Teil; Bo La? meat; nPul oTét; Ke? nNg “qr; Be! BBe? Ho 
Jm Jo! wKt! nK¢ BKt Lo! Lo? tMd4 Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? [Jolly G Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave “We — d) Be} wKt} NNg oOr SJaT:; TM} aT 

91. Cited by Apa 982 — a) Apa aAPEATT; Jo? Lo! Lo? Apa W4ta — b) Lo? airaTé 
—c) Pu? Wa Taq; Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TFtTt— d) Ho La? Lo® Hy 

ul GraratfY; Bo qrerdtfy; La! qraTaét; Ox3 raed: BK Wada 

92. Cited by Apa 982 — b) La? cMd! “IerATAar ; Bo warctat; La?“ warett: — c) 
BCa aferfssret;, td} aferssite — d) cMd! rMd4 Geta; Wa TsaAeHT; Lo? cGMd GMd> cMy 
sOx! [but cor] Ox} wPu! sPuf [but cor] Tj! Tr? mTr* Apa quit 

93. b) Md} AT; cMy Vass’; BBe? wKt} Lo! GMy TMd4 “Hart: — c) TMd3? “RT 
sparta — d) wk fe; Be? nPul fAfBPT; wKt! Lo’ Md! GMy Tr! mTr6 Jha Poreater 

94. a) BBe? STAT: — b) La? “stat at areafe; Lo? arate; La! wreafer [but mc] — c) sOx! 

uo effeMT; Bo “aa; Lal “acfor — d) nKe “ada; La! “ark 

95. a) Jolly Nd) Seta; Bo TH0d; MTr4 a: BAM; TMd3 TgaretarT — b) wKt! 
Haas, NK tt Paar; ds WAAT; wCa TAAL; Bo Has TAs; Lo* Md? sOx! 
Ox? Pu’ sPu’ Pu’ Scared, Be} Haaweaid; aK Haseas — c) rMd! Merorread — 
d) La? Lo Tj! [Jolly R] eftae, ake 5 fefrere 

96. Cited by Laks 14.97; padas a-b cited by Vij 2.136 — a) Tr! om; Tj! Tae APT [om 


420 Chapter 2 


qareamirear water Ferrer agit a | 

7 fargearaer fate wafer stake ol 
Aca PTS TW FET A Wel Weal T Al AT: | 
av geate orate at a fasrar Brera: ecu 
gira a adat aaa areciifexeny | 
cre arehet wat gat: TraTigateHT M28 


aarti g ware TERT u 2o2Il 

a]; 1Md4 aay, wKet Tea, Tj! aerIRT; Pu? saafee; TMd? area — b) Ma? STA 
nKt' om# — c) pBe? Hy Jm Kt? oM& Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TEI, Jo! Target; Ti! 
gerett; Be! [but cor] sOx! Ox? sPu’ Tr! Ku weather; wKt! warethy; Lo® Yolly R] Teeth 
— d) Md‘ Far; oOr HAT 

97. a) La! deiecamey aa; rMd4 Sqecartar; Tj? tareaTaeT; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKe! 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Fareearrad;, Ox3 FaTeeUPTTFET — b) Jo? Lo® Md? tTMd* GMd5 GMy T]} 
Tr! mTr* mTr® Wa Volly R] aaife Preraterar foMd> Prarxecer; 1M? Tj! fraaiecar]; Be? Hy 
La! franter — c) T? T wgreer wraeT— d) rMd3 Teale; cMd Bted; ako BaF; sOx! 
sPud Beara 

98. Cited by Laks 14.97 — a) Ox? Heat BHT; Lo! THT FT BRT FT; BKe nNg om first FT, 
Tr! om second; Ox} om F¥I TF; Lot ma THT F — b) Tj! Fe; Laks Weer TET — c) wKe 
gata, La! La? 7 warafe at; oOrt mate [om at]; Be! wate; wKe orifed; tMd4 arate; 
Be? T— d) Wa Tateae: 

99.* Cited by Dev 1.122 — a) Be Ho Lo! oM@ cMd? F; Pu! g AeA — b) NK Tete; 
oMy &¥dt; aK werd’; sOx! sPuS area xt — c) Be! Bo BCa Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Pu'® [Jolly M G] 
Jolly Tate, Ra Ata — d) Pul edt; +Md4 gfe; 7M? area:; La! ga; Tr? Wer Sat; Im [Jolly 
Ku] ararfear ; NNg “alee 

100. a) La! sOx! sPu® [but cor] Pu'® Tj! Wa Jolly M'?-8° R] Rnaalt; sBe? Fe; Tj! 
[Jolly R] Pears ; wKt La? was — b) Be! Be? Ho Lo’ Tj! Te Re afaeT AAEAAT; sOx! 
sPuo afader AAeTT, 1Md4 WaT AAAI, GMy SA Hea AAETAT; MTr! MTr® AARAT; OOr 
WT: aeT — d) Bo “ata ferrarsirrterg Tr? “ofeetsrarenrfarterorr; Tro “atafersreararer- 
ferrets; Jo! “afarferr ; Tj! “afraferea Hy Ox? “aif; Be! “otra BK afaerr ; 
wKt “ae 

101.* Omitted in Put, Cited by Hem 3/3.695; Dev 2.398— a) Tj* Hem qe, Bo a; cMy 
wafaeq:; coMd Dey feat; Md! “Rady — b) Ke? AaAAT eTtefe [cf. 2.102b]; nPul om 
anfaary ...[102a] “Racer; BBe? wKt! La! “str? — c) Ox? TREAT; tMd4 om F; Be warette: 
but cor to TATE: Me Jha Dave Farstt;nKt Pu2 Put [Jolly M' 24°] aartt:; Be! sBe? Bo 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt' Kt? wKt} BK La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® oM@ tTMd? NNg oOr Ox? Ox? 
Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tj! Tj? Te BhP 4.28 Hem Dev [Jolly M* G Ku R Nd] Re Mr Mandlik Jolly KSS 
aardty:; Wa aaa, Ke ear: My eardiarere — d) wKt aeresfs : Lot Lo’ Ox} Hem 





Chapter 2 421 
qat teat saad Agar aaatefe | 
aRrat g aaratat wer eter fear Fay Ugo 
a fafa g a: gat atorea var oParare | 
a yaagherart: adene faraetr: 12031 
rat ate raat Sere faferarfera: | 
attattraeiitita wearer aafea: leovit 
aarreey Uae cea Wa Aa | 


Aaseaeany eA Be HF ieokil 
Aas areata seraer PR aceresz | 


Aalgagd FartearsayeHay NP ogi 
q; tarearaaefiaser faterar frre: ahr: | 


[Jolly M34] wernt; GMd5 NNg MTr® Nd Dev TRpTret 

102, Cited by Laks 1.179; Mddh1.281; padas a-b cited by Vis 1.25— a) BAP 4.29 
saftacsret deat; Madh Year, Ho Fat Heat; cMy TFA; Be! La? Lot Md? Ox? Tj! sOx! 
sPuS Pu’ Tr! Tr? feeredyq — a-b) Vis Madh  Rasentatarchastard [cf. 2.101b]; BK ATAT 
— c) BAP 430 HHT J; Ke ward — d) LaksMadh “Att: wep [cf. 1.1010]; 
TMd4 oT ef; Pu? Rater: 

103. Omitted in Ox3; ma in Lot. Cited by Laks 1.180; Dev 2.366 — a) Be*® Bo Ho Le 
Lo! Pud Pu? Pu’ Pu! Tj? Go Ku Mr ataferafer a:; Lo? nNg Tj! Volly R] BhP 430 Laks a1T- 
fercafer a:; cMy mTr* a @ fercefer a:; La! fercafeer; rMd‘4 feed; Tr? a a: — b) BAP 4.30 
arread wrat JT; La! La? nKt! Lo? rMd? tMd* GMd> GMy oOr Puf Tr! Tr? mTr? mTr® 
gatqured + g aPrar [vKt! La? Lo? tMd* Pu’ + 4]; Bo Lo! Wa wef — c) Te w frahate’; 
tMd4 “agfeeert:; wKe La! “fecart — d) wKt3 “asafort 

In nKtt the folio containing verses 103-115 is missing. 

104. Cited by Apa 70; Dev 2.504;Madh 1.312 — a)BCa oOr sOx! sPu® Waeit [but pCa 
sOx! sPu® cor] — b) Tj! Tet: pBe? sPu° Afra; cMy Aft; BKtS Tr? feta; Apa [vl as in 
ed] “apa: — c) TMd? arth: Tr! arash aati: Madh wendkita, Tr? “aurea; sOx! 
sPus “efter — d) Apa [vl as in ex] “wor; oMy arge:; Ox? zarfafer; Lot warfare: [but co 

105. Cited by Apa 137; Hem 3/3.775; Dev 1.148, 164; Mach 1.314 — a) Md? FeaTHeAT, 
1Md! “aot; BAP 4.32 °C Us; Ho Fa; Lo? Tj! [Jolly R] aft — b) Polly R] aA; Lot 
[but cor] NNg Pu! Pu’ [but cor] Pu? Madh Frcaa; sBe wKt! sOx! [but cor] sPuS 4fI35; Jo? 
3cqay, Be! Pu!? SaTHT; cMd oMy fads: Tr Aferay— c) Bo Wa ATARI; Me [patha] + 
Pret; BhP 4.393 97k saseeTA’; Be! “Ate; Lo? “area; Lo! “Areara; sOx! 
sPu [but cor] Tearft; BKé “aes; 1Md4 “aveardéte — d) tM? 24; Lo? Tj! deaay; BAP 
4.33 FAT at fa; Lo? cMy Wa a &; oOrda T 

106. Cited by Apa 137; Dev2.508; Madh 1.314;padas a-b cited by Har-A 1.12.8 — a) 
pBe? sOx! sPu® Tr? fea; BK Lo? Freres; cMd5 Afaas; cMy “eared; NNg oOr ‘art — b) 
TMd‘* GMy nPu! saa; Apaselaet — d) Ox? “eared; sOx! sPuS Tr? earth ave; La! 
“earrate-par, Tj! prr 


422 Chapter 2 


owen frer avery gat afer ad AT Ug oll 
aftert Feratrerarat yeery | 

aT AAadaeHaly Farrar FET: godt 
araryst: Bagaray anftae: BRT: | 

ST: Wnlska: AY: CAs aa ata: Pol 


aT: BEATS FAT AMI Tea: 
arate fe Aart asagte APT Ue ott 
sreroy TT: We warrior geste | 
career: Sf fase arrester lie 2 el 
gata ar a erat yaar aft afeer | 
an frat a ager ar steratayr le eal 
feta at err ader gerarfear | 

sraaty fe atrerat a caarferiter aay Ue 2 3 


107. a) BhP 4.34 ewer aecaefreftr; GMy TAT — b) Be! La? Lo? tMd4 My Tr! mTr* 
MTr° BhP4.34 frac? fes:; commentators support Jfr: — c) Kt? La? ated; Ho TMd? 
°atu:, BhP 4.35 (SAT; Tr! °@:, GMy “AAT — d) oMe oat AST eae; BAP 435 TAT Aer, 
TM? [Jolly Nd] Tar Fey; Be? Pu? Ay: 

108. Omitted in sKt5. Cited by 4pa76; Madh 1.455 — a) BhP 4.36 afrepgrt dem: 
My ares; Pu? “wat are”; Apa [vl as in ed] aaa: — b) Pu!? “gra; Pus Pu? Pu? 

“Brat: Md} qRifée: — c) BBe? Tr? HaAT ; Md4 aeaad ; Dev TAA Bar 

109. Cited by Vif 1.28;Apa 57; Dev 1.140 — a) Pw? Tj! “C7; akt “oF, BhP 4.36 
*gagpyar at” — b) 1Md3 “gatadit, Tj! after; Pu? enfiasr — c) Lo’ ame; Lo? Bcbt; BhP 437 
arenisag: — c-d) GMd! 1Md3 tMd4 cGMd5 GMy Tr! mTr‘ mTr°Vis Apa areHtseaiset et: ane- 
wearer gar ata: [Apa arta: =:] — d) Be! Hy wKt! Lo! Lo? Ox} Tj! BAP 4.37 
Serer, Kt? BK Stearear; +Md3 sOx! sPuS “eareay, Ox3 Bar; nNg Gay gar 

110, Cited by Laks 1.242 — a) Lo! 415: — b) Bo Pud Pu’ Laks aaa — c) Lo! cMd> 
Tro 4— d) Lal Teantrarat [but mc]; Tr! Fst; BK TAT ; Be? Ho wKt? Lo! Lo? Md? 
1+Md4 GMd GMy nNg sOx! sPuS MTr4 MTr® Wa Yolly Nd] “agrEarat 

1, a) Be} La! Lo? GM@ cMy Tj! Tr! mTr4 mT Wad 3: —c) pBe? wKt! GMa rae, 
Be! tMd‘4 GMy Sc; sOx! otf [bur cor] — d) Ho La! La? Lo} Lo* Lo? Tj! Lolly R] arfer- 
treste; TMd! Tr! BhP 4.39 aT farester, pCa aT Praeesfer 

112. Cited by Apa 57; Har-A 1.13.10; Dev 1.140— a) Pu? Wa SAtat; BBe? BCa [but cor] 
Pu! Tr ger, GMy fe — b) sOx! sPuS Tr? BAP 4.39 INT; Apa AY; GMy aht; Md? afeat; 
Lo? afguT — c) Be! Pu> Pu’ Pu’ BhP4.40 Har-Aa 7% fet THI; NNg TSI; Wa STHST; 
1Md} Sa; NNg oOr Tj! Tr? mTr* Polly M' 2-8 R] Dev aba; Apa ate — d) nNg TE; 
Dev [vl] SH; Apa We [vl as in ed]; mTr4 Sha; La! GMd> GMy NNg nPul Pud Pu? Pu? Tr! 
“farata®: Jo? Lo! “Fratat; Bo “Prataz; Lo? “Rratat; tMa3 “Arata 

13. Hy transposes 113 and 114. Cited by Laks1.242 — a) Lot sOx! sPut faarata; Ox3 


Chapter 2 423 


fran ararmacae arafereestet tat ATT | 
ATTHTT AT AT sreTaT eat Aaa Ue evil 
aad 7 gra faa raat sararheory | 

cet at gta farsrer farrarearrarfes Ue 24 
TA AAA ATMA ATA ATT 

a Teese Aas aheTaAT NL Vg 
clea afea aft aureatferaaa ar | 
sed vat art a qdahraraaq tle 29 
aettarranst ae far: qaferc: | 
araterakaraarshr aatatt aafermat le ec 


faaae, Ho feata fe a4; Trl ad arf; Md} ae aTeI— b) wKt! Lo? Lo’ nPu! Tr! edaq; 
Tr? Faer, rMd3 WeeT; rMd4 AeTeT; Pud Pu? Pu? Fdet — c) Bos; La! TMd3 GMd? @; Tr? 
array, La? ererat — d) tMd3 Bate’; Ho La? Tj? “Pret; BAP 4.41 “HIF; Tj! “FAR; sOx! 
sPuo at 

114.* Verses 114 and 115 transposed in oMd?. Cited by Laks 1.242 — a) La2ae@rr ; cMy 
Wer; Jo? La! Lo? GMd! tMd?3 tMd4 GMd5 oMy sOx! [but cor] Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu’? 
Pu? Pu!l® Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr*mTr° Lolly M'?3 G R Nd] BAP 4.41 “ufreane — b) Be! Bo Ho 
Jo! wKt} BK La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lot NNg sOx! Ox? Ox3 nPu! sPu® Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr mTr4 
MTr® Wa [Jolly Ku R] BAP 4.41 KSS 3afeed; sBe? Hy Kt? La! oM@ oOr Aafered; wKt! 
FaraerfSr, Bo “fereter wr; aKtS “Re | wT, GMy BAT fom AT] — c) BAP 4.41 HRT AT 
Wererar; Be! sKt> Lo! rMd3 GM@® Tr? Laks AT AT; nPu! At eer; Pu> Pu? Pu’ arcu; Be? 
Ox? area — d) wKt! GMy atedat; Md4 Bee; Bo “ATT; Be! GMy “FaaT:; cMd! “aa: 
Lot “aaa; GMdS “acer 

115.* Cited by Laks 1.242 — a) Tr! {a;1Md? faer:; wCa fret; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
wKt! La! La? Lo! oMd? GM@ NNg nPu! Pu? sPuo Pu? [cor to] Pu? Pul® Tj! Tr mTr mTr°Ra 
Nd Re Mandlik KSS BhP 4.43 ferent; cMd! ferret Pract — b) Jo! oMd? cMd KSS frad- 
wat ; Bo aft — c) Im ae — d) Lo’ “anfay 

116. Omitted in PuS. Cited by Vis 3.201-2; Madh 1.301— a) GMy SAAT | wKO 
ARIA | tMd? aary~ — b) GMy “etaroragara — c) Tj! wet; 1Md? cMd> Tr! 
“eerpieat — c-d) BAP 4.45% ula wea ate tea vee — d) Be! oferreater 

117, Cited by Apa 54; Devi.97; Madh 1.296, 301; BhP 4.44-5 transposes 117 a-b and 116 
c-d — a) Ox? teat; Md} wrfhar: Ho Lo’ Tr aft — b) Ox carearenfer’. +Ma3 
aareanfer’; BhP 4.44 [vl] aTereae; Be? Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K2 Lo! Lo} Ox? Pud Pu? Pu? Tj! 
Tr? Wa [Jolly G R] BAP 4.44 Mandlik Jolly KSS T— c) sOx! sPu’ aeatter; Apa [vl] areeiter 

Additional verse in Mandlik [¢] KSS: 

saryre afeerretcen stared | 
werd fans datesenPrarearg |! 

118. Omitted in wKt3. Cited by Hem 3/1.444; Dev 4156 — a) Dev 117 ; Lo} tMd4 
oMy sOx! Pub sPu® Pu’ Pu? Tj! [Jolly G R] BhP 447 feaTaRATaT, Hem WATATRATAT; nPu! 
anfastercaraift — b) GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMdS GMy TH mTr? mTr® BAP 447 Tu; La! fawer- 


424 Chapter 2 


TATA ATA ATA T TATA | 


aaa TeyeIATATATSAT U2 LAI 

wea oro geerater wat: eafae arate | 
TIAUAAIPaA FRaTatearaId ileRoll 
atraraations frer qatar: | 

AAT GGT AT: WaT Aa THT UPL 
afrararert fast srrataaRrareay | 

wat aravenetifer et art afta ue 220 
are a ehrehrare A aad | 
arearatsstrter qa fear: wateta T WLM 
Wares ated eer anitsPrares | 

aTat ererarar fe ahaa afaRy: Gra: NERV 


afra:; rMd3 aeregqatera:, La? cMd5 wafer: — c) Be? Md? cMy Hem Dev fracagaat 
aatatt [Be? “aaa:]; La! “Paasetadr aatalt — d) Lot aataft: 

119. a) TMd3 1M? areareaeat’ ; Tr? “afta; sOx! sPuS “afta:; oMd? “aed — b) BBe 
7:; Lo! Tj garxvaq; Ho Md? tMd4 GM@ oOr Tr! mTr* mTr®é waTAta— c) Lo? Ox? 
“wera”. Be! Be? nKt' BK “Sta — d) tMd? GMy Tr! mTr4 mTr® aanaeehy ; Ho 
*aararfrareaet 

120. Cited by Dev 1.97 — a) TMd? HOTT; mTr4 @ewatet — b) sOx sPuo FA; Put 
Tt; nKt UT, Kt? amare; La? Lo! tMd4 GMy [but cor] oOr sOx! sPuS mTr’ mTr® BhP 449 
Dev Mr arnt; Md} anita; Go gloss amreefer aft may support ara — c) Lo} Tj! WFR; 
Tr! pqear’ — d) wk grea afer; Ho afearerfer | rMd4 “earaftoed 

121.* Cited by Dev 1.97 — a) Lo? “aftwer — b) Dev Pret — c) nKtt aerated; Tr! 
aaraded; sBe? pCa Ho wKt! wK BK Lo! Lot Lo’ Pu!? Me Dave Jha tated; Pu Pu? Pu? 
awaeiter; Ox3 tated; Jo? Lo? Tj! Fret ay; Be! Be} Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La! cGMd! oMd? 
1Md? nNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! sPuS Tr? Tr? Dev Re Mandlik KSS Tt TEC; Jolly TH TET 
— d) tMd? @ry:; Jm Jo! Ke oMd? MTr3 Rn [patha] Mandlik KSS agfar; Lot Lo’ Ox} Pul® 
Me Dave Jha ayeart [Pu!? “aT; mTr* Fat; Md} Aaa 

122, Ox? omits pada-d. Cited by Apa52; Dev 1.96; Madh 1.296-— a) tTMd? tMd* GMy 
NNg sOx! sPuo Tr! mTr4 “avaTeey; GMd! “areateae: La! La? “atedere; wKt! GMy aTeqe; BhP 
4.51 aIeIT — b) Jo? BK Lo? Lo? Lo? Lo’ GMd! 1M? GMy nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu sPu® Pu’ 
Pu? Tj! Tr? mTrt mTr° Re BAP 451 Apa [vl] - ated — d) Be! GMd! TMd3 GMdS GMy BhP 
4.51 Apa SATA; NNg ta ATH; MT 1? MTr® Bary 

123. Verse 123 placed after 126 in TMd? and after 128 in GMd5; padas c-d omitted in 
nKt+. Cited by 4pa54; Dev 1.98 — a) OX om 4; Lot ma — b) Bo wKt} La! [but me] Hy 
cMd! 1Md3 GMy stat — c) tMd* arrait; Bo atrarefifa, rMd4 nNg gat — d) rMd4 aaeq- 
aq; Apa [vl] water 

124 Omitted in NKt*; padas c-d omitted in Be*. Cited by Laks 1.185; padas a-b cited by 
Apa 52; Dev 1.96; Madh 1.296— a) Ho wKt! Hered; Apa HRAS — b) Madh eTaTAY- 


Chapter 2 425 


argent arate avait faatsRrares | 
ARATE ATBISAT ATA: Ya: YA: USUI 
at a aeahraret far: meaRraraay | 
atfrarr: @ figar aur qaetia a: N2Rg 
WAT Baler Tes easy | 

ae ot TANT YRHNPAAT 7 ile oI 
varat afeat arar adtaraty at wa¢q | 
wags aaa Taq eV 
wat J ar ett eraaaayt a ath: | 

at qatqadieara eat arte ar eral 
agers figata agua Jar | 


aTeqy — c) Md? Tr! BhP 4.53 ATH; wKt! ant; wKe Laks ATHT; TMd? GMy “ae; tMd3 
*srrét — d) Lo? Tj! #PaTat; oMd! sftareet; Wa vr-zter:; GMy Ox Na ste; Na [patha] Arata; 
Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Wa wfafir:; Lo? Rr: ae 

125.* Padas a-b omitted in Kt+. Cited by Apa 53; Har-A 1.5.17; Dev ce 98; Madh 1.297 — 
a) Hy aveafer — b) La! cMd! +Mdé fas arent’ — c) Lal NNg STIL; NK OT SATAY; 
tMd4 arated, Apa araectarer: — d) Md‘ avez; sOx! [but cor] sPuS @Tt:,; Ho Lo? Md? GMy 
NNg sOx! [but mc fh] xPu! [but cor sh] sPu% [but me sh] Pu!® Tj! mTr? [Jolly M R] Na {pa- 
tha] Nd Jolly TRRRET:; nK¢i aaterege:; Jo! BK aR: =; all other mss. read Yate: oe: 

126. Cited by Dev 1.98;Madh 1.297 — c) Lo °até:; Bo & faura; Pul? fagut — d) Bo 
nPu! Tr! agate 

127. Cited by Dev 1.100; Madh 1.298 ~ a) La? sem; Wa Tes — b) Kt? @y ; Ox? era- 
aaaat ; La? GAAAHAT ; Ox “ARIAT ; GMy ala: — c) oMy der Saat areas Pu? Pu? 
Puo wae — d) wKe qseeaatt 7; Ho Ha ae; BKtS Lo? TMd4 NNg nPu! Tr! BAP 4.58 
Laks J; Be! aT 

In nKt# the folio containing the section “arr until 140¢ is missing. 

128. a) Be? Jo Lo* Lo® sOx! Ox} sPu® Tj! Volly M34 R] BhP 4.597 AAT [but cor in 
sOx! sPu®]; 7Md3 aTaTeay, tMd4 state; Bo dtfPerar; Pu? ATH [but cor] — b) Lo? eArare, 
Ox} adtarate; Lo! ata; Pul® saTaTaft — c) mT rt aracgdet; Md? *aaeept; oMd 
Tr! dt; Md Bar a — o-d) BhP 4.59 AswHAT St carenyatsardtc: Ma} ter af 
ater 

129.* Cited by Dev 1.101; Madh 1.298— a) Be! BBe? Be’ BK Lo* Lo’ Md? GMd GMy 
sOx' Ox? nPu! sPu® Pu!l? Tr! mTr4*mTr® Volly M3] 4; BhP 4.60 4 ws — b) Ld Tj! 
[Jolly Ku R] Dev ° grat; TMd4 “aTerr; Tr? BhP 4.60 &; Ho aia: wKt! atte: — ec) BAP 
4.60 THAT Badia; Tj! “ita; Be! Tj! Dev “ate — d) pCa Lo? BATT; Ox om a; Pub 
@; sBe Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo! Lo’ tMd3 +Md4 sOx! Pu? Put Pud sPuS Pu? Pu? Tj! Tj? MTr? 
Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave & 


426 Chapter 2 


HaTaSA FATT TWeeMA TatTT: UL Zo 
argerant Atgeratt acer Prqera4r | 
apa yeudtad TARA THAT le 3 2il 
wean aanteresty | 
fasrer green atteretateerattira: 2 320 


mad otfrarorectarht eaatfrg tle 2x 
ramt agat a gaat a yfray | 


faaepat feaniere pooner aa: frat NZ Ball 
fad aeyda: at frat wafer watt | 


130. a) BhP 4.61 AAAANGSRANM, Be} Agat eftq’ — b) Pud Pu’ ayer ; Lo* Pu? 
eager — d) Lo! ater; BhP 4.61 FIRTH: 

131. a) Ho fqrrat — b) pBe? argefy — c) rMd* Fase; Tj! Pu’ La! “adit; Be! Lo? 
1Md3 Tr? BhP 4.62 Fatt — d) wKe BKt Pu! Tj! Tr? eae; TMd} AAT; Bo TAAt 

132, Cited by Dev 1.103; Madh1.300 — a) BAP 4. 63 ISN wget wat; Tj! wear: 
TMd? +Md4 MTr® Dev aga ; Bo ‘urer; Hy “aT — b) after this pada BhP 4.63 adds: 
qerasracr fear afer fampeer JT — c) BAP 4.64 FAAS AIST; Be’ fester sae"; Bo 

“wel; nPu! Pud Pu? Pu? “aTEIr:; tMd* “are — d) Kt? Md? GMd Tj! “gaer’. Between the 
first and the second half-verse TMd? adds 3.210¢-d. 

133. Cited by Vis 1.34;Dev 1.90; Madh 1.304; an expanded version in two verses is 
given in BhP 4.64~6 — a) GMy °Rrear ATg@zT — b) BKt> om F; La! Tr? J; Bo arats — c) 
Td} figa’; Dev “agfernfe” — d) BK Lo? Lo? nNg Ox? [Jolly R] Dev TaTRit 

134. Omitted in Bo. Cited by Apa 53; Dev 1.101; Mddh 1.299 a) TMd4 wer TRL T; 
Lal Md} Tr? Wer; Tr! “aher; Pu “weat— b) wKt! wK oMd’ GMy “Jt — c) Hy La? Lo! 
sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu’ Tj! T? Tr? BhP 4.67 saya — d) pBe? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt® La? 
Lo? oMd? oOr Ox? Pu’ Tj? mTr? [Jolly Ku R]Me Rn Mr BhP 4.67 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave “arat ert; Ho nNg “arora 

135. Cited by Dev 1.101 — a) tMd‘4 aT@t; GMy ate; mTr* star; Hy “at, tMd4 
“ateq; GMy ‘ater; Be! sBe Ho Hy Jm Jo! Ké La! Lo! Lot Lo® NNg sOx! Ox} nPu! Pu? Put 
Pud sPu® Pu? Pu? Pu!® Tj? Te Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave { — b) BAP 4.68 Fat; 
1Md‘ om aaat a; Hy ‘at; cMy a7; Be! sBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? La! Lo! Lot Lo® 
NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pub sPus Pu’ Pu? Pu!?® qj Tr mTr? Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave &; oMy8ft: — c) La! cor to “G4; PuS Pu? Wa Yat; Tj! GA; Bo “gat g arn; 
oMy “Jaeq fastit; cMd! 1Md4 “gat g fast — d) 1Md? tMd4 cMy ated stam: far; Be} 
arerrecatay: far; La? serored; BKtS La! [but cor] sOx! sPu’ faar aat:; mTr4 mT ro carer 


Chapter 2 427 


Tare AeA TT AATATT Ue 3g ll 
wart Bry ate ware qorater a | 

at |]: Sa AAate: TEST agrtt we: Ue Zell 
ata ager tree ait; era: | 
SAH AT Ua TT sat aver TT ULC 
aat F AAAATAT Ate ErTaHaTATAy | 
UAHA EAEt TTATMIT 23S Il 
sate ¢ a: rer aaqnearere feo: | 

aed MEST T aaa Waray Ue voll 

THA T AEN AaTyTAT at A: | 


136. Cited by Apa 159; Dev 1.106; pada-a cited by Vis 1.115 — a) TMd4 fararqaa:; Ke 
oMy Tr! ayaa:; Jo! eat— b) Hy Faq — c) Jha Dave HEMT ; Tr? athe — d) tMdé 
FIgUE: 

137. Cited by Apa 159; Laks 1.203-4; Dev 1.106; pada-a cited by Vi¥ 1.115; pada-d by 
Har-A 1.133 — a) K? 49; BAP 4.71 TT — c) Jo? Lo? sOx! [but cor] sPu’ [but cor] Tj! Tr? 
[Jolly RJ UX Bf: VTST ATS:; BhP 4.71 TET; BK ATA; Ox? Apa arsfF — d) Laks AATET 
Zat; Bo Fst; La? eerthra:; Be! eerAhra:; Me appears to read earet fc: 

Additional verse in La! GMd@ GMy Tr'!: 

Imateaawar oT Ged way | 

aaa g atteq goat wafer Frown: II 
a) Lal q@adeft Heart — b) Lal afeedet — c) Lal ade g ater; cMy ade FR; 
oMd5 attr — d) La! wafer ac: 

138. Cited by Dev 1.107 — a) Be @arreret — b) sOx! sPu® Tr? afer AFror:; La! 
after; tMd3 arfer:; Pu!? om ferar:; Be BBe? Ho La! Lo? Lo4 My sOx! Ox? Ox? sPuo Tj! 
oTr® feaa: — c) sOx! sPuo Sraaeer Te Aet:; GMd! MTr4 BAP 4.72 J Ward; Lal T Ue, 
MI ro Taey; Pu Pu? tat Tat — d) Lo* Lo® Tat; GMd GMy Tr! mTr# MTr® 

139. Omitted in Pw. Cited by Dev1.107 — a) BhP 4.73 TAT AAVTA ATA; Lo! oOr sOx! 
sPuS [me sh to] Tat; Be F— b) BK’ Wa ATM; BhP 4.73 Wat — c) BhP 4.73 ave TAT 
ws; sOx! sPue Uae Tr! Dev “SARs; aBe Be? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? oOr Pu’ Tj? mTr? 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ®&4t2a — d) oOr [but cor] Pu’ [but cor] Pud FTaFHa 

Additional verse in La!: 

aMAPraA Faraaa[H2] ge: [sic] | 
FaFPSITAaY aware seferse: || 

140. Cited by Kum 1.3.13; Vis 1.33; Apa 65; Dev 1.90, 5.38; Madh 1.137, 304 — a) La? 
Lo? Apa site ye: Bret, cMy g Pret fe — ab) BhP 4.74 wea rear pedrosest 
fest: — b) rMd3 “earaai fest:; La? “aera: — c) Bo Lal Hy Md} Hae; TMd! Pul? aad; 
Kum a1# — c-d) BhP 4.74 gives an expanded verse: EST AHeT TAC aeaeaas | Taras 
Heratal waafer aftr: — d) Ox? pres 





428 Chapter 2 


ase TAIT: T TAT ULI 
faoardifa eatfir a: wtf aarfafer | 
wrraata asst a far Teed evil 
TPUTIT WHI rasareary | 

a: wee qat wer aT aerteahtaterat Mew sil 
a aranreatert gar agar 

a@ ara & frat aaed A Zeal Hares levi 
TIA Ararat ad fear | 

aaa g fagatar tamara tev 
sursHqaarnitardae: frar | 

wares f& faser ter de aw aaa Nev 
ararearat frat at agereaat ferr: | 


141. Cited by Vis 1.34;Apa 65; Dev 1.91; Madh1.304 — a) tMd3 UH; GMy FT — b) 
wKt} TaTsTafe; Be! Ho Jo? Lot Md} sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! [Jolly M3 R] DevMadh targtere 
at; Me and Apa comment 3ftgr-areat oreo supporting the edition — d)cMd! gerf & 
SRA SA; NNg om F 

142. Omitted in Bo. Cited by Vis 1.34, 3.222; Vij 3.259; Dev 1.88; Madh 1.302, 2.259 — 
a) BhP 4.76 Bratfer— b) BhP 4.76 4: Helfer Tray; Ox? “frst — c) BAP 4.76 weaaate 
arr; Ho cMd durafe; Ho art; wKkt! UT, Lo! act; Md} NNg Ox? URI; Me [patha] 
aay 

143. Omitted in Tj2. Cited by Vis1.34; 4pa66, 919; Dev 5.66 — a) Lo! Dev usaf — 
b) Pul? “aarart ; Ket rete; nKet wre — c) pBe? ae; Vis TAT Gat 

144. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks1.224; Dev 1.93 — a) Ho Lo? wag ; Py!? wary 
Wa argurer’; 1Md3 Tr’ [Jolly M34] atquiter ; Me [patha] Na [citing sruti] aTgorey’ ; cM 
Tr! mTrosrgurer ; cMd! srrqurfer azar; cMy anfeafer cea; nNg “fees; Laks fertar — b) 
Lo! erraty SH; La! ara; GMy STAT; Md? SIT; Pud Pu’ Pu? ea; Bo TSM; Laks 
aot — c) TMd* aT ATaT; BKtS AAaT; TMd3 @ T ATaT fAar — d) Lo! xed; mTr* I; Ox? 
ged; oMd BAP 4.78 BATT 

145.* Damaged unreadable in mTr®, Cited by Dev 1.92; Mddh 1.304; padas a-b cited by 
Vij 3.259; padas c-d by Vis 1.34;Dev 3.688 — a) La* BAP 4.79 STRATA Zait ; pBe? Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt? La? Lo? Lo* Lo’ NNg Ox Pu? Pu? Pu? Pul® Tj! Tj? Wa Dev Madh Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave STRATA; wKt! SaeATAt FT; Bo sOx! sPu’ Tj! Wa “aTaT — b) Ho 
oMd! 1Md4 mT rt ararare are — c) La! [but me sh to FSH FJ] BAP 4.79 Bea gata; Pub 
Pu’ Pu? 7; Kt far Arar; Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} oMd? NNg Pu2 Pu’ mTr® Wa Dev 1.92 Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave fiqetrat 

146. Cited by Apa 67; Dev 1.93;Mddh 1.305; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.259;Jmyv 114.3 — 
a) Pu Pu’ Pu? Scares: ;rMd4 Searaa; La! “serATaT ; Lo? “aererait’; GMd! GMy nPu! Tr! 
[Jolly N Nd] seit’: mTr4 aertar ; mT ro wera’. nKet “aerareeret” — c) Lo! [but 
me] Ox? TeIPHT; Ho Lo® Tj! T— d) Bo We fF 


Chapter 2 429 


aye caer at frag aataraPhrarre Ue vl 
arareaer ar atte faferageare: | 
seaaraafa arfasar at AST ARTA NX 
eT aT Ag ar BET YoeataTHetker a: | 
atte ye frargeraearar aar USS 
Weer We: wat eaepfer ot aftrar | 
aTersfr fast aaer far wate ata: evo 
oearrarare ray Rrgetscea: ze: 

Garer gle starr araat afeey ATT UL Il 
aq arte Taran: 


Taare a: Rreyemaryq wee 
wat wafa & ate: frat wafer Aer: | 


amt fe arotieng: fraeta aT ATT U4 RI 


147. a) Lo’ 44; nKt! Ft — b) Lot TYeTAaAT, rMd? 1d? oMy Tj! “eae; Lo! “eardt- 
fr: — c) wKt! Tj! water, tMd! @yc; Tr? Fer; Hy t— d) Lo! aera, cMy Ox} om 
ag; nPul aay; Lo? arora; cMd! “araaae; sOx! sPus “arated: [Jolly R] “aTarer- 
ara 
148. Cited by Laks 1.209-10 -— a) BKt> Lo? tMd* GMd > Pu!® Tj! Tr BAP 4.82 Laks 
araReeTeT; sOx! sPu® [but cor] at sift; Lo! Pul® BAP 4. 82 at smftr— c) La! Lo® sOx! sPu® 
arfasat; Tro afer: — d) Lal 4ear aT arse 
149. Cited by Apa 65, Hem 3/1.353; Dev 1.89, 5.43; Madh 1.303, 2. 259; padas a-c cited 
by Vij 3.259 — a) Vij ACT; Tj! et aT; Lot AE Tet — b) Ke! Fr TST — c) wKt! fara 
— d) Lo’ “arafesaar; Jo? wKt! La! NNg BhP 491[vl] Hem at; Lo! 3ar; Tr? aay; Pu! war 
150. Padas a-b omitted in GMy Pu!® — a) Jo! sae; BBe wKt} La? sTemretT — b) GMdP 
MTr mTr® BHAT; Lo? Tr? om TF; sBe? aBrar, Be} afsrat; BK O aTfaray; NK ara; mTr 
zareit? — c) Lo’ ma fast; Ox3 gat fewer; Lo} gaearet — c-d) Tj} aTatf® wifegeenferar 
safer — d) TMd3 GMd@ GMy Tr! mTr4 Tr Hater AaTE: 
151. Cited by Dev 1.93 — a-b) Bo La* Md} nNg Jolly fateger —¢) MTro Fae 
gélard; Be! La! gPrept; Jo! Faresr; TMd3 alara; Pu’ wrara — d)sOx! sPuo art aaa 
[but both cor] 
152. Cited by Dev 1.93 — a) Bo Jerit; Pud Pu? Pu? Gest; Lo? “Geseat — b) Tj! 
eamita ; Lo? aaa ; BK NNg “Arad; Md? HRTAT — c) Jo? Lo? Tj! faveaar ; NK 
mTr? mTr6 @apaar, Pul? 2aredar ; wP ul “aaa Be! » area; Pu? Pu? Pu? 

“arereay —d) Tr gait; BAP 4.94 geart Bry [vl “gt aer Ry’; “gate F 
RI’); Ox “gttae: BIg’; Lo? Tj! FT; Be? &: 

153. Laks 1.210; Dev 1.93 — a) Bo Sai; MTr3 asi — b) wKt! Tr? Fare: cGMd! ate: — 
c) cMd! a aTopfieig:; nNg @; Dev ate Semg:; Laks gaftery: — d) Laks frat 
Hairy; nPul rat ca Aer; La? Lo? Tj? Faas; Ox? AAata; cMy aa; Be} Bo 








430 Chapter 2 


wT erat Ofer raat a argh: | 
murat at asa: A AT AETT UL4vII 
ort araat Stet ara g atta: | 
STAT ATTA: YETUAT HAT: WEG 
a aa eafadt wafer aarer afer Rr: | 

at & garaeftared tar: erfae fag: ugg 
aay wrens sett war aaa AT: | 

aay Rosaceae arr Rarer eel 
ma wen: Sty aan wei ares | 
WaT Mash Tet AUT ssaaswe: ULC 


BCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo oMd 2 NNg Ox? OX Pu? Pu Tr! Tr? BAP 4.95 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave J, Md J; sBe? wKt! oOr f; BBe? Lot NNg FAq: 

154. Padas c-d omitted in Jo. Cited by Dev 1.93 — b) Be! Be® Bo Ho La? Lo! Lo? Md? 
tMd* GMd GMy sOx! Ox? sPué Tr! mTr* mTr® Dev faat a ara: BhP Prater; Ox} feet 
ay —c) Wa feet GF; Md? “feet Het — d) wK om at, Bo Fars:; wKt Aer 

155. a) MI? SAT; MTr* Sttez:; La! Lo} Tr? Sate; Hy La? oOr Tj! mTr° SAS; Be! Bo 
Kt? SS; Wa WaT, Ho Md? Pud Pu? Pu? [Jolly G Nd] Steet — b) wk} afar; Ca Jo? BKé 
oMé? Tj! Volly RJT; nNg T _ Fata: — c) Be? GMM; La! wet: AWes:; GMy MRI: AS 
— d) TMd3 GMd® GMy [Jolly Nd] {srr Aa; La! Md! Tr! garrbta; Ho Lot nNg Ox? Pu’ 
Pu’ Pu? Pu!? [Jolly MG] Jolly Fst Aa; NKE sOx! sPue TAT: 

BhP 4.98-9 gives two verses in place of 155: Teetfaataat yerrt w fear ga | eS 
aera uss aes TY Ft ger ll array Sa Gea ST | afloat war FF 

156.* Omitted in Pu? — a) Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? nBKt Lo? Lo* Lo? oMd? NNg oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu} Put Pud Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr? mTr? Wa [Jolly M G R Ku] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave T&T 
water; Be! sOx! sPuo eafaet sat; oOr Aa; GMd! Ox? yarelaTer — b) TMd4 Sars; nKet? fare 
— c) Md? Ox? af ar; Ho gat caf -7Md4 “oRereT — d) NK “wed feet; La? fery: 

157. a) Ox? THAT; Bo “at — b) Ox? TAA; wKt! wresaqay — c) pCa La! TMd3 oOr 
aracparefiart ; wKt! Lo! ararrecrefiart; Be? at 2 fast; Bo cMd> cMy Far Fst; Lo’ 
Ox? Tr! mTré mTroaer fast — d) GMy “arreqaed; pCa La! Lo! [but cor] tMd? oOr Ox? Pud 
Pu? Pu® Pu? Wa [Jolly G M34] Jolly BDh1.1.10,VaDh 3.11, MBh 12.37.39 ATTATeST:; GMd! 
TMd4 GMy Pu!? [Jolly M!-2-8] araentfeor: 

Additional verse in wKt!: 

ores Tar YT war separ Fste: | 
Tera aeased ATT: I 

158. In MTr®158c to 159b damaged and unreadable. Cited by Dev 1.129; Madh 1.307 — 
a) BhP 4.102 Ta AITHST MATZ; Ho Tat; Be Jo? Pu> Pu’ Pu? Pu! Wa wey, Kt? “aR: ay 
— b) wKt! #hter, NNg UHaT:; Ho Ox? aTHaT; wKt! sOx! sPuo oper; nKt! Tr? Fremer — c) 
La! zara aTHS; Oxd aratHS; Tr! Tat — d) Tr? Fa; cMy fastest; ake fastwstsa:; mT? 
“zat; cMd! tMd4 “SS 


Chapter 2 431 


ateta yarat ert sesqTaey | 
aTeae AMT eT Tata aafreasayr e243 
wear aeaedt Ys Ta aT ada | 

at adam aaqredtard Hey ie goll 
aega: Sraratshr a aegteatelt: 
VaTaaAe AAT AeA aATAATTAT 2S 2 
earn Tat frergtasa frase | 
ATHAANT UT AAATAT AAAT NER 

Ga Tara: Wa Fs A wargqead | 

ga ala atesrrarear frre es sl 
AT PAA TERATAT fast: WA: | 

Tet aah wane aq: lee vil 
aatfagrafaecicar faRraee: | 

aq: FeatsRardeaq: AEE TATA LE 


159. a) La! aféda — b) La? Farq’; rMd? “aye — c) TMd3 AAT; GMd! rTMdé mT16 
aMy Feet Ae, Wa *eIT — d) La? Md? tTMd4 GMy NNg Ox? Tr! BAP 4.124 wfifeea4r; Be} 
Bo Pu’ asiitarar; cMd! “Rresar; Nd gloss afcrar supports $877; all other commentators 
support SescT 

160, a) Ho FaTeRAT Fs; Be! Bo Jo? La? Lo! Lo? cMd! 1Md? GMy Ox? nPu! Pué Tr! 
agate — b) BAP 4.125 TAA TF AURA; Jo? Tj! wer ZA; wKe! star — c) oOra ta 
adam; Lo! da;cMy waar — d) rMd? aarrdfrrd; Lot Ox) ders TTs: BBe? wKt} FeT- 
arent 

161. b) BBe? TR; Ho HA} — c) Be! aaredfe ; BKO aaane; Tr wane; nPul 
aqareAe ; Jo? Lo? Md} tMd4 GMd oMy Tj! Tr! mTrt mTrS war AfesTa.cMy “fesrdt sre; 
oMd! “feat ater; BhP 4.126 art — d) BAP 4.126 Arar AT a at ayaa [vistar 7 at 
araqehad]; Ke? are; Lo! ATSraaT; cGMy aTateaT; NK ATS; tM? ager 

162, a) GMd! aaa; Ox? AAMT: BhP 4.129 HEM; GMd! TAT; Ox? ata; Lot NNg 
Ox} Pul? faggte — b) wKt fae; oOr faafefer — c) Bo BK cMd! oMé@ Tr! saga; 
Lo? Lo arate’; Lo? aresigat’ — d) Md? “Sarraer a adr; Tr! Badan; Ho BAP 4.129 
“CATTET, wKt! ade:; dé ata: 

163. GMy places 163 after 160b — a) GMd> Y@; sOx! WaAct:; sPuo Baa: [corrected 
with two dots over last 7 which sOx! read as 7]; Lo? FaTHYc:; wKt? Lo® Ae — b) Lo? Lo* LoF 
WG; wKe “ged; Pu? “gerd; BK Md? “Tad — d) NNg TART 

164. a) BAP 4.131 a4 fafear Us — b) Te? aepares; Md? GEparay, TMd4 eaqparcar 
— c) Ox} FT; oOryS; Ma? TT; BKE FAIA’; Lo? Tj! Taafaqare; rMd? “Prag — d) wKt! 
wee; cMd mTr4 Tr aarher; Tr! “afr; rMd4 “afes; BAP 4.191 “APTS; TMd? sOx! sPuo 
mat 

165. Pada-d omitted in Ox>. Cited by Apa 76; Dev 1.132; padas c-d cited by S amon TU 








432 Chapter 2 


aaae wars areteafegsiret: | 
aanarat fe farmer aq: aefeaterer eee 
at fa & ASNT: WaT aera aT: | 

a: oreaty factsefte carer akedtsraeyz le gol 
arsaeter feat terest Her TT | 

a tara aang reat aaa: NLS 
aguskrredt fader asa | 

adr aadtarat farer aferareary U2 SS 
wat aE Fa Aissftarrahraey | 
aarer Atat arfast frat carat gerd Wevoll 
aqvarararart frat after | 

qT Oagera at fefrer aera le 2! 


1.12 — a) Lot adif” — b) Be? *aadeq fafaeferd:. sOx! sPuS BAP 4.132 fafaenfed: — c) 
oMds @eenfirr nKt rater” 

166. Cited by Dev 1.128; Madh 1.307 — a)BCa oMd? BhP 4.133 AaAaraafaed; Madh 
wnaaq; La? saa; Ho Lo! Tj! “sara; Tr! “rer — b) Lo? Tj! areTeraar fET:; Lolly 
R] avercerafe fEst:; BKt® Lo! sOx! sPuS Tr! BhP 4.133 THASPS ; wKO TITAS NK tH 
Tj! arercer 8°; Madh areca fe°; tMd? aretet fE° — c) TMd4 Dev Fanaa 

167. Pu!® places 169 before 167 Cited by Vis 1.48; Apa 69; Har-A 1.12.2; Dev 1.128 — 
a) TMd4 & 8& a; GMy 2a; sOx! sPuo Tr! Apa @ }—c) La! a: gery fe arelte; cMy ar 
aerare fear; Te watt; ake waht; wKH went; BAP 4.134 GAT; Wa wet fesit— d) ake 
carearaedrae; wk) afedteare 

Additional verse in GMa: 

gad ye frases se: | 
aert ta Brena serearat f ysaer |! 

168. Cited by Dev 1.129; Madh 1.140— a) Lo? TMd? GM@ Tr! mTr° Dev Madh eRr7; 
Tj! deters; Pu’ Pu? Pu? Saners; cMy fags; ake Frere 

169. Cited by Laks 1.101 — a) Tr! TAM TAA; GMy J SAA; BhP 4.137 FT TAT — b) 
BhP fecfRiy, Jo wKt? Lo! cMd! tMd? tMd? GMy sOx! BhP “art, oMd Laks “ARIAT; Be! 
“art — c) BKtS om Tate; tMd4 GMy TAA; BhP 4.137 TATA; TM? Ox} “Greer, 1M} “steer 
— d) BBe? sOx! sPus xferatfeet [sPuS cor to Fafe]; La! GMd! tMd? TMd4 GMdS GMy mT 
mTro feferaifed; oOr faferafec:; Tr! fafesrerd; nK¢ BAP faferntfed; BAP [vl] faferatea:; 
Be? fafereferct; Ho Jo? Te faferteatd; Bo aferaraant 

170. Cited by Dev 1.69; Har-A 1.1.16; padas c-d cited byVis 3.222 — a) Lo’ Tj! Tr’ a7; 
TMd4 Fee, TMd? FEIT — b) Hy ABST; oM A? “Fafeer: — c) Har-A 33a; wKt! 
Aa; BBe? TaN; TMs TA ATT F — d) Tj! TAT 

In La! folios containing 2.170¢ to 2.195¢ are missing. 

171. Padas a-b cited by Dev 1.69; padas c-d by Dev 1.66; Mddh 1.790 — a) Tr? TEWHT- 
oar’; Pud Pu? Pu? “wararart; BhP 4.139 serrararf — b) BhP 4.139 frat Hqeadta; wCa 


Chapter 2 433 


TIRE Fa ataaratad | 

yan fe areata Bass A AAT UWI 
PUTTTAMET TATITARETT | 

HA WEN ae HAT aergaT Lz 
are fated at aga at a Aer | 
al qet Bed aad adeeT Facahy igri 
aaa” Feary garant att aaq | 
Saas ATTA: ULM 
frer erreat ght: gate zafihaqertorz | 
tqanada Aa araraaag T ULEtl 
aaray ae a wearer wary fer: 
gait aa aatfor sftrat tar aay ile vv 


NNg “aed — c) Kt? +Md‘ wNg sOx! sPuS [Jolly NdJ@er Ava; cGMd! tMd3 cMd5 GMy 
oOr Tr? BhP 4.140 wer Frat; Be! Tr! mTr* mTr°Re afefeaerd — d) Pul? afar; nPu! 
“art 

172. Padas a-b cited by Dev 1.66; Mddh 1.790 — a) Hyaifrearereag; wKt! nKtt Lo! 
oMy Ng [but cor fh] @eetaq; 1Md3 “ereaaer — b) Be! wat ; sOx! sPus “Prraared; Tr? 

*Prduated — c) ak yeer Parearaa; BAP 4141 ¢ FH aTaq— d) Lo! 1Md} Wa BAP 4.141 

aragey; nPu! Pud Pu? Pu? (Jolly G]gsad; Wa Fert 

173. c) Kt aT; Be! Tart; Lo? TEer— d) Pu’ Pu? Pu? [Jolly G] ate far’; sOx! 
sPu® “gad 

174. Cited by Apa 58; Laks 1.236 — a-d) BAP 4.142 Ueqat UY Aer aT at aeT 
Faor | get at at qveeng cer gacafy || — a) Md? geen faferaat; cMd! aecgfatec; 
Bo nKt' Lo} Lot Lo’ GMy Ox? Tj! Tr! eH; Be Tr a — b) Te Aga; mTr® eT; BK ATOT 
— c) Laks tat — d) Ho Lot Ox} Volly M] Jolly THAT; NNg ded 7a; Be! [me to] sOx! 
sPuS TaeAS; Pud Pu? Pu? VVolly GATS; Lo! TY aeaga 

175. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 62; Dev1.122 — a) oOrafad ; Ca Tr? “eaiar; BKtS 
“aurea aay — b) Wa qet— d) cMy career 

176. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa62; Dev 1.117; padas a-b cited by Vis 1.22 — a) Apa 
[wl] ea:; Te afr — b) Pus “artart — c) Be? “erdaae; Dev “eit watt — d) aBe 
aftreareraa; Ho afteraaaa; nKé affaretsaa, Ox) aetarsg, Devaar ae 

177. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks1.229; Dev 1.125, Mddh 1.456; padas a-b cited by 
Apa 62— a) TMd3 GM@ Tr! mTr4 MTrSdpa BTA; Hy Lo! astaarW; Be? I [but cor 
Jh| — b) BhP argo TTT: sOx! sPuo TeTATET; Be! BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt 
Lo* Ox? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 17 ATET, Be? Lot Lo’ GMd! oM@ tMd? cMd@ tTMd4 cM 
Ox} nPul Tr! MTr# mTr° [Jolly M34 Nd] Dev Apa 7IATERRA [GMd “eai]; Pu? Volly 
M® R] @; cMy fet — c) mT rt Gent F wath; Tj! gear; Lo! qarty; Be BAP 4.146 
Mandlik Jat; cMd sentht; rMd3 @enihT; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Pu? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
ay aatfr — d) +Md3 & fafeerr 


434 Chapter 2 


MAFASTT ASST AT AMT 

ST BT T GAT a ade sitararstT ULI 
qa wT aaa Taare away | 

HOT T MATTSAATATAT TET 7 UNLV 
we: Talat waa a ta: eH Fafa | 
wae weary tat fea aeAers: llecoll 
eam rar ger fart: garreraa: 
mrearadfaean Rr: gaat wag ec el 
SIE GAA TaPeTst ETT | 
Mera Wat WECM ULM 
STAT AeA THAT I 

ATM ASTAST YSMT: TAASIST ULC AM 


178. Cited by Apa 62; Dev 1.125; Madh 1.456 — a) BKe "aT — b) Pu’ “qty — 
c) wKt BKt> TMd3 GMd Ox? Tj! ert; wKkt! ered Slr; M3 StS — c-d) BAP 4.147 FHT 
art grey ant at a avery — d) Lo! wferaret; Be! Lo? Apa [vl] afer; NKt oOr Apa 
“anfed; BCa Lot Lo’ Ox} [Jolly M34] aTe¥ 

Folios containing verses 178c to 194 missing in Pu? 

179. Padas a-b and c-d transposed in GMd5. Cited by Apa 62; Dev 1.125; Mddh 1.456 — 
a) Lo! wadarg oft” — a-b) BAP 448404 UT aa Gs sae TAIT; then adds oftare 
aife fait geet. oat; wktS oMd? sOx! sPu’ oRarg wT State TAT — b) Be! La? Tare; 
Tj! cara; Jo! wang — c) MTr?§ MT rettorr TeTTATSRAT - La? Tr? om 7; Bo weg 
Me Jha Dave VaTSeATgy ; Tr? Ress BT; wKe Pul? “wyr” — d) BAP 4.149 
“ara; Apa [vi] ART A; Jo? WIT; wKe T 

180. Padas a-b omitted in Be! and padas c-d in Lot. Cited by Apa 62;Dev 1.127; padas 
a-b cited by Madh 1.456 — a) sOx! sPu® [cor to] 34t— b) Hy om HAA... [180] Brahe 
[haplo]; cGMd! om Fahad — c) cMy Srahreper fretdt; mT erardf; sBe? wKt® cMd! 1d? 
sOx! sPu mTr* mTr°Dev Geraqaea’, wKt! epeqagdl — d) cMd! 1Md4 waka feafet ad; Be? 
NKt# Tr? BAP 4.150 Apa FART JF; TMd? GMA GMy oOr MTr4 MTr® AAA AT 

181. Cited by Vij 3.280;Apa 1141; Dev 1.127; Madh 2.394 — a) BhP 4151 Ga: ASMal- 
are, tMd3 caf, Md‘ feat — b) MTP? mTr4 MTr® Dev qr —c) Tj! erearay, ; Tr! Area 
wT ; BBe BhP 4.151 Madh Treat g; Dev “Prcarfe; Be! Fr— d) Lo? Tr! [Jolly R] FAAaTA; 
Td! Tj! Faatacee; Pul? grifers; Lolly M'2*9] gasfe saa; sOx sPuo TST 

182, Padas c-d omitted in Be!. Cited by Apa 59 — a) Jo! sea qu Be} “BET: cMy 
TMd? Md? Tr! Tr Tr [Jolly Nd] BA — b) BBe? wKt’ eae’; Lot Lo’ GMd Ox? Tr! 
[Jolly M34] “=gferepr:; Jo! Ke Lo? cMd* Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “afer; BK wKtS mTr* 
MTro safer; Wa “safes ; Pud Pu? “ayepareaer, [Jolly G] ayPeeprecar; Tj? at 
wart; TMd3 “Sr aa — c) oOr ara; sOx! sPul Tr? “aaet I — d) BhP 4.152 Het ait fe 
fcaer:; Be! Be? Ho sKé La? Lot sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu’ Pu! Tr? Set; Bo Set: nKt Sena” 

183. Cited by Vis 1.29;Apa 59; Dev1.109; Madh 1.453 — a) nKt' aa a Arar — a-b) 


Chapter 2 435 


It: go 7 eta aT aleguaay | 
Tort aR ys ys frag ure 
ad aft agrt qatar | 

Fraer weet arraPieateg ataq ue cult 
qiaeer abr: atrqeartseraer | 

at WaT Gear aPeAahat: Uecgit 
wpa Merah T TTA | 
TAIT: AMRITTAAI AT ATT Ui 
Ray adahrer Faradt wag | 

Serr gaat afereraraarar EAT Ueccil 


BhP 4.153 longer version: @Hagq tar J F aa say F car: | say als wsy FT wT wa 
aaPrar: I =) Re TaBrt; NKt cMy aes; mTrteararior — c) Be! Bo Ox? serrate ; 
Tr? “are et”; nKt! cMy “water; Be! Be Ho BKt La? sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu’ Pu? Pu!® Tj? T? 
BAP 4.154 [vl] @t2eF; Bo etget— d) wKe waders 

184. Cited by Apa 59;padas a-b cited by Dev 1.109— a) Ox} RT; Pu’ Pu? Wa &; Tr? 
freq — b) BhP 4.154 ata — c) cMd? sara; Lo! GaAETAT; BhP 4.155 ARTA — d) 
Hy om one J; Pul? of ad 

185. Omitted in sOx! Pu®; ma in Lo?. Cited by Dev 1.110; padas ab cited by Vis 1.29; 
Apa 59— a) NNg @at; wKt! wagrPrae’; La} af aT feat’; sCa Lo’ Pu’ BAP 4.155 UTft; Be! 
[mc to] BBe Ho nKt NNg Vis Dev at fae; Lot Lod tMd? Ox} atgat; Ho TeeHTA — b) 
nNg “erat — c) wKt Fras; mT ro Proet — c-d) BAP 4.155 aTa Prrer gaceahit ar a 
aia — d) Bo ‘afeardied’; sBe wKt? Lo? Ox? Dev aedha; oOr Tr “set a; Tr! 
“aaa AT 

186. Pada-d omitted in nKt wKt®. Cited by Laks1.183; Dev 1.86; Mddh 1.451 — a) Tr! 
BhP 4.157 AUT, Ox? FEST; Ho afte — b) nKe' F Praear’ BhP 4.157 Laks “age 
aft — c) pCa Tr? BaP aTaeg— d) Ho Fgura’ ; Bo “ahaa: 

187. wKt® omits verses 187-207. Cited by Vij 3.281; Dev 1.111Madh 2.438 — a) BK 
Ox? Pu’ ther — a-b) BhP qisa tearrerrpear +t aHfe after & [vi Sar] — b) wKt! 

“wae; nK¢ aftrar, Be? “ayer; Lo! “afer zy; oMy “after gaa; Pu’ oar — d) NNg 
“afeatter ; Ho Lo? My artad; Tj! “aetf ad; La? “aiifiteper 

188. Padas c-d omitted in Be’. Cited by Dev 1.111; Madh 1.455— a) BhP 4.163 TeHT- 
ger & Fret; Be! Ox? Pu? Sear, Bo HBT; GMd! Jha Dave adafret, Tj! war Fret — b) 
wKt! “frerteprarét; sOx! su’ Tj! “até; cMd’ oMy Tr! “araft — c) BK Ox? ete; Lot Lod 
Pu!? afear; Tj! aferga — d) Md} “areePrar; Ho Bet:; oOreyeT: 

Additional verses in Ho wKt! Lo? [ma] Ox? nPu! Tr?; also in 7 of Mandlik’s mss [he 
thinks these may be original]; Rc comments on both; first verse found in +Md‘* and second 
verse in Be?: 

a Ser cere: ers aw Ret ofa: | 
are He TEATS TAT 1121 
HII Wear FIST TT | 


436 Chapter 2 


qaarataey fret atria | 
STRATA AME TAHT T TTT ULC 
Tea stages aaffahy: | 
Teas Aaa Tag 1123 oll 

ated yeor freroattet wr at | 
gates anrararier feag a ues etl 

att ta art a gaifaaaaife a | 

Freer ssafeRase dear qirferr 28 20 
reagan: ear arearat: Yaga: 

ATTA Ate: aarftarirget at: USSRi 


UTI Tad Trae cer HP: Far: URI 
1. a) Ho Lo? nPu! Tr? Hea; Tr? gfaTas:; Lo? rMd4 “gree 7 — b) Lo? STNG; 
nPu! eat He -T; Ho Lo? Tr? Het — c) Ho Lo? nPu! Tr? Seat — d) rMd4 Geet 
gareae, Ho Lo? nPu! Tr? “Bearer 
2. a) Tr MereaTAET, Ho Lo? nPu Tr? Seven’; Be? M8orT — c) Tr? at wer; 
Lo? aearer; wKt! area wae; Be? Ox? Tr? Wafer 
189. Cited by Vis 1.31;Hem 3/1.424; Madh 1.455; padas c-d cited by Dev1.116 — a) BAP 
4.160 tae? ACARI; IMd4 Wa Satay; nKtt aeaed; Lo? Lot GMd! 1Md3 Ox? Pu? Pu! 
Hem Vig ° 4X; Bo” @aeit; Lo!” SeafF — b) Be? BK oOr FTF; oMd? GMy fA; Vis 
pagent — c) Lo! *safsar; Tr! “wafer; Pud Pu? “safaeit — d) Hem at Ter; Tj! fear 
190.* Padas c-d cited by Laks 1.122 — a-d) BhP4.161: TATED Aerarel SA ATy- 
seme | worserdceafted: erat — a) rMd? arerrer g; Md! wteyT — b) cMy 
“gfats; NNg die; Ho “fee eayar — c) Be! BBe? Bo BCa Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? La? Lo! Lo4 
Lo’ oMa& Md sOx! Ox3 nPul sPuS Pu’ Tj? Tr! Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “a1ea4; Be? Ho 
wKt? 1Md? MTr4 Wa Laks Pada, Te aPad, ako “Aa — c-d) nKe “SteRaaad aap — d) 
BK + TPA; aCa TIBU; NNg WaeAe; mTro wade; Hy Im Jo! J¢ Kt? GMd! oMd? oOr T7? 
Tr? mT? Laks Re Mandlik Jha KSS Davefaettad 
191.* Pada-c torn in mTr®. Cited byApa 64; Laks 1.215 — a) Be! Jo? BK Lo? Lo* Lo? 
Ox} Pud Pu’ Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M4 Me G R] Me Jolly =ifect; Pu? Put arfedt; Be} dfedr, Kt? 
wAfedt zr; Ho Temisert — a-b) BhP 4.162 TeaaAfeat aT qeor Prete fe; eke 
yeu ta a wae — b) Jo? Lo} Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M' 2478 Me 
GR] Jolly wofea; Pu2 Put “valfec; Be} “vara; Be? Ox? nPul Va T—c) Bo eATAT; TMd4 
“erat; Tj! ‘eraser: ara: Lo} eaaaret: aay’; Hy Jm Jo! K® Lo Lo? oM@ Tr? mTr? 
Na [patha] Mandlik KSS waarar ; +Md3 Prerarat’ — d) Lo? “arate; Pu’ “arifeag; oMd! 
fea ae; Pu! ar 
192. Cited by 4pa55; Laks 1.215 — a) Ho FACT FT APT Ts 1M} ara; oOr aS TZ — 
a-b) BAP 4.163 galfesarhtr FaaT see araha fe — c) Hy Praar; wKe Paw, Wa 
grater ; Apa gigeafea — d) Be? Tj! Tr! [Jolly R] Sea; BK Pud Apa [vl] STAT: 
Lo® Md‘ Setar; Bel Sey 


193.* ma in Be? [last part of pada-d torn]. Cited by Apa 56; Laks1.215 — a) BKt® 





Chapter 2 437 


Haraaeaay: EIA Adar Tear | 

sfasq wat urer wert te afaare ieee 
TTA TATA AT TATA | 

el rs aU gk Ngsanl 
anitrer frat: gateRnrsed fered: | 
WIT AAA: TATA AIT: ULV 
TIgaehyat eter airy | 

wer Ff arter fraar ta faa: lee 
att sraradt arer rer eager | 

qatar wafer a arereaat WaT 2S Cl 


“gacafer:; Hy ‘ageraer: Ho Laks “Weraorfer:, nPul “zeratevs: — b) Pus Pu? adr Jo- 
afrat [cf. 194b]; Ox? “are; Ho Hy Jo! Lo} nKt! sOx! NNg Pu! sPuS Tj! Tj2?mTr? Wa [Jolly 
Go N] Apa Na Re Mandlik KSS GAaAT:; BAP 4.164 Wat:; Tr? FAYa:; Bo La? Loe Ox? 
gaferc:; GMd! 1Md? tMd4 oMd3 Tr! mTr4 Tro wanted: — d) nPul “AaTRY”; rMd3 “ART; 
Pul? * at: ; Be! sBe? Bo BCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt? La? Lo! oMd? GMd> nNg oOr Ox? 
nPu! Pu’ Tj? Tr? MTr? [Jolly Ku N Nd]BAP [vl] Apa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4, Pu’ Pu’ 
BhP Wt, Pw Te 

194. Cited by Apa 56 — a) BK AATAT ; Apa [vl] AaTaeT; GMa “aeAae:; Lo! cMd! 
"auger: — a-b) BAP 4.165 TeAteTAR GF: eared ret — b) Lot Lo’ Ox} fret 
eargoafre [cf. 2.198] — c) Jo! anfearsa; Apa [vi] FT — d) BAP 4.165 TIT APT; Te Ae; 
Ho daa; after pada-b mTr* addsi98 a-b. 

195. Cited by Apa 56; Laks1.215 — a) Te yfeerar ; tMd?* 9AM — b) Md? GMy 
aaa; 1Md? aft; BhP 4.166 ACTEM FT; Pud Pu? Pu? + Bart: AAT — c) BAP 4.1667 
STAY 7 SATAY; MTro area 

196. Cited by Apa 56; Laks 1.215 — a) Lot Ox? BhP 4.167 areal" — b) TMd4 “ay: 
weeT; Be! Be? pCa Lal GMd! NNg sOx! Pu sPuS Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] Apa [vl] eT; Apa 
“BET, NKt Lot Lo’ oOr Ox? Ox? Tr! mTr?gtSa:; TMd? GMd! Pud Pu? Pu? MTr° Apa eee: 
— c) BhP 4167 TERRA FT A; My FWEAIIT:; Ho FANGAPT; Tr? “FayAI:; Be! 
“graTasd:; sOx! sPuo “gftreaasta:; Tr! agate; Ox? Uraste:, Lot Tase:; Md? eaurttat — 
d) Be? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] BAP 4.167 “SI; Pul? ara 

197. Cited by Apa 56; Laks 1. 215 — a) Tr Sg; Tr! @anht’; aké “arene; Lo? 
“Pre, Md? “Arye — b) Jo? Kt’ cMy Laks * ereater, 1Md! "erate; sOx! sPuS “erate, 
1M arfetas — c) BAP 4.168 78ST TAT; TMd? wT r4 Trot — d) eK fAfeerda ader:; 
BhP 4.168 Frear fercdeadar; La! fafesr; Lo! TMd4 nNg Ox? Apa [v1] far; oOr fafeait; cMd! 
GMd@ Tr! Nd Apa [vl] faaat; mTr4 mT ro Prater; TH ty; rMd4 Geese: 

198.* Padas c-d placed after 194b in MTr®, Cited by Apa56; Laks 1.215; Dev 1.120 — a) 
Bo TMdé Pu) Pu’ Tr! Dev 4h; Ho Ae; Te Usaset; BK Pul? Wa [Jolly M'-2-78) da— b) 
Be} Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Ké La? Lo? Ox? Pu8 MTP? BAP 4.169 Nd Mandlik KSS Waar Te ; 
Lo? Tj! Tj? adur qe — c) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? Tj? mT Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave TRG; 
nK¢ aK yea; oOr Feat — d) yPul aera, Te weer 





438 Chapter 2 


AaTSET ATT TUATHA HAST | 


Tt arergedia afelaatearz 298! 
aerts odtarat fear arf sade | 


ant ax freraait weter at aatsert: lRo oll 
aftararg et wafer cat a wafer Frere: | 
fetter prtate ater wafer want Ro 2H 
geal aaa T gat afte fra: | 
ara AAAI NAAT UR RM 
wieratasyart a arate Weer aE | 

sears Uae qt Rafe etre Ro RI 


199. Omitted in Ho; padas c-d placed after 202d in tMd?. Cited by Apa 56; Laks 1.215; 
Har-A 1.8.15; Dev 1.121 — a) tMd3 4 @eteeT; Har-A  BtAeT — a-b) BhP 4170 AMreaT- 
ware TeeTARY Yad —c) Bo 7 taver +7 Beta; BAP 4.170 Area — d) cMd! 
afaftecanfte: oMd? sfernft’; Lo’ wfraft?; Bo Lo! oOr Pu Laks “HTT; TMd4 “HTT; 
sOx! sPus “afted: BhP “afte®: 

200. Omitted in Tr?. Cited by Apa 56; Laks 1.215 — a-b) BAP giz WetaTeeraT fret 
Tata wade — b) Be? Prararatfe ada. wKt! Prar ay; Laks atfrwacier; rMd3 tMd* GMd?® 
oMy Tr! mTré mTro asta — c) TMd? BAT; Wa TH Heit: Apa [viata ; rMa freee; 
oOr Feraracar 

201.* Pada-a omitted in Ox? and padas c-d in GMd?°. Cited by Laks 1.216; Dev 1.120 — a) 
Pu2 sacar: Tater; Be} ararier Tara; cMd’ oftarét ae: Brg; Tr? wWraret |e FF; 
Lo? Tj! Wael EHC: Ae [Lo “are]; Be? Be? BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! wKt} eKt® La! Lot 
Lo® GMd! oMd? Ng sOx! Ox? sPuS Pu’ Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Wtatete; tMd3 tMd?4 
GMd oMy oftaret; Te mT r4 mTr® Nd Tetaret; Pul® Tj? er; Pu’ aet; Be! nKt! GMd! sOx! sPu‘ 
wer fe cara; nPul Wa @&: & Sq [Wa T SMa]; Pud Pu? Pu? [Volly G] St: Brq; Ox? TP? 
@et FA; Lo* Volly REgee: Bq, TM? GA + Hale; cMy TaAeRATA; NNg Aa — a-b) BhP 
4.172 Terarargee: Srearaaeq Preqar: — b) Bo Prag; wk} fied: — c) Wa Tea BPH- 
aaa; cMy “site; aMy tard; Bel of safe; Bo pat safer; Lo? Lo! Lo’ Ox? Tj! Volly 
R] BRPAS; nKtt sOx! Ox? sPuo HAT BATT; nNg HPETAT 

202. Folio containing 202-207 missing in Pu’; padas c-d omitted in Ox’. Cited by Apa 
56; Laks 1.216 — a) Pulogerentadaed; Md‘ eter; GMy TEs nPul Star — b) Tj! 
aTe@al, Me [patha] BE; Go gloss AVAT TeyTAAHE supports BS; Tr! Aa; mTr4 aera; 
TMd? aifeat; Bo Ho nKf La? Lo} Lo* Lo’ cGMd° nPu! fert:; cMy ferat; Be Pus Pu’ ferar, 
oMd! @ye: — c) BAP 4.173 TATeTa Use; TMd3 “aA ; BCa Jo! wKtt GMy Pul? Wa 
“saan — d) Be? “Haweah’; Lal wadrathe? 

203. Padas a-b omitted in Ox>. Cited by Laks 1.216 — a) Jha Dave Wiearargare a; BhP 
4.1774 ees TAT FT; oMy wWerargare wT; Ox3 “zaTey; Be! Bo Ho cMé& Tj! Tr! at — b) 
Md + & crete; Wa aaa; Jo! areta — c) BaP agate Te Us; NNg AeA; Lot Lo® 
TPIT, OMA Te A; BBE TET — d) nNg HAT 





Chapter 2 439 


THSMFITATA EAT HET T | 

arta yer at Rrermeeatty TNR ¥I 
TR aaa gear | 

7 afraqet yer war Teahraaad WRokll 
franpecactea facar ahr: erate | 
sfeaereg urerattad atafesreahr 20 GI 
Ty yeagha fra sara | 


Tay ay WAT aT |Rovll 
aie: aarrsateat ar Breit at asad | 


MANIA FEY TRIATAASa MtRo Zit 

TNT TTA ATTA eases 

T PART AT WeataANataTTyT R08 II 
: BY: Fant eather: | 


204. Cited by Laks 1.223; Dev 1.120 — a) Ho PAE; Md! nPu! arepaart ; oMd ait 
Tepaart ; Pud Pu? ary; Tr “gran” — a-b) My Wreraaqrarerry Aeey — b) Ox? *Geae e- 
HT tT; mTrt Weaey; Be! “seatty; Na Ku Nd Re Mr Mandlik KSS "HERT, NK Tj! Rn Laks 
“wea; tMd> “eeTeY; GMd! GM Tr! “eareazy; Ho BLT F— c) GM Tr! MTr6 arate; Tr? 
aréte; Lo? art — d) dt “wag 

205. Padas c-d omitted in mTr®. Cited by Apas4; Madh 1.306 — a) Lo’ JeRN:; Ox} om 
&; Lot ma &; Apa [vl] age; cMy afaa— b) nKtt “ae — c) Ho ager, La! age; 
Be! Be? Bo La’ Lo! aferge; cMd Tj! arger 

206.* ma in Lo! — a) Be’ Bo Ho sKt? Lo! Lo* Lo* Lo’ NNg Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu? 
Pu!® Tj? Tr! Wa [Jolly M] Me Go Jha Dave ata; pCa wKt La! tMd3 “waar, cMy 
“amAT: Re BIT; oOr Ba asa — b) Ho GMy nNg fret; tM? tMd‘ fret; Ho aft; GMy 
Tj! Tr! oft — c) Bo “Seed; La! “eedareat’; Ho PuS araat ; Jm Jo! wKkt! Kt? oMd? Pu!® 
Tj? Mandlik KSS areatfed; Md? cMy art fee; Ox? areaifed; Pu? areratfect 

207. Omitted in Pu®. Cited by Laks 1.225 — a) Bel Ox? Saeq; Lo? tag; wKt! 
AWeTS ; Pu’ “agd; nNg afefer — c) Jo? Lo? Lot Lo’ Ox} Tj! Tr? [Jolly M R] Me Re Jha 
Dave at ‘qarat, La! xPu! Pu? Pu? Wa Me [patha] Jolly Gacrariy; xNg Pul? “gacaarary, 
Ho Hy gaararty; mTr? areay— d) Lot Ox} Lod Pu’ qeag hart [cf. 205b]; Jo! Texte; 
Lal qaeqy; Bo ta-yy 

208. Ho places padas c-d after 207b — a) Tr! 41%; Bo TATSS-HT; Lot “sar; tMd4 
WaT — b) Be? cMd° Bret at; BAP 4.177 faeret usr; Bo HTaAAftr — c) Ho Jeu: Tj! 
yogi 

209. Cited by Madh 1.457-8 — a) Lo® GMd! Ox? Pu!® Tr! 31a; La! SECT [but md, 
BhP 4.178 SATIS; Be! Be nK¢ Tr! Tr? g; Tr! arearett — b) BAP 4.178 ees ; Ca 
sOx! Ox? sPuf [but cor] “sitet — o-d) BAP 4.178 Teaert TaAAETATT asta — d) La! 

“aPaTaAS; wKto “spars 


° 


440 Chapter 2 


wae AMT: TeyeTATarsat: UR Poll 
MIST SIT WT MTacaeaasg TZ | 
TRIM T Brahe Saar wT warersayT 22 2M 
qevat ¢ gafeathrarte wet: | 
qifigtrader qari farsa 11222 
eaTa UT AN ars TTT | 
asata warerfer wrare fraParet: W223 
afagtane ote fagtaatt ar ga: 

WAT Bore AK Brera TT URL vI 
ara caer gfear at a fateamrerat wad | 
aoa fereahr eater UR V4 il 
art 7 Teadtar gadtar gar ate | 
fatiageaat gatqaraetate grq UR 2 El 
fatter wagered ahaa | 


210. Cited by Dev 1.103; Madh 1.300; padas a-b cited by Dey 1.123 — a) Lo*>cMd> 
Tj! Tr! mTr?mTr> Wa BhP4.179 “quar; Md "STRATE, — b) TMdé Dey 1.103 7a%F — c) 
1Md! waamteg; aK wPul *autar; cMy ayer; rMd4 eyse — d) rMd4 “Prarath:; wPu! 
*Praved; BBe Praraa: 

2u. Cited by Mddh 1.301, 457-8 — a) Lo! 5547; cMd! F AMA TF; BhP 4.180 [vl] F 
ered arar — b) Bo ata; La! [but me] Md} tMd4 awaited ; Tj? aaa | GMd Pud Pu? 
Tr! wriresret | GMy mTroaatetet; Pud ¢ — c) Lod Md4 “gaat; Lo’ Pu Tj! “Fear 
aepratttr — d) TMd3 cMd ara 7; BK om FT; La? Lo? oMdé sOx! [cor to] sPu’ Tr? WaTet 

212. Cited by Dev 1.104 Mddh 1.301— a) BAP 4.181 78TaT J Fadi; sOx! sPuo Pu!? 
[Jolly M'2-*] 4; Lo? &; Lo’ gadtaifr; Lo! Md Tr! Tr? gadt ate; rMa? gate arr” — 
b) Md? fred; sOx! sPuS “ate; wKt! cMy BAP 4.181 [vl] aaa; BhP 4.181 [vl] ate; 
oMd! “arerare; wKt® oTerait: — c) Lo! Tr! guiiferer” — d) La? Tj? Tearct; Bo Lo! Ox? Wa 
“are; wKt3 “afar; mTr fasitad:; Be! frarrar 

213, a) Be? BCa [but cor] Jo* Lo? GMd! tMd* cMd> GMy Tj! mTr¢mTr° Wa Ua; all 
commentators support 7 — b) sOx! sPuS “ota — c) BKtS La! [Jolly M'-2-3-9 Nd] at 7; 
nk wKto aati; GMy watat +; +Mdé seit toa TAT; Jo! rMd?4 waTaed— d) Hy sKé La? 
Lo? Faratgy; Lal WaTaeg; Wa WTEIET; wKiS wet: AIT; BAP 4.182 afer FAT; Wa 
faafarar:; cMd! faaRrar 

214. Cited by Dev 1.104 — a) TMd? aftet Star — c) Be! Be} Bo Lal rMd? Pu? [but 
cor] Tj! TATE; BKO TATeT; Ho FATE 

215. a) Tj? AAT Masher aT; Wa AT; Lot SAIT— b) Wa fafacnraay; Ho fafamat — d) 
tMd4 “aqvantter 

216, Pada-b omitted in Ox? — a) BhP 4.185 Usq Yoratat— b) Lot ma Fact 


Chapter 2 441 


TeaRyG Hate Aat wPTAEATT UR 2! 
maT waaay at aires | 


aar wzerat fear qaqa wR eel 
yet at aeat ar erawat erksanme: | 


= oe ee URVWzNI 


f \\ 
rater = 
gar attra: Tasca A: | 
Om: VATAAATAT URL 
arerey saat Freer sear aariea: | 


Jat aa sassergareta wafer ue2VV 


217. Omitted in Bo. Cited by Dev 1.104 — a) BAP 4.186 favtset; BBe? Dev [vl] famer, 
Dev fameg; Md? fara — b) Tr? atRtarat — d) Kt? aa; oOr om TAH Ox THATS 

218 Cited by Har-A 1.144; Dev 1.139 — a) Te arephy — b) BAP 4. 187 STATE 
aa; NKe aver wKeS afer — c) Bo wKt® aa; Be! La? Tj! Wa [Jolly R]Dev wa ae” 
[Me Go Nd Ku have Ta¥ but it is unclear whether it is the root text or simply a gloss]; [Jolly 
R] geaet — d) nKet “geferresfer 

219. Cited by Apa 64; Dev 1.126 — b)trM@ Bre Teeit ar Rrearser:; Tr? om aT; sOx! 
sPuo “rar feranfac::; BAP 4.188 erifeest TE; La? Cw@ract:; wKt! “wre; Lo? “tet: — c) Lo! 
4a; Lo’ tMd4 aay; Tr! art fe Pravda; nKt GMd! rMd} tMd‘ sOx! sPu® mTr4 MTr® [Jolly 
Nd] ‘Pahatert — d) BAP 4.188 “HTAEaT; Be? GMy ai eke gargfear’; Be! KP rMd* wNg 
Ox} Pud Pu? Tj! mT r* Wa Apa [vl] ASAT; Apa [vl] *BST; cMd! fears 

220.* Cited by Laks 1.234; Ma@dh 2.447 —~ a) Laks gar ariram:; Ho agfefer fear 
qt:; Lot ma a; Pu’ [but cor] Ae; sOx' sPu’ 7 Aq; Kt? Pu? “eyeareqh:; rMd!4 
“wafearery: — b) Ho Wa; BBe? Be? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt? Lo! oMd? Tj? mTz? Laks Me 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ®TTaRd: --- c) nKtt GMd! rMd? 1Md* aMy Tr MTr‘ MTr® 
Madh frard; La! Tr! “safer fearar’; wKt! “greater ™Md3 GMd* “SReaqaM ; BBe? GMy 
BhP 4.189 °caftrarar’ — 4) Tr? “ART; Ho “ATTET ST"; Lot “afeater 

Additional verse in La!: 

gta career sarah arte a: | 
wat fsa sasranaterd: | 

221.* Cited by Dev 1.126 — a) MT‘ Tr’ aornafataye:; BKe wKis ahr ; Pu2 afer 
fach:; [Jolly G]Prfe:; cMd! “Pare; GM@ GMy VaDh 1.18 * Pat: Be! sBé Be’ Bo BCa 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? nK¢ BK wKtS La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo? oMd? 0Or sOx! 
Ox? nPu! sPu® Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly M N Ku R Nd] Dev Ku Rn Re Mandlik KSS 
“Prfw:; Ox “Praga: — b) Lo? gard — d) wKt® Tr! “east; Loe oMy Tr? “serar; Ke? 
oar 

222. Padas a-b omitted in Tr’. Cited by Dev2.391; Madh 1.280 — a) BAP 4.191 STL 
Fert; Pul? ara; GMd! aprer— c) nKe! weer sar — d) Be? “gore; wKt® Lo* Ox? 





442 Chapter 2 


ate et amar: a7: Raa | 
AMAA AT AT TART: WRQZIM 
gatatgeard sr: erarat eet wa ar | 

at wag at aatarat efa g ferfe: Ravi 
areata frat aa Arar wat we TT: | 
ASAT TAT Ae Fast: WRI 
ararat wert aft: frat at: sora: 

ara gPrear afte wat eat Aftreretas: UR REI 
a Arafradt sar aed TAT TTT | 

av acer fropft: aaa ae ada Ril 
aahter fra gaterarter a adar | 
aaa Bry gqeg ag: ad ware IRC 


Pu’ aerfafer:; sOx! sPuo TAS: [but both cor] 

203, b) Be? ffaeaa: Sarat; wKe AT; Tr e:; cMy HPrcaT — d) BAP 4.192 UT 
at Med AA:; Wa FATED TAT AA:; Lo? Tj! @F aT Sa ATSA:; Jot ae aT Earferary:; TMd3 
wer aa T°: BCa Lot Lo’ GMy sOx! nPu! sPu’ Pu! [Jolly M] Jha Dave Met; Be sBe’ Be? 
Bo nKt! BKtS Lo? Pu2 Pu’ Pu? Pu? Tr? arerre; La! La? Pu’ area; Ox? are” cor to 
TRIM ; sBe? TAT: 

224, Pidas c-d omitted in TMd‘. Cited by Apa 158 — a) Lo’ TATEH’; Jo! erataty’ ; Lot 

x3 aaraig Be? aataiz ; Tj! ant” — b) Bo Tj! Sar; BhP 4.193 TAT; Be? Ho Jm Jo! 
Kt? Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ oMd? Ox? Ox? Tr? MTr3 Wa [Jolly R] BhP Mandlik Jha KSS Dave U& 
T, Md} UF F —c) BoMF Va FT arya; Pu! arf wer waa: Lo! aff ar Be; Lot Apa 
auifes” — d) oMd! sf; Tr! sa q Peta: oOr BHP sf afar; Lo! gfera: 

225, Omitted intMd* Ox3; ma in Lot; verses 225 and 226 transposed in Hy Jm Jo! Ke 
Tj? mTr3 Polly Ku]. Cited by Dev 1.94 — a) wKB aTaraey; Lo! avard: eafttar — a-b) BhP 
4.194 fFat AraT qaT WaT ara: BEaTT — b) La? war wrargqyast:; Be? J; NK Fs: — 
c) Tr! amiat . tMd3 “arate; GMd! “aARTeMT:; sOx! sPue “area — d) Pu? om faatac:, 
wes fare: 

226. Omitted in Ox3; ma in Lo+; padas a-b omitted in TMd* — a) BBe* wKt} NNg sPu® 
HM [but cor in NNg sPu’] — b) Be? wKt} aMy WaTTT — c) BCa wKt! wKt Arar Ate: 
qRreard; BAP 4.195 AraTearafecfastar; nKt* frqear; rMd‘ frger; Be! Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Pu? 
Pu! [Jolly M'-2-8-9 G] Jolly air — d) Md‘ wat aT; GMy wee ATT ; GMd! Tr! [Jolly 
Nd] &T7; nPu! carat ; ; BhP 4.195 are 

207. Cited by Dev1. 95 — a) Lal Tr! BhP 4.196 35 ; cMy “att aft — b) Ho wed; 
Kt? &@c; La? aféd; cMd! aT — c) Pu!l? Acrez; sOx! sPuo cet at Prepfe::; Ox3 aarp: 
oMd? aRraT — d) Be} 4%; Ho Lo? Md‘ nNg 7; BK Tq; WK 7; NKt Ox? 7H 

228, Padas c-d ma in wKt®. Cited by Dev 1.95— a) Be? TatPreT — b) TM? “aegeaa; 
NKtt om 4; Be! Be La? d; BAP 4.197 T eT — c) Ho wKtS tMd3 GMy Tr ag fag 7 
[rMd3 Tr! g; cMy fé] ; NK! TMd4 NNg Ox Pu’ mTr‘mTr®°Na@ BhP ay fe; La! oOr Ag F; 


Chapter 2 443 

aa FATT FATT WH AT Tart | 

qT Aeragaal ata GAT WR 

a va & wat oterd wr aa APT: | 

a wa f sat Aart UateaasTa: RZ 

frat & méaens hratarretarr: eld: | 

qeteatiaeg afiarar weet 23 2 

Brararaag aigratrasrget | 

Fora: eager saahefr ates URzANM 

aT ore arpa fag J AAT | 

TVYAIM TAT Felts AAT UWRzZ3N 

ad dengar sat welt eT aaa: | 

agar wala Tatereanen: Fear: WAV 
oMd ay J; Bo Fay SteT;, La? GAT — d) Hy om at 


229, Cited by Dev 1.95 — a) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tj! wat; Te Bat — b) oOr WAETT — c) cMy 
Tr! Taz”. pBe? Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! oMa@ 1Md! Tj? Dev AeeAFardt — d) Be! etyRr 

230. Padas a-b omitted in Ho. Cited by Dev 1.95— a) BCa GMy Ut JF — c) Be? La? 
TMd? GMd> GMy NNg Ox? nPu! Pud Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tr! mTr° BAP 4.199 UF J; Bo Va F; Lal ve 
&— d) Tr! Tr? aarerat atmrerat:; pBe? BK wKtS Lo’ Aaret war fF Ta; wk “wTETAET: 

231. Cited by Dev 1.95— a) BhP 4.200 ATA; sOx' sPuo TeTAM; Tr! BAP 4.200 Dev 
“cen — b) Tr! *fratar & aferorr aya; Tr om AratfHe; La? rMd? tMd4 Ox3 mTr* mTr® 
“fratar & aférr:; Lot “firatar a af8r:; BAP 4.200 fa: frat & afert:; GMy oMd! “ferOTT 
ayaT — c) wKt! Lo! rMd3 nPu! BAP 4.200 “sate; Bo Lo? Lo’ Lo® GMd! rMdé Ox? Ox3 
Pud Pu’ Pus Pu? Dev ga-ttanfir:; La! “gattarfr: [but me sh] — d) La! cMd! Pu’ Pu? Pu? Tr! 
MTr! MT ro SIeaAT 

232. Padas c-d omitted in Ox? Tj! and ma in Lot — a) BAP 4.20189 Gey tay; nKt 
fatayat’; Bo saTeaset — a-b) cMd! Pry ceawareaed ototfeastad Zet — b) cGMy om FH; 
NNg Aiereprey oa; NKt aKt wKtS La? TMd‘ Pu! Pu!® Tr! Cafe aa°; Be! Be Ho sOx! 
Ox? sPuS “aT FB; Bo “ars”; Lo? “wredtera®; Tr? “arrdaa’; cMy "arta wet; 
Pud Pu? Pu? BAP 4.201 Head 7ét; Ox} om TET; Lot ma Tet— c) wk) dears; M3 
~ Tr! “HFPE ATT; Lo*oMy “ART AGT, wKto ager — d) Lo’ [Jolly R] eaateaeger, 

of caafgsager; Te eaaere Fred; wKeS Aiea: 7Md3 Pat 

eons Padas c-d omitted in Ox3 and ma in Lo4.Cited by Dev 1.95— a) BhP 4.202 f¥q- 

— b) La? Heat forrufeec:; Pud Pu? om and Pu’ me qa; BAPATTART; Lot Ox? 
om oe Ke 4e7 — c) Pu? Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] “arate, Jo? wKt! BKt wkt® Lo? rMd? Tj! Tr! 
[Jolly R]BAP 4.202 Dev Madh 44; Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKB La! oMd? tMd3 oOr Tj? mT? mTr® 
Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4 — d) oOrseates Welad; BhP 4.202 TewHTalHay 

234. Cited by Dev 1.95; Madh1.336 — a) wKt® adel TENET; ake Ader TeMTHAT; Jo? 
Lo} Tj! wenrPrar; tMd‘ wearect; BhP 4.203 [vl] @atgat; mT r* Teac — b) Lo? T} snPrar:; 
Wa aPra: — c) Lo! smigar g; Ho gaa; Lo? Tj! Wa sPrareq; Lot Ox? get; BAP 


444 Chapter 2 


Wad TA HAA AATMT | 
aaa fer gear Hate Prafedr ta: URZaI 
AMATI UST aA | 
ada AAA TATHART: WRIEM 
Breakage f gewer awarad | 

Ue at: UT: ATATTA sy Tas UR Zll 
seat: yar Praaradtaracrafe | 
srearary ot at etka seperate RRC 
faarqeryet Wet aerate ukrary | 
araratr ageaaaearehh weary R381 
feat tareaat fer ef: athe genfiers | 
fafaenfa a Brea aaa ada: URvoll 


4.203 [vl] Ftc — d) Lo! wat GIT; Be? wKt® Lo! “war; Be! Be Ox} rar 

235. Padas c-d omitted in BKt’ wKt® [haplo]. Cited by Dev 1.95; Madh1.336 — a)tTMd? 
at a THT; Ox} AWE — b) Ho sOx sPuo Na BAP 4.204 AaRTEAAT — c) Ho ATTA F 
apyat; cMd! Farrer 

236. Padas a-b omitted in BK wKt®. Cited by Dev 1.95-—— b) Ho La? Lo! TMd? sOx! 
Ox} nPu! sPuo Pu’ Tr? Tete BAP; GMy Taser TATA; Tj? West; WMd4 Teer; Pus Pu? 
Pu TST, BAP 4.205 Tee — c) TRA T faa. GMd! aaa; Be? “Seer, rMd? 
“teqaqear — d) La! cMd! GMy sOx sPuo Tr mTr* ReFAlaTEHTaHAR: [gloss of Go 
FATATEHACITATLUT appears to support the latter reading]; MT ro AAtaTarTaH aA: 

237. Padas c-d cited by Dev 1.95— a) GMd! Praca Hear, TMd? “aftaeper —c) 
+Md4 ent; Md} qeeretegy — d) Lot Lo’ Ox} gard 

238. Padas c-d omitted in wKt! [haplo]. Cited by Dev 1.144 — a) MTr° aTat:; Ho cMd! 
37; sOx! sPuS Tr? Fe fae — b) oMy “adta aeraft; Tr? “edtaraereft; Ho “adtarfrerefr — 
c) GMd! arcaraft at ara; Dev weamafe It; La? ot 

239. Jo! replaces padas c-d with 240 c-d; padas c-d omitted in mTr®. Cited by Dev 1.144; 
pada-d cited by Vis 1.195 — b) Pu’ Pu’ serait; Pu? sareft; La? qurftat, Tr! gurftrer: — c) 
oMy atyaraft; nKe arate 

Additional verse in La!: 

year Joutar ye: earth ye: frat | 
mete PPadt aa: seeTeT FT aed: II 

240.* Omitted in Ox? Re and ma in Lo4;padas a-b omitted in MTr®;padas c-d placed 
after 239b in Tr? — a) La! efteeiterar fee; cMd! fever fecraey, Lo? Tj! tarerar; td? cMd 
ta TUT; TMd4 TaTRAAT; NK tt CATIA; BAP 4.209 ta Tat feat — b) Be} Md} Tr! mTr* a4; 
Lo! aairt; Pu’ Pu? Pu? asi — c) Be! sBe? Bo Jo? wKkt! wKt? BK wKt® La? Lo? Lo? Lot 
Lo® tMd‘ Pu! Pu? Pu Pu’ Pu? Pu! Tj! Wa [Jolly M G N Ku R]Me Go Na Rn Jolly Rreart 
urgent [Pu2 Waatag ; nPu! @ag’; Lo? wag; Lo? Lo? Lo! Lo’ areagetfy; pCa Ho 
ager a Brent? [pCa fagerFy, Be? fafeurarft; La! om 7 — d) +Md* wATaTaTAY; Ho 





Chapter 2 445 


Teese fret | 

ATARI FT YA AraqersgT TT: URI 
aTatant yet Bret araaratas aa | 
TAT BATA HET AT AATT WRI 
ate caveahas at trata RT: Fer | 
am: aheadaar athfeternd WR st 


OT aaa: WET RT PATA TET | 
a macswar fast TAT: AT WATT NRvvil 


a ad gee fehaguedia evtfag | 
UAT TRU: AAT WaTEtT UR SGI 
ar fret mT SelaaSA: | 
eer ava es aT aa MtATEtT URL EI 


wareathy; My Tr! mTr! mTr$ BAP Faz: 

241. Cited by Dev 1.143;2.449; padas c-d cited by Apa 160 — b) GMd@ cMy “aeaneay, 
Lo? oOr Go [patha] Me [patha] Na “TepeT — c) La! nKtA ATAATAATT, Ox? ATA; Be! 
Be? Hy eK wKtS 1Md4 wNg Tj? ¢— d) Tr? “earet; Ke? get 

242,* Padas c-d omitted in GMd'. Cited by Apa 70; Laks 1.274; Dev 1.168 — a) BKtS 
aTseTtT; Be? Ox? AaTaTeT, cM aTaeTT; Bo Pul? fret; tMd* Wa fSrart — b) Md4 “ATerfRara; 
Md! Tj! Wad; NNg Fé — c) Ho Lot Lo’ tMd4 NNg sOx! Ox? Pu! Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu? Pul? 
Tj? Tr! mT1 WaJha Dave aMqary; Apa [vl] arredtart— d) Wa afesagard; vKe Pes 

243. Omitted in GMd'. Cited by Apa 72; Dev 1.171;Madh 1.458 — a) Be! BBe Wa 
aeaeda; BK wKt La? GMy areifeas; Md‘ carerfetesy atear; rMd? “Rear; BhP 4.212 
Madh “Faet atat; Be? GMy nPu! Apa att — b) Lo? [Jolly M289 R] eraar_; VVolly M34 G 
Nd] tract; rMd3 trac; BAP 4.212 Wad 7; rMd4 Mad A:; La? ea: ; Madh ®ra- 
Faeyr |r: — c) Ho Md! Yeh; nKt YeH:; BK Yew:; BKE wKt® aftaae® 

244. Cited by Vis 1.50;Dev 1.170;Mddh 1.459 — a) Vis 3T frovareset er (cf. 6.31]; 
Pud Pu’ Pu? aaa; Be aaa: — c) TM! SRT; Lo! “atat— d) sBe? Kt? wKtS Pu? Wa 
STEIN: 

245. Tj! transposes pAadas a-b and c-d. Cited by Dev 1.179; Madh 1.4601 — a) GMd! & 
ad; Be} aeqF; Lot Lo® [but cor] Ox? TWF FaTET — b) wKt! ac; wkt? eat, mMd4 etry 
— c) Lo! eet Take wk araeg; wKe! Breareg; Lo? TRITTS’ ; BAP 4. 214 TT qe; 
Trt mT r5 att — d) MTr? Tr art; NKt La? GMd! sOx! sPuo Tr? Tr [Jolly Be] ATA 

246. Cited by Laks 1.275; Dev1.178; Madh 1.460-1;padas c-d cited by Apa 76 — a) Be? 
BK wKt® fever; Tr! mara; Ho WT — b) Lo! et aMAsAe:; Be! Hy Jm Jo! K# La! [but 
me] La? oM@ Ox? Tj? mT’ Madh Mandlik KSS “creates; 1Md3 “oTeTARTa:; Wa “ASAT: 
BhP 4.214 7@8a F— c) Hy Im Jo! Kt? La! Tj? mTr> Laks Mandlik KSS art wae T 
arate, Apa aia FT — d) mT rt mTr° Hiferareea; Ca [but cor] wKt! NNg Laks Me Jha Dave 
“aTeeT; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? KE oMe& tMd4 Tj? MTr3 Me (patha] Mr “aTaéd; Re Mandlik KSS 
“HTaeL cf. similar variants at 3.82d. 


446 Chapter 2 


arars TF aE A FeyT -naa | 
year afees ar yeaghraratgd UR vel 
Tay SUTATAAaaSTTary | 


TISATASHYPYTA ATIASSATAT: URC 
wa aefe at fast So ] 
a THAI VT 7 Tt: URS 


gle arate eget waar afearar 
factatsearz: 


247. Omitted in La?. Cited by Vis1.49; Dev 1.167 — a-d) a longer version in BhP 4.216 
eate af cRersr at wear | goers qeqa geese ar go | aftes ar qepanht 
qeagfaaratd — a) Pu’ Pu? [but cor] Pu? ararat; Md} ararat; ake art g; wKke! ara 
@e; Lo? Md! sOx! sPuo Tj! mTr* fta— c) Ty? + — d) Vis erg afTATAAMT [cf. 2.242d]; 
Lo! Lo’ nNg Ox? “ATetql 

248. Cited by Laks 1.274; Dev 1.167; Madh1.458 — a) NKt* Lo? GMd! rMd? ™Md* GMy 
Pud Pu’ Pu? Pul? mTr4mTrS (Jolly M289 G]Laks Madh Uy wafer; Bo Watcafaer ; La! 
gate; wKt! wKt Tay faer — b) Hy AM ; aBBe SITE d) Tr! Grae nNg 

“aearaTars:; Pul? [Jolly M!2-8} “eararary 

249. Cited by Laks 1. 274 — a) BhP 4.218 awed FE BY fast; Lo? Tj! ar feet; Tr? few 
— b) BKt wKt® mTr* Laks “fag; Pu!? ‘Prga: — c-d) BhP 4.218 F WaT HelaST TAT 
ae Flad — c) eK wKe Tres RIM; Lo ‘As; sBBe Jo! Jo? KP wKe Lo’ Tr? mT? Me 
Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “Spare — d) M4 TeEETsTA FA:; GMA sOx! sPuo Tr? Te 
sree 

Colophon: Be! Bo Ho Lo! cMy nNg Tj? fa farad; Lo? Tj' sf afrrmadiet, Ho 
wKt3 La! supa; Be} BK O wKt> Lo? GMy sOx! sPu’ om arerat afearat; Hy Lo! yyyie- 
afearat; HowKe om Sfearat; La! wdfafeats fect; Ho Lo! seraftoerotr arr fetta; Pu’ 
Pu’ Pu? saraitfeert arr fect; Be! ateraafafeata fecal; wkt! seroReert arr fede; 
nNeg serarteat arr fecfittseara: ware: 


[acters ara] 
vette at at Fafa gaz | 
aaa afsa at nemfeaere ar ell 
aarrefter sat ar ag af aaa | 


TREIPTAAT ATT UR 
card gararret fig: | 
akan acer sreftragag eT var RU 


TONGA: TATeaT AAT zarfaker | 
Seed feet wrat want maronfrargy tte 


safest Tat aTgeentrat tat Fag: | 
av smear fonda arated uti 


1. Cited by Apa 67; Hem 3/3.779; Har-A 1.2.16; Dev 1.166; Madh 1.457-8; pada-d 
cited by Vij 1.36— a) TMd4 [Jolly M'2] are’; Ho Tar’; Ox? “arerfeae, Hy af; GMd5 are; 
wKt arat; rMd3 @rs; Tr! a [but cor fh] — b) NKt Lo? Ox? TA; cMy Ter fea; nKe! Tj! 
Pul? tafear, Hy oOrtafea; Har-A Hem Apa [vl as in ed] Maer; La? Bat — c) Hem Ta 
afear aft; Tr aarfirar, Lo! aaeay; sOx! sPuo aafaar; nKt! aaftrar; Tr? om Wea; La? Lo! 
Tj! ea; cMy Tifa; Apa [vi] Weta — d) BAP5.1 7 

2. Folios containing verses 3.2-224 missing in Pu’. Cited byHem 1.680; padas a-b 
cited by Kum 2.1.1 pratika also at Kum 2.4.9]; Vis 1.36 51; Vij 1.36— a) sOx' sareeter, 
Md? der efter; mTr? daresay, Lo? Wa Far aT; GMy T— b) BhP 5.2 31% Jury; Jo Lo? 
Tj! [Jolly RJ waa — c) Lo! afagar; nKe “wat — d) oMd? “areata; Be? Jm BKtS wKtS 
La! Lo! Pu!l® [Jolly Mi-2-8-9] “onfearq: La? Lo? Tj! are 

3. b) BKO wereta waa fag:; wks aererrert fig:; cMy weez; Md? “art Bt; sOx! 
sPu® [due me sh] 6& ar: — c) wKiS afar; Tj? afar, BBe Jo? NNg Me@ Tr? aevariy — 
d) sBe* “Hea; wKt® “HEE: wKt! Wa War 

4. Cited by Apa 76; Hem 1.680; Mddh 1.462 — a) BhP 5.4 DevJOUl FAAalc: oar 
Pu! “Ht; Lo! “Het: afr — b) NNg Pu? Pu? “adit; cMd@ “ae; oMd! “adit; sBe? sCa oOr Pu? 
“fate: — c) tMd4 sgeer — d) Md? gaat; Tj! aactger ; Tr? “Pad; Dev *Reraret [typo?] 


Additional half-verse in Tr’: 


USTAT AHA qe q dc: UTATETAT | 
5.* ma in Pu’. Cited by Vij 1.53; Apa81; Dev 1.184, 189; Madh 1.468-9 — a) Be! J 4, 
Bo  — b) Vij Atqzaferer [vl as in ed]; sOx! om TF; Bo 7 — c) GMd! tMd?3 tTMd4 GMd> GMy 


Tr! mTr4 mT r6 ar fesrat yareat StwKe a; T?fesat + are — d) Me [patha] Te! “ant- 
way; Md? ewTayt, Be! sBe? Be? Bo Ca Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKB nKt! sBKO 


447 


448 Chapter 3 


Aaa AS Wes srfererrerrers: 
cAteaet agar geht aay let 
dater Poged Pest thrametay | 
TAT AAT ae ogeTT T ll 
Ateecehtot sear arkreret + crete | 
Teter atest + arareat a ryranry lc 
aaa areeradaaaeary | 

a reaferernt a feftrornfrery 19 


wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ GMd! oMd? tMd? NNg oOrsOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu 
sPuo Pu? Pu’ Pu! Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa Vij Apa Dev Madh Go Nd Ku Rn Mr Mandlik Jolly KSS 
“aaifir BX, Ox} “waif Ayr 

6. Cited by Vis 1.54; Apa84; Dev 1.204; Mddh 1.477 — a) Pu!® [Jolly M'-?*9] 
aAaify — c) Pul? edie at; rMd4 “aaAr; Lo? estat ; Jo? NK! Lot rMd4 GMd3 Ox? Tr! 
uTr4 MTS Wa Apa Go Ku S2tathy; oOr om Garhr 

7. Cited by Vis 1.54; Apa 84;Dev 1.204; Madh 1.477 — a) Tj! GAT; BK 5 Im 
“Brat; iMd3 “aT; sOx! sPuo Pul? fayet; Lo! feet a — b) Lo! Freed; Lot Pul? Tr! Pract; 
Lo? feae¥; Be? wKt! La! Laks Apa [vl as in ed] OT 5 aBBe Treated; Tr? Aaa, Pud Pu? 
errsteate; Ca Lo Marat — c) Hy eatTEAT’; Lo! rMd? BAP 5.104 eat ; GMy Pu? 
eRarrar » Lo’ “wamearent? ; aK wKt arene’; Bo cMy “SIRT; Tr? “BAT”; Ho aa — 
d) Bo Prat’: Ho “faPt°; Lo? “sar; BAP 5.104 Pu!® [Jolly M] Pax ; mT? Past; Tr! 
"RRB; Bo Te “adt’; Ke “afte”; cMy “BT ; cMd! sOx! sPuo “weratt 

8. Padas c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 78; Laks2.27;Dev 1.200 — a) TMd‘* 
jeer b) MTr? mTrSepearatereargy; Jm “aprgt; oMy arst; BKO Ta; oMy afro: — 
c) La! My Pul? at olftent; Jo? Ng Pu!® Tj! Wa Apaaifaemt, Lo! + fer; BAP 5.100 
arfereeat — c-d) Tr! aretrest + urarerarferatat + fyret— d) Jm Arararerq{; Be? Jm Jo! 
Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} Lo? GMd! oMd? tMd‘* GM@ NNg oOr Ox? [but cor] MTr? Rn Re Mr BhP 
5.100 Apa Dev Mandlik KSS aratet; Lo! avavé; Hy aTaret; rMd? ararat; Pu? ararer; sOx! 
sPuo ararsit; NK aTarT; Bo fayarq 

9  Padas b-c omitted in Lo’. Cited by Apa 78;Laks 2.27; Dev 1.201— a) nPu! aAERT 
nKt waTE; Lo! TEA ; Lo? “ata; nNg “ATF [but cor]; Bo “até — b) Be! Bo aTer7e ; 
Lo! aarayd : ; Tj? “art — c) wKt® Tj! gente: Jm Lo! oerfe Bo La! nPu! mTr? peerareff: 
Apa ae Jm “aTdt — d) Lo? froorarnfrat: oOr arfefrrornfrst; Lo! Lot Lo’ Ox? 
Pu? Pul? Tj! + fasftvor’. pul? arfesfiaer’; Be! sBe Be? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? wKt? oM@ Pub 
Pu’ Pu’ Tj? mTr3 Volly G] BAP 5.101 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave + @ Att"; GMa aTAT 
aor” 

Additional verse in Be? Ca Ho La! oOr Ox? [but in parentheses sh] Mandlik [@, ¥, 4, 
3] KSS: 








afceqer afapart afadtat + araary | 

aasfrear agéat + apostasy |! 
a) La! “eer; Lal + gart—b) La! Mandlik KSS+ erat; Lal 7 a araat; Mandlik 
KSS -rfaarrart — c) Ho Ox? aaiferergetat at; Lal argétat — d) Be? Mandlik 


Chapter 3 449 
weaget dere sararconnry | 
aqatraagat qagtqaed frerz eo 
wee T Hagar a fate ar frar | 


AST AT Mat: GREAT Ue 2M 
aantey froartat warear areactfir | 

BAA THAT: ET: HAT TT: ULM 
qea wat qaet ar a ear a fa: Se | 

UD cat Ba Ue: ||: ATT aT ATTA: 12 Bill 
T Temattrararrrarr fe facodt: | 
wreataratt gard yar aratafazare evil 


KSS7 AaIeHGE ; Ho Ox? HESS 
Additional verse in TMd?*: 
uaattha ayer Tat a: Bore: | 
aYoeaH [rest illegible] 

10.* Cited by Apa 78; Dev 1.200; Madh 1.462; padas a-b cited by Vif 1.52;pada-c by Vi/ 
1.52 — a) nK¢ wehtt ater, GMy atezrargt; Lo? “arat — b) Md} rarer, Apa [v1] 
afters} + AMT (cf. 1.8b]; Tr? Set — c) TM} TAMAAMTaATAT; GMS mTr? MTr® Polly 
Nd] age, Kt? Ta’; Lot Lo® Ox? Pul? [Jolly M] aaiteawear ; NNg Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] 
Jolly “aarerat; Tr? searect; Apa [vl as in ed.] Hereat — d) Apa Hast area, rma} 
“sarqey lysed; Pull yeeTy; Wa Heed; Pus Pu? mTr? Ysa; Be? Lod ast 

Jm gives the verses in the following order: 10ab, 11cd, 11ab, 10cd. 

un. Cited by Apa 79;Laks 2.27; Dev 1.181; Madh 1.474 — a) sOx! sPu® Tr? Tear7; 
MTt? om4 — a-b) BAP 7.2863 7 HATE + a feerad lar — b) Me? afar’: La! [cor 
to sh] Lo? Pul® Tj! Tr! Wa [Jolly M'?R] Jha Dave 4; [Jolly M8] 41; Me supports aT with 
gloss TRA wT — c) Be} ATS; Tr? Trwsa; GMy Wet — d) Wa afar 

12.* Cited by Vif 1.55;Vij 1.56; Jmv 92; Dev 1.205-6; Madh 1.493; padas c-d cited by 
Apa 88 — a) GMd fearétat — a-b) BhP 7.3 STATA aT aT aasfer — b) tMd3 
Tr? aq — d) GMy Ox} “arfirat; Md? “aad; wKtS eaat, Lo’ HA; BhP 7.3 Vij Apa 
Jmy Dev Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave PAABAT:; Pud HAAMET:; Bo AT:; Tj! eT 

13.* ma in Pu’7; padas c-d omitted in Pu!®, Cited by Apa 87-8; Jmv 9.2; Laks 2.38; Dev 
1.206; Mddh 1.494 — a) Laks UREN Hat Bsa; nKe wKt° Tea — b) BAP 7.6 IAAT 
Haeadica; Tr? ear aw fersrr, Tj? ferer:; cMd! fear; BK) GMd! @y@:; Pud Pu? Pul? [Jolly M28 
G] Jolly at, Ho M4 Sat:; Laks Bt: — c) mTr°A T; Hy ST; Be! BBe Be? TM? oOr La! 
Pud Pu’ mTr4 MTr° Jv Laks Uateq; wKt} aster; Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? GMd! oMd? Tj? mTr? 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Ut — d) Bo TT SAT; GMy A Bs NK¢ Apa ana ; Tj! 
“sae: 

14. Cited by Apa 87; Dev 1.206; Madh 1.495 — a) Pu Pu’ ae — b) ™d’ 8; Tj? 7; 
sOx! sPuo fe afePra; Te fered:; mMd* ferefer — c) Md} aferes a fe Tar — d) Bo Fs"; 
wKkt® cMd> Dev 7; wKt® “fasafer; Td? “seat 


450 Chapter 3 


etentdtayr Atetggeedt feces: 


RoraT AIA Aaa FRAT ULE 
WYaTadl WAAACAAATATET T | 


WAHT Yate ATTA AT: ULM 
Yat WAATANIT Het aera | 
HARA YX TAT Hrsg SAT M2 oil 
atten aaa wet g | 
water fragaras a eat a mate lec 
qrthatiogn Freareteder T | 

aeat Bar waren Prepfert fereftara nec 
wenrarr antat wets a fearfeary | 
sera chfraretraterd UR oll 


15. Cited by Apa 87; Jmv9.9; Dev 1.207; Madh 1.495 — a) Be Bo Hy wKt! nK¢ Lo? 
oMd5 sOx' sPuS Pu!® Tj! Tr? Volly M'24 RN] my [vi] éarte; eked “smfafest — b) nKe 
“ert; Puld “gerer; 1M? “set; wKt “fest — c) wT? Beara; Ho TaN; Pu!? Tara 
— d) Ho Fay aay; tM} aera; oMd! aA, Ho Feat me to 

16. Cited by Apa 88; Laks 2.41, Jmv 9.9; Dev 1.208; Madh 1.495 — a-d) BhP7.9 gives 
an expanded version: {ara MATT fede ¢ | srer: gasrareafedcasarrary | 
RT yaaa shrew: Beat qe: | yaTeaseraae afer |! Obviously the author of 
the BhP misunderstood the verse — a) GMy qgrararary TMd3 qorranferacay TMd* 


gered seers Sere" wKt! Lo! wert Scar ; cM! career; wKtS “ater; Tr! 
“ayaAeteay — a-b) 1Md4 “art Ber TET — b) cMd! 1Md? cMd cMy Tr! “Semen; Tr! 
“FeaAl; Jo! “Teqer’: nPul ar; wKt! { — c) Jo! MAH, Laks WAHT 

17. Cited by Vij 3.265; Apa 87; Jmv 9.9; Dev 1.208; Mddh 1.495 — a) Hy {aR — 
b) Md aera? — c) Tr? aes eT; wKt? Far; Lo’ Pul? qear, 1Md4 qeT — d) Lo? 
“wareadlaa;, GMa’ aeareT 

18.* Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 88 — a) Bo Lo? nPu! Tr? Wa eq: Tj! ae°; sOx! sPue 
aafisafa ; Im “denfe? — b) Tj! + war; La! auf; wKe ger; Bo at g; Lal t— c) 
Be! sBe? Be BCa Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt} BKt® wKt® [but cor] Lo! Lo* [mc to] Lo® tMd4 
NNg oOr sOx! Ox? wPu! sPu® Tj? MT? MTr? MTr°Apa Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave arafea; Jm 
Lo? Tj! azar; mTrS “Sareast; Dev “@aret +; Me appears to read a — c-d) Tr? foaPreareq 
7; BhP 7.12 frat Far: FT; Apa fraeeTeT-F; sOx! sP ue “aateaa; Pu’ [Jolly G] “sar 7; Pul® 
“eareat TET; 1Md4 “@ateq a T— d) Ho Lo? BAP 7.12 ARIAT 7; Bo AF; BK wKt eof 
wart; NKt Lo} Md‘ Tj! BAP 7.127 Teele; Bo Pub a Tesher 

19. Cited by Har-A 1.27.15 Madh 1.495 — a) BKé wKtS gudtafatarer, TP Me [patha] 
“dtathrer — b) Bo wKt! nKe! Tj! Pear — c) Ho Bd; Madh WaaeT; Md? Warmer — d) Hy 
fated; wKt! “fesiRreliae; Ho festa fare 

20. Cited by Mddh 1.485; padas c-d cited by Jmv 4.3.4; Dev 1.227— a) BAP 7.14 “afr 
festexr: — b) Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? La! Lo? GMy Pu? Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa Yolly R] Madh Mandlik 





Chapter 3 451 


Walt Saetars: ASTI: 
Treerat wetter Varerareatiserz: 2 2M 
at wer reat acter qerarat aT aer at | 
ae: ad seen vet aT TMT NR RI 
werent farmer aren agesary | 
faqquater arma frargeataratary U2 Sil 
A Tay] Tawar Fag: | 
Tere ararereage sey: weil 
wart 7 Ta vat grat aparhis | 
tararageala aT adett wr NRE M 
mragaran frit ar frarat gatfeat tt 


Jha KSS Dave 1t 2S; Kt om fat; BAP 7.14 fearfect — c-d) BAP 7a4earadt sate 
Prarerenaarry — c) nPul Pu’ serdar’ ; sOx! sPur “sree; mT} HIRTHTATT — d) 
Jm *feraré Frater 
21. Cited by Dev 1.227, Madh 1.485; padas a-b cited by Jmv 4.3.4 — a) Tr wer; ake 
aTet; wKtS ae; NK fa; Md? fea; Lo’ @aer ; BHP 7.15 eae aTE:; GMy eaeearare:; 
wKt! daetartar — b) nNKt 9ST — c) wKt® nPu! areal — d) tMd4 Sarrearcead Fer; Pu’ [but 
cor] Pu'® far’ ; sOx! sPue [but cor] Sararat’ ; Bo “SAT: 
22, a) GMy NNg Pud Pu’ mTr* Wa ® wet; Be! Pul? a Fer; nKtt Tee fom AT]; nKf Lo? 
Wa ear; sOx! Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu! mTr4 BhP7.16 TAT; Bo BK? wKt® tMdé sft, GMy Ft; Lo? 
u eef: gee; Hy soter— b) nKet “etaer 7; 1Md4 “dtver wer: Tr? “eer Ter; Kt Ter 
& — c) Md? agereranaeaTy; Te qacerraraety, BhP 7.16 TA Ae fesrIer:; Hy THT; 
Bo Md! cece; Tr! aaead; Jo? dg: Gy — d) cMe WaaT; 1Md3 WAAT ZIT; Bo tMd4 
waar TOT; La! Way; BAP 7.16 TIRTAL 
23.* Cited by Apagi; Laks 2.72; Dev 1.231; Madh 1.487 — a) BhP 7.17 [vl] fawer ade: 
gary; rp “gat; oMd& Tr! Tre “goatee, Apa [vl] *qeatfeaner — b) Md atfaaer; Dev 
OWT — c) Bo T2qe ; La! “Ir q; Te “aa; La! areata; BhP 7.17544 — d) 1M? ferret 
ert wear; Lo? far wat’; Bo oMd? rMd3 Ox? Tr? BAP 7.17 “eutRr ; Be! BCa Jm wKt! 
Kt oOr Pu? Pu’? Tj! [Jolly Me RNd] Re Gia wet; wKtS mT’ “@ata wer; tMd* at + 
met; mTrS “eateq wet; Lo’ “grataeer; Be* NNg Pu Pu’ Pu!® [yolly M'-?-5-8-9 G N] Na 
Jolly Jha °SRAA THAT; nPul “get 7 TAT 
24. Cited by Dev 1.231 — a) Kt’ Sel — b) Tr? ware HART — c) rMdé Tees; Te 
afr; nPul “aeta ange; Ma} “aetaaree — d) Tj! wage 
25.* Cited by Madh 1.488 — a) BhP 7.19 aya AAT; Ho om; Be sCa F; Jm Lot 
Lo’ oM@ sOx! sPuS Pul® eat; Lo? gat — b) Wa Fi; Bo Im wKt? Lot Lo’ oM& sOx! 
sPu® Pul® “erat; Tr! “erst a at wat; cMy waaay; eKé wKtS fereafae; Lo? & arfas — d) 
Wa Hdeit; Be! BBe Be} Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? wK8 nKt BKtS wKt® La! La? Lo? oM@ nNg 
oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pud sPuo Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj? mTr? Ku Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ®eTat 


452 Chapter 3 


Treat weeata eat aren at Brat REM 
wre wera a yaaftead waz | 
HEN ST BIA Tell at: wetfagt: UR9ll 
aa g feat aenpftar at gle 
ASPA Fata Sa ae Tee UCM 

wae myst F aT arararr aaa: | 
wrarard faraarat at: & Feat URI 
wert arat afafs arargqurer J | 
Sarena sraraea fate: Bret: WRoll 
atferat afer erat wert ae afte: | 
BUTT CATT TT TIT NZ LU 


26. Pada-d omitted in BBe? — a) nPu! “afaftes: BK om second aT — b) Te afeat 
— c¢) Bo Ho Jm Weaat; Ke? arerat; sOx! Tr! aad; oOr Tat; BBe Tee — d) wKto 
eeat; tMd3 GMd sOx! mT v3 eat; oMe eat; Md‘ & BAT 

27.* Omitted in BBe. Cited by Apa 87; Dev 1.227 -—— a) TMd4 areerererd farce, Pw 
aTéfacat; BBe BCa Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? Lot Lo’ oME& Ox? [cor to] Tj? Rn Mr Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS Dave arafiear, Hyardfaear; Pu!® om 4; Lo? Pu? [Jolly G] BhP7.21 ¢ — b) Jm Jo! 
Kt? oM@ GM nPul mTr? MTr® Re Mandlik KSS°xfF°; Pul® -Ta:; GMy grafts; rMd4 
“ateafe, mT Sftead; Lo? Tj! aa — d) cMé aTeRIT; Bo FET; Ho nK¢! Heit; GMdS Pu’ Tr! 
erry: 

28, Padas a-c omitted inBBe*. Cited by Hem 1.684; Dev 1.228 — a) GMy 497; Jo? Lo? 
PuS Pu? Tj! Wa [Jolly G] 4; La! feat; Tr? rar — a-b) BAP 7.22 faa aft ae g wt 
aata afar — b) oOr Pud Pu’ Hem Wares Hafer sefeast [oOr Sa]; La! wey wafer 
cafeafer; Tj! Teasir, nNg ef — c) TM? qatart — d) BhP eat af BarEct:; BBe? om FF; Ho 
Td Tr! 2a; GMd dat aTeh:; BK GMy Pu’ mTr‘ mTr® et; Tr! eet, Bo rat; Ho a4; Pus 
at; Be ret: yastfcte:; aCa nNg Tae 

29. Padas c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Hem 1.684; Dev 1.228; padas a- b cited by Vis 
1.59 — a) Jm WaT; Md? Ca; NK Ee atPrege; Tj! att b) BKt sOx! aera tMd?3 Pu? 
are ; Lo? aera. — c) sOx'! sPu® armrart & fete’; Jm “watt — d) My ver arat ent 
sae, BAP 7.23 Farha wf SeaTa; Bo Tart; cMd! Tr! eee; Be! Ho at: yaaa: 

After 29 wKt! gives 3.32 and GMy 3.32 a-b up to ar 

30. Padas a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by Hem 1.685; Dev 1.228 — a) Tr’ wert, oOr ael- 
W; nPul afeat; wKkto qetat; Im Ke AeA; Be? nKtt Ue — b) NNg APTA: wKtS “sera; 
Md “ere: sOx! sPuS °“HTUE both cor to” War qT; BBe* Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? La! La* Lo? Tj! 
Tj? Tr? mTr3 [Jolly M® R] Mandlik Jha KSS Daved — c) Hem Beret BAYT — d) Jo! 
La! WoTTST. BAP 7.24 oTaTTearaer: 

31. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Vis 1.61; Dev 1.229 — a) Dev aTaAa — b) Md? GMd> 
erat a eaarftsa:; rMd4 wearte waarftna:; Tr eearare erarferc:; My mT ro BeurareTr 
eaaifent:, Ox? Bae; BAP 7.25 Baas: GMd! Wet — c) Vis PAA g eI ; tMd3 


Chapter 3 453 


TOAMAAAT: BAIA AT T | 
Tred: @ g faaat Ayer: srreNra: RRM 
seat forat a Are a waredt cad Ted | 
WHT Bast Tatar fakereerr 3 3M 
Qat Fal WAT aT Tet Baraat | 

@ arfacst faarerat tarrer: sPratsee: Sil 
siete formant weet wearer | 
TARAT J aoeatacarawayr WAU 

at aerat faarerat agar sitar wT: | 
ad aoe & fast: aereatdaat ar REI 
aT yates Date | 
maiga: gpagritrrcera: Frat llgell 


Bes’: Tr? BAP 7.25 *eeraTeTEeT 

32. Cited by Vis 1.61; Hem 1.32, Dev 1.229 — a) Le surat; Lo? Tj! mTr* mTr° Yolly 
R] dat: — b) K? erat a; oMd! warrareg — c) Jo? Lo? Tj! Wa Volly R] Hem @ 7; nKtt 
GMd! tMd3 GMd oOr Tr! mTr* mTr® BAP 7.26 Vis & feferstat — d) GMy sOx! Pu? sPub Pud 
Pu’ [Jolly M'-?-8 G]ae:; Pul? dept; GMy aa 

33. Cited by Vis 1.61; Laks 2.92; Dev 1.229 — a) TMd? fea; sOx! sPuo Prat =F fercat 
a nKke frat a; Tr! fear -F HY — b) Hy Lot Ox? Hara; Lo? PraTaT; Lo? Ox? Pu’ vad; 
Bo geri; Lo! edt; aKtS wKt 72; Wa For — c) cMd! waGer HAM; Bo Besar; Tr! 
MTro Baws; sOx sPus Laks Hat Stat — d) sOx! sPu’ fafererera Serer; Tj! vers 

34. Cited by Vis1.61; Apa 91; Laks 2.94; Hem 1.685 — a) sOx! sPuS gat Tat; Tj? om 
Far, Md? wat FAT; wKt® HaPT AAT aT; Hem WUT WS*ST; Im WTA; BhP 7.28 FT— b) Lo} 
Tj' Wa [Jolly R] tet ar afe reef [Wa aT Ta]; Hem Hear waArttad; sOx! [me to] sPus [me 
to] Apa [vl as in ed] TATA; cMd> Tararesler; Jo? FT Teak — c) Lo? yfses — d) Be? 
Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? mTr3 KSS Garreeatcetiters: [ef. 3.21d]; wKt® tarrar:; Tr? grees; La! 
aifadtet:; wKt! oOr sOx! sPu’ BAP 7.28 Apawfadsen:; Pul® Mandlik Jha Dave 
WPS: BK wKto afer: 

35. Cited by Laks 2.68 — a) BhP 7.295094 fest’; BBe Hy Jm wKt? BK# wK¢é fear- 
amtt; Pu Pu’ [Jolly G] fest — b) La? warren; GMy aetcr; Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? La! Pul? 
Tj? mTr? [Jolly M38] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fairer — c) oOr Sat J; Ox? FT; BK O 
wKkts g eaten — d) Lo? Tj! [Yolly R] aergar 

36. Cited by Hem 1.683; Laks 2.97 —-- a) Tr! aeatut g [om at cGMy Teast; Hem waar 
— b) oMy #tfeat AYA |T:; +Md4 ASAT; BAP 7.30 fayat aaa ; Pul? ater, TM? Laks 
atfcar yor:; mTr® Yor: — c) BAP 7.30 7 rated & foor:; Be? Hotd; mTr4 TRAIT; Bo 
yaa; NK et pst; TMd3 afeur:; GMd! cMd> & fat: — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? mTr? Ku Hem 
Mandlik KSS 74 &t4aat; Bo [but cor] Pu2 Far 

37. Cited by Apa 88; Hem 1.683; Laks 2.98; Dev1.227— a) Jm eargat carder; La! 
gataw azar’; Jm gatser azar’; sBe? Ho Hy Jo! wKt! K? wKt Kt wKt® Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® 


454 Chapter 3 


aatert: Jada GA AA way | 
sate: gate ve ve weet: Ya: URC 


Mente fray weary: | 
daar: Gar Arse RreaAar: Fel 


SMTA MNAAT Taaeat aarheaat: | 
warn afitcer sftafe a wat AAT: Usoll 


greg g Rreg agrarqcaries: | 
arredt gareg seeritae: Jar: is 21 


oMéd? 0Or Ox? nPu! Pu!® Tj! Tj? mT? Yolly M'-*8-9 Ku R] Hem Laks Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave qatar ; Be! yateaarreerarcart; wKt! GMy “ada; Dev “UR — a-b) BhP 
7.31 expanded version: Bart ear gatfer aearenty ate g | afearercrar Fa Araceae 
yay — b) Im “aTary; wKtS “arraa; My “ara Paaray; Lo? ta Fearay, Lo’ rMd? Tj! 
mTr4 Apa [vl] “Feat; oMd! “aries: mTr® faarast — c) Be! aera Bo *ad:; nPul “gaer 
PAH; oOr “YA: Pa; nKe ape ; oMy ageae Ate — d) BAP 7.31 “poaert qe er, 
Hy Jm Jo! GMd! oMdS Tj? Tr! Tr? MTr3 Re Jolly KSS “AteAe:; La? “gare; wKt! Tro 
“Sea; OMe “TAA; TMd3 “Tae: 
38.* Cited by Vis 1.59; Hem 1.683; Laks 2.98; Dev 1.228 — a) Hy Teer; nNg @at’; 
Hy Jo? wKt! BK wKt® Lo? oOr Ox? [but cor sh] Tj! ae [Jolly RN] Dey &&t:; GMd! 1Md3 
TMd4 cM& My. Tr! [Jolly Nd] Vis ata; mTr4 mTr® ea; Be? nKtt La! BAP 7.32 [vl] Laks 
“aaTEAa [Be? ST]; BhP Tat faut: — b) Lot Ox? TATA [but me Lo ]; Pus Pu’ [Jolly G] 
TUaTAI; [Jolly Go] TATRA — c) Be! Bo Hy Jo? wKt' BKe wKt La! Lo! Lo? Lo oOr sOx! 
Ox? [but cor sh] nPu! sPuS Tj! Tf [Jolly RN] Dev em; ;nKtt Laks *aaT; Be? “erst; Td} 
TMd! GM@ My Tr! [Jolly Nd] Vis “tar; Tr’mTr® Sr; BhP Saat: SA [vl *sr:] — 
d) BAP Teatearag fest:; Hem Tear aati ; Ho oMd? Pu! om one Te; Lo ma one TE; nKt 
aTateat; Ho Mr “SIT: Wa “ea: mTr4 mTr® SP; TM? [Jolly Nd] “grat, Tr! “ear, Be} Laks 
“aage:; NPu! Pul® aya: 
Additional verse given in margin in Pul: 
ardfeager: Far sreray qarger: | 
ear wee: Fa: morgen sfer Peafer: I 
39.* Cited by Apa 117, Hem 1.683; Dev 1.230 — a) Be! Bo sOx! sPu® Pu! a@qr ; Ho 
oMd> Ox? aTerat ; wK} frarey — b) Pud Pu? wg@teng ; Te ugéaagy ; Ox) sgt ag 
oMy aquteyaer: — c) Be! sBe? Be? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt wKt® La! La 
Lo! Lo? Lot Lo? oMe& tMd* NNg oOrsOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu sPuS Pu? PuS Pu!® 
Tj! Tj? Te Tr? mTr® WaApa Hem Jolly KSS  Taftat:; BKe “afafeas:; Im Ja: — d) Hy 
oredr, wPul safe; mT 3 ere 
40. Cited by Apa 117, Hem 1.683; Dev 1.230 — a) nKt! @@a ; Md? “Aeaettar— b) 
Pu? Pu’ [Jolly G] teaedt — c) BAP 7.34 Vaasa atAcer, wKt® rMd4 “arr; mT r3 after — 
d) Tr? Wat; Kt? a; Bo nKt* @H:; Lo® TAT 
41. Cited by Apa 117; Hem 1.683; Dev 1.230 — a) BhP 7.35 30eg fratered; Lo} tMd4 
oOr ule cor] NPu! Tj! Tr Volly R] HemApa ey T Rereg; wKt® “Wa fareeq; rMd3 
; Pul® [Jolly M'2] tafaréy; Be! Be? Bo La? Lo! nNg Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Wa 


Chapter 3 455 


after: ataetetear wafe wT | 
fafeafitaar gor centrentaatag te Rt 
arirenreae: TaNaseTe | 

wean wat fakresreasfir tty 3 

ae: Ararat Wel: Walat Azra | 


FATT FAT WE Yaaepeasy Wesel 
RRS Sra carafe: Far | 


aaa aGreaat aed cere incu 
Rg: Tarttas: Shot war: Wear ar: 
agtiRat: artaethr: afenia: use 
ararareanrsaaaegd fatacterestt a ar t 
aaaat TAT: SP: WAKA SAT WT: Us 
ANY FAT wet Kaasgerg uty | 


[Jolly M8°G] Nd Jolly taraferey — b) cMd’ afearga; Im “aracranfes:; nKe “arfear: — 
d) Apa wer 

42. Cited by Apa 117; Hem 1.683—~ a) La! af’; oOr aed: fet? — b) Jm “Pret; 
wKt® aTae aT; KE Lo! +Md4 nNg Pu’ Pu’ 95T: — c) oMd? fafzar Pafrerador; rMd4 “Paar 
aot; Tr? “Peat efter; La! gat— d) Bo “Branfea’; wKkto “frat faa’; rMd> “fren fara’; 
TMd4 faraieg asta 

43. Cited by Madh 1.496 — a) Ho sOx! “weur; Pud “weur; mTr? dete: — a- -b) BhP 
7. 37 PASTAETT: want wafer t— b) Be3BKtS wKtS GMy Ox? [but cor sh| mT Wexae 
—c) Ho saga”; BK wKtS eau eet; Lo! sit— d) Ho Jm fafereere” 

44. Cited by Madh 1.496; padas c-d cited by Vij 1.62;Apa 92 — a) BhP 7.38 AT:; Bo 
afsar, wk} Lo? aeit:; TMd3 art: — b) Bo Ho Lo’ Lo4 Lo’ NNg Tj! WaTat; TM? Fae; NK Ee 
TeaeT; cMy Fare; BK AS Fae, wKtS TaeT; NK! “@TWAT; Im Wa BRIT — c) Pu!? TaqeT; Bo 
aTel — c-d) GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd@ GMy Tr! mTr* mTr® Madh arate Baa I aiepeaxywr 
aat [cMy fara] — d) Lo? eae ; BK wKt® “spite; Bo aet 

45. Cited by Hem 3/3.724; Dev 1.41; Madh1.497; pada-a cited by Vis 1.79; Apa 103 — 
a) Tr! arergaat — b) MTP wae; nKe aera; cMy “Prara:; Hem “Fara: afr: — c) 
oMé “ast; Dev THAT; BK wKt THAT — d) NK age; Hem - amt ae 

46. Cited by Dev 1.38; Madh 1.4378 — a) Bo Hy Tr? SAT ; cMd> earatfaay — b) Be! 
wKe} 1ea:; Jm Tear; Jm GMd 5 sOx! @fc:; Bo wK Jat — d) oMy aferiféd:; nK¢ ate 
mfee:, M3 afgafed: 

47.* Cited by Apa 104; Hem3/3.727; Laks 3.339; Dev 1.38; Madh 1. 437-8 — a) tMd* 
Hem Saat ; Be! Ho Tr! “ater — b) wK Preder ; rMd4 rear war; Ho Apa Hem Dev 

“waft aT; o0t Pul? “afr war; sOx! oma; Lot ma 7; Jo? Lo? Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tr? Wag — c) 
BKt wKt® Lo® sOx! sPu® Tj! Tr? qd; aK é sare; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nK¢ La! cMd! tMd? 1Md* 
GMd? cMy Ox? [cor to sh] Tj? MTP Trt MTr® Mandlik Jha KSS Dave We 


456 Chapter 3 


TTT Fart agar fear sci 
arya gar eat wasters fear: 
wasyargeaar ar afttser a fecekr: seit 


freamarerg ure Prat uey aad | 
aaa wae ar AAPA TNT Ikoll 


v ear: frat faery agtagenaate | 
Tete ger oh ereisreafaatt iy 2 


eareranret g FT Atergusttater arerar: | 
area TET AT TATA are UG RI 


48, Omitted in Hy. Cited by Apa 103; Dev 1.37; Madh 1.438 — a) nKt’ reg ; Jm 
way — c) eMy garf — d) nK¢ eK wKt® Lo? Ox? aaaer, Tr? Carta, Tj! arddt; Ke? 
“aréd, Ho “ard® feae:; Be? Lo? Tr ferat; sPuS [but cor] eae: 

49. Cited by Dev 1.40; Mddh 1.499; pada a-b cited by Vij 2.117; pada-a by Vis 1.79— a) 
Md Farge; Be! BATeaT; Lo’ Md? tMd4 Tj! Tr! mTr4 Dev Visa; GMd5 Ba; Lolly Gr] 
ae — b) aMy waanfear, oOr waaferar; sOx! sPuS vaarferas; Tre? arenas; Md* “cafes, 
Bo GMd) Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Dev fera:; Lo? Md} ferat — c) Me | patha] aT}; BBe Lo® rMd3 oOr 
nPu! “fer; BK® wKt® Lot Tj? eratat — d) Hy aft Je fat’; Be} om F; BBe? Ho BKtwKt® 
g 

Addition verse in GMd? {Jolly Gr]: 


a) [Jolly Gr] THT — b) [Volly Gr] He T— ec) [Volly Gr] weereret fers — d) 
ocMd ary 

50.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Vis 1.79 — a) oM@ sOx! sPuS freq 
ured; wkt! Reng ag werg; Te? Prarcegureny, sK¢ Prema; Md? “ee; Bo 
ara — b) Bo tary; Be! sBe? Be? [cor to] BCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? nKt* Lo! Lo? Lot 
Lo® oMd? Md? Ox? Pu’ Tr! Tr? asta — d) Tj? Sarva; GMyaarys, Wa TAT 

Additonal verse in Ho oOr; placed after 3.54 in TMd?: 

HS _T at sede ares | 
crear wate cf aret freer Seer II 

a) Ho “ST; oOr arat afreit — c) rMd4 cea aif ARE 7 — cd) oOr Beat 
qaeean: ae Tamfe ara: 

51. Cited by Laks 2.88; Jmv 4.3.24; Dev 1.232 —- a)sOx! sPuS Saarar; Pu’ Pu’ Dev 
Hua: Jo! pears: — c) sOx! sPu Jefe; Hy Jo! Kt? La! oMd? tM? Pu!? Tj? Lolly M!2 8 
9] Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Teseee fF (La! F, Md} J]; Jm THt Bea fF; Be! Bars; 
pBe? Heéa — d) La! wacatster; TMd3 “fase; coMd aMy [Jolly Gr] insert here 9.98 and 
100; Tr! inserts 9.98a-b, 100a-b, 98c-d, and 100c-d. 

52. a) Pud Pu? a 4; Lot ma a; Be? wKt® La! GMy oOr [but cor fh] Ox? [but cor sh] ar; 
sOx! sPuS Tr? Shey — b) tMd? “says — c) Lo? sOx! sPu® Tr! [Jolly N Nd] areas, 
wkKt! aretaraify; GMy aregarh; oOr arestarify; tM} La! aeat, wKto aeatFr [om aT}; Lo! & 


Chapter 3 457 


amet MRT Qos Brats TT | 
Teas aAgT Heraty wrasse FT: Ue 3M 
Oat Aead Yow Alaat 7 a faa: | 


SET AANA AT HACAT NG VI 
faqhratahtar: afahrdatecer | 

wear waka aE HearorTakgAr: ky I 
TT ARR Gad Ted AT Face: | 

aaa T Wert waterarnon: fra: yell 


grater arrat war agemy aceery | 
qT arater g axa ated af ada kyl 


— d) Pul? “eftrfar:; 1Md3 “eit 
53.* Cited by Dev 1.231 — a) sOx! sPuS att; Lo’ aTat— c) wKt} nNg S147; Tj! 
IAF: Jo? AAT; Tr? Dev wef ar wer [Tr? areafS], Lo! Md? cMy Ox? BAP 7.41 Feat 
arft wer; nKt! Wa ‘Aa; Be? Lo? [cor to] He-aTh; sOx! wearft — d) Be! Jo’ BK wKt® La? 
Lo? Lot Lo>cMy sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? Put sPuS Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M R] Me Re Jha 
Dave wars & fH: [BKO Tr? aTART; wKeS aaa; wKt6 fafser:]; NNg as in ed. but mc to 
ararta & faaxt: with the comment $f& oe:; nKé waa; oOr ATE; *Md3 “eae 
Additional verses in GMd! tMd4 GMd GMy oOr Tr! mTr? MT? [cf. 9.42]: 
aa ara aatgtar: wrcafer gers: | 
Tarashy + facer: gear: fer ga: wor: 1121 
ay ayear ager fe faster aaiester | 
oer at ger at ae ceasttafer RI 
1. a) GMd! 0Or MTr*mTro are aalgtat; GMy watgrar;, tMd*4 argetrar — c) mTr4 
om 7; mTr® fers: — d) MT r6 TIT 
2. a-b) GMd! Ager: [lacuna] ateafereater; cMd> HyerET fawargt — b) mTr? 
fasaaterreste; 1M dé fastorerattrester — c) GMd! Ber; 1Md4 m Trt gage 
Cited by Dev 1.233 — a) MTr? Tat — b) oMd ara; sOx! sPu® ana, Pu areraye- 
tet sNKtt tT arate: — co) Md} aeoreaeaeAr ; Pu! [Yolly M289] q aa” — d) cMy 
“omrqater; Pud Pu? “art; Be! oOr Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly Glg 
Additional verse in rMd?*: same as added verse after 3.50. 
55. Cited by Dev 3.570;Madh 1.505 — a) Te ahratahy ; sBe? “Rrvar, aK wKté 
Lo! Lot Lo’ Md? nPu! “Rrita; Ox3 "Reta — b) Ma} “ter at: sfacaarerar — c) Tj? Gar 
a yftacar a; Md! gear: gaftacara; Tr! etfrceara; sOx! sPue “aeat 7 — d) Tr? 
TEP UTTAR: 


56. Cited by Apa 107; Laks 12.610; Dev 3.57% Madh 1.505 — a) BK wKktS aad; Apa 
are: wesIe — b) Pul® om Hd; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] tara; Be! gaa — c) sOx! sPuo ataT 7 
fe goad; wkt ata, Devat dey — d) Pul? aatPrner: fear; mT? waterarar: ;cMd! 
GM Tr! [Jolly Nd] WateTRATHST:;, TMd> GMy Fate HST; GMy FT: 

57. Cited by Laks 12.610; Dev 3.571, Madh 1.506 — a) Pu! araafead; Tj! Wa abate; 
Be! sBe’ Ca wKt! wKt? nKt* BK wKt® Lot Lo® oOr Ox? Ox} Pu® Pu! Tr? aTaay; sOx! sPu® 


458 Chapter 3 


ara ater tert arrecrafagirar: 
aft genearita fragt waa: UK 
TATA: AATARAT YUTTTAATAT: | 
afretifter wantgarag 7 kel 
ager wrfar wal wat wat aa 


afteataces Pret seat ax F gar lgolt 
ate fe aft a tree gaia a water | 


ATA: FI: WHT aT Tada le Vi 

ffaat g trararrat ad agtat eer | 

Tea aaa aaAT AT TTT USAM 
glace: famettdaeeaagt 7 | 


Say; Lo! sara; Dev aftrat— b) Ke? faasarcargy;, cMd! farsa, sKé wKkt> aches — c) 
Tet aw aaa aaa; Lo Tj! WaSTY; nKtt om J; oOr mag; wBe wKt! La! Lo4 Lo’ Md? 
Ox} Pul? 7; Ho wKB Tat aT — d) BKO wKt® aes; Lo? Tj! Ta; Md‘ Tr! Dev Ta AAaT 

58 Not commented by Me; omitted in Lot Lo® Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Apa 107; Laks 
12.610; Madh 1.506 — a) Be! pBe? pCa wKt! wKt? wKt® oMd? Ox? Te arrat — b) Te 
aqer: afergtsrer:; sOx! sPu® Teer: wKktS aye: gfe Jm °afergtsrar — c) Lo! “sar = 
—d) MTr® fareater 

59.* Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? Pu!l®. Cited by Laks 12.610;Madh 
1.506 — a) NNg (eaTCAT:; wKt} GeTerear; Be! wKt! BK wKt® Lo? cMd! rMd? GMd> GMy 
sPuS Tj! mTr* mTr® Volly R] PRATAP, Be? Hy Jm Jo! Ke La! oMd? Tj? mTr? Volly Ku] Ku 
Mandlik KSS Dave Wat Tat — b) Lo? Tj! Madh “earfefr: — c) sBe? “HAR Fret — d) Pu’ 
Pu’ [Jolly G] THUY; wKt3 THOT ; nKtt Lo2cMd! tMd? GMd> nNg Ox? [but cor sh] Tr! 
Tr mTr! mTr° Wa [Jolly N Nd] Na aepRvTeT ; Na gives reading of edition as a patha. 

60. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Laks 12.613; Dev 
3.581; Madh 1.506 — a) Bo 4qet — b) Kt? 4a BAT, GMA Tr HTat wat; Bo Ta aT — c) 
Jm Jo! Kt? GMd! oMd? GMd Tj? mTr? Madh Mandlik Jolly KSS Daveafeaxa ae — d) cMy 
pour wafer ga; Bo at X; oOr aaa ge 

61. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo> Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Laks 12.613; Dev 
3.581 — a) GMd Fat; Te 47; Hy Jo? Pu’ Pu’ é; Ho Ug; Tj! ea; Hy wat — b) Tr 
watered; Wa Wate; Md waar — c) Md} Wa avatar’ — d) BBe? BCa wKt! BK wKt® 
Lo? Tj! SSP; wKt} WSTAT, Hy om 7;Ho 7T Prada, wktS 7 acta; Lo? Tj! wearer 

Additional verse in Mandlik [1] KSS Dave; placed after 3.60b in GMd' GMd@: 

ual Fal aT AAT T oeTaaPA | 
aer carrera saree afer: | 
d) Mandlik KSS Dave “oat ere 

62. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox* Pu’ Pul®; padas c-d omitted in 
oMy. Cited by Laks 12.613; Dev 3.581 — a) Tr fe — c) HonKtt GST; MTrosrett, Dev TEM 
mre; Tr! wert are; Im q ae ; sBe a Ma — d) oMd? WaaG; Tr! ad Ja; Be! g Aud 


Chapter 3 459 


gong fata areonftator a Ne sil 
Rett sae Yarra wach: 

TPs aear HT UST NE YI 
RAAT Aa TOT | 
RorIEoAT Alter attr Ara Aaa: UUM 


AA AAT FoTTTTATAT | 
Rode wT moh wii wT Agee: NEgll 


aarfeasat eet wer at aerate | 
Garant Bats ateaeat yet ligt 


Wr FAT Teerer yet Treqqerc: 
HIS WERT Ted Ae aes lsc 


63.* Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox} Pul®. Cited by Dev 1.232 — a) Dev 
afaare:, My @ftate; aKS wKtS Bfare; Bo ferarey ; Lo! gars” — b) Lo? “sidtareaarar 
| — c) Be! sBe* Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt} wKt® wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lo? oMd? Ox? Pu? Pu‘ 
Pud Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Dev Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave Rn Gareqeeeat afer — d) Devareraiter” 

64. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Dev 1.208 — a) 
sOx! sPuo reader etter — c) TMd? Tr! mT r° [Jolly Gr] aiRreceer — d) Tr? Bor; cMd> Par; 
Kt? Kt Par; Be! TaTT 

65.* Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? Pul®. Cited by Laks 2.333; Dev 
1.208 — a) sOx sPuS “Her, PuS Pu’ [Jolly G] sta; Laks “TH Ba; TMd} [Jolly Nd] 

“saadaifer — b) BK Lo! arfeaaet; wKt° ater; sOx! sPuo areata; Be wKt! nKt! 
Lo! tMd3 aMy NNg Ox? nPu! Pud Pu? Tj! 407; cMd! HAq; La! aAerr— c) Be! sBe? Ho Hy 
Jm Jo! wKt! K? wKt} BK wKt® La? Lo! oMe@ sOx! nPu! Pu? Pué Pub sPuo Pu’ Tj? mTr? Dev 
Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave Saray fear [Pus wear | — d) aK wKktS ay aaa Saar: 
oOr afera:; Bo aaa: 

66. Not commented by Me; omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pu'®. Cited by Vis1.54 — a) TMd? 
aaa; sOx! sPus fagpaifr — b) Pus Pu? Bear; wk Borer: wKkt! wke wKt® tMd? Tr! 
oat 7 c) wKt® &; NNg “wer: cMy “ereaey; wkt! aztec — d) Bo BUT; Lo! adr; 
Tr? wera; Vis mater AE: Ox? [but cor sh] et TYAS 

67. Omitted in Lo Pul®. Cited by Hem 3/2.1329; Laks2.114; Dev 2.571— a) wKt!' wKt® 
Tr! mTr4 mTr° BAP 164 tarfeprt; Hem siareraat: oOr yepate — b) Lo? sOx! sPus Laks 
Dev Te; Jo? La! Lo! Lo? tMd4 GMd® GMy Ox? [but cor sh] Pu’ Tj! Tr! Wa [Jolly N] ae; 
Be! Te; Ho Tet; Te wre; Bo wrt at; Im wt; Be! wenfafer; Wa “ferfer — c) Hem T>r- 
aerate a; sOx! wae; BAP 16.4 { — d) Hem TaTUGaP APH; BAP 16.4 Th 
parerayr Tet, Jo? wKt! BKt ‘ia? cMd! tMd3 GM@® GMy mTr* mTr® TRE; Tj! Sf; Lo? with; 
Laks Urea; Lal aar; Tr! ararfeast; Hy Tj! Pair; Jim °gait; Wa “feat; Ma} “fRay; Ke! 
Lo? Lo? cGMd! Ox3 Te 

68. Cited by Laks 3.143 — a) wKt! QT; mT? GAT — b) BAP 16.5 dt ST FT TeVIA; Tj! 


460 Chapter 3 
arat maT aatat Frepent vehi: | 
UST FAT ASAT: TAS TEAR lle Sit 
smart qart: Praag aterz | 
att tat aferttat qaaistahrorty voll 
usdareat Aeris errata afta: | 
a qesft aafrer qaratet fora ie 


Esai al PAGAL oT: 
a pos Wert 


oe 
Mert st we A IST aaa Ue RM 


afe; wKto Tet; NNg Ox Pud Pu’ Pu!? geet; Lo fee; mTrggt; Tr! Greg’; wks Iga; 
oMd “warmest : mT r6 “Tee — c) wKt! ett; Be! [but cor] NKt' tMd* GMy sOx! sPu° 
MTr4 MTro ave}; Tr! ast; cMd avery; wKtS wrest: Md? Sfat; mTr3 aeshy; Tj? 
ae; nKtt aaa; TMd? GM@ Tr! MT r4 mT ro da BrT [MTrS BATT; cMd> “BRAT; 
Kt Tr? “gt a, sOx! sPuS “gett a; 1Md! “eerer — o-d) BAP 16.5 PEAT Taft Ys sa- 
aren, gash [vl “a@eatt:] — d)tMd? areaa; cMé aera, oOr TART; GMd! GMy TEA; Laks 
awed; Pul? aeaedeareq; Wa Uleq; Jo? Pu’ Pu? aveq; wKt! nKt! Kt? wKt® ara; Bo Ho Lo! Lo* 
Ox? aq; mTr* & J; wPu Tea; TM} AeA; GMy Wea; Md! easy 

69. Cited by Laks 3.143 — a) GMy Tr! MTr4 BhP 16.6 Laks aTat, wKt® yatat — a-b) 
oMy aaaraPreper Ae — b) Ox? Fae; sPuo eGAY:; sOx! Herifr:; Md? BHP 16.6 FAIRY: 
— c) BhP 16.6 THAT AETTST:; 1Md4 TSTEAT; GMy HA; sOx! sPu’ fear 

70. Cited by Dev 2.562-3 —~ a)tMd? 1Mdé mTr° srearas; Tr! eget; wKtS Aeraat: — 
b) BhP 16.7 Usa; TMd4 “Te J — c) GMy eat eat yaater, La! 87; Jm ert; sOx! sPuo 
mTrt mT ro Sa SPAT; Pud Pu? eat; Tj! afenitay; Md?) afesfar; Pul? aferatat; oOr afeysir, 
ake aferter; wKkto afexiter — c-d) BhP 167 afettaeraraisfargarra — d) Tr! “fete 
aT 

7. a) Lol asdapa wer; Tr! seta wer — b) oMy “garretrafe; Lo! vetafer— c) 
Bo ™Md3 eagety; wKke> FEF; Bo oOr sOx! sPus mTr* MTr6 aaPATST; cMd5 aafarmegar —d) 
Wa ae; Pul? garer 

72. Omitted in mTr?. Cited by Apa146; Dev 2.595 — a) Lo® aarfarr ; Md [Jolly Nd} 
“fafirgaat — a-b) Me [patha] caerfertery eae: fagenarert aT — c) BKt fraated; 
Me [patha] T=: — d) oMy “TUagIaA; Md4 “HRA; BhP 16.9 8H FT; Bo afar siate; 
Lo! “waft sfrafer 

73. The section 3.73-117 is omitted in [Jolly M*], padas c-d omitted in Lo’ Tj!. Cited 
by Apa 142 — a) Pul ager sec Ae; Bo Ho ATE; GMy AgeeT; NK wKt° aT — b) Ho ¥ET- 
Rate wT, Lot nNg [but cor] Ox3 weet ; Lo! after TT jumps to verse 74b [haplo] — c) Be! 
pCa wKt* nKt* wKt® Lo? TMd? GMd5 GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Ox? sPu® Pu!® Tr! mTr4 Volly M!-*- 
ae ~? Me N Nd] Apa ae; Bo ae, La! seraed; cMd! serned; Hy sere; Lo! werEd — 
d) Tr! GeaET ; GMy Teese; Trt Bet WeEeAe; Apa Bar: Taster: 


Chapter 3 461 


Wasgat gat eta: vga wiferer afer: | 
Mert edt feararat wre fraatory ov 
crear frag: erg Fa Bae BAT I 
ae aftr get f fete aeraeq oul 
aut crenefe: wernfzerafese | 
afters aheqerst aa: wat: eel! 
wat ay warren ad sftafer aera: | 
AUT TERIA aT FATT: Hill 
GAN TSAI AAT UAST | 
Tees aed TASS SPTAT TET loci 


74. Cited by Apa 142 — a) wKt® aoIgaT, Ox? Tdea?; nPu!l WaT galsEat; Hy om er7:; 
Ho @TF7; wKt° Ae: — b) Be! EAT; Ox? agar etfereet; Wa tra; Ma? aiferit — c) Be! 
pCa wKt} nKt* wKt® tMd? GMd> GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Pub sPu® Pu! Tr! mTr* Lolly M)?5-89 
Me N Nd] Apa ST@T; Ox? aTAIT; Lo? S@IT; GMd! sTePATEd; wKt° 7c fear; oMy feseareat; 
NNg fesrmaret; Be fgsrarat; Ke? eareare?, ake fester: wk srtay:; Md? fess, 
Tj! Reva; Lo} feararar 

75. Cited by Laks 3.148-9 — a) Bo SATa; tMd? GMy 3a aeh:; BKE wKt® “ghey: — 
b) Lot Lo’ Pu? Laks Go @& fast a afer [Lot Lo’ 4] — c) Pud Pu? Go saaafy Fer fe; 
Wa surat ayer; Ho Im Jo! Ke Tj! Tr! mTr° Mandlik Jha KSS Dave FaH4fer; Bort 
HAT, Jo? Lo} Tj! Tj? ATeHT [om ];ke wKt> TarfT — d) Lot Lod fare; Laks TAR: 

76. Cited by Apa 994 — a) sOx! Ox? sPu’ grarefer:; oOr sareatgfe:; cMy WaredTgia- 
fren’; mTr! Et: — b) La! sOx! Ox? nPu! sPuS Pu!? Wa ‘Terafer; NKtt Lo? Lo’ cMd! tMd4 
“sresfer — d) Lo? “tet aa: 

77.* a) GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy Tr! mTr! MTr® [Jolly Nd Greve ataeareree [ef 
VaDh 8.16]; nKt! G27; nKtt TATTeT — b) sCa Hy Jm Jo! KP wKt? nKtt La! Md! GMy oOr 
nPu! Tj? Te mTr? MrMandlik Biihler KSS 74-4 WAIT: — c) Md Us FE ; wKt! TE- 
errararer — c-d) nKt* rMd3 nNg sOx! sPu Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® [Jolly Nd] added afecr agar- 
Preatae aprar: (Tr! gfereas] — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? Tr? Ku Mr Mandlik Biihler KSS 
aded Tt APTAT: [MTr? aera]; La! sceTAT— cMd) next repeats verse 77 giving the vulgate 
reading [of Mandlik etc.] 

Additional verse in nPu! Mandlik [€]; cf. 6.90: 

aa qatar: as ayy arf deat | 
cana: af yeer afer dferferr I 
d) nPu! afore 

78. Cited by Laks 3.209 — a) Ho TMd4 mTr* @eaTa; GMy Far Fat; Tj! Tatar fry — 
b) GMd! SAAT; Bo wKtS Ox? sTaaTa4; Pu!o aRATA: La! array; Hy aaa; Jm a- 
are, wKe aete:; Ho freq: — c) BBe Hy Jm Jo! Kt? mT? Mandlik Bithler Jha KSS Dave 
Tees, ake Teer — d) wKt! Laks THES FEPHAt; Lo Pul? Tj! Lolly M'-2-8 R] TeAT- 
=STAT, Me Dave Jha TE4; Me gives Tél as a patha, saying that if the latter reading is 
followed then the previous compound is a Bahuvrihi; if the former is followed it is a Karma- 








462 Chapter 3 


a tat: saat caterer | 

qa dewaerd asarat gear: Weil 
aaa: frawt tar yarertcrerreacu4r | 
agra sehen: ert froraar lic oll 
erearraraadty eadarerearrakr | 


Prasat qaafart aferator tic 2 
TURES: AT SAAAAT HT AT | 


watgemedine frper: fifeerery uc Rt 
vanes feet asa | 
a Jarpmaeehre Pate wher ory uc 3h 


dharaya; 7ét is supported by Go Ku and Re. 

79.* main Pu? — a) Jo? om @; wKt® Garat:; nK¢ Tat:; oMd? aearare: [om A]; sOx! 
sPuo Haraify seat; Pu Pu? Surat Jeet — b) Lo* aifrewarftresar; oOrentaeraft ; GMy 
we aah’: Lot wena: Tj! Tr! Hereafr’; Lo! “Prerar— c) Ox} “=aTeIAT; BBe Be? 
Bo pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? wKt® Lo! Lo? oMd? oOr nPu! Pud Pu? Tj! Tj? mTr? 
[Jolly G R] Mandlik Jolly KSS “set Pret — d) Tr? om AY; oOr om aat; Tj! ars; nKe 
erat; cMy “Stem: 

80. Cited by Laks 3.147-8; Dev 2.563 — a) nKtt aa: fae; Ke? fra; NKe Sarge 
—b) Tj! fara’; Ke “feet ger — c) sKtS sired; wKtS rMd3 cM? Tr! arrareart; cMy 
aarad; Be! ararerd; Jm arranfere; Ho aeTad; cMy GE — d) Tr? om 3a:; Be} “Saat: Jm 
nKtt ort 

81. Cited by Jmv 11.6.17; Laks 3.148; Dev 2.563 — a) Teast etc; BBe Kt? 
wKt} nPul mT Jmy ArhaEUi; NNg arate, wKt! “arerartts, Tj! “arsed, —b)Jm 
ar’; oOr “Fafer: — c) cM fraagranerat yah; La! first Geet warhy; Jo? Lo? 
Tj! Paemstetaantat; aK wKto Rgogrenstagats; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd@ Tj? mTr3 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave q=aeed; Lo! frat ated — d) 1Md} “Starht, cMy “Safar 7 
apyor 

82.* Cited by Vij 1.217, Apa 145; Laks 3.169; Hem 3/1.208, 3/2.1564, 3/3.477; Dev 2.565 
— a) Be? Hy Jm Jo! Kt wKt} nKtt Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! oM@ GMy sOx! [but mc] Ox? Pu? 
Pu‘ sPuS [but mc] Pu’ Tj? mTr3 Wa [Jolly Ku N] Vij Apa Mandlik KSS @ateé~ which is 
supported by Ku Nd ~ b) Jm “at@4T’; Lo! cMd! Ox? Tr? Laks 7 — c) Bo TAT’; nKe 
co d) cMdé fravz: fagqaretd, Hem 32.1564 Tarde; wKe mTr® “HTetd, Be! sBe 
Bo [but cor] Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? BK wKt® Lo? oMe@? TM} Ox? Pu? Pu® Tj! Tr! Tr? 
mTr? [Jolly R Nd] Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “aTaeL which is supported by Rn Rc; GMy 
“aaed; Tj? ATE [cf. the similar variants at 2.246d] 

In Hy the folio containing 3.83-97 is missing. 

83.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1565; Laks 3.169; Dev 2.564 — a) Tr’ Ca; Jm La! “Hear? — 
b) Be’ BCa Ho Kt? BKt® Lo? Lo* Lo’ TMd? nNg Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tj? Tr? mTr? Hem Dev Jha Dave 
fret; wKeo faced: Lot TT; BK Lo’ “arfsray; Lo! Me “asra>; rMd4 Ox? Pu!® “aferas; cMy 
“aa, Ox? Pu’ Te Wa “afea; Pud “afer — c) Md? arvaarer®’: Lot Lo’ Jara’; Ho 


Chapter 3 463 


waar faer qesat fatter | 
amet: gattaarat avait sereTIey UNC 
oa: ater Barat aatsa aaa: | 
ee a 


Se Waa wT wag wg T 

ae ararghreatar aur Rawegeseaa: UC ell 
va aRrafagean watay watery | 
Taraaadheay: APrar afer WT llc 
ava sit Gf at tavagr zeafe | 
TANT TAIT FATA ST Mec 
watts Prt gate wrered FT waa: | 
Aeaeaeaeay TF aeqyer afer tq lee 


oMy “gar: mT ATeY; BBe? Be} BCa [but cor] Ho Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? BKé wKt® La! La? 
Lo? Lo4 Lo’ cMd! Md} tMd? GMy oOr Ox? Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pu!® Tj? Tr? mTr*4 mTr°Nd Go 
[Jolly M R Nd] atafepfere; Tr! “arte — d) oMd! °&t waera far, +Md? Ox? Tr! Dev fEer:; 
tM! fest: 

84. a) TMd4 @aufeeer; wKtS ma freer — b) Ox} mTr? Je; Lo* Lo’ Teil; wKt® Lo! 
tMd3 cMé Tr? Tera; GMy Wreat — c) NK GMd! arg: — d) GMy Fer; Wa BAT 

85. Placed after 87 in Jm. Cited by Laks 3.154-5 — a) Bed a:; Ho aTHetT; Lo*tMd? 
nPu! Saray; mT tarat; Tj! Fart — b) Bo aaT Aa; Be! THETA: — c) Jm Jo! Ke La! [but 
mc] Tj? MT} Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ferpaerata Feat — d) Be! mTr4 aay; Ox3 aeareaesy; 
Pu!® [Jolly M!23] we at 

86. Padas a-b omitted in mTr* [haplo]; verses 86 and87 transposed in Jm — a) Lo? Lo* 
Lo’ @@; oOr aur, wKt® By; wKt! get ar; Lo* “wale; Pyl? “ae — b) Pu? Pu? OTST 
wKt qaTTeT — c) rMd4 “gfe, Im “gRreder; oOr gRret | — d) BBe? BKtS wKt® Ox? 
feafte”. Tr Pag; Bo cGMd! “pa; Ho wKt! BKé wKt® Lo! Lo*tMd? sOx! sPu® [but cor] Tr’ 
“pecea:; Tj! “pecre:; Pus “paras; Pu? “Haters; [Jolly G] pat a; cMy “wer war 

87. a) sOx! sPuo Tr aRrafegeay; NK Ox} aRrafagear, Md! aRnyfag car; TM} 
aerate, wk weafaatcar — b) Ho aatfeey — d) wKt® Pu’? Lolly M' 24] erry, 
(Jolly Be] arereatr 

88. Omitted in GMy [haplo] — a)rMd3 sfa aearft; wKt! 7; oOr Taste, Bost — b) 
Jm Jo! Kt? oM@ Tj? mTr3 Yolly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fete"; Tr? ete@aar Seavey; wKe! 
oMd? “st Ta ZF — c) Md? Seta — d) Bo Eee; Tj! Fas; Jo? NK’ BK wKtS Lot Ox? 
Pu? Pu’ Tj? Tr? HST ; Ox? yas: oMd@? qqeT ; TMd? oOr “Bee; 1tMd* “gas, Pul? “SIS; 
nNg “aT eta 

89. Omitted in GMy Pu?. Cited by Laks3.157—~ a) Tr! Ses Pesarare; Lo! 
wees; oOr Tj’ Prt; Bo wKt GMd! rMd3 GMd> sOx! sPuS mTr® gee — b) Jo? wKt! 
agared; Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave; NNg oeat: — c) wKt® Tj! we; Be! 
ake aredtafa ; wKtS “aredr-afer; sOx! sPus “arequafe ; Lo? “feat; Tr! “drat; sBe? Lot 
sOx! Ox? Ox? sPu Pu!® [Jolly M] 7 





464 Chapter 3 


fenata teat afearerr siere | 
ULiaiseh Sansui La 


qeangft dia aftr wate” | 

froeit afearr g ad aferrat etz ue 21 
gat a feat a arat aac | 
amar Fatt a Waahrarg hr Ne i 

va a: aeyat ararott Prete | 

a wreafe we cart awit: TATA Ue 21 
gacgoedantary wad | 
poate la Oia Sal 
AIK TT aaa | 
aA Prat sar fast Tet Usa 


90. Omitted in oOr; padas c-d omitted in MTr? Wa — b) Ho “are; Be} La! Md} Tr? 
*aprargfeerttr; 1Md4 “arraraetat — c) wKt! tMd3 “afer — d) oMy teaThe ; NNg “ARPT 
ur a 

g1.* Omitted in oOr MT 14; padas a-b omitted in Wa and ma in Lo* — a) cMy $freareatt 
adit; Be! pBe? BKt® La? Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? Na Go Re 
ge; Ho Te; nPul steareqht — b) [Jolly M3] aataaer; sOx! sPue Aataqay; Be? Bo Ho La! 
Lo! GMd! rMd? tMd4 GMd® Ox? Pu’ Tr! [Jolly N Nd] Tatgyaa; oMy FatyyATS; NK! water 
HAS; [Jolly M4] wath; Jolly M2) eatery, Pul? Lolly M°]adtryaa, Pud vata, 
wKt aateqda; Be! pBe? Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt® Lo? Lot [ma] Lo’ oMd? Tj! T? Tr? mTr? 
[Jolly M34 Ku R] N@ Ku Rn Nd Mandlik KSS wateryat; mTro wateryyatad— c) Pub Pu? 
[Jolly G] = — d) La! ad; tMd3 GMd> Ox? Pub at 

92.* Omitted in Tr*. Cited by Vij 1.103; Apa 143; Dev 2.584 — b) TMd? STAT 7 
Afr, mTorr; Lot “efor — c) GMy Pu!® Tr! Jha Dave Tat FT pet. BK aTaarat 
a pat’; NKt nNg Tj! Apa att; Lod arftrt — d) Or zestferagis: Be! [mc to] Be? Bo 
Jm Jo? BKt wKt® Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ TMd4 sOx! Ox} nPu! Pu? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu!? Tj! [Jolly M G 
R] Vij Apa Dev Me Go Re aifatgte; Ho wkKt! Me “SPT erg; 1Md? inserts here 3.121. 

93. Padas a-b omitted in Pu'®. Cited by Dev 2.584; pada-d cited by Kum 3.1.13— b) Tj! 
ATE; NK ATO; TMd4 UASAAAT; GMy Tr Premrdag — o) Kt? exreafer, Lo! a -— d) 
BBe? Ho wKt! nKtt BKt) La! Lot nNg nPu! Polly G Ku] Ku * ate [Ku gives 4fct: as patha]; 
Ke “aft; Ox? Ox} Pul? TaAT; oME TAgUT; Bo sOx! sPu rasta; Be! nPu! Tats; sPuo 
manta me to TATA; wKt> Md? TAIT; Ke? Taga 

94. Padas c-d cited by Laks 3.166; Dev 1.112 — a) wKt! nPu! pete afe — b) Be! Lo? 
afar, Jm anfakr — c) Ox? Pret; NNg om 7; 1Md? aT; La! Prert — d) Wa “aifeorr; 
oMd “arftuir 

Additional half-verse in GMy: 

Preamgidet ear aware Faq II 
95.* Pada b-c omitted in Kt My! and ma in Lo4; padas a-b ma in Ox?; padas b and d 


Chapter 3 465 


Pramrgaart ar acper faferydary | 
aqeaTHAsa TaMaraaTaaT Us Ell 
Tabet TaHAThT TUMOTAAATTATT | 
wefhyeg Rory aterearhr arqhr: ell 
famrararey sd fering | 
freaate guter aeaita fefearare 9c 


transposed in Jm. Cited by Laks 3.167 — a) TMd? Geer wAaTMfe;, Pul? aque — b) mTr4 
MTro at eearieharfefey; Me [patha] ar tareenfeafer; nKtt GMd! GMd) sOx! sPuo ar grat 
aarfarer; Be! sBeé Be} BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? sKt® wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo} oMd? NNg 
Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu> Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? Tr? Wa Volly G Ku R] Laks Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS Dave ttt Gar fatrager: [Jo? Lo’ Tj! sear aT; Lo! "eI; Bo wKt} Lo? Lot Lo’ oM@? 
oOr Ox? Pu!® [Jolly MJ erar faferaget — d) Laks erat g Pert et; Md? Pret gear 
fgsmey; Ke? fear; Ox3 Pul® Bsr; BCa fEsT Te; Lot Lo’ cat Wet 

96. Cited by Laks 3.167 — a) GMd! tMd3 cM! sOx! sPuS Tr! frat arya’: w KtS 
“me”: wKt! F— b) Ra FepPeT; Tr? TepeaT — c) wKes aeaAfage, Tj! “aeartetatr 

+Md? adds here the additional verses given after 3.98 and after them inserts verse 3.84. 

97. Omitted in Ho; verses 97 and98 transposed in nPu!. Cited by Laks 3.167 — a) La! 
wel — c) BK wKt® Lo? Md‘ Ox? Pu!® Tj! Wa [Jolly M2 N] Me Na Jha Dave WAAAY; 
Lot ma fay — d) La! Hexen; Tr? werechy; sOx! sPu [but cor] ay waht; cMy “att 
arts 


98. Padas a-b omitted in Ho and padas c-d in Pu!®. Cited by Laks 3.167; Dev 2.598 — 
a) Dev aftay; rMd4 “ayy — b) Lo? Tj! aa far — c) Dev TaRafe; Be! Be’ aareafer, 
oMy et; TMd4 gata; wKtS gurez; BK ES GT: AE — d) Ox? feefeaaM; Lo? fefeary 

Additional verses in Be? La! GMy oOr MTr‘ MTr®°;given after 3.99 in GMd! [verse 99 is 
repeated indicating that in fact these may have come after 98], after 3.96 in TMd? [after which 
is inserted 7.84], and after 3.100 in GMd5; first three verses cited in Mandlik [%, %] KSS; first 
verse alone in Apa 287; Hem 1.37: 


aéa seater + cafe aaéa | 
aererkartg wreater sad 1121 
are aan ot Pafrrafenfers | 
we dae meats war oer 7 IRI 
wre Bar Tat Hafawarcd | 

cars fesrdtat et srargarray 1131 
vafeeat ate wearer afi We | 
agua a aearerattesar el 


1. a) Be ar gare — b) GMy aed; Be auréd — c-d) Hem Fererny- 
arareanshy water gard — d) Be? Mandlik KSS wit wats ead; La! wares; 
Be} sorgataetad, cMy waresared; tMd4 eae 

2. a) oOr HISMarTd; MT? Wt — c) Mandlik KSS wae Te areaths, cMy ae 
garter 

3. a-b) Be Sewer weet ats a HAT — b) Mandlik KSS TAT, GMy A- 


466 Chapter 3 


MTT waT TeaMTataaass | 

aa tar quate aeper fafergdtay 98 
Rerassdt frer wamtatr gaa: | 
ad GRATES Maisakaat TAT UP colt 


Sepr: tMd4 “fawe:; mT ro Pret — d) oOr “Stara zara 
4. a) GMy Geferceds: La! afefececrt — b) La! agreg; mTr*mTr° od Bree; 
oMd! aeareraferar — c) Lal at porat — d) La! agaseafiresar 
Following the above four, five additional verses in rMd* [some quite faint and unclear; 
the 5th verse in unreadable]: 


afad ofermerfe qeraraacta a | 

aware waar oat farted faweer 11211 
aaa aurea fact wate =z | 
ghar + renter a RI 
orayat fe at fam: steer vferer | 
sraregy fafgsstter ea cet a fee 1131 
are wed seq vier wraga: | 

gant aged Tt a ceed |! 

99. Cited by Hem 3/1.433; Dev 2.590— a) Hy AHTATH; Ho “arafarrary; Be? afer, 
Md! cafe, Pulo cafe — b) Tj! “aratritesy; pul? atear — c) wKt aarafin, cMy 
marry — d) Pu!® Lolly M'*8] Me Dave Jha SPAT, oOr AHA; cMy faferaceaer 

Additional verse in Ho La! GMd! tMd3 GMd? GMy oOr Tr! mTr*MTr® [Jolly Gr] Laks 
3.175-6; given after verse 96 in TMd?* [Jolly Gr] and after verse 98 [at the end of the addition] 
in Be’: 

afm gear frat sepernearad | 

aa ger faire ar arart afta wer II 
a) Be} HocMd! mT rt Laks aetecat — b) mT r6 ATRL: Be? GMa! “waryared; tMd4 
“wager — c) GMd! Md? tMdé Tr! ager afeere; Lal get aw Pre Fy; Or fate 
wer; Md wae at — d) [Jolly Gr] srerreaeafer; Ho La! Teta; oOr THY 

Additional verse in La! GMd! tMd3 tMd* GMd> GMy oOr Tr! mTr* MTr®; given after 


verse 96 in TMd?: 
aarpafaratarg steregaraty | 
aeons weet SYR + aga Pay II 
b) La! “argwearata garaft; cMd! gewrggaralt; oMd gitarggaraft; cMy aft 
worgtarete, TM afte gearaft — c) Lal were; oOr mT r4 wert — d)oMd5 H_- 
feaverear; La! @ ongar 

After this GMd! +Md? insert 7.84;cMd! inserts the four additional verses given in 
several mss. after 3.98; and La! inserts 3.99. 

100, Verses 100 and 101 transposed in Tr? — a) Hy Tr? Rrerry’; oMy Rrereay’; nPu! 
aeregy ; cMd Tj? Brera; Tr! reorrey: Im area’ ; TMd* “goed — b) Lot Lo’ gem; 
wKt! eta: — c) Lo! GMd? a4; sOx! sPuo uF apa [but both cor] — d) oM@ Tr? are; 
+Md! “afSa; TMd3 GMe Tr! ARTAaRT:; Pus aad; wKt? BK wKt® Lo? at — GMd? adds 
here verse 7.84. 


Chapter 3 467 


guft yfege arg uget a ETAT | 
Tareaht aat We Ataaead HaTTT U2 2M! 
vara g fraaatafiatert: aa: 

afer fe frat gerq cerafahieert leo tl 
aeortioratary far antfas car | 

safeud we frag arat aarasft ar leo all 
STAT F TREAT: WaTHAGsA: | 

aT A AT WYATT AAAS 2 0 WI 
srrorentsfarr: are qatar Teaerar | 

wes MeecaHTeS AT ATRATAAT Te TAT Moki 
a a cae aeeftarefart aa ana | 

gat WRIA wart aA TTT No gl 


101. Cited by Vij 1.107 — b) Lo? wget area ETT; Tj a aqel are Wat; cMy 
aya: — c) Tr! wate a; rMd4 et — d) Lo} Pul® Tj! feet + wares [Pul? om 4]; Lo® 
aaa; sOx! sPul ARS; Bo HR; Ma) AReaMa; wkKe) eae; Te? wert 

102. Cited by Apa 155; Hem 3/.427; Dev 2.589; padas a-b cited by Madh 1.351 — a) 
oMy “ate; Tj? 7 — b) Ox? “eromrera: — c) TMd4 atfrerarray gen; GMd! Md’ atrerr; 
Kt? @; cMy @ feat; Lo? GMd! oMd3 oOr feafeetenta — d) tM? cerreenfarer 

103. Padas c-d omitted in wKt. Cited by Madh 1.353 — a) mTr4 WaT; BK afr 
Lo’ “araor’; +Md4 “orarfereet — b) Tr? faw:; wKeo fawenrfeas; La! °ferar wet — c) wKto Te 
frat — d) Bo “waft 

104. Cited by Laks 3.274; Hem 3/1.769 — a) BK Sara; Jm BT; Bo Jo? Lo? rMd4 Tj! 
Laks Weer F; Md} T YeePT — b) Bo TENTH ; Hem AEF: — c) NNg Ata; Md! date — 
d) wKt! mTr6 a=; oOr “eTUTearBar, Hy Im Jo! Kt? wKt® oMd2 Tj2MTP [Jolly Ku] Ku 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “srfearfart; Ox? “aTRalfrat me to “srfearfart; Lo! 1Md? Pu? Tj? 
“arti: +Md4 “anf; Jo! “array 

Additional verse in Be? Ho wKt! wKt? La! oOr Ox? nPu! Pu Tr? Re Mandlik (#1, @, 4, 
Z, S, S, S| KSS Dave [unnoticed by Jolly]: 

WTPASeD aad TeAtas: | 

Se ad asda gens cer aga |! 
a) Pu cease, — c) Tr? se aeaaeftd a Mandlik KSS Dave Fate ait — d) 
La! cease RAT; wKO cert 

105. Cited by Apa152; Hem 3/1.429; Dev2.593-4; Madh 1.351 — a) Tr! aprorranfearr: 
ata; aGMd! Wa sureitelt; wKt® cauroreaifa:; oOr ates — b) Be! Bo Gatet; wKt! BKe wKt® 
Tj? Tale; Be? Hy Lo? Lo® Lo’ oOr Ox Ox} Pu Pu’ Pu® Pul® mTr4 [Jolly M34? R] Madh 
“aft; rMd3 “af: — c) Lo! Lo’ sramraeeteere aT; Tre wider; Kt? wratecr ; tM? 
yrearaTes — d) sOx! sPu® Apa [vl as in ed] Tet; BBe Jm Jo! Kt? oM@ +Md! Tj! Tat; wKt 
aad 


Ay 


106.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Madh 1.356 — a) Ox? om 4; TMd4 GMy Ox? Mddh3a- 


468 Chapter 3 


MATT PATATAITTITTTT | 
SHAT FarSty AT TA TAT lle ol 
waar g Pda seretsfahrerasrg | 

wa art aaah seer ales eter Nod 
aT arate far: gener Praaae | 
wrarst f a gery araaftepera Fe: 2081 
marrer caataRate wet Ta | 

aa aa Ta aeat Jett T Uegoll 
afy cafafresior aftat yeaa | 
yay a arg wr aay wig lle 2 21 
aeagarate wnat eeetsfafrerott 


oMy wrett” — b) Oxd ae AIT oMy Fst — d) sBe? tMd? Pul? Tr? ea; Jo! mT? Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave afef; Be! sBe? Be? Bo Ho Jo? wKt! nK¢ La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? oM& cMy 
nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pud sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu!l® Tr? Wa [Jolly M'-?-8 M G Ku R] Re Jolly 
“rier 

107. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 156; Hem 3/1.435; Dev 2.592 — a) wKt® rare 
— b) tMd! Tr? °aserg’; PuS Pu? “asarg; Jm Pu’ “asar Sar; Im Jo! wKt Tj! Hem Dev 
*araat — c) Tj! “Gat; Im “gaat; cMé fray — d) ta} Hates Ar; Im cmd “St 
ey; cGMy FT aH; La! eared 

108.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 1.103; Laks 3.200 — a) Lot Lod Farad; wKt! Pu 
Pu’ fade g; tMd? fret; NK tt Lot GMd> [Jolly M34] frat; Wa Prater — b) Bo Tr! 
aaa. Ox3 aerate’. rMd4 “Prerqenct; Hy FAL —c) Lo? GMd? Pu’ Vij ae4T att; cMd! 
+Md? tMd* GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] Laks T1163; Be! sBe Be* Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? 
wKt} La? oM@ Ox? Pu!® Tj? mTr? [Jolly M& Ku] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Tareas [Ox 
“cars|; mT ro Te ATT: NNg THATS; [Jolly M'*-4] auras; NK! atest 

109. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Ma@dh 1.358 — a) Be Lo* Lo® Ox’ Pub Pu’ Pu! [Jolly 
M GN] Jolly “art; +Md4 “arfer far; wK ee far: Ma} afen:; Tj! at far: Lo & fax; 
Be} fam: @ — b) Ox} “WT; NNg “aT [but cor]; Pu'® facet — c) Ox} Pu! [Jolly M G] 
Jolly “ATX; Lot Lo’ Att; aCa “Art; La! & ad; 1Md? ae 

110.* Omitted in oOr; padas c-d omitted in Lo!. Cited by Hem 3/1.428; Dev 2.589; 
Madh 1.354 — a) BCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Loe oMd? sOx! Ox? Ox? sPu® Pu! Tj? mTr? Hem 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave + sree: TARAS; Ho ararrer + wafaRY; Tr? aero: at 
cafakrfe — c) Bo nKf BKt® wKt® GMd Pud Pu? Pul? “gar, sOx! sPu® [cor to] "3g; wKt® 
wat; Tr? werta — d) wKke! eas = 

iu. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 152; Hem 3/1.440; Dev 2.594; Madh 1.354 — a) 
sOx! sPuo [me sh to] Tr? 321; Bo 4a; wKtS aeafer — b) Im cMd! “arfaate — c) BBe? Jo? 
Lo} GMy sOx! sPuS (Jolly R] qwmarceate, T} “rTeafag; Jm Jo! K? mT Dev aaTHfaay; Hy 
BKt? wKt® Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo Md? GMd nNg Pub Tr! mTr*Apa ¢; Ho 7; Ox? Pul® Polly M!?- 
8] ¢ — d) Pu cafe; Be! grag 


Chapter 3 469 


ASAE FATIH TAPTTT 12 221 
Tare wears AeA TEATTATT | 
THAT whey WSIS AAT Ne 2 sil 
gate: garter trot wheter | 
afainaisetaary wiertafrareary ue eel 
wart g a wT: yt yarns faaerm: | 

aq yay a Arak eat Rerarers: |e Vall 
gray gy Pay ag wag aa I 
ysattarat ad: wareakree g dah ue eel 


uz. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 152; Dev 2.595; Madh 1.354 — b) GMy®S*s; Tj? 
meray, mTraeronfe ; rMd4 “after — c) Bo cMd! fatearar ; Ti}? gaan; aK eo yeh 
Ard; Pus Pu? yee oT; wKe Feeqary ; Ox? Te yehearary — d) Md! “gers; Be! Bo 
Ho Jm wkt! Kt? La! Lo* Lo’ GMy nPu! Pud Pu? mTr4 MTr°Madh Faster; wt as; rTM? 
oMd seta; Tr THe; Be? Lo! sOx' T ATA [sOx! cor to T BT At]; sPuo T AT 
wd 
113. Omitted in oOr. Cited by 4pa154; Madh 1.354 — a) La! sareeft, GMy sceraty; 
wKt® 3earaft; rMd4 Searaty, Tr! eae; La! eearetar — b) wKt Pud a4eaT; BK AAeT — c) 
NKt WEers;, Go FePemsy; K?oMd? Ox? mTr? Madh NatepPears; Bo Hy Jm Jo! Tj? 
apes, MTs wares — d) mT dsraefrarear[cf. 114d]; Apa [vl] ear 
114.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 147; Laks3.211-2 — a) Be Be? nK¢ BKt® Lo? PuS 
[Jolly M? Nd] &at; wKt at ; Ho Sararfeatt; Bo Jo? BKtS Lot sOx! Pus sPuo [but cor] 
Pu? arfaft; Jm Jo! Kt? GMd! tMd4 aMy T/ “arfest; Tr? nPu! “afer; BBe Bo BCa Ho 
wKt} nKfi Lo? Lo* Lo® My sOx! sPuS Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr® [Jolly M3-*° Ku Nd] Na @ARPT; 
aktS wKt® Barra; Md! Bart 7; GMd! Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] wearer — a-b) Md} erarfett 
qaeagaert TT erica — b) rMd4 cMy Uff; Ox? Pul? aFreft; Jot cMd! rMd4 cMy 
Tr afer war; Bo Pu’ Pu? afeft aar; oMd? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave afeott: fer; Hy 
Jo! Ke Ty? aftehifeae:; Im ahh: frar— c) AH NT mss., Apa ST Waa [sOx! “HT; Wa 
Ue aM; nKtt aeTaAT; Ho La! “weasarq; Ox? “HaEsarT] — d) Tr? eae 
115. Omitted in o0Or — a) Md? arywHT; GMy g Fat Ger: — b) tMd4 WF; Be! Year, 
Bo aeatfad — c) Tj! SRT; Te ae SAAT, Ho F TPT 
Additional verses in nPul: 
THAT | 
weer mate we erg | 
area: ager afgaratodst a | 
gergusp[f? arttrer sroreaterareateter | 
116.* Cited by Dev 2.598;Madh 1.364 — a) Bo HowKt! wKt? nKtt La! La? Lo! Lo? Lot 
Lo® TMd‘ GMy NNg Ox? Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu® Tr! mTr? MTr® [Jolly M349] wer q; nPul “acy F; 
Be! Be? BCa GMd! tMd? GMd? oOr sOx! Pub sPu® Pu’ Tr? [Jolly M® G ] Dev Madh ViDh 
67.40 Jolly Te 7; Hy Im Jo! Kt? BKé wKtS oM@ Tj? MT Mandlik KSS Dave “Aea3; 
Be? Jo: Lo} Tj! Wa [Jolly R] aeate; Pu! om g; Te Tr‘ mTr° aay — b) Dev Farag 


470 Chapter 3 


qarterqera aq year saa: 

Tareat ad: Tate WHET: BTYMVATAT lle Vil 
WT FT hay Yer A: TAMAS | 
UATE aL Tara Ferefarag We Veil 
Talereaaed Reeageangers | 
SATE Ttaacaereygag: ULL 
teat a three aaetegaer | 

agro at a cat ef feafe: ue Roll 
ar camer Raer waaret afer zt | 
aaa f amaq arrrataetas e221 
faqaa g frdet forrserasirars | 
fosraerta are Zaterrargarfesay Ue 22 


ate f&; Md! aur FeNT; Jo? Lo Tj! Volly R] FFT; Lot mayery; Lo! fawy; cMy afery; 
cMd! a9; nKt* Lo? € — c) cMd! aareafSr — c-d) Tro ater: arr fare g aadt — d) Dev 
pagar f I; BKe wkt a, cMd gard 

es Omitted in Be?. Cited by Madh 1.203— a) Tr? tar Fettargear; Ke wKto “cara; 
BBe? * — b) Md} fart eaar:; Te afta; vKet Tj! Tea; Pul? greed, cMd* 
yeury — we Md} [Jolly Gr] aistrear 

u8 Cited by Dev 2.599;Madh 1.203; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.234-42; Apa 146, 1050 
— a) nKt 8a; Lo} att; Ox? Ft; Lo’ ae; GMy Yeas — b) Bo wKt® rMd4 FT Tra; Be? 
yaar ; oMy “apreat — ¢) Md! @F; oMy mTr® @a; Pul? dar ar 

ug. a) wKtS aarefeat ; nPul aeaerart; Be! Bo Ho Hy wKt! wKt® Lo? Lot nNg 
sOx! Ox? Ox Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Pu!® [Jolly G] Go Fe ; GMd! “are: — b) Tr! fitz; Pu’ Pu’ 
“aay wKt® Lo® Ox3 “TEL Bo Lo? RE c) Hy Ox3 eu : Pu! anger my ; 
wKt agorry” — d) Be? nk La! La? Lo! GMy sOx! Ox? nPu! sPu® Tj? Tr? Wa Re wae ; 
Be? La! GMd5 sOx! sPuS “acre A:; NNg [Jolly M] Me Rn JhaDave “aR: La? tMd3 
Tr! “acrerrary 

120.* a) sOx! sPuS Use; NKtt ast: AAP — b) GMd! Me [patha] da aar oaferdt 
[cMd! act}, rMd4 aerasr safera; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt} aK wKt® La! 
La? Lo! Lo? oMd? tMd? GMd° GMy nNg oOr Ox? sPu® [but cor] Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr3 mTr* 
Tr [Jolly Ku R Nd] Go Na@ Ku Re Mandlik KSS °ofrdt; sBe “afte, Pu? “afer: — c) 
BBe? PuS Wa 49a, cMd> Agee; La! eatsat — d) rMd3 My ae; wKt! | ae; Lo! ferdt 

121, Omitted in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 145 — a) GMd> are cer feet; BBe wKt! 
wKt} tMd? sOx! sPuS Apa AeHAST; Tr? ABT AeAeT — b) sOx! sPu’ Tas; Lo? Pus Pu’ Pu!? 
“HET; GMd! Behe 

122, Cited by Apa 418; Laks 4.10; Hem 3/1.72, 171, 321, 3/2.1064, 3/3.609; Dev 433, 
83 — a) NNg oOrf@; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] 7; wKt! Lo? Lot sOx! Tj! freer; cMd5 fager, wKt® 
fraet — b) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Mandlik KSS “Zax, Ho wKtS “eat — c) Hem 3/1.72 PATET ; 
Ox? Pui “gaay; KP “erties — d) wKetS “arftras 


Chapter 3 471 
raat are arercaert faggen: 
Aa Baer WARAT Waa: ULASNU 
aa & wera: Bet wz acat fear: | 
Waa AsT PTAA HAATAATNTeT: ULV 


Bt ea Pager AAde—pers ar | 
WAT FETS + wastes faear lhe ull 


aferat aqrerest wae aang: | 
eee ee 


afrar Sagetar fir arr freer | 
dkagmerta fret tapete aifeat te Ril 


123.* Cited by Hem 3/1.573 — a) NKtt Lo? GMd! tMd3 GMd? GMy Pu? Pu? Tr! mTr* mTr® 
[Jolly G Nd] Go Nd Me [patha] Ku [patha] wert; nKt arf: — b) cMy ‘Aters; Bo 
fagger: — c) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? Tj? mTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Davetrourtrr, 
Tr! carter — d) oMd! ware gered: Jm Jo! Ke? aaa: 

Additional verse in Tr?; commented by Rc: 

a Prdofe a: ame wfraftaer fesr: | 
soe ane arf wraRadih wag a: | 

124. Cited by Hem 3/1.377; Dev 4.154 — a) Tj! at — b)sOx! sPuo | feast, Jo* Lo} 
Tj geet FT faci’ ; wKt! Md! oOr fesse: — c) Ox? aaaaa; Md! aaatars; wKe! 
aparfear’; Pul? dearaear’ GMd Ox? Hem trarateat ; oMy & aret aret” — d) Bo wKt! Lo! 
Ox? [cor to] ‘Sea; Kt? “AeA Fa 

125.* Omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Vis 1.225; Hem 3/1.159, 3/2.1148; Apa 430, 463; Dev 
4.192-3; Madh 1.699 — a) BBe? Hy Jm Jo’ K? wKt® GMd! GMd°> GMy sOx! Pu> Tj? Tr! Tr? 
MT’ @; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo? oM@ tMd3 GMd5 GMy NNg Tj! Tj? Tr! MTe3 mTrémTr® Volly 
R Nd] Vig Apa [vl] BDh 2.15.10 Madh Mandlik KSS figeers; Apa [vl] freer; Be} Prasat — 
b) Ox? waredawte a Tr? Aa: aKtS wKt® Ox? TF — c) oMy airate wyatt; Be! wkt® 
wey ; GMd! aay — d) Ho BK wK¢t® La! Lo! Lo? Lot Md? GMd? GMy NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! 
sPu® Tr! Tr? [Jolly M Nd] Vis Apa Hem Dev Re Wasad; Be! Ox} WHT; Me Go Ku Jha Dave 
yada; Wa feared; 1Md?4 fee: 

126. Cited by Vis 1.225; Apa 463; Madh 1.699 — a) Lo! Tr? afemar, Tj! afemarar; 
oMd5 aegatt — b) GMd! aad; Ho NKtt Lo? La! GMd® NNg Tr Vis Apa @9E; nPu! “Ager: 
— c) Pu!’ gstarfametéfa — d) Vis Te ofasaa; Lal faeaerq; Lo® cMd5 GMy Pué Pu’ 
Tr! [Jolly G Gr Nd] fereae 

127. a) Bo La! sOx! Pu’ Pu’ Ser; wKt! tMd4 cMy sPu® Tj! “pean, Tr! “pear: BBe 

Be} “poate — b) Lo! f8=7; Lo’nNg Pud Pu? [Jolly G] Pa; wKt® oOr 954; NK! far; wKe 
Lo? NNg Pu? Pu? Wa [Jolly G] Go Me [patha] fafa: ea; Me [pathal feferera; mTr‘ ferefrerct — 
c) Md afetapmer J Pret; pul? ay afereqematred; wke! afer’; nNg afta; Ho wKt! Ke 
Lo? sOx! Pu’ sPuS Pu’ Tr! “areifer; cMd! “mete — d) Tr? La! sOx! ter’; | PIPAE; Be! sBé 
Wa aq; Bo pCa Jo? wKt! wKt} BKt> Lo! Lo} Lot Lo* GMy Tj! Tr! Na Nd “pete; cMd? 


“pale; cMd! “peafe; Be? “Hats; Md? “Pah; wk “Haar s; Ke Sfwar 


472 Chapter 3 


Rama tar server aah: 
seaare fort ae ae AETHER 
vaaaty fart ta fer a aed | 


Jer SOA AaAaAGAT le Vil 
AUT WAT AMAT TqITETT | 

et agereearat saver atsfahe: aya: ite Zoll 
ace f aearnaqar ar ys | 
TaEtaay fat: eateeter ate: Ne 320 
area tar sen a saife a | 


a fe eearagftarit oferta qeaa: 232i 
araat Fear fresrsy 


CASA AMAT | 
aadt Tad eT Amrsqerestinyery Ug Szn 


128, Cited by Apa 437;Hem 3/1.377; Mddh 1.679 — a) Be! deft — c) tMd? ear; 
wKt! “aara; Bo “WaT — d) 1Md4 cMy Heene; 1Md3 areTeRS; Hy HERS 

129. Omitted in oOr Ox’; padas c-d ma in Pu’. Cited by Apa 437; Madh 1.679 — b) Jm 
as; wt OF; wCa FIs; nNgAtsT; Lolly Nd] Trad; wMd4 asa — c) nPu! FasT; sOx! 
sPu® [me sh to] aPact — d) Md4 FarITRAgA,; Ho AAT TEA; Tr? aH Tage; 
ake “gear 

130. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 437; Hem 3/1.506; padas a-b cited by Dev 4154; 
Madh 1.356 — a) Hogeed; wKt! yatea — d) sOx! sPu® [me sh to] Watt, TMd4 atta: 

131. Cited by Hem 3/1.377 — a) 8Ca 4164; Be! La! tMd? +Md4 GMd5 GMy sOx! sPuo 
[me sh to] Tr! mTr’ agar ae ; Go pratika Fear; nKt! F— b) oMd! “Arqat; wKt! Pus 
Pu’ Me [pdthantara as nom. plu.] “TT; tMd4 aga; GMy “HST; wKt) “JaTAy; Bo La! 
[but cor] yAIT; cMy Yrt — c) wKe§ CTT ; 1Md? Weer ; Be? sOx! sPuo 
[Jolly Nd] “fafem: [sPuS cor to faye]; Tr! “afew; oMd’ “feransr:; [Jolly N] Na [possibly] 

“freer: — d) GMd! tMd‘ adadte; wKe aataétea, Tr! ada, Md! aaa 

132. Cited by Hem 3/1.378 — a) Be’ Bo Ho sOx! Ox? nPu! sPu® Pul® [Jolly M1289 
Me] Hem “apeyq; TMd? oOr “eprelty; wKt® “egret — b) wKt® wemfy; Lo’ oOr HdeaTy 
eaifT; Lo? om first 1 — c) GMy T 4; Be! seit ae ; Tr! “aaferit; Pud Pu? Wa ghee; 
1Mdé “aerit — d) Md? ofertor & quate; Ox? get oferor F; wa} arate ofr F; cMd> 
Tr! areata effort; mtr! afer oferta, Waaead; wKt} feeac: 

133.* Cited by Apa 449; Laks 4.75; Hem 3/1.461 — a) Pu!® [Jolly M'8parafes; mTr? 
yfad; Be! Be Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt3 La? Lo! Lo? Lo* oM@ NNg oOr Ox? nPul Pu? 
Pu? Put Pue Pu’ Pu® Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa [Jolly G Ku Nd R]Go Ku Rn Re Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave Wart — b) Jm wKt® sOx! sPu® Pul? AT a — c) sOx! sPuo atacit; GMd! Ted}, 
Me Sar [but gives Tet as pathantara] — d) BK wKt® GMd! rMd4 GMy oOr sOx! Ox? sPuS 
PuS Te? daOMaySrt [GMy Jor; Ox? Aa]; Ho La! nPu! Re HHPAOMAYSH; Hem 
ae REMAYS; [Jolly Nd] depgoraager; Tr! dasgeredgsrt; Lo! dary- 
seaarrerd, wKe! dtarfavsreanger; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Pu? Put mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave &a- 





Chapter 3 473 


araferor fact: Shr aatroraamay | 

AT TATRA STA BAwoTEANgT wT NVI 
aratrog wetter wfecorenter wad: | 

sate 7 wrest ada wae ie sui 
spatirr: frat wer gar: eeearaT: | 
spattrat ar ga: ear Par warequrem: Wesel 
wrens ser areata: frat | 
raga g aewrerasEe te Rall 

qT are wafers at: areaser due: | 

ate a far ao faera & are aiorre fesrz lle 3c 
wer Pramearenter arate a aif = | 

mer Ter He at arse aT stag T ULSI 


qe; Kt! daieqe ; Jo? aS ; Wa Fer; Lo? “FTI 

134.  Padas c-d omitted in mTr° and main Ox?. Cited by Hem 3/1.416; Laks 4.59 — a) 
Lo? [but cor] Wa Pret; *Md3 “Pte; tMd4 Frcs: wKt® Ox} fest:; My FIT: — b) Bo 
aafisr’: Lo? eaeat; Lo’ “atta F— c) cMd! tTMd} tMd* GMd’ GMy Tr! mTr4 Laks 
ererrerastfrerr, wkto °Prer a — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nK¢ oMd? oOr sOx! Pud sPuo Pu? T7? 
Tr} [Jolly G Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Prererarat 

135. Cited by Hem 3/1.416; Laks 4.59 — a) Be! Ho Jo? Lo? sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! Tr? 
aMicpreey [cf. 3.132], nPul artepess; wKeo atfafaef — b) Ox? yfesrenft; La! sare:; 
Md} aac: — c) Hem SaHeA eahy [vl as in ed]; TMd? GMd> Tr! mTr‘ [Jolly Nd] 
aerifaey seat; oMd? weary; BCa Ho Jo? wKt! BK wKt® Lot tMd4 NNg sOx! Ox? Ox 
nPu! Pu? sPuo Pu? Tj! Tr? Yolly M G R] Re Jolly 4; Tj? wae; GMd! tMd4 GMy Ox? [but 
cor sh] Laks TaPaté; NNg Tarra — d) La! ages aqydar:, Be? Ox? aqearqyazr:; Bo Lot 
Lo’ +Md? Pu’ Laks arRaaeaa; Lo? Md! “arawerahe, cMy “araataey 

136. Padas a-b omitted in Ho. Cited by Hem 3/1.443; Laks 4.59; Mddh 1.678 —a) Tr! 
om se: Be! PART; Laks Tet — c) GMd! om aT — c-d) Lo? repeats padas a-b in place 
of c-d — d) wKt! BK wKtS ga: aT aq 

137. Cited by Hem 3/1.443, 461; padas a-b cited by Madh 1.678 — a) Md* “aay; 
wKkto “aifeer — c) Ox? Pul? [Jolly M'-2-5-8-9] “SATaTe; BK T; Jo? Lot Lod (Jolly M3-4] fe 
—d) Lo Md} dearer 

138 Cited by Apa 448; Dev4.162 — a) Md? +Md‘ ard; BK HTafATs; Tj! “Fares, 
+Md? aferr — b) Jm &t:; GMy wreate; tMd4 wrefer — c) Tj! art; Lo! f Pr a; cMd! sOx! 
sPuf ay feed; Ke feert— d) Kt? a7 TE; Be! Md? oOr ITE 

139. Cited by Hem 3/1.462; Dev 4.162 — b) GMd* Ox? want @ sdife; Lo? Tr! om 
first J — c) Ho a; Jm Wife, Be! HS —~ c-d) Hem Pray gaat area eat + Tesh — d) Wa 
aires Firat facet: [cf. 3.140 d]; 7Md4 FAY; Ox? BAT; Tr? om first T; Bo F4TT; TMd4 
efaft; 1Md? efay; wkt® cMy efaafr 


474 Chapter 3 


a: areal Hed Alerast Aa: 

@ tahearad oreraratrat fare: llevoll 
aap afifear tart aferor fast: 
Feared FAT Sle Mealaeary lev 2 
make asaya T AAT HAA Hey | 
pls day ail 
aay wimetgar yea Gerais: | 

fage afar gar fattraq ser ae 7 Uva 
arm aasdaterst aRrecatr az | 
facar f& efits vate ser fromey level 
Tat URES AT TITTY | 
MARTA Beant at AAT eval 


140. Cited by Hem 3/1.462 — a) TMd‘ 4 — b) Be! [but md] Ho Jo La! Lo® sOx! Ox? 
nPu! Pu? sPuo Tj! Tj? Tr Volly R] Aterearey; wktS GMd! GMd> Pub Pu’? Pu! [Jolly M G] 
Hem Jolly “wearer; BK “agra; Td} "SET werea:; Me Go Ku Rn Re Mr support the 
adopted reading — d) Hem ft; GMd5 GMy Tr! mTr¢ mTr® fear Parsee, Mad? Bratt 
aBafe, Tr? fesitert:; Bo fesert:; Be? BCa [but cor] TTA: 

141. Cited by Hem 3/1.462 — a) Ho BKtS wKt® Lo? Tj! TaiRrtt, rMd4 GAM, wKe 
“srftffear; Be! Lo? Ox? Pul? Tj! T? Hem arfafeat; cMy afyfear — b) Ox} frat; T}? 
fgot:; sOx! sPuS qe: — c) Lo! gearfet, rMd4 gee; sOx! sPuo T AT; wKt! + aT— d) Hem 
aie Saas, Jo! ate’; wKt! Lo? GMy Tj! ane 

142. Pada c-d omitted in GMd'. Cited by Hem 3/1.465 — a) Tr! Taher; Wa afar, 
Tr? zathearr,; Ho Ox? aaetr; TMd4 FARA; oOraaMae, Td? FtsTqA; Be} ssrA — b) Md? 
ae UT Sad; Tre TATSAT — c) Lo’ Bass; Be wKb Tarsd; Hem efadera — d) Bo Lo* 
Lot Lo’ Ox} Pul? [Jolly M] ater 7 

143. Padas a-b omitted in cMd!. Cited by Laks 4.573 Hem 3/1. 378 —a) Ho agate; 
sOx! Ox? Ox? sPuS Pul? Tr! Te “aeteer; Ho BK La! “aetiier; nPul “meer; wk “afecpar 
— b) MTP? “anfraT; Ke “atta: — c) Ox? faguy; Be! fafet; cMd! cMd Laks fasgeit; Wa 
aférst; Jm Jo! Kt? BK wKt® Lo’ oOr mTr3 MTr?mTr® Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Daveafert 
aeat; Tr? afer at; Ox? Fear [but cor] — d) Pud Pu? wafer WT; NNg Ae aT 

144. Cited by Apa 448; Hem 34.447, 464; Dev 4.162; Madh 1.684 — a) tMd? +Md?* 
oMd GMy Tr! araerdafers [Mads daft, Trt “Aet]; Volly Gr] ert area” — 
b) Lo! aratfiretacatt — c) tMd3 oMy Tr! feuarft; wke eaenfadfa ; Pul? Tj! a; [Volly Gr] 
sfeady — d) Be! Lo? Tj! Jolly R] ter Fe 7 Peps0Or om wale ; 

145. Cited by Laks 4.57; Hem 3/1.382 — c) Lo! rMd? Pu!9 areareteaer ; tMd?4 
araigeaen s BK wKt® aTaeTAT ; Jo! “arrears; coMd! tMd? GMd?> GMy Tr! mTr* mMTr® 
“Saar array, Lo! “aararars, wKt6 “aararerd; tMd* “ead: Bel “sat — d) Pu!® ear; Hem 
wearer, Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave J; Be! Be? Bo BCa Ho La? Lo! Lo 
Lo? GM@ sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put sPuo Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa Na [patha] Rn Nd Rc [Jolly R Nd M2] 


Chapter 3 475 


Tea TET ySoltt areata: | 

agar cer ge: Baradt araatedt Nev gil 
UT fF WA: HT: WaT FerHeTAT: | 
ATVs AT: Aat ataraftod: UL vel 
ATARE Alger TW aay AC TET | 

aes faait weyqitarnst a diate eri 
T arat adterer Sa afer anther | 

fasr antfir g oma after saat: Neel 

a wat: ofaar: Hat X a afkawaes: | 
AAPA MAAS AAA UL 4 ON 
afer ureeftart gates Pecat cer | 

aerated TY Gea Ate AT ATTT UL4 I 


aaa, rMd4 ware 

146. Cited by Dev4.160 — a) cMd! art; rMd3 FATT’; Bo “TAT — b) Tr! “HPA; 
Lo? “afta: — c) mtr? oF afa:; Tr aa af: — d) Md? Tr! Tr? am; Hy ‘dteftt; oMd! “ater. 
Jo! “qredt; +Md4 “gedt 

147. Cited by Vij 1.220;Hem 3/1.441; Dev 4.160; padas c-d cited by Madh 1.683 — a) 
1Md? vita — b) Jm FUT; BK Tr! Here: — c) wKtS “Hered, cMy Far; Vij sire: — d) 
aMy fret ae; vii afgenfée: 

148. Cited by Hem 3.447; Dev 4.160; Mddh 1.683— a) Be! Jo* Lo* sOx! sPu° Tj! 
[Jolly R]aT — b) Lo? =PfPt, oOr ae; Md? [but cor sh] Prt; BK’ wKtS erate; Pu!? 
ATS TS; Joe TN: —°) Lo! arara fe dfeagfea’. rMd3 tes; Be! feed; Bo frate; nKtt 
afer — d) aK wKt ferarer, Hem “Ferarsarar 

149. Cited by Laks 4.56; Hem 3/1.510 — a) Ho Fa; oOr Tee — b) nKt! Tr! ea; 
GMy oOr #7; cMd! oOr Fea; Be eafaq; Lot eféfra — c) Kt? wKe6 ft; oOrd; rMd?4 
> par oA; Tr? 7; nPu! Laks SWAN; NNg WA FT; Hem J Wa:; Lo? Volly R] wat — d) TMd4 
aera; tM} featoa: 

Additional verse in GMd! rMd* GMd> NNg 0Or Tr! Te MTr4 MTr®;commented by Re: 

aay TET T veteran: | 

WTSI Horne” ATTArL || 
a) Tr! waraed cefeger; Tr? ger cefeergan ; mTrémTré “gat. — a-b) oOr 
cori ematrreTa ara HATTA — c) Or ear ear aT aemfir, Te arar — d) Tr! 
adaienths ; oMd! wearer a fF Te woes” 

150. Cited by Apa 447; Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.480; Dev 4.166; Madh 1.687 — a) sBe? 
BCa Jm Jo! K€ nKt* Lo? GMd! oMd? oOr MTr? Apa Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave &- 
afcarsrar; cMy sOx! sPuS Stat: ofear: eat; mTroofee, Md} affat — b) Kt? a; sKt> wKee 
¥ J; Md! areaeer’ — c) oOr arRaeeTaY s wKe “ase” — d) Pu’ Pu? “wea 

151.* Cited by Apa 450; Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.480; Dev 4.166; Madh 1.687 — a) T? 
afte; Lo! sOx! Ox} sPu® Pu!® [Jolly M!2--8 Nd] are”. mT? “amit, NK Lo? “amt — b) 


476 Chapter 3 


fateerar tamer arafaeroredur | 
faaster a oftreat acat: epgermerat: N24 2 
Tea WaT Ua Etat VageaH: | 
sfettar Iaa crnifrateffierar 24 al 
watt a aga uaa Free: | 
Faltee wars TreaT Ta T NVI 
aafteatsaatt aw qatar a | 

areas arora ger arteries Ueki 


Be? Ho Kt! La? Pu’ Tr? Hem 340; Apa Fats, GMygate; mTr' gat; Be! BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? wKt? BKt® wKt® La! Lo! Lo? Lo? oMe& tTMd4 NNg sOx! Ox? Pu! Pu? Pu? Put Pub 
sPu® Pu’ Pul® Tj! Tj? mTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Zi, cMd! are w ferctae — c) 
1Md‘ atsrafer, Dave arqafed [typo?]; aK wKt arate; wKt} ; Lot ma &; Md? a7; sP ue 


ger; wKt! Ox? [but cor] Iai; Ox} Pul? Tj! gar ater; Madh Yate — d) cMy Peat aT Fer 
Hee, TMs RA AT AT OT TIT; Ho kaa; Tj! et a; La! Apa wre frasiaq; Be? 
oMd’ wa 


152.* Cited by Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.480~1; Dev 4.167; M@dh 1.687 — a) BBe* Be’ sCa 
[but cor] Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo Kt? NK¢ wKt® La! Lo? Lo* Lo? oMd? TMd* GM@ GMy nNg oOr 
sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pud sPuS Pu? Pu!® Tj? Tr? mTr4 MTr® Wa Hem Dev N& Madh 
Mandlik Jolly KKS Pafaareaaarta ; ak afiecaraaartia — c) Ng faa; 
Tj! faye; rMdé facet; Pul? casftaxit; Bo wKt® Lo’ sftafer — d) GMé@ aso |; Hem 
asad ser 

153. Verses 153 and 154 transposed in Ox* Dave. Cited by Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.481, 
Dev 4.167 — a) wKt6 Feit; NNg WT; Ox} WaT; Be! Wa HTN; Ho La! nPu! aaa; TMd? TET; 
+Md3 tater: — b) Be! aa; NK tt Ox? [but cor] Tr! saraaatt; Lo? eraerate; Tj! “afraae:; 
td} “arae: —- c) Bo wfererar; Jm oftatar; NNg Wfaftst; Tr? aferatar; Lo! qeradtt; cMy 
yeaa, Md} qeaeta — d) Jo? Tr aroifvant ; wK¢e Tj! maaan ; Tj! “fterar: sOx! sPu 
“tae; Lo! “aetat 

Additional verses in TMd? [cf. VaDh 2.40]: 

ane qaTEcr Hered a: greater | 

a o ariter amr a } gaan waa | 
aa Pearce cfasererenrerar aorry | 

a a aregftest arr ararafeg afea: | 

154. Cited by Laks 4.84; Hem 3/1.481,; Dev 4.167; Madh 1.687 — a)oOr 43a FW- 
qreara; wKto zeit; Lo! wea; cMy eit; Bo Sait; sBe? setter; Bo Iear; rMd4 “OTe 1 ¢) 
Kt? TMd? nPu! Pu!® saifae; cMy Tr' sae; La! serfag gfefe ; sOx! sPuo TRafeeT; cMy Tj! 
Tr! ofefeacez; Pud Pu’ oftaftra; rMd3 ofefererea — d) M3 aor: Tr! ator" 

155. Padas a-b omitted in BKt?. Cited by Laks 4.85; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4.167; Madh 
1.687 — a) GMy @afteat aftrar da; cMd! wafferaraquaez; rMd3 mTv3 ‘aautt; nKt! Lot 
Lo’ ‘aaitut; tMd* “aasteit; wKtS “aasteiar — c) Wa arryaes; wKt® wre; Pul? prey, Ox 
Brer ze — d) Pu’ Pu!® waz; Jo! wet: rMd4 “ofetet, oMd “atest 


Chapter 3 477 


WeReAaTHE TAT Year | 
qakrat yea ange: qrenteat eae 
sere URerHT Arata | 
Matica sae: sant awfacta: u240ou 
STaTEt We: HSA Arahat | 


ayaa aedt a fee: KEETH: MLK 
fear faaqaraar feaat Aaraear | 


qratranaeaa aterar tafe eee 
aT eat a warafeferqak: | 


el al a a 
wrt wosarest ot Past Fryar | 


Tarts aout: daha wr wT NE zl 


156. MTr° has the following order: 156a-b, 157c-d, 156c-d, 157a-b. Cited by Luky 4.86; 
Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4.167; Madh 1.687 — a)cMd! “eafadt, Ho wKt! sOx! sPuS “earrate; Lot 
Ox? wet — b) oOr “earseHetar; wKt? Laks Hem [vl as in ed] ‘earftcer a; Md! ° exe: 
C at T:2) — d) My AYS:; 1d} arg; sOx! sPuS arate:; Pu! [Jolly M'2-8]angataz; Lod 

qs’; La! Bepit’; Bo “Maat; oMd “steerr:; Tr! “steer; GMy “wreat, Tr? “areas 

157. Cited by Hem 3/1.481; Laks 4.85; Dev 4.167; Madh 1.687; padas a-b cited by Apa 
447 — a) La! FHT; BBe? Be} sCa Jm Jo! Jo? KP wKt BKt® wKt® Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® oMd? 
1Md? Pu? Pu4 Pus Pu? Madh Mandlik KSS Dave HoRoae ; NK area; Ox? aero 
cor to FHRTT wkt! Apa Laks Hem Na wearer? ; Be! arepreorrafe, Md? ares; tM? 

“earft — b) oOr aTaT ; NK tt Tr! “Prt” Bo nKtt Tj! “saujeeerut: oOr “ATRETIT; BBE Lo! 
“Snheerar — c) Pud Pu? aerat ; nKt ater ; Be! pCa Ho Lo? Lot Lo® GMd! Pu!? Wa 
“after; Lol GMy “altar; oOr ater; mTro atder; 7Md? aaererapt — d) Bo earr- 
aferdhre:; KS wKt® La! aart:; Lot Lo’ Ox? oferctfar: 

158. Padas c-d omitted in BK and ma in wKt®. Cited by Laky 4.85; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 
4.167; Madh1.687 — a) Be! BBe Be? Bo Jo? wKkt! wKt nKt* BKt® wKt® La! La? Lot oMd? 


sOx! sPu’ Tj? Tr Jolly ae; Ho Md BIE; TM? ARE: — c) Tr? Gearet T att FT; Jo! 
“ardt adi; GMd! mT rt MTr°Dev arét — d) Ho cGMy Ox? [but cor] daxe:, cMd! afea; 
Tj! Afom:; nKt afen:; Tr! dap, wKo pepe; Md} “weer: 


159. Omitted in BKt> and ma in wKt°®. Cited by Laks 4.85; Hem 3/1.481; Dev4.167; 
Madh 1.687 — a) Md? far; Jm cMy Wa fate; tMd? frre’; TMa? fae — b) GMd! +Md4 
sOx! sPuo Pu’ Tr! Dev Laks Sex [given as patha in Me Nd Go Ku Nd]; Ho®ee, Be} Bear 
— ¢) Ox? [but cor] @rmPy’; rMd4 “Mr; Tr! “Rrarer — d) Md! after; Tr! erferay, 
Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] stifeser 

160. Cited by Laks 4.85-6; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4167; Madh 1.688 — a) Bo avr, Tj! 

“attr, NNg ‘areat — b) Bo Azan’; GMy FANT; Lo} “hey ; pBe? Lo! ‘féferg-afer: — c) 
NNeg Prager 


161. Padas c-d omitted in Tr!. Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.481; Dev 4167; 


478 Chapter 3 


ghtavtsiteqaat aeskiar oftafr | 

afr atest war Fara aT ULSI 
alaatl AesANa AaT aract Ta: 
Teaaat Fat TITS Ta T UL all 
ae ait a sage wT 7 | 
fet qanakear wort Ar are: eer 
arate: gaa rer arrears | 
pfasttet softadt a afataar va a legal 
siefaart afefve: aeqatafeerar | 
vatrataeate asta: wrarat: NESE 


Madh 1.688 — a) Tr wast; CMe WAT; Wa BAT; Lod “TET — b) oOr Parratfterar oT; 
Tr? Rasaet; Bo Parag; Pud Pu’ Base; Lo’ Basra; Jo? Pasay, Pul? Pail; Lo? Paszalt; 

Ox} Pasaatt; mTr3 mTr‘PasreiT; Be! BBe Wa Patt w fag” — c) Wa saree — c-d) 
Md? arc after aeitegdetraa: 

162, Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.481-2; Dev 4.167-8; Mddh 1.688 — a) Pu? 
Pu’ efeaarar’ — b) Pu’ “Sefer — c) Ox? [but cor] WR; Lo’ dra, Hem [vl] WasHT; Apa 
[vl] ATTHT; Jo? BK wKt® Lo! Lo? nNg oOr sOx! sPuo mTr4 mTrS Wa STeae; [ [Jolly R] wfT- 
ada; Tj! Sepa; Ho Ae — d) wKt! ard’; eke wk garas; Tr! Geraeh 

163. Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.482; Dev 4.168; Mddh 1.688 — a)wKt® 
atrrat; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj?mTr3 [Jolly Nd] Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave *aet wx; mTr4 
ferrite; Na [vl] eres — b)NNg TaraTaeey; Re Aa at ATIF, HoT AT, Apa CaT:; 
wKt’ ae aa: — c) oMd> Tera, Lo? Tj! “ware; cMd! Md} “areas; Tj? aearer, Apa 
[vl as in ed] “adisrer, wKkt! “atereet; Ho “aaret aeq; sOx! sPu® Gal, rMd? gat — d) TMd? 
oMd Tr! “teas; Lod Lo’ Ue at 

164. Omitted in Tr’; following sequence in NNg 164a-b, 165c-d, 166, 164c-d, 165a-b. 
Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1.482; Dev 4168; Madh 1.688 — a) Ho far ; Tj! 9a; Ox? 
“*AIFS. Lo! “Srey, cMy “att, Tr Drerets set; wkeS “ssresastdt; Be! “ste; Hy “Sif — 
b) tMd? “ga — c) Hy fea; mTr? feerez; wkKt! nKtt Ox? Tr? Wa [Jolly N Nd] Laks Dev 
Madh [given as patha in Me Go Ku Rn Mr] Tv3932;GMd! mTr* mTr® GIST; Loe 

“ada; cMy ad — d) Ho oMd?2 ToAT aTSTHETIT; GMd! GMy TAs; Lo? cMyaRTeT:; 
Ox? Tae: 

165. Omitted in Tr’; padas c-d omitted in Be? [haplo]. Cited by Apa 452; Laks 4.86; 
Hem 3/1.482;Dev 4.168; Madh 1.688 -— a) Lot [but mc] erred — b) TM@ cMds GMy Apa 
freq; Lo! arate : pCa [but cor] wKt! cMd! cMd apa — £) NNg git’: wKke! saat; 
cMd! +Md3 GMd3 My mTr4MTr® [Jolly Gr] Madh Rreasftét af — d) Be! [me to] Bo Lo? 
Pul? afgatead; cMy afeitepa 

166. Padas a-b omitted in Be’. Cited by Apa 452; Luks 4.86; Hem 3/1.482; Dev4.168; 
Madh 1.688 — a) GMd! GMd° GMy Dev stew; Tr! siteyeet, nKt* La! Lo? Ox3 Pu? refer, 
nPu! sefwet; Be! arfeftre; Tr! Apa [vl]Dev aifeva: — b) Bel aftq’; Tj! “gatreer; Lo’ 
[but me] ofeerar — c) Kt? TH; Lot Lo’ Ox Pul? [Jolly M?+5- +] Me Jha Dave °Praia- 


Chapter 3 479 


Tat eart SATIRE 
fasnfasact frat fraskig tle ell 


aramit ereftarsegmfatta aati | 

ae wer aT artet aT fe weRtt gat gc 
aE at aglaced aetea: | 

Se efafe fast ar a waemrenraa: 12631 
wadte feSnfar oRaarfehre | 
AUSHAAAT As TA YSAT Uo 
aniyeraeaant eer aa ferr | 
urea a fas: aRfatereg aor: N29 20 
anfafe: aRaat wat a ofkfaad | 

ad & aes ait ae RUSAAT: MLM 


aT, BBe? GMd! Go Ku Apa Hem [vl] Preteandta — d) sOx! sPu’ Apaasttta:; rMd4 ast- 
frat 

167. Cited by Apa 453;Laks 4.86; Hem 3/1. 482; Dev 4. 168; Mddh 1. 688 — a) Laks 
wet Prafgerrarer sare oOr “yEIATART 5 tMd3 afer =) Be! Tr! “areraateth 
My "ATER 5 ; wKt® tTMd? Laks "saree Pus “ayearafg; GMy Tr mTr‘mTr° Dev 
Madh “ararrerart; +Ma? “arfegsa:; Laks “ear: — c) Ho fea’; La! eta: Apa fear 
[vl as in ed.] —d) Bo warferastaq; Be? sOx! sPuo Madh aarft Snr 

168. Cited by Laks 4.74; Hem 3/1.465; Madh 1.688 — a) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! oMd? Tj? 
MTr? Mr Mandlik KSS wrerrecatehl Trt areata; cMy atereateaeft | oOr atest 
caret — ¢) sOx! sPuS aferser + strer — d) BK wKtS Md? went at 

Additional verse in Be? La!: the same as VaDh 11.20 and cited by Me. 

169.* a) +tMd3 ATS; NKt* Pu> Pu? Go Jha Dave aT [Me gloss 
supports this reading]; Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? oOr N@ Mandlik KSS 33&h ;pBe? “aTAt; nK¢ aT; 
Lo’ aq va — b) Te arqedged: Bo Lo! arguacyd: Lo? arquace,; Te “ape — c) nPul 2 
pater ecif tr ar, Hy 2; Lot Lo’ tMd3 GMd> GMy nNg Ox? Pu!? Tr! mTr* mTr Yolly M 
G Nd Gr] Re Jolly Jha Dave 8& BART, oa Fz, NK! BK wKté Tr? F837; Lo? Lot Lo® Md3 
Ox? Tr! &— d) Bo Jm Jo! Kt? [but cor] sOx! sPu® Pu’ Tj? mTr? Go Re Mandlik KSS aaa 

170. Cited by Hem 3/1.465, 493; Laks 4.95 — a) Kt? oOr HaAAaE; nKt! aT AE; BBe 
aaa — b) oMd! affaar ; nNg gftfaemte; Bo Ho wKt® cMy “sare; Md? “dere; wKe! 
“wahrerar — c) Tre aay ; oMy aeaeter — d) Be? yeaa, Laks APA; TMd4 att 

171. Cited by Vij 1.223;Apa 445, 1050; Hem 3/1.371, 3/3.811; Madh 1.690 — a) Pu!® 
“Srriet T; Hem 3/3.811 Fat — b) Jo2nNg 7 params; Vij a: wees; Ho aT; TMd3 
aT; Tr? ad; Jo! om act— c)rMd? & fear: — d) Lo? “faferer; sOx! sPu® “arg; cMy 
Tj! Tr! Tr? “farteq; oMe “are; Ox? “Fat: J; Apa Fes: & 

172.* Cited by Vij 1.223 — a)sOx! sPué ofafer:; nKe! “fate; Lo! “fate; aMa4 GMy Tr! 
“Pra; Hy Jm Jo! ™Md* Tj! Tj? Tr! Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave T&T, Lo? “Sea, Ho wKt! 
La! 1Md3 GMd5 GMy NNg nPu! [but cor] Pu2 PuS Pu? Tr! T? Wa Fat T— b) Ox3 a FT St 





480 Chapter 3 


wigTaer aratat asa Bret: | 
eaontt Fama a vat efrqate: gost 
WERT Aaa gt Fal Hrertterae | 

qeat sftafr qvseq qa wdit wie: lleevil 
at ¢ areat ar sift ser ae a | 
qaltr career aad TatArT Ug 9il 


ATS Wad: Weert Yous ate | 


alaat a we ae arar sraifa arimar: u2osil 


oft’. Tj’ "ae — c) tTMd4 af a; nNg 7aet — d)BKt? wKt® Lo? Lo} nPu! "ora Tj! 
“ora Bo “aT: 

173. 1TMd? places 173 after 175; La! ma sh 173¢ to 174d. Cited by Apa 452; Hem 3/1.358 
— a) Md? arat g; Tr! sarat — b) Tj! aessta; Lot Feete; pCa oMd? “qesaer; MTro BTA 
@:; PuS Pu? Volly G] tre: — c) nKt4 aoe; mT‘ Tr® edo ; wKe} Papert; cMd! 
fraeprft; rMd3 Fraear ¢ — d) oMd’ ararafeferqufer: [om a]; 1Md3 aeat; wNg fastay; Lo! 
feféry-afer:. According to an opinion cited by Me, this verse is spurious. 

Additional verse in Be? Md’: 

ated atadtargete at fest: | 
murat aw aafefeqate: | 
a) TMd‘ afaeut — b) Be? eater aif: — c-d) Padas c-d blurred in 1Md4 

174. Cited by Vis 1.219-21; Vij 1.222; Apa 445; Hem 3/1.174; Dev 4.179 — a) wKt! 
GMd! NNg Pu!® [Jolly M] sat — b) Hy at gareguiteat, Lo’ yrs"; Tr? “atest — c) Apa 
Dev Ste waft Hveeq, Wa Tea; Lo’ Juseq; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Md? GMd! sOx! sPu® Tj? mTr? 
[Jolly R Nd] Dev Mandlik Jha KSSDave @ 8. Beye — d) Hy Faufearat FT eM; wKe 
ait; Tr! step; Md? dee, Te Hee: 

Additional verse in Mandlik [1] KSS; padas c-d in GMd! Dev 4.183, Apa 447: 

sora garpey wT Fara | 
aerate & Hveratt feor: ayer: 
d) Dev Apa [vl] @reregere fesr:; Apa srg FW: 

175.* In place of padas a-b GMd! gives padas c-d of the additional verse above. Cited by 
Hem 3/1.362 — a) Lo Tj! Wa ét J; oOr st STAT J; BBe? Bo Ho Jo? wKt? La? Lo? Lot Lo 
NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu? Pu? [Jolly M G] Me Go Rn Rc[patha]  & Ae: [La? a]; Lo? Pu!® 
& J WaT; nPul Gasar-ge ; Kt! BK wKt® aret; sOx! sPuS 9e; OMe oOr Tj! TRA; NK! 
“&F — b) pBe? Ho Jo? wKt3 La? Lo? Lo® Lot Lo’ +Md4 nNg sOx! Ox? NPu! Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu? 
Pu!® Tj! Yolly M G] Me Rn Go Re [patha] Wftrs:; Be? Bo BKt® wKt® Lo? Pu’ rMd3 oOr TH 
Hem oiftrat; wKt! afeat; rMd‘ fret; Heme &; Pu’ om FT — c) cMd! at gar aq; Hem 
Pat ger — d) Be} areas rat; oMy areaaaerfWat; Be? Bo Ho Jo? wKt KS La? 
Lo? Lot Lo® cMd! nNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Pu!® [Jolly M G] Me Rn Go aerafeet; Ox? 
araraed; BK wKtS aaterea; oOr Hem Arar 

176. Cited by Apa 454; Hem 3/1.498 — a) Hem SURAT lac: TEA; NNg Ox} Pul® 
Jha Dave 3TEFa; Tr? areal, wKeo earecat; Lot areht; Lo’ aorearit; Tj! eaTsaT; Lo? 
Lo? GM@ NNg oOr Pul® Tj! Tr? Jha Dave TERIM; Bo Lo* Weer — b) nPul Feysre STAT: 


Chapter 3 481 


aera aad: wr: we: Patt wateT J | 
a ey 
aaa: 


AEATF AANA: | 
aad 7 AaaTg: we arrer Tsay levi 
aahreartt ftiser ararepear wiemey | 
feat anfe fararaorararar® evel 
arafaerRer frear Arar qaantfiray | 
we tae serfs g afar i ecoll 
ag afiae at ae aye ana | 
wera et ger aur ate fast lec ei 


gate; Lo! cMd! “arquaeafer; cMy arqufezafer — c) nK¢ 1Md3 ata; Lo! arac; sPuS [but 
cor] Wad:; sOx! alad:; GMy atadetens; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo? Lo* Lo’ NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu!® Tj! TP mT? Wa Jolly Wet; Hem HS AIt— d) BK wKt® cMd! tMd?} 1Md* GMd> 
GMy Tr! MT r* mTr° Saree; wKt ATT: 

177. Pada-d omitted in La!. Cited by Apa 454; Hem 3/1.499; Dev 4.187 — a) Bo Ho 
Ox} Pu!? deal, Lo dearer; nPu! tae; nKtl tae HTS: — b) wKt! sOx! sPuo [but cor] 
ae, Wa afte:; Tr! ater; Tr? feast; GMy ft; Jm Jo? wKt! BKt> wKt® Lo! Lot oMd? nNg sOx! 
Ox? sPu® Pu!® Wa [Jolly M R] Dev Jha Dave 4— d) oOr [but cor fh] “gate 

178.* ma in La', Cited by Apa 454; Hem 3/1.498; Dev 4.187 — a) sOx! sPu® araat; Ox 
ardat; Be! Bo Ho Jo wKt? sKt® wKt® La! La? Lo? Lo* Lo’ NNg sOx! Ox? Pu? Pud sPuP Pu’ 
Pu’ Pu! Tr? Wa [Jolly M N] BETH wKt} aay | wKt!' BKt Dev ‘aay arer ; wKté 

aay aT — b) xK¢ “Saar ; Ho ° Sater: ae; td} “Sater ae: 1Md? "Satert ae: 
oMy “Farerreye —- c) Ho GMy aaaT; Lo! aad; Be? aTaay; oOr HaeTaT: — d) Wa 
arearat » sOx! sPus arMayaa; Be! nK¢ otf; BKtS wKtS GMd> Ox? Pu’ Pu? [but cor] 47a; 
Lod affar; aMd4 often; Tr? atfrar 

179. Pada-a omitted in La! — a) rMd4 atdaferg famed; Ox? [but cor] taferente ferir &, 
oOr Ox} dafegift; Lo tafeer FT; Ho tageaht; Jm nKe' fawer; rMd3 faweq — b) Be! rar 
sraratease, wk) Aerepea4r — c) oOr aal — d) cMy “araorafirar’ 

180. sOx! sPu® place 180a-b after 178d. Cited by Apa 454; Laks 4.95 — a) Pu® are: 
BKtS wKt® Bieta; oMd? aes; sOx! sPus “sfBsit; Be? “sefeor; mT! fAret. Bo Faear — b) 
sOx! sPuS 4rd — c-d) Be? NKf La! GMd! rMd3 rMd4 GMd> GMy Tr! mTr4 mTr® Apa Laks 
amfeas anger a ganar wae [1Md? srifacer; nKet “fires; wMdé “fast; NK “war] — d) 
Ho Hy area; wPul arget; wKto aretaat 

Additional verse in GMa: 

grt goteeg teat festa T | 
gareaad ae Tt GawH: a: |I 

181. Cited by Apa 454 — a) BBe* Jo? wKt! Jolly anferfaras; Hy tMd3 Wa aTftreae; Jm 
arftrsras — c) Tr? afeatte; Lot Lo’ wert; Ox? Weta aad; Lot Ox? gt Fer — d) Jm Lo® 
Ox? Pu!® gar; tMd? car; Md‘ daia; Tr! dafat; Pu’ Pu? Volly G] Ta WaT, NNg [EST 


482 Chapter 3 


my aTeEry wieaanyy | 
AasaPraasater agra AAI: aie 
een en fre Ugcai 


waT: aay ay adwaIAyT T 

aaa fata: ae ec 
Ronit: wafyaget: verted | 
AMTAAAATAT SISATTT TT T UCU 
aqqrifaaramt wT aera ae: 

meargad fasrar aaron: wefaraat: Uecgit 


qyagengar aaaetvgqaiead | 
Para say VRaretsary Ne Cl 


182, Cited by Apa 454 — a) MTr’ SA ACTT ETAT; OM? NNg Pu! Me Jha Dave 7aT- 
SRY; Lot Ox} avedhy; Md? wey; rMd* caTaTEhY; Lo? yey — b) rMd! 
anfere’: GMy afégz; Bo Jm wKt! wKt® Lot Lo’ “tea ayy — c) Lo? HaTg’ ; Pu’ Pu’ 
“opr 

183. Cited by Dev 4.188 — a) BBe nK tt tMd? aqTett ; Lot nNg Pu’ Pu’ Pu!l? Me 
Dave Jha 3TERNT ; Ox} ATERANTEAT, Dev TIeHASAT, wKe! “gTeAT; La! Md? nPul “gay 
BKt> La! nPu! véfeh — b) NNg Tear; Pu Pu? Wa [Jolly G] ga; TMd3 read; MT et aera; 
1Md! zy fgsit ; GMy Dev afgsnfafr: — c) Bor Md! oMy afar wKkt! & frat’; Tr! ar Par; 
Lo? “aera; BCa Ho S144; wKt! BATT, Lot eral [but mc]; aK SMT; wks ereary — 4) 
Be? BKtS wKtS GMd! Ox? Pu!? fsa’ ; sOx! om Tefer and jumps to end of 184d [haplo]; K? 
“grata; wKe oaeerT; Wa STA: 

184. Cited by Dev 4.188 — a) tMd? aearegendaeq; 1Md4 area4:; mT r® ater:; cGMd! 
waeray, Devaey a4; Bo wKt} Lot Lo’ 24 — b) sPuo af me sh 1098; Md* ‘gett 
— co) Ma aire aefeaspate; Md‘ ar. Baarsa: cMy Asha; ak wKto “asrarr 

185. Cited by Laks 4.63; Dev 4.188 — a) BBe? wKt! nK¢é BKt wKt® Lo? oOr Ox? mTr3 
anf ; cMd! “saferryfeag’; wKt! cae’; coMy aay — b) BBe? cMy “FIT; Lot 
Lo’ Tr? “gath:; Laks “atast:; Wa gatae:; sKO wKtS “ao: guvifta — c) BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
wKt! K? wKt Lo* oMd? Tj Tr? mTr? Ku Rn Nd Re Mr Mandlik KSS “taresaearey, Pu! 
“eatat — d) oMd! Ox? Laks wifassttearm:; Md} 1Md? GMd GMy Tr! mTr? [Jolly Nd] 
Dev Gert Sacearaw: [cMy “atfta:; tMd3 ° afar; Pu? StS; Lo? SIS; OOrsars: oMy 
nK¢t' “artes; wKiS “HTT 

186. Cited by Dev 4188 — a) sKt fart’; wKtS aerqfacr ; Md} aerate — b) Lo! 
aeaar: — c) Tj? Wa fast — d) Lo? Tj? arent: Ket Tj? “ota: 

187.* Cited by Vij 1.225; Hem 3/2.1133, 1146; Dev 4.192; M@dh 1.697 — a) Dev 
gagaiyt — b) Pu’ Pu? ae; wKt} “fete: — c) pBe? Bo BCa wKt! wKt} Lo! nNg nPu! Pud 
Pu? Pu’ Pu!® [Jolly M! 28 G Nd] Hem Dev Madh Jolly Jha Dave Faria; Be’ FA-aaIT cor 
to Faerie; Lolly M3-+5 R] either Prraae or Paeaaq; Lot Lo’ aeare; Tr? “H=rag; 


Chapter 3 483 


fraterat fast: free frrareat warear | 
TT oarerthtat wer ae TAKA UCI 
fatesrnte frac safest arezars | 


Aap reatedt TatAaTyITAgT ULSI 
wltdted auras german eure: | 
Surrey WT: THAT AAT UuPSoll 
AMAR T: Ate ANCA AE Alar | 
aqaeeed feRrq acart afer ee ei 
ARTAT: ATT: Add Herarheer: 
RAAT FerATTT: Prac: Fasaqar: esau 


1Md4 “HPTaTe: wKt “Hea, aK) ATA; wKe! ] ae — d) wKt! arena’: [Volly Be] 
“gietay ; Ho “eftrart 
188. Omitted in Wa; padas c-d omitted in sOx!. Cited by Apa 456; Hem 3/2.1014 — a) 
+Md4 cM Prafesoty, rMd! feat; wKk+° fer: — b) Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] FaaTeHT; Lo’ Tj! Fra- 
ATA; [Jolly R] PreaTeHr, cMygfererar — c) NK Ta; Be! sPul “eter — d) Bo wKt! 
oOr TET; GMy FAP; Ox? [but cor] AT; BK wKto cMy g; nPu! KAT 
189. a) GMd! FrasTPrarfe; Pul? frafexar fe; cMy Prafeae fe; Md? fraferarer — b) 
Ho sufarefet — c) nKt? La! oOr TAYE; Tr? argycifares; GMd! 1Md3 +Md4 cMd cMy 
Tr! Pr! mT ro aT, aes “tcMd! +Md4 “yara]; oMd weeetetaT — d) Tr! caret’; sOx! 
Tj! sPuo [cor to] aardt ; PuS Pu’ eraret’ ; r+Md? “aaa 
Additional verse in aM: given after 190 in GMd oOr: 
wet J Fa Pear ear faqaet: ae | 
Terry ceraa afar | 
a) oOr STeIMET HA St; GMd Frat — c) cGMy “aa; oOr Fusitater — d) 
oMy TeHTes craft 
190. Omitted in GMd!. Cited by Apa 457; Laks 4.107; Hem 3/2.1002; Dev 4.198; Madh 
1.701 — a) TMd3 acted; Pu’ Pu’ [cor to] Hfercteq; La! Haase; nNg Sfacreq; oMd? Feraber- 
&q, oMd’ eacegq; cMy mTr* dfeceq; sPuf Hifcred me sh to Prafeadt; sOx! Tr? Patera 
ae; Lo! Pafadt sar; wKt! afer — b) Laks STAI SAHSTA: ; Jo? Lot oOr Ox? 
Tj! Hem Me Jha Dave 8% BY; wK “Peat, wKt> “Heir; Lo! “wer, Wa festa: — c) nPu! 
wparrage ; Tj! “STATA; Lo! nNg Ox? nPu! Pud Pu? Pu!? “sorta; wKkt® “sor — d) M3 art; Ho 
Hy Jm Kt? oMd? nNg Ox? Ox? Pu’ Pul? Tj! spear 
191. Padas a-b omitted in GMd!. Cited by Apa 457; Hem 3/2.1006, Dev 4.200; Madh 
1.702 — a) Lo aa": sOx! sPue [me sh to] arafex’: Be! Be? nCa tMd! Ho Kt’ La! Lo! 
tMd4 GMd cMy oOr xPu! Tr! mTr‘ dpa Prafea’; Ox3 araPaareg; Td} mTr6 Fraferare — 
b) Bo gatear:; Tr’ Fawr — c) wKt® nNg Pu’ Pu! atqdgepd — c-d) Dev wafer Moeeter 
ware Fear: — d) oOr om TT 
192. Cited by Hem 3/1.61, 3/2.1005 — a) NNg Wa aarar: — b)wKt geraRT:; mT? 
“afer — c) Lo’ are; wKt! “sreatrer ; Lo! areT — d) NNg sOx! sPuo sTaxeaar:; wKt! 
“eae 


484 Chapter 3 


TATGARAAT AAT: | 

a a feral: wqratenfratert 1128 31 
atecenniey Y atearaa: gat: | 

ear waar Jar: frasrtr: Cat: US wl 
fartagat: ataag: arearar fear: Grae: | 
aeararar tawat artkar wteferyzar: esa 
STATA TATA | 
quiere at ar aerator: ese 
ara are fast ararnt afer: | 
STASI ATT aT F garters: lesoll 
aaa war: Yat elaorasecgan: | 
Forse: Fat afer gators: uese 
watery srearaeager4r | 
afrearatar ateartar froromta fafearer ue 99 


193. a) Be} fafeetat — b) Wa asarHstta: — c) sPul [but me sh] t: seat; Ox? 
[but cor] Tarat:; *Md4 “Tart — d) Be! “Bear Prat”; Ox? “Seafeat’; Wa ater 

194. Cited by Hem 3/1.43; Laks 4.110 — a) Tr WAT» BBe? BKtS wKt® Lo? Lot LoS 
tMd? GMd Ox? [but cor] Laks FET — b) Md! om 3; Lo! FéraTET:; Lo’ Tj! Bar: — d) 
Pud Pu’ [Jolly Ghadorae fg: Spar: Im Fa:; cMy Far: 

195. ma sh in Be’; padas a-b and c-d transposed in sOx' sPuS. Cited by Hem 3/1.55 — 
a) tTMdé sOx! Tr? ferrege:; aK ® ATe:; wKtS arrarez; sOx! [but cor] sPuS aE; cMd! 
Md? GMy Tr! [Jolly M8 Nd]aqar: — b) nNg fre: gar:; Te Frgeaar: — c) Be! BCa wKt! 
NKt’ Lo! cMd! 1Md4 NNg oOr TTT; Lo? Lo’ “ate; wKt! era’, rMd} dtavar — d) Bo Hy 
Jm La! tMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy Pu? Pud Pu’ [cor to] Hea; Lo! Lota; wKt} nNg Pu!? 
Me Mandlik Jha KSS Dave aT&ar, nKtt ATE; oOr ea 

196. Cited by Hem 3/1.55 — a) Lo’ Tj! dager; Pud Pu? °wearore — b) Tj? Werder; 
Be! Ho Lo! sOx! Pud Pu! “eretat — c) Lo! gaat’; cMy awhyperaarat — d) Lot Lo’ airar 
aféqar: 9sT:; Lo’ Tj! sav; GMd! GMd> aur afé; cMy gat afé ; ake wKtS ayer fe afe’; 
Bo Tao: oMé Tj! veétasT:; wKe! “cele: 

197. Omitted in Hy; padas c-d omitted in Ng. Cited by Hem 3/1.55 — b)nKt! sfagar 
— c) Lot [but mc] Lo’ cMd! Ox? “surat a; Tr? arat — d) Jo? BKt> wKt® Lot Ox} Pud Pu? 
Wa 4; Tj! 4; Md‘ qantfert; 1Md3 qeptfest:; wKtS eranT fort: 

198. Omitted in GMd! rMd4 Tj? Wa [haplo]; padas a-b omitted in Ng. Cited by Hem 
3/1.55; Laks 4.110 — a) Lo? aTaareg — b) Md} efaergftegar:; Lo? sf; Jo? afSaract; 
Lo’ Tr? “ga: wKkt! “gat — c) cMd> FaeaISTIT:; Te Lo? JSseITSUTT: [Tr? GT]; Lot Lo’ NNg 
Joeceasa:;, NK Jewersatr:; Laks “oT: ATT — d) nK¢ Ox? Pub Pu? Tr? afar: wKkt® wKe! 
weer: Be Te? g wife; Mad? garter: 

199.* Omitted in Ox}. Cited by Hem 3/1.55 — a) Lot Lo’ safaerr arfirearr:; aK wKto 





Chapter 3 485 


aud g wo ger: Pg aftatictanr: | 
corte Bsr gaaratraey Ro oll 
meter: Prat ata: Prasat saarranr: | 
TTT aes UT Sra Ta: WR gil 
THAMMAAATAY AT THatfeara: | 

arate sear seAeTaTa aed M20 Il 
qaerate faordtat faqert fered | 

aa fe fiqerter wararrt aay UR Bl 
aaa F Yt ta Praag | 


Pu’ Pu!® Tr? [Jolly G]Jha Dave afer ; sBe Be? Bo 8Ca Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? 
wKt} sKt® La? Lo! Lo? oMd? tMd? GMy nNgoOr Ox? Pu Tj! T? Tr! mTr* mTr° Wa [folly 
Ku N R Nd] Mandlik KSS affeurafi; Be! affennafr; La! afteenfir’: cMd [defective 
pada] afierry wer’; nPu! “aer:, Pu? “ger: — b) GMy agaafeteaat; Lo! Ox? [but cor] Tj! 
pare . Be’ nPu! Tr! wreaafé; Pu2 wrear aff; nKt¢ BKtS wKt® Lot Lo’ GMd! GMd5 PuS 
Pu? Tr! mTroperafé ; TMd3 aerate ; Be! Bo Pu’ Tr? [Jolly N] ‘féaer aeT; sPuo *FeaaT 
cor to ETA; Jo? Lo? GMé& sOx! Tj! [Jolly R] Ferdraers, NK¢ Tr! wTr! MTs [Jolly 
Nd] “fever gery; Mdé4 “feret eM; wKt’ “féraraat;cMd! “févarsrery; tMd? “feTeteHs; 
Be? NNg Wa [Jolly Me M28] °féueifirry; Pul? fécerttt — c) Wa aft’; Kt? arftrentara; 
Be! Bo wKt! tMd4 cMd* ia Be! wKt! Kt? wKt® rMd‘ aan; Bo ater: nK¢ are — 
d) Lo? fauraa fafateta; rMe3 dora, wKkto eearaTaa; rMd3 Prfeare_; Lot Preftet; Lod 
PERT 

Additional verse in Mandlik KSS: 

afirarar gdegar: arson: eqfaPrecer | 
qedfeqa: Mar: dereg fesriisry || 

200. Cited by Hem 3/1.48 — a) Lo* ma 4; Md? ToT; wKt® Feat — b) wKe? “see: 
—o) mTrt aoraft sfada; Tj! aorafs fe; vKt! “dt; Im “ae; Hy He Fa — d) Pud Pu? 
“RTT 

201. Cited by Laks 4.110 — b) Jo! Kt? oMd? Wa Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave t48a:; 
Jm @aara:; aKt wKt® gararrer: — c) Be? Hy Jm Jo! K® wKt cMd? Tj? Tr? mTr? Mandlik 
KSS Dave tAeF— d)sOx! sPus at T BRO wz, Te we araAT TW; GMdd GMy Laks Be, 
Tr! avery; GMy “eer, MTr* ‘qdar 

202, Cited by Apa 488; Hem 3/1.675 — b) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave “THT at; NK La! GMd! tMd? GMy Tr! Apa Hem aTafe at; Lo? tMd? 1Md4 Ox? 
[Jolly M*$-*)] Apa Usa; Lot USAT — c) GMd! yaaa — d) TMs att create, 
wKe aria; sPuo [but me sh] ararafaed; sk wKtS cMdS “aecae; wKt! Lo! “wera 

203. Cited by Hem 3/1.135; Dev 4.281-2 — a) Be? Bo Hy GMd! GMd> Hem aa; wKt 
fectart — b) Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] TET — c) Pulled; Md! frgarig — d) Md? qatar’ ; La! 
oMy sOx! sPuS “HORT, BKtS 1Md4 “Herat; Tj! “ATeaTad; Lo? “Arafat; wKtS “Heart; wT! 

“aeantas Ad; NKt om BAA; Jo! ae 





486 Chapter 3 


Tather orga aTATRTARTT MRO 
aarred added frat 7 aaa | 

Rarrd cea: Rr agate aaa: Rok ll 
grr aa fafa a atta | 
ahrorsrant da warerraTaag Roll 
WaPANT AAT aadity aa fF 
fafarg aw geater ada frat: Aart NR ovll 
oN aeory TATE | 

TRS SATA ARAMA ITAA URC 


204. * Cited by Apa 476; Hem 3/t. 136; Dev 4.282 — a) wKt! duraral wry; wKtS Tj! 
“ART; oOr Pule “Aree; wKtS “HPT”; TMd? tM! nPu! “ATeTey — b) Jo! Pul? ge; nPu! 
ad ae NNg Dev?t ad; oMd! oMd@? Tr? 2a; Jo! Prasad; nKe ferettorery, Pu Pu’ eter: 
Apa fate — c) sBe? Hy Jm Jo wKt! Kt? wKt} NKtt Lo! GMd! oMd? +Md3 GMd® GMy oOr 
mTr3 Tr? MT r® Yolly Nd] Hem [but vl as in ed] Mandlik KSS waif fe fagerea [cMy 
F; oOré]; Tr! warfe afegerter 

205. Kt? gives only the pratika dared. Cited by Apa 456; Hem 3/2.1045, 1156 — a) 
1Md @anreacatied; Hy Tj Pul? at; wKtS carted; Apaadtea; Hem 3/2.1045 aaet — b) 
Ho fearet + ao aad; cMy fread aa TRAIT; Lo? rMd? Ox? fasareet — c) rMdé faaT- 
sarfeared; cMd nPul feared adtert:; tM? Ox} fsa. Ho -aHtear:; oMy ateart — 
d) Bo Lo?oOr [but cor] sOx! sPus mTr4 Aeafet; wKe! aeaetsars:; Be! AAaT:; GMy aaa; 
TMd? aaa: Ox? area: 

206. Cited by Apa 471; Hem 3/1.160, 3/2.1164; Dev 4.142 — a) Ho Lo! Lo? tMd*4 aft; 
BBe? om 4; Lo* Lo’ Ox? Tj? ¢ — b) Be? “Tea — ¢) Lo! Lo’ Ox? fare: wk} “word; 
Lo! “gat; Jm 8a; Lo? BT 

207.* Cited by Apa 471; Hem 3.160; Laks 4115 — a) Ox? [but cor] Ox} mTr‘4 4TH; 
Pu’ @resy; Pus Pu’ Apa [vl] aery; wKe! areay; cMd! yfary — b) Be BBe? Be? Bo BCa Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? La? Lo’ oMd? Pu} Pud Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tj? mTr? Hem Mandlik Jolly 
KSS aatditg; Ke? ta; Lot om f; NKt Lo? GMd! @; Lo> T— c) aMd! Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] 
fafatrrT; Be? faathy; sOx! sPué fafary fe 7; wKkt! J — e-d) Laks a Graft — d) Ho 
adite ftarrer:; sKt? wKt® GMd> GMy NNg Tr! mTr? foereeaer; M3 faareeeta 

Additional verse in Be? GMd! GMd® oOr Ox? Tr! MTr? MTr®: 

adray saranary ata a | 
aay fagaey T Tad: Il 
a) cMd! afer ; mTr! actor — b) Be? HETE FT; cMd WaT F— c)0Or aa- 
TR @) oMd Tr! fagag aac:; Be’ fagaracearg 7 
Prior to the previous verse GMd@ adds: 
array MRoeyg dearrary 7 | 
trey a fafady quater frac | 

208. Cited by Madh 1.726-7 — a) Be STA WENT; NKt tMd3 GMdé? Tr! ated 

Bag; Tr! Madh AAT F BAT; Be} aarqafarey; nNg sOx! sPu° “feay — b) cMy aféqeq; 


Chapter 3 487 


wre F afar tarary | 
Terre: geahreaeagay ROS 
caTaarty aatrsatkaararey | 

Tt PAlaqaa MMT ATA: TE URoll 
WH: aaa WT FeaTearasrsartad: | 
ataatest fata tarerrtafergy 2 2 Ul 
ema F farmer woradraaread | 

at af: a feat fathterehithreea 12221 
TRITATT FIAT ATA] FUIAATT | 
HPAI FISTS FSATATT UR 2 SI 
WaT Feat adage | 


1™Md afecareg; Lo! efearey — c) Tj! sTeTat’; cMd! Ox? Saget’; nKt! oMd “earat” — d) 
oMd? nNg PafgaeATEy oMd! “rafgaraga ; oMd? “agua; Ho “RTAyaaA Ma “FT 
arte; Hy “Sra, 

209. Cited by Hem 3/2.1306; padas c-d cited by Apa 481 — a) cGMd> 3ydsr feoreet- 
arr; Md} safer; Be} safeareateg; oMy 7; mTroareatarat — b) Be! Jm cMy Hem 
"aaT FT; Ho "aay wert; Bo ‘TaAar — c) Ho Aretea Aereds’; oMy agence; 
Ox} Tr? geaeda — d) Be? BCa wKt} Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ nNg Ox? Apa Jha Dave “ata; Wa 

“gfeeery 


210. Padas a-b omitted in GMy. Cited by Hem 3/2.1349; padas c-d cited by Apa 489; 
Dev 4.318 — a) oM& aor ear g set — b) Md? GM? Tr! mTré mTr$ eater ferstear 
[Tr! fa]; Bo fearftaar ; NNg ‘Raoraft sOx! sPuS “Racietar; nKtt Raeraftr — c) Lo? 
at — d) Tj? om were; Tj! arercit ar ; NK 1Md? eT; cMd! cer 

au. Cited by Hem 3/2.1353 — a)GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd? GMy Tr! mTr‘ Tro afi 
aaa a; Tj! aar ; Lo! cMd! q — b)cMd! Haat; sOx! sPu’ “afta”; GMy “AAT 
aet:; Lo? “TART: — c) cMd! efaait T— d) Ke “aetaferasy 

212. Cited by Hem 3/2.1337; Dev 4.333; Madh 1.739;padas a-b cited | by Vij 1.2373 Apa 
491 — a) Be’ Md? Taft — b) Madh TPT sere aE; oOr Pul? TP STO Ho Worarary ; 
Dev “gare — c) Be} at wie:; wKt° fest Rea’. -nK¢e festfanr Wa. Md} Ra ; 
oMy fest sir Far — d) wkd Paafatgecrecn:; ules Pareles’ Pu! Tj! aifreae 

213. Omitted in Lo? Lot Lo’ Ox? Tj! — a) Ho cGMd | a@prart; TMd4 Wa sa@pteratey, ; 
wKtS “earawerert; tMd3 “eae TAA; KE grad; GMa? GMy Tr! mTr? quaard; Lo? 
qyeterer; GMd! queMt a — b) nKtt aera; cMd! aeectar:; Be? nKt* BK wKt® cGMd! 
NNg o0Or Pu!® Yolly M Nd] Me Go [possibly] Jha Dave Jaaat:; sOx! eIepary{; M4 Yera- 
aM; Pu2 gafear, Me gives TUaAM as patha, saying: feta? ar sfecaer: — c) wKe "oy 
at, Te araager — c-d) cMd! cart gurafafgsircart [sic] — d) Bo pCa wKt? Lo? Pu! 
MTr4 MTr® [but cor] Me Mandlik Jha Dave Fores Tay; Ho “dart; Lo? “ear; 1Md? fest 
UAT: 





488 Chapter 3 


sraeart eet Praga afr Rev 
aitada fatter Pefiefrorge: oe 
ya eskacedtteg wear faterqay | 
eee eee URVEN 
eA Sas \ 
TgGa TaEgATT tiger a WAT NRL 
wae Praaeaser ae: frwsaee ya: | 


water aeresry BaTEATRAAT eT: ULC 


214. Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox?. Cited by Laks 4.207; Hem 3/2.1321, 1404; Dev 4.326; 
padas c-d cited by Hem 3/2.1423; Dev 4367 — a) GMd! tMd3 tMd* GMd> GMd> GMy Tr! 
MTr‘ MTS SHIA PAT F;oOr Para FT; Lo! veer _ awit — b) Hy Jm Jo! nK¢ La! 
La? Tj? mTr3 Mandlik KSS wetarger Prat; wt! werner; Tj! “mrect’: rMd} Oar 
wafer, Tr “aaah; Pu! “gaeerr; Hem 3/2.1404 [vl as in ed] ‘qeateaay; cMd! ty 

° ATT — c) GMy awa — d) Laky Hem Af; cMd! tMd3 GMd° Tr! frat’; Be! [cor to] 
BKtS wKt® sOx! sPuS Me [patha] 14: [but cor insOx' sPuS]; mTr4 mT v9 Ae: 

215. Padas a-b omitted in sOx!. Cited by Laks 4.207; Hem 3/2.1404, 1427; Madh 1.751 
— a) oMy eg wifastaies; nNg Freq; Tr! Seq; Bo Pud Pu’ “ara; Laks *at — b) oOr 
faverqear; sPus [but cor sh] Tr! faatua:; Wa aarfater — c) Jm cGMy weeta; Lo? Lo’ Ox? 
[but cor] Ox? NPu! Pu’ Pu? Saata — d) TMd3 cM Tr! Prat” 

216. Cited by Apa 507; Laks 4.207; Hem 3/2.1449; Dev 4.372, 375; Mddh 1.754 — a) 
Hem Taftesrergaay; sOx! sPuo IT; Ho FA; Apa [vl] WaT; BK wKeo fvsrrceceq; Apa 
Dey Pratrpaed; xPul Peergqredieq; Bo AM — b) cMy Fa; Wa “gfFar — c) wKtS 
THT; sOx! sPuo Apa Fresq; sOx! sPu® at seit —d) BBe Be? Bo BCa HowKt! La? Lo! Lo? 
NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu® Tj? Tr? Wa Apa Laks Jha Dave Priva ; La! faysar ; nNg frsar; 
Pul? Frasargia; sPu “ath cor to “afar; sOx! “sf; oOr “HTRIAT.; NNg Tj? “afer; 
TM ase 

217.* Cited by Apa 5073 Hem 3/2. 1451, 1462; Laks 4.207; padas c-d cited by Hem 
3/2. 1462 — a) Wa arareat ; Md! age’; GMy “Rilesuer’: Pu! “qaeHTger, Pud Pu? [Jolly 
G] “waet; Ho “Ager; nK¢e “afrar — b) sBe? [but cor] Be? Hy Jo? [cor to] Lo’ GMd! nPu! 
T? Tr? Tr? Wa Laks Prever; cMy Praraer; tM? Freaer— c) Be! La! GMd®* nPu!l Hem 
3/2.1451 TEACaaepAld [Lal “SPear]; nKe vesaarepata; oMd! verge avHEHata; cMy 
qed wWepald; Tr! vscaer qyepata; rMd4 WeaTAAepald; Hem 3/2.1462 TeftaT 
THBATA; sOx! sPuo Tsqeq; mT ro Tey_; wKt! TE yaa; tM? aHEHPeT — d) Jo! frag; Lo? 
Lo! Lo? sPu° g; Be! sBe? Bo Ca Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wK# nKtt BK wKt® La! La? Lo* Lo? 
Lo! [but mc sh] Lo? oMd@ tMd? tMd* GMy NNg oOrsOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pur sPuo 
Pu’ Pu® Pu!® Tj! Tj? Tr? Tr? MTr*# mTr®° Wa Polly M8~° G R] Apa Hem 3/2.1462 Laks Re 
Mandlik Biihler Heater, GMd! Feat 

218, Cited by Hem 3/2.1473; padas a-b cited by Hem 3/2.1462; and padas c-d by Apa 
508 — a) oMd? Faagaary ar; Kt rMd3 cMdS Saar g frat: [NKt! om J]; La! Sanart 








Chapter 3 489 


Rosvateret ArT wATeraTayaar: | 
aaa farraretary fatraegararad wR 23 il 
Feramrit g Firat. gers Fag 
faraarht tore eae frac UlRRoll 
frat wer g ad: Tapattaarte rarse: | 
fig: a ara aater atta sitar R221 
Rraret ar aaa yostttcaadtag: 

SM AT GAGA: AAT AATACT WRI 
aut seat TF sety aatar faatery | 
ast wy etaraate TaT WRRzI 
aha qrener eeraer ary 


Fraaeet:; GMd! tMd4 GMy & Aaa; Tr? Frdaesr. wKt> Freaeerctr — b) cMd! tMd* cGMy 
oOr Tr! ftveraay; BK wKt frsraas; Hem 3/2.1473 frerfeas; rMd3 avetfeae — c) Tj! 
fafa ; oOr “free arfey” — c-d) sKt wKt aahreerargevers gare: — d) cMd! 
TIRSAAAT coMy TUR sOx! sPu [me sh to] Fay: WaT ; Ox? [but cor] *feart 

219. Padas a-c omitted in wKt}. Cited by Hem 3/2.1476 — a) cMd ffveer eafer- 
@TATAT:; Lot Lo’ sOx! Ox? Ox} Pu’ sPuo Pu? Pu!? Tr? MTr° Eor to] Jolly Jha Dave Freez: 
eafeqeet; GMd! “ATA; 1™Md3 “HTaTE; GMy Tr! “HTaT: — c) Bo aaa; Hem AT Ua; nPu Tr! 
aaa, Md} fuser; Tr! fasreaardtart — d) Md} “ae aaa 

220.* Omitted in Pu?; verse 220 placed after 222 in Bo. Cited by Vis 1.225; Dev 4.16 — 
a) wKt! cMd! draarsr; rMd} Praarst — b) cMd! geurafy — c) Dev favagifact ats; GMy 
faraearft, +Md‘ Tr! mTrt aed; cMd> Tears; Be! BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? 
wKt} nKtt La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? oMd? GMy NNg o0Or sOx! Ox? [cor to] NPu! Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ 
Pu Tj! Tj? Tr? Vis Go Re Mandlik Jolly KSS 17&, Wa %t& — d) Bo cMy 4; Md? Fae 
fa’; Im “anferare; Lo? “array 

221.* Cited by Vis 1.225; Laks 4.236; Dev 4.16; padas a-b cited by Vij 1.254 — a)tTMd4 
ffar g wer Tat; Vij Na KSS Mandlik Tex Frac:; Tr! wentrae:; aBe wer TeA:; Ke wer 
agt:; BKO FET FAG:; Bo wer J sfta: — b) wkt! earétar Par; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Md} cM 
cMy Ox? [cor to] Pu Tj? Tr! mTr3 Tr MTr® Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Saft — c) tMd3 
feqerrartateay, Dev ftgqeq AMT; Lo’ GMd GMy Ox? [but cor] mTr4 mTré ft: SATA; Lo? 
arr tat; cMd! aaiteat — d) rMa3 aftarse: 

222, Cited by Laks 4.236; padas a-b cited by Dev 417 — a) TM} frarrerreaé; NNg 
“HET at; Be! Ho oOr te — c) TMd? HB; BBe? Ho wKt! GMe@ Ox? Tr? mTr® Laks ae- 
Jar: — d) GMd! GMdS cMy Tr! Tr [Jolly Gr] atet ages TATA, sOx! sPul aerate 

223. Tr! [Yolly Nd] place 223 after 119; padas c-d omitted in TMd*. Cited by Laks 
4.207; Hem 3/2.1476 — a) Jo? Tj! J Fat; wCa StaT ASE; Lot Ox? T Fat TJ — c) cMd! 
afer gad J; 1Md? cMy & faver’: La! afervent; Be? Hy Jm Jo! Ke? eKt) wKt® Lo? cMy 
nPul Tj? mTr? [Jolly M*-°|Mandlik KSS THT, wKt! wes JT; Pul© Volly M'?8] gf AT; Re 
appears to read WRT glossing it with Zee 


490 Chapter 3 


feof freq errasataeeatrarad UR AI 
aE TAA | 

ARI GIAGT: AAT FSAATT: URAUI 
TTT qaarary Tat ahr at AT | 
fared cat: VINA TATSa: URVEI 
weet diet a Rr gent a wer a | 
gantt da nienht anf geAtfr 7 Rll 
sudta 7 acad ae: gaara: 
akawag weal oresraty watery URAC 
TATUM T EAA sae | 

AT Uae Vala T Aaa WAI 


224. Omitted in TMd‘. Cited by Apa 492; Hem 3/2. 1368; Dev 4. 339; Madh 1.742 — a) 
Be? Ho Apa Hem Dev Madh orereangyae ; Be! wiftrearrse ; [Jolly Gr] “ager — b) GMy 
wares, Lo! afar; Dev Tyr — c) Ho famrates; Lo! fq — d) Dev araarontt 
fafa; cMd! caraamtaet ; Ho “aa: Prferrgft; Be! Be? sOx! Pu’ sPu® Pu’ [Jolly G] 
"Ga fBa; sBe wKkts “Rrferte 

225. Cited by Apa 493; Laks 4.173; Hem 3/2.1368 — a) GMd! GMd° GMy Tr! Laks Bh 
gureat gearat[oMd xf; Tr! aftreay; oMe& “ate — b) Lo! age afe dtaa, Tj! 
aeayT; Lo} Tj! “sehr — c) cMy afeqgercrraen:; Laks ake we — d) Md? aea- 
ade; cMy ead: 

226.* Cited by Apa 493; Hem 3/2. 13725 Dev 4.342 — a) Bo Td‘ Turd; tMd3 Toreg; 
Ho GMd Tera; aK wkt® qerRar; Bo “aera — c) NNg faereta; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La! 
oOr Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 5 qa; nKtt cGMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMa GMy Tr! mTr* 
MT 1r9 ae aT 

227. Cited by Hem 3/2.1368; Dev 4.342; Madh 1.744 — a) Ho 48a; Lo® Pul? war; Ke 
HIST, Hem w fafa — b) Tr? fafeerrarhy yer TF; olly R] wath fafeenty a; Pu’ Pu? 
Pu? [Jolly G] qeanry wotly FT; sPu® [but me sh] BS Te ater T— c) aCa Beh Aer eat 
— d) Lo! arnft qeaiht a; rMd4 crest; oMe seth; Lo? Tj! faferenta a 

228,* Cited by Hem 3/2.1368; Dev 4.342; Mddh 1.744 — a) Bo! wKt! wKt} nKtt La! La? 
Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo? rMd4 Ox} nPu! Pu2 Pu Pu? Pu’ Pu? mTrt Me Go Ku Mr Hem 30407 aaa 
wee: Mes OT Baa ET: MT rt STAN; [Jolly M3] S04; GMa Dev FT, Lo} aes —a-b) 
KO wKkts saftey at: adtaer geared: — b) Ho Jo? Lo? Tj! “aeq TAT — c) rMd4 “ag- 
ata; Dev Madh “anergy, Lo! Lo> Md? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? “ATaeT; Be! Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? cMd! oMd@? 
oMy Pu? Pul? Tr! mTr4 mT r° Nd Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave F744; Lo! “FT [ma A], cMd! 
gad — d) Ho TAT WT ; Be? Bo cMd! sOx! sPuS mTr° wateaq; Lo! Lo® Ox} Pu’ Pu’ Pu? 
Tj? wea; Wa wierd, Hy warray 

229. Pada-a moth eaten in oOr. Cited by Hem 32.1029 — a) NKt¢ GMd! rMd? rMd?* 
cMd) cMy NNg Ox} Pu! Pu Pu? Pu? Pu! [Jolly M'258 Me G]Jolly aPTaT ; Be? La! Pu2 
Wa aPIAT ; Lo? Lo’ art oa ; BBe? Lo! Lo} oMd? Ox? [Jolly RJA art Tea’; Be! Ho Hy 


Chapter 3 491 
we Tat Tary Blasttasaagt BA: | 
Tsetse atthe gepdirayaray WR Roll 
Gaara PN AAETSACAT: | 
wears BUT: HAtg Prgorradiaryz 23 VN 
carey aay fret etgrearfir er fe | 
sreararateerara Fetter ferent aT URSA 
SUIT AAMeGSt wisereargry sa: | 
wap Te oarsag 123 3M 
qrerahr atest are tat AAT | 
Bar aad zara fader fafetarhy uR3zvil 


Jo? sOx! sPuS Tj! Tr? + UPT We [Be! We]; wKe! + wersra’; Pu’apy sara ; Te! Hem 
“cra” — b) nPu! Baars; Be! [but mc] La! cMy BAaqa;, Bo BAA; Jm nKe Har age 
— c) Be? teat — d) Be? BCa Ho wKt! wKt? Lo? GMd! 1Md? sPuS Pu? Pu? aaa; Tj! 
aaea; Tr? dana’. Hem Fags; sOx! sPuo [mc sh to} aaa’; nKt at afer’ 

230. Omitted in Pu? — a) Tr? THAePT F WaT; cGMd! GMd° GMy Tr! mTr° site; sPu 
He; Md} ae; Pu? a; Be! La! ag; BBe Wa at; Be? oOr Ox? Pu’ 377; nKf NNg nPu! Pu> 
Pu!® [Jolly M G] Jolly 3°]; nPu! sTtafe; Bo ta; La! Weary; rMd3 Stara; sOx! frat — b) 
sOx! sPuS [both me to] Ba 7 T Pe BA; Pud Pu Pu!? weir, Md? BT — c) BBe? “eebz; 
tM eet g; Tr eat J; oOr erate: ake wk “ereeg — d) Tj! gape gear, Pud Pu’ 
gopeitra’ sOx! sPuo [but cor] Spars 

231. Placed before 229 in Md? cMd@ Volly Gr Nd]. Cited by Hem 3/2.1027-— b) cMy 

“eal EARTH: TMd4 “FaeAEET ; Pul? “wera sar; Be! “aepaterere:; rMd4 “area 

Feat: — c) Tr! atail’; Ho sOx! sPu® valrareq; Wa Me |patha| seared; Be? Tea; Pur 
Pu’ Pu? aTerATEIrA; La! rere: tea:; Be! Bo Har, cMd! Tar; sOx! sPuo BAT; Ke? Hate 
—d) Lot aadiftad’; cMy feta: 

232, Apa 502; Hem 32.1069; Dev 4.351; Madh 1.746 — a) Lot Ox} taTeaar;; tMd?3 
a { MWe; Lot Ox3 AF; Hem Bz; BK wKt® Md4 nPul Pu’ Pu? Tj? Tr? fet — b) wKet 
Lo? mTr* @; BK wkt> ¢ — c) TMd3 arena ; oMd$ “Aifeaerrter — d) Ho wKt! sKt® 
La! GMd! Md? rMd* GMy Ox? nPu! PuS Pu’ Pu? Tj? Tr! [Jolly G] Dev Apa [vl] Feemey- 
fercrty; Tj! aerty 

233.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1026 — a) Tr’ eta, Hy see; BK wKet® sarge 
Ox? “orieqrét — b) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo} oMd? 1Md? sOx! Ox? [inc fh to] sPuS Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr! 
Tr? mTr? [Jolly R Nd] Re Mandlik Biihler Jha KSS Dave ater at: at: TS asTagr ToT 
ara, oMy awe NK e wterdeaerdt; Bo Hears: wKe wt avery — c) cMy 

aaa: BKt wKt® ° garetreSar. Lo} GMy “qedar; La! Lo? tMd3 tMd4NNg Pu! mTr® 

“gear; Pus Pu’ Pu? “Heda; Bo gett — d) cMd! cMy Ox? qorfar, Wa WoT; BCa Jo? 
Lo} Tj! [Jolly R] alee; Be! Pul® “stata; nNg ‘AIeaq; Pud Pu? Go Volly G] atTtT; Ho 
tMd3 oM@ Tr! Tr? “ataaa; Bo “aad; Re FTI 

234.* Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Apa 475;padas a-b cited by Dev 4. 165; Madh 1.685 — 
a) Lo? aaearaft — b) Ox? ate — c) TMd4 BAT; BBE oMd! MTP Hava; wPul Tr? arars; 


492 Chapter 3 


Afr are afeonfr afar: gaakrer: | 
Se 
x fee ppt ger en 8 
MAGA WATS ATTA APTA: | 
ataaater fret araater eferfor: 2 Zull 
watzaknr years age afer: | 
ATHY Wee ar TA Ysa UFC 


Wa ata; Hy Jm wKkt! K? wKt? GMd! oMd? tMd? tTMd4 GMd> GMy oOr Pu? Put Pu’ Tr! mTr? 
MTré mTr® Yolly M3 Nd Ku] Ku Mandlik Biihler KSS U4; Jo! aTat — d) cMy ferarer; 
cMd! tMd3 GMd@ cMy NNg Tr! mTr* mTr® [Jolly M'-*-8 G Nd] Apa Jolly fereearafar, Be? 
Pus Pu’ Pu’ feesarfates ; rMd4 aft; Be! Ho Lo’ fae’; Tr? faeee FT, nPu! fafoearét 
235. Cited by Apa 474; Hem 3/2.1175 — a) Ho Wa srr ater; Lot ofearft; Lod afer 
— b) Be! sCa Ho wKt! sKt> wKt® Lo* Lo® nNg oOr sOx! Ox} Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu? Pu? Wa Re 
[patha] aes; wKt! Tr! afer; Lo’ “afer: — c) cMy Fifer ame — d) oOr BeTAS ; Ho 
“reriteae; Jm Lo? Ox? Pud Pu’ Pu? Tj? Tr? Wa “cae; GMd! 1Md3 GMd “ART; Or AT; Lot 
Lo’ “eaer: 
236.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1017; Laks 4187; Dev 4.355; Madh 1.748; padas c-d cited by 
Apa 497 — a) wKt® areitor; Md} Tr! Wa Hem aor; GMd! rMd? cMdé sOx! sPuo Tr! 
“worst at — b) Md? spleen Tr! yssiaa; wKt! nKe yosfteante; xPul qssfterts; La! 
yattd aft, Be! BBe Bo Ho Jm Jo? wKtS La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Tj! Tj? Wa [Jolly 
G R] Laks yastteea fe; Hy Jo! Kt? oM@ mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave FaTreet T; Dev Madh 
apareaa, wKt! wKtS GMy 4rad:; Wa area; Tr! arerat — c) Tj! ese — d) Md? Tj! 
qaatd; Lo} qgaife; oOr qazeta; wKt! qyaiaegerete ; Hy Tj? Te uTr4 Dev gerefa ; Kt 
wkt® efagfor:; Be? seep; tMd3 Beefy; sOx! om eferforry and jumps to 237d Bfasforr: 
{haplo] 
237.* Omitted in La! oOr sOx! Pu? [haplo]. Cited by Apa 497; Laks 4.187; Hem 3/2.1019 
—~ a) Ho Hem aaee WATT; Be? Aaasy Fag; Bo Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt? Lo! rMd? tMd4 
GMd> Ox? Pub Tj? Tr! mTr? MT r*mTr® Wa Mandlik KSS [cf. VaDh 11.32; ViDh 81.20] a1agor; 
oMd? arag@T; Lo’ aragur; Be! Jm La? aaget; Pu’ Wacds; Puo HATH; Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? 
wKt? La? oMd? Md? GMd> Ox? Pu’ Tj? Tr! Tr? MT MTr® Wa Mandlik Jha KSS 3AeU3; 
Be! wKt! Lo! rMd4 Wades — b) Be aaa; Im Kv? sae; Wa maga, Md? ara- 
aia; tM? Wa ara: — c) nKtt Md? oMdS Tr! mT r4 mT rotates fraepate; BCa Hy Jm 
Jo! K@ oM& Tj? Te Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave rareatagatea — d) mT? efertorr:; Be? 
sar; wke) afesor: 
Additional verse in GMd: 
sfestor a amen: Prat araaftar: | 
frgfreattc: vatemet art sf: 11 
238. Kt? transposes 238 and 239. Cited by Hem 32.1021; Dev 1.115 — a) BKtS aT afte- 
a; Jm@ aftea’; wKtS nPu! aaftea’; tMd4 nNg PNT; cMd! Yet — b) BK wKt® nPul at 
wed — c) Ho La! “ABET; wK¢t® SRT; BKtS wKt® Lo® Md? nPu! at yeh — d) Dev wef 


2 


Chapter 3 493 


WHT RET BEC: AT AIT T | 
Weer T Wea aetrAay BATT R38 
art sar aie aw aarti | 

aa fate fret ar ageserrarary URYoll 
ATT Tae Set Tata HIE: | 

sat g aftefrarct eagtaracanher: NRY eI 
asst at ae ar arm arg: seasfe ar wad | 
raat aT AAT: URS RI 
arart Rr arf airartqafererz | 
Tacs: afer: sega wy sl 
aatienarr aftargrer arftorr | 
ayepigmadmaar faterayfr uRvvil 


Testa; Ho year 

239. Cited by Apa 472; Hem 3/1.516; Dev 4.206 — a) Be! BBe Bo Ho Jm Jo! wKt! 
Kt? sBK# La! Lo! Pu’ Pu? Pu? Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave aster — b) Jo? Lo? Lot 
TM} rMd! Tj! Tr! [Jolly R Gr] Dev BrGeT Ata T;cMd! gape ata w; Tr! at — c) Be! 
wears, Oxtqwery, Kt? Pud Pu? Pu? @vex; Dev @oseq; 1Md4 Avexy — d) Be! sOx! sPu® 
ae; aMd4 “seat 

240.* Cited by Apa 472; Hem 1.108, 3/1.516; Laks 4.136; Dev 4.206 — a) Lo? Apa [vl] 
a; nKf 83 WATS; Lo? Haq — b) Pul? gare; rMd4 aeaeAr ; rMd3 Praaifepa:; cM? 
Tr! “Rreacitfesd; Kt? 1Md4 mTr6 “ater; oMe# cMy [olly Be] ApaLaks Dev Aft; Hem 
“tera — c) tMd4 @; Tr! 2; Be? Hy Jm Jo! K? cMd! oM@ 1Md? 1Md4 GMd> GMy nNg 
oOr Tj? Tr! mTr3 mTr? MTr® [Jolly Nd]Dev Mandlik KSS % =#4fr; Be! Be} Ho wKt! Lod 
1TMd} GMy Ox? Tr? [Jolly M] Laks 4; Wa @; Lo! aT — d) Jo! ART: wKt! nNg Pu! Laks 
agg ; Lo! Dev ager aa ; Be! [mc to] BBe* Be® BCa Jm wKt! tMd?4 oOr Pu? “qa 

241. Cited by Apa 472; Hem 3/1.517 — a) Lo? Pu? om WM; BBe? Bo Ho Hy wKt! 
wKt? BKt wKt® Lo! Lot oMd? nNg Ox? Ox? Pw Pu? Pu? Jha Dave [HU — b) wKt! nNg 
afer; HowKt® tMd? oOr Ox? [but cor] Teac; Pu? sera; GMy Tr! BaeBer: — c) Pu> Pu? 
Pu? [Jolly G] a; Hy ‘faareda — d) Be! Tr! erafars nNg Seat; Ox? “aTaeathtar:; Lot 
“area ta:; Lo’ aTaeaferr:; Te “aracastarr: 

242. Cited by Apa 472; Hem 3/1.517 — a) wKt® Pu? Pu’ Gast; Pu? TasiT; Hy Jo? Lo? Tj! 
quay, Tj2 Tt; Wa Brey — b) wKt® oMd? teat; Pud Pu? Pu? deathe; cMy wearafy; nKt Lo! 
cMd! a watq— c) Bo Remnitar; Hy wKto “ars; Ox3 “HTaT — d) Lo! “aeraa:; Hy Jm Jo! 
Kt? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 727: 

243. Cited by Apa 500; Hem 3/1.439; Laks 4.134; Madh 1.728 — a) Hy sTarm; Lo 
Laks aft, cMd5 att — b) wKtS SATRyT ; tMd! srerretgag; Apa FIPTAT; cMy fete: 
—c) Lo! oMy eecagarra:; BKt wKtS “sear: ; Be! ‘ardt — d) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] “are 
aerrarten WIA; wKt! ahead 

244. Cited by Apa 504; Hem 3/2.1396; Dev 4.358; Madh 1.750 — a) Be! a4; GMd 


494 Chapter 3 


Tapa APTA Beratkrary | 
Ree are ere aig fafa a: Uw 
TIT YRVTAAAMASET T | 
araasier afer anes waar URwsill 
satesiearest faored: aeraer J | 
weg aera festa a Prag uv 
aefresiearar g Pararaer ata: | 
sraargan art fresfrdaor get: WRecll 
We Wet t Shae qa wate | 

a Hat as ae sreqararsmen: Uv 
Tataer aqeats arate | 

area: Fae a are Praweager IF URKoll 


“aufas — b) GMd! “aarttargrer; mT rt erreftargrer; Ho Lo! aarargter; Md? afrergrer — 
c) Bo agar; wKe! “amar arr? — d) cMy “aa; Be! Bo Pud Pu’ Pu? Tj? ameafa, 
Td! fafa; Tr? faareragia, wke° arfoeey ter 

245. Cited by Apa 504; Hem 3.150, 3/2.1512; Madh 1.750 — a) Ld seeped ofa; 
Lo! Lod aetepramftart — c) Bo Joe Kt? rMd* See; BBe? Tre: — d)tMd3 THT; GMy 
aay; Be! Bo Lo?nNNg Ox? Pud Pu? Pu? Pul® Tr? faepear; Ho GMd5 GMy sOx! sPuf Apa [vl] 
fafertar; Tr! fafeedaa; Ho Md} oMd MT fer at 

246. Cited by Apa 504; Hem 3/1.151, 3/2.1511 — a) Apa Serr; wKt® Apa [vl] TTT 
— b) NNg "eaeTeeT; GMd! “RIRMET, Wa “SETA; wKe GT — ¢) Tre aaeT4eT; Ho Teer FT 
afer’ MTré aferst; Be? Bo wKt? BK wKt® Lo? Lot Ox} afera; Tj! aferat; Waafersir; 
Apa aferst — d) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? ser Aare? fag:; pCa wKt® waeaa, Hy wae 

247.* ma in Be’. Cited by Vis 1.225; Hem 3/2.1606 — a)cMy aafteser aap; TMd4 
frerarafararet; Be! pBe? sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? wKt aKtS wKt® La? Lo! Lo’ Lo? 
oMd Ox? Pus Tj! Tj? mT? [Jolly Ku R] Nd Rn Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave araftve — b) 
wKt® cGMd! Hem sid:, Tr? “sire: feraer; sOx! sPue aepaey; Be! sBe Jo? wKt! BKe wKee 
La? Lo! Lo’ oMd? tMd? NNg sOx! Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M G R] Jolly 7 
—) oMd! aaa; Lo? #11 afEH; Jo? GMy Pu’ [but cor] “=X — d) wCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wkt! 
Kt? Lo’ tMd3 cMy NNg Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tr? [Jolly G] Mandlik KSS J; Hem BRAT 

248. Omitted in Lo’ Lo® Ox3. Cited by Vis 1.252 — a) sOx! sPuo Pul? afteser frarar 
J — b) Md? oMy Pearaerer; rMd} effet; cMy aaa: — c) GMd! 1Mdé “atgd: wKtS cMd? 
arat — d) Pu? mTr? ‘Prataer; cMd! “Prataer; oMy  frateras; Md Prater; Lo? ge: 

249. Cited by Apa 498; Laks 4.192 — a) Be! sOx! sPuS 211; Ho ATH YHT; TMd4 GMy 
MTr Heal; GME Tr! Laks age, Ho SIS — b) Ho FIT; Ke FIST; 1M} WaT — 
c) Md} aa arfa, Bo Lo® nNg Tj! arf — d) Bo Lo? sOx! sPuS [me sh to] Tj! atfeare:; mT 
“arf: NKt “arferer:; Ox? “arisen; Lo’ “arfeerer:; sPu’ “arg: 

250. c) TMd* 9ett; rMd4 atte, GMy TATE; TMd3 arene; oMe@ ata; mTro Ara 


Chapter 3 495 

Tet watqahreard Garrard: | 

Tree aT ATA ATS A TAT URE QU 
AMAT T TIAA MEATATT | 
SAUTE: WT Eat: aay faery UREN 
aat yaat aaraaare fraqaq | 
way WET Hatagarae_ AES: UY RM 
trea raat at mrs T GTAT | 
aqafrengay ea dRrafreaf® weevil 
AIBA TAT areqaaraat fae: | 
qhedftetioranar: ataetg ag: UREN 


251* Omitted in BK wKt®. Cited by Laks 4.211 — a) Lot ma TST; wKt! wKt? Wa GET; 
La! fst; rMd3 ge; nPu! @gr; GMd Sar; cMd! qeracanr ; La! earfeatir’; wKt! afeatr ; 
TMd$ cafe Feld; Tr! eater Fett; Bel HocMy att — b) Md! oa; Be! Jo! TMd* Ox? 
[but cor] aay; ; Volly Gr] “aegr: == 0) Pu’ Pu? Pu? arava; Lo! “aaieary; wKt! 

“saPaTTSTAY uTe! “APTA; Lo} Tj! “raat? — d) Im per. [Jolly Ku] Laks 
“arefiy Hr GT’; [oly R] serertater 

252, Cited by Hem 3/2.1486 — a) wKt! @¥elaat gat aero; Tr? mTrS caer; 
Be! Ho wKt} nKé BKt® wKt® Lo? Lot Lo’ 1Md3 Ox? Tr! [Jolly M345 Nd] Sut Scala; BBe? 
Be? Jo? Lo! Lo? Pu Pu’ Pu? Tj! Volly G] Saat J F[BBe Be} Jo? “Aa; Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Lo! 
(Jolly G) 4]; Hem “feat a dt; 1d} cMd° oMy sOx! Ox? [hut cor] Pu’ Tr! Tr? mTr* mT ro 
q ; wKktS & dat FAUT; oOra qagerrr ; Me Rn Rc Go appear to omit %eq — c) Be? 
(mc to] warerraReart, ake wks aan 7 TAT wratt:; cMd> erarprerearatt:; TMd3 GMy 
“gore; MT rt Te; Md? Ter=APT; Ho Lo’ arett:; oMy @ratt; Md‘ eet — d) iMd4 agarsfir 

253. Omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 504— a) TMd? SITAR — b) wKt! aut Bras, Tj}? 
“wa att — c) Kt 1Md} aaT; wKtS wera; Lo’ aTgeTAT — d) wKt! Lo? Tj! Volly R] 
“area; Jm “atdeq; Hy Jm Jo! Kt mTr3Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “aTaeaat fE:; Laks 
“ater fesireat:, nKtt & fest: 

254.* Cited by Laks 4.211 — a) BBe? oMd? tMd? 83; oMd? aeeafeat; La! eafefar’: 
wKt! afeate wKkt® afeaft ; GMd! sated Sela; Md! eafea Sta; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? GMymTe 
Mandlik Jha Dave “Pret — b) sOx! sPuo aitesty are pyc; cMy aver aay gd; wKt! 
ave; Bo Ho wKt} BKt® wKt® Lo? Lo? Lo® Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu! Tr? Go mee 
areal qf; Jo* wKt! nKt' La! Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd3 tMd* GM@ oOr Tj! Tr! mTr® Volly R Nd] Re 
MSY; mTr*attRog; Bed Mrseq; Pud Pu? Pu? Go wes Bf Yor [Pu He], Hy oMd? Wa [Jolly 
M‘ G NR Ku Nd] @4q; nKt* Ox? gra; Lo! gad; cMd! atBrarq — c) Lo! “eye — d) Lot 
Lo? #4; Lo ea; Tj! aarafratr ; sBe? Be? Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? Lo! oMd? Pu® Tj? mTr? 
[Jolly Ku] Ku Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ®ftaf® » NKt! La! GMd! tMd? 1Md* GM@ GMy Tr! 
MIr! MTP Wat Seas; wKe} aerate 

255. Cited by Apa 474; Laks 4.127; Hem 3/2.1172 — a)tMd? TAUB; cMy RT 
TI; Ho ARIAT; Hem “BAST; oMd! ont — b) BK® wKtS GMd req; Laks Hem “at 


wat — c) GMd! tMd? Pub Pu’ Pu? Tr? g , Hy Lo? Ox? aftedftzf="; Lot aftedftefe”, 


496 Chapter 3 


qat: afer yatet stecater a az: 
afer wer vate fasta wera: URE 
Feat TT: AAT ArT Tea | 
rasa Bae wHeaT efeewg URewll 
faaer atatreated fraat area: gfe: | 


aha array araaaraTTTT RY CI 
aant asfatrat aa: aafta a | 


Tal T At AT aaa ee 7 atsheats URaSN 
ua frdoor pear foskahkagraey | 


wKt! afeghtere’, Mir efeegtels ; Ho ™d* tMd* Pu Pu? Pu? “fesiarer: Md! “fgsiattar; 
oMd Tr! fesmarat; mT4 “spaPart; oMa “sPARr — d) wKt! areeabhare:, Te ars; Be? 
* pater 

256. Omitted in Be’. Cited by Hem 3/2.1173 — a) Md} Sear = Tate [om FHT]; 
[Jolly Nd] #4; Jm TF:; rMd4 ofa; wKt! nKtt Lo? GMd! GMy sOx! Pud Tj! mTr! mTr° Tater 
— b) Md? GM Tr! mTr® [Jolly Nd Grfarfenet: — c) BKt? wKt® fasta wea, Tr? gar — d) 
NNg aera: 

257. Padas c-d omitted in Lo*. Cited by Apa 500, 551; Hem 3/.541, 573 — a) wKt! 
aftastfy, Lo’ a4:;Jm Fa:; Apa 500 a4; Apa 551 ATat — a- b) GMd! HeearethT aerate ant 
TeangTepa [reading unclear] — b). 1Md4 Are Tea ; BCa wKt! GMy Tr? wary; BKe wKto 

“Geet — c) GMd! wee’; GMy Za; Ca SaPT 

258.* Padas c-d omitted in rMd‘. Cited by Hem 3/2.1483 —- a) NKt! BK wKt® La! Ox? 
Dave Jha frase; rMd4 fergsar; Tj! frre — b) Pul? [Jolly M28] Jha Dave fraat fearfer- 
qa; pCa Jo wKt® sKtS wKt® La? Lo? Lo} Lot Lo’ Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pué Pus Pu? Pu’ Pu? 
Pul® Tj! Wa [Jolly M'23-+-5-8-9 G N] Na Jolly Jha Dave 948T; Bo Pradr — c) nKtt La! 
GMd5 Pud Pu? Pu? Tj! ARIAT; Kt? “arg — d) Jo? Lo? Tj! “ander; Ho ARERR; 
TM} “HRA 

259. Omitted in TMd?. Cited by Hem 3/2.1483 — a) Jo! aaTe; Pu> Pu? Pu? om aT; 
cMd! a7; Pud Pu? Pu? mTr# ‘Praeiear. Tr? feaeieat; +Ma3 “aetat — b) BBe Lo? Lo* Lo? a@:; 
oMy mTrtaq; Tj? “2; Jo? Lo? Tj! “tx +: — c) cMd! & at; NKtt Lo?sOx! Ox? sPu® [Jolly 
M) G] fesrr’; GMd! tMd? GMd° GMy Tr! mTr4 eames — d)oOr sOx! sPu° “et; GMd! aT: 
Jo? Lo? Tj! [Jolly R] Teq Ad [Jo? om Taq] 

Additional verse in Be? Ho Jo? BK t> Lo? oMd? oOr Ox? Pu’ Tj! Tr? [Jolly R] Mandlik 
[*, &, 7, FT, #, 4, WT] KSS [cf. ViDh 73.30]: 

aa 7 at ag waaferiier otale | 
UPoaread FT: Sey AT TAP ary || 
c) Tj! argat’ — d) Ox? Tre? ar et; Tj! eat 
Additional verse in Mandlik [1] KSS; given after 249 in oOr: 
Taye Tea fess: | 
vate eat att pfrat arr sere: || 


Chapter 3 497 


Tt faracrafy ar srarracg ar fara URgoll 
frosrtaot sir guetta Hae | 

aa: Beater TAIT aT NRE LM 
afaaran etadt Prager | 
Tea FT aa: Roereerragakret wel 
aA Yt Fr waTPraTaAhaay | 

aad Wad ate afta aT URS dll 
TAT TATA AAI THT | 
Wier: AHI FAT aTeTATART WRIT MWREv 
samt J afro arafeot fara: 

wat weater gata eat arafera: Real 
SARA AMAT HTT | 


c) oOr et arf atae 

260. Padas c-d omitted in GMd!, Cited by Hem 3/2.1504 — a) GMd! a4; cMd! tMd? 
oMd cMy mTrfrataor — b) Kt? favsrearete —- c) Pud Pu? Pu? ait; Ke? amsreatit; Lo? 
“sett, 1Md3 “sta aT — d) wKt* La! grata’. tMd4 orate tM} BETAS: Tr! “agree fafer- 
oq; Tr? a 

261.* Cited by Hem 3/2.1403; Laks 4.223; Dev 4.361; Madh 1.752; padas c-d cited by 
Hem 3/2.1504 — a) BCa Ua Freaet; r+Md3 GMd> GMy mTr* mTr® Praraor — b) Bo Ca wKt! 
BKt> wKt® Lo! Lo? oMd? tMd3 GMd? Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ Tj! Rn Jolly Jha KSS Dave TeTea; 1Md3 
oMy “eargyeda; Pul? eet — c) Pud Pu’ Pu? maTez ; Ox} “art; TMd? GMd GMy Tr! 
Tr! MTr°Laks “Uta; NK Md! “aeatart — d) oMd! @raaeadaery aT, Ho Werte 
cMy sOx! sPuS “TRUS; Hem TIAST aT; Ox? T 

262. Cited by Apa 550; Hem 3/2.1506; Dev 4. 402; Madh 1.759 — b) GMd! ayer ; 
BCa [but cor] frgator — d) Hem “arent aan; Wa alfe:; ; Tj? “aett 

263.* Cited by Apa 550; Hem 3/2.1506; Laks 4.223; Dev 4.403; Madh 1.759-— a) TMd* 
at face; GMd! tMd3 GMd5 GMy Ox? Tr! mTr‘ mTr® Polly Nd] Dev Madh aa freq; Laks ot 
free — b) Bo Ferwareafad; cMd! “Herfad ge — d) Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Ke? cMd Pu! T? 
MTr? Apa Jolly Mandlik Jha KSS Dave waa afta; Apa arr fortar 

264. Omitted in Tj?; padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 512; Luks 4.226; Hem 
3/2.1515 — b) oOr THC; NNg free — c) Pu? Tr! mTr4 aepict; Lot Ng Ox? Tj! Wa 
dep, wKkt® apd; cMd> afewar; cMy watt; Apa Ted? TAT; BBe? wKt! Pu? Bear; Pu! 
Apa [vl] tae — d) Bosraromatey; cGMy “arpa; Be! Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? KP? wKt? 
La? Lo Lo? GMd! oM@ oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! Tj? mTr3 [Jolly Ku R] Ku Mr Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave Hsraet 

265. Cited by Hem 3/2.1062, 1513, 3/3.606; padas c-d cited by Apa 512 — a) wKt® 
aeesurT; wKt!' gq Bfatse; Lo! ag fers; cMd! crafts; rMdé4 aaftacse — b) oOr arafe- 
gira; La! feat; Ho rMdé feaferar: — c) Ho @aafe; Ox3 “af: — d) pCa @; nKt! 
eat; GMd! tMd! a; Tr2 “Fert: 


498 Chapter 3 


Ripa fated aerated: URE EI 
fredfifaaaaticioaat ar | 

aaa are fret Pfrafert ary URE ll 
at arat aceraraat atararerftart J | 
AAMT AGT: WES TT TURE 
WHASSMTAMT WIadE AAT | 
Tapas MAT AAT TF UVES 

ay Arar afer arenfearfae: | 
MISA AT AAAHaT F URVoI! 


266. Cited by Apa 500; Hem 3/1.540; Dev 4.252 — a) NKt' rMd‘ efadPae ; wKt® 
gfaeaftae ; GMd! cMy Laks aaefaPae ; GMd! GMy MTré MTr® Laks prere — b) aK 
mea; GMd! GMy Fart; Ox? art; GMy Pu’ Pu’ Pu? “ature; Ho ARI — c) td 
feqeat aafedd; wk afeaed 

267.* Cited by Vij 1.259;Apa 500, 552; Hem 3/1.541, 586; Laks 4.41; Dev 4.252; Madh 
1.705 — a)cMd! faadife” — b) Ho cGMd! nNg Hem 3/1.541 I— c) La! sOx! Pu? sPuo Pu’ 
Are; Tr! art; Wa Safer; Ho Hta; Tj! fad; Pe feta; Hy Im Jo! Kt? Tj? mTr3 [Jolly Ku] 
Vij [but vl as in ed] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave [cf. YDh 1.257] Tafa; oMd? Tear — d) 
Apa fraet faftrrgorry; Lo! faftrar free; Md! faftrecdany; Tr! “aferert; cMd! “aegerar 

268.* Omitted in Pu9; padas c-d ma in BKt. Cited by Hem 3/1. 586; Laks 4.41; Dev 
4.255; Madh 1.705 — a) Lo’ oMd? a1eet; GMy “Hie aT— b) wKt® Pratar’; Ho wKt} wKtS 
oMy Tr? "arefeerr; 1™d3 “arate; My 7; cMd! 4 — c) Ho aeyor epee): GMy aeaor 
age; Ox3 SEX’; Bo NKt! La! Lo? nPu! aeW ; GMd! aVroes; wCa ager — d)oMd> aed 
@ WIHT, Be! sBe Be® Ho Hy Jm Jo wKt! Kt? wKt BKt wKt® TMd? TMd?* sOx! Pu? sPuo 
Pu? Tj? Tr! mTr3 mTr* mTr° [Jolly G Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 27@44TT; NKti Lo* Lo® 
oMd@ oOr Ox? [Jolly M345] aapta;, Pu Pu? mTr4 mTr® [Jolly G]IFT J; Be} wKt} nK¢e! 
BKt) wKt® La? Lo* Lo GMd! oMd? tMd3 oOr Ox? Pu? Tr! Volly M3-*>] Hem Tat J; cMy 
Geaq; TMd* FoTaT 

269. Omitted in TMd* Pu9; ma in BKt>. Cited by Hem 3/1.586; Dev4.255; Madh 1.706 
—a) Devarrataat wa; cMd oat; La! eae ort — b) wKt! wKe antares: Bel 
aedate; Hy Jm Jo! Ke Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4d 7; GMd! NNg Pu!® [Jolly M 
12-8] Hem WITT; GMy Was; Laks, Hem A TJ — c) wKt® Lo! Ox} “Sorex ata; Pud 
Pu’Hem att Aa; Be! pBe’ BCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt wKt} nKtt cMd! oMd@ oOr sOx! Ox3 
sPus Tr? MTr? Mandlik KSS “orer midst — d) Ox? Tj? Fa T 

270.* Omitted in TMd*. Cited by Hem 3/1.586; Dev4.255; Mddh 1.706 — a) Ho ATA; 
oMd! tMd3 ART gq; Ox? Tr? arated; Be! Tat; Wa Tq; sPuo Joatert [bur cor]; Md? Tr! 
mTr! MTS quater; nKt goat — b) Ho Md? Ng Pu!? Tj! Tr ares — c) tMd? Tr! [Jolly 
Ku Nd] aarepearaiaa; Be! afar; Hy 30; Be? “aaa; Be! BBe BCa La! nNg sOx' Ox3 
Pus sPuS Pu? Pu? mTr* mTr® Volly M*+ G] Jolly” aeatates; Ho cMé& [Jolly Gr] ° eer 
ate; Lo? Tj! Te [Jolly R] “qatar — c-d) oOr “qalatataaaasereatr — d) Pus Pu’? 
Pu? Hreanfy great g; GMd! aTaaarr ; : Be! aaa >nNg 7o 


Chapter 3 499 


Aaae J WaT TTT WANT ar | 
areitorerer ater afrateararhist UR CU 
BIS Hees: Aster Ay | 
WAMAT HA FIAT T AT: URI 
afeakreargar fer srg aaraahy | 
area BME AT T AAT T URall 
att +: T Es Wag At AT qarq Tataafty | 
wae agathat wast ESAT 7 UROVI 


271, Cited by Hem 3/1.586; Laks 4.41; Mddh 1.706;padas a-b cited by Vis 1.255; Apa 
551; Dev 4.255; padas c-d by Apa552; Dev 4.256 — b) Be’ BK wKt® La? Pud Pu? Pu? Tj? 
(Jolly G] J; Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? oMd? TMd? GMd@ Pu? Tr mTr? [Jolly Ku] Vij 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave J — c) cMd! Waaatahes: afr NNg Pud Pu’ Apa areftoreer; Jm 
Pu? aefforerer; GMd> GMy Tr! avatoreret; Pu! aretorer; iMd3 autora; Lo! anefforaer; Ox? 
anfforer ¢; rMd4 arfeqeret; Jolly comments: “the term vardhinasasya is spelt in many 
various ways in the Mss.” — d) GMy afatgear 

Additional verse in Ho Mandlik [®, 1] KSS; probably taken from Me’s com: 

areffore g ct orgatfarenr: frgesdfer | 
a) Ho Prft feat —b) Mandlik KSS asrgatymfrry — c-d) Mandlik KSS TF 

272.* Cited by Hem 3/1.541, 586; Dev 4.257; Mddh 1.706 — a) Lo ate: tMd? GMy 
Pus rears; wKt! *Md? Dev Heraie®; pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Le? Lot oMé oOr Ox? Pu? Tj? 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave [Jolly M*>-° Me Ku R] 4@RIeer:; sBe? Be? Bo wKt? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo? 
sOx! sPuo Tj! FerRereay, Kt? Ferareat:; BK wKt® GMd> Ox? nPu! Pud Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tr! Tr? Wa 
(Jolly G Nd] Madh Wetaes#; Be! Fetercat; La! FeTerept; GMd! tMd* GMy mTr‘mTr® 
Hgranay, Md? aera; nNKtt HeTaeHT — b) Ho cMd? GE; Lot Ox? Tr! Ge; NNg Pul? gz"; 
Md} “slat: Lo! “aterfird — c) rMd4 ararecare Preset; sOx! sPuo aT FT Hoa, 
Ox? ARETE THT, Lot Lo’ Tr! aarcaritqaserd; Bo Ho Im Lo! Tj! Tr? srear; Im Jo? 
cMd! oMd@? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Beara — d) Jo? Lo} Tj! arf faatre:; Lo! ade: 

273.* Padas c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Apa 555;Hem 3/1.201— a) Bo Jo? nKft BKt? 
wKt® La! La? Lo? Lo? Lot Loe tMd4 NNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPul Pu? sPu® Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tr? Wa 
[Jolly M R] Jolly’ Prargafter; PuS Pu? Pu? [Jolly G Ku] Apa Go Ku Paeraaath — b) Ho 
Lo! GMy ¥eeirer; cMd! Tj! Tr! “aatt; Wa “afer — c) Kt agteraa: Lot Lo’ qeereraita; 
tMd4 -ereqaratt — d) Md? om first T; coMd5 Fea 

Additional verse in GMa: 

USN FEF: TAT TSH Tat aT | 
wet aT ater ates ar ware tl 

274.* Omitted in Pu> Pu’ Pu2; ma in Be? Pu; padas a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by Hem 
3/1.66, 245; Laks 4.19; Dev 4.24 — a) Tj! & BAS; Lo? cMd! Hem 3/1.66 SHS; BBE Ho Hy 
Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} Lo! tMd* GM oOr sOx! sPu® Tj? MT? MTr* Volly R] Hem 3/1.245 Rn 
Mandlik KSS3Ta¢; Md} Tr! [Jolly Nd] std — b) BBe? Md? UT 7A — c) sOx! Waa; Hem 


500 Chapter 3 


aaeata fatraq were saraateaa: 
water wate WATTLE I 


3/1.66 TYAYA; BBe Hy wKt> Lo? Md? oMy Pul® Tr! “afeat — d) Hem 3/1.66 IG 7 
Fag TF [ef. 3.273d]; TMd? Me [patha] Tart; nKé wae; rMd4 Fea; MTré wresTa; Lo? 
gerd, Tr! gerr; cMd! veer; Tr? waar; wKkt! Part; Bo nKft Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ cMd! tMd? 
1tMd* GM@® GMy oOr Ox? Ox? Pu’ Tr! mTr4# J 
Additional half-verse in TMd? {cf. added verse 6 after 3.275]: 
weatey fatter fagersara: fear |! 
275.* Cited by Hem 3/1.153, 3/2.1031 — a) wKt? om first J — b) Lo? oOr Tj! ATE 
Be} Ox} 217 ; Lo? Md} GMd Pud Pu’ Tr! “aafacd — c) Hem 3/1.153 afergot @ water; Tr 
om one ad — d) Be? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? BKt® wKt® Lo? Lot Lo? cM oMd? ™Md* sOx! Ox? 
sPuo Pul® Tj! Tj? mTr3 MTr? WaHem Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave °aARTH; GMd! oM& 
tM? tMd4 oMy Pud Pu’ Pu? Tr! MTr4 mTr5 Wa oer 
Additional verses in GMd! tMd4 GMy nPul Tr! mTr4 MTr°; cited by Hem 3/1.263-4, 
3/3.509-10; Madh 1.661; verse 5 by Hem 3/1.214; given after 276 in oOr; after 278 in TMd? 
oMéd>; after 3.277 in [Jolly Nd Gr]; and after 3.280 in Bé Ho Ox? Tr? Mandlik [#, @, %, Z] 
Dave KSS; Rc comments on verse 6: 
gearente are Feuroud Far | 
eure fedtarar adtarar g afer: 1121! 
RPyshrear g wera araryqart | 
meat at prt aft arat ord ae (RI 
aera after ower ames: ar | 
arate sare fee a 1131 
Uareeat sa ey geradftat: gary | 
TA HAST FT tat SAT T Iv 
after weet wgdeat g Bw: | 
Wad forwarer F seq wr aT: HG 
weratey Ficertagerre: fart | 
aed: Wraeeay ¢ aaleorareygg 1&1 
1. a) TMd4 Barer — b) cMd! nPul Hem aeur ; Tr! eT ; Ho Ox? Tr gear 
Ba; [Jolly Nd] Teague; (Jolly Gr] wfaat; Ho TMd4 Ox? Tr? Tr! watt — c) 
aMy oOr Ox? Tr! earet g; TMd! wearer I; mTr°Hem Madh Pere; Md? 
pape; oMd ewer; Ho Harare; cMd Tr? Hem 3/1.263-4 PAH — d) 
TMd “araraarrt; nPu! Hem 3/3.509-10 APE; GMy ata; tMd4 arfeat 
2. a) Ox? aayey nPu! Fareaaey ag ; GM 0Or Jolly 4 — c) Tr‘ afer; coMy 
ad; OMe eat; TMdé Yt; GMd! ext; Be Easwataadr; Hem 3/3.509 ath; Madh 
Jolly +4 — d) nPul aHFATATaAPAAT; Be? Ho Ox? T? Mandlik KSS Dave Sad PFT 
3. b) TMd? Tr! [Jolly Nd] atest Ae: — c) nPul AreTAwAN I; Ho TATRMT- 
AwaH; Ox? tat Berar; Hem 3/1.263-4 ATITAaHEE; Be? Awa — d) 
TMd‘ fearh; Ox? Tre fees; Ho nPu! fRarniagy; oOr faqar: ag; Hem 
3/1.263-4 Ee aa; [Jolly] age TAT 
4. a) nPul feral BT; TMd? GMy feurect; Hem 3/3.510 TART; dé F WEA; 
Hem 3h.263- 4 way; Tr Sar] — a-b) Be? UaTeeat gat g wid od ae: — b) 
cMd! ga — c) Ho oMd aaa KT BT; GMdS NPul g — d) Tr! Sera; Ox? nPu! 


Chapter 3 501 


PONT araat avifrear ageatry | 

aT Taatkeawat Bar T AAT: URVEll 
war Barae: wet: qiuarfskrere | 

TUT ATSET Yatareretar fakrere Rv 


ay pataaaty watarrreerrgd | 

aay J Prgady wat sratfer geeeny URC 
wettest Sea eoT | 

feat Prerreart fatraretarftrar 298! 


Tr Bara, Ho ata; Md4* ora 

5. a) TMd3 oOr nPul “Seat; GMA Tr “AS — b) [Jolly] sat Famst:; Mad? 
GMy MTr4 uTro eos; HoHem Madh oT: wPul & gett; tMd4 WaT: — c) nPul 
feet Set; Be oOr MTr4 MTr® Hem 34.214, 3/3.492 raeetet; GMd! Hem 3/3.510 
facreara— d) Tr? Hem 3/1.214, 263-44 FT TAAT WT; Tr! wet VW: Ox? saT UT 

6. Omitted in TMd‘, padas a-b omitted in Jolly Madh — a) GMy Teeafey; 
TMd? Ox? mTré varenfeg; oMd garanfey; oOr weTemfag fae’; Hem 3/1.214 Ta 
amare; Ho eracar FARE” Hem 3/3.510 Seaver FARE’: wPu! Pfeter fag? 
—a-b) Be aeafbfaarert wearer agésit — b) cMd! “Rerwerare:; nPu! “Fears 
wae: far; Ho Fatrarers: fary— c) mTr# MTr® Hem 3/1.214 T— d) GMd> nPul 
Tr! [Jolly] Aaya 

276. Cited by Apa 422; Dev 4.20; Madh 1.666 — a) tTMd4 puryfaafs sare; +Md?3 
GMd?> GMy Tr! green; GMd! mTr‘ area aT — b) Hy Tj? Tqeat — c) cGMd! sey; Bo War- 
eafererat; Lo! Lo?tMd? cGM@ Ox? Tr! wareaT ferrat; sOx! Ox? sPuo ufteatf&rearat — d) cMd! 
aaa: Md} aera; Mads afeaer:; oOr TAT 

Additional verse in MTr°: 

aay UTE: Ter: qarentefercac | 
TUT ATT Taterererer fare (I 

277.* Verses 277 and 288 are transposed in Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wkt} BKP wKt® La? 
Lo? Lo* Lo’ oMd? Ox? Pub Pu? Pu? Pu! Tj Tr? mTr? and in all editions. Cited by Apa 465; 
Hem 3/3.568; Dev 4.81 — a) TMd3 GMd aa arae:; Hy ta Te; NNg ta PoT:; Md! 
adearae:; Pud Pu? Pu? “at; Lo! “aa — b) rMd! gaterat — c) cMy Sf ATES, Hem Ut 
TET; Lo! Tea, Wa car faut gat” 

278. Omitted in Lo’. Cited by Laks 4.27; Hem 3/1.266, 3/3.512 —— a) Lot ma 4a; Tr? 
yet; rMd? faeq; rMd4 aeq; GMy Jgex; Pu’ Jaq; Ox} Assit; Lo! feay; wKt! stez adie’; Pu2 ued 
pate. wKtS rar gare ; Lal “Peaaay, Tro Paatd @; Pu? Pu’ Pu? "Patty — c) Lo! say 
frgrarel, Tr? eget; Pu Pu’ agepeg; nK¢ agyeater’ ; Tr! age f°; Hem 4; Bo Lo? cMd 
Puf Tr! fared; Hy Jm Jo! Ke? Tj? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fqart; Pu!? om eq — 
d) 8Ca Jo® Lo? Tj! Wa 5STT:; GMd> sOx! sPué saat; Lo? Tj! Wa Tepot:; Ox? Fed; Lot 
gare 

279. Omitted in Ho; padas c-d omitted in Md}. Cited by Hem 3/2.1107; Dev 4.269; 
Madh 1.725 — a) Dev adaqae — b) cMy “errafesct — c) cMd! stear eanfta wate, 
BBe? fearar, 1Md4 Wer; Tr! “arate 


2 


502 Chapter 3 


wat are a Edt cert afar fe ar | 
aerate at Tarkries uRcoll 
saat fafrat are Brees Praag | 
sang wsaateraey URC 2 II 
a taafrat dhit atfeasyt freftae | 

a aaa far araareamafisrers: RCI 
wag wareata: ag earear fesirey: | 
aaa adaife frqaarareay Rc all 
agaaier g fay watate frees | 
aftarmsterntgerogiatar great uc 


280. Cited by Hem 3/1.329 — b) Be! wetat; cMd! usta, Ho aT oRatfaar — c) Hem 
“waratf; Ke? °sepitr — c-d) Md) cMy aeraraa aled aferenfh fate — d) Hem ot 
aa faded; Jo! gat; Tr? qatar Hy aaradied; Ox? tarfertfed, Lo? tarferaifee; oOr 
gafaaea, cMd! “Rrra 

Additional verses in Ho Ox? Te? Mandlik [@, @, T, Z] Dave KSS; Rc comments on 
verse 6 [these are the same as the addition after 3.275]. 

Additional verses in TMd? GMy; first verse in GMd?: 

ea ped aT wey Ferraro: | 

caret a peter ate enggesrry 1121! 

Usastad B argaraqaHy | 

qracsarate aorgatercet 1121 
1. a) GMy FRAT 4; GM GRARATA — b) cM arTeexeeres faraertt: 
2. d) oMy afacafer 

281. Cited by Vis 1.266; Apa 420 — b) wKt? “ett; tMd3 GMy MTr dpa AT — 
d) GMd> GMy Apa Re FF» GMd5 GMy “asa; Be? TMd4 Ox? Pul® [Jolly M] arise 
Be! [but mc] BK wKt® Ox? Pu’ Pu? Tj! Wa [Jolly R] Apa[vl] afar; Lo’ Te Re aafter 

282.* Cited by Vis 1.266; Hem 3/2.1679 —-a) wKt! 84 ; Be? 8B; Ho BKtS wKt® Pus Pu? 
Pu? ds" ; rMd3 cMy aaat; Lot LoS tMd? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Pu! “arfsrept; cMd! “astent; Be! [but 
mc] BBe Be? Bo pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wkt! K? wKt nKtt sBKt wKt® La! Lo! Lo? oMd? Ox? 
Pu’ Tj? mTr? Wa Polly R] Re Mr Hem Mandlik Jha KSS Dave afsrat, Tr? “asrat; Tj! Caterar 
——b) nKtt oOr Ox? BIfeea; BBe? TM? SiHat; Be? GMa Tr? Btfeseprait; Im Slate; Md4 
aiferanft — d) wKt! sOx! “arfefes’; cmd’ “Raat fet 

283. Cited by Vis 1.266; Laks 3.134; Hem 3/2.946 — a) Ho La! géq; wKt! nNg aed; 
Laks & Ua; Be! weet; rMd4 a@anrte ; Be} GMd> sOx! Pud sPuo Pu? Pu? aaehe: — b) 
Lo? fasirert; BK wKto f85TA:; GMA Vis (Jolly G] warfee: — c) Ox At TaTaTAe; wKt! 
ate asannfe,; Tj? a7; Hy Jm Jo! Ke? Tj? MT Mandlik Jha KSS DavepeeraTanter 

284.* Cited by Apa 560-1; Hem 3/1.64 — a) tMd! ageastter frat; sOx! sPu “sarete; 
wKkt! “ara; Tr? om; Ho Pul? Apa f@; wKt® NNg 4; Hem 4; Jo? afergt — b) Bo rMd* 
earag; NK¢ nNg Pul? egieda; wKt! egy; GMd> Tr! mT ro Barta; rMd4 “Ter: — c) Hy 
“weTeTaT ; *Md? “HEPAT; Jo? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly M39 G] aePanie’; wKe Hem “weteafe 


Chapter 3 503 
ferent watrer fer arte: 
fare amare T TTT TTA UR CuI 
udasfafed ad frat wearer | 
fasniageradtar ferent aerate Wace 


Ul gfe area etgret aiken afearat 
actats are: 


oMy “aerate: sOx! sPuo “Herrfecar — d) Ho “anfrarr afeait aafe:; wKt} “faeay, Pus 
quel; Be! Be’ Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKt# La! La? Lo! rMd3 tMd* GMd> Ox? Tj? Tr! Tr? MTr? 
MTr? mTr5 Hem Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave [Jolly Nd] tarett 

285. Cited by Laks 3.214 — a) Be Lot ferararaft; Tr? ferred; Puo Pu? Pu? ferraret, 
BCa fraaret; cMy fererrearaft, Md} faster & aa; GMd! om one fret — b) Hy Jm Jo! K? 
Kt? Lo? Tj? mT? Mandlik Jha KSS DaveaT§e ; oOr TAA ; MTrSatIaT_ ; TMd? tMd4 GMy 
sOx! nPu! sPuo “sits — c) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? Tj? mTr3 Ku Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
feraat, nK¢ ferere; Tr? ferret; aCa fea, nPul fawat; cMd! yeast; Wa yea; Tr! yenferee; 
Ho nKé Lo! Lo? eMy oOr Ox? Pu’ Tj? mTr? MTr® Yolly Me N] Laks FeRRIT; Be! Ty; 
oMd? “arteq; TMd4 “Spar; pCa “at FT; Bo La! Lo! Le Ox? Pu Pu’ Pus Tr‘ mTrS Volly M 
G] arr eae — d) Be? oMe “ameaar ; TM? cMy “arreaeryd, Bo Ho wKt! nKt BK wKt® 
La? Lo? Lo! Lo® NNg sOx! Ox? Pu? sPus Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Wa Jolly Yolly M G] avrg; 
Tre at sarge 

286. Cited by Laks 2.167— a) nKt* Laks Tore fated; Laks Heet — b) Md? Ox? Pul® 
gaat’; Lot GMd! tMd? Ox? Pu? Pu! [Jolly MG] “antares. _oMy *aaas; Lo? Te Wa afsre; nKt 

“anf — o) oMy “gerade; Tr? “geaurdtat, Lo? “gaat — d) oMd! saanfater ade; 

Laks entire 

Colophon: Jo? Lo sf arate; Be! Lo! Lo? tMd3 NNg sOx! Ox? sPué sft fare; Tj! 
sta sttaradty; Jo? wk sypsteh; BK& wKt® Lo! TMd3 GMy sOx! Ox? Pu’ sPuo om FHTAT 
afearat; Jo? oOr wKt} om afearat; Lo? °greafearat; Ox? sOx! sPuo aTaweet ATA acay, 
Lo! caaerrrafaeart geet; Pus arefafaatr aca; Be} nNg eART: BATA: 


[agutsearr:] 


agtargar anrafierer yet fast: | 
fecdtrargat ant Haat TE TAT UII 
MAST YATES aT FA: | 

at gfaeat aarerre fast sftagarate WR 
Garrat ta: BARES: | 
spat anther edt wren 131 
warrant stag Arg TAT aT | 
AAMTAPAAT ATT MATAT BHTT UW 
Reason AAA Czaharay | 
aa go afra Ret wae er ST Uk 
wears F afore aa Tarfe sitet | 


1. Cited by Laks 2.435 — b) Tr? *aftrare; Pu? Pu4 “afttcar @; Bo nKt* Lo? GMy qa, 
tMd! 3; rMd? Tj! TeifEst:; Pu’ cor to TFS; BBe? Be? BKt> Lo? Lo*NNg oOr Ox? Ox? Tj? 
mTr‘ mTr° fest: — d) Pud Pu’ Pu? Haeral; Bo SANTA; Laks Persrer [Patster?], Tr? “art; 
Lo? “aR; xPu! Tage, Pu? aa; Lo? Md} aaa; wKt! fear 

2. Pages containing verses 2-27 missing in oOr. Cited by Vij 1.127 — a) Lot age FT 
— c) Lo! afeqraarearey; oMd? aarerer 

3. Padas b-d ma in Lo’. Cited by Dev 2.448; Madh 1.308 — a) PudsToTay ; Ox? T? 
yrrarar; Pu4 aramafer; Lo! tMd4 coMy “aT; Bo “Rreaat — b) MTrtedt: S HA- 
frafec:; PuS Pu? Pu? Jolly G] eaRr. Sarfss:; Lot Ox? Tarts NK a> BA: Pur Put “Pre 
aféd:; rd? Pafaaféd:; wKe “afédt; sBKe wkto “feat: — c) Ho lacuna at 3ga17; Tj! reer 
—d) Tr aa; nPul “afer 

4.* Cited by Laks 2.170; Dev 2.451; Madh 1.309 — a) Pu? Put aay ; 1tMd4 TUMAAT ; 
wKkt! gargar ; NK aargare oft’; BBe? Be Ho Lo! Lo? cGMd! oMd? tMd4 GMd° NNg Ox2 
nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? Pu? Tj! Te [Jolly G R] Sita; sOx! sPu’ sftter — b) Pu? om TIC; Bo 
wyAT; sOx! sPuo Tj! FT; Laks J — c) Ox? Tr? weargan ; nKt “sarate; Ho Pu> Pu’? Pu? 
“may aT; Lo Tj! VVolly RJ sara 7 — d) BBE aT; Lot Aha’; wKtS ATA eM; Te 
aga; Be! sBe Be? sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? wKt3 La! La? Lo? Lo® Ox? Pub Pu? Pu? 
Tj! Tj? MT? Wa Mandlik Jolly Biihler Jha KSS Dave ®&rT 

5. Cited by Dev 2.451; Madh 1.309— a) La! qq; nKt aasetas; Md? “Bre; Tr! 
“fares — a-b) Md? StHAAT: GMy Fey: FA — b) Tj! ereatfad— c) Be! 7; Madh wPIT 
Sit; Be! Ho La! Lo’ Ox? Pu! Pw? Pué Pud Tj! ey; mT Pret; Bo Her — d) Te Ferry; KL 
Wad; Bo THt; nNKe arder; Pu’ Spat; nPul AT 


504 


Chapter 4 505 


Wat ‘aqkerrenar aera wastage 


RoMaet a aq etter wr ar | 
aeteat aft waeaearae vat ar tell 
agaraty Saat forat qeAraryz | 
Sarareae: oat ear atat arefrera: lic 
yeaa waar Rife: vader | 
arama sara sftafer 9 
arg Rretsoramaiiersaeers: | 

zet: qataaredtar: maar frtaearar ugott 
a olegd ade akaeat: ers | 

6. ma in BKt®. Cited by Dev 2.451; Madh 1.309-10 — a) wKt® tM? Ferry; Lo! 
weary; Tj2a, wKke! afore; Put aftr; Pu2 afersr — b) Ox2aa aft weitere, GMy a7 
sfatastiere; aktS arafe; Be! Sareastiera; tM? Fatasttfa — c) Md! Sar; cMd! “ferean- 
watar, nKtt La! rMd3 GMd> GMy NNg sOx! Ox? sPu® “Rroatearanr, Tr! °Fafgearrar 

7. Cited by Vij 3.28-9, Apa 169; padas a-b cited by Vij 1.128—~ a) Be! BBe? Bo Ho 
Jo} Kt wKkt? wKt® Lo? Lot oMd? NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr? Me [patha] Na Vij 
BIO ; wkt! gefie; cMy Bate ; Pus gaftegerarraer at; Put om “at ar erepetterer 
— b) Ox} “eras; Jo? wKt® Tr! wa J — c) La! sadaHat; Pub =aETfeaT; sOx! sPu! sae har: 
tMd} cMy Prafear, Pul? saéar;nKe! Pu? srefear, Te aefear; mTr® [Jolly Nd] eTefeaT; 
Tr! gaefeat: rMd4 fafeanfeatht, Tj! safeer aft + we"; Ho om aft, nKe aft — d) Pv? 
Put saerfray; Be! [but mc] wKt! “erecta; Pu “eas; Pu? Pu? Put [Jolly M'2] ve 

Additional verse in Mandlik [€] KSS: 

Ter wey ar SIA aaeshy ar | 
conreatraay ae waar ver ar | 

8 Omitted in Ox}. Cited by Apa 169 — a) sOX sPuo ToraTAfe; BK wKt® “aftr 
autat; Tr? aft aur fe —b) Pu’ [but cor] Pu? Té; nKt* “afar — c) Ho ATaTATE:; Pu? 
ATC; Be! AaTeae:; Pu ATA: Lo? saTaTRAa:; Be! “awe; wKeS “AAT — d) Be? Ox? 
nPu! Apa [vl] oteeter: 

9. Cited by Vij 1128, Apa 169; Dev 2.452 — a) sPuf [cor to] FART, wKt! oMd? Apa 
“arte; Md‘ after; Lo! “afc: Be} wKt! saat. Ho La! Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr! Apa 34a; Bo 
Lo! yaaar; TMd3} GMy ar — c) wKt! gate; Wa gParARPT. TMd? aMy “Aer ag; 
1M} cMy “qf g; Lo? nPul [Jolly R]° qeha; Pu2 Put “afkea; Ho “aetaer’ — d) cMd! 1Md3 
GMy Pu? Pu‘ Tr! Dev “qa; BBe? [but cor] ater; MTS “aag; Puo ay 

10.* a) BBe? Bo BCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt wKt} nKtt Lo! Lo? Lot Lo> oMe& sOx! Ox? Ox? sPu® 
Pu’ Pu! Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Ta; BK wKtS ada; GMd! cGMd Tr! fers” 
— b) oMd! “aeraor — c) Tj! sfte:; nKe set; oMy gfte; Pu’ stet:; Md? fafte:, rMd4 fe; 
wKtS seebea oat; wKt! artét oat’ Lo! Pul? gat’; sKtS wKt® sratenediar:; Pu’ Pu’ [me sh to] 
crapmniay isthe . Hy aratwerordta: Pu? onder; wKkt! oTedtar; oMy “oredtat; rMd3 

“oTstat [many mss. have the retroflex qratacr] — d) Md Haat, Tr? Had; cMy Saaiae ; 
Pul? °oeear 





506 Chapter 4 


sraagot yat stagramrtferary te eit 
east TATE Fart Frat zag | 
wares fe ge Teves rekr: ue zit 
aaa Fear Sitaeq carat fae: | 
erates garth arergy ue BU 
aaa cae at frer gateafaa: | 

ate gderaaies sate oar wafer evil 
awa wast a fees wor | 

qT Seay arearary aaeta: Neal 


ghaarty wag a watt FTAA: 
afasakh daar aaa ahradaq le gil 
watery career fart: 


1. a) Ho La! GMd! tMd} GMd> cMy . Pu> Pu’ Pu? Tj? [Jolly G] “attr; Tj! “ad; nNKtt 
NNg [but cor fil. ade; Pul? ada — b) Pulo “eat; BBe Herat — c) Ox} Pu! Tr! aifsrara 
Lo? “arat; Ox} “as; Hy “arat; Lo! Lo® cMy &at, Le gat — d) Lo! me to safest fe 
aiftat; Hy sftaer sfifeept; rMd3 cMy saeer 

12. Cited by Apa 170; Dev 2.459; padas a-b cited by Vij 1.129 — b)Apa gant; Lo! 
ear; sOx! sPuo wat, Ho Wa — c) sOx! sPu g; Pul? qr — d) Ke? “Aw; Be “HoT; nPul fF 
faueta:; Hy Pus Pu’ Pu? favata:; Lo! feat: 

13. Pada-d cited by Vij 3.219-20 — b) Ho Lo! sit J; 1Md4 Sflaeq; Jm sOx! sPu Tr? 
fee; Pule eraatfae: — c) T? emigerreratt; sBBe wKt! wKto Jo! Md? eat ; Tj! 
“ger; Tr! “garasrenfy; La! “gerrrenfr — d) sBe? aaratart arate; aKtS wKeS ae 
arty 

14. Cited by Apa 217, Dev 2.411; Madh 1.52 — a) Pu? Pud [but cor] Pu? acifacd; Pu? 
Pud ea; wKto et — a-b) La! ar Pret ant Gate” — b) wk afar; Hy afeaa: — c) 
Pu? Put Barer ; Lot Lo’ “arafen; Tj? arf — d) Tj? amie; mT at 

15. Placed after 12 in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Hem 1.59; Laks 2.228 — a) TMd‘4 Atay; 
Lot Laks Fétart; cMd! adtaret; Hy “araaT cMy Wa — b) Md! [om a] fase zeptrr; 
La! [but cor fh] freer, Laks Fares; Md} fesse; Put eter:; Pu2 eA: — c) Be! Jo? 
wKt! La! Lo?rMd? Ox? nPu! Pu? MTr° Laks 7 BeeT ; TMd3 GMdS GMy Tr! areer ; GMd! 
Pu2 Put mTr4 ape; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd? Ox? Tj? mTr? Ku[but may simply be a gloss] 
Mandlik KSS + fee’; Lo! “art arty — d) Be! aretaft; Put areataf; pBe? Lo! Lot Pub 
areataty; wke! tatarft; Te ararefa, nk atemrefa, rMd4 arerate; sPu® [but cor] aeatete; 
Tj! tearafe, 1Md3 arearafe; Lo? arearafe, GMy ATAPe: sPus [but cor] TAT: 

16. Cited by Apa 217, padas a-b cited by Vij 3.219-20 — b) Pt Put 4 asad; pBe* Be? 
Ho Hy Lo! [Jolly R] Wasstt; nPu! Gee; Lot Tama BW] T; sOx! HraHaws:; Tr? BAT: — c) 
Ke afemasdaur, aKt wk aa: waft; nK¢ afawate; Lot “grat: wKt! “artes: Hy “ae; 
1Md} oMy ‘aferdaat; Tj! “afessaat; Ox} pul? Saat — d) Ox? Ox} Pu” eaaaT 


Chapter 4 507 


GUTAAT ATA AT TET FAFA Ug vil 

wae: Sister yeh 7 | 

FIAT GLAATAAATATME USA 
eater a feat a | 


Ghaqhanrreangy 

fret greareaaerat ovata afearyz 23 
mart aur fe yeu: wer sakes | 
aa aa frararte faa arer Trae loll 
aftast trast ya T adar | 

waa faa a aerate FT avTaag UR i 
Uatee AeA Aaa AST TAT: | 
aeiearear: aaa qe 122 
arate Gate omer amt arr a ada | 


17.* c) Pulo quraraaegq [om Tart]; Pu? waTaaTatwaeT; Be! BBe? Be} BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
Jo? Kt? La! Lo? Lo® oMe@ sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu> sPuo [but cor] Pu’ [me sh to] Pu’ Tr? mTr? 
Re Jolly KSS Tarrararaeg; Lot wat[ma TITER; Lo! rererarararaoy: at — d) Ho®; 
Lo! aT Wet; BK wKt® when er: nPul aH Hy om He oMy Papeaat:; Pu!? 
PAPpaa4r 

18. a) Wa at; cMd! tMd} Wa wtorfer — b) Pu efenfiser s; Tr? gaer- 
Rrsrer, Be GMd aT — c) La! ar areata: Lo! faaderaragtes’ +tMd? aaah ; Pu!? aq- 
arate ; Pul gfaecr’; Pu? “erat — d) cMd “arererfea’; GMd! tMd3 “arare fa; Pu4 
om ates; Ke aR 

19. Padas a-b omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Dev 1.132, 2.448— a) TMd4 “after ; tMd? 
“afaarr ; sOx! sP uo “afer, TtTMd? GMy Tr? “ere — b) cMd! Ox3 aemtr 
fafeaify 2; rMd4 watftr a feara a; BBe Jm sOx! sPuo aatfy; Tj! Tr’ Dev 1.132 aTeahy; 
Dev 2.448 TRU; Md? GMy aTatfY — c) Lot fret; Bo Afererear’; sBe? areavafaera; Lod 
sreareraett; sOx! sPu® arearfer deter; Pu Pu? Pu? arearfer Feta [Pud area]; Tj! aresrfer 
deer; Tr? areafer tat — d) Bo Prmaraa; oMe& “Aa; cMy mT? afeary; wks Sfacort 

20. a)oMd? aur aur — c) Ke aa aenfe safe; +Md4 ae ae festa; Put om 
first Tat — d) Tj! aa; *Md4 TET; Pu? Put Wala; Bo Trae 

Additional verse in Ho Ox? Mandlik [1] KSS: 

MAST We TAT TF Ya Wee | 
7 Tet sae Hale alter are: II 
c) Mandlik KSS Tees, Ho WAS, Ox? HaS— d) Ho Batarelte Hersey: 

21. a) La! Yt and nKt afe for AAT; Put om asta; wKt! BKt wKto Tj! Fz and wKe 
fig for tt, 1Md3 ga — b) sOx! sPuo yeast Ta FT; Lal | — c) Md? Faas; Pu? om T— 
d) Bo @ for 7; sPuf [but cor] aftretaare 

22, Cited by Laks 3. 150 — a) PuS 4a; Lo? “3a; Pu? “Af; Be? Md? cMy weraal — 
b) wKt dearest; Lo? Tareen — c) rMd4 aierar’; tM? arftendaerer -oMy Hera — 
d) Ho “Prarig gfe; xKt cM Rrefe 


508 Chapter 4 


ark wot at aera Sarah UR BU 
aTaarae fast aaectateat: aar | 


aaa Pea WAT ATT ATTTT UAV 
avert a agararreat gferait: aar | 
aatet arelarard aehret Ba fF RGM 
Aad AAAS TU fFTIseae: | 
Ua gaat T Tata ahaa: REM 
wifret aaaereut agar atfiaras: | 
aware at cerarghishfag: Roll 


23, Padas c-d omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 3.150-1 — a) GMy aT; Pu? om WT; Wa 
Tr; Lot Lo’ ret — b) Put om STO ... [23¢] ATT [haplo]; Lot ma WMT; Be! Lo? Pu’? [Jolly M] 
Wt; Bo MIT — c) Lo® amr; Bo ser; wKt! aTerex; TMd4 STUTTIeaeT; Lot T aaa; GMy 
Tera; aKS wea — d) Lo! wash; NK! Md} “Prgfer; Lo? Pu2 Put “Ferperar, Ho nKt4 
Lo? Lot tMd? nNg sOx! Pul® arr; GMy “etait 

24. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]; ma in Pu7; padas a-b omitted in Jm Pu'®; padas c-d omitted 
in Tj! and ma in Pu’, Cited by Laks 3.151 — a) Lot att"; cMd! Tj! “Sag; Lo? Pu? Put 
“Sera [Put G2] — b) Ox? ast TA’; Bo Lo! Lot Lo Re Jha Dave FIR TF: [Lot Lo’ 
usted]; Me gloss ast 3fcr supports the latter reading; Ku Mr support astfed; nKtt aKt> wkt® 
aad & We: [aK Tafa]; Tj! “Ahe:; Lo? Pu? Put “deere: [om Fat] — c) sCa BKt® Lo? 
sOx! “aS; Ho “TS, Laks Beat aut; La! mTr’ feat wat; Bo Ho “Aa; Lo! GMd! cMd® cMy 
Tr! “Hat; Ox? “Fast — d) sOx! sPus gear, Md} GMy TAA; Lo? “wey: 

25. Padas a-b omitted in Tj!. Cited by Apa 217; Laks 2.120; Dev 2.414 — a) Lo’ Lo® 
Ox? Pu!® [Jolly M] I— b) Pud Pu? Pu? [Jolly G] “eMart sar; Md “aefPaieaar, wKt! 
gf; Tr! aatr:; Be? fear — c) Apa way; nKt4 zara; Pu? Tj! anf; Tr! arf d) 
Ho tMd? tMd4 NNg Pub MTrmTr® Laks qu Tr! oof: Lo? Pu? are; Pud “ATaTT; Pu’ Pu? 
Pu® dae; nKe mT ré &; MT ro T 

26.* Cited by Apa 217; Laks 2.120; Dev2.414 — a) Pwom Feit; BBe? TeITAT; Ho 
wea aq; Tj! qaeicea; Lo? Pu2 Put ANAT [Lo? “STE; BK Pud Pu? Pu? aAeAT: BBE 
“getter, Tr? “wemrear, Kt? “wetter — b) cMd! aareded; 1Md3 Taeet; Hy Tadd: Tj! 
aude, Lal arated; Tr? TaTaa:; Lo! fesaeae:; Lo? Pu? Put fewirah:. ak fEsttete: wK to 
fest, Apa [vl] feseat:; Pud Pu? “eare:; Lo? “gat — c) Lal tMd? GMd! GMy Tr? mTr® 
HIAKT FT IAT [mTr° damaged after HIATT]; Lo? WAT WAAT I; Jha Dave AAA FT; Be? 
BK wKt® sOx! sPu® Tj! Tr? Apa Gated [om T]; TMd4 Laks Dev TAIT [om J]; Be! 
wKt! La? Lo! Lo’ Lo’ @atenet [om T]; BBe Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? oMd? Pu} Tj? mTr3 Volly 
MBN Ku] Mandlik KSS SAAT [om FT]; Bo AAA FT; wKe Pu? Pu’? Pu? [Jolly G] waaret 
J, Ho Ox? Pu’ @aatet & — d) sOx! sPuo aTaTd; La! nPu!l Tj! Apa BATA; Ox FeaTRT; Pu? 
Put aed; Lo aed; nK¢ TAT; Be! Bo TAH [Be! mc TIA]; Ho ane; nKt ara. 
Lo? atfiras’; Lo’ afta ; Md? GMy sOx! sPuS [but cor] ara; Im nNg “aaa: 

27. Cited by Laks 2.120; Dev2.416 — a) Bo aIPteaT; Hy AAS wKe aarettear, Tj! 
Taeeeay, Ke? Tee; Tr! “aedteat; aBe “sree; Lo’ “aerst — b) Pu? Put 9347 aT 





Chapter 4 509 


aaatafaar ger Weert AAT: | 
TAA astra Tareas: URC 
MAA ASHAT aT | 

arr ePygaae afmetsataarsfarr: weil 
wate Frater derrafrarssery | 
garanadtar ageeonht aT UZ oll 
aaa TEA: | 
wearer rata arr U3 2 
TWroas TIAA sar TEAR | 
AMT YT: BAeaTSTITTT: URI 


fesirqart, Lo? ar 7 ar fesitaA:; Ho nKt’ La! GMd! tMd* GMd® GMy Ox? Pu’ Tj? Tr! Tr? 
mT MTS Wa arf; tMd3 mT ath ; *@Md3 cMy °fegsir: — c) Ox? Pu? Put Pud Pu? Pu? vaT- 
aH Tj! THA . wKt! zara: NK vasa ATT; oMy “saat, Md? “safer oOr 
om T; sOx! sPuS 7 — d) Be? érefar’: wKté aratger fr; Be} Tj! “SAtfeny 

28. Padas c-d omitted in Tr?. Cited by Laks 2.121 — a) Laks TA5T3 TIPTET; TMd? 
aeafrarazer, Lo? Pu? Pu‘ taTaafaar [Put rat’; Lo? ° fafsary; Lo! waTsaTFrar, GM y 
aaenfacar; oMd> “araxfar; Be! “Frat ver; Lo’ eet — b) Md? TaeeataTAA:; cMd> Ox? Tj! 
Tr! arae: — c) Tj! sromatar’; rMd3 “Aargfr° — d) Tj! rarafranfss:; 1Ma? GMy aaTaTE ; 
Pu!? aarsefirt ; Ho La! Lo’ 7Md3 Ox3 “afar: oOr TE; wKt “afra:.1Md! “afaa:; nKe 
*aféa:; Laks “aféar:, GMd! Tr! “sft; Pus CART; Lo? “HR: 

29. Omitted 1 in Lo?. Cited by Hem 1.677, 3/1. 438 —— a) BK NNg SAT > La! oOr 
aRMRRRRAT ; Tj! aaa — b) Tr} BSA; Ho 4 — c) Jm 7 eager nKt4 
apPagaae — d) Lo? Lot Lo’ Ox} Pu? Put Pul® [Jolly M] sageatae: ofapains, [Pu!? 
“Og; Lot “arFaa:]; wKtS *Md3 Hem 3/1.438 AIPTat; nKe feet: 

30. Cited by Vij 1.130, Apa 170; padas a and d cited by Vis 1.129 — a)nKt4 wafedt- 
feresteart; Be? Bo Jo? KE BK wKt® Lo! P3 Tj! Vij Trafteat; sOx! sPu® trate; Lo? ferasof® 
— b) wKto Sarenfeesrsrt; Pud Pu? Pu? free ; cMy ore : cGMd> aor 1Td3 aroate 

r! deregfaer ; Ho Lo! Apa [vl] “afer; nKet “siferet ery; Ho Kt? Lo! Lo! rMd? wNg 
sPuS Pu’ Apa Bre; Tr? “IAM; TMd4 “rear —c) aKtS wKtS Lo? Pu? gq ; Be? sKe 
Lo! Lot “gett, cMd! “gaar, nKe “apa; Md? “gf FT; Bo “gaia — d) Pu’ ara; Bo 
aaa; Apa THAT 

Hy gives the verses in the following order: 30, 32, 33, 31, 34. 

31. Cited by Laks 4.61; Hem 3/1.382 — a) Lo? “Seen — b) cMd! cM@ mTr* mTr® 
[Jolly Nd Gr] Nd Laks TEAPTAH — c) Pug ; Pul om “HAM ... [32b] aT [haplo]; 
oMd! tMd3 GM Tr! mTr* MTr® Laks @eareat — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt Tj? mTr3 Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave €avex; sOx! sPus “SarPaastaty 

32. Cited by Laks 3.208 — a)MTr° Hfena?; cMd! afena: Va; Tr? area; wKt! [ne 
to] Md? GMd> GMy oOr MTr*MTr® araqarr ei, Lo Feary Ra, Tj! gear — b) Kes wKt® 
sOx! sPuS ated; cMy “aR; TMd* Laks “afer — c) Md} cMy faanrita acai; oMe? 
aafear’; BBE “ATT; Bo HET; Lo! wRT: TATA: GMA Tr! MTrtuTr® Laks Warat — 


510 Chapter 4 


Uae waters setay Tarts: aT | 
amardanearara a cterat ef feafe: 33 
av ate eraat for: gear a: ST | 
a ofttreagrar vaca fara afa avi 


PARMAR: YRVAL: Yea: | 
ara ta an: enhrerneaeag wT NR4I 
ard antate ates ow eave | 
aad ae a ye Tart aT Hrs URE 


d) Pu Haat. Tro edad; wKe “qa; Lo! “ageerd:; Lo? Pu2 Put “ayaa; *Md3 * Sera 

33. Cited by Dev 2.457 — a) nPul USAT; sOx! sPuo “afr oOr “APA; Lo? 
“aa ew — b) cMd! aetet; Wa Fae; Lo? Pu? Pul etree ar:; Pu’ gar: — c) wKO 
Saray; Ho oMd! sOx! Tj! “arfeat arf! — d) Pu! + aera; cMd! careTa; oOr ARTA; Pu! 
aad; Tr caesar 

34. Cited by Dev2.457; padas c-d cited by Vij 1.131 — a)cMd! aTétea; Lo? Pu? Put 
aaee [oma]; Tj! deg; Be Hea; cMd! Sraat; Tj? Tas; Ho qrat — b) 8K # wKt® Lo4 
Ox? Dev 8h:; Ho Wer; Jo? Fh: — c) Tj! 7 7 tehrwagret; Bost” ; Lot state” 

35. a) GMd! 1Md3 tMd4 cMd@ pater; Bo Tj! Go Pawar ; Be} grader; nNg Ga 
dar; aK wKt® aaa [Ara]; mTr3 aa, Pul? *srqarea: — b) TMd? GMy ‘spr 
arene; Lo’ syeia:; Tr! “adet:; Lolly Be] {arae: — c) Hy STEATT; Be! HopKtS wKt® 
oMd) sOx! Pu! Pu? Pu? Put sPuo Pu’ [Jolly N] frergen:; Tj! ger Pre” — d) Tr! om T 

36. Cited by Vis 1.132; Vij 1.133; Apa176 — a) wKt! tMd4 dure; wKtS “afte: — by Pu? 
Pud area; Tj; Pus waVEG:; Md? HAVES; Pu! om HAVES ... [37] HaTIAT — c) Tj! “TAT 
ad a [om FT]; wkto Bs; Tr? Faber — d)mTr4 Fat JT T; Pud Pu? Pu? Mery; Tj! Mer; ~Md} 
oMd> GMy ee} 

Additional verses in [Jolly Gr]: 

ar ate warnfser Aer: waveg: | 
TOT: aaa Fearedat Bar wAvEG: | 
Additonal verses in nPul: 
prsefgdar ara fafea: ger | 
gern aAReda cea areterar 11211 [BDh 1.7.1] 
at att aa: OT teatresae TZ | 
Ba Bart wraT + Pres garage: 11211 
we afafeancaftdarn afer aar | 
aad vet cut are: oftetfoe: 11 
soma ater yaa: ear: | 
Tangara irae aay ty | 
wesafi: esatatemncatirera: | 
PRR: qos: Ya va HAveg: 1/41 
eretor faféar fe: creer asitrerar | 
fracarireratfr cercrcakasiad 11¢ 1 
7 UTectratety FIAT | 


Chapter 4 511 


AAaeTaaeey Ae Alt Hara | 
age aT ater a weg TWAT MT NVI 


T ayaecaeatt T werter seer | 

a utae frttert er ware area sci 
aa wt Gad fr ge ay agIy | 
vafaronfer eater saratar aarerdty SSN 
arora wareatshr Rarerarctaaaty | 
aaa aa a yet Ta aE voll 


wrartgat ant awer gars: | 
Tat aa aes aaepergaa wetaes ie el 
at faactaaerer trart aAPrgAry | 


aged F aye T a: Yee: Be: Ill | 

37. Cited by Vij 1.135; Apa 180; Dev 1.124 — a) sOx! sPuS ASarfeerqaad, Pul? fae’; 
Ho Freadifecar — b) tMd3 aee; Pu!? [Jolly M!2]aTeaaq; NKtt Lo? cGMd ! GMdS GMy Tj! 
Tr! mTr‘4 mTr° Ku Dave at; sOx! Ox? sPud atc; [Jolly M89] act — c) sBe? ATT; Md? 
sPuS [but cor] Tj! Tr! 41125; Lo® AIH; GMy ATT; TMd4 ATTA; OMd? om A; wKt! aTheee 
— d) Put om 4 Wet; rMd4 TT AAT; sOx! Ox? sPuo AeA; Ke? Dev Fea; Tj! T TANT 

38. * Omitted in Tr!; placed after verse 57 in TMd? GMy. Padas c-d cited by Vij 1.135 
—a) Ho s4at; Bo “gered, wKeo Tj! “gears, Te “ger 7 A; Lot “aaah; Be! “att; Pu’ 
“ord. Lo? tMd4 Pu? Put ‘aed; Lo? Md? Ox? Pus Pu? “aedt; oMy "aft — b) Pu? Pu’ Pu? 
warren FT adhe; oOr a wetat Hai; nPul Tava; nKtl WaTaeT; Md? GMy wareer; Kt? 
“aaT yatta, Lo? aaife; cMd> aatfa — c) mTr*mTro + aleufadterc; sBe nKtt GMd! rMd3 
GMd5 cMy nNg Pu? Putt aeasfrdtea; rMd4 a aaa g Fete; Ox Pretera; rMd4 Prete; 
oOr facet; Tr? Préteret — d) Be! Bo HowKt! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo’ Md} tMd4 GMd> cMy nNg 
oOr nPu! Pud Pu! Tj! Tr? [Jolly M!2-8~° R] Me Rn Re Dave Jha 1S 5 mT rt Tro Suhr; 
oMy “Taft; Ho cMy areer 

39. Cited by Vij 1.133; Apa 176 — a) Tj! HT AT; Md? GMy Fert; rMd4* Fee; GMd! 
qa’; Lo! qayeaar, wKt! wader Gad: Vij Fad; Pus taafay. Bo Faw; cMd! fawa; Ke far 
—-b) BKé wKt® Fe ate; Ox? get T AY; Pus FaaY; Tr ag: — c) Apa valerr werdior — 
d) TMd3 GMdS GMy MT? mTr® Wetted FT; TMd4 Tr! darat FT; wKe! wKt3 weatatar; GMy Tr! 
MT! Tro area; M4 ae 

40. Padas a-b cited by Hem 3/3.726 — a) wKB 4a TST; Lot sOx! sPuo Ara; Pur 
way, +Md4 weft; Wa om f¥— b) Bo TMd? GMy fsarmar — c) Put “area; mT? aaa; 
sOx! sPus “serrate — d) Ox3 om =F; Pud Pu? Pu? arte J; GMd! sOx! sPuo arte Harey 

41. Cited by Hem 3/3.726 — a) Tr! wren. wKt! Ox? Pul® “fagat — b) Bo Lo! 
arearegy ; Tj? ARTY NKtt cGMd! 1Md‘ GMy fester gt; tMd? cM? Tr! mTr¢ mTr6 
fereray ; Ho @uTeedt: — c) Pu? Put parfait; Md! tMd3 GMy Hem Uae — d) Tj! 
werd; sOx! sPuo faetad; nPul Feta; Be! fassafer; Ho Ox} om WETS... .[42d] FIT [haplo] 


512 Chapter 4 


Tat at ses aQUeAs wala isl 
artarartar art Aardttea arrdhy | 
gadt Farman at a aretar ergErr ls stl 
Tested ae TT aTHAATAATT | 
TU waaedt a aoreprar feos: evil 
ATAMEHIA TAY: STATA | 

a yet ay adie av wear a ater sul 
qT wepe Tae a reat a a ade | 

a stead a afte waraat uve 

qT aaa wag a Teasarht a fer: | 


42.* Omitted by Nd; padas a-c omitted in Ho Ox’. Cited by Laks 3.346;Hem 3/3.726 — 
a) sOx! sPuo f& asta’; wPul faaeia’; Pud Pu? Pu? feast’; Pu2 Put “astrcer era — b) 
oMd’ wrarrafegat— c) nKt! Lot Lo’ GMd! 1Md3 1Md#4 cMd’ cMy Pw Put Pul? Tr! wTr# 
MTr® [Jolly M Nd]Laks Hem Yat opt aera [LoS oet; cMd> Pu? Put Tr! mTr* mTr® 
otter |; Pus Pu? Pu? ait; sOx! sPuo ae tarpsta — d) Be! sBe aCa Ho Jo? Lo? Lo® 
cMd! GMy Pu? Pud Pu? Pu8 Pu? Tr! mTrémTr® Lolly G] faaete; nKe4 raed; Hem ofaetd; 
Lo! fart; Pul? sétrer 
43. Omitted by Nd. Cited by Vij 1.135; Apa 180; padas a-b cited by Vis 1.130 —- b) 
GMd! tMd} GMy 0Or Tr! mTrémTro Fat tet, Ho Ox? Tj! aradt — c) tMd3 tMd* Ox? Tj! 
Apa §art; Lot xara; wKt® Pu Pu? Pu? gat, Im quell, cMy “arr; Laks $; Ho Jo? La! Lo? 
Lo? Lo® GMd! tMd? GMd> GMy sOx! sPu® Tr! Tr? mTr?mTr® Ox? Wa Vij at — d) sOx! sPu® 
MTré MTro + BaTgeraerat; cMd> Tj! are; wKke® arattar 
44. Omitted by GMd! tMd3 GMy Tr! mTr*mTr®° Na. Cited by Apa 181 — a) NKt4 AhsT- 
aff, Jo! armpit; Ox} astaedi; Be! Be? Hy aK wKtS “art; Lo! “afer; Kt A — b)rMd! + 
qerdgarar; xnPul arg — c) Lo a aardl @ Aa; Jo? Wa weal aT Aaa [Wa 
wad]; Tj! + wad weraactt; Bo Apa Tea; Be gaat and om TF; Tr TIAA, Tj? watt; 
akt> wKto vag; Hy Waa; Apaat — d) tMd4 [Jolly Be] SaeTaT 
Additional verse in Be! Ho Tj! TP? Mandlik [®, &, 1, 7] KSS: 
Ser eraat fagaesar wera | 
eer aT dare oeetty faasracy tl 
a) Tr? Baa; Tj! aepr fase” — b) Ho aaa 
45. Omitted in Nd; placed after 46 in Bo; padas a-b omitted in Pu’. Padas c-d cited by 
Dev 2.237; Apai79 — a-b) TMd4 ATA ST T AMETAT AT — b) wKt! sOx! arqa:; Tr! 
7 far ert —c) Lota am of — d) Be! + @ eT Ta; Md} GMd oOr MTB AAT 
Additonal half-verse in GMd?: 
Tyee Tay a aerate fer: Ul 
46. Omitted in GMd! tMd? GMy Pu? Put Tr! MTr* mTr® Nd; padas c-d omitted inWa. 
Cited by Apa 179; Dev 2.237 — a) Tj? PSH; Ox} “Puit — h) Lo! a a Preah + wa; rMd4 
farcit; Lo? wdfa— c) Hy om 7; Hy sKé wKtS nNg @aataay; Bo wat — d) Jo? Lo’ aeftas 
aT area 








Chapter 4 513 


a adidivarard A WT Wada Isl 
anatase: wed mT: | 

T wart Ett freer frastery sci 
fap” srs are wt quits ar | 
frat waat ara adtargisagttod: ieseit 
qaranagent fear Fatgze: | 
aRronAngeat cat teria zat far ikoll 
Srararaeaare at caraets ar fas: | 


WUQATa: FATT WOTITIAAT T lle 2 


47. Omitted in GMd! tMd?} GMy Tr! mTr*mTr® Nd; padas a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by 
Apa 179; Dev 2.238 — a) tMd4 tT AAT FT AAT; Be? Pu’ Pu? Pu? aa — b) nKt wkd 
wKtS Ox} Pul? Apa Tea TRY fera:; Be? “aft afera: — c) sOx! sPu® “aremay: Pu! “ares — 
d) tMd4 “ETA 

Between padas a-b and c-d of verse 47 an additonal half-verse in GMd>: 

7 oe: vara wt aga [2] + or fare: I 

48. ma in La!; omitted in Nd Re. Cited by Dev 2.238 — a) BonPu! Pu? Pu4 area: 
mTr? Dev famrafa’ — b) rMd4 “HueTeredda; Lo! geaeqeta; cMd! vaetaa; Be! Jm BKtS 
wKt® Lo} cMd! tMd3 GMd My Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr! Wa [Jolly G] “2a aT; sOx! Pu? Put sPuo Tj! 
Tr “de a; nKé “Ga FT: —c) Ho wahrg; Be! eaths; Be? Lot Lo’ Ox} Pul® [Jolly MJ 
array — d) Md‘ feetort 

49.* Padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 34 Laks 1.148; Dev 2.235 — a) Jm Jd Kt? 
oMd@ mTr?3 Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ®1, Pu’ HIS — b) nKt! om BIE; Jo! Kt? La? GMd! 
oMd? Pu! mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave @Y@, Be! Ho sOx' Ox? Ox? Pu? Pu’ sPu® Pu’ Pu? Pu 
Tr? Dev Laks Apa TH BYE; oMd? om T3; Jm Jo! Kt? La? Lo? GMd! oMd? Tj! mTr3 Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave 71; GMd! 1Md? cMy ot; rMd* a; Bo BCa Ho Jo? wKt! La? Lo! Lo? nNg 
sOx' Ox? Ox Pu? Pu3 Put sPu® Pu? Pu!® Tr? Jolly TPT 7; Lo? GMd! Laks Tule ar; Jha 
Dave TUfe TF; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La? La? Lo’ oMd Tj! Tj? mTr3 Mandlik KSS Tear; cMy has 
only J — c) sOx! fact; wKt! woret; Tr! gadt; Be} ara — d) mTr3 aeftaTgy; nPul after: 
oMd! 1Md3 1Md? GMy Tr! mT? Dev aftsc:; coMd “apftsa: 

50.* Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pu!®; pada-b omitted in Tr!. Cited by Dev 2.236; Madh 
1.210 — a) Tj! Warareorayeasy; Pu? alae ; tMd4 qa ; Bo aahad: Be? “gaat, wKt! 
“geet: cMd! “Tet: — c) Put om aferomPryget — d) Be La! cMd! 3¥ wet Far fear, Dev 
“arg; oOr fear ae; Pu? car 

51.* Me says that some omit this verse: Sfafed satmaferreary aeftaAd. Cited by Vis 
1.133; Apa 34; Dev 2.236; Mddh 1.211 — a)BKt? Bray oOr ‘steereur [om 41]; Kt? om 
aT; Pu? Put & — b) Md? GMy aT &c:; GMd nNg Vis aT Fat — c) My PAS Far Bare; 
Ma age sede; Ca om TATAGHS:; Pul? “gee: — d) Be! Be? Bo Ho Jm Jo? wKt! 
K? BKt? wKt$ La! La? Lo? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ GMd ! oMd? oOr Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu’ Tj! Tj? 
Tr! Tr? Wa VaDh 6.13 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 9™TaT ; Pu'® sTaaT ; Be! Be Bo Ho La! La? 
Lo? rMd4 GMd> nPu! Pud Pu? Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? Mandlik “are”; Wa ater; Lot [Jolly M] aT 


514 Chapter 4 


wear sft a ufrariaefesry | 

wteny sfeart a wat agate Aga: G21 
ay Feateraaa sate a Rr | 
ater otal Te arat ware Uy RN 
Tear + AaAea_gad | 

TWAT aaa: Hata aoa Ne vl 
anftarkaerat + maf afar | 

a aq afaght areriscete ay IKI 
ary a ge ar Stat aT AA | 
seateraarar ated ar rarhr ar eet 


52.* Omitted in La Ox? Pu? Pu!®; placed after 48 in Lo! Lo* Lo BKt> wKt® Put Jha 
possibly also by Me; padas a-b omitted in Bo -— a) Be! BBe? Ho Jm Jo! Kt? wKt Kt wKt® 
La! Lo! Loe Lo* Lo® GMd! 1Md? +rMd4 GMd> GMy oOr sOx! Ox? NnPu! Pu? sPuo Pu? Pu® Pu? 
Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr? seat; Be “eebar; Lo’ oM@ NNg aT — b) TMi sferaraTea f°; Ho Lo! 
TM} sOx! Pus Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTr® Volly GN] atatear f°: oMy “aire fe"; 
oMd! 1Md4 GMy Pud Pu? Pu? mTr4 MTr9 [Jolly G N] fest; tMd3 f8aT:, Lot fEstT; Be? Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? wKt nKtt Lo? oMd? oOr sPu® Tj! Mandlik KSS Dave [Jolly R] tear; 
wKt® “f83t; Ho “east — c) Be? yferarce =F Seat ZT; Put om gfeq; BKtS La! Lo! Lo! Tr? [Jolly 
M!2-5-8-9] afer, Be! BBe pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} Lo? Lo? Lo’ cMd! oMd@? 
1+Md3 tMd‘4 GMd> GMy oOr sOx! nPu! Pu’ Tj? Tr! mTr3mTr4 mTr6 [Jolly M4 R Nd] Mandlik 
KSS Dave afer, sPuS Tj! sfeqe fsPuo cor to Mfertt]; Ke wera; Jo? Wa wferart; NK tt 
gferatet; Lot GMd! tMd4 GMy sPu® [but cor] Tr! mTr? [Jolly Nd M'2-8-9 | afereet [given as 
patha by Me Na and Ku, although rejected by Me; cf. VaDh 6.11]; TMd? GMd? oOr mTr® 
wiereeat, oMd? at — d) BK é wKt° oferar 

53. Cited by Vij 1.137;Apa 181 — a) 1Md3 GMy af, Pu? FeATT — b) sOx! sPu 
“eataat; Pu? “aul, cMd! tMd? oMy deta; cMd AAA; oOr Pu’ Pera — c) wK tS aT, 
Ox} afer; Lo! @ fete” — d) Lot vauret; Tj! T aeneat; wKe! oOr Targa; Jo! waraTa aT; 
pBe? WATT; Pu! weitaad 

54. Padas a-b and c-d transposed in MTr?. Cited by Vij 1.137;Apa 181; Laks 2.407 — a) 
Lo? “ATA; Nu “sear — b) Lo‘ Ox} [Jolly M] 24-7; La! Lo? Md? oMd5 * cMy 00r Tj) 
Tr! mTr? mTr® *afeay ad; Wa aftegiq; Bo Kt’ wKt® Lo’ sOx! Pu? sPu® Na “qaeP I — 
c) Tj! Taet:; Lo? Wea; Laks Tea: — d) Lo! Tj! grorarerar ; wKt! ATOTACAT Tj2 wferarerar 
Pu? Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] Vij [vl as in ed] siferaerar ; Jo? fears’ Tr? arr sare 

55. Pada-a cited by Vij 3.289— a) Be? “aera; GMd> Tr! ‘aarat — b) nNg weesA T 
afa ; tMd4 wea 7 aaa; TMd3 cMy “arrafasta; Tr! “stodfeara; ake wKeo daa — c) 
Kt + 7 gfefe; Pu? Put da ofer ; Be! oM@ Tj! 84; Be! Jo? Lo’ 1Md? cMd> cMy Tj! Tr! 
mTr mTr® folly R] faferet”; BKt’ afer; Be? “aRgat — d) Pu? Put “gaara; nKt* 
sOx! sPu’ ATCA: Weta; BK wKtS “Testa; oMd! fF eta; TMd? cMd5 cMy Tr “Pret; Pus 
Pu? + @tc; Ox? Pul® aor; Td? Be; BBe a, TMd4 wST 

56. a) wKt! Lot rMd? tMd‘ Tr! Fa — b) Put om Stat aT; GMd! Md? after aT; cMy 


Chapter 4 515 


Te: SANS 7 TAT wareAT | 
AMINA A TST UTA: UL 
ANNE Wat Wes Meat a abr | 
carers ata Se afaror arftrpatsy kc! 
T aeagt aaedt a areata weaker | 

av fedharger aqr weahregtige: KSI 


faced ar; Tr? om aT — c) Tr! artex’: Pud ater’; Pul® arteat’. cMd’ “feast at — d) tM? 
oMy atfed facvarfer ar [rMd? facrarfor]; La! atfeer; Lo! Pu2 Pu? Put Pu! [Jolly M'28] 
facnfer = 
57.* Cited by Laks 2.405;pada-b cited by Vij 1.136 — a) Jo? Lo? Lo* Lo® nPu! Pu? Put 
Pu!® [Jolly M R] Jolly Dave Jhat®: FS GAT; Wa tH: FI Je AAT; tMd4 Fqe- 
ayers, Lal ta: gene gad; NNE ae: Taye aay; Ox? +a: JTT]e [broken] 4; 
td? 4a; Be! Or sOx! Pu Pu? ATT Tr? RTT Bo Ho wKt! GMd! Vij Mandlik 
KSS are Lo! Ta Tj? gereet’; Hy Im Jo! Kt? oMd2 tMd? GM@ GMy Tr! 
ware; pCamTe SILT; Be! Be? Hy Jm Kt? wKt? oMd? sOx! Ox? Pu’ sPuo Tj? mTr? 
Trt Mandlik KSS °#® — b) BCa Tr? Vij Mandlik KSS %aie +; Be! pBe? Be* Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? wKt} nKtt La! Lo! oMd? oOr Ox? Pud Pu? Pu? Tj! Tj?mTr? [Jolly M34 G]Rn Na 
[patha] Re Laks att 7; Jo? BKtS wKt® Lo? Lot Lo® GMd! tMd4 NNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPu® 
Wa [Jolly Nd] YDh 1.1387 3art; Bor aif — c) Be? Bo nKtt La! oOr sOx! sPu° 
Terra raat [La! “Rrra; GMy Pub Pu’ Pu? aera oOr ear’; +Md4 “area” 
— d) TMd? GM@ GMy Tr! mTrémTr® + aeaadt att; rMd! Tes a; Jo! CATATEe:; Ox? 
*seIga:; Ho Lot Lo’ aga: 
Additional verse in GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd® Tr! mTr* Tr; padas a-b in nPu! [cf. GDh 
9.53-5]: 
wep sorcort fegeefeteny ar | 
pore wears earearhracd: | 
a) oMd> Tr! ganreff ast’; rMd4 a@cprt — b) Md4 T — c) TMd3 MTS ES 
ear. cMd! weraferet — d) mTr4 “arataftrac: 
Additonal verse in Pu’; first verse in Be? [after 58] Mandlik [€, $, @] KSS: 
up: eg 7 Ysa Sretaer +t Raat | 
Ver a isa Aa: FAT sae 1121 


Waray Wee T scaMaae aT | 
Great asiafrer yfceprraer fest: 181 | 
1. a-b) nPu! Yost: wart 7 — b) Bed Ua earatar fara — c) nPu! Far fF 


Tree 

58. a) Be* Ho Jo! wKkt! Kt? wKt} nKtt Md? GMy Lo! Lo* sOx! Ox} sPu Pu? Tj! Tj? Rn 
Jolly AFITTR; oOr ATH — b) sOx! sPuo Tj! Fasrerra ray; nKe wel ; wKtS om 7; cGMd> 
qd; cMd! & aeat — c) Pud Pu? Pu? TET; Pwd ATS; Tr? ATT — d) wKeto Tr? sero; Pu? 
Pu‘ cferarfer’; GMd! +Md? GMy Tr! Tr! mT agy ; Tj! Set; oOr ST 

59. a) Put Puta areagaed at; Lo} a at areateaedi; Tr! ara’; La! anda at; aBe Jo? 
oOr aseraaedt aT, GMd! aradl; nKt gaff, Bo aaadt — b) Lo! Lot Pu? Tj! arrettt: Bo 
uraefte, Md) araeiat — c) BKtS wKtS 7 afesr ; Lo! cor to feast ; Me? fefafege; utr? 





516 Chapter 4 


Tae sag + anlage wary | 
ae: wadarart a fare waa wag Ug oll 
aT yest Padang | 

T eSATA SSITIAY: UG 2 
a7 yidigasd arate | 
atiesrr arfeearet FT ArT sraeTaTT: NGM 
a gate gat wet a arisafear fraq | 
aay WAAR A SMeEEct lle RU 
a qr at maa arearhr area | 
aTeneaa Tease a Unt Peary evil 


“ergy — d) BBe wKt} Lo! oOraalaemerfage:; cMd! “dep; mTrt MTS Weer; Im “aT: 

60. Padas c-d omitted in GMd!; pada-d omitted in oMd* — a) Bo nKt* Lo! +Md‘ 
anette, Be! areftas; Ke aenfitay; aBe ake arenfieat — by Tj! aarfereige; cMdS Tr! "age; 
oMd! “age aur; cMd5 yt — c) Be? Ho tMd? GMy Pu’ Pu’ Pu? waeaeary;, wKtS WoeTaTEATT, 
mT ro Woeaed; Wa Waele — d) Tr? ary 

61.* ma sh in La’; illegible in GMd?; padas a-c omitted in oMd?; padas c-d in Lo*. Cited 
by Laks 2.338; Dev 1.20 — a) wKtS Pus “ast; aKtS faaa’; wKto fara — b) wKe after’, 
1Md! “afiie’; sOx! sPuS [cor to] SATS — c) Ho wKt? tMd3 GMy oOr Tj? mTré Laks 
omyus Be! oa; sOx! sPu® qratfts’; Jo? wKt! BK® wKt® Lo! Pu? Tj! grafts’; Wa 
“Pedtrtrara; wCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Ke nKt! Lo! Lo’ tMd? GMy Tj Tr! [Jolly Nd] Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave “worse: Ox? aA; Be? “srorrastet; Ho Pu? Pu “SATA: Dev festigpret 
— d) aKd atargee; Hy ATTA; Tr? age; Tj! as gte; wKe} ATT; Ox} Pul? “aR q; ske 
wKté “sth ‘*; GMd> Tr! “Se; oOr “age: — GMd mTr‘mTr° insert here verse79 (mTr4 MTr® 
give it also at its proper place). 

62. Omitted in Md‘. Pada-c cited by Vij 3.289— a) La! “arg Ag; Bo dea: wa; 
Pu? Put “atgaete — b) wKt! “tear — c) Pu? Put arfamereaftrars; Tj! Tr! arfamas; Pus 
Pu’ Pu? Tj? MTr* [Jolly G]aifasraaife’ ; Lo! atfearar — d) Te afeaeatet fed; Be arene, 
nK¢t aTaTet; Lo! sreerferar; Pu? Put arenes: 

63. Omitted in TMd*. Cited by Apa 182 — a) Pu? Put garaey; Tr? 3; Md? GMy Ter 
— c) Ho ateagyt; Hy ATH wkt! aTegte; Be! Lo! Ox? sPu® Pu? Tr? [Jolly R Nd] Apa “et 
4; BBe* eas; Ox} Jolly “ZaTH; Bo wKt! oOr sOx! Pus Pu? Tj! [Jolly G] “Rat 7A — d) Lo! 

“eeqest; cMd Tr? “BES 

64. Cited by Apa 182; Laks 2.400 — a) Bo Lot Lo? oMd? NNgsOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? Put 
sPu° Pul® Apa Dave Jhat JAAT WAST 7; Jolly FT TART TF WAS, rMd4 a Teal TST 
4, Joa yaete wae 7; BST TAT DT aT AS; wKe AT FIST Mes a, Te a ae 
meet FT; Ort JAS T AT A; BBe? 7 TIS WA — c) Md4* 7 wale; Trt avente Hy 
arate”; Tj! arenes’; Laks T WHA aT, Apa Cda eASeqT A; Apa [vl] cae Tessa; eke 
om 4; Hoat ef® ; Be nPul MSs NK AS; Trietas — d) tMd4edeeet ta fanaa; 
GMd Tr! mTr4 mTroSeeteserere FT aA [Tr | area; mT r® Tate]; Ho Lo? nPu! Apa Hh; 
Pu? wt; Tj! tab; Nd [patha] THAPTA [ace. to Jolly Wad]; Nd warIeaaa; sOx! [but 


Chapter 4 517 


a ural araacerer sarfeeft an | 


av Reares ysotta aT aranfegher lg uit 
Vaal A AAT TTA aread | 
Basta GT BHAT T UTE 


afatdasrgat a genferitfee: | 

a Regering arefafrafta: nevi 
fatty anreaargicemnttad: | 
queasy: Tala aeT WATT UEC 
arerag: Saat at Aer aura | 

a feermerrafir sectafeareareary eel 


me] Frareeitfatq; sPuS [but cor] Framed; nKe4 aerate, Tj! fataste, Lo? faemrt; Lot 
[Jolly M3] feared; Ox} Pu! [Jolly Me M*8-°] fatter; [Jolly M'] fatter; [Jolly M25] 
fasta; [Jolly Gr] Parad, ViDh 71.57 Apa freer 

65. a) Tj oat; rMd3 aroTet; Hy Kt? area’: Lo? ere; Tr! “prety — b) Kt? Lo! 
[but cor] nPu! mTr° HTT — c) cMy AR; cMd’ RreraTee; oOr FraaTs — d) sBBe we 
NNg ‘afta; Ox? “guay; cMd’ “after 

Additional verse in oOr: 

Ua Us ser yeh fers Heras | 
meant cer aed sry: wait aay TH I 

66. Padas a-b and c-d transposed in Jo? Lo? NNg Pu? Wa; padas c-d omitted in Put — 
a) sOx! sPuS SUAS; NNg STAT; oOr Put om FT; Pu2 aT; La! aftesy; Be? Tj! Ter T— b) Kt? 
yor, Te wane ae; mTro area; nPul wert — d) Lo! wratame to PUVEGAT, Be? 
nPu! aT 

67. Cited by Apa 173; Laks 2.358 — a) tMd* “aaHe wKt! Tj! “agar; Pu? Pu’ Pu? 
“TET, Lo! “set; Tj? SEat; nKe SRT — b) Tr! Apa aa ; Pud Pu’ Pu? aey- 
amfer’ ; Lo? area nPu! om 7; Lo* ma 4; nPu! qereahey ; Laks avafafretic: — c) c¢My 
fafa’; Pul? frat’; Be? Rrarfeargeg’; La! Pu? Put “agrferg’; Lo! “att — d) Laks “OF 
TTA: BBE Lot Mt a arfSfaehts:; Tj! gett feslid:; mT Apa ae ; Te ae ; 
Pu’ Pu? area; Pud tees; Be! atafere’: Lo! qTegerae ; wKt! wKt® ararfaftre ; rMd? 
arofefatre’ ; oOr Teaarreatad: 

68. a) Tj! fasrceq; Ho La! Pud Pu’ Pu? fa-taer; Be? Bo asta; Wa waht — b) wT‘ 
oTr® aqas —c) BKtS auTSdT’; sPuo cor to SMSGT ; oOr SATTT:; Ho wKt! “SaaTaF — 
d) Be? rMd3 weaTet Get; BK wKt® Lot Ox} Pu!® Me Dave Jha [Jolly M] waTeaTferTT; Mr 
yateaTeat; Tj! yarct — here cMd) inserts verse 4.140. 

69. Cited by Apa 183; Laks 2.40.2 — a) MTr® Gerad; wKt! “ay; Lo! “at; Be? Lot 
[cor to] Lo Md} GMd3 GMy Tr! Apa a4; Put om Fa ... [69b] TAA; sOx! TAMA; wKtt! 
wKt “eat, BBe? Be? Lo! [cor to] Lo? tMd? GMd> GMy oOr Tr! mTr® Apa Tj! * air, Lo! 
“eat — b) NK¢ La! Lo? aaf; Pu? 487; Be! Bo Ho Lod Tr? a4F; wkt! awit, Tj! tev — c) Pu? 
Pu‘ Pud om 7; Pu’ “seraTfer; Hy “STATA; Jm Jo! Kt? BKtS wKt® La! La? Ox? Pu} Pud MT? Wa 
Mandlik Jolly KSS “Stay; Lo} “Stat 


518 Chapter 4 


a Here faa foreecsreay | 

a at Pony Hae aaT loll 
otendt queadt taardt a at art: 

a feat wey Tassyrrg T MWe 
a fang sat gatefeater + aaa | 
Tat w art Tea adda fara Worl 
Har w aeagry ar aat aay | 
Tat a aarenfr gra: aftactkrgy Woz 
ae: misewatherer tay Atal Ete | 
ret 7 ysstta 7 afer 7 Tay levi 


Additional half-verse after pada-b in La! Tr? Mandlik [@, 1] KSS: 
fray afer past te arr | 

70.* Padas c-d omitted in oOr, and pada-d in mTr* [haplo]. Cited by Apa 183; Laks 2.402 
— a) Be? ygrers zeal’; GMd! rMd? tMd* GMd GMy Tr! mTr‘ MTr® [Jolly Nd] Ferret 
yeftar’; Jol Kt? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave @ Westar ; Laks Fargsrar’; Im 7 Ata; Hy 
dtyefiar; K? Apa + Better — b) GMy “taequt; Ho NNg mTr‘mTr® “SU — c) Ho 
aot, wk wafer ws; Lo? AP: He; Laks Poms at — d) Laks Garart ATA GA ETA, 
[typo?]; Md? oMd? GMy Tr! mTr® papers. Tj! warreare ; pBe? UCaA; Tr? “ara- 
aa: Ke ager; wKktS “geet 

71. Omitted in oOr mTr“. Cited by Apa 183, 253; Laks2.402 — a) Laks @teneft, Pu? 
Pu‘ Sttecte?, Pu’ Sreqte, Jo! Srendt — b) Put om TaETet FT AT; sOx! sPu® THTe=T; Pu? 
at — c) Tj! area — d) Pu! om “Y TASH [haplo]; Pus Pu? Pu? Faar; Tj! get 7 gh 

72. Omitted in oOr; pada-a omitted in mTr‘. Padas c-d cited by Apa 173 — a) GMy 
fears; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Pud Tj? mTr? Wa KSS ferret, cMdd fre; Jo? wKt® Lo? sOx! Ox? nPu! 
Pu? Pu? Put sPuS Pu’ Tj! Wa [Jolly R] Bat:; Bo Br; Hy wet — b) Tj! “ATs — c) Pu? Pus 
Tat ea Ut J; Loa F TAT; Jo? WA Tat FT; Lal om T; wKt! aT; Ox? FS AMT; sOx'! 
sPuo ge fF; TMd4 FS aT — d) Ox? Apataea; Ho Jo? Lo? BKO wKtS [Jolly R] frastat; Ho 
om fanted ... [73d] TRasiaq 

73. Padas c-d ma sh in Pu’. Cited by Laks 2.370; padas a-b cited by Apa 184 — a) Lo! 
aero; Ox} Pul? arereer; Tj? agretta; Be? tMd* om J; BCa Lot Lo’ Md} GMd? GMy oOr 
Tr! mTr4 mTr® Wa ¢; T} arfrar’; mT rt arftar ; Lot Lo’ ardtar’; Laks ardtary art — b) 
1Md3 “STAT; Bo Ca wKt! Tj! Laks BGd; Apa ATI; Mandlik Jha Dave A FTL [separated 
without sandhi of #gq4]; Ke arpa; Me Ku Go support #9 — c) nKt* om 4; rMd? cGMy 
Tr! MTr4 Tro J 

74.* Pida-d omitted in Tr! [haplo] — a) Tj!aré: stsas Herfirg; tM} aret:; Jha Dave 
atatepar ; La! Hee wah; BBe Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? wKt BK wKt® Lo! Lo? Lo! 
Lo’ GMd! oMd? 1Md* NNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu!® Tj? Te [Jolly M] Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave rq — b) Hy atae4t — c) sBe? nK¢ 0Or Tj? Tay; Lot TAA; Lo’ TITIT — 
d) Bo Trea; TMd4 TIfereT; Lot Pu? aaa — Pu? repeats here 73c-d. 





Chapter 4 519 
ad a famdad area ofa | 
aU an: whe 7 ake: aT lou 
amureeg ystta auras afaare | 
ae yout dhiargrarygard lel 
sagiaas af + sae afehra | 
a farrier + agear adt aT Ul 
afifecsn sare + wenferaarterar: | 


av arofeter a gay dherarghaifag: ect 
aT aaaer waded Bete Fors: | 
wT qeatateta aretataraarhahr: ie tl 


75.* Omitted in Tr! — a) La! Volly N Nd] ViDh 68.29 44d; cMé “afPPT — b) nKt 
Tj! ‘eat ofa; Be! pBe? Bo pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt3 La! Lo! Lo} oMd? Pu’ Tj? 
Tr} Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ‘afte tat; Be} “et et Tt; Lot Lo’ “ETAT TT — d) La! 
jReceed shied, Bo Tec; Lo! ae, Lot afeare:; nKt cMd! rMd? tMd* cMd 
oMy mTr* [Jolly Gr]: aI; oOr TS: Bary 

76. Padas a-b ma in Lo‘; pada-a omitted in Tr! — a) wKt! arf’; tMd4 orf? — b) Be! 
Be} wKt! tMd3 GMd GMy Tj! Tr! Jolly Gr] afta Bares; Ox? Tr? + ait Heras; cMd! 
afar warar, rMd4 are — c) Md‘ anf’; nNg Pu? Put “orét f@ — d) Hy atehary’; Be! Be? 
“HTgAAT ; Lot Lo’ “HIGTAATT 

77. Omitted in Pu’ — a) Ho gat; Im! af — a-b) GMy araafenaers wren Hferag 
— b) Tj! saeFT — c) Lo? amar + Teeter; Jozt fame Tea; Ox? Wat faarsr Prete — 
d) Be’ wKe argeat + Act; wKtS aarezpatadt; Jo! agearydhead, Hy aet 

78. Cited by Apa 183 — a) Ox? afefacéa; cMy afeferdt; rMd3 cMy Apa Harter — b) 
Ho HeATHuioErT; Pu “Raa: La! “aorta, nPul “wurfeat; Lo? Lot GMd! Ox3 

“asarfesen:; *Md! ° aperfescar; mTr® pee —c) Be! Be? Ho wKt}? wKt® Lo! Pu’ Tr? 

peregrine [all except Ho om 4; Be! Ba ; Ho + wat |: Tj! efrafergarrery [om 
a nKt* BKt? Lot NNg Ox? Pu’ Pu! Apa [vile > Md? “aTey; Md qu, tMd! gat — d) 

Lo! dtp Rr; Bel “agfsshfay, Ho “agente 

79. Cited by Apa 182 — a) Jo? wKt® Lo* Ox} nPu! Pu!® Tj! [Jolly M] Fae; oOr 
aad; Lo? nNg Pu? Pud Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] afaarer; Ho rMd4 [Jolly R] afaargq; Wa Apa 
afar — b) BKé wKt® Lo* Lo4 tMd4 GMd5 nNg sOx! sPuS Ox? Tr! mTr5 Apa 0ST ; TMd? 
aMy Wverear Jee:; Kt? Jeet:; Ho wKt! wKt® Pud Pu? Pu? [Jolly G M'] gore; BBe Lo! 
oOr YeHE: [see 10.18b note] —c) BonKt qe ; Be? Ho La! Pu? Pu? Pu? Pu’ ay; ; Pu? aT. 
wKt “4fafee’; Pu2 put “atafee’; Tr? “saat d) GMy arrarense Pata : wKt 
arent ; Pu? Pu araatane ; Be! wet nKt! GMd! oMy nNg Tr! areata 

Additional verse in NPu! Mandlik [ce] KSS: 

7 Padget Ferrata: | 
7 aghrigttareasd wera | 
d) Mandlik KSS “Rritaaer 


520 Chapter 4 


qT yar att cerathot + efaepay | 

a arerasradt + aver gaara lic ott 
at ger atares atearfenta aaq | 
asagqad at ay: ae ada Ashe lic gil 
sii UANg eds USEC 


T Meagher TT eafear aa: NCR 
aver wert Rrra | 


Brera seat arg Pefrahe ere le 31 
l 


qT Ua: siete: 
warmer agra a oftaaryz ev 


80. Padas c-d omitted by Pu? Put. Cited by Apa 1090; Laks 2.380; padas a-b cited by 
Apa 187,220; padas o-d by Vij 3.262 — a) Put act, Pu? ate — b) Lo! Lo’ “sifert; wKt! 
arefe’; Lot Lo’ afeegd; Tj! afepar; Md! “Ha — c) T}2 7 wae’; La! Lot Lo’ [Jolly M3- 
4-5) aTeit’; Bo “SRT; Apa “BATT — d) LaksaRTaA ; wPu! afar’; BK wKt ete Vij 
“ATER; Bo “aR; wKt® “afar 

Additional half-verse in Be* Lo! Mandlik [>]: 

ST TAM Hear ward aarfeste | 

81. Cited by Apa 220; Laks 2.380 — a) Pulomarae agate; Tre der ef 
aATae;oOr at fe eterarace; Lal at genfestat; Lot der wef — b) La! warer 
genet; Bo mTrt azedar; Lo} Jolly RJweateata; Be? Tr! witafeafer, Md} cMy 

aatdfeafer, cMd! aatafeate, ake’ “eater — c) Tj? aeasgs AMT (om TT); oOr at BAT; 
Ho Ox} aaa; Pu? aad [om G1]; Put ara fom 1]; Ox? “ge + AeA; BKE wKeS Ta: — 
d) Lal NNg Pu? Put ata ae Asaf; cMd! ae aaret=afet; Be Bo wKt} NK Lo! Lo? tMd3 
1Md4 mT 1° Laks Apa Wester 

82, Cited by Apa 183 — a) GMd! sereIT — b) Pud Pu’ Pu? SUSTTETAT ; Be! pBe* Be? 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! La! nKt* Tj! Tj? Volly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Daveaorgiarar® —c) nKt ae 

— ; Apa “saghs — c- -d) Ma? atedagey + Fer Say — d) nPu! Pu? Pud erarigsrrra: 
ul “fesira:]; Ke? ae 

83.* Cited by den 183; Laks 3.85; Hem 3/2.910 — a) Pu? Put ar ; Be! “weTt; cMd! 
GMd@ GMy Tr! MTr* a8; tMd3 “WET; Tj! “aEM; Tj’ “wert Pre’. Ke? weer; Ox} TeTET; La! 

wererey, Md? GMy Sareea; Tr? veretata — b) Jo? Lo’ Wa [Jolly R] wer Prefer astra; rma} 
cMd5 GMy sOx! PuS sPuS Pu? Pu? Tr! Apa ary asa; aK wKtS “aTastad; Ca [but 
cor] aferastta — c) aCa Hy Jm Jo! K? wKt} Kt! La? Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ Md! oOr Ox? Ox? 
Pu? Pus Tj? mTr3 Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave “TeX; sOx! sPuS “eSrratfY — d) wKt® 
ATE; Tj AT; sOx! Hferehs; oOr HRraft; Be? Bo pCa Ho Lo? TMd? GMy NNg Ox? nPul Pus 
Tr! T? mTr? mT r® Apa feePagaesatq; Kt’ cMd> Fefreregara; Ox’ fepherceyerd, 

84. Cited by Laks 2.234 — b) Ho Md? cMy Tj! i? “grat wseT; La! nPul Tj! 
“TTT; NK “UATE. NKtt nPul! Tj! “safer: Lot Lo “yale; Hy “afar; BK wKt® 
“sfergarr: Put “warfert:; Pu2 “seer — c) BBe? Jo! wKt! BK oMd? Jat ; Tr? “ast; GMy 
“afee ; Lo! asm sftarat; Be! “sasraat — d) sOx! sPu’ Seta: 1Md4 aeaaa, Ma? aaa: 


Chapter 4 521 


TAQ Us ATHAAT SAAT: 
RATATAT AAT FTAA FT: UCU 
ar qaracarter at areata athe: 

at Tet: STAT UST areeter shee: cll 
at ua: afer geretrorsratts: | 

ae war artaracarrareaaery UCN 
afer Aenicaeay | 

Ms MYA T ATNSAT FT Meciil 
asttay aera art ara | 

ad aaa BP Yraswhaay CsI 


wKt BKO wKto aaa, Hy Tj? 23a; Or “Sarasftfat; aCa Ho oMd2 GMd? Tr! Tr2 q; Lot 
a; wKe Tr? staat; Be} sfaarty; Be! sftfae 
a * Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 2. 234 — a) BBEe Jo! wKt! BK® wKt® oMeé Tr? 
; Tj! areit gat; Ho Lo? Me Tr! Tr? “are, Md! La! “apagit; Be? cMd5 cMy 
Te wT rS ast — b) Be? La! cMd° oMy Tr! Te “wastes; Ho Tj! mTr® “afeeaT; Lo! 
“ageTat; Lo} cMd! tMd3 GMd@ Tr! mTr4 mTr® casft; cMy eater — c) Md? GMd 5 Tj! Tr! 
“afer”; GMy MTrS “east”; BCa “eat aa; Be! sBBe Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt Lo! oMd@? oOr 
mT? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave WAY Fat; wPul Cat Fer;cMd CwAY Azar, Pu? mTr4mTr® way 
dear, Tj? aay Sait — d) Wa om SAAT [haplo]; Bo mTr* “Fea; Be! wCa Jm Jo! Jo? Ke 
wKt} Lo! Lo’ oM& Tj? mT? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave’ 3rta; Be? “aat: aaT 
86. Omitted in GMy. Cited by Apa 185;Laks 2.234 — a) Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt® oOr Sar ; 
1Md* @& ; Ho GT — b) oOravaafe, Ke ake wKt' atta; Ho oOraitte:; Tj! Ara: — c) 
Tj! Tr? get; Ho Gea; tMd3 Geredcy; Be? Teal WagIsT; Ho Jo? Tj! eat ust — d) cMd! 
oMd3 areecentarfer ; nNKet Pul? afta: 
Additional verse in GMd@ [Jolly Gr]: 
add usrafedt usrreargared: | 
aga dar a ad & user: | 
b) [Jolly Gr] feet — d) cM “araftr 
87. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234;Dev 2.461 — a) Ox? 4; GMd! oOr sOx! sPu® Tj! 
“aBTIAg aT —b) oMy TP “eieseafea:, Tr! eiterrtafie:; Bo “afar: — c) Tj* om @; Bo 
amqat fom a]; Hy Tatar; Pu? atc’; Tp? ware ; Ho aidtarae’; Tj! durarae’ — d) Be! Ox 
“fate, Bo Md! oOr Tj! “fearfe:; Hy “Peart 
88. In place of 88 Jm repeats verse 87. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234; Dev 2.461 — a) 
i wkt! Kt? wKt3 La! Lo? oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu? Pud Pu? Tr? after ; pBe2 Ho wKt! 
t? wKt} La! Lo? oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu Pu? Tj! TP “arent — b) Wa FERITAS, 
ne sPuo “arated; Tj? “aad; Md? “aaredt — c) My “ae Het — d) nPul “aeew ws T 
89. Padas c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234; Dev 2.461 — a) TMd* Pub 
Pu? asftas; rMd3 cMy Ox? asftfat; coMd asifary; Hy Ae; Howes; Lo? Ox? Tr! MTP 
Wa att; tMd4 Tj! Apa tr; Lot Ars; oMd! “atPrers” — b) Be? Bo Ho cMd! Pu? PuS 
Pu’ Pu? Tj! Apa a4; Lo! aod; NK Bast a; nNg ain: Wa om anaes; wKe aan: 


522 Chapter 4 


CET I Tee BAT AAT 


afirdat ta wEIHAT T Roll 
uateaedt faster aero aarathea: | 

a tat: sfereier Ser aatsRrarizer: Ue gil 
mat age gota aatat arghraaT | 
SMS Aor aqacaeAg T US Ri 


Ho wHarest: Put om waTst — c) Be! deraar W aTHIS; Be? Jo! Kt? BKé wKt® La! oM@ Tj! 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Welt; Pu? Pu? Tard; Pud FIT; Ox? Tad; Hy TAIT; Im Sarasa 
weer ; Pue Put ald raed; Ho aerate — d) cMd! Bers; wKt HES; Be! Bas; wKt! 
Het, Lo? BEA; GMd> cMy Gels; Md? Bars; Tr! Gere; Hy BAS; Pulo gags; Ho BA T 
afer’; Hy Jo! wKt! Pu Pu} Put afer; La! nPul sferyferas; Im aferarey; sOx! Tr? “aferart; 
Pu? Tj? aferay; 1M} “ada 
go.* Padas a-b except Téf omitted in Wa. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.235; Dev 2.461 — a) 
Tr ster wad? 7; sOx! sPue wEIE Apa [vl] “ag aah and "ag; TMd3 "argafer; Pu? 
“are adh; La! Pu? Pu? Pu “aster, mTrt “Ygtst [om A]; Be! Bo Lo! nNg sOx! Ox} Pu’ Pu’ 
Pu? [Jolly G] Hatt; [Jolly Nd] “FANT, Apa Polly M'253] “gate, Loe “Heer, Tj! ATS, 
BKt “aettr, wKto “qeate; Be? “gsttees; similar variants in ViDh 43.17 — b) sPu® Tart me sh 
to Wart; sOx! Aa; Tr? Sart; GMd! rMd3 GMd> GMy sOx! sPu® aes; NNg aTEATS; 
wKt} nK¢ Lo? Lo} Tr? eae; [Jolly R] UCAS; Apa MEAS [vl AeA]; Be} senstaeT, Hy 
afé; Jo! aéft — c) Bo Te aet77’; Be! Bo Ho La? Wa Dev [vl] at ate — d) oMd? ae; 
Be! Bo La? Lo! Ox? Wa Laks @ePIR® ; Tj! BEIAC ; aK Gleaea ; wKeo Steareas NK 
tMd? GM@ GMy Tr! mTr‘ BH : sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K2 wKt Lo? oM@ Pu’ Tj? mTr 
[Jolly R]Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Beas ; La! oOr SeuUH ; Ho Stearew ; Ox? Pul? 
[Jolly M!24+53)] sieure ; Dev [vl] Sadie 
91. Cited by Apa 185; Laks 2.234; Dev 2.461 —— a) MTr* mTr® wafer; GMd! tMd3 tMd4 
cMy Tr! Wa vagfacat; cMé& varfafecar; sOx! sPuo “feafe — b) sOx! sPuo arararfes:; Be! 
werates:, La! werefea: — c) Put om “ager; wKkt “ater 
Additional verse in Pu!: 
are: wert at arafar aft wea | 
SRT AES FoI PAtasHarae || 
Additional verses in La! [apparently many mistakes here]: 
aarerafer arated Pysareteereore | 
aadt seers safawaayard II 
ag famaraterreaareasrer | 
Wea Test wageatawey | 
aay are Tefae safaoet | 
vay Ter: TET TAS Temfasry |! 
92. Cited by Apa 158; Dev 2.234 — a) Lot Ox} aTaRT; Dev FET SRT, Ox) wget 
[but ¥ deleted] — b) Tj! Te aatat; Wa aatet, tM? eatabargt ; wk Md! tMd3 cM Ox? 
Tr! mTr*mTr° Dev Apa watatad; wKtS Lot Lo’ a; Lo! Pu Tr! “Part — c) cMd 
HIS. Be? Bo Ha; [Jolly G] #8t FT; Pu Pu? Pu? -¥T a; Pud Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] as — 
c-d) La! args Taye ecarhte T— d) sBe? fara ; Put om F; Lo! | 


Chapter 4 523 


TUT FAT Faas: ware: 

qat deat aaa eras aT Prez Ue Bl 
moat dear dhearyeargy: 

wat agra aif a agadtara a ell 
arava Teaver argarper aearfaker | 
presaerthie araransstasaary US 4 II 
yar FT saat gateheecents fer: 
ATIVE AT ATT Yate TIASEhyT USE 
TUTE F Fat saat ate: 
faeaeatrott ahr aarerenehary soll 
wet eet g oaifa gy fra: ded | 
aarather a aalhtr porary ATsq I< cill 


93. Omitted in Tj? — a) sBe “arderay — b) Be! pasts — c) Ho Fat; nKtt eat; Lot 
oMd5 Ox? Pud Pu? Pu? suas; Bo TT fateq; cMy TafeatSeq — d) Be? Bo nKtt La! sOx! 
Ox? nPu! Pu> sPu® Pu? Pu!® Tj! Wa Me & He; sOx! sPu® UIT; oMd? UI; Bo Lo! oOr 
amt: nKt' T Tet; BBe TF WT; Tr! eet 

94.* Omitted in Tj? — a) TMd4 dteefereara; wKt *aeaTeare;, Lal “aftrcate — b) nNg 
sOx! Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu? Tr! [Jolly G Nd] Jolly ‘aya, Wa “aya; Lo? GMd! tMd3 tMd? mTr* 
Tr “anger — c) Kt? tMd3 Pu’ Pu? Pu? 9a; La! aot; nPu! Tj! Wa ait; rMd4 ast ase; 
Td} aaret; Be} atfcer; Lal otfter 

95. Cited by Vij 1.142; Apa186; Hem 3/3.396; Dev 1.147;Madh 1.517 —- a) Pu’ ma 
aTaqeaqt; Pu? om WIS; Bo BKt> wKtS GMd! GMd GMy Hem Gis’; Lo} GetaTeat; Hy “CEI; Lo 
tMd} ar sur —b) BBe* “areeHt; Be? “arperranfafe:; La! “wrest arated — c) cMd' THs ; 
Md? GMy Tr! awe ; Be! arrat’; nKt! “ereftare; Wa “arftte, Te “erfrara; tM} oMy 

“ereftarit — d) Ho Arata Md! fait rare, ; Md? “Gereery 

96. Cited by Vij1.143; Apa 186; Dev 1.147; Madh 1.520— a) oOr Fa; sOx! Ox? Pub 
sPus Put feed g; Kt’ 7; sOx! sPuo araife, Be wear afe —c) Lo! aragy a T ge; mMd4 
oMdé Het; Lo? Pu Hraea Yay aT — d) Pud Yate; wKe! garel; Tr? wretets; Lo! werafeta:; Ho 
wearer 

97. Omitted in TMd?. Cited by Apa 187; Hem 3/3.761; Dev1.154 — a) Be! Jo* Tj' WaT 
—b) Wa “Tent, MTro earnest: Lo! Ox3 wraar; Apa faferagfe:, Be? af; wKt! afe:; 
Be! ag: — c) Put Put “cuarfi; *Md4 erat, Ox} “cafert; Tj! att — d) Be? rMd! Pu’ Dev 
Hem agraea ; Jm Jo! Kt? oMd?2 MTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Teaea ; GMy NPu! Par 
aa: oOr Ti? tearteay ; wKe aaa 

98. Omitted in sOx' nKt* sPu®; padas c-d omitted in GMd5. Cited by Apa 186; Dev 
1.148; Madh 1.520-~ a) Apa Mddh Act: Te FJ — a-b) cMd! SxiendadswersEy Paar 
fest: — b) cMy @F J; Tr? Ja J; Be? ako wKt® Frac; Tr! Tea — c) Madh ayIPT 7 t- 
BHT, Apaaagit Wet 7; Be! BBe (ma) Be? Bo BCa Jo? wKt! La! GMd! NNg Ox? Pu? Pu‘ 
Pud Pu’ Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M'?] Dev Go Ku ¢— d) ™Md3 cMy Paty rac: Te; 


524 Chapter 4 
afrererefietta + yacrrerett | 
wt frat aReredt gerefter FA: TITAT USSU 
aia fatter rer oacea ws | 
Ta Saeed Ua fast gat Taraky igooll 
perrreararsetaray asta | 
searat a gator: Kremer faery Ugo 2 
aoprashres wat rar wigeyey | 
Val AURATATATAAT AST: TTT Uo Ml 
fageatraaty Feat ways | 
WENT HATAAAAT AITAAT N20 Zi 
Tateagreaterataray IgA | 
aa Prager arate ov 


Pu2 Pu! U5; sBe? Bo sCa Ho La! Lo® Lo’ oOr nPu! Pu? T? Go ‘38 J; Ox? “we aar Tse; 
cMd! asaed; Me Ku Re support the plural Ty 

99. Omitted in Pu’; ma in Pu’. Cited by Laks 1.158; Dev 1.137; Madh 1.144 — a) Laks 
aise; Hy afer; Pu? Put afagen’; Tr afefercer — b) Laks YF — c) Ket 
Fare a [om 7]; Ho Kt? Lot Ox? ofeard; nKe gaara — d) rMd4 oReata; Hy grt 

100. b) TMd? Fret; Pu? Put TeISeS; BK SHA; Me? Tr! Saag; Md! weaege; Pu’ 
waa —c) Tj! Tr’ set; nNg FAT; wKt’ Sapa; Pul? eprqead — d) Bo fear; Be fester, 
Tr! fesit Preir 

101. sOx! sPu® transpose padas a-b and c-d. Cited by Hem 3/3.776 — a) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? 
“ser; Md) “enrftariaediar ; Pu’ “werearar’ — b) Tr! “aredtetar; 1Mdé “eta; Te? 
faadaq, wKkt! wKke festa — c) Md? GMy aseard a aeedic; Putom a... Perea 
fe? ;wKt! om J; BKO wKt® sOx! sPu® g; Pu’ 4; cMd! @atorr 

102, Padas a-b cited by Har-A 1.11.8 — a) Lo! Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tj! Tr* [Jolly GN] “are; 
nPul “arat; Lo? “erat; 1Md4 “are: BK wKtS mT? a; Be? aT — b) BBe? Be? Bo BCa Ho 
Hy wKt! wKt xKt BK wKtS La! Lo! Lot oMd@ oOr Ox} nPu! Pu2 Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? tig” — 
c) MTr?mTro td; Pu!l? tet; tMd4 Ua; Tj! asgraaea ; nKt “SATRAT ; Lo? ‘arama — d) 
Pu2 Pu “sararaeater at 9aera; mT! mT r® Gararasatora4nr: weer; wCa WISI 

103. Cited by Hem 3/3.761; Dev 1.149 — a) Tj! Raha; Lo? “aa ; Te “aay; wKe 
“atty, wKtS “ody — b) Pul? aéteprat; Hem FeTTAT, Tr? wee; BKt’ cMd! Tr! 4a — c) Ho 
Lo! we Pu? Put sPuo [but cor] Tj! Tr! aaa; wKe “Feseerr 

eae Cited by Dev 1.1491 — a) Pu* Put ater: > Tr? Wa vaPany tMd? GMy Dev 

wary; Tj! waTERTEpe Lo? “fearfrer”; Md? “fear war; wKt! “afar wat; Be? 

*arParear; Kt? oOr atferenerar; GMy om fee — b) Md? Md’ “area; Lo! ‘eparyy — 

c) Bo Lo! Pu? fae ; Md? GMy mTr® ‘erage — d) GMd5 sOx! sPuS [but cor] “3d; KP 
Wa ‘3dt; cMd! “Jat; wKt “Prat; Be} “gat; Dev [vl] ‘Taf [but Dev’s com. reads adit]; 
1d GMy gatas eat; La! Lot ary; sOx! sPuS [but cor] Tt Fa; Pu? Put a yesla; eK 
wKt® a@ert 





Chapter 4 525 


frata yr satferat arrests 
errrnrarrarerETTAT TAY to 


naeraey g 
asa: RTT: A es Neogl 


Rarer Ua eighty anty a | 
PETA gerrer T AAT: Ue ovll 
arenas ort gaeer a atrat | 

WRAY CIA AAA HAST T MQoil 
sae went w foyer feasts | 

sha: meyer wait 7 ARTAT 208M 
wterrer fect faarratfreer Saray | 

MS T BAAS Cait Tera Tay Ue Voll 


105. Cited by Apa188; Dey 1.151 — a) Pu Pu’ Pu? Pu!® frat; nNg Tr? Prate — b) 
Apa WaT, Md [but me] AIA; MT? ATTaTAT — c) Pu2 Pu’ Put sPuS Tj! warrantfes 
Lo? watearenifer nNg wena cor fh to warrants ; Lo? feat fren; wKt! Pu Pu? 
“fereret; TMd4 sOx! sPuS “Prerrear — d) wKtS “earagar’; wKt! “savant araft; Lo! 
* eararrarate 

106. Pu’ omits the section 4.106-5.37 although the page sequence in the ms. continues. 
Cited by Hem 3/3.763; Dev 1.150 — a) Ho BK wKt® GMd! 4 — b) Ho fagaaft’; Be! Be? 
Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! La! La? sOx! PuS sPuS Pu’? Pu? Tj! Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “Fret; NKt 
“Freres; Trt Prez: — c) Bo “ear — d) GMd! oMd Tr! mTr°Me [patha] Nd Ku [patha] 
art, Hy Lo* Lo? oOr Ox? Pul® ary; Tj! af; Lot Lo® wat; Im WaT; Md? GMd3 GMy feat Far 

107. Cited by Hem 3/3.770; Dev 1.161 — b) Tr? AKHT— c) tMd4 FF; Bo Ho Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? Lo’ oMd? NNg Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu? Pul® mTr3 [Jolly M3 Ku | Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
“Ager; Pu? Put fager” — d) Tj! pera; Tj? wert; cMd5 oOr Hem “WAY Aaa: BK A 
wKt® tMd! Dev Hem W4c:; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd Tj? Tr? mTr? Mandlik KSS Aaar 

108, Omitted in oOr. Cited by Dev 1.162 — a) TMd4 arte, Be? wKt! nKt4 Lo? Lo? 
cMd! +Md3 GMd GMy NNg Ox? Pu3 Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® Wasterarete; Lo! “aad; Hy 2; 
wKt® “a — b) Lo? a7weq; Tr! “wen; Lo’ afar — c) nK tt area; Wa aera; cMy 
sOx! sPuo eat; Lo CSA; Pu’ FAA; NK TATATA; Lo’ sreary, Lo! areata — d) Tj? 
ayaa; Lo! Lo’ aHaaa OA; La! TAeMAT; BK wKt® Lo! g 

109. Cited by Hem 3/3.773; Dev 1.163 — a) Me [patha] 3¢Z; Be? Ho Lo! areRTs; La! 
nPul are&erd; Tj! avers; Ox? Pul? rarer; eK wKktS Hey FT; Tr? Hem “eat; xPul 
“wa FT — b) La! Fapitent wa a; wKt! sOx! Ox? sPus [cor to] Pu? Rape a Prasat 
[sOx! sP u® (cor to) Sart; wKt} nKtt Lo? nNg Tr Tr? Tr faogy wT “frasfirt [Lo? 
foastay], Tr! “Re; nktt “aa; NNg mTré mT r° a]; Hem faut aftastia, Md‘ oOr fener 
wf [oOr Fa]; aK 6 “aera f°; wKtS Prasist — c) Dev aRecea’; Putom War... 
fardad Bo nKt La! Lo? nNg Ox3 xPu! Pu? Pu “pha; Md? “Sa; Tj? “WT; Lo? Wa 
“wae, Hem “at gy — d) oOr aay 

110. Cited by Vij 1.146,190; Apa i190; Hem 3/3.756, Dev 1.153 — a) La! “Ter, Hy fut; 


526 Chapter 4 


qraeergeeer wer aarer frosts | 
famer fagut ae avagar + atdaet 22 eI 
Wat: Wearga Fear Daraaerarz | 
areata SeAT AaHTATIAT T UL YAM 
Ae ane a aeaaita are: 


THAT: TOTES T Me 2 Bll 
aarareart we afer Rrer fer aadatt | 
Tae TATA: aac he evi 
aigadt far ae wrrafaed wea | 

TRS Tea Temt wa WSe feo: Ue gull 


oMd f&¥; Bo fares; Ho faarser — b) Pu? Pu’ Jha Dave afer; Pu? Put “fener 
aq bat [Pu2 om FT]; wKt® Seat:; Lot Lo’ [but cor] Has — c) Pu? Put SIAASTSeFST; Ox? 
Hea att — d) Hem BATT TAH, Ho Tees 

11. Cited by Apa 190; Har-A 1.10.28; Hem 3/3.756 — a) Tr? veplfecer aad; nPul 
Pu? Put Tj? “aaate ; La! “aaprafe” Tj! “aarate ; Hem sartercerdt Wey, nKt! *afereeer — 
b) sOx! sPuo TT; BBe? Be? Tj! SU WIT; Lo? SAT TereT;qcMd> Tr! mTr4 [Volly Gr] Set 
STI; cMd! Seas FT; TMd‘ mT ro SVT TT; NK! Serves, Be! me to ferad; sPu® [but 
cor] fafgract — c) Lo® ferefagut; Lo* femeer fear, rMd? oMy sferer fagur; Ho fagt; Pw 
Pu’ Pu? fagrer; mT? Tro #-— d) Be} aTagel; wKO Tr? aragerr at 

112, Cited by Vij 1.151; Hem 3/3.772; Dev 1.162 — a) Ho araht:; Bo Lot Tj! ws — b) 
tMd? GMd GMy Tr! mTr* mTr® TeaT; TM? Jere ; Ox} dara: mT} Sa AT afaTaT; Lot Lo? 
aarafaferat; Bo Jo? GMy Pu! Tj! “afeeray; Be! “afean; Hy ‘Reaeent; Md! afeert: wKt! 
“arfeeraat: Ox} “arfeeray: Lo? “afr: nK¢tt “afar: Md “afitas — c) Lo# Lo® areftarar’ ; Ho 
arefizar ; Tj! arétat Ho eat — d) sOx! sPu® afer ; Hy qa ; BBe? qa; 
Lot sPuo Tj! ar 

113. Cited by Dev 1.159; padas a-b cited by Hem 3/3.769 — a) Lo® atete; nPul arfer’ ; 
BBe* Bo BCa Jm Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? BKe wKté Lo! Lo JIMd cMd* aMy sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® 
Pu!® Mandlik Jha KSS Dave a; Tj! ava; mTr6 3Ter MTr4 are —_ b) GoM d! tMd3 rMd4 
oMy mTr° Hem Dev terarewar—tt — c) Be! sOx! aaTaear; GMd! oOr “ager — d) BKt> 
NNg Uo; Lo? Bi; Be! wKt! Lot Md? cMd? oOr Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? “area ; BCa BK wKt® 
“rexty 

114. Cited by Hem 3/3.755; Dev 1.152 — a) cMd! serefadterarfe, Hy 1Md3 amtrarear 
—e) lod HETEAT Tr! Hem were: BK Lo? sOx! sPuo weITeaeT:; Ox? werrett; Pul? 
Tarra, Jo? “gférerett; Lo} “qurared, BkKt wKt? nNNg “geharere; Lo? sOx' nPu! Pu? Pu4 
sPu® [cor to] Tj! ATE; Ho La! yMd! Ox? Pu! “aremg; Tr “area; MT 1S HTT; NK EE ATER; 
1Md? oMy Tr! aret — d) tMd4 aster 

15. Cited by Dev 1.163; pada-a cited by Apa 191 — a) BBe Be? BCa Ho wkt! Kt? nKt* 
BKtS wKt® Lo? Lot oMd? oOr xPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu’ Pu! Jolly TY; Ox? TE ; NK ae. TM? 
“att a fexaré; Tr! fear — b) *Md4 atergheaaar; cMd! sOx! sPus aTATghsed; Md? GMy 
TraTefaed; Be! fara; wKe “shee; oMd? “yet — c) Lo? Pud Pu’ om a; BKt> wKtS areiee 


Chapter 4 527 


arefeter SARA DTA Tats FT ar | 
afacat Ayer ara: ofa wferrer aw Ne 2g ll 
mfr ar ate amnftr afeRrantae wad | 
aerate: aaa FE Fast: SrA: Ue evil 
STG HT eet aE | 


watery freancerargay T Ne ecil 
soaTeahr arent Breese aor Ba I 


Weay aerrayqcaay TUT ue 2a 
areftehtareraredt T get 7 a ehkary | 


aaa a ae are ARoewt FT are: Noll 


[BKt> ma *]; TMd3 GMy “& faeafe; Bo vad; Be} 1Md4 Ox? Pu’ [me to] Tr! Tr? afer; nPul 
Tj! ofefe; Pul? aafe — d) wKt} Gee; nKtt Ox? THAT; Lo TERI; oMd? TT; Ox} om TT 
.. feor; BK wKtS aaq; Ho TafeT: 

116. Pu? transposes padas a-b and c-d. Cited by Hem 3/3.771; Dev 1.160 — a) GMy 
arta, Lot areffara — b) pCa wKt® Hem Wrastsft JT; Be! Jo? La! Lo} oMd? tTMd? tMd4 
GMd GMy oOr Pu? Put Tr! mTr4 MTr® Wa Polly R] Wat TaT— c) Lo! arferear; Md4 aferear 
-—~ d) Ho 9g; oOr Wheres [om A]; Lot Lo? Pu!® [Jolly M] ar 

u17. Omitted in Ox}. Cited by Hem 3/3.757 — a) Pul? Tr oreft at — c) wKtS aes 
greta, cMy cae; wKt! aeeer; GMd! aareear” — d) Hem aren: fF feo: BaT:; Ho 
qearay; Pus Pu? Wearat; Md! Wears; oOr Wea; Tr! grearenfS; La! seararfe; cMd > great- 
wer fear; BK wKtS om fe; mTr4 fBs: 

u8. Cited by Apa 188, Hem 3/3.762; Dev 1.150; Madh 1.148 — a) oOr weet 
Lo! at ge @ OM 7; Lo} GMd! tMd3 GMd> oMy ae; Tj! av. La! atgifgd; BBe Tr! 

"wIET, Hem saga; Md‘ NNg ‘Iga; TMd? “STIG; Ox? Pud Pu 33t — b) cMd! fw; Hy 

- Hem #3; Ho Lo? Ox} Volly M'2 R] Madh a ; oMd “area; wKt! afta c) 
nPul Tj! Tr aerfee ; wKt! septa; Lo! aranfeara — d) Be? Hem fara; Tr? mTr® 
“araigay; Madh “rat ge aat 

119. Padas c-d omitted in GMd!. Cited by Hem 3/3.760-1; Dev 1.154 — a) Lo! Ox? 
sreatr — b) Jm Jo! Kt? mTr3 Mandlik Jha Dave &T;GMy Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] ferret; La! 
sTatr — c) mT 6 “afeey® — d) Pu? Put “erepedarg; BKtS wKt® “Yay; Be! Bo TMd? cMd 
NNg Fey; Md? “aR; cMy “RTT, Ho arg Raeey 

120. Cited by Hem 3/3.772; Dev 1.162 — a) GMy oOr ateferat ; La! arefrapaaaredy; Ho 
arftapaaaredl; nKt “S6T; BBe? [but cor| Hy “wet; Pus “SS — b) Pu? Tj) oA; MTr§ 7 T— 
c) Tj! ae Ate; cGMd! wae ZT; Md Get TF; Tr! @areet; wks Sr — d) mTr§ AP: Ox? 
Puld aft’; wKto af”; BBe? arent; Tj! wea; Tr [but cor fh] ad; cMd! arr: 

Additional verse in La!: 

getat F at arat afeeit atereefer | 
deat TeeCaTAT Vs were: | 
agartatraart ar gar epeaqdr aegy | 

at mrafret feeare yorst Preagerq] | 


528 Chapter 4 


a faate 7 eae T VATA T ATT | 

qT YMA asi a afta aT Gs 222M 
Say aayaTeT Ared ake aT wT | 
ereat Tad maser T TTT NER RMI 


arrearage areata warre | 
aqearefter areararareqarefter 7 22311 


aay aaqcacar ayaa arya: | 

amag: wa: Perakath: evil 
Uda Raweriftreartrary | 

PAT: TANT TaTssAeTg UP Val 


g) La! aT 44 and omits rest; the two verses are versions of BDh 4.1.18 20. 

121, Padas a-b omitted in mTr‘. Cited by Hem3/3.773; Dev 1.163 — a) Lalom= feare; 
Tj! wate; wKt} Lo! Pu Pu? [Jolly G] faaré, La! mae — b) Be! Aarat 7 T WN; Be’ wKt3 
BKtS wKt® La! oOr [but me fh] Sarat; La! om second +— c) Md? YATATS; Lo? “ATIUTSATT, 
oOr Tse; mTr® aTesteh— d) wkt! + wT fear + BH; wKe} Bens; Be! Yous; Be’ Bo Ho K? 
BKt wKt® Lo! tMd‘ xPu! Pu? Pu} Pu‘ sPu Tj! [Jolly R] Dev ae; Jo! Fara; Lo? Ox? MTr3 
ade; sOx! Yaar mc to FHRA; Lot Lo® Ox? Lolly M Me] Fwew; Pud Pu? aH; [Jolly G] 
qt 3 

122. Cited by Hem 3/3.774; Dev 1.164 — a) Tr! afaferarry ; wKt® Lo! Lot Pud Tj! 
arg; oM@é mTré Tr arg; Ho BRAGS; La! srerargarcar; wKe Pul? areagqa4rer, Yolly 
M] areasarrer — b) cMd! ared arferarfer 7; Lo? +Md3 GMd> GMy wNg sOx! Ox? Pu} sPu® 
Pud Pu? Pu Tr! mTr4 mTr°Hem ated afearate [Lo? Hedt; cMd5 sOx! sPuS Hem arfer J; 
TMd! oOr nPu! Heck atferareafa; Lot aretrearafy agar; Lo! Hed; Bo afer aT; NK e Tr? arfer 
at af; Lodargar — c) cMd! ofr |e APT WEI, TM? BTQATAT BEAT: BBe? Be? wKt} 
nKt* wKt® Lo* Lo’ oOr Ox? Pu’ Pu? 4; Tr! 4d; Be? Ho WH TEA; NKt! Lot Lo’ wT 
seat; Im Ox? WaT eT — c-d) Ox? Pu? Pue sesor FT aa ars ofat 7 afer; Be} at 
aero — d) Ox} Pu!® “sarettr; Lot “safer; Lo’ “safest; Ho Lod “Sor ofa; BBe? “Stor 
offer; oOr om 7; nPu! Pud Pu? afefered; Hy Teeter; Ox? Pu’ oRexer 

123,* Cited by Dev 1.160; padas a-b cited by Hem 3/3.768 — a) Tj! eataTyer; aKtS 
wKt® Lot GMd! GMd> Ox} “eat sey aKt> wKt6 mTr4 ear ae [wKt® are J; Lo? tMd? 
“erat Ue: Lo? Kt! “at; Lo? Fat, Dev “aft; 1™d3 “aT; Tr! “gar — b) sOx! arefier; La! 
arta — c) Tr! aefter aeetaraar [aveaar?]; Lo! Fe weiter; aks wKt® Aqeaels; oMd! 
deemeter; sOx! sPuo deaenrefter; nPul “eftadterraar; Im Jo! Kt? aKt> wKt oMd? Tj? 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave A747 ; Be! Ca Hy wKt! GMd! tMd? tMd‘ GMé@ GMy nNg 
oOr MTr4 mTrSdareaar ; Put Saiaar; Pu2 Ssaraiaayr [cor to autaar |wKe! 3 UAT ; Lo! 
argtaar ; Lo’ argiht arey” — d) Md‘ nNg “HTeenrefter 

124. Cited by Dev 1.160 — a) BKt) ®t; wKtS oOr 242; Be? NKt! Lo? tMd3 TMd4 
oMy wNg Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Pu! Tj! Tr! Tre? “eaeit; Lo! earer— b) Be} Lo? Tj! Wa “Fa2r; oMd? 
Arta: — c) TMd4 ey; Pu ase. sOx! sPuo Ug: aear ; tMd? tMdé fer TERT 

125. a) GMd! +Md3 tMd4 GMy wefefecar,; cMd Tr! ud fafecat: Te wafeereir; Bo 





Chapter 4 529 


TQATEHATACATAIATEOTG IT: | 
sera fares U2 AEM 
aad aah waa: | 


CARAT ASAT ATT FAT: UY Ql 
wae a ata agésttry | 
wat wafrerreqat carat fat: Ug RAcil 


qT SUA ge Age FT Aer | 
a aah: aera arftara Terry We 2a 
FaATAT TT UH: SAHARA | 
TRAST PSAT TMT seater T Ue Zol 


waged; tMd? fagtaradty? — - c) Jm Jo! K? mTr5 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave #A:; Put 4; 
TMd4 gata’; Be aa; NKeé AMET; Pu! “HATET; Lod “Ferer 

126. Omitted i in Lo?. Cited by Hem 3/3.767; Dev 1.158 — a) La! TATA CATER Ho ay 
mogar ATaTe; Lo! gadawarsit ; TMd4 MTS ATs — b) nKe “ae; cMd Pu? Put Tr! 
mTr* Dev “aepentehr:; Ho "arte: Pul? “TESTA: tMd3 cMy wT Volly Gr] 7eeT- 
fag; cMd! “TET =| — c) wKt! Pu? Hem fare ; sOx! sPuo faa; cMd! wate” — d) nKe 
“aera; Wa aearareteyat 

127. Padas b-d omitted in Tr'. Cited by Vis'1.145; Apa 193 — a)tTMd? oOr asta: wT 
aedafe — b) Md! Tj? “earat; Tr? “eareit — c) Tj! ayer; wKt} aeeTeast — d) TM} 
afarest:; sBe? waphea feu: 

128. Omitted in Ho; ma in La!; padas a-c omitted in Tr'; padas a-b ma in Bo. Cited by 
Vij 1.79, Apa 103; Hem 3/3.724; Madh 1.498 — a) nPu! Pu? Pu Pu? Pu’ Tr? Madh sATaTen- 
cent aa [Tr Madh “et; Tj! arent ZJaTATeM fom A]; Lo! sATaeaT — b) nNg & gut: BBe? 
Afirat ag’: wKkt! “araff; oMd! “arert; Hy Tr? wadatt — d) Tr! “appa; wKt! anit: cMy 

“cad; Md? ar BAretenT 
Additional verse in Tr? Mandlik KSS Dave; commented by Re: 
Teyeat Saas TEs | 
acta 7 ae are wr ge || 

129. Cited by Apa i135; Laks 3.35, Hem 3/2.857 3/3.707 — a) Bo * ARAL ET; Lo® Tr! 
“gar; Lot “Sa — b) Put om CR TRT ... [129¢] wer; oOr Aare; Tr? om 7; wKt? TMd3 ATHET ; 
Tr aAtfRr, Ox “Rar; oOr “Prt — c) NNg [bur cor fh] nPu! arent]; rMd4 aTerRre; Laks 
“aR use; Ho FeRre — d) Lot Tre arfeard; Wa aTfearay; Be! mTr4 a feed; tM? + 
faa 

130. Cited by Vij 1.152; Apa 193; Laks 2.372, M@dh 1.522 — a)1Md? sOx! sPuS at, 
Laks TAaeT:; Tj! Wat; NK tat — b) sOx! Sraawardaieaar, nK ¢ rare; Laks 
“ardatermt; Madh “ateqat; oOr “BTA — c) cGMd! + HAST TEMS [broken] TFT; wKt! 
wKto ae; NKt! THA; wKt® GMd> “Gora; Tr! Heneasat; Pu? Put “Hees; Md? 
oMy Heearg — d) Laks @ftoer wT aT; Pus THVT; GMy TAH; Tr ay, Tj! Tye; wKt! 
aeul, wkt Boer A; KO ae 

Laks 2.372 adds a verse immediately after his citation of 130 clearly ascribing it to 


530 Chapter 4 


eases Tare yer a afr | 
RAUNCIMAT T IAT ATUMT 12 3 Vil 
sadarres faa THAT T | 
amfrearrarntt aes BAT: ZAM 
after area wert ar afer: | 

sete aeet oo orete a ative ie 3 all 
aT stagger wre farerer ferret | 

ara Fouts arartTaaay lle Bl 
ater ta at a gat uw agyaa | 
aaa F yoy: FaTAhY Say lle Bull 
wad aa f ger Prdeeraaraz | 
aerated aa rer ararerr gfearsr ile Ell 


Manu: 
et g aatrarat eter ofeadat az | 
aneroad feafger Per tenfacst wT II 

131. Cited by Apa 193; Hem 3/3.699; Laks 2.373 — a) Apa FAR T wat 3; Tr! erat 
7; wkt} J; Be BktS wKt® Tj! Lolly M'--°]aT — b) Hy ate; Bo Jm Lo* Lo® Tr! YT; NNg 
TF; Be? Tj! Laks [Jolly G] q; Pu? Put atftray — c) mT? “waPea — d) BK) NNg FAT; 
wKto daa; Tr? wqordt, Put Put aqua 

132.* Pada-d omitted in Lo*. Cited by Vij 1.152; Apa 183— a) Be! Bo wKt! Lo! Lot Ox? 
“aa, Pus HIRATA NKtt oOr “AAT; GMd! Saafterst; Pud “AHOeTAT; TMA 
“aATETa; Lo? ST; Apa Bt — b) TMd? GMy tat Fraysse aT; Apa Wh [vl eh] feasts 
a; Be? wKt! oMd? GM NNg Tr! mTr? faut; Lot Tj! feo — c) Pul? oerTPtercarahy, 
BBe* Ho "Prac ; Wa “Pere ; nK¢ fran ; wKto “Pieper: Ox? ‘facétaaratht — d) Be! Ho 
wKt} Lo4 Lo’ oOr Ox? nPu! Pul? Tj! Tr? Yolly M] Vij fasa; Be Bo Jo? La! La? Lo! Lo? 
Ox? Pu? Pu} Pu! Pus “ferdfz; sBe Hy Jm Jo! Kt cMd! oM@ Md? oMy sOx! sPuo Tj? [Jolly 
Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave faaq 

133. Ho transposes verses 133 and 134; pada-d ma in Lo*. Cited by Apa 194;Madh 1.522 
— a) Lot Pu aftut; rMd3 ateaeta; Lo? ta Fae; Be? Tj! ATafecsat — b) Lal + Bera 
afettr:; Be’ aeret; Pul? aera: wk} aeraraa; Lo! T7? Apateraa; BKé wkt after; GMd! 
atfter:; cMy fafeer — c-d) Be Fa Tet I— d) Be! Ho cMd? g; Tj? afar: 

134. a) Bo NNg sPu® [but me sh Aer ; Be! me to digean’ BKe Aree — b) sBe 
wKt® La! tMd} cMy nPu! Refs; Be} fefirg — d) cMd! “araPraast; Hy “saat 

135. Cited by Apa 194;Laks 2.397; Madh1.522 — a) BKD wk afer porat a; mTr6 
wet; wKe Tr? araaa, oMd? ta Prat, Tr? eter; Pu? Put faw 7, GMd> | — b) oOr Tr! 

Tet — c) Lod Aaa; OMA? “Aer aAy:; Pu? A YOY:; Put at yoy:; Laks F Ee — d) Ho 
parry 

136. Cited by Apa 194; Laks 2.397 —~ a) Apa Jeurt — b) Tj! Preéeetaaihia; Pu? Pu‘ 
Fresca; aCa cMd! Féeeaartra; Jo? Lo? Aéecauard; wkt Adeeaaere, Wa 





Wr; 


Chapter 4 531 


TATA Ta aTERT: | 
aT Feat: Preaersaat aett THAT U2 Bll 


at qaq Ber gary Fara | 
Per a ara Garay at: SATA: UL BCI 
we vehi gaara at aq | 
ganar frase a at gaiceafereae tle 38 il 
atteeet atieart atfeaeafes fee | 
AMAT TT TSAR T TW: AE Uevoll 
fergrafaragr Fardtarcaaskrary | 
eugfandtiara arfedtarar arherag ee etl 


a agate fast wearers | 
a aft wag: eet snferter fer newt 


Preanercaaaitd; sBe? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} Md? GMd> GMy Pu? Tj? Tr mTr? mTr4 
mTr° [Jolly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave R&8eaaT’, Lot Prégercuaar’; +Md* “atPra:, Ho 
oMdS “att — c) oMd! aendarsradd; 1Md4 aeHTeaHae; Laks THAT; MT! mTr8 
aenz’; Bo La! cearta 7E— d) Lot HAT T RTT 

137. ma in Be? Pu’. Cited by Laks 2.397; Madh 1.522; padas a-b cited by Apaig4 — a) 
Pu2 Put arent areata; Tr wa -—— b) Tj! Te gatocrafahr:, Pul? qatfer’; rMd* 

*wafexhr: — c) Lot cMd! Tr? mT srgeit:; Ho GM? NNg Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G Nd] Pranreng® 

— d) Md} Laks “PawRat; oOr “Pawset; Be! Pawar; iMd4 “Paesaat; Im “Presa; 
Lot aalgq FST; La! Feet; BKO wKt> Pul? mTr* sf; Md’ sfsat; TMd? ESuTA; Tj! 
gaat 


138. ma in Be?. Cited by Apa 163; Dev 1.14; padas a-b cited by Dev 3.49 — a) Hy 
garter — a-b) Tj? om gata — c)TMd? GMy 4; Lot Ox? [Jolly M] aT; Be® Tj! qd; Ke aye 

139. Padas a-b ma in Be — a) GMd’ Ha Bsa FA; wkKe FT u% -—— b) BKtS wKt® 
AMS | PATI; oOr Fresfer aT; Pu? Put wae; Be! Be Bo Ho cMd! 1Md} GMy NnNg 
Tj! Tr! Te? avaaq; Pul avaeq; Lot araaeet — c) cMd® Yeh; Lot Jewat, rMd4 YT Ay; Lo® 
ferata; Tr fearaie — d) 1Md* “Preear 

140. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 173; Madh 1.522 — a) Lo 1Md? rMd* NNg Ox} Pu!? 
Tr! [Jolly M!-9 Me NJApa “pred; Pu’ Pul aer; Be! Lo! Tj! “wer; pCa nKt Tj! “art; Lo! 
“aret — b) TMd* Madh “mere TY, Tr! “fet Tat; wKt! sOx! “fet TAT; Lo! “fet ae: — c) 
Apa Paee a Hrs; Tr} > aay; cMd! St; Lo! weaasyT — d) wKt’ wKt® “Aas; TMd4 
“Sepr, Tr! greb:; Madh TS: 

141.* Cited by Apa194; Madh 1.522 — a) mTr‘4 MTr® Peg — b) TMd3 “rar war’; 
Be? BBe Bo wKt! nKtt BKt) wKt® La? Lo? Lo* Lo® oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pul® Tj! Wa Lolly 
M N] Apa Me Na Dave Jha Arar; NNg “APTA — c) Jm Jo! Kt? mTr3 Nd 
Mandlik KSS sageatadara, Tj? Sasaer7aMd? ease; Lo! “gfauir; Tr! “taper — d) 
Be} Ho Tj! aeaarqursatad; Put om sifedarer; oMd? “eratar; Lo! Put + ftq 

142* a) TMd3 “aftr La! Tr! “Reaté — b) Lo! sOx! Pub sPu® Pu? fay; oMy °areraiy- 


532 Chapter 4 


arearg rarer: {| 
Trarfr da aathtr ahr arftrasat FT eval 
age: cater arte a eqatatatreaa: | 
Tah a treater watery fratIq evil 
agorangw: ear seratent refer: | 
wre ygareda frerafiaatra: lleva 
AForagmal Her T TATA | 

WATat Gaat ae fafa a ferere lieve 
qaqa Toe aaraeresaaterct: | 

at Fee: We atqreabser sears lle vl 


Aart; Md? “Aad; Be? “Prart — c) Put fd arf; Tj! atfY; GMd! Md? cMy aAT — d) Be? 
Ho Tj! ‘afaetar eit°: rMd4 @err; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo* Lo’ oMd? Pu? Put Tj? mTr? 
Mandlik KSS Jolly Fa; sOx! sPu’ safertay, Tj! F pCa Jm Jo! Md} tMd4 sanfertarr: 
Hy Lo! Kt? GMd! GMd> GMy Tj? Tr! mTr4 mTr° [Jolly Ku Nd]Ku Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
safertonfate, wKe! sarfercazcntrafer 

143, Cited by Vij 1.155; Apa 231 — a) Tr! eran; Vij area BBe? wKt® tMd4 ea ; . 
Lo’ eertat; cMd> gear; Be! gear; NNg Apa eatery ; Pus Pu? “araafr ; Lot 
“afatier ; iMd? “gta rer — b) Apa [vl] Tega — c) Lo? arafr; Lot aaift — d) Put 
om TRY ofr, cMd! oftraey 7 then adds TA; BKE wKt® oOr FT; Ho oMd? + 

144.* a) sPu® cor to SARA; OME saTeer:; Tr! arearhy; Md4 carafe; Pul? om arty; 
+Md? @ifer— b) Be! egarafiraa: — c) Pu® Tr? om FT; Lot aT; wKtS weenftr; cMy Breearty; 
Tr? ase; Dave tee — d)nKt oMe@? aatete TF asta; GMA Tr! MT r4 Tro Taeaanhey 
asia; sOx! sPuo aatfer oRashac; wke! aarhr 7; M3 wateta; Pus Frere; nPul ferastay 

145. Cited by Apa 229 — a) BKtS wKtS “Gene FT — b) Pu? Pus Prrareat; Wa aafraa: 
— d) oMe? “=tarParaiaatad:; sNg Te Prerreaaad:; nKtt Ke wKkts Preasteraterc:; 

Wa framatac:; Apa fahrardt + feed [cf 4.146d]; wKe “axe; Ox? “faPec:; Tj! afd: 


a “cifeadt: 
Additional verse in TMd3 GM@ Tr!: 
gat aeat ta Terenty Maary | 
Ray ade ay AFT wae | 


b) TMd? ata — c) Mad? fray; cM fay; Ma} ery 

146. Omitted in GMy — a) Pu “ET — b) Be? Tj! Prarareqat — c) La! saTy eT; 
Lot da 

147. Padas a-b omitted in GMy and padas c-d in TMd’. Cited by Apa 69, 229;Laks 3.94; 
Dev 2.499 — a) BCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd2 Tj? mTr3 Dev Mandlik KSS tehareva ey; nKt! 
aafsar, La! aererag — b) wKt! nKtt sOx! sPu® [me sh to] TaTETAy ; BK wKtS “area: — 
c) Apa [vl] ¢ @ ; Md? 7 ZT; Lo! ge ; Be? Ho Jo? Lo? Tj! Wa Volly R] TAaTE:; sOx! sPue 
Te aneng:; Tr! egy; Tr? wat st — d) Be! etaaerif; Lo! “ef werd — Hy repeats 
this verse with the following changes: a) TUT; c) TAaTE: 


Chapter 4 533 


aera Bad West aT 7 | 

sae a yaTat aifa eaefa atfaty uci 
aaat dersatd gaara feo: 

TAIRA TAA FARIA Uv SA 
alansahaerata eatery fren: | 
frgtareanatearareay T Ney oll 
UGTA UTA TTT | 

SRowermt free a gids AAMT N24 Vl 
BT TA ATT FRAT | 

wate va Edler Faarat aT TTT N24 Rll 


148. Omitted in Md‘. Cited by Apa 229; Dev 2.499-— b) MTr! MTr® Wert at; oOr Tj! 
areas, Jo2f — c) wKt® Lot GMd@ Ox} Pu2 Pué Pud Pu? Pul? Tr! mTr4 Jolly Polly M G Nd] 
agete; oOr age ta — d) Tr! safe; Lo’ Hea; Be! wKt} GMd5 GMy Tr! Tdast; Ho Tet; 
Ke afatas, mTr® gferaet; Pu’ Pu’ (Jolly G] after 

149.* Padas a-b omitted in TMd‘*. Cited by Apa 229; Laks 3.94; Dev 2.500 — a) Laks 
wearer Gast sft; Md? GMd oMy Tr! mTr4 mTreeredtaat smfe [oMd 5 Tr! “atdast]; 
Be! atest; Pu’ fleet; Pus Jolly G] gat; Tr? areot oH; Bo Lo’ Hares — b) Tr? water 
aay: wks sataraead; Lot aétarerere; Jm wKt? Lot Lo’ cMd! 1Md? cMd> GMy sOx! 
Ox? Ox} sPus Pu’ Pu!? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “2722; Be! nKt! Lo? cMd! Tr! “sreter; 
utr! MTro eater; Hy Tea; Bo aa; sBBe Be? sCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! KP wKt BKé 
wKt® Lo! Lo? oMd? NNg oOrsOx! nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly G R Ku] Apa 
Mandlik Jolly KSS J. —c) Pu Pu’ a1@IT ; Bo “sate; Tr! “sTaaaoran’; Lot asrerr’; Laks 
ante; sOx! sPue HATHA — c- d) Apa TATA WTA HOw — d) Wa “at 
FoI; Lo} “a& FarTTH AT, Be? BCa Lo? Lot Ox NPul Pu’ Pu!? shi [Jolly M N} 

“BATRA, 0Or BATT; Ox? “aaa, Lo! “aHTATE ; nNg SARIS ; Tj! * aaa 
Wea ; Bo wage 

150. Cited by Apa 229 — a) wKt! wKt3 afasar . mTroenfase anf; rMd? GMd5 GMy 
Tr! Nd [Jolly Nd N] arfasar afer; wKt4 arfeat anfea ; Tj! arfest ana’; tMadé arfatt 
afer ; Apa afaaateael ; Ox? aimatiet ; Be? “errr, 1d! “ea — b) Lo! earetgy — 
c) Apa Weary fraaaer ; nKt “operate”; Tj! “cere: we Prem’; BKt wKt® Lot Lo 

aa — d) GMd! om Ray 

151. wKt! places padas 153a-b after 151a-b. Cited by Deva. -2373 Madh 1.211 — a) Lo? 
“sara; Tj! “war, wKto “wearer — b) Jo? Lo? Wa Bt aT ; GMd5 GMy NNg Tr! mTr* 
mTr® Sard wKt! aaa, 1d atta: Ho qaat — c) Pu! aRsers; Lo! stacert; Jo! 

Kt? La! Lo? GMy Pu Pu’ Tj! Tr! mTr? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “raPttas, mTrS° cero 
dar, Jm “eS aah tar: Na gloss sRerermer Pras cIPAT assumes a Tatpurusa compound — 
d) Be! Feast 

152. Padas c-d omitted in tMd4 — a) 1Md3 45; Tj! Wawrar; Tj? WA, GMd! Ba — b) 
tMd? GMd@ cMd! GMy Tr! Saas eee — c) La! alee; Jo! gate Bafa [om va] — 
d) HoT yea 


534 Chapter 4 


taaraRersy afters fEerars | 
fat Aa wart Feat T dT NGM 
arargagaray Taredarert Tray | 
FASA eat Test: Torts taard ueevi 
afrergiat wag fag ay aig | 
antes fraad aararetatearad: UK 
ATINTAT TAMIR AAT: TST: | 
AINA AAAAATAR SAAT ULE SI 
geraet f geet ate wate fata: 
Zant a aad arkratseargrg T Ue 4 ll 
aaa HY BT: AATAATAT: 

ATA ATTA Te TATher shaker U4 


153. Not commented by Me;omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Apa 127 — a) Pu? 
Pu? daar afirredarh’; wKtS GMd! sOx! sPuS frag; nPul aaah’ ; GMd> aaah; 
wKt! Pu2 Pu4 Apa fared; 1tMd} GMy “spadeT; GMd! oOr nPu! “see; TMd4 “aah” 
— b) Lo! oMd? cMd) enfirmieg; Te afters a — c) Tr? Saeda; Apa [vl] 27 — d) wKt® 
oMd! w aay; nPu! & Adar 

154. Not commented by Me Nd; omitted in Lot Lo® Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Apa 229 — a) 
Td afta Far; oMd! arava faux; Tr? “arapr gater; Be! nPu! Tr! [Jolly Nd] 
“ae Gaha, nKe aTEAT TErL; wKtS Md? NNg “aver Fara; Ho “AaTaaT Far; Lo! Pu’ 
Pu’ [Jolly G] aTeter FET; Bo Jo? Lo? Lo? sOx! Pu} sPu’ Pu’ Apa [Jolly R] “are Tara, 
Wa “arafagaha, Be} sOx! sPué “are — b) cMd! qeareer@earet; Pu’ Pu’ gear aT ; Lo! 
qaredat ; Pu’ “araa; TMd3 GMy areaifeay — c) nPu! “fesqureter — d) rMa3 reset; Md! 
més: wKe Testers; wKt! Lo? Tj! Te “Aare; cM Tr! TTT 

155. Not commented by Me Rc; omitted in Lo+ Lo? Ox} Pu!®; ma in Pu’. In GMy the 
page containing verses 155-164 is missing —- a) Tj! ary ; wKke? “fea, wKt! Md3 “fer 
at; GMd! Tr! “fee aay — b) Tr! Prag; rMd4 Prat — c) rMd4 aes — c-d) Lo! werae 
frida eyeratea: — d) Hy “afera:; Lo? “aes: 

156. Not commented by Nd; omitted i in nKt Lo’ Lo® Ox} Pul®, Cited by Apa 231 — a) 
oMd! +Md4 cMd> “Sze; Wa War ; Lo? erg — b) Jo? Lo? Pu’ Wa [Jolly G R] Jolly 
“Rerat gat— c) wKt! aranigesst — d) Bo steer; Md‘ erqeer 

Additional verse in Tr!: 

AAR SUIPAUMATIAIPsIrrrd | 
AAI Ble AIT aa | 

157. Not commented by Me Nd; omitted in NKtt Lo* Lo® Ox3 Pu!®. Cited by Apa 231 — 
a) Pu? Put geraRt; Lo? oOr Volly R] “arate — b) Pub aféa:— d) Pud omrferat 

158. Not commented by Me Nd Rc; omitted in NKt' Lo* Lo® Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Apa 231 
— a) Ho wae? aac — b) Bo wKt® rMd? GMd> nNg wPu! Pu? Pud Tj! Tr! mTr* mTr 
ayeraeataz:; Md? Pud Pu’ Go FRPTMIRATAR:; Apa Aa aTITRATA:, GMd! FAaraaaz:; Tr? 


Chapter 4 535 


TIAA BT AAITaAT IAT | 

Gaara FETT AMAT AAT: USK 
ad Waa sa aaa Faq | 
TAA TAM FAT-aaT: Ug gol 

qe Edaser eae aftatatsearars: | 
aerarat eet frodta 7 actrees 21 
arart aw sare frat arat yeT | 

a ffergermry wer wattle afta: 2 Ri 
aaa aqrat a aaa aw Eearay | 

aa CAAT TAT a mle Ae TAT 12 Bll 
wet qe ated Hal At Provaaa | 
wart gars Rrerf ararg dt eget 


WAATAATAR: [all the above omit 4]; Ox? [but cor] Pu? om T:; Be! Teaet ; sOx! sPus a 
War: Jolly RIS: Berane’; Ox? a: aa’ — c) Tr? “AEA; Pus Pu’ “yee — d) Md! 
oOr 2; NNg Sitar 

159. Omitted in nKt’. Cited by Apa 224 — a)wKt? aga; wKt! Tr “eRay; Bo Ae 
ae; aMd5 Her — b) Be} Jo? Tj! aaa Fash — c) oOr “arta; Lo? “arevAT; Jo? om 
 — e-d) La! “aet wenrere Bac; tMa} “ast aeat aaAaa — d) Apa [vl as in ed] Tea 
aaa, Ho IAT; oMd? freA: 

160. Omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Apa 224 — a) T? Tee — b) Bo “aTeHTaat — c) Lo! 
Pu’ Pu’ vafgelr aT ; Be} Udieererar ; Md? areter — d) cMd! waar 

161. Omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Apa 223; Mddh 1.523 — a)sOx! Becver, Ho Baez; 
Lo! eedtaerer, Madh wadismer oR — b) Lo! afedtt; Tr! Wa afedtord; Bo “ardt 
aerHT: — c) oMd? TH; Be? wKt! Tj! Tr? weer — d) Md4 Teed @ faashad; Ho Tj! 
farttaieq; Be! “he Parasia; wKt? oMd? Tr? + 

162. Omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Vij 2.21; Apa 223Laks 2.393-4 — a) Ox? aT; sOx! 
“tHe — b) sOx! sPus Vigurae free, Tr! arae aur — c)nKt’ BKt Apa “apo wer; Tr BTer 
™ J; wKt BKt wKt® cMd! tMd3 tMd4* GMd@ NNg sOx! Pu? Pu’ sPu® Tr! “arr aT [sOx! 
sPuS aT]; [Jolly G] arnt a; Tj! “arerteaiar; wKt3 Lo? Lot Lo’ oOr Ox? Pul? “oath a; Tr! 
“apate — d) Be} aabiter 

163. Omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Apa 229 —a) Lot sOx aTRaAaT; BBe? Aeaay; MTr3 
arfeaert; Md? “rer — b) nKt* om@acat a; Tr? wed; Lo? @eq4 — c) Wa add at begin- 
ning 7 Téeare; Lo* Lo’ Te fed; TMd3 Pu3 $U; wKt! 8d aus, rMd4 fetear BT wT AMT; cMd 
ey; sBe* Be* Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} La! oMd? Ox? Pu! sPuo [but cor} Tj! Tr? mTr3 mTr‘ 
Nd Mandlik KSS @4; Tr? om AHF; Lo’ aA FT — d) Ho wKt! Kt? nKt* rMd4 Lo! Tj! dear; 
Lo? dey; Bo ate; wKt det; sPuo om 7; pCa asta 

164, Omitted in Pu* Put; padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 231; Laks 2.396 — a) 
Ho Et [me Xt] avs; wKt® Tavs; Be! sOx! Gus; La! Aiea; wKe! Fryeeq; Hore; sOx! 
sPuo Teed; Hy are; BBE Fw — a-b) M4 Wea lee Bas 7 Parad — b) Laks 


536 Chapter 4 


Tema fronfeterereran | 

Ma qather arrest ace aad Ue gu 
avehreat qoreathtr aearrerfegary | 
wala: weather ATag eS Ell 
APAAATSMA ASAT: | 

Fat FASaatla Teasraaay AT: UY EN 
afr aad: wt eerie Actes | 
Aaa: WhirtearsesAg lege 


Hal; Bo tMd} Heit; GMd! 44; mTr4 37; Jm Jo Kt? oMd? Mandlik KSS +4; Hy sOx! sPu° 
cs 7a — c) Lod tert; nKté Laks Fafereatey; sOx! sPu® Tj! *capar; Be? Tr? “waret; oOr om 

— d) Tj! Rreritarstadt; Laks Brent aa area; La! Rreearf, cMy freerf; rd? ferceet; 
_ Ho Pref; 7M? nPul! Rreart; cMd> Ox? Tr! Apa Pere; sOx! sPu [cor to] Breet; nKt 
om SAT; wKeo TeAT; Tr! aes; Wa ASAT; sOx! sPuo aTsteqdh; Be} arsser ay; 
TM@ eT: 

165. Omitted in Pv Put. ie | by Apa 223; Laks 2.304 — a) Tj meaT TAT, Be Tr? 
arermrayeta; sOx! sPu' ae; us “Tee, nKe “apfer; wKt! “qa; Jo! oMa Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave ait: BK wKktS “aac; me “yaa — b) Be! Bo Md oMd@ sOx! sPu’ faster ; 
1Md* faster; sBe? “srfeetiererar, sOx! “asrrar, Kt? “arerar; Be! Ho Tr! [Jolly Nd] 

“eprgaT — c) Lo4 aa; BBe? Ho wKt} NK’ La! Lot oOr Ox? nPul Pu Tr? aTferst; +Md4 Tj! 
aftr — d) Bo Ox? Pu} Pu’ afar; Lo? oRaerd; Be} Tr? afeaerd; oOr TRIS: BBe? wKE 
Tj! wfererd; tMd3 GMy = yada 

166. Omitted in Pir Pu’. Cited by Apa 223; Laks 2.394 — a)nK¢ aretfirear; 00r Grate 
—~b) Tr TOT; Bk wKktS @Har’; oOr FHTATAT; Ho tMd3 Seent Bf — c) wKt! “aria”; 
Hy Ox? MTr? aay ; Tj! “ate — Tr! onftr; Nd “31e: [with gloss 37 SATE]; Me and 
Go comments that the particle aT of arate: is without significance — Me: atesreisaeia: 
word stad; Go: ardteae sega: 

167. Omitted in Pu Pu‘. Cited by 4pa223; Laks 2.394 — a) BBe? Harem; Tr! age 
— b) sBBe* TITRA SEATS Laks TATE LAAT: ; wKe aTereareract:; Wa ATTEND. ; Bo 

EA: Pul? “gsrrrer:; Ke 1Md@ NNg Tj! Tr? “Gera: — c) Hy g:; Pu ga; dé g:a- 
aa; ; Jm wKt’ Pu! eager — d) Tj! Fer wer: aa ae: Me yeramaaraz:; Pu’ Pu’ [cor to] 
TROT; Ho WRIT; GMd! “vara: NNg “grertar, 1Md3 ad: 

168. Omitted in Pu? Pud Pu’. Padas a-b cited by aod 223; Laks 2.394 — a) ren 
wKt! om Uact:; GMd! tMd? GMd> oOr Tr! MTr?mTr® ata: aT; GMy ATacRANTT; B 
Be? BCa wKt! Kt? wKt? nKt4 wKt? La! Lo! Lo* Ox? oMd? Pu! Pu? Jolly TR; TMd? Tet — 
b) Ho oMd? Tj! “Tar, Be’ “as; Be tMd? tMd4 GM@ GMy oOr Tr! Tr? MTr° ae — c) 
Bo eq; Lo? “IAF; Be mTr Laks Re Maas; Te cara: Tj! “wergare:; 
cMd! °aareat:; wKt® “aqay:; Lot “ard; Ke? °aet:, rd? Ostet — c-d) nPul ardaed- 
Tear cepal Tear TAT; oOr aradsearhes Teas MfraeqesHy Ta; [Jolly Gr] araratsea- 
ase cepal azar aa [cf 11.203] — d) cMd! atfrdraneatad:; Jo! mT “TaTaey; nKtt 
“aqtedt; Lo! “careret; Wa “eee. Be} “east aa 





Chapter 4 537 


a wath far aaa fremagrafe | 

T ASAT T MIT ATaaaTs Uessil 
srenftat at at fe wer aera waz | 
ffanteer at fer Aerat qerera llevoll 
a ataate ator aatsat Prag | 


sentra warm waft 2921 
arertakar ate ar: wate aa | 


TAMAAATE Hyethey Hear ULM 
afe areata gag a aegqayg agg | 


169. Omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Apa 223;Laks 2.394 — a) NKt Laks fE57; Ho Tt — 
a-b) GMd! tMd3 tMd* GM@ GMy Tr! MTr4 mTr° a arfag fest fagrererteageafa[cMd 5 
fest; tMd4 cMd fagiet ; cMd! cMd5 Tr! “aageare] — b) Pu} famraagpeaft; Pud Pu’ [cor to] 
"agreft; Bo “agoreft — d) nK¢ aniTarTaae ; Be? Ho wKt! Pu’ Pu’ ara 
Additional verses in GMd?; verses 1-3 after verse 170 in Tr: 
ahd feararaTeer tat Fey | 
afearrmanrt a aardf aRastrgr 1121! 
aaa arer afgerakte ear | 
Taga Gebt pear werrz |121! 
TAN T AWAY ae TT aah | 
gett Brean ta Seacenete 11311 
aecqaraeeaay arerreg henge | 
rors o pratt acres sasie¢ |v 
1. 0) Md afar — d) oMd Sate 
2. b) Tr! Tar 
3. a) Tr tT FT —b) Tr + wrest T TdT — c) Md Gear 
170.* Tr! repeats this verse after the addition given above. Omitted in Pu? Put. Cited by 
Apa 230 —~ a) Tr? 1 efter, sOx! sPuo SAT aT; Hofssit AY; Tr! aife [but not in repetion] — 
b) Jm Gq; Ox? Tj! ater; tMd4 ART: NPul Sarda; oOr APIA; nKtt Here; sOx! sPuo [but 
cor] Jt Wat — c) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} Lot Lo’ oM@ Tj! Tj? MT MT’ Mandlik Jolly Jha 
KSS Dave earaa; [Jolly Gr] aradf a; cMd! fare 7; +Md4 ar — d) Pu Aerat; rMd4 
seal; Bot Wat; Be! Ho faad Fa 
171. Omitted in Pu? Put Wa; not commented by Mr; Jm repeats 169 as 171. Cited by Apa 
230 — a) TMd* + free aft afer; wKt} oOr Htaaft fe ar, Ho TeHteaha aAer: Lo! cor to 
“acaertor — b) Tj! Tees; oOr “eT; wKto Castor Serta; rMd4 “afafr aera — c) Be 
sentir g oar; Tj! erator g oar’ — d) Lo? gate"; Im Terfer ; Tr! faaeafer 
172. Omitted in Hy Pu? Put. Cited by Apa 230 — a) wKt! ae"; sOx! sPuS ares Kt? 
arrisahtar, Md? areal zd; cMdS “sredt — b) nK tt a: Hote; TMd! ofert — c) nKtt 
oMd?, Me Na Rn Dave Jha Caeear ; wKe “aaa BBe EAT f&; HosOx! [but both 
cor] Aer; wKt! “ara fF — d) Md Hdyart; wKe eiaatte, Ho wort; Be? sKé 
wKt® Lo! Ox? “ferseprate; Tj! “fstrepater 


538 Chapter 4 


Tea g Fase: adtate Prope: ueozil 
sree ateatat wether ware 
ad: ATaSaatt ae frases gown 


AATAATAT Wher AACA | 

Brewer Rrearator anargaread: Ne oki 
qRemtatert at erat atahrat | 

qe Wages BHA SAT T ULVEI 

tT Utara T ATI Ay: 

qT BMeaTIGAT 7 aedieatelt: U2 vil 
waver frat arar at arat: fraser: 

at Warerar ant aa weer Rea iigvcil 


173. Omitted in Hy Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Apa 230 — a) Ho Tr! 913; wKt! FF FT — b) 
oMd) 4 ST 7 ABT; Apa [vl as in ed] aT; Bo wKt’ Tj! 7 FT FAY; Jo? Lo? FT TTA; oMd? 
tMd3 My Tj! MTr4uTr° Apa [vl as in ed] WHAT; cMd! Feitayg; Md! Fearsy — c) cMd> 
7 TT; NNg eta; wKeo ae; wCa oOr Ag FF; Apa AT FF; sOx! sPuo Tr? Ha HA; Ke ° eat: 
— d) Bo BKt} wKt® rMd? sPuS [but cor] Frond; nNg Fras; cGMd! wafer 

174. Omitted in Hy Pu? Put — a) Tr! “sora; wKe! saa; Tj! “sdaa; Lo! “Hitreraa; 
Lo? “Hite; cMd! arradt — c) tMd4 avat safe; Lo’ agarssrafe — d) BK wKtS at 
qorfagrdte; Be? Lo’ Ox? Pu aye; NKtt Lo? Lo} Ox} Te eae FT; Jo? TAT 

175. Omitted in GMy Pu? Put; padas c-d omitted in GMd! — a) Ho 427; Lo} Lo? Pu? Pu? 
“earl; Lo! “eatt ; Md‘ “eater — b) Tj! 44; Be! Be} sCa Tr Tr? 3a UY; GMd Aa ea; 
Lo! dared’, +Md3 davarercr; rMdé BraTaeral — c) Jo? fBreater PBreaeaifer; cMd5 ferearteq; 
Lo? feraer rer’; Bo wKt? tMd4 sOx! sPu® Pu’ Pu!? Wa frererfor; Be? Rreneatfor — d) 
1Md4 oMé@ Tr! arfeardtae’ ; Ma? arfredtae’ ; Ho Lo? sOx! sPuS Tr? “aya; Pu? “Waa:; Pul? 
“ara: 

176.* Omitted in GMy Pu? Put. Cited by Apa 159; pada-a cited by Vis 1.114—— a) oMd? 
“anit — b) Tj! Apa Sie as in ed] Seat wafeatrat [oman]; Bo NNg a, Be} Brat At— c) La! 
epfarer ; Jo? tacy’; Pud eperig’: mTr? Pul? aren; Tj! area” — d) nPu! Pus OATS; ; 
1tMd3 ™Md4 BRATS ap Td? Ox? nPu! [but me sh] Tj BRaTe ; wKtS Pu” setae; 
Be! sBe’ BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt La! Lo! Lo? Tj? mTr3 mTr® [Jolly Ku N RINa 
Ku Rn Mr KSS Mandlik BAGS ; GMd) afar fag ; Pus Spates; oMd? oOr mTr4 
arefafee: ; Lot Lo® Pul® [Jolly M] at 

177. Omitted in GMy Pu? Put — a) Bo AT; cMd! arearfer Wa wWet— b) T™Md3 49; Te 
aa’; wKt! “oesryg:; oMd! tM? GM@ Tr! Tr? mTro oer BA; [Jolly Gr] “Teetar— d) 
Td} aRaS La! qearrat Tj! “Sema: 

178.* Omitted in GMy Pu? Put Tj? . Cited by Kum 1.3.7; Vis 1.7; Vij 1.254; Hem 3/2.1680; 
Dev 1.9; Madh 1.523 — a) BBe Ho wKt! wKt BK wKt® La! oOr Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Tr? aTar — 
b) Bo wKt! wKt? La! oOr Sat: — c) La! araretat; Pub “cacti; rMd4 “ard; Ho oMeé ATT 


Chapter 4 539 


ahaaguaraemigertatratra: | 
aeqarqraaaitaaterarrd: e931 
aaa sretAratar ger area | 
gfear areaattey fave a TATA Necoll 
vaftarary Fens aaa: TAS | 
vata wafer watgrertrerg wet nec ei 
ararat qaeateyr: sraTTer frat wy: | 
afatuRcaraateat sateen Alea: ULC RIM 
TIS aa Ble Vata aan: 


aatertisat areer grea Aratgeyr ec zit 


— d) Lo’ 44; Hem & 4; nPu! mT ro weseaReate, Pus mesa; Pul? wesafterte, Tr! 
trae faRearfe; Im wef Rear; Bo Ho Hy Jo! Je Kt? wKt? La? Lo! Lo? Lo’ Lo4 Lo’ nNg 
Pu3 Pud Pu? mT} Na@ Ku Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave tare, wKt! fear, Hy fereafer; Tj! erect; 
BBe? BKtS wKt® oMd? Wa Kum Vij Hem garter 

179. Omitted in GMy Pu? Put; padas c- -d omitted in Md? Cited by Laks 2. 3525 padas 
c-d cited by Apa 233 — a) Pud ararat Are; wKt! Carat arg; Laky “ara —b) La! 
Lo? wae; wke “afd: — c) GMd! Md} oMe oOr Tr! Laks FEaTETY ; wKt! afragarg 
Hy seag Td gaa’; Tj Tr! ‘qeraatie’ Lo! “aepataife’; La! Laks geet 
Te atgasife; Bo gta aie’; Ke “@esaenfa? — d) wKe wKt6 [but cor] cMds “aaer 

180, Omitted in TMd4 GMy Pu? Pu’. Cited by Apa 233;Laks 2.352 —— a) BBe? BCa Ho 
Hy Jo! K? wKt3 oMd? [Jolly Ku] at ; Be! att; wKt! arftferaar, Bo atferarar— 
b) Ho Rratat — c) Pul? a’; oMd? “atx — d) sBe? ard AAaTate; Ox? Faas; Pul? 
aarae 

181.* Omitted in GMy; padas a-b omitted in TMd*. Cited by Apa 233; Laks 2.353 — a) 

r uderarrae J; Apa Caesarea; Laks Udeoifgareied; Pu2 watahterser a; Put 

waraRapsrerd, Be} sCa sKt® wKt® La! Lo? Lot Lo’ oOr Ox? Ox} nPu! Pul? Wa [Jolly M R] 
warfaar ; Bo warfrar Jm Kt? wKe? ufafear aMd! Tr! mTr‘ mTr® Yolly Nd] “ate; sPuo 
“avert; NNg ayeat— b) Lot Lo ae: oh; Hy “TTT, wKe “oTat feat; Pud Pu’ wate — 
c) La! varafirear cafe; wKe wT} CART Tj! wafireer, Lo! waferateq; Jm Tj? efi; 
Ho ak wKt® oOr Laks Uafsrcteq; Hy Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo? Lot Lo® Md4 nNg sOx! nPu! Pu5 sPu® 
Pu’ Tr? Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS vafsrder; Be! sBe wKt! oMd? Pu? Pu! waferdeg; Pu! 
wafer; Jo! wfifirder; Volly N] Na [patha] werfreat — d) BBe BCa wKt® oOr Pu’ Pub 
aatstet , Ho Lot 1Md3 GMd Ox? Pu Put Puld mir! adalat ; Tr? aateprafaa; tMd4 
“aA, Tr! “araret 

182, Omitted in GMy Pu®; ma in Pu'®, Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 — a) Kit arama; 
Tj! aatwer — b) tMd! srsreamy: frat; NK wsTTTST; Be! sOx! sPuo SISTTTeT:; wKt! cMd! 
Wa farae:; Apa [vl] fy: — c) Be? Tj! afar; Md} aferag” — d) Bo “ate 7 
aeferst:; Ho [me to] [Jolly G] “per aefeast:; BK Oe “aweafeasr:; wKt! Md? & fee: 

183.* Omitted in GMy BKt5; not commented by Nd Mr; folio containing verses 183-206 
missing in Be*. Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 — a) Be! Strat; BBe? BCa Ho Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? 


540 Chapter 4 


area faHaT AeraHaTGRT: 
wat Ss: a: rar arat ga: waar ag: ecw 


Brat eat sraarteg sfeat FIT TET | 
aera: AsaIsae: Har ULM 
weearatsh mag ar acer | 
wtearaet TEM Al Ast: Tarerfer UL CEM 
aT xerorafeare fat eet ufone | 

wa: wae Zatqadicahr ear uecoylt 
fever yRrrest cert arate arr | 
afar wfeert wethrafe areaq ueccil 


wKt} nKt4 oMd? oOr sOx! sPu® [Jolly Ku] Rn [patha] a4aT; wKeo soRrareearee, Bo STAT 
aat, Lo! “caret — b) Bo ata: — c) Lal aut daft das; sBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? 
wKt3 Lo! Lo? Pu’ Tj? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave “Past wat Se; oMd? “Pareact ae, 
Tj! “Paar & steer, 1Md3 “Peifit stper, Laks SAeT — d) Be! Be Ho Hy Jo! Jo wKt! 
Kt? wKt} 8K wKt® La! Lo} Lot Lo’ oMd? tM! Pu8 Tj? Tr! Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Jfear, 
Mir figear; Bo “age; Td} “age: 

184. Omitted in GMy sKt; not commented by Nd Re. Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 — 
b) wKt aa; GMd! +Md3 gaare ; Tr? “Gereqerqarr: — c) Pu? Put eta ST"; Pud Pu? SIS; 
tMd4 nPu! Tr! a4; Pu!® ar — d) GMd! Md? GMdS Tr! mTr*mTr® ATaTgat; wKt! wKt® Lo! 
Lo? Apa feaar; Pud Pu’ aq; sOx! ac: 

185. Omitted in GMy; not commented by Nd. Cited by Apa 234; Laks 2.353 — a) MTr? 
mTr6 STAT; cMd! erat art; Ox? Pud ear Bra ae; Jo! Kt? oMd? Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly Go] Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave ®t [supported by Go Ku]; Lo! 7; nBe? Tr! mTr° Yolly Nd] &; Jm OS 
arrertar; oOr Forester; BBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? oMd2 rMd3 oOr sOx! Pud sPuS Pu? Tj! 
[Jolly G] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave “Ox; Bo “atergfeat — b) tMd* ararpareat, TM 
serena Pry; Tj! Pur, Ox} TT; Lo PIT: Fe; Tr! Sur der — c) Pu? Put aefyfern:; 
Tr? “axferaey; sOx! “ae; wKt! “Rad, Laks “Rae; Md! “Sree — d) Ox3 Tr! aeareasa:; 
Pu2 Put agar: avae:; nPul nKet aeatfawae:; Lal a@arawae:; Pud Pu’ aedaeae:; aK 
aweaedasae:, GMd 5 aearasas:; nNeaeaAa:; Tj! aartse:; mTr! aaa; wKe° ae- 
anfaage: [om FAT]; oOr “TIT 

186. a) oMd@? afaae;, Lo? [Jolly RJ weg — b) Md? Mya waste ofere; 1Md4 wert 
~—— c) Tj! @emg; Jo* Lo GMd! GMd> oOr [Jolly R] TRI — d) Be'tMd‘ Ox? sTaT; BBe? Bo 
pCa HooMd? Pud Pu? Tj! are@rt; mT ro aser aTeafer; mT rt dora asafer;cMd! ast faasafa; 
TMd} GMd? GMy Tr! soreafer; oMe sarreater; wKet! setae 

187. Cited by Laks 2.248 — a) Lo* Lo’ aT; cGMd° 4 aterrafaara; Tj! fase — b) Ho 
Lo’ cMy fafér; Be! Ho wKt} wKtS GMd! +Md? sOx! sPu® Tj! Tr? ef; Lo! af; Lo? ef; Pu? 
Put get; tMd4 wet: ofere:; mTrtufeme: — c) GMy Wat; Lo? tat:; Laks wat: — d) Lo! 
gatfeadt - Bo “afr aeqaT 

188* Cited by Laks 2.248; Hem 1.60 — a) Lo’cMd! 3f aPHTA; Put om ara ATT; 
1Md3 IT aat— b) Ho AAA; Be! at Hee; Lol ater; TMd? * fet@ar — c) Hy Jo! Kf nKt’ La! 





Chapter 4 541 


Ream 7 witarateaagyy | 
WIETATA TA Fr AMRAeT: WAT: USCA 
aaurcaeiard: sfaneetatee: | 
WISATadd as ada wsAfs U2Q@oll 
aeraateanrarg Fee weary | 
wrorearatdates wer attr atafer ee el 
T arate seedy serrata fast | 

aq aeatae ore araafate atfaag ee Ril 
Braerag ad fe fafa aaa | 
aetaerarats waragtr TUS 3M 

amt gated Fraorgey acy | 


Lo# Lo® 00r Ox? Pu‘ Pu!® Tj? MTr3 [Jolly M] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave sity@atagteg 
{oOr Pu “ferarte]; Wa Sfeay@atagte; Jm sferm@eafagtet; Jo? Lo Pu? Volly R] wieteis — 
d) Ho Wag; Lo! “wafer TRUM; Lo? arefaa 

189. Padas c-d omitted in GMy — a) Lo! “age b) Wa witear’ ; Tj! witarear ; 
oMy “saTeaTT” ; rMd3 sara te “areatrettery, Pu’ Pu? *starcrTeTy Bo “care ; La! 
Lo® Ox? sPu® [but cor] Wa “are; Lot (ra wre ; Kt? “cit ; Ho Md “mea: ; Hy aeag — 
d) wKt® “Rai; sPu [but cor] Tj! ast 

190. Cited by Hem 1.60 —a) Bo Lo? NNg sOx! Ox? Pud sPu® Pu? Pul® aaATeT ; NPu! 
areas; La! Tr? rarer’; nKet srerparaeft’; Tj! samen’; Lo! aarecnecraret” — b) 
Tr! ofafest, — c) Tj! amet; Lo’ aren; Pus Pu? earagsa’; wKto “erage; Bo sCa Ho 
La! Lo? Lo?cMd! 1Md3 tMd4 GM? GMy Pu! Pud Pu? Pul® Tj? Tr! “ata — d) La! ata ae 
aster; GMd! a4 Asuifer; Pu? Pud aterfer 

191. Omitted in Ox3; padas c-d omitted in Pu!®; pada-b in Pu!®. Cited by Hem 1.60;Laks 
2.248 — a) Bou ; GMd BENE; Tr! *Rrenfenyare, Tj! * fagiferyare, Tr “fagiacerae 
— b) Lo! Md} GMy Tr! mTr'uTrSaerepend; Hem BATT, Tj! “WET; Bo “TE — c) 
wKt! tMd? tMd?4 GMd5 GMy Tr! mTr* mTr® aeqaat ; Tr? aareatagis; La! oOr Pu? Put 
“arafe fasts; Laks ae Tere; BK wKt® Lot Lo’ sOx! sPuo Tr? Wa *fagieg; Ho om f€ 
— d) Ox? o& dtafer wa; Md? GMy Asaf 

192. Omitted in Ox3; padas c-d omitted in GMd!, Cited by Apa 285; Hem 1.38; Madh 
1.174 — a) Pu? Tj! 7 are; Pus TarHfs; BCa wKt! NNg oOrnPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu> Pu? Tj! Polly 
G] Hem ViDh 93.7 FSA; Te Taw — b) cMd! dersawaahy J oMd Tr! gars ; wKté 
dares; Tr! “afer; Lo! “afaas, Ho Tr? ‘gfeay; Jo! “aa; 1Mdé fest: — c) rMd? oMy ae ; 
Lo! 93; mT am: wKt! Loe Pu3 “afar: Pu? Pu? “afte; Pu’ *afaas, wkt® Lo! “gfe; Hy 
Im Jo! Ke? Tj? mT r? [Jolly R] Mandlik KSS afeas fF — d) Tj! 7ae ; sBe? “Fafafer 

193. Padas c-d omitted in TMd*. Cited by Apa 285; Hem 1.38; M@dh 1.174-— a) Ho 
freatag a ad fe, Tj dF fF; ake wKt6 tec [om fF] — b) Je Lo! Lo} [Jolly G R] Hem 
faferitfird: Pud Pu’ faftraraird; wkeo fafraraterd, cMd! tMd? GMy Tr arid; rMd4 
“anita; aK 48 cor to Tt — d) Ho ‘erga, cMd! “argues 


542 Chapter 4 


aut Praadisaedaat arqreheasar 29 vil 
eteastt war Gerarkyar ateafara: | 
Astoaterar sar er: aathrterawr: ueeun 


setaftetpiee: carrera: | 

arr Prafetcar seat fast: eee 
q qeateatt for + a anikfatsa: | 

a qarerartrer at att Sr 122 ill 
qT aterqagyt WT Heat Ad AT | 


194. Omitted in TMd* Ox?. Cited by Hem 1.38 — a) sOx! sPu® aur Sagastas; wKté 
geateaer, Pul? “stair; Lot “AtaSaq; Bo Lo! Lo? GMd! rMd? GMy Pu Pu? Tj? “Atqe; 
BKi “ATeoat; Tj! “Atofet; La! “Fear — b) aK O Prasrgqess; wKkiS Prasteqedy; Be! Wa 
“ayaa; Pul? ayamr; Ho ae; Lo* sOx! sPuS atq — c) BK tS wKt® sOx! [but cor] Fat; Pué 
Pu’ Prasordt faurasit; Md} frasaret senrasit — c-d) GMd! Hem arqufamétaret aur st 
fread: [Hem atarsit] — d) Tj! “eearsreremdterast; Tr! “gait; Pu2 ait; Put “agt; rMd3 
agy - Bo Mr! ‘wereait; Ho “ofeerdt; Pu! “wdtaait; Me [patha] “wefterast 

195.* Omitted in TMd‘. Cited by Vij 1.130; Apa 170;Hem 3/1.364 — a) Ox aft: Lot 
teas. Tr! eas: argu: — b) nCa Lot “seftrat; Bo “seferit; oMd! °satfrer, Tj! 
*sesfgat, Be! La? Lo! Lo? Md? cMd° Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly Nd] ViDh93.8 Nd Apa aire, 
oMd! GMy ‘anfttar:; Tr! °zffra; sBe? 8Ca Hy Jm Jo! wKt! KP wKt aK wKt® La! Lo! 
Lo} oMd? oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu® Tj? mTr? Yolly N Ku R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
“arTe:. Bo nNg “areTa:; Ho ae — c) Lo? Pul? Arete”: GM Tr! dare ; wKt® dare ; 
Ho nKt “sfe@r; wKt? Lo! Apa [vl] ‘gferat, Lo? Fay — d)nKt fee:; Ox? ar, wKt> Lot 
oMd! tMd? GMy NNg Pu? Put Pu! Tr! mTrS [Jolly M Nd] aatfad; Wa aaifeet ; KC 
water Ho aaree ; oMd aatttaeaas:; *Md3 mTr* Apa aferar:. wKt! “aaa: 

Additional verse in Ho BKt> wKt® La! Lo* nPu! Tr’. Cited by Apa 170; Hem 3/1.364; 
Madh 1.174. According to Me some teachers recited the verse given in the edition, and some 
the following additional! verse. He takes both to be authoritative. 

mer ateasit Freer qeeaor satferc: | 

Teas Ty ters aT ARTT II 
a) wKkt® a — a-b) Madh &: Bre Geeper aaa tad — b) La! Preaftreeasy; 
BKO Apa Fea; BK wKt> sales: Ho Saiferct: — c) Madh WT Ta Tere — 
d) Tr tsrart ad Ad; wKeS Fares 

196.* Omitted in TMd*. Cited by Vij 1.130; Apa17o; Madh 1.174; pada-a cited by Vif 
1.129 — a) MT Fat; Pu? “gftey; Md? “ge 3°: Be! Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! sOx! sPuS Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave ‘feetepiec:; mT ro apfeeer: — b) wKktS gferarer — c) Tr? “Ataeq — d) Vij Apa 
qHgtteared:; cMd! [Jolly G)amaferaey; Lo! Pu’ Pu’ “gferaet; Pul “aferaet; oOr aferat; 
NNg Saat; wKe “gaa; Hy La! Ox? Tr? “weezy; Ox? Pu sPul [but cor] Pu’ AG; Lo? HE 

197. Omitted in TMd4 — a) Lo! aauferm; Pu! aqafert: Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] “afer; *Ma3 
“afer, BKé wKeo “afer, cMd! “afer; Ox? Pu? Pu’ yet F— b) NNg fegA:; wKe ° fay 
ar; BKtS fegar: — c) pBe? TET ; Lo} “ATA; BBe? Ho wKt NK La! Lo! oOr Pu! Pu2 
Put Pu Pu? Tr? “Pet 


Chapter 4 543 


TAT UTT Tea HIT SAAAATHT UPS ciil 
Tete Aaa frst weld TaTaTShy: | 

SYM Ua ar ae cariher Teak UuVeeu 
afegt fateaar at akrqasttate | 

a fatar seaaReharat @ Tag IRooll 
aH TST HaTTT | 
frarrad: Fareat F sepatart fyera ilo gl 
TAA ETITRTETT 
AUYIISAAT TAT: STATE Ro QM 


198. MTr? transposes padas a-b and c-d; omitted in TMd*. Cited by Apa 230, 1229; Laks 
2.331 — b) Tj! Par. art qArata— c) Laks AraTrT — d) wKt! “aeReeht cor to “WRK; Ho 
“agar; Apa 1229 “aoe 
199. Omitted in tMd*; ma sh inNNg. Cited by Laks 2.331 — c) Tj! TE TT & fest; 
Hy Wa@; NNg ter Ueearr; cMd! Veait; Hy Teall; Lo! TEs; Lo’ Fear; Laks fast — b) Tr! 
TTT; BKO wKt® Laks Te; Bo wK Tera; Lo? HET ; Be! Aaarfe:; wKtS aarafePer:; Ho 
“arf — c) Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} BK® wKt® La? Lo! GMd! oMd@ Tj! T? Tr? mT [Jolly 
M6 Ku] ViDh 93.12 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave T&F, oOr Td; mTr* AST; Me Na Go support Tet 
200, Omitted in TMd‘. Cited by Apa 230 — a) wKt® af@#T; Be! Bo BCa Ho wKkt! wKt3 
nKt* Lot GMd! tMd3 GMd@ nNg sOx! Ox? Pu’ sPu® Pu’ Apa fag ater; Tj! fefyaer — b) Lo? 
adiqa’; Pu gta’; Tr? gdtgusttadt; Pu2 Put sPu’ [bur cor] grreefe — c) Tr? aT; Tr! 
aed; Ho efter” — d) oMd! “xfer; Md) GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] rat 7; pCa 
*zitPer; Ho Lo! Ox? Pu!® Tj? Jolly M] Sify saa; Tre it garae; Bo g; Pu’ T arr 
201.* Omitted in TMd*. Cited by Apa 234; Hem 3/2.874; Laks 3.40-1; Dev 2.334 — a) 
Bo nKt oM@& “fraragy; Lot Lo’ “Praferg — b) sBe Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? La! Lo? 1Md3 Tj? 
mTr3 Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave S7areq, wKt} La? Wa Sarg; Pud Pu’ eats; Be! Ho La! Lo! 
arate; oOr Aa; Laks Hem FTATAT wal; GMd! erareat war — c) Hem Bret fe; wKt! 
BKt> wKt$ nNg sOx! Pu? sPu® Laks f€; BBe? Ho Lo! & 
Additional verse in GMd> sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Tr? [Jolly Gr]; placed after 202 in nPu! Tj! 
Mandlik [®, @, 4, 5, &, &, U] KSS Dave [cf. YDh 1.159]: 
adtger aa: foert ert Srared sa ar | 
sarees Tet afe: erear + gate | 
a) GMd [Jolly Gr] Seco Tage: Peery — b) nPu! errarg fafergdar; Tr? Lolly Gr] 
write; Mandlik KSS Dave Tat — c) NPul eart: I Wea; oMd’ site’; Tr 
Je; GMe@ [Jolly Gr] Wel; sOx! sPuS Mandlik Dave Weg; KSS WHTE — d) cMd5 
Ox? nPu! Tr? &rt 4; cM fear 
Additonal verse in Ho: 
seer weaftvsy weed STAT | 
ereat w avatar feerrc: | 
202.* Omitted in TMd?; padas. c-d omitted i in BBe?. Cited by Apa 237-— a) | Put qr 
nKtt Tre? “sreararerer; Md? oMy “waTeeT; Ho STARTET; GMd! “SAT ART; Wa “BATT — 


544 Chapter 4 


adty qaarey asrty acy TT | 

Bet TAT TTT aT WRo RN 
ward aad aT rer Praag: 
TATTATHAT PAA RAGTATTT R01 


b) Md} actenf; Ho Sttear; Tj! Tr? sataragerfr — c) Lo’ Tr? weary » Be! Ho Hy Jm 
Jo! wKt! Kt? La! La? Lo? Lo oMd? NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Pu! Pu Pué sPub Tj! Tr? mTr3MTr4 
Mandlik KSS Apa [vl] THs; Tj! TyOsAta — d) oMd! goormeqert eedeary, Tj! Fae: 
Tr! Se, Tr? MT ro CSET ae; Pud eardataaray 

203. Omitted in TMd‘ BBe. Cited by Vij 1.159; Apa 234; Hem 3/2.867; Dev 2.333 — a) 
Tr @aaay; wKt? GMy “Tay — b) Apa BAT TF ACT FT; Lo? sOx! sPuo Tsay; Md} oMd° 
oMy Tr! Dev aeraey; wKt! ategq — c) Md} Ararat — d) Ho oOr Pu Pu? “wre; Apa 
“qaaofey [om A] 

Additional verse in oOr: 


seer afoafersrisr ar cath ar | 
ecard wacarter fase: | 
Additional verse in Pu!: 
area: Batata Tay | 
wes: Wier aera sree | 
204. Omitted in TMd! Pu", Cited by Apa 230— a) TMd3 erate’; GMd! cMy Tr? aeHT- 
za. Tj! Tareas, Te sara; Wa TaRAaT; wKto “aera — b) cMd> oMy Pu Put om; 
Lo* tMd3 NNg ma 7; sOx! sPu’ fret 4; cMdS fret 7; Bo Tr Prratge:; TMd3 cMy fraa- 
arge:, cMd! frrargfex; Pu? Put Tr? Fraarfesr:; sOx! sPu® [cor to] Praateaata — c) Lo? 
[Jolly R)aaMareeaten, Te zererafe watt; oMd! garrt — d) wKt! Lo? Tj! Te Wa 
[Jolly R] “ToT; Lo? Sarr, wKt® “aarersr 
Two additonal verses in La! GMd! tMd? oOr Tr! Tr? Mandlik KSS Dave; commented by 
Rc; the two verses are transposed in TMd? Tr!; they are placed after the next addition in Tr’. 
These two verses appear to be taken from Medhatithi’s commentary. 
ater aaa TarrsaHesnar | 
aecanita wet warda gare T1121 
sopra TSRPIAT AMPTATETLSTAT | 
amare Proar: cedar 7 RI 
1. b) oMd! “aaragitecasepepar; La! Tr! Tr? Herat — c) Tr? recat — d) 
oOr Mandlik KSS Dave avatar aT; La! waret oRastRrar:; GMd! ward 
2. a) GMd! amet FT ZT; Tr? arareye — a-b) Md? wat fYaar: apr 
ayaa! aah T— c) Te aware — d) La! ste oat eran: 
Two further additional verses in Be' wKt! sKt wKt® La! Lo? GMd> oOr Ox?; given after 
201 in sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? Put sPu® Tj! Tr? Mandlik KSS Dave. Cited by Apa 230: 
are fs 
cart werel Hresarstesl WT BAT sar 112 
ara ay at rarePuer | 
aaa ar wart a Paar gar 1121) 
1. b) Be! sOx! sPuS “afar @ gareger; oOr ‘Hféar feaastd; wKt® Apa TH 
ama; BK® Lal GMd @4ansa; Lo? areget— c) LaloMa@ Af weral; oOr We: 


Chapter 4 545 


AeUbaad sat WATE TAT | 

fer Haat wa et ysotta arate: FahrT URI 
Poa ar Weert ata: 
meTaaSaTAT TEATACTRATAT UR o GU 


AMHSGN TT yout Hara | 
SRA TET SS WT AAT: Rol 
waar tar eeyes aT RT | 
Taha T YA FepSAT T (Roll 
Tat aay Gert a fase: | 

Tos ares a agar a Guay Rol 


warat — d) GMa) Aree ATES; Tr? om BAT Far 

2. b-c) omitted in Be! Lo? — b) wKt! La! Ox? Pu? Pu Put Tj! Tr? *RrTe:; wKto 
“Pa®. oOr Prré — c) aK? wKtS Md sOx! Pu? Pu4 sPuS “gaat; oOr Tj! Tr? 
“carat 

205. Omitted in TMd4; padas c-d ma in BKt’. Cited by Vij 3.289;Apa 174; Laks 3.259; 
Hem 3/1.770 — a) MT TAY, Tj! APARaad, cMd! + We; Lo! “Paes; BBe? wKt! 
La! Lo? Pu [Jolly R] “Praga; wk “Prepay; Pul? act — b) wKt! nK¢ wKt® nNg Ox} Pul® 
Tr! Hem orAanT ; Lo? Ox} wraTaTsT ; La! arvana’; Pu! Tr? aera; mT rt aA": Lo? 
araaet’; Tj? arated; BKt 5 “age Ox? “ed; Tr! “ya; Hy Jm Jo! Ke? wKt) 8K é MT 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “apd: Pu2 “ea; T7 “ae; TMd3 aut — c) GMd! ferar:; +Md3 GMy aa 
gl; Na |patha] gT aJ— d) Be! Hy Farr: 

206.* Omitted in rTMd4; ma in BKt®. Cited by Apa 1174; Laks 3.259 — a) Tp °sto- 
Farqanyat; pBBe? NK tt wKt® Lo? Lo? cGMd! sOx! sPuS Tr! [Jolly R] spite; wKt! Ke? wKe 
Lo* Lo® oMd@ tMd3 GMe@ GMy nNg oOr Ox? Pu? Put Pul? Tj! Te Wa Apa [Jolly N] Jha 
Dave Wate ; La? Pas ; Pus Pu’ esiawaa — b) Be! Ho Tag Faq Vf; Lo! ma seat 
aa wafer; Be AT c) TP weitere zavat; cMd! watt"; BBe aereat; rMd? “aeravat — d) 
Ho wearer: of@°; Be? cent ORR": GMa crevenTeae 

207. Padas ah omitted in tMd*,. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1174; Hem3/1.610, 771 — a) 
GMd! at:; wKt! [cor to] tMd3 “ARIS ; Be? Lo* Lo’ sOx! Ox? Pub sPu® Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr? Wa 
[Jolly M] q — c) Ho &et; Pu? Pul mT’ “astarTaa; NK nNg HteTaa; Be? J — d) wKt} nKe 
La! Tr! [Jolly R] WeeTe; nPul Be; Pu!? Tj! Tr? Volly M!?°] g 

208. Cited by Apa 1174; Hem 3/1.610 — a) Apa [vl] ¥TeTA ; sOx! sPuo “wafer; nKE 
“aaiferd, Tj! afafart; Lot “preraterct, Lo? “ere; nPu! “aferay; Jo? Lo® Pu? Put “fart weet 
— b) Lot age; Md? eye; Tj! a serTIT — c) BBe? TaATeT ; La! Pul? wafsorr’; Jm wa 
fesor’. Tj! “ots — d) wk Saree 

209. Cited by Apa 1174;Laks 3.259; Hem 3/1.610; padas c-d cited by Vij3.289 — a) Bo 
at; Lo! ata ; Ca wKt° La! GMd! tMd3 GMd cMy nPu! Pu? Pu4 Tj? Tr! “s4aed; Be! Lot 
Ox} “aratd — b) aK wKeo gree fastra:; Ox? agers Pstra:; Tr! Terr; Bo GMd5 nPul 
Tj! Tr? gta; Put Geers; mTrt Gava;cMd! 7 ferasht — c) Ho THAT; Tr? wftrers; Pu! 
aferests — d) Jo! Kt? Lo! GMé GMy Tr! Wa [Jolly M3N Nd] Vij Apa fagut; cMd! tMd3 


546 Chapter 4 


Tass gen arefawer wT 
After eater aaer Pemer wR Qoll 
aheder ween Fae aaet T | 
qm wie ta qrenthoeta a R221! 
Pofecmer rat: Reka: | 
Sora alee a catarerahragryT R221 
aafad qarararcierarar attire: | 
fees arent oftarsaaeary 12 2 Sl 
yatta aqfrarHer a | 
NIAAA FAHATAAT T ULI 


GMd My Tr! asgyyfeacdt 

210. Cited by Vij 3.289; Laks 3.259; Hem 3/1.771; padas a-b cited by Apa 1:74 — a) 
Bo nPul aaa’; Lo! oMé 1Md3 tMd4 GMd oMy Tj! Tr! Vij Meat’, wKt! Lal tMd4 NNg 
oOr Wa Apa arate; Laks ara; nKe °arra — b) Tj! aextt; rMd? test; Be? Ho wKt! Ke? 
wKt® GMd sOx! sPuS Pu? aeeital ; Put aastat; sOx! sPuo [me sh to] fraet — d) sOx! sPue 
[cor to] Taea 7 Prrer a; Tj! wet Pore ws F; Pulom THST, wKt® FIST; Bo THT; Ho 
NKt' GMd! Pu} [Jolly Gr] Nd [as s@dhuh pathah] PrTet a cMd> Tr! Prva; wkKt® [Jolly Nd] 
Parser; ake Farmer; Me [patha] frareer 

2u. Lo‘ gives only the pratika aftaredea. Cited by Apa 1174; Laks 3.260; padas 
a-b cited by Vis 3.257; Vij3.289; Hem 3/1.772 — a) Tr? aftared, Tj! aftarrer; Be! Be} Hy 
Ke? Ox? Tj! Tr! Tr? gesEr; Ho BK wKt® Lo! Pul? @ueeq; Trt Ser b) GMd! My afar; 
Be? eft ; Tr! erffr — c) Ho Lo! Lo? ye; Tj! YF; oOr Eh; TMd4 Far — d) Me |pathal 
oftaremyyereT; nPul *Regcexitert; Lo! g 

212. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 11745; Laks 3.260; Hem3/1.772 — a) sOx! sPu® fafafe- 
arer, Ho fafeeferaser; tMd4 aaraT — b) BK wKtS “weafaa:; Be wKt “ster; wKt! rMd4 
*sitsty — c) NK! GMd! Tr! mTt® Me |patha] Fates — d) Lo? gataraH ; Be} wKt! BKtS La! 
Lo? GMd! +Md? 1Md4 GMd> cMy Ox? nPu! Pu!? Tj! Tr! Vij Apa Tatars: Lot [but cor] Pu2 
Pul gatas ; BBe? Lo! Lo’ “arrehat; oOr “fsaT:; Ho BK Lo! oMy “Paféar, nKt! “reat 

Additional verse in GMd! GMd nPu! MTr* MTr° Laks3.260: 

aaa faurat feat wate a | 
gard? cart qt ure gate zs 
a) NPul GATS fear — b) MTr* om FAY; GMa? aT — c) Laks WIT; GMa 
qearet, nPu! dtucedg; cMd! raarrg; Laks 7 

213. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 11753 Laks. 3.260; Hem 3/1.773 — a) Tj! aaa; T™Md3 
aafsaragar ; cMy safaarager ; PuS gars BK wK¢tS garam — b) wKt® “Helter 
ara; Tr! ° rete GMy aftr: — c) nKeA farce. Pu? Tr! a71TaTa; Be? NKtt GMd! rMd3 nPu! 
Pud Pud Pu? Tj! mTr4 [Jolly Gaara, Hy Tas — d) Put om TAAaTAT, BK wk oferar- 
rere oMy Sfcreraaed; Tr? “aed; Tr! Fred; wKt! “Aft: cMd& “oe; Lo> “aE: Bo 

ayer 
214.* Padas c-d ma sh in B&; pada-d omitted in GMd>. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1175; 


Chapter 4 547 


water Fraaer Uae T | 
qavtaeqauer zeafamProreda4r 12 24il 
waat atPearmt a tous TI 
THRE TATET TET BATTS ALM 
qatar & areas efhrarat a ad: 
afrdar a varaaghteawa a Revi 
UAa AT MET TST TTT | 
ay: qatar aaratrafetat: WRI 
area cat ef acs facie a | 


Laks 3.260; Hem 3h. 773 —- a) NPu! “epfert’; Kt? “aftr: cMd! tMd3 GMy Tr! mTr* mTr® 
“zertparst; Jo? Lo} “Apathy; vis Arse; Pu? “Apare 7 — b) Be! Be? Bo pCa Jo? BKt® wkté 
Lo! tMd4 NNg Ox nPu! Pu? Pu? Tj! [Jolly M'-? G N Nd] Hem Jolly “sphrper, wKt) “aa 
wer, Pu2 Put “dawex; sBe Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? La! oMd? GMd3 oOr sOx! sPuo Tj? Tr? MT? 
Wa Vij Apa Mandlik KSS “gftoredar — c) nPul afte’; Pu2 Put ate; Bo Agreraar ; Tj? 
raga Be! Ho Jo? wKt! Lo! oMd! oMd@ NN¢g | Ox? NPu Pu* Pu3 Put Pu’ Pu? Ty. Tr! Wa Vij 

Apa Teadgar ; sOx! sPus “waar; Lo} “afar; Tr? “agar; wPu! “ata; La! “arent; Lo! 
Tj! art; Wa “ara — d) cMy PaareMsTHEY 7, Md? Paaserper 7 

215.* oMd? transposes 215 and 216; cGMd! +Md? transpose 215 c-d and 216 a-b; padas a-b 
ma sh in Be; padas a-c omitted in cMd), Cited by Vij 3. 289; Apa 175; Laks 3.260; Hem 
3/1.773-4 — a) Bo #ATeT — b) Lo’ om THT: TMd} BEIT Tr? TRIAS BBe Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? La! Lo? Lot Lo® oMd? nPu! Pud Pu? Manklik Jolly KSS “arearer, Lo! Vij Aer, 
Pu? “axeq — c) Tj! garg ; ; GMd! tMd? GMy Pu? Pu’ Tr! Hem Apa “ag arer, Lo! Lo? Lo? 
Pus Tj! T? Wa Na Re EIT; Bo Hata; nKt! “HGdorer, Be “Hdeer, Hy “wd- 
Sarreer — d) Vij arate; Lo’ “wher + 

216.* Cited by Vij 3.289; Apati75; Laks 3.260; Hem 34.774 — a) nKtt @aaT;, Pur 
TTA, wKtS daar; GMd> nPu! Tr? Re [gives Mac as patha] TUT; Lo! wae; Apa [vl] S- 
qar, nKt4 afte’; wKt® aifts’ ; Bo aitftrasr’ . wKt! antftsenra, Tj! tapat 7; Lo! om FT; wKt 
~~ b) BBe? BCa Hy wKt! Kt? La! GMd! oMd? tMd3 tMd4 GMy oOr Ox? Pu? Pu! Tr! Wa Lolly 
M34] TS ; wKt? Wo; nPu! qs: wKkt® as: sOx! sPu® “Rotts. wKt *Prufsrrer — c) La! 
Jo! Jo? Mandlik Jolly KSS tester; Lo! Lo} Tarared; Tr! yareq — d) Lo! oOr FareeT 
arate a; cMy aafeese; Bo sfeye; Tj! “feet 

217. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apaii75; Laks 3.260; Hem 3/1.774 — a) Pu Pu’ Ward; Be? 
tMd? Hare; Tj! Ferrey; mT r?# mTrs Feet; Hem Fated; Pu’ [but cor] aaa — b) cMy oOr 
eAtferars, TMd* efterara;r, Lo! sOx! sPuo ade:; Hem [vl] PAT: — c) Lo! aféenaraaarz; 
wKt® afaface: sOx! sPuo afaéar. aBe aftdart: Tr afar, Wa ast; Hem aante@ed: wKt! 
“Sarat Far; Lo? aaa ; sOx! sPus Hater — d) M3 “sarquoftascter 

218 Cited by Laky 3.270; Hem 3/1.782 — a) Be! arafet; nNg Pu’ Pu? Wa [Jolly G] 
are fect — oc) aKe aTy: — d) Ox? ae: wat; Bo aatTAT ; BK wKtS Lo? Lo} Laks a 4faep- 
fe:; Lo! ahaa; NNg aenfaefrr:; cMd oper; wkt “efter; Md} “pia: Tr! 
“apf; wKt! aster: 


548 Chapter 4 


Toa TET aT HET: aera URI 
wet Pafeerreat Garerncra tae | 

for anita acaeBrot Aer Roll 
qT UdSey MITA: HAST: Titathear: | 
daar carer aac aeftftor: 122 211 
WHASAAAMAAAT AMT SST | 

AMT Wal wepay tatraaAT T URAAI 


219. Padas a-b ma in Lo4; padas c-d omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Hem 34.782 — a) Lo? 
@® ; BKt Lo! Lot Md} Md? Ox} Pud Pu? HT — b) BKE wKtS Aofrtseer J; Kt? a; Pub 
40; Tj! Rita 7; Tr! om 7; Bo BKtS wKt® Lo} Pu? Pus J — d) Bo SHerda Fafa, nNg 

apteater 

Additional verse in Pu2; padas c-d in Put: 

frac aftrer gener dretargeer 7 | 
IAS Yeh TorTENISEAd || 

220. Cited by Hem 3/.782; Laks 3.270 — a) Tj! GI; TMd? Ga; Pu? Put wa; Tr! frat; Ke? 
era feat oMy gaffer’; Tr? Pafrerars; 1Md! fafscrarst JF — b) Jo? Lo Lo’ cMd! 1Md4 
Tr! SUPT Pula “Peat — c) cMd! areght’; Tr! arf’; Tr? arefftenrs, rMd4 areftrert 7 
— d) Laks am"arfaati, oMd! ao 

201. Cited by Hem 3/1.782; Laks 3.270 — a) Bo T UUT; wKt! J Udy; Tr! @ Udesy, 
Ox? T Uae; BBe Lo! TARA; Be! GMd! Ox? Tj? MTP [Jolly R] Laks Hema TRARY, Lot F 
ude [ma =X FT]; Lo? cere Lo a weaeay aan’. Be? easar ; nPul aster’; +Md4 
cayoorar:; Be! eutsarar:; La! *saTa:; Bo “SITAt — b) sOx! sPuo HHaeT TatfeaT: — c) 
After Remar Tj! jumps to end of 223 pada -a: 3 — d) cGMd! aercaet AAR: Bo Teese 

Additional verse after padas a-b in Pu!: 

gepd fe aqerorasenBrer ferefer | 
at west wate & ceaparter festerry || 

Additional verse in BCa [but given in parentheses] Mandlik [S, @] KSS Dave: 

wad werent afyarst a: ay | 
aaa: aes ofre aay || 
c-d) pCa SaaeT saHaTS Fars oe ST 

222, Omitted in Tj'; padas b-d omitted in Pu®. Cited by Vis 1.175, 3.257; Vij 3.289;Apa 
240, 11753 Madh 2.300, 305 — a) Bo Te Ywrd, Tr? FHardt; Ho YwHTadt; Madh 2.305 
BRATASAT ; Be Wor WAT — b) tMd3 eae acer g Pree feta; tM? Tr! Vis Madh 2.300 

“Fa q BE atc: cMd! GMd> “Hear 7ae ferret [coMd$ 378:]; Apa2ao [vl] “aaTaeToT ae; 
oOr Hae AE — c) Pus Pul HeMearyT ; Pu2 Pul qeatat; Bo Ho Lo! Tr! yer ae; 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Yar thus reading aTataq but Me and Rc the only ones to 
comment on this clearly read Uta; oOr WtePeeT — d) Lot Lo’ Pu!® [Yolly M]Vis 3.257 AT 
ar 





Additional verse in GMd!' tMd? [after 222b] oOr nPu! Tr! Tr? MTr® [Jolly Gr] given 
after 223 in Be* Tj! Tr Mandlik [ms. @] KSS Dave; commented by Re; cited by Dev 2.619: 


TEQIIS AGUS T THAT: | 


Chapter 4 549 
arrgger weaTst faaterataet” few: | 
areca Aaa asT URI 
mire weer aay aT areyy: | 
aaa sar: AAAAAHTTT URRVI 
ararTafeteer at Eee ort waz | 
HATTA ATT FAAAAAAT WRRU&IM 
age a yd a fer gateafa: | 
Tape WA a Aad: Cantal: URAEM 


_, PEATE TTT I 
b) oOr  @ATaTRT ama cMd> Dev fayemt: — c) nPul Tr? AT HAATTAAT ; 
Mandlik KSS Dave “Sera; Be} “areTHATL’ ; [Jolly Gr] “req TAT — d) Dev 
“ager ercarae’; GMd! “eregrera?”; Be? tMd* Mandlik KSS Dave “areta 3 ; 
[Jolly Gr] anh 
203.* Padas a-c until aeétas omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 244; Hem 34.785 — b) 
oMd) faferattarafe fest:; Lo! sOx! Pu’ sPu® fagtsraTfeea?; conjectural reading; all mss. except 
ST and those listed later read “-1f47; nPu! Pu? Put “afar; Ho “ATEAT; Lot ar:; mTr4 ae: 
—c) GMd! La! Tr! mTré mT arataredtarene ; Lo4 Ox? “HA eae” — d) Md? “@TeEIAT- 
dearafras, Hy Lo? Lo? GMd! GMy oOr Ox? Tr! Hem “garde; aK wKtS “gata; Be? 
*gares’ ; Tj! garde’; Lo’ “gafaeratse; La! “gartwatad; Lo! “gaarafray, Te “waa 
224. Cited in Hem 3/1.768; Laks 3.271-— b) TMd3 AaqnaereaTer aTeyt:; nKtt sOx! sPu 
aewer; Pu? Pul aerqer; Tr? a@eq FT; GMy om 7; Be! Bo Ho art; sOx! sPuo Tr? areft: 
r arge:; Lo! Waargu:; Tj! arias: — c) Lo! ahritraeentt; Tj! “Predreatgar; Wa 
“cared; Tj? “erratéar:; Be? dar: — d) Ox aHET AAT; 1Md3 GMy TAM ; GMA AT 
THETAT; Bo Lo! oMd? oOr HeTaT 
225, Cited by Hem 3/1.768; Laks 3.272; padas c-d cited by Har-A1.19.5 — a) wKt! 
aan oMd ! rMd3 GMd> GMy sOx! nPu! sPu® Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr°Laks “afaene; Hem 
*aferte BT; Be? Bo nKtt wKtS Lo? UeeT; Wa eaT; Pu? Put “aeareHt — b) Be! Jo! Lo 
Md? nPu! Pu® Tr? [Jolly M4 Nd R] Laks Mandlik KSS BA, Kt? Lo’ oMd? Hg; Tr HY; 
wKt! BK wKt® pe; Tj! Hs; Lot Ps; oMd? HA; Tr' Beet far — c) Lot Tj! srs; Md? 
oMy aryd; MTP reread; NKtt sOx! sPuo aqaTET; Tj! TarTET; Lo’ sarerer — d) BBe? ét 
afta, Loe aaaprgaraed, BK “dad; wKt® “Saad; nPu! “aa; La! “SRT; Pu2 Pu 
“Fae, Ho Fat 
226,* Omitted in Pu’ Pu’. Cited by 4pa 290; Hem 1.86,2/1.30 — a) Tj! 37; Wa VE; 
Tj! Gat; oOr WF — b) NK GMdd GMy oOr Tr! MTr4 [Jolly Gr] Hem Apa Gata, ~Md} 
Haren: cor to Pataaacd: — c) Lo! “we Harada; cMy Tj! Tr? wera — d) oMd) eae 
eet, wPu! “art; Wa ade: 
Additional verses in Wa; the first two also in BKt’ wKt® and the third in Lo® [given after 
225 ]. All three verses commented on by Me, and the first only by Re: 
TANT PAAR Aaa | 
at anfaedr qayadisrer afew: 11211 
ettepitarttrsatrertarggtad: | 


550 Chapter 4 


amet fra Fraafteactitery | 

akg west Wea ahd: URN 
afenhratr ater atfraarrqaar | 

serene FF aearst Taras ade: Rec 
athtaea trararter Gare: 

free: sobre dhaqaageargy UR2S il 
wrt wRraratter atefargherer: 
Tear aah Saat BITTAAT RZ oll 


aes HRI 
obrEgerataitintresraree: | 


MAM Bet TPO ayerEdy 1A 
1. a) Wa “ate” —~ c) wKiS waft — d) wKeo “Aeat ger a fee; Me “Arar, Wa 
“yeqateret 
2. c) BK wKto “@reeanet TIS 
3. a) Lo’ oIPaar eesti; Me [patha] “eaaat” — b) Lo “ares: 

227, Padas a-b omitted in Pu’ Pu’. Cited by Apa 282; Madh1.165 — a) Lo! oMd? cMd° 
Apa Madh @¥; sOx! sPu° “eit; Tj! “eet; cMd! “erat; tM} “et; Bo + aaa; Tj! Pater — 
b) Madh Preaaftracaras, Ox} Preaafte”. wk? nNg “Sfteay, oOr Te “Fifteanttfteas. od 
“atdar, Ho “afer; tM? Lo} Apa “aiftear; wKt! GMd! Tr! *gfaar, Put “gh erar — d) rMd* 
FTAA, Bo Fatet:; Put adds at end Sc: 

Additional verses in MTr* mMTr® [Jolly Gr] Mandlik{€] KSS Dave; cited by Hem 1.37; 
verse 1 in GMd@: 

arash at far: sferper sfaare | 
aaeg fatgssttea er cet + fer 11 etl 
war ped seq wfeeper area: | 
eats atrgsstta + of cepeadag IRI 
1. a) GMd° Mandlik KSS Dave “xatf€ — c) [Jolly Gr] # Fg” — d) oMdS erat 
fers fea; Mandlik KSS Dave TH BI A; Hem TET T 
2. a) Hem Jolly a; mTr* Fe — c) Dave [Jolly Gr] agar, Mandlik KSS Dave 
ary aq; Hem ays ar 

228. Cited by Apa 282, 385 — a) BK wKt® face — b) Te apres ; Lo! area 
qq ; nNg STaTAATAR Ho aParaarearg ; Be! Be? wKt* La! nPu! Pu’ Pu Pu’ Pu? Tj! TEE 
aa; Ox? aR, Pu!l? aTRTETT; Lo* Lo? “aT gUaT; nKf wKt® sOx! [cor to] sPu’ Apa 
282 “aaa; Apa 385 “aaa: » Ke “qa — c) Ox} Pul® sereeafer, GMd! seqera; Put sersra; 
wKkt! Seqsray, nPul aeaaad; Tr? Sereda; Tj! seqaa; Pu’ om FS; Tj? FT; Ox3 wears — d) cMd! 
“spare, wKt! wareater, Ca wKt} oOr Ox? aaa: 

229. Padas c-d omitted in Ox2. Cited by Vij 1.210; Apa 385;Hem 1.152; Madh 1.177 — a) 
sOx! La! sPu® Puf “aeatten’ Wa “aeghtar ; 7Md3 “aeqfear — b) Pul? que; Be! wKt! 
Lo! nNg sOx! Ox} sPu® Tr! Apa [v1] Jolly arr — c) tMd? fersueg— d) Tr! Erctsa? 

230. Padas a-b omitted in Ox?; not commented by Nd. Cited by Vij 1.210; Apa386; Hem 
1.152; Ma@dh 1.177; pada-a cited by 4pa367 and padas a-b by Hem 3/1.664 — a) La! nPu! Pu? 


Chapter 4 551 


TTA TAT AT APTA OPTS: 

wage: Per ger wrar ayer farewy R321 
TRA ATTA: | 

aes: WA Aer Fat aaTaTHeaTyT WRI 
aaa aarat gaara faerere | 
aT aa RASH SATAATT: NR 3 31 
at Ut FT Ast VIET Tasker | 

aerdare wret oratfer wfera rer: WR By 


asfaa sferrarfe zareataatar a | 
agar west: eat ace g rats UR ZUN 


a faerie avat aafeer a Arad | 


Put Hem afte: aarti; Apa 386 whe: ePPaafet — c) Bo Bo Ho nNg Hem afer; Lo! 
“srftr — d) Bo Lot Lo’ Ox? nPu! Wa Sei; Be! S27, cMyélard?; Pu? Pu‘ wager 

23h. Not commented By Nd. Cited by Apa 386; Hem 1.152 —~ b) sOx ! sPu® * Sree a 
ara ; wKt! Ox? Tj! Tr “strrrcarat’; sBe CmPaarat’; cMd! nPu! Pu? Put “Haare ; 
oMe? “Pucrat’; Bo Apa ‘Pat: — c) La! a4gee:; Pud Pu’ Mandlik Jha KSS Dave #48€:; Bo 
oMd’ Wa 41g¢:; wKt® aede:; Lo! atse:; GMy aged; TMd? Aga: Tr AAgS:; GMd! 
wAERT; Lo? WEFT; Lot Ox? ATS; Lo? aYSE:; Pul? ayaes:; Pu? Put wear Aa Pra; La! 
Prramife, Wa worfiret; Tr? tet; cMd> Tr! mT? MTr° Gtet;rMd} Grez; Madh Get; oOr Wet 
— d) Pul® atager; Te Wa THT; TMd? YeqeT; Bo TAT; Pud Pu? faces; wKe facet; wKt! 
fare, Jo! oOr Madh fared; Ke? face 

232. Omitted in Tj*. Cited by Apa 386; Hem 1.152; Madh 1.177 — a) Pu? Put aaa 
aay — c) rMd4 armeerpad; Wa aipad:; rMd3 GMy apadedted — d) Be nKt? La! Lo® Ox3 
Pu? Put Pu!® Tj! Tr? [Jolly M]Madh Apa Fel Pad; Lot Tal BWPadt; cMd! Tess; Pu’ 
aerarsat me to Tea AAT; aK wKt> afar 

233. Cited by Dev 1.145; padas a-b cited by Madh 1.177 — a) NKt* GMd! GMd@ oOr Tr 
MTr‘ mTré adar & Fart — b) oOr warerc; Be? Weert; Bo ferttrct: — c) GMd! GMd® cGMy 
Tj! ards; oMd! “adtarfae’; +Md3 Carafes’; rMd4 Cararfers” — d) Bo sOx! “afar; Tj! 
“afer 

234. Cited by Hem 1.17 — a) Md} GMy Hem f8; Lo att — b) nPu! Tae; Pu? 
werent; Put aaart; Lo? g ashe — c) Puy ata — e-d) Te verde otfer wfergfsrc: 
aye:; Hem ot or fe arat cemutfer fe gfsrc: — d) Bo sfayfsra:; nPu ! Pu4 “gard; Md} 
aMy “gat 

235.* Omitted in Lo* [Jolly R]; pada-d omitted in Pu*. Cited by Apa 290 — a) GMd! 
aifarar, +Md3 athe — b) Be! Ho Lo! amrefaa : Pu! aarcafac ; Be! pBe? Bo BCa Jo? wKt 
nKtt La! La? Lo? Lo* Lo’ oMd? GMd> NNg oOrsOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu5 sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu!® Tj! 
Tj? Tr! mT mTr6 [Jolly M]Dave Jha Aa at; Md4 “aaa F:; Apa AHA F—c) How — 
d) sPuo fareter cor to J; Be! Ho Lo! NNg Ti Apa F; Pu> Pu? [but cor] Wa favtac; Pus 
faqorey, rMd4 favert 


552 Chapter 4 


aratsaraatenr gear aftatdag wRsct 
aaa ate ag: enfe era | 
argfaaraart art 7 aftatdarr laze 
ad ga: afrqare acttefrar gferar: | 
UTeSaETAT AAYATHIASAT RRL 
arqa f& aerart frat arat a fered: 

a yaar a anferbiRasia Fae: URIS 
UH: WHA Heate wr Testre | 
THSayeh Gera Ud a gpdy URvoll 
ad ata arenteat Fert | 

fern areeray atte ea Tata WRY VU 

236. Omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 230; Hem 1.90 — a) BKtS wKt® Lo! sOx! sPué freraa; 
Pu!? fear: wKt! ATaT — b) Put om aefeg7, Bo aefetear; mTrt seferer; Tro aeferet, Ox 
Apa Fee; Lo! [but cor] aeaereT; BK wKt® nNg [Jolly M'?] Hem 4 ATI; Lo Ox3 
[Jolly | Ma 5] ard — c) Tj aye wT aefegrs; Tr? Ara; Lo? act; Hem Ard ae Bo 

“yaa; La! Tr? “aeara; Wa ‘@feaera — d) wKt? GMy ‘gmcer, wkt! oMd? Tj! een 
a oR’: oOr Apa [vl as in ed] St 

237.* Cited by Apa 230; Hem 1.90 — a) Pu? Pu’ era’ — b) oOr feert —c) Apa Wea- 
ara — d) Jo? Lo} [Jolly R] at arefer wicrare; Be BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? BKt> wKt® Lo? 
oMd? oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? sPuo Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 7; NNg 
[but me sh] Wa Brat 

238. Pada-d omitted in Be! Lo* Tj’. Cited by Apa 232 — b) Tj afafefptgtte:; sBe? 
Lo! aefte $4; sBe Be? gfe; Puo gfe; Kt? nKtt Lo! Lo! gPrar:; Ho sKtS wKkt® 9frerr; 
Pu Pu? GMd mTr* [Jolly G] after: Apa aftent:; [Jolly N] aferer:; wKt! cGMy nPu! Pu2 Pu4 
Tr! afer [wKt! GMy @&T:]; Wa afwerrt:; oOr Aiea; Ox? afer: — c) Tj! warars; Pud Pu’ 

art; Pu2 “art a —d) wKt dea; Bo oOr MTr® “Sted; rMd} treay 

239. Pada-d omitted in Be! Lo} Tj’. Cited by Apa 232; Dev 2.459 — a) NNg ma sh f8; 
oMd! 0Or Puta; 1Md4 @; Lo! Tj! aret ; PuS “are — b) Ho g; oMd? f&; Md} 4; oOr fercafer 
— c) Be! Be? HotMd? cMd5 GMy Pu? Tj! Tr? “art 4; MTr4 MT ro errs; sOx! sPuo “arer 
arf? ; wKt! NK’ tMd3 tM! oOr Tj! afer? ; Lo! af f° — d) Ho La! Lo? Md? 
tMd?4 GMy oOr Tr? ae; NNg [but mc fh] mT? Haar: Jo! Paes: 

240. Cited by Apa 232; Dev 2.459 — a) Tr? WaT; BK wKt® Lo? GMd! tMd? GMd> GMy 
oOr Pu} Pu’ Tr! Tr? MTrS Na Waa; BK wKts aq — b) Tj! Fa; Jo? wKt? Lo? Md? cMd> 
aMy nNg Pu! Pud Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr® Yolly G R] wAtact — c) Pud Pu? wat yeh T; Ho Tj! 
Tr walt yeh; Jol Wht wed — d) Bo Tj! Tr? “ataranifa gepd. Be? “ata omiifer 
gepe; La! Pud Pu? Wag; wKt! f; cMy agen; Pul? om gap; La! [bu me sh]. Pt 

241. Cited by Apa 232; Dev 2.259-60 — a) NKt* Lo! 4c; Apa WE Tess — b) mTr4 

aat — d) Lot Lo® Ox Pul® [Jolly M] atftatefet Hae [cf. 230d] 


Chapter 4 553 


ear fe aarrt are FATT UY AM 
rat Fer ara cafatearnyz | 

Wes AMIMY Aaa GionT UR sil 
SAAS TIAMAT | 

Pretty: qoqererreresrAeeaad UR YS 
THAT AT TT SAT ATA | 
TAIT: ASA AIA BRAPT URS 
qeart agate: RIT | 

SSA TATA AAeNl aAuat: URvE Il 


242, Padas a-b cited by Hem 2/1.14; Dev 2.459-60; padas a-b cited by Apa 232 — a) 
oMd eater afedt a; Ke Md! “at; Put om aerart — b) Bo af af": Be? Tj! “gag: — 
c) wKt! efite ger — d) Md! aaeaefer 

243, a) TMd4 Tr! ef; 1Md4 wert; GMd! “wat; cMd! geveataT— b) Bo agar fepfeait 
fF; Be? Tj! TAT; wKtS aT; NKE BKtS wKtS GMd! 1Md? Md) GMy NNg Tr! mT r® @eaty; 
Lo? [Jolly R] g=pct — c) 1Md3 oMy ofaetay; Ox? “Star; Lot oMd Tj! Tarengy; wKe 
aremgy — d) rMd4 aet Serhor war, rMd3 weaet:; Lo! sOx! sPut errr: Tj’ want ; cMd! 
oMd GMy Tr! mT rt @arf ; Lot aerator; Tr! eardifeor, rMd? @arattfent; Tj! @erafear; Ox? 
aq waar, Pu! saarétRor 

Additional verse in GMd! tMd4 GMd Tr! mTr* mTr°: 

a fe aereadiarg 7 arent yarate | 

aa wear waret et vents | 
a) MTr4 aareereft’; cMd? “eftarat — c) mTr4 omits the pada; cMd! Tr! wafer; cMd! 
+Md4 Faved; MTr4 MT ro GaTeT 

A further half-verse added in Md? Tr!: 

aera Poca dearer: er | 
b) tMd4 farearesarerayr 

244. Cited by Madh 1.478 — a)sOx! sPuS SoH: Jetied; Pus Pu? sas: are fret — b) 
pBe? a: Fa ; Tj! eat age ; Tr? Vesey; TMd? GMy Pet; BKE wKt> “Veate; cMd5 EU: 
— c) Tr? Pref; wkes Fetter: — d) Tj! Cerarerar caste, GMd! rMd? oMd? GMy Tr! wT rt mT 
* pA AERTS 

245.* Omitted in Bo; padas a-b omitted in Md? GMy. Cited by Laks 2.276 — a) Lal 
“aaa; Jo? Lo: “HIRT — a-b) BBe? Be? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} oMd? Tj! Tj? mT} Laks 
Mandlik KSSSHAA Resse Asta — b) Be! Be Ho BKt> wKt® Lo! Lot Lo? 
sOx! Ox? sPu’ MTr4 Dave Jha Volly M] eq; mTrS Gat ast; Be! Be? Ho wKt! Ke Kt 
wKt® La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® cGMd! tMd* GMd? NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu? sPué 
Pu? Pu® Pu!® Tj! Tr? mTr® Wa Laks ata; NK asta’ — c) TMd* sereratceat afer — d) 
NKtt TMd4 mTr* MTr® Laks TAA J; Tr! Teravater 

246, a) nPul qeuret Ageia; Bo Fgelet, Be! ggdfa: — b) Be! “a4 Haeq; Ho Att 
aaa; oMd2 “saad; wKt! “afar; Jo? Pul? “eae; cM MTP “dae; BBe “Fas — c) 
Lo! Lo} afar, TMd3 GMy Tr atféar; rMd? My darren, Tj? Saar: Lo! eAareTt 7; 


554 Chapter 4 


Udleh TOKOHANZIT TAT | 
Wad: MRIS ATTETATTTS ATT URS 


ao ee aera NRvsil 


Ox} Heart — d) Be! Be? Bo Tj! Te atest: sBBe Lo? ate, NK e oe aT; Ox? TaTAT:; 
Lo! aarga:; [Jolly N] ceatact:; cMd! qferac:; cMd® Tr! mTr* mTr® geaet:; Md? Gea; Bo 
aarad:; La! Pu2 Put aafar:; sOx! sPus aenfafer, Be} Tj! Te warfea:; oOr aa: 
Additional verse in Be? Ca La! oOr Tj!: 
BAT AAT ara Tavs TAIT | 
THI SATA HIMT ATCT II 
b) 0Or aH, BCa 00r fata — c) BCa La! aqearay; Tj! aar eATAT; Be? Bee 
ae; Ti steals ae 
247, Cited by Vij1. 214; Apa 406; Hem 1.56; Madh 1.190— a) Ox3 wares Re Were; 
Ho “Tes we — b) Tj! “area; Be! La! Lo? nPu! Pu2 Put Pud Pu? Tr! mTr? yfed; rMd3 
“sated, Apa wet — c) Lal ada — d) aK wKtS “agtaeeaatar’; Lo! “agtareuraa ; 
Madh Hem ary are; wKkt! “arerdaraa’; nKtt Lo? Lo? Lot Ox? Pu! Pu? Pu} Put Pu 
Pu’ Pu! °sitare” ; Tj! ara’. ; Ho Lo! “@ferer 
248. Cited by. Apa 407; Hem 1.56 — a) wKt! wKt® sOx! sPu® TET 5 Tr? EAT ; Ho 
aga ; Lo! areal ; La! aga; [Jolly M'2-9G Nd] ViDh 57.11 ATEAT ; Ho La! nPu! Pw? 
Pu’ [me sh to] GMd! Tr! Hem Apa arecryeat; nPu! Pu? Pus Pu’ Pus atgaraead; Apa [vls] 
aeMafect and AeA eTAT; Md? cMd* cMy SaaTaTEAT, mTr+ Tr’ SecTATEAT; Lo? Put 
Pu!® Tr? [Jolly M?°] “gfeat — b) Tr? “&a afeat. Apa [vl] eratfeat; +Md? cMd} [Jolly 
Nd] 4pDh 1.19.14 Fafeat; wKt! “Ae; cMy “Afeat; Ho Ox? Wa Tifeat — c) Be! Ho nK# 
oMy treat wera, mT! MTrS atoar msrafey; Pu! #y:; GMd! a4; cMd! GMd? Tr! [Jolly 
Gr] “ofenitsaratr; Ow “watt — c- d) Md} arer serafeta acafegaperertter: — d) cMd! 
oMd@ Tr! Mir! mT ro aorftor:; My “aatfter 
Additional verse in Tr! [after this it adds the first verse given after 249]: 
Te Freer dents fesrra: | 
7 cae aganaey Baad FET II 
249. Cited by Apa 407; Hem 1.56; Dev 2.463 — a)oMd! GM® Tr! Dey + der frat- 
laa Ta} apatfer — b) Apa [vl] at-— ¢) Pus Pu? Tj! Te; nKkt4 a@ef” — d)tMd? cMy 
-Lal Tj! “Heraaere; cMd>  HeaaaeTd; Apa “war 
Pe eee verse in Be? wKt! Lo? GMd! +Md4 GMd> oOr Ox? Pu? Pu? Put Tj! Tr? mTr4 
mTr® Mandlik[11 mss.] KSS Dave; given after verse 248 in Tr!; commented by Rc. Cited by 
Apa 407, Laks 2.245: 
PatpereapayMt werner aTgt: | 
Teel Boer Sraars asta || 
a-b) cMd! Haprat aereadiftrerarr aft: — b) rMd* Tr? Mandlik KSS Dave 
fret; Be’ wKt! Apa [vl] weeds; Pu2 Pu‘ Tj! Laks eed; Apa AIST, 
Ox? mea; Ox? Pu? Put argy:; wKt! areas: — c) Ox? TET; Be? Tr! mTr° Laks 


Chapter 4 555 


WAT TEL BATT TWearag: ger Aufterfe | 
ara AeeaTeTay ATT Tse AT aT Pfs URvoll 
Jaq yaathatatkrearazaresty | 

ada: wigs FT TaRaT AT: URGE 
Tey wvadtay far ar aie aaq | 

arert ahrateray Weaayag: AaT WRAY AI 
snfte: Sure a arrest aaarhirat | 

Ud Weg wieaat waranty PraqIaq WRe“ Rt 
BTaRSeT Waar Argan wT Reraitaay | 


Tse; Lo? GMd? oOr Tee — d) GMd! mT r¢ mTr$ Gereahs; Te! Gray 
Another additional verse in Be? Pu> Tj! Tr? Mandlik (©) Dave KSS; commented by Re: 
a faaaraa & ofeorer fesrsrar | 
famenfaear g ater: watt: I 
a) Be? 78d — c) Mandlik KSS Dave feear’; Be} Tj! fae; Pu? faaot — d) 
Tj! water: 

250. Cited by Vij 1.214;Apa 406; Hem 1.56; Dev 2.463;Mddh 1.190 — a) Ho GMa 
TAT, mTr*3Raeat BIT; Be! Be? HonKt4 Lo? My NNg Pu? Pu’ Tj! mTr® Wa [Jolly R] Dev 
we; wKto Tete; wKt! GMd! Madh Barayert; Wa BaAraAs:; Pul? wearag:; Tr! Wearay:; 
7Md‘ Farry: — b) Ox} ApataraTa:; wKtS Lo! Lo} Hem Wearss:; La! wPul Tr! afer efer; 
Be} Bo Lo! Tj! B& GfY; Hem HET afer — c) Madh Hem Apa WeaRIMT: Ta; La! Lo? cMd5 
sOx! Ox? Pu} sPuo Tr? [Jolly R] Dev [vl] aT; cMd! atear, TMd? Md? ae; Ho wKt! mTr4 
arnt, Tr! ar; Ke? aeeareat — c-d) Pud stearate aera a — d) Tj! aaa; wKe) 
fade; wKkt® frsaa; Hem Frgsa 

251. Cited by Hem 1. 56— a) Lo! cor to ge; sOx! sPuo yeargfaar ; Tr? “sdteoitét’; 
oMd! “sate ft’; Md? cMy “safes. cMd’ “sitsafinfeFs — b) sOx! sPuo “afer”; 
nkt! “atfirer®: cMd! °saza° — c) sOx! sPuo ada; Ho waafe ; BK WKS “aM + — d) 

x? “aTAgaey ; Pud Pu’ “ores ger’; Tj! Caraga; wKtS wKtS tMd4 “ara gat wa; 
Jo? Lo? 7; Be! aa; nPul ad 

252. a) tMd afeeg gate ay; oMd! qeftadg Fey; wkto Toray; oM y 
wordt’; BKt aay; cMd caudtag — b) Tj! fear aed Ze; Ho 7 fast He; Lo? fear 
dat Te; Lo? aes; cMy ares; wkKee ar F TS; rMd4 Aft; Be? Ho cMd! GMd> Ox? gaat 
—) NKt STAT, oMd aitget; Lot Lo’ oMd? Pu!? [Jolly M] afrareTg; sOx! sPuo mTr® 
“Fre; Ox} aft [rest of verse om] 

253. Cited by Hem 3/1.785 — a) Lot Ng Ox? Pu! Pu!® Tj! Wa [Jolly M G N] Hem ViDh 
57.16 Jolly aties:; wKt! wKe anfias; Pu2 Put Pu? aférar; cMd> anféra:; Tj! afiree:, Pus 
afgay; rd? aftia:; ak after; wk antftfes:, cMd! afza:; Ox? aresfiet; cMy mT rt MTT” 
firrar, Md? Ras Be} Tj! °Raranfor ar — b) La! erat atorearfadt. Md! arate; cMy 

“afar: — c) tMd3 cMy Way; oOr 4g; aK wKto Ee; TMd? GMy Wears; wMd* Hae — 
d) cMd> weareart; Lo! fahaeag 


4 


556 Chapter 4 


aa aay aus Praeaq UWRevil 
ASAT TATA AT ATT | 

A WIPAAT Gl TAT ATATTETEH: URL 
arerat faa: at angen atttafr ge: | 

at TT: AAT A AAAAHAT: URGE 
wetitiaqgarar wearer aura | 

Ua ad wars aaa: R&I 
vate farcatrer fated feaarer: | 

weret Rrra fe ae satsRerakr uaecil 


uate qeeres afafirer aad | 
CTASAAHATA ATAT THT: FA: URYSM 
sat faut qaat adaaagrentad | 


254. Omitted in Lo! Pu’; ma in BKt®. Cited by Hem 3/1.785 — b) nPul Tj! tear; cMd! 
1TMd? GMy aTeater; Ox? anger Wa om 7; BKé wKt® J; Md} Fratfic:; wKe) Prastiar — 
c) sOx! sPuo a aattae”: Lot Lo’ war afta’; Ho ATG"; +Md3 GMy Saree’; wKt! ag- 
aeet; Ox} “aT; wKeo "wearer — d) TMd3 GMy dares; Pul? Presa 

ass. Page containing 4.255-5.2 missing in cMd> — b) Ho ear ferret; Lot Tr! afta 
—c) Be! “RTT — d) aKt3 wKtS 4; Lot S7;0Me? oOr a4; Pul? “erftar: 

256. a) Tj arent — b) +Md4 ager fatregan:; Lo! aTger; wKt! aTgat; Pu’ °frgan:; 
Lot Ox} Tr? PAP rat:; Lo? “Praga; Lo? “Preqar:; Tr! Refer: — c) Pe Pud Tet q; Be’ Jo! 
Mandlik KSS Tq; La! BG at A; Ho om T:; GMd! Baw ; Lo Ha ; Lot SAAR — d) 
Kt wKtS om @, Bo BKt’ 4a:; Wa Fat; Pu? Ty “eat; BK wKt® “wage AT: 

257.* Cited by Laks 2.434 — b) Ox’ Heat. tMd3 cMy ea : Bo oOr tear; GMd! 
Teareey, GMd! mT 1° Laks tuts — c) TMd? GMy FF; Ho aa; Tj! at; Pub Pu? [but cor] oF; 
wKt} La! ™Md* NNg oOr FaTaTe; Be! Ho TATAST; Ox TATA; Bo TATA; BCa TATAET — 
d) Tj! TTT; BBe? Jm cMd! Or Tj “arereraT . Be! Ho tMd4 cMy Pw Pu’ Pu’ MTr‘Jha 

“ATEARTAT » NNg ATRARTAT » Ke? (poe Pu? “arferat:; Be! sBe Bo pCa Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt\ BKt> wKt® La? Lo! Lo® oMd? TMd3 GMy nPu! Pu? Tj? Tr! mTr* MTr® Wa 
[Jolly R Ku] Ku Mr Mandlik KSS “aIPT:; Go appears to support a1Pircr. 

258. Cited by Laks 2.434 — b) Ox} faferent; Md? cMy fafas,; Lo! feararers:; Put 
aaarart:; NK’ Wa tt; Lot Lo? Ox? Pu! [Jolly M] arr — c) wKt® Pu? Rrra; TL 
ferarar,; GMd! +Md3 tMd4 Tr! Laks Peecrafray:, mT rt mT ro Faraetfea: wk! “are —d) 
oMd2 aesenfed taT:; nKe “faer=asfer; wCa Lo? f& aeesfer 

oMd? comes to an end after this verse with the colophon: Yyefear: GATeT: 

259. a) wKto TuaTfeeT — b) oOr ara: — c) Md? sOx! sPuS ATAaT, Lo! “HEAT TZ; Ho 
peqed — d) Kt? wage ; cMd! Pu? Tr! mTr3 MT rémTr® “gfaae:; Lo} * afaene ; Jo? 
“afeare:; Lo! “att; Pu Pu? “&e:; Lo! 3; Pu! get; Pud Pu? 9e:; oOr A: 


° 


Chapter 4 557 


aaa rer gate AdtTe URE ON 


NW gfe are tare wiharat afearar 
Waa Seay: 


260. b) Ho La! GMd! *Md3 GMy nPu! Pu? Tr! mTr! mTr gaaeS — d) oOr fea TAT 
whet 
Colophon: Be! Lo! tMd3 nNg $f Tara; Tj! sfer Ararat; Lo? arareat; wKe 
yysth; Be! wKt! BKt® wKt® sOx! TMd3? GMy wNg sPuf om BHAT Afsarar, Lo} wy TH- 
afearat; wKt? cGMd! oOr Pu’ om afearat; Be! ara? ary west; wKt! qeerniarrt ary 
agar, oOr Weerasat amt weal; Lo! qeerrtarry wget, nNg Sree aquy, NNg ear: 
oATd: 


[aSaatseare:] 


qa way ear wa Ary | 
PATHS ATT 2 
wa waite fort certaafasary | 
wer Ay: waar aagrertaayr wT URN 
a agar sate Aedtaaar wy: | 
yaa BT steer yegtassoratates st 
ARTA ATTA TF AAT | 


weetqaaarer Fafassratata Ws 
O™t WSat Faq weg waar | 
shy Bordtaraternrahtr aT Ul 
MSAIAITAT TIATTTATTAT | 
ag wert a tga saaet frataq Nel 


1 a) Tr’ Jaa ; Lo? aT ; oMd! 4 year erga — c) Lo! “gerer; sOx! Pué sPu® 
Pu? “giferanrs — d) Ox) “THA: Pu2 “aHAeT; Pul “Agen ; TMd4 “awa; Be! yp; 
TMd? GMy wNg Pu’ Je 

2. a) oOrUd; Lo! Lot arm; Md} faa: — b) Ox3 “gfesd; tMd? “afecear, Tr 
“qfteat — c) Md‘ Fat — d) Lo? @aares’; Lo! “areraat; sKt’ wKt® “sneayat; Tr! 
“areafadt 

3. b) Tj! FeFTAT ; sOx! Carag; Im Cara — d) Tr! Faor Rr 

4. Omitted in sOx! Tr!. Cited by Madh 2.8— a) Pu’ HeraTas; Pu? HaTRITaT; Madh 
aparareg — b) sBe? HocMd! sPus “ver feastata; Tr? er faasfare; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G]q; 
oOr oMy asta; NNg Pu2 Put Wa Madh OFA — c) wKts “aeloeT; GMy FatITeT — d) Bo 
“Femi ; Md? Carafe 

5. Cited by Har-A 1.17.27 — a)cMy @§; Pu!l® eat; Home; rMd? aayt — b) 
TtMd? aMy Tr aug; Be! Lo mTr® Temgy; NNg [Jolly R] Har-A TOS; nKt 4 THME:; Tr? 
aera, +Md3 weaitt; Md! Haat; wKtS om T — c) Be? wKt! nK¢ aaenfr — d) Tr 
"yar; Lo’ tMd3 NNg Tr! “sath, Lo! °wafi; tMd4 ° aan; sOx! sPuo “sate; Pul? 
“waratt 

6. Cited by Hem 3/1.567; Dev 4.232; Madh1.711; padas a-b cited by Vis 1.170; Vij 
1.171; Apa 247 — a)mTr® afar — b) Tr! Paar ; Bo wae nPu! ayy: TMd3 TAT 
1Md4 aay: NKt SeIAW ; Pu? Peaayeaiear — c) wKt Lo! Loi ae; Hem 2G; ake wKt 
ats; TMd3 ag; Ho nKt! GM? 4G; wKtS Tet; BBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt? BKtS wKtS oOr Ox? 


558 


Chapter 5 559 


FUTPALaATS TTTATTTAT 7 | 
arpa sararher edit az ill 
afardaran wr: efiatetaaré aur | 
ofr aRreettt fracararay at: TT: UCI 
aI Tatar at afer ferar | 
eat ta acai edger te ei 
afr wer a gmy ad a array | 
arf taht gore: Bt: Ug oll 
ware: WEAty aaterar vrata: | 
afitiettearnittetear a fractae ue ei 


Pu} Tj? Tr? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 847; La! Ter; Pul® at; wKt! TA; Pu? Pud Heyy; 
Ke agua — d) Lo a aa 

7. Cited by Hem 3/1.610 — a) GMa gar & Aedara; Tr! qar ; oOr Ta; NK wKt® 
La! Lo! wNg oOr Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? Hem Hare’; nPu! “wane; sBe? aCa wKt “HIT; Lot 
“were; wKt! “ETE ; Hem ‘ware; La! “aaret, Ho “Fare — b) Be! “garter, sOx! Pu? Pu} Put 
sPuo “quart — c) wKt! wKté “eT 5 tMd3 1Md4 GMy Tr! Hem “aie — d) TMd3 
zararfe; Lo! gant, Hy efafr 

8 Cited by Vij 3.289; Har-A1.17.23; Hem 3/1.567; Laks 3.294; Mddh1.712 — a) Ho 
wKtS cMy aifafearar [Ho “aT:]; TMd? afafear; dé afardars — b) Be! Kt Tr! “rire Ho 
“ster; wKt} Pu’ Pu’ Tr! Tr? Vij Laks Dave ‘pars; cMy Aaah; Tj! “Aearwetar; Pu? Put 
*aret— d) Tr! facarat FT; Lo! faaararar; Be! tMd! Tj! mTr° ait 

Additional verse in Mandlik [1] KSS Dave: 

eftaftr aeareattr afgererery ger: | 
aad Halaaest sated: | 

9. Omitted in rMd*. Cited by Vij 3.289;Har-A 1.17.23; Hem3/1.567; Dev 4.235; Madh 
1.712; padas a-b cited by Apa 246— a) TMd? SiQvgTaT; tMd3 GMy Baler — b) Tj! qarorr- 
Aft; Be? sOx! sPuo afed; Tr? afear; BBe Vij Apa Har-A Dev afett; GMd! cMy afeft; 
oOr Hfeat; rMd3 Hardt; Tr! Madh arfectfaar; cMd5 afedtfaar; mTr4 mTroatetiaar — c) 
oMy eft Taras [om St]; sOx! sPuo Sefer; rMd} tarqasaihy; Lo! ast — d) Har- 
A “Bente; Be! Bo {ePi; Lo! “quatt; Ho “gay; Pu2 Pud “Ger; Tj! “gent; nKe Ox} 
e 

10. Omitted in rMd*. Cited by Hem 34.616; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.289— a) Bo Hy 
wKt! Kt? Tj! set; Pu wet; oOr Wh; wKt? La! rMd3 GMd5 GMy Pu? Pu’ Tr! [Jolly G R] J; Bo 
Tj! Jey; Ho Thy; Tr! YhY; Pu’ Lolly G] wr FT — c) cMd! Aa’; wCa wKt! wKe3 
“Rrgaed; sOx! sPuS [but cor] Praaret, Ox} “Prgart — d) Pu? Put gate; Ma} es 

1.* Before verse 11GMd! places verse 5.24. Cited by Hem 3/1.582; Laks 3.298; Dev 
4.246; Madh 1.717 — a) NNg NPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tj! Te mTr* mTr°Go [Jolly G] 
HeaTz; Be! BBe’ Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? La? Lo? Lo* Lo® Md? tMd?4 GMy oOr 
Ox? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Lolly Ku R] Mandlik Jolly KSS Hare; Lo! wate; Tr? aeett; Bo Ho 
BKtS oOr Tj! KSS WHA; wKtS Bast; Wa WET ; Be? Ho BK wKt° cMd! tMd3 cMy 


560 Chapter 5 


wolag Ot wt aT UAE ECT | 

US WHATS AW ATS YRARH Ue2 
Wasatswas saheratattawry | 
fracortar AeeMTaTy aT A_TAT FT UL AN 
qe UT Fore WT sales Bolen | 
ARIMTAAZUTETAT ARATAT TW AAT: ULL 
ar eq areata & aaa Tee | 
ARMS: AAA RAAT Aaa P&I 
arétaifeararat framat eearwerat: | 
usftar: ffeqverar aqreatata Tae: LEI 


oOr Tj! Laks Taras; Lo? Taterar; Hy om Tata — b) Lo! ear ot; Put are 
afer: c) Be? Lo! “tepitas’, 1M? tMd? Tj! “tet Yay; pCa Ho wKt® Lo! GMy sOx! Pu’ sPus 
Pu’ Pu’ Tr! “arm”; BBe Be? tMd? Tj! “arnt fe"; rMd4 “art fF"; nKet “Asie” — d) Bo 
“armrfaferd; La! RY; Hem feater; Be! 8Ca wKt} cMd! [Jolly Nd] “feubata astaq; Lot Lo’ 
Ox? [Jolly M] “fxr oRastaa; Be! Bo wKt! wKt nKt La! Lo! Md} tMd? GMy nPu! Tj! Tj? 
Tr! mTr® Wa Dev aa aad 

12.* Pada-d omitted in Be?. Cited by Hem 3/1.583; Dev 4.246; Madh 1.717 — a) Lo 
prefs, Pu’ prefs; Tr! waft; Be! Hy wafdar, Md? wéaweT — b) Be? Bo Jo! wKt! Kt? 
Tj! Tr? Hem [vl] Dev Jolly WaHT¥; wks THIF; Ti? AHrT; Hy THT — c) wBe* Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? wKt? La! Lo? Lo? tMd? tMd* GMd> GMy oOr sOx! sPu® Tr! mTr4 mTr®° Madh 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave W341; Tr? Hem WAT, wKt> WIC; Ox? UssIgH; cMd! wya4rw; 
Tj! Wyetats [om AF]; Pu’ om "ars Tt — d) Tj! atege:; MTr! THE; Lo XP ; nKt* cMd! 
tMd3 tMd4 GMd5 cMy atftas; mT rt “atfeent; Be! “anftas; mTr$ “anftar 

13. Omitted in Be®; padas c- d omitted i in Ho. Cited by Hem 3/1. 583; Dev 4.247; Madh 
1.717 — a) Ho La! Tye ; Tj! FIR; Ng Ward ; Lo! WET ; Pu2 Put gear ; Md‘ wae ; Tj! 

“STRAT; Ox? “ara; Md? “Arete; Me comments that some take ST@UT¢ to be a wrong 

reading. — b) Lo! arafte; Tj! arafte; Pu Put rafa” — c) wKt? Pasar’; Pus Tr? aeendiq; 
Lo? Haare; Tj! AeeMTET, Tj? WeeATT — d) Lo! “AH; La! ait; BK OS att; TMd? GMd? My 
ae; Bel age, Tea ; Ti! TEE; wKe! agar 

14. Pada-a omitted in Be*. Cited by Hem 3/1.583; Dev 4.247;Madh 1.717 — a) Hoom 
gar da; wKt® we ta; rMd3 rMd4 GMdS NNg oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! Tr! mTr? mTro Tare; 
Be! qareered; sOx! sPuS om 7 — b) Pu? Pul HSS; Tj! eat; Be tas"; 1Md2 afsrees; 
Ke? @sreas — c) sOx! Tr? HeearétfPa; Ox? Pul? Lolly M2*-9] “wee 

15. Cited by Hem 3/1.583 — a)nK¢ ver arate; Pul? aia wearer — b) wKt} nKtt 
arad; Ox? asta — c) Lo? HeeEMe:; sOx! sPuS Weeaereas ”; Tr! CHfeaTe: gen” — d) Md! 

“areata GMy “are faa? ; +Md? “attar Fae 

16.* Cited by Vij 1.177; Hem 3/1.577-8; Dev 4248; pada-a cited by Vis 1.177 — a) Ho 
areer La! ara; cMd nNg “ara, TMd? nPu! “arareiy; Pu? Put “area; tMd3 ata — 
b) tMd4 mTr° Wa agent; rMd3 Prager; Na [patha] Pytéer — c) mTr! usftar; Be! sBe? BCa 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! wkt! Kt? wKt nK¢ BKt) wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo’ GMd! tMd4 cM 


Chapter 5 561 


T WAI HAM aay PEAT | 

wee ager AaASTTAAUT 2 ll 
ATT BoA TT AA RATATETAT | 
WATISAATA ATS Aaa: ULI 

ware fagee a aged aMEECy | 

Tas Tort Vt Aca sear wate fat: VSI 
Way TE ARAT Pal aaTy ard | 
atrararar ark sagas: Roll 
AAAS atepey Roars: | 
May yare arte T Frater: UR VM 


GMy oOr sOx! Ox? Ox} Pu? sPuo Pu’ Pul® Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr° Hem Mandlik Jolly KSS wsttary; 
Be} Bo Tj! usta; rMd3 usftat; Be! sBe? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt nKft ake 
wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo? GMd! tMd4 GMd GMy oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu® 
Pu! Tj? Tr! Tr? Hem Mandlik Jolly KSS ‘quer; Be? Tj! “ges FT — d) Be! Be Be} Bo BCa 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! K? wKt} nKtt BK wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo® Lo® Lot Lo® GMd! tMd4 GMd> oOr 
sOx! Ox? Ox} Pu2 sPu® Pu’ Pu!? Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr4mTr° Hem Mandlik Jolly KSS R3ewi- 
ata, Lo? acide, wKkt! aaeat Ta; Tro agpanaa; Pu Pu’? [Jolly G]adar 

17. Padas c-d omitted in cMd! — a) Be} waafegeerat ; Ke “sara; Pus Tj! wa. 
tM ar: wat — b) Lo! “wert arabia; KP 1Md4 “arara; wKt! Lo? Jolly RETR 
— c) Be? Honk! waaft, Lo? Pu Pu “caf ao Pféer; Ty! ayfecer; Ke ayes; yPul 
aarfetert — c-d) GMy 7 wet TEararRs + AeA [TMd? gives this as an addition after 
pada-d] — d) Md} aalerrrerece4r 

18. Cited by Vij 1.177-8; Hem 3/1.578; Dev 4.249 — a) GMy *alfaer; wK¢o safer; rMd4 
Hem *atag; Tr! satfere; Jo? Lo? Md? nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? sarfaas; Ox Pul? sarferear; wKe4 
rata, GMy erat; Pus Pu’ ates; Bo eH; Hem rerraT, Ho Vij [vl é as in ed]31g%, Tr! 
Pu’ Pu? mTr° tet — b) *Md* Pu? Pu’ Hem @y; mTr* ay; La! Ox? TH ; Hem at, rMd? 

“artery — c) wKt3 Pw Pu’ HEIST; sOx! sPuS Hear: TST; Be? WET TST; Pu2 Pu 
“sear ; Hem “Tae —d) Lo! “areas [but cor] 

19. Cited by vis 3.2245 Vij 1.176, 3.229; Apa1046, 1157; Madh 2.317 — a) Apa 1046 
gag fg’; rMd? “et; Tj “wert — b) Ho Ox 3g; 1Md? a4; Apa 1046 Bares ITT; 
Madh Apaio46 [vl] 37 — c) TM} MT r® Vis FeaUg, Tr! THE; Apa 10463 FT — 4) 
Be} STAT STRAT; Ho AeEATATEAT; Hy WRIT; mT r8 OTe; mT} wae; Ho ofa: fF5T:; Lot Lo? TT 
feur:; Vij 3.229 TARR: 

20. Cited by Vij 3.229,289; Apa 1157; Madh 2.317; padas a-b cited by Vij 1.176; and 
pada-d by Vij 1.175 — a) Bo apretarfird spear; Lo! amadarhy; cMd) aadaieg; sOx! sP ue 
ont spear @ — b) Pu? Put Beet — c) mTr6 omafe; wkt wKtS aferar ; tMd3 GMd cMy 
wT afear; wKt! Lo? Lo} Tj! aft; sCa La! da — d) Tr? faattge’; Ho wage MT rt pug- 
aT; - Bo TaAtee:, tMd4 “aedtae:; Wa aaee 

21. Cited by Vij 3.289— a) Be? Tj! dacae BHA, Lol sacarer fara, ma “ah ze 
ae — b) Jo? Lo? parepes, Te “STAT: — ¢) Be! Lot Lo’ sar; Tr “yeh: Ox? “aH; oOr 


562 Chapter 5 


wart areqitdeat: sarear apraherr: 
Fart Ba TERT TIT URI 
aygte yutera wear arrakerorny 
Teagqtraay AeetAaTT T URI 
aefaa Gea wer a ae 
agra efearr a azaT UYU 
frefereaft caremreterh fasnfahr: | 
qairerrt at create fairer: We 
Udgw feordtat weanteragrad: | 
Araera: waearier fates werracry WRENN 
We We META T BAT | 
matter Frame AOTATAT ATT URI 


— d) Be! BKt wKt® Lo’ ae; tMd4 staat g; Lo! 7 

22, Cited by Vij 1.179— a) [Jolly G] yer, Tj! dear — b) TMd? sare; wKe! Serer 
Lo? Tr? “afert — c) Md} 2Fearat;, wKto FeaRAT; MTP Tat — d) 1Mdé “et cet 
@ : Hy ATR; GMd! oMd Tr! Caeeaarae’s MTrt MTro TEAATAL ; OOr Tea TATE 
SW; NK MATT; wKtS “ae; Md} tMdé Tr! “ae, NK tt cGMd! rMd} rMd‘ cMd° 
GMy Tr! mTr4 rear, mT ro aera 

23.* a) Md‘ yererel — b) Be? wKt! wKt} Pud Tj! Hate; GMd! war, GMd> Heat FT; Pu 
aiatht aT; GMd! “afer: — c) mTr6 geery rest omitted; Be! Ho Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? nKé BKt® 
wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo Lo’ tMd4 oOr nPu! Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa Jolly Biihler KSS Feroreahy Tat 
—- d) mTr° wererst AAT A; Be! Lo? NNg Pu’ Pu? “aaAHaT; Ho “AaeTaT; wKe! “ersaty, 
Pu!° “erafaary 

24. GMd! places verse 24 after 5.10. Cited by Hem 34.616; Laks 3.292; Dev 4226 — b) 
Md} asaraATed; sOx! sPuo Pu’ [Jolly G] Dever; Pu’ wet; wKt! wer; Jm ST FT ale 
— c)cMy om ad; Bo tMd4 wet; Lo? Far; Pu2 Put “ARaTSe; wKto “Tae — d) Devg; 
Laks Hem @ Aaz:; wK Ox3 ae 

25. Pada-d omitted in Ox?. Cited by Hem 3/1.616; Dev 4.227 — a) Lo? Fat’; Lot Pax; 
Bo Ut; Pu? Put RL; oOr BF: Pu2 Put aA: BK arent: NK are b) Tr! 
cad Aergeh; oMd> carer Sermh 7; mTr? Serd; Tj? “Sera — c) NK tt “areas; oMd! 
“aes; td} cGMy “aera; wKt! Pud ad — d) nK¢ RTT: Md? GMy Fae Be; Dev 
qaat da; nNg waa; mT? Atefafsar:; Pus Pul [Jolly G] faferat; Be! Hy Jm Jo! rMd? 
GMd5 GMy Pu? T? Wa Mandlik KSS fafsar, Be} faqrar, Lo’ nK¢ nNg fepar:; La? faspar; Bo 
fae: 

26. Omitted in Lo*+ Lo®. Cited by Laks 3. BU; Dev 4.244 — a) Tr? UIgH; Bo Wage — 
b) Bo Wearmenre fesTeT:; Be? NK ¢ FaTHETA; Ho TMd? oMy wet Petra: — c) Tj! om 
yarenhy; Be} yaenfr— d) rMd4 serrestt; Put aera 

27. Cited by Laks 3.311; Hem 34.574; Dev 4.245 — a) Hem wanferd warae; Pul? mT 
mTr? sift; TMd? GMy Seer — b) Tj! sero: serzaT wat; GMd! TMd? GMd> GMy Tr 


Chapter 5 563 
Terenas at worafarecrre | 
erat wet Bae ad ororeT ASAT URCII 
aaa seorareqa ten: 
HEAT AaCATAT FETT aT ATT: URN 
ARM FAATATANT ATMA EASA | 
MAT FET Mara wiiratsae wa T llzoll 
aa afeafeeerr tar far: are: 
Basa wahre_g water faereerer 3 21 


wea TAT AAT WiIIaAT aT | 
qarerqartkrear areata T gear UZ 


mTr‘ MTr° [Jolly GrJDev aTarTeT; Jo? Lo} T— c) Tj! fafear fafrgeed; Be! wKt! wKe nKt 
Lo! tMd* oOr Wa Hem Dev Prgana — d) Tr? aTarITAaT;, Ox? °3a ARPT 

Additonal half-verse in Lo?: 

aeras Tare aT MreToaTY wera I 

28,* Padas c-d omitted in TMd3 and pada-din Ox3, Cited by Laks 3.312 — a)wKt? La! 
groreareifirg: sPuS om 44 — b) Pud Pu? Herat; GMd> Tj! Wa Berta — c) cMy Bax; Be! 
BBe* BCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt} nKt! BK wKt® Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® Md‘ oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put 
Pu? Pu’? Pu’ Pu! Wa [Jolly M] Go Ku Laks #4 Brae — d) cMy WTIfaHeTAT; Be} cMd! 
Irs 4; 1Md? a4 GT; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] Hts; oMe aitert 

29. Cited by Laks 3.312 —a)cMd Tea HRT; BBE BMTUTATSCT AT; mTr® 
ae: Pul® “sere; Ho GMd! rMd3 tMd4 Fre; mTr? MT r® Tae; Tj! wae; Tr! “AP 
— b) Be! pCa Jo? BKé wKt® Lo! Lo? Ox? Pu? Pu} Put Pus Pu’ Pu’ Tr? Wa [Jolly G] ot 
areaafterr:; Lo} “ut aft éfterr:; Be? “eftzor — d) Ke wKtS a Ate; Ho Hifea:; nPul Fear: 

30. Padas b-c omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Laks 3.312— a) Tj! TATE AAA, Tare, 
Pu! Fra, wKt! art; Lo4 Lo? 1Md oMé Tr! aray; Lo! Sq; Lo! Sarat: GMy FareT » M3 
Taaear ; Md4 Sergaay ; BBe? Lo! “ere, TM? “ATA — b) Ox? Pu’ mTr8 oIeTeate; 
Tj? whtrarreer — c) 1Md@ Wa aad; cMy erat fe; wKt! grea; sk wKtS greparemy, tMd4 
Get areas; Be? Bo Tr' ger; La! grater; cMd! @arar: sftr — d) Lo! mftrrearaicad: 
Md et Ua; GMd! “aoe 

31. Padas c-d omitted in Ox?. Cited by Laks 3.312;Hem 3/1.582 — a) Be! aaa; Lo! 
aaa; Pus aarafer ; Pu2 Put aatrassiPasta ; Bo sOx! sPuo afertia ; mTr? mTr® gfanta ; Tr 
“afar; Be? “HTeratv; cMd! oOr Ffeer wr — b) wKt! “Saat; Tr! ait cor fh “Stat; Bo 
La! cMy Tj! @a7, rMd3 a; ak wKto afer: -- c) Tr! sat; cMd? ga; oOr “apargrereg; tMd?* 
yaresr; ake wKt Tr? saceq; Lot Lo’ WATE; Hem WPT 

32. Cited by Laks 3.312; Hem 3/1.592; padas c-d cited by Hem 3/1.581 — a) Bo wKt® 
Lo! tMd‘* GMy ea; Im HtST; Ho AT Saeed; Be wkKt! sOx! Ox? sPu® Pub ary ; Tr? 
my — b) sBe? BCa [but mc] Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt sKt > wKt® Lo? oOr Volly Ku N] Na 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave were ; Ho Ox? aaer : tMd* qacfea ; Ho 1Md‘ nNg Tr? MTP? 
—¢) Treat’; sOx! sPuS “arate; NNg Hem 3/1.581 “arrears; Ke sareifircar — d) Jo? 
NNg TMd? GMy sOx' sPuS Hem 3/1.581 4 etTaTes; [Jolly Gr] geared, Tr! geater 


564 Chapter 5 


ararafaftrar ata faferstsarafe fac: 

arat gfaftrar are vaedeaasag: 13 31! 

aq Maat waerat Aneqeaha: 

alae watt Ter quratantet Gad: USVI 

frame wares at ate arkr area: | 

a der agar aft erarrattatey Ru I 
: eT | 


nag deparerearat Pfienftert: Wel 
eigary ay yaterery Ta | 

q ear F TM og WrscataT Zell 
arater QUIT ataepeat F ART | 
quraga: arate ser wether Tear URC 


33.* Pada b-c omitted in Hy rMd*, and padas b-d in Lo’. Cited by Laks 3.319; Hem 
3/1.582 [ascribed to Visnu] — a) Lo? “arfaftrar, Ox? °faferit, Tr! are — b) Bo faftrar’ — c) 
GMd! Tr! seareafaferar; tMd3 GMy Searafefear, mTr4 mTroerererfaterar, Tr 2 cafaferar; 
Hem & faftrar — d) oOrteaeae ; BBe? Be? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo La! La? Lo’ cMd! 
1Md! Ox? Pu? Pu’ Tj! T?? Te mTr® [Jolly R] Rn Mandlik KSS ¥ex Ae. Hem “ae FT :; Md4 
“aa fF @ BKE Te TA; wKes ae: 

34. Padas c-d smiled in Wa. Cited by Laks 3.319 — a) Bel aTsuTgat [but mc]; La! 
area; Pul® ager; Puld “att; Ox} “Star — b). Md! Pu? Put aT; [Jolly Nd} recA AT: 
BKt? wKt® “rgaenhir:; 1Md3 “aafearfes:; Trt athitar: — c) Jo? aTeat; Bo agate; Lo! aftr 
@a — d) Tr! ger ; Jo® Lo? Pul® area: 

35. pe By Vij 1.179; Apa 251;Hem 3/1.577; pada-a cited by Vis 1.179 — a) Vij 
anfafe famed; Lol cor to Famer sar ; Pu! “arat — b) Ho iat; wKt! aiareafer; Pul? 
arate, Be! Bo aTfer; Lo’ arf; La! [but me sh] GMd '! tMd? tMd4 GMd@® GMy Tr! mTr4 
mTr® afer & fgor:; Pu! Ht: — c) BCa Ho GMd! GM Tr! Tqarafer, mTr4 TaaTaa; tMd?3 
agar afer — d) Bo FHaTAw ; Lo! oOr Tj! “faarfer:; sMd4 “Parker 

36. Cited by Hem 3/1.580; Laks 3.316; padas a-b cited by Dev 4.246 — a) Tj! 
“areas” — b) Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? tMd? Tj? MTr3 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Barat — 
c) Bo [but cor] 44%; Md “aa: aT — d) Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] waraeray, Hem varefew; 
Be? nKt¢ Md? tMd4 GMd> GMy Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® [Jolly Nd] aaarterc: 

37.* Padas c-d omitted in NKt’. Cited by Laks 3.329 — a) Pu? Put wate ga; tMd4 
“a3; Ho cMd5 mTr5 “934; wKt! af; BBe? wKt} aa; GMd5 att, Tj! amt — b) Bo Batafte’, 
Be? Ho cMd5 oOr “SaeTaT — c) Tr! a; Pul? aa; cMd! Aa F; sOx! sPuo aa fF — d) 
Be! sBe BCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt sKt? wKt® La! Lo? Lo* Lo’ oOr sOx! nPu! Pu? sPu® 
Pu’ Pu!® Tj? Tr? MT? WaRe Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave erat 

38.* Omitted in NKt*. Cited by Laks 3.329— b) Be*® Ho wKt! Lo! Lo? Lo* cMd! rMd? 
1tMd* cMy Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Pu!® Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr° Volly M G] Dave WacHeas; Bo AacHear 
; Ox? TacHa F; cMd> traps; Wale; wKe AT: BKE wKto Aa: — c) TMd? GMy car 


Chapter 5 565 


aart aa: et: aaa ery | 
TASET YA AAT TST TSA: URS 
steer: Ugat qenhteioa: afeoreaa4r | 
aart Prert svat: stgaeghadt: ga: isoll 
aga a ant a fradacanifir | 

ae wal fer arateradierg: Ws 2 
vaty wfeacdarcarifrs few: | 

area wT aale TTA TET Us RU 
Te Wray at Fraaaretatierst: | 
araafafeat Rararcafht aarate ie sll 
at dafateat feat Prranferaray | 
asara at fresareat fF frehit ew 


qq — cd) Pu!? guragyerer fam: smatfer ver safe — d) cM) adr oeaPY; Lo! der 

39. Padas a-b omitted in nKt’. Cited by Laks 3.327—— a) TMd4 erat & Gara; MT'r! RT 
— b) sOx! sPu® “ae: —c) La! Tyyas FT Ast A [but me fh; cf. 5.41a]; Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! oOr Tj! 
Mandlik Dave Utet, nKt? wKtS aster; Lo! gagey; sCa Hy nKt Pu? KSS dered; tMd? rMd?4 
aMd’ cMy waite; cMd! aafe; mTr'mTro Ta; Bo Fa FT; Tr! aatPryet; Pu? Put yes; BK 
yet; nKe yer; Wa ret are; Pul yoate ed; Ho Aaa — d) Jo! nKtt MT r® TeHTET; Kt 
TATA: 

40. Cited by Laks 3.327— a) Tr! aftaem:; La! arqeat:; nKtt aaem:; Pu? Put soe:; 
cMd! sae; Lo! cor to araferasrar; Pulgerfer — b) sOx! sPu® “Reieanr; mTro ofertas; 
Be’ cGMd! Tj! oférerr Har: — c) rTMd3 GMy Ox? Pu!? dart; Lot [but mc] aTaret — d) BBe 
“waadt:, Im Jo! KSS =ycadt:; Lot Lo’ Pus “agdt:; Lo} “xagdt:; wKtS “waet:; Pu? Put “welt: 
tMd Peet: Tj! “Pagar:. Lo! “fesd; wKt! “adh; T7? “Rpadt:; Ox? “Pegat at; cMd> “Pegat 
atte, mTr? er; sOx! sPuo mTr$ Laks TTT: 

41. Cited by Apa 154; Laks 3.328 — a) TMd4 “Gebftt waft, Ho BKtS wKtS Apa Laks A 
J — b) Be! Be} Bo Tj! Pa Fat T HAT [Bo FF]; Pud Pu’ Pu es fst aT wafer, Wa 
sacattawatr, Pu? pul er; cMd! “@aer ; GMy eae — c) Jm wKe} feat; Tr! Tees oMd 
aea, Kt? Md? Pu? fens” — d) sOx! sPuo Tre aera aqeadia; nKe areraere” 

42. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? Pu!® [Jolly M]; not commented by Me; padas c-d omitted 
in La2. Cited by Laks 3.328 — a) wKt} ata; Tj! Bea; wKt! Tj! “Peae; oMé “Peers”; 
1tMd? cGMy “REEIFT; Jo! Pease” — a-b) rMd4 “Peerrreanrenitag — b) NK “aaa; *Md4 
ararrernt ; wKe “axarite fest: — c) Bo arerra7; BCa Hy Jm Jo! K? wk} Lo? cMd! mT 
[Jolly R Ku Nd] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ®& 2 [Jo! 3a]; Be nNK¢ IAT 

43. Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pul® [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 3.328 — a) Hy J@; TMd‘4 We 
TeAey; Ox? frre; Pu? Put Tae; GM d! Ferree, Wa Weare — b) Ho Paeert fad 
fesr:. Te fraaarar’: ; Wa radar > BK® wKt® "art Rar: — c) GMd! areauiear: Tr! 

“faféar; eMy "faftat —d) Ho aft fS am’; oMd! “aft 7 areata 
44. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 3.328 — a) TMd! a; Tr! “faf8at; Bo “ffFar — c) 


566 Chapter 5 


aisteeatet water eases | 
a steer qate a vahregeaad isu ll 
at werraepary oiftrat a Rretefer | 


a ader arg: ganeraryd veil 
Tear acHedt Ue aye war TT | 
aaa at faker + aT isl 
arpear swiftrat at staged wahrq | 

a a uftar: aera Rastaq scl 
agate a ae aqaaedt a efearq | 
verter Prada aatarerer wey US UI 

a werafe ar arr fat feear farsa | 

a ote Brat atte aarterhrer av dead tkoll 


Tr! far Jar — d) tMd4 Wa ‘eUAit; Bo “site; BK om ; wks “gat PRT 

45. Pada-a omitted in Pu’. Cited by Vis 3.265; Laks 3.329; Dev 4.251 — a) Lo! at 7 
feafer yar; cMd! ar eféart — b)rMd? feaerret” — c) nNg afta; Be? wKt oMy 
sfreaey; Be! sitar; Md! sft? 7; Im Fat ta — d) wKts “Rreearatare; Lo! [but me] aaa; 
Laks “earya, Jm “erie 

46. Cited by Laks 3.329 —a) My ‘ait’; Tj? “ati; sOx! sPu® “afer; Ho nKtt cMd! 
+Md? rMd4 oMd> Ox Tr! Rat; Lo? Bat; aK Rae — b) wKe rMd4 a Prat”: Ti}? 
Frat — c) cMd! Tj? om 7; cMd' aéeta [om A]; sOx! Ox? sPuS Tr? fa; cMd! cMd5 
[Jolly Nd] Gasrg:; Md‘ fet Fer — d) Lo? Md} GMy oOr Pu!? [olly M] “aR, Lot 
“aRReTga, Lo AT we; MT AeEMAAa, wKe “Hea, GMA “Hee 

47. Cited by Vij 1.181, Laks 3.330 — a) Lo? GMd> sOx! sPu® Vij teaTac; TMd4 GeeaIT- 
afect — b) Jo! K@ Ox? sPuo [but cor] Tr? mTr3 Ku Mandlik KSS9fc; Pu! sfer wafer; Be? Lo® 
oOr aT; Pu? Put €; La! ¢ — c) wKt! Lo Tr? mTr°Laks TET ; Be! Ox? Tr? aganit ; wKeé 
aé¢ant ; Bo Lal sife saa; Vij steafeer — d) wPu! at at Prefer Peat; oMd° at feat 
ere, Ho Pat 

48. Padas c-d omitted in GMy. Cited by Dev 4244 — a) Be! Jm Lo? Lot Ox? Pu! + 
Par; oMd! aepeaT; NK ¢ rMd? orftrar fear, mTr° fear — b) Pul? om Ara; Bo nK tt Tr? 

“geared — c) mTr® om 7; Be! RFT; Bo TMd3 et ToT; -wKktS apiece — d) Tj} 

camera @ feast, oCa eaefecenreraaftachinc, nKt! Pu2 Pus ® ae FT eT 

49. Omitted in GMy. Cited by Dev4.245 — a) TMd* aAata; Tr! ayeattr, Lot fe — 
b) cMd at war a; Lo! “arit FB; sBBe om FT; Ox? Pul? F — c) Ho Fad, Kt? Fraeter; Lo! 
Frade — d) Ho a4; mTro aeaer 

50.* Cited by Laks 3.322; Hem 3/1.581 — a) Laks Hem Ueq wead ATe;cMd! ar 
aerate atathr;, Lo! averafe: wKke! Tj! weaafe; tMdé setae — c) Te ome; Laks Hem 
aressftaar, Lo! efttrar, Be: Be? Bo PuS Pu’ Pu? Tj! [Jolly G] frrarafa; aMd! arf — d) 
[Jolly Nd] anfatadiesd; aMd3 cMy enfar a Priterd; oMd! Laks Hem “Brae crea; 
Lo! Pu} “Rr Pritera: Be! mTr' @ fread 


Chapter 5 567 


sara faraftat frecar waferrett | 
Gehar Waar a araeAta ara: 4 gi 
waate TAT at alate | 
rere figdar adap Uy RI 
ae asa Al att Wa TAT: | 
Arathet TT Alea: Trae AAT lle Ul 
BOTOTNAAGTATAT T WITT: | 


51. Cited by Apa 251; Har-A 1.17.39; pada-a cited by Vis 1.179 — a) La! Tj! fereRrar; 
Tr faerear a; [Jolly G] farex— b) Tj! Te? vera; rMd? Prat; cMd! fae: wT; Lo! 
“fear: — c) Tj! aeat; tM? tMdé4 GMy Tr AgeHat — d) Tr! sraaeafer areeer:; Ho wKe} 
nKt! oOr Ox? Tr? @aaeareararay: [oOr alewrar ]; cMd! cMy araawate, cMd afenatea; 
Jm Lo! tMd3 GMy sOx! Tr? ata: cGMd! rca: 
Additional verses in sOx! sPu’: 
aac feaftar Resa wate | 
Oar: AF Vas Tepat wes Tart 11211 
freatargaed w feerear area | 
Br TUT sa at HHT 121 
faa a aaerietepat acracdarc | 
at Tas serHeU aT 1131 | 
Pde sat sar drat cafettac | 
WAHT: TS TATEATAT AleHT AceT BAF: III 
aur wer aaa Baraat | 
HAS FAT We: Wer AHregester [141 | 
Aer Ae We: We SITY T: | 
ae qeareat FT Rrgiaesey FT AMT WaT HII 
alent Bde: Hat AAEM F aA I 91 | 
52. Cited by Laks 3.320 — b) Be? Pu? Pud Pu? Tj! aad ; Pu’ aia cor to add ; 
1Md} cMy Prasat — d) oMd! “Rare aergerp; La! “RaaeateT ; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
Kt Pud Pus Tj? MTP [Jolly Ku R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “areaaRay ATeeTIVA; GMd5 Tr! 
Trt MTS ars AeA” Md} aera; wKiS adr aR; wKe adler: TEST 
guy’; cMy adrerger ; Md? adtereager; Be! “aitféer guar’; PuS Pu? Pu? [Jolly G] Wet 
53. Omitted in cMy. Cited by Vij1.181— a) Bo a J Fest — b) La! Tr? arate; Put 
usted; Hy asta; Md? ard; wKto asta; Lo! aster warfea:; La! ac, Tro TAT — c) Be! Wa 
q @eea sieht cat; rMd4 @ Aidt T |e; Be? Ho Tj! a+ 7; La! Mega; Lo? 
w@eaedat: — d) Be? Tj! “aera; BK FT: La! oMd® guerast wet [La! gra]; Ox? act; Lo? aya 
Additional verse in Be! oOr Mandlik [H, $, €] KSS Dave: 
war wate ast wer arity seater | 
a amedt aar faa er ate faastac Il 
a) oOr Fer asf TAT — b) oOr att Faesfer — c-d)oOr Fer ATE safer AG- 
Heel aA — d) Be! ae 











568 Chapter 5 


qT aenertaate aaraakastarg Ue sl 
at & wakrargs wer arahteaper | 
Tate Atacd wafer aatiior: Weel 
THEN stat a a aT aT Aye | 
waka yarat Frakre_ AETHeT Kgl 
wagre waht sagt aa a | 
agatatt antat qaqa: Well 
TAMAS IAA TW FATS T aere | 
WYat Aa: At Faw A aM Uecil 
ae waar afrosy fereftarcr 
ARIAT SABEAT AT Ie QI! 
afrogat 7 gee ana fatrada | 


SATAN AATATA CATT UG OM 


54. Omitted in cMy; padas c-d omitted in Pu!® and pada- -d in Pu’. Cited by Dev 4.2453 
Madh 1.719 — a) BK wKt “yeray oOr MTr® Wa anfeat’; Bo Md} “apie ger — b) 
wKeé atraq — c) cGMd! + aden aaarsife; Tr? om FT — d) wKt! wateer feast; Tj! 
aarenaastarey, wKktS tMd} nPu! aaa; *Md} “shasta 

55. Omitted in Wa; padas a-b omitted in Pu'®. Cited by Har-A 1.17.39; Laks 3.319-20 
— a) Put Pref’: nPul “Rrar aa; 1Md? 1Md4 °Rrarrex — b) 1Md4 aez; La! “greré; nPu! 
“grease, Pu2 Put “spas — d) Md? My [Jolly Nd] faaBac: 

56. Cited by Kum 1.3.4; Har-A1.17.39; Dev4.245, 246; Mddh 1.719;pada-a cited by Vis 
1.180 — a) Lo4 Wa om; Tj? €11; Jo! Sit b) Bo + FS — c) BKS wKt® mT rt “Vat — d) Tr! 
fargfeer ; Bo cMd! Pu! “we; oOr Her; Md? BS 

57. Cited by Dev 5.13 — a) Bo Ho 4@; Be} saettfiy — b) aKtS wKtS  gfeeaaia; mTré 
om T 

58. Cited by Madh 1.570; pada-c cited by Vij 3.1 [intro] — a) Tj! NI Bed FT, NNg 
[but cor fh| &t; wkKe seasiragend; Be aT — b) nKt Haare wT Sferd; rMd4 Hasitar 
afere; oMd arpa; GMy HAMS; Tr! Pass; mTr® pray — c) Tr! agpet; nKt4 are- 
area; mTr4 arerat: — d) Ho wKt qa, GMd! ager 

59. Cited by Vij 3.28-9;Apa 893; padas a-b cited by Vij 1.52; Dev 5.35— a) Pu? Put 
aT — b) mTr5 ‘aravahray; Lo! aftveay; sk 6 aftve — c) Hy Jo! cMd> aay 
pBe? arered; wKt! amere; La! Pu’ tate; nKeé Kt wKt® Tr! erat; Apa arart. Lo? 
area nPu! aareraa mTr rarer d) tMd3 tex: Lo! sana Tr? “aareaaa: wKt! 
“AIS Us; Be! Jm Jo! Kt? Lot Ox? Pu’ Pu! Tr? Lolly M] 7 

60. Cited by Vis 1.53; Apa 893;Jmv 111.42; Laks 10.66; Dev 5.37; Madh1.590; padas 
a-b cited by Vij 1.254;Jmv 11.6.17; Dev 1.181 — a) Tr? aftvse; La! affvsa — b) Bo aH; 
td} dat — c) wKt! “gwar {; Be? Bo wKt? tMd? oOr Tj! Laks “HTaeT — d) La! 
Sarre; tMd4 “afer 


Chapter 5 569 


AATSAIAT ATA TaHy | 
Gas Aest eargueqar frat Arr: geil 
Pret gy grsgegreyes years | 


61.* Most mss. and commentators, as well as all editions, read here the two following 
verses. The single verse of the critical edition is expanded into two by adding two padas 
before and two after pada-a. In order to maintain the traditional numbering, I have omitted 
verse number 62. I give below the expanded version together with the variants: 

wae aranraire aftuey feeftacr | 
waar anyut yhefresary 11621 
aaat arenas areata yea | 
yaa Agee eargreger Phar afer: 11211 

Padas a-b of verse 1 are omitted in BKt® wKt® Lot Md? GMd! GMy nNg Ox? Pue 
Pu’ Pu? Tr! mTr* mTr® Volly Nd] Me Go Laks 10.17; ma in wKt®; added after verse 
58 in nPu! Tj!. First verse cited by Apa 896. 

61. a) oOr F8S; Apasaré Ba — b) nPu! fated ateprerar — c) tMd? GMy 
wt daaq; Bo TAABaa; Md? TATA; Hy nKtt sOx! Ox? Pud Pu? Pu? “aa 
— d) Laks wafey:; La! Put enfeger; Be! enfeged; Tr yfeta aw; Kt? oOr 
“Prasat; La! “Preset 

62. a) Wa airaitt — b) oOr ATaT’: La! sOx! Ox? sPuS Tr? “frater wKt! Tj! qatar 


After the first verse of the expanded version, two additional verses are given in cGMd! 
1+Md* Tr? Laks 10.23; Madh 1.583; Apa 896; both are given after the 2nd verse in GMd5 mT‘ 
MTr®. The first additonal verse is given after verse 58 in Be? oOr nPu' Tj! and it is 
commented by Na Re: 

suey caret goers T ysTT | 
ar ofewer oer: career Praca 11211 
Oe BAe cas: SH Batafarey | 
ferneartaakarort yeattary (1211 
1. c) *Md* GMa oOr MTr‘ MTr® wer oe: 
2, a-d) Md‘ gareratiearatas gareaterne | feet ghrmps Terrarrate 
— d) GMd mTr4 mTr® Laks Ra@rys cM! ° Rarer’ 


1tMd? adds several verses, the first before verse 1 of the expanded version and the others 
after 2. The first verse is given after verse 2 of the expanded version also in Be? Ho wKt! oOr 
Tj! Tr? mTr* mTr° [the latter two transpose padas a-b and c-d];it is commented by Rc: 
aaetagaey arrestin: | 
Taeaararetasery 11211 
tater ear: ravers ate[e]ater =z | 
aearafere: gor: Proaerfeaetr: 11211 
aa: ad oferer port oT Bera | 
wefan ¢ cenhs fesparsrerer weg HR 
fecererentraraferoralearrary IPS] 
1. a) wKt! aetent ; Ho arent; tMd4 aaeet — c) rMd? arerantgeare ; mTr4 
Tro eaerataetea ; wKe! warerataeten ; Tr? eitgaeart’; Ho “eiiraart ; Be? Tj! 
“onigqaare — d) oOr aa sud 


570 Chapter 5 


airerehrearangqeeaad FT NG 31 
Wet Wet teat a Reka a AP: | 


Taegan fageater srerdenaihra: ew 
apt: Serer Prong fagand garaty | 
Weatert: GT aa sees Qeata wea 


uriratagerienior year | 
wea aredt Braet Salt Greer EGU 


TARA iat FAT | 
fraargesrt 7 reargiahter ell 


63. Cited by Madh 1.606 —- a) GMd Tr! mTr4 Jaegy tMd? 1Md4 TRIE: Be! 
garyny; Lot Lo’ cMd! frat gay’; Put om qwaresta — b) okt’ “wfra eet; wKt! 
“Rr a, Lo? eyeata; oMds Tr! “eer fageafer — c) Lal mTr? Tr Afra ; cMd! afearr ; 
Be! [but me] GMd! tMd3 GMé& GMy NNg Tj! Tr! mTr! mTrMadh [vl] a@reft Fae; sOx! 
sPuo “arta dae; Be “Hreuda; Tr? “@reertaen’; Bo “aaMae — d) Lo! Pue Pu’? 
“SrATee, nPu! “oeeatefr 

Folios containing 5.64-140 missing in La?. An additional verse in TMd‘ is given below 
after 5.83. 

64.* Cited by Vij 3.18; Apa 883, 893; padas a-c cited by Vif 1.252 — a) NKt* La! cGMd! 
tMd3 tMd4 GMd? GMy oOr Tr! MTr'mTr® Nd Steaed Tat [cGMy UsATaT; nKe UsTATeNa]; 
Bo Hal, Ho aaraat; Tj! sara; wk ¢ — b) Md‘ a ware + PPT: Bo PraaHa; ake 
wKt6 Prerstta a; Pul? om Pf: — c) sOx! sPuP ara’; Vis daegait; tMd3 “eget — d) tMd4 
IE Tew ; Be BCa Hy Jo! Jo? wKt® Lo? bo" Lo° Md! oOr Tj* Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave =Ige® ; wKt Fewer ; Ke aeqew ; Tj! wegen 

65.* Cited by Vij 3.24; Apa 912;Laks 10.51; Dev 5.38-9; Madh 1.610 — a) Apa [vg au 
Pud Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] Brera; Bo Apa [vl] Rraer— b) wKt’ fagad; Tj faPaqars’; p 
Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo! Lo’ Ox? Pu® Pu! Apa Dev Madh Bh a 
11.197) Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave WATatq{ — c) Be! Ho Hy Jin Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} Lo! 
Lo} Ox? Tr? Wa Laky Mandlik KSS Dave 4aett:; Bo THeIe:; oOr tare. TMd4 Warere; BA [ad 
11.197] TATE: ; Jo? wKt! [Jolly R] tAeTA— d) Ox? Pu} Pu’ Vij gare fgeater 

66. Padas c-d omitted in GMd!. Cited by Vij 3.20; Dev5.4; padas c-d cited by Apa104; 
Hem 3/3.726; Dev2.308; Mddh 1.504 — a) mT ro PRAT. wKté “qentr ay os b) Pub Pu’ 
Pud “fram; Ho Hy La! oOr Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu? “27& — c) Bo Pu? Tj? mTr® ‘Saget; Ho 
“eae; Ox? “tas; Tj! wT Gat; Dev 5.4 tt wat — d) Apa [vl] Se; oOr WreaaT — After 
this TMd? GMy Tr? Tr! [Jolly Nd] give verse 78. 

67.* Omitted in Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [because Go comments on 66-67 together}. Cited by Vij 
3.23; Laks 10.36 — a) MTr! “ater 1d “yar; Lolly Nd] Nd “ater; GMd> GMy mTré 

“sitar ; Lot Lo’ Ox} [Jolly M] “ust — b) Lo? °sraraTghE’ ; BBe* Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wkt? 
La! Lo! Lo’ oOr Ox nPu! Pu? Pu!® Tj? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave “sri faa ; cMd! 
“STARR; Bo “SrTHahe Sfrat; Be? Td? &fe:; oMy ®t: — c) nKt freq; Be! BBe? 
wKt} La! Lo! 1Md? nPu! Put Pra; Ho Prefer; mTr® oMy alaart; Md? cM& Tr! “aite- 


Chapter 5 571 
satgartite vat freeqaterar afe: | 
TPT TA yATaererarasgT Ug 
aret aratsfxeeert art arafeatear | 
AY BSAC AIT PEAT | USN 
arate ede aradeaetear | 
WaT aT EAA arf Her AF loll 
Adastra TT FATT | 
wearer g Eromghaheret ioe tt 
art; Nd “ater, Lot Lo’ Ox Pul? [Jolly M] Me [but unclear whether root or gloss] Dave 
Jha “WweHrt; Bo Lot Pul® ¢— d) cMd Berargiaftere; wKkto Seragiaterd, Ox3 Art 
arate’; Ng Prerat afer 
Additional verses in Mandlik KSS Dave; first verse also in Ho; third verse added after 
72 in La! nPu! Mandlik [1] KSS Dave: 
WeeePrTAtaay saat: | 
Brrarg ves: purser faeftad 1121 
aT Saray: TE aT Yeraferat ear | 
RIAA saressAAT: THT URI! [= YDA 3.23] 
Tearg aatg gag spay a | 
aaa Pret gq ware craftved: (131 
1. a) HowTReRTH -— b) Ho “ATAGYdar: — d) Ho “aT 
3. a) NPu! Hay — a-b) Mandlik KSS Dave [after 72] REA FAT Yaa YaST 
a — d) La! g aftusas, Mandlik KSS Dave [after 72] ¢ afer; nPul | aftved 
68. Cited by Vis 3.1; Vij 3.1-2;Apa 870; Dev 5.20 — a)cMd> “anfies; wKt! “arfitar 
ares — b) Pu? Put Préeq; Put aterarfea:; 1Md4 afé — c) 1M? reat — d) Pu? “aaa 
69.* Pu? give only pada-a as pratika; padas c-d omitted in Jm Wa [haplo}]. Cited by Vis 
3.1; Vij 3.1-2;Apa 870, 911; Dev 5.20; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.23— a) wKt? wai ; cMy 
wt + GENT, mTro FeBTe — b) GMd> Fa; Be Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt28Kt5 wKt® La! Lo! 
Lo’ GMd! sOx! Ox? sPuS Pu! Tj! mTr3 MTr* MTr® Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 1 4 Tat; 
wKt® fear: — c) Hy La! xPul Pu} Put ate"; Bo Ho Lo? nNg Tj! Tr! “@erept — d) Pud Pu’ 
Apa fet; Be? Tj | et; rMd4 att; Jo? GMd! tMd3 GMd5 GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd R] amaree. ; 
[Jolly G] arate ; Be! sOx! Ox? sPu° [cor to] Tr Re aTeg Bo Ho Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? 
wKt3 wKt® La! Lo! Lot Lo’ NNg oOrnPu! Pu? Pu} Pu* Pu® Tj? Tr [Jolly M84 Me? Ku N] 
Vis Dev Na Mr Jolly Mandlik KSS S3ge3e ; mTr6 etqeas; Lo? aydeae ; Be? Vij 
rages; wKt! wKt? nPu! Pud Pu’ Apa 911 Yolly G] a7, Be? Bo Ho Hy Jo! Kt? GMd! sOx! 
sPuo Tj! Tj? MTP? Jolly & 
70. Padas a-b omitted in Jm Wa. Cited by Vij 3.1-2; Apa871; Dev 5.23; Madh 1.606 — 
b) tMd? “fear: — c) rMd4 sraaecrerar GE"; sOx! sPue FT; Bo Jo? cGMd! +Md} tMd4 cMd? 
GMy nNg MTr! MTr® Vij Dev Madh Bataf— d) Bo afr 
71. Padas a-b cited by Dev 5.13 and padas c-d by Dev 5.46 — a) Pul? om 7; Lo! 
“ariterendite — b) Md‘ “areta; cMd! “Heft; Tj! AIF; Lot Lo’ get; cMd! aferftr ea 
—¢) 1Md4 STAY"; Lo! HTT; Pud Pu? Pu? [Jolly G] FE — d) Tj? “Reafer 


572 Chapter 5 


PATAaHATAT J SSTegeAe ATT: 
that wert Year T AAT: Ml 


TIRIMa: Brasaypy I aT | 
aera a aratty: after qa farat tte gt 
arate J per: araitaer wife: | 
seatrearayr sat fafer: daferatera: tov 
fandt g frerer quarat ard | 
TT RT aAataykraT Wok 
afaard ane g ieoemegketad | 
aaa arte g ersarat fageafer ogi 


72. Cited by Vij3.24; Apa 907; Dev 5.31; Madh 1.608 —~ a) Be Sta g Pepa ¢; 
Wa GM& [but mc] om J; NNg T— b) Md‘ BreTqEafeat — c) mTr* MTr® Dev Dave B17; Pu? 
BIOTA mc to BEM; Pud Pu? add BiSt before HET — c-d) Me [as patha, but rejected by Me] 
qeraerearg aay a faster — d) Dev Jerrda; wNg FART FAT: BK wKt 1Md4 Apa 
FT; oOr TRATHT: 

For the added verse in La! nPu! Mandlik KSS Dave, see after 5.67. 

73. Only pratika Tein Pu‘, Cited by Vij 3.16;Apa 885 — a) BKB wKt® eA; Pu? 
°SASTAT: me to SEAT; Pu’ “wITEAT: — b) Wa gives 74b instead; [Jolly M3“] BrAsw 
BKtS wKtS & 31; Md} GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] Nd [patha] Fae — c) Lo} ate 7 FeTAy:; Lot 
Lo’ Ox} Pu? Pu!? Wa 4 aPatg:; Be! + ardty:; oOr arftarg — d) Md‘ arereg; Pu’ Pu’ Pu? 
aeadtet aT; Lo! oOr att FT; nPu! ater; wks at TF; Be? Bo Tj! SUT; nKe ater: 
Lo! oMd! Tj? gaaguee; pBe? zarfefer; nPu! qdt; rMd4 at 

74. In Ho page containing 74 to 82b is missing, and in GMy page containing 74b to 
84c; pada-d omitted in Pu>. Cited by Dev 5.46 — a) Dev afsarda a: Het:; Lo! fat FT 
ae Jo? Lo afrat 20; nPul “ada: yNg “aTaT HoT; Bo HeI:; Tr! Hed; cMd! 

— b) Pu2 Pu? srasiterer, wKt° Tj! araaitaer; cMd> Wa sraraitaer, Lo? nNg Sarsitrez; 
oe araraeq; Pu’ Pu’ Pu? “airrer, Pu’ @tfaat cor to HITE; Pud Pu? Had; cMd! atfaar, 
TMd} aitelad — c) Dev wefeert & Fa; nKe “Preit F Fay — d) nKe PAR: wafsar aa: Pu’ 
Pu? fafer; wPul fafer; aKé wKt® Pul? dard’; Lal daar” 

75. Padas a-b lacuna in nKtt. Cited by Vij 3.18; Dev 5.46 — a) Bé ditt g; Pue Wa 
faester, Pué faesrert — b) Md} Tj! afafear; GMS MTrémTro AP; Be} oOr Pu’ Pu? Pu? 
eta — c) Pu? Pu? Pu? Volly G] TST; Pud Pu? Pu? area SAT; tM‘ BareTASITT — d) 
Lo! Tj! aaa gh 

Additional verse in Mandlik [1] KSS Dave: 

area Pret ere gears oferta | 
wee Aaah SMT eater | 

76. Padas a-b omitted in GMd! [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.21; Laks 10.33;Dev 5.50; padas 
c-d cited by Madh 1.598 — a) Lo? aey; Hy Jm Jo! KP nKt* Lo? Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave T —c) Tr! ade; mT cacttagy— d) Dev wa wa fageafe, mTro epyT aT 


Chapter 5 573 


frdar afar ycat Jaet HAT | 
aaa Yat Water AtAéag: Uis0lll 
ates a yates a ater | 
waa Feat aT us fageate isc 
WMS AMAT AT Fro | 

aad eragraaat ara earaferdary toe i 
Rremigeaiaarast aferer afer | 

wer ox a vera a fearrahate fearfe: cont 
aha qo Reoagkrtaq | 

age afait afr Rreafararertg a lic 21 
we uef acatfeeter earfgaer feria: 


l 
SPURT ME: FRAATATT TAT TT UCM 
yeatest aed staqtet wera: | 

at: USES Yat Arar Qeate lic gti 


77. Omitted in NKt* [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.21; Apago4; Dev5.48; Mddh 1.600; padas a- 
b cited by Vij 3.18 — a) Te FAREST; Bo STfet — b) tMd3 SHEA [om 4B]; Tj! aT; TR | — c) Tj! 
aaTaSAS ; Pus Pu’ [but cor] “gery — d) Be! NNg nPu! Wa aa wa fageafer [cf. 78d] 

78. Omitted in NKtt cMd!; placed after verse 5.66 in TMd? Tr! Tr?. Cited by Apa 905, 
909; Laks 10.35; Dev 5.47; Madh 1.595— a) Be? tt Aq — b) 1Md4 gufaaves afeTa; Bo 
nPu! Dev J — c) Be! Wa Teatfaga — d) Be! Wa Jat wafer Ara: [cf. 77d]; oOr VareT 


79. Cited by Dev 5.59; Mddh 1.622 — a) Pe Put af, Kt? @irarad; Lo4 Lo’ Ox? Pu'® 
[Jolly M R] Dave Jha Ueearat — b) Jo! La! Pu4 Pul? Tr! “sTaTPY, wKtt “TATAT — d) oOr aa 
area Pres; wKt} nPu! ataq; sKt wKt® Ox? Pud Pu? ata; nKt4 aracenety Tr? *afatear; 
Pu! “aeftar 

80. Padas c-d omitted in mTr3. Cited by Vij 3.24; Apa 912 — aWwKt® Lo} “TaTeATaIt 
— b) wKt! “arart geafera — c) Tj! 34; Wa Fat — d) Jo! “wanfAafa; oOr “wafer; 
TMdé fera: 

81. Verses 81-82 given in La! in the following order: 81cd, 82ab, 81ab, 82cd. Cited by 
Vij 3.24; Apa 912; Dev 5.13; padas a-b cited by Dev5.38; MGdh 1.610; and padas c-d by Dev 
5.42 — a) oOr afae qaaycas; Md} AP, Hy 2ifiter; Be! Lo? Lo’ Tro STeaa0Md! 
aaa a — c) Bo wKt® Lo! GMd5 Tr? Dev 5.13 Tet: Tr? ast; Bo wat; Dev 5.13 UT: 

82.* Padas c-d omitted in Ox>. Padas a-b cited by Vij 3.25; Apa 915; Dev 5.44; and padas 

c-d by Apa 913 — a) mTr° ta; Tj! asatfe’ — b) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] enfesay a; Lo? 

“felt, nKet4 “feadfere:; Ho Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? La! Lo? TMd3 GMd@ NNg oOr Ox? Ox? nPul! 
Pu? PuS Pu!? Tr! Vij Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave fete: wKB Fera:; rMd4 ferat: 

83. Cited by Devs. 35;Madh 1.579 — a) Be’ Kt? aKt’ Md? Pu‘ Pu) Pu’ Pu? aetenr; 

Bo Garten; Tr? eaten; Be! “feat — b) Pu2 Put om g1 ; Lot ma greaes; Tr! greene 


574 Chapter 5 


wT aearettr seqestieg fear: | 
TT aeeet ZANT: GaPasegknta_ levi 


afr; Pus Pu’ Pu? [Jolly Glare: — 0) Put om dea: — d) Jm sfafer 

Four additional verses in Be! mTr* Mandlik KSS Dave; verses 1, 2, and 4in GMd! +Md?* 
cMd> nPu! mTr°; verses 1 and 3 in Ox Pu’ Tj!; verses 2 and 4 in La!; verses 2 and 4 placed 
after 94 in Pu? Pu’; verse 1 in Be Ho wKt! wKt? oOr Pu?; verse 1 placed after 84 in BKt? 
wKt®; verse 4 placed after 92 in Tr! and after 104 in TMd’; verse 4 cited in Apa 906, Madh 


1.587: 
aafiegaararer F wyfsiaer arerar: | 
carrey faver serereahatterd 11211 
mrad sary rey | 
wag att patat qert g 7 sare: 11211 
fa: qeteret wert aay | 
ufeuftaedart erafregeaifry 11311 
ad qaeantar att aheatsar: | 
amifatraest tg att aang iivll 
1. a) nPul “arare:; Ox? “arare — b) Be! Mandlik KSS Dave “@rarer: Bpaferer; 
Md & & fawer; Md‘ wer fewer; nPu! “ger art — c) Pu’ Soraraity; Tj! mTré 
aorareivs; wKt! mT “Str; wKe sirar; 1M? “ath 
2. a) La! Pu? Put “aerated. GMd! Md) mTr*mTr® "Seared: nPul “Sgarevt 7 
— b) nPu! “aR — c) nPul @a@mlara she; Pu? Put aatdate Batat; Be! 
Mandlik KSS Dave ®4Fa, 1Md* @fat — d) Be! Mandlik KSS Dave Prasaitater 
feafer:; nPul Pu? Put qed ATT BST:; La! fageret + 
3. a) Ox? Pu’ Tj! garreregead Fst — b) Ox? “atfr; Ox? Til rag 
4. a) La! oMd a4; Tr! MTSadecs ; Tr! dre; Be! Mandlik KSS Dave 
araranieg — b) GMa Tr! Apa Madh soe afuen | [4pa “afer ]; ™d 
aire g [...] agar; Md! GM@ Tr! Apa ‘ATATRITT; Be! Bataa’; GMd! mTr° “za- 
fgc:; La! “eager: — 0) Md! aavtgfeger, mTrs watt; Mandlik KSS Dave 


ast; Lal gavifafer : Tr! 2g — o-d) Pu? Put sorat oftvanfaret arr art [of 
94cd] — d)oMd! ear oe a a; nPul @ 7; La! agit; Tr! Apa St ATRIA; 
Madh arity 


Two additional verses in La! oOr; verse 2 also in Be? Pu’; verse 1 added after 5.63 in 
tMd?: 
varereearc faut aseaeatac: | 
merbaadaar feet cafafet: 11211 
arergeard fat caret carry | 
qfenttaRraiasy asfeegqaarry 121 
1. d) La! [lacuna] feét[ma AT] aafafes:; oOr fadtoarsafeter: 
2. c) La! PRY: oferty 
84. Omitted in Tr!. Cited by Apa891; Laks 10.25; pada-b cited by Vij 3.17 —— a) Pu!® 
om 7; Bel ada - Tj! ata’ Hy atae’. Be? Ho oOr Ox? Tj! “Searetft, wKe deere; 
nPu! “aeerethy; Put “aqarerhy; cMds “dearer — b) wKt! Lo! rMd4 weqea ; Tj! WAT ; 
Laks “@arfimeat, Be! Ho sOx! nPu! sPuo feat; BBe wKt® Lo! tMd3 tTMd‘ Pu? Pu4 ‘Tr 


far — c) Put Pud Gator: — d) Pu2 Pu aareiterg: ; Md! aaiareagy 


Chapter 5 575 


fearatitaaaat a afed afer aan | 

wa aeegitet ta eget erat Qeafe cull 
ary waat rer staghragry | 
arate waATsar aAheat: USE 
are eer wets eareat fast fagqeate | 
aaa g Pete wrareraadter ar iicvll 
amet area Haley AAeT SATTATT | 
aA qae Fear Presta yeakr iiccil 


TUS TASTY A feawsary | 
Teak Ae Pradetesfear cel 


aaesarrarear aT atdtar a ara: | 
midget ta gedtat a alfrarz ig oll 


85. Omitted in Tr'. Cited by Vij 3.30;Apa 921; Hem 3/1. 796; Dev 2.304; Mddh 1.228; 
padas a-b cited by Vis 3.257— a) NKt* Lo? mTr® Vis Mth’; oMad “SE; Lal Caifeyeaar 
—b) Lo? oferat; Apa ofcraregterat, Hem afer afer; BooOr afer, cMd> mTr! Tae; Md 
afar, sOx! sPuo [cor to] afrar ae — c) wKt® ata; BK wKt® Lo! Teg; nNg Tea — 
d) GMa GMy Tr? &ter, Md wee 

86. Cited by Apa 1198; Hem 3/1.796; padas a-b cited by Dev 2.262 — b) mTr® ae 
arf” — c) Md? GMy MTr'mTr® Hem Matt; Lo! cor to SUA; 1Md4 “arateagy: — d) 
sOx! Trent; sPuo wraftaer [but cor]; Ho Waa; cMy Weary; rMd3 Waar a; 
Jm aartt F; Be? BKe afte; Jm GMd! Tr! weer: 

87. Pa&das a-b omitted in nKt*, placed here and before 86a in TMd?. Cited by Vij 3.30; 
Apa 924; Hem 3/1.796; Dev 2.314 — a) sOx! sPu® at; Bo T SS — b) Ox? fay: Brear — c) 
Be} Md} [both times] GMy Pu? mTr° arate; wKe} £8; BK Lo! La! rMd? [both times] Ox} 
Pus Tr! fete — d) Lo* cGMd! 1Md3 [at 87] GMd> GMy Pu? Pu? Put Pué Tr! mTr4 mTr° Polly 
Gr] Vij Laks Hem at eget adher ar tet [rMd? Set AT]; rMd?} [at 86] sOx! [but cor] STAT 
fast fageate [cf. 87b]; La! “ear? dre; Be? wKtS La! oMd! tMd? Ox? Tj! Tr? Apa 4; Ox? 
ar 

88. Cited by Vij 3.5; Apa 876 — a) Pud Tr! affect; Lo! arfefte; mM} mTr’ anfece; nPu! 
amfeter; cMd! smféfer; Md? cMd! cMy @erel — c) Be? TaTeY; wKt! aaTAeIea>; cMd> Bat; 
kt? wK¢® seat — d) tMd3 GMd5 GMy Tr! MTr'MTr® VijApa Presvagrrsed [cf. 76b]; Pu2 
Put raat eater 

89. Cited by Vis 1.225; Apa 877; Dev 5.120 — a) NPu! La! “ate; tMd3 GMy Tr! “a- 
mR wKt® age’: nNg Tr Wa “ardtat — b) cMd! yasarafeat ae; cMd5 vasara earn; 
nPu! yasargfatersa; nNg WaRITY; wKt} FaeTY; Hy om T— c) Ho Pu’ Pu’ [but cor] ATHHT- 
a — d) 1Md4 aaritdteenfarar; cMd! “Rear:; Tr? “Prat. After this, two verses are given in the 
mss. that contain the commentary of Go. These are, in all likelihood, part of the commentary. 

90. Cited by Dev 5.120 — a) oOr sOx! sPuS aTUTE; Be! TTIVET ; Be? Bo Ho Jo? Ke 
BK Lo! Pu? Pu’ Tj! 9Ravs.; GMd! sever BY. rMd4 ores — b) Tr? aera: 


576 Chapter 5 
war waqureary rar arat WET | 
oe Ikea 
Ye grater Prete | 


oe UA QU 
qT UTaraaaeaskea afeat a a afer | 


we earagaretar ganyar fF FT sar Ue gil 
Tat Aeters eet aa: arr fereftae | 
Tara Raa ATT BIT NS I 
feneaeaar a fagar aftr a | 
Travanret Bart wer cafe wea: ei 
aamaiaeadn facreakiver T | 
ASAT SHIH TTAAg TT: NEU 


~— ¢) Be? ge; Tj? “eras; wKt! “ger a — d) Pu'? gett FT; Bo Ho La! Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pu? 
Pu? Put Pu® Pu’ Pu fut; Be! nKt T}? “aTat; Be! nK¢ Pu’ atftre 

g1. Cited by Apa 884; Dev 5.97; Madh 1.633 — c) TMd* Frees; wKt Freq; Loe 
fréer; Md} Tr! freer, cMd! frat; Apa Precate; BCa J; Dev { Feral T; TMd4 Act; Bo 
Lo? Md? Ox? te 4; Lo’ cGMd! wear 7; Md} Stora — d) Tj! Sarat FT; Ke? Prasad; Be} 
wkt! wKe} Tj! ayer; cM fagerc; wKket° freer 

92. Cited by Apa 870; Dev 5.93 Madhi1 634 — b)rMd? Dev Yager — c) Be? Bo 
oMd! Tj! “ger; oOr Pu? Put Dev “gay; Jha Dave “Teg; Lo! “GF JF — d) wKt TAT ; Ho 
quran; Jm Pu? Pu? Pu? Tr! [Jolly G] sarees, rMd4 GUT; Apa 7 raat [vl “ait; Ho Md? 
oMy 0Or Tr! mTr4 Tr? fesreHT, Pe Put fear: Jim Ox? Ox? Pu’ Jolly M] Apa fear: 

93. Cited by Madh 1.616 — a) wKt walt 7 waraifet; Bo “werdTGT — b) cMd! 1Ma? 
tMd‘ GMy oOr oT r° afer ahert aa; [Jolly Gr] aferavat & freer; wk afro +z; Lal a 
— c) BBe Ho Lo! Md? GMd) Put Pud Pu? Pu? 0; Tr! SSI cMd! vequretat; Be? Lo! 
1Md? “ordtat— d) Na [patha] #erzer 

94. Padas c-d omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Vij 3.27, Madh 1.616 — a) tMd4 tat; Bel 
Bo wKt} Lo! tMd? +Md4 wNg oOr sOx! Ox? nNPu! Pu? Pu? Pu? sPu® Tr! [Jolly M!?°8°? R] Vij 
werteray, Ho Pu’ Pu’ [cor to] Pu? Jolly G] FeTeHe; My Ferree; cMdd aTetferas; cMd! 
agreqd — b) cMy Ie cor to PTI; TM? TIA — c) wk sferwar — d) Bo Pu? 
“arf aT; oOrars; Be! a; Puo mT r3 WaT; Tj! aor 

95. Cited by Apa 916; Laks 10.47; Madh 1.626 — a) Tj! aareaHeVsrt TF; Laks feraea; 
Tr! feraras’; Bo feearex” — b) Pus Wa TRAES: — c) Lo? oOr STATET; oOr 2aTe — d) Tj! 
weated; cMd! sOx! sPu’ affar:; +Md? GMy Pu? Put Madh aft: 

96. a) oOr aT Md} oMy SaaS ; Lo? Ht ; Jo? “Sat — b) Be! Bo 
feared’; mT ro Parredr; tMd4 fearey ; Lo? feracaea’: Tr! fearered’; wKt® fare’; 
wKt! feaver ayer, Tj! farser FAST; wPu! feat wAST: Pu? Put qrarqaaser — d) oOr 
araaaaar gr:; miro aquteade; sOx sPuo aft area 


Chapter 5 577 


oleartrttsdt waar aerate Preftaa | 
arate  aeatat seaNTATeRAT U2 ll 
SAdTEs WE: Torerfeaer T | 

aa: afawa asrecur areata feerfa: ec 


fas: gear: erat afar aeargerz | 
ae: wate cata afte qa: Haber: Veit 
vaasfafed att aftosy facie: | 
satrsg atg sagte Frater igooll 
sraftes fact sa fast fader aac | 
fageate Premor AGUAaT ATATATT Po I 
qaaate ast TF smear geal | 
WAAAAaT T aay TE TAT Uo Rl 


97. a) Ho 1Md? oOr taait; TMd! “fSfReat wat — b) TMd* Ae; BKtS Lo! cMd! 
mTro aTeT Bit — c) rMd4 airaraitey; sOx! sPuS Tj! a; nNg fe Steerat— d) La! Pul? srewsr; 
wKt3 Lot Lo’ Ox} Pu!? (Jolly M] “arerat; La! “areaé; Be! PuS Pu? Pu? [Jolly G] Rn aera, 
nPu! “ar@rf; Be? Bo BKtS Lo? tMd3 NNg Pu? Pu} Pu‘ Tj! Tr! mTr* mTr® Polly N Nd] “arena: 
tMd4 My sOx! sPuo Tr? “ater: Na [patha] °ararM: ; Tj? “areas; Ho alee; Ox? “stert: oOr 
“ater: 

98. Omitted in Ox. Cited by Vij3.21; Apa 916 — a) Pu? Pul sear; Lo? mT 9 “ares; 
wKt? wea; tMd3 “wes; Lod mTr3 ares: — b) M4 ATAT eTe:; Lo? “HaTeT; Lal 
cMd! ¢ —~ c) Be! aa; tMd? afacedt; cMd! aster; Lo! Jet TAT; sOx! sPuo ereretar [but 
both cor] — d) nPu! Wa Uait aver abate [wPu! et]; TMd3 rMd4 GMd? GMy mTr* mTr® 
arate, Pu2 aarfafe, Md! rMd3 tMd4 GMd? GMy Tr! mTr4 MT r® ect 

99. Cited by Vij 3.28-9;Laks 10.106 — a) TMd4 Laks FAST: — c) BBe? WaT, TMd3 
wate; sOx! sPuo [me sh to] Tae; Tr? Wate; Pu? Tae; Be’ Bo sOx! sPuo Tj! Laks water; wKt! 
esa; Be! Lo Pud Pu? Pu? Pu! Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] tee aT; Pu2 Put ef aT; tMd3 
oMd3 cMy taf aT — d) Tj! ees; wPul Pu2 Put “fepar: 

100. Padas c-d omitted in Bo Put — a) TMd4 @agt; Tr! Pred; cMd! oOr nPu! Tr? “Re. 
fed; Tj! “aféd; Bo [but cor] “fea ad at Md? GMy Pu4 MTr‘mTr® “fed ad; Pu2 fed aat 
— b) cMy afte: Lod rMd? fesitet: — c) cMd! araftuseradty — d)1Md4 deem 
frat’; Tj! Tr! “atettat’ ; oMy “ayfsPratterar, wk Prarfera: 

101. Cited by Vij 3.14; 4pa883, 913; Dev 5.95; Madh 1.631 — a) TMd? aafave; Apa 883 
arafaes; mTr® fest: — b)NNg fBSIT; BBe? Bo Ho Lo’ PEC; Lo! eT — c) oOr fagqeater — 
d) wKtS “treet; cMd! arerar: 

102. Verses 102 and 103 transposed in GMd!. Cited by Vij 3.14; 4pa883; Dev 5.95; 
Madh 1.632 — a) Lo! NNg 4a — a-b) Md? tMd? GMa) GMy Tr! mTr? MTr® DevMadh a+ 
qT: 8 amet geata [Dev f FT] — b) cMd! sOx! sPuS eames fagqeater; Pu? Pu‘ qareraer 
Zeater — c) Wasenadat ; oMd° coMy “Hear — c-d) oMd! qananeae afad ye TT — 
d) nKO wKet’ afer ye Te [wKtS Taq]; nPul PuS Pu’ Pu? aferae ye Tac NKt* afer 


578 Chapter 5 


ayes wat afer ar 

ere Hae: PTET ga weer Faquaer igo zit 
at Pash aay Feary at air arg | 
SRA egfa: AT CraQaeeaaTAAT NZ o Vil 
aa aS fret Aaa aA | 

ay: witearet a Ya: eghr sary Uugoki 
adam Warrier we aT | 


aT Te Taq; Md‘ afesa JE TAT; Lo! + 7 afer, Md} GMy Tr! MTr! MTro TOT afery 
Additional verse in Be* nCa Ho GMd! GMd* GMd? Pu} Tj! mTr* mTr® [Jolly Gr]; given 
after 104 in La! tMd?: 
aavaee ahrat ar aerate | 
ait wearer ger ait yeater |! 
a) oMd sarees? ahr’. rMd4 MT ré MTr® erred” — a-b) [Jolly Gr] are Fert 
ait age ar oer afe— b) cMd! aef ae araedt af; mT rémTr® HIE aT TA; TMd4 
aT; Be} sae afe; cMd5 wer afe — c) La! Md4 Geareg ae Arete [rMd4 weyare]; 
Ho Tj! eat; Beat att; Pui aarht 7 wer ; cMé arairay war oMd! aegaicet- 
ard; MTraeqareter; Ho Tj! sfasreeterd; Be} HaTaeeSteTT, wCa HESHTeTT — d) 
Be} cMd’ wereitat 
103. Cited by Vij 3.26; Apa 918; Laks10.56 — b) Tr? arferafaaa; Be! Bo Jm Jo! Kt? 
Lo! Lo* Lo’ Md} Ox} nPu! Pu} Pu’ Pul® Tj! Tr? [Jolly M Nd] Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 7 
— c) Jm om Tea; Be! psBe? Ho Jo? NKtt tMd? sOx! Ox? Pu? Pué Pu’ sPu® Pu? Pu? Tj! TP? 
Me Laks Apa Dave JhaT#&; sCa Jo! wKt! Kt? oOr mTr6 Fae; wKB BK wKtS GMd! tMd4 
GMd GMy Tr! was; Ox} erefix— d) wKt! Tj! Tr? wet; Ox? wT det: BAT: 
104. Cited by Vij 3.1~2; Apa 870;Dev 5.97; Madh 1.634 — a) Ox? Pu! fay; Lo‘ Lo? fam: 
— b) La! Lo! Tj! araaa; wKt! ara; Be? Bo Ho Lo? tMd3 tMd4 GMd> GMy Ox? Pu? Pus 
Tj? Tr! Tr? Vij Madh SAT; oOr Dev area; Hy aTaaq; mTr? mTrfretaq — c) sOx! sPuo 
separ afear ar — d) TMd? Pu? Put “WET:,; Be Bo aacbgfite:; Vij “aIgfrar, w Kt 
“aasbyfear, La! Md‘ “gfttar:; Wa gaa, Tr? “agar 
Additional verse in La!: 
weg Veet Bs ASOT args: | 
aprestart BRT: pfageater || 
105. Padas c-d omitted in NKt*. Cited by Hem 3/1.792; Bhad 11.235— a) Be wKt! tMd3 
oMy aor Preert; mTr3 erat; Bo “srt — b) Bo BK® wKt® tMd4 GMd5 Pu! Tr? Hem 
quad, Md yaad; Hy aegaT ; wKet! La! Tr! avforssrt Pu? Pu aan; sBe agareat 
—c) wKt! wathepritt ye:; coMy “wtst — d) Hem af; Md? afxat fe; Tj! qed; 
Pu? Pu} Put wafer; Lo! edie; Be? GMy aAftr 
Additional verse in Be! Be? Ho Tj!: 
TUES Weare: | 
welt feted ait atrguifirrec: | 
b) Ho aT — c) Be! eal — d) Be? Tj! “gutgared: 


Chapter 5 579 


ase grate a gfrt qartghr: ghr: ueogll 
area Beater fagral qierarerterkeer: | 
TAT AIT aATAT aakaaa4w: lle oil 
Aaa: Jere arer adt att year | 
Tar St AATGET AeragT GAT: U2 oC 
afgntartr qeater aa: wert geate | 


femraahat yareat ahaatrt year Ugo 
ur ghar a: ahh: artker fata: | 


arattaerat zea Bs: Wa Prot ie gol 
amar atta a aheaAeT T | 
werfactar Fa gfe AaftfeAr: ue 2 ei 
fraser asad wgafata fargeafer | 
THAT TT UAT BGTHAT lle 2 Ril 


106. Omitted in Pu?. Cited by Hem3/1.792; Laks 10.114 — a) Laks ATTA; sOx | sPus 
[Jolly Nd] antaret — b) Lo! [cor to] Lo° “aaite; mTro “ster; mTr! “site; wKe! ad We; 
Trt MTree: — c) tMd4 arf; Lot ae; Lo’ ay; cMy weer; Bo nNg at fe gr a; 
Be? Jo? Lo} sOx! sPu® Tj! arf afr: & fF (Tj! ark], Hy gfe: a F; oOr ght: T J; Hoom fe; 

1 om® — d) cMd' + 7 Bath: gr; oMy + Feraeghe:; Pu? om last Ya: 

107. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Hem 3/1.792 — a) wKt! etait: — c) mTr* “art; Bo “qTaT- 
sae; Py! srr — d) Pu! La! df’; Tr? “feraa: 

108,* Omitted in Pu’; padas c-d omitted in Be? GMd! [haplo]. Cited by Hem 3/1.792; 
Laks 10.114; Madh 1.533, 2.116; pada-a cited by Vis 1.195,and pada-c by Apa 98 — a) Laks 
Hem area eater Tate Ho geate; nK¢é Tj! mTr*mTr® Vis area — b) Kt? wKt® tat 
aay; Lo! sOx! sPuo ater — d) Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt wK nKtt Lo! Lo* Lo’ tMd4 GMdé GMy 
Ox? Tr! Tr? mTr? Laks Hem Madh Mandlik Jolly KSS festa: 

109. Omitted in GMd! Pu®; padas a-b omitted in Bé. Cited by Hem 3/1.792; Bh (ad 
11.235) — a) Be! aif: greater ararfer; nPul aifearftr; Pud Pu? gered — b) Tr! acd; GMy 
aaa ; wKe geatet — c) nNg YaTaT; cMdS ent — d) Ox? gaa; Tj! gear 

110, Omitted in rMd4; not commented by Nd; padas a-b and c-d transposed in Lo! Lo® 
Ox. Cited by Hem 3/1.805 — a) TMd3 WUT; Tr! WaT; NKt? Wa:; Be? BCa Pu} Pu’ Tr? aihateafer: 
wich; NKtt cGMd! 4: — b) Be? Hy wKt! sKt wKt® Lo? Lot Lo oMd? TMd? GMd> GMy Ox? 
Ox} Pu’ Pu!? Tj! mTr?uTr? aizer, nKe4 fafyets:; rma} fateh; [Jolly Gr] fafeare — d) 
Tj! Js; Md} BES; Bo Yasay; Jm Bact; Hy Pu? Pu} Put Pud Pu? Pu? Prefer: Tj! Fret 

11. Omitted in tMd’. Cited by Vij 182-3; Apa 255; Hem 3/1.805; Mddh 2.134 — a) Put 
Pul® Tr! asrarat; nKé astarstt — b) rTMd? GMy SaeSATeT T— c) Md? HEAT FT Far 
— d) Bo Faso; wKkKt° woffa; cMds wafer: 

112. Padas a-b omitted in tMd*. Cited by Vis 1.181; Vij1.182-3; Apa 254; Hem 3/1.805; 
Madh 2.134 — a)nKt? FAST; Pu? Put Say — c) TM? Pu’ wert’: NK WHA: Be? ares 


580 Chapter 5 

ayant wean wer a Pepi | 
aera: Seer Frotet yore: Ue 2 all 
Tae Seat aT: aera | 

air aaré ader emerprawarkthr: ue evil 
Fant Aa aaat Ylaerat SAT | 
TAM ASATAT AT AAMT AT AIT UP Vuil 
ant aaa ofr aareafir 
WAATAT Der Tyra: WattestsT T UL LEI 


are; sOx! sPuS arft — d) GMd! rMd4 esd; Ho BKtS wKtS aryy ; 7M} areagqepa; Tr! 
“qEBe 

113.* Cited by Hem 3/1.805; Laks 10.133 — a) Ld Lo! Lo® GMd ! GMd5 Ox? ateearary; 
Be! BBe? BCa wKt! Lo! 1Md3 GMy NNg 0Or [Jolly Nd] Sear 7; Be! GMy aaa; Be? Bo 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt}? BK’ wKt® Lo? Lo? tMd* Ox? Pu? Pud Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr’ Laks 
Na Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave xara? — b) wKB NK GMd! tMd4 GMd> Pu? Tr! mTr4 
mTro Wa arest; aCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K® La! Lo} oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj? Tr? mTr3 Re Mandlik 
Jha KSS a1; wCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj? Tr? mTr3 Re Mandlik Jha KSS &a; 
Be! oOr Wa Ut; nKt* La! oOr aait : t 
aareta, Md? arta — d) nKt* rMd3 GMy Fresay; nKe* orereter:; rMd3 GMS GMy Tr! mTr4 
MTr® [Jolly Gr Nd] Toa: 

14. Cited by Vij 1.190; Hem 34.805; pada-c cited by Vis 1.195 — a) BKt amare: sOx! 
sPus °ierarerat; Tr? “Sarat; rMd3 tMd4 GMd) Tr! mT? MTr® Volly Nd] ‘Scart; oMy 
[Jolly Gr] SUT; Bo NK Lod GMd! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu!® [Lolly M!2-5-89] Hem “Scart — b) 
Tr! ayetaerarey, wkt® aT4:; Lo! AUT:; Bo Tay; wKe attereney, La! aftaer; Be? fede; 
Pu? Pud tier; Hy Heres; [Jolly G] aT — c) Pu? aaré:; Bo nKtt aarf; Vis wrt — d) 
1Md4 “acpafaftr: 

115. Padas c-d omitted in wKt!. Cited by Hem 3/1.805; padas a-b cited by Vij 1.190— a) 
Ho wKt! nKtt Lo® cMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPuS mTr4 mTr° FMM, Bo 
watery — b) cMy afaeqaat; Ho Yay STAT; BBe? “Seat; Md? “SerNt; Be! Be} wKt! 
wK® nNg sOx! nPul Pu2 Put Pu’ sPu® Pu? Pu? Tr? [Jolly G] Re Mr Go 8eSa4; Jo! Ke 
“aaa; Pu “srt — c) nK¢ afar; rMd3 arfeart; Lo? GMd! GMd@ Pu? Pu’ Tr! mTr4 
mTr® q¢— c-d) nPu! qe ta adat deat wT at — d) Pu? Put arent tMd3 area; 
tMd*4 areot A; Tr! mTr? mTr6 J; Pus Pu? Pu ° det; Bo La! GMy Tr! aeror 

Additional verse in GMd! tMd? Tr' [this is cited by Nd and ascribed to Angiras|]: 

sarees waaay at T | 
gear arty aathtr deaths waerd I 
a) Td} Vaaeny 

1Md? places verse 121 here. 

116. Omitted in wKt!. Cited by Hem 3/1.805; Mddh 2.114 — a) Ld AISI; 1Md4 SE 
— b) wKtS wera fir; nKe “aif — c) Tj! aaa a aadat; Ox? Tet; Pu? Put JETT; Lo! 
sOx! sPuS ¢ — d) cMy {fes; Tr! verroonfa; oOrveaTet act:; Be Bo Ho Jo? La! Lo? tMd!4 
Tj! Tj? Tr! Jolly R] 7; sOx! sPus + 





Chapter 5 581 


TEM BRIT T Yraergy aritar | 
TT FASIGAGET T UY vill 
afmeg wert ght agat arerareaany | 
weatagt aca: athe referer ue ec 
Uae Breda Aa T | 
ee ee 
arniaeaee: gaara: | 
Segue ara werkt: Ue Rol 
HAIER MARI ATT T | 
Qfataorrar erat wryatteet aT UL etl 


Additional verse in [Jolly Gr]; placed after pada-b in GMd?: 
arega waar frst werakory | 
gasat serrentt aaa: yaa afer: | 

c) GMd seater sraroreater 

117. Cited by Hem 3/1.806; Madh 2.114 — a) Ho FOU FATT TF; Bo WOU TF; rMd? 
amt gag; wKt! nKt La! oOr Ox} Fay; Ox? qagardlat Be ; Tr? | — b) Pu Ylaetaat — 
c) Pud Pu? Pu? nrg; Tr? args: cMd! mTr* oR ; sOx! sPu® aReTT nPu! aay ; 
Pur ay; Ho eae; wKe ARE; BKE Lal Lo! oOr “gH; BKO wKtS “wepeTAT, Pu? Put 

“aepart Tr! “Heer — d) BKt® FAOTSET at; Ho La! oOr Ox? NPul Pu Pud Pu’ Pu’ Pu? 
Wa 4a; BCa wKt! wKt® 47; Pu Pu’ Pu? “Queer; NNg ETGET; wKtS “goer ar 

u18.* Cited by Vij 1.184; Hem 34.806; Madh 2.136 — a) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? aifgetareTtr; Lo} 
Frere; oOr Wet FeefrE — c) Hem WaT; Lo! Pul? aeaAT ; GMy Ox? Pu? Put wear — d) 
cMd! Hem ‘afgra faeitad; Lo} fare 

* Additional verse in Be? Bo Tj! Mandlik [%, 4] KSS; added after126 in GMd! tMd*, 
and after 128b in MTr?@ MTr°: 

agama aaat yfeftarc | 

wermngrrer aera F Marg | 
a) Tj af Ha F AMT; Be aépasitarat I; Mandlik KSS mepasarart J; mTr4 
Tr Pr at; Md? ara — b) Be? aTaat; Bo Mandlik KSS araet — c) Bo Tj! 
Mandlik KSS°7ATeT, tMd4 “ot aT — d) Be? Tj! Hfeat Ya aaa; Mandlik KSS 
afearatearaard; Bo afeat aaa; Md4 ASAT T TTA 

119. Cited by Hem 3/1.806; Madh 2.139 — a) BCa Jo'sKt 5 GMd! tMd4 GMy nPu! Pu? 
Tro Wa [Jolly Nd] Hem 3@ ; oOr tae Wert — b) cMd> Tr! “Sear: Bo Lo} “Fart; Be! 
cMd! nNg Pu? Put fear; wktS “Searai; wKt! “darara — c) nKtt Lot Lo’ cMd! Pu!? 
Dave Jha J — d) La! "aaarahrare; cMd! “agate, Hem fares: 

120. Cited by Hem 3/1.806; Madh 2.138 — a) Tj! mrararfeeat: aT; Lo’ Te wreranfe"; 
Td} @reaaite’; Lo! “ated: Madh “aratt: — b) Tr? waarar ; Tj! “arfeteds: — c) Jo! 
“aEgTAT; wKt! “qaTat; Bo Ho Pu? Put “orerat— d) wKt! Sree: 

121. Placed after 115 in Md? Cited by Apa 260; Hem 34.806; Madh 2.138 — a) GMy 

“TOM ; Be Tj! “TaaPFAgMM — b)nKt! | — c) Lot fasrrar; wKeé “fasar — d) Be? 





582 Chapter 5 


Terrase were a gear | 
AMTTSHAS FTTH ATT LAM 
CAMA SAAT Aaa T | 

Tat & URarat wer: geafr waht: Weevil 
afar Tar WTA ATT | 

afvd Saratéar qeretio qeafr leu 


Ho nKt# Pu? Pu} Pu’ Tj! Apa T 

122.* Cited by Hem 3/1.806 — a) Tj! Terr ar; Ho Pu! Tj! Hem “wrerat; Be! BBe 
Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? BKt> wKt® Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® nNg Ox? Pu? Pu> Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pul® Tj? Tr? 
Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave °%1S F — b) Bo Wart; Md? Tray; oOr TOT; sBBe? Be? 
Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt} Lo! Lo® Lot Lo® oOrsOx! Ox? Ox} Pu? Pu® sPuo Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu? 
Tj Tj? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave tt gat — c) nPul “ateeat"; Pus Pu? Pu? (VVolly G] 
*seeret?; GMd! °ateaa°. Be! 7Md? oOr Tj! “ara — d) Ho "ype Wea. Be! wKt! K? 
wKt} wKt® Md? sOx! sPu® Tr! qua; GMd> Aa: 

*This spurious verse is found in all but the following mss.: NKt' BKt? wKt® [but ma] 
Lo* Lo’ cGMd! tMd? GMd> GMy NNg Ox} Pu!® Tr! mTr* mTr® Wa Volly Nd], and given in 
editions [except Jha] as verse 123 [see endnote] and cited by Vij 1.187; Apa 263. Placed after 
verse 126 in Bo, which omits padas c-d. I have eliminated the number 123 from the edition to 
maintain the traditional numbering of the verses: 


merpageay tat: geranferc: | 
wee Ag yaa gecaraet ay i 
a) Md? #2; La! Lo! oOr Vij [vl] wen; Hy Jm Jo! K@ Lo? Lo’ GMd! sOx! sPuo 
Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr? MTr? Mandlik KSS Davet Es. FA"; oOr Vij “TART [v1 as in ed] 
— b) Vij Apa BATATAPe:; oOr VRsaaryanra:; TMd4 nie — c) Tj! 
Fee; Apa JaTG — d) Jo? Lo} oOr FesrHEetA, Tj! “oes Qeate, Be! Ho 
wKt! Kt? wKt} TMd? sOx! sPuo quae 
124. Omitted in BKt> Ox?; ma in wKt®. Cited by Laks 10.152; Hem 3/1.821; Madh 2.147 
— a) Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu® Tr? mMTr?Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
TaABMTTHATrTT, Ho FSA; TMd! AAT F[for the pada]; nPul GABAA ses; wKt! 
aaNAeIAT — b) My AaATy ; Be? La! oOr aT — d) Ho Beata; sOx! Ox? sPul [cor to] Te 
Laks Hem Madh Teter, Tj? Tt 
Additional verse in GMd! tMd‘ mTr* mTr®;added after verse 122b in GMd5; cited by 
Hem 3/1.823 [cf. BDh 1.10.1]: 
Trasaraafergar: aterater afer: | 
FASAaTS AT TA SA FT sea II 
b) Hem “@T:; tMd4 “aa: geata; mTr'mTr® orferct — c) cMd! ayanage oT; 
mTr* om at — d) GMd! I; mT? SY; tMd4 Aer 7 
125. Pdadas c-d omitted i in Ho. Cited by Madh 2.105— b) Ox? “aR; nKtt# “aa; 
oOr om HRT; Pu? Put “aera; La! “age; nPul “aeger; Tr? “ager; wKe! "afer wk “aerr, 
oMd! “aert; Hem “aeq — c) Be! aiteeaer; sBe Herastenat — d) cMd! td} Madh FeS- 
gor fagreafer; Lo! ygeavr; Pu? Pud yaar 


Chapter 5 583 
aaa Well SIT dep: 


maatt aes aaty zergtey erg 
thr sar: afar qaTarserrsy | 


wantin ser arar wera Ue ll 
am: Jat yore Aqeer ag wa | 
VaTAAAT TWeraquizanferanr: We 2cil 
fret Ja: Beet: TH ser vaTRagy | 
waratheta Wer Pret Aenea fer: ue een 
ferret grr eitnt ger: wears | 
wea a yferaet: aT TTS BRT: Ne Roll 
ahaa wae grr aaa | 
PACT SAAT TART: UZ LM 


126. Cited by Vis 1. 190; Vij 1.185; Apa 36;Hem 3/1.818; Dev 2.247; Madh 2.148— a) 
nKtt Lo! [cor to] araaryer ; ; NPul area -oMd! araatefer 3°; Tr! Cearprt; wKt! td? 
cMy Tro °earept; Pus Pu’ Pu’ “gates; Lo! “ear; TMdé sOx! sPu® [but cor] Hem Apa Madh 
“garet — b) Lo! GMd! sOx! Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu? TST; Jo! Test, wCa SY We; wKt! 
aepa; Md? aepe:; Pud tect: — c) Hem Madh “gift eh eae; Md? GMd? oOr sOx! xPu! 
Pud sPuo Pu’ Tj’ Tr! [Jolly R M89] atea; Ox? aie Rc; for added verse in GMd! TMd4 mTr* 
mTr®, see addition after verse 118. 

127. Cited by Hem 3/1.818; Maddh 2.149 — b) Be! war wKt? nKt* “wera, Bo oOr 
[but cor] weTaqT — c) Md? FRPP; eKtS wKeS “Rahs gerea — d) mT TST AAT; Ho 
werent, mT ro oferta, Tj! werent 

128. Cited by Apa 272; Har-A 1.15.2; Laks 10.157; Hem 34.618; Mddh 2.119 — a) Ho 
gry’ — b) Laks Hem fargar ax aha; wKt! cMy sOx! sPuo tga; Tj! dq, wa 
fargo; rMd! fqer; eBKtS wKtS NNg oOr Pub aa FP; rMd3 aT aT: waa, Tj! AAT — co) 
TM} arearer Sareea; La! seared, Tj? serena” — d) oMy ar 

129. Cited by Hem 3/.838; Madh 2.145; padas c-d cited by Apa 263 — a) Hy Tj! frez; 
Lo! [but cor] afe:; cMy yfrareeer:; rMd4 “seat — b) Tj? Wt; Jo! Tj! Dave TA; Pu? Put 
Tr? or; TMd4 wer; mTromeTiear:; tM} werfedt — c) Ho “ant waSer. eK war; wKt® aa; 
Kt? Lo! GMd! rMd3 tMd4 GMd® GMy NNg Pu Tr! Apa Re Jolly Set — d) Hem Fret; Lo? 
GMdS Ng Pu} Pu’ Tr! mT! mTr® Hem Geahater 

130. ma in Bo. Cited by Hem 3/1.835 — a) BBe? Be} Bo La! sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPu® afe:; 
Ox? effort — b) mTr4 Tro areefeer gore, Tj! aed; Md? sepa: wKe “aTet; GMd! GMd? 
Tr! “aret; Hy “art — c) Be! nPu! Fare; Lo? oOr Ox? Te wd; GMy MTr*MTro Tee F; 
Bo Wade; La! nNg Wart az: Tr! erat q; Pu! parte aq; GMd@ wearet aq; tMd3 tMd4 
@ — d) rMd3 5a; Pu! “gecIsAhe:; Put ZR; oOr BRT 

131. Cited by Hem 3/1.836; Madh 2.146 — a) Tr weft; La! “€eeT — b) Lo? BPE; 
oMd! 3x; Hy La! GMd5 oOr sOx! Pu? sPu afters ; Tr! cMd! ¢ 4q° — c) Ho wenrfeftrr; 
TMd4 meatés7; Pud Pu? Pu? POET AY ; pCa TMd? Ox3 Pu? Pué Tr? eaaTey pBe? &d- 


584 Chapter 5 


wea arate arf afr aeartr ada: | 
TREAT AeT AGP AAT: UL ZAM 
aferar faygeearar wea: ae: | 

wait watgefivar eat aeanfir ffs ue 33N 
Rarentgart yard | 
Sart wart a ghey arageate eae 
qa garage yatacautfacran: | 

SPY gfrer eat aaa AT AST: NeZall 


art’; Be Tj screamed; wPul gat F | Wer — d) sBe Bo Ho Lo! Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tj! 
“sqTusTest ; Jo? Lo? [Jolly R] aSTSIe; Be? Tj! TegAT:. 7M? aftehir 
Additional verse in Ho wKt!' wKt? oOr Mandlik [@, €, , A] KSS Dave: 
afar: gfratge: vat afeere: | 
ae gf fafamer ver are gr | 
b) Mandlik KSS Dave “aig: saat fe af"; Ho “ye: geitfer afe"; wkt! fe afe” — 
d) oOr Frat 
Additional verse in La! tMd* 0Or; placed after 142 in Mandlik [€]KSS Dave, padas a 
and c transposed in La! oOr: 
ward Feat Het wat Aeare_q{ Yo: | 
are: Tach Avan feray Aeareq oder: |! 
a) La! oOr arpat Fact Feit — b) Mandlik KSS Dave Her — d) Mandlik KSS 
Dave Fear 
Additonal verse in La!; placed after 133 in oOrnPu', and after 142 in Mandlik [€] KSS 
Dave: 
TRAAT FS Grey arsit Fear: gente: | 
am gid a ast ag Feaftcradiag: || 
a) oOr wteFeareq Fart: — b) Mandlik KSS Dave Hate AA: ATA; Pu! 
awierait; La! gepferer: — c) nPul tga” 

132. Cited by Hem 3/1.842; Dev 2.250; Madh 2.148— b) La! Lo* Lo® TMd4 nNg Ox? 
Pu! ada:; BK wKt Prerer:, oOradar — c) BBe? wKt} nKtt La! tMd3 GMd° GMy oOr sOx! 
sPuS Tr! mT rt mTr® Madharerceceaeahy, tMd! ae — d) oOr 24a HoT: Bar: 
tMd! tered; Bo fared; Lo’ Garda; La! nPul Tr! Haregar:, Md} Forsyan:; Hy FOPTA:; 
Ox? Farad; BBe? Be? Bo NNg Tj! Jar HoT: 

133. Cited by Hem 3/1.838 — a) La! a1feet; Ho “Tsrit — b) cMy area; Tj! ate, 
Md} ate: rMd4 ate: — c) NK trait — d) TM? wea; Be! rear, cMd! oOr aaar:; 
oMy 4a: cor to Waa, TMd3 GM@ Tr! mTr4 MTr® [Jolly G] Hem Waa; BKt 5 w Kt Sree: 

134. Padas c-d omitted in Lo? GMy. Cited by Apa 271; Hem 3/1.794; Dev 2.250; Madh 
2.148 — a) Md! feast — b) Tr? yarft 2a"; cMd! Tj! “aeifat — c) Bo TMd4 nPu! Pu? Pu‘ 
afeart, wKkt aefear; oOr Faort FT; cMd Tr! J — d) Tj! Ya: Yaraseate; Ho Bra; 
Bo gfe 

135. Omitted in Pu’; placed after 131 in Tr?;padas a-b omitted in Lo®. Cited by Apa 271; 
Hem 3/1.794; Laks 10.120; Dev 2.250— a) La! AIT, Md} 1Md4 GMd! Tr! Je; GMy “Geet 


Chapter 5 585 


wat fas ae freee et a | 

SAT: AT atteat Ag: Qhaaterar ile 3eil 
ch earat feget aerator | 
Bayt ereaerat adtar a agony Ue Zl 
Fea AT TT WT aearaead TET | 
ASAT AAT AAaT NP 3c 


— b) Jo! Kt? Dev Mandlik Biihler Jha KSS Dave Tafazarraetiae; Jm feuprarranifac, 
Be? qafaeran: [for whole pada]; Be! Ho wKt! nKt! BKt> wKt® Lo° tMd4 nNg sOx! Ox? Pu3 
sPu° [Jolly M] Apa 4; Tr? taifacaoh. Jo? “rarer: — c) Pu2 Put SaIPT; Apa °SATE; cMy 
aftrat; cMd> Tr! wT! Tro afirart; Md! qaear tat; Lo? ar; Md4 ag — d) La! Hor FT, 
Tr! For TT; Be! Fer: Bar: nKe Ae: 
Additional verse in La! rMd4 GMd MTr? MTr®: 
serakadasy ret Tears | 
gad warerngre: arent 7 | 
a) La! gedtafta’ — b) La! @atearay ab— c) rMd4 Heart q ga — d) oMd5 
“arraghreraars 7; La! “arate 7 
Additonal verse in Be! [cited by Me and Ku at 134]: 
areca yasrr sey gay yar | 
sary 7 reete: daofhtageate | 
136. Omitted in Hy Kt?. Cited by Apa 36; Dev 2.244; Mddh 1.215; padas a-b cited by Vis 
1.17 — a)sOx! sPuS Ua; Md! fa¥; wKe ze; Tj! e¢— b) Tj'SwarsgsEs ad; Be! BBe? Ho 
BK wKt® Lo’ sOx! Ox? sPuS Tr Apa AAT ATHBE; Pus “ease, Lo} cMd! tMd4 cMd5 
oMy Tr! mTr* mTr® [Jolly Ku Rd R] Dev eaaferent [Mt “=ES]; Md} “HaeHeHT — 
c-d) Tj! Torrey aatepfergeet: aagfeemr: — d) sPu’ gar; *Ma? 4s; MT? Fa: wKe! aT 
Madh [vl] gferargard; Be Be? sKt® wKt® Lo’ GMd! tMd3 NNg Ox? Tr! Wa Apa tear; 
sOx! sPuS “sfifeaar, Pu Tr? “after; Put “sfcaa:; Jo? “sficg hy: 
Additional verse in oOr [the text is unclear]: 
qe gor pattot yfeemr AAP: | 
garegfa: aarp after | 
137.* Cited by Vij 3.250; Apa 36; Laky 1.157, Dev 2.246, Madh 1.215 — a) TMd? GMy 
Dev Tea — b) Md? GMy Madh “atfeor:; Pu? Pu? “arReet — c) Tr? Bat aaweMAT; Madh 
amyerer ryt; La! Payereg aa; rMd3 GMd 5 GMy La! oOr sOx! sPu® Tr! Laks RIT FT 
at; GMy Slgrerer— d) sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? nKt [cor to fh] BK’ wKt® Lo? cMd! 
cMd? GMy nNg Ox? Pu’ Tj? Tr! Laks Madh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ¢; Lo! areagq 
138.* Padas c-d omitted in TMd*. Cited by Hem 3/2.957; Dev 2.260; Madh 1.223 — a) 
Be! BBe? Ho BKt} wKt® Lo* TMd* GMy oOr Ox? Pud Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] 4; Lot Lo’ Te Fea; 
Be? [but cor] Hy Jm Jo! Kt? TMd3 tMd4 GMy Ox? Pu® Tj? MTr3 MTr*mTr® Na Dev Madh 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 4; Ho Jo: Tr? J Me Re support F— b) nKt? TaTAT ; Madh 
qrarar’: tMd? GMy Tj! “aTTAT Hy apr — c) Bo Atria; Be? Pu Pu Tj! “arreg — 
c-d) GMd> Madh Treamtereannry tarerr wader [Madh Fea 7]— d) Be! Bo Jo? wKt! 
wKt} nKt BKt> wKt® Lo! Lo? Lo’ cGMd! nNg sOx! Ox? Pu? Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr! Tr? Wa 
Hem “rarest. Be? Pu2 Put Tj! “ore See: Be “oparat: Ho Upy WaT; Tr? ade; 


586 Chapter 5 


Prramar: of fF: capa Ferz | 
mat arafrate afte 7 apeET e380 
qamt afta art at arrattany | 
arate faotRes a dir evo 
atRee ede gear fagats¢s a afer ar: 

FT PEAT TaATATET A Tear hoy UL ¥ 2M 
ata fica: wet T aaa: TTT | 


for a similar hiatus see 5.145c-d 
Additional verse in Be? [cf. 2.60]: 


aft te maaan Bre usr z | 
werrerafat adea after: 11 
139.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu? — a) GMd! tMd? tMd4 GM My Tr! Rrerara aaah 
[rMd4 “arate J; Be! 34 — b) Ox? fag”; nKt! Ewer aay; mT! “Sareea — c) Tr! arate; 


eas oMd! arate; wT rt ° fereseq; wKt! wKts Lo’ oMy ‘fa=afet; Be! Lot Lo’ Md! Wa “afer 

— d) Be! Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Wa [Jolly GN] “at a; BBe? Be? BCa Hy Jo! Kt? wKt} La! Lot 
Lo Pu® Tj? Tr? mTr4Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “ERT; Bo Jm Jo? BKé wKt® Lo! Lo? Pu! 
"wa; oMd Tj Tr! mTr® “aét q; Ho sOx! sPuo Tj! “3st J; TMd? GMy [Jolly Nd] ‘ate, 
Md? “agar fe; wKe! “geen; Ma} apeeyary 

140. Cited by Apa 906; Laks 2.269 — a) Pu? Put acter art; wKt @rY:; Lo’ Apa mrt — 
b) mTr6 4 BK wKtS Gat, Tj! ota feat — c) TMd3 * wer; BBe Be Bo BKtS wKtS Lo! 
Lo? 0Or sOx! sPu® Tj! Tr “BOTT; Be! Pu? Put Wa eu: Bile — c-d) Ox? Pu Pus wert 7 
estat ahrmear Sera — d) aKtS wKtS “Resear wiert; Be! Be? Bo pCa La! Lo! Md 
aMy Pu? Put Tj! Tj? Tre? Wa Laks J; Ox? T ATT 

141. Cited by Laks 1.141; Hem 3/2.972 — a) MTr® BAT; Md? BET; GMd> Pu! yer — 
b) Tj! fagaer +; Be! BBe? Ho Jm Jo! Jo? La! wKt' K? wKt} BK wKt® Lo! Lo? Lo’ Lo’ Md? 
oOr Ox? Pu’ MT? Mandlik KSS OY; oOr T#T; Tj? TF; cMd! “FTA; Lo! +Md3 GMd GMy 
MTr! MTr° Hem T aft; BBe BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKB Lo? Lot Lo’ Ox? Pu’ Tj? 
MT? [Jolly Ku R] Mandlik Dave KSS Tate fom 4); Ox? auf [oma]; +Md4 aT, Pu? Putt — 
d) mTrémTro “eafted; GMd! cMd5 cMy Tr! “efaftsd; Md} “fered; 1Md4 “eater; La! 
“aerated 

Additional verse in GMd! GMy Tr! mTr*mTr° [Jolly Gr]; placed after 142 in La! Mandlik 
[®] KSS Dave, placed after 143 in TMd* GMd5 oOr; padas a-b in rM d?. Cited by Hem 
3/2.975; Dev 2.267; Mddh 1.226 [cf.VaDh 3.41]: 


b) iM gPrerraray a; mr! forgeret; oMd! “exait; GMa Tr! “eaaterar Pe; La! 
oMd! oOr “entghat g TmTr4 mTrs erat ae gq; Madh eretpe 7; Mandlik 
KSS Dave “erty dat q; Hem “erat gfrteg — c) Dev Mandlik “aay ae 
Md? “way ar en; Trl wag wen: Md Hem “WaaTMT ; oOr "agar ar 
eT 


Chapter 5 587 


wer Tar HAT A Awa WaT everlil 
Rawat g deel sae: SIT | 
area agerarared: ofr lex aul 
aredtt fate: creat F FAIMATAATERT | 
WITT ye St Ayres: eT ews 
Great yeat wT wert a frstekarad aa: 
PaaS eA ATATAT TASH TT UY Val 


ue arate: pet cagiarta | 
Sw a: Adantar efor ert Fratercr Ue vsil 


142. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Apa 276;Hem 3/2.972; Dev 2.266; Madh 1.228— a) wKt! 
a1 — b) Be! Lo! & amar; Tras airar’: tMd4 Pu? Put ara cMy “serareaat; Pu? Put 
Teed; TMd4 Fe; Ox? Hert — c) Md‘ Pu’ Atte; nPu! Pu2 Put feet; Ho GMd! rMd? 
oMdS Tr! mT v6 afte; Ir! yfersted; Lo! Pus “dred, Dev “aeeterar— d) Tr! Dev Fae” 

143. Omitted in NNg. Cited by Hem 3/2.964; Apa 264; Dev 2.274 — a) sOx! sPu® 
shemeta; wKt! Lo! Wa 4; sKé wKtS aegeet — b) wKt! “set — c) cMd! 1Md4 wat rarer 
TKAT 

144. Cited by Vij 3.30;Apa 922, 926; Hem 3/1.796; Madh 2.364 — a)GMy ard; mTr‘ 
‘ared?; Md} atc, La! tMd3 Pué PuS Pu’ Pu? Tj! Tr? Apa 922 [vl] faee:; Jo? Lo? Apa g22 7 
— b) wKt Lo! get orer fagpeaftr; nK¢e “aah — c) Be! Be? wKt! wKt ara2”; Bo Lo’ Tr! 
yey; Tj! yA — d) Be! Tj!) AM; oMd Tr? Fahy, Tj! HYP; Md} ea: 

Additional verse in Be! Pu? Put Mandlik KSS Dave ; padas a-b and c-d transposed in Pu? 


aye F yer are art gagerag | 
meat g Tact Ayr az || 
a) Pu? Put aera 
145.* Placed after 138b in TMd‘, Cited by Vij 1.196, 3.279; Apa 1139; Hem 3/2.957-8, 
966; Madh 1.224, 2.423 — a) Be BBe* cGMd! sOx! sPuo Vij 3.279 Apa FT Fe FT IAT FT; 
La! Mica Yer T BAT A; rMd4 Wer Fear -T FEAT FT; Ox? STAT Fea; GMA eat T Year 
7; nPu! Tr? rar; wKt® oOr fereat; BK fereaT; Ho Tj! Tr! Yer; BBe? GMd! BBe? Ho GMd! om 
last T —- b) Jo? Lo? Md? GMy Tr! mTrtmTr® Vij 1.196 éifacdra@t; Be! sBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? BK wKt® Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu’ Pu’ sPu® Pu? Pul® Tj? 
MTr? Wa Vij3.279 ApaHem Mddh 2.423 Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave *weryanhy 7; Pud 
Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] w@rathr J — c) Lo! sOx! sPu’ fteait; Pul? diear area” — c-d) GMd! 
Ral MAHA: FAA — d) Be! Bo Ho aKt} wKt® Lo! Lo? nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu‘ Pud sPuo Pu’? Pu’ Pu? Wa sparen ; Tr! ara; GMd® wire ; wKt! ara 
Two additional verses in oOr; first is indeciferable; the second also is unclear: 
asfttiegied art spreafer Feat | 
geese sans felted | 
146.* a) Pu? Pu‘ WaT: BKtS wKt® “fee: — b)oMd! geaaitafafeerar — c) Hy Sehr; nKtt 
Zar F; Bo FT: — d) La? create; wKe Lot cMd! eifsar. tMd* et Prat’: Be! BCa Ho 


Pu’: 


588 Chapter 5 


aTeat aT FaeaT at qaar ake atfear | 
aq eran ader Sreart qeafr lie voll 
aver farqaar froq afirareer ate | 
TAT AAT Ha aT WAT AAHTAT EXC 
fear wat gaatfr aafacearers: | 

wat fe face ett mel HaTSy Her Ue il 
at WESAT WT West WTA | 
GPA AT AAHECTAT lle oll 
aeat caferat at wrat arqaa fig: | 

at yaad sat aera a A HPIAT lee zl 
ager! Meat aaa wa: | 


Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! Lo® sOx! Pu> sPuS Pu’? Pu? Tj? MTr? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave anifaar ; 
1Md3 aut frat” 

147. Cited by Luks 12.619; Dev 3.584; Madh 2.31—- a) wKtB ATHAT ATA AT; Be! oOr 
Tj! Tr? atarat — b) Be! Lo! Lo? Tj! Farar; Md} Garar, Ox3 garar aft; nNg Gearafy, Ho 
gear afr? — c) Pu’ Pu? Pu? Volly G] aaa 7 ded; cMd! mTrS eraser; Be! [but 
me] Be} wKt! Lot Lo rMd3 GMdS Ox? Pu? Put Tj! “aster, cMy “asa — d) Me [cited at 
8.163] ere febfefefer ferfer:; nKt4 cMd! tMd3 GMd) GMy Tr! Tr Dev art efre We"; Be? 
MTrt mT v6 Jevatt 

148. Omitted in Ox? Pul, Cited by Laks 12.619; Dev 3.584; Madh 2.286 — a) Lo! Pu? 
Put ae; Jm arefig ; Be? aver fagde; tMd? oOr ftaaat; La! faqear— b) rMd? afr; wKt 
arrt — c) Dev FAST; HOA; wk} Ter — c-d) Madh gwen fae ward +7 et earaeA- 
Fete [cf. 9.3] — d) Pu WAY; Bo WT; Ho WA ST &; Be! BBe? BCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! 
Kt? wKt} La? Lo! Lo} Lo* Lo? Pu’ Tj? Tr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Wea & ; La! 
waeett a: Laks W3teeT a 

149. Omitted in Ox? Pu!®. Cited by Laks 12.619; Dev 3.585; Madh 2.31 — a) Lo* far; 
Bo Wat; Lo! [cor to] Md? BTaT; GMd! GMy Pu? Put wat; Tr! arat; Ox? gerarft — c) cMd! 
vafarearat At; Md! wefaefear et fe; wKeS vot Sager St: Be! WT; Lo? WaT, T? ua; 
pBe? Lo! waar fae’; Pu’ Pu? Pu? [Jolly G] FT; wKt! [Jolly R]g — d) tMd3 Tj! 7€; Pu? Put 
wet; TH? Ta; Tr! Te 

150.* Cited by Laks 12.620 — a) wKt wear, Hy TereaT; wKt! YepteaT He; Put 
areat; Hy wee; rMd! Brat; mTr? Bre — b) Pul? “arat; Lo! “arf; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Ke? 
Lo! Lo? Lo? ™Md3 cMd> Ox} Pu? Tj2mTr3 MT‘ Mandlik Jolly KSS “#rty; Tr? “maT — c) 
Pus eee; BBE “TeETAT; wKt! “sacar — d) Ho Tj! ara 

151. Cited by Laks 12.628; Dev 1.223, 3.589 — a) wKt! wKt qe; Dev “ferareaat; nPul 
aT — b) oOr STAT; Or nPu! Pud Pu? Pu? aya; Dev aad, Lo aAe:; tM! ATA; 
BBe? “Het: — c) wKt! Gyre [om a]; Te PT; Hogpyad; nKtt gpyate; Md} Rey; Jo? 

o PAI=T; Bo 3TH; oOr sad; mTré Slaat:; Wa sftach — d) Dev gftert; Tre Fer; Dev 

[vl] &atc; Be! Bo Jo? sOx! Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu? Tr? [Jolly Gt 7 








Chapter 5 589 


mad fraey wart eee U24QN 
Wada WT AEE: | 
geet fer arate wet ao aera: eas 


faafte: eraadt ar qetat aftafira: 
saat: Rarar aresat wad saaeafa: ueervil 


ate Sth qeraat Tae ATATTTUTy | 
aft gaya aa aa ent adhe lege 


152.* Omitted in Bo — b) Tj! Barat gfeaAT; Lot Lo’ Ox} Tr [Jolly M] aarecarat; 
wKt! sOx! “siét; Be wKt! NNg Wood; TMd? sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPus TaTafeT: [but cor in sOx! 
sPu® ]; Jm tTMd4 GMy nPu! waTad; cM) waerct — c) BBe? faare g — d) oOr WATAT, nKtt 
aarat; Be! nKt Lot Lo® cGMd! rMd? tMd? GMy nNg Ox3 nPu! Pu? Put Pu! Tr! mTr4 mTr® 
{Jolly M Nd] zai’; BKt® wKt® TT’; Be! BBe2 BCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} Pu? Pu? Pu? mTr? 
Wa Rn Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “It 

153. Not commented by Re. Cited by Laks 12.627; Dev 3.590 — a) Lo! FTI ; Lo! 
“agers; Pul? “aragenrs; wKté “aS; BKE om 4; Tr! lacuna for 7; Be? Bo wKt! Lot Lo® 
tMd? Ox3 Pu’ Pu? Pu? Pu!? Tj! [Jolly G] Laks J; cGMd5 at — b) Ho HewIe Faaft — c) Dev 
ge rer carcte; wKkt! ger; Tj! geenhras; Te arate; nPul arte — d) mTr° TX; sOx! sPue 
“sey; Be! Lo! Md3 GMy GMd MTr° atftat; Tr? ata; wKke! arr 

154. Omitted in Md? Tr; after faafte: the rest omitted in GMy. Cited by Vis 1.76, 2.290; 
Vij 2.290; Laks 12.627; Dev 3.590 — a) Tj! faarre:; La! Vij g:3ff@:; sOx! sPu® gate: [but 
both cor]; Ho wKe eregar— b) wKt! qeratfs feafera: — c) cGMd! rMd4 mTr° aTeear 
ferret? ear; mTr4 Volly Gr] wrt: erat weraz, Bo Lo? Pul® Jha STATE:; oOr STAAT; 
Vij afars:; Lo’ feat; Bel Waa; Bo Ho [cor to] Lo® aredt — d) Pu! da”; Ox? aap: 

Additonal verse in cGMd! nPu! Tr? mTr* Mandlik [@, @, ] KSS Dave. Cited by Apa 
109; Laks 12.629: 

array ar g Sreraary: sfaara4r | 
adap + arte stared car 
a) Mandlik KSS Dave savafe; Tr? Gaara — c) nPu! Apa ar Hesreearatter 
Additional verse in La}; added after 155in oOr: 
gare fear ar aftetasor ofertt | 
weft wafer ar are gem wat + grater Il 

155.* Cited by Vis 1.84; Apa 102; Laks 12627; Dev 3.590; padas a-b cited by Hem 
3/3.176 — a) Lo! + eft w ge; Hy efter; GMd! ferat; Md‘ eftar, Tj? St; Volly G] 
gaat — b) Md‘ ata; wKt ad; Be! Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wK nKt BKO wKt® 
La! Lo? Lo* Lo®cMd! nNg oOr Ox? sPu® [but cor sh] Pu!® Tj? mTr? Wa [Jolly M]Vis Apa Me 
Rn Jha “Ta; aBe Corr — c) Pu Pu gard oft a; rMd4 Baye Aaa; rMd? 
afagpav4t a4; Bo Hy Dev B-yad; Ho WTAE; Be! nKtt wKt® Lo? Lot Lo® Md? GMd! 
cMd> GMy nNg Ox? Pu!? Tr! mTrémTr® Apa’ Ta Fe; BKo “TS aH; wk Teqrast — d) Lo! 
mat 

Additional verse in Ho wKt! sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPuS Tj! Tr? Mandlik [@, &, 1] KSS Dave; 
added after 154 in La’; padas c-d in Md?*: 


590 Chapter 5 


atireer areat ett staat at aeret ar | 
darned arateahre tery ey sll 
art F AMS FIGS: YN: | 

Tg ara ata watt a TET FT leg 
arettat ATT ated Frrat aeparkeott | 

at et ware aieedt ara LY CI 
AH ASAT FAATARAT | 

fea wrerfr fasromrarcar EoreraheryT La SU 


gett stafe ar g a scar ad aq | 
ag: aT eee agar te eee | 
a) Tj! Sftag; La! wKt! Ho ar arét — a-b) sOx! sPuo ar eat Sgurer acraTRoft — b) 
Ho Sater saa; La! ster gaareft; wKt! Pu? Pu? Sraraacd — c) TMd4 sOx! 
sPu® Mandlik KSS Dave TASH Ed; Tr Feet; wKe! Tear — d) Ho La! rMd* aT 
ant azar arg [La! aT] 
Additional verses in GMd> Tr}; verses 2-3 given after verse 154 intMd?*: 
afte: prgar ar qetathh feat: | 
aresar feared: eareead eaaeafer: 11211 feof. 5.154] 
arrears ar are aero ara fare | 
ofeasrar waterer araarg: aarfear HRI 
offer asmehhy: erifatrerghrar | 
ar agarpamife stared? aa 11311 
1. a) GMd> @TAeNT — b) cMd> Ftat Thats: — c) oMd aferaerregeras: 
2. a) Md amgte; Tr! “wfe art g 
3. a) Tr! oiferar east — ¢) Tr! ar f& Brararanner 
156. Cited by Laks 12.628 — a) TMd4 oOr [but cor] gift’; Be! Bo Jo! tMd3 Tj! Tr 
“Weer; Wa area aT — b) Pus Pu’ Pu? Tr! sftaedt; Hy 1Md? fifa}; Bo faa; La! sOx! sPuS 
Tr Sitacer; nPu! stacey; aCa Ox? sfaatf; Be! Bo wKt? La! sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® yaar 
T—c) TMd? Teal; Wa TR; Lo? Jo? “Stare”; Lo? “Heffersdt; rm! “afreafa; Tr? 
“carat — d) BK wKt® Tr? te; Pu2 Pu rae 
157. Cited by Vij 2.127, 290; Laks 12.636 — a) TMd? aes: — b) Jol “YS: GS: — c) 
wKt! + asf; Be! Be? Bo [but cor] aCa wKt} NKt4 La! GMd! +Md3 1Md4 GMd5 GMy Tr! 
MTr' MTr® Wat F; La! Tr! mTroararhy; Md? sOx! sPuo aTathy — d) Ho FaeT J; wKt} oOr 
qT 
158. Padas a-b omitted in GMy and padas c-d in Tj* {haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.127; Laks 
12.636 — a) TMd? ett, nPu! areata; sOx! sPuS ACT; wk area; TMd3 rMd‘4 arc — b) 
Tr? frerdt; Pu? Put frae:; La! Pret ar war’; Tj? “afer — c) wKt4 wet — d) Lo! Tj! erg: 
Be! gag; BKA wKe ty 
159. Padas a-b omitted in Tj*. Cited by Vij 2.127;Laks 12.636; Dev 3.595; Madh 2.45 — 
a) Wa agete; Lo? Ox? agit fe; Pu’ agate; 1Md?* aght 7 — b) Bo wart’: pCa wKt} nKt! 
Lo? 1Md? GMd? GMy nNg Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr! Tr? [Jolly G Gr] Vij Na Re BYR; *Md4 
Bar, wKe “afer: ; Tr? “anfeur: mTr® “after: Td? “arftaty: Bo ‘aifeuff — c) tMd3 TaAT 


Chapter 5 591 


aa watt aredt eit aereaet araferar | 
eat meacagafs aur a aareafter: eg goll 
wera g cat wateafrade | 

ae frearraratte afeeiterer fered 25 2 
area watedie a arrearage | 

a fadhesr arediat vafrqataaarr ee il 
utd ferarager eageper ar fread | 
freata ote wafer agate arert lee sil 
ahrrg aq: ait are smife Fraarz | 
areas arate aati dearer egy 


— d)oMd! “HpaT TBS s Ho Aafe:; Wa sets 

160. Cited by Vij 2.127; Laks 12636; Dev 1.225, 3.595 — b) TMd? MTr* mTro Seratad 
feat; Lo! aerat; Md} feaferar — c) Lal wedey’ ; rMd3 TeBerT’; GMd! “wTyAT 4; nPu! 
*argarfer; wKt! “ara — d) cMd! aar 2; Ox3 gar &; TMd? GMy Baa; tMd4 sare; Dev 
maT 

161.* Cited by Vij2.127; Laks 12.636; Dev 3.596; Mddh 2.30 — a)t Md? aroaty fe ur 
aret; TMd? GMy * STAT et; Te! “urer eat g—b)Tr *faasta; Tj! Prada; aMy Mddh 
“faaga; Lo? “Prada; rMd} “feast — c) Lo? 8; Te As; 1Md* Wa ae — d) wKtS TeaT- 
areretad; aBe: Jm wKt? Lot LoS tMd? Ox? Pu!? mTr4 [Jolly M]Ku Jha Dave TTHreT; oOr 
Tercera 

162. Cited by Laks 12.636; padas c-d cited by Vis 1.66; Vij 2.51— a) GMy SRT; 
tMd3 GM@ Tr! eta; Lo’ Tr! wat ete; Lal tMd? Pu’ Lolly Gr] vat SAT — b) Trt + 
arret ; 8Ca La! aTaar; GMd! rMd? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Pus Pu? Pu? Wa Rn Dave Jha + 
arerer of; Lo? oOrat ararrer of"; nKt4 sOx! sPuo a arererea”; Hot aterer IR" Jo? 
wKt! wKt? Lo? Md? GMd° GMy Tr! arearerer of"; Ho Lo’ Lo’ oMy Tr! Tr “e:; wKt} Ox? 
“aed — c) Md? arfediaeg; Tj! fF are; Be! Bo cMd> cMy Wa fedtaeg; Pu’? fedhrer 
— d) Jo? Lo! Bre"; caMy “xarafeard; Lo? “eafieert; wke! “eater 

163.* Padas a-b omitted in Bo. Cited by Laks 12.645; Madh 2.30 — a) Jo! ecaT ; BBe 
Be? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? aKt) La? Lo! Lo? Lo® Lot GMd! GM@ Ox? cMy Pu’ Tj! Tr! mTr*mTr® 
fecarrarte; Jo? wKt! wKt} Laks fecat Prascé. rMd4 fecarage; Lo’ fecarwaree; Hy TM? 
“BE. wK aR ; Ox? om BT — a-b) aK wk “He ar agape Matas [wKt° om ar} — b) 
wKt} & sae; NNg om aT; wKt? GMd! tMd4 GMd5 GMy Tr! [Jolly Gr] Madh arvaacd; tMd3 
aaa; mTré mT ro a at Aad; Ox Fafa — c) Be! La! feta wafer Beas; Hy Jm Jo! KP 
wKt Lo! Ox? Tj? mTr Volly G Ku] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Frta av sagrar [wKt? aT 
fede]; Lo! Fea; Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] ate — d) wKe “asa; Tr! “ger 

164.* [= 9.30] Verses 164 and 165 transposed inoOr. Not commented by Nd. Cited by 
Madh 2.30 — a)NNg era ; Ke? “ane; Tr! [but cor fh] ard; Md? “aed, Lo4 Lo? 
Ox} “art g; Pul® “ata; wKt! arergarg:; Bo om Ag: — b) Pu? Put Sera ; Lo! 
mrcafrerat, Ox? ara; Pu? Pu‘ fafeeart; Hy Prearat— c) Ox? areafaanife; sBe? Be? Bo 
pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKO nKtt Kt? wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo4 Lo’ nNg oOr 


592 Chapter 5 
aft ar arate aarareeaaar | 
aT Adare af: Aredia arerer ue ga 
wet aA Fat AAtanaeaaar | 
gerat sifaaratter ofereste aT TNS 
vagat want eft faonfa: gatarhtoty | 
qeaahyerrt aaa atfrg lie eli 
wae yaaa seaatarereahr | 


gaaeat Saty Gaereneatar TUS 
srt fatrat fret asa aarr era | 


fadtaargat wet Fa We TAT ULE 


Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu!® Tj? Tr? Wa TS: cMy “ara; Lot “ater; Ho 
Ox} Wa amie; BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt La! Lo! Lo? Lo® TMd* cGMd5 nNg sOx! nPu! Pu’ 
sPuo Pu? Pu? Tj? Tr? mTr3 Go [Jolly M*°] Go Mandlik Jha KSS Dave wisitfe — d) Md? 
oa a TeaT [me Hera]; Ox? “it T; Jo? St: where 

165. [= 9.29] Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? Pul® [Jolly MJ]; not commented by Nd Rc; padas 
c-d omitted in Lo? TMd?, and pada-d by Wa. Cited by Laks 12.629 — a) NKt* GMd! tMd? 
+tMd4 GMd@ GMy NNg Tj! Tr! mTr* mTr$ arferaefer; Be? arferarefer — b) Be! Ho akt’ wKto 
sOx! Pu’ sPu Pu? Pu? Tr? [Jolly G] HataTaesra ; NNg oOr Pu Put Pud Pu? Pu? Tr? mTr3 
“aga; Be! Ho aft: — c) Bo La? oMd! age@ranrarsife [cMd! “sterar ; om aT]; Pub 
serat wifaarater [cf. 166c]; Jolly N] ar ofesraamifer, Be! Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? wKt® 
Lo! tMd* oOr Ox? nPul Pu> Pu’ Pu? Tj? Wa [Jolly G R] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
“sraATafe [cf, 9.29] — d) Tr? areat weitere: Bel were 

166.* Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pu!? [Jolly M]; not commented by Nd; padas a-b omitted 
in TMd? 1Md‘, and padas a-c in Wa. Cited by Laks 12.629; Dev 3.591 — b) Ho AAlatenta- 
PART; Tj? om; Pud Pu? Pu? Tr? mT? ‘agar — c) Laks Se Btforarafer; wKeo se aftantFe- 
Hatter; mTr® See; Ho Seat; Pur Pu’ Pu? seTet — d) Tj! KSSafaste; TMd4* oOr Pu? 7e- 
ole 

167.* Not commented by Nd. Cited by Vis 1.87; Dev 2.437 — a) Bo Ho “saraat; nPu! 
gant, Ox8 eat; Lo? aaut 7; Be Jo! Lo! Lo’ nPul Pu? St; Jm eat: — b) wKt! fear; Jo! 
fear; wKe 1Md? fori; Ho Ox} fesTfa; cMad! “aTeoff — c) rMd* Geaahe — d) nPul 
“wer, Pu2 Pud araor ents NKt! CAAT 

168. Not commented by Nd. Padas a-c cited by Apa 77 — a) Pu'® aTat &; Be tare, 
Pu? “ATeed; Pus Pu? Ae —b) Lo’ “aetariftr — c) oOr Fae ; Lo? “feat at wT Gaerne” 

169. Cited by Laks 2.435 — a) Be! Fret: — b) cMd' eae Baa, Tj! oases; wKt! 
Ox} ag 1; Wa om 4; Jo? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tr! [Jolly G] erat — c) tMd4 “TAT — d) Lo? cMd! 
TM? cGMy Ox? Ox} Pu Pu’ Pul? Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® LaksJey STAT TAL [nKt! TF 4; Ox? 
We]; Jolly Gr] TY seit FF [sic] [Nd gloss Terr Sit WeareTshAz supports variant 
reading]; wKt® Eade, Be? HAT; oOr TAT 


Chapter 5 593 


UU ghet Arata egret wttrar ateara4r 
GSaqats eae: 


Colophon: Be! BKt> wKt® Lo! GMd! tMd¢ nNg Tr! sf Ararae, Lo? ara wKe 
yy; Be? nKt> wKt® Lo! GMy sOx! sPuo mTr° om Sayrerat afearar; wKt Pu’ om afe- 
arat; Be? aitafafeata ISaay, Ox? Genet AMT ISTH, NNgTeeIaAT ATT STAT; oOr 
Qfeaty TSTat, Be! ayeugitareaa: Tsas:; Kt? Lo! atbafafer: gst; Bo weTaeusilareara: 


[westsearz:] 


wa wera ferat fafraq ercat feo: | 
at aa frearat waratatraters: ue 
TEeRg wat waactatsaarers: | 
TUTAT UIT ASNT GATAAT URI 
aay We ad Aa aeaay | 
gag arat faferer at wees ar ai 
afvetr aaa wer arahtasar | 
greeny Prager faa: Us 
qatar: Tree aT | 


Additional verse at the beginning in tMd? [reading not very clear]: 
ar aeafreror aa wat aes | 
aeat wearer cer arat urer fread | 
Additional verse in wKt! wKt? GMd! tMd4 GMd? 0Or Tr! Te mTr? MTr°®: 
ae: Te weer at FeraPray | 
qagenert F fay gery | 
a) wKe aera — b) Tr! wet; wKt! wKe dere ea; oOr “ArPTT — d) oMd' fate 


aT TEA: oOr WaT 
1c) Ho wKt! Lot Lo’ Md} Ox? Pu aaa; wKB Feet; OOr Tea; mT TAA; Be! 
racy Tay; Bo Way TT 


2. Cited by Vij 3.45; Madh1.525 — b) Pu? Put “atafegar Lo} “Safes; Ho wKt° 
“safeaar ; ake “Sradtaar — c) rMd4 aterer 7 aTey; Im Pud wre, Vij age — d) 
oOr wadtehracenreaay feo: [6.1b]; M4 TareeT, Ho GMy AarTaed; Pud waraat 

3. Omitted in Ho Tj?; padas c-d omitted in Tj!. Cited by Mddh 1.525; padas a-b cited 
by Vij 3.46 — a) TMd? Sersaresarere; Jm BKt? wKt® Lo! GMd> sOx! sPuS Pu!? aT — b) 
Tj! at; Lo! af; oOrgé Ba; Ho ofefeed — c) tMd3 Pus Pu? Pu? AAT; Lo? ArT; La! 
warfaferca; Bel arifaferer; aKt> wkt° Frferer; rMd4 freer — d) Be! Lo! Loe sOx! sPuf Tr? 
aq; Pu2 Put “cae; Ox? Pul? 7; Bel ar 

4.* Padas a-b omitted in Tj!. Cited by Laks 14.13 — a) sOx! warata; tMd3 [Jolly Nd] 
aaa; wKe aarata — b) GMd! Tr! a7; BBe? [Jolly Gr] TE; TMd4 Ye; Tr! mTr* mTr® 
asa”: [Jolly Gr] art of&; rMd4 aréafe; wKt! ake wKe da oR — c) Kt? nPul Te 
frger; Be! rer, Be? Bo La? Tj! Peter; Md! rMd3 rMd4 GMd GMy Tr! mTré Tr Laks 
fsEeT; Lot Lo® Ox} Pul® [Jolly M Nd] FY-eT; NNg Paeet— d) Jo Pravafefsrafaa:; Pud Pu? 
Pu? Frarafaer 





594 


Chapter 6 595 


waa Ferrand fafa rgdtary tq! 
adte at dite at art erred eT eT | 


wera fare seater a NGI 
aga: ardat Fateter Rret a aka: 
TAGHOAAATAATTAATTATT NG 
wraa fren: Bg areal Aa: aarfea: | 
STAT PRTAATETAT AAA HHTH: Cl 
aare a ygarahrerr warfare | 
aera Gerard a aNTe: Ue Il 
Ree te agate wes | 
TMT T HAM TASMTAAAT T Ul 


5. Cited by Apa 941; Madh 1.526 — a) Jm wKt! sae — b) Pu? Put MHS aT; 
BKtS wKt® Pu! 7 — ¢) Jo! Tr? Galea; Madh Vata; Tr? Aerasit — d) Ho aay 

wkKt! wKt} place here the additional verses given after 6.45. 

6. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by 4pa941; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.46 — a) Trafic; Pul® 
AR; Be! sOx! sPuo F — b) Pu’ [Jolly G] Hr ar arefAa at; Pu? arf [then lacuna}; TMd? 
Srarearey FT; Lo! ma ast; *Md3 Wt — c) pBe? HePa; wKt Het FT; Put WaT; Lo? sepT — 
d) wKtB “27: Be! Bo La? Pu’ Pu? Wa [Jolly M!2-5-89 G] Vij Jolly “eteTaT; Ox? “sreanfe 

7.* Cited by Vij 3.46; Apa 941 — a) Pu? ms. torn at pada-a; Be! Lo! Lo® sOx! sPu® Tr? 
Wa U88%:; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wK} La! [cor to] Lo* GMd! tMd? oOr Ox? Pu’ Tj? Vij Rn Re 
Mandlik Jolly KSS 785 ; Be’ Bo Jo? La? wKt! BK wKt® La! Ox} Tj! ger; Md4 THT, 
oMd5 TR, Tj? afeea — b)rMd* Prerrar— c) wKB TAOS MTT TT ; BBe? FAIS ; ; Be? 
TAS ; ; Pu> Pu? Pu? ATES ; La! ae; Bo nK¢i wKt® Ox? TTS; ; Tj! Ts; Lo! BETS ; 
Put arqetirenfire — d) Hy “‘téaer ; Md? “ea; Lo! Lo’ cMd! GM@ Ox? Pu!® [Jolly 
M4) 9 

8a) Pu Pu’ Pu® Wa [Jolly G] erearaaiter fret are; cMd! Tr! mre Poy 
erg; Be! Md‘ mart; Bo Panta: — b) Bo ft: — c) Pu’ Pu? Volly G] neater erat 
(Jolly G “séiFrat], Be? carfer Fret a areat; Boda; nKt! aaT, Pu? Put Prerrarar zy; Tj! 
“arene; Ox? “atata:; Pu! “arfear— d) wKtS cMd! Pu? Pu? “arent; Pus aperc: 

9. Placed before verse 6 in Jm; padas b-d torn in MTr°. Cited by Vij 3.45; Apa 941; 
Madh 1.526 —a)wKt? sorte, Pul? faata; Apa [vl] santa; Lo J — c) Be! sOx' sPué 
Tj? arate Be? Ho ear; nKt erat; Apa BF; Tj! “ATES; Pus Pu? Pu? “PRET; wKt! 

“eee; GMd! Tr! “are: Ox? “aad, Be! “et; rMd4 “aur; 0Or Apa [vl as in ed] “ard — d) 
nPu! Apa TF; 1Md3 GMd> “aTeXt; Bo ATT; Tr! ° are, Madh “Rt sarre:; TMd4 Vij Apa 
arena: 

10.* Omitted in Ox?; padas c-d torn in MTr°. Cited by Apaggi; Laks 14.17; Madh 1.526 
—-a) oMd! eerearmrttear a; cMd° eetcm ; Tj! eT; Be! Lo’ sOx! sPus Pu'? [Jolly 
M] Me Dave ShaTTerr ; Jo! Kt “wrar, Md4 GMd Tr? MTr¢mTr® Hast; TMd3 “TTT; Tr! 

“gate, nPul “aot aaa — a-b) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Go [Jolly G] aerate acer satttetarenhy sree 


596 Chapter 6 


Aaa IN: KATATE: | 
Sib Se cn ED 
edi in cata LIST 

IAT Gott HAT TW MAAHAT U2 2M 
woiearerey Foret T | 


ATA ETT WRTAATT U2 Rl 
aargarar ata sane a | 
wat Rye Bar mearaenenfr wT evi 
ears ane qe yaahrery | 
sinter Sa avait areereenhr a Ue 4 II 


— b) Ho Ox? aetq; Pu3 ateaq; cMd! aratqy — c) Be} TAT; BBe? BCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! 
Kt? wK BK wKt® La! Lo! (me to) sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pud sPu® Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr? 
[Jolly G Ku] Re Mr Go Apa Laks Madh SATIT TF [sOx! sPuo om FT]; GMd! FePT T; Ox? 
qerar zy; [Jolly Gr] arent; Md} “aor TTT; Be? Tj! Apagy — d) Jo! Ké mT’ Mandlik 
Jha Dave Tea; Be! ZAeITEAA ; Ho Pu2 Pud Pu’ Pu? Pu? weet ; nBe? pCa Ox? nPu! 
[Jolly G] Go afro’ ; La! aféorenras ; Pud cae 
uu. Pada-c torn in MTr°. Cited by Vij 3.46;A pa 941; Laks 14-175 Madh 1.527 —~ a) tMd4 
cMy STATE 5 Tr! Madh avert: are; rMd? aTaRaeeTT; Or “SF? — b) wKt! 
“eter; Tj! “a aera; Te dante: wke game; Bo Ho lat —c) Bo srr ; Ox3 
*grapa; cMy “Sr F Ae Faq; 7M? “set BS Ja; wKt! oOr “WS Ba; Be? wKtS Ox? Pur 
Pu‘ "erate — d) aMd! freafeferrcgeaz, Be! Bo TMd3 GMy Wa Madh fraatefergda; Te 
Apa Laks PatY Tease [Apa Pratea]; rMd4 eatepnrrerart 
12.* Padas a-b torn in MTr5; pada-a torn in Pu’. Cited by Vij3.46; Apa 941; Laks 14.18 
— a) BBe Be? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt sBK® wKt® Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® tMd* oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? 
nPu! Pu? Pu? Put sPuo Pu® Pu!® Tj! mTr3 [Jolly M*] Apa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave * wre; Kt? 
Te, La! Apa THEM; Laks TECAT — b) tMd4 AgAT AAT; Tj! Te? AT; wKto oOr AeA; 
Be! Be? Bo Ho Pu? Tj! Feadt — c) Laks IT THTYSTHtT; MTP aT AAIWSSAHIcT;, Be! Ho 
Md! Pu? Pu! Pu’ Tr? gosft’ — d) nKt! aT; Bo Gat; La! “ea; Ma “Te 
13. Padas b-d omitted in Ox3; parts of padas a-c torn in mTr°. Cited by Apa 942;Laks 
14.18; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.49 — a) Ox? rata are: cMd! ereasiteerhy are, 
Pu? Put olesicanstit; Apa Bolen; sBe Bo wKt! wKt® cMy oOr Pu’ Pu’ Pu? 
a, Tr! Tr? Wa Bente — c) Lo* Sega ; aK af Vij * Kara: mTr® * ZARA; Bo 
“gated; +Md4 GMdS GMy Tr! “RaTaRI; 1™d? “Za; Apa Laks KARRI; Tj! 
“xarada — d) Md} AS FT; Md! aeea; Ma GAS 
14. Padas c-d omitted in wKt! and pada-a in Ox3; padas a-b ma sh in Pul®. Cited by Apa 
942; Laks 14.18 — a) Hy 3144 ; BBe? Be? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wK aKt® wKt® Lo? Ox? [cor to] 
Tj! Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “ait 4 — b) GMy ATAaTiy; tr Md? a@arht; + Md! 
Haaity, oOrPqper F— c) Kt? Wet; Be! GMy nNg Tj! HITT; Lo! wefieF; Lal fas; Lo? 
PPT; nNg ae; Pu? Pud 7eyS; Pul? ayer, Tj! Brea; Laks fafa — d) Be! K2 wKe Volly 
M!-2-3-8-9 G] SUT Pw? Pu’ SUITE ; cMy STH: Pu! “sary 
15. Pada-d torn in mTr°, Cited by Apa 942; Madh 1.527 — a) Lo! astepaqureta; oOr 


Chapter 6 597 


T operate sare | 
qT yrMarenasts qoarftr az wer aw eel 
ATA AT SMT BISTENTT AT | 


AEST WAST seltqarhersrshr ar gill 
SaTIMTst AT SITY Aaeaeratshy ar | 
WAT aa AT SIT AAaaT UT aT lec 
am aa anata feat areer ana: 
agaist ar ere eareverenarioe: N22 
uraranaamar ye POT wT add | 
Tardaatertiag wary aaa aR Roll 


“sapst, NK tMd3 TMd4 GMd5 GMy Tr! mTr4 mTr3mTr° Madh ate — b) wKt! Ford; wKes 
ag. Tj! ad — c) La! mir? tar afer 

16.* Omitted in Tj! [haplo]; pada-d torn in Pu? Mir, Cited by Apa‘ 942; Laks 1418 — a) 
BK wKt reps a afr Hy oMd! rere ; Ox? MT r OTe; Md wep; Pud 
wrep ; Wa “prep; Be! “dtr — b) Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] “ghacatit — c) Laks + 
area; Md} “areal; *Md4 “srrererearfit — d) La! gorqesnerfy 4; Be? Bo BCa Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? La? Lo! Lo? NNg sOx! [but mc] Ox? Pu3 sPuo [but me} Pu® Tj? Tr! 
Tr? [Jolly Ku R]Apa Mandlik KSS Dave Tat FT Fay 7; Pud om werly T 

17.* Padas a-b in Pu? lacuna; padas c-d torn in mTr°. Cited by Apa 942; Laks 14.24; 
padas a-b cited by Vij 3.49 — b) wKt! @recaarariftar; nK¢ ahaa’ NPul waa; Lo® 
Md? Pu!? a — c) BCa Pu’ Pu’ SeAeeeET; Lo? AeA; BCa Or nPu!l Wegray — d) sBe* Ho 
“eam, Md? waft aT; Be! Be? Jo? wKt? NKt BKt wKt® La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® nNg sOx! 
Ox? nPu! Pu’ sPus Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Te? Wa [Jolly M G R] Apa Jolly afepetar; 1Md4 T 

18. Pada-d omitted in Tj* {haplo]; padas c-d torn in Pu? MTr*.Cited by Apa 942; Laks 
14.24; Madh 1.527 — a) oOr Tet wemtfoa’; sBe? BKt> wKt® wKt® Lo? Pu? Pu4 “genfesar; Lo! 
“werTeaaaT;, cMds Tr! “seresst, TM? “wertfescit; Be! “werraet, 1Md4 “oer — b) mTr4 mTr5 
mTro ate; Ho Pu? Pu? Tr? Apa Saar; Pul? “safrast— c) cMd° Tj! wart; Hy “aifraay; 
wKt! Apa aeaay, GMd! 1Md3 tMd4 cGMy NNg Pud Pu? arf 

19.* P&das a-c omitted in Tj*; lacuna at pada-d in TMd4; padas b-d torn in MT?, Cited by 
Vij 3.50; Apa 943; Laks 14.24 — a) Jo! &h; Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ 3th; Kt? AHA; Be! Bo Ho Jm Jo! 
Jo? Kt? wKt? wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo* Lo? Lo’ oOr sOx! Ox3 Pu? Pue sPu® Pu’? Pu’ Pu? Tr? Wa 
[Jolly G R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave WH; wKt! a; Apa are [vl aa:] — b) Tr? feareer FT 
aed: ; oOr feareee; Be! Bo BCa wKt! Pu!l® ulgeT; Lo’ 4Igeq; Ho ae — c) Ho Tr? 
water ; +Md3 waetarfeay, tMd4 om Sata — d) GMd! 1Md3 GMd > GMy ®atgl WereHrerT:, 
Laks Sg? Werenee:; wKe serareareanifoa:; Be? Vij aT; Be! Bo Tae; Tr? “wre: 

20. Pa&das a-c torn in MTr° and pada-b in Pu’. Cited by Laks 14.24 — a) TMd? UeGT 
wKkts “aorfastathy; Ty? °frattear — b) Hy Jo! Kt? tMd? Tj! Mandlik Jha Dave KSS JePOX- 
cMd! yepor; Pud Pu? ae, cMd! ashe — d) mTr® Gary; wKeo Tari; tMd* aarear- 
frat; Tro ear; Bed caret; Hy safest; wkKe! ert; rma} caferat; Tj! aatrarrgd; Bo 
[but cor] BKS wKto Tj! eaPrat aaferr 


598 Chapter 6 


gayematy saadaewa4 | 

aBrouad: Taaatigartaraa frag: 2 VI 
wat fread fessat waethiag | 
Sarna ety AaATTAAT: WRU 
ie waar eae aateararaaihre: 
MPAA TA HAA aTeHAETT: QZ 
separa gear aT | 
ATATAIAT WAEATT: URI 
suftareatr tarry wartrer aarfaker | 
saferad: Bary aormemrt: Ue 


Additional verse in Mandlik [€] KSS Dave: 

Ut: TH SATA Act: GOTATERT | 
ae: GOT Aaa Ta: HSATSeT II 

21. Omitted in Jm; torn in MT?r°; pada-c lacuna in tMd*. Padas a-b cited by Laks 14.24 
— a) Ho wk’ Tj! He: waaift — by Lot adachad: aa; Pulse: wer — c) Laks 
earamfads: ST’; oOr om SF; wKkt! “aftetdear’; wKt oOr ‘attet Hear” — d) Kt ePaTeT 
Md} “Sara ; Be? BKO wKt® La! nPu! Pu2 Put Pud Pu? Pu? “Same [wKt® La! “ore” 1 Py! 
“Sate. oOr FarTsI:; Lo? “HAY; Pul? frat: Te Peake: 

Additional verse in La! oOr [ef. addition after 6.20]: 

aredhet aa: TF aedtea act: HOT | 
aety wat: TH aa: Foner sree II 
a-b) Lal ac: Taaqadt wae: — c) La! arexct— La! wet 

22, Cited by Apa 943; Laks 14.24; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.51— a) Pul? wait oR’; 
tMd3 ar aft’; wKt! “aeeat — b) Lo’ feesgragé” — c) nKt! cMd! 1Md3 +Md* GMy Apa 
eratar fast; oOr SraTartat fretq — d) Lol FAA IAT; Te! aryretfey 7; Lo? 
waryee aa; eK wk waags ; Tj! “Gara; sOx! sPus “Ga=T:; Jm * qaRte:; Td} 

“Tare: 

23, Cited by Laks 14.24 — a) BBe? HOT; Lo? Het; rMd4 Tea; sOx! sPu® Tr? 
“ate: Be? “aaa; Tj! “qv; cMd! “agearg aot? — b) cMd! “eareraritrar, *Md4 “earafe- 
amlftes:; Be! Be? Bo Ho BKé wKt® Lo* Lo’ GMd NNg Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Pu! Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly 
M] ‘aera; cMy [Jolly Nd] @1a0T:; Pu2 Put “aria; Md? “aTert: — c) BKE wKté aTet ; 
Wa aig; Md4 at — d) BK wKt® Pu’ sPuo Pu’ Laks aeferat:, TMd3 oMy Tj! aekarers: 

24. Pada-b torn in Pu’. Cited by Apa 944; Laks 14.24; pada c-d cited by Vij 3.52 — a) 
sOx! sPuo saegeates ; Pus Pu’ Pu? saegary AY; Tr? saegaitf ; Be? wKt! nPul Tj! Apa Laks 
sregahe; BK wKts soregafer ; Pu? Put sre Rs , oOr saeger Fr” — b) wKt! cMd! tMa3 
cMy Pu’ Pu’ mTré fageater; Be! Bé Bo Wa aie; Tj! “arg; sBe? pCa Ho BKt> wKt° 
Lo} Lot Lo’ GMd nNg Pu! mTr*Tr® Lolly M2389] ada, La! Ox? Wa ada — c) BKtS 
wKtS “sitrae; Pu? Put “aittat — d) Hy aitvaee ; Md! aitvar 26° 

25.* Cited by Vij 3.54; Apa 944; Madh 1.529 — a) wKt! nKt* oOrsOx! Pu? Pu? Put sPu® 
Pu8 Tr! Apa aiiecarca fy, Be}? Ho GMd? Tj! aiearer; nPu! enftarea; Jm Jo! Kt? cMd! 


Chapter 6 599 


WIAA: FATAT ACTA TCT: 
TONGA FAT HAT: URE 
aaa Frag are aera | 
Tear aay eerg arate Ww 
WME anferest yrarat aay | 
afer gestae afar weet aT URI 
vara aat stat fast ar aay | 
fafrerstaPradireraitrar yet: RS 
afatatenaia qeelkta afer: | 
faratagert wer a yaT llZoll 


TMd3 tMd4 GMy Tj MTr3 MTr? MTr® Mandlik Jha KSS Davesitareaty; oOr aft cares, 
Lo! aft ara, wk) dare; aKO Sarre — b) Te gay; Lo! “er wT ae” — c) wKt 
Faefae’; BK S wKt6 “Fab — c-d) Ho “Paes aeTATes — d) Tr! gt ge’; Be? Bo wKt® 
wkt “retfert: 

26. Cited by Mddh 1.529 transposing padas a-b and c-d— a) GMd! Pu? Pu? 94; 
™d Fartt — b) Bo “ante: Jo! Lo! grr; Lo? Ox? FeaTT:; Pu! aatara: — c) wKt6 arenyy- 
THAT; nNg area: wKt! areet Pate’; GMd! aarann ; Pu? Put “Hatt; Lo’ nPul wT- 
ta; Tj? aPaT, KO “aerate — d) Pu’ ager Pa 

27.* Cited by Apa 945; padas c-d cited by Madh 1.529 — a) cGMd! araataft; pBe 2 
areata, ApattTay =F — b) Ho Tha; Tr! araré; Jo? SeTAT’; Ho Kt? La! Ox nPu! Pud 
Pu? Pu? Heat; oOr Sear @td; Be! BBe Be? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wk nK¢ BKt 
wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® Md* Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pul® Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave “ATétt — c) Bo AAT; oOr om AY ; wKt! TATE; Jo? Lo’ Md} Ox? 
nPu! Apa arty — d) Tr! festererartery 

28, Cited by Madh 1.529 — a) wK uraTeraTeesatay ; Ho &eT; Lo! “eqrraar ; Be! 
BCa [but cor] Ho wKt! 1Md4 Pu? Put Tj! Tr? ardtar ; mT apftar— b) wKt} Ox? aTaTTA; 

Pu Tr? gat; GMd! att — c) wKe! WET ayers; Md! wer seta; Tr! ofa; rMd3 ges, 
Pu? Put gta; GMd 5 Geeta — d) Pud Pu’ [but cor] Pu? a8; BBe wKt! La! Pu? Tr? 
ape; GMd! waar, Pu2 Put HOT 

29.* Cited by Apa 943; padas a-b cited by Mddh 1.529 and padas c-d by Vij 3.51— a) 
La! Pu? Put Pud Pu? Pu? Tj! mT rt Vabarerbar; TMd4 UeaTRIP; wKtt GMd! “tier, Tr? Aaa; 
Wa aac; Pul® dag; cMy rect — b) wKt® oOr Tj! ter, rMd? atemtersiy — c) Be! sBe Bo 
Ho wKt! cGMd! oMd? nPul Pud Pu? Pu? Tr? “aitafra ; rMd3 “Profs airar’; Lo! “faery aren’; 
Apa frre sree — d) Be! Jo? La! [cor to fh] pCa BK wKt® Md? cMd® GMy sOx! Ox? Pu? 
sPuS Pu? Pu? Te! Tr? mT rtm Tr oY M!9 GNd] Rn Hayse; oOr aghast; Be! “oy 
wa; Tr! Fett; Be? Lot Lo’ Act; Tr! fesr 

30. Pada-b torn in Pu?. Cited by Apa 943; Laks 14.28 — a) Laks aefatterraecdan, 
TMd! zefafadaataar, Tr 9A: Be! Bo ataife; sBe? “emrda; Lo? “oda — b) Be! Bo 
Apa qeehaafaan:; aBe Teta Fae; Be} Ho Lo! oOr Ox Tj! Teehata: Pu’ Pu? [but cor] 

“yavafean:; aK wKt® mTr° afac:; Tj! afaar — c) wKe faeraafe ; Pu2 “gas — d) cMy 





600 Chapter 6 


amifirat area: astfeararanr: 

ar Prorat at aratrengrt: 3 etl 
arat aeftaatnt Sarasa ATT | 
Pageant fast qaete AeA URI 
aay g fageate ack arrays: | 
UGUagat wet eH ARTA 3 sl 
BAPTA Wear Ederar rater: 
Rrrafeaftered: waster attr evil 
wont Seararper vat Aer Prasad | 
HATHA AT TF AaATAT THETA: UZaN 
srefter fatragery yatateara eta: 

Tar a afat aaa AT Prager uae ll 


ameétvez; Put araiter; Ho cMd! GMd Tr! “ver fea; BK wKtS Pu? Put [Jolly Gr] freer 

31. Cited by Apa 536, 945; Hem 3/2.1660; Laks 14, 28; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.55 — a) 
TMd‘ vofsrat atcareira; Md! ATTA ATCT; BBe “frat sere; rMd3 © Rrarararerai; 
sOx! sPuS Apa ‘Prararenra; Tr? °Rraprerer; Lo! Loe? Put Tj! Apa Laks Wea; Lo} Tr! at- 
carey — b) T? atta; Vij waa; wPul Tj! “ep: — c) Ho nPul afrar’; wKe6 afar 
arareatt? — d) Hem serarer FETA [cf. 32d]; Laks FHT; Ho “eT; BK Pree: 

32. Cited by Vij 3.55; Apa 945; Hem 3/2.1661; Madh 1.52930 — a) Hem fercat Heft’; 
Ox? aaTft’; sOx! sPuS Hefigdr4r, Ho “wat aT — b) Hem wer TTT a; Bo Tr! IT; 
oOr aq:; Pu? ty — c) wKe frat’: sKtS wKt® Hem ‘atesaay: Tr! “aitescar — d) Hem 3@I- 
WaT eT 

33. Cited by Laks 14.30; Ma@dh 1.530 — a) nPu! FAT; oOr FATA; BCa Ho Jo! wKt! 
wKt* Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave %; Tr? 34 afae; GMy oOr mTr$ faeeda; + Ma} PAA; 
Bo Pu! fagett— c) 1d? GMy qeaar ; Pu? Pué art; Pu’ Pu? Pu? areerepr — d) Pus Pu? 
Pu? [Jolly G] mest ; Tr! eras s 1M! erepitt & GR; GMd! nNg AF OA ;0Or APT 
aft’; Be! nCa BK wKt* r™Md3 GMdd sOx! sPu® “Rea 

34. Omitted in Pu’; pada-d torn in Pu? — a) GMd> Hea; sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu‘ sPuo Tj! Te 
Tes_aerit — b) Lo’ gaets; wKe} STAT; Md? STRAT; Ox? aaheT: — c) Lo! Praras ; 
nkt “afturet: — d) Pud Pu’ vacaraftraete; oOr Waster; NKt4 BKt> Lo! GMd! Tj! Wa a- 
THT, Tj? TaTTST, Pul? gear 

35. Padas c-d omitted in TMd* MTP; pada-b torn in Pu. Cited by Vij 3.56-7,; Hem 
3/3.808; Madh 1.532 — a) wKt? “qt — b) Lo? Lo? Tj! Heit, rMd3 Barfaerery, Pue Pu? 
[Jolly G] Prt — o)nNg afar’; wKt! wKe “Wes; nKt‘ “grarer; Be? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Tj! + 
— e-d) Lo! seo @auter Frearesrsrcra: — d) oOr FETHTAT; sOx! sPu® both mc to 
qdeae:;, Pu! asteaey 

36. Omitted in tMd* Tr? mTr°; verses 36 and 37 transposed in Lo?;in padas c-d after 
S41 Tj jumps to 37 c-d omitting all in between. Cited by Madh 1.532 —- a) Lo® are, rMd3 
fafeentert — b) Lot Lo’ cMd5 Ox? Madh JaryerreaT — c) Ma APE Be aat aA; Be! 


Chapter 6 601 


sraefter feat Agra AUTH | 
atrat ta ave aaraatere: Zell 
mae freaftce adacaahirnt | 
MAGMA MIT: TAAFETT WRC 
at gear why: saTENTT TET | 
ae acitrar ater waft werafea: 1132 
meAeary yatat eoraterad wT | 
mer setleqmer we ater BaraTsT son 
smeared: aferaraterat ater: 
ayiieg ary frcter: Rarer tty el 
we va aire farmers | 
faketaer aaa aetfer Tt drat UR 


Jm 37; nKt! aga; BCa Pu? Put J; Bo atfenat — d) nK¢! Frei; Ho ATA; Bo Paqacy 

37.* Not commented by Nd; padas a-b omitted in wKt® Tj’. Cited by Laks 1430; Madh 
1.532 —~ a) NKt? araTer; GMd! 1Md3 tMd4 Madh Teaer ; My at dat; Be sKtS Lot Lo 
Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu!® [Jolly M?+] Laksd@4q ; Lo? Ferry — b) Ho eres F aI; 
Be! Wa carer TaTAfT, Be} Bo BKt® Lo? Lot Lo’ cMd! Ox? Pu!® [Jolly M25] Jolly Jha Dave 
war WaT, Tj! [Jolly M°]aarT WST:; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo® Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu mTr? Mandlik KSST8 Fart; Pus Pu? Pu? Go [Jolly G] Tat Fd — c) wCa afrgEr 
faferaeatiter Be! Lo’ GMy afrzt; Bo after; Pu? Put 7 gate; Be} Jo? nKt* La! Lo! Lo? 
Lo? tMd4 GMd Tj! Tr! mT r* mTr$ Bate 

38. Cited by Sam on BU 4.5. 155 Madh 1.536;padas c-d cited by Vij 3.56-7 — a) Ox? 
FATIH; BKO wKto gIsTTeT; La! Tr! “gente”; Bo Precaftz — b) Bo nKtt Lot GMy nPu! Pu3 
Tj! Te Wa ad; Hy wKt® Lot afer — c) wKt! Lo! “raft ear — d) Tr! gasiayere; wKté 
sOx! sPu® roa GETT 

39. Omitted in sOx! sPuS — a) Bo adurgea: — b) Pul® TATA HT, Hy aren: Ho 
“wat Hed; Tr! Ter — c) Pud Pu? Pu? ae & Amar sew; Md? Far; nKt! “Het — d) Bo 
wate; wk aafed; La! seater: 

4o. a) sOx! sPuS aeqTe; Lo! aearef a; Lod weqearht; rMd? weqreaife, tMd4 aeAr- 
waite — b) Tr! we atererct safer — c) oMd5 @eraq’: Md? oMy @efay ; La! “Heer 

41. a) Be! sBe? Be? sCa Ho Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt' Kt? wK BKt? wKt® La! La? Lo! oOr 
sOx! Ox? sPu? Pu’ Pul® Tj! Tj? Te Mandlik Jolly Jha 3PTRT ; BK wKtS “faPranat: — b) Bo 
La! Pu Put sfarafadt; cMd! afas: offrdt; rMd4* aafestRrat — c) Ho Pu? Put aaviey; 
td? aya; TMd4 ayy; Tj! TPAC; Bo APWeT; Lal ayerey, wke’ aYcaSy; wKt! 
ayearag; wKkeo anfrg; Tj! ety — d) Lo? wRasrq 

42. Omitted in GM@. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Madh 1.553 — a) wKtb Gar Uap, 
nPu! aefret; Lo? Pul? Tj! Wa weal; wKtS ager — b) Pus Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] fraert: 7 
aera; Pu* Put “qerrart; tMd? Tr! mTr4 mTr®& “aera: cMd! "aera: —c) Be! Lo! Pu 
Pu’ Pu? aaaer; oMy fafaer: mT “ser cet a; Pu’ Pu? Pu? aes; Md? Tj! aoe 


602 Chapter 6 


said: are oA | 
Sresaarar artaaraea: iy sl 
BUTS FAA BATA | 

AAA Ua TARAAAT HET HAITT Is vil 
aaa ae ahr sfifaag | 
Bree weltete Fredat year TAT USI 


7; Tr? Seated; Tr Teafee + — d) Md! setter Fasftad — After 42 TMd? GMy insert 12.10-1. 

43.* Padas a-b omitted in GMd°. Cited by Apa 953;Laks 14.43 — b) Tr! art Prana” 
— c) Pud Pu? Pu? sera; Jha “arate, Ho nPu! weer wk} “srafrat me to “TET, 
BKt wKtS “eater; wKt! Kt? sPue [mc to] MT? KSS Dave #BEaT; Kt? Im Jo! Mandlik 
*staeget; BCa Hy wKt! Lo} Lo’ [Jolly R] ‘enya; Be? Bo aeya; pBe Aa; Lot Pul? 
Jolly Biihler “apy: La? * seeyaey; Jo? “ateaey, Tj 2 “raya, Pu? Pu’? Pu? [Jolly G] 
“gases; NNg Sferegte: [a deleted] — d) Tj! yfata:; cMd! cMy Pu? xfer; rMd? 
gfraty’ > Lo? ahritr ;wKt! afirata’: Be! Lo! Lo? GMd! +Md? tMd4 GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? 
Pud sPuo Tr! Tr? MTr? MTS MTt5 Wa Apa Laks Safad: 

44. main Lo’. Cited by 4pa 953; Laks 14.43; Madh 1.564 — a) sOx! sPuo Laks ®91G; 
La! wrt — b) cGMy+ Brora; Be Be? Bo BK Lo! Loe Lo4 Lo’ NNg Ox nPu! Pu 
Pu? Pus Pu? Pul? Tj! Te Wa Apa Jha Dave GIB ; tMd4 “AeTAAT; Lo? “Aerac:; Md 
“weract; Ho Pu’ “aerfrar; PuS Pu? Pu? “aeTaart — c) Laks Harta — d) mTrt Tr “Me 
THe 

45. * Pada-a omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Madh 1. 564 — a) wkKt! 
aftr’; Tj! aPegq; Lo? Pu? Put “Teg; La! “aT, oM@ Or ‘rea; Pud Pu? “arta — b) Pu2 

“aq; GME oOr Prec; Md! “aaa; La! Tj! “aeeeT; Pus Pu’ Pu? “asa; GMy Wa Sad; 

BBe? sftaat; 8Ca Lo! tMd* GMd3 stat — c) tMd4 seater; GMd! Teter; sOx! sPuo eter 
-— d) BBe* Be’ Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wkt BKt® wKt® La! Lo! rMd?3 NNg oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? 
sPu® [but cor] Pu’ Pu’ Pu? mTr3 [Jolly G Ku] Ku Nd Na Mandlik KSS Dave Feet, Be! Bo pCa 
Hy Jo? wKt nKt Lo? Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly N]frear, Tj! Freait, Lo? Pu? Put waar, Hy Waa; 
TMd? GMdd Sater; Lo’ Tr? Fae; Jm Acar 

Additional verses in Be! Be? Ho nKtt oOr Tj! Tr? Mandlik[®, @, 7, t, 5, , , a, 
@, 4] KSS Dave; given after 6.46 in wKt® and after 6.5 in wKt! wKt3; first two verses after 
6.45 and the last verse after 6.48 in sOx! sPu®; first two verses in Mandlik [@]; first verse 
alone given in Tr! Mandlik [@] and cited byApa; first verse given after 6.68 in TMd* cMd> 
mTr‘ Tr’, after 652 in La!, and after 6.69 in [Jolly Gr]; padas a-b of first verse cited by Laks 
14.44. All three verses commented by Rc; first verse alone by Ra: 


joes Pear | 
aare aya ater dase 1121 
aaet fe aiert ager yrs | 
gkyatretee art aster Freee: 121 
acat araafdert 7 aterranfteit | 
SrpMayerayaaaugary 1131! 


1. a) Be? Ho sOx! sPuS Tj! Mandlik KSS Dave tree; Te aE’; GMA Tr! 


Chapter 6 603 


ghey aaearg aeagad aes Prag | 
AAA Ada ATTA AAMT Use 
afraratatta Ararat sere | 
aT at tearbrear at ada Fafrq lvl 
were T afeetaee: Bae aeT | 
tat area agg sci 
srearentiarretar farevert Frere: 
eae vert gart Pravkes se 
a aeaatRrarar + aeragtaaar | 


aay Be"; Be! La! Head’; nKel Hat Be; wKe Hey Bx”; Tj! om Arar — b) oOr 
Pre: oft; Be! Pry: swt; sOx! sPuo Prefae wea; rMd4 GMd> Tr! mTr4 
mTr® [Jolly Gr]Apa Laks 18 FET Volly Gr WHAT] — c) Be! garg: aasfiay; 
oMds earet; Tr! fear; rMd4 mTr! weet; La! agaread ; rMdé Tr? mT ro adorat 
— d) wKet! wKt war age Ta; oOr wT F F Ta; cMds atheray; nKe 
“warmaad, Be? Tj! Te afar; La! aaa 
2. a) wKt® avert fe at art; wKkt! wKe args; nk aT wKe Tar, wKt! 
wk are — b) wKt! agtet; Be! Tr? Mandlik [3] ararat; wKtS “HTHATT; Be! 
“apr — c) wk afeqaift @ fee; Be! HoMandlik KSS Dave feqaT ; Be? NKt 
Tj! Peer — d) Be! Piet Sarre 
3. a) wKt! nK¢t “feat; wk “far — b) wt argararanteott; Tj! “ararfett, nKtt 
“arfteft — c) Be! wKt! wkt3 nK¢ wKt meant ; Te wearaar ; Tj! weadianr ; 
Ho “HSI ; Be! nKt4 “Hest — d) Tr? “dat 
46. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Madh 1.564 — a) Lo? Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pw Put Pul? 9& 
weiger | tMd4 ore AEET ; NPu! caret — b) Hy SIC Ho fesse — c) MTP? FAT; 
Ho BKé' wKtS “a; Be! Lo? NNg Pv? Tj! Wa 4@ereeT; KS wKtS segs; GMd! rMd3 GMd? Apa 
Laks Fagreft — d) MTS Te; GMa “GAT 
47. Lo? transposes padas a-b and c-d. Cited by Apa 953; Laks 14.43; Madh 1.564 — a) 
wK¢t° sfaarerfafaeta; wKt! La! Ox} afta’; cMd! afar” — b) La! “aetearras; Pul? 
are; cMy Tr? frat — c) Pu8 tt; Lo! Fz; Bo Ho Jo? La! Lo? Md GMy oOr Tj! Tr! Tr? 
Tr! MTr® Laks #4; 1Md4 3a; NKé ATGeT — d) oOr HEART 
48. Padas c-d omitted in TMd*. Cited by Apa 954; Laks 14.43; Madh 1.564 — a) Apa 4 
gerd wee ; Lot Lo’ nNg Ox? eat oft + He’; MTP Hat; Ho wKt3 oOr om 7; Ho 
ufegeact ange — b) nNg Ha [me sh A] TarHS:; TMd? “ATG; Pus Tr? “araHTe:; wKes 
Bae, Tj! wt; Ox? Faq — c) BBe? Ho BKt> Ox} Tj! Apa [vl] Att; tMd3 GMy Tr! ata: 
Lo! ¢— d) Apat are aga; Be! NNg Tr! mTr* Wa Jd; Ho “Fat; tMd3 “Hat; oOr om 
ae 
49. Cited by Apa 954; Laks 14.43-4; Ma@dh 1.564 — a) BKt> AAT °. GaMd! Tj! aear- 
arafarr; nKt! “want; Lot Lo’ NNg Ox} Pul® Apa eta; rMd3 weet — b) Tr! Pret: 
Apa PRT: ; Bo [but cor] Frrgt:; Ho Lo! Frafert:; sOx! sPu’ Freers:; Be! mc to FRR: — 
d) Tj' qeart 


604 Chapter 6 


aTgaretarenar Brat ferta wfEhrg ly ol 
T aqaatatat aarhrefe ar ahr: | 
sratet Preysaternieqraard Wk 21 

: Urat qeet SAAT | 
fetid fer adhyeradisry kU 
weseafr crear cer eghonfr a 
aaah: Aa Wher WAaTATraTeAyT lle 31 
Hors sears w Aer Aah aT | 
vat afearnfr aq: aERaadtey ike 
UpHey Maat 7 wasaa eat | 
Ser wernt fe afaktecahr arf yu 


50. Cited by Vij 3. 59; Apa 963 — a) MTr* “RR: at b) BKS wKts aera Afaerar 
[om *]; tMd3 aaratarfa’ — c) sKtS wKtS My “faemeat — d) rMd? fet oe; Pus Tj! 
foreia; nKti fete; mTr4 mTrS Prete 

51. Cited by Vij 3.59; Madh 1.561 — a) Loe & ay’; sOx! sPu® ara — b) Lo! cMd! 
sOx! sPuo Pus Pu? Pu? Tj! Madh “Breer at; BKé ar of; Ox Pu! arfafr: — c) Be! arrestor; 
Pus Pu? Pu? ateeet; Bo staetet: Ho arate; sOx! sPuS Tr? mTr6 “arate? ; Jo? Lo? Vij “aet’ 
Be} “aeatat’ ; rMd4 “aes” — d) Lo! “wnt g Aaa; Be! sBe? Be? Ho Jm Jo! wKt! Kt nKe 
La! La? sOx! wPu! Pu2 Pu? sPuS Tj! Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha ame’; BKE wKtS “THT; Be? 
La! *Md4 GMd? Pu sPut [but cor] Pu? Pu? Tr! MTP [Jolly G | afeatet 

52. Cited by Apa 954; Laks 14.44; Mddh 1.564 — a) Apa [vl] Madh por Ho ™d? 
oMd? Tj! Paper ; 1Md4 paver ; NKtt NNg Tr? Wa Na@ Arar — b) Ox3 THT; Laks aver 
arat; wKe! est; Tre Beypward; La! BEAT; Apa Bara; Apa [vi] BAA; [Jolly Gr] 
Hera; tMd4 q AAA — c) Lo? rMd? ferrefa ; Ke? RBA; mT? Ya -—- d) oMd! 
“aay seq; mTr4 “asad; oOr “alsa 

53. Cited by Vij 3.60; Apa 964; Madh 1.562 — b) Be wKt! wKt} sOx! sPuS Seat 
—c) Md aaratgeter aire; wPu! per ait — d) Ko “Praree 

54. Cited by Mddh 1.562 —~ a) Pu’ Pu’ PY Herg aT ateurd [om 4]; Ho BK wKt® 
oMd! 1Md? sOx! Ox3 sPuo Tr! Wa Steg; TMd! Sorte; Pu2 Put aoa; Bo Ho cMd? Pu? Puf 
“grater [om 4]; Be cMd! tMd3 Tr! Tr? mTr® aT — b)t Md? BUTS JRE TAT; Be! Jo! Lo! 
GMd?> sOx' sPuo Tr! Fae; Tr! tas; nKtt Fae; Lo! Faas; skt) wKt® Jas; Be? wKt! oOr 
nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ mTré mT ro Soret; Md! afta, Lo2aer — c) Pu8 aif; nK¢é Tr! mT seat 
afer; wKke feesaranfer 

55. Cited by Vij 3.59; Apa 963; Laks 14.57; M@dh 1.558 — a) Ho UHHTH; Be! nCa Ho 
Kt? La! Lo® oOr Ox? “Sear; Vij °Reeat: Pu? Pu? Pu? “Rear; Lo? “geft — b) Be! Vij Tasca ¢ 
faeaz; Pud Pu’ Pu? seret Tog faeaz; BKO wKt® Lo* Lo? Ox? nPu! Pul? sacar a feat [wKt® 
pasta]; wKt! waste wo free; wKe weasaeq tT fede; Md? a wastewerat; Bo cMd! tMd3 
cMd> cMy NNg sOx! Pu? sPuS Tr! Tr? [Jolly M] Apa Wasa; Pu? Put vasa; La! weet; Tj! 
WISI; nPu! waste; Lo? Frere; Tr? fete — c) Lo! rMd4 wey fF afater; Be? Ho La! 


Chapter 6 605 


faye aaa ART Yas | 

ae aeraaara Pratt fret afeatag Uy Sl 
avert a Rordt engrast a atid | 
TEA: STararaattarats: WI 
aaron gyda ada: | 
afigirroerteg afetrisfr ser ect 
AMAA AAA T | 


fran fraattrarttr Pradaq kei 
eter freer UeTeTEtaoT | | 


nPul Seq; *Md3 GM@ GMy Ox3 Pu! Tr! mT rt MTr°Apa Dave Set; Pu’ Pu? Pu? Sey; Lo? we; 
wKt! nKt* La! garent — d) Be? wKt! wKt} Lot Lo’ nNg Ox? Pu! afer: sesaifguaeatt [wKt3 
were}; tMd4 Laks “Seahrasate; cMd’ “araferasate; Jo? Lo? Pur asHe; Apa Aster 

56. Cited by Vij 3.59;Madh 1.558 —- a) Md‘ faa; Tea ; NNg TATA, Ho wKt! 
wKet nKt BKO wKt’ La! nPu! Pu3 Pus Pu’? Pué Pu? Tr? “gare; BBe? BCa Tj? "US; tMd3 
are — b) Ox} 8h ; Bo “ASs4:; GMd! My ‘afSa7y; Be! BCa La! oOr sOx! Tr! “ast; wKt! 
tMd! GMd> ‘afsta, t™Md3 “asta — c) Pu? ett; BK wKt® Ox? Pul® Tr? MI; pBe2 wae ; Ox3 
*aurdy, mT rt “east — d) Vij Pret Brett, rMd4 gaRrat af? 

57.* Omitted in Lo?. Cited by Apa 963; Madh 1.558 — a) Pul°aara; Pu’ Pu’ Pu? [Jolly 
G] + wf + fear — b) sOx! sPuo @TgMTast; Loe ergrrtad; Lo! arenvaa; Be Tj! 
eagradaa; wKe agrees [rest om]; Ox} Brgrt Ay, Be? nCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? BK 
wKt® La? GMd ! rMd* GMd> GMy Ox? Pu? Pu® Pul? TP Tr? mTr3 mTr® [Jolly G Nd Ku] 
Mandlik Biihler Jha KSS Dave PaTgrt AT, Ho NNg egy Ba; Md} STETA Aa; Lo? 
eargraradrs, Tr! mTrt BaTgrey aa 7;cMd! edfe; Md? Brea — c) rd? GOTATSHUTT BIT: 
Be! “afer: ST; Kt sOx! sPuS Tr? “atRras we BT — d) oMd! arerrarratatrta:, Tj! 
erreararscarieftc:; Lo? “agfafrta:; Jo2rMd4 “agfratite:; 1Md3 Md’ GMy “Pred; Tr! 
mTr‘ MTr® Frac: 

58. Omitted in Lo3; verses 58 and 59 transposed i in Ho. Cited by Apa 963 — a) Pu’ Pu’ 
Pu? Go afagitraerarg,; Jolly M245 Nd] ‘Sree; Lo! “ara; BBe cMd! *Md> cMd5 
oMy oOr sOx! sPuS Tr! mT rt MTr°Apa @Taper — b) Pus Pu? Pu? Go [Jolly G] Prat aa 
aad; Be} wKt} cGMd> Tr? qypateda; rMd4 Gaeta, wKt! Gye 7; Ho FAA; Be! Lal 
Wa aaa:; sOx! sPue Tr? Adar — c) wKt? Pud Pu? Pu? afagtsre ; Ox? “orate; wKt ! tMd* 
“orig; Lo! “ore; Apa STAT; sBe Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Pu’ Tj? mTr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave ‘oraer; cMd! “araté — d) cMd! afageat Praeare; nKe Tr! aR; Lot Lo’ Ox} Pul? 
afe yer; Tj! “aiftaead; Be? aread: Tr! Brea 

59. Omitted in Lo? PuS; padas c-d omitted in Ho Tr’. Cited by Apa 954; Madh 1.564 — 
a) oOr AMHSTANAENT; Tr? aoa; GMd! aeqseraer ; sBe? AeTIENAT ; TMdé esa 
waa: Pu! rere; GMy “safaereor — b) TMd4 2821; Bo FTI; Tr? “RIAA; Ho 

sara Apa aT — c)wKt! Tj! [out cor] Haar ; cMd5 Ear ; tMd3 srararorhy; Tr! 

drat + far"; Lot Lo’ “aronfifaar’; cMy @aafe” — d) rMd* Prada; Tr! + ada; Lo! 
wa; Bo wKt! Prada; wke Radia 


606 Chapter 6 


ASAT WYATT BEIT lg oll 
orate metho atatreaqaar: | 

faey Ba wat araarey ware Me 21 
Rorit fester araet arf: 

wear aR arehrarradtery ug QU 
Aegean Weg Fu a Mraz | 
airattacay yttarearawetat: le Sl 
read Aa saat aif | 


qari Fa Fae evil 
GEA UTA ATT TTT: | 


ty Parokya, wT Ue all 


60. Omitted in Lo%; padas a-b omitted in Tr?. Cited by 4pa954; Madh 1.564 — b) Kt? 
mary c) Bo Md} Tr! aféarar; mTr? afeada; Jo? asada, wKe! afeee fe; cMd! agar 
aq; Jo! qaraT — d) nKt eead; La! wordy 

61. Omitted in Lo3; in Tj! the sequence is 61c, 62d, 63a-b, 61d, 62a-b, 62c. Cited by 
Apa 968 — a) sOx! sPuS ae; TM} eae; Ho Fae ; sOx! sPub TAIT; nKt4 TAT 
TT; La! Tr! nfergor; cMd! Md" GMd GMy Pu2mTr! mTr° afer Tm; Lo® tMd3 afer rt — 
b) BBe? Be? NNg HeaT; Jo! “HKa:; GMd! GMA GMy Tr! MTr* MTr® Wear; Md “Aga — 
c) NKt* sOx! Ox? Pud sPuS Pu? Pu? Tr? [Jolly G] Tat Ba; 7Md4 aut ta — d) Pu’ ara- 
areata: aK wKt® areas; wKt! ara FT; TMd3 GMy Tr! ate 

62.* Omitted in Pu’ Wa; padas a-b up to SWAMT omitted in Tj 2. Cited by Apa 968 — a) 
+Md? Tr! frst — b) Be! BBe? Be? BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? BKé wKt® Lo! Lo* Lo’ sOx! 
Ox? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu? Pu? Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Hatt HT TAT; TMd4 aur fer — 
c) Md? SAAT; Bo TAT; GMd! oOr WAT; Lo! sarah; Tj! aA; Pu? Pu? aire; Pub 
aifrad; wPul arafrasd — d) nNg Tj Tr MT Arata See IMd? My fra fattest; wKté 

“Rparasttat: iMdé Tre hfe; Jo! “Rreaq 

63. Cited by Apa 968 — a) TMd? ere [Jolly M] ateaTad; oOr TeATA; sOx! sPu® 
areat — b) wKt8 GMd! git aaRT [cMd! “AAhA]; GMy JAS; rMd3 GMd FAR; Jo? La! 
garg a; Apa TAT: — c) Wa AeeeET; Lo’ “AAT — d) 1Md4 weaibareereret:; GMy Tr! 
afr aT; tMd3 ate ar; mTr® eyferar ; Hy La! aferar’ ; Tr? qatar ; Lo? gdiarard Tr! 
ghar 

64. Omitted in 1Md? cMy [Jolly Nd]; padas b-c omitted in Md‘. Cited by Apa 968 — 
a) BK wKté aret:; Lo2aert; wKt! sOx! sPuS “waraaa; sOx! “wade; Tj! td — b) Lot Lo® 
aretheor — c) aK wKtS eatet:; pCa cMd! “waite; Tj! Se — d) nPu! geared; KP 
oMd Tj! Ga; aKO TARA: BK wKtS “per 

65: Omitted in TMd? GMy [Jolly Nd] Nd. Cited by Apag68 — a) wKt! qeqat; Ho 
art’; cMdS area — c) Lo! aigeafe’; nPul taraafe’; sBe? BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? 
Lo? sOx! Ox? Pu? sPuo [cor to sh] Tj? Tr MTP? [Jolly R Ku] Mandlik KSS aqeaer: Lot 
Lo? aaqate - Pul? “oferen 


Chapter 6 607 


yfeats hr att ar caer aa | 

ar: wag yay a fos aetereonyT Egil 

Hey BARAT TIITGIAHT | 

qT awayened aer at state uevll 
aearoed: Heqat taraefer aT aar | 
meena ter after agar ag Neil 
Tel Weal WT Aste Raeaaraar ate: 
aat erat fagqaant semarary erated ESI 
TTOTATAT ara ORT aS HY fakeracpar: 
aera ser wear aT: tlvoll 


66.* Not commented by Nd. Cited by Vij 3.65; Apa 971— a) Apa Fra; BBe? Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo* Kt? Lo? Pu} mTr? mTr> Polly Ku R Nd] Vij Ku Rn Mr Mandlik KSS3ftdt, +Md3 cMd 
oMy Tr! mTr'mTro @faa; Tr? FEST; Lot Lo? Ox Tr! yftreit faz” — b) TMd? GMy Tr! 
Tarra; Md4 warrs; Tr? aac; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKt Kt wKt® La! [but cor] La? 
Lo? Lo® GMd! tMd? NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu* Pu’ Pul® Tj? mTr3 mMTr> Wa Polly M34] Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave &&:; wKt a: ; BCa Lo! Fert: — c) Ox? MTr° om WAT — d) Tr? oma; 
Be} Tifey 

67. a) tMd? wep: nNg PAR cMd! asa: wKkt! ware — b) wKt! geht qerareas: 
sOx! sPuS aerg wKtS “arawerees; Lo! “warest; pCa La! “qareray, Md? “Warert: oOr mera 
—c) Lo’ Md? array — d) tMd4 area 

68. Padas c-d omitted in GMd!. Cited by Apa 954;Laks 14.43; Madh 1.564 — a) wKt® 
aeert a; Be’ Madh Yarat — b) Pus Pu’ Pu? aeaaeearehsy at; oMd! quieras afaetc; Jo? 
“sft ade; Be! Be? La! oOr sOx! sPu® [cor to] Tr? Wa Re [patha] ar fesr: — c) Tj! “eae; 
Pu? Put “eae; wK¢tS “erery; Bo “appa. Be? Jo? NKt* Md? GMy Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr® 
[Jolly G] “arate; sOx! sPuo “aaa; Pu? “arafaa; Tj! “wat TET; Lo? Md4 Wa @aerer: 
Tj? attest — d) Bo avez; Tj! a qut— Added verse in TMd! mTré MTr®: see under 645. 

69. Omitted in Tr?; not commented by Rc — a) Be! nNg aif& wat, Md} Hel Ut; Bo 
wKt} tat; TMd4 Ua; NNg e127; TMd? tMdé AY SA; Jm UT Seq; Lo’ as — b) Bo nKt’ 
feaftr ard; cMy afte; BK wKktS afe; Lo’ aa: — c) Be! Lo! Sear aut; Tr! mTr4 mTr® 
STcaT; MTree. ; tMd3 “a@eatef — d) Tj! “ant; tMd4 * AAU; nKtt Sarat; GMd! 
MTr4 mTr® Tara; Pu2 zaraed — Added verse in [Jolly Gr]: see under6.45. 

70, Padas c-d omitted in GMd5; not commented by Re. Cited by Dev 2.368 — a) wKt® 
“at; MTr3 UTARAT — b) Kt? wKt® sOx! “aepe: — c) Be? Lo! aarefer: 9; Kt? aaTe- 
fesfor’; +Md4 cared: wor; Md? “afer, Bo “aha: Tr? “aeet — d) NKt? cMd! tMd3 GMy 
Tr! mT! mTr° fastar:; tMd4 fasra:; NNg WHET AT: 

Additional verse in GMd! tMd? Tr’; this is cited in Nd’s commentary [= VaDh 25.13] 

aearglaat ayorat araat freer ae | 
Fr: Terra: Soar: & Sa || 
a) Md} aeareter faworat— c) rMd? earre: HTT: 


608 Chapter 6 


Tere AAT agar fF aar wer: | 
aaa Feet sar: AToTET FerTETT Wo 2 tt 
moraradeetary areonfrar Peery | 
TATE SANT ITAA ATT TTT WORM 
TMAIT YAY FHATAHATCAAT: 

arate aaasAeraetgT: 9 SU 
ris ined Nate 

age fadtreg gare afer owt 


aeatzarasasaa Sah: | 
ATTA: arererecte aay MWokll 


water sitter got qagdteat: Negi 


71. Omitted in cGMd°. Cited by Vij 3.62; Laks 14.63; Dev 2.368 — a) Bo Heat; Be! 
wKt? Lo’ Pu? Tj! Laks @4RT ; Bo Md} are; wKt! “aTArat — b) Pu? Put Farrar:; GMy Aer 
qa, Md3 Hes AAT — c) Bo Lo! [but cor] wah ; Md! afess wKtS “Fear; Pul? area; 
Bo eardit — d) Vij 1T:; tMd4 etaT; Ox? Patera; td? Pul? fever 

Additional verse in La!: 

wee: Se TST TWAT epg GoaH: | 
are aekty Prefer Afra: | 

72. Padas a-b omitted in GMd’; in MTr° the scribe jumps from WATS to ATH: (74a) — 
a) Lo! cor to “ase; Hy “Sector, oMd! “Séeetarq; Pu? Put “Reet — b) Bo Ho Pu 
“of areg; Pu’ fesfeaut, Be fefeae; 1Md4 sOx! sPuo Tr! Tr? mTré feofeaary; nKé fepfesara; 
Jo? Heat; Md) HeTI — c) TH et; cMd! dat; GMd aeaHT — d) Lo! “array; 
cMd! GMd GMy Tr! MT! WaNa Nd “arpa; wKtS yet 

73. Padas a-c omitted in Pu’. Padas a-b cited by Apa 968 — a) cGMy Searacty — b) Be! 
gaan; cMd& gear ; cMd! Apa gata MTr° gatary: Ox? Pu! gata ; nKt* aarr; 
Pu’ Pu’ gata ; Tr? “earcHfy: — c) nKt4 oMd! 1Md3 GMd5 GMy Tr mTr? Tr Bh Nd 
arrattst; Md! qaeaarfer ; sOx! sPus suet ae 

74. a) wKtS Tere: — b) TMd4 7 Praead BART: Bo Jo* Lo? & FVII — c)tMd4 
aerate; mTr? mTro wT Seq — d) Tro SeeTE Te vies 

75. Cited | by Apa 960 — a) MTr* MTr® agar: wktS arate’: oOr “armat”; — b) 
Ho Lo? “#a@a> — c) sBe? [but cor] ata; GMd! “Sharer: — a) eBe? ares: cMd! “are 
f€; Bo tMd3 Wa ated &; oMy aeaer:; Tr! tere; GMd! tTMd3 GMd Pu? MTr* MTP MTr® Polly 
N Nd] Apa Ace; Biihler says that Na@ and Nd read TX but | do not see this. 

76.* a) NNg [but cor fh] Pu Put “equ; mTr5 [not Dey] “er; wKtS GMy “es; TMd3 
MTr MTr® S1Gqaea; BBe Be? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! La? nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj? MT? Wa Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave A144 aq; La! Srgae; Tj! srg — b) cMd! are; cGMy * Praha, 1Md3 
“foreafs; cMd’ “Ste — c) Tr! “ae; Be wKt? ater, Md! tMd? tMd4 GMy sOx! sPu° 
MTr4 MTP MTr® [Jolly Nd] Ber 


Chapter 6 609 


Renee WTA TT | 
eae T YATAARy AIT loll 
adhges et Tat gat aT TEAR 
wat aT Fe Heaggretaqere lecl 
hag ey gpaahay a spay | 
fagee carat aA Tara lest 
wat waa wate adarag Pree: 

aar yanarmtta ser ae aT WaAAT iicoll 
aaet fafttat aateenpr agiTay: aA: | 
addatatr qarraratersd le 21 
eafta adtdag aacahraerey | 

T areata frarmeayqargd uc Rt 
aftraat war strarkefaeatar a | 
seater T Ade aarahied TAT ile 3 


77. a) Md? “ATs — c) Bo Ho Lo} Put treater” — d) La! “arerfit, Be! mTrS Wa 
°° fi . 

78. Cited by Laks 10.258 — a) Ox30m Jail, Lo gat — d) Bo Ho HEMET ; mTr4 
Pega ; NKe cMd! tMd} GMy oOr Tr! mTr*mTr6 PGA ; Pus Pu? Pu PET ; wKt! 
Sxaer ; Be} Tr? gamer ; cMd MT rs S@aTAaT ; wKt Laks STRAT 

79. a) Jo fafity; Lo’ Ox apart’; Te apa; rMd3 ewer — b) nNg He 
faferg a; wkt! Tr! g — c) Tr! feast; Ox} Pul? [Jolly M] feqer; nKe ara — d) rMd4 oe 
sentry; +Md3 GMd> cMy Tr! mTr° garafer; Be! Safe oe ag 

80. a) Pu? Pu’ aa; La! rMd* tear, TM? Fear — b) Tr? “arty; Pu2 Put “aray; Pu? PuS 
“ay; 1Md4 “ara; 1M} reget — c) TM? aT; tM} aET — d) Md? GMy eA ATT 
Ga; Pub om J; sBKO wk arad: 

81. a-b) Lo? Tj! faftar erer aatargt [Tj! adagr ]; Be Md‘ aatargrerer at: 
art; GMd  agieener aateet: at: — c) Be! adg-ate Bo Ho Jo* wKt® Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® 
cMd! GMd> nNg oOr Ox? Pu? Pué Pul® T? Tr! mTr¢ mTromTr® (Jolly M] "Safes wKt4 
“Saha”, Ma} “ge fauger; mTr! MTs Tawra, Tr! gee — d) Be? nKtt “Rercofer 

82. Omitted in Tr?; mc in BKt’ — a) GMd! tMd? TMd* GM@® GMy Tr! MTr? MT ro areaT- 
feras adtag [mTr® aeathra); sOx! sPuo array; nK tt earfyas — b) rMd4 aeaagarfesa; Tj! 
aeae ; Md? aaae ; cMy Tae — c) oMd! ware ; GMd! GMy nPu! “fafepfard; Pu2 
*feearrad, Md? “facafra — d) Ho “aan 

83. Padas a-b mc in BK — a) Lo? arftrast; mTr? afta; md? "war — b) Be! cMd! 
oMd> oMy @fettaar Pu? “afta: GMd? NNg Pu? Pu4 aT — c) BBe? Bo Ho Jo! Kt? wKt® Lo? 
Lo* Lo? rMd3 GMd5 GMy Ox? Pu2 Pud Pu’ Pu? Tj! [Jolly M R] sat; Ho star — d) Bo 
aardtand, Ho “et; Ke “Pera 


610 Chapter 6 


SF MAA fasaraaryz | 

gaat eairanrsrcaraary Ne vi 
saat waa ahaa ar fea: 

a faqae wert at generate lick 
ue amisginer at adtar Rreararary | 

aqdentrerat FT war Prater uc gl 

sera Teer araveat afer | 


Ud TEEITAATACAT: ETAT: UCN 
ease magecad waar frafear: 
aatnarienr fers aafer war afeyT CCI 
adarafy daar aayfatrenrcaa: 

Terr sara ae: a Ararat fF ce 
aar wdélaat: wet aETe arfer afeafery | 
arar: at Teer arfer afeafery ue oll 


84. Padas c-d omitted in Tr! — a) wKt® AAT’: oOr aster; Tj! “arafye’; rMd4 
“arafes” — b) Ho fasrrar, Md? fsa: — c) tMd3 “Pazear; wKt wKktS ear — d) 
Pul® “apaftres’; oMd’ “arevafttes’. 1Md3 “sary 

85. a) Tr! @rtarrT — b) aktS wketo oerorfer; aM? feo; Pu’ 4: — c) oMd! fag; 
Pul ferqas, TMd? faeareareary; Ho ™Md3 avarf — d) cMd! ef w@m’; cMd5 cMy Tr! mTr* 
Tro Saf ; tMd3 Sark ; NNg Arar 

86. Omitted i in GMy. Cited by Laks 14.64 — a) nKt watafarer, wkto aareferer; Lo! 
eat fatarer, Tr! “gfrer; mTr? Taterer; Tr “gat; Be! nKt* tMd} aT; HooMd! 1Md4 cMd 
Tr! mTr4 Laks &— c) Pul? & ; Be! Bo Jo? Lo? Lo? Md? Pu2 Put Wa J — d) Be? tMd! [but 
cor fh] TAFT; Be! Be Pu Pu’ Pu? Fratec:; wKe Prater 

87. Cited by Laks 14.64; Dev 1. 173; Madh 1. 436 — a)wKt! wkt Jeered; Ho zee 
aT; nKt4 Md? oOr eeTET; Hy TESTA — b) Md} “FEIT; Or FMT at afer; mT Weir 
Preyer: — d) Tj! peer: 

88. In MTr® after FT in pada-b scribe jumps to TAY at 7.1c [haplo}; Cited by Laks 14.65; 
Dev 1.173 — a) sOx! sPuo af Ff; Tr! af faa’; Be! NKt' nPu! Pu? Wa waarate, Lo? Put 
wrapadag — b) sOx! sPue “aree. BK wKtS “areafrafear:; Tj! Laks “mreragitedr: Wa fFrtad 
—¢) Ox? + eit; BK wKtS BIRT; Ho ART; [Yolly Gr] “wher stat; cMd! Carfeoy Faurr 
— d) Ho cMy aatfea; Bo safe; tMd4 Aare, Lo? ToT 

89. Padas c-d omitted in Ox}. Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) MTP adaaty gq aut; cMd! 
NNg @auT4a — b) Be! Be? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? [ cor to] wKt! KP Lo! Lo} Tj? mTr3 Volly 
R] Mandlik KSS Faegfr — c) Bo 3S — d) Be! “uf Z: 

90. Placed before 6.88 in BBe?; padas c-d omitted in Ho BKt® wKt® rMd? tTMd? Ox? 
Pu!® [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.65; Dev 1.175 — b) rMd¢ Tj! arte; nNg 443; Md? GMd> Ox3 
afer, rMd4 gyfer — c) Be? La! nNg Te vaararfier: — d) Tr! Jee; Bo afar; cMd afer 


Chapter 6 611 


aghnit daha: 
aereratorer at: Arter: Tara: Us 2H 
gfe: atat qaseer arafafeatme: 
efter were are ateatry le 21 
aa artes ater a fear: aaeftacr | 
a Leia 
ae cag iareteT: | 


deren adeatior aataragag | 
Praat aararery gaat ge aaT Usui 


91. Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu’ Tj! aghita aaah’, cmd? 
agiitta deft g fF; nPu! Pud Pu’? Pu? ghia ; Be? ag fieft fe aart, oMd! 
aghragt g, FF"; Jo? Lo} Lot Pul® Laks aratah ; Bo Ox} areata; Lo? Pu? Pula aah; 
nNg Sdaq Pr Te ata; Be! Wat aah, | MTS gaa; Lo! aaa PY; Ma? aed: Fr 
Tr! fe & Fr, wT paar — b) cMd5 orate: — c) Be? Jo Lot Lo’ nNg Ox? Pu? Pué 
Pu’ Pu’ Put Pu? Pul? [Jolly G] wattrast; Lo? “orerftrast; mTrS “watered 

92.* Cited by Apa 972; Laks 14.65; Dev 1.13 — a) cMd! Sifaretarereda; Ox? aftr:; Pul? 
gfe; wKt! Fat; nPu! qareaT; Be! “eT: — b) Bo aifrhs’; Bh Perea: [MTP is torn here] 
— c) Be Ho La! La? tMd? tMd? GMd> GMy nPu! Pu? Pu Pu’ Tr? [Jolly N Nd] Na Nd Re 
Dev €faar, Tr! étfaar, Ox? Pul® aitarrssredt — d) Ox} carey; Pul? afer; 1Md4 aart 

93.* Omitted in Pu’ Tr!; verses 93 and 94 transposed in Lo® Wa. Cited by Apa973; Laks 
14.65 — a) Bo Jo? La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo? Md? Ox? Pu! Wa [Jolly M*> R] Apa Jolly 
qareerrar af [Pul? “orfee]; Lo? cMy Pu? Pu‘ [Jolly M'-2-89 G Nd] eareerftras ef [Lo? Pu 

u’ “oraftras]; Be! Be? sOx! sPuS car Frertt afer; Tr saree eter, nKt4 Ox? qa- 
serrenfer — b) Md4 & afer fesraa:; Apa Asefreesras:; Im rMd? AY Feawt:; cMd! ar 
faw:; Ox? fay: — c) Ox} ater — d) M3 For 

94.* Omitted in BKB; ma in wKt°. Cited by Laks 14. 65 — a) GMd! qeeRTTE ATS ; 
Pu? Bu Pu? Tr! “werftray; Lo? Pu2 Put “arerftras; Pul? “oerrfarsnKe! “oar — b) BCa 
[but cor] Lo? 6Md5 GMy oOr Ox? nPu! Pu2 Tr! mTr4 ferafes aaa; tM} *fecafer are: — 
c) GMd! aaray fafer’; Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt La! Lo? tMd? cMy sOx! sPu’ Tj? Tr? MT? 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Aart fa; xKtt “Pafrerercat; Lot Lo Ox? Lolly M4] 
“Rater — d) nNg ae 
Additional verse in TMd?: 

Sra BHT MT Teast Badr Ferg: | 

Pad) Jemvergaat gE TAT Il [= 95 cd] 

95.* Omitted in BK Pu2; ma in wKt® ; padas b-d omitted in Be? and padas c-d in Tr’. 
Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) Be! d=yaaas; Tr? wat” — b) Be! ag qa aI; oMd! 1Md?* 
frat Sears; tM} My aadtor; Pul? “orgargest; Pud Pu? Pus Pu? “ayee; Lo® Lot Lo® 
nPu! Pu? Pu “aged; Ox? “oye; Tr? “ae — c) cMd! +Md¢ araqereaetorr; Be! sBe? Bo 
BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt? nKtt La! La? Lo! Lot Lo5 rMd? GMy nNg Ox? Ox? nPu! 


: URW 


q 
i 


612 Chapter 6 


Ue aren Sathir eertaeaseqE: | 
aaa: oat wat aT US Ell 
wer atsfifedt eit averrer aghier: | 
grasa: Tet cat at Prater gyi 


gtr Aaa eget aera ateara4r 
SS aT: 


Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr Wa Volly M Ku] Re Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave teweTET — d) Bel “xrF-; 
Bo “oat: Tj! “oa td “sae. Ox? “aif 
Additional verse in TMd? oOr mTr4 [Jolly Gr] Mandlik [®] KSS; placed after verse 94 in 
6Md [= VaDh 10.4]: 
area satan + TIT | 
FTV RAs TATA || 
a) [Jolly Gr] aerer ad” — b) tMd4 aS | Aaa TS — This verse in Mandlik [# 
3S] reads: CsersaHaiher ae g + ofenste | oes acer ysarrgeeeter | 
Additional verse in GMd! GMd MTr’*: 
SHAAN Paracas TAT ATT | 
fFacarrafet ar uratfer wear afer || 
96. Omitted in BKt® Tr?; ma in wKt®; pada-a omitted in Be’. Cited by Laks 14.65 — a) 
NNg Ud wath Gareq; wMd4 dereq adepatftr — b) Md‘ aes; BBe? wat; NKt4 eal 
ed:; md3 ae — ¢) Tr! Saat; Bo Ho “SST; Ox? “FAIA; TMd3 “SAAT, NKt* GMd! 
Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Pu! “eet: — d) Tj! omamaitfer 
97. Omitted in MTP. Padas a-b cited by Vij 3.56-7; Dev 1.176 — a) wKt' wK# nKf Ox} 
at fafear, Lot Lod @ fafeat; Pu “Pafeat — c) Lo? Pu? Put gut Heer: Tet; Wa a7: 
tHe:; Lo? eH; Ho Ox? Pu!? “wes — d) BBe? Be? Bo Ho wKt! La! Lo! cMd cMy NNg oOr 
Pu Tr! Tr? wait; wK cMd! +Md3 war; [Jolly M8] ast; GMd! oOr [Jolly Nd]aaT; Lo? et; 
1Md} ef; Be! sBe wKt! wKt} La! Lot GMd> Ox? Tr! Wa [Jolly M*5 R] Jolly wattear; 1Md3 
fFrarema; eked wKkeo raat 
Colophon: Be! Lo! Lo? rMd3 NNg sOx! sPuS Tr! sfer aftarad; Be? wKt sar; BK EO 
wKt® Lo! Lo? Md? GMy NNg sOx! sPu® om yypatnrar afearat, Lo syMHedfearat, Be? wKt? 
cMd om afearat; Be! stmafParat s=qrereara: ars:; pBe? afeerat ary Ter; Lo! auipra- 
aa AMT UST; oOr TMV AMT UST; NNg Ofer: TST; NNg ‘SARE: SATA: 


[arats care: ] 
UTA BATA AATT: 


ara aut wer faker TAT TIT UH 
Mal THT Seat ateror aerate | 
aera wares ader aftrarery wat 
sre f& arse adat faga wag | 
THT AAT TATA TY: RU 
TRMOTATETA TSTET T | 
watragaraa arar fager aac: wei 
were Beart Ararat tat a: 
TTR TAIT Aaa ATA WM 
arenfierasia aif a sift a | 


a at ule aati ere ue 


1. Cited by Vij 1.368— a) Be? 1Md# oOr “orf ga: wKt! wKe “aeatfr — b) Pub “gat; 
+Md! ‘gftt; Lo’ gait; Be! [but me] wafest:; oMd! sanz: — c) La! @aa7eq; BktS wkKt> cMy 
ayaer; wKt! qar— d) GMy nPu! a@ar 

2. a) BosCa Ox? aT@Rt; Md? aTe@rit; Kt? Pu’ atel; Pud Pu? Pu? at a; Tj? statfer — c) 
sOx! sPu° [but cor] etearer 

3. Padas a-b torn in Pu’. Cited by Laks 11.2; Madh 1.391, 3.5 — a) Ho ara, Tj! 
arr; Jo! om f — b) cMd! fagaeraat wad; Laks aaahigd, wKt! nKt* La! Lo? oOr Ox? 
Pud Pu’ Tr? Faget, BKt wKt® faaa; 1d? GMy fafeat; Md? fagaTate — c) Ox water 
ader — d) La! gore: 9: 

4. Not commented by Rc. Cited by Madh 3.5 — a) Tigao: Madh Tae; La! 
afmargaaret; Ho “Aeiant — c) Madh Safee” — d) Ox? arat; Tr! araier; oMd> 
freed; wkt! Pu’ feet; Ho Feet; Bo Préa; Pud Pu’? reper; Madh ame eT; Be? Ho Pub Pu’ 
Pu? Tj! aac; Ox? Tr! arpact?, tMd3 arater:; tM? arate 

5. Cited by Madh 3.5 — a)Madh Tentea;, Md? GMd> TeTeTT; wK TeTeat — b) Jo? 
Lo} Tj! Ararat; mTr* Tro ara Paat;, Wafaftar, Lo! Fifa: wy: nKe aa: — c) oOr 
mere ; Md} sacar 

6.* Cited by Laks 11.2; Madh 3.5 — a) wKtS Ox? TRA, wK TaeM ; Lo! aypafeer’; 
BBe’ BCa Jo! Jo* Kt? La! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® nNg Ox3nPul Pu? Pud Pu? Pu? Tj! Tj? Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave ‘FAT; Wa “TIT. Md “TPIS — c) wKt? cMd) Laks 34; Pub 3a; 
nK¢ OT g faerie — d) Be! + apireRr ; MtTr® appear - BBe Md! aifere 


613 


614 Chapter 7 


asfintafe ager ash: art: a ae | 
a FAT: T ACM: | AST: WATaa: lil 
aresth arate Ayer sir wae: | 
Hedt gaat gar acaay facets cil 
wena sea gevatiorz | 

ge deta wsniy: aageerdaa Ue I 
wre asaer ahh wa aarerst w acaa: | 
gea afta Rerer ga: Ja: loll 
meq sere war fifo weer | 
aga safe mre adacirrar fe a: ue el 
a ag afte ated a faery | 
ae oe Wen 
aed afreg deren: | 

afr arafreg a at a frag ile ail 


7. Omitted in Pu; not commented by Re. Cited by Laks 112; Madh 3.5 — a) Laks 
“fintag; nK¢ aig: & — b) Jo? Lo? Tj ar: aa: w ae; Lo’ MT; La! id? GMy sOx! 
sPuo ate — c) sOx! om first F — d) (Jolly M8] & eg: SATA: TM 4 FATTArT 
8. Not commented by Rc. Cited by Madh 3.5 — a) GMy “ARTA — b) Bo AGS, 
TMd3 GMy mTr¢mTré Hae: — c) Ho Hedt Saar; Jo! aa; sOx sPuo WT; Ho Ox Bat — d) 
Ho water = ferefer, Tr! Fretoy 
9. Cited by Madh 3.5 — a) Be wKt nKt Ue Ua — b) Lo? Pw? Put “fade, tM? 
“Rte, oMd! eryreartcr; Md} [but cor] “afta, Tr! “aor — c) Md? Garaefer erent; mMd* 
waht — d) Lo? ‘Sas; Ho Sd; Wa FTE 
10. Cited by Laks 11.5; Ma@dh 3.5 — a) Lo! afeter, Md‘ & ater; nKt4 aeT; Be Ho 
La? Lo* Lo nNg sOx! Ox? sPué Pu’ [Jolly M R] Laks Jolly TeteT; NNg WaeT; Kt? wKt® 
alferar — b) Md? @1é; Be? 1Md? tMd4 cMy nPu! afta: — c) Lo? Pu? Put Pu [but cor] 
Pu? [but mc] wAfesert — d) Pud Pu? [me to] FAST 

it. a) sOx!' sPu® places %% at the beginning; Be' Ho nKt* Lo? cGMd! tMd? td? GMd> 
cMy NNg Pu? Put Tr! mTrSmTr° Nd det, wKtS Lo? rMd3 fifa; tMd4 ef” — b) Tj! 
sfifeaaer; Put “spat; Lo? “ait; Wa “aT — c) Jo? wKkt! gadafea wrt a; wkto wep, rMd! 
gepaaate; Tj! Volly R] Fey: Trae; Bo cMd! wet — d) BBe? om fF; nKt? fer: 

12. Cited by Laks 11.5 — a) Bo wKt? GMd! tMd* GMd> Tr! mTr4 mTr® Seq a; TMd3 
gered Ate, Bo Md? & Alera; cMd5 ater; GMy & Alert — b) Lo! faaarers wKt? rMd3 
1Md* cGMd@ cMy “art: — c) Be! + wergfeaana; Laks aera ; Be} ay —d)Lo!& 
UST BET 

13.* Padas c-d ma in BK — a) Be! cwenfeeg & at, cMd! aeqraat; cMd5 ceqTeet; 
MTP dearest — b) MT coaedfer aeafers:;Pu> Pu? Pu? ada aefee:; Be! Bo Ho Jo! Kt? 
nK¢ BK wKt® La? Lot Lo’ GMd! oOr Ox? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 1 Ha ; Im FaI- 








Chapter 7 615 
TTT TAYATAT Tae eat | 
TAAL PSAATAAAT: PI 
wer eather ware earaerfir aerfer | 
WENT Serdt eae dot T UI 
a aareret ath a fat aes aca: | 
Wet: AIT Ne El 
@ UAT Feat ae: T AaT afar | a: | 
agar a eater sey: St: UI 
qe: afta sor: wat aes warhreerter | 
qe: gag weit ave af faager: ec 
etter & ya: TIE Tat worata wT: | 
setter woftaeg faagratr ada: 23 i 
afte a waar aes queeaatera: | 


ae; rMd* aaa; Ma} Sores AT; BBE’ HegaAT ~— c) GM) aifet; Be? Ho sOx! 
Ox} Pu’ sPuo ate” — d)tMd4 mT dat; wKe BKtS wKtS La! GMd! 1Md3 tMd? GMy sPuS 
Tr mTr ferareagy 

14. ma in BKt. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) Lo? TERT, Wa TEATS; sOx! sPue TIP, Be! 
Be? Bo nKt‘4 BKf La? Lo! Lot Lo nNg Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pud Pu’ Pu® [Jolly M G] 
Laks Jolly hate&, wKtS aet — b) Lo? Hee; Lo? Md! tMd4 GMd? Tr! mT r¢ MTr® “ATH: 
— c) wKt! wen: wKt} adasr wKt! BUSH: 1tMd3 GMy aang — d) mMTr ‘Ory ; Pu? Pu? 
Pu? “TeTaefpae:; Be} nNg Pat 

15. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) NNg 4@; tMd?4 mT ro yatty water — 
b) cMd aaftr earazrftr; Pu’ om wear; Wa Taft — c) Ho aT — d) Tr! eer 7; nKt4 
wate, Bo Tafa; Jo? fF; Lot Lo’ Ox3 [Jolly M] 7 

16. Cited by Laks 11.6 — a) wKt3 GMd! aa ; Ox? “ate; Jm afarr — b) Ox? feat te 
erect; Kt? Lo® sOx! sPuo far, Bo faut araar, Md! aretex, cGMd! tMd4 NNg Laks aiftnc:; 
[Jolly G] ata: — c) wKO weré yeaders AL’: pBe? ave FAEVETAe ; Lo’ qa; tMd? Pud 
aanféa:; Tr! ware: — d) BBE Hoy TT; MTS ART 

17. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) Ho BK TMd? TMd? GMy nPu! Tr! Ustgeut; cMy aves 
@ — b) MTr? Aer afar; Pu2 Put | &: — c) cMd! wgurafs anrat; nNg squt autar +t 
d) Lo? afeapr &:; Lo’ afar: Laks Ba: 

18. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) tMd4 avet — b) Be! wastfir’ ; +Ma3 war fe wert; 1Md4 
*zerftr — c) Pu’ ag — d) Wa &S; Be! wKt3 Md? avs; Md? wave; Md} a; wKt! get; 
Bo fagaer: 

19. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) Md’ @tex ade: Wary; Be! Pura adter ga; Be 
aye; Md? Md Ox} mTr® Yolly M*> Nd] Laks FIc:; [Jolly M°]8IA:; Lo? PaA:; Bo wt: 
— b) tMd? aatq; Be! & A UT; oOr Us Gat; TMd! wafer; wKt® werafer — c) GMy Ox? 
aafrenmty — d) wKe Tre aden; Ho aear 


616 Chapter 7 


To Aenraresay TIGR: URoll 
TITS: STA ATatrearre4ra4r | 
Rae WT Ree RART wadareathareT NR 2 
aat qvsfiar aret geht fe gfe: | 
aver fe wares saree Bera WRI 
FaaTaATTAT TAT aT: | 

asfe ania sera qesaa Prdifar: Rat 
way: adanta Peaeardaaa: | 
adoteraaay waevser rary Was 
aa waar wllearatt qusaefa araEr | 
WAAL T Aalfet Aart aearsy TAT Ue 
AEE: AMAT WATT AeTaThary | 
aren after oat atarariathray Rg tl 
at tat wore ae RravtorPradke | 


20. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) Hy 1a; Wa Fo” — b) Hy avs; GMd! qvearavea’ 
wKts qvereved’; Ho Lo’ 1Md3 @uata ; Tr? Cafes: — c) Ku [patha] 7 AeenPrafeez:; Be’ 
aS ; Pus Pu’? Pu? “Prater; wNg “PraraeT; Be! Lo’ “Praerq; Ox? “Pravraary; 1M? mTr4 
mTr® * Pare; Tr! “Prareret; cMd5 “Pare; 1Md4 “Prathyeart; MTr [inc to] *Rranrery; 
La! ‘Rairg — cd) oMd! sdorafergehtenarcentraren: — d) Jo? gd as; Bo Tr 
MTrS FAC; wKt! FAM; Lo? Tee; Tj? TAT: 

21. Not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) Bo TAATE:; Md “Stat; Lo? 
“stat —-a-b) sOx! sPuS gaterareaties, — b) Jolly ar & fra’; rMd4 Set ; La! “fexer ; 
wKt! “egies TIT — c) wKt! caret | HETepfeBrq; Ho cMd! are; Md seperti. Bo 
areas — d) Be adarreatat ; Ox} sedat ; wKtS dardar’; Pu’ “sree 

22. Not commented by Re — a) Md} a@; Hy eset; BBe NKt* Lot Lo’ Ox? Tj! mTr® 
Blas — b) Be! sFat; Wa THT; nKe Qh: Fafa — c) Pu “cad: NK “oat 

23, a) BCaTMd? GMy #1 — a-b) Pu Pu’ [Jolly G] @aarraeaife weral: cater: — 
b) Lo! Pu? Pu’ aererera gat: ; Bo rMd3 Tj! we; w Ket! aaa ; Lo’ freereat:; Lot Ox? 
Tere: — c) cMd! & 4; Pui peared — d) Ox} Tj! Frater: mT fe fear: 

24, a) 1Md3 gag:; oMd! fag:; Ho La! Fy: — b) Tj! Preae’; Lo! “aera; rMd4 
*aaepr: — c) Wa Ble; sBe “Star; Bo “Grewrqastar — d) rMd4 fear; Tr! Agart 

25. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) Ho oOr ST, wKtS aren, Te Se — c) mT aR; 
wKt! gated; Tr? eafet — d) cMe tT Tea 

26. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) GMd! @aTg:; Pu’ Pu’? Pu? 7eT@:; GMa? Tea; wKt! 
aed; sOx! sPu® awitare — c) Be? Lot Lo’ Md? after; Tr! wétez; Pu Pud arftur, r+Md3 
wer, BBE La! 1Md4 #1eer; Pu’ [but mc] aT — d) Tr! eratefatfad; +Md? wPul epfeatey’. 
1Md4 “alfa: 


Chapter 7 617 


arava fram: gat quae Peer Rll 
quest f quads geearparcam: | 
aateated afer qtr warerary RCI 
aa ot a Us Tae UT ATT | 
akemarta atttater deaq R80 
ASAI HST GRP | 
T Wea Aaa Ad Amat fawIT T URZoll 
Yat Aaa WIAMTEATTATRT | 
gal aa gk nial 
Ue TG: SAE TST TAY | 
Gera: Rare warty aatteaa: UZ RI 
wager qe: Rrestssarte sitar: | 


Prefer agit ate defeegitarearkr 13 31 


27. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) Be! 91a; Jo* Lo! Md? GMy Wad — b) Pue Pu’ 
Prater Rada; cMd! Prato’; wPul “orf ala. tMa3 “aeifer; Lo’ “acta — c) tMd4 wrATaT; 
Lo* Lo’ Ox} Jolly Marat, mT fraa:; TMd4 4a; NNg Pu2 Put wal — d) Pu? Put queda; 
mT? Ted; Be! Ho nNg faeara; Lal tMd3 GMy f& SAA; sOx! Ox? sPuo Tr? FraTeTe 

28, Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.795 —— a) TMd? G98; Laks Gaeresiy; cMd! “Saar; 
tMd? “sarsit — b) oMd! aefepar’ ; mTré geferar ; 1Md4 geet’; mTr® gehereat ; Bo cMd! 
“waa — c) MT i mT r6 erates afd; wKt! wKt “aed; Lot Lo’ oOr Ox? [Jolly M4] 
“afesdt; Hy “afesd; sOx! sPuo “afer ef — d) Md! ae 

29. Cited by Laks 12.795 — a) GMd! adit — b) aK Stew: Tar ; wKtS ma TF — cc) 
BKtS ITE; Ox} “Tarte; Md‘ Tj “aePsta — d) Be! Tj? atte witsata; Laks adie"; 
Lo’ “ardteac; Pu’ Pu? Pu’ dtsa; Md? erEaT; 0Or TTT 

30. Cited by Laks 12.794 — a) NKt’ eae Laks aE [om At]; Pu2 Put Pud Pu? Pu? 
Ku Go 1&1 — b) Be GeaaTGaaTeAT; cMy “AHA ; Be! “areag fsa; Pu? Put “gear; ake 

°aftrarar — c) Pu? Put raat, TMd?4 art; GMd> are; GMy 21a; BK EO AAT; wKt® AAT; 
Be} Sadia, Ke? tq — d) Laks query featy 7; sBe? wKkt! BKt ae; Md} Tea 

31.* Not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 12.794 — b) tMd3 “arfteft — c) Be! Be? Bo 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKt* sKt wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Ox? Pu? Pu? Put Pu? Pu’ Pu Pu? Tj? mTr? Wa 
[Jolly G] wore Tee avs: [NK tt wre; Bo aS]; Ho Werag; rMd3 rMd4 GMd> GMy Tr! mTr4 
MTr® [Jolly Nd] Fog saa [rMd‘ org]; cMd! wg amet; Ox3 awe; Lolly M R] Jolly 
arp: — d) Lo? waar 

32.* Not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 11.21 — a) TMd* ere; BBe Be? Bo BCa Ho 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? nK¢ BKe wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! sPuo PuS Tj! 
Ty Tr? mTromTr° Mandlik Dave Jha KSS (Jolly R] “EE: — b) BCa 1Md? GMy Srguauexy, 
Be? wKt! wKt} La! Lo! tMd* Ox} nPu! Pu} Pu’ yar; cGMd5 Tr! gaaueaz; Be? Md? TMd4 GMy 
*auseq — c) La! apceafirer: — d) tMd4 ararfear: 

33. Omitted in Bo — a) BBe Tafa: — b) cMd! mTr frat’; tMd3 GMy [Jolly Nd] 


618 Chapter 7 


ae faatiter qreetsrarers: | 
plies Ub bl Saal 
ey et aa fafaerar adarraya: | 
STATATATT TUT TESTA WRK 
aT AAT BAST THAT TAT: | 
aaase wae sara: US EI 
aarrreaarettr sreaeearr afr: | 
Aaqaagakasaat T TT URN 
gata frer aaa forage: gets | 
qaadt fF wat aA Gers NRC 
aasRersteas ferftarentt fear: 
factarer fe qufet fraafa weer 39 
qearsfaqaracet Usa: aaftesar: | 
areata centr Prerrerferart irsotl 


Rrarareft, cMd5 Rraret g; Pu? Put Rratssaa, Kt? wKt} BKt> wKt® cMy Tj! Wa sffe: 
— c) Ox} aut star — d) Lo! fargfirar 

34. Omitted in BKt? wKt® sOx!; not commented by Nd. — a) rMd* ateq — b) cMd! 
qredrearerafat: — c) Pu! afer; 1M? faettfa — d) Lo! “fareftrar’; nNg Wa feateadr 

35. Not commented by Re. Cited by Laks 11.156 — a) [Jolly M49] ety ety Freer; 
Lo? eet; Be} tMd4 a4; Me [patha] etsfacerat; Bo Fraverat; Ox} freerat — b) Pu? Put 
“argydat: —~ c) oOr (eaATAPT — d) BKe wKeo tar wafer ea; Be! Bo Ho Jo? wKt! wKe 
Lo! Lo? 1Md? Pu} Pu’ Tj! Laks f& efrar; Pu? Put “wercr:; Jo! “fer 

36. Cited by Laks 11.156 — a) Md} GMy Sacany ; sBe? FIA — b) Md? Hae, 
Ke BKe wera: wKt® La! oOr tera; Pu’ teat, 1Md4 wera; GMdd WaT — c) Ho Pud Pu’ Pu? 
[Jolly G] aate Syae [Ho AAS]; Pu2 Put Taras; rMd4 Tr? TASTE; Be? wKt! La! nPu! 
Fae 

37. Omitted in Ox3; lacuna at padas c-d in nKtt. Cited by Laks 11156 — a) GMd 
“omeagar ; wKe! “orig — a-b) oMd! ar@rrraeerrer sfardte oifire: — b) cMy otfirar; 
MTP} WPT: — c) rMd? Sfeerferar geattacs’ sOx! sPuS Saar; Pu2 Pu’ Prfeer; Be! “sar 
feats’; La! “guifeaes” — d) sCa Jo? Lo} Tj! ‘gueaat faser amet; Ho Radeaat, Be! wKt! 
*fereerat; 1Md? GMd cMy feereSeur; La! Pu? Pus g 

38. Cited by Laks 11156 — a) Wa om Pret— b) oOr Jr: — c) Be! BK wKt® nNg Tj! 
Tr! Wa a — d) Lo? GMd! tMd3 GMd oOr Ox? Tj! Tr! mTr4 MTr° Wa *Rrefagere 

39. Pada-b omitted in Pu? [haplo]. Cited by Laks 11.156 — a) Md} cMy Gears; 
La! Ox2@ift 723°; Bo Hit Fe 7S": sOx! sPuo Gait Te” — b) nK¢ fa-ttereate; cMd! 
1Md3 tMd# GMd5 GMy NNg MT? ata §; Im “aTeHTAY — c) Be? oOr “aTeHTAT; Bo sot 
—~ d) Bo faraart; Ho feaata; cMy peat 

40. Pada-d omitted in Be*. Cited by Laks 11.156-7 [with padas a-b and c-d transposed] 


Chapter 7 619 


ant frresrrarageaia afia: | 

ga: taaada gaat fafa a treet 

Tae frre wAaetaa TI 

wae aera are ar wee: Ue 
aRepaet frat qe a arate | 
aredifiat areafiat avatar ated: us zt 
great seat ant aarftestrartearey | 
fraferar fe areata aar erat sot: uss 
war erragqentr aurer wreife a | 
arnt sent saat Prasad eal 


— a) GMd> agar; wk} tMd3 GMy “aaAeT — b) BK wKt® Lo? Lo’ NNg Ox? [Jolly M] Me 
aafearen:; mTrs Ufeaer:; Bo tM! GMd5 nPul “fease:; Be? “Resear — c) BCa Jm Jo! Kt? wk 
MTP [Jolly G Ku] LaksMe Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TACT af; Pud Pu? area aff 7; Lot 
Lo? Ox? uerftr 

41. Verses 41 and 42 transposed in TMd? GMy; pada-a omitted in Be?. Cited by Laks 
11.157 —- a) Ho wKt! wKt} nK¢@ BKt wKt? Lal Tr? Volly Ku] aon; tMd? at At; Bed ay- 
fefater; Ke? facet — b) eKtS Pud Pud Pu? RET"; Pu2 “AYT; Wa AST; Put aeaaTaa; Lo? 
oMd! “aftr — c) Be! sBBe’ Ho Jm Jo! Kt? oKtS wKt® Lo! Lo* Lo? tMd4 Pu? Pué mTr ger; 
sOx! sPuo mTr° ger; Te mTr*@a:; GMy Gat; TMd?3 Yat; GMd> TAIT ; Lot dist’; Be! Pu’ 
daar; oMd! 43a; mTr4 mTr® TSIST: BBe? wKt! BK wKtS array ; Lo? awa ; Ho Jm 
Jo! Kt mTeaaat ; Md4 atast; NK array d) Md‘ qyeat; BBe Grey; wKt! ayer 
cor to TPA; BKE wKt> FATT, nKt* Pu? Ter 

42. Omitted in Ox}. Cited by Laks 11157 — a) Be! Ho wKt! nK¢ Tj? Pya7; Lo* uPreg; 
Md? farmers; Be! “gst; Lot “gr — b) tMd* oMd? farargttta; cMd! “arfafita,; Tj! 
“areata — c) rMd4 Baeeq — d) Lo! mTr® weTes; wKtS oOr Her; Ke Heraata; Te 
meas, mT? Aa; Be! afe:; Put TAS: 

43. Omitted in Tj?. Cited by Vij 1.311;Laks 11.157 — a) TMd* 33°; Be! Bo wKt® Lot 
Ox Tj! “wrerdt; Tr sesh: BBe Bo nKtt Ox? fer; Ke? fear; wKet! Ke? wKe} Tr! mTr4 
MTr° Jha fererevs — b) wKt! La! °-iferar; sOx! sPuo Vij [vl] & afee:; Tr? aw afesr:; Ho 7 
arad:; NKf & awd; Lot Lo’ F arerc:; Tr! apadt — c) nK¢tt aretferar arafaeir; Bo Lo® Tj! 
oat - Lot area :,1Md? afeafata; cMy “Bras; Ke wKt® “etait; Vij area fae gaT— d) Lo! Lod 
oOr Carey, Tr? “orabr; Kt? wat a: wTro water; rMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy Tr! wt T; Lo 
“TR, Tj! “TeMTEg; Laks 8: 

44. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 11.143— a) GMd! Wat; Lo? wt — b) BK t> aTT- 
wafers: cMd arraferrrs* GMd! +Md3 tMd4 GMy arrarfateert fear’: wKkt! “reser Far? 
— c) NKt* Lo? Lo’ GMd? Ox? mTrmTr mTr® folly M] ferefexreq; rMd3 tMd4 GMy [Jolly 
Nd] Laks Rrafesaez; wKe om fF 

45. Omitted in Pu’. Padas a-b cited by Madh 1.413; Laks 11.143 — b) Md‘ JareT; Lot 
Lo? Ox? [Jolly M] ¢— d) nK¢ vadrafardad; Be} ake wkt aac: TRashagt 


620 Chapter 7 


Rysrsekrahar sresrearersa FUSE ll 
waa frareay: aftare: frat wa: 
are quea TBAT aTel TT: Ive! 
Uget aed ste Patgarigany | 
anaqrest T WeeT wT osesE: WSC 
marae a at wat fag: | 

at Wat TANT at Fargar wir veil 
aaa: Raratla wear a waHEAT | 
Vand Rare BAT TAT Uk oll 


46. Padas c-d cited by Laks 11.143; Madh 1.413; folio containing verses 46b to 72 miss- 
ing in Be? — a) Ho ®TAq; cMy Hast fF w; Be! Pus WaTHT; BBe? Kt? Ox? Pu? Pué vary; 
Jo? nKt4 La! Lo? nNg Tj! Tr WaHET — c) mTr® faguae, sBe Prasad, wBKé wKt6 ferteac; 
La! faa; Bofaasaant NNg Ox? mTr* “Seorareat. tMd3 oMy “eifer: — d) Ox? #ra- 
Sear’. wKt6 Brea. GMd! sHreaT’; Pud Pu? Pu? BIA. ; Laks BUG ATCHAT; oMd! fF 

47. Omitted in Ox?. Cited by Vij 1.311;Laks 11.143-4; Madh 1.413 — a) MTr4 WTaTeT; 
BBe? Lo! Lo* Lo’ cMd! Tr! Wa [Jolly M*] Vij Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Ww7rareit; wCa 
BKt> wKtS yararet; La! Frater cor sh to Wrareiy, TMd4 FTAA; NPu! Fa; wKt! HA Fy; 
Ke a [lacuna]; Bo Ho Lo! nPu! Pu? Pu? me Pu? feareare:; nKt4 fearae:; NNg SW; MTS 

— b) cMd! "are; nKt feraT; GMd! gH: — c) rMd4 aaa 7; Be! nNg nPul 
es Pu Pus Pu’ Pu? a; Wa GT ; Ma at ; nKt! drafaeer; Lo? oMd> nNg Pu? Pu! Pud Pu? 
Pu? mTr° Bh ° Bray; Be! ganar; nKt gurard; Lo! Tr! gareat; sKtS garer; Md? Frarea; 
Trt guraTe: rT — d) Be! SMT; Bo SHAS; Tj! Brera; nK¢ Brassil; +d! earar; Be! 
wKt! wKt? Lo! tMd? cMd! GMy sOx! Ox? sPu® Tr! Laks Jor:; GMd> ToT:; nK tt ster: 

48. Cited by Vij 1.311; Laks 11.144; Madh 1.413 — a) Ox? Pu? MTr5 834; nK¢ SQA; 
NNg fa3pt; Pu’ Sat; wKt? nKt* Lo} rMd? Md! tMd4 GMy oOr Tj! Tr! mTr*mTr® ena 
— b) nKt! pada reads: qarsgur; Tj? gat; Hy “gard, wKté “garg — c) TMd4 anevest 7 
qeey, Pud Pu? VVolly G] arqvesqoeey; cMd! anevest 7; wKt anevs q; Tr! mTr* mTr® 
aneuedrer; BBe* Tr? angvesta; Ho TMd? GMy aTave Ba — d) M4 wT; GMd! Tr! qT; cGMy 
TT; NK Tae; Be! “wem:, wKt Ce: 

49. Cited by Laks 11.144; Madh 1.413 — a) Jm gareft cat; wKt! “Aaa; Pu? “carat” 
— b) Tj! &:; Laks® Je; wKt! ad — c) wKt & wares; wKe} Tagiay— d) TMd3 Md? GMd5 
oMy NnNg Tr! Tr? MTr MTr° Polly Nd] Madh at Wat TTA [rMd3 GMy Tr! Forget]; 
wKket asst agutaat; Be! BBe Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? BKtS wKt® Lot Lo’ Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Put 
Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Tj? MTr? WaLaks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave AS914aT ; BBe? Bo Lot Lo® 
cMd! Ox? Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? [Jolly R] FT; wk} war 

50. Cited by Vij 1.311; Laks 11144; Madh 1.413 — a) TMd? “aeHT; Lot Lo’ “Het; Lo! 
“werfeer” — b) Pud Pu? yrapT; cMdS “Hr: — c) GMd! Ud He; Tj! TaePoTAy, Jo? Lo? 
oMd' nNg Or mTr4 MTr® Laks teat — d) My gS; Ma wrastt, wk BAT; Bo Lo? 
GMd! rMd? tMd4 GMd@ GMy oOr Ox? Tj! Tr! yor 


Chapter 7 621 


TET TAT AT aTHTTEMA TAT | 
mrestsfe wer frag wera rar war U4 en 


AAR ater aesaaVST: | 

at yet yeat rere STAT UK RI 
SAT T AAT AIT SAAT | 
SAAT AAT AAAI AT: UG ZU 
MOSSRANs: UGA BHATT | 
afrarad art at wadia watary ex 
aft agar et cee seRTT | 
faaredtsasreat fey wet FeTTT URI 
a: art freatrer arrer afafiaer | 
eat wae of wena T NGS 
aot IARI FAITE | 
areata a ag fraenfaraers: UY oll 


51. Cited by Vij 1.311;Laks 11.144; Madh 1.413-4 — a) TMd* GMy Ox? Wa Ue; Tr! 
Wet; Tr? areata — b) BK wKtS Md‘ aTeqecar | TUT [yMd4 °seqar]; oOr nPu! Pu? Tr? 
“gaat — c) rMd4 soresit, Ox} area; cMd! wast |, cMd> wrest fF; cMd! 1Md* GMd> Ox? 
Pu Pu’ Tr! qr; Pu? fase — d) Bo tMd4 cMd@ wreaanfses; aktS wKt® FF Fay; Md? sOx! 
sPu® cat; cMd! yor 

52. Cited by Laks 11.144 — a) Ox? 8de7 — b) cMd! “aga: — c) TMd4 qa: ye — d) 
oMd feenfgstaaterart; Bo fear; nKtt BK & wKt® Lo* Lo® rMd? GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Ox? 
nPul sPu® Tr? mT MT1® [Jolly M45 Nd] HTH: 

53. Cited by Madh 1.414;Laks 11.144 — a) TMd3 BaTAT; oOrgT — c) cGMd! cMy uTr5 
mTr® Madh rear asta; rMd3 "arr ay fe anf — d) Lo’ aarrereay; nKt! area, cMd! 
Pu® Tr! qa: — Wa adds here 7.32 a-b. 

54.* Cited by Vij 1.312; Madh 1.405 — a) wKt! [cor to] Hav; 1Md? atorarret” — b) 
nPul “ale ; Be! NNg GI; Be! Bo Ho wKt} nKt* La! Lo! Lo? Lo GMd° sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? 
Pué sPu Pu Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr¢mTr® Vij Mandlik KSS GStKarT — c) TM} cMy Afeaorere aT 
qed; Pu’ afrar ae; Md‘ ofgat aa; Ho Lot NNg Tr! mTr4 mTr MTY® [Jolly M?45-9 Nd] 
areét, TMd4 aret; GMd! Tr? &— d) aCa Jo? wKt! wKt Lo? Tj! Vis Belfer art: [Jolly M8] 
adit a oft"; 1Md GMy [Jolly Nd] Tetereary 

55. Cited by Vis 1.307 — a) Bo agate — b) aK “AS; Tr! “AAA; Lo! gape — d) 
Jm Jo! Kt? nPu! Pu3 Put mTr3 Mandlik KSS 8 J;wKt? Dave Jha fe F,cMd! fax, Hy Tj 
f& J; Bo Ox? Usal; Bo Felet 

56. Omitted in TMd? GMy. Cited by Laks 11.106; Madh 1.405-6 — a) Bo at 31&; TMd4 
aerstaet . Hy Paecafiret — b) Madh amréiferfaaert [vl as in ed.]; Lo! avast; mTr4 
are? — c) Hy Lot Lo? aff; Tr! mTr3 get — d) mT? Bel; Tr? aT 

57. Verses 57 and 58 transposed in tMd?. Cited by Laks 1123, 105; Madh 1.406 — a) 
Bo Lo® Ox3 Tj! Tr! Laks 11.105 SAA — c) Ho FHATAT; BKE om FT, NKt La! arty — d) 


622 Chapter 7 


adat g fares arate facia | 
AAT TE AT TAT TTGaAAT MKC 
rer afereraraet: adtaerathr fafarag | 
aa are fafaPret aa: ant aATEAT Uys 
searaty wedter get svarcaterars | 
TRTAAEGATANT TTAAATT UE ON 
fricdarer arafahtieaderar ahr: | 
Maasarsaraany wedta Frrermmry le 21 


aaTTT Pgosttr CTA ORI | 
gitreceatead vteteatragrr le QU 


1Md? faces; Pu’ faaearfec ; Lo? Ox? Pu? Put PuS Pu? Wa [Jolly G] Laks Me Go HTeH; 
uke “Arey 

58.* Omitted in GMy. Cited by Laks 11.23; Mddh 1.406 — a) wKt} 7; Ox? fafereert; 
Laks fatter — b) oOr fashaa:; td‘ fastat — c) Be? BCa Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? 
La? Lo? Md? oOr sOx! Ox? sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr6Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
qeaderet yep [Hy rar]; wKt Lo! seattat — d) Md TT; Bo TET; wKt! AEST 
aga; Lo! Md “aga: oMd! “aad 

59. Padas c-d omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 11.23, 105; Madh 1.406 — a) Tr? Frent- 
feqet’. Lo? Pud Pu? Tr? “AreaeT:; wKtS “PTET; Laks 11.105 “APIA: — b) Ho Jm Jo! Ke? 
wKt3 Lo! Tj? Laks Madh KSSfY-PAT; wKt> Petter — c) Tr! At wre; Lo? fafaterer — d) 
GMd ater; Laks @TT; Be! sBe? wKt! wKt 8K wKt® Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ rMd* GMd> sOx! 
Ox? Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu’ Tr? MTP Wa Volly M'?+5] Me arated, Ho Farag 

60. Padas c-d omitted in mTr® — a) Puaareare; wkt! mTr® Wat edict — b) Bo Ho 
Kt’ 1Md3 oOr Sat; NK ITT; MT NG [patha] MAT BORAT Bo “area — c) oMd! 
tMd4 GMS Tr! mTr! arate ; Ke at; oMy “at aya ; TMd? “art eygAI Tr? 

“pfaaTeet ; Md! "eduarent — d) wKt! “arergudterar; tMd4 avatferat; Bo Thee 

61. Omitted in GMy Tr; pada-d omitted in Ox?. Cited by Vif 1.307 — a) BBe* BKP 
wKt® Lo! Lo’ tMd? oOr sOx! sPuS [Jolly M]Rn Go Dave fad’; Tr! fdetarer, Ox? 
faetarer; cMd! fraeieer, Tr? Prtater: Im arate — c) TMd4 atadta rat aerrq; nP ul 
aradratear ; wKkt! aradtefrat ; Pu? aracifegar ; Put avacifegar ; Ox? “ayuir aerrt — 
d) pCa [but cor] Ho Tatferary 

62.* Cited by Apa 581 — a) GMd! 1Md‘4 aut cae; Bo AurHAaT; Pud GaTAey; Lo! Tj? Tar 
Hea; oMd Tr! Tr gat ae; cMd’ Prasat; sBe? Prgsatter — b) wKe ere; TMd? cMy 
gare’; Pu? qare 5 0Or STRETE TMdé MT {erews |; GMA Tr! MT 1? ere ar 
cMd! ae mer’; Ho Jo? Lo* sOx' Ox’ Pu? Pu’ Put sPu® Pu’ Tj? Te Re “Olga; KSS 
“ara [ef. 7.54 ‘iote} —~ ¢) TMd3 IRA ; HotMd? tMd¢ nPu! “ATER; -cMd! “ara — 
d) 7M? tread Paarta; Tr fread Res; Apa aaeaeah; Apa [vl] Ret: ASAP; Md 
oMy wKt® “aati; Ke’ “aera 

Additional verse in Be! Tr?: 


aedaedtia aarearifrart | 


Chapter 7 623 


qa Ua wedia adgreafeareay | 
Sryararceeet Bor Te Hole T Ne RN 
agen: ghd: afareaect | 
qgeredinttarat zat Wat: TEATT UE 
TAT BE arrat TS aafeat fear | 


qadt ares g ge Sfarfaertat gyi 
qa ua f& aera Prerete a dears | 
qeeaceed at Aree ar Ararat: ESI 


BSrarrasart Tras | 
a) Be! aracraareapedta — b) Be! “efatfaery — d) Be! “planar 

63. Omitted in Pu’ — b) Be! Wa ‘sreaniatfad; sBe? “area: — c) oMd! efFara’; 
La! oOr sreatast; wKt Pu’ “Aretet — d) wKe afar; Lo! gat; Tr? ea; sBe? wKt} GMd? sOx! 
Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tj? Tr? BatKs [cf. 7.54 note] 

64. Omitted in Lo? Ox3; ma in Lot ~ a) 1Md} atfteeh: — c) TMd4 agardt’. wKt} Lod 
sOx! “eftatt areft; Tj! “stather; rma} “sftgaft 

Additional verses in Mandlik [®@] KSS Dave: 


65. Cited by Paks 11.33 — a) Hy wKt! Lo! GMy STATey; Ox) SATRaT; Wa aaTeT; Wa 
area, Tj! aaa — b) Tr? as; Jm @vet; tM? tMd4 GMd? a8; Lo! Saat, Bo tararast; Wa 
aaast — c) Md? Tr? FI; Bo Met; Tr “wey; Be! BosCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKtS wKt® GMd! 
nPu! Pud Pu’ Tj? mT? MTr4 mTr® [Jolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave — d) Bo 8; Be! “oar 

66. a) Be! sBe? Ho wKt! tMd? Pu? Pu! [Jolly M8} 4; oOr J — b) oMd! afrafer fe 
aaa; Md? cMy aftarete sear; cM mTro aR a;7Md4 + raf FT; Bo wktS wKt® 
Lo! Pu’ Tr! Tr? Wa fé; [Jolly M5 R] ¢; BowaaH; nK¢ Ox? nPu! afear; oMd> Stary — c) 
Be! BCa Ho La! Lo! Lot Lo Ox} aaeg a — d) mTr? MTr° Prafet; oOr sOx! sPus ively Nd] 
frac; Lo} a Rreet; cMd5 at Prefer; Jo? Lal GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMy Tr! Tj! 21 Prec; 
BCa 27 fret, mTr° om 37; KE ATTA; TMd3 tTMd* GMd> GMy [Jolly Nd] 4ta:; oOr ara; 
Tr! aTqa; Be! NK NNg Pud Pu? Tr? mTr* Wa Polly G Ku] 410aT:; mTr° @rat:; Ho Jm Jo? 
wKt? Lo? Lo? [cor to] Tj! Volly RJAMaT; wCa BBe BK? wKt® AM; Jo! aAaT:; Pu? Put 
wed?: 


624 Chapter 7 


a frarer Fag Pryefecaftee: | 
arerntisd wet yeas a Rratitery uel 
geet a ad aaa aeeiferathiagy | 
aa waar T Usa usc 
Wigs TAA 
TATA KaTSHeT BATAAN 1S UI 
gagt attain atta a | 

agt fiteet a aarbrer aay llvoll 
adn g saat fiRat aarad | 


war fe agar fiiftat fares ioe 
PaaS PTTATTATET: | 


67.* a) nKtt aferer ; Pu? fear; Pus Pu’ “ererpedy; wKe PAT; Bo PY; Te Pu Pat 
a — b) Tr? “Afted — c) Lo! sear’; Tr areerétafear: Ke? “FeeriretsLo® Wer; nKet aes — 
d) mIr Bey FT UsawgAy; Be! nK¢ cMd! rMd? 1Md* GMd GMy nPu! Pu} Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr® 
Nd Na Re PAT; vKé FAY; wks SAT; cMd g; cMd' fara’; wKe! PafPoferc 

68, Padas a-b omitted in in TMd3 GMy Pu’ [haplo] — a) wKt! Pu? Ja; Lo? gazat at 
T; Bo wKt! wKt® Lo! oOr a4; mTPaeas; nNg Pu’ Pu’ VVolly G] wat — b) Ho TBA — c) 
Ox} Tat; Md? gaaAr; Tr? FITAT ; BBe? Tae” — d) oOr “Saar”; Md! “sear; GMa 
“arearate; Tr! “arearat; 1Md4 “aan; Ho farttsa 

69. a) Ox3 FST; Jha Dave TAATA ; Bo Lo! Pu} Pu’ “aoa — b) Tr! “arya 
alfa; sOx! sPuS “arf; aMy nNg Pu? Pu* Pu> Pu’? Go Lolly G] “ATES; Jo! “antes, wKt® 

“arta — c) Ox? HRTAT ; Lo! [cor to] Aravaaraed; Tr! “areata; TMd? GMy oOr “START; 
pBe2 erat — d) Ox? © reeratoftet: TMd3 easter; Bo Kt? nKt aK tS sitet, wKt! nNg Pue 
Pu’ caste; wKeS aster; mTr4 caeter; nKf Lo? oOr “area; HowKt® La! sOx! Ox? Pu3 
sPuo Tr? [Jolly R] Hifaata; nPul HPTAA; Lo’ ATA; Bo “HTaTT 

70.* Cited by Vis 1.317; Vij 1.321;Madh 1.406 — a) Lo! get; TMd4 a: Hy Jo! K? 
La! Lo* Lo® Ox Tj? Tr? mTr3 Wa Polly M4] aqgt; Md Test; mTrt Aras; TMd3 “ait, 
Ox? FET — b) nKt* om seg; Pud Pu? “aust: Wa “aaa, MTr°? “at: Ho aretaa; nKtt 
aaa; BBe Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? BKt5 wKt® Lo? Lo? Lo Lo’ cMd! TMd? nNg oOrsOx! Ox? 
sPu Pu’ Tj! Tj? mT’ Vij Madh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave at —~ c) T? Wa IgA; Bo Test; 
BBe? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? wKt} La! Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! 1Md* cMd> oOr Ox? nPu! Pu® Tj? mTr° 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 1 — d) Madh Watge7; nKt* wagers ; BK Lo? Ox} Pu? Pu3 
Pu? Pud Pu’ mT Brenae’: Pu’ aeeqet; wKt! aaeget; Be! GMd> nNg 9e Fat 

7. Cited by Vis 1.317; Laks 1141; padas a-b cited by Mddh 1.406 — a) cGMd! tMd*# 
oM@ mTr4 mT ro aaorTfY; Pus Pu? [Jolly G] yaetter — b) Tr? Wa gat — c) Ho Vat ageT 
et; cMd! Md! mTroLaks seyeary war fF [mTrSLaks Aor; *Md4 G]; nKt Bkte wKes aot; 
Lo! wat; wKt! Pud Pu? we; Vis TART ae ; BCa Jo? La! Lo? GMd Tj! g; rMd? a ; nKt4 
Torageag — d) Te? Wa st; Lo! “git; NK tMd? [but cor fh] oOr Pu? Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] Vis 
wearer 





Chapter 7 625 


FPA HAW: PTT: WIM 
war aiPrarararaatedt ara: | 
aaa a Raha ar ataarbrerz les 
Ue: Wet Berar WHET aTeTAT: | 
Wa aac aeareet fare owt 
ACMA TT ATE: | 
Tart: fraReiseiadateat 7 Noy 
TET EAT GTA BLAEATSTA: | 

Te wage DW Aegqerantary Wogll 
aaraigearat want wermnfarany | 


ge Hefa ayat gat waaay iol 


72. a) BKS wKt Stearn; tMd4 “atBr; wKt! “Bra aut; Be! Bo Ho nK¢ La! Lo! 
Lo? Lo? Lo’ GMd! tMd3 tMd! NNg Ox? Pravedat — b) Tr! FrAa TAT: [visarga deleted 
sh]; Be! wKt® cGMd! NNg Ox? nPu! Pur Pu? Farrar: oe Ho wtraPrar: ge: Md> F71e- 
TEA: Jo! Tr SATRRT:; IM a3 ATCRERT: Ox? FATA; nK¢t “arareaer:; sOx! sPu® 

“orarefar: is Tj! Sraret:; Lo! Lo “OTA: ; Lo’ “srarerer spare: — d) Pu’ Pu’ Saqaferaa:; Ho 
Seree:; Kt? ARPT; GMy “AeaRT:; GMd! Caer: ger; wKt! “are: war: 

73. Padas b-c omitted in Jo! — a) Bo wKt! gira —a-b) Lo! war wiPresitatéater 
area F—b) oOr arafeafer — c) wKe! Tareat; wks garaat; cMds feeater; wd safer 
—- d) Lo! rMd4 GMd® GMy nNg MTP 4T; tMd? Jo:; Or Pret gt"; NK tM GMy Tj! af; 
Tr! mT waPTe: Lo! “Pra: 

74.* Cited by Laks 11.41 — a) TMd3 om UeH:; Md4 Uae; NK aTeater — c) Laks WT 
aaaeenter, 1M? araaar’ — d) Lo? Lo’ Ox} [Jolly M] Teg BRAT; Be! wCa Hy Jo! K? 
nKt BK wKt® Lo! Lo? NNg Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Pu® Tj? mTr> Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
farted: sBe? warerct 

Additional verse in Be* nPu! Pu? Mandlik [@, 3] KSS Dave: 

werente Brat Pager + sere | 
agugt git ay: areryasate || 
b) Be? Fratqes; nPul Pu} Brera 

75. Padas c-d ma sh in Be’. Cited by Madh 1.407 — a) Bo Ho wKt! Lo’ cMd! tMd? 

oMy oOr sOx! Pud sPu® Pu? TTA Wa “ara; Bo aus — b) sBe? Pu’ at; Be? Lo! 

“erates — c) mT? Prise; tM? “Arietta? — d) Be? “Shfadeacdas:, Bo Ho Lo! Md? 
sOx! Pu} sPu’ PuS Tr? Madh ard: GMd! “aarTt; Kt > wKtS “eae; wKe8 aT; oOr [but 
cor fh] a 

76. Cited by Ma@dh 1.407 — a) Lo’ FSX; wKt! La! oOr Fea mate; Bo Madh wa ¢ 
Tat; tMd? cMy Maaie; Wa qraly, Hy ava — b) rMd4 FENIGE ; wKt® ‘sata: — c) 
oMd> 7H; Ox3 ae; Md} GMd> GMy Tr! mTr® [Jolly Nd] Me[patha] wag; wKt! aahray; oOr 
Uy; nKt' ZW; Pus Pu? Madh Ja; wKt! YX — d) Te “Aas 

77. a) BBe aarear ; Be tepatt — b) Tr? FaauT; +Md4 gaat, wKt® grat; BKt? wkt® 


626 Chapter 7 


gifea a edie qyarea afer: | 

asex venfr watfir afta a ioc 
aaret ter agian: 

aart aa feat carafe aT Neel 
aaa aay UEaERaaery | 

Sara ote ade fiqaygT coll 


srereteafeargatey ata at raf: | 
AST AAMACATT FT HA Har Ue Vl 
ageat Tegerg far wet wag | 
sara ae frat feeftar ic zt 
aa eat aT altar eeheat A a aA | 
aerate frercteat arerrererat fare: le Ru 


Lo} Ox} “fact — c) cMd! af age J Ayai; Bo Aygai — d) rMd? GMy a; Td! sOx'! 
sPuo Suara 

78. Placed before 7.76 in TMd? GMy — a) Pu’ oma — b) Tj! STUaT ; tMdé “arfear; 
NNg Ufeastt:; Jo! Kt? (Jolly Ku] afeast— c) Be! Be? Bo Lo® TMd* NNg oOr Ox? Pu Pu? Tr? 
mTr® Wa Volly M8 G] a7; wKe Aer; TMd3 tMd4 GMy Tener wratfer; Wa zenfer aah; 
Bo peattr waifer; cMd! cGMd> warfer Ten; Ho wraifer yen; Tr! wratfer areifer — d) 
1tMd4 eager ; oOr aT 

79. a) Md Tj! ust; TS BE — b) Be! Wa Aefftaferst:; wks “Aererafertt:; Be? 
“sreraeferet: — c) Bo wart; TMd? GM GMy mTr? aaref — d) cMd! eat she gary; Pud 

u? “Sse; Lo! Ox? Pu} Pus “aaTE PT a 

80. Cited by Laks 11.32 — a) 1Md? Aare; Lo? Pus “HTT; wKt! Career; Md‘ “Arter 
— b) Be} aurcerarergte; Jo? Tj! Wee: BBe* area GMd nNg MTré MTr® ‘ereatepe 
— c) Bo SIgTHT ; Jo? Lo® cM Tj! aera ; Laks eerra ; tMd4 earer =a; La! GMd! 
nPu! Pu? Pu3 otat — d) sOx! sPu acter; Md} fraaay; rd?! fqaae:; sOx! gear; wKt! 
fgayy; wke’ gray; Tj! Sgaraz 

81. Cited by Apa 581;Laks 11.32 — a) wKt! aearay ; Be} aeaat fafa” — a-b) Apa 
[vl] serenfatrergpereparas fea: — c) Be? Md? tMd? oOr Ox? Pud sPu® [but cor] Pu’ 
Tr? mTr°aer, Apa [vl] tt; wKO & aat’; Pud Pu? wrateas®; cMd> cMy attad”; Bo 
“sear; sOx! Laks “Aree; Tr? were; wKt! +Md4 asa — d) GMd! oOr waiter 

82. Cited by Jmv 9.20; Laks 11.167 — a) nNKtt aK ® wKt* La! rMd Tj! agar; Tr! 
ae nNg but cor fh] staat; Ox? Beware; Be! Pu? Put “aor: BKt> wKt6 "BET; Tr? 

—~ c) Ox? “Herat — d) BK wKtS tMd3 1Md4 oMd5 Prftraratr: GMd! mTr*mTr° Wa Jmv 
pinaiei Tj! erate, mMd3 “ater; Td?* “ater; Be? Jm Tj? MTr? (Jolly M®|Mandlik Dave 
Jha KSS “atenRreiaa:; Hy ferftae; mT Preftae 

83. Padas c-d omitted in Ox? and pada-d in mTr® [haplo]. Cited by Laks 11.167 — a) 
BKt wKt® rMd‘ Tr! ToT SAT; Ox? AF AT; Bo + aT fast 4; Ox3 aTftar — b) BooOr Beka; 
Tr? @ 7; Ho Pw Put + faasafe; wkt! La! rMd3 cGMd oOr nPu! Fea — c) Tr! aeaTareiy; 


Chapter 7 627 


aq tera 7 aad wT frre sehr | 
ARASH TAIT TT TAT levi 
aaa art ayer araTgy | 

aay wreta* stared ATITET Neu i 
amet fe Rarer seeder a 

eT A A_ al AT TAMA HT Cg 
SATAY UAT AEA: TTT TST: | 

a Prada Goer at TATA UC 


Lo! tMd4 sOx! nPu! sPuo TeHTSIST; wKeto TEATS; Pu? Put AeHTHAT; Ho wKt! wKt} wKt® 
Pud Pu’ Laks feeraeat — d) Ho HteTaeTaT; Lot Lod [Jolly M‘] starr Waray; TMd3 GMy 
[Jolly Nd] ‘Fast; Bo Lo! fate: 

84. Omitted in Ox?; padas a-c omitted in mTr®. Cited by Laky 11167 — a) Be ! Lo? 
NNg nPu! [Jolly M389] eerahe; Pud Pu? trees: wKkt> aad; Be! aac; wkt! aad; Lo? Lot 
Lo? Wa {Jolly M45 N] MeNa Dave Jha Mad — b) BBe wKt} Lo? MT rs 7 7 Aeater; Lal TT 
geafer — c) TMd? afte"; tMd4 atten”; Laks “erarfer — d) Pu2 Put arererer, Wa Fe; wKto 
qatar 

85.* Cited by Apa 286; pada-a cited by Vis 1.311 — a) TMd? AY Heer — b) Ho cMd5 
Tr! starr, Lo avery, Be? gat — c) Be! BBe Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} sKe 
wKt® Lo} Lot Lo® Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr3 [Jolly M] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 1ett 
Adaeay [Bo TATA; BBE wKt3 set; Lot Lo® Ox3 Volly M] Jha Daves]; GMd! cMd5 
MTré MTro Gee AMPA | Bs [oMd! om J]; rMd} GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] Fee wMPAT arr; 
Be’ nKtt La! Lo! Lo? Md* NNg oOrsOx! Ox? Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ sPuo Pu? Tr? MTr° Wa [Jolly G N] 
Apa Ku [patha] Jolly teaoraraed — d) rTMd4 MT r5 coated; BKO eT 

86.* Cited by Apa 303; Hem 1.27 — a) BCa GMd! mTr°q; 1Md? aT; oOr GMd> Apa at — 
b) Be! Be? Bo Ho Jm sKt? wKt® La? tMd? GMy nNg oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pu Pu? Puf 
Tj! Tr? seat ate =F [Jm La? Ox3nPu! Pu’ Tj! “at; NNg Te “a:; Be? wKtS tMd3 cMy 
oOr aMet ]; Apa aaah T; cMd5 J — c) Md} GMy MT‘ MTV Het SI TST Ma? 
eq]; Lo! tet — d) Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TAR WAY; cMd! tMd4 sAeIT SITET hs; 
Mit? Hem Ger Weer 

Additional verse in Be! Hy Lo* Lo® Ox3 Tj! Mandlik [4] Jolly Jha KSS Dave; comment- 
ed on by Me Rn: 

oat wed fears ser waraatacay | 
Ws wale ay Teter vere | 
a) Hy Tj! @3rpre; Ox} &re — d) Be! wate 
Additonal verse in sCa Ho nPu! Tr? Mandlik [@, &, 7] KSS Dave: 
UT Us Wey at: Heel et Sars: | 
frat cart aarare fesra: sfeoreate | 
a) Tr? 9¢— b) Tr Ua; nPu! wsryar — c) wPul Say 

87. Padas c-d omitted in Wa. Cited by Laks 11.131 — a) tMd4 “aHtEH; nPu! Cat. aher 
— a-b) sKt> wKt® aarceres: Ger agar safer: Fe: [KO Fea]; Be? UWaATET:; sOx! sPub 
Use: — b) cMd! oMd? Laks Tage: TAL Te: nPul aged Tate: Fe; nKe Tr? arga:; BBe? 


628 Chapter 7 


aMartatter wart da wes | 

AM ASMA T UAT AAEHT TTT NCCI 
smeag Fritsate rated adifira: 
FATT: TE MATT Ea ATIF: UL AM 
T ReTguEE GeTTAT TH RT | 

a aftr ftatfisaaaars: ue oll 
qT ereiomd T Ra a HaSate | 
T Awe ate a aarettia arisevyT Ue 20 
a ga a frame a ag a Pree | 
AAA TIT TA NIT AATTAT U2 QI 
aguas art arfaattarry | 

a afte To aera wat ata lle 3 


Ho WEt:; Lo WEc:; Bo ART; GMy aye: TM? wage: wKt! GPTeT:; Be} WIT — c) Tr? 
afta’; Ox? afta’; Pu2 Put fagaa; Bo TaTary; wKt! Gar; nKtt Lo® Md} ayrat — d) Lo* 
Lot tMd3 GMd! GMy Pu’ Tr! mTr er; BBe? Pud ett; Ox3 om FAT 

88. Omitted in Wa. Cited by Laks 11.154; M@dh 1.413 — a)GMy “Rafat; tMd3 
*fraded; cMd! Bh [ad 89] Pragacd; nNg “Prater; Pu’ mTr4 “qafeed — b) cMd? Pu’ Pu’ 
Jolly G] Laks woirat TRUTH; BKtS WeTATAG; Pu? Put oTeaq, TMd4 eerer: — c) GMd! tMd3 
tMd‘ GMd$ GMy Tr! Laks H@MMT -F BAIT [oMy FAI] — d) Laks wat frat we; rMd4 
@all; Be? Uat:; Md? GMy eet 

8. a) Tj! SaeT;1Md? GMy FaIRART. Md? GMd Tr! aeRAeT; Pud Pu? “RAITT — b) 
1Md? “ara; Be! Wa weryst:; La! Tr? “frat; rMd3 tMd4 “att: — c) TMd? GMy Seaaret: 
TTT Ho yar; Pw Put Tat; Tr? aehr:; GMd eT — d) Bo Tel; wKe RATT; Ng 

“arg; Wa “TER 

90. Omitted in Lo? — a) Pu Put rege’; Pud @S° — b) GMy BSAA; Pud Pu? “ATT; 
Lo? Tj! “AT; Be Be} BKtS wKtS “AT; Wa TT — c) TM} aTeePe; Tr? asteffAY’; Pud Pu? 
afar, Tr! “Rratfafed’; Be} mTr® Praifafeet’; rma? “tated ; oMy “arafaa’; Be! 
wKt! BK wKtS ea — d) Hy “aad:; oMd “ate: 

gi. Cited by Laks 11.132 — a) GMd! 1Md* Md 4 gaTEeTSHTES; Lo? Tj! UTeaa 
nPu! eben ; mT &@M — b) Bo F Far ; Pu’ Pu? [olly G] Fests; wKe “safe — c) 
Tr? ATge ; Be! Lo? Pu’ Pu? Tj! Wa [Jolly G R] Laks “arardt, Hy arate 

92. sOx! omits 7 Fret’ to 4H [93b] — a) 7Md? oMy aTfaarsite — b) Lo® Ox? Me [patha] 
at — c) wKt gee — d) mTr® Ser; gMd! wage 

93. Padas c-d omitted in Tr? — a) Be! 41Yz ; BBe Bo ATT; Ho Lo! Md4 aTye; Ho 
Pu? cae; Be? Lo’ GMd! tMd} tMd‘ GMdd cMy NNg Pu? Pu! Pu’ Pu’ Tj! eet; Lo? “set 
— b) Pu’ Pu? “area; 1Md4 arf; rMd3 tMdé4 art qétferd; Ho wKt! BKb wKt® Lo! Ox} Pu? 
Pu? Pud Pu? mTrS ofeferd; Tr! “oetférer — c) Bo + Prd; Jo! aerget — d) NNg ma sh at; 
TMd? frat; sOx! sPuS SaAGeSTST 





Chapter 7 629 


aeq viet: wae: Gory werd We: 
wepigeed feRre acad afer ew 
Tare gE raqartyahraey | 

WaT AAAS TTTASTET F USI 
adzenhr gar a at arafe aer ad Ile eil 
ust a agqeantrerar afeat ofa: | 

Tat T Aaa sara NZ ll 
WatsaHT: AHt aterent: Taras: | 
TTS VAT AAT wT TT RTT UCI 


94. Cited by Laks 11.135 — a) GMd! aecactia:; Be? Terge: — b) TMd3 ATTA; Lo! we — 
c) Bo Ho Lo! Pu} Pus afepfagepad ada; Md? cmd) eqag ; Tr! adage”; wk! adhe pe 
— d) Laks a& aorta’; rMdé “oarfer 

95. Cited by Laks 11.135 — a) NPu! DaTeq; nK¢ aater; Laks TET, oOr FP — b) 
wkt! fePraqearig’ — c) Ho Fat T aaTATES; oMd5 Hat; *M@ Tr! BAT; Tr? ayaa; 
Ho aeaaree; eBe? Taree; TMd? sOx! sPus “arerd — d) tMd? oMd! cMy TeIget aes; 
Bo Terga4set; Be! sBe Bo Ho Jm wKt! sKé wKt® Lo! Lot oOr Ox? nPu! Pu’ Pu? Pu’ Tr! 
Tr? Wa [Volly M G] Jolly + 

96. a) 1Md3 GMd? GMy @pa; +Md4 aurer afta; Be? Lo! att; Trae — b) Pus om 
et; Kt? wKt} nKtt GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMy nNg sOx! sPuS Tr! mT? at; Md? TMd4 GMy az; 
Be? Pus Pu’ Tr 93; nKt rMd? gafeaa:; Pus feaar:; Tr! Pert — c) tMd? My “er 7; 
TMd4 @a; MTr4 MTr® &2T; Be? BepT; cMd! wafer at — d) tMd? GMd q; Be! HotMd? Tr! 
MIr MIP ar & Tater, Lo’ Tj! ar ate fe aer 

97.* a) GMd! 1Md‘ Tr! ae g; Be? sCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? La! Lo? Lo? Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? 
MTr* Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS DaveT?; Bo, Ho BK nKt® Lo! Lot TMd? GMy sOx! Ox? Ox? 
sPu® PuS TP [Jolly M] Tay; nKt? tet a Wa Used; Be! aared; Na Re support Uet:; Tr 
Tet ae 1M} mT eergear — b) Md? ST; oOr BwFer:; Tr? fe: — c) Pu? Put ast; Tr? 
Uat: ad; tMd4 oOr Tr! T; Md GMy Tj! a4; MTP [not Der] “SAT; sOx! sPuo “arfered; 
Bo atereay; nPul “geit — d) Be! oMd! araet GT; BBe? TMdé “Saf re:; mT PS [but mc] 
uafacMal “cafsanr 

Additonal verse in Be? Ho Mandlik [@] KSS; padas a-b in Tr: 

yerar Rrstquian: wed wae | 
THAT Gata sar wT Aetofea: | 
c) Ho gay 

98. Padas: a-b omitted in Tr? — a) Md? tMd‘ wor; Be! “TepaT; Be’ “TET; cMd! 
“arpe:; TMd4 “Fee; NKt “ge; BCa “Tepe: Bei — b) oMy HeTErt:, TMa? sre 
aie: ; Tr! wTrsatee:; > oMd 5 mTr4 mTr6 qaut:; Ox at at:, aBe nNg aat:; Lot 
alma erp; ; cMd! amen. ; Be! [but me] “eat; Md? ent Tare; Ca Wafer: — c) Md 
eats Rreqeteare; sBe? Bo Pud Pu? Tr? Wa ae ; Jm eke’ wKtS Ox? mT ro wad; Ho aC; 
Be! nKt! ada, cGMd! @add; sBe? Fete — d) cMd! afar; Pu? wT rel UT, Wa TT; TMd3 





630 Chapter 7 


weet te fata wer Iq wae: 

tat aka ge oearg fare usc 
vacant frag geariasrry | 

oer PaO Tae Balaahera: ULooll 
AHA HAT TATAGTAT | 

tad agar ae arrat Paferag 12 0 2 
freaqadaes: erfrer frqacten: | 

fret aaeearat Frer fsatqarh: Neo 
Rermqadaeer eeaqend HTT | 
aerreaaihr wer qa TaTHAT 20 RM 
waa ada 7 wht AAT | 


gearcihtaageet we Arar fret gaa: leo 


comments: TAIepd: Apawsa: 

99. Cited by Ma&dh 1.413 — a) Lo wet ta g ferea; Pu’ srmertteator; cMd5 
fart, tMd3 vata — b) Lo! wer ta gaad:; Be! BBe? Be} wKt} NK BK wKt® Lo? Lot 
1Md4 nNg Ox? Put Tj! Tr? mTr3 [Jolly M R] Madh Chea Fae:;Ho oOr Pub Pu? [Jolly G] 
Wit Aad:; sOx! sPuo Gat WAT; TMd3 GMy [Jolly Nd] THUR; Paficatantra |.2 Tester 
[cf. 7.101] — c) Be! Ho Jo? Lo? Tj! wearer; Pu? Put Wa aeahrer,; Pus ae Tear; nKt4 
sOx! sPu’ MTrS “ee — d) Md4 Te; oMd5 Fhe; Pud GAs PRT, BBe? HoaktS wKt’ Fr:- 
fete; Be! fare 

100. Verses 100 and 101 transposed in NKt4; pada-d omitted in GMy — a)tTMd? fear — 
b) TMd} GMy eur? — c) BKtS wKto ae — d) 1M? eet eat? 

101.* Omitted in GMy Pu? Pu3 Put — a) cMd! weit? — b) sBe? La! cMd! oMd5 Pu® 
Tr! qterar — c) Ox? adtgaat, KSS aeagea, cMd arageaT;, Be Wa THAT; cMd! 
aan, Tr! wager ; Tj? mTr’uTr6 aefager; Lo? aeftectat — d) Lo! Lo? rMd? GMS 
Tr! mTr4 MT rer Aleta; Lo? Lot Lo® Ox} nPu! Pu> Pu? mTr> [Jolly M*-5-° G Nd] Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave Wy faferta; Be! Wa aay faster; sOx! Ox? sPuo Tr? at fadaaa; 
BBe* BK wKt fr: ferry 

102. Omitted in TMd4; ma shin Be; verses 102 and 103 transposed in Wa; padas c-d 
omitted in Lo’. Cited by Laks jibisi — a) GMa * eTavs:; Lo! *HaeT as: — b) Ho 
eafreatage ; Laks AATET 5 La! oOr Pufaga ; Ox? fang; Lo! Md} My ‘tet — 
c) Be oR wKt! aya’; Be! Be? Ho sKt wKt® Lo’ Ox? “@arat; cMd! tMd? GMd cMy 
sOx! sPu’ Tr! mTr Volly Nd] ‘@aret; wKt oOr nPu! Pud Pu? [Jolly G] arat; nNg aes; 
Pus aerat; Ke awatat — d) Tr! Prez; Ho fesarvar’; BK wKt® fesgfar ; Jo! Cari: wKt! 
“arse: 

103. Padas a-b omitted in Lo?. Cited by Laks 11.151 — a) sOx! sPu® “yea oM@ Laks 
Wat — b) Be! nNg Pay ; cM Prargie’; cMy “gesre; wKt! sareq — d) cMd! rMd? 
tMd* GM@ GMy Tr! mTr* MT ro queda sar AAT, Wa Tete 

104. Cited by Laks 11.151-2; Madh 1.413 — b) La! aTgar 7 aera — c) Tj! getar; 


° 


Chapter 7 631 


area fer wt fare freed wer g | 
TSE TATA THACTATSTA: UZ oll 
qeakacaguisagaey fafrerag | 
qeacaragead Meret NMHAT U2 oll 
wa foramen ter ay: wafer: | 
aaa sary arated: U2 ol 
afe a @ a faqert: seaftah: | 
qWsaT WASASSAeaTATaAT Mleoc 


tMd‘ gettin; wKt! getter faust; Im “yeh; Tr? “gay; Ke “gwpa; Ox? “gata; Madh 
* arg; Jo? Lo Tj! at; 1Md3 rMd4 Md GMy mTr® ¢ — d) tMd4 Arar; Lo? ata; sOx! Ox? 
Pu’ sPuo Pu? Tr? Fret ATaT; Lot Lo’ Ox} [Jolly M] fremrafec:; Jo! Kt mTr? Mandlik KSS 
ATH; Jo? “Gat, Lo? “Far 
105. Cited by Laks 11.152 — a) Lo? S&T, wKt! 98; Tr? om feremg; La! Pu’ faeere; rMd4 
fear — b) Laks fenfesg; Be! La! faearRadg; Kt? Lo! rMd? feats; Be? Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® 
cMy Ox? [Jolly M Nd] Dave Jha — c) Md‘ Taree; La! Tecee, Pu? Pul edeey; Im 
; Ho nNgyécepy; cGMd! “aplaagifr — d) Wa wife; pBe? wafer; Ox? wafea- 
TAT ; Lot Lo’ waefacray 
Additional verse in Ca La! Tr? Mandlik [@] KSS: 
7 fpataferact feraet arfaferaac | 
fpararguyera worry Frpeafer | 
b) Tr? arf frat — d) wCa Forer 
Additional verses in La!: 
ferarafrat a — — aicafacat @ SqaT | 
Ted Tetears Prarafecd Ad 11211 
arerar Pract aeq afaarer Prereary | 
ares fora ediftrerer aria vfafesar 1211 
106.* Cited by Laks 11.152 — a) GMy 414; tMd4 sa — b) Be! BBe? Be® sCa Ho Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKtt La! Lo! Lo? Lo’ GMd> nNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! sPuo Pu® Tj! 
Tj? Tr’ Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fieaet TeaPAT [oOr WHA]; Be} reaeer- 
amt, Bo La? ake wks wemaer React — c) wKtS Laks PAIS; Be? PTATGAT, nKt! 
+Mdé mTr° gre — d) Lot Lo’ Ox? Pu? Put VVolly M] TeeBHa ead [Lot waa’); Be! 
BBe? Be? BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKe nKtt La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? GMe@& nNg sOx! 
Ox? nPu! sPuS Pu’ Tj! T7 Tr! Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave warren Farrag [wk 
fafere; Lo? Tj! fafiferta, La? fafy-ferra]; rMd4 fear 
107. Omitted in NKt!. Cited by Laks 11.126 — b) GMd! tMd3 GMy Tr! Fea; nNNg FET: 
gfe — c) Bo Ho Lo! sOx! Ox? Pu’ sPu’ Pu’ [Jolly M45] “deat; Tr? “agacratst; wKe “agar 
Bart — d) Ox3 aarfe; Lo! Tj! “Rrearat: 
108, Omitted in nKt*. Cited by Laks 11.126 — a) Be! Wad atafees®; wKt! & avatars” 
— ab) [Jolly M°] ae & gy + faa wart: ga” — b) wKe gerafea ir: — c) oMd! rMd3 
TMd! GMd5 GMy Tr‘ Tro Nd @eeattes mT GSA GT; TH Gea FT; Be? TaVaaT AH; oOr 
gecrt a; Pud Pu? “aeaiset; Laks “WET BA; Ma? “V@at aa; M4 “AAT aT 





632 Chapter 7 


amare agaraty afsar: | 

arraret sarafer rer weiter 208 
marae Tratar wat aren a cake | 

aUT TARGA UWE seed TATA: Me Zool 
ASAT CAUSE T: SITTATATAT | 

ahr wad ceasstifrarer warerg: 22 2 
woeatorg sro: after sift wear | 

AAT TATARY ToT: aftereal TE HTVTT Ne 2 Rll 
weer ae fer farmfrearard | 


geretarst fe arbre: qarert ie 2 sll 
PASAT TSA Aer TerAhaay | 
aa WANA T HAtareeT TAA ie evil 
arena gaterarrafa rar | 
faarctat areat a aeaattar a le eu 


109. Cited by Laks 11.126 — a) nKt! wKtS BAT ; 1Md4 ara, — b) Ox3 aftser:; wKt! 
qsat: — c) Bo Ho BF; wKt} aTaT ; GMdS wareafea — d) rMd! &F TM; mT? mTrS Laks 
asa’ ; Be? Bo Ho Lo! Pub wgfagae [Lo! we]; Be! “Brae 

110. a) GMd! tMd* GM@ Tr! mTr*mTr5 mTraar @fer of Prater [rMd4 eefer; cGMd5 Tr! 
MT 4]; TMd3 war seeraatar, nKeé aereraher; wKe! aeitcaefa; Be! Pretar; Ox} Jacuna 
at Pretar — b) Be! Lo! mee; Tr! wer; Md? tet — c) Bo TAT ME TT Ass; Pur Pu’ [olly 
G] car watts wer; Be} TIT TIT Us: Jo! Vay TA; La! BKtS oOr Trt mTr® Use — d) 
Bo eareaafe ; sBe? Tr! “feat 

11. ma fh Wa. Cited by Laks 11.83; Madh 1.409 — a) wKt® GUS; Wa ST UE TF; 
GMdS as Ue a; BKE wKtS “Wee T — b) MTP HaAtTeT; oOr HFaT ; wKt wKtS cMd> Pud 
Pu’ MT Volly G] AteaT — c) BKtS wKt® Lot Lo’ nNg Ox @ wercafereraisar ; *Md? oOr 
Pu Pu? were; cMd! yaafe; Be! Tera; wKe Tea; Hy Tare; Tr! gerd; MTP aes ; GMd! 
Tro Laks Sarearssty — d) Tj! wareerar:; M4 > aera: 

112, Not commented by Re, Nd. Cited by Madh 1.409 — b) oOr effad; Jo wiPrt — c) 
Pu! carat aur gor: — d) oOr eftaed; tMd? atara; wPu! Pu2 “asta; Pud “aster 

13. a) Be! tt Pret; Lo! fret — b) oMd> faert w aarata: cMd! fadahr; Lo? 
Prererf — c) Hy wKt aaydta ; Lo! Te “ata; wKe! “aétat, Ox? “erat — d) Ho Fate: 
qe 

114.* Cited by Laks 11.79 — a) wKt Tere — b) Laks “Fafeercd — d) OMe “ERE: 
Bo nNg [but cor fh] TUS; all mss. have the reading H7E except the following, which have the 
reading adopted: cGMd! tMd4 mTr‘ Tr MTr° Nd Laks. 

115. Cited by Laks 11.79 — b) wKt} tM? “arferafe; cMd5 Laks “aratfert; wKe! “ofa- 
erat — c) rMd3 faaraar, cMy faardar; Tr? fearetat aaar; sOx! sPud arcter & 


Chapter 7 633 


Drager Wire: was: TT | 
agra Fara etary ue 2g 
faardiereg acad gaara fraaaq | 
VAM ACATAT TAT lle Vil 
afar tama sae araarfahr: | 
AHA ATS UREA ATI ATT U2 2A 
aatt ees g ysotta fag asa gents TT | 
art yragarerat: Aeareraks: FET ue eel 
aaT arent wratftr gereeratfer car fF I 
Taser: afra: Rana wateaea: 2201 
at at Ue Hate aarifreacay | 
TSU Teed aaa VET L2H 
a aquaria water war Sez | 

aat gat aoa Tea AeA: UZRM 


116, Padas c-d omitted in Lo? — a) BBe? Be* Ho Hy Jm nKt* 0Or Pu? Put Tj! Tj? MTP 
Wa Ku Go Jolly 74; wKt} Ox3 “araret’; Pu2 Put “STAT — b) mT? wITT:, Lo} ata; Ho 
adage — c) Be wKtS aaigrr; wKt atagrt — d) Tj! eater; Jm Jo! Ke? earcty; cMd! 
oOr fearcttaras:, cMy ferarfererer 

117. Padas a-b omitted in Lo? — a) wKt® Wa faatferar’; Ho Pu’ Pu? mTr3 fara — b) 
oOr aaafe, nNg fates; Jol aK wk Freer — c) BK wKt® @agr ; Be! sagt; Be! Ho 
Wa ‘aaa — d) Tre aeray; Lo? Tj! aera; Pus “seed car 

18. a) TMd4 arf; Md? GMy afe; Ox? wer: NNg ™d3 GMy Ue; BBe? mTr5 Ust:; Lo! 
geart — c) Puo Pu’ aa; wKt! “orga — d) BK mrenraarac, wKeo areAaredr- 
fraser, Ox? mae : Pud Pu? afrmecrarar : La! Lo! “a@earrar? 

119. a) Bo TMd‘ afar; Ho 414; Bo &; Lo! a; Be! nKtt Lo? mTr* Wa T— b) sOx! 
sPuo Tear, tMd‘ fearfer + Barty; Pu’ ear aearty; Be? Bo Ho BKt® wKt® Lo* Lo® Md? GMy 
NNg Ox? Ox? Pu’ Tr! Tr? MTP? mTr° Yolly M Nd] { — c) Ho cMd! array; wKet! “zrareftar: 
Tj? eae: — d) cMd! tMd?3 GMy 9 

120. a) Ho nNg Tj? WTATfer— b) Be! Wa FzEHATT; Lot Lo® Ox} [Jolly M] ofertas; 
wKt! aft a; nKtt mTr4 Tr? mTr® S— c) Bo WAT; Lo WT; Be! ferearenty;r Md} cMy 
ageatt — d) Hy Tj? “afera: 

121. Cited by Laks 11.80 — a) oOr Tr! Laks 44; Be? Md‘ BF — b) Lo! aatahs ; sBe 
watts ; aKO wKtS prety hrae [BK wary |}, Tr? arenas — c) Ho WREST; Md} are — 
d) Lo! ae: 

122, Cited by Laks 11.80 — a) Ho aaTgqahtarag [om a]; Tra; Bo aay; Tj? agate 
awa; Md “aftarea; Im “we: Pus “say — b) Laks TaTATGMHHRAT; cMd5 tet — c) 
Md GMy aut ofeadeae:; Laks TA; La! Pu! Tr! gPX; Lo? Fd; aK wKto Gaer fara; 
oMd> aaed; nPul GRaTsaa; Be! Pu? Put afesita — d) Be! Lo* Lo’ Ox? [Jolly M‘] e=ryT- 


634 Chapter 7 


Tait f venferpar: qeeavathrt: gar: 

Wear wafer weer aes CARAT: TST: UE QRM 
a areas aly: wea: 

AUT AAAS TAT FATT WaRTTT NPRM 
Tareag great efter seapsrrer 7 | 

TIS BMGT VTAPANGSTT: UVM 

TUT SasaPeeT WHET AHH | 
wreateerratar aeratorar Arka: ULVEN 
waa Wh wT aaa | 

ATA T AIT ATT sASHUTT U2 Voll 


aa at: [Be! Ox? ‘aad a]; ake wKtS aAarey; oMds TT UST; wCa wKt! Pu? Pul wePaT- 
AY; Tr! afeae:; Md} crest: 

123. Cited by Laks 12.568 — a) Pu’ Pu’ usiteg; Ox? we fF; Laks Tey war; Teas 
wat’; GMd! egafr ; +Md? “gar; Lo’ “we; GMy Ga; Bo Ffa:; Be! Hart — b) nPul 
“arfirar:, Ox} aer:; Lo? 1S: — c) Bo waft — d) Pu? Put aafear:; Tj! waar; GMd! rMdé 
MTr? MTr® UeyeeeT 

124. a) BKt® wKt® [but mc] FT SEPA, Lo} vata; Tr! mT rs wrefarray, wKe! 
airy; sOx! sPuo arftanat: Md? Seared; aCa Te area fF; Be! Bo Ho wt! 
La! Lo! GMy Ox Pu2 Pu? Pu? Tr! mTr® Wa aa; nPul “of feet”; Hy “eater — a-b) cMd! 
1Md‘ oOr @rheairiqaes & ef: erieera [oOr aha; cMd! e#rfearh] — d) Lo? 
pareda sated; Tj! water; GMS varie: 

125. a) Jo! La! aGMd'! GM@ Tr? ust; Pu “aniftr — c) GMd! mTr*mTr° 48; NKt4 
porrette, mTr? “ag — d) GMd! oat wrargeard:; Bo Jo! La! cMd* nPu! Pu? Tr? Sr; 
wKt arg Pat; wk) “qeard; Ho Fae: 

126.* Cited by Laks 11.82 — a) Laks TT @at; Bo Ho wKt! wKt? cMd! Tj? “Te: 
Be![mc to] BKtS wKt® GMy NNg Pu? Pu‘ mTr4 mTr® Wa ATs; Be? Tr! “gepcerr; rd? 
weperr, Md‘ fepeer— b) Tr! aagepreat Heh; Lo Tj Tey Tet; Laks TE TP ; 
Be! Be? nKt tMd? cMy nNg Pu? Put Ugeprere; wKt! “eer aT; Md? oOr Wray; cMd! tMd4 
Whe:; BBe* Bo Ca Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt BK? wKt® La! La? Lo! Lot Lo’ nNg 
sOx! Ox? nPul Pu? sPuo Pu’ Tj? Tr? mT r3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 407; Be! Ox3 dat — 
c) Hy nK¢t! BK wKtS tMd4 Ox? T? Tr! mT TAT; GMd! “Preset; Lo? Tj! “req; tMd4 
Pu’ Pu’ fear aat; Hy arearet;Pu2 Put “ararét — d) rMd4 aret aTOTET afer; mT rs aet 
Sora; Lo soe; Hy Jm Jo! KE Lo! Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “$t0eq, Md? cMd5 
oMy Tr! “ster -@ arftar 

127. Cited by Mddh 1.404— a) Pu’ Ha; Im frafafa’: Be! “eat; wKt! “et; Lo! 
“zstat — b) Im wKt! La! Lo? Tj! Fa; sOx! sPuo aaah’: My T IRAs; +Ma3 T 
ofearers; Lo! wake; Be? cMd! Ox? waft, cMd> aaftesa: — c) Lo! oOr Madh art, Hy 
Tr? om@; wKt! ater — d) cMd! tMdé mTré mT ro afr ereaepery; wKio af aT ary; 
wKt ara; nKtl aT 





Chapter 7 635 


WaT GIT FAT UAT Sal T WMT | 
TATAST FUT TSE HeTAAAT RTT ULC 
PACT AATM AAAI: | 
aureareay Welceal Wetatafere: ST: UP2ASM 


WIAA Bear Ua WYfscrray: 
TAAACAT ART: TSI Aaa Va aT Ue soll 
MAT TART FAAATAMay | 
TAHGRATAT A FITS HHET T ML ZVI 
TANS TANT AaHeT TT | 
AAA TAS TAIT -T UL ZAM 
Barats arate T UAT aATHLT | 


128, Verses 128 and 129 transposed in BKt> wKt® Lot Lo® Ox3; not commented by Rc; 
padas c-d omitted in Pu5. Cited by Laks 11.88; Madh 1.404 — a) TMd3 Tar Fe Yost; Ox? 
HOT; GMy Fast — b) TMd} TT; Jo! woe; Te waft, wKto Tr! weft — c) Be? K? 
wae; nNKt4 Lot Lo? Ox} Laks war Fez; BK wKtS La! Tj! we; Be tt — d) TMd4 
BAI F BOT; Ma wersats wer: cMd! ada; Ho BAT sad 

129. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Madh 1.404 — a) TMd? GMy FareerHe; tMd4 “SreaTeT; 
TMd “aerret — b) wKt! atateeererenar:; La! cMd! 1Md? 1Md4 GMd> GMy oOr Ox? Tr! mTr4 
MTr? MTroaeqaTaHITeIET:; Bo aay’; Ox} arate; wKe arate; Lo? Tj! avatar ; nNg 
aater ; Pu? Put adter Hy °gg: —c) Lo’ Ta ; Be! Ho La! Pu2 Put Pu’ TPS aaredreay; 
Be! Be} Bo wKt! tMd3 oOr Pu’ Tj! Tr! mTryétaedt; w Ke} yetereat — d) rMdé oe Tan ; 
Pu’? Gar weitere: wet Tj! gorfeger:; 1Md4 “anfefec:; Ho Lo? Pu’ Fe; Lo? Te; Tj! Fe: 

130. Not commented by Re — a) Tr? StKPT; NNg [but cor fh] a1eaiT; wKt! arepeet — b) 
Ho tit — c) sBe? Pud Pu? anit, Hy WT:; Ox? HM -— d) K? waas:; Be! Bo wKt® sOx! Ox3 
Pu? sPu° Pu’ Wa [Jolly M*> G] a 

131. Not commented by Nd; pada-d omitted in Pu>. Cited by Laks 11.88 — a) Laks 
amearearr; wKt! La! “étarei; cMy “Grav, 1Md? “effarer; Ox? “ard; wKet! “umT:; rMd3 “aT 
— b) Tr? saree afer, oMd! agar a aftar; Be! Lo! cGMd> Ox} Pu Put Wa gare 
ays mTr! garr wy; Tj? Sarg Lo} “aff — c) Jo? cMd > Pud Pu? wT; Lo? 
rairafr’. ; Jolly M8] TeaITeaearat; Bo Tet” — c-d) BKE wKtS “oRrnerat + TOTAL a 
— d) sOx! sPu° 

132. Padas a-c omitted in PuS. Cited by Laks 11.88 — a) TMd? oF BH ; Be? MHA 
ort [om FT]; Rn comments: FATTfAke [in place of TAT] wer Fenfekt:; Me’scom. on this 
verse has not survived — b) Md? Sree? FT AeET A; La! Laks BATT; NNg WAT; BBe? Fe- 
Bet; Md} tawGer, Tr! t45e7; Be! Be? NKt4 Lo? GMd! Pu? Pul Pu? Tr? MTr4 MT PMT [Jolly 
G] Laks 20ae7, Tj! Gaseaq; wK was; Tr? a; OxsaT — c) rMd* Hyatt T Talat; Ho 
Kt? wKt} wKt Lo! tMd? sOx! sPuS Tj! Tr! ger; Lod om FT; Wa Irattt — d) tMd4 “e@aTeH- 
Tee; Tr? TAATSL 


636 Chapter 7 


aa geen detent ros ary e381! 
aeq Uareg facr ster: ata gar | 
aenty aeager weak safer ile vil 
gage faferarer akr aat wecraa | 
arcades frat garaerz ile aul 
STAM Ta T Head aay | 
Aaya Tat sor wag T Ue Bgl 
afeakraty ater aracecarery | 
rae Ape UT TAT TTT Ne Zl 
areatsorataia Yararerashtat: | 
Uae araensy arf arte adtafe: te sci 
athena Ae TAT afar | 
133. Omitted in Pu‘; not commented by Re Nd; after RATATAT Ox? omits up to TAAL 
of verse 136a [haplo]. Cited by Madh 1.408 — a) Hy Pra; Wa ate; rMd3 eefter — b) 
TM! tar 7; Be} “area, Md} “UT HAT — c) Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly Ga a wefenrs a AT; 
1Md? afeegeat | cMd! dete aA” — d) Bo Tr! faut 
134.* Omitted in Ox?; not commented by Nd Rc; padas a-b omitted in GMd>. Cited by 
Vij 3.44; Laks 11.171; Madh 1.408 — a) Tr? Usha; Bo GMy tater — b) Td} APAT:; Laks 
aTATT:; Wa tac; Md? arafer — c) TMd* & gar; sOx! sPue W eer; mT r* mT TeeTeT — c-d) 
Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] Vij wer tafe agree sPherenfertifec [cf. 8.22] — d) Be? Bo Hy Jm Jo! 
Kt? BK wKt® La? Lo! tMd* sOx! Ox? nPu! sPuo Pu’ Tj? Tr? mTr? Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha 
KSS Dave Faria; Lot Lo’ “Paeoradtafer, cMd5 azafer 
135. Omitted in Ox?; not commented by Nd Re. Cited by Laks 11.171; Ma@dh 1.408 — a) 
wKt! fe; Hy 42; Lo! Pu’ Pu’ yastte; Md? GMy Jit — b) Laks aferert; aK wKS eeat 
gfe; Tj! arat; Lo’ cMy ga; Tj? gef; Ho wKt! wKe mTr3 gat; oOrsAtt; td! ay; Pud 
Pu’ [Jolly G] a wea; nKe4 faerie; Md} THewda; Tr? yeereatq — c) Pu? Pu’? [Jolly G] 
wae au wet; TMd4 Wa waIeT ; Lo? “wT; Lot Lo? [Jolly M] aeat; nKt “aaa; Be! 
Pu2 Put carer 
136. Not commented by Nd— a) Bo Lo! & 7 ; Be! Bo wKt} BK wKt® Lo! nNg sOx! 
nPu! Pu? sPuo Aeetaett; wKt! AoeTAy; Be! Pu? Put Us; wKt Wert; TMd3 GMd F:; cGMy 
a: — c) Ox3 At age; Jm TWAT; Tro tat— d) Pud Pu? we shart a; wke! EATS 
137. a) GMd! atfeare — b) 1Md} cMy avacer ; Be! Aepre’; nNg Sald; Ho afsrar— 
d) Pw Pu’ eet as; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo} Tj! Tj2mTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 3T 


ae; wKt Ua; nPul Jaret 


138. The sequence in Lo? Tj! is: 138, 140cd, 139cd, 140ab, 139ab, 141— a) Pu’ 16a 
Rarfer ; Hy reeit Parfes; MTS presiiseter ; oMd’ rect Rarfer” ~~ b) sOx! sPuf Iara 5 
™d3 oMy {eran ; Be! “areata; [Jolly Me] “sreqe; oOr MaTT; wKt! “sari; cMy 
“sftat:; wKe “sfifea: — c) oMd! waa. Lo! ez] — d) Be? Lo? GMd! tMd3 tMd? cMd? 
GMy oOr Tr! mTr4 MTP MT ro BTS ATT 


Chapter 7 637 


Shared Yost ata TeaT Ug sil 
dria ager era art der adiafe: | 
denia yeta cor wafer aaa: llevoll 
TTA GT Wat sa HOTTA | 
eumaarast afery far: Sree TTT Ly el 
wa ad fretafrteadamrers: | 
gma TRA AT: WT: UL RIM 
fret wer weathered TeART: ITT: | 
ara: TMT At: T TT stake ews 
aaer at at: marae wea | 


139. Omitted in Tr'. Cited by Laks 1193 — a) sOx! sPu® alee — b) Md oMy 
qroraft gorar;Wa ae afer; Be! Tj! afer; mT rt mT ro aft qorar; eK 6 areca; wKto 
areeraT — c) mTr® sReran’. 1Md3 SRE ; Ox? Wa See =: oMy Sferery, 
Lot Lo® Ox} nPu! Pu? Put Laks SR aATHAT, Jo? BRearerceay, nK et shsrqeresay — d) 
Lo! “ares Priteta; wKt} rMd3 nNg Tj! ar; Md! aay 

140. Padas a-b omitted in NKt* La! sOx! Tr! [haplo] and ma in Be’. Cited by Laks 
11.152— a) Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] 7 chest + age; BKO wKt ¥seq; Lo? FFaT; Bo oOr FeaaT 
[om Faq] — b) oOr HF Aa; BCa Lo? THT; Pu? Put TET; Be! FcSIT — c) nPu! geata 
acfguit — d) PuS Pu? [but cor] safer; tMd? GMy Tr! [Jolly Gr] wafer eActr:; cMd! ada: 

141. a) wKt! SaTeT; Lo! aTATer ; Pus Pu’ “wen; nKt4 “Fer, Pu? Put “ye — b) GMy 
mat; tMd4 aTeRT; Lot Lo’ Ox? Yolly M*5] at aIxt; Bo a4; Lo! arqaret; Pu? Pu’ 
Barge, wKt! wkKt} GMd> oOr Pu’ Pu’ Tr? [Jolly M G Nd]Jolly Bares [cf. 7.54 note] — c) 
Tr! mTr® eatery — d) cMy fears; rMd? Pra; Lo? wratertt; rMd4 prefer, Tj? preted: nKt4 
I; MTP Jo: 

142. Cited by Madh 1.414 — a) Wa faentafr ; Be? fraraeafafer — c) Lo! 1Md! cMy 
“sayy; Pu’ “rer — d) Wa feat wat 

143.* Padas a-b omitted in sBe? [haplo], and padas c-d in nKt*. Cited by Laks 12.511 — 
a) wKt! MTP fatal; tM? 1Md4 a1Re; BK wKt® “aT; Bo BARAT — a-b) TMd4 Ox} mTr' 
MTr$ wee feat; rMd3 ere frat; cGMd! ace gered; GMd > ae aT — b) TMd4 trang; 

o Ugrgitd, Tr! wgrstaed; Be? aK wKt® nNg Wee CIed; Kt wee feat; Wa 
ugigaed — c) Bo ayeset:; Pu GHATS; Laks TACT; wKt! seater — d) TMd3 GMd5 GMy 
Tr! mTr‘ MTr® @ Fa: & A Safa; Wa Fa va a@ sflafe; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] yoeq FT strate; 
nPul eed 7 OG; Md! wNg Fey 7 oOr Ox? Fe: FA FT; Lo! Ye: AA F; BBe Fae FF; 
Be! Ho 1Md* Pu’ Laks & J 7 SA; Be} Lot Lo’ sOx! Pu? Put sPuo @ TTT, Tee g 7 
oft’; [Jolly Nd] @ a + FP; Hy = Jo! Kt? wK BK wKt® Pu? Tj? mTr3 Volly R] Ku Go 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave & 3 & S° 

Additional verse in wKt! Pu?: 

WATTS EA FATA: | 
ua: Pre asd ororarecar fafracte 11 
b) Pu @alsrt— c) wKt! ayes Bret — d) Pus “area 





638 Chapter 7 


fathewester fe ws ator yore lev vil 
sera afar at Hazita: aarfea: | 

get aes sfagrer gar aarz lleva 
aa fert: sot: aat: ofa rasta | 
ffaer w oot: aat aerteae afaPr: lewgil 
fas aATeEy WATS aT CENT: 

aeoy Frazee at aatarfeanfad: le voll 
TET AT A Ate TANT GUAT: | 


a peat grt yar wtardtatsfe aha: uewcil 
TSHR ETT | 


144. Omitted in nKt*. Cited by Dev 2. 450 ~~ a) Lo’ 1M? at — b) Dev wart Rae; 
Ho Md! zeqot — c) Bo Prete’; Pud Pu? fSte’; Pu? FAafeter:; Be! “star FE; MT Tr Vref 
— d) cMy tsreer 

145.* Padas a-b omitted in NKt* and padas c-d in TMd4; not commented by Re. Cited by 
Laks 11.101; Dev 3.43— b) Lo? Tj! @a: — c) Be! oOr sOx' nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPu’ Tr? MTP BeaT- 
fren [Be! war J; La? graatear ; BBe? Be* Bo BCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? Lo* Ox? Pu? Pub 
Pu’ Pu’ Tj? MT? Volly M G] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ganftstet ; nKt4 wKtS LoS genta 
amar’; wKt! La! Ox? ganar ; Lo! partrater [Go, Ku appear to support this reading]; 
Dev [vl] Wert aT ; Be! Ca wKt! NKt BK# wKt® Lo! Lot GMd@ NNg 0Or OX Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu? Put PuS Pu? MTr> Wa [Jolly M G]Dev Jolly “Srotes; Be? Jo? wKt? Lo? Lo? Tj! 
“aroraret; La! “aroazel [sic]; Bo “are: — d) Jo? Lo? Tj! 9faareq; Lo! Md} GMy Ox? Tr! 
mTr Wfaarq; Dev Weate; BCa Lot Lo’ GMd3 [Jolly M4] afaara; Jo! Lo? Tr? sftateggrat; Be? 
Ho Jo? wKt! Lo? GMd! rMd? GMd@ GMy o0Or Tj! mTr MTr® Madh GAT ZAT;Lo! BAT WaT 

146.* Omitted in TMd4; not commented by Rc; padas b and d transposed in Jm. Cited by 
Madh 1.410; padas a-b cited by Laks11.101; Dev 3.61— a) Laks warferar:; oOraar fer; 
Be! Ho GMd! Ox? mTr‘4 mTrmTr® [Jolly M4 Nd] erat: — b)nKtt wat arr — c) Bo 
nKt? wKt® Ox? Pu’ mT? feet; Md? att — d) Be! Be} wKt! La! Lo? Lo4 Lo’ oOr Ox? Pu? 
Put aeraarfeahy: oe [Pu Pu! AAT | 

147. Padas a-b omitted in tMd‘*. Cited by Laks 11.102; Mddh 1.410 — a) sOx! sPu® 
fray; Tr? “gt; BBe? “JtS:; Ox? [Jolly M589] ‘geared; Tr! ware; Pu? Put “wer — 
b) nPu! @; Be? Ho Jo? wKt! Lo} Tr? Yolly R] 14 — c) Wa aeva; Pu? rary; nNg 

“arereey; tMd4 F — d) Be Hadar: ae [cf. 7.146d]; Be? AAIaTATAT ; Ca AFAT- 
afar. Tr weaagferar : La! wereftarfear’ ; ;Md4 HeaAaTerar’; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} Lo? Lot 
Lo’ NNg oOr OX Ox} Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave aeractoat Pud Pu’ Laks Fa- 
gift’; wKeS “rere: 

148. Cited by Laks 11.102 — a) Ho T&T; Bo BK wKt® arate — a-b) cMd5 Fer Ae 
aanrey TO STAfeeT JST: — b) Be! nKt* Lo! Pu! Pu? Pud Pud Pu? @arTeT; Md? BAPTA; Bo 
WUT: — c) TMd4 & Pen, Lal pent Afe4T; 7Md* Geert agat — d) MTP? Harsh; wKet 
saver; Wa “Sankey; cMy * Sareraferer: 1d? *érirenfia: 


Chapter 7 639 


ASM MAST ASH TATA SU 
Rrecranat wat Vhataradte a | 
feria fag acarrarazat WaT UKM 
aeafeaseray ar frereat farrearga: | 
Rreavatararaty aref Ste wr ar ue eit 
creenaesrat sat wT AAT | 

HUA AIT T SARIN T TTT ULI 
gaara ta ara ae T | 


149.* Cited by Laks 11103 — a) *Md4 oMd$ mTrSaterarafreraganet; BK A; wKtS 
ae ; pCa Ho Kt! La! Lo! 1Md? oOr Pu? Tr! MTS Tete; GMd! serene” — b) Be! Be? 
Jo! Kt? rMd3 cMy Pu? Put Pu Pu? Tj! mTr3 Jolly UfeeRaY ; Lot Ox? Te “aaa wKO Pub 
Mir? SMa; BK tS wKtS GMd’ GMy Ox? Put Wa “ile; Be! BBe? Bo BCa [but mc] Ho 
Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} La! La? Lo? Lo* Lo® NNgoOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ sPuo Pu? Pu® 
Tr Wa [Jolly M G] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave “=aifer; Md! “saatrary — c) nKO 
BK wKtS Tr? ttétaeafer: rMd4 GMd5 “anferarer ; cMd! “caterer; sOx! sPuS “erst; 
Tr! ear — d) MTP Hey F ferret; Pub “praraead; sOx! sPuo “are yarad; MTr‘ Tr® 
"amd waTratt; wKe wKkto Tr? are meat; Ox} wre ywaiterta; Be? “wre weet; Pur 
“ssa; Bo sCa [but cor] Lo! Lot Lo’ Md! tMd? cMy wNg Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Laks “TaT- 
aed; Tr! erdaeratd; eBe? nK¢t “#rdvaaa; Be! Pu? Put “wre Prteda; rMdé “ares + 
aaa; nPul Wa “are Farad; ako ars gferataHo [cor to] Haft aaa; Me gives 
festreract and aaaiteare unclear which is root; Go Nd Ku Rn Re Mr support edition. 

150. Cited by Laks 11.103 — a) oMd! Laks Peer; Hy Prarer’; Bo weet; wKt! 
Rrra’; +Md4 Rredaed; Ma? Rretaepey, My Rrexadepa, Tr! “asreit; oMd5 “arrar; 
nNg “aarat Pret; Kt’ wKtS Hear — b) Jo! Lo? LottMd? GMy Pud Pu’ feat’; Tr! “=~ 
et; Tr eta ; BKtS wKt® 7Md3 oMd> oMy “ararer’; mTrS “eiteret’; Lot Lo’ “eitater’ ; 
wKt! “SAT aaa; Be? fF — d) 1Md3 cMy Teaaya? Faq; Md! Tere, Ox? TTT 
wea, Be aarreafea}; cMd ! cMd® Tr! mTr! aerraRareat; Pus “gar; Be! nPul Pu? Put 
uTro “gat, Hy weet 

151. Cited in Laks 11.106; Madh 1.410— a) Tr? He fA; wKe! “fet ser ar; Laks “PT 
wat FT; cMd5 nPul “wat; wKe “wat; rMd? “aPaat; nKt wKtS tMd3 GMS GMy Tr! T— 
b) Lo? fearrdit; nKe! frend; Tr? earat; wKe! Tj! ferrer:; wKt! Lot rMd4 Ox? fares: — c) 
Tr “Banas: iMd4 arart — d) GMd! 0Or arg Stas; Pu? Pu? Pud Tr? Ua FT; Be Us J 

152. Padas c-d cited by Laks 11.106; Madh 1.410 — a) Lo’ Teeqe:; Be? TTT; Pu? Pu’? 
qeerene ; Bo “gear — b) GMd! gq; m@d4 Fagan; wKeo “ond; nNg “ons; Tri “anstd; 
oMdS “apa: — c) oMd> @ee:; Tj! Beat; mT seat; Put BaP Fart; wKet! wear 
Waa; 1Md4 quar; wKe “art; GMy ae — d) nNg ter; +4 weror 

Additional verses in Lo!: 

amar & feet a cer tafscear: | 
waa Ugrst Sage Te | 
areal TAaHearestiasy TT: | 
aoe ured ant wsaat yaaa: I 


640 Chapter 7 


wage aT wrest a ake Le aU 
pet ure et wsrat a aaa: | 
TREATY TWAT AVSSET T ULI 
rarer Tare a fatsrttatar atteay | 
sartarant a aatale wraag: Ua 

Wat: WHAT Hey AVTHET TATA: | 

HST UTM: AAAMAT saga F AT: SAAT: ULEM 
THRIFT: TST ATIT: | 

vere eran get: aera frente: Neel 


153. Omitted in Lo!. Cited by Laks 11106; Mdadh 1.410 — a) Madh gqer TOT; nKt4 
SAAT WUT; Tr! STH AAT; GMy “ater; nPul Caeerer — b) nKt? SEIS; cMd Haws; 
Tr! wrefart; Lo’ erat — c) Tj! serge, My aer-ge:; Madh “WaT — d) cMd! gore; 
Ox} aftrart; Te wrt; nKt! om FT; Bo sPu’ [but cor] after 

154. ma in BK®. Cited by Laks 11.107; Madh 1.411 — a) TM GAT; coMd> PE; Bo 
are’: Be! “fae; wKt! ef. wkto et — b) Lo’ waatt; Laks Tad: — d) Tr? FATE; wk Tass; 
Pub Pu? [Jolly G]g 

Additional verses in GMd! rMd? tMd* GMd> GMy Tr! mTr+mTr§ (Jolly Nd Gr] Mandlik 
KSS Dave; commented by Nd; given as citation (probably from AS 1.12.23-4) in Bh, from 
which it probably entered the ST ms. tradition: 


at ava: Har: waurefarey: | 


aaa: Tea pour etos kan 
1. a) TMd? rMd4 @at — b) LVolly Nd Gr] art araftrepraa: — c) TMd? Ge:; rMd4 
sag ; Bh AS arereat: — d) mTrémTré after are’; 1Md4 Mandlik KSS Dave ftw 
are; MTrS “Gea 
2. a) Md‘ agar ae — b) tMd4 agar — c) Tr! ue; rMd4 “erarfeoneret — 
d) mTr4 qarangeafercn: ; Md! TaparTay ferar:; tMd? [Jolly Nd Gr] Teraye ; 
Mandlik KSS Dave aSrare 
155. Padas a-b ma in BKt®. Cited by Laks 11.107 — a) Bo Lo? Tj! were — b) Pub Pu’? 
fafseftiter a; Bo Ox} nPul afted — c) Md} Sarat TO URST: MT r4 mT r® Saretrer BTA; 
oMd! saredtaearare =; GMd° GMy Tr! MTr5 saretter are aT — d) Pu? Pu srenrata; Ho Lot 
Lo? Ox3 [Jolly M] feate: 
156. Cited by Laks 11.107 — a) cMd! aur TP ; Be! “aang; Ke aa: we — c) Ox3 
aja; Pu’ Pu? “eardt — d) Ox3 feaate; wKt! “aate; +Md‘ wart a:; Tr! aceqa:; wKt! ayer: 
157. Omitted in GMy Ox?; ma in Lo’. Cited by Laks 11.107 — a) MT BA SATRAR- 
wert ; Ca Ho La! aarereterert; wKt! srereriergrer aver: oOr anget vue 7 
@veT; Lo! Pwd Tr? sae? ; BBe2 ATATEET ; Lo! wPu! Pu2 Pud Pu? Tr! “sare; Tr2 “gare; cMd! 
“ger ever — b) wKt! “avereat; oOrevsreT:; Tr! °gusrer:; cMd® “gverat: — c) Hy om War; 
Pu> Pu? @a, Ho cMd! @at; rMd4 @ar 


Chapter 7 641 


waar fraeRafaaaag a | 
sree Rrrqaratt aat: ToT ue cil 
aaah ararfehrear: 
RATT THAT TSI IT T NLM 
afer a fae ter aaa 7 | 


gehrd tort a agoiPracaar U2 g oll 


wet dat at waa a fae a 
art deer wgsstta Ber were a leg ell 
arr @ fafa frag ton fasta a | 
SW Baray Aa Fer Bera 7 ULM 


158. Cited by Laks 11.107; Mddh 1.411 — a) Be Be? Bo La! sOx! nPu! sPu® fear — b) 
oMy “afer ua; wKt! BK wKtS sOx! Tr? “Aartaa: sPuo “Aaa cor to ArT; Be! wKt3 
NNg Pu Pu’ Tr! Tro “@ferartar — c) wKt! aera itary; Te aaa; Bo “ARat ft ger” 
— d) 1Mdé frarfirt aear 9%; Ho “Hert [maa]; Lo! Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Tr? “Staae: oe; GMy Gar 
aan, Ox? Te: 

Additional verse in TMd? tMd4 GMd> GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd Gr] Mandlik[€] KSS; cited in 
Laks 11.107: 

fags Satay sara: | 

fatiriigavsoret afeadta: a vert: | 
a) Mandlik favpeeseattaa, KSSfaapreseaa? AH; [Jolly Nd Gr] feepreearerarrt; 
Md! seprererard; cMy afpreerray; Mad afrpeerrar:; Laks ° CRIA 
aayer — b) Tr! “frat — c) [Jolly nNg Gr] fatsritgavsartt, ™d? Mandlik KSS 
Laks afar wwserkeg [TMd! afer]; +Md3 oMy fatertrant 

159. Cited by Madh 1.411 — a) Md! tMd3 GMd> GMy nPu! Pud Pu? Tr! mTr*mTr® Wa 
*aferaeard [for the reading adopted, see 7.180a]; Pu? afareear — b) Ho tM? Tr? aarte; 
Lo! “earsit: — c) TMd3 cMy aedate; cMy aaedat — d) nKtt HH; Jo? Pu’ [Jolly G] ar 

160. Not commented by Nd; padas a-b ma in BKt5; padas c-d omitted in GMd> Tr?. Cited 
by Laks 11.111; M@dh 1.411 — a) BKt5 wKt6 mTr° afer; BKtS wKt® Pu? Put fawesta — b) 
Lo? Be! “aTaaaet — c) Put Pu? Pu? 2eff; Be derpyT; sOx! sPuo om FT; Lo aT — d) Bé Pu’ 
Pu? Tj! [Jolly G R] ger fast’; Be | Ho tMd3 tMd? 0Or gota; GMd! GMy TRUIr 
Fart; Pul “stareer ‘s 

16." Omitted in GMd5; not commented by Nd; padas a-b omitted in Tr? and padas c-d in 
Bo. Cited by Laks 11.111; Madh 1.411 — a) Pus oma OM; cMd! aft — b) BBe Be? BCa Ho 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} BK wKt® Lo! Lo? sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa 
(Jolly R M8] Na@ Ku Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ave fawgta a [Be? Hy wKt} nPu! Tj! ary; 
TMd4 aur a eer T— d) Pu? Wa Sefer 

162. Omitted in Be! Lot Lo° GMd> sOx! Ox3; not commented by Me and Na; padas a-b 
omitted in Bo and padas c-d in Pu‘. Cited by Laky 11.111 — a) Te dftrafefaer; Ho wKt! wk 
wKkt® TMd3 GMy nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPuS [Jolly Nd] T;mTr° ¢ aifaer; wKt! fase free; La! Tj! 
fara; tTMd* NNg Pu? Pu’ Bate — b) BKtS wKt® Wa fefaer fae cet; cMd! Tr? ast — c) 


642 Chapter 7 


aararear a fottaeta a | 
aararateaam: afrstat earn: ues Rl 
RAPA BAL Bey UT aT | 

fre Barapa fete faeae: ara: egw 
Valera Be WT Tea | 
Gener a Rar fate arya ue gull 
after tat maa Garey aT | 


Rerer aracrert fafeer ererareararsy 2g Ell 
geet cata flute: erher fae | 


fafaet atelier ae urgeenprafehr: lie gilt 


Td My Seated — d) Ho Hy Jm Jo! Ké mTr3 Jolly R] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave fefae: 
wre. Bt; BKe wks war HrAAT FT [BK at]; TMd? GMy aT 

163.* Padas a-b omitted in GMd®. Cited by Vis 1.343; Laks 11.111 — a) Ox? TARGA; 
Tr? om; Vis AT — c) GMd! aurcarafer; rMd4 aaredtafer ; sBe? aarerafer; wKe arecar- 
afe’: nPul Pu2 ‘carafe’; Bo ‘carafe’; cMy ‘carafe’; Md} “gear — d) Lo! afaretar; rMa3 
GMy Pu’ Pu’ afer; td‘ & fast, Be? [but mc sh] Md} Tr? faeerr:; oOr fe TT: 

164.* Padas c-d omitted in TMd? GMy. Cited by Laks 11.111-2 — a) Pu’ Pu’ ape: 
Ieper; cMd! gar wae; +Md4 nPul * paeT, Lot Lo? * pee, Laks ° at gq, Ox3 
“paRTHry ; aKd wertraTs; Ho Bat sears — b) Bo Kt? Aare; Tj! “AeTaT; wKt} Lo! 
Tr @reaa; Be? om aT; Bo wKt! Lo! GMd! 1rMd? 1Md‘4 GMy oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? Pub sPuo Pu? 
Tr! Tr? mTr*mTr® [Jolly M Nd] — c) Laks fert PaTeraHPa; BBe Be} Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo? 
wKkt! Kt? wKt} BK wKt® La! [cor to sh] La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo*nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu3 
sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave FY1=q; Jo! fraetart : Ho Pud Pu’ 
[Jolly G] tatape; nKE Parpa; Bo Lo’ Ox? Jatwge; Lo! taraHate’; mTrs “Heit — d) sBe? 
oMd? faferit; rMd? faaeerct 

165. Lacuna in NKt? after Sédtet of pada-c until 166c. Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) nPu! 
“srrearferay: Wa caftrat — b) NK wre ; Laks BIS; Lo wa DT; wKe afer; aK wKeto 
Laks TYesat — c) TMd? GMdS Tj! mTré Tr GarceT, M4 Hees; GMde gq; Tr? Hes — d) 
Jo? aftreard; Tr aaa 

166. Omitted in GMy; ma in BKf. Cited by Laks 11112 — a) TMd? @rorer; rMd* 
arpa, nPu! fast — b) Ho oOr Bat ; Md? “eHAA; sOx! sPu’ Tr? T— c) Lo} Tj! 
fradary’ ; sBe? Prreng’; Ho ata” — d) wKtS ByaaTHA; BBe? GMd! sOx! Tj! ayaa; 
Ho Pererarest; tM? eafcanet; wKt! aed ey; Be! arqead; Te “a: 

167.* Omitted in Tr’; padas a-b ma in BKf. Cited by Laks 11.112 —- a) TMd* Ng [but 
cor fh Te"; wKt> wate — b) wKt® sfapratafesa; cMd! fer; Be! Be? Be? aCa Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? K? wKt? Lo? nNg Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu® Tj! Tj? mir? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha 
KSS Dave Go Ku Rn Mr @ravatesa; Pud Pu’ walefeaa, wKt! aKe wKt' writgteaed; ake 
prerafese — c) wk afar; Be! Wa Bara: ake HA; cMd> Hie — d) Ho La! TEIy 
Bo Ugey, Pud urged; wKt! Lot [ma] Lo’ cGMd! Md} GMy oOr UTE; Be! Tr! "arfaRr:, wKe 
Lo! SaRr:; Pu? Put “afer: . 


Chapter 7 643 


srhmaart a dtevarrer argh: | 

ary aragreayr” fefrer: tert: cya: Ue Ecil 
AAT FAA: | 

cared atferer dtet aar ater aareradg 2g St 


UA MET Ae Tay wEdr ATT | 
agkad qareart aar aerr Rare levoll 
Wal AAT Ald TS TS ay caaq | 
un facta a aar array afer lige 
aat g ereakattit wert aot 7 | 
aareter seraet arte: aTaaAPHT U2 2M 


168.* Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) *Md3 Pud aretear ; wKtS aera; oMd> “aored Aer; 
oMd! “adtearat @; La! “arfer; Ox3 “art after’; rd? GMy ¢; Ca oOraT — b) GMd? oOr 
dreaarea; mTr5 TeraTter — c)oMd! tMd3 tMd* GMd3 aMy Tr! Nd arghreit : Tr Bh 
arya: La! “eared; wKto “zared nPu! “21; BBe? Bo wCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? Lo! 
Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® NNg sOx! Ox? Ox3 Pu? Pu? Put Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr3 Trt 
Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave ®3r$; Be! “Sart; mTr6 “Sarat; cMd! “aii [but unclear and 
cor] —~ d) Jo! fafeer:; Lo’ sOx! sPuS aart:; NK Pae:; BK GTA AT: WKS aaa AT: 

169. Padas c-d omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) MTP qa; Lo? war 7 
es; Pu’ Pul Gar Te; Ho STATA; KES Ox? @TISTAT ; wKt? Lo? “@PreaTAT — b) 
TMd4 “fereer; nPu! “ferar — c) oMdS gar aaaferet dtet; Pus Pu? arared; mT r*yerey; oMd! 
wearer; wKkt! tat Y; Ho [but mc] Jo? Tr? afer, TMd3 GMy nPu! Pu’ atferest; mT r® aTeTeHT; 
wKt! PuS Pu? afesept, mTrt aTferay; Laks aTferest — d) Be Tj? TAPIA, wKt} BKt wKtS Tar- 
aq 

170.* Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) TMd* 34T, Wa Faery BT; HoTMd4 WET; Tj! WE; 
Hy Jo! wkt! Kt? wKkt® Pu} Put Laks WpreeT — b) Pu? mT? wary; Lo* Lo’ Ox} water; Lo’ 7M} 
mpferisr; cMy WHat yar; oOr WHA Ft; Ke yHaT Yar; Ho “AHIa; wkt6 “citer — c) GMy 
aegagT, Lo! aeafegd; rMd4 Tr! eng, 1M} engi; mT sgh; wkeo saree, 
tMd4 Heated; Homeghtedt; Md areqerrt:; BK & wKt® Lo! rMd3 rMd4 GMy sOx! sPu® Pu’ 
Tj! mTr*mTr5 Volly R] aera; GMd! cMd5 aereatt — d) +Md? Pu? cart; Be! BBe? Be? Ho 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt' Kt? wKt La! Lo! Lo? nNg Ox? nPu! Pu> Pu’ Tj! Tj? mT? Wa Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave ata fare 

171. Omitted in nKt'; not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 11.112 — a) TMd4 JT; BKe 
wkt® FY J — b) Tr! Ete; Lot Lo’ Ox? FSYE; Be! pCa Jo? Lo? Lo’ Md? tMd* GMd? GMy 
Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! mTromTr® [Jolly G R] Sar Ts; wKt! Sey — c) My BUT; TP om TF; Jo? 
wKt! Lo? Lo* Lo’ Pu’ Pu? Tj! q; pCa aT — d) cMy aaray, Bo ara; rMd3 aenfey; Lod 
NNg FaTSY; Ox? STEMST; NNg Pub Tr? ararfeyy; Be? La! Lo? ararate 

172.* Omitted in NKt*; not commented by Nd; padas c-d omitted in Lo?; verses 172 and 
173 transposed in Bo. Cited by Laks 11112— a) Md‘ war; Wa ‘eTeteftir, Ox3 “efter — b) 
Ox} Fatetaos; Tr! HOT T; BBe wKt! GMd> aT — c) GMy aareta; cMd* Tr! aad: — d) 
TMd? My araaate; Be! sBe? Be? Ho Hy Jm Jo wKt! Kt? wKt 8K wKt® La! Lo! Lo* LoS 


644 Chapter 7 


AAA FAT WAT AAI THAME | 

wat fear sey Peay ATAACHTAATAAT: 1219 3! 
wal Waar TF WadAAaAt Wad | 

wat & aera far enfte afer aay evil 
fre sedtat a gatatsRaset TT | 

aaa a Pret adaaye war le uil 
afe aanft aaa arr eerrarhiag | 
qgana ante fied: garg lle ogi 
aaa gatsifesr: aretae: | 
mena a waited: lleva 
wraft aderatnt aart a Praag | 
ata @ adar yorarat wT aaa: UCI 


Ox} Pu? Pud Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? MTr3 Wa Volly MS Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “aa; Lo? 
aMy “ae; GMa Tr! mT r4 “aR; Bo La? sOx! Ox? sPu® Tr? Re “aT 

173. Padas a-b omitted in Lo”. Cited by Laks 11112-3 — a) Pud Pu yeaa; Tr aay; 
oMd’ oMy Tr! ar; 1Md? tert — b) tMd4 GMy Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] aaa; cMd! aatetae — c) 
1Md? eT; Be! Bo sOx! sPuS Tr? a Bar 

174. Cited by Laks 11.113 — a) Kt? uét; Tr? ger wae; wKt! oe; mTr4 qrTasery; nKtt 
“aert TA; Lo Pu? Put Tj! te — b) sOx! sPuo THATAaAT; rMd? Tr! “Atzeret; oOr “ATaaeY; 
Kt? “Abradt — c) mTr4 aaa; Be} nKt* tMd3 tMd? Pud #279; Lod Tr? aac; NNg BPA, 
Be! erat — d) Laks afer fey 

175. Cited by Vis 1.343; Laks 11113 — a) TMd3 GMy fae; BK ATE; sOx! sPu’ Wa 
fag; Pud Pu? Fret 7e; Md3 wear FT; BBe Bo Ho Jo? wKt! wKt} nKtt BK wKt® Lo! 
Lo? cGMd! tMd* NNg oOr sOx! Pu? sPuo Pu? Pu® Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® [Jolly Gg — b) mTr* 
gateyaoer, Tj! aiftdeer, 1Md4 Ox} “aifraser; Laks “APs; Jo? wKt! wKt} Ox? Pub 
Pu’ [Jolly GJ] — c) Lo* Lo’ Ox? Jolly M43] s7aaa Aad — d) Ox3 AFA ;Ho TATTAS; 
Lo? aa 

176.* Padas a-b omitted in Pu5; lacuna at pada-a in NKt*. Cited by Laky 11.113 — a) wKt! 
wer aarfa; Pu’ aerate — b) cMd> etut darranfe:; Be! AT; sOx! sPuo [cor to] Tr? ae; 
wKt} Wa Laks “=rftor; Md} cMy “arftfr: — c) nKtt gamma Warf; Ho Jm sOx! Pu’ Pu’ 
sPuS [Jolly G] Jolly 7 Jeta;cMd> Ayers, Wa ergata — d) cMd! rMd} Tr? fafaara; 
aMy fafa [rest broken]; Lo* Lo’ Pfacrs:; Be! Jo? wKt® Lo? Pu? Pu‘ Pu Pu? Wa Go [Jolly 
G] fafaaet:; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? BK® La! Lo! nNg Ox? Ox nPu! Pu} Pu’ mTr? Yolly M53] 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Fifaarg:, Be} afaarg; Jo? Afeargar:; ake fafeargar: 

177. Pada-d omitted in Ox°. Cited by Laks 11.113 — a) GMd5 “oTaefar; tMd*4 “aera — 
b) wKtS °fersrar erfafa:; ake “fas: aftafer: — c) cMd! tMd3 GMy Tr! mTr'mTrS Nd aeT- 
arrafiet; cM aareraftrar; Laks wat earefeerr; Pud Pu? ferent 

178, Padas a-b omitted in Ox, Lacuna in Kt? for all after arate. Cited by Laks 11.113 
— a) TM? aad} adder wrat; rd‘ arate [lacuna] Fatt; Ho arate; Be! arret:; Tr? 


Chapter 7 645 


AMA Torataretarer raferarer: 

sett Beet: TARTAR KAT Uses il 

aaa aRreeghiataritagaa: | 

wat ad afraearae arrest aa: eco 
wat Ff araarfeacsaghters ster Ty: | 

caret fret ararahege wat: ec ell 
arta? gat arf arararat adtafe: | 
walt arr ar ar arat sta aaraery ec Ril 


WIT J BST wal Wale Yr Tay | 
vat arated saan alfera fat: ueca 


arafer:; Lo! aratfet; Be? NNg [but cor fh] “@raifer, Ho “arat aaa — b) Be! wKt? cuted: 
wKkt! taf — c) oMd’ arardtat; mTr! mTr® aractat— d) Tj? ett; rMd4 Cater; nKet eta 
yaad; Jo 7 fara 

179. Cited by Laks 11.113 — a) Ox} area; Lo! “dias ar’; Pu2 Put “dtr aar’ — b) 
tMdé “arecrearfeaufar:; Md! “seared; Tj! aeraTey:; wKet! “seared; Tr? “srerar fer; Ho 
fesafaera: — c) mTr arta; rMd! arate; Tr! “ar:; cMd! 1M “ater: — d) Tr? “ager 

180, Omitted in Ox3; lacuna in NK’; ma in Lo*. Cited by Laks 11113; padas a-b cited by 
Vig 1.348 [intro] — a) Pu? Put aaa; mT ro aaa; cMe Be; Lo! sth; Pu? Pus waren’; Lo? 
oMd! Pu} Vis afer” — c) Jo? Lo? Tj! [Jolly R] Tar waaatfeacser wKtS GMy Far; cmd 
Tr? ar; Md? wer; Ho sOx! Ox? sPuo aa af; cMd! ad aarfaener; tMd3 cMy afaceareT 
— d) Te “ava aarftat; wke! area, mT ararfrantoMy arafeair, rMd} area, 
Ox? fafer:; Wa feet: 

181, Omitted in TMd? GMy; lacuna for padas b-c in nKtt. Cited by Mddh 1.400 — a) 
1Md‘ wat — b) tMd4 “ears, Jo? Tj! “afterer, Bo 7H — c) Lo? Tj! aaa — d) Lol 
arafegge; Pu’ araraftaz; oOr sPu’ “ge afer [but both cor] 

Additional verses in TMd?*: 

water aw fr@err AM UspESeT TT | 
ara ai agaagfasar I! 

Se ue ee FT Cee ead | 
were fe morent: erergeg wry || 

182. Cited by Laks 11.115; Madh 1.400-1 — a) Tr? 314; Md‘ aft; mT Wy; cMd Fe 
ara; Be? Lo* Lo® tMd3 tMd4 GMd° GMy oOr Ox} Pu} Tr! MTr‘4 MTr5 MTr® Laks ATA — b) 
wKt! 1Md3 GMy aTarera; Tj? ararert; Lo! arrarat — c) Pu? BreyA aT aaT Ty; Be! wKt! 
wKt} Lo® sOx! sPuo BIST; Hy BAT; Te HITS; Be! Bo NKtt La! Lo* Lo’ Md? GMy oOr 
Ox? Tr! mTr4 mTr> MTr® [Jolly M Nd]atft; 1 Md¢ sOx! sPuo Tr? aft; Pu’ arr ar ar — d) 
Be! pCa Ho Jo? nKt* Lo! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu? Wa 41; nPu! Forres 

183. Omitted in Ox. Cited by Laks 11.115; Madh 1.401 — a) GMd> Madh aerea- 
ayqersy; Ho Lo! oOr Pw Pu’? [Jolly G] a; nK¢ fé; BK wKtS BI; mTr HTS J; Ho wKt! 
Hreagy — b) Jm mTr*aur; tMd? GMy aT; Lo! sat Fer Ya; oOr HAE; Be? Yar aA — c) Pud 
Pu’ a7; Ho La! arate: ; BBe? Lo! ara; nPu! Tj? “aa: oMd “ata — d) TMd? Pus aa; 


646 Chapter 7 


peat feat aes g are a aerfakr | 
wagers Ae uN aertaarsy T Uecvil 
aarer Freer ant afer a ay az | 
arrears aerate at: UVC 
agetatr Rrra ye gwaNt wad | 
Teaeanresr a aw fe aeact fy: uece 
Sear THVT AaryY WHET aT | 
REAR AT TAT AT VST aT UPCoiil 
ata WAS aat freanaeery | 

wat da agen fafaata war wary eccil 


wk atferay; Laks Tferd, Tr? aeeat, Pu? Pud Pu‘ aifed; rMd? wifed; rMd? Pu Pu? 
[Jolly G] feat; NK fer; GMy Fe 

184. Cited by Madh 1.401— a) Ox} mTr5 frat; TM? GMy Het; NNg Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? 
a — b) Ox? afte afer FT; Ho aTPret, Md! ara; nKe afeas; sCanNg nPul J — c) 
cMd@ Suara — d) Bo wKt3 sOx! Pu? ae; GMa MTréuTr5 MTr® ate; NKtt nPu! at; Be! 
arr; Tr! ae; Md GMy a; Ox3 arar, TMd4 are Aer fT; oOrgaIaeftad, Md} Ho F 

185. Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Laks 11.122; Mddh 1.401 — a) Be? Ho Lo! @2rreq; nKt4 
oMd5 fafeer — b) Be? ae; Be! pCa La! Lo! GMd° oOr Pu2 Pu} Put Pu’ Tr? MTr’ Wa 7 ae 
aS —c) Ho Tes’; Ke Cgefsarers; Lolly M3] ° Rreparifor — d) oMdS aranfayacs ster; 
oMdé mT r4 MTr® Grareaege; NKtt Pu> Pub “gt JT:; La! Lo* Lo’ cMd! tMd* oOr sPuo 
[but cor] Tr! MT14 Tr [Jolly M] Laks Je afer 

186. Pada-d omitted in GMy [haplo] — a) Md‘ Tj! “faa; Pu? Put “afahr. sBe 3 — 
a-b) Lo? Lo’ Ox} “afaft ae a first — b) Be! cMy Tj Wer; cMd! yer; rMd* Ye; TMd3 Fe; 
nPu! we; GMd5 eae ; Tr? “at; nKet “aret — c) nPul Te wear’; Be! “canTd?; Lo? “carry; 
Tr? “airtd — d) Be! Ho Jo? Lo! Pu? Pu? Pus Pu? Wa Ku Go at f@; Pu’ £8; Volly G] 
aftere’; oOrtéePe ; Be! Jo? Lo! Pu Pu‘ Wa [Jolly G] Ku Go a; Ox? Tr! “aa; Be! Jo? 
Pu’ Pu’ Go Ku [Jolly G] RY; Pu? Put Fy:; Ho Lo! Md4 Wa feet 

187. Omitted in GMy. Cited by Madh 1.401— a) Be? MTr> & APT— b) La! Pu’ Tj! 
aratd; sKé aag; BKO wKt® Tr? qHer; wKt! nPu! JT — c) Bo NNg oOr [bur cor fh] sOx! 
sPu® Tr? are ; Md! tMd4 cMd MTP SSTRAT; Lot Lo’ Ox3 “armereat; Pu’ Pu? Tr? F— d) 
oMd mTr° Teal; Ho FAT; BBe? FAT; Ox? FAT; Lo? sOx! sPu® [me to] Tj! Weed; cMd! 
TMd4 cGMd mT HHT; Be! Ox? T 

188. Omitted up to 24 of pada-c in GMy; padas b-d omitted in La! [haplo]. Cited by 
Laks 11.124; Madh 1.402 — a) cMd! tMd4 GMd@ Tr! mTr4 mTro adr sagararsT frMd4 
FIR ]; NNg Ox} Jolly M] aarsa ws seara [Oxtarasq]; Laks 3: WHAT a a; Md? 
[Jolly Nd]aat f%; Bo pCa Lo! sOx! Ox? sPuS Tr? aaa; wKt! wKe aera; nKe “aATarst: wKt! 

“aTaitay — b) Ox? “ef SF — c) Pu? Pu? Put Pud Pu’ Pu’ STS; Ox? Ta; sPu® [but me] Far; 

Bo W94; wKe TH @ Be, Lol wate T— d) rMd‘4 a fasrraar waa. Tr faasrac ea. 
tM} Frater; wKet! Tj! rae; oOr arta; Wa fafafaste wer; Ho wKt! tMd3 GMd > sOx! 
Ox} sPu® Tr! Wa Laks Madh det 


Chapter 7 647 


arate ade Fraser | 

aera WAS wat at woratery UCR 
TAT VAT FATTY AAA: | 

ert pe T Borrttaatraher: ue oll 
Rea BT aaa | 

TAT TN Waa ST SET ATTAT 122 2M 
Saas: aT FeaaTT Ate | 


qenyentaa aera: Brey 2a zit 
RAAT AKT 


TSA HSAAIAATT | 
aetigeae aerarfitey ater Nee 3 


189. Padas a-c omitted in La!. Cited by Laks 11124; Mddh 1.402 — a) Madh @-radt- 
ORAM, Wa ase ; NKtt wKt Ox} Pu? Put Pu Pu? Wa email; GMd! 1Md3 oMy eet; 
Bh THCAAYLIT: appears to support the plural, but Me clearly points to the dual. —- b) GMd! 
aatfeaey; aK fafaeraa — c) TMd* GMdd MTr4 MT r® Seer PATRAS; Tr! TAT AARATTST; 
NNg sOx'! sPuo Tr? starsat WT EAT, Laks WA AAT aT AFT; Lot Lo’ Ox} [Jolly M] TET 
aat fe [Lot Lo® frei]; Jo? Lo Tj! waeg; Be? Ta; tM? Baa; NKe AAA; Lo! THAT ; 
Ho wKt® “ag; wKt “ag; nKtt “arger — d) wKeS oft reper; eke art ar ae poashe, 
BBe* arfteat, GMd! tMd3 GMd° GMy Pu? Pu’ mTr® Laks Madhat orft wer; mT areftat 
wer; Bel ard} yased’; Lot art areer; Bo afar 

190. Omitted in Pu>. Cited by Laks 11.124; Madh 1.402 — a) TMd4 Ox} Jeara; rMd3 
Jere; Ke? yar; Be! eatery; La! Sarears; wKt! “Fereary — b) Laks aaeeateraera:; Lo® 

“garrett: — a-b) Lo! “araTapaaarel, — c) NK art; wKt! at a — d) Bo @ar- 
omitettiartter:; Laks “ormftararantter:, wT rt after, wT Afearer:; Be! Be? Lo? 
sOx! Pu? Put sPuo “aferearfeer: 

191. Padas a-b omitted in Pu’. Cited by Madh 1.402 — a) rMd*4 wary — b) Lo? 
fear; td! “afer — c) Ho wKt! Pue Pu’ aT; BBe Ox? FAT; Bo Tal; Ho La! aH; 
BKtS wKt® ee; Kt? GMd! Pu? Wa 24a; pCa BKtS wKt® Tr! mTr°daarq; Md4 AAA; Jo? 
Lo? Tj! aaa — d) Pu? Put Pu’ Pu’ Tj? er et; Hy om TAT; Md} Md! oOr Ox? BE 

192. Cited by Laks 11.130; Madh 1.402 — a) tTMd* GMd? Ox? Tr! Laks Fa IRAP 
[Tr! Gee; cMd5 “sey; td‘ °sa); Ho Braet: ; oMd! apa; Bo SAT; wKt! STH; Pur Pu’ 
qaeq ; Lo! Fe ay; nKt4 aA ; wKt® gan ; — b) TMd3 cMy aqurdaaifed:; cMd> suor 
ae 7 fet:; Laks ne yoraatst:; Trl wage 7 age. iMd4 arate g gq adt:; Ox3 “eter: 
ofafee ; mrt eager “BP: Be! “reece Jo? afeafef: — c) Md oMy sayerad; 
coMd! “yearger; tMd4 °pemeginat — d) tMd? “sfeeratth: Tr! “gat; oOr Fea; sOx! sPus Tr? 
“gaeqa; Bo Fata; mT “YIIS:; Md ets: 

193. Cited by Laks 11.130; M@dh 1.402— a) BBe? oOr Pw Pu’ Tj? ar’, Bo Jm Jo! Kt? 
wKt® Lot Lo’ tMd? GMy Ox? Ox? Tj! mTr3 Volly M4] Mandlik KSS Dave && ; tMd4 @e 
GMd! 1Md? GMd> sOx! Pu? Put sPu® Tr! ATceaiar; NNg Ox HeegPT — b) Be! sBe Bo Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? wKt! K? BK® wKt® Lo? Lot Lo’ tMd* Ox? Tr? [Jolly M*8-°] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
qearet ; Ox? WITSEaAST; Pur Put “RI” — c) Lot “ea; Hy “alae ; +Md3 GMy 


648 Chapter 7 


Tete Bey ata Tea | 
aeraa forttarattererrararr ee vl 
sree Ue asa | 
TTI TAT FAATATHAITTT UL S4I 
Rraraa agnifr sraraftarcaer | 
ANH UA AAATAAT SEI 
THING Geld WT acHay | 

qh Wet gear Tegra: levi 
aa sat AIT AACATITAT TAH | 
fasig vacant AT Gat FaraTT ULV Cill 


fer — d) wKt! veaarftary, Lo? Tj! teaearftaay; Md mTr4 MTr® aertteraty; Lo! 
aerator. Laks TUqutey; wPul aeadthry a ater’; Pus Pu? ated; Te? steed; wKe° 
fra; Be! Jm Jo! La! Lot Lo tMd3} GMd> GMy NNg Ox? MTr’ mTr® Wa Go Nd Ku 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 8taq; nNKt Ward 

194. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 11.130; Madh 1.402 — a) tMd4 THrerTseyE; mT 
waedT ; Ox3 Tr ae; Bo BE; Lo eer; Lo! ae — b) Lo4 Lod rMd4 Ox} mT! mTré 
[Jolly M]Laks wat aba Teed [Laks Faraea]; Jha Bat T° [Me reads Yat]; Be Jo? Lo} 
Tj! [Jolly R] waters’. Be! “area — c) Bo Ho La! Lo* Lo’ cMy sOx! Ox} Pu? Put Pu’ 
MTP Me Go Rc Met Aq; Be? Wea; BKtS wKt® Lo! tMd4 Get Wa; rMd3 Beerada; Bh Ku 
Rn support Yet: — d) Lo? Pu? Put Pu’ “arettat geaenfafe; rMd4 “aretor gearafe; Laks 
“areereier ; La! “aanfirfer 

195. Not commented by Nd; padas c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Vij 1.343; Laks 11.125; 
Madh 1.402 — a) wKt! saearfaarardta; Be La! Ox} Pu2 Pu} Put Pud Pu? sree; BK 
wKt® “art, cMdS “HTett, Tr? “areftet; Ox? “HTata — b) sOx! sPuS Laks aTeaTT, TMd4 
aerdtsact — c) sOx! sPu’ great — d) rMd! aaaiatuaert, Be! Lo? Lo’ ‘alga at 

196. Cited by Laks 11.125; Madh 1.402 — a) Ho Pu’ Tr? raed; tMd? GMy rere; 
aMd feat Sa; oOr frnea; sOx! sPuS “tacrerHiPr; Lo? aererFY; cMd! TMd3 cMd° oMy 
Tj! Tr! mT aerate; aKe aAPTA; wKtS darnhy — b) pBe? rMd4 wae; GMd? sTATE; wKt! 
greerrea ; Ho Hy weet oft; Tr? “afRaierar; Be? Lo? rMdé4 nPul! Tj! Tr! “afeareqer: M3 
cMy ‘oftateaer; Ho Kt? Wa oRurera; Lo? “oftarererar; La! “afar aut — c) Lo? 
aaa: Jo! eae — d) nPu! feparaaeras; Lo! GMd5 Pu’ Pu’ Tr? [Jolly G] frarates; 1M? 
oMy fearette a; MTr mTrfearade a; cMd! farararas: Jo! °aaet; Madh “Baft; rMd4 
“ae: 

197. Cited by Laks 11.125-6; Madh 1.402 — a) Laks STewaTgat,; Pu’ sarah Pret 
ag; wKt! “argascr a; Ox} “onguatta; Lo! “crrgastt; Md? “carga — b) 1M? qe 
wt aepd; Ox} geaaa TO Ha; BKts GMd> Tr? Madh FeAeAT; wKt! Md} nPu! Pub Fet- 
Taq; Bo TAIT; Laks FATT; wKt° wkt> Madh FS; nKt4 Depa — c) NNg FHI; wKe Thy; 
Be! aha; Pus Puede ea g; Tr! eo eh g; Lo Tj! Jy ef TF; Ho Tr? 44; Lo! Feet; GMy 
FAT; Be Fz oO Md? oMy Borg” 

198. ma in Lo*. Cited by Laks 11.129; Madh 1.403—~ a) Pud Pu’ WET FSq, Be Jo? Lo? 


Chapter 7 649 


afeat fast were qe gears: | 
Tay aos cena Rrasktag 2981 
FATA TITATA TateHray TTT | 

aa yeaa at fasta Ryew4r ilRo oll 
frat ayeradary TeMtaa arrears | 
wearaRenras waar T INR Vil 
adat g fafeetat cares Prather | 
MIT Ase Barer TAAHAT NWRo IMI 
Tarts a edie tat aateenfeary | 
TAT TRAIT TITATST: TE UR RM 
aarabaet at a Preararcaey | 
snitearraarat Begh WET RoI 


tMd4 GMd’ Ox? Tj! mT rSLaks 824 a1; [Jolly M8 G] 3a eet — b) nK# rMd4 “eaehe ar; 
cMd! GMdé nNg Tr! MTrSmTr° Laks “S36 AT — c) tMd! FAST; BBE TAG; rMd4 WTAE; 
Lo? GMd! 1Md? cMd> cMy Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Jha “@arfé; Nd supports singular; others silent — 
c-d) [Jolly M8) fage vader fast sear 7 ad — d) Bo Ho Lo? rMdé sOx! Ox} nPul Pu4 
Pud sPu® Pu? MTr4 Ga; TMd? GMdP MTP? MTrS Gear; Tr? Feet; Lo! Fea; La! cMd! nNg 
Pu? gear 

199. Omitted in TMd3 GMy. Cited by Mddh 1.403 — a) wKt afrey; Ox} arteit — c) 
wKt3 “SRT; Ox3 “start — d) Md! TeHT ; Lo? rasa 

200.* Omitted in TMd? GMy Ox?. Cited by Laks 11.129; Madh 1.403 — b) rMd* GMd? 
amarétat of; Be! Be? Hy Jm Jo! K@ Ox? nPul Pu2 Put Tj? Tr! Tr? mT r4 MTSMTr® Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave ‘RTATAT — c) Pud Pu? aay; Pus TATA; Bo Fad; mTr® Har; OX 
aadt; La! [but cor] AFA; BBe? Be? Lo4 Lo’ TMd4 GMd 0Or Tr! [Jolly MJAaeT; wKto Haar, 
Jm Jo! Kt? BKé wKt® Lo? nPu! Pu? Put Tj? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TAT — d) nKt4 
fasrreq; oOr “aahprar; La! Pu? Pu? fy wer; Ho Pud Pu? gar Roz; wKe} aa feay 

201, Omitted in TMd? aMy; padas b-d omitted in GMd5. Cited by Madh 1.403 — a) Lo’ 
Lo? fran —c) Pu? Put wear; 1Md* “ararfaerier; Be? BK Pud “eres — d) wKt! 
Lal aay” 

202, Omitted in Md? GMd> GMy. Cited by Madh 1.403 — a) [Jolly M8] #41 J; oOr 
Pu? Pu Pu’ Tr? [Jolly G] T— b) sBe? ATA FT — c) Ho wKt Tj! TEs; BBe? T FBT; Lo* Lod 
AAMT [both ma A] — d) oOr HAATAT ; sBBe? AAT; Bo ware; Wa wae ; [Jolly Nd] TARY ; 
Tr? “feet; 1Md4 “ara 

203. Omitted in rMd? GMy; padas a-c omitted in GMd 5. Padas a-b cited by Mddh 1.403 
— a) nK¢ vata; BK g — b) wKt} NK MTP? erat. Tr! cate’; Ox} watery; [Jolly 
Nd] eater; mT} areata — c) Put Gar; rMdé Tr! mTr¢mTr> mTrS Sea; KA 
aes — d) Tj! wT; wKE ged: ar 

204. Omitted in Md} GMy — a) nKt’ La! PuS mT4 sar — b) Put g; Tr! ame Te — 
c) Lo! anfterar’; Be aretftear’; wKtS Pus Pu? “at eae; oOr “ATT aTaIfer — d) Be? Ho 





650 Chapter 7 


ad starred rear taargy | 
waeaakrer g ange frac frat Rok 
we att ase: SRT Fear waa: 

fret face yr ar aagaftateer wert ROG 
afore Teer aH T AVES | 
Rrerqurakraran ararnerraryard U2 ool 
Reerafriren ahiar at ade | 

wer first gd wear gareratrery NRoZII 
at T FIt wT Gevatara wz | 

sem ferrat og fer wert Roll 


Jo! La! Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® Pu® Tj! Tj? MTrmMTr Me Go Na& Ku Rn Mr Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
are, wKt! ares Get, wKt pray 

205. Omitted in IM@ cMy. Cited by Laks 11.139 — a) wkt* Lo! Ox? Pué Pu’ ad; Lot 

Ox} Hifartad; Be! “grad; Tj! “enrarct; Lo! “emraed; cMd! “aaretar; tMd4 “ATR; oOr 
*aarere — b) Tj! fret; Bk¢ feet; rma’ free; Ox Fafa; wkis Feratt; wKe® Lo! &; 
wKt} Lo? ta Aargt; Lo} Tj! Tr “arg; Ho Wa “Stet — c) wKt} BKtS Lo! Lo? tMd4 mTr® 
aaa; : Laks 7% 8a"; BBe? ‘fart; Ho NNg Pu’ Pu? Laks 7— d) Ox Tr? get; Ox? Fat; oOr 
get; Ng fara: 

Fifty additional verses are given here in some mss. Because of their length, they are 
given as an appendix at the end of this chapter. 

206. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox?; not commented by Me. Cited by Laks 11.142 — a) Tr! 
aeantt; nKtt asta — b) oOrg Aa: — c) cMy FRAT; sOx! sPuS Tr? APT feet; Ox? om 
yFT; pCa Lo? Pu’ [Jolly G] t— d) pBe? Be aasafeafad; Ho Ayahafaer, Lo? Tj! aoe hafadr; 

Tr! aasarafeeyr; Hy ereafeaferr; Be} nKt aes 

207. Omitted in Lot Lo’ Ox?; not commented by Me; padas c-d omitted in Tr?. Cited by 
Laks 11.142 — a) Pu? Pu! Tr? orftraré; 1Md4 “a; Lo! Ox? “aTeiear; tMd? “wera; La! Pu2 aver 
— b) rMd3 rareper; TMd3 GMy Aves — c) rTMd! Ox? Pub Tj! frarcrarcafearer; Md? cMy 
frarearcaftratar ; sOx! sPu’ frareere atftrare; Bo Paver’ ; Lo? Praredirahr” 

208. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox?; not commented by Me; padas c-d omitted in Tr? and 
placed after 209 in Bo — a) Ho pKt> wKt® Pu? afr fewer warez; La! sOx! sPu° Pu’ fere, 
Ox? atte; Lo! sOx! sPu® MTT “at, Tr! apt aoe, La} nKt! TMd? GMd@ GMy Pu Pu? 
Pu’ Re Uf GHTET; Lo! sOx! sPuo “auTaT: Md! tMd4 MTP “aurea — b) M4 ete FT aT 
77:; sOx! ' sPus TPA, Md} cMy TRA; Be? tea aT; Pud Pu? Tr! ahaa; Lo? ahaa, Tj! 
atad, sBe? Bo wKt da tT — c) Md ger first aer wear; Tr! fra — d) Be? war ; 
Md} “fart, +Mdé “Fererer 

209. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox}; not commented by Me; padas c-d ma in BK — a) Kt? 
ates pager — b) oOr GestfrHe wa; Lo! qt yadhe 7; Tr Zee ; nKtt pee; 
BBe? Wa #faar qa; Hy wKt? Lo? t™Md4 Tj? mir‘ MTrS @fet Ba aq [Tro plese]; nNg 
@— c) Lo! Rerarers; wKt! fer@at, nKe ras [sic] ~ d) cMd5 waar 


Chapter 7 651 
Wat Holt Be T wT qarag T | 
Raa Sete T BEE Fat: URoll 
wea Feast wet wevrafsar | 
eos wT cargqatayitag: Re ei 
erat wemat fer agate | 
qRemaat yRrrertarrarag NR 2 21 
sree eet THT TET THEA | 
MATT Tater TT STAT aay 22 3M 
ae Wat: AReraT: Tasearsay Wary | 
agra Panter watararegqagey: WRevil 


210. Omitted in Lot Lo® Ox3; not commented by Me; padas a-b ma in BKt’. Cited by 
Laks 11.107 — a) Jo! tat; Md} My et BSE FT; Bo wKt! wKt? Bs — a-b) GMd! oer eat 
Bt 7 Te seaeta zy, Laks ait aa aye at at Tat T— b) Md! cMy art are” 
— c)oMd! feet afer; wKke! pfered; Pud Pu’ gaat; wKt> wKt® arya; Laks afHret 
— d) Jm BEAT; tMd4 Haar’; Ho “eC; Bo TW:; Md? GMy Rr 

2u, Omitted in Lot Lo’ Ox}. Cited by Laks 11108 — a) NKt4 Lo! afar; Lo! get; Hy 
gears — b) La! PuS Pu? arf; Be! [Jolly R] PTET; Lo? Wa Fea; wKt} Pud Pu? wer: 
oMd! Pul penne at; Lo! © afeat; wKe! “Afar; sBe? “AfFar — c) TP eter: Lor Sa: 
Jo! Bit"; BKtS wKtS Lo! nNg nPul Pu? Put Pus Pu’ Rn Go Laks®{@ ; Be! Be} Bo Ho wKt! 
nKt! BK wKt® La! NNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu Pu’ Tj! Tj? Ber; 1Md3 GMy “aret; Laks “@ePT; Ho 
gq; ™d4 tT fafeag” — d) wKt® dar aaritt ; Tr! “arty, Be! tMd? tMd? GMd5 cMy Tr! Wa 
“cite; sOx! sPuS Tr? “ofteer 

212. Verses 212 and 213 transposed in Lo* Lo® Ox3; padas c-d omitted in Pw Lo‘. Cited 
by Laks 11.142 — a) TMd4 GM@® &IT; Jm Lo! Ox? eat; Ox? ea, rMd3 aT; wks ett; TP 
tert, GMd ! aMy Tr! mTr*t aera; Tr aeauett; r+Md3 aera; Be! Bo wKt® wKt? TMd4 
oMd) Ox? “aT; Kt? “We; Ho ‘Tet — b) Hy “@Raf; Pu? “aerafe — d) wKe Coe’; wKt! 
“afta: oMy “aft aaa; rMd3 “afetraracr; Lo? Pu? Pu* Pu’ [Jolly G] “Hea; Ox’ 
“aoa, wKto area 

213.* Padas c-d omitted in Lo® Tj!. Cited by Laks 11.142-3 — a) BBe? Ho Hy La! Lo! 
Lo? Lot Lo’ oOr Ox} nPu! Pu} Tr? [Jolly M] Me Go Jha Dave avqee; wk amet; Lo? tle; 
nKt* BKt> GMd! tMd4 mTr> Wa a — b) nKt BKtS Lo? GMd! 1Md4 GM@ [but cor} Tj! Tr’ 
MTP MTr® Wa Mearr war oaefy, wKtS arr Tae; Lo? art; Lo ware c) Be! nKt* 
Lo? GMd! Tr’ mTro MTr® Wa Laks STAT & BACT WAT [cMd! mT taser; mTr® aden; TMad4 
MTP? Add; GMd 5 CR cor to TRU]; TMd4 STH ATT «CRT; TMd3 GMy [Volly Nd] ata F 
aar wa; cMd5 eae; Pu’ Pu’ Tr! [Jolly G] agar; BKtS wKt® La! Lo! Lot Lo’ sOx! Ox? Ox3 
sPu® Tr? [Jolly M°] Baar 

214. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 11143 — a) MTPa fF Aat:; Bo aTaT:; tMd3 GMy 
ad; Lodaat; Tr! watery” — b) wke “earmal; Md? ere — c) Md agat a faget a, 
Lo! Lo’ ageniasgentea; Lo! ayy; rMd4 Tr! dgma; ake aaat fy"; Ox? om raw; 


652 Chapter 7 


TIAA T Tataatay Hera: | 

Uae SPT waa AT ULI 
ua adhe tot ag deer aft: | 
ARNG RATS AAAI WIT MRL 
aT: BoaEe: UTAH: | 
qrifirraranareratarde: 220i! 
anor adgeanttt aa | 
faaarter a carter Prat areaeaar UR 2 cil 
aofarat: raat aortas: | 
SINIaT: SIT: FaAtlear: URLS 
Ud Waa Balt AAT | 


Md! fend, wK¢o fants — d) wKe! “ort Gar; wKe Covafeersiga:; Laks “Tra, FART: 
Ho “FoTT: 

215.* Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 11.143; Madh 1.411 — a) Pw Pu‘ Tr? * gaat; oOr 
“gate — b) 1Md3 “rapa; cMdS nPu! adar: — c) Be! waar Taare, Lo} Tj! es aa; Tr? 
aay; nKtt Ox? aHTgeyT — d) sBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} Lo? Lo* Lo® tMd? Tj! 
mTr? Mddh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Tadaratersa; Me [patha] areaeersarears: 

216,* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11157 — a) TMd? GMy aatary ust — b) cMd> 
NNg MTr® Hae AE; rTMd4 AAT — c) Kt? Ox? Pud Pu? Wa Jolly ara: cM’ Frere 
1tMd4 esate; Lo! nPul Put “RAT; Tj! “RAST — d) Tr “get; BK wKt® Jet; Pus Pu’ 
aed; Be! Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt} BK wKtS La? Lo? Lo? Lo! sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu’ 
Tj! Tr? mTr? Wa Go Ku Rn Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave faarq 

217. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11157 — a) GMd! oar wre; Ox3 “at — b) 
BBe? NKt* La! Lo! aerere: Ox? “aera: ; Ho Na [who gives Ae: as pathantara] “aah: 
7Mdé “Seeger; GMd! “aeer f°: Ho Tr? “arta; wKe eras: — c) TMd? GMy orreyer 
BK “otera: nPu! Put feraararert — d) GMd “aret Hate PoE: 

218.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11.1158 — a) wKt! fad ta 7 aTer; Lo? Lo’ cMd! 
1Md3 tMd4 GMd> cMy Ox? Tr! mTr4 Tr mTr® [Jolly M Nd] Laks Dave Jha “#8e3 ; Lo! 
Ox? Pu} Pu’ “safer; 1+Md3 GMy MTr4 mTr® Sa. BKt wKt® "saa: nPu! “saree cor to 21a — 
b) BKtS wKt® “ZeqTasTaq; Pu2 Put Pu’ Pu? Wa awa; Be! sBe Be} Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
nKt* La? Lo! Lo’ tMd‘ sOx! sPu® Pu’ Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku Mandlik KSS 2a; 
nPu! tera; Jo? La! Lo? Tj! Volly R]Rn Jha Dave ataxg — c) BBe? om F — d) Ox? rad; 
Pu? Pu’ [Jolly G] Wad, Pu? Put wercit 

219. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11.1158 — a) Ox? etferarfeaia, Bo BK& La! Lot 
Lo’ tMd? nPu! Pu? Pu Pué Pu’ [Jolly M] area; Ox? Raaatd — b) sBe? Bsa’; Ox? 
fas’; wKt} Lot Lo’ Ox} “gaae: — c) Pu’ Tr? faarae®; Hy “aeoregya:; 1Md? cMd5 cMy 
“RUST; Tr! weITMAPT; Lo? Lot Lo’ GMd! Ox? mTr? MTP MTr® [Jolly M] Me Laks “43- 
mt: — d) BBe? Lo* Lo Md! tMd* Ox? [Jolly M] Laks Wegarg: GAfear:; Tj! arg:; cMd5 
[but cor] Tj! “fea: 


Chapter 7 653 


TT WaT Wa TaHHT T UMRRolll 


yatta ahfieagt aE | 

fager a wares ga: aratfir Rrra R22 
ASPTM ATATART FATT | 

area & aatter pearearaonfey T UAV 
CAT WIT TAs TET | 
wearentat te oftretar a after UR Vsll 
Tea HATA AAT AAA T AAT | 
ska a eftadtsernge ga: URRvN 
aa wer ya: fr tate: safle: | 


220, Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 11.1158 — a) BBe? wKt! nPu! Fa weet; Lot [ma 
weet — b) Pu? Pu’ “aay; pCa wK Md? cMy *saTay; Lo? “eater; mT Sara; 
Tr? GaTeaTy:; Lot Lo’ Ox? Volly M] “aarfey; Jo? nPu! Tj! Tr! [Jolly R Gr] “aay aq; BBe? 
“aay | — c) GMd! Wa B17; BBe? sOx! sPu’ waTey; tMd4 sTaTaA; Lo? Tj! “at ase; Pue 
Pu? ta — d) mT at asHPTe[ torn]; Be? Be? Ca Hy NNg sOx! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ sPu® Pu’ Tj! 
Tr “danktey; oMd “deetry; cMd! “seresry; Laks “Sewreafey; wKkt! “sereafey a, Md? 
oMy Salt Ut FT; Ho aaft 

221, Omitted in Ox oOr. Cited by Vij 1.329;Laks 11.161 — a) MT? Rag, Be “RT 
— b) nK¢ eff: ta: Gt: Ae; Ho “GFE; NKt* Lo! Lo? Lo’ tMd? 1Md4 GMd5 cMy “g% — c) 
Ho Pud Pu’ feet; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt? Ox3 nPul Tj? mT? Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave T; 
Laks Ta; Ho WaTHr; Be} warast — d) Md? waif; Te wraifer de Rs Wa PRAT 

222. Omitted in Ox? 00r; ma in Lo‘. Cited by Laks 11161 — a) TMd* GM@ Tr! “pe q; 
Laks “PART TH ; Be’ “Her: ATT — b) cMy Aaarik, wKe “geht; rd? “gee; Bo 
Gast; Jo? La Lo? tMd3 GM oMy Tr! mT? mT ro Guar c-d) rMd4 & aremTr waar 
—— d) Ho areal; GMd3 Laks TAT ; GMd! GMd5 aeonT 

223. Omitted in oOr; padas c-d omitted in Ox?. Cited by Vij 1.330;Laks 11.162 — a) 
Laks Sargarer, TMd} oMy aeat Feary — b) Lot Lo’ Ox} sear YeYa:; Pu? Put AIST — 
c) TM? seeaTearharent; wKtS “eaThas; sOx! sPuo “warat; rMd? “warhras; La! GMy “wearfr- 
arate; Hy tf — d) Kt? GMd! Tr? goreAaT; wKe oft, wKe ated 

224. Omitted in oOr; not commented by Nd; padas a-b omitted in mTr?. Cited by Vij 
1.330; Lakg11.162 — a) GMd! aaeperr ; Tr? Haat; Bo Hee; TMd3 +Md4 oMy Tara; 
Lo® om AFIT; Bo Ho Jo? La? Lo! Lo? Md? Pus Pu® Tj! Tr! area; Be? TRI; Te SRT, sOx! 
sPu U=t; TMd3 GMd5 GMy mTr° GIR; GMd! ta — b) GMd! tMd3 TMd4 GMd> GMy Tr! 
mT MTr® ATT; Ox? “MTT; La! “arr wT a; Tr! art; Lo’ TH — c) wKt® “saat FT; BK? Ox3 
“StF; Lot Lo’ GMd! Tr! m4 “Tea; 1Md4 “SATA; Pu? Pud “sTATaTT; Be! Be? Bo Ho Jo? 
wKt! wKt? nKtt La! Lo! Md? GMd GMy sOx! Ox? Pu’ Pue sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? Wa [Jolly R] 
Laks J; Te  — d) Wa Stgarege; Be? BCa wKt! La! Lo* Lo’ Md? TMd? GMd5 GMy sOx! 
Ox? sPu’ Tr? [Jolly R] Vij APTI; BK wKtS La! “Fe; Jo? Lo} Tj! Fe ace; Vij GE AS 


654 Chapter 7 


aarer qarereqhreser TARA: UIRRLI 
wage aatfrsaeer: Preto: | 
wearer: wag wer fara lerEil 


gfe Ararat epigner wpiterar afearar 
AAAS aT: 


225. Omitted in oOr; not commented by Nd. Cited by Laks 11.162 — a) wKt? aa:; Ho 
ayant; Lot Yes; Md? Tr! ear — b) Md? GMy “att; Hy “att; Md? “st; Lo* Lo’ Ox? Pur 
Pu? wefahr: — c) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wk BKt> Lo® Md! Tj’ MT Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
afearg; wkt® Lo? afaara; nKt? afaarer; ay afaary; Ox3 wfaerg; Ox? om and Lot ma waren 
— d) Ox? “are fecsferra: FA:; Lo Tj! “ares aaheesgaeT:; Lot Lo® Md? GMd> cMy Tr 
Tr? [Jolly M Nd] Facofesraga:; Pud Pu? “Rereafgarasac: Lo? “She; aK 7:; sBe? wKt! 
nPu! “gor: 

226.* Omitted in Lo*; not commented by Nd. Cited by Vij 1.331; Laks 11.162 — a) Be! 
BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt BK? wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lo® nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! 
Pu? Pu’ sPuo Pu? Pus Tj! Tj? Te mT? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Tafgurrafacec ; 
Ox? sferesa a 2a — b) rMdé “@hT — c) BKtS HEART; Be? ager:, Hy ayet:; wKe> agey; 
Kt? La! Lo? tMd3 oOr Pu Put seaeT:; Ox? GeTeT:; Lo’ GMd Ox? Tr! mTr* MTr° [Jolly M] 
ad#ag, Be! Bo Ho Lo! tMd3 GMd> cMy Pu? Pu 8 Wa [Jolly Nd] ataatag — c-d) Laks Vij 
aaacaateager Praata — d) Be! Be} Bo Jo? nKf Lo? tMd? tMd4 GMy nNg Pu? Pu’ Tj! 
MTP Wa fafrasrat 

Colophon: Be! Lo! Lo} Md? nNg sOx! sPu° sft 2ftarad; Be? wKt ayt; Be! Bkt5 
wKt® Lo? GMd! GMd° sOx! tMd? MTr® om HaHa Afearat; Lo! Lo? wr fearat; Be} 
wKt om afecrat; Be! NNg Use: SAAT, BBe? wKt! Kt? Lo? oOr Tj! Uaaat AMT THAT, Lo! 
arsreray fer aeay 


Chapter 7 655 


Appendix 


The following additional verses are given after verse 205 in GMd! mTr*mTr®; verses 2, 5, 6 
given in Lo‘; verse 2 in Lo’; verse 7 in wKt!; verses1, 7, 9, 10 cited by Laks 11.140; verses 2, 
5, 6 are cited in Me's commentary on verse 205: 
eaargqaavar arar warren | 
cearafaat ee ade Ter wre 1121 
b) MT 14 mT r5 “arferesr 
gas fatter ge aad sarada | 
ORs Fea ceter WaT WRI 
a) Lot Lo’ && feenagwer — b) cMd! a: ya — d) wrt mT rosea, Lot Lo’ Me 
aarerar 
gourkey car dyer a: vada | 
ager & adararatay verses: 11311 
c) MTr4 MT 1S atte 
fErigaaht aa gah gover | 
eaetarr T He weafremaese lel 
a-b) cMd! “aftaretaagey —c) Tro ee 
agents ear age shrek | 
rar Jere we at gate 41 
a) Lot “tet aT —b) Lot pedirated; Me Foran ate: mit saarge 
aarp Ter agers T | 
ge daa areaed deter a aaa: I<! 
a) Lot ware — c) cMd! queda 
Sfreqerarver hfartar anor | 
saat afatewater wed Besa: Ill 
c) cMd! $@ & fr — d) cMd! gare Jaa: 
angered ¢aaraarer | 
oar agdafeats: ato ener wag Hcl 
b) mTr! aréprqer” — c-d) oMd! “afgftratorr amt 
a fe caged wafraft array | 
rartnes agra: arr |S 1 
a) cMd! “gare? —b) mTr$ ara: — c) Md! aratat woAS — d) MTr! Tro Ber 
armada agit fftrara: | 
a yourad da Pafear yea Far Igo ll 
a) MTr® “aTea; mTr? aed; mTr® aed — b) cMd! grerft afar —~ d) mTr* mTr® 


faferat 
aan fe ae Phra aahocegonfecy | 
wera + aeaser cada Or g 1221 
c) MT 1? mT r° ofereeda— d) oMd! a4 aq 
a are: eat ePacad att frac | 
aeaearanisaarerae feels 122i 
a) oMd! apafur: fear — b) mTr® “apa FT A; Md! “agar + fear —d) wTré fear 


656 


Chapter 7 


THATS T ETT | 
Tees wars FRETS: 11231 
b) Mr! MTr® Gptecat — d) GMd! “array 
Saeed aet: TRara | 
ger areas eaacgufarefe |12y| 
c) oMd! gourd aa — d) Md! “fered 
Poasaade ed ated | 
Mae east T TET wot eel 
b) GMd! 2a; mTrS “‘Rrewet 
penhre ge de ge at ate | 
HIT: Jeu sargua gfearerd 11e<ll 
a) oMd! @eafert — b) cMd! ar fe arafer— c) cMd! gant det tay” 
mer ta gonfe sr saat | 
agate a area cate fe efearz Il eel 
a) MT ere GMd! warty 
amt Pgee ger ye ar afe aye | 
aa ea & waa ae tava: Mec 
a) GMd! fageh — b) GMd! yt at— d) cMd! @a: fea: 
earficoet fe goa: sferrercr | 
cer gfe: era arf Sarearostragy 1128 1 
c) MTr? hex 
grea wt cet getonanfeay | 
Pons fae ta gertafh agaq |Roll 
a) MTr* MTr® Tet — c)cMd! fagey 
adunged ef serra fsrarefer | 
seafofaagar wercrer aw wetter 112211 
a) Tr? eae — c) mT 4 Tr arearfeftgihai, oMd! “fragereir 
ad arer Ged var ghefrray | 
cart fara aires 12211 
c) Md! eer at 
raageaatr ofearatceanty 7 | 
faraapariesr seavaraconty 7 12311 
semtr te feat aearatrantt 7 | 
aan: wager Aiferenearfer te fe [RI 
b) MTr4 areafsrarfr — d) mT! mT & 
armrest aatftr aur fagonfr a | 
pont 7 arent reser aft az R&I 
b) mTr4 mTr cent BT — ¢) mTr? gear 
Terre frrtorscnks 7 | 
ararengensy saft a: saa: | 
aatfr cadiser aa + Tere REI 
a-b) cMd! aaa afte fered --- ar a waa 
aeres Greet ator quftresar | 
aan fe ama ocafeRaray [1201 
emarayisits gear Prev: | 


Chapter 7 657 


eeataprre: Tao HT MRI 
a) GMd! “wager: faa: — d) oMd! “eareaft 

AISSAGIAT Fol Sa BATT | 

aarerggquar eater weaker 112811 
Padas c-d of 29 omitted in MTr* mTr® 

geurtinftar ¢f gach aso | 

7g canteen goort: wade 11301! 
Padas a-b 30 omitted in MTr4 MT1® — d) MTr! mTr® Jourt 

deme aor bftange Tsar: | 

Prot arate a tt waterrary 113211 
a) GMd! aur — b) mTréu Tr “are -& offset: — c) mT ro UATE (om B); MTA 
om aft at — d) Tr! mTr® hare: cMd! “Atae 

caeaggam gheerpag | 

ae fread wet gagaay: 1132! 
b) Tr? fafxerere 

agate ao eat aderreTarare | 

aa ont Poamgeygaraad Iai! 

7 aera oy paar | 

Talat: Jou: we wAaftafe geac 113% 

T GAARA FATT BATT | 

wareafeerer Sgerqrarard 113411 

Ue Ut Tar ye: adarpwarare: | 

ae adden: awreor SapeTs 1134 
a) cMd! Gaara at 

data oe yet ad ae gfaftent | 

gate gor at wiicte Fag [Rell 
d) cMd! wife = 

mar arerctat f& gents 7 wat aT | 

we: Tie we FT Hoarau |13cl| 
c) MT! pres Baer agre 7 

aaa aay wapygeararay | 

gate myer Adel vate aay 113811 
a) MTr® aarft — d) Md! lacuna for Tater 

aaa Fad asaya | 

adercaftramrerrderereree, |e I 
d) mTr* mTr® “agenarad 

aar fe war qay adercaftraRott | 

eee ry ar: fry sreag ade ileell 
a) MTr? OebT; MTS BeHraAT — a-b) cMd! ard war fe wargerdtahtrareett — c-d) 
oMd! eqgdeerett...arerarery add 

ade @¢ tacanericanagar | 

myet o feed a adaed oT add [yell 
b) cMd! @rrefeargar: mTrt aged: mTr® Me 

aa f wrest Srich Sreoresy | HT | 

wararat aa et ade WeraTeraTt | 1s I | 


658 


Chapter 7 


a) MTr4 MTS aaa— d) MTr4 FAS We; Tro wea TAT 
fraftetera ant af getearars: | 
eataer ster ferfammuagitetr: text 

a-b) MTr! Tro Predera; mTro Sts:cMd! wre; mT rt Brett: ed. HT ex conj. —b) 

oMd! “era: 

Prd ear ea yorarafe ade | 
arereer: tacoma Pree: Ise | 

b) MTr! MTr® arafada — c) cMd! “wet wast 7 — d) oMd! “Baar 
aray qag Paty aa wt | 
afemardaes Pr aeatate fear liye! 
aera gages z | 
oredr aearhy Pract att ator lwo! | 

d) GMd! frat 
adarpatard fe ta wa a dar: | 
aftrntattraer afar wafer |iscil 

a) GMd! 7#— c) cMd! afar 7 
pute er weret re: get + peafec | 
agra Fea TaTeitepead Pre: | 1S 

a) GMd'aurfret — c-d) GMd! agafey FT gear ar & eireperar Pere: 
Ud tape ad gga fafrer oftsa: | 
aate we aderenatea: Iho 

a) oMd! 24 — d) cMd! aerate” 


[steatseara:] 


aE Tet: se arbre: 
aaateanae Perit: aaBMTAT 21 
aareta: erat att atfirgerar aferory | 
Referer: cereeratter erkory UR 
wera arty Paar qaqa isl 
corarenyorrerdt frardtsearferfeares: 
QT TAA TETAS 
qateaa urert afaqar afew: 
wataeatsara fare: carer: We 
dtrfrarerta weer qugarkre | 


1. Omitted in Lo4 Lo’ Ox?. Cited by Apa 600; Laks 12.7; Dev 3. 31, 43; Madh 3.18 — 
a) Lo! “greg”; cMd! Dev ‘erefeg’; BKtS wKtS oOr “ate fee"; Pu’ Pu? “greray: eq — b) 
Pu? Put starr; Apa TRF — c) wKt3 “Fara; Bo “Yearyeaa; Laks “sffeaftreaet 
2. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox}. Cited by Apa 600; Laks 12.7; Dev 3.52; Mddh 3.18 — a) 
wkt? Pu Pu’ rare, oMd! aates; nK tt dares: Lo! ferdterdt — b) Ho aftr; BK 
AER — c) mTrt “Trerer: — d) Bo tMd4 aarfeurt; cMd! aireer:; GMd> BAIT, cGMy Haar; Tr? 
pee 
3. Omitted in Lot Lo! Ox}, Cited by Laks 12.7; Dev 3.57; MGdh 3.18 —- a) Hy FeHe; 
ul agweta, Pu’ Sarge; cMd! Fagreza — b) Ho aeatess — d) Dev Fraranft; Madh ara- 
BIT 


Additional verse in oOr: 
feat a: ged wires ar zt yaaa | 
er o & aeer Preter erat 9A: || [unclear] 
4. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox3. Cited by Vij 2.5;4pa 596; pada-a cited by Vis 2.1 — a) 
u’ “gaa; wKt! “art — b) cMd! Td! Pras; ake Pravst; Ke frets; Bo Pater, rMa 
faferar; wKe® f:-fait — c) cMd! wager ; TMd? agers — d) wKt ater; Ho 
aces T 1Md3 aaa TF; Tre? Tenet 7: wKO “Garter [om FT] 

5. Omitted in Lo* Lo? Ox}. Cited in Vij 2.5; Apa 596 — a) Lo? at; Pu2 Put aa- 
ata, cMd! “wer a Ue; Wa Aer THEM; Te aaa; wKt! tala SM [ma A]; oOr 
arart — b) Jo! afer; Bo wacarter: — c) cMd! “fawarasarat, cMd “fawaregaray; Tr! 
“zarit, nPu! “yaraifsar’ ; Lo! Pu3 Pud Pu? “zarrafsar — d) oMd! feata; cMd! “Terai: 





659 


660 Chapter 8 


erat a ated Ha eftamemtst 7 NGI 


wal eat a Hatg qata: erage | 

car frgsenteatet arent ariasty uc 
ase ear qa wate Ara: 
aaa sfemararts: fert wa ar igoll 
aferaat farftafea fant aafaaer: 

Tay wHaT frary aaoreat eat fg: 2 20 


6. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox’. Cited by Vij 2.5; Apa 596; padas c-d cited by Dev 3.15— 
a) Apa [viJetrfearesr ae: w Kt} sOx! sPuS “erates — b) Pu? Put ret; wKt! oTedy; nKt4 
aT; Ho {cor to] tMd? Pu’ Pu’ Apa [vl] ‘aTaas; Pu2 Pu “arftras — c) Be? Kt? eer — d) 
BKtS wKtS Tj! “arete 

7. Omitted in Lo’ Lo’ Ox. Cited by Vij 2.5; Apa 596 — a) Pu’eaty oar; Tre feqeat; 
wk “erat; GMd! Apa “ent. mT ro APT TT; La! feareer — b) wKt! aerantaita; Hy “aTgE Ua; 
wKt} wKt6 Jo? NNg sOx! sPu® Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] “@22a; Bo Slag; Be? cMd! rMd3 1Md4 
cMd GMy nPu! Pu? Pu3 Put mTr* MTr° MTr® [Jolly R Nd|Nd Apa eras, mTr* era, La! 

“Sr wa; Pus “gata; Tj! “art ua; Na [patha] sa Ua -—c) Md} aera ; Tr? carrer; wKte 

“telat — d) Lo! ofagTe; Md4 aan; Be! “frat 7 

8 Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Md? GMy Ox? [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 596; Laks 12.43; Dev 
3.30 ~~ a) wKt? UT; Lo} tMd? Tj! Devay; cMd! au, wKt! yface; Wa yfies — b) KP? 
faareracat, Bo Re; Tj! aeat; wPu! Pud Pu? [Jolly G] daar; mTr*fafacd — c) Laky weet 
amPrar, nKtt “ager — d) Dev eeheaat faPP; Apa Bateart FAR’: Apa [vl] Batearfarr 
pCa wk faPreret 

9. Omitted in Lot Lo’ Ox3. Cited by Dev 3.36; Madh 3.21 — a) sCa @aleq — b) Be! 
Bk zat; cMé Heaney — c) TMd? GMy aT; Bo Hy Lo! Tj! Frgsar’ ; nNg fA ; BKP 
fraisar ffgreae — d) Ke aTatr:; Ma? aT ar; wKe! Cakror 

Additional verse in Ox?: 

sergarratte wifgarsier afer | 
ardteat w pare yfreqierrerany | 

10. Omitted in Lot Lo® Ox3. Cited by Dev3.37; Madh 3.21— a) Tr? 414; Ho sOx! sPus 
ara ate; Ox? Tr wraihtr wa; Bo Aa — b) aKt THR; Pu eta; GMd! aA 
eae Ox? aftga:; Pu? Put sfrger: — c) Pu? Pu! Pu Pu’ [Jolly G]aaraaas; Bo wFy- 
tr; oMd! sfasararar — d) La! rMd? ferata; Be! Pu2 Tj! wa 

11.* Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox?. Cited by Dev3.46; Laks 12.27; padas a-b cited by Vij 2.2 
— a) oOr aferaar, Bo Friafea; Md} Prorat, rMd4 Preafer — c) Md? GMd5 GMy Usted; 
Bo cMd! tat 4; Tr? tet weal; Be! Be Hy Im Jo! Jo? Ke wKt Tj? mTr? Jolly Ku] Ku Rn 





Chapter 8 661 


ant frarartor war aatafesd | 

Wer ae aT Hedfer rarest wares: U2 ll 
Qa AT A Tae aM aT TASTE | 
agaragaatr at wate fefeadt te 3 
aa oat seri ae AAA | | 

BAe WTATMTAT FateTaT TAs: UL 

at wa gat afer eat cerfer ciara: 
AATSAT T Beta AT at eat eat sete UuI 
gar fe wrarernterer a: ged wae | 

AG 6 eee el 
ue va geet Presagatea a: | 

ahr at amar adaeater treater ell 


Go Mandlik Jha Dave KSS TarafTPAT, Lo! Lo} Tj! War afepat; wKe! warecaferpar, wke5 
cMd’ srepat; GMy eat, Pu? Put wpa; NKtt TTAT — d) Bo Lo? GMd? BA [as patha, but 
rejected] STAMTETT Ox? STATUTE; TMd? GMy SSM; TM? Tr? eT 

12. Omitted in Lot Lo’ Ox}. Cited by Dev 3.48 — a) Pu’ Tr? a4; Bo Pu fear we ; 
Be? faemecaer ; TM? Tr eae — b) Wa aarat at fecefe, wKe Tr? TAT; Wa Tet; 
coMd! @¢; Be! Be? wKt'; nKt? Lo? GMd° oOr NNg Pv? Pu’ Tr! Dev ferafer — c) Kt? arewar- 
&; Md} Bes AET; Be! Lo? aeT; NNg cor sh to WET; NKt4 nPu! Pu2 Pu} Pu‘ Pus Pu? Prepat- 
fet; BBe? Be? BKt’ GMd ! rMd} GMy nNg Praift; Hy Set — d) nPul! fast Ty; Be! Lo? 
featera; La! Put Tj! fegters; nNg faery; GMd! FSET; Dev FATETH; GMd 5 BRETT; 
Tj? wee 

13.* Omitted in Lot Lo® Ox?. Cited by Vij 2.2;Apa 604; Laks 12.35; Dev 3.34, 49; padas 
c-d cited by Vij 2.83—— a) Be! sBe? Be? BCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt? BKt tMd* Pu} mTr? 
[Jolly Ku] Mandlik KSS Dave TAT aT FT yateer [Hy TMd4 BHT; rMd4 FT]; Ox? Laks THAT T 
yateed, wKt! GT aT 7 then ma WA J; GMd! FT 7— b) Hy FHA; wKe} SATA; TMd? GAT- 
ae — c) Lo? om fagat 

14. Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox?. Cited by Dev 3.48 —— a)cMy sOx! sPuo etecaeratr, wKe 
weet — b) Pus Peargasy; Pud GaAs; Dev TarIaT AT; Jo? Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] J ; Be? aT — 
c) wKt! Kt? BK sOx! nPu! Pu’ sPuS Pu? er; NK FT; Bo Tar” 

15. Cited by Hem 2/1.15; Dev 3.48 — a)wKt! ent ug a fe sar aaf; rMd4 wd — b) 
NK¢t* GAT; MT'r® wetet:— d) [Jolly Nd] AT aT; NNg Lo? FAT; Md} GMy Fai, Pu’ HM; Ox? aay; 
Jo! sasaeita; Be} aeft:; Tr aad 

16.* Cited by Apa 447; Laks 12.37; Hem 2/1.14; Dev 3.48, 4.184 — a) Bo wae; BK 
om TA — b) Lo! F: Bed; Dev 4.184 BETS [typo?]; TMd4 BSAHS; Bo BSras; Be! 
BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo! Lo? sOx! Pu} sPu® Pu® Tj! mTr? Polly Ku] oS; 
Tr! ma @e; GMd! 1Md3 GMy Tr? [Jolly Nd] @4; nPu! @4; GMd Te — c) BK FIGeT; 
oMd! que fé — d) Apa fagéar. aterafeepc; Pu om + Sea, wKt! Parada: BK Baa; 
Tr ogre 

17. Cited by Laks 12.37 — a) Lo! cMd! Tr? UF Ua; rMd3 Vet Va — b) Lo Md? Tr! 


662 Chapter 8 


waster watt are: aferorpeste | 

Ue: AAAs: Tal Tat caTaala Ugcil 
UA WAIT Fe A MATa: | 

wat treats sate frearet ar fread ileal 
aerararasttat ar art SRE: | 
ae Tat TF Ye: BHT MRol 

WET YR Hor Tat ofraaay | 

mer atater care ax sifta wer: NR QVM 


TOT HTT: BANAT UR Bll 
srataatgat gqeat aaterit a east | 


frat; Be? Wa ACT; NNg Presta ; rMd3 GMy -atfer ae; mTr?: — d) GMd! tMd? 0Or Tr? 
Laks FoARTT; Lal wears; mTr9 eafereater 

18. Omitted in oOr; padas a-b omitted in Pu’. Cited by Vij2.305; Apa 866; Madh 3.15 
— a) Vij Tat Wests Bate; Bo Lo! gat — b) GMd! Tr! mTr? MTrSMadh Wet weet aferor 
[Madh afer]; Pu? Put Praret aa PRI [cf. 19d]; wKe 91e; Te “yerfer; BBe? Ho freafer 
— c) Pu? Pu' fearttae: vate, Te? adt; nKe ad — d) Ho ITT; Tr? “gare, Tj? mTr® 
*Frrester 

19. Cited by Apa 604; Laks 12.35; Dev 3.49;Madh 3.26— a) cMd! 30st; nKtt Ug & 
wa; GMy “are — b) 1Md! sOx! sPuo Head; Dev fe; Laks T; NK AeTas: — c) wKe! TAT; 
1Md? gate: — d) Md} Frere; GM? fararet; Apa afe; nK¢! faad; Lo! Freeer 

20. Cited by Apa 601; Dev 3.38;Mddh 3. 22— a) Ho cMd! rMd3 ara ; BK om T; 
sCa J — b) wKe HIT aT ares: Apa a Bq: sBBe “arige:; Be? Ox3 SET; oOr 
“arrga — c) Dev wtacnt T TT ; Bo Md? sve J; 1Md4 Fafert — d) Ox? “AAT WE:; Ox 
“aaa @e:; Tr! Md? GMd oOr Apa om 

21. Cited by Apa 601; Laks 12.29; Dev 3.37;Madh 3.22 — a) TMd* 4eq; wKt! 77; Bo 
Beet; Be? tMd? GMy Apa Laks Dev UaHteq; GMd! Tr! mTr‘ mTr° 3s: WHReT — b) Be? t Md? 
oMy Apa Laks Dev 3st at Ma} aay — c) Dev HST; oOr Aral wee T— d) Wa 
ceatt:; Bo Taft; La! defer 

22. a) Lo} Lot Lo’ Ox? Tj! Tj?agnet, tMd4 “utes — b) wKt! arfeacmonfrae (BSF cor 
to Aller: Haag (Est; Bo afer ; Md? tMd4 “fest: — c) TMd? GMy Wa [Jolly Nd] aca; 
La! aare — d) sOx! sPus gfffez ; nCa Lo tMd4 sfiter; cMy eraadifed; Pu’ “difeat; Bo 
Tr “dter 

23, Cited by Laks 12.7; Dev 3.70; Madh 3.41 — a) Md? a4 caferera — b) Tr? 
aus: GMy Sea: 7Mas Seay: — d) wKO Tr? “area; NKt BK Lo! Lo? Ox} wPu! 
Pu} Pud Pu? Pu’ Wa Go [Jolly G] arate 


Chapter 8 663 


iA Aah weErathr srkrorey Nv 
Tatras tarts TUT | 
ranieareraagan after T URI 


areata sear wit aT | 
aaa Tease AT: UREM 
Tears Rar araaerqaesad | 
Tae AAT Araartagars: WRI 
aya UT eet Pregetr a | 
ufaqarg a city faevrareargeg 7 URI 
Ataedttat g atat f aay: eararerar: | 
absaraaes afte: gPritafe: WRe 


24. Omitted in BKt®. Cited by 4pa611; Dev 3.80, Madh 3.46 — a) Tr? mTr® arg; 
1Md3 “aut Sat; Jm Apa FeAT— b) TMd3 “emt at mTrt Has — c) TMd4 aviswanfer — c-d) 
sOx! sPuo atisaer wratfir csteaatfir aarfiort — d) cMd! rMd‘ aro; Tr? arfeer; aMd3 
ert; Bo mr; cMd> pao; cMy Hratar 

25. Padas a-b omitted in BKt’. Cited by Apa 620; Laks 12.77; Dev 3.56 72; Madh 3.30 
— a) Laks Madh a7eaf&ar” — c) Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] yaa” — d) Hy Wa “Att; Madh 
*aapafte: ; 1M} afer; Dev 3.72 afta; Lo’ Madh at 

26, Padas a-b omitted in NKt* BKt. Cited by Apa 620, Laks 12.77; Dev 3.112; Madh 
3.43 — a) Tj? Apa sera ; rMdé “fearrem— b) TMd? 2727; Bo Jo? La! Lo! Lot Lo’ 
oMd5 Ox} nPul Pu? Pus Pu? Tr? ardor; wKt! 1Md3 oMy MTP afar — c) Pu? Pul aaa 
+Md4 aryaq La! tMd4 Laks ‘feeertor — d) tMd3 Zed; Pud Pu’? [Jolly G] aad; Te aa; 
La! Laks BU; NNg BRS: Pu? Pul SIS; Md? AT 

27. Padas c-d omitted in MTr°, and ma in Lo!. Cited by Laks 12.752; Dev 3. 310 — a) 
BKt aver ; NKt4 Lo? GMd! tMd? GMy MTP Dev arareas, wKt?  ararerfeay; Laks ara; 
Be? Ca Ox “feat; Ho ‘fecha; nKet “fear Ry — b) Laks Wag FT Wea — c) sOx! 
sPu’ aTaat; TMd? GMy Dev Wacetet AAT; Md? “HTaat — d) Hy Jo! Mandlik KSS Dave 
[Jolly Ku Nd] araearfaa ; 1Md3 areeathrt ; GMd! “atare 

28. Omitted in Jm; padas c-d omitted in GMd!; padas a-b ma in Lol. Cited by Laks 
12.685; Dev 3.310 — a) Boaatr:; nKt4 dar; TMd3 aa ; Tr? ae; nPul gar; NNg sOx! Pu? 
Pu‘ sPuS [Jolly G] a8aT ; Pu Pu’ are; Pu2 Put St — b) Ho fear; iMd3 freperfy — c) 
wKkt! aurafag t— d) Be “ety TF 

Additional verse in Mandlik KSS Dave, which is the same as 11.189. 

29. Cited by Vij 2.147; Apa 752; Laks 12.685; Dev 3.311,659 — a) Be! sffacitat; Bo 
Sagar; BKe oOr FT; GMdS atat F— a-b) Pu’ Pu’ Sfaxftat T arat t+ F separ srevay: — b) 
Ho sOx! Ox sPu® Tr? etgararar at [Tr? eet]; Wa tegeea areear:; wKtO Saey:; Lo? 
waraa:, oMd! warerar: — c) wKt! aiPaer’. cMd! T? aiBoaedie’: Ho arBarenrdie ; 
™ da aipecarite’. Pu? Pu’ ary eared: wPu! atienrdie ; Bo Jo? Lo? cMd! rMd3 cMd 
oMy Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr5 MTr® Dev Caredte ; mTr4 “taredte” — d) tMd4 “afer 





664 Chapter 8 
waTeatiae fer ue sre Prema | 
wate aTatceaat ator qarAsTT UZ oll 
aaah at gard asygqer warfaker | 
aaa wader cart aq err 13 211 
HACATT TACT BA Bley WT ACA: | 
aot ee water a aarr qvenshr RI 
aradtary AEAKT wacerkerragyy: | 
aaret ataat ahr wat T URRU 
Teed sear frsgwetattoay | 
aeart ahr agar ary USAT aaa UZ 
marae at qatar aeart Aaa: | 
aerate VET UST gaa aT WSU 


30.* Cited by Vij 2.33, 173; Apa 778; Dev3.311-2 — a) Lo® yore Bo WIte:; Tj? ware 
Pus soreereat ; Pu? Put earfit; wCa Ox? “feet; Ho Lo? cMd! nNg Pu? Put sOx! sPut 
MTP Vij2.173 Apazet — b) Be! Frame — c) wKt! sreatea’t eartt — d) Ho sOx! sPuo ett 
ata FT: Tr? eT aT TT:; BK NPu! Wa Vij Apa Te 

31.* Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Dev 3.311 — a)nKt4 at — b) wKt! atggeHl, Be! sBe’ Bo 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K® wKt? BKé La! [cor to sh] Lo! Lo* Lo? NNg Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu’ 
Tj! Tj?mTr? Wa Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave WaASaY, Lot AAA cor tot Fraser, 
Be? Htygsar, Ho Lo® sOx! Ox? sPu’ Tr? at fraear, Lot azawway, Pu? StyeAT but me to 
atqarsat — c) Ho La! sOx! sPuS Fae; oMy [Jolly Nd] 42a; rMd} aaa; cMd! MTs eearfe 
— d) Md} earft FEMA’; Lot Lo’ om at 

32.* Omitted in BKt. Cited by Laky 12.555; Dev 3.312 — a) Tr? AdgaaTeT; Be! nKe 
NNg nPu! Pu? Put Laks FAS TSET[Be! “aieq]; wKe! zaTarcqeTET; BBe? Be} Bo BCa Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt® La! [but cor] Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr? mTr> Dev 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave H4@arAT TET — b) cMd! 231; Bo Ho Jo? wKt! La! Lo? Md? 
cMd° GMy sOx! Ox? Pu} sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tr! Tr? [Jolly R]Go Ku Re @aratat, cMd> J — c) Bo 
wKt} sOx! nPu! Tr? af; Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G]atret — d) Pud Pu? aera 

33. Ox? [Jolly M] transpose 33 and 34; padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Vij 2.33, 173; 
Apa 778;Laks 12.555; Dev 3.313 — a) wKt! “art; Te? sets — b) oOr Waren; Tj! Tr? 
“aTaT Fo:; Lo! Md} cMy Put arc 3a: — d) Md! mTrS APT ent; Be} “Garett 

34. Omitted in Lo? Lo5; padas c-d omitted in BK ®. Cited by Laks 12.555; Dev 3.311; 
padas c-d cited by Apa 841— a) mTr® Pract — b) Pu? Put ferdershe; cMd! “eaftsct — c) 
Dev & war AR WT:; Lo! Fer; Lo? GMd! tMd3 GMd> GMy wNg Tr! Tr? MTPMTr° aR; 
nKtt SRT; Lo? Tet; Lo! TRY; mTr* mTr°Apa Wega — d) Apa afeaares faseer 7; Pu? Put 
aan Prarcad; cMd! are ct oeaatd; Md arene yea; Lo! deletes AH; MTV 
wast; CMe Usicet; Ho GMd! ast 44; Be? Lo! ast get; Md! oda; BBe? AAT 

35.* Cited by Vij 2.34-5; Apa 641; Laks 12.791; Dev 3.313— a) sOx! sPuo Tr 7aefafer 
— b) Be! wKt? Lo® Taf; sBe? cMd® “fXet; nKt4 GMd! Laks FT sda; Md3 tMd4 cGMd> 


Chapter 8 665 


wad FT aver: wafrearrreay | 
aaa a Premet deqaretiodt sory aE Il 
fagteg atari ger yatatated faery | 
sarangi atertratare a: zl 

4 7 weatate com get fafea Perc | 
aang fasrat crate argr wag RCI 
feftat f& georat ergata a farat | 
sehrerTaraT waaay a: NRV 
qa adh tant aga aay | 

Tat agagasraairermaita Paftanz isl! 
feared aofteratar ater | 


oMy Tr! [but me sh| mTr* MTr° Yolly Nd Gr] Fett FGA; Tr! ma Aa: — c) sOx! sPub 
cTeredtart TEXT; Bo SET — d) Lo} om ST; Be! Lo} Tr Laks T 

36. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.791; Dev3.313; padas a-b cited by Apa 641 — a) 
oMd! aerquse: wKt! aererea: — b) Pu? Deva fae; Tr! “Hear — c) tMd? Ger at FT 
@qet; Ho Pu’? FT; Ox? aT; mTrSfraater — d) Be! Ho Jo! Tj! mTr> Wa [ Jolly M8? G Ku R] 
wearer: Tj! “etredt 

37. Cited by Apa 640; Dev 3.314 — a) GMd! fate aremt wer; ak fagrrer sero, 
Ox} ¥2T; oOr BRAT — b) Apa [vI]}TaAA’; mT FAR; Lolly M'3-5-8-9] ae — c) Tj! 
*oradtet; TM? “CaTeefte; Pu? Put Wa eedtar; mT earache 

Additional verse in Pu? Pu? Pu* Mandlik [, T, 5, S] Dave KSS: 

arareg fater wear fey ust faa | 
at at ¢ goiter ea: areata || 
d) Pu? Paeata 

38. Omitted in GMd@. Cited by Apa 640, Laks 12.793; Dev 3.315 — a) Ho Lo! Lo® aq; 
Be} Lo MTr‘ MT 1° aq; Apada; Dev aa; Wat awa ; Hy om q; Be nKt4 ver Pater — b) 
MTP gerorffed; cMy awreet fated; Md‘ afed; Md! fed Fate — c) La! aeaehr — d) 
wKt3 at; Lo ret; wKt! Lo! Tr! mTr> Wa Apa Laks Dev Prasad; wKe Tj! Freaeata; Lo? 
waa, Jo? Frasraq; cMd! tMd} GMy sOx! sPué [Jolly Nd] Apa [v1] fafaferte 

39. Omitted in GMd°. Cited by Laks 12.793; Dev 3.314 —- a) HofARAT, BK om fF; Bo 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo Lot GMd! oOr Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu? Pu® Tj? MTr3 mTr4 MTr® (Jolly G Nd} 
g; Pu? Put J — b) Laks ATQaTATHeeT FT; oOr “aa Siferdt — c) cMd! tMdé Tr! mT r4 wTr5 
MTrS CATS; Laks AMTSAATIST; Pu2 Put af ager’ — d) cMd! “ofarifer 

40. Cited by Vij 2.36; Apa 641 — b) Md4 aa; GMd? Usait; Bo BCa wKt? GMy sOx! Pu? 
sPuS UST; tMd3 GMd5 GMy Tr! Tr mT ro Se: GMd! ae; NKt! Pu? Put Apa aed; Le Tj! 
aed; La! Lo* Lo’ sOx! Ox} nPu! sPu [Jolly M‘] Me [patha] dRrEc; Lo* Bh [patha] 
are; Bo sBe Ho desea; BetMd* Uefa; wKe! deer — c) Tj wig ae : Lo 
aeuy; wKt! ASI Sa; Lo? Lo} Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ “qa; Kt? “gostasdt — d) Lo? cMd! 
oMd5 nNg Tj! Tr! “Aat@ | TMd3 GMy “aaitearatfer 


666 Chapter 8 


ater younta cert osferaraag uy el 
eather ware Hato ge AeaishT Area: 
fra wafer oteer et ea arteqaftaar: sil 
ATA BS UAT ATATET YET: | 

a a wttareatar Wearet errr esi 
FUT TATA TY: THT | 
UTA PET qa: THT Ul 
aeraes TARA STAT: | 

aa ares a er a aaerefedt fra: Well 
afarrakta aq erg entteer feontary: 
aeHoM AAs THOTT USE I 
semtitraarhtparaes asa: | 


41. Cited by Dev 3.65; Madh 3.36— a) Jo? Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] suferraterratars; Lo® 
sOx! sPuS arf — b) HowKt? sOx! sPuo =ftoft’; Tr? °enrer etfa, cMd! 1Md? “eater 
aaa; Md? GMd> GMy Tr! mTr4 MTr® [Jolly Nd] Dev Madh water araaryt — d) BBe? Be? 
Bo wKt! Lo! eeatafe ; Dev & at aff; Madh@& af aft’; oMy sferersara; Put sferara- 
aq; Be! wKt! oOr wWearesad; Jo? Lo? GMd! cMd> nPu! Tj! Tr! Ra [Jolly R] TRaTeaAT 

42, Omitted in Be! — a) Hy earff; akt® erat; Lo? M4 Bart — b) nKé arene — 
c) Bo water; Tj! Starer; Md? GMd5 GMy mTr® [Jolly Ndj@teetert — d) cMd! 1Md3 rMd! 
GMd@ GMy Tr! MTr4 mTr® [Jolly Nd] Na & S& TF eater: [rMd4 GMy gy] 

43. Cited by Vij 2.5; Apa605; Dev 3.61— a) GMd5 arava. Tr? Feta: oOr HF — 
b) Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] ast arerer Heafae; GMd! Md} GMy Wstearer + YET: foMd! TT]; 
oOr Usa ATI; Ho Ox sPuS [but cor] Tr? ATT; wPu! Greg: — c) Lo Put F AT, NK tMd4 
Tj! Tr? mT Devt armft — d) Be! sBe? Be? BCa Hy Jo! Jo? Kt? nKt4 Lo? GMd GMy oOr 
Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr3 mTrt+mTr> mTr® [Jolly Ku R Nd] BA N@ Rn Nd Re Mr Mandlik KSS Dave 
yeas; Md‘ wetaret; tMd3 aad; Pu? Put Tears, Pud wrest; Tj? om BT 

44. Lo? Tj! transpose padas a-b and c-d. Cited by Dev 3.56;Madh 3.30 — b) wKt} Far; 
Pu‘ a¢ — c) GMd! +Md4 aargqart Aas [iMd? aang J; La! “arta — d) tM? Wa; Lo? 
Ty ae 

45.* Padas b-d omitted in Ox}. Cited by Laks 12.15 — a) Bh [patha] Aes Tas; 
1Md} Laks @et TA; Ho La! Lo! sOx! sPuS Tr? J — b) Wa Ta=TATPaT; La! Lo? Lot Loé 
NNg o0Or Pu? Pu! Pud MTr4mTr5 MTr§ Lolly M G] Bh Me Jolly Jha Dave ART; BK AUT; 
wkt! @rfger: — c) Lal ear WT eraere TF; Tr? far; Hy Jm Jo! K@ La! mTr3Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave &T FT HIG FT; BK! HS T SITET; Be’ ST aT — d) mTr® “far; cMd! cMd5 feafer:; Hy 
Laks ere 

46. Omitted in Ox*. Cited by Dev 1.25—— a) TMd? Lo* & Sle; nNg Jee ; Dev TET 
Ox? Tg — b) Lot Lo’ enffianag, Md? enfieprar; PuS fesrfeft:; mTre facia: —c)mTro ot 
as KS ataHTS ; Ho AAATA; Jo? “atte” — d) Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] “aTTeT; Ho 
ae After this verse Lo4 ‘nadie verses 9.235-46, and Lo® verses 9.235-47b 


Chapter 8 667 


Tratsearrrrmitfraay Usoll 
Rear a sgagaafire: | 
aoa: Ae area WSC 
SHOT ACERT SHATAAT TI 
Wh weet wT THT TUSSI 


qT: at areaeehaaisaairee | 

Te Taher: Me TATA U4 oll 
seer 7 eur Pore | 
qragtreeaet quot a ated: We el 


47. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox}; pada-d ma shin Tr'. Cited by Laks 12.331 — a) Be! Ho 
Tj! aerforret’. Bo antares’: cMd! ameter’; rMd? sreracht” — b) wKt! °aardat; TMd? 
“sept; Md “oat Z; sOx! sPuS atfear:; Pu? Pu’ Tr? Wa [Jolly G] Mr afc; Be! Aifea: 
—c) Pu? Put Tree” — c-d) oMdd “Sarhtirerretpeacifenfact — d) Md! mT “eraviferar’ ; 
1Md? Pud “eorifar’; Pu? Cert fear? rMd? GMy wNg oOr Tr? MTr® N@Go Ku “att 
far’; wKt “atfact. Bh gives both readings: Taeuqatzsaet ar, Me supports the ablative; 
for the accusative, see the similar expression at 8.48d. 

48. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox. Cited by Laks 12.324 — a) BKt5 "Sek: oOr Ta: sae; 
PuS Pu? “ave a; 1Md4 “aeeter — b) Jo? “areeafitas:; Lo! 1Md? Pu Pu? Wa Dev “Huan; Tj! 
*Fafttes: — c) Tr? “order Te — d) oMd! araateareraerst [cf. 50d]; Md? GMa GMy Tr! mT 
Na Laks areaaq; Jo! Weds; Jo? Tj! “Farerz’ ; Lo! rMd# Pu’ Pu’ Tj? “Atay; wKt! sOx! sPue 
“aftrept; BBe? after 

49. Omitted in Lot Lo® Ox> Put; pada-d omitted in GMd. Cited by Vij 2.40; Apa 645; 
Laks 12.324; Dev 3.387; Madh 3.191 — a) Apa [vi}ereter — b) tT Md4 GMy Pu? Tr’ Apa [vl] 
wad af’; Devoaarat?’; Be! THATAL mT Hearafe ; wKt? Lo! 1Md3 cMy Wa [Jolly R 
Nd] aT; cMd! ar — co) Md‘ sgmeTT ; Or aTeTaAaT; GMd! 1Md4 om araaet ... [50a] aT 
[haplo] — d) Jo? wKt} nKtt La! Lo! Lo? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] at 

50. Padas a-b [up to “TAIT omitted in Pu‘, and pada-a in GMd?. Cited by Laks 12.329; 
Dev 3. 386 — a) Pu Pu? a 4:; nPu! Dev &@H; Ho MATT; NKt* a; Ho sOx! sPu’ Tr? 

“aeutge b) Jm “aaotert; Ho TMd3 Pu? Wa Achar; nKt4 sOx! sPuo “Hfotera; Pub 

“autert; mTr! afttas — c) Des [in two mss of Laks] 7 Ua APaAwHeT:; BBe? 7 TF; BKt’ T 
aT; Lot sOx! sPu® taney ; Wa aah Bo “arene; Td? mT 16 area; GMa arener — d) 
cMd! war eeenviay; BKO Pus Pu? mTr*eaa; Pud Pu? aearer ; wKt! area; Lo! cor to 
aaa dt; Be? wKt? nKt* La! rMd? cGMd> GMy oOr Tr! Garett; mTr! Sereaaery, Ho 
“oer, Md! Use; Ox3 “aepT 

51.* Cited by Laks 12.264; Dev 3.287; Madh 3.153 — a) Jo NNg Pu? Put Pu? Pu’ [Jolly 
G] ae faacart g; rMd‘ aefteraere J; sOx! sPue arf a arearfife; wkt! nKe ae FT 
aaa J; oOrsreft agar J; Lot Lo’ Hat; nPu! ser waa: MTMaet Tea; Lo! GMd! 
at go ar’; Lo! pf g ea — b) Md? tMd4 GMd> cMy nPu! [Jolly M'3-5-8 Me N Nd] 
Dev Jolly BRA; Ox? PST; Bo wk} ffi; Pud Pu’ fesrata; dé raft — d) cMd! 
“eIPFPTSeT, Ho area: 


668 Chapter 8 


wages steamer sare | 
ahraret fazrear weer aveagheareg WG 21 
weet war fate fafeerage a a: | 
Tareas aftararagqery NY 3H 
safest wT yatecarerater | 
aaa arf ge: aaherata tly vil 


Additional verse in Be? Ho nKt* Lo? Pu? Pu* Wa [= 8.139]: 
seo Sa often Toray aE | 
amet g faye cariegareaay | 
a) Lo? 301; wKt? aatafeaeret — c) Lo? read BR; Pu? Put afegeor — c-d) nKt# 
aed feayor warearery 
A further additional verse in sCa Mandlik [%, ¢, 3, S] KSS Dave; placed after 52 in 
La! [this is taken from Me who cites this verse with T7g:]: 
aa aT AMepd TF wor a zt frac | 
T roar: qatar eet fear way || 
a) La! 84; Mandlik KSS Dave 72M ; La! Mandlik KSS Dave ope aa — b) Me 
areft ta 4 —~ c) La! Mandlik KSS Dave “o*t —~ d) Me Fate @at a7; Ca far 
adr 
52.* Cited by Laks 1288 — a) Kt? Md3 amt; BK STISAIT ; Ho Tj! ater; KP 
*enfoger, Md “eauterr — b) wKt! Héteq’; Bo étqwHET — c) Be! afiyw; Me [patha] 
afta, BBe om “ater; Be! sBe Be? Ca Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? BKt) Lo! Lo? oOr 
sOx! Ox? sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! [cor to sh] TP? MTr? [Jolly Ku] Laks Ku Rn Re Mr Mandlik KSS 
fesreer; cMd 5 feareeres — d) BBe? nK¢ tMd3 GMy Pw Pué MTr*uTr [but me} Volly M'3-8- 
°N Nd] Jolly Jha Dave BRU, Md! BE; Ox? “wr AARAT; Be! Bo BCa Lo? GMa? sOx! sPu 
Tj! Tr! Wa Re Volly R K] aetgfe ; Ho 1Md3 cMy araale ; Be? wKt cMd! oOr araahe ; 
of uRagfe; Lo’ agate’; Md‘ aeigfesiq; Lo? NNg Ox Pud Pu? [Jolly M'3-~ G N Nd] 
Me [patha] Bh Jolly Der aT aafeara; Volly M45] a earyfesta; Pu2 Put mTr* mTr® arez 
Pafeaty 


53. Omitted in GMd! TMd‘ Ox? verses 53 and 54 transposed in Lo‘ Lo®; folios contain- 
ing 8.53-94 missing in Jm. Cited by Laks 12.80; Dev 3.108 — a) Ld Lo? Pu? Pu’ atest; Pud 
afeat; Be! BBe? Be? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} sBK® Lo! Lo? Ox? Ox? Pu’ Tj! T 
Tr! [cor to sh] TP? MTr? Wa Polly R] Ku Rn Re Mr Dev Mandlik KSS 434, Bo atest, wKt! 
Nd #2; Lo} Tr? 77; Lo! TET; Pu? Put eT, Ke Tt — b) NPu! Pu? Put fer; Pus Pu? 
[Jolly G] “gadifer a; Bo “Tea a; Lo? sKt “gar a; 7 “Geared, *Md3 “ages; Lo’ “aga 3; 
Ho “wed T— cc) cMd? aa a sOx! sPuS Pave’; wKt! wareriraart ; Ho “AUTAUHT; Bo 

“arr — d) wKkt! fesftarcar a gaat; nNg fesftata & gerd; Pub uTr4 Tr Patten; , Dev 
faerr ; : oMy areftar’ Md rasa 

54. Omitted in GMd! rMd?*. Cite by Laks 12.80; Dev 3.108 — a) Hy amafe: : aK tS afe- 
zat; Wa F4eaalT; Bo Lot Lo’ tMd? Pu’ Dev saraeet; Laks “SAITT; BK T — b) sBe 
“wavatad; Be! pCa La! Lo* oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly M!--9 

R] “waaay; BK “eaaeRad,; Bo “waaerate; nKt* cGMd@ “ecaftrerrater; Lo! "ea- 
arate; 1Md3 “equarate; sOx! sPuS “eater arate; mTr4 mTr® eat erate; Be? KaaeTAd — c) 


Chapter 8 669 


srerarer arfarhrar sar erect Fer: 
rearart set a aaderanth Froradg Waal 


Feigwma TPE a a frwraagq | 
Te yates frag ASTM & tar UGE 


Wat: ater Aepar are fear a: 
ater: araradts afafe Fare ull 
arin 7 aq Fare eat ee ata: | 
a aq Prana sqarg et afer weiter: uy cil 


Sa | 
TIT etal eat aafeyor TAT KRM 


Dev Baran : Be? “forfearaars; Tj! arf — d) BKt® Lot Lo® “Rafer 

55. Omitted in GMd! — a) oOr S31; wKt! FEAT me to AeraTT; La! “area; TZ 
° ser; 1Md3 MTP Nd Tee; oMy “aTeq; Lo! “aTa; Ho “aT 7 aTRPT; BBE arferfreq — b) 
BKtS ft, La! ar; Pud Pu? [Jolly G] Hafaat FT, HowMATTaT:; Be! BBe sOx! Ox? nPu! 
sPuS Tr! Wa afta; 7Md3 GMy “Tf — c) nKtt faworarer; oOr Pu? Pui eer; Tr! 
reed; 1Md3 “arr — d) wNg Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] Feepaht, Ma} “safer; Lo’ Te Fora; Tj! 
froma; +Md4 froragy 

,5& a) wKt! after 7 aRIEe [ef 58a]; mTr4 yercyat + ag, mT ro gel aq 7 
qa ; t™Md4 qaregena; Kt? “aT: WK war; Be? "wR; Lo! aT, Hy 4algth— b) nKt* FF; 
1Md? 2a fear’; sOx! sPuS & Fifer’; wKt! @ area ; Lo! araaa; Te! fraTea — c) Tr“ 
oMd> yataery; Ho La! fare — d) pBe? *eaia; Te ° safer, Tj! ‘gutsrérae; Ho oMd’ “aut- 
cated: cMd! ‘aeutarérad; Pu’ “guteadtadr 

57* Cited by Laks 12.80; Dev 3.108; pada-a cited by Kum 1.3.24— a) GMd! tMd? cGMd? 
oMy Tr! [Jolly M'-3-8-9 Nd] Dev Laks NSm [M&] 1.52[com; Jolly 1.61] afd stare: Se HT 
[Tr! aang; Md seqch]; Bo aTaTe; Pue Pu? aAaTa:; Be! sBe? Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? Lo 
Tj! Tj? mT? Lolly Ku R] Go Ku Rn Mr Mandlik KSS afer: aft; Bo Ho Lo! Lo* Lo® Ox3 
Tj! FepeT; Lo? Ox? Aap; rMd4 Seapwt — b) Lo’cMd’ fastegeh; cMd! fearr ar; Tj fear 
a; BKtS Fesrerer: — c) GMd! rMd3 GM@ GMy Tr! [but cor sh] [Jolly Nd]exen eas Sy; 
TMd! eet; Bo TATS:; Lo! afer; Be! Tj! Hl: Bo after — d) Dev aéfatsafate; Be! 
BBe? Be’ Bo BCa Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt* La! Lo! Lo? Lot Lo> TMd? tMd* GMd> 
GMy NnNg oOrsOx! Ox? Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! [Jolly R Nd] Re Mandlik KSS TAT 

58.* Omitted in [Jolly M'3} pada-a lacuna in tMd*. Cited by Laks 12.80 — a) Bo 
are; wk) afer; xPu! sfraer; Laks aPrart — b) sk gareear; Be} wKt! Lo! Lot 
Ox? Pw MT? MTr* Mandlikaa; mT SgaT; Ma? Tr? mT r® Feat Jha SAT, NPu! @vSHT; La! 
atey quse:; oOr wfaq — c) Pu? Pula Daaaar gare; tMd? facet, rMd* Pavey; cMd* 
@ vend; Tr? freer, Lo Prverer garg — d) Md? GMy aed; wKt! at:; GMd! Tats; Ox3 
ata: ~~ After this verse Ox? inserts 9.51-9; Lo* Lo® insert 9.52-9. 

59. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox} [Jolly M'-3-4]. Cited by Laks 12264; Dev 3.286 Madh 
3.152 —~ a) Md? at arrgdtars; cMy at alggetarestar Prear, eK om aT, aKt araragey’ ; Dev 
Madh arated; nNg aTaet adtart; Lo? arant gatas; cMd aaah agate; wKt! arate 


670 Chapter 8 


Tested FaTaeM safIorr | 

lig 
waar aftr: sat eaery arr: | 
Se ta ee 
char aaaaend =a ecard a 
arat: aay aoty wat: erty arkerr: | 
waenasgen fata atte ean 
arfaatert ata at erat av After: | 

1 Fea: weal a areal wT afrar: evil 


aatart. Jolly M°] aaa adtart — b) Ho fear at a feared, Madh Pear at aPrateta; 
Pu’ fear ar ar aaatq; Md‘ fra, Tj! arate; Pu? Put afafer; tM? aMy ar atafer; GMd> aT 
afe aT aeq; Be? T? arafer areaq; Be! Pus arafeaqad; Dev arafer area; Pu’ Pu? aT Ga: — 
ce) Ma at FIT WAST; Be? TT aTaesat; Trt mT ro TTT; rMd4 crest; Kt? Lo? 
grenfsit — d) 1Md4 queat; oMd! aus; 1Md? aret at fE°; Md! sOx! sPuo et cafe’; nPul fet 
aafe 

60. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? [Jolly M'3); padas c-d ma in Tr'; pada-b omitted in 
sOx!, Cited by Laks 12.102; padas c-d cited by Dev 3.174 — a) Tr? FeueTTATET; oOr 
qearrarmared; wKkt! gétearrart g; cMd! get; Tj! gérrert: Lo! Pu Mir! gta; Ke 
“aH & —b) cMd! paarei; Be? Tj! parte; ake Paraey; wKe PAA; Ho Paras; Be! 
1d? GMd GMy safer; Laks afar, Pu2 Put aftftor; Ho atferer: — c) Pud Pu’ Prae:; 
Lo! aat; aKé are: arr’; Tr? “Rfeir, cMd! “Rrateh:; nNg Pu’ Pu? “Rrateat— d) Tj! gt 

61. Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox} Yolly M'3} ma in Tr'. Cited by Laks 12104 — a) Laks 
agar afi; Bo BRT — b)nNg eer g afer: — c) Tr? wean; BKe “araraenfir — d) 
BKt Tr? aay; GMS aret ot; BK TT 

62. Omitted in Pu’ Polly M'3]. Cited by Apa 665 — a)wKt! JéT:; Ho WferT:; cMd5 
ghar & g; aké Her: cMd! For: — c) La! sige; nK tt sear; Apa swsa:; BBe? sOx! 
sPuS MTP aregepr:; GMd! aegeht; nPu! Pu’ sreqepr:; Laks $Qe:; oOr FAM:; Bo Lo? area; 
BBe? La! oOr afer7 _; Be aerate; Hy “wet 

63. Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Laks 12104; Dev 3.177 — a)nPu! araT atry 
aay; TMd3 cMy ayaretdtatty; Lo! Laks 5TAT: — b) Be! Be? wKt! Lo! Lo? oOr Hrareray; 
Md? oMd? cMy [Jolly Nd] ort: aety; Pu? aig — c) Tj? ad; Be? La! adatt; aK 
adad; La! Tr? “gait — d) Be? fardtaraasiia; Bo fertrared; sCa wKt® Td? oMd° sOx! 
nPu! sPud faaetara; rMd3 fartiarer 

64. Omitted in [Jolly M'-4]. Cited by Dev 3.177;Mdadh 3.66; pada-a cited by Vij 2.80 
— a) Be arf; pK arf; Tj! Tr? ATR; sOx! sPuo mT r5 aret; rMd4 Atay; GMd5 aver; Pu2 
ara’; Lot Lo’ aTat:; Te aTaT:; GMy afar; TMd3 Fat — b) Pu? Put aerar Ae Sfeor:; Lo! + 
averar, TM? GMd? a aes; Tj! seat Shor: — c) cMd! ada + Hada: wKe Geeta: — 
d) GMy lacuna at 7 STRATA, BBe? Seay; pCa AEATAT; wKt! ameIMTAT, Bo GMd! after: 


Chapter 8 671 


a aralt safe: erat a arengafteat | 

a ara a fesert a agear faata: legit 

areata a amet 7 ert fran | 

a gat a firgaat arecat a frecfere: ell 
\ 


Wat FT Aat Atearat FT aaontadiied: 
T AAA A BATA AT Bat ATT aEHT: UTI 


ett arer fart: eafsarat waar feo: 
YRTT AT: FAMUTARAATAIAAT: UGC 
sqaure g a: era qatar Rarearz | 
WAAAY AT WACAT ATSAT NSM 
ararerraa art aresat exfater ar | 
Brey separ ahr sweat WaeT AT loll 


65. Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks12.111; Dev 3.177; Madh 3.66 — a) wKt! 
araveft; rMd3 aret:; Be’ ae — b) Tr! + 7 Hreqalteat; TMd3 Tj! orp: Be? *apdiody; Ho 
“gaftoait — c) Hy aaa; aMd4 fesgey; Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] TeeaT — d) Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] 7 
a agfeatire:, Ox? + emfatria:; Pu2 Put fatter; Laks Pract: 

66. Omitted in [Jolly M'*}. Cited by Dev 3.177;Madh 3.66 — a) oOr aeaefay, rMd4 
Pu Pu’ arereftat; Wa arereftat, cMy aremeftar, rMd? area RT; wPu! arezeftat; cM dS 7 
carferar; rMd4 awHear, Ke? aHeat — b)oMd! 7 geqarft apd; Pu’ faeAfed — c) wKt! 
aTgeat; Ng fos; wKt! Lo? Tj! ary; TM? Bey — d) tM} ATT 

67. Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Dev 3.177; Madh 3.66 — a) Lo? areit — b) Tr! 
“erromratifed:: — c) TMd4 aPTATaT; cMy Tard; Tr? om at BrATat; Lo! watt — d) wKe + 
TAH: 

68. Omitted in nNg [Jolly M!-3]. Cited by Apa 665; pada-a cited by Vij 2.69 — a) 
oMd! fer af; cMy Baie; rMd? wat fe" —>) TMd4 agat; cM? anfeaat fesir:; Bo Lo® 
fest:; Md} fest — c) Wa Ur: aed aerny ; Bo aear:, MTr? at; cMd! afer — d) Tj? om 
area; GMy Pu? Put ATARI: 1Md3 RITA: Bo ATARATAT: 

69.* Omitted in [Jolly M! oh padas c- “dima i in Lot. Cited by Apa 671, Laks 12.117; Dev 
3.181 — a) TMd? “afer; Be? “uréifa; pCa “urét a; Tr! “sreaft a: — a-b) Pud Pu? 
qgaicefrcaredt — b) Be? “caret; Lo’ “caret; cMd> “caeft, 1Md* sOx! nPul sPu® Tr? faanfet; 
wKt! feratfear; cMd! fearfet:; kt) ferarfed — c) rMd3 “oat — d) wKe ardtedta; wKt! 
qétetz, Be} Bo Ho Hy Jo! K# BK Lo! nNg Ox3 nPu! Pu2 Pu3 Put Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Tj? Tr? mTr3 
Wa [Jolly M>8 G] Apa Laks Dev Me Re Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 3ereaty, Apa Dev 
area, BK aay 

70. Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Apa 674 Laks 12.117; Dev 3.181, Madh 3.70 — a) 
MTr Apa fexaiter’; La! fexrarareaa: Laks ferar arrayed; Md? wat — b) tMd3 cMy &— c) 
Tr? fereaor + VAT; Ox? aya Hs — c-d) Madh rerer ahh area TeyAT YaST aT — d) 
Tre a Ua saat aT; Md! ard; NNg JTS; Be! Pu? [Jolly M5*9 Nd] T 


672 Chapter 8 


TITAN JF AT agat AT | 
artaraeat arrqernrran TIT Ws 2N 
MEAT T aay VATE NT T | 
anqrsatay Teer T TT ATT: WAM! 
ager aftagiare arfiaer aerfera: 

aay TF epery ois Boaraary Wo gn 
aAaaaeareyr aanreatag feats | 

at wet gararatt gatahat a daar worl 
arat qeyaraeg fagaarieare | 
stare area ter eantter Aare Wok 
wararasttaad zoe fer | 
Geeta agarg ages TUPATT Woe 


71. Omitted in [Jolly M'3]. Cited by Laks 12.117; Dev 3.196 — a) Be BBe’ Be? Bo BCa 
Hy Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? nK@ Lo? Lo? nNg Ox Pu? Pu? Pué Pu® Tj! Tj? Te MTP} mTr* MTromTr® 
[Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 7 — b) Tr! aret forget zor; Be? Kt? aety; cMd! oOr 
MTA MTr® are gq; Lal Ox? aret Tae; Md4* cMd$ agargd; oMd' tMd? GMy wTr® aaa; 
MO aaa ToT — c) Tr “arene; TS “arafeae; Lo! rMd) arary’ — d) Md} -gerearrrar; 
Bo “HAaT; BK “ATAAT; Lo? Tj! HAaRTAT 

72, Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks 12.117; Dev 3.183—- a) BBe? Be? Bo Ho BK 
Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo’ oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud sPuS Pu? Tr? [Jolly M G] Dev Jollyg — b) Pu’ 
a for ea; sOx! sPuo way am; Lo! “age”: BK lacuna at J — c) BBe? Pus Pu? “aR; Lo? 
qreey; rMd4 oreer — d) nNg ma sh 7; Ho Pud Pu? Tete; Bo TReIT; sOx! [but cor] sPuS 
qetette, rMd? Wa Teter; Lo} nPu! Tj! Tr! Tro arferer 

73. Omitted in [Jolly M'3]. Cited by Apa 677; Dev 3.211; Madh 3.83 — a) Madh 4 f& 
& off; nPu! Pu? Tr gfery — b) tMd3 art; GMd! are ; Lo’ arfaee; Tr? “er, Bo Bar — 
c) aMy &8y; oMd> Tj! T; Ke quiteprere; Lo’ quiteqery — d)sKtS Pus Pu’ Tj! Wa go ; 
Pu2 Put ]@ ; Bo eteeit; cMd! +Md3 GMd° GMy Tr! MT r4 MTP MTrSqprerer, wk fgsire- 
arg; Pub Toray 

74. Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Dev 3.198; padas a-b cited by Laks 12.137; Vij 
2.38 [intro.] — a) Hy Kt2 Ld Lot Lo’ sOx! sPu’ ae; cMy afer; Pu? Put after’ soMd! 
after; Be? Bo nKf “areaet; pCa BKt La! “areereft — b) GMy “urea; GMdS mTrS “Orreafe 
Hy ‘orpita — c) Pud Pu? ay are g eae; Te aa ae; Bo aT aH; wKet! gacarett — d) 
Pu? Pu‘ fedtad; eke tT Tela 

75. Omitted in Pu’ Volly M'-4]. Cited by Laks 12.145; Dev 3.200 — a)rMd? ater; Tr! 
[but cor fh] afer, nKt* Te? om SFIS; Bo [but cor] “ae=at — c) Tj! araTs; Wa wats; Ma? 
oMy a1 At; BBe? BCa Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo! Lo? Ng Tit Tj? MTr? MTr* 
Tr [Jolly R|Rn Mandlik Jha KSS Dave THEHATA; Tr! “Haat, Jolly “HAs: Laks 

“await — d) Bo ater; aK Set: were 
76, Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Laks 12.101 a) Ho “Praeit; mT Préeit; md! 


Chapter 8 673 


VEsgerg aat ware ser: Qeastr a fer: 
ehgarerarg stares & gar: ill 
PAMTAAT AGAR ATER | 

a TeraSqyart aTqaretaET Wc 

anaret: enfatr: sravafiireatirateet | 


wizarenagosta fara arecaay leet 
aq gaeaifier arhaated Pr: 
aE Yt ad AIT Fes wT aTfetar leo 


“faz; Be! sBe? Be? Bo Ho Jo NKt! Lo! Lo! Lo’ sOx! nPu! Pu2 Pu? sPuS Tj! Tr! mTrS Laks 
“ast Fc; nNg ‘ast Fete; Pus Pu’ “asttea — b) wKé “great, wkKt! +Md? GMy a7 
— c) Lo! qreerarft; nPul Pu? Put qeeerenft; sBe? wKt? GMd! mTr agare; mTré mTr® 
gg; Lo! rMd? + garg; Pub & garg; Te agaTe 

77.* Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Laks 12.118 — a) NKt* Lo? GMd! GMd> nNg nPul 
Pud Pu? Tr! mTr4 mTPuTr® [ Jolly M8 G Nd] Me Go Ku [patha] Rn [patha] Jha THT Ber- 
eaarell arg; rMd3 TMd? GMy war Serer aeft Bag; sOx! Pu} sPuo Pu’ Tr? vaetearger: 
areft arg; Bes wat Cg: Aref Sag, Lal THT sgaaed aTett [om Ba], Bo THT Gar: 
areft ware; mT rs “Qerer, Md‘ “gear — b) cMd! agaagar aff feaa:, Tr? sgar, Tj! 
arga:; Lo! aret:; nKtt 7Md? GMd* cMy NNg Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ Pu? mTr’mTr® Lolly Nd] @ feaz: 
—c) 1Md4 “afer”; BBe? Be? Jo? wKt! wKt? La! Lo! Lo? Lot Lo° oMd! TMd3 cGMd? GMy Ox? 
nPul Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! mTrémTr® Wa ferecates; Pu? Put “ferecarer — d) oOr [but cor] 
aiaraft droge, tMd3 cMy nPu! Pu? Put altel; cMd? atthardfe; wk) ateter 3; wKke! 
a at:; Pu2 Put & ear: 

78, Omitted in [Jolly M!-*]. Cited by Madh3. 80 — a) TMd?* aggre — b) BBe? Bo 
wKt} tMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy Tr mTr*aeT — c) GMa ardierar 3g fag’; Madh 
erate; md} “fegarantt — d) Lot Lo3 “satieaqariay; Bo Lo! “at; Be! “HR ETe’: La! 
aeur nNg “arfitas; Be! “arias; Pu’ Pu? “onfird; ake’ “oTaar 

79. Omitted in [Jolly M'*}; padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Vij 2.73;Laks 12.124; 
Dev 3.198; Madh 3.75 — a) Md4 Sared, Tr? FUra:; wKt! aed; GMd! tTMd3 tMd4 GMd> 
oMy Tr! mTr'mTr> MTr® [Jolly M'] Vij Laks Dev Madh afer: wataht; Pu? Put arat 
ar — b) wKt! aren; Pw om afret; Hy “aPreir — c) Hy wifgarer; Lo wifgarey; Pu? 
Pué oifgaret; wKt! GMd! Pu? Pué Pu? mTroarferatent; Ho mfeaarat; Ke? arefearet; wKe} 
WearT; Madh “are: waite; nKe “qyssita; sk Pu2 Puta gosita; Be aCa Lo! Pi! Pu3 
Tr! Vij Passtter — d) Te fafa; La! faery; Ho ata; TMd3 GMy aT 

80.* Omitted in Lo® Pu5 [Jolly M'4}, ma in Lot. Cited by Laks 12.124; Madh 3.75 — a) 
wKkt! aq ataquldey, +Md3 a; pBe? aarateral ; Pu2 gaa; Bo TMd? Pud Tj? ater; 
oMd! mTr5 mTr® faa; mT rt Atfaer:; tMa4 “AFT; GMa Tr! [but mc] “are; BBe? Jo! wKe! 
Kt? BKt’ Lo? Lo’ nNg Ox’ Ox? Tr mTr3 folly N] Rn Nd Laks Ma@dh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
“atser; Ho nPul “ater; Hy sOx! sPuo “ater; oOr ater; Lo? Pu’ “ater, Wa “atau; Be? 
Laks (vl) °aret; Pu? Put “atest; Lo! “ater — b) NNg ®Tat; nKt* Pra: — c) Md? T Fe; 
Pu} Put aged, Hy om 4; Ke? nKt ad; Lod aet AAA — d) GMy Pu geHpsas; wKt> TF; 


674 Chapter 8 


oer aey garrett atery smifa goeary | 
ge aTgaAr ata anrar qarghrar uc 2 
aesad aegideaad aretnarg | 

fragt: TAATATSAAETRAT TSTTT UCR 
aeat yar arett eet: wert ae | 


Be! Bo tMd? GMd® Tj? [Jolly Nd] 33; mTr4 arferar:; Pu? afer; nNg nPul afer; mTr6 
earferepr: 
81.* Omitted in Lo? [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks12.124; Dev 3.198;Mddh 3.76 — a) Pu? 
Pu‘ Pud Pu’ ae aralt garared; Madh sect FET garaeil — b) Kt’ NNgnPu! Pu? Put Pus 
Pu’ Wa [Jolly Me M® G] Jolly Sroremsteryaa4rt, Be! sBe? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jo! Jo? [but cor 
wKt! Kt? wKt nKtt La! Lo! Lo? sOx! Ox? sPuS Tj! T? Tr! mTr3mTr?# MT3 MTr® Volly Ku N 
Nd] Dev Rn Ku Mandlik KSS Sreraaifa Fevers; Pu} Pu’ Tr? Srermareatydart; Lo* Lo? 
Ox3 [Jolly M4] Me Saramreimraar; Dave Jha Srermreateart — c) nPu! 3; Pus 
Pu’ [Jolly G] aegTAy; Lo! wNg wtf — d) Be Ser serge; oMy arty; MT are; TMd3 
arnt; NNg mTrS Ofsrar:; Hy “gfsrat 
Additonal verse in Mandlik [#] KSS: 
fraarat et fhe ytarepeahrer | 
pan a fags fe aadt oud awry || 
82, Omitted in Lo? [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.199 — a) Be aT; Tr 
° yet — a-b) Be} nPul Pu2 Put Pu’ Pu’ Laks aerate Tater aTett: [Pus Pu “ater; Pu 
Put aTett:] — b) Wa dea; Tr? dere, wKt! areehat; Lot Lo’ arethfar; nKté cMd! rMd3 
tMd‘ oMy Tr! [but cor] mTr’mTy° mTrDev aTeerae: — c) Pi Pu‘ fafeer: aad area’: 
Md! faaet; Tr? ear: STAT; BBe? “STATETEAT ; Lo’ GMd! tMe3 “arett GeAT ; BCa “Se: 
aaa’; cMy “sife ae’ — d) Be} Hy Jo? wKt! cMd! cMd° nPu! Tj? Tr? Dev ‘caret; Jo! Kt? 
wKt} MT? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave aT; oMy mTr4 aeqd; GMd! aeaa:; Pu’ aeacr 
Additional verses in TMd‘4 GMd? Tr! Tr‘ mTr° Yolly Gr] Mandlik [, ¢, 3] KSS Dave; 
second verse given after 8.101 in BCa La!. Both verses cited by Mddh 3.76; first verse cited 
by Dev 3.198; second verse parallels NSm 1.206: 
TAY ar HTaafsereroranys | 
fret at aera tot aay 118 
aer Taree Gal Agata TOT | 
feafeer ater thar cerceres fared 111 
1. b) [Jolly Gr] “wart afeer’; Mandlik KSS Dave “svat fe; oMdS “STAT 
fefe; +Md4 “sraray — c) oMd) Brat ar — d) cMdd erator 
2. ¢) Madh Mandlik KSS Dave wafers faattor; Tr! [Jolly Gr] arenertar: 
Md‘ cMd5 aser— d) aCa La! AeA ST FT SNA; Madh TeaAa Face: 
Additional verse in GMd! Md? Tr! mTr* mTr® [Jolly Gr] Mandlik [¢ ] KSS Dave: 
uprated ded Aeat aragerc | 
aet eter dart orerareer Rar 
a-b) omitted in Tr! [Jolly Gr]; Md4 wade fect g aaret Aragead;, Mandlik KSS 
Dave “att agaaragearct — c) TMd4 eter ay; GMd! aart; Tr! Lolly Gr] Sort 
— d) tMd? tex wee 


Chapter 8 675 


aearearer fF amet adattg arfefh: ic 3! 
sete Ee: aratt wfeerear aararst: | 
FATIH: TART TT ATkaOTAT AT lle vi 
aera F oaRaT 7 wera a: | 

ata Far: saga eadareegEa: cll 
anita gaa aearetiterntren: | 

UT: Seat aw ater gaat: adafeargy cgi 
SAMA AT Gesad fry | 


; yaa & ght: gat licil 
wet TAT Pad wer gether wre | 
mdiwesadder yaar wae: cc 


83. Omitted in [Jolly M'*]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.198;Madh 3.76 — a) Pu’ Pu’ 
wad — b) nK¢ aed aed ats; rMd4 area Ae — c) M4 Tener aMHeT; GMd> 
“are; Pu’ Tr? g; Be} feared; sOx! sPuo adet — d) Lot Lo? [Jolly M45] acersty 

84. Omitted in Hy [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.199 — a)GMd® STcH:; 
nPu! SaTSHA: — b) NNg Therereter ATS: ; M3 AaTeAA: — c) Laks ATATEM:; M3 ATSHET:, 
Bo ATae:; Tr? STAT; BBe? Bo TATCHTT; Dev TATE — d) Laks otf; cMd5 
are arferor 

85.* Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.199 — a) GMd! TMd? ARTRT, 
Pud Pu? Farett ory; Ox3 a; oMy aaa; BBe? Lo! “wat — b) aMy fare: +d ar 
Lo? Tj! “ardte; Tj! + — c) Be? sCa Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? 8K Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ sOx! Ox? 
Ox} nPu! Pu? Put sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave eq; wKkt! aasatet 
— d) sPu® [lacuna] Je: lacuna filled mc sh to erajaraa ; sOx! wxataTIATET:; Be! Be? Bo 
Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo? [but cor] Lo’ MTr? Me Go Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Daves@tarat . GMd! 
Madara ; Dev FAIA | Te? ST BAR; [Jolly M9] Sa ae 

86. Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Laks 12.124; Dev 3.200 —— a) sOx! sPu® &eq; Kt? 
eqs? — b) wKkt! waretaPardt, cMy warifaarht at — c) Lal et tae eit 
J ; Dev Seat; Tr dears 7Md4 eter — d) +Md3 Gaasa efeat; Lo! Lo? Farar:; Ho FA- 
areas 

87. Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Vij 2.73 [but ascribed to Katyayana];Apa 673; 
Laks 12.124; Dev 3.203; Madh 3.78 — a) Te aearel ; wKt! "Ae — b) Ho Jo! sOx! sPuS 
aed; Lo! gest & fos; oMd! gedcr ag FES; Be? Feoqa fra; Apa fest: — c) mTr* MTr® 
SaEG: og eT aT; Tr? om WFAry; nPu! SER: aT = d) GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMy Tr! Tate 
yad: yatt [cMd! waaay]; cM) gat & fe ghey; Madh watratedarad; Jo? Lo Tj! 
mTt* MTr® Wa @ Yfea:; Laks Apa at BPr:; Wa of:; oOr Farry 

88.* Omitted in [Jolly M'*]. Cited byApa 674 — a) La! STaTUT:; GMd! tMd?* Tr! Apa 
aay Kart — b) wKt! oe: Apa YPAT; Be! eft — c) Pu? Put wits; Lo! “areat Sat; 
La! “areat Ser — d) Pud Pu’ aaateeg; Volly N] Na yeAceq; Md} YeAAT; Be! pBe? Bo 
BCa Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? La! Lo! Lo Lot Lo® sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu® Tj! Tj? 


676 Chapter 8 


Tet F eat tar J a ettateraies: | 
age: aera a eqgaat Far ileeil 
Tay aeshrg yer wT aI FAT | 
aet aa YAT Wess AT FARCAAAAT UZ oll 
USSSA Bet HAT AT | 
fren ferater gare qerarafarar afer: le etl 
aat daeaat Fat aeaae ete fera: | 


at aafraraed AT WET AT BVT TA: US QM 
aut ars: waret a Premih aferartere: | 
Se: WATS Weg A: AMAT TIT US Bll 


Tr MTP mTr! MTr° [Jolly M4 RJ BS Bae; Te Ws Ader 

89. Omitted in [Jolly M']; not commented by Nd Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204; 
Madh 3.78 — a) Te Sarat TOA Sleer; tr Md4 sArWET TW A Slew; Pud Pu’ Go [Jolly G] 
Se SAT BlHt [Me supports plural whereas Ku Rn Nd Mr support singular]; Lo' GMd! 
GMd5 sOx! sPuS MTr® Sera; Apa TeTat; Lo? Tj! Tare; wKt! Zar; wKt! GMd! mTr* Stay —~ b) 
Pu > Pu? Tr? Apa Go Jolly “arfaat; mTr® arferer:; Lo? [but cor] *anfeeer:; wKt! “atfer: — c) 
TMd3 firagte; Lo! fragur; Tr? SHAT; sBe? Lo! mTr4mTr° spar — d) sOx! sPu® ¢ caveat 
agar FUT; Tr? Baar; aks Tj! gaa; Jo! B_adt; wCa Ho La! GMy oOr Apa Baraat, wKt! 
yaad, Madh Aga: at 

90. Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]; not commented by Re. Cited by Apa 674; Dev3.204; Madh 
3.78 — a) NNg Serpe; Pu’ Tarafer — b) Be? Bo Tj! [Jolly R M] Apa [vl as in ed] 43; 
Td [but cor sh] GMy [Jolly Nd] 3% FT AeHA; Be? Lo! BA cat — c) Be! A; wKt! 
aad; Lal aead a; aMd! aeadargay, Be? Tr? ZA; Lo? GAT, Ho Te=sq — d) Pw Pu’ 
garean; Be? tMd* @aT aT 

91. Omitted in {Jolly M'“]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204— b) GMd> lacuna at Utd; 
1tMd! Fea; BBe* Hy Tj! Tr? a4; Be? BowKt! nKtt BK tS Lo4 Lo® Md? GMy Ox? PuS Tj? Tr! 
MTr‘¢ mTr® Wa [Jolly M Nd] Dev Nd Go Jha Dave U4; K? F AH; Apa Ae HEAT; oOr 
poate —c) Lo! fer a; Apa feta: a; rMd4 feraez, Apa [vi] fee: Geer; Lo! 
EIT; Ox? TIT; m Tr IY; Md? GMy sOx! sPu’ Tr? ear a d) Pu’ Pu? arageaferctr; 
Tr? “orterar; Pus Pus “artery, cMd! “arraat; Be? aTaferdt; cMdS “artpadl, wT? BA; Apa 
ot: 

92. Omitted in [Jolly M'4]. Cited by Apa674; Dev 3.204— b) Apa taeay Eas 
fete:; oOr Faeyr ele afere:; wKe weraa; Lo? aeq da — c) Tj! aa aafaareet — d) 
wKt! AT T#TaTIeaA:; Lo! rMd? rMd* Tj! THT; GMd AHT AT; oOr WT AT; MTr’ Ter; 
Hy @&44:; MTP? Tet:; G¢Md! 4; Lo* Lo® Pu Pu? Wa [Jolly M*5~? G] Jolly A; Ox? FT: 

93.* Omitted in [Jolly M'-4]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204— a) Tr? He; Pu’ Wve; Pub 
Har; Pu’ Surat 4; Pud Pu? Sars, GMy SASR:; sBe? wCa Hy Jo! Jo* wKt! K2 wKt nKt 
Lo! Lo? Lo’ GMd! 1Md3 NNg oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! Tj? MTr5 WaApa Dev Nd Mandlik Jolly 
KSS BIST; Wa SST; La! warsrt [At changed sh to 3] — b) Ho Tj! eferarea:;, rMd4 
eiferaras: — c) Md‘ aftras at aretq; mT daeerg ; cMd! @@@1g ; BBe Bo BCa Hy Jo! 


Chapter 8 677 


watered feadt ace wag | 

a: wat freer garg ge: at rarer evil 
Beat Heatran FAT: BIH: AE | 

A WTA TAHT TAT TWA: USM 
wer feats age: eat aR | 
aes Fat: Va HtHset Fer fag: Ug 
aad areraraeay ster aes say | 
oat: aera afery ay AhaTATT: Ns oll 


wKt! Kt? wkt? Lo! Lo? oOr mTr? [Jolly Ku R] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TXB; BK om 
“ge — d) MTr! AeA. BK ae; Lod areraTsd; wKe arena 

94. Omitted in [Jolly M'); not commented by Re. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.204— a) 
Be! nPu! Pu? Put Apa HARE ; Hy srarfeerer ; NK oratifirer; Lo! srarfeser’ ; Ng orate 
a; wKt! amerferer ; +Md3 GMy aarfeareet ; Md! “ere; Ox3 “ere, Ke “waren 
— b) tM? fepfeaay, 1Md4 fesfeacr, Pu Pu? fesferet; Jo? GMd! tMd3 rMd4 GMy Pu’ mTr4 
mTr® [Jolly G]Go Rn 78a; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] Ave FAT; Pu? Put Tae; Ho Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? 
Lo! NNg T? mTr3 Yolly Ku] Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave FI — c) mTr° FT, Devaar — d) 
wKt} Tr! [but me sh] T? & at: nK¢ & arent’: Be} “Prof 

95. Omitted in [Jolly M'3]. Cited by Dev 3.205 — a) wKt! af; Be! 1Md4 “safer — b) 
Be! Be® Ho Jo? wKt! nKtt Lo? Lo? GMd5 NNg oOr Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu Put Pud Pu? Pu’ Tj! 
Tr? MTr> Wa [Jolly M8 R G Nd] a: & AC: FS; Bow AC TAHT; cMy Teel: gue: 
ae; dé & aeeraray Te; BCa Md ! Tr! mTr4 mTrS@e Breads: — c) sOx! sPu® lacuna until 
“arer: Md4 arte; Pud Pu? wrest; wk) wads; ake ages FT dar; wKkt! ae eaaepeur- 
ayer ; Bo “Sqorr Lo! “sao: cMd! ‘aecaurser — c-d) oMdS at argent Faer war- 
a ae ara: — d) Ho “yerer: BK tS TMd? TMd4 GMy sOx! sPuo THTTa:; Bo SATA: 

96. Omitted in [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Apa674; Dev3.198, 205 — a) Pu? Pu’ 2a; cGMd! 
mTré mTrfegifarrad: — b) Pu? Put eareil; sBBe erasil; cMd! aIPafSa; Ho BKt GMd> nNg 
Tr! Tr? mTr’mTr® Wa Me Re Jha Dave aIhersrgd; La! tMd4 GMy atferarfsc; Md? sOx! sPus 
7 feared; Bo + fasted, oOr Freese; Ke age — ¢) Mandlik Jha Dave Tf13; Bo 2aT:; 
oMd! @aT; nNg Maite; rMd4 staed — d) oOr SHIRT; GMd! Sle, Dev arefer; Be 
Brey; Md4 wes 

97. Omitted in Ox? [Jolly M']; padas a-d and 98a omitted in wKt! [haplo]. Cited by 
Apa 674; Dev 3.205; Madh 3.78-9 — a) Be! Bo cMd! Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ ataait; Be! TMd? mTr> 
araat afer; Madh arearensfert; 1Md! “arerfery — a-b) Jo? MTr6 arerareter aferrarest 
— b) Te afer ald; Lot aret; GMd! +Md3 GMy Tr! Apa ares; BKtS GMd! TMd? sOx! sPu° 
Pu’ Tr? aeq; K? ae — c) Bo tat: FHSAA; oOr sOx! sPu’ aaa; Pu! FewaT; cMd! 
aararentert; tM? eh; Be’ @fert; Be! Tr! Jolly afeaseuy — d) Md4 aqe@rrargyeer:;; Tj? 
Apa Say ; oMa wea | TM} oMy aaty ; Tr? “gaseier: 

Additional verse in Pu* Put Mandlik [5] KSS: 

Us qaewaraery Feat Praag: | 
TAT TSG oaTTy fee wearer | 
a) Pu2 Put artery — d) Pu? fear: Pu fezar 


678 Chapter 8 


GST Wage etet aa sted Wars | 
MAPA Stet AST FATT USI 
ater Gravatar fecarsad req | 
ad wage eft ar at werd aat: Sei 
arg yftafteng: ettnt arr a Aye | 
cag to as eae Igooll 
CATA I TaTATTATTTY | 
WITYA WUE ATATSHAAT TT 20 QM 


98. Omitted in [Jolly M']; pada-a omitted in wKt! and pada-d in TMd* Wa [haplo]. 
Cited by Apa 674; Dev 1.220, 3.205; Mddh 3.79; pada-a cited by Apa680 — a) BBe* emi 
yy; Ke ray — b) ake pada reads: eéfea aTga; TM! aarefea; Teer ger TAT’ — ©) 
Lo! SAPA Bo sara. 

99. Omitted in [Jolly M'}; padas a-c omitted in TMd* Wa, and pada-d in Lo?; verse 99 
placed after the addition following verse 100 in TMd? GMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 
3.2053 Madh3. 79 — a) NNg Pu? Put Pu? Pu’ satya; Bo Kt? Lo! cMd! *asTarer — b) 
Be? Pu’ “Jaq; wKt! La! cMd! nNg 4@a — c) Lo! a; Ho wKt} Lo! Lo? tMd3 GMy oOr Tr 
“ze — d) Pu? Put Pu Pu? AT &; Md? Tj! ATT; wKt! om By; Bo ST; cMd! wRrge; wKett Tr? 
ae; Ox} Madh a¢:; wKt! a€tc cor to Fé, Be} Ho Fat; GMd! tMd3 tMd‘4 GMy NNg Apa Fed; 
Tr! [but cor fh] Apa [vl] 4e:;cGMd5 aay 

100.* Omitted in Lo? [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Dev3.205; Madh 3.79 — a) Madh Fea 
aftr’ — b) Wa a7; Be? Wit — c) Pu’ mTr3 atstq; oMd 5 My assy; Madh aerq, cMd! 
aay: 1d GMy @y — d) Bo RTAay; Pu’ “aaa; rd? eras 

*Additional verse in BCa GMd! tMd3 GMy oOr MTr4 MTP? MTr® Yolly Nd] added after 99 
in TMd‘ Tr*; added after both 99 and 100 in Mandlik KSS Dave {parallel in GDh 13.20-22; 
see endnote]; cited by Laks 12.133: 

Tega T Tapa | 
Magar at serfor da fF II 

a) Tr! “aefega — b) rMd‘ oMy Tr “atdearerergerd — c) Tr! tragyfewag; rMd4 
oMy *tageaeway; mT! waged oOr aeaet — d) Mandlik KSS Dave at arerratehe: ; 
tMd‘ GMy Tr! aRIgoTHST A[this reading also after 99 in Mandlik KSS Dave] 

Additional half-verse in GMy [Jolly Nd]; added after 99 in tMd* Tr! Mandlik KSS Dave: 

eagpanatey | 

Additional verse in TMd? GMy [Jolly Nd] [all place verse 99 after this verse]: 

a pate 7 wela gover gaara: | 
Tee Taye eT Tay || 
a) [Jolly Nd] + g quae aeta — c-d) [Jolly Nd] cet Gara Tera sa aA Tay 

1o1.* Omitted in ae M!4]. Cited by Apa 674; Dev 3.205; Madh 3.79 — a) TMd? 
varaatsaedta; Lot waretar ; mT’ Madh Ue tat’; GMd! tMd4 GMd5 GMy nNg Tr! [but cor] 
MTr mTr° [Jolly Nd] arerataa’ wKkt! “aetaed: oMd! “Ser =; GMy [Jolly Nd] seta — b) 
cMd! tMd3 tMd? GMd3 GMy NNg Tr! [but cor] mTr‘mTr° Volly Nd] @ar7Fe ; Be! * saa 
femT:; Apa “gerarfer:; Ho “aaa; Wa aifeor: — c) BK aarye; Mad? serycd — d) Be! sBe 


Chapter 8 679 


TET AT THEAAT BTEHATATy | 

Tearranifrersta ProrsyraargT Po RU 

aay etasay AAAI AT: | 

T emtemad orang Fat art safer avy Igo Rt 
aad WATT: | 

asp aspepEpy ate seieire NZovll 


Be? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? nKt Lo! Lo? Lo’ nNg oOr Ox? Ox} nPul Pu? Pu‘ Pu? Pu’? Tj! Tj? 
MT? Go Ku Madh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Davet4Xaea7eT, Ma? GMy Faq 
Additional verse in BCa La! [same as verse 2 after 8.82]. 
102, Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Apa 674; Laks 12.135; Hem 34.359; Dev 3.205 — 
a) Hy mefereerq; BBE Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? Laks Hem Mandlik KSS aftrRrenterar, Ho wKt ake 
Lo? oa! 1d! Ox? Tj! Tre “sTaHIRTIT — b) Lo? HB’ ; Be? +Md3 “aetsara; 1Md4 “waft 
wat: — c) Ho teargqanietala; Be! Bo Hy Jo! Kt La! Pu’ Tj? Tr? Hem Jolly Tar; La! Fear 
—¢-d) Hem femrsrearrer rath: UHL TRIGTA [but vi as in ed] — d) wKt! sOx! sPub fawPy- 
% ; Bo A; NNg “aed 
Additional verse in GMd! nPu! Tr! mTr*MTr®° Mandlik[S, T] KSS Dave; given after 
verse 106 in tMd? and after added verse 1 below in La’ cited by Laks 12.135; Hem 1.35; 
3/1.360; Dev 3.206: 
y avar: matey: oeftvsrashfes: | 
fesrcanfreargha abr aeqeraeg II 
a) GMd ! aeqtan:; nPu! arertar:; La! Mandlik KSS Dave & sadtat:; mTr4 Fra:, 
MTr® Mandlik [@] Faran:; Tr! waa; tMd4 aeaftar; GMd! Mandlik [3] ae: 
——b) nPu! Mandlik [2] TEATT ; La! “Roergsitfer:, ™d* “Sf: — c) La! faferea- 
afcreprerfer, nPul Mandlik [€] a ent faraete; Tr! Carga — d) La! aie 
Mand [8] Fatraratt 
Additional verses in La! [cf. NSm 1.192-3} verse 2 in Ca: 
ae Huet se arfierarcwg: | 
ae PTAA: TH FaTATELT 11211 
partee J ast wT gaara | 
warrant TearAafaary 1211 
2. a) BCa T— d) pCa Verda fers 
103. Omitted in [Jolly M'*} ma in Tr; verses 103 and 104 transposed TMd? GMy [Jolly 
Nd]. Cited by Laks 12.146 — a) Pud Pu afeet ; Be’ aici Aa — b) wKO A Ae; TMd3 
cMy [yar ae: — c) Pu? Pu erat: nPul eatery — d) sOx! sPus aeat arate; wKe 
Pud Pu’ edt; Lo? GMd! Md? GMd° GMy NNg Tj! Nd 24; 1Md4 fear ard; Howat ard; Te? 
aq; 1tMd4 at:; Pud Pu? Jolly Ga 
104. Omitted in [Jolly M!7]. Cited by Apa 682; Laks 12.146;Dev 3.207;Mddh 3.80 — 
a) BKE Pu? Tr? eafaegafanmat, rMd3 cMy eat — b) [Jolly Nd] Sect AgUT AAT; NNg 
wardtar; Lot Lo’ oOr aaateh; Tr! Fa [ma sh ArH]; La! cMd! tMd4 Ox? Tah, Waaarp- 
{: mTr4 MTroaarert; sBe Bhd; wKe Fr Tat; Ke aardrar; nKtt sacret, Tj! sacra; 
nPu! Pu2 Put ated; Apa GT AAT; Be! Wirt FT; Pu waite Ba; Pu? Te cor to TAT 
a; Ho sOx! sPuo Dev Fath J; Be? TAHT; Ox? Tart J; Madh wars J; Nd (patha) 





680 Chapter 8 


aneqaty weReied aerate | 

ayer Fate Prophet mer Ng okil 

emrvsaty qearg grant zeta | 

separ at arevat qaaretaast ar Ne ogll 
ATs 


Te: | 
aa WIAs sea aT aa: ee 


Tsar seat ar a a: Weocil 


warard ;oMd wararae; iMd3 Hanh BAERI; GMd! Wawa; Md? OMA MT! mTSaet wat 
~~ ¢) TMd? a3; Pu? Put “Jer— d) Madh afeRrenfefrere; cMd! 1Md} GMy mTr Volly Nd] 
af am fafer; cMd’ at afer far 

105. Omitted in [Jolly M'3]. Cited by Apa 682; Laks 12.147; Dev 3.207;Madh 2.390 — 
a) Ho Hy BK nKt* Lo? Lo? GMd5 Ox3 Tj! Wa Apa area; tMd3 GMy Tea; cMd! areaat 
; Be® HysOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu sPu® Pu’ Tr? Apa “aaer, BBe BCa wKt? La! Lot Lo® 
Tr! MTr4mTr5 mTr® Yolly M] Dev @&teq; Bo Lo! aghi ; Be? ag — b) Pus Pu? [Jolly G] 
“Rratsged, Tre “Ardea; aK CRI; cMd! “RRRaTE ae: nKt! “See; Td! “Sey, 
Be? Bo Hy sKkt5 avait — c) cMd! agaetadeaey; Md? cMy Hae; Ox} THTSaTT 
Waar; Be? “TAT; Dev Madh “Baaea — d) Md} & Baap get; aMy Bafsep- 
ferraet; Pu? Pud Pu? Baler, rMd* Balt; Wa Bar; Bo Prepfer:; cMd! Frepat; Be} Frpte; 
oMy Bo Pud Pu’ 9 

106.* Omitted in [Jolly M'3]. Cited by Apa 682; Laks 12.147; Dev 3.207; Madh 2.390 
— a) oOr gaArShat FEE; Pu’ Pu’ (Jolly G] Raveyguarsaga ; Md? Bors arf; Ho 
Jo? Lo® sOx! sPuS Tj! “seearft; Tj? “seater; Dev “seater; 1Md? cMy FEF: — c) Pud Pu? [Jolly 
G] seater arecar; Be? Sfequr; Jo? wKt! wKt Lo? Tj! afeegar; rMd4 afeerar; Hy nKtt 
BKt> TMd? om aT; La! Laks 7; HoT; TMd4 AT; HoaTeeT; Ox? aTevT, Bo Foevar — d) nPu! 
qeMTGat wet; Bo Ho wKt! JF ; Lot Apa Jolly Dave FA ; TMd3 GMdS GMy PRT; MTP 
wa: Be! Lo! Md! sOx! sPuS 32347 ; La! B47; Ho wKt! Lo? GMd! Tj! mTr® Dev Baer; 
Be! Pu? 7; Pu? Put g; nPu! &:; Lo’ aa 

107. Omitted in fn Jolly M- 3]; ma in Lo!. Cited by Vij 2.76; Apa 677; Laks 12.143; Dev 
3.213 — a) Bo Tj Fraeeg; Be? wKt! nKt4 TMd4 GMd° NNg Tr! Prrerreag TMd? GMy 
Suara ; MTr* MT rs Prrearerg ; Pu Pu? Proenfeg : > Ox3 refiag: — b) Pu? Put aera; 
nKtt GMa mT ré mT r° 7ePTa:; GMd! TePTa:; Md? oMy [Jolly Nd] Tat az: — d) Lo? “aay; 
Kt? “aT; Ox? om 4; Lo’ ma 4; Bo Ho TMd? GMy sOx! Ox? sPuS mTr4 Vij Apa WaeT:, NKE 
cMd! mTtS Watead:; [Jolly M8] adar 

108. Omitted in [Jolly M'}. Cited by Vij 2.80; Dev 3.219; Madh 3.82— a) cMy Baer 
[cor to ad] Fer Swler ; GMd° gerd 3a; Md‘ wer OT aa ; La! gate; Bo Fa; Be? 
uel, Madh Tg; sOx! sPus THe ; Ho AAG — a-b) Md? Gea SF BET Se. SA ATT 
arferr: — b) GMy “e1gaeaTer; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] warerer — c) Be? cMd! Ox? Pu’ aenif- 
arfe ; Tj! aifsife: ; Md’ eens; rMa4 Senfeernfer’ ; oMy anata ; *Ma? at- 
afer’; Madh tonfeenfer; Pu? Put eenfaenfe’; Ox? anes — c-d) GMd! “Heo arait 
que greg a: — d) Md? GMdS MTS Beer area SAULT a; Ox? areal 


Chapter 8 681 


Arrests: AT WIAA BAIT U2 o8lt 
aefahra taar erart wae: Fer: | 
afrsanth arr arr tora TT Ue oll 

T qa aI Baty PaCS a qa: 

aur fe aeet edy ter de a verte lee en 
witty fratey wat weer ae | 
Tamegrra a ser arfear aTtaAT NL 2 2M 
Teisetsaaaer YT Tee Tas: NL 2 BM 
af ar eatery art Fra | 

qaerer are reife cattery lle evil 

109. Omitted in [Jolly M'*]; verses 109 and 110 transposed in Lo’ Tj!. Cited by Apa 
694 — a) Pu? Put “&y ey; sBe? “aocaeig; +Md4 “aey aay; cMd! arty — c) Be? Ma Tr? 
afaaerad: Apa Saaerere:; Me [patha] + farartact: — d) Bo Pu waeatrseraa; sPu® 
[but mc fh] FAT; Wa SFA, GMd> Aaa; Md} GMy BeAaT 

110. Omitted in [Jolly M']; padas c-d [after 4feSzaTfF] omitted in PuS — a) rMd4 eter 
— b) nPu! #rarr:; Md‘ GMy a7e:; Hy Md? TAT; Ke Har; Hy rMd4 Her: — c) Kt? arhar- 
we ; Tj afareenft; Lo afecer aft; wPul avert — d) aMd! ary; Pu’ at; rMd4 317; Jo? Pu2 
Pu! Pu’ [Jolly G] a; Wa 8; Jm Kt? MT? Gat; cMd 5 Hs; wKe sPuo F514; Jo? FTP7; 
Be? cMd! aur; Jo! Ox? aa; sOx sPul [me sh to] rat; Tj! FF; Ox} FF; M4 TT 

ut. Omitted in [Jolly M'}, Cited by Laks 12259 — a) Ox3 om Bata — b) Lal cMd! 
1Md3 TMd? GMd Pu? Tr! mTr' MTS mTr° Wa [Jolly M Nd] Salted; cMy Gated; Ox} ety; 
Tj! “ait; Ho sOx' sPus “art aia; Pud Pu? “ett F ge:; cMd! “aia atfae:; Ti? get ae 
—c) oMd5 arm aaer; GMd! Tr! [but me sh] PraT— d) wKt Te 7; wKt oOr Fata; here 
Wa inserts verses 156-9 

12, Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Laks 12.259 — a) TMd? My feaTeég — b) wKt! 
TaTeqer; TMd3 wart; Lo’ sOx! sPu® Tr! [but cor] Wt; Be! Ho Lo?nNg nPu! Pu? Pué Pud 
Pu? mTr‘mTr5 mTr® Wa [Jolly G Nd] Bh 405; tMd4 Laks FH; GMA Hts; Lo} Ox? TAT; 
La! tert, rMd4 oRreart — c) rMd4 sTererairaaeit; Pud Pu’ Volly G] ararrer fact; nPu! 
ararrst fared; NNg TM? Pu2 Put Tr! mTrS Wa ardt — d) Be? sOx! sPus aaatatfet 

113. Omitted in [Jolly M'?}]. Cited by Vij 2.73;Dev 3.234;Madh 3.78; pada-d cited by 
Vij 2.75,113 — a) Ox? att ~— d) Bo FE:; Lo’ Ys; Ox? aes:; Be? Wa aaah, wKt! at g; 
wK0 oT [Rn gloss Cathy Tash supports Ua: cf. 8.88 and the note to it] 

114.* Omitted in Ox? Volly M'3}, padas c-d ma in Lot; padas a-b and c-d transposed in 
TMd? My. Cited in Apa 694; Laks 12.256 — a) GMd5 aut; BCasOx! sPuS aE : nKt Pu’? 
Tj! atet ; La! caer; Lo! avavead@’; cMd! rMd# “ereqgatgy — b) NNg Tr! Polly M G R] 
Apa 4; [Jolly M] Jolly t4;mTré mTr9 Ae; La! Frasrataq — c) cMd! Faareteareas;, Lo! Faare- 
Sea; TMd3 FACET; Bo Ho Jo? BK La! Tj! Laks UAT; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] aaa; mTr4 


682 Chapter 8 


aRrat + qe atest a | 
T unferpeate far a eT: TTT BRT: US eal 
aerer aitiarecder ger wrat aera | 
aifaaate The ae TTT: STAT: UL LEU 
afaatataane g eleaet Ha wad | 
aden frada pa aTeTHa WAT Me Vill 
SUTRA BATAAN 
Baeesatarer aed freee Ue 2cil 
COAT EIT FT: AAAI TIT | 
TT BrSheaaae_ WITT IAT: etl 
areas — d) Tr? Apa fare; Tj! aetregTR Apa SAAS 


115. Omitted in Lo® Ox’ [Jolly M'3]; ma in Lo. Cited in Laks 12.259; padas c-d cited 
by Vij2.113; Dev 3.274 — a) NK afMay; Bo Lal afta; rMd4 afer, GMd! afest 7 — b) 
wkt sara, Wa “srafer F; Lo! fF — c) Hy ATT; Tr! ahs; cMd aay’; Be! Ho 
wKt! BK Lo? Pus “Preafer — d) aKtS Gaer:; Lo? arate: Tj! afer 

116. Omitted in PuS [Jolly M'3] — a) Bé Tr? aTeaee; BBe ARIST, La! Tareq; Md? 
oMy aeretarhver ; Ho fear’; Be} fear; wKt! sOx! sPus “amer — b) Bo gar; cMd) fear; 
Ho tMd? Put Jat; nPul Tr? 97; BK rTM? STAT; NPu! FeIT; Be} Tetae: — c) Hy araher’ ; 
uiré Rrefare; wk} frgers; oOr mT ro faéefa, Pu? [Jolly G] arf; sBé Bo [but cor] wKt! 
Kt La! oOr Pu? Pu’ earfer — c-d) sOx! sPu® afi [lacuna] WaT Te: — d) aK BAT 
srt afer; Pu? [Jolly G] wert BWI: HeA:; TMd4 mT rt MTr® Serfer; sOx! sPuo Spratt; Pu? Pud 
wit: We:; WaT We: GE:; cGMd Feareger:; Be! sBe? Kt? Lo! Lot tMd* nNg nPul mTr® 
[Jolly M Nd] Dave &&t:; Md? GMy arr; La! Ox? Bary; Pu’ 7y:; Be? sOx! sPuo afer: 

117. Omitted in Lo+ Lo® Ox? Jolly M'3]; padas c-d omitted in BBe. Cited by Vij 2.77; 
Dey 3.217-8 — a) TMd3 cMd° oMy Polly Nd] aferaterepe art; sBe wKt! Lo? cGMd! nPu! 
Pu? Put pu Pu? mTr* mTr® *Paeregy — b) BCa a: ae Hepa wad; Be! Jo? nPu! [Jolly G 
Nd] @@; Pu? Put Reararee; wKt! Carer; La! mTr3 “arett; Be “arena Fe; mT Hel; 
Md! = st wet — c) TMd3 Tj! om one A; Pu’ Pu? TT BF, Tr! MT’ eae La! Tepes 
fra’ — d) sOx! sPu® & [lacuna] 4 [lacuna] Pa; Bo Hat; La! rMd4 Wa Pancapd; wKt! 
Peep wk pastayd; Ho Lo! Pu? Put Tj! Tr? Volly R)aaad; MTP BA aA; Jo! 
qed 

118. Omitted in Lo® Ox? [Jolly M'3]; ma in Lo‘. Cited by Apa680; Laks 12.141; Dev 
3.215; Madh 3.81 — a) wKt! “aTgareift; Be! Bo HonKt* Lo? tMd! Ox? nPul Pu? Pué Tr! Tr 
“arta, wKe “anfrare 1tMd? nNg “UIRTSIT — b) wKt! om Brad; Be erat — c) oMy 
SSTAES ; Lo} Tj! “aratet — d) Pu? Pul arfearaayerey 

119. Omitted in Lot Lo’ Ox? [Jolly M']. Cited by Laks 12141; Dev 3.215; Mddh 3.82 
— a) Td‘ Dev aut; GMd! Laks “Fae:; Pu’ Tr! “RTT; Madh “PITA TF: — b) Ho F; 
Lo! aq; Be? AeA; Ho TRAN; wKe) ares Faeyr; wKe rMd3 Hae — c) [olly N] ag; 
wKt! er & avs’; cMd! evetfaatateg; rMd? sOx! sPuo “fasraeg; La! “featur aq; [Jolly M] 
“Prarie; cMd “frat 


Chapter 8 683 


SMS PST Atereyd TF aeay | 
ware at HET ssl Haregd BGs T Ne oll 
are ys wry HT Tez | 

AAAS FUT TH aAearsIagT TF ULL 
Tag: BAT Threqvsreeatfar: | 
aeaatranrmaaraaret T NAMI 
aearet F gatntehtrantentrer a: 
WaTaaersrarcar aay @ Fraraag ue zz 
ay errant weer Aq: Taya sate | 

rg acty arf eqeaat ararth arg NLR 


120. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox} MTr° [Jolly M'-4], Cited by Vij 2.81; Apa 680; Laks 12.141; 
Dev 3.215; Mddh 3.82 — a) Tr! @rareveat: ase g; Tj! T? “aaea; tMd! [Jolly Nd sh] 
aseq; [Jolly Nd fh] SISeT;cGMy eT J; Md? eS |g; Jo? Lo? Pu’ Tj! Gea; [olly R] 
qus7, Be! wKt} Lo? cMd! 0Or Ox? mT‘ Tr Vij Apatea: BaTAiter — b) La! “ae — c) 
cMd! wargt HEAT; Dev HATS AVTAT; Apa Warat AeTAT; GMd> NNg Wa Feaat; Be! Be? Bo 
BCa wKt! wKt? GMy sOx! nPu! Pu} sPuS Tj! eat; NNg eee; GMd! GMd5 Wa Dev Apa @eT 
—. d) Be! Ho NKt Lo? oMd! 1Md4 My Ox? Pu? Pu? Tr! Tr? Vij Fa; wKe Prat; wKe 
Laks “age, La! “aay. ; BBe? Tqtea; wKt! [but me] T agT 

121. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? [Jolly M!]; padas a-b omitted in mTr. Cited by Vij 2.81; 
Apa 680; Laks 12.141; Dev 3.215; Mddh 3.82 — a) KP Tf; Be} FF; BCa La! Laks Sth — b) 
oMd) sraTeaeyer — c) GMd! agit; sOx! sPu® F; Pud fe; TP a Pus quit— d) tMd* afore 
aay FT: GMA GMy alee; wKt! Pu? Put aTeeareset ; Pus Pu? arfearet aa; Kt! 
arfsarard ; BBe Bo Ho Jo? wKt? Lo} cMd! NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put sPuo Pu® Tj! Tr? 
Apa Go at 7; Be} “aera 

122, Omitted in [Jolly M'*]. Cited by Laks 12.141; padas a-b cited by Dev 3.51, 215; 
Madh 3.82 — a) Be? UATATE:; Ox? VaTATg:; TMd4 UaTATE; Bo TMd? GMd? Pu? Put Pu> Pu? 
[Jolly M? G Nd] Re"; Lo? HE — b) sOx! sPus Her aveT AAT; Laks GreHT aver AAT; NK! 
grat aera; Pu2 Put Vea; Be? pCa [but cor] wKt} NKt La! Lo? GMd! GMd? oOr nPu! 
Tj! mTrtmTr® Wa Dev arfifter:; Md? “aréfthr: — c) Ho TMd3 oMy Tre ferent’; wKt! 
"aRT; Bo “arent — d) wKt! “eraiferrarr, cMd! cMd5 “Rraare; rMd3 rMd4 GMy TH 
[Jolly Nd} ‘Prerara; Tj! “Pera 

123. Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Vij 2. 81; Apa 680; Laks 12.142; Madh 3.82 — a) 
Bo nPu! Pu Pu’ [Jolly M* Nd G] Laks Madh @e’; Kt 8"; wKt! J; Be’ Ma} Hato”; 
Md! pater Ft”; Ox? afer AY” — b) Apa [vl as in ed) °ofearea, Lo! °oifsarrercit — c) ™d 
aMy ware” — 4) Bo 8€MT; sBe? mTr! MTr® Volly Nd]Laks sTemeq; Be! statereq, wKt} aT- 
arg 

124.* Omitted in [Jolly M!-3]. Cited by Vij 2.26; Dev3.290-1; Madh 1.399; padas a-b 
cited by Madh 3.155 — a) cMd! 1Md4 querer — b) NNg #41 — c) Be! sBe? Be? sCa Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? nKt* BK Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® nNg Ox? nPul Pu? Put Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa 
Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave at; Lo! aif @& aerdt — d) Pu’ Pu? [cor to] Beart; NK 


684 Chapter 8 


srergat fren reat wat a IST | 
ayaa a eut a at seeds T NAul 
agaet afar agrees a aca: | 
ART ATHNT TVS TVSNT UTAAT U2 2Ell 
TIS Hee Bat leas | 

rere a aeatr aearercahtastad Ne 2 
THSITTSAT UAT Feutsaraqsagy | 
oa Hearatfa ace ter wear ei 
anes wat Hallas aeaTTey | 
acta wrqus J ANGUS: TET ULI 
arty wat aan Pade a aaa | 
aay aaa waster UTSAT Ne Roll 


Lo! eqefercl; cMy seri; rMdé Tj! sero 

125. Omitted in [Jolly M'4]. Cited by Laks 12.782; Dev 3.290, Madh 1.399, 3.156 — a) 
Dev 37% Set; Hy “Fere; wKet! “HIE; Md4 “Hea; Tj! Er; TM! fergfer — b) nPu! eq; Tj? 
gat; GMd! T3=07:; BKS TTT; Lo’ Ox} TSaHt — c) Be? wKt! Pu? Put “Ata; Hy “Ate, Madh 
1.399 Ta; TMd3 Tr Ata; oOr “Aiftenanuit; nKet ee; TMd? HUT — d) Madh 3.156 AAS 
eae; Md? aeeras. GMd! & aa; cMy®e ate 

126. Omitted in [Jolly M'*]. Cited by Dev 3.297; Mddh 1.398— a) GMd! TMd? GMd?> 
GMy MTr‘MTr® [Jolly Gr]|Nd NSm 19.45 HITE; Tr! A[ma Trae; TMd4 saree [Bh reads 
here S3a-T but in a reference at 8.285 reads AIA]; Wa “ae, Jm wKt & fersra; Madh 
aetearer — c) cMd! 1Md? tMd4 cMd oMy [Jolly Nd] Nd arerare aerate [Nd ‘ant; cMd 
“Sle]; Tr! ARIETE aU me sh ara Aas; mTrSarrgeear avert Aes; oOr 
SITET TATSTAT; NSm 19.45 ARIAT UATSRT; BBS “art; Madh werrearsret; pCa sOx! sPuo 
Dey ‘Uerarerer; Pu2 “ TearaTsreT; Ox? Ox} aTSTRT; Ho wKt? MTP) BSA; NNg ATT; Jo? 
Lo} Tj! [Jolly R] frst — d) Wa om a0; Ox3aus; Md? GUST TVS; Md‘ ger gery; 
BBe? Be? Bo tMd? aueq; La! [but me sh] @cy; coMd aa 

127. Omitted in [Jolly M'3] — a) cMd! art’; Ox? eefavet; rMd3 TMd? cMd> GMy 
MTr! MTr® Yolly Nd] aevsaevst; Tr! Afma TAeIST — c) Md‘ seat TF GT RMN; Be? 
weet, Lo? aTaearhy; [Jolly M] earereahy, Ox? gearftr— d) Ox? aeqveaftaeda:; Md} mTr4 
cert of; wKe aearaRfeast’: Be? “aaa 

128. Omitted in MTP [Jolly M!]. Cited by Vij 2.1;Laks 12.796; Dev 3.33; Madh 1.391, 
3.25 — a) Bowevere; Laks FEVST WES: La! Lo! “quete — b) Pu Pu’ areqrarey ; Laks 
avey dary — d) Tr? Tee; Ke? Tea, cMd! zeHiaAe; Ma} areal; Pu2 arferreafer 

129. Omitted in [Jolly M']. Cited by Vij1.367, 2.26; Laks 12.781; Dev 3.295; Madh 
3.156 — a) Pu’ Pu’ anave:, Tj! arevs; Te [but me sh] BAT — ab) Vij revs yore 
eatgravs — c) Be} pCa GMd! NNg Pu2 Pu> Pu? Volly G] a — e-d) Lo? Tj! augue J 
eaqvenct: — d) La! af; Tr! “qusecaa:; iMdé “ausecat:; GMd? MT YS “aus aa: 

130. Omitted in TMd? GMy [Jolly M'4]; padas c-d omitted in Pu®. Cited by Laks 12.781; 


Chapter 8 685 


THEATERS AT: aat: wfrar yfer | 
AAHSAGANAT AT: WATTS: N23 UI 
ATHRATTSY ATA ATT SITT TT: | 
TUT ASAT TALI TeTAT WL RRM 
wervrarstr fasar fester afta: | 
at uaeadaftceed wat aiteada: 12331 
ata: weuat waar Aa Hoey | 
WSTPMITH ATA Yavleg ater le 3vil 


Dev 3.295 — a)cMd! aaah} carat J; Bo Fars; BK Lot rMd4 war; Kt? araaTA; Ox? 
TRAM; Be! wKt nKt! Lot Lo MTA; KO aT; Laks AT — b) Be! Be wKt! nKt* 
Lot Tr? Frydtg; sOx! sPuS Prrerg; La! mTr* mTr° ged; Tr! frrétd; iMd* Pratt; Ho 
sOx! sPu’ “dtreprareqare — c) Be! BBe Bo nKt La! Lo? GMd! +Md? Ng oOr Pu! Put Tr! 
MTP MTroaey; Lo! aeut; Be’ aeaT; GMa aaa; Pu? [Jolly G] ata; rMd* TAA; Lo! 
adadacd — d) nNg frgssiter 

131. Omitted in Pu> [Jolly M!]. Cited by Laks12.807; Hem 1.115, 24.53; Dev 3.229; 
Madh 3.115 — a)1Md4 Slwer START ; Pu? Put “eest— b) Pu? a Ss; Md4 Madh aT wear; 
Jo? wferat — c) wKt} Jo? La! tMd4 Ox? Tj! Wa Laks “ater; sOx! sPuS “ET — d) Lot Lo® 
Ox? Pu? Put arr ; Bo WARM ; Be? Tae ata: 

132.* Omitted in GMd'! GMd° MTr¢mTr° MTr° [Jolly M-3] Bh. Cited by Laks 12.807; 
Hem 1.115, 2/1.53; Madh3.115 — a) Ho wer; Tj! anit, Wa arTaat — b) Ke acgert; Pu’ Pu? 
wager; wKe ead Ae — c) Ox? FTA; TMd? GMy Hem eH — d) La! waeu; Lo! Lo 1Md* 
Pu> Pu’ Tj! Tr? Wa Hem 1.115 FAY:; Lo! Lot Lo’ waesd; Hy wae; nNg waeud; La! 
geptfac:; Lo} Tj! & Sarat— Ox? inserts here 9.137-63 

133.* Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox? [Jolly M'-*], Cited by Laks 12.807; Hem 1.115, 24.53; Dev 
3.229; Madh 3.115 — a) Md? GMy [Jolly Nd] Hem 1.115 FACIE FT [TMd? Hem 1.115 
gar; (Jolly Nd) stay]; La! wa; Jo! TALI; Dave Ba; Md4 Taracey; cMd 5 Taos 
nKt BK Wa SY Sat; Pu? Put fasat —a-b) Hem 2/1.53 Tavateas fer Star sare: — 
b) Tr? feetat, cMd> fester; Be? feetarr; NK fetter; Lo! fesfeteer, cMd! feat; ake) fee- 
star; wk} Pud Pu? mTré MT 1° feetenr; Hy feereer, TP feet: nPul “TAT: sOx! sPu® 
qeATd:; GMd > ToT; Hem 1.115 TATT:; Ho “aTorar — c) TMd* & Usa; mTroar UT; 
aK [but cor] La! *Md? GMd5 GMy nPu! Pu? Put sPuS “atari — d) Be? Bo tMd? tMd4 
cMy “Reread AR; Laks Raat ge aie; GMd! sat ae; Be? La! Md? OMe GMy 
agar: 

134.* Omitted in Lo* Lo’ Ox? [Jolly M!-3]; padas c-d omitted in GMd!. Cited by Laks 
12.808; Hem 1.115, 24.54; Dev 3.229; Madh 3.116 — a) Mdé @taret er Fer Ps wKt! om 
ada, Kt? aau:; nPul agar; Hem 2/1.54 Ve der: Br. Be! nKt? Tj? mene — b) tMd? 
cMy *Rerraret J PUST:; Be! “Perteaa; NNg Wa @50:; GMd° nPu! Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Tr! 
[but cor to YH] mTr® Wa Ua; Be? Be} Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wK¢ BKt> Lo! Lo? Lo? 
tMd? oOr Ox? Tj! Ty Tr? mTr? Ra ReLaks Hem Dev Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
eaHEurs, Hem 1.115 AHP: ;GMd! aa Has — c) Be! nKt* Lo? nPu! Pud Pu? mTr5 mTr® 
Wa [Jolly M G] Me Dave Jha fe#t [but Me notes: RIporsa se gis Hart agaie-], 


686 Chapter 8 


Tey Fantaeae: wef aot aa | 

x pore aye farar Beas: WY 3ull 

ot otey erect geese wa: | 
erator fserahire: wife: wr: le sell 
ST Say AT: AAA Ua: | 
Ugigavtet Freer frre Tamra: 12 Zl 
Wat F Aa areal WIA: Tea: Tad: | 
meat: UST fart: Feet Aa URAA: UL 3c 
ar ay ofaard ase aHete | 


wet aaleyyr aerate UL 38 Il 
Pu2 Put fear: mT? ay; Be! ATITEY: wKt! ATaey: TMd4 ART — d) Pu? Put araec:; TMd4 
sOx! sPu’ gating; Laks JAF |; Bo cMd> Garter; Be? nNg Tes: 

135. Omitted in Lot Lo’ GMd! Ox? [Jolly M'-3]. Cited by Laks12.808;, Hem 1.115, 
2/1.54; Dev 3.230; Madh 3.116 — a) Ho ®G; La! T:; wKt! T; Lo! Lo? rMd* GMd 5 Tj! 
gavtey — b) Jo! Far, GMa warty; r+Md3 GMy IT AT; Md‘ ae; Be? wKt! TM? aa: 
—c) Pud Pu’ @F Fea; NNg [but me sh] TARA — d) Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? sKt sOx! Ox? nPu! 
Pu} sPuS mTr? Mandlik KSS@r°; Bo tMd* BF; sOx! sPuS “ATaaT:; BBE “ATTA; MTV 
“TTT 

136. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox} [Jolly M'~3]; padas c-d omitted in mTr°. Cited by Vij 1.364- 
5; Laks 12.808; Hem 1.115, 2/1.54; Dev3.230; Mddh 3.116 — a) Lo Utsar: — b) tMd? tMd?4 
oMy MTr° Dev gent tar;1Md? GMd GMy Dev ustd— c) Tj! BHT; Jo! “Tr g; Ke? “Torq; 
cMd! oOr fastareat. — d) TMd3 oMy Wa fase: aifftectter: 97: Laks “aeafere:; Bo 
“Fireer:; sOx! sPuo “Pret; Bo sOx! Put sPuS afttas:; rMd? Tj! writes; cMd! arfifepr; La! 
aor; TMd4 gor 

137. Omitted in Ho Lo* Lo® Ox3, Cited by Laks 12.808; Hem 1.115, 2/1.54; Dev 3.230, 
Madh 3.116 — a)sOx! sPu® aor; Lo! ereomfr; Md‘ at; BKtS GMd? att — b) oOr FAT 
gaat ¢; BK AAAI; BBe? Be? wKt! TMd? GMa Laks AAA J; wKt! BK’ Use — c) 
Be} GMd! tMd3 1Mdé4 GMy Pu’ Tr! MTrmTr° [Jolly M] Laks gateret, Be! sBe? Bo pCa Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? nKt4 BK La! Lo? sOx! Ox? Pu? Put sPuo Tj! Tj? Te mT? mTr> 
[Jolly R] Rn Mr Hem Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ‘ataftrasr — d) tMd4 Water: 

138. Omitted in Lo* Lo® Ox’. Cited by Vij1.366; Apa 592; Laks 12.807; Dev 3.299— a) 
Hy Torat; oOr Pu? Put Tart; Ke acrat; BK +Md? arel; Ho earel; Hy are — b) Md? FAH; 
Hy Sat: — c) rMd4 Feat; Te os: cMd5 fasta — d) nPu! Pu? Put aes arate: Bc:; 
wKt! aga; GMd° Ox? Tr! Wa Vij Deva; Apa $4; TMd} GMy [Jolly Nd] AHA; wCa 
eapHTA:; OOr AA AAH:; Ho Jo? La! Lo? GMd> sOx! sPuo Tj! Tj? Tr! Gert: TMd* Ge; 
GMd! waa: 

139.* Omitted by Na. Cited by Laks 12.333 —— a) Lo! 32017, GMd) nPu! aur; GMd! er; 
tM rMd4 @4; rMd? @Pr;, Hy eer; rMdé oferta; Te vfs — b) BK La! TF; wKt! 
aaa ; oOr Sat, rMd4 aH — c) wKt3 Lo? NNg nPu! Pus Pu? mTré mTr® [Jolly M G Nd] 


Jolly & feet 


Chapter 8 687 
atratateat atx qatrataattry | 
safterrnt adtareararargyive: wat ile voul 
fee ae at agi wal eters | 
fae aa fe wert + waerifefeadt tex ei 
fea Be age a It oT Ad aA | 


areet aha Wels AMAT: UL wR 
a wart atrat aid ghzargarc | 
a and: ereetienrevisiter + feat: ue¥ al 


7 ahpeat aoratnfsonrar afrqeqad | 
qa aes WAT UL 


anferaiarRrainit = ETTTAET: | 
Haar waat at Aearesaaterat lleva 


140. Padas a-b omitted in GMd!. Cited by Laks 12.279; padas c-d cited by Dev 3.361; 
Madh 3.167 — a) Ho Kt? afar’; Pu’ fafare"; GMy T]! *fafed — b) Im aie’; Ho Hy 
“afSt; La! Lo? Lo’ iMd4 NNg nPu! mTr° “att; wk nKt4 Ox? Tr! Caer — d) Bo *aTeaTeT- 
aT’; wK8 “aeATaTar ; Jo! “araaratar’; Be? Madh “arent are ; BKe “gregh: ad; Jo! ad; 
Lot Lod att; GMy MT r! MTr° ate: -7Md3 at: 

141. Cited by Laks 2.218, 12.280; Madh 3.167 — a) sOx! sPuS g4; Bo 8%; Laks 2.218 
aed TBM; MT MT MTr® Tete cGMd! TM? tMdé GMy Tr! Wa [Jolly Nd Gr] afer — b) 
+tMd? sat rag — c) BKt om f%; Md? &; wCa Ho sOx! sPu’ J; GMd5 oOr Tr! aT; K@ Lo® 
TET, Tj! Jer; mT eS Tec 

142. Cited by Laks 12.280; Dev 3.361; Madh 3.167 —~ a) Ox? T&; Md> Way; 1Md4 aT 
— b) Ox? TI; oOr om FT; Be? T; Bh [patha] AAT; sOx! sPuo Ad; aMd ! eA — c) Tj! 
aret, cMd! art af; Md‘ gfeareerg — d) Tr? afer’; GMd! 1Md4 “argyear:; Pu? 
Put HST 

143. Padas a-b cited by Apa 659; Dev 3.325; padas c-d cited by Vij 2.58; Laks 2.219, 
12.298; Dev 3.332 — a)TMd? & a: [Jolly M*-9] Farelt: aK agent; Lo? atte — b) Lot 
Lo? Bret; Bo oOr HET; Tr! [but cor sh] BATE; Pud Pu? Htadt; wKe! ataftet; rmd4 
areal, cMd! alate, Ma} eet; Tj? gftrar; +Md4 “watgara — c) cMdS aTet:; cMd! ar; 
Pu2 Put arer:; nPu! arfer:; TMd4 a1e:; Be! Ox? Laks 2. 219 aT: Lo® sOx! sPu® aTe:; Bo aret:, 
Hy rset - wKt! okt’ 1Md3 Md!  aerPrenit; wKe eet feet — d) Jo? “Sere anit 
MTrt mTr° f& fawee:; Bo nKtt faser:; cMd> Prana:; 1M? Piftee: 

144, Omitted in Ox3. Cited by Madh 3.178-9;padas a-b cited by Vij 2.58;Dev 3.324; 
padas c-d cited by Dev 3.328— a) BBe* Be’ wKt! wKt? Lo? tMd? tMd4 oMy “arya, 
nPu! Pu2 “arr yssTFT; Bo “arait year? — b) oOr fsfssi; 1Md! sfery; Be? "Te — 
c) Be! [but mc] Be’ sOx! sPu® H34; GMd> Pu? Put Pud Pu’ Lolly G] Dev Madharraerar ; 
Lo? areasaar ; nPul mTro deasaar; mT Seas; wKe araaeaaar; wKe! arangasr. 
Td? peer ; oMy pea - sOx! sPuo aaraeaaAT d) tMd3 “mA; 1Md?* 
“anfwereran, coMd *Rreaara; oMd! “anit 

145. Omitted in Ox? — a) sOx! sPuS dtentic Frfrait — b) rMd? wor’: Pud Pu7 


688 Chapter 8 


atten yer a agar ears | 


ATE SHAT wa TT: TIT evel 
afenkregrrattor aferent sera ert | 


As weet + a ages level 
soreaqanreet Fret wet yore | 

UA Aguado wreat agaqaefa evil 
afer: dar area frerarafafaftar: | 
ted oitBreredt a at aR oA Newel 
a: eararraareaanrer yarhsfaaern: | 
aatatantrean aer wnver Prep: ugk oll 


wrarerry ; wKt! Lo! “wéfe; iMd4 “Heat; wKe “ric: — c) MT? aaeat; GMd! Ox? Tr! aq- 
grat, Lo? aerat; wPul srearrat — d) oMy “areraaferdt; tMd3 arerafeardy; Pu! “areseg- 
aferdt; Pu2 Put “ares araferat 

146. Cited by Dev 3.157, Madh 3.109-10 — a) TMd? aver; TM? mTr6 AHA — b) Pur 
Pu’ 7RafeT A; Kt? sOx! sPu® [but me sh] Taft — c) cMd Aywat TSTST; MTV TANT; 
cMd! Ox? areapat; Madh Feget — d) Ox? PaTEeT:; Pu? Put a: feaeRr; wKe nKe eer; 
BBe? FeT:; Md arrgead, Madh wysad; cMd! wAsTact — In Lo? Tj! the sequence is: 
146, 148cd, 147, 148ab. 

147. ma in Ho; in Ox? the sections 8.147-89 and 198-364 are omitted — a) TMd4 ates” 
— b) Hy Pu? Pu} Put mTr5 dead; tMd3 af; Lo’ aft — c) sCa cMd! years: TMd* HST, 
MTrS ae; Te eet — d) wKt om &; nKe Tr? agerr 

148. Padas a-b ma in Ho; pada- -a omitted in MTr°. Cited by Vij 2.24; Apa 632; Dev 3.156 
—a)cMd! TTT; BKo ars; Lo? Aa; Hy Jo? Pu? Pu MT Vij Apa Dev “ahareey; 
wke “tet; oOr “aTIVet — b) xPul feaay; Lo! Vij fraeaTer; Ho sOx! nPu! sPu® aver; Pu5 
Pu’ ated; GMy Tet; GMd> aTaysacr, Lo! cMd! yosted — c) Pu? Put ye agar — d) wKt! 
arg ¢ aT; BBe Hy Jm Jo! Ke? Lo} Tj? Tr [Jolly Ku R]Mr Mandlik KSS aagery 
After 148 Lo’ Lo? place verses 365-90. 

149.* Cited by Laks 12.190; Dev 3.158; Mdadh 3.109 — a) sOx! sPu® Tees; BK tS STS; 
nKt a@ ; Tr? afes ; cGMd! art | — b) BK PAST; Bo PAfRraTT’: Jo? [Jolly Ku R Nd] 
NSm 1.73 Laks Jha Frit ferer:; Be} Hy Jm Jo! sOx! sPuS Pu’ Tj? VaDh 16.18 Mandlik KSS 
Dave ‘faftr: fea: —c) Be! Be? Bo HosKt$ Lo! Lo? oOr Ox? nPu! Pu2 Pu? Pu Pu’ Pu? Put 
Tr? [Jolly M G] Dev Me VaDh 16.18 NSm 1.73Jolly #iPraget [om FT]; sOx! sPuo APART, 
tMd3 GMy [Jolly Nd] starred — d) NNg Ox? Pu’ Dev Madh oN Az; Wa ATT 
aerate; Be! Lo? oOr nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu? Pu’ [Jolly M G RINSm 1.73 Jolly ATH ARTS; 
Be? Bo Jo? sKt® Lo} Pu3 Pu’ Tj! Te strats sfeife: aCa amit sasafa; Lot faaeate, 
oMd! worect: 

150. Cited by Apa 659; Dev 3.324; Madh 3.179— a) cMd! ag; Bo Sfaaay 
Pud Pu? Tj! ate af; Lo} “ara: amt — b) Be? “ATR; Ho we; Hy Fee; TMd4 *qerop — 
c) TMd3 GMy @Atenghes ; Apa [vi] aaa hs ; mT aaeigha; Ke gest; Ke La! Lo! 
Lo} cMd! sOx! [cor to] Pu! Tr? Apa Dave fexaTeaT; Bo “fexteedt — d) oMd! aver Fper 


Chapter 8 689 


ediqafaayes arate agafear | 
MMT WE HA Ae Akar Waar Ue Vil 


Fagaateret safattar az Rake | 

eal Rha EAE 
aifrataent gfe tT aeet yey 

Unda: Bodh: Bar Breer TAT Ue sll 

oT aaa a: ers: Harz | 

a qear fatrat ate wer aad eu vil 


frapa:; Tr? ae sOx! sPuo aprTer; wKt! Fr: fee:; oOr MTP’ Frapa:; nK¢! Fr:arer:; rMd3 
frepe:; La! Pare: 

151.* Lo* Lo® omit verses 151-88. Cited by Vij 2.39; Apa 643- 4;Laks 12.288; Dev 
3.374; Madh 3.1712 — a) sCa wKt! @afte’; Tj? edie’; Ti ghefdyer; vNg gfasyer: La! 
oMd! “gfaqer — b) Be? La! Apa [vl] ana, Hyateater, t Md! arate; nPul aparfeara; 
oMd! yparea; wKt! Ox? apetedt; Be! BBe? Be? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo” wKt! Kt? wKt? Lo! Lo? 
NNg oOr sOx! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr3 Ra Nd Re Go Mandlik Jolly KSS 
apared; aCa Md4 aparear:; La! aparHat— c) Md‘ rarer ser Darel; La! ary ad ae 
are; mTr’arer aaraces aval; Be! Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Ké wKt} nKt* Lo! Lo? Lo oOr sOx! 
Ox? nPu! Pu? sPuo Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly Ku N R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ®&; GMy 3c; BK OT 
aa; Tr? off; rMd? a; Be! nNg Apa aT@t}— d) Pwd Pu arfeseraa; nKt4 oOr Tj! Tr? mTr3 
atfermater 

152. Cited by Laks 12.286; Dev3.364; padas a-b cited by Dev 3.368 — a) TMd? 
*Pereargaferefesr — b) rMd? “Reng feeafe — c) Tj? BAe’; oOr edtefiang ; Bo Lo? GMd 
oMy Pu? Put “aaa”; GMd! “mesg”; TMd3 “aUATE | My ‘geterTay — d) aK THT; Tj! 
“wee 

153.* Padas a-b omitted in NKt* [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.281; Dev3.367 — a) MTP 

“aaeate:; Wa “aeatt — b) Tr? arfiret; pCa nKt4 La! oMd’ mT ro @ arfetet; Pu’ ¢ aferei; 
1tMd4 4 & gt; cGMd! 4 7 AteT; Be! Be’ Bo wKt! wKtS Lo! Lo? nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 
Pu‘ Pud sPuo Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly M G N] DevMe Go Na Jolly Jha Dave faretc, La! Tet — c) 
Dev wate wrogks; Md* werafex: — d) Jo? wKt! Lo? Tj! aifresr aiktesr, Tj? arfrear 
aiftar; PuS Pu? arfesepr after; rMd4 writer after, Toate, wk} ara 7; Bo 
BIPaT FT; sBe? Hite T; Lo? wife 7; cMd> Hea T; nNg wat TF, rMd4 wT 4; La! 
nPu! Tr? Faq; [Jolly M] 7 aT 

Additonal verse in TMd? GMy (= BrSm 10.10): 

artist Seeaear AIST wT sitesepr | 
gadieer wHgfs: erftar aeftrar war |! 
a) GMy adds at beginning: 377 geeafa: — b) TMd3 araer 

154.* Omitted in nKe. Cited by Laks 12.328; Dev 3. 378; Madh 3. 193 — a) Bé ard 
ET; wKt Fareit; Pu2 “water; Put “aad — b) 1Md? °Presaga:; Lo! “Pretare:; Be? 

“Resa: ga: Tr? feet — c) Te Prat. 1Md4 fAfetat; Bo afx— d) Ho [cor to] Md? cMy 
[Jolly M Nd] Bh Jolly rer; GMd> Pu? Put Tr? mTr4 TRastac; Lo! oRaeaa; ake wRace 


690 Chapter 8 


saatfacar aaa farer aadag | 

aadt aaagiaearadt aque eae 
Umqte WATS HTT: | 
ofr A aepeAaTgard U2’ Sil 
aqeaAazion srareartatart: | 

emqater J at ghee at aarkert ster eal 
at wer wires ara: | 


seers & We TNR UE 
wierer qaarare ate a aq | 


PST TT FAT TaAEer UUM 
SAAT ATT g farfer: eareqeartaa: \ 
armen ser arararahy ara ue gol 


155. Omitted in NKt*+; padas a-b omitted in GMd!. Cited by Laks 12328; Dev 3.378 — a) 
Hy om sraaifireat; cM’ a4 — b) Pud Pu’ Tj! Tr sRasfaer — c) Ho Arad; sMd3 area: 
Bo Wag’; cMd! eag; My Aghe cad; eke “Aghsx aracit — d) BK 1Md4 “erat, Bo 
“adt afta 


156. Cited by Laks 12.328; Dev 3.370 — a) NKE “af; Bé BK’ Lo! tMd* “af — b) 

Lo! ™d3 aererat — c) wKe after’; Tj! “srarear’; Lo! “art ar; Tr? “art 3ar; Hy 
“pare; Bed “aT Bars Be} BKE "ast — d) Ox? Pu} Pu® Tr? cera 

157. Cited by Laks 12.283; Dev 3.471— a) tMd? tMd4 “art. Md‘ Carepranfe; Wa 
“BRST; MT ro Berar — b) TMd? “eat — c) Wa Baa; Te Bata; cMd! eargater; Lal 
Lo! 4; rMd3 ¢ 47; Jm nKt BKtS Md! mTr4 g at; TMd4 © AT; oOr aa Fhe — c-d) Dev 
pret are at T a Santa afe — d) oOrsOx'! &; nPul arenfenrt 

158.* Cited by Dev 3.348;Madh 3.185 — a) Pu 4; Be? 1 aa; Md! at ger T rater; 
tM! Tj! afery fard° — b) wKt? “ara &; rMd4 are FR; wKt! Tj! “ara; sOx! ATT: [but cor] 
-—¢)oMd! saareg TAS; BBe wKt! Lo! seztaard Ter, GMS atestaees; Tr? t aer; Madh 
@ aa;1Md} cece; *Md‘ ader — d) Be? Wa FT & ; Be! BBe? Bo Ho wKt' nKt! BKte 
La! NNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu4 Pu’ sPuo Pu’? Tr? [Jolly M G Ku] Me Go Ku Jolly 
Jha Dave 32a &; pCa Lo! Pu’ wares TAT 

159. Cited by Laks 12, 315; Dev 3.397; Madh 3- 198— a) Bo after, Ho BK é afeurer, 
BCa steraren BBe aura Ke “arguifaras; Kt “art amferay — b) Be? wKt! Kt? Pu? Pu? 
Pu‘ “art arferas; Be! cMd! “art arferay; rMd* [lacuna] fear TF Aa; BK “arrarfert; Madh 
yg ad —c) Hy qey Ox? qusstoTage;, GMy “wpraatre; +Md3 “warfare; {Jolly Nd] Laks 
Dev VaDh16.31 “eraere — d) Wa g Yat; 1M? Jat 

160, Pada-d omitted in GMd? [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.315; padas a-b cited by Dev 
3.397; padas c-d cited by Laks 12.305; Dev 3.355— a) TMd? aa: Tr? aatamfer ; Bo La! Lo? 
Lo? 1Md? sOx! sPuS Tj! Tj? sferaTe?; wk Lo! “sa; Pu’ Pu’ “uTedt; rMd? cMy “aTe — b) 
Laks fate: yawafea:; tMd? “safe; NNg Pud Pu? Tr? “atfea:; Hy “diféa:; La! Pu? Put 

“afgtat: — c) Lo! [but cor] Pu? Put “ya — d) sOx! “araft a aaa 





Chapter 8 691 


satatt gaatar frararparqery 
warerferyta sea witateet SAAT LS 2M 
tererfgreerrang sfery: Taras: | 
wqaatea aeatafee ata feats: wegen 
aarararaeretttatet erator ar | 


Waa PAAT aE aT feats ees 
wear Twa water sate erg wtafoar | 
aeaaraa aathaareaaentar Weevil 
arrears array | 

aa argu wag acd faradaar egy 
Detar ate Ae: ST Bera A Hay AT: | 


161, Omitted in wKt'; padas a-c omitted in GMd>. Cited by Dev 3.353 — a) Bo BKt Lo? 
aerate, Tr? SAE — b) oOr faaremparer; Tr faarc: yparet; Lo! fee waercrgor; rMd3 
tMd* cMy fasreraferparett, Be faa; TeeReae BKtS ° area st —) Jo 

areata, mTrs “yer — d) BK Te; utd oar; Lo! Tact; Bo “Seder Ft T 

162. Omitted in wKt!. Cited by Laks 12.306;Dev 3.353 — a) Lo! Profegeaerd; r Md* 
Profes at Bq; oMd! Pafearrra, Pui Pere; Ke? “aasete:; Jo? Lo? Tj! “arate — b) 
mTr9 [Jolly Nd] Sareefetc:; Bo “SAT:; La! GMd! rMd3 +Md4 GMd° GMy Pu?mTr! “at — c) 
La! Md? @ aenf — d) Ho ‘fee sfeferfer:; Lo! rMd4 era: 

163. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Dev3.301; Madh3.162 — a) cMd! Hatararrahieater, 
nPul aeaaraatfrdatl aa; M4 aaAareNfra4taret. mT mT aaah awa; 
oMdS Carder’: Dey “adenhtt: ada; Madh “arderafraras; Be! Bo Lo! sOx! Pu} sPu® 
Pu’ Tj? Wa “ganfratdatert [Lo! sPuo “Rraraatar, Wa Rraret aT]; Be} “areata; 
Tr? “ardent: aot; pBe? “areaefttatoa; Pu? Put “afar aves; wKkt! “arearfitat sear 
—— a-b) nKtt Tasrarderedttarottawatsrd:; cMy FAAP [lacuna] efaeer aT; Md? AaT- 
rT atoereH a eT at— b) Wa aaa, Ho nPu! Tj! 7 — c) La! Lo! rMd? sOx! sPuo 
Tr aT aaaer: Ke paste 

164. Cited by Laks 12.270; Dev 3.90 — a)Dev Aart arat + Bafa; cMd! aren; wKt3 
arar; Md} AeMr J; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] ATaT FA ASM; GMy ATT; mTrosach — b) Pud afcfto- 
a; Be} sfaftac — c) rMd4 ae Ber; Be? Ox? Tr? “SITs; mTr® “gTaa; Bo BTHsAT ; rMd?4 
“greater ent Fra; Tr! eaifa’ — d) Be? Md? oMy “aarear’; Tr! mT rt MTr® Nd aaTeIT 
Be cMy eifenrt 

165. Cited by Vij 2.176; Laks 12.271; Dev 3.305 454; Madh 3.162, 229-30 — a) MIr* 
Tr @rreasataatad; oMd! armed a feat; rMd4 aver; Lol aeay; Pu? Put 
anmearst ; Hy SPAT; NPu! Sergtaa; Wa Brera; GMd> “fasta; Ho Prater — a-b) 
oMy Praarerrard [lacuna] aruferre: — b) cMd! 1Md3 1Md4 GMd) arrest’ — c) Vij Tee; 
Bo BKt® Lo?GMd ! Pu? Pud Pu? Tr! mTr* [Jolly M G] Vij arequfer; cM d! arcaafér; La! 
areaate; wKt! aearqe; Md‘ ae; TMd? ae — d) BK cMd! Pu’ fafrade 


692 Chapter 8 


aaa areas Terre crt: eg Ell 

Searhseretashy aaa TAT | 

eaaar ar faegr ar a sara Praesarg U2 E09 

qed Teh Iorrary sary | 

Aaa PAAAaPaAGTAaTT UEC 

aa: weet Rafer arfarer: sfery: Herz | 
far seat aftre Fa: gsi 

saree aad afteftorsftr after: | 


qT awed arash qari |e voll 
HATA USAT T ata | 
ater wrarad Uae: 8 Tee wT agate lige 


166.* Padas a-b omitted in Ca. Cited by Apa 647; Laks 12.313; Dev 3.411 — a) Bo Wétq; 
Hy Jm La! Lo? rMd3 Pu Pu? mTr6 Teta; sOx! sPuS Tr? Téta:; Lo! Teta; Lo! afe fafere 
ead; Tr? Ate — b) Md} GMy BeEAIPF TAT Gt; Apa [vl] BEAT; BBe? BCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo* 
wKt! Kt wKt3} Lo? GMd5 Ox? Tj? mTr3 [Jolly Ku R Nd] N@ Rn Re Dave Mandlik KSS gat 
pdt; La! Geet Apel; Lo! om 4; Bo J; sBe? Hy Apa A — c) Be GMd! tMd3 GMy RT- 
aaa, Apatrauserend; ake avatars — d) Jo? were; Apa ert: aT: 
Tr? “cere ferraieft; oOr “eareferaiehy, vPul wfertaeres wNg “feet; Dev aye:; Apa [vl] 
Ga: wKt! ga: 

167. Pada-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.314; Dev 3.308, 410; Madh 3.164 — a) Tj! 
“raray, cMy “eeftat; Madh “aritat; wKt! GMd! nPu! “erefat; mTré Tro eet; cMd® aefit; 
Dev Sia; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] “cael at — b) Pud Pu? “erearaeq; wKt} La! 1Md? tM! nPul 
Pu2 Pud Pu? Tre mTré MTr® [Jolly Gr] Dev Madh FARR; Jolly G] FAPTST — c) wPul arf 
aat, cMd! araear; rMd‘ fafest — d) Pu? [Jolly G] qHraeT fa@rricq; cMd! cGMd* cMy 
ass, Dev THITATA; TMd4 SaTaT- FT; Bo BATT; Laks TASTA; BBe? Be? wKt! nKt4 La! 
GMd! 1Md3 tMdé4 GMy nPu! Tr! [but me fh] MTr4 MTPMTr® [ Jolly Nd] Nd Re Bh frrareaa; 
oMds feureaey 

168. Omitted in Pu5; padas c-d omitted in Pu? Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.271 b) [Jolly M] 
qoreeft, rMd4 derepata — c) Md! aataeey ; cMd! “aerepar — c-d) La! aatqeqpar- 
aapartsgeadig — d) wKt! aK Lolly M] Taare 

169. a) TMd? FART; Bo TATA; Lo! TMd? NNg Pu’ Pu’ Tr! Wa [Jolly G] feet; Tr? 
Poe — c) Md aeate AT; BCa NKt4 Jo? Lo? oOr Pu? Put Tj! Wa atta; Be? 
“weardtard — d) Pus Pu? Jolly G] fawareet; Tr? areat; Ho areit, Hy sat; Lo! amet, M3 
aftrare:; tMd4 mTr5 aor aferer 

170. Omitted in Lo}. Cited by Laky 11.93 — a) Tr? HaTe@aeT Arad; Be! sAaTehy; BBe? 
arrest; tMd? Aarea; sOx! sPuS aarétarare; tMd? areefta — b) cMy ofeeftonft — c) Bo 
amarey, Pu? sea; MT ro ay et 

171. Cited by Laks 11.94 -— a) NPu! a1 ; Lo! aretar atéaer — b) sOx! sPuo “aTeaer 
a feasted; Bo [me to] wKt! nPu! Tr! “rer faastare, Ox? yer fasta; Tr? oma; TMd3 


Chapter 8 693 


aaa FASTAT T TVTT | 

as Gad Ua: F We A ala U2 
aera ga caret cae fecar Prefer | 
ade arerar aeat frecetet Braferat: est 


Tear Bah Atetepataerfaa: | 
ART FUT A Hafer WATT: ULovil 
area F aa asutertoy agate | 
waa Taare flerag: igo 

qT: Waa Teast ata FT | 

@ Ua AAGUHT eRe T TaTT PEI 


aera — c) mTr$ <aTaaq; Be} Ho La! eargd; cGMd! aad; rMd3 tMd4 GMd STA; TMd4 Tar 
— d) La! Tr! ter Be aw Asal. Laks Wee fare; Lo? Putt wear 

172. Omitted in GMd!. Cited by Laks 1194 — a) Be! Be? Sarat; Tr? eure; rMd? 
aT ; BBe? Jo Pu Tj! Na@ Rn Mr STeAT ; La! Se’; Be? Ho Hy Jo? Lo’ nPu! Pu? Pu4 
sOx! Ox? sPuS Tj! [Jolly M] Rn areata; Nd “areca; Bh Me [patha] “atecireenta, 
wKt! °argsfestt — b) Im Jo! Kt? Lo’ Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “aateraart, wKkt! “ante 
Stor; wCa FIT; Bo wKt} Sed; TMd? Tat — c) Be! Lo! Pud Pu’ ToaTReaTA UIT; 
Lo? aearearred UT; wKt! Pu? Pud Gera; Wa Salad — d) Tr! wer Be a ae: La! wards 
a aid; Water te 7 aeafe; rMd4 aed; Bo Tae 

173. a) sOx! sPuS TEATE [lacuna] FT at, La! sf; rMd? arf — b) 1Md4 ae, 
Be! Bo aT; La! Ea; Tr frarhat; Ho rare; ra? frarfrar— c) Md} ade; Tr? area; 
1tMd? areca 

174. Padas c-d omitted in Pu®. Cited by Laks 1217 ~ a) TMd? nPu! Feq GATT; Pu? Put 
sega, Lal geeaetor; Lo! ger ester, Wa Garestor, MTP tT at T— b) Be? Ho Jo? 
BKt Lo! Lo sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pud sPuS Pu? Tj! [Jolly M G R] Jolly Baiatterrafert:; Be! 
Bo Pu? Pu’ Tr? Bataterretatr: — c) sBe? cMd> gerare — d) Pu’? [Jolly G] Fe; oOr Farr; 
Be! La! Lo} Tj! aait; cMd? aat; Jo! Tr! at; 7Md? ast; BKt aatepaiect; Laks Tee: 

175. Cited by Laks 12.11; Dev 3.289— a) Be® Ho Jo? BKt? La! Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd? GMy 
sOx! Pud sPuo Pu’ Tj! [Jolly GJ — b) TMd? GMy Tr! Dev arf ar; tMd4 Wa arrester, 
Laks 2a efor — c) nKt! “gader— d) Md} Bae ST 

176. Cited by Laks 12.330; Dev 3.286; Mddh 3.152 — a) Md? a: aTedaet 7 Sea; Pud 
Tj! oma:; BK) Aaaeaeret; GM a AeredaserT, Madh ARS; wKe ST; Jo? Lo? 
eq — a-b) Bh |patha] asad Ae aatahar av: — b) La! eaqaalpagy, cMy 
aan ; Hy Md} tezahra; mT? aqeurairas; wKt! Lo} zy; Pu’ am, tMd4 3d — c) Tr tT 
war aq ;1Md4 eater Tq; Be! Us; Kt cMd! teresa. ; Hy Jo? BK Lo! Lo? oMd! 
sOx! Ox? sPu° Tj! Velly R] ea gt a; oMd@ nPu! mTr® war TT ; oOr TAY ad ; Be} 
Wat TW; GMy Use Vg; Md UaeT sys Hy Fae; La! wg 3g"; Bo yKt 
Ng Pu? Pu? Put PuS Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly G] Bh |patha] Dev Madh tartagq. Lo? tant aq — 
d) Lo! eradenea Tat; GMd! arezetey; Je Lo? Tj! Tr! aer aer, Pus Pu? arent ae; Tr? 
armed FT; Pus Pu? om T 


694 Chapter 8 


attr at gate afrararerafire: | 
waapentas Treg ast: evi 
seat fara ust fet fraqar arz | 
areata araiir ara sag uel 
Hot TAIT oat Terarkary | 

merret afereaet fret faferager: eal 
ar aur faired vat ger aaa: | 
Mada Weta AUT aI WE: UQColl 
at fret areararat fragt waster | 

a ara: wifsareat atrargeatrett ec gil 
aera wpfaRrdaeceaatad: | 
waaay wearer face aer arda: UCM 


177. Omitted in Wa. Cited by Vij 2.43; Apa647; Laks 12.326 — a) Tj) PATTY, Lo? 
apaeafy; Md‘ wa: wate — b) Te? afterraafire:; Lo! Lo? Tr! Laks Apa afterenr’; Ti? 
afrast arent’ ; Vij eafeaarere La! aftrararent’ ; 1Md¢ aftrar — c) Bes ware’; wKt! wKt3 
Lo? Tr! mTr5 Vij Tare Apa [vl] arepe Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt?BKt* Lo? Put Tj! Tj? 
Tr? [Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave sifted; Ox? “snfesaeer — d) Be! Sarcarg; Pu’ 
Pu’ [Jolly G] ar; cMd! @ae:; Ho Tae: 

178. Padas b-d omitted in Pu>. Cited by Laks 12.769 — a) NNg Usil — b) Kt fread; BBe 
nPu! Pu? Pué Laks Fear; Ke? Tj! eager; Bo feaxat; Be! Be’ nKt* BK Lo! Lo? cMd! tMd3 
TMd* GMd5 GMy oOr Ox? Pu? Pu! Pu? Tr! mTr® Go [Jolly G Nd] fracarra?: [om TAT] — c) 
oMy feat — d) Ho atat; Bo adit; cMy Baar 

179. Cited by Laks 12.339; Dev 3.415; Madh 3.204— a) Ho BS; Tr? gfe ; Be! faq ; 
Lo! wares, wKt! ferceraret — b) cMy the pada reads: [lacuna] g4aTPfer; mTr® “anfett — c) 
TMd3 cMy Ferate; Tre afrart, Be! Pud Pu? afart; rMd3 afer; Tr! afaeat, Hy afr- 
any; Dev afTare; wNg affearat; Pu Put @ reat — d) Kt! om Pras; aK Par fr: 

180. Cited by Laks 12.341; Dev 3.422; Madh 3.205 — a) 1Md? 4; Bo frataged; Jo! 
faferreet:; Laks Perse; wKt! Perce — b) cMy TAS; Md} geet; sOx! sPuo watet; cMd! 
ae Arg: — c) pCa Bo Ho Jm wkKt! wKt} nKt* Lo® Md? sOx! Pu? Put Pu? sPu® Pu? Tj! Tr! 

r qéraett; Hy Lo! weet, MTr° wet — d) oMy af cat; Lo? rMd3 rMd4 Ox? Pud Pu? 
[Jolly G Nd] &4 ca; mTr® Seas; GMy oOrwe; rMd? Fe; Tr! Te: 

181.* For the varying sequences of verses 181-199 see endnote. Cited by Apa 664; Laks 
12.346 — a) nKt* Freroy; aK Pad; GMd5 areqars; Apa areaATT — b) kt Prag; Be! 
BBe? fafergs; Md! Fett 4; Apa Prec 7; Put Peg 7 — c) GMd> Tr? mTré mTr® Apa [vl] 
areq:; Pu Pu’ mT oiferar ; Tr? sifsaat ; BBe? Ho mifsarast — d) La! nPu! Pu? Put a fre’; 
Lo} “afar 

182. Omitted in BKt5; placed after 184 in Be! Be’ Bo BCa nKt* La! Lo? GMd> NNg oOr 
sOx' Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tr? mTr> Go[in the pratikas], and after 183 in Wa. Cited by Laks 12.346 
— a) Jo? Te ART; GMd! tMd3 GMd5 oMy Tr afafahy sat; La! gfafafergate” — b) Lo? 


Chapter 8 695 


a ate wfarwea wares TTT | 

a an fraa fefre were necai 
aa + qarate g afacey aurtafer | 

ait foe aver: eafefe eter are evil 
freraafret fret a dat serra | 

aaa fara arafrara caarBrat ecu 
AAT T At FATTAET TIAA | 

Ta tanttarmeat a reatga aeghr: ecg 


cMd! tMd3 GMdé GMy MTr*mTr? MTr® “anf: Md! “aaa: — c) GMd> ame; Be! Bé 
Lo! nPu! Pu? Put “aateq; BBe &areq; cMd! “ast a; tTMd4 “aeater; Pud Pu? “eat: wer zrET 
Wa a: FIET; VVolly Nd] FIST; Be? TIT; Be nPul Pu? Put seTaharey — d) Bo wCa Jo? 
wKt! wKt} La! Lo! Lo? sOx! Ox? Pu} Pu’ sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly G] Rn AY; BBe? Ho 
Lo? GMd! +Md4 Tr! mTr° a; Laks AR: 

183. Omitted in Pu Pu’. Cited by Apa 664;Laks 12.347 — a) tMd4 sfased; cMd! 
feared, TMd3 GMd? GMy [ Jolly Nd Gr] sfereard; Tr! aferaetat — a-b) mT? Tro & fe 
ofercareara T saree — b) cM) aareretetaTeP; TMd4 Ta; Lo! zaTET; oMd! war- 
3d; Apa TarHs; Apa [vl] taeda — c) Ld ferenfenfre — d) Apa [vl] seareefagerd; 
sOx! sPuo TereefY Jase; GM? Tr! wearenPrasrd; +Md3 cMy Fereonfrgsre; GMd! Terr 
fagoae; mT! ur sero Ysa, Be? Teaefrar 

184. Omitted in TMd? Pu> Pu’. Cited by Apa 664; Laks 12.347; Dev 3.423; Madh 3.209 
—~ a) GMdS mTr’mTr® + earter afe g; Tr! ma at, Madh Fat, BE AaT FT —a-b) cMd! F 
qyreaer wer afer serfahe; oOr cat + carey afer g wnfafr— b) ake went — 
c) BK Lo? Wa [Jolly M N] Na Jolly aPrparre aver sf; Dave Jhaa Papert aver fer; 
oMd! suet frre; nKt4 sya Ter; cMd* wa Pre; DevLaks sf Pye, Apa wT Pre, 
Madh set Paper, +Md* gt aye; Be! Be Ho La! sOx! Ox? nPu! sPuo [Jolly Nd] STATE; 
BCa GYe; wKt! TF mc ATA; Dev TT, mTr4 mTr® arer:; Lo! araet: — d) Lo! Braet T 
area, Tr! arftor; +d‘ aren: 

185. Padas c-d ma sh in Be?. Cited by Laks 12.342 — a) Tr? Pear PafeTet; Lo! cMd? 
“Fafa, Bo “fafaftet; Pu? Put “Prefifirer — b) Be! sBe? rMd3 nPu! @ar, rMd? fear; Bo 
qerger; Put “ARR; Lo} Tj! “ARTE — c) Pu? Put Pud Pu? MTr4 mTomTr® Agta; NPul aeaar; 
T™Md3 oOr 7aad; rMd4 aeafer; wKe 7ate; La! agadtfaara — c-d) mTr* MTr® ‘aa oT 
afar; GMd! “are fafaora; Be? “ara cafrara; Md? “ore at fafaara; Pus Pu? “ore aT 
fafrare; Wa om arafrate — d) sOx! sPu® “Frat [lacuna] aaa; Te “rarer; wKt! “Prorar; 
wkt? “ares? car; rMd4 carer; Tj! caarfarat; Pu Pu? caatfirdt, cMd5 ¢ ARM; Put 7 
art, Md) FO aR 

186. Padas a-b ma sh in Be?. Cited by Laks 12.342; Dev 3.424— a) Bo SUA; wkd 
agar — b) Tr? vetraazt; Lo! “arte — c) GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMy mTrtmT roo tar 
aTRrarHear [MT r4 wana; mT ro Pray; Lo! 4 a; Wa wait ; Tr! ast [ma sh Rr] area; 
Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Ox? mTr3 Mandlik KSS tat rare? — d) +t Md4 a aerer aeghy:; Be! 7 
Prag aeghr:; Ma} fates; eke) Pager; BBe Be? Bo BCa Ho wKt! wKt nKti La! Lo! 


Lo} NNg sOx! Pu? Pu} Pu’ sPu® Pu’ Tj! Retg: eran hy: 





696 Chapter 8 


sree Uta vat shite | 
fart aer at ad ama caret le coll 
Pemad atg fr: arate | 

aye agate ATT FECT UPC 
Ukéd AeA aeag T | 

a amas asia a aac feast eee 
freavenwahareanaa aT | 
aaeraaraearaveg Baw: UP@ oll 

at fara artafa aanfafrer arac | 
aga aaah araNt ar aca THT 1L8 Il 
Premearceatt aert aay | 


187. Not commented by Me. Cited by Laks 12.346;Dev 3.424— a) TMd* aera: La! 
aeodg; Te seoodtater ; cMd! Sata afac; La! oMd Pu? Put afar; Be! miPSsT 
— b) rMd! sfergda> — c) Pu? Put ar &; Pu’ Pu? aT 2a; Be! oct; Md? Fat — d) cMd! Tj! 
aaa; sOx! sPuS ofareray; Pu’ oftatoasy, Pud gaa; Lo? oferaad; Laks Tatra 

188,* Omitted in mTr5; padas c-d omitted in TMd4; 188a-b placed after 187a-b in Bel. 
Cited by Laks 12.341; Dev 3.418; padas c-d cited by Mddh 3.206 — a) TMd> fretrererady; 

La! Fert way aay; Jo wKt! nKt* GMd> Ox? sOx! sPu® [Jolly M R3] frettera; Be! nPu! Wa 
faety =; sBe? Be? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? BKt La! Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! GMy oOr Pu’ Pu’ Pu® 
Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr* Tr [Yolly R Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Prerretg; ke fr:fertraq; Pu2 
Put Peter oa — b) Tr fate; cMd! Fafer:; wk gfe; Ho sOx! sPuo earenferatert — c) mT 14 
aga; Dev AASAYAT ; sBBe? aa ; BK TTyAT 

189.* Omitted in TMd4; padas c-d omitted in Be? Pu? Put. Cited by Apa 663; Laks 
12.342; Dev 3.418; Madh 3.206 — a) Lo® cGMd! tMd? GM@ GMy Tr! MTr® Dev ate; Tj! 
dred; Beasts ; Lal TS TEA” — b) wKt! FT Wa; Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Ke wKe Lo? 
oOr sOx! Ox? sPuo Pu’ Tj? MT? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave & — c)cMd! + earfearetenry, 
{om 4]; MT rt MT Tro TST; Lo? nPul Tj! TeHeT; Wa Tet F — c-d) Md? TENA Beta; 
oMd adenet FT et feat — d) aK TT deh ear 

190. Omitted in TMd3; padas a-b omitted in Be? Pu* Pu‘. Cited by Dev 3.423; Madh 
3.208 — a) Ox? “erarea — b) Tr “feerere Be? faferare’; Hy “Pera” — c) Be! 

“afd” — d) Ho sOx! Ox? sPuS “TART; Lo? “aaa; Md! “oases; rMd4 “oer Ba; cMd? 
afess:. nPul fafeds: 

191. Omitted in *Md3. Cited by 4paig1; Laks 12.345; Dev 3.423 — a) Be! 4; Pu’ Pu’ 
Jolly G] Fret aT; aK # Fret; Hy Frere; wKkt! Lo! araafer; Wa areifer; oOr artater — b) 
sBe? wKt! gear ; [Jolly Maat; ak “Pr fee; Bo MT rt mTro ° Faer, Bel ary — c) 
Bo Pu} Tr aaat; Lo4 Lo’ Ox3 Sut at; Lo®>cMd! Md’ cMy Tj! mTr6 Laks WZ; Lo® Pu’ Wa 
“aaa, GMd! “azareit; [Jolly M Nd] “aftaait; nKe “aed; miro after, Be! “ahaa: 
Lo? “afeacdt; Tr? “aceareit; cMd> “aguedt — d) Apa Wait we a act, cMd! area, mTr® 
amar; Jo! avait, Laks Te at aes; Dev Werealt acaH; BK area aaa 


Chapter 8 697 


aiafireaararar afta: ee zit 
STMT FT: BAT Tse SCAT: | 
aaert: & sector: wearer fare: 29 31 
Fret a: Fat At aratar Hoary | 
arate a ferstat fargarquenate Neel 
Rrit qa: gat Fat Teta feet ua ar | 
rer war Wereteal TIT SAAT De: USSuI 
fafaaer wate Sterofataer zr 

tet fart gatereay areenftory 29 gil 
frat awer et atseart career: | 
Ao aa ae F eared NPS ll 


192, Padas a-b omitted in rMd4; pada-c ma in Tr'. Cited by Laks 12.345; Dev 3.421; 
Madh 3.208 — a) BKtS Peaa’, sBe Paqeaie, wKe “gerraate; Jo! Teaere — b) Ox? 
aacaent ot; Pu2 Put ereaaert; Pud Pu’ qveated; Be! Be? “Fat — c) cMd! rMd? tMd?4 
oMy mTr‘mTr° [Jolly Nd] sate areqafrarfaar® [cMd! gateary’; rMd* eatery]; Wa 
aarafafr’ — d) Lot Lo’ Dev Madh @ate Peart aiffa: [Lot Lo’ faster gi] 

193. Cited by Laks 12.345 — a) GMd° MTr‘ mTr® surferfeg; cMd! stared; Te s7- 
areeg; BBe Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? BK® Lo? Tj? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave STURT, Be! 
safeties, Kt om &:; Md} GMd5 GMy Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu? Tr [Jolly GJafemfad; Tr! ma sh 
wird — b) rMd4 et Ae: — c) TMd* aeeTaT; BK E AaeTae; Ho AAT: F; Lo! Gat: |; 
oMd! agaT ¢ F— d) Bo THA; Lo Tj! Afar ae; sOx! sPuo Afstss:, Lo! fafaager:, 
TMd3 fafaehkit:; Pu’ fegeger:; La! feferage: 

194. Cited by Apa 664; Laks 12.346; Dev 3.422; Madh 3.208 — a) Madh Pet wlacar 
u:; GMd> 4; Apatepal, Md? Hat; La! Fat — b) Apa Tara; BK Bat Bo: Madh 
aarRES — c) Md? Tj! aaa; Be} atada; Lo! afer 

195. Cited by Laks 12.341 — a) Ox} Feat; wKt! Lo! ara; cMd! arat: — b) rMd* Feta; 
Pu? Put Feta; BBe? Far Wa; La! cGMd! Ox? nPul Tr! @— c) Tr! [ma sh T] atcteay; La! GMd! 
MI! MT ro & aretout— d) TMd? aaT; oOraar 

196. Cited by Laks 12.347; Dev 3.423; Madh 3.209— a) <Md! fafermeata cet reir’; 
ake) ffeaet; cM! Prfeag, Tj! feria; nPul “wer a aeid; Be? Bo Lo’ stele — b) sBe 
fa Lo! frearafteaez; oOr Hier ar Afeeret: sOx! sPuo *Reaer; Be! sKt} aT — c) BBe? 
aCa wKt! wKt} nKtt La! GMd! Md? tMd* GMd GMy Tr! mTr4 MTr° mTr® Batterie Us; 
Pu? Put trait — c-d) Madh water TaTSHeTT, — d) TMd! wateenerrearerantear; Md | 
uTr? MTr @ateafeeareantert [oMd! “enfter:]; cMds watsareureoraferery; Md? cMy 
gaareakuras, Tr! garantie, Be Bateers sarah, wke parear- 
fee; Lo! pateferary, w Kt! -arrenftor; Be! arear:; sOx! sPu Tj! Tr? “erect; La! “erfeer, 
Lot Lo® [but cor sh] atfeot 

197. Cited by Laks 12.351; Dev 3.498 — a) Hy fasiiftrd; Wa fafofta; wkt! eet [ne 
4] — a-b) Pud Pu? Tj! cet ay areaeft — b) GMd! gear}; oOr a: Ta; TMd3 GMy aT art 


698 Chapter 8 


Waa WAIT AaT: Tet TAT | 
Freaatsarat: wr: area PaRaay Le cil 
Tea Hat Be_ swat fawr va ar | 
wat: & F fastat aaare aur fafa: eee 


VAN wT IT T TIAA: Fakrq | 
ARTA: BT TT aT SAT she Perk: WRooll 


mara; wk} Put Tj! earftrerara: — c) Pu? at aceret go aead; oMd! + aster; Lo! & aa; TP 
aad; wNg wag; Be} 427; Be’ cMd! aed; oOr ae F; Jo? nPu! Pud Pu’ arfered BAT — d) 
Lo} Tj! wearer, Be STH; rMd4 ae og aaah; Pu? aaa; 
oMd! “ats 
198. Cited by Laks 12.352 — a) GMd! tMd? rMd4 GMd GMy Tr! mTr*mTr® [Jolly Nd] 
aaerniet ¢ Wad [oMd! cMy ayer J; Jo! “erat, mT Aaa; BCa Jm Jo! KP sOx! a MIt? 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave eta; Lal €tetT — b) Be! ARIAT; BBe? AAT; cMd | ET: — c) 
oMy Preaaenage:; Md} freaaearrae:; Lo? Preararaga:;, Be? La! sOx! sPu® ho Wa Na 
Nd Re “aTTaT:; GMd! RARE: cM “AAT; Ox? “RAT Taare — d) Laks [v1] 
mga atefefeat; nKt* Lo? Lo} GMd! GMd° nNg T}! TP Tr! MTP mTroearede; wKt3 @aT- 
wae fesfeatr; oMd! “Peer: nNg ‘Pefeait 
199.* aMy Tr! place 199-200 after 202. Cited by Laks 12.352 — a) TMd? Sea AAT; Lo! 
eater g Hat; wkt! Tal; Be? Tj? Wa WaT; BKt> Pu! WT — b) pBe* Bo Ho wKt? nKtt BK 
1tMd3 GMy La! Lo! oOr sOx! sPuo Tj! Tr? mTr*mTr® Yolly R Nd] Bh Rn Nd Mandlik ff, 3, 
a, F] HAT faa [Bh’s gloss HafawAr probably supports this reading]; Pu? Put wat few; 
oMd’ gafawT; Me Go Ku support Ta; nPu! Pu? Put va Ft — c) TMd? step; Pu? sTeHPT:; 
Put sragct:; La! stsotcr:; coMd5 stepcreg & — d) Tj! @aerey, cMy aE; Lo! Lo? nNg Ox 
nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? [Jolly G|eraere ster ferfer: [Pu2 “are, Put “ate; oOr ac:; Bo fret 
*A dditional verse in Be! Be? Bo sCa Ho nKt* Lo? tMd?* Ox? Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly Nd N Gr] 
Na@ Nd Re Mandlik [®, &, 7, FT, 1, FT, FH, A, f, 5, SF, %, B] Dave KSS; placed after 198 
in La! oOrnPu! Pu? Pu? Put GMd! tMd? GMy MTr* MTr®; cited by Laks 12.352: 
amet faftrar amex: eeaenfatamery | 
weary _ deagurete | 
a) Pu? Put faferatarer; nK¢tt Pu! faférar usir; rMd? ae; Be! Bo Lo? tMd? Pu? 
aed; La! ameq:; Tr? Madlik aa; Md? Yolly Nd N Gr] frea:; cMy rex; cMd' 
ae; Be} anit — b) cMd! edta eafifaca:; Tr “fafa — c) oMd! aaa — 
d) Ho Lo? Ox? Tr! [Jolly Nd N Gr] Mandlik dreseneasta, Lal aearearnsfe, tMd* 
arefaferaéte; cMd! +Md3 GMy Tr! Tr Hz: Bo Fe 
200. Cited by Apa 635 — a) TMd‘ nNg 4AM; Pud Pu? THhT, Wa AHP; wKt! Lo? Ox? 
Pu> Tr? Wa ay gad; Be! sBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? La! Lo! Lo? sOx! sPué Tj! Tj? mTr3 
[Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave RAT FI — c) wKt! Lot Lo’ BUT; oOr aT — d) Lo? + AT 
ster aferter:; Ho fera: 
Additional verse in BCa La!: 
armas fag ar afer warren | 
afagrgrray avr: omar Fa ares ker | 


Chapter 8 699 


fama at fre agtarg gear | 
wan o fag fe arate TTT UR Il 
TY TOTES THEI | 

HSA Feat UAT Aiea TAT TTT WRORM 
array ge att faa 

Tara Ta at a at 7 feathery Ro 81 
Tat Begkrearar alg: wear were | 

THT vagest aefqeradiary: WRo vil 
aaa a efor 7 wT aT eTSAVAT | 

ad aorarearer warat quSAEAT URokI 


201. Cited by Laks 12.352; Dev 3.505 — a) Pu’ Pu’ Go fasmaral; ake) faferarel; oOr 
frastaret; wKt! faararef — b) Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] Téa; Lo? Tj! faatart; Md? Ts — c) 
BKt> GMd> [Jolly G M8] #0T; Pu? Put mTr° Laks faajeeq; 1Md? 1Md4 GMy fazed; cMd! 
GMdé mTr* mTr® fags; the reading adopted is supported by Me Go Nd Ku Rn Re Mr. 

202. * Omitted in Be! GMd° [haplo]; 202 and 203 transposed in Lo!. Cited by Apa 776; 
Laks 12.352; Dev 3.504; Madh 3.215 — a)oOr nPu! af; GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMy Tr? mTr6 
[Jolly Nd} ean; nNg Tea ; oOr Wea ; Kt om aatert; Lo! arf — b) aK O THTT:; 
Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? Tj?mTr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “aitfrer: — c) BKtS Lo? tMd*4 Pu‘ dpa 
aaa, Md‘ Gard UST; TM? Uatt — d) BBe wKt! Hy BKt® La! cMd! Pu? Put mTr* Apa 
afer; Mads anita; Te afartear, +Md3 wea; Lo? arferar; cMd! td? GMy [Jolly Nd] 
oud FT ad [tTMd? cMy Ted] 

203.* Cited by Laks 12.437; Dev 3.520, Madh 3.262 — a)MTr? HIS; oOr ARIES; 
wKt! areqeuet; Ho Tj! Te tees; Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Ke? mTr? Na Mr Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha 
KSS Dave FET — b) wKt} La! GMd> BT; cGMd> fama — c) Hy arate; cMd! [om 4] 
are; rMd3 aatet; Im Jo! wKt! Kt? mTr3 [Jolly Ku Nd] Mandlik KSS ave [supported by 
Ku Mr], nKt* 4 at 2G; sOx! sPu® lacuna at 4; cMy Wet — d) Lo’ Lo’ + eter feared; 
Pud Pu? + & ger; TMd3 GMd® GMy Dev; Mandlik KSS Ber; Bo ae a 

204. a) sOx! nPu! ateaT, Pu? Pu‘ aet, Tj? tRUT; La! arent; Pui Tre? aw at; wKt! 
agufatcarit, Lo! Md Pu} Pu’ Pu? Tr Parca; +Md3 GMy ° rated. Bo Se BBe 
[but cor] Wa fareareit — b) Md} Bear AE weed; Jot M4 Tr! wT r6 Hea ag: GMy Bet 
ag:; Bo ag; BKt ag; Lo? ag:; Md! oMds @=aT — c) tMd* SY Ut Byer, Md? St; 
Wa Suat war’; Mandlik KSS UH’; Be? La! Pub @H ; Pud AH; GMd 5 waged; oOr 
“gat — d) La! “geedtgsie” 

205. a) BBe? sOx! sPuS Wa AAT; GMd> aaa; La! Pud mT ro AT aTayT, Lo? rMd?3 
Tj! J; La! mTr° Bfteat— b) Pus Pu’ ar aeperyAy; Be! Be} Volly G] 7 FT Feet; 
Lo! Lo’ + a; La! wat, Tr? oe —c) BBe* Bo Ho wKt! La! Lo! GMd5 sOx! Pu? sPuo 9a; 
Tj! roraverree; sOx! sPuo “aferearer; La! “aareaer: wKt! “aPrerer, Be! “afreater; Ho 
“aRrerer; Lot Te “afeener; Jo? “Aarearer; Pu’ Pu? °afeearer 

Additional verses in GMd! +Md4 mTr* mTr®; first two cited by Apa 821; Laks 12.564; 
third verse cited by Apa 818; Madh 3.291: 


700 Chapter 8 


wheats qat av cat oferaad | 

eT SaTTEIT Baise: ASKART: UWRoGll 
aferorg a amg wat oRerearz | 
Pee MaMa T ERAT Roll 
qeraeatr ag gent: serge: 

@ ued a aad way ad Uae aT URI 


TH Rta west aT ary | 
Stat Aly SCP ATRTAT UTA: HT URI 


sere arr agarery areahesry | 
TITRA PE Weel Ta |! 2 
WT: Be aes TQUSITes F | 
afeare: caer erat rar Pffoareg & 111 
mA SAT TAT GTA wa | 
aera TF yagay se 11311 
1. a) Laks ae — b) rMd4 dearfe; mTr4 wre’: Laks ATT; Apa wey — c) 
Apa “apeaver — d) Laks Apa qvereeret 
2. a) TMd4 “0S:; mTr4mTr® Apa TOIT — c) mTr6 weftare:;, GMd! tMdé weér- 
a; GMd! ma — d) cMd! tM! faféaa fare 
3. a-b) Apa Madh Weantearyqarr FT Tar 

206. Padas c-d [after T&T] omitted in wKt!. Cited by Apa 836, Laks 12.364; Dev 3.438; 
Madh 3.222 — a) BBe Adv; cGMd! qd; Pu? Put Fat — b) La! cMd! sOx! sPu® [cor to] Tr? 
ofteread; oMd* Devafearaact — c) nNKt BKtS NNg MTrS GSAT; Bo Pu2 Put qarer — d) 
oMd! & @a1 ae ; Jo? @aier:; Te aatar:; Pu? Put agar: 

207. Omitted in Lo* Lo’; padas c-d omitted in Pu’ wKt!, and placed after 206b in Wa. 
Cited by Apa 837; Laks 12.364; Madh 3.222 — a) Madh aferorg: 9eATE; Be! Bo nKtt Kt 
GMd! nNg sOx' Ox? Pu? sPuo Pu’ Tr! Trt mT Tr® Wa [Jolly MJq — b) NKt! NNg & HH; 
Be? [but cor] Jo! wKt} Md? GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? Pu! Pu? Pu4 sPuo Pu? Pu® Tr! mTr*mTr® 
Apa Laks @14q; GMd! Tr? “ereatet; Dev “arate; Ku Nd Go support the present participle — 
d) Tr! “aiet Hatae prea; GMd> om F; Ho nNg Tj! [Jolly M RIT 

208. Cited by Apa 837; Laks 12.364; Dev 3.437—— a) Wa afer ; Apa Laks Dev Tt FA- 
for; La! Tr? “xpaifer, cMy FeT — b) Lo! Gea; Be! Be} “afr; Hy cMy nNg afer: — c) 
Ho sOx! sPuo Ua Hatedte; Bo aareatet — d) Ox? Ut FT 

209. Cited by Apa 837; Laks 12.364; Dev 3.437, Madh 3.221 — a) Bo CYjmTr® TT wKt! 
@wUleT ; BBE BCa Ho La! Lo! nPu! mTr° MTrApa Bearer ; wKt} Lo? Lo* Lo’ @taarem. ; 
oMd! everest”; Lo? GMd5 Tj! Tr! Tr? area’ — b) nKt4 Lo! “da; tMd3 “A@nery; cMy 
“aeary — c) Dev rat Page aay’ ; Mas safe Freee"; Md? cMy Bath a Bez"; BBE 
Bo pCa Hy wKt! wKt? Lo* Lo’ GMd! GMd5 nNg sOx! Pu} sPu® Tr? MTr? MTrSmTro Apa ate; 
Me supports 4T; Go Ku support t — d) Be! Ho wNg Tj! ‘aT; La! Pu2 Put “Hgrat; Lo? Tj! 
avert: ; BK Ura: TMd? aaa; Md? areaaga; GMy #2; Hy HAT; Be! Lo’ Ox? Tj! 
[Jolly Nd] Hat; Ca [but cof #AT; La! Ha, sOx! sPus Peat 


Chapter 8 701 


VATA FRIAS AT. | 
aiterentaaragutard wa: uRgoll 
ayer caf eatfir adfete ara: | 

srt farina aderarHcrayr 22 vil 

gart ta ad erg sahara rq | 
Tarer TAIT AAA FT eT AAT URMAM 
afe tarry TEs a IA: 

TAT ST: aut arereq eer Frepher: URL stl 
FMAM sat MAT AwTagaaear | 

wet ced var Aareraaeary Revi 


210. Cited by Vij 2.265; Apa 837; Laks 12.364; Dev 3.437; Madh3.222 — a) Lot Lo® 
uT'ré APSA, Ti! feat; wKe! gfeasit — b) Be! “ETeeaT’: Ox? “ART; NNg nPul “arf: 
gt; Pu? Put “arfta: ot; rMd! ° af Std Apa afta: — c) Md? qdtai- 
wegdtaierrg ; rMd3 iSauifen gets! aq; Bo ada’: Ox? gata Be! Be} Jo? wKt! 
La! Lo! Lo} nPul Tj! Tr Wa getter ae’; Pu Pui adtaaeddl ; oMé adtaraege ; mTr9 
adtrreadt’; Pud Pu’ “aispag’ ; nNg ‘aiarerg” — d) Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt2aKt> Pud Pu? Tj? 
Tr [Jolly GN Nd] Vij Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave *qared; pBe? “quraentes:; T? 
anfet:; mT rt mT @rfert:; Md4 arfsrt 

ait. Cited by Laks 12.365; Dev 3.436; Madh 3.221 — a) Hy =arfit — b) ake “faeft ar 
ae: — c) Lo! feria: nKe? faery: Pu2 Pué faferar any; Tro faferar arr; wKe! wKe} 
Tj! [Jolly R] Dev BHATT, Be} La! Tr! [mc sh to] Laks HAA — d) Lo4 Lo’ Pu? Put Pud 
Pu? PTAA THETA, wKt damnert; Madh wdcaterracaite, Tro “oaeeperayr; Kt? 
MT PS “@eTAT: 

212. Padas a-b omitted in Lo* Lo°. Cited by Apa 782; Laks 12.380; Dev 3.453 — a-b) 
BKt [Jolly M] Apa SAAT at wats aga [BK AKTT] — b) Md? Hes 
aaa; nKt wet; Bo Herrera — c) Lo! nPul Ward; Pu2 Put ward; Dev TaTeds; Lal 
Dat aa; Pudskt aa J BA; Apa Aa ASH; Boas de A— d)cMd! rMd? tMd4 
oMy [Jolly Nd] aeearaest A FT Sa aa; Tr! aeeatag Ba ast 7 aRaa: Dev cee AT 
aad; mT aeearaest T Ter AKA; Bo Far; Laks AT TRAC; BKE om TT 

213. Cited by Apa 782; Laks 12.380; Dev 3.453 — a)cMd! Fat aay; tMd4 eae: 
Be? La! Md? 1Md4 nNg nPul “Str ; Pu? Put “ats; Be! “Faq; Bo Ferg; Pud Pu? “Aerer 
—b) Pu? Pu! gear tata; tMd! eutg@rate at; La! tMd3 GMd’ GMy NNg [Jolly Nd] 34 ATAa: 
— c) Jo?cMd! cMy at; tMd? Tet; NNg Gat areq:; Lo! Pu’? Tr! [cor sh to] FI:; wKt! 
gat g aer— d) sCa Sree, M4 eaaTeS; Hy Te MTré Tro ey; Te Pape; sBe 
wKt! Lo? Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] Preapta 

214, Cited by Dev 3.470; padas a-b cited by Dev3.454 — a) La! Pu? Pu’ Tj! [Jolly G] 
zaetaear; Lo! caetaifear; La! nPu! Wa oifedt; wKt! nKe qAt; La! 7Md? nPu! eat — b) 
La! waraaqudar:; cMy@ar; Lo! “aafeat; cMd! “afar; mTr4 “rafiear; Jm Md? rMd4 
“qafar — c) pBe? NKt! La! Lo? cMd! tMd? tMd4 oMy Ox? nPu! Tr! mTr* MT? MTr® Dev 
at: Wl; oMd5 ae: saws fom Sed] — d) Tj! Fat; eK Lo’ Bat; Lo? “aerrahpat; 


702 Chapter 8 


yatsarat 7 Rata sated airerz | 
A VST: POSHTAS TST TET ATTT UR LUM 
wee pale wer: ar zannfvarfea: 


gattentt aren agada sary URI 
WHAT: eM aT aA FT HAT | 

A aer add saactiaents sl: 12 Vl 
ue wbsfasatal Acree: 

wet aed caf ot areifearz UR el 
at OMA Feat Aart Alaay | 
faaaeat wre a creareraraad 2281 
Pore arrest araeaRranrttony | 

UT gantahoesw ssa TD UATT WRRol 


oMd! “aerafafmat; oMy Tre “Rear 

215. Cited by Vij 2.198; Apa 797; Laks 12.404; Dev 3.473; Mddh 3.215 — a)Apa Jt, 
Vij TAT; cMy Fat; akeS Faras; Jolly Fat aTaT; all com. support Hare: — b) wKt? nKtt 
aay; nPul auted; Vij walfrd— c) Bo avSaT; GM) Pus Pu’ Tr? [Jolly G] Dev purararet — 
d) (Jolly G] & Ft; BCa Ho Jo? BKt Lo? Lo? oOr sOx! sPu® Pu Tj! Tr? Vij 7; Apa THA; Put 
Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] 2a; wKt aa4; Jo? Lo} Tj! act; Hy Aa; Lo? Lo’ Aart 

216. Cited by Vij 2.198; Apa 797; Laks 12.404; Dev 3.474; Madh 3.234-5 — a) Bo 
arder, Lal arkeg, Be @atey weit ger; Hy Ter: — b) Md? “after gta; Apa [vl] 

“aTftrerarerst: — c) mTr! mT ro gerearte ase: Tr getter der weer; Hy Jm Jo! La! Lo! 

cMd®* nPu! Pu? Put [Jolly Ku] Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4&8 ; Be FaHAT; Me’s gloss 
agartt art appears to support the instrumental. — d) Put TeAda; cMd> agAea; nKt* 
agiag, Vij SF SAAT; Apa F SAAT. Bo Fa4; nKtt Lo? WaT 

217. Omitted in Lot Lo®. Cited by Vij 2.198; Apa 797; Laks 12.404; Dev 3.474; Madh 
3.233 — a) sBe? Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? mTr?Ku Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave {eit — b) Bo Lo? Tj! 
MTr® aearcmee; wKt Tr? seg HA; Ho sOx! sPuo a: MAHA; Apa [vl] 7 Bata — c) Ox? + 
aeq; oMd! ae aexr tat — d) Lo! sOx! Pui sPuS “HerwHeNft; Tj? “Het Heft: Bo 
“yetpennft; Be} La! Md “Aetarenfe; cMd! “weenfe; Ho “HSHENfT, Ox? “WeTATENfT, 
Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] FeaATIET; ako “ATT IET; GMd! afer; Pu2 afer; Tr! [due cor] HRT: 

218, Padas a-b omitted in Ho tMd? and ma sh in Tr! [haplo] — a) GMd> war feasarFr- 
Bar; Pu? Pu? wa; Pu8 *aradt — b) cMd5 aasearrafear, Tro Aare HATT:; Loe ac 
Pu’ [but cor] “ator — c) La! sta: 9%; Lot wae — d) TMd3 oven. mTro THE ; Be! 
aahraur, Bo aaferafeat, cMy “St: BKO La! Pu3 “afear 

219. Omitted in Be!. Cited by Vij 2.187;Apa 793; Laks 12.424; Dev 3.530; Madh 3.253 
—a)oMd > aH@a ; wKt! “deri; Dev “aT — b) BBe? aed; nNg rar; sOx! sPuo Felt 
farafe — c) rMd‘ “aaa; pCa Her — d) nPul agregr; tMd4 & & eer; Tr! [but me sh] 
are far’; Hy mTr® “area 

220. Padas a-b omitted in Be'; padas c-d omitted in GMd! andma sh in Tr!. Cited by Vij 


Chapter 8 703 


wa avefaty gatertie: yfrtate: 
Wray ATARTATATET R22 
aicat faster ar fefrereterzar wag | 
USAGE TAAATAATT T URRAU 
UT FT Meet A zaate aaa | 
Maat Taeda WaT FST: Taher TE URRsl 
weq aeadt warraears Taser | 

wer Bata que ear qorratt qorrg UR Vv 


2.187; Apa 793; Laks 12.424; Dev3.531; Madh 3.253 — a) Lot Md? Pera; Be} mTr‘ mTr® 
Apa {vl] frre; aK ape; Madh Freer, oOr Dev Madh Vij 7AIet; mTr6 Bh [patha] arv- 
ae4; Be? “F=Far — b) Hy wre; Pu? aancahy : Md‘ Put aareahy; Be} wKt! “aiRat — c) 
Madh aogatee Paras aa: Vij “gat cfr ; TMd?3 ° gacfafior Md? * ganitafirr’ . Dev 
*gacf wftorar arr; cMd5 ° gemisemner ad; sBe? autageprrd — d) wKt! Arey; 
Be! sBe? Bo wKt} La! nNg Pu’ g; Tr? asic; Pu? Put U4; Bo Asad 
221. Omitted in GMd! and ma sh in Tr’. Cited by Laks 12.424; Madh 3.253 — a) BCa Jo* 
wKt! Lo? Tj! Tr! [Jolly Ku R Nd] Ra Be; Jo! Jo? La! ae; Jm Kt? Lo? Pu? Put mTr? mTrKu 
Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave UTES ; tMd3 Uepas Md‘ “fad — c) Bo “one; oOr 
“arfafaarey; nPu! “axe ¢ — d) Bo Kt? wKt3 Lo? GMy NNg Pu’ mTr6 “arfevr; rMd4 ° after: 
220* Padas c-d [up to 228b] omitted in Lo [haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.177;Apa 831; Laks 
12.430; Dev3.512; Madh 3.257; padas a-b cited by Vij 2.254 — a) Bo HonNg Heal; Lo! HT 
fasta; oMd fara; Pu! fasite; oMd! raat; Pu2 Put a; Md} ar fer wer” — c) 
Bo at; Bh ast ear; Lo! “are agey; La! Apa “ane AEST; cMd! “arerecas; TMd4 GMS 
GMy mTr‘ mTr® Bh [in root text, but he rejects it] Sererearay; wCa ANeTEwAT — d) sBe? Bo 
Ho Hy Jo? wKt! wKt? Lo? sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPu° [cor to] Tj! Tj? Tr? Lolly R] Dave Mandlik Jha 
KSS aT 
223. Omitted in Lo*; verses 223 and 224 transposed in Bo; folio containing 223d-242c 
missing in Bo. Cited by Vij 2.258; Apa 831; Laks 12.430; Dev 3.512 — a) TMd? Hae arr 
oMd? nNg @1e@IT — b) NKt? 1Md3 GMd! oMy [Jolly Nd] 1 aenaredtat FT [oMy ater; NK! 
aT]; oOr ta Fas aTIAA; Ho NNgsOx! sPu° a1eeT ; Be? Laks SAAT; Apa FIA F— c) Bo 
GMd aaart; BK aearay, Be! Tj? zed; tMd} ceata; Lo! qeeta — d) wKe Uet:; Tj! Tar; 
oMd! avaat wait; TMd* gear tat; Lot Lo? [Jolly M] Sat: Tr? ave:; Lo! avs; mTr Apa ae: 
Additional verses in Mandlik ["T, 4; first verse only in $] KSS Dave: 
areagrafar qeerer afar | 
quer aart ant are: eqreferanfara 1121) 
prea faster ar way cece | 
TUT greet eee ATVI TFT RI 
TU green aren: erent 7 KAT | 
arrerarerrt Prrareder aatq 1131 
224. Omitted in Lo?; order of verses in Pu’: 224a, 225b, 226, 225¢-d, 227 (224b, 225a 
omitted) — a) Pu2 Pu? =a dar ; Jo! wK8 Lot “adit — b) wKtS “HRIREIRT; 1Md4 “Hees — 
c) TMd? “SUT; Be? aug: — d) Pu? Put Pu? weTafer:; Tr! [but cor] Twradt; cMdS “adieaory; 


AX 


704 Chapter 8 


Hay TT: Bat Fare FAT Aaa: | 
TMA MYAETS TEM STATT UR AUI 
ufttwetttar aaa: sara sfaftsat: | 


Tea Fats Gretta fF at: WAM 
airmetrer Heat Prat areearry | 

vat frer g fastat faate: sar as NRO 
aaaferper eet wees wad | 
aaa Pree eet afr Fagg RAI 
wy eaat se wear a afar | 
fears anager quraatarad: W229 11 
fear amerar ares twreatt carter age | 
ameter ae wet awmerefrarg 1lR Roll 


Be? Ford; Jo! ToT; Tr? Te; Lo! ter 

225. Omitted in Lo® Pus — a) Pu? Put teeta g; MTree J; mT sperprgd; Be? 
Lo! Lot LoS [Jolly M49] — a-b) cMd! &: wear AAG weT so HMa:; GMdé sepeafer 
a ga Paneter Ara: — b) Kt? sOx! sPuo edo; La! Pu ator — d) Te ae goats 
ORT [ef. 224d]; Be? Md? Pu? Put der; wKt? TeHTETT; Lo’ +Mdé “aster 

226. Omitted in Be! Lo? sOx sPu®; padas c-d omitted in GMd> — a) oOr are ferenr, Tr 
“snfeferest — b) Be? Beard; Jo! gfafted: — c) mT4a Heng; Tr! Pear aut— d) Pu? Put 
ua ; Md‘ Gere ; wKt! aeenl me to Tet; Lot Lo’ yuet’; Be? Pu’ aT; Wa aT 

227. Omitted in Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd> Pud; verse 227 placed after 234 in GMy. Cited by Dev 
1.222; Madh 1.492— a) Dev [vl] Three; 1Md4 Madh TIPeorateq; cMd! “weftrar, 
Jo? Tr? MTr® “anfefrest; tMd3 #7; Lo? Wear] — b) sOx! raat; Md? Paar; Jo! are; Md 
oMy “sat; wKt “wet — c) wKe Pret g; mT? Per +;wKe faaeafex — o-d) Md? & 
fagfafasrar — d) Wa Frae aae; cMd! om Te 

228.* Omitted in Lo* Lo*> rMd? GMy [Jolly Nd]; not commented by Nd; padas a-b 
omitted in Lo’, padas b-d in nPu!, and padas c-d in Pu>. Cited by Laks 12.430; Dev 3.513 —- 
a) Lo! aferaferpe, Pu? Put om first afer — d) Pu? Put ratofafraaraa; sBe? Be? Ho Kt? 
wKt? Lo! Lo? tMd* GMd? oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! Tr? mTrS KSS af; La! GMd! wat; Hy 
frasrad; aMd! Facade; Wa arse 

229, Padas a-c omitted in nPu!. Cited by Laks 12.413; Dev 3.482; Madh 3.263 — a)wKt! 
TET, Tr? aart — b) nNg Ter; M3 mT ro area; BK TefaT; GMd! atest; cGMd! 
1Mdé Laks & Tarfafer — c) Pu? ferare:; oOr feats — d) Pud Pu? aerate: 

230. Cited by Apa 772; Laks 12.415 — a) GMy aera; Tj! Ameray; Tr? aHeTaT; Lo? 
maa; cMd! Hderar; sOx! sPus [cor to] THETAT; Pu? Put oes; TM? OTF; Tr? ars; TMd4 
are — b) TMd? @; Jo! TR; GMy SY; Be! age — c) La! area caesar WY; Jo! T? 
aT; Be! Lo! @it; pBe? Be? Jo? Lo? ocMd! 1Md? GMd° GMy NNg oOrnPu! Tj! Wa Apa ‘ert; 
~Md? Pu2 “AAT; mT ro “ear maT; Pud Pu? °erarrar aq; Jo? Lo} Tj! Tr! Aceara; ake FT; 
oMd ae; Be! &q; wKt! om J — d) Pu? Wet FT aaa, wKe oe 


Chapter 8 705 


mre: after weg a geresay awry | 
THRATATAT AT: AT MTT AAT APA: 12Z VM 
ae fear PPAR: saed far aT | 

ST FRITS Wee, UT TF NZI 
fager g edt alet wet agreter | 

afe ar a are aw erat: caret staf 23 31 
aot at a areata aaergh tera | 


agg eaat zary anger ata ULB 


231. Placed after 244 in TMd? GMy [Jolly Nd] and after236 in BKt [Jolly M]. Cited by 
Apa 772; Laks 12.413; Dev 3 483; Madh 3.263 — a) Be? WT; wK8 AT; mTr® Wa: ; Madh TAT; 
wkt! & g@ — b) Wa ygel; Lal dgter gad; Pu2 Put agear earciy; wr’ geearc Ho 
Farad; Be’ Cares; wKt! Taree? Tar; Ho Ox sPuo Wa A; Md? GMy Tj! ae; 
+Md4 @at:; Be} Tet; Pu2 Put aat — c) Be! Trearfyad; ako aAenrersqad, td) Tearer- 
ead; GMd! at etaqad; xPul “qya;cMy Madh Apa [vl as in ed.] ‘GAA; mT Fat; mTrS 
“wat; Lo? “wees: aT; Pu Pul Fear: — d) nK¢ arey eed yfe;7Ma ar eenfa- 
ydrafe:; Be! cMd! a; Be? a1; Pud Pu? Breas; Hy Breast; BCa [but cor] BATRIT; Pu? Put 
Apa [vl] “afergfer:; Lo! nNg “ae yfer; cMd! “ya yf 

232. Cited by Vij 2.164; Apa 773; Laks 12.416; Dev 3.485; Madh 3.264 — a) Vij AE ST 
a @fARr:, Lo atet; nNg fafate; Laks faster; Be! nKtt rMd} nNg Tj! Tr! Tr? fer: BBe? 
HAR; Apa [vi] PAT: — b)aked HPfaRrast; wKe oOr Te aed; Lot Pu? Put Mare; nPu! 
saeT; Pus Pu’ ceed; sOx! sPuo Faas; wKt! fad; Lo? Tj! Ferd; mTr4 et ymTro Ht — c) 
nKtt 4 — d) Laks TENT; CMA “aT |; Md! Fa g; Jo? Lo} Tj! wa a, GMd! Apa 
er ag 

233. Cited by Vij 2.164; Apa 772; Dev 3.484; Madh 3.264 — a) oOr Tr faqet; Lo? 
fagey; Md} Prager; Jm fayer; Madh faferer, vij frower, Tro fegeer;wKt! La! fewer; Ho 
fagureed; Tj! fagratcre st; Lo? fagearfeed; nKt fageatted; Bkt fageattec; Pu? Put 
fagaqed; Pu’ Pu? 7 Ed; cMd’ Ea; Hy Ha; Ke Soa; mT EoAe; Lo? Lo? 1™Md* oMd@ 
oMy uTr5 Dev att — b) Lo! Lo® [Jolly M] Apa at treater feet, Im argy — c) Pus 
Pu’ aaf ¢ HIS J; Ho om second F— d) cMd! Safar; +Md4 oOr ATT ETET 

234.* Omitted in Lo? Wa; padas a-b ma sh in Tr. Cited by Laks 12.418; Dev 3.487; 
Madh 3.265 —- a)GMd' tMd? GMd Tr! mT rs aHeeutaferator, IMd4 whatadarey; cMy 
(Jolly Ndjaaeut aferarst; oOr mT eat a atarety; Hy om 7; Be! Lo? stera; Hy Kt? 
nPu! ated; Tr! ate a; Pu? Put Pud Pu? ota — b) oMd! afererraft trerat; Md? arfer- 
eae; Me? ae PR; Madhaearereraereas; oMds afecterg a eet; Be? 
Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? Lo! Lo? oOr sOx! sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Laks Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Tet 
erg a aaa [wKt! Lot afta’; Be? aTfea]; Bel Jo? NNg nPu! afd; mT ro afta; Tr 

*sratraeat — c) Be! Be* Ho wKt! nKt* BKt) La! Lo! Lo? Lot GMd! 1Md? GMd5 GMy nNg 

oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu} Put Pud sPuS Pu? Pu’ Tr! Tr? mTr* mTromTr® Madh Tea 
qare [BKO Fa om FT; Md} cMy dead]; Laks TYAS sarg; Md‘ we g ay cars; 
Jo? Itt SATA; Lo? Tj! erry — d) Be! Fea FIs; Madh Fase; Lot gaa 
a; Laks Forage, Lo? years; Pu? Put yaar; TMd4 Ya WaT; sBe Be} pCa Ho Hy 


706 Chapter 8 


ora 7 Ger ae: wey aaah | 

al Tae Fat TAIT Wey ateskeawt WaT UVZull 
aat aqaearr atedtar ret ar | 

UGCA Tet ear Tesedr Peers URAEN 
ITA TER WAT VTA: | 
Tarra ahr Sapir wTeT T UR Zl 
aaakadt aver fateeq: agrat ate | 

Tar woes qatar: age UR SCI 

gfe aa wedi ager arated | 

for a araterd MTHTTETHTT 2381 


Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo! Lo? GMd! Md? GMd> GMy oOr Ox? Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr? 
mTré MTr® [Jolly R Nd] Dev Rn Nd Mandlik KSS TAag¥itT, sOx! sPuo Frags; Pud Tr? Fa 
aga; ak yatayT FT; Nd appears to read YFIPT TAT but gives FAvAFTAT as patha; Lot 
tMd3 GMd GMy Tj! mTr? @3tq; mTr® Hy @taret —— After this verse My inserts 227. 

235. Omitted in Lo5; padas a-b omitted in GMy and pada-d in Lo! [haplo]; placed after 
verse 237 in Be!. Cited by Apa 773; Dev 3.486; Madh 3.265 — a) Pu? Put Te ansnfaaag see 
— b) Be! adds T& before FT; +Md4 FH; mTMTH: TS; mT rt AT WS; wKe WS; Lo! Wes- 
Raa; TMd? GTSETAT ; BK Lo! Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] caaTafe; La! arate; iMd3 aavarfe; 
Apa [vt] garafer— c) Md? Pu? Put a7; nPul at ; Apa et; Md? Bea — d) Lo! + qreETT 
fasfeadt; iMd3 arfery fesfeadr; Lot Wa cere fesfeat; Te orare: afeafear 

236. Omitted in Lo5; padas a-c omitted Lot; following sequence in Be!: 237a-b, 236, 
237¢c-d. Cited by Apa 773; Dev 3.486; Madh 3.265 — a) Md‘ ATaTHATeSIAT, Ox? STAT; BKt 
areat; TMd3 att; Pub Pu’ Tr? darter, mT rt SAaoSMT; NKtt Vere, Md) Veaearay, 
BBe? pCa Ho Pu? Pu? Pud sPu [but cor] Pu? mTr® [Jolly M G] Jolly tafrearat — b) Md* om 
aq — c) Ho wKt! BKt> La! Lot GMd> nNg Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! [Jolly M G R] Go NSm6.17 Jolly 
Dev WAT, oOr Apa WAIST, Be? WIAA; Kt? Hast — d) Be? FATHIMS ; cMy WHIT 

5237 Padas a-b placed after verse 235 in Be. Cited by Apa 774; Laks 12462 — a) Ho 

ag. ; nKt ag: ; Md? GMy Apa 20, cMy Taare; [Volly Nd] Tan, cMd gat; rMd3 
aetaresr, Tr? ufos Volly N Gr] YDh 2.167 7eorreT, Lo! Pu’ Teter; Wa TelorTraT —~ b) nK tt 
UTIL aARTeT:; TM? aaAT:; La! Pu? Put aI; Lo? waser; Teg — c) 
Be! Tj? SMT: ; BKtS ARM ; BBE wKt! aeM ; GMd! Md} mTr° areaTATAT ; sOx! sPuo [cor to] 
arararat ; Tr? afeaarar’; La! sarara ; Be? ‘aTaiexar, Lo! Tj! “qTeaearay;, wKC *oTeaegay; 
oMd> “erat afta — d) Be! tMd3 GMd@ GMy Tr! Pract; Tr? Payor, mT r® Fepoy; Be! 
AUT; Tj? TACT; Pu? Put AeHeyT; La! Pu? Put T 

238. Cited by Vij 2.162;Laks 12.462; Dev 3.491;Mddh 3.266 — a) wkt! araTafe’; Pus 
Pu’? “ofted; Pu2 Put “afta; Tr? “offre; La! ater — b) oMy averaféeq:; Be? Pu’ Pu’ 
fageq:; La! fafeeq:; rMd3 + feez:; Madh sf@eq:; Pu’ fafey:; rMaé orig: Lo! faecr — c) 
wKt} sort — d) MT rt mTrooReerort; Wa “err; Be! cMd! oMy @atr; Pud Pu? “zara: Be? 
“QAO; cMdd “vera 

239. Cited by Vij 2.162 — a) Be La! Lo! Pu? Pu} Pu‘ Pud Pu’ gfa; Tr? gft:; sBe? 





Chapter 8 707 


ahr ar aga orate at ga: | 
eae: Waavstet orate UR voll 
qaIaay TF wy: wae wale | 

eat F wat aa: ARreetf arco law eit 
aferagnet wt gat TasAIAEAT | 

aterar fratestrat A BST CadtT ULV RIM 
ahaa set wT wag | 
aatsaaver year Arwer TF URv SI 


afcrets; Lo! Lo’ cMd! nPu! Pu’ Pu’ Tr? Be’ mTr6 at & Geafa; Be!sCa Ho wKt} Md‘ cMd? 
oOr sOx! Pu? Put sPuo Vij g aa Beate [Vij T AT; wKE JF Aa]; BKt> Aeedia; Tr! [ma 
Weeder; nKe geedta — b) rMd4 argc; Bel aractaay; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Ke BKé Pu} Tj? mTr? 
Ku Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave + fxareaxq — c) wKt RF; NK! Lo? Pu! Pud Tr? aTaree ; 
Lo® tMd? Pu? Tj? MTr5 Wa [Jolly M Nd] aaa; wKt! tered; NNg aa; Pue aaa; 
tMd! Bre: Be} ate; Dev qe ; Put am; Hy “ars — d) Tr aR BBe? Be? BCa Ho 
Hy Kt? wKt} Lot Lo’ nNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Pu8 a@t; Pu’ “@earey, pBe “HET; Pub 
Pu? ast 

240.* Cited by Apa 771;Laks 12.463; Dev 3.490; Madh 3.266 — a) wKt! Ty; Lo! Wa 
afet; Ho Pu? Put oat; GMd! tMd4 SRE; Or Beret — b) oOr [but me sh] aTAferHa 
oA:; Pub gaat; Be! wea; Be} TATA, rMd4 watch; Apa WATAaT; GMy OAT aT 
ar, Wa wrareeagear — c) TP AMTS; Lo? TaTS:; THA, TM} aequsret:; NPul & J averet 
~~ d) [Jolly My feraresrare” coMd> GMy Pur Pu’ mTr* MTrMTr® [Jolly Nd] Apa Dev fears 
ar: Md} aT am ;oMd! 4 gre are; sPuS [but cor] Fararesiaare” Ho Im Faarerare’ 
Md! fears are’: Tr! Seay [ma sh MRA], wKE araresa; GMy “SRT; nKe wT 
PIT; Lo? “wra4rey”; Ox? “wears; *Md3 GMd GMy Tr? MTP [Jolly Nd] Dev © aa 

241. Cited by Apa 769; Dev 3.489-90; padas a-b cited by Laks 12.464 — a) GMd! Tr! & 
— b) cMd! @uré; Lo? awaret; rMd3 aur; rMd* aaHefer; Laks Apa avsHéfa — c) Be} 
adage’ &t:; oOr 4a; Lal as 7 J; Ho Fas J; Tj? F Tel; nNg caferet ea; Lolly G] 
cafe 2a; Pud Pu? & feet 4; Lo! g Ba ae:; Be! BBe? Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt BKe 
La! Lo? Lo Lo? Lo’ oOr Ox? Pu? Tj! Tr! Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave &&T, Md? GMy mTr* 
MTr° ard; GMd! ait; Ho Hy 4a; Lo? adit; rMd4 art ea — d) rd‘ afer _ area; Pus 
aap; sBe ahraetta; La! arereife; aK Lot Lo rMd3 GMd@ GMy Tr! mTr4 mTr6 Dev 

pa Sapa; Ke area; Apa [vl] area: Jo! arurr 

242. Cited by Apa 771; Laks 12.468; Dev 3.496, Madh 3.268 — a) Tr! [but cor] aft- 
féarret; sOx! sPu® “aet; La! Lot Lo’ Md? “ae; Be? Ho aretT@t — b) 1Md3 cMd$ aMy go 
a; Jo! NNg [but me sh] TMF; Pud Pu’ Bat Fa’; Kt? Put “ayEaa; cMy “sat qaT; 7M? 
“gal TIT; tMd4 “agafy — c) Dev atISraT AISA; Apa SISA PATTHTAT; NK t4 TITS 
facrerear, Be’ Pu) Pus Tr? MTS warerarearesrar; Lo’ Tj! wares; rMd! aeqeearat — d) 
oMy Tj? 7 aear my [Tra avery ; Wa Apa waves 

243. Cited by Laks 12.532 — a) Lo! cMd’ aa; Hy Jo! Kt? Lo? Md‘ Ox? mTr° Mand- 
lik KSPR ; NK Capearayy; wKt! La! GMd! “art, tMd4 sOx! Ox? a qveay; Lo! gus 
—b) Be! cMd! wrest; Bo ST gar; GMd> Pu! Tr! [but cor) HPTEa ; oOr Sareat; TMd4 


708 Chapter 8 


vatzarrarasattte: gPreftafe: | 

eae TAT a Tera a aay MRSS 
atat oft ages frat oraatdar: 

wes arf aaedtar grentg ag Rell 
drake edt wareaceatigerr | 
qreatarednatar torte wearg Waveil 


Taras faery aetagterattr a | 
Mieporayeasr aa star TAA URwoll 
asrieqarate arer: weauter aT | 


aftrereyeit — c) Be! NNg Wa ade’; sOx! sPuS aan’; Lo! adtef — d) cMd! “art; Be? 
“aTat; La! “at; Put @aHe7; Im Jo! Ke Araer; Md} mTr® afer; Lot Lo’ T 

244. Cited by Laks 12.418; Dev 3.497 — a) Td? GM@ GMy aerate Hatahie: 
[oMd’ we aus}. rMd! afger — c) TM} earftar, Jm eaters, wKe! carterat vat — d) 
oMd! ores; wKt! oar; tMd4 “ae:; 1Md3 GMy aATH; tMd? GMy inserts here verse 8231. 

245.* Cited by Apa 758; Laks 12.439; Dev 3.544;Madh 3.276 — a) TMd4 Tr! [but cor 
sh] dhrenter eye; La! dhrreafer; Be} eats — b) nNg aTAATEST: — c) BBe Jm Jo! Madh 
Jolly 34S, Be! St; GMd! +Md4 GMd5 GMy nPu! Pud Pu? MTr> Dev StS; TMd? Site; La! 
oMd! +Md? tMd* GMd> GMy sOx! nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu? Tr! [but cor sh] MTr+MTr? MTr® Wa 
Madh AT&, GMd! Laks 7aeAT; Apa AWeAT, Md? AACATT — d) Lo’ nPul Pu? Pud Pu’ Tr? 
Madh e957; Bo nKtt BK Lo! Lo?nNg Pu} Pu? Wa avery; Be! Pud awePteg; pBe? Jo? 
Lo} Tj! ayenrRety; cMy WAPI; Lot Lo’ [Jolly M4] &qy; dé afar 

246. Padas c-d omitted in Bel. Cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.439; Dev 3.535, Madh 
3.270 — a) Be! garrettareq; Kt “Tey; Be? Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? La! Lo? TMd3 GMy Pu? Pu’ 
MT? Vij Laks {Jolly G Nd] _aetta; Tj? gat ata; Laks wafeq— b) wKt! aTET me to 
Wey; NNg aareipa; Tr? * feaQewT: —c) wTrs arent Wepre; cMy aerst ; Ox? 
arora ; Lo? nPul Wa areuetane Hy Jo! Jo Kt? Loe Lo? Tj? Tr! mTr3 mTr*Dev 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave arewédrare ; »Ca wKt! aK NNg nPul arenes; cMd! GMd° 
Dev IPAS oMy aeactarerar; La! Lot Pu2 Pu3 Put ae ; Madh * aT; tMd4 
STRAT TaT; Jm Pu “aT; mT “aTéstay — d) K? efreor Hy “orate 

247.* Padas a-b omitted in Be!. Cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.439-40 — a) Tr! ora 
aupafereart; Md? “acer — b) pBe aft ; cMd! anfidgt; Pu? Wa atid; Lo! arity 
oMy affect; Lo® aaagh — c) cMd! Md area qeaba; NK te BRUT SAPT; 
wKt ser ; Md4 ae esr; Tr? aera; rMd4 oMy mT mTr$ aereere ; Kt? aery- 
ory ; Lo? aRIRBUm ; pCa MoH; NNg stegarar — d) wKt? Lo4cMd® yPu! Pu2 Put 
ar; tMd?4 G41; Ho La! 4141s; Ho La! Lo! cMd? waafer 

The order of verses in Me appears to be: 247,250, 249, 248; Jolly says that the order in 
Me is 247ab, 250d, 249ab, 247cd, 248 [with 249cd and 250ab missing]; the order in Lo‘ is 
247ab, 250cd, 249ab, 250ab, 248. The commentary, however, contains explanations of 
250ab. There is no commentary on 249cd. 





Chapter 8 709 


dtrairg srather saqarrarathr wT URS CN 
wreatte aeate defi sear | 
ee ee 
THASeHy Taser waters: | 
SOR SRERP SRT AGHA UR 
AT UATE BITE MATT | 

atte ag atari BeaAT UR’ 2M 
Udtagaacdtar ter agar: | 

TRA T AAT REIMTTAT T NRE RM 


248. Cited by Vij 2. 150-1; Laks 12. 440 — a) NKt* Lo? Lo? sOx' MTr® aera ; GMé Tj! 

Tr! [but cor sh| mTr> aera: tMd* area; Md? aMy aerate La! “aeenens, tMd3 
*aqtat aT — b) La! arf; Be? ait. wear. 1d arte: Laks afta; Pud aver auf, 

Be? Bo? Ho wKt3 La! oOr Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tr erature; Pu’ om T — c) tMd4 Shr; Tj! SAT: 
Pu2 Pu‘ aT; Pu3 Pu “aelty 

249. Omitted in Lot; padas a-b placed before 248 and padas c-d omitted in BKt’. Cited 
by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.440; Dev 3.535— a) Pud Pu’? Safeart; tMd? om aah; nKe 
apraifer — b) tMd4 att — c) TMd} ST NKe CaTPY; wKe! gorse; wKe) der: — d) Pu2 
fret ehfeerh; sBe? Be? Bo BCa wKt! wKt} La! Lo? GMd! nNg nPu! Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr mTr® 
Wa Laks Dey Ste Pret; Md4 cMdd Ste; cMd! fardarc; Pu’ farear 

Additonal verse in La! oOr [cf. added verse after 8.265]: 

pret oe de versedatsrar | 
Uses aT ata: Bakr: | 
b) La! warerefeta tar cor to TaTeretatsrar, oOr tearasaafsra4r (unclear) 

250. Omitted in BKt° Lo4; padas c-d omitted in Pu>. Cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.440 — 
a) La! NNg Warered ; Pu’ wtareeq; Ho cMd ataTerg ; tMd? ataraig ; wKe nKtt 
AaTatey | oMd! tga — b) Wa Laks GRU AST; Jo? Pu? Put “SRTTHAT; Be? “wie 
war; Pus “wieqaraet; Be! Md! +Md} cMy mTr* MTeaTt CSET, tMd* Sieh — c) Pu? 
wren: Tr afer; > Pu? Put rete: wKt* oOr Pu? @Teier: WRT; 1Md? GMd NNg HTFTR- 
ara, Be? Lo’ Vij HrgeTeareeer — d) oMd! “weargearagery; nKt Lo? Tj! areanerar; La! 
Lo’ GMd‘ GMy Tr‘ ater FS [La! Tr! wPT: Lo’ GMd5 “wHrar]; +Md? aTeeoT | AT; Wa 
ager fe; miro aTeHeT S 

251. Omitted in Pu Wa. Cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.441; Dev 3. 535 a) Be! Hy Jo! 
Lo! GMd! Tr? @a sar; wKe eve — b) cMy HIeryhT ; Tr? ere yr’; cMd! ereyr ; 
Be! nKtt “ght 4; Pu? Put wert — c) Md! aferaarhy aetaraaar Be! afar — e- d) Bel 
érrar ay; nPul étarar- wa’; Teta’; Be Atarar aw’: Lo* Lo’ atarar: amy; GMd! 
array ; wKe4 @arar: ayerofr — d) Tr “araaepranY; +Md3 cGMd5 GMy Tr! “yerat 
Prema, tMdé “were | aaa; GMd! mT rt MTP MTr® ergatet 

252. Padas a-b cited by Vij 2.150-1; Laks 12.441; Dev3.537; Madh 3.271 — a) TMd? 
wis” — a-b) rMd! fastaretamahetsacar zy: — b) oMy fafaa’; Hy fase’: Laks 
faaeat sot — c) Be! wKt! mTr° aI; Be? Ho wKt} nKt4 Pu2 Put Pud “aT; Ho nKt‘* sKe 





710 Chapter 8 


afte aaret ua eniggrrare ary | 
arrest wr ene atararefarrtr: R24 Sil 
maga J ara ati arferer: | 

wee: dafset atte frarfeat: Weevil 
at erg wa gy: wae: athe fray | 
Frataren dtr waters arra: Real 
Rroihret atest afar cHarea: | 

Ged: afta: Sa: aay aASTAT REE 
mat Aaa Tae Aerarfart: | 


Lo! sOx! Pu sPuS Pu? ¢ — d) pCa Md? GMy “gerry TF; cMd! “awearaa FT; wNg T 

253. Cited by Laks 12.441; Madh 3.271; padas c-d cited by Vij 2.152 — a)tTMd3 31aq; 
Tr? wi; cMy Tat — b) TMd3 enfesat g faasty; Be? Ho Lo! galt — c) Pu! Te areft; Te 
we; BKtS GMy War — d)cMd! td Tr! [but cor sh ]mTr’ mTrSLaks feats Ataf: [cMd! 
ar; rMd4 ata]; cMds feare état; Be} Lo! Lot Lo’ oOr Tj! mTr5 Wa afarare; Lo? 
arad@’; Be! tMd3 sOx! Ox? sPut [Jolly Nd] Vij “fart; Be} fafa; My “fatter; Bo 
wKt! nKt* BKt® Lo! Lo? Lot Lo? nNg Pu! Pu’ [Jolly M] Me Ku Dave Jha fare; La! nPu! 
Pu? Put Tr? Dev fafa 

254. Cited by Vij 2.152; Apa 759; Laks 12.442; Dev 3.541; Madh 3.273 — a) sCa Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? La! Tj? mTr3 Yolly Ku] Apa Nd Mr Mandlik KSS afta’; Hy afta’, Be! 
TAP IBOMT, Tr TACHHSMT; oOr WACHBOMT; Pu2 Put Wa WAAGAT; Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? 
wKt} Lo? Lot Ox? Tj! Tr? Me Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave t — b) Bo [but cor] FAT; Be 
Ho La! Lo® cGMd! tMd4 GMd° sOx! Ox? sPué Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr> Wa Apa Laks DevMadh 4; 
mTr® ST; Jo! At; cMy Hearferr:; 7Md} gfearferor — d) Lo’ Tr! garda; Madh Ta 
faar’; Lo! faarfe:, ake Praredt:, +Md3 feareat:; Tr! [but cor] feaearray, Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] 
fae: 

255. Padas c-d ma in Tr!. Cited by Vij 2.15; Apa 760; Laks 12.442; Madh 3.273 — a) 
oOr aa: TT TAT; Lo’ + ferseq war; Tr! Grea; nKe¢ Ferg; Tr yee — b) rMd} GMdd 
oMy ehregy wart, Madh fray wert (cf. 8.261d]; oOr aTaet: STAT, La! ares; 
Tr? Apa ateat; Ho wKt! La! Lo? tMd* sOx! Ox? sPuS Tj! Apa at; GMd! mTr® Frere; Pud 
Pu’? Go Rad; BBe? Be Lo? Tj! Vij Apa Prot — c) cMd! rMd? tMd4 GMd3 GMy Tr! [but 
cor sh] MTr*MTr® Apa Laks wat ciex Pragitare [rMd3 cMd’ GMy dea; TMd‘ Tr! Laks T I); 
Tr? “avert; Lo’ dat: — d) Apa arent apr arfet:; Lo’ tMd? aatearaa;, Pud Pu? Laks 
amet; cMd! ATA: 

256. Cited by Vij 2.152; Apa 762; Laks 12.445; Dev 3.542; Madh 3.274 — a) Dev Brat: 
et: ae ; Ho yéteatef, cMd! Md‘ zeta; Be! Fatearsdf; Ke Teta; Jo! Wreatak, Pud 
Pu’ aéteadt, Hy Tears; Dave TetcaT aT — b) Lo! Lo’ afevit; Lo} few — c) Im Apa 
eed; Pu? Put gepfer:; Be? wKt! after; Tr? afte:; La! anftd:; Tj! carat — c-d) GMd! 
+Md3 tMd* GMd GMy Tr? mTr6 sages AG Ted: alan: war [rMd? Far: ™Md4 
ittar] — d) La! tae; Be! BBe Bo Ho Hy Jo& wKt! wKt? nKt! BK Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* LoS 
NNg 0Or sOx! sPuo Tj! Ku “Ageat; Wa IAEA; wCa Dev IYRIM; Ho HATA 


Chapter 8 711 


fandta vag are: egfdard ST URI 
VIM F Mat VAT: araararhaa: | 
drafters ay: carat crate cil 
aarararaaa J Ate dtrarkermrs | 
PUTAS FAPTTTERTT URES 
TSS EET MITT Baa Toaraary | 
MOMSIsoaaaAPT THIARTT URE 
ot Teg sar gy: atarafery cerry | 
AAA CATIA oT YTAATAT: URE LM 


TALTASTUATARTAET TET T | 
arma wr: ahragfatr: 2g 2 


257. After Utd rest omitted in NKt. Cited by Vij 2.153; Laks 12.446; Dev3.548 — a) 
oOr TWAT; Be! TITS; Be} AIATET — b) oOr FAC; GMd> oOr aeaarfat; Hy aaaTferer: — 
c) Be? NNg MTP? Taeted ;0Or TAaeT — d) Wa BIaT:; Lo! My Dev arareg fs Tr 
arareare fe"; Lo? Ma eager 

258.* Padas a-c up to By: omitted in NKt*. Cited by Vij 2.152; Apa 760; Dev 3.537; 
Madh 3.271— a) Jm Ng aTferara; Hy “ard, wKe8 “aTaf®; La! om J; HosOx! sPuo Wa 7 — 
b) MT areca aTAaTAAT:; BKtS Lo! Lo? GMa Pud Pu’ Tj! [Jolly G R] Vij Go Mr Der WaT:; 
Lo* Lo® GMd! +Md? tMd? GMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Wa [Jolly Nd M] Dev Jolly Jha Dave mr; Tr 
aft; Bo WaT:; Bo [Jolly Nd R]@TATT ; BBe? Be? Ho wKt? BKtS La! Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ nNg 
oOr sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? Pus sPuS Pu? Pu’ Tr? MTr* Wa Volly G M N] Go Na Vij Apa Dev 
Madh Jolly Jha Dave S47 ; Ox? Tr? mTr°dtaet ; Bo ATaTa — c) TM} tTMd4 GMé Tr! 
MTré MTP MTro ATHY fate’; cMd! GMy #far fas wKt! “ork; Be! wKt}? Lo? tMd3 aMy 
Ng nPul Pu? Pu Pu’ Tr? faftere [Me gloss Pret supports this]; Put “fafa — d) rMd3 
Yaa; Lot Lod Wteear 

259. Padas c-d omitted in Be!. Cited by Laks 12.444; Dev3.540; Madh 3.272 — a) sBe 
La! Ox? Pu? Put Wa atarar — b) Ho AT@TAT; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? La! Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tj? Tr? 
mT? [Jolly G R] Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave #tfranfer’, +Md3 +Mdé * after: — c) Pud Pu’ 
[Jolly G] Saeratt geste; BK sOx! sPuS Aaa; Ho agate; Trt mTrS Cqagastter 

260. Omitted in Be! BK Pu®; padas a-c omitted in mTr®. Cited by Vij2.150-1; Laks 
12.444; Dev 3.540; Madh 3.260— a) TMd? TTS; Tr? ata; rMd4 etait — b) 1Md?* cor to 


PaaTaeTary; cMy tary; Md? AHarr, nKt4 Lo’ GMy oOr Vij FoataHry; Tr! [bur cor 
sh] Toads; Md? FoelfaHs; cMd> Forts — d) sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? mTr? [Jolly 


R] Rn Mandlik Jha Dave KSS FTaART:; Be} La! Lot Lo? [Jolly M] 3atarerar 

261. Padas a-b omitted in Be!. Cited by Laks 12.445; Dev 3.541 — a)BBe’ Be? Jeera; 
Tr? eleq; TMd4 yeeaeq — b) TMd4 water: — c) TMd4 car FeNqagst; Lal at aT; Im 7 
aar; Lo! Md} acet — d) nKe arate: 

262. Cited by Laks 12.452 — a) Hy a; cMy aaKe ; Lo? “asrara’; cMd! Md? 
+Md¢ oMd$ cMy Tj! Tr! mTr4mTrS ‘cere; MTS aererar — b) Pu? Put Tr weer — ) 


712 Chapter 8 


MAMAN FZ: Vat faagat Fey | 

Ad TURUAISAT Ua AATAATESaT URE RM 
Te ASrTARTT ar at ater ey | 
gate wsat aver: Ceara feat sa: UREvU 
dara eer usar aifad tt 
shearghrrcangrenntate Rerfr: Weeki 
vatsRraateat ent: ea eer 


ae mead veer arearecafatretery Re <i 
Te Taree ahrat qeaehe | 
aetseraet F aT RT TIS URTV 


La! mTrSaraed:; Pu’ aTaeat, TM STAT; BBe? oOr Pu? Pul tat ; nNg * yeratetar: — d) 
aMd! anredt AqPrerr:; Md} cMy ehreay frre [rMd3 “aay; Md‘ a; Laks Shar 
Pu2 “agfafr; Be! La! sOx! Ox? sPu’ Wa fatty; Bo Lo! nNgnPu! Pu} Pu’ Tr? [Jolly M] 
“fatter; BK Lot Lo’ Pu? Put “fara 

263. Cited by Laks 12.446 — a) Bo aTarar; Pu2 Put Wa etrar’; Tr? “sera; Bo 
“sagt, Lo? “stay; Lo! “stgar — b) cMy @ay; Pud Pu? edit; Md? adifsa’; Pu2 Put aa 
faa’; 1Md? faa; tMd? fafaeat; cMd! Paaargt— c) Pu Laks ad FT PTAVEAT; BBE 
aafe fe perqve; Lo? af — d) Be? FT Ue FeTeTSe; TMd4 oOr Pu2 UST; Pu? Fea 

264. Cited by Vij 2.155; Apa 766;Laks 12.456; Dev 3.554— a) Be! nKt* Lo? Lo? mTr® 
Apa’ oer oMd! 1Md? tMdé GMd$ oMy Tr! MTr4 MTP Dev dete; nPul ASPIATET; Pu? 
Put “art” — b) Pu? Put arefiesrar, Pud Pu’ Tr? arearere aay; NK! Aaa; cMd! carers; 
Lo! td; TMd} GMy 8 — c) Be! Got ate; Pu? Put Tr? @us:; TMd*4 ave, GMd! queare and 
jumps to 266d; cMd° STE — d) Be! @rq fearctartar &F:; sBKé Bareerorrg: wKt! 
“atat Bradt; Pud Pu? “aTATaRTAT; Ho feara; +Md? oMy fer; rMd4 GMd> Tr! mTr‘ mTr® 
fear ea 

265. Omitted in cMd!. Cited by Vij 2.153;Apa 764; Laks 12. 450; Dev 3.544; Madh 3.275 
=a) oMdé etarart; Tr? “fared; Bo Kt? “fare; wKt! wk “feererar, Lo! “faaorar; 
La! “feererat: sBe? *afSrerat Hy “faarearat; Be? “Rrrearat— b) wKt! La! rMd* oMd° 
eek Be? Bo Uta; TMd? est — c) Tr! Tr Apa afaar’; Ti fear” ; tM? weer at’; 

Lal afetarghir; Lo! cor to “ghrargy ; Ho nKt‘ BKt> Lo? Lo! Lo® NNg nPu! Pub Pu? Dev 

Apa ayy — d) Md} cMy “oreerafefer; nNg ‘seprerfery: fearfe:; +Md? afer: 

Additional verse in Mandlik [€, 6] KSS Dave [cf. added verse ie 8.249]: 

waht afett ta Pert arate | 
warner a ater geaferar Bar || 

266. Padas a-c omitted in GMd! and padas c-d in tMd? — a) La! Rasiarhyfedy, cMy 
“Rasrafafeay, rMd3 “RresnPafeat; Lo! Paaanfafeadr — b) Be! wKt} Lo? get; Tr! fafirme 
sh 78%:; TMd3 cMy ausedtar : Md‘ Sif; Be! sBe? Ho Jo? wKt! nKt* Lo? Lo} Lot Lo’ oOr 
Ox? Pu! Pu Pus Tj! Tr? Wa Re Go faPta:; Md? “father; Bo “Perr: — d) nKt4 mT 
aretrecrer Pro, +Md4 arate @ PRT; Pu? Put ataqrecr; Tr? avaaeet; Pus Pu’? Prcte: 

267. Omitted in Be!. Cited by Vij2.207; Apa 808; Madh 3.296 — a) Tr’ “HTT, Md} 


Chapter 8 713 


Set erasure aa TA: URECI 
ana frordtat arazta safer | 
aaa age far wad UREsil 
wasnfateordieg arar arecrar ferry | 
ert: wgarse Teeat FH ag: uURvolt 
arifane caarahesteor Ede: | 


fraasar: MESA ATET RUF: UROL 


*HTBCr; wKt! “are; oMy araer — b) GMy oOr aft — c) Be? azir at: Im Jo! Kt? Lo? 
[Jolly M3] Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 33a? ; Jolly M89] zat aE; Lot Lo’ oOr [Jolly 
Me M*5] daz: andar [oOraaa]; Madh aa Bt — d) wKe Te J; aBe: wafer 
268. Cited by Laks 12.478; Madh 3.296 — a) wKt! Lo* Lo® NNg oOr nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Laks 
fay: yseard eveT: [Lot Lo’ nNg IFT); aKe Awe TTT VST:: Md? “ser; GMd! avear; 
Be? ave: — b) mTr? “@aetag; Be} Kt) “Ray; Dave “Pratt — c) nNg Pu’ Pu’ der; Bo 
Kt) Md} GMy mTr° aaa; Tj! Seat; Jo! Fat, GMd! 1Md4 aarer cA; Ke Seer ant”; Laks 
asrer anf? — d) Tj! “Tea; coMd! “age, cMy “SRST; Wa Slagle; GMd> aifaarey, GMd! Fa 
oOr MT Tro Fe: 
Additional verses in Be? GMd! tMd? mTr* mTr®;added after 269 in La! nPu! Pu* Put 
Mandlik [€, 3, 4] KSS Dave: 
faverfaaacprat quel usteragaay: | 
cemerfraat: es fat a: eraceear: 11211 
aaepargeurear faraevsncrar | 
carrera areafater fete: 12H! 

1. Padas c-d omitted in mTr® — a) Be La! fa — b) La! qvsat, tMd4 egT — c) 
Lal uaeragaat: 3S; Pu? Put Seer: — d) Md? fasta: ets; Be? aver at eta; NPul 
Pu? Put Mandlik Dave KSS eae: 

2. a) Pu? Pu ‘ayeputy ; oMd! “oral eae fam ; Mandlik Dave KSS “Tea 
fax’ — c-d) Be} nPul Pu2 Pu‘ Mandlik KSS Dave “gartt aaasifafe, Lal “gsr 
aeuastfafer — d) Md4 aventefer 

269. Cited by Laks 12.476; Dev 3.758 — a) Laks Tat fe fe: cMy “aot; Dev at g 
adar, rMd4 fgsrat; mTr® q sireftar— b) rMd? gtasta; cMdS great — c) wKt! faareg = 
arg; cMd! weg wey; Wa aretaae ; Pus “aeftag — d) rMd! afee; Lo? atea; Md? 
aaa; Pud Pu’ feyorr 

5270 Cited by Apa 809; Mddh 3.297 —- a) tMd? [pada reads] TRAST gd; oOr Apa [vi] 
wat: cMd> éronfe ; nK¢t BKtS IM@ wastes Be! wKt! waponfe Re: MTr? erste fe; 
Ho Ke? “ardteq; Lo! Pud “sifaed; Be! nKt* aK 1Md3 GMy NNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Put sPus Tr! 
Trt MT [Jolly M89 Nd] Apa aTf& @; [Jolly M35] att q; La! Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] safe 7; 
Apa [vl] a1et q; Be “aria; wKt! “stdter; Ox? “ardtat; Me Go Ku Re support the plural 
— b) La! areca; Md! areca; +Md3 arenes; Apa Feri — c) Lo! fergrar; nKtt oOr 
fergrat, nNg Rr@ar; BKe “eq — d) oOr TIATAAT; La! “oeaT 

271.* Padas c-d omitted in mTr® [haplo]. Cited by Apa 809;Madh 3.297 — a) Lo’ Tr? 


714 Chapter 8 


gataaar ator franraer eda: 
anaes ae ATT aT ATAa: URI 
qa ar a ae a at ata a 

faa garqute aver: eae fear TAT UR RI 
BMT qe aT aaa ah aaraerz | 
earth gaara qe Bara Rv 
arate frat AAT Wat AAT WET | 
AAASSd WT: TINT Mage: URI 
Taretsarat JF ae: wat fsraar | 
Tat aes: TS: AA Aa AeA: URI 


“ae; Apa “asia: GMd! “geraue’: cMy arm’: Be? TMd3 GM@ Tr! Sars: wT Par- 
; Jm Jo? wKt! nKt* Lo! Tj! NSm 15-16.23 AurT — b) Hy Jo? Lo? Tj! Tj? “Afaseer; La! 
Lo! “afgaer; Be Lot Lo’ @dat — c) My Prarit; Lo! faa; sBe? Be? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! 
La! Lot Lo’ Ox? Tj? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Precay, Kt? Fear, Be Ca Faery, 
BkeS Feray; wk} Prear:; nPu! Pu2 Put Fratwar; sOx! sPuo era, oOr Tr? TTS ; wKt3 Pu’ 
age — cd) Md Patiteaengearet eargs: — d) sBe wKt! “sdmaret; 1Md? oMy 
; : 

272. Verses 272 and 273 transposed in Kt?; padas a-b omitted in mTr°. Cited by Apa 809 
— a) oMé@ aatzeaetr; nKtt Pu? Put wate’; rMd? TitoT — b) oOr feaTATHET — c) Lo! 
aera & 8d; Be! Wa “aiftsaa’. wKe °HTaqa’; oMy “areraa’; Lal rMd? nPul 

“arararas, 1Md4 “arfraras: Pus "até — d) Lo? 335 A; Ox? a; Be! For TTP: 

273. Cited by Laks 12.481 — a) Lo! J; Be! Ho NNg Pu? Pu’ fcr; nPul gfe; tM? Be; 
Md! cM@ & Bre FT; wKt! SPT add Tet — c) Pud Pu’ factageraqte; Pu? Put fea; Bo 
facet; cMy facets; nKt* La! Pu? Pu’ gaeacata; GMd! waraqta; wKt! re cute; rMd4 wa- 
Y:; Bo yaaut — d) rMd3 feyer 

274. Omitted in GMy BKt oOr; padas c-d omitted in BKP. Cited by Vij 2.204; Apa 806; 
Laks 12.475; Madh 3.295 — a) iMd! &t; Be! Tr? arery; Md4 Apa at ate aT; MTP Bose; 
Tr? @syq — a-b) Lo! ar pot Ger anf — b) Lo? Tj! “arent, sOx! sPuo “Fer arf; Ho 
Ox? “Her aft; Ho Te aft; dé aaah; NNgaaret — c) Lo? aaa T [om gare]; 
nPul aararfe; oMd! ava ferga’; tMd3 aeadatga; GMy Jar aay; La! gerantt — d) Madh 
@us:; Bo nKt4 TMd? aug; Be! ques; Lal RET; cMd TMd* Tr! mTr4 MTr° GT ; Be Td? Wa 
wrt Tez; cGMy Apa BATT Fe; Md! “ToTTE; wKe “Gora, Tj! oetae; ™d? “gor oUt 

275. Omitted in oOr; padas a-b omitted in BKt. Cited by Vij2.204; Apa 853; Laks 
12.477; Madh 3.295 — b)Madh VijrRye Te, 1 Md4 Fe — c) cMd! ATA Was sey; Bo 
nKt La! wae’ ; pK O Taser; Hy srenftaward; wKe! area; sBBe areas; Pu? 
Pud areata, nPul aeret ad; Lo? qea:; TMd‘4 areat — d) Lo? aaa; Laks Teagan: 
Pu’ a1aqqqet:, Ho Md} aeaa:; Lo! areeger:; La! aIa_er:; Jo! “get 

276. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Laks 12.482 — a), Be fameaPraatess, La! cMd! oe 
arerr:; La! ePradteg; Md‘ mTr “aarnt g; Lo? “afrarait q: sBe “afrarard: sO 
at; wKt? Pud Pu? Pu’ Tr? Volly G] t — b) Ho @S; mT ro aval Herat, Kt? faarrat; Pat 





Chapter 8 715 


a raster afer ara: | 
saat wort qosenter fatrarr: lvl 
uy avefay: ail avaqreereq aad: | 
wa seat cen qoeareerorRy UR CII 
aa Sarasa Pearedawere: | 
SAAT AACA AHAAMTATT NRO 
aires ae a aftresqaaete | 
West TET WewsatAed RCo 
AETATAPATQCHEM AP ST: | 
wert Hast Prater: fewer arearaedaq Re zl 


fasmatat; Bo fesTAa: — c) Bo STAIT:; BK STAT; Be! aTeT; BK La! tMd4 GMd 5 GMy 
aed; cMy Jat; BK) 1Md* cMd? La! ¥4; Pu} gf; nKt* a — d) Be La! cMd! 1Md? rMd4 
GMd GMy Tr! Trt mT ro eft Feat: By: [rMd4 aay; La! rMd‘* GMd> awa SA]; Wa 
afar; HonKt4 sOx! Ox? sPuo Ha; wKt! & @ AeAPA:; Lot Lo’ UT AeAA:; NNg [but cor fh] 
FeAAT: 

277. Omitted in oOr; padas c-d omitted in Be! [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.482; padas a-b 
cited by Vij2.207 — a) Tj? @RU Ua; BBe? “Aaa; Be? nKtt Jo? Lo? Tj! mTr4 mTr° 
“greatata; Pu? Put “aredta et — b) tMd4 aorta; *Md3 aT; GMy Polly Nd] acne; 
oMd! fesrfer — c) cMd! “as.cMd> “ast — d) Bo cMd nPu! qveatfe; Be? HowKt! BKtS 
Lo! Lo} Md} tMd‘ sOx! Ox? sPuo Tj! fearota: 

Additional verse in Tr? Mandlik [@, ] Dave KSS; placed after 288 in La’; commented 
by Na Rc; cited by Har-A 1.19.15 [= VaDh 20.30]: 

ofed ofercteger ate aefer ar ga: | 
arrgeras: enfarar featoat art | 
b) Har-A He aR — c) Lal Taarerer Sto: — d) La! aeoa. Har-A fRetrarrsgy 

278, Omitted in oOr; padas a-b omitted in Be!. Cited by Dev 3.761— a) nKtt watfe- 
SauPetedt, rMd? “FART; Ho sOx! sPuS “Fahy: gett; rMd? tMdé steht — b) cMd! “eaayg; 
oMd5 “et a; 1Md? 1Md? GMy Pu’ Pu? S@raxaa: — c) Jo? Lo? Tj! Ha: TE— d) wKt! ave- 
rarer Pvt; Bo araateer ; Tj! [cor to] dé Prete: 

279.* Omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 2.215;Apa813; Laks 12.491; Dev3.763; Mddh 3.288 
—a) Tr! MT! mTrSaa aa sess [mTr*aa ] — b) BBe La! cMd! +Md} tMd4 GMd$ GMy 
Tr! MTr! MTrMTr® [Jolly Nd] Vij Apa Laks Dev Madh Nd TeIrReatraeesT:; Wa Teea- 
eT SIT, TMds ARIST —c) mT wae ear — d) Md! aera; wKt! wT 

280. Omitted in Lo* Lo’ oOr; padas c-d omitted incMd!' tMd? tMd? [haplo]. Cited by 
Apa 814; Laks 12.491; Dev3.764; padas a-b cited by Vij2.215; Mddh 3.288 — a) Bo “Weer, 
1Mdé ever; Lo? Bet aT; wKB om aT; Bo FT — c) Ho BK GMy Laks Feteerd; Tj! Fe- 
VHT; Be! TeeaaHT — d) ake nNg Wewseqayar 

281.* Omitted in GMy oOr. Cited by Apa 814; Laks 12.491; Madh 3.289 — a) Jo* UeTeA- 
ghireg’; Lo} ast oftieg” — b) wKe “eragrem:; Be? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? Lo? GMd! cMd° 
Tj* Tr! mTr? mTr# mTr° [Jolly Nd] Laks Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave PET; mTr? 


716 Chapter 8 


wafrdiaat qate grarst Saag: | 
Waa Agra TET URCRI 

FAT edt vet seaahrarag | 
ureatattearar a tarat sarong aT URC RM 
amas: Wa Feat otfeaer a ate: | 
areata 7 after carerecatertaw: Revi 
aera afore war azar | 

aa aut aa: erat arate arco uae 


*enftgren: Wa “ees: ™d?3 “greg: — c) wKt Sea; Be! Het; TMd3 HaIT; Ho sOx! 
sPuS ParHy; Pu? Put Pargt; Lo! Patt; sOx! sPus Pr [lacuna] & for Frater: — d) Apa 
fest areer wdaq. Be? fewatarer wdaq: nKe ahaa aver wdaq, Md! aaa aver 
Heda; Be! Bo Ho Jo? Lo! Lo? GMd! GMd° sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pud sPu Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? MTr? 
Go fenst; mT ro BAST; NNg feasit; Hy fend: BBe? fen; Tj? feng; wKe! fer; Md} Be arear 
Bo Wea; Pu2 Put wena; Pu Pu? araerad ; cMd! areas; Lo! Lo’ Laks aet 
yedad, Tj! arer frdaa; cMd> Tr! Madh aver Preece; mTro aver fe Heats; rMd3 
aaa PTI, Wa TeIHdac, Ho areared HA; Lod aver fea; Jo? aver Frasher; 
Jo! “waa; BBe* “arate 

282, Omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 2.215; Apa 814; Laks 12.491; Dev 3.764; Madh 3.288- 
9 — a) oMy @ci: yexarene; Ke “tacit; *Mad4 “tte; Kt! erate — b) Lo? aratest — c) 
oMy soar *. aCa wKt? BK Lo? Lot Lo’ Pu? Pud Pu’ Pu’ Tr? [Jolly M G] Jolly NS 15~16.27 
“Waa: rrr; Be! Ree". tTMd3 agra; nKt aena — d) Madh 4% gether qe; Bé “aa- 
eer; Md! “afacsadt, TMd} GMy mTr® ‘qeeady, tMd4 “aaéadt, Ox2 “aaa; Be! ‘anei- 
at ae; Tr? “ae; Lo! “war; wKt! wKe ge 

283. Cited by Apa 814; Laks 12.491; Dev 3.764; Madh 3.289 — a) Wa Tera; Tr! [but 
cor sh] wear; Pu! Feat; La! TRA; TMd* Pu’ [Jolly G] eet — b) ake Seder frat; Pu2 
“aeferarear; Tr? “defray; wKt? "area — ce) GMd! araaqt aife’: La! Pu? Put aretfe- 
erat, wKe) arefearar; +Md3 tMd4 GMd 5 GMy Tr! [but cor sh] MTr‘ MTr3 MTr® [Jolly 
Nd] “atfeeprar; Be w Kt} La! Lo! Lo} Pud Pu? Yolly M8] Apa g;w Kt! oOr Tj! at — d) 
Ho 30erT 7; GMd! rMd3 GMd Tr! mTr4 MTromTrs Fae UT [ GMdS Ter]; GMy TIT aT; 
Jo! om 7, Be’ wKt! BKt sOx! Pu? sPu® aT; Apa [Jolly G] I 

284. Omitted in Tr*. Cited by Vij 2.218; Apa815; Laks 12.488; Dev 3.761; Madh 3.287 
—a)GMd! acne ade avSat; oOr MEH; Bo HMad:, TMd! MAT; GMy GST, TMd4 
ave — b) Tj! atater:; rMd4 aft — c) Madh alae art FcR; GMd! +Md3 tMd4 cMy 
MTré MTPMTr® [Jolly Nd] Arahat; Tr! aTaAat me sh to AAA; Lo? Tj! ABSA; wKt> Pur 
Pu’ [Jolly M*> G] Vij Jolly; wKt! La! afseerq; Lo! oftrepra; sBe? afrteerr:; Md} TATETT 
— d) sOx! sPu® Water; tMd? 9eTer; BBe? WaTeaTafer; Ho Pus Pu? “@recatfer ; TMd? “ereed- 
fet; cMd! “erecta”; 1Md4 Tr! wT 4 MTP Tro Bape 

285. Cited by Apa 819; Laks 12.503; Dev 3.767; Madh 3.292 — b) Be! sOXsPu® mTr® 
“SRT. NKtt HPT; Jo! Kt2 Mandlik KSS °aRT; nPul PuS Pu? gar aur — c) GMd! Ha:; TMd? 
7, NK serat — d) rMd* fearfafe a wre; GMd “omer; BBe Gor: ; MT r® ATT 


Chapter 8 717 


ATA WAT WT Farr wet ater | 
wat WaT Aegeas BS Zaayr aT UVCEM 
sgrattearat & wrorantfereaatrerar | 
AFAAAT ATT: AATSAITAT aT URC 
gat Rear wer arrcttsarratshy ar | 


A aeaeasay ie Wal TIT ATT NCCI 
TAMMEAVSy oaeAaT T | 


TAMAS FS: TTI SHST T URI 
arrey dat wear aera wa T | 


aatratareage: ar zest feftaar uRZ oll 
forarer ane feetaafare | 


286. Cited by Laks 12.489; Dev 3.763 — a) NKt* HTG~aITMT — b) Jo'gxagT Ed; Bo Ho 
qed; Be! pBe? wKt! La! seed; cMd! eet — c) Pu’ [Jolly G] Wag — d) Pud Pu’ ave:; mTr6 
qed; TMd3 aoe 

287.* Cited by Laks 12.493 — a) Hy Lo! Lo? argvat die’; cMy argraattert [om 3}; 
Be! PuS “tsar; nNKt* Lot Lo’ GMd! Md? oOr Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] Me Jolly 
“ftsarat; BKtS La! NNg nPu! Pu? Put “dtearat; Be? “dtfearat; Lo? Pu? “Gtet ae; NN¢g nPu! 
@ — b) cMd! gift: Jm Jo! Kt2BKt) La! tMd4 Ox? mTr3mTr4 mTr® Na Ku Nd Mandlik KSS 
[Jolly Ku N] arene; Tr? qerantfir’ — c) tMd4 aaatrere art; cMd? ayereer Heer; Md} 
aye we are:; Bel ayeTTEMs; My TAMAS; Ox? THAT; wKt! Tr? “ear, GMd! 
oOr Pu! afer — d) Pu? Pu3 a4; Pu’ Pu? ad qen: wKe avs aah 

288.* Padas a-b omitted in nKtt. Cited by Vij 3.263-4 Apa 820, 1094; Laks 12.558 — 
a) Vij a wer ere Fem, Apa iog4feete gemfy Ar TET; Pu’ Pu’ (Jolly G] zearle; cMd> 
waiter; id} aMd? feare; rMd4 wear — b) wk aaa — c) Ox? ger ara; Bo aegh te 
— d) Be! Bo Ho Lo? Lo* Lo? GMd> GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Pud sPuo Pu? Pu’ Tr? mT? [Jolly 
M G] Vij Apa Me Go Nd Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ®t, wKt3 Laks Ua; Jm Taft; Be! sBe* 
ata; Laks TST; Hy AI 

289. Padas c-d omitted in BKt. Cited by Apa 820; Laks 12.559 — a) wKt! arrest ferrep- 
amey; Jo! “argy; 1Md4 “areertt — b) Md} erase"; eCa “SteAaT; rMd4 “weer, cMd! ar 
—c) Kt? Pw Pu’ Ore ; ; sOx! sPuo aug; Be? Lal Lo! oMd! tMd? GM@ mTr® aUSeT:; GMy 
quey — d) Tj? ar 

Additional verse in La! [cf. added verse 3 after 8.205]: 

Wea saa FT aU | 
aeraet Gaayagsay se | 

290. Cited by Laks 12.501 — a) BBe? Bo Ho La! sOx! Ox? sPuo ame J BTqay; TMd3 
ara te aes; Lo? Ta Tega; Pud Pu? Laks Fqa; [Jolly G] AT — b) GMd5 oOr sOx! 
sPuo UF AT— c) Bo nKt* Pu? Put Pu? ean ; sOx! sPuS garter ; mTr6 “adareng:; wKt! “ad- 
arg:; TMd4 “aeeareng: — d) 1Md4 act, iM? Tr? 27; Pu’ 22; oOr averfeafiad; Tj? evel 
Prefer 


718 Chapter 8 


HAMS TAA GHAS AT T MVP vil 
Saat Ue Fa Area TT | 

Mars aaa T VS Aqradtay URS 2M 
aaa FAT AAT TATKET FT | 

aa caret waevsat Rarat feat sa URSA 
TAPIA: Tel TSA | 

FRU: TASS AT TST: Te WAT USVI 
a wg oft dea: wghrat waa ar | 

TATA ANAT TSS ra: UVM 


291. Cited by Vij 2.299; Apa 863;Laks 12.501; Dev3.766; Madh 3.290 — a) Dev Madh 
fee Ter Br wT [Madh 7]; cMy fearteay; Lo’ fearer; Pu’ Vij Apafoatey; nNg fore; 
Tr? arat; BBe “ART; Be! wy; wKt! Laks PAG, Lo Tj! ws Lal “ga — b) Tr? fet- 
aft: ake feeisaferpar ; nPu! “aearra; Pu? Pus “71 — c) Apa seaTaTe; Tr? Apa [vl] HT; 
Be! “Ha; Pu2 “BT; 7M? “FET — d) Apa T#TTe [vl THAT 

292. Omitted in Lo* Pu> Pu’; padas a-b omitted in Be Lo® and ma sh in Be? [haplo]. 
Cited by Vij 2.299; Apa863; Laks 12.501; Dev 3.766; Madh 3.290 -- a) GMd° GMy mTr* 
MTr® Madh 844; Lo? Beat At; o0Or AT — b) Vij Apaure ; Bo ‘writ aq; akt> “writ 
aaa; Dev wreaths — c) TMd! ata; Pu’ steered; M3 atTHRIT; Be! aTpezaey ; Be! Be} 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? BKé Lo? Lo? oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu® Tj! Tr! [but cor] 
Apa [cor in brackets] Dev Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave weave; cMy arerséifer; rMd? 
areaaefe; Md areatefe, Lo! aracdtfe; Te areata, vig wertdifer— d) Ho Lo! Pu? Pu® 
Tr? qual; GMy eat; La! qued; Be? Md? Ox? MTr*MTré MTr® quay; oOr FST; wKt! 
aSt 

293. Cited by Apa 863; Laks 12.502; Dev 3.766 — a)1tMd?* qarradd,; Ho wardada; 
Bk sara; oOraatwadd; cMy Fatasdtd; wKe Jer yada; Tr “gate; sOx! sPuS Apa 
[vl] “wade; *Md3 “qasid; BKt Zit; Be Bo Ho Kt? sOx! sPu’ mTr3 get — b) Lo’cMy 
asTepet, cMd! espe; Be! pCa wKt! La! NNg Wa 4 — cc) mTr* “evel; rMd! “eveat — d) 
MTr? mTro fearafafe aeor; Te feearat fearcit; BK Lot Lo® GMd! nNg oOr Pu! Pu? Pu’ 
Tr! [but cor] [Jolly M Nd] Laks fearat; GMy @2aT; JozsKt> Lo? Lo Lo’ GMd! rMd3 GMy 
NN¢g 0Or Tj! nPu! Pu? [Jolly M Nd] Laks &: 

294. Cited by Apa 863; Laks 12.502; padas a-b cited by Vij2.300; Dev 3.766; Madh 
3.290 — a) Lo? sOx! sPuS [cor to] aT ; wKt! nKt! Laks yIsTaT ATs GMd> GMy aeTeT; 
Tr! “derat — c) Md PIT; wKe Brer:; cMd! ageren; Md} cMy Pu? Put wsteayT; Lo? 
ania, GMd5 GMy Tr! [but cor] Wa “aTat; Pu! Pu2 Put mT ro arat:; Md? aT; tMd4 Carft 
—- d) mTr® 4; Pu’ set Sat; M3 ae TT 

295.* Cited by 4pa863; Laks 12.502 — a) Tr? a4 J; cMd! Apa sherdea:;7 Md} GMy 
MTr‘ MT ro apex: — b) Lo? Tj! TRRTaT; Lota; Md? GIA; Bo TH; Be! GT T— c) BK 
grat ; Md? ware; La! afer; tMd4 “years; Lot Ye TH; Be! “aetaT — d) Laks “Jere 
=; cGMd! mTr° qsat, Lo’ ave; sOx! sPuS [but me sh] afte:; sBe Lo! tMd4 mTr® Wa Apa 
“eared: Jolly frat: [without avagraha] 





Chapter 8 719 
ayer far aafeetar wag | 
Wr Aecaed TeiseaeyT Veil 
gaat wat g fearat feat a: 
Wag Wars: FAT PITT UAV 
THATS F FS: SATIS: | 
aifraey Waars: aH T URS 
wat yaar aren rear war 7 ata: 
WATRTRATSAT: ET WAT AFT AT URSA 
Tare ater ary ery | 
AAS IU T TCT WTA: Saree fefearwy U3 0 oll 
wusfaoahiar qeurecafrte: 


296. Cited by Vij 2.300; Apa 863; Laks 12.502; Madh 3.291 — a) Lo Tj! “Hetr, Wa 
“aro; NPu! Pu2 “Aree; Jo! Ke? wKt} fxd; sOx! sPus fast — b) nKt* Lo? Lo? cMd? aMy Tj 
Te! MTrSMTro aR; Be! pBe? wKt! wKt? cMy nPu! Vij feafeatt — c) Md? ITT; Apa [vl] 

“ya sOx! sPu® Heceael; Madh Tee; Lo recent — d) Jo? [but mc] Lo? Tj! waPateg- 
wanfey [Lo® warfefer:]; Pu2 Pud arsit ; tMd3 GMy “@ay 

297. Omitted in Pu’ NNg; pada-d omitted in Lo! [haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.300; Apa 864; 
Laks 12.502; Madh 3.291 — a) Hy 3@PrRt, Md‘ qaeitat; Bel eH; Vijgsrat 7 IE; 
Be? Ca wKt! wKt? BKt® La! Lo! GMd! rMd? GMy oOr Pu’ Te mTr* Laks — b) oOr om 
fearat; +Md4 feat; Madh feat sarcit; rMd3 rMd4 cMy fear; Pu‘ feqeir; +Md4 a — c) 
BKt Isard; BBe? BKt oOr HagvST: 

298. Padas a-c omitted in Lo!. Cited by Vij 2.300;Apa 864; Laks 12.502; Madh 3.291 — 
a) Tj! *anfaat; nCa Jo2 BK 1Md? GMy oOr Pu’ Tj! Tr? t— b) cMd! auger TeATfaar, Lo® 
Jha DaveSarearst » Jm Lo! GMd5 MTP? Apa Madh “aTGa:; BBe Bo BCa La! oOr arian: — 
c) Hy Kt? nPu! Pu? Pu4 Tj! Tj? mTr? Volly R] Vij Apa Madh FTTH; Be After J; BBe? Bo 
oOr [Jolly Nd] aftr; aCa ATA; cMy ATfreeeT; BBe? Or EET; wK “evs — d) My 
geet frac; cMd! ATGPCTTT; BBe? Bo BCa Ho Hy Kt? La! Lo! Lo? Lot re nNg nPul 
Pu2 Pus Pu’ aaeeet; wKt! faeqare; nKe “orfery 

299. Cited by Apa 610, 815; Laks 12.494 — a) Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] wat rear; Bo FT 
arereg — b) Jo! Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TAY, aKt5 Acar; Ke? feat, Pus Pu? (Jolly G]U3T, 
La! tMd3 tMd* GMy oOr Apa HTaT Aelee:; Me gives patha: WaT TITAS: and comments: 
ae aftaratsaer — c) oOr AAT ; Ho sOx! sPus “oeremeareared; Pud Pu? “oerat ar- 
Sarg; Tr! me sh to Wear: ASAT; Lo! “Teed GVEA WIT; +Md3 om B{ — d) cMd! wear- 
frat; cMd Tr! “ada; Pu Pu? + 

300. Cited by Apa 610, 815; Laks 12.494; Dev 1.142; padas a-b cited by Vij1.155 and 
pada-b by Vij 2.32 — b) cMd’ ataars; Be! “HTS4 aeTR; BBe? Be} wKt! wKt} GMd! nNg 
oOr nPu! Pu? Put Wa Apa érat — c) sOx! sPuo ARI fom sit]; oOr seaeTaT; Td? 
He; Lo? Ti! fe; mTr# Weta; TMd4 TTR — d) Pu! oTageat Waae:; Be} oiyarede ; nKt* 
Lo? cMd! oMd° GMy Tj! Tr! mT Bh Dev STeaIe ; Be! “Rafer; Hy “efear 


720 Chapter 8 


wera: saearhr fates zoster Zo Vit 
wae Tatas warat fae a: 

etary Prrerset aT UGE T TAT URN 
oar fF Al stat & WT: Aa AT: | 
ae fe ada cer wtanraarory UR 0 81 
STATS TEAET AAT WAIT: UF 
aaa aera aearfer aaefer | 

TT WUT ARVAAaa TTITT UZ oll 
THT ATT TAT ASATAT ITAA T | 
TAASE Ea: TEATATATH: WRI 


301. Cited by Laks 12.505 — a) Md? waTfAS ; Pu? Put wahas ; Bo TafTS’: Be! 
*Rasraftedt; mT “fa — b) wKt! cMd! ave; Pu? Put “Ph — c) oMdS Tr! Laks STRAT; 
Jo? Tj! aes; Lal AST FT; cMd! gRaest — d) nKe fafeer quefavie; Be! cMd! cMd> 
faferrevsfrctt; Pu Pu’ [Jolly G] Pafeer avert; Lo’ cMy fate; sCa La! tMd3 GMy Ox? 
Pu! mTr* mTro Wa fafacter 

Here TMd? GMy Tr' insert 8.332; TMd? omits it at its proper place while GMy Tr' give it 
in both places. 

302. Padas b-d omitted in GMd'. Cited by Laks 12.511 — a) cMd! aad = b) Pu? 
adam; Tr? ARMAT; sBe? rae; wKe} faae; Put e:; oOr TT — c) Jot NNg Pu? Pu? [Jolly G] 
frrerearer; Hy nPu! Pu2 Put Tj? Praereez; Lo> Tj! Paeraet, Ho fae Wer; Bower ser; 
Md! Psurer; wKe faveteez; ake Prrger gait — d) La! tse, rMd3 tMd4 trex aed; 
Lot Lod Laks We frac; Be} uce yatta; Wa aaa 

303. Pada-a omitted in GMd!. Cited by Laks 12.511 — a) TMd4 ayaedter ar; Tj? T aT; 
aCa oOrg aT; Bo fé af — b) cMy sOx! sPu® aysT:; GMd> TIS: — c) La! 34; Be nPu! BF; 
wKt3 oOr 4d; BBe BCa wKt! Pu’ Pu’ feet; Be! GMd! GMd® GMy MTré MTP MT ro acta; 
Md‘ aeiderer — d) rMd* ea 7 wer; Wa aaaT ; cMd! aeaea ; wKe araeraherr, nKe 
Bk “afer, Hy “ear 

304. Padas c-d omitted in wKt! [haplo]. Cited by Laks 11.86; Madh 1.397 — a) TMd?4* 
“TSUnT; Bo TSHTaT — b) TMd4 Usa; Be! pCa GMdd Pu’ Pu’ ef8ra:; Pud eerg:; wKe Pu? 
Put watay:; Jo? La! Lo Tj! Laks Tea — c) NNg AeaTeeT — d) M3 wae WTT:; GMy 
WAAR: Madh vaeta; Lo? Pu’ afer; Pus ereeg:; Pu’ weerg:; wk) weer: 

305. a) wKt! Geetay asd; Lo? gaeftd; Lo! Lot Lo aersfa; cMd! aerstta; oOr asad; 
Tr’ as wad; BKe Farad — b) wkd aearfer Gelfa aa, Tj! wedafe, oOr aefacr, wKt! sedher, 
Bo aeafe — c) NK ET; Bo F F VS ; sOx! sPuS om TS — d) nPu! Wea:; Lo Lod [Jolly 
M] SIA 

306. Cited by Madh 1.397 — a) Bo wager ater; Jo! Wa war: aki aor — b) 
1Md* GMy Ust; Hy 4247e7; Be? Bo wKt! wKt BK® Lot [but cor] GMd! GMd$ mTr*mTr® Wa 


Chapter 8 721 


astra at ger a aha: 
TAT T WS TT AT AWS AAT Roll 
HUA WA TSIEN | 

TATE: TAHA TATA URC 
waatarate ata forgery | 
srefrarerare FT frareeintfery R08 11 
setts irate sara: 
farcrertat aeeter ferfererte ert 7 UR 2 oll 
Fret T waar arat ae TT I 
feorae aca: aed Sage TAT: UF? IM 


aaa, Be! araart — c) Ox? FHA ; Jo? Lo? Tj! Wa aeISe ; Be! wafer aEe ; Ho sOx! 
sPus aataTee. -—— d) 0Or FASS [lacuna] waferet:; rMd4 “eter 

307. Cited by Mddh 1.397 — a) nPul arefereaateact — b) Pu’ Pu? [but cor] 3e*; Bo Lo! 
Tj! Ue; Be Yewa; cMy FeReT TT; Pu’ Pu? af — c) Jm Jo! Kt? Lot Lo’ GMd! Pu? Put 
MT? [Jolly M45 Ku] Me Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 9ferart; cMd> GMy Tr! [but cor| mTr! 
MTP MTr® [Jolly Nd] Nd Re Rn Sitfenint, tM? stferarr; Madh We aT, rMd4 siferare; Pud 
Pu’ Go [Jolly G] wferiHt; [Jolly M°] aferarT— d) Be} aa: 

308. Padas c-d omitted in Lo? — a) BKt® Lo* Lo® Wa Volly M N] Me N4@ [but gives the 
accepted reading as patha] Dave Jha serra; Be} aferare Start — b) Be? “awerea: 
mr “@ifeer: — c) Pu2 Fag:; GMy AHET; Pud Pu? Glee — d) Be! aay, uTrerrae ; Pud 
Pu’ aHedtae ; cMd! aaaafer’; Jo? cMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd? Pus Pu? Tj! Tr! [Jolly G] “arftor 

309. a) BBe Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? oOr Pud Pu’ Pu8 Tj? Tr? MTr3 MTr4 MTrmTr® Lolly M4 
G Ku Ra] Rn Go Mandlik KSS ata ; Bo F [lacuna] Ha; Pu? Put “ATave — b) TMd4 
areca; Be! fuga; Ke? fay@rray, wKt! fawerra:; Jo? fawgert; Be nKtt Lo? GMd! rMd? 
oMy oOr Pw? Pué Tr! [but cor] MTr4mTr> mTr® Yolly Nd] fawetre; Pu’ fercrarret cor to 
ferrarras; Pu’ facratas — c) 1Md3 aaerareyATe; Be! Be? Bo AAAS; mTrémTrS “ae 
eae; GMd> “areararat — d) GMd! tMd? rMd? GMy MTr! MTP [Jolly Nd]Me [patha] aret 
I FT AH [oMd! sad]; Pw Pu’ [olly G] weak ; nNKe zarewy; La! Pu? feareeit ; Be} 
Lot Lo’ “eitret; Bo “atfife; ake “ated 

310. Cited by Laks 12.782 — a) sOx! sPu° orenftenten: ; My arenfiteifer ; Md} cMd5 
Tr! mTréuTro orerftnifer, — b) Laks ° aett; cMd ° agtrarcaterar —c) BCa NNg mTr® 
freer free; Ho sOx! sPuo Tat WT FAIA; oOr AMAT TTA; Pw’ Pu’ [cor to] Praewy 7 
at; TMd3 GMd GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] at — d) Lo! aaa fafee 7; sBe? ett TT; TMd? 
TtMd‘ GMd> GMy Hat a; Tr? at FT; Be! La! Pud Pu’ (Jolly G]aT; [Jolly M°] ¢ 

31..* a) Ho faaeur; cMd> Tr! Faeenfe, Bo Hy Jm Jo! K? wKt} nKt* Lo? Pu? mTr3 mTr® 
MTr° Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Davefé — b) cMd! @at aque FT; oOr om areat; Tr rae; 
GMd? mTr 3aetT; TMd3 GMy Puree; NK¢ Pud Gaetrt FT; Be aT — c) La! saeufy: — d) 
tMd? 1Md4 mTr? oOr Tad; sOx! sPuo Foard; NKtt aed; wKt? Pud TT; TMd? GMy nNg mTr4 
JT: 


722 Chapter 8 
aren Tyo fer ferrat aro zorry | 
aera a Edar aaa: 13221 
aferat arearcedtat eat acta | 
Tea AAT ATH TT Tesh Fe sl 
Ta aT Teal FHT star | 
WAN aaa wr ATT Re vl 
wears FA ays arr afer | 
the anraedterara este aT NR EM 
Wreaatat feratettar eta: Etaraqerr | 
aca T aT UT Herat fefeaay 32 Ell 


312. Folios containing verses 312-28 missing in the microfilm of mTr®. Cited by Laks 
12.47; Dev3.66 — b) tMd3 feqar; nK¢ frat; sOx! sPub ferftat; nPul Pu? Put evar; *Md!4 
feat; GMdS @retart, +Md4 aorfturr, Md} aerftorr; GMy Heo; nKe! wrftart Lo! serteat — c) 
Bo ‘qeret; Lot Lo’ Laks & — d) Be! Be? La! Lo! tMd3 GMd’ My oOr sOx! Pu? Put Pus 
sPu® Pu’ Tj? Tr? MTr* Wa [Jolly M G Nd R] Rn Go 4 at; Ho 74aT; NNg ATE; Lo? cMd! 
Pu Pu? “are; Put “aTeTar 

313.* Padas c-d ma sh in Tr'. Cited by Dev 3.66 — a) Be sBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
wKt! Kt? wKt? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo®cMd! oOr Ox’ sPu® [me to] Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa 
[Jolly R Ku M¢] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4: 8, sOx! & frit; Pue Pu4 afereate”, wrt 
eda ; rMa4 whreatdetst; cMd wae at — b) rMd! wf — c) oOr [Jolly M>~ G Me] 
Jolly Fea ; Be! BBe Be} Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} nKt4 Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo’ GMy sOx! Ox? 
sPu® Pus Tj! Tj? Te Tr? Wa [Jolly M4 Nd Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 884; Jo? wKt! 
BKtS Lo} Md! oOr Tr! [ma sh] [Jolly R] Tad ; Md} aeaata aaa, Lal saatgerre — d) 
GMy aa areofer, Md} arferreater 

314.* ma in Tr!. Cited by Vis 3.252; padas a-b cited by Apa 1078 — a) Tr? Usted — b) 
nPu! effaar, Be! sBe Be? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lot Lo sOx! Ox? Pu3 
Pu sPuo Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj Tr! [ma sh] Tr? mTr? Wa [Jolly M* GN R Ku] Apa Me [patha] Bh 
[patha] Go Na Ku Mr Mandlik Biihler Jolly KSS Doniger aaat — c) Be! wKt? tMd? Pu® 
araertrty; GMeé siraerarert; HosOx ! sPuo T eT; La! g Baa; nKt* Tea; Pu2 Put acay- 
#°: vis Tera” — c-d) cMd acetate — d) Ox? “aatfer; Ke Caraifer; Pus Pu? “aat- 
feranfer; Lo? afer; Vis seq; Hy tMd4 AT 

315. Cited by Vis 3.252; Vij 3.257; Apa 1078 — a)cGMd> &Pet ATT; BBe? Be? Ho wKt! 
nK¢t Lo! Lo? Pub Pu’ Tj? Dave Jha 82g; Ca Hy sKt oOr 476; La! Fas; wKe Fas; TP? 
Bae — b) Tr? Wa SE; Bo nKt Lo? Pu> Vij Der BEC; Tr! BH; Pur Put wad; Pus 
aBeatt; Bo Ho Ox? arf: [Jolly M] at] — c) Apa 3fe; vijate; La! afer; BCa Jo? 
wKt! Lo?cMd5 nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? Tj! mTrémTr Vis Apa anes tMd3 7a: Arota’ 
Be! oMy Vij Apa eftesrat’ — d) La! Lo! Ox? Pu’ Pu & 

Additional verse in BCa wKt? La! oOr Mandlik [®] Dave KSS, which is identical with 
11.101, 


316. Cited by Vis 3.252; Apa1078 — a) BBe 2 arearerferarener, ake? Apa aTeATSTS 


Chapter 8 723 


Sars YET ATs TaN wratranhett 
wet Breer are eaat torr Fafa 3 ell 


waRarerg Fear ova Arar: 
frter: eatarnter at: geet war 3 2c 


mg wy we grater a: TTT | 
Base wyaeay avr arerAretg 3 231 
art ENT: FRNA sediswaferay ar: 
PSA TRAIT T ASAT UZRoll 
aa akaaarat yareeataey ae: | 
Garay T ATAAPT UFR LM 


HyeTET — b) tMd4 AAT; Pus Pu? Aa WaT; Lo? dé Tj! ae; Tj! Aree — c) La! GMd! 
TMd3 tMd4 GMd> GMy Tr! [but me sh] MT rt Nd SeaIRATAST TST; Be} Lo’ Tj! srarafrear 
UST; oOr aranfFear;, Hosratfeear; Pus Pu? warferear; wKet! sravaftear q; Lo! T 4; Pu’ om FT 
— d) Apa areaatter; Pu’ Rafesar 

317. Omitted in Lo? Lo’, Cited by Hem 3/1.781; pratika by Sam on BU 1.5.2 — a) Lo! 
are, TMd3 Pu? aren; nNg Yel; TMd4 Aree, *Md? erfte — b) cMd! it arat aftanfeott, 
oMy Fat; Jo? Wa STaTT’; Be! sTaTRraTRoT; pBe? oOr “TETeeft — c) Lo? FT; Md? wT 
farerr; 1Md3 Pu fererer omer. Lo? cMd! arena Prana; Tj! Breer srarr; Hem asaTeT; 
Pu’ [but me] arered — d) anKd asfefearr 

318 Cited by Vij 3.259 — a) Volly M35] usta Ke astra; mT? conga ; 
Be! tMd3 GMy mTr? Wa [Jolly Nd] Go Mandlik KSS wat: He Be! “aveeq; BBe cMd! Pu3 
Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Tr? usta — b) NNg HIAGT; sOx! sPu® Aa:; Be? ATQTT:; Lo! ATA: — c) BBe? 
fas; Bo afar — d) oOr Ac:; wKt! adgeeat, oMy year 

319. Cited by Apa 848 — a) Hy aq; wKt! om Fe Wy; Be? Hy nKt* Lo® tMd? eq; 
sOx! sPuS BUST ; pBe? Barer ; wKt! age’; nKt4 ae — b) GMa MTr®. FRET=T; Be? 
“FRI: TAL; Tj! war — c) Apa ave T; BBe? La! oOr “aa — d) wKt! om Tt; Md? 
aT, 1Md4 aer afer; Bel det gat; wKt} “RTA; GMd! tM? rMd? GMS GMy Tr! Tr 
“RAPER; Ox? “FAeTEeT 

320. Padas a-b omitted in Pu’, and padas c-d in sOx! [haplo], and pada-d in GMd> BKt 
[haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 846; Laks 12.532;Dev3.739; Madh 3.303— a) TMd? GMy 
Beier, wKt! gerit— b) Md‘ erereafiras; Jo? La! nPul Pu? Pu? eeeeaferas; Tr! “saferas 
cor fh to Gira; tMd> “wafaas; Laks BPI; NKt4 Lo? GMy Pu’ [Jolly G Nd] ‘fera7; Lod 
“Paras cor to Pw; La! sOx! Ox? sPuo “fast; oMd5 G:; oOr fear — ¢) Be! Pu? Pu’? if [Jolly 
M>*] yi Breer; nKt4 BKtS Lot Lo nNg Tj? [Volly M4] a ear’; Lo! et wat’; Md 
arretaear; GMy TT — d) M4 TUES WHIT [cf. 8.322d]; Md array Ua a A 
ared:; GMd! Tr! [but me sh] reat tet Sae:; MTr? TAT Ura AT; wKt! TES; Pu? Tez 

321. Omitted in Jo? BK€ GMd 5; padas a-b omitted in sOx!. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa847; 
Laks 12.533; Madh 3.303; padas c-d cited by Dev 3.739;Vij transposes padas a-b and c-d and 
gives ta? as padas c-d — a) Pu? Put dar; NSm 19.32 Gat; Pu’ Pu? rMd* aot; nPul 
afery. Pu? Put qa. Td qusy® Lo! aquest — a-b) Vij Madh NSm 19.34 tart Ta 


724 Chapter 8 


WSU RIAA | 

MOAI HAS THAT WER RMM 
deca ach ae Re 

qe Var carat eeor aera 323M 

ASMA Set EAT ET T | 

RATA HT UAT FS MHCTAT MFR 


Ty Tereng earns tet | 
agar eet ta aa: wraisearfes: UZaM 


araTaeraray TET TST T | 
ae: etter camer ardtrert qret 7 URAEI 


adat srarecaftrar ar: — b) Tj? Tr? “vaferay; La! Pus Pu? “caftras; Ox? “caftrast — c) cMy 
Ng ‘arstarét” — d) Pud Pu? [Jolly G] Stat Aerator FT; Ho aT 

322.* Padas a-c omitted in Jo? BKt® GMd>. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa847; Laks 12.533; 

Dev 3.739;padas a-b cited by Madh 3.303 — a) Ho *srerecaftret, Bo °araeafiras; tM} 

“srerecrafrart — b) Pus “aiterd, Be} “afteafe;, Lot Lo’ nNg [Jolly M Gr] “aera — c) Bo 
Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? Lot Lo’ Pu’ Pu? Tj? MT?Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS DaveXtaar ; Be! 
Be’ xNg wPu! Pu? Tr? Wa [Jolly M*] VijDevaTaar ; [Jolly Gata — d) Md! arait 
Ua SaRa:; Md} For 

323. Omitted in ca Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa847; Laks 12.528; Madh 3.303; padas c-d 
cited by Laks 12.534 — b) GMy 3RFT; Be! arerorrafa; Vij al — c) Madh tart Aa WATT; 
Vij Carat te aaat; sPuo F Cart; wKt! Tarat — d) GMd! tMd3 Beer 

324.* Omitted in Ca; padas c-d omitted in Be!. Cited by Apa 847;Laks 12.530 — a) 
tMd3 oMy eet — b) tMd4 seater aeeT F:; La! sOx! sPu area; wKt! “ATTTET — c) 
wKt} La! prenrarer BT at — d) Be? Hy Jm Jo! K? BK# Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® NNg nPu! Pu? 
Pu} Put Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? BA Nd avs Us Weer [sOx! sPuo Us; cMy Gee] 

325.* Omitted in Be!. Cited by Laks 12.530-—— a) Hy 3@T — b) Tj! eqhteprarer, TMd* 
eyfoarana; nNg egarr; cMd> eenrara; Put eteararr, Lo* Lo’ Tr? Volly M345] 
ephtarard, Be? afarara; Hy efterard; wCa Tr! [but cor] Laks KSS oftarara; Kt? Mand- 
lik Rares, Jo! @erapr, Md? eRawraregq; Ho Pu’ Go [Jolly G] ahrarar; PuS Pu? 
ATeHrarsr, Bo Lo! aTfereprared; Me Dave Jha aRarary; wkt! cafarr; Rc reads weett- 
*HTMIT:; reading adopted, %@4, ex conjectura; all mss. (except Wa) and all commentators read 
the locative Ye7; nNg Het; 1Md4 a4; Bh [patha] et — c) Tj? ASIA ST AT: [of. 
8.2244]; Laks TT SCT; TMd3 ST — d) Be} Pub Pu’ Tr? Ga: BT; Md} HAT; Jo? Lo! Pud 
Pu’ euraas:; Pu’ “efarfeas; tMdé “eerfta:; Bo Rraveas:; Pu? Pu‘ feorfeas:; nKe RurfRar: 

326. Padas a-b omitted in Be! Lo* Lo? and padas c-d in Pu’. Cited by Apa 847; Laks 
12.535; Madh 3.303-4 — a) Ho wKt® La! NNg nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu’? “gute: Bo BKt 
“wvaTat; Apa [vl] Fevsrat; Lo! “ater; Be ° fart — b) rMd? GMy [Jolly Nd] 
“SaTTATARED SET; wKE Jeet; MT YoeT; BBe* TAT — c) BBE af; rMd* Beer; Md} 
area; nNg Tet — d) Md‘ eter TF; NK aT 


Chapter 8 725 


AASV HANA aT TI 
FIAT TSC Hal WAT UT | URI 
meat wart ta Aoer 7 WaTeT TT | 
AAT AYAAT TATA 3 2Cil 
aaa Baader aT | 
Tea BT aaa Aaya faye TT: UZ 
gag eft oer goraginry a | 
HAART Fs: VATAISAPFUT: ZZ oll 
akg arty aayewy | 
fareraey Wa TS: araaselard TA: 133 Zl 
ME ead wT at aeHAT | 
Preat wads geared TAT UZBRU 


327. Omitted in Be? Lot Lo® Pu’. Cited by Apa 847; Laks 12.535; Madh 3.304 — a) 
tMd4 aypaeseestaM; La! cMd! mTr‘MTrs Apa Madh@yaae ; Pu? Put ayassq — b) La! 
TAAATET FT; NK tt om STAT — c) Ho Jm tTMd? tMd* GMd> GMy sOx! sPuo Tj! Tj? Tr! 
Jha Dave aay. BBe? F HErMt — d) La! Fer, GMd! erat Weary 

328. Omitted in Lot Lo GMd?; padas a-b omitted in Be’ and padas c-d in cMd!. Cited 
by Apa 847;Laks 12.535; Madh 3.304 — a) Madh warat WRT; NKt* BEIT aa, Md? 
afernt — b) Ke doer; Bo Faeq; Md‘ ZeeT — c) rMd* cMy nNg ara — d) Pu? Put 
aaa; Md aera ; Be ParI ; wKe wearers 

329.* Folios containing verses 329-45 badly microfilmed and only parts are visible in 
mTr®, Omitted in Lot Lo® GMd!; padas a-b omitted in GMd >. Cited by Laks 12535; Madh 
3.304 — b) La! cMd‘ oOr T2 Wa G@Arnararit ; Be! sBe? Bo Hy Jo? wKt! wKt} Lo! Le? 
Lo Ng [but cor fh] Ox? Pu8 Tj! Tj? Tr! Laks Madh Jolly KSS “at wears’; wK tt stat 
aa; Pu? dar aaa; sPuo “Stat arava” cor to ATATTTAY ; sOx! “Stat aaa”; 
Ox? “tat Feral; 7M} “eat ARITA: MTr4 “AAT STOTT ; Be? “GAT AaweT, wKt 
“aH; La! “steerer — c) My Testa; Md} great | — d) Md? oMy fegit er 
sad [TMd? fegor]; Pud Pu’ aaqeate; cMd’ feqer 

330. ma in Ho; padas a-b omitted in GMd!; padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 
12.534 — a) 1Md* got eee at; sOx! sPus etd; BK Beat; Lo? — b) tMd? 

“af scMdd “arerity, Pu? Put “agnryas; sOx! sPu’ “agtearg FT; Ng om F — c) Lo? 
were: sBBe? Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt} Lo} Ox? Pu? Pué Tj! Ti? Volly Ku R] Ku Mr Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave FX; Im Lal oOr nPu! ay gfe; Be} Pu? Put “aay; La! “geatg— d) cmd 
arepure:; La! sOx! sPuS “POTS: GMy oOr “gros 

331. Padas a-b omitted in Pu’ — a) Be! sfeqeay; La! Pu’ “cdg — b) cGMd! om 4— c) 
Jo! fear; Md? GMd5 freaassrd; Be! Jo? nKtt La! Lo! Lo? GMy sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPuo Tj! Tr! 
Wa {Jolly M R] Ku @ea:; Lo* Lo’ @eaT:; oOr eS; Ho GMd usa — d) cMd> aaa 
aay, Ma araaaed at; Tr! elfeard [fe deleted]; Be? Tr? fgarct @:; Lo’ gad TA: 

332. Omitted in Lo* Lo®; from pada-b until 8.359 omitted in Pu’; placed after 8.301 in 


726 Chapter 8 


Fear LaAAAT: 
qe Fede wank areagery RRM 
at AT TUT eta TT ferred | 
aaee seat Teresa ala: 3 2x 
frarart: ggerrat wrat ga: gerfec: 
araveat aT case a: aeert at faa RR 
BATT VARVSAT AAT: TTHPAT WaT: 
ax te wdever: eats amcor 33 
Tes F Yaar eer vate fefeaay | 
weet 7 tert ahaa ahraer g uz zvll 


TMd3; padas c-d ma sh in Tr; padas a-b and c-d transposed in NNg; verses 332 and 333 
transposed in BKP Wa [Jolly M N]. Cited by Vij 2.266 [intr]; Laky 12.505; Madh 3.298; 
padas a-b cited by Laky 12.557 — a) TMd? acaTed; Pu? “sear; La! “eanead; Pu? Put 
cwrauay, Be! aad; Kt? Wa aaa — b) sOx! sPu [cor to] amet A; BK tS Aap; om 
apd — c) pCa La! Tr Pree; Tj? wares, Tr? “ser; La! “ret — d) Vij 

qd; oMd peameaaqate od; Bo Paws T ad; cMd! pat ; Im Jo! Ke MTP ae 
Jha KSS Dave gar ; wkt! peared; Tr? peareqaaes J; Madh “sae af; Ox? nPu! Pu 
Pu’ gd; nKO a FT; wKt o a:; La! a &: 

333.* Cited by Apa 848; Laks 12.536 — a) Be! Pu’ Wa [Jolly G] weary Apa 
aerearyy Ke! “wage; La! Put “fearf; wKkt! “gait, cMd> “gent — b) Md} ear: 
— c) MTr* oma; BBé Be* Bo BCa Ho Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt} nKt* Lo! Lo? Lo’ NNg oOr 
sOx' Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr! [cor to sh] Tr? mTr? [Jolly G RN Ku] BA Me 
(patha] Na Ku Rn Re Mr Go Mandlik Jolly KSS TATE; Hy Dave TATE; Tj? TSaRST, GMA 
anager, tMd3 “gisat — d) 1M? eat; BKO Tah, Lo’ Tj! ware; wKt! Parra’; oOr 
area; Md}? Mee ; Be? Aa; Bo BKtS sOx! “ARE 

334. a) Pu’ rey — b) Lo’ ea: oMd qrararaeray; Be! ferated; Kt? fated: Be} [cor 
to] Lo! *Md4 Pu! Tr! [but cor] feraftee — c) tMdé Tj! wazaree ; BCa wKt! tMd? GM@ Tr! 
MT? MTr® @taer— d) TMd4 TaeaT; TM} TS 

335. Padas c-d ma in Lot. Cited by Laks 12.779; Dev 3.296;Madh 1.391, 3.158 — a) Tj! 
frard:, Md‘ fear aret; wKe “arat:; wKt! <a> araT— b) Kt? tMd? Ft — c) TMd? [Jolly 
Nd] wratfect — d) aKt> Lo? nNg [ma as pathd] Dev Madh 2.158 weafed: HTT [BK 
Lo? Hr]; Ho seaquay, Tj! wt Al 7; Lolly R] at T Set; Be! Bo wKt} La! Lo! Md? 
1+Md‘ GM@ GMy NNg oOrsOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Tr? Madh 1.391 err facofe; Im oma; 
Lo} ar fercafer 

336. Cited by 4pa847; Laks 12.799; Dev 3.298— a) Tj! PUTT; Wa HITT; Be! Be? 
La! sOx! sPuS mTr° Apa Haeust — b) Tr? @arer:; sBBe? BeaTeT:; GMdS Gatere_q’ Pa; t M3 
arpa — c) Be? rMd4 4; Devtsit; Laks Watt; cMd> tat; Md} wat; Apa fast [vl Awa]; 
BBe? Dev Laks Haeve: — d) nPu! are; +Mdé are: La! area 

337. Padas b-d ma in Lot. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 847Laks 12.551; Madh 3.302—— a) 
oMy Ox? Pu? Put stteuTeT; Ho Jo? NKt# Lo® BK & NNg Pu’ Pu® 2tteragl; sOx! sPuo stterard; 


Chapter 8 727 


memmer agate: got arr at waa | 
fay at ag:afterretartate a: URRCN 
aT Hones aah ar TT | 

at a meat grantee vacate 338i 
AsTaaaat Bea IT Tat sry | 
TVAATTAAT TIT HAAEANT FT: UAV 


fasisea: eftrgteatiaey & aT yee | 
AT: WANA FS aTgAEter usw Lu 
Heaearar sarar afearat W Ares: | 
TAMaEAT TTT: Sek eearay ZV RI 


TMd} aerat; Madh weer — b) Lo’ Tj! Sa; cMy atafer fax” — c) Lo? areata; Pu’ der — 
d) sOx! sPuS gat; Be! BKt> La! Ox? Pu? gifaarq; Pu’ gift; Md} cMy fear; Be! sBe? Hy 
Jm Jo! Kt? BKt® La! nNg oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ Tj? mTr? Volly G] Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave & 
338. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 848;Laks 12.551; Madh 3.303 — a) Tr? “TEt:; LoS “ad; 
Ho ‘Uh; Be! NNg ‘afte — b) Jo? TH; nKe JF; Be! Ho Ox? aft — c) La! feat; Be? rMd4 
ave fay; oOr fey; wKke! fereporr; rMd3 Fac, cMy facta, TMd4 GMy 4 — d) oOr 
:; oMy “eaerafahe a; Madh RATT Be! Apa “aorafer &:; Lo? Pu? 
vi Madh ‘sorafer:; Tr “ofa fesr:; cMd! “gorge 4; Bo yrTET:; nPul “rp a; 
Laks “qofafer:; td? “goad 
339. Omitted in Kt2. Cited by Apa 848; Laks 2.321; Dev 2.467 — b) mTr’aTePat, Md? 
armel; 1Md4 aretarf — c) cMd! far waist, mTr! ater; wKe! after; Laks aTare ; 7Mdé 
wKt! dreaTaa ery 
340. Padas-d ma in Lo*. Cited by Vij 2.114 [intro.]; Apa 850; Laks 12.549-50 — a) Pu’ 
area Apastear [om UT]; TMd3 GMy areaarfaay; nPu! areata; cMd! “aft; Be? 
aay — b) Kt? nNg ‘fecetc; oMd! “feta; Lo! aramt — c) cMy MTP Sora; BKt “eae 
Saif; wKe! “earay arf — d) My at; Put a; wK} oOr t 
341. Cited by Vij 2.275; Har-A1.28.3; Mdadh 3.304 — b) nPu! “fey; Be! “Fer; BKP om 
; Md} &; Hy War — c)oMd! araanfer; nPul “eats, 1Md3 “A + — d) Madh eH AIGA 
Additional verses in BCa oOr; verses 1 and 3 in La!: 
afodtengent yfteae fated | 
sameeren car a ygaraar: 121i 
waar aaaaftelstcear safsct:[?]I 
Me MAMA TAT 7 grates HRI 
yetcenty gary geared | 
aecrenfer fearercisfereetafer ferfer: 11311 
1. c)0Or “grange — d) oOraat &; sCa “Area: 
3. d) La! frerearcacttrenyeater 
342. Cited by Laks 12.529 — a) Kt Lo? Lo? Tj! (Jolly M] aeferarat Garar [Ke 
aearaT]; sOx! sPud aearfeara;, Jo! Fearar; Md? tarat — b) Pu! efearat; Lo? afaarat; Ho 


728 Chapter 8 


aaa fatiar tear gatt: aahaeT | 
TAS PTSTQaE eS HT AMT FETT SRI 
Cer RUTTAR Taal 
arate aoa Ue ates ATT NAY 
angered seag a aa: | 
ATEaeT AT: aT aT: TIPAT: UVR 
aed adart g at adafe ata: | 

a fran areng fae aerate use 
a Raat fagerar wana | 
AHA EAE TAYE WAY 
aet feorfaRroter vat aatreere | 
feardttat a antar faga areata ugewci 


om @; Lol fariera; Im AeAg:; Lo’ Aew:; Bel setae: — c) Ho aePa’; nPu! arara’; sOx! 
sPu° areea CEA; Wa SAP TaSAT; Pu? “Fare: [om A] — d) cM’ ate: oratfer fepfeat; sOx! 
sPuo STAPaTe ; Pu? syaredte ; wKt! nKt* Lo! Lo? cGMd! cMy wNg Tj! Tr! mTr3 MT! MTr5 
Mandlik Jha KSS Brea 

343. Omitted in Wa — b) cMd! ada; Md? Gata; oOr BT ; Bo oOr fae; Be? “Pra 
art — d) TMd3 F817; Bo apa; GMd! cMd UTAT A 

344. a) Be! Lo! 1Md3 cMd5 nNg Tj! &%; 1Md4 $% — b) oMd! “ogdst aera’: Be! 
“errata aT; Ng Tete — c) Ke aera; Lo? aaa; 1Md! afer — d) Bo TST; BBe 
oMd ust; Hy atefaa; Lot Lo’ arefterarr; Lo! arefterat; Bo At:; sOx! sPue ST 

345. a) wKt! angrergeperedty, GMd! +Md3 tMd4 GMd? GMy nPu! Tj! mTr> Wa argte- 
RP ; Bel ASS: TSH: Or Ox? Pur argureaep ; Be? La! Tre argeiater ; Be} anger 
ave; Be! Lo?cMd ! tMd? tMd4 oMd? cMy Pu? Tj!mTr> Wa @@aa; oOr Pu! Pu? eRrT- 
ae; Be? La! Ox? Tr? “ear; nPul “eeeete — b) TMd} asa; La! “Sa Pafeea:; Lot Lo’ 
“ae faféac:; Be! wKt! oOr Pu? Pu’ Tr? g; Be! Jd t Md? GMd? GMy nPu! Pu? Put Tj! Wa 
[Jolly R Nd] fea; La! fewer: ; Ho sOx! sPu® Pu’ Tr! [Jolly G RANd] Jolly eter; Be? 
featq — d) BK om TT; Wate; wKt! Pu? [Jolly G]apAe:; 1M} “pat 

346. a) Tr? aed; cMd5 oOr afar. Lo* Lo5 “HART —a-b) Jo? “ay atantate; ake 
“art ay fe actafer — by Tj! aterardfe; rMa? at adfe — a) Tj! faeut; Lo2?cMd ! cMy 
aterraatfe; rMd4 a Prreate; Tr! mTr¢mTr mTro at Praresfe; wKkt! ar ferret; nKt4 La! 
Lo} Tj! ar Praeefer; oMd> ta wreafer 

247. a) NPul Pu2 Put fafircare [om =]; TMd3 frarere ; aK Oo wT rt mTr® @reorefy, 
sOx! sPuo “aramfgy” — b) +Md? fagorear; aK TETATET — c) Be! Bo Lo! “careftanra; wKt? 
BKtS “carefter — d) cMd! adctewar; Put “saraery; Pu2 “waraet; aKt> “WaTIET; Bo 
“araraert; Lo! “aeret; TMd4 Pus ae 

348. Cited by Dev 3.725; padas a-b cited by Vij2.21, 286; Apa 1043 — a)tMd? afea- 
Pronfafrart; Be! nKt! La! cMd! Vij 2.2124; cMy Pra} — b) mMd4 Pu? gary; Be! 
warrenread — c) mTr6 siat TF aay; cMd> fectarar; Ho La! sOx! sPu® g; Pu’ Volly G] 


Chapter 8 729 
serra uta aerorar a are | 
eitorygradt a wero a goats WZveil 
Te a aera at Mar ar aga | 
TANAKA TATATAI LAT 34 ol 
areata stat saat Harr | 
TH ATH aT HRT TTS UZY LM 


fawn -— d) Ho fase; Bo ford; rMd4 Brera; nPu! wreteertta; La! oOr wrrafta;, rMd3 
wrrefea; Pu’ Jolly Genter 

349. Cited by Vij 2.21; Dev 3.725; padas a-b cited by Apa 1043 — a) KtatteHaerd; Tj! 
art [om FT]; Li! Pu? Put ateA4ed; nPu! StH: cara’: +Md3 ofearfer; Lo? sfurét — c) 
akt’ Sfarerarcdy; Be! nNg Ox? Pu! Pu? Pué Pu’ Tr! Wa [Jolly M589 Nd] Dev Bh grea- 
gt; oMy “orfafaadt; mMd3 Correa; La! “oregaadt: Lo? Tj! olly R] argrrdt — d) 
TMd3 GMa GMy Tr Fa ator geafe[cMy gata]; Be! FI mc sh frHq; Ho FAWAT 4; Be! 
La! NNg [but ma sh] oOr nPu! om; cMd! 4 gute; Vij 7 qvesTaT 

350. Padas c-d omitted in nKt*. Cited by Vij 2. 21;Apa 627, 1043; Dev 3.726 — a) GMy 
at ae ; Lo! GMd Pu? [Jolly G] F&; Pu? Put “get; oOr Fat F; Lot om second at and Lo® 
the first —b) Be! Hy d@I; GMd® Apa 627 °A4 AT; tMd4 om aT — d) Lot Lo® 


13 


Pu? “area 
Additional verse in wKt} nKt*: 
MARAT Fare LY | 
Rrataet Rrattars aa gerer wat |! 


Additional half-verse in My [= 8.353 c-d]. 
Additional verses in NPu! Pu? Put Mandlik [®, Tt, 3] Dave KSS: 
seerfarearter aaracqcaeeda4; | 
amatrt sear a gata sift 1121 
waters 7 TeraToracae: | 
vaardifasrtiare warrarcaanert: 1121 
1. a) Mandlik KSS Dave ‘faféarfiratt — c) Pu? Put arecorreeat — d) nPu! Pu? 
fgarataencar: [Put ar] 
2. a) Mandlik KSS Dave watttratgeret 4; Pu? Put gefawnertt 7 — c) 
Mandlik KSS Dave taarana — d) xPul “afer 
Additional verses in sBe* [placed after 351b] TMd? [placed after verse 351d] Mandlik 
[@, $] Dave KSS: 
afaer mea aeraftniarce: | 
arerecad st ara: | 
c) BBe? “arergenet F— d) Mandlik KSS Dave 724 Ba 
351.* Omitted in NKtt Lo* Lo®; padas a-b and c-d transposed in TMd?. Cited by Vij 2.21, 
286; Dev3.728 — a) Be! Pu? Pu4 area [om 7]; Ho Lo? “weir: Hy Par; 1Md4 “aererst; 
La! et — b) K? meat — c) Vij 2.2108oa aT TET aT — d) nPu! Ayer eroquare,; wKt> 
Pu? Put Fayed FeUPela [BK eAAVAT ]; Be! Jo? Lo! Lo? rMd? cMd5 NNg Ox? Pu? Puf Pu’ 
Pu’ Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly M] Vij Dev Bh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 464 4X; Im cMd! Md} 
GMy MTr MTP mT r® ART 


730 Chapter 8 


TEI THAT HST: | 
sarrecrehre rear TaTaAT 34 RM 
acagqent fF ateer were avteae: | 

AT HORST: TIATTTT BeTT UFR 
eT Waa JET: MATT ASAT TE: | 
uaAraat ae: sTgaTeaTeayT RR 
TAA: TAARATAT BICITT | 

aT are wrgaifestesr fe aer cafe: Baal 
aar asraaa dkiseer aasfr ar | 
adtat ait wae & AHeATYaTT NBREI 


Additional verse in oOr: 
aet F TAA says: | 
ae aed coe tot aretr wey II 

352. ma in Lot; padas c-d omitted in NKt*. Cited by Apa 853;Laks 12.584 — a) TMd? 
GMy [Jolly Nd] “gramaarat, cMd> “artaaat 7; Lot Lo’ Ox? Pu’ Jolly “ay; Pu? Pu‘ Tj! Te 
“wal @; wKt! wKt! “tg — b) cMd! rMd3 tMd4 GMy Tr! [ma] mTr? MTr® [Jolly Nd] ae- 
ATATARTAaT:; cMd 5 teenrt TaPeT:; Apa FIAT FE: sOx! sPuo waa wer; Tr? “od — c) 
Lo? “até; Ho “gue? — d) tMd3 tMd4 GMd? oMy Tr! [ma sh] [Jolly Nd] 38: ofefrer 
war’; cMd! “avd: ofefere gar’; Tr! Tro Seafetcar ofeareetey 

353. Omitted in nKt’. Cited by Apa 854; Laks 12.584 — a) TMd? TetZST; Be! TTA; 

Pu’ ceayeat; Tj! cargeay; La! Tare — a-b) Pu? [Volly Nd] fe saa Sterat ae [Nd 

aac] — b) oMy sae at aed; 1Md4 sae; Pu2 Put aac; Ho La! Put “ateme:; MP’ Hape: 
TMd3 “eeHe: — c) Kt? Fount; wKe Feed; Pu? Put gow; Be! “wel: — c-d) cMy 
aeareantta: Tahar Bred [= 8.355 a-b] — d) La! Heat; Md‘ Beater 

354.* Padas a-b omitted in NKt’. Cited by Apa 854; Laks 12.581 — a) Lo! pCa Tea; 
oMd! tMd‘ Teat:; Ho GMd! get — a-b) Apa Tea FATT JouT atsta-{ — b) Be! Lot Lo’ Ox? 
nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? mTr MTr®° Go HHT; Me appears to support the masculine; Md‘ FATT; Jo! 
aarat, Lo? HHT; oOr HHA; GMd! sTTARAST ; Lo! Lo? +Md3 GMy [Jolly Nd] asrage: ; 
Be! wKt! BKt? GMd> nNg oOr Ox? Wa [Jolly M Me] Apa Jolly UHI; MTP ATA; 
Md? asiere; La! sOx! nPu! Pu? Put sPuS Pu? mTr* MTr® Go[Jolly G] ats aeae; nPul 
anriets; Ho asehet:; Te asraae:; Hy ASeraS:; Bo BTW: Kt? ahraee: — c) aK 
nPu! adareeray, La! adareneapr; Pu2 Put adarenftay, tMd3 adaenfeat — d) Pu? Put aaar- 
Sift ated; nKt areadared; mTr® “aes: 

355. Omitted i in wKt! [haplo]. Cited by Vij2.284; Apa 854; Laks 12.581 — a) NKt =A 
Tr! Feq area +Md4 area ™d? “srasthta:; BKt? Lo* Lo Apa “Ret artefrar ; 
adafirar — b) Ho “aria: rMdé “sift arftorr — c) nNg “arebfra — d) cMd! Md? ae 
GMy Tr! Tr! MTr® afercafeses: 

356. Omitted in wKt'; placed after 358 in TMd? GMy Tr! Volly Nd] — a) oMd! tMd3 
tMd? GMd5 GMy Tr? [but cor sh] MTrS oe BRAT; Te we; sOx! sPuo “Rrareéq; Lo? 

“Praga — b) BBe Ho wK# Lot Lo’ 1Md3 oMd? GMy sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu sPu® Tr! Tr? mTrt 





Chapter 8 731 


wraepat Bles: VAT WIAA | 
aeagrat ta ad Aen HAT ZVI 
fart eqgraaar a: et ar aac | 
REAM GAA Te GET BATT URC 
AMAT: AHN aoe TAT | 
agurare antar arr TTA: AaT UZRRM 
Arar afeatta difetar: wrae4r | 


wart ae eth: geenfearftar: Wa got 
a wnat ae Shr: stare: war | 
faftat warearrg gact quent 35 21 


MTr® [Jolly Nd]Rn [patha] Jef at; Ho T— c) rMd4 aaATAAA, Lo! Ox? Pu’ Tr? athe; BBe? 
TMd3 GMa GMy Tr! mTr* Tro 2a; sOx! sPus HAE — d) WK om F; Md? T ay: cMd! 
gay: Tr? get TET; Lot Lo’ aueAaTyaTT 

357. Padas a-b omitted in wKt! — a) Bo Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt® La! Ox? Pu} Tj! mTr? Wa 
[Jolly N Ku R] Go Na Ku Rn Re Mr Mandlik KSS STA ; sBe BTAR:; Lo! Te sate’; 
sOx! sPuo sraitaar; Im afe:; rMd3 &fr — b) Md4 eat; BK aTaET — c) Bo Pu? 
aeugT ; 1Md agrrt; Pu? Put “at af: — d) wKt! Kt? cMd! sOx! a; mTr6 aH; Tj? ae 
ae 

358. Padas c-d omitted in cGMd’, Cited by Vij 2.284; Madh3.317 — a) Lo? att aq; nKtt 
weleedg — a-b) cMy weleeta a: eT arta ar— b) sOx! sPuo ete; wKe! aT; TMd* 
aaa ; La! “agar, Be! nKtt GMd! “Far; Bo Kt BK Lo? Lo? oOrnPu! Tj! Vij AaIT— c) 
Pu’ [Jolly G] 4e:, Tj? Ha add wert — d) Hy om a4; Be! Bo Kt nKt! Lo! ad; NNg at 
yet; Md? aes AST 

Additional verse in Pu? Put Mandlik [€, 5] Dave KSS: 

artnet a g at agar | 
war eet Patear ar wear aerratoury || 
a) Pu? ararferatfertt — c) Pu2 esir 

359. Padas c-d omitted in Lo? [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.584; padas c-d cited by Apa 855 
— a) sOx! sPu® staerr, La! aaranr; rMd3 sararurr; Be! aaeur, rMd*4 Ayetr: — d) KP BKO 
Lo! NNg sOx! sPuo t@tcaT:; tMd?4 Fat:; Be! Jo? Lo! GMd! tMd? GMd? GMy NNg Pu? Put Pu? 
Tr! [but me sh] Te mTr4 MTr° [Jolly G Nd] Go Laks Sat; Wa 4et:; oOr FT: 

360. Omitted in Lo®; padas c-d omitted in mTr®. Cited by 4pa855; Laks 12.582 — a) Tr! 
Freyar atfarata; mT Freq [as the full pada]; Tj! serrata; rMd3 Jolly aarata — b) Kt! 
wprepreda4r — c) GMd! Fara; GMd! tMd4 mTr? Laksae SAAT; wKt! La! sees: — d) Tj! 
“caferathtar:; Md} mT rt “atfear: 

361. Omitted in Lo?; padas a-b omitted in MTr®; padas a-b and c-d transposed in mTr‘. 
Cited by Apa 855; Laks 12.582 — a) cGMd! Fara Fe TARY: [cf. 360c]; Laks F ATI; rMd4 
warey, NKt Ox? nPu! Pué Pu? Go Fare; BK é Tre FATT; BCa Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt} La! 
Lo tMdé Tj! Tj? Laks Bh Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave TART: — b) Ox? nPul “Prez; cMd5 
aaTaet — c) tM? Prete, wk} aTeraroreg: 


732 Chapter 8 


aT orang raters | 
asaater fe a anthryerareater wT NRE 
fehrea g aver: Brg aaa array | 
Tearg Fama te: vaRrag aw use all 
ASH Galera A gat aTIEle | 
ASAT TATA T AT ATYATAT: URE! 
Seat wodigepe a PeRrahr are | 
ATT AAATAT JF AAAT AAAS UFERM 
SAAT Aan AIT aIAEa | 

gee qaqa: warraterar af us geil 


362. Cited by Vij 2.285;Apa 856; Laks 12.583 — a) Ho Pi? Aur; La! Pu? Put areor 
aMy eeer’ TMd3 are — b) Pu’ faferrrediasitferg; Be! wk! faferaran?; Tr? far avait’: 
oMy fafererca?’ ; Pu2 Put faferarait’; +Md? fafereraa; Ox? fafa’: Laks [vi] fafeateire” 
— o) mT arate; Be! arate, Td! agate, Bo Hswafer; Jo? “adie; Lal Md‘ MTP &; 
nKt* 7; Be! Ho NK’ 1Md4 Tj! are FAT; Jo? La! Lo} Lot Lo’ NNg oOrsOx! Pu? sPuS Pu? Tr! 
Vij Apa aret Par; Md are Pra’; ; My [Jolly Nd] erat —d) nPul “ORferar Be! 
1Md* sOx! sPuS qet AR; tM} qet Ae; Pu? Pud “wepare’; wKt! “yTPATe’ ; Hy "agar; 
Jo? wKt} nPu! Tj! & 

363. Cited by Apa 856; Laks 12.583 — a) La! “fareaftt, Jo? Lo? tMd3 cMd5 Tj! Apal8; 
td! & a; Bo aearT; TMd}? ereregt — b) Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] te: FATT We; cMd! 
ara, ds Tara; Be! nK¢ BKt Lo’ tMd3 GMd® NNg Ox? Pu! Pu? Put 
mTr° Apa NaWard; sBe La! aiRrareaa; nPu! after; Bo “aed; Wa MTr® “ate — c) Jo! 
La! Lo! Pub Jolly dearg; +Md4 seg; Tj wrary; Pu? Put deg; Pus Hag; BBe? La! cMd* 
nNg 4 wag; BK ay wey; GMy AT; TMd? “wT, NNg RNG; Apa WHET; oOr 

“wate — d) Te ageing; wKe! sfifearg; Ho wafsraTg; Lo? Md? afsrara; +Md4 afesrrarey 

364. Cited by Vij 2.288; Apa 858;Mdadh 3.321 — a) cGMy Sra; tMd4 Seprat; GMd! & 
STATET , oMds & wraTET; mTrSataa — b) cMd! & AAT; 1Md4 Gael; Pus Pu? aA aT 
— c) GMd! art; rMd‘ Pu’? q7aeqeal; Hy qTaeg*eat; oOr qTaeTes; Lo! eragqear; Pur 
qraBea, Md} qaaeE_, wk! qieaat — c-d) Be! AHTAT TAMIA g awsaAaTYAr (cf. 
368 a-b] —- d) Tr? aut; Lo* Lo® GMd! tMd3 TMd4 GM@ Tr! Tr? mTr® Polly M Nd Gr] WIga- 
eer 

365. Pada-d omitted in wKt'; [Jolly M*~] place verses 365-390 after verse 148. Cited by 
Apa 858; Laks 12.597 — a) Be! La! Lot Hm; Hy eerste; cMd! way ; Lo’ tMd3 
wafayq ; Be! sBe? GMd°> sOx! “qepret, mTr! “Yepera — b) cMd! Refreraa ad; Tj! 
afr; cMy freed [lacuna]; Be! ata; Md! aaa; Lo? ar7aq; Ho Weaa; Md} areat 
— c) Be! GMd° Pub Pu’ SIT; Bo nKt! START; wKt* sOx! Pud sPuS SaHT; wKt! La! rMd? 
oOr Te AAA; BCa STAT, wMd4 afatt AT; Ho “arn — d) nK¢ Lo! aaat; Be! aaa, 
GMd 5 aa; Jo? ara’ cMd! araaryé; Jo? Lo’ rMd* Tj! “ARETE; Ho mTr*mTr® ° at; Tr! 
“agat [ma 7] : : 

366. Pada-a omitted in wKt!. Cited by Vij 2.288;Apa 859; Laks 12.595; Mddh 3.321 — 


Chapter 8 733 


arg g a: wear gated Area: | 

TANY Bet ATR FS ahr TETAT UFZ ll 
SHAT TERM Agra | 
faxed g ae aver: wagfattrarrr ug ¢cll 
SAT BA A Baty ae: Ears feat aA: | 


gee a apr caoertargarear Ree 
a 7 weat wEatcedtt ar aat aerate | 
WFAA a SF AMlset TAT IlRVoll 


a) wKt} Pu4 Seat; Lo! Safdar; GMy oOr “AM T— b) Pu? Put warIT — c) Ox? JEP; Bo 
Lo Tj! ga; Pu> Pu’ Volly G] are: aa. Kt “erar:; pBe? “AMAT; Apa [vI] “ATT — d) 
wKt! aarfresar af; BK La! Md) aa ; Be! waft ; rMa4 “ster ar af; ra? afer 

367. Cited by Vij 2.288; Apa 858; Laks 12.597; Madh 3.321 — a) GMy afore; Tr! 
afta me sh afrasz; Lo! Tj! aPrerer; oMd afarer; Md? mTr$ afar, Nd Bh [patha] 
afaret [Nd gloss: Herat agree]; Ox} after; Laks afrasr; wKt! afirqer; +Md4 
afirrer, cMd! frrerarg; La! “we a; Md? HRT — b) cMd> gare; Tr’ @ate ga; Ke 
Pu? “echt; tMd3 “ger; Lo? Tj! afc: — c) Md? GMy [Jolly NdJetearaget ae; GMd? 
oret waget TET; nPu! eeret TPT; oMd! Stara grartey, mTr* MT rs SeeAARAT 
Aa, Tr! Stays TET [but me sh; La! Teng feanre_ray; wKt! Pus Pu? weit, Ke? we; 
Tr? Na [with gloss Bet] Laks HEY; NNg POT; sOx! Pu? Pu} Pu‘ sPue BUI_ay, mMTr? 
weaage, kt’ Hrdag_es;,Lot Lo’ paagedt, oOr Pategeat; Me Jha Dave Beat 
ager, ™d4 ayer — d) Jo* Lo? Tj! Volly R] aerate, Ox Pu? [Jolly M] aTefe; Md? 
weed; Md! vead; Lal veg 

368. Cited by Vij 2.288; Apa 858; Laks 12.597; M@dh 3.321 — a) wKt! La! Tj! mTr® 
wor, Na Tages, Lal aaeged; Lo! eaegeay; Tj? grae_ea?; Be! HonNg Ox? Ox? Pu? 
MIT Wa Laks @uarred,; Tr? Quart; sBKe {TaTTeq; nKt! GMd! tMd3 TMd4 GMy La! Pu? Pu? 
Put Tr! mTr° Yolly N Gr] Soa aeq; Vij THAT, wke! geAEARA; Lo? TIARA; Go Rn Ku 
ARIYea — b) BBe cMd! +Md3 tMd4 GMd° GMy oOr Tr! mTr4 mTr® [Jolly N Gr] Vij Apa 
Madh anéfe — c) cMd? feard FAA; BBe? J Ad; oOr TAT; La! Lo? Tj! wes; 1Md4 aver 
— d) pCa wKt! La! sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPuo sag fafradq; cMy Wa; Lo} raRT; Te ade; ake 
Lo! Md} “ada 

369.* Cited by Apa 859; Laks 12.597; Madh 3.321; padas a-b cited by Vij 2.288 — a) 
cMd! rMd‘ Ox3 mTr® @&tq; Be! GMd TMd? BRIT UT; TMd4 Hear Bareq; Im cMd! rMd? 
oMy mTr*a:; BKt® at — b) Md? tMd! Pu’ MTroaee; ys Tare fe; Tj Tea fe"; BKe 
wer f°: ™Md3 TMd? Tr! [me to] fear; tMd4 FH; GMd? er: — c) Bo Lo Tj! JH; coMd> TH 
aay; Be! Ox? Wale; Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt eke’ La! Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® TMd? Pu® 
Tj! Tj? mTr° Bh Ku Mr Re Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave fer; Put Pret — c-d) Md4 Yow 7 
aenferqer fare } argarear — d) GMd! cMd° GMy nNg Ox nPu! Pud Pu? Go Nd “Peseare ; 
La! “Reserey Td? “Saga; Pu2 “Raat jar: MTP Laks RTT mgaresr; TMd4 Tj! “areaIr, 
La! “areer 

370. Omitted in Ox?. Cited by Vij2.288; Apa 859; Laks 12.597; Madh 3.321 — a) Lot 
Lo’ NNg Volly M]erit sepater of ot; aK Heat year GT, Pud Pu’ [Jolly G]Jolly ar &; 


734 Chapter 8 


wate wy F afeethyrafiar | 

at aT: Teta aesrst agaferer Zo 2 
Fae seaeaTy WaT AT ATT | 
MARAT Bore AT Felt WIHT UWZORMI 
aaeriherer seer faye zr: 

Aaa Ae Aa AeA aata T URORN 
Tat AAGH aT sore aoa | 

ay agadedt ay aor Aer UROYI 


TMd? aT a; wKt! Beat; La! wesedfeor aT — b) Be! cMd! @; rd‘ gwar; La! qanEta; oOr 
avsnefe — c) Lo! sOx! Pus sPuo Pu’ Tr? ageaPeet ta; Ox? geueta Be; pCa Hy Tj? 
Wa [Jolly Ku] 4; sBe UT; Bo J; oOr TE; Ho FFE; BKH Lot Lo? Tj! mTr® a: — d) cMd! 
raruigeaUay; Pu2 Put aT ; BK oOr mTr® SIEA; wKe “FeTRTAT: cMy zeae, Md? 
“xearerar; oOr FUT 

371.* Cited by Vif 3.264; Laks 12.593; Dev3.749; Mddh 1.119 — a) Ox’ BFA; +t Md? 
“aga, GMy “aereq; cMd! “Far eft; Pu’ om F— b) mTr® agaedtyraht, Madh wf; 
1Md‘ aTaeat ; Bo STGest’; Be! Ca Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt® Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® GMy Pu? Put Pu 
Tj? mT? Wa [Jolly Ku] Laks et safe ; 1Md? et seg”: Lo? arferftam ; Be? Ho Jo? wKt! 
BKtS La! sOx! oOr nPu! sPu° Tj! Tr! [me sh to] [Jolly Ret anfetas’; Na Ts as patha; wKt} 
*affarr; rMd? cMy ‘afar — c) Pus Pu’ ore; Lo! [but mc] TEX — d) Md? GMy Fey 
oat; cMd! deat afer af; Pu? Put dearg; cM agitfera; Madh “feta: nPul 
“Rerat; Pu “feta. Jo! ferfa:; Wa “fearfer 

372. Cited by Apa 857; Laks 12.587 — a) Pu> Pu’ Jeu; Be! oOr ama — b) oOr 3a; 
TMd 2a; BBe THATaG; Ox? aTHaraay; Pud Pu’ arafe; Jo2cMd! aad; mid‘ nPu! ares; 
MTr* mTr° aut — c) Pu Pu’ aaTeeaeyq; Bo Pu? Put “aaa; Apa "agar; Ke? “aeqer, nNg 
“geared, Hy “Sq: [om 4] — d) sKt> nPu! Pu2 Pud [Jolly M45] arareraeet Fa:; Ho Lo? 
NNg Tj? ae; Bowaeveda; Pud Pu’ aaeadey; oOr Fea; wKt TaeT; BBe La! Ox? Tj! 
Fae, Be! Waara: & Weed; Tr? ceed; Apa [vl] Waa 

373. Cited by Laks 12.589 — a) BKtS NNgMTr? MTr’ MedaeeehY ; Me recognizes the 
compounded form: aarauis aifeeierar; Ow daca hy” — b) Tr? reer; oOr PRAT; Ox} 
fesport — c) cMd! arearar; Lo ater; nNg ae; wKe eared; La! garat — d) Be! Bo wKt} 
nKtt BK Lo? Lo* Lo? GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd> GMy NNg sOx' sPu® Tj! Tr! Tr? austear; Pw 
Put querer; Pud Pu’ dager ad 

374.* Cited by Vij 2.286; Apa857; Laks 12.590; Dev 3.746;Mddh 3.318 — a) Lo' 3g; 
Md? aT; Lo? “Tat aT — b) TMd3 GMy suitet; NPul Saf; Lo? gd; tM‘ Fes; Bo 
“aaa; NK oMy Tr! mTr® Hraea; Puo “arfsert; T? “anfaard; Lo! “ATA — c) rMd?* 
ageargadad, wKe agaag ater; Pud Pu’ Volly G Nd] Jollyaya ay; wKt! BK Lo? 
cMd! +Md? GMd GMy NNg Pu? Pu? Put Pu’ Tr! Tr? MTr4 MTP MTr® Apa Madh oeenry ; 
akt ates, BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? NK Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ oOr sOx! Ox? Ox} nPu! 
sPuo Tj! Tj? Wa [Jolly M R] Vij Laks Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ayy Be! aqua La! 
amueasg ; nPu! aaagad ; Lo? cMd! tMd? cMy sOx! sPuS Tj! Tr! Jolly M G R Nd] 
“adder, wKt “Ader, Be! Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lot Ld PuS Pu? NNg Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS °ae- 


Chapter 8 735 


ae: Adee: Eq wacarter: | 

wee Afra qeat aoe sr arf URoull 
Hartt waqat F wesat AerhTat | 

fet asad Hate aber g seers ZWEI 
Saray F aAaT AAI THAT aE | 

fargat yeaersat areal at BerfHar NR owl 
aoe Mart seat fast Tat Tess | 
Tay TST VST: Asset AE ATA: URC 
Arret srorrer zest ararover fareftere | 
FART | afar qos: sroTarat WaT UFVel 


eft, nKe “adeaTgat — d) Madh Fat; BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K2 wKt} nKt! Lo! Lo} Lo! Lo’ 
oOr Ox? nPu! Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr? Vij Dev Yolly M G R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TH, Ox? 44; 
Pud Pu? Je:; wKt! BK a: 

375. Omitted in MTr3; pada-d omitted in Tj?. Cited by Laks 12591; Dev 3.747— a) Lo4 
Lo’ 33; Md? agger edave:; Lo! 1Md? cMd’ adere; Tj! zest; Be! sBBe? Hy Jm Jo! KP 
TMd3 GMd> Ox3 Tj? MTr? MTr* Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave &%: — b) sBe? La! sPuS Dev 
“Prafre:; wKe Prete; cMd! °Prétfirer:; cMd 5 cMy “fartteras:; rMd4 “Prétfirar:; Be! Wa 
“reer; Md} “Prato; aK’ “Preter: — c) cMy wear exPrarcarat; tMd4 age; 1M} aeeT; 
oOr ateT — d) wKt! HET; oOr Hea; Be! Hy Kt? FAT; BBe? Lo’ Pu? Put FET; Ox? Pwr Put 
MTré MTr® arefer 

376. Omitted in Ox? Tj*; padas a-b omitted in mTr>. Cited by Vij 2.286;Apa 857; Laks 
12.591; Dev 3.747; Madh 3.318— a) Dev Sta J Baar, Md? arereft; wKt! afe THT; BBe 
wey yat; Lot “ait, PuS Pu’ [Jolly G] qarat 728° — b) Laks Aaararfeta Pate; Madh 
adarer: gaeate; Vij Ftar ders Kt der; nKet “orffat — c) Be! gearard; Md? tMd4 ee- 
gat; Tr? art eveq: — d) *Md4 after Aeea>; Lo? oOr Tj! a; Ho Lo? cMd! aga, Pu’ ae- 
fear 

377. Cited by Vij 2.286; Apa857; Laks 12.591; Dev 3.747; Madh3.318 —— a) wKt? 7; 
MT Madh Vijf; Apa & AaF: Pu? Pui aaa, wKe afta — b) Bo HeMaT; La! sre — c) 
TMd? fagdt; Ke aia mTré 3gafescat— d) wKt! GMy 7; cMd! ar arftarfear 

378.* Padas b-d omitted in Lo! [haplo]. Cited by Vij 2.286; Laks 12.588;Mddh 3.317; 
padas a-b cited by Vij 2.81;Dev 3.741; andpadas c-d by Dev 3.745 — a) NKtt mTr? STE; 
wKt? S11; Jo? om atest; TMd4 qsaT — b) Be! sBBe Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt} La! Lo? 
Lo? nNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu® Tj! T? Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
qa fui; Ho 7a fay; Tj? TH; cMd assert; Be! Wa TaTRIT; Ox? Tr mTr® Ger TM? 
“Ee — c) Pu qusat:; La! Tr? que: — c-d) 1Md4 quemegq, eraaaT aH: — d) Tr? Bree 
ae; Lal ay 

379. Pada-a omitted in Lo!. Cited by Apa 681; Luks 12.588; Dev 3.293Mddh 1.399 — 
a) TMd? oOr FMTPae; wKe wea; BK Me Jha Dave Wray, La! smear, Me gives 
wraset as pathdntara; BBe? Bo [but cor] Jm wKt! GMd! tMd*4 GMd) age; Tr? avzar, Pu2 


736 Chapter 8 


TAG Mar sag sraTTaey ery | 
wead aff: gata aAUEAAATAT IRColl 
T Marrcargarterat Fererct afer 

Sea ae WaT ATT a aaT NRE 21 
Seaaq after gat det ar afet aaa | 


a MIATA agal qSeAsa: UFC RM 
Beet MAI BS TAT YH F a AAT | 
qarat afrafaant: areet & weer: WRC RN 


Pué quest; mTr3 gue — c-d)Madh gives instead 8.323a-b — d) oOr Jha Dave Woreataey; GMd> 
THY aT: 

380.* Cited by Apa 842; Laks 12.783; Dev 3.291; padas a-b cited by Vij 2.81, 3.257; Apa 
1079 — a) Md? STg; rMd4 aT, Pu? Put arerory — b) Ox? “arty aferd; Be! Bo Ho Jo? 
BKt Lo! Lot Lo’ GMd! tMd* GMd> oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? Pub sPuo Pu? Tr! mTr4 MTr mTr°Apa 
1079 Laks Dev “Sraaferd; rMd3 “oa fered; Wa “Tey orafeerd; cMy fera:; the reading 
aft is supported by Me Nd Go Ku — c) HosOx! sPuS Pu’ [Jolly M] Werett; aK rMd 
GMd° Ng MT? [Jolly Nd Greet; nKt4 wet a; Lo! Weert fe oMd! wert; Pu 
rere; wkt® “ee, Bo afé: — d) tMd3 aa; Wa aaetIT ; Pu Pu? “Af; Ho Lo? sOx! 
sPuo “Hert; mTr® “Hert, Tr? Rresct 

381. Cited by Vij 2.81; Laks 12.783; Dev 3.294 — a) Pu® aaMgat ; TMd? oMy ENC 
Pacer: wTr§ “Rarewit Bo “srarerst — a-b) Dev “AATEATATEL aTIaT; GMd! nNg Lo! * EAT 
+ at, Bel gat af; Pus Pu? “gate; La! Ox? ae are, tMd* "gait erent — b) 
BBe? Kt? wKt3 * gare, Hy “arerit; Ox3 arrest; La! oMd! 1Md? tMd4 cMd’ GMy Pu? 
Pu’ Tr! Tr? MTr® Volly Nd] Devfaae Fart; akt> Laks ofa foe, wKe g fafa — c) 
oMd> Dev TeATaet —- d) oOr aaa 7 fafa; nKe4 Arar ay Para; tM? HAA OT 

382. Cited by Vij 2.286; Apa857; Laks 12.588; Dev 3.747; Madh3.319 — a) La! 
aware; TMd4 Seaer; Be! JAT— b) La! Seat; nPul Seavey: M4; wKe a; La! afsrat; cMd! 
waa — c) nKtt Pu Pu’ om at; Hy at—— d) Bo aah; Laks Tery Ss wKt! La! Wa aéfer 

Additional verse in Be! nKt* La! NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu} Put Pu’ Mandlik [®, @, 7 7, 
a, ¢, 8, W, FT, %, &] KSS Dave; commented by Na@ Rc; padas a-b in Wa: 

atiat do teat a yet ae TTT | 
ays: Hea araeqeaareay |! 
a) NNg nPu! Pu? Put Wa 82a aT; Be! Pu’ Szurat — b) La! om aterm; Be! Ox? 
astt — c) Pu? Put & qe; Ox? 4 TA @s:; Be! Hague: 

383. Verses 383 and 384 transposed in Lo! oOr; padas a-b omitted in Wa. Cited by Vij 
2.286; Apa 856; Laks 12.588; Mddh 3.318; padas a-b cited by Dev 3.746 — a)rMd‘4 Tar; 
nKt? quel; GMy @e; La! aves; Lo? Md! oOr Tj! @eat — a-b) Ho sOx! sPus art qs — b) 
Pu? Put + arat; Be! nKtt 7A SH; rMd4 aA ae; GMd5 Fae; Tr! [but me sh] TA PA; BBe 
om @; Bo Lo GMd? mTr' asd; Lo at — c) Jha FETA; Dave FSIaT:; Ox? FEM; nKe 
afiar ; nNgnPu! Pu2 Put afar azat:; nNg aiferat Sear; rMd4 “Fear; Pu? “Pasiy — d) sBe? 
GMd! GM@ oOr sOx! Pu? sPu® Pu’ Geet; wKt! aTea; TMd? GMy [Jolly Nd] Vij Madh tee; 
Tr aed; rMd‘ weet FT; Vij Madh g; Ti t aH: e:; Md} cMy Fae 


Chapter 8 737 


aararnyarat der wsagat FA: | 

qr Hersey abet sear ar acl 

ST TRAST Yat aT AAT AT | 

ee WS ST: Sg Veet IAT WI C4 
mer tt: FE ATT AEA A Tearsy | 

aT mefteqrsrt & UT THeTHATE NICE 
wast fret cat: warat faa wae | 


384.* Omitted in NKtt Lo? Ox? Ox? Pu Pu? mTr® Wa; the verse is not commented by N&@ 
Bh— a) oMd afarat | TAA, td} “aTAT — b) Be! BCa Jo? GMy oOr Tj! Tr! Tr? Faz; 
La! dar; +Md4 Sam; Pu? dad; eBe? ar:; La! “aa; Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo} oOr Tji MT Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave “a, Pu? Put Tr! mT 19 ‘@ait; Jo? oOr Tj! G4; Pu’ H7: — c) La! HAUT; Be! 
qa, sBBe wKt! Barr; nPu! que; oOr aeafraea, Bo Ho Hy Sm Jo! wKt! Kt? Lo* Lo® 
@Md! GMd) 0Or Tj? MT? Mandlik Jolly KSS Trea; wCa “freer; Be! Lo’ sOx! sPuo Tj! Rn 
“aerated; tMd? FE [om FT] — d) cMd! afre; Lo’ afaa; Pu Put ave wa; nPu! aver Us; 
tMd! aaa; La! avexéfer; Bo Lo® sOx! nPul sPuo Pu’ 7; Ho g; Be! fe; cMy® 

385. Omitted in Lo*. Cited by Apa 856, Laks 12.589; Dev 3.745; pada-d cited in Vij 
2.294 — a) wKt! anf; Bo Lo! Tr! Apa [vl] 498; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt? oOr T? Tr? 
Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave KSS 3PraaeT; oOr sOx! sPuo *arsTRit — a-b) Md! 1Md4 
[Jolly M] Rataeye: efter: afasr [rMd* “astdt] — b) Bo Isat; Ox? Apa [vl] Gsrar 
aT ; Jo? wKt! nKt! BKtS La! Lo? Lo nNg Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? mTrémTr5 MTrS Wa 7;8Ca 
Ho oOr sOx! sPuS J; TMd3 GMy Sgrery; tM? GMy Put Tr! mTr‘ MTr® Dev astqT— c) Tj! 
avea; sOx! sPu® a0s:; TMd? mTr® 40g;BCa nKt‘ La! Lo! NNg Pu} Pu’ Tr? mTr°? Apa aI&t:; 
oMd! qvear: &: — d) Devase ATH BTA; oOr Het; cMds TT ; La! Pu Tr? aT 
feat; Lo! Put careast feat, GMd! carararr feaa:, rMd4 caren Rat, Bo aren: Bd; Pus 
Pu’ [Jolly G] fea: T}? “Raat 

Between padas a-b and c-d, BKt adds: fayePrafaeys: arama otasr{ [see above 
variant for 385 padas a-b]. 

Additional verses in Pu? [omits last half verse] Put Mandlik [€, ©] KSS Dave: 

qarciaatara yaa Patera | 
awit quengd gor 7 are dude 1121 
wats F AGT Fa HATT | 
aa qvuend fat mere Sra 121 
aratgefeaeccar F arer afsar far: 1131 
1. b) KSS “Stars } — c) Pu? Pu! averger 
2.) THT Merged FT 

38%. Cited by Laks 12.600 — a) oOr FST; Be Ox? AT AST; Tr? AAT; Wa SAAT; Bo 
pCa La! mTr° get — b)cMy ear are + faere; Pud Pu’ "efter, TMd3 GMdS “eater; mT rt mT 
Seuss, oOr gear — c) cMy lacuna for whole pada; rMd? 4 ETATeRe awe; GMd! + aTreT- 
earsat; GMd5 arate; Lo! sOx! Put Wa Jha Dave “aveeit; cMd5 “guest; mTr° “eusgr; tMd4 
* US HeT — d) BK tr; tTMd4* THT cMy BHT wk aear 





738 Chapter 8 


AAIET BATA Be Ae aMeHT: UFC 
shat aeasanrsat anet fla arate | 
Wh BIS T AMIS: WT WaT MFC 


a ara a fat a eft a gare | 
AAT UAT FIST: Batter TE USCA 


arg faordtat ert faacat fer: | 

av fagangat et Rratifecatart: RS ol 
QUENT WaT: BE ITPA: 
areat waraeaTal eaert sferaraareg 38 21 
wifes a wearer faarfefasr | 
aetariraant seats ATTHT RS 21 


387. Padas c-d ma in Lo’. Cited by Laks 12.600 — a) GMd! 1Md4 wat & Fae; BBe? La! 
GMd? oOr Fae; Ox? Frretatar; Ho sOx! Pu? sPuS Pu’ Tr? Parerarst; Tj! tat; mTr‘mTr® Catt 
— b) Bo faut wrt; Pud as: — c) La! TP atest SeeTaMe, Pul araTer Beery; pBe? 
akd aap, cMy aatsaay, Hy asTeay; aK) Wa SISTA; Bo sOx! sPu® Tj! Saray; 
Lo? taTery; cMd! rMd3 cGMd? GMy [Jolly Nd Gr] @ersay; aBe Pu’ aersay; mTr4 mTr® 
wearer FT; Tr! aereyg; Be! ypery — d) Ho La! war-we 

388. Cited by Apa 837; Laks 12.368 — a) GMy TRUS; wKt! “Tea, WK om BAT 
—b) Me ane seer; mT apg sa wets; La! awe ar aefeasir afe; Pub arsarar- 
feast; BBe? wKt} Lo’ cMd! [Jolly M] asagfera; wKt! areraferas; Tj! Jolly R] wafers; cMy 
[Jolly NdJJolly aferaz; Pu? afersit; Ho Tr! @ aeferaz; Pu’ Pu? om wastage — c) cMd? arf; 
1Md} GMy [Jolly Nd] @TAgE [GMy ae ]; TMd4 “ace; wKt! aT — d) GMy mTré aaiteue; 
BBe? oOr Taraver:; wKt! watever: final TAA om in BK and ma in Lot NNg 

389. Cited by Apa 823 — b) 1Md! om aréfa — c) Tj! sifa ara; TMd? TAT 
1Md4 array, — d) Pu’ Pu’ usr Get aah Iz; BBe? Bo nNg Tj! UST; BBe? @vSe:; Bo TP? 
aus:; Laks Apa @2t:; *Md3 My arathy 

390. b) Be! Bo BKt cMy Tj? @Tat; nKt' GMd> Me Hrd; oOr BMT seat; cMds tagcat 
— c) Md! arfagesarent; sOx! sPuo + gar; nKei a fawarsr; ake 7 fasitaat FT; Lot Lo’ 
aar, Tr! aArt; Md} cMd5 cMy ave — d) Pu’ [Jolly G] Frettarcrat fed; Md} faestrate- 
are: ; pBe? 7 Farait’; cMy Prasaifec ; Ho Prati a’; nKt4 Lo? GMd! Wa Are 

Addtional verse in Lo4 Lo’: 

arevet f oe avercghadtafe: | 
av Sarodt seq wtcatavrs safer | 
d) Lo’ attatarry 

391. a) Jol waite Md? AarreTet: Lo? “FaTensweyT, Lod “AarRrarat — c) Be! areas; 
BCa wKt} aes; La! ated; Jo? Lod area; Tj! arate; Ke Pu! yarvenrat; rMd4 vartaeey, 
Tr? waaay, MT ré mTr® ware; 7Md? GMy WIA are, oMds Wa dart — d) Lo® 
Wea 


x 


392.* Cited by Apa 835; Laks 12.562 — a) Ho wKt? BKt® Lo! Lo® GMd! tMd* GMd> Ox? 


Chapter 8 739 


ster: wher ay aftercare | 
aaa far avait feeq Aa Area 139 Sl 
went ae: Toadt ager erfarer a: | 


ahrrgrgda T ara: wakreway Fe vil 
cifrt onfirarat a arererahiery | 


RTS T UAT ATTATAT NASM 
Teitheas emer ARwraae: we: 
a a arate arathhieta a avery URE 


Pu’ Tj! Tr? mTr* MTr> MTr® Wa Me Jha Dave gfeadear ; oOr fifetear’ oMy sfeaeargaeit; 
BKt La! Lo} “zeae, Lo? ‘yaar, tMd‘4 “qaer, cMd “yaaa; BBe {| — b) Pu? Beart; t™Md4 
peat, cMd! year fare ; nPu! foarte; Pud Tr? feafaest. Bo frags: nNg safer fer: — 
c) Be! aetadt aafeast; Lo! aeét sit srafeasy; Lot srafarsirar ; 7Md4 aarersit ; Pu2 te 
ait; TMd? GMy STRATA; oMd! “ata; Tr? store? fast: Kt’ asia; Volly M8 G 
Ku] Jolly “afeait, Ox? “afar — d) NNg ne, oOr Araae:; La! arta 

393. Omitted in sOx! [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.562 — a) Lo! arr anrer:; Bo aRrr: 
ant: — b) cGMy om wf; Bo Ho qa; nK¢t Pu? afer; 1Md? Wa; oMy afer; wKt! nKe 
“pay Hs; La! Lo! Ma oMy et aaa; wkKe “Htraa; Pu? Pu’ Pud sPuS Pu? Tr! 
MT “HIS; Bo NNg FRR — c) wk ae; Lo’ tat; La! (YT; Bo at; TM? ater, 
Lo? Tj! @ — d) tMd} GMy Polly Nd] @e ta sas, MT Seta ATTH:;BCa Hy Jo! 
wKt! Lo! Lot Lo’ NNg oOr Pu Pu? Tj? Tr? Volly M G] fer, Lo? Bea; Kt? BVATAT; wBe? 
aeparaas; La! arfttar 

394. Pada-d ma in Lo’. Cited by Laks 1191 — a) GMy 9@:; Tr! mTr So: ; BK SA; 
oMd! wg: dreet:; Be! fiz”. tMd3 “aft; nKt “acat; sBe? “sat — b) Pus ate; Laks FAST: ; 
Kt? waret; wKt! erfee g; Md} aferer; Pud Pu? afar; oOr Bfaeer; Tr? om a: — c) 
oMd! snrrearcaagey, Laks MIT seer; Md aay wT Be; wKe! aTPrTBatreT, Bo 
anfrargrepdter — d) cMd! deter; Be! pCa Jo? nKt* Lo! tMd3 GMa GMy Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr! 
ara; Tr mTr® ereat; Tr? area; Md? aree aah; Me Ku Nd Re support the plural; Rn Mr 
Go support the singular; rMd? cGMy [Jolly Nd] safes. GM@ Safreat: Bo Hafacre; wk 
“eat: BBE “SPOT 

395. a) BK ear waray FT; wk} APA; [Jolly M G] anferard; Pud Pu’ carter; 
TMd! earferrat — b) Jolly M89] ategaareatad; Te “garth; Md “garat; rMd? 
*aeat & farar; wKt! BKtS Lo! 1Md4 cMd? nPu! “fra; Pu? Put Per; GMy “art —c) Tr? 
nerpena at; Hy ater ; Lo! “afer; Lal “Sr ard; Ma “efereert — d) Bo ayer aar 

396.* Omitted in Tj*. Cited by Vij 2.238; Apa 823; Laks 12.526; Madh 3.311 — a) GMy 
areal; tM seater; Pu? Put ae ; Be! Bo Ho Kt! Lo? cMd! tMd4 NNg oOrsOx! nPu! 
Pud sPuo Pu? Wa [Jolly M G] Apa Laks Madh “aTeHe; sOx! sPuo “ans; NK Bwa; MT 
Tr hed: eR; Ho ssesit — a-b) Lol area HS caeTaG sassy aT T— b) 
GMd! +rMd? tMd* GMd? GMy La! Ox?nPu! Tr! Tr? MTr*mTr> MTr® [Jolly M Gr Nd] Vij Apa 
Madh Prsargraif acre: [ocMd! earar’; Pu! Peater?: mTr¢ Tro Preater’: +Md3 ase]; 
sBe? Pu? Put Wa AMI; Bo Fre ; Tj! Aer; nK eae; Pus afrer’: Hy 
Sfwaese: — c) Jo? Tj! af; Be! ta — d) La! oOr Pu Put Prieta; cMd> “Briers; Tr? 


740 Chapter 8 


AGATA BMI FATIH | 

AAS AAATAT BTA Taga TAT NVI 
YRIay ETer: savas: | 

eyed aarrey vat falar qat ete Re cll 
Tat: Teareravetier afar air a 
afer recat arr Adare ety: NFS 
generat aRecrarey matawat | 

Praradt & teat Tease Uo oll 
amr fate emer aa afer | 
fart adavarat areaanafamar itso ei 
GSaat WATT Ta WasA at aa | 

Sait Bat WTAE AT: Ivo Rll 


“Ra A; Lo? “Sits; GMd! tMd4 Laks Ot fara; Ox? Fark areal 

397. Padas c-d omitted in BKt’. Cited by Apa 785; Laks 12.524 — a) Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] 
aaa: Te TAIT Lolly G “AT]; Bo om aT; La! AgaTAT: Jo? Lo? Tj! arat; La! Lo! [but 
cor| tMd4* GMy mT [Jolly Nd]aarme; tMd? aarHoT; Bo aa — b) Pud Pu’ aeaTew- 
qerferay; 1Md3 cera ; ™Md? cMy oOrsOx! sPuS mT? Nd worferas, Lo! Md4 “verfeas; 
[Jolly Nd] tranftas, wk} “rerftras — c) oOr art; tMd* adit; Lo’ adart — d) Tr? are, Lo} 
Tj! rear; Pu? Put gare; Pu’ Pu’ gteferay. cMd! &:; Bo at 

398. Padas a-b omitted in BKt’. Cited by Apa 833; Laks 12.518 — a) Bo Lo? Tj! ae: 
Lo! “eat g; Tr? “ert gzrer:; Be! wares: — b) Md? adfee ; 1Md4 “oer; rMd4 Wa 
“feraert:; Pu’ “frserst:; Tj? “Rraeqr:; Jo? Laks *Ferarrear: —c) Be! Lo? tMd* oMd5 Tj! 
BIA, Ho Bfet; Lo? wet, Pub HAT, cMd> aarresy — d) rMd4 AAT; Jo? Lo} Tj! [Jolly R] 
Beat: 

399. Omitted in GMy Pu®. Cited by Laks 12.516 — a) Be! cMd! tat; wKt! year: Lo! 
FIT ; Bo ReaTaTey aTueThey — b) TMd? afcrtgtf; Pu’ Pu? om 7; nPu! Pu? Put J — c) sOx! 
sPuo aTFY Seay; TMd? GMd aR, La! rMd4 FRERA; BBe? BK ASAT; OOr Freed — d) 
Md} sOx! Ox? sPu’ aatere; Tr! [but me sh}eaos; wKt! FFeT:; Be! Pu2 Pu3 Put Tr? Wa 
[Jolly G] TI Sta; Pu? TA Aa 

400. Omitted in PuS; padas c-d omitted in GMd! [haplo] — a) Bo Lo® Tj! aE ; cM 
qm; Ox? Pu? Put “ert; La! “ert; tMd3 afte” — b) tMd4 cmd cMy “septs; GMd! om 
ferret [jumps to 4o1d, haplo]; Be! “faa, Ng feat, sKe “fret; Md? “fawar — c) KS 
wear; wKt! deat — d) Be! BBe tM} “ToTAEAA, Pu? “aT; oOr Forme; Pu? Put “apr 
eH, GMa “Toray TH 

401. Omitted in GMd! [up to BRAT]. Cited by Apa 827;Laks 12.516 — a) BK 314; 
cMy om Prt; Lo! oMd Prt; sBe? sOx! Pud sPu® Apa Pert — b) Hogs — c) Pu’ Pu’ 
[Jolly G] faare; oOr Rata — d) sBBe? Tr? “fast; wKe! TH att, tM? “farmer 

402. Omitted in Lo* Lo Jolly M*>}. Cited by Vie. 251; Apa 827; Laks 12.517; Madh 
3.315 — a) ApaMadh TRRTY BATA; Md? “UPIET — b) Vij Apa Madh TH BT TAT 7A; 


Chapter 8 741 


ger art wdhart ad aremegqafereasy | 

weg weg UT ATaT gata WaT Ivo Rll 
TH ITT AT aH Teatseao aT | 

are ager ater oraret firme: FATT sox 
arses arate art are area: | 
Ramis afeekr gates: Wyo 
fateatr qareat wares att wag | 
adtetity ager age atta waterz lls og ll 


Ho sOx! sPuS aur get aar ae, TMd4 ITH; BBE Bo wKt! BKt® TMd3 TMd4 GMy NNg oOr 
Ox? nPu! Pud Pu? MTr> MTr® [Jolly M Nd] 9& @ar 7a; Pu2 Pus Put array; Laks TAT — c) 
La! @dfer; Md! SAT, Tr Wat; TMd3 Ba; NNg TVG, wKe! yerex — d) Pud Pu’ [me to] 
“et HeuTer ; Tr? “et aaeew ; Tj! “set wer’: mTr4 MTr® HETSeIT Ox? “apher’ ; Td 
oMy Heer eat; aKtS eat, cMdS “RaTTar 

403. *Omitted in Lo* Lo? [Jolly M4]. Cited by Apa 825;Laks 12.517 — a) tMd? 
gore sfeaid; Be! nKt? coMd! GM@ GMy Pu’ Pu’ gararr; La! gar; nKtt nPul gfe — 
b) Lo? GMd! +Md3 tMd4 GMd? GMy Tr! MTr’mTr5 mTr° Yolly Nd] Na ad Uraeferd [rMd3 
ad, Md‘ ad; cGMd5 cMy ‘zed, gloss of Bh UTySHSa supports this reading; Jo Lo? Tj! 
Tj? Volly RTE sATegTaR; oOr Volly M8] ata: BT’; Be! Ho BK sOx! Ox? nPul Pu2 
Pui sPuo Beq ; BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} nKtt nNg Pu’ Te mTr? Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave & Brey Lo! a] ereaqe’: La! BATS ; Apa Laks * aged; sOx! sP uo 
“araferd; Lo! “aaafard; Hy “artiferd — c) Tom 3 — d) oMd’ Fata TF BTCA; Pud Pu’ 
aerger oer; sBBe? Ho wKt! nKt* La! sOx! sPus mTr5 grant 

404. Omitted in Lo* Lo’ [Jolly M**]. Cited by Vij 2.263; Apa 834; Laks 12.789 — a) Bo 
Ho nKt* Lo! a4; Be! rMd‘ Pu5 Pu? art; Pu’ STH; BBe? cMd! GMy are; Be! ax; sOx! 
sPuS ae; Hy Pu? Put Pud Pu’ Tj? ae; Be! Ho nKfi La! GMd! GMd® GMy oOr sOx! sPu® mTr® 
Re Wa; MT? aver; TM d3 ares: — b) Lo! Saree era; Md‘ creat gr eed; Be! wKt! 
oMd! Vij Apa Fear, Pu’ Pu? TdT; BBe? Bo Ho Jo? nKt' BKt® La! Lo? rMd3 GMy sOx! sPuS 
Tj! Wa Volly RN Nd] Re Jolly Ste; tM? Trea ; Ox? Pu? “ITT; Bo Jo? BK La! Lo? Lo? 
Pu? Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G]Laks Apa @%; 0Or Pu> TP? Wa ae:; GMd! MTP’ Fe; GMy A; MTr? mT r® 
We:; TMd3 ae:; Be! [Jolly M]At:; Ho nKt* Be:; sOx! sPuo Ber:; GMd5 et:; Pu? Put sea; 
[Jolly Nd'] € — c) Jo? Lo} Tj! we sag Aftreyq; Pus Tr? we wT wgqanfrer; Jha Dave We; 
Puf oat; Lal 9a ; Ke FAST; oOr WY; TMd? GMy alftrer — d) Bo GMd orate; cMd! 
fecna; nPu! Put feenct:; Tr! Pefeeras:; tMd4 yenee:; Apa feet: TAT 

405. Omitted in Lo* Lo [Jolly M*°]. Cited by Vij 2.263; Laks 12.789 —— a) Lo! 
“quifrarenhy; Pud om aratht; Md? ara; Pu? Put ary — b) M4 Talaenfy area; sOx! 
sPuo aretrentt ae:; Jo? Lo? tMd3 Tj! az; La! arat; sBe? erat; wKt! rat; cMd! 4m; Ho 
oOr afeer:; BKt> ada: GMy CHAT; TMd3 Gt: — c) Tj? Tr? wh: BBe freer’: +Md?* qh _ 
d) oOr Jara: aafe”. cMd! +Md? Ox? Pu? Tr? gafeer of"; Be! Hy Lo! “zea: 

406. Omitted in Lo* Lo’ [Jolly M**]. Cited by Laks 12.789 — a) K¢ Lo! Pu‘ dea, 
La! mT étetea fy; Lo? drateafy;, Md‘ dtatf a; 7Md3 cMy aed; Bo °aat — a-b) MT 
wares aes Aa — b) Ho La! Lo! GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd5 GMy sOx! Ox? Pu? Put 


742 Chapter 8 


wR g arate vara afr: | 
warn fataaa a aramakta at nvovll 
aartr fefrerrat fasittararac: | 
Aaa AAA AANTET TAA Aa: Uso Lil 
uy arnkrary staereer roe: | 
arated share arta fre: teoeit 
atime arise gate faa a | 

agar war da ser ye feorararq Us 2 oll 
afer ta ter a aramit afeefiray | 
ferret ware aattir area iy 2 21 


Pud sPuo Pu? mTr4 aeateprereey; mT ro Geese BK? oOr WUATHTSTaA; Pu? Pul ae; Be! Ae 
— c) NNg Adidtteaaee; wKt! oMd! aétaty, ake aati aS"; wKe La! GMd® PuS Pu’ Tr? 
mTr® afgelrt — d) oOr TAs; Md4 arf wert; GMd> Herr 

407. ma in Lo'. Cited by Vij 2.263; Laks 12.789 — a) nPu! Jfaeft; Be! Bo La! Lot Lo’ 
GMd! 1Md? +Md4 cGMd5 cMy Pu? Pué Tj! fearanfe aear; Pu? warenfe ar [mc feararfe]; Tr! 
fgnranté aar; oOr ararazerar — b) cM d! warfsra?; rMd3 cMdS Waste; Tr? waferat — c) 
+Md‘ avert — d) Be! tMd‘ Put arereat’; GMd! rMd@3 Tr? “eta; wKt! “eaftas; Bo 
“earhetr; nKt Raat; MTD eanfaray; Pu? HE; Pud [Jolly G]Be; Vij WE: 

408. Cited by Laks 12.790 — a) Md‘ aT ATfe; oOr Fare; wBe? Tathe; mT v4 mT ro Fah 
fRr°; tMd3 GMd> GMy aeaft PPT ; Be! [but mc] Ca Ho Jo! Kt? sKt’ La! Lo! cMd5 nNg 
sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pus sPu’ Pu? Jolly M8? Nd] ‘@Taat; cMd! “grarat; 1Md4 “aTaTat — b) 
wKt! faster’ ; BKt? aefttar ; tMd? fafsretar Tr? “aera; Md} afer: — c) Pu? [Jolly 
G] 7aTeé: Wet Tq; Be! Ca Ho Kt? BKt> La! NNg NPu! Pu? Put [Jolly M8? Nd] aeraea; 
MTS Tera; Md4 aur Ata; sOx! sPus areata; Te arta ; oOr Werte — d) cMd> 
ear, wKe eaatlerct:; wKt! La! geitare:; Be! eaciiarer:; rMd3 cratiara: 

409. Cited by Laks 12.790 — a) Lo’ UE at; wKO Lo! nPul atarfar’; GMy ara ; 
tMd! erate — b) Bo Baerer; Laks “erefarta:; Wa “era: — c) pCa Ho Jo! BKtS 
La! Lo? NNgsOx! nPu! Pud sPuS Pu? [Jolly M8 Nd]@TaT ; sBe? Md? ear; *Mdé @arr ; Pu? 
Pud daar; Lal “orersredt; Pu2 “urerede; GMd! tMd3 aMy “granary; Kt? “edt; rMd4 
“ett — d) wKt3 Lo? 2aay; 1Md4 aay; Tj? 2f8as; Be! Bo Ho wKt! Kt? tMd! fave: 

410. Padas c-d omitted in BKt. Cited by Laks 12.776 — a) GMd! mTr® “Sar: b) Ho 
wKt! Kt? La! Pu’ Pu’ afte; sBe* Bite; nPu! Ea; Be PIAA; Pud Pu’ Hftea; wKt> sOx! 
sPu® Tr? at — c) Tr? vertr; cMd! werent — d) La! agqgfe fererat; wKt! are; 1Md3 GMd5 
GMy Tr! Laks tet, mTr* mTré Yel eter; Hy wk} Pud 3%; cMd! rMd* gET; Be! festATAT 

411.* Omitted in BKt’. Cited by Apa 789; Laks 12.397; Dev 3.462, Madh 3.244 — a) 
sPu® om — b) Madh sersafreitd; cMd! stair; Be! sBe Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? 
wK#} oOr sOx! Pu? sPu® Pu’ Laks Madh Jolly “f84¥; La! +Md4 oMd® “affa: — c) cMd! Tj? 
Tr? “stat — d) Md! Pu? Put af; cMd> &raifer; Bo Jm Jo! Jo? wKt nKt* Lo? Lo? [cor to] 
Lo? GMd' GMd> Pu® Tj! Tr! folly Go M4 Ku R] Ku Nd Mandlik KSS Dave 61a; T? 
PRA; MIP Bea: 


Chapter 8 743 


ae FT BAMA Hat: Aeparhaary | 
Sree: ATAACITE UT AIST: TATA TE MUS YAM 
We I Baers marwtaya ar | 

qraraa fe qesal water eeyar is 231 

wT rattar fgets qet qrenfayerct | 
faaatt f& aner eeaerraantefe ily evil 
casa WMHsat TET: Baar | 

QRret qesaraa GA areata: US La 

Wat GHA ATA WT Ware: SAAT: | 


412, Omitted in BK. Cited by Apa 789; Laks 12.397; Dev 3.463; Mddh 3.244 — a) Pub 
Pu’ [Jolly G] aT eet @reaerne; wKkt! eet; Tr creat; mTorr; Tj! a; Be! K? eragnte; 
BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jo? La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo’ tMd4 NNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu’ sPuo Pu’ Tj! 
Tr? Wa wreaerrg; Md? GMd> GMy Dev Laks Madh Apa PRAANEE; MTP BRITE; Bo 
“Sra; mT Bree — b) tMd3 areror separ fear: Wa weet — c) La! atéfer wyCay; sOx! 
sPuo afreeet:; Pub afaferd:; Na [patha] WaTzeate; cMd! Tj! srataeqr; cMy WaTaea; Pu’ 
Pu? waracat; mT oaacata; GMd> mT 1S Waa; nPu! Pu? Pu‘ wad; TMd3 Wate; rMdé Tr! 
Taratalt; Be! yaa; BBe? Ho wKt! nKt* oOrsOx! Ox? Pu} sPuo Tr? Na TY; Wa TAT HT 
— d) nNg Tr! [but cor sh] att; Tj! G57; Bo mTr® avs:; wKt! nKt* Lo! Md! nNg Pu8 wTré 
Laks Dev &&:; Tr? aT: 

413. Omitted in Tj?; padas a-b omitted in BKt>. Cited by Apa 789; Laks 12.397; Dev 
3.463; Madh 3.244 — a) sBe? MTr* Ae; GM@ om F; Tj! “ere. mT rt EUS — b) Md} Hta- 
faaitate; Be! Bo T— c) Md? aaa Ber FS aay; La! om fe; cMy gare. mir ger, 
sOx! sPuo yceeq — d) Be! BKP La! Lo* Lo’ GMd! GMd’ NNg Ox? Wa [Jolly M] Laks Dev 
Madh aaa aayar; Jo* wKt! Lo? arerorra+r 

414. Cited by Apa 786; Laks 12.389 —- a) GMd! earftar ta Pfeeey [om a]; Tr? Tet 
Prag’; Put Apa Prafegere; ake fraet ar; Be! pCa wKt! wKt} La! oOr Pu> Pu’ mTr4 
Tr [Jolly G] Pagar; +Ma fageate; Tj! Peat; Lo! g gerat— b) sKt> arene’; La! 
oOr sear — c) pCa Ho nKtt sOx! sPuo Pravtor af cer; ake Frases; Tr? om f; Be! 
Pus Te at wer; Tj! weer; Pu’ grey — d) GMd! rMd3 +Md* GMd5 GMy mTr*mTr° Bet 
aenterrada, mir peterenredtete; oOr Heard area; Laks “HTaertefa; NKt! La! sOx! 
sPuo  THaTefa; Pu! “agerdteta; Apa “a outefer 

415. Cited by Vij 2.181; Apa 789;Madh 3.240— a) wKt! Lot eased; wKt) easy; 
Bo Pu’ Pu’ ested; GMy esa}, Md? castrate, sOx! sPu’ GATT; Lo! aarsitga’; nKtt 
gered; wKt! Hwee; Be! “erat; aks “great — a-b) oMd! amtefer feat yout wmaret TE 
fest: — b) Pud Pu’ Tj! TEs; *Md3 Fesr:; ak PagTat; wk Hafafarit; Lo? Hreaearqar; aMd4 
cMé& nPul Pué “arferit; Pud Pu? “aga; Bo Lo! 1Md3 “aferat — c) pBe? Bo Jo? wKt! wKt 
Lo! tMd? nNg wPu! Tj! Tr! mTr° Vij Apa YEH; Ho sOx! sPuo HET, Be! Hast; BKO TIFT; 
oOr SRT; wKt! La! “arerr; Apa ‘aI; wKt> “erreit — c-d) cMd! Hraerefrad Preve- 
art & wad: — d) Bo sOx! sPu® Apa SAAT; nKt aaa FT: 


744 Chapter 8 


ad waka FET A aT Ta US LEM 
fester TAIT: Wate FATIMA | 

a fe aentte fired vderteat fF a: lve 
Saat waat caf waiter are | 

at fe wat cathe: attraenfe sure is eci 
HETeAIN BAleairaeaty 7 | 

aera wt Praararerrearrat aT US 23 

Ud Aaary UAT ATENTAATTTT | 

arate fetter ad sratfer aeat afery soll 


416. Omitted in Lo’. Cited by Sab 6.1.12 — a) wKt! HTat ered BEAT; sOx' sPu® aray:; 
Jo? Lo? Tj! Sab sreaea eT — b) Sab Freier: af wa J; Lo! aa war’; Be! Md‘ waren; La! 
oMy Pu? Pus wae; wKt} UasaT:; NNeg [but cor fh] Tareat — c) Lo! Ua AA: Be! TT ay 
Lo? arf” — d) Jo? Lo? GMd! 1Md3 tMd4 GMa GMy Tj! Tr! mTr® weta; Hy Fer SaTST; 
TMd3 cer & Ae 

417. Cited by Laks 12.393 — a) TMd‘ fagrel aTerregst; Be! Bo Ho Jo! Kt? wKt? Lo? 
GMd! sOx! sPu® Tj! mTr° Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fraet;tMd3 GMd GMy Tr! [but cor sh] 
mTr* mTr® Polly Nd] feereeit; Pu3 Frais, Kt? cMd ! rMd? aaT; Lo® aar:; mTr® Be: — b) 
Md} aver ; Je Lo? Ox? Tj! “aTet; Wa “aéte — c) TMd* Heater — d) wKt! were; 
nKt* mTr* MTS adurl ; Md} Md aaaratest; cMd! “erate 

418. Cited by Laks 12.776 — a) Bo Lo Wa 31; wK “Yat; ™Md4 “Yar:; NNg J Jat 
— b) Lo’ cMy afr — c) Lo? Tj' at at J @; Te at wat F a; Bo Wal, rMd! sOx! 
wapeee:, wKt! sree: mT? aa d) Jo! Aus’ Pus Pu’ [Jolly G] eraeatae; tMd4 
wreaths, 

419. a) TP aeuedtadterdt — b) Lot Lo’ Md3 Md* oMy @atet are; Tr? waifer are 
Bo qt ae; wKt! watt arent — c) Tj! waren’; Be! BKt? Lot Lo® Ng Wat aaa 
[ake fe]; La! see eps.” . Tj? Preare’; 1M! Pract are. Tr yeaa — d) La! Pract 
yee cMy “aTeaTe Br: cMd! mTr® “STERIGBRIAT La! Tr? “serra, NNg “ert Ur 

420. Not commented by Re. Cited by Mddh 3.396 — a) Jo! asaT — b) Bo nPu! “STAT 
gad; Lot Lo TMd3 cGMd PuS Pu? “STATI; aK ATATTS; Be? ATA; BCa ATA; 
oMy mT r’mTro nt at; 1Md? “ATTA — c) La! atawerdt Pet; Be Lo! aa; wKe 
BKt} Lot Lo’ GMd! tMd? cGMd5 NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu’ Tr! mTr‘ MT r® Wa Gomeae; 
oMy #g@a — d) tMd3 GMd5 GMy Tr! [but me sh] mTr* MTr® Yolly Nd Gr] Sater FETT; 
Lal ao sosifer cet afer 


Chapter 8 745 


pio asic 
GeaRTASAS aT: | 


Colophon: Be! Lo! Lo? Md} oOr sOx! Ox? sPu eft afaTae, wk) ype; wktS Md! 
tMd3 GMy MTr4 mTr® om aayitenrar afearat; Lo! “arnate; wKe} om afearay; wKt! Lo! 
SEMA TIENT ATATSHT; NNg Sfscrar arate fota: arfeneafaart  ateareary: ATE; 
Be! “sed eaaererearareen: 


[aaatseara:] 


gener arate aet ante ferwat: | 
eant faraint a eraterearfr aeaary 8 
seat: ferr: erat: get: Affararz | 
fat aoATaTaT Gea Tea aT URI 
frat waft atart wat cafe ata | 
Taker exfat gar at ett earaearehe U3 i 
wresaray rar area arerargraeate: 


aa wa yoegq arent argeeferar si 


1.* Cited by Laks 12.601; Dev 3.561 — a) Lo! Md‘ oOr nPu! Pu? Put Jeu; BKé Tr? 
geufer’; La! Lo} tMd4 oMy sOx! sPuS Tj! Te Tro feaerata; Lo? Sta — b) Ho wKt! Ke? 
wKe BKt} Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot tMd? TMd4 GMd? sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pue sPu® Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? 
MTré MTPMTr® KSS &; NK tt GMd! GMy Tj? aT; Wa oF; sOx! sPul fercear; rMd‘ ferec:; 
oOr fated — c) aCa wKt! Gant FT fear a; Te aart wary; cMd! fawartt [oma] — d) Lot 
TMd‘ wNg [Jolly M] of aes arpa 

2.* Cited by Vij 2.295 [intro.]; Laks12.601; Dev 3.562; Madh 3.322 — a)mTr® "RET; 
Tj! fever: — b) Lo? geu:; rMd4 get; tM} gor enfear — c) Be! BBe Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
Kt? BK Lo? Lo? Lot NNg nPul Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu? Pu® Tj! Tj? Te Wa Vij Laks Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS Dave favag a asaret: [KO feraacaft; Jo? Lo? Tj! TasaFeT:]; wKe} feta; mTr4 
asa: wKt “Aer; cMd! “ATT; oMd’ GMy ‘AT 7; Ox? ATATedT: — d) Lo! Fey: Be 
Ho Jo? La! sOx! sPu’ Laks “apaterat; [Jolly Nd] STAT; Hy Ké wNg Pu Pu’ MT Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave 3A; Put wait; Md4 Fare 

3. Cited by Laks 12,602; Dev 3.564; Mddh 2.286; padas a-b cited byDev 3.574, and 
pada-d by Vij 2.136 — a) Lo? Wa STTR;rMd4 ratte — c) Jo? wKt? Lo? TMd? GMd> cMy 
Tj! Tr! mTr4 Tr MTr° [Jolly R Nd] Laks Madh Jaregq eafae are [MT gate; wKe wafer; 
TMd3 GMy Tr! MTro @afeet; MT Baraat]; Ke Lo? Lot Wa @mfae; La! Pud Pu’ Tr? Bae, nKt! 
ear are 

4.* Cited by Laks 12.604 — a) Kt? arf; wKe @re:; aK @rSécder; Hy om aay; Be! 
areay, BBe: Bo BCa Ho Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} wKt® Lo! Lo® Lo? rMd? sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? Put 
PuS sPuo Pu’ Pu Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave Ira, oOrareay; La! eat — 
b) Be! arepar’; Lot arerat ; BBe? Bo sCa Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? wKt Lo! Lo? Lo’ 
TMd sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? Put Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave 
areral ; wKt! arepar ; oOr aTeaeMy ; Lo? “qyazete; wKkt! “qeraeafer; Pus “qaewerfer:; 1Md3 
“qaferg: — d) Be! areit arger erat; La! area; sBe? Bo Ca Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKkt! Kt? wk 
wKt? Lo! Lo? Lo? Md? sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? Put Pu’ sPu® Pu’ Pu Tj! Tj? Te Wa Laks Mandlik 


746 


Chapter 9 747 


genase wager: erat wear feared: | 
wate Goat: arearaegeehtar: Uk 
ga fe adantat watt etry | 
aad Uae aah way gor arr uci 
eat sate afta a ETAT T | 

er a ot carat oat watts carter Ill 
aeatat afer wat wate areas | 
AA ATA ASAT ATA TA: UCI 
agit wae fe ett gt aa een | 
aaa sonfagaet fer weg saa: UI 
a ePyenfier: am: wae oer | 


Jolly KSS Dave AAT, oOr area; Lo! aTgeferar; cMd! oOr Hrafe eera:; mTr® Cret:, Pw 
Pu? Put “eferar:; Md3 “wera; 1Md4 “siferar [2] 

5. Cited by Laks 12.603; Dev 3.562; Madh 3.323 — a) tTMd* ATfeTRT, BKt La! sar 
f&; Jo! om f¥— b) Jm Kt? wKt} La! Lo? nNg Pu! Pu’ Pu’ tar; aK’ fastftta:; nCa Laks aa: 
— c) Lo} Tj! aeprar’ — d) cMd! sOx! sPuo “waea’; Tj? “aTeag’; tMd4 “atadtg’; oMd 
*araeg: geferar:, Hy “gereferar:; GMd! nPu! Pu? Tj! eferar 

Additional verse in Bo sOx! sPu® Tr? Mandlik [&, 4, 4, 7, ¢, 5] KSS: 

wars waar wr wafer eerar | 
WaTaT VATA ater Ue: I 
a) Bo sPus tat — b) Tr? tfatat: — c) Bo sOx! sPus wart — d) Tr? tera: 

6. Cited by Laks 12.603; Dev 3.562; Madh 3.323 — a) Ho $4; oMd! 3€; mTr° sq: — 

c) BBe? ered rar, Pu aareaferd; TM} era; oOrwerd; wKe afer; Pud Pu? wat — d) Pu? 
ut gto aT; BK La! gdereate; tMd?3 sOx! sPud eferar aft 

7. Cited by Vis 1.80; Laks 12.603; Dev 3.563; Madh 3.323 — a) Lo GMd5 &; Tr* 

a; Bo TaaT; ekt’ gate: wKt! wat a fat a; cMy water wT UPr a; Ke afte; rMd4 om 
T— b) MT? q@ar; cMy Fst — c) Lot ws T; Pw Pu Te et & af; wKt! Lo} Tj! Laks 

wart a [Laks fe]; wKt! g; GMd! tMd} GM@& Tr! [but cor sh] MTr*mTr® ot gor; tMd4 
[Jolly Nd] af aot ta — d) Md} GMd STAT; Jm wKt? Lo! Lo? HTat; Dev tT; Tr? FF 
werrentey, Pus verter 

8. Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) GMd! rMd? rMd* GM@ GMy Tr! mTr* mTr° [Jolly G] 
oferatat yfasr eat [rMd? oferaraty, Hy Kt? Lo Tj! [cor to] tferatat — b) Md? 7; Bo Tr? 
ycate; cMd! wear fe; Kt? wWele; GMy Targa; Td! yearfestad; Tr! yearProrac, Tr? 
araht — c) nPu! ararecgiganac: Tj! rar’; rMd! raat aeT; GMy “ares; La! Pw? 
“orafenrared; Jo! Lo! Md? staeq — d) BK WEST 

9. Cited by Laks 12.607; Dev 3.565— a) cMd! aTgT; Ox? od — b) Laks TAIT 
erafaer; Lot & seer nPu! mTrS Tater — c) cMy afaargert; cMd! “raat — d) wKe 1M} 
férar; La! GMy mTr4 mTr? [Jolly Nd] Laks Raat; sBe aKO Wat Ta: 


748 Chapter 9 


Vay WATE: TTT Noll 
whet due tat aa ua apr | 
Aer asaarat a arftoreper aerer 2 et 
srefrat We wat: eaermahehy: | 
MATA AT THAEAT: TeAaraT: ULRM 
wat stant: wear a Rrebeayz | 
RaMSenteaeras ANAT TE UY AU 
Sat wr Tetetea ATat safer afer: | 
gar at fear ar garreta ys U2 


10. Placed after verse 12 in Bo; padas c-d omitted in Be! wKt! [haplo]. Cited by Laks 
12.608; Dev 3.565 Madh 3.323 — a)cMd> + frente: iMd4 arr: — b) GMy F WAST 
afer; NNg oOr mTr® “eferd; Pu2 Put “vert — c) Lo! oOr Pu? Put Wa udeqdatteg [oOr 
“atreg]; tMd4 garareared; wk} wdeakr; wKt} rMd3 GMy sOx! nPu! Put sPuS Wa 
“ater — d) Md? 7 aerey: offer; Ho Lo! aHlel:; Dev aeHeTT:; GMd! +Md* GMd5 GMy 
Tr! MTP aT: BT; BBe NNg “Sfere; tMd4 “xferar: 

u. Cited by Laks 12.608; Dev 3.566; Madh 3.323 — a)sOx! sPu® mTr aretaaetr; cMy 
AAMT; nPu! Pu Wat; Pu2 Put VAT; Pu? [but cor] FTF — b) Lot [Jolly M are ar fara 
wad; nNg aft; Lo! tar — c) Pud Pu’ eef; Be! cGMd> Ox? a 7 HRT; Hy TET; Lo! 
aaarrar, La! atqurcar— d) GMd! GMd5 GMy Tr! mTr® Devatfeoreret; HoTMd?* NNg [Jolly 
M] ofturraret; aKt® Pu? [Jolly G] oeétorerez; Bo Hy Lo! oftvrerey; sBe? sRuretey: [Jolly R 
N] Na@ Madh oifteraer; wKe wftererer; Tr? corer; Pu? Pu Na [patha] TRoTeeT; Lo? 
aera; NK oR; TM? arfeoreret; Bo sOx! sPu’ Ferd; wKt Tact; Be! Hy Lo! oOr 
Pu? Put Pu’ Tr? Ku Jha KSS Dave test, nPu! ater; GMy Ox? Madh ttt; Pu’ TY me sh to 
sews, TMdé4 very 

12, Cited by Laks 12.608; padas a-b cited by Dev 3.567, 745 and padas c-d by Dev 
3.566 — a) Jo! areferat; La! geferar; cMd! 7; GMy Je; NNg Tr! 72; GMd! Pu? Pu’ ar; 
oMy eal, La! Jar: — b) Hodtet” ; Jo? Tj! geteme ; nK¢ yet: Tt; Bo @ifefr: — c) cMy 
meq; TMd? Tr! ar g — c-d) mT v8 STAT eq WAY: Wager: Feferat:— d) cGMd! rMd* aMd? 
waa UTE TAT 

13. Cited by Vis 1.83; Apa 108; Laks 12.622; Dev 3.567— a) Tr? T4; Md? IIc; sOx! 
sPuS “eat: GMd! tMd4 mTr® et — b) cMd5 wauear fester; Be! aearea; Apa [vl] fae: 
Lo? faceted; +Md? afeenrd; rMd! feast; wKt! “Zar — c) La! earaeaye aay; nPu! Gar; 
Pu‘ @FaT; Be! Ho 1Md? GMd cMy Tr! Apa Dev ‘a8; sOx! sPuo “JE; BKO HeAaTET, Lot 
“ana — d) Be! BBe Bo Ho Hy wKt! La! tMd? oOr nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tr! Tr? mTr° Wa [Jolly 
G] Re Dev arta eau; sOx! sPu’ Shtort F goofy; mT ‘goorte 

14. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 12604; Dev 3.563 — a) Lot 747; Bo BT ted; Lad 
sOx! sPuo Teeaed, rMd3 aeftett — b) La! nPu! atat; Ho ATaT; sOx! sPuo arait; BK Lot 
dfere:; GMd! *Md4 ae: BBe? Jo? La! Lo? Tj! Yolly R] Laks Praag: — c) nK¢ La! cMd! 
tMd3 tMd* GMd Tr! MTP Laks faet Saat aT; cMy Polly NdJetaeaaeet aT, mT? mTr® 
eoaat fred a7; sBe? Lo*taet, Ho sOx! sPuo aT BET aT [supported by Go and Ku] — d) 


Chapter 9 749 


qaearaekrarer Ager eared: | 
treat aaatstte wderar Reeds weal 
Ud eae arearar sorafatrata | 
UT TaAlasy Feat carer wher ULE 
TATA BAT BEPTATIATT | 
Tear gat a afar agreed |e 
atta eft fear vate eat arate: 


faRtrar grea feratsaatrte Perf: ec 
aat ae yea seat Patter recat | 
career arar a yuyarahery™ ues 


Bkt yard; Hy yr 


Additional verses in La!: 


mafarareeratar: feaaftacster agg It 

15. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 12.604; Dev 3 563 — a) T} PaepTarrde, Ho 
qharear’ Hy wKe deem’; Be! nPu! Pus Pu’ paca Lo? dtsreaar’; mT r® “eraRereareg, 
Lo! Ox? Put “sqoRIIreT: Lot Tr? “sae terT, Be! “sarePaaeT; wKt! BKO nPul “eaTe- 
Ferarer, sOx! sPuo “sarefeerer, cMy “earedtapa, Pu2 “caeacared; aBe “caTaferearea; 
Hy Jo! Jot Kt? Lo? GMd! 1Md4 mTr? MTr4 Polly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “sareoReraTey; Tj 
*waqeafrarey; Bo saafrareT: Pus Pu’ [Jolly G Me] Me Go Rn Dev Laks Jolly © 7TS- 
Precast — b) cMé Arete sara; ; BBe? TysaTeT; Lo? Tj! Pretera; eee as Be! 
Ho Md? Sere; oMy Pu! “rapa: eKt’ “ered, Tj! rarer — c) Pu? Pui eerareraay, 
Tj! Fac; cMy om “Ste — d) Jo? ada; La! “Garaeda; 1Md! “aera, Pu? Pu’ [but 
cor] faagetter 

16. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Laks 12.605; Dev 3.563 — a) NKt* @ 41a; La! wares; 
oMy grat — b) Md! “feerist; wKe! “est; La! Cerise; Wa “aatst; Bo “ast — c) oMd5 
oe paearfercé — d) wk! aroff afer 

17. Omitted in Jm GMy. Cited by Laks 12.604; Dev 3.563 — a) La sear b) 
cMd! tMd4 GMd> &TF; GMd! tMdé4 “saTear; NK “HATE; Lo! “HAR: Tj? “aed; Be! Bo 
Ho Hy Jo! Kt? BKt® Lo*wNg mTr [Jolly M Ku] Mandlik KSS Dave “WAT; sOx! sPuS Tr? 
“aartat — c) Wa difé ; La! @erater; cMd! aviqat eft” — d) nPul Pu? efter; Wa “eat 

18, Omitted in Jm; padas c-d omitted in BK tMd* [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.605 — a) 
ake fexaret; Pus Pu? Rear, wKe a; tMd4 ae: wrt AT a-b) cMy fesar aatfafepar- 
eat — b) iMdé 94; wKt} FAT; Jo! Kt? BK GM@ Tr? MTr*mTr® Mandlik Jha KSS Dave i, 
ektS *Md3 rMd4 GMd 5 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 2afeafe:; Ho “fer — c) nKt! Peararrear- 
aq, Tj fe Herre; cMd! @rersrs — d) Tr? ad; Pu? Put “gaffe, Lot get caferar:; Bo 
fer: 

19.* Cited by Laks 12.605 — a) Lo! war a yferaTeartt Pycat cor to Ife]; Bo Jo? Lo? 


750 Chapter 9 


wet aa TEEy Rraeeaafaaar | 

at ta: frat geniPreretahrarrry Roll 
erreatre afeskrd atmeer aaa4r | 
wag aRrorer fra: eae UR 2 
aap wat eft aera aaa | 
aan ar wate aqacra Pra UR 
AAA ast AAHTAAAT | 
Met TTS AANA TANT RAI 


Lo! Md! Tj! Ra 3a; NNg Tea; TMd3 cra feryaay; BBe? Laks f&; La! Pu? Pu? Put a@ay; 
Be! aTaiy; wKt! aay — b) Lo! after a wacaft; Be! Lal GMd! rMd3 GM@ GMy Tr! mTr4 
MTP mTr° [Jolly Nd Gr]Nd afear; +Md4 afar; Me [patha] frre [explained as F-afaarar:] 
—c¢) Be! Jo? Lotta; Pud Pu’ [but cor] eS Md4 ae wed: MTS Bre: Be! Ho wKé 
La! Lot ‘wer’; wKt! “zero; wKe akt’ ‘afar; cMd! Sart — d) GMy aat & Baar afer, 
TMd? wear; rMd4 UpTarHic:; Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! La! Lo? Lo‘ NNg oOr Pw Pu’ Wa [Jolly M G 
N Nd] Na Laks Jolly creat aya Prepic [wkt! frepdf; Hy Freaper:; Jo! frepfer:]; Be! Be? Bo 
Ho Jm Kt? wKt? nKt4 BKt? Lo! Lo? sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? Te mTr? 
[Jolly R Ku] Ku Re Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave wet aya Prep: [Lo! graf; wBKe nPu! 
Frege; Pu? Tr? Fatt] 

20. Omitted in GMy; verses 20 anda1i transposed in [Jolly N]. Cited by Laks 12.605 — 
a) sOx! sPuo at; wKt? oe; La! gat ATA; La! Pu? Put wes; Be! Tr! [but cor] TESTA; cGMd! 
1M} rMd4 cGMd> W@STH; Tr? WES; wKt! eqd; mT rt BGS; Tro T |arT— b) cMd! 
Tr! mTr*mT ro feraecrtgqaar, +Md4 feaeergyarat; Md} Tater; cMd > ReTTTAM, 
Be! fazer — c) Be! aA [but mc]; Tr? ta; Bo [Jolly M' 3-8] ganftr’; wPul Grea; wKt! 
geafy; PuS Pu? deni; Lal gennfe — d) Lo! gaw setaea Pras, Be! “crete Preelt; 
oMd “afaféarter 
21, Cited by Laks 12.605 — a) TMd? cMy feefasarrerce ae; Jo? Lo} Tj! Tr! [me to] 
[Jolly RJTet erence et (Jo? 3]; La afemiegarcamed et; Be! Ho Pu? Pu’ earaea 
oMd! Te earafatace; wk “arPred; Tr? afar; cMd! om ufee ... Tarat — b) Bo 1Md! 
“Weer; cMy wrerer Fae; rMd4 Aaa — c) cMy Wa Tear; BBe? BKt Lo? Pu? Tj? Tata; 
TMd! aet 7; Ho Baereer — d) La! Pea; NNg ft@a:; Md! Fac; wKe Pree; wKkt! Prove: 
22. Cited by Laks 12.609; Dev 3.567— a) sOx' sPuS mTr° a1gayor; Be! wat; rMd? Hat; 
1Md4 vat — b) GMd! agsae; nNg aerate; Lot “fear — c) rMd4 areerot erate; sBe 
ares; Put arerayorr — d) tMd? PuP Pu? amy; Be! Tr! Tr? aystta; oOrnPu! Put Pu’ feat: 
23. Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) cMd! emarorafafacéar; wKt! aeeqar; tMd? sera; 
GMd5 0Or Tr? Wa aft ; Put arf; sBe? wKt! Pud Pu’ frst — b) Tj? om &; Bo La! oMd! 
cM Pu? Pud mT ager (Pe Put dant]; Md? dgeraea ay; Ho “Arar: — o) 
Ho QMS; sOx! sPu’ Tr? sgt TZ; Lo? arget FT; Ox? arsta; M3 as FT; Lot aret 7; 
oMd! aredt 7; BBe’ om 4; Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Ke wKt? Lo? Pu3 Tj? MTr? LaksMandlik KSS Jha 
Dave Igt We Jo? Tj! N@ Rn aReT a — d) Tr! STH west’: nPu! Pu? Put “aTeTe ; 

Tj! “ofterd; Hy eat 





Chapter 9 751 


UMA Ges PSTTaT: | 

Seed atfter: stat: Be: Sk: WA: URI 
uaifeat atearar fret ettyaat: gar | 
Tae wT gataaty worerathaterd wu 
waa HEAT: Wet Testa: | 

faq: Brrr Teg a fagretsftr wart URE 
TOASTS AraeT Tay | 

Tee Seay: Tere elt Praery URI 
rer erErarey BTAT CAS TAT | 
arerefsetar eat: Pageants F URC 
aft ar arate aataneeea4r | 

at wdareraatear ate: aredtir Aree URI 


24.* Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) Ho waar — b) Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K@ Lo? Lo? cMd! 
oMd’ gMy Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr3mTr4 MTr> Re Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave “ATPS°; La! 
“age; rMd4 “aeepETS; wKt! “wage”; cMd! “ger; mTrS “Gea: — c) Ho ews; Tr! 
SPE; oMd! SPE; Laks Afraparer:; oOr Wat — d) Lot Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] AAA’; Lot 
igi; nKet siaiqt:; Bo Ho 7: Te gar 

25. a) Jo? Tj! watfrar; Lo? “ararfivet — b) wKt! Prer; Put Preats wKt! Kt? wKe} neu! 
sPuo mTr3 JHT:; Pud Pu’ FH:; NNg aetT — c) Lot GMd! cMy Pu’ acess; Lo! Weg; La! Lo? sOx! 
Ox? sPuo Tj! Ter Ue; Ho FetewuT; wKt! “amid; Lot ‘at; La! Md* @as — d) Lo? waT- 
ar: La! °erf frat’; Jo! Wa ater 

26. Cited by Laks 12.609; Dev 3.570 — a) Ho La'tMd4 nNg Pu? Put STATS; Laks 
wort, cMd! werrrar; Lal rMd3 GMy mTr° WaTATAT; Lot gore; Bo Lo! ‘art — b) TMd? 
gee; Lo? GMy Usa; BK NPu! Pu? Put yeA fer: — c) [Jolly R] Pra: faa; Tj? om feae:, 
Lo! fea: ferarer; La! fear: fazer; Pu? Pu‘ Prov: ere; BK AeferT — d) Be! NNg oOr 
nPu! Pu2 Put Wa fearay arfeet ert; GMa Tj! errr 

27. Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) 1Md3 Seat — b) Tr? Wage; cMd! [Jolly Nd] Teer 
— c) sOx! sPuS Wert; NKtt Lo? Lot nNg mTr® folly M N] Me Na [patha] Jolly Jha Tere; 
MTP wert; BK# NN¢g [cor to sh] nPu! Pu Pu’ Tr? Wa [Jolly G] Na Go Re Start; mTrt sere; 
oMd! yeret, GMd5 “arava; mTr® araT TF — d) Be! NNg Pu? Pu’ ete; GMd! Heer; Lot Prarer- 
are 

28. Cited by Laks 12.609 — a) wKt! tMd3 sOx! sPuS HUET; oOr aHaratfer; Md} 
eABratheT — b) Bo Pud Pu? “errat:; GMd! “eter — c) oMd “ftaredar, wKe8 ett ca; 
oMd! “ear wat; Wa Sat:; Bo A: — d) Pu’ Pu’ Go [Jolly G] "STERET: cMd! tMd3 
GMd> GMy Tr! mT‘ mTr° f&; Be! &; Ho ZT: 

29. [= 5.165] Pada-d omitted in Bo Pu’ Pu‘ and ma in Lo*. Cited by Dev 3.567 — a) 
NNg Were aT aa; Ho afr FT areata, Tears ar a oftrete, Pus afe arr arftraee; 
NKt* Lo*Md! +Md3 GMd? GMy Tr! mTr4 MTr® Dev arferaefer — b) Tr 2 FATHTaSHRT:; Be! 
Bo Ho nK¢ BKtS Lo! Lo? Lot Md? NNg oOr Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly M N] Dev atepradaar; 


752 Chapter 9 


aPrarrg vd: eit ate sate Praca | 
arreaitr arate arate Aer Rott 
ga weafea ate: yastar wafer: | 
Rearakrr gery Fraterr U3 20 
wg: ga forafa yfaser g wd | 
agvenge shrqae atrot fag: URN 
aaa Brat at stony: Sa: FATT | 
aadiraarinng tra: aah 33 
fakre gakedtt efatrecar gah | 
TAT FT VA TT aT Tala: WTETT URI 


dimer da aaa dhraqepeqed | 
atoreretoresetar Waa 


aayamgtate 
ae gad dist eer aretaared | 


Ox? Pu “arepraesaifir:; mTr4 mTrS WaT; Pus Pu’ [Jolly G] Ta; Bo Afar; Wa “eat — 
c) Bo sOx! sPu° @; Jo? La! Lot nPu! Pu? Pu’ Tj! Wa “Sree, Lo! “streamate — d) Pu? 
ar gareaticr; La! aredter area 

30. Verses 30 and 31 transposed in Ho. Omitted in Bo BK# Pu? Pu‘; padas a-b ma in 
Lot. Cited by Laks 12.630; Dev 3.568 — a) TMd4 “aepT; Md? HG — b) Ho Lo! Srpramifer 
fafa; cMd! ata safe fafear, Be! ate; nPul @tew:; La! smtcafafeat, Be! fifa — c) 
BBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo? wKt! wKt nKt* Lo! Lo? Lot NNg oOr Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu® Tj? Tr? mTr* Wa 
Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ane ; aMy “arama; Be! Lo! Lo* Md? tMd* GMd@ oOr 
sOx! Ox? sPuS Tr? Laks Dev amife; Lal areafer — d) Pud Pu? oer oftdteaa; sBe? frag 

gi. a) Be! veqfed — b) Ho ada — c) wKt “saftey; Be! “RMT; Ho Lot Md4 
oMdS mTr5 “raf; *Md4 gerry — d) M3 “oe; Hy Praterar 

32.* a) BKO g STTAfet — b) Tj? ZT; Be! BBe* Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! 
Lo! Lo? Lo’ NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu} Put Pu> sPuo [cor to sh] Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr° [Jolly 
G Ku] Ku Nd Mr Mandlik KSS Dave Wif%— c) Md? ag: TeaTcas; TMd! oOr fesPreTe — d) 
BKt “oe; GMdS “ae; NNg 01; oOr Fer; Tr? erst; Ho faa: 

33. Padas a-b omitted in rMd* — a) Ho wat aret — b) Pu? Put Fareqat: — d) Jo? 
a 

34. a) GMd! tMd4 MTrmTr® fare gf aafegisr — b) HowKkt! wKe aafeentyretaet; 
tMdé mT rm Tr eafrcetiaee g;ocMd | aahreettaitt pati; sBe? Bo sCa Jo?sKt> Lo! 
Lo} oOr sOx! Ox? Pu! sPuS Pus Tj! Tj? Trl Wa “aiPrta; Lot “Afra, Lal “Aer ea’; 
oMd “ait g safe — c) My aay; 1Md! Tr? eat — d) Ho Lo! wafer: aT; GMd! mT 
fares 

35. Omitted in Tr?; padas a-b ma in Lo*. Cited by Jmy 113.3; Laks 12.737 — a) oOr 
avrg; eBe dred FT; Jmy Ad; Wa FT — c) nKt! ad; Jm nKe HfeM’; oMd! “wateté 
— d) Kt “oferar: 


Chapter 9 753 


aanteta caer ait Seiad Tar: 13 < 
ea ute warat avadt atreerc | 

a a atfeqoresifarg dist geate gfteg i 30ll 
wWraraaeae Beta Fata: | 
arent aera Starts erarad: WRC 
fea: meat ygraar Arata war: | 
BaTaT Teeter TAT aTaeTUT UA 
WAH Waratah | 

sara afte adh adda otefer iol 
aerate fetter arafaaraarear | 
Bay Tet T AT Teaser Wy ei 
art Tray argeftar: atdater gufea: | 

war ait aT ager gar weahaes WS 


36. Cited by Laks 12.737 — a) Lo* Volly M**] aearqerd, Ho TAA; nKtt aca; BBe? 
Pu? Pu‘ goad; Pud Pu? [Jolly G] aad; BK Ox? Berd — b) nNg Hraraatfea; rMd4 cMy 
Laks “Ofee; Lo? “aera; Tr? “vere — c) oMy arganéfet;, Wa “atefea; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] afeatt 
— d) Lo! fispepreqaadg; Md? fv; Be! Satis; cMd! aad; Bo Baird; cMy 
afer, Md? Safed; sOx! sPuo Vora; wKke! Bator 7A; La! Lo? Pu’ Pu’ Tj! [Jolly G] 
aeieardfar: : 

37. Padas a-b omitted in Lo! — a) GMd> S7HTATE; Tr? om aPafe — c) Tj! aaa ; 
Bo Lo! cGMd! tMd? GMS mTr4 mT ro Qf’; GMy “aot RePre; rMd3 “qoniefre, Tr? 
“qorepfery — d) mTrS greater; cMd! gfteg geafer, La! geafer oret:; sOx! sPuS Pu’ gfe 

38. a) Lot wardttacbare; ake “Sart — b) Be! wKt! wretmfer; Jo? Tj! Tr! [cor to] 
aera; tMd? avatar; Lo? aeTathy; NNg Pu’ Pu’ “aS:; aK “fast: — d) Wa TET: 

39. a) BK tea: erareaar: warferor, Tj! Hfea:; Wa Ateay, cMd! are@at — a-b) cMy 
[Jolly Nd] arear aft feroaroaareday; Md} areal Arter Agr Tar war: — b) cMd® Aer 
war arated; Trt mT r® Agr aaT Araretar ferer:; *Md4 Tr! Agr aaaraetoreray, La! 
HEI Fat ArenfetareTar; wCa Jo? wKt! Lo} GMd! +Md? Tj! Arar aaretatT — c) sOx! sPuo mTr® 
aa ; Pus Pu? [Jolly G|yatera; Tr? WAS 

40. a) tMd? tTMd4 GMd GMy mT aragnaasarahed; nNg aragar; wKt! aera; Kt? 
aT — b) Bo AGA aaT’; Tr! “fests Ate” — c) wKe# oOr Tr! [cor to sh] TaeaAS AIF; 
MTr® Sic; Pud Pu? afer stot J; Tj! ae; Pui wa; TMd3 rMd‘4 aghst — d) tMd3 cee 

41. Cited by Laks 12.737 — a) BKtS Gast, TMd4 Fanaa; GMy Tarafe, Lo! aera; 
Ho faetaat— b) cM) aateiarrateat; Lo? om frat; Lot ° farracar; cMy ° rarer; 
Pu2 Put fasrastfaer — c) GMd! away; GMd’ aTHez; Bo Lo? *Md4 aemHer — d) Lo! oOr Pu? 
ag; Bo aiftrar 

42. a) Be! sBe? GMd! GM@ oOr sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPuo Tr! mTr5 mTr® Waaat; BKt5 
arar, La! seat gerttat; Pu’ agefrar, mT > aatgtat, Md! watstat: Be! BBe oOr sOx! nPu! 


754 Chapter 9 


aad fr: a fraaafrera: | 

wat seater & fer cist aeaftae 13h 
qardiat grt arat afer fag: | 
CUI HAAS: WeIaay AMT Ui 
Waar Feat ASATATAT Tae = | 
for: sigeaat Beet wat AT STATFAT UI 


a frorafranhar agatat fret | 
va eet Rorftr: sremrrafetarrery US <i 


apa fra aperear wet | 
apate sartifer shan apeargeT vl 


Pu2 Pu‘ sPuo Tr! Tr? “sftat; Lo! tMd? Pus Pu? “star; cMd> “at — b) nPu! gefag: — c) 
oMd Tr araet; tMd* amet — d) La! Lot GMd® cMy sOx' sPu® [Jolly M*>~? R G Nd] Jolly 
gat; wk) “ae:; Md4 “ae 

43.* Omitted in Be! BKt* cMy [haplo]; versess 43 and 44 transposed in Wa — a) La! 
aera Lo! weafragea4r, oOr Wa fet; BBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKt Lo? Lo? Md! tMd4 
oMd@ Pu? Pui Tr! [but cor sh] MTr? MTr4 MTrMTré [Jolly Ku Nd] Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
frg:; Md? fete — b) BBe? &; oOr at fA; Lot Fer — c) sOx! sPus TAFT: BBE ABTS; 
Lot cMd! rMd3 tMd‘ GM@ NNg Tr! [Jolly M] Fafert; wKt! mTr3 [Jolly Go Ku] Mandlik KSS 
Dave fat — d) sPuo sRaftae 

44. a) Te edt, wKe! Cearat. wKe “zaTat; Ho gfrét — b) Ho wrat; cMd! adds at 
end: aur dist ate — c) Lo! eryereer — d) wKt! “argieractt; Pu? Put “argeracrt, Tj! 
aoa 

45. Cited by Laks 12.738 — a) TMd3 GMdS Baraea; Lo? Waa; tMd4 rare; GMd ! 
gararta, tMd4 Fete — b) Be! Jarrarcar Waa; Tr? om Aa; dé AMT; NKt4 FHTATCHT; 
oMy [Jolly Nd] 931s T; TMd3 GMd> Fafee; Jo! %; BBe? Bo Lo! oOr Pw Pu’ Tj? mTr° Laks 7; 
Ho 7 — c) Be! Bo fast; mTr°famrt; Lo! fast @gerar; Md? faur aigeter; tM? oreterer; 
MT 1? SPIE; oOr “erarataaiy; wKt! “eqaad at; nPul “exdae sat; Lot Laks ta at — c-d) 
Lo! tea at — d) Md? tear; Ho wKt! Lo! Md! GM? oOr MTr4 Tro ATHAT STAT; TM} 
GMy Saya 

46. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.738 — a) Be! Tj! Tr! Aiftea’; Tr? Fife; BBe? 
FORT; Jo? Lo’ fea; mTr4 Petar — bynKe wat arat; wKt! ve aTat; Lo? Tj! Tr! [ne 
to] MTr° fageae; Ho fafeerct — c) nKt weet soreit:; cMy U4; BCa Hy Bk La! Lot Tj? 
Bh Utee; Ho fasta; La! fasfty:; Pu? [Jolly G] festa; Tr! (Jolly Gr] asrite, Lot 
oMd! 4 Str, Ox? nPu! Pu2 Pu‘ Tr? fara; nNg fatter — d) Ho rMd4 ssrafafer- 
fd [om we]; Te? sarafafastfed [om waz]; Lo} Tj! “Ric:; La! PrAtar 

47.* Omitted in Pu’; ma in Lo‘. Cited by Laks 2.56; Dev 1.218, 3.720; Mddh 1.490 — a) 
Ke Prorafer — b) Te? ape, Hy wétaa — c) Lal aHeTradfe UTA; Lo! apers, Tj! 
apergeat ; Lo! Tr! caratfer; cMy aarMifer; Jo? Kt? NNg [cor to] Ox? nPu! Pu2 Put sPud [but 
cor] Pu’ [cor to] MTr? Wa Polly M'>-8-9 G R?] Jolly Jha zarttfe — d) Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! K? 
nKtt BK® Lo? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tj? Tr? mTr3 mTr? [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave WaT 


Chapter 9 755 


war msatearety Atenas T | 
Areas: Tae aarearsarahs Uc 
ako dita: aetararfier: | 

TF GT WET Te Ge FART USI 


FIAT THT AAA Aaa | 
THT A aca ATT SHPSTATHRT UK oll 
ara fist aeetarafhrer: | 

gate ahromeet a diet oar wey Ik 2ll 
wey career aro attar aur | 
Tet atormerat ftorattdeiteat war 


apd [supported by Bh Go Ku]; Put Fat Tat; NNg Fda sh Tat 

48. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.738; Madh 2.37 — a) Tr @rafty — b) mT Laks 
camfanfedty a; Madh afettenfaerg 7; Ho K? wKt} La! Lo? Lot GMd® sOx! nPu! Pu? Put 
sPus Tj! Tr! Tr? mT ro afecaranfa ; NK’ GMd! 1Md4 afearanfa ; Bo aqearenfa — c) rMd4 
gars}; nPul “sft -— d) aK gar Sarg’: La! “=thrareafe; Be! BBe wKt} Lo? Ox? Say a 

49. Cited by Laks 12.738; Madh 2.37 — a) Jm aT; Ho oOrtstac:; wPu! dts: — 
b) Ho Pud Pu’ Tr! Madh Tees; Be! “aay avfta:; cMd! °F g arf; Lo! “afta: — c) 
TM GMd AAT TETAS; Im IT F TET sreaeT; rMd4 fF F TeTsTATST; wCa wKt! BKO 
nPu!l 3erer; Be! Ox? aT AIST; Lot TANTS; nK tt TeET Tae — d) Lo! waar 
wud HS; Pud Pu? outer, Te wad 

50. Padas a-b omitted in Bo; verse 50 is placed after 52 in GMd! GMd5 tMd‘. Cited by 
Laks 12.738; Madh 2.37 — a) Be sBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! oOr Ox? nPu! [Jolly Ku] 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 44 ; GMd! tMd? GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] waar; Madh qaret. Pu? 
Pud aurea; sOx! sPu® g74T — b) wKt aetaT; Be! Gta aa — c) Md? Arena + acer 
Say; Kt? nPu! fT; Ho Go wis, La! arearftraraa, rMd4 “alfa; mTr & a — d) 
Lal ara stores, GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd3 GMy Tr! [but cor sh] MTr4 MTr5 MTr® [Jolly G 
Nd] ata garaftet; sOx! sPu® ep s aKO ephete ; nKt4 oOr hea ; Ho AMY mTr3 
“aTGe, Lo} Tj! “ardar 

51. Cited by Laks 12.738 — a) TMd3 GMy Tr! [but cor sh] MTr4 mTr® Nd wefsor 
asa: [MT r? aed]; Be! Lo’ cMd! cMd5 Ox? Ox} aaae°; mT war aes Ke oOr Tj! 
“afay, Pu? Put are; cMd> “Per; ake Frat — b) Ox3 9; GMd! nNg Tr! [cor to sh] 
“at, cMy “ahr. Be! Ox? “aay anfta:; Lot “errarfter:, cMd> “@srer arft:; Bo “ager: — 
c) Bo fedfer; Md4 mT wafer, Ke ar — d) cMdd + Ast waster; mMd4 dtorenstaet 
[ef. 8.52d]; NKtt BKt> Lo! rMd3 NNgsOx ! Ox3 nPu! Pu? Pu* sPu® Pu’ Tr! [but cor sh] Tr? 
MTro atstt FT; GMy fier 7 

52.* Omitted in TMd4; verses 52 and 53 are transposed in GMd ! tMd? GMd@ Tr! mTr* 
mTr® Madh. Cited by Vij 2.127; Laks 12.738; Ma@dh 3.350 — b) Kt? art; Bo Tj! aft; 
oMd! #Rrat afsrrr, Bo atfsrt; Tj! AS; Pu? Pud Afsrrecer — c) aKtS wearer; TMd3 WereT; 
Pud Pu’ vert; Be! Teas; Pu? Put Wert; Ke afr; nPu! aPrryg; Be! “at; nKtt La! cMd 
oMy mTr° “ef; tMd? Pu? Put wef; cMd! “Huta — d) Be! sBe Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! KP 


756 Chapter 9 


fargamraag drt zara | 

wea afr get fist are wa aT 4H 

araarargd diet wer ar weaker | 

aerate T AAT HAA HT NGI 

Ue Gat TATE TTT T | 

faerafedtot a farsa: sar ofr uaa 
Uae: away arate: watery | 

at: we seer attiat eetrrafe U4 <i 

WESser at wrat Terese aT | 

adaearey aT at SAT SKSET AT STAT UKM! 


wKt} nK¢t’ skt) La! Lo! Lo? NNgoOr sOx! Ox? Pu} sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr? [Volly R'] 
Na Rn Rc Mandlik KSS Dave “Patter 

53. Omitted in TMd‘. Cited by Vij 2.127; Laks 12.722; Madh 3.350 — a) La! frargy’ ; 
Ox? “TRAE, NKtt NNg Pu? Pué Tr! MTr? Wa area; GMdS nPul “HTS; Laks “mATeag, 
wKt! La! GMd! “sraT@a; Ho WaTeae; Lo! [Jolly M] waTeta; Lo! Lo Tj! Aa; BK 
maar ae; mTr* “mart a; mT ro Carel Ts oOr “TAT; M3 “TATA, Vij THTTT —- b) 
oMd! a& Fst wahtee, wKe aar ; mTrS Taras; 1M} sOx! sPuo Terra; Laks aa sraret 
— c) Be! tela; Lot Lo’ cMd! Ox} aes; Te FAS; NK BK ATT; rMd} AT ate ZT; BK 
ger, Lo! Pud atét — d) cMd! ateftemetfrorgsit; Md? GMy NNg oOr #17; BKt> GMd > Tj! 
aap; Hy af; Kt? afar; Ho wKt! nKt! Tj? UF aT; aCa UT | 

54.* Padas c-d ma in Lo‘. Cited by Laks 12.739 — a) Pu? Pu! Saar ; Lo! siferaar ; 
Ox? SaqaTat ; sOx! sPuS earay ; nKt4 aeratar ; La! SgaTaed; Bo Ho Kt? Pus Pu? ed — 
b) NKtt eh} wer, tMdé fattefer — c) Be! Ox? aeetrper fast, Pu Pu? aes APH; wCa 
wKkt! adh afsrmeia; sBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? sBKt5 Lo! L& Lo? Lot oOr sOx! Ox} 
nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu4 sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? MTr3 Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave APBAT TET 
[Lo? Lo Ox erraper g; Tj! ARraeta]; nKt & at; Md‘ aPrer tar — d) Be! Bo BCa Jo? 
wKt! BK Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® nNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tr? 
Wa [Jolly M G R] Laks Me Jolly Jha t AST 

55. Cited by Laks 12.739 — a) MTr? mTr TaHPaRT— b) wKt! eredter; Pud arairear’ ; 
Be! rMd3 “sifeaerg 4; Bo sider T; Jo? Lo? Tj! — c) wKt! wKt} BKtS Lo? cMd! 
tMd‘ GMy Tr mTr5 mTr° Hfearntit; cMd> “aféut a; Lo! om 4 — d) oMy fastar:; rMd4 
fastar; sk La! fase 

56. Omitted in Pu’ — a) sPuS [but cor] TYR; Md! MAKATS; Ho Wey — b) 
La! #fsr; Put “ate; Lo? cMd waitfart:; cMysapferd; Ox? want — c) aCaaat Be; Ti? 
ae aearfes — d) 1Md4 atftar 

57. Padas c-d omitted in Lo’ Ox3; padas b-d ma sh in Tr! — a) Be! Ho west: wKt 
“cser urfer, Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? BKt’ La! Lo! Lo’ iMd? Ox? Ox} Pu’ Tj? MTr3 Wa 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Wat AT— b) GMd Pu? * TaTIAET, NNg ma fh aT; TMd3 at 
Pud Pu? Tj! aT; La! sOx! sPuS mTr4 mTr° T— c) TMd? Getaerd; La! adtaery; Wa adtadieg; 
Md‘ @dtaeeg; cMd! stgqsrer 7 AT; Ca La! Lo! oOr nPu! HRT ar; NNg om UT 


Chapter 9 757 


Sret adtrar arat adtaramrftarry | 
afedt waat wear Pramas ec 
yartat aftestat frat ware frgmar | 
watearkoredeart aarrer TT USI 
faearat Prameq garnet araat far | 
veqearaeaya v fade erat coll 
fadiaae sort wert etty alee: 
afrad Pranrmef wrt afar: 1g 21 
farerat Print fra g afer | 
Tere STAT Tea TTT ERI 
framt at far feat aderat g ara: 


\ 
agar ofedt earat eqarnyeacasit We 3M 
aTeaeataear ant frarmear faonfahy: | 

aahate fraser at wy: waaay UES 


58. Pada-a ma in Tr'. Padas c-d cited by Vis 1.69 — a) BBe? SS; Jo! Lot Lo’ HTaT — 
b) sBe? water; Be! Lot Lo’ Ox? aataieam ; Pu adhere; Pu’ adtaen’ ; My oOr Tr! 
afta; +Md} adtat arr; Lo’ Bo feat — c) oMd$ afedt argat erat; Lot afedt argait 
Tea; Be! GMy mTi$ afeat — d) Pu? Pramraarafe; oMy Tr? Pact aren (Tr? aT] 

59. Padas a-b omitted in Lo‘. Cited by Vis 1.69; Vij 2.127; Laks 12.639; Dev 1.224; 
Madh 3.350 — b) Madh are: fayebar — c) Md4 satfeerar frarcrear; cMd! waregar Y AAT; 
Lal gaernfr’; Tj? wife; Be! star’; cMy waIRaaTRT. Madh Safer; oOr 

°Reereonfereraar: wk °anPiaraem: 1Md3 Rrarcar ar— d) cMd! este fh 

60. Omitted in Lo’. Cited by Vij 2.127; Dev1.225; Mddh 3.350; padas a-b cited by Vis 
1.69 — a) Madh faearat Pram? cMd’ faearar Prowmeq; Lo} fererarar:; nNg frame — b) 
Tj! arerearfy — c) Tr? vageay — d) pCa Pu’ Tr? fects a; 1Md4 wert 

61. Omitted in Lo‘. Cited by Dev 1.225 — a) oOr fedtadta; La! “Aa; Md? GMa 

“as; cMd! GMy S34 — b) TM! Stearate wert; Be! ATs; Pu? Put fy; oOr AT — c) 

- affgar, Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo nNg Pu’ Tj! T? Tr! mTr> Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 3G; 

Ho afd, wkt Md} Dev afida; mTroafgit; mirage — d) Hota; mTr3 Tea; 
Kt? Lo! cMd! tMd3 Gea 

62. nKt! gives an additional half-verse at the beginning: frearar frarmet wast 
eftaetar: — a) Lo! faerarar; cMdS faerarat; Kt? “ait; Lot rMd4 “areff; Jm “arf; cMy “aret 
— b) Ho 1Md? Pu} Put Tj! Mandlik KSS Dave Fe; Be! Haat; wKt! Fada wer; Pus om 
gq; La! a; cMy @; Be! “Fafe:; mTr® FARE — d) Md? Or adaaT; BBE TET: 

63. a) oOr gent at; Md‘ Pawar; BBe Pu? Put om a; Lal fafafecar; Bo Ox? scat — 
b) cMd! rMd? tTMd* GMdd vadat; cMy wre; MT? MT ro Waal at; tMd4 rye — c) 
Wa ofedt, Bo ardt — d) Pu? Put qaraye 

64. Cited by Vif 1.69; Vij 2.127, 136; Dev1.226; Madh 3.351 — b) nPul frgwear; Pw 


758 Chapter 9 


aateaeg vary Pant: stele vafre | 
a faaetrerge frat ga: uel 
oar Bat frafe: wget faerie: 
ATMA Treat at WET waa UI 
a wetaaet yout tifa: Fe | 
antat qat ae SAEs: UM 
aar wafer at aterq seteateer ferry | 
Prapmenreart & Rarer avert: ect 
qe fata wearar arat wer Har afer: | 
crate ferent frat fate saw: NES 


Pu? “wmeIT Baray — c) Jo? Lo? oOr Tj! Dev srafeaPahapsray; Tr safes fsa; 
sOx! sPu’ 9yssTAT — d) mTr® fet; Ho GMd Tr! Seay 

65.* Cited by Vij 2.127;Mddh 3.351; padas c-d cited by Vis 1.66 — a) BBe Hy nNg oOr 
Tj? Wa Jolly ater"; Ho “Sey; 1Md4 “fas | — b) Hy Prahr:, rMa} Peter; tMd4 Rar — 
c) Md‘ feardfrergh; cMy faergey; Madh frit aay — d) nPul “Aa; oOr mT x4 FAA; Vis 
“Set aah, Md? aert vier 

66. Verses 66-75 placed after 84b in TMd’*. Cited by Vis 1.69; Vij 2.127; Madh3.351 — 
a) BK fester; tMd3 oat FS; Wa festfaetE:; cMd! Pu2 Put fesrfaahe:; Me supports afaghx: 
and he give fegfg: as a patha; Nd and Mr support fe — b) tMd} Priféd: — c) Pu? Put 

“oRTgaAT; oOr WT — d) KP wKt} Lo! sOx! sPu’ [Jolly Ku] 45; La! a7; cMd5 44; Jo! a; 
Be! 44; Tr? a7; Ho att, rMd4 feat; BKtS La! NNg Warreater 

67. Cited by Vij 2.127;Madh 3.351 — a) Hy om @; Tre “Ra — b) Tr? “wat; Im “wae: 

my — d) Lo? BATT ; Tr? wraty; GMy Wery 

68. Cited by Vijo.a27: Mddh 3.351 — a)tMd? aa; BBe’ Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? 
Lo! Tj? mT'r3 Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave @:; Lo! Ox? 7yaat — b) Lo! “aferas:; cMy “wheat; 
wKt! “aftept; La! “Hfetest; Lot [Jolly M] “afeepr: rr: — c) wKt! Ox? Pratsrarcea”: aK La! 
fate; Hy Im Jo! Kt? BKtS La! sOx! xPul sPu’ Pu’ Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
“qearnt — d) Lo! fevréfeer Taree: [om TF]; BBe? Jo? Lo? Tj Vij Tee FT [SF aTea:; Be! at; 
Be! Pud Pu’ fasrefer 

69. Padas b-d omitted in BK. Cited by Vis 1.69; Vij 1.68—9, 2.127; Apa 78; Mddh 3.351 
— a) Bo 4eT; tMd3 tMd‘ GMd) wer; nKt! ferret; La! Pud Pu? Pu’ Tr! Faq; Pu? Put eae; 
oMd® Saray, BK Beat — b) cGMd! oar wey, GMy Teepe Te; Lo! ger: — d) mTr® Prot; 
Apa [vl] 7 fest; cMd! fa-qa, Wa 8a; Tr? Faet: 

70, Padas a-b omitted in BKt. Cited by Vij 2.127;Jmv 9.28; Madh 3.351 — a) nPu! 
“Prater: Tr? “frearter’; Tj! frererr; cM’ Tr! “aeaepr’; Jmy Peer’; wKe8 “area; 
nPul “Teta — b) Tr? GRaeT; Te Bfagar; cMd! afaferat; Pus Pu? sfaaat — c) Bo Wa; 
pBe? GMd! aster; BKt® Lo! Lo? oOr Tj! tstat; sOx! sPuo THaT; Tr? WaaT; BKt> Tj! Wear; 


Chapter 9 759 


aq ara Seen Jaden: 

ara FA: eaheEs orate Feary Wot 
faftracfenenft asrerar friars | 
amferat fasget ar sqyar arrarteary Wor 
ag aeadt sararerresy saa | 


wer agar eat wearers: (ost 
free afr vrata: waadeartarac: | 


aaterefitar f eft seeafterftaeafr iow 
freer sifie ahr sftatrerrarteerar | 

wife areata sftaRactnes: Wott 

wifvat ecterart ofteatset ae: wat: | 
fart wg aatse ar avant ofieg aay Noell 


1Md‘ ad; Lo! wHaTE; GMd TaATa — d) Pu2 om first APA; Lo! “HeATget; Jo! La! 
“peat 

71. Padas c-d omitted in Ho Lo*. Cited by Laks 2.57; Dev 1.220 — a) Be! tMd# “Rarer 
IT — b) sOx! sPus gaccarfeaerr:; Wa “after: — c) sBe2 pCa La! oOr Wa=aERT; GMd! wereS- 
at; Laks Wes, Dev TTWE:; Bo warahs — d) nPul wit; Be! Lo? TMd? sOx! Ox? sPue 
[Jolly M°] gery 

72. Go’s commentary on the rest of Ch. 9 is missing. Cited by Apa 95; Dev 1.221; 
Madh 1.492 — b) Put asregqaeanhs 7; Apa “errata, Tr? feat; PuS Pu? [Jolly G] 
aferarat — c) mTroearferar, mTr4 mT r® feayeptet; Pu? Put at wgtet aT; GMd! tMd4 Apa — d) 
Hy TMd3 Sarat; Bo BAAT; cMd! fagar; Pu’ Tro ataarfad; Lo Tj! attarfear; sOx! sPue 
arrafear 

73.* Verses 73 and 75 transposed in Jm — b) pCa Hy Jm Jo Kt? Lot GMd! tMd* Ox? 
Pu! Pu? Put Tj? Tr? Yolly M] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ararrreaa, La! “earatoafeat — 
c) [Jolly Nd G R] creak facet; Lal cer afeyet; Ho Jo? wKt! nKtt La! Lo? nNg oOr sOx! 
Pu’ sPuo Pu? Tj! Tr! [cor to] [Jolly G R] @r4; rMd} faearg — d) Lo? GMd! rMd3 tMd4 GMd5 
ee Pu’ Tr! mTr5 MTr° [Jolly Nd] Beaert ar: Tr? “SIGHT: ; Pu! “werat 

* +Md? [Jolly Nd] inserts verses 95-6 after 74. Cited by Laks 12.611; Dev 3.571— a) 

me. ioe sPu® aTatat; Bo Arata — b) Be! WATEHT’; Bo wKt! La! GMd! oOr WaaeHT ; 
cMd) eyaadepr ; GMy [Jolly Nd] ‘arfast: — c) Pu’ Pu’ gate ,oMd! gramrepfarat; Be! BBe? 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt La! Lo! Lo’ oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Mandlik Jolly KSS 


“afta — d) Md? a gaeafererft; cMd! sgenfeeafattical; put mreafter’; Ho “afer 
aa 


75. Cited by Laks 12.631; Dev 3.592 — a)GMd® SfVat; nKt4 WI; Jo! Wf; mTré 
afre; ads ofa; cMy wife; Lo? atfra — b) La! rMd4 star ; Lo! “aeratferar, Bo cMd° 
cMy oOr Put “Rera:; Lo! “Raf — c) TM? siftre safer’; wKe! g Pras; wKe areas; 
1M@ eafterta — d) oOr Reacts afé4:; cMd’ “nfée: 

76. a) Md? Tr? wifes; NK Mita; mT ro wa; Hy wire Pu! aifrar; cMd5 Tr! [Volly 


760 Chapter 9 


aacaagaara feat ati afer: | 

wes AAMT ATT FAT TF ATAT Mott 
afar wat ar ae tndae ar | 

at atararaikersantarrratesa4r WoC 
sare ofa Hlaadhsy aration | 

a emntstte farms a a ararcadeny Wo! 


waa T aKa TIT wa | 
afrar atradear Bartst a adar doll 


Gr] waste; oMd! epfadieq; rMd4 edger; Lo? Tj! “#rart — b) mT wdrar, Lo gfercer, 
Lo! om “tt; Be! Aer, rMd! AR: JAM; Bo Hy 4: — c) cMd! fearat; Ho TS art; Lo! nPul 
aearf ~— d) BK Lot raret; Lo! Md? GMy Ox? Pud Pu’? eranfedteg, mTr? are; Md4 
ater TAT: 

77. Cited by Laks 12.615; Dev 3.571—— a) Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt3 La! Lo? GMy 
Pu? Pu’ Tj? mTr3 [Jolly G R Nd Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Facet. Weert; Be! TACT 
yeetrer; tMd4 Gaeae TF Fa — b) Lo ae feast; Be! wKt! tMd‘ fer, Bo Hy sOx! sPu® 
fRasdh. aBBe Tr? fer; wKe fers; nKt wKt® Lot nNg [Jolly M] Me Jolly JhafgaTor [cf. 
9. 79]; Be! after, rMd4 atfter:; Lo? aed; rMd3 of; oOr nPul ofa — c) Lo! HE, NNg 

“wre Ho wKt#? Lo! Lo? sOx! sPu° Pus “caereaat; Jo? wKt! Lo? Lot Ox? Tj! “caereat; 
La! “eat at: wPul Caae Bat; mT ro sree; Be! “Rrertar — d) rMd4 erat; Tj! zat; Wa 
alt Te; Bo Ho SAT; nKtt Fea; wKt! La! Tj! Laks PEAT; BCa Jo? Pu? Put afasrq 

78.* Padas a-b and c-d transposed in mTr°. Cited by Laks 12.615 — a) oOr afer Wet 
at; oMy atfer; wKt! Lo4 [Jolly M] #4; Lo! “HIRT; BBE BKtS Lot GMy sOx! Ox? sPuo Tr? 
MTreMTr* MTr® Volly M] WAT aT; Wa WAT aT AT— a-b) GMd! rMd? rMd*4 GMd Tr! mTr> 
ae at ar wat aT ered arfcrade [rMd3 at ary; M3 aad]; nKt! om ar AT — b) Be! 
Kt? Lo? (Jolly M] — c) oOr aT; cMy aresterarahe’; tM} atarrereer os mT ar Bra 
arate ; nKti Peersar’ ; cMd! 1Md# “ease” — d) Md! 1Md# sOx! sPué “afteae: 

79. Cited by Laks 12.615; Dev 3.572— a) MTr° Sferct ase — b) Pud Pu’ Hayat 
amet, HorMd3 ser FT; Ma} oe wT OPT; Dev aft Sfrer— c) cMd> Laks 7 7 
fececarecartfer, cMd! Tr! [but cor] 1 ofeaecorecarifet; sBe? (eT [lacuna] J 7; Tj! fEaT- 
uTat, Bo Tr mTro faa; Lo? Md? fear; sOx! sPuo arenas, wKe} Pud Pu’ feareay,; Wa 
fedtarat; rMd4 Be! 9fgaecar; La! + fga-aT; Ho Hy Jm K@ Jo! Tj? Tr? Yolly Ku N] Na Re 
Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fearcarea, wKt! feat aT; Lo? Pu? Pu’ feuecareg — e-d) coMy 7 
carnfer feurarar arear qmaakeat [sic] — d) TP? oF; wKe a aT; Pu’ aeigads; oMd5 arar- 
qed; Bo sreamadst; sOx! sPuo “TaTeT; Jo? wKt3 Lo? Tj! “qasht; Wa cade 

80. Cited by Apa 100; Laks 2.102; Dev 3.572, Madh 1.507; padas a-c cited by Apa 77 
— a)tMd’* pada illegible, Md? Fate aaa; GMy FAW EIT; BBe Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo} 
Tj! Tj? Tr! [mc sh to] mTr? [Jolly Ku R] Madh Ku Mandlik KSS WITTY [Be “Fa; 
[Lolly M5] Rn Jolly HEMAAGT; Dev HAMTTAGA,; Be Lol Fe, wKt! Farar [om 4; 
wKt} at — b) Bo TARE AT; Apaz7 [vi] weer, Tr? “Ret, Hy Bor; Tj! a; mT ar— 
c) Laks rarcakey ; Jm Jo! Kt? wKt Pu? Tr? Tr’ [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Daveatf® ; 
Ho Pu> Pu’ Volly Garr; wKt! ae. oMd! aft Fader; wKe “Ie — d) ce 


Chapter 9 761 


qeaTeashraatey aT T AAT | 

Tata Strat Aaearaantaat Uc 21 

ar UR earg far saan Aa afte: | 
aaa aaa a afer CRIM 
afafaat g ar ant fategitrar were | 

at aa: after eas ar Hoare UC AU 


wtafirar fire g Aergqqacarey | 

TAA Tesat AT Tsu Foe Te UCI 
afe erarnraia racy atta feo: | 
aa soley IST TAT aT aT TCI 


feartaartt war; Put wTr3 fear; wKt! ent; Lot arta; md} arty, sBe Fare. 
BKt F UT Aer 

81. Cited by Apa 100; Dev 3.574, Madh 1.508 — a) cMd | aeareted Gata; Put Pod 
Pu’ farear’; sCa Ho Jo Lo? GMd> GMy 0Or Tr! [cor sh to] Tj! Apa’ feeraear, Wa * fererettee; 
NNg ferderre; wKt! “feraeret — b) BBE Ho sOx! Ox? FT; GMd> Pud Pu’ “waTT:; Pus “ya — c) 
Be! warraaft; wKt! waeat; Pu? Pud “set; Apa [vl] HA — d) Ti? “Reaarfesty 

82, Cited by Apa 100; Dev 3.573 — a) wKt! aT; Kt? Tr? Ofesft; cMy uP; eke 
art, wKt! Lo} eager; cMd! earegféar; sOx! sPuo feat — b) aK e atesed:; Md? attoat, 
Lo? Tj! afena:, rMd4 Prot — c) mTro wagarcarracmea;, aK é arearea fader (cf. 9.814]; 
Tj! aga ; wk “aaear — d) Apa avastaT Fra; Be! BBE Bo BCa NKt* La! GMd! GMy 
sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pud sPuo Pu? Tj! mTr® ATaA=TT; wKt! ATACATAT; BBe? wKt! GMd! ¢ 

83. Cited by Apa 101; Dev3.574; Madh 2.288 — a) nKt' sOx! Ox? Pub sPuo aferferar; 
wkt! aferRrar; La! aafear; Lo’y; Be! sBe? cMd! nPu! mTr4 mTro T— b) Lot + ees; Tr! 
[but cor sh] “saaiftar, Wa “aay hear; Lo4 “wag fear; TMd3 Pu? Pu? “ag ftar; Tr? “weg fran, 
Ho Kt? Pud “wag:ferat, Madh “=e frat — c) cMd! + ae: — d) La! aiear; cMd! sree ; 
Hy rege; Madh “afreft 

84. Cited by Laks 12.630 — a) rMd3 yfafaear g Far g; Pue Pu’ vfaftrst; cMd! rMd4 
gfatte; Me Jha Dave ate, Lo? Tj! Prarerser, nPu! “Prarie; [Jolly R] fared; Jm 
Jo! GMy Ox? Pu mTr? MTr3 Mandlik KSS [Jolly Nd] ‘fraft tar; sKt> waar; wCa nKt4 
fagenft; Ho Frater — b) La! eres” — c) cMy Tj! Fat; BK WT; Ho Ma} Hear’; Tj? 
yar’; Lot tet THs; Tr! [but cor sh] “TAT; NNg Laks “GAR; NNg “BART; Hy Jm Jo! Ke 
Lo? Pu? Tj! mTr3 [Jolly R] Mr Mandlik Jha Dave KSS St; GMd! “wars — d) cMd5 sOx! 
a; wkt! mtr? mTr® ear 

85. Cited by Jmv 111.47; Laks 12.611; Madh 1.509 — a) Tr! SavaTaeraift, Bo Ho wKt! 
Lo! Lo? NNg Pu’ Na Seater; Hy Lot GMd! 1Md3 +Md4 GMd’ GMy Jmv Sed TAT; Be! 
erg aera; BK Laky ST T aT; sOx! sPuo Caveat; Pud Pu? SreeavaeTAs; mTr® 
eararrereratt — b) Bo fata; 1Md4 atta; mTr$ ATA; Ho Fs; tM} fest:; cMy FeaT: — c) 
oMy areal’; Jmy Laks “gittte vy" d) wKt® Pu SaeeT NK MT Sstesat: oMy 
“sss; Bo “SSIS; Lal “seas; wKt! Pu3 sa; cMd ! rMd? tMd‘* GMd? GMy Te mTr4 MTP? 
MTr® Wa [Jolly Nd] Madh & S34F3; oOr 7 ASA: 





762 Chapter 9 


wg: atkgyyat eetert a Fee | 

tat faa Hateadar aracnfe: eererst UCI 
we acakaette waren rca | 
TUT MANTIS: TAT SAIT FT: NCI 
THETA ATT ASNT T | 
STITATARY at aE Heat gererarfaker uci 


8. ma fh in NNg. Cited by Jmv 11.1.47;Laky 12.611; Madh 1.509— a) TMd3 *syqT — b) 
Pus af; Tr Afra; BBe? Ho Kt? Afeaar — c) Be! Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Tr earata af: aut; Lot 
wqeada; BBe? Bo Hy Jo! wKt! BK Lo! TMd3 Pu? Pu‘ Tj? mTr? Wa LaksJmv [vl as in ed] 
Mandlik KSS Dave &T 24; Pu? Pu> Pu‘ at Aa; Be! BKtS rMd? Ox? Pu} Pu’ Tr? era; Ho 
ear Far; La! cata; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G]eareta — d) M3 arafers ee; GMd! nNg Taser; 
Lo‘ Pu Pu’ [Jolly M G]arasnfa; rMd3 aratonfe:; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKtt [Jolly Nd] Mandlik 
Jha KSS Daversa; sOx! sP uo mT ro TeatTfer:; GMy ATeaToTfer:; Pu! avatsifer:; Ox? 
arestife:; wk La! ararsitfer:; Bo Lo! mTr4 Jv Laks Madhatersitfe:; w Kt! + fesnter:; Tr! 
areaay; wKt! oOr Herat 
87.* Cited by Jmy 11.1.47; Laks 12.611 — a) Wa om Ad; sOx! sPu® qe: Pu? Pu4 
ceed: Lal aepeaHeTe; Be! Lo! acareomstiera; Tj! “ster — b) rMd? erarTfer; Pu? Put 
SAMTeIT; Bo Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? BKt® Lo* Pu? Pu’ Tj? mTr? Me Re Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
aren, Te? wares; Hy Lo’ nNg Tr? Laks Pervert, Be! eraser; Ox? feraar wer; 
wKt! feraar aar; Pu’ feraarsay — c) Ho STeTATMETS:; Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKkt! Kt? wk La! 
Lo! sOx! Ox? Pu’ sPu® Pu? Pu’ Tj? Tr! Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “a18T%:; Lot cMd! cMd5 
oMy “aster:; Md? “aTesTex:; [Jolly G Ku] “aTeTes — d) Lo? FSS"; wKt4 AAg’; Lo! “fere- 
eq; Md} See Lo! Lo? Md4 GMy Wa wae T 
88. Cited by Madh 1.481— a) Ho SePTI AST; wKt) cMd! Tj! Seprear’; Md! 
“waTat — b) nKt* &era; BKtS AEST; NKt4 TM? Pud Pu’ Trt MTP MT 1 aT — c)r Md? aoa 
aft; Te srearaft; Be! amet — c-d) aBe at Heat aet ger — d) wKe qerepeat aT; 
BKtS om ae; Md! eat TAT | +Md> Madh SAS AAT:; NNg FART: 
After the first half-verse an additional verse in Be! nPu! Pu? Pu* Wa; it is given after 
verse 88 in La! Mandlik [€, 3, $, WT] KSS Dave [= VaDh17.70]: 
west paurygarevateranr | 
sequen fe farsaraat ararequester tI 
a) Be! Wa ‘seafestepear — b) La! “are car der; nPu! Pu? Put “sre; Be! 
“wafearat — c) nPu! fafersrareay; Pu2 Put Pifecscarear 
Further additional verses in La!: 
Tesn wrest sat seae fear | 
TT: TRAP TAP UTS || 
wer Te aaIAgaerryS | 
Weqaraaaray ar yoy FT Sas: | 
a at apt ate sar St yore cae | 
a a yfecet onif wafirgpar wey UI 
THaygdare g sagheae rar | 
Tea Pat Tease eT a stg | 





Chapter 9 763 


SAT AURIS Ts SAGAeey | 

a daat wes wordt afehrge ucs 
attr qategaedta Hariaadt act | 

wa g wrereaertata aaa aT US oll 
ada varakersate aay | 

aa: fefrzaratfea za a arferreaker us 2h 
Berere Atadte fist wear Taga | 
Aas Waa aA Ms Sale T AT USA 


fer a gages g weragadt eq | 
aT earaatartaga4n watery NS Ru 
raat atereat gar araqrarfeany | 


89. Cited by Apa 93;Laks 2.33; Hem3/3.804; Dev 1.216 — a) GMd! @rAtal; Tr? Heat 
farsa — b) Ho 1@— c) wKt! + Fa weg yee; cMd! aaai; Td? NNg BAA7; Bo Lo? 
nPu! Pu? Put Tj! Wa Apa Laks Dev dat, Lot Pu? Pu} Put Pud Pu’ Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] Laks 
Hem Dev Jolly Wea — d) Put qorétare; La! tar FF 

90. Omitted in mTr?, Cited by Laks 2.48; Hem 3/3.805; Dev 1.217;Madh 1.484— a) Ku 
Mr Afr gTaifer gta; NK BK oOr “wyaTata; BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt 
Lo! Lo? Lo’ Pu} Pu’ Tj! Tr! [cor to sh] Tr? Wa Na Rn Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “"y&tea 
Tj? “wate — b) Pu’ T? Dev Bark’; Pud Pu? He Fe’; +Md3 HaTET — c) wKt} La! om 
a; Pu’ Pu? wraredaer 

gi. Padas a-c ma in Lot; padas b-d omitted in wKt!. Cited by Laks 2.48; Hem 3/3.805; 
Dev 1. 217; Madh 1.484— a) sOx! sPu® arefta®; wKt! arfeerarar; Be! Tj! “HT — b) cMd! 
“afr; Ho La! nNg reaxeay afe; Laks WeeRITT TA; wkd ae fe — c) nNg 34; 
+Md‘ + ReRY; wKe °Rrentfa — d) cMd! GMd Tr! mTr°& @ A; pBe2nKt' Tr? ae; Lo? 
Ft; Ox? 34; Lo! F aureqesla, Tr! [but cor] AR ; cMd! arrester 

92.* Omitted in wKt!. Cited by Apa 93; Laks 2.48; Dev 1.217 — a) 1Md‘4 aaah 
OG; MTP aePRe, La! “are: Lo! areata; Md? areeftar — b) Laks Praetr aaa; Pub 
Pu7 tr; Jm faa; Hy frat — c) Laks ATA; Be! Fras; Ho GMd> MTr*mT ro BIGae TT [om 
aT]; NNg wrgay aft; rMd4 “eet — d) Hy nKt4 4; Tr! & [ma sha]; Be! sBe? Bo BCa Ho 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt} Lo! Lo? Lo? sOx! Ox? Pu} sPuo Pu Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr? LJolly Ku R] Dev 
Rn Rc Mandlik Jha KSS Dave &1, Bh [patha] Me [patha] &:; cMy feare ct; cMd! ear 
a; oM@ enfefe a; mT arated eta; M3 earfefe area; pBe? aT wKe a 

93.* Omitted in wKt! Put. Cited by Apa 93; Laks 2.48 — a)NKt’ Lo* Pu? fos; Tr far, 
oOr sOx! sPuo fF gq; Lo? Fac; BKt> La! fester; cMd> Pu} om 7; BCa “SCT; BKt om g; 
BBe? sOx! sPu® f8; Ho La! nNNg 4 — b) Tr? “aaa; BK “ane; wk? La! mTr* Wa Bet — c) 
Pu? fiqeareaafesrig; Be Lott 4; pBe?sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt La! Tj? Tr! [me sh to] 
mMTr? Wa Polly Ku] Apa Laks Rn Mr Jolly & fF; oOr & adearaher 5 Md? @rarefa ; Bo 

“afer”; sOx! sPus “erent” — d) cMy sfaer; BK afar; Tj! “aera; Pwd Pu? “Are 
tMd? ae: 


764 Chapter 9 


meaiseagt ar at dtaft aac: ugvi 
qaqat afafat fread awsareas: 

at areadt Repnfrer zarat frerrracsy sal 
wort fir: ger: gararf wT Ara: | 
aaa et: Tay Gerat aEtfea: URE 
SI sayoarar Raat ats yous: 

RTT WaT BT BATAAT UN 
oradta vt qastr gee gfat qaq | 

gee f aeged oF sfafawarz uci 
Uae Tat WPAIT TTT area: | 
FEMA AGTMA FACITET ATT USN 


94. Omitted in wKt! Kt? Pu‘. Cited by Jmv 1.39;Hem 3/3.802; Dev 1.212, 213; Madh 
1.474, 2,121 — a) Hy Lo®nPu! Pu? Pu Pu’ Pu? Tj! Mandlik KSS “attee [supported by Bh 
Ku Mr]; La! “gotee"; cMd! etepert; Jmv ’ [vl] aeert— b) nPu “athe; Ke “artis: abe 

*arffest — c) Bo NNg Tj! stead; nNg “teat aut Be? “wants af; rMd3} J — d) NNg 
ae; Pud Pu’ erat; Md? feeafer aca, sOx! sPue Fae; BBe? GMd! HeaR; Jmy [vl] Tae; 
Md} Fer: 

95. Omitted in wKt! Put; placed after 9.74 in rMd* GMy. Cited by Laks 12.611; Dev 
3.568 — a) Lo! Saerufenrar aT; rMd? Tj? oferarat; Pu’ Pu’ “atat — b) Be! Lo? Pu? Pu’ Pu’ 
Pu’ Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly faeearfresarert:; sOx! sPuo cMy fared; nNg fart; GMa 
farasreas’ ; rMd3 yesar afer: — d) Ox? fecaraeq; La! cGMd! +Md3 GMy sOx! sPu® “ara 

96. Omitted in wKt!; placed after 9.74 in rMd3 GMy. Cited by Laks 12.611 — a) Hy Pu® 
Pu’ [but cor] SaaS; Bo ATT; rMd? Tj “are — b) tMd4 g; BKt? GMy nPu! HMa: — a) 
aMd) ¥a:; NK Hat; GMy sOx! sPu’ Fat; GMd! Tet; Md? Wa Fem; Md? aelfear: 

97. Omitted in wKt! Pu4; pada-b omitted in Pu>. Cited by Vif 1.69;Laks 2.61; Dev 1.219 
—a) Be! Bo BKt® Lo* GMy Ox [Jolly M45? Nd] ¥eactat— b) Be! Ho Lo? Lo’ Lot oMd! 
GMd> nNg oOr nPu! Pu? Tj! rad, Lo! Had; nKt’ BK# sOx! sPuo Tr! [but cor sh] TAT; La! 
yaad; Md? fad — d) wKe wearaqaead, Be! Md? Laks Hear YF Fett; cMd> Ha FT 
Fea; Lo! war GF Fa; Jo? “Afaert 

98. Omitted in wKt'; Nd has the following sequence of verses: 98, 100, 99, 101 — a) 
Ho aearta — b) Jo! NKt* La! GMd! Md} GMy Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr° Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
ae; Bel aeq — c) Lal Vere Yew Bed; Tr! fin addition after 3.51] Jew fe sfeer Hear; 
Md om f& — d) Ho P83; Ho “feaer:; Pu? Put “faseat: Tr? “fafeer 

99. Omitted in wKt! oOr; padas c-d omitted in BKt5; verses 99 and 100 transposed in 
GMy. Cited by Laky 2.57-8; Dev1.218 — a) NNg Uaead; Pu> Pu? Ua g; Laks UF FT; GMy Fe; 
Lo? 9x1; Pu’ Pu’ GATS; nPul agy aATae — a-b) Lot TY 7 I Sg aa: BAT gr — b) 
oMy Tearge; sOx! sPue Set; GMd> UTP aTera:; Pu! atet:; Pu? Put Area: — c) rMd4 cMd> 
ager: oMd5 “ARITA, Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKe sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj? mTr? Yolly Ku] Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave “er oferart — d) Tr? greet gétaa; oMd! gaeearadtae 


Chapter 9 765 


AGIA Areata yeaeate fe ary | 


ee a 
TARA MTA ATTACH: | 

UT Tt: AAT HT: ShtyTAT: TT: ULo 
amar arferatar at fagmrkrataay W202 
we etiqeaternt vat at cerafea: | 
areata arrest Prareré W203 
wea fager aga waar wat: AAT | 
waedgae faeracfigrer fe sftaat: ugow 


100. Omitted in wKt! BKt oOr. Cited by Dev 1.232 — a) TMd3 af 7 ZA, Be! aft 
3PPT; 1Md4 apy; Bo 23IT; wKe} “BPxTT; Lo! “geapHt; Bo sett — a-b) cMd ABT 
aretagery Broery — b) cMd! yay sATg; Ho nKt* &; GMd> GMy 4 — c) Ho Yrwusdy; 
Pu‘ ZA; GMd [in add after 3.51] Heat; Wa SAT — d) Pud Pu’ fea; Tr! [in addition after 
3.51] It; Ho fase; rMd3 faster 

Additional half-verse in tMd?: 

azar agente adiae a Prerary |! 

101. Omitted in wKt?; padas c-d omitted in BKt’, and pada-d in Lo®. Cited by Apa 101; 
Laks 12.613; Dev 3.581 — a) Md¢ airerenerfraey; La! aera; Lo} eet’; oMd! 
Ox? Pu? Put Tr? “aTerer’: Be! Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt® Lo! [but cor] Lot 1Md3 cMy wPu! Tr? 
Wa [Jolly M Nd] Apa KSS “Rraret; Pu2 Put “art — b) Ho oetae:; tMd? +Md4 oMd 
“ota; Pus “ose: — c) wKt? tMd4 ef — d) GMd5 om Fe:; Be! @4A:; 7 Md? MTr? MTP 
MTr® 3t:; GMy3t 

102.* Omitted in wKt!; padas a-b omitted in Pu‘ and pada-a in Lo’. Cited by Laks 
12.613; Dev 3.581 — a)oOr aT; BKt Pret aur, Tr? adaredt — b) sBe? gatat pafasar; 
tMd? Agar & Hales; Lo? “Fat; wCa HowKke “gatdt Ha ; nKO “Gar afwawedt; Tj! T 
adt fet; La! gafeit — c) Put tar; Be! Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? La! Lo! Lo? Lo’ nNg Ox? 
nPu! Pu? Pu} Put Pud Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? Te mTr3 [Jolly G Ku R] Mandlik KSS aIRraat, Ho 
aRratarat at; sOx! sPue atRraearat [om at]; Dev atferatarat fag —- d) Ho nKtt Lo? Lo! 
TMd3 nNNg oOrsOx! nPu! Pu? Put sPuo Tr? Wa [Jolly M] Me Re Prayer: BBe? Hy Jo Lo? Tj! 
Tj? fees MT! mT ro agar: BK GMd! “taet 

103. Omitted in wKt; pada-d omitted in nKt*. Cited by Jmv 1.3; Dev3.597 — a) Lo? Ut 
— b) Be! Bo tMd! Pu? Pu? aT; Pu? Put ef; Tj? ef; oMd> wafer dfear:; Md “aed; nNg 
Wa Jmy [vl] “afer; mv [vl] “aftra:; Be! Ox? “dae: — c) TMd? tMd4 “oRPT; MT “Uh a; 
Put ‘verer; Be! “urftete — d) Be! amauta; pBe? Jo! K2 wKt} Pu Tj? Tr Mandlik 
KSS Dave a4" [supported by Ku Rn Mr]; Pu2 om “ent: Tr? “erat, Tj! “et; sOx! “ant; Hy 
Jo? Pu’ Na Re “wai fatera, wk} Patera: 

104. Omitted in wKt'; pada-a omitted in nKt*. Cited by Apa 718;Jmv 1.14; Laks 12.648; 
Dev 3.599; pada-a cited by Vij 2.117 and pada-d by Jmv 2.7 — a) Lo om and Lo* ma Aga, 
Lo? Tj! wigey — b) BK AGT, Wa ART; Pud Pu? wtcte; NKt? GMd! GMd5 GMy Pud Pu’ Tr! 


766 Chapter 9 


wre wr FT Wetarq et aragrac: 


qoraqaaapag frat aa Ugo 
Ret areas Gat wafer ATra: | 

QT A AAT N20 KI 
aero waar st are | 
a va att: Ga: Brae: Wow 
freae arerteqasstest wat ada: 
gaaeate adres yratt ata: Ueocl 
TTS: ee adafe faarrafe ar ga: \ 
RID: TIAA Hla TITS: atari: W208 
at Sret sreght: ereatdg a fide a: 
oragheey ag T ayeay TyaT |e fol 


Tr! mTrS MTr° Yolly Nd Gr] @@; Md? St — c) Tj! FAT; BK La! Lot wPu! “Pray; oMd! 
Ox? “gaya: Be! frat”; Wa ftasa’; Lal ama; Hy ferent” — d) Hy “averred; tMd? 
*Aranfe; cMd! “Atrret; KO Cameay sfadt:; sOx! sftae:; Lo! sftaa; Lo? stadt; Hy sfract: 

105. Omitted in wKt! Pu5; padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Vij 2.117;Apa 722; Jmv 
1.36, 3.15; Laky12.649; Dev 3.615; Madh 3.334 — a) BKtS SSA; Be! Hy Jo? Lo nNg Tj! fF 
— b) Ox? dx; Hy fiat; cMy “aud — c) nPu! “aastiay’; Te “sft ata — d) Bo 
“aqeqda; BK O La! frazerat 

106. Omitted in wKt!. Cited by Jmv 1.36, 11.1.32;Lakys 12.650; Dev 1.43; Madh 1.502; 
padas a-b cited by Vij 2.130and padas c-d by Jmv 11.6.31 — b) GMy Hal — c) BKt? “aor ata 
— d) Ho Terre 84; Jmv 1.36 Tegan; Jmv 11.1.32, 11.6.31 

107. Omitted in wKt'; padas c-d omitted in nKt*. Cited by Jmv 1.36; Laks12.650; Dev 
1.48; Madh 1.502 — a) Tj! 4a; Lo! arafer— b) oOr ARTA ; La! nNg WERT; Hy 
Lo? cGMd! rMd3 Md‘ GMd? GMy MTr‘mTr® aa; Jo? Tj! ayaTA; Bo Tr! ayaa 
Jmv weatfer — c) Tj! wr; Lo! Lo! oOr Pw Pu’ [Jolly M*>* G] Jolly UI; cMd! [Lolly MER 
Ku Nd] eet: — d) nPu! “sraorrag: 

108.* Omitted in wKt! nKt*; verses 108 and 109 transposed in GMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by 
Jmy 6. 1.54; Laks 12.650; padas a-b cited by Apa 433 — a)ApaY Gaara saa - Tr? fade; 
oMy Gat S&F; mT mT ro eat SP — b) wKt} “3383; Be! Bo Jm Jo! Kt? wKt® Lo! Lo? Lot 
aMy oOr Ox? Pu’ Tj? Tr? MTr? Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave aga ; Ho wrgerdtae:; 
Pu} wigaartat: — c) Ho wKt} nNg Pub gaaete; tM? “aeanfeard’; Jv [vl as in ed] Feat 
qa’; MTP ade S — d) La! Tj? “SST; Bo oMdd “35S; TP HAT: 

109. Omitted in wKt! nKt*. Cited by Laks 12.650 — a) GMy SYST; Pud Tr? seta — b) 
oMy “arafer Fae: — c) BK AS: GT; Tj! Gaara — d) Tj! swe 

110. Omitted in NKt4; padas a-c omitted in wKt!. Cited by Laks 12.650 — a) Wa om 
watST; NP ul irs — b) Be! aftag; Lo’ cMy w fda; oMy MTr Laks facta a — c) Lal 
sersgftrerart eat; Pu’ Pu’ Volly G] ase Ua ae; cMy “gfadter; Pu? “gh seq — d) 
oOrageaey  TYaC; eBe? TTA; Wa eT Fay’; ake aeyh: 


Chapter 9 767 


Ud ae aagal qaat tere | 

qatar aera qatar 22 ei 
weer fay Tart: WaTTET aay | 
adie Heat Ear Teter g attra: LLM 
Rota area detat waters | 

DY SOSA AT MATTE TTT 22 a 
aaah wasTrara4ransdaraAye: 

wer artearr fereresrrargaraey Ne ee 
Tart 7 arat saat way | 
afenfrta tar g scared areraetery Ue oul 
Ud Vga Ware | 

TSS RA TIT Saag HeTAT LLM 


11. Cited by Apa 719, 722; Jmv 1.37;Laky 12.651; padas a-b cited by Jmv 1.27 — b) 
tMd “STENT; Apa BFA — c) cMd! gaawefa, cMd5 prarad, Apa 722 [vl] vase 
— d) Be! “grat:; Wa @ef;eKt) Pu Pu? “wat; Md? GMd> “wt:; oOr “wt; Ho wKE Tr? 
“water: Apa 719 Bar: gy; Lo? Tr? gerapar; mT? sferfaT— wPu! inserts here 9.213. 

112. Cited by Vij 2.114, 117;Jmv 2.37;Laks 12.655; Dev 3.619; Madh 3.334 — a) Pu Pu’ 
[Jolly G] ie: TAS, La! Steg; Be! 1Md3 cMy sOx! wTr*aar; + Md* fearqeare; wKt! 
faarfergtz:; Lo! [cor to] Sart — b) Bh [patha] FTL at az; Me [patha] Feraft ge av; Be! 
aay wre age; aK “aaret; Hy Fey; Pu2 Put geareqeray; cMd! My ase:; Lo! Fara 
— c) Be! La! Lo? Lot GMd! nNg Pu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu? Pu’ Tr! [but cor sh] mTr? Ha; Pu’ erat; 
Wa acted; Ox? cat; Tr? Fever; Pu’ Pu? HeaAereT — d) Hy aaeeIT BERT [cf. 8.112b]; Pud 
Pu? [Jolly G] act; TMd4 Tro Getaeq; BKtS TM} F; BBe? Atta; Ho sOx! sPuo eta: 

113. Cited by Laky 12.656 — a) nPu! Seeeta; Lot [ma TT] FAS afr; sOx! sPus 
tater, Pu? Put efteq; oOr Heer — b) Lod aenfea:; Hy wAFeaT; oOr zaTfea#, oMy 
[Jolly Nd] Fir afe — e) Tr! a, Lo} Tj! a0 %; Md? ae; Jm BA; Lo! 4; Hy rMd4 Sst — 
d) Laks Tat; Wa ATe7F; Lo? “ATeAay; Lo! “aret 

114. Omitted in sOx!. Cited by Laky 12.656 — a)cMy SHSTTaAT ; La! Saararat ; Ho 
“ardtarat. — b) wKt! sKtS La! Pu2 Put Pu’ sPuS Pu? Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly cast: ; 
Kt? “apya:; Tr! [but cor sh] “araTarst: — d) Pu Pu? “aay; Hy Jo? Lo? tMd? Pu? Tj! 
Tr? Laks “aa: WI; BKtS “aTet; Be! wKt! “areal; Lo! “aree; Bh [patha] “ase comment- 
ing: a9t F wrayer edtaragaat sort 

us. Cited by Jmv 2.45;Laks 12.659; Dev 3.619 — a) sOx sPuo Sart area 
[metathesis]; GMd! sareifasrreatéc; cMy aareafer — b) rMd4 aaa; La! Tr? gag; 
Pus Pu’ [Jolly G] aerfa: — c) Lo? “Paeareer g; Pud Pu’ Jv Laks Dev 2} BISsSITGT — d) 
MTré mTr® Saray; Pu2 Put Pare 

116. Cited by Jmv 2.37; Laks 12.660; Dev 3.620; padas c-d cited by Vij 2.117;Mddh 
3.334 — a) wKt! aafecttan, Put aHECET; Bo La! cMdé “Rt — b) Bo ara worry, 


BBe? GM d! ware ; Md? antes ye — c) Lo! sarétqyd;cMy Farr ya; Tj? 


768 Chapter 9 


Tate eeers: Fase ada: 

saraat adtara ef eat arafeera: 2 20 
PASAY BINT: WayUTAT: TIE | 
eaedatrergurr afar: eqefsera: Ue cil 
whe tare Tag fret aa | 
aofre Xf frat sreeta feeftaer 22a 
aaEStorrarat yarqearsaats | 

area Rravt: enfefe eat arafera: eo 
sree Waren atat area | 

frat wert corer aerator T ASTT NLR 
ga: sfret Short erst a yar: 

wet at Prat: erfefea wearer wa ULRRM 


Sarrarge; Lot Felt SEt; Ho Fae T Ta; Be “BA was; wKe! ctu; Be! Ho Hy Jm 
Jo? La! Lo! Lo® Lo* My nNg Pu’ Pu’ Tr? [Jolly M G Nd] Re Madh Jolly Saas, Te! Aor 
— d) Lo! “unfiré; Or aretmerat; Lo! “wert 

u7. Cited by Vij 2.117; Laks 12.661; Dev 3.620, Madh 3.334 — a)BKt wefea; Bo 
warheads, Ir Beer: — a-b) Md! warfeent erat stores TATE: —- b) Tr? gatenf; Hy 
“eet. Tj! “ert; Md? “and — c) Te starter: Lo! tMd4 Heme; oOr Tr! [but me sh] “ate 
fafer — d) Lot araferc:; Lo! “Fear: 

118.* Cited by Vij 2.124;Apa731; Jmv 3.36, Laks 12.671; Dev 3.626; Madh 3.345 — a) 
BK er: eT: Taepearez:; La! TRY; Madh TRN; Lot tMd* Wa [Jolly M] Me MATT: 
waneaegq; Laks eq: TET; Tr? Speenseq; Be! Pub Pu? “spy — b) Madh & aut. 
Md? yaurgrae — c) TMd3 om first STA; MTr4 “argaaiat; Pu’ *eaqurat — d) Lo! oftege- 
fecaa: 

ug. Cited by Vij 2.118-9; Apa 723; Laks 12.674 — a) Bo arafast; nPu! srstferas; wKt! 
yaifaay; Be! “faataard: Jm Jo! Jo? nKt* Lo? Tj? mT? Volly Ku] Vij Rn Mandlik KSS Dave 
aparh [supported by Ki]; Hy FHAH ; Ke? AHaes; ake PHSB; Apa MHA; wKe tara — 
b) aCa BK Lo! Lo} GMd! nPu! Tj? 4ae; GMy MTr’MTro Bea; wKt! Sst — c) Vij aenterar 
amarh; Hy aromfees 

10. Cited by Vij 2.136;Laks 12.708; Madh 3.357 — a) Vij Madh aftast s cmd 
“aratar: — b) aKtS “eatcrafrt — c) Bo cMd5 NNg SHeTeT, Tr? feat — d) 1Md3 *feafer: 

121. Omitted in BK®. Cited by Laks 12.709 — a) Lo4 ST8SI4; wKt3 STASI; TMd4 mTr® 
TAT; Ho BET — b) Be! WIsTs — c) mTr! fear wart; Md? sOx! sPu® mTr4 mTro 
MTr® BhWart:; Lot 99r7; wKt! wet; Ho TT; GMd> Ast — d) Bh [patha] TeTee; Md? 
aeHtaeat; Lot at; sOx! sPuo Tj? fasta, Tr? THda; cMd aq Aad; Ox? mT? asHtT; Me 
[patha; rejected by Me] Sista 

122. Padas a-b omitted in BKt®. Cited by Laks 12.658 — a) Lo4 395:; Lo? #facsT; cMd5 
oMy Tr! mTr® ScTaT:; Lo? Seai— b) nK tt Tj? om BPcarat; GMy Tr! mT ro HPcorars; 
BCa Ho wKt! wKt}? La! nNg Pu? Pu? ¢ — c) GMd! caer — d) wKt att 


Chapter 9 769 


Us FY Tetat T Yaw: | 
ATASTOSSISIINASATAT EAATTAT: ULV 
SST AAT Krsrt st_rTatsar: | 

ae: Tae: BT wareharfer aT NLM 
aay Ararat yararafeasrac: | 

a Waal Steaua wera Steep M24 
TATST Tet FATA STAT | 
TATA Y* THAT SAT SAT N22ll 


ayaa fatrat gat edta ghrearz | 
FATT WAG TAT SUTAMTHCT U2 2 


123.* Cited by Laks 12.658 — a) Tj? Ua; wKt! La! va — b) wKt! Pud Pu? [Jolly G] 
Hererayass: [wKe! serena]; pCa Herr qeast:; Lo? dered; wKe} Pu’ FEY; ake © J WF: 
—¢) Be! ser oa fear: BIg ; uTr6 aa; Ho “stesq ; Md “gat gat ag’; oMd5 “garag 
— Cc -d) wKt! “FATA; joMy guretgar & — d) Pud Pu’ “uTetearat; Pu? Put “qaredgera, 
pBe? garedgarat; Md? gat aarar &; pBe: mT} waraa: 

124. Omitted in oOr; padas c-d ma in Lo‘. Cited by Laks 12.658, 782 — a) Jo! STAT; 
oMy Sisrar — b) Tr? ereaguarsat; Tj! egy’; Be! oMy nNg Put MTr> GTezr:; Ho Jo! Kt? 
nKt! BKt5 Lo! GMd! 1Md4 sOx! Pu’ sPuS Pu? “d1S3T; sBe? La! Lo? 1Md3 nPu! Pu2 Wa [Jolly 
M Nd] ‘deat; mT rS iret — c) Lot om SATE: BBE TATGa:; MTS eaATGaT:; Ho SATA: 
arora, Wa eaargarat — d) nKtt La! Lot cMd® nNg Tr! [but me sh] eeefater; Md‘ eeetater; 
oMd! tMd3 MT mTr® Bearer, Lo! areer; rMd? sear; tMd4 areor 

125. a) Be! agar; BKt° Sata; Bhlad 8.126] gives a patha, 74g, which he rejects — 
b) oMd! “ort featra:; Tj! onfra aoe; nKet Comat ator: — c) oOr aaa; TMad? aay, 
nKt! arget; tMd! Aga; Tj! ATact, Lo? Pu2 Wa SISTA; BBe? wKt! wKt? Lo? tMd3 tMd4 
oOr sOx! Pub sPue Pu? Tr? sasr Lot sate sft — d) tTMd3? SAAT; wKt} Lot Pud Pu? Tj? 
BS; BBe? NKt# sOx! sPus ABT” 

126.* a) Ox? Sard) SeeTaTEM; nKe aa: Be! Ho GMd! Pu2 Put mTr® Wa Sater: 
Bo Md? NNg PuS “ssa; Md) “Ss; wKe! amt — - b) aBe? KP Tj? Tr Yolly R Ku] 
wae ; Jo! Baral ; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] yaerear sfer; oMd> “esrarg =F ea; GMd! tMd4 ayer; 
NNg Wa 2d; La! fercr — c) rMd3 AaRaETAA,; BBe? Hy Jo? wKt! La! Lo? Lo? oOr Pu? Pul 
Pu’ Tj! aaattarrig; cMd’ aaarata THT; Bel Bo Ca Ho Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} nKf sKtS Lo! 
Lo* NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu> sPu® Pu? Tj? Tr? MTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
arate wiq [Be! wrapaha] — d) cMd! Stewart, Be! mTr°SatSar; Md? SAtaTayr; oOr 
sated:; La! GMd! &jat:; Wa St: 

127. Padas a-c omitted in Pu? Put. Cited by Jmv 10.2; Laks 12.726 — a) GMd® agar aa; 
Md} agar at — b) Pud Pu? Yet; wKt! qt; rMd4 gferepr: — c) Md? Hager; oOr Jv [v1] 
wade; Be! HonNg mTr® waeeTTeTAT; rMd4 Water — d) Lo? Tj! ATT: BIT; Lo! 
at arg & . cMd' Bret em . Be! GMd! tMd3 GMd? nPul Tr! areata; Ho rar Lo? 
“aTe 

Additional verse in nPu! Pu? Tr? Mandlik [@, \, ©] Dave KSS; padas c-d cited by Apa 


770 Chapter 9 


sere of feet ger ase gran: | 
fraerf wager caer ser: sarah: uel 
qat & aa aate weITT wala | 

ara tat Aeper starear aaftarfery 1e2su 


AAT TAT FT: FT sfeat aar | 

Tea fara SIT ITT tT ULZoll 
Age was werd sah was a: | 
ater vr a etagaenters arq 2320 


deat ates Rermgaer figetd | 
@ wa garg at frost fast ararsarr | UL3R 


urraifeaatate fagrar anit enter: 


80 [cf. VaDh 17.17]: 
aurgat vera Get warspary | 
seat ay oad ga: & F gar wafefer II 
d) Apa afacater 

128,* Padas a-b omitted in Hy. Cited by Laks 12.726 — a) TMd3 cMy aa; cMd> 7 — 
b) mTr° St; Ho Ft; Bo SUT; TMd3 TSH J; GMds UT; MTr¢ Tro WHET; TMds THT; 
[Jolly Nd]Jolly 435 4; GMy Tr! aa EIT; Lot wPu! Pu2 Put Wa [Jolly M]aa TAYPT ; Pus 
Pu’ [Jolly G] aaarghy Tj’ aeghy ; Bo [cor to] wKt! La! Md? GMd> GMy nPu! Pu? Put 
Tr! [but cor sh] mTr® Yolly Nd] Laks 9f7aT, sBK® GMd! Pud Pu’ gyfer — c) wKkt! fagpeery; 
Lot [ma &e7st — d) pBe? Pud Pu? eet; Tr? Tt: 

129. a) Tr? aét aa FT; GMy Tr! act waar; rMd? aat geet; Pu2 Put zat aferear — b) 
oMd! cMd5 GMy MTP mTr® Brea; Md} wretarr — c) Hy wet aeger — d) rMd4 Stare; 
Be! Hy wKt! La! Lo! Pu? Put *fearfe; cMy nPul “felarfa:; rMd? “faera> 

a8 Cited by Jmy 11.2.1; Laks 12.708, 747; Dev 3.683 — a) TMd3 Tj! 7 — b) Hy La! 

: — ¢) Jo? Tj! TeTeTah, Lo Tees; mTré mT ro Preeecat; Jinv sftareat — d) Pus 
BIT, WaT TART, Ho BUAAT; Hy Jo? BKt Lo? Pud Pu’? Tj! Jmv eter 

igi. Cited by Madh 3.372; padas a-b cited by Apa 721;Jmv 4.2.13; Laks 12.689 and 
padas c-d by Laks 12.724 —- a) Pu? Put Jv [vl] STg2a; Ho Bo La! Lo*nNg Pu? Pu’? Wa [Jolly 
M34 G] Jolly age [but at 9.214 Jolly adopts aH]; Pu2 mT ro ataas; Hy atfeay, Pus agar 
— b) Bo Barat; Hy SARA; TM} UT AT — c) La! afer; Be! Hy BKt5 La! Lo? 
cMd5 sOx' sPuo MTP LaksUa J; Bo Ut fe; oMd! varaet” — d) wKt! eteqaentaoas; 
tMd3 “@s; Hy Jo? Lo} Tj! [Jolly R] “Rac& aE 

132. Cited by Jmv 11.2.19; Hem 31.87; Dev 4.14; padas c-d cited byLaks 12.724 — a) 
cMd! +Md4 GMd> GMy MTr4 Tro atfBaterfas: aCa Ox “Rasazes’; Lo? aera’; Md? 
fren — b) Pu’ fgets; Te Bader; oOr HF FA; Imv [vl]eeferg:; BBe? BK Pud Pu? mTr5 
{Jolly G] Bh Me [patha] eeefe — c) GMd! & UT; Md} GMy MTP [Jolly Nd}aerafere; nKt4 
qaraferee; Lot gered fous; La! Pu? Put genfeqoe J; cMd! Tr! [but me sh] MT ro GEferes TT, 
TMd! Tr? om #1; Or favs — d) TMa? featatar” 


Chapter 9 771 


wate arenfratt eyat aer Fea: ULF 
yhrerat Farar { ate yatsaorad | 
aaete nt: Bsersa4r arte fe fra: 230 
ayaar Farat _F ghrarar erat | 

at aegtrartat ettarkraray 234 
APT aT Fat ay + fargergaregyay | 
wet araaeedat garieaes Eta NPI 
Tan atest Taos | 

ary gaer weer agente faery 2 30 
Taal areraentg rat aad Ye: 
aera ste sth: Mae NAT UWL ACI 


133.* Padas c-d omitted in GMy 0Or. Cited by Jmv11.2.19— a) Lo? Pus Pu? 317; cMé 
aaveea ; cMd! Tr! [but mc sh] “sarered; mT rs arerer; Md! sare; Trt mTr® Nd aa 
wre — b) Jm Jo! K@ cMd! tMd4 GMy Ox? Tj? mTr3 mTr4 MT? MTr® Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave 7 faarmfec, Pu? Put ait Ha [cf. 9.139] — d) wKO THT; Tr? TET, Bo T Meet: 

134. Omitted in Hy oOr. Cited by Vij 2.132; Apa739; Jmv 2.39, 10.2;Mdadh 3.347 — a) 
BBe? Jmv 2. 397 — b) Lo? Tj! fvarga’; nNg “Rrra; Be! nKt# Lo! sOx! 4 saa; rMd3 

“fr srr; Tj? Tr? “qa — c) Be! GMd! GMd> GMy NNg @aeatey; tM? ferret sy — d) 
NNg Tr feaat; Ho nK¢ La! Lo? GMd sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pud sPuo Pu? fez:; Lo! ferar: 

135. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Apa 754; Jmv 11.2.16; Laks 12.691, Madh 3.374—- a) Kt? 
wKe syaTaT; Apa sxsTat; Lot gfrarat x"; Ho FaTaT — b) mTré gfreprat: — d) cMy 
ewaae Lot rMd4 @taar ; BKt? evaar ; wkt3 tMd? Apa®eear ; Bo wKt! Madh eater ; 
Pu? “aTaurRead; Te “arrarery 

Additional verse in TMd?: 

IIT sera roster quay | 
herrea qarearginerpatera4r | 

136. Padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Vij 2.136;Apa 435; Jmv 10.3, 11.2.20 — a) Put 
sepeay, TMd4 BEAT BT Ba; cMd! a; Tr? ar; nKt4 arpa — a-b) cMy apart ais F fae- 
GMAT Yor — b) nKt* FT; wk alee"; cMd! faesataa; Ho Lo’ oMd@ sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu Pu? sPuo Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® Wa Volly M G Nd|Jolly “eager ad; sBKe * aeIRya; 
1Md@ “cagarga; Trt mTro creat aftr — c) cMd! +Md? 1Md4 oMy Jat; Apa frame — d) 
Jmv 10.3 [vl] rs aerate 

137. Omitted in GMy. Cited by 4pa 103; Jmv 11.1.31; Laks 2.432 — a) PuSmT? ota 
safer — b) Be! Pud Pu’ Laks Sores, TM STATA — c) Pu2 gael g THT: Bo 
La! Lo? Gaete 7 SVB La! g]; Lot Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Wa [Jolly M G] SS T FIT; NK 
qraer = T FAT; Pu aff gre; Be! [cor to] nCa wKt3 aTAET for TIE, Be! BCa Apa [vl] 
yar — d) aK areas asta; Jmv FE ; Hy a swKe were ; BBe? Jnv facet 

138. Padas a-b omitted in GMy. Cited by Jmv 11.1.31; Laks 12.741; pada-a cited by Jmv 
5.6 — b) Hy Jm Jo! Pu? Put Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Daveavad Trae; Ke trae 


772 Chapter 9 


Wadtestete fagrat arr | 
afeaste gaat darafe drag 238i 
arg: saad: fos frdughrarge: | 

fadta g fageremeadta g fra: fre: Uevoll 
sqTAT Wt: ad: Jat wer g afert: 

a atda afer aontsaenitaa: ues 
Taker waht steerer: safer | 
mTrahearept: frost aaafer qaqa: ere UPSRM 


atagmg¢aa grammar Farrer | 
BM at asat wET srestawearasth ULL 3M 


feat; Ho sOx! sPus areaege:; nPu! Far: — c) Lo! Lo} Tj! fer ware: — d) Kt? oma 

139. Padas c-d cited by Jmv 4.2.10, 11.6.9, 31 — a) BKt® Ox} nPu! Pu? Pub Pué Tr 
gate” — b) La! faatt; Lo? featur; Bo Lo? Pu’ ataserd — c) Ox afeatagas; Put 
afeartt; Jmv afeate; cMd! enyat; tMd? Ox} Pu’ Pu? WYIA; oOr WIT Ft; nKe BAT; 
1Md? waste — d) wKt dee; Lo! daa; wKt! Lod GMy nNg Tr? Jaa; Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] 
qasry 


140. Padas c-d omitted in Ho. Cited by Apa 435; Laks 12.728; Hem 3/1.123; Dev 4.14 — 
a) Md} arg: favs ae gf; Tr! ATaT — c) sOx! sPuS a; Be! 1Md? Me [patha] figqerer dct; 
BKtS Bh [patha] fq: eer adh — d) Pu2 Put om q; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? Lo Ox? Tj? Tr! mT 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave aferg: ftg:; cMy fag: frar 

141. Cited by Laks 12.731; Dev 3.671 — a) GMy er: @: @: — a-b) rMd‘ gives instead 
192a-b — b) Wa JaT; Bo Lo? nNg Temfet; Ox} Pu GMd 5 mTr* mTr® aIFas:; Bo Lo! mTr? 
afert: ‘Lo? afart:; Wa a1g4:; nPu! alga: — c) Be! GMy nNg Tj! Tr? deeds; M3 ered; 
BBe? Hetedag, wKt! eteafeat; sBe? La! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Wa aget — d) GMy Polly Nd] 
aorirer +t gxa; sOx! sPuo @ wT; Md? AMET | GMa MTr! GAL; Jo? AAT; cMd! 
“CRTATAT: ; BKO “PTT: wKe “opie; oOr Pu’ mTr* mTr® rast: Tr! “sitar: 

142. Cited by Vij 2.132;Laks 12.731; Dev 3.671; Ma@dh 3.351 — a) GMd WaT, Be! 
La! “fear; wKt! rMd3 sOx! sPus “feat; Lo? “Rarit; sCa Ox? Tj? “sea; La! Tr? waa, wKt! 
Tr! wag 7T—~ b) nKet “ate ; Hy ee ; rMd? Vij Madh ate; GMd! NNg Pud Pu? Tr! 
mTr® “erfenr: Ho “cher; Lo? “Sa: nPu! Pu? Pui “age; Tr “farce: Bo Lo! mTr3 eferr:; 
Kt? “fae; Jm Jo? tMd3 rMd4 GMd GMy Tr! MTr5 Polly Nd Gr] Vij Dev Madh “eferr: aa: 
—c) BBe Ox? “seaTET:; 7Md* “Rear; Ho Remy; xKet “at; Be! fee — d) Tr 
arate; cMd! aaar; GMd> eae; sOx! sPuo eaeft; tMd4 UT 

143. Cited by Laks 12.744; Dev 3.630; Madh 3.368 — a) cMy Prawrargqaraa; eKt> La! 
Tr$ aac; cMd! aqaat ; Lo! afaget’: Md nNg affgeg ; sOx! Pud sPus Pu? Lolly 
G] aged; Ke “ged; td “gate — b) tMd4 gRrearga sae; sOx! “caesar; 
Ta warraeae; Pu? Pud Za; cMd! aaxt; nNg @aere — c) Joe La! oOr SHt FT; wKe 
agar; cMd! Sat arecat; Tj! Tr? asa, Pu? area; tMd4 area art; rMd3 ATT — d) cMd5 
TEATS; Hyom FE; Be! STRSTAT ; TM? STRSTR ; Or STfermantsit; Tr? “arr: 
+Md‘ “aTASiT 





Chapter 9 773 


Poprarafe qararat aretsfrerac: | 
sare: tae fer afeateareat fe a: ues 
etaa Ramat gat ardt wie: | 
arener gq adghr ata: waar a: Weve 
eat at forargdaes feta a | 
AST UGE tINIMAT ASAT | evEl 


agnrad: FA Fawrarerargared | 

a array Rear waar Mev 
vate fart Remretaattry | 

aay Bacar araretty Frater evil 
TEMA Ate ate fer: | 

arat gag aay feria fae: aya: USSR 


144. Omitted in GMy [Jolly Nd! Nd?]. Cited by Laks 12.744 — a) 1Md‘4 Fag@raTag — b) 
Pu? “arat, La! “ar; rMd¢ “areremdt freataa: — c) Trt aé:; wKt! Pud Pu? Aare; Ho 
NKtt BKt® Lo! Pu’ Pu? Sra; Be! Gaay; La! sOx! sPu ata; BCa Hy oOr Ox? RT; Be! 
Rat — d) Bo Md! “anferdr 

145.* Omitted in GMy [Jolly Nd! Nd?] — a) GMd! rMd3 tMd4 GM@ Tr! mTr¢mTr mTr® 
eteq; wKt} La! Lo! Pu’ stata; Pub Tr? eta; wKt! stews; Tr! Tr’ Paar; wKt} oMd! 
faqenrat — b) tMd4 FF ST AAA:; oOr Fa STATA; Md? Far Sat; Be! BBe’ Ho Hy 
Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! Lo? Ox2nPu! Pu’ Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave St: TAT, 
sOx! sPu® are: Fat; wKt} Sta; BKtS Tate: — c) wKt! oOrefseT; Jo? Lo! Lo? Tj! Tr! mTré 
VJolly R] aPreeete, Wa Saat; Be! sBe? GMd! Ox? PuS Pu’ [Jolly G] fe; GMd 5 7; TMd* 
ahs — d) GMa eist:; Lot weal fF &:; Pud Pu? WaaeT a; Pu’ TeeeAT; mT? a: 

146. Omitted in GMy MTr° Volly Nd']. Cited by Vij 2.136; Apa 742; Laky 12.709; Mddh 
3.357 —— a) TMd? aT — b) BK tMd! fea Ua; Be! BCa Jo wKt! wKt} Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* tMd‘4 
oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly M R Nd Gr] Vij Apaat — c) TMd4 Wa ae, 
Ho ‘Sete — d) nPu! gear weber 

147.* Omitted in GMy {Jolly Nd! Nd?]; placed after 9144 in Tr! — b) Lo! carrey 
agar — c) oOr srmatakete, tMd3 ora + Rag; Ho “Reet: GMd5 Tr! mTr4 mTr® 
“Rear, Lo! “Ree: aMd4 Re — d) Be! BK Pud Pu? Tr? Wa Preatera; tMd4 aeaieasy; Tr! 
areata; Hy Jm Jo! Ke Tj? MTr [Jolly G] Mandlik KSS Dave TareTs; Hy NNg TIRAT 

148, Omitted in [Jolly Nd?]. Cited by Laks 12.696—— a) GMd5 Laks Uafeart — c) nKA 
BKt Lo! Pu? Pud da STATA; Pu? [Jolly G)AT AAT; Lo! Put Volly M] sTdtat — d) sBe 
faarad: 

149. Cited by Laks 12.696; Madh 3.343 — a) Pu’ Wa #@PT ; Be pBe? Ho wKt! wKt} 
nKt’ BK? La! Lo! GMy NNg sOx! Pu? Pu? Pu? sPu® Tj! Tr! “gary — b) wkt! Tr! dere: ate; 
Lo! ar —- c) nPu! Y30T; NNg STAT RT; Ho FAG Wy; Te gag Rewer — d) Be! sBe? nKt! 
La! Lo* tMd4 GMy oOr Tr? mTr° fart; Hy BYAT: 


774 Chapter 9 


Sta WaT BAAR AT TI 
faretarhe tama waraa: Neko 
sar araracfast avast afrarga: 
asters YaTgar EtT UL4 LM 
ad ar emit aq ager aed | 
fee as UgQRU 


agitaretametrarentage: | 

SEAT SUT UTA YATYAT ETT NGM 
wart Sarg aegat wagashr ar wag | 
ARS SATETTATTATT TAT: ULE 


150. Cited by Laks 12.697 — a) NPu! @taTat; Pu? Put arail; Lo! fearair; aMd4 argu; 
Pu? aTaat; wKt! aTga7, Ox? gTHT — b) Be! TMd? Ox? “art FT; Pud Pu? “areer; tM} “are 
aa wT; Md4 cMd! aaah; nNg Ferg — c) Be! Ho wKt! Lo? Lo+ cMd! tMd4 cMd GMy nNg 
Pus Pu’ Pus mTr® Wa faveitar ; Pu? fawedtarftar; Pu2 Pu‘ fawenerftay. La! fwenerfear; 
ake’ fawentiras, cMd’ “wTeay; Lo! seat” — d) Pud Pu’ aa wenierafaerr:; Bo Lo! Tj! “Hast 
apa; Wa Waa: mT r? Wea: ; [Jolly G] fara: 

151. Padas c-d omitted in nKt*. Cited by Jmvg9.12; Laks 12.697 — a) Pu} Pu #hTare- 
Usa, wKe! sersrarcay sitet; nPu! sar; sOx! sPus serrerat’ — b) Jo! wKt! Wa gTaait; La! 
nPu! Tj! Tr! [but me sh gifeait; cMd! gaeit, Lo? Pu’ [bur cor] SFA; BK APT: Ta; NK 
efxaret: — c) Hy Jm Jo! Ké Tj? mTr? Ku Mandlik Jha Dave KSS ears: area, BBe 
wKt} Lo? Md} Tj! Jmv Sear: arede apres; oOr teargcreaearat; Lo! stezaregdeeast; 
NKt* oMd> Saargat RE fear; Bo wKt! wKts TMd? Ox? GMy TP aera; cMd! aaa; Be! 
mTr4 MTS east FTG; Lot Seareqeardy’ ; wkt! wks “arett?; Ox? ere” — d) cMd! t™d* 
Tr “ater yargartaa g; rMd? cMy mTré “aiet gergaiarta a; cMd> wPul “aise aar ; 
Wa “aa; NNg [but cor fh] “adit 

152.* Cited by Jmv 9.12; Laks 12.697; Madh 3.343 — a) Lo* Volly M*-5°] waar 
Reasird, cMd! ad aft ssc; sBe wCa Hy Lot Ox? ees; Lo? Jo? Tj! Volly R] wast; 
Be! pBe? BCa Jo? wKt! nKtt BK La! Lo? tMd* Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly R} 
Jmy Laks Madh set & — b) HosOx! sPuo earenft yeraia; nKe sarar TarweTa; La! 
aear; Jo? La! Lo? Tj! Lolly R] offer; Ca Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} BK Ox? Tj? mTr? Wa 
[Jolly Ku]Jmv Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Saeer [pCa Wa FT; wKt} F; Jmyv ad]; cMd! tMd?4 
oMd5 GMy Tr! mTr¢mTr® [Jolly Gr Nd] Laks Madh Wfaase & [mTr* om 5; Md‘ fawasay, 
™d} afagser g; mT wfafesrg — c)wKt} sk Lo! ef; wke! af — d) cMy afears; BK 
nPu! Pu2 Pu} Pu! Pu’ Tr? Wa ed: [cf. 8.154d]; Be! Ho sOx! sPuo aac: Lot afara: 

153. Omitted in BKt? [haplo}. Cited by Jmv 9. 12; Laks 12.697; Madh 3.343; pada-a cited 
by Vij2.124 — a) Pu’ Pu’ Tear ; Lo? NNgageiar ; Wa Teter ee’; Be! “ararfe” — b) 
My “area — ¢) Be! wKt! nPu! saga; Bo Faris; TMd? Haat — d) cMd> Madh 
gaa aan ; Bo aaqdt; rMd> “ad, wKe wat 

154. Omitted in sKt°. Cited by Vij 2.133;Apa 740; Jmv9.27; Laks 12.703; Mddh 3.344 
— a) TMd* ares, Tr! [but me sh] MTA Ae_ [Nd calls this samyakpathah]; Md? aq7; Be! 


Chapter 9 775 


aermattratar yargar a ferare | 
mean Prat sear AaaTET TT AAT UYU 
aranty at aat: at gar fara | 
Tae SITTA TeaT WAAAT THT ULI 
Weer F aattea area wnat feefiaa | 

AAT AAT: AAT: AS Gag WaT ULeol 
Jarstayt arte JT Carnyat AY: | 

AM TE Ayaaal: Teqrateaterayr: UL4CI 
ake: dole ca: PRA wa TT | 
Tetras aT SAAT ATTA TE ULaSM 
arta Galeax att: Wertaer4r | 


La! 1Md4 GMd> oOr aeqaT, Hoayat — b) Jo! Kt? Lo! Lo? mTr? [Jolly Ku]Laks Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave eeAaaeas [KSS Farha]; tMd# aagat fe; Pu’ Pu? [Jolly G] qaegara, wKe 
aafratt; Lo! aga aft ar; BBe? wKt! “ga: frat Baa; Pud “Gay areata; cMd! ar ga: — 
c) Md} earat gar’: Pu! caratéarreaey. — o-d) Apa afta aonreargrersrganic: — d) 
tMd? “greater erfa:; oOr Tr! asta 

155. Cited by Vij 2.125; Jmv 9.27; Laks 12.704; Madh 3.343; padas a-b cited by Dev 
3.614 — a) BKt werent; 1Md! wNg ATT: Bo atrataeat: Pu? Put “enferet ferent — 
b) GMd> “gat Prefarar a, GMy om 4; GMd! + Ha Add; BBe? Jo! BKE Ox? AT ; Lo? Tj! 
[Jolly R] aerate; Ho areeuree— c) Be! weaves; wKt! afe aver — d) cMd! etc 

156.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Jmv 2.43; Laks 12.701 — a) Tr’ wana; 
Jo? Lo? Tj! waaay Fs nKe “auteq; nPul “aot: Gar sar; sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Ke? wKt? 
La! Lo! Lo? rMd? GMd’ GMy Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr4mTr® mv Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave ® 
oat:; Bo Lo? Pu8sat 4; rMd* & Sat: — b) nPul ad aut; aK eo GA; MTP Fares; Ho 

“aartt — c) wKt! are; Lo! sae; Lo} Tj! sas — d) nKe “Racer 

157. Padas a-b omitted in Pu? Put. Cited by Laks 12.701 — a) sOx! sPu® BRAT; cMd! 
yeaa, wKt! Ust at I; ake F WRT aa; GMd! aatta; wT! MTPeaata; Bo Asa — a-b) 
La! ager aac rar feeftacr— b) Lo! cM@ Pu’ aTeT; wKt! aratafesacy— c) Wa Te; 
Laks TH; wKt! ear: — d) TMd3 Fated 

158. Cited by Apa 734; Laks 12.714 — a) BKt® Wa Tr! [but me sh] Jat ar; cMy oagr ; 
Md} Fat gl; wKt! 1Md3 “aerate; pBe2 “aarrare; TMd4 are; MT r! Tr aTATE; NPu! Pud 
amiga — b) Laks Wy: SAAT TT — c) Pu Pu’ agey —~ d) GMy Teaser wWarwa4:, 
wKt! 4= qMrer warwar:; Lo! Te eareraaryar:; Lo? Tj! 7 7 gar; Be! TereTar ; sOx! 
sPuo area: 

159. Verses 159 and 160 transposed in Jm. Cited by Vij 2.132; Apa 734, Laks 12.714, 
Madh 2.37,3.349 — a) Lo® nPu! Pu? Put ae; cMy ater: — b) Be! aa: HA; La! cMd 
sOx! sPuS at — c) Lo? “sex fear; nPu! Tr? “fase; TMd$ fase; Tr? fsrer — d) eke 
lacuna for the pada; sOx! sPuo areesd; Tj! aerated; *Md4 aaa 


x 


776 Chapter 9 


ATT WET TeaTaTTaTTAT: N2Eoll 
arg qoramife Ege: ASAT | 

aaat Doraratier BA: Aree: LEI 
aaa ier Sarasa gat | 

mer aataa Reet ace ata Fae: ERIM 


area Remand first asprire ar Tkack-t1 
saga gat frafterer wfrat | 
aaa F RAAT Maa: UL EAU 


160. Cited by Vij 2.132; Apa 734 Laks 12.714 [transposes padas a-b and c-d]; Mad 
2.37, 3.349 — a) sOx @Mbea, Pu’ Were; Md? Hear — b) Lo! Hat: — c) TMd4 FT : 
Tear; La! Lo? Lot NNg Ox nPu! Pu? Put Lolly G] aaa; kt’ ase; cMdd Apa ( 
aitfser — d) wKt! T @arar srareyar:; GMy Teaatel earTar; Lo? Tj! ce yatar so 
ara: 

161. Padas b-c omitted in TMd? GMd? [haplo] — a) Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt} Lo! Lo? Tj! 
Tj? Tr! (me sh to] MTr? [Jolly Ku] Ku Rn Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Beataif— b) tMd4 
guterad ae; sOx! sPuS [but cor] Bat:; oOr Fes F Aa’; Lot acat FH — c) Bo ASA; 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt Lo! Lo? Tj! Tj? Tr! [me sh to] mTr3 [Jolly R Nd! Ku] Ku Rn Nd 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave warTafer;, Pus Pu? [Jolly G] Boutarfer — d) Md‘ wyaacs TA:; 
oOr Fate 

162.* Cited by Apa 739; Jmv 10.15; Laks 12.709 — a) Lo! Pu? Put aaa ; pBe? aCa Jo! 
Ox? “arsefaet, Pu? Put “Rear; tM! Rear; BKO “ReaT — b) tM? nPu! Pu? Put Pue 
Pu? “Htee:; cMy “atest — c) La! aatderer fet eid; oMd wetadtgas; oMd5 Apa Jmv 
aeer tga; sOx! Pu sPue ae’: nKt BKtS sOx! Pu sPuo Pu? Tafa: BBe BCa Jo! BK Ox? 
“apart — d) MTr4MTr$ act Jed 7:; Bo pCa wKt} nKtt Lo! cGMd! +Md3 +Md4 GMy nPu! 
Pu? Tr? aety@ic; Be! BBe Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt sKt La! Lo} sOx! sPuS Tj! Tj? mT? mTr? Wa 
Jmv [vl] Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave agetd, sOX sPuo tcaetd; TMd4 Fae 

163. Cited by Jmv 10.13, Laks 12.708; Mdadh 3.348, padas a-b cited by Vij 2.132; Dev 
3.667 — a) wKt} UT; wKt! Ate watea: — b) Ho sOx! sPu wy: orer ae; 7Md} sete 
Get. WY; cMy frsrer; nPu! fFater— c) wKe SITATy; Bo Tr? “Agat’; rMd4 “agarereé; Pu? 
Put eart— d) Md? saerqusfiad; Madh vearcasitat; nPul 9eEreT; Lo! yaar 

164. Cited by Vij 2.132;Apa 733; Jmv 10.11; Laks 12.710 — a) Be! Test, Ho TST; wKt! 
arr; Pud om @; La! nNg T— b) wK# BKtS La! nPu! sPuo “rer; TM? MTrt MT r> Aga 
et — c) Tr! area sored; aCa ee; Te eee; La! wPu! Pu? Put aa? Jo! ata, GMy 
fuser: ské feaaere; Bo At FHT; Ho fees; wKt! “srar — d) Bo Ho Pu} Pu? Pu? 
Pu’ Tr? Wa 7 

165. Omitted in BKt®. Cited by 4pa733; Laks 12.710 — a) Bo Lo! oOr Pud Pu’ aitee:; 


Chapter 9 777 


el at aeparat g eaqeraafes az | 
aaa fora ga srerraferaery 25S 
qeaerat: Tatar Baer sarkeraet ar | 
erator Framrat & FT: aT: Sa: UL Fl 
Arar frat at zerat wate: gaarate | 
aaa Mitra a wat afer: Yat: ULE CI 
aa F wea yoratataeory | 

Tt gp a fare PR: ULES 
SIT WE WI TT AAT BET a: | 


Pu? Pud aed; La! siteaetPasit — b) Pud nNg Tr? feafteignnhray; Lot Lolly My] fsafterer; 
BBe? Jo! Ox? fiqaearey; La! fasaareeret — c) TMd4 & HAN; Ho HAAT — d) Lo! araftaa: 
auifirt:; BBe pCa Jo! Ox? ataraeaaiat ; oOr Sewer WAT: Lot sft 

166, Cited by Laks 12.719; Mddh2.38 — a) Be! Ho Jm Jo! Jo®? Lo? Lot tMd? nNg OX 
Pu> Pu’ Pu’ Tj? Tr mTr3 Wa [Jolly M48] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave@tera, tMd4 Tas, mTr® 
WaT, oMd 7; Md) eepaaeg — b) wKe ayeredta ss; Lo! [Volly M] JIFeM ; Tr! 
Madh Volly Gr] “eafeer &:; BBe La! GMd! cMy Pu’ “garg &; wKkt! “ater &; Jo? Lo’ nNg 
Tj! “ater tf; Lo! °gafea; nK¢ Lo! Tr [Jolly M] aaq fest — c) sKd aaa afaarttara; Lo! 
waar forfrard; +Md4 feof — d) *Md4 ga: sepia; BBE Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? 
nKtt BK GMd! rMd3 GMd@ GMy Ox? Pu? Pu} Pué Pu® Tj? Tr! [but me sh] Tr? MTr3MTr* mT r® 
[Jolly Nd] Nd Re Mandlik KSS Dave 4% ; Pu2 Put “wera; Be! BBe Jm Jo! Kt wKt? BKt 
La! GMd! TMd? GMd> GMy Ox? Pu’ Tr? Tr? Tr‘ mTr° [Jolly Nd] Nd Re Mandlik KSS Dave 
*apfera 

167. Cited by Laks 12.721; Dev 3.667; Madh 2.38 — a)wKt! Pu? Pu’ aecteus; sKt 
aeaert:; Be! Lo? weqeast:; Put geqerd:; Tj! Teca=tet:; cMd> Fecaust:; TMd? GMy Tr! 
aa, rMd4 aeaTT:; BBe? WoftteT — b) GMd! rMd? rMd* GMd? Tr! Dev Madh Wfader 
at; Ho wKt} Ox? Pu’ Wa  — c) La! “at a; Pu? Put Prgwray, Be! f& grat — d) oOr 
WT; NPul GAY eA: 

168. Omitted in Tr*. Cited by Vj 2.130; Apa 736; Laks 12.731; Dev 3.667-8; Madh2.38 
—- a) Pu? Put GMd! tMd3 GMy Wa [Jolly M Nd] BA J; commentators prefer the copula: Bh T 
@ Arar fear ar ceranfafer sof [acy }yead, and Me aareq: fSq eH:; Be! TET; cMd> 
Tr! [but cor sh] MTr*mTr° Fare — b) oOr ATA: cee — c¢) oMd5 wfaa; Ho NKt 0Or sOx! 
nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu’ [but cor] Pu’ Wa Apa Jat; GMd! “gat — d) TMd? dea; wKt BKE 
fastar, wkt! @ gar afer; Pu? mTr4 mT r°arhars:; Lo? efert:; Bo Lo! mTr3 afera:; La! 
NPu! @tget:; Pu? Pu? atast:; Hy wkt! nNg Se: 

169. Cited by Apa 738; Laks 12.734; Dev 3.668; Madh2.38 — a) Laks Wea F Wepatay, 
Apa {vi spare; Be! weary — a-b) Pu Put agar g wadta weater frerot — b) oOr “7; 
wKt! “ardt; wKt! yPu! Pu2 Pu? Put Na [patha] feserr:; Hy “ferret — c) Lo! 9 qehfnae, 
oMd yaquirtcd,; eke gafafses — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Pu Tj? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
faery; rMd4 eft; BBe afer: 








778 Chapter 9 


AWTS WS TAA ATT TTT: ULVoll 


nenfrenaate adrerivn art 

a oa wagered: T Tag ULI 
faa eer g FT Waa: 

a Srettt ACA aig: BAAR LOR! 
ar whieh dearer ararararhe ar at 
alg: & wat wafer aete ef area ue2o3N 
atiorrearart arate | 

A MIAH: YATE ASUSAGATST ar UuLorvil 
ar wear at ufternt faerar at eaeear | 


170.* Cited by Laks 12.730; Dev 3.668; Madh 2.38 — a) Pu? Pu! seared; La! cMd! 
oMy Tr! MTr° Sealer; TMd3 Sere; Tr! Far; BBe? Bo wCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? nKé ake 
La! Lo! GMd! rMd? 1tMd4 GMd> NNg sOx! Pu! Pu? sPu’ Pu’ Tj? Tr? mT’ MTr? MTr'u Tro Wa 
[Jolly Nd Ku R] Ku Mr Mandlik KSS T&T; w Kt} TST; GMy torn here — b) Ho 7 frarrer 
ae F:; Md4 & F; BBe Bo Jo? wKt! wKt} BK Lo! Lo? oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu? sPuo Pu? 
Pu’ Tj! Tr? (Jolly G R] Devt faaraa; Put 7 fearcter; NNg aTat [but cor fh] sKt Fey; Be! 
BET ET: [cor toWeT]; pCa Lot GMy Tr mTr? MTr® [Jolly M Nd] Dev@eafac;, Lo? ar: — c) 
Md‘ Je yeast TET; Lot Md? Pu4 [Jolly M] Ye; Be! Bo Ho wKt! wkt nKt* La! 
cMd! 1tMd? GMy oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu8 Tr! Tr? mTr> mTr® Wa Ra wyT — d) pBe? 
“FRACTAL TCTH:; BK GMy TMd3 TM? Tr! MT! MTS CAAT er BAPTET; Lo? TeHT: 

ii. Cited by Apa 739; Dev 3.668; Madh 2.38 — a) Lo* GMy Aye ; La! 
qeysaeTat — b) Be! Ho nKt} sOx! Pu? Pu’ sPuo aA; Pu? ACHR — c) BCa oOr 
Apa ¥fery. — d) wKt! “areafefere:; Md? GMy Dev “PRT a Sy: 

172. Cited by Vij 2.129;Apa 736; Dev 3.668; Madh 2.38 — a-b) Dev fiqawat F TF 
WATHUHT TS: — b) Tr? FF:; wBKt> AagS:; wKe! TAAcaTS:; TM? SHAAGS: — c) Madh & 
artry ferarttare; La! Md! art a; Te art; Bo Lo! afr — d) cMd! Ag; Tj! Hear; Ho 
tMd? GMd> sOx! sPu® “aART: 

173. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]; padas c-d omitted in Put. Cited by Apa 738; Laks 3.731; 
Dev 3.668; Madh 2.38 — a) Put at; Bo dfemac; Tr? depeard; Ho BKkt> TMd? sOx! Pus sPu® 
Pu? tepact — b) Madh arate Att; GMy om first ae; La! aT adit; Pu’ aT Bet; Pus aT 
adt; Lo? Tr! [but cor] afer — c) TMd? atg; Be! NKt’ Lo! sOx! sPu® THT; wKt! 7; GMd! 
7eaT, oMdS aefer — d) Tj? wavs; ake Sher & Trea; La! Grae: Be! Trae 

174. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.131; Apa 738; Laks 12.732; Dev 3.668; 
Madh 2.38 — a) Tj! Hoftareracears, La! eftorererecagerrf; oMd! Hoar’; Tr! [but me sh] 
faaitar ; cMd’ “areeyeaef; Bo Hy wKt! La! cMy nNg oOr Tr! mT? Apa SIT — b) sOx! 
sPu ATaTyat ; rMd* “featerafeaenrea; La! “artery; Pus Pu’ “afeaard; Pu2 Put “Rear — 
o)IMd a a Hage: TT; Lo! Paw; Lal Hrtey Ta; oOr FaeTeI: — d) Jo? Lo? wKe Tj! 
agaragar qt: [wks Jer] 


° 





Chapter 9 779 


vara T Tes TAT Lok! 
a dewaat: ergata ar | 
aralay war aT FA: TeETAEKT ULI 
areatraradtat secret aT STSRTOT | 
WAM SIMA SA TF SAA: UL 
T MANY YR AATGCTITAYTY | 

A UNIAT WAAAY TTT: SHA: ULC 
area aT araareat aT a: YReT Yat wad | 
aisqarat stage wat araferar: W208! 
aaa Farrarraray waisary | 
ganfatrettarg: fearsrarearttiier: uecolt 


175. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.728; Dev 3.668; Madh 2.38 — a) Ho 
Lo! Pu? Tj? Tr? Laks ar g Tear a; tMd4 J — b) Jo® Lo? Tj! [Jolly R|fauar Sear ar, 
GMd! tMd? +Md4 GMd@ GMy Tr! Tr! mTrmTr® [Jolly Nd] Dev fawar aesarers: [MTr5 
faferaes’ Md! mTro Few ; Jolly Nd) Bz ]; nPu! Pu? Put fear Besar JA; Hy om aT; 
BKtS lacuna for 41; sOx! sPuS [but cor] UT; BBe wKt! Ox? aft Besar; Lo! aft aera; Ho 
sOx! Pus sPu® Pu’ [Jolly G] zat — d) oOr Fe 

176. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vis 1.66;Apa 96 — b) Bo tMd‘ mTr® “area; 
Ho sOx! sPuS Pu’ ¥— c) Bo Hat; Pud Pu? af Wat; TM? TEM AT; Lo? Tj! ara AT; oOr aT 
ea; Apa warat— d) Pu3 “wet 

Additional half-verse in nPu!: 

creat Tsar ora Srpyeawer a: Il 

177. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 738; Laks 12.733; Dev 3.668; Madh 2.38 
—a)oMé “fated, Be! ‘ager G4T— b) cMd! oMy Tr! MTP Bireerett — c)oOr Laks 
aia’, Md} @egart’; Be! oOr nPu! Pu? Wa 2eegq; xMd! “Seer — d) sOx! sPuS eeaaeg; 
Pu! Pu? Wa @HT; Lo? GAT Te F:; Bo nKt! Lo? GMa mT ro Faye: 

178. Omitted in Lo‘ [Jolly M]. Cited by Jmv 9.28; Dev 3.668, Madh 2.38; padas c-d 
cited by Vi 1.90 — a) Pub Pu’ [Jolly G] aTarit Feq FPA; La! ay; Be! war; oMd aarat — 
b) Tr! arya —c) Lo! creaag; Md? areata; GMd> Taree; OOr HAETEATT;, TM! aar 
aed — d) Ho Teara:; oOr Pw Pu’ oeaa:; TMd4 TiReaaT; wKt! area; rMd? oreare, cGMd° 
rear; BKts orearal Ac: 

179. Cited by Jmv 9.29; Laks 12.704 — a) Bodlet aT araarer at; cMd! aereir ar 
acre aT; wKt! ar areas at; Tj? aT FaTeir at; Lo! at aaereat ar — b) MTP Ast TET Fal 
wad; cMd! ayer; Jo! gat; Tr? seq — c) Waarqara; nKt4 “arat — d) cMd! ef; Be! [me 
sh to] water: 

180, Cited by Vij 3.259;Apa 97, 735; Laks 12.735; Dev 3.668 — a) Apa 735 SIM; 
Td‘ MTr‘ mTr® astra — b) wKe Tr? °aTaSTERT; Pu> Pu? “aTABaRT; Pus “arraresr; Ho 
“ear aateart; Volly G] waited; La! vis warPrary — c) GMd! GMy garafe ; wKt! Tr? 
“Praag: — d) M3 SrA; Bo “Start 





780 Chapter 9 


aq vashifear: gat: wag@Teerdiom: 
mer a Strat Trameater FT AaTET FT ULC I 
AaAAAT | 


WIT TA EATAT AT AT 
aa & at gar art aaeadtsy eC 
aararmaretaaar agro wag | 


aaeaeay FIT we FaadtTy: UC AU 
wwe: Taser wadtarg Reraéte | 


qeaag aaa: at Reerer arfirr: ecw 
T Breet wT free: gar Rare: fag: 
frat etagaer Ret wat wr at UI CuN 


181. Cited by Apa 97; Laks 12.735; padas c-d cited by Apa 81 — a) [Jolly Nd] TAG; 
oMd war &; wKt! Lot [Jolly M] va fafear:; Md} Md‘ “rear: — b) cMd! “ger aisisrr:. 
wKt! “asraar:; Ke? “dtrar: — c) wKt! My Tr! MT rt mT rS Tea; Tr? GeIa; Apa TTTeT ET — 
d) wKt! Lo! mTr® eT; Ho om®; Lo? FATT; 1Md4 HaHET @; nKt* sOx! sPu® FT; Lot 
[Jolly M] Tt 

182. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]; padas c-d omitted in Be! [haplo]. Cited by Kum 1.3.7; Vis 
1.69; Vij 2.132;Apa 433; Laks 12.740; Hem 3/1.99; pada- c cited by Jmy 115.7 — a) Ho 

“arrart” — b) Jo? Lo? Tj! [Jolly R] Vis srarat aarar: qa; ake “AFHat — c) Ox? Kum 
ad ata gar, nKe aa Gar & ad; Lol Gat Ga aaa; wkd at aaa ger; xPul @ ad 
at; BBe? BCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! wKt? Lo? Lo? cMd! rMd4 Tj! T? mT? mTr> Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS Dave TARR; Kt? wateareat 

183. Omitted in Lo* tMd? [Jolly M]; padas a-b omitted in Be! Pu‘. Cited by Apa 433; 
Jmv 4.3.32; Laks 12.740; Hem 3/1.97, 101 — a) Tj? FataTas; Bo La! watarag, cMd! cMd$ 
GMy MTrt MTP MTr® aerarae ; TMd} agrar aa; Bo ‘Taaat — b) wKt! oOr  atat aaepr 
afar; rMd3 “Prt — c) Be! watette qacr — d) Jo BKt’ La! Lo? GMy NNg Pu Pu’ Tj! 
[Jolly G R Nd] Jolly gear ages [Pus Pu’ gfe]; rMd3 g:; Wa WH; tMa> aT; 
Be! Tj? adt az: 

184. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.717 — a) GMd! tMd? rMd‘4 GMd> GMy 
Tr! mTr4 mTr5mTr® [olly Nd] areas; wKe! serdar — b) GMd! GMd5 NNg warary; Bo 
afta: Pud Pu’ “arfaesnéfe; pBe? pCa Jo! aKtS GMy Ox? Laks PIF; Lo? Rawr; 
La! Reena firs, BKé “Aafe — c) wKt! “aaa; BBe om J; NNg TEzIT:— d) TMd4 NNg oS & 
ReeraThrt:; Ho sOx! sPuo AF; BBe BCa Jo! Ox? Laks MPT; TM} Remar: oOr 
feaerrerarhrs: 

185. Omitted in Lot oOr [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 653; Laks 12.717; Dev 3.672, 691; 
padas a-b cited by Vij 2.132; Jmv 11.1.40; Dev 3.667; Madh 3.349,356; padas c-d by Vif 
2.136; Jmv 11.5.5; Laks 12.748; and pada-c by Vij2.136 — b) cMy yar Rar etferg:; Bo 
fast; Apagar Rerrez:; GMd ! Reet, BBe? Jo! Ox? Laks FERT > wKG Laks “eer: Syd; cMd 
RT: away — c) Ho frame Be nKe rae ee — d) BBe? BCa Jo! BK® Ox? eT; Lo? 
fteat; Be! Jm Jo! Kt? Lo’ nNg Pu} Pu’ Tr? MTr> Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Ut 4; Rn [patha] 
aT T 





Chapter 9 781 


wang srt ry fies: sade | 

ugT: awaeat wast arraarg ues 
HAC: AVA TET TT WAT | 

wet wet EET: Sarat: fret wa ar u2col 
SaaS F ATA eer: 

Afar: yaar arearerar awa a Aaa ULC 
sent qrenirer tat freafater ferfe: | 
Aa TF antat aahasy ety: ULCAW 
GRITS VTATAATERT | 

aa aera car safer werargaq Wesoll 


Additional verse in nPu!: 
vat gfecaeda fret wren | 
aegay trast wy: Brea: aswarafer: I 
186. Omitted in Lot [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 744; Jmv 11.1.40, 11.6.7, 17; Laks 12.748; 
padas a-b cited by Jmv 4.3.36 — a) Tr! Bata; rMd? are — b) Ho firafave:; Pu’ Pu’ favs; 
TMd? @S: — c) sOx! sPuo wget; Ho Kt? wKt} BKt> GMd> sOx! nPu! Pud Pu? ayaraat; wKt! 
STAI, Apa AITETT; Tj! Iratarat— d) oMd> ITA; GMd! WAATANT’ ; Apa [vi] ATT 
Additional verse in Mandlik [1] Dave KSS: 
agared fig: ver: aaratar: sestfcrar: | 
framers ar: wat: argeear: wesifan: | 
187. Omitted in Lo‘ [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.136; Dev 3.696; Madh 3.354; padas a-b 
cited by Apa 744; Jmv 116.17, and padas c-d by Laks 12.748; Jmv 11.6.14, 21 — a) wKt! 
arr a: aftverrer; cMd! arrareegq a: feverter; Dev Madh A at Barak: fIveratez; oOr 
ar ar f frat [rest damaged], Be! areae:, La! aaeate, Ox? Pud Tro afoeer Geer; Pu? 
aftvers wea; Tr? afivercrer — b) Be BKt® nNg T}?8t — c) Jmvi1.6.21 Teas AHL; 
nK¢t @eaGeor:; Lo! qaper:; GMd! 1Md3 tMd4 GMd$ GMy nPu! Tr! mTr4 mTrmTr® Dev te- 
wat: Berar: — d) Be! Ho Pu? Pu’ Ur TF 
Additional half-verse in Tr? Mandlik [@, | KSS Dave: 
erates aft anager ar: fea: II 
188. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.136; Jmv 11.6.26; Dev 3.698, Mddh 3.355 
— a) wKt! veut’; Tr? ara — b) Be BCa Jo! BK oOr Ox? Pud Pu? #7; Jv [vl] 
“arftor: — c) Lo! cMd! Pifvear:; Tr? gaat; rMd4 yaer— d) GMy STAaT BAT; Md‘ eTeceeaT, 
Tj? SRURTSTSAT; Jmv aa UF GAT; Bo at; cMd Tr! wat feefracr 
189. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.136; Jmv11.6.34; Dev 3.698; Madh 3.355 
— a) Be! Ho La! Tj! ater; cMd + ef — b) Ho eT; Be! [but cor} Ho fer: 
190. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 742; Laks 12.745 — a) GMy aferarerer 
— b) Ho 1Md3 1Md? NNg Pud Pu? mTr‘ mTr® Volly G Nd] Laks Sarr qaetd; cMd! 
MAST ATeed; GMa ala MATS; Apa Waa TATeea;, T? aa aareed; nK tt 
BK Ox? airarfeerareta; cMy atta fteretd; Bel arart aaretd; nPu! Put Pu’ 
wiraercaasteed; Pulatrar & aaretd; Lal atreq at etd; Te aired aaretc; oOr 








782 Chapter 9 


at g at fragarat areat oat feat at | 
caterer fret ware cer eter AAT: ULSI 
wae aera F aT at aerae: 
weranas fer wPrerer gare: WLS 
ararar eqafearearararey aaa: 

ara ratfenterey weer fifergtary 28 30 
eae sa aT taf 
wera afeer etter Srey Uke 
rarest a ged eat faa da aq | 

cent Stat gare: weet WAT ULV 


“saree — c) Be! pCa oOr Tj? MTr? 34; Tr! GeT; BBe* Jo! BK Ox? UERT Apa a Rearrart:. 
Pu2 Put @TanT — d) Ho NNg om Aq; Apa & afer; Be! Bo wKt} La! Lo! cMd! tMd? cMy 
oOr Ox? Pu} Pu’ Tr? MTr4 mTr Laks Apa TAS; [Jolly Nd] TAT; oMd> Hferarract 

191. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Jmv 10.16; Laks 12.745 — a) Jmvy et gat; BBe* 
La! at @ #; oOr aga; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] #& Aa; BKO GMy a; nNg Fate [ma sh&] arat; Wa 
feaearat — b) Be! stat; Tr? wat; La! Pu} Tr? Laks ferar, td} feaa; cM feaay; Be! at — 
c) cMd! carter; mTré mTro greene; Md’ Reet earl — d) mTr4 & GF; BBe? T F; BBe? wCa 
Ho wKt! BKtS La! GMd! GMd) oOr sOx! Pu’ sPuS Pu? mTrserceeyetet; TM? tMd?4 GMy Tr! 
MTS Jmv [vl] & eget; Be! Acretr:; oOr sPu [but cor] MT Wace; La! Faery [ef. 9.162] 

Additional verse in nPu! Pu?; truncated citation in Pu4; cited by Vij 2.136: 

SYA THT Tey: Toad et fran | 
ysotar ALTA sraTesTSATSea | 
a) Vij ¥Tq: — a-b) Put [half-verse reads] ATAT: WaT TeAeta — b) Vij Ad ferar 
—e-d) Vij Teta qorafens peter ete T— d) Pu qrarera4nsareed 

192, Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij. 2.145;Apa 7213 Jmv4.2.1; Laks 12.688; 
Madh 3.371— b) oOr 84; GMd! aétae: — c) Lo? “east; Be! “Turgay; pCa Jo! BK Ox? 
“gay — d) GMé& sOx! [but cor] sPuS [but cor] mTr! aftrarg,; Te afrearer 

193. Omitted in Lot [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.145; Laks 12.688; Dev 3.661; Madh 3.371 
— a) La! mTr® Weave, BBe? wKt} areq: Tat ge — b) Hy Tuée:; Be! surte:; Md} aeared: 
— c) 0Or araTaerat fePra; cMd! Hrarrer; Lo! Pud Pu? Ararre@nseat ; TMd4 Tae ; 
Be! tMd? cGMd nPu! et feePart — d) Be! tMd4 weer 

194. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.136, 143;Jmv 4.1.4; Hem 1.51; Dev3.651 
—-a) BKe carafe; Be! Bo Ho Lo? tMd? tMd* GMdé? cMy NNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu? sPuo 
Pu? Pu Tr? Wa Vij Dev aera; La! “afefaar, Pu2 “aetfray; Lo! avefay; Md‘  aetfras- 
Jo? cMd! Ox? Tr! “eaftas— b) Imv at aw fife. Rat. Md? 1Md4 ace; Be! aafifa’ — c) 

o! argurasiferand; Jo? cMd! cMy Tj! Tr! mTr° [Jolly Nd] arguratag 

195. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.688; Dev 3.660 — a) La! area 
aed; cMd! ata Fed; Be! mTro stared: nKt saree, rMd4 arated, Bo T Fd FT — b) 
Be! Md? Geet; Pu? STAI; nPul HAMA; Jo? Lo? Tj! Hat at FA:; Lo! arf} aat— c) Be! Feat, 
NNg sttfafer, Put geea4r:; sBKt> Faar:; Bo wKt! GMd! TMd3 tMd? GMy Trt MTPMTr°® [Jolly 


Chapter 9 783 
MAAK sat | 
adterarrmaer weiter afeert 23 il 
ae: Sat TA frarsrargaiey | 
Sear AraThaeaeTgT UPTON 
fearg agafed for ar art | 
Mat TAHA TATE AT AAT ULSI 
a fret fer: ef: eorategaenned | 
caarare a frais eer age URI 
Tear sfafe a: efficent gat wag | 
Tt Waa WSAATAT: Tatfeet FT UR oll 
sa graafadt serra aur | 


Nd] Dev FeTar — d) aK waTATET Ra; Be! La! Pu? Put mTr® et 

196.* Omitted in Lo* Volly M]; padas-d omitted in nKt* [haplo]. Cited by Apa 753;Jmv 
4.2. 27; Laks 12.690; Dev 3. 664; Madh 3. 73 = a) Tj! aTat; Pw aTEFT ; BK tS Lo? GMd! 

“eat?” ; tMd? Md! oOr 7 — b) GMd! mTr® “WsTTery; wKt} Lo! tMd4 oat Be! Hy Jm 

Jo! Kt? Lo? Ox? Pu’ Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Davesq, Apa TEE 
acta, sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt3 BKt® La! Lo} rMd3 tMd4 Md) GMy nNg 
Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr? mTr4 MTromTr° Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave amsaricttarat — d) La! cMd! Put arenfaaited cet, wKt! veer 

197.* Omitted in La! Lot GMd! Pu‘ [Jolly M]; padas a-c omitted in nKt*. Cited by Apa 
753; Jmv 4.2.27; Laks 12.690; Madh 3.373 — a) GMd5 aeaeq; Tr! arated; Be! Jo? Lo Tj! 
aeea:, +Md3 GMy MTr? MTr® [Jolly Nd] Apa Mddh FAA mT TAT J; Pur Pud Pu’ [Jolly 
G] Fe Aer at; wPu! waeIt It; sOx! sPuo ATG; BBe? BCa wKt! Lo? Pu2 erat fePrg — 
c) BBe? tMd3 GMd5 NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu’? Pu’ mTr® Wa [olly G] Jmv Madhadtara- 
waar; Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? wKt3 Lo! Lo? tMd4 GMy oOr Tj! Tj? MTr3mTrt MT ro Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave aysrarrdtrarar 

198. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.145; Apa 721, 753; Jmv4.2.16; Laks 
12.689; Dev 3.666; Madh3.372 — a) BBe? Jo? Lo? Tj! fear, cMd! Md? ferateg; PuS Pu? 
Tj? fesaeq; pCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! wK Lo? Ox? mTr3 [Jolly Ku] KSS ferar g; Kt? Mandlik 
Jha Dave Raarg, nNg ag; Be! rar: BA ; Jo? TKS ; Pud Pu? “Set — b) Lo! yet — 
c) Lal ararft Set”; Apa [vl] taeda, Ho La! Wa “pet — d) La! mTré “Geret 
aad; Ox? aT Aa 

199. Omitted in Lo* Volly M]. Cited by Laks 12.683; Dev 3.654 — a) oOrom 4; nKt# 
aTfrete; TMd3 Prete:; GMa Fret; wKe Prete; Pu Pu’ Tr? fara; Ho erat wry — b) wKt! 
“RISdHeA ; Tr) gIGHea; GMd! nPu! Pu2 Put Aeaare; Ho HVA — c) Lal Saeeta 
afenfs — d) Ho Dev Seq; Be! mTr® det; cMd! “esa; La! Tr! Tr “waar 

200. Omitted in Lo? [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.118-9,147; Apa752; Laks 12.683; Dev 
3.659 — a) GMd! Tr? a1; tMd3 My mTr6 acest — b) La! Tj! *saorerega4, Md} Hag: — c) 
nKt' oma; sBe? at a; Tj AST ; Lo} TART ; Bo TMEt — d) Ho HAT; wKe Tahar 
dT, Dev Idee: 








784 Chapter 9 


saaaeqera FT a aah ra4r: Ro tl 
aaarahy Fra ag aaa ath | 
Taras sweat Teaead URoRI 
wafiar g ait: eng g_ladtat wT | 
FRET UR RU 
aftefaferatt 3 act Sreisfirrestr | 
wet adtrat ar ate frergatiort: Rov 
aearat g adurttercatat wag | 
ware rm: crafter sft arco lok 
fart g arer awe at wad | 
Aarlates Bar argaihetsr TUR 
WIN WY AST ot TH: HAT | 


201. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.140; Apa 750; Jmv 5.7; Laks 12.666; Dev 
3.629; Madh 3.201, 366 — a) cMd! #taafert; Lo! “afasit — b) coM@ Pus Pu? sTeTRT ; wKt! 
oraresrarsat; mTr aferer, GMd! Tr! [but me sh] aferdt; Apa “afereraft — c) Tr! “sr; Be! 
“yap; Laks “repre — d) TMd4 om 7; wKt! Tr? REPS’: Pu2 BPS: nPul der APs: 

202. Padas a-b omitted in Pu’. Cited by Vij 2.140; Laks 12.666; Dev 3.631; Madh 3.366 
— a) Lot [Jolly M] 4; Laks THI, Tr! at =a; Be! Bo Pu? =I; GMy =TaT — b) Bo sOx! 
Ox? Pu} sPu® Pu’ Tr? af; wKkKe! feet; nK¢ areHT; Lo! GMd> ae; Dev eT; Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 
Pu Tr? Wa FtfaP:; Ho TMd4 Madh Aiftor:; Be! nNg HAT: cMd! Aefior — c) Jo? Tj! 
[Jolly Rjemies aH &; cGMd! tMd3 GMa GMy Tr! [but me sh] mTr4 MTr® [Jolly Nd] 

“arrearg — d) oMd! aeeated wae; Tre vfedt; Hy aferar; oMywaaher Ta 

203. Cited by Apa 750; Jmv 5.17; Laks 12.667 — a) La! aT ait: — b) K? HFTT— c) 
Be! aTaty ; Lot GMd® Ox? Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! Wa SAT — d) cMy [Jolly Nd] argréfer 

204. Cited by Vij 2.118-9; Jmy 6.1.54; Laks 12.682 — a) Be! Ho feraz; Lo} Tj! a — 
b) Tr? Lo! sats; La! 3 — c) Pu? Put HTT; Lo! [cor to] TAAGET; BBe? TelaereraA — d) 
Be! “orfest; aKt’ GMd> Tj! Mandlik KSS “atfesa:; [Jolly Nd]Rn [patha] Dave “afeat; wKt! 
“ater: 

205. Verses 205-25 are placed after 9.247 in TMd?. Cited by Apa 727; Laks 12.682 — a) 
pBe? Lo! Lo! Pu’ 7 — b) nPul aut aaa at; Be! BBe cMd> Pu? Put “Atecea; Pus Pu? 
“steaty; oMd! “sfterapa’; rMdé4 “sfteree’ Apa [vl] “fractal; Lot He ; Tj! Wa “Hear 
at; Lod Tj! Tr! “agate; wKe! “Be gt ea — c) Lo? Tj! M7 Ay; Bo GMd> GMy NNg oOr 
amex — d) Apa [vl] Par, Lo! “Reafife; wma! “Rreaidtaart; sOx! sPus eee; Lo! 
STOTT 

206. Lacuna for padas a-b in wKt!, Cited by 4pa724; Jmv 6.1.9, 31; Laks 12674 —— a) 
mdi eaitet J wend; Teg FT By — b) Lo! TT TF AA; BK’ om Ad BKO HIE — 
c) Jo! K® La! Lo! PuS Pu? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 85547" [for 35 see 8.118, 120]; Tj! FA"; 
La! “qgifear; Lo! “arftas, Kt rMd3 “Rata — d) cMd> GMy ay; tMd3 “ada; Md? 
“gaia; Jmv “arte” ; Jo? wKt! La! tMd3 GMS Ox? Put Pud Pu? at 


Chapter 9 785 


a fritter: caragra feRrecatasttaray loll 
AAT TAT Aas | 
eaniamel aAararar agate URoZil 

ae g frar serra aargard | 

a aepntteretrart: SATA MRO 
fara: aectted Rormregqaa | 

anes fant: eee aa a feared 2 2oll 
ar sae; erst ar AAarveraa: 
Raaresreat ah AST ATT AT BATT URL 
arat Rasiedt ater afar: waz | 

wreat FT aT WRT TANT: URL 


207. Cited by Jmv3.28; Laks 12.665 — a) Bo nKt* 4d; nNg aa; TMd4 Tet; Bo Feq; 
nKtt Fea — b) GM d! aazarh:; ake afe:; Tr! ab; wKe mT rt mTroeeertorr — c) Pu? 
wafer: ereprtand; wKkt! at; La! afer: tMd4 Prater; Lo? rte:; Lo? Frater:; md? 
frger — d) La! Lo! tMd4 Refredie’: tM? Baresi’; Be? wKO BK mTr® Afar 

208, Cited by Vij 2.118-9;Apa 723; Jmvy 6.1. 3, 313 Laks 12.676;Madh 3.377 — a)nPu! 
aware fot seh; Bo sears gear; Lo? aay; wKt! aaTH Bkts rae Be! nKt4 
BKtS Lo? *Md? 1M? sOx! Put Pu’ sPu’ Pu? [Jolly G] Fagged; Pus mT? Tro ° rgzer — b) 
BK #47; BBe? aCa wKt! Lo! Lo? cMd! rMd? rMd4 GMd5 nPu! Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! mTr> Wa 
Apa Jmy [vl as in ex] 3gUNtAT MTP TeIMTAT; wKe agustad; Bo wera — c) cMd! 
1d} “Atea; Lo! Lo? GMd Tj! Fee; wKe! “weereprareeray, tMd! aTaTeTAT; NK Pu’ ar 
THT; Pud Pu? Wa ¢ ATHTAT; La! Apa Laks T ATHTAT, Lo? T | ATHTAT— c-d) Vij Madh 
qe T ceed faaar sears 

ae Cited by Vij 2.121;Jmv 2.21, 6.2.32 — a) BK AP; Lot Md? mTr4 [Jolly M] FT 

— b) Tj! “araara; Md “HyaTH; Be! Jmy [patha] “HaTey; Jmy (pathal “Haare [both 
ee by Jmy}, xKt* “aAare; Lot [Jolly M]. aga, cMy “area are — c) aMd5 
aan — d) Ho “want wer: Lot “caf a@rra:; Md3 oMd> “cant art aera: BK 
° sant. La! Lo? GMd! +Md3 1Md? Pu’ Pu’ Tj! aan, wKt! “aAfic:; Lo? “ware; Pu? Pu! 
“at 

210. Cited by Apa 748; Jmv 12.1; Laks12.754; Dev 3.700; Madh 3.360; padas a-b cited 
by Vij 2.139 — a) Pu’ Pu’ arent; Tr? east” — b) wKt! fara’; Jmy [vl] “Aer — c) mTrS 
aareda; Md! areter; wKt! eat at; GMy mTré ferer sf" — d) Kt? “osthet; wKe 
“so; La! Md! wPul “ssid; wKet ssaSTETT; Lot [olly M] SsASETI; Md} “ss; 
Lo? GMd! tMd? GMy MT?’ MTr° [Jolly Nd] @t 

21, Cited by Laks 12.754; Dev 3.703; Madh 3.362 — a) NPu! Gut; rMd? tTMd! WaT; Ho 
wate — b) sOx! sPuo wétaial wearaa:, wKt! far w warea:, cMdS tat, Be! Aerawr:; 
mTr® Sete: — c) Ox? ar’: Md} Har’: wKe! aarras; Ho Paar; sOx! sPus 
Carat aT; oOr aary ead — d) Wa APTS; MT wTro wrt fergearc Lal fecad 

212. Cited by Vij 2.139;Jmv 11.5.32; Laks 12.754; Dev 3.703;Madh 3.362 — a) Bo 


786 Chapter 9 


at Stat fatredia arirgigerdtae: | 
ase: Sauna Pres UAT: R23 


ad ua fader aia wrt az | 

aT araeat sfrsent sre: edt ate UR ev 
es eae} 

tT Dae fart frat qearewerarsr UR LUI 

wea Prammeoreeg feta eters | 

agent a a agihraa a Ft: we URE 

TATTT FAT ATA SETAATYyATT | 

area at garat Prgatar stars U2 Zi 

mo at a adie with aarfarer | 

cared afeefr aad waar waAT URI 


aad; Pud Pu’ Tr? Wa ateat; Ho ataat, Hy aeal, rMd4 ateat; Vij Jmv fTsZEdT; eBe La! 
1Md? Tr? “steeq; tMd3 GMd> GMy nNg mTr® “Steet; BK Lot Pud Pu’ Tr! [cor to sh] “Hey 
— b) wKe! feraracer afear:; Pu’ Pu? aaa warfear:; cMd! Gar: — c) cMy ware; Lo! 
way Va; Be! FA; Lo? Ft — d) GMd sOx! afeTT; Lo} wT 

213. Cited by Vij 2.126; Laks 12.660; Madh 3.383— a) Lo? Tj! Sst ay, Tr faced — 
b) Tj! Stew; cMds Grargraad?’ — c) Bo SItRITEMAPPT; Be! AIST; Be! “UPTEg; Laks 
“spit a; BKO Pus Pu? “wT: errr” — c-d) wKkt! MY Ase arr APecerr caf: — d) 
Ke Frarer 

214. Pada-d omitted in GMd!. Cited by Laks 12.666; Dev 3.621; padas a-b cited by Apa 
720, 749; Jmv 5.6— a) TMd3 Bat — b) Be! Bo area; Jo! aTé=cT;, Lo? BTaRT, Hoare — c) 
La! arexat & DP; Bo Ho sOx! sPuo atexat; wKt! Texar; TMd3 HPfteway; rMd4 Hfacenat 
— d) NNg 0Or [Jolly G] age; Ho Tj! Beara; Pu? Tro atta: Md‘ Ata; Bo Tae 

215. Omitted in GMd!. Cited by Apa 727; Jmv 2.86;Laks 12.655 — a) Ox? “art; Pus 
“feat — b) oMy Beret; wKB wateeer — c) tMd4 Jy [vl] Laks + ta fat BTT; Lo? 
TtMd} GMd? GMy Tr! MTr‘ MTr° MTr Apa Jmv + TA AT; Bo Lo! “ant; Be! Bo fara 

216. Padas a-b omitted in GMd!. Cited by Vij 2.122;Apa 729; Jmv 7.1; Dev 3.711; Madh 
3.340 — a) wKt! ferarty streeg; tMdé fare atateq; La! Put “SaTaTET; NNg oOr STD; 
Pu2 “ser — b) sBe faa; Pu> Pu’ ffarta; Wa Bteaet; Jo? wKt! Lo? Lot Pu? Pu‘ Tj! 
Laks 4 8 — c) MT ATE AA; wKt! BK Lo? nPul T aT; Bo ar arg a7; Lot Lolly M] 
ar aeq fa’ — d) Pud Pu? “waters; Te eh ae; rMd4 gaheae 

217. Cited by Vij 2.136; Apa 744; Jmv 11.3.2; Laks 12.748; Dev 3.691; padas c-d cited by 
Jmvy 11.4.4 — a) Tj? Faq — b) wKt! nKtt GMd! NNg nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? Tr? mTr mTr® Wa 
Laks TaresTyare — c) rMd4 g; Ho Farat— d) Tr? feqarar; Lot Apa Devel Ett 

218. Omitted in GMy Pu? Put; padas c-d omitted in Md > [haplo]; verses 218 and 219 
transposed in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Jmv 13.1; Laks 12.695; Dev 3.713;Madh 3 382 — a) cMd! 
Wr, Lot or at; sOx! sPus ad fet — b) Md? fesrey wT aeTfaRy; aMd! “wadearrfafr — c) 


sOx! Pager 


Chapter 9 787 
aA Tae Farayae rz: 
anTaarare  t Pret weet UR Rit 
seep frat a: gart aw fearfate: 

BAT: SATA Geert ratert WRoll 
ad wet Fa tet ue Parag | 
Tearedreemaat at arat gPreirarq WR? ei 
TERtddieat WWaqaaeat | 
aattrer weftera aafeetaararad WRI 


srtiRriieard agree Teas | 
start: faearet seq a faster: TaTeaT: URW 


219.* Omitted in GMd?. Cited by Vij 2.118—9; Apa 725; Jmv 6.2.23; Laks 12.678; Dev 
3.643; Madh 3.380 — a) Lo! NNg 4&7; tMd4 aeaatea; GMd! tMd3 GMy Ox? MTr® [Jolly 
Nd] Nd 3a: Hy “Sere; aK Laky “See: — a-b) Jmv [vl as in ed] Sarat — b) cMd! 
ary; Md? “yet; cMy ferat: — c) Be! sBe Bo Ho Hy Jo! Kt? nKt* wKt Lo! Lo? NNg 
sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu5 sPuS Pu? Pu® Tj! Tr? mTr4 mTr® Wa Vij Apa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave arrest Fae [in Tr! the anusvdra is given and crossed out]; La! “ar. wKe! aprert 
ware; TMd? +Md! arereryere [tMd4 “ast] — d) Lo? Tj! fase 9°; Apa feast FF"; La! 
GMd! Ox? mTré fase oOr fear; wKt! Tr? fered; Lot wae 

220. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]; padas a-b omitted in GMd> — a) La! @aqanl, MTF UT 
adr ferarir; Lolly Nd] f stRit; tMd* fester; tMd* sOx! Pu3 aT; TMd3 Pu? Pu‘ Tr? &: — b) 
BKO warfafir — c) Bel wKt? TMd? Pu’ Pu? mTr4 mT road; GMd SSTT; Ran 
appears to read stearétat — d) cMd5 “a4; Jo? Lo? Tj! Tr? ‘erat feratert 

221.* Omitted in NKt* [haplo] in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.762; Madh 3.393 — a) 
wKkt! santa; Ke “gaia — b) Md} a; Ware Rar’: Tj! agr Par; Bo usar Par’; 
Be! sBe’ Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKe wKt Lo! Lo? rMd? sOx! Ox? sP uP Pué Tj? Tr? 
Laks |but vl as in ed.]| Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ueraar Laks |but v1 as in ed.] @gT- 
fgaraaq; Lo} Tj! Jolly Ri Parra — c) cMdd weaeaaHaadd, Be! sBBe Jm Jo! Kt? [but 
cor] Lo! Lo? Tr} Mandlik Jha KSS UaeTeT: sOx! sPuS tsarerae; Tj? asawee ; Hy 
unite ; GMd! “weit at; tMd4 mTr4 Tro “aevit Gat — d) tMd4 at & arcdt gferdiferar; 
1Md3 “ere: 

222, Omitted in Lot nKt‘ [Jolly M]. Cited by Madh 3.393 — a) TMd4 Tesraraer Tee; 
wk aeadtenrt — b)rMd4 aang Gaega; Md staat; wKe aeae ; wKt! “aanieit, 
BKt er c) Hy wafer; Be! wetrare; Tj! sferarce; Pus warard; Hy witara; Pu? Put weer 
—-c-d) Tr! [but cor] odrarasqreta 

223. Omitted in Lo* NKt' [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.199 [intro.];A pa 804; Laks 12.761; 
Dev 3.19; Madh3.388 — a) TR “area; tMd4 “spa — c) Im Vij Devafaty: Praag; 
aCa mifrPafafeetreg; nNg Tq — d) wKt! are: 

Additional verse in La!: 

ge rae te usr ae Parad | 
qaks Graded wat sara: | 





788 Chapter 9 


qa aed Aa a: Zatearata ar | 
areatry ae Farr feather: URW 
feaary gafterary Her Teese ATAATT | 
frartery alfesta feor Fratetegerg wea 
Ua UE AAT Uae: WesAAEHT: | 
faadfeaar Prer avert fear: so: RRM 
Garaget Ts Araet wed | 

TEATE FT A SAT eTEAMTAT ghaarsq Rl! 
Wea aT Wear at afsaad at ar: 

mer querer: CATT AME FTAETAT URI 


aafaqqaathreg qs aIguaagay | 
aren ao meager gered: gat: URN 


224. Omitted in Lo? [Jolly M]. Cited by Vij 2.202; Apa 804; Laks 12.762; Madh 3.392; 
padas c-d cited by Apa 865 —~ a) wKt! FArTa — b) GMd! 1Md3 GMy Tr! mTr® Lolly Nd] Apa 
Laks 3: Barer BRAT [1Md3 wewat; cMd! Tr! F weebw; Volly Nd) BAtsea]; wKe mT! 
ace; oMd) & af: wT; Lo! wPu! Pu2 Put ewaerar; wKe) wre ar, rMd4 “vate TF — c) 
TMd ara ; tMd4 area — d) Bo Bara; wKt! mTrS WaQaied 

225.* Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Laks 12.527; Maddh 3.393 — a) Pu* Pu’ 
faery; tMd? BAA; sOx! sPus aorEall ; [Jolly Nd] Peaaresteart; cMd! Recarpiear, 
Jm ear; Be! om Fe; nKt* Md} Md! [Jolly Gr] Bh [patha] Nderq, cMd! cMd5 cMy 
[Jolly NdJ®ort; Madh Start, Jm Jo! Kt? Ox? Pus Pu’ [Jolly G Ku] N@ Bh Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS ®; HosKt’ La! Lo! Lo? nPu! Pu? Pu} Put Pus Tre Re MT; sOx! sPul Tj? FRM; 
Bo are — b) nKt* BK& sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu’ rave ; wKt? Lo? GM@® GMy oOr Tj! 

1! orqwepate; Lo! cravat; Bo wravesta, Madh WaVSTAfT; Jo? Travseta; Hy “BIE — c) 
Pu’ afte ; cMdS afte; aké aiftsarar, Md! arftsaies — d) Hy sOx' sPu® Parad: ake 
cMd! oMd rata; Ox? rapt; Bo wKt “BR; Tj? Bt, GMd> NNg ERT; sOx! sPu 
“Sa 

226. Omitted in Lo‘ Volly M]; padas b-d omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 12.527—— a) La! 
oT UE adarar fF wPul wet ued; Put ued; Tr! asd; Ty! feerarat — b) Hy Fesa:, BocMy 

“qeBe: — c) cMy “fearer, mTr* ‘Beaarfret — 4) oMd Pu’ ated; Ho Ted; Be! tMd4 
afgepr; Lo! afgest; Md} ager: wk! aferenr: 

227. Omitted in Lo? (Jolly M]; pada-a omitted in Put. Cited by Laks 12.762 — a) Hy 
“wert, Md! “Ber — b) Hy FS; nKt TS: cMy FZ; sKO FaHe ae — d) Be! srearetaly 

208 Cited by Laks 12.762 — b) Pu’ Pu? at aaa Aa: — c) Tr! sf¥s"; Lo! Pus Pu? 
(but cor] eer frpect:; sOx! sPuo “gaeeT:; GMd! “fase; oOr Peper — d) Pu? Put 
are; Lot qraerar; Be! FI: war 

229. Cited by Laks 12.802; Dev 3.292;Mdadh 3.159 — b)r Md? @¥é¥; oOr a7; Boalgy ; 
sOx! sPuS ag; Bo Ho Pu? ead — c) Lo! Tj! aqet; wKe arr; Lo! mTr6 ator — d) 


<a) 


tMd? 0Or Dev fast eet: at: [TMd3 fBsit]; Lo? fast at: at: [om FETA] 


Chapter 9 789 


AtaTSraATEMT FRaTATIRTT | 
T NRZoN 


Rrefaaoranakiaeargqataday 

y Peaerg eaty eq: sratfr arfierey | 
TANT TATA area eT: UR3 LM 
RMIT THAT T TTHTT | 
Aarmaetary sare fecatarerar URRRI 
aie aakre a aa wat aad | 

ga aaaat Pree agar rad W233N 


saver: ifsaret ar aeqaicertraa4r | 
aeae qate: Ea T Ae TW sSAT URI 


230.* Cited by Laks 12.802; Dev 3.292; Madh 3.159 — a) Lo! “eat — b) Tr? aft- 
grat TIT; Be! Ho Jm Jo! Je wKt! Kt? wK nKtt 8K Lo! Lo? Lo? TMd4 GMd> sOx! Ox? 
Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ sPu® Pu’? Tj! mTr3 Yolly G Ku R]Laks Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave agit 
afro — c) BK rw’; yPul Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu? Devarntfa’ ; Jo! Fafa’; La! oOr rene; 
Lo? watfa’; +Ma3 Bratfresr ; Madh Prater; Tr! aw’; Pu? Put “faer” — d) 
wkt! “sferhT; Lot “afertr 

231. a) Lo! fageredy wry; Ho Put aT; Me [patha] tsfrqwred [Me comments: 
saaroerar: sofa], oMd! fFrawy erty — b) Bo wifaer; cMd! tMd3 GMdS Tr! [but me sh] 
mTro SIRT; Be! Hratat; GMy HRT — c) M3 aqrqorr, mT? eaTCHUIT; GMy arena. Pu2 
Pu‘ F=rAT: pCa Lo! tMd4 oMy Ox? “aTAiear ; Tj! Tr! °aTRaT ; Bo TMd? nPu! Pu? Put “ATT 
at — d) Be! Bo Hy K# wKt? sKtS Lo! Pu’ “eaifsear’; tM? etRgRaTHT ; oOr Pu? Pu! 
“eafaeerar ; Lot [Jolly M] Cagu: 

232. Cited by Apa 862; Laks 12.570; Dev 3.752— a) NPu! pearrenr ; Bo Pu? Put “oodar 
— b) Be! Ho! Wa gftert — d) Lo! fgeafar” 

293. Cited by Vij 2.306; Laks12.266; Madh 3.161 — a) Tr? cifad;wKt! cMd! Tj! ata; 
(Jolly Nd] Froffa, mT r4 atRarMa} Sf; rMd4 fa; nPu! Aft; cMd argferee; oOr om T; 
La! at — b) Vij erat ferret; rMd} erry Baa; Kt? cGMd! TRA — c) Kt? Pat; cMy wea 
aver, rMd4 aaeta?; Dev aaeHare Be! fagrs; Md fear 4; Vij TT 7 — d) Pw Put 
ferarragar, Vij Tarsit; Madhagaret adaq; Lot rMd} Tj! Lolly M] frac; Lo3nPu! + 
aay 

Additional verse in nPu! Pu? Pu* Mandlik [€, 6] Dave KSS: 

cite maf a at were feat | 
fayer qenrena acer great II 
a) Put ctfeat; Pu? Pu? at 

234.* Omitted in BKt®. Cited by Laks 12.269; Dev 3.304— a) BCa Hy Jm Jo! wkt! Kt? 
wKt? GMd! tMd> tMd4 GM@ GMy Puf Tr! MTr3MTr* MTrMTr® [Jolly Nd] Laks Na Ku 
Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 3A1eu:; Lo} 3TaTet:; GMd! tMd3 GMy [Jolly Nd] Bh sifgataer; Pu? 
[but cor] Pud mfeaarer — b) TMd3 aeeyEteT HRA; Be! Bo Ho Jo? La! Lo’ NNgwPu! Pu? 
Pu? Put Pu Pu? Tj! Te? Wa [Jolly M G] Dev &: Gat’; GMd! cMd> Pu’ Laks 3 Be: He; 
aCa wKt & Gf: wrt: Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? cMd! tMd3 tMd! GMd® GMy Pu’ Tj? Tr mTr3 


790 Chapter 9 


Aelat A AUT AEH TEaew: 

Ue aed Wasa AeraTaeay AM: URRAI 
agutate daar sakraaredany | 
a ea 
ear g aug arf generate: ce 
wT qa swaareataartea: | 

uae: afrat dar: adtertateerar: R23 CII 
aiereateerreaeat HAT: FATT: | 


MTr* MTS MTr® Mandlik KSS Jha Dave (Jolly Ku] 48q: are — c) oMy Ted; oOr TAIT 
— d) cMy aea@ ahr awed; Pud Pu’ Volly G]aee Bar qetd; Be! BBe? BCa Hy Jm Jo! 
GMd! tMd? GMd sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPu® Pu’ Tj? Tr! mT rt mTro MTr® Bh Ku Mandlik KSS 
Dave a; oOr Ta; NKt ae; Lo! &:; Md‘ aieaes;, Be! | aus” 

235.* Omitted in La!. Cited by Laks12.784; Dev 3.753 — a-d) for this verse Bh gives 
the following as a patha: Hew Gut WT aewe Joaert | vafaacguaaatserrctaay 
ae || — a) Hy gered — b) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Ox? Pub Pu’ Tj? Tr? mTr? {Jolly G]Re Mandlik 
KSS teat tT 7S — c) nPul & WF; Lo? araaty ; DevITMAT, wBe? TaAEM; Je Lo! Lo? 
Lot nNg Ox? nPul Pu? Pu’ Tj! geratsar; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? sOx! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ sPu® Pu’ 
Tj? Tr mTr? Wa Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave F282; Lo? gaharersret’ — d) wk} wer 
ara; TMd? AR:; Lo? RH 

236.* Omitted in La!. Cited by Vij 2.81; Apa 843; Laks12.784; Dev 3.291 — a) Lo? Tj} 
waar; cMd! Vij Dev TTA — b) Hy *edar — c) Be! Lo! rMd? oOr Ox? Pu? Put Tee; BBe 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo} Tj? Tr? Wa Vij Laks Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Daveattele, wKt 
arty. Lot Lo’ sOx! sPu® “Ow — d) GMy @S wort WHemad; cM qee; Lo’ Gera; 
pCa wKt! Lo? Pu’ Tj! Laks TRF avs; oOr wavs; Pu? Put At aE; Be! Bo wKt af; TP 
Word: Apa gepferd; td? + pera; Be! waetct 

237. Cited by Vij 2.270; Apa 842; Laks 12.784; Mddh 3.304 — a) La! “aedt; BKE “act; 
wKt! HRT; Md* aa:; wKt! tMd4 rt — b) Ho Fe; cMd> Yeas; Md? BEAT: wKt! 
“east — c) GMd5 SA; TMd! Jha TPL AT; Be Hy Jm Joi wKt! Kt? Lo? Tj?2MTP MTP Vij 
Mandlik KSS Dave @; PuS Pu’ mT ro age: Brat; wKe! aay ares — d) Na aeeaeretr: and 
gives the reading of ed. as kvacit pdthah; Be! wK Kt Lo! saecarert: [BK “irr; Ox? 
Pu Pu’ “fre:; Ho Aer: 

238.* Pada-c omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Apa 843; Laks 12.784; Dev 3. 733 a) TMd3 
ore aay eeatsar, BK ae urearecaeaTsar;, LoScMd! Ox? mTrémTro mTr® Wear; 1Md4 

“siRT; Lo! Apa “wieaTEae La! °sisarare’ Hy wKt3 Lot nNg Ox? Ox? Pu? Pu? Tj? Tr? Wa 
“asa ae”; Lot tMd4 Ox3 Tj! Tr Volly M]SAASA; Lod THAI; Bo WATT; mT! MTr® 
wenitsa — b) Dev amareaparfrarfes:; rMd? GMy [Jolly R Nd] @aSaT ; Be! HAA; LoS 
sOx! sPu® Trt aaa’ ; Tj! wave ; Ox? area; nPu! Pu? Put afaren ; Pub area; 
1Md! saear; Tr? retar’; Bo aeTRT; Lo! wdarer; Apa feafeer Pu2 *fararefr:; 
Md? area; Put faigiar:; mtr! Ranft: Lot Me Jha °Reanffar: — c) Lod Tj! Tr? ofr, 
Tr? dat; Dev aat— d) nPu! a4; Bo afecpa: 


Chapter 9 791 


friday Prareerreaeeategrearry 23S 
marred g Rater: yt amt sankey | 


frat at waar axet: Tas: URS LI 
ZAC FAIA WTA: | 
AAAS BTA TATATTT URS 
aradte aa: arysterarabeear any | 
Meare ABMATT aa sro Ferg URS 3I 


239. Cited by Laks 12.785; Dev 3.753— a) Pu? Pul sTfa’; Lot Dev arufiraa. cMd 
“afrRrata; eCa Tr? aRrreaad; Lo? aPareaa: [Jolly M] “afer: 1Md? Pud afernaa: 
Pu2 “aferata — b) Dev BAT:; Bo Pui Wa “Bet: — c) Bo Feat; TMd?4 Patar, wKe! Fear; 
Be! fiftwar; oOr Frater; Dev Pat=aT; Bo “AEPRIRT; nPul “HEprater — d) wKt! “aTeAT 
aret 

240. Cited by Vij 2.270, 3.259;Apa 843; Laks 12.785; Dev 3.754;Madh 3.305 — a) 
Be? Md} tMd‘ GMy Madh Paretteator:; Bo BK Lo’ Ox? eater: — b) rMd4 mTr® Ge, 
mTr? QF; Be! BBé BCa Ho Jm Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? La! Lo? sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put 
sPuo Pu’ Tj! [Jolly R Ku] VijMdadh 44; Jo! wKt! BK mTr? Mandlik KSSAFTAT, Apa Tat 
ANT; Kt? TaAT; Pud Pu’ mT Berfeer:; Pue Put warfea:; wkt Apawafrd — c) wKt! ATsT; 
nK¢ arear, Madh 337aT, Md? ATeaT; Tj! ATR; Lo? ATSaT; GMy ARaIT;tMd? Tait, cMd! 
usrreray erat’: La! Lot GMd GMy Tr! mTr> Wa Polly M Nd] Laks Sorey aT; BCa Jo? 
Lo! tMd} 0Or Tj! {Jolly R] Vij Dev & atar— d) Madh “para ; GMd! tMd Tr? “Breer; 
oOr aTeat 

241. Omitted in Lot. Cited by Laks 12.785; Dev 3.754— a) Pu’ Pu’ Sarreg sary; Lo? 
Tj! org; Lo! srteq; Lo* Ox arrey; Pu? Put ate; Bo HAE; nKtt aag; wKt! aerecc, 
oMd! GMd® Pu? Pu‘ Tj! “orety; Be! La! GMy [Jolly Nd R] Weht; Wa “tretur; Bo 1Md4 
“areag; Hy Im Jo! Kt? wKO ake Tj? mTr? Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave “eX, xP ul 
“opt — b) 1Md4 art; cMd! “arear:; 1Md? Pu? Put “area — c) Tr? fara; sBe? Bo nCa Ho 
wKt! La! Lo! Lo} Tj! Tj? Fraveay; Jo?sOx! sPu® [me sh] Fratear, rMd‘4 featery, wKt} oOr om 
ar, Bo Haaren: — d) rMd4 Weer:; rMd3 agony Lo! “fee: 

242, Omitted in Lo*. Cited by Laks 12.785; Dev 3.754 — a) wKt? nPu! Pu? Pu? Wa 
“apr — b) BBe *arraerad:; Be! tMd3 “arf eraa:; Laks aft ata: — c) cMd' & 
aden. Bo aderey : nKtt GMy Pu mTr® “area; tMd* eereH; Lot arm; Laks 
“eritt ; Be! Pu’ Pu? “efreafer — d) Tj! aeerreg; cMd ere; NK TATA; Dev TATIUT 

Additional verse in Ca La! tMd? Tr?: 

ue fagragerey Us ay goat | 
oer Parmer carga | 
a) pCa Uafaer ; La! eratagan’ ; rMdé “sara; Te “saTragy — ce) TMd! ger safer 

243. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) Put Tr? sada; TMd} Aredia; Lot 
araétt, Bo TF — b) Lo? Tj! Tr! mTr? mTrSmTr° Volly Nd R] Wafeeat; Hy oMd! “orafeear 
— c) T? wearer; Hyom ¢ — c-d) Lo! Ox) areerreg achat dardtafiacara [0x3 “wea ] 


792 Chapter 9 


Wy WaT T TE aeraqasad | 
AATATTT AT AraeT sfarsAT URI 
SI FSET ATT Cat SENT a: | 
BT: AAT AAT AAMT AMATET: URW 
aT WaT UAT WPA TATTTT | 

aa BT A Atay Aas: UREN 
fread at aerter seater feat gee | 
aera tT wetted fap TT ATT URN 
MAUMIATT F BATAVIA | 
rankaadeaeTsrreye: UCI 


QTATATEAT TY ATaATAAET AAT | 


— d) Be! Bo Ho Lo! Laks Career; Ca wKt! BK# La! Lo? Lo? Lo* oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu} Put sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tr? Lolly M R] Jolly TS; mT aeret 

244. Padas c-d omitted in GMd! +Md¢ [haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) Lo’ s1e¢oa; 
Md! afaee, Pud Pu? Tae BUS AT; Lo* Lod [but cor sh] Ox* at; La! Md? TMd4 GMa GMy 
Laks (0S — c) Laky Bfafeerrass, Te ge; Pus Pu? “gee”; tM “fer; mT! TS MT ro 
"ot; wKt Lal GMy oOr Pu? Put [Jolly Nd] “Gaae sel; Be! “GAT; oMd 5 TF — c-d) Lot 
aqareg ahear aarattfaarcad [cf. 9.243] — d) mT’ Tr aTeTT; MTP HTSTT:; La! Pu? Put 
area 

245. Omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) GMd! afait, tMd4 UTaIT; sPu® gait; sOx! 
@at; Lot qusqet — b) Be! Lot Lo® GMd Ox? Pu? Pu’ Laks Usit; Bo Md? tat; BKe Lo! UST; 
Md‘ fea: — c) Pu? Saray aaa 

246. Pada-a omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) Lo [Jolly M]aa 7 frac; cMd! 
asteret — b) wKt! srtaseay; rMd4 oTt@pceaT;, Pud Pu? ee c) Lo! 44; oOr 37; Be! cGMdé 
Pu2 Put @Te J; GMy [Jolly Nd] Ste J; Lot Lo’ Ox} Gar 7; Wa TTA — d) cMd! chars: 

247.* Cited by Laks 12.787 — a) NNg Protea; Be! Frdteaed; Jo wKt! Lo? Md} Tj! 
sd, Pud Pu’ [but cor] “afer; Tr! J — b) oOr satay SAaS:; Jo? Lo? Tj! Hrarahy; Be! 
Ho wKt! nKtt Lo? GMd! Md? GMy Ox? nPu! Pud Pu? Puf Tr! [but cor] MTr?MTr MTr® Laks 
aarerfs — c) tMd4 ater; nKe* Tj! wAtad, ake wetaad — d) oOrdepct; Pui fear; rMd3 

r! faepfeer; Be! BBe? Hy Jm Jo! K® sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! sPu® Tj? mTr3 Volly K] Mandlik 

Jolly Jha KSS Dave fpc FF; BKt> Lo! Lot [Jolly M] fepfert a; Bo Ho Pe Put fae Aa; 
Be! ast 

Additional half-verse in tMd?: 

wera wate g wkeafer gefter: 1 

248. Omitted in oOr. Cited by Dev 3.754;Madh 3-396 — a) Ho Lo! tMd4 sree ary; 
MTrS aero SETA; Madh  ONRTTETATA; Tr! [but cor] “AAT; Bo cMd! sOx! sPuS “area 

T€J — b) cMd! sOx' sPué “afer: — c) pBe? wKt! cMd> eemfes?’; cMd! Dev genferaan ; 
wKt! “SSetor° 


Chapter 9 793 


serait qarader eteq Paras: ues 
sfeatsa Praca frat fraaaraat: | 
TETANY arty arrerer Fretr: wR oll 
wa aariiir erat edearareetafe: | 
Amaia wear wareaT U4 I 
amafireaeg Hager wer: | 
weet Permiasaragrry WY RI 
CANA BVCHTAT DT AeA | 
atatatea arf werateataeaer: Re 3N 
sareeeetrerg afer wetter afr: 

ret TEAS UE canter ater Wail 


249. Cited by Laks 12.796 — a) Lo! araraqeaer a ae; Tr? aravaeret Te I; GMy 
“aaer; BKO Tat; Pud Pu? aweaay. — c) rMd} aera ataegr, cMy “ager — d) BKo Pu2 
Pu‘ Pud Pu? epfer fa? 1Mdé faftrrza:; Lot “aeefer 

250. Cited by Laks 12.770 — a) Tr aft 4; Lot Sah [ma YT] F; Be! Sear F:; Pw Pu? 
Zar AT; GMd! om 4; Lo! Lot NNg GMd5 Ox? Wa fereaedt — c) cMd! srenraaroarty — d) 
Laks aaerfare:; Be! cMd! aaerg 

251. Cited by Laks 12.770 — a) NNg [but cor fh] T%; BK tS TMd4 Pu? Put BBe? Fatih; 
Be! Bo sCa Ho Jo? wKt} nKtt La! Lo! Lo Lo? Lo* oOr sOx! sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! [Jolly M] 
apraifer eatfer [Ho Pu’ eatfer]; cMy aatfer aratftr; mTrs Laks pratfer wath; cMd5 srarfer 
ait; BKe om Hair; Pu Put waifer— b) iMd4 @aeat Het"; Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? 
Lo! Lo4 Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pud Tj? Tr? mTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ade — c) 
La! tareena feraa; cMy Fates; Tj? om aeeaifgaa; Lo! “wera ferdet — d) oOr 
wreraread; Wa Tae 

252. a) Be! aarpfaate ; TMd4 aepnface ; Ti? eam; Lot [Jolly M] “sary — b) Ho 
poets, Md? paaeter; Be! nCa wKt! Lot tMd4 GMd@ oOr Tr! mTr® [Jolly M Nd] “we; Bo 
Tr! mT rt mTr°arpadt:; Lo? aera: — c) Md) Tr! “wrest, +Md! “Sot — c-d) Wa Preraear- 
fecagent; Be! nNg Pu’ Pu’ vamrfacsfsergqet [Be! Prema |; Jm Pu? Pui aearfesaapy 

253, a) TM? wea. Tr? “getlat— b) Bo aay; wKt} aieaq — c) Bo Aeafea — d) 
Bo deat; Im Tey 

Additional verse in La! [quite illegibly written]: 


Targa: amred dfaaearaa: TET 
254. a) GMd! aerated; Tr! seraedep ; Be! Lo! Lo! aerate ; Lot area 
& ; wk saree ; rMd4 ergedee ; wKt! aterrer cep ; 1Md? Harare — b) rMd4 


794. Chapter 9 


Patz g wearer wes agaenbreay | 
oer aaa Pret frerart za ga: URAN 
fatten ure WITTE | 


TRURTATTTBTRTAT areergarahe: R&I 
Wedsaerdar araraearasttferet: | 
WeaAdsaHhead ANCA AAT: URI 
Soarararaateren asa: Pear | 
AFOSATAA WEA: AT UCI 


a; cMd! o1ffat: — c) Be! Bo Ho Jo? Lo} Tj! wea qeafa sere; Lot wer apeafer F ae, 
[Jolly M]aer; GMd | aa; wKO acer gered; Tr? ve — d) wk eth; Lot Lolly M] 
Ted; My Teeftae; rMd4 Roar 

255. Cited by Laks 12.511 — a) GMd! tMd? MTr‘ mTr° Pote wer aafe, Lo? Frfar fe; 
BBe? BCa nKt! Lo! Lo! GMd5 GMy Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! [Jolly Nd R] f€;NNg Laks 47 — b) Lo! 
MTr4 MTro wee ar agerPret [mT r4 MT ro “ofS; nPul we wstaerad; cMd> UST; Bo “sore 
Jaq; Ox? “TerPTad; wCa Lot qarxs — c) Lot [Jolly M] wenPraeda, cMd! NNg oOr ae 
wre — d) Ho fAserary; Ke era; Lot Volly M] AA; + Md} feware; Tj! sfer; Tr? gar: 

256. Cited by Laks 12.256; Dev 3.735 — a) La! 1Md3 fafaeietes’; Be! Lo! fafer- 
ae; Be! Bo La! Pu? Pu? Tr! “ufearenrct — b) Tr? Teerery ; Lo? 1Md3 1Md4 GMy Pu’ 
Tr! MTrMTr® Wa [Jolly Nd] LaksNSm 19.1 @1feor; — c) tMd4 FeraraTreTaeT, wK Lot 
Lo’ 1Md3 TaHrabarrsraer, Tj? om awetater — d) nK ti wTaray’; Be! seastadt’; mTr® 
“media 

257.* a) GMy Tj! TeTaT; Bo My sOx! sPu® mTr> [Jolly M Nd] “arecaat — b) Tr? 
“Sftfaat — c) Be! sBe? nCa Ho wKt} NKtt La! GMd® oOr Ox? Pu! Pu’ mTr4 asrpreagi; 
BKtS sOx! sPuS “asaareaut; Pu2 Put “araaraa; Lo! “araaed FT; Jo? [ma fh} wKt! Lo? Tj! 
[Jolly R] “asqppaa; Bo nNg Pu’ Pu’ Wa a>aHreaa; Lot Volly M G] Jolly aetna; 
Laks “asaer Sar — d) Jo? wKt! Lo? Tj! [Jolly RJSar arefer Sar: [Tj eae]; cMd5 
Tr! ehreattastifes:, wK8 ecaearefeer srat:; BBe Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? sOx! Ox? Pub sPué Pus 
Tj? Tr? mTr3 Rn [patha] Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ® eatefeesres:; Lo! ATATOVaTeaT SAT: 
TM? arahfeaaisrr:; cMd! ar: 

258.* Cited by Laks 12508 — a) Pu’ Pu’ seplRrerediafeer, mir Septet states, 
Lo! sitepraet attafrer; Bo 3<etT; Ho sOx! sPuo sepifreer’; Wa atteprraraity; mT v4 
scat; La! Lot “wephaite’; Be! Volly M] arate: nPul Pu2 Put “wesrttafer- 
ary; oMd Tr! mTrS “aer safer; Ket Caer arafser; Laks Ter: Af; Jo! Jo? Lo? 
GMd! 0Or Tj! mTr® Wa “siraftrer; Lo! “sara RTeBrT; mT? “afta, Lal “aftr — b) Lot 
nPu! Pu? Put {Jolly M] aerenttepcatere, Laks fepcar aeTsreTay; Bel Pud Pu? asdepiiapc- 
arerert [Pu Pu? “=1at]; sOx! sPuS aera: saa: a1ST:; Ox? Pu? Pu’ Te feaar: aeT:; BKE 
om TT — c)cMd! AIFor ; nPu! Fer, Be! La! nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu’ “sapT; Lot “atta; 
cMd! °aertar — d) cMy Polly Nd] sanaderforerteter; oM d® raraerftrenrere; Lot Re WaT: 
et; Pu2 Put agate; Jo? AEH; Bo Hy Im Jo! Kt? wKt nKt BKtS Lo’ Lo? rMd? rMd4 
oOr Ox? Pu? Pu’ Tj, Tr! mTr’ mTrémTr? Wa [Jolly G Ku R]Mandlik Jha KSS Dave agar ; 
Be! Pus Pu? wander; Pu2 Put wareaer; La! wghater ; nPul Tr? mTr° agar; cMd! sated 


Chapter 9 795 


TAATRTAT HETATAT PT RTaT: | 
Rearrange from: wera: Ue 
TaR Taare THATS ITT | 
Pree ftorarrerraratart fester: NREoll 
afeatacar qabtaercatarkthr: | 
TRAST: TATE ATATAAT URE LU 
aar ararafrearer et eat aftr aaa: | 
Bata MAT TAT ARTRATTATTT: UREA 
aw fe qoeradt wae: eg aafatme: | 
warat agate Fry aeat Pray URE AN 
AAAI ATTA: | 
agers: AAT: ero T NRSV 


waftre:; Ho Tj? Lo! nNg sOx sPuS saraderre:; wKt! AePaeASsa:; BBE: HEPAT: 

259. Cited by Laks 12.508 — a) Laks saree; Pu2 “Rot ta — b) sOx! sP uo 
“ara? ; wkKt! wKe “APT; La! Lot Pu2 Put PuS Pu? “HTaiBr’; 7Md3 “ARaTP’; La! Lot 
wPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu’ “fscreprt; Hy “ecre: — c) Lot Rredpare’; 1Md3 GMd! [Jolly N Nd] 
ferediaee’; Be! La! Lot nPu! Pu? Put Pu? “air — d) TMdé mTr® Fagen: ;rMd3 Pytrt; Bo 
wKt! PuS ur; NNg ger” 

260. After pada-b Lo! places verse 262. Cited by Laks12.509 — a) Hy Jm Jo! Kt T/? 
MT Mandlik KSS TaaTetPasr ; sOx! sPus [Jolly N Nd] “sieftart — b) wKt! “aster — c) 
Be! Lo? GMd! 1Md? 1Md‘ GMy nNg Pud Pu? Wa Na “anftorat’; mTr “aorftoraat’; nPu! 
“aattorta sara 

261. a) TMd> “fecarrae’; wKe erate’; GMd> MT rt MTr® gq af — b) wKt! mTr® 
“eer; nPu! ereTATRAT: oOr ercpraeanfepe: ake “after: — c) Pw? IRS : Tr? afet- 
te; Lotanitere ; oMd! ated» rMd4 saadert: — d) La! Lot [Jolly M] Sree; 
Tr? WeaTeT; BK GMy [Jolly Nd] Weert; Wa Were; mTr® wee; Hy Jm Jo! K? wKt? Lo? 
Ox? Pu? Pu} Put mTr? Ku Mandlik KSS Jha Dave [Jolly Ku] StcaTet 

262. a) Pu’ Pu? Samar; GMd> sOx! sPuo “feearer; Pu’ “Rrarf; Lot “Rrearer — b) Lo? 
om one &; Pw Pu’ @: @:; wKe faeea: — d) Md? “FaTHTRT ; BK Fae; sOx! 
sPue attra: 

263. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly MJ, not commented by Me. Cited by Laky12.511 — a) TMd? 
art, ak aarp — b) Laks aTafahy ; rMd? Prag — c) Pu? Put aa; wKt! wKO Ox? 
amagetat; cMd5 GMy aaaegat — d) Md? aeat Prefer ferct; cMd! frat; rMd3 GMy Tr! 
[Jolly Nd] Fate, wKE azar; Ho FT 

264. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 841; Laks 12.545 
— a) nKtt La! @4T:; Lo? mTr° SATAT oM di SATA, nPu! “ehrarrer; oMd@ mTr> 
“SoTTST; Bo Pu? Pu‘ Pus Pu? “uae; NNg Gaarer; 1Md4 “AUST; nNKe “sae; Ox? 
“Qasr; Hy “after; Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “31@Iaal as a compound — b) Jo? Pu’ 
aarrarerawar:; Ox? nPul Sear; La! dear’; Pu2 Put ea"; Wa Sait; Lo! rMd? Sa: La! 








796 Chapter 9 


stutarraeahy srearagreanrer a | 
year Beara Ta T UREA 
vafrargat rq AeA: STATA: | 
aera ferent SUR UREN 


ARTETA MAATATHATAAT: | 
oe TaaeET: | UR GM 


WAST AMAT aT sala: | 
MASAMI EPEAT TART URE 


ay at aretgestrearar FT | 
aaa TA seg akraaetarerary UR<Fit 


“wera fewar: Bo La! sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj? “apa, wKt! aa; coMy aT; Lo! Pu’ Pu? [but cor] 
Tro fear; wPul °feer:; cMd! “Rear — c) Md? Md oMy agurabtergary — d) 1d? 
1tMd* cMd@ GMy oOr BATT 

265. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly My]; not commented by Me; ma in Lo!. Cited by Apa 841; 
Laks 12.545 — a) Apa ait —b) wKt! wre, Be! “Sarath; Ho “Aart; oOr Farerhy — 
c) La! RaTeaTenTT ; Bo Apa aterm ; Pu} arene 

Additional half-verse in nPu!: 

aa afearanty warranty T | 

266. Omitted in Lot [Jolly My}; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 841; Laks12. 546 — 
a) Md wafarit Jor; BK “Bd; Md} rMd4 “gar, Tj! 2ar— b) Md} Tee; oMd! FATT — 
c) Ho Tee; wKt! “fete — 4) La! oMd! aaa’; Apa TUR, oOr “TARA; cMa 
“aread; Lo! “areata; eke “aaa; GMy Tear: 

267. Omitted in Lo Volly M]; not commented by. Me. Cited by, Apa 841— a) Lo! 
acarer ; NKtt eee ; MTP Apa aTRET 5; Be! ™Md* serer ; Tj! aeaTeae ; BK GMy Pud Pu’ 
Tr? mTr® [Jolly Nd] ere: tary; wKe! “are: aq ; NNg “ete; ; Bo Ho Pu Pu} Pus “@rt- 
sqrt: BBe NKt! La! Lo! GMd! 1Md¢ oMd Ox? Put MTS Wa gery; Tr? eebarrfe- 
alar’; Wa “qaaatar’ — b) oMy “ataninftrarfefr:; Hy eCa BK GMd! tMd3 1Md4 Tj? Trt 
mTr® [Jolly Nd] Apa “garfeft:; Be Lo? Wa warfefr:, sOx! sPuS “warfeRr:; sBe? wKt! nNg 
Tr Me[patha] TaTRr:; Ox? “safer; cMd “veer: — c) Te frerereraceata; wKt! fererr- 
year; Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! sOx! sPu® mTr3 [Jolly Ku] Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 3arex [cf. 
9.261]; TMdé “Feta — d) BBe? yer: 

268. Omitted in Lot Volly MJ; not commented by Me; padas a-b and c-d transposed in 
Lo} Tj'; padas b-c omitted in TMd? [haplo]. Cited by Apa 841 — a) BBe* Bo Ho wKt# Ter; 
cMd> weit; sOx! sPuS “sitsayeaer; sBBe Jm Jo! Kt mT Mandlik KSS Jha atsataeaper, 
La! “eateq — c) wKt} La! Pu? Pud Put ate; rMd3 oMy Tr! def; La! sOx! nPul sPu 
“aaitge; La! “sag — d) TMd? cMd @ardat; Tr? cat area ; wKt! Lo! “1nT:; NNg 
“ae 

269. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 841— a) Tr? 47; 
oMd! ata — b) Apa “apa: afreaey [vi afer]; Tr! “gate Tr? wifes — c) Apa 
aft qq: audtaear: — d) Md? erate FA"; Jo? Lo? GMy NNg nPu! Pu Pu’ Tj! Tr! [but cor] 


Chapter 9 797 


a ater fear att oreerarhtet a: | 
Bats AIH TAA AAAT URI 
yrary a a Breather wars: | 
UMVSTAS TAT TAA aTaAAT URL! 


Teg waaay aaa afrary | 
smarrag arenes FAT UR 
wate eterna wager asia: | 
TAT Ta warsAtia Beg URo3N 
grad freras afr atarfreats | 

afrat area Frater: aaktesar: UR 


Wa [Jolly Nd RJ ayaala ; Apa aTRTAT: 
270. Omitted in Lo‘ [Jolly M];not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 849— a) Lo? nPu! 
Put Pud Pu’ Tj! aéle4; Bo nK¢ et; Lo® ea; Pu’ Bert; Md? Wer; Lo? GMd> GMy Tj! Tr! 
mTr Trott; cMd! +Md4 are — b) tMd? arafaest — c) Tj? ets; Lo! Tete; 1Md4 Ba; 
ake reer; Pu’ Pu? “ater — d) Lo! mT eerearfaeay: Wa “aad; Hy “AAA; Apa [vl] 
“areut 
271. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 849; Laks 12.548 
—a) BK om 4; Kt J; Ho om®; Bo Ox? fafa’. Md! af — b) Lo! 'cMd$ cMd! oMy 
NNg pe Tr! mTSmTro earerot; Hy “oy wMerTaT:;Bo Ho Af ; TMd4 WA; Bo Bae:; Tr 
— ¢) Jo? Lo! rMd3 “araraPaa; sOx! sPus arte — d) oMd! aati fraraata; 
sOx! ane mTr! MTr® Laks RARTETaaa, oMd! “earTETaa tM “RaTAPaTeaT 
272. Omitted in Lo’ Pud Pu’ [Jolly M], not commented by Me. Cited by Apa 850;Laks 
12.550 — a) GMy [Jolly Nd]ere: Ft apa; wKt! wena; La! Lo! Lo? cMd! gMd5 
oOr nPu! Tj! Tr! 4pa wegifepar; Md‘ wefapam,; rMd? oorferrary — b) wKt} Pu’ 
armada zafeary; Pu3 areaianit; rMd4 weqarata; nNg nPu! alfeara; cMd! af-eart — c) 
P reraayg; Be seaaray; Md‘ aeargay; cMd! sarareay — d) mTr® ° Bera’; Lo? 
tMd3 cMd GMy nNg Tj! Tr! mT 1° “eeiterfte; sOx! sPu’ Zar 
273. Omitted in Lo’ [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Laks 12.776 — a) Pu? 
Put & aft — b) rMd4 weqay; sOx! sPu® “stad; aCa [but cor} Ho wKt! nKt* La! 1Md? oOr 
Ox? nPu! Pu? Pué Tr? Wa sffarr:; BK “sft; GMd! ° fear — c) wKt! nPul! Pu? Pu‘ arrel- 
aaht aves [wKet! Branca], wke atraaft ae; Lal “Se g at Brean Be! aafate; 
TMd} aaTaed; Ox? TET — c- -d) 0Or asta acaftarediarcah seae: — d) sBe? sOx! Ox? 
sPuS gatafaegd, wKt! wKe La! “euteaftege: Tr? “eaifea =a; Pus Pu’ freq: Jo? Lo? 
Tj! Pere 
274.* Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]. Cited by Apa 850; Laks 12.550 — a) Ho La! O14; nPu! 
IPT; Md? tM? aTazaTe; Lo? Tj! “ata; cMy Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G Nd] Jolly are Ser ; Laks 
fear’; Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt? wKt oOr [Jolly Ku] N@ [patha] Ku Rn Re Mr Mandlik KSS Jha 
Dave feat ; Apa [vl] eer; Na et; TMd? at; Pu} Ser’; sOx! sPuS Wa Nd ad; cMd! 
war; Pu? wT; Volly N] TEPVAT; mTr “art — b) rMd4 afer; Tj? Wa Laks arafe’; Lo! 
aoe; nKtt aah BBe* Bo Ho Jo? La! tMd? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu’ mTr* ary ; Lo? cMd 


798 Chapter 9 


Ua: etd wfageg at fears | 
areas aaaTIErT URAL 

ae fran g & att wat edhe cere: 

cat fircar gat seat cftest yer Prager URN 
ager year SAT TIT TE | 

fad weracott adr aermdfa NRW! 
aaremaraa aM wWearaasers | 
arena Areer Rreaeadrerraat: URC 


GMy Tj! Tr! mTr° draPy ; wKe! wKe are; cMd! MTParte; mT? Ba; Ho Jo? nKH 
Lo? tMd? cMy nPul! Pu? Put Pu Na Re Welt; Wa “wt — c) Md! tMdé Tr! Tr5 mTr6 
anita; Be! Ca Ho aKt GMd> NNg afectahy ; Ke aifaer ; Bo aes wKe 7 
fe ara’. Lol 4faeaat cor to Tafafirar, tMd4 ° qraeaT — d) BKt5 Fraveqr:; Bo La! aaftusc:, 
1tMd! aufeeesar 

275.* Cited by Vij 2.302; Apa864; Laks 12.568; Mddh 3.395 — a) La! cMd® aatr; cMd! 
ast; Be! 1Md3 rMd4 cMy MTS User ; La! Pu3 Put HAT; Be? ATT; Pud Pu? Branhae ; 
Md ‘eater — b) Be? Ho Ox? Pu Te wfereee 7 afera4; Bo wKt! La! Lo! Lo? Lo4 sOx! 
sPu® Pu’ Wa Rn Laks sferepoaraferary [Bo Rr]; Jo? wKt8 cMd! Tj! [Jolly Nd R] Jolly Jha 
miferetera erat; tMd‘ sfcrgeatrattart (7), oOr mifeaesy,; cMd 5 oMy MTP WIferaRONT ; 
1d oifereeaty; Pus Pu? [Jolly G] “eax at ferart — c) Lo! raat” — c-d) GMd! TMd3 
tMd* oMy Tr mT rs MT Volly Nd] srdtorrgysrearar oraafefaatde: [oMy “osreb; Trt 
MTrs ‘GME, tMd? “aferaar; Volly Nd} ‘veradt] — d) Madh “Weeteatearta FT, Ox? 

“desde; La! aarrepry; Be! STAeHrT: wKt! sOx! sPu’ Vij WITH 

276. Cited by Vij 2.275; Apa 845; Laksi2.527; Dev 3.738 — a) Pw Pu’ Vij Dev fra; 
wKt} aKtS Lo oOr Tj! [Jolly R] Laks BeaT; mTré mTr® Fercar;, Hy fesarcat, TM? oOr Wa 4; 
aKt> at; Md‘ a; La! art; td! Ae; akt> der — a-b) oOr wat TF — b) Md! BaegG — c) 
Apa Farcat; Wadd; Pus Pu? aet eect, rMd4 eet; Tr! get — d) Te chee, cMy ater; La! 
Lot cMd! Wa [Jolly Nd] Vij cesar; Md} afte; nK¢ 9s; La! weed; Lo? aera 

277. Cited by Vij 2.274;Apa 845; Luks 12.532; Dev 3.738; Madh 3.302 — a) GMy NNg 
Pu? Put aEST, Bo Lo? tMd? Ox? argtes, Bkti ages; Jm Jo! Ox? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
ETT pCa Ox? Ter; La! oRa®; pK “See7; nPul Pu2 Put “NE J; Md4 Fs T — b) 
+Md? Sead; cMd! weaay; sOx! wae; 00 wate, BotMd? mTr® Jé— c) Bo Wa fertta; Lot 
eq; nPul Pu2 Put searaet G; Md! “ast, mTr6 “aor — d) Ho TANT; NNg Tea; cGMd! mTr4 
MTro FAATYATT 

278, Cited by Apa 849; Laks 12.548 — a) Wa anttear BBe Bo “areatey Bo arta — 
b) nPu! aeaa ; GMd! GMd5 cMy oOr aA; Be! “aR; cMd! “aaa — c) Bo 
afrearder area: wk arfaer ; TMd4 deer; Wa afer; wKkt! ararscer; Pu’ Pu? ares; 
7Md4 aTuar; MTP ATweT; Pu? Put aqeT; sBe aren, cM Lo! [Jolly M Nd] aterea — d) Tr? 
Rrearat’; 1Md3 Preatait’. +Md‘ Rreadt’; Be! Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! Lo? LotsOx! Ox? sPu® Tj? 
mTr? Apa Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Great’, GMd5 Tr! garedt’; Lo? cMd! tMd? 
oMy NNg Tj! MT rt MT? =a; Hy Im Jo! Kt? Lo? mTr} Mandlik Jha KSS Dave {Jolly G] 
“satefit; Lo? cMd! “sareir’ MT ro zara 


Chapter 9 799 


aASNMas FIMTIY YarIt ar | 
cathe wieegate TATA URES 
POUMTAFATTICSATETI ATH | 
ax Seaataaag Wool 
ag yaaa cenettas et | 
ant avarat Preargy a aver: WaaTeaT URC LI 


AAAAITATT Sea | 
a at rare qarater aay AeA URN 


aragasa at gar whet ates wr ar | 
uftarauragted ae areaferte fafa: WRczi 


279.* Pada-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.566; Dev 3.757 — a) NKf Lo? mTr® Polly 
Nd R] @3T& ; GMd! tMd} rMd4 cMd GMy Tj! Tr! mTr> Dev aeT# ; Tr? “Faw; rMd? 
“afar, BCa GMy nPu! Pu? Pué [Jolly Nd] Sart; sOx! sPuS “Set; coMd Tr! “fet — b) 
Lo! Pub aya; Tj? RAYS; Ti! Gar’; wPul Braet; Lo? ATA; Ho Lot Tr? Yolly 
M Nd] 4 — c) Ho La! Lo! sOx! nPu! Pu} sPuS Pu’ Tr? Dev Na Re Teafe; Jo! wKt! Ku 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Tg%; Ox?& aft; cMd> tT =aIPY, Lot [Jolly M]TaThy; Pu? Pué 
TAHT; Bo Teahe; Rn ats ar; wT Tar we; NK “HAT — d) Be! BBe? Bo Ho Jo? nK¢* Lo! 
Lo? Lot nNg 0Or Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Wa Jolly [Jolly MGR Nd] areata ; pCa Hy Jm Jo! Ke? 
wk Ox? Tj? TP mTr? Mandlik KSS Jha Dave WIECH ; Lo? fear’; Dev Tae; 
wke “area 

280. Omitted in Lo* [Jolly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Vij2.273; Apa 845; 
Laks 12.530 — a) Lo? @Test ; rMd3 +Md* GMd° GaMy Tr mTr® TST; oOr BIT ; Apa 
aaRIMT ; Be! Hrsreeret — b) Tr? “aaa; GMd! 1Md3 1Md4 uTr4 MT1® Laks fet: — c) Lo! 
“aT, Apa “eT — d) Wa frareaa; NNg * eer 

281. Omitted in Lot Volly M]; not commented by Me. Cited by Laks 12.566; Dev 3.757 
——a) Pu 94; Be! qat; +Md? ‘fafateer: wKt! “Preftsrer — b) nKtt sOx! sPuo mT r® Volly Nd] 
are ; GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd GMy Tj! Tr! mTrS Dev az — c) NNg aTTHT; BK NPul Put 
Laks WAT, Dev ATAISRATT; Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! Tj? Tr! Na [patha] Rn Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave fared; akt> Prat; rMd3 Pret; BCa Jo La! wKt! Wa Na oar, Lo? Tj! eeara; 
Be? tare — d) sOx! sPuo “aTee: 

282. Cited by Apa 765; Laks 12.455; Dev 3.552, Mddh 3.279 — a) Wa “aTit — b) Tr? 
aeqaer — c) wKt} om@; Te a; La! cMd! ariauit; Lo? Tj aria, Wa erie; Tr! 
e@ratare — ¢-d) Be! Bo Ho Lo! Kt’ Ox? Te sratqit qeseetet 7 aed [Be! 
aaa; BK ees] — d) Pud cece; sOx! sPus “Hearat wT aiterd; wKe! era aie’; 
Lo? aift afte’; Laks @ @ att’: Pu? Put & Asin; Lot [Jolly M] & waiter; Im area 

283. Omitted in Jm La!. Cited by Apa 765; Laks 12.455; Dev 3.553 Madh 3.279 — a) 
Lo? Lo* tMd‘4 nNg nPu! Pu? Put Pu? Pu’ Tj! Wa [Jolly M R] sage aT Gat AT; BCa Jo? 
ATKAT Gal ar; Lo? araggdt; oOr aragea; Md? ATIgay ar; BKe aIgaT FA; Apa Laks 
Dev Mddh WdeTaT; mT r3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Tet — b) Md? TFA, Be! Bo Ho TMd4 
sOx! sPuS | — d) sOx! sPuS aes ; Apat area ; oMy = &t aire’; Apa [vl] + waiter 


800 Chapter 9 
fafeerarat ater fear saat aa: | 
HATIATT TAT ATTTT TF ALT: WRC 
Gara Wea T eH: | 
wfagater acad wsr gars 7 URC 
arghiarat gear goer Ney TUT | 
aoa T Tes: TITATEa: URC 
wae frat weg ats yeadtsfr ar | 
a Maret ot at AETAAT aT URC 
aera a aatttr wsant faq | 
gear aa aereq Pager: orator: URC 
WET T eae TAT aT TTT | 
at Ba wernt evar waraaq URC 


284. Omitted in Jm cGMd! — b) Bo Ho Pu Preitrarat; Lo! frearraeat, rMd? Rrearare- 
act; wk} waraar; Pud Pu? waear; La! waar; Pu> Pu? far: — c) Be! aA; Pu‘ ary Pu2 
aq; Pud Pu? age q; Be! wait; rMd4 sera — d) Pud Pu? argd AeA: BT; cMy ATA; 
La! Lo! Md3 GMd@ Pu} Tr! Tr? 7 

285. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Apa 822; Laks 12.565 — a) cMd! eq dwHaacetar, tMd4 
awagarstat — b) Md? “tarawarat; Md! gfererat; Lo? Heat: — c) Bo Tce — d) cMy 
Tea ; NPul ost BST: Teh; Pu? qereasT sehr; Te aT 

286. Folio containing verses 286-99 is missing in Ho; pada-d omitted insKt’. Cited by 
Apa 821; Laks 12.565 — a) TMd> Haq — c) Md? Apa [vl] aatat; cMd! GMy Tj! [Jolly 
M Nd} ‘araftt 38; Kt! La! cMd5 NNg Pu? Put Tr! MT Wa Bh ATA; TMd4 ATTA, 
Apa [vi] araga®; Be! “arqarae; sOx! sPu’ “aTATRe; BCa wKt! Ox? Pud Pu? “arafdte; wT x5 
*aTataater; nPul aracarany; Laks APTaaTey evs:; oOr “ATATAAT ave:; Mad} “aTAfT AST 
@vs:; Apa J, cMd! weve: — d) GMd! tMd4 a; Bo FacaT ; Lot cMd! rMd# “aTeet 

287. Omitted in BKt5; padas c-d omitted in wKt!. Cited by Laks 12.513; Apa 825 — a) 
GMd! Md Tr! mTrémTro FAeq; Md? MTP’ AAT; Lo! a FR; Pu? Put wer fB; mTr§ fearor:; 
oMd> fecatereq; Lo?fagadeq, cMd! tMd4 mTromTr®° Wa 49; 1Md? wer — b) Wa 
feraeaerdy, cMd! +Md4 GMy mTr® Waeaqeaat; MTP WHeAeray, TMd? Waeateaa’?, Jo? Lo? 
Tj! BrRaRTer; Lo? fF F— c) Jo? Md! sOx! sPuS Tr? Haga ; BBE? Jo! mT? Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave tag’; Hy TF — d) GMa TH ART; NK ETAT; Lal TMd4 NNg Polly M] FTA 
wa, wk} 

288. Omitted in Tr?; pada-a omitted in BKt®. Cited by Laks 12.782 — a) GMd! areas; 
nK¢ aaafy;, GMd? fleift; Pu? Put J; tMd3 GMy mTr*mTr® Jolly Nd] 7 scetfr — b) Jo! 
Tr! Us APT; Tr? mTr® wears — c) wKt! g-par afe TIE; cMy Lolly Nd] Fp; cMd! 
gears; nPu! ter; wKt gq; cMd! genta — d) Tj! fagat; cMd! fearaat:; cMd 5 oT9- 
pa: 

289. ma in Lo!. Cited by Apa 853; Laks 12.567 — a) BK TMd? FHS; Tr! Weer; 
Laks “Carta; Pus Pu? om 7; wKt! Md} ae: — b) Bo La! Lo?nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu’ 


Chapter 9 801 


ary adg edeat fart aa: 
qorefr area: Ferg fafrerg aT URoll 
admtadt aq dhiterer aa a | 
wataraaaa rea TQATEEPT URS 2H 
Waa Sata: Fe: UVM 
AAAS TATA eT | 
STOTT BS T UAT FS THeTAT Nl 
ARTA OT UWE HSV Ysa | 

OA THaAT aT: AAT THIAAAT URI 


afearert; GMd! rMd3 +Md4 GMd5 GMy Tj! Tr! Sftarat; Lo? aftarat; cMd! & fear — c) Be! 
Bo wKt3 Pu Pu? SAre; La! Md? rMd4 GMy oOrsOx! nPu! sPu® Tj! Apa Laks tare —- d) 
oOr Ox? Pu Tr? fer frateateqed; cGMy Wareae cor to WaTeAA; Apa Laks FATIAT; BBE nKt4 
Wepre; Md) wareray 

290, Cited by Apa 821; Laks 12.565 — a)cMd! aftratey — c) Lot “aaifor; Be! wKt! 
Lo! cMd! amat®:; Jm Jo! K® wKt La! mTr3 Mandlik KSS UATe:; Md} tMd4 GMy mTrémTr® 
[Jolly Nd] are; sOx! sPu’ ataTa [Na@ Nd support the locative]; Pus Pu’ [Jolly Ku R?] Jolly 
UrATar, nPu! ayy; [Jolly M?] arafe:; Apa fast; nKt avare:; Pu? Put arearat — d) Pu? Put 
Peed, 1Md4 cMd My fafererfy; nKtt aT 

291. Cited by Apa 825; Laks 12.513 — a) La! eater; cMd! adr’; mT astta s wKt! 
Rae; cMy “Prater, 1M? °faspareea; MT? Apa Laks “aaft mer; wKt! om 3a — b) cGMd! 
Siteateite wT; oOr wate; rMd} dtepreretas; Be! BBE Bo Hy wKt? Tj! Tj? Te 
Pay, Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? mTr? [Jolly Ku] KSS pe. oM& “ape; NPut Pu? Put “egret; BKt? 

“epret; Pu? Pud aapef; [Jolly M!] “PET: Volly M*] “ES, Apa [vl] “SET and “eB: Jo? 

Lo! Lot 1Md‘ GMy Pud Pu? epreraita; wKt! La! [Jolly G NE] “apreretaa, Pus “epreratr 
— c) sOx! sPuo Hatz; TMd? Hate; wKt! ader; Lot nPu! “saarag; Apa “Seared — d) 
Apa [vl] fear; Md} 1Md4 GMy [Jolly Nd] fafaet; cMy wKt! “arger:; wKt BK +Md? area; 
Apa “are 

292. Cited by Vij 2.297;Apa 862; Laks12.522 — a) wKt "russe Be! aE: oMd! 
“onfacst — b) Pu? Put CART; wk} sare; Lal “are arerferg:; wKt! tMd? nPu! Pu2 Pu? Tr? 7 
— c) TMd* Pu? Pui ETAT ; Td} vader; nPu! "eat, Lo? “weit; La! “Haat; NNg 
“HRP — d) nPu! “Staar:; Dave Jha ACA: [supported by Me Ku]; Be! at 

293. Padas c-d omitted in Pu’ — a) Be! La! dt’; Be! wKt! GMd5 My geargertor — 
b) La! 1Md4 cMy area. — c) sOx! sPuS @riararel arch AT; GMd! g — d) Md? oMy Us; 
Be! Bo wKt! wKt} nKé BKt® Lo! Lo? Lot nNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu’ Tr? Wa ae ast; mTr® 
avs:; Lo? Tj! Volly R] waaaa; after this verse GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd Gr] insert 9.312 

294, a) Lo} Tj! “HTea:; Be! “ared; Pud Pu? Tr? “Ter; Tr? gerne; cMd! weet — b) La! 
sr; Lod Brat: Wa “aut, Ox? “aue:; rMd? “quer; BKt) dé Tr? ave; wKt5 Tera, wke 
TEMA; GMd! tMd* GMy MTP MTr$ aa FE; Md? Far Fer — c) Pu? Put WHat — c-d) 
cMd! 1M? tMdé MT r4 MTree THEY Sera [cMd! SAMI] — d) Jo? Lo} 


802 Chapter 9 
aarat THAT TJ USTeIat ATA | 
Ud od edt atta eT FET URI 
angers tery freer Pravgaq | 
waenprasears PRrefaftara wre 
ag ag fe gery acay fares | 
at Tara eet aaa eRe UR 
unieaeanis Rater a ery | 
wake weak aw rer frerereresat: RSC 
tient a aatfr aah ate a | 
MAT Ae: BT AhereyT Yeorsaqy™ UR 
seve BA aa: Alea: FA: TA: 
sara f ger attra M30 oll 

Tj! [Jolly R Nd] #34; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? oMd> oOr Tj? Tr! mTr? Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 


aus, Lot wat; oOresafaeres 
295. Cited by Laks 11.97 —~ a) Be! La! GMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Laks a b) TMd?4 


asrematr, Lo!'tMd? Pud Tr! Tr? tssearet; wKt! Usaenat, Lot tsgeg; cMy w7ewe; Lot 
oMd! “ar: — c) Pu? yaad; Pu eau; La! gaged — d) wKt! ave; Bo eA; nKtt TAS; Laks 


erat Jt: GMd! tMdé mTr# MTP MTr® rey a: 

296. Cited by Laks 11.97 —- a) GMd! tMd4 GMd GMy oOr Tr! MTr* MTP MTr® [lolly Nd] 
Laks SATseaTeT, Md} TAHT; Hy “FET F— b) Lot Ox? [Volly M]ferrerTes; Be! fagerer 
—c) Be wKt! “afrreaa; wKt} Lo! nNg Pu’ Pu’ Tr! [but cor] Tr? “areata; Tj! “sara — 
d) Jo! “Prefered; aK oMy ‘fafefafterd; wKke! Rafer area 

297. Cited by Laks 11.97 — a) NNg Tj? MTr*Nd 4; Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? Pu? Pu’ Tr? 
MTr? MTr°Mandlik Jha KSS Dave &; GMd! 1Md? +Md* GMy MT? mTr® @ray — b) Tr? 
adag; cMd! adess — c) cMd! a7; Be! acaead; sOx! sPuo aferead; Lo! eatery; cMd! 
qed; Laks Teed, rMd3 at — d) Pod Pu’ cafasaqead; GM d! “sae ; ;GMy 
“saaitey ; Lot feateq; [Jolly M] Pareq’; Be! “sae Tera; wKt! “Rise 

298. Omitted in MTr°. Cited by Laks 11.113-4 — a) wKt! arorarearis; wCa BT» Hy 
td? Tj! aT ; Lo! Ait. +Md3 ater nNg aay Tj’ aay: nNK¢ ART; Lo? “gare 
47; Jo? Lo? Ox? Tj! Tr! [but cor] “eye — b) wK rMd3 GMy fear Aa; nPu! feaar sa; 
wKt! GMd! tMdé sOx! sPuS #4; TMd3 oMy [Jolly Nd] ae — c) Tj? TRafes — d) GMy 
ferenfter aera: La! Lot Md? Pu? far; Lot Pu’ [Jolly M Gr] faererreta:; BBe: Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt Lo! Lo} Tj! Tj? mT? [Jolly R Ku|Mandlik Jolly Kss Rrarréafer 

299. Padas a-b and c-d transposed in Be!. Cited by Laks 11.114 — a) Tr! Sreatte; aCaT 
— b) Md? GMy eertify aetafe: — c-d) cMd! rMd? Md‘ GMy Tr‘ MTPMTr° [Jolly Nd] 
Bhiporaadt areat ad: wrt aarata [cMy areal; cMd! oMy ‘“areadt; cMy Volly Nd) 
aay; Md? aaa] — d) Be! FasT; Lot ma AT 

300. Omitted in Lo‘. Cited by Laks 11114 — a) TMd4 areaer 4; BKé sOx! sPuo wratftr 
— b) 1Md4 ste: — c) BKtS rMd! wafoate’ ; GMy sOx! sPue “TTT: GMd! “eaTATOTT; 


Chapter 9 803 


Fa Fat Ba grat afta 7 Il 

Tat Tare Tarher wear fE ATAEAT NR Vl 
ale: Tgat watt @ AAT sae FT | 
SRN Mae FT PTT NRO 


SHIH AAT AAT AVNET T | 
Ta: Breas attad FAT URo Rl 
aftararge Arar arsisRrradhr | 
maprated Use aaftrad ae WRo¥N 
aet arareauifferdrr ea tBah: 
aa etent Weerthad fF aq zo 


TMd! “weraTat: Be! “CATE; Jo? wKt? Lo! coMd nPu! Pu? Put g; cMy ¢ — d) Bo Jeu:; 1Md4 
Jer; cMd! gear; Lo? fitted, cMds fife sade 

301. Padas a-b omitted in GMd! — a) tMd*4 GMd? GMy Tj! a; nPul Gar; My “at — 
b) Ho wKt} sOx! Pu? Put sPuo fea; GMd> aT — c) Lot ast, Md? tar Ferhsy; wKt! La! 
gat aearft — d) Md} ast; cMd! asf 

302. Padas c-d omitted in wKt! [haplo] — b) Be! safer Sta; Lot wafer Stare; Pu? Put 
wafer WaTeT; BKtS La! nPul Gog; Ox? TPTE; Lot gra; Hy Tj? mTr*arqe Byer — c) Pu Pu? 
warey; Tr! weary; Lot nPu! [Jolly M] weiny; Be! BCa Jo? nKt* BK# Lo! Lo} Lot 
tMd? GMd> Ox? nPu! Pu> Pu? Wa [Jolly M] *eafeaerar, La! “syfearetar; rMd4 *sgfear 
Fav; My ‘waferaetar; mT ro syferdt Far; Lo? “syReaesar, Pu? Pui “eyfegd Far, Tr? 
“wgfed Fat; cMd! “aetat — d) Lot Lolly M] Papa a; Tr! [but cor] frareeq; sKt5 
ferare g; 1Md4 faraeeg; Wa feae gad; cMd! ferareegect 

303.* Cited by Laks 11.3 — a) sOx! sPu oFeTHeT; Wa eIST; Hy Im Jo! Ke? nKt* 
Lo! TMd3 TMd? GMy NNg Put Pu’ Tj? MTr? WaMandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave aaet — b) Jo? 
Lo} Tj! wourey WHET FT; TMd3 aT — c) tMd4 sOx! Pud sPuo Pu? MTP SREMN: BKO SHAT: ; 
Laks Ae: — d) aK “are; 1tMd3 “FaaTAR; Pud Pu? gue dd; Lo? THe 

304. Cited by Laks 11.3 —— a) GMy anf; aK atfiast age — b) Jo? Lo’ Tj! tar 
agitate; sabe aar aahratte; Lozateas rade. Bo Ho Lo! wKt! sOx! Pu sPuo Pu? 
Pus Tr! aethg: water (wKe! wertfer], cMd> wagrenPrerifer, 1Md? was; NNg "at ahr; 
Be! cMd! “sft wade; 1Md* aMy nPu! Pu? Put =r fe wetter; eke) “ahredhe; 1Md4 

“ahmed — c) Bo nPu! aa ; cMd! aanfaa’ oMy aanfas : - Me aat £& ay. La! war 

ates: sBBe aa ales, wKt! “ratte, Ho “Rratee. nKe “Prats; Lot pra. eq; 
sOx! Ox? nPul sPuS “feet Ue; Lo! “Ueerers; wCa “eeaere®:; Laks “Pagre — d) Md} ust 
aA Te; Be! Ho Jo? wKt! La! Lo? Lot cMd> Ox? Pu? Put Tj! Wa Lolly M R Nd?] ae 

305. ma in Lot — a) cMd! at — b) Bo @RTT; GMy RAE; Lo? cMy @efe; Pu? Put 
ate — c) Pu2 Put aan ef state ; nPul Taresgay Utah FY" -rMd? aa; wKt! etewe; aK 
om ®t; La! uret f°; Lot [Jolly M] asafse — d) GMd! tMd3 tMd* GMy Trt MTP mTr® 
[Jolly Nd} werent ; Jo! Lo Tj! Tr? “freaatad, mT rt aetac; Md? Ox? Pu3 Tr? “ad 
ata; GMd! NNg Pu? Put MTS at TET NK eR ts Tr! 7 aq 


804 Chapter 9 


wher achyartr var ate avec: | 

aaT ait: weer qaAafe Area 30K 
Tat aa: fragt om are Praester | 

aa Tat Prapeceart: waar TAACT UR oll 
qe wT Uda va HR zea | 

aat aatstare TaAahr aATSIT WRC 
ayet qa wer TET eater Ara: | 

aa THAT Ber A aeaataar TT: URoRil 
vara Fer arearsseatg | 

Fea SeT AHA AT HAT MWRLoll 
aar aathor warky aer award TAT | 

wat aatter warty fare: arbre aay Re eH 
waeraesar Gat freaafera: | 


306. b) GMy Far WRATST: — c) Bo FUT BTS; Lot GMy Be; sOx! sPue NT; mT rs 
ate:; Lo? Lo} sfarear— d) 1Md3 acta; Be! Tec: 

307. Omitted in Be!; verses 307 and 308 transposed in Pu’ Pu’, and 307a-b and 308a-b 
in Bo — a) oOr T&T; nPul GA; BK EO ART; La! a Fer, Te “Seat; Lo! [but cor] Feeat; wKe! 
oMy sOx! sPu® “aut — b) Jo! GMy NNg Pu? Ta; tTMd4 Aazefer — c) BK FUT; Pu? WT; Pur 
Pu’ fasted — d) pBe? marteafe; GMd! rMd3 rMd4 GMd®° GMy Tr! [but me sh] mTr* mTr® 
[Jolly Nd Gr] a4 ahs; Pud Pu? at ate; cMy “fe ad war; GMd! aH; pBe? FAWST:; TMd? 
aan 

308. Pada-d omitted in TMd3 [haplo] — a) GMy [Jolly Nd] tet J TbT Polly Nd 
aout]; Ox? aTetrt; Jo? Tj! aetteq; La! avetrg; oOr Tarte — a-b) Md‘ Weg — b) 
tMd3 cMd GMy Tr’ [Jolly Nd] Sead aettte:, Tr! “dea qapPAt:; Lo! “sea A gad; 
Pus Pu’ mTr® “datarfreert; Bo sOx! sPuo “ade; Tr wd; Be! wt weera; Hy Jm Jd Ke 
wKt3 cMd! tMd‘ Pu} Tj? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave taiPrgead; mT; Jo® Lo? 
Tj! I — c) Boake) Tar; rMd} eT; Bo Pud tet Pry’; Be wKt! Tanfay; mTr> agitate; 
Pus Tr? ager 

309. Omitted in tMd?; padas c-d omitted in Put —- b) Bo Ho wKt! wKt} cMy @@fd; 
tMd4 greta; Pu’ Pu’ Fratfea; Bo cMy sOx! sPuS aT4q: — c) BoBKt? nPu! at; Lo? 
“aarafery; sOx! sPuo afer; Ke eBay — d) BBe Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Ox? Put Tr? Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave araatar 

310. Omitted in 1Md3 — a) Pu? “‘gmast; Pud gatas — c) cMy F ; Jo? Lo? Tj! 
“fear, Md? “feaer; BKe Pu? Put “fay — d) Lo! Lot cMd? Pu’ aaraaad; +Md4 aeaa- 
ad; T? om Bt 

3u. Omitted in tMd?, padas b-c omitted in GMd! — a) Lo* Pu? Pu‘ Lolly M] watt 
aatfer — b) Ho nKt! Tj! eer; tMd4 aaa; Wa aTeT — c) BKt TAT — d) Ox? fea; cMd! 
feat; La! fareret:; Lo! Tj! oifita; rMd4 afe 


Chapter 9 805 


eearey UT gary aT UT UT TNR LRM 
TATE MAT ATAU THAT | 

ot gat Etat sey: AT: AaAMATSTT 323M 

a: He: aa atts Hear werahr: 

att areata: Bt T AASTHTT ATT URL 
Sera wears Bran: | 
qareEgrsaray we: Rreqeareargyard MWR 4 
arerarerer fercofer ater taray aden | 


war da at Aa at Fearendasifag: 1324 
afaataa faster aett tad weg | 


312. Omitted in GMy; padas a-c omitted in TMd? — a) Lo4 “qraareir at — b) Kt! 
Pega; oMd Peat garraae:; Lolly M] Fat; Tj? “ara: Pus “afer: — c) Be! 
Lo! &TgIstT, TMd4 ear Ute; Be! faa@tara; ake Telrad — d) Be! Ho Lo} PuS Pu’ Tj! 
Tr! Wae ue; Kt Lo? GMd® GMy oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr? mTr? MTr® [Jolly R] aT 

313. Omitted in GMy; verses 313-4 placed after 319 in [Jolly Nd] — a) cGMd! Ter; Pu 
“cavaé; Put “RaTTe; Lot om WHT; GMd> 9TH; oOr Ox? Tj! Tre set — b) tMd4 arererar 7 
wrraa; Pu mTr® wet; oMd5 wert 7 — c) wKt! & Ba afFar say: — d) Lo! [Volly M] 
ays wKe waaay 

314.* Omitted in GMy; padas c-d omitted in BKt? Put — a) oOr Hc; sBe! Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
Jo? wKt? Lo? Lot sOx! Ox? sPu° Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M4 R Ku] Mandlik KSS Dave “78; [Jolly 
M°] erft — b) sOx! sPuo “eafar wet” — c) Lot aft [ma a] afeaiests:; Bo area’ 
md araftrerag:; Pud Pu? aergerars:; BCa wKt! La! Lo! nNg oOr sOx! sPuS Wa *Pra- 
%d-%:,; Be! sBBe Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} Lo? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Pu® Tj? Tr? mT Re Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave “Pre: att: — d) PuS Pu’ aat AT GaHIET AM; Ho oma; Lot zeta ; Be! 
“BTA [om AM]; Lo? Tj! BTA; Bo La! “atrara; rMd? “arfta:. M4 “Brae 

Additional verse in Md‘: 

Te saat stay avarer fefer sear: | 
aera warast arat fefer ferafsrr | 

315. Padas a-b ma sh in Tr; pada-a omitted in BK t. Cited by Laks 11.174 — a) Laks 
TATTLE, Pus “aye; Lo! “see; oMd’ “Safe — b) BK om X Stats; Ke? nPul 
“qTePa; Bo Bilt: ; GMy alfrer: — ae Pud Pu’ Sattareapa; Lo’ Tj! atetep ; Pu’ 
“pear, Kk? wKe “eapa — d) Pud Pu mTrSar yaafeas aat:; NNg HEMI; Wa 
fererar: aR 

316. Cited by Laky 11.174 — a) GMy [Jolly Nd] @7aT ; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? cMd5 wPu! Pu? 
Put Pu’ Pu? Tj? mTr3 Volly G Ku] Laks Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave aTTUPTeT, nKt 
armnPret — b) Be! arat: qatar Saar:; Pud Pu’? ear sleet adar:; sCa La! cMd! rMd? 
TMd4 Pu} MTr5 MTr® Laks Gat lpr; GMyaer SlHrg; sBe? Fara; BK cMd> Farq; oOr 
waar: — c) Md! serqaret Aut; Be! HAT; Luks TaIT T IA; BOFT; GMy TANT; wKt! Lolly 
M] a9; Pud Pu? dat — d) Jo? Lo? Tj! garnet 





806 Chapter 9 


woftramttaa waifidad Fed |} ll 
waracaty acredt array Aa goat | 
EAA AAT WT Taras WF LCI 

va qratrey adder adetg | 

IU HIT: Tat: Tar sar fH ag UaLsM 
AAA SET TTT TAT: | 

waa araeg carey ater fR aaeaT URRlll 
aeushyaaet: waa oteqeray | 
aat adaat aor: cary airy area 322i 
Aaa aor ATT Ter Tee | 

wal at wage are aH UZRAIM 


317. Padas a-b and c-d transposed in Be! Laks. Cited by Laks 11.174 — a) Laks afagiar 
fagtata; nNg fastdarafegta; Be! wt fagrfagier;rMd! fagte: — b) Md} GMd aTeIoT; Be! 
Md! seit. Be! 2ad; Bosfifad; Waafadt Aer — c) rMdé weftatearaefiater — d) nPu! 
aur: Be! sKé sOx! sPue “faaad; Tr! Rrgac; eK “act car 

318. Omitted in mTr5. Cited by Laks 11174 — a) MTr’mTr® ay AT; wKe sarah 
f&; oOr Bart AT; Lo} Tj! Tr'[cor sh to] BAAT F; Jo? BIMAT J; rMd} aurfet — b) sOx! 
sPuo War; tMd* + — c) Lo? Pu’ Pu? Pu® gaarty aay; Md? {AATTAT; BBe? La! nPul 

“aT: BK& “HTeT — d) cMd! tMd? Md? 6M? oMy Tr° Laks Polly Nd] varhtysad, Tr! 
ue fe qere 

319. Omitted in MTr°. Cited by Laks 11.174 — b) Lo't Md? tMd4 GMd@ sOx! Pu’ Tr! 
MTr® aad; Tj? acter; Be! act — c) BKtS Tr? werT:; GMd! tMd3 GMd& GMy wnPu! Tr! wTré 
aay: Tor: ; NNg TAT; nKe! ear: — d) Laks @4a@ TET; La! oOr Pud Pu’ ade ead; Tj? cad; 
Be! BCa La! Lo! Lo4cMd! sOx! nPu! Pu2 Pué Pud sPuS Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly M G] Jollyeacdt Fec; 
wKt} f€ ae; BKtS Ox? Pud Tr? f& F; tMd3 tMd4 GMd) GMy Tr! MTr4 mTr° [Jolly Nd] f& @: 

320. Pidas c-d omitted in Tr!. Cited by Laks 11.174 — a) Jo? oOr Pw? Put Tj! exfra- 
entree, Lot afaent® geet; Tj? aRroentrase; nNg sae; BBe? Wa AF- 
afr’; Hy La! GMy Pu’ Tr? Laks erarenfa 9g; Md anf 9a; Md} GMy “waeter — 
b) Tr! aerate: ofa; Lot #@r; Be! nPu! Pu? Put avevor fer; wKt! Lot Md! *Md3 oMd5 
GMy nNg MTr*mTr MTr® Wa [Jolly Nd M] Laks @4c: — c) Md) sata; wKt! afraest, 1d} 
afraea — d) Wa at 

321. Omitted in GMy — a) HytMd3 oMd> fiderr:; BBe? Hy Wa 84; sOx! sPut [but 
ma sh] lacuna for &% — b) oOr wafer, Ma? evaafaar; Lo! eraAeray; cGMd! earated; 
Ke aaaaalate ; BBe apa, ; TMd? “a Raa: — c) Be! wKt! WaT; Hy ad, Lo! 
Td? NNg Fatt — d) aKO EAA; sBe eaTqaay; Lo! wareaafer; Be! Asstfer 

322. Omitted in GMy. Cited by Laks 11.173 — a) Lo* 74@T; GMd! FaeT; Lo* nPul Pu? Put 
Tr? errparfer — b) Lot tMd4 Pu? Put aera; wKkt! ade — c) Tr aael; Be aTaT; Lo? TMd? 
GMd> Tr! MTP att J; GMd! rMd? mTr4 mTré at J; sOx! sPuo eT; La! eT; Bo FT; Ca 
BKt? NNg oOr f@; Lo* [Jolly M]q; oMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMdS Tr! mTr6 Goch SejmTr> GIy 


Chapter 9 807 


qeat oat g Porat: adausagieny | 
ge wet aarecr edie erat war FRAN 
Ua AVA Ft TIA aa: | 


frag aa alee caterer 3201 
wastes: wafaremt tat: wala: | 

at water Prema ara Szrgaat: WRN 
aeRg PAeEe: Fear aahkwEeq | 

ardtat Freagm: St TAT aT TMT URI 
marae azarr get after aye | 
MATT Tua T Vat: was TAT: URI! 
To Serer are: Ear ware ahaha | 

Set Seater aera tae: BeTT WRC 


gat; Ox? Pu! Pu? Put Laks FawHfAeE; ako ayoatfae — d) rMd? *frenga a afa:; Lo? Tj! 
[Jolly R] Frerga a; sOx! Pu’ sPuo aTY7; aK’ NNg mTr° ae; Wa ae; MTT ger:; Tr! 
amfa:; rMd4 ange 

323. Omitted in GMy — a) wK sea; Te 7; Lo? gfarer: — b) Pud a4; Be nKt! mTr® 
Jolly 74; Pu2 Put atert’ sOx! sPuo “agfera; rMd4 ayfera:; Te “aafad; Pu’ “aye; 
Ox? “aati — c) Volly Nd] gt Usd TATA; Lo! Far; mT FF TELE cMd) sz; Lot 
Pu? Pu‘ Me Jha [Jolly M] AATaTE; Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? Ox? Pu? MTr? Mandlik KSS Dave PATS; 
La! fafaférer — d) Be! Ox? 91997; Rn [patha] FF 

324. Omitted in GMy — a) TMd4 Usd FT AT aT; Ox? Put BeeaaT; Jo? wKt! wKt? La! cMd! 
sOx! Pud sPu Pu? Pu’ mTrémTr° Yolly G R2] aetargehy — b) BK Pu? Pué Tr! est; nPu! 
usa’: Pud Pu? “efor — c) Be! fet a adstwer — d) Md} seater TATA; Be! Lo*NNg 
MIr° waaaygar 

325. Omitted in GMy — a) Kt fae; nCa wKt! Lo? 1Md3 GMdS oOr Pud Pu’ Tj! Tr! 
“Fert enifafe’; cMd! “Rast used set; Tj? erafafe” — a-b) Pu? Put “feearfatedt asit 
ea: wards: — b) Lo? tatt — c) oOr UF; wKt! Lot cMd! etfate; nNg eafeer; Be! La! nPul 
fara; oOr Bare; wKe saree 

326. Cited by Laks 2.255 Madh 1.417 — a) Md! aaeaHA — b) Lo? Tj! Haare’; Jo? 
wKt! Lo} Tj! “afte: 

327. Padas c-d ma sh in Pu’. Cited by Laks 2.255 padas a-b cited by Madh 1.417 — a) 
GMy @zarat, rMd4 zara; Pu’ a; Pu? Azat — b) GMy T&T; Lo? rMd3 Tr! oftaat; Ng [but 
cor] TRamad — c) Be! starr =F — d) Be! wal; NNg THT; Td? wherse; Lo? rMd? Pu? Put 
Tr! gftadt; Lo? ee TET 

328, Padas c-d ma shin Pu’. Cited by Laks 2.256; Mddh 1.417— a) Lo! oMy 7 g; nPu! 
Pu2 aaa: @eeTA:; wKt} Lot [Jolly M] BT; cMy Bf; +Md4 ara — b) Be! Sareea; Tr! vers: 
—c) GMy deraqeefe; La! dea ferofa, 1Md? Azafer MTP aeSfer, Pud Pu’ GIR; Lo! ART 
— d) GMd! “aer:; rMd4 “ater; sOx! sPus “ear: Fae: 


808 Chapter 9 


ATMA HEAT AAA 7 | 
TeTAT A Tava a feraradaeracry W328 
forrgatast ward aearetayTer TT | 
arate atta Geararrar adaw: R30 
ANAT TW AYSAT FAMAT TA TMT | 
SMart aT wart war a Pradrz 133 21 


yet a ate frag arava fafaer ao | 
Fa Vaasa mafawassgT T UW332M 


qT T PI aIsIapery | 
TITT AAYATATAAAT THAT: WHR AU 


fast aafagat qeerat agaarz | 
MAT T Peet sat Asa: Ww: NRW 


329. Bo places 329c-d and 330a-b after 332b. Cited by Laks 2.256; Madh 1.417— a) 
Be! tMd4 TM: Tr! wT “saTerAt; BKS “waTenfear — b) Laks SMT; tMa? Beat; Pu? Pud 
areaeet; GMd! cMy araaer, rMd4 ate — c) GMy Feral TaraT — d) Bo La! Lo‘ nPul 
Tj! fee”; wKt eetaorach; Be! Ox? “afacstach; Md‘ Pu? “at wore; La! Pu’ Pu? at 
TOS; CMy PITT 

330. Padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 2.256; Madh 1.417 — a) Pu’ Pu? seat ta 
att; Lo! sftarargfaftcg: eira; cMdS “gufaea; Pu “fats eae; Ox? “afadtter — b) 
cMd! 1Md3 tMd4 GMdS GMy Tr! [but me sh| MTr4 MTS MT 1° Nd Laks @aetsuyorer — c) GMy 
[Jolly Nd]aaanter, mT “arrer, Jm Jo! Kt? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “@¥t T wKt! La! 
“arrer: sOx! sPuS aMtaeger. — d) rMd4 Hoar: wKkt} qararg; nPu! “arr; cMd! “arr 
qT; Be! Jo? Lo? GMd? sOx! sPus aac: 

331. Cited by Laks 2.256; Mddh 1.417— a) Bo BKt? “art a; La! “art a; sBe? “aretay 
— b) ™Md* Fy; Hy Jm Jo! Kt La! nNg Ox? Pu’ MTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave PI — 
c) Md‘ Glarant | earay; Be! “@rareT; BKtS La! sOx! sPuS “ordt J; Wa om TaTAT, Ma 
gaat -- d) Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wkt! Kt? wKt}? Lo! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Pu‘ Pu’ Tj? Te mTr? 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Tat TRaet; Md ereivtieata 

332. Padas c-d omitted in Bo. Cited by Laks 2.256; Madh 1.417 — a) NK GMd! +Md?* 
Yar; Md? WTATAT; GMy Yara; Tr? Yat; mTr°Yt; Md} gfe; cMy Afar; La! yf; Bo Pus 
ydfifaerre; La! Lo! Lot farang; nPu! Pu? Put geez — b) BKt® [but cor] La! Lo! svat a; Md? 
arater; La! Tr? fafeat, nKe! Jor — c) Lot gareITAa TT; TMd3 Pu? Pud “ant aT Lal at a 
— d) MTS Madh 3 far ; BK TMd3 Pu2 Put “fase ver 

333. Cited by Laks 2.256:Mddh 1.417 — a) Jo? Lo? Tj! ator geagearfarfa ; +Md4 
GMd Pu? Put om 4; cMd! sgt ; tMd* wager; Pu2 Put “garmf — b) Be! “get 
afacs’; GMy oOr get aTfersS"; oOr “tater; Md? "Sq gang; 14 “aaa — c) 
wKt! gear q—d) Md “wet aaa; Md! “saa a ya: KO “saa 

334. Pad- d omitted in TMd*. Cited by Laks 2.265; Madh 1.417 — a) sOx! sPu® aafegar 
— b) sOx! sPu® Tr? aafeaat; nKet “feat: — c) Ma} Tj? Gras; Bel gprs; nKet BETA; 





Chapter 9 809 


Qregpegayigamegd: | 

Tearmarrar frerakat arterdttsyg URI 
UaSAas ata: Bae: YA: 
area fe aecat waged Praterr WAR <I 


gfe arr egret wat atearar 
AAAS ATA: 


La! pysaa J; Bo FAIF J; sBe? wKt) Pu? Pu‘ wT; wKt! fe — d) La! oOr sOx! sPuo a: 
FqyEHeE: WE: Bo Pus at; Be! BKt5 LotcMd Pud Pu? PuS Wa Fr:-aae:; BBe2 wKt! wKt} Lo? 
Lo} cGMd! nNg Tj! Peta: nk Pera oe; cMd> Dave Jha Te 
335." Omitted i in Lo* tMd?; pada-d too faint to read in wKt?. Cited by Laks 2.265; Madh 
1.417 — eat Hy “CHE: ; ee “epenty WE; Jo! BKts "PATS Kt "PETG Tj! ‘Gee: ag 
— b) BBe? “gyaarr’ ue“ gHganr wkt! “3: ggart ; nKt! Kes qygarané ; Madh 
“gg: ade ; GMy ‘attr wkt ot “ga — c) Bo Ho Hy Jo! Kt? sKt® Lo? Lo? Tr? [Jolly R'] 
wermaryar, Tj? srarorarPrcy; one sPuo FeIVAAPTaT; BBe? GMy ATAUTAPIAT; [Jolly Nd] 
wea eT [Nd 2 8a:], Ox? ararreqprar, Be! Jm wKt! Pu? mTr? Mandlik KSS Dave 
mremrearrat; La! Tj! srermerat; cMy “er — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? GMd! tMd3 GMd5 GMy Tj? 
mTr3 MTr* mTr5 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave tpt siferrgzd; Be! “Efeala; Bo wKt! wKe 
Lo? Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Tj! Te “Hf; Na HRT: wKe! wKe “fer; Pus Pu? “qeafet; Tr 
“qeqht; Lo? “gate, nK¢  Hegft; NNgsOx! sPuo Wa “yet, Pu? Pu? Pu? Pu’ anfercihgd,; 
Ox? sifertrger 
336. Padas a-b omitted in TMd4 — a) sKt® Pu? ator — b) GMd! 1Md3 GMd@ oMy Pw? 
Pué Tr! mTr* mTr5 MTr® ‘apt emfafe:; Bel adfafer:; nNg - fafir; nPul war, wKe ZA; swe 
qe:; Jo? Lo? Tj! Ft: — c) aCa array fafsedut; Md‘ om araaft fe; wKe ata; cMd! om 
f€; cMd5 0Or Pu? Pu! Pu’ Pu? Tr! mTr° 7; Be! BBe nKt* La! Lot Md? GMy mTr°q; Lo4 g 
adat; nKt* Lo! Md! nNg sOx! nPu! sPu® Tj! MTP mTrSaeeaut; La! Ox? aaat— d) Lo} Tj! 
wad: afistad (Tj! HAet]; BBe Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? wKt nKt Lo! Lot wKt> tMd3 GMd> 
cMy sOx! Ox? Pu? Put sPuo Tr? mT? MTr* MT1° Mandlik Jha KSS Dave aeataataet 
Colophon: Be! Lo! Md} nNg Ox Tr! fer sftarre; Lo? sfer affarad; Be! BK cMd! 
GMy sOx! MT’ om SyareHrat Seca; ors vsHalasayl APT AAT 


[Sarats are: 


aeftttticrat ant: crater fora: 
T Aaerfate frarr: et 


HATH TAT HEAAT 

aaat want free TearTeefaer | 
mga eet er Ta aT URN 
erage a acon | 
aearer Pgrarer aorar arar: TT: UN 
ae: athrat agrerat ant feo: | 


age wacnfeed yar arf g Sarr: UI 
adanty gqeag waters | 
AAGIT KYAT ATeaT HAT UT 7 UI 


Before the first verse [Jolly M] adds: 
aa: Te yas aretcerer at fafer: | 
1. Padas c-d omitted in Pu‘ [haplo]. Cited by Dev 1. 143 — a) Lo! aq: TeeTaT —- a-b) 
Md aeitikesatenerat ant force: — b) Pus Pu? wart; sOx! sPuo “attear — c) oMd! 
WeaTaATeATT; Be! Be? wKt! BKt> La! Lo! Lo? Lo* Md* GMy nPu! Pu? Pul? Tr? Dev “ORT 
— d) oMy Taaraaerfafa; oOr taerfafe; Lo? cMd! tMdé Pus mTr4 mTr® “afer area 
In place of verse 1 MTr° gives the following verse: 
aeaaert dard wt aearet wae | 
anfeqas am acter gafergararate | 
2. Padas a-b omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Vis 1.197 — a) wKt! S@IUIT; GMd! aTaATS:; Bo 
La! Pu? fare — b) Ma? Sregorar’ ; mT r® weqaTaT — c) Kt wea fates — d) BK TM? 
aan, Md Tr! caraeg 
3. Cited by Laks 12.811 —— a) wKt! GMd! GMd° GMy Tr! mTr? mTro @ferear; Put 
astar; Lal “aepfe:; Ox? “apa, Be! BBe Jo! Kt? Lo? Md‘ NNg Pu’ Tr? mT ro “tear ; 
wKt! “ten — b) GMy “Betrer; Md} BerTeT; eke’ “rer 7; Ho NNg om 7; sOx! sPuo 
q; wKe! area — c) La! tMd4 GMy nPu! eepress; Tj? starea — d) Md! Md4 GMd3 Tr! 
MTr4 mTr® (Jolly GrJaaeat aTarT:; Tj? TST Te: 
4. Omitted in Pu!®, Cited by Laks 12.811; Dev 2.407; padas c-d referred to by Sam on 
VeS 1.3.36— a) La! starr; Jo! BKtS tgaresat — c) cMd! agar; Pu2 Put age, wKt! vasnfa- 
eq; Md! tMd? mTré mT r® Wassircttaegay; Put Pu4 “oretteg; Be! “smfer: 7; GMd5 “aT — d) 
Be! 3TeaF; Ox? aTRTMeT; Pu? om 
5*, Padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Dev 4.180; Mddh 1.511 — a) wKkt! arent 
eag; Pu} Geregq; md? gearey: — b) wk Tat g AAT; La! GMy nPu! gaity aa; patha 





810 


Chapter 10 811 


charming freentargary | 
aaa argatqatatatteary Nel 
rT Ararat faker sara: | 

Frere Aart wet Rrenfes faery ill 
MAMA H ATTA A ATT | 
Frere: Fewaat F: UTA TTT CI 
ahargarara ReraaEary | 
TAYSAA GEM AMT TATA UCI 

faser Bry ashy aacdutangat: | 

aerer aot teftary esas Taat: STAT: Nol 
abrir gat wate sree: | 
Sararraaaar tetas aTgay 2 etl 


in Bh and Me aretaera ; Put om aercaifrg; Hy “airy 7 — c) BK & sOx! sPus arqerer 
ayer, Hy Md? Tj! ager; cMd! Tr? ayaa; — d) Be! Jo? BKt> 1Md? nPu! Pu Pu? Wa 
Dev tare FT 

6. Omitted in Pu!®; padas a-b omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 12.812; Mddh 1.511 — a) 
oMd eta’: nPu! Pus “arareg — b) Bo fesger’; rMd? “ecarfear’; nPu! “aregert — c) 
Tr? Wad: asAMAgT ATT: Put om Asa; TMA? Aeala; Be! AEM; wKt! atgarara — d) 
Tj! “afer ; Jo? Lo? Safar’; NNg “ary 

GMy inserts verses 10.14 and then 10.9, Tr! inserts verses 10.14—5, and TMd? verse 10.14 
[tMd? also gives it at the proper place] 

7. Omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Laks 12.812 — b) Tj! faferut; ake feaferea; Pu? Put 
aad: — c) Te gaeyasTart; cMd! gagad ; Jo! stata; wKt! rMd3 veTAT ; Ox? 
arg [om FH]; Be nKtt BKtS La! rMd* GMy GMd nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pud Tr! mTr4 mTr® Wa 
gaa ZF [La! Pu? Pu’ om 4; nKtt cGMd> nPu! Pu‘ g; omitting of T% supported by Nd Rc]; 
reading of edition supported by BA Me Go Ku Rn — d) GMd! @3F; Bo wKt! aK Lo! Ox? 
Pu’ Tr? mTr4mTr® et; Tr! ef; La! nPu! Tr! fea’. cMd! feenfext; Be! faemay; nNg fererr- 
aq; Waom 34 fate; sOx! Pu2 Pu‘ fate: 

8 Omitted in TMd3; ma in Lo'; padas b-c omitted in TMd*, and pada-d in La! sOx' 
[haplo]. Cited by Laks 12.812 — a) BKt’ “SeaTAeIST — b) sBe? “Fatt; Lo? Aa HAT — c) 
BBe? Fra: — d) Lo! Teara; Pu! qtare; Be! orerare; wKt! 9r@ae; Pu2 Put oreaa; Te Toe 

9. Omitted intMd3; ma in Lo’; padas b-d omitted in GMd? oOr. Cited by Laks 12.812 
— a) Ho aay ; Lo? ‘@aT:; Be! “seat — b) tMd4 EME ; oMd! “fata; Lo? 
*freorearyt — c) Pu? Put 8a; Wa ayetedtedtt — d) Pu2 Put “quai; cMd! “eaaTar 

10, Omitted in GMd? oOr. Cited by Laks 12.812; Madh 1.512 — a) nCa fay — b) Kt? 
Pus Tj! Tj? Tre? aya att; cMd! qaarder— c) Pus Put degen wafer; wKt! Parez; nKe 
dzatteq; Bo pCa Jo? wKt! wKt? La! Lo? Md? GMy Ox? Pu} Tj! Tr! Tr? mT'r° Madh oF 
wafer — d) Lo! 48a; cMd! GMy Pu} Tr! MTr BA ‘Carer; nNg “cae: rMd3 aera ey: 

ui. Pada-a omitted in GMd> oOr. Cited by Mddh 1.513 — c) wKt! “sare: NNg Tf 


812 Chapter 10 


YATRA: AAT AISTSATIAT TTT | 
piniaglaas iar Gial We RU 
USA AAMAS TAT Sat | 
adda aad wifes Tar 3M 
Tat aati: eAviteHy AAATT | 
ATA HET ATS TT ULSI 
MAMTUHIMasal AT ATT | 
anitsraeraarmrarea @ rar: Wea 
HARTA SAT DT ASTI TOT | 
WIAGAT Are YATETASTEAT: ULE 


ast, Pul? “Seat; oOr “Aser — d) nKe¢ wefifS"; La! uspars’; rMd4 “FATy T; Hy Pu? 
“gat 

12. Padas c-d omitted in Tr!. Cited by Madh 1.513 — a) [Jolly N] BSeavTe: ; Ho sOx! 
sPu’ YareaaTa:; aK YRTATAT:, Bo Yaratara, 1Md* “gare, oOr Pu’ Pul erapaver’ ; Te? 
eraraer ; Tj! Tr! arapaver ; Kt) Md? erareqver — b) wKt} La! Ox? nPu! Pu? Tr? [Jolly 
Ku] ast ; Bo Tj! averarat ; tMd4 TesrmeETay; NK “erat; Hy ToT — d) GMd STAT; Ho 
nKtt “afer; Be! Md Pu! Tr? [Jolly Nd] Be; Pud Pu’ * gant; La! Lo? cMd! tMd4 NNg 
wPu! Pu? Put Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly Se; oOr Awe 

13.* Omitted in Pu’ Tr! — a) nPu! wearer; 1Md? @Tq 5 BCa Jo? Lo? GMy Tj! Wa aq 
— b) Jo? Lo? Tj} *rargurratar; mTr4oOr ‘SHiT; Pu? [Jolly G]aar; Md! eat; MTreyct:; La! 
gat — c) Be! BCa wKt! nKtt Lot 1Md? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu’ mTr® Waatt ; BBe Pus ety ; 
pBe? nPu! Pu? Put Wa defeat; Lo? eee; 1Md4 areata — d) Tr? sfersres; Pu wifey; 
nPu! gferattg; Ho mferarafr; pCa Lot GMy oOr Pu’ Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Jolly mifasret g; 
Pu! afeatet g; BK Pu2 Put mTr3 ofesrt J; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! wKt} Kt? Le Tj? mTr3 Tr? 
MTr§ Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Wteareify; Lo! wifearate; Bo Pu’ nK¢ ufeerat; Be! arferat- 
FAY; NNg SPST TTT 

14. Cited by Vis 1.1; pada-a cited by Vis 1.14— a) oOr Wa Fat; TMd4 FT Waray: 
pBe? Tr! Gata; sOx! sPuo Tr? daraer ; BBe? TM? [at 14 but not in addition after 6] Tr! 
MTrt eaty wt — b) Tr? “oft; BK “vite; Ho fest; aM} [at 14 but not in addition 
after 6] festa: — °) Pw Pu? “HIRATA; Pu? Put “FARA; TMd? [at 14 but not in 
addition after 6] Tj! “ATRTRT +Md?* “ATR — d) Lo! GMd! tMd3 [at 14] tMd? Pu? Pu? MTP 

“dary; Md? [at 6] “tat Fs Ca spree; Bo GaRaa; cGMy waar 

15. Verses 15 and 16 transposed in GMy Pu?; [Jolly Nd] places verse 15 after 17; not 
commented by Me; padas c-d omitted in BKt?. Cited by Laks 12.820 — b) Pu? Put “area; 
oMdé “aga; GMy afd; Lo? Tj! “aradt; Tr! “anit — c) Bo Ho arfht, 1M} afBey; mTrS 
"SRT; Lo! “aarar arr — d) sBBe* “arreit; Lo! “wear; Pul? “set: rMdé “wat; Bo 
“Tear, oOr 7; BBe? GMd! tMd? GMy feres:; Bo ferfacr:; Ox? ferae:; nPu! efypr:; Pul? 
fesyr:; Tr! afeart:; Be! fexpr:; Tj! feavr:; Lal fearr:; rMd4 Fre: 

16. Omitted in BKt>; not commented by Me. Cited by Madh 1.513 — a) Put starr *. Bo 
grit; tMd4 at a; Tj! Taegq: Pu! at — b) Jm Jo! wK Lo! Lot oOr Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Pu! Tr? 
aver — c) Pu2 Put pfaer; 17? srt — d) nPu! sraraoeeargeareas: oMy Pu} mTr? mTr4 


Chapter 10 813 


aaranraacet ara wr gz | 

TATA AAT WSATAERAT: ULM 

Stat frarereagarat sear water Gower: 
Gara frat g a Ft Hegew: ea: Uecil 
aera F aa sir tek | 
Steet caSagerat For Se NLA 
faoreaa: sang Taarecraare”d ars | 
Aaa TST aaa URN 
areas Arar Ferg aTaTeaT ySoaves:* | 
Maratea @ Gores: sra* wa eT URI 


Tr mTr® Farer ; sOx! sPuS “FaeT; Bo Feat ; GMd! “asrarfeaa:; Tr! “oereferr:; rMd3 
“ofearfeae: 

17. Omitted in Lo? GMy Tj! [haplo]; not commented by Me; padas c-d omitted in wKt!; 
sequence of verses in Jm is 19, 18, 17. Padas a-b cited by Mddh 2.56 — a) Tr! azar: arr; 
1Md3 agar sare’; Bo nKt! Lo! Wa “a@ét — b) tMd3 “aTearT; BBe? Jo? wKt! La! Lo! Lo? nNg 
oOr Pu! Pu2 Pus Pu’ Pu’ Pul? Wa 3; [Jolly M] a1 — c) sBe? mfearet Stat; Be! Ho nKe 
coMd! +Md? tMd* sOx! nPu! sPu mTr° ydtaae; Pu? Put attests ~ d) Jm Kt? QIesaaT ; 
7Mdé TeeTTeaT ; NKt! GMd! t™Md3 GMd Pu Tr! mTr3 MT r# MTS ° oaTar 

18* Omitted in cMy. Cited by Laks 12.820 — a) Tr! fratar: 3aTat; oOr Prate: Barat — 
b) sOx! sPu® Seu; Tr? sreaT;, wKt3 smfer; Be! F-e:; BBE BCa Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? nKt! La! nNg 
oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj? Jolly Ku]Mandlik Jha KSS Jea:; wKt! wK FeeaT:; Bo Jo? Lo? 
Lo* rMd4 nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pu> Pu’ Pu® Pu!® Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] Jare:; Hy Fepa:; BKO 
TEPC: — c) Pu? Put ygrsorcae_q Haat; La! gyersoracd Prarat gq; BKe cMd! Frurerat [om qT]; 
nK¢tt tMd4 Pu! mT rt mTr6 Provert a: — d) TH at Hee; Pu? Put Bpear:; Tj! aa: 

19 Cited by Laks 12.820; Ma@dh 2.248 — a) TMd? GMy GM@ Tr! mTr# mTr® [olly Nd] 
SI Sa: erarat; Md! saree: aParai: oOr eraser; wKt! “era; nKtt eT; 
Be? “eratat qT; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? Lo? Tj! Tj? MT? [Jolly R Ku] Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 

*eritaat [om @]; Be! sOx! sPu’ om J — b) Ho ATH; Tj! fratras — c) nPu! Put Pub Pu? Tr! 
aafeaer; Pu2 Put “at aRT — d) Bo Ho Lot cMd! GMy nNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? Pud sPu® Pu? 
Tr! mTr! mTr° [Jolly G Nd] 44; Tr? $7; Be! 4; tMd4 Aa; Pu! fer 

20. Cited by Laks 12.826 — a) Md? fesrraaegq aatg; Md} fesaera ; oOr fEsraat- 
aa; Be! wanted; Tr? gautgy — b)rMd4 wafer Tae; sKv “qaTeT; Lo? Pu? Pui Tj! 
*aaier, 1Md3 GMd5 GMy Pu’ Pu’ Tr! [Jolly GN] arqart; Bo FATYAA; Be! sBe? wKt® 
am — ce) Md arfasar a ofeseert — c-d) Me [patha rejected by him] aaarat safer 
arrarearfeatatearr, 1Md3 “wer arear Ser” — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj2mT? Mr Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave anata fate; wk} “antreafehéaa, Lo CoarPreaft Afar, mT “enPreahiy- 
are 

21* Padas c-d omitted in Tr!. Cited by Laks12.826 — a) Wa fayrg Sade area; La! 
Tr! aTetig; Be! arcqteq; oOr aTereq; Pu? Put aTeaT TT; M4 areal; Pu! arearat; Be! faurt; 
cMd! favat — b) Pu’ aT Tj? 357 ; Be! aH; cMy yer ; nKtt TT: GM@ Tr! mTr4 mTr® 


814 Chapter 10 


Fel Aga use arenekokre a | 
ae ema war eas va TURIN 


aay Wad Ae Faaraet wz =z | 


preaay fasrat a Aa: Ateag UT T URN 
arr antamanaaat a | 
TASANT TINT AA ataAsT: NWR 


aaa Fg setae: | 
WIAA aASAIAPANTT: UWRYI 


Yer; GMd! tMd4 RT: [Jolly Nd Gr] Het; MTS BIT; BBe? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! 
Kt? wKt3 Lo* oOr Pus Tj! TP MTr? Volly Ku R] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave wT; Lo} qt; 1d? 
ga —c)nKft Pub Wea: BBe? aT; aK ed aaef’: Be! “azar: Jo “oeeat; Lo? 
“atearit; Pu2 Put “ateeaTay: sOx! sPuS “aTeurt; La! “arenrat; Ho °aveurat; 1Md3 Conraray 
—d) Tre geracare ae; Pus Pu? VVolly G] FT MeaHera Lolly G FA]; sOx! sPu’ For 
[lacuna] @teTaT; Ho Frater; Be! La! wPu! gere:; oOr Fs:; Pu? Put Fors; mTr4 
gore:; mTr$ qorat; GMd! god; BKts FePe:; Be? TRite:; Md> ForeERT; Lot Jolly M4] 
Jolly ToRRaz; [Jolly M5] qorsrer; [Jolly M3] yersrex; Volly M°]goreae; nKt* Jere: 
ater; [Jolly Nd] Joraftaee; NNg Wa JUST; BBe? Pu’ Pu! are@; La! Stet; Kt? wKt} nPu! Pus 
ty; Lo? atu; wKt! aK aT; wKt! nPul Pu2 Put Seaa for Vs T 

22. Omitted in GMd! Pud Tr!; not commented by Me; padas b-d omitted in Lo’. Cited 
by Laks 12.826 — a) Jo? t3T, Lo? Tj! Bar; nKt La! mTr* aay; Pu2 Pu! at; Bo Wat; Lo! Ox? 
Tey; nPu! Prat; Be! HAT Feed; cMd> Waray; Md} Afeer; La! Te ase, Tj! wera — b) 
La! arearfestete ; Be! Ho nKt sPu® Pu? Tr arenteesta s mT? mTr® ATT ESS TMd3 
aranfefetr : sBe pCa Hy Jm Jo! wKkt! Kt? BK Lo? Lo* Pu’ Tj! mTr? Mandlik KSS Dave 
arenfatesta ; sOx! sPuS Te aTenfaeate ; GMy [Jolly Nd] ‘Raftr — c) mT ro teste 
POT; GMy Tear; Lal now Hepaa; Md? Gea; Bo BU Ba; wKe weobaa; Tj? 
worry — d) Be! aCa wKt! wKt} GMd? Gait; NKtt GMy mTr4 GT; Pu! Put GAT; Bo eat; 
BKt> SUT; TMd3 Stay; Ox? gait; La! wail; Md) sfae@; nKt! mTr4 rs; rMd3 sfra@; Be! nNg 
Pu? Tj! faer; Pu? ar 

23* Omitted in GMd! NNg; pada-a omitted in Lo’. Cited by Laks 12.826 — a) Wa Ward 
wae aard; ake Searq; nKt Fer g; Pu? Pus der g; La! dearer aT ; NKt STaa; Be! nPu! 
aT, Bo GMy Pu? Put mTr area — b) Jolly Garat UF; Ca VA FT— cc) La! Het varhrsr- 
aT UW; rMd3 argued Prager; Pu’ parece; pBe? Hear; GMy Volly Nd] resta; Lo? BTe- 
Tar, TMd4 sOx! sPuS Treva; BK tS TET; NKt4 Tr? Tr? Wa TOT; nKtt ara FT; GMy 
fastarar,; 1Md* GMd5 mTr* mTromTr® [Jolly Nd] frstger; Te! Protrer — d) Pu? Put Fa:; sOx! 
nPu! sPuo Wa area; Ho cMy mTroaeaa; nKt* TaTST:, Lo? aTeaa; wKet! asa; BK aac; 
Be! arya; rMd? at 

24. Omitted in Pu [Jolly Nd] — a) Tr? afar ; oMd® “ardor — b) Tr! “at Ferdawer 
a; tTMd4 GMd sOx! Ox? sPuS “ATaET ; Ho Pu? “afaar’; nKe “at yaar ® — c) Bo FaNtrar — 
d) Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? BKt? TMd* GMy sOx! Ox? Pu3 sPu® Pu’ Tj? Tr? mTr3 mTr*Re 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave STat TAHT: 

25. Cited by Laks 12.820 — a) TMd* datfavfay; wCa Put Tr! F 7; eke seq; Pu! Ay 


Chapter 10 815 


Yat Stews VST ATTA: | 

ane: atta aarahta wT TNR 
Ud We aI isaaahe ATT | 
ATIATAT Te Ta aT AtferT URIoM 
BUT FAT ANTAL TATCATET TTAT | 
AAMT FT TAT ATTA HAT: URCIL 


ah aeegqagerdtsarrghrary | 
Teer any aaa Rarsarq URI 
ale Yat Meat ae way TTT | 

TUT AAT APATATeT WHAT URoll 


— b) Be! °arre:; Md? “Sha: — c) nPul gfe; Be! “ouPrareara; cMd! 1Md3 cMd5 
Pud Pu? mT r® PeAey; sBBe “oH; aKé faesrer; wKB8 aewaeT; Lo! “weppar; Te “eiAPT — 
d) sBe? aPaaen’; KO aTaraarerey 

26. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Pu? Put Gat; BBe Pu’ Wa aaftar° — b) Jm Lo! oOr Pu 
Pu’ [Jolly G R] AST ; Bo cMd! Tr! averera; Laks @ATTAT TT; Bo cMd! Tr? “erat: — c) 
Be! La! arrepda ear F [Be! eras]; cMd> HVTET:; Lo? rT; BCa BK Lo! Pu? Pué Pu’ Pu’ 
Tj! Tr? mT ata; Bo af; Hy Lo? iMd3 Tr! ert; Be? “sTfereq; Bo Jo? Lo? 1Md4 Ox? Tj! 
“separ — d) Bo aarart F Ur FT; Lo? om Va T; La! ar 

27* Padas c-d omitted in BKt® Tj'. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Lo? Tj! Gaeta; Tr! taut 
as NKt4 AeaTeHUT » NNg om AUT; rMd4 “MMF TT — b) GMA Tr! Polly Gr] ° safer 
fanfsarq, Tj? aorfey; Be! a ary — c) Put wg ; Me Jha “STRIT:; BBE Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo? GMd! nNg sOx! sPu® Tj? Tr! Tr? Wa Polly N Ku R] Laks Go N@ 
Nd “seat; Lo! “set; Lo? Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu’ Bh Me [patha] ReJolly “stTet; oOr WTEa; Tr? 
yetaat — c-d) Be! nKt* Lo? Ox? Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] aTgsat Saat | Aeer sHAAfeT F [Bel 
nKtt “stem; Lo? FT] 

28, Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Lo! rMd* @aT — b) GMy gales ead; Pus Tr? 
*orete; nPul ereqr; 1Md3 GMa Ox? Pu’ Tr! “erent WaT — c) Bo La! Tj! eara: Tr? 
aTareaareast ; wKt! GMy aaetat rs Md? seat @: pBBe “aa; Pu? aleaer; Md? 
tMd* cGMd> “aa; Be! Lo! Lot GMy NNg Pu? Pu? Pu! Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Go Laks 
Jolly = — d) Tj! TAT; Be! Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] areas, wKkt! areraases:; aK areltagqwr:; Lo! 
aTeteateaa:; mTr4 MTroaTerg fasr:; GMy HT; rMd4 Ha:; Hy Im Jo! K? Tr} Mandlik KSS 
Dave PAT 

29. Padas c-d omitted in Pu? Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) cMd! auT frareirge ; 
Pu’ [but me] arenftga; 1Md? cMy aver gt — b) Jo! “eat; Lo? “RAAT; Ho Lot sOx Ox? 
sPuS Pul? Tr? MTrS Bh “water; aBe “aiftrary; Md? “Alea — c) Be! TERT; NNg 
qeeteey, Ke? weererarey — d) sBe wifeart 

30. Omitted in Pu!®; padas a-b omitted in Bo and padas c-d in tMd‘. Cited by Laks 
12.821 — a) GMd! GMd sOx' sPu® Tj? 724; Jo? wKt! wKt? Lo Tj! war f&; oMd! a; Tj! 
arama — b) TMd3 aTereee _ aed; cMd?> cMy Put aTel; Ox? ae; Tj! wq:; BKte La! 
nPu! Put aq; Pu’ gsc — c) sBe? FUT; Tr! Tr? arent; Tj! arelae; 7M? areraey; sOx! 


816 Chapter 10 


fe ACATAT ATEN ATTATYAT: | 
dtr dary weet antares F ULI 
TATA TIAA STATA | 

Arey anyeraher TA TALALTT UFR 
Hare J IgE ATES ATTA | 

TT WaIITeT AT AwerarstswoTsT AAU 
Prorat ater At Tar atest erry 


Sadhafe a srguatadrarkrsr: Wasi 


sPuS arama. wKt3 BKtS Lo2 Lo* Ox? Pu? Put aT@ireat ; Ho NNg arerent ; La! Tj! svar a; 
BBe? oOr aera. — c-d) Be! Pu> Pu? Go Gar aTerae Srengrell ah: Wet — d) nKt! sOx! 
sPus “srq°; nPu! “ade; Ho “qazat: Ng “gaat; sOx! sPuS “qdwat; Bo wKt! nKt? Put Tr! 
“gat Lal “gett, ake “gduis; Pue Tr? “gdtig gad; Md! wattate 

31. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) sOx! sPu® Tr? ae; GMd! “a; BBe? Tr! aaa, Tr? 
ada; tMd4 actaat, Pu? Put acrarar — b) Tj! ater; Be! GMd5 Pud Pu’ are; Tr! areirer- 
uw: FA:; Ho nKf sOx! Pu> sPuS Pu’ “aR; tMd4 are; Bo La! cM& “at qa:; Pu? Put 
“at F4:; BKO Ox? nPu! “ar: G:; GMd! “ares — c) GMd> GMy Pu? Put mTr* MTr® Wa 
dar @r:; wKe Tj! Bar SAT, Ox? SATA; GMy BK? Lo! ec; oOr SATA: TMF 
erent: La! Grea: Treat: Te eta; Lo? Geary; Lot TE; md‘ ward; 
oMd 5 cGMy wT rt SotTaeT — d) wk} aniat a aaa I; Ho Tj! autcaea ; La! GMy nPu! Pu? 

Put aut: 95a; BKO aut GT; sOx! sPu “eater at 

32. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Be! Lo* waveat — a-b) Pu? Pu? “are: Aare [Put aT] 
— b) 1Md? “arearreeaté; Tr! “Avera; Be! pCa wKt} Lo! sOx! Pu! sPuS “aret; Jo? “arat; Hy 
Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt Lo! Lo’ oOr Pu? MTr3 Mandlik KSS qastt ; Lo! arent’; Lo? “sftaat; 
BCa Jm Jo? wKt! Lo? Lot sOx! Ox? Pu? Put sPuS Pus mTr3 mTr4u Tro Sifat; nKet “sftfad — 
c) Md? Aare TerShe; sOx! sPuo eT; Ho SAT; Tr? Ae; Im Jo! Jo? Ke wKe Ox? Tr? 
[Jolly Ku] Mandlik KSS DavetRar, Hy ARE; wKt! Fad; akt> Feat, Pu sitezx — d) Pu? 
Put wer seqartter:; Be! La! cMd? ga; cMd! Md? rMd* cMd? cMy Tr‘ mTr? geqaanrs: 
[oMd! mTr® gent, mTr4 arent; Md? aeqas GMS “aTd:; GMy “1; MT ro WA]; Wa Arar: 

33. Padas c-d ma in Lo!. Cited by Laks 12.821 — a) Put frist, Bkt> Haae; Bh 
[patha] tae; rMd4 Facts; cMd> Haat; BBe? om FT; Bo F87; BBe? FaEt; oOr BAe — 
a-b) BKt HTyar Fs: — b) Be! Bo La! Lo? GMd! GMy Pu2 Pu’ mTr? mTr®aTeya; cGMd! tMd3 
Md‘ Aya; Pul? Hyer; Tr! ATER; Na are; Jm arr; Ox? dusted — c) La! Afr garer sare, 
BBe? Pu? Pu} 3; Pu Put watearer; Tro weTeTeTs WK TT TF — d) sOx! sPu “ATT; Ox? 

“area, Pus Pu’ “are; Bo Pu? “aTéT; BKtS “aa, MTr! mTr® ret, TMd? GMS “areat; Tr! “aTaT 

34* Padas a-b ma in Lo!; lacuna for whole verse after fYaTe in GMy; padas c-d omitted 
in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Laks 12.822 — a) GMd° cMy frata; La! fearet, Ho Arita; cMd' cMd> 
Pu2 Pué Tr! MTr* MTrmTr° BA APT; rMd3 Arias, nPul Arie; BK ATE; sOx! Ox? Pu sPub 
Pu’ [Jolly G] are; Tr? atx; La! Tr! get — b) Tr! gar; cMd! eet; Be1 BBe Bo Ho Jo! Kt? 
Lo! Lot [but cor] NNg oOr sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu* sPu® Pu!® Tr? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave @; 
Lo? erat, BK are; Pud Pu? ara; rMd‘ IY; Be! dat’: Bo dha’; rMd* are; nPu! 
“Afar: Be! sBe? Bo Hy wKt! wKt} Lo! Tj! Tr? “Stat; mTr* Star; nk! “sttfasr — c) Be! 


Chapter 10 817 


Waren weary a | 
wacaranrstead ASAT: FR AT: URAU 


areraet Frater aaa: TAT | 
aaeerserrar afentaafeerat 3 <i 


ISTO ATISAT AT HARA ATETLATT | 
sifeheat Fret aera aad tll 


Wet FT aaat Foararargraary | 
ewes Ararat are: war aor: UCI 


Bo Ho Jo? wKt} Lo! Lo? Lo? tMd? sOx! Pu’ sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tr! Wa Sad Sfa; nNg Sad serT; 
MTr* @: 

35. Padas a-b omitted in Pu? Pu‘; padas c-d omitted in cMd!'. Cited by Laks 12.822 —- 
a) Hypermetric pada; Jo* Md GMd9 [Jolly R-] aN Bo Pu’ Pu’ qatar, 
[Bo "TAT |; Te TITATRMTAG; Be! SITET AAG; wBe gerahy; Lo! “SeATETAY; Tj? 

“yeasty; nPul “yeaaaty; Hy wKt! Lo! mTr3 ae THT; KSS ay areag; Ke ea 
arey; Jo! Mandlik ° 3 ae b) La! “arateatear Bo alaTaatg; sKt Lot aTATEATY 
nNg St FT — c) Bo Waea ; Tr! “afacaa; 1M} “waa — d) Put wf’; Bo wTAT ; Pu! 
Tr? Wa yafeaz:; nKtt BK GMd> Pu? Pu3 Put Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] gafamar:, *Md? wPul ga- 
faspar, La! oOr Ox? gufeser:; Be! yea: 

36. Cited by Laks 12.822 — a) rMd* @rereat frureat g; Be! La! nPu! @reraney; Jo? 
areaey; Pu? Put prerare; Tr? pretest; Tj! HUeal; Bo Hretaey; cMd! area; tM? Heras; 
wKt! @rerrat [me sh to Frat]; Lo! Fraveeq; La! cMd> nPul Pu? Put Prorat g kt frareanrg; 
Md? frarert [om q]— b) BKt? La! tMd4 GMd5 GMy Pu? Pu!°Jha Dave #1%; sOx! sPus 

“area; Lol mre ; Jo? Lo? Tj! wera; Tr? warexa — c) Be! Hy Jo! wKt! K#? Lo? Lo? 
Lo! Ox? Pu? Put Pul? Tj? Tr! mT? [Jolly M] Bh Go Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Davetafear ; Pu'® 
aefear . Tj! dearer’. NK “a@rewat; cMd5 Wa “Hey; rMdé “ar; sBe? “Heit — d) mTr4 
Tro afeutauesaar:; cMy Tr! afeutarerfe ; nPul afeuter gfe; Im “Prat; Md “ara: nPul 
“aa 

37. Padas a-b omitted in Pu!®; padas b-d omitted in Pu4 [haplo]; padas a-b and c-d 
transposed in GMy Tr!. Cited by Laks12.822 — a) BCa Ho La! GMd> Ox? Pud Pu? Tr? ares 
1Md3 @ererar, Put qesreareay. NKtt “sitar”: wKt! sige’; Bo Pu} “ature; rMa 
“atTe : Tr! Sree oMd> “arora BK “StaTace ; BBe Sper GMd! “atarast cr 
— c) tMd? Pu? Tr? afeftsar; sOx! sPuo amfeveanr; Lot afeveat: Be! mc to afeftser; Lo? 
areftser, Tj'anféfaer, Tr! mT ro arPaftear, Lal snfegftest; Tr! frarat g¢ — c-d) cMd! 
Proret a dearer ater: — d) Pu acer ae wad; Jo? ATaTAG; Tr! Starea; Tj! 
orreat 

38. Omitted in Pu; pada-a omitted in Pu*t. Cited by Laks 12.822 —— a) La! Wert 
Speq; BK AVETST [ma 1] wwaltatet, Ho Im wKt! Lo! Ox? Pul® Tr? [Jolly MG] Jolly 
aver: Tj! erat; La! om J; GMd! Pu’ [Jolly G]F; sOx! sPuS araret; Pu} dtarest — b) 
nKtt Hts"; Md! 1Md4 mTr? MTr® Wa @feae:; oOr “Aft — c) Bo Jo? BKtS Lo? Pu? Pu‘ 
Pu? Pu Pu! Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly M] J=rett; Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? La! oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® 
MTP [Jolly Ku] Mandlik KSS T#PeT [see10.18b note]; Lot Tarear;, wk? Jawuas, Be! 


818 Chapter 10 


froreat 7 asters Faraday | 
PITTA TT TENA TET WAI 


at aaa: Praararaferar: | 

Tea aT THETA aT afer: eawAAT: Soll 
Taafaarreacat: TE gar fase: | 
Fat F AIA: aasesast: Sar: US el 
aatfisonnaar at maf ar ar | 

seat aed o aqetar aera: SRI 
gas feearetarfear: erases: | 

GIG TAT TH AATTAATT T SRI 


Tweat; Ke garear; nNg Feat; Lo! werd; wKkt! gre:; rMd3 seq: — d) M3 TAA; NP! 
“afara: 


39. Cited by Laks 12.822 — a) sBe? Protest; Pu? Pu! “ety; BK om q; BBe? Bo BCa 
Ho Jm wKt} BK Lo! oOr Ox? nPu! Pu} Put Pud Pu? Tr? vere — b) Pu? AeA | TM? 
oMy mT ro FRaTaaT : GMd! “ATaaaT’; Be! [but cor] arat; cMd5 “afr; wKt! “arat — 
c) tM? art; wKt! “sree; wKO CAPaAe; Ho ate — c-d) oMd! araraaret wretar erate 
aed — d) sOx! sPuo areata; tMdé4 mTr4 Tro aS: 

Pu‘ replaces pada-d with 9.142 c-d; thereafter Pu’ replaces 40-47 with 9.143~150, verse 
48 with 9.151 a-b, 152 c-d; verses 49-51 with 9.153-155; verse 52 with 9.156 a-b; and omits 
verses 53 and 54 a-b. 

40. Padas a-b omitted in La!; pada-d lacuna in mTr°. Cited by Laks12.822 — a) Be! 
aetaraeda:; wKke! Tj! seraedtan:; aK araateaan:; Md? sree: — b) GMd! ATaT- 
farafrefirer:; Tr? arafta ; Hy om “ATS; GMdS “Westar; oOr Te “Tertfgar: — c) Ox? weaT- 
sat: Tr? WaeTaT; wKt! geprarteT — d) Be! 4feaer:; Bo Md‘ afecer; Be! qanHth: 

41. Omitted in Tj? MTr®. Cited by Laks12.824 — a) Be! funfe’; sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? 
Tr [Jolly G Ku]Mandlik KSS Dave Bf ; Bo BATE; TMd3 GM “RATRSTFTE — b) Pu!? 
THT, MTr WaT; wKt! afgeattor:; GMd5 sOx! sPuo “ertor:; oOr Be! [but cor] “aftr: — c) 
nKt! La! Lo? Tj! Tr Bh STAT; wKt! Pu’ wT; BBe wKt) MTr! Sear: ; rMd4 STAT — d) 
nKtt aavetaar STar:; Ox? at TEAAT:; NNg om STAT: La! Ter: 

42 Pada-a omitted in mTr°. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) La! Tr? aarti’: mT asia ; 
Be! pBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? La! Lo? Md! nNg Ox? Pu? Put Tj! Tj? mTr? [Jolly R] Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave Wag, nKt? oOr Pu’ Pu’ Wa [Jolly G Nd] Na Go *aTat; Pus aTeeT — 
b) GMy Tr MTr4 eee BT Bt Md aol & BT BA Ke aa wesfet — c) mTr4 
sertbarretty; Tr! Sent aretha; La! seater’; Ho aart, GMd! amet; Ox? J — d) 
oMd! tMd4 mTr6 Aye FT THAT:; BBe sOx! Ox? sPu® a ; Lo! Pu? Pu? Puf Tr! Tr? 
age ; Bo Ho cGM@ nPu! Pu? Pu Pu? Tj! s1:; Be! wKt? Lo! GMy sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu’ Tr! 
wang; Pu’ sag 

43 Cited by Laks 12.828 — a) wKt! 437; Ho Seafear — b) aMd! “oredr: 
aarstat:; rMd4 “orfefe arta; nKe afar. saa; Ke “after: — c) nNg Tat — d) 
oMd! stator: efraretar; La! nNg nPu! Pu2 Pud Pu? Wa [Jolly G] Me Jolly Jha wrermfesparr 


Chapter 10 819 


(ER alsattet: BAT ATAT: FAT: | 
areal: Usarattar: Feerar atareaur svi 
FAIA at ate saat afe: | 
wWreaaszaray aT At A FAT: STAT: USUI 
y feoraraqeat & aTedaat: TAA: | 

a fatedddagigorara sah: ee 
gaara Parker | 
Steer chert anrerat aftrerr: isl 
Aeaatat Frater TARCaATaTAeT T 


44* Omitted in Pus; padas c-d omitted in mTr°, Cited by Laks 12.828 — a) GMd! arqrr 
aeatte>r:; Lo? quEsHr BBe? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} BKt® La! Lo! Ox? Pu} Pu’ Tj? 
MTr? Go Ku Rn Nd Re Mandlik Biihler KSS ag Jm Pu? Pu3 ager -wKt! dteer; Pud 
Pu’? [Jolly G] Steger; Tr? dieser’; Be! dugepat’; nPul gegaspatys’ | Md} cMd Tr! mT 
“sites [Jolly Gr] “arate; [Jolly Nd] 241% ; Ho NNg Pu? Tj! Volly M23] “aitz"s NKt! La! 
Lo! sOx! sPuo Wa [Jolly M'“] site"; BBe? BCa Jm Jo! Kt wKt} Ox? Tj? Mandlik KSS Dave 
“sits’. Be! Hy Pu’ “siTg°; [Jolly M9] STZ; Bo “ATS; Laks ARE; Tr? SS; wKt! alte”; 
Jo? “siter’; Tj! Cait’; Lo! Lo} Pu? Volly M8 R] aver’; nK¢ mT? “sfirer:; wKe “gfe; 
uTrs eftrer:; GM@ Tr! mTr afrer: — b) TMd3 Tj! Beater; Hy HAT; Tj? Fferer:; sBBe 
Saar aer:; La! ara:; Kt) Wear:; Tr? Preer:; Md? rMd3 Yep: — c) TMd4 orearar: were: 
wKt! wKt? Lo! GMy Tr 3ear:; Ho Jo! Kt? Lot nNgsOx! sPu® Pu’ Pu!? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave TR&T; oOr TSAR; Pu? mTr5 Laks THATAAT:; Md? TgaTsavar:;, Tj! mearaftat:; TP 
Teareatar:; wKt? Lo! [me to] Lot Teardtar:; cMd> Teardtar:; Bo Lo’ Tarai: nKt4 
cogaralat:; La! ogaraftar:; nNg atf&arredtar:; nPu! “sfar:; BKtS “after: — d) Bo fete; Wa 
areererar; Md} every ; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo! Lo? Lot Ox? nPu! Pu} Tj! 
Tj? Tr? mTr3 [Jolly R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave @&: @at:;nCa Ox? eet: GAT:; BBE Far: 
aaT:; Pu* eter: Tar:; Pu® eter: aat:; Ho GkaT: Ae: 

45. Omitted in Jm mTr®. padas a-b omitted in Pu!? — a) cMd! “arsatat — b) TMd? Ox? 
af; wKt? Pu? ota> aT; GMd! +Md4 sOx! sPuS aTacd — c) GMy waar BATA; oOr 
mresarafrarrar:; pCa wKt! BK TMd4 “ararearar; Md! 1Md? Tr! Wa “aritfaray [Wa 
“art; GMd! “ara; +rMd3 “set; Jo! Kt? mTremTr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave “arepared- 
ard: at; nKtt arqarsard: at 

46. Omitted in Jm GMy. Cited by Laks 12.829 — a) cGMd' 3 oT ager & FT; eke g; 
+Md3 GMd® Pu? Pu? Tr! mTr3 MTrémTrS MT ro Tater; nKtt “oatear — b) BktS + ary 
1Md? adaeaasr; Ho ares astT:; GMd! “edarepr:; Tj? “eter; Lo? gar: — c) oOr aire; 
Md} “afgadgé — d) Be! “starfire; oOr STATA 

47. Omitted in Jm. Cited by Apa 119; Laks 12.829 — a) Lo? “@eTH — b) sOx! sPus 
Fafeeferat; wKt! 8k Pafaserar; La! oOr Pu? Fafescac; Be! GMd! +Md3 Pafteeaa; Hy Jol 
Kt? cMy Tj mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Fafeeart — c) sBe tMd? Ox? Pu2 Pud Pu? 
defeat, Ox? Raat wrt; BK sOx! sPuo “art — d) td? AVTEMT; Jo? La! 1Md3 oOr nPu! 
Pu? Tj! afar; cMd! aftracer; wKe aftrearr 





820 Chapter 10 


2 


rane ater arayr aDeaTEaT US 


Taga TeIgTaAT 7 | 
aay faarar adaeat: AR: Ukoll 


wera g antares: 
AITATAT SAAT GATAAT MTTATT U4 LU 


48. Omitted in Jm; padas a-b and c-d transposed in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.829; padas 
a-b cited by Apa 119 — a) Ox ARATE; Bo “UTa; Pul? “arar; Ho Praréat; sBe? Pravarar — 
b) Apa STHTaRTEReD Get [vl PTET]; MTr4 mT 19 PETA: ; Pud Pu’ aferecaa La! 
aftcxanit’ NNg Pulo Wa afteeaat’; GMy ate; MTS afterra ; Laky caftewrar’ ; sOx! 
sPus caftesrat’ ; Lo! caftecarat’, tMd? cGMdd airs Tr! afteert’ ; +Md4 cMd° fiero” 
Lo} afteearat ; Tj! aftecarar’ ; Bo BCa wKt! nKt' Lo? TMd4 GMd> GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Pu3 
- sPuo Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr> Wa [Volly G] I—°) Be! FETE ATTA ; BBe? RUTGIT ; 

ul faheryat gar La! Ratagearray Pu2 Fara cMd! REETTAET 5 aMy 
sme | wKt! array Tr! a Jo! Tj! yj Pul? at Bo Jo? Lo? 
wT Ir? Yolly GN Nd]. Jolly eae Lo! Mire "ag; Tr? Wa “ae; ; Pu’ ‘ee [Jolly M +8 
y "Ej Lo! [Jolly M5] °3y’; Ox? “gar” — d) NKtt Ox? Tj! wTr®° aver; TMd3 “ATSUT 
wKt! “feaar 

49. Omitted in Jm cMy Pud [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Laks 12.829 — a) rMd4 aga Tj! 
ara; TMd? GM) Ox? Pu? Tr! mT mTr° evant ; Be! etarr ; GMd! araTet ; Lo! ata; Ho 
Jo? Lo? Lo*nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pu! Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] J&eerar; Be! Bo “q:rart; BBe? Hy 
Jo! wKt! Kt nKtt BKt La! oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “qaepart [see 10.18b 
note]; wKt? “gap, Lo! om @; wKt! wKt aK nPu! Tr? 7— b) wKkt! afearr: wfeera: [cf 
51b]; Kt? NKtt Lo! Lo? Pul® Wa frat’. Tro fast ; Bo La! Pu? Pu? fear’. mTr frets; Be! 
La! cMd! Tr‘ fate ; rMd? fate; Md? fata; BKC eater ; nPul fadtat’; cMd’ aac 
—~c) TM@ Tr! dara g Pars; Lo} eau’; Be! BBe GMd! 1Md4 Tr fesaarat; Tj! 
Resort, nK¢ ferearat, La! ferret, Lo? Reorat, Te 7 ede; oMd mT g wars; La! 
atapret — d) Be! sBe? Lot Md} tMd‘4 NNg Pu’ Tr! mTr4 mTr° Sar; Jo! Kt? Lo! aut; sOx! 
sPu® 241A; Ho FATT; Md‘ AeSaTEM; NK ASAE; Tr! mT! mTr6 BTeSaTeT 

50. Omitted in Jm mTr°; placed after verse 52 in GMd! tMd‘4 GMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by 
Laks 12.829, 832 — a) BKt® Lo? Md? 24; Tre 34; La! Tage mTr* Saaer @ — b) Lo! 
mTrt toy 7 aty FT; Jo* Lo’ Pu? Pu Tj! arya FT — c) cMd* qegedcafearar; Pus Pu’ 
aay; Wa aay; BBe? gaaheeer; Jo! Kt? NNg Ox? mT? Mandlik KSS Dave fa@at 

51. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) oOr Welaganeart FT; Ho BKf La! Lo! Ox? nPul Puf 
avers ; La! avers: wKt! SSte:; nPul “eager; Tj! STS; Ke CsaraTaTat; wKt! Ho 
BKt} sOx! Ox? Pud sPu’ Pu? 7 — a-b) GMd! aarat gq Haat Parreraferra — b) nKt* Lot 
Pod Pu? Tr! mTré¢ Tr mTrS Prat: een? [MTr® Fata]; oOr ateary gfe wKt! afeata: 
gfe; BKO La! afeatavfa; rMd? “Rerr; Bo ‘feart:; aKtS °feerat: — c) Lo? Lo Pul® Tj! 
[Jolly M N R Nd] Né@ Jolly AaITAT [editions of Me give both AaITA and AqTA}; Ox? Pus 
Pu’ [Jolly G] sea-sraea, Te vacrarey; La! wPu! arqorarar; Be! xaceT; Bo +Md* oTaz; 


Chapter 10 821 


arate arent Rerares a ATA | 
aronaareare: aaa a Perr: eR 
a 8: caaahars gest atarey | 
araent Prretat fate: aaah: ae UK RN 
sara were 2 enisaranrs | 

Tat + Reged ag TT TUL 
fear atgq: wrart fafear sme: | 
waned wa te fPretghtte feafr: wey 
RANT SY: AAT TUTET TATAAT | 
eA Wey: TATA T NGM 
anfaratiardt at aquatfasny | 
armeatrarrdt sah: arraarg U4 ll 


aMy “qrter; Md} “art =; Lo! “ara; Wa “OTaT: Wed; Be! Md? wd: nKt4 cMy 
acter — d) Ox? aaut, cMd> aaa; sOx! sPuS om at; Pu’ Pu? { WE; Ho Lo? GMd! Ox? 
nPul mTr4 & Est; Lo! T? “mest; BK Ox? “me; Jo? “TEM; Pu! “saree; rma} “Tea 

52.* Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) cMd! araieagar ; cMy 3gaarh; Be! Bo Ho Jo? La! Lo! 
Lo? Lot NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pud sPuS Pu’ Pu’ Pu!® Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly Jha 
Dave ‘say — b) La! feerate. rMd? das; Be! Be? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKt* cMd! cGMd° 
oMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu’ Pu’ Tj? [Jolly G Ku Nd] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave #85 — c) 
Lo! “xenr [cor to FAY] SHOT; Ho aKé “AHaATsaHre:; Lo? Te ST:; BBE “HT; Be! La! 
Lo? 1Md4 oOr nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tj! “are — d) Be Tj! oRarsar; Te sftarsar; sPub aRase:; 
Bo ofasal; Pud Pu? ofasared; pBe? sOx! Tr! afavaray; oOr A4eT:; after this verse mTr* 
MTr® insert verse 10.50. 

53. Omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) Borfe araftreefs; Jo? Lo? t4:— c) 
kt aaere; BKe Lo} Tj! [Jolly R] Preaat— d) oOr faaré:; Lo? Tj! frare:; TMa3 FAT 

54. Omitted in Pu, padas a-b omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) nPu! sear, 
Ket Praetar: rMdé Tr! “Bur, GMd! Tet; Or “eta; Bo My “eft? — b) cMd! 8; rMd? 
enigaend; rMd* HIST; BBe “His — c) Lot fretz oOr frat; Bo Jo* wKt! nKt* Lo 
Md! tMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy oOr nPu! Pu} Tj! Tr! Tr? Mr? mTr® © ter; Lal om ]— d) nKet 
ar 

55. Cited by Laks 12.832 — b) Pu‘ Tj! Pagar; cMy “aeate, Ho ae: — c) Tr! 
aoretaaas, Tj! rarer; cMd! “area; tMd? GMy “ayaare oMd “arerard; Ox? “RATS: 
Kt? BKt 1M? aaa; Ox? Tata; wKe Fad — d) Bo Pree” 

56. GMy places padas c-dafter verse 58. Cited by Laks 12.832 — a) BK t Tear; Kt? 
Tr? aearar; Bo Feara; Ca TeaTd; Pulo deara: cMd! eyed ad — c) cMd! mTr® 
*aratearearey; mTr* Were — d) GMy mTr® SeAMGTAL ; Laks SRATITHS ; GMd! areaarae 
Hy 2aTAL ; Jo? wKt? Tj! VVolly R]Sat ATA; Lo! Bear BAS | GMa SAAT’; Put om 
aro 

57. Padas c-d omitted in wKt! [haplogaphy] — a) Pul® Tj! “Rarer; mTr° “fart — b) 


822 Chapter 10 


orate Fregrar grat fafeeareranr | 
Ter aswaedie ate ByTathoryT UK 
fast at wort after argahraaa ar | 

a wart gather: wept wat Prat 4s 
Bor FST HraeT TET Eareerarae: | 
WIIeIe Aedes TSCA aT a_ UGoll 
at cae aftedar araedt acta: | 
wie: we care rte farsa 1 2 
Mares wart ar seertisyTEA: | 
Stareraara a aera fifearory gril 
afgar acaate: atrafifatrae: | 

Ud araeas at argdetsadiarg: gil 


Md! Put HEAT; GMd! cMd “ater; Tr? “ater, rMa} “atfret — c) sOx! sPus arferatr 
amar, Tj? adararé; wKe °Rravert — d) 1Md4 “street 

58. Omitted in wKt! —- a) tMd4 sartat — b) Pu? Pu aad fafta; La! Preparercr; 
Pu! “grea; Put “areavaT — c) aK asardte; cM? eran fF — d) Ox Ae HET’; Be! 
oT 

59. Cited by Laks 12.828; Madh 1.478 — a)GMd! tMd? tMd* GM@ GMy Tr! mTr* 
mTr® Laks Madh fagat — b) Be! GMy 7 — c) wKt! eet aaraihs: [om]; BKtS om 7; TM? 
gat — d) rMd4 vepfeentrreete; cMd! erat eat; Md? GMy Tr! Tr mTré foreesfer; 
oMd> & waste, Madh feqoater 

60. a) GMd! cMd sOx! sPuo @@; nKt! Fars; cMd! Fer fe — b) tMd? TMd* cGMd? 
oMy Tr! [Jolly Grjafe er ; cMy Saetiatee:; BBe wKt} BK La! “afae: — c) Lo! ayaa; 
Md} eye — d) wKt AST; Bo aerey’; wKt! aaved ; BK O “errr at; oMd> “erate aT; Be! 
oMd> ag:; cMd! 9: 

61 Cited by Laks 12.828 — a) GMd Tr! o& 4a; Pu? Taread; Put dara, Ox? after- 
er, Bo Lal afevar; Tr? sfeatarr:; wKt! agerer; Ho Jm Jo! Kt! cMd5 sOx! sPuo mTr? Laks 
Mandlik Jha KSS Weatarsare, — b) Bo sOx! sPuo Tae; Puld arad; Tr! Tr? ahaa: wKt! 
BKtS tMd3 GMd’ GMy Ox? Pu} Pu® Na Ku Mr acfeerer:, mT ro aoftaaeer: Or aver THT: ; 
nPu! “gare: — c) Lo} Tj! Jha wealt:; Hy Jm Jo! Kt?mTr3 Mandlik KSS uftea:, cMd! GMy 
Tr! mT? Tro treat: Md? Tet; TMd4 uee:; Pu! oftaat; pKtS Uehr:; Pu? Put ueet:; 
TMd} agit — d) La! oOr Wear 

62.* Cited by Apa 119; Laks 12.833 — a) Ho arf; Be! saTaet 2s; NNg Wa [Jolly M] 
qt — b) tMd4 escort F [lacuna] Se:; Tj! ‘Gepd; Apa [vl as in ed] “Tepe: — c) BBe* Bo Ho 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? La! Lo! Lo? Lo‘ [cor to] GMd! oOr sOx! Ox? sPuS Pu® Tj! T7 
Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave “eITret, Jolly M'2-S~]eaardt, Lo? “eaardt; mTrS “eae 
after; cGMd! at — d) nKt? ata; tM? arerat; La! asa; GMd fir’. wk) “after 

63* Cited by Vis 1.8; Laks 12.834 — a) BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? wKt? Lo! Lo* Lo? 
Ox? Pu? Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? MTr? Lolly G Ku R]Vis [vl] Laks Go N@ Ku Mandlik Jolly Jha 





Chapter 10 823 


STA MAMA: ATA ASAT | 
ssa Si TAT AMAT NEVI 
Wat aerate ararater YTATT | 
aPransnrand g Preeeraata a NaI 
Aaa AFTAT MAMI ATA | 
Taare aed FAT ARIAT UEEII 


KSS Dave AeTHeTS — a-b) GMd! Md‘ Tro agar aTyaer T ATARI TATE: NK tt Lo? Pus 
“Rear: — c) Lo! U4; BBe? BCa wKt! wKt BKt> La! GMd5 oOr Tr! Gerd; Ox? Pu? Put Tr? 
S4; Pu? 3; Be! Lot cMy Pu’ Tj? [Jolly M Nd] Ua; sOx! sPu® was; Pu! gst; wKt! arate, 
Be! GMd! tMd? nPu! Pu? Pu3 MT r? mTro Steer; Md} aTaTRTa; Pu!? [Jolly M] waTatfaa; 
Bo ararfarcteaet; Kt? oOret; GMa mT ro gaf— c-d) Vis wT Aree aearadot watt: -— 
d) Be! sBe: Bo wKt! wKt3 BK La! GMd! tMd4 nPu! Tj! agar; My [Jolly Nd] a¢taeF; Lo! 

rr! aTgqaer aft? 

Between padas a-b and c-d the following verse is added in Be! GMd! tMd4 nNg nPu! 
Pu? Put mTr* MTr® Mandlik[®, 1] KSS; the second half-verse is added in GMd° GMy; this 
verse is given by Go at the beginning of his commentary on verse 63: 

ATSOANATIA T TAHITANT AA | 

wort SY sey car tarreaar | 
a) MT ro) fereerest art — a-b) mT rt airga@ratfeetacaarsarerrarstt — b) cMd! 
faqatsatae:; rMd* mTr? arafaeatre: — d) GMd! GMd5 GMy mTrémTr® ait 
Preargaar, Pu? Put qaer 

64. Omitted in Wa. Cited by Laks 12.825 — a) La! ar@mit sitc:; NNg “ora: —b) 
La! Streat; Pul? Sra; 7Md4 ae aan; Put Saas; Lot WaT | NNg WS; wKt! T 
weTrd:; cMd5 & WTA; or IarstHA_— c) Me! araigeart afd FT; BKt Pue Pu? ae ; 
BBe? “pit sifer — e-d) Md! [half-verse reads] tae} siferarareresarentret — d) Hy La! 
Tr? TeerUr; oOr TesT: AA; Lo! aaa; wkKe! Md aeaeare,; La! AaaPTaT; TMd3 GMa 
MIT! SaaTeBard, BCa [but cor] ura 

65. Omitted in Pul®. Cited by Laks 12.825 — a) Bo mrarara fa — b) nPu! arerorad fer, 
wKkt! srarrrda; Jo? Lo? Tj! avarit arfer; Be! Kt? La! Lo! oOr Tr! mTr® “opafer, cM di 

“opatfe; sBe? Bo wKt! wKt Ox? Tr? “orate — c) nKt Put “saree; Tr! “sora aq; Jo 
oMd! Lo? Tj! mT ro saree fee” (Tj! “aa]; +Md4 “soared fer”; La! rMd? cM 
GMy oOr MTr5 &; wKt! f€ — d) GMd! rMd3 rMd4 GMd® GMy Tr mTr? MTr® feereerfaerat 
wet, La! fraser aaa. oOr nPu! feregeaetaa; Jo? Lo} faaregareata; Tj! fearear ata; Lot 
[Jolly M] 

66. Padas c-d omitted in Put andma in Lo!. Cited by Laks 12.823 — a) GMy Sararer; 
Td! sarara, Tj! ayaa; BK Pu!? ayer — b) nKt4 TeTTEG; Tr! mTr® sree; tMd4 
weg — c) Lal tMdé mTr® Sarre aT STATA; NPu! aera Pw Pu’ “sreaararar; 1 d3 
“wer; Pue ATatg; Jo? wKt! wKt} nKtt Lo? Tj! “arate; cGMd> oMy Tr! mTré Arater: 
Lo! 0Or “aTat T; sBe “areder — c-d) Md! ware at ade 7 ter afaragadq— d) My 
area agatefe; La! tare daRrgaa: oOr Peat T WAT; Hy Jo? wKt? Lo? Tj'Volly R] 
SUPRA Wad [wKe “ATate’; [Jolly R] ATEN]; [Jolly Nd] om #afe; Be! wKt! Lot 
wer AK; Volly M4] wer FIR’; Pu! Pu2 Safere’; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G]afs Ze; 7Ma Tr! 


824 Chapter 10 


Wat ARPAPTATaT TACT: | 
Wasaarataararart ef Frat: nett 
argues at arate: | 
apart: gt Tae: waste: UCI 
gat Aa gent ore Saat TAT | 
TUS aatat as SeETAEhgT UE 
saree serait ear vet feror: | 
fret wary ase g safer: tvoll 


wer diaeqeaata fragt | 
after at Say eatesy waT ol 
Terra Rear arasAaT | 


Tr! afer AK; cMd afer AK; Ox? [Volly M9] Prara 

67. Omitted in Pu!°; ma in Lo’; omitted up to fet in Put; padas b-c omitted in BKt5; 
padas a-b and c-d transposed in Tr‘. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) Jo? Lo® Tj! sratsordecaaty- 
afaray; tMd? Tr! aRtaavat; BBe? GMd 5 Pu? Tro arataarat; Lo! arateaarat’ — b) wKe 
oMy ‘HTatvat; Pu’ “grat wa° — c) Lo? aTeaeTATAT ; Be! *ararat’ ; Ox? Tr! [but cor] “carate- 
aaa” — d) wKt! fe ferfer: 

68. Omitted in wKt'; ma sh in sPu°. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) GMd! mTr° Laks Sarat 
caeeernfafa — b) cMd! “fafer areafaer fag:, wKe Tr? et; Tr? “feafer: — c) Lo? rMd? 
cMy sOx! sPuS Pu!? Tr! Tr? Laks Me Jha Dave S#1@:; BB@ Bo Lo? Md} tMd‘ wPu! Pud 
Pu’ MTr® Wa Jayae:; aK Jagat: — c-d) cMd! + ayparowt: Ys Serenfslae: — d) Md? 
BET: TAA; BBe? SAC; nPu! Sac; wCa SA: oOr Waar: 

69. Omitted in wKt'; ma in sPu°. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) BBe BK eae; tMd? 
oMd> GMy Tr! Tr BA [ad 10.70] Fas; cMd! Fated, La! gdtaeca; Md! aadisraa; 
Laks 7; Be! Ho Md} Jas; tMd4 Faq; sBe? BK BAT — b) Td? sg; Md! START; 
Tr! dared; Tj! aad; Lo! gar — c) MT curPhareararaT;, Pu’ sratsorrcreraratar; cMd 5 
aa STaHATaTaT: aK Ta; TMd4 TaPaTSATT; BBe? Jo? La! Lo® oOrnPu! Pu2 Put Pud Pu? Tj! 
*saTaarat ; Wa araratat — d) nCa Ho sKt> TMd? Pud Pu? Wa a; oMy aderar ; cMd! 
seen Bow + war 

70. Padas c-d omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) NKt' GMy aisr¥q; Put aaa, 
oMd! “#a aarti — b) pCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt Lo? Tj! Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS Dave XA — c) Pu Pu’? ar, Be! Md‘ qt aeT; Lo! aur at; cMy qa F 
— d) Tr! a4; cMd> wae FT; GMy aT ad; Jo? aaaT aa: wKt! me to 7; Tj! “Ferd. BKt 
Lal fera: 

71. Padas c-d up to afte omitted in Pu‘; padas a-b omitted in Pu!®, Cited by Laks 
12.824 — a) oOr sOx! sPu® 389; La! ayer ; Lo? Tj! “yaa; GMd! Pu’ Pu’ “aan SS 
b) Be! Hy wKt} Lo? Md? GMd5 Pu’ Tr! “Hae; BKtS “AAT FT; La! oOr nPu! Pu2 Frahey; 
wKt! “Heater — c) GMy srapftr — d) GMd! tMd3 *Md! GM? Tr! Props WaT 


Chapter 10 825 


Uae Tea TEATS WATETT WORM 
TAAATSATA UTA | 
araratadtaran + eat areata wos 
Tao Taare J erateraherawr: | 
a aenastag: weather pray oe 
PATTI GAT AAT AUT | 

amt siamedta veeaterara: (okt 
wont g wore Ahh sath offre | 
anrrearayt aa fegarer vfewe: ioe 
sear wat frader ara ater sf | 
eae aot aT adtaa wfaae: Moll 
ae uf aaa Pract ferfa: | 


72. Omitted in Pu!. Cited by Laks 12.824 — a) GMd! aararerquras; tMd* NNg oOr Pu® 
Pu’ Tr! aegis — b) GMd! tMd3 “arrguat; aBKe “TATA; nKe Tj! aTq; Be! Bo wKt? Lo? 
Pul® wae; Tr! Wael — c) TMd3 "arr avars — d) Bo nK¢' faery 

73. Omitted in Pu!. Cited by Laks 2.272, 826 — b) Be! Lo! amart; Lo? tMd¢ mTr4 
“antes; oOr Br Laks 2.272 SPAT: — c) Wa AIP; +Md3 ayerat — d) Kt area 
anifafe, GMy Wat AT; Md? + aT; GMd! GMy Tj! zaarfafe; Jo! araafedt; Pul? arerar 
afer; [Jolly M] erat afer: Tr? Caaf 

74. Omitted in nPu! Pu!® — a) Lo? om ST@ToT; TM? STAI; MT ro HAT; GMd! Y Aer 
aerney Md? Tr! avert — b) La! “Prem: eee a oaferar:; wKt! gar ; Bo Lo? 
Tj' mT Bheaeteraferar:; sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wK@ Lo? Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tj? mTr? 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave wea: [Ho om & ; Md} @; wKt! gare |: Ox? wurtyera- 
feat: — d) BK Wa @afafe; sBe “ar:; Pud “Hae 

75. Omitted in nPu!; pada-d omitted in Put. Cited by Laks 2.168; Dev 2.449; Madh 
1.135 — a) oMd! 1Md? Tr! Dev Madh 34 areaat — b) Jo Lo? Tj! [Jolly G R] aert ast 
— ¢) Ho Jo? Lo? cMy Tj! aeafe; skKtS La! yMd3 tMdé Tr! mT ro “ae Ba; sOx! sPus HE 
afer — d) oMd! “a@atfor aenear 

76. Omitted in Pu'; padas a-b omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Vij 1.117; Laky2.167; Madh 1.140 
—a)oMd! eaut zer; rMd3 rMd4 wa AE — b) sOx! sPuo GAT: BBE Md? Pu? Put 
ofifeerr:; +d? sfifaar — c) cMd! sOx! sPuS aA ; Bo “aTeaTy; GMdS “aTeaTeTy; BBe? Tj! 
“eaTaT — d) wKt! fagperfz; sBe cMy sOx! sPuo fagpera; Laks feapeer, Dev fafarcered; 
1M! fafareer; nKe Ter: 

77. Omitted in Hy Pu!. Cited by Laks 2.251; Dev 2.449; Madh 1.308 — a) BK HAT; 
wKt! aut; Be! Ho Pu! eaifer act [Pul® qatar]; Jo? Tj! [Jolly R] Madh Fadeq — b) [Jolly 
N] aTe0r:; tMd? Tr? #eT:; Lot HIT; Lo! ATAIT:; Laks TeTOT:; GMd! arat F APY; mTr4 
MT ro geal & afer ; oMy [Jolly Nd] sat & afr: Tr! arr + afr: Ho sOx! sPuo etfirarafer 
—c) wKt! om 7 — d) Ke? ské Tr! gets ; Be! oftye: 


826 Chapter 10 


av at ofa f averaty aaere serrate: thot 
Tareas awaer attrengeaet far: 
afaart eter arr ar: let! 
aan Tarren ahrrer FT TAT | 
aratena Serer fairer eartg coll 
aot waht Tar: aT BATT | 
starrer & er Wea: UC 2H 
mmarated ar ena aac | 
gharremrena sitar sfifrary uci 


aergeate sfaeg arerr: afratsfr ar | 
arsrat aereftat PR Ta ATT UCR 
grt atate vert ar afe: afertiar | 


78. Omitted in Pu!. Cited byLaks 2.251; padas a-b cited by Dev 2.449; Madh 1.308 — 
a) Pu’ Pu? T8aer; BKE Lo! GMy nNg AAG; BBe? Lot Pu!? Lolly M] Tatar — a-b) Pw? afer 
fade aaaa sft — c) cMy Udt ofa; Lo? cat afer; cMdS sfeaqersary; mTro fee; 
Kt’ om fe; GMyé 

79.* Omitted in Pu'. Cited by Dev 2.449;Madh 1.397;padas a-b cited by Vij 1.119; Madh 
1.308 — a) Pu! “yet; nNg atfserer — b) Pud Pu? aftraer”; Ke? sOx! sPuo mTr* “ft; Be! 
Be? Bo wKt? sKt’ Lo! *Md? NNg oOr Pu? Put Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Pu! Tj? Na @etfat:; Ho Jm Jo! 
wKt! nKt La! Lot oMd> Ox? Tr! mT'r5 mTr6 Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “#ftf&ar:; cMy 
“astfeer:; Tj! Tr? aa: — c) Tj! afta’; Lot cMy amsftfaart; pul? ereriegq; wKe aateg; ake 
oOr eteg — d) Pu! asrftr, Madh ST: cMyt: 

80. Omitted in nPu! mTr5; pada-b from { until the end of pada-c omitted in Tj! — a) 
Ho sOx! sPuo “vara fe fawer — b) Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo? Lot sOx! sPu® Pul? Tr? mT Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 4; Ho 7; wKt Bet; nNg UT; Lot eet — c) wKt! arate; cMd ! 
tMd? Pu’ “apie; Tr! Pud “ant d) wKe fafarer fe; Md‘ Pfeterg 

81. Omitted in Pu’; verses 81 and 82 transposed in Wa. Cited by Dev 2.469 — a) Be! 
Bo oMd GMy Ox? mTr3 anrsttereg, BKtS tMd? amsfiaeg; Md? aisftarer ait” — b) BKtS La! 
aver: — d) Tr? sre"; GMy “ARTE 

82. Omitted in Put; pada-b omitted in Pu!®; padas b-d ma Lo! [haplo]. Cited by Vij 
3-353 Dev2.470 — a) Vij Farstae; Be! “gusficeg; Bo cMd$ “afastideg; Tr “afastiaeg; 
Hy “sArereg =~ b) Md! agar: — c) wKt? Pud Pu? Bf; wKt? GMd! TMd* GMy NNg Dev 

“VeraT; pBe? “weroTeNTET — d) Bo nKtt Lo! Lo* GMd* oOr Pu? Pul® Tr! mTr4 MTromTr® 

a sfageasifaert [mT sftferat]; Tj! aradzasttfaerr. Jo? Lo? MBSTaT; Ox? “Sepr; Pul afer; 
1M Steet 

83. Omitted in BK nPu! MTr°. Cited by Apa 936; Dev2.470; Madh 1.426 — a) rMd* 
Madh Tear gq, cMd> “gear fF; La! “gate; rMd3 Cas FR; wKe! Tr? “gearersftaeg; Tr! 
*qentistteer — b) Jo! om aT — c) oOr fearhet; Te feahrorat; Lo! ara aT; nNg “wT 
yee — d) Be! pitta, cMy Tar 








Chapter 10 827 


yt yaaa ear erste cel 
Sq g afadeena aprat atagqurea | 
facovagagarare fart fraater call 
aay warmed Fart w fas: aE | 
THAN Ha Ae wat T A AAA: NCE 
ad T atead Uh Tatar TT | 
afr aegqeemit wees autre: cll 
amy: ser fae are art weter ada: 
afte ete afr ga der ay We Bary iiccil 
areata aerate afro aaife a | 
ag tet a orett a watategrnierar ck 


84. Omitted in nPu! Pu’. Cited by Apa 936; Dev 2.470; Madh 1.426 — a) Ox? Pu? Put 
Pu’ Go #ft:, aK HAT; wBKt> Pu? Tj! Wa aretfer; Lo! aredt wera cor to aT TART — b) 
Bo at; Tr eafgaféar; oOr argatéar:; cMd! tMd3 Tr? MTP? MTr® aeatfea— c) Pul? om 
yf; Bo “santa — d) Tr! mT Hees 

Additional verse in Be! tMd‘: 

aay Teas ATE SAAT | 
Uprenteater Sear Basta: | 
b) tMd4 Heeraehteargant 

85. Omitted in Pu!. Cited by Laks 2.199 — a) 0Or $4; Lo? 3¢ Frater ; oOr Tr? qe ; 
nKt! GMd! 1Md3 1Md4 NNg MTr4MTr5 MTr® Wafer ; Laks ©"; Pu? Put “aaqvare¢ — b) sOx! 
sPuo eset, TMd4 Pu3 Sista; Pul? Tr! caste; wKe} orci}, mT r4 mTr® ferry; Pul? “Agu — 
c) Pu? famet 3 gcihare; Lo? facorer. La! Lo! fava’: put faqur [rest om], Lo! cMy 
“HEAT ; Pul? “ahaeor — d) TMd?4 sOx! Pul? fafa; cMy Pu? faara; Lal fara; Lo? Tj! faster 

86. Omitted in Pu'; padas a-b omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Har-A 1.20.12; Laks 2.199 — a) 

u2 TAA; sOx! sPuo “died; aK “Teg — b) Laks FT — c) Be! Lot HVAT; +Md4 HaAT 
— d) Ox? f 4; Bo AYT:; BBe? Laks AMAT: 

87. Omitted in Pul. Cited by Vij3.36-8; Har-A 1.20.12 — a) BK AF; Pu2 J; Bo 7H; 
1Md‘ ae — b) Bo 2 ; Ho Put Tj! aor; Md! art; Hy aT; BK Lot Pul® mT rs ettarfsr- 
aft — c) BKtS Lo! aft 7 ye ; Hy Teac; Pus Pu? “earfer — d) Tj! “Ae; La! Pu? Put 

“aS: Pu? Put aitaeft: La! aniter 

88. Omitted in Pu!. Cited by Har-A 1.20.12; padas c-d cited by Vij3.36-8; Dev 2.479 
— a) Hy Lo! Pu? Put aim:; Md? artes; Put far — b) TMd4 oOr AIA; GMy WHT; Wa aT; wKe} 
‘Tj! wearer; sBe? Wet adar:; Waada: — c) N@ Sle and as patha ett; Pu‘ efteetg; Pul? 
aftons,; Tr! ee afte aftr, Ke? ete; cMd5 GMy MTP MTP [Jolly Nd] are afer; Hy Tr! 3a; 
BktS gt — c-d) oMd! afte ane aff ay yc Belew Hart — d) ake Goassrparsyy; Pu3 
Tr Hos FS; Pu’ Pu’ Tr! Wet; mTr Yo; Md? TS 

89. Cited by Har-A 1.20.12; padas a-b cited by Vij3.36-8; Apa 931 — a)BCa La! cMd! 
Tj! Tr! srevaier — b) Be! at — c)aMd 5 Has; [Jolly Nd] Asat Att; Hy AHS; Bo nKt! BKE 


828 Chapter 10 


RAY HAT T aaa Halas: 
fatia fergary raktrreerarz ugotl 
WAAASSATETAE ATTEHET Fas: | 
genia: atasrar frat: ae Aootter US 2H 
a: Tale AeA HTAAT TaTT T | 

waST Yat wate gern: attefawarr |S 2M 
gaat F waar fawafes waa: 

TAIT: STAT Aaa Feeresfa* 33M 


TtMd? tMdé GMd> sOx! Ox? Tj! Tro ates; Te ater; Tr! fees; La! Pud Pu’ om first 7, Md} 
coMd Tr! mTr° aret; La! Lo! oOr sOx! @retaz; Lo* ore — d) Hy waraia ; Ho Jo Lo? Lo} 
cMd! +Md? Md? sOx! PuS sPuS Pu? Tj! mTr° Volly G RJWaAe ; sBe? sate ; GMy aat- 
2m; Bo arat Tar; Kt wKe “arprecar; cMd! Tr‘ mTr® Bh [patha] Me [patha] “arnrraga; 
tMd? GMd GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] Har-A’ HTL 
Additional verse in Be! BCacMd! tMd‘ GMy oOr Tr! mTr* MTr® Yolly Gr Nd] Mandlik 
[#] KSS Dave; cited by Laks 2.199: 
ager car ate aorenfy a adr: | 
Tort ware aarerary waary | 
a) Be! “att;eCa ‘aft; cMy te aT Be FT; Laks SE; Tr! Ste — b) TM} tare 
aa ader: — c) cMy warty @ aareftf; Tr! [Jolly Gr Nd] Taras; Be! curenr 
— d) Be! wenght @ asia; oOr ahr asta 
go* Cited by Vij 3.39, Apa 933; Har-A 1.20.13; Dev 2.480;Madh 1.431 — a) Td 
armgend; Lolly M**] serqere; Pul? eragedyaa;, Te Fea; Jo! Par:; Lo! PT cor to 
@Or; Bo Jm sKkt> La! Lo? GMd! nNg oOr Pu’ Pu’ Pu® Pu!® Tj! Tj? mTr? Apa Har-A Dev 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave PAT, Be! sOx' nPu! sPuo Prareq; Wa Pe; Ho GMdd Vij Par, 
Kt? Madh Nd Par; TMd3 Tard; BK) TF — c) Lo! fasitorfer;oOr nPu! Tr! fasstefte; La! 
Pu’ fastefrard; Ox? frorsaty — d) Tr eatafeferary; Ho rataty’: nKe watatafe’; 
Lo? aifraferar; cMd! “Rrafeerar; Pu? Put Prefer 
g1. Omitted in Pu!? Volly M*°]. Cited by Vij 3.39, A4pag33; Dev 2. 480; Madh 1. 431-2 
2a20) nKt' oMd! mTroqearafeseg a: [mTro Seq se]; Hy Wa TARIH ; NNg TRINH; ; 
Lo? ° feared — c) BKtS tMd3 GMy Tt [Jolly Nd] pings facerat; Tr? wh; NNg Apa 
feoftr’ ; Hy wKt! pH tMd3 fase’. Be! BK nPu! pfra:; nKtt pric, Ho Jo? Lo’ tMd?* 
GMd oOr sOx! sPu® Tj! [Jolly R] Vij Dev Madh ftrfcat [Lo oMd 5 Tj! fA]; Be! sBBe 
wKt! nNg oOrsOx! sPu® [Jolly M4 sh] Dev Madh & fatarat; [Jolly M>|eafacerat — c-d) 
oMd! pftrycer akg aay fe Hofer — d) Lal tere Sah: az; Lo! gear 
92. Omitted in Pu! [Jolly M®°]. Cited by Vij3.40; Apa 934, 1046; Dev 2.480;Madh 
1.422 — a) La! mTr® ofr; Be! asia; BK Araya — b) Bo La! cMd! mTr° orate; 1Md* 
ore, aBBe areray; Tr? aT -— c) Md? BT; Lo! Pw Pu’ [Jolly G] gat — d) [Jolly Gr] az; 
Tr? wafaw ; GMd! GMd’ oMy Tr! mT rt mr mT r®° fasret; rMd3 “fame 
93* Omitted i in Pu!® [Jolly M *°]. Cited by Vij 3.40; Apa 934; Dev 2.480 — a) TMd4 
oMy Vij Apa Dev [vl] SaeaTTTEMAT; Lot T; wNg Tr! Wa TATMAT; Tj! FarMt — d) Bo GMy 
azarae, cMd! Vij T T=; BBE Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo*wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt BKtS La! 


Chapter 10 829 


Tar waa Tar wat wa: 

FATA ATHFatat feast aera ARIAT: UVeil 

ofaaeat uaer: atorercet ra: | 

a aa sed afar afehrg usa 
\ 


at antert ate sitagepeeathy: 
ot Urat Prete peat arate wart USI 


at creat fayrt + oreer: cagftoa: 
cert safes oer: wafer sifaa: uo 
aeciarenin qeqeht adag | 
varaararaihr Prada a akRATT UCI 


Lo! Lo? Lo? sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu4 Pub sPu® Pu? Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa Dev Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave Prrvafe; Be! Apa wreath 

94. Omitted in Pul® [Jolly M®°]; padas c-d omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Vij 3.39; Apa 
932-3; Dev 2.481;Har-A 1.20.15; Mddh 1.431 — a) Pud Pu’ wefan, MT v9 CaSaTceaT; 
Tr iintaer; Bo “AFA; La! “Hteear; Be! Apa “UTA; BBE “TET: tMd4 “aeT — b) 
cMd! & da, La! + 3a; wKkt! + & Barr; aK aeoatr; Tj? ta; nKt La! cMd! GMd@ aMy 
Tr! mTr4 mTromTr® [Jolly Nd Gr] Me [patha] Bh fae: — c) Jo? Lo Tj! paTaaear 
27; Ho wKt! nK¢ nPu! sOx! sPu Tj? [see GDh 7.21] area Be! Lo! Lo? Lo! [cor to] MTr3 
[Jolly M Nd] Jha F PAA [Jo? om A]; wKt! + Part — d) Be! Bo nKt* Lo! mTr fas; 
oMd! fear; mT eA NK Tea; GMd! AeaATT 

95. Padas a-b omitted in Pu? Pu’. Cited by Apa 934; Dev 2.473-—~ a) TMd? sfteteeea; 
oOr tset — b) Lal ager eer Tet:;cMd! tMd4 Ox? Tj! Apa [vl] aaa; Pul? “ort; Tr! 
“orert: Lo? BBe? “card: sOx! sPu® Pu!? Tat: — c) BBe GMd> Aa; Ox? AAT; BK th Pud Pu? 
saad — d) Be! ft aTAY; wPul Put “agate 

96. Omitted in Pu!'®; padas c-d omitted in BBe?; the following sequence of verses in 
[Jolly M'*-8]96, 105-109, 114, 97-104, 115. Cited by Apa 822, 865; Laks 12.565 — a) La! 
Md? a; wk GrTaeray, GMy @raTeeray; GMd! GMd° nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ Tr! [Jolly G] Hetew- 
HY, Apa 822 [vl] SHreaat, Lo! araraaat— b) wKt! sftagr Guresif: — c) tMd* oOr Pret 
— d) cMd! Pu? Put Tj! Apa 822 fara, tM! vera 

97.* Omitted in BBe? Pu!® [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Vij 3.41; Apa 935; Dev 2.466, 475 — a) 
Md} oe: ererat Frygor:; Md‘ Stareeaeratfeyr:, GMy at; cMd! tMd4 GMa? Tr! MTr4 [Jolly 
Gr] Farereay, GMd Tr! feyer:; wKe4 fAPST — b) BKtS GMd! TMd3 1Md4 GMd> NNg Ox? Pe 
Pu’ Tr! Te Trt Wa teenies [Tr “Ate” ]; [Jolly M]Jolly Jha Dave TEIATeaTT- 
feeatd; cMy Terateagiteart, Lot ma 7; mTr} avet:; La! afaftect: — c) Md4 Vij TEA 
feo:; wKt! sffeeq; Be! sfta-a:; GMy sffaer: — d) Tj! mr afer 

98. Omitted in Pu!®; padas a-b omitted in pBe*. Cited by Apa 934; Dev 2.473 — a) 
Mir? oftaeers NKe °sftercer”: Pu? “ateefor; oOr “Ragaa — b) cMd! ada; Bo oMé aviaet 
— ¢) Tro aararerereratftr; BK tS GMd! GMy Tr! sararafer araifir [cMy Hatter]; Bo Md} 
sara 7 Haier, sOx' aararer wraifer; Be! GMd> Pud Pu? sara’ — d) rMd? + ada; 
nKt4 ace [om fr]; wkt! La! fradaa; cMy Praefaa; cMd! “aa Waad:; Be! aarfeeart 


830 Chapter 10 


wry PN YE: sg ferry | 
Gaarerey oat sfteereseahr: uss 

a: wif: sate: gered feoraz: 

attr srennatter Breas fafeenfr az uooll 


aaafrraneey start: et ahr fer: 
sraferafire: deer af gare 20 2h 
ade: wets aerate: | 

afar gerdtatag etat araqaad 2021 
areata wearer swfaverd | 

art wate fear saeargaar fF 7 Uo 
areas atsaaker seared: 
arama ast TT sao fcr WLowil 


anitrd: gat sqqarade gyfer: 


99. Omitted in Pul®, Cited by 4pa162; Mddh 1.423 — a) oOr Pu Tr? sarerqeey; NP ul 
argpyaer — b) Lo? Tj! BAPE; Bo “TAT: — c) TMd4 “RAF; Lot [Jolly M] Apa aT TA — 
d) NK iMd3 sfacsreathy:; ake sfaer: wreanift:; aBe sider areahr:; Bo argH ; 
nKtt aaTearAT:; Ho HART; Ox? “afer 

100. Omitted in Pul. Cited by Vij 3.35; Dev 2.456,474; Madh 1.423 — a) La! wafreq 
afecd:; aCa cGMd! 1Md3 GMd> GMy oOr Tj! Tr! [Jolly R Gr] Madh Fae: Lo? qefact: — b) 
sOx! sPuo Tj! Gage — c) TMd4 arepenaT for 

101.* Omitted in Pul®; padas a-b omitted in Pu*. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.464 — a) nPu! 
Pu? “afer anf ; ake ght carafer ; oMd’ “fers, Md? “feats — b) rMd4 arererarafr; Ho 
BKtS sOx! sPuS Pu’ Apa Sa; Lo! Ft — c) La! aah; Apa Efe ; Be! pBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? wKt} BK La! oOr Ox? Tj? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ®FTea:, MTS aay — d) 
cMd! tMd3 Ox? nPu! Pud Tr! “fad; wKt! “fearerateaar ; Be! eet; Ox? ware 

102, Omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.464; Madh 2.326; padas a-b cited by Dev 
2.457 — a) Apa aayerae — b) Bo waTmecatafted:; Tj? sepaeaas; mTr4 mTr° sTeT- 
TTAe; Be arerrecatad; nPu! sett: KaTTe;, Lo? Md! Tj! ararmrecaay; Tr! Tamer — 
c) Md* Sfexr; cMd! gaaetae; Pus Sadtetag: Tr? sada Sag; aBe “atta — d) wKt! 
ata: afecae 

103. Omitted in Pul°mTr°. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.464; Madh 2.326 — d) Md‘ GIo- 
argaaitec:; Be! Bo Jo? wKt! wKt} La! Lo? Md? Ox? Pu? Pu Put Pud Pu’ Tj! Tr? [Jolly GR 
Nd] Rn Re St@ATaAT, Hy SAGATSAAT; OOr Tj? TAT; GMy “AAT fF a: 

104.* Omitted in Pul® Wa. Cited by Apa 935; Har-A 1.213; Madh 2.326 — a)cMd! 
Sradierr : Md sfaarara: mT Afters — b) Me Jha Dave TART: — c) GMy STHRT 
ga — d) oMd! & ater + ferad; Apa t TT & fea: aCa ag WAT 7 fecaa; Tj! om F; all 
NT mss. and all editions read 7 & Woe fecad; nPul wafafecrey 


Chapter 10 831 


T atferra srry orchtararacy WL oull 
WARS Ma sy caterer: | 
mat uftemt araat a ferary Neo 


wat: garded agar srr aa | 

agit: stare qaeaent* AETaaT: UZ oil 
qucarranns fear: aaraathy | 
WeTeertaat saree: wot 
wanerarmaat aarearrarahe | 

wfane: serat: Ter farmer aia: Uo 


105* Omitted in Pu!®; padas a-b ma in Lot; padas c-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 935; 
Dev 2.465; Madh 2.326 — a)aMy anferrfa:; Tr! amsftrg:; wMd4 arsftre — b) Be! ‘Tanta; 
wKt} Pus Pu? Pu’ “are; nKt “gaeie; oMd! gata; Lo! anTesq; nPul “orfatea; Tr! 
“frat: — c) nPul arfesarer; cMy Tr? arfescafer; Lo! [but cor] TMd3 GMd? oOr atferaer; rMd4 
artat, Be! sBe? Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? BKt? Lo! Lo? Lo! nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu’ Tj? mTr? Wa Volly M] Go Ku Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 144 — d) Ox? aad; wKt! 

Wa goxfaeprear ; Ho wKt} BK tS Ox? Pu? Pu Tr? “ater 

106 Omitted in Put Lolly M°]. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.465; Madh 2.326 — a) Lal! 
Lo? Md nPu! erate; wKt! gaia mTr “ara; Be! Tj! “areata; Bo “aratg; Lo? “srt — 
b) Hy °farareor: — c) GMd! +Md3 GMd) oMy Tr! stort zarorrata; 1Md4 srorraafeeerret 

107* Omitted in [Jolly M°}. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.465; Madh 2.326 — a) Bo Hy 
wKt! La! Lo? Ox? Pud Pu? Tr! mT Apa AREIT:; Bo BCa Ho La! tMd* sOx! sPuo MTr* wT 
mTr® qarePer, Ox earathT; Apa ed ey— b) GMd! GMd5 oOr Tr! Fast; tM? GMy FAST; 
Md? sftat — c) My Pu! afear:; Pu3 “safe — d) Pu’ Pu? qq BCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo* wKt! 
Kt? nKt* Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* tMd4 NNg Pu‘ sPu® Pu® Tj? Tr? Wa Volly M34 Ku R] Rn Mr 
Mandlik KSS Jha Dave garnet ; BKt? La! GMd! GMy Pu? Pu? Tr! mTr¢mTr mTr® [Jolly N Nd] 
Na Re yeu ; Ox? Wa gen Tr? gear ; nPu! qed ; Be! qya ; BBe? [Volly M!?4] aed 
sOx! Fared ; wKe gy ; Bo Fart ; Dev FAA; oOr Fear; Tj! getetest; Apafargdt- 
eT, Madh Feast, cMd> aera; Pul? guar, Ho qaeceivter ; tMd yeawrter Hy La! 
NNg Ox? Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Tj? Tr? Go Mr ‘eorter cMd! Tr! Heear:; Pu? Ferearr:; nKt* BKt? Lo? 
tMd‘ nNg Ox? Pw Pu? Pul? mTr* mTr° GoFeTaat:; Tr? Apa Feta: 

108, Omitted in [Jolly M°}. Cited by Apa 935; Dev 2.465; Ma@dh 2.326 — a) Tj! Tr! 
“sagt; wKt! “ATGACTETS; NNg “SITE — b) sOx! sPuo rater atgat; iM} fear 
ofa; Pud Pul asa, wKt! astro; Tr! “sR Kt? “srertt; sKiS nPul “sired — c) Bo Ho 
La! Lo! Ox? avers — d) La! mT ré Tro faerahe AeTaaT: 

After @ST@eei TMd* jumps to 11.190 and gives the omitted verses after 12.24; probably 
the exemplar the scribe was using had folios misplaced. 

109. Omitted in [Jolly M?]; padas a-b omitted in Pu? Pu’. Cited by Apa 9353, Dev2.476 
——a)cMd! “aeTsareatet; HonKtt nNg sOx! Pu? sPu® Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr “MT ré Wa waTeq — 
b) T™Md3 GMdS aeareaaaralhe; Apa TAT area cMy *earaarefy — c) uTr® “ae; Bo TTA; 
Apa [vl] sfetat: — d) Lo? Tj! wer Ae a afea:; Devt X fave; La! afear: 


832 Chapter 10 
anrarearaet fer eat GepaTTATT | 
siamese rat RRA: M2 Poll 
WEAVAAT IAAT: FAT | 
weer g canst aada a U2 2 
Rretsenanredte fantssftasracaa: 
wemetkon: Faas ass: WET W222 
defs: garters ar qfrtae: | 
Qa; Teeaaaaneacecanrmaetsy WP 23N 
wed T Parag whonsAgt T | 
fewest orenrt a ad wdaatrad 12 eel 
an feanrar eat saat ort: wat a: 
want: edanrey wafeas wa wT NLU 


110. Omitted in [Jolly M?]; padas b-d omitted in nKt*. Cited by Apa 936; Dev 2.476 — 
a) Bo nKt' “earaafted; Tr? Pret — b) Lo! He sfrarerat: Be! sBe? Ho Hy sKtS La! cMd! 
1Md?} GMy wNg sOx! Pu? Pud sPu [but me sh] Pul Tr? Raa; wKe Lo! Te “araT — c) BKe 
“seer, tMd3 “Weg; oMd! “aeer; mT ro AS c-d) La! weer ager fracas: — 
d) Bo sCa Ho Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo! Lo? Lot Md? cGMd> sOx! Ox? sPu° Jj Tj? Tr? mTr3 mTr5 
[Jolly Ku] Apa Me. Go Ku Na@ Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TETAS ; Ho BKth Pul® T? 
“ara; Jo! Kt? ereTtt:; Pu2 STATAT 

111. Omitted in [Jolly M°]; padas a-b omitted innKt* and padas c-d in Wa. Cited by Vij 
3.35; Apa 936; Dev 2.476; Madh 1.183-4 — a) wKt! La! cGMd! td? Ox? Pu!® Tj! Tj? “aa 
GAT; sOx! sPus “Hao, Ho “AAW: NPul “AT — b) wKt GTIATEAT ; Ho sOx! sPu 
“ett; Bo “at:; Apa “eaTaTepa —¢)oMy ‘fifirat car; aktS nPul Tj? 7 — d) Pul? 
aqad; sBe? Hy Jo? wKt! La! Lo? Ox? Pu? Put Pu’ Tj! Vij J; oOr Tr? aT; Pud Pu’ fe; Md? ay 

112. Omitted in [Jolly M°]; padas a-b omitted in Wa and padas c-d in oOr — a) TMd? 
fast’; Pud Pu? “seuredtarf — b) 1Md? oMd3 Pud Pu? Tr! “sftafereretct: — c) cMd! “aeT- 
afre:; Tr nke “werafe:, Md? “gered Seeadt; La! “wePossrarad: Tr “Red; cMd! 
oMy Pu? Tj! Satay; Te Satara — d) Te? “ass; Ma? GPS: 

113. Omitted in oOr [Jolly M°] — a) Kt? aftefe:; Lo? drafg:; Tr! sfrag:; Put gates” 
—— b) TMd3 GMy “feaier; tMd3 aver ahr — c) sOx! arear; wKt! arsa:; GMa MTP? area: 
Lo! ase: — d) Jo? Lo Tj! ° tefeeqecant s *Md? “Oefrereat’; cMd! “Wefteteart’; tM! 
fies 

114. Omitted in GMy oOr [Jolly M°]. Cited by Dev 2.477 — a) La! Get T Ha AA; Jo? 
Lo? Tj! q;aMd ! ateper 7; BK te TMd3 tMd4 GM? Tr! Hat BT — b) La! tMd4 nPu! Dev 
a: BKt “afenata; pCa wKt! BK Lo! Pu’ at — c) Ho sOx! sPuo arerast feeer TW; La! 
Md! 1Md# fever, Ox? “Hai — d) Hy Lot Tj! gagda’; rMas TS: GT; Pul gs gaa’; 
tMd4 ot FT ead; Lo} Tj! GF aaaaq, Be! Ox? Tj?” ArH; Md! cMé Tr! “@qaz; Pus 
a 


115. Omitted in [Jolly M?]; padas c-d omitted in TMd‘. Cited by Vij 2.114 [intro.]; Hem 


Chapter 10 833 


fear Bret afer: dar areer faafer: eft: 
aferstet pelts a agar sflaataa: 1221 
wart: aBrar aft ate Aa ward | 
art gag wart qarearftaasferarz 2 Quit 
weerraarasty erat arrarate | 


iu aloo eal RASS, 
ware fasaedet 7 wT : 


mer dary tre T ULLRN 
greased fast gee Rar arataoracy | 
BATH: Zar: Bea: RrfeTtETAT ULoll 


1.41, 3/1.525; Dev 2.450; Madh 1.309, 3.330— a) Bo featsat; Lo! fearrreray, wKt} rMd4 
Ox? wat — b) Lo? Ga, 7 Md3 ST; MTrSoret; Jm SMT: MTr4 mT ro feat; Kt? TAT — c) La! 
grarr:; Pu? adapra; oOr erate; Kt? “are — d) wT OTe 

116. Cited by Vij 3.42; Apa 936;Laks 2.222; Dev 2.475— a) cMy feat; Tj! we:; Pu! 
gfer:; cMd! yferecta — b) Hy Lo? Tj? Apa AZ; La! nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? MTr3 Lakstiteet; Md? 
[but cor] TREAT; BKt> Vij Wer; rMd4 ARV; wKet! Feet; Md! Pu? faser:; Pu’ faster — c) 
Ho Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu’ Pu’ Wa gfertfedt; Pu? gfafiter, Tr? afefitenr, rMd4 Vij Apa farfester; 
TM mT Bferstet; BBe? wKt! Kt? nNg Bate; ako weterr — d) mT} sftfeaeaa: 

17. Cited by Dev 2.472 — b) MTr* mTr° ate; Tj? ate a yar, Ox? Sarr atta — c) 
Pu! om @; Lo} Md4 Tj! t; cMy watate — d) Tr! “draafrat; rMd4 “dtrenfereni, ul? 
*feqar:; Jo? NK BK La! oOr Ox? nPul [Jolly GN] feva; wKe ferert; Be! sOx! sPuo 
“erat; Bo Ho NNg Pu? Tr? “oar 

118. Omitted in MTr?. Cited by Laks 11.89 — a) Pu Pu’ Laks “art fF — a-b) Tr? art 
agaarcarnift arravafe — b) wKt! etfs; Md? afar; sOx! sPuo apraefer, Lal aprreaty — 
c) wKt! offers: aat:; Jo? BK cMd! Pu!l? wait; GMd! werae; La! werae:; oMd 5 were 
FAT; oOr TARTaTareaT — d) La! Pefeaorer sapere; Md} Pefeaarafe’; Put feefeaat afer; 
+Md?* “areata 

119.* Cited by Laks 11.89 — a) Be! Ox? aut; GMd! eaerat, Pul? aera; Laks fasrd cer 
— b) Pu? ays; BK T AT; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} BK La! Lo® Lo? [me to] Pul® 
Tj! Tj? Te MTr? MTr*mTr® [Jolly M R] Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave =e, oMd! qT Ba; VVolly 
Nd] 4a; 1Md? Wa; GMd> Wad; tMd? AaeT TAT; sOx! sPus Tere ; Tr! “Ug — c) GMy 
ae; Md3 Be, BK der; Tr? S227; Lo! rearreia; Md! oo wT — d) Bo cMy Tr 
gata’. KS eater, GMd! GMd) PuS Pu’ Pu!? afar; Bo BKtS Lo! TMd? sOx! “aTeee; Pu2 
Put “agfes:; oMy aed 

120. a) Ho T24; oOr F; Tj! “eas. wKt far; rMd4 fat; Lo! Be — b) Tr! fesrepra- 
opaTat, aMy falar; Pu!® faar:; sBe? BK La! rMd3 TMd* GMd Pud Pu’ [Jolly N Nd] faar- 
wrt ; Te Na [patha] Prereprat; GMd! Frateput’; Lal aria’; tMd3 Hato; aBKtS Md? 
+Md! Ox? “Gtr ae; Jo? “astaz; Lo} Tj! “quay; [Jolly Nd] ‘Gora; Pud got ae; Jo? “Ger ay; 
Lo? “sorere; Pu’ “quest — c) wKt! eats; Lot “gerfter:; Pul? “ganftorr T War:; cMd “zu 
SE; NKt ras; sOx! sPus “erga — d) wKt! GMd! 1Md3 oMd® GMy Pu? Put Tr! 


834 Chapter 10 


TRY Toray waaay | 

afer areqarerer Ser qyat Froftfarrg e221 
eran at forma a: 

AAA ATT AT TT FAPATAT URI 
faraaa gare fare at ater | 
aaah Ber Acar reHerT WAM 
Rea ax adhe: maerareaaea: | 

Mie WaT ser T yea wT AST ULV 
sReead aeaer sfintfr aaah a | 
Joraae aearat sftotaa aitesar: neil 


ferferr: BreaeTeT; Jo? Lo? HIeaT:; Tj! Brest 

121.* Omitted in oMy Volly Nd]. Cited by Apa 161; Laks 2.266; Madh 1.421 — a) Pub 
Pu? a27; La! aRerae Jo? afremaTeTET; Tra |TFT; Ho “arg —~ b) Tr? SATAY ; 
Lo! ara; La! “sree; GMd! Tr! Lolly Gr] Nd “eteft; Lot wMd3 Pu"? [Jolly M!2-5- 
§-9) Jolly afer, Kt! tMdé mTrémTr® Fert: — c) Pu? Put aftay; Apa ary; Tr? ore, 
Jo? “oTeeT, GMd5 “ater — d) Be! zat; Ho 37; wKt La! 35; cMd! a; HonKté La! sOx! 
nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPu® [Jolly M] Apa Jolly farsitfag:; +Md‘ fersfifera:; Me Go Ku support the 
active verb. 

122. Omitted in GMy [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Apa 161; Laks 2.266; Ma@dh1.421 — a) cMd! 
“saad; Laks F— b) Tr? Apa wert 7 Perera; nKt? La! cMd! tMd3 tMd4 GM Tr! mTr4 
MTr® Laks Tea aa [NK trast; La! asad]; mT rv? svar ares; Na [patha] 
famrenftaraat — c) aMd* sitet; mTr* MT rs aT aTel ; Apa © ae 5 NNg STCaTeTTeT 
[om Bea]; tMd3 GMd5 “SPIE, Pu’ “aeae4; Bo Laks “areat (8; Madh “areg. eaTeaT — d) 
Pu? &; Bo aeaey; Lal areater; 1Md‘ aed HT 

123, Padas c-d omitted in Pu4 mTr?. Cited by Apa 161; Laky 2.266; Mddh 1.421;padas 
a-b cited by Vij 1.120; Dev 2.455— a) sKt “aader; Bo “at T— b) Jo? Lo? Tj Sas wy; 
pBe? a4; Tr? Tat; BBe wKt Head; nPul wT — c) cMdd Fact; rMd4 adcrahex, Pul? 
gerd? fe. PuS Pu? werahs; oOr waeaarake, Lo? Tj! “ae aed; cMd! “aifgeed — d) Be! 
TKI; BBe* Lo! oOr KASS, wKt3 TKATET; Ho sOx! nPu! Pu? sPuo Apa TKATET 

124. Cited by Apa 161; Laks 2.267; Madh 1.420— a) Ox? Weeat; sOx! Pu? sPuo Pu’ 
TCT; Ho Pu? HAH; GMy Apa WH TATET; nPul wepercter; Laks TateraTey; wKt! 
are; Ho BKY sOx! sPuS Madh wet & oes Tr! agft — b) cMd> aes ; nKt auE ; GMy 

“SRI: - Md *arat mérafe:; oOr “cereafec: - Kt “atect:; Pul? “arfe:; Ho sOx! Ox? 
sPuS nfaftr c) Tj? aaa; Lo! ardez; Wa Teaez; Jo? nKt* La! Lo? Lo! Pu!? Tj! ater; Bo 
BKt} La! Pu! get; Ho atet; Lo! eter [om 4]; GMd! Md} GMd> GMy Tr! MTré mT ro afer Fy; 
™ dé Aa T— d) BBe? Thtys:; Wa TAT: [cf. 125d]; nNg Tease 

125. Verses 125 and 126 transposed in Wa. Cited by Apa 162; Laks 2.266; Dev 2.456; 
Madh 1.420 — a) Pu? Put Seecerst 7 araet; wKkt! sfescenft arctet — c) Lo! gorateta; 
Md? gaat; nKt! Lo! GMd! GMy Ox? Tj! mTr§ Jaeras; Ho ForraAs; sOx! sPuo Tors: 


Chapter 10 835 
a ae wae Sr a deers | 
areata esha a eaterftrterry ue 2k 
ered iat: gat aeragftean: 
Aras T Fear waa Hyatt T ULM 
wat war fe agaarwaearagqay: | 
aa AIT A aT Hts wMeatateaa: UPil 
aay fe yao a erat wea: | 
at fF aaararsr Hear array 12S 
ue agat antararcaat: watfetar: | 
Teena Tater WAT MT UP Roll 
wy afar: geetargieter aia: | 
Hat: we Tae sraarafaer serT es 2h 


ta, Pu? Put gareerata — d) cMd! sftthta; rMd3 sfef Aa; ake sfortareata; Bo Tfewe:; oOr 
qr 

126. Cited by Sam on VeS 1.3.36 — a) BBe? ST; oOr Teta: — b) cMd? fasFerarft — c) 
kt eat areafererafea; nk 4 arearfeert eft; sBe? Bo rMd? GMd5 nPu! Tj! eather; 
1Md4 om eatfet; Wa om fet — d) La! rMd? oMd? Tr! arerat ; GMd! +Md? etufa; oOr eat- 
afearet 

127.* Padas b-d omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Laks 2.271 — a) La! TARTS: ; oMd! 
avegeg + afer:; Tr! atzaeg; wKt! Pu2 Put “caer; Bo ear:; Lot aia: — b) Be? Jo? 
wKt} La! Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd? TMd4 GMd> GMy nPu! Tj! Tr.mTr qraay Pu? grag pCa 
wKt! aK Lot NNg Ox? Pu! Tr? [Jolly M] Laks Me Rn Jha Dave T4434; oOr wAAaferar: — 
c) cMd! GMd “ast; Tr! “asars: oMd! guafa; cMd’ gery — d) oOr vataTagater fe; mTr® 
Water wT cMy “afer & 

128. Omitted in Lo‘; pada-a omitted in Put — a) Jo! war f€ aur; ake war fe war 
tMd? war ware; GMd! &; cGMd5 GMy Tr! agfear ; Tr? seer — b) BBe? “Teraaay ; wCa 
La! Tj! Ce CUC on Lo! “Ear; coMd! mTr4 “aaa: — c) cMd! aaat; nKt aaa; Tr! aeh7; Ho 
La! Md oOr TH; Tj! om ary — d) oOr Stew: wintfer face; Be! way, cMd! Gren ; 
BktS “are Ho fafear; Hy nNg Pu? Pu3 fafeacd: cMdS rae: 

129, a) Pu! atftpT; Pul? om f; GMd! &; rMd* 4; Kt [but cor] cMd! 3ReT — b) Lot 
Pu? Pu? Pu! Pud Pu’ [cor to] Tr? Wa aay: — d) nKtt Fal; mT r4 aera; + Md? aera; 
Ho “orreraTerey; Ox? aaa; Te were 

130. In wKt folio missing containing 10.13b to 11.19¢ — a) mTr® TgUrary aura ; Py! 
[Jolly M] 4; sOx! sPus weeagqat. skKt> rateray — b) cMd! autarta gat: —c) Tr? d wer: 
+Md? at aT: MT rt MTP arertay — d) Ox? [but cor] Pu? Tr? ards Tet ait 

131. a) Lo Ud; BBe Md? Hea — b) sBe? Ho Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? “geen; Lot [Jolly 
M45] “qaut yaiifeer:; Pu Pul® Tr? [Jolly M289] “qdwek: gabtfer: [M8 °fear:]; tMd! 
“gaara; Lal “qdttadtarg:. Tr! tea: — c) wKt! Pub Te arr wee [Pus Tr? ar]; 
BK yaerfir — d) nPul orePare; La! “fate ay 


836 Chapter 10 
ster aaa eget Hat ateara4r 
SaaS ATT: 


Colophon: Lo! 1Md3 nNg sOx! Ox? sPu® afer Atte; Lo? sfer sfarrata; Be! sKt> Lo! 
Lo? GMd! 1Md? GMy NNg Tr! MTrSom Sayprerar Sfecrat; wKket! aragat ATT eSraT; oOr 
auteepet ATT @aray; nNg Aaa eer Feral; Pud Pu’ wfasragetasrdg hays ATT 
Saray; Tj! UTS AT eer 


areat f& Rordreat Sent erefBrore | 
gave ateahe Hart Fae UI 
aaaift wat g wae swfeaaad | 
Materia azaret ta aferrnyq el 
Fraismrarry Aiferear atsRrreaker | 


1.* Cited by Apa 77, 263, 294; Hem 1.30, 3A. 354; Madh 1.429 — a) Hy wKt! BKé Lo! 
Pu dar; Tj! ara; Kt? BKtS Apa wea; Pu! aewar ; rMd4 “aT — b) BBe Bo BCa Jm 
Jo! La! Lo! Lo? oMd! oOr sOx! Pu? Pud Pui sPuS Tj! Tr [Jolly G R Ku Nd] Madh Mandlik 
Jolly KSS 7 ; *Md3 tMd! adaet — c) MT’ wT uTro yarariayears; Apa 2904 TART; Be! 
BKtS Lo? Apa 263, 294 [vl] J reer: Pu’ weet; Md? yal; oOr TH; Bel BKO Pul® Apa7z, 263, 
294 [vl] “aT; Pul® Apa 294 °araft; Ma? Carat — d) Md! area suanftrt; Be! 

“urataatfert:, Ho sOx! Ox? sPuo “aritvarft; sBe? Lo? oOr Pul® Tj! [Jolly R] argaantas; 

nNg "gpogratts: ake ‘arguates; Tr! “arfaaftt; sBe Bo Lo! oOr “aTftat; cMd° nNg 
Pu? Pu! Wa Hem Madh ‘arf; Lot “arftat 

2. Cited by Apa 294; Hem 1.30;padas a-b cited by 4pa77, 263 — a) MTr4 MTr? MTY6 
gata; Tr? aaa; Be! Tj! Aa art; BKtS Lo? sOx! sPu’ THAT; Be! arferenfrreng, 7 
Pu> Pu’ feet — b) Hy Tar; GMd! adr. Be! Apa “agar, Apa [vl] “Sera; MT 

°Praqft: — c) nKt? BKt® La! Lo! Pu} Rreaeit, Ty? ae, Lo? 243° — d) Hy rMd? a; ee 

fer; sBe? cMd! feargarra: 

3.* Padas c-d omitted in Pu‘. Cited by Apa 294; Hem1.30 — a) GMd! GMa Tr! [Jolly 
Ndj wasanfe; cMy werenfe, rMd3 weit f8; cMd! Wa Apa feat, tMd? feorfersay, Lo! 
fest; Ox? fgsirereaiy — b) Howarferet — c) Lo! afeder:; rMdé afedat — d) Jo2nKt! La! 
Lo} tMd? oOr Tj! Hem pars & faeftact (La! gare; Md‘ Harr A}; GMd! tMd3 GMd> GMy 
Tr! mT‘ MTP mTr? areas Preaa[rMd3 apes]; Apa Hie Arar 

4. Omitted in Pu’ tMd4; padas a-b omitted in Put — a) oOr Uait — b) Pu? wart — c) 
Lo? Lo* Pu? Pu Put Pu!® [Jolly Mj atarst aafagfr [Lot Pul? Golly M) fag]; Ho sOx! Ox 
sPuS avattrapy feet. wke! arerefs fet; nNg aver 4°: yPu! “Faget — d) Pu? var; 
Md? & wate; Be! Bo Ho nKt! La! Lo? GMy NNg sOx! Pu? sPu® Tr! Tr? mTr® Wa eferorr:; 
Pu? Pu! [Jolly M!23-S-9] afer; wKe! afer; GMd! weer 


837 


838 Chapter 11 


Cease Hey TT TeaIaTaeT Taher: UI 
wer Farhi we wath years | 

aries arte frat a ate agate itt 
aa: taeda ger a: ata frat feo: | 
astiaatargatsh* + aerate aenery Ucit 
Bh: WAT sat wart Tiaotttaty | 
weavareat frareare: w etiofreare: sil 


5.* Omitted in TMd4; padas a-b omitted in Pu — a) TMd? Hdarefear are; oOr Haale: 
Tea; Wa Get art; Tr! Ge ae; Bo FENT; Lo? art; Lo! Lo? “are — b) Md! oMd5 
oMy Tr! ar Rafércarfirrester [oMd! “car f& azaf]; Be Prferar; Lo? frferenai; Lo! aterr- 
woofer — c) MTrt Ueera eS; Md! 1Md3 Tr! “ATH; oOr ATA; MTro TET He — d) sOx! sPur 
freeta ; Be! wKt! GMd! tMd3 GMd? NNg Tj? Tr! Wa ater 

An additional verse is given in the vulgate editions and Biihler as verse 6; it is found in 
the following mss: Be! Ho Jm Jo! Jo? K? nKtt La! GMd! tMd? oOr nPu! Pu? Pu Put Tj? Tr! 
MTT? MTr* mTr®; padas c-d in Md‘. Verse number 6 is eliminated from the critical edition. 

aft g wararter farg vferareac | 

aafieg fafray ver et age |! 
a) HomTr4 MT fareaty, GMd! TMd3 oOr Tr! nPu! Pu? Put taht gf [cMd! 7; nPu! 
Pu? Put f@]; La! tareafe; nKe4 fear g; T? aaerer gar’ — b) Md? fairer: — o) 
nPu! Pu? Put “fereey faferetg — d) cMd! er; Ho cMd! 1Md? 1Md4 nPu! Pu? Pué Tr! 
MTr4 MT ro eat FETT 

Additional verse: cMd! tMd? GMd@ Tr! [Jolly Gr]; given after 1110 in Ox? NPu! Pu? Pu? 

[but erased] Put Mandlik [€, 5, T, 4, ] KSS Dave; cited by Madh 2.384; Vij 1.224, 2.175: 
gat o aranfiaet aed arat gar: Brg: | 
aap Pear wear AArTsteT | 
b) Ox? Vij 2.175: Fa: — c) [Jolly Gr] arene 

7. Omitted in Pw. Cited by Apa 165; Laks 2.132-3; Dev 2.418; Madh 1.157— a) Bo 
cMd! “afta, Lot “ardas; Ox? Madh Fart; La! GMd! mTr4 mTr° ated — b) La! fafed yer; 
oMd! “gaz; cMy “ad; Apa ‘Gay, Be! “qua — c) cMy [Jolly Nd] arate at feet; Be! 
Bo Lo? Pu? Pu’? aft 

8.* Padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by 4pa165; Laks 2.183; Dev 2.418; padas a-b cited 
by Vij1.124 — a) TMd? 1Md! Ox? Pu} ApaLaks HARTA, Bo eae, cMy Fear — b) 
tMd4 &; cMd! fred; rMd3 argttreete; nKt4 agate [cf 11.7d] — c) Be! Be? Bo Hy Jm Jo! 
Jo? wKt! Kt? La! Lo! Lo? Lot Ng oOr Ox! Ox? Pu! Pu? Pu? Pu® Pu’ Pu’ Pu!l® Tj! Wa Apa Laks 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave & Sta’; Tj? aT; Ho NKt? Lo? GMd! tMd3 GMd GMy Tr! Dev 
Bh Re HHA [oma]; aK atta — d) La! + aehemargara; nKt! GMd! 1Md3 GMd5 GMy 
Devt & gate [Dev & 7]; Tr! + Gua, Bo Ach; Pu’ Pu? F Hes 

9. Padas c-d omitted in GMd?. Cited by Apa 283; Hem 1.44 — a) Tr? Ath: La! TUT; 
oMy Pu? Put after; mT 9% SA; 1Md3 Wa “SAT — a-b)oMd! “aAetar ead — b) Lo? 
@; Pu Pu’ [Jolly G] g2atifea; cMd! Tr! °sftaPr; Ho “sAfafe; wKt! “strafer — c) Bh [ad 
11.10 as patha of some] HeaTeatal fearaa:; Ox? HEAT; Wa FeATITAT; Be! BK Lo! rMd3 


Chapter 11 839 


Warnes a: atinedeeaz | 
amaagaas Saatser FAT T Uoll 
qAAaaee: SMHS A Asa: | 
ararrer fargreor efits afer crothr 2 2 
at dar: Sareguyeraaqraraa: | 
HIT ARMAS ATT WEA 
aretq Ahr ar se av wer yee awa: | 
a fe qaet aag arate aitae: 230 
asaeanr: wayeasar WT aeaT: | 
eee 


ASMA AM GUEST: | 
aa ager saat atta rade ec 


Tr! mTr+mTr® Hem TeaTaray, rMd4 AeaaTay; oOr AearfAat; Lo? Tj! AeaTeaer fear’ — d) 
BBe? Lo! GMd! tMd? tMd4 Tr! erent’; oOr eae: Tt [Jolly M'-8-9 R] & @4:; sOx! 
“geretee:; Tr! wfeepear; cMd! ae wT Soe 

10. Omitted in oMé, Cited by Apa 283; Dev 2.596 — a) GMy “age ; Lo ae 7 
— b) Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! Tj? mTr3 mTrémTr? mTr® Dolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
acarl [Bh gloss 477d supports Tq]; nKti NNg Pu? Pué Pu!® "are; ; Lo? Ox? nPu! Pu? Put 
MTr® Wa [Jolly R] Dev ‘efea> — c) tMd3 “qeea> — d) Jm Jo! Lal Lo! oOr sftader; aCa 
TMd3 rMd4 nPu! Pul? mTr® sftfacer; Hy Kt? GMy Pud Tj? Tr! mTr3 Tr? Té mTr® DevMan- 
dlik Jha KSS Dave Stacer, cMd! starr, nKt* sitfeereares; La! Tr? ar 

11, Omitted in GMd°. Cited by Laks 2.162; Dev 2.422 — a) Lo’ tMd? Tj! aera afer ; 
Bo SET: ; BKt? "TE; nKtt tMd? mTr*¢ MTP? “TE; MTro weer: — b) mTr® aap, Tr2 
“aq; pCa BT; sOx ! sPuo asa; NPul afar; Tj! a37e:; Lo? afer: — d) cMy 
anfteearareart 

12. Cited by Laks 2.162-3; Dev 2.422 — a) GMy at dare agua; Tj! ar; Or 
aregage ; Wa Tae — b) aK Hgaraw:, cMy ATAaT:; Md4 “ater: — c) GMd5 
Hear ; Be! Bearer; Laks BEMaTaeT; cMd! weraraer — d) wKt! ager steamer fsa; ake 
“vereg Prat 

13. Cited by Dev 2.422 — b)BKt 5 HPTRIRST; BKO TMd? nNg Pu? aaa: — c) Lol 
user; wKt! Jer J — d) BK afar’; rMd4 sferre: 

14. Cited by Laks 2.162; Dev 2.422 — b) Me Jha Dave TRUST, tMd* “aaa aT; 
oMd! ager: — c) Jo? Lo} Tj! Volly R]Earft; oMd> cMy @ — d) Bo fraraa; Te 
“REA: 

15. Cited by Laks 2.162 — a) Hy Lo GMd! Tj! 4am; GMy Seat ; Be! sBBe  Pram- 
sar; Pul? “Fraareatg — b) Tr! “arguieta waad:; oMd’ “ster waa; Pud Pu? “stave: 
Pul? “yaaa: — c) Tr? oat aarer sta; Ho Lot tMd? Ox? mTr4 (Jolly M*>-*]Laks T&T, 
TMd4 ae; Pu? TAT; sOx! sPuo mT? Fae; Ke were; Jo! Tae; Pu! wera — d) eke aeraahy- 
ade; Trea ofr ait; aBe ata; cMd! tMd3 tMd? GMy mTr? mTr® ereatar; cGMd5 


840 Chapter 11 


at AAA wh Ait WeAAAT | 
sparta ser sere: LEN 
Berl AAMAS Act aryTerAd | 
reader F aM Grad ale qeakr uo! 
qerned a sder aa Hara | 


aL ll lin ASCASI G 
eee aig ee 
a arenes ariite: aferdita: | 


attrer fe atfearg arart: atafer erat R20 
TT YI AreaT EaHeraTa a: 


taper, Be! Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt cMd> Pu} Pu’ Tj? mTr3 Mandlik Jha KSS Davevaae'; sBe? 
sOx! sPuo vader 

16. Cited by Vij 3.43; Apa 938; Dev 2.466; Madh 3.304— a) Apa Wat Ah — b) Pub 
Tr! “spat: — c) GMdS GMy Tr! fears; mTr4 “Pret; cMd! tMd3 MTrSMTr° Bh Prerarr 
— d) Be! oOr Tr? Bader; Ke2 Geforr:; rMd4 “ator 

17. Cited by Vij 3.43; Apag38; Dev 2.467 — a) Wa@atd; sKt> @stq; Tr? FeaTd; sOx' 
sPuS Saeed | tM? @TE; BBE? Lal “EPTRTET; Jo? Lo? Tj! ameretT — b) Md} TaeyT- 
wera; Tj! arayT; GMy mTr'mTrS ‘oye — c) Bo Hea ; BKE Tere; M4 “ater caret, 
NN¢g oOr Pu? @; Lo? ¢ Tet 

18. Omitted in Tj! [haplo]. Cited by Apa 938;Laks 2.225; Dev 2.467 — a) Ox? Fares 
AT; Laks TET TT BK om J; La! oOr Tr HAST — b) BBe? HTT — c) TMd4 TeT fafa. 
BKtS La! 1Md3 cMd Pu2 “Prana; Apa Tae; GMy Wataeq easiter’; GMd! wart” — d) Pu? 
“ate eq; wKt! Ma} “are ; La! “aeeerméfer; Jo? Apa (vl) “Greater 

19. Omitted in GMy; padas a-b omitted in Tj’; not commented by Nd — a) cMd! q; 
wKt! “sq: erarera — b) Hy ararery’; tMd4 argepa wT — c) Lo! aepeat — d) Pu! 
dare; Tj! apt; Lo! ar sat, wKke! areadt 

20. Omitted in GMy; not commented by Nd; in place of verse 20, Jo! gives 10.125. 
Cited by Vis3.252 — a) Pu? Pu* 7 G4; Bo Ho Lo? sOx! Ox? Pu? Pud sPu® Pu’? Pu Tj? Tr 
[Jolly G] Viset uaa; Lo! fret gers Md? “ar@rAt — b) Bo F fag” — c) Be! aacqrAT, 
Jo? aafsaat; Bo Ho Lot cGMd® Pu? Pu! aaarat; Lo? siferat; Tr? arama, Lo? oOr Tj! F; 
oMd! af ; wKt! mT r4 mTr° aay — d) Bo Jo? wKt! nKt* Lo? Md? NNg oOr sOx! Pu? 
Pu? sPuo Tr! Vis Eee; Ox? Tj! “Ae Sy; wKe “Arges; Tr? “gett 

21. Omitted in GMy; padas c-d omitted in TMd? nPul; not commented by Nd — a) mTr® 
“agus — c) Lot afaed fF; Jo? wKt Lot Lo’ GMe& Pu! mT ro g; Be atfesare; GMd5 MTP 
STS; NNg [but cor sh\ afeeaa; Md4 ater 





Chapter 11 841 


qeattes a frara afer eat srertg RRM 
SAT FR A CATT AAA: 

trem f& atagant aearerratfe cerarey UR 3 
a aart at gare fast Prete enifera | 
asrarar fe Pafereat avers: Fer wae URS 
marta Pater at a ad seal | 

@ atta wear fr: ereat at Wa AAT: URI 
tad qa a orlareafte q: 

a UTA Wt ale Tete stakes URI 
afte Barat fer ataaessy | 

RaTAT UQaaTa PrepeTATTT UR 
aes at et Zeasarate far: | 


22. Padas a-b omitted i in rMd? nPu! — a) Pu? 2TeT; Pu!l? [olly Mes] aeATgeT —b) 
aMd5 ES 5 oMy 8&3; Tr‘ mTrSape; La! eet me; Ox? weet TE; wKt! 
Here wt ad —c) Tr afte; Md! aaeatts; wKe} Pu? Put “afte fafecarer; Lo? iMd! fear; 
Lo! fart — d) Be! La! Lot Pu? Pus aut aft; rMd4 eat GPa; Pu!’ cat gfe, miro ref; Pu’ 
Pu’ Lolly G]a Wea 

23. a) Be! Lo! sOx! sPu® “Rreat 7; BK “rear a; 1Md? afer, Lo! agher wa; BBe? 
Jo? wKt Lo Tj! | — c) Lo! wait; Lot Pul? asmft;, rMd3 tMd* GMd5 aMy Tr! waTeaRT — 
d) wKt! GMd! tMd?3 GMy oOr Tr mTr ceRTaratfer; sOx! sPu® @eTaTT; Bo wKt} NK La! Pu? 
Pu‘ tera; wCa wKkt! Wa eto, TM} tMd4 tear 

24. Cited by Apa 168; Hem1.60; Dev 2.421; Madh 1.185 — a) Ho art — b)aMy fay; 
Hem Prati, sBe? wet; Lo! wAfad; BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? mTr? Hem Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS Dave #féPrq— c) Hem Prfercar asrarat fF; Dev “ATHET; cMd “ATA — d) Bo 
Ho Jm La! Lo! Ox? Pul®? Madh ast: 

25. Omitted in BKt’. Cited by Vij 1.127;Apa 168; Dev 2.421 — a) Ho wKt} wars; Bo 
ware Pater — b) Vij a: at A— c) cMd! varia; Ke ashe; sBe? asnfe; sOx! sPue Brae; 
BBe? wKt! wKe area; La! saat — c-d) GMd! Md? GMd> Tr! seat fav: areat — d) Be 
Hepa Beat AAT:; GMy SAAT 

26. Omitted in Pu!®; pada-a omitted in sKt>. Cited by Hem 3/2.1035 — a) wKe 
aaarel ; Tj? sary; Be! Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt2nKtt La! Lo? Lot oOr Ox? Pu} Pud Pu’ Pus Tj? 
Tr? mTr> Yolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4 — b) nNg Sarat? ; Jo* Tj! “ATER; BBe? pCa 
Lo} [Jolly R] AMéeq — c) Tr? get; Be! I — d) Bo WHRoer 

27. Cited by Vij 3.265; Apa 167; Dev 2.415 — a) Hy eft; Pu? ara; Bo ae fay Vij 

“at Fa, Lo? om Pret — b) Tj! aes 8; sOx! sPuo “oefar; Lo? “eee; pBe? “asta; nPu! 
“oaifer — c) 1Md3 Fgarat; +Md4 ferarat; Tj? grt ; Pu? mart; Vij QB; GMy FRAT, oOr 
qgarart — d) cMd! freperarreas; wk ‘aged Bo oMdS “sent wae 


842 Chapter 11 


a arate wer cer aeeatararhkeay URC 
fatter aa: aretter avatar Hef: | 
sag aeratataer: sfeferfer: Fer: UR 
TY: WATT asyHst Te | 

aT are cer geafiaad wey Roll 
aT aet aaeiter Referer afer | 
edie aheeararrarrrehr: 3 2 
ediammdiarr wat asaray | 
aareana aki Frapttardfgsr: 1320 
autre: gatizatrakay | 
areget & grammer aa gerradtfeast: 13.31 


28.* Cited by Apa 167; Dev 2.415 — a) Be! Apa [vl] STTEATOT; BBe? FT; NK Ta — c) 
NKt' Lot aaraife; Tr! Apa [vl] & stsifer — d) all NT mss. [except Pu?] Apa Dev Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave Ter Frater 

29. Cited by Apa 167; Dev 2.415 — a) Ld Tr? fraeatar; Lo! feraeter; Ho [Jolly 
M 28-9] fepaed:; Pul? degee:; Pul? [Jolly M28] erareteT; aktS aed: [om FT] — b) cM! 
weer; Be! aertat; mT rt Tr tt: @ wefGf:; Wa “Shr aged: — d) Ho Lot rMd} sOx! 
sPuS mTrS “@fe:; GMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Put Pu’ Pu! Apa [vl] afahr:; wKe “AFT; Lot 
Pu? Put ofafreft; Pus Pu? afefer:; Wa ect; Lo? ear:; cMd! tMd3 GMd GMy Tr! mT rt &et: 

30. Cited by Apa 168; Hem 1.88, 2/132, 3/1.452; Dev 4.160; Madh 1.684; padas a-b 
cited by Vis1.38 — a) TMd‘ 9%; HyWZ:; Lot woaHeter — b) mTrtagReas; Lot *aey q 
oMd! “wet a; Apa “weqade; Md adit — c) Md? F aTrerfenerer; Tj! ataretra; Lot 
alaraay, Bo ararefaa,; nNg Pu? “reas: Tr? “arg — d) Be! 0Or sOx! sPu® Tj! ger ferercr; 
Pud Pu? gaat 

31.* a) Lot aver; rMd4 aeror; TM? Tr! aaetta; wCa aah; Be! dead; Jo! Ke? aaa; 
BK Fea; Md! aaafe; Im wKt! nKt wkKt} Lo! nNg Pu> Pu’ Pu’ Pu! Tj? Tr? Wa Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave tt — b) Lo! + Fefagrrestac; Lo} Tj! Ffergrarr; rMd4 feafsreros; 
Jo! fesferarsrt — c) sOx! sPuo gat; cMy afi’: PuS Pu? aiareat’; Bo TP acarAr 

32. Cited by Apa 232 — a)aMy arstataifes — d) rMd3 nPul “arate fear: 

33.* Omitted in Lot Tj?; verses 33 and 34 transposed in Bo — a) tMd? GMy Tr! 
oferetudret [tMd3 cMy 3ferer; cMy “Pret; BKO Wa afar’; mT ro yfeeaaie ; Ho 
wKt! BKé Tj! tat, Ke? “eat:; *Md4 oOr Pul? “wer: — b) Im weEatEAe’; BBE Baterakes’; Lo? 
warearte ; Be! BBe Bo BCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? wKt? wKt Lo! Lo& Lo* nNg oOrsOx! Ox? 
nPu! Pu2 Pus sPuS Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tr? mTr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ferarat, Pu3 
“feraay; Ho “frarad; wKt! Wa [Jolly N] Na Ararat; Nd reads aRrafte — c) Be! oOr 
Put araarred; wKe! are; GMy ane ate; Lo! “et wemreia; Be! i) aerereT Ff; Lo? Ox? om 
4, ake aterreda — c-d) Tr? af Heazerefer atfer oat awer [see added verse] — d) 
mTr? mTr® ct areal far ete; Pul? eats Ma cere Bsr: 

Additional verse in La! [repeated after 34a-b] GMd! rMd* Ox? [padas c-d given after 





Chapter 11 843 


attrat agdtior atarrqarers: | 

aaa apagat g waetatesrert: WAS 
faerat anftar amr Fat aart sere | 
wey areas Gara Bent Fireheary URI 
aa wear a gateateatrat a+ arte: | 
Stat errafetrer arat areeHeETAT WALI 
ae fF wala Gaq: F A wer aq | 


AATAATARAET ETAT SMTSAITET: NRW 
TTT sParoey 
orafecntntate araretr feera afer 3c 


34d] Mandlik (€] KSS; given after 33 a-b in Tr! mTr* mTr°: 
che Baers omatfer oeat afery | 
aed adererronarrart 7 argh: | 
a) Ox? “aTetfty — a-b) Omitted in rMd4; Mandlik KSS Dave tees Taarearorrt- 
frarf = aftr: —c) Ox? aaat ad” — c-d) Omitted in La’; Mandlik KSS Dave 
aadhiwaraor seearft are — d) Tr! afer; La! cMd! afenc: 
Half-verse added in TMd?: 
mrenghadt Hy: Saas arate | 

34. Cited by Apa 232 — a) Lot agar; +Ma} arardtefor — b) wKt! avettear ; sOx! 
sPuo “aTAT — c) GMd! GMé Tr! | — d) sOx! sPu® Pul® mTr* Wa [Jolly M29] “SiPeTAT:; Lo? 
[Jolly R] site: 

35. a) Hy tht — b) [Jolly Ku] 441; aK é sTerorgqead — c) cMd5 aeTATe ; GMy aat- 
are ; wKt! areas; Ho Tj? Aes; Jo? w Kt! Lo? Md? GMd5 Tj! Tr! mTr? mTr® Volly RN] 
Bh Gata; nKtt Hara; Pud Pu’ gat — c-d) La! BatatgeHt — d) oOr FHrttea¢q Fre; Volly N] 
ah; Tj? Axl; Pu? Bees; Be! Bo Lo? [Jolly M3]aet; Te Fat; Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? sKt* Lo! Lot 
Ox? Pu! Pu> Pu? Pul® Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Yr; Tr? yer 

36.* Pada-d omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 125; Laks 2.126; Dev 1.66, 2.423 — a) Laks 7 
a; Be! sBe* Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt4 BKé La! Lo! Lo? sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu? 
Pu Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 7 &, GMy 7a; Pud Pu’ Tr! Tr? gat 
aTet; pBBe gate areq ; cMy gataftater —a-b) Bo Aa ear Jafearareafaer — b) cMd! 
“fare; Ox? aTear: — d) cMd! 7 apa ; MI r3 ATeeTTeTaT; Dev1.66 “separ q 

37. Padas a-b omitted in Pu’ and padas c-d in GMy. Cited by Dev2.423 — a) Ho Jm 
Jo! wKt! Ké rMd4 sOx! sPu® Pu!® mTr? Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 7; Bo Tirete; 
Lo! teed, Lot Fararet— b) wKt! Sia: wHeET Aq; La! Pu? Dev FRrt:; Pul® TEs A; Lo? 
wer I — c) Md? “@earesr — d) La! enresrarer: 

38. Cited by Dev 2.420— a) La! Lot 9ST; Be “are; Pul? “Rerrars’; Lo! 
“arareat ; Pu2 Pu “ararent; 1Md? “axa” — b) rMd4 “aTereT: wKO “eTeT; Bo wKt! 
*eepr; Ho 7Md4 nPu! aferor — d) MTr® STAT; Jo? SHS; BKO oat 

After verse 38 Wa inserts 11.48-9 


844 Chapter 11 


aera Edita wear Pate: 

T aera BAT WAI 
gheartir ag: eatery: aft oar wae | 
SITTAT AMAT TAT oll 
aerate] AT: BRIT: | 
ara ater steered fF aT Ue 
a 
mead fF garrett aaatag wfkar: WSR 
aa AaaAATAT TTT TAAay | 

Tat AeA say saifer Fat USI 


39. Cited by Dev 2.419;Mddh 1.158 — a) nKt* Tsar ; oOr parayoniy; Pul? aefer 
— c) wKt! wearer’: oMd! °fartkfeg ast? — d) Tj! Wa “aisrae; Lo! ° sivas; Lo? Pul? 
“aaorae; nPul “ators: oMd! Tr! “ahsrafe; oOr “Sete =; Madh “Seats; wKt! °F 
wad; Tre? “atasd; BBe wKt! La! warat 

40.* Cited by Dev 2.419 — a) Tr! SeATT:, Lote aq: — b) Be! etfer:; Hy nK¢! La! 
Lot sOx! Pu!? Hf; BBe Jm Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} BKt® Lo! Lot oOr mTr? Dev Mandlik Jolly 
Jha KSS Dave 33; Hy Jo! La! Lo! Lo® Lot ¥siT; Pud Pu’? 48f — c) BBe’ cMd! afer; GMd! 
NNg USTEGEAT ; Lo! gat GET: BBe? Ga Te — d) tM? GMy MTr'MTrS MTP Beit > asAT- 
area: [MTrMTr MT ro areta:]; Lot ar; Pud Pu? aaa; aK Lot MTS aA; Tr? aI; 
sOx! Pu? Pu} sPuS Fact 

Additional verse in Be! La! rMd4 nPu! Pu? Pu* Mandlik [A, T, 3, S, 4, ®] KSS Dave: 

aaa aeare Herehreq aefeast: | 

ater afer afer aereat fey: | 
a) La! erefétat, rMd4 @taree — b) La! rMd?4 aefeast — c) nPul Pu2 Put aoa a- 
arfereait — d) rMd4 aaraet 

41. Cited by Apa 1154; Madh 2.425 — a)1Md4 afirerst efeats; Be! Jo! erase; Tr! 
*apyate’: ake “erareaafe’; wKe! “érstafa’; neu! “dravafeaeits; Be! Bo oMd! “fant; Ho 
La! sOx! sPuS “fesarf:; Tr? “était — b) cMd! arerom:; Tj! “asrare:; Ng wPu! “aprear:; Be! 
pBe? oOr Pu’ Pu? “aed: — c) Hy FHT ; Lo! wea; Bo Ses — d) wKt! “wT Ae; Bos 
aed; tMd! fea: 

42. Cited by Apa 168; Hem 1.60; Dev 2.420— a) Pu? Put &:; Hy 4; ™d?4 TAGE ; Kt? 
Fae ; wKt! Apa “aera; Tr! “area? — b) Apa Barf af — c) tMd? Tr? MTP MT 
sfased warcuer, Hem at 4 star Aa; cMy =efrasreate Lo? Tj! sefersredtt; oOr 
aefeastedgy;, GMd! GMy Tr! Apa 5er; TMd3 oMd 5 qaregaer — d) cMy serarfefanttar; 
Pu! aféa:; wKe! afear: 

43. Cited by Apa 168; Dev 2.420— a) Tr! 41; Lo! Apa Waar, Tj! “ATE, BBe? 
“at — a-b) GMy MTr® [Jolly Ndjararat aad aaa Tor wea [Tr! adds this half-verse 
after the regular 43a-b] —~b) cMd! “araTaRt Ya Wear; wKt! “arar eargaafeat; Ox? Apa 
i as in ed] Tag ; +Md4 “asfifFat; NNg Afar; tMd3 “Baat— c) sOx! sPuS Bar; La! 

— d) Kt ag; Lo! Ted eater; mT! mTro Peat; Lo! date 


Chapter 11 845 


aedteated at fatter a aware | 
yastahrartg sraPretar ar: seit 
Wee: Her aT waar frager: | 
SHERPA aAere saratary Useit 
WHA: FA WT aareaeasd Beaker | 
ere Fa Aleta wafer: qaftad: sell 
mraRaitaar srex Sareqagper ar | 

a tert asreafz: sraRrasee fist: uve 
ge gata: sir sRregece | 
oTgater surest ae wafatay USC 
Gara: BAST BT: VTATATATT | 
Meet ered sharel Tears: Ws 


44.* Cited by Vis 3.210; Vij 3.219-20; Madh 2.6;pada-a cited as pratika by Kum 3.6.43; 
Sam on TU 1.1.1 [intro.] — a) Pul° aapafafed; sPus sedated — b) Ke Tr? Paftecea; Jo? 
Lo} Tj! ft FT; Ho TATART — c) Pud T}? Taras; Pus wasreaPs”. BKtS Lo! oOr sessT- 
ARS: Te wesPaRe; wKB rMd4 FaSeTaRE ; Pud Pu? Go WASSIeARE. MTP TASPARE ; Jha 
Dave TaaafarS ; Im Jo! Kt? Kt* Lo? Lo? Ox? Pu? Pu! Pu!® Tj! Wa Vij Mandlik Jolly KSS 
TAmARE ; Jo? WRAPS mc to WATS 7Ma} wea; wKe! awsPt Rs” — d) Lo! 
wrap gaae:; Mad} sahara fe a: 

45. Omitted in Wa; verses 45 and 46 transposed in Hy. Cited by Vij 3.226; Mddh 2.152 
— c) NNg [but me sh] wHaTe: Or Pus Pul #rAT; wKt! nKe “Ha WE — d) Be! Pu 
“eer; cMd! gGMd5 “ata, 1tMd3 “Preetare; Lo! “aatar:; ake “fraterarete 

46. Cited by Vis 3.212, 226;A4 pa 1040 — b) Put Jaf; Ca Apa 7VateT — c) BKt® 
wrapped; Bo Hd; oOr Apa Ht WH — d) ake gafeerer: 

47. a) Hy Lo! Baferrat, Md! “Bardaat; sOx! “Braaat, tMd “Raataat — b) Kt? 
oMd! PuS Pu'? @ar ; patha in both Bh Me Htereqd [ad 11.90 Bh gives this as his own read- 
ing]; oMd “carrpery; [Jolly R] Ha Be; Ho T— c) wKt! sat asteanh; rMd! wacaiR: — 
d) Be! BBe? wKt} Lo? Lo? NNg oOrnPu! Pu? Pu‘ Tj! Wa Bh [ad 11.189] “pe afer, Ty? ae: 

Additional verse in Ox? Tr? Mandlik [@] KSS Dave: 

Treat ara a: ike Peet Perr gere 
wage sara hte arr | 
c) Ox? aaa 

48. a) BBe ¢ afta: — a-b) Lo! SPrehPrey’ — b) Be! Im “eget AT [cf. 11.47]; 
Wa Hatter — c) Put angafear; Lo? gUeAA; MT! AETATAT; Lo! Pul® [Jolly M]geraret — d) 
Ox? aTATEy: ; TMd? Se ET 

49. a) Lo? GMd! tMd4 GMd GMy Pu’ Tj! Tr mTr> Tro “Ate: sOx! sPuS Tj! Bret: 
Md? ete — b) cMy AUTRE Be! aa 1tMd4 ere: Bo Pu2 Put sary cMd! sary: 
wKt! Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] ate: — c) aKtS “aired; Md} avait earetaret — d) rMd? ater; 


Pud “aeaee: 


846 Chapter 11 


fy: yfortacd Gare: yarerary | 
ereringamerniinet a fare: UGoul 
saeatraed Aer ANTE: | 
TEATS: RT TFA TST: WN 8 
ua waragrenn arredt afenfter: | 
Se 
ahead fer marred ayer | 


freafe wartinr ararasrepcaa: levi 


50.* a) Be! Fg; [Jolly M2589 Nd] gfaaracd; nKtt La! gferararcd; Md § gferatfarcd; 
1M} gferatferer, +Md4 gfeatered; Lo? afearacd; Be! Bo sCa Ho Lo? Lo* sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pus Put sPuS Pu® Tj! Jolly M4 R) gferafeet; Ke? Te gfernret; nNg goafeee; oOr 
grata; Be? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! wKt sKt® Lo! Tj? mTr3 Yolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
ahferanfert; Pus Pu? difesnfaret — by nNg que; sOx! sPuo afae:; nKtt aK yfra:; Md4 
area; Be! afer’, Te? gferrret — c) Bo Ho Lo* cMd! tMd4 cMy Tj! Tr! mTrS MTro are; 
Lo! Pu’ Pu!? Wa tes Lo? “dre; Pu “erreva fete — d) rMd* STATS BBe? Ho Jo? 
Lo? 1Md3 sOx! sPuo Tr! “feearr; cMd! mTr° faftert; Wa “fatter, cMy “feread; Hy “faaerr; 
wKt! Tr? 4; mTr® fafrar:; Pud Pu? feera: 

51. Padas c-d omitted in wKt! tMd* [haplo]. Cited by Madh 2.251 — a) BK “arated; 
Pu2 Put “Harfert — b) TMd3 Har mrarretitar:; cMd’ Weer; BBE ara art — c) nKt* qeaT- 
Goresder, Pus ceavreree:; Ho “sea; Be! “erReaay; Bo @Rwaas, pBe? aCa BF; aK 
Lo} 1Md? Tr! 8 — d) cMd! cMd cMy ga; Ho @araTPT 

Additional verse in Be! sCa wKt? La! Md‘ nNg oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Put [Jolly M R Ku] 
Mandlik KSS Dave; padas a-b in Tr?; given within brackets by Jolly [cef. ViDh 45.20-1]; Rn 
gives this as Fafacars:; commented by Re: 

aueat wears: pro fFratcaerar | 
fear Sea eeriaatees I 
a) nPul daameat, La! waerer: — b) nPu! Pratora:; La! Prataar: NNg Ox? Tr? 
[Jolly M R] Mandlik Jolly KsS Rrataat wat; tMd4 “Gee: Bet: — c) wKt? La! 
[Jolly R] Rn fearea: wear Shit [La! arity], Ox? Fara, Pu? Put “yf”; NNg Polly 
M] Mandlik Jolly KSS “yaeat — d) Rn Weer orate; Volly RJT We: TR 
arfee:; La! arate: orearRep:; Biihler reads: araTy: oreaihtas:; Ca wKe Tg: 
areneafaer: [pCa TT:]; Ox? aféaar g atest; wPul “areifit’; Pu2 Put Carerfir- 
wanteae: 
The above verse is given as verse 52 in Biihler’s translation. To maintain the tradi- 
tional numbering, 1 have eliminated the verse number 52. 

53.* Omitted in Tr? — a) ImUcd; w Kt} Ua; Ox? Haass cor 1o PAFAAAT, Bo wCa 
Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? BKe La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot tMd? TMdé oOr nPu! Pu} Put Pu’ Pu? Pus 
Pu!l? Tj! Tj mTr3 Yolly M G] ViDh 45.32 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave BATAAN, Pu2 patfeattor 
—b) Lo4 tMd3 Saad; TMd4 2aea; Pud Pu’ arfeat ; aKO afer; oOr Par — c) TMd3 GMdP 
Tr! mTr5 1 ; GMy SRI ; 1d! cMd “afere 

54. Omitted in Ox?. Cited by Vij 3.219-20;Madh 2.3 — a) TMd? afta waat; Be! 


oe 


Chapter 11 847 


ASA YUTATT AT TASATTA: 

Aelhet Weare: ease A: ae UGG 
wd T aqeet tons a Way | 
Trace rater: war AeEeTaT UES 
deve aaa Heart yer: 
Tisartrerasther: gearrerarer Ts Nt 
PATTIE APA TT | 
yRragaattat a ea SAT UGCA 


Tae: Aang SaNtsreoNg T | 
aq: Fret a ety qeaorast fg: U4 
TraisaTTeaest oRaratafawat | 


—b) Tr! rar; Pu? Put 7 Yast — c) BBe? Pe; Ho Pras; Bo Jo? Lo* GMy oOr 
Tj! nee mTrt mTro & ftser; La! “dha — d) nNg Pu Pu? “fra”; tMd4 
*Rropedde:; nK¢ Prarasre:; Tr! aPregaaer:; wKt3 Lo} Lot GMd! tMd? GMy “aaa: 

55.* Only pratika in Lo‘. Cited by Apa 1044 — a) Lo GMy MTr° “gear; Md‘ GMd5 “art 
— b) sKtS Lo! Lo Md’ GMy 0Or Tr Apa arTt— c) Bo Tr! wetfer — d) Be! eat ead: 
as; Lo! [but cor illegibly] Tartaed: AE; Lo} Has sed: ae; Tr Farr Ba; BBe? Hy Jo! 
Jo? wKt! Kt? wK8 La! Lo? Tj! Tj? mTr3 Yolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ARIF, Bo Lo? 
TMd3 tMd4 oOr NNg Pu’ Pu? Pul? Tr? mTr> MTr® Wa [Jolly M G]aarr 2a; Ho sOx! sPu® 
Apa aah aa, Im aa aht 

56. Cited by Apa 1047; Har-A 1.24.23; Madh 2.419 — a)cMy [Jolly Nd] Add Sray- 
apt; GMd! agar; Tj! Wa eeut; tMd? “spat — b) nKe aspnfahy tear; rma} anf, Tr! 
“aft, GMy + 894; Pu! Sgt; Be! at; Lo? Hgt — c) cMd5 Tr! “ata; Lo! “fern”; Be! 
*Praer:; aK “aarr: — d) cMy ary 

57. Cited by Sam on BU 1.5.1; Vis 3.223; Vij 3.231; Apa 1047, 1157; Madh 2.293; 2.419 
— a) GMd! tMd# GMd5 oMy Pu? Td mT r? mT r°Sam Vis Apa TAS Farr [Vis VEIT 
mT! mTr® Sait; GMd! aa]; Md? dale Fafa T; Be! galtfParar; sBBe TASS; Bo HANK, 
Ke TOT nKt* wellee4t — b) BK’ Lot GMd! tMd? nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pal? Apa He; Kt? “arent; 
wKt} “aret; GMd! wege: — c) Lo! aféarnfenfers; Tj! afarat & ar aARr:; Bo afar; wKke 
La! nPul Pu® Pu’ Lo* cGMd! GM@ GMy Ox? Tr! [Jolly M] Apa sagyafgarerer Td Vij 
afsarasaay : aKO afeararsay 

58 Omitted in Pu!®, Cited by. Vif 3.225; Vij 3 265;Apa 1048, 1110; Madh 2.419 — a) 
Bo Wert; Vij SCT — b) Bo AWA ; Md TPA — c) wKt! wfhaa’; rMd4 BMT; Vis 
afta” [but vl as ed]; PuS Pu’ aauyfiauttar — d) Md! area aad; sOx' mTr4 Tr 
Oe NK¢tt Bars TMd3 BH; GMd! Bya:; wKt! Tr? fAs:; Lal TT; wBe fea: 

59.* Omitted in BBe*; padas c-d omitted in GMy. Cited by Vij 3.231; Apa 1048 — a) Hy 
*aae:, mT r6 Aas; La! Pus aaa J; Ho Jm Jo! Kf? Lo? cMd! Ox? Tr? mT? Volly G ME Nd] 
Apa Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave SArTT; Lo? Tj! VVolly R] Apa {viJeratrg; tMd? Tr! 
waaay; Md! aaa J — b) Ho Tj! ara 





848 Chapter 11 


TRAIT: AAT: FAT 7 UGolI 
uRfatrargat wRaqaar 7 | 
aaa T SIMIAN T ATT ELI 


war ger Ber anffier qareafa: 
asrmermaanrmraaqeeyr aT fawr: USI 
AAA AIIM WarATTATAT 7 | 


yaaa aT awT: URN 
warereaehaent Aeaarady | 
feareetar casita Rrant yeah TUS 


60.* Omitted in GMy. Cited by Madh 2.13 — a) Pu!® atest, cGMd! writ, nK¢ 
“gran; pBe? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La! cMd! tMdé mTr3mTrS [Jolly M2] Mandlik KSS *garer 
— b) Me [patha] wreerdafaet; nPul Pu2 ge: Be! Put mTr4 mTr® Teerercafe ; La! 
aearareifa ; wKe! “aratgfaat; oOr “faaait:; Bo frat; Lot Pu!? mTr3 [Jolly M23458-9] 
“fama; Be! nBe? Ho sKtS La! Lo? cGMd! GMd5 sOx! xPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pud sPuS Pu? Tr! Tr? 
Tr‘ MTr° [Jolly G Nd]Madh Na fae; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Md! Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 
“faar: — c) Bo ATaTtayecam:; nPul Te gearqaemm:; Tr! egargaftearr: — d) mTr6 
*erreaat:; oOr “earanit 

61. Padas a-b omitted in GMy. Cited by Madh 2.13— a) Pu? Pu? ofefereargaraa; nPul 
gRaargsarta; Ho Lo! Md? cMd 5 Tj? Tr! mTr5 mTrS [Jolly Nd Gr] ofefaferar argshr[Tr! 
affacar; +Md3 cM afefaar]; sOx! sPuo afa far args [sOx! aaa]; Hy Jm Jo! Ke? 
Lo? MT? Mandlik KSS Jha Dave RPT A [Jm Jo! Ke “AS; Jo! A]; Lot PRAMAS 
—d) 1Md3 “eraatsrraa a; Pul? “atta gates, rMdé arse; Lot aT 

62.* Cited by Madh 2.13 — a) sOx! sPuS @-rai — b) cMd! arf; sBe* Bo Hy Jm Jo! 
Kt? wKt? Lo! Lo? Lot nNg Ox Pud Pu’ Pu® Pul? Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave a§@; Be! Pu? are; sOx! sPuo ayy; BK o areas; Lo* tMd? 1Mdé GMy Tj! Tr! Fat 
wafe:, La! taTeqa; Ho wKt! nKt4 wPu! Pu? Put [Jolly R Nd] Me Madh acegic:; GMd! yet- 
wafe:; Tr? Tr waTeQher:; Be! BBe Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} BKt Lo! Lo? Lot nNg sOx! Ox? 
Pu sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu!® Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa Na Rn |patha] Rc Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
aaarrdt — c) cMd! tMd3 tMd4 oMd5 oMy Tj! Tr! MT9S MT tS Madh a2Te; Lo} aSreT ; sOx! 
sPu® “TROT d) BBe? om 7; cMd? fast; sOx! fafera:; La! nPu! faa: 

63. Omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Mddh 2.13— a) Lo! aemat; GMd! areqdt; tMd4 
aaa; sBBe? At — b) Be? BCa Ho Jo? wKt? Lo* sOx! sPuS Tj! [Jolly R]Rn ViDh 37.20 
FaSraAs AUT [wKe TAeTIT]; cMdS YawsRATIAHE wT; Be! Jo! Ke La! Pu? Pu Pu? Pu’ Tj? 
mTr3 Yolly M G Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave JareAaT ; Jm year; Lo! yereaattat — c) 
oOr YaSRATAATEA ; BBe? Ho Lo! NNg sOx sPu Tr? yeren; Ho Lot Ox’ Pulé FeTETET 
Jo? Lo} Tj! Volly R] Fareea ; GMa “eaTaAT’; Ke? “ea ; Bo SAE — d) La! “art 
quaTat aa fawe:; Be! “aaa: Pu’ Pu? Pu!® “aera: TMd3 “Hast; oMy fas; sOx! 
fafeea:; Ke faieer: 

64. Cited by Madh 2.13; padas c-d cited by Apa 15— a) Bo aatee aeftery, rMd3 
warreertteret, Be! cMd! cMd° sOx! Pu5 sPuS Pu? Tj! Madh aatare Im wate’; GMd! 


Chapter 11 849 


° 


PATA FAMITATITAAT | 
aTeart o fearait fafeararet aa NEG 
waatra Sen” aorat araear | 
seared alefter aerate use 
MIST ATTA | 

sls Ul eb alb an ibelNatgs 2 
lait LE bulenl 


Sarr oft a Ayer orfegret arerz eit 
AAA A APATETAT | 
Gate az ataeafewer aT NS 


*eftasrer — b) Tr! Ferear; TMd? “WacA:; Pul® “wach — c) GMd! GMd5 GMy mTr4 Tr! Nd 

featoftregarsttat [cMd> “asftdt]; +Ma3 feerreqasttat ar, Md? featoeregasttay; Pul? Tj! 

Bel: Lo? Pud Pu? rear — c-d) mTr6 Sot w oftat qe — d) Pu! °Rrare; cMd! faarer 
; BK om F; Be! “ig [om 7] 

65. Cited by Madh 2.135 padas c-d cited byMadh 2.293 — b) Ho sOx! sPu® Tears 
Jo? Tj! TEA» Bo Lo! “HTeTt Ba gay; eCa La! “ota gat; BK “ated — c) Hy aTeMT- 
f a after Baral, cMd> Peart — d) Tr? mTré Peataer wat; Ox? Faearars- 
strat; tMa3 eared aa; Pu’ Pu? “area 

66.* Pada-c omitted in GMd!. Cited by Madh 2.13— a) Tr!” fier; Bo “RAAT; Jo? Lo? 
Tj! (Jolly R Nd] eer; all other NT mss., Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave@Tq — b) Hy Jm 
Jo! Kt? Lo® Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave STATA; HonKt! Pu2 Pu3 Put Pus Pu’ Nd 
amy; nPul aqq — c) sBe? BCa Jo? La! Lo! Lo? Md? GMd> Pu!? Tj! Te mTr4 mTr6 
“eafterrt; Ox? “waren — d) pBe? Bo pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! K? wKt? nKt! BK Lo? 
Lo} nNg sOx! Pu3 sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr? Wa [Jolly Me Go R Ku] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave Bftoarer 7 fPAT [Bo atte ; nNg aware |; Lo! siafteregaer: fear; iMd4 Hater; 
tMd? atafts; Be! La! Pud Pu’ Pul? [Jolly M] BIH; [Jolly Nd] Htares; Lot wtafter; mTr° 
wifeer, cMaé Hfeer; cMy [Jolly Nd] aet: Pu2 Pud aad car 

67. Cited by Madh 2.13 — a) Lo! aT; Md3 GMy Tr! mTr‘? MTromTr® [Jolly Nd Gr] 
area — b) Pus Pu’ Pu! qearedt’; Bo “Prataer — c) mTr4 mTrS AE etree, Jo? 
“ager, nNg ma sh fae; MTr “errarat — d) rMd3 ated; Tj! ATTA | 

68.* Cited by Vij 3.234-42; 4pa1183; Mddh 2.14 — a) Be! oar ; nPul oy. wKt! wk 

tt: ; MTP oa ; Be! Bo BCa Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo? nPul Pu2 Pu’ Tj! Wa Vij Apa 
Madh N@ Re Mr Mandlik “prem; BBe’ Jm nKtt BKP Lo? Ox? Pu} Tr? mTr3 [Jolly RIKSS BAT 
— b) sOx! sPuS aif Te ; Ho Ox? HoT ATT; Tr! ARTA: — c) Be! BBe Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? 
wKt3 BKt? Lo! NNg sOx! Pu} sPu® Pu’ Pul® Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Davestert 7 
dat gh; Md Ox? = ser; Tj! get — d) Lal nPul anf? 

69. Pada-d ma in Be!. Cited by Vij 3.234-42; Apa 1183; Mddh 2.14 — a) Apa 
STATA; Pus Pu? @ePat; Jo? Lot rMd? cMd> GMy Pul® Tj? mTrS @ertera ; Lo! 
eitera ; Ox? eR; MTP eet BT — b) La! “at aftenfaased ae; Hy “fraerer’; Ti! 
“auredar; Mao ae TIT — c) mT Paste FHT. ake aH’; mT aH. cMd! 7M} 


850 Chapter 11 


fabarat aatart ater yraray | 
HUTA AITAAAET T ATTTTT Igo! 


PRCA AMPA | 
POUR T AaAET 192i 
Tarra eat awake qa | 
acters aft were Frater wor 
aelet araqreniter eet Frat aa aT | 


Tarerfgacet gear qakinteasny Woz 


ahiiiieatiaat ar Praarfirearte ar Wok 


cMd3 GMy TH mTr4 mT rS aatefaret; Lo! areoft — d) Tr? raerer FT ATI [cf. 70d]; rMd4 
ate; Tr! ate”: Be! “afewrer 

70, Padas a-c ma in Bel. Cited by Vij 3.234-42; Apa 1183;Mddh 2.14 — a) tMd* 
ear; Ke? varert — d) oMd! danafgate aot: nKt4 aa aaeeT TF; Be! rMd? Tr! mTr5 
MTr° Apa TAT 7 

71. Cited by Vij 3.234-42; Apai129, 1183; Madh 2.14—— a) Lo? tMd? tMd* GMd> NNg 
Tr! Tr? Apa feof’. Hy “ate: Td “aeiteear; wKt! Lo! “Ea; Pul? “grat — b) Bo "art — 
c) wKt BK GM@ nNg Apa vous; K? wSewy, Tr weee; Bo weae ; rMd! 
TOT ; ; Lo! “BATE —d) wkt! “aeetataraé; Md} wae; aMy “Heear; Pus Pu? Hore; 
cMd! Fara; mTr® Hors 

72. ¢) La! nPu! Pu? Put aa& ; Lo? om first dt; Md! “Grae; BBee “Tea 

73. Cited by Apa 1060; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.243, andpada-a by Vif 3.244 — a) 

e? gTaatretft; Hy Jm Jo! K® BK& Lo? Lo* Ox? Pu’ Pu!® Tj? Tr mTr3 Wa [Jolly M] Me Mr 

Mandlik Jha KSS Dave $1@31 AT: — c) Jo? Lo? Lot Seurearet ; +Md? fretra@irar; Ho La! 
sOx! sPuS MTr? MTrS MTro wet TTT [Lal ark]; Pul? Seraearer ; mT rs “caPrgert — d) 
oOr Rraert’; Lo? “Rt”: Be! “ant”; Ma} “Breeds; cMd> “east 

74. Cited by Vis 3.243; Madh 2.155, 405; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.248;Apa 1060; padas 
aand c by Vij 3.244; and padas c-d by Vij 3.247; Apa 1059 — a) Bo wKt! nKt! Lo? GMd NNg 
Pu? Pu’ Pu’ at; Be! area; Tr! ae; Md? “dd — b) cMdS fagut Fesarers:; wKt! fafear ; 
MTr4 srt ; oMy farrarfr’; oOr “ara — c) sBe BKtS eTET; Lo! waar ; sOx! great 
aren — d) Te age atfer arfeare:; cMy Afra; ako Preafearer:; Madh aaPeRT:; Lo? 
“arfeare:, Pu Pu? “ane; sOx! sPu® “anfearr:; nKtt “atferr:; mTré mTr° “arg: 

75. Cited by Vij 3. 248; Madh 2.405; pada-a cited byvis 3.237 — a) "sOx! aad; BBe 

al agra, Lo? ata Pea ; tMd4 om ara; Bo Pu! apa — b) TMd? watfsra;, rMd?4 aah; 

aie Vijt — c) cMd5 “keg — d) Tr? Rrgerfracnfrar; oMd! “ireenf. La! “faganfe, 
Lot *frgenfa; Md? Pul? “frank ~ 


Chapter 11 851 
WTAIAT Aq AAA We AAT | 
ameter Prenge Frade: ioe 
weet at aghag maaaTsa | 
gat at otaaraes We at aaftesay Noll 
Srenpargad eae aaah | 
omar faarentat ager afearq tect 


Hoar Praag WAT Ttastshr ar | 
AAT TAT AT Mast Ta: NOI 
mares wart at aera | 
FAT ASEATAT AAT MaTATITET T NC 


76. Cited by Madh 2.406; padas a-b cited byVij 3.279 — a) Vij aftcarerat; Lot ta: 
Tr? a — b)wKt! aorta ad; wKe waa — c) wKt! “semaTert: Bo “Aterf — d) Be! 
BBe? Lo! Pul? firerafaterateaa: 

77. Cited by Vij 3.250; Apa 294, 1061; Madie.399, 406 — a) GMd ad FT aT aafae; 
Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave weet Fafagy; rMd4 Fafafe — c) Md4* at 
Be? HonKt* BKtS Lo? Lo* Jha Davefé, tMd* @; cMy sffearares; Pul? sttaarares — d) Pul? 
Je; Td! atagfe ; Lot GMy Pu!? Me Ra Jha Dave are: Ress 

78. Padas c-d omitted in Lo*. Cited by Apa 1060; Madh 2.406; padas a-b cited by Vij 
3-249; padas c-d by Vis 3.242;and pada-c by Vis. 244 — a) Lo? GMy Pu? Pu* Vij [Jolly Nd} 

*wparpata; cMd! cM Tr! wT rt “3parqata; TMd? “BRTTAR; Lo} [VVolly R] waa; 

Lo! “spar gata; Tj! “yar T Tat — b) wCa wKt! oOr Tr? Bta:; Md? GMd> GMy Tr! aitat; 
oMd! ‘eat — c) Put Put Tae; La! aft ar Prat — c-d) TMdé mTrS aft ar Perera Past 
agaeteat [Tr! add this after pada-b] — d) Bo Ho Jo? Lo? GMd> Ox sOx! Pu} sPu® Tj! Tr? 
Jolly R] atagedt aadifeat [Lo® Tj! “fea: Hay, sOx! sPue “pear; oMy @rtadaer 7 
afeat. Lal “erfeast aedifear. ake “areferat 

Additional verse in Pu?; cited by Madh 2.402: 

fee: sraftrereene fect feyor ware | 
ad Bap are aeet are Propfer: | 
b) Madh A — c) Madh Pryor Aa — d) om in Pe 

79. Cited by Vif 3.239, 244; Vij 3.243;Apa1053; pada-a cited by Vij 3.244 — a) mTr® 
Praacpara4nst aT; Apa Paarat TAGS; Jo? Haars; cMd! waardfe, Lo? pauses; Pul? 
Paar; Tj! paras; wKt! nNg PAAaTAT aT; GMy Peasy AT; sOx! sPue Poarat ar; TMd? 
paar, cMd> part aT; Lo! “araal cor to arey; Kt2 “areay, [Jolly M'?5~9] “amr; BBE 
BCa Ho Md? Pu? Vis Vij Madh areat at PY; Im Cartt at PP; wPul Cava at FP; La! 
“auat at aaq; oOr “aTattaae; Pud “ardt Prada; oMy Fafaste — b) Pu!® aasit; Lo? Tj! 
MATT AT; Jo? Md? Aast AAT — c) BK agers — d) Apaastyated; Pul? Lolly M25] 
“fea aT; Pu? Pud ee: 

80.* After TI in pada-c nKt* jumps to 82d Tea [haplo]. Cited by Vis 3.239, 244; 
Vij 3.244 [twice]; Apa 1058 — a) Lot Pu’ Pu? Pu!® ware araremet at; Lo? nPu! “orf; Tj! 
“ort; Ho om ma; Lo? Tj! Tart; Wa TarT [om AT}; Be! om AT; sOx! FT — b) BBe? Bo Ho 


852 Chapter 11 


maat sfathat at adearahrer at | 
farer afahre ar sree fagert uc 21 
ua qeaat trex qararet aarted: | 

SA gaat aT Aglecat sata UCR 
ret ar yfraarat aqaaanrsy | 
ease saa feet uC 3M 
THT TAIT HHA UAT Tae | 
TTA aaa Frearer Fear cv 
TAIT: Aaaaa savas Saaz | 

wat tq weer Taste FE BOAT UCI 


aat aafeat qgerserng Prepfery | 
ar aut waar ear afer fagar fe are cei 


Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} La! Lo? tMd4 oOr sOx! Ox? Put sPu® Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tj? Te MTr? 
Tr Vis Vij N@ Mandlik Jolly KSS 2. 0"; Bo La! Lo! Vis Vij PIT — c) Lo! Fart — 
d) MTr° om att; Kt? NNg Ox? Go Ku Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave "ater; Vis AT 

81.* Omitted in NKt‘ GMy. Cited by Vis 3.244;Vij 3.245~6—~ a) Lo? 4; Jo! mTr? 
Mandlik KSS faT= [supported by Ku]; La! frat; rMd4 wae; Be! Lo! Pub Hae; Ox? HaTe; Lo? 
* Sx, Tr! Vis [vl as in ed] Wrst; mT mT ro WaT; Kt? “eT; Lot “Se; cM “Rwy; [Jolly R 
Ku] ‘aret —b) GMd> Ox? “fafrer, cMd! °faferea; Pul® “afsrer; Lot rMd? [Jolly M] 
“faster; +Md4 “ager, Pu’ Pu’ a; Tr! at — c) Ox? ¢ Pfr; Lo? afefira; Tr? gfra — d) 
BBe? Bo Lot tMd? mTr° Vij STTSTH [supported by Rn Na]; cMd! werart; Mandlik Jha Dave 
“orate gerd, Be! nPu! Pu? Put faguafe, Lo? fagere 

82. Omitted in mTr5. Cited by Vis 3.244; Vij 3.244— a) Bo wKt} gS — c) Lo! THE; 
Tr! mTr6 Got @ great; wKt! ger greet — d) Md‘ mT rt Tr quae TAISCAAT; Lo! AT; 
Tj? ee; Be! “ecarattefer 

83. Cited by Vij 3.244; Apaios7 — a) Lo! mTr‘ mTr® fatter; GMd! tMd3 GMd® 33; 
Pu!? fergr; Hy fererr; Md? afecer ar; Ox? feretat af’; tM@ adeart — b) Tr 7 — c) 
BBe? eareriay ; Tr! @aaray ; Bo Lo! “yx; Ho sOx! Pu? sPuo Tj! VVolly G R] Vij Apa 
“yt; Jo? Lo? Tj! Volly R] Vij Apa ST; tMd* “HY — d) BBe “RA FITS, Wa FIT 
gaara; Lo! “aenfeyera; aCa La! fegeafer; nKt! cMd! nPu! Pu? Put fageater; Lo? fagearc 

84. a) La! fer ae ae — b) Md HS GAT UT Sac; BBe Hy “ay; BCa Lo? 

“at; Lo! ae, cMd! “Ha; La! Usa; Bo Lo? Pus WMATA — c) wKt! “APTA; oOr 
“anrredar — d) Wa “aat ferearar; Tr! faster; Ho Gea 

85. ma in Lo! — a) wKt! S@rT:; KE weIOT:; MTP PHS; GMd5 THaATAT; Pu? Put Pur 
Pu? wa Aa — b) BK Fae — c) Pu? aa Be; Pud aaroT Ba — d) Lo’ aaer Wa HTT; 
Tr? dal BAT HRT; pCa Tal Dara HIRT; wKt! nKe4 Tj! Far aq fF [nKt Fa]; sBe? GMa 
Wa om & 

8. a) Tr! CUT; Tr? MTr°e at; rMd4 aaldefael; Tr! [but cor] saeTay — b) Tr? aa: 
Aa; oOr aa; Be! “Aaa; cMy Prepfer:; Be! nNg r Md* Frepet; cMd > gupfe — c) 





Chapter 11 853 


aaa fates far: aware: | 
WEA HA WT ATMS MC 
Beat THAT TT ATT | 

Ta Barrera a rr CCI 
Tet Farad arer ufos Te aa | 
omer a fray Hear wy eltggrery UCR 
ga fagfeeftar sarararrar fasrq | 
arrat araroraer Prepfect ferefterer ug ott 
at dear fast werfrant get fred | 
aar @ wry frdeer gare fafeaaraa: 19 etl 


Tr? &; Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Wolly G R] Weft, Pu arfaste; cMd! gaara — d) Be! wKt! Lo! Lo? Pv? 
Pu? afer; Lo! fagar; Lot fe ar 

87. Cited by Vij 3.244—- a) Lo! adea: aaTeTa: MTr} adl; Im ARTA Lo? 
are — b) Lo! fafer:; mT? mTr® FARE — c) Wa om I — d) oOr WIAA ; La! “oTTATIS- 
aaret’: Tr! mT eraearar: Be? oOrnPu! Pu2 Pu’ Pud Pu? “cafaar; Be! “aHfaaar; nNg 
Tr “arreer; Lo! “aren: ak “aradar; Vij “ee 

88. Cited by Apa 1063;Mddh 2.32; pada-a cited by Vij 3.251, padas a-b byVis 3.244 
[twice], and pada-c by Vis 3.245 — a) wKt! fécat; sOx! sPuo mF 7 fear’; Md? wenfearr ; 
NNg [but me sh] HASTA; Bo Fart’; Lo! “Prat” — b) cMd! aerate; aK TT: AMT NK 
aad mt —c) Tr usarderdtarararael: wKe Lo? Pul? “dit; Lo! Md} “er; Apa ‘SeM- 
arr nNg “Saat Sart a3"; Pu2 Put “Sear Fears”; rMd3 Asay’; tMdé wTr® aan; 
Be! Foal GT; Lo? Bat UT"; GMd! Aaaraysy’ ; Ox? AIT’ ; Lo! @srar ars” — d) 
Bo 3at aft FT; Jo? gt 

Additional verse in Be! Mandlik [t] KSS Dave: 

wary sep: Gepar AeaTTaT | 
afte caer ar ar erase faggur: | 
c-d) Mandlik KSS Dave & eareraTaat & fag” 

89. Cited by Vis 3.246; Vij 3.251;Apa 1063 — a) Bo Lo‘ Tj! Tr! StH; MTr* Hear; Pu? 
dar’. 1Md! aret — b) Be! nKt* Tr? Apa theeea; oOr Tr! Rn Nd wfereea; La! afarewez; wKt! 
Lo? erere; Lot afegey; sBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? wk Lo! Lo? tMd? Ox? Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? 
MTP? MTrVij N@ Re Mandlik Jolly KSS eee, wK Feet — c) La! IPT; Bo HET; 
Hy ater; GMd! g; Be! Bo Hy Jm Jo! K@ sKt® La! Tj? Mandlik KSS Jha Dave Fr:ett — d) 
Ho om 7; wKt} om 7 At; GMd! Fr ges; La! “ear; BBe2 “eat 

go. Cited by Vis 3.212; Vij 2.21, 3.226, 243;Mddh 2.11, 402; padas a-b cited by Vij 
3.254, 258 — a) Lo? Lo4 [Jolly M] efeter —~ b) Lo? weareraay fm:; wKe! ATVAT’; Tr 
fest: — c) Bo HTH; NNg [but me sh] HeTae; Te TAT — d) BK Pepfet; Pu! Pepa 

gi. Padas a-b cited by Vis 3.247; Vij 3.253 —- a) mTr® fEsiT; Nd prefers to read FESTTSAT- 
8lct with the comment: aAterafagdeas area epercafer sreead — b) Pu? “eer” — 
c) GMy car & freed; nPul aay; nKt4 GMd5 Put aa; Jo? Pu’ Pu’ Tj! [Jolly R?] TaTeT, Bo 
aaifer art; GMd! rMd3 Tr! [Jolly G R'] ert; Be! sBe? Brat — d) Ho sOx! sPuo Fart 


° 


854 Chapter 11 


TRfast ar fraggate ar | 

Wat Fr AT ALMITG WTHAAAT AT URI 
aoa weraqer fears at aptater | 
quareragert aresarar wat easit 8 30 
QU Ft qoAAA WaT wT AeA | 
aE Serer A Aet FIAT usvil 
met tet a aredt a fasar frffer ger | 
aaa TUT aat A aaa FESTA: USM 
aa A AT Awaaz | 
agart Ante SavavrAAT Efe: USE 
TAT aT Taetat Ake areqaretey | 
ASAT AEAAT TA ATAtET: Ul 


adfeferard; Lo? Ura; tMd3 “ore 

92. Omitted in GMy; padas c-d omitted in BKt> sOx! [haplo]. Cited by Madh 2.412 — 
a) La! Lo! [but cor] “att; Be! aut; Ke “ast — b) Ca Pu’ J — d) BBE oOr WHR ; Pu2 
Put ararege ; Md atarperata: wKe! aereeuarite; Ho 7 

93. Padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis3.248; Vij3.254; Mddh 2.412 — a) Bo HT 
aT; Hy Lo4@eorear; Ho sOx! Pu} sPuS Hurst Wet; Be! “Faeg:; Pud “Hare, Lo! “IgfT; Lo? 
“dey —~ b) Lo? cMd! favarar orapfSfer — c) Be! Lot nNg Pu’ Pu’ gato ; Madh “OATS 
at; GMd! “qrafagent — d) wKt! a ar afer eastt; Wa om ate ; La! aaarar; Ox? Te- 
ata; Ho sOx! sPuo atearar; Ke? Tet; Vis easft at; tM} east ast; sOx! sPuo waepsr 

94. Verses 94 and 95 transposed by some according to Bh, but he prefers the normal 
sequence. Cited by Vis 3.247, 253; Apa 1044; Laks 3.330; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.253; padas 
c-d by Kum 1.3.7 — a) La! Pu? Pu3 Pu get; Pu! get; Md? F & AS ATA — b) cMd! fe; 
nPu! Pu? Pu &; Hy om F@A; BKtS WA SAT — c) Lo? “waar; Tj! “art — d) Kt? datz, 
BKtS GMd! tMd4 My @ fraeget [cMy eer; BKS eer]; Hy fret 

95. Cited by Kum 1.3.7; Vij 3.253 [twice} 4pa 1044; Laks 3.330; Har-A 1.17.21, 1.21.8; 
Madh 2.411; padas a-b cited by Har-A 1.25.3 — a) TMd3 GMd$ Tr! atest; TMd? ANY; Bo TIS 
OFT; BBe? sOx! sPuo Feet, GMd! tz; sPuo om first T; BK TMd4 GMd nPul Tr! mT MTr° Vij 
aredt a Ot 7 — b) sOx! sPud fastafea’; La! Prffer:; La! Pu? Put mTr° qer: — c) BBe 
at’: Apa war tat; cMd! “dat; La! “tar — c-d) tMd? tMd4 GMy Tr! Har-A Madh waar 
7 qraear aur aat fesirae: [rMd3 war ser; sMd4 wales? |] — d) Lo nPu! Pu? Put Wa Apa 
[vl] fesnfary:; Kum seratfere: 

96. Cited by Vis 3.250; Vij3.253; Apa 1069; Laks 3. 330-1 — a)sOx! TATE: : ; Ho nKt* 
cMd5 cMd! sOx! sPu® Tj! Tr! mTr4 MTr® [Jolly Nd] Apa [vl] arama, Ox? Rear; La! 

*frarrarf — b) Lo! cMé NNg 4a; nKt4 Bef; BBe? Tj! Tr! Are; GMy Gees: Tr? Rees; wKt! 

gerard; Lo? Md4 Feast — c) Ox? + TAT TST; Lo! Aga F WAT cor to “arr, cMd! 
aU aet ; Tj? agra; sOx! sPuS + arqTer — d) Be! cMdS Apa “Fat; BBe? Bo Lot “Jat 

97. Cited by Laks 3.331; padas a-b cited by Vis 3.250, and padas c-d by Kum 1.3.7 — a) 


Chapter 11 855 


TT SATA TT AVAUTTTAA AH | 
cee rah MTT Yaar aT a aT UCI 


war faferorPrear gerarser Frege: | 
ae meat seen gavtecatrepiery <8 
qoraapent warakarer J | 

ET CUTTIQITAT WaTTG Merah N20 oll 
Welkeat Fay UT APs TF aay | 
aet qeafer wat aarti ar No gi 


AAT Fatheenst AT | 
aivarar festtstey ages ATT WORM 


Ho ota, nKt tee; wKt! aate® Praa?; Lo? F; Ho Tara, tMd} gaara; Ox? gaara — 
b) Rn appears to read Hafeay commenting Hz; rMe? afewrarey’ ; Bo BK NNg sOx! 
Pu? Put sPuo are; Pu!? ary ; Lo? nPu! Na argue’; Pu? areraeta; Put arearateeaq — c) 
Bo sOx! sPuS aeererasr Bale; Kum “EAE; Trt mTv$ ‘eBrater; Tj? om aT 

98. Omitted in Lo‘. Cited by Vis 3.250; Laks 3.331 — a)aMd> adara . Be! eae; 
La! gerd — b) cMd! Fewargreact YH; Vis FAAS: Pus HaaTgT NNg “grat — c) BBe? Tr? 
aafer, cMd! rMd3 GMd5 GMy Tr! ager a — d) Pus Pu’ sarreasfer Bxct; Ho fF 7; cMy 
MTr® arferreeta; La! cMd! tMd3 GM Tr! Vis @ frresfer; Ho Jo? w Kt! nKtt Le Lo} oOr 
sOx! Ox? sPuS Tj! Wa & Fraasfer [sOx! sPu FB] 

99. Padas a-b omitted in oOr — a) BK Tar PraTRy; Pu! afar’: Ho La! Lo? Lo! 
7Md} sOx! sPuS Tj! Wa [Jolly M] “arfafear — c) BK oMd! cMd@ Tr! ata. TE 9a; BKE 
*aerfr — d) wKt! GMd5 Pud Pu’ Tr! evtecrer Prapf [Pus Pu? gat ]; Bo rapier: 

100. Cited by Vis 3.251;Apa 1079; Madha. 414; P ada-a cited by Vij 3.257;Apa 1082 — 
a) oMd> eatiedaerpigut — b) Md} GMy Wa * Farr, Ho Jo? wKt® Lo! sOx! Ox? Pu} sPu® 
Tj! Tr? Lolly R]7—c) Tr areaTen aot et GAT ; ; Apa Tera ¥ ya eM ; Te pater ; 
MTr‘ Saag ; Ho La! sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj eat a - +Md? eae AT — d) Lo! rMd3 
Tr! Vis UIT, Tre? “ganPafer; wKt! “garefer 

toi. Cited by Vis 3.251; Vij 3.257 (twice); Madh 2.414; padas a-b cited by Apa 1079 — 
a) Vis Vij (once) TAT FaoArers; Lal JetcarMHs AT; Ho Jo? nKt* BK Lo! Lo? Lo* Ox? 
nPu! Pu} Pub Pu’ Pu! Tr? Wa Ware; Be! FAG; aCa Hy wKt! wKe Hos — b) Vis aa FATT 
a Ft:; cMd! pada reads: tees; Madh Tpepatd ET Aa — c) NNg ae; sOx! Ox? 
sPuo yea, Ho Head — d) Tr! war. pBe2 oeqTTaT; Im Jo! Kt? Lot Ox? Pu? Pud Put Pu!? 
MTP [Jolly M Me] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave J; Bo La! nPu! Pu3 4; GMd! aT 

102, Pada-d omitted in Pu!® and main Lo‘. Cited by Apa 1080; Madh 2.415 — a) Lo! 
TATA TT; eM d! avararagaeg; Pu’ Pu’ areardgghres:; Bo TITY; Tr! araray 
wKt qeaeg — b) cMy ‘aA — c) Bo FeaAT; oOr Aeara; cMd> Madh ATSATAT; Lo? 
fgurrevat? — d) oOr Weg Tale FA; La! mT ro TarHaAa Tae; TMd! HaSV TAATAT;, Madh 
aegelauad; PuS Pu? aetel ; Md? GMd> ae STAI; NK AASHTO; WK BAST, Be! 
Bo Ho Hy Jo? BKt Lo! Lo? NNg Pu Pu5 Pu’ Tj! Wa [Jolly G R] Me GoN@ Ku “eter fof. 
11.128]; sOx! sPuo “afar. Ox? Tr? “aur. TP “sur 





856 Chapter 11 
Uddaeated WT aE FET: | 
qeettrrtr 7 Tathreargad 203 
TRIAS ATS ACTS | 


att seredt abot a frgeafr ox 
erat at Rreraqwrgepeareary USAT | 

aaredt feararferssar Prararafreart: Wok 
wget dficarar ar argent Pot ay | 
THAI Reps BAetT: ULI 
ararat ar ater: | 
Baer Farrar ar WEarcaragaq4x tow 


103. Omited in Pu'®; padas a-b omitted incMy — a) Tr! “drat — b) Lo! qattedape 
feor:; BBe Wales: Pa; sOx! “wa, Bo “pie; MTP 4t: — c) Bo warg; cMd! *aaAeeT; 
1+Md3 “rT, Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] 744 ta — d) BCa Ho 1Md? oOr sOx! Pu? Pu Pud sPu 
Pu’ Tj? MTr® aaeaeaTsNd [ef. 11. 170]; oMd> “Rrewget 

104.* Cited by Vij 3.259; Apa 1083; Madh 2.255 — a) Wa acaftna’; cMd! +Md} GMy 
Tr! MTrS MTr® Bh TeTNAAT ; GMds “aeTTATAT ; BBe Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? Ke Lo! 
Lo* rMd‘4 oOr Pur Pu? Tj? Te [Jolly G] Vij Madh Me [patha] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 

"qeafirar — b) Bo Tr Re Jha Dave 7eAET; Lo} Tj! “Teg; BKtd “TegHY; Be! “wea; Be! 
Bo wKt! wKt? Lo? Lo? Lot GMy nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pu® Pu? Pu® Pu!® Tj! [Jolly M G R] Jolly 
Fale ; oOr Fars; NPul gare; Ox? arate; Lo! qeiteeivaa; Tr! “ate — c) Ho ake FF; 
00r af, wkt! get, Wa ar Le aa; Hy Tj? Tr! sre; Lo} sa@rd?, Lot rTMd3 [Jolly M3- 
sae Me] “denser ie [Jolly M8] “eitnfeya Fey; Lo? sOx' sPuo aif; Hy MTP Vij 
IPS ; Bo Tj! aera: vKe Peer gay"; Ox? aPoer Fay"; [Jolly Mb Nar aget ay 
— d) Pu’ Pu’ Lolly G] “areqvtater gaa, mT + fag” wKe fegqeae 

105. Pada-d omitted in Pu? Pu‘. Cited by Vij 3.259;Apa 1083; Mddh 2.253, 255 — a) 
1M? @; Pud Pu? Beer; Tj! “gaongege — b) Tr! Congereurara; rMd4 “orgacoTara;, Be! 
sOx! Pu? sPu® Pu’? Pu!l® Apa “Saree; tMd3 GM@® areal; Tr! arasifes — c) La! rMd3 Tr! 
ald; Be! Aaefer; Pul? Freddi; Be! La! fafsrar. 7Md3 gare 

106.* Omitted in BKt5; pada-a omitted in Pu? Put. Cited by Vis 3.254; Vij 3.260-— a) Bo 
@gTsel; Kt? @gtgT; Lo? Pul? veri; Be! ae: nPu! fe; Lo! GMy “STAT; cMd! Pu> Pu’ om 
aT; Be! Bo Lo! sOx! sPu® 4 — b) Be! Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lo! Lo* Lo* Lo* GMd! nNg oOr 
Ox? nPu! PuS Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr3 Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave fast — c)mTr* mTr® 
wtepagr 

107. Cited by Mddh 2. 264; padas a-b cited by Vij3. 260 —— a) Hy aa ; Te ‘aitay — b) 
tMd) areraereer : pCa *ararary wafer; wKt! “srafrr’: cMd> nNg “safe rares:; 
mTré MT “easier Bo faaead: — c) nK¢é efaer geararz; 1Mdé efaeae; La! sara — 
d) GMy “aeaguery; wKke! “aaate 

Additional verse in rMd?*: 

meme get fear yeaer asx az | 
famrgeat gett a serecat faszar [7] II 


Chapter 11 857 


TadaaequEanaeat AT | 

soa erecta rar: 120 CI 
TITNTAHAGHT WAT AT Tarkera_ | 

Fe Tags aT AT Fae: ULV 
ugiareataraaneat Fret | 
THETA eat sy Arar Praaferr: We Poll 
Rarpraar meg froged wr: faq | 
gafiear waeper wat steer aa 122 21 


frodtagttag aredhareargqard | 
srettarg caret frerat ftarcae: WP 2R 


108. Cited by Vis 3.262 — a) Lo! Uae: arity’; Bo nKtt 1Md4 Pu! era — 
b) cMd! “oraf&ar, wKt NK Lot cMd! GMd> Ox? Pu? Put Pu’ Pu!? Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTrsmTr® 
Vis Hart, Lo? tMd? Ferd; Md! Hor: — c) Tr! “aEaAARY — c-d) Lo? sOx! sPuS “aecda 
fafeafraars: [sOx! sPuo “aHtert:]; Ho “aeaae aa aae:; pus “saa fafsahaas:, 
pCa NKt' La! oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Put PuS Pu? MTr [Jolly G]Na fafeetfraaier: — d) 
oMd! “fatttc:; cMy fattat 

109. Padas c-d placed after 110b in oOr. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa 1101; 
Madh 2.191 — b) Hy WaT; Tj? ATHY; mTré anf — c) OX Tr! Tre Haas; cMd! Paar; 
Lo? Vis PAATTAT; oOr Wa FeATAT; Lo'gaarst, rMd* gaais; nK tt WIGS; BKE TRIS; 

0? FagIS — d) Tj! THT; Vij DATS, pBBe? Fac: TMd4 Bye: 

u10.* Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263- 43 Apa 11015 Madh 2. 191 — a) Tj wTroage, cMd° 
Tear ; ; NNg aTe apa’. Pyle “apres > Pud Pu? “are oeft’; akt) Lot “are 
arest® —b) Pud Pu’? mTr® “sprereraer, Pu! “want; o0r “sambad, cMd! aa: BK Lo? fad — 
c) BK GMd! 7Md3 tMd¢4 GMy Tr! TEA AKT; BBe* BCa Jm wKt! Lo! Lo} oOr Tj! Vij “aro 
aed; nKt4 “HATA, Ho aq; Be! Bo Hy Jo Kt? wKt} La! Lo? nNg Ox? Pu8 Tj! Tj? Tr? 
MTr? MTr*mTr® [Jolly R Ku] Vij Apa Madh Mandlik Jha KSS Dave "aT — d) Ox? arat 
geartec:; Apa [vl] Praca: 

111, Omitted in Pul°; Jm gives 107-9 again in place of 111-3; pada-d omitted in Ho. 
Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa 1101; Mddh 2.191 — a) Bo fear Prreseat aTreg; Bkt 
ea meg; mT? wesgreaat; Hy Jo! Kt? Lo? Tj! Tj? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 

“TT EGTETT; Lo? meq — b) Pus Pu’ feroaafir — c) Tr? Eyre; eBe? Byfaear, Tj! qerafacar; 
Pu? Put “tea; Ho T4epST; wk rMd4 cMy “eM, nKt* BBe? BCa Lo? GMd! Tj! Tr! MTr° Vis 
“aay — d) td} tMdé mT? Tr MTr® Vis Madh Rett, Lot Me Jha Dave Frey, Volly 
M] ater; sOx' sPu® diet; rMd3 tMd? GMy sOx! sPuo mTr+mTr5 mTr® Vis [vl] Madh 
wad; Lo! fata; Lo? ast 

112.* Omitted in Pul® mTr°. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263—4; Apa 1101; Madh 2.191; cf. 
Raghuvamsa 1.89 — a)GMd ! tMd4 mTr® Vis Madh ferocity a fercser [mT r® forse, Madh 
feteq]; Lo! cMy Pu fereditca’; sOx! sPu’ fated: nNKtt BK La! Lo? oOr Pu? Put Tr! 
“feet, 1Md3 “ferceeer; GMy *fereer — b) 1Md4 artes”; 1M} “xfttag at asta — c) Madh 
aréiaraft arta; sBe? Bo sCa cM@ curettt; Hy Jo! Ké La! Pu? Pu} Pué Tj? Tr? mTr3 


858 Chapter 11 


aTearrant at aearafeAnh: | 
Ufaat wReut ar aarranfsareaT ue 23H 
sor sates afta ar ared arfer ar wary | 


T PaATSTAEAT TeHeayT J afrHat: UL Lv 
aera ate arerat We HasTr ar Aer 


werredt at aera frat Bar aT 2 ul 
ort fatrat aeq atat wr agpreste | 

a tecared ar Brratetatefe eect 
qatar mar garegakaaa: | 
atrerart ated aafrgat Fraga i? gol 
Waar ad Byeuarateat at: | 


[Jolly M'?-3-5-8-9 Ral Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave tarétat — d) Tj! Fret 

113.* Omitted in MTr5; padas c-d omitted in La!. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa 
1101; Mddh 2.191 — a) La! @razeat, Bo BKt> Lo? tMd3 tMd4 GMy NNg nPul Pu? Pud Pud 
sPuS Pu’ Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly G Nd] Piftent; Be? Hy Jo! Jo2wKt! K? wKe Lo? Tj! Tj? Te 
[Jolly R Ku] Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave ‘Prareat; Madh “Pret; Pu! “Rraent; Be! nKe 
BKtS Lot GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd> GMy Pu? Tr! Tr’ MTr® Vist; Wa 4 — b) Lo? Lo? cMd! 
oMy NNg Tj! Tr! mTr Vis ate — c) GMy ofear:; Be! wKt! NNg Ox? Tj! [Jolly R] aut; 
oMd> “wut at; Bel cMd! Pud Pu? Tr! mTr4 mTr® Vis T— d) Jo! KE mTr3 [Jolly G] Vij Na 
Mandlik KSSeatrats; Hy waTAT’ ; WNg “Wot: EEA; BBe? Ho Hy Jo! Jo? K wKt sKé 
Lo* td? GMd* GMd@ sOx! Pu? sPuo Pu’ Pul® Tj? Tr! mTr3 Vij Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
“ara 


114. Omitted in La!. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263~4;Apa 1101; Madh 2.191 — a) Pu!® 
say. Pul? affat; wKe afte — b) Pu!® aredy; Lo? aed; Pul? Tr? aff ar; Pu? Put arfaarafer 
— ¢) MTrt MTr® 7 paicrer ; Be! Pul? “ara: eftortt— d) Lo? Pu!? aiefirear; wKe? * Peary; 
tM} GMd> GMy Tr! [Jolly Nd] @arfene: 

15. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apa 1101;Mddh 2.191 — a) BKt> @TeTTT — b) Jo* 
La! cGMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd? GMy Pu Tj! mTr° Fé; Vis &F WA; BBe Bo sBKt’ GMy HF AIT 
we; nNg AF aT aT GS; wKtt Wa Madh BF GST at; Apa AT BST aT— c) nKt tT 
arr — d) wKt! BK Tj! Yolly M45) Nd R] fae: cMy fafa; Im atte, Apa ta; Ho 
Jo? sOx! sPus aTfF; Lo? Tj! aft; wkKt! Pu’ terept 

116.* Padas c-d omitted in BK Tr?. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.263-4; Apaiio1; Madh 
2.191 — b) BBé Bo 8Ca Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo* wKt! Kt? wKt? BKt La! Lo! oOrsOx! Ox? Pu? Put 
Pud sPus Pu’ Tj? Te mT? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave W144 ; Lo? WY ; Be? aaferefa — c) 
tMd?* eerpe: Tr! “ger & @— d) Ba [patha which he rejects] Prat ere fer 

17. Cited by Vij 3.263-4; Apa 1101; Madh 2.191 — a) Kt! tMd4 Tr! mT Tro eo 5 
oMd? “gar; Md? “aat; Tr! “aarrecter; oMy “aarg at at, Te “eaTeT gar ; Bo Ho wKt! wKt 
BKtS Lo! Lot oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu3 sPu® Pu!® Tr? Jolly Teg; Tj? ae — b) Be! & eereah- 
aaa:; Pub Tr? “adt — c) Tr? “ATT — d) nNg aTereneait 


Chapter 11 859 


saatttast gaat argerorranfr ar ue ec 
aaa Teor wT AUNT | 
areata are rtf FrRr ue es 
gram fafeadtarencar afrerar | 
aaa qgareattaredt: ugrott 
waa tae: Ae Arerer fess: | 
seer aeergertat aaratfet: 22 etl 
Ad FET Te WasAT T | 

age afar aa aisaatfirs: 2220 
vara sey afacar weary | 
Sat aaa waat ofatdary 223M 


u8 Cited by Vij 3.265;Apa 1105 — b) Jo! Pu! f8sT:; Ho sOx! sPu® 7eT: — ¢) hyper- 
metric pada; Lo! rMd? rMd‘ sOx! Tr! mTr* saesteff a gpaerF [sOx! “aster; rMd4 aitete; 
Ox? “asteffe, Lo! J]; Pud Pu’ (Jolly G] waaitiagaert; Lo? raat ae geet; La! nPul 
Pu? Pu} Pu‘ Bh Vij “ast. Wa ast; mTr® ‘agg; MTP ast & qari 

ug. Cited by Vij 3.280; Apa 1140; Har-A 1.26.8; Madh 2.436 — a) Tt aftr, nKt! Lo? 
“stat: sOx! “ar; La! 7; Ho FAT: BBE oOr HA; Hy nKt? Ox? nPu! area; GMy TT; 
Jo! irq; La! pret — b) Be? eA; Vij TTA; oOr TETTH: — c) GMd! rMd4 Tr? MTr® 
(Jolly Gr] Madh eaTcstoreefaars; My Saeaarfaears; tM} qreefaartat — d) sOx! sPuo mTr® 
aad; Pu? Pu3 wat; rMd3 aaiferaeta; Be! asrar Aaefer:, Pul? watt Apa TET AAT; BBE 
Hy wKt} La! oOr 42efe; Lo! A387; nKt4 Prater, cMd5 Faire fefer; BBe? NKt4 La! cMd! 
TMd! Tr! fefar; Be! Lo? oOr fear 

120.* Cited by Apa 1140; Madh 2.436 — a) Tr?gcaThit; BBe? wKt} Lo! [Jolly M] Heart; 
Kt La! Lo? Pu? fafeemetat ; tMd3 Tr! [Jolly M'-2-8-9 Nd] @etqaat — a-b) tMd4 “agta- 
waerefeerar [2]; cMd! cMy alt aad a; oMd MTrS art aad a; Tr! str ard zy; 
wkt! “agrtercaer — b) nKt “SMTAAeT; BBe Ho wKt} sOx! sPuo “raced; Lal RTeT; Tr! 
ahaa; aBe afreur, wKkt! afifeerar; Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? Ox? mTr3 Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave WAeTaT; Pu!? [Jolly M239] ayaer FT; aK TAeTaT — c) GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd> GMy 
Tr! mTr4 mTrS ata — d) Lo? “eter 

121, ma in Lot. Cited by Apa 1140 — a) Jo? Lo? Tj! STAT; sBe? HASH; sk Far — b) 
oMd fesratat — c) wKt! “sort — d) Pul? “geisfert, cMd! Wa gdeta; rMd! aeraties:; nNg 
[but mc sh} “afer: 

122. ma in Lo? [Jolly M§] — a) wKt! La! Pu? Hed; Lo? NNg sOx! Ox? Pu‘ sPu® Tj? Wa 
Red; Bo, Ho nKt* aKt? Lo! nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu!® Tr? Lolly M G] Jolly Fed:; HyAted; nKt* 

“ger; Lo? “Eer{ — b) Md! Md! MTré Tr geeaferarg; sBe? wKt! oOr Te; Bo qa — 

c) Pul0 aqerafer; Tr! ght; HomTr @fa; sOx! sPuo Ba; cMy “Ae; Pu? “Afar — d) wCa 
Ho a1e@Ft; tMd! Tr? dat; eBe? asians; cMy “aatfirar, Te “aiifirer; wnKe Caafeer:; 
Pul® “aaitfea: 

123. ma in Lo! [Jolly M8]. Cited by Vij3.280; Apa 1141; Madh 2.436 — a)TMd* 
afer — b) sOx! sPuo wear ; Be? wea: Pus Pu? ary; wKe Tj! amr — c) aK 





860 Chapter 11 


wat wert Rent adaware | 
srepitararaces a year new 
siigeEt at parTaArsar | 
Maar Fry TATA WVU 
ARITAFAMY AT Weraaary | 
afoatecotag an: ile Gi 
qtat qaecara: aterrer ae Bye: | 
ceSeA TET Ys ET Ie: EU 
fasirers: | 


HEAR UAT 


aarReet TT TARGA: ULI 


ares, BBe? BCa Hy Jo! Kt wKt} Pu2 Put Tj? mTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “aRPAe ; Lot 
Madh “area; Be! Bo pCa Ho Jo? wKt! Kt? nKt Lo? NNg oOr Ox’ sPu® Pu’? “Ser — d) nKtt 
; Be! oftacaa; rMd4 aRadaet 

124, ma in Lo* Volly M8]; pada-d omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Vij 3.280; Apa 1141; Madh 
2.436 — a) GMd' TIT; Be! Bo Ho Jo? Lo? Ox? Pu? Pu} Pu’ Pu? Pu’ Setor— b) Be! ada- 
am; Md} Apa reitaee T/ area ne sPu° addear ; Be! wKt* Lo'nNg a3 — c) 
sOx! sPus saeger Pra”; Lo? Tj! — d) GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GM@ GMy oOr MTré MTr° 
mTro “HetAtedor Beater [oOr a, tol Jo! Volly G] vacr weet 

125. ma in Lot; padas c-d omitted in Tj!. Cited by Vij 3.254, 289; Apa 1183; Madh 2.441 
—- a) BK “wage —b) Te pear g yarresar; nPul Pu? Put “sreafewsar, cMd! +Md3 
oMd) oMy Tr! mT ro araefezear; Md? mTr4 Volly Gr] “araefresar, Pul? “areeftresar; 
wK¢ sOx! sPu’ “sear — d) BK é TTT 

126,* ma in Lo‘. Cited by Vij 3.289;Apa 1183; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.269; Apa1128 — 
a) TMd4 aera; Lo? dae Be! ae sOx! sPu° aa 1tMd? gar ; coMd! aepre- 
ast; NK earerearsy: Be? “aT pray; Ho “pay — b) GMd! ATaTazarterteae:; NNg ATS; 
Ho wKt! nKtt sBK® La! Lo? oOr Ox? Pus Pu? Wa Apa Me ATe:; TMd? tTMd4 GM@ GMy Tr! 
Are; mTroatre; Ho wKt! nKt* BK nNg Pu’ Pu? Tr? Wa Apa Me Jha Dave “ar: — c) MTr? 
ag. mT’: Lal “arftoftag; 1Md4 “afeftay; sOx! Pul? “stay; Lo! Pud Pud Pu’ Tr? 
“ott FT Bo “WT F; Apa [vl] daa — d) wKt! aaenaraHexs; Jo? cMy Tj! mTr® [Jolly R 
Nd] Nd 7H; sKkt> at; Jo? Bretaa 2; Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? mTr? NaJha KSS Dave TIRTa- 
Ree; Mandlik AAITHAE, KS ArHHpeass; La! areas; Jo? Lo} dé GMy Tj! 
[Jolly R Nd] Nd Sree =e ; Bo Brearapeas; cMd! Sead wae 

127, ma in Lo4; padas c-d omitted in BKt>. Cited by Vis3.244; Vij 3.266—-7; Apa 1105; 
padas a-b cited by Vij 3.285 — a)nKt’ BKt) sOx! Gey; Tr? gear, cMd> adtat — b) Jm aer:; 
Md! Tr? ger; La! Lo! aer:; Be! Tr! far; aK aa; GMy Sq; Lo? Tj! [Jolly RY Fert: — c) 
BBe? Lo? azure: Hy tMd? +Md4 NNg Ox? Pu? Put mTr? Vis Apa “cents: Tr! “cedar; oMy 
“ental; cMd5 “eat; Be! NNg [but cor fh] TAeI, TMd4 AMRIT; Rn appears to read ATeT — 
d) BBe? Yat; Pul® aared; NNg aed; wKt! Kt? GMd! 7Md? GMy NNg Pu? Pue Pu’ 912; Lo! 
OVSar 


128. Omitted in BKt5; padas c-d omitted in BBe* rMd?. Cited by Vis 3.244, 263-4; 
Har-A 1.24.4; Mddh 2.73; padas a-b cited by Vij3.266-7; Apa 1105 — a) Bosra ; La! 


Chapter 11 861 


met atat raat wet agent aay | 
TARA YATE TaryotrargT: ULV 
Wadd Uae srafard fastraa: | 

wae Vel aMeL TMS MT WATT NP Zoll 
Uaaed Fa HT THAT wT | 
qaveragr ae senfenrr ar: feat: 23 2h 
AMARA R Fea ATT AVHAT T 
ATA THES YES AMAT ALT ULAR 
aa: frag Err at art areqat are | 


TNT SAI AT A asad AIT ULIAN 


oH; Pul? sreprreped; Tj? cerned; T2 Wa wsteat — b) Be! fafrarear; Wa fatter; cMy 
fafearer; Pu! [Jolly Mj faftece; Pu2 fesiterar:; Tr! fesirat: — c) vis 3eT°; GMd GMy 
“aeeat; Md‘ Pu2 Put “ase; cMd “agente [om aT]; cMé at — d) Hy Jm Jo! Ke TMT 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave tareqaraae: [cf. 11.116d] 

129. Omitted in BKt® Lo* 1Md?. Cited by Vis 3.244; Har-A1.24.4; Madh 2.73 — a) 
[Jolly Nd] #2; Be! [but cor] wKt! Lo! Lot ated; Bh [ad 11.131 as patha of some] F=T, La! 
ar atfaaay; Pu? Pud Frat: cMd5 ferat — b) GMd! tMd? oOr MTré MTP? MT PSV is Tear 
TeaSAT [tTMd4 MT r? MTrSsetet; OOr TAN]; Be! HEF | serftr ad, pul? afe sarrad; Tr? 
ate; sOx! sPuS seteferad; Bo NNg Ox Pu? Pud Pu? Wa Ku @feT; GMy @er — c) Pud Pu’ 
FACT ATET; Ho Jo? sOx! sPuS Tj!Lolly RJ TAT ; NK “LaRT, Jo? Lot Pul? Tj? “wat; Madh 
art — d) cMy gary 

130. Padas a-b omitted in Lo? 1Md? oOr. Cited by Har-A 1.24.4; Madh 2.73; padas c-d 
cited by Apa 1105 — a) cMd! a@aea — b) Pu’ Breage; eke festart: — c) Be? WATEAT- 
seraferes, rMd3 Pud Pu? FATED; Tr? TATE; wKt! FATT; GM@ FATE; Pu3 Pud Bea; 1M‘ asar, 
td of Aa7eT; Pu? Put gferer, Be! wearer — d) La! Tj! Na [patha] Bh [ad 11.131 as patha of 
some] Zereta’; Pu! [Jolly M] SIIB; Lo! 1Md4 nPu! Pu? Put ene ; oOr aes 

131. Padas c-d omitted in sOx' sPu® [haplo]. Cited by Vis 3.262; Apa 1105; Har-A 
1.24.4; Madh 2.72 — a)wKt! fate pest; ako Ha Pes; aCa Md} Hes — a-b) Ho La! cMd! 
1+Md? sOx! sPuS mT r5 mTr° Madh Water AS WaraMaes ac Aa[sOx! sPus HTATa ; Ho 
“arate | — b) Lo! GMy TAT Beer; wKO Aa; nKtt wT — c) Md? GMdd Tr! mTr4 Tr 
Vis eT MeT . tMd3 “eat; Wa ait; La! “war aTeq — d) Pul? aear fewre; Tr! “grr areq aT; 
oMd! Md? ferar:; wKt! are 

132. Omitted in sOx! sPu®. Cited by Vis 3.266; Vij 3.270;Apa 1130; Madh 2.68 — a) 
BK Aa ; Lot Pu! [Jolly M] aisite vase — b) sBe? wKt! are; Pu2 Put UT, Pul? ard; mT 
are; Lo! aga BKP ave; Be! Kt? Lo? NNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Put at — c) mTr‘ mTr® “NTS; 
Md! “qecrenier, Tr! “gate; oOr “sea — d) ak aeeagehy ad; cMd! gaurd; 
MT rt MTT Bea Te 

133. Cited by Vis 3.266; Vij 3.270;Apa 1131; Ma@dh 2.68 — a) Hof¥aret — b) Lo! 
ary; oOr Berar; nPul Pul? areaar; w Kt! atead; Lo? areast; wCa AEAAT; Pud Pu? 
aTeasit — c) Lo? S4egS7; Lot Pul? [Jolly M] Vij AH: ByStaq; Lo? ° ata PRT aT; Lo! Tr! 


862 Chapter 11 


ay sronteedt sarq at gear fastre: | 
USNs WS Fas AT ATHT 123i 
qagar ae F froarr g fafa | 

ge feerrt act mise gear Prerrrq P34 
Seat HA Ios Taw aenag T 

at TUT T SAgEOMT TPT 3K 
aat saree seat usa Atery FATT TTT | 
THAMAAZTES AL TABTTAT U2 Zl 
HAMAR Wien sy TaMTTARaAy | 
ARAMA AAAS SAT T FMEA ULI 


aac, Pu’ aaedt, Be! Gaeat F— c-d) wKt! aa. Weare AT anead st — d) Pu? 
are ead; nKt aread; Be! Bo aK sOx! Madh at @ad; Lal F Vfsar, Tr! avetact; Pu} Tar, 
Lo? atq; oOraste 

134. Cited by Vij 3.273; Apa1132; Madh 2.67 — a) TMd? safacorareet ead; Jo? Le 
Lo} Pu} Pud Tr? arf; cMd> aT; Bo GMy 2H; wKt! af; Pu? Put aiff; BBe afereprontadt, 
Tr! pore; Tj? “at, oOr “ae — b) wKt! Lo! TP? ad — c) Lal Goreme art aT; Te? 
gress; Lo? tMd? vars; Md} Tr! “areas; Kt? *Md4 GMd3 cMy TS; Lo! Pud Pu? Tj! We; 
+Md}3 oOr Tr! TS; Lo! @us; GMd! HMs — c-d) Pu? Put areures Tetear Aer TATE — d) 
Apa aria ta ahaa, Bo sCa Jo? wKt! La! Lo? Lo? Lo*cMd) nPul Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! mTr4 
[Jolly G] Ku Go Stas; +Ma3 Sta; Tr? stares; eke aiard; cMd! Aad; oOr Aaa; Hy Jo! Kt? 
Lo? Lo* NNg Tj? MTr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave SHATTH; nKt4 ATT; Hy La! Tj? areas; 
1tMd? arae 

135. Cited by Madh 2.64 — a)NNg 87; Tj? At were; cMd! rMd3 tMd4 aM Tr! 
MI1# MTr® até; Jo? Lo? Tj! 7 — b) cMd5 “ster; BK La! T; NKt! NNg sOx! Pu? Put Pu’ sPuo 
Pu’? Pu’ fefare; rMd3 +Md4 GM& GMy Tr! mTrfetare; mTr4 Tro ferfere — c) cMd! yar; 
La! Md? tMd4 GM@ Tr! mTr¢mTr5 mTr® Gas; Tr Betas: — d) sBe feeat; wKt? Lo4 
ferrrT; Bo La! Md} Put =rerat 

136. Cited by Vij 3.272; Apai1132; Madh 2.62 — a) Pu? Tj! €4; Be! aT; nKt* ke 
1Md3 GMy oOr Pu? Puf Tr! Tro gore; MTP aate; Pud Pu’? (Jolly G] Torstar; wKt! sOx! 
sPuo at — b) K? 3m; Pu? Put am; Bo afterag; wKt! at — c) BBe? wKt3 “aTat; +Md3 “erat 
— d) Lo! seqaitgrar ; rMd4 exattar aren; Tr? aT: 

137. Cited by Vij 3.271; Madh 2.69 — a)cMd> aval Seal BA FATA; Madh FAT, Bo 
ast; BBe La! nNg Farey; Pu? Put @eaT — b) Lo! Afar; Pu? Put Atequ; nNg FMT; Pu? 
mTr# [Jolly M-*-°] a1. — c) Md? Tr? arta’; Pu! qsrtar ; Lo? aot Fea; Lo? TM 
1+Md4 “aarT nKt* La! Pu2 Put “Aaa” — d) Pu @t Baar Brat; rMd4 GT; Lo? Pul? 
eae wKt3 “eranr; tMd4 eat 

138. Omitted in TMd*. Cited by Vij 3.272; Apa 1132— a) Be! sBe’ HANTE; Vij Apa 
[vl as in ed] FeaTaeq; sOx! sPus Pus Tj? Heras, wKt! ars Jb) wCa sasT TA ; sOx! 
sPuo aa: qa Pu!° acat oa: Wa “afeatt; Lot “afar — c) wKt! Lot Pul® GMd> GMy Tr 
MT? Vij Apa AAT; Tr? speatat; BBe wKt3 stspeatet; GMd! NNg Wa Seas; Lo? aepeqr- 


Chapter 11 863 


foansraty praneyes | 
agarare antar arigcareaferar: Ue 3RU 
qt qeaetes aatetaTayTT | 
weap fer: Taga Uevoul 
HERAAT J ATATAT AEHET TATA | 

Ut AEA F YRSMAT AT ULL 
fetrea g fase qaraferrat ar | 

area da Rarat sora geafe evr 
HOM TJ AAMT Sat AAA | 


aa; TMd3 aeporreet;, Lo! HeaTaRg; La! wearat— d) Be! 7; Be! Pu’ Tr? Apa PUTT; Apa [vl] 
aerer 

139.* Omitted in 1Md*. Cited by Apa 1128; M@dh 2.76— a) Tr! Tope yent:; wk? 
NNg Pu!® Wa [Jolly M Nd] Jolly ae; Hosts; GMy WS ;1Md3 ToT; Be? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
wKt! Kt? La! Tj! Tr? [Jolly G Ku R] Jha KSS Daves’; Lo Mandlik P47’; BKt S17 5 Bo 
Lo! Pu? Pu’ Apa aff’; Ox? sftef; sOx! sPuS sta’; GMd! Zz’; GMd Fe ; Be! Pu? Pu‘ Ate ; 
Lo? ef; Tj? ARF; wKe! “argas’; Be! nKt Ox? Pu? Pud Put MTr° dpa aeaedt:; Tj? Te? 
“aeavat, Md? “aeatfe:; cMd> “aeatfs; Jo? Lo} La! sOx! sPu’ Tj! Volly R] "aeerdta, oMd! 
“eat — b) Madh cerqafegped, oOr gaferenfe” — d) Be! nKt4 Pud Tj! Tj? are eer ; BCa 
Ho wKt! wKt} BK oOr sOx! Pu? sPuS Pu? Pu! Tr! Tr? [Jolly M G] are Seat ; Lo! ant 
eal; nPul aréteear’; Me |patha which he rejects) ANPTcar ; BK“ caTerafevat; Lo! Tr! 
*fere:; aCa Ho wKt} La! oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPuS [Jolly M G] eer; Tr? Rea fer 

Additional verse in Be! BKt} La! nNg oOr Mandlik [®, 7, 4, &, S] KSS Dave: 

amare zareraraaad: | 
wate yar eat Bsgeead We II 
a) BKtS oOr quay — c) La! afarat g fae scar; nNg THT FT 

140. Cited by Vis 3.270 — a) Lot far’; +Md3 faferatas, Pu2 Put faferattar; wd‘ aa 
fritay; Ke “Peta; cMd! “Prfeeaat® — b) ake arotarétarager; Lo} Tj! gear; Lo! 
waétary ; Bo Ho xPul “aaa; nKtt “arta — c) GMd! GMy waremat ae"; Tr? Uap: ae; 
Lo? tMd! 0Or Pu!® [Jolly M] Caper ae’ [rMd4 Bt ]; tM? we-papar’; Tr! weparaz’ 
nKe has Hae; Pus Pu? “Vepeet — d) Vis TAT ages, Tr! wages 

141* Cited by MGdh 2.66; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.243, and pada-c by Vis3.265 — a) 
Be! Jo? rMd* Pu? Pu’ [Jolly G] Gosearaart Sart [rMd4 om AAMT); GMy Fear: 
NNg Pu! [Jolly M] aiferaat; Putafergat; sBe Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKkt! Kt? wKt nKtt BK 
La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo? sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu} sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa [Jolly Ku R]BA [ad 
11.131] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave afeaadt; Pu? om J; BKt> Lo? Md! 4; Lo? AeAT — b) NNg 
Tr? WaTaeT; wKt! waTIaT; Ho WATT; Put TATA; Ng Protaty — c) MTP Is; GMd> a; BK 
Ng MTrt aa; tMd4 Tr! Hae; Be! Md? tMd4 AeA; wKt! “AeTt; NK eM; GMd! 
“area: Tr! ait d) TMd! ageat ad; Tj? Fe 

142. Cited by Madh 2.66~7 — b) Pu aaa; oOr Haafer; Hy “ferrar; sOx! *Perarat 

—~c) TMd3 aaferarar a arat; Kt! Pud Pu? ae; wKE eet, Ho aaet; Pu! aera 


864 Chapter 11 


yragioaar a grat a dtearq Wess 
TARA AAA TATA AT Aa: | 
BAKA T FATA Fergie ULYvI 
PRATT Atay T eT ay | 
TRASH ate Talat: ULSI 
uadaeiel eeat Raraqaay | 
AATAAKA PET POAT LEI 
Aaratsrestt dear denrtotrr yeahs | 
afagaafrter sronitacatafer feat: esl 
AT: QUAM AMATI. 
qsaert fraeficar aged wr: Ue cu 


143. Omitted in Pu!® Tj?. Cited by Vij3.276; Apa 1134; Mddh 2.434 — a)wKt} nKt* Lo? 
oMy “a4; nPul “arte — b) wKt! eae ard; Ho cM? “yaa: Md? Pu’ Pu’ “Hee; BKtS 
“geet — c) nKt Farag; tMd* g; Hy om F ferarat— d) Tr? faeerat 

144. Cited by Apa 1138 — a) cMd! aareat ta aarti, La! ares wKt! ware — b) 
Tr? CHAT, Or Tr! Volly Gr] USTarAT, Pu? Put BTSs; cMd! wart Ba; BCa wKt! La! 
“aTat aaa FT; Ox? ger: — d) oOr Apa Fr WT; Pu!® [Jolly M2-*-9] “orang altars; Apa 
fagquater 

145.* Omitted in Lo’. Cited by Apa 1138; Madh 2.434-5 — a) GMd> presraraetar 7; 
Be! wKt} “start”; Be! Bo Ho Lo! nNg sOx! Pu! Pu2 Put Pud Pu? sPuS Wa atreftar: Tr! 
“eftar; Pus “art — b) Tr? om F; Tj? ae; Pul? at — c) Pu2 Put garessor aa; NNg FIeAH; 
tMd} gereeat: BKt 5 Farse; GMy Tr! Tat; BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Ké wKt} La! Lo! 
Lo? Ox? Lo? GMd? Pu} Pud Pu’ Puf Tj! Tj? Te MTP [Jolly G R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave &F%; 
BKtS Lo! Lo? GMd! nNg Tj! [Jolly M R] ¢ 7 ; Be! NK TMd3 NNg FROST; M4 TRVTG:; 
wKt! weer — d) cMy fetta; Ox? a7Aas; Be! BBE BCa La! cMd! tMd? cMd) NNg 
Pud Pu? Tr! carat 

146. Padas c-d omited in BKt5 — a) Md fade"; Lo! “Gra — b) Tj! eaear; Pul? 
ees; +Md? fear; cMd! °a:; Put “gat — c) Pu? Pu “apa; BBe Lot Pu!® [Jolly M] Peg; 
GMy nPu! [Jolly NdJaa; Jo? wKt! Lo} td? Tj! Volly RJT — c-d) oOr “ape Wey peg 
araverersr — d) Pu’ qyanmerwentt; sBe La! yaar ; Be! +Md3 1Md4 GMy nPu! Pu? Pud Pu 
Pu’ Lolly G] y3ATaTT [Pu? Jolly G) “atfe; Pud “ate }; Lo! NNgsOx! sPuS Tj! [Jolly M289 
R]VyaaT 

147. Omitted in BKt5; padas c-d omitted in Pu!® and ma in Lo’. Cited by Vis 3.249;Apa 
1074; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.255,and padas c-d by Apa 1069, 1210 — a) wKt? aareaer — 
b) GMy Vij Teper fageafet; oOr Apa AePRAS IA, cMd> Gepieta — c) TMd} Afar; cMd> 
“gata; Pud Pu? fart — d) mTrS aromeater [2] area; +Md4 aroraefafer Pera; Te sett 
fees nKet Pere: 

148. ma in Lo’. Cited by Vij 3.254; Apa 1074, 1160; Madh 2.349 — a) Bh [ad 11.97] 
appears to read: Gera MseraeeaTT:; BK t > om AT:; Be! BBe BCa Hy La! Lo? Lo? Lo! oOr 


Chapter 11 865 


SET arat wT Afar fatracntetey a | 
Yatra tearm: garatht Praq sez ULeR I 
TSN FITT WATT TAT: | 
may Perrer ga wer fageafer ueyott 
ward wer fare gueegers TT | 
Graeeaetet sat amt orerr: UL 8a 
art Feet wet Neral aah T | 
Fradea faordtat gaaeereatfr 242i 
MBM TF wa oheikoera 7 | 
RAT ART WT AAs satfersay ULK AN 
goiter a earata dicar Aeareaty feo: 
AALAATAAT ATAATT AAT: ULL 


nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu? Apa 1074 [vl] rm; - BKtS om “BIT — b) tMd! Fa; Ke “yTETeT- Bo 
Ferrera oMy “fercerar; Bel *Rerarr, La! °ferarear; sOx! sPuS Pu? “fear aff; oOr 
*fear mar; pCa fear 7; Ho oma — c) Jo? La! Lo} Tj! Volly R] Fagor; iMd4 ga Shear 
— d) sBBe qeagqeferd; Md? ger’; Tr! mTr4 mTrS oar; oMd> “gonfra; Ox? “quate; 
tM “gopya; GMd! nPu! Pu? Pud Pul? °goftge 

149. ma in Lo‘, Cited by Apa 1164; Madh 2.313 — a) Pw Put T&T; Tr! BET FET F; 
oMy Tat TET F; Apag; Tj? eater — b). Lo? J — c) Tre sroitfengrar, Pul? yarPoret J. Lo! 
Tr! “Reeiar; aK “fesret 7; rMd4 Madh fare a, Ox? “Reset 7, 1Md3 Apa [vl] Reeren, 
Apa Pexeregq; Bo Lo! teat a:; Madh Sear J— d) La! wae aq 

150. ma in Lot. Cited by Vij 3.254; Apa 1164;Madh 2.349 — a) JmpKt* tTMd? Pul® Tr? 
[Jolly M] sTemrer ae — b) Madh Hearara; BKtS GMd! tMd? Pu2 Put Tr! atau: — c) Tr? 
qrereq; TMd4 AATaT; Be! sBe? Bo nPu! oOr Pu? Put Pud Pu? Tr! Tr? Preraer; Tj? Prerger 
—~d) BK Pub WRT; Bo Wer 

151. Omitted in GMy [Jolly Nd]; ma in Lo*. Cited by Vis 3.249; Vij 3.254; Apa 1074, 
1164; Madh 2.298— a) wKt! asta; cGMd! SATe WR g; Tr? Wet; Bo YT — b) oOr FAT: 
eed; Tr! “areata; wKt! wKt? Md? “agen, oMd5 ‘aaf8a; sBe pCa Jo? Lo} Pu!? Tj! 
Tr? (Jolly M?-* R] aT 

152. ma in Lo‘. Cited by Apai075 — a) Lo? AWAT; BK Ox? Tas; Put A; TMdé AT 
Pu? Put Feat; Hy Fast; BKé NNg Pu! Ader; Pul? ave — b) nNg Ser’; Puld wet’; Be! sBe 
Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La! oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? Put Pu> sPuo Pu’ Pu’ Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha 
KSS Dave 883; sBe2 Seat; wKt! Kt? “ae; Pus “sat — c) cMd! Tj! Pada — d) La! cMd! 
tMd4 Tr? aeererefe; BK “aeeforr 

153. main Lo‘. Cited by Madh 2.313; Apa 1167; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.289— a) Jm 
oOr Pu a; Bo Y; Ho Tj! Yrs; Bo Pud Pu? Yet — b) Tr? aT — c) GMd> ATeHT HT, wKt! 
nKt* BK TMd3 tMd? PuS Pu? “ser; Bo °wReaTET, La! “wearot an: Vij T— d) Be! “OAL 

154. Cited by Vij 3.289 — a) Pud Pu’ Tj! Tr? garht; Bo Tart; wKe! aeorhy; Tr} 


Bewrt; Pu2 yay; Lol yay, cMy Fat; BK Hart wT; Pu! para; rMd3 porary; 


866 Chapter 11 


fasten wears: whrarear: 
wrt HaCaT Ears ATT WEA M 
gett smear arent atari saarhr a | 
AAS AT TAMAS TT AT ULE 
PATTIES HRECTAT T WATT | 
ATETHERTNT OT AAT FATT ULI 
aterm g asataraaaraeat fect: | 

a aeyergquaadare Aee TT UL4Cl 
aaa FF asaya eT | 

A HAT MHA Hey TaaNT TATITAT ULKSM 


TMd4 aarest &— b) Vij [ed] Steatstear [Nd reads atea Py], rMd3 wet Fear; Tr! yepT 
tear’; Lo} Tj! Fearerr — d) Pul? arent weer; Te areas; Pu Pu? aaa AT; oOr Te 
maest AT; Md? aaerst aT NNg WAeae: 
155. ma in Lo‘. Cited by Apa 1164; Madh 2.296 — a) Lo! fagueer Aertr— b) sBe? 
Pud WaT; oOr WAT; aK HaHa; Tr! Prasenresadt:, Md} Capra: — c) Pud Pul? grex; 
Madh Ft Ft at 
156.* Omitted in BBe? BKt5; verses 156 and 157 transposed in Tj; verse 156 placed after 
162 in Bo. Cited by Apa 1166 — a) TMd? TMdé MTr4 MTro StRAT G Bepatenty [mTr* mTr® 
3h]; Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! sOx! Ox? Pu’ Pud sPuo Pu? Pu® Tj? Tr? mTr? MTP? 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Yr; Lot Fat; Pul® Ya — b) Md? Heras aT; rMd4 
afogpdaty a; Lo? om Hawiry, MTr® acer; Be! opfacrft; Hy @raThy — c) oMd! 
tMd4 aay; La! araTeraly cMd! sOx! qaer ; wKt! Ke? oOr Gaver; wKt Gaver; oMy 
garfer’; rMd? gre; rMd4 gare; MTr4qaraaa ; La! Pu! qaremaa” — d) Apa @ 
areadg 
157. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1166— a) Te HIEAT ; wKt! Vij Apa wemeeyre [wKt! 
wees ]; BBe? Bo pCa Ho Kt? wKt} BKtS Lo! Lo? Lot Ox Pu’ Pu? Pu! Tr? “amet — b) 
La! aaepetat; rMd4 were — c) Pu2 Put “ares ay’; La! oOr Wa Hrepeacarnt aH 
Vij “SrepeRPat aa; wKt! “earth — d) Lo! aH; Lo? NNg sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu‘ sPu® mTr4 
MTP MTr® Wa dpa ar [cf. note to 11.209c]; La! fairey 
158.* Omitted in [Jolly M]; ma in Lol. Cited by Apaii44 — a) Pu? Put aTferaera; nKt4 
tMd3 tMd* GMd> GMy Pu? Pu’ Tr! Tr? mTr4 Tro Na@ Re Go afeert; Bo La! om; sBe 
BCa Jm Jo? wKt! BKt> Lo? GMd! nNg oOr Pu? Pu’ Tj! 7 — b) Ox? Pu? Pu4 STENT; wKt! 
“argagferer, Md‘ “areaeraradan; [Jolly M8] “SATEHT; Jo? BKE Lo? [Jolly R] Jolly afer, 
BBe’ Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt? Lo! GMd! GMy Ox? Pub Pu? Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr* MT? MT¥° [Jolly 
M?] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 4&2"; Lo} Md Pv? Put Tj! [Jolly R2] afaer; Bo Faw — d) 
Pu? dee; Ox? Tr? dear ad; cMd! TTS TIT 
159.* Cited by Vis 3.278 — a) BBe? Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? Lo! [ma] 
Lo? sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu} Pu‘ sPuo Pu’ Pu! Tj! Tj? mMTr3 Mandlik KSS serart, Lo? T— b) 
Pulo “areraie; oOr HIT — c) Lal @ T Pear at Pes: Pu! gH: Lol wad; Ho wat 
ary; Pu? Put pre — d) Ox? ac; La! waHaIT; BCa La! oOr Pu!? Te Tara; Lo! Taree 


Chapter 11 867 


fastoarenghae Wear TET T | 
ayaleraaa w ar TaatOPT ULSol 
baa aera: Bhakreasar | 
VAAIHAAe BWexr arey wert: UL el 
asarenacettea erat ferfereit fefer: | 
T Faat TAT Fearfer: USER 
Heat BATE TAATAT: | 
raadtaetes Heagreret fageate eeu 
ATA F BUT elit souyeet T | 
Krai aw Yara TAT Ew 
FARTIAT: | 


FAMOTACTARINT FAT 


160. ma in Lo‘. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 1167 — a) Lo? frereasrencbftar, nNg ferstastar- 
afar; cMd® fers; Tr! rare — c) Ho “Fea: BBe 2 mTr4 MTr® Brame; sOx! sPuo 
“Heras; Lal “aterctt a; Lot om T — d) oMd’ fader aarrdet, Hy waft’; Pud Lolly R] 
are; Jo? nKt* Lo? Lo’ Lot GMd! NNg nPul Pu? Pué Pu’ Tj! Tr! Vijatetf; sOx! sPue [Jolly 
M] gates; Wa gases; mT! mT gadtar 

161.* ma in Lot; padas c-d omitted in GMy — b) Lo! fafa’, Lo? gr’; oOr gure; Be! 
“aeat, Tr? weet; Kt? aT; GMy “wafer — c) BCa Ho Jm Jo! sOx! nPul sPu Tj! Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave 3217 ; BKe ara Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm_ Jo! Tj? TP Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave ° aa Tears; 1Md3 cM & Tr! “amyg; [Jolly Gr] “aes grt; cMd! tM@ mTr4 mT 
mTr® orergart sOx! sPuo “aaa; [Jolly Nd] 3 gears; nPul Wa qmgart; Lo? 
“aepgart; nNg ymygrat, nKet “yarrgrt; Pus Pu? yay ASI; [VVolly G] ye Ta; Ox? Pr 
Pu Pul? “ager Tj! “yar — d) sBBe? areratcaresanreat; t+Md4 2itee; Pu? Pué ae; Be! 
wKt! Lo! Lo? nNg Pu? Pu! arearg; sOx! ary; La! arearfeeair ; aK sitet, wKt! are: 

162, ma in Lot — a) cMd! Ug; Tr! wile; Bo La! Lo! Le xPu! Pu} Pus Pu? Tr? 
uaa; Lot mTr! mT ro ATES; BBe2 ATEARAHT; Be! sOx! sPuo “areas; Lo? 
“arene, Tre “aceite; Ho “Bien; La! “eit — b) Pu? Pu’ fefereit; Tr! faferer — c) Pul? 
aqararaeretn; La! eat ; sOx! sPuS Aaetorae’; tM? “ataTs — d) Pul? feat — After 
verse 162 Bo adds verse 11.155 

163. ma in Lot; padas c-d omitted in Lo®; the ms of mTr? ends after PcaT HT. Cited by 
Vij 3.265; Apa 1109; Madh 2.427 — a) Pw Put ORO nPu! arenfrert ; Ho ‘eaataiter, 
Tj! “ator — b) cMd! @ear ary; Pu? Pu! wear |; Ke? wena; Tr! fgsirwAT: — c) Be! BBe 
Lo! 1Md! sOx! [Jolly M34] Vij ast — d) oOr Hegreaa; Tj! PeTegt; Be! Lo! nNg Pu2 
Pu} Put Vij Peas; TMd4 Peas; Bo Pwslea, sBe fagead 

164. Omitted in Lo?. Cited by Vij3.265; Apa 1110; Madh 2.427 — a) Hy om J; Be Ho 
BKt® Lot nNg sOx! nPu! sPu® Pu8 Pu!? [Jolly M R] Apa 4; Md? Tj! Beer — b) Bkt aq; Lo! 
@—c) Pu! Wa ardiegy’ ; ; BBe? Jm wKt wKt? Lo! g — d) Bo 00r. Tr! ahs aa Pu? Pu’ 
yet ara ; [Jolly G] lagarr, Im “wpatd, Te str ata; cMds “aor ae; Te! “aera; Vij 
Apa “aot g 


868 Chapter 11 


meat Fey aRatereayayr Negi 
VEMSATTEY AAATET TT | 
FaeHeM TST faarerry ULSI 


TTSTSAT WT YSRAT TST T | 
aerate a Bert eared 2 cll 


ARAMA ATHET TAAET T | 


TERMI WT Tae BAT ULSI 
arisen Retaqrer T | 
gferrettaettar a wearta sre wT: ULSAN 
Tanaed WT etapa far: | 
smear x Aathreargad ULVoll 
Tracts eatea: frat eeatry | 


165.* Cited by Vij 3.235; Apa 1110; Madh 2.427; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.257— a) wKt 
me to Serr — b) Lo? Tj! pear 7 Fert; tMd4 cMd® Tr! Me Jha Dave “asafT, Bo pCa 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? wkt} Kt* La! Lo! Lot Ng oOr Ox? Pu! Pu’ Pu? PuS Pu!® Tr? Tro 
Wa Vij Mandlik Jolly KSS saa: — c) Md) “aataret; Pul? cattast — d) La! Pratearer- 
fraree, sOx! sPu’ cearrer fageey; oMd! afeeatarear” 

166. Cited by Vij 3.235; Apa 1110; Madh 2.427 — a) BBe? wKt! wer Apa qoPHTsa 
PuS Pu’ “eet; Lo! [but cor] cMd! “erter — b) nKt? Pu! “arte aT —~ c) Apa [vl] FATS ; 
NNg om J; GMd> Tr! g — d) La! featraor 

167. Omitted in Ho; padas b-d omitted in BBe’, and padas c-d in Tr’. Cited by Vij 3.235; 
Apa 1110; Madh 2.427 — a) Lo’ Tj! “erat 4; Bo NK tMd4 GMd) Tr! mTr4@ — b) TMd3 
Broa; Bo FHT TF; oOr FH F; nKt4 Feet; Put aT — c) Hy Jo® Kt? La! Lo! Lo? Lot 
Ng Ox! Ox? Pu! Pu? Put Pu’ Puo Pu’ Pu’ Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly 3@ ; wKe “aati; Lo? 
Tj! afoot 

168. Padas a-b omitted in Tr? and padas a-c inBBe. Cited by Vij 3.265; Apa 1111; Madh 
2.427 — a) Be! oOr Fw ; oMd Tr! “aratat — c) tMd? ‘mart — e-d) Lo? Tj! [Jolly R] 
“qardtar eet Fe HoTAaT — d) oOr slearat; GMy HAT:; GMd! Horse: aK ts HTT; 
wKt! worfaar; Tr? Husa, Vij HERAT 

169.* Cited by Vij 3.265;Apa 1110; Madh 2.427 — a) nKt* eeresterasioat; nPu! Pu? 
Pu‘ Tr? eater; wKt! afte; Lo2NNg Wa Vij SHuTAT. Ox? Sutat, Be! wKt! “sratat; Pul? 
“@tat — b) Be! Bo BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? sKt® Lo! Lo? Lot nNg oOr Ox? Pu’ Pu’? 
Pu’ Pul® Tj? Te Apa Madh Go Na Ku Rn Mandlik Jolly KSS artearner; Me Dave Jha 
fgsrthergeer — c) BKS get: Lot Pu’ Pu! “aeitt’; eCa I — d) Bo wHrda,; cMd> tear Fa; 
Md} Tr! taser FT; wKe! feopdta; rMd4 BoapeT we 

170. a) Bo nKt! UfFae ; Lo? “Fettea; nKt4 om ade — b) Lo! eaaepe fest:; cMd! 
Pus Pu? [Jolly Gat: — c) Bo waRTE; sOx! sPuo “rT Ber; wKt! BKtS Ox? Pul? a — d) 
wKt} Lo? Md! NNg oOrsOx! sPuS Tr! Wa Fataeay ; Pul? Rreargqed; Lo? “Rreweat 


Chapter 11 869 


aeq: greet a Sly Sartareaag TUL 
Yaad aftrt aefat agra a | 

AGA WAHT Wed AAT AT ULI 
vate art area ghears | 
Acar: Tate TTAAT: ULIZM 
WaT yet serararaaitery | 

ta: Rear wes Bar Her array aT ULI 


ayat g aaraer gfe arfate ar feo: 
Trams fear ta waar: STATATRT ULI 


171. Cited by Apa 1118; Mddh 2.252, 264 — a) GMd! “aer Ta — b) Bo Tj! Tr! fra; 
BKt akears ay — c) Md? ofay; *Md4 FaeT BAT; Tr Gare saty; oOr FIST FT TIT — 
d) BKtS “Cara 

172. Omitted in Hy; padas a-b omitted in BBe?. Cited by Vis 3.254; Apa 1118; Laks 2.10; 
Dev 1.187, 189;Madh 1.470 — a)Laks fq; Tr? Fa; wKt4 OFT; sOx! Sqeareteht; sPu’ Fepa- 
att; aCatqeaeet; Bo tated; La! taefat; Lo! nPu! Pu’ Pu’ fracreett; Lo? fraereet, 
oOr Pu? Put frqrareea, Be! fares; nKt4 aft 7 — b) Bo Se, Tr! eafee, Tr? eafear; 
Lo? oOr @aat, Be! nNg weet; wk} creat; mTr4 Sea; Pus Pu! efter, Ox? at, cMd5 
ereftar, aMy eafera; wKt! eaftar, Lo*ar — c) mTr® Arger ATgerqeT; tM? ATEaT; NK oOr 
Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] wtqereer; Md? GMy Tr! Tr‘ [Jolly Nd Gr]Apa Nd wrgerat a; La! arger- 
yea; Jm Jo! Kt? Mandlik KSS o1gerrar 

173. Omitted in GMd! [haplo]. Cited by Apa 1118; Laks 2.10; Dev 1.187, 189, 190; padas 
a-b cited by Madh 1.470, and padas c-d by Apa 79 — a) Be! Pu!? ver: feraeq; rMd? 
waredateq; Be! BBe? BCa wKt! wKt? La! rMd* Pu? Put Pud Pu? Pul arate ~— b) Be! 
TOTS TTA; Tr? “‘aeq; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave FET; BK TT: 
pBe? Lal “?aeY; oOr Ata — c) Be! BBe? wKt! Lo? Tj! ama; wk aaaary ; Tr! 
araarary ; cMy afesary ; PuS Pu? areeiary ; rMd3 aaa ; mTrMTrS araagy ; Kt 
afacdaray ; Apa79g AANge: Lo! “arated: Apa 79 [vl] “Aareaaarear: — d) cMy 
qafer quaae:; Tj! sferaearaaer:; BK tS Lo? Ox? Tafa; Lo! caerya; NNg GIT; Lo? 
mare ; Be! @araaw:; Laks Gata; Pul? querer: 

174, Omitted in cMd!. Cited by Apa 1149; Ma@dh 2.272 — a) NNg Pu’ Pu? aarqereasy; 
Me |patha]Straraeé Jet; Be! rMd4 sraTgquy; =oMd?> aratggy; rMd4 get; Tr! ger; Madh 
arash{ — a-b) Bh [pathalaarttaadt @ Sareat ta atfafer — b) Lo? sae — c) Wa 
Yate:; Bo Ho Tj! Tr! far; Oras; [Jolly M] BS; Bh [patha] Me [patha] TS @ TF [ef ViDh 
53.4]; wKtS tt — d) GMd? Atanas; GMy aed; La! ya: 

175. Omitted in NNg Tr? [haplo]. Cited by Madh 2.276 — a) Be! Lo* 7; wKt! aaTaee; 
Ho FATE; Lo? FATAST; 1Md4 Sasa; Madh TART; Be! aHTeTT — b) Pu’ Pu’ Ta; Bo 
gett; Pu! arferfer; +Md4 at — c) Pulaarteg feat Fa; oOr AsHTey; Be! fear wat; cMd! 
feanft aT — d) Hy ater:; Bo La! aatar 

cMd! mTr® omit padas b and d making a half-verse of padas a and c and gives the 
following as the second half-verse: 


crear aeaciftcarar: srorarsr geater || 


870 Chapter 11 


DSTI AM Wear Bept WT Mee 7 | 
Teeter feast arareareat FT Taker ULoeN 
fangel fer wat Preeareaatr | 

ATT: TERY aelat aaa U2 

al ayt: Weel aaqararaaterar | 

Fey UA UT AMT: WaT TAT NLC 
THUAN TIAA feat: | 
Tapa RrArtetateter Wott 


176, Cited by Vif 3.257; Vij 3.260;Apa 1046, 1121; Har-A 1.28.11; Madh2.88 — a) BBe* 
Bo Hy Jm Jo? wKt! wKt? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot oOr Ox? Pu} Pu!® Tj! [Jolly M?+5 G R] Vij aTUET 
Tre aeratet : Ho anstorat fearay, Pu’ Pu? aeeteer Pert; Tr! averorarfeaair; Wa "ea 
b) Bo Ho sOx! Tj! Tr! ent; TM? Har; Bo Fer se” — c) cMd! “ard wear — d) oMd5 
oMy “et; Ho Pu? Pus Pu? ; Lo? seater 
177. Verses 177 and 178 placed afer 179 in GMy; pada-d omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis 
3.254; Apag8, 1124; padas a-b cited by Dev 3.569;Madh 2.176 and padas c-d by Vis 3.256; 
Vij 1.70, 3.275-— a) Pu2 Put wecafer fer — b) Be! Bo Tj! Frevar’; Wa Preear; TMd? 
Rewari’. Md} “8a aah — c) Bor Md3 7: GH; sOx! sPud Taps; NK TREN’; oOr Tea 
at —d) Lo! Mat; cMy a2: pBBe? wKB Lot ered’: Pu! ae’: Hy areger 
Two additonal verses in nPu! [for first verse see under 178]: 
wraprcedeter frat Aro wr z | 
were Teangutestfeaed: Fart || 
178. Pada-a omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis 3.250, 254; Apa 1125 — a) La! aT; Be! Hy Jm 
Jo! Kt? wKt Lot Ox? Tj? TP [Jolly Nd M*] Mandlik Jha KSS DavewSAT; BB e TART; 
tTMd? GMd> oMy Tr! mTr4 ager — b) Be! agai ; Pul® aged; Pu! [Jolly M!-23-°7} 
“arguferar; mTr? aferar:; Md} “afre:; Apa Hfead; sBe? Bo pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! 
Kt? La! Lo? Lot [but cor] GMy sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr? [Jolly M4 Nd R] Nd Ra Re 
Mandlik KSS “aaa; Lo! “afexat; sKe “aequr— c) Bo wKtS eg; Lo? Br Ba — d) rMd3 
aratt; cMd! crest wa 
Additional verse in Be! Mandlik [1, t, | KSS Dave; given after 176 in nPu'; cited by 
Vij 1.72: 
srerrenrataenr arat: sor Ara: | 
asta fagrety: sraferast Acre: | 
b) nPu! Mandlik KSS Dave faa: 3S; Mandlik KSS Dave JStaFAT: — c) Vij 
faguater 
Additional verses in Pu!: 
Ala Arete SPT ATgereth rgerar | 
figaatartroresy art a (2) eet ear | 
shear wrerarat & ara aera | 
welt safer areat aratt aoitaar g ar II 
179. Cited by Madh 2.251 — a) BBe* Bo cGMd! tMd? MTr*mTr°a: ay — b) BKt® Lo! 
GMd! tMd3 +Md? sOx! sPuS Te MTr’ mTr° Madh) @a4; cMd5 °aaare; GMy “are; Tr! 


Chapter 11 871 


wat aTTGATAT aA FrepEe: | 
ufad: agmrarkrr: yoy rept: uecolt 
aay Tata aeat aeTaesy | 
TATA ATT FT ATATAATATAT UL LI 
at aa ufaasat dent arta area: 


] 
a aeale ad Hay aerentagqar eer 
ufiaenaae are afiesatearad: aE: | 


fatacset arene wreqfearnyedtrar nec 3 
aft aenat got wheta teaver | 


HERTAQITS aT IIa: AT ULC 
fradtar aerrg arava | 


“aarar, Pu3 fear: — c) Be! BKtS Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pus Pu? gee; Tr Tae Bo Pu! ager; rMd3 
Madh & Her; Wa “waTaBrear, Pul? “ward Pret; cMd! mTr4 mTr® * gerararenteata ; My 
“sprrarcafeafir — d) Tj? Bh [patha| Prater; cMd! “tedtefer; Madh “arfefer 
180. Verses 180 and 181 transposed in Wa — a) Jo! Kt TaT; Lo? NNg nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pue 
Pu? mTr¢mTr® Wa [Jolly M3-*5] Wat:; GMd! [but cor] Te Tat; nKt* Ue; Lo! * gary: BBe 
“at Awa; nKtt NNgnPu! Pud Pu? Pul? mTrémTrS Wa HePad — b) sOx! sPuo arqaeder 
frcpfer:; +Md3 aquifite; Bo Kt! Lo? PuS Pu? Wa Prepdt:; nNg Pract; Tr? Pear; Pu!? 
faepeat — d) BB e* GMd! 1Md3 GMa GMy oOr Tr! mTrémTr® [Jolly Nd] aa yer 
fropf, rMd4 “arfaear ger epi; Be! Pul? Wa frepfe: 
181. Cited by Vis 3.257; Vij3.261; Apa1087; Har-A 1.21.5; padas a-b cited by Vi¥ 3.257 
— b) nNg ofeach: Fe FAT; Bo cMd! GMd5 sOx! Tr! mTr* mTr° [Jolly Gr Nd] Vis GDh 21.3 
BDh 2.2.3504 Tae; BK TA UT; GMy AAratgd — c) sOx! sPuo “emrmfhit’. Md‘ “caTerat 
4+; Be’ Pu’ Wa “arate — d) BBe? * Sareea; Ox? 1; Be! Bo Ho sOx! Pud sPu® 
Pu? MTP MTro ararerareaet; wKt! nKtt Lo! arareateatd; Lot OAR; Tr? SAA; 
Jo? Lo? Md? Ox? Tj! Tr! Save, [TM “ATT 
182. Cited by Vis 3.257 [twice]; Vij 3.261; Madh 2.23 — a) wKt? aq ofa; +Md4 
“aatar — c) Md) TaN; Tr? J + Batt — d) Bo Lo! Pu’ Pu’ [Volly M45] aaenier Taw, 
BKt> Md} 1Md4 GMy Tr! aeerer frye: oMd Sater T Bsa, Tj! Tas 
183.* Padas b-d omitted in Lo*. Cited by Vij 3.294; Apa 1206 —- a)mTr® “eiteas ead 
— b) oMy arftvé"; Be! sBe? pCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? Lo! Lo’ cMd! nPu! Pu? Pu3 
Put Pu’ Tj! Tj? Wa Vij Apa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “aieaaste:, wKt! “atertafe:; Lo? “atara: 
wT — c) Md} Feaelt — d) Apa oaTS 
184. Cited by Vij 3.2904 — a) wKt? ef — b) sCa Tata; nKt4 whe; GMdd Tr! Tr? 
ger I. Md} Tr wre I; Lo? Nada [Na patha as in ed.]; Be! Ho Lo*® Md? tMd4 GMy 
00r: Ox? Puf Ty Tr? [Jolly R] ‘AeaeT; Jm BKtS cMd! nPu! Pu2 Put Pud Pu? Wa [Jolly M289] 
Na ateT; Bo aeet — c) Bo Tr? “ais — c-d) sOx! sPu “aorete Tait; nKt* Lo} Tj} 
“gard araiet [Lo® “ardte] — d) La! cMd? NNg oOrnPu! Pu’ Pu? Tr! Wa Vij ware 


872 Chapter 11 


array wart a ara Se fe alfeat ueca 
rear a Pade Srerrer a aaa | 
ST Mygareaer wdtary woratsrw: uecei 
ware TF aka wear aay | 

aaa Ate WTA: TATA FT TET Nott 
aay a ae wer view wat wey | 
aattor arfreratior reared aaratey ULC 
wana fat gate atfieg aftrareatt | 
FMA FTF AATT Tethers ULC 


185.* Omitted in Tr?; padas a-b omitted in GMy. Cited by Vij 3.294; Laks 2.424— a) Ho 
tMd‘ sOx! sPuS Vij Practecaea are [preferred by Biihler]; Md? gate; [Jolly M89] Fra- 
der; Nad |patha] 7 wefa for Pacey; Be! BK Lo? Lot GMd5 NNg 0Or Tj! [Jolly M4] 
“RE, BK aeATeT; Lot [Jolly M*>] Terra; Ox? Pulo Tea [om I] — b) Ox? nPu! Pu? Pub 
Pul® Wa ‘aerat:; sOx! sPuo “ae — c) NNg WaMT wKe! watt; oOr wart BE; wKt! FE — 
d) Be! Bo Ho BKt? La! Lot Md? GMd° GMy sOx! Ox? Pud sPu® Pu? Pul® Tr! mTr? mTr® Wa 
[Jolly M GN Nd] Vij Jolly arate & ateavt [Wafe; tMd? GMy atfear; Pul? stfafay; Laks 
urate a atfat; oOr art we a; wKe araTafe; Lo! dae; Md! a FT; rMd4 Ba gq; Tj! 
atfesfar; cMd! atferast 

186. Folios containing 11.186-229 missing in Tr'. Omitted in Bo Pul® — a) TMd? J BK 
aq; Tr ava ; Pud Pu? [Jolly G] 7 Pra’. tMd4 afaa’ Pu! Put fafa; Ke oMy Prada; nKe 
fradet — b) Pu3 aear’; Lo! Sateared; Pus Pu? sacs eT, GMd! SAtewreyl; mTrosacoure: Be! 
Sesurey, Tr? swsaraey;, Ox? Sesargreey, Lo! Tr’ g; La! mTr® ast; Be! wKt? Lot sOx! Ox? 
Pu} sPuo Pu’ Tr? [Jolly M G] Me Jolly Jha Dave 46q; Pu’ Pu’ aéq; TMd? Fee — c) Pu? 
wasiat; Ox? sheeatar, cMd! Shear oT Tr? tet oT: BBe? wKt agar; BKts agar; Jo? 
Lo? tMd? GMy Tj! [Jolly M2 Nd R Gr] Jolly “areer; tMd4 “aTeer, Ox? “area, Pus Tr? 
“greta — d) wKt! aeftateg gonftrar:; oOr “weizer:; cMy far 

187. Cited by Vis 3.291; Vij 3.295;Laky 2.424 — a) Vis BRaag aad; Pu “Braque; 
oOr 4 — b) wKt! BAT Foraay Fg; Ng Pu’ Pu? Vij WT; La! at; Pu? Put 4a: — c) BBe? La! 
Lo! Lot Tj! wReag:; Md} WeEaZ:; Laks WRT; Be WTaZ:; Bo wey: — d) Bo pCa Jo* Lo! 
Lo? Lo? Pu’ Pu? Tj! ger; Pue Pu? Searsra4r 

188, Omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Laks 2.424 — a) wKU 4 Gd AY Fe WET; Ox? aT; 
La! adtq; BBe om 4; BBe BKtS La! GMd? Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu’ set — b) Pu? Pu’ Yat far; Bo 
fawer wat; Ox? faweq wart; sOx! Pud sPuo Pu? Yat; Jm GH; sBe? FE c) cMd> aarofifer 
a apraifer; cMd! sre; Lo! art; Laks Sarwar for 

189. Omitted in BKt [haplo]. Cited by Vis 3.250, 292; Apa 99;Laks 2.424; Dev 3.579, 
680 — a) Vis UT Ua fae: Bra; Be! nCa Ho Lo! LotnPu! Wa [Jolly M35 Ku] Dev aaa; 
Jm Jo! rMd3 tMd4 GMd> oOr sOx! Pu5 sPu® Pu’ [Jolly G] Vis 3.250Vij taea;, Jm rMd3 
+Md* GMd> GMy oOr Pw Pu’? MTr‘4 Vis 3.250 Vij Tt Bate; Vijz.260 FI — b) Laks 
aitreeaufcareaty, nPul ofteq; Ox? afar T]— c) GM GMy MTP‘ MTYr® Vis Apa Laks Dev 
qeaaarat et |; Lo? nNg ee aah | Fears; TMd4 aeaTHTTA; GMd! tMd3 “sR; La! CsATAT: 








Chapter 11 873 
vakaRrmithart feared | 
Fabia Grae Behr Nes oll 
Tena Fanta fagaratr nia: | 
MMM A Aes TA AAT LS el 
aat faarat attest area area 
arama arepery surequarrag ues 
mrad ferateteer feresterreq a fear: | 
aa aT Uehara LS 3A 
agieaastater BT AAT TT | 
cee year wart aaa aT NLS vI 


Pu2 Put “sated; Pud Pu? “ott; sOx! sPuS “SrATeee a@°; Ox? Pub Tr? wT — d) NNg aTaa- 
aera, Apa Tee; Lot fesrger; Ox? yarferar 

190.* Padas a-b omitted in BKt. Cited by Laks 2.424; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.261 — a) 
oMy waea aT; Tr? waar; Lo! cor to Ct: SAT ; Bo Lo Tj! cafeate 1Md4 weak; wKt! 
“Rath; Be? Pefar; Put “Pftres art — b) Pud Pu’ “ate; Lo? “ata; oOr “ATRT; Be Lo! 
Ng sOx! Put sPuo Wa [Jolly G R M4] Vij ViDh54.31 SPY; My BRT; GMd! mTr°” Fereat- 
we; Hy Jo! K@ nPu! Pu5 Tj? [Jolly Nd Ku] Go Ku Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “Parcreraed; 
Ox? °Rrereract — c) Put “srptstars; Pu2 “steet SATs; Be! Bo Ho Jo? Lo! NNg sOx Ox? 
Pu} sPu® Tr? Wa [Jolly M R Nd] Jolly Jha Dave ViDh 54.32 “sraatarsy, NKtt Lot Pu!® cMd$ 
oMy MTMTr mT ro “SAPAT at; GMd! “oestetars; Laks “sTateaars; nCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! 
Kt? oOr Pu’ Pu? Tj? [Jolly G] Mandlik KSS sata 7 — c-d) Tj! “waPae aA; Kes 
“sAPae Gyaa + d) Im Ta + HP; Md! GaferT 

191. Cited by Apa 1209; Madh 2.155— a) cMy [Jolly Nd] Tow AT PAT AT; oMd aed 
pared; Md? Md‘ stent THA FT; mTr4 Tro sara; Pud Tr? om HaweT — b) La! fag- 
aatft, 1Md4 cMd? [Jolly Nd] fagearaft; rMa3 fageareft — c) tMd3 GMy gar — d) NNg 
ma sh AtePaT, oMy eteear, TMd3 Hedy; wKkt! Faeq; Lo? afaara; Apa [vl] aa 

192. Padas a-b omitted in oOr. Cited by Vis 3.262; Vij 3.265; Apa 1107;Mddh 2.433 — 
a) Lo! Lo’ Md} GMd> cMy Tj! eat; Tj! afeastt — b) Lo! Ox? arya; BKe ATs; Bo nKt! 
Apa [vl] Aa; BBe? ATA; Pu? Pu4 arava; Lo? area; wKt! area; TM} Herat — 
c) Lo! ataftear, 1 Ma? atapeek — d) Pu? Pu “feeraar ; NKtt Lo! arta; Lot oOr Tj! 

“ara; Bo “areata; Tr? “area — +Md4 jumps here to 12.25, and 11.193 to 12.24 are omitted 

193. Cited by Vis 3.262; Apa 1107— a) Tr’ “dedt — b) Be! BBe BKt) La! Lo! oOr Ox? 
nPu! Pu2 Put Pu’ Apa ®t; GMy “STIR; Md} “eat @ a; sK# fer: — c) Bo La! Lo? 
TM@ nPul stare; Tr? mTr® aTATes; Tr? aaTePT; oOr aTalPT; GM@ sarareq; Pud Pu? 
ararrer; Pu2 Pul ator a; tMd3 FB; Pula afk — d) Pu2 Put etararerearfasta; tM? 
“area; BBe TMd? 0Or “arfeatcr; mTr® “erated 
194. Cited by Vij 3.289; Apa 929, 1150 — a) Wa © AE; Ox? & AE; Ox? nPul 
“Saardafer: Lo! eaartatee; 1Md4 ‘fear aad; Jo! “Feaarsta; Bo GMy safer — a-b) Tr? 
agiéd eau a seo aeHeqd — b) La! star: HAaTET; Ho sOx! sPud svar: atu; 
wKt svar STATUIT; BK tS Lot FSI; wKe! STATO; NK“ GAT — c) Apa 1150 Agate — d) 





874 Chapter 11 


aficar aftr arfasar: azar aarea: 
are wes wT: Tear Feresaareergy UWesail 
sTaraga TT Mastery | 

wore aftqsy: aver ateraedifa Pez 2c cil 
Were g fg fatetaae vary | 

mMHAT: wafer det eqerer ate egott 
TAA AT Hat Tareas T | 
arate a rir: getfegeater ueeci 
Tod west ad fagrer a fea: 

aaa Warereadaayrqaqaerrsr uessil 


TETAS WT: wafers wT | 
RAFAT MTA Yeats WRooll 


nKtt PuS Pu’ STS; Lo? nNg Pu! Tr‘ Apa [vl at 929s in ed] SU; Md} STFA; BBe* TTA; 
oOr avenft; BKtS GMd! oOr aT; pCa wKt! Pu® ¢ 

195. Cited by Vis 3.284; Vij 3.289;Madh 2.430 — a) Vis Seat & Fifer — b) Lal! 
aarfeat: — c) Pu? Put aa; Be! ara; Jm ast — d) Wa Fad; Be! 1Md3 “weaftrert 

196. a) Lo! Wa Sua; Lo! rMd3 sOx! Pu? Pu sPu® Pu!? “wd; oMy “pany gq; TMd4 
par aay, Md? om 7 — b) Pu’ Pu? atastreargqarrc; cMyatasr ; Lo} ATT ; Tj! wast: 
Ja; mtr ears | tMd! aa’; Be! oOr “FAUT, Ho ard — c) Pul? gore a 
gfteaty:; Ke? grat; oOr wart: of; BBe wfagesg:; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Mandlik KSS Jha Dave 
gfagety: — d) Put aret a; Tr ater at, Bo oOr Ox? ater at, Md? ater aT; wNg [but 
cor fh | Bet a. nKt rer ar. Lo? Rae oMd! areas: Md! Tj! & 

197. Omitted in Be; padas a-b omitted in Tj! — a) La! fq; Ho Put “EH; BBe 
afary; LotaMd5 cMy Pu! Pu!® fase; ake fasttear — a-b) Jo? gf faferefeny wae — b) La! 
faeregarartd; sOx! fader ; rMd3 faaitter ; Md‘ faster; Tr art wat. Ho fafee aaa; 
Tr? a — c) wKt! tMd4 yactd; GMd> wafed; Pu! vaca; cMy walfad; nNg fafa — d) Tj! 
(Jolly R] Saraqer; Lo? Batetez; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] Byeter, cMd> cMy mTr! Was 

198. Cited by Vij 3.288; Apa 1152; Madh 2.429— a) TMd4 BrsaT TR, TMd3 ar; 
BKtS ante; Pu! art; BKt> om Heat — b) sBe Feat Frere — c) Pu2 Put arfrar » tM? 
tMd4 oOr ‘Hélat; Tj! “HBB; Lo} “MéBa — d) Hy Jm Jo! Ke GMd! Pu! Pu’ Pu? Pu’ Pu! 
[Jolly M'-2-8-9 G] Vij Madh ViDh 54.25 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave PRATT, sOx! om 


199. Cited by Apa 1152; Madh 2.442 — a) PuS Pu’ areait ; Ox? “Tae, t™d? “ae g 
west — b) nKt* om 7; Ho Ox? Apa a7; sOx! g; GMd> ag foe —c) Ho Hae; Hy aaa; 
uTrt mT ro wavererceay —~ d) wKe! oar cere; Pus Pu? Hadufer; BBE “wee, Be! 
Lo? Ox? Tj! Wa “waaafe; pCa AIA; BKtS wPul “Hostafa, nKet “Aastee; Pu2 Put “AT- 
asife; Apa ATHRaRT 

200. Cited by Vij 3.277; Apa 1135; Madhe.54 — a) wKt)  @eeet; Ox? Pu! Trt mTr® 
Wa Geer, Lal “etéat — b) [VJolly Nd] saPz: [supported by Nal; Lo? at — c) Be! Ho 


Chapter 11 875 
Womsteadt Ae aeawt vst T | 
arava areent Frearmarerrarat fagirerty N20 21 
Tea AAR AAT DW BAA: | 
eueat a fait ferarar: sromaratragt Qeaker RoR 
fanfare arardt: ant ararer J | 
waar aeuger wrarereT fageata Uo Ri 
aattarat frearat ator cata | 
MAHATHIR UR O’ I 
Bae Teekay ceHre aT TTT: | 


Lot GMd! rMd? GMd> GMy Ng Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Wa aT ; Bo “*ateetaer’; Tr? “sacefer- 
giver — d) Jo? Lo? Tj! “arafegeater 

Additional verse in NNg Mandlik [®] KSS Dave: 

yarardadieesr wdidefoaer T | 
af: vetoed arepafaar age | 
d) nNg ate gqorr 

201. Omitted in BBe? BK GMd> [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.286, 288; Apa1153 — a) Bo 
TSI; tMd* “araay; Tj! SAAT; La! “aaa; La! nNg ATS; Te arfer — b) sOx! “se; Hy 
Jm Jo! Kt? wKt3 Pu2 Pu} Pu‘ Tj? Vij 3.286 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 3 — c) Pu’ Pu!® etapa; 
MTré e127; Md? Tr? TeHear; TMdé mTr?o ATHST; Tj WHS; Lo? HST; Ho AHA; 
La! arvat; Hy wKkKt! Kt? wKt} nKt! oOr Mandlik a16eT; Jo! KSS THT, mTr4 areHTay; Pur Put 
area; Hy Prearrar — d) Lal aMd? Wa ‘Huet; Vij 3.286 AIST; tMd4 AGHSTAT; 
wT! MTr AISATAT; Lo! “Aaterrr 

202. Omitted in BBe’ BK GMd’. Cited by Vij 3.290;Apa 1184; Mddh 2.443 — a) Tr? 
seerary; cMd! a b) wKt! ae ; Pu? Pu’? aw: sOx! sPuS @eteat, Md} SCAT, oOr U- 
art; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave § — c) Lo} Tj! rear fast faferarar:; mTr4 
mTro Sear Aare fesaran:; Vij Apa Madh Waray FATES [Apa fearat}; wKt} aca; Bo Hy 
Jm Jo! K? nPu! Pu? Pu} Pu‘ Pu’ Tj? Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave J, 1Md? fart ferare: — d) 
Lo? Md! Tr srorant ater; IMd4 TOT aT; Lo? aT 

203.* Omitted in wKt? Lo?; page containing verses 202b-205c missing in sPu®. Cited by 
Vij 3.292; Apa 1188;Madh 2.443 — a) Pu'® [Jolly M] faezarcard:; BK wreard:; Bo 
arearay:, oOr aearat:; mTré are@nd:; mTromTr6 aratad:; Pud Pu? Apa aTaat:; NNg UTee; 
oMd! arated; tMd3 aT=p@ — b) sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? sPuo ak; mTr® areteq; BCa Im Jo! Jo? 
Kt? Lo? Tj! Tj? Mandlik Jolly KSS tPF, Hy afer; Tr? aPreer; nk afar, Be! Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? Kt? wKt} Lo? Pu? Pu‘ Tj! Tj [Jolly R] Mandlik KSS Jha Dave T— c) Hy wKt' skt® 
La! Lo? tMd? tMd4 GMd? GMy oOr Tj! Tj? MTr4 MTromTr® [Jolly R] Madh® asl, Wa FAST, 
Apa T4S; Madh TEeasT; ds aeuge; mTr) weurger — d) cMy AHfSeyT, TMA 
TTaTS sa; tMd4 agent o 

204. Omitted in Pu!l®. Cited by Vij 3.292; Apa 1188; Mddh 2.443; padas c-d cited by 
Har-A 1.11.17; Vij3.234-42 — a) Tj! feerat; wKt! adat — a-b) cMd! eau fremar — b) 
Hy @feft. cMd! “orafeadat — c) Ho Haas; tM} “Star; oMdS “STAT; Hy Ti}? g 


876 Chapter 11 


CUAAAAS: WIAA WaTEAT WRI 
aehrear qerarkr Hrs araeT ATTA | 
faare ar fafafter sftrrer wareae ilo Kill 
way wad aeAhEt J | 

Rrareaar qreroren Aca TTT URW 
mired aaa: wry aerfer aor: 
AAISASATIO ACHAT ATH TIT WRI 
Tay aepapatepey Fras | 
gealtepeat Hater fawettearer sitfirry Rol 
agmirepatar J TaTaTATGaT | 

Whe AAT WT TATA THeEIT UR Lol 


205. Verses 205 and 206 transposed in Lo'; pada-d omitted in GMd>, Cited by Apa 1185; 

Madh 2.355 — a) BKtS Lo! grr, Hy Fete; cMd? ferasre; cGMd! arent Hear; BBe Bo Ho 
“Sarr — b) Bo FHT; Lo! oOrg; Tj! Tear; Lo? Tea; MT Te — c) BBe? “saa: 

206. Padas a-c omitted incMd®. Cited by Apa 1185 — b) Be! Lo! Svs aeaT FT ATaAT; 
Pu? arated CATTATAAT [om HIS]; GMy sOx! Uae; Ho WaT; Bo GMM aTHeA; Ox? Te FT; 
BBe? aTAe; [Jolly Nd] MAST ;7 Md} tTMd4 aTaST; BCa Pu’ aeaTfa; Tr? aearft, rMd3 ara — 
c) Be! Pu’ Pu’ Go faarearft fire; Lot frarfearfafatirer; wkt! afar fafa’; Ti? az; aCa 
Ho sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu!? arf Fafsrer[pCa aft; Ox? afr; Pu! aTPa] — d) BBe? WaTeAaT; Jo? 
Lo! feast 

207. Omitted in BKt GMd> Tr?; padas a-b and c-d transposed in TMd*. Cited by Apa 
223; Laks 2.394; Madh 2.358 — a) La! aaysd,+Md} age; Laks waite; Pu? Put 
wareate — b) wKt! wKB La! Lo! Pu2 Pu3 Put Pu? Apa RYBeT; Lo? “BIT [om 4]; Be! Hy Jm 
Jo! Kt? wKt} Lo? sOx! Ox? sPus Pu’ Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave % — ) Be! fraterar & fewer 

208. Verses 208 and 209 transposed in TMd? tTMd4 Tr‘ mTr®; padas a-b omitted in 
BK. Cited by Apa 223; Laks 2.394~5; Ma@dh 2.358 — a) Lo aac: alfred; mTr? mTr® 
arecdeartrd; tMd4 aaa; BBe2 BCa Ho wKt! Kt? wKt nKt? La! Lo! Lot oOr nPu! Pu? Put 
Pu> Pu’ Madh Jolly TT — b) GMy Mddh AU@MTE; Wa TTR; [Jolly Gr] festAT; Ox? 
fesre7t; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave €1a3; Bo BCa Ho ma [as patha] 
wKt! La! Lo! oOr Pu’ Apa FétaSIT — c) Bo ATCT: Jo? Lo} aTaaee; Laks MATS; Lo! 
aragtas ; 1Md4 aracaftae — d) pCa Ho wKt} Lo! Lo? cMd! 1Md! oMy NNg Pu? Put Pu 
Pu? Tr? Wa 4th; Lo! tMd* GMy nPu! Wa Me Jha Dave TT 

209.* Padas a-c omitted in GMd and padas c-d in Be!. Cited by Vij3.280; Madh 2.358 
— b) Bo Lo! rMd} ° pa; mTr4 mT rSPrarerd; Pul? Prorat — c) Wa Boenfagpas; Be 
Bo BCa Ho Jo? nKf BKt? Lo! Lo? Lot [ma] oOr Pu> Pu? Pu® Pu!® Tj! [Jolly M G R] Jolly 
ViDh 54.30 Frpeg, Pw Te “fapeR— c-d) Vy Pals Pass 

210. Cited by Madh 2.360 — a) NNg  Prpctat; Md? sOx! sPuo t#— b) cMy Fara 
—c)wkt! om araer aftr 7; Jo? La! nKt nPu! Pu? Put ate; Tj! om last 7 — d) Be? 
Ox? BA [ad 11.85] frets; BA [ad 11.209] reads THOT 


Chapter 11 877 


Fog arrat arqests | 

areas yaaa satarrgakrary We ei 
we Wee aT eAaahaay | 

we wT aretha serge aeeaet: UR LRM 
ving witerr afte afr aft: eatery | 
URUATAA He MATT TTT WR2AM 
uae oreeftarg setter ffir eae | 
me aTaaeaatapeay attest: WRI 
ane wat aeetaartears | 

wire Rragerg apart aarfea: UR 
AMAASTAMT FEMA | 
Ural ATT HeAsST AaaTTIA TT: ULI 


211. Omitted in Lo? — a) Jo* Lo! Lo* oOr Pu'® Tj! mTPayeadt ; cGMd aegaa’. Pu? 
“qratsrer; Md} “oTatenifer — b) Pud Pu? [Jolly G] aRargrethe; Tr? aay; mTr® HTTeaT, 
oOr ATfray; nPu! Pu? Put aoreedfea; Pu3 arseedfer — c) Pul? aTay; rMd4 avd; MTP aay 
ga; oMd amram’: Be! “sata” — d) Lo! “fradfrary, Be! “afaat 

212, Cited by Vij 3.319; Apa 1236; Madh 2.25— c) Vij Te WE ZT arstara; mTr* 
Brett; Lo? om 7; Lot cMd! tMd? rMd4 GMy Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pul® mTr® Ma@dh J— d) Pu> Pu? 
[but me] sETTeaayAT, Lo! Md4 cMd? wPu! [Jolly Nd] ate Fear: 

213, b) Be! tMd? sPu® Tj! aft; Md! waite? — c) cMd “erate; rMd3 “are | — d) 
Be! nKtt Lo? NNg NPu! Pu? Pu? Pud Pu’? Pu!? Wa [Jolly M!-?-8-9 G] Go BDh 4.5.11 PRR: 
aaa: Ba:, GMa Ararat; Ox? Pub Tr? “Gt aT 

214. Cited by Vij 3. 319; Apa 1238; pada-a cited by Vis 3.315 — a) BKt> Lo! TMd} Wamp; 
Lo} art; *Md3 a — b) wKt! aera; tMd? Atergdas, La! get: — c) Be! Pus Tr? qya- 
ae; wkt! “aaa”; eke’ “aeerctafa; cMy Pu’ warrahe — o d) mTrt Sarafefegregy — 
d) Tr? weer; TMd4 aaa; TMd3 ae fesr:; Pu3 Bee Eat: 

215. ma in Lo‘. Cited by Vij 3.317;Apa 1235 — a) GMy ae fav — b) Lot gaeftesto- 
far; Lo} Md} Tj! eee’; Pul aoafiz’; Tr? “gat? & — c) Ho “gor: Pu !0 “gory, mTr® 
“gar — d) Md? aporrar aafeac:; Jo? sOx! sPuo apa, oMd! apes; Put apart 

Additional verse in nPu! Mandlik [71] KSS Dave [taken from Me’s com., where it has the 
ascription FAPreaRamy Teed]: 

ant eer Bus godtar a aftr: | 
qa: fer Poe Brat area: | 

216. Omitted in Pu'°; bottom of folio containing verses 216c to 223d torn insPu®. Cited 
by Vij 3.326; Madh 2.26 — a) TMd‘ Sereaaioarmeaa; Be! BKt> Pud Pu? SATA; oOr 
WATCH; tMd3 Ga; Pud Pu? * Ta; BKt nNg “yar [NNg ma sh*t]; BBe* °gacer; 
Lo? “see — c) GMdS wNg Pu? Pu? Pud Pu? orerast; La! ores — d) rMd4 oMdd “arate: ; 
wKt! nKt? Pu2 Put “qraTtear; wKe oTavaatest:; nPul “orarasitest:; GMd! tMd3 mTré mTr® 
“qrqworrat; cMy [Jolly Nd Gr] Madh BDh 4.5.15) TOUR: 


878 Chapter 11 


Usd FAAS Fo BH A aA | 
TU RATAMT AAAI STTT WR LOM 
wane far pean | 
YRrataraaacarsaT ATT URC 
were waft fresrareatea fer | 
ee 


aqaseatrs at frgararat ITT ee 
quraufaerverar freatsatict: aarfea: | 


aaa aaa aeareary WR? eI 


217. ma in Lo‘. Cited by Apa 1243;Mddh 2.240— a) nKtt Wart; Lo? giaa’; Tj! ereae ; 
Be? tMd3 +Md* sOx! sPu® Pu’ mTr* Volly Nd] wa; Pu? grad; cMd! “feavsry — b) nNg 
ma sh Por; Md‘ Ox? Pud Pu’ Tr? Apa JF PO; Ma? F; Lo? THAT; Apa [vl] aI — c) 
Md? ameg, sOx! saegea hr ; Ox? Pu? Pu? sree" wKt! Lo! Td? GMd> srg” — d) 
Apa WHPATETET FT; Madh “wor; Lo® “wer aa; Lal Md4 “aor Aa; BK’ “AT TET 

218, Omitted in oOr. Cited by Madh 2.241 — a)BKt> Uctea; Lo! Volly Nd] THAT; Bel 

Ho Jo? wt? Lo? Lot tMd? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M R G] Ga4aa; 1Mdé Tr? 
POT Md? qegaT b) Pu Pu’ “aera; wKt! La! “ager [La! eat}; rMd4 
“FETT: — 0) Lo? Tj! POTTRTT 5 wKt! “cee; Ho “oafafrr’; aCa wKe BKt La! wTré 
“frre me; oMdé “Freer” — d) [Jolly Nd] ° Prreearraerrarayé; Bo wKt} Tj! PART 5 ; 
BBe? BKt “PAPI ; Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly M G] Jolly “opavearsr ; Lot Pul? “patel aT; Kt? 
La! NNg Madh Wort, GMy “AAT; Ho Lo! Md Tr? WaT 

219. Omitted in oOr; the following order in Lo! 221a-b, 220a-b, 219, 220c-d, 221¢-d; 
verses 218 and 219 transposed in NKt*; padas c-d omitted in BKt. Cited by Vij 3.324; Apa 
1243 — a) TMd3 atét mrereraettara; La! Lo! waredtare; cMy aarstan; mTr4 mTr® 
ATaATEM — b) BK mT [haplo] after ST jumps to fF: in 220b; Tj! “aeafey; cMd! 
ferary — c) cMy fraates; Lo! warerar, rMd? efererrar; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Na Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave sfarcaraft, Tj? sfacaret [for reading adopted see 11.221¢] — d) Md} UMA We; 
oMd’ nNg nPul! afesarat ; Ho wKt! La! rMd? Pu!® Wa Vij 4%; Be! Jo? Lo! Lo} sOx! Ox? 
nPu! Pu? Pu® Tj! mT rt mT ro Set 

220. Omitted in oOr MTr‘ MTr®; padas a-b omitted in Pu’, and padas c-d in BBe*. Cited 
by Vij 3.324; Apai243 — b) GMd! rMd? GMy nPu! Pu? Wa favstfre: partea:; Md? fas: 
fost porfee:; La! fas: ffvstepafa:; wKe om Proery — c) nKtt ef a — d) TMd3 cMa 
nPu! fSgpars ; cMd5 Pu® Pu’ [Jolly G?] Vij BDh 4.5.18 “aot ata; La! GMd! tMd} 1Md4 
aMy Pu? Tr? [Jolly G' Nd] “aur ae; wKt? “gor ae 

221. Padas a-b omitted in pBe2. Cited by Vij 3.324; Hem 3/3.23 — a) Bo Waals TF 
faust; cMd! ° Rafgurerr — b) Ox? Pu!l® Tr? ° sft: Bo “she, Hem site: wKt! ° fran: Tj’ 
“fte:; Pud Pu’ “afte aarfgar: — c) La! area’ — d) mT ro @ ogee Steet, BBe? wKt! 
NKt? GMd! Md 0Or Pud Pu’ Tj! Tr? aeeafer 


Chapter 11 879 


UeagIRAIMaA AAAATAT AAT | 
ASMA AT AVA ASEAT: UR 
merertgatert: eter: STZ | 
SAAT AT AATAT URAL 
BraaParaar vara wearfaate | 
ciqaufaarta aire efefrq wR 
erraarar fretagrntse: setter ar | 


Tara act aw ware Tesaheordts: WM 
afast a aarer afaenhr a ae: 
ade gaa wrarartareg: UuR2<ll 
waters: ateat aaerfepaere: | 
sepa ASST TTT URI 


222. b) cMy aaa Wad; BK Tr? “ar aeaTd; rd? @araaard; mT ro “aaa; 
Jo? “areas: — c) tMd4 TAI ESAT, Lo! cMd5 Ox’ Pus Tr? mTr* mTr® wae. Bo Pu? Pu’ 
Pu’ aateey; Pud aaa; Pu2 Put “apart; Md “Htetra — d) nPul HTeeat; Be! Ho GMd! 
TMd? tMd4 GMd3 GMy Ox? Heua:; Pud Pu? mTr4 mT r° Beith: 

223. Cited by Apa 1230; padas a-b cited by Vij 3.325; Apa 1246, and padas c-d by Vij 
3.313; Madh 2.459 — a) Ho RETA; oOr mTr® PETA; tM} * Prete: — b) mTr6 acer — 
c) BK’ Pud Wa Madh teat; wKt'[mc to] GMd> Ox? Pu Tr? weraeataaa — d) Ox? aT; 
nKtt Tara; TMd4 Jolly G) AaTaey; Tr? PaPTAT 

224.* Cited by Apa 1230; Madh 2.459 — a)tTMd‘4 Breartes’; oMd! GMd GMy Pu’ mTr* 
mTr’ MTr® [Jolly Nd] Ku Apa Madh Parf& FFF Jo! Kt? Ox? Mandlik KSS Preefer ; La! 
ranifér’; Ho Pud “Fraraiar; Be! pCa Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt2nKt! 8K La! Lo! Lo’ Lo4 GMd! 
tMd* GMd@ GMy sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu® Pul? Tj! mTr4 mTromTr® [Jolly M R Nd] Apa 
Madh Me Rn Re Mandlik KSS Jha Dave “frat FT; oOr frarat @g — b) oOr Sarat: 
Aare; Tj! aat, BonKt AHA; dé “ATaaT; sOx! “Ha; BBe? “AIGA — c) 
BK Pu2 Put afaarta; sOx! sPuS “afadala: Md" “afar a; tMd3 “qfiaeta — d) sOx! 
sPuo area; Tr? aRATAT; Jo? 7 TATA; BK “arerceofe fare 

225. Cited by Apa 1230;Mddh 2.459 — a) BKt’ aart, Md! feat’; oOr fae —b) 
nKktt “Sararesr; La! “Vaeray: Pu’ Rearsrea:; Lo! ° Rat BT: cor to ° caret av; Madh ° taxr- 
eter:; BK “watt aT; Lo? “a: at wad; Bo Tr? F— c) Tj! adt 4; oOr ad? Ter Je — d) 
Lot year ; Pud Pu? “aafearda:, Tj! *feonfae:; mTr* mTr® “feanfarcr:; oOr “Bards: Pw 
Put” : 

226. Padas c-d omitted in Tj'. Cited by Apa 1231; Madh 2.459; padas a-b cited by Vij 
3.325 — a) wKO nKtt Tr? arfast; Pub Tr? ¢; TMd* GMy STofser — b) Tr? sferarorr, cMd! 
arfearter; Md? Saifed:; aCa T Ader: — c) Md? Hata [lacuna rest of pada]; cMd! adr; 
NNg Ox? nPul Pu? Wa a4tay; sBe aay 7; wKt! Md? nNg nPul Pu2 ada; Lo? TATA; Bo 
area, wk} pata Madh “Saga: nKt* “saea: Pu? “area: 


227. Cited by Vis 3.296; Madh2.451 — b) NKt* cMd! “freee: —c) wKt! nKf BKt 





880 Chapter 11 


RIAA TATT ATA T | 


WTP HAT WITT TAT sag ATA WRC 
TIT AAT AST KT HFraTGATTT | 

AAT AAT eaaareeaaaaey FATT URI 
WaT TUT AAT SoH BT TEE | 

aan aan ate aq aarertor Fes UR Zoll 
Rear are fe Faeyr aerate | 
aa gat gaffer Praca yaar ar: RZ 
va direst Aaa Ser eAEmleaT | 


watargraater Be wT TATA UR RRM 


[Jolly Nd] “WTaTeq; TMd4 “oTIeg; Be! Lo? cMd! Pu’ Pu’ “grater; rd} “oar — d) Tr 
+ BKS wafer, Lo! Lo? Ng Pw “éfeq; nKt! Kt La! [Jolly Nd] Vis aire: 

228, Omitted in Hy. Cited by Vis 3.296; Apai231; Madh 2.336 — a) BK BATA 
a; Md} eartaargaret; Lo! [cor to]leaat F AAA; Ho VATGAT TAT — b) Ho oOr Ox? 
“ear; 1Md3 oMy *saraart; Lo? NNg oOr aT — c) TMd4 age — d) aK aear, My are 

229. Omitted in Hy; verses 229 and 230 transposed in Ho. Cited by Apa 1231 — a) TMd? 
war attest BaF — b) Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] PT TAT; Bo Heat F Aad; wKe Pear T ara; 
oOr Pu? Put pear FA ATI — c) Bo GMy Wa waar: Pulo <aqaar: rMd4 aaate. — d) 
Md! 00r “fear ator 

230. Omitted in Ca Hy sKt> Pud Pu’ Tr? MTP [haplo]; placed before 227 in mTr* MTr°®. 
Cited by Apa 1231 — a) Apa ARTE; Lot Pu! Lolly MJAe: eT — b) Ho FHA; Pu gap; 
+Md4 geet; mTr® TET; w Kt! TMd3 rMd4 GMd) GMy [Jolly Nd] Apa Prafa; Lo wafer — c) 
Jm nKt att F; BBe? Bo Jo? wKt! wKt3 La! tMd¢4 oOr sOx! Ox? sPué Pu’ Tj! arte g; cM 
areteeq; TMd? arte 8; GMy are FF; Lo? attweraar — d) sOx! sPus ear; oOr Tr! tt 
ar, wks Saray 

231.* Omitted in Hy; padas a-b omitted in BK. Cited by Apa 1231— a) nPu! Pu? Put 
ae peat, rMd4 pear fe oe Aare; Be! Lo?nNg sOx! Pu’ sPuo Pu? Wa Go Ku WT 
Pear, Jo? Lal Tj wey Facey; Te sary; Ox Tarde, nKt4 TAA; BBe? Fae — b) wKkt! 
“ret Feared — c) Be? Jm 3a; sOx! sPuo A4; Tr? Sat; [Jolly NJA7:; Be! wKt BK La! cMd! 
GMy oOr Pu Pu? Pu’ mTr’mTr® Volly M'*5-8 G Nd] Apa Jolly Aaa; Lo} Bal; Be! wKt! 
NKt* Lo? GMd' GMd Pu? Put Pud Pu? Tr! Trt MTom [Jolly M'2-5-8-9 G Nd] Jolly Bard; 
La! @Y:; oOrere; sOx! refer, Bel gah — d) cMd! Md‘ mTr4 mT ro Pagear w fagqeater 
[tMd4 frgeq; mTr’ om U]; mTrd Fracar qered Atwke Prepare az; Tj! Freer, wKe! 
fge:; Tr! aftecar, Md? GMd? GMy Ox? Tr! [Jolly Nd] gact aa:; MTP Yad Az; Bo Ho Im 
Jo! Kt? Lo? oOr Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Tad J &:; Be! BK Lo! Put Apa 
gad fe &:; Wa qa w &: 

232, Verses 232 and 233 transposed incMy —~ a) Jm #& af; tMd? Pu2 Pus Pu? 
afer — c) Ox? Pu? Lolly M'28 R] Jolly FATaTHHART [for AFF see parallel at 11.242] — 
d) TMd* 37; aK® SATIS 


Chapter 11 881 


TATA aT AAT Fear wT ferrfsay | 


centeahmatasd fedtt a war RRM 
aerate FA AAT: Saaz | 
aterarada: gate argent WIT URZw 
augers ad sagas Faq | 

aay get: Sh adie sear: UR3KI 
ASITET AT ATT AT: TACT TET | 
aerer J aA arat aa: Yrer Say URE 
RAT: AAT: Heehrenaar: | 
avatar saat deter TTT NAMI 
afryerenrar fram eft or fare fear: | 
aaa witeaier aaeaar fe arerrqT URAC 


age TET ag Ter FETT | 


233. Omitted in BCa GMd°> sOx! sPu® Pu!® Wa [haplo]; Kt? repeats 231¢-d in place of 
233c-d — b) Kt? gear waaay [cf. 11.232b] — c) Lo! TMd4 wasywA ; Bo Ho wKt5 La! 
Trt mTr6 qeartegher ; Pud Pu? afta, wKe! Lo! mtr! “yfenaferete; La! Put om 7; 
oOr a BAT; Pu2e war 

234. a) MTr°aferse ; wKt! sOx! sPuo “spfvaftr, Be! Lo? Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? Tr? 
Go Re “apturgeee,; Tj? afore — c) wKe! afer; Tr! “erade: — d) wKe arg; cMd! 
araagitc”. aK “feearat 

235. Padas a-b omitted in Ca and pada-d in wKt! — a) Bo “Toa ad; Be! af — b) 
MTr! MTrgea Beary; cMy Tr! Wa fa; wKt! GMd! Md sOx! Ox? Pub sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Tj! 
[Jolly G M' 8°] 8a; Be! Bo wKt nKt BKt® La! Lo! Lo? GMd! nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® 
Pus Tj! Wa ATqearay; Jo? Pu’ Pu’ “argh — c) Lo? Wa & wi — d) Lo! daafetfr:; Wa 

“aaifr:; NK¢ La! GMd! MTr4 mT mTr® ° asia; cMy aft 

236. Omitted in Pu5; pada-a omitted in wKt! — b) Ng [but cor fh] aPraeT, TMd3 HTT 
— c) Ho La! omg; sBe? Bo wKt} sOx! sPu Pu’ [Jolly G] 7 

237.* ma in nPu! — a) BCa Bua: TART SaT:; Lo? + Md4 Pu2 Pud Pu’ Tj! Wa afearears:; 
nPu! afrarears:; wKt! wKt} nKt Lo? sOx! sPu’ afaarets:; Be! sBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? 
Lo! Lot GMy Ox Pu} Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj? TP Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave FACT: — b) 
oMd! “gear; Te “qorfsrerer:; Md “efrer aa; Ho NNg Pu Tr! “Pronfarr:; Lo? “a: 
—c) ake aga; wKt! BKt sOx! sPuo aarafer; nKt? soreater, cMd5 afasater 

238.* a) BBe Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt* BKt? La! Lo! Lo4tMd? sOx! Ox? sPu! 
Pu? Pu? Put Pu Pu® Tj! Tj? [Jolly R Ku] Ku Rn Nd Mr Mandlik KSS *apTét; Md? “RTE; 
Pu2 Pu‘ dat — b) sOx! ef; nKtt Md? Pud Pu? Wa 2a; BBe? @a; cMd5 ferar; ake afer: — 
ce) TMd? ava; Md} oferty; wKt! @ feet; nNg Te fe fereafer; Kt? Tj! crear — d) 
Tj! Jolly R] TIAA; BKE TT WIT; cGMd! acretar; wKt! 7 


882 Chapter 11 


werd arar are aut fe qefamary R38 
Aeraraearae sTaraTHERTHeT: | 

ama gant ered fefeaaraa: Noll 
werner wea TIT 7 
earaniher a yetter fea aria aataergy URS oN 
afestada: Eater aatare taht: | 
aed freee avd aaerar: URI 
amea fgqaer avarer fratea: | 

qoarar Wiens ier areata aT MRAM 
marae ser amdargreny: | 

aaa Aare AAT UL 
TAATATAT Tar HSTATeT Taare | 


239. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]; bottom of folio containing verses 239-43¢ torn off in sPu® 
— a) BKO GEepe BEM, Be! agEIe FETT; Md* aged gerertt — a-b) wKt! agers Tyat 
aah wea gape — b) nKt! agi; nPu! Pu? age; TMd? BEeT; Wa AEC; cMd! Agee wea; aK 
sOx! Get gee; Lo! Md} g=pPet — c) Bo La! Lo! Lo* Ox? Pu? Pu> Pu’ Pu’ Pu!? [Jolly M G 
Ku] Jolly Jha Dave ViDh 95.17 74 TATA; Tr? BSF FT ATA; wCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? BKtS Lot Ox? 
Tj? Mandlik KSS 34 & ATA, GMd! tMd? GM Tr! art — d) M3 aTAASeA; La! Pud Pu’ 
Tr! “apr: 

240. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Vis 3.270;Madh 2.454 — b) wKt sOx! & TAT 
aprrenrfeur: fwK} are |; ake faarareré ; Lo! oMy “srearf ; Md} GMy TCT: —- d) Bo pCa 
Kt! tMd3 GM? sOx! Tr! MTr4 MTr$ Ferd; 7Md4 Sere; GMd! Pu2 “are: 

241. Omitted in [Jolly Nd] — a) Ma? Heals ; wKe! Hera ; rMd3 aHeraihr ; Be! 
ater. ate; oMd aatanfe’ ; Jolly Nd] arate ; My @teparft va"; Ho Heat oa”; 
sOx! Herat gd; mtr starsta ad b) Bo Wgaeazife; ake waif; Tr aaifer — c) 
mT’ mTro & Batfor— d) sOx! arfer 

242. Omitted in [Jol/y Nd]. Cited by Madh 2.454 — a)BBe* apr — b) BK GMa 
GMy [Jolly Nd] Jolly Jha Dave FATaTERARIST: [ef.11.232]; Lot GMd! tTMd3 Ox? Pul? Tr! 
[Jolly M Gr] FAtareHraeAR: [om FAT]; Pud AAaTaHTAaRAT:; Bo Paar — c) wKt4 Pud 
Pu’ faufecarg; Be! Put Pufceagy; Bo Prayarargy; rMd‘ Prfereng; mTr* Peterengy; Tr! F 
weary; Lal aw fPreerey 

243. Omitted in Kt? [Jolly Nd] — a) Ho Tr? 7744. cMd fageated; sOx! aHET — c) 
Tr! mTr? mTr® Sear a; Pu! gare, +Md? Garey, Lot [but mc] SPT; oOr SsIT aufe nKt* 
wifey — d) wKet! ort da. Bo oar das nK¢ wares; wKe epraveary ; sOx! sPuo Hr 
ameatet; Bo “aragater 

244. a) My fefté a — b) Tr! “Sa gsrany:; rMd3 Cargsrany:; nPul “oof: — c) 
Ho dae; GMd Put Tj? farsa; Md} Zar Bet — d) Lo? Md? GMy Pu? Put Tj! “sense 
wafer, Tj? “aeaateafaater 


Chapter 11 883 


AAMT TORAATA: TIARA WIM 
AAPA SAS WRT ASTRA sar | 
AACA TAT ATTA ATTA WAYS 
arerasar afe: we fret are | 

aa ATATAAT ITT Het sett aahag Uo 
AaEast: AMAT: AMAA ASA | 

APT YOST ATA YARELE: FAT: URYS 


245. a) TMd? Tr! mTr [Jolly G] SST ATA; nKt4 SF TATA; Hose TIT; Pud 
salar atar; Me Jha Dave UEATTY, M4 BeIRTATaT; Lo! GMy Pu’ Pu? “wat — b) Ho La! 
nPu! FaeUe -— c) oOr FAeMY Tsay; Ox? as aT: warafect; Bo Tae ; aK weet; Hy 
Ng RIA TIT: [vNg TIT]; BBe? La! “gear aT: — d) Bo cMd5 “easar; BK La! 
Ox? Tr? qaeeea; wKt! Lo? Tj! grea; Md? Quay gad; Bose; BBe’ Jm Jo! Kt? BKE 
Mandlik KSS Faye 

Additional verse in Be! nCa La! Pu’ Tr? Mandlik [#, ©] KSS Dave; given after verse 
246 in BKt oOr; commented by Rc: 

sera aay er: ae Yarersyrry | 
MPEG TT Sh AAT | 
a) BCa SUT — b) La! yereT Be! Garris — c) Be! pCa oOr SAT 

246. Cited by Madh 2.172, 379, 451 —- b)cMd! werast: erat fear; cMy aanfeea4r;, Ho 
Lot TM? sOx! Pu? sPuS [Jolly M] ‘aatar:; Lo! °asrpor; wKt} Lo! Lot Md? sOx! Pu2 sPu 
[Jolly M] STAT: ;BKt> tMd4 mT r4mTr® at: — c) rTMd4 areraeay; Tr? areca; Ox? aTAa- 
BY; aK sera — d) Lo! are; Be! “ony a; Im “oreafer 

247.* Cited by Mddh 2.172, 451 — a) Bo nK¢# sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPu® Wa atuifa afr- 
i; sBe? Jo wKt! Lo! Lo? Pu’ oOr Tj! Tj? aahreaauife; Hy ata; Be Ho wKt} Lo? 
Lo! [ma] cGMd! cMd5 cMy nNg Ox? Pu Pu? Tr! Re Go aatareasrayr, Tr? aaerasa; Bk we- 
eeawar; Pul? Volly Myaeta Aswar, rMd} aaaateasrar, Pud waterway; wKe “are; Tr! 
“eaarat, tM} NNg afe — b) Ox? Tr! oTHT; BBe? Hy wKt} Tr? STAT; nPu! Pu? Put Tec; BCa 
arc: Be! Bo cMd! tMd? GMd° Pu? Pu’ Pu? mare ; nNg gra; Ho Jo? wKt! nKté BKO 
Lo! Lo? sOx! sPu® Tj! Tj? wratf aefer; Wa sreify cefe; sBe ora aefer, Tr! aro — c) 
Mdadh wept at — c-d) Lo* Pul? ace oy — d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt Pud Pu’ Puf Tj? Lolly G] 
Go Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave #4, Jo' om 42faa; Jo? asfaq 

*Additional verse in most mss. and all editions [see note] as verse 248, which number is 
omitted in the edition: 

saat wap seafarer | 
ae wet tert ward Prater |! 

a) Ra [patha] S@arT ; aK “aaa; wKt! “aa — a-b) Jo? Lo’ Tj! setar fafec: 
peat: waBrcer at fate: Yo? aA ea:] — b) Ox? Pu? Tr? “Bat faye — c) BKt) 37; oOr 
THAT 

Verse numer 248 has been eliminated from the critical edition. 

249.* Cited by Vij 3.301; Apa 1216; Dev2.368 — a) Hypermetric pada; sBe? Hy wKt! 
wKt? BK# La! Lo! Lo} nPul Pu? Pu? Put Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa Volly R] Na Feared: awTaT: 


884 Chapter 11 
are arama zetagq ats a ae sie | 
atest gaaersa quash fagqeafr esol 
aprarsamia Rraarwewsg 7 | 
weer gat g amraate frte: WIV 2h 
teenie a ane sdife a | 


Oat Ger Aw Teast TEAST: URYRII 
Taat een Rratiacattay | 


[pBe? Hy La! Lo’ nPu! Pu? Pu? Put “efe:; sKtS Wa gfe]; Jm Jo! Kt? oOr Pu’ Vij Dev 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave Fag farrasn: [oOr “EFe:]; Pul? sears feareg yorar:; Be! nK¢! 
Tr? “gferparar:; Lo? “edreura4:,; Md! ayraT:; GMy FwaT:; Bo Ox? Re TWAT: — b) Ho 
coMd> GMy nPu! Tr! “an; Hy “arated; pBe2 “aTaTsT; 1Md4 “aTATg; Ho Tr! rear: — c) Ox? 
Tj Teer; tM} GMy Tj! Tr! “@; Lo! “eat; rMdé “eat; Be? Bo ATATT; Lo? [Jolly R] arate; 
Ox? WaT — d) Bo FATED ; Tj! Har; BBe? Harry 

250.* Padas c-d omitted in Tj?. Cited by Vij 3.303; Apa 1216; Madh 2.457— a) TMd? 
Breer, Wa Het; Pu? Htat; GMy He; Put war; La! ets; Tr! wear wateiae; Madh 
aftcartarar arf ; Jo? Pu’ Pu’ seat sfer arf; La! setar— b) rMd! arfrd Sa ge yf; 
Be! nKt# nPu! Pu? Pué Pu’ Pu’ [Jolly G] aiferé: afer & 2a [Be! Volly G) afr TAT; NKt4 
Ta], Ho Tj! ars; Madh AeTs TT; Wa APT 7 TA; Pul? aflaers; sBKo om F; Ho Jolly 
syd aff; Bo Tr? erat ofa; cMd! GMd$ GMy Tr! Volly Nd] Prt afer; Lo! Ox? seat FFE; BCa 
Hy Jm Jo! wKkt! Kt? Lo} Lot [Jolly R Ku] Vij Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Fatert; Lo? 
gfakRere, wke of sat; Jo ofr soe; Pus Tj! Tj? af cpt; sOx! sPuo wf ae; Pu afer 
aad; Lo? wat; ake sfeags; La! of vega; Pus wae oft; sBe? sfaregd — c) Tr anfeey; 
Bo aTfeear, Apa ASST; wKt! Lo? Lo* Md! oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pud sPu® Pu’ [Jolly 
M GN] BA Me [patha] Go Na Ae; Pu!l? aT; La! Hes; Md? GMy Tr! mTr® aeafos FT; 
MTr! {agloger, cMd> afreay a; La! aggre; Ho Ox? “arepr; sOx! sPuo “aT; wKt! 
“aap — d) Lo! cor to RIT; wKe gear faa” 

251. Padas a-b omitted in Tj?; too blurred to be read in GMd?. Cited by Vij 3.303; Apa 
1216 — a) sOx! sPuS “erareer, +d “erafter — b) Lo! Tr! fre; Pu!? [Jolly MJ aT— c) NK? 
Td} GMy Vij gear eaty, +Md? Tr! feeearrageants, wkKe} La! wrg@eT; Bo pCa Ho BKé 
La! Lo?GMd! NNg oOr sOx! nPu! sPu® MTr*mTr®° Wa f8eer J; BoBCa Ho La! Ox? Pu} Pub 
Pu’ Tr? 4; Hy aq — d) NNg Aor; Pw Put FAS; BK Har: 

252.* Cited by Vij 3.304; Apa 1216; Madh 2.458 — a) wKt! wKt} Lo! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Tr? 
faery; Jo? nKt! Md} sOx! sPu° Pud Pu’ Tj! Tr! sfacardtas’; Be! efacaredtar: Ng 
sfoordiar Ox? efron. +Md? giana: Be? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Wa Mddh Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave effort’; La! eiacedian ; Lo? fradten’; oOr aera — b) 
ake a Ae & Sdters, Tr! THT; Ho Tafa; BBe THAeAHa; Pu} aT; oOre — c) rMd4 mTr4 
MT ro SAT Feu FT [MTr$ aay J]; Be! Bo pCa Ho wKt! sK& La! cMd cMy nNg Ox? Pu 
Pu? Pu? Tr! Tr? [Jolly Nd] Vifsteat J; Jo? Lo? Tj! sath; mTr4 ste; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? Lot 
aMy nPu! Pu’ Pul® Tj? [Jolly M] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave SfteaT TST; nPul mTr4 Fe 
— d) Wa Feat; Md? uTr4 mT Yar 


Chapter 11 885 


wae weer afeeerahrtf aT UR 

sferjensteaer want art festfecy | 

TRACT TI AAAS UR 

aanis F saat Arar geate | 
PATA TAA TD TTT WRG 

aarifra tracted ar TUT | 

sme F Fare areata ReryTsy Ua 

wat: arecerttics gear get fas: | 

AYA AAT aT AT TERT URI 


253. Padas c-d ma in Lot. Cited by Vij 3.305; Apa 1217;Mddh 2.459 — a)tMd! “gearfor 
— b) sBe? Farattaiayay; Bo Pu? “argdt’; rMdé “ATea> — c) GMd! Pu? Pu4 atege; Pul? 
wage Be! aaaqs; Tr? was; Lo? saad; Md} setae; Tr! stetfere; La! afeega; Put Pub 
wie: Lo'wtfedt — d) oOr afenfattanadia, Hy tafercife; wKt! Ke? wKt nKtt Lo! Lo? 
Lot GMy Ox? Tr? [Jolly M G] Prefrdtfa; eCa Pul? “fafeafircife; Be! Pu’ Pu? “Pafedifer a 
[Be! °“Pafer], rMd? “aeferfeerr:; Hy Jm Jo! Ke wkt} nKt* NMd} GMy Ng Vij Ku Rn Nd Mr 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 

254. Cited by Vij 3.306; Apa 1217;Madh 2.174— a) Bo “gferarenr; La! “gfenper — b) Bo 
Ho Tj! Tr! ser; NKtt EBT; wKE WAT; La! peereasy; Pud aa; Tr! as — c) wKt! Hy eee 
HRT; Bo TIAL; MTM TTA BK AAT; Be! “ART; eK “HaTS — d) Apa array Fat 
SIT; Lo! $c; Bo Ho wKt! La! Lo‘ Pul® Feared; Bo AMAT Bete; La! Meese; Tr! [bue 
cor fh] “eae: Wa “ere 

255. Padas b-d torn in GMy. Cited by A4pa1217 — a) Apa [vl] araretgor Tea:; Pu! 
aaeg Suri. Be! La! Lo? Md? Apa AAT ; Tr? aT; nPu! art; GMy at; Pu? Put are; 
Ox? at; Jo? Lo? Tj! Aes; Bo “SF; oMd! “SF; Pu? Pu’ T; Bo Lot nNg Ox? Tj! waar; 
TMd} ala; TMdé Tr! TAIT; Pu? Put aT; Pud Pu? THAT; BKE TQM; wKe! aay: — b) 
NNg Me Jha Dave TT: TAPTVTST; nK tl TARTST; eBe fageafer — c) wKt' nKt! Lo? Te 
TERM; BBe? AAT; MT! MTS Feat aratd; Be! oOr sOx! Ox? sPuo Wa “att; Bo wKt! 
"aR — d) nKt* Lo! Pu® “ater fates; Be! “atanfafe; cMd! Pu’ Pu? “HeRafafe, wKe? “aeAT- 
fafer, mT rt aerate; Tr! Apa “afearafe. 1Md4 rMd3 Forafe at aE; BBe? om F; Be! wKt? 
Lo} Lo* oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Pu‘ Pu’ Pu? Pu8 Tj! mTr> Wa [folly M Nd] a7; Lo? da; sKé 
oMd! mTr‘mTr® ares; La! GMd5 Tr! Apa arg; Tr? atest; Hy Kt? Lot sOx! Ox? Pu? sPue 
Jolly 34; Be! Bo Ho wKt! wKt} nPu! PuS Pu? Tt 

256. Omitted in BKt’ GMd!; page containing 255d to 260d damaged in sPu®. Cited by 
Apa 1217; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.306 — a) Hy sTearehy ; Lo? aateaPt’; Bo Lo? Jha Dave 
sears — b) oMd “Saat; Belastet; Te esr — c) Pu? Put saat; NNg sOx! Ox? 
sPuS Tr? tyaeTaT; TMd3 SMSRRT; rMd4 aA; BBe? FT; NNg Ox Pu? Tr? Bedat — d) Lo! 
“até; Bo aT&ar; Ho Lot tMd? NNg Ox? Pub Pu’ Pu? Vij HENaT 

257. Omitted in sKt® GMd!. Cited by Vij 3.303; Apa 1217;Madh 2.457 — a) TMd? 
ae wk ane : La! ae aMy are artr? — b) TMd? GMd MTr° BAT; MT TT 


fea: — c) Lo! gyda; Md eayeataeaat, nNg Pu? Tj! aa; La! Ox? Ty? Vij wT; 


886 Chapter 11 


AeTTaHagMsp rag: AAee: | 
snares uraarttterent agqeater weci 
avy at Broerer wadt acafearz | 
yard wae: ad: Tee: oe URGSU 


AE TIaAgmASTs IAT 
coe wae ee 
TAPTAT: HIME TAITATTAN TA: | 
TATA He AATTATTA TTT URE 2 
seal Harare earaY aera: | 
mrad aateast Aa: oratfea fear G20 
weed Grower ager ar aarfea: | 
AAT aT AEM TAIT: TASTE AU 
Wut Aeted sree fer ater faazafe | 


Pu2 Put ad ad — d) Pud Pu? afttear HT; MTr4 Tr Sifrcar AA; wKt! a; Md} tMd4 Pu2 Wa 
Bh |patha] 74, Lo? 47: Lot aa; Te AT Pre; Mach aafeapt 

258. Padas a-b omitted in GMd!, and padas c- “di in mTr®. Cited by Apa 1218; Mddh 2.458 
= 9) Be! nNg sOx! Ox? Pus Suara — b) TM? “@reagr:; Lola weagr:; NNg Pul? Lolly 
M?] ‘3g; Lo? “=eT; Be! sKtS aATfeaT: — c) cMd! sear greater dar’; tMd4 sreqerred; 
Pu2 Put ‘AMRAT; Be! Bo wKt! nKt! Md‘ PuS Tj! “arft 4°; pBe? sCa wK8 AMT #°; Ox? 
“art #° — d) Be! Bo Ho La! Ox? Pu? Pus “$titearery; wkt! “ftRrerery; t™Md4 “arefagqeater 

259. Padas a-b omitted in MTr°, padas b-c in Ho, and pada-d in sKt5; 257c-d given in 
place of 259c-d in Jm. Cited by Vij 3.301; Apai218; Madh 2.456 — a) Lo seer, Lo!  — 
b) Jo! Waa; Apa WaaT; Be! “afear, pBe? “afeary — d) La! Lo? NNg nPul Pu2 Pud Pu? oT; 
pBe? Were; TMd4 Tr! anferafeahy: 

260. Padas a-c omitted in Ho BKt’. Cited by Apa 1218 — a) My fae; mTr? STI ; 
Jo? Lo! nPu! mTro Wa ; Bo Ia; yMd4 Tr! “aaa fae’; Tro Saenfear: — b) tTMd4 “Ter; 
oMd! “w@cara’; Md? “ayaa: La! eqqaac:; Lo? “Gaere:; Tr! Cae at: — ) Tr! af sear 
— d) Be! Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lot tMd? Ox? Pu!l® Tj? [Jolly M] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 
adfersiftcaraaar; rMd4* art 

261. Verse 261 placed after 263 in oMy — a) Bo mT: — b) GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd> 
oMy Tr! mTr’mTr “Grameen: [Jolly Nd] ‘TrMtilet; wKe “Atec:; Pu? Put “Alea; [Jolly R] 
ViDh 55.7 “aiqay — c) sKtS war — d) GMd! tM? 1Md4 GMd) oMy Tr! MTr’mTr® “orasoitest 
[cGMy “4:]; La! oOr Pu? Put “arama; BK “ATE: Jo? Tj! “Atear 

262, Cited by Laks 1.174; Madh2.174 — a) Lo’ aT; oOr arava? ; Md} araraiety 
— a-b) MTr'mTr® searte AarSerySS Acreage: — b) rMd3 °efaeratt Tad: Laks 
“edtarafacrator — c) Lo! cMd Tr? areafest, Be? atgafeasit — d) Tr! 7 

263. Cited by Apa 1218 — c) Ho ava; Tr? erat; tMd4 wat — d) Tj! yA 


Chapter 11 887 


wat gakte at aa Rrafer asa uReevi 
wat aay arent arate fafeenter a | 


uy waferaaat at aera aafaT NEKN 
Br Gq wae Hal AAT aterarfettoar | 
at Tesatargqear aed ae a aafad UR<<ll 


264.* Cited by Apa 1218 — a) TMd‘ om ABT; Ho HeTee; GMy ST — b) wKt! oer 
aeafe & gq; Lo! Tj! fey; Hy fafet; Jo! Kt? w Kt? Lo? Lot NNg sOx ! sPu® [me sh to] Pu! 
[Jolly M R] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave P84; wKB STeT; BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? akt' 
Lo! Lot [cor to] GMd! aMy oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu> sPu® Pu? Pu® Tj? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave BE; Lo! wrsafe; Tr! Frassrfer — c) Hy af — d) Tr ae ofer Frasorfer, rMd? rMd?4 
GMy Pub aa; Apa Padfe; rMd4 Brae Aor 

265.* Cited by Apa 1218 — a) 8K 3aT; Apa [vl] eaTTPT; Be'sCa Ho Jm Jo! wKt! 
Kt? wKt? La! Lo? rMd3 tMd* GMd> GMy oOr sOx! Ox? sPuo Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr*mTr® Wa [Jolly 
R Ku Nd] Me |patha] Na Ku Rn Nd Mr Mandlik KSS arent, Hy aaft; Lo! cMd! [but cor] 
amit; Apa arate; Bo aMify — a-b) aBe? agft arnt area; Lo! Tr? aftr aarhy 
arstfY [Lo! argtft]}— b) tM? aay — c) TMd4 om UT; BKtS “BT — d) Kt? Lo? nNg Pw 
Pué Tr! Wa et Fe FT; sOx! sPuo eq FE A; wKt! AST T: FT; wKe Fedt a; Hy om Fafa; 
La! adaafag 

266, Omitted in Lo? sOx! sPu® — a) TMd3 GMd? Tr! ¢ 2aee; Be! Lo! & aerz; Ho wKt! 
wKe geez; La! aresrere — b) mTr4mTr® afer’; wKt! Md‘ Pu2 Put am ofr; Lo? ‘fafteat; 
+Md3 facefer — c) mTr4 Tenates ; wKkt3 “geait — d) mTr‘ MTr® Seq; La! eq; ak a er 
@; Be! Bo Jo* wKt! Lot GMd> My oOr Pub Pu’ Pul® Tr! Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Go Na Nad Jolly 
at act a; [Jolly Gr at aq FT FT; pBe? Ae; Tr? om Aq FT 

Additional verse in Ho La! Lo? tMd* GMd oOr sOx! nPu! Pu? Put sPuo Tj! mTr* mTr® 
[Jolly Nd R] Mandlik [®, &, $] KSS Dave; commented by Rn; padas a-b given in TMd? 
GMy: 

sauphiec: pear: sarafatcta: | 

se adfate ferent Prater || 
a) Lo} Tj! [Jolly N R] Mandlik KSS Davett aPafea: Heet:; sOx! sPuo UT FT 
fafa: aa: — b) Ho Md? Mandlik KSS Dave WaRrcaet Frm: [rMd? Frit]; cMy 
grafarceg ffir: — c) nPu! Pu2 Put KSS Dave Prva; Mandlik Peas, mT ro F:3t- 
ae; rMd4 Mandlik KSS Dave w4fafet — d) Ho sete Prater; sOx ! sPuo fawet- 
arfraterd; La! fawert; [Jolly Nd R] fase 

Additional half-verse in TMd? GMy sOx! sPu°: 

ae: We wae ganfakayaay | 
b) Md} Prafae Br 

Additional half-verse in La! Pu? Pu* Mandlik [€, €] KSS Dave: 

yrarenracarar a fe aeftrgega: | 


888 Chapter 11 


SAL gs 
AAAS ATT: | 


Colophon: Be! Lo! Lo? Lo} Md? NNg oOr sOx! sPu® Tr! sft 2a; wk} yap; 
Be! BK. GMd! tMd3 sOx! sPuo om Septet afearat, Lo! Lo? Lo? ypiatearay, wk} om 
afearat; sOx' sPuo raharcreary Weptast:; wKe! wrafaraPray aeresteare:; Ho waaay 
qaareaieare:. Lo! sraBarafafiattenresitears: 


[ateattseara:] 


Wey Ease Meare | 
SAT HGR WI AEA: TTT Ul 
a agar water wedtaraat wy: | 
sey der ae seer Prokeeyz Rll 
ayaa et Adana | 
BHAT MAA TURPAATTAAEATAT: U3 
aes Prferente safircorer afer: | 
aa AAT areradary isl 
Taran vrata | 
Rreenfiragrer Bre at array uel 
eam tar Uyer ta aa: | 


Before verse 1 GM@ oOr add ®Ua Hy: 

1. Cited by Madh 2.484-5 — a) La! wqawfer; wKt! wKt sKt} La! GMd! oOr nPu! 
Pu? Pu Tr? atgaier; Ho ade; Be! Psy; NK Port — b) Md? aHeATat: — c) wKt! 
Tr w4ur; sBBe wKt! aK “Proaft — d) Tr! af; cMd! “caraaqut; Be! Bo Ho Lo! 1Md? 
oMd> nNg nPu! Pu} Pu! Tr? Wa 9%; BK® Tet; here cMd@? adds Jeary 

2, Omitted in Wa. Cited by Madh 2.485 — b) GMd ! Hedfaraat, Tr? Te: — c) wKe 
are ater — d) wKe paeioer; cMd! wares; tMd4 Freke:; pBe? reat 

3. Cited by Madh 2.485 — a) cMy {urayit — b) sOx! sPuS “arepraeas; mT mTr§ 
“wert — c) Md} oT; Tr! anistaratar; +Md4 agar — d) Tr? “wear; Ho AeaTAT, TM? 
“Fey 

4. Cited by Madh 2.485 -— a) Lo? 32s; MTr4 MTr’ BRIS; Hy Lo’ Tj! “seaTeT — b) 
Ho Jm wKt! mT afercar’ [om Px]; Madh @ferer’ ; oOr “SH aT; GMy Polly Nd] afeat; La! 
Tr! mTr° @fegy — c) cMd’ “eorer wer, +Md> “aeetaTaT — d) La! Lo! cMd! +Md‘ 
fea’: La! “array: ak “ades:; Lo? oOr aeT 

Additional verse in Pu*; padas a-b given after verse 5 in NKt# [cf. addition at 12.8]: 

are Pfr at areas g ughteny | 
Pater ta ante career ase | 
a-b) nK¢ Pafaet g ae arar da agfeter 

5. Cited by Apa 997; Madh 2.485 — a) Tj? Rreart; Lo? “cea; 1M} “Prat — b) 
Bo “aart — c) TMd? fafmerh; Ox? Tr! “Rast a; Be! Md* *Praerer — d) Lo? at; Ho 
AT: 





889 


890 Chapter 12 


aaa ager wreaghaery git 
aearargarar fear ware: | 
Urania aT ante Frfeer Srey Moll 
are FAITE PAYA | 
aa ATT Fa HA BINT F BHT Ici 
TA: BAVA Larar ar: | 
afas: ara areaecafaarr |e 
anaussy Adlaus: Stavseaag T | 
aad Paar gat Rrevdifer aw sera Noll 


6.* Page containing verses 5c to 12b torn in sPu®. Cited by Apa 998; Hem 3/3.632; 
Madh 2.485 — b) Lo? om 4 FIAT; Apa tyerAte; BBe? Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? La! Lo! Lo} 
cMd! tMd‘ Ox? Pu’ Tj! Tj? mTr® [Jolly R Nd]Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TF; sOx! aTft; Pu’ 
Pu’ Pu! Wa [Jolly M] Apa 84c:; Te aadet — c) GMd> afte; Md? sade; Be! Pu? Put 
ates. Hy a8:; Bo HowKt! aeteT; BBe Im Jo! Jo? K2 wKt} Lo! Lo® Ox? Tj! Tj? Laks 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 344K; Tr! “wart Zz — d) wKkt! ara wke eareag yt; Lal 
ereagurar 

7. Omitted in Pu!®, Cited by Hem 3/3.632; Madh 2.485 — b) Be! TMd4 GMy Tj! ta 
faerad:; La! taRreraa:; Te? ta Prada: — c) Ho “Fadt; oOr “Fars — d) Put ae; Jo? 
wKt! Lo? Ox? Tj! Hem ira 

8 Cited by Mddh 2.485 — a) Tj! arear ; Tr! AAaaT ; oOr sag — b) cGMy 
“aeeh; [Jolly M] J — c) NK arar aret, Ox? arar arfer, GMd3 GMy Tr! mTr4 Tr Madh 
araa areepe; tM} arfaa> araepe; Jo? Pus Tj! pdt ae; Tr? om et — d) wKt! wre; cMd! 
Tj? Hq; Be! Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? sKtS Lo! Lo? Lo? Pu’ Pud Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tj? mTr> Mana- 
lik Jolly Jha KSS Dave &, Pu’ iftet; Lo? eraar 

After pada-b additional half-verse in tMd?: 

Aaa dep wt ae aera | 
Additional verse in NNg oOr Ox’ Mandlik [®] Dave KSS; padas c-d in nKt} [see 12.5]: 
fafa g arekter arar te wgfserz | 
aaa Pater wy serertqatecastey | 
a) oOr Ox? T— c) NNg Ox? AE; nK¢ oOr Pafaer Ba — d) Ox? sarees ALEITIT 

9. Cited by Apa 996; Maddh 2.485; padas c-d cited by Vij 3.68 — a) Tr are: 
apartey anf; Be! GMd! Pud Pu? aretest:; Tr! fretest: — b) wKt! St: — c) oOr aTaa:; Ho 
sOx! Pul? vet: mMTr® “ya — d) Bo arRAzeasnfaar; sOx! ° area; nKt strerat; ™Md3 
“aaferat 

Additional verses in NNg Mandlik [numerous mss.] Dave KSS: 

Ue wittdad antetatgar sac | 
agi: sada Reienfy sre II 
NNg adds two more verse [same as 12 after verse 10]; Mandlik Dave KSS add three 
more verses [same as 1-3 after verse 10] 
10. Verses 10 and 11 transposed in tMd?. Cited by Apa 951; Laks 14.42; Madh 1.549 — 


Chapter 12 891 


Rrevstatatrer wayag Ara: 

area a at aa: fate Presta 2 21 
ASEM: BAT T HAT TTT | 

a: were x waifir x yatta get: UPR 
Haaser: Get: TAT | 

aq aad ad ge Tat T AeA U3 


a) Jo? Lo’ Tj! Apa aheveeT; BK arevery — b) BBe’ Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt! Kt? wKt Lo! Lo} 
Pu} Tj! T7? [Jolly Ku] Go Ku Rn Mr Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ®14@5S ; Bo Jo? La! Lo? cMd! 
+Md4 gMy Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr> mTr® [Jolly Nd R]Apa ‘aver & WT: [Apa “FEerT] — c) Bo 
aaa; tMd4 Fer J; Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! Pub Tj? Me Rn Mr Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS 
Dave Fafear; Be! Pu! Pu} Put Pu! Tr? [Jolly M]Apa Re fraar @et:; rMd4 frerar Best; La! 
sOx! Ox? frrar fret; nKé gat — d) Tr? Pravéteqeaer Fet:; Jo? wKt3 La! Lo} sOx! Ox? Pu! 
Put Pu? Tj! Wa LJolly M] a Pravét orafere:; Rn & Pravdifer ead; Apa & Pravetfer wear; 
Bkt) Pravet &; Ho oma 

Additional verses in Be! La!; they are given after 12.9 in NPu! Mandlik KSS Dave, and 
after 12.12 in Pu? Pu‘; first two verse given after 12.9 in NNg; the second only after 12.10 and 
the first after 12.11 in Ox?; all three cited after 12.11 by Go; verse 2 cited by Apa 951: 

arava eft frat ariteve: get afery | 
pique arepesreareaeeerd: 11811 
arevet Abrnferse arigus carey | 
Maer Ff aeer ororaray feeftacr 1121 
revs aaartt arée + g sore | 
ara oiftiar ta ame a aerfafer 1131 
1, a) Ox? ¢ aT — c) La! waqvesr 
2. a) NNg nPu! Mandlik KSS anevery wait; Ox? Dave THETS — b) nPul 
WMS; ApaPageradteat; Be! crate; La! Pu? Put Dave AAT; OX 
cant — c) Ox? aaa aE J; nNg Pu! Mandlik KSS arétwer fF weer; Be 
are FT TM gs — d) Ox? wroraray fersirey 
3. b) Be! Put arétor J — c-d) Lal ae array ter arftrar faerafrea: 

u. * Verses 11 and 12 transposed in Jm. Cited by Laks 14.43; Madh 1.549 — a) La! 
“aerfaterer, Md? as Parer, Tr! Cae Pferer — b) Tj! arrat: — c) Kt’ “ate; TMd? 
“pret; La! “wre; Laks “sradt ast Ter; BBe Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt? cMd! tMd3 GMy sOx! 
nPu! Pu? Pu8 Tj! Tj? Tr? Madh Mandlik Jolly KSS J; Dave Jha Fara — d) Kt? GMd! 1Md3 
1Md4 GMy Tr! mT Madh Bh Me Rn Re Jolly Jha Dave Frraster 

12. Cited by Laks 14.113 — a) Lo? Tj! Fearevs:; Laks Heat: Tr! Gera: Ho 
BRAT; sOx' sPus HreaAc:; cMd! s#refacat — b) wKt> Lo! eraet ct; 1Md4 | wad — d)wKt! | 
garaged; Jo? arse, Pud Pu? yore 

13, Cited by Laks 14.113 — a) Pw Pu’ sfta:; tMd? mT 1° “dae ; Be! NNg AT a; 
Lo? Ox? “teat: — b) Hy om Best: 1Md4 °afeat— c) TMd3 Us Aa’: Pul? aaufe; oOr sOx! 
sPuo dead at — d) GMd' tMd? tMd? sOx! sPuo Gag:; MTr'mTr® sarfestsrY; Ho sOx! 
sPuo BAT; nNe TT T 


892 Chapter 12 


aE yaa Aes TT 7 | 


pnb DAA Sines Guia Neon 


a eer ee Wau 
GST Ua AANA: eT TePAAT TTT | 
mt waareiereagerassg TST ULI 
aaTAT aT areat: ares ATTA: | 
aad aA Wetted FT: Uli 
asgugarary sareareagary | 
SSeS aT aaa FETA UCI 
at ent weer ae uraferdt aE | 
anat wait arm: Tets T FT UA 


14. a) TMd3 aT Sit; BBe? “aire; nNg agra; Tr! agit — b) Be! BKt> TMd?4 nNg 
Here; sPuo “ea wea; 1Md4 nNg “ae Beare; Ox? tr @ — d) wKt! fate; nPu! Pu? Put frat 
at; BKtS (Jolly M] at; Pud Pu? Hoarer; Ho La! Lo? mTr4 mTr® facafer 

Additional verse in NPu! Pu? Put Mandlik [€, 5, $] KSS, given after 14b in Bel: 

SUT: JOUR: TAT yaTEe: | 
ay oreaaarfease frrctorrfpa: | 
d) wPu! Pu2 ferafe satan; Put feats erarbae:; Mandlik Ot Har: 

15. a) NNg stereaa; TMd4 “aeTea GMd! “aerat — b) nK¢é Frvafa; ake oar, Tr 
arafta:; Ho aretfeor: — d) cMy ateafe; cMd! ateqears:; Ho aT; Pu2 Pu? Pu!® &:; mTroar:; 
Pu c: 

16.* a) wKt! TedeaT FaTATATST:; Ho Teta; GMd | rMd? GMd5 GMy Tr? MTP mTr® 
GeATaa; Md4 Tart AAT ; Ho Lo} ATTHT:; Me Ku Dave Jha Hat: — b) tMd? gepferit, 
cMd! frepfert — c) sBBe area’; Md! areaarata ser’; Pus Pu? araarate avez ; [Jolly 
Nd] armteftar — d) La! GMy yet; Be! BBe Bo Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? wKt nK¢ ake 
La! Lo! Lo? NNg oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr> Volly M Nd R! Ra!-3] Mandlik 
Jolly Jha KSS Dave J; Pus S 

17. a) Pud aayyy; cMd! “at ot ary; Tj? a; NNg at; Lo! afte; HooOr art; md! 
ate; w Ket! art: — b) mTr? eee |; oMd! araar — c) wKt! ata; Pu! aed; cMd! 
maa nKtt aed; sBBe Yorarangy; TMd4 “art q; Tr? “ATA —~ d) GMd! mTr? mTr° afgera 
wear 

18. Padas b-d omitted in Tr! — a) Ho wkt rMd* GMy nNgoOr sOx! Pub sPu? Pu? Tj! 
mTr® [Jolly Go R] “ya ger; BK Lo! “gary ; wKt! “yareiteais; rMd3 ° yanfedteas 
Pul? “@taet — b) nke! ara’; ; Lo} Tj! Gtarhs; Lo? Patearrar; Be! Hy Lo! oOr Tj! Tj? 
Tr aFa; Md} “AEH — c) cMy Bdta ; Tr? wea; wKt! way; Be! “Hear, Md 
“cafe — d) Jo? La! oOr Pu8 Tj? Helse; GMy Pu! Fest 


19. P&ada-a omitted in Tr’; page containing verses 19-21 missing in Pu!® — a) Pu’ Pu’ 


Chapter 12 893 


wars eet ae mreaasetacasy: | 

aa araat wa: eat Gey URol 
ate g seaiseat aacr ataem: | 

afta: a aRernt art: sratfer area: 2 ei 
areca areaat: srer a@ sftat dtaecan: 
areat TST Yates FAC APT: URI 
wat aren Sitrer wet: ae aaa | 
THASIAACAT TT TIMCAaT AA: UN 
ad cream fifaaarerat yrs | 
jatar wary Aeraaraarad: UI 
at saat gor ae arecrarfatterc | 


3; Md} cat; BKO FAT — b) Bo Ureradt; nKe arafeac:; Tr! arate; Md} & afegdt— c) 
Ho nNg aT#at; Lo® Tj! aif; Bo Ho Jo? Lo? Md? Tj! Te aye: — d) La! Lo? oOr sOx! Pu? 
sPuo Tr? Wer Ue; GMd! tMd3 tMdé cMy Tr! Galqes; Bo HosKt? La! Lo? oOr sOx! Ox? nPul 
Pu2 Put sPuo Tj! mT15 [Jolly R Nd] GAT [Bo Ho Ox? “TA 

20. Padas c-d omitted in BKt* — a) Ox? Pud Pu’ [Jolly M G R] Nd Jolly Jha Dave 
marae; nPu! Pu2 Pu‘ Tr! aaraefe; Be! geraefa; mTrta: — b) TMd4 “enfaqreray, — c) Tr 
aq, Pu’ Pu? azeaargat; Ho Waa; wKe} agate: Tj? om Ad: — d) wk! TT Ferry; Ho 
ert; La! genorgd; Ox? Ferg 

21, Padas a-b omitted in BKt®, and padas c-d in Pu? Put — a) Md? afe &; oOrafefer 
— b) Ho Aead; cMy &ad; Pu? Put rtperar: — c) Jo! actct:; Joe Md 5 wNg Pu’ Pu? Tr! 
Tr? [Jolly G R Nd M3]8af; GMd! oMy afta; nKtt “eras — d) sBe? Ho Pud Pu’ art; 
TMd3 arf; nKtt art; 1Md4 oe; rMd3 ater; Te? freer: 

22.* Padas a-b omitted in Pu? Put — a) La! Lo! Ox? [Jolly M] ariteq; Waaret g; rMd4 
afer, Tj? araararer — b) wKt! aréet dia; Bo ata ; Be! [but cor] “BET: — c) rMd* 
Ta wr; mT aeyetfy— d) Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? nKtt cGMd! 1Md3 rMd? Pud Pu? Tj? Tr! 
MTr? MTr1° [Jolly G Nd] GoRn Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave FRAT 

23. Page containing verses 23c-28d torn in sPu® — a) Ox? tareq get laa; nKt 
BKt® La! GMd! tMd? GM@ GMy Tr! mTr4 Gat; MTr? a: ERTeT; wKe! se FT; Lo? Pu Tj! 
stared; tMd3 gtevet; nNg om steer — b) La! cMd! rMd3 GMd5 GMy Tr! mTr‘mTr> mTr® 
ate; nKeé afer; Tj? afer; Lod wdt:; Ho Tar:; Pu’ Pu’ wWe:; Md‘ afaedta, Ho Ag; Pud Pu? 
tag; cMy Uda: Pu? Wete:; Md? Ut; Be! BBe? Ho cMd! Ox? Tr! daar — d) BBe? Bo Hy 
Jm Jo! Kt? nK¢ Ox? Pud Pu’ Tj? [Jolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave @tatceat; cM d! 
aaAercy; sOx! “araat:; Bo mTr! “eaeteart:; La! Aa: 

24. ma in Pu’. Cited by Laks 14126; Mddh 2.487 — a)GMd! tMd? GMd> rMd?* 
oMy Madh “ate — b) Bo La! Ox FtPae’; wKe goa; La! Jor:; tMd4 TT; Ho Tt: cor 
to TT: — c) Tr? Hart; wKt! araT; Ho GA; Lal atert — d) Lo} Ferrara: 


894 Chapter 12 


OT aar ages oF Helfer Teo RAM 
A AAT TASHA Cast WT: HAT | 
Uaeatratat § aayaera ay: UREN 
an zeta freer wera | 
TAM TENT AT AGTATAT URI 
ay Teac: | 
agate frag aad att sary URC 
WT VMs MAH araHy | 
AAT TAAIAAT URL 
TATA BAT TTA FT: weet: 

aT AeA area a wae: MR oll 
aan ATT atrataeafrae: 


25. Omitted in Pu’. Cited by Laks 14.126; Madh 2.487 — a) Ho ageut; Be! BBe? Lo? 
Lo? tMd? Ng 0Or sOx! Pu! Tj! Tr? aaat; ake aeat; wKt! Fear; Lo? qT; Hy FF — b) wk 
areped — c) Lo? “araedt — d) BBe wKt} *Md} cMd? Put Pu? araftor, wk! area: 

26. Cited by Laks 14.126; Madh 2. 487 — a) oOr Aa; Tr? ara; Kt Aer, La! AF; Bo 
wears; Ho THe — b) Lo? cMd! Wa “By; Pul® “Sut; rMdé “afr aneatir: Lo} Tj! tH: 
Bye; La! Pu’ Pu? 8]; wKt! oOr Bat; Lot eytT — c) Lo? Taam wean, Ox? wagarata 
aut; Pu? t agar ; sOx! “feat — d) cMy [Volly Nd] “Yarra; Lo! “xenfacr 

27. ma in wKt!; padas c-d omitted in BKe cMd! [haplo]. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14.126 
— a) Bo 47; Md} #9; Be! a sife’; nPul a: Sif’; sBe? safe’ — b) Lo? wert — c) Apa 
marathi, Wa Yar; oMy Jar; Tr gard; Md? gure — d) Lo? Pud Pu? Tj! eae; 
Jo? aerayy cMy @9aa1 ; BBe? Bo Ho Jo? Lo? Ox? Tj! aeaureaa; Pus “arez; wKt! “api 

28 Omitted in GMd! rTMd?; pada-a ma in wKt!; padas a-b omitted in Pu. Cited by Laks 
14.126 — a) Bo Lo! 4; Jo? Lo? Tj! Laks Tet; Pu! Lolly M] 3; eke goer —a-b) Put 
ag RATATAT HoT aT favraTcra> — b) Lo? “ab Refrerafy aera, tMd3 “ay siferere- 
HaTHt:; Ho ae sale ; Lo? Tj! “ae at iter ; Pu’ Pu? “@reats GMy “aTet er — c) TMa? 
ashi; Be! AGaT; NPul Aa; sOx! TTT; NNg cast: fas; wKe! aa at wes; La! “ofa: 
sOx! Pu2 Put “wfast; [Jolly M] Me Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 9f84; PuS Pu? “afear; nPul “sferer; 
Jo! “gfe; Ho Ox? Sfet; Lo? “afant; Tr? “afr, Lo! afer fare; Ho Ox? faearct — d) Wa 
art; Me Jha Dave &¢; Ho HG; Te star a4:; Ox? afer 

29.* Omitted in GMd! tMd?; Cited by Laks 14.126 — a) NNg U&q; Tr! aa — b) Tr? 
“agafrrarcray, Laks “gd & OH; Im Jo! wKt! Kt sKf Lo! Md? GMd® GMy oOr Ox? 
Pu! Pu? Pu3 Put Tr! mTr?4 mTr5 MTS Yolly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave “Hert; Pud Pu? 
*farqaradt — c) wKb “faster” — d) Bo “STATE; BBe Jo? Lo? Tj! aeaar” 

30. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) Lo! teat — b) Pul? & yorat Warear:, cMy MRSA — 
c) BBe? wKt! BKO anit; Te ee Fea; Lo! TaRPIC; BK TaRTET — d) Pus Pu? Tara 


Chapter 12 895 


afraid a afer Toreemny U3 et 
santa timate: | 
Freaaaay AST TST ToT URI 
ar: wansafe: eet ater Prerafear | 
STAT TATE ATT ToT U3 RI 
Taare Barat Tat fry fasary | 
Se TAT TT BAM TO TATTT UAT 
qeet gat gaa aera oad | 

ava fagat ad arash oreerrT RG 
TTT ote eufahreste gaors | 
Tr Trae atest F UTTTT UAC 
aaa ae aT Hoar aay | 


31. Padas c-d omitted in Lo! Pu’. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14127 — a) mTr‘4 mTr® 
femur’; Ho TMd4 “sare TUT; Wa “SaTeeTAY; GMy Tr! “east aat:; Be? “eat er — b) Ox? 
aoufars’ oMy *Prré — c) Tr anifear : sOx! “fear a Pac; La! “Rear aA [om FI; 
Wa ‘Parar ar; 1M} “Para a — d) Kt Ir; wKe} “wera 

32 * Omitted in wKt? Tj2; padas a-b omitted in Lo! sOx! sPu®; verses 32 and 33 trans- 
posed in Lo?. Cited by Laky 14.127 — a) Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K@ Lo? Pus Tj! Volly R] Rn Nd Re 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave areaefaat [wKkt! safer]; oOr “eect; Laks “eerit; Md} °aferar; 
oOr ‘ferarentr’; tMd4 eff” — b) Ho &f aeorfer oftae:; 0Or Haeprt gfage:; Lo? 

“gfaae: — c) faypermetric pada; Md} fatraraaansret; Lo! [cor to] oMy fearerafeerar q, ™Md*4 
feaaear; Be! GMd nPu! Pu2 Pu? Put “warner: akt ware a; Tr? “aara ret 

33. Omitted in GMd! mTr° [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a)GMy [Jolly Nd] “gfate 
— b) Tr! égfeaar— c) wKke! ara wateeq; Bo arfereageart; oOr FATaRT; Ho WATT; 
sOx! sPuo FATT [om FT] 

34. ma in Lo!. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) TMd4 araTorrafy — b) Lo? qoraraty faced; 
La! gorat @ ufefteat; Md} zor wt afr fersat; Lo? Tj! Prafersat; Md‘ Ox? Tr! mTr4 mTr® 
[Jolly Nd] Ty feceat— c) Pu Put gqnrenferas; Md} aratftee; Ho warfaas; rMd4 aTaTiass; 
oMd! 3tté — d) rMdé mTr6 Hae Kae 

35. Omitted in BKt® Lo? Tr? [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) Bo Bdeq — b) Lo? 
ora; Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKt* Pu? Pu!® Tj? Lolly M]Nd Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Bs3ft; wKt! 
ward; Lal Bed; wKe wed; Ox? Asafa — c) Be! Bo Ho Pui aca fagur aa; cMd! aeee, 
+Md* aed; Md} cMy sOx! Tr! fagut; Tj! fagured; sBe at 

36. Omitted in Tj! [haplo]. Cited by Laks 14.127 — a) Md! afer ania; rMd? “=e 
Hot; Lo? “spthitstes — b) La! Lo! [Jolly Nd] exferq=ata; Laks eae Wester; BBe “ad; 
BBe? K? Kt Lo! ges — c) tMd4 + aaacaege; wKt! & GT; cMd! & 7; sOx! sPuo ta 
air; Lo? aaer: Tr! atten; Be! arafe aad; ake “eae: ; mTrS Gait — d) oMd af 
aa, Lo? T 





896 Chapter 12 


BT TT AAT AACA TAIT RN 
THAT HAT BAT TET TT | 


AT wat at: AeA TITHAT UFC 
at arg Wrest danrefarass | 

APART TTT TATE TITHATT NARI 
aad arieaar arte Aqered J UT: | 
feekas avaar faarfterar Brier wie: tvoll 
frfaer frfeerar g fasrar aiftrat vf: | 
seIAT AeAAAT wT HAfaefasrart: WS LM 


erat: phratersy Ace: eat: atta: 
areas PTT Treat avaat afer: WSR 


37. Omitted in Tj'. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14.126~7 —- a) GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd> GMy 
Tr! Tr [Jolly Nd] ad area arg [1Md4 oMy Md! arf; 1M? aa]; Lo? wearer & feared; 
nPul act’; sOx! sPuS Pu! [Jolly M] a: AF ; Ho Laks Teas Axaf — b) Laks BT FT 
Waray, MTr® Apawsad AF AAT; BK TT; Lo! assfte; Lo? aval, rMd4 wate; wKt! 
wate arate; La! Lo araeq; Te arate; mTr? AIST; BK ATART — c) rMd4 qeafar ee; 
TMd? Pu? Pu!l® area; GM d! UTeaTeaT; sOx! aT UTcHT; Hy Jm Jo! wKkt! Kt? wk Pu® Tj? 
[Jolly G] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave WHT; Ox? ATCATERTCAT — d) tMd4 arfeaas ToresereT; 
oMd cared; Tr? TTA ; Bo TMd} oOr aad FT 

38. Cited by Apa 999; Laks 14.127 — a) MTr° GTAAY; Tr GUT; Pud Pu? BTA — b) mTr® 
ure; wKt! “eta; Pud Pu? “eager — c) tMd? Md sOx! sPuo Tr! ef — d) Jo! Lo? 
oMd! Tr! Tr? mTroatteaaur, Ho wKt8 La! rMd4 aceaut; Pud Acoaut; wKt! Wearaat: Apa 
Setasqayr ; Wa TaTHATE; Lo? uarg4; Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Tj? [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave sone 

39. Omitted in Tj! Tr? [haplo] — a) GMd! tMd? trMd4 GMd5 GMy Tr! a4 a4 WMA, 
[Jolly Nd] @ a4 _¢ FIA; Be! Pu? Put Bed; oOr Weg; Pud Pu’ YorAat — b) cMd> Baranr- 
aad; Ho nNg Pu? warren, nKe4 Fare gfe’ Md? deere — c) sOx! sPu® aeTar ; 
cMd! aReat ; wKe caer — d) mT 4 oF Ter; Md} ager 

40. Padas c-d omitted in TMd*. Cited by Madh 2.488 — a) wKt} afeaa?; NK afer — 
b) Lo? Argued; Te ayer; sOx!' sPu® fE; Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? BK La! Lo? NNg oOr Ox? 
Pu} Pud Pu? Tj! Tj? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 4; Ho wstat; Lo! usrar— c) nNg ferret; 
oMy Pu Pu} Put Tr? arer air Seto (Te arfer]; GMd! GMd) Tr! mT? aaa SANT; 
Tr araar setaT — d) Bo Lo! tMd? sOx! sPuS “aot; Jo! Brat; Ox? fafrar 

41.* Omitted in TMd4; padas a-b omitted in sOx! [haplo]; page containing verses 41c to 
46b torn in sPu°. Cited by Madh 2.488 — a) Lo? fafaar BF; Bo cM frfaenfeafa; Be! 
BBe? Jo? BKt La! Lo? Lo? NNg oOr Ox nPu! Pu? [but cor] Tj! mTr5 mTr® Wa [Jolly M' G 
Nd] Jolly Pafeear, Pu? Put faferat; cMy Prfeeiear fasta; wKe = 6} Pu? aur aiferaet; Be! 
cMd! nNg Tr *orast; La! Paferar afer: — c) Pu? aeaar aear anf; eBe? wKt! “ATHT; Pus g 
— d) Md} wat feenfesrra:; mTr4 MTS ot aeaTeTetTe:; sBe? ier’, Lo! Tr! °fenfeatacr: 

42.* Cited by Apa 1000; Mddh 2.488 — a) Lo’ TMd3 wNg Tj! Tr! Tr? ff; Bo Ho oOr 


Chapter 12 897 


gaara games Yat Hears vite: 

fer aavat aera AeTAT araet afer: Uys 
array gant yearte arfarar: 

cares a fearrearar aveettarar Te: seit 
ag Hel weds Yeursy Baa: 
TATA AAT Trot TT: USA 
TTSMIATT AETAT tat Ter: WEN 


Terat yeraT wat aera T | 
ataraa: wat cordtyera Ta: USM 


Ox? BHT: BET AeA: [oOr fora] — b) Pud Tr? Fear: UTP aetgaT:; Ox? AMT: aT: Be? 
aaT ACSI; oOr THT ACSMT:; sOx! om AI:; BK aT; Lo! Aaa Hw T:; rMd3 GMy sftgr:; 
nKt? wegT; Be! BBe? Bo? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} Lo! Lo? Lo} nNg oOr Pu’ Pu’ Pu’ 
Tj? Jolly G Ku R] Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave t#@5A: — c) Be! Hy Jm Jo! Kt Lo? nNg 
Pud Pu’ Tj? Go Ku Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Farata — d) Pu’ Pu? Waa: BKtS rMd3 
aaett; rMd4 ate; Pud Pu? wet: 

43. Verse 43 placed after 45 in BBe?. Cited by Apa 1000;Mddh 2.488 — a) Bo 
efereagerer — b) Be! ast; wKt! Bear: yerz; Md4 Fest FT; wKe WOT; Apa HT 
fanféar:; Lo? afer; cMy wehar:, TMd3 aT: — c) BBe* Bo Ho wKt} La! Lo’ GMd! +Md? 
oMd5 GMy oOr sOx! Tj! [Jolly M Nd R G] Jolly faeearaactena; wk t> Tr! fe; rMd? Fee; 
Pu! caTy; 1M? ater 

44 * Cited by Apa 1000; Madh 2.488 — a) Ho WRIT FIMPT; Bo ATT; Jo! Farry; 
Bo acter — b) wKt! FqeaTas; Bo aftar:; cMy atfereer:; Md} Tr! erftrepr: — c) Lo! Tj! 
ffsrrarar — d) Be! Bo nKt* BKt® La! Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! rMd? cMd> NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu? Put Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr> MTr® Wa Volly G] Apa Madha Go THE THT, sBe? 
TMd? aaa AT 

45. Omitted in Lo!. Cited by 4pa1000; Madh 2.488 — a)GMd> oOr mTr® ag; Lo Ox? 
HB ABT; MTr Ar AST; Ho ASAT; Apawgr FET; La! 7éhata — b) wBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
wKt! K? wKt Lo! Lo’ Pu’ Tj? Volly Ku] Madh Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Jeu. WAGTA:, 
nKtt sOx! Jeurearhgaa: ; Lo’ Tj! [Jolly RJJOT: AEAITTA:, nKt! GMy FOUATHTTT:, aMd! 
geardaaaa: — c) BBe* a aMy gar ; Lo? “orafeacney; BBe NK tt La! “warez; Ho Pu!® 
[Jolly M] “Sara; Be! ‘aar 7 —d) Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo! Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Ta, 
BK aerar; Tj! HETAT; Lo? aaa 

46. Omitted in Pu!® Tj! [haplo]; pada-c omitted in Pu’. Cited by Apa 1000; Madh 2.488 
— a) sOx! Apaataaaa; mTperar azar: — b) oOre wat TaRar:; Tr? om wat Aa; wKt! 
tera; Pu? Put [Jolly Nd}tarate; Bo La! tMd4 gafecr: — c) BK emyHMgeHT; La! Md! 
oMy Pw Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr® Re [Jolly Nd]arye ; oOr aMyE ; Td} aMTE ; nPu! WeqE ; 
Hy Jo? wKt! oOr sOx! sPu® Pu’ Tj? [Jolly R] Rn Weehra; La! “warprar — d) Pud wrett 
aren; Apa fede; sPuo arrat 

47. Pada-d omitted in oOr. Cited by A4pa1000; Madh 2.488 — a)BKt5 sOx! sPu® TIE; 


898 Chapter 12 


arzar aaar fast & a darter wT: | 
aerator a tear seat arftaat af: vc 
aay AIA Far Far Kathir acer: | 
fraeaia arearar fadtar arfeaat afa: ues 
aan Rear aat werrermar T | 

Saat akeaattat weet er: oll 
wy ad: agearener wir: | 
fafeattafaer: pet: Tae: aria: Ue 2H 
steam vasa wtendatt a | 
Waraatied AARTAaAg ay ALTA: WARM 
at at aft ¢ sfatse aa ate actor | 


Apa TEeaT; oOr TAHT TAT; wKe} Tet — b) Md} fagary BBe wKt? BK cMd! Pu!l? 
[Jolly M] Madh fafraryaeed; sOx! sPuo faferer [lacuna] Terr; Apafafear waerer — c) 
sOx! sPu® aatataza:; rMd4 “cree; Be! Lo? Pu’ “wa: fear; oMy "eae Bal; BBe GMd> mTrS 
ad — d) sBe asret Gear Satr:;nNg Saar ustet aAfer:; Be! Bo NKt’ BK La! Lo? GMd! 
TMd? GMd> sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu‘ sPu Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr4MTr® Wa ApaMadh Go U8 TAAT [see 
12.44d note]; TMd4 troreét APTAT 

48. Pada-a omitted in oOr. Cited by Madh 2.488 — a) TMd? aveaT Ba F fay, rMd4 
amanda 2 faut — b) GMy om 7; Be! wKt! Sarferer; Pu2 Put wT; oOr mTr? FIT: — c) 
Md} Jeretacearad;, Ho taearad; wKt> Na [patha] fara; Tro FeeT— d) BK AAT; Lo! 
FEAAT, Ox? TART; Ho aTeaept 

49. Omitted in Lo? tMd* sOx!' sPuo [haplo]; padas c-d omitted in oOr. Cited by Madh 
2.488 — a) Tr? Gear; Tj! asara:; La! Lo! TMd? GMy oOr Asal; nKt* Bet: — a-b)wKe! 
aevay derecar sareift; Bo cMd! GMd> oOr Tr! Madh er Fat — b) La! aTaer:; Wa TeeTT: 
— d) Be! pBe? Ho [cor to} Jo* wKt! nKt* BKe La! Lo! NNg Ox? Pu? Put Tj! Tr? [Jolly R] Go 
Ku WAT; GMy afer 

50. Cited by Sam on BU 1.4.6, 3.1.1[intro.]; Madh 2.488 — a) Lo> GMd! det; BBe 
ferprasit; Pu’ eat — b) Be! BBe? La! oOr sOx! Pu2 Pu3 Put Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tr? Go 
[Jolly M G] Jolly Ferrer Ur; Madh Fee; wBKtS FerTerH Va; wKt! aT — c) Ho 
aaa; wKe aferpaanr, rMd4 amreiaar; ake “asta: oOr “asta: Pu? Put strat — 
c-d) tMa} anfeaast feeraarareafiftor: — d) nNg [but cor ARERY: 

51. Cited by Madh 2.488 — a) Bo 44; wKt! oOr Tr? af:; Ho [cor fo] BKt> La! Lo! 
cMd! tMd4 sOx! nPu! sPuS Pul? mTr4mTr° Wa Polly M]et: — b) NNg fever” — c) 
TMd@ Md? Pefaer Paferet; oOr a4: — d) rMdé4 dare areas; Lal ad” 

tMd} GMy [Jolly Nd] places vers 12.81 after verse 51 

52. a) sOx! vere — b) Pub Tr? atemfersmator; Ox? J — c) rMd3 GMd5 GMy MTP 
qraret; nPul Pu? Tr! gran: @ ; Tr? oer: &; Ho Kt? Md4 sOx! sPuo WaTAT : Bo La! Lo! cMy 
Pu2 Put Tj! Tr! “aft — c-d)rMd4 “arr ged a Paatet — d) Be! “wranfasie: wKt! 
“orfeagtante; Tj’ “oars; pBe? Tr? 47ers: 











Chapter 12 899 


erat ate oteseearacard rater 430 
T ATHY MTT TAT | 
AARIA ATT ASTATARS ARATE UA 
TTHTAA SIN TSA TIT | 
DISTT EHATAT ee NRRL 
Saat A a afermmy | 
fart Ba aaa Year gait art Teel 


gaterermt @ feat argeftery | 
fear a fararat war for: ager: Ue oll 


PyAoda wT wearat seorahy | 
REAPAT AT MAM TET TT: WC 


53. Cited by Madh 2.502 — a) oMy St; nKt4 om °F — b) oOr Pu} Te Wa a &; 
wKkt! Ft | — c) My HAA; Md? rMd4 sOx! Tr? afer; Tj! att — c-d) Madh Hrattsoater 
oreestaaceard Patera — d) Ox? “Rreread afsater, tM! “Perr cart: sOx! sPue “rear 
fre Tr! f& ster 

54. Cited by Madh 2.502 — a) Lo! “watedrert — b) Tr! “aAaarr; La! Ox? Axa; Lo? 
Tj! Volly G R] yrad ear; Bo WTATeTATT; Be! Lo! cMd! rMd4 oOr Ox? [Jolly M] TRC; 
sOx! sPuo Tent; BKE TTT — c) TMd4 Aare sfared; Ho Farreafer ; wK} cGMy war 
gfe’. Ti? “wea— d) tMd3 cM “afecae 

55. Cited by Vij 3.207-8;Madh 2.502 — b) TMd3 GMd® Pub aarp; NK! ast 
saa; yMd4 atsnfeyT — c) BBe? Bo Ho Jm wKt! La! Lo! Ox? Pu’ Vij ass ; Jo! wKe 
nKt* oOr Ox? [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave * gaperat {see 10.18b note]; Hy Kt? 

gaara, Be! parr; Ho Jm Jo? La! Lo? nPu! Pu® Pu? Pu® Pu! Tj? Tr? [Jolly G] 
“qenart; BKO “Y=PSrt; Bo FAT; wKt! “yenanélat; wk} tMd3 tMd4 Md oOr | — d) 
Ho oOr afaftreater 

56. Padas c-d ma in Lo! [haplo]. Cited by Vij 3.207-8; Mddh 2.510— a) 1Md? nNg 
sOx! Tj! Tr! Tr? FFT’; Be! wf; Pud om Hftaite; La! witanfe’; Pul? VVolly M] BsrTAT — 
b) tMd3 ferapar;, cMy Raya; tMd? faeat, cMd! facyfrita, Pu’ afer — c) La! fear; 
tMd! te Feat; Pu2 Pul T Sea; mTr°ta FEET; Ho sOx! sPus 7 feramat — d) Te 
gear ataarast; BK TMd4 werety, GMd! tMd3 GMd3 GMy Tr! mTr? MTP MT ro sera; 
Hy atc; Lo? ast; Be! Lo? sOx! Pub sPu® Pu? Haq; nPul ast 

57. Omitted in sOx! sPu®; padas a-b ma in Lo!. Cited by Vij 3.207-8; Madh 2.511 — a) 
Lo? Tj! Volly R] ware ; mTr® wate ; BK amt ater; Vij “aera; BBe? wKt! wKt? La! 
Ox? Pu? Pui Tj? arent; GMd! “awa: MTS Aart — b) oMd! freargfrafeur: oOr 
fere@arat 7 sget; cMdS fesrat; wKe! aregarkur; nNg argarfeur; Pu! Lolly M] arfearkearr; 
Ho Pu? aq T c) La! Sarat; Jo! om 4; Madh aftarrarat — d) mTr° faur:; Md4 wee: 

58. Folios containing 58b to 84a missing in La! — b) cMy #e@TTerMt 7 after [om 
aft]; wKt! Tj! HemTeT; oOr WATE; Bo afteasrafy — c) Ho Pud Pu? Pus Pu!? mTx4 ‘part qT: 
TMd? Md! GMdS GMy Tr! “earat F; Bo “Hat tt — d) oOr Tr! Tr? Ha 


900 Chapter 12 


fear wafer wearer: Prats eT: 
Ueeaiest: FAT: Taree: ue Sit 
dant cacti weta a areery | 
sagen a famed water aerate: Koll 


AAMT Tal GAT Aaa: | 
fafrenfer a tart ara SHAT UG kU 


MYT Teal AAA: BET Fal Ay Fa: 
wey Sat: TT: BHT TH AT AGOT TPT URI 
Are WAT aat Ages Tere: ATT: 
atareg waet gorar swaEerrshy sil 


59 * Verses 59 and 60 transposed in wKt) GMy — a) Bo Wafer; Be! HeaTe:; Ho wKt! 
BKt> Lo! sOx! meaTeT — b) NKt* Lo? tMd? NNg Pu! Tj! Tr! fase; Be! Bo Tj? AAT; wKt! 
feral; rMd‘ fearar; Hy Lo? Pu!® Tj? “eT Pe; Bo weruferr:; Me Dave Jha THAT: 
Tj! seTT:; GMd! GMd) Pu? Put “HeTUTT:; Or “HET — c) Lo! TeeTTTeA; BBe? “UAeAT; Tr 
Tro “afedt #eeIT:; Be! BBe? Lo! NNg AT; Tr! ett — o-d) oMd! mTrS aeredtafer: Fer: 
eaaeaairarfest: [cMd! aapaaireratest:] — d) Te? verat arate: nKe aKt> warer- 
BY. Ho Pud Saver’: Be! Tr! Fenetet’. Ma} dearer Tj? garnet: NNg rarest’: 
Hy “Frafaer:; Pu? Pu? “Prtar:; oMd “Faor:; NK’ rMd3 GMy Tr! mTr4 ° Prater; Lo! 
*raterar: 

60. Omitted in sOx! sPu°. Cited by Madh 2.492, 511— a) BKtS Gat; rMd4 ofa TeaT 
— b) BKt® GMy NNg Ox? Pud Pu’ g; BBe? BKt5 atfttat; Ho cMd! oOr Tr aftr: — c) cMd! 
1M} GM mT v6 ae aT [GMa “Bear T; Mes “ear a; Tr “earhey; Put srper; 
oMy Pud Pu’ Volly G]g; Tr a; Ho Pu? Put Pu’ Pu!® Wa [Jolly M] YDh 3.212 Fae; Lo! 
[but cor] Tete — d) Be! Hy BKtS Lo! GMd! tMd? GMd? GMy Tr! mTr® wafer; Be! Bo wKt! 
BKt® Lo! GMd! tMd3 GMd GMy nPu! Tr! MT15 “ererar: 

61. Padas a-b omitted in Pu5; section containing verses 61c to 66c torn in sPu°. Cited by 
Vis 3.204;Vij 3.213; Madh 2.511 — a) GMy WaTorer; NKt! Tr! [Jolly M Nd] Wate 4 — b) 
Be! scat; wKt! St aT ae; BKt > rMd? GM@ Put Vis ArtaT:; Tr! Ar7aT — c) Pu Pu’? 
arifeaty vai; sBe2 om WT; cGMd! wafer; Lo? wear — d) wKt! wKt} BKtS rMd4 GMd? Tj! 
Tr! mTr4 MTr® Wa Stat; TMd3 GMd> Mach BERIT 

62. Cited by M@dh 2.511 — a) sOx! att; tMd? Sea; Hy Hea; wKe! Pu’ waarg:; sBe? 
waeurg; wkt! BK waeay:; GMd! waeMy: — b) BBe* HIST; GMd! SeW; wake fe Tay; Lo? 
aay, GMd! +Md3 GMd> GMy 5; MTr* MTr° TS; Bo SAS; OOr TT — c) Lo? Ga, TMd? Caray 
— d) MTro to TF ABST; Lo? *aqaat; Lo! Aas; BK SMT Fer 

63 Cited by Madh 2.511-2 — a) Bo gut; Tr! Jat; BK’ TAT; BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! Kt? wKe NKt Lo! Lo? Md? NNg Pu Tj? [Jolly Ku] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave F; Lo? 
Tj! [Jolly R] TAIAG ; Lo? 9% — b) NNg sOx! nPu! Pu2 Wa ee eaTdouTfaar [Pu “orf, 
sOx! “are; oMd! Pu! mTr> [Jolly M Ku] Jolly ViDh 44.23 "as F Souter [MT 

edo; cGMd! “orfreer]; Ho MTr MTr® Rad; Kt? “Sts; oOr KS T Fat; Ox? Fars: wKe! 





Chapter 12 901 


amigrer fafattéear ett gear g ade: 
arated BSA WIT AT ayST TST USI 
SPI: Paras ways T alert: | 
attache fateerparr J ete: UGA 
wat vate garth year query | 

Tht Zeart arate ara stasis: u<eit 
caret: Cae ATT AMATI: TAT: NEM 


Fares; Md MT 1! mTr$ AwaeH:; Md} Aoaar; Md? Aas, GMy Volly Nd] Awaew:; Bo Ho 
Jo? Lo! Pu3 aafta:; Tj? dafte:; Be! deaz:; nK¢ Lo} Tj! Volly R] deat: Te Fara; BKH 
aaret; Pus Pu? Aeura:; Tr! daaar:; Lo? ators: — c) nKt! mTr4 Na date; Bo dite’; 
ake dare; wKe} titan’ ; Lo! Ferrara” oMd! ateares’; Troster; NNg Hare 
TMd? GMy oOr Ox? [Jolly Na] rarer Madh eftvarea’; Tr! Aros’, [Jolly Ra!) Aiftarar ; 
[Jolly Ra’] arian; cMd waratas ~— d) Tr? Foe, BKE TaTH:; TMd3 THT; GMd> FoT- 
aprere ; Tr! sept afer 

64. Cited by Madh 2.512 — a) Be! Heft; Be! sBe 1M? Tj! fafa Eear, Tr fates 
Zam, Pu? Tr! fafate Tear; BBE Lo? “feécat— b) Pu’ Pu’ SF; wKE Pear, Lo? FAT; Jo? 
wKt® Lo} oOr sOx! nPu! Put Pu? Tj! 4; Ho 4; GMy agz:; Be! pBe? F4t:, Lo? Ee:; Jo? Lo? 
Pu! Pu? av: — c) BBe? BKt5 Lo? GMd! rMd3 1M? nPu! Pu2 Pu} Put Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! mTro 
MT r® Madh rote; nKt4 areata; GMy Brae; Ho “areday; +Md3 area; cMd! “arway; sOx! 
Hist — d) cMy [Volly Nd] War Teteel FS; [Jolly M]aT HTaTeaTeTe:; cGMds Arar wT aT 
qe; Tr! War; Lo? WaT; BKA om HT; Lo! Lo® Tj! aT; wKt! aye; BKe aT¥eT; Tr! Yet 7a; Wa 
aefeys; cMd! areyet ee 

65. Placed after 66b in GMd'; padas 65c-d and 66a-b transposed in Tr! mTr* MTr°. Cited 
by Madh 2.512 — a) BoMadh Feseet; Pu! Jha Dave FSIt:; Lo? Fea; nKt* Tr? Sse- 
fe:, Tj! seat; oMd> Seat, Wa weale:; rMd? Md‘ Fyaet; cMds yagaty — b) Madh TH; 
Be! Ho Lo? 0Or nPu! @; GMy Pu? aféor; Pu’ aféut — c)tMd3 MT rSeaThteg ; oOr *atepaTst 
@; Ho epParat; Be! sBe fafaurr — d) Pu? “aqpena; sBe wKt! “Park; oOr Pu? Pu! Pus 
Pu? 4; Ox? Pu? Put Pus Pu’ age:; wKt! Pus Tr? afeaan:; Lo! area; mT ro seat: Tr! BETH: 

66. Folios containing verses 66-126 missing in Jm. Cited by M@dh 2.512 — a) Md 
Yar; cMAa ar watt — b) Pul? pee BT; Ho nKt* BK oOr Pu’ Pu’ “Het ST; Lo! Ox? 
Pu} Pu? Tr! “after”; Bo GMd! TMd3 GMd> GMy Pu? Pu’ mTr® eréter ; BBe wKt! wKe 
sOx! Wa #I< ST; 1Md4 QIEPe:; KE MIEHE — c) Lo? ear went araife; wkt! ear 
arate tatty; Be! eear varhy avaifs — d) cMd! staat sftafassa:; Md} saat strasfiferar:; 
oMd Tr! sraee srasitfrarr: (Tr! “sftaarr:]; sOx! om aI; Ho sfifasitfae: 

67. Cited by Madh 2.512 — a) Hy PTH; Tj! Fret, cMd! WNT; md} gator, cMd5 
qafrearasr ; Lok Ta; oOr aTaPa — b) sOx! Pu? Pu‘ sPu’ BS; BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jo! wKt! 
Kt? wKt} Lo! GMd! oOr Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu® Tj? mTr*mTr° mTr° [Jolly G Ku] Go Ku Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave BOYS; NNg BTS; Be! wKt! Lo? Ox? Pu? FT; Ho wKt! Hebe:; Md? JrB!: — c) 
sOx' sPuo eAryet, Ox? erage; Lo’ Tj! Put Tj! Tr! ef ger:; cMd! eit get; rMd4 eat oer, 


902 Chapter 12 


Wal Wal WeaTHIET AHA: | 

oar atfer fechas aveat Dated afar: ust 
ria wert Fear seaaryy: | 
TaN AaTAT ATateagratter aT: UCI 
ent: Berg erepaa ant gqaafe | 
WaT GANTT TAT atiet TIT Igo 
arangearaga: wat fart wate feegqa: 
THAT TF ars: Bey: Wo 
Faretetfes: Tat Seat wate gee | 


dorreeg wate gat aaferereeqa: Worl 


+Md? efeayer:; Bo et aearcat; nPul eft gerarcepy, Tr! eter; Pue Pu? saterant; nKt! 
eHHT; Ho Jo? Lo! [mc to] Lo* Tj! Tr? Wa araey; wKt! afereer ate; mTr4 mT ro aThe— d) Tr! 
TarTS: FeT; wKe oOr Wags: Lo! AKT: ; Tr? GAA; BKe IT: Lo’ TITS: 

68. Cited by Vis 3.221; Vij 3.210-1; Ma@dh 2.512 — a) Te 4gt ager oe ger, Md? agt 
Ea W — b) Ho Toarae:; mTrém Tro aYae: — c) cMd> wet aTfer J; Ho rMa4 onfer sOx! 
sPu’ feta; Tr? feped; Lo! Fre — d) rMd4 Aa act 

69. Omitted in TMd? GM@®. Cited by Vij 3.216; Mddh 2.512 — b)cMd! 1rMdé mTr? 
aieed ar. TEAS [Md 7]; oOr Vij PAT; sOx! sPuo SAT; Bo AYA — c) Bo oOr VaTTAfT 
— d) oMy [Jolly Nd] Téteay’; Tr! oferery’; Tr? geateraty aft; cMd! sOx! sPuo °xrenter; 
Trt “Hater 

70. Omitted in wKt! — a) Ho Jo? Lo! [mc to] Lo? Tj! Tr! 7; Lo? cMd! oOr [but 
cor] apiter. tMdé mT? mT ro eerer — b) BK HART: AT; oOr aTST; GMA ToTeAATAe; Ho 
1Md4 GMy Tr! aut stavafe; kt) autararafe, Md! aarearate — c) cMd> wor: tear 
HEP: ake ara wrartet IRM; nk¢ Ox? arated; sOx! Pu2 Put sPu° Tr! [Jolly Nd] 3oT: 
a . Md! Tact; Ho Agee: nPul “RET: wKe ° ire; MTr'mTr6 aeqeT; Pul? “sage, 
tMd! ‘Fagen; Ti? om FIST; BonKtt Ox? sare — d) Lo! erat; Tr! mT eS [Jolly Nd] Waar; 
oMd tera, Pu! Volly M] Ferd; BKt> Lo? Md! S*qY; sBe? Hy Jo! wKt! Ké@ Tj? Ku Go 
Mandlik KSS 334 

71. Omitted in Hy. Cited by Vij 3.219-20 — a) Lo! “Pae:; GMd! Md} “FE: GAT — 
b) BBe? Jo! wKkt! Kt? Tj? [Jolly Nd R] Vij Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fast watreasreega: [cf 
zed]; Lo! avait wafer =a: — c) wKt! “art; Be! BBe? Jo! Jo? Kt? Kt? wKt aKt® Lo? Lo? 
Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr? Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave J — d) BK TT apr; mTro 
afad; nKt! lacuna for BEYAt:; PuS Pu? Lolly G] woyast:; Pu? mTr? mT ro Beyet:; TM} Tr! 
MI? Me Jha Dave Volly M] ®eYer:; Tr? raga: ; +Md* Bears: 

72. Cited by Vij 3.219-20 — a) GMd! MT mTrS Saeit;nKt* [lacuna] a7e77; sOx! sPuo 
[Jolly M] 40 ; sBe? Fare’; Hy Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa Sarez; Pu2 Put Pu’ Pu? fare; wKt! 
Sages’; oOr Hast; Tr! Fork: eiferer:; Pu! Sareasaifac:; Be! Fareawiiferw:; oMd5 
salar TMd3 “car, oMd! sOx! sPuS Pu? Tr Wa ‘saifaa; Jo? “satferr:; Wolly Nd] 
“ata: — b) TM? 8a; sOx! ya; Bo TYR — c) Md! cMd nKt Lo? Tr! mTr4 wT 5 


Chapter 12 903 


wat war feat Preararrarerat: 

AAT AUT HAT ATT ATITTAT WIM 
aserrearcesint aut oar: | 
agar gah ag atkas atfery tov 
arene ag aay Rader | 
atari Tease T WKN 
fafaertta edter: erate weroenry | 
STATA GHAI FATS T-AETT Wot 
era rary g:anrarg faeer: | 
aftarratRreratar fare war a ell 


TAPRNATAT aT AAT WT sey | 
aya at preter aaercaadg T Iwcil 


Tr [Jolly G N Nd] Taree; NNg Farsremeq; Hy Jo! Ke Tj? terse; Tr? tore; Pus 
dorrg; akes toramed; Pu! [Jolly M] AoretHeq; sBe? taraHed; Be! Tererawyed; nPu! Pu2 
Pul ToreEHeT; 1Md* *Sarrerrey; TM? Torereq — d) cMd’ eateeraraly; pBe? eater: 
Tr! waters: 

73: a) Be! MT? Far aur; Wa Fadafea — b) Pu’ Pu? “qarferar:; BKtS cMy * PaTeTe:: 
wkt! “canfaepr:; +Md4 “aarera:; Pul? [Jolly M] Tafa: — c) Pu2 Put Barat; oOr Baler 
— d) cMd! pemint Md* act aut warae; Md3 oMy oy aga 

74. Padas c-d omitted in oOr — a) TMd‘* GMy arearey [om @]; coMd Aen; Pu 
Pu? aera BATT; oOr TAT: SHAT; GMy “caf; pBe? sat — b) sOx! sPuo qrararay — c) 

e ayated wT grat; sOx! sPuo aargatet; cMd! wea acafer — d) cMd> arg areaheorg 
qT; MTP THATS; BBE TIAA 

75. a) Ho Lo! nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? Tr? arraieg; md? arPrartes; rMd4 arg; Jo? 
sOx! sPuo Hey; Pud Pu? Yay — b) nKf om ACH; oMd! Away, wkKt featey; sBe? nPul Pu? 
Put Pu? Pu? mTr® Pray; Pu!® [Jolly M] 3ad4; Bo Fada; nKe feat — c) Bo adios; Tj! 

orersy — d) Tr! tet; Tr? eer aay; Lo? TarATesTe TT; oOr wean 

76. Omitted in cMd! — a) Te “erred fr: ; +Md4 errr: dtery; Tr “erat 
BKtS tMd} Pud Pu’ ast — b) Bo Gara; BBe? “Sta — c) GMd BRAT ; Ho BAA ; wKt! 
GAT: Be! “agar; Md? “ATSB; Pu! Pu? Put Pul® [Jolly M] at@aereatar:; KO 
*aTyaeegay, GMa TATA; Tr! “aTaret — d) Hy BPerorepra, Tj! eeftaraier: Md! “orepied; 
Hy Jo! Kt? Ox? Pu? Put Pu’ Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave SeurT 

77. Omitted in GMd! — a) Kt? BK® Pud Pu’ ayaa; Tj! arate, Tr! STP, tTMd? 
Md? “apa ary; ake fear; Lo! fitrat | — b) Lo! “orate; rMd4 “gras; eKtS 

“greet FY’; Or Tare BAT; tMd4 GMa? nPu! Pu? Put mTr* MTr® Wa Baar; sOx' sPu° 
aad:; ™Md3 waar: — c) MTrS afta’: Tr! sara; eK oMy aftaaranr ; - Ho “aarTar- 
ara, wKt! “anfearara; sBe? arate — d) tM? Pafeenr 

78. Omitted in Pu’ Wa; folio containing 78 to 83a torn in sPu’ — a) TMd4 aera orfar- 
wr; nPu! Pu? Put gsfard T — b) Pu! Pu2 Pul war Se fF ater fom aT4]; TMd4 aa-arer 


904 Chapter 12 


wyhataria ward ta srt: | 

Tart wT aa a Penarer ashy Nell 
ot Fardteant anaPratadtsrz | 
Raa fateateatears aya VW DTT Noll 
Wat F Wat adent rae | 


ATEAIT AAT TAeHHAITAT ll CLA 
wy ad: wafers: wir a: weiter: | 
sae safer rent Prater uci 
area Aaa ae aA: | 
afar yeetat a Prstrarae WT UCM 
adarate daar qarne aorz | 


Ox? aT garett; Pu! TAAaTSIT; BKtS om T— c) Pu’ aT; Ho Pu!® Tr wrrerhy; wKt* sOx! 
Mandlik KSS ®1S1F7; Jo! Pu’ Sar; Bo Haier; aBe? TerFY; Be! Lo? watfor — d) Pu’ ae 
Lo! “MeIaae; Ho Yarata; wKe errr 

79. Omitted in Wa — a) tMd? tMd? 0Or sOx! wafer faart a; mTroargffsrarriar; 
oMy “rar: NKt? GMdS nPu! Pu2 Puf “Rrant a. wKe! °Reirer — b) Ma? aert aft: ge; 
oMd? oMy Tr Tr! mT rS Sareea: (Tr! Card ar’]; Ox? earr apd: ae; T}? fafeerhr 
wafY 7 [=12.77d]; Bo Fava; wKt! Fares; Pu’ afesas:; BK for Fa — c) GMd! mT 
ganar 7 — d) Md) Porrafeast, Tj! aft; Lo! art — nKtt adds here a half- 
verse which is nearly identical to 12.77 a-b 

80. Verses 80 and 81 transposed in Lo} Tj! — a) [Jolly Nd] Serdarectterr:; Pu! 
[Jolly M] watt ta yeftere [Pu!? “asret]; Bo Ho nKt4 ST; Tj! ast; NKt4 tMd? GMy oOr Tj! 
Tr? ta wel; wKt! BK cMd! “wet; Pu? Put “weteret — c) Ho ¥20Fq; Be! ates; Lo? 
wprarer; NK seta; akt> *sarear — d) Pu? Put ¥egea; Tj! T; wKt> F; Jo? Lo’ gg; wKe 
MIP gort 

81. Placed after 12.51 in TMd? GMy — a) Be! wKt} Lo? oOr Pu’ Pu’ agate Area; 
TMd3 cMd) areata are; Ox? aresrarqureay; cMd! araert arefeer; wKt! @; TMd? GMy Tr! 
fe — b) Pud Pu? [but cor] Prater — c) tM? argatt — d) Pu! [Jolly M] & TaeRSwAC,; 
nKt! om one Td; Ho wKt! sOx! “SHAAN 

82. a) Bo Tae; oOr WF; Jo? wKt3 BK Lo? Tj! [Jolly R]at:; NNg Pu! [Jolly M] aT: 
— b) Kt? wKt #AtT, GMd! oOr :; BKt> &; sOx! aT; Ho Lo! nNg OX Pu! Wa 7 — c) Hy 
Jo! Kt? Tj? Mandlik KSS Jha Dave +: 308Ht BF; NNg Pulo feta — d) Jo! Jo? Kt? Tj? 
Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fame; NNg faves; [Jolly M] faved; cMd fesreny 

83, a) MTr‘mTr fare ; Bo Bh [patha] avatars”; cMd! Bh [patha] arate — b) 
Bo g;wKt! dae:; Pu Pu’ [Jolly G] t78:; Lo! tMd3 GMd Tr! [Jolly Gr] frre: — c) wKt! 
afar aes Far a; nKe? Tew; Pul? wea FT; Lo} “aar; aktS dar a7 — d) BBe’ nKt* Lo! 
Ng Tj! Pet"; BK Md? GMd cMy #5); Pus 37° 





Chapter 12 905 


Rrra wath Fer Tee Ucvil 
adaraty Sao Te HAT | 
TA TATA TTT TTT Ae: UCU 
moa F Yaar sot tet ae T | 
HHHTAT HAT AdaT sat Seay UCI 
afee atanr g catered: | 
senlahe arrears UCM 
gangete aa Acar a | 

wae a frat a fafeer at afeary cc 


84. Omitted in BK TMd? GMd Pu!® [Jolly M]; padas a-b omitted in Lo?, and padas b-c 
in Be! — a) Pu aaaraa, Te wane; nKe orate g aur — b) wKt! Pus “ara, Pus “ara 
— c)nKtt cMd! Pu? Pu’ fesfeaeeta’ ; GMy nPu! Pu? Put Tr! mTr4 Tro Wa fee ware; wKt! 
La! oOrf J Ba; Lo? Tj! Fr PAT; NK Lo! Caepecrt, Pus “get Ta; MTrs “Teme aah 
— d) Ho ater of qed 

Additional verses in Ox? Pu: 

fafear adeatfir asarracife a | 
frafacntt feat wear ware a etl 
fate g acarnt asx Raafe astra | 
ferk ait afafear qoratt Repeater 121! 
1. ¢) Ox? Frtafer avatar 
2. Padas a-b omitted in nPu! — c) Ox? arerafafear 

85. Pada-a omitted in Be!. Padas c-d cited by Sam on BU 1.4.7 — b) BKt® eater —c) 
BKD ae adfasrt ; Lal *Md3 dae; BBe GAT; Be! Jo? sOx! sPu® Tr? Text; oOr Tay; 
Lo? aera ad; Wa faery — d) wKt! aad; Ho SAG; MT a: 

86.* a) BKP Hast; Lo! Md‘ Pu’ Pu? Wa TTA _; sOx! om J; sBe? Hy Jo! Kt? 
wKt} La! sOx! Pu3 Pud sPu® Pu’ Tj? Tr? [Jolly G] Go Re Mandlik KSS W4at — b) sBKé Wet 
aed:; nPul Pu2 4; Put are — c) Pu’ Pu? Aaewe a fasts; cGMy WEP AA; Be! nKt* Lo! 
NNg SaeHCTH; Wa art — d) wKe eke’ afar; Volly M] as at HA; Lo? om Afea; Ho 
afeat, Lo} afear 

87. a) TMd? cMd5 afede: waatital [oMd> “aTAE]; BK om Sfear; cMy afeay, cMd! 
aaary; wkt? om J; Ho GMd! sOx! sPuo mTr*uTr® fF; wKt! La! Pu? Tr? + — b) BKO ade 
arate: — c) sOx! sPus aeanfater aatftr; oOr wafer af aeaaret’; wKt! “sfafer — d) cMy 
Tr! [Jolly Nd] waar aferepfer ; +Md? cMd’ erat aferafer ; wKt! Tr? om waareater- 
fapar ; sOx! sPu® “feral 

88. Cited by Vij 3.58; Apa 1033; Laks 14.146-7; pada-d cited by Sam on BU 1.1.1 — a) 
Md cMd> gartangaas (om Aa]; Ho “zaas, wKt “eft; Lo? “Rras at; wKe! ae; Apa 
ata — b) nKt4 Kt) tMd? La! Lo! mTr9 Vij 32%"; BBe? Put Tj! Pet’; Ox? Pu? Prt’; cMy 
“aaa, Wa ufeaer; Tj? “wepete — c) GMd! cMd? Pud Pu’ waht & ahr, NKt om Pract 
t— d) Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] fefaet ear: we 


906 Chapter 12 


Fe AAT a Brey vad wet Tela | 

Prant arg ¢ Praqufesrt ca 

wad HH aeeT FaraAte atkcary | 

Pad tare yarereafa wT FT Uo 
aaa arent arya area | 

AT TAMAS ARTETA US uN 
aurnrare satter ofterer fear: | 
AAAs WH TMT Fara T AAaTT URN 


89.* Padas a-b torn in GMy. Cited by Vij 3.58; Apa 1033; Laks 14.147 — a) La! 3garq7, 
wKt! a aT a at; Be! Be? Hy Jo! Jo? Kt? wK nKt! BKtS Lo! Lo? cGMd! NNg sOx! Ox? Pu 
Pu} Pu‘ sPuo Pu? Tj? Tr Wa [Jolly M] Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave AYA; oOr AYA PTL 
@; Bo Ho BAF WET, rMd3 arAT ATeers; nPu! Pu? Put @rt — b) Ho Jo! WaT; Pul? a FT, 
Ho [cor to] Hf — c) Jo? BK Lo! Lo? Tj! aragd g Prep; rMd4 Pu’ Preart; Pu!? om G; 
sBe? wKt! Lo sOx! sPuo J — d) oOr act BA Ged; Lo Tj! Volly R] WHAT; La! sOx'! 
sPuo Tr? “Tgeaet 

Additional verse in nKt* MTr‘*mTr® Mandlik [1] KSS Dave; commented on by Rn; padas 
a-b given after verse 88 in Pu? Pu‘: 

served Per Agusta | 
wate wd wy gecyufesae |! 
a) Pu? Pu’ apatred — b) Mandlik KSS Dave Pract a faritag 

90.* Omitted in Pul®. Cited by Apa 1033; Laks 14.147 ~ a) Pub vat fF Weer; Lo! 
yaad; Ox? Pratt; rMd4 waves, Ho wKt! Lo! Ox? mTr6 Jha Dave THT; BK TAeT:; GMP 
Pud Pu’ teaq; TMd3 Gea; Tr! FA; oOr TATET — b) oOr CAAT STATA; Lo? garaifa; 
Lo} daraPrfe; Ke? daraafe, cMy “area arferat; rMdé “arafer atrevat; Ho Lo? Pud Pu? 
aretat; Bo aredar, rMd3 Tr! afteat; Be! areca; wKt! arférat; Jo! Kt? wKt} sOx! Ox? nPu! 
Pu? Put sPu® Pu® Tj? Tr [Jolly K] Me Rn [patha] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave 812tdT; Pu? Lolly 
M] Apa area; Jo? La! NNg Laks aTeHat;, Hy aeTaT; BKE aTeTeT: — c) Pud Frat wt 
weer; sOx! sPuo rac; cMd! Agta; BBe? BK La! rMd4 Seaareg; wKt! Faart J; nNg 
nPu! Pu? Put Gaara — d) Md! qarredfea; rMd3 yaraeeafer; Be! BKt> La! Lo? Ox? nPu! 
Pu? Wa [Jolly M] Me [patha] Na Weatereifa;, GMd! Tr? [Jolly G] Me [patha but rejected] 
qarerate; Tr! sareacafer; Lo! zarercfife; Apa yarereate, Md? oGMd’ TT J; Bo THTA:; 
Laks TAHA; BK : 

gi. Verses 91 and 92 transposed in Pu’. Sam on BU 3.1.1[intro.] refers to this verse 
cited by Laks 14.147 — a) Pu? Pu’ Tr? aeyaeaarcary; BKtS aeTey — b) oOr Pu? Put Pu! 
aayay — c) wKt! GMd! cMy Pu? Pu4 auaasresarsit & [Pu? Put 3; cMd! a; wkt! at]; rMd3 
oMd > Tr! qusasrerat sfté:; Lal Goeaarqarsit w; Lo! qagearcaarearsy; Pul?art, rMd?4 
agree — d) Be! sKt® Lo! Pu! arse; Ho @ UT; BBE TAST : wKt! gua; Td} 
oMd> aawafer ; Pus Pu? “ferferafer; Ho Pul® (Jolly M] Beteester 

92. Cited by Laks 14.147 — b) wK# ofterd; Pu? aftera; Pu‘ after; Be? Hy Jo! Kt? 
NNg Ox? Tr? Me Rn Mandlik KSS Jha Dave Vers; mTr® taper; tMd4 fester — c) Pu? 


Chapter 12 907 


UVahes Sara qreprer fared: | 
mretaepepeat fe fast wafer Arete US 3 


eet are a aagreatater fearfer: evil 

Ol Aga: AAAT ATA BAT HqTT: | 

eater frome: ser vate fe ar: SAT: Ua 
THT TUT T ATs ahr | 
aerated Pore 7 Sel 
Uist Tal STSIACIPTAT: TTR | 

wet wer fret a ad aarenfteate sui 


[Jolly M] stray WATIST: Be! strata; Lo! “ary TaN; pBe? Ho wKt! BKtS Lo? NNg 
nPu! Pu2 Pu} sPu® Tj! 24; Wa ATH; Be! Lo? HF; sBe oOr TA TST; wKt! J; Bo Lo? md? 
oMd at; Tr! &; BK & — d) Tj! Tr! Tre tMd? tMd! GMd’ “sarar waary; oMd! “eet 
aera; Ho Pa IAAT: Pu? Pud Pul® “saree wary 
93. Omitted in [Jolly Nd]. Cited by Sam on BhG 15.20;Laks 14.147 — a) Be! nPu! Vag 

ferred; rMd4 vag festa FT; NNg sOx! Ox? Pu2 Put sPus Tr? TATATAET; BBe? Bo Ho 
Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? Lo! Lo Pu Tj! Tj? olly R] Go Ku Mandlik Jha KSS Dave TATHET,; 
BKtS Pud Pu? aTareat — b) TMd? cM? aTerer AEE: — c) Ho “HaT; La! “PeMtt; Bo Ox? 
et 

94.* Omitted in Pu!®. Cited by 4pa12; padas a-b cited by Dev 1.129 — a) Dev [vl] 
sefrea b) tMd* oOr Squeyq:; La! Sapaey:; aK Saray; TMd* Pud Pu? Dev FATA: — c) 
nPu! Pu? Put afaret; aKt> AART; BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wK3 La! Lo! Lo? Lo? nNg 
Pud Pu’ Pu’ Tj! Tj? Go Ku Rn Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave 337, *Md4 FateT, nKtt AAT; 
Be! seen: M3 amaaret 

95.* Folio containing verses 95c to 100d torn in sPu°. Cited by Kum 1.3.5; Apa 14; Laks 
1.262 — a) TMd} Tr! [but cor] Wa at; cMé 4; mTr? mTr® aT@:; BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jo! Jo? 
wKt! Kt? wKt* Lo! Lo? GMd> sOx! Ox? sPuo Pu® Tj! TP Tr? mTr° [Jolly Nd]Kum Bh Ku Re 
Mandlik KSSeyerat; mTr4 Be — b) Be! aPrePTBreH ; BBe? Ho NK#! Lo! Lo? oOr sOx! Pus 
sPu Pu? Pu Pul? Wa Kum Apa ®IPaee; Tj! BPH ; Pu? Put Herecd:; cGMd! Ager: ; Md? 
yee: — c) oOr FAT; Bo waren oMy Fronet; Kum Apa Laks grarenit — d) Lo? Tj! 
Apa TANTaT; Md? aaa; wKt “Protea; GMd! & ar; mTr5 aceeqan:; Pul fe are: 

96. Cited by Apa 12; Laks1.262 — a) Bo 3d; wKO STITT; GMd! mTr? SeaTac; 
Hy wKt? Lo? tMd4 NNg nPu! Pu? Pu’ Pu? Apa Saat; Be! oOr HART; Tr! BAA; BBe* Jo! Jo? 
wKt! Kt? Lo? Pu’ Tj! mTr> Wa Polly R] Laks Mandlik KSS @a-d; La! aged aT; Jha 
Dave faasatet ar; tMd3? GMd> faaaary mer; Ox? Rc fstera TAT — a-b) Tr? J 7 
arden af ait a ara — b) Pu? aft aren aft a; oMds wrt 3 — c)aKt 
araateerstraar; La! arerateanrracear; xPul watoaranfsarcar; Ox? areas ; oMd Tr 

“aeptfescrat — d) GMd! nPul “angenr 
97. Verses 97-112 illegible in 1Md*. Cited by Dev 1.128 — a) Put aa ; BBe BKt 


908 Chapter 12 


we: VR BT WT aT Wear asa: | 
aatea shereater safetoretat: USC 
fait ayant deat warty | 
TATA AT TSTAET STIT USS 
AUITT TUT T VeAGaaAT T | 
adorei a atagreahraeta 20 oll 
wat Waaen afedeenatatr garz | 
wat sete aaet: BAT sTATSTA: Lo VN 
aagreaniaradt AT TAP TIT | 
Zea Te fewer TET Berg Lot 


agaist; cMd5 adit; cMd! drasir; mTro eater — b) Pul® [Jolly M] ater: ey feearcarearerar: 
wKt! BK Lo! sOx! “space: FRTPTAT:; oOr SPACE SPTHT: — c) Ho WT AaRAEPT; Bo 
yanagered;, sBe? nKtt oOr Tr! Yat; GMd sOx! Jha Dave Wagaey; SBE Hy nK¢ Lo? 
GMd nNg Tj! Tr! [Jolly R' Nd] Dev afaeaer — d) Lo? oOr at 

98.* Ms of Tr! ends at pada-c — a) Md} aeqerafEt FT; Lo! Tj! sea; Hy Bear:; Bo Ho 
nKt* La! mTr® eat; Hy om ST FT — b) wKt! Wer T GST F; Pud Pu? Terese FT; tM} 
qe; Md! art: — c) Hy wKt} Pus sfeeater; Jo! Kt? Tj? Mandlik Jha KSS Dave Wat — 
d) Be! Lo? weet; L Lo? WITT; Bo ratty; BBe* Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? nKt* Lo! Lo? 
oMd! tMd?3 GMy oOrsOx! Pu? Pu? Put Pu® Tj? Tr? mTr4mTr MTr® Yolly Ku R N]Bh Ku Rn 
Re Mandlik KSS mere ; Pu? Put raray ; Pu? Pu’? Go ry ; BKt wey; oMy “aif; wKt! 
“art JT; mTr4 MTr® Sater: Ox? “apafurr: BKt> rMd? GMd> sOx! Pu? Tr? Wa [Jolly N] Me 
[patha}] Na “enter: 

g9. Padas c-d omitted in wKt?. Arrangement of verses in [/o/ly M] is 99, 106-8, 100-5, 
109-122, 126 — a) 1M? Pu? Tr? aearreatfer — b) Ox? Aa: — d) Pul? Stay aTeT ATIF; Bo 
asrat ; NNg Wa Sed? [om ax]; Lo! GMdS -ateet; Wa “wer aT; wKtt nPul areas; TM? 
aed 

100, Omitted in Pu’ Pul® — a) Jo? Lo} Tj! @arfarer usr a; Hy wKt! Ke? wk nKt4 
Pu’ Tr? Wa Jolly Jha Dave ar’: BBe arr. oMd aarate — b) Pu? ae; Ho Td? “Sacra; 
BBe* “Ape — d) Bo “aresfafetéa:; Te “arexfaatte 

101. Omitted in Pu!®. Cited by Dev 1.129; Ma@dh 2.172 —- a) Be! Lo? aTafaay; Te 
araaact — b) Pu? Pul afeéanerstaft; ake “aarstafe; Be! “eneiatt; oOr “aneigarerert 
—c) Pu? Pud aaa; Lo? Fae: 

Additional verse in nPu! Pu? Put Mandlik [®, T, ©] KSS Dave: 

7 aroma saeatehria¢ | 
TaATY Hered ced at Tae |! 
b) Pu? Put “antfentae — c) Mandlik KSS Dave SaTATeT; Put yaTerer 

102. Omitted in Pu!°; padas c-d omitted in GMd!. Cited by Dev 1.132 — a) Te “aera — 
b) Te ax dat ; Bo TMd? Dev UF FAT; Be! 277; Bo cMd! Pu? Put Dev aed; Wa tet — c) 
Dev Sea forester a; wKt Kt! ferceca; cMy afeaet — d) sKO * eI; nKtt GMy Bead 


Chapter 12 909 


ware afer: sear yferear erfturr act: 
atten sift: sear afreat eraathrar: 2031 
aat feat a famer frstraat weg | 


ATA BAT Stet Mrrawaqargydr iow 
weet aaart wT wet w fafenraz | 

aa gfatad art ectgfzafierar okt 
amd eatvesr wo aagrearfartterar | 
aerergaara Tat Aq AAT: ULo kil 
Taras at aaraasrea: | 

ATTA TRACT THETA 2 oO 
way ry at enfafe axa | 

4 Rrer wear Fz: a at: oa Noi 
etonfirrat eg az: auger: | 


103. Omitted in Pu! — a) BKt® La! Tj! atest; nNg ae; Ke Thera: BBe? TRA: 
SST —~ b) Md? Fet:; NKt! aa: — d) Be! aTferait; Put Bh “eater: 

104, Omitted in Pu. Cited by Apa 960; Dev 1.144 — a) Lo! feared; Dev frenft; ake 
fame — b) sBBe nKt? Tj! FE”; wKt! wKt} La! sOx! sPu’ 359°; cMy nPu! Pu? Put Put 4:3"; 
TMd3 GM@ aar:taeHt — c) oOr TATA; BK THAT; Hy Jo! Kt? sOx! sPus Tj 2 Mandlik Jha 
KSS Dave fofeat — d) eK rararget ; Pus fafawargerr’; oOr Fara 

105. Omitted in Pul°; verses 105-26 omitted in wKt!. Cited by Sam on VeS 2.1.11; Kum 
1.3.2; Laks 1.32; Hem 24.22 — a) La! GMd! Pu’ Sam Kum Laks Hem TReTATAM 7, Be! 
yerey — b) Bo Tr? Laks 1% FT; nPul Pu2 Pud Put Kum aed TF; Be! feferar; miro fater ayer; 
oMd5 “art: — c) Lo? om 74; Ho afafed; ake afafed; Lo! nPul gq fafed — d) cMd°5 
arergfasierar; Bo cGMy NNg Pu? Pui Tr? (Jolly Nd] fers’; sBe mTr! mT rs wage ; 
wKt Pub eaters ; Volly M] eta: Md? arcrghe’; Ho oMd! Tr? “sfifeaar; Pu2 Put 
° sftearar: Kum [Jolly M] “sftcaat; Bo Atcaar 

106. Cited by Sam on VeS 2.1.11; Apa 22; Laks1.32; Hem 24.22; padas c-d cited by Kum 
1.3.2 — a) Ho nKt Lo! Pu? Pu Pu!® [Jolly Mat; cGMd! UT; Ho Pul® [Jolly M] qataeert 
[om 7; Pul? eata], cMd! “tara — b) Bo Hy 1Md? GMd5 nNg “areata”; Pu? Put 
“areata; Wa “areaifaet?; NNg Ox? faeterat; oMd? Rafer; wKe Preferar — c) Hem 
weer { aed — d) Md? oMdS eared; nPul aq; La! Faer:; Ho Fae; LaksATe: 

107. Padas c-d omitted in oOOr — a) BK La! Lo! sOx! sPu® 35"; NNeg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? 
Tr? Pra. nKt4 fe’ Be! Pus Tr “aaae at — c) Pu? Put “seer ard; snKtS La! ater 
we — d) Pud Pu? “eres; wKt} GMd! nNg sOx! sPu® Pu!? mTr® [Jolly M G] 3eead; Lo? 
“feed: Tr? “ager 

108. Cited by Laks 1.35; Dev1.7 — a) La! aareaay; Laks watstg; tMd3 “ara, BKt5 
ar, cMy aay — a-b) Pu2 Put sara eer enfefer Ate waq — b) Md} GMd@ Aaa: 
—c) Hy td? @; cMd! fre; aK Sarr 


910 Chapter 12 


ov Breer ara ear: ylarereteagt: ULV 
aaraet ar uftaer ef aftecrg | 

marr ate area & at a Rema ie oll 
ahr tqeeaat Aemt ataew: 
AIATART: Ts aATRCATERTAT N22 21 
maaan aaaaara TT | 

mat aftasgar eater te 22 
vast aafrat a arate fasten: | 

a fara: wth oat arararafedisga: 223 


109. Cited by Apa 82; Dev 1.6 — a) Md3 aA’; Apa aT; Be | “onfestat; oOr 
Wa ‘oTarrdt; aK aa; BBe? aeq — b) mTr* mTr6 deer fe: La! aaa oh”; Py! °Sfeur:; 
oMd! “aéur:; aKtS “dfeat: — c) Lo? Rrre; Tr? eI; BK Ox? aa: — d) sBe Ber; Be! Lo” 
“yerReae: 

uo. a) BBe sara; cMd! eararet; La! mTr° BA[ad 11.85] Sao; Pul? eee af’: 
Be! GMd! sOx! sPuS Tj? om aT; Pu’ Pu’ G;NNg nPu! Pu2 a; Pus Tr? tT; Wa 7 AT Te; Lo! 
afta; nPu! Pu? Put oe]; sOx! sPuo sf ee; Ho TRU; Lo2om oa wf — a-b) Lo? Tj! 
oRaat tof — b) Lo oRuat aw ofemediq: tM} oe ef oftarea; cMd’ Gera; 
Ng Pus “aera — c) sBe? Prazt; aktS Braet, rMd? szaeraft, Lo! Te saat FT [Lo! a]; 
Pu} saree q NNg sOx! sPuo af; Bo aft; cMd° wee; Be! gaeT; wKe TTS; ak 
gfe; sOx! sPuo aeIT, Ho oOr ABM; La! GMy Ox? Pu2 Pud Pud Pus gaewed; Tr? 
gerearet, Lo! gareqrd — d) pBe? Bo Hy Jo! Jo* Kt? Lo! Lo Lo? GMy oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! 
Pu? Pu} Pué sPu® Pu’ Tj! Tj? (Jolly R Nd] Rn Re Mandlik Jha KSS Dave fraraag 

Additional verse in NPu! Pu? Put Mandlik [#, 7, T, 3] KSS Dave: 

get array et: orgy aahafafercrs | 
anenftrant aeanfe + een gare: | 
b) Mandlik KSS Dave ag TTTgPaerern: 

iu. Cited by Apa 22; folio containing verses 111c to 11% torn in sPu’ — a) Be! Bo 
GMd! tMd3 GMd@ mTr° Sear; BBe FAT; Ho Jo2 La! Lo! Lo? NNg Pu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pu? Pu? 
Pu’ Tj! Jollytae ; 1Md3 FqHeet, nPul “wereet; sPul “Head; sOx! Pud “werd: sBe 
oMd> Pu? Put “aeda> — b) oOr 384; sPus “aTeet: — c) tMd? gaa; Pu’ waraRrr:; 
Be! yf; Pul? ad; BKtS Fear — d) Bo TMd3 GMd5 GMy NNg nPu! Pu? Pu} Pué Pu!? Tr? mTr* 
mT rs Wa Apa T8euT saat [rMd? ofea J; sBe? SfeT: BMT; Be! “aer:; Md! “art 

112. Cited by Vij 3.299; Apa 21; Dev 1.8 — a) Ho agg sed, Md? Ox? Pus Pu’ 
“farqacam: aKts “agar — a-b) Wa “faagdafres aafitr a — c) wKt? La! 
oMd! Pu? Put 2axt:; BK GMd> Frat; Apa AAR; Vij ATT; nPul Vij WHfestar; Pu2 Put Wa 
ata Far; +Md4 ater sar; La! sear #ar:; cMd! “star: — d) Ho “Parra: 

ug. Cited by Vij 3.299; padas a-b cited by Vif 1.9 — a) Lo? Farhi F — b) Vij T 
arate; sBKt> oOr at; GMy 4a ; BBe? cMd! faaete; nNg Maa; Lo STARA; Lo! 
feaete; cMd! sOx! fest; BBe? La! TMd3 GMd5 GMy oOr MTr’ MTr® faaeror: — c) La! & fF 
az:; Be! Lo? oOr Put Put Vij & Ha: TAT — d) tM} MTroaTaay Tr? qaTaTy ; Lo! 


Chapter 12 911 


RAAT STATA aTATT | 
Vea: Aaa aay aT Frere UL vil 

a aghea cahyar Fat ataafze: | 

ATT AIT Yea aapAG Tesla Wy eat 
wdasfifed at frstraret wT | 
wearer far: sreatfer ear wifey ue kk 
Ua FT Wrardat ater aera | 
GT WA We AAT adAMATT NN? Lull 
area aaa wearer sara: | 

ad greats aa avert ged Aa: N22 
aeag tat: wal: adaraaeuay | 
arent f& saaerar stant atitomsy 2 28 


aTaTATE BBe2 “gfe; Lo! sOx! “afearae:; Lo? Tj! “agaTgc:;Ho “ae; Tr “We: 

114. a) Lo! agarart — b) pBe? sftaat; rMd3 “Garth — c) Lo? Tr? weet: — d) oMd! 
afefere; 1Md4 Pu! Pu? Put mTr® Watded Aq [uTro a fe]; Lo? “werafeed; ake ade 

115. Omitted in cGMd! — a) Pu’ a; Ho nKt* La! rMd? tMd4 NNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu? Tj! 
Tr? Wa [Jolly R Nd Gr] BDh1.1.11; VaDh 3.6 agar; Lo? Saar; Ld Wa THT YET; pBe* 
wKt} La! tMd* GMy nNg nPu! Pu? Put [Jolly Nd] ryzeT — b) ake Heathraige:; mMd4 
eatertasrd:; Md? cMd> yurarererarae:; Tr? ; Bo Ho nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pud Pu’? Pu!? Aart; 
Bo “afage:; nPu! Pu* Put mTr* mTr® Wa Ford: Pul® “xafexa: — c) TMd3 deat; Lo! 
TCT; NNg [but cor fh] FAT; wK Hear — d) Ma} aepAaTTesie, cMd> AHAs a Tele; 
aMy Pu? Put Pud Pu’ [Jolly G] aareasprester; mTr* Tr arab nPul qgaAT ; NNg 
agen ; La! aegtg | wKe wpafertete 

116, Omitted in GMd'. Cited by Apa 1027— a) Be? fafed; Be! “FAfed; sOx! “fated; 
nKt ef; Pu? Put Pud Pu? aed — b) NK’ aK sOx! Tj! FEY"; BBe? GMy nPul Pu} Pu’ Tr? 
Tt"; tMd3 cM 45° — c) TMd} tMd4 GMA 0Or [Jolly R] TeTaTAAT; GMy [Jolly Nd] 
aarefrady; Lo} wenreargay; Hy weaned, Be wKkKe fragt. oOr ate: 

117. Cited by Apa 1027-~ a) GMy Ue FE; rMd4* Wa @al WTA — d) oOr YAHATT 

118. Omitted in Pu5; pada-d omitted in GMd?; ms. of wKt ends after pada-b. Cited by 
Apa 1027;Laks 14.201 — b) Pu? Put dar acaer Prevat; BK MET — c) GMd! GMy Laks 
Apa waareaty, tMd4 at “TAP; Ho Jo? Lo} Tj! areHP; La! cara; Lo? GMd! Md‘ mT1* 
MT ro aasaq TM? GMd5 Sae7 — d) Pu T OTT Beer Ae; BKtS Wa ares: rMd4 Garr Afer:; 
TMd3 GMd Wa Ffe: Be az: 

119. Pada-a omitted in cMd!. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201 — b) TMd* Wa "ear 
aferd; sBe Tr? “fer: — c) Ho seat we fF START: Be! Lo! Lo? Pud Pu? seta; Pud Pu’ 
areca — d) Lo} Tj! wether 

Additional verse in Ox?: 


aefeat fafecarat sens safe | 


912 Chapter 12 


@ aad ay terest | 
Urngeat: WE AT: HSsat at a AT URoll 
watts fear: otter ater Prop ae afte | 
araty Proaert srr a marafert ue ei 
Taare TararacfareararoTreky 

earn caret frame ger TET U2 
WANs Tera AAT waa | 

THAR MONA Fay MPATT NLM 

uy wath yar asahreater afahr: | 
werafaarrer carats ama Wee 


a ud frac ag a Fefagut aA: II 

120, Omitted in Ho; mss. of sOx! sPu® end after pada-a. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201 
— a) pBe MTr® & & Paeaeag[mTr Fa]; nKe4 aT: AaAaT; Ox? afr; aa} “aaa; 
Bo “aad; Apa @d; sKt @4; nNg AY — b) sBe AesA:; Pul? "eatafe a wkd “as — c) 
Be? GMy Pu’ Pu’ Pul? Wa Apa afm ; rMd3 dese: ak Taare; Te afepgted?, nK¢! 
ara: BBe? Pu!? “ater; oMd! “gtatd; Apa ‘Ser; Lo? Pu? Put “sted; La! “sted; nKt4 9e; Lo! 
[but cor] Tat — d) MTr*uTro Ser PTT HTT; Be! Lo? Pu? Put Apa Set; cMd | Hs; Bo 
La! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu Pu? Pu8 Pu! Tj! Laks AS BT T[La! nPu! Pu’ Avr; Ox? Pu’ Pu? 
Pu!° ayer]; oMd! @F Fat 7; Lo’ “ar at; Lo? Wa Thar; La! gt 

121 * Omitted in nKt* TMd4; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa 1027;Laks 14.201 — 
a) Bo Hed; Pub “ats:; Apa ft; tMd3 “aay; oMd! gait rar — b) Hy #1aT; BKt5 
Hrd, Bo Bra; tMd} Hira; GM Brat; Ox? Hes; Laks We; Tr face TS; mTr° fous Fe; 
TMd} 4; Pus Pu? Te; La! BSae, Pu! sfe:; BBe? Bo Hy Jo! Kt? Lo! Lo’ BKt? GMd! cMd> 
NNg nPu! Pu’ Tj! Te mTr5 mTr® Lolly Ku] Apa Laks Mandlik Jha KSS Dave ®&; Wa 8; 
oMd! 4% — c) cMy Tr? aTeat; Ho arreafiy; Pul? “fafiggenst; Pul Wa Fanit — d) Tj! 
Feat; Lo? Pu? Put woray 

122. Omitted in NKt! 1Md4; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201 -— 
a) Ho warferare:; Lo! warftrare; oOr Tr? atfeanre; Laks Apa arataart —b) Bo offaraair 
oMy ‘oftrarsit’ — c) Bo bert; mTrémTr® SAT; Pul? <aranTer — d) Pu! fat; Be! Lo? 
GMd! TMd3 nNg nPu! Pu? Put mTr® Wafaerg; ake afgerget; Laks Feary 

123 * Omitted in NKt' TMd4 [Jo//y M]; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa 1027;Laks 
14.201; padas a-b cited by Sam on BU 1.4.6 — a) Pul GAA Taeah; La! Lo? oOr PutmTr* 
Tro Waas; NNg Pu2 Taya; BK Tata; rMd3 wats; Lal ager — b) oMd! at ag: WaT 
aff; BBe Hy Lo? NNg oOrnPu! PuS Pu? Tj! Laks Aqaa, Wa AAG; Tre ATA; Lo! FWA; 
oMy tTMd3 GMd5 mTr4 mT ro Feaa— c) Hy Jo? Lo} Tj! SFART; TMd3 WOTAT; BK EO ITAA 

124. Omitted in nKt* [Jolly M]; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa 1027; Laks 14.201 
—b) Tre Prater; +Ma3 “Rrefa refer — c) GMy sarge TMd! “fafserat Pret; Lo! ert 
fret; GMd! Pu’ Apa “eat Pret — d) Ho Fareaftamad; cMy sureale; akts earafe; Hy 
wae ay; NNg wate a ga; La! amar 


Chapter 12 913 


Ud FT: AAYAT TACTATAATSTAT 
A AATAATHET TAMA AT THT NPN 
waeearaansey BAT wTgaTAeAT ULI 


Pa ee ae 
Aeavar sTaqrseary: | 


125. Omitted in nKt* [Jolly MJ; not commented by Go. Cited by Apa 1028; Laks 14.201 
— a)Apa a Wa; rMd4 NNg yah — b) Hy Ng Tr? taTeah; oOr “aH — c) cMd! & 
adetatar; Tj? ada waaay; BBE: “aTafa — d) cMd! 1Md3 cGMd5 cMy Pu) Pu’ serrate; 
Jo? Kt} Lo! Lo *Md3 GMd> GMy Ox? Pu? Tj! Tr? [Jolly R Nd Gr] Laks “fer ATT 
Additional verse in Hy Lo? Tj! Mandlik [S, 4, 4, 31] Dave KSS: 
aged yearer aeresT area | 
yar arafartate oatratat ae | 
126, Omitted in NKt? Lo? Pu; not commented by Go — a) Lo! 3faf ad; Hy Jo ake? 
La! Lo? cMd> Tj! mTrémTro $a ATT — b) Lo} oOr Ox? Tj! GSE fest:; BKO Fea FT: —c) 
Be! Pu2 Put ararerdtrafaed; oMd! sacurreurter, sk waarae — d) rMd* cMy mTr® 
aa; Md} aereraiqar ; cMd! GMy MTP MTr® [Jolly Nd] aapnfefe; Lo! afearyare 
Additional verses in Mandlik {[®] KSS Dave: 


a Tees TC ST TST: AT APIA |! 


Colophon: Lo! Lo? 1Md3 nNg sOx! sPu’ sf sftarte; Lo? sfer tradi, cMd! yay 
and om afearat; Lo! Lo? aqprmafearat; Lo? om yyararat afearat 


11 


1.2 


1.6c 


1.74 


1.7d 


NOTES TO THE CRITICAL EDITION 


CHAPTER ONE 


The initial invocatory verse before the first verse must be quite old, because it is com- 
mented by Govinda and found in 18 northern mss. It is, however, clearly spurious. The 
verse is not recorded in any ST ms., making it likely that it was a northern interpola- 
tion Medhatithi commenting on 1.2 calls it dvitiyah Slokah (“the second verse”); if he 
accepted the invocatory verse, 1.2 would have been the third verse. The invocatory 
verse must have been inserted into the text, therefore, sometime after Medhatithi. 


The additional verses were probably interpolated at an early date, because they are 
found in several mss. of the ST (both Malayalam and Grantha), in the Kashmiri Sarada 
ms., in Nd, and in many NT mss. They are ignored by Me, however, and missing is 
most ST and NT mss. 


Me, Rn, and Nd take pdda-c as a single Bahuvrihi compound mahdabhitddivrttaujah 
qualifying svayambhith. The explanation of Go could go both ways, although Biihler, 
in his note to this verse, thinks that he takes mahabhitdadi as a separate compound 
qualifying idam of pada-b. This is also the interpretation of Ku and Mr. On the other 
hand, Re appears to read mahabhiitadih in the masculine qualifying svayambhah. It is 
difficult to determine who is right. Converting the entire pada into a single compound 
makes it clumsy but keeps the pdda as a meaningful unit. My inclination is to go with 
Ku, because his interpretation makes a more natural division of the compound. 


I have adopted the reading atindriyo ’ grahyah, although it is supported by only a few 
mss.: Ho Jo? NKt* La! Ox? Ox? Tj! Tr? Wa. The reading is, therefore, somewhat con- 
jectural. It is supported, moreover, by BhP 2.11 and the citation in Samkara’s com- 
mentary on BU 1.4.6; it is also so understood by Anandagiri in his sub-commentary on 
Samkara. My reading is also supported by Nd. Most mss. and commentators, however, 
compound the two expressions: atindriyagrahyah. Medhatithi interprets atindriya 
(“what is beyond the senses”) as the mind (manas), and takes the compound to mean 
that the creator is to be grasped by the mind. This interpretation is accepted by most 
other commentators. A slightly different interpretation is given by Go, who reads 
atindriydgrahyah: he cannot be grasped by the mind (atindriyena manasa grahitum 
aSakyah). | think the traditional reading and interpretation is awkward and forced. The 
word agrahyah at the end of pdda-a nicely parallels the other negative with a similar 
meaning, acintyah, at the same final position in p@da-c; note the parallel -ndriyo and 
-mayo in both with the elision of the initial a of the following word. 


Although mss. are divided over the two readings esa and eva, it is clear that the former 
is far superior; it is represented in the broadest spectrum of ST and NT mss. and paral- 


914 


1.10a 


1.13a 


1.20 


1.22a 


1.44b 


1.45C 


1.46a 


1.61d 


1.64¢ 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 1 915 


lels nicely the correlative yo ’sau in pdda-a. The particle eva, furthermore, is pleonas- 
tic in conjunction with svayam. The adopted reading is found in: Be! Be? Jo? wKt! 
wkt} nKtt nKt’ La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo’ GMd! sOx! Ox? Ox? sPu® Pu’ Pu !? Tj! Tr 
MTr? MTr® WaBhP 2.11 Nd Sam [vl in 6 mss; but edition gives eva] Jha Dave. 


There is some question as to whether the reading is narah or nardh. Ku says that Go 
reads nardh and offers an explanation of it. Ku may have made a mistake here. It is Me 
(and not Go) who explains the term, saying that children are given the name of the fa- 
ther: thus children of Vasistha are called vasisthdh and the children of Bhrgu 
bhrgavah. In both we see that the initial letter does not take vrddhi. The preponderance 
of mss. evidence, however, supports ndrdh. 


There is strong manuscript support for both tu and ca. I have adopted tu, which is 
found in Be! Bo Ho wKt! nK¢‘ BK La! Lo! Lo* GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd> GMy Ox? Pu? 
Pué Pu! Tr? mTr? MTr*mTr°. My choice is based on the unanimous support fortu in the 
mss. of ST, with strong support from many NT-x mss., whereas ca has the unanimous 
support of NT-y vulgate mss. 


Nd places verse 27 before 20 and comments: “If some read it later on, it is due to the 
error of scribes.” See Biihler 1886, 11; Jolly 1885~89, 17. 


Me says that the particle ca is misplaced; its proper position should be after devandm at 
the end of the pada: karmdtmandm ca ity ayam adeSe cah pathitah. tasya deso 
devandm ity ato’ nantaram. 


There is strong manuscript support for both readings: ca kacchapah and sakacchapah. 
Commentaries do not offer any help. The latter is supported by pBe? Jo NKt* La! Lo! 
Lo? Lo* GMd! tMd? NNg oOrnPu! Pu? Put Pu> Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr® Wa 
[Jolly M G R Nd] BAP 2.70 Jolly. | have adopted it because of support from most ST 
mss. However, some ST mss. also support the latter, and the reading here is clearly un- 
certain. For sakacchapdh at the end of a pdda-b, see 12.42 [critical apparatus], al- 
though there I have adopted the reading sarisrpah. 


Me, Ku, and Rc give the verb in the singular: upaj@yate. With reference to the plural 
verb, upajayante, Me observes: upajdyante iti pathe “ye canye kecid idrsch” iti pathi- 
tavyam. He appears to connect pddas c-d syntactically, separating them from pddas a- 
b. I think the plural is justified without such textual emendation; along with Sn and Rc, 
I take pdda-c as syntactically connected to pddas a-b, with pdda-d forming a separate 
clause. 


All the ST mss. contain the reading sthdvard in place of taravah. The reading is com- 
plicated by the sandhi with the previous word. Here, I think, the ST is wrong; I have 
adopted the latter reading, which is found in: Be! sBe* Ho Jo* wKt! BKt La? Lo! Lo? 
Lo? Lo* nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pué Pu? sPu° Pu’ Pu® Pul® Tj! Tj? Wa [Jolly MG 
R K] Jolly. 


Both amitaujasah (preferred by Jolly) and mahaujasah have strong manuscript sup- 
port. The commentators, except for Rn, are silent. I have adopted the latter principally 
because it is the near unanimous reading of the ST and in addition has backing from 
both NT-x and NT-y. It is found in: sBe? Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt BKt La! 
Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! tMd3 GMd? GMy oOr Pub Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr! mT? MTr? Tr. 


Jolly has preferred the instrumental singular rd@vara, but the vast majority of the mss. 
have the accusative plural ta@vatah, and the commentators also support this reading. 


916 


1.68c¢ 


1.78 


1.81d 


1.97d 


2.10C 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 1 


The commentators, however, noticed the problem with the accusative in a nominal 
sentence and solved the problem by implying the verb vidyat. Thus, Ku comments; 
tavata iti dvittydnirdeSat vidyad ity adhyaharah. The reading adopted is found in: Be! 
BBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt' BK La? Lo! Lo? Lot TMd? TMd* Ox? Ox? 
nPu! Pud Pu? Pué Pu? Pu!® Tj! T}? Tr! mTr* Wa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. 


The particles ca andtu have strong manuscript support. I have adopted ca because it 
gives a better meaning connecting pada-c with pddas a-b. Here the ST mss. go with 
the vulgate NT-y. It is found in Be! Bo Ho wKt! nKt‘ La! La? Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! oMd? 
NNg oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu!® Tr? mTr® Wa [Jolly 
M!-2-7-8-9]; it is also supported in Me, Go, and Ku. 


All editions have the redoing rasagunah smytah; Jolly does not even give any variants 
here. The manuscript support for this reading is limited; none of the ST mss. have 
snutah. The adopted reading, rasagundtmikah (supported also by mss. that have the 
readings anvitah and d§rayah) is found in Be! Ho La! La? TMd* GMy Ox? Pu? Pué Pu’ 
Tr! Tr? mTr‘ MTr° NG Re. 


Me, Nd, and Nd support upavartate. The readings prativartate etc. may originate from 
commentarial glosses: Re Go: manusydn prati nopavartate |or na vartate]; Ku: 
manusyan prati sampadyate. 


The vulgate editions and many NT mss. read brahmavedinah. All the ST mss. and the 
vast majority of the NT ones, however, have the correct reading brahmavddinah. This 
term is used frequently by Manu with reference to persons with extraordinary knowl- 
edge (of either the Vedas or Brahman): see 2.113; 4.91, 199; 6.39; 11.42, 120. The form 
brahmavedin is found only here. 


CHAPTER TWO 


Although the preponderance of evidence favors amimdmsye, the positive alternative 
mimdmsye is noteworthy. It is found in both NT and ST mss. and is strongly supported 
by Rn, who argues against Ku on this point: srutismrti sarvarthesu jiidtavyesu ami- 
mdmsye pratikiilatarkena na vicarayitavye iti kullikah. tan na. sarvarthesu mimdmsye 
eva iti pathah. The adopted reading, however, is supported by Me, Go, Na, Ku, Rc, and 
Mr. 


2.40d The reading adopted, brahmanah saha, is both the lectio difficilior and has the support 


of most mss. In the reading brahmanath saha, the instrumental was clearly influenced 
by the proximity of saha, which actually governs the two words at the very beginning 
of the verse: naitair apitaih. The reading adopted is found in: Be! sBe? Bo nCa Ho Hy 
Jm! Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt sKt Lo? cMd! oMd@ oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? sPuo MTr* Wa [Jolly G 
N Ku | Apa Dev Madh Na Ku Re Go Jolly KSS. 


2.44d The adopted reading, sié#trikam, is supported by Be! Jo? BK Lo* GMd! tMd* GMd* Ox? 


2.47d 


Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tr? mTr® Wa [Jolly M N] Apa Me Na Jolly, with numerous other mss. 
having the variant sitrakam. 


The mss. are evenly divided between anagnidisitah and ndgnidisitah. It is difficult to 
decide on the original; I have preferred the former, principally because it is the lectio 


2.50d 


2.56b 


2.63¢ 


2.73 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 917 


difficilior with elision of the negative a, which many have prompted scribes to read the 
initial na as na + a, giving the reading ndgni-. The adopted reading, coming at the end 
of the second line, nicely parallels anudvegakarah occurring at the beginning. This 
reading is favored also by Me and Rc, and appears to be supported also by the glosses 
of Go and Ku. The adopted reading is found in: 8Ca Jo! BKt Lo? Lot Lo® GMd! tTMd4 
NNg NPu! Pud Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu! Tr! MTr4 mTr® WaApa Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. 


The reading ndvamdnayet is adopted by all editors, including Jolly’s and has the sup- 
port of Go, Ku, and Mr. The overwhelming majority of the mss., including all the ST 
ones, however, have the reading na vimdnayet, which is also the lectio difficilior. This 
reading is supported by Me, who glosses vimdnand avajfidnam, as also by Rn andNd. 
It is found in: Be! pCa Jo? wKt! wKt3 NK BK b La! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ GMd! oMd? Md? 
tMd? GMd@ nNg Ox3 nPu! Pul® Tj! Tr! mTr4 MTr® [Jolly M R Nd] Apa. 


I have adopted the reading n@dy@d etat over nédyddeva both because of manuscript 
evidence and because it is the /ectio difficilior. The referent of the pronoun erat is un- 
clear, and this may have caused the emendation to eva. Most commentators do not 
comment on efat, and those who do are divided over the referent. Nd takes it to be 
annam, and Nd, with great probability, refers it to ucchistam of pdda-a and says that 
the student should not eat the leftovers given by his teacher between meals. I think that 
taking ucchista as the referent is justified especially because this topic recurs in pa@da- 
d, although the over-eating of pada-c appears not to have anything to with ucchista. 


The reading of this pdda is quite uncertain, most mss. being divided over pracina aviti 
and pracinam Gviti. Three commentators, Me, Go, and Ku, note that the correct form is 
pracinaviti. This compound has been dissolved for the sake of meter. The question is 
what the uncompounded form is. Me is silent; Go and Ku give it as prdacina aviti. My 
better mss., however, prefer pracinam Gviti, with the first member in the adverbial 
form. I have adopted this. The ST mss. have preserved the compounded form (also 
found in Nd) by inserting the particle tu, but this must be seen as a later innovation; it 
also violates the standard metrical form for the final four syllables of the pada (all be- 
ing long). 


The reading I have adopted in pdda-a is supported by only a few mss. mostly from ST: 
BBe? GMd! TMd? GM@ Tr! mTr* Wa [Jolly N Nd]. It is clearly conjectural. The com- 
monly accepted reading has the teacher as the subject of the verb briiydat and the stu- 
dent intent on receiving instruction is the one to whom the teacher says these words. 
Medhatithi clearly states that it is the teacher who at the beginning of the lesson says 
“Recite” and at its conclusion (pdda-c) says “Stop” (virdmo ’ stu). His interpretation is 
followed by Go, Ku, Ru, Re, and Mr. The only commentators to dissent are Nd and Nd; 
both of them follow the reading I have adopted and take the pupil to be the subject. 
Several reasons prompt me to adopt this reading. First, the GDh (1.46) reads adhihi 
bho ity dmantrayed gurum, where the subject is clearly the pupil and the words are ad- 
dressed to the teacher. Now, Manu, as I have shown in the Introduction (p. 44), fre- 
quently follows Gautama and this verse, I think, is no exception, because none of the 
other Dharmasitras says anything about the rites associated with the beginning and 
conclusion of instruction. We have an ambiguity similar to Manu’s in Sa@ikGr 2.5.10 
and 4.8.12. Oldenberg (1886, 67) is correct in taking the words to be spoken by the pu- 
pil; this is confirmed by Prdatisakya Satra cited there by Oldenberg and GobhGr 
2.10.38. In the TU (3.1-6) also these words are put in the mouth of the pupil. The 
request adhihi (changed to the middle voice adhisva in Manu) is made by the pupil to 


918 


2.75 a 


2.80c 


2.99¢ 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 


the teacher in all these sources. Second, all the surrounding verses deal with things that 
the pupil must do; and the expression adhyesyamdnas tu occurs at the very beginning 
of this section (verse 70). Third, if we take the teacher as the subject of the first 
sentence with briyat, then we have to abruptly change the subject in the sentence 
within pada-d if, with most translators, we take the pupil to be the subject of dramet. I 
think the subject of brityat and Gramet should be the same. With regard to the iti clause 
in pada-d, N@ thinks that it is the pupil himself who says virdmo ’stu and then stops his 
recitation. I think this is erroneous, even though the natural reading of the text (with iti 
and then iti ca) suggests it. I think that this ca connects the two verbs rather than the iti 
clauses. Biihler is correct in taking the last quoted words as being said by the teacher, 
and this is supported by SankGr 4.8.17. 


Jolly adopts the conjectural reading praktildn in place of prakkiilan against the evi- 
dence of all his mss. His conjecture is based on B-R, which takes prakkala as a wrong 
form of praktila, and on GDh 1.50. It may, indeed, be true that the former is an incor- 
rect rendering; prdktila is attested in several sa#tra texts: BauSr 2.1; JaiGr 2.8. 
Bohtlingk refers to ASGr 3.2.5 andGobhGr 4.5.11 [it should be 4.5.15; I have not been 
able to trace BGhtlingk’s reference to the KauSika Sitra 11.25 in Whiney’s edition]. 
The AsGr editions of Anandasrama Sanskrit Series 105 (Poona, 1936) and Adyar Li- 
brary (Adyar, 1980), however, give the reading prakkiila. In GDh 1.50, the reading 
praktila in given in Stenzler’s edition. Unfortunately, he provides no manuscript evi- 
dence or variant readings; it is thus unclear whether this reading was merely a 
“philological emendation” on the part of Stenzler or whether there was manuscript 
evidence for it. In the editions published subsequently with the commentaries of Hara- 
datta and Maskarin, the reading is uniformly prakkila (see my notes on this sititra in 
Olivelle 2000). The conclusion one can draw from all this is that these two forms were 
used in the tradition probably from a very early date. It is difficult to decide which 
form was used by the author of the MDh. I have, therefore, retained the form prakkila, 
attested to by all the mss. and the commentaries; “philological emendations” should be 
generally avoided in critical editions unless there is at least a modicum of manuscript 
support (see Olivelle 1988a and 1999a). Indeed, it is evident that Me read kiila, because 
he comments: kilasabdo darbhdgravacanah; so also Na: kilam agram. Likewise, De- 
vannabhatta (1.135) comments: prakkildn prdgagrdn ity arthah. 


All editions, including Jolly, read brahma for vipra. Surprisingly, Jolly does not give 
any variants, even though his own K ms. [= sPu®] has vipra. The reading I have 
adopted is supported by all the ST mss. [except Tr'] and by the vast majority of NT-x 
mss., as also by Me, Nd, and Rc. The gloss brdhmana inGo and Ku may refer to either 
reading. 


Me and Ku read tato ’ sya, but it is unclear whether tatah is part of the commentary or a 
citation of the root text. The reading adopted, tendsya, is supported by all the ST mss. 
and most NT ones. 


2.101¢ Most NT mss. have the reading samasinah. Only Me appears to read sadasinah; and 


sada here is certain, because he comments: sad@Sabdo nityatém dha, ubhaya- 
samdhyasesah. Only N@ clearly reads samdsita, glossing it with upaviset. Others, 
however, also support a finite verb here: Ku: upavistah sydt; and Rn: adhydsita 
upavisya japed ity arthah. See the two finite verbs in verse 103. The original reading 
here is clearly uncertain. I have adopted samdsita. The prefix sam-- is supported by all, 
whereas sadd is found only in Me. I have opted for the finite verb both because it is 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 919 


found in almost all ST mss., as well as in a few NT ones, and because it fits the syntax 
better paralleling tisthet of pada-a. It is found, however, in only: La! GMd! rMd* cMd> 
sOx! sPu® Tr! mTr‘ MT¥® [Jolly NING, and, therefore, should be considered conjectural. 


2.101d Some mss. and Nd have the reading samyagarksa-, with “a” inserted before rksa. That 
there should be an d@ here is clear, but its absence was already noted by Me, who 
explains that this particle is implicitly taken over from pdda-b: drkadarSandd iti ya 
ak@rah sa ihanusaktavyah. 


2.114a Quite a number of mss., including all of the ST, read ityaha. Because of the ambiguity 
of sandhi, this could be itf ha or itya dha. The latter would be an ungrammatical for- 
mation of the gerund, although such a formation from uncompounded verbs is occa- 
sionally encountered. Nevertheless, I think the original reading was etydha. The 
parallel passages in Nirukta (2.4), VaDh(2.8), and ViDh (29.9) read Gagdma, and Me, 
Go, and Ku have the gloss Ggatya. The adopted reading is found in: Be! sBe* Bo Ho 
Hy Jm Jo! wKt! K? wKt} BK La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo? sOx! [mc to] Ox} sPuS [me to] Tj? 
MTr? Wa (Jolly M34] Laks Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave. 


2.115a Several mss. and editions have the reading vidyan niyata-, with the verb in the third 
person. The context of vidyd speaking to the Brahmin clearly calls for a verb in the 
and person; and vidyah (vidya with the elision of the visarga through sandhi) parallels 
nicely vidya personified who is speaking in the second person: brihi (pada-c) and 
raksa and dah in the previous verse. The glosses of Me (jdnithah) and Ku (jandsi) are 
also in the second person, while Go has janiyat both in the editions and in my mss. The 
reading adopted is found in: Be? 8nCa Hy Kt? wKt? BKt? Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ rMd3 tMd* 
aMy sOx! Ox? Ox} oOr Pu? Pu’ [but cor] Pu? Tj? Tr! mTr* Wa Dave Jha Jolly. 


2.121¢ The reading tasya vardhante found in Jolly and other editions is attested by only a few 
mss. The vast majority has vardhante preceded by a word or prefix beginning with 
sam. The reading of Me appears to have been sampravardhante. Of the other com- 
mentators, only Ku notices this, and he reads samyak vardhante. Most ST mss., as well 
as the very old nKt’*, also have that reading, which I have adopted. The reading here, 
however, is uncertain. Jolly applies sandhi to the end of this pada with the reading 
vardhanta. All but a few the mss., however, dispense with sandhi at the end of the 
pdda and read vardhante. The reading adopted is found in: La* Lo? TMd* GMd> GMy 
Pu? Pu‘ Pu’ Tj? mTr*mTr° Wa Ku BhP 4.50, supported by other mss. with variants of 
this reading. 


2.125d Jolly, following Biihler (see his long note to this verse), has adopted the reading 
purvaksaraplutah as a Bahuvrihi compound. This reading is supported only by very 
few mss.; and even then we cannot be sure that this is not simply a scribal error, be- 
cause visargas are often omitted in the mss. This reading is adopted only byNd (who 
also explains the compound as Bahuvrihi), and it is given as a variant by Nd. 
According to this reading, the letter “a” is added at the end of the name and the syllable 
preceding this addition is prolated. Thus, we have Devadatta(3)a. The majority of mss. 
and commentators read parvaksarah plutah. This causes some grammatical problems, 
because aksara is a neuter noun and the reading should be pérvadksaram plutam (a 
reading suggested by some medieval authors of Nibandhas; see Jha 1999, Vol. 9, p. 
100). Nd calls the masculine ending a vedic peculiarity: liigavyatyayas chdndasah. Me 
avoids this problem by giving the meaning of consonant to aksara, thus taking 
purvaksarah as a Bahuvrihi. He gives this rather complex and lengthy explanation: 
“The term piirvaksarah qualifies the vowel ‘a’, which is to be lengthened; and aksara 


920 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 


here stands for the consonant; and the compound means ‘that vowel of which the pre- 
ceding syllable is a consonant,’ i.e., the vowel occurring along with the consonant. 
What is meant is that it is the vowel ‘a’ already there that is to be lengthened, and not 
any such vowel as might be added.” The interpretation offered by Me and others fol- 
lows Panini 8.2.83 and agrees broadly with ApDh 1.5.17; VaDh 13.46. I have provi- 
sionally adopted this reading. See the lengthy note to this verse given by Jha (1999, 
Vol. 9, pp. 100-05). According to this reading, the name is pronounced Devadatta(3). 


2.129d Mss. are evenly divided over the two readings: va andca. I have opted for the former 


both because it make better sense within the context of an option between two forms of 
address and because most of the ST mss., including all the Malayalam ones, support it: 
Be! Be} Bo Ca Ho wKt! wKt} BK La! La? Lo? Lo* Lo>cMd! GMdé My nNg Ox? 
nPu! Pul® Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTr® Dey. It is also found in some mss. of the Madh and sup- 
ported by Ku and Rc. 


2.135a-b The mss. are divided over the two reading in both pddas: ca and tu. I have opted for 


2.145 


the former both because it fits the context better and because it is found in all but one 
of the ST mss. and a good number of NT-x ones: Be* Bo pCa Jo? 8K La? Lo? Lo? 
GMd! rMd3 GMd> GMy oOr Pu’ Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® Wa [Jolly R Nd| BAP 4.68. This 
reading is also found in the parallel passage in ViDh 32.17. 


This is a problematic verse. The tradition is of many minds with regard to the gram- 
matical case of the names for persons vis-a-vis whom others are more eminent: these 
are placed in the ablative singular (updadhydydat, acdrydt, pituh), in the accusative plural 
(upadhyaydn, pitfn), and in the genitive plural (@cdrydnam). The ST mss. generally 
prefer the ablative, and it is clear from the manuscript evidence that this was the origi- 
nal reading in the case of pituh. In the case of acdrya, on the other hand, the ST mss. 
may have been seeking uniformity; the genitive plural is the best attested. In the case 
of updaddhydya, on the other hand, there is strong support for both the ablative and the 
accusative. I have adopted the former because it parallels the other ablative in pada-c 
and is supported by all ST mss. and a good number of NT ones as well. Although the 
accusative and the ablative can be used with the verb atiricyate, | think the undisputed 
ablative of pituh in pdda-c supports a similar ablative in pdda-a. In pdda-c, the reading 
of Me is uncertain. Jha and Dave read sahasram pitfn iti vacanam, whereas Mandlik 
and my ms. Pu!® read instead pitur iti vacanam. In pdda-a, up@dhydaydt is found in: Be! 
Be? Bo Ho nKtt BKt La! Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd? rMd* GMd@ GMy sOx! Ox? nPu! sPu Tr! 
Tr? MTr® Re Vij. In pada-c, pituhis found in: Be! sBe? Be? Bo nCa Ho Hy Jo? wKt! 
NKtt La? Lo! Lo* Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd@ oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? 
sPu Pu? Pu? Pul® Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr* Na@ Nd |patha] Ku Re Mr Vis Dev 3.688 Md&dh, 
and this reading is supported by Go. 


2.156a The reading sthavirah, which I have adopted, in recorded in Be! Be? Be? Bo nCa Ho 


Hy wKt! wKt} nKtt La! La? Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? sPu Pu’ 
Tj? Tr! Tr? MTr® BhP 4.100|Jolly Ndj. The commentators Me, Go, Ku, Rc, and Mr 
give vrddhah, although it is not altogether clear whether it is the reading of the root 
text or a gloss. I had adopted sthavirah because it is the lectio difficilior and because it 
is found in all ST mss. and in quite a spectrum of NT ones; it also parallels the word in 
pdda-d. It is the lectio difficilior because it makes the pada hypermetric with nine syl- 
lables. The way to make it scan is to read bhavati with the Prakrit pronunciation of 
bhoti, which is required also in other verses; for example, in 2.201 p@das a and c. It ap- 
pears that vrddhah was substituted to restore the meter. However, bhavati does not 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 921 


give the regular cadence of the last four syllables, where as the reading sthaviro bhoti 
gives the regular cadence. Indeed, other scribes attempted other strategies, substituting 
jieyah and bhiiyat for bhavati. As in verse 201, this is probably a proverbial saying 
taken over by Manu; hence the Prakritic pronunciation. 


2.190c Both the readings eva and evam have strong manuscript support. I have opted for the 
former because of strong manuscript evidence from both ST and NT: Hy Lo? Lo? cMd! 
TMd? GMy NNg Ox? Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Pu!? Tj! mTr° (Jolly M G Ku R Nd] Jolly. See also 
other variant readings with eva. This reading also fits the context better. 


2.190d The reading adopted, pracaksate, is supported by most ST and NT mss: Be! pBe? Be? 
Bo Ho wKt! wKt wKt’ BK® La? Lo! Lo? Lo} Lot Lo’ rMd? TMd4 GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? 
Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tr! Tr? MTr® Wa [Jolly M G Ku R Nd] Jolly. 


2.191a-b Clearly, the reading nodita/pranodita is the lectio difficilior. I have refrained from 
adopting it, however, because the overwhelming evidence of the mss., including all the 
ST ones and the citations of Apa and Laks, support codita: NBé Bo pCa Ho Hy Jm! 
Jo! wKt! K? wK nKt La? Lo! Lo? GMd! oMd? TMd3 1TMd*4 GMd5 GMy NNg 0Or sOx! 
Ox? nPu! sPu® Pu® Pu!? Tj? Tr! mTr4 MTr®. In Be! pada-a has nodito and padda-b 
apracodita. 


2.191c The vulgate has the reading yatnam. The source of this may be Me, who glosses 
yogam with yatnam, followed by Go. 


2.193d Both readings, abhimukhah and abhimukham, have strong manuscript support. I have 
chosen the former because it is the near unanimous reading of the ST and has strong 
support from NT mss. including the two Sarada ones. My reading is supported by Ho 
Jo? NK BKt? Lo? Lo? Lot Lo cGMd! tMd? tMd‘4 GMy sOx! Ox? Pu? Pub sPuo Pu? Pu!? 
Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® Wa [Jolly M G R] BhP 4.164 [v1] Laks Jolly. 


2,198b The reading adopted, nityam syat, has overwhelming support: Be! pBe? BCa wKt! 
wKt} nKtt wKt La! Lo! Lo* Lo GMd! oMd? 1Md? TMd‘ GMd GMy NNg sOx! Ox3 
nPu! Pu? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu? Pu!® Tr! Tr? mTr4mTr® Wa Me Ku Re Surprisingly, 
however, Jolly, who adopts this reading, gives no variants. 


2.198¢ It is surprising that the reading guros tu, which has so little manuscript support, has 
been adopted by all the editions, including Jolly’s, who gives no variants for this also. 


2.201ac The pddas a and c of the verse are hypermetric, with nine syllables. As in verse 
2.156, here also the word bhavati has to be pronounced as the Prakritic bhoti, which 
rectifies the meter and restores the proper cadence to the final four syllables of the 
pada. Again like verse 2.156, this must have been a common proverb taken over by 
Manu; hence the Prakritic influence. 


2.206a The mss. and commentators are divided over the two readings evam and etat. The 
former is supported by Me and Go, which lends it weight. I have gone with the latter, 
however, principally because it is found in all the ST mss. and a substantial number of 
NT-x and NT-y ones. According to Sanskrit grammar, the pronoun should agree with 
the noun to which it refers within the same sentence and not to its antecedent (Brereton 
1986). Thus, the correct form should have been esd corresponding to vrttih. Yet, we 
must make allowances for later Sanskrit where this rule may not have been adhered to 
consistently. The adopted reading is found in: Be! sBe? nCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? 
wKt? La! La? Lo? GMd! oMd? tMd? TMd4 GMd GMy sOx! sPu® Pu® Tj! Tr? mTr* mTr® 
N@ Ku Mandlik Jolly KSS. 


922 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 2 


2.220b Surprisingly all editions, including Jolly’s, have the reading kdmacdratah even 


though it is supported by so few mss. The reading I have adopted, k@makdratah, is 
supported by Be! Bo pCa Ho Jo? wKt! nKt' BK wKt® La! La? Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ cMd! 
1tMd3 GMd@ GMy NNg oOr sOx! Ox? Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu’ sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr! 
Tr? mTr* MTr® Wa [Jolly M G R Nd] BhP 4.189 Nd Rn Re. Cf. ViDh 28.53. See the 
same form at 11.41, 45. 


2.2214 I have adopted the reading abhinimluktah. It has only limited support: TMd? TMd4 NNg 


Pu? BhP 4.190 Me Go Jolly Jha Dave; but see the parallel abhinimlocet at 2.219. This 
word has been subject to many spellings, including abhinimrukta found in ApDh 
2.12.22; VaDh 1.18. The most common form found in the mss., abhinirmuktah, is 
clearly an error. 


2.240c The mss. are divided between the two readings. The reading adopted, vividhdni ca 


Silpdni, is supported by Be? Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKt La! Lo! GMd! oMd? tMd? GMd> GMy 
NNg oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? Pu‘ sPu® Pu’ Tj? Tr! Tr? MTr? MTrémT ro folly Nd] BhP 
4.209 Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. 1 have chosen this because it is supported by almost all 
ST mss., all NT-y mss., and a good number of NT-x ones, including the old NKtt and 
the Sarada mss. I also think it is the /ectio difficilior in the sense that it would have 
been easier to change this general text (probably a well-known proverb) into the 
“theologically correct” alternative, rather than the other way round. Yet, the authority 
of Me and Gois behind the alternative, and the reading here must remain uncertain. 


2.242c The reading ca is found in most mss., including all the NT-y mss. and most of the ST 


3.5d 


and NT-x ones.. The alternative reading va, however, is the lectio difficilior and at- 
tested by both Me and Go. In fact, Me found the reading v@ problematic and explained 
that it is used here with a copulative meaning: vasabdo ’ py arthe. Nevertheless, given 
the overwhelming manuscript support, I have gone with ca, which is found in: Be! 
BBe? pCa Hy Jo! wKt! K? wKt} nKtt nK® wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? oMd? TMd? GMd 
GMy Ox? Pu? Pu’ Ty! Tr! Tr? mTr? BhP 4.211 Laks Apa Mandlik Jolly KSS. 


CHAPTER THREE 


The preponderance of manuscript evidence supports the reading darakarmani 
maithune. However, I have adopted the reading darakarmany amaithuni. This reading 
is supported by Me and Nd and is found in TMd? GMd GMy Tr MTr4 MTr°® [Jolly Nd] 
Jha Dave. 1 take the reading maithuni in the sense of relationship by marriage as found 
in ParGr 3.10.13 and Panini 4.3.125. Thus, amaithuni would mean “a woman unrelated 
by marriage.” Given the context, this reading makes the best sense, and failure to de- 
tect this meaning may have led scribes and commentators to emend the text. Ned inter- 
prets amaithuni to mean a woman who is a virgin (@ksatayoni). Me, on the other hand, 
has an elaborate and unconvincing explanation, connecting the term with pituh and 
taking it to mean a girl who has not been born through the father’s sexual union, i.e., a 
girl born from a leviratic union (iyoga). The meaning of the reading maithune is not 
altogether clear. Biihler, following most commentators, translates: “is recommended to 
twice-born men for wedlock and conjugal union.” Why Manu should add that she is 
recommended for sex on top of marriage is unclear to me. 


3.10 


3.12d 


3.13¢ 


3.18¢ 


3.23d 


3.25d 


3.2748 


3.38d 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 923 


This pada is hypermetric, containing nine syllables. A few mss. have attempted to cor- 
rect this with the reading -dantam in place of -daSandm, and this is adopted by Jolly. It 
is clearly the lectio facilior and should be rejected. 


Because of the ambiguous sandhi, it is unclear whether the reading is vardl or avarah; 
most mss. do not write avagrahas. All editions, except Jolly’s, adopt avardh indicated 
by an avagraha, and so do the editors of Vij Apa Jmv Dev Madh. Devannabhatta com- 
ments avard jaghanyd ity arthah. The commentators Nd, Rn, and Rc also support 
avarah with their glosses: hindh and hinavarndh. However, Me, Go, Na, Ku, and Mr 
support varah, which I have adopted, with their gloss: sresthah. 


Although there is support in the mss. for both readings rdajiias tu and rdjfiaS ca, the 
prepondence of evidence supports the reading I have adopted: Bo pCa Ho Jo? wKt3 
NKtt nKt wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lo} Lo* Lo’ TMd* GMd> GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? 
sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa Apa Jmy [vl] Dev Mddh. 


The mss. are deeply divided over the two readings adanti and asnanti. 1 have opted for 
the former, because it is found in almost all the ST mss. and a substantial number of 
NT-x ones: Bo Ho nKt‘ wKt® [cor to] La! La? Lo? GMd! TMd? cGMd@> GMy Ox? Pu? Pu? 
Pu® Pu!® Tr? Tr! Wa [Jolly M G Nd] BhP 7.12Na Nd Rc Jolly. The reading of Me is 
unclear; the editions of Mandlik, Jha, and Dave read asnanti, whereas in all my ms. 
(Lo* Ox? Pu!®; while Lo® has the defective ndti) the reading is nddanti. The reading, 
however, remains uncertain. 


There is uncertainty regarding the reading na raksa- and araksa-. The confusion is 
compounded because of the preceding word dharmydn; mss. sometimes tend to double 
a “n’” before a vowel even though the doubling is supposed to take place only when the 
preceding vowel is short. Such a doubling would give rise to the form 
dharmyannardaksa-. 1 have adopted the reading araksasan because it has strong manu- 
script support and the Bahuvrihi is syntactically more appropriate as qualifying tan. 
This reading is supported by BBe? Ho Hy wKt® NK wKt? La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot 
GMd! GMd@ sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? sPuS Pu’ Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa Me Ku Mr Apa Laks Dev Man- 
dlik KSS Dave, as well as by the variant reading in Bo oMd? tTMd? Ox? Tr? BAP. 


The two readings, kathamcana and kaddcana, have good manuscript support. Only 
two commentators, Ku and Nd, note the word, and they are divided. I have opted for 
the former reading because it has the unanimous support of the ST mss., as well as 
substantial support from mss. of NT-x. This reading is found in Ho Jo? Lo! Lo? Lo* 
Lo? GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd@ GMy Ox? Pu? Put Tj! Tr! Tr? MTr* MTr® Wa [Jolly R] BhP 
7.19 Madh Nd. 


All editions, including Jolly’s, read arcayitvd, even though it has very weak manu- 
script support. The reading adopted, arhayitva, is found in Be! Be? HowKt} nKtt sBKo 
wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! tTMd? tMd4 cMd> GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! 
sPu® Pu? Pu Pu! Tj! Tr! Tr? mT r+ MTr° [Jolly GIGo Na Re Nd Dev Apa. The editions 
of Jha and Dave give the reading of Medhatithi’s commentary as cdrcayitva, whereas 
Mandlik and some of my mss. read carhayitva. 


The short “a” in kayodhajah instead of kdyodhdjah is clearly due to metrical reasons. 
Me, however, and following him Ku, refers to Panini 6.3.63, which permits the substi- 


“en? 


tution of a short final “a” for the feminine long “a” in the vedic language. 


924 


3-39C 


3.47b 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 


Most mss. record the usual form varcasvinah, which is clearly the lectio facilior. The 
older and probably the original form varcasinah is preserved mostly in the mss. of the 
ST. Using the principle of /ectio difficilior, | have opted here to go with the minority 
reading with the strong and clear support of Me: brahmavarcas tadvanto brahmavar- 
casinah innanto ‘yam. The reading adopted is found in: Lo? GMd! tMd? GMy GMd? Tr! 
Dev Me Rn Re Mandlik Jha Dave. 


Note the double sandhi at ninditaikddaSi (for nindita@ ekddaSi) clearly for metrical rea- 
sons. The only commentator to note this is Rn, who ascribes it to a vedic peculiarity: 
sandhir drsah. 


3.50b The reading varjayet is supported by most ST and NT-x mss. I have opted to go with 


3.53d 


3-59 


3.63¢, 


3.77b 


the manuscript evidence, even though the participle varjayan fits the context better, 
coordinating with the other present participle vasan and leaving a single main clause 
with the finite verb bhavati. The participle varjayan is supported by Me and Go (both 
glossing with partharan), Nd (glossing with upgacchan), Ku, Rn, and Mr, and has been 
adopted by all editions. The finite verb varjayet, which I have adopted, is found in: Be? 
Bo Ho wKt3 Kt} wKt® La! La? Lo? cGMd! tMd4 GMd5 cMy nNg oOr sOx! Ox? [but cor 
sh] nPu! Pu2 Put Pud sPu® Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr*# MTr® WaVis Re. 


The alternative reading, td@vdn eva sa vikrayah, has strong manuscript support and is 
the reading preferred by Me. The reading adopted, however, is supported by BBe’ Be? 
Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt} wKt! Kt? nKt La! Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd? TMd4 GMd oOr 
NPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Tj? Tr! MTr3 MTr* mTr’Dev Go Ku Mandlik Jolly KSS. The support of 
the Malayalam and the Grantha mss. tilts the decision in favor of this reading, although 
the original is clearly uncertain. 


Mss. give three readings: sada@bhyarcyah, samabhyarcyah, and sada pijyah. Most ST 
mss. record the second, while the NT-y vulgate has the third. I have opted for the first, 
with its two parts getting support from the other two readings. It is found in: nBe? Bo 
BCa Ho Jo? wKt nKt* La? Lo! Lo? +Md4 NNg oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Pu’ Tr! Tr? 
Wa [Jolly G Nd] Laks Go Madh Jolly. 


65c There is much confusion on which of these padas should read kuldny asu 
vinaSyanti and which kuladny akulataém yanti. All the editions, including Jolly’s, as well 
as Biihler in his translation, have the latter in 63c and the former in 65c. I have inverted 
this order. That 65¢ should have the latter is clear from the manuscript evidence. All 
the ST mss. plus numerous NT-x ones have this reading: Be? Bo pCa Jo? wKt! nKt* La! 
Lo? Lo? GMd! tMd? tTMd4 GMd@ GMy NNg oOr Ox? Pu® Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr° Wa 
[Jolly R N Nd] Nd Dey1.208[vl], Laks 2.333; it is also supported by the parallel verse 
in BDh 1.10.28. It also fits nicely with the very next verse, which speaks of ku- 
lasamkhydm gacchanti. The original reading of 63c, however, is not as certain. Here 
also I have gone with the unanimous ST reading, supported by several NT-x mss. in- 
cluding the important nK¢‘ and the Sarada mss.: Be? Kt? nK¢ La! GMd! rMd3 rMd4 
GMd> GMy nNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! sPuo Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr® Wa Na Nd. The parallel 
verse in BDh 1.10.26, however, reads kulany akulatam yanti. 


The reading I have adopted, sarve jivanti jantavah, has overwhelming manuscript sup- 
port: Be! nBe* Be? Bo Ho Jo? wKt! nKt wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® oMd? TMd? 
TMd4 GM@ NNg sOx! Ox? Ox} Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu! Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® Wa [Jolly 
MGRNgd] Me Go Ku Jolly Jha Dave. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 925 


3.79c Although the alternate reading adopted by Jolly and other editors has substantial 
manuscript support, the adopted reading, atyantam, is found in all ST mss. and in a 
majority of NT-x ones: Be! nKtt BK La! La? Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! rMd? tMd4 GMd> 
GMy nNg sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu‘ sPu® Pu Pu! Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTr® Wa [Jolly M Nd]Me Rc 
Dave Sha. 


3.82a, d The reading dadyat in pada-a, which I have adopted, has the overwhelming support 
of mss., commentators, and citations: Be! sBe? Bo BCa Ho Jo mKt! nKO MK eo La! La? 
Lo} rMd3 tMd4 GMd oOr sOx! [mc to] Ox3 nPu! sPuS [mc to] Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr! Tr? 
MTr* MTr° [Jolly M G Nd R] Me Go Re Rn LaksHem Dev Jolly Jha Dave. The support 
for the adopted reading dharan in pada-d is not as overwhelming but still very strong: 
Be? nCa Ho MKt* La! Lo! La? Lo? Lot Lo® cMd! tMd4 MNgoOr sOx! Ox? mPu! Pud 
sPuo Pu? Pu!? Tr? mTr? MTr® Wa [Jolly M GJ Apa Hem Dev Jolly. 


3.83¢ It is unclear whether the original reading was kamcit, as all editions have it, or kimeit. 
The former has the support of only one ST ms., whereas all others read kimcit. How- 
ever, the important and old nKt‘, as well as the Sarada mss., also read kamcit. I have 
opted for kKamcit mostly because it makes better sense, qualifying as it does dvijam, the 
former concluding pdda-c and the latter pada-d. Because it is thus separated from its 
referent, kamcit is also the lectio difficilior; scribes may have been wanted to find a di- 
rect object for the adjacent verb. The reading of Me is unclear: Jha and Dave read 
kamcit, while Mandlik and my ms. Pu!® read kimcit; his explanation, however, indi- 
cates that his reading was indeed kamcit. Of the other commentators, Nd is the most 
clear, glossing kimcid apy annam, while Go’s gloss anyam bradhmanam na kimcid 
bhojayet also appears to support kimcid. Ku, on the other hand, supports the reading 
adopted: na kamcid vaisvadevartham brahmanam atra bhojayet, a reading found in 
Be! Bo nCa [cor to] wKt} NKt* Lo! Lo? GMdé NNg sOx! Pu? sPu° Pu’ Pu’ Tj! mTr? Wa 
[Jolly G Ku] Hem Dev Ku Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave. 


3.91b Most mss. are in error with regard to the unusual word sarvdnnabhitaye. It is found 
only in BK® wKt® Lo? nNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu’, It is unambiguously supported, however, 
by Me, Go, and Re, and it is given as an alternate reading by Nd. See also SankhGr 
2.14.15, which gives the mantra to be recited on this occasion: namah sarvanna- 
bhittaye. See Gopal 1962 for Manu’s indebtedness to the S ankhGr in this passage. 


3.92d It is difficult to decide which of the reading, niksipet or nirvapet, is the original. The 
former has broad support among both branches of the NT; it is also found in all the ci- 
tations. I have opted for the latter principally because all but one of the ST mss. record 
it and it also has substantial support from the NT mss: BBe? pCa Jo! Kt? wKt}? nKt‘ La! 
La? Lo? GMd! tMd? GMd> GMy nNg Ox? Pu® Tj? Tr! mTr* mTr° Wa [Jolly Nd] Rc 
Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave. The reading, however, remains uncertain. 


3.95b The traditional reading found in most mss. and all editions is gdm dattva vidhivad 
guroh. Several mss., including the old NKt, as well as the Grantha and Sarada mss., 
read gam dattva tu yathavidhi. 1 think this is a variant of the original reading preserved 
in only the Malayalam and Telugu mss. gam dattvdgor yathdvidhi; scribes probably 
did not understand gor (= agor) and changed it to tu. The word agoh (genitive of aguh, 
“a poor man”) is somewhat rare and is clearly the /ectio difficilior. This reading is sup- 
ported by Nd, who glosses agoh gohindya, and by Go, who cites a pratika from 
Yajfiavalkya alpaguh (possibly a variant reading of YDA 1.204). It is easier to see how 
this difficult pada was changed into the very common motif of giving a cow to a guru 


926 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 


rather than the other way round. The adopted reading occurs in TMd? rMd* Tr! mTr4 
mTr° [Jolly Nd]; it is also found in the Trivandrum ms. 22039, which was partially 
collated. A reading with the nominative aguh is given as a patha by Me. 


3.106d The alternate reading atithibhojanam has strong support. The verb piijayet, however, 
with the meaning of feeding is found also at 3.243; 4.31. See also 3.117. I have adopted 
the reading atithpiijanam, because it is found in all but one of the ST mss. and a sub- 
stantial number of NT ones: sCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? wKt? sKt? wKt® Lo* Lo® GMd! rMd3 
+Md4 GMd@ Pu? Put Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr4mTr9 [JollyM>*%9] Madh Nd Mandlik Jha KSS 
Dave. Although Me, Go, and Ku have bhojana in their commentaries, it is unclear 
whether this reflects the reading of their root text or is simply a gloss. 


3.108¢ The reading I have adopted, tasmai cadnnam, occurs in Jo? BKP wKt® La! Lo! Lo? Lot 
Lo’ sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pué Pud sPuo Pu? Tj! Tr? MTr*mTr® Wa [Jolly G R M?“] Me 
Go. The reading is further supported by nKt* Lo? GMd> Pu’ Vij, which also have 
tasmai, and by ST mss., which have tasmdd. It is also partially supported by GMd! 
1tMd? tMd‘4 GMy Tr! which had tasmdd and by Lo? GM@ Pu® Vij that read tasmda [= 
tasmai| annam. 


3.110a All editions, including Jolly’s, have the reading na brahmanasya tv atithih; indeed, 
Jolly does not record any variants! The commentaries use the expression na atithih, but 
it is unclear whether this is merely a gloss or reflects on the particle na in their root 
text. The vast majority of the mss., however, including all the ST ones, support the 
reading I have adopted: Be! Be? Be? Bo Jo? wKt! wKt} nKt nKt? wKt® La! La? Lo! 
Lo} Lo* Lo’ cGMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy NNg NPul! Pu? Put Pus Pu? Pu® Ty! Tr! mTr4 
MTr° Wa Dey [vl in 2 of 3 mss.] Madh. 


3.114¢ It is remarkable that the original reading, anvag eva, attested by Me, Go, and Nd, is 
preserved only in the mss. of ST: GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd GMy Tr! mTr4MTr®. 
Me glosses anvag evaitan anugatan eva bhojayet. The gloss of Go also contains 
anugatan, clearly showing his dependence on Me; and Na@ glosses anvag agre. It may 
well be that such a gloss that lies at the root of the NT reading agre. This reading is 
given by Me, Go, and N@ as an alternate reading preferred by some. Me says: astye tv 
agra iti pathanti. In this case Jolly does not follow the principle he himself articulated 
of adopting the reading of the old commentators such as Me and Go. 


3.116a It is difficult to decide between the two readings tu and ca, both having equally strong 
mss. support. The commentators offer no help. I have gone with tu, because it is repre- 
sented in Malayalam, Grantha, Telugu, and Old Nagari mss. The reading, however, 
remains uncertain. 


3.120b The adopted reading, upasthite, is supported by Be? nCa NKt! Lo? Lo* Lo® TMd? sOx! 
Ox} nPu! Pud sPu® [cor to} Pu’ Pu!® Tr? Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly Jha Dave. This pada ap- 
pears to have had several alternate readings even during the time of Me, who con- 
fesses: iha dvitiye pdde ’nekadha pathapratipattih. And he states in the clearest terms 
that the reading I have adopted is the correct one: ato ’yam eva patho yuktah yajita- 
karmany upasthita iti. The alternate reading, however, has the strong support of the ST 
mss., as well as a broad range of NT-x and NT-y mss.; it is also supported by Go, Ku, 
Na, and Rc, who gloss prdptau. Yet, | think upasthite is the correct reading, especially 
in view of the identical reading at 3.187b, where this reading has unanimous support. 


3.123a The reading pinda@ndm for pitrfnam must be very old. It is attested in most ST mss., by 
Go and Nd, and given as an alternate reading by Me. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 927 


3.125a Although the alternate reading. pitrkarye, has considerable manuscript support, I think 
the correct reading is pitrkrtye, which is supported by most commentators. It is found 
in: Be! sBe* Bo nCa Ho wKt! wKt nKf BK wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® cMd! 
Md? oOr sOx! Ox? Ox3 nPu! Pu? Put Pu> sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Tr? Wa [ Jolly M G] Me Go Ku 
Rn Rc Dev Hem Apa Jolly Dave Jha; cf. VaDh 11.27. See also pretakrtya in 3.127. 


3.133a The majority of the NT mss. and the commentators have the reading grdsan, as do all 
the editions. I have opted for pinddn, first because it is found in all ST mss. as well as a 
substantial number of NT-x ones (including the old nKt* and the Sarada mss.), and 
second because pinda (“rice ball”) makes a nice parallel to ayoguda (“iron ball”) at the 
end of the verse. The reading adopted is found in sBe? 8Ca wKt! nKtt wKt La! Lo* 
Lo® GMd! tMd3 +Md4 GMd> GMy sOx! Ox3 sPu® [zc to sh] Pu!® Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr® 
[Jolly M Gr] Apa Laks Hem . 


3.151b Several readings are found in the mss.: durvdlam, durvalam, durbalam, etc. The 
commentators gloss the word with duscarma, a man with bad skin or a skin disease. 
Me is the only commentator to give an alternate explanation: skhalitalohitakeSo vika- 
lendriyo va. The reading adopted in found only in Jo* Lo* Lo® Md? cMd> Ox? Tr! 
MTr* MTr°[ Jolly M4 Me Nd] Dev Madh; hence it is conjectural. The parallel passage 
in GDh 15.18, however, also reads durvala. The list contains classes of people who are 
viewed as outside “good society”; within such a list, people who are weak or with bad 
skin seem incongruous. I think the term durvala refers to “bald men” in the sense of 
heretical ascetics, parallel to jatila. 


3.152a Numerous mss. read cikitsakan devalakan in the accusative plural; this is followed by 
Jolly. Then, we would have to connect padas a-b syntactically with the preceding verse 
and the verb na bhojayet. It is more natural to take these pddas as forming a syntactic 
unit with the rest of this verse governed by varjydh syuh, which would demand nomi- 
natives. Words in the nominative are also supported by Me, Go, Ku, Rn, Rc, and Mr; 
that is, all the commentators except Nd. The reading cikitsakd devalakah, which | have 
adopted, is found in: Be! Bo wKt! wKt3 La? Lo! Lo? GMd! rMd? Pu Tj! Tr! Jha Dave. 


3.169c¢ The reading daive karmani has strong support from the ST mss. and those containing 
the commentary of Me; the latter must have been the reason for its adoption by Jolly. 
Yet, I think daive havisi is the correct reading because it has overwhelming manuscript 
support: Be! nBe? Be? Bo pCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? nKt BK wKt® La! La? 
Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! oMd? tMd‘ oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa 
[Jolly R Ku] Go Ku Mandlk KSS. For the same expression where havisi has even 
greater manuscript and commentarial support, see 3.240c. 


6or99 
1 


3.172a The reading parivettd has the broadest manuscript support, even though the short 
violates the normal Pathya form of the sloka. It appears that scribes attempted to cor- 
rect this by cither reading parivetta, also adopted by Mandlik, Jolly, Jha, and Dave, or 
by adding a final ca, which, however, makes the pada hypermetric. 


3.175 The alternate reading in the plural, as opposed to the dual that I have opted for, is de- 
liberately adopted by Me, who cites Panini 1.2.58 (that a class name denoting the sin- 
gular may optionally be used in the plural) in support: j@tyakhyayam iti bahuvacanam 
pranina iti. The dual, however, has strong support from both NT and ST mss.: Be! Be? 
BCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? nKt* Kt wKt® La! Lo! Lo? oMd? tMd? TMd* GMd5 GMy oOr 
sOx! Ox? sPué Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr3 MTr4 MTr® Mandlik Jolly KSS Na Re. 


928 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 


3.178a Although the alternate reading samsprsati has strong manuscript support, I have 
adopted samsprset. It is found in all ST mss. and a significant number of NT ones: 
BBe? Be? nCa Hy Jm Jo! wKt! nKtt Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd? TMd4 GMd> GMy oOr Ox? nPu! 
Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr* mTr° and all editions. In the printed versions,Me, Go, Ku, and Rc read 
sampraSsati, but these readings cannot be trusted without critical editions of these 
commentaries. 


3.187c The alternate reading nimantrayita must be very old; it is clearly the lectio difficilior. 
Nevertheless, I do not think it has the kind of manuscript support that would justify its 
adoption, as, for instance, vdcayita at 11.31. All the ST mss., for example, read niman- 
trayeta. Regarding the form nimantrayita in the Dharmasiitras, see Bharadwaj 1982, 
119-22. The adopted reading is found in Be! Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K® nKt* La! La? Lo? 
Lo? GMd! oMd? tMd? GMd? GMy oOr sOx! Ox? Ox} Pu? sPu Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mT 1+ mTr® 
Wa Mandlik KSS; see also YDh 1.225.The commentators Me, Go, Ku, and Rc have the 
reading nimantrayet. Even though there may be some orthographic confusion regard- 
ing “I” and “e” in Devanagari, the two signs are quite distinct in the southern scripts 
and in old Nagari, Bengali, and Newari. 


3.199a The reading of pdda-a is somewhat uncertain; mss. are divided between the two 
readings. The reading adopted, anagnidagdhagnidagdhan, is found in nKt' Lo? Lot 
Lo® GMd! tMd? sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? sPu [Jolly M}] Hem[vl as in ed] Me Go Jolly, and 
has the support of BK wKt® Pu? Pu!® Tr? [Jolly G] Jha Dave. 


3.204c The alternate reading is strongly supported by the ST mss.; the reading must, there- 
fore, remain uncertain. The vast majority of the mss., however, have the reading I have 
adopted and it is supported also by Me and Rc: Be! Be? Bo BCa Ho Jo? sKt wKt® La! 
La? Lo? Lo Lot Lo’ rMd4 nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pub sPuS Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj! TP 
Tr? Wa [Jolly M G R] Me Rc Dev Apa Jolly Jha Dave. 


3.207b The reading I have adopted, jalatiresu, has the overwhelming support of the mss., 
including all the ST one: Ho nKt BKt) wKt® La! Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ GMd! rMd? tMd4 
GMd? GMy nNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Ox3 nPu! Pu? Pu4 sPu® Pu® Tr! Tr? MTr4mTr® Wa [Jolly 
G] Me Rc Apa Laks Jha Dave. 


3.217d Most mss. of both the ST and NT have the reading mantravit, and this is followed by 
Mandlik and Biihler. All commentators, except Rc, support the reading I have adopted 
mantravat. Even when the editions read mantravit, as in the case of Rn, it is clear from 
the commentary itself that the commentator read mantravat, because they give the 
mantra that should be used in the rite. One possible reason for the alternate reading 
may be the frequent occurrence of dharmavit as the last word of a half-verse: 2.61, 128, 
245; 3.149; 4.192; 5.167; 8.41, 265; 9.152; 11.31. The only occurrences of mantravit are 
at 3.131, 133, where the term appropriately refers to a learned man in general and not to 
the performer of a rite. The adopted reading is found in Be? wKt! Lo! GMd Tr! and 
must be considered conjectural. 


3.220c There is considerable manuscript support for the alternate reading sra@ddhe, including 
several ST mss. Biihler also follows this reading. I have adopted srd@ddham because it 
has the strong support of commentators. Me, for example, glosses: sr@ddhdrtham 
annam $radddham. Further, sra@ddham is frequently used in the MDh as the direct object 
of eating: 3.146, 222, 247, 24g 4.131; see also Sr@ddhabhuk at 3.250; 4.109. It is clearly 
the /ectio difficilior here with the indirect object (one’s own father) also in the accusa- 
tive. In these usages, as Me notes, the term sraddha refers specifically to the meal it- 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 929 


self. The accusative reading is supported by Be* sCa BKP wKt® Lo* Lo> cMd! rMd? 
1tMd? Ox? Tr! MTr* MTr§ Dave Jha. 


3.221b The reading jivec capi has the support of most ST mss. Nevertheless, I think vdpi is 
the original reading. Na@, for example, saw the problem of reading vd here and com- 
ments: vasabdas carthe. Further,Go and Ku also have the gloss: pitrjtvanapaksadpekso 
vasabdah. This reading is found in Be! sBe? Be! Bo nCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt? nKtt nKt 
wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! oMd? 1Md4 NNg oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pus 
sPu® Pu’? Pu!® Tj! Tr? Wa Vis Vij Laks Dev Na Go Rc Jolly. 


3.226c The mss. of NT-y vulgate has the reading piirvam, while those of the ST read sarvam. 
I have followed the reading of NT-x in this case, because it receives strong support 
from several commentators and from citations: Be! nBe? Be? Bo pCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt 
BK wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® oM& nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Pus sPu® Pu? 
Pu Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M G Ku Nd R] Dev Hem Apa Go Ku Mr Jolly. 


3.228c The reading adopted, parivesayet, is found insBe? Be? Bo sCa Ho Hy Jo? sKt’ wKt® 
La! La? Lo? Lo? GM@ NNg oOrsOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! sPu® Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa Me Go Na 
Ku Jolly. Most mss., however, have either parivesayeta or parivesayec ca. Both these 
would make the pdda hypermetric with 9 syllables. Jolly does not give any variants for 
this pada. Given the divergence of the mss., the reading is uncertain. 


3.233b The reading adopted has the support of mss. of ST and NT-x: Be! pBe? Be? nCa Ho 
Jo? wKt! BK wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lot Lo’ cMd! tMd4 GMd> GMy NNg oOr Ox? Ox? nPu! 
Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Pu!® mTr*# Wa [Jolly M G Ku] Hem Go Jolly. 


3.234c The alternate reading @sane has the unanimous support of the ST. The adopted read- 
ing, however, is the lectio difficilior and has the support of Me, Go, and Rc, who con- 
sider Gsanam to be apposition to kutapam. The adopted reading is found in Be! pBe? 
Be? Bo BCa Ho Jo? nKt' BK wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ NNg sOxX Ox? PuS 
sPuo Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tj Wa [Jolly M!2-4-5-8-9 Me G Ku R] Apa Me Go Rc Jolly Jha 
Dave. 


3.236b The original reading here is quite uncertain. The mss. of NT-y vulgate read fe ca, a 
reading followed by most editions. Many mss. of NT-x have the reading te ’pi. The 
reading I have adopted, caiva, is found in the mss. of ST and NT-x: nCa wKt? BKt® Lo* 
Lo? GMd! tMd* GMd@ GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Pu? sPué Pu® Pu!® Tr? mTr* mTr°[ Jolly 
M Nd] Hem Jolly. It is also supported by the variants in: Md? Tr' Dev Madh. The 
commentators offer no help on this. 


3.237a The alternate reading usnam bhavaty annam has the support of some ST mss. The 
reading with us:da, however, has the support of Me, Go, and Rc and, | feel, is also the 
lectio difficilior. It is found inBBe? BCa JonKt* BK} wKt§ Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! cMy 
NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud sPuS Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tr? [Jolly M G N R] Apa Me Go Rc Jolly 
Jha Dave. 


3.240c Here the ST appears to go with the NT-y vulgate in reading karmani,a reading not 
found in any commentary. The reading havisi, which I have adopted, has the support of 
most commentators and is found in Be! pBe? Bo sCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt? nKt! sBKt wKt® 
La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® sOx! Ox? Ox} nPu! Pu? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr 
Wa [Jolly M G R] Me Na Ku Rn Re Hem Jolly Jha Dave. 


3.247a The reading adopted, asapindakriyakarma, has the strong support of Me, who glosses: 


930 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 


prathamamrtasya asapindakarandkhyam karma kartavyam | sahapindadanam 
pirvabhyam na kartavyam. The reading also has the support of Go, Nd, and Rc. This 
reading is found in Bo NKt* La! Lo? Lo* cGMd! rMd3 GM@ NNg oOrsOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu? Pu! Tr! Tr? mTr4mTr° Wa [Jolly M G N Nd] Vis Hem Go N@ Nd Re 
Jolly. For the problems of interpretation of this verse, see my note to the translation. 


3.251d Ku Rn Rc Mr appear to read bho abhiramyatam iti. However, Me glosses abhitah with 
ubhayatah, and explains: thaiva svagrhe vd yathestam Gsyatam ity arthah, and Na@ and 
Nd have similar explanations of the term. Go’s explanation mirrors that of Me, while 
Ku gives abhito as a patha. 


3.254a Me takes the correct reading to be svadadhvam and rejects the reading svaditam. He 
also gives the alternate reading svadatu. Likewise, Nd gives the alternate reading 
svadata. 


3.254d The reading adopted, rocitam, is found in Be! nCa Ho Jo? nKé wKt® La? Lo? Lo® Lo* 
Lo® NNg oOr sOx! Ox? Ox3 nPu! Pu? Pu’ sPu® Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M RG 
Nd] Go Na Rc Laks Jolly. The reading of the ST rocata also supports this reading over 
rucitam. However, Me appears to have had both readings in his sources, because he 
comments: rucitam rocitam iti vd. 


3.258b I have chosen niyatah over prayatah; the former is found in all ST mss., as well as in 
a substantial number of NT-x and NT-y ones, including the old nKt* and the Sarada 
mss. The adopted reading is found in: Be! nBe* Be? nCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? Kt! 
La! Lo! GMd! oMd? tMd3 tMd4 GMd> GMy nNg oOr sOx! sPuo Tj? Tr! Tr? MTr3 MTr# 
MTr?® [Jolly Ku R Nd] Hem Rn Re Mandlik KSS. 


3.261b Most editions, following the interpretation of most commentators, opt for the reading 
parastat. They take the meaning to be that some prescribe the offering of the rice balls 
after the Brahmins have taken their meal. This stands in contrast to the provision at 
3.215, where the balls are placed before the meal. The manuscript evidence for 
parastat, however, is scant, as acknowledged by Biihler. I have adopted purastat, be- 
cause it is attested in mss. of ST and NT, as well as in all the citations: Be! sBe Be? 
Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? Kt wKt? La! La? Lo? Lo’ GMd! tMd‘ GMy nNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Ox? 
nPu! Pud Pu? Pu? Pu!l® Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr3 MTr4 MTr® Wa Jolly M G N Nd] Hem Dev 
Madh Mandlik. The editions of Me give his reading as parastat, but all my mss. have 
the reading purastat. For my interpretation of the term, see my note to the translation. 


3.263d Even though all the editions read sa@ttvikam dhdrmikam, it is found in very few mss. 
Most mss. record the reading I have adopted: Be! Be? Be? Bo pCa Ho Jo* wKt? nKtt 
BKt wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! oMd? TMd? tMd4 GMy NNg 0Or sOx! 
Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pu> sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr° Wa [Jolly G R]Hem 
Laks Dev M@dh. This sequence is supported also by Go, Ku, and Rn. 


3.267¢ All editions read trpyanti. The reading I have adopted, priyante, however, is found in 
most mss. and in all citations: Be! sBe? Be? Bo BCa Jo? wKt! wKt nKt Kt wKt La! 
La? Lo! Le¢ Lo? Lot Lo® GMd! oMd? tTMd3 1Md‘4 GMd® GMy nNgoOr sOx! Ox? Ox? 
nPu! Pu sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu? Pu!® Tr! Tr? Tr‘ mTr® [Jolly M G R Nd] Me Dev Laks 
Madh Hem Apa; cf. ViDh 80.1. Both Goand Ku read pitaras trpyanti, but this may 
well be a gloss, because, in commenting on the following verse, both refer to the syn- 
tactic connection of that verse (268) with this, saying: pitarah priyanta ity parvena 
sambandhah. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 3 931 


3.268b Both the readings, iha and atha, have strong manuscript support; the latter is found in 
most ST mss. including all the Malayalam ones. I have adopted the former, however, 
which is supported by all the medieval citations and found in Bo BCa Jo? La! La? Lo! 
Lo? Lo? cGMd! oMd? GMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu8 Pu!® Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M'2-*? RJ Ra 
[tha sraddhe| Laks Hem Dev MGdh Jolly. This reading parallels pdrsateneha of 269b. 
The reading, nevertheless, remains uncertain. 


3.270c The pada is hypermetric, and this may have been the reason for scribes to attempt to 
correct it as reflected in the several variant readings, all restoring the meter. The read- 
ing adopted is found in a broad spectrum of mss. and is supported by all the medieval 
citations: Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt3 nKt* BK® BKt® La? Lo! Lo* Lo* Lo® cGMd! 
oMd? GMy Ox? nPu! Pu’ Pu! Tj? mTr3 Wa [Jolly M'2-8-| Hem Dev Madh Mandlik 
Jha KSS Dave. 


3.2724 The reading mahdsalkah is found in only a few mss: Jo? NNg sPu? Pu!® [Jolly MP8], 
and in Hem 3/1.586 Jolly. However, the singular is attested in more mss. than the plu- 
ral maha@salkah, and the other items in this list are all in the singular.. 


3.273a The mss, are divided over the two readings, madhund mifram and madhusammisram. 
I have opted for the former because it is represented in all but one of the ST mss., as 
well as in all the NT-y mss. and good number of NT-x ones. It is found in: Be! pBe? 
BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! Kt? wKt Lo? GMd! oMe& TMd3 GMd5 GMy oOr Tj? Tr! mTr6 
[Jolly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. 


3.274a The reading bhifyat is found in Be! sBe? Bo nCa Jo? NKf sKt? wKt® La! La? Lo? Lo? 
Lo* Lo* GMd! oMd@? GMy NNg Ox? Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu* Pu’ Pul® Tj! Tr? MT r4 T° [Jolly 
MR Ku] Me Ku Go Laks Hem Dev Jolly Jha Dave. 


3.275d The mss. are deeply divided over the two readings: anantam and Gnantyam. I have 
opted for the latter mostly because it is represented by the largest number of ST mss. 
and a substantial number of ST-x ones. This reading is found in: Be! nBe* BCa Jo? 
wKt! wKt} nKt* La! La? Lo! Lo? Md} GMd* My NNg Ox? Pu! Pu? Pu4 Pud Pu? Pus 
Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr® [Jolly N Nd R]. The fact that aksaya can be both an adjective and a 
substantive makes the choice harder, and the reading remains uncertain. 


3.277 Verses 278 is placed before 277 in all editions, including Jolly’s. [ have followed the 
order of these verses found in all the ST mss., as well as in substantial number of NT-x 
mss., including the old nKt* and the Sarada mss. This order is found in Be! Be? Be? 
BCa Ho Jo? nK¢ La! Lo! Lo? cGMd! TMd? TMd* GMd> GMy nNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu‘ sPu® Pu® Tj! Tr! mTr* mTr® Wa. In this order, verse 277concerning the two fort- 
nights nicely connects with the matter dealt with in the preceding verse. 


3.282a Both the readings, paitryajfikah and paitryajfiyah, have strong support. I have opted 
for the former because all the ST mss. have a form with “k.” It is also supported by 
Me, Go, and Na. See the parallel pdficayajfiika at 3.83, 281, 286. 


3.284d There is strong manuscript support for both readings: purdtani and sanatani. The 
latter is the reading of all but two ST mss. I have chosen the former, however, because 
it is found the most NT-x mss. and is the reading of Me and N&@, whereas the latter is 
supported by only Rc. The original reading, nevertheless, remains uncertain. The 
reading adopted is found in: pBe* BCa Jo? wKt! wKt? BK wKt® Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® cGMd! 
oMd? GMy oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud sPuS Pu? Pu? Pu!® Tj! Wa [Jolly M GN R] Apa 
Me Na Jolly. 


932 


4.4d 


4.10a 


4.17 


4.26c 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 


CHAPTER FOUR 


The alternate reading, kadacana, is well represented in the mss. and appears to be sup- 
ported by the glosses of Go [kadacid api] and Ku [kaddpi]. | have opted for katham- 
cana, however, which is found in all ST mss. and in most NT-x: Bo nKt' 8K wKt® 
Lo! Lo* Lo® GMd! oMd? tMd3 tTMd4 GMd cMy nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put sPué 
Pu’ Pu!® Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® Re [Jolly M Nd]. 


I have adopted vartayams tu because it is found in all the ST mss. as well and in sev- 
eral NT-x ones. All editions opt for ca, which is found only in the NT-y vulgate and in 
some NY-x ones, including the old NKt* and the Sarad4 mss. The reading adopted is 
found in Be! Be? Ho Jo? wKt! La? Lo? cMd! +Md3 tMd* GMd> GMy NNg nPu! Pu? Put 
Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® WaNd [Jolly R]. 


The original reading here is clearly ya@payan, which is also the lectio difficilior. It was 
easy for a scribe to change this somewhat unusual word, meaning to support or make 
someone subsist, to the orthographically similar (in Devanagari) dhya@payan, which 
when combined with the preceding yathd gives adhydpayan, influenced no doubt by 
the svddhydaya mentioned in pdda-b. Significantly, this reading is absent in the mss. 
with southern scripts. The reading adopted is found in Bo wKt! wKt} nKf BKt wKt® 
La? Lo?cMd! tMd3 rMd4 GMd5 cMy NNg Ox? Pu? Pu‘ Pu? [but cor] Tj! TP Tr! mTr4 
MTr®° Wa N& Nd Go Dave Mandlik Jha. This reading is also supported by the com- 
ments of Me: kutumbakam jivayati, and similar comments by Ku, Rn, and Mr. 


This pada has numerous variants. It is clear that that the original reading had hy ayana- 
rather than tv ayana-. The manuscripts and other sources are divided on the rest of the 
pada. It is clear, however, that ante is the original reading, rather than @dau. The for- 
mer is attested by Me and Rc, and found in most mss. including those of the ST. The 
latter is supported by N@, Go and Ku. The reading adopted is found in BCa Jo” nKt Lo? 
GMd? NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu!® Tr! Wa [Jolly Me M!-?->-8-9 R Nd] Me Re Laks Jolly 
Jha Dave. 


4.38d There is little to choose between svam riuipam and svaripam. I have chosen the former 


because it is found in most mss.: BBe? sCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt} nKf sKP wKt* La! La? 
Lo* cMd! oMd? sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? Put sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu? Tj? mTr? mTr4 MTr® Wa Vij 
Mandlik Jolly KSS. 


4.42c The alternate reading prajfid laksmi yaSas caksuh has much to commend itself; it is 


found in all the ST mss. and in several NT-x ones. I have, however, opted for the tra- 
ditional reading; it is clearly possible that the change in the alternate reading was made 
deliberately so this pada would not be identical to pada-c of the previous verse. 


4.49b There are quite a lot of variant readings here. It is clear that the original had kastham 


4.50 


lostam patram as separate words; the compounded form is found mostly in NT-y vul- 
gate. The last two words, however, are less certain. I have opted for tudani va because 
it has the best manuscript support, including most of the ST mss.: Be! sBe? Be? wKt3 
nKtt BKt wKt® La! Lo? Lot Lo’cMd! tMd? TMd* GMd> GMy nPu! Pud Pu’ Pu Tr! 
mT‘ MTr® WaDev Apa. 

All the mss. containing Me’s commentary omit this verse. Yet, there is a brief com- 


ment: mitrotsargasamutsargam tya4gam, which appears to be a comment on the first 
words of this verse. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 933 


4.51d The reading prandbddha is found in nBe? nCa Hy Jo! wKt nKt rMd? TMd4 cGM&® 
aMy NNg sOx! Pu? sPu® Pud Pu’? Pu? mTr*mTr® Jolly, and is supported by the parallel 
reading at verse 54d. In the Devanagari it is easy to drop the stroke for the long “a” 
after a retroflex “‘n’’. 


4.52a, c Most mss. have the readings pratyagnim and pratigam, using the accusative with the 
particle prati. These forms may have been influenced by the a-stem neuters in the three 
other compounds: pratisiiryam, pratisomodakadvijam, and prativatam. The original 
forms, however, were clearly the adverbial compounds pratyagni and pratigu. The 
former is found in Be? Hy Jo? wKt! nKt* Lo? NNg Wa [Jolly M G N Nd R] Jolly, and 
the latter in Bo nK¢' wKt® nNg Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Wa [Jolly G N] Jolly Jha, also 
supported by the mss. with the form pratigum. The reading pratigu is supported by Na 
and Re. 


4.57a This pdda has a large number of variants, possibly because this was a well-known 
proverb with multiple readings. In attempting to come up with a plausible reading, I 
have tried to figure out first the form of the verb and second the position of the verb. 
The form svapyat is the form found in most mss.; unfortunately the commentators do 
not bother with this pada. The alternate form supydt is found only in Bo Ho wKt! La! 
Lo! Lo? cMd!. The position is less certain, but I think it should come at the third posi- 
tion, as in pddas b and c; that is, the verb comes after the initial “na” and the following 
word. The mss. also support this position; the verb in the last position is found only in 
La! Jo Lo? Lo* Lo’ Md? NNg nPu! Pu? Pu* Pu!® Wa. 


4.570 The reading Srey@msam is clearly the original and the older reading attested by MS 
3.4.5 and KS 22.2 (see the study by Jamison 2000). This reading is also presupposed 
by the comments of Me, Go, Nd, Ku, and Rc. It is found in Bo La Lo? TMd? GMd> 
aMy Ox? Pu’ Pul® Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr®. There is some doubt as to the position ofna, 
some placing it in the second position. The parallel with pddas a and c [see also the 
surrounding verses], as well as the manuscript evidence, makes it clear that its original 
position is at the beginning of the pdda. 


4.61c The reading -jandkrante is supported by Me and is found in: Be BBe? Bo Jo? wKt 
BKt? wKt° La! La? Lo? Lo? tMd* GMd> NNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu 3 Pud sPu° Pu’ Pu® 
Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr? mTr° [Jolly M G R] Laks Me Rc Jolly. 


4.704 The editions of Go has the reading grhniydt, but all three of my mss. with Go’s com- 
mentary read mrdniydt. The gloss vimardanam by Me supports the adopted reading 
found in the vast majority of the mss. 


4.74a Jha and Dave adopt the reading divyet following Me; but I think the word divyet is 
used by Me as a gloss on kridet, because divyet is not found in any ms. including those 
with Me’s commentary. It is difficult to choose between the alternate readings kadacic 
ca and kadacit tu. | have adopted the former, because it is found in most of the ST mss. 
and a good number of NT-x ones: Be! Be? BCa Jo? NKt* La? Lo? TMd? GMd> GMy oOr 
Pu? Pu? Pu? Tr! Tr‘ mTr®° Wa Jolly. 


4.75b The alternative reading, astam ite ravau, is supported by the comments of Go, Ku, Rn, 
and Rc. It is clear, however, that Me had the reading with prati, because he explains the 
accusative ending of astamayam with a reference to Panini 1.4.90: pratilaksane karma- 
pravacaniyatvad dvitiyd. The technical term karmapravacaniya (Panini 1.4.83) refers 
to verbal prepositions that govern substantives. Here prati govern the accusative. The 


934 


4.83¢ 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 


translation of Jha of this statement of Me is misleading; he appears to think that the ex- 
planation confirms the reading astam ite ravau. The reading adopted is found in nKt 
wKt® La? Lo? GMd! +Md3 tMd4 GMd> GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Ox? NPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ 
Pu? sPuS Pu? Pu? Pu!? Tr? mTr4 MTr® Wa [Jolly M!2-8- G N Nd] Na Jolly. 

The reading adopted sndtas tu is supported by most ST mss. and occurs in Be! sBe 
Be? Bo Ho Jo? wKt! BKt) wKt® La! Lo? GMd! oMd? tMd? GMd? GMy nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pu? 
Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® RiLaks Hem. 


4.85cd The uncertainty of the reading —vesa or veSfyd—is noted by Ku, who ascribes the 


4.90 


4.94 


former to Me and others and the latter to Go. govindardjas tu daSaveSydsamo nrpa iti 
pathati | medhatithiprabhrtayah praiico daSaveSasamo nrpa iti pathanti. The com- 
mentary of Me as we have it, however, does not contain this reading; his comments are 
very brief on this verse. The vast majority of mss., including almost all the ST ones, 
however, support the adopted reading: Be? Bo Ho wKt! nKtt nKt wKt® La! Lo? Lo? 
Lo* Lo’ cMd! tMd3 tMd‘4 GMd5 GMy NNg oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pus 
sPu® Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr! Tr? Wa Go Laks Jolly. The reading veSyd is also supported by 
YDh 1.141. 


The reading /ohacG@raka is quite uncertain; there are numerous variants in the mss. and 
the commentators generally ignore the term. Competing readings are: lohakdraka 
found in most ST mss. (the reading of Md? is unclear); lohdngdraka; and lohadaraka, 
which is the reading of most editions. The adopted reading is found in: Be? nCa wKt! 
Lo? Lo* Lo’ GMd! nNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu? Tr? mTr® (Jolly M?-4 G N 
Nd] Apa Na Jolly; see also ViDh 43.22. 


It is clear that the sense of the verse requires the verb to be in the past tense rather than 
in the optative. For this reason Jolly has adopted the reading avd@pnuvan. It is, however, 
found in a very small number of mss. Even the ST mss. give the optative, but quite ir- 
regularly in the singular for a sentence with the subject in the plural. [ have maintained 
the optative reading av@pnuyuh found in most mss., even though I am troubled by this 
reading. 


4.123¢ It is surprising that all editions have adopted the reading va@py antam when it has so 


little manuscript support. It is true that the distinction between “v” and “c” in northern 
scripts is often blurred. But mss. in southern scripts also favor “ca.” The reading 
adopted in found in: sBe? Be? Bo Ho wKt} La? Lo! Lo? Lo? sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? Pur sPue 
Pu? Pu’ Pu! Tj! Tr? Wa. 


4.132d There are four alternate readings: adhitisthec ca, adhitisted dhi, adhitisthet tu, and 


adhitistheta, all with considerable manuscript support. Somewhat hesitantly I have 
gone with the first, mostly because it is strongly supported by most ST mss.: wKt! nKt! 
BKt? wKt® Lo? TMd4 GMd> NNg Pu? Pu? Tr! mTr‘ mTr® [Jolly G K R] Jolly. The reading, 
however, remains uncertain. 


4.1416 The adopted reading, vayo’dhikdn, has the unanimous support of the ST and NT-y 


mss., as well as a substantial number of NT-x ones: Be! nCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo wKt? 
La! Lo! Lo? GMd! oMd? 1Md3 tTMd*4 GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? sPuo Pu’ Tj? Tr! Tr? 
MTr* MT? Mandlik Jolly KSS. The reading, nevertheless, is uncertain. In the southemn 
mss. “g” may have been pronounced as “k” through Dravidian influence and then 
compensated by changing “ti” to “dhi.” See the parallel at 7.149 where the reading is 
unmistakably vayo’ tigdn. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 935 


4.142d The plural reading jyotirgandn is supported by several ST mss. The reading adopted, 
jyotirganam, however, has broader support: Be! nBe* Be? Bo Ho Jo? Kt? wKt} BK b 
wKt® La! La? Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo> oMd? TMd4 NNg Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Pu® 
Pu! Tr? Wa [Jolly M G R]Me Rc Jolly. Likewise, Go’s gloss samitham also supports 
the singular. 


4.144c All mss. read rahasyGni. The printed editions, however, give the reading rahahsthani 
in several commentaries. Without critical editions of these commentaries it is impossi- 
ble to determine the original readings. For example, in Mandlik and Dave Me reads 
rahahsthani, but in Jha and my mss. rahasyG@ni. In Mandlik N@ and Rn (as also my 
ms.) read rahasydni, but in Dave rahahsthdni. With either reading, however, the term 
refers to the “hidden” or the private parts of the body. 


4.149b Although both readings, dvijah and punah, have substantial manuscript support, I 
have adopted the former because it is found in all the ST mss., as well as in a large 
number of NT-x ones and all the citations: Be! Bo Ho nKt* Lo? Lo* Lo’ cMd! rMd3 
GMd? GMy Ox? Ox? Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tr! mTr4 mTr° [Jolly M Nd|Laks Dev Dave Jha. 


4.170¢ It is surprising that all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading himsdratah 
when so few mss. record that reading. The reading of the commentators given in the 


66s99 


editions cannot be trusted, because the stroke for “i” can be easily dropped. 


4.176d The reading adopted, lokasamkrustam, is found in Be? Bo nKtt La? Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! 
NNg sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu? Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly M G Nd] Me Go Rc Jolly Jha Dave. The 
prefix “sam,” however, also has the support of a large number of other mss. with 
variant readings. 


4.178d The reading adopted, risyati, is found in Be! Be? NKtt La! GMd! tMd?3 TMd4 GMd5 oOr 
sOx! Ox? Ox? sPuo Tr? MTr4 MTr° Dev Me Nd Rn Rc Jha. The Parasmaipada “ti” end- 
ing is also supported by other mss. with alternate readings. The reading dusyati is 
clearly a very old variant, because it is found already in Kumiarila. 


4.181c The reading of the pada, as also the meaning of the entire verse, is less than clear. The 
attempt to clarify the meaning may be the reason for many of the variant readings in 
this pada, as also in pdda-a. The commentators Me, Go, Ku, and Rc appear to support 
the reading etair jitaih. They appear to take the pronoun efaih, however, as referring to 
the disputes rather than to the persons engaged in the dispute. This may be the reason 
why several mss. change ebhih in pdda-a to etdn referring to vivaddn. I think the 
pronoun here and in pdda-a refer to the individuals listed in the previous verse. Within 
this context, I think the nominative jitah makes much better sense. The parallel etair 
adhiksiptah in verse 185 also supports the nominative. Biihler (1886, 157) also thought 
that “this reading, though less well attested than the vulgata, is perhaps preferable.” In 
fact, however, this reading is better attested and is the reading found in all the ST mss.: 
Be? Bo sCa Ho Jm wKt} nKtt wKt5 La? Lo? GMd! TMd? GMd? oOr Pu® Tj? Tr! mTr* 
MTr® Wa [Jolly Nd] Na Rn Laks Dave. 


4.183c All the editors have adopted the reading apdadm loke, although it is found in only a few 
manuscripts. The reading adopted has broad manuscript support: Be! Bo pCa wKt! 
nKtt wKt® La? Lo? Lo* Lo’ cGMd! tMd4 GMd? oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu} Pu4 Pu> 
sPu® Pu? Pu!® Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr® Wa Apa. The commentators do not comment on this 
expression. 


4.183d The genitive lokasya in pada-c supports the adoption of prthivyah, which becomes 


936 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 


prthivya due to sandhi. The orthographic distinction between that and the locative 
prthivyam is slight. The reading adopted is found in Bo Jm La? Lo! cMd! tMd? cMd> 
sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pus sPu® Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr? mTr® Wa Apa Jha Dave. 


4.188c The reading adopted has the strong support of both ST and NT-x mss.: Be! sBe* Bo 
BCa Ho wKt! wKt? BK wKt® La? Lo! Lo? GMd! oMd? +Md3 TMd4 GMd5 GMy sOx! Ox? 
NPu! Pu3 Pud sPu® Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tr! Tr? mT? MTr6 [Jolly G Nd] Re Laks Hem; cf. VaDh 
6.32 . Surprisingly all the editions adopt the alternate reading. 


4.195b All three alternate readings have good manuscript support: dambhikah, dambhikah, 
and dambhakah. The readings of the commentators are suspect, because it is unclear 
whether the editors have emended the text. In the editions, Me Go N@ Ku and Mr read 
dambhakah. The reading adopted, dambhikah, is found in Jo? NKt¢ Lo4 Lo® oMd@? TMd? 
GMd> Ox} Pu? Pu‘ Pu> Pu? Pu!? mTr4 MTr® [Jolly M G Nd] Jolly. The original readings 
is uncertain. 


4.196a Here again we have a problem with the readings found in the editions of the com- 
mentaries, which all read naiskrtikah. The overwhelming evidence of the mss. and all 
the medieval citations indicate that the editions are probably wrong and that the com- 
mentators also had the reading adopted: naikytikah. 


4.201b Again it is surprising that all editors (except Jha), including Jolly, adopt the reading 
snaydc ca when it is found in so few mss. mostly belonging to NT-y vulgate. The 
reading adopted is found in Bo wKt! nKt' BK wKt® Lo? Lo* Lo? oMd? GMd> GMy nNg 
sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put sPu® Pu’ Pu! Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr® [folly M Nd] Apa 
Jha. The commentaries offer no help. 


4.202c The reading adopted upayufijana has overwhelming manuscript support: Bo nCa Jo? 
wKt} nKtt BKt wKt® Lo! Lo} Lot GMd! tMd3 GMd* GMy Ox? Pu? Pub Pu? Pu8 Pu!® Tj 
Tr! xTr° Wa [Jolly M G R Ku Nd] Apa Me Ku Dave Jha Jolly. Manuscripts frequently 
confuse formations from yuj and bhuj. 


4.206a The three variant readings, aslikam, aSrikam, and aSlilam, have good manuscript 
support. It is clear that Ku and Mr read aslikam, because they comment on the change 
of “r” to “1.” It is simply a variant form of asrikam, and one or the other form is found 
in Go, Ku, Rc, and Nd. The reading of Me and Nd@is unclear; the editions of these com- 
mentaries have aslilam. The gloss of Me is aSlaghyam, and that of Nd is papakaram. 
The glosses can support either readings. I have adopted aslikam because it, and the 
variant asrikam, have the broadest manuscript support. The reading adopted is found in 
Be! Bo Ho Hy Jo! Kt? nKt? La! Lo! Ox nPu! Pu? Pu’ mTr3 MTr4 mTr®° Laks Jolly 
Mandlik KSS. 


4.214b There are three alternate readings: -vikrayikasya, -vikrayakasya, and -vikrayinah. All 
have substantial manuscript support. At least in the printed editions, the first is sup- 
ported by Nd@ and Ku; the second by Me; and the third by Rn, Rc and Mr. Given the 
slight difference between the first and the second, however, the editions cannot be 
trusted completely. Here even the ST mss. are divided. I have gone with the second, 
because it has the broadest manuscript support, including most of the ST ones: Ho nKt! 
Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo? GMd! tMd3 cMy Ox? Pu} Pu8 Pu!® Tr! mTr4 MTr® [folly M 459 R] 
Dave tha. 


4.215b The reading -avatdrakasya adopted by Jolly and others is found in only a small num- 
ber of mss. Surprisingly, Jolly gives no variants even though his own Sarada ms. has 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 937 


the reading I have adopted. This form has also entered into the Sanskrit dictionaries, 
probably via the previous editions of the MDh. The readings of the commentators are 
suspect because we have to depend on the imperfect editions. In them the above read- 
ing is found only in Nad. The reading adopted is found in Be! Be? Bo pCa Ho Hy Jo? 
wKt} nK¢ BK wKt® La? Lo? GMd! tMd? tMd?4 GMd5 GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu® Pul? 
Ty! T? Tr! Tr? MTr4 mTr® WaApa Hem Me Rn Re Mr Dave Jha. 


4.216c Mandlik, Jolly, and KSS give the reading rafijakasya, meaning a dyer. This appears to 
be a silent editorial emendation; Jolly gives no variants when his own Sarada ms. has 
the alternate reading. All but three of my mss. have the reading adopted, rajakasya; it 
is also the reading in Vij, Apa, and Hem. The problem is that this word generally means 
a washerman, who was already listed as cailanirnejaka in padda-b. It is evident that the 
meaning dyer was also attached to rajaka, for Me glosses it with v@sasdm 
niladirdgak@rakah. The various readings of the commentators for this word in the edi- 
tions cannot be trusted. 


4.223b All NT mss. have the reading aSrdddhinah (with a few asrdddikah). It has been 
adopted in all editions. I have chosen to go with the ST and adopted the reading 
asraddhinah found in GMd!' tMd? 1TMd4 GMy Tr! mTr*mTr° [Jolly Nd]. It is given by 
Me as a pathdantara with the following gloss: aSraddhina iti va pathah | aSraddhavan 
ity arthah | tatha cottaraSloke Sraddhayah praddhanyam evaha vadanyasyeti. 1 think 
Me is perceptive in pointing out the broader context in which this verse is placed, and 
that context deals with the importance of fraddhd (see verses 224-6). The same 
p&thantara is given by Hem (3/1.785) with the same explanation. If we interpret the 
particle va of Me as showing a preference (“or rather”; see note to the translation of 
9.111), then I think we can assume that Me himself preferred this reading, which is also 
supported by his further remarks. This meaning of the expression is also supported by 
the comments of Nd, Nd, and Rc, although the latter also gives the alternate interpreta- 
tion: a man who does not perform sraddhas, which is the interpretation of Go, Ku, and 
Rn. In this case, | think, the ST has preserved the better and possibly original reading. 


4.226 The additional three verses are commented by Me. It is probable that he took them to 
be authentic verse of the MDh. The fact that they are absent in almost all mss. indicates 
a) that Me’s influence on the establishment of the text was not as great as may be as- 
sumed, and b) that the mss. sometimes give better readings of the text than the com- 
mentators. 


4.235b The mss. are equally divided between the two readings eva ca and eva va. I have 
opted for the former both because the copulative makes better sense with tav ubhau in 
pdda-c. It is found in Be? Ho Hy Jo! wKt! Kt? snKt wKt® La! Lo! GMd! tTMd? GMy Pu? 
Pu? Tr? mTr? Wa Mandlik Jolly KSS. 


4.237d Even though all editors have adopted the reading ca, most mss. including all the ST 
ones, as well as the citations, read tu, which I have adopted: Be! sBe? Bo wKt! wKt? 
NKt# La! La? Lo! Lo* Lo® GMd! rMd? tMd4 GMd3 GMy Ox? Pu? Pu’ Pu !? Tr! mTr* mTr® 
Wa Hem Apa. 


4.245b Even though the preponderance of manuscript evidence supports varjayet, I have 
adopted the minority reading varjayan, because the participle is clearly required by the 
syntax. The only commentator to note the word is Go, who clearly presupposes the 
participle. The reading adopted is found in BBe? sCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? wKt? nKtt La? 
oOr Ox? Tj? Tr! mTr* Go Mandlik Jolly Jha KSS Dave. 


938 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 4 


4.257d Both the alternate readings, G@sthitah and Gsritah, have strong manuscript support. 


Even the ST mss. are divided; so are the commentators. I have adopted the former, be- 
cause its support is somewhat stronger both in the mss. and among commentators. It is 
found in Be? Ho wKt! nKt* Lo? Lo* Lo cMd! tMd* nNg oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? Pu? 
sPu® Pu’ Pu Tj! Tr? [Jolly M G Nd] Me Na Rc Laks Jolly Jha Dave. 


CHAPTER FIVE 


5.11a The reading adopted, kravyddah, with the consonant ending is the /ectio difficilior and 


is found in Be? nCa nKt! BK La! Lo? GMd! cGMd? sOx! Ox? sPuo Pu!® Tr! Wa [Jolly M 
N Nd] Hem Jha Dave. This reading is supported by Me Na@ and Nd. The alternate 
reading with the thematic ending, kravyaddn, appears to have the support of Ku, Rn 
and Rc, although all give the nominative kravyadah and we cannot trust the editions to 
be accurate here and the reading could as well be kravyddah. The mss. that have the 
reading kravydda may also support the reading adopted, because it is common to drop 
the visarga before a sibilant. It could also be the thematic stem form, however, com- 
pounding with sakunin. 


5.12c The two readings, rajjuvalam and rajjuddlam, have strong manuscript support. I have 


gone with the latter because it is found in almost all NT-x mss., as well as in ViDh 
51.29 and YDh 1.174. The former, nevertheless, has strong support and is found in al- 
most all ST mss. The reading is clearly uncertain. The reading adopted is found in Be! 
(me to) Be? Bo Ho Jo? nKf BKt? La? Lo! Lot nNg Ox} nPul Pu? Pu? Pu4 Pue Pu? Pu!l® 
Tj? Wa [Jolly M GN R] Dev Jolly. According to the printed editions, Me, Go, Na, Ku, 
Re, and Mr have rajjuvdlam, although such readings are not very trustworthy. My mss. 
of Me, for example, have the reading rajjudadlam in the commentary. Further, an ani- 
mal name such as this may have had several regional variations. 


5.16c-d In padas c-d, most mss. give the accusative plural. This causes a problem of syntax. 


We have to either understand a finite verb or connect these accusatives with na 
bhaksayet that begins the next verse. The latter alternative is given only by Nd and is 
unlikely, because verse 16 is meant to give exceptions to the blanket prohibition of fish 
in verse 14. The former is given by Rc. The best alternative, I think, is to take the 
words in pddas c-d as nominative, which is the reading of most commentators: Me, 
Go, Na, Ku, Rn, and Mr. Although still problematic, then we can extend the past parti- 
ciple Gdyau in the dual to these pddas by understanding it as plural, which appears to 
be the solution of the commentators. Although the edition has the accusatives, Hem 
also appears to read nominatives, because of his comment: rdjivadyah sarvaSo ’ niyuk- 
tendpi bhaksyah. A similar explanation is given by Dev. The reading adopted is found 
in Jo? Lo? NNg nPu! Pu? Pu’ Wa [Jolly G] Vij Dev, while TMd? has the nominatives in 
all but the first (rajivdm), and MT14 MTr° have the nominative simhatundds ca. 


5.23c The reading rsiyajfesu has the support of Me, Nd, Ku, Rn, and Mr; others do not com- 


ment. It is clearly the lectio difficilior; the change from purdnesv rsito purdnesv api 
requires only a slight emendation. The reading adopted is found in BBe* Be? Bo sCa 
Hy Jo? wKt? Lo? Lo? GMd! +Md? GMd nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu8 Pu!? Tr! 
MIr* Me Na Ku Rn Mr Dave Jha Mandlik. Quite surprisingly, Jolly adopts the alternate 
reading without giving any variants. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 939 


5.28c Both readings, sthdvaram jaigamam and jangamam sthavaram, have strong manu- 
script support. The word order of the reading adopted is supported by Me, Re, and Mr, 
and it is found in Be? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Kt? La! Lo? GMd! GMd? GMy nNg sOx! Ox? sPu® 
Tj! T? Tr! Tr? mTr3 MTr4 MTr°, as also in all the editions. Although the original reading 
is uncertain, my selection is influenced by the near unanimous reading of the ST mss. 


5.33d The past participle pretah, which I have adopted, is supported by Me, Go, and Ku. It is 
found in Be! Lo! Lo? tMd? GMd> GMy nNg sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu! Tr! mTr* Wa 
[Jolly M G Nd] Me Jolly Jha Dave. 


5.37d The reading adopted, kathamcana, is found in Be? Bo Ho Jo? Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd? 
1tMd* GMd> GMy NNg Pu2 Pu} Put Pu’ Tj! Tr! mTr4 wT ro [Jolly R NdjLaks. 


5.38b The alternate reading, tdvatkrtvehe, found in most ST mss. is probably derived from a 
different version of the verse found also in ViDh 51.60. In this version, pada-d reads: 
pretya ceha ca niskrtim. Thus, the object of the verb prapnoti is niskrtim. Then we can 
have the reading Artvd iha with the object mdranam. The reading of the second half of 
the verse in the MDhA makes it clear that the object of prdpnoti is maranam, making it 
certain that the reading should be tavatkrtvo ha. 


5.50 It appears that some took this statement to be a negative one with reference to a per- 
sons who does eat meat, and not as a positive statement about someone who does not 
eat meat. Thus, Laks, Hem, and several mss., especially ST ones, appear to read an 
avagraha before priyatdm, thus making it a negative, and eliminate na in padda-d. 


5.61 Most mss. and commentators, as well as all editions, read here the two verses given in 
the critical apparatus. Pa@das a-b of the first verse is clearly spurious. They are not 
commented by Me and Go and are absent in all ST mss. The citations by Vij 3.18, Laks 
10.17, and Dev 5.26 also omit these pddas. This causes the anomaly of a verse with six 
padas. \t is apparent that pdda-d of the first verse and pdda-a of the second verse are 
also later additions. The reading adopted in the critical edition follows nKt> wKt® Lo4 
NNg Ox? Pu? Pu’ Pu? [Jolly M G Gr] Me Go. Jolly also saw these pddas as spurious 
and placed them within brackets. He notes that the reading with a single verse is 
“probably the original reading.” For further arguments in favor of the reading adopted 
in the critical edition, see the Introduction, pp. 44-46. 


5.64a The alternate reading rajanyadhnaiva caikena has much to recommend it. All the ST 
mss. have it, as do the old nKt’. It is also the /ectio difficilior with the uncommon word 
rajani for day. I have refrained from adopting it, however, because all the commenta- 
tors (except for Nd), including Me and Go, have the other reading. Surprisingly, Jolly 
does not give any variants for this pada. 


5.64d All the editions have the reading tryahdd udakadayinah, and Jolly does not record any 
variants here. The vast majority of the mss. and the citations, however, support the 
reading adopted, which is found in Be! Be? Bo Ho wKt® BnKt nKé La! Lo! Lo? rMd3 
TMd4 GM@® cMy nNg sOx! Ox? Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu* Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu® Pu? Pu? Tr! 
Tr? Tr‘ MTr° Wa Vij Apa. 


5.65b All the editions have the participle samdcaran in place of the finite verb; Jolly gives no 
variants. Within the syntax of the verse, the participle makes better sense, which also 
makes it the /ectio facilior. The commentators Me, Go, Na, Ku, and Rn imply a partici- 
ple with their glosses kurvan and krtva. However, it is unclear whether their root texts 
also had a participle or whether they were merely explaining the passage. The over- 


940 


5.65¢ 


5.67b 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 


whelming majority of the mss., including all the ST ones, however has the reading 
adopted: Be! Be? wKt BKt? wKt® GMd! tMd? TMd* GMd? GMy nNg oOrsOx! Ox? NPu! 
Pu? Put Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® Wa Vij Laks Rc. According to this 
reading, we have to understand either a correlative (yah and sah) or a particle such as 
yadi. 


The reading adopted, pretadhdraih, is found in nBe? Be? nCa nK¢ BK wKt® La! Lo? 
Lo* Lo’ GMd! TMd? GMd> GMy NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu4 Pu? sPuo Pu? Pu® Pu? 
Pu!? Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr4 MTr°Vij Apa Dev Madh Bh (ad 11.197 in Derrett) Jolly Jha. Jolly 
gives no variants. It is unclear whether Gh@ra here is merely a variant of ha@ra found in 
the alternate reading. Devannabhatta in his gloss takes @hdra to mean food: preta- 
dravyopajivinah pretakutumbantargatah sapinda iti ydvat. In any case, both forms im- 
ply a close relationship to the deceased and most commentators take the expression as 
referring to a sapinda. 


All the editions read visuddhi, and this reading appears to have the support of Ku and 
Nd. The vast majority of mss., including all the ST ones and the citations, however, 
support the negative asuddhi, the reading adopted: Be! Be? Bo Ho Jo? nKtt BK wKté 
Lo! Lo? Md? tTMd* GMy nNg sOx! Ox? Pu? sPuo Pu® Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr° Vij Laks. 
This reading is also supported by GMd! and Bo. Jolly, once again, gives no variants. 


5.69b Even though all the editions read na ca, most mss. record the reading adopted: Be! 


BBe? BCa Jo? wKt! wKt nKtt Lo! Lo? Lo? 1Md? tMd* GMy nNg oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? 
Pu® Tj? Tr! Tr? Wa [Jolly G] Vis Vij Apa Dev Go Ku. However, Me appears to support 
the reading with ca. 


5.69d There are diverse readings for ksapeta in the mss., and it is difficult to discern the 


original form. I have opted for the singular both because it is represented in the best 
mss. and because the singular is supported by Me, Go, Ku, and Nd. The reading 
adopted is found in: nCa NK¢t‘ BKt® Lo? Ox} sPu® Pu! mTr* mTr® [Jolly M!?->-8-9; Me 
2-5-8-91 Dave Jha. This reading, however, is quite uncertain. Mss. using the singular 
have other forms as well: ksapet tu, ksapayet. The final particle also has many variants: 
tu, vd, andca. The reading adopted is found in: Be! BBe? Jo? nKt wKt® La! Lo! Lo? 
Lo? Lot Lo’ 1Md3 tMd* GMd> GMy Ox? Pu? Pu’ Pu!? Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® Vis Vij Apa. 


5.82b All the editions read sthitah. It has considerable manuscript support, and Me and Ku 


also have that reading, although we cannot trust the editions given the minor ortho- 
graphic difference. I have adopted sthitih, because the verb sydt would be somewhat 
superfluous with the participle sthitah. The reading adopted is found in Be! nBe Be? 
Bo BCa Jm Jo? 8K wKt® Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® GMd! sOx! sPu® Tj! T? Tr? mTr* mTr® Wa 
Apa Rc Nd. 


5.108d The grammar of the verse with the anuvrtti of Sudhyati would require dvijottamah to 


be in the singular. The mss. are divided. I have opted for the plural, first because it is 
the lectio difficilior (given the grammar of the verse); second because the plural is 
clearly the reading of both Me and Go; and third because a large plurality of the mss 
favor it. Me clearly states the plural: rena dvijottamah Suddha bhavanti; and Go: 
brahmandas ca sasthadhydyavaksyama@nena Sudhyanti. The singular is supported by N@ 
Ku Rn. The reading adopted in found in: Be! nBe? BCa Ho Jo? wKt! sK® wKt® La! Lo? 
Lo? TMd? NNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pué sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tj? MTr* mT r® 
Wa [Jolly M R] Hem Me Go Jha Dave, as well as in ViDh 22.91. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 941 


5.113a All the editions have the reading apd agnes ca. The reading adopted is found in nKt! 
La! Lo* Lo? GMd! GMd? Ox? nPu! Pu!® Tr! mTr* mTr® folly M Gr] Hem. This reading 
is further supported by many other mss. that have variants of it and begin with agneh. 
Most commentators do not provide any clue as to the order of the two words. How- 
ever, they refer to the vedic story about Agni copulating with water (Varuna) as the 
underlying myth behind Manu’s statement. In the myth it is Agni who united with wa- 
ter, and having Agni first in this verse agrees with it. 


5.118x The reading of the added verse is quite uncertain especially in pada-a. For the most 
part I have followed the reading of the Malayalam mss., except that I have given the 
genitive plural conjecturally, following the majority of the mss. that have Saucadndm. 


5.122a The reading adopted, -kasthdni, is found in sCa wKt! wKt NKtt La! Lo! GMd! tMd? 
TMd4 GMd> GMy oOr sOx! Ox? sPu® Tr! mT14 mTr® Jolly Nd]. The commentators offer 
no help. The alternate reading has the strong support of NT mss. and is adopted by all 
editors. I have opted for the former because it is found in all the ST mss. with the sup- 
port of several very old NT-x mss., including the old nKt* and the Sarada mss. 


5.122b The reading adopted is found in Be! nCa Ho wKt! nKtt BK wKt® La! GMd! 1Md3 
+Md* GMd? GMy NNg nPu! Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® WaHem. Again the commentators offer 
no help. All the editors have chosen the alternate reading, which is found in most NT 
mss. Once again my decision to go with the former is based on the fact that it is found 
in all ST mss. and several significant and old NT-x ones, including all three Old Nagari 
mss. and several Newari ones. 


5.122x The verse excluded from the critical edition but included in all other editions is found 
in all but the following mss.: NKt‘ nK® wKt® [but ma] Lot Lo® GMd! tMd? GMd> GMy 
nNg Ox} Pul® Tr! mTr4 MTr® Wa [olly Nd]. The reasons for its exclusion are the fol- 
lowing. At the manuscript level, it is omitted in all but one of the ST mss., as well in 
several NT-x ones, including the old nKt’. It is not commented by Me, Go, Na, Nd, and 
Mr; the only ones to comment on it are Ku, Rn, and Rc. The way this verse entered into 
the manuscript tradition is very clear. It is given at the very end of Me’s commentary 
on verse 122 with the introduction yathoktam and concluding with (ti, clearly demar- 
cating it as a citation. Go also gives it at the end of his commentary on verse 122 with 
the introduction yathd ca vasisthah and concluding with iti. This verse is VaDh 3.59. 
Because the verse came at the very end of the commentary and right before the next 
MDh verse (124 in the critical edition), it was easy for copyists to mistake it for a verse 
of the MDh. In order to preserve the traditional verse numbering, I have eliminated the 
number 123 from my verse count. The inclusion of this verse in MDh mss. must have 
occurred early, because it is cited as a verse of Manu by both Vij and Apa. 


5.137d I have opted for the reading ca, because most ST and NY-x mss. have this reading: 
Be! Be? Bo sCa Ho wKt? La! Lo? Lo4 Lo® Md? rMd? oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? sPu® 
Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tr? Tr? MTr4 MTr® Wa [Jolly M] Vij ApaDev. The reading, however, 
is uncertain. 


5.138a Here also I have opted for ca for the same reasons as in 137d. The adopted reading is 
found in: Be! sBe? Bo pCa wKt! wK nKt BK wKt® La! Lo! Lo? Lo} Lot Lo® cMd! 
GMd> NNg oOrsOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu Put Pud sPu Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu !° Tj! Tr! Wa [Jolly 
G] Hem Me. 


5.139d The mss. have widely different readings of this pada. Along with Jolly, I have opted 
for the neuter srrisiidram as a collective Dvandva; this is the lectio difficilior. It is sup- 


942 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 


ported by Go and Nd. Obviously the scribes had difficulty with this formation. The ST 
mss. along with the Sarada and Nd have resolved the difficulty by using the dual. Oth- 
ers have split the compound into two nominatives: stri and sa#drah, many adding ca to 
connect the two. The reading adopted is found in: NK nNg oOr Ox? Lo? Ox? Pu!® 
[Jolly M'-5-9] Jolly. 


5.145b The reading adopted is found in Bo nKf Lo! TMd? GMd> GMy NNg NPu! Pu? Put Tj! 
Tr! Tr? mTr? MTr6Vij 1.196 Madh 1.224. I have opted for this reading, because it is 
found all the ST mss. and in several significant NT-x ones, including the three in Old 
Nagari, NKtt NNg nPu!. The reading, however, is uncertain. 


5.146d I have adopted the singular dharmam, which is found in Be Bo wKt! nKtt BK wKt® 
Lo? Lo} GMd5 GMy nNg oOr Ox? Ox3 Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr? Tr [Jolly M'-2-5-8-9 Me R Ku 
Nd] Jolly. This reading is found in some form in all the ST mss., as well as in several 
significant NT-x mss including the Old Nagari ones. The reading, once again, is 
uncertain. Me and Goappear to support the plural, whereas NG@, Ku, and Rn support the 
singular, although all these are glosses, and it is unclear what the readings of their root 
texts were. 


5.150b I have adopted the singular reading grhakdrye ca, which is supported by Me, Go, and 
Ku. Others do not comment. The reading adopted is found in Be! sBe? Be? Bo nCa Ho 
wKt} nKtt sBKt wKt® La! La? Lo* Lo’ cGMd! tMd4 GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu? Pub sPu® Pu’ Pu’ Pu? Pu!® Tj! Tr! mTr° Wa [Volly G] Laks Jha Dave. 


5.152d Several important mss., including most ST ones, have the reading sva@mi in place of 
svdmya. I have, however, opted for the latter; it is the preferred reading of all the 
commentators and is clearly the lectio difficilior. 


5.155b The support for both readings, uposanam and upositam, is strong. I have opted for the 
former, which is found in Be? wKt! La? Lo! Lo? tMd? TMd4 GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? nPul 
Pu? Pu? Pu? sPu® [cor to] Pu? Pu’ Tr! Tr? MTr4 mTr° Jolly G R Nd N] Laks Hem Dev 
Na Mandlik Jolly KSS Dave. This reading has the support of all but one ST mss. The 
alternate reading is found in Me and Rn; most commentators simply gloss upavadsam, 
making it difficult to know the reading of their root text. 


5.161d Although most mss. support the reading adopted, several commentators appear to 
presuppose the alternate reading paralokat. This reading appears to be presupposed by 
Me’s gloss: svargam na prapnoti, and possibly also by Go’s gloss: bhartra saharjitam 
svargddilokam na prapnoti. See the parallel at 5.166d. 


5.163c The reading adopted has the overwhelming support of ST and NT-x mss. and is found 
in: sBe? Be? Bo Ho Jo? wKt! nKtt 8K wKt® Lo? Lo? Lot Lo> GMd! tMd3 TMd4 GMd 
GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? NPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu? sPuS Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pul? Tj! Tr! Tr? mT r4 
MTr?® [Jolly M R Nd] Wa Laks Madh. All the editions, however, adopt the alternate 
reading, probably because it restores the regular meter. 


5.164a It is difficult to decide on the alternate spellings of srgala and Srgala. See 9.30, 11.200 
for similar confusion in the mss. I have adopted the former, which is found in: Be! 
GMd! tMd? TMd4 GMd> GMy sOx! Pu? Pu? sPuo Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! mT3r° Jolly. 


5.164c Although the alternate reading prapnoti has considerable manuscript support, I think 
that the correct reading is c@pnoti, both because it provides a better sense and because 
it is the reading of most mss. in the parallel verse at 9.30. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 5 943 


5-166—7 These two verses are omitted in the mss. containing Me’s commentary. Jolly com- 


6.4c 


6.7a 


6.10C 


6.12a 


6.16d 


6.17d 


6.19a 


ments that they are superfluous, because they are also found at 9.29-30. They are, 
however, found in all other mss., including those of the ST. Medhatithi himself com- 
ments: stridharmopasamhdraSloka rjava§$ ca stridharmd ity ato mayatra vyakhydana- 
darah krtah. It appears, then, that these verses were known to Me, although he did not 
think it necessary to comment on them. 


CHAPTER SIX 


The reading niskramya is found in all the ST mss., as well as in several NT-x ones, 
especially those containing the commentary of Me. Nevertheless, I have adopted the 
alternate reading found in most NT mss.; it is supported by the commentaries of Go, 
Ku, Rn, Nd, and Rc. The reading, however, is uncertain, with a third variant nirgatya. 


I have adopted.the reading yadbhaksah as a Bahuvrihi. This is the reading in Me and 
Go, and it is also the lectio difficilior found in Ho NKt* Lo* Lo® TMd? GMy NNg nPu! 
Pu? Pu? Pu4 Pud Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr! mTr* mTr® [Jolly M G Nd] Me Go Dave Jha. This 
reading is further supported by mss. that read yadbhaiksyah, as well as by those that 
read either yadbhaksa or yadbhaiksa, because manuscripts frequently drop the visarga 
before a sibilant. With regard to two correlatives, where the relative pronoun in the 
subordinate clause is within a compound, see Wackernagel II, 1: 32-3. 


Many mss. have the reading uttardyanam in place of turdyanam. That is clearly a 
mistake; possibly a commentarial gloss was taken over into the text. With this reading 
the pada does not scan. The reading adopted is supported by Me, Sn, Ku, Rn, and Nd. 
The only commentators who appear to support the alternate reading are Go and Mr. 


The mss. are divided over the readings tu and ca. [ have opted for the latter, which is 
found in Be! Bo 8Ca Jo? wKt! nKtt La! La? Lo? cGMd! tMd? GMd> GMy NNg Pu? Pu’? 
T? Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr® Wa lolly M'-?->-8-? G Nd R] Go Vij Laks Jolly. This reading is 
supported by most ST mss., as well as significant NT-x ones, including the old nKtt 
and NNg. The commentators are silent, except for Rc, who clearly has the reading 
adopted and glosses: ca punah. 


The reading adopted, puspdani, has the support of all but one of the ST mss., as well as 
of many NT-x ones, including the old nKt*. This reading is also supported by Me, Go, 
and Rn, whereas the alternate reading is given only by Ku and possibly by Rn, who 
says: puspaniti medhatithih, indicating that he read otherwise. The adopted reading is 
found in: Be! nBe? Ho nK¢ sKt wKt® Lo? Lot Lo’ GMd! +Md? tTMd4 GMd5 GMy Ox? 
NPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? Pu!? Tr? MTr4 mTr® Wa [Jolly M G Gr Nd] Laks Me Go Jolly. 


The reading dantoliakhalikas tathd has the support of the vast majority of NT-x mss. 
The commentators are silent on this reading. I have adopted the alternate reading, be- 
cause it is found in all the ST and NT-y mss., as well as in a substantive minority of 
NT-x ones. The adopted reading is found in: nBe* Bo sCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! wKt3 
La? Lo? Lo’ GMd! rMd? tMd4 GMd> GMy oOr Ox? Pu? Pu? Put Pu’ Tj? Tr! mT? aTr* 
MTr®, 


The reading adopted, v@nnam, has the support of all ST mss. and numerous NT ones, 


944 


6.254 


6.27b 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 6 


including the old NKt* and NN¢g. It is found in BBe Be? nCa Hy nKt BKt’ Lot GMd! 
Md? tMd* GMd> GMy NNg Ox? nPu! Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® [Jolly M Nd]Vij Jolly. 


The manuscripts are divided here with several readings: c@tmani, tvatmani, svatmani, 
and simply a@tmani. In this case, most ST mss. go with the NT-x vulgate. The com- 
mentators are silent. It is evident that some cluster of consonants preceded &tmani; 
thus the vulgate reading is erroneous. The reading I have adopted is found in: Be! nBe? 
Bo Ca Jo? wKt} BKtS wKt® La! La? Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® NNg Ox? Ox? Pu’ Pu? Pu? Pul® Tr? 
Wa [Jolly M G] Jolly. 


There is strong support for both readings: Gcaret and dharet. The latter is given in all 
the editions. It also appears to be the readings of Me, Go, and Ku. However, these 
commentators give the persons from whom one begs in the ablative: e.g. t@pasebhyah, 
grhamedhibhyo vanavasibhyah. It could well be, therefore, that @haret in the com- 
mentaries is merely a gloss and not the root. However, dharet is in one sense the lectio 
difficilior, because bhaiksam caret is the more common expression. Nevertheless, I 
have opted for @caret, because it is found in almost all ST mss. and a substantial num- 
ber of NT ones: wKt! La! Lo? GMd! tMd3 cMd5 aMy NNg [but mc] sOx! sPu® Tj! Tj? 
Tr! mTr?mTr4 MTr® [Jolly R Nd Gr] Apa. Further, @caret is grammatically better 
with the locatives then Gharet. The reading, however, is less than certain. 


6.29d The two alternate readings have strong manuscript support. I have, however, opted for 


6.37b 


6.43¢ 


6.43d 


samsiddaye, because it is clearly supported by Me, Nd, Ku, and Mr. It is found in: Be? 
Be? Bo Ho Hy Jm wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt? La! [but cor fh] La? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® cMd! 
1Md? NNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Pud Pu Pu! Tj! Tj? mTr? Wa Vij Apa and all the editions. 


The mss. give three readings: dtmajan, prajam, and sutdn. The commentators are silent 
on this word. I have adopted &tmajan because it is found in all but one ST mss. and in 
several NT-x ones, including the old NKt‘ and the Sarada mss. The reading, however, 
remains uncertain. The reading adopted is found in: Ho nKtt Lo! tMd? tMd4 GMd> 
aMy nNg oOr sOx! Pu? sPuo Pu’ Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr9 [Jolly Nd| Laks Madh. 


The reading adopted, asamcayikah, is attested in all the ST mss., as well as in a large 
number of NT-x ones and in the citations: Be! nNKtt La! Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd? rMd* 
GMd> GMy oOr sOx! Ox? Ox? Pu? Pu? Put sPu® Pu® Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr> MTr® 
Wa [Jolly N Nd Ku vl]Rc Bh Laks Apa. This reading is supported also by Bh, Na, and 
Rc. In addition, Me remarks that the alternate reading is preferred by some: anye tv 
asamkusuka iti pathanti, and gives the meaning of this unusual term. It is clear this 
was not Me’s own reading, which must have been asamcayikah. The meaning of this 
word was so obvious that Me did not think it necessary to comment. Rn, likewise, as- 
cribes the alternate reading to others: kvacid samkusuka iti pathah. Only Go, Ku, and 
Mr give the alternate reading; Ki gives the reading adopted as an alternate reading: 
asamceayika ity anye pathante. Even though I have adopted asamcayika, the alternate 
reading is clearly the lectio difficilior. Tt is easier to explain how the unusual 
asamkusuka was changed to the clear asamcayika than the other way round. Never- 
theless, in this instance I think the manuscript and commentarial evidence outweighs 
the latter criterion. 


The alternate reading has the unanimous support of all ST mss., plus several NY-x 
ones. Nevertheless, I think this is a later emendation from the more difficult 
bhavasamdahitah. This reading is given and explained by all the commentators, except 
Nd; both Bh and Me have the reading adopted. 


6.45d 


6.57b 


6.62b 


6.66a 


6.66b 


6.76a 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 6 945 


The mss. are divided over the two readings nirvesSa and nirdeSa (or nidesa). Only N& 
clearly reads nirdesSa with the gloss djfid; but he gives nirvesa as a patha. All others, 
explain the word as bhyti (“wages”), which would presuppose nirvesa. The old 
Kashmiri com. attached to sPu® also contain the gloss dhanakalam bhrter upabhoga- 
kalam ity arthah. The reading nirveSa is attested in all but one of the ST mss. It is 
found in: Ho Lo? Lo* Lo’ cMd! TMd*4 GMd> GMy Ox? Pu? Pu‘ sPu [cor to] Pu!® Tr! 
MTr¢ MTPMTr® [Jolly M] Apa Me Jolly Biihler Jha. See the parallel verse in MBh 
12.237.15, where the Poona edition has nidesam, but it is given as doubtful; the South- 
ern Recension of Telugu, Grantha, and Malayalam mss. all have nirvesa. 


Even though all ST mss., except significantly MTr*> with Bharuci’s commentary, sup- 
port the vulgate reading, I have adopted the alternate reading with the nominative 
labhas cainam. The latter is the lectio difficilior, because labhe here may have been in- 
fluenced by alabhe at the opening of pada-b. The nominative also agrees better with 
the causative harsayet, although dictionaries give also a non-causative meaning for it 
possibly depending on this verse of the MDh. The reading adopted is found in: Be! Bo 
Jo? wKt3 nKt? La! Lot Lo® oOr sOx! Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu? Pud Pu? Pu? Pul? mTr> Wa [/olly 
MR ] Apa Go Rn Jolly. \t is also supported by the parallel reading in Be? Lo! sOx! 
sPu® Tj!. The parallel verse in MBh 12.269.10 also has the reading adopted; and the 
editors do not give any variants for this pada. Although Fiihrer’s edition of VaDh 10.22 
reads (Gbhe caiva (which I followed in Olivelle 2000), I now think that the alternate 
reading /a@bhaS cainam found in the Anandaérama Sanskrit Series (48) Edition and 
some mss. (see my note to this verse) is preferable. 


All the editions follow the alternative reading samyogam ca. The commentators offer 
no help. I have adopted samprayogam, which parallels viprayogamof pdda-a, because 
it is found in all the ST mss., as well as several NT-x ones, including the old nKt* and 
NNg. This reading is found in: Bo Jo? wKt} NK Lo? Lo? Ox? GMd! 1Md? tMd* GMd> 
GMy NNg oOr nPu! Pu‘ Tj! Tr! Tr MTr4 MTr® [/olly Nd] Apa. 


The reading adopted, bhiisito, is attested in most NT-x mss., as well as a couple ST 
ones. It is also supported by the glosses of Me and N& This reading is found in: Be! 
Be? (but cor sh) Bo Ho wKt! wKt nKt* BK wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo® GMd! rMd* 
NNg oOrsOx! Ox? Ox? NPu! Pu? Put Pu> sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu? Pu!? Tj! Tj? Wa [Jolly M G 
N] Me Go Na Dave Jha Jolly. 


The two alternative readings, vasan and ratah, have strong manuscript support. The 
commentators are by and large silent on this word, except for Go and Ku, and their 
gloss sthitah appears to support the former. I have also gone with the former, because 
it is found in all but two ST mss., as well as in many NT-x ones and in the citations. It 
is found in: BBe? Be? Jo? wKt! La! [cor to sh] Lo? Lo? Md? GM@ GMy oOr sOx! Ox? 
Pu? Pud sPu® [but cor} Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! mT 14 MTr® [Jolly M'2 G R Ku Nd] Go Vij Apa. 


It is very difficult to choose between the two readings: sndyubaddham and sna@yu- 
yutam. The latter appears to be the /ectio difficilior, and it violates the meter; the Sloka 
does not permit short the sixth and seventh syllables. The parallel in MBh 12.316.42 
also has this reading, although Telugu and Grantha mss. have the alternate reading. 
Nevertheless, I have adopted the former, principally because it is found in all the ST 
mss. and is presupposed by the glosses of Me, Go, and Ku. Even though Me’s com- 
ment srdyund baddham may be simply a gloss on yutam, yet the parallel comment on 
pdda-c dehacarmand avanaddham indicates that Me probably read baddham. The 


946 


6.92c 


6.93a 


6.94Cc 


6.95¢ 


7.6a 


7.13b 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 6 


reading adopted is found in: Be! Jo? GMd! tMd4 GMd> cMy sOx! Ox? Pu sPuS Pu? Pu? 
Tr! Tr mT‘ MTr°, and also supported by the variant in TMd? MTr°. 


There is strong support for the alternate reading hrir vidyd especially by the ST mss. 

and several commentators. Nevertheless, I think the correct reading is dhir vidyd, be- 
cause it is presupposed by the glosses of both Bh and Me and has the broadest manu- 
script support. 


There are several variant readings of this pada caused, I believe, by the fact that in the 
original reading the pada is hypermetric. The most common correction is 
daSalaksanakam dharmam, which is the lectio facilior and influenced by the reading 
of pdda-a in the preceding and following verses. It is hard to see how such a reading 
would have been changed into the hypermetric daSalaksandni dharmasya. The other 
attempt at correction kept the plural and the genitive in place but changed laksandni to 
cthnd@ni, thus restoring the meter. Two scribes appear to have restored the meter simply 
by omitting the plural ending and using dasalaksana, creating a grammatically impos- 
sible formation. The three mss. of Go, Pu’ Pu’ Pu’, show the confusion created by the 
two readings; the scribes give both readings almost superimposed on each other: 
daSalaksanani dharmasya nikam dharmam. The scribe of Pu’ attempted to improve on 
this without much success: daSalakanikam dharmasya, with a marginal notation giving 
the pdtha: laksanani dharmasya. The reading adopted is found in: Be? Ho Hy Jm Jo! 
wKt! K? wKt} nK® wKt® Lo? GMd! tMd4 GMd> NNg sOx! nPu! sPu® Tj! T? mTr3 mT3r4 
MT?r°. The reading is supported by the glosses of Go and Ku; others are silent. 


It is surprising that all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the singular veddntam 
when the overwhelming manuscript evidence and the commentators support the plural. 
The glosses of Me, Go, Na, and Rn presuppose the plural. The reading adopted is 
found in: Be! nBe? Bo nCa Ho Jo? wKt? nKt* wKt® La? Lo! Lo? Lo® Lo? Lo’ TMd+ 
GMd? NNg oOr Ox? Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Pu® Pu? Pu! Tj! Tr! mTr¢mTr> Wa 
[Jolly M\ Laks. 


This is one instance that I have rejected the reading supported by a majority of the 
mss., including ST ones. I have adopted the present participle abhyasyan in preference 
to the gerund abhyasya. \t makes better sense in the context and has the support of 
most commentators: Me, Go, Na, and Nd. It appears that the source Me was using had 
the reading abhyasya. His gloss indicates that his preference was for the participle: 
abhyasyann iti Satrpratyayantapatho va. Jha also interprets vd here as indicating Me’s 
preference. The reading adopted is found in: Jo? Lo? GMd° oOr sOx! Pu? sPuS Pu? Pu® 
Tj? Tr! [Jolly G N Nd R] Jolly. 


CHAPTER SEVEN 


The orthographic difference between eva and esa, especially in the northern scripts, is 
slight. Yet, I think the overwhelming manuscript evidence supports eva, even though 
all the editors opt for esa. Jolly gives no variants, and Go appears to support esa. The 
reading adopted is found in: Be! Be? Bo Ho wKt! wKt} nKt* BKt’ wKt® La? Lo! cMd! 
TMd? tMd* GMy oOr sOx! Ox? Pub sPu Pu8 Tr! Tr? mT? MTr* MTP? MTr® Laks Madh. 


The reading samvyavasyet is attested in: Be? nCa Hy Jo? wKt! wKt} La! Lo! Lo? Lo? 
GMd? cMy nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr4 MT Jolly. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 947 


7.31¢ Three major readings are found in the mss.: (a) dandah pranayitum Sakyah, (b) dandah 
pranetum Sakyas tu, and (c) pranetum Sakyate dandah. The second is a variant of the 
first and is found in all the ST mss. I have adopted the first, which is found in: nBe* Ho 
Jo? wKt! wKt La! Lo? Lot NNg oOrsOx! Ox? nPu! sPu® Tj! Tr? mT? Re Laks Jolly. 


7.32a There is strong manuscript support for both readings: ny@yavrttih and nydyavrttah. J 
have adopted the former, however, because it is found in all the ST mss., as well as in 
many NT-x ones. The adopted reading is found in: Be! wKt? Lo* Lo® GMd! tMd? tMd?4 
GMd aMy NNg Ox? Pu? Pu? Tr! mTr* Wa [Jolly M Me G Nd]Laks Me Jolly. In his 
notes, Jolly indicates that this reading is found in Me and that the alternate reading is 
given as a pdtha by Me. The editions of Jha and Dave give just the opposite. My own 
mss., however, support Jolly. The commentary of Bh also clearly supports vrttih, even 
though the root text gives vittah. 


7.54b The mss. are divided over the two readings kulodgata and kulodbhava, something en- 
countered also at 7.62, 63, 141. In this verse, there is strong manuscript support for the 
latter reading also, but in the parallel verses the support is much less. I have opted for 
kulodgata in all the occurrences. 


7.58c The mss. are divided over the readings mantrayeta param and mantrayet paramam. 
Although this verb generally takes the Atmanepada, see the clearly Parasmaipada 
ending at 7.146. Commentators offer no help. Me has param, but it is unclear whether 
it is the root or a gloss. Although the reading is uncertain and editors have generally 
opted for the latter, I have gone with the former because it is found in the best and the 
widest array of mss., including most ST ones: Be! wKt} NKt’ BK} wKt§ La! Lo! Lo? 
Lo4 Lo® aMd! rMd4 GMd> nNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu? mTr> Wa. 


7.62ab There appears to be something amiss in this verse. See my note to the translation for a 
detailed analysis. 


7.67d It is unclear whether the original reading in this pada also was krtyesu as in pada-a. It 
has the support of all the ST mss. and of several NT-x ones. I have decided to keep 
bhytyesu in this pada, because of the broad manuscript support and because krtyesu 
here may have been influenced by the same word in pdda-a, and because the ca in this 
pada calls for something different from kytyesu. The reading, however, is somewhat 
uncertain. See the note to the translation regarding the meaning of this verse. 


7.70a, c In pdda-a the reading ca is found in: Be! Bo nCa Ho Jo? wKt} La! La? Lo! tMd3 
GMd> GMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr4mTr® Wa Vis Volly G]; and in 
pdada-c it is found in: Be! Bo nCa Ho Jo? nK¢ BKt wKt® La? Lo! Lo? TMd? GMy nNg 
sOx! Ox? Pu? Put Pu? sPuo Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr* Tr WaVis Vij Madh. 


7.744 Even though all editions read vidhiyate, all the ST mss. and most NT ones record the 
reading visisyate, which has been adopted. See the parallel use of visisyate in verse 71. 
The use of this term is most appropriate if, as attested by several commentators, this 
verse is not a prescription of a fortress in general but a recommendation of a particular 
type of fortress, either one built with an earthen rampart [Bharuci] or a hill fortress 
[Raghavananda]. See my comment in the note to the translation. The reading adopted 
is found in: Be? Bo Ho Jm Jo? wKt! wKt3 La! La? Lo? GMd! tMd? tMdé GMd5 GMy oOr 
sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPué Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® Wa [Jolly R Nd] Laks. 


7.85¢ I have constructed a conjectural reading for this pdda. I think the scribes and com- 
mentators tried to clarify and correct two problems with the original reading: the un- 


948 


7.86b 


7.86X 


7-978 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 


usual word pradhita and the final four syllables of the p@da which are all long and thus 
does not scan. For pradhita there are two variants: Gcdrya and Srotriya. In the parallel 
passage of the GDh 5.20 the term is Srotriya. The term Gcarya in this position is un- 
likely, both because Manu normally follows Gautama and because all the other terms 
indicate personal qualities rather than a relationship to the donor. I think pradhita was 
the original in Manu, a term very rare and used only two other times in the Dharma lit- 
erature, once in the GDh itself at 16.44 and once in ViDh 93.3, which is a citation of 
this very pada and reads: sahasragunam prdadhite, just as my conjectural reading. An- 
other reason for the alterations may have been to restore the cadence to the pdda. This 
is especially true for the reading prddhite Satasdhasram. Manu, however, has numer- 
ous verses which violate metrical principles, including hypermetric pdadas (see Intro- 
duction, p. 37). Another reason favoring the conjectural reading is that all the other 
padas open with a number, the second and third containing the word guna and 
bracketed by the first and the last having sama and ananta. The reading Gcdarya is 
supported by Me and Na, and pradhite by Go, Ku, and Mr. The reading sahasragunam 
has the support of Na, all ST mss. and a substantial number of NT-x ones, whereas Go 
and Ku support SatasGhasram. 


Even though a large group of mss. have the reading tathaiva, nevertheless it is evident 
that the correct reading should be the instrumental sraddadhanatayaiva paralleling 
visesena of pdda-a. The former is also the /ectio facilior, and it is easy in the northern 
scripts to mistake tha for ya. The reading adopted is found in: pBe? BCa Hy Jo! Jo? 
wKt! Kt? wKt} nKtt La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot Lo® GMd! tMd4 GMd? sOx! Ox? sPuo Tj? Tr! 
MTr MTr4 MTP MTr® Wa. 


The additional verse dese kale is accepted as part of the MDh by Jha and given within 
brackets after verse 85 by Jolly. It is clearly a spurious verse recorded in only three 
mss. Its claim to authenticity is the fact that Me comments on it. However, it appears 
that this verse is actually a citation by Me in his commentary on verse 86. This is dem- 
onstrated by the fact that, after he comments on this additional verse, Me returns to his 
commentary on 86 and completes it with his comments on the word pretya. Nowhere 
else does Me return to the previous verse after commenting on a subsequent verse of 
the MDh. Thus, the added verse must be an extraneous verse cited by Me in his eluci- 
dation of verse 86. 


The reading here is uncertain. I have opted for rdjfie, because it is attested in the best 
mss., including all but two of the ST and the old nKt! and Ng. Further, the dative is 
supported by Me, Go, and Ku. 


7.101¢ Scharfe (1993, 47, n. 20) suggests reading buddhyda for vrddhyd. Although this reading 


is appealing, eliminating as it does the tautology (vardhayed vrddhya), it is found in 
very few mss. The reading vrddhyda appears also to be the /ectio difficilior because the 
commentators had to explain it. Bharuci, for example, says: atra vrddhyartham updayo 
vrddhisabdenocyate, prakaranasaGmarthyat. 


7.101d Even though all the editions have the reading pdtresu niksipet (same as pdda-d of 99), 


the overwhelming majority of the mss. records the reading d@nena, which I have 
adopted: BBe* Be? Bo BCa Jo! Jo? Ho Hy wKt! K? wKt nKtt BK wKt® La! Lo? Md! 
TMd? +Md‘4 GM@? oOr Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr3 MTr4 MTr® [Jolly M8] Mr. I also think that 
this was the reading of most commentators. Bharuci, for example, glosses: da@nena 
patresu niksipet. Here Derrett has taken pd@tresu as the root (so also the root in MT?°), 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 949 


but I think Bharuci saw d@nena as the root and gave pdtresu as a gloss because the 
object of the giving is left unstated in the root. At 99, for example, Bharuci did not feel 
the need for a gloss because there the root was pdtresu. Likewise, Kullika: vrddham 
Sastriyavibhagena patrebhyo dadyat. Here Sastriyavibhdgena appears to gloss danena 
with the addition, once again, of the object of the giving with pdtrebhyah. Kullika also 
did not feel the need for such an explanation at 99 where the root is pdtresu. 


7.106 The vast majority of the mss., including several ST ones, transpose pada-b and pada-d. 
This order is supported by Na@, Ku, Rn, Rd, and Rc, and found also in the parallel verse 
of the MBh 12.138.25; the critical edition notes no variants, indicating that the MBh and 
the MDh traditions diverge markedly on this point. The commentators are of immense 
help here. All the ancient one—-Bh, Me, and Go—support the order I have adopted, 
which is also found in the following mss.: Lo* Lo’ cMd! TMd? tMd4 GMy Ox? Pu? Pu4 
Pu? Pu’ MTr® MTr* MTr®. Note that most ST mss. and the ones with Medhatithi’s 
commentary follow the order I have adopted. I think that this order also makes better 
sense. Running away goes well with the brooding mentioned in the first line, and 
attacking like a lion fits the tearing to pieces like a wolf in the second line. 


7.114d All the NT mss., as well as two ST ones, read samgram in place of guptaye. I have 
conjecturally adopted the latter, a reading found in most ST mss. This also appears to 
have been the reading of Bh, who, in commenting on verses 113 and 114, makes a clear 
distinction between civil administration addressed in the 113 and public safety ad- 
dressed in 114: rajabha@vyasamgrahartham raksartham ca. The distinction between 
samgraha and gupti is also clearly made in the parallel passage of MBh 12.88.1: 
rastraguptiin ca me rajan rastrasyaiva ca samgraham | samyag jijidnamandya 
prabrithi bharatarsabha | The use of samgraham in verse 114 makes the syntax of the 
sentence impossible, with two separate objects (gulmam and sam graham) of the verb 
kuryat. The commentators try to explain this with limited success. Several take 
samgraha to be a kind of a police station (raksdsthdna), but that is the meaning of 
guima as attested in the AS 2.16.18 (with Kangle’s note); 2.35.12; 3.20.14. We have 
parallel constructions with guptaye at the end of pa@da-d in the MDh 1.94, 99. We also 
have frequently a dative of purpose at the end of the verse or half-verse: 6.30; 7.109, 
167, 215; 8.368; 11.12, 53, 106, 138, 139, 164, 181, 209. The use of sam graham here 
may have been influenced by its use in the previous verse and the close presence of 
kuryat in the same pada. The reading adopted in supported by Bh and Nd and found in: 
aMd! tMd‘ mTr4 MTr> MTr°Nd Laks. The dative is also supported by the variant 
reading in GMd>. The reading of the pada, nevertheless, remains uncertain. For a study 
of this verse, see Numata 1999. For the construction with guptaye at the end of the 
verse, see YDh 1.198, 321; BrSm 1.28; MBh 12.69.24; 12.73.6, 7. 


7.126b Most mss. and all editions have the reading vetanam, which is clearly the lectio fa- 
cilior. All the ancient commentators support the reading bhaktakam. So, Bhcomments 
on the two verses 126 and 127: bhaktaprakiptih Slokadvayena. Likewise Me comments: 
bhaktartham pano deyah; and Go: pano vaksyamanah sa jaghanyabhrtakasya 
bhaktartham pratyaham datavyah. Similarly, Na and Rc also support this reading with 
the gloss: bhaktakam bhrtih. See also the parallel term bhakta in verse 127. See Intro- 
duction, p. 36 for further comments. The reading adopted has the unanimous support 
of the ST mss. and of several NT-x ones and is found in: Be? NKt* Lo? cGMd! tMd? 
tMd* GM GMy oOr Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Tr! Tr‘ MTr MTr® Wa Volly G Nd] Laks. 


7.134d Even though all the editions have adopted the reading acirenaiva, the overwhelming 


950 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 


manuscript evidence, including most ST mss., is in favor of acirdd eva. It is supported 
by Go, the only commentator to note the term. The adopted reading is found in: Be! 
Be? nCa Jo? wKt! wKt? nKt* La! [but cor sh] Lo? Lo? GMd! TMd3 GMd GMy oOr Pu? 
Put Tj! Tr! mTr4 MTP mTr® Wa Mddh. 


7.143d The mss. record a variety of readings, possibly because the scribes failed to under- 
stand the two pithy sentences within this pada. | take mytah sah as one sentence; and 
na sa jivati as a second. The reading adopted is supported in various ways by several 
mss., especially the ST ones. It is found in Jo? wKt! La! Lo? Lo’ Ox? Tj! mTr5 [Jolly 


M] Jolly. 


7.145c All editions have the Bahuvrihi hutdgnih. The best mss., including all the ST ones, 
however, give the gerund furtvd, a reading I have adopted. It also accords well with the 
ca at carcya. The reading adopted with the singular agnim is found in: Ho Jo? wKt 
BKt> Lo? GMd! tMd? GMd> GMy NNg Tj! Tr! mTr* MTr® Wa [Jolly R Nd] Rn Dev. 


7.146a Several mss. have the plural sthitah qualifying prajah. Professor Wezler (personal 
communication) finds this quite an attractive interpretation. See, however, the similar 
expression at 8.2, where the one standing is clearly the king. 


7.149b The reading adopted, vayo’ dhikdn, is found in: Be? Hy Jo? NK¢ nKt® wKt® Lo! Lo? 
TM? tMd4 GMa GMy Ox? Pu} Tj! T}? Tr! Tr? mTr3 mTr4 MTr° [Jolly R Nd]Rn Mr. See 
the note to 4.141 for further comments. 


7.161b The reading adopted is found in all but one of the ST mss. and in most NT-x ones. It is 
supported by Bh, Me, and Ga. It is also the lectio difficilior, the gerunds being changed 
to the substantives in imitation of the other terms of the sixfold strategy. See the usage 
of the gerunds in the parallel passage in AS 7.4.4. The reading adopted in found in: Be! 
Bo nCa nKt! La! La? Lo? Lo* Lo® cMd! rMd? GMy NNg Ox? Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Tr! mTr4 
MTYr MT?® [Jolly M*>°G Nd Ku] Na (patha) Laks Jolly. 


7.163¢ Mandlik, Jolly, Jha, and KSS take tadd as a separate word: tadd tvdyatisamyuktah. 
This is clearly an error. Biihler translates tadatva correctly: “An alliance which yields 
present and future advantages.” This is also the clear understanding of Bh, Go, Na@, Rn, 
Nd, and Mr. Only Rc takes tadda as a separate word. See taddtva used again at 7.169. 


7.164c ] have adopted the reading mitrena even though the majority of the mss. and all the 
editions record mitrasya. The reading adopted is clearly the lectio difficilior, and it is 
attested by the all ST mss. plus a sizable number of NT-x ones. Even more impor- 
tantly, it is the reading of Bh, Go, and Nd, and is given as an alternate reading by Me. It 
appears that the reading mitrasya gained popularity because of its adoption by Me; for 
example, Ku and Rn says that Go has the reading mitrena, but that they follow Me in 
reading mitrasya. We have a clear explanation of mitrena given by Bh: yasya 
parasyamitras tadvijigisor mitram. tena yada parasyapakriyate tadvijigisor mitrend- 
pakyte vyasanini pare viparito vigrahah. This explanation is paraphrased by Go. See 
the construction with mitrena in the very next verse dealing with the two kinds of 
march into battle. The reading adopted is found in: Be! NK¢' La! Lo? GMd! tMd*4 GMd5 
oOr Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Tr! MTr4 MTP MT? [Jolly G]. 


7.167b Although all the editions read karyarthasiddhaye, the reading adopted is supported by 
all the ST mss., plus a large number of NT-x ones. The gloss of B# also supports drop- 
ping artha: svakdryasiddhim kurydat. The reading adopted is found in: Bo Ho nK¢ La! 
La? Lo! Lo? Lot Lo® cMd! tTMd3 tMd4 GMd5 GMy oOr sOx! sPuo Tr! mTr4 MTP MTr® 
Laks (Jolly M*}. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 951 


7.168¢ I have adopted the reading vyapadesas ca even though it is found in a minority of mss. 


The major reason for adopting it is that it was probably the reading of the two oldest 
commentators, Bh and Me. The clearest isMe, who gives the reading of the majority as 
an alternate reading: pathantaram vyapadesdartham iti. In the commentary, Me 
explains: vyapadeSaS cdpidite ’ pi Ggamipidaparihdrdya vyapadesartham anyam 
samSrayet. Here we have vyapadesartham used in explaining vyapadesah. This, I 
think, is true also of Bh, who comments: sGdhusv avyapadesartham. Here also -artham 
is used in the gloss to explain the root text, which in Bh also is in the nominative. Bh’s 
use of the negative avyapadeSa is noteworthy, even though with just one extant ms. it 
is impossible to say whether this is merely a scribal error. I think that the reading of the 
glosses in these two ancient commentators may have influenced the alteration of the 
root text also to vyapadeSaGrtham, with the added influence of the parallel 
arthasampddanartham in pdda-a. The reading adopted is found in: Be? Ho wKt? nKtt 
wKkt) TMd3 rMd4 GMd? GMy Laks, and is supported by La! wKt® nPu! MTP. 


7.170d All ST mss. and a large number of NT-x ones support manyeta, the reading adopted. 


The commentators gloss with @srayet and adhyavasyet, but it is unclear what term they 
are glossing. The adopted reading is found in: Bo nCa nKf BK wKt® La* Lo? Lo* Lo® 
cMd! +Md3 +Md4 cMd° cMy sOx! Ox} Pu? Put PuS sPuo Pu? Tr! Tr Tr? mTr> mTr® 
{Jolly M G] Re Laks. 


7.172d The reading of the last word is quite unclear; the mss. are divided over the singular 


and the plural, as well as the word: ari or ripu. Both the early commentators, Bh and 
Me, prefer the singular arim. The gloss Satriin of Go and Ku supports the plural, leav- 
ing the term in the root unspecified. The evidence points in the direction of both the 
singular and the term ari. This is supported by arim in the very next verse; the sur- 
rounding verses also use the singular. The reading adopted is found in: nCa Jo? Lo? Lo® 
GMd! tMd3 tMd4 NNg oOrnPu! Pu? Put MTP MTr® [Jolly M8? Me R NdJolly. 


7.176d Among the three major variants recorded in the mss., nirvitarkah has the broadest 


support, including that of Bh, Rn, and Rc and of all ST mss. It is unclear what reading 
is supported by the gloss of Me: nirvikdrah. The reading adopted is found in: nBe? Bo 
Ho wKt! wKt} La? Lo? GM@ sOx! sPu® Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr4 MTr> MTr° | Jolly M' R Nd] Bh 
Rn Re Jolly. 


7.200c The reading adopted, samzyatto, is clearly the lectio difficilior and is found in: Be! Bo 


7.213 


BCa Ho Hy Jo? wKt! wKt nK¢ La! La? Lo! Lo? cMd! nNg sOx! Pu? Pu sPuS Pu? Pu® 
Tj! Tr? mTr*mTr° [Jolly G R Nd]Go Rc Madh Jolly. Note also the orthographic simi- 


larity between “p” and “y” and between “tt” and “nn” in northern scripts. Thus, sam- 
yatta can easily be read as sampanna. 


Many mss., especially the ST ones, have gerundives in place of the finite verbs in 
padas a-c. Derrett (1975, II: 83) supports the gerundive reading, referring among others 
to the ST reading of MBh 5.37.17 with the same reading. Although there is much to 
commend the gerundive readings, I have opted to keep the finite verbs. The main rea- 
son is that even the ST mss. are divided on this, TMd?, GMd°, and cMy giving the finite 
verbs always, while mTr* has the finite verb in padas a-b, and mTr° in pdda-a. The 
overwhelming majority of the mss. support the reading adopted. 


7.215d Even though all the editions read arthasiddaye (and Jolly surprisingly records no 


variants), the reading adopted has the overwhelming support of the ST and NT-x mss., 
as well as that of Go and Rn. The fragmentary gloss of BA also appears to support it. 


952 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 7 


The adopted reading is found in: Be! Be? Ca Ho nKt' BK wKt® La! La? Lo! Lo? 
GMd! tMd? GMd® GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Ox} nPu! Pu? Pu? Put sPué Pu? Pu® Tj? Tr! Tr? 
MT?r MTP MTr® Wa Laks. 


7.216d All editions read viset. However, all the ST mss. and a substantial number of NT-x 


ones have the reading vrajet: sBe? Be? BCa nKt* La! Lo* Lo5 cGMd! tTMd? 1Md‘4 cMd> 
oMy NNg Ox? nPu! Tj? Tr! mTr4 MTrmTr° Laks The gloss of Me, ydydad, is somewhat 
ambiguous, but probably supports vrajet more than viset. 


7.218a The reading udakath is found in all ST mss. It appears to be supported by Me, al- 


though the mss. simply give the pdda without comment; hence, it is unclear whether 
this is merely a scribal insertion or whether it was the reading of Me. The reading 
adopted is supported by Go, Ku (both with gloss ausadhaih), Rn, and Re, and is found 
in almost all the NT mss. 


7.218b Mss. are divided over the verb. I have adopted nejayet, which fits the context of 


sprinkling a liquid antidote better and is also supported by both ST and NT-x mss: 
wKt! sKtS wKt® La! Lo? Lo*GMd! tMd3 GMd> GMy Ox? MTr* MTPMTr’ [/olly M GN 
Nd] Na@ Nd Re Laks Jolly. 


7.226a The reading adopted, vrttam, is supported by Me and Na, as well as all the ST mss. 


8.11¢ 


8.13a 


8.16b 


8.304 


and a number of NT-x ones, including the old nK®’. I also think that is fits the context 
better than vidhdnam. The reading adopted in found in: Be? nKt* La! Lo? GMd! tMd? 
TMd4 GMd? GMy Pu? Put Tr! mTr4 MTr> MTro [Jolly Nd] Vij Laks. 


CHAPTER EIGHT 


The reading adopted is supported by Bh, Me, and Nd. The two latter commentators 
gloss prakrtah with adhikrtah, and this may have been the source of the reading intro- 
duced into the text. For the unusual term prakrta found in the vocabulary of the AS, see 
my note to the translation of this verse. The adopted reading is found in: sBe* Bo pCa 
Ho La! Lo* Lo? GMd! rMd? tTMd4 NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu® Tr! mTr* 
MTP MTr° WaLaks Dev. 


The reading adopted is supported by Me and Go. The alternate is given by Ku and Rn, 
but Ku acknowledges the correctness of Me’s reading: medhdatithind tu sabha va na 
pravestavyd iti rjv eva pathitam. This reading is found in: Bo Ho Hy Jo* nKt Lo! Lo? 
GMd! tMd? GMd> GMy sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pu> sPu® Pu? Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTr 
MTr° Wa [Jolly M G N R Nd] Vij Apa Dev Jha Jolly. Cf. NSm Md 3.9. 


Most mss., including all NT ones, have the reading alam. This is also the reading in 
MBh12.91.13. Several ST mss., however, as well as many southern mss. of the MBA, 
record the reading /ayam. This reading fits nicely with the phonetic etymology of 
vrsala. Yet, I think, alam here is the lectio difficilior precisely because layam is more 
easily connected to the “la” of vrsala. All the commentators take the reading to be 
alam. 


All the manuscripts have the compound pranastasv@mikam, and most commentators, 
including Bh and Me, explain it as a Bahuvrihi compound. It is odd, however, to call 
the owner pranasta; this term is usually applied to lost property and not to a lost or ab- 


8.31b 


8.32a 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 953 


sent owner (see the note to the translation of this verse for further details). Following 
the parallel passage in GDh10.36, I propose that the original reading was pranastam 
asvamikam riktham, with a hypermetricpdda; or, perhaps, pranastdsvamikam riktham. 
This interpretation, where pranasta refers to lost property and asvdmikam to such 
property whose owner is unknown, appears to be supported by the commentary of Go 
(which is reproduced almost verbatim by Ku): aji@yamdnasvamikam [Ku 
ajfiatasvamikam| dhanam rd@ja@ kasya kim pranastam ity evam patahadinakhydya 
dvdrddau varsatrayam sthapayet. 


The alternate reading, anwyojyah, is found in most mss.; it is also the reading of Me, 

Go, Ku, and Rn. Only Nd supports the reading I have adopted; Bh, unfortunately, does 

not comment. The adopted reading is found mostly in the ST mss., but with the support 

of the old nKt‘ and several other NT ones: wKt! nKt‘ La! [but cor sh] GMd! tMd? tMd4 
GMd3 GMy oOr Tr! mTr* MTré mTr®, and the partial support of Pu’. I think this is the 
correct reading. It fits the syntax better, with the main clause of the correlative con- 

struction containing a single verb arhati. With the gerundive anuyojyah, which has to 

be taken as a verb substitute, we have to insert another pronoun as the subject of 

samvadya and arhati. As it is, the sentence moves smoothly: “He” — after he has been 

interrogated and identified the objects properly — “is (judged to be) the owner and de- 
serves to get the article.” 


Although the reading avedaydno nastasya is adopted in all the editions, the reading of 
the critical edition is supported by all the ST mss. and a considerable number of NT-x 
ones. The reading pranastasya, moreover, fits with the use of the same word in the sur- 
rounding verses and is supported by the presence of avedayan in other variant read- 
ings. The reading adopted is found in: Ho La! [cor to] Lo? GMd! rMd? tMd‘ cGMd 
aMy sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Tr! Tr? mTr? mTr® Wa [Jolly Nd]. 


8.35b All the ST mss. have the reading hetund or hetutah. Even though MTr° has mdnavah, 


the commentary of Bh has the gloss kdranatah, which may at first sight support the 
southern reading. However, I think that the word hetund/hetutah may have entered the 
manuscript tradition precisely through such a gloss explaining satyena. We have in Me 
a similar gloss: satyena pramdnena. 


8.45b Both Bh and Me read s&ksinam in apposition to dtmanam. Bh comments: pasyed atma- 


8.51b, 


8.52c 


nam sdksinam krtva. Likewise, Me using very similar words: etac catma@nam sadksinam 
krtva gavesaniyam. But Me recognizes the other reading taking Gtmdnam as a separate 
item, and comments: asmin pakse saksina iti svatantram padam. All other commenta- 
tors opt for saksinah, which is supported by the majority of both ST and NT mss. 


52d In both these places karana is clearly the correct reading and not kdrana, which 
was adopted by Jolly. For karana as a legal instrument, see NSm 1.83, 117, 122, and 
MDh 8.57 (where most mss. read karana), 154. This reading is also recorded in the B-R 
under MDA 8.51, 154. 


Here and in the following verses, the reading deSa is clearly superior. It is found in the 
parallel passage in AS 3.1.19. For the meaning of desa as documentary evidence, see 
my note to the translation of this verse. The change to desya probably occurred be- 
cause the original Arthasastric meaning of desa had become obsolete. In this verse, the 
reading desa is found in: Bo wKt} nKt* La! Lo? Lot Lo® GMd! rMd? tMd4 GMy nNg 
Ox? nPu! Pu? PuS Pu? Tr! [but cor sh] Tr‘ mTr° Wa [Jolly M G N Nd] Me Bh Na Go 
Nd Jolly Jha Der (not mTr°]. 


954 


8.574 


8.57d 


8.58b 


8.69d 


8.774 


8.80a 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 


The reading s@ksinah is found in some NT mss. and is used in the vulgate editions. The 
overwhelming majority of mss. and all ancient commentators, however, have the 
reading jiiatadrah, which is also the lectio difficilior. Medhatithi glosses jfatarah with 
saksinah, and that may have been the source of the vulgate reading. The reading mery 
uktva contains a double sandhi [me+iti= ma iti>mety|. Kumarila (on PMS 1.3.24) 
notes this irregularity: santi ma ity uktveti vaktavye vydkaranam anepeksyaiva samhita 
kita. 


Most mss. of both the NT and the ST record the reading hinam tam api. Nevertheless, I 
think the correct reading is hinam tam iti. The grammatical problem in this construc- 
tion was already noted by Medhatithi, who explains the irregularity of an accusative 
with ivi by saying that ii here refers to the manner in which the decision should be 
made and is not used to mark a direct quote: hinam tam iti dvitiydntah pathah | 
itiSabdah praka@rdrtho drastavyah | ebhir uktaih prakarair anyats caivamvidhair 
hinam tam nirdiget. He notes that if iti is taken in the normal sense, then the reading 
should have been hino ’ sav iti, which is the reading of Dev. Bharuci likewise reads itt 
and explains it as having the meaning of evam. I think scribes and reader may have 
changed iti to api_to “correct” the grammar of the sentence. The reading iti is sup- 
ported by: BK Lo? GMd! nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pud Pu? mTr* MTromTr° Wa [Jolly M G| Bh Me 
Go Jolly Jha Dave. 


I have followed the reading of the overwhelming majority of mss. The orthographic 
distinction between “b” and “‘v,” especially in northern scripts, is slight, however, and 
there appears to have been a confusion in the tradition as to the precise word and its 
meaning. Both Bh and Me gloss the word with bandhana, that is, imprisonment. They 
appear to assume the reading bandhyah. The reading is uncertain, although the mss. in 
southern scripts, where the distinction between the two letters is clearer, support 
vadhya. 


Even though all editions have Sarirasydpi, the reading adopted, Sarirasyaiva, has broad 
support of both ST and NT-x mss.: Be! pBe? Ca Jo? wKt! wKt NKf! La! Lo? Lo* Lo4 
Lo’ GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? sPuS Tj! Tr! mTr4mTr> mTr° folly M4 
R Ndj. 


The main question here is whether the readings should be (a)lubdha and asaksi. One 
reading found in most NT mss. and several ST ones is (a)lubdha with the positive 
sdakst. | have adopted this reading, which is also supported by Bharuci. However, 
Medhatithi and Govinda prefer the positive reading /ubdha and the negative asaksi. 
Kulltka, who prefers the former, clearly states the position of his two predecessors: 
medhatithigovindarajabham eko lubdhas tv asaksi sydd iti pathitam vyadkhyatam ca. 
According to their interpretation, the prohibition of a single greedy individual implic- 
itly permits a single individual free from greed to be a witness. This is a round about 
way of stating the obvious. The whole purpose of the verse is to contrast the preference 
of males over females when it comes to judicial testimony. Clearly, the thrust of the 
verse was lost on some readers. In pdda-b also, some mss. convert the negative to a 
positive: Sucyo 'pi ca striyah, implying that even women can testify if they are pure 
and honest. 


I have adopted the reading vittha, which is obviously the correct one. The manuscript 
tradition, however, appears to have had a lot of trouble with this word; hence the nu- 
merous variants. See the parallel at 1.33. Besides being supported by many of the vari- 
ants, the adopted reading is found in Be! wKP Jo? NK La! My Pu’ Tj! Dev Jolly. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 955 


8.81b The original reading of this pada is quite unclear. I have opted for prapnoti over 
Gpnoti, mostly because the Grantha and Telugu mss. (Be* Md! tMd? tTMd* cMd?° 
GMy) as well as several NT ones have this reading. The alternate reading, however, 
also has strong support, including the Malayam mss. With regard to puskalan, which I 
have adopted, and anuttamdn, on the other hand, there is stronger support for the for- 
mer. The latter is confined to some NT mss. 


8.85c Although all the editions have adopted the reading ta@ms tu, all the ST mss. and a sub- 
stantial number of NT-x ones record the reading adopted tam ca: Be! nBe? Bo wKt? 
NKt* La! Lo? GMd! tMd3 1Md4 GMy nNg Pu3 Pud Pu? Tr! MTr4 MTP MTr® WaGo Laks. 


8.88d Even though a plurality of the mss. have the reading sarvais tu patakaih, I think the ST 
mss. have retained the original reading ebhis tu patakaih. This reading is also sup- 
ported by many important NT mss. such as the old NKtt and NNg. A very similar verse 
is found at 8.113 where the reading is sarvais tu. In that verse (= NSm 1.181) this read- 
ing is appropriate and is supported by almost all the mss. It is possible that that reading 
may have influenced the reading in this verse. Here ebhih is appropriate, because the 
consequences of perjury are enumerated in the subsequent verses. Medhatithi’s gloss 
vaksyamanaih patakaih also supports the adopted reading, which is found in: Be* nKt! 
BKt> Lo? GMd! tMd‘4 GMd> GMy NNg Ox? Pu? Put Pud Pu’ Tr! [but mc sh] MTr? Wa 
[Jolly Me M8~° G Nd] Apa Me Go Jolly. Medhatithi also cites this pada in his com- 
mentary to 8.99 with precisely this reading. 


8.93a There is strong manuscript support for both readings: kapali ca and kapdlena. I have 
opted for the latter, because it is found in most ST mss. and in the parallel passage at 
VaDh 16.33, and it fits with the surrounding adjectives describing the sinner. This 
reading appears to be supported by Go with the gloss karparena yuktah and by Ku with 
karparenopaliksitah. It is recorded in Be! Be? Bo Ho BK& Lo* Lo® tMd4 GMd> Ox? 
nPu! Pu? Pu> Put Pu’ Tr! [but me sh) Tr? MTr* MTr® [Jolly M4-5] Re Jha Dave. The 
original reading, however, remains uncertain. Lariviere’s critical edition of the parallel 
at NSm 1.183 has kapdlena, although two mss. read kapali ca. 


8.100x The additional verse pasuvat ksaudra- is found in all the ST mss., although only one 
NT ms. records it. Bharuci apparently read this verse as an authentic part of his root 
text, because he comments ami pajica Slokah, and we get five slokas only by including 
this additional verse. 


8.101d Although all editions give the reading sarvam, all the ST mss. and a large number of 
NT ones have the reading adopted satyam: Bo nCa Ho wKt? snKt’ La! Lot Lo® GMd! 
TMd? rMd* GMd> GMy sOx! Ox? Pu} sPu® Pu’ Tr! Tr? mTr# MTrMTr® Wa [Jolly Nd] 
Apa Dev. 


8.106d Jolly opts for the reading ¢ryrcena. See the Varttika on Panini 6.1.37 for the formation 
trea. 


8.114a I follow Jolly in reading va hdrayet. All other editions read va@hd@rayet with sandhi 
[= Gharayet]. Only Kulliika has a comment showing that he accepted Ghdrayet. 


8.124c All editions have the reading ydni, which is found in most NT mss. I have, however, 
adopted /ani, the reading in all the ST mss. and in several NT ones. I think tani fits the 
syntax better; I take pddas a-b, pdda-c, and pada-d as separate sentences. This reading 
is found in: Bo Ho La! Lo?GMd! TMd? +rMd‘4 GMd GMy sOx! Ox? Pu? Pud sPuo Pu? 
Pu® Tr! [but cor] Tr? MTr4 mT15 MTr° [Jolly Nd Gr] Dev Madh. 


956 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 


8.132 This verse is omitted in all but two of the ST mss., including all the Malayalam ones. It 
is omitted also in the ms. of Bharuci’s commentary. Medhatithi comments that this 
verse is omitted by some: imam Slokam kecin nddhiyante trasarenau yipratipattya- 
bhavat. The authenticity of this verse is thus doubtful. Evidence, however, is insuffi- 
cient to remove it from the critical edition. It is cited in several medieval sources. 


8.133a This pdda is hypermetric, and several scribes have attempted to correct this by re- 
sorting to various strategies. 


8.134b The alternate reading eka is found in all the citations and in many mss. The reading 
adopted, eva, however, is supported by all the ST mss., plus many NT ones, including 
the old nKt* andNNg. The reading fv eva krsnalam is found only in Be! nKt La! sOx! 
sPu® Pu’ mT? Jolly, althoughtu here (as opposed to ca) has the support of all the mss. 
with the reading eka. 


8.139 Jolly places this verse within brackets and doubts its authenticity. N@ also questions its 
authenticity with the comment: yne deye pratijfiata iti S§lokam atra kecit pathanti. The 
context does make the verse suspect. However, it is found in all the mss. and both 
Bharuci and Medhatithi comment on it. 


8.149d Most mss. of NT-x have the reading nopabhogena jiryati {or jiryate|, which is fol- 
lowed by Jolly. The reading adopted, however, is found in all the ST and NT-y mss., as 
well as in several NT-x ones. 


8.151b The reading dhrtd is supported by all ST mss. and a number of NT-x ones, as well as 
by Bharuci and Medhatithi: Ho nKtt sKt® Lo? GMd! rMd? GMd> GMy Tr! Tr? mTr# 
MTr MTr° WaBh Me Na Vij Apa Dev Jha Dave. 


8.153b The mss. are deeply divided over the reading vinirharet and punar haret. | have opted 
for the latter principally because it is found in all the ST mss. The reading, however, is 
uncertain, especially because Medhatithi records the former. The adopted reading is 
found in: nBe? BCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? K? wKt? nKt’ Lo? GMd! TMd? tTMd4 GMd> GMy 
oOr Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? MTr? MTr* MTr° [Jolly Ku R Nd]Rn Rc Nd Laks Mandlik KSS. 


8.154d The correct reading is karanam, i.e., a legal instrument or document. See note to 8.51. 


8.158d The alternate reading, yateta, has broad but not unanimous support among the NT-x 
mss. | have adopted the reading prayacchet, which is found in all ST and NT-y mss., 
as well as in some NT-x ones: Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? Lo? Lo? GMd! tMd? tMd‘4 GMd> 
oMy Tj! T? Tr! MTP? Trt MTrmTr® [Jolly R Nd] Dev Madh Na Rc Mandlik KSS. The 
reading, however, remains uncertain, especially because yateta is found in Medhatithi 
and is also the /ectio difficilior. 


8.166b The reading adopted, kutumbe ca, is found in Be! Be? nCa Ho nKf BK? Lo? cMd! 
TtMd* NNg oOrsOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pud sPu® Pu? Pu® Tj! Tr! Tr? mT r4 mTr®° Wa [Jolly 
M G| Me Nd Apa Laks Dev Jolly Jha. Although some ST mss. have the alternate 
reading, the adopted reading is favored by most ST mss. and our best NT-x mss. 


8.181 The sequence of verses 181-99, but especially 181-4 in various mss. and commentaries 
is diverse. Bh and Go give the sequence 181, 183, 184, 182; the same sequence is found 
in Be! Bo sCa nK¢ Lo? nNg sOx! Ox? sPu® Pu’ Tr? mTr®, whereas Wa transposes 182 
and 183. The order in Nd is: 181, 183, 182, 184; in Nd:180, 195, 188b, 185, 186, 189, 
194, 187, 188a, 181—4, 196, 190-3, 197, 198. Medhatithi, however, makes it clear that 
the sequence should be 181ab, 182, and 181cd, and Bh4ruci appears to agree with this. I 
have followed the latter sequence in the translation. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 957 


8.188a Most mss. support the alternate reading esu. The locative may have been influenced 
by the two surrounding locatives; scribes may have overlooked the syntactic connec- 
tion of esa to vidhih in the next pada. T have, however, opted for the /ectio difficilior, 
which is esa. This reading is supported by the glosses of Medhatithi (anantaroktah), of 
Kullika and Nandana (pirvokrah), and less clearly of Govinda. It is also supported by 
the mss. with the reading eva. The reading esa is found in only a small number of the 
mss.: WK NNg [Jolly G Me Ky] Jolly. 


8.189b Even though all the editions have adopted the reading vd, the vast majority of both ST 
and NT mss. record ca: Be! nBe* Be? Bo nCa Jo? nKt* BK La! Lo! Lo? Lo* Lo’ cMd! 
TtMd? GMd> GMy NNg nPu! Pu2 Put Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? MTr* MTT r® Wa Apa Laks 
Dev. This reading is also found in the vulgate of NSm (2.12; under 2.6 in Lariviere’s 
critical edition). 

8.199b The reading krayo vikrayah is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of NT 
ones. However, the reading kraya may have been influenced by the following vikraya. 
I have adopted the /ectio difficilior, which is supported by the commentators. Bharuci’s 
gloss krayavikrayau appears to support the alternate reading, but this may merely be a 
gloss on vikaraya which he sees as standing for both buying and selling. Further, it is 
difficult to see how a non-owner of an item can sell it! 


8.199x The additional verse is found in all the ST mss. and many NT ones. This verse must 
have entered the manuscript tradition rather early. | have not adopted it, however, be- 
cause it is ignored by all the ancient commentators, Bharuci, Medhatithi, and Govinda. 


8.202b The reading adopted, -Sodhitam, is found in most mss.: BBe? Be? Bo BCa Ho Jo* wKt? 
NK¢t BK® La! Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo’ tMd3 TMd4 GMy NNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu4 
Pu? sPuS Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tr! [bur cor sh] Tr? MTr4 MTr°mTr® Wa | Jolly M G Nd ]Apa 
Laks Dev MG@dh Jolly. The alternate reading, -‘odhitah, however, appears to be 
supported by Bh, Me, and Go. Under this interpretation, it is the person who is cleared 
of any wrongdoing by the public purchase of the article. But see visuddham in the 
previous verse where the term refers to the clear legal title to the property purchased. 


8.203ab All editions read samsrstaripam as a compound. This is supported only by the NT-y 
(vulgate) mss. The commentators explain rijpam as a separate word referring to any 
article that is sold. N@ glosses: riipapadam vikritamatropalaksanam. 


8.222cd Bh appears to have had the reading so ’ntar dasahat tat sdmnd, as in several other 
ST mss. He, however, rejects this reading as apatha and proposes the emendation: so 
‘yam dasahat tad dravyam. He also gives an alternate reading that he found in his 
sources: dandddne dasGham tu syadtam api nipatini. 


8.228d Numerous mss., including several ST ones, have the reading dharme or dharmme. 
The doubling of “m” may have contributed to the omission of “y” of dharmye, which I 
think is the correct reading. It is found in the following: Be! Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! nKt* 
BKt? Lo? Pu? Pu? Pu’ Tj? Tr! mTr° Wa Laks Dev Me Rn Mandlik Jolly [without giving 
any variants] Jha Dave. 


8.234c Here I have adopted the reading pasusu svaminadm dadyat against the testimony of the 
majority of mss. of both NT and ST. The adopted reading is found only in sCa Hy Jm 
Jo! Kt? wKe Tj’, with partial support from Lo? Tj!. This reading, however, is clearly 
the lectio difficilior; the locative plural pasusu going with mytesu of pdda-d to form a 
locative absolute. This connection, coming after the active verb dadyat, may have been 
missed by scribes; hence, the “correction” found in most mss. The accepted reading is 


958 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 


supported by the commentaries of Me, Go, Ku, and Nd, and by the reading of Dev. 
This reading has been adopted also by Mandlik, Jolly, Jha, KSS, and Dave. 


8.234d I have adopted the reading ankams ca against the testimony of the majority of mss. of 
both NT and ST. The reading adopted is found only in NKt NNg nPu! Pu? mT?r [folly 
MG Ku] Jolly Jha, with some support from Lo? Lot TMd4 Pu? Pu‘ [here the mark for 
“e” may have been a mistake for the anusvdra]. The reading avigdni in this context 
makes little sense; what should be shown to the owner are not the limbs but the 
distinguishing marks of the dead animal. The reading aka is supported by the old 
commentators: Medhatithi: aikah karnddayah svdmivisesajidnartham cihnani; Gov- 
inda: cihndni vadatad karnatvagddini; Kullika: anyani ca cthnani Srngakhuradini. 
Medhitithi’s comment appears to indicate that owners branded their cattle with a 
marking on the ear, possibly a particular cut; by showing the ear the herdsman would 
be able to demonstrate to which owner the animal belonged, especially in the likely 
event that he herded cattle of more than one owner. 


8.240a There is an ambiguity in the sandhi at ksetre parivrte; it could also be aparivrte with 
the elision of “a.” Derrett and Dave record an avagraha: ksetre ’parivite. For reasons 
why I have adopted the positive parivrte, see my note to the translation. 


8.245¢ All but three mss. have the reading jyestha. Jolly has corrected this to the standard 
Jyaistha. I see no reason to standardize this pronunciation against the near unanimous 
testimony of both ST and NT mss. 


8.258b Although the mss. are evenly divided, I have opted for gra@mah because it is clearly 
the lectio difficilior. It is found in: Be! nBe* Be? Bo nCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? 
wKt? La! Lo? NNg oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu‘ sPuo Pu’ Tj? Tr! mT rt MTP MTP? [Jolly Ku N] 
Rn Apa Madh Mandlik KSS. The difficulty of this unusual word with an older meaning 
may have caused scribes to change it to either the more usual gramydh or to compound 
it with the following with the result that s@manta was changed to simd@nta: thus 
grdmastmantavasinah. Given the nature of the glosses, it is unclear which of these was 
the root reading of the ancient commentators. For s@manta, see also verses 258, 262, 
and 263. 


8.271c The adopted reading, nikheyah, is supported by the parallel passages in ViDh 5.25 and 
NSm 15-16.23, as well as by a majority of the mss: Bo Ho Jo? nKt' BKt’ Lo? Lo? GMd! 
tMd? GMa? NNg oOr Pu? Pu Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr? MTr5 [Jolly Me G R Nd]. 


8.279b The NT and ST are divided over the reading here. Only two NT mss. record the ST 
reading himsydc chreyGmsam. 1 have followed here the NT reading; it is supported by 
the glosses of Bharuci, Medhatithi, and Ramacandra. The reading, however, remains 
somewhat uncertain. 

8.281b Manuscripts are split over the readings avakrsta and apakrsta. Most ST mss. record 
the latter readings, although in TMd? 1Md? the Telugu distinction between "v" and "p" 
being slight, the reading could be either. I have adopted avakrsta because most mss. 
have that reading: Be! sBe? Bo Ho Jo? wKt? nKt* BKt La! Lo! Lo} Lo* Lo? tMd3 
TMd‘ nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put sPuo Pu’ Pu Tj! Tr? | Jolly M G R] Apa Me Rc Jolly; 
it is also supported by the reading in NSm 15-16.26. The reading, however, remains 
uncertain. 


8.287a There is strong manuscript support for both major readings: the genitive pidandnam 
and the locative pidandydam. The locative, however, is derived from the feminine noun 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 959 


pidana, which is not attested in the dictionaries; the normal form is the neuter 

pidanam. | have, nevertheless, opted for the latter because the majority of the ST and 

NT mss., including all the Malayalam ones, support it. The genitive may have been 

created by scribes attempting the correct the grammatical irregularity. The locative is 

supported by: sBe Bo nCa Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt? Lo! Lo TMd? GMd> sOx! 

sPuo Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! MT? mTr4 MT? MTr° [Jolly Me Ku R Nd]; this reading is supported 
by Ku Nd. Neuter verbal abstracts in -ana occur alongside feminine in -and (see Wak- 

ernagel II.2, pp. 190f) especially in the early language. Manu may here be using an old 

form for the word that later scribes may have considered erroneous. 


8.288d The mss. are divided over the genitive rajfah and the dative rdjfie. I have adopted the 
former principally because it is recorded in most ST mss., including all Malayalam 
ones, and in numerous NT mss.: sBe? Be? Hy Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt# aK® La! Lo! 
Lo} GMd! tMd? tMd4 nPu! Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr! mTr3 MTr* MTr® Wa [Jolly Ku Nd R]Ku Ra. 
Even though the printed editions of Me and Go show the dative, it is unclear whether 
these old commentators themselves had that reading; they do not comment on the case. 
Manu uses both the dative (see 3.94, 99, 231; 4.80; 5.151 etc.) and the genitive (see 
3.108; 8.184, 234, 275; 9.71, 155 etc.) with the verb Vda. The only other time the verb is 
used with the noun rdjan, however, it is used in the genitive (7.97). 


8.295d Opinion among commentators is divided over whether there is an elided “a” (= avi- 
cdritam) or if the term is the positive vicdritam. Mss. are of little help because they 
generally do not include avagrahas for elided “a.” Bharuci and Govinda take it to be 
the positive vic@ritah, which is given as an opinion by Medhatithi also. According to 
Bharuci’s explanation, vic@rita here means that the punishment is determined accord- 
ing to the provisions of the following verses. All other commentators, however, follow 
Medhatithi in taking the term to be the negative avicaritah (Buhler’s comment on this 
verse erroneously takes Ri, Nd, and Nd as supporting the positive). Manu has similar 
constructions with avicdrayan occupying the last place in a half-verse at 3.114; 7.212; 
8.283; 8.250; 9.135, 170, 280; 11.14. In two other places Manu has avicdritam at the 
end of a half-verse: 11.29, 33. These parallels support my assumption that here also the 
negative is meant; nowhere else do we have the positive vicdritam in a similar context. 


8.311a Even though all the editions read hi, it is found in only a small number of mss. The 
adopted reading ca is found in: Be! nBe? nCa Ho Jo? wKt! BKt La! Lo! Lo® Lot Loe 
GMd! tMd? 1Md4 GMy NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Put sPuS Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr¢ Tr? Wa 
Bh [ad 8.306]. 


8.313a, c The mss. are divided over the appropriate relative pronoun at the beginning of the 
two pddas: yat or yah. The grammar of the verse supports yat, which corresponds to 
tena of the main clauses. The change to yaft may have been prompted by mistaking 
tena for a masculine rather than a neuter instrumental. Kulltika, who reads yah, is thus 
forced to add a second pronoun in the main clause: dubkhitair aksiptah sahate yah sa 
tena svargaloke piajam labhate. The older commentators Medhatithi and Govinda have 
correctly adopted the reading yat (Bharuci does not comment on the term). Some mss. 
have yat in pada-a and yah in pada-c, although the latter reading is sometimes unclear 
because of the triple conjunct. The reading yat in pada-a is found in: Be* nKt¢ BK La! 
1tMd? tTMd* GMd GMy NNg nPu! Pu? Pué Pud Pu? Tr! [but cor sh] MTr*MTr° [Jolly M 
9 G Nd Me] Me Rn Nd Go Dev Jolly. 


8.314b The vast majority of NT mss. and all editions have the reading dhdvatd. However, all 


960 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 


the ST mss., as well as NT ones in old Nagari script, read dhimata, a reading supported 
by the two oldest commentators, Bharuci and Medhatithi. The parallel passages in the 
Dharmasiitras (GDh 12.43; BDh 2.1.16) make no mention of running; only VaDh 20.41 
has the reading abhidhavet, which is also uncertain because several medieval citations 
(Vij 3.257; MGdh 2.416) give the reading abhiydcet (both Jolly and Biihler depend too 
heavily on the VaDh reading for their decision to adopt dhavara). The repetition of this 
provision by Manu at 11.100~—1 also makes no reference to running. Bharuci comments 
on the term: dhimatd “vividhena vadhena ca” (MDh 8.310) Suddhihetur idam prayas- 
cittasastrasamarthyad ity evam janatdnena. Medhatithi is more succinct: dhimata 
dhairyavatd. In the parallel passage of NSm (19.93) Lariviere has adopted the reading 
dhavata; however he used only northern mss. for the edition and the Trivandrum 
Sanskrit Series (no. 97 1929) edition of the NSm reads dhimatd. In this case the 
southern mss. of the MDh and the NSm have preserved the original reading. The 
adopted reading is found in: NK BKO GMd! tMd? TMd* GMd> GMy NNg nPu! Pu? Put 
MTré MTr° [Jolly M Nd]Bh Me Vis Jha Dave. 


8.322c Even though all the editions have the reading Sese tv ekd-, it is clear the reading 


should be Sese ’py ekd-. The latter reading is found in most mss., including all the ST 
ones. None of the commentators comment on the reading. The reading adopted is 
found in: nBe? Be’ BCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt} nKt* La! Lo! Lo’ GMd! tMd3 1Md4 GMd? 
aMy oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? Put sPu® PuS Tj! Tr! mTr# MTr? [Jolly Nd R]Laks. 


8.324d The sequence of raja dandam is unclear. All editions and some NT mss. read dandam 


raja. 1 have adopted the sequence supported by the vast majority of mss. of both ST 
and NT: pBe? Bo pCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt} nKt La! GMd! rMd3 rMd4 GMd> GMy oOr 
sOx! Ox? Pu? sPuo Pu? Tr! mTr* MT? MTr® WaLaks Apa. This sequence is supported 
by Go, Ku, and Re. 


8.325d The reading of this pada is very uncertain. Most commentators did not quite under- 


stand the meaning of sthiirika; hence the numerous readings of this word. Medhatithi 
gives no less than three opinions: goad, back side of the food, and a cow in the habit of 
running away. Bharuci gives two meanings: barren cow and the area three inches 
above the heel. The correct meaning is clearly the second given by Bharuci, i.e., the 
Achilles tendon. This meaning is also attested to by Medhatithi and Nandana (see my 
note to the translation of this verse). Mayrhofer (1999, III: 526) considers the term to 
be obscure, but accepts the meaning of ox and barren cow and refers to R. Hiersche, 
Untersuchungen zur Frage der Tenues aspiratae im Indogermanischen (Wiesbaden, 
1964), p. 129 and note 44. 

The last word of the pada is even more problematic. All but one ms. (Wa) and all 
commentators read the locative bhedane. Given the history of interpretation of this 
verse, it is understandable that the tradition has preferred the locative bhedane, because 
this was thought to be a reference to one more crime. The NSm 19.40 points us in the 
right direction: gosu brahmanasamsthdsu sthiirayas chedanam bhavet, “in the case of 
cows belonging to Brahmins, there should be the cleaving of the Achilles tendon.” I 
have conjecturally adopted the accusative reading bhedanam. It is quite out of place 
for injury to an animal to occur here, given that the entire section deals with theft. It is 
clear that both punishments indicated in this verse—cleaving the heel and cutting half 
the foot—are for stealing livestock of Brahmins, the first for cows and the other for 
goats and the like. 


8.329b The difference in the two readings caivamdadindm adydnam, which I have adopted, 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 961 


and caivamadinam madydnam is slight, simply the presence or the absence of the 
anusvara. 1 think the term evamddinam more properly relates to food items rather than 
to liquor. The adopted reading is found in: Be? Ca Ho Jm Jo! Kt? nKt§ GMy NnPu! Pu? 
Pué MTr? MTr? Mandlik Jha Dave. 


8.333¢ Most NT mss. have the reading tam Gdyam. 1 have adopted the reading tam Satam, 
however, because it is recorded in all the ST mss. and a substantial number of NT 
ones. Further, this reading is supported by Medhatithi, who gives the alternate reading 
as a patha. The reading is, nevertheless, uncertain, especially because Bharuci’s com- 
mentary is damaged at this crucial point; but later he mentions ddyo dandah, which 
supports the alternate reading. 


8.351d For the reading tan manyum (as opposed to tam manyum), see parallels at BDh 
1.18.13; VaDh 3.18; ViDh 5.191. 


8.354b There is strong manuscript support for both rahah and saha. The latter, indeed, could 
be seen as the lectio difficilior, because it is syntactically connected to patnya occur- 
ring in the previous pdda. Nevertheless, I have adopted rahah both because it fits the 
context better (secret conversation with a woman) and because it is supported by 
Medhitithi (Jolly is incorrect in assuming that Me reads saha). The reading adopted is 
found in: pBe? Jm Jo! Jo? wKt} Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! 1Md3 cMy Puf Tj! Tj? Te mT? MT rs 
[Jolly Nd R] Me Re Mr. 


8.369c Manuscripts are divided over the readings trigunam and dvigunam. Among the older 
commentators, Bharuci has dvigunam and Medhatithi trigunam. Neither, however, 
comment on the term, and given that we have a single ms. of Bharuci and no critical 
edition of Medhatithi, it is difficult to know whether these were their own readings or 
later emendations. I have opted for trigunam because it is recorded in most ST mss. 
and numerous NT-x ones: Be! pBe? Ho nKt' Lo? GMd! 1Md‘4 GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Ox3 
nPu! Pu? Pu} Pu‘ Pub sPuo Pu’ Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr® Wa [Jolly Nd?] Laks Apa Me Nd. 


8.371b It is unclear which sequence is original: jratistriguna or strijndtiguna. It is further 
unclear whether the latter is a compound or if stri_ should be construed separately with 
yd tu or the previous pada. The commentators Me, Na, and Nd gloss with jfidtiguna 
and striguna indicating that they read it as a Tatpurusa compound and that jiati came 
before str7. Most of the medieval citations also support this sequence, which is found 
in: Bo NKt' Lo? GMd! tMd4 GMd> NNg Ox? Pu? Pud Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTr5mTr® [Jolly 
MGNNd] Dev Madh Vis Nd Jolly. 


8.374c-d This half-verse appears to have caused a lot of problems for commentators and 
scribes alike; hence the numerous variants. The uncertainties center around three 
times: agupta, angasarvasva, and gupta. For the first, I have adopted conjecturally 
agupta ahga-; this reading is not found in any ms. The problems here, I think, derive 
from this hiatus created by sandhi. Scribes appear to have resolved this in two ways: 
first, by adopting the accusative aguptam anga-, and second, by adding eka and 
adopting a double sandhi aguptaikanga-. A few mss. add a ca to eliminate the hiatus: 
agupte canga-, which was adopted by Jolly. The reading ekdiiga is supported by Bh, 
Na, and Nd. The unusual double sandi is explained by Nd thus: aguptaikatgety atra 
Sakalyamatena yakaralope krte chandonusdrad yakaralopasya asiddhatvam anddrtya 
vrddhividhdnam. The addition of eka is probably a later formation; Me, Go, Ku, and Re 
clearly state that the bodily part cut off is the part that was used to commit the crime, 
namely, the penis. 


962 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 


In the second compound there are three major readings: angasarvasvaih, anga- 
sarvasvam and angasarvasvi. There is scant manuscript support for the first; its intro- 
duction may have been influenced by the instrumental sarvena of pada-d. The second 
is also represented by only a few mss.; the accusative also does not fit the syntax. The 
third appears to be an elliptical compound; Me and N@ clearly have this reading and 
have long explanations of its meaning. The meaning appears to be that a Sidra who 
has sex with a guarded woman becomes “one having his penis and all his wealth (taken 
away).” I have adopted this reading, which is found also in all the medieval citations: 
BBe? Bo Ho Hy La! Lo! Lo? wKt! sBK® GMd> oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu® Tj? Tr? mTr* 
MTP mTr® Apa Laks Mddh Me Na Jha Dave. 

Finally, in pd@da-d there are two readings: gupte and guptam. The former is clearly 
the correct reading; the latter may have been influenced by the “correction” introduced 
in pdda-c by some scribes. The reading adopted is found in: Be' Ho La! Lo? cMd! 
1TMd? tMd4 GMd5 GMy NNg sOx! Pu? Pu? Pu? sPuo Tr! Tr? mTr4 Tr MTr® Wa[Jolly N 
Nd] Apa Laks Bh Nd Rc Jolly. 


8.378b I have adopted the reading vipradm guptdm first because it is found in all the ST mss. 


and a substantial number of NT-x ones, including the old nKt*. Secondly, we see that 
gupta almost always follows the class name in all the surrounding verses (374-84). 
The only exception is verse 384, but the inversion of the order there may well be de- 
termined by the meter. The reading adopted in found in: nCa nKt* BK Lo4 Lo® cMd! 
+Md? tMd‘4 GMd> GMy oOr Ox? Ox? MTP MTr®. 


8.380b The mss. are divided over the two readings api sthitam and vyavasthitam. The context 


clearly favors api, and it is supported by the explicit statement of Medhatithi: apisabdo 
yugapatsarvapapakarye ’ pi brahmano na jatu kadacid dhantavyah. Similar support for 
api is given by Go, Nd, and Ku. The reading adopted is found in: Be? Hy Jm Jo! wKt! 
Kt? wKt nKtt La! Lo? Lo? GMy NNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr? Tr? Tr‘ Vij Apa. 


8.384b Even though all the editions read paficasatam, this reading is supported by very few 


mss. The reading adopted is found in: Be! sBe? Bo nCa Ho Hy wKt! wKt? nKt Lo! Lo4 
Lo? GMd! 1Md? rMd* GMd> GMy nNgsOx! nPu! sPuo Pu’ Tj? Tr? [Jolly M Nd]. The 
nominative masculine is also supported by other mss. that read paficadasah and by the 
parallels at 8.264, 268 297, 329, 369, 373. Only once is the accusative used: 8.331. 


8.384c Although there is strong manuscript support for the reading icchet, it is clear that the 


original reading is rcchet. This reading is found in Me, who glosses it with prapnuydat, 
an explanation repeated by Go and Ku. No commentator permits the guilty Ksatriya to 
exercise an option regarding his punishment. The reading adopted is found in: Be? Jo? 
wKt} La! Lo! tMd3 GMy NNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu4 Pu8 Tr! Tr? mTr* mTr° Me Re Jha Dave. 


8.392a The reading with a short “a” prati- is explicitly given by Medhatithi; he gives prati as 


an alternative: Gdidirghapathe svarthiko ’n. The former reading is found in most ST 
mss. I have, however, adopted prati, because it has the broadest manuscript support. 
The proper reading in the parallel passage in YDh 2.263 (the short form is found in Apa 
and the long form in Vij) and in Vidh 5.94 is unclear. The reading adopted is found in: 
Be! Be? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? nKtt La! Lo? Lo* TMd? nNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu3 
Pu‘ Pu? sPud Pu? Tj? mTr? Me[patha] Go Na@ Ku Rn Nd Rc Mr Mandlik Jolly KSS. The 
reading, however, remains uncertain. 


8.396b We have two distinct readings, the one in NT and the other in ST (also followed by 3 


NT mss.). Bh, Me, and Nd do not comment on this pada; all others support the NT 
reading, which I have adopted. The reading, however, is uncertain. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 8 963 


8.403a Jolly writes tulamadnam as a compound. This is incorrect. Bharuci clearly indicates 


three items in this list: trayam apy etad rajamudrdnkitam. 


8.403b The manuscripts have very divergent readings here: ca syat, tu sydt, and tat sydt. 


Although the manuscript evidence is scant, I have adopted the last reading; it is found 
in the medieval citations and is attested by most commentators: Me, Go, Ku, Rn, and 
Mr. 


8.411b Manuscripts and editions provide two readings: karSitau and karsitau. Confusion 


g.1b 


g.2c 


9-4 


g.19d 


between the palatal and retroflex sibilants is a common feature in mss., but here the 
palatal and the retroflex derive from two different roots V krs and V krs, In this com- 
pound, both makes sense. I have adopted the palatal form principally because it is at- 
tested to in most of the ST mss. and in numerous NT ones. It is found in: Jo? NKt* Lo! 
Lo? Lo? Lo* Lo® TMd? GMd GMy nNg Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? MT? 
MTr? MTP MTr° Wa Dev Mandlik Jha KSS Dave {in GMd! the palmleaf is damaged at 
this point]. See also 2.24d, 9.74c, 10.101¢. 


CHAPTER NINE 


Most mss. of both ST and NT read dharme. Nevertheless, 1 have adopted what I be- 
lieve is the correct form dharmye, which is found only in Be! sBe? Bo Hy Jm Jo! Jo? 
La! NNg Pu® Tr Laks Dev Mandlik Jolly Jha Dave. The common form dharme is 
the lectio facilior, and the doubling of “m” (@#t) found in many mss. is very similar in 
Devanagari to (af). 


The mss. are deeply divided over the reading of this verse. All the editions have the 
alternate reading, which is also supported by Me, Nd, Rn, and Rc. Even though there is 
uncertainly regarding the original reading, I have adopted the reading found in all the 
ST mss. and a large number of NT ones, including the old nKt’. This reading is found 
in: nCa Ho wKt! wKt? nKtt La! GMd! tMd? tMd4 GM@ GMy oOr sOx! Ox? sPu Tr! 
MTr* MTP MTr® [Jolly Nd] Dev Madh. 


Most NT mss. have the reading v@cya in pddas a, b, and d. This is the reading adopted 
in all the editions. I have adopted the reading yapya, however, which is the lectio diffi- 
cilior and the reading found in all but one ST mss., as well as in several NT ones: nKt’ 
Lo* GMd! tMd* GMd> GMy NNg nPu! Tr! mTr4 mTrmTr® [Jolly M N Nd] Nd. This 
reading is also supported by the corrupt readings in Be! La!. Bharuci is the only 
commentator to gloss this term (ya@pyd vacaniyGh). Derrett here has emended the 
commentary to read vdcyd, even though it would have been pointless for Bharuci to 
gloss this term with vacaniyah. For the meaning of the term yapya, see Introduction, p. 
36. For other occurrences of this term, see GDh 13.23; 19.2; BDh 3.10.2;VaDh 15.19. 


The ST and NT diverge radically in the reading of this pada. All the ST mss. have the 
reading I have adopted. I think arti not only is the lectio difficilior but also makes far 
better sense and parallels nidarsana in the same position in the very next verse. Here 
the text is not dealing with expiatory rites or formulas but with the perverse nature of 
women. To prove this, Manu adduces a vedic text in verse 18, and goes on to say in the 
first half of verse 19 that there are numerous such texts in the Vedas. In the second 
half, he says that he will produce a sampling of these. The term @kyti with the meaning 


964 


9.24b 


9.32b 


9.434 


9.47d 


9.52d 


9.54c 


9.54d 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 


of sample or specimen (cf. Gkrtigana in grammar) is somewhat unusual, which may 
have led scribes and commentators to change it to niskyti, especially in view of verse 21 
that mentions an expiation (nihnava). | take tasdm in this pada as referring to the vedic 
texts (Sruti), here following Medhatithi; Bharuci takes it as referring to women. Only 
Bharuci and Nandana read @kyti. Jt appears, however, that Bharuci’s commentary has 
been emended to read vyabhicaraniskrtim, as pointed out by Derrett. 


The reading apakrsta is found in most ST mss. and several NT ones and, therefore, 
should be a strong contender for adoption. I have adopted avakrsta, however, for sev- 
eral reasons. First, it is supported by Medhatithi; and, second, the parallel passages at 
5-163; 7.126; 8.177, 281 all have avakrsta. The readings in several of these places, how- 


ever, are somewhat uncertain, especially because of the confusion between “‘p” and “v” 
in many southern scripts. 


Here we have a classic case of a /ectio difficilior, in this case kartari, being changed to 
the easier bhartari, even though the latter reading causes a tautology. We see this 
process happening in sPu®, where the original kartari has been corrected above the line 
by a later reader to bhartari, which reading is then reproduced in sOx!, which is a copy 
of sPu°. This pada is also an example of the usual superiority of the ST; only a few NT 
mss. have preserved this original reading, which is supported by the clear gloss of 
Medhatithi. This reading is found in: NKt* BKt® Lot GMd! TMd? tMd* GMd? GMy sPu® 
Tr! Tr? mTr* MTP MTr® Wa [Jolly Nd M N] Me Nd (patha) Jolly Jha. 


Normally I would have adopted the reading viddhah, because it has the unanimous 
support of the ST mss. and is found in several NT ones. Yet, I think the original read- 
ing was ksiptah; it is supported by Me, Go, Nd, and Ku. The reading viddhah may have 
been influenced by the repeated viddham and vidhyatah of the very next pdda. The 
reading ksiptah at the end of pdda-a nicely corresponds to ksiptam in pdda-c; it also 
parallels uptam used with reference to the seed in earlier verses. The reading, however, 
is uncertain. The reading adopted is found in: Jo? wKt! wKt? La! Lo! Lo* nNg sOx! 
Ox? nPu! Pu} nPu® Pu? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr! [mc sh tol Tr? | Jolly M G N R] Me Go Na Ku Re 
Mr Jolly. 


The reading adopted, sak:t sakyt, is found in: Be! Be? BCa Jo? wKt! wKt} La! Lo! Lo3 
Lo* aMd! tMd? tMd‘* GM@ GMy oOr sOx! Ox? sPuo Pu? Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr° Wa [Jolly 
M GRWN4q] Dev Laks Madh Rc Jolly. 


Manuscripts are divided over the two readings baliyasi and gariyasi; all ST mss., how- 
ever, record the former. It is also supported by Me, Go, Ku, and Nd. This reading is 

found in: Jo? Lo? Lot GMd! TMd? GMd? GMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? mT14 wTr> MTr® 
Wa [Jolly M G Ku Rd R?] Vij Madh Jolly Sha. 


The reading of this pada that has been adopted is found in all ST mss., and it is either 
found in or supported by several NT mss.: wK0 nKtt La! GMd! 1Md? 1TMd4 GMdé GMy 
NNg Tr! mTr4 MTP MTr° [Jolly Nd] Laks. The meaning of the pada also supports this 
reading; it is not the seed (bija) that belongs to the owner of the field but the crop. 
Commentators have wrongly interpreted rat in this pada as referring to the seed; it re- 
fers instead to what has grown from the seed implied in the verb prarohati of the pre- 
vious pada. 


The reading adopted, vapta, is found in all the ST and several NT mss.: Be? Ho Hy 
Jm Jo! Kt? wKt nKt* La! GMd! rMd3 tMd4 GMd@® GMy Ox? Tj? Tr! mTr3 MTréMTr 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 965 


MTr°®. This reading also suits the context of a sower (probably of rice) whose seeds are 
carried to an adjoining farm by wind or water. The alternate reading may also be influ- 
enced by the identical reading of verse 51d. 


9.65a Jolly has adopted the reading naudvahikesu, and this parallels the form of the word at 
9.206 [= YDh 2.118]. Only a few mss., however, support the vrddhi for audvahika here, 
although they adopt it at 9.206. Apparently, we have here two forms of the term with a 
very similar meaning. 


9.73d The ST and the NT have two very different readings here: kKanyddanam and kanya- 
ddatur. The former is at one level the easier reading, because the compound kanyddana 
is so common. On the other hand, the genitive kKanyddatuh may have been influenced 
by the other genitive compound in the same pdda. The reading kanyaddnam has the 
advantage of providing a clear reference to the tat of the previous pdda. 


9.74c¢ On -karSitd, see note to 8.411. The palatal form karSitd is found in: Bo Jo? nKft BKb 
Lo* Lot rMd3 tMd4 GM@ GMy NNg nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pu? Pu? Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTr° Wa Jha 
Dave. 


9.78d Mandlik, Jha, KSS, and Derrett do not recognize the sandhi between pddas c and d, 
writing: paritydjya@ vibhiisanaparicchada. It is clear from both the context and the 
commentaries of Me, Nd, Ku, Nd, and Rn that the last compound is a negative one: 
avibhitsanaparicchada. 


9.87b I have adopted svajatyd here, even though at 86d I adopted nd@sajatih. Numerous mss. 
that used sajati in the previous verse give svajati here. Both forms are correct and I see 
no reason to be consistent as to the spelling when the mss. are not. The reading 
svajatyd here has overwhelming manuscript support: Be! sBe? Ho wKt! wKt nKt} La! 
Lo! Lo? Lot GMd! tMd4 GMd GMy NNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pud sPuo Pu? Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr> 
MTr® Wa.Jmv Laks Ku Nd. 


9.92d The mss. are divided over the readings steyam and stend. | have adopted the former 
found in all the ST and numerous NT mss.: 8K? La! Lot cMd! rMd? 7Md‘ GMd GMy 
NNg oOr nPu! Pu? Put Pud Pu? Tr! MTr? mTr> MTr° Wa [Jolly M G Nd Gr] Apa Laks 
Jolly. Bharuci and Medhatithi also gives as a patha the masculine stenah. In this case, 
the one prohibited from taking the jewelry is the husband, as explained by Bharuci: 
evam capathe purusavisayah Sloko bhavati. 


9.93 Bharuci comments that this verse belongs to some other smyti and not to Manu: smrty- 
antaresv ayam Sloko na tv atra samaGmndyate. Medhatithi also records such a view: 
kecid Ghuh amanavo ’yam Slokah. 


9.102c Most NT mss. have the reading abhicaretam; this is, however, the easier reading be- 
cause the term vyabhicara for sexual transgression is a common term in the text. 
Medhatithi clearly reads aticaretam, because he comments: aticaro ’ tikramah dharmd- 
rthakdmesv asahabhavah. The reading adopted is found in all the ST mss. (GMd! is 
torn at this point) and in a few NT one: sBe? wKt} NKtt wKt Lo* tMd? tTMd4 GMd> 
GMy oOr Tr! MTr4 MT? MTr® Wa[Jolly M N Nd] Laks Me Na Mr Jolly Jha Dave. 


9.108b All editions have adopted the reading bhratin. The majority of the mss., especially the 
ST ones, clearly support bhratd: sBe? Hy Jo? wKt? La! Lo? GMd! tMd? tTMd4 GMd> 
NNg 0Or sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pu? sPu® Pu? Tj! Tr! mTr6 Wa Apa Jmv [vl] Ku. This read- 
ing also parallels nicely bhartari in the same position in pada-d. 


966 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 


9.118a Medhatithi appears to read: sva@bhyah svabhyah kanydbhyah. This reading has con- 
siderable merit, because otherwise this pdda is simply repeating what is said in pada-c, 
but it is supported by only a few mss. According to Medhatithi’s reading, each brother 
is obliged to give a portion of his inheritance only to the sisters belonging to his own 
caste, that is, born to the same mother as he. This is also the interpretation of Narayana 
and Raghavananda. 


9.123c Editions are inconsistent with regard to the avagraha before jyestha. Mandlik, Jolly, 
and Jha put an avagraha, while KSS and Dave do not. Manuscripts usually omit all 
avagrahas; therefore, it is impossible to determine if a negative or a positive is in- 
tended. I follow Bharuci and Medhatithi in reading here (a)/yesthavrsch. 


9.126c Once again the ST mss. give us a superior reading, ekagarbhe ‘pi, which has been 
adopted. All but one of the ST mss. have this reading, and they are supported with re- 
gard to eka by 11NT mss. The reading adopted is supported by Me and Nd with respect 
to both eka and api, and by Bh and Ku with respect to eka. 


g.128b The mss. are deeply divided over the word that comes after cakre. I have adopted 
cakre ’ tha, which is found in the majority of mss.: Be! pBe? Bo Ho Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? 
wKt} nKt BKe La! Lo! Lo* Lo? GMd! nNg sOx! Ox? sPuo Pu® Tj! Tr? Tr MTr°Man- 
dlik Jha KSS Dave. No manuscript supports the reading cakre sa adopted by Jolly. 


9.133b The reading is uncertain. Several ST mss. and a few NT ones have the reading 
adopted by all editions. The reading I have adopted, however, is found in three ST mss. 
and the vast majority of the NT ones. See also the parallel in verse 139b. The differ- 
ence in the readings does not affect the meaning at all. 


9.145b Although all editions read jatah putrah, the sequence in inverted in all the ST and 
most of the NT mss.: Bo nCa Jo* wKt! wKt} nKt' BK® La! Lo? Lot GMd! tMd? tMd4 
oMd> NNg oOr Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! mTr4 MTr>mTr®. This appears to be the se- 
quence also of Bharuci. 


9.147a Mandlik, Derrett, and Dave give the positive reading y@ niyuktanyatah. This reading is 
supported by the comments of Ku and Nd. I take the form to be aniyuktd and see a 
sandhi here as explicitly stated by Me: aniyukteti prasleso drastavyah. The negative 
meaning is supported also by Nd, Rn, and Re. 


9.152b The mss. present three major readings: parikalpayet, parikalpya ca, and pravibhajya 
tu. The two latter readings have the gerund, making the whole verse a syntactic unit, 
the first of these two is given in the NT-y [vulgate] mss., while the second is limited to 
the ST mss. I think that the gerund may have been introduced precisely to make the 
verse a single sentence; the reading adopted, which I think is the original, gives the 
verse two finite verbs. This reading is found in: Be! sBe* Bo wKt! Lo! Lo Lo* oOr 
nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu> Pu’ Pu’ Tr? [Jolly M G] Jolly. I think the first half-verse ending 
with parikalpayet is an independent sentence providing an alternative to the compli- 
cated methods of partition given in the previous two verses. Then the second half-verse 
and verse 153 go on to state how the division is to be carried out among the sons from 
wives of different classes. 


9.156a The mss. of both ST and NT are divided over va and ye. I have adopted the former 
principally because it is attested to by Bh and Me; it is also found in a wide variety of 
mss., including the old nKt*. This reading also makes better sense as this verse gives a 
simple alternative to the rather complex rules of partition outlined above (see the par- 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 967 


allel in verse 152). Medhatithi is somewhat confused about this reading, because he 
apparently takes va@ here as providing an alternative to the verse immediately preceding 
and feels that such an alternative is not possible: va@Sabdo dvitiyam vikalpam anta- 
rendnupapadyamdanah prakrtam apeksya nirakankso bhavati (Sha’s translation of this 
is inaccurate). The reading adopted is found in: Be! Ho nKt' BKt’ Lo* GMd! tMd‘4 nNg 
oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? sPuS Pu? MTr° Wa [/olly M G] Bh Me Laks Jha. 


9.162d The reading adopted here is found in Ho wKt! Lo? Lot GMd> NNg Ox Pu? Pu’ Pu® 
Apa Jmy, but is also supported by the many mss. that read tat samgrhnita. See, more- 
over, 9.191d where the same expression occurs; there the reading adopted here has 
greater manuscript support and is also adopted by all editions. 


9.170a Here the majority of the mss. in both ST and NT have erred in reading yasya for yas 
tu. The latter reading is found in: Be! Jo? Lo? Lo? Lo* oOr Pu? Put Pu® Pu’ Tj! [Jolly M 
G R] Dev Jolly Jha Dave. The person to whom the child belongs is not the person who 
owns the house but the person (i.e., the husband) to whom the mother of the child be- 
longs. In a joint household, the owner of the house may be different from the husband 
of the woman who gives birth. Further, we would also expect a correlative for the sah 
of pdda-c, as we have in the surrounding verses. 


9.196c The mss. are quite confused about the reading of this pada and of 197b. Many have 
different readings here and in the parallel pada at 197b. I have adopted the reading 
atitayam aprajasi, which is clearly the /ectio difficilior both because aprajas is a rare 
word in classical Sanskrit and because its adoption goes against the requirements of the 
standard Pathya form of the sloka. These considerations may well have promoted 
scribes and commentators to change aprajasi to the more standard aprajayam. Occur- 
ring at the end of the pada, even this violates the normal sloka, which may have 
prompted others to move it to the beginning of the pada, giving the reading found in 
the vulgate: aprajayam atitdyam. The reading adopted is found in: Bo Ho nKt' Lo! Lo? 
oOr sOx! Pu} sPu® Tr?, as well as in the citations of Apa, Laks, and Dev. It is also 
supported by the reading in the parallel verse in YDh 2.144. The only commentator to 
note the term is Na, who reads aprajayam. 


9.197¢ See the previous note for the reading adopted, atita@yam aprajasi, which is found in: 
Be! Bo Ho Kt Lo? sOx! Pu} sPuo Tr! Tr? Apa Laks. 


9.219¢c Most mss. take yogaksema and pracdra as two separate items. Only Bh and Rn take 
the three words as a single compound. Others take pracdra as a separate word, gener- 
ally taking it to mean a pasture or a path. I have opted to see the three words as form- 
ing a single Tatpurusa compound, but this reading is found only in Jm Jo* wKt? Lo? 
GMd! rMd? GMy Tj? MTr> Jmv Laks Dev Madh. Brhaspati (1.26.52) and Katyayana 
(884), who can be regarded as early commentators of Manu, also divide the two terms, 
and Katyayana explicitly uses the expression gopracdra. Clearly, the older meaning of 
pracdra as “activities” became obsolete at an early date. Scharfe (1993, 195-200), ina 
close semantic study of the term pracdra, has clearly shown that it does not mean land 
or pasture but activities (see 7.153 n.). He says that this verse of Manu (9.219) may be 
the best candidate for the meaning of pasture. I think that even here the term refers to 
activity. The confusion is created by the fact that the term has been separated from the 
preceding word yogaksema. The separation is created merely by the addition of an 
anusyara at the end. At every other place in Manu, pracGra refers to some form of ac- 
tivity either within a Tatpurusa compound (antahpurapracdram 7.153; uddsina- 
pracdram 7.155) or with a genitive (mandalasya pracdram 7.154; madhyamasya 


968 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 


pracadram 7.155). It is, thus, always the pracadra of some place or person. I think the 
same is true here, and pracdra here refers to activities or measure taken to ensure 
safety. One can think of watchmen, fences, and the like. These must be continued un- 
disturbed by the partition. 


9.221b I have adopted the reading rdstre in preference to rdstrdt, which is found in all edi- 
tions and most NT mss. The former, I think, makes better sense; the object is to sup- 
press gambling activities within the kingdom, not to banish them from the kingdom 
(verse 224 tells him to execute gamblers; see the locatives in the additional verse in 
La! after verse 223). This sense is made clear in the very next verse with the word 
pratighata. This reading is also found in most ST mss. and is a good number of NT-x 
ones: La! Lo? GMd! TMd4 GMd®° GMy NNg oOrnPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu? Tr! mTr‘ mTr® 
Madh (also vl in Laks). Commentators offer no help with this reading. 


9.225a The last word of this pada is quite unclear; mss. give four major variants: kera, kela, 
kriira, and caura. 1 have adopted the first. The two last ones are probably attempts to 
find easier words for an obscure one; the “k” in kriira supports one of the first two, 
while the “r” of these two support kera over kela. The latter also may be an attempt to 
find an easier word; Bh explains it as kelijivinah and Nd as kelisilan. The reading adop- 
ted is found in: nBe* nCa Hy Jo? wKt! wKt? Lo} 0Or Tj! Tr! mTr4 MTP'MTr® Wa [Jolly 
N RJ N@ Rn Mr Laks Dave. 


9.230b The mss. are deeply divided over the reading of this pada. I have gone with daridrd- 
natharoginadm both because it is probably the /ectio difficilior and because the three- 
word compound nicely parallel pdda-a. This reading is found in: BBe? Bo Hy La! Lo* 
cMd! +Md3 GMy NNg oOr nPu! Pu? Pu® Tj? Tr! mT? MTromTr® Wa [Jolly M Nd] Dev 
Jolly. This is supported by Nd, the only one to comment on this pada. 


9.234 The mss. and the commentators are deeply divided over whether the nouns, pronouns, 
and verbs are in the plural or the singular; several even give singulars in some and plu- 
rals in others. The central verb kurydt in pa@da-b is in the singular in most mss.; only 
the ST and vulgate mss. give the plural. I have opted for the singular throughout. 


9.235c The reading adopted, prthag vedyd, is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of 
NT-x ones: wKt! wKt nKt BKt® Lot [after 8.46] GMd! +Md3 TMd4 GMd> GMy Ox} Tr! 
MTr* MTP MTr° |./olly M Nd]. 


9.236c Even though all the editions have adopted the reading Sariram, the overwhelming 
manuscript evidence points to the compound Sariradhanasamyuktam. This reading is 
supported by almost all ST mss., and it appears likely that the reading sariram in sev- 
eral medieval texts is due to their modern editors using the vulgate MDh reading of this 
passage in their texts. The reading adopted is found in: Bo Ho wKt! nKt' BK? Lo? Lo* 
Lo® cMd! tMd4 cMd> GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Pu? Pud sPu® Pu? Pu Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr¢mTr5 
MT1® Apa Me Na Rc, with support from mss. with the reading Sariram. 

9.238b The sandhi between the two words has caused much difficulty to both scribes and 
commentators. Me tries to explain this by reading vigarhita and seeing the ensuing 
compound as a Dvandva [asampdthyah + vigarhitah|. The most probable explanation 
is that here we have a case of double sandhi: asampdathyd avivahinah being further 
combined to give asampdthydvivahinah. 


9.247b Numerous mss., including most ST ones, have the reading yathoktdani. This is clearly 
a mistake; this expression is so frequent that the scribes may have unconsciously read 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 969 


it in place of the less common yathoptani. The latter reading is found in: Bo Hy Jm Jo! 
Kt? wKt} BK La! Lo! Lo* Lo® tMd4 nNg sOx! Ox? Pu? Pu? Pu4 sPuo Tj}? Te mTr? Wa, 
and supported by Jo? Lo? Tj!. 


9.257¢ The reading here is quite uncertain with no less than eight different versions. There is 
broadest support for tv ete, which is found in: Hy Jm Jo! Kt? Lo? GMd! tMd? rTMd4 
aMy Pu} T? Tr! Tr? MT? MTP [Jolly Nd] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. 


9.258d The reading here is quite unclear, and so is the meaning. I have followed Jolly is 
adopting the reading bhadrapreksanika, although it has very little manuscript support 
and must, therefore, be considered a conjecture. The only real support for this is pro- 
vided by Medhatithi, whose root text clearly contained this reading and who provides 
the gloss: sarvasya karavardhane bhadrapreksanikah prasamsipurusalaksanah. 
Bharuci does not comment on this verse; all others give some form of iksanika. 


9.274a The reading here is very confused; scribes were clearly attempting to make sense of a 
very obscure word. Broadly we have three forms: hidd, ida, and hita@. None of these is 
a well-known term for a dike or dam. B-R and M-W give this meaning for hitd, but 
solely on the basis of its single occurrence in this verse. Other scribes have attempted 
to come up with easier terms, such as tadd/tatd |probably derived from tadaga] and 
setu. Mainly on the basis of its frequency in the mss, I have chosen Aida, although with 
little certainty: Be! nBe? Bo sCa Ho Jo* nK¢ La! Lo! Lo* Lo? TMd? GMd> NNg Ox? 
nPu! Pu’ Tj? Tr? MTr* MTP MT?° [Jolly R] Apa.In Tr! the letter after hi has been erased 
and d@ is written in the margin; it is impossible to make out the original letter, but it is 
probably /@, making its reading hitd. 


9.275b The mss. are divided over the reading of this pada. The reading adopted is found in 
BCa Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nK¢ sKt? Lo? NNg oOr NPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pud Pu? Tj? Tr! mTr? mTr4 
MTr MT1® Vij Apa Madh Mandlik KSS Dave. 


9.279d The reading adopted, dadydc cottamasadhasam, is found in wKt! wKt? La! GMd! tTMd? 
TtMd* GMd@ GMy sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? sPu® Tr! MTr4 mTr5 MTr® Laks. The finite verb is 
supported by Na. 


9.3034 All the editions read vayos ca, and this reading is found in an interesting group of 
mss. which normally do not contain identical readings, namely, several ST ones, the 
old nKt' and NNg, and the vulgate group of mss. Nevertheless, the manuscript support 
for the reading adopted is very strong: Be! nBe? Bo pCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt? BK La! 
Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! GMd° 0Or sOx! Ox? NPu! Pu? Pu} sPu® Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr° 
MT? [Jolly G R] Laks. 


9.314c Mss. give three readings: indu, candra, and soma. I have adopted the first, especially 
because, given the sandhi (cenduh), readings with candra also approximate it. The 
adopted reading is found in: Jo? NKtt Lo? GMd! tMd3 tMd‘4 GMd@ Tj! Tr! mTr* Tro 
[Jolly M G Nd R] Jolly. 


9.335d Here all ST and NT-y (vulgate) mss. have the same reading, which is adopted by all 
editions. The reading utkrstam jatim appears to be supported by Me, although it is un- 
clear whether it is the original reading or merely a commentarial gloss. The reading 
jatito ‘Snute is supported by all the NT-x mss., and it is also the lectio difficilior found 
in: Be! pBe? Bo Ho Jo? wKt! wKt} nKt’ La! Lo! Lo? Lo’ nNg oOr sOx! nPu! sPuo Pu® 
Tj! Tr! [me sh to] Tr? Wa. The first word of this pada is also unclear, the mss. giving 
several variants: ucchritim, ucchritam, utsrtim, utkarsam, and utkrstam. | have gone 


970 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 9 


with the first even though it is found only in a few mss.: sBe? Ho Jo? Lo! Pu® and sup- 
ported by Rn. It makes better grammatical sense than ucchritam and is supported by 
several variants ending in “i.” The original reading of this pada, however, remains un- 
certain. 


CHAPTER TEN 


10.5d The reading tathaiva te appears to have been the reading preferred by Me, who com- 
ments: ye ’pi “ta eva te” iti pathanti tesdm api sa evarthas tajjatiya iti. The adopted 
reading, however, has the support of Bharuci. 


10.13d The original reading here is quite uncertain. Most mss. have the locative reading for 
pratilomya [or pratiloma| with the addition of the particle tu or (a)pi. The locative ap- 
pears to be supported by Bh. This locative, however, may have been influenced by the 
proximity of janmani. 1 think Nd and Rn are correct in connecting janmani with 
ekdntare, the very first of the verse; these two locative thus bracket the entire state- 
ment. If that is the case, then the original reading probably was the instrumental 
pratilomyena, paralleling dnulomydt of pdda-a. The reading adopted is found in: Jo? 
wKt! La! Lo? cGMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd> sOx! Ox? sPu® Tj! [Jolly R]; but the “n” of the 
instrumental is supported by variants in several mss. 


10.18b The original reading of this caste name is unclear, and it is made more problematic 
because of the difficult orthography of the conjunct consonant. Jolly has preferred 
pulkasa, whereas the vulgate appears to read pukkasa. The same name occurs at 4.79; 
10.38, 49; 12.55, and I have attempted to give consistency by adopting the form pul- 
kasa everywhere. I think there is better evidence overall for this form than for the 
others, even though the reading remains uncertain. The adopted reading here is found 
in: Ho Lo! GMd! tMd? tMd4 GM@ Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr® (Jolly R Nd Gr] LaksJolly Dave. 
The readings found in the printed versions of the commentaries are unreliable, because 
each editor appears to have used his own preferred spelling. 


10.21b, c As in verse 18, here also the spelling and pronunciation of the name is inconsistent. 
The reading I have adopted, bhrjjakantaka, is found in: BK La! Lo! Lo* NNg sOx! 
Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu‘ Pud sPu® Pu’ Pu!®. This reading is supported by variants found in 
several mss., including ST ones. Likewise, the reading of pa@da-c is quite unclear with 
regard to both puspadhah and Saikha. 


10.23b The sandhi here is unclear. Biihler takes the two words as sudhanvd + Gcdrya. This 
division with the sandhi of two d@’s is supported by Go, who also reads dcdrya. Jolly, 
on the other hand, takes the two words to be sudhanva and carya without any sandhi, 
but he gives no reason for taking the latter term to be cdrya rather than Gcdrya. From 
Go's commentary it appears that both the Satvata and the Acarya earned their liveli- 
hood by functioning as temple or shrine priests (devapijana). Although Bh, Go, Rc, 
and Mr take these as two separate names, Nd appears to take sudhanvacdrya as a sin- 
gle term, because he sees only five names in the verse. 


10.27cd Both the reading and the meaning of the second half-verse are quite unclear. There 
are four readings: mdtrjatyam (locative), matrjatyah (nominative plural), matrjatya 
(instrumental), or matrjdtau (locative). Most commentators support the locative. Only 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 10 971 


Me prefers the nominative. Of the four forms, I think the least probable is the last; it 
must be construed as a Bahuvrihi to obtain the masculine ending; I am unclear as to 
how that would fit with the syntax of the verse. I have also rejected the locative 
mdatrjatyam. This would force us to assume that the verse is speaking about three kinds 
of women; the clear parallel between svayonisu and pravardsu yonisu makes it un- 
likely that a third category would be introduced with jati in place of yoni. Further, this 
reading would also imply that pratiloma sexual unions as envisaged here would beget 
children who belong to the same class as the father. The reading preferred by Me is the 
nominative, but his explanation is labored with the introduction of a correlative ye and 
the assumption that prasiyante is passive (contrary to its use as an indicative in verses 
30-1): ye ca mdtrjatyah prasityante ’nulomd mdatrjdtiya .. . te’ pi svayonisu sadrsan 
janayanti. The parallel verse in MBh 13.48.14 reads: matrjatyam prasityante pravara 
hinayonisu, but this is clearly a lectio facilior and an attempt to resolve the difficulties 
of the original. I have adopted the instrumental mdtrjatyd, connecting it syntactically 
with pravardsu: “in wombs that are higher by reason of the mother’s caste.” This cor- 
responds to what will be said in the very next verse, namely, that a person begets chil- 
dren similar to him also from women of the class immediately below theirs also in the 
case of outcastes. Thus, a Vaidehika male (Vaisya father and Ksatriya mother) is one 
grade above a Magadha female (Vaisya father and Brahmin mother). In terms of the 
mother’s jdti, hower, the Magadha with a Brahmin mother is superior to the Vaidehika 
with a Ksatriya mother. So, a Vaidehika begets children belonging to his own caste 
through a Magadha woman. Granted, this is a somewhat elaborate explanation; but it 
appears to be the only plausible one, given the reading we have. The reading I have 
adopted is found in Lo* rMd? tMd* GMd5 GMy nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu!® Tr? mTr° Volly 
MI. 


10.34b Although many mss. read dasa, the correct spelling is clearly dasa. The connection of 


10.44 


this class of people with navigation is clearlly indicated in MDh 8.408-9. There is 
overwhelming manuscript support for the reading -jivinam, but see 10.32b where the 
reading clearly is -jivanam. 


The ethnic names contained in this verse have a variety of readings, and it is impossi- 
ble to determine the original forms. The readings given in the edition, therefore, are 
uncertain. In pdda-a the reading pundraka is found in: Jo? NK¢ Lo? Lo* TMd3 tMd4 
GMd GMy NNg sOx! sPuo Pu!® Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTromTr® Wa. In the last pada, the read- 
ing adopted, daradas tathd is found in: Be! Bo nKt* BK? Lo? GMd! rMd4 GMd? nNg 
sOx! sPuo Pu? Pul? Tr! mTr4 MTremTr° [Jolly M G Nd Gr], a reading adopted also by 
Jolly and Biihler. 


10.52b The mss. are deeply divided over the reading. Even in the ST, the Grantha mss. read 


bhandesu, while the Telugu and Malayalam ones read bhande ca, which I have adopt- 
ed. This reading is found in: Bo nCa Ho Jo? wKt! wKt nKt La! Lo! Lo? Lot tMd? 
1tMd? nNg 0OrsOx! Pu? sPuo Pu!? Ty! Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTP MTr® Wa | Jolly M Gr] Jolly. 


10.62c The adopted the reading, abhyavapattau, is found in most of the ST mss. and a good 


number of NT-x ones: Be! nKt! nKt Lo* tMd? tMd4 GMd? GMy NNg nPu! Pu? Pu4 PuS 
Pu’ Pu! Tr! mTr4 MTr? Yolly M® G Nd] Apa Me GoJha. In Laks the editor has adopted 
upapattau even though at least two mss. record the reading avapattau. The reading 
avapatti is also supported by the parallel in ViDh 16.18, which reads stribaladyava- 
pattau. The word abhyavapatti or the verb abhi-ava Vpad is not recorded in B-R or 
M-W dictionaries; Apte gives the verb as meaning “to protect.” 


972 Notes t6 the Edition: Chapter 10 


10.63a I have adopted akrodhah in place of asteyam, because it is found in most of the ST 
mss. and a large number of NT-x ones: Be! Bo Ho nKt¢ BK® La! Lo4 TMd? aMy nNg 
sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu‘ sPu® Pu’ Pu!? mTr> Wa [Jolly M Nd] Vis. See also the parallel at 
11.223. The reading asteyam, however, is found in the parallel verse in YDh 1.122. The 
reading here is clearly uncertain. 


10.79b The mss. are divided over the three readings: krsi, krsth, and krsih. The second is im- 
possible as a feminine nominative plural; N@ is obliged to call it a Vedic form! J have 
opted for the first; the dual is the lectio difficilior, and | think vantk here stands outside 
the compound as a separate word for trade. The adopted reading is found in: Hy Jo? 
Lo* Lo? cGMd! tMd? Tj! Tr? Wa [Jolly M G R Nd] Vij Jolly. 


10.90a Most mss. and editions have the reading krsyam; a few mss. record krsyat. This is 
clearly an error; scribes were influenced by the adjacent utpddya requiring an object in 
the accusative. There is no word krsyd (fem.) or krsya (mas./neuter). The term is krsi 
and the correct reading here is krsyd in the instrumental. This reading is found in nBe* 
Hy Jo? wKt! wK@ nKt* Lo? Lot rMd4 GMy Ox? Pu? Put Tr! Tr? mTr4 mTr°/olly. The 
commentators Me, Go, Ku, Na, and Rn support the instrumental. 


10.93d All but two of the NT mss. have the reading niyacchati. Jolly appears to have adopted 
nigacchati conjecturally; all the mss. available to him read niyacchati. | also have 
adopted nigacchati, which gives a much better sense and is found, with a single 
variant, in all the ST mss.: Lo* TMd? tTMd4 GMd? GMy NNg Tr! MTr*# MTP MTY® Jolly. 
See the similar variants at 12.11. 


10.97b The alternate reading, paradharmat svanusthitat, has strong manuscript support and is 
found in most ST mss. The ablative here, however, may have been influenced by 
varam of pdda-a. | have adopted the NT reading both because it is the lectio difficilior 
and because it is in several ways supported by many commentators. Me, Go, Ku, and 
Ra support the presence of the negative particle na, and Go, Ku, and Rn specifically 
comment on the term pdrakyah. This reading is also found in all the medieval cita- 
tions. The original reading here, however, remains somewhat uncertain. 


10.101¢ The reading adopted, karSitah, is found in Ho Jo?nKt* Lo! Lo? Lo’ Lot GMd! tMd?3 
TMd* GMd? GMy nNg sOx' nPu! Pu? Put Pu> sPu® Pu? Pu® Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr> Wa. 
For this reading, see 8.411b note. 


10.104d The reading adopted, dosena, is found in all the ST mss.: *Md? TMd4* GMd@ GMy Tr! 
mTr‘4 mTr°Har-A Madh. Although the reading remains uncertain, I think the parallel in 
105¢ favors dosena here also; see also dosa in verse 103. 


10.105¢ The reading adopted, dosena, is found in: Jo? wKt? nKt* La! Lo? GMd! tMd? GMd5 
GMy oOr Pu? Pu? Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? MTr* MTP MT? [Jolly G R Nd] Apa Madh Rc Jolly. 


10.107d I have adopted the reading brboh conjecturally. The mss. present a wide variety of 
readings, a clear indication that the scribes did not know what to make of this word. 
Sayana in his commentary on RV 6.45.31 cites this verse with the reading brboh and 
gives the story behind the saying; interestingly, however, Madhava, reputedly his 
brother, has a very different reading in his citation of this verse. 


10.1196 The adopted reading is found in: Be! Bo Ho nKf Lo! Lo? rMd! GMy NNg sOx! Ox? 
nPu! Pu? Pu4 Pu> sPuS Pu? Pu® Tr! mTr> Wa [Jolly G Ku] Go Ku Laks Jolly. The 
reading of Me is unclear: tathad cdhave na sy&t parGhmukhah | bhaye upasthite 
pardhmukho yuddhe na sydd ity arthah. \t is unclear whether cdhave is merely a gloss 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 10 973 


and bhaye is from the root text or vice versa. The fact that the text required such an 
explanation favors bhaye as the root; if it was Ghave the text would have been clear. In 
Go, on the other hand, it is clear that his root had bhaye, for he comments: 
prajaraksanapravyrttasya ca yadi kutascid bhayam syat tada na yuddhaparadnmukhah 
sydt. The same explanation is given by Ku. 


10.121a-b The syntax of the first half-verse is turbid; yadi does not make much sense with the 


present participle akanksan. The commentators Me, Ku, Nd, and Mr appear to read 
akankset, although it is unclear whether this is the root or a gloss. A finite verb would 
make better sense with yadi. On the other hand, Go, reading the present participle, 
provides the following explanation: §a@dro brahmanasuSriisayd Gjivan yadi 
vrttyakanksi syat tadd ksatriyam paricaret Jolly follows Me in substituting iti for yadi. 
This reading, however, has almost no manuscript support. 


10.127b Mss. give three readings here: vrtta, vrtti, and dharma. The last has little support. 


11.1b 


11.3d 


11.5x 


11.8¢ 


There is little to choose between the other two. I have gone with the first principally 
because it parallels sadvrttam of the very next verse, a reading supported by most mss. 
The reading adopted is found in : Be! Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Kt? nKtt sOx! Pud sPuS Pu? Pu8 
Tj? mT? MTr® WaNa Rc Mandlik Jolly KSS. 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 


The reading sarvavedasam, which I have adopted, is found in: Be! Ho Hy Jo? wKt! Kt? 
nK¢ BK Lo* GMd> GMy nPu! Pu Pu? Pu’ Pu!? Tj? Tr! mTr# mTrSmTr® Wa [Jolly M] 
Apa Laks Me Go Na Nd Mr Jha Dave. 


Even though an alternate reading with vidhiyate is found in several significant mss., 
including all the ST ones, all the commentators favor the adopted reading. 


The additional verse given as verse 6 in the vulgate editions is omitted in BBe? Bo Hy 

wKt! sKé Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo* TMd* cMd> GMy NNg sOx! Ox? Pud sPuo Pu? Pu’ Pul® Tj! 

Tr? MT? Wa [Jolly M G N R]. This verse is also not commented by any commentator 
other than Ku. It is not notices by Bh, Me, and Go. Jolly gives the verse within brack- 
ets. This verse must have entered the text at a relatively early date, because it is found 

in several ST mss. and in the old nKt. 


Two diametrically opposed interpretations of this pada have produced two different 
readings: sa pitasomapirvah and apitasomaparvah. According to the first interpreta- 
tion, even a man who has already performed a Soma sacrifice is deprived of the fruits 
of a Soma sacrifice he performs without the minimum wealth specified in the previous 
verse. Some, such as Me and, following him, Vij (on YDh1.124), consequently permit a 
man with lesser wealth to perform the sacrifice if it is the first time he is doing so. The 
implication is that the first Soma sacrifice is obligatory (#itya, hence the exception), 
whereas subsequent ones are optional (kdmya). This is unconvincing; if this were the 
case why would Manu put the particle api “even”? Others, such as Ku, draws an oppo- 
site conclusion: a fortiori, a person who has never performed a Soma sacrifice should 
not perform one without the minimum wealth. According to the second interpretation, 
even a man who has never performed a Soma sacrifice is forbidden to perform one 
without the minimum wealth; a fortiori, those who have already performed one are 
also forbidden, because such sacrifices are optional. The reading with the negative 


974 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 


apita is favored by Bh, Go, Nd, and Rc. I favor this interpretation, because it highlights 
the significance of the particle api. I think the original reading was so (a)pitasoma- 
pirvah, a reading that was misunderstood and changed to sa pitasomapirvah by some 
and to apitasomapirvah by others. The adopted reading is found, however, only in 
tMd? Tr? mTr4 MTP MTr® BA and must, therefore, be considered somewhat conjectural. 


11.28d I have followed here the reading of the ST mss., all of which give the reading 


avicaritam. Of the NT mss., only Pu? has this reading. For a detailed discussion of this 
reading, see note to 8.295. 


11.31a The usual optative form vedayeta has been adopted by all the editions, even though it 


is found in a minority of mss. all belonging to NT. A broad range of mss., including 
most ST ones, have the adopted reading, vedayita: nBe? Bo Ho Hy Jo? La! Lo? Lo? Lo4 
cMd! GMd> aMy oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu3 Put sPu° Tj! Tr? MTr4 mTr6 [Jolly R]. The 
latter is clearly the /ectio difficilior, a form of the optative that emerges in late Vedic 
texts and séitra literature. It is easy to see how this unusual optative could have been 
changed to the more normal vedayeta, and very difficult to see how the latter could 
have been changed into the former in so many mss. 


11.33b The presence of iti here makes it most probable that the term is avicdritam and not 


avicdrayan. The former is found in all ST mss. but only in two NT ones. Here also the 
ST has proved to contain the superior reading. For iti avicdritam, see 11.28. The read- 
ing adopted is found in: NKt La! GMd! tMd? TMd* GMd> GMy Tr! mTr¢ Tr? mTr® 
[Jolly G}. 


11.36a The reading adopted, naiva, is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of NT-x 


ones: Jo? Lo? Lo* GMd! tMd3 tMd4 GMd? NNg 0Or Ox? Pu!? Tr! mTr?# mTromTr? [Jolly 
R] Apa Dev. 


11.40b All the editions read prajah. The singular prajam, however, has broader manuscript 


support, including most mss. of the ST: Be! Bo Ho nKf Lo! Lo? GMd! tMd3 1Md* 
caMd5 cMy nNg sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pud sPuo Pu? Pu’ Pu! Tr! Tr? wTr¢ MTr5 
MTr® Wa. 


11.44c The reading prasajan, possibly due to the sandhi creating prasajamS, has created 


problems for the scribes; hence the simplification to prasaktas found in many mss. and 
adopted by some editors, including Jolly. The present participle here makes much bet- 
ter sense paralleling the participles in p@das a and b. The reading adopted is found in: 
Bo BCa Ho La! Lo* GMd GMy NNg sOx! nPu! sPu® mTr* MTr°Vis Madh. Derrett gives 
the reading prasaktas both in the root and in the commentary of BA without any note. 


11.50a There are numerous variant readings, the three major ones being piitindsatva, 


pittinasikya, and pautinasikya. The last is found in only a few mss. mostly of NT-y and 
can be rejected. It is unclear whether the original was ndsatva or ndsikya. 1 have 

adopted the former both because it is represented (with many variants) of both the ST 
and the NT-x, and because the abstract noun parallels pativakratdm of the next pada. 

The adopted reading is found in: GMd! GMy Pu!® Tr! mTr4 MTr° Wa Jolly [but see its 
many variants given in the critical apparatus]. The reading with nasikya, however, is 

supported by the parallel in YDh 3.211 with patindsikah. 


11.53a Mss. of both ST and NT are deeply divided over the two readings, karm@vasesa and 


karmavi§esa. 1 think both the manuscript evidence and the probable meaning of the 
verse favors the former, which is found in: Be! sBe? Ho wKt} nKt* GMd! cMd5 GMy 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 975 


nNg sOx! sPuS Tr! MTr4¢mTr> MTr® WaJolly. This reading is also supported by the 
commentaries of Bh [here and ad 8.66] Me, Go, Ku, and Na. 


11.55d The syntax calls for the nominative samyogah rather than the accusative samyogani. 
The reading adopted is found in: nKt* BKt§ GMd! GMd? GMy Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu® 
MTr‘ [Jolly R Nd] Me Jolly. 


11.59a The adopted reading, svayonyGsu, is attested (if we include the variants) in a large 
spectrum of mss. of both ST and NT. It is found in: Be! Bo Hy Jo? wKt! wKt nKt! 
BKt> Lo! Lot GM@® GMy NNg sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pu> sPu® Pu’? Pul? T? MTr* mTr> Wa 
[Jolly M'-2-4-5-9] Nd Go. The grammatical form yonyd, however, is unusual, especially 
as anoun [see RV 8.45.30 for the adjective]. The form may also be influenced by the 
Prakrit formations in -ya, such as in Sriya and striyd. See Edgerton 1953, I: 10.6. 


11.60b Although the majority of the mss. read vikrayah and vikraydh, it is clear that the dual 
is required here. The scribal confusion may have been created by the perception that 
paradara is a separate word and not part of the compound. The commentator Na@ notes 
the abnormality of the singular masculine and ascribes it to a vedic peculiarity: 
pGradaryadtmavikraya ity ekavacanam chdndhasam. The adopted reading is found in: 
wKt! wKt? nKt* Lo! Lo? nNg Ox? Pu’ Tj! Tj? Wa [Jolly R] Jolly. 


11.62b Two quite divergent readings are found in the mss. The reading vaérdhusitvam is sup- 
ported by all the ST mss. and a considerable number of NT ones. The exact form of the 
last portion of the pada is, however, uncertain. Many have the compound vratacyutih, 
while others have vratdcuytih. 1 think the latter must be actually vratdc cyutih; scribes 
often fail to double the “c” especially before a conjunct consonant. The form vratdc 
cyutih is found only in Jo? Tr? Rn. 


11.66a All the NT mss., as well as Me, Nd, Ku, Rn and Mr, have the reading steyam, with the 
exception of a few that read stainyam. The NT reading is clearly the lectio facilior. All 
the ST mss. contain the more difficult strainyam, which I have adopted. This appears 
to be reading of Bh’s root text. Derrett (1975, I: 33) notes that Pandit Aithal examined 
13 Malayalam manuscripts and found them all to read strainyam. It is also unclear why 
steya here should be mentioned without reference to the objects stolen, when specific 
forms of theft are referred to in verses 58, 67, and 71. Moreover, the three points in this 
half-verse go together: not establishing the fires, acting like a woman [perhaps homo- 
sexuality], and not paying the debts all imply refusal to get married. 


11.66d The reading vyasanakriyd has broad mss. support, including all ST ones. It is found in: 
Be! La! Lot GMd! tMd? tMd?* GMd> Ox? nPu! Pué Pu’ Pu!® Tr! mTr* Tro mTr® Jolly 
M]. This reading is supported by Nd and Rc. The previous word originally was some 
form of kauSilya, because it is found in all the transmission lines. The reading kautilya, 
which Derrett (1975, I: 33) adopts, is clearly the lectio facilior and must have been 
introduced precisely because of the difficulty of kauSilya. 


11.68c The reading adopted, pumsi ca maithunyam, is found in: Bo Jo? wKt! nKt* La! Lo! 
Lo? Lo? GMd! tMd? tMd4 GMd? GMy oOr Ox? nPu! Pu? Pud Pu? Tj! Tr! Tr? Trt mT 
MTr® Wa [Jolly R Nd] Go Vij Apa. 

11.80b I have adopted samyak over sadyah principally because it is represented in a wider 


range of mss., including all but two of the ST: Be! nKt‘ nKt Lo! Lo? Lot cGMd! rMd? 
GMd? GMy nNg nPu! Pu? Put Pu® Tr! mTr* wT r® Wa (lolly M45 Nd] Apa Me Dave Jha. 


976 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 


11.81a In the parallel passages at A pDh 1.24.21; GDh 22.8; VaDh 20.28, the term used is 
pratirdddha. Manu appears to prefer pratiroddha: see also 3.153 and 9.93. In the par- 
allel verse at YDh 3.246 the term is not used. 


11.104a The reading adopted, gurutalpo, is found in Be! Ho Jo? wKt? NKf La! Lo? Lo? NNg 
sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pué sPu® Pu’ Pu!® Tj! Tr! [Jolly M R Nd] Apa Na Jolly. Most ST 
mss. have the reading gurutalpago, which would make the pada hypermetric. Me also 
appears to have the latter reading, giving the vulgate version as a pdtha. The commen- 
tary of Bh also has gurutalpagah, but in both cases it is unclear whether this reflects 
the reading of the root text or is simply a gloss. 


11.106b The reading here is somewhat uncertain, but I have adopted nirjane because it is 
found in all but one ST mss., as well as in a number of NT ones: nCa Ho wKt! wKt 
NKt¢! TMd3 tMd4 GMd> GMy sOx! sPuo Pu!? Tr! mTr4 MTP MTr° Vis. 


11.110c [I think the participle @caran is better with the syntax. The participial form is also 
found in most ST mss. and a good number of NT ones. The reading adopted is found in 
Jo? BK Lo? GMd> sOx! nPu! Pu? Put Pu> sPuS Pu? Pul® mTr® Wa [Jolly M G Nd Ra] 
Vis Jolly. See also all the mss. that read caran. 


11.112c Even though all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading Gsinah, it is found 
in only a few mss. The adopted reading, dsita, is found in: Be! Ho Jo? wKt! wKt} nKt! 
wKt? Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot GMd! TMd? Md‘ GMy nNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu® 
Tj! Tr! mTr‘4 MTr° [Jolly M4 R Nd Ku Gr] Vif Apa. 


11.113a The reading adopted, abhisaktam, is found in Be! Ho nKf Lo! Lot GMd! sOx! Ox? 
Pu mTr?# mTr° Vis Apa Na[Jolly M Me]. It is also supported, however, by the many 
mss. with the impossible reading abhisiktam. Even though the printed editions of Me 
has abhisastdm, the gloss grhitdém goes better with abhisaktam; so also do the glosses 
of Na@: parakrtam, of Nd: piditam, and of Re: akrantam. 


11.113d The mss. are evenly divided between the equally possible readings: vimoksayet and 
vimocayet. | have gone with the former principally because many ST mss. (especially 
the Malayalam ones) and significant NT-x ones, as well as three medieval citations 
support it: Be! Bo pCa wKt! nKt* Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! 1Md?* Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu® 
Tj! Tr? MTr* mTr° Wa Vis Apa Madh.The reading, however, remains uncertain. 


11.116b Most NT mss. have the reading gam in the singular. This reading was probably influ- 
enced by the cow in the singular in the preceding verses 113-5. But this and the fol- 
lowing verse conclude the description of the vow and picks up the theme of following 
cows (in the plural) that was the subject of the earlier verses 111-2. The reading 
adopted is found in: Be! NKt* Lo? Lo* GMd! +Md? tMd4 GMd> GMy nNg nPu! Pu’ Pu!® 
Tj! Tr! mTr4 mTr> MTr° [Jolly M G Nd Ku R] Vis Vij Apa Madh Jolly. 


11.120b Even though all editors have adopted the reading samety rcd, it is supported by very 
few mss. Me clearly indicates that the pratika intended here is simply sam: “sam ity 
anayd.” The formula is TA 2.1.8: sam md sificantu marutah. The pratika then should 
be either sam iti or sam mety. The reading adopted is found in: Be! Bo Ho Hy Jo* wKt? 
nKt* La! Lo! Lo? Lo* GMd! GMd5 GMy NNg oOr sOx! nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu‘ Pu sPu® Pu? 
Pu’ Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr° [Jolly M3*> G R Nd] Apa Mddh Me Rn. 


11.126b Me gives the reading in the nominative aindavo mdsah. This makes good sense, as it 
refers to the “lunar month,” namely, the Candrayana fast. It appears that the presence 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 977 


of the neuter sodhanam has influenced the other two words. However, the manuscript 
evidence for the accusative endings is strong and I have retained them in the edition. 


11.139a The original reading of the word is quite unclear, mss. giving jila, jala, jina,and the 
like. Clearly this was a term that the scribes were unfamiliar with. The commentators 
unanimously explain the term as a “leather bag” (carmaputa), but it is unclear what the 
reading of their root text was; most editors use jina, whose choice may have been in- 
fluenced by the vulgate reading of Manu. The only other Dharmasdstra to use the term 
is the GDh (22.26) in a parallel text giving the penance for killing a wanton Brahmin 
woman. In all likelihood, the term in the GDh reads jila, which is Maskarin’s reading. 
Haradatta, however, reads nila both in the GDh and in MDh 11.139 that he cites. I think 
the evidence favors jila, which is, however, found only in Be! nKt* Lo* oOr nPu! Pu> 
Pu’ MTr4 MTPMTr® Bh. The mss. with jina supports the long “7,” while the “I” has the 
support of most ST mss. That this term, which may have been originally from a 
regional dialect, was obscure even by the time of Yajfiavalkya is demonstrated by the 
fact that in the parallel verse (YDh 3.268) he substitutes the more common term for a 
leather bag, drti. Sanskrit dictionaries (B-R, M-W, Apte) depend solely on this verse of 
Manu to give the meaning of leather bag to the term jina. 


11.141a Most NT mss. have the reading asthimatam. I think this must have been a scribal 
change of the more difficult asthanvataém, which is retained in all the ST mss. and a 
few NT ones: GMd! GMd@® Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTré MTr® [/olly Nd Gr] Jolly. See also the 
variant asthinvatam. Only Na clearly supports this reading, glossing: asthanvatam 
asthimatdm. See, however, asthimatam in 141b. 


11.145¢ The “r” and “1” in the two readings @rambe and Glambe are clearly regional or dial- 
ectical variations. Although dlamba is viewed as the “correct” form, I have gone with 
the former because it is represented in a broad spectrum of mss.: Be! Ho nKt Lo4 
GMd! tMd* sOx! nPu! sPu® Pu!? mTr4 MTr5mTr®° Wa [Jolly M Nd] Bh [ad 11.143 in 
MT? Apa Jolly. 


11.156a All the ST mss., as well as quite a number of NT-x ones, read jagdhva, which I have 
adopted: Jo? wKt! wKt} nKt* La! Lo? Lo’ GMd! tMd? tMd* GMd?° GMy NNg oOr nPu! 
Pu? Pu4 Tj! Tr! mTr* mTr® Wa. See also the use of jagdhvd in preference to bhuktva 
with regard to meat at 5.31, 33; 11.153. The term appears to have somewhat of a nega- 
tive sense, similar to the English devour, and it is often used with reference to eating 
deplorable things: 4.112; 5.19, 20; 11.57, 160; 12.68. 


11.158b There are widely different readings in the mss. I have opted for samdvrttakah, which 
is found in Be! nKt* La! Lo4 Md? nNg oOr sOx! nPu! sPu® Pu® Pu!® [Jolly M'-?-5-9 
Apa. The reading here, however, is uncertain. 


11.159a The mss. are evenly divided over the two readings, vratacari and brahmacari. I have 
opted for the former both because it is the lectio difficilior and because it is found in all 
the ST mss., as well as in a cross section of NT-x ones, especially the old nKt* and 
NNg. This reading is found in: Be! NKtt nKt La! Lo? Lo* cMd! tMd? 1TMd4 cMd® GMy 
NNg Pu? Pu? Tr! Tr? MTr?MTr* MTr° Wa [Jolly M4~5~°G N Nd] Vis Me Go Na Nd Re 
Jolly Jha Dave. 


11.161a Even though all the editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading ajfdna, it is 
found in only few mss. The reading adopted ajfdta is found in: Be! sBe’ Bo Hy Jo? 
wKt? NKt' La! GMd! tMd? tTMd4 GMa NNg oOr Pu Put Pud Pu? Pu8 Pu!l® Tj? Tr! Tr? 
MI? MTr° MTr® Wa. 


978 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 


11.165b Mss. are divided over the two major readings: vesmanah and vesmatah. I have gone 
vesman principally because all the ST mss., as well as several NT-y ones, support it. 
The reading adopted is found in Be! nBe? nKf Lo? Lo? GMd! GMy sOx! Pu? Put sPu® 
Tj! mTr‘ mTr® [ Jolly Nd R]Apa Madh. This reading with “n” in place of “t” is sup- 
ported by the mss. with the reading vesmani, a reading also supported by Me. 


11.169b The reading adopted with khura in place of sapha has the broadest manuscript sup- 
port, including all the ST mss.: sBe? Jo? wKt? NK¢' La! Lo? GMd! tMd? cGMd GMy 
sOx! nPu! Pu? Put sPu® Tj! Tr! mTr? MTP mTr® Wa [ Jolly G R Nd] Vij. 


11.183b One may argue that bahih is the lectio difficilior, because saha may have been influ- 
enced by the instrumental. See also the parallel bandhavath saha at 184d. Yet, I have 
opted for saha because of the overwhelming manuscript support from both the ST and 
the NT-x: Bo Ho nKt! BK} La! rMd3 rMd4 GMd5 GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? Pu? sPuo Pu? 
Pu! Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTr MTr® [Jolly M G R] Jolly. 


11.185d All but two ST mss. and numerous NT-x ones have the accusative reading yatram 
laukikim. This, I think, goes against the grammar, the intransitive verb nivarteran re- 
quiring the nominative. The accusative may have been influenced by the presence of 
the neuter pradanam in pdda-c. The nominative reading that I have adopted is found 
in: BBe? BCa Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKt* Lo! Lo? Lo? tMd4 NNg 0Or nPu! Pu? 
Pu} Put Pu Tj! Tj? mTr [Jolly Ku R]Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. GMd' gives the nomina- 
tive of the first word and the accusative of the second. 


11.190c Of the three major readings, caindn, caitdn, and caiva, | think, the manuscript evi- 
dence supports the first. It is found in nBe? wKt La! Lo? Lo* Md? TMd4 nPu! Pu? Put 
Pu® and is also supported by others with the variant caindn. 


11.203b Although several editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading samnivesya, the 
vast majority of the mss. record the reading adopted samnisevya: Be! BBe? Bo Ho 
wKt! nK¢ BK La! Lo! Lot GMd! TMd3 tMd4 GMd@ GMy NNg oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? 
Pu} Put Pue Pu? mTr‘ MTr° MTr® Wa Me Re Dave Jha. 


11.209c The question is whether Manu uses k&rcchra as a masculine or a neuter noun. Mss. are 
divided over this here and at verses 157 and 213. At verses 192 and 216, however, mss. 
are in agreement that the term is masculine. In several other verses where the term 
occurs in the nominative, it is placed in the neuter; but this may be because it is used 
adjectivally to qualify a neuter word such as cdndrdyana and sdntapana: 11.178, 216. 
In all other occasions, krcchram is used in the accusative making it impossible to de- 
termine the gender. I think Manu generally uses krcchra as a masculine word. 


11.224a The mss. are divided over the case of ahar and nisd. Most give the genitive ahnah, 
and this is clearly the correct reading. With regard to niga, on the other hand, most 
mss. of both ST and NT prefer the locative nisayain and this is also given by Me, al- 
though it is unclear whether it is the root or a gloss. I have opted for the genitive in 
both cases; it is somewhat anomalous for there to be a shift in the case between the two 
words, and orthographically 41a and UT in the mss. can be confusing. Some scribes, 
and even commentators, may have forgotten that the genitive is the preferred case with 
multiplicative numerals. The form ahnah [see parallel at 11.260] is found in: Be! sBe 
Bo pCa Ho Hy Jo? wKt! wKU NKt’ Lo! Lo? Lo? Lo*rMd3 tMd‘4 NNg oOrsOx! nPu! 
Pu? Pué Pu? Pu’ Pu!l® Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly M G R] Me Go N& Rn Re Mr Jolly Sha 
Dave. The form nisa@yah is found in: Bo Be? Bo Hy wKt? Lo? NNg Pud Pu’? Tj? Tr? Wa 
[Jolly G] Go NG Mr Jolly. 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 979 


11.231c Mss. have differing readings of the two words here: evam and etat, and kuryam and 
kuryat. In the case of the former, I think the preponderance of manuscript evidence 
supports evam, which is found in: Bo Ho Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? nKt Lo! Lo? Lo? Lot tMd? 
+Md4 GMd> NNg Ox? nPul Pu? Pu4 Pu!® Tj! Tj? Tr! Tr? [Jolly M?-4 Ku R] Na Ku Man- 
dlik Jha KSS Dave. The decision is more difficult in the case of the latter, both read- 
ings having strong manuscript support from both ST and NT. I think we are here 
dealing not with an external prohibition: “Don’t do this again!” implied by the third 
person kurydt, but with an internal determination “I will not do this again!”, which is 
supported by the very first statement of the next verse: evam samcintya. The first per- 
son reading kuryam is found in: Bo Ho Jm Jo! Jo? K? wKt? BKt? Lo! Lot tMd? rTMd?* 
GMy NNg 0Or sOx! Ox? NPu! sPu® Pu® Tj! Tj? Tr? Wa [Jolly M34 Ku RN] Ku Rn Re 
Go Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. The reading, however, is uncertain. 


11.231d Me appears to prefer the gerund nivrtya He comments: kriyabhedam ca darsayati 
ktvdpratyayena samtapya nivrtyeti. 


11.237a All editions read samyata. The correct reading is clearly samsita, which is found in 
the vast majority of the mss, especially the ST ones. Besides the ones with variants of 
the term recorded in the critical apparatus, the adopted reading is found in: BK? La! 
cMd! tMd3 GMd? NNg oOrsPu® Tr! mTr4 MTP? MT?°. 


11.238a There is broad manuscript support for both the plural agadah and the singular 
agadah. The overwhelming support for the plural in most ST mss. prompts me to 
adopt it, although the reading remains uncertain. The adopted reading is found in: Be! 
Ho Jo? Lo? GMd! GMd> GMy NNg Pud Pu? Pu!® Tr! Tr? mTr* MTr® Wa Volly M G N Nd] 
Me Go Na Jolly Jha Dave. 


11.247 After verse 247 most NT mss. add the verse given in the critical apparatus. Jolly also 
suspected this verse to be spurious and placed it within brackets in his edition. This 
verse in missing in all the ST mss., showing once again the general superiority of this 
line of transmission. It is also missing in Lo? Pu!®, and placed after 248 in Lo*. This 
verse is not commented by Bh, Go, and Nd. It is given by Me with this introductory 
comment, which indicates that he himself did not accept the authenticity of this verse: 
kecid atremam Slokam pirvam adhiyate (this comment is found in my ms. Pu!®, but 
omitted in the editions of Mandlik, Jha, and Dave). 


11.249a This pdda has been subject to numerous emendations, probably because the original 
was hypermetric with nine syllables. This, I think, is the correct reading adopted in the 
edition and found in: Bo Ho Jo? Lot cGMd! TMd? tMd* GMd? GMy nNg sOx! Ox? Pu? 
sPuo Pu? Tr! mTr°mTr° | Jolly M G Nd] Apa Rc.This verse was probably a proverbial 
saying [hence the possibility of hypermeter] and found also in BDh 4.1.29 and VaDh 
26.4 with the same reading. Several mss. attempt to restore the proper meter by delet- 
ing “ka” and reading savyGhrtih. 


11.250b Mss. present widely varying readings of the final portion of this pada. | think the 
preponderance of evidence suggests that prati is the final word of the pada. J also think 
that the correct form of the other word is trca (a set of three verses) and not tryrca (tri 
+ rca) as assumed by Jolly (see 11.255d), or trica as found in several ST mss. The 
reading adopted is found in: TMd> TMd4 NNg mTr* MTr°MTr® Apa. The reading, 
however, is uncertain. 


6? 


11.252a The correct reading here must be havispantiyam [RV 10.88] The letter “p” after “s” in 
Devanagari can look very much like “y,” with several mss. reading havisydntiyam. The 


980 Notes to the Edition: Chapter 11 


adopted reading is found in: Bo Ho sKt® Lo? Lot GMd! GMd* My Pw Pu® Pu!® mTr* 
MTr MTr° Bh Vij Apa, with the support of mss. reading havispantiyam. 


11.252c The reading adopted, japtva ca, is found in: BBe? wKt NK Lo! Lo? GMd! rMd? oOr 
sOx! nPu! Pu? Put sPuS mTr*> Wa [Jolly G] Apa (see VaDh 26.7). The reading is 
uncertain. 


11.264b Even though all editors, including Jolly, have adopted the reading ksiptam, it is found 
in only a very small number of mss. Although in Devanagari “pt” and “pr” can be 
orthographically confusing, in the southern scripts the two are quite distinct. The 
reading adopted, ksipram, was also the reading preferred by Biihler. The noun Josta 
can be either masculine or neuter. I have adopted the masculine, which is found in 
most ST mss.: Be! Ho wKt} nKt La! Lo? Lo? Lo* GMd! tMd? cMd nNg Pu? Pu? Pu4 
Tj! Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTP MTr® Wa Apa. 


11.265a All the ST mss. and a considerably number of NT ones have the reading anyani. In 
spite of this strong manuscript support, I have opted for the reading @dydni, principally 
because it is the preferred reading both of Bh, who comments: yajiimsy adyani sam- 
hitégatadni na tu brahmanamadhye ’ dhitani padakramanvitani [which is repeated al- 
most verbatim by Go], and of Me, who glosses ddyani mukhyanity arthah. The adopted 
reading is found in: Jo? NKf sKt® Lo? Lot NNg nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu> Pu? Pu® Pu!? mTr° 
[Jolly M G] Bh Me Go Jolly Jha Dave. 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


12.6c The reading adopted, anibaddha, is found in: NK BKt? Lo? GMd! tMd4 GMy oOr nPul! 
Pu? Pu? Pu? Pu’ Pu! Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTP MTr® Wa [Jolly M G Nd] ApaMadh Jolly. This 
is also the reading at YDh 3.135. 


12.11d The reading nigacchati has the support of the old commentators Bh and Me. It has, 
however, weak manuscript support. The reading adopted niyacchati is found in: Be! 
BBe? Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt} nKtt BK La! Lo! Lo? Lo?GMd5 NNg oOr 
sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu? Put Pu? sPuo Pu? Pu’ Pu!? Tj! Tj? Tr? mTr4 mTr® Wa Laks Man- 
dlik KSS. 


12.16d There is strong manuscript support for the two readings, drdham and dhruvam. | have 
opted for the former because it is found in all the ST mss. and a good number of NT 
ones: Ho Jo? Lo? GMd! tTMd? tMd4 GMd> GMy nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu? Pu’? Tr! mTr4 Wa 
[Jolly G Go R? Ra’). 


12.22d There is good manuscript support for both readings abhyeti andapyeti. I have opted 
for the former, because it is found in a large number of reliable NT mss. and is sup- 
ported by the reading in Bh: Be! Bo Ho Jo? wKt? 8K La! Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd* cMy nNg 
oOr sOx! Ox? nPu! Pu? Pu4 sPu® Pu® Pu! Tj! Tr? mTr> Wa [Jolly M R]Bh Re Jolly. 
The reading, however, is uncertain. 


12,29b All the ST mss. have the reading avyaktam, and this also appears to be the reading of 
Me. He explains visayatmaka as a separate compound. The meaning, however, sug- 
gests that the entire pdda-b is a single compound with avyakta in the stem form; at- 
tachment to senses is more a characteristic of rajas as indicated in verse 32. This is 
also the way Go, Ku, Nd, and Rn understand the verse. The adopted reading is found 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 12 981 


in: Be! sBe? Bo Ho Hy Jo? wKt} nKf* La! Lo? Lo? NNg sOx! Pu? sPu® Pu? Pu’ Pu!® Tj! 
Tj? Wa [Jolly M G N Ku R] Jolly. The compound form is found also in the parallel 
verse at MBh 12.239.22. 


12.32a On the basis of the mss. it is impossible to decide whether the reading is (a)dhairyam 
in the negative or the positive dhairyam. All the commentators who note the term (Me, 
Na, Rn, Nd, Rc) take it to be adhairyam. So do ail the editors, who place an avagraha 
before dhairyam or simply connect it to the final -t@ of the previous word. I have opted 
for the positive dhairyam mainly because in the context of rajas we should expect for- 
titude rather than its lack. Indeed, the lack of fortitude (adhyti) is given in the very next 
verse as a characteristic of tamas. See also verses 36 and 46, where seeking fame and 
fortune and individuals such as kings, Ksatriyas, soldiers, and debaters are connected 
to rajas, and verse 38 that relates artha to rajas. 


12.41a Jolly has adopted the partitive genitive esam, but this reading has little manuscript 
support. No commentator notes it, and Me, Nd, and Rc explicitly presents esd as quali- 
fying gatih. The reading esd in the nominative is found in: Bo Ho Hy Jm Jo! wKt! 
wKe nK¢ Lo! GMd! tMd3 GMd? Pud Pu? [cor to] Pu’ Pul® Tj? Tr! Tr? mTr4 [Jolly M?— 
3-8—9 R] Mandlik Jha KSS Dave. 


12.42b All the editions have adopted the reading sakacchapah, and it has good manuscript 
support. I have, however, opted for sarisrpah, which is found in all the ST mss. and a 
large number of NT-x ones, as well as in the two medieval citations. The only other 
place that kacchapa occurs is at 1.44 and the reading of that pdda appears to have ex- 
erted influence on this verse; see, for example, the variant nakra in several mss. Only 
Go and Ku comment on this term and they gloss karma, which would support the al- 
ternate reading. The reading adopted is found in: nKt’ La! GMd! tMd* GMd sOx! Ox? 
nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu4 Pu! Tr! Tr? mTr4 MTP MTr® Wa [/olly M Nd Gr] Apa Madh. 


12.44d The reading t@masesu in the masculine locative plural has overwhelming manuscript 
support. According to this understanding, the reference is to the ta@masa kinds of spe- 
cies listed here; Go thus glosses tamasesu manusyesv uttamd gatih. I think, however, 
that this is a mistaken reading influenced by the several masculine nominatives in the 
list. These species rather constitute the highest gati among the gatis that are ta@masa; 
thus, I think, t@masisu is the correct reading with the implied gatisu. The same is true 
of verse 47d where the correct reading should be rdjasisu. The correctness of this 
reading is demonstrated by the parallel with reference to sattvika in verse 50, where 
sdttiviki here in the singular qualifies gati. The reading ¢@masisu is found in: Ho Hy Jm 
Jo! Jo? wKt! Kt? wKt GMy Pu’ Pul® Tj? Ku Re Mandlik Jolly Tha KSS Dave. 


12.59d Commentators note the irregular double sandhi here [pretyd + antya> pretydntyal, 
some calling this a vedic peculiarity. 


12.86a The reading adopted, pirvesdm, is found in all the ST mss. and a large number of 
NT-x one: Be! Bo Ho Jo? wKt! nK¢ Kt} Lo! Lo? Lo? GMd! tMd3 GMd* GMy NNg oOr 
Ox? nPu! Pu? Put Pu’ Pu! Tj! Tr! mTr*mTr5 MTr® Wa [Jolly M R Nd Ku] Me Bh Nd 
Jolly Jha Dave. 


12.89a Even though most NT mss. read c@mutra, I think the context calls for va. The reading 
adopted is found in: Lo? TMd* Md? nPu! Pu? Pu? Pu8 Tj! Tr! mTr* MTP MTr® [Jolly Gr 
Nd] Vij Apa Jolly. 


12.90b The lectio difficilior here is clearly sarstitdm, which is supported by several variants 


982 


Notes to the Edition: Chapter 12 


and found in: BBe* NKt* Lo! Lo? cMd! cMd@ Tj! mTr* mT? MTr° Wa [ Jolly G R Nd] 
Go Na@ Rn Re Jolly. 


12.94c The reading adopted, atarkyam, is found in all the ST mss. and in a number NT-x 


ones. GMd! rMd? GMd® aMy oOr sOx! Ox? Pu? sPu® Tr! Tr? MTr4 MTr® Wa Na Nd Re 
Bh (Jolly Nd] Apa. 


12.95a The adopted reading, Srutayah, is found in: Be! nK¢ BKt) La! Lo? GMd! tMd? rMd* 


GMy nNg oOrnPu! Pu? Put Pu? Pu? Pu? Tr! MTr> Wa [Jolly M G] Me Na Apa Laks 
Jolly Dave Jha. The variant reading smrtayah, however, must have been very old, 
because it is found in Kumarila’s citation. 


12.98d Although the majority of the mss. gives the stem prasiti, thus forming a compound 


with the two next words, I think the correct reading is the nominative prasitih. The 
commentators Me, Nd, Nd, and Rc explain the pdda by taking prasiitih as a nomina- 
tive. Although Bh appears to base his first explanation on prasiti as forming a com- 
pound, his second explanation clearly takes it to be in the nominative. The nominative 
form is found in: Ho La! GM& NNg Ox? nPu! Pu!® Tj! [Jolly M]Me Na Nd Rc Jolly 
Jha Dave. 


12.121b I have adopted the reading harim, even though the alternate reading haram also has 


considerably manuscript support. The latter may have been, however, influenced by 
the proximity of visum, scribes desiring to bring Siva into the picture. This reading is 
supported by Na, who glosses harim i§varam. The adopted reading is found in: Be! Ho 
Jo? Lo? TMd3 GMy oOr Ox? Pu? Put Pud Pu? MTr4 (Jolly M G R Nd] Ru Nd Jolly. This 
reading is supported by Nd and Rn, both of whom interpret the term to mean Indra. Rn 
remarks on the alternate reading: haram iti pramd@dapathah. 


12.123c The editions of Mandlik, Jha, KSS, and Dave read pare after eke, without an ava- 


graha. It is impossible determine whether the reading should be pare or (a)pare, be- 
cause the mss. almost never use avagrahas. Both Ku and Rc, however, explicitly give 
apare as the reading, and I have followed it. Jolly also gives the avagraha, whereas the 
editors of Apa and Laks omit it and read pare. 


APPENDICES 


This page intentionally left blank 


APPENDIX I 
Fauna and Flora 


Common fauna and flora that can be readily translated are not listed here; they are 
found in the Index. For further information on flora, see K. M. Nadkarni, /ndian 
Materia Medica. Revised edition; 2 vols. Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1976. For 
animals, see S. H. Prater, The Book of Indian Animals. Bombay Natural History 
Society. Reprint. Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1997. For birds, see K. N. Dave, 
Birds in Sanskrit Literature. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1985. 


Asmantaka. The plant Bauhinia tomentosa, whose fibers were used to make the 
girdle of a student. 

Baka. This term is applied to a wide variety of water fowl, including heron, ibis, stork 
and the common flamingo. 

Balaka. Flamingo; the term is sometimes applied to other water fowl, such as the 
egret. 

Balvaja. A type of coarse grass: Eleusine indica. 

Bel (Bilva). The tree Aegle marmelos, as also the fruits of this tree. 

Bhasa. The bearded vulture (Gypaetus barbatus), but often the term may refer to other 
kinds of vultures. 

Bhistrna. The plant Andropogon schoenanthus; geranilum grass; ruaghas in Hindi. 
A fragrant grass native to central India. 

Cakra. The ruddy sheldrake called the Brahmani Duck. The fidelity of a mated pair to 
each other and their grief when separated is celebrated in Indian poetry and 
folklore. 

Darbha. A type of grass used for ritual purposes, most commonly the same as Kua; 
specifically the grass Saccharum cylindricuni. 

Datytiha. The hawk cuckoo. 

Ena. The Blackbuck (also called Krsnasara: MDh 2.23), an antelope with black hair on 
the back and sides and white under the belly: Antilope cervicapra. About 32 inches 
at the shoulder and weighing about 90 Ibs., with horns 20-5 inches long. 

Hamsa. The ruddy goose, the most celebrated species of Indian goose. The term is 
often applied to other large geese and swans. 

Kakola. A kind of raven, although the term may have been used more widely for 
various species of ravens and crows. 

Kalasaka. The plant Ocimum sanctum, commonly referred to as holy basil or Tulasi 
plant. 

Kalavinka. A species of sparrow, identified as the “village sparrow” by Vijfianesvara 
on YDh 1.174. According to Dave (1985), the word is used for blackbirds, 
magpies, and finches. 


985 


986 Appendices 


Kataka. The fruit of the tree Strychnos potatorum, called “clearing nut tree”; Hindi 
nirmall, 

Khadira. The tree Acacia catechu, called “cutch tree”; Hindi khair. 

Khahjaritaka. The yellow wagtail. 

Kimsuka. The tree Butea frondosa; called “bastard teak”; Hindi palas. 

Koyasthi. The lapwing, also called the paddy-bird. Dave (1985, 358) identifies these 
as “‘the smaller crested Herons and Bitterns which keep standing in shallow waters 
for hours for prey to come to them.” 

Kraufica. A species of large water bird, probably the common crane. Haradatta (on 
ApDh 1.17.36) says that they travel in pairs, and Buhler identifies the bird as the 
red-crested crane now called Saras. 

Kubjaka. The shrub Rosa moschata; called “musk-scented rose”; Hindi kujai. 

Kuga. The most common of the sacred grasses (see Darbha) used for rituals purposes. 
Poa cynosuroides. 

Madgu. The snake fish or a cormorant. 

Mahasalka. A kind of large prawn. 

Munija. A species of rush belonging to the sugar-cane family and reaching about 10 
feet in height and used for basket weaving: Saccharum munja. Its principal ritual 
use is in the manufacture of the girdle given to a Brahmin boy at his vedic 
initiation. 

Mirva. A species of hemp used in the manufacture of bow strings and of the ritual 
girdle given to a Ksatriya boy at his vedic initiation: Sanseviera roxburghiana. 
Palaga. A variety of fig tree called dhak with a beautiful trunk and abundant leaves: 
Butea frondosa. Incisions produce a red juice used as an astringent. The tree was 

viewed as sacred in ancient India and its wood used to make ritual implements. 

Pathina. A kind of sheat-fish, Si/urus pelorius or boalis. 

Pilu. The tree Careya arborea; Hindi kumbi. 

Plava. A coot or cormorant. 

RaAjiva. Said to be a kind of lotus-colored fish, or one with stripes. 

Rajjuvala. A species of wild fowl. 

Rohita. A kind of red fish said to feed on moss. 

Ruru. A species of spotted antelope. 

Sala. The tree Shorea robusta, called the “Sal tree’; Hindi: sakhu, but in other 
languages sal. 

Sali. A variety of rice. Commentators call this red winter rice. 

Sami. The name covers two plants. First, Mimosa suma (Hindi: chikkur), a thorny 
shrub. Second, Prosopis spicigera. 

Sahkhapuspi. The plant Canscora decussata. 

Sarasa. A species of crane, Ardea sibirica. 

SaSalka. Lit. “with scales,” a kind of fish. 

Selu. The tree Cordia ntyxa. 

Sigruka. The tree Moringa oleifera or pterygosperma, commonly called “drumstick” 
tree (Murunga), whose long pods are widely used as a vegetable. 

Simhatunda. Lit. “lion-faced,” a kind of fish. 


Fauna and Flora 987 


Slesmataka. Also called slesmata and Selu, the fruit of this small tree is about the 
size of a cherry. Called bhokar in Marathi, it is used today for making pickles. 

Syena. A kind of hawk or falcon, although the term is used for any large bird of prey. 

Udumbara. A type of fig tree whose wood is used for ritual purposes: Ficus 
glomerata. 

Vardhrinasa lit., “leather-snouted.” This sometimes refers to the rhinoceros, but in 
these texts it refers to a type of bird, probably a hornbill. At BDA 1.12.6, however, 
it is classified as a bird that scratches with its feet in searching for food, which 
would argue against a waterbird. 

Vrihi. A variety of long-grained rice different from sali and ripening, according to 
commentators, in 60 days. 


APPENDIX [I 
Names of Gods, People, and Places 


Adityas. Literally the son(s) of Aditi, the term in the plural refers to a group of gods, 
including some prominent ones such as Varuna, Mitra, and Indra. Early texts give 
their number as eight, but the Brahmanas already show their number as twelve, 
which has remained the norm ever since. Together with the Vasus and the Rudras, 
they constitute the three major classes of gods. In the singular, the term Aditya 
refers to the sun. 

Agastya. The name of an ancient sage, said to be the son of Mitra and Varuna. In a 
later myth he is said to have instructed the Vindhya mountains to remain bowed 
(not to grow taller) until he turns from southern India. 

Agni. Fire and the god of Fire. 

Agnidagdha. The common designation of a class of ancestors (pitr) who maintained 
sacred fires while they were on earth. 

Agnisvatta. The common designation of a class of ancestors who maintained sacred 
fires but performed only domestic rites and not vedic sacrifices. 

Ajigarta. A sage famous for his story told in the AitB 7.13-16. He wanted to 
sacrifice his son, Sunahsepa, to appease the wrath of the god Varuna. 

Ajyapa. Literally, “ghee drinkers,” the name of a class of ancestors descendant from 
Pulastya. They are viewed as the ancestors of Vaisyas. 

All-gods (visvedeva). The name of a class of gods. In the later Dharma texts they are 
listed as ten in five pairs: Kratu and Daksa, Vasu and Satya, Dhuri and Locana, 
Kala and Kama, and Puriiravas and Ardrava. See Kane 1962-75, IV. 457. 

Anagnidagdha. The common designation of a class of ancestors distinguished from 
the agnidagdha; hence, possibly ancestors who did not maintin sacred fires on 
earth. 

Andha-Tamisra. One of the 21 hells. No light of the sun falls into this region. 
Suicides and adulterers are consigned to this hell. 

Ahgiras. Name of a sage. In later mythology, he is viewed as one of the ten mind- 
born sons of Brahma. 

Angirasa. The name of a class of priests closely associated with another group called 
Atharvan. The name is also used with reference to a group of sundry divine beings 
and is an epithet of several gods, especially the fire god Agni. 

Antyavasayin. A very low-caste person, even lower than a Candala. Explained as 
the offspring of a Nisada woman and a Candala man (MDh 10.39). 

Apsaras. A class of female deities connected with water and often regarded as the 
wives of the Gandharvas. 

Asamvrta. A name of a hell. 

Asipatravana. A hell where tree have leaves as sharp as knives. For further Puranic 
descriptions, see Mani 1975, 58. 


988 


Names of Gods, People, and Places 989 


Asura. Although in early Indo-Iranian mythology it was a divine epithet, in Indian 
myth asuras are viewed as demons and opponents of gods. 

ASvin. Twin deities described as young, beautiful, fond of honey, and expert in 
medical knowledge. They are the physicians of the gods. 

Atri. A famous sage and author of many vedic hymns. Later mythology sees him as 
one of the ten mind-born sons of Brahma. 

Barhisad. Sons of Atri, they are the ancestors of various demonic classes of beings. 
For later descriptions, see Mani 1975, 108. 

Bharadvaja. An ancient seer to whom the composition of the sixth book of the 
Rgveda is ascribed. 

Cailasaka. An evil class of ghosts that feed on moths. 

Candala. An outcaste person whose mere touch polutes. He is considered the 
offspring of a Sidra father and a Brahmin mother. 

Carana. This term can apply to bards, singers, and the like, and also to mythological 
beings connected with singing. 

Daitya. A class of demons often associated with Danavas. 

Daksa. Name of a divine being associated with creation and one of the ten sons of 
Brahma. For myths associated with him, see Mani 1975, 192. 

Danava. A class of demons often associated with the Daityas. 

Dasyu. A generic name for degraded persons and outcastes. The name is also applied 
to ethinic groups outside the four major classes of society (see MDh 10.45). 

Dhanvantari. A god produced at the cosmogonic churning of the ocean, he is the 
physician of the gods and the divine author of medical science. 

Drsadvati. Name of a river flowing into the Sarasvati from the east. 

Gandharva. In the early vedic literature Gandharvas appear as a class of divine beings 
alongside the gods and the forefathers. They are associated with the Soma drink 
and are said to be fond of females. They are often associated with the celestial 
nymphs, Apsarases. In later literature, especially the epics, the Gandharvas are 
depicted as celestial singers and are associated with music. 

Guhyaka. A class of divine beings; attendants fo Kubera. 

Havirbhuj. Lit. “eaters of oblations,” this class beings are regarded as the ancestors 
of Ksatriyas. 

Hiranyagarbha. Lit. “golden egg or foetus.” In cosmology, the initial state of the 
cosmos in the form of an egg (MDh 1.9). 

Indra. The most famous of the vedic gods, Indra is called the king of the gods. He is 
powerful and loves to drink Soma. His claim to fame is his victory over Vrtra, a 
combat that is given cosmogonic significance. Indra is closely associated with 
rain, and prominence is given to his weapon, the Vajra, conceived of as the 
thunderbolt in later tradition. 

Kalasitra. A hell depicted in the Puranas as extremely hot. 

Kasyapa. The name of an ancient sage. 

Katapiitana. An evil class of deceased persons (preta) or demons. 

Kavi. An epithet of Bhrgu. 

Kavya. The name of a class of ancestors. 

Kratu. One of the mind-born sons of Brahma. 


990 Appendices 


Kubera. God of riches and guardian of the northern quarter. 

Kuru. Name of a tribe inhabiting the region of between the upper reaches of the Indus 
and Ganges rivers during vedic times. This tribe became allied with the Paficalas, 
who occupied the land to the south-east of the Kurus. 

Kuruksetra. The land of the Kurus. In later times, this referred to a stretch of sacred 
land situated south of the river Sarasvati and north of Drsadvati where the epic 
battle of the Mahabharata took place. 

Marici. The first of the mind-born sons of Brahma. 

Maruts. A group of gods connected with the wind and the thunderstorm, and thus 
associated with Indra’s exploits. 

Matsya. Name of a region located to the west of the Paficalas and south of the Kurus 
and of the people of that region. 

Mitra. Name of a vedic god closely associated with Varuna. 

Naga. Serpent, especially mythical beings viewed as serpents. 

Narada. Well known in later literature as a famous sage, he is one of the sons of 
Brahma. See Mani 1975, 526. 

Nirrti. Goddess personifying death, destruction, and adversity. 

Nisada. A mixed caste considered to be the offspring of a Brahmin father and a Vaisya 
mother. 

Paficala. The name of a region in the upper reaches of the Ganges, to the south-east of 
the Kurus; also refers the people of this region. 

Pisaca. An evil supernatural being; a goblin. 

Pracetas. One of the sons of Brahma. 

Prajapati. Literally “lord of creatures,” he is the creator god par excellence in the 
Brahmanas and the Upanisads. He is the father of the gods and the demons 
(asura), as well as of all creatures. 

Prayaga. The sacred city at the confluence of the rivers Ganges and Yamuna; present- 
day Allahabad. 

Pulkasa. An outcaste individual viewed as particularly impure; the son of a Nisada 
man and a Sidra woman (MDh 10.38). 

Rudra. Generally regarded as a storm god, Rudra has an ambivalent personality. He 
is fierce and feared. He is also a healer, the one who averts the anger of gods. In 
his benign aspect he is referred to as siva, “the benign one,” an epithet that 
becomes the name of the later god Siva, with whom Rudra is identified. 

Rudras. In the plural, the term refers to a group of eleven gods, who, together with 
the Adityas and the Vasus, constitute the three classes of gods. The Rudras are 
associated with the Maruts; both of these groups are ruled by Rudra. 

Sadhya. A group of somewhat ill-defined deities, said to occupy a region above that 
of the gods. 

Sarasvati. The most celebrated river of the vedic age, it is personified as a goddess. 
In the Brahmanas she becomes identified with speech and the goddess of speech, 
and in later mythology Sarasvati is the goddess of eloquence and wisdom. This 
river flowed between the Indus and Ganges river systems. Its disappearance in the 
desert became the focus of myths and folk tales. 

Sarpa. A serpent; also mythical beings in the shape of serpents. 


Names of Gods, People, and Places 991 


Saumya. A class of ancestors. 

Saunaka. A famous vedic sage to whom various vedic texts, as also works on Law, 
are ascribed. 

Soma. A sacrificial drink pressed from a plant with apparently mind-altering 
qualities, it was personified as a god and later identified with the moon. Thus the 
term often simply means the moon. 

Somapa. Lit. “Soma-drinker,” a class of ancestors. 

Somasad. A class of ancestors. 

Sukalin. A class of ancestors. 

Suparna. Generally referring to any large bird, the term is used with references to 
bird-shaped mythical beings. 

Siirasena(ka). The name of a region somewhat to the south of the Matya; also the 
appellation of the inhabitants of this region. 

Ugra. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of a VaisSya father and a Sidra 
mother. 

Utathya. Name of an authority on Law. 

Varuna. One of the great gods in the early vedic literature, he is viewed as the grand 
sovereign and upholder of the natural and moral order. He becomes increasingly 
associated with the waters and the west, and his residence comes to be located 
within the ocean. 

Vasistha. One of the most important seers of the Rgveda. May stories surround his 
personality, and he is credited with the authorship of numerous texts, including 
the seventh book of the Rgveda and a treatise on Law. His hostility to ViSvamitra 
is a recurrent theme in the stories. 

Vasus. A group of eight gods distinguished from the Adityas and Rudras, although 
their general character and specific identities remain rather vague. 

Vinasana. The place where the river Sarasvati is believed to disapper into the ground. 

Vindhya. The major mountain range in north-central India dividing north India from 
the Deccan. 

Viraj. Literally “the wide-ruling one,” he is presented as the first creature in the 
Rgvedic creation story in the Purusa hymn (RV 10.90). In the MDh (2.32) also he 
is presented as the first creature to emerge from the union of the primeval pair. 

Visnu. The great god of later Hinduism. He is a somewhat minor solar deity in the 
vedic literature and is especially celebrated in his two human incarnations, Rama 
and Krsna. 

Visvamitra. An important seer of the Rgveda. Stories depict his hostility towards 
Vasistha. In later legend, he is viewed as a Ksatriya who transformed himseif into 
a Brahmin by means of austerities. 

Vratya. The term is used in ancient literature to refer to groups of people, at least 
some of whom appear to have led a wandering or a nomadic life. Already in some 
vedic texts, however, the Vratya is presented as a mysterious, powerful, and even 
divine person. In later times the term is used to refer to either mixed-caste people 
or to Brahmins who have not undergone vedic initiation. 

Yama. The Indian god of death from the most ancient period of vedic mythology until 
contemporary times. In ancient myths he is called king and divine characteristics 


992 Appendices 


are ascribed to him, but he comes to be identified with death itself and many of the 
negative aspects of death become associated with Yama. Later myths associate 
him with judgment and punishment of the dead. 

Yavana. The Indian designation of Greeks and Greek-speaking peoples in the north- 
western parts of the subcontinent. A mixed class considered to be the offspring of 
a Ksatriya father and a Sidra mother. 


APPENDIX III 


Ritual Vocabulary 


1. Names of Rites, Priests, and Ritual Objects 


Abhijit. A particular sacrifice that is a component part of the major sacrificial session 
(sattra) lasting 12 months known as Gavamayana. 

Adhvaryu. One of the four principal priests at a vedic sacrifice. He belongs to the 
Yajurveda and is responsible for most of the sacrificial actions, including the 
offerings made in the sacred fire. 

Agnistut. A particular form of Soma sacrifice lasting a single day. 

Ahina. A particular kind of Soma sacrifice at which the pressing lasts between two 
and twelve days. 

Bali. The offering of cooked food to various deities, spirits, and animals. 

Brahman. One of the four principal priests at a vedic sacrifice. 

Camasa. A square ladle made of banyan wood and used for a variety of purposes in a 
sacrifice, including serving as a container or a drinking vessel for Soma. 

Caru. A porridge prepared from rice or barley and cooked in water with butter or milk. 

Gosava. A one-day Soma sacrifice. It is recommended for people aspiring to 
sovereignty. See Kane 1962-75, ii. 1213. 

Graha. A ladle used to take Soma out of a larger container. 

Horse Sacrifice (asvamedha). One of the most important vedic sacrifices, it is 
perfomed by a king to demonstrate his sovereignty and ritually to enhance his 
dominion. A horse is set free to roam at will for a whole year, during which time it 
is guarded by the king’s troops. At the end of the year it is brought back and 
sacrificed. 

Hotr. One of the four principal priests at a vedic sacrifice. He belongs to the Rgveda 
and is responsible for all the recitations during a sacrifice. 

Sacrifice of first fruits. An oblation consisting of the first fruits of the harvest 
offered at the end of the rainy season. 

Sacrificial cake (puroddsa). A cake made with rice or barley flour and baked in 
potsherds. 

Sakala. An oblation accompanied by the eight verses of VS 8.13. 

Sakata. A cart used to carry Soma plants and for other ritual purposes. 

Savitra. Commentators take this to be an oblation offered to the god Savitr or an 
oblation using the Savitri verse. 

Seasonal sacrifice. Four sacrifices, each performed at the end of the four seasons. 

Sphya. A wooden sword made of Khadira wood and used within the vedic ritual for a 
variety of ritual purposes. 


993 


994 Appendices 


Sruc. The common name for ladles (including Juhi, Upabhrt, and Dhruva) used for 
pouring ghee into the sacred fire. 

Sruva. Distinguished from the Sruc-type ladles, this is a smaller spoon used mainly 
for spooning out ghee or milk into the Sruc. The Sruva has a long handle at the 
end of which there is a small globular spoon without a spout. It is made of Khadira 
wood. 

Sirpa. A winnowing basket made of bamboo or reed and used to winnow grain for the 
ritual. 

Trivrt. An oblation with the chanting in “‘triplicated” form of three verses, especially 
the verses of RV 9.11. 

Udgatr. One of the four major priests in a vedic ritual. He Helongs to the Samaveda 
and performs the chanting of Samans. 

VaiSsvanara. A sacrifice to the “Fire present in all men” generally cooked on twelve 
potsherds. 

Visvajit. A sacrifice at which one gives away all one’s possessions. It is also a 
particular sacrifice that is a component part of the major sacrificial session (sattra) 
lasting 12 months known as Gavamayana. 


2. Names of Ritual Formulas and Texts 


Aghamarsana. This is the hymn RV 10.190 used in a particular ritual to efface sins 

Asyavamiya. This the rather long hymn RV 1.164. 

Calls. (vydhyti). These are the names of the seven worlds in ascending order: bhur 
(earth), bhuvah (mid-space), svar (sky), mahar (great), janas (people), tapas 
(austerity), satya (truth). These names are considered sacred and powerful. The 
first three are generally referred to as simply Calls, whereas all seven are called 
Great Calls (mahdavyahrti). 

Gayatri. Another name for Savitri. 

Great Calls. See Calls. 

Havispantiya. This is the hymn RV 10.88. 

Jyestha Samans. Haradatta (on ApDh 2.17.22; GDh 15.28) identifies this as SV 
1.31 (= RV 1.24.15), while Govinda (on BDh 2.14.2) identifies it as SV 1.67 (= 
RV 6.7.1) and (on BDh 3.10.10) as SV 1.33 © RV 10.9.4) and RV 1.115.1. 
Commentators of the MDh identify these as Samans sung in the wilderness. 
Obviously, there is a lot of confusion regarding these Samans. 

Kismanda. The four formulas TA 2.3; sometimes identified with the formulas at TA 
2.6. 

Kutsa’s hymn. The hymn with eight verses RV 1.97. 

Mahitra. The hymn RV 10.185. 

Pavavmani. Opinions are divided about the identity of these verses. Some identify 
them as RV 9.67.21-27. Medhatithi (on MDh 11.258) takes them to be RV 9.1- 
114 (that is, the entire ninth Mandala), whereas Bharuci identifies them as RV 
9.14— 67. 

Purusa hymn. The creation hymn RV 10.90. 


Ritual Vocabulary 995 


Re. The sacred verses found in the Rgveda. 

Sakalahomiya. These are the eight verses of VS 8.13 = TS 3.2.5.7. 

Saman. A verse generally taken from the RV and sung to a particular melody. The 
Samans are contained in the Samaveda. 

Savitri. Also called Gayatri, this is the most sacred of ritual formulas: RV 3.62.10 
(see App. TI.3: “That excellent. . . ..’” Sometimes the term is used with reference to 
vedic initiation, because teaching this verse to the initiated boy forms a central 
part of that rite. 

Siras formula. “OM the Waters, the Light, the Taste, the Immortal, Brahman! 
Earth, Atmosphere, Sky! OM!” Mahdanarayana Upanisad 342. 

Sivasamkalpa. The first six verses of VS 34. 

Solar formulas. According to Medhatithi (on MDh 5.86), they are the verses 
beginning with RV 1.50.1. According to Govinda (on BDh 3.8.14), RV 1.50.10; 
1.50.1; 1.115-1. 

Somaraudra. This is the hymn with four verses RV 6.74. Bharuci (on MDh 11.255), 
however, identifies them as the verses to Rudra at RV 2.33.4 and to Soma at RV 

. 9.96.5. 

Suddhavati. The three verses RV 8.95.7—-9. 

Svadha. The exclamation accompanying the offering of an oblation to ancestors. 

Svaha. The exclamation accompanying the offering of an oblation to gods. 

Taratsamandi. The hymn RV 9.58. 

Vasat. A ritual exclamation uttered by the Hotr priest at the conclusion of the 
sacrificial verse as the Adhvaryu priest puts the oblation into the sacred fire. 

Yajus. A ritual formula in prose contained in the Yajurveda. These formulas 
accompany the ritual offerings into the fire. 


3. Formulas Cited in the Translations by the First Words 


“Adoration . . .”. Commentators identify this variously. Medhatithi and Bharuci take 
it to be “Adoration to Rudra, to the strong one, to the one with braided hair... .” I 
have not been able to identify this verse. 

“Aryaman, Varuna, and Mitra, Indra and Visnu among these, Maruts and Asvins. . . . 
This is RV 4.2.4. Some commentators think that the three or two verses beginning 
with this are meant. 

“Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, the host of Maruts, and Aditi—we invoke for assistance. 

” The seven verses beginning with this are RV 1.106.1-7. Bharuci (on MDh 
356), however, take this to be RV 1.7.1. 

“May the Maruts pour upon me, may Indra and Brhaspati; and may this fire pour upon 
me long life and strength. May they make me live long.” TA 2.18. 

“May the virile strength return again to me, may long life and prosperity. May goods 
return to me again, may the Brahmanical state.” ASGr 3.6.8. Variants of this verse 
are found in AV 7.67; BrU 6.4.5. 

“No anxiety, no danger, ...” This is the hymn RV 10.126. 


” 


996 Appendices 


“That excellent glory of Savitr, the god, we meditate, that he may stimulate our 
thoughts.” RV 3.62.10. 

“This, yes, this is my inclination. ...” This is the hymn RV 10.119. 

“To welcome the Dawn the inspired Vasisthas did first awaken with songs and praises. 
...” This is the hymn RV 7.80, containing three verses. 

“Untie, Varuna, from us the bond at the top, at the middle, and at the bottom, so that in 
your commandment, Aditya, we may remain sinless for Aditi.” RV 1.24.15. 

“Waters, you are refreshing. Further us to strength, to see great joy. The auspicious 
flavor that is yours, accord to us here, like eager mothers. To him may we come 
with satisfaction, to whose dwelling you quicken us, O waters, and propagate us.” 
TS 4.1.5.1. These are the Ablinga formulas. 

“We placate your anger, Varuna, with obeisances, sacrifices, and oblations. Wise Lord, 
ruling king, loosen from us the sins we have committed.” RV 1.24.14. Bharuci, 
however, identifies this as RV 10.59.9. 

“Whatever offense that we humans commit against the race of gods, Varuna, if by 
inattention we have violated your institutes, O god, may you not punish us 
because of that evil.” RV 7.89.5. 


APPENDIX IV 
Weights, Measures, and Currency 


NB: weights, measures, and coins have varied over time in India. The values given 
below are approximations. In coins the weight of each measurement differed for 
gold, silver, and copper. See MDh 8.132-37. 


Angula. A measurement of length (lit., a finger) approximately 2 cm. 

Bow. A measurement of length; approximately 6 feet or 1.82 meters. 

Dharana. A measure of weight; approximately 377.6 grams; a silver dharana, 
however, is said to weight only 3.776 grams. 

Drona. A measurement of capacity especially of gains: probably about 5 liters. When 
it is a measure of weight, it is approximately 9.6 kg. 

Finger. See Angula. 

Gaurasarsapa. “White mustard seed”; a minute measure of weight equal to three 
Rajasarsapas. 

Karsapana. Also known as Pana, this basic copper coin weighed approximately 9.33 
grams. A silver Karsapana weighed 3.76 grams. 

Karsika. A copper coin, the same as Karsapana or Pana. 

Krsnala. A measure of weight appliximately 0.118 grams. 

Kumbha. A measure of capacity: about 105 liters. 

Likga. “Egg of a louse”; a very minute measure of weight equal to eight Trasarenus. 

Masa. “A bean”; a measure of weight; approximately 0.59 grams. 

Masaka. A silver Masaka weighed approximately 0.25 grams; a gold coin of this 
name is mentioned at 8.393. 

Niska. A measurement of weight said to be four Suvarnas, i.e., 37.76 grams. 

Pala. A measure of weight; approximately 37.76 grams. 

Pana. Same as Karsapana. 

Purana. A silver weight said to be sixteen silver Masakas, i.e., 3.776 grams. 

Rajasarsapa. “Black mustard seed”; a minute measure of weight equal to three 
Liksas. 

Rod’s throw. It is unclear whether this is an actual measurement or the distance that 
a rod can be thrown. 

Satamana. A silver Satamana weighed approximately 11.66 grams. 

Suvarna. A measure of weight; approximately 9.44 grams. 

Trasarenu. A particle of dust seen in a sunbeam; smallest measure of weight. 

Yava. A measurement of weight: 0.039 grams 


997 


This page intentionally left blank 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


PRIMARY LITERATURE 


Apararka, Apardditya, commentary on the YDh. 2 vols. Anandasrama Sanskrit Series, 46. 
Pune, 1903-04. 

Apastamba-Dharmasittra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000. 

Apastamba-Grhyasitra. Ed. by M. Winternitz. Vienna: Alfred Hélder, 1887. Tr. in 
Oldenberg 1886-92. 

Baudhdyana-Dharmasiittra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000. 

Brhaspati-Smrti (Reconstructed). Ed. K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar. Gaekwad’s Oriental 
Series, 85. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1941. Translated in Jolly 1889. 

Devanabhatta, Smrticandrikad. Government Oriental Library Series, 43, 44, 45, 48,52, 56. 
Mysore: Government Oriental Library. Vol. 1, Samskarakanda, 1914 Vo. 2, Ahanika- 
kanda, 1914; Vol. 3, Vyavaharakanda, 1914-16; Vol. 4, Sraddhakanda, 1918; Vol. 5, 
Asaucakanda, 1921. 

Gautama-Dharmasitra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000. 

Gobhila-Grhyasitra, Ed. with Bhattanarayana’s commentary by C. Bhattacharya. Dethi: 
Munshiram Manoharlal, 1982. Tr. in Oldenberg 1886-92. 

Jimttivahana, Dayabhdga. Ed. and tr. by L. Rocher. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2002. 

Kamandaka, Nitisdra with Sankararya’s commentary. Ed. T. Ganapati Sastri. Trivandrum 
Sanskrit Series, 14. Trivandrum: 1912. 

Katyayana-Smyti. Ed. P. V. Kane. Poona: Oriental Book Agency, n.d. Aiyangar, Rangaswami 
K. V. n.d. “Additional Verses of Katyayana on Vyavahara.” In A Volume of Studies in 
Indology (presented to P. V. Kane on his 61st birthday), ed. S. M. Katre and P. K. Goode 
(Poona: Oriental Book Agency), pp. 7-11. 

Kautalya, Arthasastra. Ed. and tr. in Kangle 1965-72. 

Laksmidhara, Krtyakalpataru. Ed. by K. V. Rangaswami Aiyangar. Gaekwad’s Oriental 
Series. 14 vols. Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1942-79. 

Madhava, Parasara-M4Gdhava. 3 vols. Reprint. Calcutta: Asiatic Society, 1973-74. 

Narada-Smrti. Ed. and tr. in Lariviere 2003. 

Pafcatantra. Ed. and tr. by F. Edgerton. American Oriental Series 2-3. New Haven: 
American Oriental Society. Tr. by P. Olivelle. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997. 
Paraskara-Grhyasitra. Ed. with five commentaries by M. G. Bakre. Bombay: Gujarati 

Printing Press, 1917. Tr. in Oldenberg 1886-92. 

Patanjali, Maha@bhasya on Panini’s Astadhydayi. Ed. F. Kielhorn. 3rd revised edition by K. V. 
Abhyankar. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1962-72. 

Vaikhadnasa-Dharmasiitra. Ed. by W. Caland. Calcutta: Asiactic Society, 1927. Tr. in Caland 
1929. 

Vaikhdnasa-Grhyasitra. Ed. by W. Caland. Calcutta: Asiactic Society, 1927. Tr. in Caland 
1929. 


999 


1000 Bibliography 


Vasistha-Dharmasitra. Ed. and tr. in Olivelle 2000. 

Vijhianesvara, Mitaksara, commentary on YDh. Ed. U. C. Pandey. Kashi Sanskrit Series, 178. 
Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series, 1967. Translated with Mitramisra’s Viramitro- 
daya and Siilapani’s Dipakalika by J. R. Gharpure. 3 vols. Bombay: 1936-38. 

Visnu-Dharmasitra. Ed. with Nandapandita’s commentary Kesavavaijayanti by V. Krishna- 
macharya. 2 vols. Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, 1964. Tr. in Jolly 1880. 

Visvaripa, Balakridd, commentary on YDh. Ed. T. Ganapati Sastri. 1921~22. Reprint. New 
Delhi: Mushiram Manoharlal, 1982. 

Yaska, Nirukta. Ed. V. K. Rajavade. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, 1940. 


EDITIONS AND TRANSLATIONS OF MANU 


Biihler, G. Tr. The Laws of Manu. SBE 25. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1886. 

Burnell, A. C. Tr. The Ordinances of Manu. Completed and edited by E. W. Hopkins. 1884. 
Reprint. Delhi: Mushiram Manoharlal, 1995. 

Dave, J. H. Ed. Manu-Smrti with Nine Commentaries by Medhatithi, Sarvajfiandrayana, 
Kulliika, Raghavananda, Nandana, Ramacandra, Maniradma, Govindaraja, and Bharuci. 
6 volumes. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1972-84. 

Derrett, J. D. M. Ed. and Tr. Bhdruci’s Commentary on the Manusmrti (The Manu-Sastra- 
Vivarana, Books 6-12). 2 vols. Wiesbaden, 1975. 

Deslongschamps, A. L. Ed. Lois de Manou publié en Sanscrit avec des notes contenant un 
choix de variantes et de scholies. Paris: Levrault, 1830. 

. Tr. Lois de Manou comprenant les institutions religieuses et civiles des Indiens. Paris: 
de Crapelet, 1833. 

Doniger, W. Tr. The Laws of Manu. London: Penguin, 1991. 

Jha, G. Ed. and tr. Manusmrti with the ‘Manubhasya’ of Medhdatithi. 10 volumes. 1920-39. 
Reprint. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1999. 

Jolly, J. Ed. Manava Dharma-sastra: The Code of Manu. Original Sanskrit Text Critically 
Edited according to the Standard Sanskrit Commentaries, London: Triibner, 1887. 

Jones, W. Tr. Institutes of Hindu Law or the Ordinences of Menu according to the Gloss of 
Culliica, Calcutta: 1794. 

Kavyatirtha, N. R. A. Ed. The Manusmrti with the Commentary Manvarthanuktavalt of 
Kullitka. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press, 1946. 

Mandlik, V. N. Ed. Manava-Dharma Sdastra with the Commentaries of Medhatithi, Sarvajfia- 
ndrayana, Kulliika, Raghava@nanda, Nandana, and Ramachandra. 2 volumes and a sup- 
plement containing the commentary of Govindaraja. Bombay: Ganpat Krishnaji’s Press, 
1886. 

Menu Sanhita: the Institutes of Menu with the Commentary of Kullika Bhatta. Calcutta: 
1830. 

Nene, G. S. Ed. The Manusmrti with the ‘Manvartha-muktavali’ Commentary of Kullika 
Bhatta. Kashi Sanskrit Series 114. Varanasi: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Office, 1970. 

Strehly, G. Tr. Les Lois de Manou. Paris: Ernest Leroux, 1893. 





SECONDARY LITERATURE AND TRANSLATIONS 


Aktor, M. 1999. “Smrtis and Jatis: The Ritualisation of Time and the Continuity of the Past.” 
In Invoking the Past: The Uses of History in South Asia, ed. D. Ali, pp. 258-79. Delhi: 
Oxford University Press. 


Bibliography 1001 


Altekar, A. S. 1952. Sources of Hindu Dharma in its Socio-Religious Aspects. Sholapur: 
Institute of Public Administration. 

Ayyar, A. S. Nataraja. 1952. Mimdmsda Jurispurdence: The Sources of Hindu Law. 
Ganganatha Jha Research Institute Series, No. 2. Allahabad: Ganganatha Jha Research 
Institute. 

Bailey, G. 1985. Materials for the Study of Ancient Indian Ideologies: Pravrtti and Nirtti. 
Pubblicazioni di “Indologica Taurinensia”. Turin. 

Bandyopadhyaya, N. C. 1980. Development of Hindu Polity and Political Theories. New 
Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 

Banerjee, N. V. 1980. Studies in the Dharmasastra of Manu. New Delhi: Munshiram 
Manoharlal. 

Banerji, S. C. 1972. Smyti Material in the Mahabharata. Calcutta: D. P. Mitra. 

___. 1999. A Brief History of Dharmasastra. Delhi: Abhinav Publications. 

Beaman, G. B. 1895. On the Sources of the Dharma-Sastras of Manu and Ydjiiavalkya. 
Leipzig: Harrassowitz. 

Betai, R. S. 1962. “Textual Problems of the Manusmrti.” Journal of the Gujarat Research 
Soctety 24: 271-76. 

. 1963. “Widowhood and Niyoga in the ArthaSastra and the Manusmrti.” Our Heritage 

11: 1-11. 

. 1965-66. Revisions of the Manusmrti and the Background of These—A Fresh 

Study.” Journal of the Ganganatha Jha Research Institute 22: 193-201. 

. 1968. “State of Criminal Law in Manusmrti.” /bid. 24: 279-300. 

. 1970. A Reconstruction of the Original Interpretations of the Manusmrti. Gujarat 

University Theses Publication Series, 9. Ahmedabad: Gujarat University. 

. 1973. “Criminal Law from Manu to Yajiiavalkya to Narada—A Positive Transition.” 
Journal of the Oriental Institute (Baroda) 22: 265~89. 

___. 2003. Evolution of Law of Crimes in Ancient India. Delhi: Bharatiya Kala Prakashan. 

Bharadwaj, S. K. 1982. Linguistic Study of Dharmasitras. Rohtak (Haryana): Manthan 
Publications. 

Bodewitz, H. W. 1973. Jaiminiya Brahmana 1, 1-65: Translation and Commentary with a 
Study Agnihotra and Pranagnihotra. Orientalia Rheno-Traiectina 17. Leiden: E. J. Brill. 

___ . 1985. “Yama’s Second Boon in the Katha Upanisad.” WZKS 29: 5-26. 

Bongert, Y. 1963. “Réflexions sur le probléme de |’esclavage dans I’Inde ancienne 4 propos 
de quelques ouvrages récents.” Bulletin de l’ Ecole Frangaise d’ extréne-orient, Ll: 143-— 
94, 

Bosch, L. P. van den. 1991. “The Marriage of the Dead in Ancient India: On the Interpretation 
of Vaikhanasasmartastitra V.9.” In Leslie 1991, pp. 62—79. 

Brereton, J. 1986. ““Tat Tvam Asi’ in Context.” ZDMG 136:98-109. 

Brinkhaus, H.1978. Die altindischen Mischkastensysteme. Alt- und Neu-Indische Studien 19. 
Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 

___. 1980. “Zu J. D. M. Derretts Textausgabe und Ubersetzung von Bharucis Manusastra- 
vivarana-fragment.” WZKS 24: 147-80. 

Biihler, G. (tr.) 1879-82. Sacred Laws of the Aryas \containing the Dharmasitras of 
Apastamba, Gautama, Vasistha, and Baudhayana]. 2 vols. SBE 2, 14. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

______. 1888. “Lexicographical Notes. 5. Bhritna, bhriinahan, bhriinahatya, bhriinahanana.” 
WZKM 2: 182-85. 

Burrow, T. 1975. “Two Saka Loanwords in Manusnuti.” Ural-Altaische Jahrbiicher 47. 30- 
34. 

















1002 Bibliography 


Caland, W. (tr.) 1929. Vaikhdnasasmartasittram. Calcutta: Asiatic Society. 

Chatterjee, H. 1971. The Law of Debt in Ancient India. Calcutta: Sanskrit College. 

Chatterjee, H. 1972-74. Forms of Marriage in Ancient India. 2 vols. Calcutta: Sanskrit Pustak 
Bhandar. 

Dallapiccola, A. L., and S. Zingel-Avé Lallemant, eds. 1989. The Sastric Tradition in the 
Indian Arts. Beitrage zur Stidasienforschung. Wiesbaden: Steiner. 

Das, R. M. 1962. Women in Manu and His Seven Commentators. Bodh Gaya: Kanchana 
Publications. 

Das, S. 1977. Crime and Punishment in Ancient India. New Delhi: Abinav Publications. 

Day, T. 1982. The Conception of Punishment in Early Indian Literature. Waterloo (Canada): 
Wilfrid Laurier University Press. 

Derrett, J. D. M. 1964. “Bharuci on the Royal Regulative Power in India.” JAOS 84: 392-95. 

___.. 1965. “A Newly-discovered Contact between Arthasastra and Dharmasastra.” ZDMG 
115: 134-52. 

.1967a. “A Jurist and His Sources: Medhatithi’s Use of Bharuci.” Adyar Library 
Bulletin 30: 1-22. 

___. 1967b. “The Concept of Law according to Medhatithi, a Pre-Islamic Indian Jurist.” In 
Der Orient in der Forschung. Feshtschrift Otto Spies, ed. W. Hoenerbach, pp. 18-41. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 

____. 1968. Religion, Law, and the State in India. New York: Free Press. 

. 1973. Dharmasastra and Juridical Literature. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 

. 1976—78. Essays in Classical and Modern Hindu Law. 4vols. Leiden: Brill. 

. 1976. “Rajadharma.” Journal of Asian Studies 35: 597-609. 

Deshpande, M. M. 1999. “What to Do with the Anaryas? Dharmic Discourses of Inclusion 
and Exclusion.” In Aryan and Non-Aryan in South Asia: Evidence, Interpretation and 
Ideology, ed. J. Bronkhorst and M. M. Deshpande, pp. 107-27. Harvard Oriental Series, 
Opera Minora, 3. Columbia, Missouri: South Asia Books. 

Dirks, N. B. 2001. Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 

Drekmeier, C. 1962. Kingship and Community in Early India. Stanford: Stanford Univ. Press. 

Dutt, M. N. 1907. The Dharma Sastras. Calcutta: Des Elysium Press. 

Edgerton, F. 1953. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary.2 vols. Reprint 1972. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Emeneau, M. B. 1962. “Barkcloth in India—Sanskrit valkala.” JAOS 82:167-70. 

Falk, H. 2001. “Suicidal Self-scorching in Ancient India." In Vidydrnavavandanam: Essays 
in Honour of Asko Parpola, ed. K. Karttunen and P. Koskikallio, pp. 131-46. Studia 
Orientalia, 94. Helsinki: Finnish Oriental Society. 

Fezas, J. 1996. “Susriis@ dans |’ Arthasastra: obéissance, devoir conjugal ou maison du beau- 
pére?” In Langue, style et structure dans le monde indien: Centenaire de Louis Renou, ed. 
N. Balbir and G-J. Pinault, pp. 385-412. Paris: Librairie Honoré Champion. 

Fitzgerald, J. L. (tr.) 2004. The Mahabharata: Book 11: The Book of the Women; Book 12: 
The Book of Peace, Part 1. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Gharpure, J. R. 1943. Sapinda or the Law of Sapinda Relationship. Collection of Hindu Law 
Texts, 27. Bombay. 

Ghosh, A. 1973. The City in Early Historical India. Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced 
Study. 

Glucklich, A. 1982. “Karma and Social Justice in the Criminal Code of Manu.” Contributions 
to Indian Sociology 16: 59-78. 

. 1984. “Karma and Pollution in the Dharmasastra.” /bid., 18: 25-43. 














Bibliography 1003 


___. 1988a. Religious Jurisprudence in the Dharmasastras. New York: Macmillan. 

___. 1988b. “The Royal Scepter (Danda) as Legal Punishment and Sacred Symbol.” 
History of Religions 28: 97-122. 

___. 1990. “Images and Symbols in the Phenomenology of Dharma.” History of Religions, 
29: 259-85. 

Gonda, J. 1965. Continuity and Change in Indian Religion. The Hague: Mouton. 

___. 1966. Ancient Indian Kingship from the Religius Viewpoint. Leiden: Brill. 

Gopal, R. 1962. “Manu’s Indebtedness to Sankhayana.” Poona Orientalist 27: 39-44. 

Gupta, P. L. 1969. Coins. New Delhi: National Book Trust. 

Hacker, P. 1959. “Two Accounts of Cosmogony.” In J/aanamuktavali: Commemoration 
Volume in Honour of Joh, Nobel. ed. C. Vogel, pp. 77-91. Sarasbati vihara series. v. 38. 
Dethi: International Academy of Indian Culture. 

. 1961. “The Sankhyization of the Emanation Doctrine, Shown in a Critical Analysis of 
Texts.” WZKS 5: 75-112. 

Halbfass, W. 1991. “Homo Hierarchicus: The Conceptualization of the Varna System in 
Indian Thought.” In Tradition and Reflection, ch. 10, pp. 347-405. Albany: State Univer- 
sity of New York Press. 

Hara, M. 1979. “Sraddhavivesa.” Indologica Taurinensia 7: 261-73. 

. 1992. “Sraddha in the Sense of Desire.” Asiatische Studien 46: 180-94. 

- 1994-95. “Bhartr-Pinda-Niskraya—The Hindu Concept of Loyalty to the Kings.” 

Bulletin of the Deccan College Post-Graduate & Research Institute 54-55: 299-311. 

. 1997. “A Note on the grhasthasrama.” In Lienhard and Piovano 1997, 221-35. 

Hazra, R. C. 1935. “Puranas in the History of Smrti.” Indian Culture 1:587-614. 

Heesterman, J. C. 1968. “The Return of the Veda Scholar (samavartana).” In Pratidanam: 
Indian, Iranian and Indo-European Studies presented to Franciscus Bernardus Jacobus 
Kuiper on his Sixtieth Birthday, ed. J. C. Heesterman et al., pp. 436-47. The Hague: 
Mouton. 

Hiltebeitel, A. 2001. Rethinking the Mahabharata: A Reader’s Guide to the Education of the 
Dharma King. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 

Hopkins, E. 1881. The Mutual Relation of the Four Castes According to the 
Mdanavadhamagastram. Leipzig: Breitkopf and Hartell. 

___. 1885. “On the Professed Quotations from Manu Found in the Mahabharata.” JAOS 11: 
239-75. 

Huxley, A. 1996. “When Manu met Mahasammata.” //P 24: 593-621. 

Jain, M. P. 1966. Outlines of Indian Legal History. Bombay: Tripathi. 

Jamison, S. W. 1986. “Brahmana Syllable Counting, Vedic Tvdc ‘Skin’, and the Sanskrit 
Expression for the Canoncial Creature.” Indo-Iranian Jouranl 29: 161-81. 

. 1991. The Ravenous Hyenas and the Wounded Sun: Myth and Ritual in Ancient India. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 

. 1996. Sacrificed Wife/Sacrificer’s Wife: Women, Ritual, and Hospitality in Ancient 

India. New York: Oxford University Press. 

. 1997. “Sanskrit parinahya ‘household goods’: Semantic Evolution in Cultural 
Context.” In Festschrift Eric Hamp, ed. D. Q. Adams. Vol. 1. Journal of Indo-European 
Studies Monograph 23: 139-45. 

. 1998. “Rhinoceros Toes: Manu 5.17-18 and the Development of the Dharma 
System.” JAOS 118: 249-56. 

. 2000. “A Sanskrit Maxim and Its Ritual and Legal Applications.” In Anusantatyai: 
Festschrift fiir Johanna Narten zum 70, Geburtstag, ed. A. Hintze and E. Tichy, pp. 111— 
25. Miinchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft, Beiheft 19. 

















1004 Bibliography 


Jayaswal, K. P. 1930. Manu and Ydjfiavalkya: A Comparison and a Contrast, A Treatise on 
the Basic Hindu Law. Calcutta: Butterworth. 

Jha, Ganganatha. 1922-27. Studies in Hindu Law. The Princes of Wales Sarasvati Bhavana 
Series. 6 vols. Benares: Sarasvati Bhavana. 

____. 1930. Hindu Law and Its Sources. Dethi: Indian Press. 

Jolly, J. (tr.) 1880. The Institutes of Vishnu. SBE 7. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

___. 1885. Outlines of an History of the Hindu Law of Partition, Inheritance, and 
Adoption. Tagore Law Lectures 1883. Calcutta: Thacker, Spink, and Co. 

. 1885-89. Manutikdsangraha: Being a Series of Copious Extracts from Six Unpub- 
lished Commentaries of the Code of Manu. Calcutta: Asiatic Society. 

_____. 1887. “Manu and Brhaspati.” WZKM 1: 275-80 [expanded version in Jolly 1889]. 

. 1889. The Minor Law-Books: Narada, Brihaspati. SBE 33. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

. 1913. “Arthasastra und Dharmasastra,” ZDMG 67: 49-96. 

Jong, J. W. de. 1988. “Buddhism and the Equality of the Four Castes.” In A Green Leaf: 
Papers in Honour of Professor Jes P. Asmussen. Acta Iranica, 2nd Series, Vol. XII, pp. 
424-31. Leiden: Brille. 

Joshi, A. R. 1987-88. “Medhatithi and Other Commentators of Manusmrti.” Journal of 
Manuscript Studies 17-18: 153-71. 

Kane, P. V. 1925. “The Tantravarttika and the Dharmasastra Literature,” Journal of the 
Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, N. S. 1: 95-102. 

. 1962-75. History of Dharmasdastra. 5 vols. Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental Research 
Institute. 

Kangle, R. P. 1964. “Manu and Kautilya.” Jndian Antiquary (Third Series) I: 48-54. 

. 1965-72. The Kautiliya Arthasastra. 3 vols. Bombay: University of Bombay. 

Kohler, H. W. 1973. Srad-dha in der vedischen und altbuddhistischen Literature. Thesis 
Gottingen, 1948. Ed. K. L. Janert. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 

Konow, S. 1945. Kautalya Studies. Reprint. Delhi: Oriental Publishers. 

Krishna, D. 1992. “The varnasrama Syndrome of Indian Sociology.” Contributions to Indian 
Sociology 26, 2: 282~98. 

Lane, J. W. 1981. “The Creation Account of Manusmiyti.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute 62: 157-68. 

Lariviere, R. W. 1982. “Coins in the Naradasmiti.” Journal of the Numismatic Society of 
India 44: 108-13. 

___. 1983. “More Equine Lexicography: the Hamstring Is Not Connected to the Nose.” 
JAOS 103: 421-22. 

. 1989. “Justices and Panditas: Some Ironies in Contemporary Readings of the Hindu 
Legal Past.” Journal of Asian Studies 48: 757-69. 

. 1991. “Matrimonial Remedies for Women in Classical Hindu Law: Alternatives to 
Divorce.” In Leslie 1991, pp. 37-45. 

. 19974. “Power and Authority: On the Interpretation of Indian Kingship from Sanskrit 
Sources.” In Lienhard and Piovano 1997, pp. 313-27. 

___. 1997b. “Dharmasastra, Custom, ‘Real Law’ and ‘Aprocryphal’ Smrtis.” In Recht, 
Staat, und Verwaltung im klassichen Indien, ed. B. Koelver, pp. 97-110. Wiesbaden: 
Franz Steiner. 

____.. (ed. and tr.) 2003. The Na@radasmirti. 2nd ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Laszlo, F. 1971. Die Parallelversion der Manusmrti im Bhavisyapurana. Abhandtungen fiir 
die Kunde des Morgenlandes, XL, 2. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 

Leslie, J. 1991. Rules and Remedies in Classical Indian Law. Panels of the VIIth World 
Sanskrit Conference. Leiden: Brill. 

















Bibliography 1005 


Lienhard, S. and Piovano, I. ed. 1977. Lex et Litterrae: Studies in Honour of Professor Oscar 
Botto. Turin: Edizioni dell’Orso. 

Lingat, R. 1962a. “Les quatre pieds du procés.” Journal Asiatique 250: 489-503. 

___. 1962b. “Time and Dharma.” Contributions to Indian Sociology 6:7-16. 

. 1973. The Classical Law of India. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Losch, H. 1927. Die Yajfiavalkyasmrti: Ein Beitrag zur Quellenkunde des indischen Rechts. 
Leipzig: Harrassowitz. 

Malamoud, C. 1972. “Obervations sur la notion de ‘reste’ dans le brahmanisme." WZKS 16: 
5-26. 

___. 1982. “On the Rhetoric and Semantics of purusartha.” In Way of Life: King, House- 
holder, Renouncer. Essays in Honour of Louis Dumont, ed. T. N. Madan, pp. 33-54. New 
Delhi: Vikas. 

Maxwell, T. S. 1989. “Silpa versus Sastra.” In Dallapiccola 1989, pp. 5-15. 

Mayrhofer, M. 1956-80. Kurzgefasstes etymologisches Wérterbuch des Altindoarischen. 4 
Vols. Heidelberg: Carl Winter. 

Meyer, J. J. 1927. Uber das Wesen der Altindischen Rechtsschriften und ihr Verhdltnis zu 
elnander und zu Kautilya. Leipzig: Harrassowitz. 

Mishra, S. C. 1993. Evolution of Kautilya’s Arthashastra: An Inscriptional Approach. Delhi: 
Anamika Prakashan. 

Numata, I. 1999. “Manusmrti 7.114.” Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies (Indogaku 
Bukkyogaku Kenkyu) 47-2: 30-4. 

O’Flaherty, W. (ed.) 1980. Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 

Oldenberg, H. 1886-92. The Grhya-Sitras: Rules of Vedic Domestic Ceremonies. 2 parts. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Olivelle, P. 1981. “Contributions to the Semantic History of Samnydsa.” JAOS 101: 265-74. 

_____. 1986-87. Renunciation in Hinduism: A Medieval Debate. 2 vols. Vienna: Institute for 
Indology, University of Vienna. 

. 1998a. “Unfaithful Transmitters: Philological Criticism and Critical Editions of the 

Upanisads.” JIP 26: 173-87. 

. 1998b. “Caste and Purity: A Study in the Language of the Dharma Literature.” 
Contributions to Indian Sociology 32: 189-216. 

. 1998¢. The Early Upanisads. New York: Oxford University Press. 

___.1993. The A §rama System: The History and Hermeneutics of a Religious Institution. 

New York: Oxford University Press. 
1999a. “Sanskrit Commentators and the Transmission of Texts: Haradatta on 
Apastamba Dharmasitra.” JIP 27:551-74. 

. (tr.) 1999b. Dharmasittras: The Law Codes of Ancient India. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 

_____. (ed. and tr.) 2000. Dharmasitras: The Law Codes of Apastamba, Gautama, 
Baudhdyana, and Vasistha. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

___. 2002a. “Abhaksya and abhojya: An Exploration in Dietary Language.” /AOS 122: 
345-54. 

_____- 2002b. “Food for Thought: Dietary Regulations and Social Organization in Ancient 
India.” 2001 Gonda Lecture. Amsterdam: Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and 
Sciences. 

_____. 2004. The Law Code of Manu. Oxford World’s Classics. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

____.. forthcoming-a. “Power of Words: The Ascetic Appropriation and the Semantic 














1006 Bibliography 


Evolution of dharma.” In Asceticism and Power, ed. Peter Fliigel and Gustaaf Houtman. 
London: Curzon. 

Olivelle, P. forthcoming-b. “Manu and Gautama: A Study in Sastric Intertextuality.” In 
Wilhelm Halbfass Commemoration Volume, ed. K. Preisendanz and E. Franco. Vienna: 
Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 

____. forthcoming-c. “Semantic History of dharma: The Middle and Late Vedic Periods.” 
JIP. 

Parasher, A.1991. Mlecchas in Early India: A Study in Attitudes towards Outsiders up to AD 
600. Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 

Patkar, M. M, 1978. Narada, Brhaspati and Katya@yana: A Comparative Study in Judicial 
Procedure. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal. 

Pollock, S. 1985. “The Theory of Practice and the Practice of Theory in Indian Intellectual 
History.” JAOS 105: 499-519. 

__. 1989a. “The Idea of Sastra in Traditional India.” In Dallapiccola and Lallemant 1989, 
pp. 17~26. 

1989b. “Playing by the Rules: Sastra and Sanskrit Literature.” In Dallapiccola and 
Lallemant 1989, pp. 301-12. 
. 1990. “From Discoure of Ritual to Discourse of Power in Sanskrit Culture.” Journal 
of Ritual Studies 4: 316-45. 

. 1997. “The «Revelations» of «Tradition»: Sruti, smrti, and the Sanskrit Discourse of 
Power.” In Lienhard and Piovano 1997, pp. 295-417. 

Rau, W. 1957. Staat und Gesellschaft im alten Indien nach den Brahmana-Texten dargestellt. 
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. 

Rocher, L. 1954. “The Technical Term ‘anubandha’ in Sanskrit Legal Literature.” Annals of 
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 35: 221-28. 

. 1955. “Ancient Indian Criminal Law.” Journal of Oriental Research 24: 15-34. 

. 1964. “The Theory of Proof in Ancient Hindu Law.” Recueils de la Société Jean 
Bodin, vol. XVII, pp. 325-71 Brussells: Les Editions de la Librairie Encyclopedique. 

___. 1965. Droit hindou ancient. Introduction Bibliographique a |’Histoire du Droit et a 
l’Ethnologie Juridique, ed. J. Gilissen, vol. E/6. Brussels: Edition de I’Institut de 
Sociologie, Université Libre de Bruxelles. 

. 1969. ““‘Lawyers’ in Classical Hindu Law.” Law and Society Review 3: 383-402. 

. 1976a. “The Introduction of the Gautamadharmasitra.” Adyar Library Bulletin 39: 
90-100. 

____- 1976b. “Notes on the Technical Term Sdhasa ‘Fine, Pecuniary Penalgy’.” In V. 
Raghavan Commemoration Volume, pp. 515~31. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

___. 1977-78. “The Purana of Fate and Human Effort.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute 58-59: 271-78. 

____. 1980. “Karma and Rebirth in the Dharmasastras.” In O’Flaherty 1980, pp. 61-89. 

___. 1993. “Law Books in an Oral Culture: The Indian Dharmasdastras.” Proceedings of 
the American Philosophical Soctety 137: 254-67. 

_____.. 2002. “Ddsaddsi.” JAOS 122: 374-80. 

Samozvantsev, A. M. 1980-81. “Arthasastra and Dharmasastra—Two Traditions.” /ndo- 
logica Taurinensia 8-9: 353-63. 

Sandahl, S. 2001. “Women One Should Not Marry—Some Comments on Manusmirti 3.6-9, 
11.” Acta Orientalia 62: 166-76. 

Sarkar, U. C. 1958. Epochs in Hindu Legal History. Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Vedic 
Research Institute. 











Bibliography 1007 


Scharfe, H. 1993. /nvestigations in Kautalya’s Manual of Political Science. Wiesbaden: 
Harrassowitz. 

Schlingloff, D. 1965. “Arthasastra-Studien. Teil I: Kautilya und Medhatithi.” WZKS 9: 1-38. 

Schmidt, H.-P. 1987. Some Women’s Rites and Rights in the Veda. Pune: Bhandarkar Oriental 
Research Institute. 

Schmithausen, L. 1991. The Problem of the Sentience of Plants in Earliest Buddhism. Studia 
Philologica Buddhica, Monograph Series IV. Tokyo: International Institute for Buddhist 
Studies. 

Sen, P. N. 1980. Hindu Jurisprudence. University of Calcutta Tagore Law Lectures, 1909. 
Calcutta: Saraswat Library. 

Sen-Gupta, N. C. 1953. Evolution of Ancient Indian Law. University of Calcutta Tagore Law 
Lectures, 1950. London: Arthur Probsthain. 

Sharma, R. S. 1990 (1958). Sadras in Ancient India: A Social History of the Lower Order 
Down to circa A. D. 600. 3rd. ed. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Shastri, H. C. 1972-74. Forms of Marriage in Ancient India.2 vols. Calcutta: Sanskrit Pustak 
Bhandar. 

Shastri, S. R. 1959. Women in the Sacred Laws. Bomay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. 

Silk, J. 1992. “A Bibligraphy of Ancient Indian Slavery.” Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, 
16/17: 277-85. 

Sircar, D. C. 1968. Studies in Indian Coins. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass. 

Smith, B. K. 1994. Classifying the Universe: The Ancient Indian Varna System and the 
Origins of Caste. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Sprockhoff, J. F. 1987. “Kathasruti und Manavasrautasitra: eine Nachlese zur Resignation.” 
Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, 13/14: 235-57. 

Sternback, L. 1972. “Place and Time of King’s Counsel with Ministers according to the 
Dharmasastra-s, ArthaSastra-s and Subhasita-Samgraha-s.” In India Maior: Congratula- 
tory Volume Presented to J. Gonda, ed. J. Ensink and P. Gaeffke, pp. 200-7. Leiden: 
Brill. 

_____... 1974. The Manava Dharmasastra I-11] and the Bhavisya Purana. Varanasi: All India 
Kashi Raj Trust. 

Stietencron, H. von 1997. “The Non-Existence of Impurity and the Legitimation of Kings.” In 
Lienhard and Piovano 1997, pp. 487-508. 

Thakur, A. 1933. Hindu Law of Evidence; or, A Comparative Study of the Law of Evidence 
According to the Smrtis. Calcutta: University of Calcutta. 

Thieme, P. 1931. “Grammatik und Sprache: eine Problem der altindischen Sprachwissen- 
schaft,” Zeitschrift fiir Indologie und Iranistik 8:23-32. Kleine Schriften 2:514-23. 

. 1939. “Indische Worter und Sitten,” ZDMG 95: 219-221. Kleine Schriften 2: 343-70 
{the section of Pija translated in Journal of Oriental Research 28(1960): 1-16]. 

____.. 1958. “Sanskrit edhate.” Indian Linguistics 19: 149-58. Kleine Schriften 2:160-69. 





—__.- 1963. “‘Jungfrauengatte’: Sanskrit kKaumarah patih.” Zeitschrift fiir vergleichende 
Sprachforschung auf dem Gebiete der indogermanischen Sprachen 78:161-248. Kleine 
Schriften 2: 426-512. 

. 1984. Kleine Schriften. Vol. 2. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner. 

Turner, R. L. 1966. A Comparative Dictionary of Indo-Aryan Languages. 4 vols. Reprint. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1999. 

Wackernagel, J. 1957-78. Altindische Grammatick. 3 vols. Géttingen: Vandenhoeck & 
Ruprecht. 

Watkins, C. 1994. “Studies in Indo-European Legal Language, Institutions, and Mythology.” 





1008 Bibliography 


In Selected Writings, Vol. Il, pp. 422-55. Innsbruck: Innsbrucker Beitrége zur 
Sprachwissenschaft. 

____. 1994b. “‘In the Interstices of Procedure’: Indo-European Legal Language and 
Comparative Law.” /bid., pp. 718-27. 

Wezler, A. 1982. “Manu's Omniscience: On the Interpretation of Manusmrti II.7.” In 
Indology and Law: Studies in Honour of Professor J. Duncan M. Derrett. ed. G. D. 
Sontheimer and P. K. Aithal, pp. 79-105. Wiesbaden: Steiner. 

____.- 1986. “Cattle, Field and Barley: A Note on Mahabhasya 1.337.24—27. Adyar Library 
Bulletin 50: 431-77. 

_____- 1987. “On the Term antahsamifia-.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 58: 
112-31. 

___.1994. “A Note on Sanskrit briana and bhriinahatyd.” In Festschrift Klaus Bruhn, ed. 
N. Balbir and J. Bautze, pp. 623-46. Reinbek: Verlag fiir Orientalistische 
Fachpublikationen. 

__. 1995. “Der Tod als Mittel der Entsithnung.” In Im Tod gewinnt der Mensch sein 
Selbst: Das Phénomenon des Todes in asiatscher und abendlandischer Religionstradition, 
ed. G. Oberhammer, pp. 97-140. Vienna: Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 

. 1998a. “Medhatithi on the Role of Manu, the Prayojana of the Manusmrti and the 
Inventive of the Brahmins to Study It.” In Si#ryacandrdya: Essays in Honour of Akira 
Yuyama on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday, ed. P. Harrison and G. Schopen, pp. 216— 
40. Gottingen: Swisttal-Odendorf. 

_____. 1998b. “Should the Adopted Son Be a Close Relative? On the Interpretation of 
VasDhS 15.6 and 7.” Indologica Taurinensia 17-18: 359-81. 

. 1999a. “Methatithi on sa@mdnyato drstam [anumdnam].”J1P 27: 139-57. 

.1999b. “Uber den sakramentalen Charakter des dharma nachsinnend.” In Raum- 
zeitliche Vermittlung der Transzendenz, ed. G. Oberhammer and M. Schmiicker, pp. 63~ 
113. Wien: Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften. 

____. 2000. “Some Remarks on the 135th Adhikarana of the ‘Kautiliya’ Artha-S@stra 
Entitled ‘Policy towards Samghas’.” On the Understanding of Other Cultures, ed. P. 
Balcerowicz and M. Mejor, pp. 489-503. Studia Indologiczne 7. Warsaw: Instytut 
Orientalistyczny. 

Witzel, M. 1984. “Sur le chemin du ciel.” Bulletin D'Etudes Indiennes 2: 213-79. 











DHARMASASTRA PARALLELS 


CHAPTER ONE 

10 MBh 12.328.35 

18 MBh 12.224.43 

20 MBh 12.224.31 

28 MBh 12,224.47 

29 =©6- MBh 12..22.4.47 

64 MBh 12.224.12-3 

65 MBh 12,224.14 

66 MBh 12.224.15 

67. MBh 12.224.16 

69 MBh 12.224.19 

70 MBh 12.224.20 

73 MBh 12.224.30 

75 MBh 12.224.35 

76 MBh 12.224.36 

77. ~=MBh 12.224.37 

78 MBh 12.224.38 

81 MBh12.224.22 

82 MBh 12.224.23 

83. MBh 12,224.24 

84 MBh 12.224.25 

85 MBh 12,224.26 

86 MBh 12.224.27 

94 YDh 1.198-9 

CHAPTER Two 

6 ApDh 1 11-3; GDh 1.1-3; BDh 
1.1.1-6; VaDh 1.4-6 

12 YDh 1.7 

14. ApDh130.9; GDh 1.4 

22 BDh 1.2.9—10, VaDh 1.8-9 

23 BDh 1.2.12; VaDh 113-5; YDh 1.2 


1009 


24 


26 
29 
30 
31 
34 
35 
36 


37 


38 


39 


40 
41 


42 


44 
45 


46 


48 
49 


51 


ApDh 1.32.18; BDh 1.2.13-5; ViDh 
84.2, 4 

YDh 1.10 

MBh 3.177.29; ViDh 27.4 

ViDh 27.5 

ViDh 27.6-9 

ViDh 27.10-1; YDh 1.12 

ViDh 27.12; YDh 1.12 

ApDh 1.19; GDh 1.5-11; BDh 1.3.7- 
9; VaDh 11.49—-51; ViDh 27.15—-7; 
YDh 1.14 

ApDh 1.1.20—6; GDh 1.6 

ApDh 1.1.27; GDh 1.12—4; BDh 
1.3.12; ViDh 27.26 

GDh 21.11; VaDh 11.74-5; ViDh 
27.27; YDh 1.38 

VaDh 11.75 

ApDh 1.2.39; 1.3.10; GDh 1.16—-9; 
BDh 1.3.14; VaDh 11.61-7; ViDh 
27.19—20; YDh 1.29 

ApDh 1.2.33-7; GDh 1.15; BDh 
1.3.13; VaDh 11.58—60; ViDh 27.18; 
YDh 1.29 

BDh 1.8.5; ViDh 27.19; YDh 1.29 
ApDh 1.2.38; GDh 1.22—4; BDh 
1.3.15; VaDh 11.52—4; ViDh 27.21-3; 
YDh 1.29 

GDh 1.26; BDh 1.3.15; VaDh 
11.55—-7; ViDh 27.22 

GDh 1.25; ViDh 27.24 

ApDh 1.3.25; GDh 2.8, 5; YDh 1.29 
ApDh 1.3.28-30; GDh 2.36; BDh 
1.3.16—7; VaDh 11.68—70; ViDh 
27.25; YDh 1.30 

ApDh 1.3.31—42; GDh 2.39-40; 
ViDh 68.40—1; YDh 1.31 


1010 


52 
53 


54 


56 


58 


59 


60 


61 


62 


63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
69 
71 


72 


73 
74 


75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


MBh 13.107.25 


GDh 2.41; BDh 2.5.21; 2.12.7; VaDh 
3.28; ViDh 68.34-5 


BDh 2.12.7; VaDh 3.69; ViDh 
68.42-3; YDh 1.31 


ApDh 2.1.2—3; BDh 2.12.9; ViDh 
68.48; YDh 1.112 


BDh 1.8.14; VaDh 3.26; ViDh 62.6; 
YDh 1.18 


BDh 1.8.15—6; VaDh 3.26; ViDh 
62.1-4; YDh 1.19 


ApDh 1.16.2—10; GDh 1.36; BDh 
1.8.19-21; VaDh 3.27-9; ViDh 
62.6—8; YDh 1.20 


ApDh 1.15.4—7; BDh 1.8.17; VaDh 
3.31; ViDh 62.5; YDh 1.18,20 
GDh 1.36; BDh 1.8.23; VaDh 3.31; 
ViDh 62.9; YDh 1.21 

ApDh 1.6.18-9; BDh 1.8.5~10 
BDh 1.6.6—9; ViDh 27.29 

GDh 2.9; YDh 1.36 

ViDh 27.13; YDh 1.13 

ViDh 22.32; 27.14; YDh 1.13 

GDh 2.6—10; YDh 1.15 

ApDh 1.5.18-23; BDh 1.3.25-8; 
ViDh 30.32; YDh 1.26 

ApDh 1.5.22; GDh 1.46; BDh 1.3.25; 
ViDh 30.32 

GDh 1.46 

ApDh 1.13.6-7; GDh 1.57; ViDh 
30.33 

GDh 1.48-51; BDh 2.7.5-7 

ViDh 55.10 

ViDh 55.11 

ViDh 55.12 

VaDh 26.4; ViDh 55.13 

ViDh 55.14 

ViDh 55.15 

ViDh 55.16 

VaDh 10.5; 25.11; ViDh 55.17 
ViDh 55.18 


85 
86 
87 


101 


102 
103 
105 
106 
107 
108 


109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 


119 
120 
121 


122 


123 
124 
125 
127 
128 
129 
130 


131 
132 


VaDh 26.9; ViDh 55.19 
VaDh 26.10; ViDh 55.20 
VaDh 26.11; ViDh 55.21 


ApDh 1.30.8; GDh 2.11; BDh 
2.7.12—3; VaDh 7.16; ViDh 28.2-3; 
YDh 1.23-5 

BDh 2.7.18—20; VaDh 26.2—3 
BDh 2.7.15 

ApDh 1.12.9 

ApDh 1.12. 3-5 

ViDh 30.34-8; YDh 1.41-6 

ApDh 1.4.16, 23; 1.5.25; GDh 2.8,30; 
BDh 1.4. 4-8; VaDh 7.9, 15; ViDh 
28.4, 7, 9,12; YDh 1.25 

YDh 1.28 

BDh 1.4.2; VaDh 2.12 

ViDh 29.7 

BDh 1.4.1; ViDh 29.8 

BDh 1.4.1 

Nirukta 2.4; VaDh 2.8; ViDh 29.8 
Nirukta 2.4; VaDh 29.9; ViDh 29.10 
ViDh 30.41-2 

ApDh 1.5.19—20; 1.14.7~9; GDh 
6.1-3,5; BDh 1.3.25-8; VaDh 
13.41-3; ViDh 30.43 

ApDh 1.8.11; GDh 2.21, 25 

MBh 13.107.32 

ApDh 1.5.15; BDh 1.3.26; MBh 
5.39.60 


ApDh 1.5.12; GDh 6.5; BDh 1.3.27; 
VaDh 13.44; ViDh 28.17; YDh 1.26 


VaDh 13.45 

ViDh 28.17 

ApDh 1.5.17; VaDh 13.46 
ApDh 1.14.26—9; GDh 5.41-2 
GDh 6.19 

ViDh 32.7 


ApDh 1.14.11; GDh 6.9; BDh 1.3.45; 
VaDh 13.41; ViDh 32.4 


GDh 6.7; ViDh 32.2-3 
GDh 6.7-8; ViDh 32.2 


133 
134 
135 


136 


137 
138 


139 
140 


141 
142 
143 
144 


145 
146 
147 
148 


151 
154 
155 
156 
157 


158 
159 
166 
168 
169 
170 


171 
172 


174 
176 
177 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ViDh 32.3 

ApDh 1.14.13; GDh 6.14-7 

ApDh 1.14.25; MBh 13.8.20; ViDh 
32.17 


GDh 6.20; VaDh 13.56—-7; ViDh 
32.16; YDh 1.116 


GDh 6.10; YDh 1.116 


GDh 6.24; BDh 2.6.30; VaDh 
13.58—60; ViDh 63.50; YDh 1.117 


GDh 6.25; VaDh 13.59; YDh 1.117 


ApDh 1.1.14; GDh 1.9-10; VaDh 
3.21; ViDh 29.1; YDh 1.34 


VaDh 3.22—3; ViDh 29.2; YDh 1.35 
YDh 1.34 

ViDh 29.3; YDh 1.35 

ApDh 1.1.15; Nirukta 2.4; VaDh 
2.10; ViDh 30.47 

VaDh 13.48; YDh 1.35 

VaDh 2.3-5; ViDh 30.44 
ApDh 1.1.18; ViDh 30.45 
ApDh 1.1.16-7; GDh 1.8; ViDh 
30.46 

BDh 1.3.47 

MBh 3.133.12 

ViDh 32.18 

MBh 3.133.11 

BDh 1.1.10; VaDh 3.11; MBh 
12.37.39 

MBh 12.37.40 

GDh 2.42 

ApDh 1.12.1-2; YDh 1.40 

VaDh 3.2; ViDh 28.36 

VaDh 2.3; ViDh 28.37; YDh 1.39 


VaDh 2.3; MBh 3.177.29; ViDh 
28.38 


GDh 1.10; BDh 1.3.6; VaDh 2.4-6 


GDh 2.4—5; BDh 1.3.6; VaDh 2.6; 
MBh 3.177.30 


ViDh 27.28 
GDh 2.8; VaDh 7.17; YDh 1.22 
ApDh 1.2.23-6; GDh 2.13-20; BDh 


178 


179 


180 
181 
182 
183 


184 
186 
187 
188 
189 
190 
191 


192 
193 
194 


195 
196 


197 
198 
199 


200 
203 


204 


205 


206 
207 


208 


1011 


1.3.23-—4; YDh 1.33 


ApDh 1.3.11, 7-24} 1.7.5; GDh 2.13; 
BDh 1.3.24; VaDh 7.15; ViDh 28.11; 
YDh 1.33 


ApDh 1.3.12—33 1.7.3, 8-10; GDh 
2.13, 16-7; BDh 1.3.20; ViDh 28.11; 
YDh 1.33 


ViDh 28.48 
ViDh 28.51 
ApDh 1.4.13—-4; BDh 1.3.19 


ApDh 1.3.25; GDh 2.35; BDh 1.3.18; 
ViDh 28.9; YDh 1.29 


GDh 2.37~-8 

ApDh 1.4.16; BDh 1.3.19; ViDh 28.4 
ViDh 28.52; YDh 3.281 

YDh 1.32 

YDh 1.32 

YDh 1.32 


GDh 2.29-30; VaDh 7.13; ViDh 
28.6-7; YDh 1.27 


GDh 2.22 
ApDh 1.6.20 


ApDh 1.4.22, 28; GDh 2.21; BDh 
1.3.21; ViDh 28.13 


ApDh 1.6.5; GDh 2.25; ViDh 28.18 
ApDh 1.6.5-9; GDh 2.28; BDh 
1.3.38; VaDh 7.12; ViDh 28.19 
ViDh 28.20-2 

ApDh 1.2.21; 1.6.14-7; ViDh 28.23 
ApDh 1.8.15; GDh 2.18; ViDh 
28.24-5 

ViDh 28,26 

ApDh 1.6.15, 23 

ApDh 1.8.12-3; BDh 1.3.34; ViDh 
28.27-8 

GDh 6.3-—4; VaDh 13.54; ViDh 
28.29-30 

ApDh 1.7.28-9 

ApDh 1.7.30; GDh 2.31; BDh 1.3.44; 
VaDh 13.54; ViDh 32.1 

ViDh 28.31 


1012 


209 


210 


211 


212 
213 
214 
215 
216 
217 


219 


220 


221 
222 
223 
225 


228 
229 
230 
231 


232 
233 
234 
235 
238 
239 
241 


243 


244 


245 


247 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ApDh 1.7.30; GDh 2.32; BDh 1.3.36; 
ViDh 28.32-3 


ApDh 1.7.27; GDh 2.31; ViDh 32.2.5 


ApDh 1.7.27; GDh 2.32; BDh 1.3.37; 
ViDh 32.6 


GDh 2.34; BDh 1.3.33; ViDh 32.13 
MBh 13.48.37 

MBh 13.48.36 

MBh 13.48.37 

ViDh 32.14 


ApDh 1.14.8; GDh 2.33; 6.2-3; 
ViDh 32.15 


ApDh 1.2.31—2; 1.30.8; GDh 1.27; 
VaDh 7.11; ViDh 28.41 


ApDh 2.12.13—4; GDh 23.21; BDh 
2.7.16; VaDh 20.4; ViDh 28.53 


ApDh 2.12.22; VaDh 1.18 

GDh 2.11; BDh 2.7.2; ViDh 28.2 
ApDh 2.29.11; MBh 13,108.13 
ApDh 1.14.6; GDh 21.15; ViDh 
31.1-3 

ViDh 31.5 

MBh 12.109.5; ViDh 31.3,6 
MBh 12.109.6; ViDh 31.7 


ApDh 1.3.44; MBh 12.109.7; ViDh 
31.8 


MBh 12.109.8 

MBh 12.109.8; ViDh 31.10 

MBh 12.109.11; ViDh 31.9 

ViDh 31.6 

ApDh 2.29.11; MBh 12.159.29~30 
MBh 12.159.29-30 

ApDh 2.4.25; GDh 7.1-3; BDh 
1.3.41-2 

ApDh 2.21.6; GDh 3.5—6; BDh 
2.11.13; VaDh 7.4; ViDh 28.43; YDh 
1.49 

GDh 3.9; YDh 1.50 


ApDh 1.7.19; GDh 2.48—9; ViDh 
28.42; YDh 1.51 


GDh 3.7; ViDh 28.44-5; YDh 1.49 


248 GDh 3.8; VaDh 7.5—6; ViDh 28.46; 


YDh 1.49 


249 ©ViDh 28.47 


CHAPTER THREE 


1 


11 


13 


14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
20 


21 


23 
24 


25 


26° 


27 


28 


29 


30 


31 


ApDh 1.2.12—6; GDh 2.45-7; BDh 
1.3.1-4; YDh 1.36 


VaDh 8.1; YDh 1.52 
GDh 4.1; VaDh 8.1; YDh 1.52 


GDh 4.2-5; BDh 2.1.37-8; VaDh 
8.1-2; MBh 13.44.17; ViDh 24.9-10; 
YDh 1.53 


YDA 1.54 
ViDh 24.12~6; YDh 1.53 
YDh 1.53 


BDh 1.16.2-5; VaDh 1.24-5; ViDh 
24.1-4; YDh 1.57 


VaDh 1.26; YDh 1.56 
VaDh 1.27; ViDh 26.6 
BDh 2.2.7 

VaDh 1.27 

VaDh 14.11; ViDh 26.7 
MBh 1.67.8 


BDh 1.20.1; VaDh 1.29; MBh 1.67.8- 
9; ViDh 24.18 


GDh 4.15; MBh 1.67.10 

ApDh 2.12.3; GDh 4.14; BDh 
1.20.10; MBh 1.67.10-1; ViDh 
24.27-8 

MBh 1.67.11-2 

BDh 1.20.12; MBh 1.67.13 

ApDh 2.11.17; GDh 4.6; BDh 1.20.2; 
VaDh 1.30; ViDh 24.19; YDh 1.58 
ApDh 2.11.19; GDh 4.9; BDh 1.20.5; 
VaDh 1.31; ViDh 24.20; YDh 1.59 
ApDh 2.11.18; GDh 4.8; BDh 1.20.4; 
VaDh 1.32; ViDh 24.21; YDh 1.59 
GDh 4.7; BDh 1.20.3; ViDh 24.22; 
YDh 1.60 


ApDh 2.12.1; GDh 4.11; BDh 1.20.6; 
VaDh 1.35; ViDh 24.24; YDh 1.61 


32 


33 


34 


37 
38 


42 
43 
44 
45 


46 
47 
48 
50 
51 


53 


54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
61 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 


68 
69 
70 


72 
76 


Dharmasastra Parallels 1013 


ApDh 2.11.20; GDh 4.10; BDh 
1.20.7; VaDh 1.33; ViDh 24.23; YDh 
1.61 


ApDh 2.12.2; GDh 4.12; BDh 1.20.8; 
VaDh 1.34; ViDh 24.25; YDh 1.61 


GDh 4.13; BDh 1.20.9; ViDh 24.26; 
YDh 1.61 

GDh 4.33; ViDh 24.29; YDh 1.58 
GDh 4.29-32; ViDh 24.30-2; YDh 
1.59-60 

ApDh 2.12.4; BDh 1.21.1 

ViDh 24.5; YDh 1.62 

ViDh 24.6-8; YDh 1.62 

ApDh 2.1.17-8; GDh §.1-2; BDh 
4.1.18~-9; VaDh 12.21—4; ViDh 69.1; 
YDh 1.79-81 


YDh 1.79 

YDh 1.79 

YDh 1.79 

YDh 1.79 

ApDh 2.13.11; BDh 1.21.2—3; 2.2.27; 
VaDh 1.37-8 

ApDh 2.13.11; VaDh 1.36; MBh 
13.45.21 

MBA 13.46.1-2 

MBh 13.46.3; YDh 1.82 

MBh 13.46.5 

MBh 13.46.5-6 

MBh 13.46.6 

MBh 13.46.4 

BDh 1.10.26 

BDh 1.10.28 

BDh 1.10.28 

BDh 1.10.29 

GDh 5.7—8; BDh 2.4.22; ViDh 
59.1-2; YDh 1.97 

ViDh 59.19 

ViDh 59.19-20 

GDh 5.3~4, 9; BDh 2.5.11; 2.11.13 
ViDh 59.20—4; YDh 1.102 
ViDh 59.26 

MBh 12.255.11 


78 VaDh 8.14-6; ViDh 59.27-8 

80 ViDh 59.29 

81 YDh 1.104 

82 MBh 13.100.8; ViDh 67.23-5 

83-6 ApDh 2.3.12, 16-7; GDh 5.10; BDh 
2.5.11-2; VaDh 11.3; ViDh 

87-91 ApDh 2.3.12, 15, 18-233 2.4.1-8; 
GDh 5.11-7; VaDh 11.4; ViDh 
67.4-22 

92 ApDh2.9.5-6; ViDh 67.26; YDh 
1.103 

93 ApDh 2.4.9; ViDh 67.28, 32, 44, 46 

94 ApDh2.4.10~-1; BDh 2.5.12~5; 
VaDh 11.5; ViDh 59.14; 67.27; YDh 


1.108 
96 GDh 5.18; YDh 1.108 
97 VaDh 3.8 


99 =ApDh 2.4.13, 16; 2.6.7—15; GDh 
5.31-4; VaDh 8.12; ViDh 67.45; YDh 
1.107 

100 }§=69ViDh 67.33 

101 ApDh 2.4.14; GDh 5.35—-6; YDh 
1.107 

102. GDh 5.40; VaDh 8.7; ViDh 67.34 

103. SaikhGr 2.16.3; ApDh 2.6.5; GDh 
5.40; VaDh 8.8; ViDh 67.35 

104 YDh1.112 

105 VaDh 8.4-5, 8; ViDh 67.29-30; 
YDh 1.107 

106 ApDh 2.8.2-4; GDh 5.38—9; YDh 
1.104 

107. YDh1.107 

108 ApDh 2.6.16—-7; VaDh 11.12 

uo) Sankh Gr 2.16.2; GDh 5.43 

111 GDh 5.44; ViDh 67.36 

112 =ApDh 2.4.18~-20; GDh 5.45; BDh 
2.5.14; ViDh 67.37 

113 «= ViDh 67.38; YDh 1.108 

114. SankhGr2.14.21; ApDh 2.4.11-2; 
GDh 5.25; BDh 2.13.5; ViDh 67.39; 
YDh 1.105 

115 = BDh 2.5.18; 2.13.5; ViDh 67.40 

16 © ApDh 2.8.2; ViDh 67.41; YDh 1.105 


1014 


117 
118 


119 


120 


122 


125 


126 
128 
129 
130 


134 


135 
138 


139 
140 
141 
142 


144 


145 
148 


149 
150 


151 
152 


153 


154 


155 
156 
157 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


BDh 2.13.6; ViDh 67.42 
BDh 2.13.2; ViDh 67.43 


ApDh 2.8.5—9; GDh 5.27-8; BDh 
2.6.36—8; VaDh 11.1-2; YDh 
1.109—10 


GDh 5.29-30; BDh 2.6.37; YDh 
1.110 


GDh 15.2; YDh 1.217 

GDh 15.21; BDh 2.15.10; VaDh 
11.27; ViDh 73.3-4; YDh 1.228 
BDh 2.15.11; VaDh 11.28 
VaDh 3.8 

GDh 15.21; VaDh 11.29 

MBh 13.90.46; ViDh 82.2 


VaDh 6.26; MBh 13.90.43; ViDh 
83.9-13; YDh 1.221 


MBh 13.90.44 


ApDh 2.17.4; GDh 15.12; BDh 
2.14.6; VaDh 11.17; MBh 13.90.36 


MBh 13.90.34 
MBh 13.90.35 
ApDh 2.17.8; MBh 13.90.39 
MBh 13.90.37 


ApDh 2.17.5~6; BDh 2.14.4; VaDh 
11.18 


BDh 2.14.4 


GDh 15.20; ViDh 83.17-8; YDh 
1.220 


ViDh 82.1-2 


GDh 15.16; VaDh 11.19; YDh 
1,223-4 


GDh 15.16—-8; ViDh 82.13 
GDh 15.18; ViDh 82.8-9 


GDh 15.16—8; VaDh 11.19; ViDh 
82.26; YDh 1.222 


GDh 15.16—8; VaDh 11.19; YDh 
1.223 


GDh 15.17—-8; YDh 1.222 
ViDh 82.20-1; YDh 1.222-3 
ViDh 82.23, 29; YDh 1.22 


158 


159 


160 
161 


162 
164 
165 
166 
172 
184 


185 


186 
187 


188 
191 
202 


206 


207 
208 
209 
210 


211 

215 
216 
218 
220 
221 
224 
225 


GDh 15.18; MBh 13.90.7; YDh 
1.223-4 


GDh 15.19; MBh 13.90.8; ViDh 82.5, 
28; YDh 1.222-3 


GDh 15.18; ViDh 82.18; YDh 1.223 
ApDh 2.17.21; GDh 15.18; VaDh 
11.19; ViDh 82.19; YDh 1.222 
ApDh 2.17.21; ViDh 82.7 

GDh 15.18; ViDh 82.22; YDh 1.223 
YDh 1.223 

GDh 15.16; YDh 1.224 

BDh 2.1.39; MBh 12.159.63 

ApDh 2.17.22; GDh 15.28; MBh 
13.90.19; ViDh 83.1-5; YDh 1.219 
ApDh 2.17.22; GDh 15.28; BDh 
2.14.2; MBh 13.90.20; ViDh 83.2-4, 
15-6; YDh 1.219-21 

YDh 1.219 

ApDh 2.17.11-5; BDh 2.14.6; VaDh 
11.17; ViDh 73.2; YDh 1.225 

GDh 15.23; YDh 1.225 

GDh 15.22 

A pDh 2.19.3-4; ViDh 79.24; YDh 
1.236 

ApDh 2.18.6; GDh 15.25; YDh 1.227; 
ViDh 85.66 

ViDh 85.54-65 

ViDh 73.2; YDh 1.226 

BDh 2.14.7; ViDh 73.12; YDh 1.231 
ApDh 2.17.17—9; BDh 2.14.7; ViDh 
73.12; YDh 1.235 

BDh 2.14.7 

ViDh 73.17-9; YDh 1.241 

ViDh 73.22 

ViDh 73.23 

ViDh 75.1 

ViDh 75.4 

VaDh 11.26 

BDh 2.15.3; VaDh 11.25 


226-7 ApDh 2.16.23—4; 2.19.19—22; ViDh 


228 


73.21, 23-4 
ApDh 2.17.4 


229 


231 


232 
234 
235 
236 
237 
238 
239 


242 
243 
244 
245 
246 
247 
250 
251 
252 
253 
254 
258 
259 
260 
261 
265 
267 


268 


269 


270 


271 


272 


273 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ApDh 2.18.3; ViDh 79.19—21, 81.2 
BDh 2.14.5; ViDh 79.515; YDh 
1.239 

ViDh 73.16 

ViDh 79.16; 83.18 

VaDh 11.35; YDh 1.235, 240 

ViDh 81.11, 20 

VaDh 11.32; ViDh 81.11, 20 

MBh 13.90.13; ViDh 81.12-3 


ApDh 2.17.20; GDh 15.24; ViDh 
81.6-9 


ViDh 81.15 

ViDh 81.19 

ViDh 81.22; YDh 1.241 

VaDh 11.23; ViDh 81.23 

VaDh 11.24; ViDh 81.24 

ViDh 21.3 

VaDh 11.37 

ViDh 73.26; YDh 1.240 

YDh 1.244-5 

YDh 1.240 

VaDh 3.69-71 

ViDh 73.27 

ViDh 73.28; YDh 1.246 

YDh 1.257 

BDh 2.14.9 

VaDh 11.21—2; YDh 1.256-7 
GDh 15.15; MBh 13.88.3; ViDh 80.1; 
YDh 1.258 

GDh 15.15; MBh 13.88.5; ViDh 
80.2—5; YDh 1.259 

GDh 15.15; MBh 13.88.7; ViDh 
80.6—9; YDh 1.259 

ApDh 2.16.27; GDh 15.15; ViDh 
80.10; ¥YDh 1.259 

ApDh 2.16.26; GDh 15.15; MBh 
13.88.9; ViDh 80.11-2; YDh 1.260 
ApDh 2.17.1-3; GDh 15.15; ViDh 
80.14; YDh 1.260 


ApDh 2.19.20; MBh 13.88.15; YDh 
1.261 


1015 


274 VaDh 11.39—40; MBh 13.88.12; 
ViDh 78.52-3 

276 ApDh2.16.5-6; GDh 15.3; VaDh 
11.16 

277. ApDh 2.16.8—22; GDh 15.2—4; ViDh 
78.8—49; YDh 1.261~8 

278 ApDh 2.16.5; VaDh 11.36; ViDh 73.2 

279 =YDh 1.232 

280 ApDh 2.17.23; ViDh 77.8 

283. ApDh 1.13.1; BDh 2.11.3 

284 YDh 1.269 

285 MBh 3.2.58; 12.235.11 

CHAPTER FOUR 

1 MBh 12.234.29, 235.1 

2 MBh 12.254.6 

7 YDh 1.128 

8 YDh 1.128 

12 YDh 1.129 

14 VaDh 27.8 

15 YDh 1.129 

17 BDh 1.10.30; ViDh 71.4; YDh 1.129 

18 ViDh 71.5-6; YDh 1.123 

19 ViDh 71.8; YDh 1.99 

21 GDh 5.3 

25 BDh 2.4.23; VaDh 11.46; ViDh 59.4; 
YDh 1.124 

26 BDh 2.4.23; VaDh 11.46; ViDh 
59.5-7, 9; YDh 1.125 

30 YDh 1.30 

32 ApDh 2.4.13; GDh 5.22; BDh 
2.5.19—-20 

33 GDh 9.63—4; VaDh 12.2; ViDh 63.1; 
YDh 1.130 

34  ApDh 1.30.13; GDh 9.3; VaDh 12.4; 
ViDh 71.9 

35 ApDh1.30.10-2; GDh 9.4, 6-7, 
71-2; BDh 1.5.7; YDh 1.131 

36 ApDh1.8.2; BDh 1.5.35; 1.6.1; 


2.6.7; VaDh 12.14, 37-8; ViDh 
71.13-6; YDh 1.133 


1016 


37 


38 


39 


40 


43 


44 


45 


46 


47 
48 


49 


50 


51 
52 
53 


54 


55 
56 


57 


58 


59 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ApDh 1.31.18; BDh 2.6.10; VaDh 
12.10; MBh 13.107.17; ViDh 
71.17-21; YDh 1.135 

ApDh 1.31.13; GDh 9.52; BDh 
2.6.15; VaDh 12.9; ViDh 63.42; 71.23 
GDh 9.66; ViDh 63.25—30; YDh 
1.133 

GDh 9.29~30; VaDh 12.5; ViDh 
69.11 

GDh 9.32; VaDh 12.31; ViDh 68.46; 
71.25; YDh 1.131 

GDh 9.32, 48; ViDh 71.26; YDh 
1.135 

ApDh 1.30.18; GDh 9.40, 61; BDh 
2.6.24; VaDh 6.12; 12.11; ViDh 60.11, 
16, 19; 64.5; 68.14; YDA 1.131, 134 
ApDh 1.30.18; GDh 9.40; VaDh 
6.12; ViDh 60.4, 10, 21; YDh 1.134 
ViDh 60.8-9, 15; YDh 1.134 

ApDh 1.30.20; GDh 9.12; ViDh 
60.22; YDh 1.134 

ApDh 1.30.14-5; GDh 9.37—-8; BDh 
1.10.10; VaDh 12.13; ViDh 60.1, 3, 
23; YDh 1.16 

ApDh 1.31.1; GDh 9.41-3; BDh 
1.10.10; VaDh 6.10; 12.13; ViDh 
60.2; YDh 1.16 

VaDh 6.13 

VaDh 6.11 

ApDh 1.15.20; 1.30.22; GDh 9.32; 
VaDh 12.27; ViDh 71.26, 32-34, 37; 
YDhA 1.135, 137 

ApDh 1.15.21; GDh 9.73; ViDh 
71.36; YDh 1.137 

ViDh 63.8; 68.123 71.41, 55 

ApDh 1.30.19; ViDh 71.32-5; YDh 
1.137 

GDh 9.54—~5; VaDh 12.42; ViDh 
70.133 71.56, 58; YDh 1.138 

BDh 2.6.38; MBh 12.186.19; 
13.148.24; ViDh 71.60 

ApDh 1.31.10, 16; GDh 9.22—4; BDh 
2.6.11, 17; VaDh 12.32—3; ViDh 
71.62; YDh 1.140 


60-1 ApDh 1.15.22; 1.32.18; GDh 9.65; 


62 
63 


64 


65 
66 
67 
69 
70 


71 
72 


73 
74 


75 
76 
77 


7 


80 


81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
87 
88 
89 
90 
92 


93 
94 


BDh 2.6.21; ViDh 63.2; 71.64-8 
GDh 9.58; ViDh 68.27 

GDh 9.9, 56; BDh 2.6.5; ViDh 68.21; 
71.69 

ApDh 2.20.13; GDh 9.51; ViDh 
71.70-1 

ViDh 68.20; 71.39 

GDh 9.4; ViDh 71.47 

ViDh 63.13—4 

ViDh 71.44, 46; YDh 1.139 

ApDh 1.32.28; GDh 9.51; ViDh 
71.42-3 

MBh 13.107.15 

ApDh 1.32.5; GDh 9.32; BDh 2.6.9; 
ViDh 63.15 

GDh 9.32; BDh 2.6.13; YDh 1.140 


GDh 9.32; BDh 2.6.6; VaDh 12.36; 
ViDh 68.19, 23; 71.45; YDh 1.38 


GDh 9.60; ViDh 68.29; 70.3 
ViDh 68.34; 70.1 

GDh 9.32; BDh 2.6.26; VaDh 12.45; 
ViDh 63.45; YDh 1.135 

ApDh 2.20.11; GDh 9.15; BDh 
2.6.16; ViDh 63.23—4; YDh 1.139 
ApDh 1.31.22; VaDh 18.14; ViDh 
71.48-52 

VaDh 18.15 

ViDh 68.38; 71.53 

ViDh 64.12 

YDh 1.140 

YDhA 1.141 

YDh 1.140 

ViDh 43.1-7 

ViDh 43.8-15 

ViDh 43.16—-22 


VaDh 12.47; MBh 13.107.16; ViDh 
60.1 


ViDh 71.77 
MBh 13.107.18 


95 


96 
97 


98 
99 


101 
102 
103 


104 


105 


106 


107 


108 


109 


110 


111 


112 


113 


114 
115 


Dharmasdstra Parallels 


ApDh 1.9.1, 3; GDh 16.1-2; BDh 
1.12.16; VaDh 13.1-5; ViDh 30.1; 
YDh 1.142 

ApDh 1.9.2; BDh 1.12.16; ViDh 30.2; 
YDh 1.143 

GDh 16.40; ViDh 30.4 

VaDh 13.6-7; ViDh 30.3 
ApDh1.9.9-11; GDh 16.19; BDh 
4.21.15; VaDh 18.12-3; ViDh 30.14, 
27; YDh 1.148 

VaDh 13.8 

GDh 16.5-6 

GDh 16.22; BDh 1.21.6; VaDh 
13.36—-7; ViDh 30.8-9; YDh 1.145, 
149 

ApDh 1.11.8, 27-8, 31; GDh 16.10, 
23 

ApDh 1.11.30-1; GDh 16.15—6, 22; 
BDh 1.21.4; VaDh 13.32—3, 35; ViDh 
30.9; YDh 1.145 

ApDh 1.9.20—4; 1.11.29; BDh 1.21.7; 
VaDh 13.9; YDh 1.145 

ApDh 1.10.24; 1.11.31; GDh 16.19, 
45; BDh 1.21.4; VaDh 13.17; YDh 
1.150 


ApDh 1.9.14; 1.10.19; GDh 16.7, 19; 
BDh 1.21.5; VaDh 13.11; ViDh 30.10; 
YDh 1.148 

ApDh 1.10.22; 1.11.17, 25-6} 1.32.12; 
GDh 16.11—2, 18, 34, 46; BDh 1.21.8, 
21; ViDh 30.16; YDh 1.149 

ApDh 1.11.30; GDh 16.22; VaDh 
13.34; ViDh 30.5; YDh 1.146 

ApDh 1.10.26; 1.11.25; YDh 1.146 


GDh 16.17, 34; VaDh 13.14, 23; ViDh 
13.17 

ApDh 1.9.28; 1.11.15, 25, 31; GDh 
16.7, 12, 35; BDh 1.21.4—5, 17, 22; 
VaDh 13.10, 21-2; ViDh 30.4; YDh 
1.146, 148, 150 

BDh 1.21.22 

ApDh 1.10.19; 1.11.33; GDh 16.8; 


BDh 1.21.16; VaDh 13.35; ViDh 30.9, 
12; YDh 1.148, 150 


116 


117 


118 
119 


120 


121 


122 


123 


126 
127 
128 


129 


130 
131 
132 
134 
135 
137 
138 
139 


140 


141 
142 
143 
144 
146 
150 


1017 


ApDh 1.9.6; 1.11.9; GDh 1.61; 16.18; 
BDh 1.21.8; VaDh 13.13, 26-7; ViDh 
30.15; YDh 1.146, 148 


GDh 16.48; VaDh 13.16; BDh 
1,21.10-1 

GDh 16.34; BDh 1.21.20 

ApDh 1.10.1-2; GDh 16.36, 38; 
ViDh 30.5, 24-5; YDh 1.144, 146 


ApDh 1.9.27; 1.11.16; GDh 16.17; 
VaDh 13.17-9; ViDh 30.18—21; YDh 
1.151 


ApDh 1.10.20; GDh 16.20, 34; VaDh 
13.20, 28, 31; ViDh 30.11, 19-21; 
YDh 1.149 

ApDh 1.11.8; ViDh 30.7; YDh 1.149 


ApDh 1.10.17-8; GDh 16.21; BDh 
1.21.5; VaDh 13.30; ViDh 30.26; 
YDh 1.145, 148 


GDh 1.59; ViDh 30.22; YDh 1.147 
YDh 1.149 


ApDh 1.31.19; BDh 1.21.18; VaDh 
12.21; MBh 13.107.54; ViDh 69.1; 
YDh 1.79 


ApDh 1.32.8; BDh 2.6.25; ViDh 
64.3-—4, 6 

ViDh 63.39; YDh 1.152 

MBh 13.107.52; ViDh 63.19 

ViDh 63.40; YDh 1.152 

MBh 13.107.20 

YDh 1.153 

ViDh 71.76; YDh 1.153 

GDh 9.68; ViDh 71.73—4; YDh 1.132 


ApDh 1.31.12, 15; GDh 9.20, 32; 
ViDh 71.57; YDh 1.132 


BDh 2.6.21-3; VaDh 12.43; ViDh 
63.2, 4,6—-7,9 

ViDh 71.2 

ApDh 1.15.18; YDh 1.155 

ApDh 1.16.14 

ViDh 71.79 

VaDh 26.14 

ViDh 71.86; 76.1; YDh 1.217 


1018 


151 


152 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 


162 


163 


164 
165 
166 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ApDh 1.31.2; GDh 9.39; MBh 
13.107.48; YDh 1.154 


MBh 13.107.21 

BDh 2.6.35; MBh 13.107.33 
ViDh 71.90; YDh 1.154 

VaDh 6.7; MBh 13.107.6; ViDh 71.91 
VaDh 6.6; MBh 13.107.7 

VaDh 6.8; MBh 13.107.13; ViDh 
71.92 

ApDh 1.1.15; GDh 21.15 

ApDh 1.31.23; VaDh 12.41; ViDh 
71.83 

ViDh 71.80-2 

GDh 21.20 

GDh 21.21 


167-8 GDh 21.22 


172 
173 
174 
175 
176 
177 
179 
180 


MBh 12.92.20 

MBh 12.92.20 

MBh 3.92.4 

GDh 9.50, 68-70 

GDh 9.73; ViDh 71.84-5; YDh 1.156 
VaDh 6.42 

MBh 12.235.12-3; YDh 1.157 

MBh 12.235.13-4; YDh 1.158 


181-5 MBh 12.235.14-9 


186 
187 
188 
191 


192 


ViDh 57.6—7 

ViDh 57.8 

VaDh 6.32; ¥YDh 1.201-2 
YDh 2.202 

ViDh 93.7 


195-200 ViDh 93.8-13 


201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
207 


208 


BDh 2.5.6; ViDh 64.1; YDh 1.159 
BDh 2.6.29; YDh 1.160 

ViDh 64.16; YDh 1.159 

YDh 3.312-3 

ApDh 1.18.27; GDh 17.17 


ApDh 1.16.23-7; 1.19.1; GDh 17.9— 
10; VaDh 14.3, 22-3; ViDh 51.19; 
YDh 1.162, 167-8 


ApDh 1.16.30; GDh 17.10~1; ViDh 


209 


210 


211 


212 


213 


214 


215 


216 


217 


218 
222 
223 
224 


225 


227 
228 
229 


230 
231 
232 


233 
240 


241 


51.17-8; ¥Dh 1.167-8 

ApDh 1.18.16—7; GDh 17.12, 17; 
VaDh 14.9-10; ViDh 51.7, 9,17; YDh 
1.161, 168 

ApDh 1.18.18, 22-6; GDh 17.178; 
VaDh 14.2-3; MBh 12.37.22; ViDh 
51.7-9; YDh 1.161 

ApDh 1.17.17-20; 1.18.13; 1.19.14; 
GDh 17.14, 16-7; VaDh 14.2, 4, 20, 
28-9; ViDh 51.9—-10; YDh 1.161-2, 
167 

ApDh 1.16.19; 1. 7.3; 1.18.21; 1.19.14; 
GDh 17.17, 19; VaDh 14.2, 19; ViDh 
51.10; YDh 1.162 

ApDh 1.17.4; 2.6.19-20; GDh 17.17- 
21; VaDh 14.2; ViDh 51.11, 18, 20; 
YDh 1.162—4, 167 

ApDh 1.18.30; GDh 17.18; VaDh 
14.3; ViDh 51.12; YDh 1.161, 164-5 
ApDh 1.18.19; VaDh 14.5; ViDh 
51.14; YDh 1.161, 163 

GDh 17.18; VaDh 14.3, 11; ViDh 
51.15-6; YDh 1163-4 

ApDh 1.16.18; GDh 17.18; VaDh 
14.6, 11; MBh 12.37.21; YDh 1.163 
VaDh 14.2; ViDh 51.8 

GDh 23.23-4 

ApDh 1.18.3-8, 14 

BDh 1.10.5; VaDh 14.17; MBh 
12.256.9 

BDh 1.10.5; VaDh 14.17; MBh 
12.256.10 

YDh 1.201 

YDh 1.203 

VaDh 29.8; ViDh 91.3, 15-6; 92.21, 
23; YDh 1.210 

ViDh 92.134; YDh 1.210 

ViDh 92.5, 11-2; YDh 1.204-6, 210 
VaDh 29.12; ViDh 92.22, 27; YDh 
1.211 

VaDh 29.19; YDh 1.212 

MBh 13,112.11 


MBh 13.112.10, 13 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


242 MBh 13.112.15 

247. ApDh 1.18.1; GDh 17.3; VaDh 14.12; 
ViDh 57.10; YDh 1.214 

248 ApDh 1.19.13; VaDh 14.16; ViDh 
57.11; YDh 1.215 

249 ApDh 1.19.14; VaDh 14.18; ViDh 
57.12 

250 ApDh1.18.1; GDh 17.3; BDh 1.9.8; 
VaDh 14.12; ViDh 57.10; YDh 1.214 

251 ApDh 1.7.20; GDh 17.4; VaDh 14.13; 
ViDh 57.13; YDh 1.216 

252 ViDh 57.15 

253. GDh 17.5—6; ViDh 57.16; YDh 1.166 

260 GDh 9.74; BDh 2.3.1; VaDh 8.17 

CHAPTER FIVE 

5 ApDh 1.17.26, 28; GDh 17.32; VaDh 
14.33; ViDh 51.3, 34, 36; YDh 1.171 

6 GDh 17.32-3; VaDh 14.33; ViDh 
51.36; YDh 1.171 

7 GDh 17.31; ViDh 51.37; YDh 1.171, 
173 

8 ApDh 1.17.22—4; GDh 17.22—6; BDh 
1.12.9-11; VaDh 14.34-5; ViDh 
51.38-40; YDh 1.170 

9 ApDh 1.17.18; GDh 17.14; BDh 
1.12.15; VaDh 14.37—8; ViDh 51.38, 
42; YDh 1.167, 170 

10 =ApDh 1.17.19; GDh 17.14; BDh 
1.12.14; ViDh 51.42; YDh 1.169 

14 ApDh 1.17.29, 34; GDh 17.28—29; 
BDh 1.12.1-2; VaDh 14.48; ViDh 
51.28—-30; YDh 1.172 

12 «=ApDh1.17.32-3; GDh 17.28—9; BDh 
1.12.3; VaDh 14.48; ViDh 51.3, 29; 
YDh 1.172-4 

13 GDh 17.35; VaDh 14.48; ViDh 51.27; 
YDh 1.172, 174-5 

14 GDh 17.29, 34; BDh 1.12.3, 8; VaDh 
14.48; ViDh 51.21, 29; YDh 1.173-5 

16 GDh 17.36—7; BDh 1.12.8; ViDh 
1.51.21; YDh 1.177-8 

17. ApDh 1.17.37; GDh 17.27; BDh 


18 


19 
20 
22 
24-5 
26 
27 
28 
29 
34 
35 
36 
38 
39 
40 
41 


42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 


53 
54 
55 


58 


59 


1019 


1.12.5; VaDh 14.39, 44; ViDh 51.6, 
27; YDh 1.174 


ApDh 1.17.37; GDh 17.27; BDh 
1.12.4-5; VaDh 14.39-40, 47; ViDh 
51.6, 26; YDh 1.177 

GDh 23.5; ViDh 51.3-—4; YDh 1.176 
YDh 1.176 

VaDh 14.15 

ViDh 51.35; YDh 1.169 

YDh 1.178 

YDh 1.179 

MBh 12.10.6 

MBh 12.100.15 

ViDh 51.62 

VaDh 11.34 

ViDh 51.59 

ViDh 51.60; YDh 1.180 

ViDh 51.61 

ViDh 51.63 

SankhGr 2.16.1; VaDh 4.6; ViDh 
51.64 

ViDh 51.65 

ViDh 51.66 

ViDh 51.67 

ViDh 51.68 

ViDh 51.69 

ViDh 51.70; YDh 1.181 

VaDh 4.7; ViDh 51.71 

ViDh 51.72 

MBh 13.116.12; ViDh 51.73 

ViDh 51.74 

MBh 13.116.14, 34; 13.117.10; ViDh 
51.75 


MBh 13.116.10, 16; ViDh 51.76; YDh 
181 


ViDh 51.77 
ViDh 51.78 


ApDh 2.15.2—4; ViDh 22.26-7; YDh 
3.18, 23 


GDh 14.1; BDh 1.11.1; VaDh 4.16; 


1020 


60 


61 


64 
65 
66 


67 
68 
69 


71 
72 
73 


75 
76 


77 
78 
79 


80 


81 


82 
83 


85 


86 
88 
89 
90 
91 
93 


94 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ViDh 22.1; YDh 3.18 


ApDh 2.15.2—3; GDh 14.13; BDh 
1.11.2; VaDh 4.17-8; ViDh 22.5 


GDh 14.14-6; BDh 1.11.1, 19-23; 
VaDh 14.20-3; YDh 3.19 


GDh 14.23-7 
ViDh 22.85 


GDh 14.17; BDh 1.11.31; VaDh 4.34; 
ViDh 22.72; YDh 3.20 


ViDh 22.29-30; YDh 3.23 
BDh 1.11.4; YDh 3.1 


ApDh 2.15.3—4; BDh 1.11.4; VaDh 
4.34; ViDh 22,28; YDh 3.1 

GDh 14.20; BDh 1.11.30 

BDh 1.11.8 

ApDh 2.15.7-8; GDh 14.37-9; BDh 
1.11.24; YDh 3.16 

GDh 14.44; ViDh 22.39; YDh 3.21 


GDh 14.19, 44; VaDh 4.36; ViDh 
22.40-1; YDh 3.21 


YDh 3.21 
GDh 14.19, 44 


GDh 14.6; BDh 1.11.17-8; VaDh 
4.24; ViDh 22.35; YDh 3.20 


GDh 14.28; BDA 1.11.28; ViDh 
22.42-4; YDh 3.24 


GDh 14.20, 22; BDh 1.11.29—-30; 
ViDh 22.44; YDh 3.24 


ViDh 22.45~-6; YDh 3.24—5 


GDh 14.2-5; VaDh 4.27—30; ViDh 
22.1-4; YDh 3.22 


GDh 14.30; BDh 1.9.5; 1.11.36; VaDh 
4.38; ViDh 22.69; YDh 3.30 


BDh 1.15.31 

ViDh 22.87; YDh 3.5 
ViDh 22.56; YDh 3.6 
YDh 3.6 

ViDh 22.86; YDh 3.15 


GDh 14.1, 45-6; BDh 1.11.1; VaDh 
19.48; ViDh 22.48-50; YDh 3.27-8 
VaDh 19.47 


95 

98 

101 
102 
103 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 


110 


111 


112 


114 


115 


116 


117 
118 


119 


120 


121 


122 


123 


124 


GDh 14.9-11; ViDh 22.47, 52; YDh 
3.21, 27 

YDh 3.29 

BDh 1.11.33 

ViDh 22.8; YDh 3.15 

GDh 14.31; ViDh 22.63—4; YDh 3.26 
BDh 1.8.52; ViDh 22.88; YDh 1.194; 
3-31 

ViDh 22.89 

ViDh 22.90; YDh 3.32-3 

VaDh 3.58; ViDh 22.91; YDh 3.32 
BDh 1.8.2; 3.1.27; VaDh 3.60; ViDh 
22.92; YDh 3.33-4 

ViDh 22.93 

ApDh 1.17.11; GDh 1.29-30; BDh 
1.8.32, 44; 1.14.4; VaDh 3.49-50 
BDh 1.8.33; VaDh 3.61—-2; ViDh 
23.7; YDh 1182-3 

BDh 1.8.33; VaDh 3.58; ViDh 
23.25-6; YDh 1.190 

ApDh 1.17.12; GDh 1.29; BDh 1.8.35; 
1.13.26—7; 1.14.16-7; VaDh 3.49; 
ViDh 23.27, 29-30; YDh 1.190 
ApDh 1.17.13; BDh 1.8.50-1; 1.13.26, 
29-32; VaDh 12.15—-6; ViDh 23.8, 
10; YDh 1.182~3 

ViDh 23.9, 11; YDh 1.183-4 

GDh 1.29; BDh 1.8.42; 1.13.11; 
1.14.11-2; VaDh 3.49; ViDh 23.13- 
4, 18; YDh 1.184 

GDh 1.33; BDh 1.8.36, 38, 43; 
1.13.13; VaDh 3.53; ViDh 23.14-5, 
18; YDh 1.182 

BDh 1.8.39—42; VaDh 3.55; ViDh 
23.19-22; YDh 1.186—7 

GDh 1.30-1; BDh 1.8.45-7; VaDh 
3.51-2; ViDh 23.23; YDh 1.185 
ApDh 1.17.10; GDh 1.29; BDh 
1.8.34; 1.13.21~—5; 1.14.1-2; VaDh 
3.49; ViDh 23.16, 18, 33, 56; YDh 
1.187-8 

ViDh 23.5 

GDh 1.31—2; BDh 1.9.11; 1.13.16—20; 
VaDh 3.56—7; YDh 1188 


125 
126 


127 


128 


129 


130 


131 
132 
133 
134 


135 
136 


137 


138 


139 


140 


141 


142 


143 


144 
145 


147 


148 


149 
150 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


VaDh 14.23; ViDh 23.38; YDh 1.189 
GDh 1.42; VaDh 3.48; YDh 1.191 
BDh 1.9.9; VaDh 14.24; ViDh 23.47; 
YDh 1.191 

BDh 1.9.10; VaDh 3.35—6, 47; ViDh 
23.43; YDh 1.192 

BDh 1.9.1; VaDh 3.46; ViDh 23.48; 
YDh 1.187 

BDh 1.9.2; VaDh 3.45—6; 28.8; ViDh 
23.49; YDh 1.187, 193 

VaDh 3.45; ViDh 23.50; YDh 1.192 
ViDh 23.51; YDh 1.194 

ViDh 23.52; YDh 1.193 

GDh 1.43; BDh 1.10.11-5; ViDh 
60.24; YDh 1.17 

ViDh 22.81 

BDh 1.10.11-3; VaDh 6.18; ViDh 
60.25 

VaDh 6.19; ViDh 60.26 

ApDh 1.16.7; GDh 1.36, 43-5; BDh 
1.8.26; VaDh 3.26—9; ViDh 22.75; 
62.8 

ApDh 1.16.2-8; GDh 1.36; BDh 
1.8.18-22; VaDh 3.26-—34; ViDh 
62.6-7; YDh 1.20, 

ApDh 2.3.4-8 

ApDh 1.16.11-3; GDh 1.38-—41; BDh 
1.8.24~—5; VaDh 3.37; ViDh 23.53; 
YDhA 1.195 

BDh 1.10.34; VaDh 3.42; ViDh 
23.54; YDh 1.195 

GDh 1.28; BDh 1.8.27-9; VaDh 
3.43; ViDh 23.55 

ApDh 2.1.23; ViDh 22.67 

ApDh 1.16.14; GDh 1.37; VaDh 3.38; 
ViDh 22.75; YDh 1.196 

GDh 18.1; BDh 2.3.44; VaDh 5.1; 
ViDh 25.12 

BDh 2.3.45; VaDh 5.3; ViDh 25.13; 
YDh 1.85 

YDh 1.86 

ViDh 25.4-6; YDh 1.83 


151 
154 
155 


1021 


ViDh 25.13-4; YDh 1.75, 83 
YDh 1.77 
ViDh 25.15; YDh 1.77 


156-7 YDh 1.75 


159 
160 
164 
166 


ApDh 2.23.5 

ViDh 25.17; YDh 1.75 
VaDh 21.14 

YDh 1.87 


167-8 YDh 1.89 


CHAPTER SIX 


i=2 


11 


13 


15 


16 
17 


18 


19 
20 


ApDh 2.21.1~—5, 19; 2.22.6~-7; GDh 
3.1; BDh 2.17.2-5; ViDh 94.1-2; 
YDh 3.45 

ApDh 2.21.9-10; GDh 3.26, 28; 
BDh 2.11.15; ViDh 94.3; YDh 3.45 
GDh 3.26-7; BDh 2.11.15; VaDh 
9.10; ViDh 94.4; YDh 3.45 

GDh 3.26, 29; BDh 2.11.15; VaDh 
9.4, 7, 12; ViDh 94.5; YDh 3.46 
ApDh 2.22.1, 13-4, 17; GDh 3.34; 
BDh 2.11.15; 3.3.19; VaDh 9.1; ViDh 
94.8-10; YDh 3.46 

ApDh 2.22.7; GDh 3.2930; BDh 
2.11.15; 3.3.5—-7, 20; VaDh 9.7 
ApDh 2.21.21; 2.22.11; BDh 3.3.19; 
VaDh 9.8; ViDh 94.6; YDh 3.48 
ApDh 2.22.12; BDh 3.3.5-7, 203 
VaDh 9.10 

ApDh 2.22.17-8 

ApDh 2.22.2, 17; 2.23.2; GDh 3.26; 
BDh 2.11.15; VaDh 9.4; ViDh 
95.7-11; YDh 3.49 

ApDh 2.22.24; ViDh 94.12; YDh 
3-47 

VaDh 9.4; YDh 3.46 

BDh 3.3.2, 9-12; ViDh 95.13-4; 
YDh 3.49 

ApDh 2.23.1; GDh 3.35; BDh 
2.11.15; 3.2.11; ViDh 94.11; YDh 3.47 
ViDh 95.5~6; YDh 3.50 

ViDh 95.11-2; YDh 3.50 


1022 


21 


22 


23 
25 
26 


27 
28 


31 


33 
34 
35-7 
38 
39 


40 
41 


42 


43 


44 


45 


46 


47 


48 


49 


50 


51 


52 


53 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ApDh 2.23.2; BDh 3.2.9, 11 


BDh 2.11.15; VaDh 9.9; ViDh 94.10; 
YDh 3.48, 51 

ViDh 95.1-4; YDh 3.52 

ApDh 2.21.21; VaDh 9.11; YDh 3.54 
VaDh 9.5, 11; ViDh 94.7; YDh 3.45, 
51, 54 

YDh 3.54 

ViDh 94.13; YDh 3.55 

ApDh 2.23.2, 4; BDh 3.3.9, 13-4; 
YDh 3.55 

BDh 2.17.1-6; ViDh 96.1 

BDh 2.17.15-6 

ApDh 2.24.8; BDh 2.11.34; YDh 3.57 
BDh 2.17.18—28; ViDh 96.1-2; YDh 
3.56 

BDh 2.17.29; VaDh 10.1; MBh 
12,236.27; 12.269.20 


BDh 2.17.30; VaDh 10.2-3 
GDh 3.16; BDh 2.11.24; 2.17.31; 
VaDh 10.12, 28 

MBh 12.237.4-5 


ApDh 2.21.10; GDh 3.11, 14; BDA 
2.11.16; VaDh 10.6; MBh 12.237.53 
ViDh 96.2 


ApDh 2.21.11; GDh 3.18-9, 24; BDh 
2.11.19, 21; 2.17.44; VaDh 10.9—10, 
13, 29; MBh 12.237.7; ViDh 96.10—-11 
MBh 12.237.15; ViDh 96.18 

BDh 2.11.25; 2.17.43; 2.18.2; ViDh 
96.14-7 

GDh 3.24; BDh 2.11.23; VaDh 10.29; 
MBh 12.269.6; ViDh 

96.19~20, 23 

BDh 2.18.3; MBh 12.269.6 

ApDh 2.21.13; VaDh 10.17, 20; MBh 
12.317.25 

VaDh 10.21 

ViDh 96.5; YDh 3.59 

GDh 3.22; BDh 2.11.18; 2.17.10-1; 
VaDh 10.6; YDh 3.58 

ViDh 96.8; YDh 3.60 


54 ViDh 96.7; YDh 3.60 

55 BDh 2.18.12; VaDh 10.24-5; ViDh 
96.3; YDh 3.59 

56 GDh 3.15; BDh 2.11.22; 2.18.4—-6; 
VaDh 10.7—8; ViDh 96.6; YDh 3.59 

57 VaDh 10.22; MBh 12,269.10; ViDh 
96.4 

58  MBh 12.269.11; ViDh 96.9 

59 BDh 2.18.10-3; VaDh 10.25 

60 BDh 2.18.2~-3; YDh 3.61 

61 ViDh 96.36, 38; YDh 3.63-—4 

62 ViDh 96.27—9, 37; YDh 3.63-4 

63 ViDh 96.39; YDh 3.63-4 

64 ViDh 96.40-2; YDh 3.63-4 

65 VaDh 10.14; YDh 3.63-4 

66 VaDh 10.18; YDh 3.65 

70 VaDh 10.5 

71 BDh 4.1.24; VaDh 25.6 

72 ViDh 96.24 

73 ViDh 96.25 

75 ApDh2.21.14-6 

76 MBh 12.316.42; ViDh 96.43-53 

77. + MBh 12.316.43; ViDh 96.43-53 

83. ApDh 2.21.4; BDh 2.18.20~7; VaDh 
10.4 

87.  ApDh 2.21.1; GDh 3.2—3; BDh 
2.11.12 

88  ApDh 2.21.2; GDh 3.1 

89 GDh 3.36; ViDh 59.27—-9 

90 VaDh 8.14-6 

92 VaDh 10.30; YDh 3.66 

95 VaDh 10.26 

CHAPTER SEVEN 

8 MBh 12.68.40 

14 YDh 1.353 

16 GDh 12.51; VaDh 19.9; ViDh 3.91; 
YDh 1.367 

18 MBh 12.15.2 

19 YDh 1.355 


76 
78 


79 


80 
82-3 
84 
85 
87 


88 
89 


90 
91-3 


94-5 
96-8 
99 


Dharmasdstra Parallels 


MBh 12.15.34 

MBh 12.15.11; ViDh 3.95 

GDh 11.2—3; YDh 1.308-9 

GDh 11.2-4 

ViDh 3.96; YDh 1.333 

ViDh 3.97 

ViDh 3.76 

AS 8.3.66; ViDh 3.76—7; YDh 1.309 
GDh 11.3; YDh 1.310 

GDh 11.4 

ViDh 3.50 

ViDh 3.51-2 

ViDh 3.71; YDh 1.312 

YDh 1.312 

YDh 1.312 

ViDh 3.16-21 

AS 1.15.7-9 

ViDh 3.4-5; YDh 1.321 

AS 2.2.1~35; MBh 12.87.5; ViDh 3.6; 
YDh 1.321 

ApDh 2.25.2-3 

GDh 11.12—8; BDh 1.18.7—8; VaDh 
19.3-6; ViDh 3.70; YDh 1.312-3 
ApDh 2.26.1; ViDh 3.78, 81, 84; YDh 
1.313 

YDh 1.322 

YDh 1.314 

VaDh 30.7; YDh 1.315 

GDh 5.20; ViDh 93.1-4 

GDh 10.13-6; BDh 1.18.9; ViDh 
3-43 

ViDh 3.44; YDh 1.323 

ApDh 2.26.2—3; ViDh 3.45; YDh 
1.324 

BDh 1.18.10; YDh 1.324 


ApDh 2.10.11; GDh 10.18; BDh 
1.18.11; YDh 1.325 


YDh 1.325 
GDh 10.20~3 


VaDh 16.6; YDh 1.317; Paficatantra 
1.2; AS 1.4.3 


101 
102 
103 
105 
106 
114 

115 


116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
124 
127 
128 


130 


131 
132 
133 


134 
135 
136 
137 
138 


141 
142 


1023 


YDh 1.317; AS 1.4.3 

AS 1.15.60; MBh 12.139.7 

MBh 12.139.8 

MBh 12.84.46; 12.139.24; AS 1.15.60 
MBh 12.139.25 

AS 2.1.4 

ApDh 2.26.4-5; MBh 12.188.3; 
ViDh 3.7-10 

MBh 12.88.4; ViDh 3.11-12 
MBh 12.88.5; ViDh 3.13-5 
MBh 12.88.6 

MBh 12.88.6-8 

MBh 12.88.9 

ApDh 2.26.4; MBh 12.88.10 
MBh 12.88.10; YDh 1.338 

YDh 1.338 

YDh 1.339 

MBh 12.88.11 


ApDh 2.26.9; BDh 1.18.15; MBh 
12.88.15 


GDh 10.24-5; BDh 1.18.1; VaDh 
1.42; ViDh 3.22, 24 

GDh 10.27; VaDh 1.42; ViDh 3.25 
GDh 10.27; ViDh 3.23, 25 

ApDh 2.26.10; GDh 10.11; VaDh 
1.43; 19.23; ViDh 3.26 

ApDh 2.25.11; GDh 10.9; ViDh 3.79 
YDh 3.44 

VaDh 1.44; ViDh 3.27 

VaDh 19.26-7 

GDh 10.31—2; VaDh 19.28; ViDh 
3.32 

ViDh 3.73; YDh 2.3 


ApDh 2.10.6; GDh 10.7—8; BDh 
1.18.1; VaDh 19.1; ViDh 3.2; YDh 
1.335 


147-8 YDh 1.344 
155-8 ViDh 3.38; YDh 1.345 


159 
160 


ViDh 3.39; YDh 1.346 
ViDh 3.39; YDh 1.347 


1024 


171 
179 
182 
183 
194 
202 
203 
204 
205 
208 
213 
216 
218 


219 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


YDh 1.347 

MBh 5.39.41 

ViDh 3.40; YDh 1.347 
ViDh 3.41 

MBh 12.101.44 

ViDh 3.47 

ViDh 3.42; YDh 1.343 
AS 6.2.6—12 

YDh 1.349 

YDh 1.352 

MBh 5.37.17 

YDh 1.327 

ViDh 3.87 

ViDh 3.88 


221-2 YDh 1.329 


223-4 YDh 1.330 


225 YDh 1.331 

CHAPTER EIGHT 

1 GDh 13.26; VaDh 16.2; ViDh 3.72; 
YDh 1.3593 2.1 
GDh 11.19-24; VaDh 1.17; 16.4-5 
GDh 13.26; VaDh 16.2; ViDh 3.73; 
YDh 2.3 

13 NSm MG 3.9 

16 NSm M4 1.35; MBh 12.91.13 

18 GDh 13.11; BDh 1.19.8 

19 BDh 1.19.8 

25-6 YDh 2.13-5 

27 GDh 10.48; VaDh 16.8-9; ViDh 
3.65 

28 ViDh 3.65 

30 =©96GDh 10.368; VaDh 16.19-20; YDh 
1.355; 2.33 

31-2 YDh 2.33 

35-6 ViDh 3.63—4; YDh 2.35 

37 GDh 10.44; VaDh 3.14; ViDh 3.58; 
YDh 2.34 

38 GDh 10.43; ViDh 3.56-7; YDh 2.34 


39 GDh 10.45; VaDh 3.13; ViDh 
3.58-62; YDh 2.35 

40 ApDh 2.26.8; GDh 10.46-7; ViDh 
3.66-7; YDh 2.36 

41 ApDh 2.15.1; GDh 11.11, 20; BDh 
1.2.1~8; VaDh 1.17; 19.7; ViDh 3.3; 
YDh 1.360 

43 GDh 13.27 

44  ApDh 2.29.6; GDh 11.23~-4; VaDh 
16.4-5 

46 ApDh 2.15.1; GDh 11.20; VaDh 1.17 

50 ViDh 6.18; YDh 2.40 

52-7 AS 3.1.19 

53-6 YDh 2.16 

59 YDh 2.11 

61 GDh 13.1 

62 BDh 1.19.13; ViDh 8.8; YDh 2.68 

63 ApDh 2.29.7; GDh 13.2; VaDh 
16.28; ViDh 8.8; YDh 2.68 

64 GDh 13.2; ViDh 8.3; YDh 2.70-1 

65 8BDh 1.19.13; ViDh 8.2; YDh 2.70 

66 BDh 1.19.13; ViDh 8.2-3; YDh 
2.70-1 

67. BDh 1.19.13; ViDh 8.2; YDh 2.70 

68 VaDh 16.30 

69 VaDh 16.29; YDh 2.69 

72 GDh 13.9; ViDh 8.6; YDh 2.72 

73 ViDh 8.39; YDh 2.78, 80 

74 BDh 1.9.7; ViDh 8.13-4 

75  ApDh2.29.9-10; GDh 13.7; BDh 
1.19.14~—5 

76 ViDh 8.12 

77 YDh 2.72 

79  ApDh 2.29.7; GDh 13.5; ViDh 8.24; 
YDh 2.73 

87. ApDh 2.29.7; ViDh 8.19 

87~101 AS 3.11.34-7 

88 ViDh 8.20-3 

89 ViDh 8.25; YDh 2.73-4 

90)=—s- BDh 1.19.10; ViDh 8.26; YDh 2.75 

93 VaDh 16.33; NSm 1.183 


Dharmasastra Parallels 1025 


97 NSm 1.188 
98 GDh 13.14-5; BDh 1.19.12; VaDh 
16.34; NSm 1.189 


99 GDh 13.16; BDh 1.19.12; NSm 1.90 

100 GDh 13.18—-9 

102 BDA 1.10.24 

104 GDh 13.24—5; VaDh 16.36; ViDh 
8.15; YDh 2.83 

105 YDh2.83 

106 BDh 1.19.16; ViDh 8.16 

107. GDh 13.6; YDh 2.76 

108 YDh 2.113 

109. =GDh 13.12—3; ViDh 8.19 

112 GDh 23.29; VaDh 16.36 

13 © ViDh 8.22-3 

114-5 ViDh ch. 11-12; YDh 2.103-9 

117. ViDh 8.40 

119-23 YDh2.81 

124 GDh 12.46-7; ViDh 5.2-8 

126 GDh 12.51; YDh 1.367 

127-8 VaDh 19.43; YDh 1.356 

129-30 YDh 1.366 

131-7 ViDh 4.1-13; YDh 1.361-—4 

138 =ViDh 4.14; YDh 1.365 

139 = ViDh 4.20-1; YDh 2.42 

140 GDh 12.29; VaDh 2.50-1; YDh 2.37 

141 YDh2.37 

142 VaDh 2.48; ViDh 6.2; YDh 2.37 

143 GDh 12.32; ViDh 6.5 

144 ViDh 6.6; YDh 2.59 

145 ViDh 6.7—-8; YDh 2.58 

147-8 GDh 12.37; VaDh 16.16—7; YDh 2.24 

149 GDh 12.38-9; VaDh 16.18; YDh 
2.25 

151. GDh 12.31, 36; ViDh 6.11-7; YDh 
2.39 

153 GDh 12.30, 34-5 

158 ViDh 6.41; YDh 2.53 

159 GDh 12.41; VaDh 16.31; ViDh 6.41; 
YDh 2.47, 53; AS 3.16.9 


160 YDh2.54 

163 YDh2.32 

164 ViDh7.11 

165 ViDh7.7; YDh 2.89 

166 ViDh 6.39; YDh 2.45 

168 ViDh7.6; YDh 2.89 

176 =ViDh 6.19; YDh 2.40 

180 YDh2.65 

189 YDh2.66 

191 ViDh5.169~-71 

199 YDh2.168 

200 NSm 1.76 

202 YDh2.170 

204 YDh 1.66 

207. YDh 2.265 

211 YDh2.259 

215-7 ApDh 2.28.2—3; ViDh 5.1534; YDh 
2.193 

219 ViDh 5.168; YDh 2.187 

222 YDh2.177 

224 YDh1.66; NSm 12.33; AS 3.15.14 

225 YDh 1.66; NSm 12.34 

230 }6©69ViDh 5.138; YDh 2.164 

231 ViDh5.140 

232 ViDh5.138—-9; YDh 2.164 

233 NSm 6.18 

235 ViDh 5138-9; NSm 6.16 

236 © NSm 6.17 

237. YDh2.167 

239 )©69NSm 11.36 


240 ApDh 2.28.5; GDh 12.19-21; ViDh 
5.140-5; YDh 2.162 


241 GDh 12.21-6; ViDh 5.146-—7; YDh 
2.161 


242 ViDh5.151; YDh 2.163; AS 3.10.24 
243 ApDh2.28.1 

246-—7YDh 2.151 

251 YDh2.151 

256 YDh 2.152 


1026 Dharmasastra Parallels 


257. YDh 2.253 

262 VaDh16.13—-5; YDh 2.154 

263 YDh 2.153 

265 YDh 2.153 

267. GDh 12.1, 8,10; YDh 2.207 

268 GDh 12.11-4; YDh 2.207 

269 ©ViDh5.35—-9; YDh 2.205-6 

270 ApDh 2.27.14; GDh 12.1; ViDh 5.23 

271 ViDh 5.25; NSm 15—-16.23 

272 ViDh 5.24; NSm 15—-16.24 

273. ViDh 5.26 

274 ViDh 5.27; YDh 2.204 

279) )6GDh 12.1; ViDh 5-195 YDh 2.215; 
NSm 15-16.25; AS 3.19.8 

280 YDh 2.215 

281 ApDh 2.27.15; GDh 12.7; ViDh 5.20; 
NSm 1516.26 

282 ViDh5.21-2; NSm 15-16. 27 


283 ViDh5.65; YDh 2.217; NSm 
15-16.28 


284 ViDh5.66—-72; YDh 2.218-20 

285 ViDh5.55-9 

286 ViDh5.75-6 

287. ViDh5.75-6; YDh 2.222 

291 YDh2.299 

292 YDh2.298-9 

297-8ViDh 5.50—4 

299-300 A pDh 1.8.28-9; GDh 2.42—4; 
AS 3.3.8-9 

302 ApDh 2.25.15; YDh 1.336 

304 YDh 1.335 

305 VaDh1.44; MBh 12.76.7 

306 YDh 1.335 

308 YDh 1.337 

314-5 ApDhi1.25.4; GDh 12.43; BDh 
2.1.16-7; VaDh 20.41; ViDh 52.1; 
YDh 3.257 

316 ApDh1.25.4-5; GDh 12.44—-5; BDh 
2.1.17; VaDh 20.41; ViDh 52.2; YDh 
3-257 


317. ApDh 1.19.16; VaDh 19.44 

318 VaDh 19.45 

320) 69ViDh 5.12; NSm 19.33 

321 ViDh 5.13; NSm 19.32, 34 

322 ViDh5.81-2 

324-5 ViDh 5.77-8 

326-1 ViDh 5.83-6 

332 YDh 2.230; AS 3.17.1-1 

335 MBh 12.121.57; YDh 1.358 

337-8GDh 12.15-7 

339 ApDh 1.28.3; GDh 12.28; YDh 2.166 

340 GDh 12.49-50 

348 BDh 2.4.18; VaDh 3.24 

349 GDh 7.25; BDh 2.4.18; VaDh 3.24 

350 BDh1.18.12-3; VaDh 3.15—-7; ViDh 
5.190 

351 BDh 1.18.13; VaDh 3.17-8; MBh 
12.15.55; 12.35.19; 12.56.30; ViDh 
5.191 

354 ApDh 2.26.19; YDh 2.285 

355 ApDh 2.26.18 

357-8 YDh 2.284 

359 ApDh 2.26.20; BDh 2.4.1-2 

361 YDh2.285 

362 BDh 2.4.3 

363 YDh 2.293 

364-7 YDh 2.287-8 

367 AS 4.12.3 

371 GDh 23.14; MBh 12.159.59; ViDh 
5.18 


372 GDh 23.15; VaDh 21.1-3; MBh 
12.159.60 


373 MBh 12.159.61 


374 ApDh 2.27.9; GDh 12.2; BDh 2.3.52; 
VaDh 21.1, 5; YDh 2.286, 294 


377. ApDh 2.26.20; VaDh 21.2-3; YDh 
2.286 


378 ViDh 5.40; YDh 2.286 

380 GDh 8.13; BDh 1.18.17; ViDh 5.2 
385 ViDh 5.41, 43; YDh 2.294 

386 ViDh 5.197 


389 
392 
394 
396 
397 
398 
399 
400 
401 
402 
403 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ViDh 5.163; YDh 2.237 
ViDh 5.94; YDh 2.263 

ApDh 2.26.16 

YDh 2.238 

YDh 2.179 

YDh 2.261 

ViDh 5.130; YDh 2.261 
YDh 2.262 

YDh 2.252 

YDh 2.251 

VaDh 19.13 


404-5 AS 2.28.21-21 


407 AS 2.28.18; ViDh 5.132-3 

416 MBh 1.77.22 

CHAPTER NINE 

2 GDh 18.1; BDh 2.3.44; VaDh 5.1; 
ViDh 25.12; YDh 1.85 

3 BDh 2.3.45; VaDh 5.3; MBh 
13.20.21; 13.46.13; ViDh 25.13; YDh 
1.85; NSm 13.31 

4 GDh 18.22; BDh 4.1.12, 17-9; VaDh 
17.69-70; YDh 1.64 
MBh 3.13.60 
YDh 1.56 
YDh 1.81 

17 MBh 13.40.12 

18 BDh 1.11.7; MBh 13.40.11 

27. MBh 13.46.10 

30 VaDh 21.14 

32 ApDh2.13.5-6; GDh 18.9—14; 
VaDh 17.6—9, 63—4 

45  ApDh2.14.16-20 

47 ViDh 5.161; YDh 1.65 

50 VaDh 17.8 

59 GDhi8.4—5; BDA 2.4.9-10; VaDh 
17.56; YDh 1.68 

60 VaDh 17.61; YDh 1.68 

61 GDh 18.8 


62-3 YDh 1.69 


71 
72-3 
75 
76 
80 
81 
86 
87 
88 
90 


92 
93 
94 
95 
98 
104 


105 
107 
109 


112 


114 


115 
116 
117 
118 
119 


1027 


ViDh 5.160~1; YDh 1.65 

ViDh 5.162; YDh 1.66 

ViDh 25.9-10; YDh 1.84 

GDh 18.15-—7; VaDh 17.75-80 

YDh 1.73 

BDh 2.4.6 

ViDh 26.1; YDh 1.88 

MBh 13.47.36; ViDh 26.2-3 

GDh 18.21; BDh 4.1.11; VaDh 17.70 


GDh 18.20; BDh 4.1.14; VaDh 
17.67—8; MBh 13.44.15; ViDh 24.40; 
YDh 1.64 


GDh 18.20 
ViDh 24.41 
MBh 13.44.13 
MBh 13.44.26 
ApDh 2.13.11 


GDh 28.1; BDh 2.3.3, 8; ViDh 18.36; 
YDh 2.117 


ApDh 2.14.6; GDh 28.3; BDh 2.3.13 
VaDh 17.1; ViDh 15.45 

MBh 13.108.6 

GDh 28.4 


GDh 28.5—7; BDh 2.3.4; ViDh 
18.37; YDh 2.114 


GDh 28.11-3; BDh 2.3.6; VaDh 
17.43; YDh 2.114 


ApDh 2.13.13 

GDh 28.8 

GDh 28.9-10; VaDh 17.42 
ViDh 18.35; YDh 2.124 
BDh 2.3.9 


123-5 GDh 28.14-6 


127 


130 
131 


133 
136 


GDh 28.18; BDh 2.3.15; VaDh 
17.15—-7; ViDh 15.5 


BDh 2.3.14; MBh 13.45.12 

GDh 28.24; BDh 2.3.43; VaDh 
17.46; MBh 13.45.13; ViDh 17.21 
MBh 13.45.14; YDh 2.128 

GDh 28.19 


1028 


Dharmasdastra Parallels 


137. BDh 2.16.6; VaDh 17.5; ViDh 15.46; 
YDh 1.78 

138 =ViDh 15.44 

139 ©6©°ViDh 15.47 

140 BDh 2.3.16 

1441 VaDh15.9-10 

143-4 GDh 28.23 

149 =VaDh 17.47 

150 MBh 13.47.11 

152. -“ViDh 18.1 

153 BDh 2.3.10; VaDh 17.48-50; ViDh 
18.2-5; YDh 2.125; AS 3.6.17 

154 ViDh 18.32 

155 GDh 28.39 

156 ViDh 18.28-30, 36-7 

157. MBh 13.47.56; ViDh 18.31 

158 ViDh 15.1 

159 GDh 28.33; BDh 2.3.32; VaDh 17.38 

162. =ViDh 17.23 

163. ViDh15.28-30 

164 BDh 2.3.11 

165 GDh 28.34; YDh 2.132 

166 ApDh 2.13.1; BDh 2.3.14; VaDh 
17.13; MBh 1.111.31; ViDh 15.2; YDh 
2,128 

167. BDh 2.3.17-8; VaDh 17.14; ViDh 
15.3; YDh 1.69; 2.127-8 

168 BDh 2.3.20; VaDh 17.29; ViDh 
15.18-9; YDh 2.130 

169 BDh 2.3.21; YDh 2.131 

170 »=6- BDh 2.3.22; VaDh 17.24; ViDh 
15.13-4; YDh 2.129 

171. =BDh 2.3.23; VaDh 17.37; ViDh 
15.24-5; YDh 2.132 

172. BDh 2.3.24; VaDh 17.22~3; ViDh 
15.10-1; YDh 2.129 

173 BDh 2.3.25; VaDh 17.26~7; ViDh 
15.15-6; YDh 2.131 

174. BDh 2.3.26; VaDh 17.30—2; ViDh 
15.20-1; YDA 1.131 

175 BDh 2.3.27; VaDh 17.18—9; ViDh 


176 
177 


178 
179 
181 


182° 


183 
184 
185 
186 
187 


188 


189 


15.7-9; YDh 2.130 

BDh 4.1.16; VaDh 17.74; ViDh 15.8 
BDh 2.3.28; VaDh 17.33-5; ViDh 
15.22~3; YDh 2.131 

BDh 2.3.30; VaDh 17.38; ViDh 15.27 
YDh 2.133 

ApDh 2.13.6-10; BDh 2.3.33-5 
VaDh 17.10; ViDh 15.42 

VaDh 17.11; ViDh 15.41 

VaDh 17.39, 81; ViDh 15.28-9 
ViDh 17.6-8; YDh 2.135 

BDh 1.11.9 

ApDh 2.14.2-3; GDh 28.21; BDh 
1.11.10-3; VaDh 17.81—2; ViDh 
17.11; YDh 2.135 

GDh 28.41; BDh 1.11.14; VaDh 
17.84—6; ViDh 17.14 

ApDh 2.14.5; GDh 28.42; BDh 
1.11.15-6; VaDh 17.83; ViDh 17.13 


192~3 YDh 2.117 


194 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 


201 


202 


203 


205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 

212 


213 


ViDh 17.18; YDh 2.143 
ViDh 17.19; YDh 2.145 
ViDh 17.20; YDh 2.145 
MBh 13.47.25 

MBh 13.47.24 

ViDh 17.22 


ApDh 2.14.1; GDh 28.43; BDh 
2.3.37—40; VaDh 17.52—3; ViDh 
15.32; YDh 2.140 

GDh 28.43; BDh 2.3.37—40; VaDh 
17.54; ViDh 15.33; YDh 2.140 


GDh 28.44; ViDh 15.34-6; YDh 
2.141 


GDh 28.31 

GDh 28.30; YDh 2.118-9 
YDh 2.116 

MBh 13.108.11; ViDh 18.42 
ViDh 18.43; YDh 2.119 
ViDh 18.41; YDh 2.120 
ViDh 17.17; YDh 2.138 
MBh 13.108.7 


214 


215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
224 
229 
231 
232 
234 
237 
274 
276 
277 
278 
279 
280 
282 
284 
285 
286 
292 
294 
294-5 
315 
317 
318 
319 
320 
321 
322 
327 
328° 


Dharmasastra Parallels 1029 


ApDh 2.14.15; GDh 28.40; BDh 
2.3.38; MBh 13.108.10 


MBh 13,108.12; YDh 2.120 
GDh 28.29; ViDh 17.3; YDh 2.122 
ViDh 17.7; YDh 2.135; AS 4.11.9 
YDh 2.126 
GDh 28.46~7; ViDh 18.44 
YDh 2.304 
YDh 2.43 
ViDh 5.180 
ViDh 5.9, 11; YDh 2.240 
YDh 2.305 
BDh 1.18.18; ViDh 5.3-7 
ViDh 5.74 
YDh 2.273 
ViDh 5.136; AS 4.10.1 
YDh 2.276 
YDh 2.279; AS 4.11.17 
YDh 2.273 
ViDh 5.106—7; AS 2.36.16—7 
ViDh 5.175-7 
ViDh 5.174 
ViDh 5.124; YDh 2.245-6 
YDh 2.297 
YDh 1.352 

AS 8.1.19 
MBh 13.136.16 
MBh 13.136.21 
MBh 13.136.22 
MBh 13.136.23 
MBh 12.79.21 
MBh 12.56.24; 12.79.22 
GDh 11.14; VaDh 19.4 
MBh 12.60.23 
MBh 12.60.26 


CHAPTER TEN 


4 


ApDh 1.1.3—5; BDh 1.16.1; VaDh 


2.1-2; MBh 13.10.63; 13.47.7; YDh 


An ao 


11 


12 


16 


17 


18 


19 
20 
21 
22 
24 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
43 


1.10 

ApDh 1.13.1; ViDh 16.1; YDh 1.90 
ApDh 2.13.4-5; BDh 1.16.6 

GDh 4.16; BDh 1.16.7; VaDh 18.8 


GDh 4.16; BDh 1.16.7; 1.17.3; VaDh 
18.8; YDh 1.91 


GDh 4.16; BDh 1.16.7; 1.17.4; VaDh 
18.8; YDh 1.92 


GDh 4.17; BDh 1.16.8; 1.17.7-8; 
VaDh 18.6; ViDh 16.5-6; YDh 1.93- 
4 


GDh 4.17; BDh 1.16.8; ViDh 16.4, 6; 
YDh 1.93-4 


BDh 1.7.7; VaDh 18.1-3; ViDh 16.4; 
YDh 1.93~4 


BDh 1.17.8; ViDh 16.5-6; YDh 1.93- 
4 


GDh 4.19; BDh 1.16.8, 11-2; 
1.17.13-—4; VaDh 18.5; ViDh 16.5 


BDh 1.16.8—10; 1.17.11-2; VaDh 18.2 
BDh 1.16.16 

GDh 4.20 

GDh 4.21 

YDh 1.96 

MBh 13.48.14 

MBh 13.48.15 

MBh 13.48.16; ViDh 16.7 
MBh 13.48.17 

MBh 13.48.18 

MBh 13.48.19-20 

MBh 13.48.20 

MBh 13.48.21 

MBh 13.48.24-5 

MBh 13.48.25-6 

MBh 13.48.26-7 

MBh 13.48.27 

VaDh 18.3; MBh 13.48.28 
MBh 13.48.29; ViDh 16.17 
MBh 13.33.20-1; 13.35.17 
MBh 13.35.18 


1030 


47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
62 
63 


64 


74 
75 


76 


77 


78 


79 


81 


82 


84 


85 


86 


87 


88 


Dharmasastra Parallels 


ViDh 16.10-3 

ViDh 16.8 

ViDh 16.9 

MBh 13.48.32 

ViDh 16.14 

MBh 13.48.32; ViDh 16.14 

ViDh 16.11 

VaDh 18.7; ViDh 16.17 

MBh 13.48.40 

MBh 13.48.41 

MBh 13.48.43 

MBh 13.48.34; ViDh 16.18 

ApDh 1.23.6; GDh 8.23; ViDh 
2.16—-7; YDh 1.122 

GDh 4.22; YDh 1.96 

VaDh 2.13 

ApDh 2.10.4; GDh 10.1-2; BDh 
1.18.2; VaDh 2.13-4; ViDh 2.5, 9, 11; 
YDh 1.118 

ViDh 2.41 

ApDh 2.10.6; GDh 10.1; BDh 1.18.3; 
VaDh 2.15-6; ViDh 2.9; YDh 1.118 
ApDh 2.10.7; GDh 10.1; BDh 1.18.4; 
VaDh 2.18; ViDh 2.9 

ApDh 2.10.6—7; GDh 10.7, 15, 493 
BDh 1.18.3—4; VaDh 2.17-9; ViDh 
2.6—7, 12-3; YDh 1.119 

GDh 7.6; BDh 2.4.16; VaDh 2.22; 
ViDh 2.15; YDh 3.35 

GDh 7.7; BDh 2.4.19~21; VaDh 
2.24, 32-6; YDh 3.35 

BDh 2.4.20-1; VaDh 2.32-—6; MBh 
3.199.193 12.254.44 

ApDh 1.20.10-1; GDh 7.8; YDh 3.39 
ApDh 1.20.12-3; GDh 7.9, 14-5; 
BDh 2.2.27; VaDh 2.24, 26, 29; 
ViDh 54.18, 21; YDh 3.36, 38 

GDh 7.9-10; VaDh 2.24-6; ViDh 
54.18, 20; YDh 3.36-8 

ApDh 1.20.12-3; GDh 7.912; 
VaDh 2.26; ViDh 54.18-21; YDh 
3.36-8 


89 ApDh 1.20.12; GDh 7.13~—5; VaDh 
2.28; ViDh 54.21; YDh 3.37-8 


90 VaDh 2.31; YDh 3.39 
91 BDh 2.2.26; VaDh 2.30 
92 VaDh 2.27; YDh 3.40 


93 YDh3.40 
94 ApDh 1.20.15; GDh 7.16-7, 21; 
VaDh 2.37-9 


95 GDh 7.26; ViDh 2.15 
96 VaDh 2.23 
98 VaDh 2.23; ViDh 2.15 


99-100 GDh 10.57, 60; ViDh 2.14; YDh 
1.120 


102. ApDh1.18.5-8, 14~5; GDh 7.4 
103. VaDh 27.9 


104 YDh3.41 
a1 ApDh 1.28.11; VaDh 20.45-6; ViDh 
54.28 


114 =VaDh 12.3 

115 GDh 10.39-42 

116 ©=©6©YDh 3.42 

117. VaDh2.40-3 

119 GDh 10.16, 41 

120 §©VaDh 19.37 

121. GDh 10.56; YDh 1.120 
124 GDh 10.61 

125 GDh 10.58-9 

126-7 GDh 10.64—5; YDh 1.121, 262 
129 )6 GDh 10.63 


CHAPTER ELEVEN 

1 ApDh 2.10.1-2; GDh 5.21; BDh 
2.5.19; MBh 12.159.1 

2 MBh 12.159.2 
GDh 5.22; BDh 2.5.20; MBh 
12.159.3 

4 MBh 12.159.4 
ApDh 2.10.3 


7 VaDh 8.10; MBh 12.159.5; ViDh 
59.8—9; YDh 1.124 


li 
12 
13 
14 


15 
16 


17 


21 
22 
24 
25 
27 


29 
30 
31 
34 
35 
36 


37 
38 
39 
4o 
41 


44 


45° 


46 
48 
49 


50 
51 
52 
53 


Dharmasastra Parallels 1031 


MBh 12.159.6 

GDh 18.25; MBh 12.159.7 

GDh 18.24; MBh 12.159.8 

GDh 18.26—7; MBh 159.9; AS 
3.14.37 

MBh 12.159.10 

GDh 18.28—9; MBh 12.159.11; YDh 
3-43 

GDh 18.30; MBh 12.159.11-2; YDh 
3-43 

GDh 18.32; MBh 12.159.12-3 

GDh 18.31; MBh 12.159.13; YDh 3.44 
ViDh 59.11; YDh 1.127 

YDh 1.127 


MBh 12.159.14; ViDh 59.10; YDh 
1.126 


MBh 12.159.15 
MBh 12.159.16 
MBh 12.159.17 
VaDh 26.16; MBh 12.159.19 
MBh 12.159.18 


ApDh 2.15.18—9; GDh 2.4; VaDh 
2.6; MBh 12.159.20 


MBh 12,159.20 

MBh 12.159.21 

MBh 12.159.22 

MBh 12.159.23 

GDh 22.34; VaDh 1.18; 21.27; ViDh 
54.13 


GDh 19.2; BDh 3.10.2; VaDh 22.1; 
MBh 12.35.2; YDh 3.219—20 


GDh 19.3-—6; BDh 3.10.3—-5; VaDh 
20.1-2; 22.3-5; YDh 3.226 


YDh 3.226 
VaDh 20.43; ViDh 44.1 


VaDh 1.18; 20.6, 44; ViDh 45.3-6; 
YDh 3.209 


ViDh 45.7—10; YDh 3.211 
ViDh 45.11-4; YDh 3.210 
ViDh 45.20-1, 31 

ViDh 44.32 


54 
55 


56 


57 


58 
59 


60 


61 


62 


63 


64 


65 


66 


67 


68 
69 
70 
71 


72 


73 


74 


73 


78 
79 


YDh 3.220 

ApDh 1.21.8; GDh 21.1; VaDh 
119-21; ViDh 35.1-2; YDh 3.227 
GDh 21.10; ViDh 36.1; 37.1-3; YDh 
3.228 

ApDh 1.21.8; GDh 21.1; ViDh 36.2; 
37.4-5; YDh 3.228-9 

BDh 2.2.3-—4; ViDh 36.3; YDh 3.230 
ApDh 1.21.8—9, 17-8; GDh 21.1; 
BDh 2.2.13; ViDh 36.4~7; YDh 3.231 
ApDh 1.21.9-10; GDh 21.1, 11; VaDh 
1.23; ViDh 37.6, 9-10, 13; YDh 
3-234—5, 237, 239-40 

GDh 21.11; ViDh 37.15-8; YDh 
3-234-5, 238 

GDh 21.11; BDh 2.2.13; YDh 
3.236-8 

GDh 21.11; BDh 2.2.5; ViDh 37.14, 
19-21; YDh 3.234-5 

GDh 21.11; ViDh 37.22-6; YDh 
3.240, 242 

ApDh 1.21.14~5; GDh 21.11; ViDh 
37-7, 24, 27; YDh 3.239-40 

GDh 21.11; BDh 2.2.13; ViDh 37.28- 
30, 32; YDh 3.234, 242 

GDh 21.1, 11; VaDh 1.23; ViDh 37.13, 
31, 33; YDh 3.236-7, 239 

ViDh 38.1-6 

ViDh 39.1 

BDh 2.2.6; ViDh 40.1 

ApDh 1.21.12—7; BDh 2.2.15-6; 
ViDh 411-4 

GDh 22.1; BDh 2.1.1 

ApDh 1.24.11—20; 1.28.21-9; GDh 
22.4—-6; BDh 2.1.2-3; ViDh 50.1-6, 
15; YDh 3.243 

ApDh 1.25.11; GDh 22.2-3; YDh 
3.248 

GDh 22.10; BDh 2.1.4 

YDh 3.250 

YDh 3.249 

ApDh 1.24.18 


1032 


80 


81 


83 


88 


89 
90 
91 


g2 
93 
95 
102 
104 


105 


106 
107 
109 


110 
11 
112 
113 
114 
116 
117 
118 


11g 


120 
121 
122 


123 


Dharmasdstra Parallels 


GDh 22.7; VaDh 20.27; YDh 
3244-5 

ApDh 1.24.21; GDh 22.8; VaDh 
20.28; YDh 3.246 


ApDh 1.24.22; GDh 22.9; BDh 2.1.5; 
ViDh 35.6; YDh 3.244 


ApDh 1.24.6—9; GDh 22.12-3; BDh 
2.1.12; VaDh 20.23-—4, 34-6; ViDh 
50.7~9; YDh 3.251 


ViDh 50.10 

GDh 21.7; BDh 2.1.6 

ApDh 1.25.3; GDh 23.1; BDh 2.1.18; 
VaDh 20.22; MBh 12.159.45; YDh 
3-253 

YDh 3.253 

ViDh 51.14; YDh 3.254 

ViDh 22.82 

ApDh 1.25.10; ViDh 52.3; YDh 3.258 


ApDh 1.25.2; GDh 23.8-9; BDh 
2.1.13-4; VaDh 20.14; ViDh 34.2; 
YDh 3.259 


ApDh 1.25.1; GDh 23.10-1; BDh 
2.1.15; VaDh 20.13; MBh 12.159.47; 
YDh 3.259 


ViDh 53.1; YDh 3.260 
ViDh 53.6; YDh 3.260 


ApDh 1.26.1; GDh 22.18; VaDh 
21.18; ViDh 50.16; YDh 3.263 


ViDh 50.22 

ViDh 50.16; YDh 3.263 

ViDh 50.17-8 

ViDh 50.19-20 

ViDh 50.21 

ViDh 50.24 

YDh 3.263 

ViDh 37.35 

ApDh 1.26.8—9; GDh 23.17; BDh 
2.1.31-3; VaDh 23.1-3; YDh 3.280 
GDh 25.4; BDh 2.1.35 

BDh 2.1.30; VaDh 23.4; ViDh 28.48 
GDh 25.1-2 

GDh 23.18; ViDh 28.49 


124 
125 
126 
127 


128 


129 
130 


131 


132 


133 
134 


135 


136 
137 


138 
139 
140 
141 


142 
143 
144 
145 
147 


148 


150 


151 


152 


GDh 23.19; ViDh 28.50 

ViDh 28.7 

ViDh 29.2; 40.2; 41.5 

GDh 22.14-6; BDh 2.1.8-10; VaDh 
20.31~-3; ViDh 50.12-5; YDh 
3.266—-7 

ApDh 1.24.14; GDh 22.14; BDh 
1.19.1; YDh 3.266 

YDh 3.266 

ApDh 1.24.2, 4; GDh 22.15; BDh 
1.19.2; YDh 3.267 

ApDh 1.24.3-4; GDh 22.16; BDh 
1.19.2; YDh 3.267 

ApDh 1.25.13; GDh 22.19; BDh 
1.19.6; VaDh 21.24; ViDh 50.30~-2; 
YDh 3.270 

YDh 3.270 

GDh 22.23, 25; ViDh 50.34-5; YDh 
3-273 

GDh 22.24; ViDh 50.36—9; YDh 
3.271, 273-4 

BDh 1.19.6; ViDh 50.33; YDh 3.272 
BDh 1.19.4; ViDh 50.25-8; YDh 
3.271 

ViDh 50.29, 40-1; YDh 3.272-3 
GDh 22.26; YDh 3.268 

VaDh 21.26; YDh 3.274 

ApDh 1.26.2; GDh 22.20-1; VaDh 
21.25; ViDh 50.46; YDh 3.269 

GDh 22.22; ViDh 50.47; YDh 3.275 
ViDh 50.48; YDh 3.276 

ViDh 50.49; YDh 3.275 

ViDh 50.50; YDh 3.276 

GDh 23.2; BDh 2.1.19-21; VaDh 
20.19; ViDh 51.4; YDh 3.255 

BDh 2.1.22; VaDh 20.21; ViDh 
51.23-4 

GDh 23.6; MBh 12.159.71; ViDh 
51.25 

GDh 23.3; VaDh 20.20; ViDh 51.2; 
YDh 3.255 

BDh 2.1.20; VaDh 20.18; ViDh 51.5 


153 
156 
157 


158 
159 
160 
161 
163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
171 


173 


174 


175 
176 


177 


179 
181 


182 


183 


184 


185 


187 


188 


189 


Dharmasastra Parallels 1033 


VaDh 14.33; ViDh 51.50, 54-6 
ViDh 51.27.34 

GDh 23.4—-5; VaDh 23.30; ViDh 
51.3-4 

VaDh 23.12; ViDh 51.43-4 

VaDh 23.11; ViDh 51.45; YDh 3.282 
VaDh 23.11; ViDh 51.46-7 

GDh 23.26 

ApDh 1.25.10; ViDh 52.5 

ViDh 52.6 

ViDh 52.7 

ViDh 52.8 

ViDh 52.9 

ViDh 52.10 

ViDh 52.11, 13 

GDh 23.12—3, 32; BDh 2.2.13-4; 


VaDh 20.15-6; ViDh 34.2; 53.1; 
YDh 3.233 

BDh 2.1.37-8 

ApDh 1.26.7; GDh 22.36, 23.34; 
ViDh 53.4, 7; YDh 3.288 

ViDh 53.4; YDh 3.291 

BDh 2.4.13-—4; VaDh 23.41; ViDh 
53-5—6 

MBh 12.159.58; ViDh 53.8 

ApDh 1.27.11; BDh 2.2.11; ViDh §3.9 
GDh 21.3; BDh 2.2.35; VaDh 1.22; 
MBh 12.159.35; ViDh 35.3-5; YDh 
3.261 

ViDh 54.1 

GDh 20.4-6; BDh 2.1.36; VaDh 
15.12—3; YDh 3.295 

GDh 20.4, 7; VaDh 15.12, 14; ViDh 
22.57 

GDh 20.8~—9; VaDh 15.15-6; YDh 
3-295 

GDh 20.10; BDh 2.1.36; VaDh 
15.17-21; YDh 3.296 

GDh 20.11-4; BDh 2.1.36; YDh 
3.296 

YDh 3.297 


190 )§69ViDh 54.31 

191 ViDh 54.32; YDh 3.299 

192 VaDh 11.76—9; ViDh 54.26 

193 ViDh54.27 

194 ViDh 54.28 

195 ViDh 54.24; YDh 3.290 

196-7 BDh 2.1.36; YDh 3.300 

198 ApDh 1.26.7; ViDh 54.25; YDh 
3.289 

199 YDh3.289 


200 GDh 23.7; VaDh 23.31; ViDh 54.12; 
YDh 3.277 


202 YDh3.291 

204 ViDh 54.29 

205-6 YDh 3.292 

208 MBh 12.159.43 

209 BDh 2.1.7; ViDh 54.30; YDh 3.293 

210 = ViDh 54.34; YDh 3.294 

212 ApDh 1.27.7; GDh 26.2-5; BDh 
2.2.38; 4.5.6-7; VaDh 21.20; ViDh 
46.10; YDh 3.320 

213 BDh 4.5.11; VaDh 27.13; ViDh 54.19; 
YDh 3.315 

214 GDh 26.18—-9; BDh 2.2.40; 4.5.8; 
VaDh 24.1-2; YDh 3.320 

215 BDh 2.2.37; 4.5.10; VaDh 21.21; 
ViDh 46.11; YDh 3.318 

216 BDh 4.5.15; ViDh 46.18; YDh 3.321 

217. GDh 27.12—3; BDh 3.8.10, 19-23; 
VaDh 23.45; 27.21; ViDh 47.4-5; 
YDh 3.324 

218 GDh 27.14; BDh 3.8.26; 4.5.17; 
VaDh 27.21; ViDh 47.3, 6 

219 =BDh 4.5.19; ViDh 47.7 

220 BDh 4.5.18; ViDh 47.8 

221 GDh 27.18; BDh 3.8.31; 4.5.20; 
ViDh 47.9; YDh 3.325, 327 

222 BDh 3.8.30; ViDh 47.10 

223 GDh 26.1—6; 27.2; BDh 3.8.3, 7-9, 
12-3 

224 BDh 3.8.17; YDh 3.326 


1034 


225 
226 
227 
239 
246 
247 
249 
250 
251 
252 
254 
260 


261 


262 
263 


Dharmasdstra Parallels 


BDh 3.8.14-6 

VaDh 24.46; YDh 3.309 

VaDh 25.3 

ViDh 95.17 

VaDh 27.7; YDh 3.314 

VaDh 27.1-2 

BDh 4.1.29; VaDh 26.4; ViDh 55.2 
VaDh 26.5; ViDh 55.4; YDh 3.304 
VaDh 26.6; YDh 3.304 

VaDh 26.7; ViDh 55.6; YDh 3.305 
GDh 24.2-3; BDh 4.2.4-5 

GDh 24.10-2; BDh 3.5.2-5; VaDh 
26.8; MBh 12.148.26; 12.207.13; YDh 
3.302 

BDh 4.2.15; MBh 12.148.26; ViDh 
55-7 

VaDh 27.3 

BDh 3.9.1-21; 4.5.29 


CHAPTER TWELVE 


YDh 3.134 

YDh 3.135 

YDh 3.136 

YDh 3.131, 134-6 

YDh 3.182 

MBh 12.187.30; 12.212.29; 12.239.20 
MBh 12.187.31; 12,212.30; 12.239.21 
MBh 12.187.32; 12.212.31; 12.239.22 
YDh 3.137 

YDh 3.138 


33 
40 
52 
55-6 
57-8 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
75-6 
83 
91 
101 
108 


109 


110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 


YDh 3.139 

YDh 3.137-9 

YDh 3.219 

YDh 3.207 

YDh 3.208 

YDh 3.212 

YDh 3.213 

ViDh 44.14-20; YDh 3.214-5 
ViDh 44.21-5; YDh 3.211, 215 
ViDh 44.26-30; YDh 3.215 
ViDh 44.31-4; YDh 3.213 
ViDh 44.35—7; YDh 3.214-5 
ViDh 24.38-43; YDh 3.214 
ViDh 44.44; YDh 3.217 

MBh 13.112.110; ViDh 44.45 
YDh 3.206 

YDh 3.190 

ApDh 1.23.1 

VaDh 27.2 

GDh 28.48; VaDh 1.5 

ApDh 2.29.13—4; BDh 1.1.5-6; 
VaDh 1.6; 6.43 

GDh 28.49; BDh 1.1.7, 9 
BDh 1.1.8; VaDh 3.20 

YDh 1.9 

GDh 28.50 

BDh 1.1.16; VaDh 3.5 

BDh 1.1.11; VaDh 3.6 


PADA INDEX 


Note: The + sign indicates that the pada is found in an additional verse given in the 


critial apparatus. 


T 


SAAT AAA: 9.117 
aes TT: BAT 8.225 
HHA UAT 11.128 
ABA: Hr WT 11.46 
ADRAC: ee ory 11.45 
serrer far BRT 2.4 
+THMTEd PT 12.89 
HHL UGH T 2.76 
THR TRAM 3.157 
APART AAS 2.125 
AHA HATST 11.97 
TBAT ST my 11.44 
HPT T PARAL 10.114 
FHT: F J fat7: 8.199 
AGA AT Pat APT 9.136 
+APAATAT A: 7.64 
APA HTITT 2.187 
APA aearanet 11.138 
TAA HIATT 3.213 
SAGA: SAAT: 3.192 
+H THAT 4.204 
ART aeeer 4.3 
+e @ aaut 7.205 
FAAS T UAT 8.291 
AETAT OT afatet 9.23 
HAT TAC FT 2.84 
waaay AT 3.257 
SHAROAMTAT: ET: 5.73 
rey sere 10.71 
SRR @ 11.170 
STRETE) WE: 3.158 


1035 


spree a epee: 6.41 
aye axa 8.374 
AYA FAA 8.385 
at ar @ Tae 8.114 
+3 gear frUTTT 3.99 
aferemeraa 9.278 
sonra meet 8.350 
ahreaaray aT IT 6.17 
afargererry 1.23 
aparaneyr arraear 3.199 
aMaraer FaTAT 3.195 
sahara FASTA: 3.199 
aert Aare 6.4 
aert UT YATE 4.25 
+HPSTET PINT 2.67 
aferanfeeariry 11.41 
aubarcatt Farart 6.25 
aurat Rergat 2.108 
SPAT AT FANT 5.113 
aa: AAAS FT 3.211 
aa: arer Darel 3.85 
sat Bareqerar 3.210 
wat WRATEAe: TR 3.76 
ARATE Tat Wee 4.58 
aaa gq fever 3.212 
ararery WHeuaty 2.143 
STAT: aay aay 3.184 
SAT FAT TIT 12.30 
HT HAG YEH 3.18 
agTavisara FT 8.287 
ager aPerstqer 9.277 
ager aT Bz 8.370 
FSIS TS 2.59 


1036 


Tay gt 4.77 
TRIAS 1.3 
ahr sort 8.174 
AGT FAT 7.205 

HBT UPATIT 8.187 
ATSITIVTST: 8.148 

STA TTSASTS 11.137 

gfaas AHN 9.119 
after gq four 9.119 
oamfeay gq Tee 8.235 

+HPT Fad FA 5.131 
ORTeAser BST 4.11 
astrte: @d Fd 10.105 
sortifeged ard 5.145 
aoteregy WathT 10.81 

aa fF aTORTETE: 2.153 
arent Va FATT 11.156 
Hara 11.161 
HMAYHYSTS 5.21 

+ qa J 8.199 
+35 WATETeET 12.101 
FATA HRT feat 11.151 
HAAS F AT qr 8.121 
AHAMATSTIOVAT ST 8.118 
aerate ar AMAT 11.233 
wartgrentt ttear 11.147 
SHAT TPA: TST 12.103 
ast wafer & are: 2.153 
aeaegrasgeyg RTT 9.110 
suse: oer: aot 1.44 
+S ARTA GIT: 1.10 
gear arar fearerer: 1.27 
+e Sear Tea 11.247 

HT RA AHS ATT 9.187 
HT Se T SAT 4.98 

Fe Tet TISAT 2.39 

aed Se yar qweqewy” 8.278 
aa Set yore rf 8.218 
we Bet yarn areeTr’ 8.266 
He wet Tare TaTET 8.214 
aa meat saeaihr gar 11.99 
+a wed Gaetet SAT 8.351 


Pada Index 


aaqIRaTEATA: 4.190 
HaRt ATAT T 12.94 
are faqdaer 7.34 

+3: TC Waeaihy seAASTET 10.1 
+3: TC Tae IF 6.1 
He: We yee waar 10.131 
wa: Fe yaeer aay 9.56 
+H. Te yaeurfer carefarer 11.266 
ae metas Fear 11.8 
atest ATRTE: 11.121 
afamrd sae J 5.76 
afamraeaprest 8.156 
afamad TAT aT 9.78 
afar UTTaTs 4.122 
afaRrasartaar 3.114 
afaitcarqarrait 4.182 
afewatar tear 4.16 
saferarrraeyr 4.169 
afearanttaftera 6.47 
adtarat & aaet 7.178 
adiaramamste wea 9.196 
adlararaastret ATanfray: 9.197 
ata Breas: 7.179 
sasrarty orarfer 6.53 
AASIATATETT 11.87 
AASUAAA FAT 4.13 
FASTA T TEL 8.300 
aasaar Tareq 5.31 
Feast TTAAYT 8.397 

wat FeaeET: 8.78 
aeasaret waver fer 2.213 
aegradr AAI 7.170 
aeqar aaa RTT 3.236 
aa ara araettanr: 9.42 
+35 WIT TATIAT: 3.53 
ara Tara Fea: 5.41 

AY TAIT WAT 9.137 

AT ores 8.202 
HEVSITGISAT UST 8.128 
Hausa FAT UST 8.202 
+aecTeIaytT ferret 8.341 
AGUIATAI TT 12.7 


FGM: 4.202 
Hera TF T UAT 3.115 
FAWMTT F AT 8.158 
HAA AIT 8.155 
aerate Jaatar 8.161 
SERIA FATT 9.91 
SEAT FATT 9.286 
Teena area 5.127 
aes war feat s. 53 
wag FTE 3.247 
afgea aA 3.35 
afearatr seater 5.109 
aged wer BT 5.118 
+3: WETeT We 11.200 
agar Tenor YF: 1.78 
AKASH: AT 9.321 
HACHE: WAST 7.21 
HRY TF YATAT 4.148 
aeete Yat 4.2 
FER T arta 4.73 
searefaeat 8.47 
STAT AAA T 12.41 
TMTVST BS 8.107 
ard AT 6.64 
HUAtelT TEATT: 8.304 
aA TA: WS 2a 
aertthre aad 4.174 
HTT TIE: 9.249 
TITAN 4.54 
MMA THC T 4.133 
aentaar BPRS: 8.310 
eT WTA 4.171 
aentrer ay ar FF 4.170 
aftras arf fereta in.7 
Haaser Bay 4.78 
are sat TIT 6.83 
afataar ¢ ar are 9.83 
Heer ATA 6.93 
aefter faferagert 6.36 
seteieray aur: 10.1 
setter ay sfer FAT 2.73 
wargftertapttn: 4.196 


Pada Index 1037 


RAT UIT FT 10.77 
TANT Barer: 4.101 
SATARAGT 1.88, 10.75 
SAT Faas: 3.70 
TAMIL TET: 2.208 
rearrarare PITT 2.151 
+TAATST FEM 1.103, 106 
TAVITA TS 2.73 
TATAESTIT: 2.70 
aay ataafadr 9.201 
sae aa 3.199 
smahrAae: ST IT 6.43 
arr fire: earyht: 6.25 
wage: Prt geet 4.231 
5.102 
ameter fesit Fert 6.37 
STATA STAT 4.108 
area feared 7.158 
arate: PAVE: 9.187 
FTA TTAAT 10.7 
HATE FART 9.217 
TTP Ae T 6.35 
HT frareary 5.52 
aes Sara 5.4 
sAaTTaT mre 3.248 
ara Saray 4.213 
HTM 9.14 
+HFST FCAT 3.98 
AAaaAale 8.309 
TTT aq fearar 11.142 
SARRAPAIPT 10.98 


1038 


aaRarteeator 10.73 
HATaTAT SATA: 10.66 
HATARPAITART, 11.227 
warearirar Ser 11.66 
safeariniate 11.38 
AST: WHAT 8.412 
afer fe ferdr FTE 3.102 
afiear fast aA 7.199 
aerts TRET 5.143 
afarad: cffearé: 3.42 


afrer 2a abe 6.37 
+3rftareaaPranry 7.205 
Aiea: Aad 4.22 
AYR FA: 3.147 
aqMrMeepdar J 11.210 
+APRSMATATT 5.104 
PTR SAT vt 5.103 
ayer aor 2.47 
HTTHUTTEL 9.208 
AFT STATA 5.7 
aqawd TRA 8.126 
agareal ¢ aT: PPT 8.69 
AAT faarterar 5.51; +5.51 
Ae fereareat 7.209 
age: BPI: 7.64 
STP WT 7.154 
AGASAT FT SPANT 2.241 
ATTA: 2.61 
wat a ayy 11.56 
HTT T ASAVET: 8.36 
FTAA 8.105 
HTAMIGTHS F 5.153 
+agat F aT APT 5.144 


Pada Index 


act aeenttr 5.159 

sat waar Taser 6.85 
SAT HAAR FEPACAT 2.164 
at q [AMAT 9.128 

oat ATT FAT 5.166 

aaa faferat fret 5.169 

amar fate weg 11.116 

art fat UST BATT: 8.343 
aaa faerat tre Fret: 8.178 
+3 faRIAT SITET: 8.199 
aeart fear are 3.281 

amt fahar wart 6.81 

aaa fae 8.2u 

art fer at 4.260 
HAGMAN T 1.2 

aera fray 4.126 


+o T aT ae wa 3.259 
aa da aur 3.99 
aaa 7.118 
aaaar cert 10.54 
aaedrsareacd 11.51 
+oHET FSET 11.40 
wae BET ate 8.317 
SARISAT GAT 11.144 
saReATapetarL 3.233 
TT TARSMITET 4.164 
age STAFTUT 9.40 
srafeais PSA: 9.64 
ara geahiearar 8.204 
sar waedter 7.60 


HY BSP TIT 1.85 
HT BAYT TAT: 1.85 
aaut Waar 8.329 
aerat 7 BST 7.183 
FMRI 9.296 
aay eT 10.25 
FUTIAN: 9.101 
ToT T qed 9.195 

ay wet qawtet 18 

amer ateararter 9.28 
HTTSATA FT PAT 5.161 
TTTAT UT 6.2 
aaa 8.54 
aqeahar FATT 8.182 
AUTAPT AIT: 10.51 
ARIPTAT ITT 6.31 
SRTGRTAT TAT: 3.255 
reer PT 3.214 
aT eet 3.214 
aTET FT PAT 11.89 
HIE FT (AVE 12.60 
TET gar @ 11.251 
Tet aafeyor 8.139; +8.51 
HIGASTANET 8.52 

aq: ser fat AT 10.88 
ST: GAIT TRT: 11.148 
amor att fra: 2.104 
+S HITE 3.149 
AUTEHIAET 3.170 
ATTEAIET AT Tq: 3.169 
TTSATSAT TE: 3.183 
STS AAT: WEI 3.176 
HAT ST 11.70 
samt faaeq Fray 11.215 
ath TBH 10.87 
+f aT: TIARA 9.14 
att +t: & Bd YA 3.274 
afr yorer ATeTL 11.249 
aft eqet HF 7.55 
ayer srepfargE 2.57 
sya FATA FT 9.135 
+HTAT WIT TY: 9.191 


Pada Index 1039 


apart far 9.127 
SMT: Road 1.47 
ght J Tgw 255 
+TTSMAT HAT 11.5 
+SSTAT fageag: 11.178 
ayranstarr: aT 3.105 
SITRIAATT TH: 12.29 
ayaasrafaster weet 1.5 
+aaresr Fear: 4.204 
HUATETGT: FH: 3.61 
WI: FAY 6.26 


WIT T PAT 11.256 


aren fF AT AAT 8.303 
anand 7 11.198 
ana ey aay 9.290 
afafiteatsrear at 1.75 
HUMAOTHRT 6.58 


1040 


afrrer gq &: BIT 8.367 
apiece 7.204 
HASIAT AAS 11.161 
aieart gq BT 11.153 
TIFT WNT 2.178 
TRA AMT FT 2.211 
areas WAH: 11.258 
FOTIA FATT 9.272 
TATRADT PSI 8.372 
+H TgeT wereaifer 9.127 
ahr erortaer GATT 11.134 
ameter Ye WAT 5.20 
+aAeae gary et 11.139 
SHIH J HAT 2.66 
wareryper ote 7.141 
THTARTSSNS 7.157 
SATS: WIPSaTHy aT 9.234 
HATA GUS ATA: 7.65 
HATTA Jes: 11.174 
SATII TT: 9.284 
aarada add 7.104 
SATA Te ara 4.114 
HATATEaT aaa: 4.113 
TATATEITHT T 4.128 
aftaretr age 2.239 

+ AFAR: 4.222 
+t HST 4.221 
Waa WHET 2.162 


ATPISAT FT 11.168 
+TTG JT TFT 8.385 
SIRI 3.65 
ay F MET 3.278 


Pada Index 


FTAA 4.167 
areata Te OST. 9.12 
aReferare UAT 8.308 
aRefeareara4e 8.309 
FY BIST! 5.69 
ae Prareré aT 7.147 
ae ar ARTS 1. 259 
+P TSIAPT 11.245 
oreastae fe areaseary 7.3 
aerate Pr 7.158 
am: aaRrarefw: 1.83 
+afrod oferenrter 3.98 
at wae ay Sr: 2.224 
aiprmaamrar 2.13 
STAG FT 7.168 
ater ae AAT 9.11 
+TUTIHOAe 7.205 
HaPTAGUt FEAT 8.24 
esr g 8.51 
wey: TETAS 8.62 
TEATS 8.39 
arnt art cea &: 1.32 
+o STAT: BT: 4.86 
wala WaTEteart 8.30 
srateerrerarcett 5.59 
HST ACHAT 3.54 
seca fart 3.128 
FEIAYIHT 3.119 
+36: BTEAMPAMT 1.106 
+HEMTIRAMTT 3.98 
ASSTHMAIAT: 8.392 
TOBE AWeatT 9.92 
HSPOT TAT 7.222 
SPT FA FAT 5.68 
HOP FARM 3.28 
seer te cay 7-99 
woe tenet 7.101 
+TOTIT T ParT 4.169 
Hos GSWs FT 6.54 
qoary SeaRSraT 2.184 
sere + fersret Sat 6.57 
afest fafeawr 4.200 


Her aT TE aT WT 7.86 
HeT aT Is AT ART 2.149 
FTHTERAATT 6.59 
reraaRyay 8.330 
FASAT ASAT 3.53 
aaprary eT 3.207 
aera trast yart 11.118 
srereptoty g PT 11.119 
weap WRpusy 11.209 
rea TIRAMT 11.207 
FAI ST TPS 3.218 
aafastad? Sat 8.282 
HATA AF 8.282 
+3TGCAEC aut 5.102 
waar ae fears 12.68 
HACTaT VASAT: 8.198 
aaerat waar a 8.145 
FARRRIAAIAY 8.94 
FATE ACHAAT 8.75 
warar Aferay ATar 2.128 
afaaart aaeF 11.117 
afeart F FANT 9.205 
afagrae frsrer 9.317 
fags Ber 2.214 
aferEry mT: 4.188 
afasercad: FT 8.109 
afapaserad: 3.2 
+afageerrar HPT: 8.200 
+STeROPASTOTT 1.15 
arafopfare: ater 10.101 
arg Peep fara fe ot 9.74 
weet TAT 6.61 
HITT Te 11.253 
HAI VAST 8,32 
wersTst aera 3.10 
FATA 5.128 
HAART 12.114 
sada fetid 3.170 
FUGA PAT 10.99 
+HoTeIe ey 6.71 
FATTER 9.254 
HAA T T UIT 8.316 


Pdda Index 1041 


araftferart Tera 8.140 
orate: waaay aT 5.155 
HYST ATA: AT 5.58 
+a: BACLT 12.9 
gsargarscaredter 8.37 
HAGE FAST 6.17 
SHAT SAT BT 10.86 
FSA WATS 8.250 
saat afer 10.64 
api: far Ter 3.136 
SAT IE: Peet 5.82 
spar aT TF: ANT 3.136 
HBPATMYAT 4.206 
+PTATEA FT 8.102 
+SPTFTATATE 8.102 
+3PITCII ATA 8.100 
TPIGETT ATT: 4.189 
SPATS 11.16 
THT TaeRrT 4.119 
+R 8.9 
arerearg arty fraaihy 8.3 
HVAT ATT GACT 9.250 
FRM GPUS 5.96 
HRM FT TRA 8.337 
areTaset aaa 11.219 
ARTAArAARAT 3.20 
AVATAR 3.269 
aet UIT: TATEATAT: 7.156 
aet araraaiees: 9.305 
sTeearaTy after 3.275 
eprey a7 Ter: 2.203 
seep tart 3.245 
TAPATMTIAA: 5.36 
sepgyay 12.78 
eI eT 12.15 
STMT 11.66 


1042 


arate fear oe 5.101 
wafer 7 aT ATG: 3.5 
orate aay 5-100 
arerfrear worry 7.19 
THTSPTAT 8.163 
TTS TTPAeT 8.55 
SAIS WAIST: 9.238 
FARR TAA 9.259 
HATITET AIST: 2.210 
Wea AT: 3.43 
Teaeay AT 8.109 
Tae FATT 2.130 
aaraat tr 4.90 
aferaaaraty 12.75 
saga fre: THT: 9.186 
HqTET AT AT aT: 2.114 
areat arene 2.122 
+redarafe Id 4.204 
saa ta feentt7.205 
TATTA FT AAMT 11.141 
HRT HTH 6.76 
HSTETAAT FAT: 12.116 
HATS WIT 7.98 
apereniisRasarh: 1.107 
Het PeTAT SM 7.100 
HT TIAT JIT 12.2 
+5EMT UT AIT FA: 9.127 
ae THAT FATT 3.230 
areata Ia 8.107 
arearayr eneter: a BTC 5.104 
areaerat: fear: HTT: 9.2 
HAT: TIAATT 7.226 
Sea Hal FET 8.199 
+TSAHIGAHAT 5.118 
FEUSTTAT 8.419 

ae wT ferqereg 1.34 
FECTMSGTIT 1.67 
TERT ASAT 5.29 
+FeRY TMA 5.75 
FE AAT 9.189 
saa T FAT 6.60 
afgeattearea?: 6.75 


Pada Index 


afseada YAT 2.159 
atéear qeear ZT 12.83 
agente ar frene 5.44 
SATIS 11.223 
aPear ASAHI: 10.63 
+e TITAT 4.204 
areal FASMATSIT 4.246 
aed FT Et UT 3.73 
HSRTATIRAT 11.184 
werey feared 1.65 
Hel VHT WAN TF 5.64 
FET UAT T UTIL 6.69 


AMMICIAT AAT 2.6 
SPIRE: BT 3.165 
STAT: WAT IA: 1.108 
+I FT TAIT 1.2 
+HTIISAT BP 4.156 
FPIRTSTART 4.156 
ararenfeegat fam: 1.109 
ATIRIBUT EY: 4.156 
AAR T AFH: 1.109 
+I FUP AIT 4.156 
arart qua 5.91 
ara ft Wane 4.162 
aTTATs: BT: 2.109 
grarer far da 2.225 
araecaer at aft 2.148 
arart g ae va 2.247 
IITA TAIT ATT: 2.226 
ararayr TAOIST: 4.182 
area Wear T 3.27 
arsftaart arey 10.79 
+TeMeaeltsy Deane 12.110 
AeAARAAT FAL 8.350 
ATTA RATATAT 8.350 
SETA TT aT 11.113 
STA ST T RTT 12.92 
arerpa oftarer 8.349 
MATA BT 5.89 
sear rare Utd 7.105 
WIAAT TERA 6.49 
MAA BE AFIT 11.115 
STAT areratearert 4.252 
TAHARI 6.38 
ATS WT: 1.51 
+A WAIT FT 7.205 
+I: TTT 7.205 
Tear wad we 7.213 
WAM BITS 9.177 
Ar T aapaer 5.42 
STATTATHAT Fe 9.12 
STATS WT PART: 11.65 
arent fF FATA 12.119 
arta aqar: ear: 12.119 


Pada Index 1043 


area BIH: aett 8.84 
+3RISUT SAT FT 8.350 
HeEMET TZMATT 9.243 
Hea: TAT 8.341 
area qaudey 8.223 
areal 7 Yash 9.98 
+e Wasyear 5.135 
+aaale Ut: TT 6.21 
agate wat art 2.117 
aredtart Suny FAT 7.131 
arediary TSurT waterfer’ 8.33 
STQAATAASTATT 4.223 
+3T GCA: FT: 5.67 
SMM: 11.15 
ATEMARIGS 7.204 

+e feast 7.152 


AT TT PAC FAT 11.266 
TATTET TH AIT 1.20 
aT gifaane ATM 2.38 
arfeearafarreanit 8.145 
ante: rar avery 8.149 
areata FT FAT 6.83 
AAAI T 10.28 
Aree BET 3.272 
ar Provera 6.31 
FORT aye: 10.5 
ayer aT Tee 9.229 
+3TIAT SAT UT 4.204 


AIGAST AT TE 9.283 
ag FT AUTAT 1.116 
aarerTeaeear 9.103 
array fe Orrar 2.113 
amare fe aay 9.336 
am: Bet YPATayT: 5.128 


1044 


amar arr sfe war: 1.10 
STE: Ses: arg: 2.109 
STAT: aay ary 8.63 
+feaas TT HAST 10.1 
anihtsreaara4r 10.15 
STR: BATA 3.84 
aaa qT: ATS 3.191 
aT Fen: Broafaxse 4.137 
oar adesratorr 7.178 
RIA WET: 7.179 
+TTTAGS BATT 7.64 
armeaat a frat 8.419 
aTgfamrrarest 4.237 
AIT THT 9.41 
aged Fa Te 3.263 
STMT GAT 2.125 
WGA WEA FEC 2.52 
tT UTA 2.34 
+3TQ: OT BI A: 5.155 
ae: qavreareyst 4.218 
AAVTGT AT T 10.16 
ARUP WAAL 10.89 
ARIMT T TAIT 5.9 
aad ad: BF 9.299 
aRAdT BATT 9.300 
areereferar ey 12.32 
HAY BAIT: AL 8.216 
ATR YATT: 4.76 
agureeg yout 4.76 
+HTSATS FT ATS 4.36 
aTgaTated sHaT 6.23 
afte: Borst T 4.253 
aretar evar 7-211 
arteqftarret 10.57 
ary GATS AT 12.106 
+ATTRATST: TA: 3.38 
HTT TAT Ber 3.53 
AMET: TAHA 3.38 
HTCRTEAATITET 5.4 
+O AFS FT 4.91 
ASTI FT 10.21 
areas ufefeht 5.8 


Pada Index 


MGAAT TEBOT 7.82 
aaa BETH: 3.80 
+H TEAC 5.102 
TATE A WAT 6.34 
ary say aT 11.79 
array fesretat 8.390 
AT VSAM HATE 2.38 
awe te aA T 7.161 
SreaTaeay Bear 3.107 
SARITA: 4.29 
HTIATTBAY 3.208 

ar ware: aréteer 2.244 
AT AATACAHATT 2.108 
aT FAST et yang 2.22 
arat Feffaatr 6.32 
ameter TOUT are 2. 204 
areata AIL STFA 5.158 
areteg GANTT 1.5 
antiwer fora: BHATT 2.196 
aera Taree 1.112 
TTT ATH: BL 2.193 
+378 STAT: ART: 1.31 
+TStT Ut: THT 6.21 
amet SH aT F AT 11.13 
MAA 2.182 
areay. Pratsatat 7.89 
anfeftsar Frareét 10.37 
aTgecTa err 9.32 
aTeT at PUA: 3.27 
argangedt Preir 4.248 
ar ta & TST: 2.167 


Saeur g earar 10.93 
sqear g aorat wana 9.189 


SALT FT TITAT BS: 8.379 
Sereay gq auratreray 3.35 
wAey g rey 3.41 
saey STS 3.182 
sate BAT 1.70 
SOLSTTATSH: 1.82 
SVTATA FAT: 11.245 
+eclderaryth 11.247 
SAHA BET 12.126 
+5caa sate: PT: 11.266 
se WIT AIT 1.106 
Bq ITAAAT 6.84 
se Bet gq peat 1.58 
se serra: 1.104 
+3e areaaehtte 1.106 
se araitar ar 12.34 
Be TART AS 1.106 
SF J Teadweand 10.85 
sanraean wart 6.84 
SQGTATAM 5.1 
+3¢ Jat IS 1.106 
+5gas A ALT 3.123 
SPAHSIT WT 12.123 
oqeareer aTAeT 9.303 
Saioaarert 7.4 
STs eT: 3.87 
steam faat 2.88 
+SSSTUT SHRAMT 1.14 
Sea Gt ANT 7.44 
sfearrr g TAIT 2.99 
starr Feet 6.60 
sfearor Fass ay 2.93 
Sfearr Tasa Ter 12.50 
strat wer: Mt 11.40 
eraarty Tay 4.16 
PRATAP 11.65 
BA le ART 2.233 
Ba fe adantaT 9.6 
ay pura fread 9.325 
Sara or tt 8.259 
SAaCTAT AT 4.101 


oa fagreeiear 11.90 


Pada Index 1045 


sa wfafe Yar 9.37 
+o at atsetd 3.104 
See aie et 11.27 


+30 eat ore 7.205 
se WA aT meer 12.89 
serat Bifaamfer 5.166 
ser Blas FAST: 12.102 
seared gd a orer 3.141 


z 


Sor: ager ST: 9.245 
Sat QSET FST: 9.245 
dae a wart 4.153 
Sat: BATA 1.99 


Ss 


Sel FT VIAUTAT 5.146 
SaT aang are 11.89 
STA Afeesray T 4.212 
Seay yartey 12.15 
Saray Hay gear 6.73 
Soa aay fer 12.14 
sem al 7.121 
SReECaIHAT we 7.139 
BReCAeT adel 10.105 
sae arrey BIT 3.245 
sRare: ATER aq 4.109 
sree fata a 4.151 
SROST T TIE: 5.143 
seiites Prt Bary 3.89 
SPT g ARTS 3.265 
SOIT FATT 3.246 
+SQPAATAATY TE 6.95 
sept afte: War: 9.24 
Sept aot 7 10.42 
SPLATT 9.88 


1046 


SHIGA RET: 9.258 
+937: FORT: 12.14 
saat aastta4r 12.50 
SAAT FAA 8.366 
STATF IRANI 1.93 
SANGAATTT 4.245 
STAT Bard 3.107 
sateaahed 4.244 


Pa&da Index 


sseareraarter 8.350 
STAMET TE: 5.98 
SECA TAT 4.132 

Bged FEAT ATaT 3.4 
searpedte: 8.352 
SHTATSTPPA 9.201 
sare afer ate 9.79 
saasery Tt: ST 3.161 
srerefear Bre: 8.357 
Saye, aq 7.184 
sored: fear area 5.154 
sR ART 8.249 
SATS 7.197 
sree a: BRIT 8.193 
str Te: fIET 1.69 
sre — AMF 3,228 
srt gq @: FETT 2.140 
STAT J: AS: 9.141 
SITTAHETH: 11.109 
STTTSHARST 11.108 
sree tare 7.195 
STATUPS T JT 11.196 
+oufeer yar eat 2.52 
BSIAAASHTS 4.66 
SIT J APA! 3.209 
STS WaTATST 9.121 
sqaad F eT 7.175 
SreqaT forar 8.125 
sae Te ferent 3.103 
Srey U Sey 11.124 
wees 11.217 
sregafearyanr aT 6.24 
STETL AaUT AT 11.133 
STIRIGHTAIA 3.208 
sree fear Fer 2.53 
STR: CARSATTT: 2.85 
Sora aet 4.119 
STATA SSI: 2.145 
SIMEt FT ATA 4.66 
saad & Veet: 3.104 
STRTHSUSE: 6.43 
Sarg a 7.215 


+Suer STAHT fast 4.44 
sae ufe ahr 9.40 
+3AaF TaTET 5.61 
ST FT TF TF 9.34 

Wh 3.225 
SHAT: AA STASI: 5.136 
+suren SPafesser 7.205 
SURAT 10.82 
saath 7 aa 8.377 
saratt f& at aa 2.14 
SH FT UPICHT 8.204 
SF ares Ber 7.162 
Sar a aa ATT 9.143 
sar frper eTeT: RTT 8.184 
+3ORT T feait STAT: 1.31 
sear frataer 1.38 
sor avfe ate ar 11.114 
SSI AASE 11.202 


a 
pateaitar tet 5.68 
wet gq BIST 9.90 
we aera 1.92 
pet aTeaity |aPr 5.132 
wet figer ATGeT 9.104 
sed WoT aera 2.120 
wet FATT SHATTER 9.216 
set TIARAT 9.77 
SHUPATTAIT 1.45 


ce 


RACITTTT AT 6.10 
seater AreaTer 11.263 
RIT TLAaT: 11.262 
seme freg aay 12.112 
aeaaT aaaaay: 4.124 

sea aay ATE 11.265 
MTGE FT TT QF: 2.47 
BENT Tq HST A: 8.154 
FET AIT 6.35 
seor ay afer 8.139; +8.51 


P&da Index 1047 


RY at T AaerT 9.218 
Rapes IT 4.5 
RATATAT HT 4.4 
REPS ATT 3.45 
+HGTHS FT A EOL 3.50 
+HGACT fF favs 9.88 
+a FT Ur ATT 4.120 
eg: ware: GAIT 3.46 
+a? T Wasa 5.144 
gy > 4.179 
se ferate gar Uet 8.206 
aT TTA: 8.388 
se fear fe Barr 11.42 
seyapateee et 2.154 
eI: frat Fat: 3.80 
SEN: ARIAT: 11.237 
eva cheered 4.94 
seRratatere 6.30 
safer: frary ATaT: 3.201 
setae FAI 4.21 


wT 
Ue UT ayer 6.42 
+0 TH TAT PE: 7.205 
+UH UT WaT YEW 4.65 
Up UT gees: 8.17 
Teer Uae: FF: 9.163 
war guage 9.123 
UPR seer 6.55 
UH WT F aT 3.29 
coporfegard ey 8.270 
+UGT UT FET: 2.83 
Veeear g ART 2.141 
USAMA 3.83 
wHyACIA 9.60 
wHat J TST 1.91 
+Upae Prearyay 1.15 
UHHT seca: 7.9 
+UBHAEAT 8.82 
vas FT aay 3.102 
UPUAMTAA 11.213 


1048 


wepfedetaarret: 4.166 

> 3.131 
Tee: TATA Seq: 4.240 
vas ae aerate 7.74 
Up: ait FFT 2.180 
+0: IE FT PAT 4.57 


+UBTERIT TIT BT 3.075 
Ueplfela Bes: 9.117 
UTA AYSRMT 10.13 
Weert ada 1.70 
wast fess Te feet: 5.136 
+UpTeregeA fay: 5.83 
+UpTSTaSaTH eT 10.84 
waa araarene 11. 217 
Ube pracy 7.138 
wares oA 11.214 
waaay fagrt 3.129 
UPA Puy 11.140 
VHP FTA T 1.68 
40H FT eae 4.57 
TESTE THAT 4.240 
verse safest 10.113 
THEsgerg arett Aq 8.77 
THSAT IAM 8.91 
ur atta et 10. 63 
Carag ray fered 7.100 
Urea rar WIE: 2.12 
warery TeeaaT 5.137 
Tacs PNT 7.50 
Ua? 7 qe UPB: 9.99 
Wade TATPTeT 7.215 
Teas fF FST 4.136 
Vagal F 2.78 
VdaeaeT TIT: 1.50 
UdEwh Teac 5.26 


Pada Index 


waar Wet 1. 130 
aes FT BF: 11.118 
waded ae per 11.131 
TAATTTET 2.20 
Udg SeAHee 1.71 
ware waaay 12.93 
Take FAST 1.59 
CASTETAN AT: 11.222 
UAE: ARHAYST 9.56 
vatgarat faster? 4.125 
waleerd fagiar STATS: 4.91 
Ud au Sra 4.160 
vatey A fester 9.148 
watgartarfacay 8.244 
Vagd AAAS 7.226 
vagishfed AFT 5.100 
vasa ad fart 3.286 
veeshated at Prstrereet 12.116 
WagST WT: TET 1.59 
vagafeaeaer 12.26 
Vaaeer areaeet 5.55 
Wasa AGRI 12.123 
vara far Bard 11.189 
wane fafer peer 11.218 
Uae fray: 2.80 
Tass oA 11.123 
UARR AAA 4.104 
UdT Greer HAST 12.23 

T 4.105 
Qayg: PITT 8.122 
+The STAT: EPET 4.91 
vary Aer 2.136 
vary afar 6.54 
Tae ASAT 4.22 
Vas AA 6.5 
UdraTAaed CT 8.101 
venteoraa eat 2.24 
Waray war FS 3.101 
Taraaiet aarhr 11.72 
VaPaTATIRL 3.167 
Teas JST: 9.45 
Taare SST 9.24 


Waray aaa 6.29 
wanfererey ararer 11.173 
Vat: Wear ye 7.156 
Ud FEST: 6.87 
Tet ACat AMAT 10.130 
weaeay fe fears: 11.3 
Ud AAT ATARI 1.36 
Ud Te SAAT: 9.226 
wd aay SISTEM: 4.253 
Ud We ASAI 10.27 
+UauT Bawa: 8.341 
Wart FART UT: 8.387 
UANTAT TYAT 12.69 
TaTAT FIAT 1.91 
waaay 2.248 
ve at aT: 9.235 
9.10 
TaSTAET 9.312 
warerer orafer 4.181 
+a eer ager 3.9 
wafearaa: BRAT: 11.227 
vafessaear 8.252 
TASSTERTSTST 4.181 
TATA 11.103, 170 
wasaeey: 11.108 
waaay CUT 11.146 
wat aurea 4.102 
welear ORs 4.247 
TART SORA 11.253 
vahtatiea fir: 11.190 
Tat Teasley PAlr 8.19 
va wilh fawn 5.2 
ue FECT 9.319 
Ua a: aay 3.93 
Ta T: AAYAT 12.125 
ue faagarer 7.107 
+0 fagraqanreay 9.242 
Taras Sa 9.266 
Wade IIT: 7.33 
wager want CAT 5.167 
Uq_ FT AVTRSATEM 1.57 
ue afar AAT 11.232 


Pada Index 1049 


Ud GTS BATT 6.96 
usr e WAST: 12.117 
we aygase 9.116 
+UG TARATAAT 8.97 
Us FRPAIEAT 3.87 
ua a farts 7.142 

ue ad & yee 1.51 

Ua Tas UT 7.216 
Ug aalary UST 8.420 
Ud US Feat 9.111 

ur CUTA AAT 9.16 
Ud PATA 11.53 

Ue Terr Ica 6.1 
ua afer at fam: 2.249 
Ud FAal Fh: 9.324 
ud aster Baty 8.221 
wd gerd? Fret 1.82 
+0G Caper AF 7.205 

ug af fast: 9.46 
we geaiftr apraitfer 9.251 
ug Paar Par 3.260 
wa yaa BAe 7.220 
Vaaraay @&T 1.110 
sUaATeaIATAATE 8.350 
TaHreNnasarttanrd 9.260 
sUgaraor: AT 3.77 
waaake ad 1.41 

4UG UT wey et: 7.86 
Uy qatergqea: 11.265 
uy aosfafr: deh 8.278 
wy aafae: Beer: 10.131 
Uy at: oz UAT «2.237 
Uy at: SaeT 9.101 
Uy satshasarM: 8.218 
Uw TAT TaPIST 9.55 
Uy TASTSret aT 6.86 
uy aaa: 8.409 
Ty wer fEaTAAT 2.68 
uy saleeawr e 2.19 

Uy f WTA: HET: 3.147 
uy asPafedr at: 6.97 
wy sarah: Peet: 5.146 


1050 


Ty BIT FT: We 5.110 
wy aa: aAfercheayaeeey 12.51 
Uy aa: aaa: BHT 12.82 
Uy aarher Hay 12.124 

TY CAAA: 9.103 

ust fe ag 7.71 

wat fe faeeer SH 5.149 

war fer ar a: 2.05 

UST WApPaychy 11.180 
Tsay ert 8.119 
USTHIATAT FET 3.146 

wor fafratear 11.99 

Ty BMY HAs 8.8 
uaa: BAfaTer: 9.325 
uMshasnRtsar aS” 8.301 
TISRIOASaT at: 8.266 
WaeaT TETET 4.259 
UMTeaT SIHATAT 9.25 
USDSATNTETSIH: 11.162 
UASAHS FITAT 9.336 
UIDSTIEpT: WH: 7.98 
+UST TET: TAT: 3.273 


warty TAPErL 5.42 


x 


iy VIMAR: 8.344 
Oy PTATAITEMT: 5.93 


st 


HRS HTT: 2.81 
atwarared st 9.54 
ATE: WAT FET: 5.40 
SITET: WITHA: 1.46 


att 


HaHa FARA 3.015 
arty arfefie: 3.166 
AH TT GIe 3.268 
aReeanit yar 9.165 
area: gasTIT 9.159 


Pada Index 


FRAT FATT 9.164 
Serra? FAI: 11.238 


e 


+HGE SEGIGIy 1.51 

HEI Parsy FraTeT: 8.281 
HUA weer 11.93 
PERSO FAT 9.252 
pusdt PEGA 3.68 
pafaem art 3.190 
weer ae fear: TT 9.122 
ey Fey: water 5.2 
+PUPET fecrara4r 3.275 
PUA Sa T 7.152 
BOAT faftraq 3.29 
PITT BRST 3.31 
PUVA 3.30 
BI WPS 8.365 
PUT EW AT 11.62 
oprarayr TayeHrayr 9.97 
wUT HI I BATA 8.369 
HIS TATOTT 6.44 
+PAUSSSATAAT 4.36 
+S OT FT TUT 5.116 


+HT aparece: 4.36 
wmuprashe war 4.102 
mut wy Tae 8.234 
aut aa fedtett 2.200 
PTALRAS: GT: 1.66 
maT Wear ar 12.3 
ea gq faaHreT 1.26 
aeaomtt at wart 8.177 
+a TAT TET 246 


BAET freer 4.215 
parson wde 2.91 
HATHUOT: BET: 10.120 
Haas TF ST 5.12 
ale: WERT Wary 9.302 
+PEPMATATSUT 6.45 
Heracaey arr F 11.23 
wots ta Fae: 1. 95 
+ arefaer at 7.152 


+OTHATSTACATT 7.205 

BMT AAT aT GOT 8.274 
BMT UIE 9.160 

BMT AT FAST: 3.222 

ar srastaray 3.144 
PABRPASAE: 11.45 

Bray T eae aa: ARE 2.1 
Sapa T FART ASAT 8.175 
BA GR T aT T 2.178 








PAA TIAA 3.12 
BAA TMA 11.90 
Ta tae: FH 11.121 
aT FT ATMS 5.157 

ary g ag art 10.117 
a T setalar 2.216 
PATI ASAAT 2.189 
BAA ALMA T 9.89 
SHAT PT J 10.90 
BATA 7 TERT 2.2 
BATT FATT: IF: 7.27 
prep Te 8.121 
Pes go Ct: 2.180 
arararar frar 2.147 
+HTATRTTAT AT | 8.358 
aity fray 8.112 
+RTRT wie wafer 2.5 
serum eat =e 6.94 
aprear fe searferrt: 2.2 


Pada Index 1051 


aret aisder “at ZT 7.10 
sort gear wfafet 2.67 
IT: WIRARIT: 2.26 
BIT AIST: 8.336 
araraed fersta: 8.136 
PIOTTTASHIE: 10.52 
BIS HIGAIHPT 1.24 
prerat: wait: 6.21 
+HISIAMT FEMTAT 1.63 
HOA HET FT 8.324: 9.293 
arava TAT 6.45 
BOM FAH: 3.272 
FHT: aoter GS FT 7.205 
aresarar Frat ATT: 9.4 
+e ATE yt 3.98 
wre Weare aT 3.105 
PITRAAAT 2. 41 
fepfretqenray 12.84 
+feRagaart at 7.205 
fererer gq al: RIT 8.363 
feaPrce q fart 11.142 
fercorpamararr{ 9.225 
PRATT 1.39 
mleraiererer 11.241 
BTA WEIN ATT 9.150 
BETH ART 11.12 
BEATS 8.167 
HIT Wet TAT 3.234 
Bay Trey 7.42 


= Bratt: 3.63 


BUOUMAGT AT RAT 4.7 
Be WAGA FT 3.86 


Pez ard 9.232 
syarttsrearar 
BR FT 11.164 


aorTsathy FEAT 8.106 
Py array aq 11.178 
pranapea GAT 11.209 
+E aq Fewer 7.205 
Past FART T 7.210 
PICNIC 11.5 
PaPTtAataAry 11.190 
Ga TEAAT TAK 9.233 
Hr Fag AT 9.301 
PaGsy Pale: 1.97 


Pada Index 


BAATAT Praag 11.79 
paaay aaares 11.109 
parsatseqresay 4.154 
8.152 
part apa aT 10.94 
ed Tae TAT 1.83 
+HAAEMTAT: ATT: 1.86 
+PATHRIGM FT 4.226 
PATATARTET 2.173 
Pear oT fe aay 11.231 
Par qT year T 5.138 
par feet ae @ 7.184 
T 3.94 
poet ameter at 7.154 
pera orerer 8.207 
+P: TOUT Sard 7.205 
phtrstercrrrear 1.40 
pirweragTay 12.56 
gericaare! 11.71 
> SAS 10.91 
pit hata FIT 10.84 
PITTA 10.82 
apfasttat strat 3.165 
PCAATATTAT 11.145 
purer qarearet 3.276 
POTS AT 2.23 
+HPTTSTHILT 7.205 
Hat FIAT 3.190 
pamleraqa ZT TET 4.207 
Harpers FT Fray 11.160 
PMTCT 4.83 
spared: Treat aT 2.65 
aomnteceer STMT 2.46 
way Tedd Beal 8.283 
pada x WIE: 10.34 
BISMIRIGIIL 9.280 
pleat gq Bay 8.123 
Biel TRaTT selat 11.250 
Bega Fea 7.193 
erert farartecar 12.64 
BIITAHASE: 5.120 
PART: eae ar 9.220 


PAT: qaer 4.125 
PAA TT BSasArT 12.53 
+m a fase fF 8.81 
aaa 7.127 
PUSHIN: 8.5 

war o fase FF 8.201 
PATETPUSTTT 11.157 
PATE: WH 1 5.11 
Poa ey TMA 11.138 
PONT SATA: 5.131 
+A ep Ia STAT 9.253 
+ahreire at 7.205 
PINT 9.53 
pistidacepect 1.80 
profareecareanest 9.174 
area faster ar feefar 8.222 
+sptear fasrr ar Ter 8.203 
HAT AT ATYATT 5.32 
Bat 7 vie 6.48 
RPAH Ua 12.58 

+S TAT OTe: 5.51 
reasashy wor free 7.51 


are aa tera 8.411 
ape aa at a 4.135 
ararer Ataf sar 2.42 
aren Wy at: 7.144 
aren fe aTreaTe 11.21 
aI PAA 10.9 
aad FT 10.65 
sear ao Seat 8.382 
aPaeyPIT 10.11 


Pada Index 1053 


aPaIATAa 8.384 
+arfsae aay 7.181 
aaa aearaor 14.34 
aT TAIT fret 8.312 
erat TTT aS: 9.314 
TAMIA 3.7 
ait oat afear: 2.84 
eran seated fagrt: 5.107 
efter Wa HAST: 7.166 
atte ar afer at 10.88 
+etrerfer ares 5.8 
Gro TAT J 8.297 
IPA PITT 10.108 
adh SATA aT 4.43 
ary fer me 2.046 
SARIS 8.262 


@ ahassieay 12.120 

Wail aT ate aT PMT: 3.242 
wgTet ARATE AT 11.106 
GPASTAAT 11.69 

GORA MANIST 11.17 
+OTEas TAT WE: 5.51 
+aleer Ua: war 5.51 
wit Bar BSralE: 2.60; +5.138 
CITA 11.228 


T 


TIT WHET PT BT: 4.219 
Tors atreEra T f&ZUT 4.209 
Taye WT 7.186 


1054 


TAT PATI IMT 7.224 
areerared: aera: 3.209 
Teyat Tear! Get: 12.47 
TRITAT FT CAAT FT 9.329 
Teer 7.131 
TEATS J 8.298 
Tegel TT 5.90 
+THET Tear FOS 7.205 
THTeHTaa WaT 2.36 
THs HAs 2.36 
Ror gf fearerte: 8.407 
+TFaoft cay aT IT SMT 11.88 
TECATSAART: 11.57 
Tat WATTHT 4.209 
Tar a aay 5.124 
Tat sy ay ger 4.72 
ar fawasraft aT 3.260 
Trattr ter aaifir 4.143 
mrad: & g fasta: 3.32 
TTayT wereeadd TAT 3.26 
TPFaaT wera Va: 3.21 
Teas 2.07 
PRIS TASS 7.147 
sire ear: far: 5.61 
wrayer g Pater 1.48 
+r yaar qaer 1.78 
+TTAAAATAT 3.280 
TPA TMP 3.226 
Te alge YH 7.76 
qe at sHgat aT 8.350 
TOUT: MATT 3.4 
yederad Bad 11.171 
Teqer wr: BT: 9.237 
Teaea share: 11,104 
yeary Batt 2.217 
eae afaue ar 2.247 
qerat qd gate: 2.212 
Tours T Bae, 2,211 
Tea aay 2.207 
TEATGNITSINT: 11.60 
ered 2.231 
+oeaT yeatar 2.239 


Pada Index 


TOIT SWATT 9.62 
Teratagea4n: @: 2.210 
TOSPATAT aT 2.233 
+TOSPIATIT: 1.106 
TO caadiay, 4.252 
Tecate = 11.103 
enycapanfeorerhy 4.251 
eR GAs 2.205 
geria TATE: 2.200 
Ter aeareayy 2.198 
rraparestanrdeer: 11.56 
a: we tT Per 2.184 
ae: eres fereregq 5.65 
ae aera Pra 2.164 
ae Breer IRI 8.317 
ret frgaret as. 
qeragioart FT 11.143 
Tearsr PITTS 7.190 
TeArauper fateary 8.247 
TST CTATS TST 9.159 
Tey SaTHIT 7.105 
Te TSAR 8.264 
TeersTarer asaTFT 4.230 
TEAy WATT 6.27 
TAA FA: 3.163 
TET TAT AWS: 6.89 


afteat qa UST 11.101 

7? TACT aT 5.43 

Tere Yeo SAT 3.51 

HTBART FAT 8.205, 289 
strenfarrafeag: 5.124 

maar: Fr: 9.142 

aay ‘aafrg: 9.142 

are: afew FET 8.231 

Teter sat ae ae: 8.113 

TeivErrase TEAR: 8.88 

TATA ary 5.95 

MACHT IAT 3.64 

mMRr: gafee FPF 11197 


TMA F FHT: 9.50 
TT ATT ate 11.213 
arate aT 11.92 
Hregoreeet 11.110 
sfrarsey fear aa. 175 
TREABTANITSTT 8.102 
TART TAA 8.100 
TAM SIRAAATET 11.60 
TISSUES 2.204 
WY TATE 8.325 
+g a fafamyT 3.207 
Tareas YT: 8.231 
+r FIT TAT A 5.131 
ayer Ost ar aredd 11.95 
Tree qa WAT 5.131 
HIRT aT TACHA 3.073 
+afaare: ST HAT: 8.205 
+TSTET SAET 1.106 
+Tetreay TOUT 8.341 
Wetar Ble Aks: BINT 8.166 
aera fesrazy 9.274 
UT WASTATEATET: 7.119 
mT ST 8.221 
THAT CTAT 7.116 
+O ZIT IT 2.157 
mrrearterate Bar 7AIS 
praTerer FGeT 6.4 
WATE FHA 6.28 
WAIPHOMT J 8.254 
raat a a BPI 9.271 
TRSTETHeT 9.202 
Tey TTA RMT 6.23 


HIMTSA PATHE 6.45 
Ty 


+UTAGT: To GARETAT: 5.51 
+OTGT: UT Was 5.51 
oraafgfaeere: 9.275 
FaBar RTS @ 11.135 
areserayaraeaTe 1.50 

arory at area 3.241 





Pada Index 1055 


aT 


eae WATS: 8.156 
WHA: BSI: 8.153 
afer qertherer 2.138 
aeyarar ZT pt 7 8.125 
WUSTOY CHAT WT 12.55 
Gusied ATS 3.239 
TUSTPIT IAT @ 10.51 
AUsToetcialalt 10.108 
FUSTSTANIZaNMT: 10.37 
UETOCOASY Tea 11.176 
TST TF AUTH: 10.38 
age WITHA 11.220 
TGUSAIFSUST: 9.153 
UG MATA 3.24 
TG TAS 11.122 
TSA BT 11.220 
agarart tear aT 4.8 
aguratt Fast wT: 9.236 
AGMA TNTAT FAT 5.57 
TINA ATAT IT 8.359 
aeurart ara art: 11.139 
TATA AUTATATATE: 1.107 
aqurary AIT TIS 3.20 
AGUAPTATT FT 7.17 
age wasted 10.4 
Te pTeaPA ATL 11.110 
aquateet aT RMT 6.19 
ACUAEEIST 10.118 
TEUAT ATT TST 6.33 
agerargst aVTATecay 4.1 
agy: AIETAsy 9.186 
agi mfr edo 2.34 
sari wad: 6. 91 
pce amet 3.46 

J 3.207 
aigiuier pestis 12.1 
+TGaeay yer 12.125 
TTA a ATT: 9.264 
TAA HS TT: 1.81 
Tay rep: 8.137 


1056 


ACTIN 8.220 


TARTAR 8.169 
soca Tet ae 4.65 


qeae GRIT 2.101 
TAME: TAHT 1.69 
agerdaardar 7.4 
ERTS WAIT 4.222 
eee: greasy 9.303 
+a Vel: 7.205 
WAG TST FT 5.116 
GITAATAT: 5.29 
aftcermar Fret usa 
Pent gaan TF 5.117 
aay pay oer 11.125 
TAT pay array 11.165 
ay: oft ctr: 9.238 
THIPHANIST 8.289 
WHT TIT 6.76 
UT ACTA 1.62 
sarees feutgeET 4.130 
HITGANET FEIT 2.03 
argent Say Bra: 12.97 
Sara, aT Tt ATeary 11.107 
SIT PAT 11.41 
ararantaarar 6.20 
ATCO gras 12.44 
SIRT: TIT: 7.154 
UTRMTCAMSALTT 9.298 
WeAIAGAaIMt: 9.261 
+ Fates yar 4.249 
Pafescreser ara: 4.212 
Patent caesar: 3.152 
Raecerart FETT 9.284 


fiarar FEAST 11.102 
aaTRET BAT 12.63 
ery fesrctat 2.35 
FST FT 11.167 
aerate fersrrfrarey 7.194 
SGI IAy 10.50 
qoqrersut aps: 5.119 


Pada Index 


aoe Hate 12.72 
ateat TOUT FAST 2.191 
4Oeauey a oe 8.390 
aRercarty: 1.82 
Tees WT 4.118 
ater TONS 8.189 


a 
wae fague FT 5.19 


Swat Bea ABT 4.199 
SMTA HTe AT 4.51 
Sa TAT array 4.185 
foe aq aac 8.239 
fesaarer wat 8.291 
Bara: WAST 12.65 
Saal TACIT 8.279 
aad tq ast 8.292 
Beast WRIT 8.277 


T 


TTT ayaa 1.111 

TAT ATH T 11.153 
STRAT wfaftrar are 5:33 
TET AAMT T 8.365 
STE UAH 8.205 
wer fayarae#6 6.6 
afee areftart 3.151 

TSA TST: 11.53 
aerate 7.149 
aca CTT 5.61; +5.61 
waar aferarar J 9.192 
wafacar ad cea 3.17 
TST ager 9.126 
ATT @ 5.71 

+a areprrerrey 2.117 
sary aka 8.90 
TTY Tere: 11.88 
HHA 12.124 
wea 11.254 

wat gear aq 4.146 
FTI Fz 11.76 


SISTA: 10.111 

aftcar afer arfacar: 11.195 
TTT year 4.145 

waar aaa: 11.78 
HUSA SAT BIA: 3.74 

Hea FT Ter ah 11.252 
waa g ae 2.87 
Tay UPASTT 6.62 

set AaTITHRT 12.80 


+H afer fafawe,r 5.131 
TOMAR 4.36 
+Tesair, Besa 4.36 
Czoy aes 7.69 
HATA IT BI: 5.70 


Pada Index 1057 


HSSAS AMAT: 12.13 
oftferareraarrat: 10.104 
sfracerarerstor 10.81 
sreear UTR. 10.95 
Same of 7 FgaT 11.68 
ara: afer aap 8.57 
afacaarqaaredr: 11.173 
amferear: AHA STAT 3.264 
aifersar sferor ear 3.31 
smear FACT 3.275 


sis UF a q gone 9.105 
wea T soe 11.186 
Word BAST 9.113 
TSE AAT TASTAT 9.124 
sareer fear sare: 9.112 
Ie: BS TWAT 9.109 
we: yaar are 9.109 
SST WYATT 11.186 
PAST AATATAT 9.106 
sass ATR TAHT 8.245 
sar wd sat 9.58 
wafeoer frearred 1.78 


2 N 


a 


Hgl ABI AeTAT 12.45 
Fal HET URN 10.22 


feraTeasaMT FT 5.95 


1058 


a 


a wa fe Fay ST. 2.230 
a ua fF Far Far: 2.230 
a Tat FIST 7.49 

q ae gree eater 7.12 
a wast fret Pear 10.96 
a UST WARE 7.27 
T Wd VSI 8.333 

a apy afar 5.151 

a fe RAL TATE 1.94 
aT MeME: W MF 4.147 
a wrest aearar 9.172 

aq prrrarehtt 9.147 
+Pedy Sears 11.33 
att fergar ae 12.35 
aay ahaa 9.54 

oT Vaieareys: 2.220 
asrrtaar BUT 9.279 
TSMTYSIMMT 8.248 
ASPIRE 11.62 
AAT TECHS 7.105 
ACT FT CARH: 1.60 
aa: wana 4.174 
+o: UF WTS 5.61 
aed: MATT: aT: 9.124 
ad: NTA 1.6 

Tat Teates BAT 3.265 
Tat HF T ME T 7.29 
TASTOSSATSTTT: 9.123 
adr yaar ast 3.253 
+TaSes UTA 4.86 
TAS YAIAT 8.243 
aes FeAPTET RATT 9.112 
wae fader 8.117 
aaa BT 4.234 
rater water 3.275 
TTT FST 1.42 
TAIT SMTAGNT 8.261 
raed Bray 8.334 
+TAGIAT FF 3.98 
THESES WaeITPT 7.36 


Pada Index 


aasaeaaW: 2.236 
ad a FAT TIT 8.90 
TATA 5.24 
aay 3 ore] YeaT 12.115 


4am Teeter warat 4.243 
TT WaT YA: ferret 7.225 
at asifadaa 12.27 

aT 4 FATATST 2.170 
aa aeernsndt SIT 9.190 
aa & arte: & 3.124 
aT Us WAST: 8.336 
aT THAT 8.104 

aa fae F AREAT 2.112 
at oer garrett 8.74 
aa fere: war: waw: 7.146 
aa watt WaEVST: 8.293 
TATST TC: preset: 7.217 
aaraRad ater 8.238 
aan: feat att 8.2 
wares Arar arfast 2.170 
aoarst fester 9.41 
TYR fF SHEET 8.353 
+aeTs fan ar 2.117 
aead aTaT ae 11.239 
acad Pee 11.242 
TSAR: 2.223 
area: 9.267 
+aegar Waar FY: 9.185 
Tea aa TT 7.75 
TeaT sare: part 9.234 
war Tera feet 2.018 
aur TEETTPITT 3.77 
AST FARMAAT A 7.114 
Tara or ah 11.261 

UT FT Yaa TP\T: 9.19 
aa ae: ater 9.306 
aT STATA ITT 11.247 


TAT TUT BASAT 12.73 
aT GUT caMAT: 11.229 
TIT TIT TA: HT: 8.285 
aar aur fase 4.20 
Ta TAT area TTL 11.230 
Ta TIA AA A 10.128 
aa Stat eS 6.78 

aT aeter aagt: 12.101 
Tar patter ad 11.264 
aear ataaarr 8.321 
ay seater et fer 9.43 
awe Fret TaaaT 9.102 
aur fFAARTASERATEL 4.194 
TUTTT SAAT 3.142 
TAT ITT RATT 9.308 
TAT THAI APT 9.309 
TAT WAAATAST 7.68 
Ta TAAL ITE: 10.30 
afraid we 9.304 
ear Taser wae 11.15 
Ta Fw AAT: 7.200 
aT eae USE 7.110 
aurar + feat 7.73 
aur war rarer: 9.307 
TIT TATALy GOT: 7.112 
TIAMAT SIATAT 10.69 
TUTTE TEAST: 7.129 
aaa eT ar UWE 7.128 
TUT ATRL yarert 3.277; +3.276 
Ta ag Ulaeerd 7.180 
ar aarfer wey 9.311 
+CUT UPSSIRIMPT 9.265 
TA SHC WMT 9.305 
aes FARA 1.119 
aarearar aert 6.71 
+T8T GF FIT 7.205 

aa FargyeT: 11.244 
ae Tay We 11.16 
+e aayarr 7.205 
+a AGIEPTE: 7.205 
aeaTa a FF 9.51 
ayaa: Fal: 12.47 





Pada Index 1059 


atari: af 6.90 
aartatereare 8.192 


Tar (UT Tes PAT 7.173 
+7eT TARTHTAMT 3.61 
oer Prassnteeret 8.9 
aaa fara 7.181 

aar Wyte BT ATETT 9.68 
aarrtur Her 3.103 
aeret aT 1.54 
cat araeTeas 7.183 
AGIORTIAATA: 4.117 
aer ferereary 4.104 
aarfeartet arty 1.18 
aareia Waar 7.172 

Tal FAAAMIAT 6.80 
+aareay faaaporett 7.205 
aeep ase: aaa: 2.97 
agur mga 8.107 
TeHAAAYT 1.79 
+U@4T TAISAIAT: 4.120 
aay aaa 8.130 
+aeM te BreNT: 2.167 
TENT BAT 8.408 
ALTBSAGAT 8.46 


TTT HEAT BT 12.104 
TUATITT RET 11.102 
area waeater 11.237 
ayaa ofeeater 11.238 
area foxpaer 11.243 
areaT qaet 11.240 
THAI F 1.33 
at: T BAYT 1.86 
TUSTATIAOT 3.134 
+OUATTA I 11.47 
AUSATAWATAST 10.42 
ae Fe: Wey 11.235 
aitratte ae 11.235 
aur are wa ae 1. 25 
aot fear a faweT 12.104 
+TUTASTASINT 1.96 
AUS aa: 2.165 
alse TAT: 11.215 
aaa 8.272 
aaAt AIA 8.228 
wate ye fare 2.149 
AFT TRUT 1.49 
THE SST BET: 12.38 


Pada Index 


TATE: TASH 8.308 
TADS T PAPTST 1.55 
Taree ferret rare 9.166 
a ydia weer 3.3 
a at fears ager 1.33 
aa we freer 11.91 
aareaae. we 2111 
aah BeraTeay 11.14 
saat a Her 3.280 
Tararat FUT: 2.20 
aay WT GIT: 11.61 
aaeeaRrear J 7.205 
cater weftard 9.222 
qatar fer pater 2.228 
carterer fr Rae 9.191 
aarre arenfraey 9.133 
sane aHar wt: 3.98 
FAILITAAAITT: 7.205 
TeHUMATETF 9.266 
palais 1.17 
ae 49 
Gore Tea: 5.61 
aeareaa4r, na 5.113 
PETE set A: 9.138 


TETEATRIETA: 4.185 
+TRTSATT IST 7.205 
saree yeepret 7.205 
ACTS, ad FT Baer 9.227 
create fear arart 8.38 
aes afarey 7.13 
aaTSHy vert 4.242 
sae Fae 4.243 
AATSAT T SIT: 8.15 
ASTRA IITA 11.94 
TATE Se CATH 8.173 
cergare Tar 3.48 
+THTEARAINT 4.36 
TRAE FrITaeT: 7.83 
Tey ArT sL 11.233 
TTS ATT BRTS: 11.37 
+CTRHTAUT FIRVIT 9.88 
aes Fat: HART 8.96 
Tag AST 1.92 
afeaeanreran: Bard 11.234 
aA MT FET 1.9 
aR T APA: 2.18 
aferas & ATETT 1.12 
aarnene Prer 3.127 
aerate T MST 1.53 
at ara aararley 3.108 
TH ABA FATT 11.35 
aey ar ate faorr 2.115 
aay ger FT aaer 3.168 
acer wafatart 1.102 
TT BATTEN 8.206 
TT earsar avs 8.224 
ae aged Per 9.255 
Te clerd Bar 9.73 
Ter Teast TAT 1.69 
aeT ANAT SIT: 6.39 
TET TslIHerq: MTT 9.228 
ae auefesrareg 8.119 
Tey sersywmer 6.40 
ae Fer ATT: 2.107 
+7 TAMA 8.100 


TI FF T Tea T 5.80 


Pdda Index 1061 


TAT WPAT WS 9.254 
wet der wes afer 3.139 
TT Fert QTCAT 11.22 
wer ae ara 7.76 

+0 ET qr gery FT 3.53 
soem of: ear aT 7.205 
wer cous aTATET 11.98 
TT STA Sear TS eT 2.16 
Te TENTH 8.305 
wer watttr yay 7.15 

cer dtefer tae 8.21 

wer osehisrearet 1.74 

qe erafearart 7.12 
Tet VT TITET 3.19 

Tea STAT: AAT: BT: 9.157 
sae TAAaT TTT: 9.176 
TeNedtet YSATT 8.35 

TST ARIAT 3.62 
TAHT THU WF 7.134 
+oearafearr aq 7.205 
TRITATSHY FAtS-SIT 9.130 
wert Bayar 7.14 
TAY Het AFA 8.367 
sorearer Pre pf 12.126 
TINE: AHTATC 7.26 

ea: gery a Are 3.250 
+TeaT THT FT ATT 3.50 
qweie Prfeereathy 12.4 
TAS MATT FET 9.53 
aeie ar FETATET 8.36 
aeaty OUR 9.21 
Tae Beate 11.194 
at faasiaeeget 4.42 

ar tar. woeater 8.85 
area facar Spear 11.192 
aT ary: wreaerir 8.371 
art areat feyarrer 9.95 
ar appre feeaTeT 4.120 
TBST 8.29 
aretacar gory BUS 11.206 
arefarcar Trae GATE 4.166 
TEST GT Haley 9.22 





Maa T HS AT 3.176 


aaat 7 WA: 3.178 


Pdda Index 


araar wae yer 3.133 
Aare AT ea 7.61 
ATAASAMAAT: 4.168 
+aTeadt dae 4.91 
areca param: 5.79 
araaeatteer fra: 3.237 
MARIA: 11.154 
TAIRA 11.208 
aay WET 5.126 
arama a fasta: 8.194 
AGHAST 10.68 
agar THT: TAT 4.035 
arast TRAST 8.191 
agar aad? STAT 9.63 
TAHT HTT AT 12.14 
arar attentor CATT 9.85 
aeat HAT Fata 3.69 
TMT AEISSMAT 8.236 
aa FAY ATTY 9.149 
TTATATETA TART 3.47 


are arg heres FT UA 9.233 
sare arene dT a: 9.233 
ot agape 3.130 
AAT TF HAT: 6.10 

Gea SeTeCAAT: 11.127 
Ter art yeatart 8.403 
+9oTe fenaer aT 5.154 
FTSTSZAMT FT 11.167 
DY ASAAT FT 12.58 

aT ATT WTEPy 8.339 
att yfreqa 3.101 

adit arens JT 8.129 
adr USGrATaT 2.169 
acted: 8.210 


+o fayor Wh 11.78 
+0 Tralee TE RIT 12.126 
ay eq Ua Ue: & 3.13 
a att aTaraaeT 10.29 
a RATT 2.152 

at AElAaeerT 8.92 

+aq Ter fare ar 3.99 
aa Ger: Sat Us 4.86 
at a Yer waar 3.104 
+t OT gq yor 8.37 


+aq ad act: OA 4.36 
ay art fafaPrer 7.59 
aaa ar art: 12.17 


ate aed Wa: 11.187 

a vara 4.197 
ash are werd 7.23 

a IS TAT TY: AAEM: 8.255 
a yerey war aa. araTatay. 8.261 
Ssrareareea ry ‘Sat 12.74 
+a RSET FET 8.385 
AIST 7.39 
aa sar FAT 104 

a F WTSI FAST 9.49 

& Prver sTeroT HOT: 12. 109 
ast a afore 7.122 

aur aataet gy: 11.86 

TT VE TYSTATAT: 9.158 
ast Faas 11.43 

Sot TIT AT: 9.321 

aot SARAATETT 7.124 

aur crear faqs? 6.69 
ast @ eats 7.57 

aor aren sratfer 7.120 
ast fecar aor eet 9.276 
asr gq waaay 2.139 





Pada Index 1063 


ae Fa WAIT 2.229 
aut wafer 4.201 
AST ATA 1.16 
aur FAT T FAT 3.223 
aur 9.262 
aur + carafe J 8.184 
aet 7 TRAST: 1.97 
aor favsr g fastar 8.227 
au: BT APT 6.53 
ATT 2.236 
que TerHeea4r: 3.149 
aoratte fester 3.200 
+AU TTA 1.23 
aurait Fassia 7.62 
+<auTaaid FAVET 5.83 
ASAT 8.4 
AMTARAYT FT 3.204 
aos T AAMT 1.19 
args 9.203 
AITYSHHA 3.210 
ATTN FATT 3.194 
+007 THT FPR 5.51 
ag ay fe Pay 9.297 
ay THY T SAT 3.216 

ay FerPadart: 2.5 

aq VST MT 8.136 
ara Ry qey 2.228 
aa Sct SPIaT 2,235 

a aR: 10.74 

a cotter 2.10 
aser Tarrer aparttr 7.78 
aser Fa ST 7.81 

o St Ba FF: 9.313 
aera sofar 5.111 
ae agar ach 12.20 
ania: a URerm: 12.21 
aeons: ATT 8.48 

&: ant Pradter 7.56 
at ¢g wat Tet 3.175 
ay at weraeder 12.19 
at say mesiy 8.59 
are gqaicaT UT 7.47 


1064 


ay f& ayat MHA: 8.418 
aattaarar{ 8.389 
ANErPaysy ART 6.15 
+FTGHT TAT BIE 10.89 
aT grated rT 12.105 
aaeIea aT: ys 12.111 
ae: wee feat 8.169 
sororatt Aaat TAT FT: 12.30 
sarah zagt rr fry 12.34 
SITAR AT 7.200 
Faye art 9.186 
Fare Tae: BT 3.47 
sar ear radar 10.77 
THUS AAA: 8.133 
Prercepat Fad: PAL 1.64 
Rast ater 9.94 
faayer Sete 5.137 
frond: Tae: 3.185 
+ Prange aaa 12.10 
PravsAaaerey 12.11 
FITeT ea ATERT 8.107 
farrer aq atest 2.81 
+Pifte feafgaefr 3.071 
Rear: qe: 4.36 
rer ua ery: 2.77 
11.224 


eT Fae: qe 2.603 5.139 


By ay ar 8.124 
Praag ad fF 4.193 
Prepares 2.232 
Preattatreper fe 2.237 
+fF: WETIAWTT: 2.83: 6.70 
Teg ATS ST 3.215 


Pada Index 


afer arr gerater 3.235 
ter sar: wearer 5.107 


Sear. yaar aa: 9.188 
Sfaeraert Prat 7.43 
Fae eqereat 12.111 
seer ararectey: 9.151 
sqee ateT Fae: 11.129 
ears TAIT 2.134 
STAT WTST AT 11.81 
SIT RIGHT 12.112 
SIRT APT FACT 12.110 
arat: afeaRrater: 8.60 
SARAUSKAUT AT 9.94 
sae WIasaey 11.214 
BIE qa: 11.260 
sae 7 atcaget 4.110 
are oe T APA 11.212 
sae Waete AT 1.212 
PUSIHAGAGT: 5.83 
ISM BEt Wales 10.92 
srefeeer aft weet 4.7 
cag: We TST: 8.284 
SAG WET TAT 1.3 


z 


afer ao WPT ET 3.258 
afermmratt tT 3.206 
aferonArgEr wat 4.50 
aeoney WT TA 8.207 
afer Het TT 5.92 
aweager ast 7.187 
+80SQgl GATT: 7.152 
WSeHaay T 8.159 
TET West Te 7.51 
auser fe ware 7.22 


aug. rag WaT: 7.31 
aug: afet WaT: Bal: 7.18 
aus: gay aif 7.18 
questa aa 9.273 
aety rerelart 7.108 
aver fe GAeAT: 7.28 
TaN FAT 8.014 
qa seronty 3.175 
at Are tad 3.267 
away ot gq faye: 9.323 
aeaT JA: TTS 9.71 
aay a ear oar 9.129 
qareq aay 9.333 
SIGE: ATE 3.82 
ahr wer aT BHT 5.10 
au: etrer AMET 8.326 
SAMA T 5.58 

+ OTIS Oy 5.141 
+aarey Bayar 6.45 
Tat: Teast Tats: 3.256 
erMfaaet T 8.160 
aaa freed 6.74 
PAH GIAT 6.9 
aart arelareareed 4.25 
aT PASAT 7.45 
FTATTAT FSI 4.85 
oar Yaraereasary 3.37 
Sart gaat AT 8.33 
aor ATE TAT 3.270 
areata It 6.94 
BISA Gt: 6.91 
IOI TGHRA 12.4 

aa wernt ater 6.93 
SaATAA WH 4.85 

ST YASS 4.86 
ar Say eseT 8.124 
qatar: 8.290 
zag PAT: 9.165 
qareared Teereyp 2.134 
GR AT aoe 12.110 
SMS BAAN 5.59 
+RTESAT fay: 5.83 


Pdda Index 1065 


wat ee T yat 7.119 
aegmtpaaeg &f 11.18 
tered CAAT 6.71 
TAT TRAATAICITI 8.166 
art adathA: 8.40 
aay FYTAATATAT 6.8 
ara? atsreeiar 3.259 
TNA 4.193 
agugepd fata 3.191 
aeategerPsT 3.143 
amet fAvae 4.207 
arrufeyfea We 8.160 

art ware aq 1.88 

art wregeatr 10.75 

+8 afasret Tet: 5.61 
+E AT F SMT 5.154 
sere ater ar aret 5.155 
ama aafattar i140 
aaa hpeart see 8.51 
TSAI 8.47 
TET Fat AT 11.185 
SRIMSAAATT 3.171 
arierrat Bar 1.112 
ERIE EV: 9.28 
@RMTTTAA 8.409 
araatter afer 3.246 
TAPAS TF 8.342 

art seat FF 11.184 
TS FT PRIBMT 8.412 
aM AT STASTEAT AT 9.179 
areata fF Tear 8.413 
areata firersor 5.167 

fea wen faaror 5.159 
fearestfcgqeaar aT 5.85 
feaTTeAT HAT: 3.90 
fear ae: amraret 10.55 
feargreerar We 11.111 
fear aMeIAT We 8.230 
+atere afer: 11.40 
afer water 4.210 
+arqear Waaey: 11.51 
arargeat TMT 7.193 


1066 


arateatt aeréer 8.406 
IITA: SATIT 2.032 
gale aay 1.23 
SOA fe Fev: 4.157 
+gupd fF ATMA 4.201 
gearatienr 9.310 
gu: aaganiay 7.24 
+afear UAT TF 11.178 
gfear araatr 4.180 
HS TACIT 4.167 
port yaaa 4.157 
g:faar TT GATT 9.288 
+9 SIMA STACTST 5.145 
at UT fe TAT 7.66 
at ada weoattr 7.63 
EAT TOT Se 7.153 
qaeIped HA 7.66 
FA AIAG 2.202 
+aered force ART: 7.105 
QUSTTAUTTT 4.151 
Reser aT: 2.186 
queer THET 3.130 
IIIT TAT 7.195 
arid PATH 5.125 
goat Fgara: 4.246 
ghey ates 6.46 
gst guatiqur 2.54 
saprare fearetar 3-203 
eaaraksearra4r 3.72 
eae wer Us: 4.130 
saan aq 2.176 
STAT RTT TeECAT 6.12 
+cat gy arar 7.205 
are arfeaepr arteet 12.40 
qazar wTaTatT 9.95 
SaarreaTeaay: 7.23 
SaaS 8.87 
Fal ATMSTST 9.59 
aa Welceay 9.97 
SRT TST T 11.26 
sary Tear 3.117 
qareparearey 9.315 


Pada Index 


saree oararear 1.36 
+8aTeaI FET 3.180 
Sa aACaT 5.32 
SATAN: 2.152 
eaqRpr wea 3.201 
+S HTOUT CTT 7.205 
aor me TST T 8.45 
eae aay 1.118 
sarrwanfearar 9.251 
+aar are fears 7.86 
SSGSHAT AAT 6.63 
aay Barats 6.65 
SCETTATETUT 3.196 
+g motor Prep 7.205 


+eaq faferar Th 7.205 
ear Weer TA: 3.38 
+8a7 fF at PRT 7.205 
aay fe Wala: 7.205 
ay wetedt ay 1.67 

ae afaty frst ar aq 3.240 
ar erate fat ar gf 3.169 
aren: arse 3.38 
searrtraaeyt ie 7.205 
ates at FOMT T 5.134 
ast wate fear 10.103 
ater eared Ue: 8.171 


Sea Us T ST 9.131 
afer frente rey 3.148 
atest aayat 9.139 
afear atas Ret 9.132 
Ya GATT AT TF: 9.224 
gd waged Te UT 9.221 
Yd FT WATE T 2.179 


ZUM DT AB T 12.79 
sears erat FT 9.17 
ESA ASIAT: 1.26 
FACATAHS 7.49 

sale Bet: Wa 9.5 
FAIA TSI 7.114 
+QIGSIT START FT 3.275 
BTIt UTAATE: 1.86 
+3TTe SUT AT 1.86 
TIAHAGIE 4.9 

Bre ada TSH 9.289 
gree ataTsrey 4.127 
fear rar aa FT 8.142 
fear ad ar aha 8.141 
fee art fe Tart: 8.141 
HEFT TSAI 9.233 
feqyorr ar ag: afte: 8.338 
+eacanteargiT 8.102 
fesraa soso: 8.311 
fesrrere: aay 10.20 
fgstemaer fest 3.167 
fgsnftqeaacar 3.286 
fearetar FT OAT 8.348 
feaitsearr: eftorg te: 8.341 
fect qd faqeden: 9.140 
fectaarger ant 4.1; 5.169 
fectanay wT 9.61 


Pada Index 1067 


fect FETT 9.277 
(FUT PracAayl FF 1.32 
fefeer aed oe 7.167 
fefeearecreperroreed 9.256 
feared I TT aT: 8.368 
fevar fe efertey 3.144 
feves arelt 4.213 

= PUTS aed 8.135 

ay aa Ta T 4.163 
eft are T 7.160 

gr g ay feaearar 9.191 
ar ay fraper aT 3.125 
@) ATT ARIAT 3.268 
+EUTTRATII PT FZ: 9.135 
FAPPAUTY AAT 10.7 


ay 


at ay fyargrd: 9.146 
at at Saarars 11.77 
+04 Talat Bs 4.226 
et Taharray 9.135 
GAIT WTA 3.263 
soy GF Taree 11.5 
Oty ATTIRE 10.121 
TTT TeeTe: 8.237 
TTT wal T 3.160 
47 WTP 5.51 
oat eager g 11.34 
SAMA TAAMT: 9.231 
+07 UAHA FF 1.106 
TT FATA AF 3.106 
aa est 7:70 
eeonfy sar ster: 8.137 
ay Ur sar ST 8.15 
et a: aragand 4.238 
at IPIaaTPTeT 8.8 
safHarcaraear FT 12. 31 
east a peat a 7.209 


ayaSayaaT 12.23 


1068 


east cer BT: 4.195 
SAAT OTSTATAT 4.107 
ava yer 4.243 
gaya TIT: 8.20 
oye FANAT 4.155 
sata RAT 4.169 
+otoafaar QM. 2.15 
sata TATET 1.106 
eprey: prea: 8.57 
er Tor Ter 12.117 
gaer arerir qe 11.84 
emfeareararnt 8.122 
emifgated eft 7.28 
gary I Fd VAT 8.212 
wart ue faye: 7.79 
rare ays ZT 3.98 
+Tart FTAA 4.227 
ward BT 6.64 
TAIT AT WT: 2.224 


gaa GT T Mae 2.112 





Pada Index 


+O, SAMTET 1.106 
arfteur anfa: Steer: 12.103 
Sider ASAHI: 6.92 
fester pete aT 10.116 
Qfa: eAT FHSEIT 6.92 
ASR THAT 8.146 
+eart Ferear Arye 4.204 
Aa area 6.73 
eae aaaaat 6.82 
carer afeeRrd 9.21 
Rramrat wart 10.49 
fererarer g frat 3.220 
casey Whee: 8.415 
seaport ofa ata 8.249 
+cat afeadtt ada 8.265 


7 


7 wPrT gaiFr: 10.59 

7 Hardy BATT 4.48 

7 walhre fest TET 4.169 
a wera: far faery 3.51 
7 Bfitath fez: 7.90 
aT wt Frond watt 4.70 
T PTAA TAT 4.15 

a prettier: ah: 9.10 
T SMITA 7 AIF 4.78 
7 BAKO AST 2.209 

at gots Far Wee 4.63 

T petarcrrearer 11.114 

+ REUGIEAT 7.90 

+7 papa: 4.79 

+7 pute J TAT 8.100 
Th aa SAAT 6.19 
sae fear 4.169 
aeraftr 7 ScaPT 12.48 
+ Gea Hit 7.205 
WT GAARA 7.205 
Ae ANT Bay 7.121 

+7 TY T AGW 4.169 
TUT AVS: HIST T 8.93 
T OASTARITATSY 6.16 


TT Fae aeted 7.133 
TT Sarat 3.188 
TT AHA BAT: 5.84 
47 Tee T TAT 4.45 
TT feaTeaT FZ: 3.236 
qo am: aha 4.75 
TT Jarre fra 8.56 
+7 FT Wfaser ome 9.88 
7 7 miftrae: wet: 5.48 
TT MMAR 8.43 
Ta aoa ary 9.37 
TT arate ASIP: 8.306 
TUT ae HT: RTT 9.328 
TT area 12.36 
TITS Bor oy 1.55 
TT FAMINE 7.91 
aa gat FAM: 4.249 
+7 FT: JST: BA 7.205 
FT Weta HABA: 9.014 
T West SPLIT 8.170 
TW: BORAT 8.143 
T UPTIRT JSUT 2.205 
HT aaa UT: 4.169 
aT aft weaeaha: 4.142 
T afaeate fer 8.115 
+t Sec raTeSty 4.36 
7 BfSareg eT 10.105 
7 aeaaesret 4.80 

T Aq TTT 8.58 
TF aeaIPTeT 6.47 

qT Ud Wed: Bat 4.54 
TUT yy THe 7.6 

a ae afenergh ty 4.55 

T aareagart Bad 2.56 
7 VATARAHAUT 3.83 
7 Sareea 2.199 

7 UaAT WET 9.89 

+ FTAA RATEIT 6.50 
ay deer FCAT 4.38 

+7 ATOR: Tate: 8.51 
7 RTT 4.69 

T WG BA: BAT 2.94 


Pada Index 1069 


7 Wg MAT EAT 8.380 
+ shifter 4.46 

a ofhToagiayr 4.34 
ACT BOAT 10.22 

+ a aT a UST: 7.83 
7 aaimendt 9.209 

qT qenoranittea 5.54 

T TT WES 8.038 

a+ am fread feoarey 8.183 
+ aaany WaT 2.96 
ad wae weet g 8.197 
Ta WACIMMET: 9.200 
a aferameaere 11,21 
Tae Freier: MAT 2.227 
q aay aaa ae 8.217 

T areargarahey 4.169 

T AGA AAT: 5.34 

T argeatartat 6.51 

av fersafer ga: yar 2.103 
+7 © SaAAHET 7.205 
Tq arate Tera 5.157 
+7 Ot HPT Geter 9.88 

FT Ot Beer water 2.156 
T ACTA: 2.229 
+e waaay 10.53 
a at ofa fe areraty 10.78 
7 cummsfer (EIT: 9.79 
T marorefarniyst: 11.39 

q ae Sree afer 10.95 
a ae gq pase: 4.173 
Tat J PT FT 5.37 
+t ae FTEAWALT 4.248 
T caret ae 8.143 

FT ata Hea 9.71 
7 FMTae ACATET: 8.189 
T wart fear are 3.282 
+7 agra: 4.79 
a fadtarge FET 4.59 
wales TAT Tar: 6.78 
ae ary afeeet 8.406 
aera any gag 8.356 
Tay FAIAT 4.203 


1070 


F TVET: HAT: 8.64 
qT ay mrgartea hare 8.355 
qT peor fearer 4.187 
a fécheer arediat 5.162 
T eager 4.198 

T TSAATEAT 4.47 

T ATMATSMT 6.67 

T ATE T UT AME 4.120 
+7 ATT: BATT HPA 7.205 
a fPreate geaar 3.72 
ay frdafer a: are 3.123 
aT frete fear: BY: 9.199 
a Pace STAT 7.87 
a framed oR tt: 4.90 
7 Pepafaeaira4 9.46 
T TVET a WAT 4.64 
Tt quent 3.9 

7 Taree T 4.44 
T TPMITEATS: 4.177 

7 Wet eyerest 3.229 

7 Wat aaa 4.65 
T TNPSaTHT 4.61 
7 yaar 7 ante: 4.239 
7 TTAT (ATA 9.215 

+7 geured at 7.205 

T aS yey ferry 2.245 
7 taatrer er: 3.282 
T HIPS 6.16 
T WaPe TIS 4.46 
aq amafeer ot 4.192 

T TATA: 3.14 

T ITEM TAT 3.149 

T HSMAMNEAT 8.381 
FT He FaAtey 11.31 

aT wee at ART 5.50 
+ WHA ATL 5.17 

at Pree yostter 4.65 
a Praagerge 4.67 

a te a TUG 7.93 

7 WHAT ATT 4.121 
T PteregaAs 4.62 


+7 Pet WITS: VAT 2.188 


Pada Index 


FT MPA TSAI: 8.144 
a dart & ay: 3.109 
7 went + Raz: 9.185 
re Weer 4.57 
T ALTAR SIT: 5.56 

7 Atat + frat + ST 8.389 
T argar sara eg 9.125 
a Pereronrgreir 8.347 
T Hwa arty 7.91 

+7 FADS: BIT 8.381 
TT ar ete 4.45 

7 erate foray 4.79 

7 AM fayette 4.70 
a gary et Bald 11.24 
aaa aT 8.44 
+R TASH 2.5 
Te fe Tara 11.37 
RH PSTT FT 4.88 
AHSAN 11.157 

tT Usa: oferg tet 4.91 
T Ua: WOTRTT 4.84 
qt uarsraarsister 5.93 
RPASATEA 11.200 
arated aT 9.253 
TegEaTt 3.9 

T OPA 4.38 

FT Sega ade 4.11 

7 TAATaTSIPT 5.84 
FUAATAT AT 4.27 

T areagr adh 4.59 

aq areatr Treas 4.192 
Torey: Fee 4.129 
7 fryer eur Badr 4.72 
a fame 4.77 

ay eae & 4.249 
7 far ay freey 5.104 
7 fANGSHTAST 2.97 

7 fegarasy at 8.390 

a late a HHS 421 

7 featefaeraer 9.65 

+7 ferataferaeed 7.105 

a fate ATT 4.236 


7 FA TTT GATT 8. 


7 Tar 7 Bas: 8.66 
+7 SEgOAI PEST 12.101 


TF cay TEA 3.106 
7 Weal TWAT FT 7.30 
+7 OTT TAS Bard 4.20 
7 Beer HAT 4.61 

T GI Ale FAT 4.80 
T ae OTe ferry 10.126 
T arate gq aaa: 3.57 

T apPgrer TAIT 5.141 
ToT AUT fan: 9.43 
aera fafrare at 8.185 
seater SUH 3.97 

FT FATT FT HA: 8.67 
7 ASAT T PSFeET: 8.65 
aS fear pH: 8.232 
TS AAG TA 3.180 

7 aaaer afad: 4.79 

Tq ae atare: 11.47 

aT Gears aftrea4r 4.82 
+7 UES: WaT TF 4.47 
T ayer ue A: 8.361 
TT UlWarMear 7 8.186 
qT Uatyarmer: Aa 8.50 
T TATAy WAY 4.47 

7 oeft quit: GT: 8.65 
aT ameter TST 11.30 

7 Ua TT AF 8.203 

T MAHA 8.386 

T ateary esr 4.171 

wT eteceraey fay: 4.34 

Tt ay T faaare 7.92 

7 trad FT Td 7.84 


Pada Index 1071 


a tartar Prgershtr 8.414 
T aaa afed: 2.154 

7 PESTGISMTATAT 4.162 
a fe aente farreer 8.417 
7 fe qstgd BWR: 9.263 
+7 fe eaarerT 7.205 

+7 fe Sareea aTeT 4.243 
+ fe Bae aay 11.13 
ae sraraa easy 3.132 

T CGIAATGe 4.134 

T PAA wale ay 2.98 
T Bet fear ae 9.270 

+ GaerreraemRi 6.82 
T aed my 2.171 
TPMT FIPIGIT 8.226 
AHA WaT FEAT 5.48 
ATH SHAT SMT 4.130 
ara: HrSceparet 4.74 
ATTFSUIIET 1.37 
ae FAA 4.53 
afadare waft 8.116 
ATHU WaT BIS ZT 9.240 
atest aT TRI 4.140 
Aaah aa AT 4.44 
areaaraaer ary: 8.351 
arfeeper afeert 4.140 
arfeamar arferarh 4.62 
aifeatacast ares 8.153 
+ATHTeTOT AAPA 3.9 
ATA GSaAIGAaTETT 5.30 
TAMA 4.137 
afater Hae 5.70 
ATevSay APT wantster 8.335 
aTadict JT: AY: 9.243 
arafer PqeaeTt 3.18 





arte + ft zy ferent 3.138 
+ARITOVAT: 7.205 
atoms AGT aT 3.52 
ATege: TaTaTatshy 2.161 
ATAATAGAEMT: 2.295 





Pada Index 


arate aTeISrAr 3.8 
area & WY: 4.135 
afetaaarge: 4.67 


area TT YTT: 2.195 
sarge fS AIA 6.45 
arftaaer gafarar T 4.163 
Ret eATaNT 8.82 
area Got fear At: 9.18 
aT GAIT TAT: 5.155 
Wendy FT ete 4.64 
AAATTAASATT 3.229 
TTT phage 4.29 

ATED BRITSHAATE: 5.69 
arer fog Ter ferret 7.105 
aTenRerery ets 10.126 
faferer gee 8.196 
PATS 11.58 
fFreresa;e Terr 8.192 
Preqerasarea eae 8.190 
PaTAaT ay 8.188 
Fecaret frer 8.185 
Frey a: par aT 8.194 
FREASATAT: AWE: 8.271 
Parearhora ary 9.260 
ayer arqaedt 8.220 
fave wepdtar F 7.175 
fraecr aT OAT 8.311 
Fer seared 4.19 
fret BE: HOST. 5.129 
frer agaeanrt: 7.102 
freq feraeet gay: 8.91 
frep erear arr: Bard 2.176 
frer aferearaet: 7.59 
fFrerrer afer etter 5.130 
Pra AaAISeT 7.103 


PreaqTdaS: SINT 7.102 
Preeegeranter: CTT 2.193 
frerraeare Uq ST 4.107 
+PSSATGAAT TF 5.51 

frefar f& JeToTAT 8.39 
fety: Boyeet 4.244 
fatrecrar gare 11.70 
fredsett eae 11.183 
fafeahitrear ToT 3.42 
PIRACY ARM 3.50 
Pree wer aT: 11.54 
ele ora wate 5.163 
frend: Ica Ts 4.201 
fragitareer amar 8.255 
FTAs ACI 5.13 
FAA BIL 3.187 
fraferatee frac: 3.189 
frafaar fer: rer 3.188 
+a ar 6.95 

frter ear Bet T 1.64 
frpragrafesrard 2.220 
frrareaT SfaeTreET 11.219 
Fad? FERAL 6.95; +6.94 
fraer wad? are adtare: 4.49 
PIRI Wad? araaRRAT 2.185 
faery qroatoreaed 2.192 
faye FATRIT 5.35 








Pada Index 1073 


fréar afeaareor 5.77 
faféteneaiepr fe 7.144 
Att wear 2a 7.205 
fader gq WaTeT 9.255 
ftor. setae 8.318 
Rat wer we 5.112 
frddarer arate: 7.61 
Pgrysert J 5.67 
fret I adt art 5.91 
fradey farcat 11.152 
Fader TATE 11.185 
fret SAAT eT 12.90 
+a aTeT GIT 4.219 
freer yeast 2.51 
FraTaeat F WSO 10.39 
fate: Raa 10.8 
rarer Arla Er 10.34 
fatter ATTA 8.361 
freafesAard: 2.16 
Frtaare 7 pater 2.142 
+frareranty fereater 12.84 
Freary ary ¢g 12.89 
free aah WT 7.205 
freed TF TEMPT 9.247 
+PAWAITAAAS 7.205 
sfrone faa er 7.205 
Prevter fe TAT 8.414 
Frearata gTeT 3.98 
Prater aor a 1.117 
FreaeaT SAATET: 11.2 
ate aes are 2.198 
safes SRT 1.106 
atere arrsrex 4.113 
TUAPTYSA 5.67 

agit Pike FT 7.70 

TIA PITUME F 7.65 
FUOTAAT BT: 7.82 
+e FF 1.28 
yaa fgasr T 4.21 


aq Hear tT Jate: 11.36 

aq eat gatere 11.231 

tare: Yaa Perr 9.144 

AT TVERY 8.362 

sae HAART 12. 82; +11.266 
TAaaAS wT 12. 107 





ATES TARE 4.37 
seat aratt 8.344 
GIT FASTA: 3.192 


Be ustercres#4eT_ 3.216 


T 
afwgredl: Tt act: 12.120 


TAA FT TAIT 8.329 
+THTIMTT Pretert 3.275 
Tereaaa eres 6.20 
ofesreeehiar PT 11.169 
afer wat wet 5.125 


Pada Index 


afer Wear wer 3.162 
+T ST Wat: AS: 1.106 
TIPMGP! ATT: 8.134 
qed Bal Aelaal: 3.69 
THT Pad set 8.98 
qrdey Ud ATATeT: 12.16 
+TSTATTHATERA 3.4 
+THTAT UAT 7.152 
qrdaaaar FT 3.67 
gers facttear 11.148 
TRR Ferry 8.402 
IST TAT TST 3.68 
Saar I aay eea4: 3.25 
Tart AY ay 2.137 
Teese 8.322 
WIRY AIZIS: 8.297 


qr at at aT 8.404 

+90 wart arr 8.223 
+40 STaST ETAT 8.223 
+OOT BTGQT GTI: RTT 8.223 
TMT F sad Ae 8.138 
+0017: as wees 8.205 

TUT SaASAPST 7.126 

+7er TEP PAT 5.136 
qaeiaa4r fam: 11.176 
qafaorracte TF 4.208 

ofa ar arreeher 5.165; 9.29 
afer pd at 5.155 

Ufa feraraapre 5.163 
sofa afar 8.277 
facta wrt 11.183 
ofcar TseUt oT 11.113 
ofed: ayer 11.180 
ufeadt Waal AAT 9.58 
ufaatat afer 9.8 


qfaraey T PAT 8.28 
afeeaar yet ATT 2.67 
THASTATART 1.34 
TaN FT 7.132 
+Tet afearie 9.185 
gear state BISET 3.174 
qeat state a: SAR: 9.200 
svar sftafer ar gd ot 5.155 
gear sftafer FATaT: 9.195 
afer ay aRga 8.240 
TeTSEaart 8.7 
Teal FeTHHIMRT 11.43 
qa ae ayer 7.188 
+o: frag Pre 11.215 
oa: fear BROT aT 11.133 
Tar Ya aT ALT 11.92 
TASHA 3.82 
TAI 4.201 
qeeryAay 8.352 
TERT aI 3.174 
GaRTeaT FT 12.7 
aera ea 12.5 
qeesor state 10.97 
aetet g a ear RTT 2.129 
tT CET 3.104 
sane araig 5.67 
7-154 
THT FAATAS TST: 9.16 
Ty FAAS AMT 8.302 
TAPE 4.238 
Ia ATA 4.243 
+N FAI TTT 9.88 
oars ASAT 8.356 
TRASSEM 7.152 
TAT ET 10.29 
TEENA 8.358 
qeeqUtes: AT: 12.59 
+TRERIGHASMT 1.78 
+TRET TT AAMT: 7.154 
TET BUS ATTA 4.164 
TReT Te TEN: 8.354 
geen erste wT TAL 


Pada Index 1075 


TMT ATT PAST 11.216 
TUFSeIMATE: 2.197 
OAT aort 7.199 
URTACATT ES OTA: 9.313 
+TRSST ASAT 7.205 
+TRgay WT CTT 5.141 
anges aay 4.297 
TRAST HTAT 4.176 
aaa HAT 7.212 
sofas 6.45 
ahaa array 8.331 
oRyer Tar TF 9.309 
ofeargurare fret 9.283 
after pftrtate 2.201 
oftarareaer wafer 2.201 
OR aRTATISHT 11.61 
oar: TRaaT 3.172 
aftaar a fasta: 3.171 
Rava: 3.228 
wéferar: faraetyT 7.219 
TT FT CAME 8.223 
+RUSTATT Beer 7.64 
Tarra afiesr: 3.40 
+ TERT UATET 5.118 
qaast FEAT 3.45 
TH TAMPA: 8.135 
Teme art aq 5.19 
TOTNES 11.134 
ofeas uee qa 3.256 
afer gaia 10.102 
WaT wre 1.43 
Gad FTO 12.42 
UQAT Waa JT 4.26 
sTaRpatefiier 1.23 
TYAS 4.126 


+TYARNFTTAT: 8.100 
Tay eat Aa 8.229 


Tay carer ea 8.234 
ayaT WANT AT 8.410 
WAT VAT TT 1.90 
agar gay aq 8.325 
HATA 8.223 


1076 


+TyPa Parga @ 3.275 
+I ASIEN 8.97 
RAPA 1.39 
Pated T TUT ART 8.212 
Tarcatearyrea Ft 8.161 
Tage ufeprIyd 9.218 
qParat g TART 2.101 
oparat qd Tari: 2.102 
oPararaegeregy 5.92 
oigat fear ae 4.115 
qrepasteertt 1.119 
asateararat 5.16 


TIPyaT AS AT 8.280 
+TPT HATS aT Faw: 4.227 
+aTAHAT FS ar fay: 3.98 
oraer fe faatsr 7.86 
+91 WaTAT AT 7.86 
We Teper AST 8.404 
TWTeqatsaat 7 8.283 
TET ART 3.230 
We: GAAS: FATT 8.18 
Tet TECHN 8.280 
TESATHET HATS 8.18 
Tt FATA: 9.13 
ose: fasta 7.50 
+o ater Sarre 4.36 
qepapeacd FT 11.228 
aaertr Feat 3.177 
TIRANA 3.159 
TOS FARMS: 12.52 
TTR AT TARIAAT 12.70 
are agarrat 3.274 
TITEL SETTUET 1.90 
Tat: TAMA: 10.44 
eat TT 12.6 
Tire WT AWET 7.207 
SUPT TAHT 4.226 


Pada Index 


sem atarer 4.57 
UTSUSTTTAPT 1.118 
TUE aTATAT FT 5.90 
qrafhisayT aA 4.30 
favsfaaqor errr 3.261 
fugraerar ines 3.122 
freaeaterer art 3.219 
+fuedfeua: oar: 3.199 
frase aRaeT 12.49 
fraraet: FEAT 8.335 
frargat forsmtrardy 2.135 
ftar wat eT 9.121 
fearaer ar Tee 3.222 
+farreper aT: Fat: 9.186 
fear wer @ Tce: WIT 3.221 
far werter Brae 9.3 
ffar & wréceHs: 2.231 
frar BtaGAST 9.185 
feqsfirar Arger 2.133 
feq: a art aaite® 3.221 


Maser aaa: 3.81 
rrequr ae ame: RTT 3.146 
AGIMTTAT 9.106 
frau after ars 3.123 
fica Wea 9.108 
fratasd <ear: 3.205 
far wat gaat 5.149 
frat faaqurer 3.159 
fas + TaTeae JT 9.93 
fase ar wore afte 10.59 
frerar Prerreert 3.279 
fret ahr g wey 3.149 


ogra Saleen: 10.44 
+7er TPIT TT 1.106 
+The T TATE 7.205 
wares Baty 11.39 
qey fertt yet aT 2.30 
qe: eT 6.97 
yar sft Bart 2.151 
GAGTEET areary 8.114 
qaerrery UH: 10.99 
gaafertretag: 9.180 
a He 9.169 
wegred ATK: 9.31 
peak aay 9.108 
Ua: Blaer strorat 9.122 
Garorr watt wat 5.148 
GATSleaT UATE 9.158 
Tar AST: 10.14 
gfrerat para FT 9.134 
aor Sreraratea 9.137 
UF UST FATIST 9.323 
gay arat FR 6.3 
gt ag warest 4.257 
qaaterat BATT 5.168 
gareeorereiert 11.151 
gate wee FAT 1.105 
USAT ATHTIATT 9.138 
qarer areaeney 8.372 
Tarte Ia 3.49 
+7, AAT GA: 12.110 
geste aary 5.23 
FITTS? ATT 3.115 
+7T PRATHER 4.169 
Jeu AIMS 10.58 


Pada Index 1077 


+ 7.205 
+TOureT aor 7-205 

49t waTe aq 9.223 
qirerabasta 6.11 

gafed a eater 7.78 
FORTS: FAT: 3.198 
Torney GIT 10.125 
Tere WAT WT: 10.38 
Tene BOAT 3.129 
YOSHI FT 11.166 
goresmaaitt 6.21 

fern: wea 1.47 

gay Bed ART 8.330 

ger T Seat BAT 4.96 
qataca4r ad: WaT 3.117 
erereary freq 2.54 
aay 4.31 

+ UST aaa FT 4.212 
afr art frer 2.55 
afr 3.98 

year aafacreaer 3.55 
Gara FETT 10.72 

qa Paterna 4.220 
cifeierferattor 2.212 

art GMS F 11.141 

qe STARA 8.205 
Tay FT dd 8. 252 
qearenttat ae: 8.354 

af qe year freer 7.52 

ct a TET AATIRT 9.295 
qat aear waa eT 2.102 
qat mar waRasenast 2.101 
Tat AAT TURAS ATS 4.93 


1078 


TRSTATAMeT 8.60 
ger wafeqhar 3.251 
ont aeaeer 8.300 
gear” Hatt 3.91 
tae g ffat Fer 9.209 
Foret MAT 11.172 
Ofer qweareseT 8.415 
Footer aa: 2.45 
FARIA 3.25 


UT weet Fe: 7.48 

TRI IPATORRATET 9.15 
qrrarerdiares faarst att 9.133 
qaaeaarstas Fass aI 9.139 
att ATaTAS eT 9.136 
Raves peer 3.155 
aya wat aT 9.176 
Tsat ses 4.149 
weer cer aght: 10.124 
WHR AWH AT 8.351 
yeprarteraneat 9.222 
TERIASIBEAIT 9.257 
SORTS TSIT AT 9.256 
THA TATA 3.113 
TNO TAWA 5.118 
WAIT StaTaTART 3.264 
+WEITTT TAIT 4.91 
waar aes 7 1.35 

West aT VHT AT 9.228 
TROT TAT 5.107 
TAA TTeaT 9.257 
+e TTT 4.195 
Yrsatl aT WRT FT 10.40 
+57 ay arey 10.63 
meray fear: WET: 9.96 
THATS ASTATTT: 9.26 
Wort Sey art 1.89 
waar ofeeerrt 5.94 
woaratakee sey 1. 244 
fuels oeaTe 9.327 





Pada Index 


OST eae MRT 10.118 
stay 7 Terr 7.25 
ES IaEGclabal 8.175 
WaRaaRerTraqeaT «9.59 
Fat eer ate a 4.94 
yar ast ger TENG AT WEIS 4.41 
Gar ast as wage wate 4.42 
Tot aR Tey: 11.196 
WIR I WAAST 2.197 
WIT SISTA: 8.23 
yofersaroticrer 9.317 
STATA THT 1.48 
Terry eect 9.310 
sera qT Teer 7.205 
wfercarer Aas 9.285 
wfeeEes ATATAT: 10.31 
wey yfaard FT 4.52 
qreryer fear feert 4.110 
Wey Jets 6.28 
afespennterarer 11.254 
Wreryererd TS 2.48 
gfemettrt J 10.111 
WaTeAATSHT 4.186 
Wemeey fAs 10.110 
Wfass: WTAT: 10.109 
ferrets: Tar 10.112 
WaTeTIMTATET 10.109 
+HATST ZT 3.98 
Maye BMY 4.186 
were Fras OTT 11.215 
Wager TAIT 1.4 
wfereear oat 1.74 
WfasrT TF WS TF 8.307 
Wears TPIT 3.153 
sufeara aunfeey 2.220 
oferarerssyarcr FT 2,203 
wfaftar eer J 9.84 
wreaearey areniqt 2.206 
TRPTATTATY 2.195 
weaaaeara4;r 4.206 
gatas Sa 10.17 
VESTAS 5.13 


yer aforrf: 9.52 
Weaet UA ZT 12.105 
Tes VIMTST 2.01 
rear afer FT 4.52 
GUS SHara4: 9.27 
Toe peqagrer 7.125 
TAS BT 8.3 
TATETT aay 6.72 
WITT 2.120 
VU CAATT: 2.196 
WGI ARTA 1.4 
yates Bra aT: 7.157 
WIA AGAMA 8.132 
eraser zat aT 2.35 
aferar Taperer 3.127 
wa feror qerearhr 2.48 
wafermit eft 4.39 
TITRE 7.201 
Wer gAAIIT 8.265 
+IGRIUT TETFS 2.66 
ree ReT 8.30 
TST FET 8.34 
GaSe 3.284 
WATT AT 10.2 
FAAGIEMTEATT 10.1 
+L a fee WT 7.205 
We: WAAHeueyT 11.30 
+THRARAIST 7.205 
Waey gar aq 2.214 
War dea SIHST 11.85 
TAMMY T BATT 7.203 
TATTACAT OTT: 8.295 
Tare Ser Aer 11.130 
+TTSACHT BIT 9.88 
+Hater yet ater 3.259 
yam aarat 8.49 
yesad fares 5.152 
FATASHEPLTT 2.248 
WaT: eae 10.115 
Taare aay 9.292 
FTaTaTavSfAcayT 8.123 
wasnt = 7.224 


Pada Index 1079 


Waar aay 9.306 
Waid HT FIST 12.90 
yau a Patt T 12.88 
WAAL YATAT 5.56 
garter: eert 12.27 
Faaane API 12.122 
Yocey;r: dares 8.254 
yaaa sara 11.44 
yates Rade 5.49 
THE PAE 3.33 
FAATTIRE 10.32 

Tat afaraer: 5.130 
TEIATS SLT 7.194 
WERT T AAT 9.289 
WaPo: 2.75 
+TTFREROATATAT 5.67 
WE aiPraearege: 2.29 
mfr ARTA 3.279 
WIT RAST: 8.294 
WATIST WPT 11.106 
WATT TASTY 11.38 
+OTSATTST TTPPTAS 2.66 
gnigear Preafte 6.38 
Wat BST ae T 7.210 
oer: SfeTe BATT 4.187 
UTFATHSTIAANT 8.79 
WITT FEAT 8.296 
WTA AHATT: ATL 6.57 
yorenratae ad 5.28 
HTT Prreer 11.150 
GOAT Tweet 10.106 
WIAA aT 4.28 
UMTSTAT STATIS 6.70 
WMTATASSETITL 6.72 
greener: Ud: 2.75 
miftrhr: eae UR 9.223 
oiftr ar afe aronfer 4.117 
WHT FATE 8.159 
Tas WaT 10.16 
wiferasaryaear A 8.392 
+UTCAAGaTAT AT 9.88 
WEpPIAAT T 4.106 


1080 


FONE 2.95 
Weare sar: ET: 8.299 
Wyatt GUHA: 11.48 
Waa paper fF 12.93 
wap Frere 11.193 
WaT q Barer: 9.240 


+ 2.221 


wrarearcr qd ART 11.187 
40a ATT AT: WH 11.47 
+UReal BY aT 7.205 
sitar aaretihr: 5.155 
WTS aorerarrer 11.155 
WRaeTHAAUY AT 11.74 
+a ahr ae 4.145 
fret a ary GAT 4.138 
frar wafer BIHeT 8.42 
way BY TPT 6.79 
+obaeet frereesrrer 3.275 
TaTTATSHY TST 9.84 
waaay 3.166 
eras, qaeaey 5.57 
Water: GT AT 5.65 
We ash asf: 5.82 
a T FAH 9.25 
yee Agar fam. 4.199 
yeorrareirerar 8.102 
Ta AHHH 8.363 


OY TTAeY Tera 3.153 


HO PASI 6.67 
WOSMT FT FAM 11.143 
HOCAGT Bl 1.84 
He SAR 9.52 


Pada Index 


+e Fata THT 3.98 


weep 11.71 
wey ary IH aT 7.182 


q 


ae eq Tae 7 5.14 
THARATIGITT 7.106 
wear Hate TAT 12.66 
aA TF Hy 12.78 
FIA T AAT 9.288 
TyareanieT 12.79 
THATS INST: 5.23 
aes GATT Us: 8.172 
soa AY: 1.76 
AOA SIMA: 2.015 
soey earfeaster 7.167 
ToEA TIE 8.168 
— Aga: 9.184 

: 7.40 
Eel — 8.164 
ages WRIST 8.73 
TEATTTARL 12.54 
ae: yfarare 10.107 
ray PHAM 9.148 
TOMA PAPA 11.191 
aTaarateas RaeT 8.27 
STOaT AT YACHT AT 5.147 
TSS TF 8.312 
ToT T 8.71 
aTedargead: 4.179 
aT: FAATAT AT 2.208 
aTOAT: TATA: 4.69 
aera + witha 9.247 
+9 OPT TSM ITT 11.177 
ae SaTeaeey dW 5.78 
ASIST ATS: 7.8 
arate faut TFET 2.150 
aret frgdar facet 5.148 
averages: 8.25 


TA AA T ATA 9.322 
Sea FT STAT BIST: 8.89 
+He@reed SGT STA: 1.245 
sara ter 5.129 
TATU WEETT 6.87 
sararey wafer 4.128 
TATA Act TF RATT 11.225 
Farararerger 2.183 
seraset wafer 3.50 

Fa Va at AIT 9.316 
Ta SAP TT 4.100 
aerry fF fever 2.146 
TET: FTF BATT 2.74 
THOT FT IRA: 11.193 
+59A0oT afaPrearer 4.36 
sary TET aq 2.173 
THAT WS 7.14 
seas: 3.185 
wartee oRfarrer 3.154 
TA TEATAAIT 2.116 
TTT 2.37 
TATA: TAT 3.39 
sera J 3.89 
+Teaee: qe wa 1.97 
TaSeMPa WT 11.87 
HRSA 11.76 


Pada Index 1081 


TSS HOT 11.55 
TET ATTA 11.49 
Selel T GUPTA 9.235 
TAT FSAI 11.73 
Tela oA SATE: > 2.70 
+TSTATUTATTTET 1.10 
aera t ae 4.149 
Faas WT 2.71 

ger feraasir et: 12.50 
aera area 4.114 
TaghiEt FT 2.106 
sale aay RTT 9.320 
TAA Fay 11.57 
SST FUT: Bard 3.231 
+A PATT Wty 1.86 
TAIT Bas FST 2.127 
qrerentsaraet FETs: 9.155 
sorerrenfsafaant AAT 5.138 
+seretaateat wnat: 11.178 
TSTESITA FT 8.276 
arent afert Ser 1.31 
+H T FA PAT 3.189 
areror aay 7 2.135 
avert Prayer ath 3.243 
+areorea eho: 2.157 
soared Pfr SAAT 8.37 
see GUAT 11.150 

+ TTA TET ger tar 11.107 
TATTET ATT: 8.338 
TTT aay art 11.236 
STRAIT RT cater: 3.110 
WATT CTPT 11.68 
sree FeSTIOT a.11 
TTT CAT TOOT 9.149 
meet ead 2.190 
mere T oder 11.18 
wert: afsar at io.7 
ara: arar Ser: 10.4 
STAT: SATA 4.245 
TAIT: ARTAT 10.93 
Sa. anda 11.85 
TST ITAL 10.15 





1082 


+TTSMTTSREAT AF: 11.33 
T 10.8 
+STAIUAT TATE 9.314 
ararorrearerareter 7.37 
TIT ATTATT I 9.248 
areTaaragy: 11.4 
serra FST 9.335 
TAIT TaAASM: 10.74 
aes T 8.112 
TST FT Ut FT 9.327 
Tea TUT 4.165 
WAITS TAT aT SSRI: 10.62 
TAIT TAR AT ARTI 11.80 
ater fafSasta 8.407 
+A carter I 9.247 
+STST: WET FEAT: 5.131 
+See: ASAT FLAT: 4.36 
arat Taya J 8.376 
TAT TSTSHAUT 9.198 
arerer aaa 2.242 
greg a fasta: 1.97 
aa UTS: qa: 8.276 














Pada Index 


wert Ed fesaarat 3.74 
Te Et MIT FT 3.73 
Teller TAT TIT 8.88 
WIGws 7 TAT 8.56 


tT 


He TKTASTLT 8.148 
wea 7 BUM 11.115 
sae F Teh 5.61 
VETAIRATTSSAT 9.268 
VETTEL 11.166 
wer wpe = fafaer 3.227 
WRITIFITSNE: 5.18 
wee TAT T 1.113 
weary ayer 5.17 
WSS 1.2 
mietga Rr 9.104 
wads REET 9.192 
we aatate TAT 4.139 
Haye a Feat aet 8.120 
WIM BT 7.15 
UREN: SOTA 10.107 
wat aca aed 7.95 
ware agar qd 8.371 
agagepd fet 7.94 
eTQeataPaerr 4.120 
wd: FF fast 9.32 
We: TEP 9.86 
+o T ante 5.154 
wae Teer 2.49 
VATA 12.126 
YAMAHA 10.35 
WIAA JT UAT: 2.49 
WET AST ay 5.111 
wert ed ey 3.181 
sett wafer ar ary 5.154 
wethxay fax 3.97 
UP BaaatT TT 9.204 
ATS arity 8.405 
HUSTaaereare 9.271 
+TTaeaHAST FT 8.350 


WaT TPT TT TT: 8.416 
wat aes areer RET: 8.299 
+STaTReaecay: 8.385 
+Tatat Wear 9.5 
araret qearreey 5.168 
+Uararay aar ae 7.205 
Pret a Frere eat 3.94 
Prerafecttertsd: 6.34 
sfrarryfaet Scar 3.04 
RRITAYIUTT AT 3.96 
Preyer aPEraIT 8.360 
Pree Pret wT 2.50 
RreIaTHaT AKT 7.150 
frareda aerit 7.196 
nag T fesry 3.111 
Hay zh fayy 3.116 

7.221 
ser areatene 2.53 
ereprdserarrerTa 4.222 
+HooTaT ALITSTAT: 9.191 
ysotrarar Te: WATT 3.116 
USAT Rett 8.147 
+ TIT ART WaeT 1.2 
Yt Wer AIA T 12.97 


aft yPrerarae 10.84 
gfrasrtiat ZT 11.58 
sit facade 6.22 
set aaa 12.125 
afraish REF 6.66 
wet Rye At 6.14 
YHA BT 3.156 
YATRA 11.63 
YAS FT BATT: 8.215 
3earar T att franc 9.332 
YIM AT TPF 5,02 
YUMA 11.10 
year Hater GAT 7.123 
+7eraT fase 7.97 


Pada Index 1083 


+TAQITAYSST 2.188 
fermareafagart 11.73 


ager adafser 2.188 
Fer afeay ater: 2.188 
Her yerar fe ale: 6.55 
+30 HasdT UT 8.390 
FATRISAATEMTE 10.91 
aerart fe a ae 3.109 
WTA year 3.112 
MTACTATSISAT 3.195 
aaa TAT 2.108 
sree mae 2.124 
alfraee oar a: 5.142 
wearer FT ART, 9.212 
Wart sate: oF: far 4.184 
MIGvasexr aT Arar 9.57 
+UIGuayear 3.173 
WTAATAITSIMT 2.132 
wgyaer AAA 3.173 
WITATATTMT 9.194 


1084 


AMT POT APR 4.222 
ARITA FAITET 10.48 
AceMTe: ATA: 5.15 
ACUTE AGTST 5.14 
FeeIAT afer aq 8.328 
ne At T SIRT T 10.89 
FDTUAATA FT 9.80 
+e yar 5.122 

AY Fa: TT: BI 12.62 
age WT yet FT 5.41 
+a yas T 5.27 
ETS aeat 3.120 
neaeaseert FT 4,131 
meatestseRt aT 7.151 
FETT T act: FS 3.262 
Fee WaT T 7.155 
Fea: ToT FAT: 8.138 
wey care feared 1.13 
FRATITAT FATTEATE: 11.9 
HepaTaae: Ge: 1.18 
FAAS HTC 1.14 
+e fafa HA 12.8 
HTT Tepes HF 12.8 
ares fest: ATF 12.121 
WA: ane farepect 1.75 
+Tttanreaearary 11 


2 


qqaomaresy 1.1 
+HGYAMAA ST 1.59 
+g SAT 7.74 

FIAT PAT 8.296 

AAMT J SCT 11.164 

FARIA Ye: 9.66 

AGU IAT FT 8.286 

+g: MATTYET Fa: 12.126 

AalecoaTer 3.194 

FATaTR ea eT 1.104 


Pada Index 


FATUR WET 2.29 
wage 7 ater 10.127 
FAAS FT 3.137 
jeter 2.34 
HAY TEPAMENT 5.36 
40: TOTRATIRT 4.203 
Het: sTepoerne: 11.257 
Tacs Brae 7.74 
Ward F WITH: 8.85 
Aas Tar UST 7.173 
WIMTITETT 1.80 
wararate ar aT 8.35 
aaah at Ta 8.31 
wetRrasate cet 1.35 
Hoge sft I ait 3.88 
+Fatat a fageter 7.181 
AAsEPAT 9.291 
+HOTeaTAAaTey: 9.14 
afedinetay 11.126 
Hect eacrT ET 7.8 
ASASATAT ATA 1.79 
aefetigeart 4.257 
Tenis Fer 8.110 
FEIBSMA F 8.395 
FeraAaT WA 1.15 
Felfet WAHRITE: 11.55 
AST ASIP 3.6 
Herma aR 8.179 
Ferg BCT 8.324 
Feary: 11.258 
FeMateeaate 11.240 
FerHas FAT: 1.6 
Agar 7 1.112 
ASIA APT 2.28 
aereare tare: 11.223 
are TM Fear AE 12.63 
at & weraagy 5.55 
AAA FT UE 8.284 
AST APTAT 8.328 
ATS: WSU 5.26 
ATaIPT FT A GTA: 5.53 
ARM TW APA: 5.73 


ATE: atasMteey 10.26 
ATAYSI AT WA 4.96 
ATaT aT SATE ST 2.50 
arac frac sar 8.275 
araart 7 gaat 9.217 
Arar {tat aT <aTaT 9.168 
arate START: 4.180 
ATA TAGS 9.171 
ATeaMIaaSar FT: 9.177 
Alar qfrear are 2.226 
ATTaS Age WT 3.148 
saree rere qd 5.67 
FTSTA EM SABA 9.193 
+ATAT ATTEAUT FT 11.178 
ATIUISRISTAT 2.169 

AT eorer frqerter 2.130 
AIS aferoft arr 5.81 
ATG UIGRTART 11.172 
Adeg ates ACI 9.131 
Aid: WA: favs 9.140 
AGH WET aT 9.92 
ATA WAIT 10.27 
argag harass 2.133 
ATI ATOM 2.131 
ATAT t4aT gfear aT 2.215 
aan SHUNT 9.330 
FTAA STRAT 12.107 
+arme fee at 12.4 
AME Fada 12.8 
+AU J GIST 12.10 
Aled FORA AF 11.122 
artatrt za arer 7.182 
Alt AAAS 5.116 
ARAMA 5.129 
FATA ST Beal 11.132 
FATEH: PATH 8.84 
HITHER AAETS: 8.298 
Are mes ca: diear 11.195 
+ATaaeY BRT SINT 5.75 
AAT The TSA 8.142 
ated & ASAI 11.158 
FARAPTSAIST 11.221 





Pada Index 1085 


anes WIT 11.250 
fre fewer arr aT 7.206 
Page: GPAVET 8.89 


Prayalcgher 3.160 
FATST ART 7.166 


faareurcaraet 7.207 
fasor saree 7.164 

frer Uq WaldTeT: 8.195 

PRT aa: BAT AT 8.195 
faut wstar WaaT 9.70 
freararét a Geary 8.400 
Hraifscarays Far: 4.224 
TSAO aT 10.45 
FAURE TI 1.87 
FEIT Ba CaM 8.323 

ead Waa: TASAT 11.260 
Fad Waa: A: Tea: 11.259 
Fad TACIT: 11.80 
Tae FT HAM: 2.43 
aust aT Test aT RATT 2.219 
FaTahey TT: ATT: 3.257 
BRST: 6.5 

WAT AETPLIT 8.384 
WAIATe 4.50 
omar STATA: 9.290 
TRISHA FS: 8.289 
qa aaedy 8.144 

Tare fearean: 7-47 

ar TRAST 4.241 

Wa F area Fer 4.5 
FATT RITA 10.35 

ad watt FART 9.4 

ye wale aedt SH 5.160 
ware: year SMA 5.108 


ay gt water 11.175 
ATSTANAT FAME FT: 7.111 
atest FIGCTAT *SRUT 2.42 
Ales yonfasr aS: 8.379 
Tosa: BMT 7.54 
+a ARTIST 1.106 
PararsaTaate 7.133 
feaararey aft 9.211 
FATA STATA FT 10.45 


rT 


a aahet TATA: 12.115 
a aren are we: 12.108 
a agate : 2.144 
a Ud F TT FEM: 3.200 
aT Waser SUTRA: 4.221 
a wasttieanr Jat: 9.181 
+7 Ue feract aq 12.119 


Pada Index 


gant fret OAT: 5.40 
aareaey Pafercar 11.25 
mart vere: UCT. 5.39 
ware srereterear: 5.22 

aa g fad aa 3.28 
FASTA aT 4.237 
aad Fz 7 4.36 
Taser qr aa 5.39 
sary FTA Fay: 12.49 
Tad Ue Hat 9.6 
Tay ATARI Ad: 7.188 
Us AAAS Wet 7.189 
+Ue: TH AAA 6.20 
+UT: TH AAA 6.20 
TAHASIAAST 11.216 
afeargraor aft 5.20 
THANTHOAT 11.179 
rept gaciser SNe 4.161 


TAVSIGSTea 1.79 
aa aa ORAS: 10.61 
+0, er ao wd 7.205 


ay sat wear 8.14 
40F 7 Spa OFT 8.51 
Uy AMT FIT 3.56 
aT AAI Ui 9.246 
aa argue yea 8.165 
aa BAT alfearer: 7.25 
OF OY BST ATES: 2.137 
TATTSSAAT 8.76 
aaradad RT 8.293 
FATT T WIT 3.56 
Wega eae ag 12.37 
aateagryda: 1.30 
TUTHAPIIVSAyT 11.221 
Tay aaa Ty 1.41 
UTE BUTTS 1.40 
+UaTHTeS TITGT 1.0 
QUT BISAaAyr oedt 2.157 
+TTTeT RATST 3.98 
TIT GAIT 2,218 
TAT WSCA 9.48 
TUT UEShHS aT 2.158 
OMT MATT: Wet: 3.277 
UAT WTA 4.254 

DUT aTaaer af: 12.101 
QUT ATT 4.17 
FUT FATT ATTAT 10.28 
+9057 que fet 8.385 
aaT ST Prartary 7.73 
aa Agar: AF 6.90; +3.77 
aaT TTT HTT: 8.44 
mer afer ar 9.102 
+aareaistr FT faa: 3.53 
aT gaat 4.194 
WaT HOT gear 7.128 
amar ae a ane 9.42 
marae weet 9.39 
GUT ATSIMAISTS: 9.87 
2 TARTHT B Bart 3.253 
+5 “wat aT art FT 3.61 
Ta Weed Wer 11.264 
mer frat ge eA 7.208 
aT Ga ase 11,229 





Pada Index 1087 


aa oer dat 12.73 
Gay GAT AACIST 11.230 
TIT BIT ASE-S 8.286 
aur Fur fF FET: 4.20 
mer aa fe aged 10.128 
war TA: PagRit 9.307 
+FUTyT FAT 1.40 
TUT: GTA 7.16 
qaqa ey 8.391 
WITTE 7.129 
4a TACT FE 7.205 
mea ad FAIPTST 3.77 
aerfeter Prey 5-27 
aafeaea ere 9.70 
mrearenret I PAT 4.97 
BUTZT TATEr< 8.101 
TAPIA: PATS 11.261 
TUT TESHS: CATT 2.158 
aaraeeeqaras 2.5 

mar garter ety 9.311 
PATTaTE: BATT 4.51 
qereqrea ferent = eq: 7.177 
sour f wrt wreter 7.205 
+057 fe aa yay 7.205 
+9 BSAA 5.61 
Bay HASTA 1.119 
afer START 3.142 
aeeeasrar ate: 11.247 
met aes: 7.180 
40NT AA: Wet: 3.276 
sag aga 1.103, 106 
aeer aar STATI 10.30 
QaareayT Gar GA: 9.130 
aayear TUT Fal: 11.95 
TAMHUeT FT 6.88 
Baad: IW AT 8.217 
arpa Harfor 12.92 
BUT TGA 8.257 
mara BT 5.72 
auiedst fate 4.100 
marge Fetar 7.110 
Tea ME, Bed 10.123 


1088 


gedta ward 8.305 
UGTA 9.99 
Wael VACA 9.127 
TaropATesT YcaT 1.56 
ae T MAAS 7.181 
uel I eorearetinr: 7.172 
Wear Wear ¢ 7.174 
Far WET ANAT 7.170 
qar wat Fate 6.80 
Tat ART ATT 7.171 
aerenreseragea4r 7.169 
gar a aay arta 1.52 
Ter cafafe AAT 1.52 
qT Ms T BalT 8.9 
+a ARaeHT T RAT 5.51 
afe aah aaere 7.176 
are g TRANSIT 12.21 
ate & gad fersay: 7.108 
afe cafarertr 31 
afe careafaar amt 2.243 
ate aer Tae 7 8.233 
afe + worden 7.20 
ate aT TAY 4.173 
ae Sart Us RM 8.253 
ae TaTIAAT 8.213 
ate eat wear: 2.223 
ae MTATRTAT 9.85 
ae fe eat tT Mtr 3.61 
TRAE 1.71 
aer arene: 3.283 
uearer far GIT 9.155 
UgeaaMarag 11.194 
agere aga 11.239 

UE FARAATACT 8.80 
Usa USS 11.20 
Tea ABET 5.47 
Tea: SATA FANT 6.7 
Tae py 4.159 
+TISTATARPIT: | 4.169 
Gea FT RTL 4.159 
+aeqfevay ala 3.98 
aaeater fatter 3.275 





Pada Index 


ae Bed feof 2.4 
aaerad fees: 3.231 
mesa Aer @ 5.102 
TTT TV: 9.50 
aay QTd ATs: 9.154 
aafrar g are: UII 9.203 
GIT fated ay 2.174 
TIT ASU 1.29 
garaeter et a: 12.20 
caer feat Bat 9.162 
TaTS BRUAS 8.22 
Ugl Agl WET 12.68 
aghedterr YE 3.238 
T gq paftr aft: 1.28 
a T TPR UT 8.38 
aarfa PERIEEIAT 8.408 
ayaa: GAT: 1.17 
TAT AAT FSSA 9.20 
TAA TAST 9.126 
TATA TBAT: 4.204 
waraaad FAT 4.204 
afr! + aecatt: 8.115 
aad J arr fer, 2.115 
TAT Faeaa? FF: 8.92 

a oa ofeyetard 9.171 
T HAM BST 9.178 
a Aratart Bar 2.207 
GaSe FRAT 2.161 
TATA aad 5.25 
+THTTAAATT 8.341 
aatreeg at aay 9.57 
GAGES AATAT 9.120 
Taseragares tar 8.343 
ey Prearere set 3.153 


ae ayadl BIT 8.224: 9.73 
meq yatafareer 9.281 
+9eT yar ae 5.104 
ae via: Wee: 7.94 
Ue Wy Ue PRATT 8.319 
meas wrarfrer 8.174 
TRAM: Te 8.355 
TRATYIGAIT 8.333 
TATE TASAPIAT: 3.78 
weet FAT 6.40 
TATEAALAIT 3.193 
OeATeaT qs 75 
TATE NAATAT 10.72 
aera ae ST: 8.208 
TT HART Hr 11.234 
afar Rraad? 2.92 
afer favftafer 8.11 
+ofeaaer ard 10.1 
aera arate 9.107 
aaa fret 3.60 
aera HS 8.228 
aferarertarae o 8.117 
met carferar at 5.151 
TT BATT FAT 11.98 
mer F deat ore: 9.181 
Ter Fates wa 11.7 
TE TAT BATT 8.108 
+aer ateast FST 4.195 
+7ET TY ATEHAUTAT 9.88 
URT Ware var sft: 7A 
Gel AT T AAR 7.148 
mer framerate 3.139 
Gey qa fear 9.162 
TET Tae FATT 7.134 
Tet agra es 2.160 
mer fags aac: 8.96 
TET WRT PET 8.21 

Ter eat: FT AT 8.386 
Tear fA GRIM: 9.69 
TEI T WARTAT 3.11 
Tea Taraher 1.95 
aeae faar Fst 12.10 


Pada Index 1089 


sey FRAT ATF: 2.239 
a: Hla TJ HAM 12.12 
a: Pela TAT FET 2.143 
a: eprepeahret: 2.7 
a: wet frat FATT 8.94 
a: arate Bed 3.140 

qT: Oa GAT 8.176 

a: weary fesisete 2.167 
a: wer aeaaast 8.50 

a: crease 2.107 
qT: SPAMS 8.150 

ar ar art q sftatse 12.53 
aera IR SAT 8.34 
+ORTeT Ta FATT 2.188 
ar aR aad 9.173 
+I FT: AAT 3.259 
APTN TATET 12.33 
OTe: ROTATE: 10.113 
UMATATIATENAL 11.181 
MARAT BT 10.76 
USARATAATT 8.340 
anranars fret 10.110 
SONTAG? ATS 4.91 
arated TF GIT 3.151 
asaraanestarry 4.33 
ag eat Teaeat 8.370 
aararagtasert 4.3 
area oT WAT CAT 9.22 
areer aoraratfer 9.161 
ager Tad FT 9.36 
aga FETA 4.134 
agar wordt fe at 9.9 
area wate WT 5.34 
arear afar: wrat: 8.61 
aTearT g HTT 12.81 
AIST WAST 4.254 
OAS TAT arat 4.232 
GATATATA AST 4.202 
ane at Ug@d 8.290 
UAMACSTAAT 2.202 

mitt TaTHI HOT 8.251 
ae dager erat 1.44 


1090 


ater wera 5.10 
TMaHrad: Tr 9.147 
ater UTS 7.118 
TITRA 5.132 
araaprer fata 9.316 
OTFARET LPT: 10.130 
OT Ter aT oa 9.175 
areat oratter aT: 12.19 
sore: oBrt apy 4.91 
UPA AAT: WIT 12.22 
WIBS THT FAT 8.236 
Ot WAS THT FANT 8.235 
ar aft erg fear 9.82 
Wat: VETMSFH: 3.178 
aradht GAagkE: 8.155 
Mad Tad PMS 3.133 
Waa FRITS 8.97 
mad FET HAZ: 2.235 
Wah CTH: 8.27 
AEST TACIT 3.237 
4.411 
grea tears: 3.124 
Tara TRAIT 5.38 
TSAI 5.126 
WAATAT TT 9.249 
aT Afaeadt GATT 4.2 
aT aqarel: ATA: 12.95 
ar aafatear fear 5.44 
Ua Aaa Ye 3.54 
TATE EYSlEAC: 9.193 
+UR Sd TACT. 9.14 
Twa a TTT 7.142 
saparetertieter 4.95 
ath: aR 2. 243 
gam aol ar pat 7.197 
Fe BArTT 3.278 
BIT Wad 1.54 





Pada Index 


y 7 AeTAA: ZT 3.193 

Y AF ATA: 9.269 

a (EAATATEET: 10.46 
at Sahat 8.279 

at quate GETAT 12.37 
OT TORT: 8.353 

aa aera art 9.297 
ae ake PINT 12.39 

aq at gq weet 4.234 

at aq WTST 8.334 

aq saad AF 12.13 
Dares Star 12.36 
aarer freer mar: 4.178 
+ ger” way 9.231 
asap seep erear 9.113 
+2 Tofer fear: PAT 12.126 
Y WHIPS: 2.86 

aX amafaar faut: 4.197 
+2 Bat: MART: 8.102 
zt Bare herrraest 11.42 

aot saws: pfassr ar 9.211 
aur g arear eT 1.42 

aor feat aestt ini92 
a waar: wean: Far: 3.150 
Bea TT 11.211 
Aertel FT 3.48 
WIsgaesrs 11.72 
joraarreray HIATT 12.24 
a HAP: wats: 10.100 
a: od: Ta Tea HT: 9.314 
OSHA FIIHAT 8.364 
ae TTT 7.127 
UPAATAMC FT 9.219 
GVTEHSIIT AT 8.230 
apmearaaaateg 8.165 

UY WAeaSaMT 8.219 

at Srwsr Stsg_kt: EMT 9.110 
ay ser fafasdte 9.213 
ay WSt Fey aay 2.174 
aseareaar edi 8.340 
at ear BATA: 6.39 
+47 qeatrersor 6.1 


ar et vepralar 5.158 
GNEelaseaSTtay 2.82 
aera TF 2.141 
aisaeter fgsit Te 2.168 
at T seaftareer 2.126 
arsarteanh: SAT: 11.14 
APH eAsay 6.63 

at Fret GTA: 8.181 
ar frery areater 8.191 
OSIM GATT 4.255 
OY TUATTIBAT 5.46 

aT STSTTATATaT 8.382 
OT ATVasIaHEAT 8.95 
+aT ATT qq fe 3.53 
at mar fates 3.180 
Al Agar TIT SS 12.05 

Ul Ger get atep 3.22 
ar mer wires 8.158 
ay mer aerate 5.15 
+aY Teast wae 4.221 
ay seater feast 3.36 
ar aratsedtart 8.59 

ar ar wadasr 11.182 

aT at arareeeaat 1.20 
ASVATASAT 8.307 
aT tat: oferyerter 4.87 
arsradt afer 4.235 
ape arate @ ahr 5.106 
+OT BIPATATAST 12.14 
aT SMITA FTI 10.96 
aaa & a 2.11 

ay t gavafart: 2.156 
ay aa: RATGSA: 11.12 
USAT RASTATAT 11.19 
USATACEAISITET: 1.7 
Geert: BRAT 12.12 
asheeemty Wary 5.45 
ar air. a fesir fat: 3.010 
aT wer atarae 4.81 


xr 
THI Tea TTA 12.66 





Pada Index 1091 


BMIEMTAAT 9.253 
Wet SAAC TAT: 9.3 
WITT FATT 8.306 
wef a frarapr aTaeT gear 12.44 
eerie a Perera ATEIT: 1.43 
weer fareratedr 3.204 
wearer aaer 7.3 
ed AAT 7.99 
wert adage 7-101 
verar qeashe 9.15 
seed fF TEM: 7.181 
WPT FAT 4.216 
wrengar art 4.41 
wre eat FATERT 5.108 
WEIR TAT 5.66 
WAIOAMST FT 6.77 
VII T WAT 3.239 
THT HATTET 5.133 
Uaasy Be AST 115 
Ger IS 7.203 

wl Ra aAT: 8.209 
wpa BRT ST 7.96 
aaa 7.69 

Tal Cater: 10.94 
WIAA TI 7.203 
Tere aI 3.24 
WIGHT FHT 7.125 
CAAA TT 3.202 


+UATUAREMT 8.268 
MHI BAT 11.88 
UIMYASSEeT 8.318 
UAARATAP YET 3.119 
INRIA FT 8.249, 265 
UTA 2.139 
used MATT T 8.149 
RST FT waar 3.120 
UT TSqgATAT: 8.40 


1092 


wert: arora 12.46 
IaTs AT Ase 4.218 
WaT HAA 8.19 
war fearorr Bary 8.196 
Ue aay WTS: 8.314 
tra TATSAAT 11.23 
urettar: FASGVSPT 5.16 
err aes 1,114 
Tard WHAT AST 8.1 
Us: BIT 9.275 
UST: REIT ATIST 8.399 
+t: Prt BS WATT 7.143 
Us FT Baa: 7.97 
Ue aT: Yh VINK 8.213 
+UST ret FAI AT 8.358 
+uatt waterar aed 11.178 
Uet FT ews 7.97 
oars: afta: ferer: 7.120 
Tat Tor: yes 2.37 
Tait ATeretas BAM 5.94 
aait Farr aarfer 9.301 
aatt fe Teer: 7.123 
UsIrFAGMMTAay 9.221 
arr a aad 1.73 
UPTRTATATeaIAY: 5.66 
UP: wer aT PT 8.86 
Uy: MARTA YATAT 1.65 
war wT see 4.73 
+t fASEYSITT: 2,220 
war + frayed 10.54 
Wat mx 7 BAT 3.280 
TT ae MT 7.113 
weet ae: BATT 8.380 
aftadt: ae agree 10.61 
Tey TaIRIHAL 9.272 
+UgaeAad fF 3.280 
Renate afesRreg 8.405 
+feprearet TAISEN 9.135 
Seq waAVEHTAT 12.122 
wae T Qe WAL 4.122 
BUGIS 4.141 
SIACATATAT: 3.40 


PG&da Index 


Ya: rer TS tq 11.174 
Wa: ARM 11.59 
WiSAAALT 8.108 
TAT TEMP 444 


oO 


wet aeayar aT CAT 11.74 
+soerern, fea: BaTT 3.49 
BoeaAay UW: 2.46 
OMTert WA TIAT 9.331 
Beanearerar FT 12.57 
BPsaerrs 8.131 
BHICIMIT FHA 3.213 
+OTereTr goararatter 9.242 
BSMIFGIZT 9.315 
oer F fegert 1.31 
Brepanfettsat UAT 5.97 
arm: wae: wT 12.33 
SARAH WET 8.120 
SIFT RIAATT 8.118 
arene? greet 4.71 
BEIFINT T 4.90 
aieargerratart 5.6 
aia afar aft 2.37 


q 


+TTATTCUSTY: QTL 8.277 
AHA RAITT 7.205 
aftrars BHT T 1.90 
FT DST 8.116 
art seared eq: 11.101 
aera war TAA 8.130 
erat Teg: 10.56 
aearer oy: WAT 10.56 
area usar 7.40 
aT SAT 3.88 
aqerdar aaar 8.285 
sod OPER: BAT: 7.154 
at aay fram: 6.1 

ay J Eee 6.33 


FRATSA SIGIR 9.81 
+TUTORSAT FT 6.1 
art FAST AWS: 11.152 
agerrdtctarat 7.64 
ae: eurseter 4.18 
+aatshereat ATHETAT 3.9 
Say: MII 3.261 
at ear fesyr: 10.97 
+e aBrerarerst 8.102 
+9C HAMA: 8.102 
RISARMAT AT 7.187 
aRoqerrer: 7.84 
qe Far UTar: 9.308 
santa 4.128 
SMI AT AT 2.177 
asian 6.14 
au SY TANT T 8.go 
anteater aarter 8.24 
SSIES: 4.68 
AUT THC WH 9.67 
TUTAT GTRRIGMT 2.18 
+ TOTTI OT 11.139 
SUTATAPTAMT FT 7.35 
auras eart 10.57 
are RSPEI 4.10 
aaa URI Fea 8.173 
ay SISTA 5.53 
TANIA TF ATT 8.28 
ar peategaary 2.100 
FUT GRIT YTET 3.44 
aaReae DATA 11.129 
FUT YPATEST 5.135 
afecar at aTe: 4.116 
afessfafear ahs 8.140 
aseatt aT 8.110 
ada aT dt aT 6.6 
aetearyyeor 2.41 
oe g Pray 3.284 
: 10.50 
et TIASHL 9.219 
soe ay Talftr 5.115 
FATT FF FT 11.189 


Pada Index 1093 


ARATT SIR: aT 11.51 
arte FAT FORT 2.159 
areeret + STAM 11.33 
arPavSest FT TST 7.48 
anatS aL Bar 8.129 
AREvSYPAT WSU 8.72 
ATSUSIST AATEUS: 12.10 
+arever aaa 12.10 
sarever efer fst 12.10 
TTR 8.345 
arcade wert: 8.105 
arar aray Gt PH 12.8 
safe pita BT 12.10 
ahaa: aerar 12.9 
are Wor WT WIT: 4.23 
area Prayeent 12.121 
araat Paar: at 4.256 
arate Terr WT 4.23 
ares mreager 8.410 
ATASIOTSMT 11.120 
aTeTSWUTATA 12.46 
ASAT 8.269 
amt SANA FT 11.136 
FAIA THK 8.339 
AARYCHTAG: We: 12.71 
ardl fatter: SCAT FT 5.144 
araerat patorr qT 3.92 
AGIAN GATT 3.189 
org: an Sera WT 5.105 
aravit fereearorrey 1.77 
aRaayaTeer 4.48 
aitaeqramnter 4.229 
arate F277 10.80 
arate Mage: RIT 9.326 
+o TT WE: 3.271 
anfforaer Arey 3.271 
SATACATS: 4.233 
arf? aT TT 3.202 
aierage Aa 9.304 
sept sae 10.89 
FTAA cater: 6.11 
arent Aro 10.52 


1094 


STAT SET SCAT 11.137 


+OTSaraT Se ye 8.205, 289 
faarctar arear 7 7.115 
ferercftaregy aed 7.117 
fa@dfaar Freer 9.226 
fratert aitecaray 9.225 
fenenesart gq 4.249 
apes 7-158 
fasparely ot feeRreq 8.201; +8.81 
sfamedt 7 SATETATE 5.51 
fasta fronssrt 10.90 
faahe weer ee 8.197 
faery oer UWSIT 7.143 
ferret g faearer 5.75 

ferret MAT FT 3.285 
feooratt wafer 3.285 
feet qd eq AE 8.233 
feaetradr Pret 6.52 

frat qeT aT FT 8.187 
fart adueart 8.401 








Pada Index 


frat ve aatset ar 9.76 
fear ferer afar: Far 10.116 
fagesaaarer 1.38 
fagramaay 4.103 
feats: ofee: afe: 21 
fag aeMIt FET 8.37 
faarat FIAmET 9.60 
faearar frarret 9.62 
ferret anfitar Ser 11.35 
fers sift afer 9.75 
feerer afer waren: 9.74 
+fafear adeatrr 12.84 


fareRrafreant: 2.80 
faygrer ert wat 11.177 
fayart fate 6.62 
fawagitt & arse 3.220 
faved WaT 10.123 
fever afefee ar 11.81 
fever Pry ay 10.10 
fener eur = 4.111 
fovettattar 8 9.150 


fame satay SavST 2.155 
+fagngeat gat JT 11.107 





freng anaes 8. 229 
faate ar fatafrer 11.206 
ferareay aT HASTA 9.241 
fares T quater 3.207 
fafeenty a tar 12.61 
fateerf a rear 2.240 
fafeeratafaset: 6.29 
fafeerita after: 12.76 
faqert MaeT 9.128 
fafarsé pafagit 9.34 
fatte: Brag aT 5.154 
fagreater PRIA 5.101 
fasrrasaerat 7.55 
farrel STETT: BEIT 8.417 
feast yor 9.31 
sferarea ar 7.105 
+o 7.105 
feererte FPRT: 3.90 
feeaat Ber Varay 3.85 
fepaer ed: UTeAeT 11.29 
face a centr 7.218 
fareeresyier 7.218 
fear 7.205 
favaror aerator 1.15 
farary SAGE 2.96 
fesse FT 1.89 
faut UNAM 9.2 
fasaiear ae 12,32 





Pada Index 1095 


feareeryt Te 2.239 
fener are hrenearst 4.220 
feesacaer oar 8.219 
fager T FAT: Tal: 7.146 
fagsr ear 6.79 
fAGCT ATAMTETET 3.258 
ferehae aait Star 7.33 
feeTArestr 7 9.55 
feet TF TAHT 7.201 
eae Ta: BMT: 3.177 
ayaairewayr Far: 6.32 
FHITMAGAT 7.106 
FHT WT SITAST 12.67 
qeayerad amt: 7.192 
afer aT weet 8.239 
adtar Bay aq 1.113 
FA MITHTT 6.56 
+geet rae 3.180 
TUPAC 5.7 
TUTIA: WaT 5.38 
TIALS 11.145 
TAA LATATAT 5.89 
gur fe sre Bry 8.11 
gaat fe vac 7.38 
geared fret aaq 7.38 
+FSGRET WHITE: 8.153 
+3al wy Aayaey 11.5 
ayaa WT: 11.128 
gyterear We 11.117 
gyverear art 11.131 
qt WaT Bla 10. 43 


1096 


age aera 2.166 
FauSrerr 2.83 
aafeeaty aiser 3.179 
+aafaey fatachy 11.5 
+aafere#n faferaral 12.119 


FAAS aAS BRIT 11.246 
FARIA TTT 10.80 
garage fe fawer 2.166 
seria 7 3.186 
Fea Tar 2.97 
SAHARA 1.84 
qars fear aa 2.6 
sated aa HT 4.14 
aateart Pear 11.204 
aaay ag 2, 105 
aay faaresferare 7.41 
AVaRGREATST 4.18 
SUT 7.219 
+aoites ae T 1. 15 
AIST: qe: 10.68 


Pada Index 


afeas: waft: Te: 2.26 
aeenrearaat 10.36 
See 9.253 
seen ehteart 10.47 
aeeha SAAT 10.19 
after aaae 4.133 
aarfessat peter 3.67 
aarfeasr fate. fr 2.67 


Seqer gd AY AAT 11.236 
aarer erage 2.32 

aerer at Sepftary 10.10 
Sat: THIEMST 5.83 

Ser: vate water 5.99 
Aer: ARAQVST: VAT 8.375 
aaa sereaaet 9.151 
aay TI ATCA 10.23 
aaa STA: 2.155 


aeaste: wrath 2.62 
+SRiY gTSME: 1.86 
avarseaetart = aT 8.267 
payed fe aaa 3.121 
pagaer reat 3.84 
aaa gq fst 3.108 
ag: a rat water 9.173 
+e araer 3.207 
TAIT He 2.72 
araHeagt far 4.260 
UAH ASAT 12.18 
aatrer feftay at 8.420 
ahrarery We: cat 5.164; 9.30 
caftrartor AUTAT 10.24 
TARR 8.1 
SITS ofa 7.137 
aaery FRAT 10.53 
OTT T TUPT 7.53 
AT TCTPT 7.45 
ATTA Taher 7.53 
eae Ber 7.159 
FOTIA FET 4.226 
AUS BAET WWW 8.260 
eaterat favgrt aT 9.72 
SARA ALWAASAT 9.80 
ARTE WATS 7.216 
MME TSTAT 8.260 
eure femora car 6.70 
+S: 7.205 
+FO1g eT: aatedt 9.253 
FAINT FT 1311 
aeraret qd asatared 11.159 
qearaeaegey 2.189 
qaeraht ates 3.234 
aay TAUAPT 2.3 
Fay WT WS 4.198 
sTAIaTS FT T 4.204 
FTAA STRITCITT: 11.63 
WIA FE Fa 8.373 
arearg sad fray 10.21 
WIM IT PAT 11.198 
Hea: Wear AE 9.39 


Pada Index 1097 


st 


STARIASSIIT 7.116 

STAG 7.117 

Ih PAIS T 8.388 
are: Tear GldT 11.9 

Uhh Wet Tet T 10.124 
ates araeer oy a 11.210 


aed STATA: 4.32 
aeany Fe ago 10.129 

arer frearfareer 4.106 
SOTA Wat: 2.44 

ae saTfor after 4.165 

Bet SATSAT 7.74 
aavardd set 8.98 

Be AS TATEST 8.267 

Baa TT GST: WICISH 8.385 
Bas TST TST: SINGAAT 8.264 
Tay IST Wey: VMBAIT 8.378 
seagate fatar: 3.186 
aqarary frst 7 7.186 
aaeq PRATSMTT 10.43 
aaa AAT 4.172 

Bog: aay ST T 12.98; +6.71 
SRAIATATAAT ATT 8.237 
aarei + ysl 4.74 

+ SATA STAT 5.115 

a: Wear 4.112 

area TelrepeaTary 4.250 
TAIT S BL 9.17 

TAT 2.119 
SATA 2.119 
+A WEA T 4.57 
BUTT TRIST 11.199 
SOT 11.191 
IOSATTAT 6.26 

ae: afar ae: 3.44 
MIRAPTCH AT 8.247 

MAS aaAPAT 12.16 
SRST: 7.112 


1098 


ait: PACT: 12.9 
aete da ary 7 2.192 
aaa 9.236 
SII BT 6.68 
arereor ay AT 8.17 


TARA AIST 10.79 
Seer aay UT 10.119 
+3 BATA 8.341 
MPYSHAA FT 5.119 
TREPATTARAL 3.145 
+e yan 4.219 
arte arate 5.139 
IMst T ARIAT 9.23 
+UTOASAET 8.341 
Bers Has HAT 8.396 








ahraraaihrerarer 12.77 
Bee eet ACT 11.195 
ger vid ae 4on 
Belt AT BUTT 11.154 
Seay Sa sare 2.177 
serantetrad: 11.218 


Pada Index 


BRAT Aaa 7.31 
ara tar fafa tT 3.206 
+ areata: areatg: 5.131 


at FE TSBET 9.98 
yew T PIT TANT 8.369 
Bor TOITA: 8.366 
opast eat 9.100 
part UIRECL 8.400 
FOIA BIST 8.398 
{PAW AAMT T 7.88 
aparacar TAP 11.111 
PAT FT YR 0.334 
genet fears 7 4.139 
SBT Seay ATT 11.156 
aT PTET 8.413 
8.104 


qe yea 5.56 


FEIT FOE J 10.18 
FET J AVANT: 10.41 
arr after wrt 5.140 
Iarerarra: Su 10.12 
Zsa araraat: 8.383 
{Sa ASIST: 10.64 
qataat Tags: 3.16 
Fars Ud: FSM 8.68 
IAT fe GARATAT 2.172 
wer arar Wat 3.13 
Yar TAAYA aT 8.374 





ispoenes 4.158 
TIE T at FT 4.226 
TeIpPA wat a 4.226 
Tel WT AY AT SMTA 3.259 
TTT AqIAST 4.225 
ITAA ZT 10.63 
TES: THISSIT I 3.275 

+ TE TATTOO 3.259 
ATSYGIGIACT 3.250 

FTE Var oT sro 3.249 
ATE WARATRAIA: 3.276 
ATSTVIT MSTA aT 4.95 
Prt TaRaT ye 2.52 


Pada Index 


+ateray astafrer 4.69 
APA IEMT 5.120 
ye tar a one a 8.273 
yas fafecareyr 7.135 
YAFAMITA AT 9.244 
yarattes ay Taare 11.22 
TTNAIAT AA 4.226 


safage wT SM 2.14 


sycar wet 7 wer FT 2.98 
oaargrat TAT 5.1 
Tat IF sy 5.3 

TAT: STATS 9.184 
RTPLAC TT 12.86 
TTY TEAht 2.207 
+O: AGAR 9.88 
SSAA 1.100 


Sep gfe waa: 5.135 
aS VHT 3.164 
PRTC CE Ty Sata 4.115 
TN SPT PTT 11.132 
saftrgcrer aay 5.131 
TATA SATA IST 10.106 
TTA WMSHAt T 4.216 
RTSCAIETTT 12.55 
ATTRA LES: 11.200 
maT great 3.241 
raat fafeer 12.65 


1099 


1100 
safer areTasy TET 5.18 
T 


yapueer TAIT 4.9 
yePrarateaa TT 3.1 

yey Vey WAT 8.403 
YSTTe fewer 3.23 
Vegas THEHATT 3.217 
sofas 5.83 [bis] 
+UGRT Hcl 4.249 
sort J BAIT 10.76 
TOTTI FT TAT 12.86 
saa att 4.7 
THT Aa IT AIT 6.18 
UAT Seo 3.269 
+VSTSAY SATA 4.128 
+OtaT ad aft aft 3.275 
UBS gq ereaar 9.164 
USAGI AT 11.201 
yessamrerd ATR 2.34 
TTT: 7.126 
Wsaet F AMET 8.337 


a 


qa TAMAS 2.88 
+A eat 7.205 
aaa fryer 7.214 
+agatey TBST 7.205 
+aga hy Ty yay 7.205 
+O GTTIaaT GSAT 7.205 
art WATT 12.60 
aany farant aT 9.1 
AIT THYAT 6.68 
Tees 7.135 
UAT UST T 7.136 
MACHT FATS: 11.199 


Pada Index 


4ATROT TTT 10.84 
qacae adit JT 5.76 
qT STAM 8.31 
arearrer yer: 4.32 
Easrey TaTHS 7.205 
+UTT BEI TET 3.98 
aarea Prfeer arf 7.185 
PIII TAS 10.60 
aarearadt te 1.117 
TaRNATI AT 12.54 
agMRasy ar FF 9.216 
aepar Beat TF 5.51 
see BATT SPTT 7.205 
aeprer fesrrer 10.3 
TEPRTF WT 2.66 
GRITSIATATET 9.190 
aeaen wo Par 7.165 
ASarATATIL 7.191 
Geel SAAT 2.71 

qq Vd ar aTedtet 8.208 

a UF aie at FAST 9.132 
a@ UF TAT: TT: 9.107 
Hey MST T 2.140 
ARIAT GAGeA FT FT 8.364 
AAT TTA AEST 8.368 
T BAC: YT Fey: 7.7 
Apsara 11.251 

qT pear wept Pay 11.159 
@ PAT SAAT 11.19 

oT Pear great qed 7.148 
appear favafer 9.47 
apes FerMte 9.47 

a plan: AAA 9.174 
Feet. FART ay Bay 11.171 
Te: TAS T ay yedoreay 11.59 
a were We SIT 3.93 

ao WSs (AT: 2.044 
aT TOTAL art 2.249 
a Te YS SCTA: 9.170 

a yest gTaAeT 3.71 

ao MecIHHes WT 11.116 
AHMTAPAUY 11.126 


APART AT 11.69 
THe Waaeaay. 10.40 
GHATS: BAT FT 2.3 
gata & J 10.25 
AHARATIAT 9.285 
Beas WaT Bl 7.34 
aurmtmaPafaer 7.88 
aad T Apa 4.89 
+8 FT ATAPI APT 3.153 
aT a caTeaatermracy 9.93 
arraraed UWeEt at 7.54 
aT ae TR GSE: 8. 295 
afer afeuger 11.203 

o tear aaa 5-45 

a Haar PRT 2.168 
assafer fe & are: 8.362 
@ war aferay ear: 2.23 
Asa: VTEARATT: 4.106 
+a Bor UT 4.227 
attest eps 4.89 
asfaafe are 1.57 

a ae wearer: 8.180 
@ wer TAAL 12.25 

oT aes aT AT 1.28 

+7 amedt war fam: 5.53 
a cele ret BATT 11.182 
T TANTEI RS 8.288 
a aaah 7.122 

ao agar eareat 5.33 12.2 
Ye FA 1.4 
atest Sarre 7 3.126 
oa fe ard caer 8.303 
+TTTHVTTET 6.61 

ae at TART 12.26 
aa wena 12.24 
WIT BAT GF: 12.38 
aey aret garaef 8.81 
+0787 SATE TIT 8.82 
FTATATAY 4.175 
ATTA TagrT 6.46 
wore 7 ATTRA 8.45 
acager g ayy 11.197 


Pada Index 1101 


wer gard fs Fare 4.138 
+I ATTASST FT 6.45 


Fe FT ATT Hare 8.164 


FT AY T Ac WET 11.188 
tT que Waa 8.319 
ay ey: pwrosreret 8.215 
OU away fafrar ate 8.154 
aear Werear wer 5.150 
+87 TAA FST 5.53 
agar gq Tepar 9.169 
wear wiry 9.168 
aareanty STAT 9.125 
FIAT ATE: 10.6 
areata Aca 8.46 
aa: tafe aa 10.92 
TT HATSH IT CATT 6.18; +4.7 
aa: Bfawsd FT: 5.98 
a ar aBraTTUy ead 9.282 
a anita we AST 11.28 
a Praise: MBEAN 9.207 
AGS Asay Wal 3.60 
aay FS TS 4.12 
Gay TATEMT 4.12 
FeaT WAAR 6.3 
arr 7 fare aT 7.160 
afer fexar g a ae 9.276 
afer gq fefeer fear 7.162 
satearewroarl 7.64 
AASVAAIT FT 4.131 
AAMSVAAT FT 3.280 
aeaareafaten: 2.78 
Seat AIT ATAT 7.223 
Raa Ber 3.280 
Saar ATET 9.278 
afraray F HET: 5.74 
aa F ART 2.93 
ahaa 2.175 


1102 


UAT HATA 1.16 
+TTAIPAMT 6.95 


aarer aspaier 6.95 
TUG: 6.96 

e Fareor aay 4.87 

aT WISTAT BAF 4.255 

& OAT FS BIS 11.26 
a afaesr fAareAt 3.94 

FT URAAT BT: 9.178 
AIS: AWaIaVVTS: 8.240 
ATSray AISA 8.242 
afrsar T Jet 5.60 
AAPA THT 7.52 
aHgIaHt TF 6.48 

ae Weparayr ear: 9.294 
+URTAAT BATT 5.8 

ae fearrar ae: 10.115 
Sarre meget 11.123 
TAFAS UIT 9.296 
Sara yepetar J 9.295 
+THET Tet: FST 4.201 
@ WYAEH TF 9.287 

a Test Zar ake 5.35 
aaah eaaTS 5.71 

aT Fe TARAS 2.82 

g Tee Tay: 2.116 
art: Aer: WATT 8.79 
UHTAITATSITAT: 9,264 
muta 9ITAt 8.10 
AUT aT 7 VATA 8.13 

a WoT a arate 3.115 
TARA 8.74 
ara ae Taeary 6.44 
+Uy ya) Tae 9.253 
UAASTANY SFT 7.85 

at wsgareranstt 12.91 
+ORET TATE 3.153 
SAAN FT ATA: 9.156 
ara feardtar 8.269 
CAT 7.196 
area fart: SRST 9.134 
aaere FETT: AERC 9.210 


Pdda Index 


aaeae fem. earfeter et: 9.120 
aaa fear: rafter oft 9.205 
TART FT way 7.57 
a FelAhaar Yr 9.67 
aT Fay AAT 6.66 
a ara a ftar a: 2.144 
TAAAMHAT FT 7.163 
aaa BT 4.40 
TAMIGATAET 5.60 
GN Tea GAT 5.88 
aaa gear FF 11.82 
aafaate FITS: 1.56 
saa fearet 3.98; 4.212 
sored pate 7.62,64 
wes FT ART 2.51 
ater wr ost 7.26 
afer pera 8.41 
aay 8 Yet: WAG 7.19 
+TTPUTHIRAT 8.268 
UATMAAT ST: 8.287 
ayer T APTeT 5.49 
AYTACTEAHTT 8.347 
AAMT EAT 3.244 
AAUAATTATT 9,282 
TASUTRIST: 8.157 
ayaa Tat T 3.158 
aye TUcaray 8.188 
ayTey Bry 6.41 
+UQGHATS FT 5.124 
tT wat are ater 3.249 
aatsquregerdit aT 3.49 
wy J PIPL 8.73 
wae fart FT 9.287 
TANGA UST 7.87 
AHSAP Sa 8.177 
arate 3.254 
WaT: TYAS 7.143 
BISA TSIMHAT 2.131 
aouratsetsrar 10.73 
aor cafe 3.99 
aogatret gary 12.74 
BMT YSTATIT 8.146 


eater wer at ferent 2.147 
ay Taya 8.4 
aye eat Har go 
aunt AF AT 8.200 
aan afaea4r 3.141 
GAME TAM PST 2.162 
Sa oT 5.124 
aerate at 8.54 
aad y 7.60 
TRMEAGIA: 6.74 
ATES 9.252 
+e Prosar feat 2.23 

a afe sfasde 8.183 

a urea: fsa 38.181 
a ae wreet fam: 11.25 
ATAMEIEM: 2.17 
+ORSET TF MATE 4.44 

Y UST gear aus: 7.17 
UT TeAGUyT 8.176 
aed: APRA 1.24 
ae att ag 2.185 

at ar Reese Tq 9.152 
aad WaT Ft Faw: 3.36 
ae geared 3.100 

ad TAS 1.100 
ad areaty ATRL 12.118 
at UT fapren: 9.214 
TASES 9.292 

ae tear 7.205 

ad Farad oh 10.87 
ad a fasdas 4.75 

ad a ear 1.40 

+a aaa aS 7.205 
ade: WATE Sealey: 10.102 
ade: oferye art @ 4.251 
aaa: Trea 4.247 


Pada Index 1103 


aaa TAT SAT: 8.304 
wast Ff ser eq: 8.241 
aa STAT: Foul: 9.319 
+USUreTIg FF 7.205 
oder ada OT: 2.15 
aagenter eer ZT 7.96 
a g Hae 2.8 
adgerataych: 6.81 
TATA YT: 8.63 
aaTAMTAS 9.35 
aya Re: 1.7 
aay GAM 12.91 
TaaTHryT aoe 12.118 
ad WAT TA 4.160 
ad yAId TT 8.99 
TaTAT UIT J 11.4 
Boer Sy 4.158 


aattir aiaeaiir 11.188 

seater aaeer 7.205 
+saatetas Beare 7.205 
TaTIRAGTEIL 4.17 
FAISOPAMAMT 8.168 
wary TAM 10.86 
Taare 2.100 
TAATASIAAT 9.183 
aareat FAwHeT: WET 12.95 
aTeaeT Tar 9.183 
aaor qd Waa 7.71 


1104 


aa AREA AT: 2.234 
HIF qaeana;r 5.83 

aa A TART 2.86 

aa a ot yao 9.182 

aa FT AH Alt 3.172 
wash HAMA 6.88 

ad TIPPS: 8.263 
+TSUT BAAR 5.61 
aaar gd fafecaat 7.202 
aagr gq faerees 7.58 
aayr ga ATA 1.21 
Bau waar 9.114 
aauTaty Baar Fa” 6.89 
aaaTahy Baar FAT 12.84 
asurahy BANAT 12.85 
aeararey qd ZIT 9.202 
FATA JT 9.188 
aaaranerat Fea: 8.210 
AAAS FAT 4.033 
aera aarat 5.106 
aagr aTerorr ferret 10.2 
AaIAT FAAIT 11.226 
qaSIAeTAIT 8.190 
+FReT g atreg 2.137 

war quefsray Ble: 7.22 
FATT BATT 7.177 
+a: Tay 7.205 
aya: Veal AST: 8.134 
a fesfeat Star: 4.200 

ae sree arar ate 5.50 
aay feretrat 3.12 

aTaT SAE SL eS: 5.77 
TATA TOAST Fel: 5.78 
@ fasta WT ert: 12.113 

a faancer Pay 7.67 

a fayae TAT 6.85 

a faa aren fase 8.346 
a fear AAI TI: 4.71 
+8 Ff aTefTsT ATT 3.153 

a & adaamfe 2.160 
+A lS HMA 2.83 
+eearg feet aqora4r 6.70 





Pada Index 


Teas free: UWTET: 11.249 
Tea Ter: Uwe: 2.72 
wet ott 2.63 
A Act MYATES 8.225 
a Barges: 2.103 
a aart: waar 3.79 

WF ATAAAATAST 12.125 

a adem feaweT: 5.46 

a earstfedr ae 2.7 
Uae: FT Saat: 8.193 
a agitate: 2.11 
+cat TTI TET 6.1 
Tard ATTRA 4.26 
a MMleaad SHIT 3.140 
Aeagat AT 8.357 

ae Trager 3.86 
aeftrstHart J 3.248 
+08 TACT BATT 2.67 
+ae Gafeanr: wal: 2.67 
aT ede ART 9.141 

ae ait aT: 7.206 
ae Wat: SATA: 7.214 
aee fe wear 3.131 
UCAPAKTAS 2.79 
aay Wey 7.85 
Tee Array qeT: 8.375 
asa gq fqarar 2.145 
ee aTerar aus 8.383 
USA HAM GET: 8.378 
Feaal: TACT 12.114 
+UeaaT: FST: 1.10 
ASTATaY: 8.281 

a fe aay: 1.98 
aele ATS 9.270 
aelat Beal GF 3.30 
TARA 7.80 
arene Ud MIT 8.253 
aremerararr 8.178 
afer UW 1.115 
arett TEYTSAT 8.75 
aeUATa J Wale: 8.258 
areas wre: 8.182 


RISA TET: 8.82 
OT UA: TEM 11.178 
aT Waa: RN 9.176 
aT ANT WaaTs SMT 11.86 
a FARRER 9.78 
ATT AIT 7.168 
GRAM TW FAT 1.22 
saree aad: SANT 5.155 
AGATA 9.82 
Masa TAT 1.1 
aay wereearat 8.391 
aT garear fest 3.5 
+O AGSIHAMT 5.155 
aT VGSHMTATA 5.165; 9.29 
araauel yaretedt 7.109 
ARAATSAGT 4.123 
APPATICTAT FAT: 8.262 
AAMAS JT 8.259 
AAA FZ: 8.263 
araae: Byer: FIT: 4.124 
STATA TATA 7.109 
rat aT OeeeaAaT 11.263 
arat at HET 7.198 
ers 7.185 
Tap way 8.387 
—— ware REST 3.121 
+OTet Wee} 2.52 
are WT FCAT 2.186 
ORE WEIS T 5.12 
ARTI ABET 8.126 
SRA FT AMSAT 9.331 
aaa 3.244 
TIfaaaraeTAeT 4.150 
safest ter sareyx 2.83 
area a TUT 11.226 
aleasttafaar area: 2.39 
afadiaeretizite 2.104 
UNAAATAGRISAT 2.118 
araaed Ie ae 2.83 
a a: SAASaAWT 9.83 
+aTee aT Gaeae 8.351 
USAT AT PAT 8.345 


Pada Index 1105 


mee aaa J 8.346 
wMeay TF VAT 8.72 

fear Saar ARTETA 12.43 
+e aT wfaterr 12.84 
+e 9.253 
faster AISA 6.42 
Hare STy 9.293 
atate: Ba eK: 10.113 
ahr zor ate 8.249 
atat af ayy 8.245 
SRA SIT 8.265 
ahnfatyorr wee: 8.258 
adinfaareerer 8.6 
argerred eater 8.246 
Say HAT 8.248 
gpd: anftan we: we 8.256 
ge Casas: are 2.163 

ga afer BIPLEAT 2.163 


gal FAT FAA AT 3.34 
Wea cal ST WT FT 5.145 
gat aa qert 10.69 
agaae aay 7.176 
Baar 11.93 

ae tear fest ATS 11.91 
Oe & ASAaMT 11.94 
GET aT FIERT aT 9.14 
qatieagarer 4.215 
qatar: BET 11.49 
+gaor aad Uh 4.145 
Garena ar 8.321 
qarrdaprey: 11.100 


1106 


gear: ferry 7.32 
CHAT ATA 6.65 
Geareay aPaTaT ET: 1.19 
EAST TaSa: 9.5 
Tay aor saat 7.191 
yee ATgee SNE 5.61; +5.61 
TAT T 10.47 
yar acer 10.26 
GATS 8.326 
GAMIRATTAT 4.84 
at sort oP oad 11.104 
gar arthge: 2.221 
anes WN 5.164; 9.30 
Weded: WIT. SAT: SAT: 1.61 
afte wast AAA 1.19 
gfteditetgareara: 3.255 
+OGdM ITE: 1.23 
Baa feaaoreaaiy 7.189 
SaTeT FT UST FT 12.100 


Ba AGATA 4.6 


Ae AMAR 10.32 

al qenseatergse: 11.266 
ansfitate ager 7.7 
ansrarare were Usa 7.111 
ASSIS: ATTA 9.213 
Aleat FEAST 9.212 
ASA SEA 9.179 
SST yaa 12.18 
ASAAETARET 8.222 
ASIA WGN 9.146 
AICPA TEACH 3.238 
astraarryatsry 11.8 
ashrare AERA 1.8 
+aTTUTAT GT Fey 2.188 
ararar ary fast 3.197 
STAT wa: TAT: 3.198 
arfasshnr fassr 3.180 
SATA S AMT 5.96 
aaTT Ust AHS 9.129 
aaa g ae: 11.255 


Pada Index 


aSaId ATT AA: 4.81 
GSAT AST 7.30 
aser wrather AAT 8.10 
sarang aarrer 7.205 
TRIAS 5.86 
MUTE TAF 8.315 
CAMAGATPATA 4.210 
Caqaet: FASATAT 8.301 
eaAMAT ASTEST 8.302 
ar UT Pryerare 9.312 
ear qatar 9.263 
WT T ACT AT 8.6 
eaaarrred at 11.162 

mae g Te BT 9.237 
feat water Z: 8.358 
feaita fasrdur 7.150 
feaz: Broz Wey 9.26 
ferar Blat 7 Ec 4.205 
fear g waa 3.62 
fexaraagua wrt 8.70 
frre TEA 9.198 
Fassaet BT 12.69 
fear tarry fear 2.240 
ARAT Ta asaity 5.9 
cArit ares fers: BY: 8.68 
ea GaTIABe 2.33 
CAMIT FT FATTSAT 2, 179 
TARA J 5.72 
teats J FT AIT 3.52 
ofrkint + arrer 1.114 
eAyeat fearrr 8.7 
CHASM TAT 9.232 
Harorsarar FT 10.62 


oftyer earepepy aft 12.67 
Srewansaeagrt 7.149 
amy aT 8.349 
eAtgaufaciiie 1.204 
cAyyafaeesray: 11.67 
CSITACTTAR 10.6 
ears sah 3.6 


BTA SHAT 6.13 
CMY HEC 9.44 
ert ayey ate 7.56 
QTATSATAT (ASTCTAATY 6.22 
WMA Aetaae: 11.225 
+I TF ACET 8.3 
set gees get 7.205 
aM Fs T GAS 7.190 
erated F AT ILS 8.157 
easy TET 7.202 
erred aL 7.141 
TAT MRIS 3.207 
eae ae tq 5.28 
eae TP WY 11.241 
STAT: phreterar 12.42 
+ferfeer ser ater 8.82 
Soaey T add 7.211 
PTAPAATHOTA 4.259 
TAHITI T 11.204 
TAPE A Used 2.138 
+E FT TVATATT 4.201 
earear & far fearar: 11.202 
BIMaAaS: AT 11.205 
+A TWAT 4.203 
Sreaesrarca4r Fr: 2.181 
+ETTeaT TRACT ATNT.. 11.175 
Sea TIS: epyiy 5-103 
Mt FArRANT 4.203 
so ET A: Bay 4.203 
Sr wae ta 7.220 
CTR TSUNA: 2.245 
+e fated art 5.105 
+OETS FT FRAT 5.122 
ayartet farsa: aret 5.142 
el aca T Afeet 1.149 
BAIT 4.143 
CAA Wapert 5.117 
Beas: AT TAT 7.192 
+R ETAT: 8.223 
RTH Ble 7.80 
STAMNSH HAIAT 8.332 


+TATRATA HAC 3.275 


Pada Index 1107 


afer aeq are 3.3 
waged FF 2.74 
SICA] SAT 11.255 
Maat ewVT 3.163 
HT UE TT ZF 7.181 
@ @ ake Prey 2.20 
WHY SMTFAT 11.100 
west T IPT 10.24 
wera Pade 1.53 
waarere aT ferathe 9.199 
MIATA: 10.41 
wore 11.163 

a a at Wat 97 
eaqear ar faesr aT 8.167 
maar Tea 8.162 
caer Praenrar 9.167 
waeat Soaeret 10.119 
UTE TW Beast: 3.252 
mura J TT: 3.252 
wan fereer sarant 2.181 
TANSATTSATET 9.13 
TT UT aTetorr 2.213 
rarer UgY: 8.78 
TAT TART 5.52 
RAAT ATT: 11.83 
wae aerr Yen 1.101 
saa aT earar 5.83 
wae aT Rrrgror 11.105 
apres arart 7.164 
MITA WET 9.160 
waieaeet AT 9.208 
aaAT FT A FAT 8.186 
aaa CMTE 1.12 
HATS THES 1.1 
waa fearae: 8.25 

UI MAGA: RATT 7.32 
TT TSATTATT 5.160 
comers aT 10.122 
TRIG UASTSIIPT 4.13 
era assis 4.191 
wadatancttarer 11.32 
waa TST 11.31 


+l T AHA 4.130 
eat T IAT FT 8.244 

CA We BALI T 9.7 

maIeT a 7 SrepferPac 7.21 
TATRATEN FX UE 9.204 
CTTYTITT FAT: 1.61 
SAYA: GAT 1.63 


earayar Faery 1.102 





tS AT TPA T 9.166 
aet FarAaay 1.45 

cae, SE BHT: 12.70 
ARAAET HATRT: 9.118 
ee @ oF fafarert 7.35 

ee ease BaTAT 1.63 


& 


gear THAPSSTeT 11.88 
ocaT fear a Pra 7 3.33 
SCT GSMA 11.262 
SAT SH TST T 11.136 
+04 GUT Sear 5-51 

aft ATETATAPT 8.99 
Barrer ae: 11.40 
BI WAM 8.14 


Pada Index 


SURTITGMT: 9.248 
aaa fear 9.145 

erafentr any 9.187 
SUIT TSMIRGS: 3.233 

+efearqor JT FHAT: 3.237 
efaatrt fateraq 3.211 
BIRT 3.266 
afast porate 2.94 
SfaarqraaeseT 11.252 
TAMIYA ATL 11.78 
+BPAMATTCHA 2.52 
@fasqor Fara AT 11.107 
SAIPAN 1.94 
sar TF FARM 3.135 
+RRIARAAT 5.135 
SRSA: 3.162 
CRIT TOTT 12.43 
FVII AT 9.280 
+feaar Carers 11.51 
fear a: Ged SPIT 8.3 
fSarmrat terfAT 10.83 
fearteer at Fret 4.170 
feateefar warstte: 11.64 
feearor ay fara 12.57 
fearor aq Gar 12.56 
fear wate HUTT: 12.59 
fearfet FeRe 1.29 
eat qregrrr 3.164 
feay ta GHeT 9.324 
feaateeaartet 2.21 
+fECIT PTA: 5.61 [bis] 
fecer aaa T 10.114 
Tere PeaaTea 7.208 
facer yhrag aT 4.188 
[ECIAALA FT 4.189 
erates Pyer 3.7 
émontaftaer Aer 3.15 
at qerereor 8.232 

ee 7.205 

{ 4.141 

ert ‘ was ar 3.242 
MAGA: SMT 2.194 


Pada Index 1109 


oar aay Wea 10.31 say 3.281 
EHC TSI 11.205 sqmrsrngeer 4.30 
+eqsat arercrenty 5.116 Slat att StaT 8.209 
gant srarrbaret 7.145 BlaT SNSMSTAST 11.36 
sean faferastary i120 emer sreser FST 11.201 
gaa aay 9.318 arr Ward Fe 3.240 
SaaS: 2.1 ear eat afoata: 3.70 
eq: gat fam: 2.62 ferns fast: 6.59 


gay da arent 3.227 


This page intentionally left blank 


INDEX TO THE 


abattoir 4.84-6 
abortion 5.90; 11.88 
abduction 8.323 
Abhira 10.15 
abuse 7.48, 51 
Acarya 10.23 
acid 5.114 
action (activity) 1.18, 21, 22, 26, 28, 30, 
41, 42, 49, 53, 55, 65, 66, 87, 91, 102, 
107, 117; 2.4; 6.74; 7.205; 10. 74, 
76, 80-1, 96, 99-100, 117; 11.44, 
65-6, 100, 126, 188, 194, 232-5, 
246, 256; 12.2-116 
mental 1.104; 12.5, 8,9 
oral 1.104; 12.6, 8, 9 
physical 1.104; 12.7, 8,9 
actor 4.214 
Adhvaryu 3.145; 8.209 
Adityas 3.284; 11.222 
adoption 9.141—2, 159-60, 168 
adornment 3.55, 59; 4.152; 9.129 
adulteration 11.50 
adultery 3.156, 158, 174; 8.356-9, 371- 
86; 10.24; 11.60, 177-8 
adversity, time of 1.116; 2.40, 113, 241; 
3-14; 4.100; 5.33; 7-213-4; 966, 58, 
103, 168, 313, 336; 10.1—-131; 11.27~ 
30, 34, 228; 12.70 
afternoon 3.277 
Agastya 5.22 
age 2.136, 154-5; 4.18; 9.14 
old 6.62, 77 
Age 1.68, 70, 71, 72, 73, 79, 82, 83, 84, 85 
Dvapara 1.85, 86; 9.301-2 
Kali 1.85, 86; 9.301~-2 
Krta 1.69, 81, 83, 85, 86;9.301-2 
Treta 1.83, 85, 86; 9.301-2 
Aghamarsana 11.260-1 
Agnidagdha 3.199 
Agnistoma 2.143 
Agnisvatta 3.195, 199 
agriculture 1.90; 3.64; 4.5; 8.410; 10.79, 
_ 82-4, 90, 116 
Ahindika 10.37 
air 3.77, 90; 6.31; 11.215, 237 
Ajigarta 10.105 
Ajyapa 3.197-8 
Aksamala 9.23 
alkali 5.114 
alliance 7.160~—3, 169, 206 
All-gods 3.83—5, 90, 108, 121 
alligator 6.78 


TRANSLATION 


ally 7.158, 164-6, 177, 180, 186, 206-9; 
9.294 
almsfood 2.51, 108, 183, 188; 3.94—-6; 
4.5, 248-9; 5.129; 6.7, 27-8, 34, 50, 
55; 8.93; 11.73, 124, 256, 258 
ambassador 7.153 
Ambastha 10.8, 13, 15, 19, 47 
ambrosia 2.162, 239 
amnesty 7.201 
Anagnidagdha 3.199 
ancestors 1.37, 66; 2.58—9, 176; 3.37-8, 
74, 80-1, 91; 3.146; 4.124, 249, 257; 
8.37; 9.28, 106; 10.91; 11.211; 
12.49, 94 
classes of 3.192-202 
worship of 4.150 
ancestral offering 1.94—5, 112; 2.189; 
3.18, 70, 72; 81-3, 97, 122-284; 
4.31, 109-11, 116-7, 131; 5.16, 32, 
41, 52; 6.24; 9.127 
food 3.266-72 
invitees 3.150-91, 187-191; 4.110 
time for 3.273-81 
ancestry 2.247; 3.5; 5-59-60, 78,100-1; 
9.59, 187; 11.183 
Andha—Tamisra 4.88 
Andhra 10.36, 48 
anger 1.25; 2.214; 3.192, 213, 229-30, 
235; 4.163-— 4, 166; 6.92; 7.11; 
8.118, 121, 173, 280; 10.63; 11.223; 
412.11 
Angiras 1.35; 2-151; 3.198 
animals 7.72, 149; 8.44, 146, 242, 286, 
296-7, 328, 404; 9.43; 10.32, 49, 
723 11.12, 132-42, 157, 200, 241; 
12.9, 40, 68 
aquatic 1.44; 12.57 
carnivorous 12.58-9 
classification 1.43-45 
creeping 12.42 
domestic 5.39-40 
double—hoofed 11.169 
draft 4.67; 8.146, 151 
fanged 10.89; 12.58 
farm animal 1.39, 43; 4.126; 8.229, 
232-4, 238, 240-1, 244, 295, 297, 
324-5; 9.326-8, 331; 10.86; 12.42, 
67 
incisors in both jaws 1.39, 43 
land 1.44 
looking after 1.90; 10.47 
predatory 1.39, 43 


1111 


4112 Index to the Translation 


single—hoofed 5.9, 11; 9.119; 10.89; 
11.169 
skin of 2.41 
vicious 12.56 
unknown 114.156 
wild animal 1.39, 43; 5.9; 10.48, 89; 
11.138 
antelope 2.64 
anthill 4.46, 238 
antidote 7.218; 11.238 
Antyavasayin 4.79; 10.39 
Anumati 3.86 
anus 2.90—-1; 5.136; 8.282 
Apapatras 10.51 
Apsaras 1.37; 4.183; 12.47 
Aranyaka 4.123 
archer 7.74 
architect 3.163 
argument 4.139, 179-85; 8.390; 11.206; 
12.29 
Arista 5.120 
arm 1.31, 87; 3.279; 4.58; 10.45 
armor 7.92 
armory 9.280 
army 4.121; 7.65, 157, 167, 171, 173, 182, 
184-5, 188-90, 194, 222; 9.294, 
313; 12.100 
alTOW 3-44; 4-113; 9.43-4 
maker of 3.160 
arsonist 3.158 
artisan 2.134; 5.129; 7.75, 138; 8.65, 102, 
_ 360; 9.265; 10.99-100, 120 
Arya 2.39, 207; 4. 175; 7.69, 211; 8.75, 
179, 395; 9-17, 253, 258; 10.45, 57, 
_ 67, 69, 73 
Aryavarta 2.22; 10.34 
Asamvrta 4.81 
ascetics 5.137; 6.1-97; 8.407; 11.219 
female 8.363 
heretical 4.30, 61 
ascetic toil 1.33, 34, 41, 86, 94, 110; 283, 
97, 164-7, 175, 228-9; 3.98; 4.148, 
190, 243; 5.107; 6.23-4, 30, 70; 
10.111; 11.101—2, 194, 228, 234-45; 
12.31, 48, 83, 104 
ash 3.97, 168, 181; 4.45, 78, 188; 5.111; 
8.250, 327 
Asipatravana 4.90; 12.75 
ASsmantaka 2.43 
assault 7.51, 196; 11.89 
physical 8.6, 69, 72, 278-301, 345, 
386 
verbal 8.6, 72, 266-73, 345, 386 
sexual 8.72, 352-85, 367; 11.62 
assembly hall 9.264 
assessor 8.10, 140 
asterisms 12.48 
astrologer 3.162 
astrology 6.50 
Asura 1.37 


ASvayuja 6.15 
Asyavamiya 11.251 
asylum 7.160—2, 168, 174, 176 
Atikrechra 11.214 
atom 1.27; 12.122 
Atri 1.35; 3.16, 196 
attachment 1.89, 93; 3.104; 4.16; 6.33, 
49, 55, 57; 72; 75, 80-1, 96; 8.65 
freedom from 2.13 
attributes, three 1.15; 12.24-56, 99 
Darkness 12.24-5, 29, 33-4, 38, 40, 
42-4 
Goodness 12.24—-5, 27, 31, 37-8, 40, 
48-50 
Vigor 12.24—5, 28, 32, 36, 38, 40,45- 
7 
aunt 2.130-33 
auspicious 2.30, 33; 7-182 
inauspicious 11.183 
austerity 1.25, 31; 4.236-7; 5.105, 109; 
6.22—4, 75; 10.42 
Auttami 1.62 
autumn 6.11 
Avantya 10.21 
Avrta 10.15 
axle 8.291 
Ayogava 10.12, 15—6, 26, 32, 35,47 


Baka 5.14; 11.136; 12.66 
Balaka 5.14; 11.136 
balances 8.403 
bald—headed 3.151 
Balaka 12.63 
Bali 3.70, 74, 81, 87-94, 108, 121, 265; 
6.7 
Balvaja 2.43 
bamboo 4.36; 8.247, 299, 327; 10.37 
bandits 7.143; 8.66; 9.257 
banner 11.93 
banyan 2.45; 8,246 
barber 4.253 
bard 8.360 
Barhisad 3.196, 199 
bark 2.47, 76; 6.6 
barley 3.267; 5.25; 6.20; 9.39; 11.107, 
109, 126, 153, 199, 218 
barren 9.81 
barter 10.94 
bath 2.1209, 211; 3.283; 4.45, 82-3, 129, 
152, 201; 5-144;6.6, 24, 69; 7.216, 
220; 11.83, 110,124, 133, 187, 205, 
215, 217, 255, 260 
bath-powder 4.132 
naked 11.202 
with clothes on 4.129; 11.175, 203 
bath-graduate 1.111, 113; 2.138—9, 245; 
3-4, 119; 4.1-260; 5.1; 6.1; 10.113; 
11.2, 204 
battle 4.121; 5.95, 98; 7-88-90, 94, 160— 
3, 165, 171, 185, 187, 191, 194, 199; 


Index to the Translation 1113 


9.323 
bean 3.267; 9.39 
beard 4.35; 5.141; 6.6, 52; 8.283; 11.106 
beauty 3.40, 144; 4.141, 230; 7.69, 77; 
9.14 
bed 2.119, 194; 3.89, 107; 4.29, 40, 54, 
74, 202, 232, 250; 7.220, 225; 8.357, 
372; 9.17, 63; 10.56, 104; 11.166 
bed—post 11.106 
bee 7.129 
bees-wax 10.88 
begging 2.48—51, 108, 182-90; 4.5; 6.27, 
50-60; 8.93; 10.116; 11.1—26, 123, 
152; 12.33 
Bel 5.120 
belching 4.121 
betrothal 9.69,71~73 
betting 8.7; 9.221-8 
Bhadrakali 3.89 
Bharadvaja 10.107 
Bhasa 11.25, 136 
Bhauma 6.14; 11.156 
Bhrgu 1.35, 59, 60; 3.16; 5.1, 3; 12.2, 126 
Bhrjjakantaka 10.21 
Bhistrna 6.14 
Bhitatman 12.12 
Big Dipper 2.101 
bile 8.234 
bird 1.39, 44; 3.9, 261, 268; 4.208; 5.11, 
22, 40, 125, 130; 6.51, 78; 7.23; 
8.297, 328; 9.55; 10.89; 14.71, 169, 
241; 12.9, 55-6 
breeder of 3.162 
birth 1.42, 99, 100; 2.30, 146-50, 169— 
72, 227; 4.44; 5.58, 60-1, 70; 663; 
8.20, 242; 9.30, 125-6, 172; 12.124 
impurity 4.110, 112; 5.61, 77, 79 
birth rite 2,27, 29 
black buck 2.23, 41 
blacksmith 4.215 
bladder 8.234 
blind 3.161, 177; 7.149; 8.93, 95, 394; 
9.201; 11.53 
bliss 1.106, 117; 4.149, 258; 5.46 
blood 3.180, 182; 4.56, 122, 132, 167-9; 
5-135; 6.76; 8.44, 284, 287; 11.173, 
183, 208—9 
see also menstruation 
blue jay 11.132 
boar 3.270; 7.187; 11.135; 12.43 
boat 2.204; '7.192, 8.408—9; 9.161 
body 1.8, 12, 14, 16, 17, 32, 51, 54, 55, 56, 
93, 98; 2.26, 28, 60, 66, 100, 164, 
192, 232; 3.4, 7, 10; 4.184, 189, 243; 
5-109, 132, 141, 157, 165-6; 6.24, 
30-2, 40, 47, 63, 78; 7.77, 112, 218; 
8.17, 23, 125; 9.29, 133; 10.91; 
11.91, 230, 232, 242; 12.3, 8, 12, 15— 
7, 24-5 
bone 3.182; 4.78, 221; 5.59, 68, 87, 121; 


6.76; 8.95, 250, 284; 11.141-2 
boneless 11.141-2 
boundaries 7.24; 8.6, 149, 245-66; 9.291 
bow 7.192; 8.237; 11.139 
maker of 3.160 
bowstring 2.42 
Brahma 1.9, 11, 50, 68, 72,73; 2.58—9; 
12.50 
Brahman 1.98; 2.28, 82—4, 226, 233, 
244; 3.21, 27, 37, 39, 89; 4.182, 232; 
5-93; 6.32, 79, 81, 85; 7.14, 42; 8.11, 
81,209; 11.98, 102; 12.1423, 125 
time sacred to 4.92 
Brahmanas 4.100 
Brahmasuvarcala 11.160 
Brahmavarta 2.17-8 
Brahmin 1.31, 88, 93, 96-101, 103, 104, 
109; 2.20, 31-2, 36-40, 42-6, 49, 
62, 65, 80, 114, 125-7, 135, 155, 190, 
225; 3-13—-9, 23-4, 35, 63, 74, 116, 
197, 199; 4.39, 48, 58, 135, 142, 162, 
197, 199, 208, 236-7, 245, 259-60; 
§-2—4, 21-23, 27, 36, 77; 83, 87, 95, 
99-101, 104, 108, 127, 159; 6.30, 51, 
70, 93, 97; 7-32, 37-8, 58, 75, 79, 
82-6, 88, 145, 201; 8.1, 9, 11, 20, 
37-8, 60, 73) 87-9, 102, 104, 112-3, 
123-4, 169, 267-8, 272, 276, 317, 
325, 338, 340, 349-50, 359, 376-83, 
385, 391-2, 407, 411-3, 417; 9.45, 
149~51, 153, 155, 178, 188-9, 198, 
229, 232, 235, 237, 241, 244-5, 248, 
268, 313-23, 327, 334, 335; 10.1-4, 
8, 10-12, 15, 21, 30, 43, 62, 64-6, 
74, 77, 80-94, 101-14, 122~3, 129; 
11,.2—4, 11, 18, 21, 25,29, 31-5, 38, 
41, 49, 55-6, 68, 73-90, 94-8, 100— 
2, 127~30, 134, 136, 142, 150, 163, 
176, 194, 197, 202, 205, 207, 209, 
215, 220, 225, 236, 243, 249, 262; 
12.48, 55-7, 60, 71, 82—109, 113, 116 
Brahmin seers, land of 2.19 
branding 8.281; 9.237, 239-40 
brass 4.65; 5.114; 11.168 
Brbu 10.107 
breath(s) 1.22; 2.120; 3.19, 241; 4.23, 28; 
5.28; 12,123 
control of 2.75, 83; 3.217; 6.69—72; 
11.142, 150, 200, 202, 249 
smelly 11.51 
brick 8.250 
bridegroom 2.138; 3.29; 8.209 
bride—price 3.51—4; 8.366, 369; 9.93, 
97-8, 100 
bridge 9.285 
bronze 12.62 
broom 3.68; 4.36 
brothel 4.84—5; 9.264 
brother 3.11, 55; 4.180; 5.83, 15; 8.275, 


1114 Index to the Translation 


299; 9.92, 104, 118, 182, 185, 192, 
194, 207, 211, 214-6 ; 11.172, 186 
deceased 3.173; 9.146 
older 2.225-6; 3.154, 170-2; 4.184; 
9.57-8, 105-6, 108-10, 112-5, 117, 
119-20, 122-4, 126, 204, 211, 213~4; 
11.61 
wife of 2.132; 9.57-8 
younger 3.154, 171-2; 8.116; 9.57-8, 
108, 112-5, 117, 120, 122, 204, 211, 
213-4; 11.61, 186 
brother—in—law 3.55; 9.59, 69, 97, 143, 
147 
bucket 8.319 
buffalo 3.166, 270; 5. 9; 9.48, 55; 11.69 
bull 3.29, 53; 8.16, 242; 9.50, 123-4, 
150; 11.117, 128, 130, 137 
butcher 4.86 
butter 5.37 
butter-milk 8.326 
buttocks 8.281 


Cailasaka 12.72 

Caitra 7.182 

Cakra 5.12 

Caksusa 1.62 

calf 4.38, 59; 5.8, 130; 7.129; 9.50; 
11.115, 135, 137 

Calls 2.78, 81; 6.70; 11.223, 249 

Camasa 5.116; 6.53 

camel 2.204; 3.162; 4.115, 120; 5. 8,18; 
8.146, 239, 296; 9.48, 55, 69; 
11.138, 155, 157, 200, 202; 12.55, 67 

Candala 4.79; 5.131; 8.373; 9.87; 10.12, 
16, 26, 37-9, 51-6, 108; 11.24, 176; 
12.55 

Candrayana 11.217 

cane 7.132; 8.327; 9.230 

capital 8.140; 9.294 

Caranas 12.44 

carnivorous 11.138, 157, 200 

carpenter 4.210; 10.48 

cart 2.204; 8.209; 11.175,202 

Caru 5.117 

caste 8.221, 271, 273; 9.148-57; 10.27, 
40, 44, 64; 11.163 

falling from 3.16—7, 150, 157; 8.88, 
1133; 10.92, 97, 126; 11.55—-67, 108-— 
24, 176 
low—caste 2.238; 3.9, 15, 241; 8.177; 

9.23—4; 11.59, 171, 176; 12.9 

castrate 11.134 

Cat 4.30, 126, 197; 11.132, 160 

cat—VOwW 4.192, 195 

cattle, see cow 

celibate 3.50; 5.15860; 6.26 

cemetery 4.116; 9.318; 10.39, 50 

chaff 4.78; 8.250 


chariot 7.96, 192; 8.209; 9.280; 10.47; 
12.48 
charioteer 2.88 
chastity 3.2, 192; 4.128; 11.82, 118-24, 
225 
children 2.168, 239; 3.15-7, 42, 61, 64, 
76, 205, 259, 263, 278; 4.156, 179, 
184, 189; 5.68-—-70, 78; 5.159, 161-2; 
6.2; 7.8; 8.27, 66, 70-1, 89, 163, 
275; 311, 350, 395; 9-7, 9, 25-8, 34- 
5, 45, 48, 55, 59, 68, 70, 81, 96, 103, 
146, 172-4, 195, 198, 203, 230, 232, 
247, 283; 10.5, 10, 19-20, 27-31, 62, 
64-9, 72; 11.5, 40, 191, 220 
Cinas 10.44 
clockwise 3.87; 4.39 
cloth 5.119; 6.41, 44, 46; 10.87; 11.206; 
12.64 
clothes 2.174, 194, 246; 3.44, 52, 59; 
4.18, 34-5, 45, 66, 116, 129, 188-9, 
231, 2333 577-8, 103, 118; 6.6, 15, 
23; 7-126, 219; 8.2, 256, 321, 357, 
396; 9.202, 219; 10.35, 46-50, 52, 
56, 125; 11.51, 93, 137, 167, 224; 
12.66 
cloud 1.38; 4.104 
coal 8.250 
cock 3.241; 11.157 
cockroach 12.63 
Codas 10.44 
collyrium 2.178; 4.44, 152 
colostrum 5.6 
comet 1.38 
conception 2.36; 3.49 
conch 5.121 
conciliation 7.107, 109, 159, 198; 8.187 
condiment 7.131; 9.329; 10.86, 94; 
11.144 
conduct, proper 1.107—10; 2.6, 12, 18, 69; 
4.156-8; 5.4; 6.66—9; 7.122, 135, 
153, 194, 201-5, 211; 8.86; 9.17, 25; 
12.23, 33 
consecratory rites 1.111; 2.16, 26-35; 
3-43; 5-69 
constellations 1.24; 2.30; 3.9, 278; 6.10 
consumption 3.154; 11.49 
contract 8.5, 219~21 
conveyance 7.75, 222; 8.113, 419; 9.313, 
copper 5.114; 8.131, 136; 11.168 
coral 9.329; 11.168; 12.61 
com 7.110 
corporate body 3.164; 8.219 
COTpse 3.166; 4.108; 5.64—5, 67, 85, 101, 
103-4; 9.178; 10.55; 11.73; 12.71 
cotton 2.44; 8.326; 11.169; 12.64 
seeds 4.78 
tree 8.246 
wood 8.396 
couch 2.198; 3.3 
counsel 6.50; 7.58 


Index to the Translation 1115 


Counselors 7.54—9, 146-55, 216; 8.1 
Court 8.1-3, 10-4, 18, 60, 75, 79, 95 
COW 2.158, 246; 3.3, 6, 29, 53, 64, 95, 
104, 141, 260; 4.39, 48, 52,59, 72, 
130, 142, 162, 188-9, 191, 209, 231, 
233; 5-6; 5.8, 87, 95, 121, 124-5, 
128, 133; 8.88, 98, 112-3, 146, 231, 
242, 296, 325, 339; 9.48, 50, 55, 
124; 10.107, 114; 11.14, 79-80, 92, 
109-17, 128, 130, 136, 138, 145, 197, 
203, 213, 258; 12.55, 64 
hair 8.250 
herd 4.253; 8.410; 10.82, 116 
killing 11.60 
pen 4.45, 58, 116 
five products of 11.166 
cowdung 2.183; 3.206; 5.105, 122—4; 
8.250, 326; 11.92, 213 
cow—pen 11.109, 195-6 
cow-pen offering 3.254 
cowshed 11.79 
craft 3.64; 9.75; 10.100, 116 
craftsman 7.138; 10.120 
crane 11.135 
creation 1.25, 29, 52, 75, 78, 80, 87, 93; 
7.22; 9.16 
creator 1.33; 5-30; 10.73; 11.35; 12.50 
creature(s) 1.8, 25, 26, 28, 29, 33,41, 42, 
65; 95; 96, 99; 4.238, 240; 5.45-7, 
49, 56; 6.8, 39-40, 52, 60, 68, 73> 
75; '7+72;, 103; 8.295, 306, 347; 985, 
37, 306, 311, 327, 333; 10.84; 
11.141-2, 144, 237, 241; 12.9, 11, 14— 
5, 42, 58, 69, 99 
creditor 8.47—-8, 50-1, 60-1, 143-4, 161, 
176-7 
creeper 1.48; 8.247, 330; 11.143;12.58 
crime 8.126, 334, 380; 9.262-3 
sexual 8.6; 11.104 
criminal 8.66, 126; 9.288, 308 
crippled 7.149; 8.66, 394 
crocodile 1.44; 7.187 
crop 8.237-44, 49; 9.247 
crossroads 4.39, 131; 9.264; 11.119 
CrOW 3.92; 7.21} 11.25, 132, 155, 157, 160; 
12,62, 76 
cruelty 1.29; 10.9, 58; 12.33, 58 
cuckoo 12.67 
Cuficus 10.48 
curd 2.107; 3.226; 4.250; 5.10; 8.326; 
10.88; 11.213; 12.63 


Daitya 3.196; 12.48 

Daksa 9.128 

Daksayana 6.10 

Danava 3.196 

dancing 2.178, 4.64; 7.47 

Daradas 10.44 

Darbha grass 3.255—-6, 279 

darkness 1.5, 6, 49, 55; 9.161; 12.95, 115 


Dasa 10.34 
Dasyus 10.32, 45; 11.18, 70 
Datyttha 5.12 
daughter 2.215; 3.28, 51, 234; 4. 180, 
185; 9.88-102, 127, 130~2, 136, 193, 
198; 11.172 
daughter-in-law 9.57, 62-3 
female—son 3.11; 9.34, 127-40 
son of 3.148, 235 
dawn see day: daybreak 
day 1.64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72, 73, 743 2.102; 
3.90; 4.25, 50-1, 102, 106; 6.19, 22, 
55-6, 59, 68-9; 7.44, 47; 8.230; 
9.2; 10.553 11.111, 175, 184, 224-5 
daybreak 2.15; 6.22, 24; 10.33; 
11.250 
midday 4.131, 140; 6.22, 24; 7.151 
deaf 7.149; 9.201; 11.53 
death 1.9; 2.111, 148; 3.87, 104, 139; 4.91, 
137, 167; 5.2—4, 38, 45,57—-100; 
6.34, 45, 973 7-11, 53, 86, 133; 8.17, 
108, 234, 306, 343; 9.97, 101, 195, 
204, 323; 11.104, 147, 184; 12.16, 
80, 95, 124 
rites 3.247-8 
debates 4.72; 6.50; 12.46 
debtor 8.47-8, 50, 52, 139, 176-7; 12.46 
debts 6.35, 94; 8.4, 107, 108, 139, 154, 
158-9, 161-2, 176—7; 9.106-7, 218, 
229; 11.66 
deer 2.157; 3.268-9; 5.130; 9.44, 69; 
12.55, 67 
demon 3.201, 225; 7.23; 11.20, 96 
dependents 3.72, 116; 4.179, 251; 5.22; 
9.105} 11.7, 10, 22 
deposit 8.4, 145, 149, 179~96; 11.58, 89; 
12,120 
desire 1.8, 25, 34, 75; 2.2~5, 94-5; 12.89 
Dhanvantari 3.85 
Dharana 8.134~6 
Dhigvana 10.15, 49 
diamonds 11.58 
dice 4.74 
Didhistipati 3.173 
dike 9.274 
disease, see sickness 
document 8.52~5, 168 
dog 2.201; 3.92, 164, 230, 241; 4.4, 6, 
115, 126, 208, 216; 5.130—1; 6.51; 
7-21; 8.90, 232, 239, 298, 373; 
9.237; 10.51, 91, 106, 108; 11.132, 
160, 200; 12.55, 62 
dog—cookers 3.92 
donkey 2.201; 4.115, 120; 8.298, 370; 
10.51; 11.69, 119, 123, 137, 155, 157; 
200, 202; 12.55 
Dravida 10.22, 44 
drinking 7.50; 9.13, 78, 80, 84, 235, 237; 
11.49, 55,57, 67, 91-9, 147-50, 153- 
4, 250; 12.45, 56 


1116 Index to the Translation 


Drona 7.126; 11.135 

Drsadvati 2.17 

drum 10.49 

dumb 7.149 

dusk 6.22, 24 

dust 4.102, 115; 5.133; 6.77; 8.132; 11.111, 
208 

duties 1.3; 7.127-139; 8.159, 390 

dyer 4.216, 219 

dyspepsia 3.7; 11.51 


eagle 7.187 
ear 2.90-1; 8.125, 234, 272; 12.121 
earrings 4.36 
earth 1.13, 78, 99, 100, 105; 2.20, 76, 226; 
3.86; 4. 183; 5.105-06, 108; 5.111, 
120, 125—6, 133-6; 7.6, 148; 8.39, 
86, 256, 327, 381; 937, 44, 67, 238, 
303, 311; 11.83; 12.120 
VOW 9.311 
earthenware 5.122; 7.132; 8.289, 327 
earthquake 4.105 
ear—wax 5.135 
east 2.22, 51-2, 61, 75; 3.261; 8.87 
eating 1.101, 105; 2.51—7, 118, 195; 3.106, 
176-9, 236-42; 4.43, 45, 55, 58, 62— 
3, 65, 74-6, 121, 129; 5.145; 9.238, 
201 
those alongside whom it is unfit to eat 
3.167-82; 11.181, 201 
men who purify a row of eaters 
3.183-6 
eclipse 4.37, 110 
edict 9,232 
ege 1.44 
golden 1.9, 12 
ejaculation 2.180—-1; 11.121, 174 
elders 2,120-~2, 130, 142, 149, 203; 3.110, 
119; 4.130, 154, 160, 251-2; 5.82, 91; 
8.275, 350; 9.57, 62-3, 235, 2373 
11.56, 89 
wife of 11.49, 55, 59, 103-7, 171, 252; 
12.58 
eldest 1.93; 4.153; 11.186 
element(s) 1.6, 18, 20, 27; 12.14, 20-2, 
90 
elephant 2.157; 3.10, 162; 4.120; 7.96, 
192; 8.34, 296; 9.280; 11.69, 137; 
12.43, 67 
embodied 1.30, 53, 84; 12.119 
Ena deer 3.269 
enemy 2.111, 239; 3.138, 144, 230; 4.133, 
213; 7-32, 73, 83, 90, 94, 98, 102, 
105, 110, 154, 158, 168, 171-5, 177, 
179-81,183, 185-6, 194-5, 197-8, 
200, 202, 207, 210; 8.64, 93, 174; 
9.232, 275, 277, 298, 307; 11.32-3; 
12.79 
energy 4.42, 44, 189; 7.28 
entertainers 9.225 


envy 7.48; 10.128 

epics 3.232 

epilepsy 3.7, 161 

Epoch 1.63, 79, 80 

ether 1.75, 76 

etymologist 12.111 

eunuch 2.158; 4.211 

even 3.48, 278 

evening 3.105, 121; 4.62, 140; 6.6; 11.212 

evidence 8.52-3, 103, 178, 200, 263 

evil 8.345; 9-5, 30, 73, 295, 299, 310; 
11.48, 222, 230; 12.16, 70, 77, 79 

ewe 9.48, 55 

excommunication 11.183-6 

excrement 3.180, 250; 4.45—52, 77, 92, 
109, 132, 152, 220, 222;5.134, 138; 
6.76; 10.91; 11.151, 154—5, 203; 
12.56 

executioner 10.38 

existent 1.11, 14, 74 

exile 7.124; $.123, 281, 284; 9.225, 241, 
274; 10.96 

expedition 7.182—4 

expiation 3.19; 11.90, 99, 140, 180, 210, 
228-66 

export 8.399 

eye 2.7, 90; 4.42, 44, 67, 177; 7.6, 25; 
8.25-6, 125; 9.256; 12.120 

one-eyed 3.155, 177, 242; 8.274; 

11.119 


factory 7.62 

fairs 9.84, 264 

falconer 3.164 

fame 1.106; 2.9, 121; 3.40, 66, 106, 263; 
4.13, 94; 7-33—4; 8.81, 127, 302, 
343-4, 387; 9.76; 11.15, 40; 12.36 

family 3.15, 57, 60, 109, 245; 4.18; 7.9, 
77; '7.119, 210; 8.28, 166—7, 169, 179, 
323, 395; 9-7, 82, 109, 187, 199 

famine 8,22 

farm 10.79 

farmer 3.165; 9.38, 247 

farmland 9.330 

fast 2.188, 220, 4.222; 5.20, 155; 11.158, 
196, 204, 213, 260 

fat 3.182; 12.63 

father 2.133, 135, 144-53, 170-1, 225-37; 
3-5, 11, 51,55, 136-7, 157, 159, 220—- 
1, 284;4.162, 178, 180, 182, 184, 239; 
5.61, 91, 148-9, 151; 7.80, 135; 
8.275, 335; 366, 389; 9.3-4, 20, 32, 
48, 50, 92~3, 104—5, 108, 110,120, 
132-3, 138, 142, 155, 168, 170-2, 
174, 177; 179, 182, 185, 191, 194, 197— 
8, 204, 209, 215; 10.40, 59; 11.1, 60, 
172 

father—in—law 2.130; 3.119, 148 

faults 1.104; 5.4, 56; 6.72; 8.351, 388 

feet 1.31, 81, 82, 87,90; 3.229-30; 4.53-— 


Index to the Translation 1117 


4, 65, 76, 112, 177, 207; 5-13, 142; 
8.125, 283; 9.278; 10.45 
fence 8.239 
ferry 8.404~9 
festival 8.392; 9.84 
fetus 2.27; 9.8; 11.88 
field 8.237, 240-1, 243, 262, 264, 341; 
9.32-3, 36, 44, 49, 51-4, 145; 
10.69—71; 11.17, 115, 164; 12.12, 14 
fiend 3.21—6, 33, 170, 204, 230; 4.199; 
5.31; 7-23, 38; 11.96; 12.44, 60 
fight 4.121; 7.191, 192 
fine 8.32, 35-6, 51, 58-9, 107-8, 120-1, 
123, 129, 138-9, 159, 191, 198, 213, 
220, 223-5, 240, 243, 257, 267-9, 
274, 276, 284-5, 287, 289,293-4, 
297, 307, 322, 329, 333, 336, 354, 
361, 363, 365, 367-9, 373, 375, 376, 
378, 383-5, 388~9, 400, 412; 9.84, 
229, 234, 236, 240-1, 244, 246, 279, 
281-2, 286-7, 290 
finger 2.59; 8.367-8, 370; 9.277 
fire 1.23; 2.47—-8, 67, 94, 108, 143, 176, 
248; 3-74; 76, 85, 98, 103, 122, 210— 
4, 260-1, 282; 4.28, 48, 52-4, 58, 
104, 106, 118, 142; 5.1, 69, 83, 96, 
103, 105, 113, 133; 6.4, 9, 17, 23, 25, 
35, 43; 7-4 7; 9, 78, 90; 8.86, 106, 
108, 114-6, 176, 189, 191-2, 209, 
264, 275, 319, 330-1, 333, 339,377, 
392, 397; 9.278, 284-5, 303, 310, 
314, 317-8, 321, 323; 10.103; 11.43, 
74, 120, 122, 247; 12.66, 101, 120-1, 
123 
abandoning 3.153; 11.41 
establishment 4.27 
domestic 3.84 
five 3.100, 185 
three 2,230-1; 3.282 
householder's 2.231 
nuptial 3.67; 9.194 
offertorial 2.231 
sacred 11.14, 38, 41, 60,66 
southern 2.231 
VOW 9.310 
fire offering 2.27—8, 69, 105, 186; 3.240, 
282; 4.10, 25, 145-6; 6.9; 7.84, 145; 
11.36-7, 42 
fireplace 3.68 
firewood 2.176, 186-7; 4.247; 7.118; 
8.112; 11.65, 71 
fish 1.39, 44; 3.267; 4.250; 5.13; 7.20, 
72; 8.95, 328; 11.69; 12.42 
fisherman 8.260; 10.48 
flag 9.285 
flamingo 11.136 
flax 2.41; 10.87 
flesh 3.182;5.52; 6.76; 8.284 
flies 1.40, 453; 5.133 
flood 8.189; 9.54 


flower 1.46, 47; 2.182; 4.250; 5.10, 157; 
6.13, 16, 21; 7.131; 8.289, 330; 11.71, 
144, 166; 12.67 
fodder 7.75, 195; 8.112 
fog 4.113 
food 2.49-57, 118, 142, 177, 194; 3.59, 76, 
78, 81-3, 99, 104-18, 124, 236-7, 
243-6; 4.29, 188~9, 205-25, 229, 
233, 247-56; 5.28-9, 73, 102, 105, 
138, 140, 144; 6.3, 7, 17-9, 43, 50- 
60; 7.118, 129, 195, 217, 220, 317, 
329, 393, 415; 9-11, 202, 219, 271, 
278, 333; 10.35, 54, 86, 94, 114, 125; 
11.3, 51, 78, 96, 110, 123, 144, 153, 
158, 163, 166-7, 176, 212, 216-7, 
254, 262; 12.65 
forbidden 1.113; 5.4— 26; 11.57, 147—- 
62, 153, 162; 12.59 
of sages 3.257, 272; 6.5, 11, 15 
side dishes 3.226, 228, 233 
sour 2.177 
unfit 11.57, 65,161 
fool 4.79; 7.30; 11.21, 30, 36; 12.415 
foot 8.280; 9.237; 11.43, 184 
footwear, see shoes 
force 8.49 
military 7.101-03, 108-09 
ford, sacred 8.356 
forefather, see ancestor 
foreigner 2.23; 7.149; 12.43 
forehead 2.46, 9.240 
forenoon 3.256, 277; 4.96 
forest 6.1, 3, 27-9, 33; 7-40, 70; 8.259- 
60, 356; 10.107; 11.73, 106, 145; 
12.48 
forest hermit 1.114; 5.137; 6.87 
forgery 9.232; 12.60 
fort 7.29, 69- 76, 157, 181, 185; 9.252 
fortnight 1.66; 4.25, 113, 119, 128, 150; 
6.20; 8.58, 107 
bright 1.66; 4.96, 98; 6.20;11.217—8 
dark 1.66; 3.276-7; 4.98; 6.20; 11.217 
fortune 3.55; 5-152; 9.26, 300 
fowler 8.260 
fox 12.64 
fraud 1.82; 8.165, 193, 203-5; 9.258 
friend 2.134; 3.113, 138-41, 144, 160; 
4-133, 253; 7.32; 8.17, 89, 118, 120, 
335, 3473 9.206, 269, 307; 11.57, 89; 
12.79 
wife of 11.59, 171 
frog 4.126; 11.132; 12.64 
fruit 1.46, 47; 3.82, 227, 267; 4.29, 247; 
5.6, 10, 54, 119, 130; 5-157; 6.10, 13, 
15-6, 21, 25; 7.131; 8.151, 289, 331, 
3393 9.51-2, 54; 10.87; 11.71,143-4, 
166, 237; 12.67 
funeral 2.16; 5.168; 11.198 
furnace 6.71 
furniture 11.77 


1118 Index to the Translation 


Gadhi 7.42 
gambling 1.115; 2.179; 3.151, 159-60; 
4-74; 7-47, 50, 159; 8.7, 9.220-8, 
258; 12.45 
Gandharva 1.37; 3.21, 26, 33, 196; 7.23; 
12.47 
Ganges 8.92 
garden 4.202, 262, 264 
garland 2.167, 177; 3-3, 209; 4.55, 66, 72; 
8.256 
garlic 5.5, 19; 939 
garment see clothes 
gate 9.289 
Gaurasarsapa 8.133-4 
gem 2.240; 4.250; 7.218; 8.100, 323; 
9.286, 329; 11.58, 168; 12.61 
generosity 3.202, 259, 275; 4.158, 225-6; 
7.86, 211; 11.39 
gentleness 1.29; 7.140 
ghee 2.29, 84, 94, 107; 3.226, 274; 4.39, 
188-9, 233; 5-103, 144; 7.34, 131; 
8.106, 328; 9.60; 10.88; 11.92, 120, 
135, 144, 150, 213, 215, 257; 12.62 
ghost 3.230, 6.77; 12.71 
ghoul 3.21, 25, 34, 141; 12.44, 57 
gift 1.86, 88, 89, 90, 101; 2.97, 158; 3.59, 
240; 4.186-95, 226-37, 246-56; 
5-107; 7.101, 198, 203; 8.4, 159, 165, 
199, 212-4, 305; 9.206; 10.75, 79, 
91; 11.1-26,140, 228 
receiving 1.88; 4.84—91; 6.8; 10.75— 
7, 102-3, 109-12, 115; 11.70, 126, 
195; 254 
girdle 2.27, 42-3, 64, 169-71, 174; 11.152 
girl 2.33; 3.48-9; 7.152; 8.204—5, 224- 
6; 9.81, 118, 127, 172; 10.8—9, 11, 15; 
11.36, 59, 61, 171 
gleaning 3.99; 4.5, 10; 8.260 
gnat 12.62 
goad 3.44; 5.99 
goat 2.41; 3.6, 260, 269, 272; 5.120; 
8.235, 298; 9.48, 55, 119; 10.114; 
11.69, 137, 139; 12.55, 67 
wool 3.234-5 
god(s) 1.22, 36, 52, 67, 71; 2.17, 58-9, 
152, 156, 176, 232; 3.21, 28, 38, 56, 
72, 80-1, 201; 4.39, 124, 130, 153, 
163, 182, 224, 251, 257; 5-31, 127, 
154; 6.83; 7.5, 23, 29, 72, 201; 8.16, 
23, 85, 87, 96, 110, 248, 409; 9.95, 
315-7; 319; 11.20, 26, 29, 83, 85, 96, 
211, 225, 245; 12.40, 49, 90, 94, 117 
offering to 2.189; 3.18, 70, 75, 84-6, 
97, 125, 128-33, 139, 147, 149-50, 
152, 167-9, 175, 203-5, 209, 240, 
247, 254, 256; 4.31, 80, 152, 206; 
5.16, 32, 41, 52; 612, 24; 8.242 
Golaka 3.174 
gold 2.29, 246; 4.36, 188-9, 230, 233; 
5.112-3; 7.130, 206, 208; 8.88, 99, 


113, 131, 181-2, 184,321, 393; 
10.114, 49, 58, 99-103, 251; 12.122 

goldsmith 4.215, 218; 12.61 

goose 3.10; 11.136; 12.62 

gourd 6.54 

Graha 5.116 

grain 2.155, 246; 3.6; 4.7, 232, 250; 
5.118-9; 7.69, 75, 96, 130; 8.151, 
320, 330-1; 10.94, 112, 114, 120, 
125; 11.50, 67, 93-5, 163, 168; 12.62 

granary 4.7 

grandfather 1.9; 3.148, 221-2, 284; 
4.178; 9.132, 136, 140 

grandmother 9.193, 217 

grass 1.48; 2.75, 204, 216; 4.70-1, 166, 
169; 5-122; 7.132; 8.326, 339; 
11.167, 197, 206; 1258 

purificatory blades 2.75 

sacred 3.208, 245; 4.36 

great-grandfather 3.221; 9.140 

great self 1.15 

greed 2.178; 3.179; 4.87, 195; 7-30, 495 
8.118, 120, 213, 219, 412; 9.213, 243; 
11.26; 12.33 

greeting, see salutation 

grindstone 3.68; 6.17 

guest 3.70, 72, 80, 94-120, 130; 4.29--32, 
122, 179, 182, 251 

Guhyakas 12.47 

guild 1.118; 3.154 


hair 2.46, 211; 3.7-8, 10; 4.78, 83, 144, 
207, 220; 5.125, 141;'7.91; 8.116, 
250, 283, 314; 11.79, 93, 109, 160. 
See also bald—headed; head, shaving 

body 6.6 

cutting 2.27, 35; 4.35, 69; 5.58, 67 
gray 2.154—6; 6.2 

matted 2.219; 3.151; 6.6; 11.93, 129 
topknot 2.219 

halo 4.105 

hand 2.72, 90; 3.212, 223-5; 4.74, 82, 
117, 142, 175, 177; 5-116, 129, 136, 
143; 6.28; 8.125, 280, 283, 322; 
9.277 

cupped 4.63; 11.105 
left 2.63, 72 
right 2.63, 72; 3.214; 8.2 

happiness 2.9, 32; 3.79; 4.12, 160, 170, 
232; 5-45; 6.64, 80; 7.88; 9.25; 
11.235; 12.19-20, 88 

Hari 12.121 

harvest 4.26; 9.49 

hatred 2.1, 178; 4.163; 6.60—1; 7.12; 
8.175, 346; 9.17; 12.25 

Havirbhuj 3.197 

Havismat 3.198 

Havispantiya 11.252 

hawk 11.136 

head 2.60; 4.49, 82-3; 8.114, 239, 256, 


Index to the Translation 1119 


300; 11.43, 73 
shaving 2.219; 5.140; 6.52; 8.93, 370, 

375, 379, 384 

health 2.57; 4.142; 7.69, 226 

heart 2.1, 62, 97; 8.86 

heaven 1.95; 2.5, 57, 76, 232; 3.18, 79, 
86, 106; 48, 13, 235-46, 260; 5.48, 
104, 156, 159-60; 6.84; 7.53, 89; 
8.75, 86, 127, 313, 318; 928, 253-4; 
10.122; 11.40, 241, 243; 12.20 

heavenly light 1.38; 4.105~6, 142 

hedgehog 5.18; 12.65 

heel 8.325 

heifer 11.138 

heir 9.158—60, 162, 186-91, 200 

hell 2.116, 3.172, 249; 4.87, 197, 235; 
6.61; 8.75, 94, 128,307, 313; 9.138, 
11.37, 207-8; 12.54, 75 

hemp 2.41-30; 10.87 

hemorrhoids 3.7 

herb 7.131 

medicinal 11.169 

herdsman 3.154; 8.5, 229-44, 260 

heretics 1.118; 5.90; 9.225 

hermaphrodite 3.49 

hermeneut 12.111 

hermit, see forest hermit 

hermitage 6.7; 8.390; 11.79 

heron 4.30; 7.106; 11.136; 12.66 

heron—vow 4.192, 196~-7 

hill 4.46-7; 7.70-1, 147; 10.50 

Himalaya 2,21 

Hiranyagarbha 3.194 

home 5.43; 6.26, 38—9, 41; 9.26 

homeless 6.25 

honesty, 9.80; 11.223 

honey 2.29, 107, 177; 3-226, 272-4; 4.39, 
247; 5.41; 6.14; 7.131; 8.328; 10.88; 
11.9, 95, 159; 12.62 

honey—mixture 3.119~20; 9.206 

honor 9.26, 72, 109-10; 10.72; 11.40 

horn 4.67; 5.121 

horse 2.88, 204, 246; 3.64, 162; 4.120, 
188-9; 5.53, 133; 7-96, 192; 8.98, 
146, 209, 296, 342; 9.280; 10.47; 
11.38, 51, 58, 69, 137, 200; 12.42, 67 

hospitality 3.18, 70, 94~120, 126 

Hotr 8.209 

house 3.58, 62, 89, 101,105; 4.202, 230, 
250; 5.102, 122; 6.25, 43; 7.75-6, 
82; 8.69, 93, 230, 262, 264, 333, 
392, 415; 9.12—3, 150, 170, 172, 265; 
11.13~4, 17, 22, 77) 115, 123, 163-5, 
188 

householder 2.232; 3.1, 67-285; 4.8, 31- 
2; 5.137; 6.1-2, 27, 30, 87-90; 8.62; 
9.334 

human 1.39, 43, 65, 96; 7.8, 72, 205; 
8.98, 286, 296; 9.66, 71, 284; 
10.86; 11.157, 235; 12.40, 94 


hunger 4.33~-4, 67; 7.133-4; 8.67, 93; 
10.105, 107-8; 11.21 

hunter 4.212; 7.47, 50; 8.44, 260; 10.48 

husband 1.115; 2.67; 3.45—50, 55, 60-1, 
116, 174, 262; 5.90, 148-9, 153-8, 
160-6; 8.6, 28, 317, 371; 94, 3-4, 
7-8, 13, 15, 20-3, 29-30, 32, 45-6, 
68, 69, 74-9, 86, 90-2, 95,101-3, 
135, 175, 183, 195-6, 199-200; 
11.177 

hypocrite 3.159; 4.30, 211; 12.44 


idiot 2.110; 7.149; 8.394 
ignorance 2.158, 214; 3.97; 4-191; 6.84; 
8.32, 118, 121, 249; 11.43; 12.25, 52, 
103, 113, 115 
immobile 1.40, 41, 56, 57, 63; 5-28-9, 44; 
7.15, 29; 11.237, 241;12.9, 42 
immortal 2.5; 6.60; 9.107; 12.85, 104 
imperishable 1.18, 19, 57; 6.64, 97 
impermanence 6.77 
impotency 3.150, 165; 9.79, 167, 201, 203 
impregnation rite 2.16, 26, 142 
impurity 2.27; 4.124, 142-3, 212; 5.59, 
67, 79-80, 134-5, 142; 6.71; 9.725 
41.71, 126, 154, 160, 184 
from remnants 4.82, 109, 142 
indigestion 4.121 
indigo 10.89 
Indra 3.87; 4.182; 5.93, 96; 7.4, 7; 8.344, 
386; 9.303~—4; 11.120, 122, 256; 
12.123 
Indra—vow 9.304 
infantry 7.172 
infidel 2.11; 3.150; 8.22, 309; 9.21; 
11.67; 12.33 
informant 11.50 
ingrates 4.214; 8.89; 11.191 
inheritance 8.27; 9.47, 77, 79; 10.1153 
11.185 
partition of 1.115; 8.7; 9.103-220 
initiation 2.26—64, 68, 108, 173-4; 3.245; 
6.38~—41, 8.412; 9.326; 10.68; 
11.36, 147, 151-2 
observances 2.173-81 
time for 2.36—40 
injury 2.177, 179; 4.170; 8.279, 285, 293; 
10.63; 11.64, 127-46, 223;12.83 
insane 8.67, 71, 148, 163, 205; 9.78, 201, 
230 
insect 1.40, 201; 4.207; 5.125; 11.71, 160, 
241; 12.42, 56 
insignia 4.200; 8.65, 407 
intellect 1.96, 106; 5.109; 12.40, 23 
interest 8.140—4, 142—4, 150-7; 10.116—7 
contractual 8.153 
cyclical 8.153, 156 
manual labor 8.153 
periodic 8.153 
intoxication 3.34; 8.67; 11.96-7, 148-9 


1120 Index to the Translation 


iron 5.114; 8.315, 372; 10.52, 84; 11.104, 
134, 168 
ivory 5.121 


jackal 4.115; 5.164; 9.30; 11.155, 200; 
12.42 
jewels 5.111; 7.219 
Jhalla 10.22; 12.45 
Jiva 12.13, 22-3, 53 
judge 8.9—-11, 57, 79, 87, 109, 181-2, 190; 
9-234 
judgment 7.211; 8.117, 196; 9.233 
judicial conduct 8.23-6, 41-6 
justice 8.12—9, 23, 44, 122 
injustice 8.12, 18, 122 
justice system 8.1-—420; 9.1-231 
Jyestha 8.245 


Kaivarta 10.34 

Kakola 5.14 

Kala 1.64 

Kalasaka herb 3.272 

Kalasiitra 3.249; 4.88 

Kalavinka 5.12 

Kamboja 10.44 

Karana 10.22 

Karavara 10.36 

Karsapana 8.136, 274, 336; 9.282; 
10.120 

Karsika 8.136 

Karusa 10.23 

Kasta 1.64 

Kasyapa 9.129 

Kataka 6.67 

Kataptitana 12.71 

Kavi 3.198 

Kavya 3.199 

Khadira 2.45; 8.315 

Khafijaritaka 5.14 

Khasa 10.22 

Kimsuka 8.246 

King 1.114; 2.135, 138-9; 3.119-20; 4.33, 
84-91, 110, 130, 218; 5.82, 93-7; 
6.97; 7.1-226; 8.1, 8~11, 18~21, 27— 
8, 30, 33-5, 38-40, 43-4, 47, 50, 
59-60, 73, 123, 128, 149, 169-75, 
176, 178, 186, 192, 196, 213, 219, 221, 
223, 224, 228, 238, 245, 252, 258, 
263, 265, 272, 276, 281-3, 286,288, 
302-9, 311-2, 316-8, 322, 324, 
333-6, 343-4, 346-7, 352, 371, 
380-1, 386, 389-91, 395, 399, 410, 
412, 418~20; 9.189, 213, 221, 224, 
226, 228, 230-1, 234, 236, 240, 243, 
245-6, 248-9, 253-4, 256, 262, 
266, 269-70, 273, 275-6, 278, 292— 
4, 301-12, 323-5, 327; 10.55—6, 96, 
113; 11.4, 11, 21-3, 31-2, 56, 100-1; 
12.46, 100 

chaplain of 7.78—9; 12.46 


daily routine 7.145-226 
servant of 3.153; 9.324 
service of 3.64 
Sidra king 4.61 
kingdom 4.61; 7.40, 42, 55; 7.111, 1545 
8.380; 9.221, 323 
constituents of 9.294-7 
limbs of 9.296-7 
Kinnara 3.196 
Kiratas 10.44 
knee 4.112 
knowledge 1.86; 2.7, 8, 37, 112-5, 117, 
136, 155, 218; 3.39, 78, 98, 128-37; 
4.24; 5.105, 109; 7.217; 9.41; 11.85, 
236, 247; 12.25, 31, 41, 83, 85, 89, 
92, 104 
Koyasthi 5.13 
Kratu 1.35 
Kraufica 11.135; 12.64 
Krsara 5.6 
Krsnala 8.134-5, 215, 330; 9.84; 11.138 
Ksatriya 1.31, 89; 2.31-2, 36-8, 42-6, 
49, 62, 65, 80, 127, 155, 190; 3.13-4, 
23-6, 44, 110-1, 197; 4.135; 5-23, 
83, 98-9; 7.2, 87, 98, 144; 8.62, 88, 
104, 113, 267-8, 276, 337, 375-7, 
382-5, 411; 9.151, 153, 155, 229, 
320-2; 10.4, 9-12, 17, 22, 43, 65, 77; 
79-81, 83, 95~7, 117-8, 121; 11.18, 
21, 34, 67, 84, 88, 94, 127-8, 236; 
12.46, 71 
Ksattr 10.12-3, 16, 19, 26, 49 
Ksetrajfia 8.96; 12.12, 14 
Kubera 7.7, 42 
Kubjaka 8.247 
Kudmala 4.89 
Kuhi 3.86 
Kukkuta 10.18 
Kumbha 8.320 
Kunda 3.174 
Kuru 7.193; 8.92 
Kuruksetra 2.19 
KuéSa grass 2.43, 182; 3.210, 223; 4.250; 
10.88; 11.149, 213 
Kusmanda 8.106 
Kutsa 11.250 


lac 10.89 
seller of 10.92 

lame 3.242; 8.274; 11.51 

land 2.246; 4.188—9, 230, 233; 5.124; 
6.13; 7.192, 206, 208, 212; 8.99— 
100; 11.58 

languages 9.332; 10.45 

Law(s) 1.2, 81, 82, 93, 98, 99, 107-10, 
113-4; 2.1, 13, 25, 61, 224, 237-40; 
4.92, 147, 187;5-1,44, 146; 6.64, 66, 
97; 7-7; 10, 13-5, 17-8, 26, 28, 35, 
46, 87, 93, 98, 135-6, 141, 144, 151, 
203, 209; 8.6, 8, 20-1, 24, 33, 49, 


Index to the Translation 11214 


58-9, 63, 78, 86, 103, 141, 164, 174—- 
5, 179, 184, 212, 214, 218, 228-9, 
261, 265-6, 272, 306, 348-9, 352, 
381, 390-1; 9.1, 6—7, 18, 25, 28, 46, 
56, 61, 64, 66, 76, 86, 94, 96, 101, 
103, 107-8, 117, 120-1, 145, 152, 154, 
167, 179, 188, 220, 233, 236,238, 
250, 273, 324, 333-4; 10.53, 63, 68, 
78-9, 81, 85, 90, 97-8, 101-2, 106, 
108, 115, 117, 119, 126-7, 130—1; 11.2, 
9, 24, 28, 31, 84, 121,191, 229; 12.1— 
2, 38, 50, 52,72, 105-6, 108—9, 112— 
3, 115, 117-8 
contradictions 2.14-5 
in times of adversity 1.116 
of castes 8.41, 46 
of families 1.118; 8.41, 46 
of guilds 8.41 
proper to one 2.8, 150; 3.3; 7-153 
8.335; 10.92; 12.72 
of regions 1.118; 8.41, 46 
sources of 2,6—12, 25, 4.155 
study of 2.16 
ten point 6.91-94 
treatise of 2.10, 16; 3.232. See also 
Treatise 
lawsuits 1.114; 7.140-1; 8.1-3, 9-10, 24, 
43, 54, 56, 58, 61, 63-4, 69, 76, 78, 
80, 97, 103, 110, 117, 178; 200; 
9.231, 233, 250 
lazy 2.73; 5-4 
learning 1.96, 97; 2.1, 8, 214-5, 238-40; 
3-143, 4.18, 91; 6.84, 92; 7.16, 37— 
53, 135; 8.273; 9.76, 206, 244; 
10.116; 11.22, 86 
leather 2.157; 8.289; 10.36, 49; 11.139 
leeches 7.129 
leeks 5.5, 19 
leftovers 2.56, 209; 3.116—8, 216, 245-6, 
249, 253, 285; 4.75, 80 
legal assembly 12.110-2, 114 
legal interpreter 8.20-2 
legal procedure 8.9—46, 199 
leprosy 3.7; 8.205 
leukoderma 3.7, 161, 177; 11.51 
levirate 3.173; 9.57—-70, 120-1, 143-7, 
167 
libations 2.176; 3.70, 74; 5.60, 64, 70-1, 
88-91; 6.24 
Licchivi 10.22 
lice 1.40, 45 
lies 1.82; 2,179; 3.229-30; 9.71; 11.56, 
70; 12.6 
life 4.134, 260; 5.27; 6.33, 45, 57; 7-17, 
46, 111 
long life 2.52; 3.106, 263; 4.13, 27, 
76, 78, 94, 230 
lifebreaths, see breath(s) 
life span 1.83, 84; 2.57, 121; 4.157-8; 
7.136; 11.40 


lightning 1.38; 4.103, 106; 5.95 

Liksa 8.133 

limb 2.209, 211; 3.8, 10, 178, 242; 4.141, 
143; 7.105; 8.279, 287, 334, 374; 
11.50 

lineage 1.105; 3.5, 109; 9.128, 141-2, 165, 
190 

linen 5.120-1; 12.64 

lion 7.106; 12.43 

lips 2.62; 3.19; 8.282 

liquor 3.159; 5-56, 90; 7.47; 8.159, 163; 
9.80, 84, 225, 235, 237; 11.49, 55, 
57, 68, 71, 91-9, 147-8, 150-1, 250; 
12.56 

litigants 8.252, 254, 311; 9.231, 250 

litigation 8.3, 24, 49 

grounds for 8.4—420;9.1-230 

livelihood 2.24; 3.286; 4.2—-12; 10.76, 
79, 85, 101, 112, 116, 121-9; 11.22-3 

livestock 7.9, 96, 130, 212; 8.98; 11.40, 
67 

living beings 1.96;3.77; 5.48, 155; 7.112; 
10.83; 11.127—46 

lizard 5.18; 11.132; 12.57, 64 

loan 8.49, 51, 143, 151, 166 

logic 2.11; 7.43; 12.94, 106 

logician 12.111 

Lohacaraka 4.90 

Lohasanku 4.90 

lord 1.2, 6, 12, 22, 28, 32, 34, 80,91, 933 
7-14 

lotus 7.188 

love 2.1; 3.32, 35; 6.60-1, 175; 9.103, 
194 

low—born 2.223; 4.79, 141 

loyal 7.209, 217 

lucky 4.139, 158 

unlucky 4.156 

lunar fast 6.20; 11.41, 107, 118, 126, 155, 
164, 172, 178, 217-20 

lust 2.147, 178, 214; 3.12, 173; 5-154; 
7.27; 8.118, 121; 9.17, 63, 67, 107, 
143, 147, 178; 12.11 


machine 7.75 

mad 3.34, 161; 9.79 
Madgus 10.48; 12.63 
Magadha 10.11, 17, 26, 47 
Magha 3.273 

Magha 4.96 

magic 9.290 
Maha—Naraka 4.88 
Maha—Raurava 4.88 
MahaSalka crustacean 3.272 
Mahat 12.14, 24, 50 
Maha-Vici 4,89 

Maihitra 11.250 

Maitra 2.87; 10.23 
Maitraksajyotika 12.72 
Maitreyaka 10.33 


41122 Index to the Translation 


male 1.11, 19; 3.7; 5.67; 7.17; 9.144 
Malla 10.22; 12.44 
man 1.32, 33, 92; 4.124, 205, 210, 212, 
216; 5.32, 35, 47, 50— 54, 98, 107, 
121, 135-6, 139, 143, 151, 157, 162-3; 
7.91; 8.62, 77, 179; 92, 9~10, 12, 33, 
41, 44-5, 49, 51, 60, 91, 172; 11.36, 
58, 68, 70, 83, 164, 174-5, 200; 
12.44 
Mandap§la 9.23 
Manu 1.1, 36, 60, 61, 63, 79, 80, 102, 118— 
9; 2.7; 3-36, 150; 3.194; 4.103; 5.3, 
41, 131; 6.54; 7.42; 8.124, 135, 168, 
204, 242, 279, 292, 339; 9.17, 158, 
182-3, 239; 10.63, 78; 12.2, 107, 
123, 126 
manual labor 8.177 
mare 9.48, 55 
Margasirsa 7.182 
Margava 10.34 
Marici 1.35, 57; 3-194-5 
marriage 1.112; 2.40, 67; 3.4-66, 157, 
171-2; 4.1; 7.77, 152; 8.112, 226; 
9.65, 85, 88-102, 160, 172-3, 175, 
179, 195-7, 238, 326; 10.24, 53; 
11.61, 173, 181, 183-4 
bride 3.4-19 
kinds of 1.112; 3.20-44; 9.196-7 
remarriage 9.65, 176 
supersession 9.80—3; 11.5 
marrow 3.182; 5.135 
marshes 7.192 
Maruts 3.88; 11.120, 222 
Masa (Masaka) 8.134-5, 298, 319, 392- 
3; 11.134 
massage 2,209, 211 
Matsya 2.19; 7.193 
mealtime 6.19,56; 7.216, 221, 224; 11.16, 
110, 201 
measures 8.403; 9.330 
meat 2.177; 3.123, 227, 257; 427-8, 112, 
131, 250; 5.6, 13, 23, 26-56, 73, 131; 
6.14; 7.131; 8.328; 10.106; 11.96, 
153, 156-7, 159, 167; 12.63 
sellers 3.152; 10.88, 92 
Meda 10.36, 48 
medicine 8.324; 9.293; 10.47, 87; 11.238 
meditation 1.1; 6.61-86 
mendicant 3.94, 243; 8.360 
menstruation 4.40—-2, 57; 5.66,108; 9.93; 
11.88 
mental retardation 9.201; 11.53. See also 
idiot, mad 
merchant 2.118; 4.215—6, 220; 8.169 
merit 2.57, 112; 3.95; 4.238-46; 7.79; 
8.74, 83, 304; 9.111, 249; 11.4, 15, 
23; 12.19 
messenger 3.163 
metal 5.111; 6.53, 71; 7-96; 9.321, 329; 
11.67, 104 


meteor 1.38; 4.103 
mid~space 1.13; 2.21, 76; 7.29 
milk 2,107; 3.82, 226, 257, 271; 4.250; 
5.8, 25, 130; 8.231, 326; 10.88, 92; 
11.92, 115, 133, 145, 148,169, 195, 
213, 215; 12.62 
milk-rice 3.371, 274; 5-8-9; 6.11; 8.105 
mind 1.14, 18, 53, 74, 75, 92, 160, 192; 
4.16, 18-9; 5.105, 109, 165-6; 6.46, 
733 7-6; 9.29, 67; 11.230, 232, 234, 
242, 258; 12.3-5, 8, 10, 121-2 
collected 2.53; 3.226, 228, 258; 4.93; 
6.94; 7.145; 8.23; 11.82, 87,106, 
195, 215, 218, 220-1, 263; 12.118 
mineral 8.39 
mines 8.419; 11.64 
minor 8.27—9, 148-9 
miser 4.210; 11.9 
Mitra 12.121 
moat 9.289 
mobile 1.41, 56, 57, 63; 5-28-9, 4437-15, 
29; 11.237 
molasses 8.326; 10.88; 11.95, 167; 12.64 
money 2.109, 112; 3.6, 31; 4.33; 7-75, 79, 
96; 7124; 8.47-8, 50, 141, 155, 162, 
176, 212; 9.231, 323; 10.113; 11.19, 
24-5, 42, 163 
moneylending 1.90; 8.102, 140, 169, 410; 
10.116—7 
mongoose 4.126; 11.132, 160; 1262 
monkey 1.39; 7.72; 11.136, 155; 12.67 
month 1.66; 6.18; 7.126, 138, 182; 8.140, 
142 
moon 3.87; 4.52, 231; 7.4, 7; 8.86, 303, 
314; 11.221; 12.121 
change of 3.45; 4.150, 153 
full 3.86; 4.10, 95, 113-4, 128; 9.309 
new 3.86, 122, 127, 282; 4.10, 113-4, 
128 
Vow 9.309 
morning 3.121; 4.62, 69, 140, 152; 6.6; 
7.37; 8.87; 11.212, 220 
mortal 1.84, 88; 5.97 
mortar 3.68, 88; 5.117; 617 
mortgage 8.165 
moth 1.40; 11.241; 12.56 
mother 2.50, 133, 144-7, 169-70, 225— 
373 3-5, 157; 4.162, 180, 183, 239; 
5-61, 91, 101; 8.275,335, 389; 9.4, 
20, 92, 104, 110, 123-5, 131, 133, 
140, 168, 171, 174, 177, 192, 194, 197, 
217; 10.6, 14, 27, 40, 59; 11.1, 60, 
172 
mother-in-law 2.131 
mother's sister 2.50, 4.163 
mound 4.39, 46; 8.247 
mountain 1.24; 2.22; 3.9; 4.60 
mouth 1.31, 87, 92, 94, 95; 2.60, 62; 
3.98; 4.53, 117; 5.130, 139; 5.141; 
7.84; 8.271~2; 10.45; 11.160 


Index to the Translation 1123 


smelly 11.50 

mud 10.10; 11.113 

Muhirta 1.64 

mung bean 9.39 

Muifija grass 2.27, 42-3, 169-71 

murder 8.89, 317; 9.235; 11.49, 55~7, 67, 
69, 71, 73-90, 102, 109-17, 127-42, 
144, 191, 249; 12.7, 55 

Murva hemp 2.42 

mushrooms 5. 5, 19; 614; 11.156 

music 2.178; 4.64; 7.47, 225 

musician 4.210 

musk rat 12.65 

mustard 5.120 

mute 9.201; 11.53 

mynah 5.12 


Naciketa 3.185 

Nadi 4.90 

Naga 1,37 

Nahusa 7.41 

nails 2.167; 3.153; 4.35, 69-71; 5-135; 
6.6, 52; 8.271; 11.49 

naked 4.45, 53, 75; 7-92; 8.93, 

name 1.21; 2.30—3, 122-8; 3.9-10; 5.60; 
8.271, 274 

naming ceremony 2.30 

Nara 1.10 

Nara 1.10 

Narada 1.35 

Narayana 1.10 

Nata 10.22; 12.45 

navel 1.92; 4.143; 5.132 

neck 8.283; 11.206 

needle 7.187, 191 

neighbor 8.262-3, 392 

neutral 7.180, 211 

night 1.64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 72, 73, 74; 
2.102; 3.46-—50, 90, 102, 280; 4.50— 
1, 73; 99, 102, 106, 109, 118-9, 129; 
6.19, 59; 7-44, 145, 195; 8.86, 230; 
9.2, 60, 276; 10.54; 11.93, 111, 119, 
184, 224-5 

midnight 4.131; 7.151 

Nimesa 1.64 

Nimi 7.41 

Nirrti 11.119 

Nisada 10.8, 18, 34, 36-7, 48 

Niska 8.137, 220, 284 

noon, see day 

north 2.52, 61, 70; 3.217; 4.50; 8.87 

north-east 6.31 

nose 2.46, 90; 8.125 

smelly 11.50 


oath 8.109-16, 190 

oblations 1.94, 95; 2.84, 86, 143; 3.81, 
98, 100; 4.206; 6.34; 8.105-6; 
9.318; 10.111; 11.27, 96, 119-20, 
201, 223, 257; 12.68 


observances 2.3, 28; 3.1; 4.80-1; 5.69, 
71; 6.29 
occupations 1.113; 4.18; 8.273, 410-20; 
10.46—50, 74-130} 11.193; 12.45, 70 
ocean 1.24; 6.90; 8.175; 9.22, 314 
odd 3.48 
odor 1.76; 5.128; 11.150 
official 7.157, 203, 226; 8.12, 18, 34, 43; 
9.234, 258, 272, 294 
offspring, see children 
Oil 4.62, 83; 5.24—-5; 7-33; 8.272, 328; 
10.88; 12.63 
oil-cake 11.93 
oil—miller 3.58 
oil—press 4.84-5 
old age 2.148; 4.141, 179, 184; 7.38, 149; 
8.66, 70-1, 163, 312, 394-5; 93, 
230, 283; 12.80 
100-year—old 3.186 
oldest, see eldest 
OM 2.74-84; 6.70; 11.249 
omen 6.50; 7.197 
once—born 8.270; 10.4 
onions 5.5, 19 
ordeal 8.109-16 
orders of life 2.230; 3.2, 50, 77-9; 4.1; 
7.35 
organs 2.89—90, 215; 4.22, 143; 6.71; 
11.40 
control of 2.70, 88-100, 175, 192; 6.1, 
4, 59-60, 75, 92; 7-44;8.173; 10.63; 
11.39, 76, 107, 110; 12.31 
of action 2.91 
of perception 2.91, 192 
orifice 2.53, 60; 4.144}; 5.132, 138; 8.11 
omament 4.6; 7.220; 8.2, 357; 9.17, 78, 
92, 150, 200, 219; 10.52, 56 
outcaste 3.92; 4.79, 213; 5.85; 8.389; 
9.58, 63, 795 118, 144, 200-2, 235- 
49;11.125, 180-90, 224, 240, 246, 
258-60; 12.54, 60 
Owl 11.132; 12.76 
owner 8.5, 197-9, 229-44, 290, 293, 
320, 331; 9.145 
ownership 7.21; 8.4, 30-1, 144, 146-7, 
150, 197-205, 252; 9.93 
OX 2.204; 3.162; 4.231; 11.137, 175 


Padma 7.11 
Pahlavas 10.44 
Paijavana 8.110 
pain 1.26, 49; 6.64, 77; 8.286; 12.28 
Pala 8.134, 397 
Palaga 2.45 
palm 4.143 
joining of 2.70-1, 192; 4.154; 7.91 
parts of (tirtha) 2.58—61 
palm tree 8.246 
Pana 8.136, 138, 224, 241, 404 
Paficala 2.19; 7.193 


1124 Index to the Translation 


Pandusopaka 10.37 
panegyrist 3.158 
Paradas 10.44 
Paraka 11.216, 259 
Parasava 9.178; 10.8 
parasol 7.96 
Parivettr 3.171 
Parivitti 3.171 
park 9.265; 11.62 
parrot 5.12; 11.135 
partition, see inheritance, partition of 
partnership 8.4, 206-11 
partridge 11.135; 12.64, 66 
Pathin 4.90 
Pathina 5.16 
Pavamani 11.258 
peacock 11.136; 12.65 
pearl 9.329; 11.168; 12.61 
penance 1.116; 2,221; 5.20—21; 8.105; 
9.236, 240; 10.131; 11.1-266 
arduous 11.157, 159, 163, 178, 192, 198, 
209, 214-5 
penis 5.135; 8.282; 11.105 
performer 8.65, 102, 362; 9.225 
perfume 2.177; 3.209; 4.250; 7.131, 219; 
9.329; 10.88; 11.169; 12.65 
perishable 1.19, 27; 7.83-4 
perjury 3.158; 8.120-3 
pestilence 8.22 
pestle 3.68, 88; 5.117; 666; 8.315; 11.101 
pewter 5.114 
Phalguna 7.182 
phlegm 4.132; 5.135 
physician 3.152, 180; 4.179, 212, 220; 
9.258, 284 
pickpocket 9.277 
Pig 3-190, 241; 8.239, 298; 11.155, 157, 
200; 12.55 
Pilu 2.45 
pipal 8.246 
Pisdca 1.37, 43 
placenta 1.43 
plaintiff 8.2, 53, 56-8, 62, 79 
planet 1.24; 7.121 
plant 1.46; 5.40; 11.64, 143, 145 
Plava 5.12; 12.62 
pleasure 1.26, 49; 2.13, 224; 4.176; 7.26, 
45-7, 50, 151; 9.2, 76; 12.38 
pledge 8.143-50, 212 
plovers 5.11 
plow 10.84 
plowed land 4.46; 6.16; 10.114 
unplowed 10.114 
plowman 9.150; 
plunder 7.48, 51 
poison 2.162, 239; 4.56; 7.90, 217-8 
seller of 3.159; 10.88; 11.9 
poisoner 3.158 
pole 9.285 
policy 7.159; 8.1 


polity 8.24 
poor 3.95; 8.395; 9.74, 230 
porcupine 5.18; 12.65 
portent 6.50 
porter 8.404-5 
pot 6.28; 11.184, 187-8 
unbaked 3.179 
potsherd 8.250 
Pracetas 1.35 
Prajapati 2.58—9, 76~7, 84, 226; 3.21, 30, 
38, 86; 4.182, 225, 248; 5.28, 152; 
6.38; 9.16, 46, 327; 10.78; 11.38, 
244; 12.121-1, 123 
Prajapatya 11.106, 125, 212 
Prausthapada 4.95 
Prayaga 2.21 
precedence 2.134~9 
pride 8.213, 215 
priest 2.130, 143; 3.28, 119, 148, 151, 172, 
179; 4.182; 5.81; 7.78-9; 8.206-10, 
335 
officiating 11.183 
temple 3.152, 180 
primogeniture 9.105-~10, 134, 210; 11.186 
prison 8.310, 375; 9.288 
procreation 3.22; 12.121 
property 1.81, 82; 7.12324, 204; 8.27— 
40, 166, 193, 196-7, 201-2, 288, 
320, 322, 329, 375, 380, 399, 416-7; 
9.78, 114, 130-1, 136, 141-2, 144, 
146-7, 150, 152, 155, 162, 165, 184— 
5, 187-200, 204-9, 231, 241-2, 243, 
256, 333; 10.51, 115-20; 11.20, 77, 
81, 117, 186; 12.5 
ancestral 9.209 
confiscation of 9.232; 10.96 
lost 8.30-—40 
prosperity 2.32, 52; 4.231; 7.11, 171, 208; 
9.109 
prostitute 4.209, 219; 9.143, 258 
protection 1.87, 89; 2.32; 7.18, 88, 110, 
142-4, 152; 8.27-8, 39, 112, 304-6, 
349; 10.80; 11.23, 191,199, 236 
Prthu 7.42; 9.44 
puberty 9.89—90, 93 
Pulaha 1.35 
Pulastya 1.35; 3.198 
Pulkasas 4.79; 10.18, 38, 49; 12.55 
Pundraka 10.44 
punishment 6.24; 7.14—31; 8.58, 119-30, 
191, 194, 205, 221, 242, 276-8, 286, 
290, 292, 295, 301, 314-43, 382-3, 
409, 415; 9.213, 228, 245, 262-3, 
272-3, 278, 286, 293; 11.21, 32, 100; 
12.100 
capital 8.104, 123, 193, 306, 321, 323, 
352; 359, 364, 366, 371-2, 377; 379- 
81; 9.224, 232, 242, 248-9, 269-71, 
275-7, 279-80, 289, 291, 292; 
10.56; 11.101 


Index to the Translation 1125 


corporal 8.129-30, 267, 299-300, 

310, 320, 322, 325, 334, 352, 367— 
70, 374; 9.230, 236, 276, 101 

pupil, see student 

Purana 3.232; 8.136 

purchase 8..5, 222-8; 9.174, 332 

pure 1.76, 92; 2.61, 183; 3.216, 226, 228, 
235, 258; 4.35; 5129-31, 145; 6.5, 
11-3; 9.335; 11-154, 161 

purging 5.144 

purification 1.113; 2.40, 51, 69, 222, 240; 
3-126, 192, 235; 4.93, 127, 148; 
557-102, 105-27, 134-146; 6.92; 
7.145; 8.83, 87, 311; 10.63; 11.54, 
73, 84, 86, 90, 101, 104, 118, 124, 
126, 142, 144, 147, 150, 157, 161, 163- 
6, 178, 182, 191, 194, 200-3, 231, 
243, 249-50, 254-5, 258; 12.31 

purifier 3.256 

Purusa 11.252 

pus 3.180; 4.220; 12.72 

Puspadha 10.21 

Pusya 4.96 

Pitimrttika 4.89 

pyre 4.69 


rabbit 3.270; 5.18; 7.106 

raft 11.19 

rain 3.76, 273; 4.38, 103; 9.304; 11.114 

rainbow 1.38; 4.59 

Raivata 1.62 

Rajasarsapa 8.133 

Rajiva 5.16, 

Rajjuvala 5.12 

Raksasa 1.37, 43; 3.196 

rampart 7.70, 74, 195; 9-289 

rape 3.32, 164 

rat 4.126; 11.160; 12.62 

Raurava 4.88 

realm 7.109-13,114, 128-9, 133-4, 136-7, 
143, 157, 181, 195; 8.21—2, 219, 302; 
9.221, 226, 232, 241, 254~5, 294, 
304-5, 312; 10.61 

rebirth 1.50, 117; 2.249; 4.148—9, 166; 
6.74; 11.48; 12.16—23, 54-82 

relatives 2.129—33, 134, 136, 154, 184, 
206; 3.31, 52, 54, 57—8, 110, 148, 
264; 4.179, 183, 239, 241; 5.58, 70, 
74, 77, 81, 101, 103; 7.28, 111, 202; 
8.29, 70, 97; 108, 166, 185-6, 371; 
9.59, 110, 158-60, 187, 239, 269; 
10.55; 11.63, 173, 183-4, 188; 1279 

renunciation 1.114; 5.108; 6.35-7 

reservoir 7.196; 8.248, 262, 264; 9.279, 
281; 11.62 

restaurant 9.264 

retirement 1.114; 6.94-6 

revenue 7.55—6, 60 

revolt 7.24 

reward 7.85—6, 128, 144, 206-7; 11.5, 8, 


28, 30 
rhinoceros 3.272; 5.18 
rice 2.34; 3.267, 329 
rice—balls 9.132, 136, 140, 142, 186; 
11.217-21 
righteousness (dharma) 1.29; 3.40; 4.195; 
7.174, 201; 11.11, 21-2; 12.20~1, 23, 
31 
unrighteous 12.20-1, 23 
riot 5.95 
rites 1.84; 2.2, 26, 28, 84, 103,136, 171, 
234; 3.7, 56, 65, 154; 4.145-6; 5.99, 
105; 6.75, 82, 95-6; 8.208, 226-7, 
388, 393; 9.18—9, 28, 86, 180, 220; 
10.43, 69, 110, 126; 11.12, 16, 18, 
37-8, 119, 152, 183, 198, 204 
domestic 3.67; 7.78 
funerary 5.65; 9.142 
river 1.24; 4.47, 77, 202; 5. 108; 6.78, 
90; 8.175, 356, 406; 9.22; 11.133, 
255 
Rjisa 4.90 
toad 4.45; 7-185, 187, 240, 341 
royal highway 9.282, 288 
rod 8.237, 3453; 12.10 
Rohita 5.16 
roots 3.82, 227, 267; 4.29, 247; 5.10, 54, 
119, 157; 6.7, 13, 15, 21, 25; 7-131; 
8.260, 289, 331, 339, 341; 10.87; 
11.166, 237 
rope 4.38; 8.299, 319; 9.230; 11.169 
Rudras 3.284; 11.222 
ruler 1.99; 4.153, 184; 7.17, 167, 203; 
12,122 
Ruru deer 2.41 


sacrifice 1.22, 23, 86, 88, 89, 90; 2.3, 15, 
23, 28, 97, 143; 3.28, 118, 120, 171; 
4.57, 236-7; 5.22-23, 31, 39-41, 98, 
155; 6.35, 53, 83; 7.79; 8.206, 305- 
6, 311; 9.238, 318; 10.75, 79; 11.1, 
11-4, 20, 24-5, 34, 36-43, 88; 
12.49, 91 

Abhijit 11.75 

Agnistut 11.75 

Ahina 11.198 

animal 4.26—8; 5.39, 53; 11.27 

cake 6.11; 7.21 

consecrated for 2.128, 169; 4.130; 
8.360 

constellation 6.10 

food 3.256-7, 266; 4.205; 11.78, 107 

Gosava 11.75 

great sacrifices 1.112; 2.28; 3.67-286; 
4.21-—4; 6.5, 7-11; 11.246 

horse 11.75, 83, 261 

new- and full~moon 4.10, 25; 6.9 

new—harvest 4.26-8 

officiating at 1.88; 3.65; 4.33; 8.340, 
388; 10.75—7, 103, 109-11; 11.37, 42, 


1126 Index to the Translation 


60-1, 181, 198 
patron 8.317, 388; 11.24 
seasonal 4.26; 6.10 
Soma 4.26; 11.27 
Svarjit 11.75 
Trivrt 11.75 
ViSvajit 11.75 
sacrificial arena 11.3 
sacrificial cord 2.44, 63-4, 174; 3.279; 
4.36, 66 
sacrificial fee 8.207-8, 303, 306, 349; 
11.3-4, 38-40 
sacrificial gift 3.141, 143; 6.38; 7.79 
sacrificial offering 4.226-7; 5.104; 6.34, 
36-7; 7.21; 11.219, 221 
sacrificial session 2.106; 4.9; 5.93; 8.303 
sacrificial vessels 5.116; 6.4 
Sadhyas 1.22; 3.195; 11.29; 12.49 
safety 7.70-3; 8.230, 303 
sage 1.36, 58, 59, 110; 6.25, 41, 43; 7.29; 
2 8.91, 110, 407; 9.31, 67; 11.29 
Saikha 10.21 
Sairandra 10.32 
Sakakola 4.89 
Sakala 11.201 
Sakalahomiya 11.257 
Sakas 10.44 
Sakata 5.117 
Sala 8.246 
Sala rice 9.39 
sale 8.165, 199, 201, 203-5, 222-8; 9.46, 
98, 100, 332 
saliva 3,19 
Salmali 4.90 
salt 3.257; 5-73; 6.12; 8.327; 10.86, 94; 
11.110; 12.63 
seller of 10.92 
salutation 2.117-33, 216-7 
Saman 1.23; 4.123—4; 11.265 
Jyestha 3.186 
Samghata 4.89 
Sami 8.246 
Samjivana 4.89 
Sampratapana 4.89 
Samyava 5.6 
Sankhapuspi 11.148 
Santapana 5.20; 11.125, 165, 174, 213 
Sapindana rite 3.247-8 
Sarasa 5.12 
Sarasvati 2.17; 8.105; 11.78 
Sarngi 9.23 
Sarvannabhiti 3.91 
Sasalka 5.16 
Satamana 8.137, 220 
Satvata 10.23 
Saumya 3.199 
Savitra 4.150 
Savitri 2.38—9, 77-83, 101, 104, 118, 148, 
170; 10.20; 11.192, 195, 226 
scriptures 2,8, 10, 13-5, 35; 4.155; 9.19, 


32, 96; 12.95, 109 

scrofula 3.161 

sea 2.22; 8.157, 406 

seafaring 3.158; 8.157, 406 

season 1.30; 4.194—-5, 119, 128 

rainy 3.273, 281; 4.102; 6.23 
Six 3.217 

seat 2.119, 198, 202; 3.99, 107, 208-9, 
234; 4.29, 69, 74, 154, 202; 7.91, 
220; 8.281, 344; 9.17; 11.166, 181, 
225 

secret texts 2.140, 165 

security 4.232; 7.56, 127; 8.303; 9.219 

seed 2.112; 3.142; 5.63; 8.88, 113; 9.20, 
33-40, 42-3, 49, 51-4, 56, 145, 181, 
291, 330; 10.69—72 

seer(S) 1.1, 4, 34, 60, 9; 2.176, 189; 3.21, 
29, 38, 53, 69, 80-1, 194; 4.94, 2573 
5-1, 23; 6.32; 10.72; 11.211, 222, 
237, 244; 12.2, 49, 106 

self 2.117; 6.29, 49, 63, 65, 73, 82-3; 
7-43; 8.84-5; 9.45, 130; 12.4, 12— 
15, 22-3, 25, 31, 53, 85, 92, 118-9, 
125 

self-control 1.108; 2.222; 4.12, 145-6; 
6.8, 92, 95; 11.87, 112, 219, 260 

Self—existent One 1.3, 6, 61, 63, 92, 94, 
102; 5.39; 8.124, 412; 9.138, 158 

Selu 5.6 

semen 1.8, 56; 2.27, 180-1; 3.49; 4.220, 
222; 5.135; 9.50, 79; 10.42; 11.121, 
174 

seniority 2.155—6; 9.85-—7, 111-9, 122-6 

sense control 4.145; 12.83 

sense objects 1.15, 89; 2.88, 96; 4.16; 
6.59; 7-30; 9.28; 11.5, 44; 12.18, 32, 
73 

senses 1.7, 15, 553 2-215; 6.34, 72; 12.52 

servant 3.9, 112, 116, 153, 242, 246; 6.45; 
7-67, 125, 217; 8.70, 102,215-7, 243; 
9.332; 12.70 

service 1.91, 111; 2.32, 109, 112, 218, 229, 
233-5, 241-4, 248; 4.6; 7.88; 7.125; 
8.410; 9.28, 334; 10.116, 120, 122; 
11.70, 236; 12.78 

sesame 3.223, 234-5, 255, 267; 4.75, 
188-9, 229, 232; 9.39; 10.86, 90-1, 
94; 11.135 

$eX 1.25; 3.32, 45-50; 4.40—2, 64, 116; 
5-56, 144; 8.100, 362, 365-6, 368, 
371, 374, 376—-8, 382-5; 9.4, 14, 58, 
70, 235, 237; 10.31, 49, 55,59, 67-8, 
88, 103-7, 170-9, 252; 12.7, 58-60 

sexual organs 2.90; 4.144. 8.125 

shadow 4.51, 185; 5.133 

sharecropper 4.253 

shaving 2.65, 219; 11.79, 109, 152 

sheep 3.6, 166, 268; 5.8; 8.235, 298; 
9.119; 10.114; 11.69, 137, 139312.55 

shelter 9.271, 278; 11.114 


Index to the Translation 1127 


shield 7.192 
ship 4.120; 10.34 
shoes 2.178, 246; 4.66, 74 
shrubs 7.192; 8.330; 11.143; 12.58 
sick 2.138, 187; 3.8, 114; 4.67, 129, 144, 
179, 184, 207; 7.149; 8.64, 71, 107, 
163, 216-7, 312, 395; 9.78, 80, 82, 
167, 230; 11.1, 113 
sickness 1.83; 4.60, 157; 5.50; 6.62, 77; 
8.108; 9.30, 72; 12.80 
, Vil 3.92, 159, 177; 5.164; 9.79 
Sigruka 6.14 
silence 2.83; 3.236-7; 6.43; 9.60 
silk 5.120; 11.169;12.64 
silver 3.202; 4.230; 5.112—3; 8.131, 135- 
7, 321; 11.58, 168 
Simhatunda 5.16 
sin 2.79, 102, 221; 3.191; 4.198, 202, 243, 
260; 5.34, 107; 6.85, 96; 8.13, 40, 
88, 105, 112-3, 317-8, 420; 9.249; 
10.103-5, 111, 127; 11.46, 48, 53- 
126, 210, 216, 227-8, 231, 240, 242, 
246-7, 253, 255-64; 12.18-9, 54— 
82, 115 
grievous 3.98; 9.235~49; 12.54 
heinous 2.185; 3.159; 4.211 
singing 2.178; 4.64 
sipping 2.51, 58-62, 70, 222; 3.217, 251, 
264; 5.138-9, 142-5 
sister 2.50, 133; 4.180, 183; 9.192-3, 211; 
11.59, 171-2 
son of 3.148 
sister—in—law 3.160, 173 
Sivasamkalpa 11.251 
skin 2.41, 64, 90, 99, 174; 44189, 221; 
5.119; 6.2, 6, 76; 7.132; 8.234, 284; 
11.109, 123, 167 
disease of 11.49 
sky 1.13; 4.59, 105, 142; 10.104 
slander 2.179; 3.161;7.48; 11.50, 56; 12.6 
slaughter—house 3.68, 71; 11.156, 262 
slave 4.180, 185, 253; 8.70, 299, 342, 
412-6; 9.179; 10.32 
women 3.52; 8.363; 9.48, 55, 179; 
11.184 
sleep 1.5, 52,53, 54, 57, 65, 66, 74; 2.108, 
163, 181, 194, 219-21; 3.34; 4.55, 57; 
. 75-6, 993 5+73, 145; 7-47, 92; 9.13 
Slesmataka 6.14 
slough 2.79; 11.229 
smell 1.78; 4.107, 111; 5.126; 6.76; 11.68, 
150; 12.98 
smoke 4.69; 6.56 
snake 1.44; 2.79; 3.9, 196; 4.126, 135; 
7.23; 8.260; 11.69, 134,140, 229, 
241; 12.42, 57 
sneeze 4.43, 213; 5.125, 145 
social class 1.2, 91, 102; 2.18, 25, 132; 
7.35; 8.24, 142, 269, 277, 359, 385, 
410-20; 9.6, 85, 156, 168-9, 174, 


189, 240, 248, 335-6; 10.61-73; 
11.139, 151; 12.1, 70, 97 
born in between 1.2; 2.18 
mixed 1.116; 8.352; 9.67; 10.1-73; 
11.69, 126 
soft recitation 2.78, 85-7, 181, 220, 222; 
3-74; 4.93, 145-73 5.107; 6.83; 
10.111; 11.34, 78, 133, 143, 194~5, 
226, 250-7 
soil 2.112; 3.142; 8.251 
soldier 7.70, 97, 190; 12.46 
solitude 6.59; 7.147 
solstice 4.10 
Soma 3.85, 211, 257; 5.23, 96; 8.209; 
9.129; 11.7—8, 12, 150 
seller of 3.158, 180; 10.88 
Somapa 3.197-8 
Somaraudra 11.252 
Somasad 3.195 
son 2.28, 135; 3.16—-7, 37-41, 48-9, 136, 
160, 234, 262; 4.180, 184, 239, 257; 
5-77, 148-9; 6.3, 36-7, 95; 7-14, 
135; 8.28, 62, 114, 159, 299, 335, 
389, 416; 9.3-4, 9, 31-56, 60-1, 
106-8, 120-84, 209, 215-7, 220, 
323; 10.6, 8-9, 14-5, 18, 39, 41, 99, 
105, 107; 11.59-60, 62, 171 
female—son 3.11; 9.34, 127-40 
Sopaka 10.38 
sorcery 9.290; 11.64, 198 
south 2.52; 3.206, 214~5, 258, 279; 4.50 
sowing 3.142; 9.36, 38, 40, 42, 49, 51, 53, 
247, 330 
spade 2.218; 11.134 
spear 8.315 
speech 1.25; 2.90, 160, 185, 192; 4.18, 23, 
177, 2563 5.165~6; 8.105, 345; 11.33, 
51, 86, 232; 12.4, 8, 10, 121 
control of 3.258; 4.175; 9.29 
Sphya 5.117 
spider 12.57 
spies 7.153, 184, 223; 8.116, 181-2; 
9.256, 261, 266, 298, 306 
spit 4.132; 5.145; 8.282 
sprout 1.46; 9.36, 39-40, 54 
sputum 4.56 
Sravana 4.95 
Sri 3.89; 9.26 
Sruk 5.117 
Sruva 5.117 
staff 2,45-8, 64, 174; 4.36; 5.99; 6.5; 
7.187; 11.152312.10 
stationary 7.160—2, 166—7, 172, 195 
statue 9.285 
steadfast 7.209—10; 9.74; 11.71, 82 
stealing, see theft 
stomach 4.175; 8.125 
stone 5.111-2, 7.132; 8.250; 9.321; 
10.86; 11.168 
strategy 7.160—2, 167, 177, 200, 214~5; 


1128 Index to the Translation 


8.49 
political 7.160—80, 206-15 
six—fold 7.160, 167 
straw 3.100; 5.122; 8.377; 11.134 
strength 2.31, 55; 4.42; 7.10, 16, 89, 1753 
9.201, 298; 11.113; 12.101, 121 
student 1.103; 2.69-249; 3.94; 3.186, 
234; 4.33, 114, 175; 5-71, 81, 129, 
137; 6.87; 8.27, 70, 299, 317; 9.187; 
11.1, 118-24 
breaking vow 2.187; 3.155 
insignia 2.41—7 
life-long 2.243-9 
return home 3.3—4; 11.158 
VOW 11.159 
subjects (of king) 1.89; 7.18-9, 36, 44, 
80, 88, 123, 142-4, 146, 170, 175, 
209; 8.175, 226; 9.307, 309; 10.61, 
118 
Subrahmanya 9.126 
Sudas Paijavana 7.41 
Suddhavati 11.250 
Sudhanvan 10.23 
Siidra 1.31, 91, 116; 2.24, 31-2, 62, 103, 
127, 137, 155, 168, 172; 3.12—-19, 23~- 
4, 44, 64, 110-2, 156, 164, 197, 249; 
4.80, 99, 108, 140, 198, 211, 218, 
223, 245, 253; 5-83, 92, 99, 104, 
139-40; 7.138; 8.20—2, 62, 68, 88, 
102, 104, 113, 267-8, 277, 337, 374, 
377, 383, 410, 413-4, 417-8; 9.98, 
151, 153-5, 157, 160, 178-9, 224, 
229, 325; 10.4, 8-9, 12, 16, 18, 30, 
41, 43, 64-5, 92, 98-100, 110, 120—- 
9; 11.13, 24, 34, 42-3, 67, 79, 98, 
127, 130, 132, 141, 149, 153, 224, 236; 
12.42, 72 
king 4.61 
officiating at sacrifices of 3.178 
sex with 3.191, 250 
woman 3.155 
sugarcane 8.341; 9.39 
suicide 3.245 
Sukalin 3.197-8 
summer 3.281; 6.23 
Sumukha 7.41 
sun 1.9, 23, 65, 101; 3.76, 105; 4.48, 52, 
69, 231; 5.87, 105, 133; 7-4-5, 7; 
8.86; 9.137, 303, 305 
eclipse 4.37 
northward passage 1.67 
southward passage 1.67 
VOW 9.305 
worship 2.48, 181 
sunrise 2.15, 219~21; 3.280; 4.37 
sunset 2.219-21; 4.37, 75; 11.220 
Supama 1.37; 3.196; 12.44 
Stirasenaka 2.19; 7.193 
surety 8.158—62, 169 
Surpa 5.117 


Sita 10.11, 17, 26, 47 
Suvarna 8.134, 137, 213, 220, 361 
Svadha 3.223, 252 
Svapacas 10.51-6 
Svapaka 10.19 
Svarocigsa 1.62 
Svistakrt 3.86 

sweat 5.135 
swimming 4.77 
sword 7.192 

Syena 11.136 


tail 4.67; 8.234 
tailor 4.214 
Tamasa 1.62 
Tamisra 4.88, 165, 197; 12.75 
Tapana 4.89 
Taratsamandi 11.254 
taste 1.78; 5.128; 11.9; 12.99 
tavern 4.84-5; 9.237, 264 
tax 7.80, 127-139, 307-8; 8.394, 398, 
400, 404-9; 9.254, 305; 10.119-20 
teacher 2.51, 67, 69-75, 108-16, 140-63, 
191-249; 3-1, 148, 153, 156-7; 4.114, 
130, 162, 179, 182; 5-43, 65,80, 91; 
7.82, 175; 8.317, 335; 9.187; 10.75— 
7, 103, 109-11; 11.1, 35, 60, 63, 120, 
122, 181, 183, 225; 12.83 
family of 2.184, 243 
gift to 2.245-6 
relatives of 2.207 
son of 2.109, 207-9, 247; 5.80 
teacher of 2.205 
wives Of 2.131, 210-7, 247; 5.80 
tears 3.229~30; 5.135 
teeth 3.10; 4.69, 152; 5.141; 6.17 
black 3.153; 11.49 
temple 4.46; 8.248; 9.280 
tendons 6.76; 8.234 
termites 4.238 
terrace 7.147 
testicles 8.283; 11.105 
testimony 8.62, 68-71, 73-8, 87, 89-90, 
93, 95-101, 102-8, 117-9, 120, 122— 
3, 194, 197; 11.57, 89 
theater 9.264 
theft 1.82; 2.116; 6.92; 7.83; 8.6, 30-40, 
72, 189, 198, 213, 300-43, 345; 
9.92, 222, 237, 256, 270, 274, 276, 
278, 280-1, 293; 11.49-51, 55, 58, 
67, 71, 89, 99-103, 163-70, 251; 
12.57, 60-70 
thief 3.150; 4.118, 133, 210, 255; 7.83; 
8.29, 34, 40, 67, 191, 197, 233, 296, 
302-3, 314—43, 386; 9.226, 235, 
254, 256-7, 263, 266—7, 270-1, 272, 
276-8, 312; 11.101, 113; 12.59 
thigh 1.31, 87; 10.45 
thorns, eradication of 1.115; 9.252-93 
thread 2.44; 8.326, 397; 9.329 


Index to the Translation 1129 


threshing 11.17, 115 
throne 8.23 
thunder 1.38; 4.103, 106 
thunderbolt 7.191 
tiger, 11.113; 12.43, 67 
tin 5.114 
tongue 2.90; 8.125, 270, 277 
tortoise 5.18; 7.105 
touch 1.76; 3.241; 5.133; 12.98, 120 
town 4.107; 7.119; 8.237; 10.54 
trade 1.90; 3.64, 152; 4.6; 8.102, 398— 
403, 410; 9.257, 326; 10.47, 79-80; 
11.70, 236 
trader 3.181; 8.401 
tradition 1.27, 47, 77, 78, 96, 108-09; 2.3, 
6- 12, 14, 90, 4.155; 7-803 9.57, 126, 
194; 10.41, 45; 11.58, 164,178, 213, 
217, 220; 12.7, 25, 85, 95 
trapping 7.222; 10.32, 49 
Trasarenu 8.132-3 
travel 4.55, 60, 67-8, 140; 7.47; 8.408-— 
93 9.133 14.1 
treasure—trove 8.35-9 
treasury 7.148, 157; 8.38, 419; 9.275, 
280, 294 
treatise 1.58, 59, 102-08, 118-9; 4.19- 
20; 7.31, 54, 63; 11.66, 244; 12.105, 
107, 126 
treaty 7.202 
tree 1.47, 48; 4.39, 120; 5.6, 40; 6.13, 78; 
7-131, 192; 8.246, 285, 330, 339; 
9.254; 11.65, 143, 167; 12.101 
foot of 4.73; 6.26, 44; 11.79, 129 
memorial 9.264; 10.50 
planter of 3.163 
with milky sap 8.246 
tree bark 11.102, 106 
triple set 2.224; 7.27 
tripod 9.296 
Trisuparna 3.185 
truth 1.29, 81; 2.52, 83; 4.138, 170; 
5-109; 6.46, 92; 7.26; 8.14, 35,45, 
61, 74, 80-1, 83, 87,101, 103-4, 113, 
116, 179, 257; 10.63; 11.223 
untruth 8.14, 35-6, 82;9.18 
tuberculosis 3.7 
Turadyana 6.10 
turtle 1.44; 3.270 
tutor 2.141, 145; 5.91 
twice—born 1.33, 108; 2.11, 24, 26-7, 35, 
53, 103; 4.165, 190, 192, 196, 223; 
5-5, 19, 25-6, 33, 42-3, 92, 101, 140, 
167; 6.1, 37; 40, 85, 91, 94; 8.22, 68, 
87, 269-70, 311, 341, 348, 374, 390, 
410~1; 9.64, 66, 85, 156, 224;10.1, 
4, 6, 14, 20, 41, 46, 99-100; 11.8, 28, 
32-3, 47, 91, 102-3, 118, 121, 140, 
151-2, 154-5, 158, 170, 175, 192-3, 
199, 208, 212, 214, 227, 257; 12.93, 
126 


twilight 1.69, 70; 2.78, 101-3; 3.280; 
4.50, 55, 93—4, 113, 131; 8.86 
worship 2.69, 101-3, 222; 4.93—4; 
7.223 
twins 9.126 


Udgatr 8.209 

Udumbara 2.45 

Ugras 4.212; 10.9, 13, 15, 19, 49 

Ulkamukha 12.71 

umbilical cord 2.29 

umbrella 2.178, 246 

uncle 2.130—1; 3.119, 148; 4.179, 183; 
5.81 

unmanifest 1.6, 7, 11; 12.50 

Upanisads 6.29 

urine 4.45-52, 77, 93, 109, 132, 151, 222; 
5.121, 134-5, 138; 6.76; 8.282, 375, 
384; 11.92, 110, 151, 155, 213 

usurer 3.153, 180; 4.210, 220, 224; 8.152; 
11.62 

Utathya 3.16 


vagina 9.237; 11.174 
Vaideha(ka) 10.11, 13, 17, 19, 26, 33, 36- 
7) 47 
Vaikhanasa 6.21 
VaiSvanara 11.27 
Vaisya 1.31, 90, 116; 2.31-2, 36-8, 42-6, 
49, 62, 65, 80, 127, 155, 190; 3.13, 
23-4, 44, 110-2, 197; 5.83, 99, 140; 
8.62, 88, 104, 113, 267-8, 277,337; 
375-7; 382-5, 410-1, 418; 9.151, 
153, 155, 229, 325-33; 10.4, 8, 10-2, 
17, 23, 65, 78-80, 82-3, 85, 93, 98, 
101, 119-21; 11.12, 34, 67, 88, 94, 
127, 130, 236; 12.72 
valor 2.155; 7.159, 211 
Vamadeva 10.106 
Vardhrinasa horn—bill 3.271 
Varuna 3.87; 7.4, 7; 8.82, 106; 9.244-5, 
303, 308 
Vow 9.308 
Varuni 11.147 
Vasat 2.106 
Vasistha 1.35; 3.198; 8.110, 140; 9.23; 
11.250 
Vasus 3.284; 11.222 
Vatadhana 10.21 
Vatsa 8.116 
Veda 1.21, 23, 84, 93, 108-09; 26-12, 
78, 81, 97, 117; 3.41, 70, 154, 161; 
4.92, 114, 163, 192, 95,232—3; 5.4, 
42-4, 107; 6.83, 89, 95; 7.38, 43, 
85, 97; 9.316, 334; 10.74, 80, 11.1, 
33; 37, 57; 78, 85-6, 97, 193, 199, 
204, 244, 259; 12.49, 86-8, 94-102, 
105—6, 109, 114 
abandoning 11.57 
annual course of study 4.119 


1130 Index to the Translation 


end of 2.160; 4.123 
expository texts 3.184 
knowledge of 2.149-58; 3.7, 65-6, 
184-5; 4.31, 94; 8.11; 11.2, 4, 77, 
117, 247, 265-6 
recitation 1.88, 89, 90; 2.28, 70-87, 
104-7, 166-7, 191; 3.75, 81, 151, 168, 
188, 232; 4.17, 35, 58, 95-127, 147— 
9, 1903; 5.138, 145; 6.8; 9.238; 11.46, 
60, 76, 201, 228, 235, 246, 255, 258, 
260, 263; 12.31, 83, 92, 113 
Rgveda 3.145; 4.124; 11.262-3; 
12,112 
Samaveda 3.145; 4.124; 11.263; 
12.412 
suspension of recitation 2.105—6; 
4.97, 101-27 
study 2.2, 28, 164-72; 4.95-100; 
6.36-7; 7.85; 10.1 
teaching 2.108-16, 140-63; 4.260; 
5.23 10.1; 12.94 
triple 2.28, 76-7, 118, 230; 3.1-2; 
4.12; 7.37, 43; 9.188; 11.264-6; 
412.111 
Yajurveda 4.124; 11.263; 12.112 
Vedanta 6.83, 94 
vedic consecration 7.2 
vedic disputations 3.231 
vedic formulas 2.16, 29, 66; 3.121 
vedic retiree 6.86-97 
vedic savant 1.97; 2.113, 154; 3.136-7; 
4-91, 199; 5.82; 6.39; 11.42, 121 
vedic scholar 2.134, 242; 3.120, 184; 
4.31, 205, 224; 5.81, 82; 7.133—-4; 
8.65, 149, 393-5; 9.245 
Vedic Supplements 2.105, 141, 185; 4.19, 
98 
vedic vow 4.31 
vegetables 2.246; 3.226; 4.250; 5.119; 
6.13, 15; 7-132; 8.331 
vehicle 2.138, 202; 3.52, 64; 4.120, 202, 
232; 7.220; 8.290-8, 342, 404-5; 
9.150, 219; 11.166, 181; 12.67 
Vena 7.41; 9.66; 10.19, 49 
victory 7.11, 183, 199, 201-5 
Vijanman 10.23 
village 2.79, 185, 219; 3.103, 153; 4.60, 
73, 96-7, 107-8, 116, 118; 5.11, 68; 
6.3, 4, 16, 43; '7.114—20; 8.219, 221, 
237, 240, 245, 254, 258-9, 261,274; 
10.36, 51, 54; 11.79, 129, 200, 203 
VinaSana 2.21 
Vindhya 2.21 
violence 1.29; 7.48; 8.6, 72, 332, 344-51, 
386 
Viraj 1.32, 33; 3.195 
Virginity 8.205, 226, 364-5, 367, 369- 
70; 9.47, 69, 71-3; 10.5; 11.62 
virtue 2.1; 3.40; 5.1543 7-37-53; 8.311, 
318; 9.244; 11.22 


Visnu 12.121 

Visvamitra 10.108 

Visvedeva 4.183 

Vivasvat 1.62; 8.92 

vomit 3.109; 4.121, 132; 5.144 

votary 5.88, 91, 93; 11.121-2 

VOW 1.104, 111; 5.155; 11.62, 82, 118-24, 
130, 152, 159, 204, 225 

Vratya 2.39; 8.373; 10.20—3; 11.63, 198 

Vrihi 9.39 

vulture 3.115; 11.25—6, 136; 12.63 


wages 7.125-26; 8.5, 214~8; 9.332 

wagon 7.187 

waist 2.43; 4.112 

waking 1.52, 57, 74; 2.163, 194; 4.47, 93; 
6.31; 11.78, 133 

war 7.56, 87—98, 160-2, 164, 170, 176, 
181-200; 8.415 

washerman 4.216; 8.396 

wasp 12.66 

water 1.8, 10, 13, 78; 2.51, 53, 58-62, 99, 
104, 218; 3.35, 82, 99, 101, 214-8, 
223, 260-1, 267, 283; 4.29, 46, 48, 
52, 109, 143, 183, 229, 233, 247, 250; 
5-69-70, 77-8, 86, 96, 105-06, 
108-09, 111-5, 118, 121-2, 126-8, 
133-4, 138-9, 142-5, 7; 6.13, 31, 
41,46, 53, 67; 7-33-4, 70, 75, 195, 
219; 8.86, 100, 106, 114—5, 248, 319, 
326, 408; 9.161, 168, 186, 219, 244, 
281, 305, 321; 10.88, 103; 11.92, 
133, 148-50, 158, 164, 174-5, 184, 
187-8, 203, 213, 215, 224, 256; 
12.62, 67 

water—booth 9.264 

watercourse 8.252 

water pot 2.64; 3.68, 88, 96; 4.36, 66; 
6.52 

wealth 2.13, 31, 136, 154~5, 224; 3.40, 
106, 263; 4.3, 15, 18-9, 92, 141, 156, 
170, 176, 226; 5.96, 106; 7.4,9, 26, 
42, 46, 136, 151, 213; 8.36, 74, 125, 
1793 9-11, 163, 316; 10.85, 115, 129; 
11.20, 34, 70, 77, 194, 242; 12.79 

weapon 3.192; 4.122; 5.98-9; 7-75, 90, 
92, 222; 8.113, 324; 9.278, 293; 
10.79, 88,119; 11.33-4 

weaver 8.397 

weights 8.132—7, 321, 403; 9.330 

well 4.202; 7.226; 8.248, 262, 319; 
11.164 

west 2,22, 52 

wheat 5.25 

wheel 8.291 

whip 4.68 

whistling 4.64 

wicker 5.119 

widow 8.28; 9.60, 62, 64-5, 175 

son of 3.156, 174; 9.175 


Index to the Translation 1131 


wife 1.115, 129-33; 3.4—19, 45~50, 60—2, 
64, 103, 113, 116, 121, 173-4, 262; 
4.1, 40-4, 128, 180, 184, 232, 239; 
5.162, 167-9; 6.3; 7.77, 213; 8.6, 
114, 227, 275, 299, 317, 335, 352, 
362, 389, 416; 9.1-31, 41~6, 57, 59, 
74,76—-87, 95-6, 101-3, 120, 122-6, 
146, 148-57, 159-60, 162,164—7, 
170, 183, 191, 203, 220, 235, 2373 
10.5~6, 29, 99; 11.59, 62, 64, 171, 
173, 177-8; 12.7, 60, 69 
another man's 4.133-4 
paramour of 3.155 
wilderness 2.104; 5.69; 6.2, 4; 7.147; 
8.69,356; 9.265; 11.259 
wind 1.23, 76, 77, 203; 3.189; 4.48, 52, 
102, 122 5.96, 105, 1333 7.4, 7; 8.86, 
282; 9.42, 54, 303, 306; 11.114, 120, 
122; 12.120 
VOW 9.306 
winter 3.281; 6.23 
wisdom 2.121, 239-40; 4.42, 52, 94; 7.31 
witchcraft 3.58; 9.290; 11.64 
witness 1.115; 8.18, 45, 55, 60—72—102, 
108-9, 169, 178, 181-2, 252-3, 257— 


9 

wolf 7.106, 8.235—6; 12.67 

womb 2.27, 147; 4.200, 200; 5.164; 
6.63; 9.30, 34-5, 37, 52; 56, 126, 
173; 10.57-9; 12.53, 55-8, 77-8 

women 1.32, 114; 2.66—7, 123, 129, 138, 
158, 177, 179, 202, 213-4, 223, 238— 
40; 3-50, 55-9; 4.40—4, 53, 198, 
205, 208, 211, 212-3, 220; 5.9, 66, 
72, 108, 130, 139, 146-150; 7.47, 50, 
96, 125, 149-50, 153, 219, 221, 224; 
8.6, 27-9, 68, 70, 77, 89, 100, 149, 
323, 349, 352~85, 366, 370-1, 373- 
4, 376-8, 382-5, 404; 92-3, 5, 10, 
13, 17-9, 21, 23-4, 29-30, 33, 48, 
56, 61, 68, 91, 134, 143-5, 147, 175, 


183, 192-200, 219, 230, 232; 10.7, 
1i—2, 14, 18, 20, 24, 27-8, 30, 32, 
35, 37-9, 41, 47, 62; 11.59, 66-7, 89, 
139, 153, 164, 170-9, 191, 224; 12.59, 
67, 69 
barren 8.28 
menstruating 11.174 
pregnant 3.114; 8.407; 9.173, 283 
remarried 3.155, 181 
season 3.45-50; 9.70; 11.88 
wealth of 3.52 
young 3.245; 11.36 
wood 2.157; 4.188; 5.69, 115, 122;8.236, 
339, 372; 11.167 
wooden 8.289 
wood—apple 2.45 
wool 2.41, 44; 5.120; 8.151; 10.87; 
11.169 
world 1.5, 6, 9, 19, 27, 31, 33, 41, 51, 52, 
57, 63, 84, 94, 100, 111;2.4, 5, 9, 25, 
230-3; 4.238~-9, 243; 5.39, 55, 96- 
73 7+2, 22; 8.89, 96, 343;9.29-30, 
109, 137, 245, 315-6; 11.85, 245, 
262; 12.53, 97, 100, 102 
WOrM 1.40, 201; 3.92; 8.232; 10.91; 
11.71; 12.42, 56, 59 
wound 4.122; 7.93 
wrath 7.45-8, 51; 8.351 


Yajus 1.23; 4.123—4; 11.265 

Yaksga 1.37; 3.196; 12.47 

Yama 3.211; 5.96; 61; 7.4, 7; 8.86, 92, 
173; 9-303, 307; 12.17, 21-2 

VOW 9.307 

Yava 8.134 

Yavana 10.44 

year 1.12; 4.26; 6.18; 8.30, 373, 375; 
12.49 

Yoga 2.100; 6.61—86 

younger 2.120, 128 


