Parimal Sanskrit Series No. 93 


ao AM Wad aTyeana 
MATSYA MAHAPURANA 


(An Exhaustive Introduction, Sanskrit Text, English Translation, 
Scholarly Notes and Index of Verses) 


Vol. I 
Chapters : 1-150 


Translated into English by 
A Board of Scholars 


An Exhaustive Introduction by 
Shantilal Nagar 


Edited with Scholarly Notes by 
K.L. Joshi 


PARIMAL PUBLICATIONS 
DELHI 


Published by 


PARIMAL PUBLICATIONS 
Office : 27/28, Shakti Nagar, Delhi-1 10007 (INDIA) 
Retail Outlet : 22/3, Shakti Nagar, Delhi-1 10007 (INDIA) 
ph. : +91-11-23845456, 65441516, 47015168 
e-mail : parrmal@ndf.vsnl.net.in 
url : http://www.parimalpublication.com 


© Publishers 


All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or any 
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 


First Edition : Year 2007 
ISBN : 81-7110-305-7 (Set) 
81-7110-306-5 (Vol. I) 


PRICE : Rs. 1600.00 (Set of 2 Vols.) 


Printed at 


J.N.Printets 
251, Street No.8, Padam Nagar, Delhi - 110007 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 


CHAPTER | 
The cause of the lord Visnu assuming the form of fish and other related details 


CHAPTER 2 
Conversation between Matsya and Manu 


CHAPTER 3 
The primary creation 


CHAPTER 4 
The story of Sarasvati 


CHAPTER 5 
Birth of the daughters of Daksa and Kumara K4rttikeya 


CHAPTER 6 
Description of the Kasyapa dynasty 


CHAPTER 7 
Birth of Maruts and description of Madana Dvadasi 


CHAPTER 8 
Presiding deities of each sarga and the crowning of Prthu as king 


CHAPTER 9 
Description of Manvantaras and seven Rsis 


CHAPTER 10 
The story of the king Prthu and the milking of the cow 


CHAPTER 11 
Genesis of the solar and lunar dynasties and the story of Ila 


CHAPTER 12 
The story of [14 and description of Iksvaku dynasty 


CHAPTER 13 
Description of Pitr-vamsa and the hundred and eight names of the Goddess 


CHAPTER 14 


Fall of Acchoda from the heaven and her redemption at her prayer to the manes 


CHAPTER 15 
Description of Pitr-varnga and the method of performing Sraddha 


CHAPTER 16 


Different kinds of Srdddhas and the qualities of the Brahmanas to be invited in the Sraddhas 


Xill 


22 


28 


29 


32 


35 


4() 


45 


50 


32 


55 


vi 


CHAPTER 17 

Performing of Sraddha for achieving prosperity and emancipation 61 
CHAPTER 18 

Method of Ekoddisti and Sapindikarana Sraddha 67 
CHAPTER 19 

Distribution of havya and kavya by Pitrs in Sraddhas 69 
CHAPTER 20 

Story of the sage Kausika and the ants 7) 
CHAPTER 21 

The story of Brahmadatta and the four sheldrake birds 74 
CHAPTER 22 

The time suitable for the performing of srdddha and some rules connected with the same 77 
CHAPTER 23 

The origin of Moon, his marriage, performing of Rajasitya yajna, his attraction for Tara, his fight 
with lord Siva, and ending of war at the instance of Brahma. 83 
CHAPTER 24 


Birth of Budha from the womb of Tara, the story of Urvasi and Purtrava and that of Yayati 88 


CHAPTER 25 

Kaca and Devayani join Sukra for learning of Mrtasafijivani after bearing painful situations 93 
CHAPTER 26 

Devayani proposes marriage with Kaca who refused and their mutual showering of curses 100 
CHAPTER 27 

Quarrel between Devayani and Sarmistha, Sarmistha pushes Devayani into the well, Yayati saves 
Devayani, conversation between Devayani and Sukracarya 1Q2 
CHAPTER 28 

History of Yayati and dialogue between Devayani and Sukra 105 
CHAPTER 29 

Denouncement of Vrsaparva by Sukracarya and Sarmistha becomes the slave girl of Devayani 106 
CHAPTER 30 

Forest sports of Devayani and Sarmistha with their handmaids, arrival of the king Yayati- his talk 
with Devayani and his marriage with her. 109 
CHAPTER 31 

Birth of a son to Yayati from Devay4ni, meeting of Sarmisthd with Yayati in seclusion and the birth 
of a son to her as well 112 
CHAPTER 32 


Talk between Sarmistha and Devay4ni getting annoyed at the birth of a son to Sarmistha, Devayani 
goes to her father with a complaint. 115 


vil 


CHAPTER 33 

Yayati's efforts to exchange of old age with the youthful age of his sons who declined, but Puru 
accepted the old age of Yayati, earning the boons 118 
CHAPTER 34 

Enjoying of worldly pleasures by Yayati, and then his proceeding to the forest crowning Puru as the 
king 12] 
CHAPTER 35 

Performing of the tapas by the king Yayati and his reaching the heaven 124 
CHAPTER 36 

At the instance of Indra, Yayati repeats the advice given by him to his son Puru 125 
CHAPTER 37 

Fall of Yayati from the heaven and the question asked to him by Astaka 127 
CHAPTER 38 

Conversation between Yayati and Astaka 129 
CHAPTER 39 

Conversation between Yayati and Astaka 132 
CHAPTER 40 

Discussion of Yayati and Astaka on asrama dharma 135 
CHAPTER 41 


Discussion between Yayati and Astaka, Yayati refuses to accept the merits granted by others 137 


CHAPTER 42 


Refusal of the king Yayati to accept the offer of the kings including Astaka and others 140 
CHAPTER 43 
Description of Yayati's dynasty and the story of Kartavirya Arjuna 144 
CHAPTER 44 
Burning of the trees with lustre of Kartavirya, curse of Vasistha to Kartvirya and the description of 
Andhaka race | 147 
CHAPTER 45 
The story of Syamantaka gem 154 
CHAPTER 46 
Description of Vrsni dynasty 156 
CHAPTER 47 
Life story of Krsna, history of Daityas, battle of gods and the demons 159 
CHAPTER 48 
Description of Turvasu and Druhya, story of Bali and the birth of Karna 181 
CHAPTER 49 


Description of Puruvamsa, BharatavarmsSa and the birth of Bharadvaja etc. 139 


Vill 
CHAPTER 50 
Comprehensive history of the rulers of Puruvamsa 


CHAPTER 51 
Dynasty, Origin and various names of Agni 


CHAPTER 52 


Description of Dharma and Adharma, the excellence of Karmayoga over Jnana-yoga 


CHAPTER 53 
Descriptions of Puranas and merit of making the gift of a Purana 


CHAPTER 54 
About the ordinance of Naksatra-purusa 


CHAPTER 55 
The merits of the vow of Aditya-Sayana 


CHAPTER 56 
Krsnastami Vrata and the merits of adoration of Siva in different months 


CHAPTER 57 
Rohinicandra-sayana Vrata, The rules of performing different vows 


CHAPTER 58 
The rules of consecration of newly built tanks, wells, pools, temples etc. 


CHAPTER 59 
The rites of dedicating trees and planting groves 


CHAPTER 60 
About the ordinance of Saubhagya-sayana 


CHAPTER 61 
The birth of Agastya and the dialogue between Narada and Siva 


CHAPTER 62 
Description of Ananta-trtiya vow 


CHAPTER 63 
Vow of “Rasakalyanini trtiya” and rite of Sahasra Agnistoma 


CHAPTER 64 
About the ordinance of Ardranandakari trtiya 


CHAPTER 65 
Vow of Aksaya-trtiya and its merit 
CHAPTER 66 


Description of Sarasvata ordinance 


CHAPTER 67 
Merits of charity at the time of solar and lunar eclipses 


194 


201 


205 


208 


214 


218 


221 


222 


-_ 


230 


“a 


236 


241 


245 


248 


250 


ai 


252 


iX 


CHAPTER 68 
Rituals of bathing on the seventh day of a bright fortnight 


CHAPTER 69 
Vow of Bhima Dvadasi 


CHAPTER 70 
Vow of Anangadana, the method of worshipping Kama 


CHAPTER 71 
Description of the ordinance known as Asiinyasayanadvitiya 


CHAPTER 72 
The vow of Angaraka, the dialogue between Pippalada and Yudhisthira 


CHAPTER 73 
Method of the pacification of planet Brhaspati and Sukra 


CHAPTER 74 
The vow and merits of Kalyana-saptami 


CHAPTER 75 
The merits of the vow of Visoxa-saptami 


CHAPTER 76 
The ordinance of Phala-saptami 


CHAPTER 77 
The vow and merits of Sarkara-saptami 


CHAPTER 78 
The vow and merits of Kamala-saptami 


CHAPTER 79 
The vow and merits of Mandara-saptami 


CHAPTER 80 
The ordinance of Subha-saptami 


CHAPTER 81 
The ordinance of Visoka-dvadasi, the method of worshipping Laksmi 


CHAPTER 82 
The merits of gift of Gudadhenu and other symbolic images of the cow 


CHAPTER 83 
The benefits and greatness of all gifts 


CHAPTER 84 
The description of gift of salt-hill 


CHAPTER 85 
The description of gift of raw-sugar-hill 


254 


258 


263 


269 


210 


275 


2716 


278 


279 


280 


282 


283 


284 


285 


288 


29} 


py 


296 


CHAPTER 86 
The description of mountain of gold 


CHAPTER 67 
The description of mount of sesamum 


CHAPTER 88 
The description of gift of cotton-hill 


CHAPTER 89 
The description of mount of clarified butter 


CHAPTER 90 
The description of mount of gems 


CHAPTER 91 
The description of the mount of silver 


CHAPTER 92 
The description of the sugar-hill 


CHAPTER 93 
The performance of Santi and Pusti (Oblation to the nine planets) 


CHAPTER 94 
Description of the form of nine planets 


CHAPTER 95 
Method and merit of the ordinance of Siva-caturdaéi 


CHAPTER 96 
The greatness of giving up of all fruits 


CHAPTER 97 
The method of Sunday ordinance 


CHAPTER 98 
The process of bringing Samkr4nti to a close 


CHAPTER 99 
The vow of Visnu-vratam, known as the Vibhiti-Dvadasi 


CHAPTER 100 
Description of the vow of Visnu-vratam 


CHAPTER 101 
Prescribing of the sixty vratas and the related glory 


CHAPTER 102 
Method of taking bath and the performing of tarpana 


CHAPTER 103 
Anxiety of Yudhisthira, his meeting with the sage Markandeya 


296 


297 


298 


298 


299 


300 


301 


304 


318 


319 


322 


325 


326 


328 


330 


334 


34] 


344 


CHAPTER 104 


The glory of Prayaga and description of various sacred places 


CHAPTER 105 


Position of those who die at Prayaga and the importance of giving a cow in charity 


CHAPTER 106 


Glory of Prayaéga and description of various auspicious places 


CHAPTER 107 
Description of the various sacred places of Prayaga 


CHAPTER 108 
The glory of Prayagatirtha 
CHAPTER 109 


Glory of Prayaga in preference to other tirthas 


CHAPTER 110 
Dwelling of all the auspicious tirthas at Prayaga 


CHAPTER 111 
Stay of Brahma, Visnu and Siva at Prayaga 
CHAPTER 112 
Glory of Prayaga as described by Vasudeva 


CHAPTER 113 
The description of Jambidvipa and its mountains and varsas 


CHAPTER 114 
Description of Bharatavarsa, Kimpurusa and Harivarsa 


CHAPTER 115 
Story of the earlier birth of Purtirava 


CHAPTER 116 
Description of Airavati river 


CHAPTER 117 
Description of the astonishing splendour of Himalaya 


CHAPTER 118 


Description of the astonishing beauty of Himalaya and the hermitage of the sage Atn 


CHAPTER 119 


Entry of Purdrava in the hermitage, description of the grandeur of the 4srama and the tapas 


performed by Purtirava 


CHAPTER 120 


347 


348 


351 


355 


357 


360 


362 


363 


365 


366 


373 


380 


38] 


383 


385 


390 


Tapas of the king Purtirava, sports of Gandharvas and apsards, arrival of the sage Atri, the boon 


eranted to the king 


393 


CHAPTER 121 
Description of Kailasa and Ganga besides Jambidvipa 


CHAPTER 122 
Description of Sakadvipa, Kusadvipa and Salmalidvipa 
CHAPTER 123 


Description of Gomedaka and Puskaradvipa 


CHAPTER 124 
Speed of the Sun and the Moon described 


CHAPTER 125 
Description of the movement of the sun and his chariot 


CHAPTER 126 
Riding of different gods over the Sun’s chariot in different months 


CHAPTER 127 
Description of the chariot of the planets and praise of Dhruva 


CHAPTER 128 
Movements of divine planets and the speed of the sun and the moon 


CHAPTER 129 
The building of Tripura 


CHAPTER 130 

Building of Tripura by Maya-danava 

CHAPTER 131 

Comfortable living of the Daityas in Tripura, witnessing of the dream by Maya 


CHAPTER 132 
Atrocities of the Daityas of Tripura, taking refuge of the gods with Brahma 


CHAPTER 133 
Building of a surprising chariot of Siva for the killing of Tripurasura 


CHAPTER 134 
Attack on Tripura by Siva and other gods 


CHAPTER [35 


Attack on Tripura by Indra at the command of Siva, victory of the gods and the retreat of the 


Danavas to Tripura 


CHAPTER 136 


Anxiety of Maya, construction of a surprising stepwell, terrific war between Nandikesvara and 


Tadrakasura 


CHAPTER 137 


Anxiety of Maya with the drying of the step-well, Danavas enter the nether world 


397 


402 


409 


414 


421 


425 


431 


433 


439 


442 


444 


448 


450 


455 


458 


465 


470 


xill 


CHAPTER 138 
Terrific battle between the gods and the Danavas and killing of Tarakasura 


CHAPTER 139 
Maya entrusts safety of Tripura to the Danavas convincing them again 


CHAPTER 140 
War between Gods and Danavas, killing of Vidyunmali by Nandisvara 


CHAPTER 141 
Pururava’s union with the sun and moon 


CHAPTER 142 
Description of the Yugas 


CHAPTER 143 
Description of yajna and its method 


CHAPTER 144 
The temperament of Dvapara and Kaltyuga, the story of the king Pramati, start of Krtayuga 


CHAPTER 145 
Changes in the bodies, varna with the change of the yugas 


CHAPTER 146 
Birth of Vajranga, his making captive by Indra and his release 


CHAPTER 147 
Birth of Tarakdsura with the boon of Brahma 


CHAPTER 148 


473 


478 


483 


489 


496 


S02 


505 


S05 


521 


526 


Performing of tapas by Tarakasura, receiving of his boon from Brahma and the preparations of war 


between the gods and the Daityas 


CHAPTER 149 
The start of war between gods and the asuras 


CHAPTER 150 
Battle between gods and the demons 


528 


536 


537 


Introduction 


The Matsya Purdna earns its title from the fish incarnation of Visnu, the other nine 
being Kirma, Varaha, Narasimha, Vamana, Bhargava Parasurdma, Rama, Krsna, Buddha 
and Kalki. The Matsya Purdna is not all based totally on the life story of Matsya, but it 
deals with various other subjects, though in some of the chapters Matsya himself is the 
speaker. Before embarking on the subejct of the incarnation of Visnu, it would be quite 
pertinent to visualise the need for such an incarnation. In this connection, there is the well 
known passage from Bhagavadgita in which the lord Krsna declared that whenever the evil 
or adharma becomes predeomient, in the society and the virtues or dharma are on the 
decline, or are relegated to the background, the lord incarnates on earth in order to uphold 
the virtues and to destroy the evil forces, would be quite relevant :— 


aat aat fe ever tena aT 
MAMTA TAI HATTA tt 
UAT ATA faye A SATA 
eT aay at ath 
Bhagavadgita 
The same spirit has been conveyed in the following verses of the Brahma Purdna:— 
sua YireeT: Taga MATA: | 
AML FAI ATAU TATH | 
qel Tera Ghavata wt fet: 
ey Brava dat fal WATT 1 
SAA AAT FEM Heras SHASTA 
AAT TUNA CHA TTATS AI 
gor Foret stat a aefgary 
WATT THOTT AAAS AT FA-AAN (1811-4) 
The number of incarnations 


The incarnations of Visnu have been variously described in the Puranas, since the 
Matsya Purdna relates to one of the incarnations of Visnu, it would be of interest to analyse 
the position of the incarnations in the Purdnas:— 


1. Vayu Purana 


(a) Divine Incarnations 


XVi 


(1) Varaha (II. 36.73) in the fourth yuga, when Suras were in distress, he was born 
within the ocean for killing Hiranyakasipu. 


(ii) Narasirhha (II. 36.73) The second incarnation was that of Narasimha. 


(iii) Vamana (II. 36.74) The third incarnation, that of Vamana, took place in the 
seventh Tretayuga, when all the three worlds were overrun 
by the Daityas and were ruled by Bali. 

(b) Human Incarnation 


(iv) Dattatreya (II 36.88) The fourth incarnation was Dattatreya, with Markandeya as 
his preceptor. 


(v) Mandhatr (II. 36.89) The fifth incarnation is Mandhatr 


(vi) Parasurama (II. 36.90) The sixth incarnation was that of Parasurama, son of 
Jamadagni. 


(vil) Rama (iI. 36.91) In the twenty-fourth Tretayuga Visnu incarnated as Rama. 

(viii) Veda-vyasa (II. 36.92) Visnu took his eighth incarnation as Vedavyasa born of 
Parasara. 

(ix) Krsna (II. 36.93) Visnu was born as Krsna, son of Devaki and Vasudeva as the 


ninth incarnation. 


(x) Kalki (II. 36.165-120) Visnu in his future incarnation will be known as Kalki. 


(2) Varaha Purana 


The Vardha Purdna counts the ten incarnations of Visnu, in a chronological order as 
follows:— 


Wearanaey AaeISa ATA: 
TATA HOGA TRH TT IM (4.2) 


(Matsya, Karma, Varaha, Narasirnha, Vamana, Parasurama, Rama, Krsna, Buddha and 
Kalki are the ten incarnations of Visnu} 
(3) Brahmavaivarta Purana 


The Brahmavaivarta Purdna, mentions mainly at two places about the incarnations of 
Visnu. Initially in the ninth Chapter of the Visnu Khanda, there is a mention of seventeen 
incarnations of Visnu as under:— 


TAyVafaen: BAlaisera a 
TH Aifeicheay SHOT Fa ATI 
Gant an: afenatg: afterittan 
Ud BM: HAI Wa BAT FAI 


XVii 


aut yfaet way yarata farefay:| 
ufeyataH: Feat Agus weet TATA 
(Brahmavaivarta Purdna, Krsna Khanda, 9/10,12/13) 
The above verses classify the incarnations of Visnu as follows 
(i) Those which emerged Brahma, Isa, Vighnesa (Ganega), Karma, Nara- 


out of amsas of Krsna Narayana, Karttikeya. 
(or Visnu) 


Here Nara and Narayana have been treated separately, 
but elsewhere in this Purana, Nara-Ndarayana have been 
treated as one incarnation (Krsna Khanda 22/28) 


(ii) ArbSavataras of Visnu Vamana, Kalki, Buddha, Kapila and Matsya. 
(11) Ptrandvatdras Ktrma, Narasimha, Rama and Krsna. 
Irrespective of the above list of seventeen incarnations, the second Sthala of Krsna 


Khanda of this Purana (23/37; 41-49) mentions Vamana, Varadha, Narasimha, Kirma, 
Rama, Parasurama, Kapila, Nara-Narayana and Krsna. 


(4) Garuda Purana 
Chapter-14 of the Brahma Khanda of ithe Garuda Purdna deals with the incarnations of 
Visnu. The lord is described here not only the author of everything but also as the destroyer 


and as enjoyer of the best in everything. In this connection a number of things which are 
excellent in each class are mentioned and the Lord is said to be its enjoyer. 


Chapter-15 of the same texts provides the list of these incarnations which includes Vis 
nu-Vdsudeva, Samkarsana, Aniruddha, Sanandana and others. Besides the names of 
Varaha, Narayana, Kapila, the expounder of Sankhya philosophy, Dattatreya (the propunder 
of Anviksiki to Alarka) Svayambhuva Manu, Korma, Dhanvantri, Mohini, (Sri), 
Narasimha, Vamana, Parasurama, Vyasa, Raghava ( Rama), Krsna, Buddha and Kalki are 
also mentioned. Some of the relevant verses are quoted hereunder :— 


Ta et: WeTrreen cake efeatorata: | 
TARA EG eA Tete owt TTA: 

TM Seay Magy Aen waa Se 
Sequrt fate wera MaKIA tata eeacry 
aal SX Mew Bae TATA: | 

den feraaforasy warecs denfad: atelier 
aa eft wTarareiarat F ayamaea: 

SHA AMT: Tits ted ot ufad Afag a 


XViil 


Aal SAAS: Yat Yous Ta Ups aah 
Tafeat afraront a ats yfutr-eat Aaa Wey: I 
AMAIA F awpaqat Waareaia Wr: 
wpa aya tenfefrdeuria ada 
(Garuda Purana, Brahma Khanda, 15.17-22) 


(5) Bhagavata Purana 


The texts in its first Skanda describes the number of the incarnation of Visnu as twenty- 
four as follows:— 


“At the time of the beginning, with the desire to create the universe, the lord assumed 
the form of a man (purusa) consisting the sixteen parts created from the tattvas (primary 
substances) of which Mahat (the great or intellect) is the first. 


Brahma, the head of the progenitor of the universe, was born of the lotus of the deep- 
lake-like navel of the Lord, who was lying on the waters (of the post-deluge ocean), 
extending his yogic meditation slumber. Verily that form of the lord on the formation of 
whose limbs is based the extent of the universe, is very pure, excellent, and full of sattva 
(goodness) they (i.e. yogins) with their vision visualise this form which is wonderful (on 
account of its having thousands of feet, thighs, arms, mouths, thousands of heads, ears, eyes 
and noses, shining on account of thousands of crown, garments and ear-rings):— 


UPAASATHAMTAYAT MSA eA AST 
UeATAAMM Af ARAMA THUS AA! (1.3.4) 


At first, that very God manifested himself as a youth and becoming a Brahmana, 
practised unbroken celibacy which is difficult to practice. Secondly also the lord of 
sacrifices (Narayana) with the object of creation, assumed the body of a boar, for raising up 
the earth which has sunk down to the lower region called Rasdtala. And thirdly, he having 
become the Divine sage Narada in the Arsa creation (pertaining to the sages) expounded the 
religion-mystical treatise pertaining to the satvatas (the devotees of Visnu), namely 
Pancaratrdgama by following which actions become void of their binding force. In the 
fourth incarnation, having been born of the wife of Dharma (namely Marti, daughter of 
Daksa-Prajapati) as the twin sages Nara-Narayana, He performed severe penance with fully 
pacified mind. 


The fifth (incarnation) was the name of Kapila, the chief of the Siddhas, who explained 
to Asuri, the Samkhya doctrine which determined all the principles, which were lost 
formerly in the course of time. In the sixth (incarnation), he being requested by Anasiya, 
became the chifd of Atri, taught Metaphysics to Alarka, Prahlada and others. Then in the 
seventh incarnation, yajna was born of Huci and Akuti. He alongwith gods, of whom Yama 
was the first, protected the period assigned to Manu called Svayambhu. In the eighth 
incarnation, Lord Visnu, was born of Nabhi and queen Meru Devi. He as Rsabha showing 


XIX 


to the strong minded ones, the path of Sanydsa, the most respectable of all stages of life. 
Having been explored by sages, he assumed the ninth form known as Prthu. From this 
earth, he milked medicinal plants. Thereby he became most pleasant. At the time of oceanic 
deluge in the epoch called Caksusa, he assumed the form of a fish and protected Vaivasvata 
Manu, by making him board the earth boat. This was his tenth incarnation. In the eleventh 
incarnation, in the form of a tortoise, the Omnipresent lord supported the Mandra mountain 
on his back while gods and demons were churning the ocean. The twelfth incarnation is of 
Dhanvantri and the thirteenth, the female form of Mohini, who after deluding others, 
enabled the gods of drink nectar. Assuming the fourteenth man-lion form, he tore up the 
chest of the powerful king Daityas with his claws like the weaver of mats tearing the grass. 
Proposing to beg three steps of land, but desirous of recovering heaven, he assumed the 
Pigmy (Vamana) form and arrived at Bali's sacrifice. In the sixteenth incarnation, being 
angry at the hostility to Brahmanas, he extricated the warrior class form the earth twenty 
one times as Parasurama. In the seventeenth descent on earth, he was born of Satyavati and 
Parasara. Seeing the people of low intelligence, he divided the three in the form of Veda 
into several Branches. After this, in order to help gods or to kill Ravana, he assumed 
kingship and performed acts of valour such as the control of the sea by building a bridge 
over it. In the nineteenth and twentieth incarnations, having taken birth in the Vrsni family 
as Rama (Balarama) and Krsna, he lessened burden of earth. Then on the full advent of the 
Kali Age, he will be born as Buddha and as soon of Ajana in the Kikata country. Then in 
the twilight of the Kali Age, when the kings will be as good as robbers, this protector of the 
world will be born of Visnuyasa under the name of Kalki. 


(6) Agni Purana 


In the Chapter 48 of Agni Purdna stress is laid on the recitation of the Vaisnava mantra 
(3% FHl Wad aAqeard) from the number of Sanskrit letters entering into its composition. 
Then there 1s an elaborate description of the twenty-four forms of Visnu. The next Chapter 
(49) deals extensively with the iconography of Visnu, and his ten incarnations, Chapters 44- 
47 highlight the essential points in the making of an image of Vasudeva and any other 
deity; the essential points of the divine pedestal and its dimensions; the different kinds of 
Saldgrama stones and the process of worshipping Salagramas. Then chapters 202 and 203, 
contain highlight on the worship of Hari and the fruits acquired by a man for worshipping 
Hari. Chapter-305 recites the fifty names of Visnu. 


The ten incarnations of Visnu are also found mentioned in the following Puranas, 
besides the Mahabharata:— 


(1) Varadha Purdna , 4.1-3; 48.16-23;112.27. 
(i) Brahmdanda Purdna 2.73, 70-126. 
(111) Matsya Purana 47, 234-251. 


XX 


(iv) Devi Bhégavata, 105, 1-15. 


But the subject of incarnations has been discussed variously in the Puranas as well as 
_ other religious literature as would be evident from the following facts. 


(1) The Reasons 


(a) Visnu is the only god of the Brahmanical trinity, who is known in the texts to 
incarnate not only in animal, or composite forms, (half anima! and half human) but also in 
purely human form and even is born of human parents. The theory of incarnation of Visnu 
could also be traced in the Satapatha Brahmana, wherein the rescue of the Earth from the 
deep sea by Brahma in the form of a Boar has been discussed:— 


Fa eae SATIS ATMfedtadt Aras wa yeaa mew ATT shat 

aU SHI Ase: Ufa: waafadtaawarass feo arash Maat Hea 

alfa Wael asa forieeara car ufsen war at tee at viltssermaa wy) 
( Satapatha Brahmana, 14.1.2.11) 


(Then, the earth, torn up by a Boar, he takes only thus large was she in the beginning, 
for, indeed only so large was this earth in the beginning of the size of a span. A Boar called 
Emusa, raised her up and he was her lord Prajapati, with that mate, her heart's delight, he 
thus supplies the complete him............ ). 


(b) The same version is repeated in the Vajasneyi Samhita (38.5) and some other texts as 
well. However, the Matsya Purdna also declares that whenever there is a decay of 
righteousness, Visnu takes birth in order to establish righteousness by destroying asuras ‘— 


Wet WA: Yafawge wigtieret wy: 
Haq TATAATTUM TOTTI (Matsya Purana 47.32) 


(c) It also testifies that Visnu's resorting to the various incarnations on earth 1s due to a 
curse pronounced by Bhrgu and that Visnu assumed most of these forms:— 


HIM AAA Wad Aaa 
TT MUTT Cea THA dali! (Matsya Purana 47.37) 


(At the same time on account of the curse of Bhrgu, there was destructive warfare 
between Devas and asuras to cause pain to Bali, when lord Visnu manifested himself in 
human form to establish righteousness, for the sake of the Devas and the asuras). 


(d) According to the above authority, it was Bhrgu who initially commanded Visnu to 
incarnate, in order to establish righteousness over the unrighteous deeds of the asuras. Thus 
the seeds of the theory of incarnation of Visnu could quite well be traced in the Vedic texts 
and the Satapatha-Brahmana, but the clear vision as to the need of such incarnations has 
been provided in the Matsya Purdna and the Bhagvadgitd as described earlier. 


(ec) Almost identical views are contained in Chapter-II of the Devi-Mahatmya wherein 
the goddess declares similarly. 


Xxi 


(f) The Curse of Sukra, the priest of asuras 


The Matsya Purana (Chapter-47) further goes on to testify that there were indeed twelve 
conflicts between the gods and the asuras. On one occasion when Prahalada had been 
overcome, Indra has gained the empire of the three worlds. Sukra, the priest of the asuras, 
left them and went to the gods. They however, entreated him not to desert them; when he 
reassured them by the promise of his support. They (the asuras) were attacked by the gods 
and they resorted to Sukra, when their assailants left them. Sukra then referred to their 
earlier discomfiture and advised them to wait for a more favourable time and resorted to 
Siva to obtain a sacred text for achieving their victory. On being praised by Sukra for the 
sacred book, Mahadeva advised him to practice severe austerities. The absence of Sukra 
entheused the gods to attack the asuras, who feeling insecure went to the mother of Sukra, 
to save them. Then mother of Sukra, was ultimately slayed by Visnu at the instance of 
Indra, quite hesitatingly because she was a woman. Visnu was thereafter doomed by a curse 
of Sukra to be born seven times in the world of men and in consequence of this, he 
appeared for the good of the world when unrighteousness prevailed. In the consequence of 
Sukra's curse, which operated periodically, Visnu had to be born seven times among men 
for a sin of killing a woman, knowing that a woman under no circumstances is to be killed. 


Ta Waa aaa wal Frafean 
TRS MaKeas AGATA! (Matsya Purana 47.103) 


Besides, Brahma had also decreed that all those asuras who should be disobedient to 
Prahalada should be slain by man. This also explains the reasons for Visnu's resorting to the 
human form for the destruction of the asuras:— 


velar Fey 7 7 eA a 
TTRIAATA Wa Tella CAST: Il (Matsya Purina 47.233) 


(it) Types of Incarnations 

As to the types of incarnations of Visnu, they could be divided in following three 
types:— 

(a) Complete incarnations like Rama and Krsna. 


(b) Partial incarnations like Parasurama, who though a Ciranjivi was endowed with 
divinity for a short span of life and had finally to retire to the mountains, handing over all 
his divine powers to Rama, after his mission, the suppression of Ksatriyas was over. Thus 
with Parasurdma the divinity was not a life-long endowment, but of a short-lived nature. 
This type is called dvesa. 


(c) The third is characterised by a portion of the power as illustrated in samkha and 
cakra, the attributes of Visnu, who are occasionally ordered to be born among the men as 
embodies beings to improve them in their ways, by becoming devotional personages and 
achieve the purpose of their mission. Such incarnations are called amsdvatdras or partial 
incarnations. 


XXil 


(iii) The Classification 


These incarnations can also be classified, into human, animal and the composite forms:— 
(a) Human forms, include Rama, Parasurama, Vamana, Krsna, Buddha and Kalki. 
(b) Animal forms, include, Matsya, Ktirma and Varaha. 


(c) The composite forms include Narasimha, wherein the deity had the head of a lion 
placed on a human trunk. Sometimes even Vardha is conceived in the composite form of 
human with the head of a Boar. 


(iv) The Doctrine, its genesis and evolution 


As to the number of the incarnations of Visnu, the different texts speak variously on the 
subject. In this connection, J.N. Banerjea has observed as follows:— 


“The doctrine of the vibhavas (Avataras, 1.e., incarnatory forms) was no less component 
part of Paficaratra or Bhagavata creed than that of the Vytthas. The difference between the 
two lies in the fact that we have some evidence regarding the existence of the former in the 
later Vedic texts, whereas there is none about the existence of the latter in them. The term 
avatdra 1s applied to the act of the god coming down in the form of a man or an animal to 
the earth and living there in that form till the purpose for which he had descended in the 
universe was fulfilled; it also sometimes denotes the assumption of different forms by the 
god for the attainment of particular objects. It is thus distinct form for the attainment of 
particular objectives. It is thus distinct form identification (where one deity is identified 
with another), or emanation (as illustrated by the Vytha doctrine). It is also different from 
the possession of one individual entity by the divinity in which the latter takes up 
temporary abode in the former; but this idea of possession has to some extent been manifest 
in the story of Parasurama incarnation of Visnu. In the Pancaratra theology, the Vibhavas 
(Vi-bhu-as), 1t.e., the act of becoming in a special manner) being the Pure Creation 
(Suddhasrsti) to which the Vythas also belong; these incarnations, however, may not only 
be of a composite god Visnu himself, but also may be of his Vyihas, sub-Vyihas and 
Parsaddas (companions), or even of his attributes and emblems. One of the earliest reference 
to the assumption of some forms by the divinity is to be found in the Satapatha Brahmana 
and the Jaittiriya Samhita where Prajapati is said to have assumed the forms of Fish 
(Matsya), Tortoise (Ktrma) and Boar (Varaha) on different occasions for the furtherence of 
creation and the well being of the created. When the doctrine of incarnations in association 
with Vdsudeva-Visnu-Naréyana, was well established all these three were bodily 
transferred to that composite god, and were regarded as some of the celestial (divya) 
Incarnations......... ” 


On the question of the number of incarnations of Visnu, J.N. Banerjea has observed:— 


“A brief reference to a few of the Epic, Puranic and Pancardatra passages enumerating 
the various incarnations will be useful for our understanding of many Vaisnava images. If 
we study them together, we shall not only recognise in some of these enumeration all the 


XXill 


stereotyped ten (this list also some times varies in the north and south of India) whose icons 
are common, but also find the names of many Avatdras whose images, though not so 
common, are also known. The Narayaniya Section of the Mahabharata refers in one list 
(X1I.349,37) to the Varaha, Vamana and Narasimha or the man-lion incarnations. The 
human incarnations refer no doubt to Vasudeva Krsna, Bhargava Rama and Dasarathi 
Rama, for in Chapter 389, (Verses 77-90) of the same section not only the stories about the 
first three in the list given above are briefly narrated, but also those about his incarnations 
as Bhargava Rama (Parasurima), Dasarathi Rama and Vasudeva Krsna are recounted. But a 
fuller list is given in verse 104 of the same Chapter which contains the name of Harhsa, 
Kirma, Matsya, Varaha, Narasirnha, Vamana, Rama (Bhargava), Rama (Dasarathi), Satvat, 
(Vasudeva or Baladeva for both of them are of Satvat race) and Kalki. The number of ten 1s 
to be noted here and the absence of Buddha in this list may show that Buddha has not yet 
been regarded as an Avatara. In the Vayu Purdna, mention is made of the ten incarnations 
of Visnu, of which the first three, Yajfia, Narasimha and Vamana are celestial, the rest 
being his human incarnations; they are Dattatreya, one unnamed, in the Tretayuga simply 
called the fifth, Jimadagnya Rama, DasarathI Rama, Vedavyadsa, Vasudeva-Krsna and 
Kalki, the future incarnation. Here also the Buddha is conspicious by his absence, and a few 
other constituents of the stereotyped list of three— Matsya, Karma and Vardaha are replaced 
by Yajna, Dattatreya and Vedavyasa........” 


The following tabulation shall provide a comparative picture of the number of avatdras 
as contained in different texts:— 


Mahabharata) ViyaPurina Matsya Varaha Brahmanda Purana 
Narayantya (Chapter-98) Purana Puraga (Chapters  2.72:73- 
Section (Chapter-47) (Chapter-15) = 126) 
Harhsa Yaja Dharma Matsya Narasimha 
(Partial) 
Kirma Narasimha Narasimha Korma Vamana 
Matsya Vamana Vamana Varaha Varaha 
Narasimha Dattatreya Dattatreya Narasimha Karma 
Vamana Rama Parasurama § Parasurama Dattatreya 
(Jamadgnya) | 
Rama Rema Rama Rama Rama 
(Bhargava) (Dasarathi) (Dasarathi) (Jamadagnya) 
Rama Vedavyasa Vedavyasa Krsna Rama 
(Dasarathi) Vasudeva 


Satvat Vasudeva Buddha undefined Vedavyasa 


XXIV 


(Vasudeva or Krsna 

Baladeva) 

Kalki Kalki Kalki Kalki Krsna 
Dhanvantri Matsya Matsya Matsya Matsya 
Mohini Kirma Hayagriva Kirma Kirma 
Narasimha Varaha Korma Varaha Varaha 
Vamana Narasimha Varaha Narasimha Hayagriva 
Kirma Vamana Narasimha Vamana Vamana 
Parasurama Parasurama Vamana Parasurama Narasimha 
Rama Rama Parasurama Rama Parasurama 
Krsna Krsna Rama Balarama Rama 
Samkarsana Buddha Vasudeva Krsna Kapila 
Buddha Kalki Buddha Buddha 

Kalki Kalki 

Dattatreya 


As to the number of the incarnations of Visnu, Gopinatha Rao has observed:- 


“Some Hindu authorities do not consider Buddha to be an avatara of Visnu and 
substitute in his place Balarama, the elder brother of Krsna, as an avatara.” 


But a comparative study of the above tabulation would reveal that there have been 
deviations in respects of the avataras, while some are omitted in one text the others are 
absent in the other lists. But ofcourse Buddha 1s found 1n a number of lists from various text 
describing the incarnations of Visnu. According to Hemadri, Hamsa is an addition and Krs 
na is an alternative of Balarama. In this connection D.N. Shukla has observed as follows:— 


“Thus the incarnations of Visnu are innumerable and those so far mentioned are only a 
few types. All these show philosophically the universal character of the god as alil- 
pervading and all sustaining. These Avatdras are like rivulets flowing from one 
inexhaustible lake. Rsis, Manes, gods, sons of Manu-— Prajapatis are all his portions. Here is 
it enough to say about this great tradition of the Hindus, forming the very pillar of the high 
edifice of our religious life. The philosophical idea of incarnation is given in the oft-quoted 
verse— Yada yada hi dharmasya etc. Cosmologiclly 1f we take into consideration all these 
incarnations, we find that the first four are cosmogonic in nature. Manu says that in the 
beginning of the world, there was nothing but water. The fish was the first representative 
creature in the process of the evolution of the world. After water, mountains came out in the 
course of creation, and they are represented by the Karmavatara. The recovery of the land 
from the water as a next stage of evolution may be represented by the incarnation of 


AXV 


Varaha. The Narasimha incarnation can also account for the animal and the man-kingdoms 
on earth. These varieties of the Dasdvataras again......... contains some sub-varieties also, 
e.g., Varahavatara in sculpture comprises three different conceptional types namely; Bhi- 
varaha or Adi-varaha, Yajfia-varaha, Pralaya-varaha. Similarly Narasirhha avatara has also 
so many varieties. The sub-varieties of Krsna-Navanitanrtta, Venugopal, Goverdhana- 
dhara, Balakrsna etc. are a common property both of sculptors and painters.” 


Various texts describe the iconographical details of the DasSdvataras of Visnu, but the 
iconography of the images of these incarnations in the Agni Purdna is tabulated 
hereunder:— 


Incarnation Body Arms ___ Attributes and Remarks 

other details 

Matsya Resembling ‘ : 

a Fish 

Kirma should Should be made to 
resemble look like the 
Tortoise. prototype of _ the 

animals from which 
its nomenclature 1s 
derived 

Varaha Composite Four Gadé and other 
body with a arms weapons in his right 
boar's head arms; conch shell and 
fixed over a the goddess Laksmi 
human trunk. seated on lotus to be 

resting on the other left 
elbow. 

Narasimha Lion's head Four Gada, Cakra and the Daitya should be 
placed over a arms other two tearing the placed over the thighs 
human body belly of the demon. of the god. 

Vamana Human body Two Stick and an umbrella 
looking like a arms 
dwarf 

Parasurama Human body Two A bow, arrow and an 

arms axe. 
Rama Human body Two A bow and an arrow 
arms besides a sword and a 
conch-shell. 

Balarama/Krsna Human body Two Four or two arm or a 

arms conch-shell. A gada, or 
a plough. 

Buddha Human body, Two Should have Fair complexion, 

seated on a aris comparatively larger wearing a cloth 


lotus with 


ears and the calmness 


XXVI 


petals turned should be made to 
upwards. reflect in his 
appearance. 
Kalki Human body, Not A bow and a quiver, a Should be mounted 
mounted on a_ defined Samkha, cakra, gada ona horse. 
horse. and padma 


Other lists also describe the iconography of the incarnations of Visnu and the account 
that follows, throws some light on each one of them. 


(1) Matsya 

While dealing individually with the ten incarnations of Visnu, it may be stated that 
according to most of the texts this incarnations comes first of all and accounts of 
Matsyavatara are found in the Agni, Bhdgavata and several other texts. The texts in general 
prescribe that the representation in art of Matsydvatara should resemble a fish:— 


‘Teaco ta UTA TeaeTad|’ 
The Mahabharata (Vanaparva 12.297 ff) also describes it and Matsydvatdra is also a 
subject of discussion with the author of the Agni Purdna of the initial four of the ten 


incarnations of Visnu which are of cosmogenic nature, Matsydvatara comes first as 
representing the acquitic animal. 


The Bhdgavata Purdna describes that after having been addressed by Visnurata the 
divine Badrayana related the deeds of Visnu achieved by him in his fish incarnation. At the 
end of the past ka/pa there was a practical dissolution of the universe in which the earth and 
other worlds were submerged in the ocean. Then the powerful Raksasa named Hayagriva 
took away the Vedas from the mouth of the creator, who from the drowsiness, which had 
came on through the lapse of time, had became disposed to go to sleep. On discovering this 
deed of Hayagriva, the chief of the Danavas, the divine lord Hari, took to the form of a 
Saphari fish and recovered the Vedas. 


Though the Puranas in general agree about the number of the incarnations to be ten, but 
the Bhagavata Purdna and other texts speak out differently on the subject, as would be 
evident from the following facts:— 


Avataras in the Bhagavata Purana 


The Bhdgavata Purdna enumerates the avatdras thrice, in the first recounting (1.2.6- 
22), the number is twenty-two; in the second (11.7.1 ff) the number mentioned 1s twenty 
three and in the third list (XI.4.3 ff) the number of avatdras mentioned is sixteen. The 
names, common in these lists are as follows:- 


(1) Purusa, (ii) Vardha, (111) Narada, (iv) Nara and Narayana, (v) Kapila, (v1) Dattatreya, 
(vii) Yajfia, (viil) Rsabha, (1x) Prthu, (x) Matsya, (xi) Ktrma, (xi) Dhanvantri, (xi) 
Mohini, (xiv) Narasimha, (xv) Vamana, (xvi) Bhargava Rama, (xvii) Vedavy4asa, (xviil) 
Dasarathi Rama, (xix) Balardma, (xx) Krsna, (xxi) Buddha, (xxi1) Kalki. 


XXVII 


This enumeration includes the names of all the usual ten in the steriotyped list, but the 
Purinakdéra emphasises that the divine descents are innumerable (avatdrah 
hyasamkhyeyah). The difference of this list from the other two is immaterial; the last 
omitting some included in the first list, but none of them omits Rsabha (Adinatha or 
Rsabhanatha, the first Tirthankara of Jainas and Buddhists). The Vardha and Agni Purdnas 
contain the steriotyped list of ten incarnations while the Matsya Purdna lays down that 
Visnu was born seven times among the men because he was cursed by Bhrgu for killing his 
wife, the mother of Sukra. These are (1) Dattdtreya, (ii) Mandhata, (iii) Jamdagnya 
(Parasurama), (1v) Rama Dasarathi (v) Vedavydsa, (vi) Buddha and (vii) Kalki, by adding 
three others, those of Narayana, Kirma and Varaha (probably meant to be the celestial 
ones), the number of ten is made up, though this list of Dasavatara widely differs from the 
usually accepted ones, as many as four here, Dattatreya, Mandhata, Vedavydsa and 
Narayana are the substitutes of Matsya, Kirma, Varaha and Balarama (or rarely Krsna) of 
the usual list. 


The evidence of the early and late Pancardtra Samhitds also refers to the incarnations of 
Visnu. The Satvat Samhita, one of the earliest in the series enumerates as many as thirty- 
nine incarnatory forms of Visnu. This list 1s copied verbatim in the Abhirbudhnya Samhita 
which belongs to subsequent period. 


(1) Padmanabha, (2) Dhruva, (3) Ananta, (4) Saktydtmana, (5) Madhusiidana, (6) 
Kapila, (7) Vidyadhideva, (8)Visvaripa, (9) Vihangama, (10) Krodatman, (11) 
Badavavaktra, (12) Dharma, (13) Vagisvara, (14) Ekarnavasayin, (15) Kamathesvara, (16) 
Varaha, (17) Narasimha, (18) Piytsahatana, (19) Sripati, (20) Kantdtaman, (21) Rahujita, 
(22) Kalanemighna, (23) Parijdtahara,, (24) Lokanatha, (25) Santamna, (26) Dattatreya, 
(27) Nyagrohasayin, (28) Ekasrngatanu, (29) Vamanadeha, (30) Trivikrama, (31), Nara, 
(32) Narayana, (33) Hari, (34) Krsna , (35) Parasurama, (36) Rama Dhanurudhara, (37) 
Vedavida, (38) Kalki, (39) Patalasdyana. 


Matsyavatara destroyed by Siva 


This form of the deity is not available in the texts, but in the Ekambaresvara temple at 
Kanchi, Siva stands depicted as a mythological bird swallowing the Matsydvatara of four- 
armed Visnu having the human bust with lower part of a fish. The bird has four arms, two 
legs and a composite body, partly of a bird and partly human. The bust except the neck is 
human with four arms. The right hand carries an avkusa and an indistinct object, while one 
of the left hands holds an antelope and the other one projects varada-mudrd. The legs 
resemble those of a bird. The neck and the head too are like those of a bird; in the beak the 
Matsydvatara is held. 


The Matsyavatara on the other hand wears a Kirita-mukuta and holds a club in his right 
hand. The fish part of the deity 1s slightly curved. A human devotee with hands folded 
against the chest stands to the left. 


le 


CD N CD Pr QO 


XXVIII 


The Matsydvatdra has been found represented 1n composite as well as the fish form. 
According to the Visnudharmottara, the image of the fish incarnation is to be made in the 
form of a fish, with a horn. The Mahabharata also describes the same legend in which the 
fish is described as ‘Srngi’, having a horn. Here he is considered to be more a form of 
Prajapati rather them Visnu. 


The fish incarnation found representation tn the Indian art individually as well as in the 
Dasavatéra panels. A stone pillar from Sarnath depicts the Fish-god with two tails. The 
upper part of the figure 1s human, while the lower part is that of a fish. Another 
representation of the similar type is engraved on the belt of a human figure from Mathura. 
R.D. Banerjea has referred to an uncommon variety of the image of Matsya from 
Bajrayogini in Bengal. In this case, the bust of four armed Visnu issues from the fish 
enthroned on lotus. The god holds itn his four arms, the usual attributes viz., a mace, a 
conch, a disc, while the mutilated lower right hand could be holding a lotus. The main 
figure is flanked by Laksmi and Sarasvati, each perched over small lotus springing from the 
main lotus stalk; on the pedestal, there is a small figure of Garuda, and a devotee flanks the 
main figure on either side. The representations of Matsyavatara of Visnu are found in the 
Dasavatara panels, but no individual shrine exclusively dedicated to this form of Visnu has 
come to light so far, indicating his subsidiary character. The specimens described above are 
mostly from the outer walls of temples. The incarnation of Visnu in the form of Matsya in 
the company of his consort Laksmi, is carved on a big boulder on a hillock at Kothagattu 
lying south of Karimganj in Andhra Pradesh. The shrine on hillock 1s known as Matsyagirt 
Svami temple. A big fish of 8 feet length in black granite is lying in the corndor of the 
temple at Kalesvaram. (Ramaiah, J., Temple of South India, p.186). 


A beautiful figure of Fish in stone comes from Kari Talai temple complex, dates back to 
the eleventh century A.D. This sculpture is carved exceedingly well in a most naturalistic 
manner. It is partly damaged but still the execution of the fish is commendable. Another — 
image of Fish incarnation of Visnu, comes from Himachal Pradesh. Here the Fish 1s also 
shown in quite a natural way surrounded by various deities. 


A painted jewellery box from Kangra, displays the ten incarnations of Visnu in a most 
lively manner. In these the Fish incarnation is also included. Four-armed Visnu here 
emerges from the fish in the ocean and is attacking the demon Hayagriva. The ocean is 
painted in silver grey colour. The demon is lying before him in the water and is holding 
back shield and a sword, while Visnu holds his usual attributes of samkha, cakra, gadda and 
padma. Four devotees are shown against the yellow background paying tribute to the lord 
with folded hands. 


The story of Ekarvava doctrine has been the subject matter of discussion not only in 
India but also in the foreign lands. In India, it is connected with the fish incarnation of 
Visnu. 


XXI1X 


The Description of each incarnation 


Fish incarnation 


The Matsya Purana describes the fish incarnation of Visnu in the first Chapter, 
according to which, a certain king named Manu, leaving his kingdom went out to Malaya 
country to perform penances and there obtained a boon from Brahma that he should be able 
to protect all the creatures at the time of dissolution. The boon was granted and then the 
king one day at the time of offering oblation to Pitrs noticed a small fish in the palm of his 
hand. He put it in water pot which the fish fully occupied by waxing during the course of 
the day. Then the king threw it into a Jar and the same thing happened again. The fish was 
then thrown into a well and then it could not be contained there and was thrown into a 
pond, after which into a river and finally the fish was consigned into the ocean. When the 
piscine form filled the whole ocean by its giant size, the king became perplexed and asked 
the fish of its true identity, saying, “Are you the lord of asuras or god Narayana himself. 
How can any one else behave like this? O, I have know the truth; you are certainly lord Vis 
nu, the cosmic deity in the form of fish.” The Fish replied, “Verily, O king, you have 
known the truth. Soon the earth will be submerged into the water. Look here at this boat 
which all the hosts all the Devas have improvised for the protection of living beings; place 
them on the ship and when the same is rocked by the furious winds of dissolution, then 
fasten it to my horn or cranial protuberance. When the storm is over, you will have saved 
the creatures and then the crowned as Prajapati of the universe.” 


Manu further asked as to how such a state of things would take place and was told that 
for hundreds of years there would be a severe famine and the solar disc also would emit 
such intense heat as would reduce everything on earth to ashes. The sea would emit the fury 
of its submarine fire and the nether world would throw up poisonous fumes from the 
thousand mouths of the cosmic serpent so that the three worlds, the sky, the gods and the 
stars would all the consumed. Then would appear the clouds which are produced at the end 
to time. They are of seven kinds viz., Samvarta , Bhimanada, Drona, Canda, Balahaka, 
Vidvatapataka and Sona. There would be condensation is all space and even the oceans 
transcend their limits creating a condition of watery flood technically called Ekamava:— 


Ucn Aa aera A TAT 
(Matsya Purana 2.10) 


The king was also told that the boat which would come to him was the ship of the Vedas 
(Vedanavam), that he should stock there seeds of all living creatures (Sattva-bijani), that he 
should pilot the boat by a rope to be supplied by the divine Fish and tie it to its horn to be 
protected by the glory of the divine creature. Things happened as was predicated and all the 
assurances given were fulfilled. The rope was the cosmic serpent and the Fish to whose 
horn the boat was enchored in the midst of watery floods was the divine creator himself. 


There are several symbolical terms which have been duly interpreted by V.S. Agrawala. 
(Matsya Purdna— A Study, pp.4-5) The first question is about the real nature of Matsya or 


XXX 


the Fish. The fish is the symbol of Egg. The Cosmos is the Egg of Brahma (Brahmanda). 
Here Brahma himself is the fish, and therefore the Brahm4nda is the same as Matsydnda. 
Somewhere in the golden egg produced by Brahma is a spec of life-principle which 
recreates and perpetuates consciousness on life or vitality from one aeon to another and the 
same process continues through successive ages of the universe during immeasurable units 
of time. 


The Vedic doctrine of Hiranyagarbha 1s here completely repeated in the story of Fish 
incarnation or Matsyavatara. The Fish is an appropriate symbol of the principle of egg; it 1s 
borne out of the scientific knowledge of the present day. The class is the largest of all the 
vertebrate classes including some 20,000 species. Within it is found a great diversity of 
structure than any other class of vertebrates. Fishes live under a great variety of conditions, 
at the surface of sea, in mid water, at bottom or buried in sand or mud. Their greatest 
quality is found in their capacity to produce eggs. Most of the important northern food- 
fishes produce a great number of eggs that float in the sea, and in some species a single fish 
sheds millions of eggs annually (Encyclopaedia Britanica 14th edition, vol. IX, p.309). 
Moreover there is a resemblance between developing child in the womb called the foetus 
which is suspended by umbilical cord and floats freely in the amniotic fluid as the fish in 
water. The embryo assumes at a certain stage a cylindrical form, one end of the hollow tube 
thus formed is enlarged to form the head and neck; the other, the tail end, becomes curved 
forward and tapers to a point. Not only the tai! but also the circulation from the heart and 
blood vessels at first resembles that of a fish. It should not be presumed that the 
microscopic details had been observed by ancient writers, but there is no doubt that within 
their comprehension was rooted the belief that the fish was the most dominant symbol of an 
Oviparous (Andaja) vertebrate producing a life-germ. Although human beings have 
developed to a placental stage (Jarayuja) still both belong to a common ancestory extending 
over geological times. 


The Fish incarnation of Visnu is directly connected with the deluge or the Flood waters. 
These deluge stories are commonly found in several countries of the world. The old answer 
about the flood myth was that such a catastrophs which overwhelmed the world actually 
occurred and many legends of the great flood which are so widely scattered among the 
mankind, embody more or less different versions of the same as would be evident from the 
following tabulation:— 


Motif Indian Sources Foreign and Other Parallels 
(1) Hero surviving with a Greece, Iceland, Greenland, Anals of 
woman. Assam, Lepchas of Sikkim, Entagno 


Islanders or Indonesia, Bataks 


Sumatra, Benuajakam of Malaya 


Peninisula. 


(11) 


(111) 


(iv) 


(v) 


(v1) 


(vii) 


(viii) 


(1X) 


(x) 


(x1) 


Female 
alone, 
appearing 


Male or 
surviving 
counterpart 
later. 


Incestuous Relations 
for re-creation 


Survival of a number 
of persons 1n pairs 


Survival of a Hero, 
couple of a group with 
several other things for 
recreation, e.g., seeds 
of every sort, various 
animals, birds, etc. in 
pairs. 


Flood warning given 
by animals or divine 
being in the form of an 
animal. 


Flood warning viven 
by Human hero 


Flood warning given 
by divine being 


Escape through an Ark, S.B., Mahabharata 


boat or Canoe 


Mountain 
Deliverance 


Sacrifice of Thanks 
giving 


S.B. 


S.B. 


Mahabharata and 
Puranas 


Mahabharata and 
Puranas 


S.B., Mahabharata 
and Puranas 


and Puranas 


of S.B., Mahabharata 


and Puranas 


Pelew Islanders of Micronesia, Engano 
Islanders of Indonesia. 


Bhils of central India; Amis of 
Formosa and Chriguanos of Bolivia in 
south America. 


Babylonia, Egypt, Hebrew, Alfors of 
Ceram Islands (between Celebese and 
New Guinea); Tarahumares of Mexico, 
Indians of Brazil. 


Persia, Hebrew, Welsh, Bahnars of 
Cochin, China, New — Guinea, 
Melanesians of New _ Hebrides, 
Michoacans of Mexico. 


Greece, Bhils of Central India, 
Papagos, Pimas and Charokee Indians 
of North America (Coyote, Eagle, 
Dog). 


Greece (father); Tinneh Indians of 
North America. 


Sumer, Babylonia, Hebrew, Persia, 
Huichol Indians of Mexico, 
Montagnais of Hudson Bay Territory. 


Greece, Egypt, Babylonia, Hebrew, 
Finnish, Welsch, Iceland, Singaphos of 
Burma, Benua-Jakun of Malaya 
Peninsula, Kanchadales in East Asta: 
Borneo, Figi, Newzealand, Australia, 
North and South American Indian 
tribes. 


Greece, Babylonia, Hebrew, Some 
tribes of North and South America. 


S.B., Mahabharata Greece, Babylonia, Hebrew. 


and Puranas 


XXxil 


(xii) Sin and wickedness as Mahabharata Greece, Rome, Egypt, Jews, Babylonia, 
the cause of flood (Kaliyuga ends Mexicans, North and South Indian 
with Deluge) tribes. 


(xiii) Excessive rain as S.B., Mahabharata Greece, Babylonia, Hebrew, Finnish, 
source of water. and Puranas Singhphos of upper Burma, [bans of 
Sarawak in Indonesia, Figi, Malaysia, 

Tribes of North and South America. 


(xiv) Rising sea as_ the Bahanirs of Cochin, China, Indonesian 
source of flood Islands, aboriginals of Australia, 
Eskimos in North America. 


Besides the above, it will be of interest to note as to what the Muslim historians speak 
about the incarnation of fish in the Hindu Pantheon. In this connection a passage from Aine- 
Akabari compiled by Abul Fazal during the time of Akbar, in the sixteenth century A.D. 1s 
reproduced here under:— 


“The deity was herein manifested under the form of a fish. They say that in the Dravida 
country at the extremity of the Dekhan in the city of Bhadravati, during the Satya Yuga, on 
the eleventh lunar day of the month of Phalguna (Feb.-March), Raja Manu, having 
withdrawn himself from all worldly concerns, and being then ten thousand years of age, 
lived in the practice of great austerities. He was performing his oblation on the banks of the 
river Krtamala, when a fish came into his hands and said— “Preserve me’, it remained in his 
hands for a day and night and as it increased in size, he put it into a cup, and when it grew 
larger, he placed it in pitcher. When the latter could not contain it, he put it into a well and 
hence transferred it into a lake and afterwards to the Ganga. As the Ganga could not hold it, 
he placed it in the ocean and when filled the ocean, the R4j4 recognised the origin of the 
miracle and worshipped it and prayed for a revelation. He heard the following answer. “I 
am the Supreme Being. I have assumed the form of this creature for the salvation and a few 
of the elect. After seven days the world will be destroyed and flood shall cover the earth. 
Get thou into an ark with a few of righteous together with the divine book, medicinal plants 
and fasten the ark to this horn which cometh out of me.” The deluge continued for one 
million, seven hundred and twenty eight thousand years after which it subsided. (This story 
slighty differs from the one available in the Mahabharata, the Matsya and other Puranic 
texts. ) 


The Matsya Purdna also mentions about the sun worship and the building of a sun 
temple at Multan (Mulasthan) in Pakistan, with Iranian connection is widely known. In this 
connection it may be stated that the Mathura Museum, exhibit No. 894, belonging to the Ist 
century A.D. shows the Sun-god holding a dagger and wearing boots, long coat and 
trousers. Such motifs persist upto Gupta period in Mathura region. An image of Sirya from 
the same Museum, has a flaming halo, holds a staff and sword in its left head and a lotus 
bud with stalk in the right. The much damaged torso and head of an image of probably the 
Sun-god in the same Museum (No. D-1), has a remarkable circular halo. The face is 


XXXiil 


considerably injured. He wears a hamlet fastened under the chin by means of a strap. Long 
curly locks falling down on both the shoulders. Wears thin moustaches (?) and is clad in 
Cuirass over which there is a very elaborate necklace. A scarf thrown over both the 
shoulders is fastened in a knot on the left breast. A double card girdle is tied round the loins 
and fastened in front. 


According to V.S. Agrawala, there is another example which reflects the intercourse 
with Iranians, thus: 


“Another example which reflects the intercourse with the Parsaika (Persians) is an 
imprtant bust which wears fizzled bushy hair, a bearded chin, knotted scart and a cuirass. 
The bearded head reminds us of the description of Persians given by Kalidasa in his 
Raghuvamsa, where the bearded heads of Persians are compared to the bee-hives carved 
with black laces: 


Terrahrreta fray: yyeEy 
TRA VATA: IR Weretita: 


“Another marked Sassanian feature on this image is the Sun and the moon symbol on 
the Kulah cap.” 


Now the question arises, as to why this intercourse with the solar sect of Iran took place. 
Though India had normal trade and diplomatic relations with many countries of the world, 
but the follower of the Sun-Culi in Iran seem to be men of great significance and 
importance; and probably had some special features of their own. The Sun-worship was in 
vogue in India, ever since the dawn of civilzation, but in Iran, the Maga Brahmanas had 
developed some aspects of the cult practices which were possibly unknown to the 
contemporary priest-hood in India. That is why it became necessary to import the trained 
Maga priests from Iran to India, the evidence of which is provided by the Samba Purana in 
the context of the episode of Samba, the Son of Krsna from Jambavati, who was inflicted 
with leprosy due to a curse. Though it has not been possible to categorically state that the 
Iranian Sun-cult was more emphatic on the healing power of the Sun, (which aspect is also 
brought out in the literary evidence) which necessitated the import of the qualified priests 
from Iran to rid Samba of the heinous disease, and of which he was ultimately cured: these 
imported priests were lodged in the Sun temple at Multan, as per the evidence of the 
Matsya Purana- 


TRU TAPER SATIN Tat 
wary frat Arad wredearaTea 
Matsya Purana, 175.49 


The glimpses of other prominent episodes relating to the different gods are presented 
herunder quite briefly:— 


(1) Brahma 
(a) It has been stated in verse 7 of Chapter-167 Matsya Purdna that the Satvik 


XXXIV 


Brahmanas who perform and direct the performance of sacrifice were born of Visnu. He 
created Brahma, Sdmaga, Hota, and Adhvaryu. 


(b) The Chapter-168 of Matsya Purdna, states that the lord, selects out of the Jivas on 
the earth, a person for the position of Brahma for the creation of cosmos after the expiry of 
one thousand Mahayugas, (Each Mahayuga comprises of four yugas). The one who is a 
pure soul, endowed with the power of asceticism and the highest knowledge with the yogic 
powers and equipped with all the excellences, who 1s established in his self and is purified 
by many births is made a Brahma. In that great ocean, the great place of pilgrimage, the 
infallible Hari, the creator of the worlds plays for some time and brings forth out of his 
navel, a wonderful lotus of a thousand petals shining like the sun. The beautiful lotus 
looking like the hair of the high soul was brilliant like fire and bright like the sun. Then Vis 
nu out of the golden lotus begot Brahma, the creator of the universe. The lotus was many 
yojanas wide endowed with the qualities of earth, full of gunas and all the lustre of the 
golden colour. 


(c) In earlier times Brahma had five heads. Siva cut off his fifth head with the nail of his 
left toe. Then Brahma said— “You have cut off my head for no fault of mine therefore you 
shall keep on wandering in the sacred places. Hearing the curse Siva went to Himalaya and 
begged alms from Narayana, in the skull of Brahma which was stuck up with his arm. Lord 
Narayana cut off his finger nail and blood rushed out of it, but the skull could not be filled. 
Thereafter the stream of blood flowed for a thousand years. Then lord Visnu said to Siva- 
“How was this skull brought into existence, you tell me?” Lord Siva replied— “In ancient 
time Brahma was endowed with a divine form and after thousands of years, because of his 
tapas, fifth head appeared on his body which was shining like the gold. I cut it off in anger 
and now it follows like Brahmahatya.” Lord Narayana said— you go back and please 
Brahma and the skull will be removed from your body.” On hearing this I went to all the 
sacred places, but the skull did not depart. The moment he reached the AvnimuKta tirtha the 
skull left him for good. This episode is described in various other Puranas differently, 
where the skull! is said to have disappeared at Kapalamocana-tirtha at Varanasi. 

(11) Visnu 

Lord Visnu is conceived in Matsya Purdna as the imperishable Brahma— Isvara. 
Brahman in the neuter form is abstract supreme spirit and [svara is the deity in his active 
nature. He is the one who 1s able to do or leave undone, or do anything in any other manner 
than in which it is done. He having three qualities is the cause of creation, preservation and 
destruction; the parent intellect, nature and the other ingredients of the universe besides 
being the source of the final emanciation. There is a school of thought that Visnu is partly 
Aryan, a form of the sun god and partly atleast, the deity is of Dravidian affinity, as a sky 
god whose colour was the blue sky and the middle Indo Aryan or Prakrt form of Visnu, 


which was inhu or vehhu (Srinivas lynger, P.T., Life in Ancient India is the Age of Mantras, 
p. 125.) 


XXXV 


Indeed Visnu is a mild and benevolent deity who offers salvation through, personal 
devotion rather than the practice of rituals. Though the deity has its origin in the Vedic 
literature, still in the later vedic texts, his personality was deified into an entirely different 
deity, adding two or more arms to the existing one, making him four armed, or eight armed 
and ending in his having a thousand arms and heads. He indeed is the preserver of the 
world. According to Hindu ideology, at the end of the Kalpa, the universe is destroyed. 
Brahma is then reborn of Visnu and recreates the universe. In each one of these great 
cycles, in which 1s has rescued the cosmos, Visnu appeared in a different form. Among the 
popular subjects of Hindu art, are the representations of Visnu, in the form of Matsya— 
when he rescued the seven sages and others; then the form of Kirma, when he as 
instrumental in the churning of the ocean and without him the event could never take place. 
In the form of Boar, however, he rescued the earth from the depths of the oceanic water. 


Of several other subjects, Matsya Purdna also variously deals Visnu, occasionally 
besides his incarnations, a bird eye view of which Is given here under:— 


(a) Matsya is the first of the ten incarnations of Visnu and the episode of his protecting 
the seven Rsis as well as the king Manu has been detalied already. 


(b) Kurma 


In the Matsya Purdna too like other texts Kirma performed a privatol role in the 
churning of the ocean and it was he who served as the base for the Mandaracala, which was 
used as a churning rod by the gods and the demons. Because without the base for the 
churning rod, there could be no churning of the ocean at all. Accordingly fourteen gems are 
said to have emerged out of the churning of the oecan:— 


TAT: HSM Fea THEA SAT: 
Se aaTG: far eftaq wraIsyd arg 
Tara ages wafead San Wet EAT 


Thus these were the gems emerging from the ocean as a result of the churning of the 
same. Thus as Karma, Visnu performed his job well. 


(c) Mohini 


In Chapter-251 of the Matsya Purdna, the incarnation of Visnu as Mohini 1s mentioned. 
The fascinated demons placed the nectar pot over the hands of Visnu, who being deluded, 
placed the nectar pot over the hands of Visnu, who being deluded, placed the pitcher of 
nectar into the hands of the lord and then ran towards the gods to fight with them holding 
various arms. In the meantime the lord, most ingeniously, brought the pot of the nectar 
before the gods and the demons and the gods started drinking the same. The demon Rahu, 
assumed the form of a god and seated himself along the gods and was about to drink the 
nectar. The sun and the moon drew the attention of the gods for their own benefit. When the 
nectar had gone into the neck of Rahu, Visnu severed his head with his Cakra. The severed 


XXXVI 


head of Rahu fell down on earth shaking it, but remained alive and became immortal. It was 
known as Raéhu. Thus he became the enemy of the sun and the moon and 1s said to torture 
them both during the solar and lunar eclipses. © 


(d) Vardha - 


Varaha-— the third incarnation of Visnu has been popular in the Brahmanical panthern 
from the remote past. It is not possible to give any specific date from which Varaha— the 
boar became popular in ancient India and when he penetrated into the religious or sacred 
annals. This would be evidenced from the fact that in the Reveda (1.6.1.7 and 8.77.10) 
mention is made of a myth in which Visnu is said to have carried away a hundred buffalos 
and cooked rice milk which were guarded by Emusa— the boar. This boar has been regarded 
as a fugitive designation of vrtra. In the same text a casual reference to Rudra as the boar of 
the sky (1.114.5) could leads one to believe that there existed an Indian counterpart of the 
German wodan with the boar. Yet this animal in some way or the other, 1s also associated 
with Brahmanaspati, Soma and other gods in the Rgveda (9.97.7 and 10.67.7). The 
Mahavardahacarita has been described in Chapter 247-248 of the Matsya Purdna. 


According to V.S. Agrawala, the theme of Varaha is closely associated with the history 
of the country more so during the Gutpa period. He feels that Candragupta Virkramdaditya 
was one of the great Gupta rulers, who annihilating the vestiges of foreign rule also 
extended the limits of his empire up to the ocean on the east, the sea on the west by his 
conquest of Vanga and Aparanta respectively. His gigantic programme of acquiring 
territory includes direct conquest of north-west up to Balhika or Bactria on the Oxus. He 
had a system of peaceful alliance with kings of south (referred to as by K4lidasa in 
Raghuvamsa, 7) 1.e. restoration of their autonomy or sovereignty, which had been disturbed 
by Samadrugupta and by this his fame perfumed the waters of the south sea (Mehrauli 
Pillar Inscription of Chanda). 


Besides the symbolical and philosophical aspects, the Purdnas point to the sanctity of 
the episode of the rescue of the earth by Varaha. They testify to the actual place on which 
the Varaha emerged with earth. The Varha Purdna (Ch. 140.4) describes it to be a sacred 
place just where Koka emerged. This seems to be the location of Kokamukhasvamin. Infact 
the actual name of Kokamukha appears in the same Purdna. In Chapter 122, verses 19-22, 
the Varaha form of Visnu testifies to the rescue of Prthvi from the deep ocean. As to the 
place where the Varaha form of Visnu first appeared, it may be pointed out that the same 
text (140.24) testifies Visnusaras as the place where Varaha pulled out the earth with the 
stroke of the tusk. Cunningham believes Varadha-ksetra in basti district of Uttar Pradesh as 
it is the place where Varaha appeared with the earth. 


Varaha form of Visnu has also been known with the following epithets:— 


(1) Ekasrnga (Mahabharata, 13.149.70). Since the Varaha had a single tusk, he was 
called Ekasrnga. 


XXXVil 


(ii) Mahasrnga (Mahabharata, 3.142.45) The one having a huge tusk. 

(111) Nrvaraha:— The one who has the composite form of a man and a boar. 

(iv) Adivaraha:— The one who appeared to rescue the Earth from primeval waters. 
(v) Bhttvaraha:—~ The one who rescued the Earth from deep sea waters. 


(vi) Yajnavaraha:— The real meaning of the Varaha conception as applied to Yajna is its 
significance as a symbol of Vedic cosmogony. 


(e) Vamana:— 


The episode of the proceeding of lord Visnu in the form of Vamana has been contained 
in Chapter 244-246 of the Matsva Purdna. As Vamana's treads the whole earth shakes and 
Bali asks his preceptor Sukracdrya the cause of the shaking of the earth and why the fires 
do not accept the offerings of the asuras. He replied smilingly— “In Kasyapa's house, Visnu 
has taken birth. He will come to your sacrifice. The earth quakes at his strides, unable to 
bear his great weight. On his approach, the fire, refuse your offerings.” At this Bali felt 
delighted and asked his preceptor as to how the lord should be received and entertained.” 
Sukracdrya said— “The lord arrives in the sattva quality, to preserve creation and to crush 
you. Beware of making any promises to him inspite of their being quite petty. Just say I am 
unable to give you anything.” Bali replied— “How can I refuse the lord anything when he 
directly makes a request. I shall not say no to him. Please do not stand in the way of my 
charity. You know, I am his devotee and he will never kill me. Of course he come in the 
form of a dwarf.” Bali was greatly delighted. On the arrival of Vamana, Bali picked the 
argha and said to the lord, I shall give you anything you like.” 


At this, the lord said— “O king give me three feet of earth for the worship of fire by me.” 
Bali gives him three feet of land. As the consecrating water falls on the hand of Vamana, he 
appears in his true form. Then assigning the three worlds to Indra and bestowing many 
boons to Bali, established him on his throne. 


(f) Narasimha 


(Chapter 161-163, Matsya Purdna) The episode about the lord has been stated in this 
Purana, according to which, once the gods under the leadership of Brahma approached lord 
Visnu with a prayer to deliver thern from the atrocities of Hiranyakasipu. Visnu comforted 
them, promising them to kill Hiranyakasipu. Then Visnu took to the form of a man-lion and 
went to the kingdom of Hiranyakasipu, who enjoyed all the worldly pleasure. His son 
Prahalada, who was against his father's way of life as a demon and was a great devotee of 
lord Visnu, described to his father about Visnu as the lord of the universe. Hearing that, the 
demon king commanded the Daityas to captive Narasirhha. All the demons therefore struck 
the lion variously with several types of weapons. Then in a moment Narasimha frightened 
al the demons. Still they made a fruitless effort of kill Narasirhha together with 


XXXViil 


Hiranyakasipu. Suddenly Narasimha captured Hiranyakasipu, placed him over his thighs 
and tore him apart with his sharp nails. Then the man-lion was praised by Brahma and 
others. Narasimha as described is the fourth incarnation of Visnu. 


(iv) Siva: 

Lord Siva has been factually conceived on the one hand as the loftiest and the most 
transcendental of all the gods, dwelling in inaccessible heights of spiritual perfection and 
on the other hand, as the most liberal and popular of all the gods, easily approachable by 
men, women and children of all classes, castes, and races. He is called Asutosa or the one 
who gets easily pleased. He is not inaccessible to any one, however low he may be. The 
worship of Siva does not require any elaborate rituals or valuable articles for offerings. He 
is above all desires, likes and dislikes, besides the senses of worldly values. He is prepared 
to drink the poison produced by the vicious and indiscreet actions of people and to save 
them from distress and death, whenever they take refuge in him. He js self-absorbed, as 
well as an all-absorbing, all assimilating and all-unifying force. “He is spoken of as the one 
dwelling in cremation ground (smasana— the abode of the dead), the region where all 
worldly differences vanish, where all diversities are reduced to unity, where all that in 
impermanent disappears any only the eternal and permanent remains. It is a place where all 
creatures ultimately must take refuge. Siva waits there to receive all into his loving arm and 
to bestow on them immortality and bliss.” This is the Saivite concept of the Supreme Deity 
and the Saivite ideal of spiritual life. According to this viewpoint, one who transcends all 
worldly limitations and attains spiritual perfection, becomes one with all in love and 
compassion and transcendental experience. 


Saivism had certain ideals which were alien to the Vedic society. For example, the 
Vedic ideology believed in the classification of the people into four-fold divisions (Varnas) 
according to their distinctive characteristics and capabilities. Saivism on the other hand 
disregarded all such barriers and treated ail as equals entitled to attain the highest spiritual 
good. Saivism extended identical treatment to the Aryan and the non-Aryan alike, which 
was not acceptable to the early Vedic society. Thus there was ample ground for Vedic 
society to disdain the ideals of Siva cult. The early attempts of the seers of both the school- 
Vedic and Saiva, at reconciliation between the two, could hardly produce any produce any 
positive results. The later Vedic literature as well as the Pauranic tradition kept up the 
memory of the early history and referred to many anecdotes connected therewith. 


He is the lord who has been mentioned not only 1n almost all the prominent Sakta or 
Saiva Puranas, but is also held in high esteem in the Vaisnava Puranas. In the Matsya 
Purdna, however, the following events of his life have been eloquently discussed:— 


(a) Destruction of Daksa's sacrifice (Chapter- 13) 
(b) Killing of Tripura (Chapter- 129,140,188) 


XXxix 


(c) Marriage of Siva and Parvati (Chapter-154) 
(d) Birth of Karttikeya in the reed forest (Chapter- 146-158) 
(e) Birth of Ganesa (Chapter- 154) 


(f) Quarrel between Siva and Parvati, who goes for performing tapas to become Gauri, 
Mutual curse of Siva-Parvati, (Chapter-155) 


(¢) Killing of Taraka by Karttikeya. (Chapter-160) 
(h) Killing of Andhaka (Chapter- 179) 


Besides the gods, the important stories about rulers of the past have also been included 
in this Purana:— 


(1) Story of Kartvirya Arjuna. (Chapter-44) 


(ii) Description of the Syamantaka gem and acceptance of Satyabhama as wife by Krs 
na. (Chapter-47) 


(iii) The story of Satyavan and Savitri (Chapter-209-214) 
(iv) Story of Yayati, Devayani and Sarmistha (Chapter-3 1-37) 
(v) Story of Kaca and Devayani. 


In Chapters 25-30 of the Matsya Purdna, there is the well known story of Kaca, the son 
of Brhaspati to receive the knowledge of elixir of life from Sukracarya, the priest of the 
Daityas. Inspite of Kaca being the son of the priest of the gods, he was welcomed by 
Sukracarya with open arms, and not only did he impart him the full Safijivini lore, he also 
saved him from the wrath of the Daityas a number of times, and who did not look kindly to 
Sukra's providing training to him out of the spite for Kaca, and in order to save themselves 
the demons killed Kaca who has grazing the cows and threw his dead body to the wolves 
and jackals to eat it up. At the instance of Devayani, Sukra brought him back to life. Kaca 
told his preceptor that he was killed by the demons. He was killed the second time when he 
was collecting flowers. This time the demons burnt him alive and the ashes of his body 
were mixed with wine and they made Sukra to drink the same. This time Sukra finding him 
in his own body imported knowledge of Safjivini to Kaca and asked him to bring him back 
to life after emerging from his belly. Kaca did as desired by his preceptor. Devayani, the 
daughter of Sukra when wanted to marry Kaca, ne refused to oblige her on the grounds that 
he had been in the same belly in which she herself was lodged. Then she cursed him that 
the knowledge he had gained from Sukracarya shall be of no consequence when used by 
him. He accepted the curse saying, “Though I may not be able to make use of the said 
knowledge, but the person to whom he will import the same shal! make use of the same 
successfully. Then Kaca and Devayani curse each other in which Devayani was told by 
Kaca that she would never be married to a Brahmana. She was ultimately married toYayatt. 
This story is contained in the Siva Purana as well. 


xi 


Besides these stories, Matsya Purana also contains a number of chapters on scholarly 
issues. Chapters 252-270 are dedicated to divine Vastusastra or Ancient Architectural 
science including iconography and related subjects such as Pratimalaksana. These chapters 
describes in relative detail about the temple architecture, house architecture, town planning, 
various directions and various architectural norms. It also details some astronomical 
subjects such as various planets including sun and the moon, their distances from the earth, 
their relative sizes, etc. 


This is one of the series of the work of English translation of the Puranas, which has 
been undertaken by Parimal Publications and I am sure, it will be of significant interest to 
the readers. 


Shanti Lal Nagar 


ARTO AA 1 


ad 


g TT 
9 


Ace CTUTY 


2 


~ 


MATSYA-PURANAM 


3% TA Wad aAeara 


Salutation to Lord Vasudeva 


CHAPTER 1 


Saunaka and other sages, questioned Sita, 
the cause of the lord Visnu, assuming the 
form of fish and other related details. 


yavedveaery waar aa fern: 
Ved asta Wa AUG: 11 VI 


Let lord Siva, with the force of whose 
tandava dance, the elephants of the directions 
are thrown away, let his lotus like feet remove 
all the obstructions. 


WATTS AMAL ALY TROT 
oat TohUcwaquccuiace e Te 
PANT AAA AA Se SPTAMT- 
RATA aa aharaeTaTeas at STAT 2 
At the time of the incarnation of fish, while 
jumping above from the Patalaloka,! the oceans 
rise above with the strike of his tail after 
pervading in the form of the particles of the 


globe and fall on earth covering the whole of it. 
Let the words of the Srutis* (Vedic passage) 


aol eel RB | 


|. The world of serpents or demons and thought to be 
under the earth, sometimes used as a general name 
for the lower regions or hells. 

2. All the sacred writings of the Hindus are divided into 
two classes namely Sruti (what is heard or revealed) 
and Smrti (what is remembered). The Vedas 
constitute the Sruti for they are regarded by them as 
revealed and the sacred Laws etc. now pass under the 
name of Smrti. 


emerging from the mouth of the lord, remove all 
your miseries. 


ANAT AMAA AL Ua ATA! 
edt Utd da aa ASAT 3 1 
Offering salutation to Narayana and Nara, 
the best of the humans, besides Sarasvati, one 


should recite the Mahabharata? (or the other 
Puranas). 


snistt a: fraranranrant eft wa: 
Frora faders Wert ASAI gh 


The one who ts unborn, is eulogised as 
Narayana because of his activities. He has 
threefold form, i.e. sattva, rajas and tamas.* He 
has the form of the three Vedas viz. : Rk, Yajuh 
and Sama. Salutation to the selfborn lord. 


Sears Afrercveantas:| 

Aa Sea Upp eaT SATAN 2 
TEATY YUNY araty caferary a 
HAY Va St WAH 3 
HMA WON Aas ATT 
TATA MATTIE WANS 


Once at the conclusion of a long time yajna, 


3. This 1s a benedictory verse which occurs at the 
commencement of every Parvan of Mahabharata. 

4. An ingredient of nature, chief quality of all existing 
beings (viz. sattva, rajas, and tamas, i.e. goodness, 
passion, and darkness, or virtue, foulness, and 
ignorance). 

5. The Vedas which ts held in equal reverence will 
Brahman by the Hindus for its spiritual knowledge 
consisting in words. 


2 


the dwellers of the Naimisaranya! including 
Saunaka and other sages, felicitated Stita? again 
and again who had been seated with a 
concentrated mind and expressed the desire to 
reveal the mysteries of the religious Puranas, 
which happen to be quite beautiful and 
rewarding. Saunaka said, “O Sita, you have 
narrated to us several of the Puranas which are 
like the abode of nectar. We have developed a 
desire to listen to the same Puranas. 


HA TAR MTA AAT ATT 
HAT AAA ATTA: HG UI 


O Sage, how did the excellent lord create the 
mobile and immobile universe? How could lord 
Visnu take to the form of Fish? 


Ward Tae Wate a aa fe 
HA SAT: HUfereal SINT FHA: EH 


How could Siva, achieve the position of 
Puraritva as well as the one of Bhairava? How 
was the bull-bannered lord Siva, turned as a 
Kapali.° 


TAMARA et CARATS: ATT 
apeadeala 7 afte aera ot 


O Sita, you kindly narrate the details of 
each one of the events in a chronological order, 
because we do not feel satisfied by listening to 
the nectar like narrations from you.” 


Ut sara 
yu waararqeraant sore FEST: 
MRT YWOT Rat GAM WIT I 


1. One of the five principal places of pilgrimage (viz. 
Visranti, Saukara, Naimisa, Prayaga, and Puskara). A 
most sacred place where all the Puranas are narreted. 

2. The word signifies the offspring of a Ksatriya by a 
Brahmin woman. This mixed caste used to keep 
horses and drive cars in the days of yore. A 
particular family of this caste however became 
famous for its knowledge of Puranas and other 
sacred writings. 

3. Bearing a skull in the hand. 


Matsya Puranam 


Sita said— “O Brahmanas, lord Gadadhara,* 
in earlier times, I had narrated the Matsya 
Purana. You listen to the details about the same. 
It is meritorious, pious and prolongs the life. 


UT WT TANT Atotaayet AT: 

SPRUE EICUO ES ICICIC ols Mika 

WeaeaHey FT Valea: | 

Wg: GAG A: WAI TPATAA 80 I 

In ancient times lord Vatvasvata Manu, the 

son of the Sun, who was merciful, possessing 
all the virtues, treated pleasure and the pain 
similarly, and possessed enormous prowess. He 
entrusted the kingdom of his son, went to the 
Malayacala mountain to perform severe tapas 


(penances). Performing tapas there, he achieved 
the best of success in the yoga. 


GS AIT TTY Te 
At GUUS VATS Wit: WM HAMA VM 


Then with the performing of the tapas by 
him, crores of years passed, after which 
Brahma, having the seat of lotus, getting 
delighted appeared before him in order to 
bestow a boon on him. He said to him, “Ask for 
a boon.” 


VaqAlSTataM WORT A TATA 
Uetaereaty AN STATA 22 1 
TIM TAS WaT ATA TI 
Waa TAUNTAT Weta ATTA SATII 83 | 
When so inspired by Brahma, lord Manu, 


offering his salutation to Brahma- the grand 
sire, spoke, “O Lord, | would like to ask for a 


4. Bearing a mace in the hand. 

5. Yoga or union with the Supreme Being. The union 
can be effected by two-fold means first by a true 
knowledge of the nature and being of Brahma or 
impersonal Self, which is called Jnana-Yoga and 
Second by doing one's own duty and religious acts 
without any selfish motive which is called Karma- 
Yoga. This has been explained the Bhagavad-Gita in 
detail. 


Chapter-1 


single boon from you, that at the time of every 
deluge, I should be able to protect the entire 
mobile and immobile creatures.” 


vantrata fase aan 
TGS: Yet TIT FATA Vw 


At this Brahma, the soul of the universe, 
disappeared from the scene, saying, “Be it so.” 
At the same time the gods showered enormous 
rain of flowers. 


HAA TAT Had: TATATITT I 
TUT WTO AAUT Te HTAAAT 2h I 
Spl Tea RAG FT Calera: | 
THOMA Hea A ALATEST 2 1 


Once, while performing oblation for the 
manes lord Manu, carried a small fish together 
with the water in the hand cup. Finding the fish 
there the king was filled with compassion. 
Keeping the fish in his kamandalu,! he tried to 
Save it. 


HENTAU cer USge ae: | 
USAT Us Trailer ATTaTTI Vo 


In a single day and night the fish was 
enlarged to sixteen finger's breadth and started 
crying for safety. 


a aaera Alors wreroaeraor 
TAT VATA SAAAVTHA Ve I 
The king then placed the aquatic creature in 


a pitcher filled with water; where it was 
enlarged to the length of three hands. 


WA: Wetted Asan 
OB Ua: Utes Well AME SUT Aa I Ve 


Again the same fish spoke to the son of 
Stirya in a pathetic voice, “O King, I take refuge 
in you. You kindly protect me.” 


aa: HU ct ees Wfeunsfarea: | 
Tey A Ufa aay HY WT: WaT Volt 


1. A gourd made of wood or earth used for water by 
ascetics. 


fase YAMA sara 
TaTENS WA: wife Wife TATA 2 aN 
aa: @ Aaa feat Wrasse 

Fel Fal VAS Ft wilaroafettata: 1H 


After this, the son of Sirya lodged the fish 
in the well, but when the fish could not be 
accommodated in the well, then it was lodged in 
a tank, where it grew to the size of a yojana 
(distance) and feeling miserable, it spoke, “O 
Best of kings, you save me, save me.” Manu 
then released the fish in the Ganga. When it 
further grew to a gigantic size in the Ganga, 
then the king released it in the ocean. 


Fel AAaet Seat wafer: 
TAT We Tala: AST aT 23 
WIT AGCARANA Sa WaT 
UAT A aA HA ToT MARTIN VI 


When the fish expanded its size to a gigantic 
proportions, then Manu, feeling panicky asked 
it, “Are you a demon king? Or, are you lord 
Vasudeva? Otherwise how could anyone else be 
like that? How could anyone else attain the 
body of such an enormous proportions 
extending to crores of yojanas? 


WAS AATSITT Ai Weafa aya 
SMH WTA TTI ARIST TN UI 


O Kesava, [ have come to realise that you 
are teasing me taking to the form of a fish. O 
Hrsikesa, Lord of the universe, you are the 
abode of the universe, salutation to you. 


Vath: FT WaRRARA WATS: | 
UY Aa Mar AAPA RAATAI 2 6 I 


At these word of Manu, lord Janardana in 
the form of Matsya, said, “O Sinless one, you 
are correct. You have well recognised me. 


areata are Afeat Afettad 
Waal Wet AAT AMTAAH AT 29 11 


O King, very shortly, the earth, together 
with the mountains and the forests shall be 
drowned in oceanic water. 

Ata adeamt Fara fartran 
Telararaey WOT WATTA 221 
Because of this, O Lord of the earth, in order 


to protect all the large creatures, the gods have 
made this boat. 


Waveslteal I a A a Vat WaT: 
TE MNT Maas FAA 28 UI 


All the creatures born of sweat, eggs, those 
which grow on earth and those which are 
covered by membrane, should all be lodged 1n 
this boat like orphans, and have to be protected 
by you. 


taataea sar Tafa aT 
Westar Fa Wey AeA AahTApAN 3 
O King, when the boat starts shaking 
because of the winds of the time of dissolution, 
at that point of time, you connect it with my 
horn. 


Adal Malt AAT WMATA WT Tl 
Waafad wfaar Aa: Grated 3 Vn 
Ud HIITAal Bast sera: | 
Tarerenna saga afaearan 3 21 


Thereafter, O Lord of earth, at the end of 
dissolution, you will become Prajapati of all the 
living beings. In this way, at the start of 
Krtayuga in the form of a patient and 
omniscient ruler, you shall be the lord of 
Manvantara, and you would be adored by the 
gods even at that point of time. 


ofa simieead Tere snfeat wafampdare 
YTS: 1 QU 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 2 
Conversation between Matsya and Manu 
Ud sara 


Wager AR UTD 


baie ialel 
HARA TT 11 QU 
Ga UO He Ae Teel TTS 
MN AE VAAN: St aT Maa WAN VA 

Stta said, “O Sages, at these words of the 
lord Matsya, Manu put a = question to 
Madhusiidana. He said, “After how many years 
the deluge will occur? How shall I be able to 
save all the living beings? O Madhustdana, 
when shall I have the chance of meeting you 
again?” 
Wee] sdite] 
Taaffe Weta 
Taga As stteragTaE Ti 3 


AASTUMTAAACT TAA; GA STU: | 


AAA AE A VATE TAO: XU 


Lord Matsya said, “O Great sage, for a 
hundred years from today, there shall be a 
rainfall on earth, as a result of which there 
would be terrific draught and famine. Thereafter 
at the time of the delusion at the end of the 
yuga, the seven scorching rays of the sun shall 
start destruction of the petty creatures. 


stamersty faa ater ane 
PAMASNTT UAT aT : | 
TAY Head a aaa I & I 


The submarine fire would also take to the 
horrible form. The poisonous fire emerging out 
of the mouth of Sarmmkarsana and the fire 
emerging out of the third eye of the lord Siva, 
shall consume the three lokas raising high 
flames. 


famfaceat areata Wer 

Ua SMT Hel Pat Aal VATRATAAMTI & It 
TATU AH ASAT TAT 

ad: MeGAa WTA PATTI 9 


Pa a ed ty \ eirefeJ 


Chapter-2 


OQ Great sage, when the entire earth 1s 
reduced to ashes, and the sky will be filled with 
heat then the entire universe with gods would be 
destroyed. 


Gant WqAey FUwvSl Aenea: | 
ayers: NUT BAA AAA: CU 
These are the terrific clouds of that time 


known as Samvarta, Bhimanada, Drona, Canda, 
Balahaka, Vidyutpataéka and Sona. 

sia ware ATT: 

AGT: AMAT HAT STARTS 

Weald ad aheara say 

ACA Yel AraahsahT WaT: Yok 

II WHI Ted TAA 

GAT Aa Heap ATMA Tea: kh 

They would spring out from the vapours of 

the heat and drop heavy rains when all the 
oceans are united into a great mass. All the 
seven oceans shall be turned into one vast 
ocean. At that pomt of time, you owning the 
boat in the form of the Vedas, and carrying all 
the living beings in the same, tie the rope, then 
provided by me, with my horn. By doing so, O 
Great ascetic, all the gods shall be reduced to 


ashes, but only you people shall be saved with 
my influence. 


Ua: Wate cay TEA TTT 
WATANAS Ta ATMA AA AT: | 22M 
Wer a At Yost wHVsat Terws:| 

Wat sat: TOT ferent: Pata TN 23 
CAAT Ag IaS feet TaTCTAT HRT 
VANS Tit MTATAT ATT 2X 
aera cacaNiet Hat 

UY FT TATA ATA 84 


During this horrible delusion, only moon, 
the sun, myself, Brahma with the four lokas, 
river Narmada- the Puranas possessing all the 
lores and this boat together with you shail 


5 


remain safe. O Great sage, during the delusion 
of Caksusa Manvantara, when the entire earth 
shall be submerged in the flood water, and the 
creation shall be started by you afresh. Then | 
shall propagate the Vedic knowledge.” Thus 
speaking he vanished. 


Tena ant arqeayareny! 
NAUM AMAA TAT PAT TN 2G 


Manu on his part, remained there and by the 
grace of lord Vasudeva, kept on practising till 
the advent of the time of destruction. 


Sle Bah ABI ATCT TATRA 

TS YISATAA UTA HATS I VOM 
WET WAST VAT: TA TUNTa 

TA AAAMTHES APTA THAT VC Ut 
ASM AT YS ATTA 
SUPORTE: WTI FATA 89 1 


Thereafter, when the time for delusion 
arrived, as foretold by the lord, Janardana, he 
appeared in the form of a fish with a single 
horn. At that point of time a serpent also in the 
form of a rope reached there floating over the 
flood waters at the living being over the boat. 
With the use of his yogic powers, the boat was 
tied to the horn of the fish using the serpent as a 
cord. Thereafter he himself also boarded the 
boat offering his salutation to the lord 
Janardana. 


ayaa afer arena 

Oea WAT Ua WaT aeration 

dice Vaasa TUE A TAT MRoll 

qeare: WT US: eAMieares feat: 

aedaHla Aaa: UT AMSA 2 21 

O Best of the sages, in this way, on the 

occasion of the ancient dissolution, the sage, 
who was well-versed in the yoga, at the instance 
or Manu, the lord Matsya had narrated the 
Matsya Purana, and the same will the narrated 
by me, before you. Therefore you listen to the 


same quite carefully. O Brahmanas, you have 
asked me about the creation of the universe and 


44 


MATT: WETEAS ATHATATN ¥ ott 

Wat afpacantar gata aaraT 

VR AHA WAS TSAR ANT ¥ VI 

Both of them adored Aurava Agni for 

begetting sons. Getting pleased with their 
adoration, Aurava said to them, “Either one of 
you two will get sixty thousand sons and the 
other one will have a single son who will 
expand the dynasty.” At this Prabha, accepted 


sixty thousand sons, while Bhanumati begged 
for a single son. 


PCC RUMECURCSL Et 
aa: Sfeaearttr qa Beat WTS VU 


After sometime Bhanumati gave birth to 
Asamafyasa while Prabha, the daughter of 
Yadu's race gave birth to sixty thousand sons. 


Gara: Baal een faa as yaar 
TAAT TA As waray fasts ¥ 31 


When those sixty thousand sons of Sagara 
were digging the earth, they were reduced to 
ashes by lord Visnu in the form of Kapila. The 
son of Asamanjasa came to be known by the 
name of Ansuman. 


wee Yat fetter fecitarg we: 
UT APTA AST TT: HealaraLATH ¥ VI 


He had a son named Dilipa and Bhagiratha 
was born to Dilipa. It was Bhagiratha, who after 
performing hard tapas brought Bhagirathi 
Ganga from the heaven. 


TT AAT ATT Blt Fare: 
AT ATTA ATS Ife TORT ATS ATH B & UI 


Nabhaga was known as the son of 
Bhagiratha. Amabrisa was the son of Nabhaga 
who produced Sindhudvipa as his son. 


TATA: Yatsyequuretas rae 
TA HMA WAHA Ad: WANE 
Ayutayu was the son of Sindhudvipa and 
Rtuparna was born to Ayutayu. Rtuparna had a 
son named Kalmasapada, to whom Sarvakarma 
was born as a son. 


Matsya Puranam 


TAMA: WAST TAS TAT 
Pegarant srereafaary FAT vel 


His son was Anaranya, who had a son 
named Nighna. Nighna has a son named 
Anamitra and Raghu, who was the king. 


smfaat aametaat @ Fad FT: 
TareaTfect ae Peete AIT Y oI 


Out of them Anamitra retired to the forest, 
who would be the king in Krtayuga. Dilipa was 
born to Raghu, while Aja was born to Dilipa. 


UATE TAATATAUT TET FT 
THEVA AAT TAATTAAN ¥ 8 I 
Dirghabahu was the son of Aja, Aja had the 


son named Ajapdla, while DaSaratha was born 
to Ajapala. Dasaratha had four sons. 


ARTA: AS TAIT TTT 

TATA ASTE AMASA: 1 4 
All of them had been born of the amsa of 
Narayana. Rama was the eldest of all, who had 


been the destroyer of Ravana and expanded the 
race of Raghu. 


arene afta waa anaes: 
TA Yat HoreaT awa HATA SA & Vi 
sider Hynaet Feet UTA: 
TAR AVATARS ATT & 2 I 


The Maharsi Valmiki of the race of Bhrgu, 
had described the life story of Sri Rama, 
exhaustively in the form of Ramayana. Sti 
Rama had two sons named Lava and Kusa, who 
expanded the race of Raghu. Atithi was the son 
of Kusa and Atithi had a son named Nisacha. 
Nala was the son of Nisadha. Nala's son was 
named Nabha. 


AWA: YOSSI Ad: TAA: 
TA WAISHaR SAMA: VATA 4 31 
Pundarika was born as the son of Nabha. 


Pundarika had a son named Ksemadhanva, 
Devanika was the valorous son of 


Chapter-13 


Ksemadhanva. 
TTA Fd: ASAT: WT: 
TAIT STADR ATA SAAS AAT & VI 


Devanika's son was Ahinagu, who had a son 
named Sahasrasva; who had a son named 
Candravaloka. Tarapida was born as a son to 
him. 

TATA TAS TAT 
FA TAATATAT A PUTTAT WG GI 


From Tarapida was born Candragiri as his 
son who had a son named Bhanucandra. 
Bhanucandra's son was Srutayu, who was killed 
in the war of the Mahabharata. 


Tet gaa facet ast ayaa 
AMAA ARAM ATAETT 11 GN 


This dynasty which originated from the sage 
Kasyapa, had two kings known by the names of 
Nala. One of them was the son of Virasena and 
the other was the son of the king Nisadha. 


Ud daad ast Wa ytateor: | 
ATHAMITA: WATT Yenlieter: 14 Ot 
In this way, all the kings born in [ksvaku 


race of Vaivasvata, were extremely charitable. I 
have narrated their stories broadly. 


ofa sare Wer Gea AM 
SISMISATTAT: 11 2211 


kK 


CHAPTER 13 


Description of Pitr-vamsa, and the hundred 
and eight names of the Goddess, in relation 
to the episode of Sati 


Wear 
TSA rea TATU Ayr TTT 
Tag ageard BT a fared: 112 
Manu asked, “Now I would like to listen to 
the best of Pitr-varnsa. In that too I have the 


special desire to know as to how the sun and the 
moon became the Sraddha-devas? 


Ack] sdtd 

ea ot aareeay faq aye 

TAN FOG TOT: AT TAA TF 

Ufa aa: Waarateaaa: | 

TAT: PAGO ATT WATT: 113 

ward arcarron atren sft faa: 

DEO CRC IC HARB ORCI Tere ccictibd] 

Wageteard FT WT Teaes: | 

GMT at Ala Wal ANT AST UI 

es 4 ic ‘\ " q o~ ; t 

AAAS Cal ALATEST SI STAT NG 

Lord Matsya replied, “O Royal sage, it is 

quite blissful, that I am now going to narrate to 
you the story of the Pitr-varhsa. You please 
listen. There are the seven ganas of Pitrs in the 
heaven. Out of them three are formless, and the 
remaining four are with forms. All of them are 
immensely glorious. The formless! Pitr-ganas 
are the sons of Prajapati Vairaja. Therefore they 
are known by the names of Vairaja. They are 
adored by the gods. All of them after achieving 


the Sanatanalokas, fall from the yogic path and 
then at the end of the day of Brahma, are reborn 


1. The Vayu, Matsya and Padma Puranas and Hart 


Vamsa, profess to give an account of the original 
Pitrs. The account is much the same and for the most 
part in the same words, in all. They agree in 
distinguishing the Pitrs into seven classes; three of 
which are without form (#4#4:) or composed of 


intellectual, not elementary substance and assuming 
what forms they please; and four are corporal 
(aqd4:). According to a legend given by the Vayu 


and the Hari Vamsa, the first Pitrs were the sons of 
the gods. Matsysa has Faany araai frat cagaa:! 'The 


Pitrs are born in the Manvantaras as the sons of the 
gods. The Hart Varnsa has the same statement, but 
more precisely distinguishes the Vairajas as one class 
only of the incorporeal Pitrs. The commentator states 
the same, calling the three incorporeal Pitrs, 
Vairaias, Agnisvattas and Varhisads; and the four 
corporeal orders, Sukalas, Angirasas, Susvedhas and 
Somapas. The Vairajas are described as the fathers of 
Mena, the mother of Uma. Their abode 1s variously 
termed the Santanika, Sanatana and Soma loka. 


46 


as Brahmavadins. Then they regaining the 
memory of the past, taking refuge in the 
excellent Samkhyayoga, achieve the siddhi 
which relieves them from the cycle of rebirth. 
Because of this, the donors should donate the 
offerings of the Srdddha! to the yogis. 


Uda AAA HAM Veit fErad Aan 
THES Be: ASAT Ha 
Hla: Wat AA Aa TIsA: 9 


Mena, the mind-born daughter of the Pitrs is 
known to be the wife of Himavan. Mainaka 
happens to be her son. Kraunca had been born 
even earlier to him. On the basis of this same 
Kraufica, an island has been named after it, 
which is surrounded by the clarified butter 
(ghrta). 


Wat a qua frat: GAM Aa: 
SHHIMISTUT BT AaaATTAMT: 112 I 


Thereafter Mena gave birth to Ekaparna, 
Aparma and Uma- the three girls. All of them 
were engaged in yogic practices and performed 
severe tapas. They were considered to be the 
best of the female ascetics in the world. 


arte fadetenr Steerer ATT 
cat fetaal Ae: Wal eles TUS ferear: 112 It 


Out of these daughters, Himavan, gave one 
to Rudra, one to Siva, and the third to 
Jaigisavya. 


RUT hd: 
HATA Ya TATSTS SCAT 
ferageent AHA TAT Aalto 


Rsis asked, “O Sita, why did Sati, the 
daughter of Daksa immolate her body? Then 


1. Sriddha is commonly an obsequial or funeral 
sacrifice, but it implies offerings to the progenitors 
of an individual and of mankind and always forms 
part of a religious ceremony on an occasion of 
rejoicing or an accession of prosperity, this being 
termed the Abhyudaya or Vrddhi Sraddha. As. Res. 
VII. 270. 


Matsya Puranam 


how could she reappear in the same form as 
daughter of Himavan? 


Geta fase Tat at Tara 
SAT Ciena Ya fatal Arn zai 


At that point of time, what did Daksa, the 
son of Brahma, speak to Sati, his own daughter, 
as a result of which she immolated herself? You 
kindly narrate the entire story exhaustively to 


39 


aa Jaret 

eae Ua faad wyaraterch 
waaay say ware frat wT ezI 
ferret ata vat W aasferarata: | 


aT Shel AAS SA ANG ETAT 3 11 


rT.) r= 5 TT} 


GATT Gal Se MATA ACHAT WI 


Sita said, “O Rsis, in earlier times, Daksa 
organised a vast yajna, in which enormous 
riches were given away in daksina. All the gods 
had been invited to receive their shares of the 
yajna. (But Siva, the lord of the gods, remained 
uninvited. Sati finding the share of her husband 
in the yajna absent) asked Daksa, her father, “O 
Father, why has my husband not been invited in 
the yajna.” At this Daksa replied to Sati, “O 
Daughter, your husband carrying a trident, 
destroys the world in the form of Rudra. As a 
result of this he 1s considered to be inauspicious. 
Therefore he is not fit enough to be invited in 
the yajna.” 


wat a a fact faquTsaAgaR: | 
aATASMU A Galea ATTA gk I 


On hearing this, Sati felt enraged and in the 
height of anger she uttered, “O Dear one, I shall 
finish this body born out of your sinful body. 
You will be the only son of the ten Pitrs and 
after having been born in the Ksatriya family, at 
the time of Asvamedha sacrifice, you will get 
destroyed by Rudra.” 


SA BTN TacelRaaT aT 


Chapter-13 


Freed Tara Weargefeat: 1126 I 
fer feanafete ster wrererorrerch: | 
SOTA TAA: WUT J: Ra: 11 291 
Thus speaking Sati, burnt her body with the 
yogic power emerging out of her own body. At 
that point of time the gods, asuras, kinnaras and 
the Gandharvas cried aloud, “Oh, what is all 


this happening here? What is happening? They 
sounded miserable as they cried. 


A WAY WAT STRATA 
Sfeged ter ofa WaT TEaTATAT 2 I 
Observing all this Daksa went close to Sati 
and offering his salutation to her spoke, “O 
Goddess, you are the mother of the universe. Be 
graceful on me. You had been born to me at my 
request showering your grace on me. You are 
the deity showering your fortunes on the people 
of the world. 
qt aa ted fafregenus wary 
Was HE Mt T Ai Alera 28 
OQ Goddess well-versed in dharma, you 
pervade in the entire mobile and immobile 


things of the universe. Be graceful on me. You 
should not desert me at the present moment. 


We cat Geral Ans HT Mea: 

feRrarays AM Wel BAMA WAM? ol 

Ware wragead a: sre Aaa 

marae MAA STATA AISTHICTAN 2 Bit 

At this prayer of Daksa, the goddess said, 

“OQ Daksa, the task which has been started by 
me would surely be completed by me. After the 
destruction of the yajna by the trident bearer 
Siva, and with the desire to create the universe, 
you should perform tapas for me. With the 
influence of the same, you would become a 


Prajapati named Praceta and become a son of 
ten fathers. 


Tevet feared 


47 


Weare TT: HAM BTA 2 2 
At that point of time sixty girls would be 
born to you out of my amsa. Because of you 
performing tapas for me, you would achieve the 
excellent position in yoga.” 


UATISTAEA: HY HY AAS 
aay a A SSM VAST eT ATA 23 


At these words of the goddess, Daksa said, 
“Q Sinless goddess, for this purpose, which are 
the sacred places to be visited by me, to have 
the audience with you? Which are the names by 
which, you should be eulogised by me?” 


eearet 
Taal AAA HEM Tact hea 
Uaeteay Atenreated A ar aaa 
Tasha Vy TG Fem FareTcay: | 
TTCEN Arata TT SATA AAT UG 


The goddess said, “Though I pervade in all 
the living beings on earth, and you can visualise 
me everywhere. Because whatever exists in the 
universe is not separated from me. Or in other 
words I pervade in all the mobile and immobile 
beings, still a person desirous of success and 
riches or fortunes, should have an audience with 
me at the sacred places, the details of which are 
being given by me. 


anor fastened Afra forsee 
Wat eter Sa ATTA, TTT & I 
WAS HY A fawHray FATSTATN 2 it 
At Varanasi, I live as  Visalaksi, 
Lingadharini in Natmisaranya, Lalitadevi in 
Prayaga,! Kamakst at © Gandhamadana 


mountain, Kumuda at Manasarovara, Visvakaya 
at Ambara. 


Tea Wad AMT Wet HMA 
Telhel UAT Tait SPATTT CI 


1. A sacred shrine of the Hindus the junction of the 
rivers Ganga and Yamuna. 


48 


STS TM MT TAT Wea 
ween aalfrrat fast fagaat fag: tt 


Gomati at Gomanta, Kamacarini at 
Mandaracala, Madotkata at Caitraratha, Jayanti 
at Hastinapura, Gauri at Kanyakubja, Rambha 
at Malaya mountain, Kirtimati at Ekambhaka 
(Bhubanesvara) and Visva at Visvesara. 


Gent YeRdit hart Ata 

Tal fenad: ed MeO WgeHfOTATI3 OMI 
meat wart q faradt faccufien 
siotel Welat ATT WaT ASAT TAT 2 


Puruhtta at Puskara, Margadayini at the 
Kedaratirtha, Nanda at the back of Himavat, 
Bhadrakamika at Gckarna tirtha, Bhavani at 
Sthanesvara, Builvapatrikaé at  Builvatirtha 
Madhavi at Srigaila, Bhadra at Bhadresvara. 


FA ATE T BIC HATA 

CARIEA VT VU clei cArerosty FTTH 21 
Telfer 7 alten wale WHeait 

wears uetedt ferafert seria 31 
Taga HA F Wart eifera aM 

SUT ASA HIM Weeden 3 vil 


Jaya at Varaha mountain, Kamala at 
Kamalalaya tirtha, Rudrani at Rudrakoti-tirtha, 
Kali at Kdalafjara mountain, Kapila at 
Mahalinga tirtha, Mukutesvart at Markota, 
Mahadevi Salagramatirtha, Jalapriya at 
Sivalinga, Kumari at Mayapuri (Rishikesh), 
Lalita at Santanatirtha, Utpalaksi at Sahasraksa- 
tirtha, Mahotpala at Kamalaksa-tirtha. 


Tava Agen aa fare YearTy 

FATTO TTA Wee YUSaTA IS & I 

anTauit yued ¥ fare wage 

ferget Fagen ATT BHATT AeTATETCTNS & I 

aed alent J PIT Wad a 

THETA FAM T WATE TATATIZ Ol 

Mangala at Ganga, Vimala at Purusotama- 

tirtha (Jagannathpuri), Amoghaksi at Vipasi, 


Matsya Puranam 


Patala at Vikita, Vipula at Vipula, Kalyani at 
Malayacala, Kotavi! at Koti-tirtha, Sugandha at 
Madhavavana, Trisandhya at 
Ratipriya at Gangadvara. 


forage frame afeat fern! 
SAU FAM FT WaT FATAT AAC 


Nandini over to Devika river in Punjab, 
Rukmini in Dvarika and Radha in Vrndavana. 


Saat HETAT F Meet UAT 

ferrae ae Aiat fares fereanfranfarti3 <1 
VaTaaaT F Beas FT Ula 

THON WA T APATAT WMT of 


Godasrama. 


1 am Devaki in Mathura Puri, Paramesvari in 
Patala, Sita in Citrakuta, Vindhyavasini over the 
Vindhya mountain, Ekavira at Sahyadn 
mountain, Candrikaé at Hariscandra-tirtha, 
Ramana at Rama tirtha, Mrgavati in Yamuna. 


ata Tereedtent cat farsa 

SIM ATA F VeleAlet TSA AU 

sITOAaAY Ue fra 

TUSSI WS ATT TATE MTSE YU 2 

Mahalaksmi at Karavira (Kolhapura), 

Umadevi at Vinayaka-tirtha, Aroga at 
Vaidyanatha, Mahesvari at Mahakala, Abhaya 
at Usna-tirtha, Amrté in Vindhya caves, 
Mandavi at Mandava-tirtha, Svaha at 
Mahesvarapura. 

SMATTS WaVST F Ulosat Atal 

AAA TUT WATT VERMA 3 

SANTA UTA UNTATAS AAT 

Teles TENT Watwar Re TTY v1 
Chagalanda, Candika at 
Vararoha at Somesvara-tirtha, 


Pracanda at 
Makaranda, 


|. Kotavi is said to be an eighth portion of Rudrani, and 
the tutelary goddess of the Daityas The word in the 
lexicons designates a naked woman, and 1s thence 
appticable to Durga in some of her forms. 


Chapter-13 


Puskaravati at Prabhasa-tirtha,! Devamata at 
Sarasvati, Mahabhaga at Mahalaya-tirtha over 
the seashore, Pingalesvari in Payosni. 


fatgent gather q sifted aereaTt 
SUTAMH CAT BART MOTTA & UI 


Tat FagUt HANTS ATTA 
aT faaraat ant fears § 


Simhika in the KrtasSaucatirtha, Yasaskari at 
the Karttikeya-tirtha, Lola at Utapalavartaka, 
Subhadra at the confluence of Sona, Laksmi at 
Siddhapura, Angané in Bharatasrama, 
Visvamukhi over the Jalandhara mountain, Tara 
at Kiskindhapura. 


area Uftetan apse 

itor eat fertst q yfefayaat qMivelt 
HUTA Bega TATA TT 

Wgert array ght: Prose ATSC 
arent F aE Ferrer hcot 
SUA ATT ASATTAM TAT 81 


Pusti at Daruvana, Medha in Kd4smira 
region, Bhimaddevi at Himagiri, Pusti at 
Visvesvara, Suddhi at Kapalamocana, Mata at 
Kayavarahana, Dhvani in Samkhadvara, Dhrtt 
in the Pindaraka-ksetra, Kali at Candrabhaga, 
Sivakarini at Acchoda, Amrta in Vena, Urvasi 
at Badni-tirtha. 


ee UH HME Hylean 

WAM BAe T The AANA ol 
aya ata F Ptadsrarorer 

Maa Acaer Uadt fora Prat iy vi 
Cac TAA TAAY ATA 
Telfer HT ATT HUTT Awa ATU 21 


|. Prabhadsa is a place of pilgrimage in the west of 
India, near the temple of Somanath, and town of 
Pattan Somanath. It is also known by the name of 
Soma-tirtha; Soma, or the moon, having been here 
cured of the consumption brought upon him by the 
imprecation of Daksa, his father-in-law, 
Mahabharata, Salya Parva. 


49 


Ausadhi in Uttarakuru, Kusodaka in 
Kusadvipa, Manmatha at Hemakita mountain, 
Satyavadini at Mukuta, Vandaniya in 
Asvatirtha, Nidhi? in Vaisravanalaya, Gayatri in 
Vedavadana, Parvati with Siva, Indrani in 
Devaloka, Sarasvati in the mouth of Brahma, 
Prabha in the solar disk, Vaisnavi among the 
mothers. 


eM Vat F Wars a freA 
fart Tene AT Vifeh: MASAO 31 
Arundhati among the chaste women, 


Tilottama among the beautiful women, 
Brahmakala in the mind and Sakti in the people 
of the universe. 


Wlgeyie: We ATTEN AA 

TSA DT MAA MATMACSTET TINY XI 

qT; TAvapoaTgIshT aura: wea 

WY AAT A: Heal AM UPA AT ATG GM 
waurafaram: aed fragt aad 


UT AUTH Het HUIAT ATT NG E 1 

a ferent Tat TENA MSTA 

AAT eq Maa eTa aA 

In this way, I have spelt out a hundred and 

eight names of mine, together with an equal 
number of the holy places. Whosoever will 
recite my hundred and eight names or shall 
listen to them from the mouths of others, he 
shall be freed from all his sins. A person who 
having a bath at the above holy places shall 
have an audience with me, he, getting relieved 
of all the sins, shall reside in the Sivaloka for 
the duration of a kalpa. Besides a person who 
would remember these holy place at the end of 
his life, he piercing through the globe shall 
reach the place of Siva. 


TATA ARYA TAT: | 
Te ABE A AAS AT FANG CH 


2. Nidhi is a treasure, of which there are several 
belonging to Kubera; each has its guardian spirit or 
is personified. 


30 


Careaaa fagraS-aTen terres ie 


Ud Aaa Al AA SaISSHMAIATIG 811 
A person who on the third or the eighth day 

of the moon, shall recite my hundred and eight 
names, he shall achieve a number of sons. A 
person who would recite these names at the 
time of donation of cow, Srdddha or daily at the 
time of adoration, he would achieve the position 
of the supreme Brahman.” Sati thus speaking, 
reduced herself to ashes in yajfia-mandapa of 
Daksa. 

TaRayalshe arert eat: wraratssaA 

Ueda Msvaeat Fraeeeanhaig of 


Tara yaad 
HEM AAT T ATTA ATG 21 


Then at the appropriate time, Brahma's son 
Daksa appeared as the son of Pracetas while the 
goddess Sati was reborn as Parvati to become 
the spouse of Siva. She was born from the 
womb of Mend, who bestows pleasures as well 
as the salvation. By recitation the aforesaid 
hundred and eight names, Arundhati achieved 
the best of the yogasiddhi. 


TRAY Tater STATA 
BAUfat: GAA A eT DT APTSTE VN 
The Royal sage became invincible in the 


world. Yayati achieved a son, while the son of 
Bhrgu achieved enormous riches. 


AUIS CACM Grea: Afra 
aval: We sea: fatartadaftaarqig 311 


Thus several of the gods, Daityas, 
Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and the Siidras, 
achieved success in various ways, in their 
desired wishes. 


adiectad frase cadre 
4 Oa Meal etied Heatferefe area g v1 


Wherever the list of these names is Kept or 1s 
adored keeping it near a god, the misfortunes or 
grief can never reach that place. 


Sta srareed Hargerat fuga 
THATATS PASTA AT PANS: 1123.1 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 14 


Fall of Acchoda from the heaven and her 
redemption at her prayer to the manes 


Ut sara 
cileal: GAGA ATT Aa ANAT: 
add Sa frat Car ATT 2H 


Sita said, “O Rsis, the place where the 
manes of the gods of the descendants of Marica 
are lodged is known as Somapatha. The gods 
adore the manes. 


Saar Sit Ga Aart VA AAT: | 
SPT AT At F AMAA HAUT ACT 
arate ATA oat: fagharad TT 
Teste T Ausra feet aUAeaT TIN 
BNA: WATS: Tat a 8 a aT 
FERRET: Wat (STATA: 1% 


The manes who are devoted to the yajnas 
are known by the name of Agnisvatta.! At their 
dwelling place, a river named Acchoda flows 
who happens to be the mind-born daughter of 
the manes. The manes had in the earlier times 
built a lake named Acchoda. In earlier times 
Acchoda performed severe tapas for a thousand 
years. The manes getting pleased with the tapas 
reached there, getting pleased in order to grant 
her the boon. All the manes were clad in divine 
costumes wearing the garland of divine flowers 
and their bodies were plastered with the divine 
paste. 


ad Fart ater: HIATITA AT: | 
TASHA AT Hat FT AISSATIG I 
ad aut as Hyasedifean 
AMEE TAT aT Say ATP UI 


1. Agnisvattas—sons of Marici and Pitrs of the gods 
(Manu-Matsya, Padma) : living in Soma-loka and 
parents of Achchoda (Matsya, Padma, Hari Vamsa). 
The commentator on the Hari Vamsa derives the 
name from Agnisu (3749), 'in or by oblations to fire.’ 


and Atta (amm:), ‘obtained,’ ‘invoked.’ 


Chapter-14 


att T Ayes Waray Yaretet 


frramaqaenttast th Tat vitor 
ay AA UT Mataarata fag 


PATO ACCT THAT ATTA CU 

All of them were quite young, valorous, 
besides being beautiful like Kamadeva. Among 
them there was a mane named Amavasu, the 
beautiful Acchoda, desirous of a mate, became 
excited and expressed her desire to live with 
him. Because of this mental folly the beautiful 
Acchoda, was deprived from yoga and fell on 
earth. She had never touched the earth earlier. 
The date on which she expressed such a desire 
and Amavasu, the mane, did not yield to the 
passion, was subsequently known as Amavasya 
tithi. Amavasya is therefore quite liked by the 
manes and the offerings made to them on that 
particular day are heartily accepted by them. 


STBCISATA SAT iste ATA: TATA 
Sr faa UL MIS SHATATBANS 


Acchoda after losing her powers acquired by 
hard tapas felt ashamed and crest fallen. She 
lowered down her head in shame and prayed to 
the manes for her salvation. 


facermrn fagiittarca wate 
qaennettad edad Ud Aa Qoll 


SeqEMIM: Wareysrar FT 
fafa fecagritur aftafafenad gat:112211 
We Teast YRAd ALATA 
Ga: Get HalfoT aes WAT ANNI 


Then the manes reassured the female ascetic, 
who had been crying in the lonely forest. The 
ereat manes, taking into account the future task 
of the gods with the speech filled with delight 
and welfare spoke to her, “O Auspicious one, 
whatever auspicious deeds are performed by the 
people with wisdom in the heaven, they enjoy 
the reward of the same with the same body, 
because the deeds performed in the devayoni, 


51 


yield the reward atonce. To the contrary, the 
deeds in the human life yield the reward after 
death. 


Tea YT ATA: MCAT Het ARTA 

TSTfag Alaa a Bae WANTS 3 

AeHAMIU wa He Hera 

AAT TA: BAM AMAA ATA YY UI 

Therefore, O Daughter, you will reap the 

reward of your tapas in the next birth, after your 
death. In the twenty eight Dvdpara, you would 
be born as the fish. Because of your violating 
the norms of the Pitr-race, you will achieve that 
painful yoni. Then getting relieved of that yoni, 


you would be born as a daughter to the king 
Vasu. 


HAM TM T AAAS Sey 
WUT AUT YAN TATT TI 8 I 
ae g Tatime STaTTAOTTEATT 

B aqua agen favriseait Ft AAEM 


Inspite of your being a girl, you shall surely > 


achieve to inaccessible lokas. When still a girl, 
you shall conceive a son in the island of Badari 


forest, who would be known by the name of 
Badarayana, besides being the incarnation of 


Narayana, who shall never fail in his duties. 


Your only son would divide the provisions of 


the Vedas. 
URaRUSSeA Bt YT ARMA VT: 
fafaadhierarcan faatgel FT: 


Thereafter, you will give birth to two more 
sons from the king Santanu of the race of Puru, 
born out of the arhsa of the ocean. The names of 


the two sons would be Citraéngada and | 


Vicitravirya. 


SUA Aa AMT a: 
Wreauercaren fgetes waearan ec it 


The intelligent Vicitravirya shall have two 
sons named Dhrtarastra and Pandu. Then on the 
full moon day of Bhadrapada, you shall be 
reborn in Pitr-loKa. 


he 
er 


he 
ur 
Id 
Ne 
lat 
AL, 


Ng 


wO 
the 
be 


Des 


52 


AA Uelaat cites frees TIS 
MAMAS FT AAT ATATI NS 


Thus you will be known as Satyavati on 
earth, while in the Pitr-loka you shall be known 
as the goddess Astaka and you will bestow the 
desired wishes to the people. 


fasta Wt aret Tales BT afeaha 
Qua aT ATES ci BATAAN oN 


In due course of time, you on earth would be 
known as Acchoda, the best of the rivers with 
auspicious water.” 


SUA A MOAT ALATA AA 
ASHATY U Aa thet Aglad FTN 


Thus speaking the group of manes, 
disappeared from that place, while Acchoda 
enjoyed the reward of all her deeds, which have 
been stated earlier. 


Stet STATS ATTN fugayngattt aH 
ATMS: LY A 


kk * 


CHAPTER 15 


Description of Pitr-vamsa and the method of 
performing Srdddha 


aa sara 
fauret aa art g feta aha gaa: 
cient afenat aa foat: at Gaat: 12 


Sita said, “O Sages, there is a loka in the 
heaven, which is well known as Vibhraja, being 
quite illustrious. The best of manes known by 
the name of Barhis! live there. Thousands of 
planes with Peacocks remain ready there. 


Ua atergrnltt aay AeA: | 


|. Barhisads—sons of Atri and Pitrs of the demons 
(Manu) : sons of Pulastya. Pitrs of the demons, 
residents in Vaibhraja, fathers of Pivari (Matsya, 
Padma and Hari Vamsa). 


Matsya Puranam 


Gacen afeal aa facara wetefaa: 21 
PACAMIEAMY Wet Agena: | 

APT SAITO TATA TOT: 113 
Teanga aaa fetes saa: 
YORATAT: MAT RAT ATA AAT: 1S 11 


It is the place where barhi (kusa grass) 
remaining present there and are anxious to 
bestow the reward to the people, making 
offering to the manes of their ancestors, finding 
happiness there. These Pitrs are venerated by 
the gods, Asuras, Apsaras, Gandharvas, Yaksas 
and Raksasas. These Barhisadas  Pitrs, 
possessing the great power by Yoga, are the 
sons of the sage Pulastya. 


TSI AAMT SATA: 
Uda Wat sea wat fefa faszariy i 


They bestow safety and freedom from fear 
to their devotees. They live there. These Pitris 
had a mind-born daughter, known by the name 
of Pivari. 


AAT ATTA BT AIPA TeTaUTA 
WHA ANAT AL Te TAT STH 


The said Yogini as well as Yogamata known 
as Pivari, performed hard tapas by which lord 
Visnu was pleased. He appeared before her and 
Pivari then begged for a boon from Sri Hari. 


aad Bea a watt fara 
tte ta Waaed Ult A aaa ATVI 
She said, “O Lord, in case you are pleased 
with me, then you bestow a husband to me, who 
should be well-versed in the yogic practice, 
extremely beautiful, having control of his sense 


organs, best of the orators besides the one who 
should well look after me.” 


Jara tat Vfaat SATAGAT Aad WH: 
Wad TAT Wal at AMI T Yaad 1 
Tat aa HM seal AWS a ahr 
USMS ATT AMT TST HI 
TT PIA AAAs a at: Bar 


Chapter-15 


POT TL: WY: Wiser AT Tao 

Hearing this, lord Visnu said, “O Excellent 
one, when Suka will be born as son of the sage 
Vyasa, then you shall be the wife of the same 
yogdacarya. By union with him, you shall have a 
girl born to you who shall be well versed in 
yogic practices. Then you should give away that 
girl to the king of Pancala of the human race. 
Your daughter being well-versed in yoga, shall 
be the mother of Brahmadatta. She wul be 
known by the name of Gau. Thereafter you 
shall have four sons known by the names of 
Krsna, Gaura, Prabhu and Sambhu. 


Tara Fara AtTeaa Ut TET 
ATCT THAT HATTA 211 


They shall have enormous self confidence, 
possess enormous fortunes, and shall ultimately 
achieve the supreme position (salvation). 


aaa: frat afar Gat: Bar: 
TAT F AAA: Aa Be F TATTLE 
wifraifag clay a cara fea: wT 
fA: lsat AA A ATTA 3 I 


The manes who are the sons of the sage 
Vasistha are known as the beautiful form of 
dharma. All of them dwell beyond the heaven 
in the Jyotirbhdsi lokas. This is the place 
wherein even the Sidras who perform Sraddhas 
mounted over the wish-fulfilling planes enjoy 
all the sports. 


Tears fanreaty west: 

fe Wa: aTger fam aiated: Peaharag: 1191 

Waa sean Aa J Arat fefa ward 

WH Sf Veit ATA Atha OG 

What to speak of the active and devoted 

people engaged in the performing of the 
Srdddhas? These Pitrs were born out of Gau, 
the mind-born daughter of the Pitrs who resides 


in the heaven; and happens to be the loving wite 
of Sukra and expands the glory of the Sadhyas. 


33 


an tee ‘ q bs ct TI 
fart aa frrsta efaerisfet: Fars 2e 1 
Thus in the solar region, there are several 


other lokas known as Maricigarbha, where 
Havisman, the son of Angira,| live as the mane. 


awa eNal Ata Ia AaTaaa: | 
Tat F feared SF arraTHeTTAT: 11291 


They happen to be the manes of the Ksatriya 
kings. They bestow the heaven as well as moksa 
provider. 


Udat WAG HAT Apel Malayan 
UR BAT: SST SANT UTA TV 

WT Teeter TATA 

ear: BUSA ATT TAA TACTMNT: 1188 1 

_ Such of the Ksatriyas who perform 
Srdddhas in the holy places, they achieve these 
lokas. These Pitrs have a well known mind-born 
daughter named Yasoda. She was the daughter- 
in-law of Pancajana. She was the wife of 
Amsuman and mother of the king Dzilipa, 


besides being the grand mother of Bhagiratha. 
There is another Pitrloka called Kamadugha. 


Tam ae faet aa frst Yaa: 
STC AT AAT HEAT WATT: 112 0 1 


ral 
are 
e. 


| tl 


| ind 


Va 
SA 


COMES 


rm 
ese 
om 
er- 
of 
pa, 
ha. 


Where the Pitrs performers of the best of of 


vratas known by the names of Susvadha are 
dwelling. These Pitrs are known as Ajayapas in 
the lokas of Prajapati Kardama. 


YoRISAETa AVIRA TI 
TA MgAA: Ta WAR ATTA: 12 VI 


Ade IgiddqwadaligH1c ICs (Ife | 


ANT TANGA TTAT AAT: 112 VI 


O Great sage, that Vaisyas, who had been 
born from the body of Pulaha, adore them. All 
the Vaisyas who are performers of the 
Sraddhas, reaching in these lokas, meet 
thousands of their relatives like the mothers, 


|. Havismantas—in the solar sphere, sons of Angiras 
and Pitrs of the Ksatriyas (Manu, Vayu. Matsya, 
Padma, Hari Vamsa). 


are 
; in 


ras 
sya, 


bro’ 
rela 
Sar 


Pitr 
and 


the 
flo 
livi 


34 


brothers, fathers, sisters, friends, kins and 
relatives of thousands of births, at one and the 
same place. 


Uae AAA Baw fara ara faze 
OT Ucit ATS SAAT TAT? 3 1 


Viraja is the mind-born daughter of these 
Pitrs, who happened to be the wife of Nahusa 
and mother of Yayaitt. 


URIAISMANPA Teles TAT Tee 
TA Ud WOM: Wreayadel F Fae IVI 


Subsequently Virajé, who was immensely 
devoted to her husband, proceeded to 
Brahmaloka, where she was known as 
Ekastaka. Thus far I have discussed about the 
three pitr-ganas and now I am spelling out the 
details about the fourth one. 


Care AAA AT Tausrart Aiea: 

Vat T AAA SHA AAT AMT FaTATN AGU 
araar are fort aa arate wyatt: | 
qua: We Wat TAT: WANE MN 
SUA: TIN FT Telea wy ATA: | 

Fa PEMich Aa AAA Bind PAT 291 


There is a Manasa-loka lodged over the 
globe, where the indestructible manes known by 
the name of Somapa, live. They are the manes 
of the Brahmans, while Narmada is the name of 
their mind-born daughter. All the manes have 
the form of dharma and are even beyond 
Brahma. They were born of Svadha and were 
well-versed in the yoga. All of them achieving 
Brahman, getting relieved of all the 
responsibilities of the universe, are presently 
dwelling in the Manasaloka. 


Tet AM AST YF HAM Taare Bled 
TA A Usa SeTOTIA TAT CU 


Their daughters named Narmada, reaching 
the Daksinapatha became a river with water 
flowing in the same; which purifies all the 
living beings. 


Wa: Wa FT Aaa: WaT: AG Fafa: 
Wea SMa Haka catrashs Wal|n2 e1 


Matsya Pura4nam 


With the tradition of these Pitrs, the Manus 
engage themselves in creation in _ their 
respective times. Knowing about this secret, the 
people at the time of the decline of dharma 
always perform the Sraddhas. 


Wy US WA: Wel Warereraafay 
faqoranteeat F srgta fata ot 


By the grace of these Pitrs, in order to again 
revive the yogic traditions, at the start of the 
creation, the performing of the Srdddha was 
brought in vogue. 

aaa Ted WATT Tra 
ad wae quer fasts Waar VI 

For the sake of these Pitrs, in case a vase of 
silver or silver mixed with other metals, is given 
away in charity, reciting svadha, delights the 
Pitrs always. 


SATA F HATTA eT: 
srMTaSha fared Woraty Aeism|NT3 21 
AATHUSVARUT AT Med AT Aletetiiten 
PaUraray wars alate feeesrereati 3 31 


The intelligent performer of the Sraddha 
during the time of the performing of the 
Sraddha, the Pitrs should be pleased with the 
oblation of Agni, Soma and Yama. In other 
words, the food meant for the Pitrs should be 
dropped into the fire or in the absence of fire, 
the same should be placed over the hand of a 
Brahmana, water over the ear of a goat, or a 
horse, in cow-shed or close to the nver water. 
Sky has been prescribed to be the place of the 
Pitrs. The southern direction has been stated to 
be more auspicious for them. 


mraraayed fen: TAA A 
SUT ATS UWS Met AT TAT 3 KI 
Gy te Ue ch ST9el Ula S ay: | 


+f o e y C14 SU 


MlIs&ll 


sara nee feeofig We 


Placing the yajnopaviita in apasavya 
position, the offerings of water, sesame seeds, 


Chapter-16 


Savyanga, green coconut, fruit pulp, cow's milk, 
sweet juice, iron, honey, kusa, Pathina, the flesh 
of rhinoceros, Syamaka rice, barley, wild rice, 
kidney beans, sugarcane, white flowers, 
clarified butter etc. are liked by the Pitrs the 
most and should be offered to them. These are 
liked by them always. 


BENT UNA ares ASAT ATT TUBE 
TC VTOT ETT A STAT: | 
. 3 TAT IZ il 
4 tat: fgardy wavannfadk ae 
AFACTLAUTAT:; HUA ATTA 2 U1 
Now I am narrating the things which are not 
liked by the manes and should not be offered to 
them in the performing of the Srdddha. These 
include Masiira (lentil), hemp, ripe black 
musturd, black-gram, safflower, lotus, wood- 
apple, sun flower, white thorn-apple, fruit of 
neema tree, Vasa, milk of she goat, split- 
chickpea, linseed and liquorice should never be 
offered to the Pius by one who 1s desirous of 
winning their favour. A person who pleases the 


Pitrs by devotion, they shower their blessing on 
him 


warafa 4 eats fags: frattesan 
POAT A aA TTA: Worth TINS 1 
Taoted Mat: Wie TMT WaT 
caaratera Ua: fageret fafererdiry oi 
eae a tat: Yaa BAA 
vihararercaantar fr:gret: Fercateet: 1s at 
Waa: Wreaat: Bad fraranfer: | 
TRAE: BAT: Wat: TaCAAT 1S 2 
Bramrararearaet sregea: Tat cha: 
Ure: Taare fageeyeteTy 
Yue Uae trata AAT TTY 3 1 
When the Pitrs are pleased, they bestow, 


good health, heaven and children to their 
devotees. The adoration of the Pitrs 1s more 


IGIiC et | CHE: J 


|. Adhatoda-vasica 


55 


important them that of the gods.* Therefore the 
Pitrs should be pleased first of all. They get 
pleased rapidly and preserve no anger. They 
cause no harm besides being affectionate. They 
possess the spotless and noble soul, they like 
purity in every respect. They are soft spoken 
and bestow happiness, prosperity to their 
devotees. The sun happens to be their lord. 
Thus I have narrated to you the family of the 
Pitrs and by listening to the same, one achieves 
happiness in life besides all the virtues. 
Therefore everyone should read and listen to the 
same. 


Sid stare TeTgTTOt Faget ATH 
TAVIS AT: 11 2h I 


KER 


CHAPTER 16 


Different kinds of Sraddhas, the time of 
performing them, and the qualities of the 
Brahmanas to be invited in the Sraddhas 


aa Sara 
qeaaaanhaet WY: Wes Aya 
Maal a fated seve wa ae 
SST Ua sf I a aval faa: 


BATA aT FUGA: ATA 
Herat ST Md MS J WIT 
Fate Ct ated Set WroTfet aAeaT TNS 


Stita said, “O Rsis, listening to the entire 
narration, Manu asked lord Matsya, O 
Madhustidana, what are the best times for the 


2. They are said indeed by Manu (III. 203), in words 
repeated in the Vayu and Matsya and Hari Varhsa, to 
be of more moment than the worship of the gods : 
canard Tet agar fafst&Iq! These ceremonies 
are not to be regarded as merely obsequial; for 
independently of the rites addressed to a recently 
deceased relative and in connection with him to 
remote ancestors and to the progenitors of all beings, 
which are of a strictly obsequial or funereal 
description, offerings to deceased ancestors and the 
Pitrs in general, form an essential ceremony on a 
great variety of festive and domestic occasions. 


56 


performing of the Srdddhas? What are the 
different types of Sradddhas? What types of 
Brahmanas should be invited in the Sraddhas? 
Which types of Brahmanas are forbidden for the 
purpose? During which time of the day, 
Sraddha should be performed for the Pitrs? 
What type of the suitability of a person should 
be there to be given the offerings of Sraddha? 
How does one get the reward for the same? 
What is the method of performing the Sraddha? 
How does the Srdddha please the Pitrs. All 
these details may kindly be explained to me. 


We Ta 
PACE: MgrAealaT aT 
waigeractaiste faa: vifraraeqi 
fat Afar cared fafa orga 
Pret Maan streatareratsray its 1 


Lord Matsya said, “O Royal ascetic, having 
faith in the Pitrs-srdddha which should be 
performed offering the water or the food items, 
the milk or the fruits. Srdddha has been 
described to be of three types viz : nitya (daily), 
naimittika (occasional) or kdmya (optional). Of 
these the first one 1.e. nitya is being described 
by me. It is devoid of arghya or invocation. 

aed agartaaraar way BAT 

Uraut fafa whee Woy araaetad ig I 
Traut & Fraser aregyuper afer 
wat: crrasia frguet: weafaqiion 
aif: stage fatrareategnre: | 
Waal adefasrat Wade: HenPar et 
YAO THA: TAATAA TAT: | 
fora: fagar: qeernisea Sera 118 


The Srdddha which is performed at the time 
of festivities is called Parvana. O Lord of the 
earth, the Parvana-Sraddha is known to be of 
three types. You please listen about the same. O 
Naresvara, I am going to spell out the person 
who should be deputed for the Pdrvana- 


Matsya Puranam 


Sraddha. You please listen. The person who is 
well known in the Pancagni lore, or adores the 
five fires! like Garhapatya, is a researcher, or a 
student of the Vedic lore, or is well-versed in 
the six angas of the Vedas, is a Srotriya, a 
scholar well-versed in the dharmasastras, 
omniscient, well-versed in the Vedas, who 1s 
the proper consultant, born in the well known 
family, belonging to the noble and spotless race, 
well-versed in the Puranas, devoted to dharma, 
engaged in studies* and japam, one who is 
devoted to Siva, one who is devoted to the 
parents, devotee of the sun, and is a Vaisnava. 
Tava Batson fara a weary 
aeaty tet Att: TICATETN Voll 

One who is devoted to Brahma, one who is 
well-versed in the Vedas, well-versed in the 
yoga, peaceful, one who could exercise his 
control over the souls and the one who 1s 
valorous, such types of Brahmanas should be 
invited in the Srdddha. (Now I shall narrate the 
names of the persons who should be offered 
food in the Srdddha.) They include the son of 
the daughter, one's own friend, preceptor, 


facutt age Tey arTary 

APT AMeHet AT BY TATA AT TUR I 
AMatlaaaya Vet wTa Tas: | 

WAM Feat ST AaTwAsA Tafaqeit 
Tad Yoad Me Aa TAT 


1. The Ahavaniya, Garhapatya. Daksina, Sabhya, and 
Avasathya, are the five fires; of which the three first 
have a religious, and the other two a secular 
character. The first is a fire prepared for oblations at 
an occasional sacrifice : the second is the household 
fire, to be perpetually maintained: the third is a 
sacrifical fire, in the centre of the other two, and 
placed to the south: the Sabhya 1s a fire lighted to 
warm a party: and the Avasathya the common 
domestic or culinary fire. Manu. III. 100,185, and 
Kullika Bhatta's explanation. 

2. Under Niyama are comprehended purity (Sauca), 
contentment (Santosa), devotion (Tapas), study of 
the Vedas (Svadhyaya) and adoration of the supreme 
({Svara-pranidhana). 


Chapter-16 


Us AM: WAT Sea aT A311 


Acarya, maternal uncle, kins and relatives, 
Priest of sacrifice and Somapayi. They should 
be invited making all the efforts and the food in 
Sraddha should be served to them. Besides a 
Soma-sacrificer, a grammarian, one who 1s 
well-versed in Mimamsa (commentary), 
performer of the Vedic sacrifice, one who is 
well-versed in Samaveda and the chanting of it, 
one who is quite well learned, one who is 
respectable or learned, whose presence could 
elevate and purify the people, the one who sits 
for the feast with him in the same row, the 
reciter of the Sdmaveda, a Brahmacari, a Vedic 
professor or the one who is known as Brahma. 
These are the sort of people who should be 
invited in the Srdddha feast. When such people 
are feasted, the Srdddha becomes real and 
earnest. 


Ufadistrgredt: aeita: fryers thre: | 
HAG VATA HUST AAT: 18S UI 
Ufa WA ATTST RUT: | 

ASle Tea ST SAHA I 


Now you listen to the names of the people, 
whose entry is prohibited in the Sraddhas. They 
are the fallen people, the notorious ones, cursed, 
eunuches, backbiters, deformed because of 
ailments, the patients, having deformed nails, 
those having black teeth, bastards, bastards of 
widows, tamers of dogs, offspring of a younger 
brother married ahead of the elder brother, the 
servants or those who are attracted for service, 
lunatic, drunkard, mad men, stone hearted, 
cheats, swindlers, the conceited, the temple 
priests etc. All of them are prohibited from 
partaking the Sraddhas. 


= nt ea Pw rec q 


‘ *TF EL ole - Po “f 
ee 


Hail 
aaaiectigt: Wasatgenet FAPTT: | 
ydaratgat fara faa go 


57 


Similarly the ungrateful persons, the 
atheists, dwellers of the Mleccha country, 
Trisankus, Barbaras, Dravitas, Dravidas, people 
of Konkanas and the lingis besides the 
Sannyasis. These should all be particularly left 
out of the Sraddha feasts. 


Patante fort sotto aa 


STA Washer TASSMATTOTTA 22 I 


The performer of the Srdddha should invite 
humbly the Brahmana for the Sraddha feast, a 
day or two in advance, because the manes arrive 
on the particular day and remain with them. 
They follow the Brahmanas in the form of the 
wind. When the Brahmanas take their seat, the 
manes are also seated besides them. 


SUT ATTA a aT Farad: 

Ua frat Fran sreeifragarrargi ee i 
SA: Waa: Gad Taras: | 
Wqdel WAKA WAT DW AAV 2 ofl 


The performer of the Sraddha, touching the 
right knee of the Brahmana, should pray to him, 
“IT am inviting you.” Thus extending the 
invitation, revealing the performing of the 
Sraddha of father, brother and other or the king, 
he should speak. (I shall perform the Sraddha 
on a particular day). Therefore you should 
remain without anger, purified, following 
Brahmacarya-vrata. I shall also follow these 
rules being the performer of Sraddha.” 


fagast fardet ques 7 asFrary 
froSrarera Hares hegaadl awh? ei 


Thus having been relieved of the Pitr-yajna, 
oblation should be performed. The performer of 
the  Srdddha should __ perform _the 
Pindanvaharyaka Sraddha on the moonless day 
alone. 


Tae F sferorraat wet 
Mag TUT MSS AT AeA? VW 


A sloping place near the cow-pin or near a 
reservoir, should be plastered with cow dung 


58 


and the Srdddha should be performed there with 
devotion. 


aifaauiaa we a age: | 
faqeat Freardifa wel aferorat AAT? 31 


One who consecrates and maintains the 
sacred fire, should cook caru and after offering 
with equal handfuls, should say, “I am offering 
to the Pitrs.” Thus speaking he should place the 
caru to the Pitrs and the rest should be placed to 
his right. 

awa Ad: Halfaararaaya: | 
aSTT TRTAAT: THA 

aaa F Hald Wat Wratrady 
TUTATA TRV SATAN 

Sea FT Art FT Batol wT AlAs 

Perea; WATAOT AATAT TATA ATIF GU 
metered I Ua seo: yA: 

VANE AAA MATA FAN I 

Then the ghi (clarified butter) should be 
poured in the three plates. The Caru should be 
divided in three parts and one should place them 
in the front. These parts should also be stretched 
to the length of four fingers. After putting the 
sacred thread over the right shoulder, the 
performer of Srdddha, should put a water goblet 
and a vase of bell-metal and meksana, 
sacrificial wood, kuSa-grass, sesamum, leaf 
plates, sandal, new cloth, scent, incense and 
sandal paste should be slowly placed to the 
right. 

TWA ANAT FT AUSeTy 
AAT; ATTRA AAUTAATAT I 2 CI 
famront erertearearara Ya: TA: 

ih ai, etary famraq ei 


J 64] 


IIR Sil 


Teva B TCT | 


4 23 fogged deere aie 
aiaradiyatiste 7 Halfgett Ga: 
caud Fata faureatfeat a:113 20 


Ca 


Matsya Puranam 


Thus collecting all the essential things, he 
should draw a mandala with the urine of the 
cow over the space plastered with the cow- 
dung. He should worship the mandala with 
unhusked rice and flowers. Then welcoming the 
Brahmanas repeatedly, he should wash their 
feet. Then the Brahmana should be made to sit 
over the seat of kusa-grass and should provide 
water to them for dcamana as well as the 
eatables. Then he should get their opinion for 
the performing of the srdddha. A person with 
intelligence should serve food to three 
Brahmanas in the Deva-kdryas or the Pitr- 
karyas. Or alternatively on both the occasions, a 
Brahmana each should be served with food. 
Inspite of one's possessing enough of riches, the 
expansion of Pdrvana-srdddha is not advised. 
Initially arghya should be offered to Visvedeva 


and the Brahmanas should be adored 
subsequently offering the arghya. 
ar Haare farfast aenfeater 
TAY BA Heal WH A113 2 
AHNTIANA FT HATA FAT: | 


afar Weta aT A Wenthtafestra: 113 311 


Again the performer of srdddha should, with 
the permission of the Brahmanas, the Caru 
should be placed in the vase of bronze and then 
one should perform homa appropriately in the 
fire. Thereafter the learned person should 
perform oblation for Agni, Soma and Yama. 
Thus the best of a Brahmana who 1s devoted to 
Agni, and the wearer of vajniopavita, with the 
igniting of the Daksind fire, should complete 
the srdddha. 


aaa Haat at: wane 
Weta Head: Wa faaai3 vi 
He should perform Paryuksana with the 
sacred thread on the left shoulder and one who 


knows all the rites should perform it with the 
sacred thread on the right shoulder. 


Chapter-16 


We A TAG la VTS ea Ade 
SASSHMT A Alter METUTOTATINS & I 
Sara Wet Torr THAeHT fara: 
faara chat ae Farner 3 & 1 
afta: Hateat cat Frere ah 
fara faustcheh aaa AATTIS Olt 


With the remaining Aavi, six pindas should 
be made and the sesamum with water be 
dropped with left hand. Then getting free from 
jealousy, holding kusa in hand, turning the 
knee, draw a line over the pedestal making all 
the efforis or the kusa-grass should be spread in 
lines. Then turning his face to the right the 
pindas should be placed over the kuSa-grass in a 
sequence. 


Frater ety antarentet | 
ay SG ct Set PISA OTT 6 It 


Then lifting up the pindas one by cne, 
speaking out the goiras and the names of the 
manes, the pindas should be placed over the 
kusa grass one by one. Then for the satisfaction 
of the manes, the hands should be wiped out 
with the ends of the kusa-grass. 


Waa U At: HAGA: Wea 
TSAR TATUM: 113 8 


Thereafter the water should be sprinkled 
over the pindas as before. Then all the six Pitrs 
should be adored offering fragrance, incense, 
and other materials for adoration, offering his 
salutation to each one of the Pitrs. 


wanrate aad senrdarted: | 
UPA UT SMAaTT Sfatat TATU oI 


They should then be invoked with the 
reciting of the appropriate Vedic hymns. Then 
the one who is Ekagni, or the performer of 


Agnihotra, should offer a pinda of rice with a 
ladle. 


59 


AAHAISA SAMUANASA AMT A: 
TaaUStad Halalatetaasay IS Vi 


After completing all these procedures, the 
performer of the Srdddha, should offer food for 
the wives of the Pitrs. The process of invoking 
and Visarjana! should again be repeated as has 
been done earlier. 


aat Jatrar faust AAT: Pal: HAUT TI 
Aa aM AAA WIAA AT UY 21 
The performer of the Srdddha, then picking 
up small portions from the pindas shall give 


them to the invited Brahmanas for eating, first 


of all. 
AMTeAaga ATT Aatateat TEs: | 
ATCA TAT ETAT 3 1 


Since the portion of the food taken ont of the 
pindas is consumed by the Brahmanas on the 
moon-less day or Amdvasyd, therefore this 
particular Sraddha is known as Anvaharyaka. 

Ya Gal J Tae Vlad freien 
aS watt tadaraieatt Gate x 
ques Te ut a Waar 
AMAIA FATATTATTT SUS GU 

The performer of the srdddha_ should 
initially offer the ring of kusa-grass with 
sesamum seeds and water in the hands of the 
Brahmana and then the portion of the pinda 
should be offered. Then uttering the phrase, 
“Let it be svadha for our Pitrs, the food should 
be served to the Brahmanas. Then the 
Brahmana, discarding anger, remembering the 
name of Narayana, should speak out, “It 1s quite 


sweet, It 1s quite auspicious,” and then consume 
the food. 


1. A rite in which the life given is sent away and the 
idol is thrown away. These two peculiar religious 
rites distinctly show that the Hindus do not worship 
the idol but the spint which they temporarily invoke 
in that idol. 


60 


TAMA Aa: Hallgate aaaroreny| 
Wek Maye Aetet wlaveyfans si 


Pleasing the Brahmanas, the host should 
place food on earth, with rice and water for the 
use of all other classes of people. This is called 
Vikira or scattering. 


MARTY FACAATTMAA TAT 
Taterarrta ad forstaft waretaivioi! 
Caled Weald ASATMS AAT WaT 
FIGRT TAMUTARAAT Feat WEA 2 11 


After the Brahmanas rinse their mouths, the 
host should drop the water, flowers and 
unbroken rice over the pindas and the reward of 
the Sraddha should then be dedicated to the 
lord, otherwise the srdddha becomes impure. 
Similarly, after going round the Brahmanas, 
they should be sent off. 


afar fegmrangiaareart Aa: 
aa Alsat Aal: Pata Ave 
TS A at ut armagag ct a asfeafea 
ata FA ag Maahaaias AVATEIIG of 


At that point of time the performer or the 
host, facing sought, should humbly pray to the 
Pitrs, “Let there be increase in our giving of 
charities, study of the Vedas, the progeny, our 
faith in lord should never diminish, we should 
have enough of riches for performing chartties, 
we should have enough of cereals, crowds of 
guests should always visit our house. 


SMa A: Seq AT A Ae er 
Udeteatt Taras J WATT 2 


Many should ask favours from us, but we 
should never beg from anyone.” The 
Brahmanas should speak out at that time, “Be it 
so.” Thus the Anvahdaryaka-srdddha also known 
as Parvana, which is performed on_ the 
moonless day has been completed. This 
Sraddha can be performed in other tithis as 
well. 


Matsya Puranam 


arses Teese FTE 

fusig faa carart Wests any VU 
famradt a fafeatgarteretrargred 

Ue q Hee fas wrpeifgraraaTG 3 
arent frat mas Waa 

Tagan freceratem fara: iy Si 


After the concluding of the srdddha, the 
pindas should be given over to the cow, a goat 
or the Brahmanas. Or alternatively they should 
be consigned in water or fire. They can also be 
given over to the birds for eating in the presence 
of the Brahmanas. The middle pinda out of 
those should be consumed by the performer's 
wife herself saying, “O Pitrs, you kindly get me 
the conception for the increase of the progeny.” 
With this desire, the wife of the host should 
herself consume the pindas with all humility. 
The host should remain standing till the 
Brahmanas depart. He should then perform the 
remaining rites. 

avaea aa: Halfaged frgaaton 
Se: Ue Ad: MN Hoste PagafaaTy 4 i 

After the Srdddha rites are over, the host 
should make and offering to the Vaisvadevas, 
by making oblation in the fire and then he 
should happily enjoy the company of his 
friends; concentrating his mind towards the 
Pitrs. 


WANs AAAS 
MEPEONETSAT Tara gaa & I 


On that day, the one who performs the 
srdddha as well as those who participate in the 
feast, should not take the food twice. They 
should not go out of the village, after the 
Sraddha is performed. They should not use any 
conveyance, nor should they unite with their 
WIVES. 


Taras até da fara a aden 
an fate are Freerae Faaqy oi 


The recitation of the Vedas on that particular | 


Chapter-17 


day is prohibited. The host should not pick up a 
quarrel with anyone on that day, nor should he 
sleep during the day. This is the manner of 
performing the Sraddha. 


SURMGIUS FOTIA Waray 
GA AT WalteT AUSTRIA TA 
aad fanaa caatanat deri 


Thus the Agnihotri should perform the 
Sraddha in the dark fortnight of the month, 
when the sun is in the sign of Virgo and Taurus. 
Whenever the Sapindikarana-srdddha' has to 
be performed, then also the above process 
should be followed by the one who adores the 
sacred fire. 


ofa staat ceTqaisferape Aga AA 
WSIS: 11 LE 1 


kK ** 


CHAPTER 17 


Performing of Sraddha for achieving 
prosperity and emancipation 


dd sated 
wa: Wt waeats tana agatha 
MS MAU AT WHYS VI 
Sita said, “O Rsis, hereafter, I shall narrate 
about the Srdddha which bestows pleasures as 


well as the emancipation and had been narrated 
by lord Visnu himself. 


ay faga ay aT ahaa 
THAT OT THLE RU 


UHM DT AIT ANA A AAeytivil 
BMA: VAT AIM TATRA AAT TAT: | 
AM Waeatiel a ca Are faAATIG I 


1. The Sapindas or those connected by offerings of 
cakes to common ancestors. 


61 


When the sun is in the equinoctial and the 
period when the sun passes from one zodiacal 
sign to another, the period when the planetary 
body passes from one Zodiacal sign into 
another, on the Amavasy4 or Astaka of the dark 
fortnight, and on the fifteenth day of the moon, 
the period of Ardra-sixth, the Magha-tenth, 
Rohini-fourth lunar mansions, the presence of 
materials and Brahmanas, the time of 
gajacchaya, the day of the full moon, or on a 
Monday, the days called vistis, and vaidhrtis, 
the third day of the bright fortnight of the month 
of Vaisakha, which is the anniversary day of 
Satyayuga, the ninth day of the bright fortnight 
in the month of K4rtika, the anniversary day of 
the Tretayuga, the fifteenth or the full moon day 
of the month of Magha- the anniversary day of 
Kaliyuga, the thirteenth day of the month of 
Bhadra, corresponding to the August- 
September- the anniversary day = of 
Dvaparayuga are the periods and occasions, 
when by performing of srdddha, one gets bliss 
and exhastless merits. In addition to the above, 
on the anniversary day of the beginning of the 
Manvantaras, as detailed above, the srdddhas 
can be performed. 


WVATASECHAA BEM aAtfey TAM 
GA CAMARA AM MSIE ANE I 
WITT MAAN UTHEgt TAT 
ANTS SMTA ATTA AT ATTN 


On the bright ninth day of the month of 
Asvin, on the bright twelfth day of the month of 
Kartika, on the bright third day of the month of 
Caitra, on the bright third day of the month of 
Bhadrapada, on the moonless day of the month 
of Phalguna, on the bright eleventh day of the 
month of Pausa, on the bright tenth day of the 
month of Asadha, on the bright seventh day of 
the month of Magha, 


MATTE FONT TMssarat a fora 
altel GIT dal Sesaseght Fara 
WAAL CAT LTATEATAT TNS I 


62 


TA WaATATAMS Sal TAA FeaTeAT: | 
TTA AA MTT CATSAAATATN I 


On the dark eighth day of the month of 
Sravana, on the full moon day of the month of 
Asadha, besides the full moon days of the 
months of Kartika, Phalguna, Caitra and Jyestha 
are the fourteen fithis, of the fourteen 
Manvantaras and the srdddha performed during 
these tithis bestows everlasting reward. When 
the initial tithi of the month of Magha, falls on 
the seventh day of the bright fortnight, then lord 
Sirya mounts over his chariot. That day 1s 
known as Ratha-Saptami. 


Urerear free first 
SEM AGa: Wait AYE: I 
Me Hi v1 AM: Wea 
TWRNACAY Fafa oI 
In case, during this tithi a person, making all 
the efforts, offers to his manes, a vase filled 
with water and sesamum or performs oblation, 
he achieves the reward for performing the 


srdddha for a thousand years. The secret of the 
same has been told by the Pitrs themselves. 


SMAI Hea eT 
Hataarinsy eturarayey AI 
fafaraqaierety arg ea fara 
famrga ut aie, faster Fra? 


The intelligent performer of the Srdddha, 
should on the full moon day of the month of 
Vaisakha, during the solar or lunar eclipses, on 
special occasions, during the Pitrpaksa, at the 
holy places, in the temple of the god, or in the 
cowpen, lamp house, in the orchard, or a place 
in seclusion plastered with cowdung, perform 
sraddha with devotion. A day or two earlier to 
the srdddha, one should humbly invite the 
Brahmanas who should be humble, noble, 
virtuous, beautifiy] and quite aged. 


ERLE rnd Ta) 1 | 


at cet aizae for weg aT 


Matsya Puranam 


During the Devakdaryas, two Brahmanas 
should be invited, while in the Pitrkdryas 
number of the Brahmana invitees should be 
three, or alternatively one Brahmana should be 
invited in each case and served with food. 


TAIT ATSIT 7 waste ferent 
farearad: years SAATA AAI RY I 


Inspite of a person being financially well 
off, there should be no expansion. At that time 
offering seat to the Visvedevas, they should be 
adored with flowers and barley. Then keeping 
two terracotta vases, the kusa-ring should be 
placed in the same. Then the Brahmana invited 
for the Daiva Sraddha should be attended 
offering a seat of barley and flowers. 


Way F wT qHUfaTAT 

vt AT cdhran: Haleatsaiia Tara V4 1 

Tey Toa ayaa wht AAT 

faya tara semararare: faferterarqn 26 1 

Tage at eearerelqesid| 

nea AATTS figerd TarerT V1 

Two vases should be placed with Kusa rings 

and water should be poured after uttering “Om 
Sanno Devi” etc. Flowers and sandal paste 
should also be dropped in the vases for 
Visvedevas uttering the mantra “Om 
Visvedeva” etc. who should be thus invoked 
pouring the barely at the same time. After the 
flowers and the sandal paste are offered, the 
host should offer Arghya water to them reciting 
the mantra, “Yadivye” etc. After the conclusion 


of the Visvedeva worship, the adoration of Pitrs 
should be started. 


Sued F seatsset Aor urarfor TAT 
AUfaaier Heasset wi at eater: faraqges 
facisaita frerparcrengentd YA: 

Ua areas TAT VOT TANS 

Wes ASA Halt AAT ATTA 

Brat wart Arsh faqort ETAT of 


Chapter-17 


In the Pitr-Srdddha, the seat of kusa should 
first be offered. Then three Arghya vases should 
be readied and the rings of Ausa-grass should be 
dropped therein, reciting the mantra “Sanno 
Devi” etc. Reciting this mantra, these vases 
should be filled with water. Thereafter reciting 
the mantra “Tilosi...’ etc. the sesamum should 
be poured into them. Then pouring the water 
into the vases, the fragrance, flowers etc. should 
also be offered. The vases used for the purpose 
of the Pitrs should be of wood, or the tree 
leaves, or the leaves grown in water or the 
ocean. Or alternatively they should be of 
conchshell, gold or silver. 

THA GA AST AeA SAA aM 
THATS ATTA THAT aA 112 2 

STAT TAT STATA THOTT 
AMUSATUS ATA FAO Tat ATTN VU 
frearatea Tardtaatagaecy| 

AMIS TIT CASA THAT 31 

In case one cannot afford the silver vase, 
then the worshipper may give away a little of 
silver.! In case he cannot afford it even, then he 
may simply look at it or merely mention its 
name. By offering even the water with devotion 
out of the silver vase or the vase of alloyed 
metals, the devotee gains everlasting bliss. The 
silver vase is the best to be used at the time of 
offering libation of pindas and of food to the 
Pitrs of water. Infect silver 1s said to have 
emerged out of the eyes of Siva and was 
subsequently appreciated by the Pitrs. But it 
should not be used at the time of the Deva 


worship, because it is considered to be 
inauspicious in that case. 


Ue WAT Pacey Aare TaAeaT: | 

ar feeafa faqata wWaetet =A vw 
farrrarefaenttr afer ¢: FA: 
SARA TASS VAMTSTS AAPL 2 4 UI 


Thus making appropriate arrangements for 


1. The notion originates with Manu, ITI. 202. 


63 


the vases as per one's own means, getting free 
from pride, holding Ausa in his hand, the 
performer, should recite the mantra, “Yd divye” 
etc. and should also recite the name and gotra of 
his father, place the vase on earth saying, “I 
shall invoke your Pitrs.” In reply to this the 
Brahmanas should say, “Do it.” After uttering 
of these words, the mantras like “Usantastva” 
and “Ayantu nah”, the Pitrs should be invoked 
through the Brahmanas. 


OT AY TMM aT eTT: | 
Bega Yas Sea MASSA NEM 
fagara fara qorgutat aad 

fap: WA Fara waa 011 
aay yaarnaletaarel faucet: | 
SNATAT SLAVS UPAR cI 
Water: Aad storage: | 

TON: YUMA ATV TT 8H 
wa J Wafeakt Mat wenakaay 

Tra sons a wathagheare Sy7a:113 ofl 


Then reciting the mantra “yd-divye” etc. 
Arghya should be offered to the Pitrs, besides 
the fragrance and flowers etc. adoring them 
drop it in the vase of Pitrs. Then the vase should 
be kept upturned before the pedestal; reciting 
the mantra, “Pitrbhyosthdnamasi’ which means 
that the place is meant for the Pitrs. Thus 
uttering the mantra, water should be poured 
over it. In this case as well, one should perform 
the fire rites as explained earlier quite carefully. 
Then carrying kusa in his hand, the performer 
with a peaceful mind should serve the 
sumptuous food including pulses, vegetables 
and several other dishes, which should be 
brought by him carried in both the hands. In 
offering food, curd, milk, clarified butter of 
cow's milk and sugar should also be put in the 
dishes. The Pitrs are exceedingly fond of flesh. 
This has been stated by lord Kesava. 


at arat areas Farareor 7 
AUT AGL: WHAT TH AU} 21 


64 


CONT SIMA Fata Mace 

AA WAHT TATAUAT FINE 2 

Se May Talat Teepe: 
WMHAA A AAT F331 
darat J Wat Waa WaT aI 

Wea A Taha AAAS F311 
Sra Ura afetglaerantiant 
aM Ua Gea da Fes it 
afafarngaasdt Meitt yaurray 
eamerafieng: fiat: yeaeaar: 13 GI 


The Pitrs say that the offering of fish keeps 
them satisfied for two months, the flesh of deer 
for three months, mutton for four months, the 
flesh of birds for five months, goat's flesh for 
six months, Parsat's flesh for seven months, 
Vena's flesh for eight months, ham and buffalo’s 
flesh for ten months, hare and turtle's flesh for 
eleven months, cow's milk and rice cooked in 
cow's milk for a year, the flesh of Ruru for 
fifteen months, lion's flesh for twelve years, 
Kalasuka's (pot herb) and flesh of rhinoceros for 
a great number of years, the cow's milk mixed 
with honey and rice cooked in cow's milk, 
clarified butter made of cow's milk offered even 
in small quantity, satisfies Pitrs, the 
Purvadevatis, to the maximum possible extant. 


ar saad yaoTakaenhst A 
TAlaMqagn Frat fata a3 911 
SMMAM TTI Tea TAMA: | 
FEU ARHASAT AASV 2 
ae PPA HESTAUT TI 

HUSH GeO TaaMAHTT TF AGAIN Sl 
famrormarearagaa aad AAAI 
Yay AMAT UTA FA ol 
Waattarat dtasseret aro 
AAAS HAA TA fafatayrans vi 
afraang 2 sar saan: Het AA 


Matsya Puranam 


Wt at TART Ward Ua TNS 2H 
aat T Urat A feat a ay- 


+ maga Taste 
aWAasA Bia AAA 
WAY Hag FSM Taqs3 


The Pitrs are the supreme divinities of the 
householders. Therefore at the time of sraddha 
the recitation of Pitr-sikta, all the Puranas, and 
the siiktas relating to the Brahma, Visnu, Strya 
and Rudra, besides Agni, Indra, Soma, 
Brhadarathantara, Jyestha, Siman with Rohini, 
Santikadhyaya, Madhu Brahmana and Mandala 
Brahmana and other similar types of loving 
Siiktas, or Strotras should be recited by the 
Brahmana or by the performer himself. After 
the food is finished by the Brahmana, all the 
items of food should be brought and placed over 
the earth before those who are required to take 
food saying, “Such of the living beings of my 
race, who had been cremated in the past, or 
those who could not be cremated, all of them 
should get pleased with the food spread on the 
ground and achieve the supreme position 
(Salvation). Those who have no mother or 
father or brother, whose gotra has not been 
purified and those who do not possess the food, 
for their satisfaction, | have scattered the food 
on the ground. All of them should go to the 
heaven like my Pitrs for enjoying all the 
comforts. 


TAMA AAT Hera TAT 
Sfareurnera: wares fafa Syl 


Similarly such of the brides of the race, who 
met with their death without purification, or 
those who had been discarded by the family, the 
remaining part of the food or that part which 
has been stuck to the Ausa-grass, is meant for 
their alms. 


Taste SeIaAENet Fan 
TUfeTA TAGS MMH AAAI S & I 


Chapter-17 


Then finding that the Brahmanas have been 
satisfied, the performer should pour water over 
their hands, Then the kusa-grass should be 
spread towards the south appropriately over the 
ground, which has already been plastered with 
cowdung and the cow's urine. 


RIPE ICICCHOUIDIC CO CE 
adqu as frosreq TrPaAaTs & 


Then the performer of the Sraddha, reciting 
the name of his father and his gotra sprinkle the 
water over the pedestal of kusa. Then he should 
place the pindas made of the several types of 
food over the kusa grass, as was done in the 
case of Pitr-yajna. 


aera J AAT Aa: | 

TRUS CAAA WATTS 
Ware Vat Welt uforisa weferory| 
faxarita aeart fatraestarforanis ct 


The pindas should then be adored offering 
the fragrance, flowers etc. sprinkling the water 
over them. Kneeling down, he should then 
adore them with folded hands. Then holding 
kusa in his hand, the Pitrs-yajfia should be 
completed appropriately. 


SUMTAT AEHAUT TET FT: | 
AMSSAAG ASSAY ANT TENA HAHTNS 8 IN 
The intelligent performer of the srdddha 


should light the lamp as prescribed earlier and 
adore the pindas with flowers. 


TY TOTTI 
Afaet AANA TaTETAAT A STOMA oft 


When the Brahmanas have already rinsed 
their months, he would rinse his mouth himself. 
Then he should, placing the water, flowers, 
unbroken rise and sesamum seeds over the 
hands of the Brahmanas, offer daksinds to them 
according to one’s own means. 


Tye Iaraia Teh VAT 
eMeafee faunas: Tata By a1 


65 


Again, discarding miserliness, pleasing the 
Pitrs, he should give away in charity things like 
the cow, land, gold costumes, beautiful beds, or 
the things in charity. 


fergie tea: frger: wifes 
ad: TMAH Fareay AEH 2 


Thereafter reciting Svadha, the intelligent 
performer of srdddha, facing the east, shall 
offer water oblation to the Visvedevas and 
receive blessings from them. 


Sasso: wirsrarefesea: Weal Fa: | 
Ta: fat: wey Ara: Tafeat sy 311 
He should at that time tell the Brahmanas, 


“Let our Pitrs be comfortable.” The Brahmanas 
should ten repeat, “Be it so.” 


Ta TM aaa Tee t: TA 
alae Aistradeanfatt Aaa ATI XU 


Again the host should say, “Our gotra 
should flourish, and the donors in our race 
should prosper.” At these words of the host, the 
Brahmanas should say, “Be it so.” 


Ua: Tenia: My Baas t: TA 
aferarras HAlUVS aT AAT UG GH 
Sat F afaserarem farastat: | 

aat Wester Halfeta ateraeaia: ty § 1 


The host should then say, “Let the blessing 
come true.” The Brahmanas should say, “Let 
them be true.” Then the Brahmanas should 
recite the svastivdcana. Then lifting the pindas, 
he should perform the graha-bali. This is the 
limit of dharma. 


TOIT ITAA STAT 

Saar aaa MTT Waar 4 Vi 
Till the Brahmanas are sent off, all the 
things become the left overs. The left over of 


the faithful and those devoid of deceitfulness 
and the food scattered on earth in connection 


66 


with the Pitr-karya, forms the share of the 
servants, as is widely believed. 
fagiaFifttd yetaareanrert wen 
ATA AYATOT TATU ATTTG cA 
O NareSsvara, the oblation prescribed by the 


Pitrs is also useful for those having sons or no 
sons besides the ladies. 


RATATAT: Perce UAT ATT 

Ts ART Sta MoH oaTTT FrasTaT NG 8 
Ale: WAT HaArerarayaoy| 
aya alert: WRTataArar: 118 011 


Then making the Brahmanas to stand in the 
forefront, holding the water vase im hand, 
uttering vdje-vaje the Pitrs should be sent off 
from the tips of the Kusd-grass. Then going out 
together with the kins and relatives he should 
follow-up to eight steps the Brahmanas and 
should then circumamublate them. 


frgea witrocaar waeatita Waa 

cued Werdid etch aferta UNe v1 

TY AUCar AYIA: | 

Woman: Wa Mgrs 21 

Returning from there, he should offer his 

salutation to Agni, he should perform 
Vaisvadeva and nitya-bali. Finishing the 
Vaisvadeva-bali, he should take food with his 


servants, sons, brothers relatives and the guests, 
with all the items and padarthas. 


UAT Haaay Tay! 
Mg AAU AT AAAS 31 
This Pdarvana-srdddha, bestows all the 
desires, and can be performed by a person 


without having the sacred thread, on the 
occasions of festivals. 


WMaAatensaasaaraeaisis AAA 
Wasemaaparess Fay STG VI 


The intelligent person who is devoted to his 


Matsya Puranam 


parents, but having no wife or when he is in 
foreign land, can perform this srdddha. Even 
the Siidras can perform the same in the 
aforesaid manner, even without the reciting of 
the mantras. 


Targa seas Aged 
THATS AA TEMARCTIE & 

Now I am going to narrate the third type of 
Parvana-Sraddha which ts known as 
Abhyudayikavrddhi-sraddha. This srdddha can 
be performed on any one of the festive 


occasions or the joyful occasion, yajna, 
marriage or on any other auspicious occasion. 


Wat: WI Wea: Trace erATy 
aat ATATHET Wace TAS ANG & I 


In this Srdddha initially adoring the mothers, 
the Pitrs have to be adored subsequently. 
Thereafter the maternal grandfather, and 
Visvedevas are to be adored. 


Weferon a toT SeAATAT Ha 
meq freufavsredar a atari 91 


The host, should, facing east, perform the 
circumambulation, should offer to the pindas 
curd, unbroken rice, fruit and water with kusa. 


aratrenged cae Fatea: | 
ST PATA: THM TeAATAT ATS: HG I 
In this Abhyudayika srdddha, the mantra 
Sampannam should be recited and arghya 
should be offered to both the types of Pitrs. At 


that point of time, the costumes, gold and other 
things should be offered to the two Brahmanas. 


faery aa: cat AetyrearT yaa: 
TSeahs a Valier areatahaTP TS: 116 SH 
Uttering the word Nandi, barley should be 
substituted in place of sesamum. Then all the 


Brahmanas should be made to recite the welfare 
mantras and other stotras. 


ua yeiste arMragtasrgstT Aare 
THAR WATT HACIA: AaTi'9 0 1 


Chapter-18 


SAMI: WR: VMAs ATA: | 
SA MATA ET GTA Tet VA 


Thus in this ordinary vrddhi-srdddha, even 
Sidra uttering the Namaskdra mantra can 
perform the same without cooked grain. The 
Sidra should particularly be charitable because 
by being charitable, all his desires are fulfilled. 
This has been ordained by the all powerful lord. 


Sta ST Marg TOt MaMUNeaatist ATT 
WASH SATT | 11 219 1 


k*RE* 


CHAPTER 18 


Method of Ekoddisti and Sapindikarana 
Sraddha 


Wat Save 
Valeena aed Meth WATTorT 
Ua Yara raat a reli gi 


Sita said, “I shall now speak out the method 
of Ekoddisti-Sraddha, which had been narrated 
by lord Visnu himself, the holder of cakra. At 
the death of the father, you listen to the 
performance of the sons till the time of 
purification. 


SMe Maas Terory feet 

afiag am x a vet dyay da PEIN 

Weg Aranryihet aftusy faetrad 

Ae aispTSeT AT WA: BAAN 

The impurity of ten days has been prescribed 

among the Brahmanas. Similarly this period has 
been prescribed to be twelve days for the 
Ksatriyas, fifteen days for the Vaisyas and a 
month for the Sidras. This impurity prevails 
among the people of the same gotra. The child 
whose ceremony for the shaving of the head has 
not been performed, the impurity lasts after his 


death for a night and the one who is elder in 
age, his impurity lasts for three nights alone. 


WSaae WIRY AaaN 


67 


TMS Pra FeqeTTTT HY I 

Yara frusert FT wes Tara 

Uae TAT Tech Ae: Wife ASTNG I 

Similarly impurity for the birth of the child 

has also been prescribed for the people of all the 
varnas. In the impurity of death, the relatives 
can be touched after the collection of the bones 
of the dead. Pindaddna should be performed for 
the departed soul upto twelve days, because 
pinda happens to be the food for the departed 
soul; therefore it is extremely comforting. 


THATAATL Wet aN A Ata 
Ye YA Hew Heys Wayarag i 


This is the reason that the departed soul is _ : 


not carried to the place of Yama for twelve 
days. The departed soul remains in the house 


itself for twelve days, observing his sons, wife 1% 


and other relatives. 
TRUAAAATAIN SMTA TET 


THON 


ore a Jp) pare eissire 


Therefore for the removal of all his 
sufferings and the fatigue of the journey, a vase 
filled with water should be hung over a Pipala 
tree for ten days. 


ad Uae 7 faararesta 7 
aaa: dard J Mae EATNIC 


Then on the eleventh day, eleven Brahmanas 


should be served with food. Similar process | 


should be adopted by the people of Ksatriya and 


others and after the removal of the impurities, | 


the Brahmanas should be served with food. 


fadtiste yrerecantfes ware 
Maleate cael fase i 


Again on the twelfth day,' the Ekoddisti- 


1. The eleventh or twelfth day is the term on which the 
Sraddha which crowns the whole of the funeral rites 
is to be performed and when Brahmanas are to be 
invited. Nirnaya Sindhu, p. 437. 


ild 
the 
eS 


™— 


1es 
for 
se 
ted 


his 
ase 
ala 


68 


srdddha should be started as before. This should 
not include in invocation, offering pindas in the 
fire, and the adoration of Visvedevas. These 
activities are prohibited. 

Wes Ufaatatse UH: frost faetre 

Bfatsalaeaes UshAeTASTN Lo 11 

tated fatatagaigat artreaary 

we ydaeata ard aefaer faq: ea 

In this srdddha, there should be a single 

pavitraka (ring of kuSa-grass, a single arghya, 
and a single pinda). Thereafter uttering the 
word “upatisthatam” the water with sesamum 
should be offered. Then reciting fully the 
complete mantra of “Svaditam” etc. the food 
should be spread over the ground. At the time of 
send off, one should utter Abhiramyotam. In 
this way, the sons, who are well-versed in the 


Vedas, should perform their fathers mites 
appropriately as before. 


Ayer fee aes AATTTONRT: 1193 11 


Following the same method, the same 
process should be repeated every month. After 
the conclusion of the impurities, an image of 
gold, frmts and costumes, the bed should be 
given over (to the Brahmanas). At that point of 
time a Brahmana couple should be adored 
offering both of them the costumes and 
ornaments. 


qa watt sat a BATE WAT 
TERS STA TATA aA: 11 8 
MACS TANS Ufrorengaay| 
MA: AAT YO Aosta TAT I 
Then he should perform the mite of the 
release of a bull, giving away in charity a white 


cow. O Best of kings, thereafter, he should give 
away in charity several eatables, a water vase, 


Matsya Puranam 


filled with water and sesamum seeds. The 
giving away of the water vase in charity should 
continue for a year. After the completion of a 
year the Sapinda-srdaddha should be performed. 


AfquStaOees WA: WaUTATNTAT | 
SGTAY AY VST TATTLE UI 


After performing of the Sapinda-srdddha the 
departed soul becomes entitled to the Parvana- 
Srdddha and becomes eligible for adoration at 
Vrddhi-srdddha and the house holder also 
becomes entitled to perform Ndandimukha- 
Srdddha etc. 


afqugtatat sre gay Parad 
faafraraera yaad farreerTi gon 
Telealietaeh HAIaTAT Say! 
arated fagurry Naas WeeTaq ec 1 


In the Sapindikarana-srdddha intially 
Visvedevas are adored, then the Pitrs are given 
the place. The place of the departed soul should 
be prescribed separately. Then he should keep 
four vases ready with sandal paste, water and 
the sesamum seeds. The Preta-vase with water 
Should be divided into three parts and water 
from the same should be poured in the vase of 
Pitrs. 

aga qt: WuetqwSreeaT 

Yt AAMT St Aas J fasaiferan ee 
Gane WA: wre T Helfaadt wad 

AA: FUGAMTTA: AATATTA 112 ot 
AAMAS MATA TT 
afrogtearoneed Tet TET aA? VW 

Similarly, the giver of the pindas should 
prepare four pindas and should place them 
separately over the places of the Pitrs reciting 
the sarhkalpas. Then reciting the mantras like 
“ye-samana” etc., the four Preta's pinda should 
be divided into three parts with kusa grass and 


each one of the parts should be mixed with the 
pindas of the Pitrs. Thereafter the fourth pinda 


Chapter-19 


becomes redundant. After this, the Pretatma 
feeling satisfied from all the sides is turned as a 
Pitrs and achieves the infallible position joining 
the Agnisvatta divine Pitrs. Because of this, 
after the performing of the Sapindikarana, 
nothing more 1s offered to the same. 

fagera q aided afaust ay df: 

aA: Wyld MAPA UAMMSTg Ne 1 

fatqusnratargtalee yasett 

Wentfae UfITT Yas A: AATEATTN 31 

The Pitrs among whom the Pretaétma is 

lodged, the three parts of the pinda should be 
mixed with the pindas of those Pitrs. Then on 
the first day of the month or on the days of solar 
or lunar eclipses or on the days of festivities 
tripinda-Sraddha should’ be _ performed. 


Ekoddisti-srdddha 1s required to be performed 
on the day of the death of the deceased. 


aaa fager a MAMI eTeTH: 
Yate Wat HAASA Als AAAI 


The performer of the Srdddha, who on the 
date of the death of his father, discarding the 
Ekoddisti-srdddha, performs other srdddhas, he 
becomes the destroyer of his parents and the 
brothers. The performer of the Pdarvana- 
srdddha on the day of the death of the father, 
achieves the degraded position. 


AMSA: MAY FT Aa War 
wirdacat Teacentfes AAPA 4 I 
Because the Pitrs get upset in association 


with the pretas, therefore Ekoddisti-srdddha 
should be performed annually. 


Wage F at ceneaant faa: 
MAA ASAT HST HATING 


A person, who discarding all the jealousies, 
gives away in charity for the sake of the 
departed soul, food and other things, besides the 
water vase, he achieves the merit of ASvamedha 
sacrifice. 


69 


AMA Tal Halfglaye: ArgcataM 


ara Haase Farag 2911 


The performer of the srdddha who is well- 
versed in the procedures, when performs an 
ordinary srdddha, then he should ignite the fire 
appropriately, performing pindaddna at the 
same time. 


fata: aftusteacar areata fram 
Tal Mea BreeT Tal AAT TRAN CU 


When the father (after his death) develops 
his relationship with his father, grandfather, 
great grandfather and others, then he is relieved 
of all the bondages. 

TIS Sore welt ASTANA 
ena: fran: ferent: 
fquge: AAT MiGeST MATH eH 

After his release from the bondages, he, with 
the sprinkling of water with the kuSsa grass, 
wiping (/epa) and not the pinda, they are 
entitled to the food, being the seventh 
generation in the giver of pindas. These seven 
are known as sapindas as the sapindahood 


includes these seven counted from _ the 
performer of the sacrifice. 


Sta sitar TeToTTEY AfqostencoTHeT 
ATATSTS MISA: 112 1 


CHAPTER 19 


Distribution of havya and kavya by Pitrs in 
Sraddhas 


RAT cd: 
ae HT Ca Fea a thee 
Treated faqetHeraas: BIST Wea V1 
ate wat fast ys Fad ate aisret 
MTT: tae TATTT HEMT 
The Rsis asked, O Sita, what is the method 
of offering havya and kavya by the people to the 


Pitrs? How do the havya and kavyas given for 
the sake of the Pitrs reach them in Pitr-loka? 


710 


Who carries the same to them? In case the 
Brahmanas on earth eat them up, or the 
offerings are poured into the fire, then how do 
the Pitrs having achieved different forms 
according to their karmas, make use of the 
same. 


qd sate 


aqaera a fiqreset a fraser 
wiaarreretatssferntatd afeent aft: 130 
Sita said, “O Rsis, the Pitrs are called 
Vasus, Pitamaha, as Rudraganas, and 
Prapitamahas (great grandfathers) are known as 
Adityaganas. The havya and kavya given for the 
sake of the Pitrs reach them through them. 


am Mia FeO y Te TTS: | 
Mga Wal: AST DW Srassfaatats yi 


The mantras chanted during the performing 
of the srdddha are also responsible for carrying 
the given material to the Pitrs. The usages of the 
sraddhas are also the means for the same. 


SAAT SARTATAT STATA: | 

ATTA AAT ATATT NY 1 

MOT: Wore ATEN ATA 

Sat ate fra sa; RATATAT: 1G 

Taya year erasers 

Seas APTRUT UY A Ft AAT HI 

Agnisvatta and others preside over the Pitrs. 

Whatever the eatables are given before the 
divine Pitrs, reciting their names and gotras, 
time and the country with devotion, reaches the 
Pitrs even when they are in the cycle of several 
births, satisfying them at the same. The same 1s 
turned into the appropriate food for the Pitrs 
living in a particular yoni. In case with the 
influence of the noble deeds, the father is born 
in a Devayoni, then the food etc. given for his 
sake turns into nectar and reaches him in the 


Devayoni. The food of srdddha turns into the 
article of pleasure and grass in the Pasu-yoni 


Matsya Puranam 


(form of animal). 
Mga ATSUT Masa TS eT 
Ur Heater Tara Tara TASS 1 


In the form of serpents, it reaches before the 
reptiles. In the yoni of the Yaksa, it turns into 
beverage and in the Raksasas it is turned into 
the flesh. 


SFora AA AAT ara Vlaeay| 
TASATAI ANAT AAT 
In the yoni of the Danavas, it takes the form 
of Maya, and with goblins it turns into blood 
and water. In the human race, it turns into 
various types of delicious eatables or food 
items. 


Ties: fat: SRT aerate 
SMoh: Aaya BAAN Ao tl 
TSTMS Wreh wet TATA: | 

aa: YAR faat wat wet Garr seen 
Tet ta wee her wat: FAG OTT 


TAT A UT Wat Wan: tien: 
Ushrarrdaenta fae: at Tage 


It also develops the conjugal pleasures and 
bestows beautiful women, delicious eatables, 
strength for digesting food, enormous riches 
besides the desire to give away the charities, 
beautiful form, good health etc. All of them 
have been described as the flowers of the tree of 
devotion. Their reward is the achieving of the 
Brahman. When the Pitrs are pleased a person 
achieves long life, sons, riches, lores, heaven, 
moksa, comforts and the kingship. It 1s heard 
that in earlier times, the sons of Kausika, 
because of the glory of srdddha, took birth in 
the yonis like vyadha, deer, sheldrake birds etc. 
five times, got relieved and achieving the 
highest position reached Vaikuntha. 


Sta sired Verge sregaed Ge 
AMAA SEAT T: 1122 UI 


kK * 


Chapter-20 


CHAPTER 20 
Story of the sage Kausika and the ants 
RAT od: 
ae catfgrenerarer: WTAE APTA 
Vsfiadad: ae aera wai en 
Rsis asked, “O Sita, how could the sons of 
Kausika achieve the highest yoga and how 


could their sins be washed out after taking birth, 
five times? 


aa sara 
aalfgreny ATA eaieat Healt Wersia: | 
AMA: HUTT Yaar Fratert 2 1 


Stita said, “O Sages, there had been a noble 
sage known by the name of Kausika at 
Kuruksetra.! He had seven sons. 


Wagu: At fea: fry: afata a 
ange: fagadt w wWifyreaetais va T3 I 


The story of these sons of the sage is being 
narrated by me in a sequence. You please listen 
to the same. They were known by the names of 
Svastpa, Krodhana, Hirhsra, Pisun, Kavi, 
Vagdusta, and Pitr-varti. After the death of their 
father, they became the disciples of the sage 
Gaga. 


faery aarayeg Marqearory 
safes Tadt Patera ais 


During that period there had been no 
rainfall, which terrified the people. There had 
been a horrible draught. 


Tea See CTT TTT: 
Gem: afqenvat aa aeitfsat gery 1 
In the meantime, all the disciples, with the 
permission of the sage Garga, engaged 


themselves in serving him. All of them terribly 
suffered in the forest due to hunger. 


1. The field where the great battle of Mahabharata was 
fought. 


71 


Sit fartaat Ue AT: We ACISTT: 
FAVA GET ATHRWUNT ATATTNE | 
Ua afaead: fagadt qeisqst: tt 


When they could find no means of removing 


their hunger, then Pitrvarti, the youngest of all 
the brothers advised them to perform srdddha. 


ah Usd: ASMA A AT TA: 

at 2a oreadt ean fed AeA I 
waa Hel Age: AN gi 
TA WATT TAU ATTTAOT: 112 I 
fart tat acratsfa axe fatrater: 


saa Frea eases wherTAATAN R01 
wa aM afer ay: Wares: 
ated aorta Bt aaitor Farsi ge 
Tt: AMARA AA STATS AAT 
Weare wrcared Fagus afer 22 i 


When the elder brothers agreed to the 
proposal, Pitrvarti arranged for the srdddha. At 
that point of time, in the sequence of elder and 
younger, entrusted two brothers in the 
Devakdrya, three were entrusted with Pitr- 
karya and one was entrusted with atithi-karya, 
while he himself became the performer of the 
Srdddha. Thus pitrpardyana Pitrvarti, invoking 
the Pitrs performed the srdddha reciting the 
mantras. In due course of time because of some 
discrepancies in the srdddha, all of them were 
born as hunters in the city of Dasapur 
(Mandasaur). But because of their influence of 
the srdddha performed by them, they could 
retain the memory of the earlier birth. 


UA ACHAT ARR TAT 
Oto Me AAT SATA HRAAAOTT 23 1 
Faq Va Araceae WT at 
aT AA ATI WA evi 
Because of the earlier evil deeds, they were 


born in the house of a hunter no doubt, but 
because of the glory of the Pitrs in the earlier 


72 


birth they could retain the earlier memories. 
Because of the effect of srdddha all of them 
developed sraddha. They all took to fasting and 
ended their bodies born of a hunter. 


SAS: Wat Hat WM: sreteat firth 
HaARISA FA: PAGAL TAT: 11 Bh 


Thereafter all of them were born as deer 
over the mountain K4lafijara, around the temple 
of Nilakantha there. 


TANT AAA TAT: 
HATA AA ASAMAT TE Ut 


There also, having been influenced with 
grace of the Pitrs, they could retain the 
memories of their earlier birth. During their 
birth as deer, they could possess knowledge as 
well as detachment. All of them getting devoted 
to dharma, taking to fasting, ended their lives in 
full view of people there. 


Wa UHH Baa: VA ATA: 
Wat: Hat: Wales FATA: 11 Yo 
Thereafter all the seven of them who were 


devoted to yoga, were reborn as Sheldrake birds 
at the Manasarovara lake. 


Ga: HYc: Wararayit Waa: | 
Pras Mas ATTA 1 


O Brahmanas, you listen to their stories in 
the sequence of their names and the deeds. As 
Cakravaks or sheldrake birds, they were known 
by the names of Sumana, Kumuda, Suddha, 
Chhidradarsi, Sunetraka, Sunetra and 
Arhsuméan. All of them were devoted to yoga. 


WM STARAS TITSTOT ATA: | 
seat fama ATES alheaa qT 28 
Hled fafadmladeracrarHay 
UMM ATA TT WTA AT SATIN 01 
Three out of them having little wisdom were 


fallen from yoga and started wandering here 
and there. At that point of time the king of 


a = 


Paficala-race, possessing enormous prowess and 


Matsya Puranam 


having huge army as well as the vehicles, 
arrived there with his queens in the same 
pleasure garden and enjoyed love-sports there. 


TRISH ea TEA WetaanT 
fagadt a at fam: sregenfeagarrct: 112 gi 
Observing the grandeur of that influential 

king, one of the aquatic birds developed the 
desire of becoming a king. He was devoted to 
the Pitrs and was known by the name of 
Pitrvarti. 

Mt APO Gat MyTaTCTATEAT 

fad THAT FART 2 UH 

Tea Yt Peart ayafgarean:| 

faungaecdalsaqaead sft BIT 3 i 

Riayat qat ait usta gare 

TASAS MH: Wy UfeaaaesraT Fv 


Similarly the other two also observed the 
king's ministers with vast army and the vehicle 
and developed the desire to become ministers 
on earth. O Best of Brahmanas, the four of 
them, who were devoid of desires were reborn 
in the races of the best of the Brahmanas. The 
first out of them was born as son to the king 
Vibhraja and was known as Brahmadatta. Tne 
remaining two were reborn as Subalaka and 
Kandarika- the sons of ministers. 


US fared: Wayeafaryee | 

AMAA TA GAA ASMA MAT 2 & Ul 
After the death of the king Vibhraja, the 
intelligent royal priest crowned Brahmadatta as 
the king. The powerful king of Pancala was 
immensely valorous, well-versed in all the 


sdstras and yoga, and could speak the language 
of all the creatures. 


TAT UMSHARTA CATA SHIT FUT 
Gaara fewer Ale Asa TI EM 
fagara Pearareraqeerantert 

TA MAN Wad: A UW WAST 


Sannati, the daughte of Devala, became the 


Chapter-20 


wife of Brahmadatta. She spoke on Brahman. 
Brahmadatta, ruled the country with the help of 
Sannati- his wife. 


HAMA TTETAT AS A Ula: 

SE AlefMYAM ARASH TAN CI 
TeUaT AAA: HieeAT ya: | 
UPA: WISTTaT Fe Hl 


Once the king Brahmadatta, accompanied 
with his wife Sannati, went to an orchard for the 
purpose of enjoyment, where he found a pair of 
male and female ants engaged in a quarrel over 
the love sport. The body of the male ant was 
infested with passion and it spoke to the female 
ant with all humility. 


Taal Veg cles afte faad safari 
TRATAIS ATTA THEA TAAL 0 M1 
avian |atoit Asa Ureelhet 
TRAAATAA TSMATATAI 2 


“OQ Dear one, there 1s none more beautiful 
then you in the world. Your waist is thin and the 
thighs are thick. You walk slowly with weight 
of your heavy breasts. You have a fair 
complexion like the gold. You have beautiful 
hips, you are sweet spoken and wear pleasant 
smile over your face. You have beautiful eyes 
which can reach the target, you love sugar and 


guda (jaggery). 
wera ata ye et Sala Sra MT AAT 
wierd Afet STAT a HAST TEES 2 


You take food after I do so and take bath, 
after I finish my bath. When I move in foreign 
lands, you feel miserable and get frightened 
when I feel enraged. 


fant ae acafar aueaeat feran 

Tl ware Va F faaterafa at S33 
aT Hae Ff At fara faveran 

Wad Malta PASAT: AAA VI 


73 


QO Auspicious one, you tell me why do you 
feel annoyed with me?” Then the female ant 
replied to the male one, “O Wicked one, why 
are you talking nonsense to me? O Cunning 
one, only yesterday, you discarding me, took a 
piece of the sweet ball and gave it to another 
ant. 


Trutietes Sarat 

UGA SRA aaa 

ACHAT HY area ara 3 4A 

tied BEN WA: Fate Yaa 

pea wrat wet weal WoTAT ANS EI 

The male ant replied, “O Beautiful one, by 

mistake I gave the piece of the sweet ball to 
another ant, since she resembled you in form 
and beauty. O Beautiful one, you forgive me for 
this mistake. I shall never repeat such a thing in 
future. I speak on truth touching your feet. Be 
pleased on a humble person like me.” 
Ud sald 

Sit Age Beat AT WAS HeAT: | 

STATA Area FUT FeTAATIR 9 

Teaniswages Ft areat faa 

TGA GA SUSI 
Sita said, “O Rsis, thus listening to the 

words of the male ant, the female ant was 
pleased, on the other hand by the grace of lord 
Visnu, the holder of cakra, Brahmadatta who 


know the speech of all the creatures, listening to 
their conversation, felt surprised. 


Sit AAT TAT sgHeY ALATA 
fadifcenragray ararfagttseara: 112 ofl 


k*E* 


(Pe - i i 


74 


CHAPTER 21 
The story of Brahmadatta and the four 
sheldrake birds 
RAT ad: 
SA MAGAMSTTAMSA TTT 


TAMARA Hel UAH ATS ATI 
Rsis said, “O Stita, how could Brahmadatta, 
having been born on earth, know the speech of 
all the creatures? In whose race all the four 
sheldrake birds were born? 
Ud sate 


aferaa Ut Way UT MTA 


SSlared Sater fam AST: TA Vit 
Siita said, “O Rsis, all the sheldrake birds 
were reborn in the city of Brahmadatta, as the 
sons of an old Brahmana. In that birth as well, 
the Brahmanas could preserve the memories of 
their earlier births. 


giatendayt a faaruseiega: | 
Aa: HAVA Yee F FATA 
At that point of time they were known by 
the names of Dhrtiman, — Tattvadarsi, 
Vidyacanda and Tapotsuka. According to their 


deeds, they were the sons of the Brahmana 
known as Sudaridra. 


aaa ahegtraral cat fT 
area: wat fakehreeer TETAT:  1 


Right from their childhood, they were more 
inclined towards tapas. Then they spoke to their 
father with prayer, “O Father, we intend to 
achieve the supreme success by performing 
tapas.” 


TARA FCAT all ARTA: | 

Sara stra ara featafett areas 4 
SIH UT Sta a: Hat AAA 

Fee FareRST AAR Sra NE I 

al 7 Misa Mae GraMTantata aT 
Tae Hera FhreATa Aes AeA ATI! 


Matsya Puranam 


Listening to tneir words, Daridra- the great 
tapasvi spoke in miserable words, “O Sons, 
what are you speaking? Discarding an old and 
poor Brahmana in this miserable condition, you 
intend to become the forest dwellers. What type 
of merit are you going to achieve by discarding 
me? What will be your position? This will be a 
grave sin.” Thus speaking, the father tried to 
dissuade them from the performing of tapas. On 
hearing this, they said, “We have arranged for 
your livelihood. Besides this what more do you 
want, you tell us. 


faa Ua: TA area YRS 
TH WAAC Wd Wetec il 
In case you go to the king in the early 
morning and recite some verses, then he would 


give you enough of riches and thousands of 
villages. 


y fame: Here 
STRAT STL TTT 
Gletont Ua Ud AHA 
QW at aaa FAST 11 
The verses mean, “those who were the best 
of the Brahmanas in Kuruksetra, hunters in 
DaSapura, the mountain deer in K4lanjara and 


seven sheldrake birds of Manasarovara, they 
becoming successful, live here.” 


green fiat ame at aT 
FSIS WHT SATA SeATAATAN 20 1 


Thus speaking to the farther, all of them left 
for the forest for the performing of tapas. On 
the other hand, the old Brahmana, Sudaridra 
also moved towards the royal palace for the 
accomplishment of his selfish end. 


Sa AG AUT: WsTeeatat: TT 
Yaredt Sacaet Ste ATT WLU 
ATTA Tay Ata AATT TTT: | 
AA: HC TSM TRA FASTIN 
(The story of the birth of Brahmadatta has 


Chapter-21 


been narrated). In earlier times, there had been a 
king named Anagha in the Pancala country. He 
was the son of Vaibhraja. The said king with 
the desire of getting a son was engaged in 
severe vrata and adored the omniscient, god of 
gods- lord Visnu. 


at quiet we Tt Cede FT 
Wage eat Fa A AAAI 


After the lapse of a considerable time, lord 
Jandrdana, was pleased with their tapas and 
appeering before him, he said, “Let the welfare 
be bestowed on you. Now you ask for the 
desired boon from me.” 


Yat H efe cae NeaereT ATT 

Tet Va ites ATA TTT YI 
Raeraetat 8 ef AAT 
Wanteettet feared TAS UTAVAT NG I 


At these words of lord Visnu, the king spoke 
desiring for the best of the boon, “O lord of 
gods, you better bestow a son to me, who 
should be possessing enormous strength and 
prowess, should be well-versed in_ the 
scriptures, besides being the religious one, the 
best of yogis and should know the speech of all 
the creatures, besides being devoted to yoga. O 
lord bestow me such a type of son.” On hearing 
this, lord Parmesvara spoke to the king, “Be it 


73 


so”. 
Weal Waar ASAT! 
qt: WT TAT YalSeYEGeaM: WATTATTN LE I 
Thus speaking, lord Visnu, in full view of all 
those present there disappeared from the scene. 


In due course of time, he got the glorious son 
named Brahmadatta. 


AAAA THM A WATT ATR: | 
TAMAS AAA AVALAT: 11 29 1 


Subsequently, he got a son who was 
compassionate on the creatures, extremely 
valorous of all the living beings, knew the 
speech of all the creatures and also became the 


TS 


emperor of all the jivas. 
AeA BTA A faaifernewrt: | 
OA AMSAT THAT ALATA RS I 
ad: Ol Pagal Ft saat Yfaferan 
PRACT SST WAR TAT ACTT TN 28 It 


Thereafter he reached the place, where the 
ant couple were engaged in conversation, 
finding that the male ant was filled with 
passion, Brahmadatta laughed. Finding the king 
so laughing the queen Sannati was surprised 
and apprehending some future misfortune, she 
questioned the king Brahmadatta. 


AArlaeara 
Heed faaayag 
Bae TATA ae Hat To 


Sannati asked, “O king, why this sudden 
loud laugh? How have you laughed untimely. | 
am unable to understand the reason of this 
laughter. 


at sara 
saegrgaiste a fiitfernnfaary 
WHAT: APTANA SIA ATT? VI 
1 aah fared Yrarerd 
TASHA Sa WreTeAAS TA 
TevaTE efaar + vitfaet aatseam 
aa fautferenrent aeat ata faa AUT st 
TeARaasSenaS Baar fart: WAI 
aa Freee Tat aR SVU 
areas Frat wea ATA: | 
TAC We RMA: WT AST H 
Tala Tage WTR: | 
SaaS Aa fay: WAST FT: TATE NH 
frrasfarated: Sarat eA: 
Text fara d ge Pees Fi 
Stta said, “The prince Brahmadatta, 
repeated the conversation between the two ants 


76 


and said, “O Beautiful one, I laughed because 
no other reason for my laughter.” But the queen 
Sannati did not believe in the words of the 
emperor. She said, “The words spoken by you 
are totally untrue, presently you laughed some 
how on me. Therefore, I shall not remain alive 
any more. How could the people on earth 
(except the gods) know about the talk of the 
pair of ants. Therefore you have presently 
laughed at me alone. What else could be there?” 
Listening to the words of the queen, the sinless 
Brahmadatta, could give no reply. Then with 
the desire of knowing the secret of the same he 
started performing tapas before Hari for seven 
nights. Ultimately lord HrsikesSa spoke to the 
king in dream, “O king, tomorrow in the early 
morning, whatever a Brahmana would speak, 
his words shall reveal the entire secret to you.” 
Lord Visnu then disappeared from the scene. 
The next morning, when the king Brahmadatta 
together with his queen and courtiers, was on a 
round of the city, at the same time, he found an 
old Brahmana coming to him. He was uttering 
as follows. 


Peat sdtd 
% fare: Heagey 

STURT STAT TET 
alert AA WT WAaal 

YAMA F aaaa FASTIN WI 


The Brahmana said, “The one who was born 
at Kuruksetra as the excellent Brahmana, 
Vyadha at Dasapura (Mandasaur), as a deer 
over the mountain Ka4lanjara, and seven 
sheldrake birds at the lake of Manasarovara, the 
same person, becoming a siddha, is living 
here.” 


Wa sare 
SMHS TCA A UAT Ye aa: 
SOUP RC CHCCER ET 


Sita said, “O Rsis, listening to the words of 
the Brahmana, the king was filled with grief and 


Matsya Puranam 


getting fainted, fell down on earth together with 
both his courtiers. At the same time he regained 
the memories of his earlier births. 


AAMANA AT AVY YATTR: | 
Use sft ey faga: Tayreataq ot 
HUST Tala ACMIeANATA: | 


TAT TATRA CATA AATAUTRTATIS 8 


Out of the two excellent courtiers, one of 
them was Babhravya Subalaka who was well- 
versed in the love sports, besides all the holy 
scriptures. He was known by the name of 
Paficala in the world. The second one was 
Kandarika who was quite noble besides being 
the orator of the Vedas. Both of them having 
been overpowered with grief also fell down on 
the ground, who also regained his earlier 
memories. 


Bl aad Atawer: AMA: BATT: | 

Ua faery TEMA APTA TAT 113 2k 

PARAS SI TA: Ast 

AAT It SA WHAT ATS 31 

Both of them lamenting bitterly, spoke, 

“Alas, all of us getting greedy, getting 
entangled in the bondage of the deeds, have 
completely fallen from our path. Thus all the 
three of them lamenting variously becoming 
omniscient by yoga, feeling surprised, started 
highlighting the glory of srdddha again and 
again. Thereafter, the king gave away the 
Brahmana, enough of riches and the villages. 


agrl Mant ta sg Tryestaay 
Me FA: YA JUAUTATAT TN 3 I 
faaeaaiiart 7 Ta TeswaaTaT 
Uae fate: Aa A AAT ATG 
In this way, the Brahmana, getting delighted 
with the receipt of the wealth, was gracefully 
made to retire by the king. The king 


Brahmadatta, then, crowned his legitimate son 
named Visvaksena as the king and he himself 


Chapter-22 


retired to the forest. Thereafter Brahmadatta and 
the other excellent yogis, discarding all the 
jealousies, devoting themselves to their father, 
collected again at the Manasarovara. 


TASMAN SATA FATA: | 
CaaS Hacer STN & I 
TRIMS Wa TeahaereAA 

aafa We THT FT Wea eaT3 Olt 


The anger of Sannati, the queen was wiped 
out and she spoke to the king, “O Kung, 
whatever is presently being desired by you is 
the result of the giving up of the kingdom and I 
am indeed responsible for the same.” The king 
accepted her words and again felicitating her 
said to her. 


aaIMeles Wa TAMA Ter 

ade STANT a Wa AANHAANICM 
TAA WH TEAR ACTA 

Wanrged fae Tat Tet Bat 3 ei 
Ward Yass FO Mat: Tras: | 

a oe Ngai TAA FT AMV! 


“Tt has all happened by your grace and | 
have got the due reward. Thereafter all of them 
becoming the forest dwellers, embracing yoga, 
ended their lives through Brahmarandhra and 
achieved the highest position of Yoga.! Thus 


1. The term Yoga (4M:), which is that used in its 
literal acceptation signifies ‘union’, ‘junction’ from 
Ji ‘to join:’ in a spiritual sense it denotes ‘union of 
separated with universal soul;’ In the Bhagavad Gita 
It is variously applied, but ordinarily denotes the 
performance of religious ceremonies as 2. duty, and 
not for interested purposes. Yoga is understanding of 
the identity of the contemplator and the object 
contemplated; ®4Iq t:1 A text of Yajfiavalkya 
is quoted to this effect: 34 amen fais ar- 

apgdad: dari Sea) STITT: | 
‘Know holy wisdom to be the same with Yoga’ (the 
practice of) which has eight divisions. That which is 
termed Yoga 1s union of the living with the supreme 
soul.’ 


77 


the ancestors when pleased grace the humans 
with long life, riches, lores, heaven, moksa, 
pleasures, sons and the kingship. 


faa: Maat ar yotrar wy an 
Berle MT Teele WEAAIS 2h 


OQ Brahmanas, the one who narrates the 
glory of Brahmadatta's devotion to his 
ancestors, or listens to it, or himself reads it, he 
is praised in the Brahmaloka for crores of 
kalpas. 


Sta ATA TET srgeaed fagurencst 
ATH ARTaST SEAT: 112 2H 


ko 
| A 


CHAPTER 22 


The time suitable for the performing of 
Sraddha, the place and some rules connected 
with the same 

RAY qd: 

Herat TROT TAS Tar 

HAAAM F ASH ST SATAN 

Hay HY A Het srg ARHet WAT 

Rsis asked, “O Sita, during which part of 

the day should a srdddha be performed by the 
host? When does the srdddha performed 
become most beneficial? Which are the holy 


places where the srdddhas performed yield the 
maximum and the best of the reward? 


Ud sale 
SU F ATA arfafargifentrean 
Ofenfaerid AA AeAATSTSATN | 
Sita said, “O Rsis, the Sraddha performed 
in the Abhijit-muhirta in the afternoon, or at the 
time of the rise of Rohini constellation or 


whatever is given during this particular time, 
becomes imperishable or everlasting. 


Tat Att Me PaqUrt acct A 
AMAA Gea Parcor ETAT: 3 


78 


O Brahmanas, I am now going to speak out 
the names of the holy places which are liked the 
most by the Pitrs. 

fagete War aT Aealiat YT 
asset sacae: Taare Faas 
ear fargheritar Te ATTATCTAT: 1G 1 

The Pitr-tirtha of Ganga, 1s best of all the 
holy place and bestows welfare, where 
Pitamaha, the god of gods, himself remains 


present. This story is narrated by the Pitrs who 
desire to participate in the Srdddhas at Gaya. 


USM aed: VAT TeAISHT Wat Fara 
MAT ASME Aer A FART ATIE 1 


The people should desire to have many sons, 
because in case a single person goes on 
pilgrimage to Gay4, or organises an Asvamedha 
sacrifice, or releases a blue bull, then he shall be 
redeemed.” 


TM AeTUTAt yoat FaqUit accra Tent 
TAA AHA HHMI 9 
_— ie teteun 
Similarly the auspicious V4ranasi, is always 
liked by the Pitrs. It is the abode of 
Vimalesvara, the giver of prosperity and 


emancipation. This place is also dear to the 
Pitrs. 


fag wart J AaaITHATAT NG I 

TeMTY WAMIAT TAtaT: | 

ARITA RATEAET TAT HVA 1S Ut 

Prayaga is another scared place dear to the 

Pitrs, which bestows the fulfilment all the 
desires. Lord VateSvara together with Madhava 
and lord Kesava, sleeps there in yoganidrd. (the 
sleep at the end of aYuga) 


cea Jos Wea Wa a 
TAS Hea AEA ATA FAT AM 


The auspicious §Dasasvamedha-tirtha, 
Gangadvara (Haridvara), besides Nanda, Lalita 


Matsya Puradnam 


and Maydapuri (Rishikesh) are also the holy 
places dear to the Pitrs. 


ae fared AM aa: He! 
TTA: MaMa FST 
The Mitrapada-tirtha, 1s also the best. The 


excellent Kedaranatha and Gangdsagara, the 
best of Jirthas are also dear to the Pitrs. 


At TAMAS Ac Eel 
ait @ Afas AT TaeTHeTTTTN I 
Similarly the holy place of Brahmasara in 
the waters of Sutlay river is also considered to 
be the best. Besides Naimisaranya is the place 


which bestows the combined reward of all the 
tirthas. 


TATRA Waa Aaleya: TATA: | 
TM AMAT SAAT CTI TN 3 
UF AH AALS BT: 

ae efter Pot SATA TY It 
CP UDR CCIMIELICE EL 
CaeaeT TANT ANTS J SPAN RG 
UT: WANA A Ya ATOTIS STAI 
Sate AeTUs AauTapTS TT Ve | 


This place is also dear to the Pitrs. There 1s 
the place known as Gangadbheda in Gomati, 
Varaha-ksetra, which is abode of lord 
Mahadeva, and the lord Siva having eighteen 
hands, the place where the cakra of Visnu fell, 
is known as Natmisaranya, which 1s the most 
sacred of all the tirthas and where lord Varaha 
is worshipped, are considered to be the sacred 
places. A person who visits that place 1s 
liberated from all the sins and he finally attains 
emancipation. 


Gasset AMaeey WAI FAST: | 
aafhapadt ant faut aeorst Aan got 
at aa frata wera: frat: aan 
HRA NeUS Mama AAA VU 


Iksumati is the holy place which serves as 
the dwelling place to lord Narasimha and is held 


Chapter-22 


dear to the Pitrs and is located at the confluence 
of the Ganga. Besides Kurukseta is the most 
sacred place where the Pitrs remain always 
present. 


TM TMA: YON Vaca 
SMa Aal Aaleagerearferanraat gs 
UTA chara lett WANT GTEC 


Tat SOTA Yoo WAT Ara AAT oll 


The river Saray is adored by all the gods, 
which is quite auspicious. Same is the case with 
Iravati, besides the rivers, Yamuna, Devika, 
Kali, Candrabhaga, Drsadvati, Venumati and 
Vetravati are sacred and dear to Pitrs and the 
Sraddhas performed on the banks of these 
rivers, confer great benefits over the performers. 


faa aoe eet: arg ETON AAT: 
Want wergquea aa art fe cea eI 
seta fagaa aradanrrHeTaT 
Aernvstatt ward Faget ETAT 12 2H 
TM GRU: YS Wt AAAI a 
Wafer TMS eDAT FAUTETTSA ATEATAT 31 


Jambimarga, from where the path of Pitrs 1s 
visible, is sacred pitr-tirtha even to this day. 
There are other sacred FPitr-tirtha like 
Nilakunda, Rudrasarovara, Méanasarovara, 
Mandakini, Acchoda, Vipasa and Sarasvati. 


yafrand Tega TerAcTy 
FAT ACT TATRA STCTOAT YAN VI 
The Purvamitrapada, Vaidyenatha, the river 

Ksipra, Mahakdala, K4lafjara hill are the 
extremely sacred places. 

AMAT STARS MPVS TETHCTY 

agat famyye WerEAa ANI 

TAfIUsert AAA ASaa: | 

Ua fagdatt waaraeafoT ANE I 


Vamsodbheda, Harodbheda, Gangodbheda 
are among the sacred places in addition to the 


79 


Bhadresvara, Visnupada, Narmadesvara, which 
are also the holy places and offering of the 
pindas there is as good as offering the pindas at 
Gaya. These are the Pitr-tirthas, where all the 
sins are washed out. 


PUTA etearat fey aA TT 
atrart fagdte a aratt arene 91 
srerorres 
PATTY AeA AAT 
Yate a fread det weak wey 
aaemaet Yor setentfetmenterang 2 et 
Se ST TA SI Ta Tera reat 
HATA SUT ATT AMT ANU ACTIN oll 
Maat AON Aaa THT 

Tea PGS a Me TT ATTN 

et Sarah AT TAT: WT 

TM UTS AT YOSTSA ATTA ASTID Vt 
YA Ta el Weer ETM 
Teas: Ween a APTA 311 
TMT AUT AST YOR HRTNTeT Teter eT 
Tereg Vellore SMO T AT YT VII 
Weragl Pael A aa faye axl 
easel Taael at wroTTETT 3 4A 
cAlictel UM Aal Yar fare A AeT TUM 
Teta fasta wreart SSA: 113 1 
MEAT Tet TEAC WITT 

Stott areadt arcrafteiterat Far113 9 
Teal Wat A AA A Tea: | 

BRT HOTA A AMSATAT CAAT 21 
Tet fora ArT dar ws Fri teatorenn 
TAATG TAT AT AGS SAUTETATN 8 
Udy Fagay AeA GTA 

ae Wet AM TAINS FATEA I ol 

UA WISI PMP: 


TATA I aveahy | 


80) 


TM Weletates Mel Mea ACT PATS Vi 
TM MATA ASTM AST TUM 
Uma Mele TAM WAAL Aeq us 211 
oR fagt da fagarna: Tey 
sietet vient ate aPaeaat: TENS 3 
The mere recollection of these sacred places, 
bestows enormous benefits, what to speak of 
those who perform the Srdddha thee. The 
places like Omkdaresvara, Kaveri, the 
confluence of the river Candravega, and 
Amarakantaka are also the auspicious places 
where by taking a bath, one gets hundred times 
more merits than by bathing at Kuruksetra. 
Sukratirtha, Pindara and Someévara are also the 
sacred places, which remove all the sins, and it 
is quite auspicious to perform Sraddha there, 
besides giving of the charities _ there. 
Kayavarohana, Carmanvati iver, besides 
Gomati, Varanaé, Ausanasé, Bhairava-ksetra, 
Bhrgu-tunga and Gauri-tirtha are also the sacred 
places. Besides Vindyaka and Bhadresvara are 
also the sacred places, which release a person 
from the sins. The river Tapati too is also a 
sacred one. The river Mulatapi, Payosni and her 
confluence Mahabodhi, Patala, Nagatirtha, 
Avanti, Mahasala, the river Vena, Maharudra, 
Mahilinga, the river Dagarna, Satarudra, 
Satahva, Visvapada, Angaravahika, Sona river, 
Gharghara river, Kalika river, Vitasta river, 
Droni river, Vata river, Dhara river, and Ksira 
river, are also the places where Srdddhas when 
performed bestow great satisfaction to the Pitrs. 
Besides Gokarna, Gajakarmna, Purusottama, 
Dvaraka, Arbuda, Sarasvati river, are known as 
the holy places. The rivers of Manimati, 
Girikamika, Dhitapapam and the southern 
ocean, Meghakara tirtha which is the abode of 
Janardana Visnu, the Mandodari-tirtha, the river 


Campa, Samalanatha, Mahasala river, 
Cakravaka, Carmakota-tirtha, Janmesvara, 
Arjuna-ksetra, Tripura tirtha, Siddhesvara, 


Srigaila, Narasirnha are also the places fit for the 


Matsya Puranam 


performing of the Srdddhas for pleasing the 
Pitrs. 


Wes UTM Yor srs aaTT 
TAT Tal AGAATHAS BAAN VI 


Mahendra, Sriranga are also the places fit 
for the performing of the Srdddhas. They are so 
auspicious that, one is freed of all the sins by a 
mere visit to these places. 


evitefy dat Wa: Uroeufor at 

THAR Al YOAT AM TA ALT & 1 
WAM HOA aT HIAeT AAT 

Tat Mevadt are fader eS 
cet Farah aM Waite 

TASS MTA: TANS FAA: S10 
mTgnay way aifeatfequt wary 
Boars Ua Ava Vea FATIH 


The river Tungabhadra, Bhimarathi, 
Bhimesvara, Krsnavena, the rivers Kaveri, 
Kudmalé and Godavari, Trisandhyd-tirtha, 
Trayathbaka- the abode of Siva, which is 
universally venerated, are taken to be the holy 
places. A mere remembering of these holy 
places removes all the sins, while the 
performing of the Sraddha there bestows 
unlimited satisfaction to the Pitrs. 


AOL ATTUUT eT ATA 

TM UA Yom Frat Wa Ase 
waned a fend wore aw eT 
Yost THAT ARCO TAT TTY 0M 
aE W fT HAT aT 
MUHA Tec AGAT: TTL 2 
Me efeark FYTR WICH 

agate farwaat WaT a weet ACTIG 2 
Walqaraeaa aur afar: | 
Syaalet AMS TT a Had SAN 311 
UAT Tet Hk WTA TI 


Chapter-22 


Udy Adar Vikted SIT Aa vi 
andy Wag ot alfegranferar 


The river Sri-Parni and Tamraparni, 
Jayatirtha, the sacred river Matsya, Sivadhara- 
tirtha, Bhadra and Pampa rivers, Ramesvara, 
Elapura, Alampur, Angabhita, Angaraka, 
Anandakamata, Budha, §Amaratakesvara, 
Ekambhaka, Govardhana, Hariscandra, 
Krpucandra, Prthidaka, Sahasraksa, 
Hiranyaksa, the Kadali river- the abode of 
Rama, Saumitri-Sanghama, Indrakila, 
Mahanada, Priyamelaka, are quite sacred rivers 
because of the abodes of the gods and the 
Sraddhas performed there, extremely please the 
Pitrs. 


Aa A ATTA Ta PASAT PATA 

alet Urged ATs Aal Urelfeteat YT 

MEATY Way st HS MAPATTNG & 1 

aa fuga 7 aa Aeradt Aah 

Oe eSATA MAA TACTART NY 9 1 

WAY Ties ASAT ATT 

Wael WA BA Neva AATNG C1 

Tee CATHAATACATaAA A 

Mersey aa AilegranfIrenqny et 

The auspicious Bahuda river, _ the 

Siddhavanas, Pasupatas, the river of Parvatika, 
are the places where, the Srdddhas when 
performed yield much more benefits. The Pitr- 
tirtha, near the Godavari river, with images of 
Siva, is an exceedingly auspicious place. It is 
also known as Jamadagni-tirtha. It is here that 
the river Godavari was ruptured because of the 
fear of the sage Pratika. It represents as Deva as 
well as the Pitr-tirtha. It is also known as 
Apsarayuga. With the performing of the 
Srdddha here, the merit of Agnihotra as well as 


that of the charity is multiplied millions of times 
more. 


TM Veale a TaavaTTAT 
AGT Tal YA AAA: Tita: TUTNG ol 


8] 


Peet AA ha PRATT Ta 

aa Ot At: AAMAS MATE 2 
ae | yeAt AT METI ae aT 
amar a fad aa Sara VII 


Then there are the holy places of 
Sahasralinga, Raghesvara, the river Indraphena, 
where Indra had to face his down-fall and 
where, he destroying the demon Namuci, 
returned to the heaven, performing the penance. 
These are the places where the Srdddha when 
performed by the people bears everlasting fruit. 
Then Puskara, Salagrama, Somapana- the place 
of Vaisvanara, are also the auspicious places. 


ated arad aa canfadel ade a 
TeraU at Yar alfgrent ager AAMT 311 
aaut Asa AT FT TAO WEE wT 
STAT AAT YUM TAT TTT PTT g KI 
Udy MegAAy MASAI yA 

wees war diet farHeente Bg 4H 
FRAT WBTATRTAT ACTS TTT 
HOM J TM Mel Yereityfert AAMT G1 
Canard def wea wa 

Way fagisty sArePTAG OI 
seerd wa de masa a 

TM Aas F Slt FT Ad: WNC 
Teadt HMad eats was a 

fausra a fereat yigrant wa Tee 
quest farak a Aemadta ay 

TMT ST ION Wate aa AiN'9 01 
satel a facaatrd sreeray: | 

tet aaford aa wate Acti 21 
at ayNe AM Wrens aa al 

WAY MBIA: TAA TT TEIN VM 
qa Sartre Wordlet aera 

Wat fared da ead at A931 


the same question was put by Manu at the time 
of deluge, to lord Kesava. 


ageara 

SUA Vora Ma SPATS TI 

avarattd da yaret T fae 2 21 

eManfat da saregHed A PITT 

SOT TABI AAT AN 3 3 

cadet pirate warafgad yal 

aad faretton at af carenquefan 2x 

Manu said, “You kindly enlighten us on the 

origin of the universe, and the destruction, the 
human race, Manvantaras, the stories relating to 
the people born in human race and their 
conduct, the expansions of bhuvanas, method of 
charities and dharma, sdsvata-srdddha-kalpa, 
divisions of varnas and dsramas,! the method 
of building stepwells, tanks and ponds etc. and 
the consecration of gods. Besides the other 


religious issues which exist on the earth, you 
kindly narrate them to me exhaustively. 


Wa SATA 

TRAIT Ute 

WHATS ATA TA VATA ACTOTT 2 & I 
MAHA MTT ATTY A 

Aa: TAT: WAS: TOTHAOITTN 2 I 


aRIadetae Wears: | 

Lord Matsya said, “At the 
dissolution, the entire universe, including 
mobiles and immobiles was covered with 
darkness like the one overpowered with sleep. 
No one could imagine about the then prevailing 
condition, nor could anything be known about 
the same. No trace of anything existing earlier 
was left. Nothing known thing was leit. 
Thereafter lord Svayambhu who is the abode of 
the auspicious deeds and is not manifest, with 


time of 


1. A religious order of which there are four kinds 
referable to the different periods of life; Ist that of 
the student or Brahmacdrin. 2 that of the house- 
holder or Grhastha; 3 that of the anchorite or 
Vanaprastha; 4th that of the Samnydsa or Bhiksu. 


Matsya Puranam 


the intention of creating the universe, piercing 
through the darkness, appeared in the universe 
alone. 


ASAPAA: Wt SATO: | 
ARTA Sit art: A Wa MATRA VON 
At the same time, the one who 1s beyond the 
comprehension of the organs of senses, being 
greater than the greatest, smaller than the 
smallest, being imperishable and known as 
Narayana, emerged on the universe alone. 


qT: writers fagafafad We 
AT Va WASH AY AAAI ICI 


He, from his body with the intention of 
creating several type of creatures, meditated 
carefully and initially created water. He planted 
his semen as the seed in the same. 


Teas WANTS Wed 
TATA TAATAATA TN 23 


After the lapse of a thousand years, the same 
seed was turned into an egg of gold and silver 
and its lustre resembled the lustre of ten 
thousand suns. 


Grapardertst: TATA TE: | 
WHATS ARTA Fa: 113 0 
Thereafter the immensely illustrious 
Svayambhu, himself entered the egg and 


pervading in it with his own influence, he came 
to be known as Visnu. 


TEMA Va: AAAI 
MSRM AaKEN Tel TSAI 3 VI 


In due course to time, the sun emerged out 
of the golden egg, first of all. Since he was born 
first of all, therefore he was known as Aditya. 
Because of the reciting of the Vedas, he was 
known as Brahma. 


fest aft BATTS ATETA 
O aaa: Gal We SMT DT PIFATI 3 2 
He divided the egg into two parts creating 


heaven and the sky. In between both of them, he 
created the directions and imperishable sky. 


Chapter-3 


AUGUSTE PTT TT 
Ferd A AAASATSTAAVS HAI 3 3 


TANSUSATT: BEAT: Tat AAT ETAT 
Ge AST AAT AST ARIAT: | 
CATT AUNT ATTA AAT: 11 3 


At that point of time, out of the embryo's 
skin, the mountains like the Meru and other 
seven mountains, were formed and the womb 
was turned into the lightning and clouds. From 
the same, the rivers, the manes and Manus were 
born. Besides the seven oceans with diamonds 
and gems were also born having the salt water, 
sugarcane juice and wine etc. They were also 
formed of the watery substance of the same egg. 


a faganyed: weather 
AMAA TAT AMUS: VAAN 34H 


OQ Destroyer of the enemies, when lord 
Prajapati became desirous of engaging himself 
in creation of the universe, then with his lustre 
Martanda (the sun) emerged. 


WasvSs Wad TAAMUSe Taya: | 
TANTO AAT TT AST: 
AAHS: AT MTA ATATAS 11 3 & I 
Since he was born after the destruction of 
the egg, he came to be known as MArtanda. The 
rajoguna form of the said Mahatma appeared in 


the form of the four faced Brahma also known 
as the Grand Sire. 


wl YE Wd Va ACA 
Tale Tied TEATSTEAT 3 91 


It is he who created the gods, asuras and the 
humans, besides the other creatures of the 
world. You should take him to be Mahatsattva. 


FCIRINCAIC TET 


KK %* 


CHAPTER 3 
The primary creation 
Wa edt 


TMNaddoToe Ie 


| 
> 


aa J aM gagE Tallaet AT 
Manu said, “O Lord, how did Brahma the 
best among the learned people, the Grand Sire 


achieve four faces and how did he engaged 
himself in creation of the universe? 


Teel sara 
Aaa GIAO MATTE: | 


AMAA ART: AATF ASHAT: Hh VU 


Lord Matsya said, “O Royal priest, Brahma, 
the Grand Sire of the gods, initially performed 
severe tapas, with the influence of which, 
angas- (lores, kalpa, grammar,  nirukta, 
astrology and metres), Updngas (Puranas, 
Nyadya, Mimamsa and Dharmasastras), Padas, 
(recitation of the Vedic mantras) and Krama (a 
method of the Vedic recitation) together with 
the Vedas, were created. 

GOT PAA GIT TROT VATA 
Pret Mears YOR MetaHiewaeaTT 3 

Before the creation of all the sastras, 
Brahma composed the Puranas, which happen 
to be indestructible, full of words, auspicious 
and were comprised of a hundred crores of the 
verses. 


strat aT aaa aera faht-gar:1 
HATA VATA TAT: tt 
ASAT GATT AAT: | 

TA: TAGS S Aa BAA APTI G UI 


Thereafter, there emerged from the mouth of 
Brahma, the Vedas with their accessories, 
mimamsd and nydya. Thereafter the sons of 
Brahma, who were engaged in the recitation of 
the Vedas, were born with the desire of his 
mind. Because they were born of the mental 
desire of Brahma, they came to be known as the 
mind-born sons of Brahma. 


he 
ire 
‘ed 


‘as, 
en 


US 
the 


of 
es, 

of 

of 
his 
ital 
the 


82 


sada aa diel ate teach aan 

qa WaT ARATCTL TAT XI 

aqvada A Ut ser aw 

VAG MTT: TAT ULAT MATTING th 

ae Wye AT Hartge aM 

aed o fact Wiferata ao & 1 

THM He a HEMT Ata A 

feftequaat qaquetiagt AMV! 

Aaa Vaca 

TA MTG WANA AT ACTA: 1119 CA 

Sarasvata, Svami tirtha, the mver Malandara, 

Kausiki, Candrika, Vaidharbha, Vaira, Payosni, 
Kaveri, Jalandhara-giri, Citrakita, Vindhydacala, 
Lohdanda, Kubjabhra, the banks of Vasistha, 
Harita, Brahmavarta, Kusavarta, Haya, 
Pindaraka, | Samkhoddhara, § Gomtesvara, 
Bilvakesvara,  NilkeSvara, | Dharani-tirtha, 
Ramatirtha, | AsSvatirtha, Vedasira, river 
Aughavati, Vasuprada, Chaglanda, Badari, 
Gana, Jayanta, Vijaya, Sakra-tirtha, Sripati, 
Raivata, Sarada, Bhadrakdlesvara, Vaikuntha, 
Bhimesvara, Mahadeva, Matrerha, 
Karavirapura,  Kusaisaya, | Gaurisikhara, 
Nakulesa, Kardamala, Dindi, Pundarikapura, 
Godavari, the abode of Tirthesvara are the 
sacred places. One should perform the Srdddha 
to attain the final emancipation. 

Ua Fea: MHRA Wael FAM 

ATMS T Vrerahet farerehcany ATT: 198 


Thus I have collected the names of all the 
holy places and explained to you in brief. Even 
otherwise, Brhaspati is not competent to narrate 
their glory fully, then what to speak of the 
humans. 

Uet ae car ae dara: | 
qosraront Neste ae y WTETETTNC ot 

In fact the Satyatirtha, Dayatirtha and 
Indriyanigraha tirthas, do exist in the abodes of 


Matsya Puranam 


those who faithfully follow the Varnasrama 
dharma. 


Uaritely aegreg Arenrferrieeat 
TAMIA AS As WAALS il 


Since the Sradddhas performed in these 
tirthas bestows crores of times more the reward, 
therefore the people should perform the 
Sraddhas in these holy places making all! the 
efforts. 


WHI Yedialrasaeaed TI 

WeMereaged: CANT: WANS VI 

Waar: Vg TT 7 AAAI 

TAA AT AT Ae Ale WaHATNS 31 

ae eat fara st ws a Adar 

TATEMT Yer A: MW Sl: HAT: BAe XI 

The period of three muhartas' in the 

morning is treated as Sangava, the three 
muhirtas of the noon time are uttamas, the even 
muhartas which should be avoided, because 
that time is treated as Raksasi for Srdddha. 


There are fifteen such muhirtas in a day and the 
eighth of them are called Kutapa. 


WANS Adel WANA Walt AAT: 
TATA STITT FATA S & HI 


The movement of the sun is slowed down 
during the noon and it is the best time to 
perform the Srdddha at that time. 


TANG: GET BT AM ATA: | 

BEY Tieden Mal ale: TAS I 
WG Hiaasen WATT: | 

Telad Brera Sta fasyat: ci 


Since the afternoon sun always moves 
slowly therefore the time of the bestowing of 
limitless reward 1.e. kutapa starts. During the 


1. This is equal to the fourth part of Ghatika which, 


considering the latter synonymous with Muhirtta or 
one-thirtieth of the day and night, would be twelve 
minutes. 


Chapter-23 


noon, a vase of rhinoceros, horn, a Nepal 
blanket, silver, Durva grass, sesamum, kins and 
daughter's son, are the eight essentials of 
Sraddha. Kutsita is another synonym of Papa 
(sin) and the eight things mentioned above, 
absorb heat of all the sins (Ku) therefore they 
are known as kutapas. 


Sea T HaulelMedudwaud | 
Teach SAAT 61 


Beside these eight the Kutapas, other four 
and five, the nine muhtrtas are known as 
Svadha. 


faenideaqeyen: HM: HONfetera 
MSA WHOA TATE AHA 1S BH 
ficitearoatecal aerereticrantare: | 
Ualgartad Algae fatyrertie oi) 


Kusa-grass and black sesamum were both 
produced from the body of Visnu therefore they 
are fit enough to protect the srdddha. This has 
been ordained by the gods. The visitors of the 
tirthas holding kusa in one hand and sesamum 
in the other, should perform the oblation and by 
the performer of the sraddha and by doing so 
the importance of srdddha is increased. 


eae 7 Ufo sea 
aut wae faferte Wer Bya:11 2 


At the time of the performing of sraddha the 
pinda is offered with one hand, but the oblation 
is performed by both the hands. This is the 
process which is followed since long. 


Ud sara 
que varrget waoraearTerTy 
Te Hear art dears yatta 
Yuna: A: Wdeshe srarearad ATe VU 
Mega A arhed Ta Marana: | 
AAMAS UTS 31 
Tag weret a Fara 


83 


Tames yfad a 
MEA WTA TRAN US SI 


Sita said, “O Rsis, in earlier times, lord 
Matsya had spoken about the performing of the 
Srdddha at the holy places. This is quite 
meritorious, extremely auspicious, prolongs the 
age and destroys all the sins. A person who 
listens to the same, or himself recites it, he earns 
enormous riches. The people on pilgrimage, for 
the removal of all the sins, should recite the 
glory of Srdddha-Mahatmya, which _ is 
extremely auspicious, bestower of glory, 
destroyer of the grave sins of the people. It is 
honoured and held in esteem by Brahma, Rudra 
and the sun. 


Sf SATA WATT SATgeHed Eifagseaa: 2 VU 


**k* 


CHAPTER 23 
The origin of Moon, his marriage, 
performing of Rajasilya yajna, his attraction 
for Tard, his fight with lord Siva, and ending 
of war at the instance of Brahma. 
RAT Sd: 
am: faqurafear: at yreafaynree 
Aavat I a MAM aA: Aiea: gi 


Rsis asked, O Sita, well-versed in the 
Sastras, what has been the origin of the moon, 
the lord of the Pitrs? You speak out all about it. 
Besides we would like to know about the rulers 
of the past in the lunar dynasty. You kindly tell 
us all in detail. 


qd sata 
aMfeet geo yanta: wifaat yu 
ATA ATT AT: FST AAT: 12 
Stita said, “O Rsis, in the earlier times, 
Brahma commanded his son to start creation. 


Then the all competent Maharsi, performed 
Anuttama tapas for the creation of the universe. 


84 


bare achnlaniah bi 


TAS tt 


angers} fear 
WSIeAATA TAM: WATASHI AIS UI 
TAMA: MTA TAS: | 

ft FRAT AMSAT TRATCATTS TeaTTT: 11G I 

I: Yala WANA aT Tear! 

CaPaMARae PACA WATATANE 

With the influence of the said tapas the 

blissful Brahma, the dispeller of the discomforts 
of others, and is enshrined within Visnu, Siva, 
the sun and Rudra, who is super-sensuous and is 
the bestower of all peace and is lodged in the 
eyes of the peaceful things, the same Brahma, 
getting pleased with the tapas of Atri, became 
the cause of his happiness, in other worlds. He 
caused the moon to be produced from the eyes 
of Atri. At that time, lord Siva, with the goddess 
Parvati, was immensely delighted to find the 
moon. He therefore decorated his head with the 
same. The power produced from the water 
which emitted from the eyes of Atn illumined 
the universe with its lustre. 


Cee WBA VARAUOT YA! 
TH Yael AAAS eAVTATAT AI Ut 


The directions held that shine in the form of 
damsels desirous of getting sons. The said tejas 
after entering their womb, remained there for 
three hundred years. 


AMT TTT ITT TT: 
AAA TMAH AGA 
FAA Tag ATA 

CHAS ASA ASMA WISN 
ANA casera B Tare: 

TA TANG: WAASTRATAT WAATAI V0 Ut 


When the directions were unable to contain 
the womb any further, then they discarded the 
same. The four faced Brahma then collected the 


abr) F 


Matsya Puranam 


same and turned it in the form of a young man, 
holding all the attributes. The powerful 
Pitimaha, mounted over the chariot of 
Vedasakti, driving with thousand horses took 
him to his loka. The Brahmarsis then declared 
that, “Let him be our lord.” 


PASI CUES RILCIICIRS ime 
GSq: VACaAG AMM WAATS: Ve 
The Pitrs, Brahma and other gods, 


Gandharvas and Osadhis, adored him with the 
Vedic mantras known as Somadevatya. 


RAS TMNSlaAT ATTA: 
Aaifaaranaata fea aa TOT: 1122 1 


Having been thus eulogised, the lustre of the 
moon was increased. With the same lustre the 
divine Osadhis were grown. 


melaen Tega waft ween 
SAT: ATATS RST METALS 
SAT Ale Ales BAAVSeA| 
ated add da act Hol A Waewni evi 
Because of this the shine of these Osadhis 
increases during the night. Because of this the 
moon came to be known as the lord of osadhis. 
He is also called Dvijesa. The lunar disc was 
caused to be created with the juice of the Vedas. 


It always increases in the bright fortnight and 
gets reduced in the dark fortnight. 


fava a Gat Wet eat: Wraaay eet 
BUMAVTAG TA HAM: TAT GI 


Thereafter, Daksa, the son of Praceta, gave 
away his twenty seven beautiful daughters who 
were quite illustrious to the moon as his wives. 


ad: WIAA Aearior asta TI 
TTA Pilar y TON ATTT: 1 NG 
TAS WTA ATAU Ble: 

At FONT WaT UAT SATE: 11 21911 


Then the moon with his cool rays, devoting 
his mind exclusively to lord Visnu, performed 


Chapter-23 


tapas for ten lakhs of years. As a result of this 
lord Janardana, who 1s also known as Narayana, 
and Sri Hari, was pleased with the moon and 
appeared before the moon and said. 


Aa AI AUNT: Yael TITAS 
WIA MH AT AT APTI CI 


Taya YC TEA: We A fea 
TAUTeT: FANS TATA VAY BTU 


The lord said, “Ask for a boon.” When so 
commanded by lord Visnu, the moon seeking 
the boon said, “I would like to conquer the 
place of Indra and the gods should arrive in my 
palace to receive their share individually. In my 
Rajastya yajria,'! Brahma and the gods should 
serve as the Brahmanas. Then the auspicious 
lord Siva, the carrier of trident, and the divine 
Raksapalas should conduct themselves as the 
security guards.” 


TAH: Te ag TE y faa 
BMS aE AMS OAT TTS : 112 0 UI 


TMATTIA SUS Be: TAT! 


VSAM: TAHT Waa BAT i 

To this lord Visnu replied, “Be it so.” Then 
the moon arranged for the Rdjastiya yajna in 
which the sage Atri became the Aotd priest, 
Bhrgu officiated as Adhvaryu, Brahma was the 
udgatd, lord Hari officiated as the Brahmana 
priest, besides Saunaka and other sages were the 
members in the Rajastya sacrifice. 


Uae faaeat awa TI 
Aches earn a1 hana: wfrarfea2 VU 
The ten Visvedevas performed as Camasa- 
addvaryus. In that sacrifice the moon gave away 


the three lokas as daksind to the sacrificial 
priests. 


aa: MATES ALITA TTA 


1. A sacrifice in which one becomes Lord Paramount 
after exacting allegiance from minor chiefs. 


85 


aaNet a sea: Fafa si 


On the occasion of the sacrifice, all the nine 
goddesses influenced with love, went to have a 
look at the moon. 


Pea ara fattaren WM AeA 

Aitfamag AgaeaaAeTAN ev 

WT Want Mera sae He: TAT 

SaeaT ANT TAT PATTN 2 4 I 

gfraaaa oft are artesian 

aM Sa AAS arqarara area|Nrn 2 € it 

Ca FAM ATA TG TOTETET 

A PMMATTATT VI: PreaTah: YAS 

TMS faqegean waqarest: | 

Laksmi left leaving Narayana, Sinivali left 

Kardama, Dhyuti left Vibhavasu, Tusti left 
imperishable Brahma, Prabha left Prabhakara, 
Kuhi left Havisman, Kirti to Jayanta, Vasu to 
Kasyapa, the son of Marici, Dhrti left her 
husband Nandi and went to serve the moon. The 


moon at that point of time was illumining all the 
directions with his rays looked graceful. 


Ba: wren serety apa 
UAH MATa. ATA ASTI 


The moon achieved such a store of pleasure 
which is envied by Rsis, and became sole 
Monarch of the seven lokas by his austerity. 


HelkagaraTa Aaya 

STATON PITA 
Teanaaracaan 

TORT Te sSHAgaeT ATTN 2 CH 


Once the moon came across Tara, the wife 
of Brhaspati, when she was roaming in the 
garden. On seeing Tara, adorned with flowers, 
having projected breasts, too delicate to touch 
the body with flowers even, the moon was filled 
with passion. 


86 


mal a at aT 
SONATA AT 

ai a areata: Bd: 
ag Tare fafa of 


He approached her who was the figure of 
exquite beauty with lovely eyes and caught her 
by the hair. 


AST BTA AE TT 
AGIA ETAT 

fat fagrara SITs ATT 
faeretar Taye Tatsfan3 vn 


Tara too finding the enchanting form of 
moon was overpowered with passion and 
enjoyed his company for long. The moon 
enjoyed her company for a long time and then 
carried her to his abode. 


t oftarrater yesht Ter 
ACH TENTAT| 

Se aMldetatenraara- 
TAUGHT ATTN 21 


The moon was so attracted with her beauty 
that he never felt satisfied, even after enjoying 
her company for a long time. Brhaspati was 
missing her very much in the absence of Tara. 


WMG YT TM agra 

T WAM AT aaa TST: 
reared fafaerour- 

FAA STENT: 13 3H 


He came to know all about her by means of 
his tapas, but could not dissuade the moon by 
means of the curses, incantations, arms, fire or 
the poison. 


O WAIT AY SAT 
ae wauraeegaa: | 

@ Ma eet A ATT 
FEMA STATS: 113 VI 


ee ee SS LL KT 


Matsya Puranam 


Then Brhaspati, burning with passion went 
to moon, and humbly requested him to get him 
back his wife. But the moon who had 
completely fallen for Tara, refused to part with 
her 


TERT YY 
Tae: We MHC: 
eel el at a arifates 
Tel Fea: MATT BTA 4H 
Subsequently the moon refused the requests 
of even Siva, Brahma, Devas and Maruts 


besides others to part with Tara, which enraged 
lord Siva. 


a anda: wfad: ofwear- 
WHS aaa 

ad: atgreat fatter: frre 
TEMA ASAMTTS: 113 & 


Then Vamadeva carrying the Ajagava bow, 
accompanied with his attendants, the 
Bhiitegvaras, Siddhas! started a fight with the 
moon. 


At the time when Siva issued fire from his 
third eye, looked quite horrible, when the moon 
looked at him. 


1. A Siddha is a Semi-divine being supposed to be of 

great purity and holiness and characterised by eight 
supernatural faculties namely. 
(i) Anima or the power of becoming as small as an 
atom; (2) Mahimd or the power of increasing size to 
any shape , (3) Laghimd or the power of assuming 
extreme lightness at will , (4) Garimd or the power 
of making one's self heavy (5) Prdpti or the power of 
obtaining everything at will (6) Prakdmya or 
irresistible will; (7) Jsitva or supremacy (8) Vasitva 
or the power of subjugating all. 


Chapter-23 


Ua Wy MUTATE 
feryreaty : afer aa: | 
wea: alfegacte- 
YASUI STATA CH 
Finding that Siva was engaging himself in a 
full fledged war, together with his attendants 
like GaneSa and others holding various 


weapons, Kubera also followed him with large 
number of his soldiers. 


TATA eH ALTO 

Walt deat AaISaCA 
cetfeafirgiart tart 

AMISeMAT THAT: N38 


The Moon on the other hand finding the 
enemy forces marching against him, he also 


moved with his army of constellations Vetalas,” 


Yaksas, serpents and the line of a million and a 
half of the chariots in order to engage himself in 
the war. 


AACA ATA : 

WHEAT HIT: 
are Wet ater Slee 

STAT YEAST ANY 0 1 


The army of enraged moon included the 
constellation, Daityas, Asuras with Sani and 
Mars co-operating with him, and reached the 
battle ground. The sight frightened all the seven 
lokas and the islands with the oceans. The earth 
started shaking. 


a armanenmaferat 
Tettaranreatagnietate: | 
STATA RUN aA- 
VAATINT WaTeaArS Ay 21 


Then Siva holding the terrific fire-arm, 
attacked the moon. Thereafter a terrific war 
started between the two armies. Gradually the 
war took to a horrible form. 


87 


It £8 Pe od C1 tre A-!, 
a 


“, 
RTT TT Sie) | ordre 7 J:] 


VAAN GAT ATT TAT 11% 2 
All the living being were being killed in the 
same, and the weapons were shining like the 
fire. Thus both the armies started vanishing with 
the use of terrific weapons, on both the sides. 


Uateat VeaUT aeasTIeT hs 
eaftrararctaa eet 
AIST ATTA Tay 3 


At that point of time such shining types of 
weapons were being showered which could 
reduce to ashes the heaven, earth and the nether 
world. Finding this, Siva shot Brahmagsirsa 
arrow. The moon also in reply to this used the 
infallible Somdastra. 


TAU WaRTAN- 
WATT TT MTA 
AeA Wat tara 
waenelaer frases 


With the mutual striking of both the 
weapons, the ocean, earth and the sky shook 
with terror. Finding that both the weapons were 
causing destruction to the universe, Brahma, 
together with the other gods, entered the 
weapons and some how made them infructuous. 


a: Wavy ae warsy- 

frarrarara Yt; aga 

BF ASTRAL HANS 4A 
TAUAA STOTT ATA 

aM Hel FRAAa AT 
WTERa Aad Ty 

Wrasaet TAA faa 
Wraaa area Kal 

T OTAAUS TET UEASTTNY § It 


Then Brahma and other gods spoke to the 
moon, “O Soma, why did you do this without 
any reason? This is the destroyer of the people. 
Because you had indulged into such a terrific 
war after usurping the wife of other person, 
therefore, you inspite of being a peaceful planet, 
will become a planet of malignant aspect at the 
end of the bright fortnight. You should hand 
over the wife of Brhaspati to us. In case the 
usurped riches are returned to the owner, one 
does not earn any disgrace. 


a sara 
cafe Aare fentyyarett 
HUA: PTT: | 
Feld: AIT AT 
Fl WNT AYE ARV 
Siita said, “O Rsis, then the moon said, “Be 
it so.” Thus the moon accepted the command of 
Brahma and becoming peaceful, he retreated 
from the battlefield. Brhaspati, on the other 


hand after receiving his wife back, returned to 
his abode delightfully with Siva. 


Ste srareead weTTTOY ArATTA ATA 
TAMAS SATA: 112 3 A 


kk % 


CHAPTER 24 


Birth of Budha from the womb of Tara, the 
story of Urvasi and Purirava and that of 
Yayati 

Yt Sata 
WA: AAMT STATA: | 
Feemtereartert FeTTo TT: 11211 
Sita said, “O Rsis, then after the lapse of a 
year, Tara gave birth to a son. He was 
illustrious like the twelve Adityas, was clad in 
yellow lower garment and adorned with all the 


divine ornaments. He possessed the lustre of the 
moon. 


Matsya Puradnam 


ae tg tater : HATTA : 
TAS Ol caia.cic “a oOlliwus Ast Vil 


He was well-versed in the artha-sastra, 
having enormous intelligence, and he knew 
fully well the science of medicines for the 
elephants. 


ara UgAyaT feast WateterenT 
Ta: WA VARTSAGA GT: GIA U 


The said Sastra is known by the name of 
Rajaputriya. The treatment of the elephants has 
been exhaustively explained therein. Because of 
his being the son of the moon, the prince was 
known as Rajaputra or Budha. 


WIA:  Aaifa Wavdanraqaeit 
TAMIA ASSMySAT CaM: Wei 


The valorous prince, soon after his birth, 
over-powered all the powerful things. During 
the name giving ceremony of the child, all 
divine sages and the gods assembled in the 
house of Brhaspati. 


gemliye Wa WetHalcaa Aer 

ASA YUAN BA Wt: HATH It 

ad: UW Misa dat 7 fafaeaawen 

WA: FRAT FST TA TTA 

areata ferreare aatsyertey: Bay 

TT SARUAEN Welaet MT ATA 

Ma At: Frat WaT: 

TEAS WATT TEM TAMTATAT: Ne 1 

At the time of the birth ceremony, Candrama 

(moon), accepted the son and gave him the 
name of Budha. Thereafter the omniscient 
Brahma together with the Brahmarsis, asked 
Tara repeatedly from whom the baby was born? 
Hearing this she held her face in shyness, and 
after a long silence bashfully declared that the 
child was from moon. The moon accepted this, 


crowned him as the king on earth and made him 
the foremost of all comparable with the planets. 


Chapter-24 


Uvadt Maca TAAL 
selet  afies ga: GATT I 
Brahma then disappeared in full view of all 
those present there. The same Budha, produced 
a noble son from the womb of [4 who came to 
be known by the name of Purirava. 
MING ATAU: ACTA 
FRAT Sit GAM: TAASATAT RON 
He was respected by all the people and 


because of his strength, he performed more than 
a hundred ASvamedha sacrifices. 


fenaferat Ta Wa WATS 
AAAS ATRIA RANT VN 


The said king Purtrava, performed tapas for 
Visnu at a charming place in the mountain 
Himalaya and acquired all the fortunes of the 
world and he then became the lord of the seven 
islands. 


Sfgrryca era: aalfee aa after: 
SAM AAT UTA MTS NF 


He destroyed Kesi and other crores of 
Daityas, because of his prowess. Urvasi— the 
divine Apsara, fell for the beauty of Purirava 
and accepted him as her husband. 


ART TAA WHA THAT 
qT Unferat AA Aaciaatsea OTT 23 I 


Then Puriravaé, who had the desire of 
welfare of all the universe, ruled religiously on 
all the mountains, forests, orchards ard the 
seven continents. 


arent aft: Wer dargenfeat 
fa Wareleast CelaaeA TNT 


The glory always served him like a chowri- 
bearer. By the grace of lord Visnu, Indra had 
offered half of his throne to the king Puritrava. 


MARTA VANANAUTeT AT! 
ena: AAAS: TALTAAT ATI LG I 


89 


Purirava followed dharma, artha and kama 
with a religious mind. In earlier times, dharma, 
artha and kama went to the king in a 
personified form in order to test his equal 
treatment for all. 


RaareaeTea Set Uyait T AAT 
TET Ta AAA acs FTE 


They were desirous of peeping into the 
conduct of the king. The king offered them. 
arghya and pddya etc. appropriately. 


Teas feet rH 
EC RO IOIC IMI CCRC mG MEIC] 
WTR aAatanrs TE wit 
It: MITES MS ATTA RS It 


Then three golden seats studded with gems 
were brought and they were made to occupy the 
same and were adored at the same time. 
Thereafter he adored dharma a little more, 
which enraged artha and kama. Then artha 
pronounced a curse on the king, “You will get 
destroyed because of greed.” 


aMISeNe Taal feat Wea 
HUTA FLATSARTAATTN 28 


Then Kama said, “O King, because of the 
separation from Urvasi, you will lose the 
balance of mind over the Gandamadana 
mountain. 


qmisene fried antes afacatan 


TARAS WSS AAP HATHTI 0 
MAM Beara A Are yfa areafen 


SUTRAS AAT: AF WaT Wet TSATTI? Vi 


Dharma said, “O king, you shall have a long 
life remaining immensely devoted to dharma. 
Your generations shall achieve old age by 
several means. Till the sun, the moon and the 
star shine in the world, your generations shall 
never get destroyed.” Thus speaking‘all of them 
disappeared and the king started ruling the 
country. 


90 


swede tas FS Ait A Tre! 
Halelaoe TW SSTONATATOTTN 2 QI 
AAU AISTVAAN AAA 


SiSTAT STS RT PTET STATIN 3H 


Purtrava, the king of kings, used to visit 
Amaravati to meet Indra. Once he, mounted 
over the chariot of the sun, was roaming in the 
southern region of the sky. Suddenly he spotted 
the apsards named Urvasi and Citralekha being 
forcibly carried by the demon Kesi, through the 


sky way. 
a farce ant fafaengenforn 
GAGA STITT YEA ARIST YI 
aa wrniste wat aa da fatateta: | 


frarerTeaea targa APTN 4 I 


The Budha's son Purtrava, desirous of 
glory, holder of various weapons, used the 
wind-arrow in the battlefield and defeated Kesi, 
the lord of the Danavas, who had defeated even 
Indra in the battlefield. The king then carried 
Urvasi and handed her over to Indra. As a result 
of this, he developed the height of friendship 
with the gods. 


MATA TACTICS: t 
Vacant Tea Ae: HATE 
Since that time, Indra also became friendly 
with the king Purtrava, Indra then bestowed on 
Puriirava, supremacy of all the lokas, enormous 


strength, prowess, glory and fortunes, besides 
the riches. 


Walaa AASl Naat AAT A 
A TRA: Wea Wait Ad TEqueoi 
At the same time, Indra, made sage Bharata 
to recite the glory of the king. Urvasi, because 


of her love for the king used to sing the glory of 
the king lovingly. 


Vasa AM AT Wahetery 
VARTA TST FAA TARTS SST 61 


Matsya Puranam 


TAT AC AT MAAN Tai 

MM FRA Tea FRrA AMT SATIN eI 
fasta wa sea aeaer 
WMT MW: AMAT FACT o UI 
USGS cea Mat YAM Araeara 
Tara: faprad warqafaraens 


Once the play of Laksmi-svayamvara as 
composed by the sage Bharata, was enacted. In 
that performance, Indra desired Menaka, Urvasi 
and Rambha to dance. Out of them Urvasi 
taking to the form of Laksmi was dancing 
rhythmically. At the time of dancing, spotting 
Purtrava there, she was overpowered with 
passion, losing the balance of mind at the same 
time. As a result of this, she forgot all the 
process of dancing as had been taught by the 
sage Bharata earlier. This enraged the sage 
Bharata, who in anger pronounced a curse, “you 
will be born on earth in a subtle form of a 
creeper, while Purtrava shall wander there as a 
pisaca (goblin). 


AAAS Mea aT eT 
WT AAT SAP TTTTAT 13 VU 
ne 


TAT: 3 311 
aff: aati team 
MAAN AT: Yar Twat Aa AI vi 
tare fear Bt aT: War WERT: 
TH: WAM Ga Tarater faqs & Ut 


Thereafter Urvasi, went to Purtirava and 
accepted him as her husband for long. After she 
was relieved of the curse of the sage Bharata, 
Urvasi, in union with Purtirava— the son of 
Budha, gave birth to eight sons, who were 
known by the names of Ayu, Drdhayu, Asvayu, 
Dhanayu, Dhrtiman, Vasu, Sucividya and 
Satayu. All of them possessed the divine 
strength. Out of them Ayu had five sons known 
as Nahusa, Vrddhasarma, Raji, Dambha and 


Pre CASH | 


Chapter-24 


Vipapma, Raji had a hundred sons who came to 
be known as Rajeyas. 


ATTA ATO TACHA 
aT afar Fa Tae TT: 113 & 1 


Raji on the other hand, being sinless, adored 
lord Visnu. Lord Visnu, getting pleased with his 
tapas, bestowed several boons on Raji, as a 
result of which he conquered all the gods, 
asuras as Well as the humans. 


Sag TMOTR fatal Tay 

BT CATAL FHAYCU MATT 9 

WelerHaaa a aise Tay: | 

aa Sarge: WE: We AAPA TSF C1 

Thereafter a great war started between 

Prahlada and Indra, which continued for three 
hundred years, but neither of them could be 
victorious. Then all the gods went to Brahma 
and asked him, “Who shall be victorious of the 
two?” On hearing this, Brahma said, “To 
whomsoever the king Raji joins he shall be 


victorious.” The Daityas then went to the king 
Raji and requested him for their victory. 


aaa FH: Wghtaatt Asawa 
HAT Weta WAT MEARS AA ASAI 
Listening to their request the king Raji said, 
“I can help you in case I become your lord and 
not otherwise.” 


ded: wre afe carat at wenfis aerator 

Tat: Wot aero Ate o It 

AM Wea ATT ETH ATTA Few 

aat fanigrt: Wa Asaeat SWAfOATIIy gh 

But the asuras did not agree to this proposal. 

The gods on the other hand accepted the 
condition and said, “O King, you be our lord 
and destroy the enemies in the battle.” 


Thereafter the king Raji, killed all the asuras 
who were infallible by Indra. 


9] 


Yaar: HAUT fey: 
Sra AST TST ATT ATS TTS 2A 
Having been pleased with his prowess, 
Indra— the lord of gods, became the son of the 
king. Then the king Raji, handing over the 
kingdom to Indra, proceeded on to the forest for 
performing of tapas. 


ayaa Tones ara 
AAMT DT Wet WT AMAETTUTMRAT YSN 
Thereafter on the strength of their tapas the 


sons of Rayi, forcibly usurped the fortunes and 
the path of yajna from Indra. 


THREAT Prat Tagaratfee: | 

wre areata dra: wifeatsfer Tt: Fase 
1 UME Usd A feta gee 

TIM A act fears frsonfergis 4 1 


Aa FEM: WearArleacraraay| 
Temata Ufa A HAUTE I 


Thus Indra having been so humiliated by the 
sons of Raji and having been thrown from the 
kingship of heaven, went to Brhaspati and 
spoke to him, “O Great preceptor, I have been 
tortured by the sons of Raji. I have been 
deprived of my share in the yajfa and my entire 
kingdom has also been usurped by them, 
therefore O Brhaspati, you kindly make some 
effort for the restoration of my kingdom to me.” 
Brhaspati then restored his grandeur as well as 
the strength to Indra by means of pleasing of the 
planets and by Paustika karmas. 


TRAST Wigarara Wayaraeaae: | 
fret wares aeare W aefaquven 
aera armeirey fargo: | 
ASMA SPATS AAPAALNS CI 
TET Wal AU Wahedafeqpary 
TES Weert Yarata antar ys i 


Then he went to the sons of Raji and cast 
illusion on them. Then Brhaspati who was well- 


92 


versed in the Vedas, taking refuge in Jina 
dharma, made them fall from the Vedic 
dharma. Thereafter Indra, declaring them 
atheists and having been disowned by the 
Vedic-dharma, killed them with the use of 
Vajra. Thus the sons of Raji were killed. 


Afadata: Walitera: Wiata a 
Waal Meta AVAMAT: NG ot 


Now I shall narrate the story of the seven 
noble sons of Nahus who were known by the 
names of Yati, Yayati, Samyati, Udbhava, Paci, 
Saryati and Meghajati. The race expanded with 
all the seven of them. 


afd: HATATASH at Aearrals war 
TATA TAAL: AATUY VI 
Vita Tea arasagStaa FATAUT: | 
UMASS AAI A ASAATUG VW 


Yati- the eldest of all, when he was still a 
boy took to a yogi! taking to the form of 
Vaikhanasa. Then the second son Yayati taking 
refuge under the dharma took up the reins of 
the kingdom. At that point of time Sarmistha, 
the daughter of Danava king Vrsaparva and 
Devayani, the daughter of Sukracdrya, were 
married to the king Yayatt. 

Gad: WT SATA HARTA ATT: | 
Saat As YA TAG ASHTATIY 3 
TM FTA TH Wieasaagary 

Ue: Yea Vat Serfaty 

Five sons were born to them. From these 
two queens, Devayani gave birth to Yadu and 
Turvasu, while Sarmistha gave birth to Druhyu, 
Anu and Puru.* Both of them expanded the 
race. 


1. Fant CHE WesTHy Aharay Gay aM 
TAA Maa Gq a SPH aaa: uw weraado i 


2. An account of this lineage 1s to be found in Visnu 
and Bhagavata Puranas. 


Matsya Puranam 


FAMAAUSTMS SATS ATTA: | 
UAT Maa ey Paper 14 4 I 
siren fiat Cail wad: Aen 
ANAT: WAT TAATI TTT: WG 


Yayati the son of Nahusa, was truthful, 
valorous and invincible. He ruled the earth with 
a religious mind and performed several yajnas 
appropriately. He also adorned the gods and the 


Pitrs with full devotion, ruling all the earth. 


OMA: WA TAT WA THOT Tea 
SUAS ASTANA ATES BOATS 91 


In this way Yayati, the son of Nahus, ruled 
the country with the religious mind. In the 
meantime he reached the terrific old age, which 
deformed the body. 


TUR: WAT Wa Sagal 

a WS aad U Fa Uy a UMasyell 
Tat Weare Yara: Tel 

Pere ret trea ARTA SATS SHAT: 1G 8 


After having been overpowered with old 
age, the king Yayati called for his sons and 
spoke to them, “Though with the passage of the 
youthful age my desires have also vanished, but 
I have a desire to relieve with the young 
damsels, regaining the youthful age. You should 
help me in this regard,” 


a Yat caer: Yau agraaley 
Ueeal Aad: HATA Faqs ot 
On hearing this Yadu, the elder son of 


Devayani said, “What type of help have we to 
render to you with our youthful age.” — 


UMA THAT ASAT AW Wie 
Hawa Aaat aa araSqe vt 
aaat Seat Waa TTA AA 

SI: UAT AsTaANSS TT TATE VU 


Then Yayati said to his sons, “You can take 
my old age and then I shall enjoy the worldly 


Chapter-25 


pleasures with your youthful age. With the 
performing of the long time yajfias and with the 
curse of Sukracarya, my kdma and artha have 
been destroyed, therefore I cannot enjoy them. 


THAT MATT ATA TTT a 

HE TASHA Fal BAMATETATANG 311 
TAS WGA TEMA FTA! 

ATA Taal As FTTNE VI 
AAGaAA: TS: HaaTAa HA: | 

Sat at ofe Aaa aT AY Sea & I 


Therefore if any one of you can accept my 
old age in exchange for the youthful age, and 
with the achieving of the youthfulness, | shall 
enjoy all the worldly pleasures.” But when 
Yadu and other sons refused to oblige the father 
and refused to accept the old age, then the 
Royal sage cursed them. This is what has been 
heard by us. Thereafter Puru— the truthful one, 
who happened to be the youngest of all, said to 
the king, “O Father you give away your old age 
to me and in exchange you have my youthful 
age for the enjoyment of all the worldly 
pleasures. 


3g WU AASSATA Tea Wey asswani 


Way: M Woe a aa aA & I 

ARNT FA TAT YT ASIA 

WAU STAT TT Aaa AT: 1G 9 

I accepting your old age, shall conduct 

myself according to your command shall take 
care of your kingdom.” At these words of Puru, 
Yayati- the royal sage, with the use of his tapas 
established his own old age in the body of his 
young son Puru and he himself became young 
with the young age of his son. 


AAAI STA WHT ETAT 

TA ALAA TATPATATTATT: 1G 
AIA Sq HMM TS FAqare ZI 

AAT STATS wa AMAT: TANG CI 


93 


Then Puru attaining the old age of his father 
started ruling the country. Thus even after the 
passing of a thousand years, Yayati remained 
dissatisfied with enjoyment of the worldly 
pleasures. Then he said to his son Puru, “I claim 
to have a son because of you and you are my 
real son. From today onwards, this dynasty shall 
be known as Puru dynasty.” 


Ultal aor sare weanfa wiles afta 

Aa: BW FIMMSe: TH Teas aeT Tivol 

clea Wea Vane aaa 

Tea WAIT YOAG TATA: | 

UAT AAT AAT ALATA ASAT: 119 21 

Thereafter, Yayati, the lion among the 

rulers, crowning Puru as the king, got himself 
detached and after the lapse of a lot of time met 
with his end. Now I am going to describe the 
dynasty in which the Bharata-vamsa expanded. 
I am now going to describe about the Purv- 


vamsa. All of you should listen with a 
concentrated mind. 


Sta sea VETTE Array sarrahia 
Aq fa MISEATT: 112 SI 


kk * 


CHAPTER 25 


- Kaca and Devayani join Sukra for learning 


of Mrtasanjivani after bearing painful 
situations 
BAT Fd: 
ferret ual aet: seaed wT TACT 
sae alder: fant daa frame 
Tatar at fae ae 
TAT AUA ATT BU AAT IT 


Rsis said, “O Sita, how could the Pum 
dynasty, achieve excellence, inspite of Puru 
being the youngest of all the brothers? How 
could the race of Yadu be deprived of grace 
inspite of his being the eldest of the brothers? 
You kindly explain the story of Yayati in 


94 


considerable details, because it happens to be 
quite auspicious, enhances age and is praised by 
the gods. 
ad sara 

Utes YM YS: Maret vile: 

MUP RICE Oo GUCCI RE CCUELL 

Sita said, “O Rsis, in earlier times Satanika 

had asked about the auspicious, pure, important 


a story which increases the age from Maharsi 
Saunaka. 


Waris Sara 
Tafa: YSRISVN BTA A: WATT: 
cet MT YRATT AY TASTY I 
wafeeararg site ferertor autert 
ATTA HMA WAT TUTTNG I 


Satinika asked, O Tapodhana, our ancestor, 
the king Yayati, was born in the tenth 
generation of Prajapatis. How could he get 
Devayani, the unique daughter of Sukracarya as 
his wife? I would like to listen to this story 
exhaustively. You tell me the story of each one 
of the kings of the Puruvarhsa, individually. 


vita Sara 


TACT ATTA A 

af Yaqaraiunt aart ft gar FTG 1 
TASS AAA Pasa THAT 
CAM TA TATA TET ANI 


Saunka said, “O Great king, Yayati the royal 
ascetic, was as illustrious as Indra. In earlier 
times, Sukracarya and Vrsaparva had given 
their daughters in marriage to Yayati. | shall 
relate the relevant story at your instance. 
Simultaneously I shall also narrate about the 
union of Yayati and Devayani. 


Aug a aaa t fr: 
tad wit Madeteaa WTC I 
faritaen wat cat aquigra gry 


Matsya Puranam 


Uafad a aM Het WAT we 


Once for the possessing of the fortunes of 
the three worlds, there had been a great war 
between the gods and the asuras. For the 
purpose of achieving victory in the war, the 
gods established Brhaspati, the son of Angira as 


the priest, while the Daityas appointed 
Sukracarya as the priest. 
Tat aaut Ferra wet yer 


aa tan foeqarenarge WraAq 01 
AAA Hea fereracresveane 
TAR VASAT Aral FTL 


age Paqarguarag 
T ARAMAAAT TEMA SST AU! 


Both the Brahmanas had great conflict 
between themselves. Whoever demons arrived 
in the war were killed by the gods, but 
Sukracarya with the use of Sajfijivani-lore, 
brought the demons back to life. They then 
again getting up started fighting with the gods. 
But the gods who were killed in the war, could 
not be brought back to life by Brhaspati. 


4 fe ae a ai faa at areal ae ada 
Caleat aat ar Fawr aT 3 
It was due to the fact that Sukracarya knew 
the powerful Sanjivani lore, which was 
unknown to Brhaspati. Because of this the gods 
felt immensely disturbed. 
BT Cal MAEM: HMS AAT 
TY: HUTT TS UT TEMA ULI 
WARTS TETAS Welt ad ay! 
aise ferent Frerater arerors Prreratratu Bh 1 
Wa amet fax arraret afeeafar 
qaqa: AAISA yet RE aT FETE I 
The gods getting terrified from Sukracarya, 
felt exceedingly anxious. Then they went to 


Kaca— the elder son of Brhaspati and said, 
“Sukracarya possesses Safjivani-lore, which is 


Chapter-25 


unknown to Brhaspati. As a result of this, the 
gods have suffered. You own us. We take 
refuge in you. By doing so you would be able 
the share of yajna from the gods. You own us 
and help us.” Sukracarya- the immensely 
illustrious one possesses Mrtasanyivani lore. 
You must learn it quickly. You can meet 
Sukracdrya in the vicinity of the demon king 
Vrsaparva. 


WH AAA FT Waray 
aaa Prat AT: HEA TIT! 
Saat A Sa YM TAT USI: | 
ATTA PRAT AT: war faerie i 


He remaining there protects the Danavas, 
but those who are not Danavas are not protected 
by him. No one else 1s competent enough to 
adore him. Devayani is the name of his dear 
daughter. By serving her you can also please 
her. No one else can do so. 


Mera IMTTa TAT ST 
eaara F Tera fae at weara gages 
By pleasing Devayani by your humility, 
broad-mindedness, sweet temperament, noble 
conduct and controlling of the sense organs, you 
can please Devayani and by doing so, you will 
surely learn the Sanjivani lore. 


cer fe waa ea: aA gaat: | 

TAYRA FT A MAGMA YA: HAN ol 

B teal wafeat Trea: Wafer: He: 

AVAL YR MOMS TAT FI? vit 

mutate: wat yt Tenggea: | 

Ten aeld faced Fret VEIT At AAT? VI 

He said, “All right.” Kaca, the son of 

Brhaspati, having been honoured by the gods, 
went to Vrsaparva. Thus Kaca who had been 
deputed by the gods, went to the city of 
Vrsaparva— the king of D&anavas and met 


Sukracarya offering salutation to him, he said, 
“O Lord, I am the grand son of Angira— the 


95 


great sage and am the son of Brhaspati. | am 
known by the name of Kaca. You kindly accept 
me as your disciple. 
Tadd arent wag we TT 
ATTA Ai TATA TAT 2 3 I 

O Brahman, you are my preceptor, and I by 
staying with you for thousand years shall 


observe the excellent brahmacarya. You kindly 
accord me the necessary permission. 


WA sated 
Sa Gears ase wpe at ae: 
aA eAA AMA ey TRMAA UWI 
Sukracarya said, “O Kaca, you are most 
welcome. I accept your request. You are 
respectable for me. Therefore I honour and 


welcome you, and when I do so, I actually 
honour Brhaspati. 


vies Sart 

a FT AAA WMS Tea 

Mas HAYA PRONG TATUM 

ad AU Adhiet A Aah Wee 

SUATAUATS SATA A ATA GU 

Prenat yar sarin! 

TAA CAAA AAAI 9 

Saunaka said, “Kaca then said, “All right.” 

Then at the command of the immensely 
illustrious Sukracarya, the son of Kavi, Kaca, 
took to Brahmacarya-vrata. Kaca was thus 
owned by Sukracdrya since he had embraced 
vrata for a fixed period. Then Kaca, started 
adoring Sukracarya and his daughter Devayani 
regularly. He was a youthful boy and pleased 
Devayani, by singing and dancing. 

Ueacaa BA AIT AT 

Yet: Tet: WATT AVATAR CI 

caarare & fax Fravareanttorg 

ATMA AAA TS: TAATARTN 3 


96 


Devayani, the daughter of the acarya also 
had entered the youthful age. Kaca used to 
bring the flowers and fruits for her, and acted as 
per her command. He always pleased her. 
Devayani too, kept regular company of Kaca 
who observed the Brahmacarya-vrata singing, 
dancing and joking. She also served him in 
seclusion. 


Waals HMA AAT FHA 
Aaa Td AKA CAAT AT: HAIN ofl 
bibesabeh adhe 
ASAT ATMAAS ATS 2 
er aergivan referer: ary 
aay Mat Feparen seater: TaPagTATN3 211 


Thus living there, observing the vrata of 


Brahmacarya, Kaca spent five hundred years. 
Then the Danavas came to know of the reality. 
Therefore, they finding that Kaca was in the 
forest grazing the cows alone, because of their 
jealousy with Brhaspati, and for the protection 
of the Sanyivani lore, the Danavas having been 
filled with anger killed Kaca. After killing him 
his body was cut into pieces and they threw 
them before the jackals. On that particular day 
the cows returned to their abodes without the 
cowherd. 


MT Seat Tea WY HUAI FATT! 
Sa Tat let SAAT APTA 311 

gt warttrela a qearet wa: wah 
SAMUBSSTAT Wa: HART A TPAC VI 
oI Eat Fat ashy wearenat afaeata 

a fart Aa sitenfa aa: Get TateeA3 41 


When Devayani found the cows returning 
from the forest without their protector Kaca, 
then she atonce informed her father- 
Sukracarya, “O Lord, you have performed the 


Agnihotra, and the sun is also going to set, the. 


cows have today returned without their 
protector. O Dear one, but Kaca is no where to 
be seen. O Father, Kaca has surely either been 


Matsya Puranam 


killed or has been captured. I am speaking the 
truth. I shall not be able to live without him.” 


Wr sara 
AEllt Wert Yo Waitara 
ad: Usted fae Waa HIAT™aTI 3 € I 
Mad: Wea: Wa AAT A: 
BaUSeialet Missa Tera feoTeaT: 113191 


a Pea: YE ITEM 
at Tat Het far: WSS A META C1 


at Tent frat eayetaey WI 
Tastes t Kat Tt Feat 7 Baqi 
WAT ASMNA YUAN TTT 8 1 


Sukracarya said, “Don't worry my daughter, 
I shall call back the dead Kaca saying, “Come 
here, Come here. Thus calling him I shall bring 
him back to life.” Thus speaking Sukracarya, 
making use of the Sanjivani lore, called Kaca. 
Then at the call of the preceptor, Kaca— the son 
of Sarasvati, ran from a distance and coming 
close to Sukracarya, offered his salutation to the 
sage and said, “O Preceptor, the Danavas had 
killed me.” Again once Devayani sent Kaca to 
fetch flowers from the forest. Then Kaca— the 
Brahmana, reciting the Vedic hymns, went to 
the forest. The Danavas spotted Kaca, collecting 
flowers from the forest. The asuras then killed 
him the second time and burnt his body in the 
fire. Then they made the powder of his dead 
body and mixing up that powder in the wine, 
made Sukracarya to drink the same. 


cara erste frat areaagate 
TREMP HARMT A EVA ol 
OR Eat Yat ashy qereta wfaeate 
a far ta sitenfa aa: aed Tats A gi 
Then Devayani spoke to her father, “I had 
sent Kaca in the forest for the fetching of the 
flowers, but he has not returned so far. O Dear 


one, it appears that either he has been killed or 
has died otherwise I cannot live without him.” 


Chapter-25 


Wa sara 
qed: Ya: Ut Hea: NAT Aa: 
faern sifadisata gare ararftr faqs 
i yal or ve tah 
Tee AeA We 
Tetid Jal d diese 
Vay carl aaasht Ass 
qifgeta sre wd- 
qafead AATa: TATA 
arease silafag fenfe: 
Usilfaat at aaa da ya 
Sukracarya said, “O Daughter, Kaca, the son 
of Brhaspati is dead. I got him back his life with 
the use of the sacred lore, but again he 1s killed 
like this always. What should I do, O 
Devayani? You should not grieve like this. 
Don't cry. A powerful damsel like you never 
grieves for a dead person. You indeed are being 


adored by the Vedas, Brahmanas, all the gods 
including Indra, Vasus, Asvanikuméaras, the 


Daityas and all the living beings of the world — 


thrice a day lowering their heads, because of my 
influence. Now it is impossible to bring that 
Brahmana back to life. In case he 1s brought 
back to life, the Daityas shall kill him again. 
Therefore it would be of no use to bring him 
back to life.” 


eaarqara 
TMs Tara: frat 
qeeateemta frat raat: | 
ae: Wye waenty ws 
ca TPM AAS A VATU 
a Farad a aay 
Relfert: BAG Aa eer 
aerate what 7 alee 
frat fe A ata Hershreg ee 


Devayani said, “O Father, the one who 


97 


happens to be the grandson of the sage Angira, 
whose father is Brhaspati, the abode of tapas, 
the one who 1s the son of a Rsi as well as the 
grandson of a Rsi for such a Brahmacani Kaca, 
why should I not grieve? O Dear one, he was 
engaged in performing the Brahmacarya vrata, 
the tapas was his only wealth. He always 
remain alert and was quite competent in 
performance. Therefore Kaca had been quite 
dear to me. He always moved according to my 
desire. I shall stop taking food and shall follow 
the path on which Kaca has proceeded.” 


vite Jara 
a aa ease vee: 
SUNT STANT HTT: | 
aes UTA feat 
a 0 rearrmarqara sist 
HHA ae heres ha Ue 
Ueld mega arate 
AHUUISET Aafegrd: 
H TSN A SCAUTANY CII 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, at these words of 
Devayani, Sukracarya, who had been grieved 
because of her grief, called for Kaca and then 
getting enraged with the Daityas, he said, 
“There is not the slightest doubt that the demons 
are jealous of me. This is the reason that they 
kill my disciple, who has arrived here and has 
taken refuge with me. These Daityas with 
terrific temperament intend to make me fall 
from brahmanhood. This is the reason that they 
are acting against me daily. The result of this 
sin will surely appear. Who cannot be burnt by 
Brahmahatyds irrespective of his being Indra or 
any one else? 


a dassget fase arog: 
Wada WSt AAEM 
THAaHT Veet 
waar fate gfe areas ei 


ira 


3 | 


nov 
sho 
aliv 
alte 
ali 


98 


Then the preceptor making use of the lore, 
called the pupil, then Kaca, who had been 
lodged in his belly was frightened and he said 
slowly. Listening to his voice Sukracarya said, 
“O Son, how could you enter my belly. You tell 
me correctly.” 


ad sald 
WANATA Helit Al ld: 
Wa MG Ted AM FT FAT 
qd TNT: aa T 
Ta: FEM MAT BATTAAG 0 11 
Yt: Wat wadsfar eal 
Seal SAT Boaca MT aT 
Gell Wat aa aa UAT 
cafe Feat aertranferarerctiy gi 
Kaca said, “O Preceptor, my memory has 
not faded out because of your grace whatever 
had happened is well known to me. In case | 
come out tearing off the belly, my tapas would 
be lost. I am feeling miserable in order to avoid 
that situation. O Great dcdrya, the asuras, after 
killing me, burnt out my body. Then making the 
powder of it, they mixed it in wine and they 
made you drink the same. O Great Brahman, 
you are well aware of Brahmi, dsuri and Jaivi 


Mayas. In your presence how could anyone else 
venture to cross these Mayas? 


Yr sare 
fa a fra arava acd 

fara 8 sifad wee 
qaa Hania Werte 

CVA Aaa SAAT Y 2 


Sukricarya said, “O Daughter Devayani, 
now tell me, what is the pleasant task which 
should be performed by me? Kaca can come out 
alive only after my death. There is no other 
alternative but to tear out my belly, to take Kaca 
alive out of my body. 


Matsya Puranam 


Bt Ut yetatracdt eat 
SA AMA VATA: | 
HAA AN AT Ae TG 
TAT Stel ATE STATING 311 
Wa sata 
Ufageusta Gea: YA 
Wal Wh Wd Saar 
faentaat wreqte sitet ca 
TCR: HAT AMETG VI 
4 fFradanitaaireat Ware 
Te aaifaeach TANTIMTATEAAS IY & 1 
Wat war Pemmarerra 
PRAT Het ag At a Aa 
saan Mada 
TU: Bearer ferent Afar: 1 & 1 
Sukracarya said, “O Kaca, the son of 
Brhaspati, you have now become a siddha, 
because you are devoted to Devayani and she 
likes you. In case you are not Indra in the form 
of Kaca, then you receive Sanjivani-lore from 
me. Except one Brahmana, there is none else 
who can come out alive from my belly. 
Therefore you receive the lore. O Dear one, 
after coming out of my body you will be like 
my son. Therefore you bring me back to life. 
After receiving the lore from me as a preceptor, 
you would become highly learned and even 


then you should remain devoted to me and look 
at me with kindness.” 


vite Sara 
TU: Wargnerrangy fer 
firat afer Ftceca fam: 
MAK: YTD UF 
TANTS Crores 114 91 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, receiving the 
Safijivani lore from the preceptor, Kaca, atonce 


Chapter-25 


tore out the belly of Sukracarya in the same way 
as the moon appears on the evening of the day 
of full moon from the Sveta peak of the 
Himalaya mountain. 
eeal a at Ufad Aeuhy- 
FATA Ta: SHeaISHT 
faa fegt ararentrarar 
Ad: Here THATS 6 
Y USS THAT 
entee - 
WATT RT TAT IMTEST: 1G SN 
Finding the sage Sukracarya lying on earth 
like the mountain of the Vedas, Kaca with the 
use of the Sanjivani lore, brought him back to 
life and then addressed him, “O Worthy one, 
you are bounteous like an ocean and the most 
generous among the givers of the boons. Those 
who do not extend due regard and respect to 


such a preceptor, are grave sinners and fall in 
hell, after being wrecked. 


Wires Tae 


Quarrel 
Garret Vay aT 
geal he Ue AaMiwAd 
Wheat AAT AAT ARATE ot 
WATS Aer aa- 
welyrt fanfed fay: | 
weal: ae aeata We 
QUT WTA ATA: HE VN 
Saunaka said, “Sukra (Usana) who was 
deluded through drinking, on getting back his 
lost disciple and finding his graceful form and 
the powers of tapas, desirous of doing a good 
turned to the Brahmanas taking the wine, 


uttered the following words against the drinking 
of wine and its evil consequence. 


99 


Ws sae 
at TreMiserpite AE 
Teg waft weais:| 
SUTIN Teel Ua W EA- 
Stators Net: TTA ANE 21 
Tar wat fava 
walet a wiftat Pacis 
car Se UaY Wale 311 


Sukra said, “Hereafter, the foolish 
Brahmana, who shall drink wine shall be devoid 
of dharma and shall by so doing to earn the sin 
of the killing of a Brahmana and shall be 
despised in the present as well as the next 
world. I have laid down this law for the 
Brahmanas of the universe. Let the auspicious 
Brahmanas know the injunctions of the 
preceptor and let the gods and the Daityas also 
listen to these words.” 


vite are 
Silage FT WEMia- 
waratreat Fafa: | 
aerate Freq 
Fig Wares Falswarag ¥I 
Saunaka said, “The illustrious seer Sukra, 


after thus uttering, called all the Danavas of 
clouded intellect and spoke to them thus.” 


Wh sara 

BAN A SAAT Alergy: 
forear: arat areata aa 
AINA HTT TANITA 1G 4 UI 


Sukracarya said, “O Danavas, Kaca has 
become a siddha, after receiving the knowledge 
from me and he has the influence comparable 
with me. This Brahmana is the form of 
Brahman.” 


AY 
Wy 


ref 


OVE 


to | 


Brl 


100 


vite Tare 
TUE THN BT SM AIA TI 
SMA: Seal Waa Hay TeTAT NE & I 


Saunaka said, “Kaca thus lived with his 
preceptor for a thousand years and completed 
his vrata. Then getting permission from the 
preceptor to leave for his home, he thought of 
proceeding to the Devaloka. 


ofa sired Target Aras wanfrafet 
USA SATA 24 


kk 


CHAPTER 26 


Devayani proposes marriage with Kaca who 
refused and their mutual showering of curses 


Wa sare 
aMftdad tq tage TROT Aen 

wid femrard saartengatqi et 

Saunaka said, “When the vrata of Kaca was 

over and Sukracadrya— his preceptor permitted 
him to return to his home, Devay4ani, then said 
to him. 

RUN: Wa FATT TT 

gna faa da Aa a SAA ANI 


Devayani said, “O Grandson of Angira, you 
possess noble character, are born in high race, 
have excellent education and fapas at your 
credit, because of the control of your sense 
organs, you are earning enough of grace. 


meres ERT APA: faye wera: 
TM APY SAT AA yay FeeaT NFM 
Ue Wen faarife aqua ater 
are Franrad aan aatag wafaiei 


As the immensely glorious Maharsi Angira 
is adorable as my father, similarly your father 
Brhaspati is also adorable for me besides being 


Matsya Puranam 


respectable. O Performer of great fapas, 
keeping all this in view, I have to say something 
which should be kept in mind by you. When 
you were engaged in the following of the vratas 
and the related rules, you must not have 
forgotten the behaviour I extended to you. 


a amnfaafaan At wat A AME a! 
Terr Ufor fatraary WATT ATTN UI 
Now ending your vrata, you have achieved 
your education. I love you. Therefore, you 


accept me. Accept me in marriage with the 
reciting of the Vedic Mantras. 


aa Jared 
Wea AR MTA AA Ata Ta 


TM AMAT TSA ATAT WATE I 


Kaca said, “O Devayani with spotless limbs, 
as your father Sukracarya is respectable and 
adorable for me, I hold you in the same esteem. 


STATO: HATA ANTE RTT: 

wa WS THAT: TSM Taal Aa AAI 

Ga AT Teread AI: Ya: Hat aan 

CaM Wa wa tae AT awAeaNIC I 

You are dear to the sage Bhargava much 

more than his life. Because of your being the 
daughter of my preceptor, you are always 
adorable for me. In a way you are much more 
respectable than him. O Excellent one, O 
Devayani, as Sukracdérya, my preceptor is 
extremely respectable for me, you are like the 
same. Therefore you should not speak like this.” 


qaarqara 
Teqae Ya 4 Ay wate 4 faq: 
CATT RT AaNG ve PERTTI 
TREAMIA J Get Ala YA: WAI 
TAMA AM Mile ANA MAA Aol 
ete AAMT aT Ser F ahaa 
TASS Mt Ah AAT I 


Chapter-26 


Devayani said, “O best of the Brahmanas, 
you are the son of my preceptor and not my 
father (therefore you cannot be my brother), but 
you are adorable and respectable for me. O 
Kaca, when the demons killed you repeatedly, 
the love I had for you since that time, should be 
remembered by you. You have already 
witnessed my goodwill, my attachment for you, 
the excellent devotion for you. You are well- 
versed in dharma as well. I am quite sinless and 
am devoted to you and helpless too at the same 
time. It would not be proper for you to disown 
me In any way. 


ad sdid 


ara fart ait fraafer qa 
wale Gyre wt SAT YAN 
aalfad famrenfat cen aera 


TaTSAA AR HA HreTeT aA 3 


Kaca said, “O Beautiful one performing the 
excellent vrata, you are leading me to the path, 
which is not at all proper. You are held by me in 
high esteem much more than my preceptor. O 
Beautiful damsel, with vast eyes and the face 
resembling the moon, the belly of Sukracarya in 
which you have dwelt, I have also dwelt in the 
same. 


Wirt cat Fa Aa ara: AAI 
Tara ax A Waa ATX 


Therefore, O Noble one, from the point of 
view of dharma you happen to be my sister. 
There is not an iota of anger against you in my 
mind. 


aes wai Uitents frareagr 8 afar 
ATT TART TATA S HAT ATATI RG Hl 
STAM TATA TS WANE I 


Now I shail leave the place, therefore, I seek 
your command. Bless me that my journey 
should be pleasant. Holding dharma quite high, 
you remember me occasionally during your talk 


101 


and devote yourself in the service of my 
preceptor keeping yourself alert and careful. 


qaarqaral 
eeledea ARGS et Tera aM 
afe at adaraeal weanereata aa: 
wd: ae ad fae fataner afseafai go 


Devayani said, “O Kaca, after your repeated 


| killing by the Daityas, I had saved taking you to 


be my husband. Therefore my request to you is 
based on dharma. In case you disown me, then 
this Sanjivani lore will be of no use to you. 


weal Sara 

Teyalla Hearss wearers 7 SAT: 

TROT UMA: BMA MTT ANRC I 
amd at Farnise saafs sar ea 

We Aeshar Heo AMAASS A a1 Vek 
AANA FT: BA A aa Afacate 
Raya 7 a HiT UfoT TateafA 2 oN 
Tfersata + A fae wagaata aaa 
eaafaeniy a st Tet fare wafer 2 vt 


Kaca said, “O Devayani, I have not accepted 
your words taking you to be the daughter of my 


preceptor, not because of any defect in you. The ~ 


preceptor is also quite well aware of this. You 
can pronounce a curse on me as you like, O 
sister. I had been talking of the ancient dharma. 
Therefore I was not entitled to receive any curse 
from you. Your curse on me has _ been 
overpowered by passion and not on the basis of 
dharma, therefore the desire of your mind shall 
never be fulfilled. You will not be married to a 
Brahmana. You have told me that my education 
shall have no success with me, that 1s correct, 


but when the same education is imparted by me ~ 


to someone else, he would be successful. 
vite SATE 
VAYRA FINS SAI BAIT 
Fresrorera vite Serr FESTA 2 BI 


1S 
nN 


ay a Pra a heed rea _———\ 


102 


TATA Sat: VATA: | 
seals Was HaTgdaTeaaT: 11231 
Saunaka said, “O Satanika, the best of the 

kings, Kaca, the excellent Brahmana, thus 
speaking to Devayani, anxiously returned to 
Indraloka. Finding his arrival, Indra and other 
gods collectively went to Brhaspati with Kaca 
and delightfully spoke to him. 


Cal Se: 
a GMa HY Hearea ge! 
TS AM: Woe wT UTA VI 


The gods said, “O Kaca, you have done a 
great job for us, which is quite astonishing. 
Therefore your glory shall never fade out from 
human memory. You will also have your share 
in the yajna. 

Sta sia Verret WAayt aarhrafte 
TSfaAMISEATT: 2G I 


k*k* 


CHAPTER 27 


Quarrel between Devayani and Sarmistha, 
Sarmistha pushes Devayani into the well, 
Yayati saves Devayani, conversation between 
Devayani and Sukracarya 


Vite Tare 
Sila Ha wea gee fedtaa:| 
Baca at feet Herel ATTA VI 
Saunaka said, “O best of Bharata race, after 
the return of Kaca, learning the Mrtsanyivani 


lore, the gods felt delighted. They learning the 
knowledge from Kaca, felt beholden. 


Wa Us AAT VHyAMN TTT 
HAKATA Als METER 
Then all of them said to Indra, “O Indra, 


now the time for us to show our prowess has 
arrived. Now you should destroy the enemies.” 


Way UE dieaevtaatean 


Matsya Puranam 


TATRA TTAN BSUvatgrad FTTH 
When the gods so spoke collectively to 
Indra, he said, “All right” and after thus 
speaking he arrived in a forest with a large 
number of damsels. 


MS Y BAA at Aaa 
ard: WT aenir qatote saesTaqiy 


They were enjoying the water sports and the 
name of the forest was known as Caitraratha 
which was quite pleasant like the divine 
orchard. Indra then taking to the form of the 
wind mixed up all the costumes of the ladies 
lying over the river bank. 


Aa HMA A: HA: Afearatad 
SEAT AERA SATA: GU 
Then the damsels collectively got out of the 
water and in confusion, tried to put on the 


clothes whatever came handy to each one of 
them. 


aa ATA CAAA: VMs WTS TUT 
SAH Steal FATAUT: NG A 
aaeraareta fatter: WaT 
CAAA TNS VST AAAI 


In this confusion, Sarmistha put on the 
clothes of Devayani. Sarmistha had been the 
daughter of the demon king Vrsaparva. The 
costumes of both of them were mixed up and 
the fact was unknown to her. O King, in the 
exchange of the costumes both Sarmistha and 
Devayani picked up a quarrel. 


qaarqara 
HATaTea A aed Hea year TAIsSAe 
Agere J a ar afawafenic i 


Devayani said, “O Daughter of a Danava, 
being my disciple, how do you dare to put on 
my clothes. You are devoid of the noble 
conduct of the excellent people. Therefore you 
shall not face welfare.” 


Chapter-27 


vitdsstara 

sae TWA a faa a fort aT 

Title Teatt artlent aterer; yfertararque it 

aaa UT Sem Mad: Meyer: 

Yass RAMA Saat TT Teme gol! 

Sarmistha said, “OQ Damsel, irrespective of 

my father being seated or sleeping, but your 
father offers prayer to him like bards, with all 
humility. You are the daughter of a beggar. 
Your father offers prayers and lives on charities. 
J am the daughter of the king who is praised and 


the one who gives charities to others and does 
not receive anything from anyone. 


SEN Aga: fee a Hata freaytan 
MAAN Wrargrt A a al WITT gh 


Q Beggar, you are empty handed and 
possess no weapons even. Look here I have the 
weapons, therefore you are showing your anger 
to me for nothing. In case you intend to fight, 
you will find a rival who can fight with you 
with force. I care the least for you.” 


Vita Save 

a faa taal wat at a arafa 
wisest wiferaHT At: LAUTAN I 
erate fagrea pitiear arate 
BART TA ALATA TATU 23 UI 


Saunaka said, “O Satinika, listening to these 
words, Devayani felt immensely surprised and 
tried to drag the costumes from the body of 
Sarmistha. Finding this, Sarmisthd pushed her 
into the well and thinking that she must have 
been killed by drowning, the sinful Sarmistha 
returned home. She had been filled with rage, 
therefore she returned home, without looking at 
Devayani. 


SF SUNT erga: | 
TAPS: ATE Paecy: faufaa: esi 
Thereafter, Yayati- the son of Nahusa 


103 


arrived at that place. His charioteer as well as 
the horses, had been tired. They felt dead tired. 
They had been following a wild animal in the 
forest and had been feeling thirsty. 


Teta: wararon fe a Far wales 
CaM Seat at aa charahaforarfran eG 1 


Yayati started looking at the well, where he 
found a girl in the well, resembling the fire 
flame, who resembled a divine damsel. 


AAI Seas HIATT 
AAA FNS: UTA WAAC 2G I 
al wet ARTE VAT YPeAlUHose 

ale Aaa Meas HVA AT ASSTT I 
ae O Uften ererat arequrad 

Glam da HA St ae Ws BREAN VI 


At the very sight of the girl, Yayati— the 
excellent monarch, spoke to her with calm but 
sweet words, assuring her and asked, O Damsel 
with beautiful waist, who are you? You have an 
extremely pleasant face. You also appear to be 
quite young. Your ear rings are also beautiful 
and glittering. You have been overpowered with 
great anxiety. Feeling disgusted you are having 
deep sighs. How have you fallen in the well 
covered with grass and creepers? Who is your 
father? You tell me correctly. 


caaryars 

Asa eaearacagenaae fers 

TI] YRA HAUSE A AT TA A TAAL 
ee clan TerforMTTE TT: | 

ATE Fela At aetted fF A Aaoll 
SMe at I Ut aaa aay 
THA Utd HTSeATS STATA VN 


Devayani said, “The one who brings back to 
life the demon who are killed by the gods with 
the use of hits lore, | am the daughter of the 
same Sukracarya. Surely you do not recognise 
me. O Lord, this is my right hand with red nails 


as 


he 


he 
re 


he 
ut 
el 
an 
De 
ul 
th 
12 
ell 
ur 


(Oo 
th 
he 
se 
ils 


104 


and fingers. You kindly hold it and pull me out 
of the well, redeeming me at the same time. | 
am aware of the fact that you are a monarch 
bom in a high race. I am also aware of the fact 
that you are extremely peaceful in your 
temperament, besides being valorous and 
immensely strong. Therefore, you kindly 
redeem a helpless damsel having fallen in the 
well.” 


Wha Jara 
AAT Great eat B fags AAT: | 
TAA SAVY UOTGSHSIT TASACTN Vi 
SI CA ATA ALATHUTATTCTT: | 
SAAT FARO Taft: AT TANIA 
Tet J Age aareaaraty Fred 
SATA Waar BorHrarra FAV 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, thereafter the 
king Yayati- the son of Nahusa, taking 
Devayani to be a Brahmana girl, held her right 
hand in his own hand and pulled her out of the 
well. Thus driving her out with force from the 
well, the king Yayati, getting permission from 
Devayani, returned to his city. After the 
departure of Yayati— the son of Nahusa, the 
chaste Devayani, having been filled with grief, 
then spoke to the maid servant who appeared 
before her. 


eaaTqaral 
vated ofote tres Waaraed 4 fog: 
ert 7 Weert Ae FATATT! 4 I 


Devayani said, “O Ghirmika, you should go 
with utmost speed from here and reveal the 
factual position to my father. I shall not enter 
the city of Vrsaparva hereafter. I shall not place 
my foot in that city. 


via Sara 
a Fo eaftd wear atlas gaat 
SSA HAMAS HOTTA FTATATIN2 & UI 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, on hearing these 


words, Ghiimika atonce rushed to the palace of | 


Matsya Puranam 


Vrsaparva, the lord of the demons, meeting 
Sukracarya, while shaking narrated the entire 
sequence of events to him, faltering in her 
speech. 


aT UA A Ae Vaart ay Ba 

VMSA ASAT SEAT FAVATT: NI 

HAN Start BTA VASAT TAI 

aM Frat SERA: Yat FANUC 

aaa efent arent taarit alert 

aA Walaa E: Raat aaaTaTN? FI 

smear Wa FETS TAT: 

Wa eat ashe Tet Feat: Harn} oft 

She said, O Great intellect, Sarmistha, the 

daughter of Vrsaparva, has almost killed 
Devayani.” On hearing that his daughter 
Devayani had almost been killed, Sukracarya 
became extremely anxious and moved in search 
of his daughter in the forest. Then finding his 
daughter Devayani in the forest, he embraced 
her holding her in both his arms and with a 
painful heart he said, “O Daughter all the 
people because of their merits or demerits have 
to face pleasure or pain. It appears that you had 
done some evil deed, for which you had to 
repent like this.” 


eaarqara 
frepfratser at aIStq yuraratedt AT 
Vitesat Aaesher sfeat FATAUT: 113 2 
aed facticat wre cearrafer area 
Wa fe A aerate weet aaa: 113 21 
Sar Meus NATH FTI 
Waal sfecnsha wa avert: whee 3 31 
Gass WAM TansMerT ET 
Sta are yifeat sfet Sarat: | 
MTATHATA STOUT TTB VI 
Gee Waren Steet Haye: | 
werefaet viftearttiege fe Wat WANS 4 I 


Chapter-28 


Devayani said, “O Father, it is immaterial, 
whether I get redeemed of my deeds or not, but 
you kindly listen to my words attentively. Are 
the words spoken by Sarmistha, true? She had 
told me that I sing the glory of the Daityas like 
the bards. The loving daughter of Vrsaparva, 
with her eyes red in anger, had spoken very 
harsh and sharp words. She had said, “O 
Devayani, you are the daughter of a bard who 
sing praise for others, who is a beggar and 
receive charities, while I happen to be the 
daughter of the king who is eulogised by your 
father. My father gives charities without 
expecting anything in exchange.” This 1s what 
Sarmistha, the daughter of Vrsaparva has 
spoken to me. Her eyes were red, when she was 
so speaking in anger. She had been filled with 
pride. In case I am really the daughter of a bard 
or the one who 1s a receiver of the charities, 
then I shall please Sarmistha by serving her. | 
had told this to my maid. (At these words thus 
spoken by me, Sarmisthd getting enraged, 
caught hold of me and pushed me into the well 
in the lonely forest. Thereafter she returned 
home). 

Wa sata 
Want stan 7 wa AS 7 where: 
Ae WIAA Seal STATA GI 
qUIAg Tee YH WaT AT ABT: | 
afar ge Frater fe wet TAMIR 

Sukracarya said, “O Devayani, you are 
certainly not the daughter of a bard or a beggar 
or the receiver of the charities. You are the 
daughter of such an auspicious Brahmana, who 
does not praise anyone, but to the contrary 1s 
praised by everyone. This fact is well known to 
Vrsaparva, Indra— the lord of gods, as well as 
the king Yayati. The unparallel and unthinkable 


Brahmanhood only is my strength and the 
fortunes. 


sft stared Merge array aenferatea 
ATA MNSEATT: 19M 


105 
CHAPTER 28 
History of Yayati and dialogue between 
Devayani and Sukra 


Wa sald 

a: Wat Ad Freanfaareiftataerter 

cae faarife aa aafae fri ai 

a: ayia wale Fryer ea Ae 

O aadeyead Ait A THT AAT 

a: Byatad mls Fast 

teats faarife aa watts farsi 

Sukracarya said, “O Devayani, my daughter, 

you take it for granted from me that a person, 
who listening to the harsh words from others, 
ignores them, he appears like having conquered 
the entire universe. The one who controls the 
height of anger like the forceful horse, he is 
treated to be the true charioteer by the noble 
people and not the one who hangs on holding 
the rains. O Devayani, the one who subsides his 
anger with forgiveness, you take it from me, 
that he resembles the one who has conquered 
the universe. 

a: aAeafad art ata Freestar 

WTS Vio st YET TATINIt 

As the serpent discards its old skin, similarly 

a person who overpowers the height of anger 


with forgiveness, he is indeed treated to be the 
best of the persons. 


aq mara ad astra fafrerta 
WY AA A Ae YH ASAT ATTN tt 


The one who follows dharma with devotion, 
and bears the worst denouncement and does not 
feel painful when tortured by others, he is the 
abode of all the virtues. 


Tt arent fa ates wt AAT: 
Te HAA ATA TATA ATG tI 
YHA: HATA At HYTATA:| 
ATMA Halt Ager A AcraeTAIN91 


106 


A person who performs Asvamedha- 
sacrifices in every month for a hundred years, 
and the one who does not show his anger on 
others, of these two, the one who never 
becomes angry is indeed the better. The 
innocent boy and girls become envious of 
others because of ignorance, they should not be 
followed by the people with wisdom, because 
the innocent children are unaware of the 
strength of others. 


Sale AT ASH Haro | WArTAT! 

HY catftare AT AAMT AegevS Ut 

Prereninagd fe 7 adet Gygum 

TAHA ATA WA AT Wade tl 

Devayani said, “O Father, though I am a 

small girl, but still the difference between 
dharma and adharma is well known to me. The 
strength of forgiveness and denouncement 1s 
also well known to me. But a person, who being 
a disciple, does not behave properly like a 
disciple, then the preceptor, desirous of his 
welfare should not forgive him for his misdeed. 
Therefore I do not like to live among the 
Danavas who are mean in their out-look. 


Yat oar sa ATT a 

1 ay Fada: satsat ureghggn gol 

a ahr Se TT 

TY MSY ARIST A ATT: Aes FEAT 

wa TA aaa AHea SIT 

Ase MENT Sfeqaqraor: 1g 

T Gal Seat VAY aet eeeate Fay 

MT; Waeaa Seat Sst: TYITATI Ls H 

Those who denounce the conduct and race 

of others, the people desirous of their own 
welfare should not live with such people with 
evil thought. One should live among the people 


having excellent way of thinking, conduct or 
those praising the family of others. O Dear one, 


Matsya Puranam 


the terrific and evil words spoken by Sarmisthi, 
the daughter of Vrsaparva, are churning my 
heart as a person desirous of igniting the fire, 
churns the fire sticks. I do not consider anything 
else worse than this in the three worlds. It 1s 
better to lay down one's life instead of praising 
the riches of others, himself being a pauper. 


ofa stared TergtTat 
Afra AS STAM SEAT 12S 


kk * 


CHAPTER 29 


Denouncement of Vrsaparva by Sukracarya 
and Sarmistha becomes the slave girl of 


Devayani 
Vite areal 
TA: HAN YINS: ATS Fi 
AguUGqiUldit "Tate ° URAL 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, listening to the 
words of Devayani, Sukracarya, the excellent 
preceptor, having been filled with anger, went 
to Vrsaparva, who was seated over the royal 
throne and started addressing him without 
thinking of anything. 


TMi Water: tela Tia 


MTA Terate Fraraan gt 
afe aIssmmt Yay a Aeapala TT 
WIAA Be Fatatradan3 


O King, whatever evil is done on earth, one 
does not get its reward atonce. As the cow litres 
after getting served for sometime, or otherwise 
the seed sown on earth sprouts in the form of a 
plant and bears fruit after sometime, similarly 
the evil deed performed by a person, slowly 
destroys the roots. The evil effect of the riches 
earned by unfair means, is not visible openly, 
but it crossing over the future generations of 
sons and grandsons, overpowering them all, 
appears in the future generations. 


Chapter-29 


weld Fst UT TRyHirarat 

Tel MAT fat HITS FAT 
ATTA Tat YAS AaTS TH 
ANSTATT AaTET SATA AY tl 
qaiaaae a Mey wat Warqay 
Wg afgTa Tear WNT aa Weg I 
Teak eet fresnel 
areata feat feaqeeraiii i 


Though the heavy food taken by a person 
causes no harm atonce, but it does so after 
sometime, similarly the evil deed performed 
surely reveals it reward. O king, Kaca, the 
grandson of Angira 1s an auspicious Brahmana. 
He has been sinless by nature, is devoted to 
dharma and he was engaged in serving me 
living in my abode. But you got him killed four 
times. O Vrsaparvan, you listen to my words 
carefully. Initially you killed a Brahmana who 
was not at all fit to be killed. And now, my 
daughter has also been thrown in the well 
intending to kill her. Because of these two 
killings, I shall disown you together with your 
kins and relatives. O king, I shall not be able to 
stay on in your kingdom even for a moment. O 
Daitya king, it 1s today alone, that I have been 
able to well understand the Daityas like you 
embracing falsehood. Why are you neglecting 
the misdeeds of your daughter? 


ayaa 
Tae 7 yararé vata ana arta 
rafal At A TT AarM a At MATIC 


Vrsaparva said, “O Son of Bhrgu, as far as I 
know, you have never spoken falsehood or 
improper words. The dharma and truthfulness 


are both firmly established in you. Therefore, | 


you showering your grace on me be pleased 
with me. 


WaaAMAGEA afar areata ania 
AYR Ursa AST WTA 1 


107 


In case you discard us and leave the place, 
then I shall surely jump into the ocean. Because 
no other alternative would be left for us. 


Ya sara 

Wag Mayet at fay at aaTATAT: | 
Sfeqaiind arg yRalsé afar fe Aoi 
Wa Saar fat aa A ferry 
MATHS ETAT FECA I 


Sukracarya said, “O Demon, it is immaterial 
whether you fall in the ocean or flee in all the 
directions, but I cannot tolerate the horrible 
behaviour extended by you towards my 
daughter, because she is extremely dear to me. 
You better please Devayani because my life is 
lodged in her. In case she is pleased, I shall 
guard you as Brhaspati guards Indra and other 
gods.” 


afeafregrsn fae ag arta 
Ga stewed a TST SAT BIT LI 
Vrsaparva said, “O Bhargava, you are the 
master of elephants, chariots, horses and all the 


riches of the asuras and similarly you are the 
master of all my wealth and belongings.” 


Wa sata 
alenfsehea Fat See VETAT 
ATU AAAATAA WATTS It 
Sukracarya said, “O King of the asuras | 
shall consider myself as the master of the 


Daityas, in case you please Devayani and not 
otherwise.” 


vite Jara 
aetey TAA: YR Ue AG Tat 
Jara Ut YAN was TITIAN gv 


Saunaka said, Hearing these words, Sukra 
went to Devayani, along with Vrsaparva and 
said, “Now your words are realised.” 


108 


fe aac Ua fares arta 
TAT AIS WaT Faq At TTNLG 
Then Devayani said, “O Dear one, son of 
Bhargava, you are the lord of the riches of the 
king. I shall not take your words to be true. | 


shall believe in case these words are repeated by 
the king himself.” 


quyatarea 
q amatnmita eats yfatar 
TASE ANTM TAT ASOT 2G Ul 
Vrsaparva said, “OQ Devayani with an 
auspicious smile over your face, whatever thing 


you need, I shall get you the same, even if it be 
unique or inaccessible (you believe in me).” 


qaaryara 
STAT HATTA fear TTT 
aa At aa Aa areas F Aratu gei 


Devayani said, “What I desire is_ that 
Sarmistha should be my slave girl with a 
thousand other slave girls and wherever I am 
married by my father, she should also 
accompany me.” 


qayalarea 
Shas ents tres wa Viiteat VATA 
HO BMA HM SAMA AT TATU I 


On hearing this, Vrsaparva said to the maid, 
O Dhatri, you go and quickly bring Sarmistha 
here. Then she should fulfil the desire of 
Devayani. 


vila Sart 
a Ia AA WaT MifearaeATae 
SRreS HE MS Ata FATA 
ata Get: frearcaarn wafer: 
SM AMA AM A Hasa ASA! 
STATA TA SAMA: WRNAAN2 o 


Matsya Puranam 


Saunaka said, “Then the nurse went to 
Sarmistha and said to her, “O Noble Sarmistha, 
you get up and make your kins comfortable. O 
sinless princess, today Sukracdrya, at the 
instance of Devayani is disowning— the 
disciples and the yajamdnas. Therefore you 
should fulfil the desire of Devayani. You have 
been declared as the slave girl of Devayani. 


vitthestara 
GU aMad A Hawa AAI 
Tl WTA YEA SAAT AT AeA 
Sarmistha said, “In case Sukracirya 1S 
calling me thus, for the sake of Devayani, then | 
shall do whatever Devayani desires of me. 
Because of my crime, neither Sukracarya nor 


Devayani should go anywhere. They should not 
think of going elsewhere, because of me.” 


Vite Sarel 
dd: Hada sat fear aan 
faghieorratter Farad TAT 2H 


Saunaka said, “O Satantka, thereafter, the 
princess Sarmistha, at the command of her 
father, mounted the palanquin atonce and 
moved out of the capital city, surrounded with a 
thousand girls. 


viftestarel 
WE BUSA TTA Tt UeTai ca 
qa tat aa areas aa areata a AAT aI 
Sarmistha said, “I shall serve you with 
thousand girls as your slave and wherever your 


father marries you, I shall surely accompany 
you there.” 


eaarqara 
Waa Saat Vs Aaa: whee: 
Ware Steal ae erat wgeAPA ei 


Devayani said, “I am the daughter of a bard 
and a beggar, but you are the daughter of a great 
father, who is praised by my father, then how 
shall you serve as my slave?” 


Chapter-30 


wiftrestarer 
WA Sahaanat WA PSAs 
PARAMS TA TA STARA AF TATU GH 
Sarmisthd said, “One should provide 
comfort to his kith and kins by all means. 


Wherever you father gives you in marriage, | 
shall accompany you there.” 


vis Sate 
wmiryd eraa Seat FATATT: | 
Saar AwsS Tat area? A 


Saunaka said, “When Sarmistha, the 
daughter of Vrsaparva— the great king, thus 
spoke, then Devaydani said to her father.” 


Wrage yt art Tester ferent 
ama aa fants fararact & A011 
Devayani said, “O Father, now I shall enter 
the city. I have gained full faith now that your 


knowledge and the strength of your lores, 
besides the wisdom 1s infallible and fruitful.” 


vias sara 
Wayral farerat efeat WaerayT: | 
Wiad Wt ge Ufa: MASAI 
Saunaka said, “At these words spoken by his 
daughter, the glorious Sukracarya, the excellent 


Brahmana, having been adored by all the 
Danavas entered the city. 


Stat STR ETT Bra Banferatea 
WAPATISEATA 281 


KET 


109 


CHAPTER 30 


Forest sports of Devayani and Sarmistha 
with their handmaids, arrival of the king 
Yayati— his talk with Devayani and his 
marriage with her. 
Wa sara 


3 SU Ghietl CAA JURA 
ad aca fata lS ATAPUPATIN gH 
Saunaka said, “O Excellent king, after a 
long time Devaydni with the excellent 


complexion, again went to the same forest for 
sports. 


Wt SaaeAT Be Vifaesar Aen 


AMA SH UMA AMAT WANT AT 21 


mit: wetter: ate wath far yoy 
ISCAS: Tal: raat Tey ATTN | 


A that point of time, she was accompanied 
with Sarmistha and a thousand slave girls, who 
were attending on her. Reaching the same place 
in the forest, she started roaming about with her 
associates, at will. They enjoyed several types 
of sports there consuming the juice of the 
flowers of the spring season. 


Gie fafaareraraent fataenh a 


Yas Aa Wat Wafers eTATH S| 
THA Se Ua Herferey: waiter: | 
CaM CAAT TT MMS APT ANT NG I 


Sometimes they consumed several types of 
delicious food items. At the same time, Yayatt, 
the son of Nahusa, per chance arrived there for 
hunting at the same place. He felt exhausted 
because of the severe labour and feeling thirsty, 
he was desirous of drinking water. He spotted, 
Devayani, Sarmistha and the other damsels as 
well. 


fret cerns feeaacoryea4:| 
Sufaet a aay east wfafararqg i 


110 


All of them were consuming the beverages. 
The king found Devayani wearing an 
auspicious smile over her face seated over a 
beautiful seat. 


SUOTMAAT AAT At wet ATA 
Visesa HAMA Wedareaeaty: w9 i 
Her beauty was beyond comparison and was 


seated among the damsels, while Sarmistha was 
serving her at her feet. 


TANT SATE 
at SAMeANA F Bet Uae 
Wa A AA Se Bal: Tea DeAe i 
Yayati asked, “O Damsels having been 
surrounded by two thousand girls, I would like 


to know your names and the gotras. I would 
like to know your introduction. ” 


eeaTyare 


MSTA Aaa Set HATH 

YR ATT: Yat AMS TET APTN 
sa IY AG cat Aare TA MA 
stent era wifes Gaaor: igo 


Devayani said, “O Lord, I shall introduce 
myself to you. You please listen to my words. | 
am the daughter of Sukracdrya— the preceptor of 
the Danavas. She is my handmaid as well as the 
slave girl known by the name of Sarmistha and 
is the daughter of the Danava king Vrsaparva. 
Wherever I shall go after marriage, she is sure 
to accompany me.” 


AAfareara 
ae Jt Wat arat Sate arate 
AALS YY: Wi algect fF Mee 


Yayati said, “O beautiful one, how could 
Sarmistha with beautiful eyebrows being the 
daughter of Danava king, become your 
handmaid as well as slave girl? You tell me. | 
am quite anxious to know about it.” 


qaargara 


Matsya Purdinam 


ada areas fanaa 

fate fated sicar ar fatert Wr: HAT VIM 

Taaguayht a seit are fantt a 

fern wa Hens Her YAN HT AM 

Devayani said, “O Excellent king, all the 

people conduct themselves according to the 
moves of the destiny. Be satisfied taking it to be 
the move of the destiny. You better do not ask 
about the astonishing events related to the same. 
By your beauty and costumes, you appear to be 
a king. Besides you are talking in pure Sanskrit. 
You kindly tell me your name. Where from 
have you come and who 1s your father? 


aaMrearea 
Tera AUet A eer: leIst Aa: 
Wass Taya Tarte faye: es 
Yayati said, “I have studied all the Vedas 
performing brahmacarya. 1 am the son of 


Nahusa and presently I am myself the king 
known by the name of Yayati.” 


qaarqare 
ot aa Jud et oot AAMT: | 
fargeralht afrnfrerar Waererarn 24 11 


Devayani said, “O Lord, what for have you 
arrived in the forest? Are you desirous of water 
or lotus or are moving for hunting?” 


Aafcreara 
BMA Ug Waa eIS SAT: | 
AMSAT FAIS ANTM AG AN VE UI 


Yayati said, “O Noble one, I have been 
following a wild animal for the purpose of 
killing it. I feel fatigued because of the same 
and have arrived here to drink water. Therefore 
you permit me to return.” 


eaaryaret 
SRal BAUACANA TAT Viftesay Tel 
acaasfat Ve T MS Wal DA Wao 


Chapter-30 


Devayani said, “O Friend, let you meet with 
welfare, I together with Sarmistha and two 
thousand girls submit to you. Therefore you be 
my husband.” 


AaMfarearea 
fagairta vé 4 a weeisher anfahe 
aa: A Ta Sa Peta Rc A 


Yayati said, “OQ Devayani, the daughter of 
Sukricdrya, let you meet with welfare. O 
Excellent one, I am not suitable for you. The 
Ksatriyas are not entitled to receive kanydddana 
from your father.” 


eaaryarel 
UTS TAU at at Tater afar 
MGT KAGAN AAT MTA ATTN I 


Devayani said, “O Son of Nahusa, the castes 
of Brahmana and Ksatriyas are interlinked, you 
are the son of Rajarsi and are yourself a Rajarsi. 
Therefore you marry me today itself.” 


Aaa earea 

USE RAT AUTTATASHT AT 

GRAM: VASSAR SF GAT AT:112o lt 

Yayati said, “O Beautiful damsel, all the 

four varnas have been out of the body of one 
and the same Parmesvara, but the conduct and 
rules for each one of them are different. Indeed 
the Brahmanas are the best of all the four 


varnas.” 


eaarqare 
Uforset agers A Ui: faa: TT 
wa Uftraadiad quite carted Aas? 2 
at 7 8 WARaSM: WoT: WaT 
Tegan aa aseghror MTN VI 


Devayani said, “OQ Son of Nahusa, 
panigrahana 1s the dharma for a lady. No one 
had earlier held my hand. It was you alone who 
held my hand for the first time, therefore | 
accept you as my husband. I am a woman who 


111 


has complete control over her mind. Having 
held my hand by the son of a Rajarsi, or a 
Rajarsi like you cannot be held by anyone else. 


qalaearea 
: 


Se Tiara = Te Tic 
STANT fam: Teor FaAAAT 2 3 UI 
Yayati said, “O Goddess, the person with 


wisdom, should treat a Brahmana's anger, like a 
poisonous snake or the burning fire.” 


qaarqare 
HID Sag cad love TACHA RE 
SUT FAT FATT FHT YI 


Devayani said, “O Excellent human, the 
Brahmana is more dangerous than the 
poisonous snake or the terrific fire flame, how 
could you say that?” 


TM eare 
Va aNERa WAT TTT 
area fam: werentor yaoaty fe alien e i 
Sua fareTeare At AA 
aaseat a fear wat ax 7 faaeTeaTeAN 2g 1 


Yayati said, “O Excellent one, the snake can 
bite only once, only one person is killed with a 
weapon, but the enraged Brahmana destroys the 
entire city or even the country. O Damsel, this 
is the reason that I consider a Brahmana to be 
more dangerous unless your father hands you 
over to me, I shall not marry you.” 


eaaryarea 
eat aga far at at fe weraal wan 
Aaa Wa At Sat aT WleTSA NW 


Devayani said, “O King, I have selected you 
as my husband. Now you should marry me after 
[ am given over to you by my father. You 
yourself shall not ask for my hand from kim and 
shall accept me when I am given over to you by 
him. Therefore you need not be afraid of his 
anger (I send a message just to my father). 


112 


vite sare 

rated Saas whan TTT: | 

ad FaCaTaTa Mat TAY TATA c A 

ag AT Wa BATT Aa: | 

sedaurnd faa aarfa: yfraratr:2 ei 

AGS Wet Bled wroafet: Wort: fer: 

a MENA ah er: AAT WAAC ol 

Saunaka said, “O King, Devayani atonce 

sent the nurse with a message to her father. 
Reaching there, the nurse apprised Sukracarya 
of the factual position, revealing all the facts. 
Learning about the situation, Sukracarya 
reached there and met the king. The king Yayati 
offered his salutation to Sukracérya and humbly 


stood there with folded hands. Then Sukracarya 
aiso assured the king in sweet words. 


TSS AEA SY UnforTTETA 
Tret Ue aa oles Art fet Tar aU 
Devayani said, “O Dear one, I offer my 
salutation to you with folded hands. He is the 
king Yayati- the son of Nahusa. He had held 
my hand at the time of misery, therefore you 
kindly hand me over to him. | shall not accept 


anyone else as my husband 1n the world except 
him.” 
WA sata 
aaSrM Ua Yaa a TAT 
TRO WA Sat Alsat AKUTATNS 2 
Sukracarya said, “O valorous son of Nahusa, 
my loving daughter has accepted you as her 


husband. Therefore my daughter given to you 
should be accepted by you as your chief queen.” 


aM aeare 
SIA Ui sed WAIT Arla 
SOA Telfala wal WTA 311 


Yayati said, “O Bhargava Brahmana, I seek 
a boon from you that in this marriage the sin of 


Matsya Purdnam 


creating a confusion of castes for such intercaste 
marriage should be wiped out.” 


Wa sald 

aemhat fags at are afta 

afaraae @ yemeal Te: WG Farts Aa vil 

ae arat ator saat wrarerary 

STAT TE AMAT AAAS & 1 

Sa Ula Hat Ft Vlassr aaavit 

AIM Ua WHA VA PT BANE I 

Sukracarya said, “I shall free you from all 

the sins. Accept this gift, who has been chosen 
by her. You will become graceful by this 
marriage. I free you from future sins as well. 
Marry this humble Devayani according to law 
and have every enjoyment in her company. This 
Sarmistha, the daughter of Vrsaparva will 
attend on you, but you should never invite her 
to your bed. 


vitae Sara 
Wayral AMY YR Feat Welerorg 
WTA TAY RS: MSAMA ASTAATIZ I 
Saunaka said- “On hearing the words of the 
seer Sukra, the king Yayati circumambulated 


the sage and with his permission entered the 
city delightfully. 


Sta stared Margaret Braet aafererfea 
FAITSEATA: 113 01 
kk * 
CHAPTER 31 


Birth of a son to Yayati from Devayani, 
meeting of Sarmistha with Yayati in 
seclusion and the birth of a son to her as well. 


Viren Sara 

maf: agi wre BESTT 
Waar: Yt Aa SAI AAAI 
SAAT MITAR Yat At FATA: 
AMHAMANA Ts Fea AAMT 


Chapter-31 


qa sataeanr vies TTR 
aaa UiareT YaGATTNS 
Saunaka said, “O Satanika, the capital city 

of Yayati was like Amaravati, the capital of 
Indra. Reaching his city, Yayati lodged her in 
his palace with her consent. He also built a 
palace in the Asoka-vatika for Sarmistha, the 
daughter of Vrsaparva, where she was lodged 
with her thousand companions. For them, 
arrangements were made for their costumes, 
food and drinks separately. 


CaM F Med: A FW AAA: | 
fare aercaayiedt FTAs I 


King Yayati— the son of Nahusa, enjoyed all 
the pleasures with Devayani for many years like 
the gods. He was extremely happy with her 
besides being delightful.’ 


Rqatet J Waa Saat aA 
AM TY WITT: HAT ATTA HI 


In due course of time, during the period, 
Devayani conceived and after the appropriate 
period, she gave birth to her first son. 


TA TAA J VS aT 

Sav Alert AMAT Fat AT HATTIE Ut 
Ferrara aden sequrett a sift 
MYR UAT A HT afta: 109 11 
fea wet fort aaded et Hear YE war 
aI WaAISA Sass wT. 
IM AM Fat Tat Ware GOUT ay 
TM YaHet cafate F Fferat ate: 
SHE W TAA Tet We FATIH 


On the other hand, after the expiry of a 
thousand years, Sarmistha, the daughter of 
Vrsaparva becoming youthful found herself in 


'. Devay4nt used to visit the charming Asoka vatika 
and enjoying the forest sports with Sarmistha, 
leaving her there, returned to her palace. In this way 
she enjoyed pleasures for long. 


113 


period and she feeling worried, thought in her 
mind, “I have started menses, but I have not yet 
got a husband. What 1s this situation? Now what 
should I do to achieve comfort? Devayani has 
got a son, but I have reached the youthful age 
now, which is going waste. As Devayani has 
made Yayati her husband, I shall also do the 
same. I shall request the king to give me a 
similar fruit in the shape of a son. 


Vite Sara 
a Feary Uasal afer Aces 
AM HAAHVAT feat wer fafara:11 2011 
Ta Tela seat yviitieat areefat 
WET SH Heal UA AMIGA I MI 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, while Sarmistha 
was so thinking and as luck would have it, the 
king Yayati, per chance got out of the palace. 
Finding Sarmistha lonely in Asoka vatika, he 
felt surprised. Then Sarmistha with a serene 
smile over her face found the king walking 


lonely. She came forward and welcomed him. 
Then she spoke to him with folded hands. 


Vittestarer 

WAST AIST Ay THVT aT 

qa At Ae We: a: feast FEMA eI 

SURMMAMeMe GI WEA Ti Tey 

A wat Atel Wares TeAfe TeferTe3 

Sarmistha said, “O Son of Nahusa, whether 

there be the moon, Indra, Vayu or Varuna, who 
can cast a glance at the ladies of your palace. 
(Therefore I am completely safe here). O Lord, 
you are aware of my race beauty and the 


conduct. Today, I pleasing you intend to request 
you to make the period of my menses fruitful.” 


qa ear 

af wai erat cereeaa Area 

Be 7 a a upate qearate Freq ew 
TMagahtaT Yat Vaart AaISaTy 
TAMA F MAT STATATTT gy I 


114 


Yayati said, “O Sarmisthd, you are the 
spotless and humble daughter of Vrsaparva, the 
king of the Danavas. I know about you fully 
well. In your body or beauty there is not the 
slightest space which could be denounced. But 
what can I do, when [ married Devayani, 
Sukracarya had clearly told me not to invite 
Sarmistha, the daughter of Vrsaparva over the 
bed.” 


witestara 
Tat Get feared 
Tay Uta faarearet 
MONTY WATATTRTL 
URACIL AE A 
PERG Met waaht aM 
vate frat As a 
Vana J Maher 
fear aed Bid Arey 


Sarmistha said, “O King, the jovial words 
even when false are not harmful. There is no 
harm in speaking falsehood, at the time of 
indulging in sexual pleasures, on the occasion 
of marriage, when life is in danger, or wealth is 
at stake, or in joke. To indulge in falsehood on 
these five occasions is said to be sinless. O Lord 
at the time of giving witness, if someone spoke 
out falsehood when asked by others, they are 
considered as indulging in falsehood. But when 
the question of welfare of me or Devayani is 
concerned, then to ignore either of them 
becomes falsehood, which could harm the 
speaker.” 


wat earal 
TT WaTe Yara w faryaayet ae 
seqeaaty wer 4 fear HAART I 


Yayati said, “O Goddess, the king is the 
authority for all the people and in case he 
resorts to falsehood, he has to face distraction. 


Matsya Puranam 


Therefore I cannot do any wrong, even while 
facing danger.” 


Vifaesrarel 
Maat At Tara: AST a: Ulett 
aa faare scare: Ter USA afta Vet 


Sarmistha said, “One' s own husband and 
the husband of a handmaid are considered to be 
equals. My friend has made you as her husband. 
Therefore I have also done so.” 


qaateara 
Set UAT Bier W aTaTSay 
aU Aaa He At Te fH Ararior aA oll 


Yayati said, “I believe that the beggars 
should be given their desired things. This is 
what I believe. This is my vrata. You have also 
expressed a desire to me. Therefore you tell me 
what should I do for you which could be dear to 
you? 


viftestarel 
setae At WM a waa 
AMISUATAA leh ALT TATA VU 
TT UAT TAMA STATA Fe: 
ad Uae GA Tt TAT ASAT 
Saar yfreasheay ava WT Ta APTA 
A MS BAA WHOA MTT ATTN 31 


Sarmistha said, “O King, you kindly save 
me from adharma and make me follow the 
dharma. What I desire is that I after producing 
children from you, follow dharma in the world. 
O Lord three people are not entitled to inherit 
the riches viz. the wife, the slave and the son, 
because the wealth acquired by them belongs to 
their masters. (In other words, the wealth of the 
wife goes to her husband, the riches of the salve 
belong to the master and the son belong to the 
father. I am the slave of Devayani, who is your 
wife. Therefore, O King, both of us are entitled 
to enjoy your grace. Therefore you should 
accept me.” 


Chapter-32 


vias Jara 
Ua eTa Us Tala 
YHA VIEST Te AT WATT? YI 


@ Aare viftat aerarssarey a 


sare TIS Ae TAPTATTN GH 
Terman yy: Wits audit 


AY TY METAR U AAT 2 UI 
Wa U Ad: let Ust Teitaererm 


SUL CTT TATA 219 1 

Saunaka said, “At these words of Sarmistha, 
the king took her to be correct. He welcomed 
Sarmistha and owned her as his wife 
appropriately. Then uniting with Sarmisthd, 
respecting each other, both of them returned as 
they had come and reached their respective 
places. Sarmistha having beautiful eyebrows, 
had first conception from Yayati. O Satanika, 
then in due course of time, Sarmistha, with lotus 
like eyes, gave birth to a divine child who had 
the lustre of the sun. 


Sit ATR TET TOY Atrergt earferafea 
Wenfagnseara: 113 kh 


kk 


CHAPTER 32 


Talk between Sarmistha and Devayani 
_ getting annoyed at the birth of a son to 
Sarmistha, Devayani goes to her father with 


a complaint. 

vila sare 
HA HA Wt A eaart yfafara 

ferrets Sferee stare Pitaeat whet ATTN RI 

aisha yitsst taaragatfean 

fond aftt Gy: Gd t AMET I 

Saunaka said, “O Bharata, Devayani with an 

auspicious smile on her face, was filled with 


grief on learning of the birth of a son of 
Sarmistha, besides her conduct. Then she went 


115 


to Sarmistha and said to her, “O Sarmistha with 
beautiful eyebrows, having been overpowered 
with passions, what type of sin has been 
committed by you? 


Vifdestare 
mire: argue aeact: | 
OAM Fat: GBM afar TSN I 
TET: BMA Breer 
TANGA ATTA Aes TAT Tivit 


Sarmistha said, “O Handmaid, a noble Rsi 
had arrived who was well-versed in the Vedas. I 
sought for a union in a divine manner from that 
Rsi according to dharma. O Auspicious one, I 
do not act against dharma. This child has been 
born to me from that Rsi. I am speaking the 
truth to you. 


weed wifes a alae AA 

ae afe A Mel Rarer & FTG II 

Vert wre Ae cemel w Wad fiat: 

TRAM: Stafreahtt t fe 1 

Devayani said, “In case, O Sarmisthi, it is 

like this and in case you have produced the 
child from the excellent Brahmana, then I am 
no more angry with you. In case it is so, then it 
is well done. Have you known about the name, 


race and gotra of the said Brahmana? I would 
like to know his name.” 


Vifaestarer 
seat aaa da aera wa aan 
t FRAT AT UMS Virals SMrep aera N 


Sarmistha said, “O Auspicious one, he was 
shining like the sun with his tapas. Looking at 
him I did not have the courage to ask him any 
question.” 


vite Save 


TATA ST USAT Ta fa: 
SMT ata ayy aeafrcaharsariis | 


116 


WMteaarat J Yaaagy: | 

a uw qag da wrafaay saree i 

TANS J Waa: Vey ATU 

Za UT UW Ye W APHANSI 201 

aa: Get BU Aleeaar Yrareran 

TAMAS WATT SUT TTL 

aayt Waal aa HANaATaUT: | 

SATAY AAEM ATA ASATA TAR 2 Ut 

Saunaka said, “O Satanika, both of them 

laughed, by thus talking between themselves. 
Devayani thought that Sarmisthd has spoken 
correctly. Therefore she quietly returned to her 
palace. The king Yayati then produced two sons 
named Yadu and Turvasu. Both of them 
resembled Indra and Visnu. From the same 
Rajarsi Sarmistha, the daughter of Yrsaparva 
produced three sons known as Druhyu, Anu and 
Puru. After sometime Devayani with the 
auspicious smile went to the forest alone, where 
she found some children who were quite 
beautiful fearlessly playing there. Looking at 
them with surprise she said. 


caer yare 
HAA AT UAATATAT: YT: 
TAM BUTT SRA AGMTATTI LS 
US Feel FW HATE 
fee AMeRITA a: Ye Saat: FAT gw 
faga 4 aaa AiATISeAA TEA! 
ASEM AMSA AA POAT LU 


Devayani asked, “O King, whose children 
are they who possess all the noble symptoms 
and look like the divine princes? They resemble 
you in beauty and the tejas.” When so asked by 
the Devayani, the king did not reply, then she 
asked the children, “O Children, in which gotra 
are you born? What is the name of your 
Brahmana father. You tell me correctly. I would 
like to listen to the name of your father.” When 


Matsya Puraénam 


so asked by Devayani, the boys revealing the 
name of their father, pointed towards the king 
Yayati. They also said that Sarmistha was their 
mother. 


vite Sar 
Midst Wat da TA HY: HAT: | 
SAAT ASAT ETT TATA TTA: 1 2G I 
WATT TART SAAATTTS feta 


RETAST MSNA T AAT TTT I V9 I 

SLA AT FT AeA Mora Ura wie 

Gee UT aaa Sat iieawearaar qe 

Saunaka said, “Thus speaking, all the boys 

came close to the king, but at that point of time, 
the king did not welcome them because of the 
presence of Devayani. He did not carry them in 
his lap even. Then the crying children went to 
Sarmistha. (At the words spoken by the 
children, the king Yayati felt some what 
ashamed.) Visualising the extreme affection of 
those children towards the king Yayati, 
Devayani could understand the mystery and she 
thus spoke to Sarmistha. 


Teal at HeATeH aa TAI 
Massa amie t frais fer ee it 
Devayani said, “Sarmisthd, why did you 
behave in a way which was not liked by me 
inspite of your being my slave? You have again 
started following the dharma of the demons? 
Are you not afraid of me? 


viftestarea 

USMPA aa AeA Use ara 

Maa Tas ATA a AAs All 

Fal A Fal Ul Fa Wa Fat Tat 

Vara fe ator vat wakes MN vt 
YSIS AT AT HT AEST VAST A GTN 
cael fe H yeaa Te: feat aire ATI 


Chapter-32 


Sarmistha said, “O My friend, with pleasant 
smile on your face, in case I introduced my lord 
as a Rsi, there was nothing wrong in it. I always 
conduct myself according to justice and 
dharma. Therefore, I am not at all afraid of you. 
When you had accepted the king as your 
husband, I also did so at the same time. You are 
the senior as well as an excellent one, but this 
Rajarsi is more adorable to me than you are. 
Are you not aware of this? (O Auspicious one, 
your father Sukracdrya has given over both of 
us to the great king. The adorable king Yayati 
as well, thinking me fit to be brought up, 
maintains me.” 


Wis Sart 

TAM TAA Tet SraTATaeay| 
Uaae arena fata A aa HTTNIU 
Aeaafaat VAM FAT Tt AeA! 
gut ware areres wrath Sar eTEN I 
Aaa AUEA: Yr: Atay: | 

Asda TA Ua BATAAN IG Ul 


sifagaat (at) fafaer wart Arye 
MATA AHA ATTRA TATAIS AHA 2 § I 
a 7 geaa fraratrareraa: fea 


SN BAMA HIM ATTAIN 9 


Saunaka said, “Listening to the words of 
Sarmistha, Devayani said, “I shall no longer 
stay here. You have agonised me _ the 
maximum.” Thus speaking, the youthful 
Devayani, with her eyes filled with tears, 
suddenly got up and left the place for going to 
Sukracarya, her father. Finding this Yayati felt 
painful. Getting upset, he followed Devayani, 
trying to dissuade her from leaving the place. 
But she failed to return. Her eyes were getting 
red in anger, without speaking anything to the 
king. She kept on dropping tears from her eyes. 
After a short while she reached Sukracarya— the 
son of Kavi. Meeting her father she stood 
before him offering her salutation to him. 


117 


Thereafter the 

Sukracarya. 

earargare 
srecor fata ae: WIAAATAT 
yifaear aistrgaistet Shem FATA VWI 
AUST AAT: TAT WaISAa TATA 
SUT AA StF Yat alt Ta AU 
qda St fant UT TMT WEE 
A Talat HAHA A ol 


Devayani said, “O Father adharma has 
overpowered the dharma. The down trodden 
has risen and the high ranking has fallen. 
Sarmistha, the daughter of Vrsaparva has 
moved ahead overpowering me and she got 
three sons from the same king. Yayati, but O 
Dear one, the destiny has given only two sons 
for me. I am speaking out all this to you 
truthfully. O Best of Bhrguy’s race, the lord 
Yayati has been well known as the follower of 
dharma, but he has crossed the limits. O son of 
Kavi, | am speaking to you truthfully.” 


War said 
ited TEN aise: fra 
THAT ATTRA THATS 21 
Then Sukracarya said to Yayati, “O King, 
you being the strict follower of dharma, why 
did you follow the sinful path. Therefore, the 


old age, which is difficult to over come, will 
soon overpower you. 


Far ears 
Hq A AMA A eal YAr_a: 
PR TAT TAT Ae Teaniaha: 3 VI 
agar fart seq Wat Teta ahaa: | 
Arete at fe ator Teeeqeat F-13311 
SMA AMAAMS ARONA Wael 
IATA: VST UA AAT TINS YI 


Yayati said, “O Lord, the daughter of the 
demon king asked for the rtuddna from me. 


king Yayati too adored 


118 


Therefore, I, taking it to be quite a religious 
duty, I acted accordingly. I did not do so with 
any other intention. O Brahmana a person, who 
does not oblige damsel praying for the rtuddna 
is considered by the Brahmanas, well-versed in 
the Vedas, as the killer of a Brahmana and the 
one who does not grant the desire of a damsel, 
even on her making a request, he is said to 
commit a sin comparable to the slaughter of a 
great Brahmana. O Preceptor, for fear of such 
sins, I shakingly offered myself to Sarmistha. 


Ws sara 
I ae Were Teast war 
frearercorenig abet waft ABT 3 4 I 


Sukracarya said, “O King, in this connection 
you should have taken into consideration my 
command, because you are subservient to me. O 
Son of Nahusa, a person who acts falsely in 
dharma earns the sin of the theft. 


Vite are 
PEATTTA MA AAAS TRTaT 
eh Ts UPLTTT ATT TUN SHATETTINS & I 
Saunaka said, “When  Sukracarya 
pronounced a curse on Yayati, the son of 


Nahusa, he was atonce overpowered with old 
age in place of a youthful monarch. 


TaMictearea 
AGA Matas TaIM Teel 
Wale HE A Fess oT fagtt ANZ 
Yayati said, “O Excellent Bhrgu, I have not 
been satisfied by living with Devayani in 
youthful age. Therefore, O Brahmana, be 


graceful on me and do something to ward off 
the old age from my body. 


Wr sata 
WE FOr aera wreatsha ahaa 
Me at aA AeA AN cI 
Sukracarya said, “O Lord of the earth, I do 
not resort to falsehood, you have already 


Matsya Puranam 


become old but I provide this much of 
convenience to you that in case you so desire 
you can exchange your old age with a young 
person, giving your old age to him. 


TAT oarea 
ISS SCLC UO RIC UTR Cao UF 
Gt SMA TT: TAR RATAT AAAS 8 
Yayati said, “Anyone of my sons who 
bestows his youthful age on me, he earning the 
great merit shall also inherit my glory besides 


my kingdom. O Preceptor Sukracarya, you 
kindly agree to this. 


Yn sara 
Tafa wet aes ARITA 
WATS TAT TT UTTTATAATATIY oI 
aay areata a Yat a: @ ten afaeafa 


TAMAS TATA TY VI 

Sukracérya said, “O Son of Nahusa, by 
faithfully devoting your mind to me, you will be 
able to transfer your old age in the body of 
someone else, and by doing so you shall earn no 
sin. He will also inherit your kingship. At the 
same time he shall enjoy long life, shall be 
glorious and have several sons.” 


Sie SATA TeTgTOt Aree aarratea 
SIATNSEATT: 13 UN 


kk * 


CHAPTER 33 


Yayati's efforts to exchange of old age with 
the youthful age of his sons who declined, but 
Puru accepted the old age of Yayati, earning 


the boons. 
vite Sarel 
a WT Tareq Tae wer war FB 
Ya wes afd a agiteagatioa: en 
Saunaka said, “O King Satanika, the Yayati, 


carrying old age with him, entered his city and 
calling for the eldest son Yadu, said to him. 


Chapter-33 


aaiteare 
WAT Get A At aa Ulett a VAT: 
MARAT: MITA A Tasher Aare 
wa Uel Nave WO ATA el 
dart ada ate fararaeqns 


Yayati said, “O Dear one, with the curse of 
Sukracdrya, the son of Kavi, I have been 
overpowered by old age. Wrinkles have 
appeared in my body and the hair has grown 
grey. O Yadu, you accept my blemishes with 
this old age and I shall enjoy all the pleasures 
with your youthfulness. 


yot adage x dla Bat eT 
Sra UMA WA ALA AEIIV I 


After the completion of a thousand years, I 
shall return your youthful age and get back my 
old age. 


ageare 
Faayaget sat aca Perfect: 
AMAA FEV FAT: FUG 
ST: Ha Uy: A Aer 
Terasitfattste aaaret afrarTag 


Yadu said, “O Great king, J am not 
interested in getting the old age on the arrival of 
which the hair of moustaches and beard get grey 
and the pleasure of the life is lost. The old age 
makes one totally fatigued. The entire body 
develops wrinkles and a person becomes so 
weak that no body wants to look at him. One 
does not have the strength to work in the old 
age. An old person is despised by the damsels 
as well as the servants who earn their livelihood 
from the same old man. Therefore I am not 
interested in embracing the old age. 


Aft F Fea: Ya Aa: fa TT 
WU Vel Tat YAIR gules Ani 


O Religious minded king, you have many 
sons, who are dearer to you than me. Therefore 


119 


you better select one of your other sons for the 
purpose.” 
Tawar 
Gea URI FI: WA Wao 
WUT ATaa TEST T MTCC | 
Yayati said, “O Dear one, you having been 
born of my own heart refuse to exchange your 
youthful age with my old age. Therefore 
because of this sin, your progeny, because of 


the illicit relationship of the maternal uncle, 
would be termed as the evil people. 


Gaal Witera WO AAT Tel 
dara we & faratera WAN 


yut aaa 7 Wales ata 
ae Wiracenhs WAT ATA WEN oN 


Then he called for Turvasu and said to him, 
“You accept my blemishes with the old age. O 
Son, I shall enjoy the worldly pleasures with 
your youthful age and I shall return your 
youthful age after a thousand years and get back 
my blemishes with old age.” 


qaqa 
THY WA At AMAT STATT 
TABATA FAAS 8 Ak 


Then Turvasu said, “O Dear one, I am also 
not interested in the old age which destroys the 
passions. It puts an end to the strength and the 
beauty, besides making the honour, wisdom and 
reputation of a person to fade out.” 


Tat ware 

Gea Wea FT: TT waa 
THA MSS FAA Ta AAAI 
Aaa WT TT 
fafgrartgry acne FA Tat Afaeaha es 1 


Yayati said, “Turvasu, you were born out of 
my heart but refuse to give me your youthful 
age. Therefore your progeny shall be destroyed. 
O Fool, those who conduct themselves like the 


yf 
11 


120 


degraded castes, and eat the unripe flesh, or 
those belonging to the race of Candalas, you 
will be the king of those degraded castes. 


Tearorang frerarag a 
Ugafdy etrasy Uy wafaeafan exit 


You will be the king of the Mlecchas, who 
fall for the wives of the preceptors, who behave 
like the animals, or those who conduct 
themselves like the animals.” 


Vite sara 

Us ag Peat salt: Yaa: | 

Vitara: Ya Vs Fe AeATaTN eG I 

Saunaka said, “The king Yayéati, thus 

pronounced a curse on Turvasu, his own son 
and then he talked to Druhyu, the son of 
Sarmistha. 
qaearel 

Tel wa witaea quran 

at aug A atat TS WaT II 

qu ae aga 7 a Nerente ata 

ASSAM YASS WOT TAT AS Vol 


Yayati said, “O Druhyu, you accept my old | 


age, which destroys the lustre and beauty, and 
exchange your youth for a thousand years with 
me. After the completion of a thousand years, I 
shall return your youth and shall get back all the 
blemishes with old age.” 


gqeaa 
TU TW Ae Sot ye a a fer 
A We Vals Tat FT BAA 


Druhyu said, “O Father, in old age, a person 
can neither enjoy the royal pleasures nor can he 
enjoy the horse or the chariot ride. The love 
cannot inculcate in his heart. Therefore, I am 
not interested in old age.” 


AA eave 
qed U Rasa AI: Ta 7A yaaa 
aagel & fra: art ad Paes Fafaqeei 


Matsya Puranam 


qrerera dant aa Fret afaeaia 
SUTIN a AA WaT AAT oll 


Yayati said, “O Druhyu, you having been 
born of my heart and refuse to give your youth 
to me. Therefore, your desires could never be 
fulfilled. Therefore, you will migrate tc the 
place which is beyond the reach of yoked 
horses, best of chariots, horses, elephants, 
palanguins, donkeys, goats, bulls etc. where one 
has to move over the boats throughout the day, 
with your sons and other relatives, where the 
people of your generations will be called Bhojas 
and not the kings.” 


Tad eae 
al wa WATER UC AAT Ae 
Uh aaa J Ms Alara a2 vi 


Thereafter Yayati spoke to Anu, “O Anu, 
you receive my blemish with my old age in 
exchange for your youth for a thousand years. | 
shall enjoy youthful age with your youth for a 
thousand years.” 


Hoare 
aitul: forgftarssad aretsayfaan 
A Heller eT srerster Tat MT ATA VI 


Anu said, “During the old age, O Father, a 
person takes untimely food like children, 
remains unclean and is unable to perform homa 
in time. Therefore, I am not interested in such a 
type of old age.” 


AIM Harel 
qed Yea aa: TA Waele 
SUC Aa A ARTS WATE? 311 
Way Mat wen farvara Sat Tal 
wiwreErcided aes wfsearae xii 


Yayati said, “You have been born out of my 
heart and inspite of that you refuse to give me 
your youth, therefore, you shall earn all the 
blemishes of the old age and your progeny shall 
get extinguished in old age and you also 


Chapter-34 


behaving like an old man shall discard the 
performing of homa. 


aatdeare 
WU ef where Wot WaT Tel 
SY fraet: Yard atraraeaa 2 & I 
HUT Fe A AT Aa Veta a WaT: 
AAA: VTA ST Tasha Baie ti 
fafacnet ata af farararar aa 
Wt ad aga 7 wfrerenta ater 
@ da wfrareass Wad ATT AVI 


Then Yayati said to Puru, “You are the 
dearest of all my sons, to me. You shall achieve 
the enormous virtues, O Dear one the old age 
has overpowered me. Wrinkles have developed 
on all my limbs and the hair on the head has 
grown grey. All the symptoms of old age have 
appeared over my body at one and the same 
time. Because of the curse of Sukracarya, the 
son of Kavi, I have attained this form. But I do 
not feel satisfied with the pleasures of the 
youthful age. You better own all my short- 
comings with old age. With your youthful age, | 
shall enjoy the worldly pleasures for sometime. 
After the completion of a thousand years, [ shall 
return your youth to you and get back all my 
short comings with the old age.” 


Way: wears ye: fracssran 
UMSSM ce MTT Aenea FAM VI 
Wraarents F Weta STAT Tel 


Ten Seat Tat aaa 8 


Saunaka said, “At these words of Yayati, 
Puru humbly spoke to his father, “O King, | 
shall faithfully obey your command (To obey 
the command of the preceptors bestows on a 
person merits, heaven and long life. It is Indra, 
who rules the three worlds with the grace of the 
preceptors. Receiving the approval of the father 
like a preceptor, all the desires of a person are 
fulfilled.) Therefore, O King, I shall accept your 
old age together with all its short-comings. You 


121 


get my youthful age and enjoy all the worldly 
pleasures to your liking. 


TIISE Uitesal TAIT 
Gad Wad ear aftentt wwrava4i3 of 


Having been overpowered with old age, 
taking your old form and old age, I shall live on 
earth. Therefore you get me the command to get 
you my youthful age. I shall faithfully follow 
your command.” 


Talaeare 
Tet washer a aca at Ve erie a 
VaHaayAA vaca TT WAT VU 


O dear Puru! I am very glad to you and in 
due course I am giving a boon that your 
subjects will attain all desired prosperity. 


Sta ArT METI TTT Aa aeTferatea 
FAAS: 113 3H 


ke 


CHAPTER 34 


Enjoying of worldly pleasures by Yayati, and 
then his proceeding to the forest crowning 


Puru as the king 
vias Sara 
Vay: A Ua: Bret Bray Wega! 
GRA FAT TST GA ARTA at 
Saunaka said, “O Satanika, at these words of 


Puru, Rajarsi Yaydati, recalled the great ascetic 


Sukracarya and installed his own old age in the 
body of young Puru, extracting his youth for 
himself. 


WAU STAT AAT: | 
Mifereeat Teese FATE TATN 


Then Yayati, the son of Nahusa was 
immensely pleased with the youthful age of 
Puru and started enjoying all the worldly 
pleasures delightfully. 


ae Ae 
emifaegranrn aaiseta a va fe 


Titfawaga aaistsrTargia: | 
TANT AG ATA eae TUS Ul 
Marici was the foremost of the mind-born 
sons of Brahma. Thereafter the illustrious Atri, 


Angira and Pulastya were born. 
qa: TARA SF AA: HATTA 
WAM AA: VAT AABATTATA: 119 
Then Pulaha and Kratu were born. After 


them, a son named Praceté was born. Vasistha 
was born thereafter. 


Yat TTA aT 
SAAT GAAS © I 


Bhrgu was born after Vasistha, followed by 
Narada.! These were the ten mind-born sons of 
Brahma who came to be known as the great 
ascetics. 


WTA TAA ATGEMATSTTT 

ATTAIN: WATAATAT AAI 8 It 

MH: CATA geaeHy Mga: | 

YUASA ANTATAETE: 11 Rot 

THUS: TAMAS :| 

WegMachsryaeatara FTI 

WIT. HTT Pa ATTA. I 

Ud AT Ya TAHA TAMA TA: 

STAT Sit faa SMTA TAT: FAT V2 

Now I relate to you about nine sons of 

Brahma. They all were void of their mother. 
Daksa Prajaépati was born from his right thumb, 
Dharma was born from the chest, Cupid was 
born from his heart, Krodha (anger) from the 
interval between the eyebrows and Lobha 
(greediness) from lower part of the body. 


Buddhi gave birth to Moha (delusion) and Mada 
(inebriety) was born out of Ahamk4ra. Pramoda 


1. The Vayu describes the Rsis of each Manvantara as 
the sons or in some cases the descendants in a direct 
line, of the seven sages, Atri, Angiras, Bhrgu, 
Kasyapa, Pulaha, Pulastya and Vasistha 


Matsya Puranam 


(pleasure) was originated from neck, and death 
from the eye. Bharata was born out of his palm. 
O King, these nine sons were born out of the 
body of Brahma. The tenth issue of Brahma 
happens to be a girl, who was known by the 
name of Angaja. 


ayeata 
Tarts: Maraalhr Aca catheter 
TERT TA: la Thegara fenEAT V3 


Manu asked- “O Lord, whatever has been 
told by you, that Moha was born out of 
intelligence and in the same context you have 
mentioned about ahankdra (pride), krodha 
(anger) and the wisdom. What is all this? You 
kindly enlighten as on the subject. 


Weel Jara 
wed Treas Toa EAA 
Areata vata: afcatiia evi 


HATA ATTA ST | 
Udea Parate ath faqs an gu 


Lord Matsya said, “O Royal priest, the three 
gunas known as sattva, rajas and tamas are 
often mentioned. The presence of these three 
gunas or attributes are in equipoise form of the 
Prakrti. The same Prakrti is known as 
Pradhana, Avyakta and Mdayaé.2 The same 


2. Maya has been defined as the inhcrent force residing in 
the Supreme Brahma which 1s essentially cxistent and 
which cannot be differentiated. As the consuming 
flame of fire imparts an idea of its force, so the 
potentiality of force present itself is plainly scen tn the 
objective world. But this Maya cannot be said to be one 
with Para-brahman, nor as something distinct, in the 
same way as the consuming force of a fire cannot be 
said to be the fire itself. Then again if you admit it as a 
separate entity you cannot by any means describe its 
separate existence. (Pancadasi, Book II. V. & 43.) 
Maya is described as a force and it is elsewhere defined 
as something indescribable, which is neither existence 
(sat) nor non-existence (asat) in short it is one with 
Ignorance, which again being the chief factor of the 
grand cosmos is the same as Prakrti of Kapila. 


Chapter-3 


Prakrti is responsible for the creation of the 
universe and also for unmaking of It. 


TON: aap sat fase 
Vet Afters ATT Te TS AT: VE I 


‘With the disturbance of these three gunas the 
gods are born. The image of all the three gods is 
the same, but it turns into the forms of Brahma, 
Visnu and Mahesvara. 


aa Tews WaT 
Telfatat ad: Galacitart Arad Pari e911 


Then with the deformation of Pradhana or 
principal, emerges the Mahat-tattva ‘and he is 
called the supreme in the three worlds. 


SEAN Wed Wad WATT: 
Srqanitt ad: Wa set afgamr 7 
Wiguatat Urn qa Ada Thi ge 


From, Mahat-tattva emerges the ahankdra 
which is the cause of the increase of the pride. 
The said ahankdra influences the ten sense 
organs.* Out of these ten sense organs, five are 
influenced by wisdom or knowledge while the 
other five are subservient to the karmas or 
deeds. 


sta wah erat fagr alfeeat a VIA 
WU FAVS ASpealgTATS : 11 22 I 
In the group of the sense organs, the ears, 

eyes, tongue and the nose are known as 
Jndanendriyas or the organs of knowledge. The 
organs like anus, /iriga, hands, feet and speech 
are the organs of karmas or action. 

Wer; WPT WT a Tal Tay WET: 

STAMPS TTT AHA: | 20 I 

THA Wales aet Baro ay 


1. Intelligence otherwise called Mahat or Buddhi. This 
is the first production of nature and the intellectual 
principle. 

2. Ahamk4ra or the consciousness of ego or I am. This 
is produced by intellectual principle. 


SPAT: TAU let TA fAOT: 11 2 VN 

The functions of all the ten organs of senses 
include sound, touch, beauty, taste, fragrance, 
discharge of refuse or urine, delight, receiving, 
moving and the singing etc. Besides these sense 
organs, the mind is another organ of the 
individual soul that lies enshrined tn it. It is for 
this reason that the frame within which lies the 


asylum of individual soul is known by the name 
of the subtle body. 


TART VAAN: PA FA META 
VAATTAANS HT PTT Ter TE VN 


The individual soul, by coming into contact 
with the atomic body are called tanmdtras or 
the corporeal body. Because of its (jIva's) 
coming into contact with the body, it 1s also 
called Sariri or the one having the body. 


TH: Ole famed are fagerm 
MAIN MTA APA TOTAHAN 2 3 I 
MaMantay: WMAP Taq! 
STAY CASA TTAT: It 2 It 


When the mind 1s forced by the desire to 
engage itself in creation, then it resorts to the 
creation of the universe. From the sabda- 
tanmatrd, emerges the sky having the qualities 
of sound which is brought into being, with the 
deformation of the sky, the wind is formed, 
having the qualities of sound and _ touch. 
Thereafter, with the touch of the wind with the 
subtle form of the matter, splendour 1s formed. 


faut afar Teverrgtenad 
 AMARTGMARNT TATU 24 I 
THTAA TT WA TATU 
WARY TATA STOTT ON TAT 2 & I 
The wind on the other hand comprises of the 
sound, touch and form, (the three deformities) is 
called Lrigundtmaka. With this Trigundtmaka 


coming in contact with the tejas, there emerges 
the water possessing the four gunas, which 


122 


The great king used to enjoy all the worldly 
pleasures as per his enthusiasm, according to 
time and according to dharma. 


Cae: arate Trae 
aaMvete: aay RATTAN 


He then pleased the gods with the 
performing of the yajnas, the Pitrs, with the 
performing of the srdddhas, pleased the beggars 
and the down trodden people by bestowing 
them their desired things. He also pleased 
Brahmanas by fulfilling their desires. 


arfeeitraartey fayey wfrarert:| 

AWA WRT SATU AG I 

TUT FMA: Wal AMAT SAAT 

AM: WAT WMssx SATAT= 11 1 

He served the guests with the supply of food 

and water, the Vaisyas by protecting their 
wealth, the Sidras with his compassion, the 
decoits by impressing them and all the people 
by saving them according to dharma. In this 


way the king Yayati, served the people, as Indra 
serves the gods. 


a tom fagaara yar faranrat:: 
Sa THT MMT FST Ne! 


The king was valorous like a youthful 
person and powerful like a lion; all the matters 
were under his control. He enjoyed the best of 
pleasures without neglecting dharma in any 
way. 

a deg Yura: faa uta: 
le AUASAPA MENT ATT CI 
Ufifaet FT Hee: Ae AST sear 
UU Aca Ad: Hier TS YAVATE SII 
TW BU: SATA yah 
Ram Horace yr warfraeag0 1 

With the enjoying of the auspicious 
pleasures, he initially felt satisfied and pleased, 
when he recalled that those pleasures were to be 


Matsya Puranam 


lost after a thousand years, then he felt painful. 
The valorous king who was well aware of 
K4latattva, while calculating each one of the 
kalas and kasthas, correctly kept in view the 
period of a thousand years. Realising that the 
presceribed period of a thousand years was 
over, then he went to his son and said, “O Son, 
destroyer of the enemies, with the use of your 
youthful age I have had all the pleasures, but the 
desire for the worldly pleasures does not 
subside by indulging in them, rather it gets 
inflamed like the pouring of the offering of ghi 
in fire. 


ayer aitead fara aga: Tara: 
A AAA AAT PTT TAN VL 


All the cereals, barley, gold, animals and the 
women, would not suffice even for a single 
person, thus thinking one should feel satisfied. 


WMHS Bales TAHT 
Veet: fara: YT Mast WaT TaN 
Wa vidisher UX A Jere ata 
Ted Mes WEIS SH EY ageyA si 
O Puru, let you face all the welfare, I feel 
pleased, you better get back your youth besides 


the kingship. This is because you are the son 
who has pleased me the most.” 


VAs Tae 
wfate wat Ten Tarfertigeeten 
atat wide YS: TS GATT ISI 
Saunaka said, “O Satanika, at that point of 


time Yayati, the son of Nahusa, got his old age 
back from his son Puru who got back his youth. 


aga TT Te Yt STAY 
MAMTA ANT SF TATA TN YG | 
ea ae atest Cea: Ya WM 

wa Tefal We TT: WaTeaPATN NG I 
WIS AGHA YA TASTY 
VMSA: Yat FYRAMNST: THta TV 


Chapter-34 


When the Brahmanas came to know that 
Yayati intended to crown his youngest son Puru 
as the king, then they went to the monarch and 
said, “O Lord, when Yadu, the eldest son of 
Devayani and the grandson of Sukracarya is 
alive, why are you giving away the kingship to 
Puru? Yadu happens to be your eldest son, 
Turvasu was born after him. Then there are 
Druhyu and Anu, the sons of Sarmistha and 
only then comes Puru. 


aa SNH SAI TEa 
CAAT AAA TATA TUTTE SI 
Neglecting the elder sons, how could the 
youngest son be entitled to the kingdom? We 


are reminding you of the fact, that the dharma 
should be upheld. 


Tat eaTe 
TEMA AM: Va YOST Y Fa: 
TIS Wi Aa Tet A St A HTL I 
Yayati said, “Let the Brahmanas and other 


people listen to my words. I have in no way to 
give away the kingdom to the eldest son. 


Wy SIS Tea Fra AUT fera 
afrenet: fies TM YA: Mat AA 
My son Yadu did not obey my command. 
The person who does not obey the command of 


his father, he cannot be treated as the true son of 
his father. 


Wraaaearprat: WaT A: AA: 
G YA: Vasey Acie FAT ATTTN2 eh 


The one who obeys the command of his 
parents, and moves according to them, and 
conducts towards his parents like a true son, he 
could be the true son in reality. 


AgusetagaeN Fagasta ar 

SQ ATA MATA Fe YMA Ut 
TaN Y sea aes Wad a faye: | 
SAAT STaet SAT VA FAT WAN 


123 


WA aM: AT Ha: Teun Yalan 
Ya Ua SA: HATA WAAN2vI 
Yat Teasqada TUT Garett: | 
Wat: Wi TR Tester 4 


Yadu has disobeyed me, Turvasu, Druhyu 
and Anu too have humiliated me, while Puru 
has obeyed and honoured me. He had embraced 
my old age, therefore the youngest son named 
Puru is really entitled to inherit my kingdom. 
Puru has fulfilled all my desires. Sukracarya has 
himself given me the boon that “the son who 
shall follow you, he would inherit your kingship 
besides being the ruler of the earth.” Therefore | 
Shall humbly pray to you that Puru should be 
crowned as the king.” 


IGATT Hy: 
U: Yat Toraaal WTaualfed: Wan 
ad Uisela Heat SAAT WWE I 
He WUE Uses a: fra: Wagar 
ST YHA A Wa THAN! 

The people of the kingdom said, “The son 
who is virtuous and is devoted to the parents, he 
is the best inspite of his being the youngest. He 
is entitled to be bestowed with all the welfare. 
Puru is the son who had done good to you, 
therefore as per the boon of Sukracarya, he is 


the only one to inherit the kingship. Nothing 
can be said against this decision.” 


Vitter sare 

Uae eycAl ATEN 

STE AT: TS Teel TAQ CI 

Saunaka said, “The people of the city as 

well as the country, feeling satisfied, when thus 
spoke to the king, then Yayati, the son of 
Nahusa, crowned Puru as the king of the 
country. 

Sra A TS Tet Saar etfera: 

Tae Freatat Tar aTAUATTA: BEN 


124 


Thus bestowing the kingship on Pury, 
Yayati receiving diksa for becoming a forest 
dweller, went out of the city with the ascetic 
Brahmanas. 


TAY MSA Ae TAIT: FAT: | 
TMI Yar MT SAN TIAA ol 
ike Uttal ae aa aretsha unite 


Se TUUGATY Wet HHMI a 

Yadavas-the Ksatriyas were born of Yadu, 
the progeny of Turvasu were known as 
Yavanas, who reached upto grace. The sons of 
Druhyu were known as Bhojas while the 
Mleccha castes were born out of Anu. O King 
the Paurava dynasty originated from Puru, in 
which you have been born. This kingdom has 
been merged in the Kuru race for thousands of 
years. 


Star STA META TUY Array aarrahet 
Aq fAMISEMA: 113 V1 


KER 


CHAPTER 35 


Performing of the tapas by the king Yayati 
and his reaching the heaven 


Vite are 


Ua F AEA Tat Alt: Yafcaay 
Taster "sa AAMAS HATA RI 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, thus Yayati, the 
son of Nahusa crowning his son Puru as the 
king, embraced Vanaprastha position gladly. 


Sfarat aaard @ gat: We Gira: 
ATA SN TM LATA MATT 


Then he living with the Brahmanas in the 
forest, performing severe austerities, consumed 
fruits and roots, controlling the mind and the 
organs of senses. Ultimately he proceeded to the 
heaven. 


UM: ard J Aaaaled: Far 
BTA AAT: A: PHT UTA: 113 1 


Matsya Puranam 


Reaching the heaven, he started living there 
quite comfortably. After a long time he was 
pushed out of the heaven by Indra. 


fragt: Weya: TaMlamreay Viet 
PUATISSHERAA A Act Yt WAT 
After his fall from the heaven, he was stuck 


up in the sky and could not reach the earth. This 
is what has been heard by me. 


aa Ta Wrety meat: cattater safe: 
Tat FQue Meet UT sary 
wad fora aie fact wafers 


It is also heard that the immensely valorous 
Yayati, joming the kings named Vasumaéan, 
Astaka, Pratardana and Sibi~ acting as the 
sages, went back to the heaven, because of the 
influence of these ascetics. 


Wari Sara 

Sa St a fea YA: wreat werafe:| 

eeu aaa ATT 

TANTS HAN Arata drat: | 

Sa waran fan caferrora rai i 

SAU Brateraa: yfaatate: 

aat: Hoag fawraqarea ie i 

Satinika asked, “What was the reason for 

that king returning to the heaven again? Why 
did Indra pushed him out of the heaven? O 
Excellent Brahmana, I would like to listen to all 
the facts in detail. You kindly enlighten me on 
the subject exhaustively. The king Yayati of the 


race of Kuru was comparable to Indra, in glory 
and his fame had been spread or. all the sides. 


wer feria: Aer ree: | 
stgfrants eae fafa ae A AAT Ne 


I would like to listen to the auspicious story 
of the noble king Yayati relating to the earth as 
well as the heaven.” 


Chapter-36 


Vidch Sava 
Sa 8 Hae Tae BATT 


fefa ae a Guat TauTUNPTANTN 01 
Saunaka said “O Satanika, the excellent 

story of the king Yayati, 1s auspicious in this 
world as well as in the heaven. It destroys all 
the sins, which {| am going to speak out to you. 

TAA WaT WS Tat SATA 

Taster yea: WaaTst FA TATUM 

arg a fare GareqTar 

GAA WaT GASH AAPA 


a faaren franrertaadcad: | 
Srey Tatras Sa TAA: 1123 UI 


Yayati— the son of Nahusa had crowned his 
son Puru as the king, lodging the other sons 
over the outskirts of his kingdom. Thereafter he 
gladly retired to the forest, where, he 
consuming fruits and roots, lived for a long 
time. There, he purifying his heart, overcoming 
the anger, performed oblation to the gods and 
the Pitrs daily. He spent the period of 
Vanaprastha appropriately performing the 
homas daily. 


sirafadt ae efaat fay: 

PRTG ATTA PATA ATMA: 1 YY 

youl age auloTAghacyyT: | 

AAMT: W UTA AAAS: 114 UI 

TAY ATMA S MATT aT 

Vad BATT Wa TA e I 

WRHUTSTAATS S AUT ATA STA: I 

WU: LAT TASS TT USAT VN 

Following the strict norms of the 

Vanaprastha age, he consumed the left overs of 
the yajnas. Before the performing of homa, he 
welcomed his guests offering them the fruits 


and roots of the forest. In this way he spent a 
thousand years. He, controlling the mind and 


125 


the sense organs, lived for three years on water 
alone. Thereafter, he shedding away lethargy 
lived for a year on inhaling the air alone. Then 
for a year, he performed fapas burning five 
fires! around him. Thereafter for six months he 
stood on one leg inhaling air alone. Then the 
king Yayati- the auspicious one, spreading his 
glory on earth as well as in the sky, proceeded 
on to the heaven. 


Sta stared verry ara aanfraea 
US AMISEAA: 113 41 


x *& * 


CHAPTER 36 


At the instance of Indra, Yayati repeats the 
advice given by him to his son Puru 


We saa 


Tangy a Ue Aaaraaenhal 
yfsaferast: wrest greeter 2H 
Saunaka said, “O Satanika, reaching the 
heaven, the king Yaydati started living in the 
divine palace, where he was greatly honoured 
by the gods, Sadhyas, Marudganas, and the 
Vasus. 
— ae a am 
saayrararent chereretate aft: ti 
The king having the noble soul, who had 
overcome his mind as well as the organs of 
senses, while moving from the heaven to the 
Brahmaloka, spent a long time, according to the 
tradition of the Puranas. 


a Halfageresl Tala: yA: 
Ud Ca AU VS: A ofaaata: 31 
Once Yayati— the excellent king went to 


Indra. At the end of the conversation, Indra put 
a question to the king Yayati. 


1. The five fires to which an ascetic who practices self 
mortification exposes himself, viz one fire towards 
each of the four quarters, and the sun overhead. 


126 


WH are 
Tal THRs BUNT WEY 
Tt Tera Waray cite 
Tel Tes Uva Te 
wae fee: BAAS ATTN 


Indra asked, “O King, after Puru, receiving. 


the old age from you, started wandering on 
earth, in your form, you tell me truthfully, what 
did you advise him at that time?” 


Bala earet 
PITA YS TI Praqrgay 


Tea Heesa fare 
TEAL Ufa ee TAT MAAS ASHTRAY Ul 


Yayati said, “O Lord of gods, I crowned 
Puru as the king with the approval of the people 
and had advised him thus, “O Son, the entire 
region located between the Yamuna and the 
Ganga shall be under your control. This region 
is the middle of the earth and you will be the 
king of the same, while your brothers will be 
the kings of the boundary regions.” O 
Devendra, thereafter, I advised him then that the 
people should not be mean, wicked and angry. 
They should be free from wickedness, 
jealousies and enmity. They should never be 
disrespectful to their parents, intellects, ascetics, 
those who forgive others, besides the literary 
people. The powerful people always forgive 
others. A person devoid of power always gets 
enraged. The wicked person is envious of a 
noble person, while the weak person becomes 
envious of a strong man. An ugly man gets 
envious of a beautiful person, a poor 1s envious 
of the rich, the lethargic gets jealous of an 
active person and the irreligious person 
becomes envious of a religious person. 
Similarly a person devoid of virtues is envious 
of a virtuous person, O Indra, these are the 
symptoms of the age of Kall. 


Matsya Puraénam 


STRAT: lay fafone- 


AAYTA AGI TAP 
fagientarfaee: Wert: 116 1 
SHLAA AIssmIgaTNA feataerte 
aren eet Gad art faerie 
Teqe: Mra Tease 
qT Gala: TENA 


TAS AM UT sfaata 


Tat aegerdt wraetearqic 


A person who does not become angry is 
better than the person who gets angry. Similarly 
a tolerable person is better than the intolerable 
one, of all the non-human creatures, human is 
better, while a person with wisdom is better 
than the foolish person. In case any one 
denounces or rebukes anyone, then the person 
so abused should not behave similarly. Because 
the one who tolerates the rebukes and abuses, 
the internal grief of the same person is reduced 
to ashes as against the one who abuses. At the 
same time, he usurps his merits. One should not 
hurt anyone in anger at the sensitive spot. 


qraavenfagant Try 
faeneredtadd SAT 
Te frag Fatt aerqie 


Ga FA WetaANYAA: ot 

One should not speak harsh words against 
anyone and should not overpower the enemies 
by unfair means. The words which burn the 
heart or incite others, should not be spoken, 
because only the sinful people behaves like this. 
The one who is harsh by nature and hurts the 
sensitive spots of others, or speaks harshly or 


Chapter-37 


injures others with harsh words like the thorns, 
he should be treated a pauper. It 1s bad even to 
look at him, because he by speaking foul words 
carries a pisdcini in his mouth. One should 
conduct himself in such a way that, the noble 
people besides praising him in his presence, 
praise him in his absence even. 


ASMA TSA AA ct 
ated: Wels at zeta 
Ute A TAY at Uae 


AAfUSAt AAT AAT VM 


One should ignore the evil words spoken by 
the wicked people and taking refuge of the 
noble conduct of the good people, one should 
follow the conduct of the noble people. The 
wicked people are in the habit of issuing arrows 
in the form of the evil words and a person 
getting injured with the same is engrossed in 
anxiety. Those arrows of the evil words hurt a 
person at the sensitive spots. Therefore a person 
with wisdom should not use similar type of 
language for others. 


Teles dart fay slay fae 

BOT Hat T Seay STAT A AT ST STN 

Taal Tel Areal FT aed Wed saad 

TRAIAN STATA 23 1 

One should be friendly and compassionate 

towards the others, give away charities and 
should speak sweet language for all. There is no 
other better way than this to overpower others. 
Therefore one should not utter harsh words 
even. He should adore the respectable people. 


Give charities to others and should not himself 
ask for anything from anyone. 


oft street Ferg Urragt Benferat ee 
WPA SEAT 113 & 


KR 


127 


CHAPTER 37 


Fall of Yayati from the heaven and the 
question asked to him by Astaka 


SH Ta 
Tater rao AAT TA 
Terateasa at Taste 
Trea FETA ATT YA 
SAUNT TOURATAT TATA 


Indra said, “O King, you finishing all the 
karmas, had left for the forest disowning your 
abode. Therefore O Yayati, the son of Nahusa, I 
ask you, as to who is the one comparable with 
you in tapas? 

TANT eaAT 
Te Caray A eae 
AAAI Toa HIPAA AAAI A 

Yayati said, “O Indra, I find no one 

comparable to me among the humans, the gods, 


Gandharvas or the Rsis or the sages, in the 
performing of the tapas. 


SF Sates 
AaISaueM We: ATA 
OTM eae: | 
Talc Pataaretay 
aor Yur UA SAT TAN UI 


Indra said, “O King, without caring for your 
elders or seniors, your youngers, you have 
disregarded them, therefore the period of your 
stay in this auspicious lokas has come to an end. 
All your virtues have declined. Therefore you 
will fall from here.” 


aaa eared 
aiarasdaaararera 
Tat 4 afe Veneer: | 
Sere Yeager: 
Gat wea UG FATTY 


Yayati said, “O Indra, the lord of the gods, 
in case my merits have declined by disregarding 


128 


the gods, Rsis, humans and others, then I would 
like to fall among the sages, leaving the 
heaven.” 


Sq Jara 
Feat: Wiest Ga aS a: | 
wa fafarar ¢ Waar 
J ASAMRM: ASM: AAT ANGI 
Indra said, “O King Yayati, you, after your 
fall from here, will reach among the sages and 
shall regain your lost glory there. But having 


known all this, you should not insult your 
seniors or equals in future. 


Wha Jara 


Tat AMSAT I 

Saunaka said, “O Satanika, then Yayati, 
leaving the auspicious lokas, which could be 
enjoyed by Indra and other noble souls, was 
ready to fall down. At that point of time the 
great sage Astaka witnessed his fall who said to 
Yayati. 
Heh Sard 


aKa Fal ATaaqeTar: 

area area aansha: | 
TARTU AAT: 

GQ GAUW Watt AMSA: i910 
Fem FT at Tava 

A VATA HET TATA TT 
faqfeacaranita wa 

faded: uftalfzat: Ben 


Astaka asked, “Who are you having the 
body as charming like that of Indra? You are 
shining with your own lustre like the fire. How 
are you falling from the sky with the darkness 


Matsya Puranam 


of the clouds, like the planets in the sky? Your 
lustre resembles the sun or the fire. You appear 
to possess unparallel prowess. At your fall from 
the path of the sun, all of us feel surprised, 
getting confused about the object that is falling. 


weal B walsfaftad Caart 
PHT aA TATA 
WYMAN AIT Aa 
TAMA Aa FAATAATAT: 8 I 


Witnessing your fall since you resemble 
Indra, Stirya and Visnu, we have arrived here to 
find out the cause of your fall. 


Taft wat gera: Wea 
qa aneeata & aa 
creat Feta Weuilaad 
Se a aT fale AAMT NON 
We cannot muster courage to ask anything 
from you, nor can you ask from us about our 
credentials. Therefore, I myself ask you. O 


Great man with charming beauty, who is your 
father? What for have you arrived here. 


Ta 7 a ag faunal 
RMUSSY SaRAATTAT 
wat ada fe Wat Waarst 
WAT TAS AeRIST HTH RNN 


You are as powerful as Indra and as such 
you should have nothing to be afraid of. You 
should also be relieved of the pain for having 
fallen from the heaven. Presently you are 
among the saints. Indra, the killer of the 
Danavas would now be unable to face your 
lustre. 


Wat: Mien fe Qaeqart 

Tat ASAT 
a Wa: Wawa: 
Wihtareat MEVT ATUL 


O Great man, illustrious like Indra, the saints 
are the only refuge for the people who are 


Chapter-150 


deprived of the pleasures. The noble saints, who 
rule over all the mobile and immobile beings 
have collected here. Presently you are among 
the saints who are as auspicious as you are. 


WI: WATT YPATATT WT: 
WY: Ta: WANT Mat AAPA: WSN I 
As the power of burning is lodged in the 
fire, or the earth has the strength to contain the 
seed which is sown, or the sun has the strength 


to illuminate, similarly the strength to rule over 
the saints, rests with their guests. 


AA M SEAT: 113 911 


*K* 


CHAPTER 38 
Conversation between Yayati and Astaka 
qa earel 
He TarIgTel Tr: 
VERO CECICEIEICE 
wufgrise qitgetary 
Ua: WITT TT: 11 211 
Yayati said— “O Great ascetic, I am the son 
of Nahusa and the father of Puru. My merits 
have declined because of my insulting all the 


living beings. This is the reason for my fall 
from the abode of the gods to lower regions. 


arg fe Yat aaa Tage 
waar Waa 7 PSA 

Ql faa ara SAT aT 
ga: Ta Gata RAT 


In age, | am senior to you. This 1s the reason 
for my not offering salutation to you. Among 
the Brahmanas, whosoever is senior in age, he 
is considered to be respectable.” 


Heh Jdid 
Haka ATASHA Wag 
ofa a unataea: safe 


129 


a a faghara daa: 
a Va Te vate MATT 1 

Astaka said, “O King you have stated that 
since you are senior in age, therefore you 
happen to be senior’, in this case an 
exaggerated statement has been made by you, 
because among the Brahmanas, whosoever is 
more learned or has the enormous tapas to his 
credit, he is considered to be more respectable. 


BAM eave 
Waltat Waar arate 
Wasa Arad a a 


USAT WiAAaTETHS 1 
aga Ut faqet wee 

facearistertan wefan 
Ud varaissafed fat 

A att F fasts ATG I 
TATA Asal lacie 

CANA ASAT: | 
arena + fasta at 

fee aera Sit WeaIS SHIT ATINE | 


Yayati said, “Sin is considered to be the 
destroyer of the merits. A person earns the hell 
with the same. This aspect could be witnessed 
among the indisciplined people. The excellent 
people do not follow the misconduct of the evil 
people. Even in earlier times the noble people 
followed the footsteps of the noble people 
alone. I possessed the enormous treasure of the 
auspicious merits, which has vanished by 
denouncing others. I cannot regain it even after 
making all the efforts. Realising my miserable 
position, the one who devotes himself for the 
welfare of self, he happens to be a person of 
wisdom as well as the patient one. There are 
several living beings of different temperaments 
in this world. All of them are subservient to the 
destiny. Therefore all his efforts for gaining of 
the riches etc. become infructuous. Therefore a 


130 


person should realise that the destiny is more 
powerful than the wisdom. Keeping this in view 
one should remain unmoved in pleasure or the 
pain. 
UG fe wate ast ¢:a 
carat faratet ats sergreca 
TAME THAT A 
Saray ganar it 
Whatever pleasure or pain is achieved by the 
living beings, is due to the moves of the destiny, 
therefore taking destiny to be supreme, one 
should remain free from the pleasure or the 
pain. 


G:G 7 aad YS 7 - 
TIA Add Aes NT: 
fee acila sft Werart 
T Geataha wear i 


He should not feel miserable with the 
miseries and should not be too pleased with the 
pleasure. The person with patience should 
remain neutral, taking destiny to be more 
forceful. He should relieve himself from sorrow 
or happiness. 


TA A YEMACAS Hala 

Hara Y Arat afer BET 
grat aa At facente ete 

qa MMSE Afadit AAT I 


O Astaka, I do not feel deluded with the 
danger. I do not suffer from the mental agony, 
because I am confident that I have to live 1n the 
world, the way, the destiny wants me to do so. 


CAT MUSA Yea 

UG: FAAS WAM: 
AAUSVATAR Vas A Ua 

fareary tal Wald WaT 20 1 


Andaja (born of eggs) Svedaja (born of 
sweat), Jardyuja (born of membrane), Udbhuja 


Matsya Puranam 


(sprouting from the earth), snakes, reptiles, fish, 
stones, wood etc. assume their form through 
fate. 


MA Yas: aA Feet 
HATA IASATS THAT 
fa Hat a faa peat a we 
TATA AHA ATT: 112 8 


O Astaka, I am well aware of the perishable 
nature of the pleasure or the pain, then how 
could I be overpowered by grief. What should 
be done by me and what not, I have stopped 
worrying about them. Therefore becoming 
careful I keep the misery, grief etc. away from 


+3 


me. 
vila Sava 
TMNSH: TTA 
ae 
aa Ferd cates aera ezit 
Saunaka said, “O Satanika, the king Yayati 
possessed all the noble virtues, and was the 
maternal grand father of Astaka. He was lodged 
in the space like living in the heaven. On 
Yayati's speaking the above words, Astaka 
again questioned him. 
Heh 3did 
Ya cleat: Was WaRT- 
KAM We FA Aiel FAT a 
wt Werge Wa Baa 
adaqaesa a fe TATUs I 


Astaka said, “O Lord, you have enjoyed all 
the pleasures, living in the different lokas. You 
kindly enlighten me on all of them in reality. O 
King, you are discoursing on Dharma like the 
great souls.” 


AM ta Harel 
Taisen frag arasir- 
Tal MASTS SAT AI 


Chapter-38 


_ 
TAY ATA: 11 YH 

Yayati said, “O Astaka, I had been a 
Cakravarti king on earth. Because of the merits 
of my noble deeds, I conquered several 
countries, spending a thousand years time there. 
Thereafter I reached the best of the lokas. There 
I was lodged in a vast city having a thousand 
gates. 


ad: Ga Jagr Tali 
AAR MAA 
_ , 
TA TAT ATTT: 11 4 UI 
aat FeeTAL WET wie 
Maeda Ta 
_ , 
TAL ALATA ANT: 11 2G 
vag tam frag a 
fafa Maratad aeTeq 
AMAA: WE 
CCAM ATA TATU TH 19 11 
Thereafter I reached the further higher loka. 
Thereafter I reached a place which was beyond 
the reach of the Lokap§alass. It was a divine 
country which was inaccessible even for the 
Prajapatis. The old age was no where to be seen 
there. I spent there a thousand years of Brahma, 
the god of gods. I wandered there in different 
countries at will and was honoured by all the 


gods there. By influence and glory, at that point 
of time, I was like the great gods. 


TUISAR Tet BNTATH 

AAT MATA 
Tear T TOT 
TRTA TATA RS UI 


Then, I, taking my form at will, in the 
Nandanavana, enjoyed the company of the 


13] 


apsards and spent two lakhs of years there. I 
came across the divine trees there which issued 
the divine fragrance and were laden with 
flowers, besides being pleasant to look at. 
aa fart ui taqay at 
aeascit Tetet Aas fer 
ATCA ATA TALI U 
> Fafse R 
TA MISS TSATOTY TA: | 
STASMT BAY ATT 
TAMPA At ATTN tt 
whee afrorquat Tata: 
Ware Yoav: | 
Aga Tea eAaISE 
Tat Tet Fa HT TN VM 
ames AAaTTSArTas Fa 
enbtstetal : 
THATS Ua Waa? 21 
Living there, I was attracted towards the 
divine pleasures, then after the lapse of a long 
time, when a horrible divine messenger, came 
to me and shouted in high tone thrice, “Fall 
down, Fall down, Fall down”, O Best of the 
kings, I could only realise this much. Then after 
the decline of my merits, I fell down from the 
Nandanavana. O Best of the kings, at that point 
of time, I heard the voice of the gods who 
grieved for me, in the space, “Alas! It is 
extremely painful that the king Yayati, 
possessing the auspicious glory, is falling down 
as a result of the decline of his merits.” Then 
while falling down, I asked them, “What is the 
remedy for my falling among the noble 
people?” Then the gods informed me about your 
yajnabhimi. I, looking towards it, then reached 
here. With the fragrance of havisya, as well as 


132 


the smoke, I felt delighted, getting reassured at 
the same time. 


sta ATR TATU AAs 
AAA TAS BUA SATA: 13 oA 


kK 


CHAPTER 39 

Conversation between Yayati and Astaka 
Aka Sdid 

Tel AUST AMBIT HATO HAAN 

faa args feat Ae ATA ATET: 11 2H 

Astaka said, “O Monarch, you are the 

foremost of all the sinless kings of Satyayuga. 
You have spent ten lakhs of years in the 


Nandanavana, taking to any form at will, then 
why did you return to earth, leaving it?” 


at earel 
Wit: TERawt A awe 
afar fad Raa WTAE 
TIT TT QitoryUs Aye 
afd Wl: WaT CAPT 


Yayati said, “As on earth, all the close 
relatives, friends, kins and others desert a 
person having lost the riches, similarly in the 
heaven, after the decline of merits, he is 
disowned by Indra as well as the other gods 
atonce.” 


WH Java 
ae aeratorguar Hat 
UAE UST WAS HATAT 
fafatorer: ae ararqantt 
ae Ve datas wat Aa 


Astaka said, “How do the merits of a person 
decline in the Devaloka? My mind gets 


confused on the subject; which is the place of 


Prajapati inhabited by extremely auspicious 
people? You tell me, because you appear to me 
like a man of wisdom.” 


Matsya Puranam 


qatar eara 
Sa at Aceh t wah 
AAMT ATA Tea 
ot BUTT 
fart faafs ager warrixi 
Tae SHAT ATG 
ae Sle Meo A AAI 
send a wide Wasa 
Taye ae fa a aaa i 
Yayati said, “O Lord of the humans, those 
who praise themselves for their merits, they fall 
in the hell on earth, where they get exposed to 
vultures, jackals, crows and others, who live on 
human flesh. They have a large number of sons 
and grandsons. Therefore, O Indra among the 
humans, one should free himself from all the 


degraded deeds totally. O sage, I have apprised 
you of everything. Now what more should I tell 


7? 


you. 
Hea sald 
eal J ae aged aaifa 
Ta Yet: Totavat: Wrst: | 
ae Ward HATA 
Tad Wa AHS BONA | 
Astaka said, “When a person 1s eaten up by 
birds, vultures, peacocks and the insects, then 
how is he reborn and in what form?” I have for 


the first time learnt about the hell named 
Bhauma, which I had never heard earlier.” 


Chapter-39 


ara Tet WUT: MATA] 
STAT SAT WTAE AUT: 112 11 


Yayati said, “The body is born because of 
the karmas and after its coming out of the 
womb, the jivas wander on earth, enjoying all 
the pleasures. Their wandering on earth has 
been termed as the Bhauma hell. They iall in 
the same and they remain unmindful of it for 
several years, which are spent by them 
uselessly. Many of the jivas live in the heaven 
upto the length of sixty thousand years, after 
which they fall on earth, where they are tortured 
immensely by the terrific demons with sharp 
fangs. 


MSH Jae 
AeA Waa 
AT AAT WeTaTeTUTE wT: | 
HA Matt HATA 
SATA WHYAT TARA UI 


Astaka said, “The demons with sharp fangs 
trouble these jivas, who fall from the sky 
because of their sins. Then how could they 
remain alive after the fall? How do they have 
the sense organs? How do they enter the 
womb?” 


BMA: ATA AAI 
TATA AELTTS SFaAGTI ec 

AU Ay ral araearye 
aged feud wht wa 

WANA THAT AAPA 


Yayati said, “The jiva falls from the space in 
the form of blood, which in due course of time 
becomes the seed for the new body. Then it, 


133 


with the combination of the essence of the 
flowers, moves into the yoni according to his 
karmas. With the union of a person with a 
woman at the time of conception, it merges with 
the semen and reaches the womb of the woman. 
Thereafter it is turned into a womb. The jivas 
falling in the water enter the greenery, Osadhis 
(herbal plants), etc. Then entering the water, air, 
earth and the space they are reborn according to 
their karmas as animals, birds or the humans. In 
this way, they falling on earth, according to the 
aforesaid sequence, enter the womb of the 
mother.” 


HEA sdid 


TEU aes TH 
SAAT BT Arka 
STEAM AAlfANAT- 


TSA Y APA ATATTINLVI 
Wikeeteaypesa B 

GY :AA Mt HT TATA 
Waa Ae Sree Ye: 

aaa wat Waar fe Wasi 


Astaka said, “O King, the jiva taking to the 
human form enters the womb with the same 
body or does it take to some other form? You 
kindly speak out the secret to me. I ask you this, 
because of a doubt in my mind. After the entry 
of the jiva in the womb, how does he gain the 
different limbs of the body like the eyes, ears, 
the sense organs and the activity therein, 
besides the consciousness? You kindly 
enlighten me on all these points, at my request. 
© lord, we consider you to be the self- 
illuminating person.” 


Tar eave 
ad: Wyeast Walt 
Wat VA: TATA 
aa TAHA: 
AUT Haas WATS 


134 


OA Wasa Vere: 
STesra Tay ART: | 
G Manat Acaite We 
Ba Be Uva Baza ANG I 
Brot we fargaisal ta a 
AMT WAG TAA SATA 
senate fe fats 
WRIT: WOT: TAT UI 


Yayati said, “At the time of menstruation the 
air draws the semen virile up from the inside 
after which it gets developed there. Then it 
takes the form of embryo and then assumes the 
human or the animal form, according to the 
kind of womb where the growth occurs. Then it 
hears the sound through the ears, sees the things 
through the eyes, smell with the nose, tastes 
with the tongue, feels perception with the skin, 
and meditates with the mind. Similarly all the 
limbs are gradually formed.” 


WH Jae 
a; Ufa: Yea Tad a 
Fraad astt Fae ani 
amraya: a ferrets 
SASS UTA TTA VI 


Astaka said, “The body which is consumed 
in fire, buried or eaten away by the animals, 
then how could it enshrine the soul within it?” 


aMteard 
feat ais Tqwatattsarany 
giera gad gad 
fara Se TAT Tafa ec tt 
quar art yoagett fare 
Wat Air UIA Ta 
clel: Udgey Wald Wor 
TH faaarster Wea? I 


Matsya Puranam 


Yayati said, “O Lion among the Kings, as a 
person while breathing, freeing from the body 
travels through the dream, similarly the 
conscious jivdtmd, uttering unclear words, 
discards the dead body and then travels by the 
subtle body, and then placing the merits and 
demerits or sins in the front, he attains the other 
yoni. The auspicious people achieve the 
auspicious yonis, while the inauspicious people 
attain the inauspicious yonis. O great man, I 
have inclination to discuss these subjects in 
detail. 


agerar fgver: wfarowy 
AANA WHAT aT 
smenddarac fe wa 
wae fa Feats Waa oll 
O Best of the kings, the jivas after entering 
the womb, emerge therefrom as humans with 
two feet, animals with four legs, or the birds. I 


have explained this to you completely. Now 
what else do you want to ask me.” 


Heh Said 

Tet: Heat ara fae at 

a YS: WA Wa aaMa- 
SPAT AT MSHA TN RI 
Astaka asked, “O Dear one, by performing 

which one of the noble deeds, the people earn 
the excellent glory? Can this glory be achieved 
with the performance of tapas or by attaining of 
the vidyd or knowledge? The action which 


yields the best of the people, the same may 
please be stated.” 


atarwarea 
THY ST MA er 
Bris Tey HAM 
water weet aah at 
SNe Meta Vliet TAT VU 


Chapter-40 


Aaitor aah aarfeants 

AT: TaTAPasTA HOT 
Tara AP TAN AT: 

Ya: data aaa VATU 
aaa: Ufvsdaaary 


TUT A TACT FATA v1 
sent salfor wafer 

SOB OES ROG WIC TCE 
WAAR AAT 

SIC CR CORA TELAT 
T UIA Fenech 

Tag Wea 
Wa: Tt: Wares Ah 

TANT: MTs POTTING 
sha cenfefer aatferaettetter Y ery 
SUMATRA AAA RTT UA 
UUSSAA ATTA FTO 

TAHA ATA AAT 
ata: aeR Mara 

Uat Mt WT: Wet AU 


Yayati said, “O King, the noble people 
speak of the seven doors of the heaven, which 
serve as the entry points to it for the jivas. These 
are defined as asceticism, charity, self-control, 
restraint, modesty, honesty and compassion on 
all the living beings. The sages also speak of the 
fact that even the ascetics are ruined by conceit 
and tamoguna. A student who thinks too much 
of his learning and makes use of his learnings to 
belittle others, loses his privilege of finding a 
place in the higher regions and that the wisdom 
bears no fruit for him. The performing of 
agnihotra, the keeping of the silence vrata, the 
acquisition of the knowledge and _ the 
performing of the sacrifice inspite of their being 


135 


the good deeds, are marred by indulgence in 
drinks and conceit. It is worthy of a large- 
minded man, not to get elated on being praised 
by others and not to be angry at the 
denouncement by others. The people with high 
mind, worship the god and the wicked people 
never achieve the supreme knowledge in the 
world. The performing of charities or the study 
of the Vedas, in the prescribed manner, should 
be considered to be the best of all. The vices 
mentioned above should always be discarded, 
which would enable the learned people to 
achieve the vicinity of the Brahman through 
regular meditation culminating in attaining of 
the final beautifude.” 


Stet STA RTA Brag aarherarea 
Weal TeaaT TIT SEAT 113 3H 


Ke * 


CHAPTER 40 


Discussion of Yayati and Astaka on dsrama 
dharma 


ALA sdid 
Gye: SMlt sary 
aa fe: aaa 
area: Aas Afar 
TEAM ASAT 
Astaka said, “O King, the people well- 
versed in the Vedas, consider many of the 
actions under the dharma as the excellent ones 
and the source of achieving of the best of the 
lokas. Therefore I ask you as to how a 
brahmacari serving the acarya, the householder, 
Vanaprasthi, engaged in noble path, or a recluse 


or a Sannydsi, can achieve the best of the lokas 
by following the dharma?” 


Tai earel 
TAT Teany werd: 
Taree UT ATTA 
Weare afr: 
TATA: THAT TAPATAT I 


136 


Yayati said, “It would be proper for a 
disciple that he should go to the preceptor at his 
command and study there. He should devote 
himself in the service of the preceptor, 
whenever he is asked to do so. He should go to 
bed in the night, after his preceptor does so. He 
should get up in the morning, earlier than the 
waking up of the preceptor. He (disciple) should 
be humble, control his sense organs, patient and 
alert, besides being studious. A brahmacdri 
who follows these rules always achieves 
SUCCESS. 


qa WAT at Ata sencacarferedaaaeaea| 

steers Uta Hat Wea ATAU | 
A householder should perform yajna with 
the wealth earned by him by lawful means and 
give away charities besides feeding the guests. 
He should not accept anything belonging to 
others unless they are specifically given to him. 


This is the ancient most form of the 
householder, besides being mysterious. 


Tatas afrtagat 
Sra UVVAT A UTA 
agai: fataqutt qari 
Mas PaaS 1S 1 


A Vanaprasthi sage should live in the forest, 
controlling his conduct and the food. He should 
lead his life on his own strength and efforts. He 
should keep himself aloof from sins. He should 
give charities to others and should trouble 
nobody. Such a sage achieves the best of 
siddhis and moksa. 


aigeasital feryess Frei 
frahga: Waar faye: | 
stare oy ferea- 
TEVA HAT: A AMTSUG 
He should not earn his livelihood by means 
of working as an artisan. He should possess the 


virtues like self control, suppressing all his 
passions, possessing the best of the virtues. He 


Matsya Puranam 


should always control his sense organs, keeping 
himself aloof from others. He should not sleep 
in the abode of a householder, he should not be 
dependant on others, and should keep himself 
light. He should walk bit by bit and should 
wander alone. Such a type of recluse can indeed 
be called a bhiksu. 


TAT SA TTT SAT 
Watt SMM: FST a 
ama Ufa wade fagr- 
AUT fet TATA UI 


ava Jaren amnig 
Wai eeas SHAT Aa 
AAA YA SAet 
FRAT AY TAMA AN 
When the beauty, essence, and other worldly 
pleasures, appear to be of no consequence, or 
are controlled according to one's own desire and 
in case one feels comfortable by disowning 
them, at that very moment, a person with 
wisdom should try to become a forest dweller. 
A forest dweller sage, who meets with the end 
of his life in the forest, drives the ten previous 
and the ten following generations, including 
that of his own to the heaven.” 


HEH Jara 
aiitaeara AT safe area 


Tat Acres MyreaIe TTT 
Astaka said, “What is the number of the 
munis and who are to be classed among the 
sages who keep the vow of silence (maunis) and 
among the observers of the vow of silence how 
many types of such munis are there?” 


Tar eae 
BUY FAA AA UMA alt FSA: | 
WY AT AaaSTIA A A: TANTATHTTN 


Yayati said, “O Janesvara, while living in 
the forest, the one who turns his back towards 
the habitation and also the one who lives in the 


Chapter-41 


town, having his back turned to the forest, are 
both treated as munis of high order.” 


WSR aA 
auhagadswaY WA ata GSA: | 
WA Al AAAs BT ahr VST 


At this Astaka asked, “How can one living 
in the forest has his back turned towards 
habitation and how could one living in the town 
turn his back towards the forest?” 


Tataara 


TWAS FT soa ra 
AMSA AUASTOY WTA Wahl FeSA V2 
SESE C TSO RIE Oru RICH 

UAH et Aaa aeded MATIN LA 
TAMMNGa Aaeaer AAT 
AIST] GAA WISTS Haha FSA L311 
Tey BMTAeaea Arnel Farag: 
aM BRM a oles Fagarearqi esi 


Yayati said, “The muni who lives in the 
forest and does not use the things produced in 
the village, for such a Vanaprasthi muni the 
village is treated at the back. The one who has 
discarded the fire and the home, the one who 
has severed his link with the Vedas and gotra, 
the one who keeps silence, is desirous of only 
that much of cloth which is sufficient for 
covering the body and a J/angoti, or he takes 
food just enough to maintain the body fit and 
alive, with this end in view the muni— the 
dweller of the village, the forest is considered to 
have been left behind. A muni who discarding 
all his desires, has already stopped performing 
the deeds, the one who controlling all the 
senses, maintains silence appropriately, such a 
type of sarinydsi achieves the best in the world. 

aed FITS el STA HAT 
ated Farner Het Afelg rela gh I 


137 


The muni’s whose teeth are clean and 
auspicious, whose nails are clipped and the hair 
is shaven, who takes the bath daily, follows all 
the religious rules and regulations, whose 
complexion has become dark bearing heat and 
cold, whose conduct is the best, such a sarinydsi 
is adorable for all. 


ATE aia: ATT: attorararfersnfora: | 

aet vata Feat aft aarfer:1126 1 

amy centre fara ee ett weer 

SMe F Ale MWaaprad WAH 

AMT CH: Tal A: ASTAAT BETA Vl 

With the decline of the flesh, blood and the 

bones, because of the tapas and the body having 
become lean and thin, and the one who is 
unmindful of pleasure, pain, attachment or 
jealousy and is free from all the worldly 


struggles, has been practicing silence regularly, 
he after conquering the world also conquers the 


| other world. When a sarinydasi or a muni takes 


food by mouth munching like the cow or a bull, 
without taking help of the hands, then he should 
taken to have conquered all the lokas. Such a 
person is considered to be competent to achieve 
moksa. 


Stet MATT TaTgUar Baar aafratea 
CATT STISEATA: HY 0 I 


KK * 


CHAPTER 41 


Discussion between Yayati and Astaka, 
Yayati refuses to accept the merits granted 
by others. 


ASH Ta 
area: Ta carafe AAA 
SHAAN WTA gh 


Astaka said, “O King moving like the sun 
and the moon towards their goals, which one of 
the Vdnaprasthi or sannydsi achieves Brahman 
earlier?” 


138 


qantrearet 
aaTTEAy AMAGdG Fa: | 
OM Wa ae: Yaat TAI 


Yayati said, “A Sarnydsi, who living with 
the passionate householders, controlling all his 
sense organs, discarding his own household, he 
achieves Brahman earlier than the two types of 
munis. 


sara SaaS a: wat fait tq 
AAT AS AeHear VLA ATTA: 13 1 
ai Hh rea 
4; Vad ata: | 
HAGAN: A Aa Thi- 
Weta W MAAS 


A Vanaprasthi, achieving the unique long 
life, does not get polluted after facing the 
worldly pleasures, and falling from the aim ts 
entangled in the worldly pleasures, and in case 
he repents thereafter, then he should perform 
the tapas again for repentance. O King, a 
person with evil wisdom, when performs an evil 
deed, such activities of the monarch are sinful 
and project falsehood. But the performing of 
dharma by a Vanaprastha sage, tentemounts to 
simplicity, samadhi or the good conduct.” 


Hed sdid 
Sale wa F Miedtsfa I 
FM Sat Bata: Yaa: | 
ad: AMA: Haat fers ca- 
RIGIRC RICE EVIER Cc 


Astaka asked— “Who has sent you here? 
You are young in age, adorned with the flower 
garland, presentable and are illuminating with 
lustre. Where from have you arrived? Or 
otherwise, 1s there some excellent place on earth 
for your livings?” 


AMtaeara 


Matsya Puranam 


waeyat Wr eAATT: | 
SRAISE FT: WAIT 

ACTA TAO SHteHUT AE 
Wat Ma YF Fa: WaT 

AA YOTAAT Aal 
Ware wan fe att was 

Ufaerat afteet ATT 11 


Yayati said, “I have fallen from the heaven 
on earth due to the decline of my merits. The 
Lokapaélass of Brahma, are anxious for my 
expeditious fall. Therefore, with your 
permission and taking leave of you all, I shall 
now fall on earth. O Narendra, when I was 
about to fall on earth, then I sought a boon from 
Indra, that I should fall among the noble people. 
I got the boon as a result of which, I could enjoy 
the company of the noble people like you.” 


WH Jara 
Tata cal Wad WU 
fe cleat: Uta Afar AST 
aed ate ar feta far: 
ag wat TT TAT WATCH 


Astaka said, “O Lord, I am sure that you are 
well-versed with the dharma of the heaven. | 
ask you this question since you are falling from 
the heaven. Is there any heaven in the space, 
which can be achieved by me?” 


aaiteara 
BERva: Tey: were 
Taecian fefa a afer a 
aan faariife ATaraes 
Yayati said, “O Lion among the kings, an 
equal number of the lokas are available for you 
in the heaven as compared to all the animals 


like cows, horses and others besides the wild 
animals and birds in the forest. This 1s certain.” 


Chapter-41 


32h Jaret 
aired carte UT Woe Word 
a cer fefa wre ata 
aera afe at feta fara- 
TATA TAWATAARTISTAI Qo I 
Astaka said, “O Indra among the kings, 
whatever lokas were available for me in the 
heaven, I give them to you in order to avoid 
your fall. Whatever places are available for me 
in the heaven or the space, I bestow them on 
you in order to avoid your fall. Therefore you 


proceed to these places atonce, because you are 
the destroyer of the enemies.” 


qatar 
TeagESaTAON Telfered vie add THATS 
WM Wea Aad fEseeral se YaHS ATTN 
TSAI: BIO Ty ea- 
Tay Meare AIS 
aise AeaTGays WH 
fatacaart: fay aa Aa: uez 
Yayati said, “O Excellent king, it is the 
Brahmana, well-versed in the Vedas who could 
receive donation, and not a Ksatriya like me. O 
Indra among the kings, I have performed 
charities giving them to the Brahmanas earlier 
in the best possible manner. The one who is not 
a Brahmana, he should not lead the life like the 
miserable Brahmana. It is the Brahmana, well- 
versed in the Vedas, who its entitled to receive 
the donations. I am desirous of performing the 
noble deeds, therefore, how can I indulge in an 


evil practice, which had never been done by me 
earlier." 


Wied Sara 
Poors at WeuiaaT 
Wieatse fe ara Hat: 
aerafet ate ar fate sar: 
at al Aa AMT TAT 3T 


139 


Pratardana said, “O Best of humans having 
the desired form, I am known as Pratardana, and 
I ask you to tell me, in case there are some lokas 
in the heaven earmarked for me? I consider you 
to be well-versed in the divine dharma. 


aMaware 
Uta Cleat TA ATS 
Wah MA Wael 
Tega yaait fare 
Reread: Whar a 


Yayati said, “O Indra among the kings, there 
are many lokas for you. In case a week is spent 
in each one of the lokas even then there would 
be no end to them. The nectar flows from all of 
them and they are filled with lustre. There 1s 
absolutely no place of grief there. All these 
lokas are waiting for you.” 


Wied Jara 
at Sat WATT TI 
ay clare a a Wa 
wera ate at feta farn- 
TATA FTTH 11 2G 1 


Pratardana said, “O Lord, I give away all 
these lokas to you, to save you from falling. Let 
all my lokas now belong to you. Irrespective of 
the fact whether they are in the heaven or in the 
space, you should go there getting free from the 
illusion. 


aad eara 

A aes: Yad fe ara 
Baas Uirareaita: wy 
srrgera fe 7 Aq WaT I 
HaAAaY TTA ATT: | 

7 Ufget etatate at 
Ga HAHA UT AMSse Vo I 


140 


pataye 4 gt aaa 
fafacaar: fay aa ag: 
r . sat im 
JAA ATAATSRATTN Ve I 
Yayati said, “O King, I am myself an 
illustrious king therefore I am not at all desirous 
of availing of other's merits. A learned king 
should not indulge in evil way even when he is 
entangled in enormous misery or in case of 


danger. A king having his faith in dharma 
should strictly follow the path of dharma and 


glory. The one who is devoted to dharma, for a 


person like me, should not indulge in such a 
miserable action willingly, for which you have 
made an offer to me. A person desirous of 
performing the auspicious deeds, cannot move 
in the way in which no other king had moved.” 
When the king Yayati was so talking, Vasuméan, 
the excellent king then said to him. 


Sit steed TET Areas anfrefer 
CRAIC SEAT: NY 2 


kkk 


CHAPTER 42 


Refusal of the king Yayati to accept the offer 
of the kings including Astaka and others 


at at AST TAT WAN I 


Vasuman said, “O Foremost of the king, | 
am the son of Usadasva and I ask you, “In case 
there be popular lokas in the space or the 
heaven, you enlighten me about them. O 
Auspicious man, I consider you to be well- 
versed in the divine knowledge.” 


AMlareara 
Gerdital yluat Teves 
GAHA ATA ATTA 


Matsya Puranam 
Caretta fefa afer 
SF eat Wat wheaTeTar ATA 
Yayati said, “Whatever regions are 


illumined by the sun on earth, the sky and the 
directions, the same number of lokas have been 
earmarked for you in the heaven and are waiting 
for you.” 


ay rigatel 
diet Sata Va At WaT 
YY olaraa a a wag) 
POTATO Ta 
MATS Ae MASTS: 113 
Vasuman said, “O King, I give over all my 
the lokas to you. Let all of them belong to you. 
O Intelligent one, in case you find some 
blemish in accepting the offer, then you 
purchase them from me, giving me a bunch of 
grass as the price.” 


qaidteara 
4 fase fama & erafa 
Tat Ha FrgpTashs Tar 
Hal F wary 
fafaraart agua AGN! 

Yayati said, “O King, I do not remember to 
have ever indulged in such a type of fake sale 
and purchase even in my childhood. The way 
by which the ancestors have not moved, I can 


not do so, because I am committed to the 
performing of the good deeds.” 


ayAtyara 
Tea MAA TL 
Ta edleae We: WA 
We Ara Me ATS 
Wes CATA FATTY UI 


Vasuman said, “O King, in case you do not 
want to purchase them, you kindly accept the 
lokas which have been given by me of my own 
accord. O Narendra, you take it granted from 


Chapter-42 


me that I shall never go to these lokas. Let all of 
them form part of your domain.” 


foifaeara 
yeaa wat forfatteiaisé 
Tate ctrent ate ait ate 
aera ate ar feta fan: 
ag At TA TAT TATE I 


Then Sibi said, “O Excellent one, I am the 
son of Usinara and am known by the name of 
Sibi. In case there be any auspicious lokas for 
me in space or the heaven, the same may please 
be made known to me, because you are well- 
versed in the dharma.” 


Aware 

1 aT Fea WY 
Waa AISaH MT ATS 

ware fefa cet: faat & 
fag: TAA ASTI 


Yayati said, “O Narendra, whosoever the 
noble people came to: you, for seeking 
something, you did not insult him in words or 
even the mind. Because of this, the innumerable 
lokas are available for you in the heaven, which 
possess the lustre of lightening, besides being 
full of sweet words and are indeed great.” 


Tle AAAI SraT 
aa a aa aenfa oearqic i 


Sibi said, “O Lord, in case you do not intend 
to purchase these lokas, then these auspicious 
lokas which are offered by me should be 
accepted by you. O Excellent one, by giving 
away these lokas, I shall not be able to visit 
them, where you would be arriving.” 


aarterearet 
Ba ratergtraa- 


14] 


Wl WMA Aa Cleat: 
AISE cieh A TASTE 
Aaa ATTA FPN Ih 


Yayati said, “O God among the humans, O 
Sibi, since you are as influential as Indra 
himself, similarly your lokas are also 
innumerable in number. Inspite of the same, | 
cannot live in the lokas donated by others to me. 
Therefore the lokas offered by you are not 
welcome to me.” 


Seah sdf 
Tacha Teieclara: Terretar 
Ud WETS AeA As FAT oI 
Astaka said, “O King, in case you refuse to 
accept the lokas given by each one of us, with 


pleasure, then all of us are prepared to fall in the 
hell giving away all our lokas to you. 


Tar eare 
Tegietecead A: Wat: Venfeehrr: 
He FT ATA AcHd A AIT TAT 
SATA FW Tew 
T TMS ee Aaa 
TA WATS Aca Ath 
aes UH MATIN LN 
Yayati said, “You better try for something 
for which I am worthy of, because the noble 
people welcome the truth. The deed which | 
never performed earlier, I am not going to do 
the same. O lion among the kings, whatever 
have you spoken for a person devoid of greed, 
its reward would not be disgusting. To the 


contrary, you will get the reward which would 
be beyond measure.” 


wes sara 
Hed Witeved TH: Tat ferret: 
Sed; Gt: Weed VaetasHaferar Sa g3 i 


Astaka said, “To whom do the five chariots 
of gold, flying quite high in the sky belong? 
They are illumining like the fire flames.” 


142 


watt ears 
Waa WA dat WH Aft feToAaT: | 
Beaay Weel Valea AA ASU 


Yayati said, “The shining golden chariots 
which have arrived to carry you and me with 
them. Boarding these chariots we shall arrive in 
Indraloka.” 


eH Jaa 
sas WH Ueifanaea fagrrati 


AAAI SAT SATA ATE A UI 


Astaka said, “You better board the plane, 
and fly ahead in the sky. We shall follow you in 
due course to time.” 


Aad eare 
ater WaAed Us Ta faat Aa: 
We at faut: WaT ead SATE I 


Yayati said, “All of us have conquered the 
heaven together, therefore all of us should move 
to that place. The divine path free from 
rajoguna besides being sdftvika is clearly 
visible to us.” 


Vite Tara 
sfiree Ws Ward FA FAT: | 
AAA fed wit TUssaet Wears go 
Saunaka said, “O King, thereafter all the 
kings mounted over the divine planes and 
moved onto reach the heaven with the strength 


of dharma. At that pint of time, the lustre was 
spread over the earth and the sky. 


eh Jars 
Cal Wa: Baa A ASM 
ened Fyfaerase- 
SCAU D IC CHE RIC RYAL 


Astaka said, “O King, high-souled Indra is 
immensely friendly to me and as such | think 
that I alone can reach him ahead of all. But Sibi, 


Matsya Puranam 


the son of Usinara, has moved ahead with 
greater speed leaving behind all other planes. 
How could it happen?” 


qaTiteara 
RAIA Aatettrarad: | 
SUATT Wasa Tee fe a: Forfa ueein 
Bl: SAAT AAAS STATE 
THeaaray Tarfor wae 
frat fraranft yaaa 
ua at Afra fats 
TERS TAN 011 
Yayati said, “O King, Sibi the son of 
USinara, had donated all his belongings for the 
achieving of the path of Brahmaloka. Because 
of this, he is the best of all of us. O Naresvara 
he views the charities, purity, truth, modesty, 


wealth, nobility equally. It 1s for this reason that 
he is going in the finest chariot ahead of us all.” 


Vid Sara 


Sich AGA GAOT: Aferay ATI Vk 


Saunaka said, “O Satanika, thereafter Astaka 
again put a question to Yayati- his paternal 
grandfather who was comparable with Indra. He 
said, “O Lord, I ask you a question and you 
give me a reply truthfully. Wherefrom have you 
come? Who are you? Who is your father? 
Whatever has been done by you, there is no 
other Brahmanas or a Ksatrtya who could do 
the same.” 


qanlaeara 


MMe ATA YA: 
Wat: faat arawaeerets sa 


Chapter-42 


Ta Wa WMA Tala 
UMAR AAA ANAT 12 VI 
qatraat ylaat faire 
Gl MetAeat TAIN: 
WAT SAT: TOMA TART 31 
uUifaarahaera: Were 
Ti: Gauss ey Te 
TWA: AAMT: PAM RATATAN I 
ae Fay age a 
aatasteta ATT 
TA gM Mea are 
Ged fe Wat: WaT & I 
MASH Veaite As 
Waat aged feta a 
Ud eal Wray a: 
Ge TMT Stet FATT I 
Qa: aha Wa aad Fae 
TACT EAANA: TATA: MATRA ANGI 
Yayati said, “I am the son of Nahusa and the 
father of the king Puru. I had been a Cakravarti 
king on earth. All of you are my own people. 
Therefore, I shall reveal the secret before you. | 
am your maternal grandfather. (Though I have 
already stated the same, but I repeat it again). I 
had conquered the entire earth, which was in 
turn donated by me to the Brahmanas. When a 
person donates a hundred beautiful horses, then 
he becomes the auspicious soul like the gcds. | 
had given away this earth full of cereals, cows, 
gold and the best of wealth and riches to the 
Brahmanas. Besides | gave away in charities 
innumerable cows, elephants and horses, the 
earth and the sky are stable because of the truth. 


Similarly the fire is ignited on earth because of 
truth. I have never indulged in useless talk, 


143 


because the noble people always respect the 
truth. O Astaka, whatever has been told by me 
to you, Pratardana, Vasuman and Sibi, is all 
true. I have a firm belief that all the lokas, the 
sages and the gods are honoured because of the 
truth. A person becoming free from Jealousy, 
shall narrate this story of conquering the heaven 
before the people and the Brahmanas, he would 
surely achieve our auspicious lokas.” 


vite Sara 
Ud WAT Vera Aaa: 
Telfer fara: | 
aT Wel UHAT 
Tat Tat: HUTA FANN I 
Ua aa frend aaTa- 
SRE F Uied ATTA 
agit wet wierd wheal 
ASAT AST AHCT NI 2 


Saunaka said, “The king Yayati was the 
immensely great soul and he indulged in 
activities with a large heart. His own daughter's 
son redeemed him like a frend and he 
becoming glorious over the globe, because of 
his noble deeds, proceeded on to the heaven, 
leaving the earth. Thus I have narrated to you 
the truthful story of the king Yayati, the son of 
Nahusa, exhaustively. The same dynasty, in due 
course of time came to be known as Puru 
dynasty, in which you had been born like 
Indra.” 


Sta Sree META Aaa Aarfcrarhee 
FRIAS SEAT: NY VU 


KEK 


144 


CHAPTER 43 
Description of Yayati’s dynasty and the story 
of Kartavirya Arjuna 
ad sdf 
STARTS Martel FTA 
fafort: Wat wet Worrs sarssastn git 
Sita said, “O Rsis, the king Satanika 
listening to the entire story from the sage 
Saunaka felt immensely surprised, because of 


the height of his love, his face started beaming 
like the full moon. 


Waa Wafafaterarcaer Va 
THT: Gautsy arate feaeretei 2 1h 
Thereafter, the king adored the sage 


Sauanka, offering several of the gems, cows, 
gold and costumes. 


Wiaye ad: Wa Aga wed FAI 
SAT AT TUNA PASTA 1 
The sage Saunaka after receiving the wealth 


from the king donated it further, the whole of it 
to the Brahmanas and he himself disappeared.” 


ENT Ta: 

Taras: se faeata aan 

TeNyfay: Yadar oes whatsrys i 

The Rsis asked, “We will now like to learn 

about the Yayati dynasty. After his sons like 
Yadu and others were well established, then 
what happened thereafter? You kindly narrate 
the same to us in detail.” 
Ud sate 

aalaet wants sees ATA: 

fereatorssqyeat a Teal H Prater 0 


Sita said, “O Sages, now I am going to 
describe exhaustively about the varhsa of Yadu, 
who had been. the eldest son of Yayati. All of 
you should listen to it carefully. 


aa: Yat ayaie Us tage: 
TERA USaTa Aaa faarera ig 


Matsya Purdnam 


Yadu had five sons, who resembled the 
divine princes, were illustrious, the great 
archers, as well as valorous. 


Vea Res: BSAtes hat AT: 
MEATY STATA Maa UTA: 19 
Wary earerasa: WAT: | 

Sea TANT TAT AUT AS 1 


They were known by the names of Sahasraji, 
the eldest, while the names of the remaining 
four were Krostu, Nila, Antika and Laghu. 
Sahasraji had a son named Sataji, Haihaya was 
born as son to Sataji, besides two other sons 
named Haya and Venahaya. All the three of 
them were quite illustrious. 


eeael J aTarel ata: whersya: | 
THAT HAY ASTRA AISSHRTNS U 


Hathaya had a world famous son named 
Dharmanetra. The son of Dharmanetra was 
known as Kunti, who had a son named 
Samhata. 


Gere J Aaral Uisorarsy Talat: | 
ASH: Val BAVA: WaTTATTN Qo UI 


aOR ald Wares a 
CHAVA YAISHSSSA ATT UTA: 22H 
Mahisman was the son of the king Samhata. 

The glorious Rudrasrenya was the illustrious 
son of Mahisman who was the king of the city 
of Varanasi. His story has already been 
narrated. Durdarma was the son of 
Rudrasrenya. 


SAMY Yat Haat AMT FRAT 
HARA J TATA Cienega: 112 
adda: Aas Haast ata a 
PAM ATA TeATa AAAS TT: 1123 1 
The wise Kanaka was the son of Durdarma. 
Kanaka had four sons who were well known in 
the world. Their names were Krtavirya, Krtégni, 


Krtavarma and Krtanga who was the fourth one. 
Out of them Arjuna was born of Krtavirya. 


Chapter-43 


wd: RAGAN AIA FT: | 

aay AIRAT art Yfaaaht: ew 
SAMA SaaS Pa ATATT 

TE SAT ATT AAT: TRATTTI YG I 
yd agded J A aa WaT: | 

TG ATATOT ARATTT FATLOTN 2G I 
Gar yea Farrar qeaterqarerry 
UTS ATATTET celay TTCATRAT I V9 I 


He having a thousand arms, came to be 
known as Sahasrarjuna. He was the lord of all 
the seven islands. Sahasrarjuna, the son of 
Krtavirya performed tapas for a thousands years 
for Dattaétreya— the son of sage Atn. Getting 
pleased with him, Dattatreya bestowed four 
boons on him. Against the first boon, Arjuna 
sought a thousand arms for himself. Against the 
second boon, he desired to relieve the noble 
people of the influence of adharma. With the 
third boon, he desired to conquer the entire 
earth and rule it according to dharma. Against 
the four boon, he desired his death in the 
battlefield from some one who is stronger than 
him. 


wae Usa Wat aagrar Wada 
malefeatearanr erat fate rate 


With the influence of these  boons, 
Kartavirya Arjuna, following the dharma of 
Ksatriyas, conquered the earth surrounded by 
the seven islands and seven oceans, comprising 
of the mountains and trees. 


We AeAea SF Sates GAT: | 
TW AMY WAT SHAT LS I 


The intelligent Kartavirya Arjuna developed 
a thousand arms at his desire. The chariots and 
the flags also appeared in the same way. This is 
what has been heard by us. 


BM ATASAMTT Tat BVy Ft Tey 
Pe FA Fat TET ANAM 


145 


At the same time, it is also heard about 
Kartavirya Arjuna, that he performed ten 
thousand yajfias in quite a humble manner, in 
all the seven islands. 


Us AM AUS STATS TTT: | 
Ud HSA Val: ASAT: 112 Vk 


The great king gave enormous wealth as 
daksind in these yajnas. The yipa-pillars in 
those yajnas were made of gold. All the 
pedestals of the yajfas were also build of gold. 


wed ta: aa wearers: | 
Taare Frertaragn fra: 2 
All the gods arrived in the yajfas for 
receiving their respective shares, on the planes. 


The Gandharvas and Apsdras also graced the 
occasions with their dances. 


TST At WT Meat Wat ARTETA 
HUA TAMA FAT A123 
A Tt Hrcalrey Wet Area atferar: | 
Tea RAT FAT AI 

a fe way gy Gat wat we 
TH AUATATINT Uva TRANG 


Observing the glory of Raéyjarsi K4rtavirya, a 
Gandharva named Narada, sung a story in the 
yajna. There was no other Ksatriya king who 
could be compared with him tn the performance 
of sacrifices, in giving alms, in practicing of 
asticism, in progress and in the learning of the 
scriptures. The King Arjuna always travelled 
about his extensive country and punished the 
thieves and the wicked with his sword bow and 
the arrows. 


UraSATTT TROT A TTT: 
O AaAU Ha GAYS FUE I 


The king Arjuna ruled the country for eighty 
five thousand years, possessing all the gems and 
remained the Cakravarti emperor. 


a Ua UMensyRMaae: F Ua fi 


146 


O Ua FEM WAM Ahreaasatsaaq 291 
ASA AMgAeAT TaratafSacran 
Wit WPAACAT MITEAST ATHENA 


The emperor Arjuna was the king of 
animals, because of his own strength, was 
protector of the fields and he dropped rain 
timely turning himself into the form of clouds. 
With the strikes of the stringing of the bow his 
skin had become quite hard and he appeared 
with his thousand arms in the same way as the 
sun appears graceful with his thousand rays. 


Wa AMT HAIG Tfsorat Herella: | 
meena fara Yat AA AMAT SU 


Arjuna, who was immensely graceful among 
the humans, had conquered Karkotaka and had 
made him captive in the city of Mahismati. 


UT at TART MGT HAT a 

ASAA Ta: Wieratal AEaha: 113 01 
Cera ALSAT AAT MiaaTAT eA 
afayafedarareatenens zit THATS 2 
Val WMgasAaNl Aes A AeVay! 
RUqegan J Tat MISSA 21 
TA AAA aarerarot Teleett 
area FT: WATT WTA: 113 3 I 


The king Arjuna, during the rainy season, 
facing the flow of water used to enjoy the sports 
comfortably. When engaged in water sports 
with the ladies, in the river, Narmada shook 
with fear at his sight and becoming highly 
astonished, herself surrendered to him. He alone 
with his thousand arms, sweiled it by pushing 
the oceanic water into it and increased it, as it 
increases in monsoon. The ocean having been 
thus agitated with his thousand arms was 
subdued by him and he extended his sea power 
so that the dwellers of Patala got inoffensive 
and peaceful. 


JIC a Ps a a : qT} 
Trea Aaa Taa areTS : ASA ¥ It 


Matsya Puranam 


He with his thousand arms churned the great 
ocean and in that process the small and big fish 
which were caught in the water waves were 
pounded and the foam that emerged out of the 
ocean made the whirlpools unbearable. 


HUA SAAT ASAT ATTA 


WCAC PATS MSA: 3 
var Fayerqatat vata @ aeleT: 

Uae Heciauer Fatafeafrar sas tI 
ud seem aqralarafeah watt: wt: 
MSTA Welaea FJ Mat WaT ACMTNZ I 
fafsiea aeeat UIssAra arfeora TAT A 
SAL MM VARA ST AAT CI 
Waa WH: Were Yor Ta 

TA ACTA AYA TIAA AT: 113 3 
PIAVASA STARE RA TAA 

ae aa feed antaist aarti ol 
ae Wea Teal Saat TMT 

GASSUAY UHal GAA PAA 8 
Taga wet a fayd wa geal 

TAT GEHL GU Hea eres 211 
fA WAeaea TIT ATA ae 
AURA STAUB wat A ateTeaT ATT 1K 31 


At the same time, having been surprised 
with churning of the ocean in earlier times, 
getting apprehensive of the emerging of the 
nectar from the ocean, the hoods of the Nagas 
became static as the wind becomes static in the 
evening making the banana leaves to be 
motionless. Similarly, Arjuna, once, repeatedly 
going to Lanka confused Ravana with the 
shooting of the five arrows. He overpowered 
him forcibly and bound him with the string of 
his bow. Making him captive he brought him in 
the city of Mahismati. On hearing this the sage 
Pulastya, reaching the city of Mahismati pleased 
Arjuna in various ways. Then Arjuna, at the 
assurance of Pulastya released Ravana— the 


Chapter-44 


grand son of Pulastya. With the stringing of his 
bow with a thousand arms, such a terrific sound 
was created by him which was like the thunder 
of the thousands of the clouds at the time of 
dissolution. But his moves of the destiny are 
quite graceful, that Parasurama, born in the race 
of Bhrgu, cut off all his arms like the creepers, 
and shattered them. The reason for this is that 
the sage Vasistha had once pronounced a curse 
on him saying, “O Descendent of Haihaya, 
since you have reduced to ashes my favourite 
forest, therefore someone else would bestow the 
reward on you for this misdeed. A valorous 
Brahmana of the Bhrgu race, being an ascetic 
will cut off a thousand of your arms and then 
shall severe your head.” 


Ut sara 
TA Weta array: PT ata: 
awa 7 Us: awa Ft: VAs 


Sita said, “O Rsis, because of that curse, 
Parasurama became the cause of his death no 
doubt but the royal sage had himself sought for 
such a boon. 


TAT YAM ATA AA WEA: | 

PAA Ae: VAT TAA ARTA SG I 
Wy YI gz: Mee al 

Wee deat states fargrradirs & 1 
WATT YAY Teg Aelaet: | 

TA AMAT AS ACARI Slt FAT: Uv 
Aat US HET: GAA VSIA TEAM 
START PATA MSTA RTATINY 2 It 
aie faareaenigree 
aiftegeanta saat are atari 
SHIRT YAY SHAT AH AY i 
UHAT AERA WAT THOT UTA 
Hala gyal AT WaT ACAAAT TN 0 It 
a Mae er FAafstar wet 

TAT HAA HOATAMAT AAT 1G Vt 


147 


Tel fa: AAS BT A: 
aataed At GAT Haafes aaa: | 
AMARAS TA TAs ASAT VI 


O King, Sasrarjuna had a hundred sons, but 
five of them were quite powerful. Besides them, 
his sons known as Sirasena, Sira, Dhrsta, 
Krostu, Jayadhvaja, Vaikarta and Avanti were 
quite valorous and well-versed in the archery, 
besides being strong, devoted to dharma, and 
immensely valorous. Talajangha was the son of 
Jayadhvaja, who had a hundred sons. The race 
of Haihayas was divided in five parts and were 
known by the names of Vitihotra, Saryata, 
Bhoja, Avanti and Kundikera. They were also 
known by the name T4lajangha. The glorious 
son of Vitihotra, became the ruler of Avarta- 
Gujarata. His grandson was invincible who was 
the destroyer of the enemies. The immensely 
intelligent, Sahasrarjuna looked after the people 
with a religious mind. He had conquered the 
earth upto the ocean with the strength of His 
bow. A person who getting up early in the 
morning recites his names, he does not have to 
face decline in the riches and in case it 1s 
already lost it 1s restored. The person who 
narrates the story of the birth of K4rtavirya, his 
soul gets purified and 1s praised in the heaven. 


ofa sitaeel Hergeay Ararat Tareas 
fea THT SETA: HY 3 


kkk 


CHAPTER 44 


Burning of the trees with lustre of 
Kartavirya, curse of Vasistha to Kartvirya 
and the description of Andhaka race 


BAA od: 

fas cet CRITE eT: | 
cider famer wat Wale WaT 
eet BF Tale: Waraate A: ATT 
A He UA Ma SACSAAMSATN 


The Rsis asked, “O Sita, what for had 


148 


Kartavirya burnt the forest of high-souled 
Apava. Tell me in detail. We have just heard 
that Rajarsi Kartavirya had been the protector of 
the subjects and as such, why did he burn out 
the forest of Maharsi?”’ 


ad sala 
aera fRartOT array eTe | 
fata Wreaa siferatss TIT 
Sita said, “O Rsis, once the sun, taking to 
the form of a Brahmana, went to Kartavirya, 
and said, “O lord of men, I am Sirya, you 
kindly provide satisfaction to me once.” 


Taivarel 
Maat fae waa earn 
alent Ae ete seat J faces 


The King said, “How could you be satisfied 
O Lord? O Divakara, what type of food should 
be provided to you? On hearing from you I shall 
make the requisite arrangements.” 


Meet Save 
wat fe A WAM saat aT 
aa Tat Aad a aT A gate alana 


Strya said, “O Great donor, you better give 
me the food of immobile trees. I shall be 
satisfied with the same. It will be the greatest 
satisfaction for me. 


alta SATel 
1 VM: WAT: Wa AAA A Gert A 
Freres ATUaT eS AA AT MOTATATS ANG I 
Kartvirya said, “O Best of the illustrious 


ones, all these trees cannot be burnt with my 
tejas, therefore, I bow in reverence to you.” 


Meet Jara 
Geass Me SeaATaA Gr 
Q wera saferata aa dat: aaFaat: 91 
STfaer ay TA: Mea VAT 
ParTanaeard a eras i 


Matsya Puranam 


Stirya said, “O Naresvara, I am pleased with 
you, therefore [ am going to give you an all 
faced arrow, which, because of the possessing 
of my tejas, shall dry up all the trees. 
Thereafter, I shall feel satisfied. 


at Sara 
AT: MURATA Wee 
at SAS AMAA AAAS AN 
Teasssata aerfor ara a 
MUSA TANT SATUS AN Ro HI 
Ud Writtacedd: Wal A sea 
fran Fregon fader ator FTA gH 
Uafaraa Bret J saat erat: 
SM AUASEMUT TAISSTA A ASAT NUN 


Stita said, “O Rsis, thereafter, Siirya gave 
away the arrow to Ka4rtvirya Arjuna. Then 
Arjuna burnt out all the trees, villages, dsramas, 
towns, cities, fapovanas, charming forests and 
the orchards, reducing them to ashes. Arjuna, 
thus after burning out the eastern region also 
burnt out the southern region. With the terrific 
lustre, the earth was deprived of even the grass, 
getting completely destroyed. At the same time 
the great sage Apava had been performing tapas 
seated in the water for a thousand years. 


Ul Fa Harta Safes eTTTT: | 
ASTRA SAAT TRANS HI 


He came out of the water after the 
completion of the fapas and found that his 
dsrama had been burnt to ashes by Arjuna. 
Then getting enraged he pronounced a curse on 
Arjuna, as has been told by me to you. 


AMAT MG Tae Alf AT AT WAM 
HSI: YU Tava AAUT ETL ex 
Tara aya faeopsfearpetee:| 

PENATATA START TT: 11 4 


O Rsis, now you listen to the prowess of the 
Rajarsi Krostu and his Varhsa, who was full of 


Chapter-44 


strength. It is the same varmsa in which lord 
Visnu in the form of Krsna, the gem of the 
Vrsni-varhsa was born. Vrjinivan was the son of 
Krostu. 


Gherilaasy Yatsuyetarel ATA WeTaet: | 
AURYAS MARTTI Ag ATU LEM 


Vrjinivan, had a son named Svaha, who was 
quite valorous. Svaha had a son, named Rsangu 
who was the best of orators. 


ay efit wag: aha 
farts Ya: BART AT: gol 
ay date wa fagerefern: | 
Wears Cashadt WF SN 


Rsangu, with the desire of getting a son of 
noble character (performed the tapas). Because 
of his noble deeds, he got a son named 
Citraratha. Sasabindu was the valorous son born 
to Citraratha, who in due course of time became 
a Cakravarti king. He gave away enough of 
daksind in the yajnas. 

SATAN VNAISa MAAS AAT 
WMA YAO MATT TI LS A 
In earlier times, a verse was being quoted 


about the dynastic traditions of Sagabindu, that 
Sasabindu had a hundred sons. 


arrat aaa yftgfaorcsrarey| 

AST AMAA WAST ARTIST 112 01 

TIAA: VAM: VATA VATA: | 

Byatt: YMA WHA: Myarsa 112 I 

Each one of those hundred sons of 

Sagabindu again had a hundred sons each. All 
of them had enough of wealth, the lustre, 
beautify and possessed enormous wisdom, six 
of his sons had the term of Prthu, added to their 
names. Their names are like this— Prthusrava, 
Prthuyasa, Prthudharma, Prthujaya, Prthukirti 
and Prthumand. All of them were born in the 
race of Sasabindu. 


149 


Wart A WMT: WTA TTT 

MATA FATA FAAS AAT 2 

SIA FT FARA A wergfaatrany 

ATTA MATA 12 3 1 

These were the kings born in the race of 

SaSabindu. The people of wisdom, well-versed 
in the Puranas, praised Prthusrava, who was the 
eldest of all. Suyajfiia was the son of Prthusrava, 
who performed the yajnas quite properly. Usana 
was the son of Suyajfia who was extremely 


religious. He protecting the earth, performed a 
hundred Asvamedha sacrifices. 


FaityTraga Ser: SAAT: 

TTT TAA TAO 112 YI 
AAT AIT: Haar ST: | 

Ya Vata fagrancaeraey: 124 1 
Pat Vara: Wagar: 

ara fafatatctara gfratfrar § 11 


Titiks4 was the son of Usand, who tortured 
his enemies. Marut who was the best of 
Rajarsis, was the son of Titaksa. The valorous 
son of Marut was known as Kambala-barhis. 
Kambala-barhis had a son who was the 
intelligent king Rkmakavaca. Rukamakavaca, 
had with the shooting of his arrows, killed the 
powerful enemies and conquered their lands. 


rave Set Ta Tena stam 
Ua YT SAAT: Halfaaxalwa4n ot 


Rukmakavaca, the great king had performed 
once an Asvamedha sacrifice and had given 
enormous daksind to the Brahmanas. 


Witt US Yarey veratat aqua: 

BENG: Yor Tar: UTar BTU 
una w aft da faeesearrateaan 
VEATTTARTA JSAM EASAT: 112 8 
CT: Walaa TRIM Ae 
MUTA SAU STRATA TAT: 113 0 1 


150 


WN GATS SAT esi TH 
Adel JT Wels Bact FAHTAT: 13 


mae fat mat arrearage 
RUMI eat Uf LoraT ATs 2 


The king Rukmakavaca had five sons, 
named Rukmesu, Prthurukma, Jyamagha, 
Parigha and Hari. They were extremely 
valorous and great archers. The father 
Rukmakavaca crowned Parigha and Hari as the 
kings of Videha-ksetra. Rukmesu was the chief 
king while Prthurukma was subservient to him. 
All of them drove out Jyamagha from the 
country. The Brahmanas, who had collected 
there, were pacified and he embraced the 
position of a vanaprasthi. After sometime, he, at 
the education of a Brahmana, mounted a chariot 
with a fluttering flag, and holding the bow and 
arrows in his hand, moved towards another 
country. He reached the bank of Narmada for 
the purpose of earning his livelihood. Then he 
went to the Satapurd mountain range and started 
living there. The chaste wife of Jyamagha, 
named Chaitra, had reached the middle age and 
she could not produce a son. 


sya ASAT sara FT fra 
TAUSSMGAA Fg TT HATA F113 311 
Walqara ara at yfararn 
WanISTalet HT Vs TAT BNI vil 


Thus though the king Jyamagha had no son, 
but still he did not marry another damsel. Once 
the king Jyamagha became victorious in a 
battle, where he received a girl of marriageable 
age. He brought her and handing her over to his 
wife, said to her, “She is not my daughter, but is 
your daughter-in-law.” At these words of the 
king she asked, “Whose daughter-in-law 1s 
this?” 


Teilara 
net ae Yaar svat afacafin 
TATA ATAU HAM: ATTA 4 


Matsya Puranam 


ya feast gam dat aftorat ach 

Taya & feargra qari merchigreah 
MAME Tales FT YT UTS SI 

Tan faeutswaaTeAUaMTer 
AAMT: aT AAR J ASSAF 91 
afgrnea fate: vat Tene FU: BAT: 
Ha faayare HAST AS SHAS TAIZ CI 
HATS: Yat Ga TWH: TATA 

geeq Yat ante fafa: WratTaTN 3 81 
deal ad: Yat aaT ag fags: 

BME a YA ATT BT a BAI 
AMereda QTY Vat VGA FAA oll 


At this the king said, “She would be the wife 
of the son that would be born to you. (Finding 
this the girl started performing fapas). 
Thereafter as a result of the tapas of the girl, 
Caitra conceived, inspite of her being quite old. 
She then gave birth to a son named Vidarbha. 
The intelligent Vidarbna then produced three 
noble sons from that girl, who were known as 
Kratha, Kaisika and Lomapada. Jnati was the 
son of Manu. Cidi was the son of Kausika and 
the kings born to him were known as Caidyas. 
Kratha the son of Vidarbha got a son named 
Kunti. Dhrsta was the son of Kunti, who was 
quite glorious and well-versed in wartare. 
Nirvrtti was the son of Dhrsta who was quite 
noble and was the destroyer of the enemy 
warriors. Nirvrtti had a son named Vidiratha, 
while Vidiratha had a son named Dasahi. 
Vyoma was the son of Dasahi. Vyoma's son 
was knowr as Jimita. 


aigeyal fanereres Sra: Yas 

Tat HS SHCA AaTA: FeHeTU 211 
AT MISSMGSU: VPM ASST: 
TAMA: ASAT AST BUY 


Vimala was the son of Jimita and 
Bhimaratha was the son of Vimala. Bhimaratha 
had a son named Navaratha. Navaratha had a 


Chapter-44 


son named Drdharatha, who had a son named 


Sakuni. Karambha was born of Sakuni, while | 


Devarata was born to Karambha. 

CANASMAGA CAUSA: | 

SATA Vg CAATATST IS 3 I 

TEA Heras Hat: WTA 

AAA: TRaTEATT YY I 

WasT anal WKAR Tos: 

URAL AMARA HATTA & I 

Aad: Mad yeh: Aaa aAlfetaers: | 

ont fag fagra sarees Were: | 

TATA AAT Ue: AMT HTT YG 

URAC AATAPALTCA FA TAM 

Thr wa 7 feet target Fv 

Mh U EMiet Wen aT aera) 

aa J ATTA ferertota TeVOTIK 1 

Devaraéta had an immensely glorious son 

named Devaksetra. Devaksetra had a son named 
Madhu who had the lustre like the divine 
prince. Puravasd was the son of Madhu. 
Purudvan was the son of Puravasa, with the 
union with Purudvan, the Vidarbha princess 
gave birth to a son named Jantu. The name of 
the wife of Jantu was Aiksvaki who gave birth 
to a son named Sattvata who expanded the race. 
Thus on hearing the family tradition of the 
noble Jyamagha, a person achieves a son and 
ultimately he achieves the sdyujya of Soma. O 
King, Kausalya was the wife of Sattvata, she in 
union with Sattvata, gave birth to the valorous 
sons named Bhaji, Bhajaman, Divyavrdha, 
Andhaka, the divine king, Mahabhoja and 
Vrsmi, who delighted the race of Yadus. Now | 


shall speak out their story exhaustively, which 
you please listen. 


THAT GOAT ATTA A ATA: | 
PIA Ya FF AGH AaSMATI U1 
TA A APA | ATA TTA 


15] 


fa a afaet ta afin meyer 
WT Aaa YoRA SSTAMTESTATIY 0 M1 
Smyjaya had two daughters named Srijayi 

and Vahyaka, who were wedded to Bhajaman. 
A son known as Vahyaka was born to them. 
Besides these, both the sisters gave birth to 
several other sons known by the names of Nimi, 
Krmila and Vrsni, who could conquer the towns 
of the enemies. All of them were born in union 
of Bhajamén and Srijayi and Vahyaka's 
wombs. 


ae cargat Tat aeat faa: 
WAKA TAT UA AT: | 
Ua: MayoNaa Wy yates WET VI 


Thereafter the king Devavrdha was born, 
who was immensely friendly with his kins. But 
the king Devavrdha had no son at all. He 
performed severe tapas for begetting a virtuous 
son 


TA FAVA WTA EIT 
ACMA ET Ta HAAG 21 


He embracing the mantra entered the water 
of the river Parnasa. Because of the touch of the 
water by the king, the river Parnasa started 
doing good to hun. 


ACAURATALIA TA AT FETT 
PaaS WATT STAT FaPASTTNG 31 
Terrase AR Teatafar: YA: 
HIT AATMS AATIT USAT HG VI 


The best of the river was then upset for 
doing good to the king. Ultimately she come to 
the conclusion that she was unable to find a 
second woman like her who could give birth of 
a son desired by the king. Therefore she 
thought, “I shall myself today take to thousand 
forms.” 


HY WaT HAN A fayet wy ay: 
MUMS US AAT ARTA UGG 


152 


BT A TAN Tha WTA Atal aT 

Ya MAQUI BY SATS TAT & I 
TAN YOM WH VLA 
TOAST SHlcteeal STAT 14 9A 
BAA YOTA FUSTVATATTAS aA 

AY: AS ATO SAAT: AAG SH 
weer TAGE: AeA a Meth: | 

WAS YAS TATA TUTSATIAT TT 3 


Thereafter, Parnasa, taking to the extremely 
beautiful form, appeared as a maiden, informed 
the king who accepted her as his wife. 
Thereafter Parnasa, the excellent among the 
rivers in union with the king Devavrdha, gave 
birth to a son in the ninth month possessed of all 
the virtues known as Babhru. The intellectuals 
well-versed in the Puranas, in the context of 
spreading of the dynasties, praised the king 
Devavrdha, saying, “Whatever had been heard 
by us earlier about this king Babhru from a 
distance, we find him in the same position, 
coming near to him. Babhru is the best among 
all the humans, while Devavrdha is himself 
comparable with the gods. O King because of 
the influence of Babhru and Devavrdha, seventy 
six thousand of their ancestors, became eternal. 


Meal SATA TVA Fora: | 
BUSTA: FAAATTETATG 0 1 


The king Babhru was the performer of the 
yajnas, giver of alms, valorous, devoted to the 
Brahmanas, performer of the vratas firmly, 
beautiful, illustrious having enormous prowess. 


HI HF SEM YF ATT: FATA 
Ht MAT MT HeaeTa ST TING VU 
Thereafter in union with Babhru the 


daughter of Kanka, produced four sons named 
Kukura, Bhajaman, Sasi and Kambala-barhis. 


HA YA Gers wat gfe: 
HUATAT ALANA AeA AS SHTANE VU 


Matsya Puranam 


TASHA: WA fagrqat ae: fen 
CUA TA ATA A eA VASSAL BU 


Vrsni was the son of Kukura, Dhrti was the 
son of Vrsni, Kapotaroma was the son of Dhrti, 
Taittirl was his son and his son was Sarpa, who 
had an intelligent son Nala. Dundubhi was the 
son of Nala. 


dfarrattd at start: Way: 
ARAM DT TAA ARTA: HG YI 
TET TASTED ATA LT 
arteq fagrendgit Gat ea WAIT: NG GH 


O Best of the humans, once Dundubhi was 
performing a yajna for getting a son and a son 
named Punarvasu was born to him. Punarvasu 
was born at the Atiratra ceremony in the court 
and because of that he was immensely learned, 
well aware of the good and evil karmas, 
devoted to the performing of yajnas besides 
being a donor. 


TANSSAQAMT ayettatad fact 
MERITS Seat AA Gd AAT ATG EI 
SHEA PAP TATE 
RUTTER TEAM TAA 9 
Ti Faaarant agente asta Fi 
ATAAA ST AAA AIGA ATATSAS 1G 61 


Tyferatagres a asta 
MERA Blt MAT Fedde AGEATIE SN 


O King, best among the learned people, 
Ahuka was born as son to Punarvasu. He had a 
daughter known as Ahuki. Both of them were 
born twins. Ahuka was quite popular and 
invincible. These verses were recited by the 
people relating to Ahuka~ the king Ahuka had 
ten thousand such chariots, the axles of which 
were quite hard, with flags fluttering over them. 
They were decorated with kavacas and 
produced the sound of the thundering clouds. In 
the Bhoja race, no king was born who was 


Chapter-44 


truthful, lustreless, ante-yajnas, incapable of 
giving daksind in thousands, unclean or 
foolish.” These were the words spoken by the 
people who lived on the livings provided by the 
king. 

WMERMAIAY TAN Ussgat eat 

MeAAIAUS eM St Yat MATA lt 

PCCM IDES ECUCELIC HLT 

SAHA GAT AT Tat Heya: N19 


SAAT TAT Yaa SAAT: | 

At TAM: WMASSMAQeA AT Fathi 21 
caagacal a facet apie 

Seat Maca A TAA Aft AAAI 3 


Ahuka had married his sister Ahuki to the 
king of Avanti. In union with Ahuka, the girl 
Kasyaki gave birth to two sons named Devaka 
and Ugrasena. Both of them had the divine 
lustre. Devaka had four valorous sons known by 
the names of Devavan, Upadeva, Sudeva and 
Deva-raksita. He had seven sisters as well who 
were married by Devaka to Vasudeva. They 
were known by the names of Devaki, Srutadevi, 
Mitradevi, Yasodhara, Sridevi, Satyadevi and 
Sutapi who was the seventh one. 


TATA Ya: HARA F WA: 
ATT YUM I AY MET FTA: 
SN] TEMS FaANe: YAN: | 


ANT TAA: TSISSMHAAM HAA TAT Ut 
Ory Teme a ag cit TTT: 
STAT: ARTA SANSA: HaHa 9 I 


Ugrasena had nine sons, of whom Kamsa 
was the eldest one. The rest of the sons were 
known by the names of Nyagrodha, Sunamé, 
Kanka, Sanka, Ajabhi, Rastrapala, 
Yuddhamusti and Sumustida. The brothers had 
five sisters named Kamsa, Kamsavati, Sutantu, 
Rastrapali and Kanka. All of them were 
extremely beautiful. Ugrasena with this sons 
and daughters is said to have been born in the 


153 


Kukura-vamsa. 
THAT TatseT trent faeer: 
THe: WRT fAqwadisHaqiiow tt 


Bhajaman had the son named Viduratha, and 
the valorous Rajadhideva was born as the son of 
Viduratha. 


Teacaey Yet Beet Safa 
PRAATAMATAT PUOTPT: VATATEA: 119.6 11 
Sonagva and Svetavahana were the sons of 
Rajadhideva who were illustrious like the gods 


and were devoted to following strictly the 
discipline and the vratas. 


WOT GAT YM: US YT Tifayneay:| 
Wet st sagat a at: PMMA 8 it 


Sondsva had five sons named Sami, 
Devagarma, Nikunta, Sukra and Satrujit. They 
all were valorous and skilled in battle. 

iftiga: wicera: wicteraret UIs See: 

Maar: Yat AA CHT AISSARTNC Ol 
Ca HAM ATA Sot ATTA: | 
FAAMSTARAT MAGA A ATA 1S 21 
eaTesa AM ATE Aelact: | 

SAA AAA SA AHATTALIIS 2 

Pratiksatra was the son of Sami and Bhoja 
was the son of Pratiksatra. Hrdika was the son 
of Pratiksatra. Hrdika had ten immensely 
valorous sons. Krtavarma was the eldest of all, 
Satadhanva was the middle one, and the rest 
were known by the names of Devarha Nabha, 
Bhisana, Mahabala, Ajata, Vanajata, Kanfyaka 
and Karambhaka. 

Cael Yel fageay Hracater: | 
AAAS: YC THAT UTS SHAT NS 31 
otagal famed: Were: 

Gewa TAT HO SATA AAT 1S KI 


Devarha had an intelligent son named 
Kambala-barhisa who had a son named 


154 


Asamajija, who had a son named Tamoyja. 
Thereafter, there were the three kings known by 
the names of Sudamstra, Sunabha and Krsna 
who were all quite valorous and glorious. They 
had no sons. They were also said to belong to 
the Andhakavarnsa. 


STAM ae a: alter Fra: 
Tea faget Aet WAATAT ATS 4H 


A person who recites the glory of the 
Andhakavamsa daily, he achieving sons, and 
expands the dynasty. 


Sta stared TeTgATOT BTA 
Aq FAT CMSA: USVI 


**K* 


CHAPTER 45 
The story of Syamantaka gem 

Yd sald 

TRI wa Ast a sored aya: | 

TRI STAT Ola PESTA I 

Tgt senha Yt aal St Saniigay 

srfad frrfa da wart Hacer 

Sita said, “O Rsis, (now you listen to the 

details of Vrsnivarhsa, the son of Sattvata) 
Gandhari and Madri were the two wives of 
Vrsni. Gandhari gave birth to two sons named 
Sumitra and Mitra-nandana, while Madri had 


five sons named Yudhayit, Devamidhusa, 
Anamitra, Sibi and Krtalaksana. 


aritargar fret frerentt g et gah 

wae wera: wife agus 
RTS: WHT HUTT TATA 

Yuet Watt ta ft Aswaatr si 
Rie Hea | Av ator aatsrefera: 
THAIS TT NT MISHA A HVT TG I 


Nighra was the son of Anamitra while 
Nighra had two valorous sons named Prasena 
and Saktisena. This Prasena had the 


Matsya Puradnam 


Syamantaka gem which was the best of all the 
gems and was the foremost of all the gems on 
earth. Lord Krsna also being desirous of 
achieving the said gem, requested Prasena for 
the purpose, but he could not get the same. But 
at the same time, Krsna, inspite of his having 
the strength to forcibly usurp the said gem, did 
not do so. 


HAAG Aa: WATT Hla: | 
Tae A ara fact waa TANG 
Once Prasena, wearing the Syamantaka 
gem, went in the forest for hunting. In a cave in 
the forest in which the bear of the cave was 


present, Prasena heard a great sound and 
disturbance. 


ad: Ways Bact WAY Warrant 

BU: Wad U aa wet ta WAARATII I 

Sea HA: WHT T Aered Aor 

SSR TAT SUA MARTINS I 

wed J Bi Mean Mla: ufeiga:| 

Maa SAT BAe WHAT APTOS 

WaT Was TOS Alo Haat: | 

af SSI a edett Mae: weyara zit 

aha aad errant yaad fe afeurgi gon 

Out of curiosity, Prasena entired the cave 

and found a bear there. Then both Prasena and 
the bear glanced at each other and started 
fighting. The bear killed Prasena and snatched 
the gem from him. Thus Prasena who entered 
the cave was killed by the bear, therefore no one 
could see him. On the other hand, apprehending 
the killing of Prasena, lord Krsna became 
doubtful that people would attribute the death of 
Prasena by him for the sake of the Syamantaka 
gem, which came out to be true. When he neard 
of the talk on the subject lord Krsna replied, 
“Wearing the said gem, Prasena had gone to the 
forest. Possibly he has been killed by someone. 
Therefore, I shall kill the person who happens 


to be the killer of Prasena king, the enemy of 
Vrsnivamsa.” 


Chapter-45 


ay atau aarera Wat Fria: YA: 
ASSAM A Mia FATIMA TAT 8 VI 
af Sa F Mage WU VTISaei 
We TA FT Mae: Gear: wavs a: 
HVAT TAIT AelaTAI 221 
Then lord Krsna, went on for hunting after 
the lapse of a long time, and while wandering in 
the forest at will, he reached the same cave. 
Finding Krsna there, the powerful bear, uttered 
a loud thunder. Hearing the sound, Lord Krsna, 
holding the sword, entered the cave and found 
the powerful bear who was none else than 
Jambavan himself. 
ATRL CUlcH TET TAM 
MT A AMS MUTATE 1123 Ut 
Then the powerful Hrsikesa-Krsna, with 
eyes red in anger, overpowered the powerful 
bear Jimbavan with his own strength. 


qerad del al: aura woe : THA 
ATTSY ATAU ATAT B¥ 


Then the bear king eulogised lord Krsna, 
reciting the Visnu-stotras, which pleased the 
lord who delighted Jambavan, by granting a 
boon. 


wraaryaret 
Sad UAVENU AMISE WOT WN 


HA Vs AT YM Malt AMATeTAT TI 

Ast AAO: WAT F BAT MAT WaT WAT A 
Wa: A Maat F SAN WATT S Wy: 
PIGM Aelaly: Aha AUTATSTT ILE I 


Jambavan said, “O Lord, I have a desire to 
meet my death with the striking of your cakra. 
Let my daughter who is quite beautiful, 
embrace you as her husband. O lord, thus the 
gem, which I had got from Prasena, after killing 
him, should remain with you.” Thereafter the 
immensely competent and valorous Sri Krsna 
kilied Jimbavan with his cakra and accepted his 
daughter as well as the gem. 


155 


det Galhaarat Wa Bradaatel 
ot faeargaiesd Gases HAST: 112911 
Returning home in the assembly of 


Sattvatas, he handed over the gem to Satrayit, 
because he was fed up with his false talk. 


Tae Wea: Va aqearagGa7| 
TAT T AM AHA AAT SATU 
At that point of time all the people of the 
race of Yadu, thus spoke to lord Krsna, “O 


Krsna, we were totally sure that Prasena would 
meet with his end at your hands. 


HHT YN ATA TM MATfSAT: FAT 


TATA Yar waa J faa: i 
SMart Aelatat ASAT Fast: 28 1 


The ten beautiful daughters of Kaikeyaraja 
were the wives of Satrajit, who had given birth 
to a hundred sons from Satrayit, who were well 
known in the world besides being valorous and 
praiseworthy. Bhangakara was the eldest of all. 


TT FAA TATRA Tau 

Bqd THA fa: HATA 12 01 
AIA AT OT Shrat A esac 

TM VSS eT ABT TTT ASTI? Vit 


In union with Bhangakara, Vratavati, gave 
birth to three beautiful girls with tender limbs, 
known as the excellent Satyabhama, Vratini- 
the performer of vratas and Padmavati. 
Bhangakara gave away all the three daughters 
to Krsna. . 


smitty ahaa 
AIHA YA AAT ASSAM 
aera ggaTey Fra TATA 
HAST FIAT PTT SHAS AAT? 3 11 
aerate: Ua sft eM: Weller: 

AAA ST ATTA BOTT: IVI 


Sini was born of the youngest Anamitra- the 
son of Vrsni. He had a son named Satyaka, who 


156 


had a son named Satyaki. Satyavan and the 
glorious Yuyudhana were the grandsons of Sini. 
Asanga was the name of Yuyudhana who had a 
son named Dyumni. Yugandhara was the son of 
Dyumni. Thus the race of Sini has been 
described. 


srr Sat yest aT gents: 
oat J Taal At FHT: AT Wa ANI 


Now I shall describe the Anamitra dynasty 
claiming its origin from Vrsni-varhsa. Prthvi— 
the second wife of Anamitra, gave birth to 
Yuddhajit, who had two sons named Vrsabha 
and Ksatra who were quite valorous. 


FN: AMNIATA Yat warafarad 
MIT HAT F YA: AAT: 2 El 
CTIA SAAT STATES : 

TRL: TFA TRUST ARS FA AATUT: 11 219 1 


Vrsabha married Jayanti, the daughter of 
Kasiraja and an extremely beautiful son named 
Jayanta was born to her, who was devoted to 
the performing of the yajnas, immensely 
valorous and honoured the guests. Akrira was 
born as a son to him, who in due course of time 
was also devoted to the performing of the 
yajnas, and giver of enormous wealth in 
daksind. 

TH GAT FT VT SCAT TATAT 
FAAICaTATa Wate st Aalders? ott 
STATS: ATTA Fee AT Ts T 
TSA: WETIT: MTA SAAT 128 
Ty EuAAON Teas AT 

Ge F Mra THA SRT ANZ of 

The king Sibi had a beautiful daughter 
named Ratné, who was marned to Akrira. 
Immensely valorous sons were born to her who 
were known by the names of Upalambha, 
Sadalambha, Vrkala, Virya, Savitar, Sadapaksa, 
Satrughna, Varimeyjaya, Dharmabhrd, 
Dharmavarma and Dhrstaman. All the sons 


Matsya Puraénam 


born of the womb of Ratna, were the performers 
of good deeds including yajnas etc. 


HUET Yat Bt Hera 
SAAN Vet SAAT VN 


Ugrasena, in union with Akrira produced 
two sons named Devavan and Upadeva, having 
the glory of the gods and who expanded their 
race. 


aya A Aa: TAT: Yyragyta aI 
STOTT YA FUT TATTN3 VI 
areata: gaat a aa yaaa a 
arate taay aes: TAUTATINS 31 


ASvini was his second wife who produced 
Prthu, Viprthu, Asvatthama, Subahu, 
Suparsvaka, Gavesana, Vrstinemi, Sudharma 
Saryati, Abhimi, Varjabhimi, Sramistha and 
Sravana. These were the thirteen sons who were 
also born to him. 


oui frenfinta at ae Hoeateany 
1a faeries sfgrensa aafeaa3 vi 


A person who is well aware of the removal 
of the blemish from Krsna, he can never face 
false allegations from any quarter. 


Sha STR HTT TAA 
USA CISA HY 4 UI 


kKREX* 


CHAPTER 46 
Description of Vrsni dynasty 
qa sara 
Rea YTS Ak GATT TY 
WHATS VATA YAAT STAN 
ayqeal Welag: YaarMaAgsia: | 
aU AN Aa SAKA: TAU 
Sita said, “O Rsis, Aiksvaki (Madri) gave 


birth to an astonishing son known as Sirasena, 
who in due course of time came to be known 


Chapter-46 


Idhusa or Devamidhusa. Coming in contact 
with the valorous Sura, Bhoja gave birth to ten 
sons and five beautiful daughters. Among the 
sons, the long armed Vasudeva was the eldest, 
who came to be known as Anakadundubhi. 
Devabhaga was born thereafter followed by 
Devasrava. 


amgie: frrsa tera ayaa: 
PAA: WAH: WAT: WH UT AMSAT 
aretha: Yar cer yee STaSTAT: | 
Tnfaeat Bt aa Stat STATA 11% 1 


Pra YJ Meat Gta YIr YM 
SH Stata J WN Asta FING I 


Thereafter Anadhrsti, Sini, Nanda, Srijaya, 
Syama, Samika and Sarhyiipa were born. The 
names of his beautiful daughters were 
Srutakirti, Prtha, Srutadevi, Srutasrava and 
Rajadhidevi. They were the mothers of five 
valorous sons. Srutadevi, the wife of Krta, gave 
birth to a son named Sugriva. The chief queen 
of Kaikeya country known as Srutakirti gave 
birth to Anuvrata. 


TAHA VET FAT: ATE 
aE arat A WayarwaSa: 1G I 


Srutasrava, the wife of the king of Cedi, 
gave birth to a son named Sunitha, who 


followed the dharma variously, besides being 
the destroyer of the enemies. 


WT USM Fase Hea Yat eh 
Ud Fait WARN TYCACTAT YAMIN 11 


Thereafter Sira gave away his daughter 
named Prtha to the old king Kuntibhoya out of 
friendship. Because of this, Prtha the sister of 
Vasudeva came to be known as Kunti. 


ayer UW sa WoSaat afarea 
WUSRaT A Vy CAVATHEAPNC 


The unblemished beauty Kunti— the wife of 
Pandu, for the expansion of the race of Pandu, 
gave birth to the divine sons. 


137 


qs Wet AAA FAT: | 
SHGATAIA PTCA TA: 8 UI 
Tiga J Vircrakantata yes 
AHA: UCAT BUM TPA 20 1 


With her union with Dharma, Yudhisthira 
was born, Bhima the gigantic one was also born 
with her union with Vayu. With the lustre of 
Indra, Arjuna was born. At the same time with 
her union with ASsvanikumaras, Madri gave 
birth to Nakula and Sahadeva. This is what has 
been heard by we people. 


Tent wat Ara wal BASH: | 

AY RS Yt WA AT A Yes Hae 

Sad Gt Uy Musrannratey! 

feat & Hurt g Ufsvat wR Ferieeit 

Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva), in union with 

Rohini,! of Puru family, gave birth to the eldest 
son Balaréma, and to his brothers— Sdrana, 
Durdama, Damana, Subhru, Pindaraka and 
Mahahanu. At the same time she gave birth to 
Citra and Aksi, two daughters with beautiful 
eyes, 

Caaa Gat Mt: qa: aAtfraraha 

Sera MRM eTaTTEA TN 

Wl AAC HA; WAAAATATIN 3 I 

In union with Vasudeva, Devaki gave birth 

to Susena, Kirtrman, Udara, Bhadrasena, 
Rsivasa and sixth Bhadravideha— all they were 
killed by Karhsa. 

WIT A STATA atte  Afawate 

TA Het Tela: Ys HOT: waaay 

HAM AHAHOT FAST AAT 

SAEA FT ARTA Get MTT RTT ITU I 


1. Vasudeva had two wives Devaki and fRohini. 
Baladeva was, transferred from the womb of the 
former to that of the latter and there-fare he was 
called Sankarsana. 


158 


At the same time, Devaki gave birth to Sri 
Krsna, having long life, the lord of the universe, 
also known as Sri Krsna- Prajapati. After Sri 
Krsna, his younger sister Subhadra was born, 
who was sweet tongued. Thereafter Devaki 
gave birth to the glorious and illustrious son 
named Siri. 


Way Aa Ta ML: Hettae: 
SURAT AY Tra Salata 
Ver HA ST YAM HAKATA TAT RE I 
From the womb of Tamra, Vasudeva begot a 
son known as Sahadeva— Devaraksita gave birth 


to a son named Upasangadhara and a beautiful 
daughter who were killed by Karhsa. 


fart Tear Uw add J caer 
Ud We AAA PICEA Waar 2011 
TIME ACTA A FHA 
Vasudeva also got the sons known as 
Vijaya, Rocamaén, Vardhaman, Devala from 


Upadevi. He also begot Mahatma and Avragaha 
from Vrkadevi. 


FHA TAS GA eal AT ATA I 
Tat saalya Wet Yes FT 

TAN TANT ASMTAATT TTT 2S A 
age fae 7 ar fe fearg 
AVATATMSTES UT: Ut ASTRA ot 


Then Vasudeva begot Nandana, the seventh 
son of Devaki and a valorous king and from 
Sraddhadevi, he begot a son named Gavesana. 
Earlier he had got Kausika from his wife of 
Vaisya clan, as a son. 


Ory WT aT vitae afore 
ques aftesta Tyee Tet BI 


Pundra and Kapila were born as his sons 
from his wives known as Sutanu and Ratharaji 
respectively. He got two more sons. 


SAT ATA FTaTS SMT: AW TTT: | 
Ghisay wala Weare TYATN2 


Matsya Puranam 


The first was a great archer among the 
Nisdda clan, was known as Jara. After him 
Saubhadra and Bhava were born from his wife 
of Vaisya clan. 


SaMPTEATY AHMSATGaa: BA: | 
fost wa : AARAANR 31 
hed | e-el eel & JP IRIE CE 
PETA VAST AAT AMSA 2 YI 
HOUAATAT FOS: Yt Tat 
Gas FT MSM Seat ATTAIN I 


The son of Devabhaga was known as 
Udbhava. The first son of Devasrava was 
known as Pandita. The glorious Eksvaki in 
union with Anadhrsti, gave birth to a son named 
Nidhitasattva. Srdddha originated from 
Nidhitasattva. Lord Krsna getting pleased with 
sonless Kartisa bestowed on him a son named 
Candra, who was extremely fortunate, strong 
and valorous. 


HAAG: Yaraat Bl A AeA 
See Ua start Weraet 2 & it 


Both the sons of Jambavati gave birth to 
sons known as Carudesna and Samba, who 
possessed all the auspicious symbols. 


APA aie FEAT Aaah 

Whaat fear: Treacy: | 

fay TA VAM YORTRAT 9 

They were strong and possessed great 

prowess. Nandana had two sons known as 
Tantipala and Tanti. Sami had four sons known 
as Viraja, Dhanu, Syama and Srnjaya who were 
immensely strong. 


SUNS HTTIT: Way at Tah 
SWRI RISIEICE CIC IEE EAT 


Out of these, Syama was issueless, while 
Samika denouncing the performance of the 
Bhoja dynasty retired to the forest. While 
performing tapas there he achieved the position 
of a Rajarsi. 


Chapter-47 


FUT WaNZed a: aida Fert: 
unfa Wat Pet aaa: weEAT I? eI 
A person, who regularly recites or listens to 


the story of the birth and rise of lord Krsna, he 
is relieved of all the sins. 


Sta sitet Verret arrast Gforce AT 
AAAS ATT 1S EU 


kR* 


CHAPTER 47 
Life story of Krsna, history of Daityas, battle 
between gods and the demons, and the 
related stories 
ad sara 
wy eal Wale: WS HoT: warafa: 
fagreed Sag Wafers WTA 


Sita said, “O Rsis, in earlier times, Lord 
Mahadeva, the god of gods and the ruler of all 
the people, incarnated in the human form of 
Krsna on earth. 


CAM TYCATA TTA TERT: | 

ATa gered At FeeNat sae STATN 

rear eat seca Feeeetay TraTT 

Jared AYeaet ST Gat SF WAIN 

Because of the tapas of Vasudeva, he was 

born from the womb of Devaki. His eyes 
resembled the lotus flowers, had four hands. His 
divine figure was illumining with the divine 
lustre, and his chest was adorned with Srivatsa 


mark. Then Vasudeva observing the divine 
symptoms said to Sri Krsna. 


Wass Ca HAA Aaeadagalia a 
TH UAT Baar STAT HAT: SI 


“O Lord, you better wind up this form. O 
Lord, I am frightened from Karhsa, because he 
has already killed my six valorous sons, who 
were your elders.” 


AYCATI: IA BT TatisaAA:: 


159 


STATA Aa: ML Tae SAAT Ut 
Listening to the words of Vasudeva, lord 
Acyuta spoke to Vasudeva, the son of Siva 
shoula be carried to the abode of Nanda. With 
this command, he changed his form. 


Sead TANT WAM UTA 
are AaHea Beart vfawafe 
A J MA Caraga TA: Ha STATA 
Thereafter Vasudeva, carried the child to the 
abode of Nanda— the cowherd. Entrusting the 
care of the child to Nandagopa, he said, “O 
friend, you better protect this child. He will 
bring many-fold welfare for the people of the 


race of Yadus. The child who has been born to 
Devaki is sure to kill Kamsa.” 


ENG Se: 

mh UG agqeay caat A Aiea 

TANG HKAT TMA A AAAI 

Ot fae SAAT St aT 

a Ty HAAS At at Aa AT IC It 

The Rsis asked, “O Sita, who was this 

Vasudeva, who had the privilege of getting the 
lord as his son and to whom the lord himself 
addressed as the father? Who was the glorious 
Devaki, who produced the lord out of her 
womb? At the same time who was Nanda-— the 
cowherd and who was Yasoda— the performer 


of the great vrata, who brought up the lord 
during his childhood?” 


Ua sare 
Yea: HyATEaaletalteq rar Byer 
TAN: BVATKAM: YMoaraerarerawni? i 


Sita said, “O Rsis, Purusa~Vasudeva 
happens to be Kasyapa and Devaki happens to 
be his beloved wife— Aditi. 


WT SAAT CAM; AATTAT 
Y TAA ATT ATA 1120 
Asatte wel ta: wast Aa ATT 


160 


TSA AATT APTA ATTAIN AN 


Both Deva (Vasudeva) and the goddess 
(Devaki) had desired for the lord who is beyond 
birth, to be born to them as a son. Kasyapa 
happens to be the amsa of Brahma, while Aditi 
is the armmsa of the earth. Lord Krsna fulfilled all 
their desires. The same lord who 1s also known 
a Yogdtma, depending on Yogamaya, confusing 
the people, incarnated on earth in human form. 


Te a ae Tat ferns fearact Wy: 
ey TAT MATA MUTT 
At that point of time, the dharma was on the 
decline, therefore in order to establish dharma 
and for the destruction of the demons, Visnu 
possessing the enormous prowess, was born in 
the race of Vrsni. 


BEAU ATA AT AIM APA TAT 
SAT A AAMT HAM WMT HATO TATU 
faaferer a anferat tat area am 
Yviten Sse ATR ary fersra TAM 
WaNclt tatat Uearfor a VSTi exit 


Krsna had sixteen thousand wives, chief 
queens among them were Rukmuni, 
Satyabhama, Satyaé, the daughter of Nagnayiti, 
Subhama, Saibyd, Laksman4- the princess from 
Gandhara, Mitravinda, Kalindi- the goddess, 
Jambavati, Susila, Kausalya— the princess from 
Madra country and Vijaya. 


MAM TAIT TATTLE 

GSE Wr YL MT DT MBIA LG I 

Fae URIS A Yew AAA TI 

TY Maya A ASR Fareay! 

Weed HAS WHA MST TATE I 

Rukmini gave birth to eleven sons, who 

were well-versed in warfare. They were known 
by the names of Pradyumna, Ranasiira, Sucaru, 
Bhadracaru,  Sudesna, Bhadra, Parasu, 
Carugupta, Carubhadra, Sucaraka and 


Matsya Puranam 


Charuhasa, the youngest of all. Rukmini also 
gave birth to a daughter named Carumati. 


MRL AAT ATT ATAATT: 

Uist Siteraeta AeA TERTA: 112911 

UTA gt Ta TaATTey Talaat: | 

AAA: Tat Be ATT: APTA VS 

Satyabhama, gave birth to seven sons, 

known as Bhanu, Bhramarateksana, Rohita, 
Diptiman, Tamra, Cakra and Jalandha, besides 
the four daughters who were quite beautiful. 


Jambavati gave birth to Simba who was well- 
versed in warfare. 


fraaratecva Tata-et agar 
TAAaTE: Taya ATA: WaT TE ATVs 


The immensely beautiful Mitravinda gave 
birth to two sons named Mitravan and 
Mitravinda. Nagnajiti on the other hand gave 
birth to two sons named Mitrabahu and Sunitha. 


wanaths yarort agente Frater 
Vet MATASAT YAO TSA MAT UQoll 
Similarly thousand of thousands of sons 
were born to Sri Krsna from his other wives. 


TMA ASAT Asa ATTN 
ANG TAT Me TATU RATT 2 
TTA J Yat ae: Gat wa a 
TRA BTvA WATOTTATSATN 2 VW 


In this way the intelligent Sri Krsna, the son 
of Vasudeva, had sons numbering one crore, 
one lakh and eighty thousand. Upasanga had 
two sons known as Vajra and Sanksipta. 
Gavesana had two sons named Bhirindrasena 
and Bhiri. 


WI J alel aavat afew: 
AAS WISTS ARSE WleheTs 1123 11 


Pradyumna had a son named Aniruddha 
from the princess of Vaidabhrya; who was quite 
intelligent, and could fight enthusiastically in a 
battle. The son of Aniruddha was Mrgaketana. 


Chapter-47 


BAVA ATAAAA AATCC: 
AANAHAA at: VS ANT: Wala: gv 


In union with Samba, Kasya, the daughter of 
Parsva, gave birth to five sons who were quite 
active, truthful and valorous, besides being 
beautiful. 


fra: Het: WANT Aearat Wate 
Ue: MAATANUT Aleta Wea 4 UI 


Thus the number of the valorous Yadavas at 
that point of time was three crores but sixty 
lakhs out of them were immensely valorous and 
strong. 


cane: Wa Was Ora WENA: | 
CATAL BAT A A AGU A Vela 
Seta WAY Ged Waaar| 
AAMAS SAY Asa HEI 


All the Yadavas had been born on earth 
from the amsas of the gods. In the battle 
between the gods and the demons, the strong 
asuras were killed. They had been creating 
trouble for the humans after having been born 
on earth in human form. 


HAM Mas A AAA ASA) 

UanaHel Wega ANSI HEN! 

PENTA MOLT I MeL AT ATT: | 

FESTA HA AAAAT 23H 

In order to destroy the wicked people, the 

lord incarnated in the race of Yadus. These 
ereat Yadavas are divided in a hundred and one 
races. All these races come under the race of 
Visnu. Lord Visnu (Krsna) had been their 
leader besides being their lord. It 1s said that all 
the Yadavas were under the command of lord 
Krsna. 
RIT Fd i- 

WAT: HATHA ey MforacTM 

Wietfertevead fat Gara 011 


161 


sifecaen fauna we daa: 
fend dat yet: Bat: TT: Ble eI 
The Rsis said, “O Stta, Lord Visnu ts linked 
with Saptarsis, Kubera, Yaksa, Manicara 
(Manibhadra), Salaki, Narada, Siddha, 
Dhanvantri, besides the community of the gods, 
then what for does he incarnate on earth? For 
how many times has lord Visnu incarnated on 


earth and how many incarnations are going to 
be there in future? 


vfaen: aft dard weNtat Were: | 

Tay wy feavelires Bras VU 

qedtts Waa faqs: | 

WA: WANARNY TA: Wels Feoarq3 311 

When the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas feel 

fatigued, what for does he incarnate on earth? 
What for Visnu (Krsna) who 1s the best among 
the Vrsni or Andhaka Vamsas, incarnates in 


human form on earth? You kindly enlighten us 
for these reasons precisely?" 


Gd sata 
waa front ay fawraryaftag ara 
PY aT Usa let Migaer WIKI 
Sita said, “O Rsis, when the people become 
unmindful in different yugas and the auspicious 
activities move towards decline, then the lord, 


relieving himself of his divine body incarnates 
on earth in human form. 


earaaney Waa eat: | 
fecoaenforat Set Aetraet wrarsrafans & i 


In earlier times, when Hiranyakasipu, the 
great demon was ruling the earth, at the time of 
the battle between the gods and the demons, 
lord Hari incarnated on earth. 


aferastattad Aa YT clhaAY HAM 
USIMTATA SATA: TENGEN 


Similarly when Bali, was ruling the three 
worlds, the gods were intimately friendly with 


10 


because of deriving its source from the rasa or 
juice, it is usually liquid or fluid. Thereafter the 
earth with five gunas or attributes is formed, 
having mainly the quality of fragrance. The 
wisdom comprises of possessing the factual 
knowledge about all these facts. 


Wat TNT MF aheagtar wes 

UH: Wad YS Ter: WHATS: 11 VI 
sateoray: Uist sitarea eat ae: 
Ud wefagré wih weYS AA CI 


All these twenty four tattvas- (five organs of 
wisdom or jfidna, five organs of karmas, five 
mahabhitas,! five tanmatras,2 ahankdra, the 
mind and the wisdom) are enjoyed by the 
humans on earth. He also functions at the 
command of the lord or is subservient to the 
lord. Because of this, he is called jivatmé. 
Therefore the human body is conceived with 
twenty six tattvas. 


Tit Tear aftentetracrd 
Uda Hea WBA SAAT 2 8 I 


The sages like Kapila and others have given 
it the name of sadmkhya because of their 
leanings towards sdmkhya philosophy. Brahma 
too had resorted to the creation of the universe 
depending on these tattvas.* 


Ufaat aragrad efe Heat warfare: 
ad: AAU PAT SEAACHAAI 3 01 
When Brahma devoted himself to Savitri in 

his mind with the intention of engaging himself 
in creation, he started performing tapas. At that 
point of time, his body, while performing tapas 
was divided into two parts; half of which was in 
male and the other half was in female form. 


tt 


. Mahanti bhitdni, the gross elements. 

2. The subtle element 

3. The twenty-fifth being Purusa or Spirit which 1s 
neither a Producer nor Production but wholly distinct 
from the twenty-four other Tattvas. (SAmkhya K.) 

4. According to Samkhya the creation 1s effected by the 

involuntary union of soul and nature. Others hold 

that Brahma brings about this union for a mere sport. 


Matsya Puranam 


RUT aeg THAT 
WABI VT AT TAA Alaa a Frac 3 at 


AUAGT WIA TAU A UTAT 
Td; TCSAATATAT TATA T AH 3 21 
SOT at Safaaead Aare fey: 
Hel WTA BUA VAs WIAA: 3 3k 
at area aera TAT: | 
TaN FT feafereayy TASTE ate 3 
sel BUN BUA We VA: VAs 


Aa: VOMAATT At YACAN ACHAT 3 4 1 


O Great sage, the female came to be known 
as Savitri or Sataripd. The same is also called 
as Sarasvati, Gayatri or Brahmani. Thus 
Brahma, accepted Savitri, born of his own body 
as his own daughter. But suddenly at the sight 
of Savitri, Brahma, the best of the Prajapatis 
was fascinated and filled with passion and 
uttered. “What a pleasant from, what a beauty.” 
Brahma then could think of nothing else except 
looking at the face of Savitri. He kept on saying 
repeatedly, “What an astonishing form? What 
an astonishing beauty is there?" Then when 
Savitri offered her salutation to Brahma bending 
downwards, then Brahma again gazed at her. 


aT Yelerot aaa a frqarararin 

GRAY ATA AUTH TTA 3 & tl 

Mata dt aaa start wos ISa 

AMAAASS DT WATS TAA: 1 30 

ATAAATT ST ATA TA 

TAS ACMA HUTA AAT 3 CI 

Thereafter Savitri, again circumambulated 

Brahma, her father. At that point of time 
another head with yellow complexion, emerged 
to the right on the side of the head in order to 
gaze at Savitri. Thereafter an astonishing head 
with fluttering lips also appeared at the back of 
the main head. Then to his left another head 


infested with the arrows of kama also appeared. 
This was the fourth head. 


Chapter-4 


SUAS BTA eee! 

gpa apd AT AT: UTASTSUTTN 3 81 

AAA ASTRA ATT 

Wales FEATS TET AT: | 

Marae Ager ATAUTY: II ¥o I 

Because of the repeated gazing at Savitri, 

the severe tapas that had been performed by 
Brahma, for engaging himself in creation, 
became infructuous. As a result of the same sin, 
another head emerged (over all the heads of 
Brahma) which was the fifth head. This head 


had the matted locks of hair. The illustrious 
Brahma accepted the said head as well. 


MAMTA YAR AKAM 
WAT: GRAMM: ACATATATTAT: NY Vil 
Thereafter Brahma, commanded his mind- 


born sons named Marici and others, for the 
creation of gods, demons and humans on earth. 


Vaya: Ta APalaraMn: WaT: 
TAY Ay YEU MOTT AAT & 2 
sat & fayaren weaaratafeary 
At this command of the father, the sons 
resorted to several types of creations. After the 
departure of the mind-born sons of Brahma, 
after offering their salutation to the father, then 


the lord married Sataripa who had been lying 
over his feet. 


GAYS TM Aarne Fary: 

Ue UHH Sa: HUCMSCS wt 
Wags et AMT: Waal WA: 

AA: Aled ASA TAT: YASS YI 


After the lapse of a considerable time, a son 
named Manu was born from the womb of 
Sataripa, who in due course of time came to be 
known as Svayambhuva Manu. 


Taran sit Gad: a tauteta 3: say 
AGUA ATCA SAAT YG I 


11 


He is also called Virat since he possessed all 
the virtues and form of his father, he was also 
called Adhipurusa. This has been heard by us. 


ATA ITF Wal aed: Visas: | 
TAABTAT VET: AA AA AAT XE I 


The same Brahma dynasty, multiplied 
considerably and the Vairajas are among them. 


Tanase: Ud A TaqeraeraTT: | 

sihafay arate A MAAISEATH ¥ 91 
Svarocisa and seven Manus, and another 

sect of seven Manus, like Auttami and others, 

numbering fourteen belong to this dynasty of 

Svayambhu Manu. O King, the lord, Vaivasvat 


Manu, you are the seventh of the last set of 
Manus. | 


Sta sarees Tera anfeat yarakray 
FAAS ATT: 11 3 
CHAPTER 4 
The story of Sarasvati 
A edie 


Bel AEA daar fawn 

HA A STATO TANT: 1 2 

Ta TWAT: UMAR 
aaearregat fora Y aerd feat 2 


Manu asked, “O Omniscient lord, it is 
surprising to stare at the daughter again and 
again which is a painful situation, but by 
indulging in such a manner, how could the lotus 
born Brahma not earn any blemish? Moreover, 
how could the sons of Brahma marry in the 


|. Visnupurana describes here the seven manvantars- 
“The first Manu was Svayambhuva, then came 
Svarocisa, then Auttami, then Tamasa, then Raivata, 
then Caksusa: these six Manus have passed away. 
The Manu who presides over the seventh 
Manvantara, which is the present period, is 
Vaivasvata, the son of the sun.” 


162 


the demons. 
GIT ATA Mralaaet TTA! 
Preenfaryanta TaeargT: AATNZ OI 
Thus when Bali! had been ruling the three 
worlds, the time passed for three yugas. At that 
point of time the entire universe was disturbed 
with the presence of the demons. Both the gods 


and the asuras were under the command of the 
demon lord. 


WAN Sears Wg: Yara: 
SAMA UT I AN: ATA WENCH 


Ultimately at the time of the subjugation of 
Bali, a great war was started between the gods 
and the demons, which was quite destructive. 


ae MUST Trad Aa TeaS 
QM: Wad FT CarqcHd Tas 


Then lord Visnu in order to well establish 
the dharma and because of the curse 
pronounced by the sage Bhrgu on the gods and 
the demons, he incarnated on earth in human 
form. 


ra ad: 

aa SAHA SMU WAT AT | 

Cage AM Fo AA: Wale FHATNVol 

Rsis asked, “O Sita, how did lord Visnu, 

engage himself in the form of an incarnation for 
the sake of the gods and the demons? How was 
the war between the gods and the demons 
fought? You kindly narrate the same quite 
precisely.” 


Oa save 
Tat arafatad a MMT YareUT: | 
AUTEN SM El A MUS MraAL Wars 1s VM 


1. According to the mythological account is that Visnu 
in his incanation of dwarf placed one foot on earth, 
one in the sky and wanted room for the third. Bali 
then offered his head. Visnu placed his third foot on 
it and sent him down to the nether region, where 
even now Bali is reigning. 


Matsya Puranam 


AAA BATA Yorat feraere: | 
mara areeeey fetreerie ATT Ay UH 


Gay ATT AGUS TA: | 
SUT: USAT GAARA: 1X 31 


WS MIAH AANATTRT 
STATS AAA FAATAH: SVU 
qTAVA SAGAS Aa STATS: Ta: 
WiIal GSMA AT: ALMSTHAATS& I 


Sita said, “O Rsis, in earlier times there had 
been twelve conflicts like Varaha and others for 
the war between the demons and the gods, 
which are said to have occurred during the time 
of priesthood of Sandamarka. I am speaking out 
the names of the incarnations quite briefly. You 
please listen. The first battle was fought with 
Narasithha,2 the second during Vamana, the 
third during Varaha,? and the fourth at the time 
of the churning of the ocean. The fifth war was 
fought during the time of Tarakasura and the 
sixth was fought during the time of Hyadivaka. 
The seventh was related to Tripurasura, the 
eighth related to Andhakasura, the ninth related 
to the killing of Vrtra, the tenth was related to 
Dhatra, the eleventh was related to the poison 
hadlahala. The twelfth war was known as 
kolahala. 


feromenforgeca anfaer Urfat: | 
aT aera AeA aT HAT! TTI Gl 
facuarent wat Ee where q ead: | 
CEM J ATC Aga fet Hatsiv 
In these wars, lord Visnu, killed 
Hiranyakasipu in the form of Narasimha. In 
earlier times while measuring the three worlds, 


lord Visnu captivated Bali in the form of a 
Vamana. Then the lord taking to the form of 


2. The man-lion form of Visnu, one of his incarnations 
in which he killed the giant Hiranya-Kasipu. 

3. The boar-form of Visnu in which he raised up the 
earth from water after deluge. 


Chapter-47 


Varaha, tore out Hiranydksa with his fangs, 
killing him at the same time, dividing the ocean 
in two parts. 


weret fafsiet Fax SAUTE 
fatrare Welfetrafaraavert Xo 
saula 9 fara Pecencanen 
WMI Cai Ws AS Bears et 
Feat SAat: Wa Feel Aah FI 
TY PAT STATA TA 0 1 
am canqe ~ fagiela wat: 

Ugo Sagal AY Teteet FANG VN 


At the time of the churning of the ocean, 
Prahlada was defeated by Indra in a war fought 
between them. Getting enraged with the same 
Virocana, the son of Prahlada, waited daily for 
an opportunity for the killing of Indra. He could 
not tolerate the gods at all, but Indra in the 
battle with Taraka, displaying his own prowess, 
killed the demon. All the Danavas, Asuras and 
the Pisacas, were completely killed by Siva, 
while in war with Andhaka. In the said battle, 
the gods, humans the Pitrganas and all others 
participated. Then Vrtrasura, who had been 
surrounded by the Danavas was killed in the 
hdlahala war. 


Tel fayaerest Weg Fata: 
Bat A ASAT TAHA Afaql 
eqreUaya famtatt: WEA: NG VU 
Thereafter Indra detached Vipracitti from 
war, with the help of Visnu. But Vipracitti who 
was well-versed in yoga, concealed himself 
with Maya and turned himself in the form of a 


flag. But inspite of the same, Indra, killed 
Vipracitti with his brother. 


Sava arava WAM fae WAAL 
Tae Wares: Uftaay FANG 31 
TRAY svat Vos Y sat: | 

Ua Sargt Fut: Vea grays Fis vi 


163 


Thus Indra, in the war named Kolahala, 
killed all the demons, who had arrived in the 
war collectively. (It appears that Indra had 
organised a yajiia), in which at the time of the 
ceremonial bath, two demons named Sanda and 
Amarka who were the demon priests, were 
spotted by Indra. In this way twelve wars were 
fought between the gods and the demons, which 
destroyed the forces of both the sides, but were 
beneficial for the people. 


CATANIA: WAT J fears a 
feraentorg tet aatoradé at 4 


In ancient times, Hiranyakasipu ruled the 
earth with all the glory at his command for a 
period of one hundred million seventy eight 
crores and eighty thousand years; after whom 
Bali ruled for two crores and seventy thousand 
years and Prahlada also ruled for a similar 
period with other demons. 


farce vasa aaah a 
Aa AW Aafor AeA TAG GA 
TAA F Tarsyeateraaryd WA 
afeciagentar Fant a fait: ty 


All the three of them were the most 
powerful Daitya kings and came to be known as 
Indras among the Daityas. The world remained 
under the domination of the Daityas for a period 
of ten yugas, after which, Indra ruled over three 
regions with marvellous tact and statesmanship. 


at Tera alacant Ta Bt 
Mache J Welel Frat Mat: ANG ci 
Saree Pagar srquont WehTa: | 
Seas AAMAS TANG VU 
AMAMAHAT He gUT TTC 
TIUAS ASMA GAYA FANG ol 
WEES BA afareaciet HATTA! 
TAA | ANT AeeeT UTP 
TASHA Yat CAA TDANG 8 


164 


Indra ruled, since the close of the days of 
Prahlada, when the seer Sukra deserted the 
Daityas and joined the gods. Then in the due 
course of time, after the killing of Prahlada, 
Indra became the lord of the three worlds. At 
that point of time the universe was without an 
enemy, for a period of ten yugas and Indra 
continued to rule the three worlds with ease. At 
the same time Sukracdrya deserting the demons 
joined a Devayajnia. 

aq cara Td falta: Bree 

fe cea at faa Tet AAT AH FATT NG VI 
Wy T Waa wa wfagrat Tarde 
VATS Ta eM ATU ATATULG 3 IN 

Thus finding Sukracarya having joined the 
yajna of the gods, the demons complained to 
Sukracarya saying, “O Preceptor, why did you 
join the yajna of the gods in full view of we 
people? Therefore we cannot stay here any 
longer and shall enter the nether world.” At 


these pathetic words of the gods, Sukracarya, 
assured the demons, speaking the sweet words. 


mr te afrents aaa tas atsqT: | 
Wavy TA AY A AAT XII 
penta ofa fiesta weetat Bey a 
aad a: werenty Borat FAT TATE 4 1 


He said, “You should not at all be afraid. | 
shall with my own strength own you up again, 
because all the mantras, osadhis, essences, and 
the riches are possessed by me and only one 
fourth of the same is meant for the gods. I shall 
give the rest to you, which is owned by me for 
your sake alone. 


aa Cane AeA Farnese 
aaaaha tar a afagreq Farzerarig & 1 
ara BT sé Va Stradale at Tene 
Uy Tes Tot Aaraeaaapeaag oi 
Wee seat foeiey weret TATA 

Aa CATT ATEN SAAT BIG Cit 


Matsya Purdnam 


When the gods realised that Sukracarya had 
again patronised the demons, then the 
thoughtful gods started confabulation among 
themselves saying, “O Brothers, Sukracarya, is 
bound to upset all our plans, forcibly. 
Therefore, it would be better that before the 
preceptor strengthens the demons by educating 
them, we should leave the place and kill them 
forcefully and then force the remaining Daityas 
to enter the nether world.” Thus taking a 
decision, the gods pounced upon them and 
attacked them. 


ae TAMA HAMAS : | 

WM: BAY Arswar Fol SaeATUNIG e 

TH HAM Wet cares 7 

area Sea Ferd Sat VST ATTA: 19 ol 

Thus finding their total destruction, the 

demons again took refuge with Sukracarya. The 
preceptor then finding the demons having been 
driven out by the gods, made arrangements for 
their protection, as a result of which the demons 
started torturing the gods. When the gods found 
Sukracdrya to be inactive at that time, they 
removed themselves from the battlefield. 


a: HASTA Talo tat faery 

AAA Ad: HST: Vs FAATAATTI 2 

Acted at ed ad ana fat: HA: 

aferagt eat Se Peay father: 192 

HEAT AMY VEMTAY Ytem:| 

aedearetfas Feat A: WATT 9 3 

fafaforeng qt a ag wisteaft 4 AAT 

Aft at atsfrearentt fared Hep ¥ 

WeMrag Velead Wears fararaey 

AMAT AATSATSATAT HATTA 

TANS VACA: MIT I SATIN 4 I 

Then the Brahmana Sukracarya was 

reminded of the earlier happenings, who 


thoughtfully spoke to the demons, the beneficial 
words, “OQ Demons, Vamana, usurped the entire 


Chapter-47 


kingdom of Bali with the measuring of it by 
three steps. Bali was imprisoned and his entire 
kingdom of three lokas was _ usurped. 
Jambhasura was killed, besides Virocana. In 
this way in all the twelve wars, all the 
prominent demons were killed by the gods by 
different means. Only a limited number of the 
demons have now survived. Therefore, you 
should, think stop fighting, and taking into 
account the adversity of the time, presently 
become peaceful. I shall subsequently apprise 
you of some way out. I am proceeding to lord 
Mahadeva today itself in order to seek a mantra 
for the achieving of the victory. After my return 
from Kailaésa, meeting Mahadeva— the god of 
gods, receiving the infallible mantra, only then 
you should fight with the gods with my help. 
You will be victorious then.” 


Tae PTAA LAP AIS TT: | 
Te aa Wa fcarver TSAI A 
ad mayan: aga acacia 

WICH AI: Aral AeMteNd FT Adi 
aa Cal Aaa farsa Geary a 


aTeray eety PaPgaretad BT: N92 it 
AAA COT; Sl eMeHTeT TATRA | 
FROTATRA TT CHT: SHleT ATA ATTRA 19 8 UI 
Pagers sare Sf At welett STAT: 
TSP UAT Aeles WWEANS of 


Thus making consultations about the war, 
the demons went to the gods and said, “O Gods, 
we have presently disarmed ourselves, 
removing the kavacas and unyoking the 
chariots. Now we shall be wearing the bark 
garments, shall perform tapas stealthily.” 
Hearing the words of the truthful Prahlada, the 
gods were pleased with the dropping of the 
weapons by the demons. Their anxiety was over 
and they became unmindful about the war. 
After the stopping of the war, Sukracarya spoke 
to demons, “O Danavas, all of you shedding 
away your evil ways and pride, should engage 
yourself in tapas. You meditate for sometime, 


165 


because time is performer of the great jobs. 
Thus all of you should live in the hermitage of 
my father, and wait for my returm.” Thus 
advising the asuras, Sukracdrya reached the 
abode of Mahadeva. 


Wn art 
Walrad ta a a aha gee 
TAMA CAAA HAT ANS 


Sukracarya said, “O Lord, I intend to know 
about the mantras for the defeat of the gods and 
victory of the demons. These are not possessed 
by Brhaspati.” 


Wariscateat at SI AT arta 
Yo qeaea FT HNITAMATagTT: | 
fe urate ag a dat ararceafaiic 2 


At these words of Sukracdrya, Mahadeva 
said, “O Bhargava, let you meet with welfare. 
For your purpose in view you shall have to 
perform severe vrata. In case you perform tapas 
for a thousand years keeping your head on the 
ground and raising your legs upwards, inhaling 
the smoke of chaff, only then would you be able 
to achieve the desired mantras.” 


meatal AGATE YR TPT: 
Wal Aaya cael arefarrgatea: 1 
ad MUA Ca AAISSHRIST SF WAIN BI 
Then Sukracarya, - the son of Bhrgu, 
accepting the command of Siva, touched his 
feet and said, “O Lord, All right, I shall act 


accordingly. O Lord, I am starting the vrata 
from today itself. 


TUSFTSI CHT HUSIMAISA ITH 
Tel aaa YR MAO fears ai 
Tart aa aatt Tere Westie v1 


Then getting leave of lord Mahadeva, he 
went to Yaksa Kundadhara, who could produce 
smoke and for the benefit of the asuras, for 
achieving of the mantras and started living in 
the hermitage of Mahesvara performing the 


166 


brahmacarya. 
AegaM arya J WT AA AaISTt:| 
APSE TalSTaAAN-ATTIRATNS 4 I 
Short: MM: Wa FATT: WTS 
When the gods came to know of the 
conspiracy of the demons in deserting the 
kingship and the treacherous ways of the 


demons, they tried to turn them out of the 
region where they had been living. 


SEAS ACTON SAAS ATA: | 
INT: WEA I F AARTAPATASFaTINC 9 


Wa WASTA SA Baad aaah 
Sra Naat MIT Para at frargaic ci 


Thus finding the gods getting ready for 
attack holding the weapons, the demons were 
suddenly panic striken and they got up saying, 
“OQ Gods, we have discarded the weapons and 
we have also been assured of your protection. 
Our preceptor is presently engaged in the 
performing of the vrata. Then why do you 
intend to kill us even after assuring protection to 
us? 

SATA Fal SARAH EAT AA AAT | 
SHOOT THAT TTT NS SA 
Wr faci saya T MAA: ae 
AISA WRAP HTATATAT TN ol 

Presently we people are without the 
preceptor, and have discarded our weapons, 
standing unarmed, like the ascetics wearing the 
deer skins. We are inactive. Under these 
circumstances we are totally unable to wage a 
war against you. Therefore we are going to take 


refuge with the mother of Kavya, without 
fighting a war. 


ay aM: Head qaaata at Ts: 
Prat A Aa Ys Area Sforaraean: 11g Vi 


We shall spend the difficult times there till 
the return of our preceptor. After the return of 


Matsya Puranam 


our preceptor, we shall take up the arms and 
shall then fight a war with you.” 


VARA TAS AT MCT HTTATAT| 
Wert aat Marea ea FT ATS VI 
Thus the frightened demons, while 
consulting among themselves departed from 
that place and took refuge with the mother of 
Sukracarya. 
T Weer A Veet Wal AAT SAAT: 
Tate adat att sttfageNferie 3 
Then she providing protection to the demons 
said to them, “O Danavas, do not be afraid. Be 


fearless because by living with me here, you 
shall be completely fearless. 


TM AQUA GRA SAT AAS TTT 
afnny; Waele TeTATANe XI 
TAMMANY CagaTS AAeATaT 

Cal HegSTACAMA aA: UAT & Il 
AY TAGs ASAT 

TEAM CE TAAATTAAT ATTAINS & 


Thereafter finding that the demons were safe 
with the mother of Sukracarya, irrespective of 
the valorous or weak, the gods forcibly attacked 
the demons. Finding the demons being so 
tortured by the gods the mother of Sukracarya 
spoke, getting enraged, “I shall just now deprive 
you of Indra.” At that time, the ascetic goddess, 
collecting all the materials, made use of 
Abhicdra-mantra and made Indra inactive 
forcefully. 


are KAT SEAT SH aya YHA 
Wat Aa Wl SX TAT APTHATNe i 


Finding their own lord having been made so 
inactive, the gods became dumbfolded. Finding 
that Indra had been overpowered by the 
demons, the gods fled away from the place. 

TAY QTANG Yh fae 
Ui wa wha ag a Afaer wat TATA CI 


Chapter-47 


After the flight of the gods, Lord Visnu said 
to Indra, let you meet with welfare. You better 
enter my body. I shall carry you from here to 
some other place.” 


waged fast visa ytaz: 

faut tert Sear at Hal AASTaTNe V1 

Wat cat fae Aes EI TAT 

fae AAA Baa A AMAT Yo of 

At these words of lord Visnu, Indra entered 

the body of the lord, who carried him to some 
other place, which was quite safe. Observing 
that lord Visnu had carried Indra to a safe place, 
Khyati- the goddess, spoke the words getting 
enraged, “O Indra, in full view of all the living 
beings, I am going to forcibly burn you out with 
Visnu. Let both of you witness the strength of 
my tapas.” 


caste at earfeasawy ayag: | 

ae Teale Ufeat fay heATaA! 20 8 
Saisaaionte Mai Bast 7 sear 
fasreonenyaster cadisé Bie AT FATT VN 
at: Wher Faure tata serrate: | 
MMA TIAHAMTGHUM J ATI 0 3 
ate AA Teh: Vat Aaa: | 

Wet fanaa: He SeTisrenthsey 
He: Taree ferrets 2 framigo vi 


On hearing this, both Visnu and Indra were 
frightened. Then Visnu said to Indra, “How can 
both of us be relieved of the crises?” On hearing 
this Indra said, “Before she reduces us to ashes, 
let us kill her. I have already been overwhelmed 
with your influence. Therefore, it is you who 
can kill her. Don't delay.” Then Visnu, keeping 
in view the goddess and her evil designs against 
him besides the enormous sin involved in the 
killing of a goddess, he was overpowered with 
anxiety. But keeping in view the impending 
action of the lady, Visnu in order to relieve 
himself of the ugly situation, thought of the 


167 


cakra, on the arrival of which Visnu, 
hesitatingly cut off the head of the lady— the 
mother of Sukracarya. 


af Gal Tala at BAT PTT: | 
AAISHAGTA TOT fawopytataet ANT ok I 
Tea Aaa aaa wat Fafa 


TARE AAKAS AGATA 20 € UI 

On the other hand the illustrious Bhrgu, 
witnessing the terrific killing of the lady, felt 
enraged and pronounced a curse on Visnu 
saying, “O Visnu, since the killing of a woman 
is prohibited and this fact is quite well known to 
you. Inspite of that you have killed my wife. 
Therefore you will be born as human on earth, 
seven times.” 


MARAT TS MT WA: WA: 
eae a feats Trad ATAafaR owt 


Because of the same curse, and due to the 
decline of dharma and for the welfare of 
Visnuloka, lord Visnu incarnates on earth again 
and again, as a human being. 


HFM ET A H ACTA KAT 

TAA AA: STATA eSATA Ro cH 

wa wi faupr ef gat MetaareareT 

are Bee forrar sinilats AsTaq 28H 
ate Feet AA Tat Arad Ufeatshs an 

wa We Waa ale Wet ASAHI 201 
AAA Wet Vilaereaae AsTatT 
casted Tal tat Ueilfaat Aan geeil 
eee AAMT GAT Yo 

Wy Aeat Het Tra Aaafewrq eee 


After pronouncing such a curse on Visnu, 
Bhrgu atonce lifted up the severed head of 
Khyati and joining it with the trunk of the lady, 
he spoke, “O Goddess, you have been killed by 
Visnu but I shall now bring you back to life.” 
Thus speaking, he joined the head with rest of 
the body and said, “You come back to life.” 


163 


Then he spoke with a firm resolve, “In case | 
am well aware of all the dharmas, ail the 
dharmas are followed by me, or in case I am 
truthful and with the influence of the same truth, 
you get back your life.” Thereafter he sprinkled 
cool water over the body of the goddess and 
said, “You come back to life.” At these words 
of Bhrgu, the lady atonce got back her life. It 
appeared as if she had woken up from sleep. 
Observing this all the people, uttered “well- 
done, well-done.” These words were resounded 
in all the directions. 


Ud WaeM AT eat AM YUM aaw 


fasat caari fe Tagafranraqe 3 it 
Thus the sage Bhrgu, in full view of all the 
gods, brought the goddess back to life, which 
was an astonishing event. 


AAMT PTO Gert Titfaat TA: | 
GREAT ART ACT PTY HTT: It 
VAT AAA TARTAN ev 


Then Indra came to know with a disturbed 
mind about the survival of the wife of Bhrgu, he 
was terribly afraid of Sukracdrya. He lost the 
peace of his mind and always remained 
disturbed. He could not sleep during the night. 
Then after a deep thought, Indra called for his 
daughter Jayanti and said to her. 


Ufearead UAT Tal HAT UHI: | 
UT HAN Oras Fat Ait TROT! 

AA SAHA: Uf Fett Alera THN It 
Tes Waa AAT: YT: 

ARAMA THT ATMA ATTIRE I 


O Daughter, Sukricdrya is performing a 
terrific vrata for the benefit of my enemies. The 
intelligent Sukracarya has completely upset me. 
Therefore you go to him and establish my 
cause. After going there you shall have to be 
free from laziness, and you have to conduct 
yourself in such a way that the sage 1s pleased. 
You should adore Sukracarya in such a way by 
which he is fully pleased. 


Matsya Puranam 


RANA Bat Tea A AEA: 
Tes Sh AT SAIS WaeT He AcHAN 221 


You go and dedicate yourself to Sukracarya 
from today. You endeavour for my welfare.” 


Vagal TA A aa: We a fag: 
STA Nt A aT seer fara eeci 
a Gea g rad a Soar 
GA UTA ST HUSA UTA LL I 


When so asked by Indra, Jayanti the 
daughter of Indra, accepting the command of 
her father, departed for the place, where Sukra 
had been performing the tapas. Reaching there 
Jayanti found that Sukricdrya was inhaling 
smoke produced by Kundadhara Yaksa. 


Gam ut Wat cat arermafeny 
RUA Saet TATA 

fiat aealat ares OT Hla Haat Tao 
Tifivdargacny: Wad TeTTATH 
TAMATET: Bet NAMA A: SII 

ATTA THM SAT ARAM: AAT 2 


Reaching close to him, Jayanti found the 
sage inhaling the smoke, with his head turned 
downwards. He was quite peaceful in 
meditation. His body was plastered with the 
ashes and he had grown pretty weak. Then as 
per the advice of her father, she started serving 
Sukracadrya. The sweet tongued Jayanti, offered 
prayer to Sukracarya with favourable words. 
She gently pressed his hands feet and other 
limbs and served him variously. Thus she Kept 
on serving the sage variously in a docile manner 
for many years. 


ol quad dferat aaa 
UU GHCAATS Het Wat WaeTAy 22 1 


On the completion of the smoke-vrata after 
the lapse of a thousand years, lord Siva was 
pleased with Sukra and pronouncing a boon on 
him. 


Chapter-47 


Weed Sara 
Wedd aaa alot wea sara 
TANG ATA THM AAT A ACT ALi 
AHA UM YUaal earns aaa A 
Teaaead Talat PISA LI 


Lord Mahadeva said, “So far this vrata has 
been performed by you alone. No one else has 
been able to complete this vrata. Therefore, you 
yourself shall be able to defeat the gods with 
your tapas, wisdom, knowledge of weapons, 
strength and the lustre. O Brahmana, all your 
desires shall get fulfilled. But you should never 
speak out this mantra to anyone else. O 
Excellent, Brahmana, with the use of this 
mantra, you will be able to subjugate all your 
enemies.” 


WRAY J AAs Aare I Heed! 
Talhraral aa wa afawate Fear? 4 1 
Ware ae APTA Ta: WA: 
waga yrange TS TSTueg I 
Ue AUTH: UHCSATT ES: | 
Bareat wea feos eA 

am frifarda Gee AereiferTg zon 


After granting the boon to Sukracarya, Siva 
again declared him as Prajapati, lord of nches, 
and to be invincible. On receiving these boons 
the body of Sukracarya was thrilled. Because of 
his immense pleasure, a divine stotra emerged 
out of his heart in praise of Siva and he sang the 
hymns of praise to the lord of blue and red 
colour. 


Wa sara 
TSey foritenvars afar Yaual 
CHART BIA ARTA: WAN RIA 
Hater UCT TA ACTA ET 
ARYA Yaa SaCATT THAN 
THT YaaATT TKI TAI 


169 


AAAS VHT ATA FATT 23 ol 
Ba BRAM Sal Uies A 
HAT WAGAA AAHHSas ANI WI 


Sukracrya said, “Salutation to you O Lord, 
O Siva, known as Sitikantha (blue-necked), 
Kanistha (Dwarfish), Suvarcas (full of 
splendour), Lelihana (eating much), Kavya 
(omniscient), Vatsara (form of a year), 
Andhaspati, (Lord of all the cereals), Kapardi 
(Having the matted locks of hair), Kardala, 
(terrific), Haryaksa (having yellow eyes), 
Varada (granter of the boons), Samstuta 
(praised by the people), Sutirtha (the best form 
of the holy place), Devadeva, (god of gods), 


Ramhasa (having great speed), Usnisi (wearing 


a turban), Suvaktra (having beautiful face), 
Bahuriipa, (one of the eleven Rudras), Vedha 
(maker of the rulers), Vasureta (form of Agni), 
Rudra (life of the living beings), Tapah (form of 
tapa), Citravasa (clad in strange type of 
garments), Hrasva (Vamana), Muktakesa 
(Dishevelled locks of hair), Senani (leader of 
the armies), Rohita (form of deer), Kavi (well- 
versed in the worldly pleasures), Rajavrksa 
(Rudraksa), Taksaka-kridana (sporting with 
Taksaka). 


Asana da AsaATs Usw 
SUT MARAT FHATT A} 2 


Sahasrasira (having a thousand heads), 
Sahasraksa (having a thousand eyes), Midhus 
(performer of stuti), Vara (one who is to be 
owned), Bhavyaripa (beautiful), Sveta (having 
fair complexion), Purusa (well established in 
self). 

faftera anisala afer sisaus aI 


AIA TAA ahat AMAT TS 31 


Prater a ATT TART ATU 
aga wear waa Sora a fears Bes vil 


Girisa (dweller of the mountain), Arka 
(Sirya), Bali (valorous), Ajyapa (worshipful), 


170 


Sutrpta (completely satisified), Suvastra (clad in 
beautiful garments), Dhanvi (archer), Bhargava 
(form of Parasurama), Nisangi (carrier of 
quiver), Tara (protector of the universe), Svaksa 
(having beautiful eyes), Ksapana (form of a 
Bhiksu), Tamra (having red lips), Bhima (one 
of the eleven Rudras), Siva (Bestower of 
welfare to all), Ugra (violent), salutation to you. 


Telcara vata faseafgrara a 

fervary aftara TST WTA TI & I 
areiert fare yard aes a 
OTT SAT WATTS TNO AN 23 EI 


Mahadeva (adorable by the gods), Sarva 
(destroyer of all), Visvariipa-Siva (Siva— the 
form of the universe), Hiranya (cause of thie 
birth of gold), Varistha (the best), Jyestha (the 
eternal lord), Madhyama (the middle one), 
Vastospati (preserver of the homa), Pinaki 
(holder of the Pinaka bow), Mukti (bestower of 
salvation), Kevala (unique), Mrgavyadha 
(hunter for the deer as yajna), Daksa 
(enthusiastic), Sthanu (base of the universe), 
Bhisana (clad in horrible costumes). 


agiara gare fears a 
HUA AM AN Ya AAA ALB 


Bahunetra (one who could visualise 
everything), Dhurya (the foremost), Trinetra, 
(having three eyes), ISvara (the ruler of all), 
Kapali (the holder of skull), Vira (valorous), 
Mrtyu (destroyer of death), Tryambaka (one of 
the eleven Rudras). 


avd a faygta fagerareona a 
firarfert ayaa ferarer TieATa A321 


Babhru (form of Visnu), Pisanga (having 
tawny hair), Pingala (having blue and yellow 
complexion), Aruna (sun), Pinaki (holder of the 
Pindka bow), Isuman (holder of the bow), Citra 
(having astonishing form), Rohita (a deer of red 
colour). 


f 


Matsya Puranam 


TSITTHUE sas *egers A 
BUA YEA AAT FSAMALVTI 23 VI 


Dundubhya (one who is pleased with the 
sound of dundubhi), Ekapada (one of the eleven 
Rudras), Aja (one of the eleven Rudras), 
Buddhida (the bestower of wisdom), Aranya 
(forest dweller), Grhastha (house-holder), Yati 
(sannydsi, Brahmacari), (one who is devoted to 
Brahman). 


Tia da ares cafes aferara a 

AATSMA WAT TAA AAT Ale oll 

Vera aferarara farses Tete 

TATA HEAT TTT BATT TNS 8 

Samkhya (propounder of  sdmkhya 

philosophy), Yoga (propounder of yoga), Vyapi 
(omniscient), Diksita (the performer of yajna), 
Anahata, Sarva (a form of Siva noticed in 
Darukavana), Bhavyesa (the lord of Parvati), 
Yama (the form of death), Rodha (the protector 
of dharma), Cekitana, Brahmistha (well versed 
in the Vedas), Maharsi (the great Rsi), 
Catuspada, (well-versed in four types of 
dhyanas), Medhya (the auspicious one), Kaksi 
(the protector), Sighraga (one who moves fast). 


foraftes arena efter faaceay 
MATA WHAT YMA TATALY 21 


Sikhandi (having tuft of hair over the head), 
Karala (horrible), Damstri (the one having the 
fangs), Visvavedha (creator of the universe), 
Bhasvara (illustrious), Pratita (well known), 
Sudipta (beaming), Sumedha (possessing the 
sharp intelligence), salutation to you. 


AUMaaMda Heonres Fras a 

Aras ea HST eafteaeT YMTT A Ye 3 ti 
Vaya aa PITA PIs a 

aga faforera waa a Tat ex vi 
ATT TEMA AAT AZATT AT 

wa WMS Ue Mlert feeereA ys 4 I 


Chapter-47 


Krira (cruel), Avikrta (devoid of 
adversities),  Bhisana (horrible), Siva 
(benevolent), Saumya (peaceful form), Mukhya 
(the excellent one), Dharmika (follower of 
dharma), Subha (auspicious), Avadhya 
(infallible), Amrta (beyond death), Nitya 
(everlasting), Sasvata (permanent), Vydprta 
(engaged in activities), Vasistha (the best of all), 
Bharata (the sustainer of all), Saksi (the 
sustainer of all), Ksema (the form of moksa), 
Sahamana (one who could bear all the 
adversities), Satya (the form of truth), Amrta 
(the form of Dhanvantri), Karta (the performer), 
Paragu (carrier of battle axe), Siili (carrier of the 
trident), Divya-caksu (possessing the divine 
eyes). 

ATTA STATS TAUNTS eI 


Yaa GRMATT TEATATT Bera PY GI 


Somapa! (consumer of the soma juice), 


Ajyapa? (name of a Pitr), Dhimapa, (the 
smoker) Umapa (name of a Pitrs), Suci 
(completely pure), Paridhén (wearer of the 
costumes), Sadyojata (name of Siva), Mrtya 
(form of death). 


fafgrarera Bara Ware feareart a 
FAT ALS AAT ALAA v9 11 
Pisitasa (consumer of the pulpya fruit), 
Sarva (the soul of all), Megha (one who donates 


like the clouds), Vidyuta (dazzling like the 
lighting), Vyavrta (wearing the elephant hide), 


boron 


. Somapas—descendants of Bhrgu or sons of Kavi by 
Svadha, the daughter of Agni; and Pitrs of the 
Brahmanas (Manu and Vayu Purana). The Padma 
calls them Usmapas. The Hari Varnsa calls the 
Somapias to whom it ascribes the same descent as the 
Vayu, the Pitrs of the Stdras; and the Sukdlas the 
Pitrs of the Brahmanas. 

. Ajyapas—sons of Kardama, Pitrs of the Vaisyas 
Kamaduhaloka (Manu); but the law giver calls them 
the sons of Pulastya. The Pitrs of the Vaisyas are 
called Kavyas in the Nandi Upapurdna; and in the 
Hari VarhSa and its comment they are termed 
Susvadhas, sons of Kardama, descended from 
Pulaha. 


ih 


171 


Varistha (the senior most), Bharati (completely 
full), Taraksu (name of an animal). 


fayrera dalarecara tase a 
FATE SANT ORAS FORAY Ct 


Tripuraghna (destroyer of Tripura), Tirtha 
(the form of a great preceptor), Avakra (one 
with pleasant temperament), Romasa (one with 
long locks of hair), Tigmayudha (one having 
sharp weapons), Vyadkhya (specially praised), 
Susiddha (possessing all the siddhis), Pulasti 
(form of the sage Pulastya). 


TAA UUSTA BHATT HAVANT TI 
ail FAAS Yast Ad TA eve 


THAT TTA FER Aaa TI 
Mla Was aaa Fas Ah oft 


Rocaman (delightful), Canda (extremely 
angry), Sphita (ever rising), Rsabha (the best of 
all), Vrata (perfomer of Vrata), Yufyjaman (full 
of activity), Suci (having a spotless heart, 
Urdhvareté (performer of the complete 
brahmacarya), Asuraghna (the destroyer of 
demons), Svaghna (the protector of the kiths 
and kins), Mrtyughna (the remover of death), 
Yajniya (the performer of yajna), Krsanu (one 
who reduces things with his own tejas), Praceta 
(the one who preserves consciousness), Vanhi 
(the form of Agni) and Nirmala (the spotless 
one), Salutation to you. 


where UgErafaera safaars a 
FAUT ASTANA SUA STATA A Vt 
FON PT HAaa AHA TI 
SAAT ATA TA TESATT ANG 211 


fewaared a SATA Ft Nels al 
YHA WIM APTATT FATT LG 311 


Raksoghna (destroyer of the demons), 
Pasughna (destroyer of the animals), Svasti (one 
who breathes heavily), Avighna (one who is 
without obstructions), Vibhranta (without 
confusion), Mahanta (the great), Atyanta 


172 


Durgama (extremely inaccessible), Krsna (the 
supreme lord), Jayanta _— (victorious), 
Lokanamisvara (lord of all the people), Andasrita 
(independent), Vedhya (the one who is achieved 
by the devotees), Samatvadhisthita (one who 
extends the same treatment to all), Hiranyabahu 
(the one whose arms has the lustre of gold), 
Vyapta (omnipresent), Maha (illustrious), 
Sukarma (the performer of the good deeds), 
Prasahya (one who has to be tolerated), Isana 
(the controller), Sucaksu (the one having 
beautiful eyes). 


ferret weyara ferara wterart = 
caftera fUgreTa WeIears aA gy XII 
TeTATA eTATS Weal Tes a 
Seahay Hater Ta A TRANG GI 


Ksipresu (the one who shoots arrows with 
speed), Sadasva (one who resembles the best of 
the horses), Siva (the lord of welfare), Moksada 
(bestower of the salvation), Kapila (name of a 
sage), Pisanga (glittering like the gold), 
Mahadeva (the great god), Dhiman, possessing 
enormous wisdom), Mahakalpa (the one who 
takes to a gigantic form, at the time of 
dissolution), Dipta (illustrious), Rodana (one 
who makes others to cry), Hasa (one who 
makes others to laugh), Drdha-dhanva (the one 
having a strong bow), Kavaci (the wearer of 
Kavaca), Rathi (lord of chariot), Varithi (the 
one having the army of goblins and ghosts). 


TTTAT WRT TEM aera 
THAT WHAT FAM FATT ANG Gt 


Bhrgunatha, (protector of the sage Bhrgu), 
Sukra (form of Agni), Gahvarestha (one who 
likes the bowers), Vedha (the form of 
Brahman), Amogha (unfailing), Prasanta, 
Sumedh+ (having excellent wisdom), Vrsa (the 
form of dharma), Salutation to you. 


TMS PA wratawna Afraraa 
UAT WAY TAT AAT TA TT UG YI 


Matsya Puranam 


You are Visva (having universal form), 
Krttivasa (wear the elephant hide), Pasupati 
(lord of animals), Bhitapati (lord of the 
goblins), Salutation to you again and again. 


WS BUG AY Talela TW TTA A 
SHLAA AAT PAT ATCT TANG CI 


You are the form of Pranava (omkara), 
Rgyajuhsdma (form of the three Vedas), Svaha, 
Svadha and Vasatkara (these are your forms), 
Mantratma (you are the form of hymns), 
therefore salutation to you. 


wae OTT TM a Wey: AMATATS Ti 
TAMAMTAMA PAT HAC TA LG VI 


You are Tvasté (Prajapati- Visvakarma), 
Karta (the performer), Caksuh Srotramaya 
(having the divine eyes and the ears), Bhita- 
bhavya-bhavesa (one who knows about the past, 
present and future) besides being Karmatma 
(the soul of activity). Salutation to you. 


aaa da MAN SHEIIT A 
fara WTA Get SATE TAG oN 


You are Vasu (one of the eight Vasus), 
Sadhya (one of the Sadhya devas), Rudra (the 
remover of miseries), Aditya (the son of Aditi), 
Siira (a god), Visva (form of Visvedeva), Marut - 
(form of the wind), salutation to you. 


ara Tea a 
Taya wate sana A 
WAT Tea a TT TAMA AA VG I 


You are Agnisoma-vidhijnd (well aware of 
the Agnisama yajfia), PasSumantrausadha (well 
aware of the osadhis and the animals used in the 
yajna), Svayambhu (self born), Aja (beyond 
birth), Apirvaprathama (form of the beginning . 
and the end), Prajapati (lord of the people), 
besides being Brahmatma (the form of 
Brahman), Salutation to you. 


SUAMASSHAVAT TAM fagaa aI 
RAYA STATS FAT ATT ATG U1 


Chapter-47 


You are Atmega (lord of mind), Atmavasya 
(over power the mind), Sarvesatisaya (foremost 
of all the ISvaras), Sarvabhitangabhita (limbs 
of all the living-beings), Bhitatma (the soul of 
all the living beings), salutation to you. 


Faora YOM ATHATATTATA Ti 
Frauen Farr Get AST TARE 31 


You are Nirguna (beyond the sattva, rajas 
and tamas), Gunajfid (well-versed in the 
mysteries of the gunas), Vyakrta (one who 
changes the form), amrta (form of nectar), 
Nirupakhya (invisible), Mitra (friendly to all), 
Yogatma (form of yoga), salutation to you. 


yfaet arate fecart a vera ah 
HARTA MAT FRAT SAAT TA 1G VI 
You are Prthivi (earth), Antariksa (space), 
Maha (Maharloka), Tridivya (heaven), Jana 
(Janaloka), Tapah §(Tapaloka), Satya 
(Satyaloka), Lokatma (form of all the lokas), 
salutation to you. 


HAH A Hed Tae gas TI 
STARTS FAA TA May TARE I 


You are Avyakta (formless), Mahan (great), 
Bhitadi (origin of all the living beings), Indriya 
(fork of sense organs), Sarvatméa (soul of all the 
living beings), Atmajfia (well-versed in soul), 
Visesa (the maximum of all), salutation to you. 


Fara USS TAA a 
Wars Fra dey get Wey TT EN 


You are Nitya (eternal), Atmalinga 
(comparable with self), Stksma (subtle), Itara 
(greater than the greatest), Suddha (spotless), 
Nibhu (omnipresent) and Moksatma (form of 
moksa), salutation to you. 


Treat fay cay Are Tate 

AeAAY Wealy ATT TW AHISeT TURE 
TT; Tia WA Meats A ated Aa 
Were Sit TAT AMS STATA LE oI 


173 


I offer you salutation to you in all the three 
lokas. Besides those, I also offer my salutation 
to you for the three Paralokas. Thus starting 
from Maharloka to Satyaloka, I offer my 
salutation to you in all the lokas. O Lord, you 
love the Brahmanas, whatever has been spoken 
by me in this stotra irrespective of its being 
right or wrong, you kindly forgive me, taking 
me to be your devotee.” 


qa sara 
WaT Sao Aereitfedy 
TAS RMUTARARY Mroatfera AAS TATTLE 81 
HA Wa WaT set Wits: 
Frard alt Sra AAAI V9 ot 
ad: Wsafed afareagyispat Tan 
fread Uefa Sear Taian aaa V0 v1 
Seal a TAT ar at g:fad afte g:faan 
Teal TTA Feat feral ut aaa go 2 
SMT UA AAT VHA THA TI 
Gat Ba Batter wMatsfer azafoini ge 3 
fafreofa amie ae AM: Wye 
At MAUI TENT TAY TERT: 1 V9 V1 


Sita said, “O Sages, thereafter Sukracarya, 
thus praying to the blue throated lord Siva, fell 
at his feet with his hands folded. Then he 
humbly got up and quietly stood before him. 
Then lord Siva delightfully touched the body of 
Sukracarya tenderly and appeared before him in 
his true form. Thereafter he disappeared before 
him. Sukracarya then noticed Jayanti, who had 
been serving him, thus, “O Beautiful one, who 
are you? Who is your father, you had been 
facing all the trouble while I was engaged in 
performing of the tapas. Thus performing this 
tapas, what for had you been serving me? I am 
immensely pleased with the height of your 
devotion and humility, controlling of the sense 
organs and love you had been extending to me. 
What do you desire of me? O Beautiful one, 


174 


what do you want? You should surely speak out 
the same to me. I shall surely fulfil your desire 
today, irrespective of its being difficult.” 


wagsaaed ATM Wyre a 
facitfid fe 2 weted fe Aer aaa V4 11 
At these words of Sukracarya, Jayanti said 
to him, “O Brahman, because of the strength of 
your tapas, you can well visualise my inner 
most desire because you are well aware of 


everything.” 

Wayeisaatett Gear feeart way 

TA Te Ta BAO ToT aAUlfoT MPAA og 

Teter a aaaSea rT 

afa erdlargart atte aac 

Ud gona art wa al S aes oI! 

Us Hay THA Feral Aaanrigthn 

Ad: CATS TAM: UVES TN 9011 

At these words of the girl, Sukracarya, 

making use of his divine sight, could realise the 
desire of Jayanti and he said to her, O damsel 
with beautiful eyebrows, you have a dark 
complexion like the Indivara lotus flowers. O 
Goddess, your eyes are quite charming and you 
speak sweet words. O Beautiful one, you are 
desirous of living with me for ten years and it 
will be done. Come with me to my place. 


Thereafter Sukra took her home and married her 
there. 


TAM AAA SM ASOT ATT: 
ASA: MAYA AA WAT: WY? 
Then the sage Bhargava, in order to enjoy 
the company of Jayanti without disturbance, 


made himself invisible by means of his yogic 
powers. 


PUA SAT lt Ua feat: Yat: 
ss Te Yleatedt fagea: 1c olt 
aT MA A Uva ATTA ATd TAA 

MATT TAT ACTS MAA I NS it 


Matsya Purdnam 


The Daityas on the other hand, getting the 
news of the return of their preceptor after 
achieving success, were overjoyed and went to 
him delightfully to pay their homage to him. 
But they were unable to find him there because 
of his having been enveloped with the illusion 
and they returned disappointed. 


GTM Wes Hea Aral ATT ar 

TET SM AMT Sea FaATATAN ee 2A 
Gea aaat asta srarnftey Aer: 
HAT BUTT AHUAPTMSATI LS 31 


When Brhaspati came to know _ that 
Sukracarya, for the benefit of Jayanti and to 
please her, had been bound in a bondage of ten 
years in order to please her, then taking it to be 
the biggest shortcoming of the Daityas, at the 
inspiration of Indra, he took to the form of 
Sukracdrya and summoned the asuras. 


AAAI TAT SAT FEMMNTSATT Fl 
Tard WA ASIA Wreatse al feat Bee vil 
On the arrival of the Daityas, Brhaspati (in 
the form of Sukra) spoke to them, “O My 


clients, you are welcome. I have returned from 
tapovana for the sake of your benefit. 


arg aiseanrafacaite fae: wretreq Bt Wan 
aered RATA frereayTUat ee 4A 


I shall now educate you with knowledge, 
which has been acquired by me.” At this all the 
Daityas collected there delightfully for getting 
so educated. 


WU areal afer eyraricn 
Waar SAA Aalerar Sher Ale: 0 
lg Wh AA: ASA AAA WARTS GI 
On the other hand, when the period of ten 
years was over, then Sukracarya thought of 
taking care of his clients. At the end of the said 


period Jayanti gave birth to Devayani. This is 
commonly heard. 


Chapter-150 


ofa Tea FE WA Aayfatand 
fayrdatad Olea franatcirerq ec ot 
UATRASTA ST AH MAT AETAT 

We IT: Meat Tala TH TATA Aescit 


Then he spoke to Jayanti, “O Goddess with 
an auspicious smile, you have vast eyes and 
your sight is quite unstable, O auspicious one, | 
am now leaving to take care of your 
yajamanas.” At these words of Sukracarya, 
Jayanti spoke to him, “O Mahdvrata, you 
should surely do good to your devotees, 
because it is the duty of the noble people. O 
Brahmana, I do not intend to destroy your 
dharma. 


aat Measyrsea sara sera 

ASAAASU At: HASTA APN VWI 

aed Ut at faceted atfeat fatter fay: 

Afgyal at FI A Aa YUTA SAAT: oll 

Thereafter, Sukracarya, on reaching the 

place of the Daityas, found that Brhaspati had 
cheated the Daityas by impersonating him. 
Then he said to the asuras, “O Danavas, you 
please listen to me carefully. I am Sukracarya in 
reality who has pleased lord Siva with the 
performing of severe tapas. Therefore, you 
should adore me alone as Sukracarya. Brhaspati 
has indeed cheated you impersonating me.” 


HAT AM FATT ct AMAT TaISTAT 
Martel aa Ferrata gfarera: 129 vi 
UNySTaT: Aa AF WaerT fo 
TTAATTSY HATA ATA 28 2A 
STATA AY We HTN SAAS SAAS: | 
TTT Ai SIA FTAA Ne 31 


At these words of Sukracarya, all the 
Daityas felt confused at that time. Then they 
Started staring at both of them at the same time 
and while doing so they were non-plussed. 
They were unable to understand anything. 


175 


Finding them so confused, Sukracarya said to 
them, “O Daityas, I am Sukracdrya- the 
preceptor of demons and he is Brhaspati, the 
preceptor of the gods. Therefore, you should 
disown Brhaspati the preceptor of the gods. 
Therefore, you should disown Brhaspati and 
follow me.” 


SYS PATA aaMt Waaey a 

ASIST FANT FA AAAS VI 
FEMA SATA ATT RTO : 

HAN ASE WHAM AAUISs FeeafA: eel 


At these words of Sukracarya, they started 
staring at both of them quite carefully, but they 
could notice no difference in both of them. 
Then Brhaspati spoke to them quite patiently, 
“© Daityas, I am Sukracarya, your preceptor, 
while he is Brhaspati, who has taken to my 
form. O Daityas, he 1s confusing you taking to 
my form.” 


Waeafa WIT AMAT aS AT: 
HN TAT AAA A AAT FT AASTATILS EI 
Ta A aM aalfor Meat oft a wy: 


WH Sf TRAATHM TT FATS ll 
At these words of Brhaspati, all the Daityas 
collected and spoke thus, “The preceptor 
(Brhaspati) had been giving them the lessons 
for the last ten years and according to their 

judgement he was their real preceptor.” 


ated SAAT: Wa MOTT a 
Sat WIEST FRNA AifeAT ke cH 


Thereafter, all the asuras offered their 
salutation to the sage Brhaspati in the guise of 
Sukra and accepted the words spoken by him to 
be true, because they were deluded by him 
during his prolonged stay of ten years with 
them. 


TIAA: Ha TACT: 
ot Teens ah Wes Ta APT AT TSI 


176 


unfay aster aisha Tare A TE: 
frat aa Freviser ag wat res or PATTI 
Then the Daityas, with their eyes getting red 

in anger, spoke to Sukracarya, “He happens to 
be our preceptor and well-wisher. You are not 
our preceptor. Therefore, you better leave this 
place. Irrespective of his being Sukracarya or 
Brhaspati, he happens to be our illustrious 
preceptor and we shall follow his command. It 
would therefore be better for you to leave this 
place, without delay.” 


VATRAS YT: Aa Weel Feely 

Tel A WATT HAT WEFAN 2 o Vi 
Fay Antanas aT TI 

ata fe Wa AAA At AAT SAAT VW 
TAIGASHM A WANA TATA 

Shel SAT ATA SATA AATTAT TN? 0 3 11 


Thus speaking all the asuras went to 
Brhaspati. On the other hand when the asuras 
gave no importance to the words spoken by 
Sukra, then he felt immensely enraged for their 
pride and pronouncing a curse on then he said, 
“Danavas, since you have not cared for my 
advice, therefore in the future war, you would 
be deprived of your consciousness and you 
would face a defeat.” Thus pronouncing a curse 
on the demons, Sukracarya returned in the same 
way by which he had arrived. 


WA MAAAIA HIT F FeAl: | 
HUA: A Tal KS: TART WATT o Vi 


THU FUGA MA HAAS AT 
At: WAS Aareq fay ArHAATTN 2 oI 
When Brhaspati came to know _ that 
Sukracdrya had pronounced a curse on the 
demons, then he felt overjoyed, because his task 
had been established. Then he atonce appeared 
in his true form, with his wisdom he found that 
the demons had almost been dead, therefore, he 
took to his original form and disappeared from 


Matsya Pura4nam 


the scene. At the disappearing of Brhaspati, the 
Danavas felt extremely confused and started 
talking among themselves. 


sal faafger: fa WeTAATGaT 
TSnshyawa asset Fiz kit 


They uttered, “Alas! We people have been 
particularly cheated. Brhaspati has cheated and 
made as miserable visibly as well as invisibly. 
He has confused us with his delusion.” 


afsat: Burd w wa aah waa 
aaa ST Ae TAA ATs 
WSCA: Heal HAAYIS TAQ 
Ad: BIT AAA SUTATATS ST: | 
PATA TAGLA HM ALATA Foci 


Thus getting dissatisfied, all the Danavas, 
under the leadership of Prahlada, again went to 
Sukracarya in order to follow him. Reaching 
before Sukracdrya, lowering their heads, they 
stood there surrounding him. Then finding the 
arrival of the demons again Sukracarya said to 
them. 


TA Maa: Wa AAT ASA 
ATAATAATAT TAT FAT TTA 08H 
“OQ Déanavas, since you disregatded my 
correct advice and you did not welcome me, 


therefore because of the insult you extended to 
me, you have faced the defeat.” 


Vea FAT Ye F MTOTaT TAT FAT 
WEISS Tala Ar Ae AT APTA? Qo 
QENRARMMAE Tea Wat APTA 
ae aa Wt Careaur Alisa: 

Tea Ea Sf Wey TUTTATT BAST? Va 
ate Tea T HON WATS TTA 

STATA RAT ST MALTY THAT? V2 


At these words of Sukracarya, the eyes of 
Prahlada were wet with tears, then with a 
choked voice, he spoke to him, “O Son of 


Chapter-47 


Bhrgu, we are your dependants, besides being 
your slaves and the devotees. You kindly own 
us. Brhaspati the preceptor of the gods had 
confused us in your absence. You can well 
realise the position of your devotees by means 
of the long tapas performed by you. O Son of 
Bhrgu, in case you do not shower your grace on 
us, then we shall be overpowered with the evil 
thoughts and shall have to enter the nether 
world today itself.” 


WAT BIN AMA HSA THAT 

Ua Wea Sf aa: ale Frey a: 
TAA NAT A MAST TATA 2 2311 
saya Mfaat Wat: wrreat Als aah 
TVET Ge fae TE AAAI Vv 
Gal WAST A alse AAA wera 
SeaTfoaTA AOA UreTeT WAITANGI 
Met Taare Be ether TaMseTATTA 


Tae TET AeA ort TETRA 2G 1 
PTT TM AO CarTHeT Tah 
Udlaat St Alet Sf TAM WHAT 2 oI 


When the demons so offered their prayer to 
Sukracarya, he could well understand the 
factual position with the use of his divine sight 
and his heart was filled with compassion. Then 
he controlled his anger and then spoke to the 
asuras, “Do not be afraid, O Prahlada, nor 
should you proceed to the nether world. You 
will ofcourse have to face the unavoidable 
miseries, which cannot be averted, because the 
will of the destiny cannot be averted being so 
powerful. The consciousness which you had 
lost because of my curse, shall be restored to 
you today itself. At the same time at the arrival 
of the adverse time, even after your gaining 
victory over the gods, you shall have to proceed 
to the nether world once, because it has been 
ordained by Brahma already. Because of my 
grace, you have ruled the universe, placing your 
feet over the heads of the gods. Brahma had 


177 


ordained for your ruling the earth for this period 
only. 


Tet Traore et ya: feet afacafin 
CHATTAT ATTRA WA: TAT IR VC 


You will rule the earth again in the Savarni 
Manvantara. At that point of time your 
grandson Bali shall be the lord of the three 
worlds. 

Ue fenet fer: whet: tered far waa 
ATA EAT HeHy AAA ATT 29 I 


This had been stated by lord Visnu to your 
grandson during the discussion of the lord with 
him who had usurped the universe. 


FANATAM ET THT : | 
TANGA Wert PA St TAAYATI oN 


All the events shall happen now. Because 
these best tendencies continued for ten years, 
therefore getting pleased with their conduct, the 
kingdom has been bestowed on you. 


cate aferaler sta UibsTal 

TASS VAT YAAT sATeTaaT: A Farah e 2 eI 

Wert UTE sat ATeqet TaeyaM 

Tefreqaea a vata ated Wee 

Bali shall be established as the king over the 

kingdom of the gods and these words were 
spoken to me by lord Siva as well. Because of 
this, he is spending time, keeping himself aloof 
from the living beings. Thus getting pleased 


Svayambhu had given you another boon. 
Therefore you should pass time with the asuras. 


4 fe wed wer Tea Frenfemnfagy 

TaN wafegise vfaer saat fat 231 
Sut a forest et Wel Warde geeTA: 

dad: UE MPS Aaa MATT HR VVII 


OQ Excellent one, I am well aware of the 
future happenings, but I cannot reveal those 
events to you in advance because I have been 
prohibited from doing so by Brahma. Both my 


178 


disciples known as Sanda and Arka are like 
Brhaspati possessing great influence, who were 
born with the gods and shall protect you.” 


SIM DAT: Va Hleraerearu 
CSI AY: Ale WRIST TSTATIN BI 
Sukricdarya, who performed his task quite 
comfortably, when so spoke to the Daityas, they 
with Prahlada, returned to their abodes 
delightfully. 


ays MITT F AAT YRUT MPT 

VHA HA YH MTT 

CMA: AE: Wa Aa SATATATSATN? PEI 

At that point of time the words of 

Sukracarya, that whatever is destined to happen 
shall surely happen,” were echoing their minds. 
After the lapse of sometime, they thought, that 
they shall be victorious atleast once, according 
to the words of Sukracarya. Therefore with the 
hope of victory all the demons put on their 


kavacas. Then arming themselves appropriately, 
challenged the gods and reached before them. 


CAACIS TUG AEM TUE 
Ua PYAR SATA AAANTATN VAI 
When the gods found that the asuras had 
arrived, well-equipped with their army, then 
they too organised their army, and getting 
united started fighting the demons with all the 
equipments. 


Carat ael afaradar Met TAT: 
TATATT SARA SAT DAATTN VI 
MANTA Tat VASAT 
aeAaeaT: MUSA F AGA 2eIW 


The war between the gods and the demons 
continued for a period of a hundred years, in 
which the asuras defeated the gods. Then the 
gods after confabulating among themselves 
came to a conclusion that they would call for 
Sanda and Arka on the pretext of performing a 
yajna, after which they could be victorious over 


Matsya Puranam 


the demons. 


GH USSET at Wheat MTs 
aa Jat AAA: Ue Haat J SATIN? 3 oll 
Thus consulting among themselves, the gods 

invited Sanda and Arka to their yajfia and told 
them, “O Brahmanas, you should leave the side 
of the asuras. With your co-operation, we 
defeating, the demons, shall serve you.” 

Us Henferaeat at oSreat Tere 

AAT SAT HA TAT AATAT HUTA: 112 3 

WUSTMAU I SAAT ACTA 

We SM: YM HST eA ETAT 3 2 


Thus when an agreement was reached 
between the two Daityacdryas and the gods, 
then the gods became victorious in the 
battlefield while the Danavas were defeated. 
With the deserting of the Danavas by Sanda and 
Arka, the demons lost their strength. Thus, 
because of the curse pronounced by Sukracarya 
on the demons in the earlier times, the Daityas 
were killed at that time. 


RAMU ATT FAT AAT: | 
Freeman easy fafaged TATA? 3311 


The remaining Daityas having been 
influenced with the curse of Sukracarya, 
became shelterless from all sides and the gods 
started driving them out from the earth, after 
which, they feeling helpless, entered the nether 
world. 


ua fret ta: at: Fedo Sar: 
aa: WHA MNT IMT TNS Vil 
aa gt: Pfaeqent wfgttaet my: 
HAMUATAAAATO TONSA 34 UI 


Thus the gods, with great difficulty could 
dissuade the demons from war. Since then 
because of the curse of Sukracadrya, with the 
decline of the dharma particularly, and for the 
re-establishing of the dharma and for the 


Chapter-47 


destruction of the demons, 
incarnates on earth again and again. 


were Fest FA WaT a 
WFAA Va Tellt ATES: 112 3G I 


In earlier times, the all powerful Brahm, 
had spoken this in some context, that such of 
the asuras who would not be subservient to 
Prahlada, shall get killed at the hands of the 
human beings. 


TATU: ATTA SHAT 

ei SF AAAATYSaT SAAASATN 23 
WMia ACT Te Mra feet: | 
TTSTA UPAt J sIAy YY Asc 
wy Byard fecoraferarden 

feriter aefreret eat wraeaST 23 eH 


In the Caksusa Manvantara, lord Narayana 
had been born out of the arnsa of Dharma. After 
his birth, in the Vaivasvata Manvantara, he had 
performed a yajna and Brahma officiated the 
priest of that yajwa. In the fourth Tamasa 
Manvantara, when the gods fell into miseries, 
for the killing of Hiranyakasipu, Visnu took to 
the form of Narasimha! for the killing of 
Hiranyakasipu. In the second incarnation of 
Narasimha, Rudra officiated as the yajna priest. 


|. Man-lion incarnation of Visnu. In ancient time there 
were two demon kings named Hiranyaksa And 
Hiranyakasipu. They were deadly enemies of Visnu 
and tried their best to put down his worship. Their 
attempts were however baffled by the birth of a 
pious son of Hiranya Kasipu, by name. ralhada, who 
was a devout follower of Visnu. Hiranyakasipu tried 
every possible means to induce his son not to 
worship Visnu but he was unsuccessful. He then 
tried to kill him, by throwing him down from a 
mountain summit, by placing him under the feet of a 
mad elephant and by various other means, but all to 
no purpose. One day growing exasperated he asked 
his son" Where is your Hari ?" Pralhada said" My 
Hari is everywhere. He is even in this pillar before 
you." The Danava king, in anger, struck the pillar 
with his foot and anon Visnu came out inhis man- 
lion form and killed him. 


lord Visnu 


179 


aferreay clang Farat aes fe 

THY AAAS TUT | WTA ¥oll 
Uanhera: Bares fear: deat fea: 
TTT: AT ASAT PITTA FAANTATI 2 2I 


In the seventh Vaivasvata Manvantara, in 
Tretayuga, when Bali was the lord of the three 
worlds, then Visnu incarnated on earth as 
Vamana (dwarf). During that period Dharma 
officiated as the priest. O Brahmanas, these are 
said to be the three divine incarnations of 
Visnu. Now you listen to the seven incarnations 
of Visnu, which appeared on earth as a result of 
the curse pronounced by Bhrgu, as human 
beings. 


ATT F WIN SAA Tye sl 
TS IT UA WAHVSATT:- ATW 


The first one was in Tretéyuga, when the 
dharma had disappeared from earth, making the 
sage Markandeya to officiate as the priest, lord 
Visnu incarnated on earth in the form of 
Dattatreya. 


Waa: Useva B Ada Waya z 
TMA AHA J ACTASTT- ALY 3M 
In the fifteenth Tretayuga, he incarnated in 
the form of Mandhata, the Cakravarti (splendid) 


emperor. Maharsi Tathya then officiated as the 
priest. 
Ualttavat Aaa WaeraraHiey: | 
AUST TST FMTAATT AT AY VI 
In the nineteenth Tretéayuga, Parasurama— 
the son of Jamadgni, incarnated on earth who 


came to destroy the entire race of Ksatriyas. At 
that point of time, Visvamitra helped him. 


aqfast Ft Wat afaess yetera 
AAA WAU Ast SIA NYG A 


In the twenty fourth Tretayuga, Rama 
appeared as the seventh incarnation of Visnu 
being the son of the king Dasaratha. The sage 
Vasistha was his priest. 


180 


STEN BIT farerfagt weg! 
ACMA VA AGHVAGT: FTE I 
In the twenty eighth Dvapara yuga, lord 


Visnu incarnated in the form of Vedavydsa. The | 


duty of the priest was during that period 
performed by Jatikarnya. 

he THAT ATO WOT STAT 

FS AAVAY TATA TERT: 

CATS GUAT ATVI 

fap git anit dante afarafin 


Hecht FY AVANT: WAIMATATN YS 
For the establishing of the dharma pretty 

well, and for the destruction of the asuras, in 
the ninth incarnation, lord Buddha was born, 
Sundara was having the same form at that point 
of time. His eyes resembled the lotus flowers. 
Dvaipayana— the great ascetic happened to be 
his priest. At the end of the same yuga, when 
only sandhya would be left, lord Visnu will 
incarnate in the form of Kalki- the son of 
Visnuyasa. 

SHAN MATA AMACEATT AT: | 

aaby yaifeatraraavsita WaT: 1 

MPS ATAAANGA: MAMTA USS 

FPR Tal AT Beata 

Taga: TUG Hela FT TAY Mol 

Thus in future tenth incarnation, Vyasa, the 

son of Parasara and Yajnavalkya shall officiate 
as priests. At that point of time, Kalki, 
accompanied with hundreds of thousands 
Brahmanas, who shall be well armed, shall 
destroy the fake kings of Stidra-race because the 


incarnation of Kalki 1s meant for the destruction 
of the enemies who are inimical to Brahmanas. 


ustast fad: afeensftard: watra: | 
VSAM F AAR A SF AT 2 
Waraal Tear J aiceria 

SUA FLAT MAMA ATTN & 2H 


Matsya Puranam 


In the twenty-eighth yuga, lord Kalk, 
together with his army, shall rule the earth, 
becoming successful. At that point of time, the 
lord, after completely destroying the Stdras, 
shall destroy the sinners, expanding his 
kingdom. Thereafter Kalki, after completing his 
task, shall take rest with his army. 


aaedel FT a Aas: wars: 
Maret Maar F APSA J ATTN ZI 


At that point of time, all the people facing 
total development because of his influence, 
shall serve him. 


IHATHAS Ae Marae Afar: 
erafean q ASAT MATS aT SATE SN 


Then with the influence of the moves of 
destiny and future events, the people will get 
confused and suddenly become envious of one 
another. Then they fighting among themselves, 
shall kill one another. At the end of the time of 
Kalki, he shall disappear from the earth. 


aa: Gel Stet J A Cals 
JUST WAY WAT PTSTATT IG GI 
Tet farant 7 gat Brae 
WN Tea T Pea: Yes FaaT V4 GI 
Thus with the destruction of the kings, in the 
absence of any protector, then the people shall 
kill one another 1n the battlefield. Thus with the 


fighting with one another, getting terrified, their 
condition shall become miserable. 


wafer fear wey goad Feaftrer: | 
WAST ALATA TAT & Olt 
AZYON AAT: TANTEI: | 

WAT: SHYT AeA FMA CU 
Smears afar attra: 

UTA ATA TATAHCNSTAT 4 BH 
ANCA STANT: Wea AAT: | 

IMAG A: TACT AKALMYA AT: WATE o 


Chapter-48 


Then they getting deprived of their families, 
deserting the cities and the villages shall retire 
to the forest. Their varnas and dharmas shall 
disappear. At the end of Kaliyuga, the people of 
the country shall start selling the food-grains. 
The images of Siva shall start selling at the 
crossings, while the women shall sell out their 
own chastity. The people shall become 
dwarfish. Their age shall decrease and shall 
meet death at the tender age. They shall live in 
the forests, river banks or the mountains. They 
shall consume fruits, roots and the leaves, and 
shall wear the bark garments, animal hides or 
the dear skin as the costumes. All the castes 
shall mingle into one mass. The people will be 
reduced in size and will find themselves in great 
distress and subjected to many misfortunes. 


Us HEAT: Bret PETG ANN 
Ta: ota MEAT Tet ATT TE 


Thus having been overpowered by the 
misfortunes and difficulties, the people will 
become annihilated along with the age of Kall. 


aor afer afareda: Harada 
SMUT AANA ereMeSATN YG VI 
AAMAS MUTA wa AMT: | 
qaareg waaay wager SAY § 31 

This period will be followed by Satyayuga, 
while the Kaliyuga goes on decline. Thus I have 
narrated the activities of the gods and the 
demons in relation to the race of Yadus, 
highlighting at the same time, the glory of the 
lord Krsna. Now I shall describe the details 


about Turvasu, Puru, Druhya and the Anu 
dynasties. 


sft stareel Tera Tats aeeat ATA 
ATA SEAT: LY 9 1 


ke * 


181 


CHAPTER 48 


Description of Turvasu and Druhya, story of 
Bali and the birth of Karna 


Ud sald 

TaAaY Yel Wt ATTRA SSH: 

sR CICS CUCU CUOUAIED| 

HUTT ATA UTS STAT: | 

Set: UTM TAT Ya THOT I 

Sita said, “O Rsis, Garbha was the fifth son 

of Turvasu- the son of Yayati. Gobhanu was 
the name of his son. Trisari was the son of 
Gobhaénu who was valorous and invincible. 
Karandhama! was the son of Trigari who had a 
son named Maruta. He being issueless, adopted 
Dusyanta of Puru dynasty, as his son. 


Ud Tene TTT TT 
Tae: Uta at wieder ye fens 
Thus in the earlier times, when Yayati was 
overpowered by old age, and because of the 
curse pronounced by Yayati to his son Truvasu, 


the dynasty of Turvasu had merged into the 
Puru dynasty. 


STS F Saat aaa aM Ufa: | 
AMY AMSUS: PAAR ASST NS 
USI Hiwewla aot: Hea a 
Nt HAUST: GALA: WTUSATP ANT: eA NG UI 
Varttha was the son of Dusyanta. Andira 
was born of Varitha. Andira had five sons 
named Sandhan, Pandya, Kerala, Cola and 
Kama. Each one of them established their 


respective countries, which were known after 
the name of each one of them. 


garg wat yet Aq: aya a 


UGTA: MY TANTRA SAT: NE I 


1, Markandeya explains name Karandhama to denote 
his creation of an army, when besieged by his 
revolted tributaries, by breathing on his hands (4X + 


fH). 


182 


The fourth son of Yayati, named Druhya, 
had two sons named Setu and Ketu who were 
quite powerful. Setu's son was Saradvan who 
had a son named Gandhara and the vast couniry 
of Gandhara was set up after his name. 


Gad TA AISA wRMfawal Wer 
MEAT FAM SATA AT 911 


The horses produced in the Aratta region of 
that country were known as the best of the 
horses. 


TRAGA CARY FARTRAS SHTASHTATT 

gated fagay Wat WealaTeTeaT UISSATT IC I 

Waa: YAM WA: Wa Va Tl 

THM: Aa Scrat fegrarfsrar: 118 

Gandhara had a son named Dharma who had 

a son named Dhrta. Vidttsa was born of Dhrta. 
Vidisa had a son named Praceta. Praceté had a 
hundred sons, who were all crowned as the 


kings, being the lords of the Mleccha rulers in 
the north. 


sta Gar atreaa: weenie: | 
WAAPATTFA WAG Aol 
WIT Yaeg fagrarenect FT: 
TST TAT ATA ATT eT: VN 


Anu, the third son of Yayati had three 
valorous sons named Sabhanara, Caksusa, and 
Paramesu. All of them were quite religious. The 
son of Sabhanara was full of wisdom and 
known by the name of Kolahala. The noble son 
of Kolahala was known as Sanjaya. 


UAT A A ATT FETA: | 

ANAM AST YCTAT AAS AAT 22 UI 
HATTA TATA S HAYA: 
STARA TAT Weereaea SHAT 3 1 


Safijaya had a valorous son named 
Purafijaya. Janamejaya— the great king was the 
son of Purafijaya. Mahasala was born as the son 
of Rajarsi Janamejaya, who was as illustrious as 
Indra, and had a well established glory. 


Matsya Puranam 


TSM: YTS STMT TT: | 
AAI Sel THA ASAT: 1 eI 
The said king had a son named Mahamana 


who was deeply religious, besides being the 
Cakravarti emperor of the seven islands. 


Tera gt Yat srarara feat 

Seat a ast feifaal da ATA 4 i 

TH UTA Uy Taaar:| 

JM HM AA SM A A eat SMSMee 

Mahamana had two sons who were well 

known as Titiksu and USinara. Usinara had five 
queens named Bhrsa, Krsa, Nava, Darsa and 
Drsadvati, who were born of Rajarsis. 


SMATAL YAY AT Se: Hele: 
ATA FF ASA Wa FHA Mier: oI 
The extremely religious sons who expanded 
the race were born of them. All of them were 


born to Usinara in old age as a result of the 
tapas of Usinara. 


PMA FT: Yat AAT Aa Va Al 
HUA AM Wet SMA: Yaalsradl 
eae: Gaventa ferfateaad TAU 
Nrga, the son of Bhrsé and Nava was born 
as son of Nava, Krsa gave birth to Krsa, while 
Darsa gave birth to a son known as Suvrata. 
Sibi was the son of Drsadvati and Usinara. 


ferereg Fora: Yaryeranat elenfeqat:| 
Gye: TAA HHA MHA | 
Vai HAUT: Gla: SheHal Vea 
AtaravaS UTP FATT AHA oN 
Sibi had the sons known as Prthudarbha, 
Suvira, Kekaya and Bhadraka. All of them were 


also known as Sibiganas. Their countries were 


known as Sibi-ganas. Their progressing 


countries were known as Kekaya, Bhadraka, 
Sauvira and Paura. 


TATA TUSTAST AMA FACT Ih 
AAT TATE J ferirarrey WaT WOT? vi 


Chapter-43 


Kekaya was the country ruled by Nrga and 
the country of Suvrata was known as 
Ambastha. The capital city of Krsai was 
Vrsalapuri. Nava was the lord of Navarastra. 
Now you listen to the progeny of Titiksu. 


fatrareerersron yereat feter tery: 

TERA: AAA TEA Tals MARTTI VI 
AAA YAU Tet YATE ale: | 

HAY ATA J AT IPT WapTATIN? 311 
Wear J A Aetaal TAM 
TAMA SANTA TAN ¥ 


Titiksu had been a popular king of the 
eastern direction. He had a son named 
Brhadratha who had a son named Sena. Sena 
had a son named Sutapa, while Sutapa had a 
son named Bali. Bali the Mahayogi, on the 
destruction of his race was born in the human 
race, with the desire of getting the progeny. He 
was subjugated by Vamana, possessing 
enormous strength, captivating him at the same 
time. The king Bali had five sons, all of whom 
ruled the earth. 


ae A WAM as Ya Wa a 
Us afeas MAM Aes Arye 
SMA GRMOTS TL AMAT: WHat 


The names of his sons were Anga, Vanga, 
Suhya, Pundra and Kalinga. These were his 
Ksetrajiia sons. Since the sons of Bali were born 
from Brahmana, they were known as 
Brahmanas and carried forward the race of Ball. 


TAY TRIM Tat AL: Wty AAT: | 
TRATES HOTT UPLATE & It 
ASI Baa et carat AeA: | 
AAAS Aa WAT WAS FATA 
We BM Bag TH TaN TAT! 

ATU FaAAraUIA SF RAAT WYN 
aot A UH Sel ARIST: TATA 
QUST: aAcrewy qa ssa FT Frarat2@ 11 


183 


In earlier times, Brahma, getting pleased, 
had bestowed a boon on Bali for becoming a 
great yogi; enjoying the life span of a kalpa. 
Further that he would not be defeated in the 
battlefield. He would follow the best form of 
asuras. He would enjoy the glorious victory in 
the battlefield, besides being well-versed in the 
tattva of dharma.” As a result of this, the 
powerful Bali established all the four varnas i.e. 
Brahmana, Ksatriya, Vaisya and Sidras. It was 
through the glory of Brahma that Bali was 
favoured even when he was the captive of 
Visnu. The family of Anga is being described. 


qa ay: 
Ha At: WaT Aa: Way TAT We: | 
fen ATH ATeat eT TAT HT TA: 113 ot 
aa Ue Ta: Nahe Tesary 
Tera a waa a Paes acer aq; 2h 


Rsis said, “O Stta, how was Bali blessed 
with five children and who was their mother? 
Who was the Rsi who begot them and how did 
he do so? Kindly relate to us all this and also 
explain us the glory of the said sage. 


aa Sara 

SOeet sit Tart sreifgarga: TM 

Ue SF UAT AT GATT ARTA 113 VI 
Shes AararS oTUSTAT A 
TEMA STAT AAT TAT 13 31 
Jara WaT FT eat araforih 
sacar a waehser g farang xi! 
a 7 Tae WH: HelegeaM 
SHR OIG BTS ATATNG 4 
smletared ania + at afsrqefan 
aifearaa Na Set AM AT ART WATT EH 


Sita said, “In the ancient times, there had 
been a great sage Usija, who was married to 
Mamata. Brhaspati- the younger brother of 
Usija intended to enjoy the company of the 
latter's wife. But Mamata, understanding the 


184 


intentions of Brhaspati, dissuaded him to do so, 
since she was already carrying a child to his 
brother and added : ”O Brhaspati, the child in 
my womb will get angry, for being of the seed 
of Usija, who knew Vedas well. Thus, O 
Brhaspati, do not approach me now Since your 
seed also never goes in vain. After [ am 
delivered of this seed of Usija, you may think 
proper.” 


Ua WAGE Feel: | 
SATA A ASKAIShT A WA: AISaaTATI3 Vl 
ays Mal Ta AeA 
Sega J AA are MTS TTT 2 1 
Inspite of her objection, Brhaspati, even 
though he was such a mighty sage, could not 
controlled his passion and forcibly carried out 


his intention. When he was about to emit his 
seed, the child in the womb cried out- 


aw ara! araraten! garretts Baia: 
waa MT vs areftrans saa 3 81 


“OQ Sire, O Lord of speech! there is no room 
for two souls in the embryo; you are also of 
unerring valour; and I have come here before.” 


Aswad At: Hg Way Jeeta: 
Ys Reser SF grapes aTargie: Ny oN 
TaAaMeN art TANS Fea 


WMA MATT Ste WAAAY RIN 
When the child in the womb objected to the 
act of Brhaspati, he was enraged and thus 
cursed his brother's son in the womb~ ”You, 
who are present in the embryo and are putting 
an obstruction in my way of enjoyment, will 
suffer from blindness. 


Aat STAT AT BTOTefaTaTTAT 
SASHA Feralas seatal aA 21 


Because of the curse of Brhaspatt, the child 
was born blind and came to be known as 
Dirghatamas, who was_ illustrious _ like 
Brhaspatt. 


Matsya Puranam 


AAMAS SF TAT MTT TTA 

T AAA RY FH TPTAT RTT: 1% 3 
Al Mat Fagen sya ATT Tey 
AAA ATTA ATHTAT F FAUX 
AMAT ASAT FUNG 

WME FT SUATT: YR A AGATTUS4 It 


Dirghatamas then settled in the house of his 
brother leading a life of celibacy. In the 
meantime he learnt the dharma of the cattle 
from the bull. He was supported by his brother 
and the uncle. Once an ox started grazing the 
kusa grass planted for the sacrificial purpose, 
but Dirghatamas objected to it holding the bull 
by the horns. 


arent frytaya + ware werden 

ansaaegued & Yst Ut afer ATE I 

A WMNSSAatad Aa KaAT: Farad 

WH ard: BAY aria + fF 4 aera 

WS Malt UVa: MaRSs At TMI 

The bull tried his best to get itself released 

from the grips of Dirghatamas, but was of no 
avail. Ultimately he said to Dirghatamas, “O 
Bravest of the persons, let me go. I have never 


come across a more powerful person like you. I 
am pleased. You ask for a boon. 


Wayesgaled Wat a eq areata 
Wa wat aT famleahs UrraTe VAMSANY CII 
Dirghatamas said, “You cannot go till I am 


alive. I shall not allow you to graze on other's 
field. 


gay sara 
Aah fad Ad Wah wae a 
TeMMeT TMT da Vas Was Aye 
fauet deat Sa Td Wa Nat Ba: 
Haas A ATA BT AAT Aik ol 


The buli said, “I have committed no theft. 
This is the natural performance of the animals. 


Chapter-48 


There are no specific rules to be followed by us 
for grazing, drinking or sexual enjoyment.” 
Many of these duties are imposed on bipeds, 
and not on us, the quadrupeds. 


Yd sata 
nat at yt gear dureneg fayss Ty 
VSAM WMT ATATATIG VI 
Sita said, “Thereafter, hearing the words of 


natural law from the bull, Dirghatamas released 
it from his grip and fed him with corn etc. 


watfedt Ta ated aaa a: 
wade UAeet afer FE Wy 2 


On the bull going away satisfied with the 
repast, Dirghatamas embraced the natural law 
as spoken to him by the bull. 


dal Aaa: Uett MTNA ETAT 
PUAN A AA AMISASAAS FT TANG 3 
Mey Ut Weal TAM TTVATTETT 
fricet dt SAT A ASA MITT ANY Xi 
MTA Jt Weal Aeeanyara AM 
fara 9 St eat srrgenira aA YI 
TANT TAY MeaMtensraTars 

ead ANA Tas TAA HAOTIIG GI 


On one occasion he met the wife of his 
younger brother's son, Gautama, and inspite of 
her being with child, he taking the laws relating 
to cattle to be of superior importance, did not 
desist from her, and caught hold of her with a 
violent jerk and enjoyed himself in her 
company, though she was like his daughter-in- 
law in relation. Knowing about futurity, he 
began to dilate upon the cattle law, when that 
lady said— "You going against nature are 
behaving like a bull, and without having regard 
for the rules of prohibited relationships in 
Sexual intercourse; but following the natural law 
of beast, you have commieted an incest on your 
daughter. Consequently, I forsake your base and 


185 


mean, and now go away on account of your 
doings.” . 


aes YR Ware MATA WAT TT 
TARATMN FHT TAN TreAfesat: 114 


With those words, sie packed him in the 
wooden box and threw him into the Ganga river 
saying, "I abandon you (and do not kill you, 
pitying) your blindness and old age.” 


ATA AT VATS SATO TT 

we tA ante aera rea Teta 6 
STU SI TANT TTT 
Wasa aula apearara Ft fers 8th 
aA Fat Fs YAS SANT: | 
Cars AAT AAA A AA 

TUG ON 


That box, after a long run, was drifted 
ashore and was noticed by Bali, the son of 
Virocana, who handed it over to his queen, who 
took him out of the box and took good care of 
him. Then he told Bali to ask for any boon. 
Bali, the king of Danavas, desired him to beget 
progeny from his wife. 


UATAUSA SAA RTATS Pea TAT 

BAS UA Cat Mat Yeoh AT wifeaTa 

TS FH A A Meal A A Sat WMT SE VU 

Wat aaa Teas wifeoiTan 

TA Halal ya YRAATA TASTE BN 

WAST THAT VRPT eH 

TATA FT Ae TT FRAT HalaCearps 31 
Dirghatamas agreed to do so, hearing which 


f Bl] da by, - : Ife 


Bali sent his queen Sudesna, but she thinking 


him to be old and blind, did not approach him 
but instead, sent the daughter of his nurse to 
him. With the union of both of them Kaksivan 
and other Sidra sons were born by the self- 
restraint Rsi. Then king Bali seeing Kaksivan 
etc. Sidra sons, told the sage Dirghatamas— 


186 


Tilarea 

Wane UTS: 

FARA FEARS TAIN V1 

wma afd gard af erases ater: | 

Tgaraafred dt weather area TG & 1 

ITA: WRI F Was FIT 

ae TEU Ui Wear Youn alsa aa 

WETNSAATATAY Yst Arafat FINE GN 

King said- So well up in saintly precepts, so 

illustrious, so sacred and so versed in saintly 
lore, said to Dirghatamas, that they were the 
sons of Bali but were his own sons because they 
were born of the Sidra nurse sent by his queen, 


who herself had rejected him because of his old 
age and blindness. 


Ad: WAAAY Sore aT 

fer: YON A MA AAAS SAA 1G lt 
WAPAMAHA BAT WATTEAT! 

at @ eae eal qa Heal MANE Ci 
eT AUTO aT Aya ZI 

Tere AC Sree TH 

area were efe yard wraftaarqg 811 


After that, King Bali appeased that sage was 
furious with his wife; and sent her again well- 
dressed, after her toilet, to the sage, when the 
seer said~ O Devi, Cast off your bashfulness 
and then lick the whole of my body with your 
tongue, after rubbing it with salt, curds and 
honey; you will then attain your wish and get 
sons.” 


TA A Agel eat Wa Heart er 
A AISUAATAE cal UTETAATII'9 o It 


The queen followed the directions of the 
seer, but omitted to lick the hind private parts. 


MYATT Aa: BST Aa UitEd YA 
HIST HA F Wafaeafa TaMTIV9 2 
Then the sage said to the queen that her 


Matsya Puradanam 


eldest son would be born without that private 
parts of the body which she failed to lick. 


Tela va RTT Ys aTgUIgyT 
MAPA GMM TATE HE A WAI I 


The queen then begged for mercy. “It is not 
worthy of you to bless me with such an 
offspring, be pleased with my devotion.” 


STqAAT Save 
TaTANTeAS ATT AAT BT 

Te Seat aR Wat aS STAT HoT 31 
reat fat da areal afacate 


THATGAMNST HA WMATA 9 ¥ It 
Migr aaasy A BT rater 

oF freak Fat Ulorareantralgtrenios i 
afaeair HANEY a Sagara: | 

aafaa: Wgulya Wart afteavs Ae 


At this Dirghatamas said, “Because of your 
fault, your son shall not delight you in anyway 
but your grandson would do so. He will, 
however, not feel the necessity of the missing 
part of his body.” The sage then touched her 
belly and said, “O queen because you have 
licked all parts of my body except the privates, 
your sons will be like the full moon and you 
will produce five sons in all, who would be 
quite illustrious, righteous and the performers of 
sacrifices.” 


Ut Sara 
TENT YOM TAS: GAY ATTA 
TEMA afgVaA JOS: YRTag Aoi 
Gethitd Usd ae: aw aT: | 
SAA AAA THAT: YATETATING C1 


Sita said, “O Rsis, Sudesnd begot from 
Dirghatamas, a son named Anga who was the 
eldest, followed by Kalinga, Pundra, Suhya and 
Vangaraja. Thus the sage begot the above 
named five sons to the king Ball. 


Chapter-48 


Miramar fe aes arvaeta: 
TA ATA WT HAA SF WAT: 1981 


Then the sage performed the requisite | 


ceremonies for the sons, like the Brahmanas and 
in this way the posterity of Bali was born. 
ated dard qivatearadle 
ferard seamed wart t ad fastiic ott 
WEA MAAS ATY aa Master asza 


THA TA STIATATANATSNA Sire eI 

aemeeaay won a fast wala 

amt yey Taste srararaqerht Tie 21 

The divine cow, Surabhi, then said to 

Dirghatamas, “Since you consider the cattle law 
deliberately and consider it to be superior to all 
other laws, I am pleased with you and hereby 
remove your blindness by smelling you. The sin 
of Brhaspati is inherent in you. I also relieve 
you of the old age, death and loss of vision, by 
the same process.” 


Ae: F MAA sifaat WPT: | 
AIT AYIVT MYM TASTATUC 311 
Trared aafa af ware Aswad 
alata aat Tear we frat fare v1 
qa Wear fiqd a quiaetnt a: 

aa: HET HSA ATA Mifaaey Aca 
Faeyr Hgat SATA Trews wera ay: 

CO CUM G EMEC ICcOT a DAAT 


AYA J Mit Fass ANT 
YRASSMA AASA A WATS: ATI 
The sage then atonce regained his vision 
besides his youthfulness and subsequently came 
to be known as Gautama because of his having 
been freed of blindness because of the cow. 
Then Kaksivan— the son of Sidra nurse went 
with his father Dirghatamas to Girivraja and he 
aiter performing tapas for a long time, purified 
his body born of Sudra mother and became a 


187 


Brahmana, at which his father told him— “I 


consider myself to-day blessed with a son 


through you, and O pious one! I feel blessed on 
getting a righteous and renowned son like you, 
who after casting off his previous sheath, has 
became a Brahmana.” 


Mes Wey Hretlar-aeargacgar 
SATUS MAAS Wal: Alailat: TATUS ci 
Kaksivan on becoming a Brahmana begot a 


thousand sons who were known as Kiismandas 
and Gautamas. 


Seay SeaTa Acasa A 
aura a: ara: Patera e 1 


Thus [I have explained as to how 
Dirghatamas, came in contact with Bali, the son 
of Virocana. 

SAMS SS US YAMA 
HAA: BST eae Aad: WAIN o lt 


Then Bali addressing the five sons said to 
them that he, by having them as sons considered 
himself to be quite fortunate. Thereafter he 
enveloped himself in the yogamaya and waited 
for the prescribed period in Patalapuri. 


HEPA: MAYA Hea: A A Wy: 
TAB F SATAY Was saa ASA: 118 vl 
ahraretqaed wan fefarr: Tyd: 
Arafat AQAA FI VU 

The king Dadhivahana was the son of Anga, 


Diviratha was the son of Dadhivahana and 
Diviratha had a son named Dharmaratha. 


a fe ata: stare face firth 

AA: WRT SF Wat AS Wal AeTeaATs 3H 
ay reranyyavar: fact 

AT AAT: TARTANA: ete Xi 
CUTS Set GATT IT Yas Aa 
HY STUART ASTAGT NS GU 


The great Dharmaratha drank the draught of 


188 


nectar with the seer Sukra over Visnupada 
mountain, as a result of which he became the 
father of Citraratha who had a son named 
Satyaratha, the father of Dasaratha, who was 
also known as Lomapada. He was the father of 
the girl Santé and a well known son named 
Caturanga. 


RAYEMACT We TAHA: | 

ATS FY YAeMa Sit BTN EI 

WYMAGAvANT AAT TS Fl 

ATT J YT AMT Ys A Mert aque 

Caturanga on the other hand by the grace of 

the sage Srigi expanded his race. He was the 
father of Pithulaksa. Pithulaksa had a son 
named Campa, after whose name the country 


Campapuriis is known, which was earlier 
known as Malini. 


WUMETaTeA RASISET YAS Aad 

Ue PAMUSHAT ANT: MFA: 118 ci 
HAMA Yat TAaeT ATT 

SAS FT May Ara wa: feRetus ei 
TY TAMAS SMITE FAT: | 


By the grace of Ptirnabhadra, Campaka had 
a son named Haryanga, the father of Vibhanda, 
who begot Vadrana, the resister of his foes. In 
the yajna of the said king, he had made the 
celestial conveyances to descend on earth 
through his supernatural powers and who 
served as a useful vehicle for defeating the 
enemies. Bhadraratha was the son of Haryanga. 
Brhatkarma was the son of Bhadraratha. 


TEA: TAMA TAA AeA Yo of 
Tea UNA WaT a ATA 

WT HAG AMT AAAS FTEPAT FU: 20 Qk 
sategeraryaa fags: | 
STAGES UST SF ALATA S ATT: 1120 2 
HOT FTAA YATRA SOT: | 
UASHANSSAAT: Wa WA: alta WAT 


Matsya Puranam 


faratUnssyyeaer WRT WOT FRAT: 20 31 


Brhadbhanu was the son of Brhatkarma. 
Mahatmavan was born of Brhadbhanu. The 
king Brhadbhanu also got another son who was 
known by the name of Jayadratha. Brhadratha 
was born to him as his son. A son named 
Janamejaya, the great conquerer, was born to 
the king Brhadratha, who had a son named 
Anga, the father of Karna. Vrsasena was the son 
of Karna, who had a son named Prthusena. O 
Sages, thus I have explained to you about the 
family of Anga. Now I shall narrate to you the 
details about the family of Puru.” 


RAT Hd: 
SA TATA: HU: BM USS: | 
Uae MIAH Me MA Ro ¥ I 


Rsis asked— “O Sita, you tell me, how was 
Karna the son of Adhiratha Sita and then how 
was he known as the son of Anga? We have a 
great desire to have this mystery unfolded. You 
kindly narrate the same to us, because, you are 
past master 1n narration of the stories.” 


aa sara 

TATTA AA TA A FST: | 

TSA Urge Sehaseary wa TA 

AMA A VAM I AAA AA WINK I 

TAS J WAM Beal SAT! 

OM Tea: Te fasts any Faq 20 G1 

PAA FETA Yat FET: | 

TTA VA TAA VETAT: Ro 

AIHA: VAP: TA: | 

a: HU wage aA HO WaT: | 

dele AAAS Hol wilt MAMAN cit 

Sita said to Rsis, *"Brhadbhanu had a son 

named Brhanmana, who had two wives known 
by the names of Yasodevi and Satya. Now you 


listen from me the races of both of them. In 
union with Brhanmana, Yasodevi gave birth to 


Chapter-49 


the king Jayadratha and Saty4 gave birth to the 
world renowned Vijaya. Brhatputra was the son 
of Vijaya and Brhadratha was the son of 
Brhatputra. Brhadratha had a high-souled son 
named Satyakarman who had a son named 
Adhiratha. The same Adhiratha was also known 
as Sita, who had rescued Karna when he was 
floating in the river Ganga. Because of this, 
Karna come to be known as the son of Sita. 
Thus I have explained to you the reason behind 
the hear say about Karna. 


Sher STR ETAT 
ATA SSAA SEAT USS 


KK 


CHAPTER 49 


Description of Puruvamsa, Bharatavamsa 
and the birth of Bharadvaja etc. 


Ga sara 
WU: Yat AeA WaT A AT: | 
Waar: YR A: WreatrTAeeTTN aI 


Sita said, “O Rsis, the youngest son of 
Yayati, named Puru had the illustrious son 
Janamejaya, who had a son named Pracitvata, 
who established the Praci (or eastern) quarter. 


WAT TA WARP TATSMAT 
TT WAAAY AMT AAT 2 


Pracitvata had a son Manasyu, who begot 
Pitayudha (Abhaya), the son of Manasyu. 


Cea UTA weraee: | 
Pagar: YA: MATT ASSAF 


Dhundhu was the son of Manasyu. 
Bahuvidha was the son of Dhundhu. Sampati 
was the son of Bahuvidha. 


BUY jaat YSPaCTET USS: | 
WTA FATA J SMA Gra SA 
sikagya wigra Bagra Wye: | 
qiaya farqya Wergydad AAA I 


189 


qq: dadqya yorayata F Sy 
Aaa AT ATA SV AATAHTATATINE H 
Tea @ WaT aerant waafay 
BRAN TARGA TAA WTA I 


Rahamvarca was the son of Sampati, and 
Bhadrasva was the son of Rahamvarca. 
Bhadrasva had ten sons from an Apsara named 
Dhrta, who were known by the names of 
Auceyu, Hrseyu, Kakseyu, Saneyu, Dhrteyu, 
Vineyu, Sthaleyu, Dharmeyu, Sanateyu and 
Puneyu. Jvalana was the name of the wife of 
Auceyu, who was the daughter of the Naga king 
Taksaka. The king Rantindra was born of the 
womb of Jvalana. Rantinara produced from his 
wife Manasvini, many beautiful sons. 


sae at fret da enftieng 
TH GAM Flat A ARAN Fc 
Out of whom valorous Amirtaraya and 
Trivana were most popular. His third issue was 


a daughter named Gauri from whom Mandhata 
was born. 


SMT FT AARMSS Aaa ASTTATAT 
TAATSTTAPATSS HET (eaferay SMT tl 


tina was the daughter of Yama. She in 
union with Trivana begot sons who were gifted 
with Divine knowledge. 


TEMA Yates aqiieaferaeasd 
RETA Gerd TANT AAMT OM 
The son of [lina in union with Upadanavi, 


produced the sons named Rsyanta, Dusyanta, 
Pravira and Anagha. 


HAA Aa AA SRA: 
VPA ALA TET ATT AT ATTAT ANN 


The second son out of them, was born of 
Sakuntala in union with Dusyanta, who in due 
course of time became the Cakravarti king 
Bharata, after whom the country came tu be 
known as Bharata. 


190 


Steak wit Tard arp argratieomh 

Tet Weal fay: Yar VA Alt: DW Wa AV 
WU YA Feat AISANM: Watery 
Yat Fad Ya: Utd TATA 

ca ANT AMAT THT MAAS Wepre 23 1 


The divine voice once addressed the king 
Dusyanta, “Mother is like the pair of bellows to 
father which produce the sons; the son thus 
resembles the father. Therefore O Bharata you 
bring up your son and do not discard Sakuntala. 
The son raises his father from the hell to the 
heaven. You have produced a child. The words 
of Sakuntal are true. 


mee fareg Tray ge feven 

YAU AIGA: FTL S 
aa WEAN YA: AY Gea: 
Calta ALERT WER TTT TUG I 


In this way Bharata was the son of Sakuntala 
and the king Dusyanta. In earlier times when all 
the sons of Bharata, met with their end, because 
of an epidemic spread by the goddess Matrika, 
then Bharadvaja, the son of Brhaspati was 
brought by Maruts and gave him to Bharata. 


RAT a: 
WMA MEM: Yas Wed: BAT 
Galley Teraaetal Fe AMAA TN LE UI 


The Rsis said, “O Sita, you please tell us as 
to how illustrious Bharadvaja was given by 
Marut gods to Bharata? 


Yat Sart 
Tear: a Fert afer 
WIMNA A GLa F FeMltwara Tilt 
Tats Teer AAT TAT YM 
WaMISTae TANS FEMA RCI 
mM: Ufa Ta Seta frm 
smeared ante ad dat fanferqeei 
WayisHaa MaMa Fouatet:| 


Matsya Purdnam 


Aaewaa fare F ATAU oN 

Qua: Weert Nearer 

Tal FEMA WAT TI TOT ATT FI? Vi 

Uffaet we gatas arm gee 

AANA AAAI SE FAN 

Vag: UTM Had: weyara z 

TARA aret Waydead Ald 

afata dara way Stet waeafan 311 

ad: BM Uae eas serge: | 

ater Pad forypents rae Xi 

Wan HAIN YF sat FT AAAS Tala 

Tien We VS ATT FATA 

Sita said, “Brhaspati, while staying on earth 

once saw the pregnant wife of his brother Usiya 
and desired to enjoy her. She tried to dissuade 
him from doing so by addressing him that "the 
embryo in my womb is mature and is already 
reciting the Vedas and therefore, the seed will 
not be fruitless and thus, your proposal is 
sinful”. But the same forcibly molested her. At 
the same time he pronounced a curse on the 
child in the womb to be born as blind 
(Dirghatamas). The seed of Brhaspati fell on 
earth from which Bharata was born. The lady 
then asked Brhaspati to take care of the child 
and left the place. 

VATA MAT AT YF Maa Aste Ft AAA 

Traageat Ah I Gear t Wed: Here 

WYSa MET Wed: HI PATA 

She then left the place and the child was 

abandoned by the father as well as the mother. 


The Martus took pity on the child known as 
Bharadvaja and carried him with them. 


aferanret J wat agitraginiay: | 
Gatafrendaeaanya CATION 
Gel A AMM YA ASSATATY: | 
TA: TY ASAT YA AAUTSTTIN CI 


Chapter-49 


The king Bharata at the same time, with the 
desire of getting a son, had been performing 
yajnas, but the powerful king could not get a 
child inspite his performing the yajfas, then he 
performed a yajna called Martuasoma with the 
purpose of getting a son. 


OF OF TERT WERENT TEA: 
Suet Yared WTA SVM 


With the performing of the said Marutsoma 
yajna, by the king Bharata, the Maruts were 
pleased who carrying the infant Bharadvaja 
gave him as his son, reaching the yajna. 


AMIS: FAA FEA: | 
Gala ATE WET WATIZ ON 
In that way, they handed over Bharadvaya, 


the son of Brhaspati, the son of Angiras to 
Bharata. 


TUM Went YA wer faygata 
aelarafeas wa Fearatss carat fast vi 
The Bharata receiving Bharadvaja as his 
son, thus spoke to Maruts, “O Excellent Maruts, 


initially, getting this child, I feel quite beholden 
to you. 


ya 7 fand aferat & pra 
aaeg fatal ATT ATSTST FUTSHATIS VU 
All the yajnas that had been performed by 
me earlier for the purpose of getting a son, were 


of no avail, therefore, Bharadvaja came to be 
known by the name of Vitatha. 


TATA ALATA: ahaa Afar 
RUTAOAlea; aed fears AF 311 


Both Brahmana and Ksatriya sens were born 
to Bhardvaja on earth who came to be known as 
Dvyamusyayanas and the Kaulinas. 


Tat wre fe fat reeey fet aah 
Tent fea areal wffirer qaagfe:3 vi 


Then on getting Vitatha as his son, the king 
Bharata, crowning him as the king proceeded 


191 


on to the heaven. Rajarsi Bhardvaja too in due 
course of time crowning his son as the king, 
proceeded on to the heaven. 


Cael fereaears SMI YaAA TARAS: | 
TRNTATAT: YAKAN YAATa: 113 & UI 
Teal Netatal AW wives dary 
TO A: TARA VAT WRTAGT 13 GI 
The immensely glorious Bhuvamanyu was 
the son of Vitatha. Bhuvamanyu had four sons 
named Brhatksatra, Mahavirya, Nara and the 


valorous Garga, who were as forceful like the 
wind and other four fattva. 


Teal aeayeal Ape AGM Beit 
Thea da arare: frfafteraradii3 oi! 


Samkrti was the son of Nara. Samkrti had 
two sons who were quite glorious and were 
known as Gurudhi and Rantideva. Both of them 
were born of the womb of Satkrti. The 
intelligent Sibi was born of Garga. 


aT: Heady WA: aardan fea: 
MAAAFAS NAT ATS EATS: 113 2 1 


His progeny comprised of both Brhamanas 
as well as the Ksatriyas. They were also known 
as Saibyas and Gargis. Sibi had two sons 
named Ahdryatanaya and Uruksava the 
intelligent one. 


Tes oat faynen J Ya YaHAaT! 
aan yeah da ale da were 38H 
Visala, the daughter of Uruksava gave birth 


to three sons known as Trayusna, Puskar and 
the glorious Kavi. 


STA: Wal Ba Aa Weal War: 
HANA F AT a AA: WaT ASIA UY oll 
Tt: Gada: Hew: aartar fEsraa: 
ya CA TeAAeT a ferfeas1y V 
GEUTAR Taal SATA Yaz 

ate Farad ya Ot TTATSaTTNY VI 


192 


All of them are known as Uruksavas, who 
were ultimately converted as the Brahmanas. In 
the race of the kavyas, these have been known 
as Maharsis. The Gargas, Sankrtayas and 
Kavyas, are twice-born Brahmanas_ with 
Ksatriya strain in them. Brhatksetra of the 
Angira gotra had also ruled the earth. Hasti was 
the son of Brhatksetra, who in earlier times 


established the city of Hastinapura 
(Gajasahvaya). 
ramyda eae: wera: | 


ame fers Youleaa Wis 3 it 


Hasti had three sons named Ajamidha, 
Dvimidha and Purumidha, who were quite 
iltustrious. 


ase Way fra: aeacileed:| 
ert aftr da aigrit da faqaiiy sit 


Ajamidha had three wives of Kuru race 
known by the names of Nilini, Dhimini and 
Kesini. 

Bag Waa Yara Saale: 
ATASA ARIAT BAT TT TAHT & I 


Ajamidha produced several sons from his 
wives who were quite intelligent, illustrious and 
religious minded like the gods. 


aenmaed fat ay H yoy 
MANS Aya Ha: Waals s € I 
All of them were born of their father in old 


age, with the grace of the sage Bhardvaja. You 
listen from me the relevant story. 


Venta: YAR THMHTVaTAAT FEST: | 
TANS PAA TH FECTIT- UV It 
Tealdeass FETA FEAT: 
ASAT: YAVANT Feat YT USo 


From the womb of Kesini— the wife of 
Ajamidha, a son named Kanva was born. His 
son was Medhatithi. The K4nvaya clan of 
Brhamanas were born from him. Bhimini or 
Dhimini, the second wife of Ajamidha gave 


Matsya Purdinam 


birth to Brhadanu, while Brhanta was the son of 
Brhadanu. Brhanta begot Brhanmané, the father 
of Brhaddhanu. 


TaN eey: GAA HAT: 
SIRT VATA ASAT Y FI 


Brhadisu was the son of Brhaddhanu, and 
his son was known as Jayadratha. His son was 
ASvayit and Senajit was his son. 


ST ahaa: VARIA Sten ferye:| 

SAGA HURT TT FSTTAATI 01 

ARMISSATAY TAM TAA ULacTEAT: | 

CATAL STATS: TIAA STAG 114 VU 

WaT Ue werataise wirary 

Arete AA ATOTAATATNY 211 

Stor sft WAI WA: Aa Va tt 

AGT AHL: AATATAT THiS: 1 31k 

Four well known sons known as Rucirasva, 

Kavya, the king Drdharatha and the king 
Vatsavartaka. Out of these, the descendants of 
Vatsavartaka were known as Parivatsaka. The 
son of Rucirésva was the glorious Prthusena, 
who had a son named Paura and Nipa was born 


to Paura. Nipa had a hundred illustrious sons 
who were all kings and known as Nipas. 


RATT MA AT ASS AAAS TAA 
AAT UTA AavA Slt FT ATG VI 
Ua: AayuNaA wat a faqer afar 
UGA: VaR: YAR AHA MATING 4 I 
Samara was born as the son to Kavya, who 
was quite glorious and expanded the race of 
Nipas. Samara had three sons named Para, 
Sampara and Sadasva who were all well known 


and virtuous. Prthu was the son of Para and 
Sukrta was born of Prthu. 


HH VAI ferreeereaT AS SAT: | 


FAUT YF SASKANSY ATA SAAT GU 
TST YOAAAT Fratreat AAMT: | 


Chapter-49 


A son named Vibhraja was born to him. 
Anuha was the most valorous and illustrious 
son born to Vibhraja who was the son-in-law of 
Suka and the husband of Krtvi. 


AYES F Taal Tea AMtUAT: 114 91 
OMe: Yay FAS STAT: | 
faa: YAU FRIIS HAVMIG ct 


Brahmadatta— the king was the son of 
Anuha. He had a son named Yugadatta who had 
a son named Visvakasena. Because of his 
merits, the king Vibhraja was reborn as the king 
Visvakasena. 


aaa YAY see aya Zz! 
TOME YAR] TAS SHSTATATT: | 
SUT TRA Wet ATT: MONAT UG 8 


Udakasena was the son of Visvakasena, who 
had a son named Bhallata. Janamejaya (second) 
happened to be his son. For the protection of the 
same Janamejaya, Ugrayudha killed all the 
rulers of the Nipa dynasty. 


RAT SW :- 
SUNGT: A Yd: HA AN T BAC 
fennel aa a ator: wa deat Wong: 11 of 


Rsis asked, “O Sita, who was the father of 
Uprayudha? In which dynasty was he born? 
What was the reason for the complete 
destruction of the rulers of the Nipa dynasty? 


Wat Sate 
SHIT: YAAVARATT EAT TTT 
RUOPYASSATSS Ft AST TANT GV 
TT URS WaT ATTA eTaT A | 
Jara Ord fafa wept SF Qerafaig 21 
SUMMA TATRA eT 
WONT TESST PITTA STG BN 
afe Aster AreTt Walaa at AA: | 
AAATHATANVTTT AAT YLT: A GUE vil 
PUM UTaTs staat TIATAT Aa 


193 


TAMA Pa ees FH TaTTTANE 4 I 


Sita said, “O Sages, Ugraéyudha, was born 
in the solar race. He went to an dsrama 
(hermitage) and staying there like a pillar 
performed great tapas for eight thousand years. 
At the same time the king Janametaya, getting 
defeated, reached before him. At the prayer of 
the king Janamejaya, Ugrayudha promised to 
get his kingdom restored to Janameyjaya. 
Thereafter the immensely valorous Ugrayudha, 
exterminated the rulers of the Nipa dynasty. 
Initially, Ugrayudha tried his best to bring them 
round by some advice, but when they failed to 
listen to him and got ready to kill both 
(Janamejaya and Ugrayudha), then Ugrayudha 
cursed them, “For no reason, you are ignoring 
my words, therefore, in order to protect a person 
who has taken refuge with me, I am 
pronouncing a curse on you that, “In case I have 
performed the tapas with devotion, then Yama 
should lift you all to his abode.’ When all of 
them were so dragged to the abode of Yama, 
the heart of Ugrayudha was filled with 
compassion and he commanded Janameyaya, “O 
Janamejaya, at my command, you better stop 
these warriors being carried to the abode of 
Yama, protecting them. 


WAIT SATE 
SL UAT STAT Mfrs eT FHT: 
TAHA Ta THT Fa FATE § 


Janamejaya said, “O Sinful and wicked 
messengers of Yama, you release them 
otherwise you shall earn punishment.” When 
the messengers of Yama replied in the same 
tone, the king Janamejaya fought with the 
messengers of Yama for long. 


aMahacaaad We AR! 

fafa yaa wenteqyafranadg ot 
TASMAAA Gag Fat WT 

Ua Aa fat Hear WIA PFOMTSTATING 611 
Vat F ale Yer Sad ATTA: 

BE Miles UL Aa TNR TTA BI 


Wa = 
e _—_ 


— Ia 


2 -« ‘© 


7T> Op . 


194 


Ultimately Janamejaya conquered all the 
messengers and together with Yama, he 
produced them before Ugrayudha. This is an 
astonishing thing that had happened. Then 
Yama getting pleased, bestowed on Janamejaya 
the divine knowledge for salvation. Thereafter 
all of them performing the appropriate religious 
duties were absorbed in eternal Sri Krsna. By 
knowing about the life story of these rulers, one 
does not have to face the untimely death. He 
also achieves the everlasting pleasures in the 
present as well as the future world. 


snes afta fageay sara: 
gare Yaa aca Ueagid: Wa: 
FA UGA: Gal SSAA: WATTAPLI o Ht 
Soares Beat ATT UTlea: 
MAGIA: WAIT: TATTATTIN'9 21 
araniafa faent: yrermtartgant 
TRUTHS ARTA TAT ST: 19 


From the womb of Dhtiimini Yavinara was 
born as the son of Ajamidha. He had a son 
named Dhrtiman who had a son named 
Satyadhrti. Drdhanemi was the son of 
Satyadhrti. Sudharma was the son of the king 
Drdhanemi. The famous Sudharma had the son 
named Sarvabhauma who was graceful on earth 
as a Cakravarti emperor. In his vast race, a son 
named Mahapaurava was born. 


WENA Wa TENA: Gd: | 

HT GHTTTS SHUT ATA UAT: 1119 3 1 
Gaara Bara anita: 

aay catear WaT AaraTAATI 9 ¥ 1 


The king Rukmaratha had been described to 
be the son of Mahapaurava. Suparsva, the king 
was the son of Rukmaratha. The religious 
minded Sumati was the son of Suparsva. The 
son of Sumati was known as Sannatiman. 


TASHA: Sell AT Yat ATA 
fecoater: Foret: ALTA WTA: 94 HI 


Matsya Puraénam 


He had an immensely glorious son named 
Krta, who happened to be the disciple of the 
sage Kausalya. 


Ugfawiaean Aa wear a arrafea: 
BA WAG: Hal AMS APM: 1 
This particular king divided the Sarnhitas of 

Sdmaveda in twenty-four parts, which 
subsequently came to be known as Pracyasama, 
and those who sung those Samhitas came to be 
known as Kartasamagas. 

AUAOMANSA I TEA: | 

aya a4 fara yaar fiat sasiowlt 

SU EMTAAISAY Ft wera: | 

aya a4 fara yy frat satslocn 

Tet AT HET: TreMeraTagT 

SUT STATS: AUT AMT ASTAVT: 11198 It 


Ugrayudha was the son of the same Krta, 
who particularly expanded the Puru race. It was 
he, who displaying his prowess had killed the 
great Nila— the king of Pdamficala country. 
Ugrayudha had an immensely glorious son 


named Ksema. 
TAT: Mgt Ye THAT: 
uaa far sald UAT: BWatsti2 oll 


Sunitha was the son of Ksema, while 
Nrpafijaya was the son of Sunitha. Viratha was 
born as the son of Nrpafijaya. All these kings 
came to be known as Pauravas. 


AAHATHISAANSEATT: 1S 2 


kK * 


CHAPTER 50 


Comprehensive history of the rulers of 
Puruvamsa 


Ut sare 
TANS Alera Atet: WAG: | 
eA THAT YTS TTA 


Chapter-50 


FEM: YM WY FOYT 
WAT: VASAT AR PAT TAHT TTN 2 
Sita said, “O Rsis, from the womb of Nilini, 

the wife of Ajamidha, the king Nila was born. 
As a result of the severe tapas of Nila, Susanti 
was bor as a son. From him was born 
Purujanu, who was the father of Prthu. 
Bhadrasva was the son of Prthu. Now you listen 
about the sons of Bhadrasva. 


Fey Tass TT TelayeM 
Sfarey fared: aafaesta 9379: 11311 


He had five sons known as Mudgala, Jaya, 
the king Brhadisu, valorous Javinara and 
Kapila, the fifth one. All of them were the sons 
of Bhadrasva. 


WAM Ua WHATS aS : 
usrereron aa sera: A: TATU 


The country was ruled by all the five of 


a Ye 8 ox 


them, came to be known as Paficala. All of them 


were the protectors of the Pancala country, as 
has been heard by us. 


Faerie Mates: aarven fear: 
Ut Sata: Vat AMAT: HOTT GU 


The sons of Mudgala who were Ksatriyas as 
well as the Brahmanas, came to be known as 
Maudgalyas. They, having been born in the 
gotras of Kanva and Mudgala, were merged in 
favour of Angira. 


YANTA Yat GA Tas: WAAM:| 

SHOT: YAR FATTER US SAT: 1G I 
feat We Wren safer: 
fealerasy taiftrecat a aphartiivt 


The immensely glorious and engaged in the 
study of Vedas, was born as Mudgala~— the son. 
He had a son named Indrasena, who had a son 
named Vindhydsva. Twins was born to Menaka 
in union with Vindhydsva, as has been heard. 
Out of the twins, one was Rajarsi Divodasa and 
the other was the glorious Ahalya. 


195 


WEA CTaeAeca AIGA 

Warrants TNT VASAT 1S I 

Ut: MAGA ase WT: | 

STATA: WRT artner qe tt 

Tha Ta: WIA ACATA Set 

feat aa Syd aPearata BATT 011 

Ahalya gave birth to Sataénanda in union 

with Saradvan. Satyadhrtt was the son of 
Satananda and was well versed in Dhanurveda 
(science of archery). The semen of Satyadhrti 
was unfailing. Once the semen of Satyadhrti - 
was discharged in water, while looking at an 
apsard, as a result of which twins were born in 


the water and kept on growing in the same 
water. 


ad: Otte aera BTA Teta: 

GSAT AME HIM VAI TA WAV 
Ut MET: YA STATA TAT SAT: 

amt sed yaanfy fealereet t wa: ezH 


Once the king Santanu, went for hunting. 
Finding the two children there he lifted them up 
out of compassion and carried them home. Thus 
I have narrated the story of the sons of Saradvan 
who were known from the Gautama gotra. Now 
[ am narrating the story of Divodasa's progeny, 
which you should listen from me. 


feateraes cravat attest fray: 
Tara: Bist WAY At: BTU 
Ud AAT Ad: WAT: aarareT ATA: | 
WaT UAT AMT WATT Yar: BAI 


Mitrayu was the religious minded king, 
being eldest son of Divodasa. The other two 
sons named Maitrayana and Maitreya were born 
subsequently. They were all Ksatriyas but 
became Brahmanas belonging to gotra Yati. 
Because of their Ksatriya lineage, they were 
called as Bhargavas. The king Caidyavara was 
said to be the son of Maitreya. 


196 


SY UTA gar YaAeAA ASST: | 
SAMS: Tae: MOY AP | ATH 
The valorous Sudasa was born as son to 
Caidyavara. After the extinction of the dynasty 


Ajamidha was again born as the son of Sudasa. 
_ He is also known by the name of Somaka. 


WaT YR Weed aeed wh 


FANTASMA HTT RE I 
Tiedt aS qerit Yara 
FAM ATA Vet SUHHTT SATU I 
Jantu was the son of Somaka. After his 
death, the noble Ajamidha had a hundred sons. 
Dhiimini the wife of Ajamidha gave birth to a 
large number of sons. After the death of Jantu 


an the demise of the sons, she started 
performing severe tapas. 


grasta fafrarrareataatariern 

ARAN A FATT ATTA I 

Tea a qantas: waaary 

BA OM TAMA THAT PATA 83 

Dhimini consumed purified eatables only 

once a day, while performing the homa was 
overpowered with sleep. With the continuous 
performance of the homa all her limbs had 
become smoky and the complexion had faded 
out. At the same time Ajamidha impregnated 
her, as a result of which a son named Rksa was 
born to her, who was the eldest of his hundred 


brothers and his body was of the complexion of 
smoke. 


RAIA Wa Ho WAU: | 

GT: VARTA HRAATACTATN 2 oUt 
pang Het sal Yaea 
POMTVAA: Vol HATA at SMT? Vl 
quad a Une a Hea Y MEATY 
TAA: FATA ATE J ALTA: 112 2 


Sarhvarana was born from Rksa, while Kuru 


Matsya Puranam 


was born of Samvarana, who had attacked 
Prayaga and established Kuruksetra as a holy 
place. The king Kuru ploughed the land of 
Kuruksetra with his own hands for many years. 
Indra finding him so ploughing the land got 
frightened and bestowed on a king a boon, as a 
result of which the land of Kuruksetra has been 
known to be the auspicious one. The dynasty of 
the king Kuru had been quite vast, which in due 
course of time came to be known as Kaurava 
dynasty. 


ing efan: Yat Ya WaT a 
Ufatedl Vela: WHITACT: 12 311 


Kuru had four loving sons known as 
Sudhanva, Jahnu, Pariksita and Prajana, the 
destroyer of the enemies. 

Geary sare: Yat Afra aes 
ATT YAEY TT Tera IN YI 
ATA FAT: YA RATTAN ACTA: | 
SU: Yat Walaa: Tater fay 2G 
ANAT A THAT: | 
darafraraag fifter watt FANE I 
Tera Aree fayat at Test: 
WaITa: Hpda UTA SiaTSt: Nl 
Vy ayaa ARI: Het AT AAA 
TEA STM: HMM AMT faTA UWA 
FMTAMS SRST FIT ATT Atay 
GUT F SMe: YTAATATS Ua 12311 
YT: PUTT TA Tee TRA: 
STASATS TTT STAT AAT 0 1 


The king Cyavan was the son of Sudhanva, 
who had been full of wisdom and well-versed in 
the tattvas. Krmi was the son of Cyavana, who 
had been born of Rksa. Vasu was the son of 
Krmi. He was a remarkable warrior like Indra 
and could move in the sky. He produced seven 
issues from Ginika. The king of Magadha was 
the first of them all, who was known as 


Chapter-50 


Brhadratha. The second was Pratyasrava, the 
third was Kusa, Harivahana was the fourth, 
Yaju was the fifth, Matsya was the sixth. The 
seventh one was a daughter known as Kali. 
Brhadratha's son was known as Kusagra who 
had a son named Vrsabha. The king Punyavan 
was the son of Vrsabha. Punya was born of 
Punyavan, while Satyadhrti was born of the 
king Punya. Dhanusa was the son of Satyadhrtt 
who had a son named Sarva. 


VA UMA: VARA TEs: | 
ORCC RS CROCE CKNC RATER] 
TA Mela PATTI: BI: 

HAT VAT AAT AWGN ASAT: 13 2 


Sambhava was the son of Sarva, the king 
Brhadratha was bom to him. The son of 
Brhadratha was born in two parts and was 
joined into one by a demoness known as Jara. 
Because of the joining of the two parts he came 
to be known as Jardsandha. The immensely 
powerful Jardsandha, was the conqueror of all 
the Ksatriyas of his times. 


HUTT YAY Weta: TATA 
AeA: ATA ARATE 13 3H 


Jarasandha had a son named Sahadeva. He 
had a son named Somavi who was a great 
ascetic. 


HATA BATT: Ue ay: 
W@rartays Ta AT APTA SI 
GU F Taal Stet Ta fae: 
farrrgrantt arasty Sit BPA BG 


Srutasrava was born as the son of Somavi. 
Because of their ruling the country of Magadha, 
they were known as Magadhas. King Suratha 
was born as a son of Jahanu. Vidtratha was the 
son of Suratha. Sdrvabhauma was the son of 
Vidiratha. 


TAMARA GATT ASST: | 
Shey Tay MTA TAT RAAT S HATING & 


197 
TARA AATAMRAT: GAA 
CaM Taal ST Us AYA FFI 


Sarvabhauma had a son named Jayatsena, 
who had a son named Rucira. Rucira had a son 
named Bhauma and Tvaritéyu was born of him. 
Akrodhana was the son of Tvaritayu. Devatithi 
was born of Akrodhana. Daksa was the son of 
Devatithi. 


MTAAKA Safe T ATT AIS SHAT: | 
ferret WaT TT WATE: BATS CI 
Cala: via ata FFA: 
TetHeal F Salat: AAT ASAT: FAT: 
SAU SIME: HATTA 113 8 


Bhimasena was born of Daksa, who had son 
named Dilipa. Pratipa was the son of Dilipa. 
Pratipa had three sons known as Santanu, 
Bahlika and Devapi. All of them were the kings 
and Bahlika was the ruler of Bahlika. The 
people found fault with Devapi and as such, he 
became a recluse disowing the throne. 


a By: 
mentee fame a woeaal Tat: | 
Sl Sat TAA WAT: ASTRA OM 
Rsis said, “Why did the people find fault 


with Devapi and which one of the blemish of 
the prince was highlighted by them?” 
ad sata 

THeIsSHSMTyART Hest ft AAG 

ar dat gy carat ert wie ETT: 

fast aritrents verteq Fraterctirs eu 

Sita said, “O Rsis, the prince Devapi was 

suffering from leprosy and as such the people 
did not honour him. Now I shall narrate the 


future family of Santanu. You please listen to 
the same. 


viaqearagnen fagra a warira 
Be Mlereccaa Veith wit Tethaay BI 


198 


qo RMA wea stot Afro a 
Wada FT Halt THI yi fags ssi 
TA Vigra fe wentate ater 
asaya Hates vise Tussi 
Tea Saad ATT HA Ware: | 

alent faferatel  argtat WAAAY I 

aetna 7 , 

After the returning of Devapi to the forest, 
Santanu, was crowned as the king. Besides his 
being a man of wisdom, he was a renowned 
physician as well. His quality of being a great 
physician was highlighted by the people in a 
verse, which means that whenever the king 
Santanu touched a patient or an old man with 
his hand, he was turned into a young man. 
Because of this quality, he was known as 
Santanu among the people. The people always 
talked of his quality of healing the ailing people 
besides making the old as the young ones. 
Thereafter Santanu begot, from Jehnavi, the 
famous Devavrata— Bhisma was born. Ka&li, the 
daughter of Nisdda, also known as Satyavati,! 
in union with Santanu got a son named 
Vicitravirya, who was quite dear to the father. 
He was calm, sinless and died childless. 


PME AM Ar Aferararachiy 1 
game uw Wg a fagt Meni 
FATS WTA FATAL I 
AS SAE: HS: Aaa SF wy: 

Wal Sait TA da ToS AAT NYS 


Maharsi Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa, in the 
region of Vicitravirya produced Dhrtarastra and 
Pandu, while Vidura was born of a slave girl. 
Dhrtarastra in union with Gandhari gave birth to 
a hundred sons and Duryodhana was the eldest 


1. She was the daughter of a fisherman. Santanu fell in 
love with her "and espoused her on condition that 
her son would succeed to the throne. Bhisma, the 
eldest son of Santanu, led a life of celibacy to make 
good his father's promise. 


Matsya Puranam 


of them all. He was the lord of the entire 
Ksatriya reace. Similarly Kunti and Madri were 
the two wives of Pandu. 


RASA: FAT: TH TTS reas HTT 

THTACS Tel AERTS THIET NY 

STaeneaya SACI: | 

Tae Weed FT ARTA ING 011 

From the womb of both of them, for the 

expansion of the race of Pandu, the gods 
bestowed five sons to her. In union with 
Dharma, Kunti gave birth to Yudhisthira, in 
union with the wind god (Vayu), Bhimasena 
was born, Arjuna was born by her union with 
Indra. Similarly from Madri, the second wife of 


Pandu, Nakula and Sahadeva were born through 
the two gods Asvin1. 


Waa Uosararg soe wit Yar: 
areas wiaferet afafiomqy 
eet MiTAC TATA 

AAA THAT ASCATSAMAT 2A 
Aeerred Maratea STS: Weatetere: 
MAST WOSAM: TATA ASAT 1G Bit 


In union with these five Pandavas, Draupadi 
produced five sons. Her first son Prativindhya 
was born in union with Yudhisthira, Srutasena 
was born in union with Bhimasena, Srutakirti 
was born in union with Arjuna, Srutakarma was 
born in union with Nakula, while Satanika was 
born in union with Sahadeva. These five sons 
were born of Draupadi and came to be known 
as Draupadeyas. Pandavas had other six sons 
also besides these five sons. 


Coe MTAATY Yat Wat elena: | 

SIM ATA F AAT YTTNG VI 
Yea Wd Wgl Vecaraqaa 

RT erat Freftreg Aree: 1G 4 A 


A son named Ghatotkaca was born of the 
union of Bhima with demon girl Hidimba and 


Chapter-S0 


Sarvaga from Kasi. Sahadeva produced a son 
from the daughter of the king of Madri country 
who was his wife. Sahotra was his name. 
Niramitra was the name of the son of Nakula 
born of Karenumati. 


usa Wit Were 
aes Saat Ua YA Te AAS i 


Abhimanyu was born as son to Arjuna, in 
union with Subhadra. A son named Yaudheya 
was born to Yudhisthira, from his other wife 
known by the name of Devaki. 


SMM: THe UA: WYTT: | 
HANTS UU: Ya: TTT NG Ot 


Pariksit was the son of Abhimanyu who 
entered the city of the enemies. The noble soul 
Janamejaya was the son of Pariksit. 


TA BTA A St ata 

O amaata Wet: fret wefsoriy ct 
1 Was eae Tadtgat yal 
MAMA wa Clas Maca Waeaas 211 


Janamejaya appointed V4ayjasenaya, an 
Acarya of Sukla-yajurveda, to officiate as 
Brahma. Finding this Vaisampayana, as priest 
of Krsna-yajurveda pronounced a curse on him 
saying, “Your Sarbhita— literature shall not be 
respected on earth. It shall be honoured only 
upto your life time.” 


aay fad ara ad: Waa Was: 
array faasa We A AAAAAIE oI 


Since then, learning of the victory of the 
Ksatriyas over Brahmanas, many people from 
far and wide started living close to the king 
Janamejaya, the promoter of Sukla-yajurveda. 


aa: waft MAT atrereT T aTeT: | 
IMA AAA BH Aa: WIT Wag VM 
TAT Wiser: Hraasandas AeA: | 


But, because of the curse of the sage 
Vaisampayana, many of the priests officiating at 


199 


sacrifices performed by Ksatriyas began to 
decline and refused to attend on occasions of 
their sacrifices. 


alae fam sear afarararafery 
O AMT Wagranhereara: 1G 2 


At the time, when Janamejaya after finishing 
the sacrifice of Prajdpati, on a full-mon day, 
was about to offer the paurna-mdsa-havi 
(entering the hall of sacrifice), his entry was 
stopped by Vaisampayana. 

wae: Walsat F uray Wasa: | 
RMT ATER ATA AAT: 116 31 
Vadfaran ft Wage ana 

frare arent: arena at wate vi 

Thereafter Janamejaya, the son of Pariksit, 
performed two Asvamedha sacrifices in which 
the methods of Sukla-yajurveda was applied. 
The entire performance was organised under the 
leadership of the sage Vajasneya. At that point 
of time some controversy developed among the 


Brahmanas who pronounced a curse on him, as 
a result of which he retired to the forest. 


HANSA ch TATA q ataary 
TAGRT: Pe Yat Tees hahaa & 1 
The valorous Saténika was born as son to 

Janamejaya. While proceeding to the forest, 
Janamejaya crowned his son Satanika as the 
king. 

SUPE Ta: WAHT sary 

TASCA H OMT: Aiwet BW ASAT: Ng § UI 


As a result of the performance of the 
Asvamedha sacrifice, Satanika was blessed with 
a powertul son, named Adhisomakrsna, who is 
still ruling the country. 


arararatd Te 7 gonaienreay 
aud dead o sift aatfir yet 
age HEA Treat FEARTAT: 1G ON 


200 


O Brahmanas, while he is ruling the country 
and it is in his reign that you have engaged in 
this huge sacrificial session, of which three 
years have passed in Puskara and two years in 
Kuruksetra and Drsadvaiti. 


qv ag: 

wast aaqfresm: WAT cragath 

Te fener Vers att ated ATG C1 

ay a Wea aa TIT a 

VATA A AMAA ATAUTAIE FU 

FAFA ST AATTATATTAT 

HA MAATUT TA BAST FTAATI9 0 1 

GOs: GIA T Maes PTET FI 

Waa WAST Yeoat gfe 7 Wat eh 

The sages said, “O Sita, this is all the 

history of the past. We would like to listen 
about the future kings. Please tell us about the 
future kings, giving their names and the 
duration of the reign of each one of them. 
Please also tell us about the duration of Satya, 
Treté, Dvapara and Kaliyuga, besides the 
adversities, prosperity and vices of those ages. 
Gd sdld 

WMT Half Va careaifecreatom 

aed afer da aa Wao aT Ih 

SMTA Aalto Yat A Fraverd 

a Sea Waa fares J TOTEM 311 

teadaaaa da wha ara aM 

dy Weed Tea Usenet YT! 

Ararat raat Afar aplerargarqii9 x1 

Sita said, “O Rsis, Vyasa of untiring energy, 

had narrated to me in the earlier times, the 
details about kaliyuga and other Manvantaras 
and the same is going to be repeated by me, 
which you should listen from me. Then I shall 


describe about the kings, who are to be born in 
Aila and Iksavaku dynasties in future. 


Matsya Purdnam 


PASTS Yay QArd FW: TAs 
A: UTA: VRAIS SY ACA T:194 
SM: Meal: YferaeT Bletent Aare 
HAMMAMET FT MAY eSATA: | 

Waa: Wee AMAIA ATA G 1 


Besides them the rulers of Ksatrtya, 
Paragava, Sidra, Bahiscara, Andhaka, Saka, 
Pulinda, Culika, Yavana, Kaivarta, Abhira and 
Sabara, who would be born in future in these 
races, besides, those who would be born in the 
Mleccha races, I am going to highlight the 
details about all of them. 


AAPM WI Add TT: 
Tara aaah afaet alarargarqiisioit 
sfeningergay faayufaant 7a: 

TMT F EA ASAT AMTAT™A9c 
wee faagam alge 7 Fraceata 
TARTS YATRA HATTA THAT: 119 8 Ut 


Adhisomakrsna happens to be the foremost 
of all, who is presently alive. | am going to 
narrate the names of the rulers to be born in his 
race. Vivaksu will be the son of 
Adhisomakrsna. After the washing out of the 
city of Hastindpura with flood waters of the 
Ganga, Vivaksu will desert the city and shall 
live in the city of Kausambi. He will have eight 
valorous sons. 


WIS: YraTeT Tea fra: Wd: | 
Yraxayawnegtarmisy Yragatqi¢ ott 
afar: qaowy afacaia Yras: | 
TATU RAAT YAM ATT TTA 1ic gi 
TUT aT FIY: FATA: | 
FAT eael vfaat a Yataets12 VW 
TSA HAFAN Aral Tar UTM: | 
Ufwnagaaa Alaa FAM JIS 31 
eral TA rarer faeatt A Aya: | 


| Refer: Granta afacait yea 2 vi 


Chapter-51 


Bhirt will be his eldest son. Citraratha will 
be the son of Bhiri. Sucidrava will be born as 
son to Citraratha. Sucidrava shall have the son 
named Vrsniman, who will have the son named 
Susena. After Susena, Sunitha— his son will rule 
the country. Nrcaksu will be born to the king 
Sunitha. Sukhibala wiil be the son of Nrcaksu. 
Parisnava will be the son of Sukhibala. 
Parisnava will have the son named Sutapa. His 
son undoubtedly will be immensely strong 
known as Medhavi, who will have the son 
named Puranjaya. 


Sat WIT: Breer Fare AeA ATS SHAT: | 


FUTETEGA ATH AIST FATT & 1 
ager: Wartteat Mates: | 
afqet WIAA WaT FEAT RI 


Urva will be his son, and Tigmatma will be 
the son of Urva. Brhadratha will be born as son 
to Tigmatma. Vasudéma will be bom to 
Brhadratha, while Satanika will be born as son 
to Vasudama. Udayana will be born to Satanika. 
The valorous Vahinara shall be born to 
Udayana. 

aes TueuUMifacatt 

SUSU ear PTATY: TAB 12 91 
SATA MVeHISa May fast: Tes: | 
TAA AW Afra safacn:| 

ah MA Wa AeMTeat Het Fie cit 

Dandapani shall be the son of Vahinara. 
Dandapani will have a son named Niramitra, 
who will have a son named Ksemaka. A verse 
had been coined by the ancient sages about the 
family tradition of this dynasty, which means 
that this dynasty represents the Brahmanas as 
well as the Ksatriyas, which is honoured by the 
Rsis, getting Ksemaka as the king in Kaliyuga, 
will come to an end. 


sae Ulta aot aurafes alfa: 


TIT: WOSTART ATT TETAS 8 
Thus I have described the Puru-dynasty and 


201 


the dynasty of Arjuna, the son of Pandava, in a 
realistic manner. 


Stat AMTRA ATG Baa Yea AT 
USAT SEATT: HG 0 


ERS 


CHAPTER 51 
Dynasty, Origin and various names of Agni 
RU Sd: 
a TM: Wigiarrsa: Gat Aden 
Me AAA TSM MATA: 1g 
The Rsis said— O Stta! Please tell us about 
those Agnis or Fires which are honoured 


amongst the twice-born,! and narrate the history 
of the descendents of that dynasty in detail. 


Yd sate 

ASMA Ba: TaYaS A 

THN WAR: TARTAR SATAN ZI 

Wak Tat a yay a: Aya: 

Fae: WaNasided: Waa 3 

Sita said- O Rsis! in Svayambhuva 

Manvantara, Agni Abhimani (the presiding 
spirit of Fire), was born from the mind of 
Brahma, and Svaha was his wife. She gave birth 
to Pavaka (Sub-terranean), Pavamana 
(Terrestrial) and Suci (Celestial) fires. 
Pavamana or Terrestrial Fire is produced by 


friction and Pavaka (Subterranean) Fire 
produces the magnetic fire, called Vidyuta. 


Qreria: wa: a: wrawle J war: 
UA Biteasdae: A SAMI 


Suci is also called Saura (Solar or Celestial 
Fire). These fires are known as Sthavaras or 
Fixed Fires. Havyavaha is the son of Pavamana. 


Wath: Wea FISTE: Whe: | 
Sa SAAS: WG TAT: AAG Ut 


|. Brahmana : his second birth is said to take place when lic 


puts on his sacrificial thread. 


12 


same gotra? You kindly remove my doubt in 
this connection. 


Uk sald 


fearmiagine witreayean 
AAPA TRaA AMT TAAT 3 


fears a feoagrray ean 
T Wee: Mea ath SF ATTA: XI 
Lord Matsya said, “The rajoguna creation 
emerging in the form of Satariipa and others is 
divine. As the Mulaprakrti is beyond the reach 
of the organs of senses, similarly the damsel 
Satariipa's body was beyond the reach of the 
sense organs. It possesses the divine lustre 
besides the divine knowledge, therefore, the 
humans having the bodies of flesh cannot be 
described with their mortal eyes. 


UM ast: AatoTATATeT fayarafaroiy| 
facta unt fecarat fee Wa A AAT: 4 I 


As the paths of the serpents are known to the 
serpents and those of the birds are known to the 
birds alone, similarly the ways of the divine 
souls like Satariipa and others could be known 
to the divine jivas alone and not to humans. 


arta 7 Cat WANT | 
TATA UPR AAMT FO TNE 
O Great king, since the activities of the gods 
(irrespective of their being) proper or improper, 
do not yield good or bad fruits, therefore it 
would not be proper for the humans to think 
about them. 


we WaaerMaeasra ATS: | 
TA TRUTATR SAT PTET 
od afrgita fret aererertt 
faftfada wratera edt area 
Wit GI Aad TA Aa WTA ct 


The other reason is that as Brahma happens 
to be the creator of the Vedas, similarly, Gayatri 
in the form of Sataripa is said to have been 


Matsya Puranam 


born of the limbs of Brahma, therefore, this 
union is conceived as visible as well as 
invisible. Alas wherever there is Brahma, 
Sarasvati 1s bound to be there and wherever 
there is Sarasvati, Brahma must be there. 


TATAA A UstyorsaaM FvAd srfaq 
TAA TaN: wed ata + farsa ei 
As the sunshine cannot be separated from 


the sun, similarly Gayatri cannot leave the 
company of Brahma. 


aa: Wal Ten Alaat rales 
TRA BENT: TATE THT Fats ot 
Though Brahma represents all the Vedas and 
Savitri or Gayatri is the supreme goddess for 


him, therefore Brahma does not earn any 
blemish casting an evil eye over Sarasvati. 


TAT SAMA: VST TTT 
TATAUTATSM MT HAANFTTI Ve 
Still Brahma, felt shameful for his evil 


action at that time and he cursed the god of love 
his own son. 


TENANT Yaa TA: Wert Wes 
THC AATTGRT TATA NI 


He said, “Since you have badly wounded 
my mind with your arrows, therefore, lord 
Rudra will soon burn you to ashes.” 


Td: VASAT ATA aTTY aA 
TUT Pret arereha AAI 23 1 
Renata: WORatg ATA 
‘staan: dara Shear vi 
arate Fa Waa Weaet 
anal WA: Vaart waaateh TT Fast V4 I 
Thereafter Kamadeva, offering several 
prayers, pleased Brahma. He said, “O Lord 1t 
would not be proper for you to pronounce a 
curse uselessly on me, without any reason. You 


yourself have produced me for disturbing the 
minds of the living beings. O Lord, you have 


Chapter-4 


yourself commanded that irrespective of the 
man or the woman; you always disturb the 
minds of all. 


THTSTTTNSS AAT STATA Fersith 
HE VATS ATLAS FAs REI 


Therefore, O Lord, I am faultless by earning 
a curse from you. Therefore, O Lord, be 
compassionate on me to enable me to attain my 
original body.” 


Telarea 

AAAS WA Aearaqasya : | 

TWH ATT Fel Wea Aaa: 1 V9 

TAMARA genraeraceate 

TEMG RAAT CS TAT YACTHEAPA VC I 

Brahma said, “O Kamadeva, on the arrival 

of the Vaivasvata Manvantara, when Rama, the 
destroyer of the demons, possessing my 
prowess, shall incarnate in the form of 
Balarama in the Yadu race and dwell at 
Dvaraka, at that point of time, you will be born 
as son of Sri Krsna, possessing the comparable 
prowess. 


Ue MAAN eA ATTA: | 
TA ALAA AT ARAFAT: 11 28 Ut 
You will achieve a similar type of body, 
enjoy all the pleasures in Dvaraka and then you 
will be born as the son of the king Vatsa in 
Bharata-race. 
aT A AaqanyTaeTay | 
Tart ada: Wet HeeaTe TPCT 2 0 II 
Then you will become the lord of the 


Vidyadharas and enjoy all the pleasures till the 
time of dissolution and then shall return to me.” 


Ta MUTATE ATT: PYG: | 
MHA AA ST A AAT TTTN 2 VN 


In this way, Kamadeva, after earning a curse 
as well as the boon having been filled with grief 
and pleasure, returned in the same way as he 


13 


had arrived. 


Heated 
SA Bete Veet AEN BMGT: | 
a A Sat GANT feanel HAATIA= | 22M 


Manu said, “O Lord, the race in which you 
have told that Kamadeva would be born, who 
are those Yadus? 


THA HA Bl a By: Tad! 
Uae AAT Yort: Ura fe TW 
What for did lord Rudra burn Kamadeva and 
for what purpose, kindly speak out the early 
creations in the race of Bharata? Listening to 
these words a doubt has developed in my mind. 


Therefore, you narrate the same from the 
beginning. 


Ack] Said 


MT A Saga WAT Tea 
SAAT A Valea MARAT Masa Bvt 


Lord Matsya said, “O King, from the half of 
the body of Brahma, Gayatri, the narrator of the 
Vedas was born, who happened to be the 
mother of Manu. She is also known by the 
name of Satariipa and Satendriya. 


UereTa Bf rela STEM 
Ad: AT MARBUT VATA 2G UI 
Y WeaMea: VAT AAT aN: | 
CoA: HAMA: TAT VE 
Rati, mana, tapa, buddhi, mahat, Dik, and 
Sambharana produced the ten mind-born sons. 


The universe full of learnings emerged out of 
them. 


aasgugMed fayerarntury 
aaepat fay WaaaT TaN 21911 


Thereafter Brahma created Vamadeva- the 
holder of trident, and also created Sanatkumara, 
who were the ancestors of the ancestors. 


202 


Pavaki, Saharaksa and Havyavahamukha are 
sons of Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci 
respectively. The Havyavahamukha Agni is 
sacred to the Devas and the first-born of 
Brahma (Pavamana) is the fire sacred to men. 


WEA: YUN | AAT FASTA: | 
Waal YAMA Mayas ANE I 


Saharaksa is the Agni sacred to the Asuras. 
These three Fires belong to the three classes. 
Their sons and grandsons number forty. 


Weed AS Waar APT! 

Ulaat citfecnl Sa: WIA TRULY F191 
Teteaireaegay eat ATT FewTT: | 

SUA FAAS ACSA AA Aci 

B gasaaer: Yat wfyt: yenttatea 

Aisaat ciency aiercferonta: A Teas I 


They are now described and named 
separately. Pavana (Pavamana), the Fire of 
human beings (Laukika), is the first-begotten of 
Brahma, and Brahmaudana known also as 
Bharata, was the son of Pavamana. Havyavaha 
is also known as Vaisvanara Agni. He died 
while carrying Havya offerings to the Gods. He 
being dead, the son of Atharvarn (Angirasa) 
produced the Fire Puskarodadhi (produced by 
the churning the cloud), which is known as 
Atharva Alaukika Agni and also as Daksina 
Agni, by non-rubbing. 


YN: WATAAMTa SMTA: TA: | 
TR ietfcnat Bacar: Wa WA ol 
Atharvan was begotten from Bhrgu, and 


Angiras was the son of Atharvan, who begot the 
above-mentioned Alaukika Daksina Agni. 


a a: wane feast: a sea 
Bada MeTMNS A: WIA Te: Wa: 
Pavamana 1s called Nirmathya Agni, also 
produced by (rubbing fire-sticks or) any 


friction, and the same is known as Garhapatya 
Agni or household Fire and 1s the first-begotten 


Matsya Puranam 


of Brahma. 
at: WIAA BT Up Fara 
AA: WS AMT WHY FAST 
GT: Gedieatars tracert fast: BATH 
He produced, from Samsati, two sons, 
named Sabhya and  Avasathya, — then 
Havyavahana was enamoured of sixteen rivers. 


The twice born call this Agni Abhimani 
Ahavaniya Fire also. 


aad HMA A AWat AAT da 
Marat facet at ATTAIN 83 
fara atforent ta pag Wet aM 
Gat waft da erfedt weat wate 
The sixteen above-mentioned rivers are:- 
Kaveri, Krsnaveni, Narmada, Yamuna, 
Godavari, Vitasté, Candrabhaga,  [ravati, 
Kausiki, Satadru. Saray, Sita, Manasvini, 
Hradini and Pavana. 
AY BISVANISSHH WaT Yaa, YAA! 
Aal F fagteary ferereres: WATT Feit 
artererafera fererarearaeraey ereara: 
ferry aT eT fea: BAT NG Mt 
After dividing his body into sixteen different 
parts, he dallied with these sixteen river- 
goddesses, when he was attracted towards 
Dhisnyas.! Produced from these Dhisnyas was 


the progeny known as Dhisnus. Since they were 
the sons of Dhisnyas, they are called Dhisnus. 


grad a alga ferag wierarat 
aa fagcuiar ft sreraey ASyUT 
fay; WareUnseerreM fermratsati go 


|. Dhisnya. A sort of subordinate or side altar, generally 


a heap of earth, covered with sand, on which the fire 
is placed, and of which 8 are enumerated, viz., 
besides the Agnidhriya (in the Agnidhra), those in 
the Sadas belonging to the Hotn, the Maitravaruna or 
Pra-tastr!, the Brahmandchchansin, the Potr, Nestr 
and Achchavéka and the Méarjaliya. (Moniter- 
Williams’ Sansknit-English Dictionary). 


Chapter-51 


fagtha Sat quae WaT 
SAC PAA YT HATS I 


All the sons of the rivers made friends with 
these Dhisnyas. Listen now about the 
Viharaniyas (those which are removable from 
the altar and Upastheyas (those which are fixed 
in their places and worshipped there), amongst 
them. Vibhu, Pravahana and Agnidhra are fixed 
in their altars, while the remaining Dhisnus are 
shifting and moving and taken from their places 
when some auspicious occasions arise. Hear the 
names of Anirdesya (undefinable) and Anivarya 
Agnis (inavertible fire), in order. 


araaista: Amal fedtaracates:| 
anshaga weruttsta are: 128 it 


Vasava and Krsanu are both the Agnis of 
Dvitiya and Uttara vedi (altars). Samrat was the 
son of Agni, and the Brahmanas worship these 
eight Fires. 


Wat: Tag fata: aMszevac 
WARN: AMY Atae ASTRA o 1 


Parjanya and Pavamana are also Agnis and 
are seen on the Dvitiya altar. Pavakosna and 
Samuhya are the Agnis found in the North or 
uttara altar. 


SAYSl PAG: Maa: W fawewd 
PIAA HATTA TAA A SAAN Ve 
TARAMMATATAT TRAN Te 
AAAUGUAT: A A MMP TA: 1 


Havyasiida and Asamrijya are both known 
as Samitra. Satadhama and Sudhajyoti are 
described as Raudraisvarya agnis. Brahmajyoti 
and Vasudhama are said to be Brahmasthaniya. 
The Upastheya Agni by Ajekapada 1s known to 
be Salamukha. 


aera Bean setar J ateuit 


Yat ad J Ader TTT fet: ATVI WN 


Anirdesya and Ahirbudhnya are carried to 
the south. The Brahmanas say that these 


203 


Upastheya Agnis should be worshipped by all. 


amt faetuiag agareret 7 ARTA 
BAA Yat Maa FATATET 2 VI 
Now I shall describe the Viharaniyas and 


their eight sons. Barhisa Agni, the carrier of 
sacrifice, was the son of Hotriya. 


WreaShA: waa feta: Wael: 
Gat Maawaal Tees THAT? 4 I 
Praceta Agni is the son of PraSarhsya. He 1s 


the second Agni. Sarnsahayaka Visvaveda is the 
son of Agni, called Brahmanacchansin. 


sat A: Wa: Tart: Agata faves 
fara sewn aa Weed RAEI 
Svambha Agni ts described having its origin 

in the waters. His name 1s Setu. These Dhisnya 
Aharana (shifting) Agnis are worshipped along 
with the Soma in the Soma sacrifice by 
Brahmanas. 

aa A: Wael AEN A: UiRarT Tea 

BA: Psaqgat Hal aHaly Mesa 21 


The god call Pavaka Agni to be Yoga, and 
that. Agni is worshipped along with Varuna at 
the time of purificatory bath. 


CATA YR PASSA AM Ta 
TIA EM ASIA: Att BAI 


Agni, the son of Hrdaya, that digests the 
food, is known as Manyuméan, Jatharagni and 
Viddhagni. 

Tenia aayarte fader 
SAAT: UAT AL: Wade: BTW 
The Agni that 1s produced spontaneously by 


friction and consumes all beings, 1s the son of 
the Agni Manyuman, called Ghora-sarnvartaka. 


fraaa: Waal WAX asaya 
Aygatat: Ya: Terett fateraii3 of 


This Agni dwells in the ocean, drinking 
water, in the mouth of Vadava (Oceanic 


204 


volcano) and the son of Samudravasin (oceanic 
fire) is Saharaksa. 


VEU ft BUTS A TAI FUT 
HOM: ATR TEAST ST ATTN 2 
Saharaksa Agni resides in the houses of the 
people, and fulfils their desires. Kravyada Agni, 


the son of Saharaksa, devours the dead (1.e., the 
funeral fire). | 


Sad WaHeaegt: Yat: Wealfea: | 
A: TAY Waaaraa Ty TEA: 13 VU 
These are the sons of Pavaka Agni, as 
related by the Brahmanas. Their sons, through 


Sauvirya, were stolen by the Gandharvas and 
the Asuras. 


Ufaat greater gy astra aT 
SAAN F MTA ey MUTA 3 1 


The Agni obtained by the rubbing of Arani 
went to dwell in the sacrificial fuel. This fire 1s 
called Lord Ayu, in which sacrificial victims are 
immolated. 


orga afearyat Gert ad: Gas 
WRIST St BI YAH AB VI 
AaAMeaeared FA HT YAth: As 
Yasea fart PAYA: A MSTA 4 I 


Ayu begot, Mahimdana, the father of Dahana. 
This Dahana is the presiding Fire in Pakayajna 
(domestic sacrifice) and eats the fire oblations 
made into it; and it eats also offerings made to 
the Devas and the pitrs. His son ts Sahita 
Adbhuta, who is very celebrated. 


WAM Et ol TAH a: 
AAT Ye ANT SAMY WaT: 3 & I 


He eats the offerings, made at Prayascitta 
(atonement). He (Adbhuta) 1s the father of a 
portion of the heroic Devarhsa, known as the 
Great. 


fafanntaerera wet gat Terenfa: | 
fafanfagaenteaiset Gat: BAT: 3 lt 


Matsya Puranam 


Vividhagni was born of the Vira Devarnsa, 
who begot Mahdkavi. Arka, the second son of 
Vividhagni, begot eight sons. 


arated wreattqed F:| 


Gee gararel Sa STATIN Ct 

Way: Aaa seret a weather: | 

PA WAT AT AAT AYE VI 

He who is known as Raksohayatikrt is the 

presiding deity in all Kamya sacrifices. The 
second son is Surabhi (the fifth); Rukmavau 
(the sixth); Vasuman (the third), Aunada (the 
fourth); Haryasva (the fifth), Pravargya (the 
seventh) and lastly Ksemavana (the eighth) and 
including the progeny of Suci Agni, these are 
fourteen. 


Sela MPAA: Wheat: Huiat a fe area 
aaa J WT A aM: BE FUN oll 


Thus have been described the Fires, which 
were employed in sacrifices in previous world 
periods by the Devas, along with the Yamiés (a 
class of gods). 


TarayaSaA YTS TA: | 
Ud fagraiay sarees Bu 


These Agnis were the presiding deities of 
sacrifices in Svaymbhuva Manvantara. Now, 
these are subsidiary fires, shifting from one altar 
to another and roaming among animate and 
inanimate beings. 


WMISAS HET: WTA SeTaTEAT: | 
Ia aracHleaed I A Haga Aa: 1% VI 


They were the presiding deities of altars and 
were known as Agnidhra Fires in ancient times, 
and were then carriers of sacrificial offerings, 
and were employed in those days, and may be 
employed in present days in voluntary 
(Kamya)’ and occasional (naimittika) rites. 


|. Any act or ceremony done from interested or selfish 


motives. 


Chapter-52 


ya Heartisdia Yaar dt: Te 

Ud CaM: el WTA Aas 3H 
SAM BAA Yea: WANS Waza 
Tanifaey Hat: MATA AAG v1 


Having passed all Manvantaras, in the next 
first Manvantara they along with the Devas 
known as Sukras, Yamas etc. were present 
during sacrificial acts. Thus have been 
described the altars and the sources of the 
various Fires; they should be known as existing 
in the seven Manvantaras, beginning with 
Svarocisa and ending with Savarna. 


aa 7 Weed ainaTTaeae 
Way Tay AA WAAAY I 


Thus have been described the Agnis of the 
past Manvantaras. Now will be described the 
characteristic marks of the Fires to be 
worshipped in the present and the future 
Manvantaras. 


TARY Way AATSUTa TT 
add Ad Bea: PEAT NYE HN 
In all Manvantaras, these Fires, along with 


Yamas and Devas, make their appearance in 
various forms and for diverse objects. 


STATA: Al: AL ARRAS ATT 
SUS WANS War Weal BHAA 
feretonssayeat a faaareatafrepai yo 


These Fires live along with future Devas; 
and thus I have described the Past Agnis; what 
more do you wish to hear now, O Rsis? 

Stat sta ETT TUtS Frere 
ATH TSTIT A SEATA: 1 HI 


kK*K* 


205 


CHAPTER $2 


Description of Dharma and Adharma, the 
excellence of Karmayoga over Jnana-yoga 


RAY Sd: 
Sem We Agwy: Ye: WAAL 
areal waraea aqterer faereqi 2 
The Rsis said— “O Sita! Be good enough to 
relate to us the difference between Virtue 
(Dharma) and Vice (Adharma) in detail, as 


explained by the Lord Visnu, at the respectful 
enquiries of the king Vaivasvata Manu” 


Ut sara 
Vata aera AeA: 
faeareenfecerer wre aay 2 
STATS faa WA Taal 


SUA UT Al WM aaatgeraraay 3 


Sita replied— Rsis! Lord Janardana, in the 
form of Fish, has explained at length Karma 
Yoga and Sarhkhya Yoga’ to Manu, the most 
illustrious son of the Sun, at the time when the 
world was a vast sheet of water. He explained 
them at length the first creation and the 
destruction of the world.” 


RI Hd: 

Rafa Yr BAIT TAT! 

qanetated ete a fafara Geax 

Hearing those words of the sage, the Rsis 

cried out— “Sita! We are also most eager to 
understand the characteristics of Karma Yoga, 
because, Oh Pious Sita, there is nothing 
concealed from you in this world, and you are 
the knower of all.” 
qd sata 

erat a aeata aan faoorfasrfaar 

WHATASE eS HUA: WHAT I 


1. Performance of a religious duties. 
2. Samkhya doctrine to the knowledge of spirit. 


206 


SUIS AA THAT WaT 
Haase Te A a AAMT: 1G 
Siita said-- Rsis! I repeat the Karma Yoga, as 

taught by Visnu. Karma Yoga is superior to a 
thousand Jnana Yogas, because Jnana Yoga 1s 
produced by Karma Yoga and from Jnana 
Yoga, one attains the final emancipation. The 
divine knowledge of Brahma springs from 
Karma Yoga and Jnana combined. Jnana Yoga 
in its turn does not arise without Karma Yoga. 


TAMU BRAT TATA SEAT 
adisfach ayerransta @ ager 


Consequently a person devoted to Karma 
Yoga attains to eternal Truth. The entire Veda 1s 
the fountain-head of all Dharma; so also the 
conduct of those good men who know the 
Vedas 1s also a root from which Dharma arises. 


ARTA TOA TTA AAT: | 
SA AAT YAY Ait WASSTTAT TC 
STATA TM ih Maa fetes: | 
SATATAY BAY ATSIMAMNTAAT AN 1 
Te Faaq auTaargafsdy a 
TUS URSA WANG A WaT oll 


The eight spiritual qualities must exist in 
pre-eminence, in order to produce Dharma:- 
They are, (1) Clemency to all living beings, (2) 
forbearance, (3 protection of him who seeks aid 
in distress, (4) Freedom from envy in the world, 
(5) external and internal purification, (6) to 
calmly meet sudden emergencies in all works, 
(7) not to exercise niggardliness in the case of 
the distressed and with regard to one's earnings, 
(8) not to hanker after the riches or the wives of 
others. 


ARTA: WaT: FAUT | alfa: 
sane FHA AAT ATH 11221! 


The above eight spiritual qualifications of 
the soul are enumerated by those learned in the 
Puranas and the possession of these qualities is 
essential which is, for Kriya Yoga, the means to 
the attainment of Jnana Yoga. 


Matsya Puranam 


aaant faa a arate Fad 
grated aayares aaa: 221 


None in this world attains Jnana without 
Karma Yoga; consequently, the duties enjoined 
by the Sruti and Smrti ought to be closely 
followed with diligence. 


cada PAU a ATEN A Aart 
PASSA MAMA MOTI! 23 UI 
Every day one ought to perform the five 
sacrifices, viz., (1) worshipping the Devas, (2) 


the Pitrs, (3) feeding men, (4) the lower 
creatures and (5) honouring the Rsis. 


TOTTI 


PRSICAC MCS ICRC TCAIES] 


The learned according to the prescribed 
rites, ought to (1) adore the Devas by 
performing sacrifices to the fire, (2) worship the 
Rsis by the recitation of the Vedas, (3) the Pitrs 
by Sraddha offering, (4) the men by showing 
hospitality to guests, (5) honour all lower living 
creatures by scattering food for them on the 
ground, as described in Balikarma. 


Uae fate aa: TaTATIATA 
HUSA VU Yeo HAH WAST I 


To ward off the five sins by which the 
animal life is accidentally destroyed by a house- 
holder, viz., (1) the threshing of the grain, (2) 
grinding of condiments and grain, (3) lighting 
the fire-place, (4) fetching water, by the water- 
pot, (5) sweeping by the broom; the above five 
sacrifices have been laid down. 


US TA Wee aA Tat 7 Teoh 
ACTTATSTATATAT UST Aa: Welfare: 1126 1 


By the above-mentioned five deeds the 
householder commits the five sins that are 
known as paficastind; and because of that he 
does not go to heaven. To destroy the above 
sins the performance of the five sacrifices are 
prescribed. 


Fehi TICs theaolr fit. 
"ae 


Chapter-52 


gifamireraset a a Meare: weathered: 
AEHSAT A WaT AAT UVa SHAT: 11 819 11 


The twenty-two as well as the eight 
Sarhnskaras have been described in_ the 
scriptures. But without the eight spiritual 
qualifications mentioned above, a man, even 
combined with Sarnskaras, can not gain 
emancipation. 


qaeTOa: Arad WArATL 
Maraurat fart Ader AATATIN ee 


Therefore, a man possessed of virtues of the 
self, ought to perform the rites prescribed in the 
Vedas and should support the cow and the 
Brahmanas with his wealth, and always do good 
to others and should be well-conducted. 


UI 


Waa eawTaHagaana TAIN Le I 


A man should worship Siva (Vasudeva), 


who is in the form of Brahma, Visnu, the Sun, | 


Rudra, and the Vasus, by means of cows, land, 
gold, cloth, incense, flower-garland and water. 


qaaratatiaargar a faaeat:| 
BSAA: VT: TEAS: AAA: | 
ATCA WTA PTA SANZ 
Tan fawey wrararusl Gears: 

TS A TAARTRCTS MT MUTETT: 
eenMTe ema FTA ATATETATNR BN 


Observing a fast and vows with devotion 
and void of jealousy, one should worship Siva 
(Vasudeva), according to the prescribed rites, 
and. Siva (Vasudeva) is supersensuous, 
peaceful, unmanifest, subtle, all-pervading, 
eternal. And the whole universe is His form. All 
the following Devas are his manifestations:- 
viz., Vasudeva, Lord of the universe, Brahma, 
Visnu, the adorable Sun, Siva, the eight Vasus, 
the eleven lords of hosts (eleven Rudras), the 


207 


Lord of the Lokapalas, manes and the Divine 
Mothers. 


SUT faye: WERT AAT: | 
TAMU TerrereHferatt: BAT VW 


These above-mentioned Devas are said to be 
the powers of God. These powers include all 
moveable and immoveable objects and belong 
to that Supreme Spirit who is the root of 
Brahma, Visnu, Siva and the Sun; and who is 
said to be the overlord of the Unmanifested 
(Prakrt1). 


TAO aT yar fraps feast aw 


AAT AAT ATT AATAT AI 2 3 1 
He who has adored all the four (Brahma, 
Strya, Visnu and Siva) without observing any 
difference among them, has worshipped, in fact, 
the whole universe, including the moveable and 
the immoveable. 
Telalal Ut ara Taroary Areata: | 
aaAMaAT: TT YT: WAT NVI 
He who is the supreme abode of Brahma and 
the rest, in whom all the three (Vedas) reside. 
He is Pisan, the personification of Vedas; and 
consequently he should be worshipped with 
great diligence. 
THM ErHea TaaTaeary 
SAAT AUSTATAT ATIVE 
These Deities, Brahma, should be 
worshipped by feeding the fire and the 
Brahmanas. Moreover, they should be adored 


by utterance of mantras, sacrifice,  giits, 
penances, ordinance of fasts, Japas and Homa. 


ofa FRaranrarreorey 
AeATA RT AAT 

facnsitaer Aer 7 fated 
WCE OL A MANE II 


For those who are devoted to the above- 


208 


described Kriya Yoga and who love the 
Vedanta, the Smrtis and the Sastras and who are 
afraid of sinful deeds there ts nothing in this 
world as well as in the next which is beyond 
their reach, 1.e., such people attain everything. 


TAOS STATA SEATS 1G 2 
a Be 
CHAPTER 53 
Descriptions of Puranas and merit of making 
the gift of a Purana 
Wa Ha: 
YUU ATA Ua TARA: HATA I 


SAMA J WMATA: 1 VI 
The Rsis said— O Sita! Be pleased to 
describe to us the number of the Puranas in due 
order and in detail and also about the giving of 

gifts and charity (Dana Dharma). 


Ud sate 


SENS TUOY YAU RA TAT 
UeaarT fear Hag ahrateaa 2 


Stta said— | shall tell you exactly what the 
Universal Soul, the ancient Male Lord, said to 
the King Vaivasvata Manu. 


Ue sdivd 
YUU AAMT WT Talo VIA 
sre Uae servers fart: 13 1 
Lord said to Manu! Brahma remembered in 
the beginning first the Puranas among all the 
Sastras. So Puranas are the first among the 


Sastras. Afterwards, Brahma uttered out the 
four Vedas from His four mouths. 


TUOMAS SAAT HOUTA AT 
Fava Yor yetcniemtaeaeqy 


There was only one Purana in the beginning 
of the Kalpa. It was alone the means of the 
accomplishment of the three ends of man 
(Dharma, Artha and Kama). And it was the only 


Matsya Puranam 


holy book consisting of thousand millions of 
stanzas. 


MARA: MATA YTOT TTT: | 
HIATT FRAT TOT AA FTC I 
MARE Heal eM Fy FA 
AYATTAOA BTL FIT ART 
TASTE FAT orcs CAT PAT 
Hey Saettens Parsaccnlfemfaerey Yo I 
Teaisa Uqeat Paro Fratera: | 

YOM Syeat I Aint Aeareat ea 


When all the regions perished by fire at the 
Great Dissolution, then I recited the four Vedas, 
with their six Angas as well as the Puranas, the 
manifold Nyayas, the Mim4arhsa andthe 
Dharmasastra. In the beginning of the new age, 
I immersed myself in the furious waters, at the 
time of dissolution of the universe and 
explained them fully to Brahma, Who in His 
turn revealed them to the Devas and the sages, 
after which they spread all over the world. 
Therefore, the Puranas became the source of all 
other Sastras. Later on, seeing the neglect of the 
Purana under the changed circumstances, | 
repromulgated them in every yuga, through my 
partial incarnation of Vydsa. In every Dvapara 
yuga, I compiled the Puranas to the extent of 
four lacs of slokas, and spread them in the 
world after dividing them into eighteen. Even 
now the bulk of the Purana extends to a hundred 
crore verses in the Deva loka. On the universe, 
however, its bulk is abridged only to 4 lakhs of 
Slokas, and is divided into eighteen Puranas. 


ATCA RAT OTE ATT AATAT: | 
TAOMSTHet YS ASAT ATTAIN 


Chapter-53 


Sita said~ Hear, O Rsis! The names of the 
different eighteen Puranas. I shall enumerate 
them to you, as they were described to Marici 
by Brahm. 

Tel Fears Yurot afar 
feiharan wear At Terese aaa 
AMSAT A Teles WetaAN 3 I 


The Brahma Purdna. Brahma Purana 
contains 13,000 slokas. One who writes and 
gives it away in charity, along with a cow and 
water, in the month of Vaisakha on the full- 
moon day, passes his days in Brahmaloka, in 
happiness. 


USl ATSIC ANS HAT YY 


The Padma Purdna. At the time when this 
universe came out of the cosmic waters, in the 
beginning of the Lotus Kalpa, and in the form 
of a golden lotus, then the Padma Purana was 
revealed, describing that creation, and it 1s 
called Padma Purana by the wise. And 1s 
consists of 55,000 slokas. 


AYU BT A ceegavrarrenary| 
was tifa frettenraternet MATH OG I 


One who gives away Padma Purana in 
charity, along with a golden lotus and sesamum, 
in the month of Jyestha, gets the benefit of 
performing an asvamedha sacrifice. 


AMsHcUTaAA THA WUT: | 
qaMe Mahaney aoe fags1126 1 


The Visnu Purdna. Similarly, the rules of 
virtue laid down by Pardsara, for the period 
when there was the Varaha incarnation of 
Visnu, in the beginning of Varaha Kalpa, form 
the Visnu Purana. 


ATS A Al eT aaraqy! 
tara fagarea a ve aft areory 


209 


TAantaeas AAU Fass: 11 V9 11 


That Purana contains 23,000 slokas and one 
who gives it away in charity, along with a cow 
and clarified butter, in the month of Asadhas, on 
the full-moon day, is purified of all sins and 
goes and rests in peace in the region of Varuna. 


Sarwar mpage 
aa Welaaley VANE aT! 
AUAMASAMUT AUT afer Ve I 
The Vayu Purdna. The rules of virtue laid 
down by Vayu, along with the glory of Rudra, 
in the Sveta-kalpa, is known as Vayaviya 
Purana. It contains 24,000 slokas. 


ava sant wits qeaqanraqy 
Tt CNTIath Belonra Hetrar 
Foraeies A UAT HET THAT 


One who gives it away in charity, along with 
a cow, jaggery and an ox, to a Brahmana, 
whose family is large, on the 15th day of light 
half of the month of Sravana, attains the region 
of Siva and resides there for a Kalpa. 


Gana Waa avd qafaea: | 

FATA TATA EAT ot 

AAT HOTT TAY SATA: | 
AGUS Ms TAMTAT TAA 2 2 
feta tet at carentaeaararry 
lara wracat a art arat Te 
ALTE AAT FU ATAITI? 211 


The Bhadgavata Purana. The Purana which 
begins with the description of the sacred 
Gayatri worship, and goes on to mention 
various Dharmas and which contains a narration 
of the destruction of the demon Vrtrdsura as 
well as an account of the famous men who 
flourished in the Sdrasvata Kalpa, is known as 
Bhagavata. One who writes Bhagavata and 
gives it away in charity, along with a golden 
lion, on the full-moon day, in the month of » 


210 


Bhadrapada, attains final emancipation. It 
contains 18,000 slokas. 


GASSES ANY TATecHcaexeaniur a 
URAMASATUT ATLSTT AEA ZA 
hat Teaat J AaTaTanraay 
went fafgarenft yarrghagerarqn 2 vit 


The Naradiya Puradna. The Naradiya 
Purana, containing 25,000 slokas is that in 
which Narada has described the Brhatakalpa 
and the Dharmas of the Brhatkalpa. One who 
gives away this Purana in charity, on the full- 
moon day of Asvin, along with a cow, attains 
bliss, and is liberated from the cycles of birth. 


SANTA MGT ATTA MTT 
AAA frog ear heyereremTATAT: 112 1 
Wave afd acre freer a 
Yt AAS MUSA eA? & 1 
The Markandeya Purdna. The Purana which 
begins with the story of the birds solving the 
difficulty of Dharma and Adharma and which 
the pious sages explain in an answer to the 
question of the sage (Jaimini), which has been 
described at great length by the sage 
Markandeya, at the request of the Rsis, and 
which contains 9,000 couplets, is known as 
Markandeya Purana. 
wfaferes a at candtautafraay 
SAA YOST SAT AAA WEPAAMATATN Ut 
One who writes this Purana and gives it 
away in charity, along with a golden elephant, 
on the full-moon day, in the month of K4rtika, 
attains the benefit of performing Pundarika 
sacrifice. 
Waa Hed FARAH A 
SPASM WIRTH TaTaATT Ie oI 
The Agni Purdna. The Purana, which 
commences with the description of the [sana 


Kalpa, and which was a path of virtue revealed 
to Agni by Vasistha, is known as the Agneya 


Matsya Puranam 


Purana, and contains 16,000 slokas. 


feifarat wet at carguoeraaady 
anigieal faa freerpaararqi2 8 


One who writes this Purana and gives it 
away in charity, along with a golden lotus, a 
cow and sesamum, on the full-moon day, in 
Margasird, attains the benefit of performing 
16,000 sacrifices. 


qed WSTaee AamTHeAMISA 

Q: WeIAL: ASA Tate Walaa} oN 

Taga ATereaAeI ATT: | 

TAHCUTAAIA ST ATA 

WA HAA YAM AUNTS 2 

ASM USAT TAT UT Me aA 

Maer waar afegreras 211 

The Bhavisya Purdna. The Purana in which 

Brahma has described the history of 
Aghorakalpa, the glory of the Sun, the existence 
of the Universe, the characteristics of the 


ageregate multitude to Manu, is known as the 
Bhavisya Purana, and contains 14,500 slokas. 


aS Tifa at zeneatotareat feracat: | 
TSHATAMA He AAT 3 I 


One who gives away this Purana in charity, 
free from the feeling of jealousy, on the full- 
moon day of Pausa, along with a pitcher of raw 
sugar, attains the benefit of performing the 
Agnistoma sacrifice. 


Waa HAA FAATANIAA Al 


AAU ASTD FOUTATRTRAT TTT 3 SI 

UA FAAS Beat afott WE: 

TERENAS ARIAT TOTTI & I 

The Brahmavaivarta Purdna. The Purana 

which commences with the description of 
Rathantara Kalpa, and in which Savarni Manu 
has described to Narada the glory of Krsna and 
the history of the Rathantara Kalpa, and in 
which there is also a constant allusion to 


Chapter-53 


Brahmavaraha, is known as Brahmavaivarta 
Purana and contains 18,000 slokas. 


Wut Talaad A cas a 
Uurareat water Taree Weta 3 & 1 


One who gives away this Brahmavativarta 
Purana in charity to a Brahmana, on an 
auspicious day, in the month of Magha, on the 
full-moon day, goes and enjoys in the region of 
Brahma. 


GAaergUAA: Wes Sal AST: | 
TOTTI aa aaey A113 91 


The Liiga Purdna. The Purana in which 
Siva explained the virtues of Agni and the four 
Vargas, viz., Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa, 
by manifesting Himself through the pillar of 
fire, which commences with the description of 
Agneya Kalpa, and which was uttered by 
Brahma Himself, is styled Linga Purana and it 
contains 11,000 slokas. One who gives away 
this Purana, along with sesamum and cow in 
charity, on the full-moon day, in the month of 
Phalguna, attains the form of and similarity with 
Siva. 

Heard Meech FUT Te LATTE 
TeHAMA A PA A: Trea 
faeeryanrarh Warf Feraarearayrqi3 cl 
UATE FMTAAT GT TA 
feropaistafed atu aarTetrerearaii3 8 


The Vardha Purana. The Purana in which 
Visnu has described the glories of the Great 
Boar to the goddess Earth, and which was 
recited in connection with the Manava Kalpa, 1s 
known as the Varaha Purana, and contains 
24,000 stanzas. 


WHA VARA HTS WPA: | 
AAMAS AUT ACTON STATA 0 1 


One who gives away this Purana in charity, 
along with a golden eagle (Garuda), cow and 
sesamum, on the full-moon day, in the month of 


211 


Caitra, to a Brahmana with a large family, 
reaches the region of Visnu by the favour of 
Varaha. 


lat Wes Hear freweqaarany! 

Worareat Hat ceeaTeroTl etter 

AUST WATT UTA AeTTETTIY II 

Wa TeMraraAa TTT: 

Hel AEH Fi Ulwarasrys I 

are AT YUUT a Menon Ter 

Aeantor wrt creas Wey TATIY 3H 

The Skanda Purdna. The Purana in which 

the six-faced Kartika has expressed the virtues 
of high-class men and also about the worship of 
Mahadeva, 1s known as Skanda Purana. It 
commences with the description of the 
Mahesvara Dharmas, as found in the Satpurusa 


Kalpa, and contains 81,100 slokas in this mortal 
region. 


Ulierer B At TaTgUyeTaAagy! 
Ve Venarenfa WA Bard Tats si 


One who gives away this Purana, along with 
a golden trident, after writing it out at the time 
of the Sun being in the 12th sign of the Zodiac 
(Pisces), goes to the region of Siva. 


fafa wera aqyG: | 

frentavareanted art Ufa y & I 

YUM Brae HAaHcTTT fyrar 

T: Wega SMES ARTA TENE I 

The Vamana Purana. The Purana in which 

the four-faced Brahma has related the glories of 
Trivikrama and which describes the three 
Vargas also to the Devas, after declaring the 
glory of Vamana, is known as the Vamana 
Purana, and contains 10,000 slokas. It describes 
the Kalpa, and is auspicious. Following Karma 
Kalpa, one who gives it away in charity, after 
writing it out neatly in the autumnal equinox, 
goes to the region of Visnu. 


212 


Aa IMMA Werear AT Taal 

TS SAAT HAT TATA: UVM 
STINE BNA: vara 

ALAM ATAU MAHA SHU CU 


The Kirma Purdna. The Purana in which 
Visnu has dwelt on the glories of the four 
Vargas (Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksa) in 
the form of a Kirma, in the Rasatala regions, 
before the sages, in connection with the story of 
Indradyumna, where Indra was also present, 
through his companion Indradyumna, is known 
as Kiirma Purana, and is related to Laksmi 
Kalpa. It contains 18,000 slokas. 


at Neat HA Sra AA-ary 
MACANEAT Weet ANTATAT: 11% FU 

One who gives it away in charity, along with 
a golden turtle, at the time of the equinox, gets 
the benefit of giving away thousands of cows. 


HAA GA HEU WARM WAST: | 
TRAST TAS AASTAUAT NY ot 
RTH TAT: | 
AAA Arte AAMT ATSTUG VU 


The Matsya Purana. The Purana in which 
the Lord has related the glory of Narasimha to 
Vaivasvata Manu, at the beginning of the 
Kalpa, with a view to propagate the Srutis, in 
the form of a fish, and in which the Lord has 
also described about the seven Kalpas, 1s 
known, O sages, as the Matsya Purana. It 
contains 14,000 slokas. 


faga sauces ear da anfaay 
a center tt aa vata arfaemis 211 


One who gives this Purana away in charity, 
along with a golden fish and a cow, at the time 
of the summer solstice,! acquires the benefit of 


1. The first pointof Aries or Libra into which the sun 
enters at the vernal or autumnal equinox, the 
equinoctical point. faqs - the shadow of the 


Matsya Puranam 


giving in gift the entire earth. 


Tel A Mas Hed faguslaresteay 
AAPA HOM WSS afeereras 3 
Tee Uh USAile Taal 
1 ; * ‘ * at fe re 
a fate ca Feat frac a afeaerry vu 
The Garuda Purana. The Purana in which 
Krsna has described the birth of Garuda out of 
the cosmic egg, in the Garuda Kalpa, is known 
as Garuda Purana, and contains 18,000 slokas. 
One who gives away this Purana in charity, 
along with a golden flamingo, attains a place in 
the region of Siva, endowed with highest 
perfection. 


TAN FAMVSATIAAA A TATA: | 

Ted HAMAS TAVS TAMMANY & 1 

MAT A HEU ad TA FereAT: | 

ATMS T TO A FANON AAaTSTAINY & UI 

The Brahmanda Purana. The Purana 

commencing with the glory of the cosmic egg, 
and in which Brahma has described the future 
Kalpas as well as the history of the Universe to 
the Devas, is known as the Brahmanda Purana, 
and contains 12,200 slokas. 

WM Caerad Tao Tay 

THAIASAST HATA AAT: 

SHAT Ye AT TelUHAMAANY lt 


One who gives away this Purana in charity, 
along with a yellow woollen garment and a 
golden cow at the time of Vyatipata, attains the 
benefit of a thousand Rayasitya sacrifices. 


Uae Wh SATAATa THAT 
afaqay frat a war get Fraferqy ci 


Vyasa, possessed of wonderful deeds, said 


shomon at noon. fa¥ae7q the day of the equinox. 
faya TG the equinoctical line fafa GAIA the sun's 
equinoctical pasage, V.S. Apte, pp. 524-525, MW p. 
998. 


Chapter-53 


these eighteen Puranas, to the extent of 4 lacs of 
Slokas, to my father and my father explained me 
and now I have described the same to you. 


Se wlantedaa alert aaoM 
Sarena Say yitantfenfaerey is 1 


The venerable sage has abridged the Puranas 
for the sake of the good of this world; 
otherwise, the entire Purana existing in the 
Devaloka, contains a hundred crore slokas. 


SUMNeTHaLA ola A Gyfaftadra: 

Wel YUUr Bate Terra 

TMS Aa Aha SreAAIg ot 

Upapuranas— (1) Narasimha-— | shall now 

tell you about the difference between the 
Puranas that exist in the universe and the 
secondary Puranas. There is a mention of 
Narasimha in the Padma Purana, and the 18,000 
Slokas (dealing with the history of Narasimha) 


forms the Narsirhha Purana (which is one of the 
secondary Puranas). 


TAM GA Wate aida aaa 
FAUT Ae TAA ALAA VI 


(2) Nandi upapurdna— Where Kartika has 
described the glory of the great goddess Nanda 
(the portion dealing with that), is known as the 
Nandi Purana. 


aa Wad Weel Wasa ara 
Weat Arete Aaya: Ng UH 
(3) Samba upapurdna— That Purana in 
which Lord Siva, taking His most noble 
consort, Gauri, as his audience, has related 


about the future, as found in the Bhavisya | 


Purana and also is styled by the sages as Samba 
Purana. 


WU BETA Yeo fagaen:| 
aed UTAATTE YMUTATAAT 
CaM A AAT UALTETTNE 311 
(4) Aditya upapurdna— The learned who 


213 


know, say that the recitation of the list of the 
Puranas dealing with the ancient Kalpa, 1s 
conducive to glory, fame and long life. This is 
the order of the Puranas, as described above. 
Similarly, the Aditya Upapurana is also 
mentioned therein. 


HAMA YASUO Aaiayad 
fanried farerarteaa farraqie x11 


O Rsis! The secondary Puranas have been 
deduced from the original eighteen Puranas. 


USS YOY serena Va 
aay wires aon Warafor aT 
AVATAR Ma YO USTTOTTNG & It 
The following are the five characteristics of 
the Puranas : They describe (1) the creation of 
the universe, (2) its genealogy and dissolution, 
(3) the dynasties, (4) the Manvantaras, (5) the 
dynastic chronicles. 
TAAMgTH Sg Weed FATT TI 
VARA A TATU THAT SHE & 1 
The Puranas, with these five characteristics, 
sing the glory of Brahma, Visnu, the Sun and 
Rudra, as well as they describe also the creation 
and dissolution of the Earth. 


THUS HMB Wea ara sled 
Taeara FUOlG Ages A AHTTNE II 
The four Vargas (Dharma, Artha, Kama and 
Moksa) have also been described in all the 


Puranas, along with evil consequences 
following from sin. 


AaaHy YUTOLY AeA ST: 
Tay BT Meas Tet fagsug ci 
TEE Aes ATTY feat a 
aay area: freon a Frets 11 


1. Like the eighteen Puranas, Upapuranas are also in 


eighteen numbers, But this Purana gives the names 
of only five Upapuranas. 


214 


In the Sattvika Puranas, there is largely a 
mention of Hari's glory. In the Rajas Puranas 
there is the greater mention of Brahma's glory. 
In the Tamasika Puranas, there is a mention of 
Siva and Agni's glory. In all kinds of Puranas, 
of all the three attributes, the glory of Sarasvati 
and the pitrs have been described. 


ALM WMO Heal Aaa yA: | 
UMMA wa aeustety 
aaa Aah sardalws EMA '9 o 11 
The great sage Vyasa, after compiling the 18 
Puranas, indulged in the composition of the 
story of Mahabharata, in order to magnify their 
bulk, which was an addition to the Puranas, by 


another lakh of slokas. And in which he has 
condensed the sense of the Vedas. 


areata T Aah TATA 
TAOS ifsd Tear yrcaHfewtaercAii'9 V1 


The glorious story of Ramayana, sung by the 
sage Valmiki, at the instance of Brahma, also 
extends to a hundred crore of slokas. 


Wed Aerta aa aed YA: 
Aechiehat A Steg THAT ATLA 
Ud AUNT: VHA TAM Wel Waifs 9 IH 
Brahma narrated the original Ramayana to 
Narada; the latter revealed it to Valmiki, who 
gave it to the world, and which is a means of 
giving Dharma, Kama and Artha. And in which 


way the famous epic exists in the world, and 
contains 5,25,000 slokas. 


Taareay Hou YOON fagaren: 
SMO RCO RIO MIRLUICIUCE Tf 
YT; USRHUPATSISTT A Ahr UTA MATING 3 1 
The learned know of the Puranas of the 
ancient Kalpa. The recitation of this list of the 
Puranas is conducive to prosperity, fame and 


long life. He who reads or listens to it, gets 
wealth, reputation, long life and emancipation. 


Matsya Puranam 
fae farorafracest a 
se 0 caeafad a 
Treat frag Wet A Tao 
This list is the most sacred. It 1s the giver of 
fame and the destroyer of sins. It is very dear to 


the pitrs and is prized by the Devas as a nectar. 
It is external and destroyer of sin of all men. 


Sfa stared weraaet uroraaforeneeanrd Aa 
FACT STSTAT ASAT: 1G 31 


KERR 


CHAPTER 34 


About the ordinance of Naksatra-purusa 
ad Jara 

at Wasa creased: 

TUIATAATHIM AAS kt 

Wea Hale ASA AT NAA: 

GMa WAV aH ATTA 2 


Siita said, Rsis! I shall now relate to you in 
full about the gifts (Dana Dharma), vows 
(Vrata) and fasts, as explained by the Lord in 
the form of fish. This narration 1s in the form of 
a dialogue between the great Lord Siva and 
wise Narada and also a mention of trivarga, 
(Dharma, Kama and Artha). I shall relate 
exactly as the dialogue took place. 


STATA TANS: YT 
PASI STs et STAI BI 


In ancient times, Narada questioned the Lord 
Siva, who resides on the summit of Kailaga, has 
three eyes, and is the enemy and destroyer of 
Cupid. 


ANG Jara 
Wade Telawagaa| 


ITT D' Tels Te jpegs, I] 


dame fawtal TARA: FA AIT SI 


Chapter-54 


aret at fara wezporaTeraaAT 
SUrarae ta fepfargatrererar qn & 1 


The Sage Narada said— “O Adorable God of 
gods! O Ruler of Brahma, Visnu and Indra! 
please tell me how one may become your 
devotee or a devotee of Visnu and so attain 
wealth, life, health, beauty, luck and prosperity? 
You also tell me which Vrata is the giver of 
gradual emancipation to married women or 
widows, possessing all good and auspicious 
qualities?” 

Sat Jara 
VAGUE VA Tederafenaay 
AMAA THA Aa YO] ANG It 
ARATE ATT Act ATTICA 
ICCC IFCUE IRIE CAREC (RCL 
wit argqeaer Yeettfay arta 
AAMT AAA Heal TAOTATAATT A CH 

Lord Siva said— Narada! You have put a 
very useful question for the benefit of all. Hear 
about the vow which is beneficial to widows. 
There is religious observance (Vrata) which is 
known as Naksatrapurusa Vrata, which should 
be devoutly kept. It (Nakstra—purusa Vrata) is 
worship of Narayana in the figure which should 
be made according to rule, having feet, etc., and 
the names of Visnu should be recited. The 
devotee should arrange an image of the Lord 
Vasudeva and invite a Brahmana and should 
then commence to worship it from the month of 


Caitra, at the time when the moon ts in the 
Mila, etc. 


qatrreeytig’ 2 

WS A: WATT TTI Qo 
ale AA: Mises fawn: 

MAA PHATHTY! 
qardaaadelea U 

UPd A: SAlMATTSATAN BAN 


RASTUMNY A WaT 
TATA PATNA WRATH LI 
We attary a Wr. 
Tee aT Tee 
sitorgacntlateenra 


At FAME ASTI THAT: 1 V3 tt 


Sat T Gel WITTEATA 
Tashrawa sft Hewt: | 


Paaragyferyaarm: 


AAT TT AAISTATTTAT: YI 


year Aah 
TAHA AAMT: | 
RA Tet Vota 
RABY HVS STAT: 1 AA 
a aura THishrgEN 
TAT TAU WAH 
ye Fe aaa 
TA FA A UTTTTH VE I 


AM AA: HUTA 


Wo FET ArHOr FU got 
TASeY Waa WaT ATAT 


TTT TST 


215 


216 


ATG TITS Her 
TAIse_ FT we faghorman ee 


He should recite the following mantras on 
the various limbs, beginning from the feet and 
ending with the hair of the figure :— 

(1) Namo Visvddhardya— on the two feet, 
sacred to Mila asterism. 

(2) Namo anantdya— on the two ankles of 
the leg, sacred to Rohini asterism. 

(3) Namo Varaddya- on the two shanks, 
from the ankle to the knee, as well as the two 
knees, sacred to the Asvini asterism. 

(4) Namah Sivaya— on the two thighs, sacred 
to the Parvasadha and Uttarasadha. 

(5) Namah Pafcasardya— on the organ of 
generation, sacred to Pirva-phalguni and 
Uttaraphalguni. 

(6) Namah Sarngadhardya- on the waist, 
where Visnu should be worshipped, sacred to 
Krttika asterism. 

(7) Namah Kesinistidandya— on the two 
sides of the ribs, sacred to Pirvabhadrapada and 
Uttarabhadrapada. 

(8) Namah Ddmodardya~ on the two 
arm-—pits, sacred to Revati asterism. 

(9) Namah Mddhavaya- on the chest, sacred 
to Anuradha asterism. 

(10) Namah Aghaughavidhvamsakardya- on 
the back, sacred to Dhanistha asterism. 

(11) Namah Srisankhacakrasigadadharaya- 
on the four arms, sacred to Visakha asterism. 

(12) Namah Madhustidandya- on the hands, 
sacred to Hasta asterism. 

(13) Namah Sdémndmadhisdya— on the tips 
of the finger, sacred to Punarvasu. 

(14) Namah Matsydaya— Then the nails of the 
Fish (Matsya) should be worshipped, sacred to 
Aslesa asterism. No mantra in the original. 

(15) Namah Kadrmdya Kurmasya Pddan 
Saranam vrajami-— on the throat, and the feet of 
the Tortoise (Kirma) sacred to Jyesthd. 


Matsya Puranam 


(16) Namah Vardadhdya— on the two ears, 
sacred to Sravand asterism and the Boar 
(Varaha). 

(17) Namah Nrsimhadya Ddanavastidandya- 
on the mouth, sacred to Pusyd asterism— 
Man-lion. 

(18) Namah Kdranavadmandya-— on the fore 
of the teeth, sacred to Svati asterism and 
Vamana (Dvari) avatara. 

(19) Namah Bhargavanandandya- on the 
gullet of the mouth, sacred to Satabhisa asterism 
and Parasu Rama. 


(20) Namah Radmadya- in the nose sacred to 
Magha asterism and Raghunandana Rama. 

(21) Namah Rdmaya Vighirnitaksdya-— in 
the eyes, sacred to Mrgasira asterism and Bala 
Rama. 

FHA VAI TWH eee 

fearg aN WM: 
forishryst acuity faenn- 

Tasty fast aleaafaatn 2¢ It 

(22) Namah Buddhaya Santaya- on the 
forehead, sacred to Citra asterism and Buddha. 


(23) Namah Visvesvara Kalkiriipine— on the 
head, sacred to Bharani asterism and Kalki. 


Aa fEAGPTAT: sil Qolt 
(24) Namah Haraye— on the hair, sacred to 
Ardra asterism and Purusottama. 


On the day of the fast worthy Brahmanas 
should be honoured. 


Chapter-54 


wera Yor sere Fafasr- 
Teal gtdeaTaT Weal 
Wea Taare 
Geht WEMETG FATA 2 VI 
On the completion of the Vrata, the devotee 
should give away a beautiful and big golden 
mace, studded with pearls and other jewels, 
cows garments, bedstead, to a pious Brahmana, 


versed in the Samaveda. The mace should be 
placed in a pitcher of water. 


aalfed afenfataetted oa 
TEM gTaeema Aa 
Tala A: Whee 
feUITATAT SRE VSN 


Besides all that, the devotee should give 
away other things worthy of being offered to a 
Brahmana, after which he should devoutly pray 
to the Lord to fulfil his desires in the words: 
“Manoratham nah Saphalikurusva hiranya 
garbhdacyutarudrarippin.” O You having the 
form of Brahma Visnu and Siva, fulfill all my 
cherished desires. 


Aes AAAS Brat Tea 
Wear FT zarataM aeMefaatsstarq 2 ¥ I 
The image of Visnu along with that of 
Laksmi, should be given away to the Brahmana 
and his wife, with a peaceful mind. So also 


should be given a bedstead, made of wood, 
without any joints. 


aan 4 faa gird aad saferq 

TM FRU HMA AAT APTN 24 It 
UI A MAA WA Aa YS VATE 

VA ATA HON TTT TAT 2G A 


The devotee should recite the following:— 
“As the worshippers of Visnu never get any 
sufferings or sin, so let me get beauty and health 
as well as highest devotion towards KeSava; as 
the house of the Lord is never devoid of 


217 


Laksmi, so my house, may never be bereft of 
my consort in all my life; O Krsna.” 

ud fae aad Tea 

Taare fanaa frastaq 29 

YMadeerayl Aaa: | 

art aah farmed frastaqi 2c 

After that, the Brahmana versed in 

astronomy, should be dismissed by giving away 
the image of the naksatra purusa, along with 
Clothes, garland, sandal paste. The worshipper 
should abstain from salt and oily food during all 
the twenty-seven days of his observance of the 


Vrata, and should feed others according to his 
means, without giving way to miserliness. 


stat qaageaqurey fatraccaay 

Rararmrarcnta fawyetes Weta 28 tl 

reecntes fafateg args at FT 

eT aT qed STATA 3 0 1 

The worshipper of the naksatrapurusa attains 

all his desires, and at the end passes his days in 
the region of Visnu with happiness. He washes 
off all his sins as well as all the sins of his 


deceased ancestors committed in his present and 
past lives. 


sented I WATT 3 I 


The married woman or the man who reads 
or hears the story of this observance with 
devotion, will free herself or himself from all 
the sins by hearing and reading it. This 
Observance confers many blessings on the 
worshippers. 


Sia Sree Teg aaaTENad ATA 
Ad WAT TISEATT 114 ¥ 


KK* 


218 
CHAPTER 55 
The merits of the vow of Aditya-Sayana 
Mie Sate 


SWATHS Tea Herta: | 
TRI Wal fahas TPT TT v1 


Narada said, “O Lord! If a man who, owing 
to poor health or otherwise, is not in a position 
to go through the ordinance of fasting just 
explained by you, what should he do?” 


Sat Jared 
SUAS ARHMA Ah ATATET 
afardd WaT TIAA Wedd 21 


The Lord said- One who is incompetent to 
keep up the fast should take his meals in the 
night which will also give him everlasting great 
benefit. 


SMITA AT SaaS TAA 

Ay AAA G YAO: WaRTTH 3 

Tel FAT THAT ft Aa 

AT MY Venlta eas: A ArccentTae vt 

SOT STAT eA He TTT 

Waleat foraters AT wept: 1G It 

Hear about the Vrata, called Aditya Sayana 

Sankararcana observance, as described by the 
learned in the Puranas, as well as the method of 
worshipping Sankara, on the conjunction of the 
moon with particular asterism. That day 1s most 
auspicious which falls on a Sunday, when there 
is Sankranti and the 7th day of the dark 
fortnight and when the moon is in the asterism 
Hasta. On that day, the images of Uma and 
Mahesvara should be worshipped, the former 


after reciting the names of the God, Sun and the 
latter along with the invisible form of Siva. 


sHad Teale + el Grad safer 
TAMAS Te WY AWAIT GN 


There 1s absolutely no difference between 
Siva and Sun, and consequently, the devotee, 


Matsya Puranam 


when worshipping the Siva uses the mantras 


addressed to the Sun. They are as follows :— 


ee BT Fala Way Wel- 

aaate faarg A TERS 

ara faynang A AeA oh 
TATU TASHA 

qaga wa WeaMel: | 
TIBNAAETA AAISHY Te- 

firsra Brae chet A THN CI 

With (1) Sarydya namah, let him adore the 
feet of the image, along with Hasta asterism; 

With (2) Arkdya namah, the ankles, with 
Citra asterism; 

With (3) Purusottamdya namah, the Shanks, 
along with Svati asterism; 

With (4) Dhdtre namah, the region of the 
knees, along with Visakha asterism; 

With (5) Sahasra Bhdnave namah, the two 
thighs should be worshipped along with 
Anuradha asterism; 

With (6) Anangdya namah, the generative 
organ, along with Jyestha asterism; 

With (7) Indrdya Somaya namah, the waist, 
along with Mila asterism; 


Vaasa A AY AY AM: VAGUE AT 

Hania a sect a geil ws afrerg fads 
aa; Wet AAAS Hemera aT ATT 
TaRTNRUTEY UT Ag AHIVSHTA WAI Rol 


With (8) Tvastre Saptaturamgamdya namah, 
the navel, along with Parva and Uttara Asadha 
asterism; 

With (9) Tiksndmsave namah, the arm-pits, 
along with Sravana asterism; 


With (10) Vikartandya namah, on the back, — 
with the asterism Dhanistha; | 


With (11) Dhvdntavindsandya namah, in the — 
eyes, with the Satabhisa asterism; | 


Chapter-55 


With (12) Candakardya namah; on the 
arms, along with Pirva and Uttarabhadrapada 
asterism; 


AAA BiEt A 
aoe fat tacig 
TST Yoaht TeNPIATy 
TUS VAVFTATAI 2M 
HORA ATTY HIS 
fearerreaataartran 
Panta say 
AOAAATS THETA 211 


With (13) Sdmnadmadhisadya namah, the two 
hands, along with Revati asterism; 


With (14) Saptvdsvadhurandhardya namah, 
the nails, along with Asvini asterism; 


With (15) Kathoradhdmne namah, on the 
throat, along with Bharani asterism; 


With (16) Divadkardya namah, on the neck, 
with the Krttika asterism; 


With (17) Ambujesaya namah, on the lips, 
with the Rohini asterism; 


UTA STAT BATE: 
ATTA SCY ATT 
TH: Oar Tt Wgt a 
AAT I TATA AU 23 
Mea eae 
Geasctanl Aaya 
arase wife fagetwrare 
TETY HUifafer ATT ee I 
yary wareorearaara 
SATO ASAT STAT: 
TATA Yat B 
fesrcata a yeran 94 11 
With (18) Haraye namah, on the teeth, with 
Mrgasira asterism: 
With (19) Savitre namah, the tongue, along 
with Ardra asterism; 


219 


With (20) Samkardya namah, in the nose, 
along with Punarvasu asterism; 


With (21) Ambhoruvallabhadya namah, on 
the forehead, along with Pusya asterism; 


With (22) Vedasariradharine namah, on the 
crown of the head, along with the asterism 
Aslesa; 

With (23) Vibudhapriydya namah, the ears, 
along with Magha asterism; 

With (24) Gobradhmanavandandya namah, 
the eyes, along with Pirvaphalguni asterism; 

With (25) Visvesvardya namah, the 
eye—-brows, along with the Uttara phalguni 
asterism. 


FASE TSA ATT- 
HUTA SATATA! 
TATU RTA 
Ferrera TA: F¥aTAH 2& I 


Afterwards the devotee should pray to Siva: 
“O Lord! armed with a noose, a hook, a trident, 
a lotus, a human skull; and the wearer of the 
snake and the moon and the bow, I salute you. 
O Lord! the destructor of Gaja, Demons, Cupid 
and Pura and Andhaka, etc., I salute you.” 


Sei areata ysT Fre 
ferpatrate feratsferqer: | 
THATAAATAA CTI ch 
| 11 291 


The worshipper should also worship the 
different weapons (mentioned above) and 
should salute the Lord by bowing down his 
head, with the mantra Visvesvardya namah, and 
every day abstain from oil, flesh, green 
vegetables and salt, and eat moderately. 


seta fit aaift grat cenqaaah 
WMATA SMTA SATA FAT VC I 
Waray wea fama afer Faeaq 
BAY AAG AUNT alae AAT 281 
After thus taking his meals in the night, the 


220 


devotee, on the Punarvasu asterism day, should 
put some rice, along with some ghrta (clarified 
butter), in a vessel made of fig—leaves. And 
should then give it away to the Brahmana, after 
putting some gold in it. Then, on the seventh 
day of the fast, he should give to the Brahmana 
a couple of raiments. 


TEN F MUM UU ATaTfeae 
TAOTAATARAA TSATTASHA: 1 2 ol 

On the day of the fourteenth repast after the 
fast, the worshipper should feed the Brahmanas 
with raw-sugar, milk and clarified butter. 

HA F HS Wea waforay 

YR Tear VaNTTee TT 2 aN 

wai fare ara faegarratsstary 

PU IEC ACEI CIT ECOR CCRT EET 

UTA OTSA TUT 

THOT Uae Wea: 3 

Tea faery AIH TORT 

aie TAA Yee A TAAATN 2 VI 

tergt Gey warat areca 

SATAN Yate A ATCT AT 24 


And after that, he should get a golden lotus, 
eight fingers in length, made with eight leaves 
and studded with gems, and bedecking it with 
nice cloth, should give it away to a Brahmana, 
along with bedsheet, pillow, utensils, shoes, 
camara, a piece of mattress, looking~—glass, 


garments, fruits, incense, bedstead, a cow with 
its horns covered with gold and hoofs with 
silver, along with her calf and a vessel of 
bell-metal for milching the cow. The cow must 


necessarily be given away on that occasion. 


Way Ta Aaa 
STAT FEAT FAT TA TAT A Ty PATE I 
Then the devotee should pray to the Sun: 


“God! as Your house is not bereft of lustre, 
fortune and prosperity, similarly let mine be 


Matsya Puranam 


also in the enjoyment of same blessings.” 
WMT 7 eal: Ha ex fag: 
AAT ASA HAG AAA TTT 29 
“Lord! who else is there, except yourself, to 
grant me prosperity; consequently, be pleased to 


safely and comfortably see me through this 
mundane sea of trials and troubles.” 


ad: Weferottaer witracs faraastaq 
weanae aad faerer wat AAT CI 


After that prayer, the devotee should 
circumambulate and salute the Deity, and then 
dismiss the Brahmana and send to his house all 
the things given in charity. None of them should 
be kept in the house of the worshipper. 


Aafegtera 7 atterenra 
heer fare 
Va sarreate- 
dana Frerateent faerti 28 
Nothing should be said about this sacred 
observance to a blasphemer, to a person of evil 
conduct, to a hypocrite, or to a false reasoner, 


for they are liable to profane it. Doig so, would 
lead to sin. 


THT SATS I Yeast rae 
Be Nermacatrarronmeant aefaret aaratil 3 ot 
The self-controlled and the devout are 
worthy of being told about the mystery of this 
observance. Those learned in the Vedas assert 
that it is the destroyer of all sins and giver of all 
peace and happiness to men. 


T TATA aetfagen: 

UMS: ATO 
Tafa Wi Ta wlage:a 

UM AT AT Greets HATA 3 VN 


Those women and men who observe this 
ordinance with devotion, are never bereft 0 
their sons and other dear ones. They attain the 


Chapter-56 


Divine felicity, and are free from the curse of 
disease, grief and suffering. 


oe ahaa FIST 

aa FACT YES 
THAME ATT- 

Tart Ua A Ayrars Tea 3 Vt 


In early time this ordinance was at first 
observed by Vasistha, Arjuna, Kubera and 
Indra. The mere recitation of this liberates one 
from all sins. 


feanradie FI: Hela 33 


One who reads or hears about this Ravi 
Sayana observance, endears himself to Indra 
and helps his deceased manes to go to heaven 
from hell. | 


ofa sired werguet anfacayread aH 
UATE: 1G & UI 


KR 


CHAPTER 56 


Krsnastami Vrata and the merits of 
adoration of Siva in different months 


FOTIA AA Aer AAUTIMOT HAT 
midi watt wa: Car fagredsi en 
The adorable Siva said— I shall now explain 
to you about the Krsnastami Vrata (ordinance) 


which is the destroyer of all evils. This fast 
gives victory, peace and emancipation to men. 


ugi anifenta yy dishingrag 
Te wet eG Nees AT GTA UI 
Sankara should be worshipped on the eighth 


day of the dark fortnight in the month of 
Margasirsa, Sambhu, on the corresponding day 


221 


of Pausa, Mahesvara in Magha, Mahadeva in 
Phalguna. 


wy Ua fered agave AAT: 
WE upafe areas SadaqI 3 1 
WaT Wel RY a TEM 
STS TT aa a af v 


Sthanu in Caitra, Siva in Vaisakha, Pasupati 
in Jyestha, Ugra in Asadha, Sarva in Sravana, 
Trayambaka in Bhadra, Hara in the month of 
ASvina and [sana in Kartika. 

FOTTMY UalY Yr: Waar 
or — GH 


THE acide Aa 


TTA Tl 
PITT A MAYA Vane aa ATI KI 


These worships should be performed every 
month, on all the eight days of the dark 
fortnight. The devotee should worship the 
Brahmanas, and should observe a fast after 
giving away cow, land, gold and cloth to them, 
especially to the devotees of Siva. In the night 
time, Siva should be worshipped with 
Paficagavya! and with urine of the cow, 
clarified-butter, cow's milk, sesamum, barley, 
Kusa grass, water, the water of the washing of 
the cows’ horns, the leaves of Sirisa, arka 
(Calatropis gigantea), leaves of Bilva (aegle 
marmelos) and curds. 


sya U ae Ualgeat waa al 
Uae Wage a fagh UT UeWA: II 91 
AMTMTATSMNA BVA BAA SAAT 
Whee Sra qaaay WAI ¢ 1 
The worshipper should feat the learned and 


the pious, from Margasirsa after an interval of 
two months, under the following trees:— aSvatha 


1. Pancagavaya— Five products of the cow, taken 
collectively; i.e., milk, curd, clarified butter, urine 
and cowdung. 


222 


(the holy fig tree), vata (the banyan tree), 
udumbara (Ficus glomerata), plaksa (the rose- 
apple), palasa (butea frondosa), jambu (eugenia 
jambolana); and he should use the tooth—brush 
made of these trees to cleanse his teeth on those 
days. 


Cay SNA A HOT WM AMAIA! 
SENATATN CAA PATA 8 
An offering of arghya water and black cloth 

and black cow should be made to the Deity, and 
at the conclusion of the fast, curds, grain, 
canopy, flags and camara should be given away 
in charity. 

F — a 

Ta: FON: Yaot a araira fataentt a 

AMA TATA ATT MHA: I ol 


Brahmanas should be given a vase of water 
along with five gems, and a black cow, gold and 
different kinds of cloths. If the worshipper be 
not in a position to give away all that, he should 
give a cow at all events. 


4 fanned Hala He-crerrarcyand| 
POUTEMAUAS AACA ATT | 
yaramafaat ea: fererettes Teter Ve 


Close-fistedness should not be exercised in 
charity, for it leads to sin. One who observes the 
Krsnastami fast according to the rules laid 
down, enjoys happiness after being venerated 
by the Devas, for 307 kalpas, in the region of 
Siva. 

sia saree MeTgUTU Hest ATH 
HATA PTT SEATTT: 11 & & Mt 


k * * 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 37 


Rohinicandra-sayana Vrata, The rules of 
performing different vows 


ARE sara 
dalntranentwate- 
GH: TART AAT: TAT 
Tees I AAT 
ad wares afegatetii ei 


Narada said— O Lord! with moon as your 
crest-jewel, pray tell me all about the ordinance, 
the observance of which begets long life, health, 
fecundity of the race, kingdom, in several 
successive lives.” 


aM USMS WAH TAHA 
Tees Ta seit sega fag: 2 
The Lord Siva said~ O Narada! I have 

already explained to you about the ordinance 
that confers everlasting blessing on the devotee 
and I shall now also explain to you more clearly 
about it, as described by those learned in the 
Puranas. 


Tea VR ATT Ta 


TT SU 


os ILE FILA. bs J 


Rohinicandra Sayanavrat 1s most sacred. 
The devotee should worship the image of 
Narayana, after reciting the names of the moon 
in observing it. 

Tal Baler Yar Wataesh saa 
Ia TAAaAA WoaTA waa v1 
Te GA AL: Haley AAT: | 
STARA Y AURA FANG 

When the full moon day falls on Monday, or 
when the Rohini asterism falls on the full moon 
day; the learned should bathe with pancagavya 


and mustard, and after that, should recite 
“Apyaya” Mantra for a hundred and eight times. 


Chapter-57 


USAT UAT MAT TTT STAM Tat 
aaa arena fase a Aa AWN II 


The Sidra also may observe this Vrata with 
extreme devotion, freeing himself from the 
company of ali unbelievers, and should 
devoutly salute the Gods, Moon and Visnu with 
the following mantra, instead of the Vedic one : 
somaya varada yatha visnave ca namo namah. 


HIM, CAYSITAMAY A AeTy i 
RAHAT AAT HEATH 9 


After finishing his bath and the recitation 
(japa) of the mantra, he should return to his 
house and worship Madhusiidana, by offering 
fruits and flowers and singing the names of 
Moon (Soma), as given below. 


Aaa MRNA AAT UTet- 
SMe BW ATE 
Seg ale Were 
AMAA S TATA SA CI 
After reciting (1) Somaya Santaya namah, 
should be worshipped the feet (of the Divine 
image) and after reciting (2) Anantadhamne 
namah, should be worshipped the shanks and 
knees, after reciting (3) Jalodardya namah, the 


two thighs, and after reciting (4) Ananta- 
bhahave namah, the organ of generation. 


Tat AT: BME 
ale: WMS Versa 
qe Were 
THT: PMSA TASATTTATU 8 
After reciting (5) Ka@mdya sukhapraddya 
namah, the waist of the moon should be 
worshipped. After reciting (6) Amrtodardya 
namah, the stomach, after reciting (7) 
Sasdnkdya namah, the navel should be 
worshipped. 
THIS UM Fa Ts 
Sal TEATS, USAT 


223 


ere TPATaS TTT 
WBt HASAIATATA 20 1 

After reciting (8) Candrdya naman, the 
mouth should be worshipped, after reciting (9) 
Dvijddhipdya namah, the teeth, after reciting, 
(10) Candramase namah, the face (hdsyam) 
after reciting (11) Kumudvantavana priydya 
namah, the lips. 


ART FATS SaaS Tat a 
Saga Ua aaa ATT PITH VN 


After reciting (12) Vanausadhindsdya 
namah, the nose, after reciting (13) 
Anandabhiitdya namah, the brows, after reciting 
(14) Indivarasyadmakardaya namah, the eyes like 
lotus. 


qT: WEATaea 
auigd Sayer 
cerefaret wefeatrara 
HM: ATMA: TITAN 2 
After reciting (15) Samastadhvaravanditaya 
namah and Daityanisidandya namah, the two 
ears, after reciting (16) Udabhipriyadya namah, 


the forehead, and after reciting (17) 
Susumndadhipataye namah, the hair. 


ft: PNET AA WUM- 
fassrrata aa: face 
Valier Ueto A cet: 
ATTA TAT SATA 23 1 
cat a aa YT 


224 


mara: Araya 
YHA TOAST V4 Ut 


After reciting (18) Sasamkaya namah, the 
head of Murari, after reciting (19) Visesvardya 
namah, the coronet (of the Divine image), 
Rohini should also be worshipped. The devotee, 
by praying : “O Rohini, the beloved of the Lord, 
also known under the name of Laksmi, O 
blessed one,” should, offer sweet~smelling 
flowers, incense and eatables, etc., and sleep on 
the floor in course of the night on getting up 
early in the morning, and after taking his bath, 
he should offer a vase of water, gold and 
eatables to the Brahmana, with the mantra 
namah papavindésandya and then hear the 
recitation of some sacred book (Itihasa), for a 
couple of muhirtas (96 minutes), after taking 
twenty-eight morsels of food with clarified 
butter, milk and urine of the cow, but devoid of 
flesh and salt. 


MaAMfey AAT BUSA Aaland 
UA Tale: RATA TAAR TAN Vo 


Then he should worship the Moon-like 
Visnu with Kadamba, (Naulea Parvifora) blue- 
lotus, Ketaki (Pandanus Osoratissims), jasmine, 
lotus, rose, fresh kubja flawers, Sindhuvara, 
Mallika (Jasminum Savebac) white karavira and 
campaka (Michelia Champaca). Hari should be 
worshipped with all the various kinds of flowers 
that bloom in various months, from the 
beginning of the month of Sravana. 


|. poral TECTIA STM S HNN: TRRGhCINIGC ice 


Matsya Puranam 


Ud Tat Bagurea fateraaz: | 
Sard MA SENS SUT ATATTN V2 


In this way, the devotee should go on with 
the worship, according to the prescribed rites till 
the end of the year, after which he should give 
away a bedstead, along with a mirror and other 
things in charity. 


Ufenirergtied arisen Array 

TR: VST: HLA Whew MATT VM 
Trea Pavey 
eae Ua: Area aay 
SETA Yale MY HATATT TN 2 oN 


Then he should make an image of Rohini. 
and the Moon in gold. The image of the latter 
should be six fingers in length and that of the 
former four fingers. And he should give them 
away to a good Brahmana, along with eight 
white pearls, white cloths, milk, some utensil of 
bell, metal, rice, raw-—sugar, sugar-—cane and 
fruits. 


Saas Faure Wt Wea: waaay 
TAA FF TAT VS DW PUTTIN 2 ei 
He should also give away after that, a white 
cow, with its horns plaited with gold and hoofs 
covered with silver and its back covered with a 
cloth, along with utensils and a couch. 


THM gMeT ITAA TUNA 
Vase fESt Waa sft BETA 22M 
Afterwards, the worshipper should bedeck 
the Brahmana along with his consort with fine 
clothes, and should look upon him as the moon 
in company of Rohini. 
AT FT Wheel Hegre Tee TeThAT 
RR FT TETAS eT UAT V3 
And he should then pray, “O Lord! as 


Rohini shines in your house, so, let my house, 
too, be full of lustre. 


Chapter-58 


aM AN Maat WTAPAA he: | 
afnenea aaa Tareq F Aa Vv 


O Lord Moon! As you bring happiness and 
emancipation to all, be merciful enough to 
shower the same blessings on me; and let my 
devotion in you always remain firm.” 


Sit Parity Uae UE 
BURVATIAT AAT SMA ATT ATTN 24 I 


“QO Lord Moon, grant me health and 
prosperity. I am afraid of this world, and desire 
bliss at your hands.” 


Sena faut a Aaat aes FA 
AAU MAHATMA 
aacleararetia fagayea F Ferdi 2e it 


This ordinance 1s very dear to the Pitrs, and 
the observer of it at.ains the region of the moon, 
after being the lord of the three world as for 307 
Kalpas and then gets final rest. 


At at Teoh aT A TATA 
aife aca Tara hrgesTAN VN 


The women folk, observing this fast, beget 
the same fruits, and are liberated from the cycle 
of births. 


Bit watt yontt at a set 
TEMAaasei FATA 
afaate a carta atste yilt- 
HAATAT: ULITTASAT: CI 
One who reads or listens to this form of 


ordinance, gets pure intellect and goes to 
heaven where he is venerated by the Devas. 


ofa SRS Targa UiguikersyEad AA 
CATA SEATAT 211 4 Al 


* ER 


225 


CHAPTER 58 


The rules of consecration of newly built 
tanks, wells, pools, temples etc. 


aa sara 
WMT faa Waa: | 
ASMA ATTY Alera AI VM 
fata yeahh cae canary a 
Aa Ueda AT Sat aT Alay WaT I 


Siita said, “The King Vaivasvata Manu 


‘asked the Lord, who was lying in the water in 


the form of fish, to explain to him when should 
the sacrifice be performed and what feasts 
should be employed therein, and what kind of 
altar should be made for the occasion to 
consecrate a newly built tank, well and pool, 
grove and temple. 


afd: ciel: WAATEA Wa a 
FOU Hitt Vea BaMTea Aaa 3M 


He also asked the Lord to explain what fees 
to the officiating priest, and sacred offerings to 
the Deity should then be made. What are the 
proper time and place for this observance, and 
what preceptor should be appointed? 


Ace] sald 

TT Tea ASrMey at feater: 

qoiftafreraiss waa acaniaht: isi 

wer wet et Weed BrTaUT 

quests famed Aca AVTATATT IN Ut 

The Lord Matsya said- Hear, O Mighty- 

armed, the rules about tanks, etc., as laid down 
in the Itihasa and the Puranas, by knowers of 
the Veda. At the end of the summer solstice, the 
man performing the ceremony should get the 
preparatory rites to the observance performed in 


an auspicious bright fortnight, after consulting a 
Brahmana. 


WYSSAAU SM ASTTEA TATA: | 
Jeet Yt sat grat aPYUrq « I 


226 


After that, he should get a nice Vedi (square 
altar) measuring four-hands in length, with four 
openings made, near the tank, to be consecrated, 
in the north-eastern direction. 


TM WSMSet: AVS BYE: 

aerey Uftal Wal Tea eae: 1 9 

Taq AA aT Wa Aateea TAA 
faarerarar At: ATIC MATS fet aeTATI ¢ Uh 


A pandala (mandapa), measuring sixteen 
hands, with four openings should also be made, 
and then around the altar should be made pits 
(gartas), five, seven or nine, but not more in 
number, one cubit deep and three circles round 
them. The receptacle (your) of the altar should 
be one span long and six or seven fingers 
broad. ' 


Tay da Wa Wheavaitearaet: | 
AAA TAM: WY]: VANHATATAT 8 


The gartas or pits should be seven in 
number, and the circles should be three inches 
(parvas i.e. digits) in height. Flags and buntings 
of the same colour should be on all sides. 


IMS ATIAS MHA Tl 
WUSTes Wafest WTA AMATI Pot 


In all the four directions of the mandapa, 
arches of the twigs of the Asvatha, Udumbara, 
Plaksa and Vata trees, should be made. 

WARATS BAT ARITA 
AB J ATH: HA TAIT SAUTE: 11 VAN 


Then eight Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas, 


should be employed as sacrificial priests (hota), . 


eight as warders and another eight as Japakas. 
adeeranon Wafatahararsea: | 
HAMAAUTH: FUT: TATeaArTA | VW 


1. Measure of length (defined either as a long span 
between the extended thumb and little finger, or as 
the distance between the wrist and the tip of the 
fingers, and said to = 12 Angulas or about 9. inches)- 
Sanskrit Eng. Dictionary, by Monier Williams. 


Matsya Puranam 


The Brahmana who has all the virtues in 
him, who is able to restrain his passions and 
knows the mantras, is calm and belongs to a 
good family, should be chosen to perform the 
functions of the priest (Purohita). 


mferTey HTM ARTA A 
AT ATT YY TTT BfreTAH V3 


Water-pot and materials of sacrifice should 
be placed at each of the gartas (pits), after 
which a fan and a white c4mara should be 
placed on a big plate of copper. 


aaa HAM: Tea: wficaarye 
area: wiereraraqasr Freer: 11 vi 


Afterwards, the family guru (Acarya) should 
scatter on the ground the different kinds of 
boiled rice and barley for presentation to the 
Gods, after reciting the Vedic text. 


sicmrat qu: wareigataritad: | 
TAAATATON AT ATT ATTA 8G 


The sacrificial posts should be made of the 
glamorous fig, measuring three cubits, with 
closed fist, in length, of the hand of the 
sacrificer. It is also auspicious to get them made 
of the size of the worshipper. 


SUTTS TAT: rat: Weaferyehet eteraT: | 

HUSA BT Say HAHA AN LEN 

qMeTed: Waar araita fataen a 

Wade At Parana fe TA: 

SEMA HAAN MATT VI 

Twenty-five’ Rtvijas, arrayed in ornaments 

of gold, should be presented with golden 
earrings, armlets, rings and different kinds of 
cloths, without making any difference between 
them. But the family (Acdarya) should be 


worshipped with double the number of things 
offered to the Rtviyjas. After that, the worshipper 


2. The eight Hotas, eight Dvdrap4las, eight Japakas and 


one preist. 


Chapter-58 


should give away in charity the things liked by 
him the best, along with a bedstead. 


Maulana Tard WIS 
MT Hes HTAaATTT: FIAT: | 
Vantaa acaanreraa fagriadii ve it 


The turtle and the crocodile should be made 
of gold, the fish and the unvenomous water- 
snake should be of silver, the frog and the crab 
of copper and the Sisumara (porpoise) fish of 
iron. All these things should be prepared from 
before, O Lord of men. 


PRM: YUMA: | 
Racha SMTA ATITTT: 1 LS 
TAA; Wee: YAU at: 
UBT ATA MavEIPTAUST AN 2 0 It 


Then the worshipper (yajamana), bathed in 
the water of different herbs, according to the 
Vedic injunctions, by those Veda knowing 
priests, should enter the sacred pavilion, 
wearing a garland of white flowers, white 
garments and smeared with white sandal-paste, 
through the western arch, in company of his 
consort, sons and grandsons. 


aa Aserpes NOT FTA A 
HAM Se HAAgU Arafaqi 2 2 


Then the learned preist should draw up a 
ring with powders of five colours by uttering 
auspicious sound, while the music of drums 1s 
playing. 

Wet wey TPM AqyaA 
Aq BULA Ft HEA TMT 2 I 
Then a circle should be made, with sixteen 


spokes in it, and in the centre a figure of a 
beautiful lotus of four leaves should be made. 


SATA AeA Aetetanatl aAT: | 
G aaarad: Warafafey fret: 11 2 311 


Afterwards, images of the planets and the 
regents of the world should be established in the 


22] 


proper directions on the different altars, after 
reciting the Vedic hymns (prescribed for the 
occasion). 


HAs WAT SHV TATA: | 
Tana a fore faery are WTTATTT VI 


Then, images of the turtle and other water 
animals should be established in the middle, 
after reciting the hymns of Varuna (the God of 
waters), and afterwards images of the Deities, 
Brahma, Siva and Visnu should be established. 


fanaa a fase aHuenataat Aa 
Was Tac MATT AA ATA TG I 
After establishing the images of Ganesa, 
Laksmi and Ambika and for the peace of the 


Universe, the images of the group of the Bhitas 
should be established. 


TRIGA HAS Faery 
PMATATM ASAT: UAT 2 EI 
Then the pitchers full of water should be 


covered with clothes, incensed with the odour 
of flowers and fruits. 


WOT BOTTA: | 
Useaat AqarerareeangaTad | 219 


After garlanding the warders and putting 
sandal paste on them, the Acarya priest should 
ask the warders (the Dvd4rapala priests) by 
saying “pathadhvam” to chant the Veda. 


aegat Yad: Wren afar ayfaet 
arant UIA aggatO waraOTt Vi 


In the east should be seated the Vahavrcas 
(the two priests versed in the Rgveda), in the 
south the two Dvéarapalas (learned in_ the 
Yajurveda), in the west the two Dvéarapalas 
(learned in the Samaveda) and in the north, 
similarly, the two Dvarapalas (learned in the 
Atharvaveda). 


Sea aferorat aararsr sofa 
THA AAAs TN 2H 


a a hessemesh bch om aN e 1 


228 


SHER fiBeatate area 
Vamfera araalaeMis T Wafaqii 3 ott 


The worshipper should seat himself on the 
south side, facing the north and the Acarya 
should ask the eight (Hota) priests “Yajadhvam” 
to commence the sacrifice; and to the skillful 
Japakas he should say “tisthadvam” (to sit 
down). Thus directing them, the Acarya, versed 
in the sacred text, should sprinkle water silently 
round the fire without uttering any nitual 
formula, 


Weagreuhiarna a after 
eh sited AGU Wa: 113 QI 


Sacrificial fuel and clarified butter should be 
offered to the Fire, after reciting the hymns of 
Varuna, and the sacrificing priests should also 
be made to do the same all round. 


TEA fafa ATT TI 
Teal Henge fafsaferartarn 3 21 


Afterwards, according to the prescribed 
rites, offerings should be made to the planets, 
Indra, Isvara, Maruts, Lokapdlas and 
Visvakarma. 

Thy U Te UT WAN Yager 

HUY: UR Teh Taal Ga: FIST II 
Wea We a ahs a Hos Baaay 
ahah wares afer ayfag: 3 vi 


Then the knowers of the Rgveda, seated in 
the east, should separately mutter the formulae 
of Réatristkta, Rudrastkta, the auspicious 
Pavamanasikta and Purusastkta; in the same 
way the Dvarapdlas, learned in the Yajurveda, 
seated in the south, should separately mutter the 
formulae of Indra, Rudra, Soma, Kismanda, 
Fire (Jatavedas) and the Sun. 

ated Ulead YH Alaut weafear 
Wyre Uy et wet Sagas aN 34 I 
ameet Feraa Whe WUT 


Matsya Puranam 


Tat ad WU Hd | wei aaa 
TMAQ: MT WH VT BITAT STAT: 11 3G 
Similarly, the Dvdrapalas, the chanters of 


the Samaveda, seated in the west, should chant 
the hymns of Vairajya, Paurusasikta, Suvarna, 


Rudra Sarnhitaé, Saisava,  Paficanidhana, 
Gayatrisikta, Jyestha, Sama, Vamadevya, 
Brhatasama, Raurava, Rathantara, Kd€nva, 


Gavam vratam, Raksoghna and Vayas. 
SUSI: Maes USS TAT 
SOU Ta SaneA THT MTT ZO 
Afterwards, the learned (Dvarapalas) in the 
Atharvaveda, seated in the north, meditating on 


Varuna, should devoutly recite the mantras of 
the Santikas and the Paustikas. 


aera Walaa Hrarkranrary| 


A SCI e i fe 


FEMeRT HG Wearreaea gan! 3 <I 


After performing the above-mentioned 
ceremonies on the first day, adhivasana! should 
be done, and then the earth of the following 
places, viz., Elephant ward, stable, well, lane, 
pool, cattle-shed, ant-hill, the place where four 
streets meet, should be put into the pitchers full 
of water (placed in the mandapa). 


Treat a ata Wt WH TI 
SU TS ed Weer ara 3 8 
Then the worshipper should bathe in the 
water, incensed with the following things: the 
yellow pigment white mustard, sandal paste and 


resin together with paficagavya (five products of 
the cow). 


werd JF VeMtate sear fae: 

va aunfrarena faterqt SATMI ¥ oll 
aad: Wale faa VSNASaA Meat TWAT 
TSUNA: WeMIATaEY AT TA: | 


1. Preliminary rite of consecrating an idol before it is 
placed or a pupil before he is initiated. 


Chapter-58 


Weerarsear Fefagrerer feria cerTi & gh 
Having thus finished the preliminary rites 
performed with the utterance of great mantras, 
with regard to each ceremony, the worshipper 
should pass the night in sleep. In the morning, 


the worshipper should give away 100 or 68 or 
50 or 36 or 25 cows to the Brahmanas. 


TA: MAA WA A ATT 
aewesy mada fafad: GAs 
araleipal Frat Her MAA 
ATT TAT Sa Seo feargTTT s 3 


Later on, on some auspicious day and hour, 
as calculated by the astrologer (Samavatsara) 
the worshipper should give away after making 
her pass through the water of the pond, etc., to 
be consecrated, a cow decked with gold, to the 
Brahmana versed in the Sdamaveda, after 
chanting the text of the Vedas accompanied 
with music. 


Wales Bani warranted! 

dat fafarar waracadita Bast: 

gai Ugfaetfancacarsant: it ¥¥ i 

Veranda SATA aATA I 

SHUG ey HET F AAT SG I 

Afterwards, the worshipper should put, five 

different kinds of gems on a plate of gold, and 
give away to the Brahmana, and should place 
the alligator, fish etc., in a pond. Then he should 
worship the above mentioned cow standing in 
water, held by the Brahmanas versed in all the 
four Vedas, with the Ganga water, curd and rice 


and should afterwards make it swim in the 
water facing towards the north. 


sao Vea PAA A 

smifesta TAT arcana A AUSTIN YEN 
Yaa AAA Alot SEM AAA: | 
Weal atet Seat AAT: ON 


229 


The cow should then be bathed by reciting 
the text of the Atharvaveda etc., such as 
punarameti, as well as 4pohistha, and then the 
worshipper should return to the circle of priests. 
Then the tank should be worshipped and bali 
offerings should be made on four sides of It. 
Afterwards, homa sacrifice should be performed 
for four days. 


Uqalead aed Car aaa AT: 
SUT TAM THAT AAU CI 
At the end of these ceremonies the Caturthi- 
karma should be performed, when the 
worshipper should give daksina to the 


Brahmanas, according to his means and should 
mutter mantras of Varuna. 


HA T AAUTATUT AAITATT AT 
Rhavaeg TA sa wUST faywsieyy: | 
SUG A Meat a wer Fraeaq vei 


Then the entire materials employed in the 
performance of the sacrifice, including the 
pandala, should be equally distributed to the 
Rtvijas and the golden bedstead should be 
conferred on the chief priest. 


dd: Gea famonawars yd aa 
Geta AA Farrer fasta: 
Wady YATUtY ASAT & ot 


Afterwards, the worshipper should feast 
either 1,000, 800, 50 or 20 Brahmanas, 
according to his means, which is the way of 
consecrating the tank, as described in the 
Puranas. 


auaag Wary qa Yenloiy a 
We we fares: wirarg ata TN eI 


And, similarly, it has been laid down for the 
consecration of wells, pools, small tanks etc. 


Tarr faye: ATsrarekeryAg 
aa aHTags fale: TaIEyaT 
Ae eraHeAM ferrersaE TOMS VU 


1¢ 
1¢e 


1¢ 
1¢ 
1¢ 
IC 


St 
1S, 
of 
he 


he 


230 


As to the consecration of palaces, groves, 
lands and buildings, the ritual formulae are 
somewhat different from the consecration of 
tanks. Lord Brahma has prescribed these rites 
for the wealthy. Forty people, in less favourable 
circumstances, should follow the Ek4gni rites, 
without giving way to miserliness. 


mage fad at aie BTA 
Wtehle FUR TARTS eAeTeT THT 
ATAU SAT FMT TTT G 3 


The consecration of tanks in the rainy 
seasons and autumn begets the fruit of 
Agnistoma sacrifice!, and of the Vajapeya and 
Atiratra sacrifice in the seasons of Hemanta 
(winter season) and Sisira (spring season). 

TIUTAA We TATA Peay 
Teste afer att cerqenfaforerd & ¥ 

The consecration in the vernal season 

(Vasanta) begets the benefit of Asvamedha 


sacrifice, and of the Rajastiya in the summer 
season. 


B Alt SAAT Ye: 
Hears Wed ANG 


The Lord has said that one who performs the 
ceremonies mentioned above, with the mind 
purified by scriptures and with full faith in 
them, goes to the region of Siva and resides in 
heaven for many ages. 


SHAT TETAS] 
TRA UTR T TT: | 
Gea fawn: wa We Aq 
MTA TSMC TANG GI 
Afterwards, that man goes and enjoys in 
1. Agnistoma = a protracted ceremony, extending over 


several days in spring. 
2. Vajapeya = a particular sacrifice. 


Matsya Puranam 


higher regions, and remaining there for the full 
life of Brahma, to the extent of two Pardardhas, 
gets emancipation and enters into the highest 
stage with Visnu. And all this he gets through 
the merit acquired by the performance of this 
ceremony. 


afa stare HeTgaTUT 
SIMIC SOIREM ES IN ID AILWAl 


Kk * 


CHAPTER 59 
The rites of dedicating trees and planting 
oToves 
RA dd: 
Trent fate wa aarafgenteel 
faferat at aed wreurerat ait: 11201 
a a cleat: Ware AWAeMt aes 7: 
THe AMA WI aes AMAA I 


The Rsis asked— O Sita! Tell us in detail the 
rites which the learned should observe in 
dedicating and consecrating a tree, and also the — 
region in which he would go after his death and 
also tell us it's benefits. 


ad sara 

Treat fats aed atareryfie 
ASMMaaraaararel STEHT 3 I 
BaZUSTA MATA aT: | 


THUGS at Sal 

Sita — I shall explain to you, O Lord of the 
world, the rites of dedicating as well as those 
prescribed for the laying out groves. One should 
follow the rites, as dictated for the consecration 


of a tank and should then plant the trees; the 


NiTiline.e uel 
* he. # 


Rtvijas, the pavilion and the Acaryas should be 


arranged in the same way, and the Brahmanas 
should be adored with sandal paste. 


aaiegqed: frnaprdafayieary 
GaP STATA ATI & A 


Afterwards, the trees should be bathed with 


Chapter-S9 


the water, mingled with all the prescribed 
medicinal herbs, and then, garlanding them, 
they should be wrapped with cloth. 


TAT Mav aes Aaat Hose! 
St UT Saed ARAMA & I 


Then with a needle of gold, the Karnavedha! 
ceremony should be performed on the tree and 
similarly, with the same golden stick the eyes of 
the tree should be painted with black pigment. 


Hell VA UBT a areca BIA 
Wah Magan set aAafaraadqii 9 
After that, seven or eight fruits made of gold 


or silver of all kinds of trees should be placed 
upon the altars. 


GUST NYA: ATATTUTATASAA| 
TARA, HA TEATRO 


The incense of the resin (guggula) 1s 
considered best on such an occasion. Copper 
pitchers, full of water, should be placed and 
worshipped with cloth and incense etc., after 
placing corn on them. 


STAY FAG TATA AAT 
CAM Feat Aaa AN 8 
qd cranemitesert fasted: | 
areas fagiaetn: arat fate: gon 


Then the pitchers containing gold, inside 
them, should be placed close to the trees and 
sacrifice should be made after which offerings 
should be made to Indra, Lokapalas, trees etc. 
according to the rites prescribed by the learned 
Brahmanas. 


TA: SAMA Bau HATTONT 
Tae eet Gant yeraratanfery 
VARA GAAS AAS 82 


After that a milch cow, covered with a piece 
of white cloth and wearing gold ornaments and 


1. The piercing of the ear with needle to put on earring. 


231 


having horns covered with gold, should be let 
loose between the trees planted, with her face 
turned towards the north. A milking vessel of 
bell-metal should also be included among other 
things to be given away with the cow. 


TASHAHAAN ATMA 

BRIT: UAT arene 

Ata HM: TUT Haag: 11 LM 
Ct: YROMATATRENTAMIS PTAA 
TMMfaMad: Tat seas eae: 23 I 
Sng: Whenua: | 

ara: rater qareeaTatedh: | 
AO MT Tee aeTa TAA 2 I 


Then the trees should be watered with (the 
water contained in) the copper pitchers, after 
reciting the Mantras of the Rk, Yaju and Sama, 
addressed to Varuna, accompanied by music 
and song. Afterwards the worshipper should 
bathe with water, taken from the above pitchers, 
and wear white garments, and then with a 
peaceful mind should confer on the officiating 
priests the cows, the riches, bedsteads, sacred 
threads, bracelets, rings of gold, . clothes, 
sandals, along with other things, and feed them 
on milk for four days. 


aay WI: Bal aa: Henfacrera 
Tea: WremTGaste TAT: | 
STOTT ST UATE ATT TRAN gk 


Libations consisting of mustard, barley and 
black sesamum and wood of butea frondosa, 
should be offered in the Fire, and on the fourth 
day, festivities should be observed and Daksina 
should be given to the Brahmanas, according to 
the means of the worshipper. 


qafesad fafa aden 
ara feat seme, whoraes ferasarerqi 26 1 


The worshipper should also give away with 
an easy mind other things which he likes, and 
should salute and dismiss the chief priest 


232 


(Acarya), after giving him twice as much as he 
gave to other officiating priests. 


arr fafeat aq saleaairaa ger: 
AAAS Het AAA PTA 291 
BAHT Uees Gat WeaTaar: | 

Biste wat Tage arafesyTATaTN eC I 
TATA MATA ag Tay 

went fatgarcnltt Yaa hTgereTT ke 
YT Se HOAfat Maga Aa: | 

Asta ampfara Sagacity WeAAI 2 ott 


The wise who observes these rites in 
dedicating the plantation of trees, obtains all his 
desires and attains to endless felicity. One who 
plants even one tree, O King! According to the 
prescribed rites, resides in heaven for 30,000 
years of Indra. The planter of trees, according to 
the prescribed rites, liberates the same number 
of his past and future manes and attains the 
highest perfection and is never re-born on earth. 
One who hears or relates to others these 
prescribed ceremonies goes to the region of 
Brahma and is venerated by the Devas. 


Sfa stared wargTUl qaterat 
ATM HYAA AA SEATAT: 1G 2H 
CHAPTER 60 


About the ordinance of Saubhagya-sayana 
Ace] Sad 

aaa WaeaiA aaa 

Seay ATT A eTUfaNt fags en 


The Lord Fish said— I shall now relate to 
you the Saubhagya Sayana Vrata (ordinance), 
the giver of all bliss which is known to the 
Pauranikas. 


We ee ay Ya: TaMeTCy 
A TAA IATA TAT 
AGUS TANT FONT: RATATAT 2 It 


Matsya Puranam 


Tt: Hl Tea YA: Whaat FT: 

SATA He WATT SAT AA 3 

AA A AGATA HACIA NTA: 

= 5 safentfaeteom 

TIAA SAMA Sas TAI YN 

When the regions Bhth, Bhuvah, Svar and 

Maha, etc. were consumed, then the good 
fortune of all creatures went and centered itself 
in the heart of the Lord Visnu, in Vaikuntha 
heaven. Again, long time after, with the object 
of creating the world. O King! The plastic 
material, consisting of Pradhana (root matter), 
and conscious souls called Purusas, was 
enveloped with self consciousness (ahankara), 
when there arose a rivalry between Brahma and 
Krsna, regarding the fashioning of the future 
world. Then (from their clashing wills), a 
terrifying flame of fire arose in the form of a 
linga (pillar) by the warmth of which the good 
luck of the world resting in the heart of Hari 
came out (in the form of perspiration). 


aa wet ante fae: arate 
THEM Aa Aa MTNA AMAT 4 A 
Sera AaTeTGATT aA 
SAO UAHA AAUCTAU ATTA & It 
That good fortune emerging from the heart 
of Visnu, passed through the Intermediate plane 
(antariksa) before it could reach the earth in 
liquid form, and Daksa the wise son of Brahma, 
drank up this giver of beauty and loveliness. 
et AA HeTA AT WA: 
HE ALTA ATSB AAATATIN 9 It 
dt SAT ARTA: AA ATS aA: 
saa Taste OUTST TATA © It 
e ‘it aunt sant aM 
aU MEA Ta AMAA EAA IH eI 
Then Daksa got mighty power and great 
lusture, and the remainder of (the good luck) 


Chapter-60 


which reached the Earth was divided into eight 
parts. From them were produced the seven 
givers of prosperity to all men, namely (1) 
sugarcanes, the kings of all Juices Rasarajarh (2) 
Nispava, coriander seed (?), (3) the cuminseed 
(Kalayjira), (4) the clarified butter (ghrta), (5) 
cow's milk (Ksira), (6) saffron (Kusumbha), (7) 
safflower (Kumkuma). So also the common salt 
was produced as the eight, and these are called 
Saubhagya Astaka, the eight blessings. 


Ue ACTAGAMT ArTATAfaeT YA: 
Shoal ATTA AT Aca AMAT Yo tt 
AAA Mfereaectern a Bea 


AHERPAUATT TAY FATT VAN 

Ol eat Vara yreny hac 

ATA YA aT At aT fH 7 farater 221 

That which was drunk by Daksa, the son of 

Brahma, the knower of Yoga, became his 
daughter, known as Sati (Parvati). Parvati, 
owing to Her matchless beauty, came to be 
known as Lalita; and that paragon of beauty 
was afterwards married by the Lord Siva. The 
very Sati is called the Goddess who gives bliss 
(Saubhagyamay!), and also prosperity and 
emancipation. Those men and women who 
worship Her with devotion may obtain 


everything. 

wyearel 
SIA TAT WEAN TATA 
ea WaT Aq Aa A Aaa Asi 


Manu said— O Lord! explain to me the ways 
of worshipping that sublime Goddess, the 
upholder of the Universe, and tell me 
completely the ritual of Her worship. 


Weel Sa 

AATAMAM AE FHA SATA 
Yaar Jats fret: SM Tara evi 
REPT BU eat feiet FeRmTEAAT et 
TRI 


OPaas | a or? ew thl 
a 


233 


vila 


TATU Ace aad : ll VE A 
se na oo 4 
AUN Acide TATA TAT 219 11 


The Lord Fish said— The devotee should 
bathe himself with sesamum in the forenoon, on 
the third day of the lunar fortnight, in the month 
of Caitra, during the vernal season; for, on that 
day, the Goddess was united to Siva, the soul of 
the Universe, with martial rites. On that day, 
Siva, along with His consort, Parvati, should be 
worshipped with flowers, fruits, incense, lamps 
and offerings of foods, and the image (of Gauri) 
should be bathed with Paficagavya and scented 
waters, after which Gauri and Sankara should 
be worshipped as follows. 


TASH Weems J Wet om: feast Ti 
Forarafet a cated Seared Tema AT | eC 
Fryoratt ears Tart THARP TT 

frat wand a fawaraft art 

Gates efceagra aaTS ATS TA eI 


By pronouncing (1) Pdtaldyai namah, the 
feet of the Devi should be worshipped, and 
those of Siva should be worshipped with the 
mantra Sivdyanamah. Their ankles should be 
worshipped after pronouncing (2) Sivayanamah 
and Jaydyainamah; after saluting Rudra with 
(3) Zrgundyanamah and the Goddess, with 
Bhavanyai namah, their shanks should be 
worshipped. After saluting Gauri with (5) 
Rudresvardyai namah, Siva and with Vijayaya 
namah, their knees should be worshipped. After 
saluting Siva with (6) Harikesdyanamah and 
Gauri with Varade namah (the giver of boons), 
the thighs should be worshipped. 


SMa UO cle CoM: vrata vary 
aga a plead Wey YETTA 2 ott 


Their waist should be worshipped, after 
saluting the goddess with (7) [sdyai namah, | 


234 


salute the goddess, Isa. He should salute 
Sankara with Sankardya namah. The abdomen 
should be worshipped by saying (8) Kotavai 
namah, 1 salute the goddess Kotavi, and by 
Saline namah, 1 salute the wielder of the 
trident.” 

Hert AHH At anf 

Aa AA VAMTVTY A HASTA! 2 vit 

The stomach of the Goddess, after saying (9) 

Margaldyai namastubhyam, “| salute Mangala” 
(the giver of bliss); the stomach of Siva, after 
pronouncing Sivdya namah “I salute Siva;” the 
breasts of the Goddess, after saying (10) Isanyai 
namah, “I salute [sani;” and of the God by 
saying Sarvdtmane namah, { salute the All- 
Soul. 


fora Sarery aagaTs aust 
faqrena faded BEAT 22M 


The throat of the Lord, after saying (11) 
Veddtmane namah,“1 salute the soul of the 
Vedas;” the throat of the Goddess, after saying 
Rudranyai namah, “| salute Rudrani,” their 
hands, after pronouncing (12) Tripuraghndya 
namah, “T salute the god, the destroyer of the 
demon Tripura, and the goddess with Anantayai 


namah, “I salute the Infinite.” 
freA A Bt Ae Hleaewa 
arate Veo Marra 
TART TAT ST Yaa eT TAH! 2 3 It 


Their arms, after pronouncing (13) 
Trilocandya namah, “T salute the three-eyed, 
Hara; and the goddess by Kdldnalapriydyai 
namah, “I salute the beloved of the Lord,” the 
omaments, after saying (14) Saubhdgya- 
bhavandya namah,” their mouths, after reciting 
(15) “Svahdsvadhdyai namah, for the goddess 
and Isvaraya namah, for the god.” 


mmarated qwararet a afar 
Wma FR AGIA CATSTAN 2 YI 
The lips of the Goddess, the giver of 


Matsya Pura4nam 


prosperity, should be worshipped by reciting 
(16) Asokamadhuvdsinyai namah and of the 
god by Sivdya namah. The cheeks of the Lord 
should be worshipped by saying (17) Sthdnave 
namah and of the goddess by saying 
Candramukhapriydyai namah. 


AUIS SAI TET AAS ATTEN 
Ay Sea Seas ctferafat Gayatn 24 1 


The nose of the Lord should be worshipped 
by reciting (18) Ardhandrisdya namah and of 
the goddess by Asitdngyai namah. The eye- 
brows of the Lord of the world should be 
worshipped by reciting (19) Namah Ugraya, 
and of the goddess by Lalitayai namah. 


Wala Wea araet J AACA 
Ta: steasarared fyracag rete 
qramaetqus fot: Wale AT VE I 


The tresses of Siva, after reciting (20) 
Sarvaya namah, “I salute sarva,” the destructor 
of Pura, the tresses of the hair of the Goddess, 
after saying Vadsavyai namah, “| salute Vasavi, 
the hair of the god, after reciting (21) namah 
Srikantha nathaya and of the goddess with the 
same mantra. The head of the goddess, after 
pronouncing (22) Bhimograsamaripinyai, “| 
salute Bhimograsamartpini’ and of the God by 
Sarvdtmane namah. 


frame fafrardhirarsa tara: | 
291} 


TAT FT Ha Heras AaTAA| 
Sat Tae TSA 1 2 It 


After thus worshipping Siva, the devotee 
should place before Him the Saubhagya Astaka, 
the eight blessings consisting of the following 
eight things : clarified butter (ghee) nispava (’), 
saffron, cow's milk, cummseed, sugarcane 
(rasaraja), salt and coriander seed. All these 
eight things are considered as boons, and 
therefore their mixture is called Saubhagya 
Astaka. 


MITT o> Tlicicn o> 
ae 


Chapter-60 


Ua fae acadasa: frat: 77:1 
Tal FRI MT TATA ATTN 28 I 


After offering these things to Siva and 
Parvati, the devotee should wash the horns of 
the cow in the night and drink the same and 
sleep on the floor. 

TA: WA J AM HST: BT: 
aay faa AAT AATATT 11 3 0 lt 

Getting up in the morning, the devotee 
should bathe, and after turning his rosary, 
should offer clothes, garlands, ornaments, to the 
Brahmana and to his Consort. 


ATTRA TAA Ta | 
Waar aera areora Fraeaqir 3 gu 


The devotee should get a pair of golden feet 
made and give them away, along with the eight 
blessings to the Brahmana, after invoking 
blessing to the Goddess Lalité, saying 
“priyatamatra Lalita.” 


Ud Haat Aaya Way TA 
cried fara Ra Maa ATCT AT: 13 21 
Similarly, for a year, the worship should be 
performed according to the prescribed rites, on 


each third day of the moon, by those who desire 
all blessings. 


Mgt aa a fagraisa Frater a 

Tee MAMTA AM WAT VAN 33M 
WE WenaHgy faraat yet ary 

Ta att Movs ATT A HMA 3 VI 
airemprgat TIT aries YuaTTTET 

TAT Ara | MNT WY ATTA TAT 84 
Te FOfe TSM T TAP 

citer fasta HRT TAT HyNT FHawi 3 & 1 
aTgeat qa WT Use HAT Tel 

SMO ataret J Wreaaatr Hivaqii 391 


The following special articles of diet and 
mantra of gift (Dana) should be observed; hear 


235 


them from me. The devotee should drink the 
washing of the cow's horns in the month of 
Caitra, eat cowdung in the month of Vaisakha. 
The flower of Manda4ra tree in the month of 
Jyestha, the leaves of the wood apple 
(Bilvapatra) in the month of Asddha, curds in 
the month of Sravana, the water sprinkled with 
the Kusa grass in the month of Bhadra. Milk in 
A§Svina, clarified butter, mixed with curd, in 
Kartika, the cow's urine in Margasira, clarified 
butter in Pausa, Black sesamum in MaAagha, 
Pancagavya in Phalguna. At the time of giving 
away the gifts, the devotee should recite the 
following mantra: “Lalita, Vijaya, Bhadra, 
Bhavani, Kumuda, Siva, Vasudevi, Gauri, 
Mangala, Kamla, Sati, Uma, be pleased.” In 
other words, the devotee should in each month 
invoke the pleasure of the Goddess by reciting a 
fresh name out of the twelve names mentioned, 
viz., in Caitra he should say, “Lalita be 
pleased,” in Vaisakha, “Vijaya be pleased,” and 
SO on. 


Alecia Macha Hera: | 
HOA HLA DW AOTAATAHSHAAI 3 C11 
Fagan a wag HTay ae: BETTI 
AUTHUAIHAG Tet MaaAcHTH 3 21 


TIA WereMT BTA A AaaT 
Ud Haat aaguresy fafraat: ol 


He should offer the following varieties of 
flowers (one each month), at the time of 
worship: Mallika, Asoka, Lotus, Kadamba, 
Utpala, Méalati, Kubjaka, Karabira, Banam, 
Amlana, Kunkuma and Sindhuvara; or any of 
the following flowers, as procurable, should be 
offered, viz. Jasmine, Safflower, Malati, Lotus 
and Karabira. 


At SAT AT HAN aT Fyramead aH: 
Tared WAT TENA TATA & 2 


Married woman or maid, after worshipping 
Siva with full devotion, at the end of the 


236 


ordinance, should give away a bedstead, along 
with all the necessary requisites. 
saree #4 Gay U Wal Vel 
Wrafaaa VA Tera asad ¥ 2 
At the time of giving away the bedstead, the 
following things should also be placed on it and 
given away along with it: The golden images of 


Siva and Parvati, the golden figures of ox and 
COW. 


nahin nin 


a 
eraarata ver sratrerainy 


Besides this, according to his means, the 
devotee should give to the Brahmanas and their 
wives, clothes, grain, ornaments, cows, cash 
and should not give way to niggardliness or 
doubt. 


WAAAY APA TTAATATATTI & YI 


One who observes this  ordinance-— 
Saubhagya-Savana, achieves all his ends and 
emancipation. This ordinance had better be 
observed without any object of bearing fruits. 


ee 


1 Regah egrrmerdemee | 


Tey Rew aaifor MPa 
Hilt BA UP a Mavsyaysat:| 


GRIN TART, Aa UT AAT & & 


One who observes this ordinance every 
month, begets good fortune, health, beauty, 
longevity, clothes, ornaments, etc., which last 
him for 9,00,00,00,300 years. One who 
observes this ordinance for 12 years, 8 years, or 
7 years, goes and enjoys in the region of Siva, 
for three Kalpas. 


At At Hed AAT HA aT TAT 


Matsya Puranam 


Cie aeHeTATCH ea SoSH MTA X'9 | 


The married woman or the maid who keeps 
up this ordinance also attains the same benefits 
through the grace of the Goddess Lalita. 


syopaTeha asia WeeNera HiT 
Riste fama yar tates fat TAT CN 


One who hears or advises others to listen to 
the account of this ordinance, passes his days 1n 
heaven for a long time in the form of 
Vidyadhara. 

5 . raf , 
WATT HIATT A 
HAT THU AeA at 
fay SAA Ad gaa: BATS 

O Lord of men! In this region, Cupid 
observed this ordinance very first, and then 
Satadhava, the son of Kartavirya, was the 
second to observe it; and afterwards it was kept 


up by Varuna and Nandi, and consequently this 
is considered so sacred in this world. 


Sta sited wergerat Bharagead ATS 
af SAUI SEAT: 1 & 0 lt 
CHAPTER 61 


The birth of Agastya and the dialogue 
between Narada and Siva 


ANE SATA 
qeletsa yacien: Taeitatsa Wea: | 
AT: Ue A Aad Cael: Wala 


Narada said- Siva! There are named the 
following seven regions of the Devas, viz., 
Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svah, Manah, Janah, Tapah, 
Satyam. 

TAA F MATH Het aT 
Se tiles YM BINT: Brae a 
Men Page AA HA Ta WIA 21 


How may perfection be obtained in 


Chapter-61 


succession over these lokas and how one may 
obtain in this earth prosperity, beauty, long life 


and blessing. Please also explain to me how 


they become blessed with fortune, beauty and 
wealth? 


Wea Sara 
UT GA: Aes Aes HelaeT 
Mes: Toads Faarera ASAT 3 
Siva said—~ Formerly, a fearful fire was 
ablaze on this earth accompanied with a strong 
wind. The friction caused by the wind produced 


the fire for the destruction of the demons, at the 
command of Puruhtta (Indra). 


Peay ae SAAT AAT: | 
Ah: HAMM Hees: UIA: | 
PARA PANACEA & I 


That terrific fire reduced many demons to 
ashes, when  Tarakdsura, § Kamalaksa, 
Kaladanstra, Paraévasu and Virocana fled from 
their warfare with the Devas. 


TST: UTyGUava AfadwHa 
AMM Slt ASAT HATA AAT: 11 4 


They all plunged themselves into the waters 
of the sea and took up their abode there, where 
fire with the help of air could not consume 
them. 


aa: Wye t Car AI Te WAT 
Wiley @ WA Wary what qaster & 


Afterwards, the demons began to come out 
of the waters and persecute the Devas, men, 
sages and other living beings, and disappear 
again into the sea. 


Wd adage at: ta a aa aT 
WeSMAMT TE USAT WTA 9 tt 


In that way, the demons asserted their 
boldness for twelve thousand years and 
continued their campaign of persecuting the 
three worlds, for a period of five or seven years 
at a time, by taking shelter in the fortress of the 


237 


OCCan. 
ad: TAM atearecraaafeaa: | 
seem fare afete fagierart ci 


Later on, Indra directed the fire and the wind 
to dry up the ocean in the following words : Dry 
up this receptacle of water quickly. 


FETS SATAG YU HOTT: 


TATRA HIV MOTTA 8 


“Because it shelters my foes. They have 
taken their refuge in the home of Varuna. It 
should therefore be dried up as quick as 
possible. 


TAFT: Mea MAST 
SIG UG Cay MNT FAAS 20 It 
TAHA Ted: Hara waa 
TATA UTA HlaTa: FEAT 22M 
Ta ARPS stealer a 
Paata Gas a set ATS TaN 21 


Hearing that mandate of Indra, both fire and 
wind said to Him, the destroyer of Sambara-~ “It 
would be a great sin to destroy the ocean. 
Because innumerable beings had made it their 
home, and the destruction of the ocean meant 
their annihilation along with it, therefore, we, O 
Purandara, cannot do it. Lacs and lacs of beings 
inhabit the ocean, within the space of every 
yojana. It was not meet for us to annihilate 
them. What fault have they done to be 
destroyed. O chief of the Devas.” 


Wah: FA HUTA TH: | 
Sarde Gat Weaeefas WAHT 231 


Hearing the speech of the fire and the wind, 
Indra became full of wrath. His eyes turned 
crimson red, and it appeared as if He was going 
to eat up both fire and wind. In his rage, he said. 


TAM Aa WIT: Fare 
wadey fayreanr Uretest anfaferefen ex i 
Teast TAA WT aa 


238 


yracateate Uae cae HAT 
qalimeatted ora aft fayraati 24 


TaNeeHT ATE "ITT ATT 
Wedd Ua wie da way afaeatan 261 


Teal a Uqaasha aarTeda Wea: | 
wfeearattag Tal CaaTATAATAI Vo 


“There is no question of Dharma or 
Adharma where Immortals are concerned, and 
your glory is still more high. O Agni and Vayu! 
Since you have violated my injunction and have 
adopted the duties of the Munis not to injure 
any being, and since you have leaned towards 
the enemies who are devoid of religion and 
politics, losing sight of duty and Sastra; 
therefore You, O fire, will now be born by 
assuming one body along with Maruta, among 
the mortals, in the form of a sage. In that form 
of the sage Agastya, you will dry up the ocean, 
after which you will again come back to your 
Divine form.” 


Sate natadt TATU watt 

TAM ARTE HVT TTT 261 

REICCOUDICICOI EEE OIR mst 

ATT STITT: AAT TANATH 28 

After thus being cursed by Indra, both of 

them fell on the earth, where they were jointly 
born out of the pitcher by the seeds of Mitra 
Varuni and came to be known as Agastya— the 


younger brother of Vasistha, and one of the 
most renowned ascetics. 


ANE Sate 
aad: A a We aaa TA: | 
aa a faaraautt fra at at 
TT HASTA HT TTT STI 2 oll 
Narada asked Siva how Agastya became the 
brother of Vasistha, and how Mitra Varuna 


became his father and how the sage Agastya 
was born out of the pitcher? 


Matsya Puranam 


Sat Jara 

WT YON Ee: Hah TATST 

wart aa fawerant fayet 77:11 2 vi 
que wea ites farened weaves 


WUT HATTA TOTAAL 2 2 


Siva said that, once upon a time Lord Visnu, 
the son of Dharma, began to practise rigid 
asceticism on the summit of the Gandhamadana 
mountain. Indra being afraid of His austerities, 
sent a group of nymphs in company of the 
Vernal-season and Cupid to distract Him from 
His penances and destroy His austerities. 


aal ARTA ATSAUMSAT BET: 
4 SMa a fararatt wa 231 


The Lord Hari was not in any way moved by 
the songs and music, gestures and tones of the 
Cupid and the spring, nor was his mind 
attracted to external objects. 


Tal HUTA TARTS ATT RUT: | 
GAMA AAA LATHE HTTATIAT | 
ATTA ATTA AAA SATA 2 YI 
Finding the Lord remaining firm, the agents 
of Indra began to shiver with fear, when the 
Lord, in order to further bewilder them, 
produced from His thigh a damsel of exquisite 


beauty, fascinating the dwellers of the three 
worlds. 


GEM aM Sara J saatgMt 
say: Waal fF Casa ST: 1 24 It 
Seeing whom, all the Devas, along with 
Cupid and spring, became enamoured of her, 


when the Lord said to them, in the presence of 
the Apsaras. 


aT sft A WM caATATaT SM: | 
Sayfa BAe oes Tents afea A 26 11 


“This is the nymph Urvasi, O Devas! And | 
have created her to become the head of all 
Apsaras.” 


Chapter-61 


aa: ara Pao Bray 
ST A Tat aetiergatry AT VI 


Then the God Mitra called her, and asked 
her to enjoy with Him, which she accepted. 


Te UAL deretafacratarom 

SOOT FAT WAT AH ALATA 2 CN 

faxoné ser Yate sat 3 a fast 

TATA SHUT AT ASAT WATATTN 281 

Afterwards, the lotus-eyed Urvasi, while 

moving in the sky slowly, was caught by 
Varuna, who slowly pulled her by her cloth, at 
which she told Him: “Your action 1s not proper. 
Because I have accepted Mitra first, and 
consequently I cannot be your wife, O Varuna.” 


Varuna told her, “Keep me atleast in your 
favour and then go elsewhere.” 


Tea Tecra far: YTTAeKAT 

Te UGA Ta Ta ATT YaST 3 oll 
TAMA Aa APTI WI AM Het: 
HAHN sat areas faa gears a 
wien Gare greta Pree 3 vu 


She replied— “Ail right.” When Mitra heard 
this, he cursed her: “You go down to the world 
of the mortals and be married to the son of 
moon, Budha because you have followed the 


ways of a courtezan.” Saying that, both Varuna | 


and Mitra threw their seed in a pitcher of water, 
out of which two sages (Agastya and Vasistha) 
came out. 


fahrara We wale: TT Weaatora 
CARS AABY TRAPATT: 113 21 


Te TRMAhaat TT BW ATT 
facera warata aaeerat GAT 3 31 


Once upon a time King Nimi was playing 
with women the game of dice, where Vasistha, 
the son of Brahma, chanced to go. At that time 
the king did not show his respect to the sage, at 
which the latter got annoyed and cursed him to 


239 


become bodyless, and the king also pronounced 
another curse on the sage. 


TAIT Talat sa Va 
WAT: VITA TANT AT: UAT 3 vl 
They both became bereft of reason, as it 
were, through the curse of each other, and went 


to Brahma, the Lord of the Universe, to remedy 
the effects of the curses. 


AT TU STS MEM AAAT AA: | 
FAST: TST STAT ABATE ATTEN 3 4 I 
ata IseMan aT BT Waa 

ad: PATAA: WeTTARAVSAT: | 

ATT SA MATA TST TATA: 1 3 I 


With the orders of Brahma, Nimi entered the 
eyes of the mankind, and this causes them to 
open their eyes; but when Nimi takes rest, they 
close their eyes; and hence this shutting and 
closing of the eyes is called winking or nimesa. 
Vasistha, similarly, entered that pitcher of water 
and was born out of it and after him the sage 
Agastya was born, of the same pitcher, of white 
colour, with four hands, sacred thread, 
kamandalu and garland. 


TeaaaeN J terrae: | 
Ward: Aaa faserayea Fear 301 
The sage Agastya went to the Malaya 
mountain, along with his better half and began 
to practise rigid austerities, surrounded with a 


number of other sages, according to the rules of 
forest-dwellers, hermits. 


ad: Gerd Weal aAHletaaifsay 
TGA A HIT UlearaSUeTaAAN 3c 


A long time after, the sage Agastya, seeing 
the world oppressed by the demon Tarakasura, 
drank the ocean. 


AAS Atel: Aa AYA: WETS: 
Tan fawpey wraraera Wag: | 
at quia vg qt aaMte Aa PANIC M 


240 


Then Siva and other gods alongwith Brahma 
and Visnu went to grant him a boon and asked 
him to seek any boon he wished. 


ATT JAA 
MATa aeaUT Werfariares: | 
aattteal Meret afarorrarcracararit ¥ o It 
Ufgarea Hat: Hey wT 
a aaeteneraa: varaor afaeatri x 


Agastya said— “I wish to have the privilege 
of moving about in the Vimdanas on the 
Daksinacala muont, till a thousand Brahma 
come and go in turn for twentyfive crores of 
times; and those who worship me at the time of 
the appearance of my plane, should be the 
monarchs of all the seven realms, till the time of 
the re-establishment of fresh sovereignty in the 
seven climes.” 


Sat Java 
Vanfeatt aswerat wrydaT Va 
TENT: WEAN ATT AUT FAUX 


Lord Siva said— “It will be so;” and 
afterwards all the Devas went back to their 
respective regions. It is therefore proper for 
every sensible man to give a libation of water 
(arghya) to the sage Agastya. 


ANG Sarel 
Saree F aet aa ot fev 
Aart ASR HA ARES AUN 


Narada said— “How should a libation of 
water be offered to the sage Agastya; be pleased 
to explain to me the ways of worshipping him.” 


SUT Jared 
means fagry galeetes ffm 
CU Yee Fett 


The Lord said— The learned should get up 
early in the morning, with the rising of Agastya 
and bathe in water mixed with white sesamum 
and should wear garland of white flowers and 


Matsya Puranam 


white clothes. 
WIS Ht Weqaaayay 
CAAT FATATAPAT TN % & 
And then a good pitcher, free from 
perforations, should be placed, after decorating 
it with flowers, clothes, and filled in with 


Paficaratna! and having a pot, full of clarified 
butter, put on top of it. 


FHS Ter We 
Blautaradagevsx 
aaa aye free 
AT MAT ATATATITN Y & I 
Afterwards, a golden image, of the size of a 
thumb, with extensive arms and four heads, 
should be made and placed on top of the 


pitcher; and then, after filling it in with sapta- 
dhanya? and decorating with cloth. 


TAN TEMEnyzars 
THI ATE: AN Vl 
It should be given away to a Brahmana, 
along with a vessel of bell metal, rice, shell and 
then the image of gold should be given away in 


charity, with the devotee's face turned towards 
the south. 


amt FT eae Viner 
tea: Gtenpat waranty 
a4 at: attadt wong 
AAV FATTY CN 
The devotee, if he can afford it, should give 
away a milch cow, along with her calf, after 
getting her hoofs covered with silver, and horns 


covered with gold and wearing a bell round her 
neck, to a Brahmana. 


1. Lit. five gems. 
2. Seven grains. 


Chapter-62 


STAN TASANAS TT 
aaertacdtehet ALT: | 

Taal: GAMA - 
THREAT Gara AAT 8 I 


The devotee should observe this rite for 
seven days from the nsing of Agastya. Some 
say that it should be observed for seventeen 
years. 


UMTTOTTATAT ST. STAT eT TTT | 
Pra: FI HSI TASH AG ofl 


“OQ you, as white as Kasa flower, O you born 
of Agni and Marut, O you son of Mitra and 
Varuna, I salute you, born of a pitcher.” The 
devotee worshipping like this with fruits and 
flowers, never gets aggrieved. 


faragiguaant tadrarararce| 
CHACHA SAM MSTA AAAS TT ANY 2H 


Afterwards, homa_ sacrifice should be 
performed, without any desire of obtaining any 
fruits. The devotee should thus offer libation of 
water. 


aTaTaY ara AA AAR: Maa: TT 
NURTA: AATANSA TAY AG AAG 2 
Tagha Tent wafaUea aT 

mays AAA A wha 

Wee J HeaNa Haat Paha 31 
Be Heal At: WHE: Her 
art fate aeq yore Praag 4 wi 
oo eh @ Ue Saar: | 
faites qactie aries a at: TUG GI 
Bea cenraeiia Mave a: Were 
MAY A: HAUl TANT TEH ATs & 


The devotee offering a libation of water 
once, according to the rites prescribed, gets 
beauty and health; the one offering it twice gets 
a place in Bhuvara region, the one performing it 
thrice goes to heaven. In the same way, one 


241 


who performs it seven times goes and enjoys in 
all the seven realms, one after the other; and the 
one who offers it during the whole of his 
lifetime, becomes united with Brahma. 


Se Ustad Jor at a Ua- 


Hara: UPTTTAS ATTY: 114 9 


One who hears, reads or relates to others this 
ordinance, goes to the clime of Visnu and 1s 
respected by the Devas there. 


Sit ATT ATTN Sreea ST aT 
AM HAA SATA: 11 & VU 


kk x 


CHAPTER 62 


Description of Ananta-trtiya vow 


ayeara 
TYS 3 TU epi eryr, ah H | 
afaginne ta aa gfe Warea gi 
King Vaivasvata Manu said— Lord! Pray tell 
me about a vrata (ordinance) that may be the 
giver of good luck, health, prosperity, 


emancipation and everlasting fruit in the next 
world. 


Wey Jara 
Aga: YU ea Jara YTACA:| 
HATA SET YETTA FeReTN VU 
aay wgag Taty clergy a 
aieart waaay aiRyRHCTITSAH 3 I 


Lord Matsya said— I shall relate to you what 
Siva, the destroyer of Pura, said to Parvati, in 
answer to a question put by her, while he was 
sitting on the beautiful peak of the Kailasa. | 
shall explain to you now the ordinance which 
gives prosperity and emancipation, as 
enunciated by Him, in the course of a 
conversation on religious and pleasant subjects 
in which they were engaged. 


14 


any eeeegen nee 


TRUE VON 
eraisaiy tse 
Taig GT Vaal WHT A Ad: TAN WM 


Lord Vamadeva, created Brahmanas from 
his mouth, Ksatriyas from his arms, Vaisyas 
respectively and created the lightening from 
Vajra, clouds, rainbow of different colours, 
besides the metres. 


TA: MTT eaAT TTA: | 
RET ATTRA ATATUT AAT: A 3 0 
Thereafter the powerful Vamadeva, created 


eighty four crores of Sadhyas who were free 
from birth and death and had three eyes each. 


aMmisuaaacateraen fara: 

Jafaat Taco PATATA STATI 3 VI 
Since they were free from birth and death at 
the time of creation by Vamadeva, therefore 
Brahma, stopped them from indulging in 


creation work because there could be no 
creation without birth and death. 


yarnfetar at 7 Ha Bie: We 
ud feud: @ AAret GE: AOTATS HAAN 3 2M 
The creation which is the combination of 
auspicious and inauspicious, it happens to be 
commendable. At these words of Brahma, 


Vamadeva was relieved of the job of creation 
and thereafter he became motionless. 


CARNAL AAA RATATAT EAT 
UAT BUSUTG A ATT ATTA 3 3 
fragararel WRT 

CUT HAM AAT YIM ATT ATA 3 wi 


(Now there is the description of sexual 
creation). The immensely intelligent 
Svayambhu Manu performed severe tapas and 
achieved a beautiful girl named Ananti, as his 
wife. Two sons named Priyavrata and 
Uttanapada were born of her. Thereafter Stnrta, 


Matsya Puranam 


the daughter of Dharma who was extremely 
beautiful walked gracefully, besides being 
intelligent one, in relation with Uttanapada, 
produced the sons. 
SAAT HITT 
AUT Hla Ta TAT GN 

At the same time, Uttanapada, the Prajapati, 


produced four sons named Apasyati, Apasyanta, 
Kirtiman and Dhruva. 


FAAS HAAT TMA TSTIAT: 
Ta ATAU AT Heat AT: FTE 


Out of them Dhruva,! in earlier times, 
performed severe tapas for three thousand 
years. 


feanTg Ad: WTA TAU AAT 
Ta WA: Heat Fa AAT: FAAT: 1 Fl 
Even today the seven sages* are lodged in 


the space, with Dhruva appearing as the 
foremost of them. 


CM AG VA: HAM Farag Asis 
SMPTHA FT Yoo HEN Fa Tar 3c 
au fund qi Fah a Tat 
aye Geleteat atiwat a Fras: 3 ei 
In union with the same Dhruva, Dhanya, the 
daughter of the Manu, gave birth to Sista. With 
the union of Sista with Suchaya, the daughter of 


the fire god, produced the children named Krpa, 
Ripunjaya, Vrtta, Vrka, Vrkatejas, and Caksusa. 


TUT F BATA 
Ta UAHA AAA A MAT ol 
WASTE TAAPAM YMA STAT | 
He: TS: MATAR Aaa: 11 I 


1. An exhaustive account of Dhruva's translation to 
stellar regions occurs in Visnupuranam. 

2. The seven sages, Marici, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, 
Kratu and Vasisttha : here the constellation called Ursa 
Major, the seven stars of which are said to be the seven 
sages mentioned above. 


Chapter-4 


AVATAR TTT: | 
AMAT TMA AAAS ¥ 2 


Ripunjaya, out of them produced Caksusa 
Manu from the womb of Virini, the daughter of 
Virana. Caksusa Manu, on the other hand 
produced from the princess Nadvala, the sons 
named Uru, Puru, Satadyumna, Satyavak, Hav, 
Agnistut, Atiratra, Sudyumna, Aparayjita and 
Abhimanyu, who had been the tenth. All the ten 
of them were quite valorous. 


RAGA FT TIAL 
ST GAT Tait HTACSTA TAT Y 31 
fagern yatta y eraRTasITAT 
STM AMT WAH TT 
GIA AeA: BW Yat Ba ¥ XI 


Sunitha, the daughter of the manes, in union 
with Anga, gave birth to Vena. (Vena was quite 
an evil one and met with his end due to the 
curse from a Brahmana). The Brahmanas then 
churned the hand of irreligious Vena, as a result 
of which the immensely glorious Prthu was 
born. He had two sons. 


sere Uta fratvsarasiisrd 
aghast faronerracgan 
Wrataet Ms TA WER Act PATTY 4 
MIG CIPS BIC It SES! iL (ba 
agit: WaT Gea: Gata: ve 
TAMA F ARAL SENT YAY: 

Be Veal AM FAST WT wt 
TAUTATAT FAT Betts WATT: | 

SATA AAMAS RATT YC 


They were named as Antardhana as well as 
Havirdhana. Out of them, Antardhana, 
produced a son named Marica from his wife 
Sikhandini. Dhisana, the daughter of Agni, in 
union with Havirdhana, produced six sons 
named Pracinabarhis, Sanga, Yama, Bala and 
Subha. Out of them, Pracinabarhis was crowned 


15 


aS Prajapati. He expanded several races in the 
name of Havirdhana and produced ten sons, 
from Savarna, the daughter of the ocean. He 
was extreme:y proficient in the science of 
archery and became popular in the name of 
Praceta. O Son of Siirya, because of the tapas of 
these Pracetés, remaining well protected the 
trees look graceful everywhere, but at the 
command of Indra, all the trees were burnt out 
by Agni, reducing them to ashes. 


amesaace Arerer are fase 
TAT SAU A UTA 8 UI 


Thereafter Marisa, the daughter of the moon, 
became the wife of these Pracetads. She in union 
with Pracetas, gave birth to Daksa. 


Caer GAA WT aT: | 
SRIRATa Tat Maa FAT 4 ot 


After the birth of Daksa, the Somakanya, 
produced all the osadhis, the trees as well as the 
river Candravati. 


AMT B ia eareargieraiea: 
arat @ ferent aeet ate a: Qufahsa: 4 a 
Daksa! who was born of the arhéa of the 
moon, had eighty crores of issues, who are 
currently spread in the entire length and breadth 


of the universe and shall be described by me 
shortly. 


Taree echfearcchreargeued AAT: | 
FATT: MEH: HUMTATOTAAT & 2 
Some of them had two feet while some had 
many feet. Some of then had deformed faces. 


Some of them had the ears like pigs. The ears of 
some of them had been covered with the hair. 


ART: ahfeicch fa caerAreqarT | 
VATA: cheese AAT! & 31 


I. Daksa is elsewhere said to have been one of the 


mind-born sons of Brahma or to have been the son of 
the Pracetasas. 


242 


SUX Jara 

quate efa wMaraTquand 

TUOTAT ATOT ATT TTT YU 

WEY ATT IMTS YOST TT 

eA TATA TEAM MTT HG 

TR WAIAAEN West TAM 

afirererefiet creme fret =a 

ATS Tea A Safer GA 

Siva said— Hear, O lady, attentively, the vow 

which gives endless merit; the best of vows, 
worthy of being followed by men and women. 
The devotee should put the tilaka mark on his 
forehead made with a paste of gorocana, fresh 
urine of the cow, cowdung and sandal, mixing 
them with curds; after bathing well and rubbing 
white mustard on his body, in the month of 
Bhadra, Vaisékha or the holy Margasisa 
(Agrahayan and) on the third day of the bright 
fortnight. This is giver of auspiciousness and 
health, and is very much appreciated by the 
goddess Lalita. 


Wiel Tairarg arattargan 
TACT Tht At WET PAA oil 
Faget Meni HAN Wacaraean 
eat y Werreals at: after Haren 
CUT Te FTN ehT AC 
Dahlin 


-+* 3 . 


SHER TH 


srecmcfetroat ait Set wer 
WSN HAMavel ATA Lol 


On every third day of the bnght and the dark 
fortnights, the male devotees, with their minds 
controlled, should wear yellow garments, the 
married women red garments; the widows 
should put on ochre-coloured garments and 
maidens should be clad in white. Afterwards, 
the devotee should bathe the goddess with 
paficagavya and milk, then with honey and then 


Matsya Puranam 


with water aromated with flowers and sandal. 
Then white flowers, various kinds of fruits, salt, 
raw-sugar, milk, clarified butter, white rice, 
sesamum, coriander and cuminseed should be 
offered to the goddess, and a libation of water 
should be made on the third days of the bright 
and dark fortnights with the following mantras. 


atera AA: Wel AAT AecHt AT: fare 
TMT AM We Wael HAT TATU VMN 
Fe Ueerad ameet sar Her 
UNea: AST: AHA AA VM 
att aardeast aera” fart 

We eturanteast arrears Fert TA 230 
The TA ATA TAP 

TaD MMAR ATATAY FOTTEAETTNN OI 


The feet should be worshipped after reciting 
(1) Varaddyai namah (1 salute the giver of 
boons), the ankles after reciting (2) Sriyai 
namah, (I salute you Laksmi, the goddess of 
wealth), the legs after reciting (3) Asokdyai 
namah, the knees, after reciting (4) Pdrvatyai 
namah, the hips, after reciting (5) Mangala 
Karinyai namah, | salute the giver of happiness, 
the waist, after reciting (6) Vamadevyai namah, 
the stomach, after reciting (7) Padmodardyai 
namah, the breast, after reciting (8) Kadmasriyai 
namah, the hands after reciting (9) 
“Saubhdgyaddyinyai namah, the arms and the 
mouths, after reciting (10) Sriyai namah, the 
face after reciting (11) Darpana_ vdsinyai 
namah, the cheeks after reciting (12) 
Smaradayai namah, the nose after reciting (13) 
Gauryai namah, the eyes after reciting (14) 
Utpaldyai namah, the forehead and the tresses, 
after reciting (15) Tustyai namah, the head after 
reciting, (16) Karydadyanyai namah. 


at wet aay fered aa: aed za: fara 
THT cHfera a MT ATTSST AT AA GN 
va Woe fafaaara: wernfenaa 

WageMayeh Heer Teor 26 1 


Chapter-62 


The Goddess Gauri, should be worshipped 
also after pronuncing the mantra: “Salutations 
to Gauri, Dhisna, Kanti, Sri, Rambha, Lalita, 
and Vasudevi.” Then the devotee, having thus 
worshipped, according to rule, should draw in 
front of the goddess, the figure of a lotus with 
twelve petals, with the pericarp made of saffron. 

yar faagtiaannt a at: TTT 

War sfarot TEER BW Aa: TTTH VI 
fara aha war Werarfaar 
AAA SAGA AASETATATN Ve I 
Tet a ° ¢ ‘ ® 7 
HO Wey Sees ciferat sforarahe 
PUMA MATT FATA LFA 

The Goddess Gauri should be fixed on the 
eastern petal, Aparna on the south-eastern petal, 
Bhavani on the southern petal, Rudrani on the 
south-western petal, Saumya on the western 
petal, Madanavasini on the north-western petal; 
and after that Uma on the northern petal; 
followed by the terrible Patal4 on the north- 
eastern petal; in the centre, in due order, should 
be placed, 1. Masanga, 2. Mangala, 3. Kumuda, 
4. Sati; and the Lord Rudra in the midst of all 
these goddesses, the goddess Lalita on the 
pericarp of the lotus flower, the goddesses 
should be located with flowers, rice, and water 
by uttering the salutation, namah. 


TaagserararAaea Tae: 
Waa TH ATCA NT : | 

fret Brant a arat forts waa 2 ol 
HHT AAT AT: 
TATCEA Tae TAAL 

TUS Weeds Palette: fear: VU 


Afterwards, auspicious songs should be 
sung, conches blown, and the goddesses, 
adomed with red sandal, red cloth, red flowers, 
should be worshipped and the devotee should 
put red pigment and bathing powder on them 


243 


after bathing them, for, red sindiira and saffron 
are extremely aggreeable to them. The teacher 
(guru) should also be adored, with prescribed 
rites, because where the guru is left unadored, 
all the rites prove fruitless. 


Te TR geerad: Ten 
MATT AT Se PTT 1 2 
aaa Tee ate Ut Ue: | 
papaya eat wer | Tra 
FRAN AAT AT HITS TAS ATTA 2 3 
GI T AfecraTya gS TATTTSCT | 

TID HAATSMNATTS WT Aa: | 

ISTH ATA AAT THATTNTI 2 XI 


The Goddess Gauri should be worshipped 
with blue lotus, during the month of 
Bhadrapada; with red Bandhujiva flower in the 
month of Asvina; with white lotus (Satapatra) 
during the month of Kartika; with jasmine 
flowers in the month of Margasirsa 
(Agrahayana); with the yellow amaranth flower 
in the month of Pausa; with the white jasmine 
or safflower in the month of Magha; and with 
the white jasmine or Sindhuvara flowers in the 
month of Phalgun; with the Champoka and the 
Asoka flowers in the month of Caitra; with 
Patala flowers in the month of Vaisakha; with 
lotus flowers in the month of Jyestha; with fresh 
lotus during Asadha, with Kadamba and Malati 
flowers during Sravana. 


Ta wad afte ef aft: aye 

farauaTayed UT Aa WIA TWN 

Tared a faced wroracaayreten 

UdeTeretel F WMT AYeTEt AI 2 I 

The devotee should take the following 

things, one after the other, from the month of 
Bhadrapada— Cow's urine, cowdung, cow's 
milk, curds, clarified butter, the water of Kusa 


grass, the leaves of the wood-apple (bilva), the 
flowers of Calotropis-gigantea (arka), barley 


244 


(yava), the washing of the cows horns, 
Paficagavya! and Bael fruit; and offer these to 
the Goddess as PraSana. They should be taken 
one by one, viz., on the third day of Bhadrapada 
cow's urine, in the month of Asvina cowdung, 
and so on. 


wfamet a fed qtarat ara 
QafaaTA aA SATA TCATA:1t 9 
In the same way, on every third day of the 
bright and dark fortnights, the devotee should, 
after adoring the God Siva with his consort, 
offer them cloths, garlands, flowers, sandal. To 


a male God, a yellow garment should be offered 
and to a female goddess, saffron-coloured dress. 


Ya: Uarat cen fers Arqerarean 

FIUTAT TUTHATAT TTI 

Tes SE Wet WH Yaa yA TN Ve 

aM 7 efa sagreat utes Tai 

TM ATT AUHG -WAAAPTTATN 2 8 

The following things should also be given 

away to the Goddess— Nispava, cuminseed, salt, 
sugarcane, raw sugar, flowers, fruits, a lotus of 
gold, with these words: “Goddess! As Siva does 
not go anywhere forsaking you, so you should 


save this devotee of yours through this mundane 
sea of troubles.” 


Haar farsa Tart A ger fear 
Cera HAC AM Aa THT Ta 3 oN 


TweaMfey aay warTETaT 
SAT VA SEM FAVA eTaATTN 3 VN 


The Goddess Kumuda?, Vimala, Anant, 


1. The five products of the cow taken collectively 1e. 
milk, curd, clarified butter or ghi, urine and cow 
dung. All these are regarded as sacred articles of 
paramount; and essential importance for worshipping 
a deity. 

. All the above Goddesses are really manifestations of 
the same deity. The words Kumuda, etc., may be 
taken also as different names of one and the same 


Matsya Puranam 


Bhavani, Sudha, Siva, Lalita, Kamala, Gauri, 
Sati, Rambha, Parvati should also be 
worshipped. The devotee should invoke the 
pleasure of the Goddess by reciting each of the 
names mentioned above, one by one, from 
Bhadrapada, viz. “Kumuddad  Priyatam,” 
Kumuda be pleased and satisfied, and so on. On 
the completion of the ordinance, a bedstead 
along with a golden lotus, should be given away 
to the Brahmana. 


faust aafagrem et at Wada 
AS TST VATA AFAATI 3 2M 
Every month, 24, 10, 8, 6 or 2 Brahmanas, 


with their wives, should be adored by the 
devotee and by his consort. 


yd Sea FT Wa Pee: | 
HAA ASA CTINTI 3 3 


After first giving Daksina to the guru, it 
should be given to other Brahmanas. This 1s 
what has been laid down for the observance of 
this ordinance— the giver of infinite benefit. 


aduraet ea aaranraarsany 
7 oat forest aathaeta aga 
We at ale aT ANT faesary TAIT 3 VI 


It is the destroyer of all sins and the giver of 
good luck and health. It should not be missed 
through miserliness, for the man or the woman 
who exercises miserliness goes to the lower 
regions. 

TOT afta Am Hae ara WATT 
TAM ACA AAT TAA FATA 3 4 I 

Women who are in the family way, maids, 
those in confinement due to delivery, and those 
who are ailing, should take their food at night 
(not keeping the full fast). If one 1s in her 


menses, and so cannot observe it through 
impurity, she should get it observed by others, 


Goddess for the purposes of worship in different 
months and tithis. 


Chapter-63 


according to the prescribed rites. She herself 
should observe continence. 


Saar aetel Begala AAT 
meualesd Ut feracite wera 3 i 
One who observes this Trtiya, giver of 


endless fruit, with devotion, remains in the 
realm of Siva for a hundred crore of Kalpas. 


fandiift aed adaayaratt:| 
TOA BIST ACHTATETATTII 3 19 1 


Even the poor who observes it with devotion 
for three years, according to the prescribed rites, 
using flowers alone for worship, gets the same 
benefit. 


at aT Het A F Hart faaatsaan 
Unfe acetate Maaco 3 cI 


The maid, the married woman or the widow 
observing it, also gets the same benefits through 
the grace of the Goddess Gauri. 


sta vata sunt ar a sei 
Pitararadtagaraa ea: | 

Taare a zala asta ea- 
THA HACT THT 3 8 


One who reads or hears the relation of this 
Gauri Vrata or advises others to follow it, 1s 
honoured by celestial beings and by the Devas 
and their consorts and the Kinnaras. 


Sta sitet vergalsatgdaad AT 
fRafwaatsearsg: NG Qn 


K*KS 


CHAPTER 63 
Vow of “Rasakaly4anini trtiya” and rite of 
Sahasra Agnistoma 
Sat Jara 


IAM SAM Fara ATTA 
TaHeAMUr aa WeAcTaar fag: gI 
WTA F MMS Fara Yee: 


245 


wretieay waar fit: A PAA 2H 

PMG Sat THAT TT 

SRAOTISTA AUST Aa ATT TaN 3 

The Lord Siva said—I shall now describe to 

you another Trtiya ordinance that washes off all 
the sins and 1s known as “Rasakalyanini trtiya” 
by knowers of ancient rituals. In observing it 
the devotee should bathe in cow's milk and 
sesamum on the third day of the bright fortnight 
in the month of Magha. The Goddess should be 
bathed with honey and the juice of sugarcane. 
The right hand side of the Goddess should be 
worshipped first and the left hand side 
afterwards, with the following mantras. 


cifras AAT Sea: UTet yout TAsaAT 
at HE Aa yea AAT fot AA wit 


The feet and the ankle should be 
worshipped, after reciting (1) Lalitayai namah 
“T salute the Goddess Lalita,” the legs and the 
knees, after pronouncing (2) Santyai namah, the 
thighs, after reciting (3) Sriyai namah. 


Teer J aferaeas TAIT 
wt Herat Hye B BATT G Ut 


The waist, after reciting (4) “Maddlasdyai 
namah”, the stomach, after reciting (5) 
“Amaldyai namah’, the breasts, after reciting 
(6) “Madanavdsinyai namah’, the shoulders, 
after reciting (7) “Kumuddyai namah”. 


WH WNT Wet Grea Wate 
Yee A AT VST TATA & I 


The arms and the hands, after reciting (8) 
“Madhavyai namah’, the mouth and the face, 
after reciting (9) “Kamaldyai namah’, the 
brows and the forehead, after reciting (10) 
“Rudrdnyai namah”, the locks of hair, after 
reciting (11) “Sankardyai namah”. 


Tae fayenfast for: Bret dara 
Weed cele F Meas Tayatuon 


The coronet, after saying (12) 
“Visvavdsinyai namah’, the head, after reciting 


246 


(13) “Kantyai namah’, the left forehead, after 
reciting (14) “Madandyai namah’, the brows, 
after reciting, (15) “Mohandyai namah’. 


WT Uareehud Get a aet WA: 
SAS AT: HUSATATA AT: SATII 


The eyes, after reciting (16) 
“Candrardhadhdrinyai namah’, the mouth, 
after reciting (17) “Justyai namah’”, the throat, 
after reciting (18) “Utkanthinyai namah”, the 
breasts, after reciting (19) “Amrtdyai namah”’. 


Trad area a fargienrd Ta: afer 
eed WMS Wes AAETAN 21 


The left abdomen by reciting (20) 
“Rambhdyai namah’, the waist, after reciting, 
(21) “Visokdyai namah’, the heart, after reciting 
(22) “Manmathddhisnyai namah’, the stomach, 
after reciting (23) “Pdataldyai namah”. 

wale Gearhart ware aera 
WE AA We Maat gies AA got 


The waist, after reciting (24) 
“Suratavdsinyai namah’, the thighs, after 
reciting (25) “Campakapriyadyai namah”, the 
knees and the legs, after reciting (26) “Gauryai 


namah”, the ankles, after reciting (27) 
“Gdyatryai namah’”. 
quer Wel fewer aa: fore: 


AM Wars cfd Hracet safer gen 


The feet, after reciting (28) “Dharddhardyai 
namah”, the head, after reciting, “Visvakdryai 
namah.” Namobhavaniyal, Kaminyal, 
Kamadevyai, Jagatapriyayai, should also be 
said. 

ud any fafraaigreramra 
Aaa Bator faACAT: 1 ZU 

The Goddess should be worshipped like this, 
and then the Brahmana and his wife should also 
be honoured and feasted with sweet food and 
drink. 

WA AA HY Waray gay 


Matsya Puranam 


Sea YSU MATTE: MAA 3 


A pitcher, full of water and decorated with a 
pair of white cloths, along with a golden lotus 
and flower-garlands and sandal, should be given 
away in charity to the Brahmana. 


Waar HIT VRAeaaTTAy 
arr fafert cat ufa afa aera exit 


Afterwards, the devotee should say, O 
Kumuda Goddess! Be pleased and accept this 
lavanavrata. In this way, the Goddess should be 
worshipped each month. The Goddess Kumuda 
becomes pleased with the devotee by the 
observance of this ordinance. 


TAT ARIAT WIE US WA: 
det Tha aor AA aR a AE ATTA GN 


In the month of Magha, salt should not be 
taken, raw sugar should be avoided in Phalguna, 
oil and mustard should be discarded in Caitra, 
and honey and sweets should be avoided in 
Vaisakha. 

UA VISAS F sas Bs via 
TAN TIAT at afer WIKIS FATH 2G I 


In the month of Jyestha puddings should be 
avoided, cumin-seed should be discarded in 
Asadha, milk in Sravana, curds in Bhadrapada. 


FATT Tagust aaet ot UTeTaAT 
ara UMTS FWY aval | Pra Vol 


Clarified butter in ASvina, honey in K4rttika, 
coriander in Margasirsa, sugar in Pausa should 
be avoided. 


dard Ath Wade aha aha a 
SMa gaa YUUTATT AAA Vc 


On the completion of the ordinance, a 
Kamandalu, full of water, along with a full 
vessel, should be given away in charity, each 
month, in the afternoon. 


Megas HATTA TELAT: | 
MATA TI TUBTTUTT AUSTIN 8 I 


Chapter-63 


at Wich UW CePA USA Soca aenT: | 
WMA SANA ATH! 2 oI 


(1) White balls of sweet (Laddu), (2) 
mohanbhoga!, pudding, (3) cake (puri), (5) 
gharika cake, (5) sweet cake, (6) sweet cake 
mixed with spices, (7) mandaka, (8) milk, (9) 
vegetable, (10) curd rice, (11) indari marti, (12) 
avokavartika Gojha, should be given, one by 
one, after putting them on the top of the 
Kamandalu in each month i.e. in Magha, white 
balls of sweet should be given, in the next 
month mohanbhoga, and so on. 

yet Maat Mt TT sat aT Fear 
SO Ut: Get TEAST Terewnerawi 2 VI 
earate waa wrarnfatt aka 
Waa TTA WITT WASTE 

Sara WaRARIARA ACHAEA 2 ZI 

Kumuda, Madhavi, Gauri, Rambha, Bhadra, 
Jaya, Siva, Uma, Rati, Sat, Mangala, Ratilalasa 
should be invoked, turn, by turn each month, 
beginning with Magha, and say ‘priyvatdm’. The 
devotee should offer to the goddess the prasana 
with pancagavya, and should observe a fast on 
each of the prescribed days; if he cannot keep 


the full fast, he might eat something in the 
night. 


GAA AMAA Benet HeHATT 

HAM F rt MT TeeTaaaATAI 2 3 
IRC ROR ESC CRUISE 
aayatrsayat PaaaaTeTgATTN 2 
Tenlaat Ya Gaies faaray 
TAA THRAMT WaAATAT 24 


Again in the month of Magha, sugar should 
be placed on the Kamandalu and after saying, 
“Goddess be pleased,” should be given away to 
a Brabmana in charity— the golden image of 


1. Sweet made of gram-flour. 


247 


Parvati, of the size of an inch, after decorating it 
with the five gems, rosary, sacred thread, 
Kamandalu, the figure of the moon with four 
arms, white eyes and white clothes; a pair of 
white cows, decorated with gold and covered 
with white cloth, along with a milking vessel. 


ar fata ae TARA 
HAT A AAMAS HEATH 2 & I 
Faenea FA Sst Wa AT: 
Gaureanet Mt ate wire aeat: 
AMAA AHA ACATATAN 291 


One who observes this Rasa Kalyanini 
Trtiya ordinance, becomes instantly liberated 
from sins and never remains grieved for 
9000001000 years. One who gives away an 
image of Parvati, with a golden lotus, each 
month, gets the benefit of performing a 
thousand agnistoma sacrifices. 


A AT Hed A F HAN A ATA 
Taga A AM ANT ANG AcHeTATeyara 
Sa aTAT MT eS HTT 2 Ut 


The married woman, or the maid, or the 
widow who observes this ordinance, derives the 
same benefit ard gets good luck and health and 
goes to the realm of Parvati. 


Sta watt Jot seat: WAST 


caetactstaaeh: Uradterenyte 
waste a arent at aerfa frat 


faqaafaraart Aaa: FATE V8 


One who reads or hears this, is liberated 
from the sins of the Kali Age and goes to the 
region of Parvati. One who relates this to others 
or induces others to observe this vrata, also 
becomes like the Lord of the Devas and moves 
about in aerial chariots. 


Sit SATS Hegel Teaeaortad AT 
faafPaaTsearay: 1 31 


* KS 


248 


CHAPTER 64 


About the ordinance of Ardranandakari 


trtiya 
Sat Java 
qarat waaay _atar weary 
Te ot eile faarrsrrenttaangi vi 


Siva said- Narada! I shall now tell you 
about the ordinance known as Ardranandakari 
trtiya, which is the destroyer of all sins. 


Fel Yaordararanaiest yarratad 
Teel a Wat at ee Terns an 
aurea: FM aal AIH AAAI 21 


. On the third day of the bright fortnight, 
whenever the moon is in the mansion of any 
one of the following asterism, Ptrvasadha (or 


Uttarasadha), Rohini, Mrgasria, Hasta or Mula, | 


the devotee should take bath in water mingled 
with kusa and incense. 


YANG: RATT: | 
VATA YTS: ATT: | 
Weear AAAS ARTA 3 


Afterwards, he should wear a garland of 
white flowers, white raiments, and use white 
sandal paste, and then worship goddess 
Bhavani, along with Her consort, Mahadeva, 
with white flowers and incense, and then seat 
them in their proper places, and recite the 
following mantras. 


AAA TA: UTet VATA AM ST 
ae Mnfaaieret STS AA: WHT SI 


Parvati's feet should be worshipped, after 
reciting “Vdsudevyai namah”, and Siva's feet 
should be worshipped after reciting “Sankaraya 
namah”, and their legs, after reciting 
“Sokavindsinyai namah and Ananddya namah” 
respectively. 


Tre Wee fears a frat: | 
oferta ale Sem: wert: MTATUTATNG It 


Matsya Puranam 


Their hips, after reciting “Rambhdayai 
namah’, for the goddess and “Sivaya namah” 
for the God Siva. The waist of the goddess, 
after reciting “Adityai namah”, and of the God 
by reciting “Sulapdanaye namah”. 


Weer WAM Aa wears al 
Waa ATA ATTT & I 


The navel of the Goddess, after reciting 
“Maddhavyai namah” and of the God Sambhu, 
by reciting “Bhavaya namah’”. The breast of the 
Goddess, after reciting ‘“Anandakdrinyai 
namah”, and of Sankara by “Jndudhdarine 
namah”, 


Sais AN; Hus Aersvsrst F FT 
RUAN SHAT AT ATTA: 
ae a Ufa fryers eTet AON 


The throat of the Goddess, after reciting 
“Utkanthinyai namah” and of the God Hara by 
“Nilakanthéya namah.” The hands of the 
Goddess, after reciting “Utpaladhdrinyai 
namah” and of the Lord of the world by 
“Rudraya namah”. The arms of the Goddess, 
after reciting “Pdrirambhinyai namah” and of 
Hara by “Trisuldya namah”. 


con wea faenfadt geera yafast: 
fart wanreterd fayagara a fartsici 


The mouth of the Goddess, after reciting, 
“Vilasinyai namah,” and the mouth of Siva, 
after reciting “Vrsesdya namah’. The cheek of 
the Goddess, after reciting “Sasmeralildyai 
namah” and of the God by “Visvavaktraya 
namah”’. 


a Teraet favart refer: 

gat yatrara J aos gra Mere 
com creepers gerarera a ferit: 
Tare Gene tem faurterenra 41 201 


The eyes of the Goddess, by reciting 
“Madanavasinyai namah” and of the God 
Tristlin by “Visvadhadmne namah”. The brows 


Chapter-64 


of the Goddess, after reciting “Nrtyapriydyai 
namah” and of the Lord by “TYandavesdya 
namah.” The forehead of the goddess, after 
reciting “/ndrdnyai namah”, and of the God by 
“Havyavahdya namah”. The coronet of the 
Goddess, after reciting “Svadhdyai namah” and 
of the God “Gangddhardya namah”’. 


fayarat fast facet feat 
Waa Se Wad TTA 221 


Then the following prayer should be said to 
them: “Visvakadyau Visvamukhau Visvapdda- 
karau Sivau Prasannavadanau Vande Parvati- 
paramahesvarau’— | salute Parvati and 
Paramesvara, the whole universe is whose 
body, mouth, hand and feet, the auspicious ones 
with gracious countenance. 


Wa aay fateraen: fare: WI 
VSN WA ARTA AAT 82 
Waa Aheh TaaH HIT 
Ted: UaaeA TA: Ulta Yat 
Magiaeantar feracies AAAI 23 


Having worshipped in this way, he should 
make, according to rules, in front of image of 
Siva and Parvati pictures of lotus, etc., with 
vanous coloured powders. He should also make 
pictures of conch, quoit, flags, tridents, 
(svastika, goad) and camara. As many grains of 
the coloured powder as fall on the ground, the 
devotee remains for the same number of 
thousands of years in the realm of Siva. 


Seale FaAUTaer Beware vid: | 
areal faa ArH eenraaa arr 
Mittal UTA Aacafaaeat Vv 


For four months, in the dark as well as in the 
bright fortnight, the devotee should give away 
to the Brahmanas four kamandalus full of water, 
grain and gold and having a vessel of clarified 
butter and gold on top of them. 


aay BAU WraTaaaTAraAT 
GANT AHA TATATATOAT: TTT Bu A 


249 


Tae THAT wet Hele 
wed cf Sas WysIEHNa AN VE I 
fasted tar ant aeguieadt WA: 
BMT ARTA FA:11 VM 
farted WATS TAU MTTST 
WAG Valedas WIT AASTETAN Ve 


Then, for another four months, the four 
kamandalus should be given away, after placing 
four pots of barley meal (Saktu), along with a 
vessel, full of sesamum on top of them and after 
that, for another four months, 4 pots of 
sesamum should be placed on top of the 
kamandalus and for one year from the month of 
Margasira on the trtiya tithi the devotee should 
offer the following eatables to the deities, one in 
each month (1) Incense : with water (2) flower, 
(3) sandal and water, (4) saffron and water, (5) 
curd, (6) unboiled milk, (7) washing of the 
cow's horns, (8) water and flour, (9) water 
mixed with powdered kustha (a kind of plant, 
called Costus speciosus), (10) Andropogan 
Muricatus, (11) water mixed with powdered 
barley, (12) cumin-seed, sesamum and water. 


TAA VST META Tapa 
Sale UM AAT WAMATSTATN Ve Ih 


In the worship of this Goddess, white 
flowers are said to be the best; and at the time of 
giving away dana (presents to the Brahmanas), 
the following mantra should be uttered. 


Tt W wlaat Perey Wee 
ara wera Tart Aaa 2 0 


“OQ Goddess Gauri, be pleased, O Goddess 
Mangala, the giver of happiness, liberate me 
from sins, O Goddess Lalita, promote my good 
luck, O Bhavani, fulfil all my desires.” 


Aa Haut eR BT Aleta 
wed WaUee B UfETTINGGy FN 2 eM 
SHIA CH Maha 


Z50 


BATA yrat Afearat Fracaq 
utters fawrer We A wraahahau 2 zw 


After a year, the devotee should give away 
to the Brahmana and his wife, after saying, “O 
Gauri, be pleased with me,” the following 
things, pitchers, full of salt and raw sugar, 
matron, sandal, cloth (netra patta) lotus, along 
with gold, the images of Siva and Parvati made 
in gold, sugarcane, cotton and _ bedstead, 
alongwith mattress and pillows. 


aMarcaHd AAT Fataer Baa 

ONT AU Ahet PTHAIT WaA 2 31 
Se Meh Verranreniat area: | 
MATUTAOA T BLAH AAT 2 


One who observes this ordinance, called 
Ardranandakari trtiya, goes to the region of Siva 
and attains healthy longevity, wealth and 
happiness in this world, and never gets grief or 
woe. 


AN A Hed A J Hardt fara a an 
ita area Cerreenferanit 24 I 


Married women, or maidens, or widows 
also, through the grace of the Goddess, attain 
the same benefits. 


wirmerqaretd taredafaartad 
BHU aA Tatra hee 2G 


The person, acquainted with the rites, duly 
observing this ordinance, goes to the realm of 
the Goddess Parvati. 


a sé QUAAa Haag wa: | 
Wena A Wala: Waste FAIA 291 
One, who hears or relates this ordinance to 


others, goes to the region of Indra, and is 
venerated by the Gandharvas for three ages. 


TT Gt aveatagar fagara afin 


We Te Yara yA 
TMHaae Befaer afar waren 2c 


Matsya Puranam 


The woman, whose husband 1s alive, and the 
widow, who observes this ordinance, attain 
unbounded happiness in their houses, and in the 
end goes to the region of Parvati, along with her 
husband, and the widow rejoins her husband 
there. 


sft sirereet TeTguat araltaatigdtarad AA 
Ad AAT AMSEATA: 11 G YI 


KERR 


CHAPTER 65 
Vow of Aksaya-trtiya and its merit 

Sat Jared 

TATA aeariey Fara Waray 

TA St Fd WA Va Walt MATA VI 

Siva said— I shall now explain to you about 

the Aksayatrtiya (giver of all desires) vrata, on 
which day the performance of charity, sacrifice 


or Japa gives inexhaustible benefit to the 
devotee. 


AMS STUN F Tatar aeurhsan 
HAT HANA PAA THT TN 2 
One who keeps a fast on the third day of 


bright fortnight, in the month of Vaisakha, 
derives inexhaustible fruit of all his good deeds. 


Al aM Hirata fagreur Ayfara 
aa Sd Ea WA AAA CATI 3 I 
If the asterism Krttika happens to fall on that 

day, it becomes still more sacred and charity, 
sacrifice or Japa performed then, begets 
inexhaustible benefits. 

TAM Wade THTATA| 

MAC AT: AAT FaMTSTaT TMATATAN ¥ It 

fayy eat Aa TM Ayah 

ATASENINT HATTA GTA 4 A 


The progeny of the devotee will be 
unlimited and her good deeds will have no end. 
Since Visnu is worshipped on that day with 


Chapter-66 


Aksata, it 1s called Aksaya trtiya. On that day, 
the devotee should bathe in water mixed with 
unhusked rice (Aksata). He should also offer 
unhusked rice to Visnu and to the Brahmanas, 
or well-made barley meal (Saktu) should be 
offered to the Brahmanas as well as taken by 
the devotee himself. The devotee who does this, 
gets everlasting benefit. 


Varah Fara fatereray: | 

UAaas Vala Tart Het WaT & 1 

TAA Wa ATaTA SATE 

TATITHST WAT MAT a TaeiaI 9 1 

One who keeps up, according to rules, this 

trtiya ordinance even once, begets the benefit of 
having observed all the trtiyas, and one who 
keeps a complete fast on this trtiya and 
worships Janardana, gets the benefit of having 


performed a Rajastiya sacrifice, and attains 
bliss. 


Sit SI TTT TUseeAga aS ATA 
USa SAA SATA: WE Gt 


KK 


CHAPTER 66 


Description of Sarasvata ordinance 


wyeara 

TAT At St GAA FTE 

wa arate aft frag atererq gi 

TAIT THAN TTT TT 

arayy fare Yat Fat Hee Ara 2A 

Vaivasvata Manu asked— O Lord! By what 

vrata does one get sweet speech, worldly 
prosperity, intelligence, skill in all arts and 
sciences, inseparable conjugal union, fast 


friendship and longevity. Please explain all this 
to me. 


Weg Jard 
WAR YE AT WeegQu Aad FA 
Te Mas Terie ATA 3 I 


251 


The Lord answered— O King! You have put 
a very useful question to me. Now listen 
attentively to the description of Sdrasvata 
ordinance, the mere recitation of which gives so 
much pleasure to the Goddess Sarasvati. 


a Aah: TarHalergarayyay | 
aaraTet WAST AMAA ¥ Uh 


The devotee should begin this vrata by 
adoring the Brahmanas on the morning of the 
day which is most appropriate for the worship 
of the Goddess he usually worships. 


WAM CAA TEATACT AI 
We MSA HA STRIATE & 1 


Or, the fast should be observed on a Sunday 
and the Brahmanas fed with rice, cooked in 
milk and sugar, after consulting the stars and 
determining an auspicious hour for the feast. 


Yaraeatur sat A Alea Mead: | 
TAAL THAT VATA: Ht & I 


According to his means, the devotee shculd 
give away gold and cloth in charity, and should 
then worship Gayatri with garlands of white 
flowers, and with white sandal etc. 


aM 4 efa warden frase: 
wa UfcaeT GRAM Fa AWN I 


And then pray, “O Goddess! as Brahma, the 
father of the universe, never lives in the 
Brahmaloka separate from you; in the same way 
be pleased to give me boons. 


aal: VAT Barter Margene A AAI 
4 faa waar fa wen a aq fasasnci 


“Goddess! The sacred Vedas, the Sastras, 
the songs and the dances, are not apart from 
you; let by your grace success attend me. 


matte at UfeTt ate: war aft: 
Uae: Us sere aT ATA 8 I 


“O Goddess Sarasvati! Protect me with your 
eight-fold body, viz., Laksmi, Medha, Dhara, 
Pusti, Gauri, Tusti, Prabha and Mat. 


252 


Ue TST wera eTTOTTATAT ETT TUT 

VSAM MHS TATA 

Tae Yates Wes were TFA Qo 

Waa wiraet a yoraqgeranhaary 

Ta AUST YAUTATT AAT 

at Celfgrvad MT Maal Weaaatail 221 

Gayatri with a Vina (a kind of harp), a 

rosary of Aksa, a Kamandalu and a book in 
each hand, should be worshipped with devotion 
with white flowers and unhusked rice. The 
pious devotee should, then in silence, take his 
meals, morning and evening, without speaking a 
word at the time. He should worship the 
Brahmavasini (Gayatri), on the fifth day of both 
the fortnights. He should also offer her a 
quantity of (Prastha) measure of rice, placed in 
a vessel and full of clarified butter and milk and 
gold, by invoking her in the following words: 
“Gayatri, be pleased with these.” 


WATT A AM WAH, TAA 
TAT AS HAMA ATA ATTA 22 Ut 


The devotee, following this rite, should 
observe the vow of silence in the evening, and 
should have in the day time no meal, till 13 
months are over. 


GA I Fd HARM Yaeger: | 
Yes AAAI T SAMEM ST ATA 83 1 
On the completion of the ordinance (vrata), 
the devotee should take white rice and before 


doing so, should feed a Brahmana and give him 
couple of clothes. 


com fant evel a fara wate 
Wed AAG A ered aT TA evil 
TAUSETUT Ha AOA ET 
farroraus teal TAMTCAT ACTS: 1 4 tl 


Then he should give away, in honour of the 
Goddess, the flags, bells, a silver-eyed milch 
cow, sandal, a pair of clothes and a crest jewel. 
Afterwards, the preceptor should be worshipped 


Matsya Puranam 


with devotion, with garlands, cloths and sandal 
paste, without giving way to miserliness. 


arr fate aq Haleantad TAT 

faerareeachl HAUS AAT 2G 1 
UAT: WAST Tele Tea 

AR AT Het A F MT Aceves 


Tae TAR AAA TATA 29 11 


One who worships Sarasvati in this way, 
becomes learned, wealthy and gets a melodious 
voice. Besides this, he goes to the region of 
Brahma through the grace of the Goddess. The 
women folk, observing this ordinance, too, get 
the same benefit. Such devotee reside in the 
Brahmaloka for three Ayuta Kalpas. 


antad Fa Ae FOpaTaT a: wa 
frye BIST TAHCTTAAATTN 2e UI 


One who reads or hears this, goes and 
enjoys in the region of Vidyadhara, for three 
Kalpas. 


PeMTPAMISEATT: 11 & & Il 


** 


CHAPTER 67 


Merits of charity at the time of solar and 
lunar eclipses 


Afadia 

THAT q TTA 

Tee Mafra Ferrafaaraaqi vi 

Manu said— O Lord! Knower of the rites, the 

mantras and of the things to be given away in 
charity at the time of solar and lurar eclipses, | 
wish to hear from you the method of bathing at 
those times. 


Weal Tard 
UT TM AAA MAST : | 
qa TM waeata waleafaarrd: i 20 


Chapter-67 


PRT MATT Fea TTATOTATETT 
ORT BA Fama: 11 3 Ut 
SCE CIUUUCOR IE IGIE ITC af 
UTA: FTATUTAT TAT 


The Lord said— When the eclipse take place, 
at the time when the sun or the moon 1s in that 
particular sign of the zodiac under which a 
person is born, it is necessary that he should 
bathe in water mixed with herbs, according to 
the prescribed rituals, as mentioned below. 
When there is a lunar eclipse, the devotee 
should get blessings invoked by Brahmanas and 
worship four of them with white flowers and 
sandal paste, and place four flawless pitchers, 
full of water and herbs, before the 
commencement of the eclipse, and consider 
these pitchers as representing oceans. 


a tee larhichd oc uice > | 

THENAC NET FEAT ASTI G 

Pare THANG YT A 

Te Wagrat a tareraaraayn § I 

Gales Get Ma ata waaay 

Tet AAAS MAST TOT 

waned fatter aerearaead ATI ol 

Then the Devas should be invoked, after 

putting the following things in the pitchers: 
The earth of the elephant ward, of the stable, of 
the chariot-house (or road) of the anthill, of the 
tank, of the confluence of two rivers, of the 
cattle-yard and of the king's gateway, as well as 
paficagavya, good and _ genuine pearls, 
gorocana, lotus, conch-shell, paficaratna (five 
jewels), quartz (crystal), white sandal, Ganga 
water, mustard, andropogan, muricatus, 
Kumudini (lotus), Rajadanta (ivory) and resin 
(guggula). 

Ga AAR: Atrarataihy Tea AAT: | 


AAT AAT STATA AT: 11 
Asa aaa sa safacaat wy: 


233 


WEA WETS STTEGN 8 

We a: Adeart areactacarfe: 

SRUTTASTA AA: USt SATAN 2o Ut 

The Devas should be invoked with the 

following mantras— “All the sacred places, seas, 
rivers, tanks, rivulets, come here to wash off the 
sins of the devotee. May the God Indra, the 
wielder of the thunderbolt, known as sovereign 
of the Adityas and having thousand eyes, come 
and remove my suffering caused by the 
(inauspicious) planet. May Agni, the mouth of 
the Devas, having seven flames, of 
immeasurable brightness, come and remove my 
suffering caused by the lunar eclipse. 


OT: HUTA Tar Tat UfsTaet: | 
TESTA WA UlSt STUSA VeN 
ATTA HEN Sa: TAT AH Tae: | 

B WeMaasr SUS ATTRA 22 Uk 
WOIUT A olearaa Hers ra: | 


aT UrSrra SAUTE 23 tt 
asa fafrafaca: GeTgrerrenan: | 


TRUTHS Tet T ATTEN Vv 

May Yama, the mder of the buffalo, 
representative of justice (Dharma), the witness 
of the deeds of all men, come and soothe my 
pain caused by the lunar eclipse. May the living 
god Varuna, the ruler of all waters, the rider of 
the alligator, and wielder of the noose, 
consisting of sea serpents, come and remove my 
suffering caused by the lunar eclipse. May 
Vayu, who nourishes all creatures in the shape 
of vital breath, who loves black antelope, come 
and remove my suffering caused by the lunar 
eclipse. May Kubera, the giver of wealth and 
master of riches, and armed with sword, trident, 
club, come and drive away my sin caused by 
the lunar eclipse. 


asaaget ea: fant grat: 
RUTH Utst FATA PATI RG 


254 


Sera AAA yeh aaTfoT ATT TI 
Tefawachyeea Me Ut TET I EN 


May Sankara, the rider of the bull and the 
wearer of the crescent and armed with the bow, 
called pinaka, come and destroy the pain arising 
out of the lunar eclipse. May Brahma, Visnu 
and Arka as well as all mobile and immobile 
beings existing in the three worlds, come and 
burn up my sin.” 


Vana Ft: Here hafeeAt qo: | 
RAY AAT VTA 


- IE QTE 


VITAL ‘Tete 


After thus invoking all Devas and other 
beings, the devotee should sprinkle upon 
himself the water of those medicated pitchers 
which are adomed with white garlands and 
sandal paste, and then worship the Brahmanas 
and the family Deity by reciting the mantras 
laid down in the Rg, Sama and Yajur Vedas, 
and then give away a cow, along with cloth to 
the Brahmanas. 


Waa Aat Walateraentan-aary 

AAIEESTA Ua TATA AAT VC tt 

ame forfa eae fr: 

aatsfrareagerae TAN SU 

wey: Gafaan ¢ Wafer 

ware fafida aamerase: | 

PUM F Vee genres Faeaqi 2 ot 

The mantras mentioned above, (in the verse 

8—16), should be written on a piece of cloth or 
on a lotus leaf, and placed in an earthen dish 
with five jewels (gold, diamond, sapphire, ruby 
and pearl, or gold, silver, coral, pearl and 
ragapatta). The Brahmanas should place on the 
head of the devotee, the said dish and await the 
time of passing away of the eclipse. At the time 
of the eclipse, the devotee should turn his face 
towards the east and worship his family God. 
On the cessation of the eclipse, cows should be 


Matsya Puranam 


given away in charity, and then after a bath, the 
cloth, on which the above mantras are written, 
should be given away to the Brahmana. 


ar fate ae WAM Warat 
T TAT WSUS TATA A TATA: 2 I 


One who bathes according to these mites, 
after an eclipse, never gets any trouble through 
unlucky stars, and his family and kinsmen will 
also prosper. 


went fatgarcifa yarghrecrary 

Tare FAA Tel TAG AAT 2 21 

ifteat: WRIT: Sy: Ble A WTA 

waded Font wet SAT TTA: 1 23 

The person following the above rites with 

devotion, attains highest bliss, free from rebirth. 
At the time of a solar eclipse, the mantras 
mentioned above should be recited by 
substituting the word Strya (the Sun) in the 
place of Candra or Moon. The additional gift in 
the case of solar eclipse must consist of rubies. 
A beautiful cow should be given away at the 


time of any eclipse (either solar or lunar), in 
honour of the moon. 


Tse YMA Marga Aa: | 
Ranafarareal wees Weta 2 XI 


One who hears or causes others to hear 
about this ritual goes to the realm of Indra, after 
being liberated from all sins, and 1s glorified 
there. 


Sfa stared ergot waieenanretafaterara 
TAS TAM SEAT: 11 & 191 
kk * 
CHAPTER 68 
Rituals of bathing on the seventh day of a 
bright fortnight 
ate Sata 


Regd HAI: HA TAA 
Wracarentcarey a fener v1 


Chapter-68 


Narada said— O Lord! What should be done 
to restore the equilibrium of mind in times of 
distress? How 1s poverty to be got over? What 
should be done at the time of the ablution of a 
woman whose offspring do not survive? 


aVTTaTyara 
OT HAT OTT Hee TATU TETT| 
Trahan wawaSs AN VI 
Lord said— The sins of the past fructify in 


one's present life. Disease, misery, loss of dear 
ones, are only the results of past sins. 


AAA AAT Wal AeA OHTA 
AAG ATA TAUISTATSTATAI 3 I 
SAM AT Aa AAT Weyac 
TSS FT Aart Ale ara VI 
Was Aa sea Paracas 
TTA ATT AAT STATIN tA 
I shall now describe to you the rituals of 
bathing on the seventh day of a bright fortnight, 
that washes off all the sins, which causes 
prosperity, and destroys all human troubles. | 
shall also describe to you the rituals of the 
ablution of a woman, whose offsprings do not 
survive, as well as for the longevity of old and 
diseased men as well of young men. This 


ablution which 1s done according to special 
rites, drives away the uneasiness of the mind. 


faecal AT ANTel Bt BETTI 
AAA TANT Seal F AT SAT ING I 


In a future Varaha Kalpa, O King, there will 
be a Vaivasvata Manu also. 


uaa a aaa wafagart aan 
Sa AT Wt aa Ceara: | 
Waal Wrat: Fda: WATTATIN 9 


Then in the 25th Satyayuga, of that 
Vaivasvata Manvantara, an illustrious and 
powerful king, Krtavirya, the promoter of the 
Hatyahaya dynasty will be born and thrive. 


Z99 


a waghact wretaera saer 
AGUAS ATUT BAMA ANISH 


That king will rule the world, consisting of 
seven continents for seventy thousand years, O 
Narada, with great statesmanship. 


AAT A AAT Ala GAMA TAM 
AAT F MTs faarerquareatan ¢ 


He will have one hundred sons who will.all 
die as soon as born, owing to the curse of the 
sage Cyavana. 


UATE Fal Ufaat TAT a Ya: 
RST: AA ALTA TIT: 1 Rol 


Sometime after that the King Krtavirya will 
be blessed with a renowned son, named 
Sahasrabahu (thousand-armed). He will have 
beautiful eyes like elephant, will be lucky and 
possess all the auspicious marks of a king. 


PIAA Asay feateaey| 
srartadigedarhay AT 

VECO RICE IPIGECOMSICECIICO IES] 
HAA a YP St aeala eH: 


ANIM Tal HCATATMAT I 22 
His father, Krtavirya will worship the 
thousand-rayed Sun according to the Vedic 
hymns with fasts and vows, in order to ward off 
the sage's curse, so that the son may not die in 


| infancy. He will then come to know of the 


rituals of this particular ablution from the God 
Sun, who will relate to the king the ways of the 
ordinance that would wash off all sins and allay 
all misfortunes. 


wa yard 
RASA Hea WATS AUAT! 
wae Fasital faq ATTA 23 1 
The God Sun will say— “O King Krtavirya! | 
am very much pleased with your devotion and 
penances; there is no further need of them. | 


bless you that this son of yours will be long- 
lived.” 


256 


Uatead aed waeteafedra a 
WIT YAAATAT: MAY APS ATTA 


SIT RATATAT Wa WYATT LY 


I shall now explain to you about the rituals 
of ablution on the seventh day of a lunar 
fortnight, in order that all men may be benefited 
by it. The woman, whose offspring does not 
survive, ought to bathe on the seventh day of 
the lunar fortnight, or on the seventh month 
after the birth of the child. 


WeMNVae HEA Heal Welvrararsyi 
Tea Waa asad aT far Ta: 
TTA A Her VMfeaty an ei 
The worshipper should consult Brahmanas 
about his lucky stars and then fix some 
auspicious day for the rituals, avoiding the birth 
asterism of the child. This ritual applies to old 
men and to others suffering from illness. 
TMA eTATaT Terran aET 
Tg THMaTe Mea 
Paty WeaA AAPA aaa: 1 2 Ut 
According to the rites of the Ekdagni fire 
ceremony, the devotee should locate the Fire on 
an altar, plastered over with cowdung, and cook 
on that fire pudding (caru), with red rice and 


cow's milk, and offer it to Sirya and Rudra by 
reciting the mantras of Rudra and the God Sun. 


ania Teese Wael UW Parga: | 
FENGA THT Tag AHI Vo 


An offering of clarified butter should also be 
poured into the fire, after reciting the seven Rk 
mantras of the Sun, and similarly, he should 
offer to Rudra with hymn sacred to Rudra. 


are: Aiea AAC TAT: | 
TARMAC: HHAUNST MT YAN Ve 
STEAM AI ASTM A: 
GN SU aed Ase Br AAT ee i 


Matsya Puranam 


In this sacrifice, the fuel of Calotropis 
gigantea and Butea frondosa should be used. An 
offering of barley and black sesamum should be 
made 108 times in this homa. In the same way, 
another 108 offerings of clarified butter should 
be made, after reciting Vyahrti mantras. 
Afterwards, the worshipper should bathe. 


fawn defager fataaestartoran 

NAAT F AGT: HA BOY PIA Poll 

Tad a ye ceaarafeatir 

PNTATTN FUT MAA AAN 2 VU 

Four pitchers should be placed in four 

comers by a Brahmana versed in the Vedas, 
with a Kusa grass in his hand, and a fifth one 
should be placed in the centre, after filling it in 
with curds, uncooked rice, etc., reciting the 


seven Rk verses, and then Agni should be 
invoked. 7 


atin Aaa yor traafaay 
wary Wale werreranaary 
Gaeta: Waray: oar 2 2H 


The central pitcher, which must have no 


flaw in it, should also be filled in with the 


sacred water of the Sirya-tirtha. All kinds of 
gems, and different kinds of herbs, paficagavya, 
pancaratna, fruits and flowers, should be placed 
in the corner pitchers. Afterwards, the pitchers 
Should be covered with cloth, and then located 
at their respective places. 


ATT acu hic ee 


TAMU! 
Ayal Fears wate fataferdq 230 


The earth of the following places should also 
be put into those pitchers, along with the things 
mentioned above: stable, elephant, yard, chariot 
house, anthill, confluence of two rivers, tank, 
cattle-fold, royal palace gate. 


agate a Hwy Try Wear 
TAA TATA ANAT EAT 2 vt 


Chapter-68 


The Brahmana touching the central pitcher, 
which is surrounded by four other pitchers, each 
containing precious stones within them, should 
recite the Vedic mantras relating to the God 
Sun. 


AN: TAA SATA A 
Ufsrerferelereracer Area eafeayyaut: | 
RAM eT PAA 24 
aay Tess agar a waft 
SMT SA: ATs WEAAAVS et: 11 2G I 
Aye AeaHTe aS Tareas: | 

a8 Ura @ Aa: eal UT HANAHAN 21 
faa: vitat sayy a a ane: Fafa 
Uist Hay ATT A AGHA A Veit 


Seven Brahmana ladies, along with their 
husbands, should be worshipped with garlands, 
cloths, ornaments, etc., according to the means 
of the devotee. These women should have no 
bodily defect. Afterwards, the Brahmana 
women should perform the ablution ceremony 
of the woman whose children do not survive, 
and recite the following words: “May this child 
be long-lived, may this progeny of this woman 
be long-lived. O Sun, Moon, planets, Stars, 
Indra, Devas, Lokapalas, Brahma, Visnu, Siva 
and other groups of Devas, always protect this 
child. O Mitra, O Saturn, O other Devas, O 
Agni, O Balagraha, be leased and never injure 
the child and his parents.” 


aa: Vea Haag yA 
GAA THAR TOTAT TS FAN VV 
Then this, the seven Brahmana women with 
their husbands and children and wearing white 


raiments, should be honoured along with the 
preceptor. 


aa I ad: HAhaguraae era 
wfcrat eceret We fatraeaq 3 ot 


Then the image of Dharmaraja, made in gold 


257 


and placed on a copper vessel should be given 
away to the preceptor. 


STAT eee: AYATTa : | 


8 | 0 K-34) r. 


AIGCUIae 


st 3 Qi 


Afterwards with his mind free from jealousy 
and muserliness, gold, cloth, gems, clarified 
butter, milk, should be given to the Brahmanas. 


YRAT WU THOT Waa WIAA: | 
Salgyrey aetss seater Tat 3 V1 
The Brahmanas should be fed first and then 

the devotee should take his meals. After meals, 
the preceptor should pronounce his blessings in 
the following words: “This child may live for a 
century and may always remain prosperous. 

afraracel etd aed asarten 

TEN VRl AY: Lael fay: VeRl ATH 3 3H 

Wry Ad SPA Al: We Adan 

Vana aa et HATA 3 xt 


“All his sins be instantly consumed in the 
submarine fire. O Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Vasu. 
Svamikartika, Indra, Agni, protect this child 
from al! calamities and bless him.” The 
preceptor pronouncing the above blessings 
should be worshipped.” 


Vind: alte carer a frat 


TH U Yratet WoT TTS TH 3 I 
BANS Tareiarartacara Tisha 
SCUATAY MNS TAT WHAT 3 GI 


Then a milch cow should be given away in 
charity to the preceptor who should then be 
dismissed with proper honours. Then the 
woman holding her child should salute the Sun 
and Sankara and eat the remainder of the caru 
(Sakalya!) and then pronounce ‘“Aditydya 
namah”. This is the way which should be 
followed to restore the peace of mind caused by 
evil dreams or calamities. 


1. The thing which ts offered as a libation in the fire at 
the time of sacrifice. 


258 


areferet IAT WTAE 
Was SAAT AA Hag ata 3 ot 


One who observes these rituals on a seventh 
day of a bright fortnight, avoiding his birthday 
and asterism, never comes to grief. 


Rere faa carat: | 
HATO MITT Waar arg 3c 
The king Krtavirya most renowned, got long 
life and ruled the world for a period of ten 
thousand years, owing to his having observed 
the above mentioned rituals repeatedly. 
ques UaraTge Aan ta: 
sapaat FAIS AAA 3 8 
The deity Sitrya, having described this 
ablution called Saptami-snana and which 1s 


sacred, sanctifying and giver of long life, 
vanished then and there. 


Uae TSM AAS 
ASR UM Te WT FEAT ¥ ott 
This Saptamisnana, which has been thus 


described, is most sacred and dispeller of all 
evils. It is the giver of great benefit to children. 


Teresa et Hees W¥ Qn 
Health ought to be sought from the Sun, 
wealth from Agni, knowledge from Isvara, and 
emancipation from Janardana. 
Wate Cat fat aefaaet a 
suifa areata fats qarat ate 
This ritual is the destroyer of great sins and 
giver of happiness to the children, and the 


Munis say that one who hears about it attains 
SUCCESS. 


Sit Sree VET TUT BATtad 
ATATBUTTAAT SANT 1 CI 


KK * 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 69 


Vow of Bhima Dvadasi 
Yk] did 
UU Wa Bed UST Teer 
TET Welea: FoATst FeO TATA I 
The Lord said- In the past, during the 


Rathantara Kalpa, Brahma asked Siva on the 
summit of the Mandaracala mountain. 


Tarara 
HUAN PTAA ATTA | 


TNT ATM Sa AAATASAST FOTATN 2 


Brahma said~ “How one may with the 
performance of slight austerities get unending 
prosperity and health, O Lord of immortals? 
How may men attain emancipation by 
practising brief austerities? 


fangid Hered Mararereatet 
Tara ATA Heche 3 


Q Mahadeva, nothing is unknown to you. 
Through your grace one knows everything. 
Please, be pleased to explain to me how, by 
practising small austerities, one may get large 
reward.” 


Ack] sald 
Ua US: F faa TaN oT: | 
sHrafaKare WT: WAHT XI 
The Lord Matsya said— On thus being asked 
by Brahma, Siva, the lord of Uma, the Soul of 


the universe, the creator of all worlds, began to 
explain the ordinance, so pleasant to the mind. 


eat Jara 
TSU UTT a ATU} 

ae Maa HOTA TART FTI G UI 

ACA VAd GAY Alclad 

OT PT AREA TTT AT NGI 

TA A Ueleal AACA TATEA: | 

aaacoara fret faeorafaeata 9 i 


Chapter-69 


Siva said— After this 23rd Rathantara Kalpa, 
will again follow Varaha Kalpa. In that Kalpa, 
also, there will be 14 manvantaras. The seventh 
of these will be Vaivasvata manvantara. In the 
28th Dvapara yuga of the Vatvasvata 
manvantara will be born the great God, 
Vasudeva Janardana. By the end of the same 
(28th Dvdpara) age, Lord Visnu will manifest 
Himself in three different ways, to relieve the 
world of its burden. 


SUTTER UTS VTE: 
HAMSUATA: HMA: FMA: CU 
He will manifest Himself as (1) Dvaipayana 
Vyasa, (2) Baladeva, (3) Kesava, and will bring 


relief to the world by crushing the pride of the 
wretches like Kamsa. 


al Bad AT ATA AT HTAcH 


frarMadgnmafraraa ofa: | 
TART HUTA ARATE SATA: 1 8 


The puri Dvaravati, which 1s now known as 
Kusasthali, will become Dvarika and will be 
planned for the residence of Krsna by 
Visvakarma, according to my instructions. 


Tea Halas: AMaraadaia: | 

manasa spyfetretert: 11 20 tt 

HUAI: HEAT: | 

WEMTY YOY edategaty aN eel 

Sard Wa UTE: WATTaT 

AM UR TUT WTI SHAT 22 

In the noble assemblage which will be 

attended in that sacred city, in company of their 
beautiful ladies, by Vrsni, Yadava and the 
Kauravas, the Pandava Bhimasena, the most 
illustrious of all assembled there, will, at the 
close of the pauranic discourses, ask Lord 
Krsna, attend by the Devas and the Gandharvas 


and He will them explain about the ordinance 
just now asked by you. 


299 


Waal A del Teal Ga Talat: 
WAMAISTA THAT UO gUAT Weraer: 11 23 1 


QO Brahma! after that Bhimasena will follow 
the rituals dictated by Lord Krsna and will 
promulgate it in the world. 


Aq MAU Fal AM Hat eerares: | 
WaT Sa: A: TAA AT Aat Fenlars Vwi 


Bhimasena is called Vrkodara, on account of 
his having Vrka or wolf-like fire given by me in 
his stomach. His hunger will never be appeased. 


Tar See ATA Aer 
Waa: AMrHeT SF BTA BI 


Bhima will be most wise, charitable, 
wealthy, handsome like Cupid, and will have 
the power of ten-thousand elephants. 


RTT Taras area 
Se SAAT TATA AA RE I 
The pious who are unable to suppress their 


hunger and keep up a full fast, should observe 
this ordinance, which is the best of all for them. 


mated faa argeal WTS: | 
AMTAAHASAMAT AAAI ATI V9 II 
APT OM ATA MTT TT 

Waal Wad UT ASAT WT ASAT! 
MART TMT FMT WATT TAN CI 


For the benefit of the pious, unable to 
suppress their hunger, Lord Vasudeva, the 
Jagadguru, the soul of the universe, will explain 
the rituals relating to this ordinance, which will 
be the giver of the benefits of all the sacrifices, 
the destroyer of all sins and calamities, the giver 
of the highest prosperity, the most ancient of all 
the forms of ordinances and venerated by the 
Devas.” 


ayes Tara 
MATA ATS Vag ave ATT 
seaaeray A PASAT TATA Ve I 


260 


aa: oat: fatatrat qaurawont erry 
strea fafa wes fae: Wt TET Qo 


Vasudeva said— the devotee who may not be 
able to fast on the eight, fourteenth and twelfth 
day of a bright fortnight, or on any other 
prescribed day, attains unification with Visnu, 
by keeping a fast on this sacred day only. 


TATA SMTA AUT YT ATT 
FAANAHA Fea fret: AM AAPA 2 gi 
On the tenth day of the bright fortnight, in 
the month of Magha, the devotee should bathe 


in water mixed with sesamum, after anointing 
his body with clarified butter. 


aaa famed Tat arereTar het aT 
FONT Wel ASA MI: Aa TAN 


aqua aavsgt: sAacrantean 

vigt ateut tarley ates a 

Wa ATA ASM Tea: HAT 23H 
qmleragat Wg Tama ah 

THE MATA ATA TAATATIT 2 ¥ 

TM atearat f WE wel farsa A: 

AA FY AT: MRS AGT Teal AM: FHA VG 
7a: Ut AW: Wet ge EY AA AA: 

He should then worship Visnu with the 
words, “Namah Ndardyanaya.” The feet of the 
Lord should be worshipped with “Krsndya 
namah”, the head with “Sarvdtmane namah’, 
the throat with “Vaikunthdya namah,” the breast 
with “Srivatsadharaya namah,” the four arms 
with “Cakrine namah,” “Gaddine namah’, 
“Varadadya namah’, “Sankhine namah,” the 
stomach with “Ddmodardya namah,” the region 
of Cupid with “Pancasardya namah,” the thighs 
with “Saubhdsyandthaya namah,” the knees 
with “Bhiivadharine namah,” the shanks with 
“Nilakanthaya namah,’ the feet with 
“Visvasrije namah”, Then the Goddess Laksmi 
Should be worshipped with “Devyai namah,” 


Matsya Puranam 


“Sdntyai namah’, “Laksmyai naman’, “Sriydyat 
namah,” “Pustyai namah”. “Tustyai namah’, 
“Dhrstyai namah,” “Hrstyai namah.” 


aa faesarara arena ufart 
faunas Fret wes aha 2G 
Afterwards, Garuda, the king of birds, swift 


like the wind, the destroyer of serpents, should 
always be saluted. 


ud ao Mfaerarafefeaarrat 

Teter oe aara 219 1 

Tea Tae fast HATA aaa: 

AUT HS Hara A MA MATS TAU VI 

Having thus worshipped Govinda, Siva and 

Ganesa should be worshipped with sandal, 
incense, flowers and various kinds of victuals. 
Then the devotee should take, in silence, with 
ghee, the porridge made of nice sesamum and 
grain, cooked with cow's milk, sugar, and walk 
a hundred steps. 


TANG SAATSATA Talat GT: | 

Tera Tate AIT: WTS 281 
TUM Heat Geared Tah 

TAY ATAU TATE PILOT TWA 3 ot 
Veer Fe: AN A AMAT 
Ua BW Genet Feacat SA A TTA AUT} vit 
afaer ania eq Brat GANTgga: | 

Wea FOSMHT FISPAT AAT 3 2 
afenta aaraé faery Fer Th 
Vag WIA aheraaa FA 3 3 
HA WATT Ta Tat AAT fergtiae 

GM Heal Yel ARATTVSAa TAT 3 VI 


Afterwards, the devotee should brush his 
teeth with a stick of banyan or khadir and then 
rinse his mouth, facing the east or the north, and 
holding a kusa in his hand. After sunset he 
should perform his sandhya and then utter: “Om 
namondarayanaya namah, tvamaham 


Chapter-69 


Sarnangatah. | salute Narayana, | throw myself 
under your protect.” On the Ekadasi day, | shall 
keep a fast and worship Narayana and keep a 
vigil at night; have a bath early in the morning 
(i.e., on the Dvadasi) and make an oblation of 
clarified butter to Fire. Pundarikaksa, I shail, 
with mind controlled, eat rice, cooked with 
milk, with a few good Brahmanas. May that be 
fulfilled by your grace, without any obstruction. 
With these words, he should sleep on the bare 
earth. Then, on day-break, he should hear 
recitations from the Itihasa, and go and bathe in 
a river, after rubbing earth on his body. At this 
time, he should avoid the company of wicked 
persons. 


Tre Tea fata a frau 

MOTT ST AHN MACHA TAN 3 4 A 

TEA TH aM YoSs aaa: | 

SVS AT AT HAAMTIATH BE 

After that, he should perform his sandhya 

prayers and offer libations of water to the manes 
of his deceased ancestors, and then salute 
Hrsikesa, the sole sovereign of the seven 
worlds. Then he should erect a mandapa 


measuring ten or eleven hands, in front of his 
house. 


ager Yor FaracrnheageA 
ATER  faaaaaa TTI 3 91 


An altar, measuring four hands, should be 
made in the mandapa and a portal of the same 
measurement should be made. 


SUNT He Ta ESATA, THAT: 

FRU HeraoyerAa seo eT: | 

Tea MT a force arcane FPN 3 cI 
eee feat: Fererar ettrenet ware 
Sa BUS BT Hara FASTIN 3 8 


He should place there a pitcher of water and 
worship the Guardians of the quarters 
(Dikpala). There the devotee should sit on a 


261 


black deer skin and over his head place the 
pitcher of water, after making a hole in its 
centre. He should allow the water to trickle, 
drop by drop on his head, and, in the same way, 
should allow a stream of milk to fall on the head 
of the symbol of Visnu. 


Gas WT Agha Gell: werafqa 
faeisy faurcacttayetaadert sol 
Gal U awa WSIS Malas 
FTA SHAT SF AMTATRTT UTA ¥ VI 
HARM ATaA TAA TATE 
Tada PACA HAI ¥ 21 
THM: Ua: waraataart 
UdMagaetedal BA SCS: 3 


There should be made a sacrificial pond, one 
hand deep, of the shape of a conical triangle and 
surrounded by three circles, and after that the 
Brahmanas should be asked to make an offering 
of milk, clarified butter and sesamum to Lord 
Visnu, after the rituals of Ekagni, with mantras 
sacred to Visnu, after which a stream of 
clarified butter, of half the size of a winnowing 
basket (Nispava), should be poured into the fire 
as well as the caru, mixed with cow's milk. 
Thirteen pitchers, full of water, should be 
placed. The mouths of these pitchers should be 
covered with plates of fig leaves containing 
different kinds of eatables and five jewels and 
covered with white cloths. Four Rgvedi 
Brahmanas should offer sacrifices to Fire, 
facing north. 


BHATIA Aya: 
aaa J AMA Bat: Aaa: | 
saparaearasa: UTITSaAqi ¥ vit 


Four Brahmanas, well mastered in the 
Yajurveda, should recite the mantra sacred to 
Rudra. Another group of four Brahmanas, 
versed in the Samaveda, should be asked to 
chant the hymns of the Samaveda, sacred to 
Visnu, along with Arista hymns. 


262 


Ue BEN Aaa ATCA CTT: | 

TRAST CAAT HEHE TAG SY I 

ara: weiss fargreadtaataste :| 

Ud Tatar AF Mase: aT YE I 

The twelve Brahmanas thus employed 

should be hououred with garlands of flowers, 
sandal paste, bed sheets, gold rings, gold sacred 
threads, gold bangles and different kinds of 
cloths. Miserliness should not be exercised in 
this respect. That night should thus be passed in 
rejoicings, accompanied with singing and 
music. 

STARR FT Wag TO Aaa FI 

aa: Wad famet Aye WAST viol 

To CMHEAs Wavy aAyA: | 

WaeaaT: Plead: BAS AA AAT YS 

URN: Way waaay: 

AT AGT Tal AMT MATT AAT ATI ¥ 8 

Double of all these Daksinads should be 

given to the preceptor and O Bhimasena,” on 
the following morning thirteen quiet and good 


milch cows, with their horns covered with gold, 
hoofs with silver, covered with cloth and 


painted with sandal, should be given away in | 


charity, along with milking pots of bell metal to 
Brahmanas well fed with nice eatables. 


HM F Welonaarraaafaetan 
YRA MATA A fra TaTA TN & 0 I 


Then the devotee should take his meal, 
without acid and_ salt. Afterwards, the 
Brahmanas should be dismissed, after being 
satisfied with dainty dishes. 


ITT USI YAMA Aa: | | 
WaATAa SAM: VM: SCMATIAA HG I 
frraca gee faenrferontes gaat fora: 

TOA TUE aa WaT TAT UI 


The devotee should follow the Brahmanas 
for eight steps in company of his son, wife, and 


Matsya Puranam 


should say : “O Kesava! The destroyer of all 
evils, be pleased. Siva is enthroned in the heart 
of Visnu and the Visnu in the heart of Siva. As I 
do not see any difference between the two, so 
there may be long life and prosperity to me.” 


Vatearal aE YR a 
araifa wa aaat Jaros wretagea: 14 3 
With these words, the devotee should send 


the pitchers, the cows, the bedding, the clothes, 
to the house of the Brahmana. 


ITs AIAN Tea 
VAT CASEI Aaa TATA & 


If many beddings cannot be given, then only 
one should be given away, with all necessary 
requisites. 


SireragTONts arataanfranreae 
ated Tees a sesigget Bra & 4 I 


One who wishes to acquire vast wealth 
should read the Puranas that day. 


TS Tae Ta Fara: 

He TAM MAH Hea FAA 4 & 

aM Hawes atreaamnent vara 

A atgregtt eat WaaTTET AT 

MF HEMUAT AT YT BeUy Vasa 4 Olt 

“OQ Bhimasena! You should also keep up 

this ordinance (vrata), without pride and with 
purity of heart. I have dictated all this out of 
affection for you. Bhima! This ordinance 
observed by you will be known after your 
name.” The ordinance (vrata) of Bhimasena 
dvadasi is the dispeller of all ills and was 
known as Kalydnini (welfare imparting) in the 
past Kalpas. 


ranean Ta Means tary 
CTC ICT 

TAM: CTPHATATT 
fareUrarereonfeaa: BAT & 2H 


Chapter-70 


Hea MT ATCT ATES 
AVA FAT PATA 


aM ecrs 
aay Beat AHI G 21 


Masa avrHetreanty 


Tea Wee 
aatta dea: uftaritnad 
Oy Tal AAT AIATATH oft 


O Valiant one! You will be the first to 
observe this ordinance (vrata) during this 
Varaha Kalpa, having remembered all about tt, 
you will be liberated from all sins and attain the 
rank of the Lord of Devas (Tridasas). The 
public women of other Kalpas having observed 
this vrata, have become celestial nymphs 
(Apsaras). One dairy maid, of a previous Kalpa 
(Abhira Kany4), having observed this vrata out 
of curiosity alone, has now become Urvasi in 
the heaven of Indra. The daughter of a Vaisya 
became the daughter of Puloma and the queen 
of Indra, by virtue of this ordinance; and 
similarly, Satyabhama, the maid of that girl, has 
become My beloved.” 


CATT: WT HUSA AE 
THAT ASoTATATT 

Tat a Hearse franz 
ASAIO AGATA: NE Vl 


Similarly in days of gone, the Sun also 
having bathed on the Kalyadnadvadasi in a 
thousand torrents, got the body of bright 
splendour, surrounded by halos, and has 
become the thousand-rayed Vivasvan. 


Send Beit WETS 


fagradcnteat WS qs Vi 


In former times, the same ordinance was 
observed by Mahendra and other gods, by the 
Vasus and by Asuras. No one, even with a 


263 


thousand tongues, can adequately describe its 
effect. 


HUTA AWeaaas: | 
Tested A: Harferil & 31 


Krsna, the King of Yadavas, will describe 
this tithi which, when observed, dispels all the 
sins of the iron (Kali) age, and liberates all his 
manes from the region of Yama (Naraka). 


q sequfaent sont waa 
Ufadte WTAE: 
fafatie aaerestTeats- 
WS ATUATATATAT AAA & ¥ Ut 


One who devoutly hears about it which 
dispels all sins or reads it for the welfare of 
others, gets whatever he desires and attains the 
equality with Brahma. 


HIM AT YW ays 
TT geet Wafers Ta 

MT UUgyA Gat fae: 
COTTUMS AT ATTTAT & I 


What was 1» the former Kalpa, known as 
Kalyani-dvadasi of the month of Magha, will 
come to be known as Bhimadvadasi, when 
observed by Bhimasena, the son of Pandu. 


Sid area wer agave 
AMAA AAT ASAT ANG 2H 


KK 


CHAPTER 70 
Vow of Anangadana, the method of 
worshipping Kama 
TaaTa 


SAUAATOT WaT: YAO WAT TA 
TATA TTA aT : 
WUSEATOT HASTA AAT TAT VI 


264 


Brahma said— O Siva! I have heard of the 
efficacy of Varna Asrama as well as of good 
conduct, as prescribed by the Dharma Sastras. I 
am now desirous of hearing the practice and 
conduct of public women. 


SUV MAMA: TAAL 1G UI 


Siva said— There will be 16,000 wives of 
Krsna in the Yuga mentioned above. When 
once, in the spring time, those ladies, having 
decorated themselves with ornaments, would be 
drinking together on the banks of a pond 
studded with full-budded lotus flowers, dancing 
with the wind and resounding with the 
melodious notes of the cuckoo and musical 
tunes of the big black bee, they will see Lord 
Samba, beautiful like Cupid, having eyes 
handsome like those of a gazelle, and wearing 
the garlands of malati, passing by. 


SAS AT ATT: AUTOMATA RTT: 
Wel Wea Afaeafa aera & 
They will cast on him amorous glances, their 


hearts being fired with lustful feelings and they 
being targets of the arrows of Cupid. 


TaAeA WTA: Tat ATA 
We aeahd at; Pal at eieeia wera: | 
Tate Id: HMAcleaelehad ATTY I 
Lord Krsna will come to know all that with 
his mental vision, and will curse them as 


follows: “Because you cherished the desire of 
amorous pastime during my absence, all of you 


Matsya Puranam 


will be taken away by bandits.” 
qt: Walfedt ea sé aeate Wey 
AUST: PITTA TATA ATTCA tI 2 Ut 
SATA STA ATRIA AUT: | 
SCRA TARA APA HCATOTAITHATI 8 It 
Vaaagaaean Aad Hater 
Tear eTaaste vfawafe 
SAA AT: UT WaT LAMA: Il Qo 


Then those ladies, overcome with grief on 
account of such a curse, will please Krsna (by 
their prayers), when the Lord will say: 
“Dalbhya Rsi of eternal soul, the favourite of 
the Brahmanas, will teach you a vrata, which 
will be the means of your liberation from the 
bondage and which will actually free you all. 
This vrata will be of great benefit of futurity. 
With these words, the Lord of Dvaravati left 
them. 


ad: let Weal ANTAAY Fell 

Fraga Whaet ageaga feaarran Ve 

Wa aga wdantee farisssrt 

ENT POINT SAAT Aga! 221 
faery a chieredarg waa 

SATS ATCA SHAT ATT ARTAUT: 11 23 


TATA TST MOTT YA: WA: 
CUA aAT ATTA HAUT: | YY I 
TTT AeA Slice THI 


WAL AMAT TTA TTT AL 84 Ut 
feoaMat at A Ue AACE TT 
BRAG: Tara RUTHAAL| 
MHS HTT PATS FRAT: 1 8G 


Then, ages after, there will be a great 
slaughter, owing to the misala affair; and Lord 
Krsna, after relieving the universe of its great 
burden, will go to heaven. The Y4adavas will 
have ceased to exist; and the ladies of Krsna 
will be seized by robbers, a warrior, like 
Arjuna, being defeated (and unable to protect 


Chapter-70 


them). These robbers will take them to the 
seashore and enjoy with them there. When these 
ladies will bemoan their hard lot, the sage 
Dalbhya, will appear before them. Those ladies 
will worship the sage by offering him arghya 
and salute him again and again. They will then, 
with tearful eyes, remember their past 
enjoyments, use of garlands and sandal paste, 
and think of their Lord, the unconquerable 
master of the universe, as well as of flowers and 
the beautiful city of Dvarika, glittering with its 
riches and gems, and of their respective abodes 
therein, the Divine forms of their sons dwelling 
in that sacred city. Then they will put the 
following question to the sage, standing before 
him. 


Tera od: 
cea aa: Uae at TATA 
CATA ATH: MTT Aa V9 Ut 
sifesisha wa garages a ara 
HATHA TAT MT AVATTATTAT: 1h Ve 
avaTaG at qaeaal Ge TUNA 
HAART A STARA 1 28 1 
“Sage! We have all been forcibly defiled by 
these robbers. Now we have lost our Dharma 
and place ourselves at your mercy. O Seer! 
Please explain, why we have been degraded to 
the status of concubines, we, who have been 


united with God. You have been ordained by 
the wise Krsna to be our guide. Please explain 


to us the duties of concubines.” Thus 
questioned, the sage will say. 
area] Sata 


WeTHSaeny TT Ata Aa! 

TAMA A MAA ANSTSHATHTANTA: lt 2 0 1 
EMMA: Wat TSANSTATA: WT 
TTA UE: w arfad 

aa ATT S eat Vat AfaTATaMTH 2 VN 
TATE FT: MIATA TT 


265 


VATIAST ATMA AAT: 112 2M 
GANT USEPA RTT: | 
Wat ARTA TA MATTAPAN 2 3 


Dalbhya said~ “O Ladies! In the days gone 
by, all of you were sporting in the Mansarovara 
lake, when Narada, chanced to go there. Then 
you were the daughters of Agni, in the form of 
nymphs. You did not salute the sage, but asked 
him how Narayana, the Lord of the universe, 
would be your husband. Narada blessed you 
with the boon asked for, but also cursed you for 
not saluting him. He said that, by giving away 
two beddings, according to prescribed rites, on 
the twelfth day of the bright fortnight, in the 
months of Caitra and Vaisakha you would get 
Krsna as your husband in the next life.” 


TERA WO FT TATA 

ufvypisfes tary fart at afaeatan 

AEM: Tal APA AAATAT VY 

Va Aeges Aya Uw aaa: 

aaa: Wal Waa: ATTA fsAT: 

Serna aged MaHU AUEAT 24 I 

And cursed you as follows~- “Because in 

your conceit of beauty and prosperity you have 
omitted to salute me before putting me this 
question, you will also be separated from Krsna 
and will be lowered to the rank of public 
women, after beg forcibly carried away by 
thieves. In consequence of the curses of Narada 
and Krsna you gave way to lustful feelings and 
have become prostitutes. Now listen to what | 
Say. 
aT STATI 

TU aA Te SAY HIM: Yt 

SAAT TANG TAA TARTAR & li 

qa araaearior varata a array 

UU ah weer as a 

a Aalor say: WaraT Feat AT VON 


266 


Once upon a time thousands and thousands 
of the demons (Danavas, Asuras, Daityas and 
Raksasas) were killed in the war between the 
Devas and the demons. Indra told their 
numberless widows and those women who were 
forcibly seized and enjoyed, to lead the life of 
prostitutes and remain devoted to the kings and 
the Devas. 


34 Jara 

SPAT SHAT FTAA 
THANE SAHA AN VSM 
TH: TaNATTCM: Ta ANT AT Aaa: | 
aaa a dard wararata yrds 281 
aq: aerepeaMea YEH a: TaN 
Pearrearat &: WT ASAT STATA 3 oN 
coat fart a yoare wyUrer 
Tafewaarants Wea Taya: | 
TAO AUNT: HAT TATA A 3 VW 


Indra continued, “you should look upon, 
with equal eye, the kings your masters and on 
Sidra. All of you will attain prosperity, 
according to your fate. You should satisfy those 
who would come to you with adequate sum of 
money to enjoy your company, even if they be 
poor. But you should not give pleasure to proud 
men. You should give away ccw, land, grain 
and gold, according to your means, in charity on 
the sacred day of worshipping the Devas or the 
ancestors. You should act as the Brahmanas in 
work and speech. 


FMAACI MATIAS Aa: 
Sfaaol AAAS DW ATA 3 VU 


In addition to this, I shall also tell you an 
ordinance (or vrata), which all of you should 
blindly practise.” 


arkacureaemdgataal fag: | 

Tey Haar SAT: VN AT WATT 33N 
AMARA AAA WATE 

aet Wayey Afaanararverta 


Matsya Puranam 


This ordinance has been held to be the best 
means of crossing unscathed the sea of the evils 
of life, by those learned in the Vedas. The 
women folk should bathe in the water mixed 
with several herbs, on a Sunday, when there 
falls Hasta, Pusya or Punarvasu asterism. 


q aba 3 YI 
HUTT Wet UT WE st Algeria 

Qe awaits afe wifaad TAN sG I 
A GRSTATSTS WaT BT TATA 

Cas ROAM WATASHI 3G 
seharafa AHuvsaTeIA ATU 

STE YATTA YTS SATO 3 19 1 
Waa & alter facies Weer 
Wala UW als Saal WHAT 321 


They should then approach the God of Love 
and worship Pundarikaksa, by reciting the 
names of Cupid, viz. the feet of Visnu, the God 
of the gods, should be worshipped with the 
words, “Kdmdya namah”, the legs with 
“Mohakarine namah’, the region of Cupid with 
“Kandarpanidhaye namah”, the waist with 
“Priti mate namah,” the navel with 
“Sankhyasamudrdya namah’, the stomach with 
“Ramdya namah,” the heart with “Hrdayesdya 
namah,’ the breasts with ‘“Ahlddakdrine 
namah,” the throat with “Utkanthadya namah,” 
the mouth with Anandakdrine namah,” the left 
limbs with Puspadhanvaya namah,” the right 
limbs with “Puspabandya namah,” the head 
with “Mdnasdya namah,” the hair of the head 
with “Vilolaya namah,” and all the body with 
“Sarvatmane namah.” 


TA: TPA PITS UMTS A 
Tet UtaeATS Vg aRNTS AZ < il 

TA ARTA AMAT AA: 
HAMA AA: Wied AAT Tel AA: FHA wo 
Ta: Wed Are AN: Wale | 


They should then salute the respective Gods 


Pr reat pe ee Le 


Chapter-70 


and Goddesses with the following mantras, 
“Namah Sivaya, namah Santaya”, “Namah 
Pasankusadhardya,” “Namah Gadine,” 
“Namah Pitavastraya (yellow-robed one)” 
“Namah  Sanrkhacakra-dhardya,” “Namah 
Nardyandya”, “Namah Kdmdatmane,” “Namah 
Sarvasantyai,” “Namah Prityai’, “Namah 
Ratyai,” “Namah Sriyai,” “Namah Pustyai,” 
“Namah ~~ Tustyai,’ “Namah — Sarvartha 
sampade.” 

Ue AAT CAMA TH TTT 

TAA TUE DT UAT Y eh 


The women folk should then worship the 
Lord, whose body is Cupid himself, by offering 
Him incense, flowers, sandal and eatables. 


aa BA THe TET TeTTTTT 
HATATS WHT TUT: 1 2 
Afterwards, the Brahmana, well versed in 
the Vedanta, who must be virtuous and free 
from bodily deformity, should be honoured with 
the offerings of incense, flowers, sandal. 
Meagan FAUT ITT 
qet fara a carne: wrrnfaan san 
And a quantity (of the measure Prastha) of 
uncooked rice, along with a pot, full of clarified 
butter, should be given away to the same 


Brahmana, after saying, “Lord Madhava, be 
pleased.’ 


WEEN a Aa fra 
Tee ameaisafata fertsaared Ty xi 


That Brahmana should be well fed and be 
devoutly looked upon as Cupid, for the sake of 
sexual enjoyment. 


Tacs farqerdpaltgct aa 
TAMTAA ATAU ATT ATAUTT IE YG 


Each and every desire of that Brahmana 
should be satisfied by the woman devotee. She 
should, with all heart and soul and with a smile 
on her face, yield herself up to him. 


267 


VAM Ma AAT ATT| 
TUSAMIST A AAT AAT SST & & I 
ATAMS Ua UTA Te ATH 


FARR HT Peat TEMEAATITT Yo 
AMAT ALRATAT ATRATATIT YT 


ASI 


q SEL as! F * 5 aps 


This rite should be observed on every 
Sunday; and the devotee should give away the 
above mentioned quantity of uncooked rice for 
a period of thirteen months; at the expiry of 
which, the same Brahmana should be given a 
full bedding, with all its requisites, viz. pillows, 
good sheets, dipa (lamp), a pair of shoes, 
umbrella, sandals, a small pieces of mattress to 
sit upon. 


AURA STATS each 
PONT: WHCHAUATCT TTT: 1 8 
Next, that Brahmana, with his wife, should 

be honoured with gold threads, gold rings, fine 
Cloth, bangles and with incense, garlands of 
flowers and sandal paste. 

area WUeich Tenia Peay 

ATTA ATTA WGoll 


a rj 5a 8 o J | 


Taare 
Seed WANT aeleaT AT WaT G a 

The images of Cupid and Rati, seated on a 
plate of copper, placed on a vessel full of 
molasses, their eyes being of gold and they 
being well dressed, should be given away, along 
with a fine milch cow, a vessel of bell metal and 
a piece of sugarcane, by reciting the mantra of 
the following signification. 


GIA A Ua aaa: Aer 
wae Ue FAN Met WANG ZI 


As I do not make any difference between 
Visnu and Cupid, so O Lord Visnu, be pleased 
to always fulfil my desires. 


268 


GM A aren serrata aa Agra 
AMT AAT Sag MAT Ta HS WANG ZU 


O Kesava! As the Goddess Laksmi never 
remains apart from you, in the same way make 
my body Your dwelling place. 


aM a ated ta wiper: 
H Se HAMleta ated TAMA 4 vi 
After that, the Brahmana, accepting the 


image of Cupid, should pronounce the 
following Vedic mantra. ‘Ka Idam Kasmat.’ 


aa: Wefeunt Aca fat fergsary 
Waa Was TMT FE TAT GM 
Then the Brahmana should dismissed, after 
being circumambulated, and beddings and other 


things should be sent to the house of the 
Brahmana. 


ad: wofa at fant wad yearn: 
GAT: Wat BT GAT AAMT Y GI 


Henceforth, any Brahmana coming to them 
for the sake of sexual enjoyment on a Sunday, 
should be respected and honoured. 

Ud wey Taare earrar 
Tea aT WiTAS AT AAPATTNY 9 


In this way, the good Brahmanas should be 
kept satisfied for a period of thirteen months; 
but if they go abroad, their course of action will 
be different. 


TATAA WIAA AASATA Aa 

Teste aanfaet miyftat FN Y cit 

da Ot Ae AT CAAT aT AA: 

ATA ISTP VAPATTI 4 3 

If, with the consent of that Brahmana, 

another handsome person come to them, these 
women should, with love and affection and to 
the best of their ability, perform all the fifty- 
eight kinds of observances of Love, favourite of 


man and gods, which would lead to pregnancy 
and which is not harmful to their soul's welfare. 


Matsya Puranam 


Wits afad way vada fasted: 
HIMNSS Tat 7 TBARS ArT & oI 
I have described to you this vrata in detail, 


which, when always performed, never leads the 
prostitutes to sin. 


Yeget Tah Say YT TAM 
afee Unad Was Tadteaty waT I & vit 
[ have fully related to you what Indra said to 


the women of the Danavas (demons) in ancient 
days. 


TATA TAHT aT TAT | 
SMU A HMA AH ATA NG IU 
O, Women of beauty! This vrata is the 
dispeller of all sins and giver of innumerable 


benefits. I wish well of you; hence you should 
do as | told you. 


Hilla ASMTGVS AA 
SCAU Merah a eM 

TM Ufa CarTaT TTA 
Tae FATT 1G BA 


She (the well-favoured), who follows this 
ordinance strictly, goes to the region of 
Madhava, and is honoured by the Devas, and in 
the end obtains a place in the Visnu-loka. 


Fd Heat DW CAMA: Voll 


The Lord said— “The sage Dalbhya, having 
thus taught those women how to observe this 
ordinance, will go to his own place; and those 
women of divine origin will practise the vrata, 
as directed.” 


Sit AIRS TET ARAMA ATA 
TATA SATA 19 0M 


KR 


Chapter-71 


CHAPTER 71 


Description of the ordinance known as 
AstinyaSsayanadvitiya 
gelaret 
Trargiste aergista a; wTeat Wasa 
qeante Feit ca ae TaH THT 
ammaqerae aay faretear 
Wears eG 7 Ade Tag It 
Brahma said— “O Lord, Graceful to all! by 
delusion or pride if a man indulge illicit 
connection with other's wife, what is the 
ordinance for him to avert the sin. Be pleased to 
explain to me by the observance of which there 
may be no separation between husband and 


wife, nor should there be any grief, disease, 
fear, or pain.” 


TTA ara 


TUTE Fear HOTA WTS: | 
eiula Weis: Wel Aaa Ayag= 1 3H 


Lord said—- Kesava always reposes in 
company with Laksmi, in the ocean of milk, on 
the second day of the dark fortnight, in the 
month of Sravana. 


Tea TT Mears Walaa 

Tyfewaerne BA HUTA TANS I 
By worshipping Govinda on that day all the 
desires are fulfilled, and by giving away cows, 


land, gold, the devotee goes and resides in the 
region of Visnu for a period of 700 Kalpas. 


SUA AH fete werent fre 
TEA META OUT fer aera: I 
The ordinance is known under the name of 
Asiinyasayanadvitiya, on which day Visnu 
should be worshipped, according to the rituals 
and mantras mentioned hereafter. 


HATS STS TAS TT 
Tew AT MOTTST A ary TARTS G I 


269 


The devotee should pray— “O Srivatsadhari, 
Srikanta, Sridhdmana, Sripati, Avinasi, let this 
house-holder's life of mine which 1s the giver of 
trivarga (Dharma, Artha and Kama) may never 
be destroyed. 


SAAT AT MOTT CATT: Tear 
foal WT MOTT WIStT STAIASATTI 9 Ut 


O Purusottama! Let there be no destruction 
of my Agni or Pitrs, nor let there be any 
separation between husband and wife. 


me faqerdt ca A Helfer wary 
aM Hera sa TY faqeaary ci 


Deva, as you never remain apart from your 
consort, Laksmi, similarly, let there be no 
aloofness between me and my wife. 


| PART TYR ate Wea aM Td: 


WAT TATA ALA TTTSAI 8 


Madhusiidana! As your household is never 
bereft of the goddess Laksmi, similarly, let not 
mine be devoid of my wife.” 


Tdateatrate eacaea alder 
Wey UAC AAAI AA: Qo 


After this prayer, the hymns of Visnu should 
be sung 1n accompaniment of various kinds of 
musical instruments; if that may not be feasible, 
then the mere ringing of the bell is sufficient, 
for a bell 1s an embodiment of all musical 
instruments. 


Va aay Mfaapanicatsstay 
THAN AAA AAT SAA 2 i 


After thus worshipping Govinda, _ the 
devotee should have his meals at night, 
avoiding oil, salt and acids. 


Ta: WAT A Canta aTa AAT 
SOA VAT SEN AATUIAT BUA 


In the morning, the image of Laksmi and 
Visnu, candle, food grain, cloth, utensils and 
bedstead should be given away. 


270 


| 8 'r) 4 | 


TBH eh SATA TATA 23 1 


A pair of sandles, shoes, umbrella, camara, 
mattress, white sheet should also be given away 
with the bedstead. 

ararafasat wertrfatary 
TINT AMT PTS AAA 8X Ut 
seagig fara aera qt 
STAM Aaasa MATA TU VU 


Pillows, bedding, fruits, ornaments, should 
also be given away, along with the bedstead, 
according to the means of the worshipper, 
without exercising jealousy and miserliness, to a 
Brahmana, who may be versed in the Vedas and 
be a devotee of Visnu, having a large family 
and having no bodily defects. 


qaafaya erated faa: | 
UAT AT SENTRA AAT TH 8G I 


At the time of giving away the bedstead, the 
Brahmana, along with his wife, should be 
seated on it and the former should be given a 
vessel, full of nice eatables. 


MAO Hairy rearaaaary 
wfeat tacaes Bleqett Facade 


The golden image of Visnu alongwith other 
equipments should be given away to the 
Brahmana after placing it on a pitcher full of 
water. 


Ue ae TUpara aT eT: 
faagaat edt ARTAUTOTTAUT: It Re tt 


A at farar Tears 
4 faeat 4 pearat eeadt saat: safer ee 


A woman with a husband, or a widow, who 
keeps up this ordinance according to the 
prescribed nites, without niggardliness, goes to 
and resides in heaven. They, being always 
dutiful and free from sorrow and blessed with 
sons, cattle and wealth, always remain in 


Matsya Puradnam 


company of their husband, without being 
separated so long as the sun, moon and stars 
remain in heaven. 


1 TAUN As At faa 
AAUMSAT TAU Al 
HAA ANA FaMets WEA! oi 


© Grandfather, their sons, cattle and wealth 
are never destroyed, and the devotee goes to the 
region of Visnu where he resides for seventy 
seven thousand Kalpas. 


Sta SIR WATTS yA 
ATH RAPES EAT: 1119 21 


x** 


CHAPTER 72 


The vow of Angaraka, the dialogue between 
Pippalada and Yudhisthira 


Sut sara 
TY UTR a Aer AMT 
Vaca at ater grad frase 
foorereer tater yfateracert: 11 ei 
Siva said— “O Pitimaha Brahma! Now listen 
to the ordinance that will be the giver of wealth, 
and will come in vogue at the end of future 


Dvapara. It is in the form of a conversation 
between Yudhisthira and the sages, Pippalada.” 


aed afrared frorené werqy! 

TTT AAT UT We aera 

afetea agar ada ercrerrq 2 it 
“Yudhisthira, the pious, will go to 


Naimisaranya before the sage Pippalada, and 
put this question to him.” 


qeaet sara 
areal asad area 
watem fra afdwrat at wa 3H 


Yudhisthira said, “O sage! How health, 
prosperity and firm faith in religion can be 
maintained, and how can unflinching devotion 


Chapter-72 


be centred in Siva and Visnu, and how may one 
be free from all bodily defect?” 


Sat Jara 
Tae Tey fracas aaa: 
suey Ugeatta A agar afta: i xi 


Siva said— “O Brahma! I shall now tell you 
the reply of the sage Pippalada to the queries of 
Yudhisthira.” 


AUNTS Sara 
Ag YS AMT Ws Sart HAT a 
ARAMA TEA TTA 1 


Pippalada said— “King! You have put a most 
useful question. I shall now tell you something 
about it.” So saying, he will describe the 
Angdaravrata. 

HASTA Aes TATA 
favre dare wana a aT I 
About this, there is the following ancient 


story. There took place a dialogue between 
Virocana and Bhargava. 


Weel Ya ser Tersutaray 
BUNT HAT ASFA TSA: 19 UI 
Te MY Aetarel ferret Fert aN 
TAM lad TT WHS ALTA 


Once upon a time, the mighty sage, Sukra. 
seeing Virocana, the handsome, sixteen-years 
old son of Prahlada, laughed, and saying, 
Sadhu, Sadhu, addressed him, “O mighty armed 
Virocana! O prince! O may you be always 
prosperous.” Then Virocana, the enemy of the 
Devas, wondering at the laughing of the sage, 
inquired. 


TAHT STH TAT 
ay WMeat Waa Tees AU 


OQ Brahmana! tell me the reason of your 
laughter without any apparent cause and why 
did you again say, Sadhu, Sadhu, to me? 


271 


aMdated Yoh Sara Aaa aT: 
Ad AAT Poll 


Sukra said- “I laughed on the sudden 
remembrance of the glory of the Vrata (which 
you had the good luck of witnessing in your 
past life and which gave you this handsome 
form). 


UU sateen HITT T Ble: | 
BY ARMAGH Tefageieed: il Vit 


In ancient times; a drop of perspiration 
trickled down the forehead of Siva at the time 
of His getting into rage to annihilate Daksa. 


RRA A PAU AeA aT | 
VAHAEATAA AAA: 1h 22 UI 
ag sft Wad: BUTEA: 
HAUSA AHI TATA: | 
Prades Wa: Teraa fatrarta: 1 23 

That drop penetrated into all the seven lower 
regions and dried up all the seven oceans. 
Afterwards, out of the same drop, Virabhadra, 
with many a mouth and eyes emitting flashes of 
fire from them, was born. He was endowed with 
myriads of hands and feet, and destroyed the 
sacrifice of Daksa. This Earth-born Virabhadra 
destroyed the sacrifice of Daksa and then 
attempted to burn up the three worlds. 
Whereupon, Siva intervened, when He saw 
Virabhadra was going to consume the universe, 
and made him abstain from his campaign of 
destruction. 


Pt VA ag saa 
SOMATA Mee HAT LVI 
MAMTA AAG ASOT WAT eT 
Weed TAT: Wat HTT STATA 84 


Siva said~ “O Virabhadra! You have 
destroyed the sacrifice of Daksa, and now you 
should not consume the universe. Be calm. You 
will be prime in the mansion of auspicious 


IIT? ~ a rJiP we 4 


272 


planets, and people will worship you through 
my favour. 


TEN Str Gata ateaa sat 
Vacttenstadla BW Aa we Maea LE I 


“You will be known as Angaraka (the planet 
Mars), the son of the Earth, and your form in 
the Divine region will be a pearless one in 
beauty. 


qa wat Tafa wget wafed AT: 
SUNN Aad Usaha ot 


“On the fourth day of a bright fortnight, 
wher it falls on a Tuesday, the people 
worshipping you will get everlasting beauty and 
prosperity and health.” 


WaT Mia TTH | 
THAT TAA AT TATA: 11 Re I 
Hearing such words of Siva, that son of the 


Earth, instantly became placid and afterwards 
turned into a planet. 


G Halas Waraifeanyary 
SUA HAA A YSU A SAAT 1 28 I 
Wea KIAMA: WAAcsE 

fafaat a ofa TeIrta fase 2 ott 
fates sft weeretrat Caerrar: | 

WEN RAAT TAT TT TVA 


samt RTA Gear faterrarrer 2 gil 
arg Treats TAHA Aree 


Upaashe vagaries fay had 2 2 


“Some Sidra was worshipping that planet 
Mars, and you saw the ceremony, on account of 
which you are so handsome and renowned, O 
you son of Prahlada. You are known as 
Virocana by the Devas and the Asuras, because 
you possess various (vi) far-reaching 
intelligence (Rochi), and hence you are called 
Virocana (far-reaching light). I was astonished 
to see the great beauty possessed by you simply 
by your looking at the ceremony of 


Matsya Puranam 


Angarakavrata and consequently I greeted you 
with the words Sadhu, Sadhu, thinking of the 
ereat mahatmya of that vrata. When, by merely 
looking at that ceremony, one gets beauty and 
lordliness as yours, I do not know what would 
be the case 1f a man were to observe this 
ordinance.” 


Gael THAT MOTTA 
fafa tarfeary 
Metend A Tees 
ASP Ta ST AAT ISU 


“Q Prince! You looked with faith at the 
ceremony of giving away the cows, in charity, 
at the conclusion of the vrata performed in 
honour of Mars, the son of Earth, by a low-born 
despicable Sidra, and consequently you have 
been given such a handsome form and are born 
in the royal family of Daityas.” 


Sy Jara 
BT Aga FAT APTA TEI: | 
WeIaTSa AT: YA: UES PATA Vw 
Siva said— “On hearing those words of 


Sukra, Virocana was very much astonished and 
asked him.” 


fatrat sara 
WAM MAG Mya Aaa: | 
SIM F MEM AT SE AAT 24 I 
Virocana said— “O sage! I am eager to hear 


about the ordinance as well as about the 
charities witnessed by me in my previous life.” 


were ot fat cea aeragereta 
Slt aemeat Aart WA: Wrarer Fre AE I 
“Please explain to me the glory and the 
rituals connected with that ordinance.” Hearing 


those words of Virocana, Sukra, began to 
explain it in detail. 


Ws sara 
UAatet Fal Haft eA 


Chapter-72 


Fel At al HA TaraMfasyad: i Voi 
Sukra said— O Danava! if the 4" day of the 
bright fortnight fall on a Tuesday, the devotee 


should bathe after rubbing sand over his body, 
and then wear rubies. 


ata feat wat Hoa See: | 
Waa areas arrest 1 20 


He should mutter the mantras, “Agnimurdha 
divo,” by turning his face towards the north. If 
the devotee be a Sidra, he should silently, 
without uttering any mantra, meditate over the 
form of Bhauma (Mars). The company of 
women should be avoided that day. 


aaa SMart WeATY MAT 
MOT TOTTI: MATT 1 Ae 
At dusk, the courtyard of the house should 
be plastered with cow dung and adomed with 


floral wreaths, and uncooked rice should be 
placed all round. 


MATa Val HEH TA! 
FLPMA FT THAME 3 oI 


Thereafter, worshipping Bhauma, a lotus of 
eight petals should be drawn in saffron. If 
saffron is not available, then it should be drawn 
by red-sandal. 


Ua: Aa: Hat TIMI aa 7 
TUS THM: TAT TTA: I 3 vl 
Four pitchers, full of eatables, should be 


placed, and uncooked rice and rubies should be 
placed in them. 


UTA aA Ae Hens fafaents a 
Temeatea ad ata fafraeaq 3 21 
The pitchers should be located in the four 


comers and fruits, flowers, incense, etc., should 
be placed over them. 


aU afterares 
Va: Wt: Haale Waray! 


273 


qcat TAM Utes 
AI VATA TATA 3 3 I 
Then a milch cow, with her horns covered 
with gold, and hoofs with silver, should be 
given away to a Brahmana in charity, along 
with a milking vessel of bell metal, and her calf. 
So also should be given an ox, and the seven 
kinds of grains tied in seven different pieces of 
cloths. 
TSS Yet Wa 
Blanrqereatagevsy| 
aga eae fafas 
Ua qeeaatt ara 3 vi 


An image of the size of a thumb should be 
made in gold. Its four arms should be extensive. 
The image should be placed on a vessel of gold, 
and the vessel should be placed on raw sugar 
and clarified butter. 


ane faareara 


Patel: YAYSTA AAAI 34 I 


Afterwards, all that should be given away in 
charity to a Brahmana who is versed in the 
sacrificial rites, is able to restrain his passions, 
is clam and modest, 1s well-born and has large 
family. It should never be given to a Brahmana, 
who is a hypocrite. Then the devotee should 
recite the following mantras, with his hands 
folded. 


ufiga Tem welea fortes: 
SU wat Waatss Vero AMIS TUBE IN 
O Son of Earth, O blessed one, you have 
been born of the sweat drop of lord Siva, [ pray 


you for beauty and have taken shelter under 
you. Be pleased to accept this arghya, I salute 


AVE 


274 


you. Please accept this libation of water. 
WAU Fare TheaeraT TOT 
AASaA MAL THATCINATICHT: 11 39 


The libation of water (arghya) mingled with 
red sandal, should be made by reciting the 
above mantras, and the Brahmana should be 
worshipped with red sandal, red flowers and red 
cloths etc. 


SMa TOT ats TAT 
Wai FT Vfenel TEN VaNTATA TATA 3 CI 


By uttering the same mantra, a cow, with an 
ox, should be given away in charity in honour 
of Mars, and a bedstead, well-arranged with all 
its requisites, should also be given away. 


GMeyAy with Beara efad Vel 
AATUTAT SA ACAAATATAII 3 FN 
All the nice things available or the things 
appreciated by the devotee wishing to acquire 


everlasting benefits, should be given away in 
charity to the Brahmana. 


Welaut ad: Heat fas farsa 


TATA Yo lt 


Tita Vearic. 3 


After this, the Brahmana should be 
circumambulated and dismissed, and _ the 
devotee should take his evening meal with 
clarified butter, avoiding salt and acid. 


TEM TY WA: Halcare rasa 
ATT AT A TT AqUS AgaIA av en 


I shall now describe to you the benefits that 
accrue to the devotee by observing this 
Angaraka vrata for eight times or even four 
times with devotion. 


RUT: Pa SAT 
faoitara fora we: aeEtafeat waTi x 21 


He gets handsomeness, luck and devotion to 
Siva and Visnu in all his lives, and becomes the 
king of the seven realms. 


Matsya Puranam 


UAHCUAEENOT Hxettch WEA 
aaa eI TTNACATATATI Y 3 1 


He lives for seven Kalpas in the clime of 
Siva after death, and, O Prince of the Daityas! 
You should also therefore perform this Vrata.” 


Trae Sava 
seaqaen yyratsty 
ST Cea Meat WaT 
wa UT THE AANT- 
aasaxa Aefaet FaraT XI 


Pippalada said— After thus describing the 
rituals, the sage Sukra went away and Virocana, 
the Prince of the Daityas, afterwards kept this 
observance, according to the prescribed rites, 
and O King Yudhisthira! You should also keep 
it. The knowers of Veda say that its fruit 1s 
inexhaustible. 


Sut Jara 
aaa Wes a freee 
aaa Dareyaaraaay 
TON AAAS 
erenta fats srary® faerti 
Siva said s Hearing all this from the sage 
Pipalada, the King Yudhisthira, of the 
wonderful deeds and prowess, said — “Let it be 
so.” He then performed this Vrata. One who 
hears about it, after pondering over the words of 


Pippalada with attention, also gets the same 
benefit by the grace of the lord Mars. 


Sfa stareat veTgatsgtagd AA 
PRAAPTATSEMNA: 1119 2M 


K*K* 


|. The word Bhagavan which means one who is possessed of 
Bhaga or spiritual power which is of six sorts namely, 
dominion, might, glory splendour wisdom and dispassion. 


Chapter-73 


CHAPTER 73 


Method of the pacification of planet 
Brhaspati and Sukra 


TaUeTe Jara 
SMA: TOT OT Wht Yew WTA 
TATASAM A AMT Yeas fea VN 
Tad at aul araAsaat WA: 
yeayeracad Faradegeaha 21 


Pippalada said— “O King! now listen to the 
rituals pertaining to the pacification of the 
malignant aspect of the planet Sukra (Venus). 
On the beginning of a journey or its end, or on 
the occasions of the appearance and the 
disappearance of Sukra, a vessel of silver, gold 
or bell metal should be made and filled in with 
white flowers, white cloth and uncooked rice. 

faerea Tate Boh Brae 
TAU A Aa APTA Faeaqii 3 


A silver image of Sukra should be made and 
given away to a Brahmana well-versed in the 
Samaveda, after decorating it with pearls and 
placing it on the top of the vessel. 


THe AAAHAM TT PTT 
aa Matagas Yee AMIS Avi 


At the time of giving away the image, the 
following mantra should be uttered— “O master 
of all realms, O Bhrgunandana, O Kavi, 
salutation to you. Accept this arghya for the 
fulfilment of my desires.” 


Wareaed HAMAET A ATA 
Farrar Faw WetaAaN 4 I 


The person who thus gives away all the 
things mentioned above, in charity, according to 
the aforementioned rites, when undertaking a 
journey, etc., at the time of the appearance of 
Sukra, goes to the region of Visnu, after getting 
all his desires fulfilled. 


275 


Waa H A A EA aT A Merah: YR: 
aoa: Uftanfey memset 
aad A area fafer: carorifeagan € i 
The devotee should not take his meals until 
he has finished his worship of Sukra by offering 
Him white flowers, fried cakes and cakes of 
urad pulse and things made of wheat and gram. 


The person who does so attains trivarga 
(religious merit, wealth and enjoyment). 


Tagraead: Tat weet afafer 

aura Bqotraterqareaqi 9 i 
WAAR Heal TAA TIT: | 
COMPA CTT AC 


Yudhisthira! the worship of Brhaspati 
(Jupiter) has been described in the same way, to 
which now listen. An image of Brhaspati should 
be made in gold and placed in a golden vessel, 
after being dressed in yellow cloth. The devotee 
then should bathe in water mixed with 
sesamum, or with water mixed with the juice of 
butea-frondosa or Pancagavya. 


WarsITaaay Yael F BRAT! 
MOT I MAT ATS Te FazaqN <I 
He should then put on yellow raiments and 
paint his head with sandal mixed with saffron 
and then pour libations of clarified butter in the 
fire. Then, after saluting Brhaspati, the image 


should be given away to a Brahmana, along 
with a cow. 


THEASHETA AT ATaud A FeeAA| 
RIC: VifSAAMGAT AMY AAs Vol 


Brhaspati should thus be - saluted:— 
“Salutations to Brhaspati, the giver of solace to 
those falling under the influence of evil stars.” 


ARTA BAT VAPASAG Tl 
HaGead: Yat Waly AMATI V2 


O, son of Kunti! One who thus worships 


276 


Brhaspati on a Sankranta or on undertaking a 
journey or on other auspicious occasions, 
attains all his wishes. 


ofa sare wargemt Tegangenfateram 
PO AAATS ATTA: 1119 3 1 


KR 


CHAPTER 74 


The vow and merits of Kalyana-saptami 


velrara 
WTA CATAL | 
fafacad Wares TaN aA 2 
Brahma said— O Lord Siva! You are the 
One, who sees all beings safely through the 
ocean of the world, please therefore describe 
some such ordinance, as may lead people to 


cross the sea of the world in safety and attain 
health, heaven and happiness. 


Sat Jara 
at a yaeata ana aaeaoraaay 
fayinaedt ded Getleut TATE 2H 
Vea TaAa Yat AMT HATHA 
WANA THAT YMAAATT 3 
Gala: Went: Wat gafey fara: 
fererraret aeanity wea TTT: WY 


Siva said to Brahma! I shall describe to you 
the Saura dharma, consisting of the following 
vratas : (1) Kalyana saptami (11) Visokasaptam!. 
So also (111) Phala Saptami, the destroyer of sins 
and giver of great merit. Similarly, (iv) the 
sacred Sarkara Saptami (v) Kamala Saptami (v1) 
Mandara Saptami, (vii) Subha Saptami, the 
giver of auspicioiusness. These are the givers of 
endless merit. All these have been respected by 
the Devas and the Rsis and I shall describe their 
rituals to you, one by one, in due order. 


aa F Yararamnfeena fet wae 
AF Beater ary faster a Fret 4 


Matsya Puranam 


When a Sunday falls on the 7th day of a 
bright fortnight, it is known as Kalyanini or 
Vijaya Saptami. 

Mea WaT SRA AAT 


AA: VSG: UHRA: WReTA TI & UI 
On that day the devotee should bathe in 
cow’s milk, in the morning, and put on white 
clothes and then sit facing the east and draw the 
picture of an eight-petalled lotus flower, made 
of uncooked rice powder. 


Weyaiseed HA AgeTai a cAftreary 
yeast faq Wad: HARI 9 


He should, then, draw a circle round that 
lotus, and in the centre of it draw its pericarp, 
with the same material. Then, on all sides of 11, 
he should draw eight pitcures of the Sun with 
flowers and rice. 


aor aaarata arSTata UTAH 
ara fearauata fara sft tad ci 
wiry qaurata wreaTata UTrAct 
wet faadariat Tad GEA ser eit 
The devotee should put a pinch of uncooked 
rice on each petal of the lotus, after reciting the 
following mantras— namah, 


Martanddya namah, namah, 
Vidhatre namah, Varundya namah, Bhaéskardya 


“Tapandya 
Divdkardya 


namah, Vikartandya namah and Ravaye namah, 
respectively, beginning with the picture of the 
Sun on the Eastern petal and then on those on 
the South-Eastern, Southern, South-Western, 
Western, North-Western, Northern and lastly on 
the North-Eastern petals! 


Meat U Wel AMSA WAT 
TAU: Wea TARAS I 20M 


eee i i ee el 


|. Note~ A pinch of uncooked rice should be placed on 
each petal after reciting one name each time, until it 
is placed on each eight petals, viz. on the petal in the 
eastern direction by reciting Tapandya namah, and 
sO On. 


Chapter-74 


At the commencement, as well as at the end, 
and so also in the middle, of placing rice, he 
should recite the Mantra Paramdtmane naman. 
Then at the end, the God Sun should be saluted. 


Yaad: were oneayeret:| 
WUSet WARM MSA HAV A VAI 


The Sun should be worshipped on the altar 
by being offered white cloth, fruits, incense, 
flowers, sandal paste, eatables and raw sugar, 
along with salt, all of which should be given 
away in charity to Brahmana. 


adt arefaaur faraatafera sar 

Vftad: Waa Teargeiaty: | 

frau fewa a gran Fraeaa 22 i 

Afterwards, good Brahmanas should be 

devotedly worshipped with raw sugar, clarified 
butter and milk and then they should be given 
gold placed on a dish, containing sesamum. 

Ud Parad Gea Wea AA: | 

HAA fat: Mea FATAAAN 23 1 


Then the Brahmanas should be dismissed 
with fees, after reciting the *vyahrti’ mantras. 
The devotee should then go to sleep and then, 
after getting up in the morning, he should bathe 
and finish his japa (prayers) and take rice 
cooked in clarified butter and sugar in company 
of the Brahmanas. 


yaa a aefage fasrracatssid 
Gat Watch Beast Aaeadn wi 
After meals, the devotee should give away 
to the Brahmanas, who may be free trom 


hypocrisy, a pot, full of clarified butter, and a 
piece of gold, along with a pitcher, full of water. 


Wraaraa wary UT feareaz: 

art fafert wa aia aife ga ATI V4 I 
AMAR Ula A a SAM AAEM 
TMAH NAT: TAM: TATRA 1 A 


At that time the devotee should say: “O, 


Adorable Sun, the Supreme Self, be please 
the worship of the Sun should thus be follow 
for a year, on the bright Saptami of eve 
month, and in the 13" month, 13 cows, w 
their mouths covered with gold and bod 
adorned with clothes and ornaments, should 
given away. 

Waa Weeltal fearetat farrcaz: 

4 fangnad wala Bea Arar TacaT: 1 VU 

If one cannot afford such number of co 

he may give only one. The observer of t 


ordinance should not exercise miserliness < 
jealousy. Those who do so, go to hell. 


art fata Tey Hace aoa 
aaurafar: qe Tetra 
MANTA AS AAAI VS Ul 


One who thus observes the Kalyana Sapte 
ordinance, goes to the region of the Sun, a! 
being liberated from all sins, and obtains |c 
life, health and prosperity on this earth. 


adurren Fed waeeafaran 
TASRTIM Gal HAUT 22 1 


This Saptami, which is the destroyer of all 
sins and venerated by the Devas, is known as 
Kalyana Saptami, the remover of all evils. 


SHAMS Ae HeAMVTAAA 
TU USI WE AAI: WAM Pon 
One who reads or hears about this Kalyana 


Saptami, the giver of endless merits, is freed 
from all sins on this earth. 


ofa stared wergaTel aeaoraetitad AM 
Fa : TAPATANS AMAT: 1119 ¥ I 


kk * 


278 


CHAPTER 75 
The merits of the vow of Visoka-saptami 
SUX Jara 
fayinaant case yPaga 
AAU AL: Vile A Halfafaeryqdii en 
Siva said— O sage! I shall now tell you about 
the Visoka Saptami (the sorrow-destroying fast) 


the observance of which fast frees the devotee 
from all grief. 


Ue HOt: CAAT VHT A HITT: | 
PUM: FAM SAMA HH 
WaTaad Heat Tera wafaen2 ti 


On the sixth day of the bright fortnight, in 
the month of Magha, the devotee, after brushing 
his teeth in the morning and rubbing the body 
with black sesamum and bathing, should fast 
the whole day; and at night, again brushing his 
teeth, he should take krsara pudding (consisting 
of rice, sesamum and a pulse cooked in milk 
and eaten with ghee and without salt). Then go 
to bed as a Brahmacari. 


ad: WHY SAT HIATT: Wha: 
PA F ated wala @ WAI 
On the following morning, after bathing and 
finishing his daily prayer and so being pure, he 
should have a lotus made of gold and worship it 
by pronouncing ‘Arkdya namah!. 


STAR Tht THAT ANZ H 

aa fags Yat tated wean 

am fag ase waka: WaT TI 

The lotus should be worshipped with red 

kanera (Nereum Odorum) flowers and a piece 
of red cloth. The devotee should pray to the Sun 
with these words:~ “O Aditya! as this world 
becomes free from all grief at your rising, in the 
same way, let me also be free from sorrow, In 
all my lives, and may I have always firm faith in 


35 


you. 


|. Salutation to the Sun. 


Matsya Purainam 


Ue AST wea F Ta WTAE 
GRA ATP WT AAT 1G 
aos fawrat WeUAaaraTy 
TRA vel a greens Fraqaqng i 
Thus, having performed Pija on the sixth 
day of the bnght fortnight, the Brahmanas 


should be worshipped with devotion. The 


worshipper, after taking cow’s urine, should go 
to bed.* Then, on the following morning, rising 
from his bed, bathing and finishing his daily 
prayers, he should offer food to the Brahmanas, 
in a vessel containing raw sugar. Then the 
golden lotus should be given away to a 
Brahmana, along wih a pair of red clothes 
mentioned above. 

Aaa YA AAA WA TA: 

ATA: WMUAGUT Hed fahraTATIVO 


On the Saptami (seventh) day, oil and salt 
should be avoided, and the devotee, wishing 
proserity, should observe a vow of silence and 
listen to the Purana. 


amt fafa waaeranta wera: 
HA Aa TAMAYHIACA ARATE I 


The ordinance should then be continued on 
the seventh day of each fortnight, till the next 
month of Magha. 


Farad BAM TATA HATA! 
Wat Berea caret a Tae 
On the conclusion of the ordinance, a pitcher 
of water, along with a golden louts, should be 
given away, and a bedstead, with all its 


requisites and a milch cow, should also be given 
away. 


ara fafa aq fangneafaataa: 
fama pares aia wat WAN RON 
WaaTAA Be alley Wad 


= 


ce ie ele ll 


2. This ceremony relates to the sixth day. 


Chapter-76 


aaa Wrst Wererierateata: 11221 

qa wea aM tt aaretia Gener 

FATA: Het Aq A Ut Tal Tesa ge 

One who keeps up the Visoka Saptami 

ordinance, according to the rites mentioned 
above, without giving way to miserliness, 
attains bliss, and never gets any sorrow for a 
period of ten padmas, and is also free from 
disease. He also attains his wishes and if he 
observes it without any desires, he becomes 
unified with Brahman. 


I: USaVUATE fanart a AAA 
TSMR A SsTaT Tad BHATT 3 
One who reads, listens to, or relates this 


vrata of Visoka Saptami, goes to the realm of 
Indra and never gets any sorrow. 


Sia sitaret wergarat fagieaedted ara 
Wareara aa SEAT: 1119 & 


KR * 


CHAPTER 76 
The ordinance of Phala-saptami 
Sut sara 
SaTATY Waeanha ATT FT WelaaATAL 
arene at: Unga: TATTAT I a 
Siva said— “I shall now describe to you the 
Phala Saptami (fruit-gift fast) the observance of 


which liberates the devotee from sins and leads 
him to heaven. 


TMTee WAY aA Meta Free: 
TTT HA AAA FT BATT 
weantagd CaSO Fete 

Va areas Heart wera atta 
celeignteraenat ATH Meaarare 3 


In the month of Margasira, on the seventh 
day of the bright fortnight, the devotee, after 
fasting, should give away a lotus of gold, along 


2719 


with sugar, to some Brahmana with a large 
family. A golden image of the Sun, weighing 
one pala in measure, should also be given away 
to a Brahmana in the afternoon, when the 
devotee should say, “O Sun; be pleased on me.” 


Tea 7 farses UE aT 
STA HAHA AAA OTA AT HY 


On the following day, that is, on Astami, the 
Brahmanas should be worshipped with devotion 
and fed with milk and fruits; during that period 
of the day, so long as there is any portion of the 
Krsna Saptami remaining, and on every seventh 
day of the dark fortnight, fruits should be given 
away in charity. 

arreqarey fafraerta sau FI 
TRSAHe SAT TACHA ATTN | 
WaT TAMTOTAA AA 
daar 3 aa fafearereaasig 1 

In the same way, any fruit made of gold, and 
a lotus along with sugar, utensils, cloths and 
flowers should be given away on each seventh 


day of the dark and the bright fortnights in the 
month, for a full year. 


SHYT TAT HAM: TATA 
Wytal tage Wa: wal ee: fea: 
HMFAMTAT RAR THT: Wraerfateniie 


The following names should be recited, one 
after the other, each month— Bhanu, Arka, Ravi, 
Brahma, Surya, Sukra, Hari, Siva, Sriman, 
Vibhavasu, Tvasta and Varuna. 

WAT I MAA ATT RA 
WAT HAIMA HAA NC I 


Out of the names mentioned above, one 
ame, turn by turn, should be recited monthly, 
on the seventh day of the dark or bright 
fortnight. The desire of obtaining any fruit or 
merit, by the observance of this vrata, should be 
renounced by the devotee. 


280 


gard fastest wregeaTt:| 

Wea He SAKATA ATTN I 

GOT A fae HTT AT Wel Tal 

TIARA AW AAATAI Qo I 

At the end of ordinance, a Brahmana and his 

wife should be adored, and then cloth as well as 
a pitcher, full of sugar, along with a lotus of 
gold, should be given, and the following prayer 
should be offered:~ “O Ravi! As the wishes of 
your devotees never prove fruitless, so the 
attainment of endless fruits be mine, throughout 
my future seven lives.” 


Suhel TF: HAHA 
AAU SAT Tae WaT ea 
One who observes this Phala Saptami, the 


giver of endless fruits, being liberated from all 
his sins, goes to the realm of the sun. 


qurartian fatseeaa at HAL 
AAS ATTA A: HAHAH LA 


He is freed from the sins arising out of 
drinks, whether committed in this or the next 
world. All that 1s destroyed, who observes this 
Phala Saptami fast. 


HAT: GAA AAT Aad Wratea: | 
TAMA TeareMtaaalaynay 
A: Huis USee Ashe AAO g3 I 
He who observes this Phala Saptami, 
becomes free from all diseases and liberates his 
past ancestors as well as his successors, for 21 


generations from bondage. One who reads, 
hears or relates this to others, gets also 


prosperity. 
ofa stared ETT ATA 
TEMA AAA SEATT : 119 & 1 


kK ** 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 77 
The vow and merits of Sarkara-saptami 
Sut sara 
pretreat seat Teenerenf orig 
MTT AAT WATT 8H 
Siva said— “I shall now explain to you 
something about the Sarkara Saptami, (gift of 


sugar) the destroyer of sin, by the observance of 
which one gets longevity, prosperity and health. 


Tea fad wt aan Fadad:| 


WTA: Area feet: WMH ACAI 
In the month of Vaisakha, on the seventh 

day of the bright fortnight, the devotee should 
bathe in water, mixed with white sesamum, and 
then put on white sandal paste and a garland of 
white flowers. 

wits Wanicnes hata wafer 

aferaa: afar gq waeat Frees 


A lotus with its petals and pericarp, should 
be drawn on an altar with saffron, and flowers 
and incense should be put on it, after reciting 
Sdvitre namah. 

WAGERS Way 
VUSAATARA WHAA eT: | 
Gaur AAT AAU WATASHI 

Afterwards, a pitcher of water, with a vessel 
of sugar, should be placed on it. The pitcher 
should be covered with a pieces of white cloth 
and white flower, sandal paste, and gold should 


be put on it. Then the pija should be made with 
the following mantra— 


faydenat wangearelia wsTa 
Vag AAT: MA WAS ANG I 


“O Pitcher, you are the Vedamaya!, and 
consequently, you are praised as Vedavadi-. 
You are like nectar to all, bring peace unto me.” 


1. Full of all Vedas. 
2. Knower of all Vedas. 


Chapter-77 


Weted ad: Ura tated: fart 
Oath BAT WUT ATG UI 


Afterwards, the devotee should drink 
pancagavya and sleep on the floor, by the side 
of the pitchers, and should recite the Vedic 
mantras relating to the Sun and listen to the 
Puranas. 


HATA Wet WEVA Haye : 
aad fags aggraona Pacaqivet 


After the lapse of a day and night, on the 8th 
day of the fortnight, the devotee should give 
away all the things to the Brahmanas after 
performing his daily prayers. 


Wateatehal fares TyqUTa : | 
YMACAAA TATA AAT 1 

arr fafest ad mite afar 
AT MAT Mh THM ATTN I 
Rateanag eat Tt wate 

Te TW MHA SANTANA aA TI 20 UI 


He should feed the Brahmanas, according to 
his means, with sugar, clarified butter and rice 
cooked in milk and sugar, but should avoid oil 
and salt. He himself should take his meals in 
silence. The same rule should be observed each 
month for a year, after which a pitcher of water, 
with a vessel of sugar, a bedstead, with all its 
requisites, and a milch cow, and if means 
permit, then a house containing all the 
necessities of a householder's life as well as 
eatables, should be given away. 


TeaOY FA Hea Seay aM 
pirates Pequot ded aie vita een 
YAU Wanted: UaaaaraTe Ay 

q fagredt alt Hay SG MATT 21 


The devotee should, in addition to the things 
mentioned above, give away a horse of gold 
worth 1,000 Niskas, 100 Niskas, or 10 Niskas, 


281] 


or of even 5 Niskas,! according to his means, 
by reciting the mantras pertaining to the Sun. 
Miserliness should not be exercised, for it leads 
to sin. 


mgd fad aaareeargataea: 

Fuga agent wiferygara: Bats 1123 11 

WaT I WU Aaferanisgacadanry 

SBT TATA: YOR MAM CARAT NVI 

The nectar fell from the mouth of the Sun, 

while He was quaffing it, out of which (Sali) 
rice, minga pulse and sugarcane were 
produced. Sugarcane is the best of all these 
three, because out of it sugar is prepared. Its 
juice is just like nectar; consequently, an 
offering of sugar to Devas and Pitrs is dear to 
the Sun also. 


WAUAAA UT ATTA 
AAEM TAT AT ATA LG UI 
HAC HEM AA BRaTyA 
HU AMAT Fat Af TT WET VG I 


This Sarkara Saptami is said to give the 
same benefit as Asvamedha sacrifice. It 
removes all diseases and makes the sons and the 
grandsons thrive. One who observes this fast 
with unflinching devotion, gets bliss. He passes 
his days for one Kalpa in heaven, and then 
attains emancipation. 


SoMa YOa Ta: ASI 
Unadte feararer orc 
afrata a cera asta ca- 
TATA AAT CTAN STITT 11.219 11 
One who hears, listens, or reads about this, 


goes to the region of the Sun. One who advises 
Others to observe this ordinance, is also 


|. Niska is a weight of gold, but according to different 
authorities of very different amount. The 
commentator here terms it a weight of four Suvarnas, 
each about 175 grains troy. 


16 


The faces of some of them resembled those 
of the horses and the bears, while others were 
lion-faced. The faces of some of them 
resembled the dogs, pigs, as well as the Camels. 


THT TAA TTA THT: | 
O UBT WATT eat: Peat: WSR 4 VI 


Thus the auspicious Daksa of his accord also 
created several types of Mlecchas. Thereafter he 
produced the females. 


sat Ba MMT HVAT AAT 
Tata Bara eat aaa fea: | 
CATYATMS ANA: MAASAI G4 I 


Ten out of them were given over to Dharma, 
thirteen to KaSyapa, twenty seven of them 
known as Naksatras (constellations) were given 
over to the moon. All the gods, demons, 
humans and others were born of these women, 
who filled the universe. 


Sia stare HETQT anfeat araUTEAM 
AqUISEATA: NN 


KEX* 


CHAPTER 5 


Birth of the daughters of Daksa and Kumara 
Karttikeya 


RAT dd: 
CaM SAAR MT Waar 
Safa faerie ga gfe AartTTN eI 
Saunaka and other sages asked, “O Sita, 
how are the gods, Danavas, Gandharvas, Nagas 


and Raksasas were born? You kindly enlighten 
me on the subject exhaustively. 


Sita said, “O Excellent Brahmanas, prior to 
the creation said, have been made by Daksa- the 
son of Praceté, was made by mental resolve, 
sight, and the mere touch. But after Daksa, the 


Matsya Puranam 


creation went on with the sexual intercourse 
between the male and the female. 


want: Geift enfes: ya cat: Taya 
IM ase datel wae Ore FRAT 3 UN 


In earlier times, when Brahma, commanded 
Daksa for the creation of the living beings, then 
the initial creation of Daksa is being described 
by me; which should be listened by you. 


Bel YF PATA Saar 
t Sferraeneral Hea: | 
SA: UAASANTT USA ATTA VI 


When there was no expansion of the 
creation by mental resolve, sight or with the 
touch, there was no progress in the creation of 
the gods, the sages and the nagas etc. Then 
Daksa produced a thousand sons from the 
womb of Paficajani who were known by the 
name of Haryasvas. 


ary SBT Me: Frgefafaan: aT: 
ANG: We FAA eATTAAATALI & I 


Finding that the Haryasvas were ready to 
create several types of the living beings, Narada 
said to them. 


Ya: YAO Waa Waka Ua TI 
aa: Ble fagreor eearg heart: & I 


Narada said, “O Best of the sages, initially, 
you should roam about on earth and visualise its 
expansion, besides the parts lodged above and 
beneath the same. Thereafter you can create the 
universe in a special form.” 


aT Weed Feat Va: Waal feyry 
santa + ada ayaites Parra: iio 
Listening to the words of Narada, all of them 
proceeded on to different directions and could 


not return till date, in the same way as the 
rivers, after falling in the ocean, never return. 


Say WOT Freel: yorafe:t 
ATA YAU EAA TAT: 1 ci 


Chapter-5 


Wan aa a fag: Waar: Bleed: 
ATAISTURAME FRAPTAAT APL 8 
a: WTO Maa AAT ITPA A 
AMT UT Bis a alee agra: 1 Qo 


Then when the sons known as Haryasvas, 
met with destruction, the influential Daksa 
Prajapati again produced a thousand sons from 
the womb of Virini who became popular by the 
names of Sabalas. When those excellent 
Brahmanas, collected before Narada, for the 
purpose of creation, then Narada spoke the 
same words to the new comers, “O Sages, all of 
you should first of all roam about on earth and 
examine its vastness and searching for your 
brothers, you return and engage yourself in the 
creation of the universe.” 


asfe Fa Pio SAWIGIAT Taw 
Aa: Walt a oe: aAraranitesta 


PATS: TTC AT Tea TaSTATN VAM 


Then all of them proceeded on following the 
path on which their brothers had moved earlier, 
never to return. Since then the younger brother 
does not go in search of the elder brother. But in 
case he does so, he finds himself in a miserable 
position. Therefore, one should not do so. 


aTedy fawy ais HM: Weald: 
QfWa TAIT SAT: WATT RAAT 221 


As aresult of the destruction of these sons as 
well, Prajapati, the son of Praceté, Daksa, 
produced sixty daughters from the womb of 
Paficajani - the daughter of Virini. 


| Wee aT THT HATS TAA 
aafasia Bara aaalshTAA 23 1 

& da Yas & Hea aac 
CCUPCRCUCECUCRCCSRG ES 


Out of those daughters, Daksa gave away, 
ten to Dharma, Thirteen to Kasyapa, twenty 
seven to the moon, four to Aristanemi, two to 


17 


Sukra, the son of Bhrgu, two to the intelligent 
Krsasva and two of them were given to Angira. 
Now you listen to the names of the gods and the 
expansion of their progeny in detail. 

STOP CAATTUT Morea 

TRA ALATA AAT ATT TH TTT BG 

Ase T Yea a ae fawn a wats 

THUCT: TASMAN Yatfaraerat 26 Ut 


Out of them Marutvati, Vasu, Yami, Lamba, 
Bhanu, Arundhati, Sankalpa, Muhirta, Sadhya 
and the beautiful Visva, the ten in number, are 
said to be the wives of Dharma. Now you listen 
to the sons of those damsels. 


faaicang far: Wen Aer 
TRA THM TA TAA V9 1 
WAY MAAaeyeMa YeceaT:| 

ATA ATO APTS J ATTA Ve 


TMI TINA LU ee Tq | 


ASTIN AseU aggre Partai ee it 


Out of them, Visva gave birth to the ten 
Visvedevas, Sadhya gave birth to the twelve 
Adityas, Muhirta gave birth to Muhirta, Lamba 
to Ghosa, Yami to Yogavithi, and Sankalpa 
gave birth to Sankalpa. Arundhati, gave birth to 
all the living beings on earth. 


SHAT A tar sargent Tat faery 
AMA AARSMAAa AT Fava 2 ofl 


Now you listen to the birth of Vasus. These 
are the most influential gods and are spread in 
ali the directions and are all known by the 
names of Vasus. 


TN gay Area aetanrensaer: | 
UT WATT TAAISHY Vent herar: 2 en 


Now you listen to the expansion of their 
creation. Apa, Dhruva, Soma, Dhara, Anila, 
Anala, Pratyisa and Prabhasa, are known as the 
eight Vasus. 


282 


venerated by Devas and heavenly damsels, and 
passes his days in heaven. 


ofa stared UTI yratad ATA 
TATA fA ASAT: 1919 th 


x ** 


CHAPTER 78 


The vow and merits of Kamala-saptam! 
Sut sara 
Ha: UL Wael AEA 
TAM: Wada Taras rarer: 1121 


Siva said~ I shall now describe to you that 
Kamala Saptami vrata, by the mere mention of 
which the God Sun becomes pleased. 


aaa GAA Ala: Gy Tae: 
fact a Atlant faa are MTT A 


In the spring, on the 7th day of a bright 
fortnight, the devotee should bathe in water 
mixed with white mustard and should then 
make a golden lotus and lace it in a golden 
vessel, full of sesamum. 


TAA FM TAS: THAT 

TA: HMA THEA MAMTA 3 
Fea AMET WTA THISE Ti 

Ta Fee TTA TAT 1 
fama SARTO aearrerrafasyet 
VEN TAM CaaciHed TMA NG UI 


The lotus should be covered with a pair of 
cloths, and then the Lord Sun should be 
worshipped with incense, flowers etc. The 
following mantras should be recited at the time 
of worship. “Kamalahastaya —namah, 
Visvadhdrine namah, Divakardya namah, 
Prabhdkardya namah” and he should then give 
away the golden lotus in the evening, along 
with the, pitcher of water adorning it, with 
ornaments, cloths and garlands, and then give it 
to a Brahmana. So, also, according to his 
means, he may give away a milch cow after 


Matsya Puranam 


adorning her well. 
BETA Wa WHEAT Aa ETA 
AMMA FBT AAA aAT ANE I 


On the following day 1.e., on the astami the 
Brahmanas should be fed according to the 
means of the devotee, but he himself should not 
take flesh and ol. 


srt fate ya_oreran wife ata a 
aa Waa ae farpreutaataa: 1119 11 
In this way, the devotee, without giving way 


to miserliness, should observe the same rituals, 
on the 7th day of a bright fortnight each month. 


Fart Wad Saya HAT aAT A 
TU SNAG F YAUed Ware 


B é + ITTY Xe | 
arr fafeat wet Halenaeraeay 
TAT Tae Weta eA 


On the conclusion of the ordinance, a 
bedstead along with the golden lotus, should be 
given away and a cow with its horns plaited 
with gold as well as utensils, asana (seats) and 
candle sticks should also be given away, along 
with other necessary articles. One, who 
observes this ordinance, according to the 
prescribed ites, becomes possessed _ of 
inexhaustible wealth and goes to the kingdom 
of the Sun. 


HA Ta MAA WAT YAH TAH 
TER: Useerat Aah UAT APTN oN 


He also goes to all the seven lokas, in each 
kaipa, where he enjoys in the company of the 
nymphs and gets bliss. 


I: Upade OTA Ae: 
Usd Wasa ats zante 
SAA aaa 
TAMA ATTN 2 I 


A man who sees, hears, or relates it or insire 


Chapter-79 


others to do so, he attains immoveable wealth 
and the regions of the Gandharvas and 
Vidyadharas. 


Sia SIRT TeTITU aeTaatad 
ATATS AAT A SEATS: WNC I 


K*K OK 


CHAPTER 79 
The vow and merits of Mandara-saptami 
Sut Sava 
sad: Toraeay Aaaraonfyrany 
aH TAT ATT HATTA 2 


Siva said— I now relate to you about the 
Mandara Saptami, the giver of all desires, the 
most excellent and the destroyer of all sins. 


TAMA TF TAA APMEAT: | 
STATS Ae: Heal WHIT GT: 12 1 


The devotee should take some light food on 
the fifth day of the bright fortnight in the month 
of Magha, and having arisen from his bed in the 
morning and brushing his teeth and bathing, 
should keep fast on that day viz., on the Sasthi 
day. 

fay Wasser J wert wrprataten 
Ta: WT SAT real GAM WAP HI 
UB hd: Hea TARHTAT AT | 
Maul Yet AES eT TMT 

That day he should honour a few Brahmanas 
and feed them with delicious food at night. 
Mandara! prasana should be offered to the 
Deva. On the following morning, that is, the 
saptami day, he should feed the Brahmanas 
again, according to his means, after his morning 
ablutions. Then procure eight Mandara flowers 
and prepare a golden image of the Sun carrying 


a lotus in his hand and place it in a copper 
vessel containing sesamum, and prepare also on 


|. Mand&ra is the name given to several species of 
plants, viz., Calotropis gigantea, Erythrina Indica 
and thorn-apple. 


283 


eight petalled lotus and invoke the God Sun, 
thus. He should offer one mandara flower on 
each petal. 


Wat FUOTfset: Heal ATU TIAA 


SUA A TTT TAT GI 

THAR Ag Waa ser 

aferot qgeenla aera Ase g | 

vi ae T aed USHA 

WIA: CRITI: WTA I 

He should then salute the Sun and put some 

flowers and uncooked rice on the lotus leaf, in 
the Eastern direction by saying “Bhdskardya 
namah’, in the south-east by saying “Surydya 
namah” in the south, by saying “Arkdya 
namah” in the south-west, by saying “Arvamne 
namah”, in the west by saying “Veda dhamne 
namah”, in the north-west direction by saying 
“Canda Bhdadnave namah”, in the north by 
saying “Pusne namah’, in the north-east by 
saying “Ananddya namah.” 


aura UT ed wT Walia al 
WRaed: warapa wetatermenfata: 1c i 


The devotee should place the image of the 
Male Purusa on the pericarp of the lotus, and 
after saying “Sarvadtmane namah”’, white cloth 
should be put on the image, and eatables, 
flowers and fruits should be offered. 


vam aed aMactad WA: | 
YAATAAAA ATT: WSTy Fate tt 


Then all these things should be given away 
to a Brahmana versed itn the Vedas. He himself 
should take his meals, but then oil and salt 
should be avoided. He should observe the vow 
of silence while eating and take his meals facing 
the east. 


sjea fafaar ad sues aly tao 
PAA Aaferonsataaag: 11 o 1 


This ordinance should be _ observed, 
according to the prescribed rites for a year, on 


284 


the seventh day of a fortnight, each month, 
without giving way to miserliness. 


Uded Farad F Pera aerate 
Miafarat: Ars ated ferrari ge 
On the conclusion of the ordinance, the lotus 
of gold should be given away after being placed 
on a pitcher of water. One wishing to acquire 


prosperity, should give away a cow in addition 
to it. 


TA GRAM WENT a 
TS TA ALARA AAT APT 8 2 
The following prayer should then be offered 
“T salute Mandaranadtha and Mandarabhavana, 


O Lord Sun! see me through this worldly ocean 
of troubles.” 


or fate ae Hara 
fauna Wat Ae: aed a fafa Alea gsi 


TTOSTHe TUTE Te {| 


ror AAA ANAT SI 


s abd Fd f ql 


a: csequeraf wat: WATT 4 UI 


One who observes this Mandara Saptami 
fast in this way is freed from all sins and goes to 
heaven where he resides for a kalpa. This 
ordinance is like a torch that dispels all the sins 
like pitched darkness. One who keeps it up gets 
his desires fulfilled. One who reads or listens 
about this ordinance becomes freed from all 
Sins, 


Sf saree WergtTat WarcaAtad 
ATLARTATST AAAI SEAT: 119 2 


kK ** 


CHAPTER 80 
The ordinance of Subha-saptami 
AT TATA 
serait gents great yereeciy 
ATA UET At WTAE: WTA 


Matsya Puranam 


Sri Bhagavan said— I shall now explain to 
you about the excellent Subha saptami fasting, 
which frees the devotee from all disease, 
sorrows and troubles. 


Woy UPA UT Hae: Yet: 
STAI Aa FAMASTAAATT NIN 
The devotee should observe this ordinance 
on the seventh day of the bright fortnight, in the 
month of Asvina, after ablutions and morning 


prayers, when the Brahmanas have done the 
svastivacana. 


afte WET TTC : | 
TA PASTA ATTA 
ATS YAREMOTMTAT AAT AA 


A milch cow should be worshipped with 


| incense, flowers and sandal paste and the 


devotee should say, “O, One who has been born 
of the Sun and one who resides in the various 
climes, whose body is goodness itself, I salute 
you for the fulfilment of my desires.” 


IY Hea few ATTA PATA 
ee 


PLB) hd ue] © Taga +] 


mercfeeretererrien sea 


After this, a quantity (of the Prastha 
measure) of sesamum put in a vessel of copper, 
an ox of gold with incense, garland, molasses, 
various kinds of truits, eatables and dishes made 
of milk and clarified butter, should be given 
away in the evening by reciting the mantra, 
“Aryamd Priyatam.” 

qeret F weys wad farsa: 

ad: WATE TATA TaAT TEASE I 
arya faferat cea AIPA eT AT: 
aa Gt SH TaRt HATHA NA 
Tard Waaayevststrady | 
PIMBIEC ID BUS CIC CROCE TAT 


The devotee should offer Pancagavya as 


Chapter-81 


Prasana. He should be free from all pride and 
sleep on the floor. On the following morning, he 
should get up and worship the Brahmanas with 
devotion. Thus men should give away each 
month a couple of cloths, a golden ox and a 
golden cow, and at the end of the year, 
sugarcane, molasses, bedding, pillows, utensils 
and mattresses. 

amas fame ataut gest aan 

emMactiae wa fara wraafatane i 

Afterwards, a quantity (of the Prastha 

measure) of sesamum placed in a vessel of 
copper and a golden ox, should be given to a 
Brahmana versed in the Vedas, with the words, 
“Visvatma Priyatam.” 


ara fate fag paler: yTaaay 
Te Sfagen alkiaeahs aA Qo 1 


One who keeps up this ordinance in this way 
becomes wealthy and renowned in each birth. 


TARTS: WIAA: WU 
THROM eA AACN ATA TATA 
HOUTSTAAA OTT MARAT ATI 2 211 


He is also honoured by the nymphs (i.e. 
Apsaras and Gandharvas), and resides in heaven 
as the Lord of Hosts (1.e. Ganas) till the end of 
the kalpa, after which he is born as a king. 


TAMAS WOE TI 
AMAA YOST TSad PATA L2H 


Thousands of the sins accruing by the killing 
of Brahmanas and by wilful abortion, are 
explated by the reading of this sacred vrata of 
Saptami. 


SU Uda: UATE 
Tea aT Star 
aise Watafayemee: 
TCA FEA TATTRHTA I 23 I 


One who reads this or hears it, even for a 
moment, or sees the vrata performed and things 


285 


given away, is freed from all sins and becomes 
the Lord of the Vidyadharas. 


MaAcaa: WA AT: Hilla 


a: Gaal Gataeraary 
a Vacanaat: BAT 
TAT US Atht UL AMT UV 
One who keeps up this Saptami vrata 
(ordinance) of sevenfold prescription, for a 
period of seven years, becomes the Lord of 


seven regions, turn by turn, after which he goes 
to the region of Visnu and attains bliss there. 


Sia saa Tera yaaa 
ATT STATA SEAT: 112 01 


KER 


CHAPTER 81 


The ordinance of Visoka-dvadasi, the 
method of worshipping Laksmi 


FA adte 


oe 


TOT Ft aT 
favatgaeant qaers tary 
TAM Tet A TAN 
Manu asked—- O Lord! which is_ that 
ordinance, by the observance of which, 
separation from the dear ones ceases to be 
painful and which confers prosperity on the 


devotee and which saves men from the evils of 
this life? 


Weel TATA 
ufyerrd afer ¢ faaerarate sett Wear 
Ta MHA VY SATAY Te 2 


The Lord said— The question put by you, O 
Manu! is beneficial to the world, and owing to 
the sublimity of the subject-matter, 1s beyond 
the reach of heaven even; and though kept 
secret from Suras and Asuras, now, | shall relate 
it to you on account of your intense devotion. 


236 


quaaas tifa fayrengreyitary 
Sean MyPagMaaesy Ts 1 
The Visokadvadasi ordinance falls in the 
month of Asvina. On the tenth day of the 
fortnight, the devotee should take some light 
food and commence the ordinance by observing 
the prescribed rites. 


FETA MATA A STAT TAH 
waleyal Fret: Wee FT Aya 
fad ange fafrasientt cautseAixt 
Wa Pama Gea wees Aa: | 

SM vated: Hal TaMentes T 
HAART: THAT OTT ATCT 1G 


On the Ekadasi day, he should brush his 
teeth by turning his face towards the north or 
the east. Then he should worship the Lord 
KeSava and the Goddess Laksmi and fast the 
day. “I shall take my meal consisting of many 
dishes next day.” With this thought, he should 
go to sleep, and on getting up in the morning, he 
should bathe in Paficagavya water, mixed with 
various medicines, and put on white clothes and 
garlands of white flowers. Afterwards, the 
worship of Laksmi and Narayana should be 
commenced with white lotus flowers. 


faint Aa: Wet Te A Aes al 
HMA AA TESS A TTI I 
Sans TA Te wears AT: aleq 
ameraagat wd o fagena aio 
A @ WATTS Fea WT a 
steara fautaer: att waft aac i 
afaul amare a alert wey 7a: 
aHUSTA AN: HUSA ANTES FN 
Tea arqeart aferath 
cee aaa aaa Taya 201 
serartdarata fate fryer 
TM: TATA AaheHT SHITTGTAL 2 aH 


Matsya Puranam 


The feet should be worshipped, after reciting 
‘Visokdya namah,’ the legs after reciting 
‘Varadadya namah, the knees after reciting 
‘Srisdya namah, the thighs after reciting 
‘Jalasdyine namah,’ the private parts after 
reciting ‘Kandarpdya namah,’ the waist after 
reciting ‘Mdadhavdya namah,’ the stomach after 
reciting ‘Ddmodardya namah,’ the ribs after 
reciting ‘Vipuldya namah,’ the navel after 
reciting ‘Padmandbhaya namah,’ the heart after 
reciting ‘Manmathdya namah’, the breasts after 
reciting ‘Sridhardya namah’, the hands after 
reciting “Madhujite namah,’ the left arm after 
reciting ‘Cakrine namah,’ the right arm after 
reciting ‘Gadine namah,’ the throat after 
reciting ‘Vaikunthdya namah,’ the mouth after 
reciting ‘Yajnyamukhdya namah,’ the nose after 
reciting “Asokanidhaye namah,’ the eyes after 
reciting ‘Vdsudevadya namah,’ the forehead after 
reciting ‘Va@mandya namah’, the eye brows after 
reciting ‘Haraye namah,’ the locks of hair after 
reciting ‘Mdadhavaya namah,’ the crown after 
reciting ‘Visvartiipine namah’, the head after 
reciting “Sarvdtmane namah.’ 


Va BET Mas HeMTeaT CT: | 
AY HUSe ra Wlvset BAAN I 
Thus worshiping Visnu with sandal, fruits 


and flowers, an altar should be made on the 
ground after making a circle. 


Uda Uda Uenayareray) 
HUT Te UW UAT AMATAATAT ANS 
The altar should be a square in shape, and of 
the dimensions of a cubit, and should slant 
towards the north. It must be smooth and soft, 
surrounded by three small mud-walls. 
agel Aifepd Aare aRIY RGA: | 
wfuseretatere farITET eT AAT YS 
The upper surface should be eight fingers 


high from the ground; and the mud walls one 
finger! high and two fingers thick. 


1. One finger 1s a little less than one inch. 


Chapter-81 


Tata YU AMT: witht AAT 
AUS MATT Tage: 114 


On it should be placed an image of Laksmi, 
made of river sand, and placed in a winnowing 
basket, and worshipped according to the rites 
hereafter mentioned. 


AMt Set AT: Ya AAT Herat aT: fara 
Aa: Yor wae Get weet AAT AE 


Laksmi should be worshipped, after reciting 
the following mantra~ Devyai namah, Santyai 
namah, Laksmyai namah, Srivai namah, 
Pustyai namah, Tustyai namah, Vrstyai namah, 
Hrstyai namah. 


fagtrent :waargrrea feargivat axerseq Wr 
Fagin are ares fagter wah vei 


The devotee should also say, “O Visoka 
goddess, destroy all grief, grant some boon, 
give wealth, and fulfil all desires’. 


aa: Warat: yt AeT WayacHet: 
AAA ARAMA ANRC UI 


After this, he should wrap up the winnowing 
basket in a piece of cloth and worship Laksmi 
with fruits and various kinds of clothes and with 
a golden lotus. 


Try a wary fraetted se: 

TA MaTAMS ANAL Tae APTN eH 
UMA Std T YA Aa: | 
arg a fast ea AAAI oN 


The devotee should drink the water purified 
by the Kusa grass and carry on music and 
singing throughout the night; and on the lapse 
of three quarters of the night thus past in vigil 
and prayer, the devotee should sleep in the last 
quarter, and then waking up, go and worship 
them, along with three couples of Brahmanas 
and Brahmanis according to his means; if not 
there, at least, one couple should be 
worshipped. 


2387 


Vieareafor Wa aT ATIC: | 

WRIT WRT TASS ATE 

aa Weta Wal APT Hail 

WA MT dd: SA Hea SEIT AT 21 

TR FT aaa feragreafaatard:| 

YAM AA UMN ated aft ATAU? 31 

He should offer them sandal, flowers and 

cloths as well as bedsteads, with the mantra, 
“Namastu Jalasayine.” The night thus passed 
with watching, music and songs, the devotee, 
after bathing in the morning, should worship the 
Brahmana couples, as mentioned above. They 
should be fed according to his means, free from 
niggardliness. And then, after taking his meals, 


he should pass that day in listening to the 
Puranas. 


aa fatter ad mfenfa ware 


Fara VAT CASA aA 
AAAS MATA PNTTN2 XI 
The devotee should observe the same rituals 
every month till the ordinance is over; after 
which, he should give away a bedstead, along 
with the guda dhenu! (sugar cow), pillows, 
bedding, sheets and cloths. 


aM + Mentcagst cat Ufa Teale 
TM TRUITT INT FASTA 
Then he should say, “O Lord! as Laksmi 


does not forsake you similarly, beauty, health 
and pleasure may always be mine.’ 


am ca teat a aati cara 
aa fargiehat US AHEM DT AMINE I 


“As Laksmi does not go without Visnu, let 
there always be happiness with me. Let my 
devotion always remain centred in Visnu.” 


TAU Wat WIT Aaa 
WU a Mera Aled aired aicaTATI ON 


|. Guda dhenu has been explained in the next chapter. 


288 


With the above words, the devotee should 
give away the bedstead and guda dhenu, the 
image of Laksmi and the winnowing basket, to 
the Brahmana. 


Suet ATA WT AUTH 
atch FTA BT Ula WATT 
HE HOA WMA: WATAANA AAMT cH 


The following flowers are always desirable 
in this form of worship viz., “Lotus, Kanera, 
Bana, fresh Saffron flower, Ketaki, Sindhuvara, 
Jasmine, Gandhapataka, Kadamba, Kubjaka and 
Campaka. 


fs sited wenger fargttengrepttad 


AMT SATAN S ATT 11S BH 
“oe Ye 
CHAPTER 82 


The merits of gift of Gudadhenu and other 
symbolic images of the cow 


Weald 
Teetfaar W Waar WAT 
fae Sa Wau ted aera aI 
Manu asked- O, Lord of the Universe! 
Please tell me about Guda dhenu. How should it 


be made, and by what mantra should it be given 
away? 


ce] sdf 


TSAI AUS AeA 
afeert wager waarafaareTy A 2 1 
The Lord Matsya answered— O King! I shall 
explain to you the form of Guda dhenu, and the 
fruits of its gift, as well as the mantras, 
according to which it should be given away. It 
is the destroyer of all sins. 


SOIR Mee WT faaegial 
Tay Aaferarat salary ASAT 3 
CUA Aged BT UiTAcTa 


Matsya Puranam 


WEE Hera gTySaUel MATH | 

The floor should be plastered with cowdung, 
the Kusa grass should be spread on all sides, 
and then over it should be placed a black 
antelope skin of four hands in length with its 
neck towards the east. This 1s meant for the 
cow. A smaller deer skin should be spread on 
the floor, near the first, and it should be meant 
for her calf. The cow should be made to face the 
east and the calf the north. 


SAM Wea: TAS AAT AT 

aa UNO Hala EVA SF ETAT VPATG 
ASU AN: VHAG ACH TI 
STAI AT: TAGS ATT ATTA: 1G I 


The image of Guda dhenu (Sugar cow) 
should be made of 4 maunda of raw sugar, and 
the calf of one maunds of raw sugar, which is 
considered to be the first class; the image of the 
cow made of two maunds and the calf o1 half a 
maund of raw sugar 1s considered to be the next 
best. The image of the cow made of one maund 
and the calf of ten seers of raw sugar is 
considered to be the last best. The devotee is to 
choose between the three, according to his 
means. 


eae gareat a fargenratradt 
Ufmenotfaararal ya Teac eTUTT Ho 1 


The mouths of the images of the cow and 
the calf should be made of clarified butter, and 
both should be covered with five silk cloths. 
Their ears should be made of mother-of-pearl 
and legs of sugarcane and the eyes of good 
pearls. 


fargarforiet at faraactertact 
aTShySt at faeeaaaliic i 


The tendons, nerves, etc., of these images 
should be made of white threads, white blankets 
to represent their dewlaps, cheeks and backs 
should be made of copper, the white hair 
trimmed from a camara (antelope hair) should 
represent the hair of the body. 


Chapter-82 


fase Tareas 
Hayes aHiaare raster Tare A 


AauySraon Tad: WTA 
ARTRAAAT a MUTT ATUS AL 


sd vafiran at qudttrendiqieo 


The eyebrows should be made of corals, the 
udders of fresh butter, the tail of silk cloth, a 
vessel of bell metal should be placed to 
represent the milking vessel, the horns should 
be made of gold, the pupils of the eyes of 
sapphire, the hoofs of silver, the scented fruits 
in place of the nostrils. After thus making the 
images of the cow and the calf, the devotee 
should worship them with incense, lights, with 
the following prayer. 


TT wet: Aaya a a caesar 
CTRUUT MT Sa AT VT WereaT aM 
CoM AT A THO MSTA Aet fran 
TRU MT Cat WG UG SAUTETI eI 
franrdata at cet: tater at a fawreat:| 
TSH HA MOUSE TT FIN V3 1 
TAGS A Atal AAATAT TI 
AA AUT AT TTATAISRT AU VU 
TaN At UGA Talal AAT A AM 
TAU STATA WET ANG I 


“The Goddess, who is inherent tn all beings, 
in the form of Laksmi and who also resides 
among the Devas, let that Goddess, in the 
symbol of a cow, may confer peace upon me. 
The Goddess who is known as Rudrdani, the 
favourite of the Lord Siva, in whose form she 
resides, may that very same Goddess in the 
symbol of the cow, dispel all my sins. The 
Goddess, who reclines on the breast of Visnu, 
as Laksmi, who ts present in the form of Svaha. 
in the fire, and is called the power and the 
energy of the sun and the moon and Indra, the 
same Goddess, in the symbol of the cow may 


289 


grant me wealth. She who is the Laksmi 
(wealth) of Brahma, Kubera, Lokapalas may 
grant me boons in the symbol of the cow. She 
who is Svadha, of the highest Pitrs, is Svaha of 
the Devas, may she remove all my sins and 
bring me peace in the symbol of the cow.’ 


Vea at ef Taonga Paced 
PAAR TA PATA TST 2G A 


The gudadhenu, thus invoked by the above 
prayer should be given away to the Brahmana. 
The same ritual is observed in giving away all 
sorts of Cows. 


Treat: WaT: Usa Se aa: | 
ATS TERT ARAT ATT A ATTN go 
O King! There are ten sorts of cows that are 


said to remove all sins, and | shall enumerate 
them to you. 


WANT WSIq: CAST TATTT| 

faerie J aaa aerafear 8c 1 

areas farerrat weerrerarer 

AA Pehle PT ATTA 

THEA AAA SHA LATA STAT: 1128 1 

They are— 1. Cow made of raw sugar (guda 

dhenu). 2. Cow made of clarified butter (ghrta 
dhenu). 3. Cow made of sesamum (Tila dhenu), 
4. Cow made of water (jala dhenu), 5. Cow 
made of milk (Ksira dhenu), 6. Cow made of 
honey (Madhu dhenu), 7. Cow made of sugar 


(Sarkara dhenu), 8. Cow made of curds (dadhi 
dhenu), 9. Cow made of syrup (Rasa dhenu) 


~and 10. The real, that is, the living cow. 


HUT: ARS ATA T ATT: 
Gaus hates AAA Not 


The symbols of cows made of liquid should 
be placed in pitchers filled to the brim, and the 
symbols of the cow made of other substances 
should be arranged in a heap. In this matter of 
gift, some also like to make a symbol of the 
cow of gold. 


290 


Tate Tay aaa a WEI: 

Uded faa BAA Va: SPAT 12 VN 

Waraetaayeat: Fel Tarot Tatar 

AMA WETS AHA HCAAT: 112 2 

Some sages have also said that the symbol 

of the cow made of fresh butter and gems 
should be given away. The above mentioned 
rituals should be observed in giving away all 
sorts of cows (described above). The devotee 
should give away, with faith, these cows to 
attain prosperity and emancipation, on 
occasions of different festivals, accompanied 
with the invocation of mantras. 


TWAS Walearasratiadr: | 
AMTANHAST: Wal: UTTST: WAT A 
I have explained in connection with this 
guda dhenu gift, the gift of other symbolical 
cows. These gifts are destroyers of all sins, the 


givers of the fruits of innumerable sacrifices, 
and are very auspicious. 


TAA TA ala Mae 
TESA UAT YSII: WHAT VI! 


Of all the ordinances the one. of 
ASokadvadasi 1s the best, and the gift of guda 
dhenu, as being an ingredient of that vrata, 1s, 
therefore, praised as the best. 


art faye youd aatardsaar FA: 
TREAT SATU MATA I 


It is most appropriate to give away the guda 
dhenu, on the days of equinoxes and solstices, 
on the occasion of an eclipse and Vyatipata (1.e. 
when the Sun and the Moon are in opposite 
Ayana and have the same declination, the sun of 
their longitude being equal to 180". 


fayiengregtt cet yar uae YAM 
ATR AN arf ARNT: UTA Wag I 


This Visokadvadasi is most sacred and 
dispeller of all sins and 1s auspicious. He who 


Matsya Puranam 


fasts on this Dvadasi goes to Visnu's highest 
seat. 


Se a a arama a 
aos TAT ALOT A SAT RTTTN 1911 
He attains prosperity, longevity and health in 
this world, and after death, he goes to the city of 


Visnu, remembering him always at that critical 
moment. 


TaAeASaT eet AB a afar 
SRC TRCN OM COR CIC CE MILPAT 


The virtuous devotee never gets grief or pain 


for a period of nine arbuda and eighteen 
thousand years. 


A at Hed A F favingesitaa 
JAMNATTT FT ANT AeHTATTANTI 2 8 I 
A married woman, observing _ this 
VisSokadvadasi vrata, with music and dance, 
obtains also the same benefits. 


Tard ete Whar 
Seal YHA TEM FAT FTNZON 


Consequently, one, full of faith, should 
always have music and son@s in honour of Hari, 
on the occasions of this vrata, for, thereby, he 


gets prosperity. 


aafa a frase: werd HTT VI 


Thus who reads, listens to, or sees the 
adoration of enemy of Madhu, Mura and 
Naraka demons (Visnu) or gives advice to 
others for this ordinance, attains the realm of 
Indra, where he is venerated by the Devas for a 
period of one Kalpa. 


FORIIGGHINEZ ICRI PACET 


KK 


Chapter-83 


CHAPTER 383 
The benefits and greatness of all gifts 
aie sdtvd 


qeaad WL ete caferrorghsrry gi 


Narada said— O Lord of the Universe! [ wish 
to hear the benefits of that best of all gifts, that 
may be the giver of everlasting benefits in the 
next life and that may also be venerated by the 
Devas and Rsis. 


SHAT Hara 
Wt: Wert aeata agra ry 
TST ATA TOAST 2 I 


Siva said— O Sage! I shall explain to you the 
ten ways of the gift of dana known as the 
Sumeruparvata gift, by virtue of which, the 
devotee attains the highest of the climes and 1s 
respected by the Devas. 


TU FT ey AHA TI 
q ae Heifers TaPTT | 
The blessings conferred by this form of 
charity cannot be attained otherwise, not even 
by the reading of, or listening to, the Puranas, 


Vedas, performing sacrifices and worshipping, 
or erecting temples to the Devas. 


Tea aan Waa HATA 

Tet areagter: Targa aU US 
TSI Ada SATA: | 
USA: A WS: HOTTA GN 
AAU FANT TAAL 

Taal ATULAREMA: Pa ACT ANE Ul 


Consequently, I shall relate to you the ways 
of this form of charity serially. The following 
ten hills should be made and given away viz. |. 
The hill of grain, 2. The hill of salt, 3. The hill 
of raw sugar, 4. The hill of gold, 5. The hill of 
sesamum, 6. The hill of cotton, 7. The hill of 
clarified butter, 8. The hill of jewels, 9. The hill 


291 


of silver, 10. The hill of sugar. 
aed faaraeat qaTaaqTTagT: | 
se faye yor eadrard fewaraiio i 
eR satarargat wigan 
TAATAIAATAT ETSVATAAST FASC 1 
Waa weyat at yoael at faa: | 
arava tar gargired faeraas 19 


Now I shall explain to you the ways of 
giving away the different hills enumerated 
above. The hills made of grain, salt, etc., should 
be given away on the following occasions— on 
the day of the sacred equinoctia and solsticial 
sankrantis, at the time of Vyatipata, on the day 
of the conjunction of three tithis (tryahasparsa), 
on the third day of the bright fortnight, on the 
occasion of an eclipse, on the amavasya day, on 
the occasion of the sacrificial rites connected 
with the marriage ceremonies and_ other 
festivals, on the 12th day of the bright fortnight, 
on the full moon day, and on the day of the 
moon being In a sacred asterism. 


aaa are WS aT SATU 
HUST ANAK UTA SA 
WYTCHTAV AEMSYE AT AMAT: 1201 
TMT eaTa TATA I HY 
TAA Uses HAlgAHMTTAAT ATA I 


A four-cornered (square) mandapa should be 
erected with devotion, within a temple yard, in a 
sacred place, within the limits of a cattle-shed or 
in the devotee’s own courtyard. It should face 
the north and be slightly slanting towards east 
and north, and the floor should be plastered 
with cowdung and covered with Kusa grass. In 
the centre should be made the hill, surrounded 
by posts as props. (Four hills should be made in 
the corners, with Sumeru in the centre). The hill 
of (1,000 dronas or) 16,000 seers of grain 1s the 
first best, of 8,000 seers of grain is the second 
best, and of 4,800 seers of grain the last best. 


292 


TARTAN Waa: | 

Tea: Uayifan: ais: ward Pa: ST eI 

TeneTaena WA YaUgaayA: TAT 
MAA MATHTETTT: 1123 11 

UN Weddle: 


ae aeart | 
sirquswaustitd: Warety 


Maa: YAMA: FATT BSI 


The Sumeru hill in the centre should be 
made of rice (vrihi), three trees of gold should 
be in it. Pearls and diamonds should be studded 
in the east side of the hill, cat's eye and topaz in 
the south, emerald and sapphire in the west and 
lapis lazuli and ruby in the north. Pieces of 
sandal wood should be placed on all sides. So 
also a creeper of corals should surround it, and 
the surface and the bottom of the rock should be 
bedecked with oyster shells. 


mere faerargate- 
fearentiswas fend: Tad 
Tega TTA 
CDEC OEIC DAI ELA 


The images of lord Brahma, Visnu and Siva 
as well as of the Sun should be made ot gold by 
many holy Brahmanas, and should located on 
the top of the hill. 


AeaMnt Sto A Usa 
PFaeanrate Watt: BATA 
TAA MATH ay 
SICAL mE LAT 


The four peaks should be made of silver, 
and silver should also be plaited at the bottom. 
Sugarcane should be put in place of bamboos, 
the caves should be made of butter, and the 
streams, of clarified butter. 


YRra vagrant 
Targa wens a afaor 


Matsya Puranam 


aaa Uae Hay 
TH MARAT FATEAT V9 
The clouds surrounding this hill on four 
sides, should be made of cloths of four colours, 
viz., those on the east, of white cloth, those on 
the south, of yellow, those on the west of 
pigeon-grey, and those on the north of red- 
coloured cloths. 
Tae Tae 
dere erenrferrdtsaaoT 
AMTGHeH A Tad: Ta 
TARA WMATA i 


Fruits of different kinds, fine garlands of 
flowers and sandal should be put on all the 
sides. Eight silver Lokapalas representing 1. 
Indra (east), 2. Agni (south-east), 3. Yama 
(south), 4. Stirya (south-west), 5. Varuna (west), 
6. Vayu (north-west), 7. Kuvera, (north) and 8. 
Candra (north-east), should be made and 
located in their ascribed places. The hill in this 
way should be decorated. 


fanaa arate wsaut- 
Targa fad a 

SO MECRDIEINGL ED 
Wee faRMIATA HUTT 28 | 


qian wales a 
Pease eae Ar 
GaUT Hae 


Bh Ad: BAHAFHSAAR: 1120 | 


The canopy should be made of five colours, 
and it should be garlanded with white unfading 
flowers. The Sumeru hill should thus be located 
in the centre, and its four spurs decorated with 
flowers, and sandal should be located in their 
proper places. Then the Mandaracala hill should 
be erected with barley in the east and adorned 
with the row of fruits and on the top, should be 
planted a tree of gold, representing the Madra 
Kadamba tree. 


Chapter-83 


enlienene wir te 
Tem wiimateda faTeTAAAI 2 gh 


That hill should be adorned with a golden 
image of Cupid, arrayed with beautiful dresses, 
garlands of flowers and sandal. There should be 
on one side of it a vessel, containing milk, 
representing the sea of milk and on the opposite 
side, another vessel, representing the sea called 
Arunodha. The forests of the hill should be 
represented by silver trees, according to the 
means of the devotee. 


aaa wemensy Fayre 
MET TIA; HAMA TT: | 


eat asa BATA 
AAT Tata UW Waa: AN 2A 


On the south, the Gandhamadana hill should 
be made of wheat, putting some gold in it; on 
the top of which should be placed a golden 
image of Yajnapati and the lake Manasarovara, 
of clarified butter and a garden of white cloth 
and silver should adorn It. 


WIAA AH a TTT 
Atauifroretierorae aay 
MAAGAAGATT Te- 
Taltad cata areqaryi 2 31 


On the west, the Hiranmaya hill of sesamum 
should be made and adorned with sweet 
flowers. Silver, fig tree and swan of gold, 
garden of silver-flowers, a pond of curds 
representing the Sitoda sarovara and clouds 
represented by white cloths, should also be 
made. 

tera a fagestermanror 

Wet quesaty weds Yar 
Yes] FATEUTEUPTAT - 

TTA TATA ATTA 2 IN 


293 


TeaeATaISA AIA Ag- 
star waraan a ad Frere 
7 $ IR GT 
yan eran faera Hug 
artery Aap 
Tat BT ATTA grtagel- 
Taret a Hera Perea 2 G1 


On the north, the Suparsva hill, of urad pulse 
(Phaseolus radiatus) should be made. A golden 
vata tree and a cow of gold, should be placed on 
the top of the hill. A pond of honey, 
representing Bhadra sarovara, and a garden of 
silver trees, should also be made at the bottom 
of it. The Brahmanas, versed in the Vedas and 
Puranas and able to control their passions and of 
blameless character and sound bodies, should 
be made Hotdés performing Homa. The 
sacrificial pond should measure one cubit 
square in size and east of Sumeru hill. 
Sacrificial offerings should be made of 
sesamum, barley, clarified butter, sacrificial fuel 
and Kusa grass. The devotee should keep 
himself awake during the night and blow 
conches, etc., and sing. Now I shall describe to 
you the way of invoking the hills. 


a Pacaurraa faag- 
AMARA ATTA 
ay fara He waa A: 
aya: TAHA WAT U9! 

In invoking the Sumeru hill, the devotee 
should say, “O hill! You are the best resort of 
all the Devas. O hill of immortals! Destroy 
quickly all ill-luck in our houses and confer all 
prosperity on us as well as the highest peace. | 


have commenced worship with unalloyed 
devotion. 


aig wari gen fanfare: | 
Taaeat aera: Ue PAA SI 


294 


Tara MaMa farsa AAT 
SSAA UW AAT WAST AUR 


You are the adorable Siva, Brahma, Visnu 
and the Sun. You are formless, with and beyond 
all forms. You are the seed of all, protect me, 
therefore, O Eternal One. You are the temple of 
the Lokapalas and of Visvamirti, the Great 
Omnipresent, as well as of Rudra, the Adityas 
and Vasus, therefore give me peace. 


TASTE Fea A 
TRAPATT SUVS : AAA TTA 3 0 1 
Since you are never bereft of the Devas or 
Devis or by Siva, therefore take me across the 
mundane ocean of sufferings in safety.’ 
val tf 6 det aa 
TAA Tl AST WT AAT} 8 
wa area ea Tall 
TETSU RY MTA 211 
Tadaayrard: alfrceised A 
After thus worshipping the Sumeru hill, the 
Mandaracala should also be worshipped with 
the following words— “OQ Mandaracala! You are 
embellished with the forest called Cattra-ratha, 
and the continent, called Bhadrasva, therefore, 
soon bring happiness unto me. O 
Gandhamadana! You are the crest jewel of the 
continent, Jambtdvipa, and are adorned with 


Gandharvavana, therefore, grant me high 
renown. 


THe AGA AMAT AAT ANZ ZU 
TANT STATS TT AI 

Tt: HVAT AAT ATT ANI Vil 
Gard Tra Frere: sieraTsTT Fh 

Van A Bary ware amet TAB 4H 
AAT ALA SOA Vel 


O, Hiranmaya hill, you are adorned by the 
Ketumdla continent as well as by the garden 
called Vaibhraja. The golden fig tree is on your 


THAIS 


Matsya Puranam 


summit, let my power therefore be everlasting. 
QO Suparsva hill, you stand majestic, beautified 
by the northern Kuru country and the Savitri 
forest, therefore, let my _ prosperity be 
inexhaustible.’ After thus invoking those hills, 
the devotee should bathe in the morning and 
give away the best central hill, to the guru 
(preceptor). 


fanned caetana; AAMT WANB EN 
TY CARA MAIAT SMT ANE 
Ta OA AAS AT VS CEMA HATTNZ 91 


The four corner hills should be given away, 
in due order, to the four Rtvijas, and O Narada! 
Twenty-four or ten cows should also be given 
away. Nine, eight, seven, five or even one milch 
cow should be given away to the preceptor 
(guru), according to the means of the devotee. 


Varta ra ear aften a Taran 
Udararagrarorag wa fafa: Ban sci 
T Ua Uo Ware Wale WaT: 

TEU MHI TATA A BAN 3 21 
Tataula Way IA: Mey Vad 

STATE TARTAR ARAPATRTTH ¥ 0 I 
faart Taye HAM: OT ATE 
artalet UA Wat: Vay MT ARH VI 


This is the way of the worship of all the 
hills. The same mantras and materials for 
worship should be employed in worshipping 
them all. The sacrificial offerings to the 
different asterisms, Lokapalas, Brahma and 
other Devas should also be offered by applying 
their respective mantras. Diurnal fasts should be 
observed. In case the devotee cannot do so, he 
may take his meals in the night. O Narada! Now 
listen to the Dana mantras of all hills serially. 


3Ta Fel Ad: WHA Wor: wafsar:1 
TAKARA UM WAT AAA Y VI 
STAN Adal MANNA WAT: 

TATA Us ARATTRTT Y 3H 


Chapter-84 


Hear also the rituals of their being given 
away. “The (Anna) grain is Brahma and is 
known as the giver of life. The grain nourishes 
the universe; consequently, it is Visnu and 
Laksmi. O, Supreme of all the hills! Protect me 
in the form of a hill of grain.” 


ore fafert we carga fie 

Wadd AT Sach Tela Y¥ 

Teo canes FATA 

fanr fea: geuraia wa Fafa: 

THAT TIAA A ATTN YG I 

One who gives away the hill of grain in this 

way, resides in Devaloka during the reign of a 
hundred Manus and traverses through the skies 
seated in an aerial chariot in company of the 
nymphs and the Gandharvas. On the exhaustion 


of his merit, he is reborn in the family of a great 
king. 
Sfa stared UATTTOT STATI ATA 
PIM MATASATT 1S 31 


* KR 


CHAPTER 84 
The description of gift of salt-hill 


Sat Jara 
AMT: ANAM HAVA AAA 
GACTA ART Pera aTATTH 8A 


Siva said— I am now going to tell you about 
the mount of salt, the donor of which goes to 
My region. 

SAA: USMS: HCA AAA: | 
TIT: CAAT AGMA: YA I 

The first best mount of salt 1s of 256 seers 
(of the measure of 16 dronas), the next best is of 
128 seers (eight dronas) and the last is of 64 
seers (i.e. 4 dronas). 


feameral TATRA goat FT HUTA 
SAI fara AGI 3 


295 


The poor may make it of any weight rising 
from 16 seers (one drona) onwards. The four 
corner mounts (viskambha) should be of the 
quarter measurement of this main mount. 


faa yoapalgrencht a ween 
CEBMA Vale UTeM Aaa II ¥ I 


And Brahma, along with the other Devas, 
should be arranged in the same way as 
mentioned before, and the golden Lokapalas 
should also be so located. 

Tifa Braet ATTA 
HATA AT STATA & I 
ATTATTTA AASA ALU TH: 
dead a at Ue ATTN I 


The ponds and Kamadeva and others should 
be made as before. The devotee should keep up 
all the night. I now explain to you the mantra of 
giving it away. “O Salt! You have been born of 
the ocean of fortune, in consequence of which 
you are styled as the best of all the flavours. 
Hence this gift of the mount of salt may protect 
me from the evils of this mundane world. 


TANeATa: Ua Alehet Aa far 
fra a raat aware was Ait 


“There is no flavour in anything without a 
pinch of salt. It is always dear to both Siva and 
Siva (Gauri). Hence, O Salt! Give me peace. 


fameeaqand Tarenraagry| 
TAMTAASIT Ue PATA <1 


“The salt that has sprung from the body of 
Visnu is the giver of health. Therefore, O Salt 1s 
the shape of a mountain, carry me through the 
mundane ocean of troubles in peace.’ 


arm fafeaat aed ceneeraurga ry 
Siete TAHT Aa Are TAT ATTN St 


One who gives away the mount of salt in 
this way, attains bliss after passing a Kalpa in 
the realm of Siva and Parvati. 

efa saree wera AANA ATA 
AAT AT ASEAN CY 


296 


CHAPTER 85 


The description of gift of raw-sugar-hill 
Sat Jara 
Ma: Ut WAR WeTAAT TAT 
AACMTAT:; TATA ATITT TI gH 


Siva said— I now relate to you about the gift 
of the mountain of molasses, the donor of 
which, honoured by the Devas, remains in 
heaven. 


SAMY Sofaitders: Tae: 
fair: afte: MMegeaarar 2 
The mount of 50 maunds (10 bharas) of 

molasses is the first best, of 25 maunds (5 
bharas) the second best, and of 15 maunds (3 
bharas) the last best. The poor may make it of 
7’ maunds even. 

TERTTAT Yat SAAT TAT 

PaRATIUSAT ARCA TACT: 11 3 

BANU, Agee AeA AAT 

TMAH A eH WAYS ¥ I 

The invocation, worship, the golden tree, the 

worship of the Devas, the four corner mounts 
(viskambha), the ponds, the forest, the Devas, 
and the sacrifice, the keeping up of the night 
and the lLokapalas and the preliminary 
ceremonies, all these should be done according 
to the rituals connected with the mount of grain, 
and the following mantras should be 
pronounced. 


aay tay fagren warise TATE: | 


AMA Aa Weleay APTA & Ut 
TAM: MAAN ATO rer ae 
TM TAT WAL: AeAATA TAT G Ut 
“As Visnu is supreme among the Devas, the 
Simaveda among the Vedas, Lord Mahadeva 
among the yogis, the sacred Om among the 


mantras, the Goddess Parvati among the ladies; 
similarly, the sugarcane juice is superior to all.” 


Matsya Puranam 


Oa Ta Men Tera ahs ai 
TATA TIM BT St WS Tae 
Parente ware TS AGI 


“Therefore, O mountain of molasses, give 
me unbounded wealth; you are the brother of 
the Goddess Parvati (the giver) of good luck, 
and the abode of Parvati; therefore grant me 
peace.’ 


ar fafeat ae cerqqena rT 
Ua: Matec WTA cI 


One who gives away the mount of molasses 
in this way, goes to the region of Parvati and is 
honoured by the Gandharvas. 


at: HeUMAA J AAgaraat wae 
MAMTA: MTT TTT: 8 
After seven Kalpas, he becomes the 
sovereign of the seven Dvipas. He remains also 


always healthy and never gets defeat from his 
enemies. 


Ste Sia TTT Tetadartal ATA 
CAT GT FATA SEATS: 1 A 


KR 


CHAPTER 86 
The description of mountain of gold 
Sut sara 
BY URL Tal FAUT 
Tel Were afte art aera: eI 
I am now describing to you the ways of 
giving away the mountain of gold, which drives 


away all sins, and takes the devotee to the 
region of Brahma. | 


SAA: UMA HIT: Way: Mts 
ACeAMITA Agee Maa ST Mead: 
SOMCHUCTSA ATTA FATAT: 1 2 


The mount of 4,000 tolas (1,000 palas) of 
gold is the first best, of 2,000 tolas (500 palas) 


Chapter-87 


is the second best and of 1,000 tolas (250 palas) 
is the last. The poor may make, leaving pride 
aside, one of less weight, but greater than one 
pala, according to his means. 


qatar faceararyga 
famnrsteneged whens: wrod 3 
AA TAA Taras FAA: 
TANSTAHACT TUS HTT YI 
TAMA eS THT TS SATCTA 
SUTATRUUT TACT ATTA GN 


The rituals prescribed for the mount of grain 
should be observed. The four corner mounts 
(viskambha) should be given away to the 
sacrificing priests, as before, with the following 
words : “I salute you, O Mount of gold, you are 
the seed, the womb of Brahma, you are the 
giver of unbounded fruits. The gold is most 
sacred on account of its being born of Fire; 
therefore, O Nagottama! Protect me’. 


ort fafa ae ceenrenraay 
Hala Wa TelelaacaaT 
aa Hered fesaat aft wat wf EN 
One who gives away the mount of gold, 


according to these rites, goes to the blissful 
realm of Brahma where he resides for a period 


of one kalpa, after which he attains 
emancipation. 
ofa saa Berge Panlacrates a 
TSM SEAT: Hc & Uh 
kk x 
CHAPTER 87 


The description of mount of sessamum 
emt sata 
sd: Ut Waa freste fanaa: 
AAA Ait FAM VAAN ii 


Now I proceed to explain to you about the 


giving away of the mount of sesamum, by the 


virtue of which the devotee goes to the realm of 
Visnu. 


297 


Sam couse: uss: wa: 
fafa: afist fess factor: weal 20 


The sesamum mount of 160 seers (10 
dronas) is the first best, of 80 seers (5 dronas) 
second best, and of 48 seers (3 dronas) is the 
last. 


Yaar Aaly faeacaratra fry 
CMA Wee Baa a 3 1 


The four corner mounts (viskambha) should 
be located as before, and I am now telling you 
the mantra to be recited at the time of offering, 
O Narada. 


Tara ae fannceaeayca: | 

fT: AME AGT AAA areas v1 
eal HI BT Aared fret warfarerory 
TMCS Very faetraet THIS UGA 


Sesamum, kusa and masa were produced 
from the sweat of Visnu, at the time of His 
killing the demon, Madhu; therefore, O mount 
of sesamum grant me happiness. In Havya and 
Kavya, (in the Deva as well as in Pitr worship), 
sesamum is considered to be the best, therefore, 
O mount of sesamum, I salute you.’ 


SA UW AY See freer 
a aod we aft Yarahrsererqn & i 


One who thus gives away the mount of 


sesamum, attains similarity with Visnu, and 1s 
never born in this world. 


aralged waren yaatsey ated 
faghidearrad: qeaart fea aetait9t 


He gets long life, children and grandchildren 
and goes to heaven, where he is honoured by 
the Devas, Pitrs, Gandharvas. 


Sta Soe Vera Tat frerarctatts AM 
CATA SEATS: 1 9 Ut 


a ta 


298 


CHAPTER 88 
The description of gift of cotton-hill 
Sut sara 
MA: ANA HATA AAT! 
TSeMTAT Preararent WA WEAN gi 
The Lord Siva said— I shall now fully relate 


the method of the gift of the cotton-hill. By this 
gift, one attains the ~ state. 


LI Wad ie T°] 


SUTRA: in Uayeayy: Wa: 
SUE BIC MICOICCIOCMIED 


It is best to make the mount of cotton for 
100 maunds (20 bharas), of 50 maunds (10 
bharas) is the next best, of 25 maunds (5 bharas) 
is the last best. The devotee, if in straitened 
circumstances, may make one of 5 maunds (one 
bhara) even, without exercising miserliness. 


quate WaAATae WAT 
WTA FT Maat Tateayetwac 3 tt 


© Narada! the rites prescribed for the giving 
away of the hill of grain should be observed in 
this also. On the lapse of the night of prayers, 
the devotee should recite the following mantra 
in giving away the hill of cotton. 


AMAA AMATectaAMaS Ader 
HUA ATEPAA TAA TAN XI 


“O Hill of cotton! You cover everyone in the 
shape of cloth, I salute you, kindly dispel my 
Sins.’ 


ofa arotasters at cemescataan 
SANs AUT Hed Fat TT Wafes Gi 


One who gives away the cotton hill, 
according to these rites, goes to the region of 
Siva where he resides for one Kalpa, after 
which he 1s born as a king. 


ofa sired Werqunl aratagteratts 
ATATSTS TATA SEAT NS CI 


KK 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 89 


The description of mount of clarified butter 
SIX Jara 
Ad: UT Waa Yaa TTA 
aaS Tara FST USAT 2 
Now I shall describe to you about the gift of 


the mount of clarified butter. It is like nectar, 
and its charity 1s the destroyer of all ills. 


AMM FIRMA: TAEVATAcT: | 
SUITE : Wh: Taher: SOT It Ql 
The mount of clarified butter, consisting of 
20 pitchers, full of it, 1s the first best, of ten 


pitchers is the second best, and of five pitchers 
is the last best. 


weafadis a: Hatgenaitae faa: | 
PUA ATT BETA 3 


People with limited resources may make it 
of two pitchers even. The corner spurs should 
be duly located in the four sides, like the 
previous ones. 


Uieraugeraraer raat agra 
HA MeteaaaT TN faeaAT: | 
Vessels of uncooked rice should be neatly 
placed on the mouth of the pitchers, touching 
each other, and rising up into the form of a peak 


like a pyramid, and should be adorned, 
according to rules. 


. aT eTe 
Fy ty esale ik-as m °} 


cachet tentin ondiens 


They should be surrounded with sugarcane, 
fruit and cloth, etc.. The rest of the rituals are 
the same as those described for the hill of grain. 


weAAYS FT TEST TATT 
WTA F Maat Wa ataaaat 
fA Ags aAMA: VITA IG Ut 

The devotee should keep himself awake 


during the night, perform Homa offerings and 
worship the Deities, and give away everything 


Chapter-90 


to the preceptor (guru) in the morning. 
HAMA THATS TAIT AT: | 
THT ee MATT PISTON 
TAA Tea Fa afgguateaa 
GAA TEAS Us AISHTTATN ¢ 
art fate TEMNGTAAATTAT 


The spurs of the hillock (viskambha corner 
mounts) should be given away to the Rtvika 
priests, as before, after which the devotee 
should say with a peaceful mind: “The clarified 
butter has been produced by the confluence of 
the fire and nectar, therefore, O Sankara, the 
Lord of the universe, be pleased. Brilliancy is 
Brahma which is present in the clarified butter, 
therefore, let there always be my protection, by 
virtue of this charity of the clarified butter hill.’ 


TATA AMIS HBACM PSTN FA 
gaan fafsutererantern 
faaraisanites fagtaenatda: | 
fagtitagit: ag TWaarydqderayi go 
One who gives away the first best hill of 
clarified butter, decidedly goes to the kingdom 
of Siva, inspite of his being a great sinner, and 
resides in heaven till the dissolution of the 
world where he roams about in an aerial chariot 
decorated with cranes, birds, small bells, 


perforated work and portholes in the company 
of Apsaras, Siddhas, Vidyadharas and the pitrs. 


Stet ATARI RTUNTUY Barerereat ets 
AMAA AAAS 1S 


KER 


CHAPTER 90 


The description of mount of gems 
gut sare 
Ba: Wl Waa Tracer 
WMATA Veet: CAAT HI 2 
TEN: Taya: SAT: 


299 


agaist fanmade: : AAAI 21 

I am now going to explain to you about the 
mount of gems. The mount of one thousand 
pearls is the first best; of 500 pearls the second 
best, and of 300 pearls the last best. The spurs 
(viskambha) in ihe corners should be made and 
located in their proper places, the quantity 
consisting of one-fourth of the main mount. 


Tt ICG ifs a ~ : 7 
WRT: Bra fash: 1 3 1 
The eastern spurs of the mount, should be 
made with diamonds and cat's eyes. The 


southern spur (Gandhamadana mount) should 
be made of sapphires and topazes. 


aedfagn: usredfast fareract:| 

NIM: Watavrento a farsa vi 

qramddad Tanaie uftacwd 

Taclalet HACIA AAAI G 

The western spur, called the Vimalacala, 

should be made with corals and laips lazulis, the 
northern spur to be made with topazes and gold. 
The rest of the rituals should be observed as laid 
down for the hill of grain. The trees and the 
images of gold should be made and invoked in 


the same way and worshipped with incense and 
flowers. 


THAT: WT a aaT: 
Tass RANT SUA ATS TAIL & 


After the night is passed, the devotee should 
give everything away to the preceptor (guru), 
priests, by uttering the following mantras. 


Get Sanu: Wa Aateteaearad: | 
ca Tae fred ATES Wesel I 


“When all the Devas are dominant in the 
jewels, and you are the mountain of gems, you 
are of immortal stability. I salute you. 


TANGA Te WHE at: 
Fal WIM ALAA: Wile Tae ci 


300 


“Lord Hari is pleased by the gift of precious 
stones, therefore protect me. O Lord! by virtue 
of this gift of gems.’ 

arr fafert ae cages FATT 

Ol Aft PATA TA: 11 8 
TacHeuyd UT THedes TTT 
BUTTON: AASIATTT ASTI Yo 

One who gives away the hill of gems, 
according to these rites, goes to the region of 
Visnu and 1s venerated by the Devas like Indra, 
where after passing his blissful days for a very 
long time, he 1s reborn as an emperor on Earth, 
endowed with beauty, health and all good 
qualities. 

Teena feaferarearya at Hay 
aad Argrarata Prasat Bau gen 


His sins of killing a Brahmana are destroyed 
as the thunderbolt destroys the mountains. 


sta sree METI Tetrercteahtt ATA 
TATATATSEATA: 11.3 0M 
**R* 
CHAPTER 91 
The description of the mount of silver 
Sat Jara 


ad: Ti waaay theresa 
TAAATAN Ait BATS ATT TT 2 


Now I shall explain to you about the mount 
of silver, by the gift of which the devotee goes 
to the realm of the Moon. 


SN: UTAEASAA TIAA: | 
Taney: Weeder: BA VM 
The first best silver mount 1s of 40,000 tolas 

(10,000 palas) of silver, the second best of 
20,000 tolas (5,000 palais) and the last best of 
10,000 tolas (2,500 palas). 

aint fayreed area faeten 

fareradaretgd Tay HeTIATN 3 


Matsya Puranam 


The devotee, in tess _ favourable 
circumstances, should make a mount from 80 
tolas (20 palas) of silver and upwards, as much 
as he can afford, and, as before, the four corner 
spurs should be one-fourth in dimension of the 
main central mount. 

Tac LCi eto *| 
EDP ECUMI RAT 

According to the rites mentioned before, the 
mounts should be made of silver and the 
Lokapalas of gold. 


Tatawadharara fraaisa fecora: | 

Tad Waeaet Ud aes ASAT 
Separate images of Brahma, Visnu and the 
Sun (Arka) should be made and placed at the 
bottom of the hill; whatever has been ordained 


to be made of silver in other places, should be 
made of gold here. 


We FT Yaad Halarrronfeaa 

Saat: WA T Aa Tes «I 

fanipesana: wr aeafayent: | 

SH Wd USCEMEMUUaACAT: 9 I 

The rest of the rituals, like Homa, vigil, etc., 

should be observed, as before. The devotee 
should keep himself awake during the night and 
give away the silver mount to the preceptor 
(guru) and the corner mounts, after being 
decorated with cloths, etc., and worshipped, 
should be given away to the priests (Rtviyas). 
Afterwards, the devotee, holding a blade of 


kusa grass in his hand, should recite the 
following mantra, with a peaceful mind- 


FaqOT seca TETTggOT fra a 
Ue Walt TAS MHAAAPTAI 6 


“The silver is pleasing to the Pitrs, and so it 
is to Visnu, Indra and Siva, therefore, O mount 
of silver! Protect me from the ocean of sorrows | 
of this world.” 


Chapter-92 


sea Facer al cease 
TaMqaeeal Wet Went AAT 
ates A Weld: feearreacai at: 
TRA SAE AANA ATATH 20 It 


One who thus gives away the mount of 
silver, attains the benefit of having given away 
ten thousand cows, and goes to the region of the 
Moon, after being venerated by hosts of 
Gandharvas, Kinnaras and Nymphs, and resides 
there till the dissolution of the world. 


Aa ATA ATA SATTT : 1 OH 


RR 


CHAPTER 92 
The description of the sugar-hill 


SM Jara | 
HMA: WHA Meg 
TAI WEA GWAH STATA AAMT Qik 
I now relate to you the ways of giving away 
the mountain of sugar in gift, by the virtue of 


which Visnu, Siva and the Sun always remain 
pleased. 


SRT: WATE: LATTA: | 
SAMA: Wiel ARATE: BIA 
The first best mount of sugar is of 8 bhdaras 


of sugar, thé second best of 4 bharas and the last 
best of 2 bharas. 


TO ASI Hale: ~acafarary 
PRT Hatt TAA ATA 31 
If a man is having limited money, he may 
make it from one or half bhara, and the four 


comer spurs should be made one-fourth of the 
central mount. 


qa AAMT ANT 
MUU Aged WI SATSTTA IN ¥ II 


301 


Wet: Uy Tata: Heaaey: | 
Udagera Ute adtate Frareraqi 4 


The rituals connected with the mount of 
grain should be observed here as well. The hills 
should be made with the images of Gods settled 
on them, and, as before, the three golden trees 
of Mandara, Parijata and Kalpadruma, should 
be located on the Sumeru peak. These three 
trees should always be located on the gift of 
every kind of hill. 


Sheree Yau: 
Fava waviery fapraresctreatct & 


Haricandana and Santana’ trees should be 
located on the east and the west, respectively. 
This should be done in the case of the gift of. 
every hill, and particularly in the instance of the 
one made of sugar. 


Wet HMA WIAA: Tel WaT 
TINGS FT Ge: VNC: MN 9 1 
Meal adage ga: TafgTeran 
emt qos yxtacherontaat wa c 


The image of Cupid should be located on the 
Mandaracala peak facing the west, that of 
Kamadeva facing the north, on the top of the 
Gandhamadana, on Vipulacala, the incarnation 
of the Veda, in the form of the Swan, facing the 
east; facing the south, the (Surabhi) cow of gold 


on the Suparsva hill. 


The tnvocation, etc., should be done, as 
before, in the case of the mount of grain, after 
which the central hill should be given away to 
the Preceptor (guru), and the corner spurs 
should be given away to the priests (Rtvias), 


1. Two names among five trees of Indra’s heaven, 
Other three are Parijata, Mandara, and Kalpa. 


302 


while reciting the following mantras : 
AMATI Tet: Wana: | 
THMHS Wa Werg Adal! Volt 
amgd fraat a a Fraga irene: 
CaM ACTS Ufes A: WaT LAN 


TATRTTHAT GTA Bea AT: 
SASH Tergter US WATTAMTATTN 221 


“This hill of sugar is known as the essence 
of prosperity and nectar; therefore, let you be 
the source of everlasting bliss to me, O Lord of 
hills, O, mount of sugar! The drops of nectar 
that fell from the Devas when they were 
quaffing it, produced you, O sugar, therefore, 
protect me. The sugar has also been generated 
from the floral arrows of Cupid, you are the 
mount of the very same sugar; therefore, save 
me from this sea of troubles in the world.’ 


TT Caraga fafear at: 
aautfarien: a aft wt TEA 31 


One who gives away the hill of sugar, 
according to these rites, is liberated from all 
sins, and attains bliss. 


4 
TSTRTATE Hells chk Ba 


ater arena wa reaehfe: Ikea 
Ta: HOUMA F AAR Aa 
MANA A AAT SATAN 84 


By the grace of Visnu, the devotee traverses 
through the sky seated in an aerial chariot, 
shedding lustre like the moon and the stars, after 
which he becomes the lord of the seven dvipas 
at the end of a hundred kalpas and enjoys health 
and wealth for three arbuda of lives. 

TT Vifard: HaTa vA: 
TAMA AAA PATA | 
g = . v, tt pad fd Poe 1-1 


TT RG I 


In observing the rites of giving away these 
different hills, the devotee should feed as inany 
Brahmanas as he can, according to his means; 


Matsya Puradnam 


and, then, with their permission, should take his 
meals without salt and acid. He should send 
away the materials of the hills to the houses of 
the Brahmanas. 


Syt Jara 
MATT Fercned qe ferrari: 
Gewne fea aa Se: AAT: ol 


Siva said— In ancient times (Brhatkalpa), 
there was a king named Dharmamirti, the — 
friend of Indra, who killed thousands of 
Daityas. 


aragaleat wea dora farraws:| 
Tall MAM AT Waa WUTAT: | 
ATES AT ACU SELATTT: HVC I 
He eclipsed even the sun and the moon by 
his lustre and he destroyed hundreds of 
enemies, and was ever victorious. Inspite of his 
being a mortal, he had access to every region; 


and roaming about hither and thither, he 
subjugated many of his foes. 


TET ATMA AT ATA AST TTA 28 1 
UMA Sa WONT WTA 
CIAO Wel ATA TWH oll 


His queen, Bhanumati, was the most 
beautiful among all ladies in the three regions. 
She was matchless, like the Goddess Laksmi 
and excelled all the beautiful ladies of her time. 
She was dearer than life to the king. She was 
looking like Laksmi in a group of ten thousand 
ladies. 


qraleaeant + Haag | 
HEAT: WHS A TTA 
fraRAaga Tan Aas yeaa 2 2 


Thousands, aye, millions of Rajas, could not 
be compared to him. On one occasion, that 
remarkable sovereign, while seated on his 
throne, asked his Purohita, the sage Vasistha. 
with mind full of bewilderment. 


Chapter-92 


Tatara 
Maat THOT WT eM TAT 
peared Faget Aa Wee AERTATN 2 21 


The Kind said— O Sage! be pleased to tell 
me, on account of what good deeds in my past 
lives, | have become so illustrious and wealthy 
in my present life? 


arag sara 

Ye etettadt aT ayer fyrearaeraum 

TM SAITEVA Wa AUT: | 

eugene: Arg saatgherrataHqn 23 11 

Vasistha said— “Some time in the past, there 

was a public woman, named Lilavati, who was 
devoted to Siva. She gave to her preceptor 
(guru), a mount of salt, along with the trees of 


gold, as prescribed in the rituals, on the 
fourteenth day of the bright fortnight. 


WE: PAU ATEN PUSS HaTAT 

Ie otenadte at sear faratrar: 1 Vv 

Ta: TAS Kal waa 

SATSUTT TATA Teraear Feary 

dentate aa 7 Watt BAAN BG 

In the house, of Lildvati used to live a Sidra 

servant, named Saunda, goldsmith by 
profession, who was very clever. O king! He 
had made beautiful golden trees and images of 
Devas, with faith, and with marked skill and did 
not charge anything for his labour. He never 


charged any wages. He thought that these were 
all meant for religious purposes. 


SHAM ATI BSNS: | 
ceradt fr: wef ufterat a Ufa E11 


O King! the wife of that goldsmith, fixed 
those trees artistically on that mount, after 
polishing them well. 


FA MAM M SIT WHATS 
Ol @ oetladl AVA HIT VeATG Bl 2011 


303 


ATHTAMAT HAA ANS 
aaaataraear ST PTaArSTTH VS 


Lilavati, along with those two, while 
worshipping the mount with faith, showed great 
devotion to their preceptor (guru). After a long 
time, Lilavati died, and by virtue of her charity, 
she was liberated from her sins and went to the 
kingdom of Siva. 


asat Gavan easwraaar 
T WTaTeTEPaTA: A Was AHATN 22M 


The poor, but high-minded, goldsmith, who 
was in the house of Lilavati, and who did not 
charge anything for manufacturing those trees 
of gold and images, has been born in your 
person. 


CASITA TTT: ATTA 
Ta Yau Atal SAAT: | 
PAT: Ua HF MAMA Ta 3 ol 


By the same virtue, you are so illustrious 
and have your sway over the seven continents. 
Your wife of the past life had polished up the 
trees, made of gold and had fixed them up on 
the mount, in consequence of which she has 
now been born as your queen Bhanumatit. 


TAT CMSA TTT : 
TTATTT TA | 
TaAhad AcatcHaar- 


FT HAA AIUTACT AIL 3 It 
Tae ART TAA 

TNPAaTRAT Tea 
Taran fray 

TITAS HUA 3 2 
waht AeA w ayhT- 

aut afagel et a wart 

A TATATA TTA 13 3H 


304 


On account of her polishing those trees, she 
is of matchless (polished) beauty and achieved 
lordship of this earth, and both of you had 
devotedly served in the gift of the mount of salt; 
consequently, you have obtained heaith, wealth 
and kingdom. You should give away in your 
present life the ten kinds of hills, according to 
the prescribed rites.’ Then Dharmamirti said 
“Be it so” and honoured the words of the sage 
Vasistha, the king performed the gift of ten 
hills, beginning with Dhanyacala and went to 
the realm of Visnu. 


UPA UAT S TAT 


apraeate Sear 
soit waa ata canta 
fanene: asta fed warfai3 <i 


One, who himself cannot perform, but 
merely touches, hears or even advises others to 
give these gifts, is liberated from sins and goes 
to the region of Visnu. So, also, one who is 
poor, but who, full of faith, sees this Ptya 
performed by others. 


Staal weragafa wera: 
WergHaATANST ATER | 

a: Hatteng wrygeaE Wag 
VAM THAT STATI 3 A 


OQ foremost among the sages! when the 
people read this story of king-hills the effects of 
evil dreams come to remove. One who 
peaceful-minded gives away the gifts of all hills 
with devotion, what can we say about It. 


sfa stared WaT vedere ATH 
ferataaraiseara: 1 21 


*w RR 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 93 


The performance of Santi and Pusti 
(Oblation to the nine planets) 


aa sare 
SRA ASA: WT 
Taare Ft wet wifrenatisear gi 


Sita said— In the days gone by, Saunaka 
asked Vaisampayana, who was seated at his 
leisure, to explain to him the ways of the 
acquirement of all desires by the performance of 
Santi! and Pusti2 rites. 


aM Sarl 
THA: WIAA AT AeaAeT TARA 
Say UAT aT AMATTAT, TA: 
a TaraMat TH Fem: FOTN VU 


Vaisampayana said~ I shall now relate to 
you, listen to it attentively what should be done 
by persons desirous of acquiring wealth, peace, 
longevity and of freeing themselves from 
malignant influences and how the offerings to 
the planets should be made by a person desirous 
of Santi and Pusti? 


Tas Here tafser 
TEMa Wa Yroeranfeanrg 3 


[ shall explain to you, in brief, on the basis 
of all Sastras, the ways of propitiating the 
planets. 


questa fawafad qrat Geluraraay 
Terreacaey Tara Vt BATS vi 


On an auspicious day as pointed out by 
almanacs and Brahmanas, and after inviting the 
Brahmanas, the different planets and their rulers 
should be located tn their proper places, through 
a Brahmana, and homa sacrifice should be 


. Those which pacify or neutralize the malignant 
influences are called Santika rites. 

2. Those which strengthen and augment the beneficent 

tendencies, are called Paustika rites. 


oe 


Chapter-93 


performed. 
WEAR aN Whep: Yuopafrani fae : 
WIMSAAIT: TACHA AAT: TTT GN 
Gata: alee Aaa: | 
TANGA A ATES: WANN 
Te Tag sar Faro aire 
Trea frahergafaregarq 9 i 


The knowers of the Puranas and Srutis have 
described the planetary offerings as being of 
three kinds viz., 1. of the thousand homas (fire 
oblations); 2. of a lac or a hundred thousand 
homas; 3. of ten millions of homas, that fulfil all 
desires. Hear the ways of performing the homa 
with a thousand offerings, as told in the 
Puranas. This is called Navagraha yajna, or the 
sacrifice to the Nine Planets. An__ altar, 
measuring two vitasti wide, within the 
sacrificial pond, should be made in the direction 
of north-east of the fire pit. 


augaga afe farcry 

COMA Sart ATTA ¢ I 

ATMO Feat TATATATSACTT| 

Saal aa: ATEN fayrictaraerfereari <i 

The vedi (altar) should be one vitasti in 

height and square, facing the north. It should 
have two buttresses on which the Devas should 
be located. Afterwards fire should be lighted tn 


the fire pit and the thirty-two Devas should be 
invoked in that fire. 


wa: Ae stat qatar: | 
Uganda MAT Ae Slenfettaed: 11 Yo I 


The following are the nine planets, viz.,— 
The Sun, the Moon, the Mars, the Mercury, the 
Jupiter, the Venus, the Saturn, the Rahu and the 
Ketu. They always bring good to all creatures 
(to call some of them malignant, is a mere mode 


of speech). \ 
HEY orcad faenecitfed afar a 


TAM TH faeneasd Yara TN Ven 


305 


yaar and faeces eferorgdca 

uaa wit faerare verrefarn 

wearer: Sef ATTA TLACTATUgeT | NF 

(1) The Sun should be located in the centre, 

(2) the Mars in the south, (3) the Mercury in the 
north-east, (4) the Jupiter in the north, (5) the 
Venus in the east, (6) the Moon in the south- 
east, (7) the Saturn in the west, (8) the Rahu in 
the south-west and (9) the Ketu in north-west. 
All the planets should be drawn with uncooked 
rice powder. 


TAT fereangar a wigrreta 
HANH FAT A AMT STAN 231 
Tat a Wifaareswenta s prearatay| 
WAIT T TA Wel: alot Ma AN evil 
ale fara a adarafacaan: | 
aera: fatafeamnics Wat a aAT IN GI 
TAT AUT Te Weare: | 
fara war eat arate aI 
Te ALI 2G It 

(10) Siva is the Presiding Deity (adhidevata) 
of the Sun, (11) the Goddess Parvati of the 
Moon, (12) Skanda (K4rtika) of the Mars, and 
(13) Hari of the Mercury, (14) Brahma of the 
Jupiter, (15) Indra of the Venus, (16) Yama 
(Dharmaraja) of the Saturn, (17) Kala of the 
Rahu, (18) Citragupta of the Ketu, (19) Agni, 
(20) Water, (21) Earth, (22) Visnu, (23) Indra, 
(24) Aindri (wife of Indra), (25) Prajapati, (26) 
Sarpa, (27) Brahma, (28) Ganesa, (29) Durga, 
(30) Vayu and (31) Akasa are the secondary 
presiding Deities (Pratyadhidevata). All these 
make up 31, to which number adding the Twin 
Asvinikumaras, the group becomes of 32. All of 


them should be invoked in the sacrificial fire by 
Vyahrtis!. 


[ > | oa vic. iad CH + 
“2 


|. Vyahrti means utterance. A mystic word, viz., the 


Syllables, Bhuvah, Svah, Mahah, Janah, tapah, 
Satyam and Om. 


ae — (yo ~— »w 


306 


hUdrddd! 


aeahunt ant<tek 
TeUg aa Het et Haat fag: gon 


The colours of these planets should be as 
follows— The Sun should be drawn in red, the 
Moon in white, the Mars in red, the Mercury 
and the Jupiter in yellow, the Venus in white, 
the Saturn and the Rahu in black and the Ketu 
in smoke colour. 


Tania cal araifa Haars a 
qUTAAISA YUTSUes aay 
WN CTA: ATTA ATTN RCI 


Their forms are of the same colour as 
indicated above. They should be dressed in the 
same colour of cloth and offered the same 
colour of flowers. Incense, highly fragrant, 
should be offered to them, and a nice canopy 
should be placed over the altar, which must be 
well decorated, by hanging flowers and fruits. 


Ystest ACERT ATS FATT 

aT Mars gare aitrafT <1 
Caled U stars Yara aT YSaTH 
WITT FATA FT Wea 
fasted a aaa: addetardadil 2 ol 


Rice, cooked in coarse sugar, should be 
offered to the Sun, clarified butter and rice 
cooked in milk and sugar to the Moon, 
mohanabhoga (pudding) to the Mars, milk and 
rice to the Mercury, mce and curds to the 
Jupiter, coarse sugar and rice to the Venus, rice, 
sesamum and pulses, cooked in milk to the 
Saturn, mutton to the Rahu and coloured rice to 
the Ketu. 


WPA Tar TeT TET ATH AT A 


; —_ 


HR QV 


RAT TST 
WTI HS Toot ar fea 2 


To the north-east of that altar, a flawless 


Matsya Puranam 


pitcher of water painted with rice and curds 
(five powders) and decorated with paficaratna 
(five gems), the leaves of the mango tree, fruit 
and cloth, should be placed, and Varuna should 
be located on it. 


iia afta: Wat: AAR Wits A 
Tattle WRI 


saarita fy waren 
red fares ara afar 2x1 


ad aya: afta: wuts a Aare 
AAT AAA START TAAT: 11 24 I 


The earth of the elephant ward, stable, 
chariot-house, ant-hill, tank, cattle-shed should 
be mixed with water, along with the different 
herbs and Ganges water, and the devotee should 
bathe in it, after reciting the following mantras: 
‘All the rivers, seas, tanks and rivulets, come to 
wipe out the sins of the devotee.’ 


VATA eaCA AMA ATT 
a BAT Ufa fatrenfeati 2G 


O, sages! The Deities should be, similarly, 
invoked and afterwards Homa offerings of 
clarified butter, barley, uncooked rice and 
sesamum should be made to the fire. 


ah: Uetenaterauraratsa fore: 

aierat: Bat gal Honey Uhr: BHATTI Vil 

CTO IEE CR IIC MICE alt 

aiaeat agafnat cer da waren 8c 

The wood of Arka (Calotropis gigantea), 

Palasa (Buteafrondoss), Khadira (Catechu), 
Apamarga (Achyranthes-spera), Asvatha (the 
holy fig tree), Udambara (the fig tree), Sami 
(Prosopis spicigera), Kusa and Diurva grasses 
are to be used for lighting the sacrificial fire. 
The Homa offerings, consisting of honey, ghee 


and curds of milk, should be made either 101 
times or only 28 times to each planet. 


MCSA SiTHT STeTRET StTeTAgTAT: 
Aer: BUI: ATHY AaaT 281 


Chapter-93 


The sacrificial twigs (of the plants named 
above), in all homas, should each measure a 
span in length (pradesamatra!) and should not 
contain roots, branches and leaves. Such a kind 
of fuel should be used by the wise in all 
sacrificial offerings. 


carafe aaargursy UTaTefa 
TA ta TAT VlteT: AMT: FAIZ ofl 
Particular kind of sacrificial fuel should be 
used for the particular Deity (named above) and 
offerings should be made, after uttering the 
particular mantras in low voice, with the name 
of the Deity for whom it is intended. 
aired BT Barareh weve WA: 
TAC MA A BVT SARA ETA: | 3 kN 
The sacrificial twigs should be soaked in 
clarified butter and then thrown into the fire. 
Afterwards, the eatables, like Caru etc., should 
also be put into the fire. Ten offerings should be 
made at first to one’s own particular mantra. 


The completion of the sacrifice should be 
performed by the vyahrti mantras. 


TTA: MPA AT PYG FAT: 
TAY SAAT: WAaAT TI 3 2A 
The learned Brahmanas should be placed 
either facing the North or the East, and the 
cooked rice, caru (pudding) should be placed in 
front of each Devata, with recitation of the 
proper mantras. 


Gal FT ATSATAH Ta Se AAA 
arpa a Fata ete: eArar FEST 3 3 
Mea ATA TAT AeA: | 
aadet feat wa sft area AAAI 3 wi 
am faereagya sit arya a 

gemma Utara WT TAT Ba 

Wa a srafefa a yaente Pre 


!. A span measured from the tip of the thumb to that of 
the forefinger. 


307 


wate YA: Brat Sather wre 3 it 
HAMA SYS Sit Werealed: | 

at HVART FAHAATAG PITTA 3 I 
Tat sift wT aera Waray, 
SUSAR TAA TANTRA 3 oI 
faonitte farenyicta wast TrarTa: | 
SAMeaMal SHAT ARAN: 3 VA 

aM AT Aa Thea Sra: weather: | 
ATA TEAM WA: WAT ¥ oN 
faaryerer areata water fag: 

aftr at quite sft Agected: | ¥ VM 
Sead Teuiacrat wa: weather: 

Wy: Urerdetatt dey TST ¥ II 
aca yar sft fawrearet:| 

SHI Welt SPT VHT MATHS 3 
SAAT QT sh Cea: AAA 

MATa: Weta: Waratah BA yA 
AMISH BUY sft AAO Ar Sea 

UE Fa FT wlrany sft TAMVYSTEA YG A 
fara arate wat get: Baya: 
AAIEN TAA SUAS ACAI YE I 
SEM TAM STATA STRAT: 

aT forgateat a areata: watfta: vio 
Wat Sat atyeat seafyaial Sead 
yuighrer walt fea seatsrarteaqi vo 


After the Homa of cooked rice (caru), the 
remaining offerings should be made with the 
twigs (samidhas), in honour of the planets, viz., 
offering (1) to the Sun should be made after 
reciting ‘Akrsnena’, etc., (2) to the Moon after 
reciting ‘Apyayasva’, (3) to the Mars after 
reciting ‘Agnirmirdha divah’, (4) to the 
Mercury after reciting ‘Agne vivasvadusase’, 
(5) to the Jupiter after reciting ‘“Brhaspate 
paridiyarathena’, (6) to the Venus after reciting 
‘Sukran te anyat’, (7) to the Saturn after reciting 


308 


‘Sannodevi-rabhistaya’, (8) to the Rahu after 
reciting “Kayanascitrabhuvat’, (9) to the Ketu 
after reciting ‘Ketunkrnvan’, (10) to Rudra after 
reciting ‘Avoraja,’ (11) to Uma after reciting 
‘Apohista,’ (12) to Kartika after reciting 
‘Syonaprthvi’, (13) to Visnu after reciting ‘Idam 
Visnu’, (14) to Brahma after reciting 
‘Tamisana’, (15) Indra should be invoked by 
reciting “Indramiddevataya’, (16) to Yama by 
reciting ‘Ayangau’, (17) To Kala by reciting 
‘Brahmajajnanam’, offering should be made 
(18) to Citragupta after reciting ‘Ayjnataine’, 
(19) to Fire after reciting ‘Agnim duttam 
vrnimahe’, ‘Uduttarhnam Varunam’ 1s the mantra 
for (20) Varuna ‘Prthivyantariksam’ for (21) the 
Earth, ‘Sahasrasirsé purusa’ for (22) Visnu. 
‘Indrayendo marutvata’ for (23) Indra, 
‘Uttanaparne subhage’ for (24) the Goddess 
(Indrani), ‘Prajapati? for (25)  Prajapati, 
‘Namostu Sarpebhyah’ for (26) Serpents, ‘Esa 
brahma ya rtvigbhyah’ for (27) Brahma, 
‘Aninam’ for (28) Vinayaka (Ganesa), 
‘Jétavedase sunavama’ for (29) Durga, 
‘Aditpratnasya retasa’ for (30) the Akasa, 
‘Kranasisur mahinafica’ for (31) the Vayu, 
‘Esousa apurvya’ for (32) the Twin 
ASsvinikumaras. Murdhanamdivah 1s the mantra 
for offering the last hbation, called the 
Pirmahuti, to complete the sacrifice. 


RMNMIHTAT ATS: 
qUigerd wa Sart WTSI Ye I 


Afterwards, the devotee, facing the east or 
the north, should get himself sprinkled with the 
water of the pitcher, by the prescribed mantras 
accompanied with music, blowing of conch and 
songs. 


weagTaaadgey srararyad | 

TAA Sled Aa: TAA feats 4 ofl 
Four Brahmanas, free from natural 

|. These all mantras are prescribed in Karmakanda for 
prefatorily ceremony of none Grahas and other 


Devas. 


Matsya Puranam 


deformity and wearing garlands and golden 
ornaments, should bathe the devotee. 


qantas garam: | 
aTgeat WTA AeA Tay: | 
WEIMAR Tay PATA ANG VN 


At that time they should utter the following 
mantras: “Brahma, Visnu, Mahesa, all the three 
Gods may sprinkle you with the holy waters, 
and may Vasudeva, Jaggannatha, Sankarsana, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha lead you to victory. 


srauseistiraraa & Freferean 
ae: Vaasa armenia fea: 
TSUN Aled: Vat feaaeneaagd ans UW 


“Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Varuna, Vayu, 
Kubera, Siva, Brahma, Sesanaga and Dikpalas 
may protect you. 


— aifaclertdfater ofp: sat frat aft: 


Ags AY: MT: Hay AAT: 
Waa AHI: TATA: 1G 3H 
Kirti (fame), Laksmi (niches), Dhrtt 
(Firmness), Medha (power), Pusti, Sraddha, 
Kriya (Accomplishment), Mati (mind), Buddhi 
(Intellect), Lajj4 (Bashfulness), Vapu (body), 
Santi (peace), Tusti (Contentment), Kanti 
(Lustre), who are called the Mothers, and are 
Dharmapatnis may come and sprinkle you with 
holy waters. 


SST AAT MAY Gat site: FaatsehaT: 
Tereaiaaary Ug: tage AAT Gv 


The Sun, the Moon, the Mars, the Mercury, 
the Jupiter, the Venus, the Saturn, the Rahu and 
the Ketu may also sprinkle you with holy 
waters, after being satisfied. 


CAC MAMT TA AAMT ATATT : | 
RIN WAM Wal AMAT Us ANG 4 I 
Cae FAT ATT CMTC TUT: 


STEATUT UASANOT TUGNAT AAAI TWN EH 


Chapter-93 


SANA ST A Heres aa A 

Oita: AMAT: Metal Here Aek: | 

Ud amit waanraefaga 4 9 

The Devas, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, 

the Yaksas, the Raksasas, the Serpents, the 
Seers and Sages, the Cows, the Divine Mothers, 
the trees, the nymphs, the Nagas, the Daityas, 
the weapons, the arms, the kings, the king's 
vehicles, the herbs, the gems, the various parts 
of Time, the rivers, the oceans, the mountains, 
the sacred places, the clouds and the rivulets, 
may also sprinkle you with holy waters, for the 
fulfilment of all your desires.” 


ad: YARN: VSM: | 
wate: WaT: Saftat fETgsa Gc 
Afterwards, the devotee should get himself 
sprinkled by the Brahmanas, with the water 
mixed with different herbs and incense and then 
put on white clothes and white sandal paste. 


TH: Was Alt: FAA eary 
STOTT: WET UOTE: 1G 8 


Then the devotee should fasten his garments 
with those of his wife and worship the priests 
with devotion, and ‘offer them appropriate fees, 
with full taith. 


gaa afte at ye cared 

TH ITM Tae BT HHRMA ott 
aA WaT J Wa Utara 

YA CATA FO WTA AAAI € Vi 
WAT Wes TMH AVI TTT AT! 

Yau AAT sat aaa star & 2H 
Asa Way Vrreaw Sayfa: | 
qaurraean ceayeat At quate 

Uae ae: Wal: War TTT 34 


A milch cow should be given away in the 
name of the Sun, a conch in the name of the 
Moon, a red ox in the name of the Mars, gold in 


309 


the name of the Mercury, a pair of yellow 
garments in the name of the Jupiter, a white 
horse in the name of the Venus, a black cow in 
the name of the Saturn, tron in the name of the 
Rahu, goat in the name of the Ketu. The fee in 
each case must be a piece of gold, called 
suvarna (a golden coin), or cows adorned with 
gold, in the case of every one of these planets, 
or a suvarna coin in the case of each planet. If 
he cannot do that, then, he may give whatever 
may appeal to the fancy of the preceptor (guru). 
Everything should be given away, after reciting 
the prescribed mantras with fees, as noted 
below. 


afi waear werent teu 
aca wared: wiht wees ANE VI 


“OQ Cow! You are worshipped by all the 
Devas, You are Rohini, you are the sacred 
pilgrimage, containing all the Devas, let there 
be santi to me. 

Quake MAQUI AAMT a ART 
faut fageanta aa: wiht wees ANE GI 

OQ Conch! You are sacred amongst all, you 
are auspicious amongst all auspicious things; 


you are held by the Lord Visnu, therefore let 
there be Santi to me. 


Sea GURU We acHITA 
WORST Mit WAST TG EI 


O, Ox! You are the symbol of justice, source 
of the world's happiness, the conveyance of the 
Lord Siva possessing eight forms, therefore 
grant me Santi. . 


eae erat faye: 
HTVTHACAT: Mit WT ANE OI 
O Gold! You are the womb of the Golden 
Child (born of the golden egs of the Lord), and 
are also the seed of the Sun and the giver of 


everlasting rewards of good deeds, therefore 
grant me Sant. 


Ce 


310 


Waray Tega FeoNy| 
Were Y faa Seat: Mit Wes WUE NN 
Since yellow raiments are beloved to you, O 


Vasudeva (Krsna), hence, be pleased with me 
by their gifts, O Visnu, and grant me santi. 


far HRIO SATA YT AAT : | 
Talnaten Ferd: WT wees ANE eI 


“O Visnu, you, in the form of the horse, rose 
out of the ocean of nectar, and you are the 
eternal carrier of the Sun and the Moon, 
therefore, grant me santi. 


Tara Yat Wat oq: aerarata 
Haute fAeard: Miia Wes Aol 


O Cow! You are the symbol of the Earth and 
you are the beloved of KeSava, destroyer of all 
sins, sO grant me Santi. 


TaTaAa BAT Aart aed 
CUTTS TRATED aT WIGS Trio Vit 


O Iron! Since all difficult works are under 
your control, you helps in the forging of the 
plough and arms etc., therefore, grant me sant. 


Tad TAA sa TATA: | 
ar fauraaicand: ofa wees A921 


O Gold, you are an ingredient of all 
sacrifices, you are the eternal vehicle of the sun, 
therefore grant me sant. 


Tamey fasta yar ager 
TaTefasa A Vales As WA A 31 


O Cow! Fourteen regions are present in your 
body, therefore give me wealth in this world, as 
well as happiness in the next. 


TACT WT Aya W Waa 
VAT WTA ASA SAT TAT TAT 9 vi 
As the bed of Visnu is never devoid of 
Laksmi, therefore, my bed may never remair 
unoccupied by my wife, by the virtue of my 
giving away this bed in charity. 


Matsya Puradnam 


aM THY AaY Ud aT: whefsen:t 
AM TU TAY WAT FT ATMO tt 


As there is always the presence of the Devas 
in all gems, so may the Devas grant me all 
jewels, by virtue of my giving away precious 
stones in charity. 


BM YAMA Het Aol VST 
CARR & pnb rarer 9 & 


All the forms of charity do not come up to 
even 16" part of the gift of land, therefore, let 
there be Santi to me by virtue of gift of this land. 


vali haihie ede 


BACACTY 


TIATHIUL J 


With devotion, devoid of muserliness, 
worship should be performed with jewels, gold, 
cloth, incense, flowers and sandal. 


or fafa aeq FETs TATA 
Tararararcnta Wer Tat Weradiecit 


One who worships the planets in this way, 
attains all his wishes and goes to heaven after 
death. 


Te Ustat emeufaresy at We: 
i Ae WOT PATA AGTT: 119 8 


The particular unlucky planet should be 
worshipped: with great care, according to the 
prescribed full rites. Other planets should, then, 
be worshipped with abridged rites. This is for a 
man of limited means; otherwise all planets 
should be worshipped with full rites. 


Tel Ma ALT Tena Fay: 
Uf: Wa ASAT NC ott 


The planets, cows, King and Brahmanas, 
especially, are worthy of being worshipped. 
Those, who worship them, are nourished by 
them, and those, who insult them, are destroyed. 


BM MUTI Haat Wald AIT! 


| TSCATTETATAT Via ATLOTN ¢ it 


Chapter-93 


As the armour shields the warrior from the 
blows of arrows, similarly, the propitiation 
ceremony (Santi) protect them from the effects 
of the bad destiny. 


Tea SAU Het hth 
argue afer serreatsty qeafa ¢ 2A 


The person desirous of acquiring prosperity 
should not perform any sacrifice without giving 
away the fees (Daksin4), since by the giving of 
handsome fees, even the Deva is propitiated. 


aearyreaisa TaTeAa FIT: 
faareraaasy wirsey BAT c st 


Homa sacrifice with ten thousand offerings 
is prescribed, in the ceremony of the 
propitiation of the Nine Planets. The same 
number of Homa offerings should be made in 
connection with the nuptial, festive, yajna 
ceremonies as well as with the ceremonies of 
the installation of sacred images. 


Rfaard qe aalgreyqay a 
HMASTAAISA AAA: UTIL I 


O Sage! the ways of performing the sacrifice 
of ten thousand offerings to ward off obstacles, 
caused by one's past karmas, as well as the 
dangers arising from evil spirits, have been 
described. Now I shall explain to you the ways 
of performing the Homa sacrifice of a hundred 
thousands of offerings. 


weary seers fagaen: | 
PaO arent AraayleHgr ATA ¢ & UI 


The learned have said that a sacrifice of a lac 
of offerings should be performed for the 
fulfilment of all desires. It is very pleasing to 
the Pitrs, and is the giver of prosperity and 
emancipation. 


TEMG HEM HAM MeloTaraty 
TRAATAN AUST ANATTT: 16 GU 
HATTA A ATTATTSTS 
SEMAN AT SKA GMAT: Il C9 Ut 


31] 


The devotee should get the blessings 
invoked by Brahmanas, after selecting an 
auspicious day, according to the benign 
influences of planets and stars, and then make a 
mandapa to the north-east of the house, or a 
square mandapa, measuring 10 or 8 hands, 
should be made to the north-east of a temple of 
Siva. 

wyeaeraat ofa aed ae: | 

WAL AAA West AVSTEA TNC CN 
——— — 

Uda UY Maat AAS Ce 

The altar should have a slant towards north- 
east, and it should be made with great care. the 
same north-east corner of the mandapa, should 
be selected for the purpose of digging the fire 
pit. This pit should be a square, beautiful and 
according to rules. The pit should have girdles 
round it and of the form of the mouth of a yoni. 


eH aeaT Hae TaghapT 
UNTSRAAA HA Aad: AAATAATIL 8 ol 


The girdle should be 4 fingers in breadth and 
of the same height, slanting from east to north. 
It should be even in other directions. 


Weal Vaca AIST: Wa: 
Wea HUSHAaAIAS WAI 
TATA Pies Ferrari < vit 
The sacrifice for the propitiation of the nine 
planets has been laid down for the peace of all. 
It is dangerous to make the sacrificial pond of 
more or less dimensions than prescribed. 


Therefore, it should be made carefully, as 
described above. 


HATE: Weal MAA: TaAYAT! 
aed: wae sferonferea Ag 2M 


Brahma has said that the sacrificial pt in the 
ceremony of a hundred thousands of Homa, 
should be ten times the dimensions given above. 
The daksina to the priests should be ten times 
that given in the ordinary ten thousand homas. 


312 


fgemtiand ageaqeatad FA: | 
Mae TaHUS Araed FaeTAN es Bu 
To perform the sacrifice of a lac of 

offerings, a sacrificial pond of 4 hands in length 
and 2 in breadth should be made. Its mouth 
should be made of the shape of a conical 
triangle. Three girdles should also be made to 
surround the pit. 


Tea aay feararerrera rey 
WT Ca TT Teel MITA AAA eV 
To the north-east of the pandal, after leaving 
a space of three vitastis,' the sacrificial pond 
should be dug. On the land selected for it, a 
square altar slanting north-east should be 
erected. 


facnmenitasd wien wits fayeatom 
CANA Sa AAT AATAATTN FG I 
Visvakarma has said that the buttress of the 
altar should be 1% vitasti, that 1s, half of the 
above measurement, and should have three 


girdles. The Deities should be located on this 
buttress. 


RUaereeapa AN: WIT: A Sele: | 
ATAPI STEATATTAT 8 EI 
The first girdles should be 2 fingers high and 

the remaining two should be only one 2 linger 
high. 

sere a fart: weet aed ae: 

Seren fart: warn Tara 
TH Q9N 


The breadth of all the three girdles should be 
three fingers and the wall round the altar should 
be ten fingers high. The Devas should be 
invoked on it, with flowers and uncooked rice. 


Te aiwesagqncuaat 


1. Defined either as a long span between the extended 
thumb and little finger, or as the distance between 


the wrist and the tip of the fingers, = 12 Angulas or 


about 9 inches. 


Matsya Purdnam 


snferayat: Wal: Afemeafecaran: | 
PATA YAS AAO TTS 18 CI 
O Sage! the presiding (Adhi-devata) and the 


minor (Pratyadhi devatas) Deities should all 
face the east, and not the north or the west. 


Tenens Ue: rates 
AS Tet TAB: | 
faruraatt Ferra: ofet wares ANS eI 
Persons, desirous of acquiring wealth, 
should worship Garuda also in addition, by 
reciting the following mantra— ‘the chanting of 
the Simaveda, is your body; you are the vehicle 


of Visnu and the destroyer of poison and sins, 
therefore grant me Sant. 


Yaa AGA ATA 

ASAT Yet Feat AAAI FA: | 

FAPMAMA WdaeteraTH 20 oll 

In the former manner, the pitcher of water 

should be placed, and then the homa should be 
performed. The sacrifice of a lac of offerings 
being finished, if there remain some more 
sacrificial fuels, then these should be thrown 
into the fire, with the pouring of ghi on the 
pitcher, in the form of a continuos stream 
known as Vasordhara. 


TEMA Ba Hea ad: MSTaAaA 
FAI TAM AAMTSAT TAA Ro Vit 
The sacrificial ladle should be made of the 

fig tree. It should be of fresh, sappy wood, and 
straight, and free from rot. It should be one 
hand in length. This ladle should be placed on 
two supports, and clarified butter should be 
poured through it in a continuous stream into 
the fire. 

maa UH aang Weta! 

Wag AAT VITA A ATATI Yo it 


The hymns of the Agneya-siikta, Vaisnava- 


Chapter-93 


sikta, Raudra-stkta, Candra-sikta, Maha- 
vaisvanara-sikta, Sama and Jyestha Sama 
should be recited, while so pouring. 


aM 8 MaMa Yaa Calerarary 
SAAT AAMT YAAEATT: WAH 0 Ft 


The bathing of the devotee with the holy 
waters and the Svastivacana should be done as 
before, and the devotee should also give 
Daksina separately, as before. 


USAT ANA: MTT AT 
Aarne famerant aeater: 11 Yo XI 
TIT lA YA slate afrentfarats 
SMAI FA Walt ARAN You 


The Daksina to the sacrificial priests should 
be given free from anger and bias, and with a 
calm mind. There should be four Brahmanas 
well-versed in the Vedas, to officiate on the 
occasion of the sacrifice of the Nine Planets or 
only two such _ Brahmanas, 
disposition and versed in the Vedas, should be 
made officiating priests. This is in case of the 
sacrifice of ten thousand Homa offerings. The 
number of Brahmanas need not be greater than 
those mentioned above. 


TRC TM ABT AT TAR T leche: 
ACA: Wihaetgeadeany AT faAeAT 11 Qo EI 


In the sacrifice of a lac of offerings, there 
may be eight or ten priests, or even four, 
according to one's means. 


THIET, TA MATEY THAT 
TAM CNTAAS FHUTAT Yea: 11 Qo Vit 
Wel Pact taf Heats a 


auiisterafeatin usKaTioT MATT Ro 6 


The sacrificial materials should be ten times 
more for the sacrifice of a lac of offerings; than 
what it is in the sacrifice in connection with the 
worship of Nine Planets. Eatables, ornaments, 
bedsteads, necklaces, sacred threads, rings, etc., 
should be given away, according to the means 
of the devotee. 


of peaceful | 


313 


qT HAaUTEt fared Aa: 
ASAOMAA WSN, POAATTATETAI Yo 2 I 


Daksina should be given according to the 
means of the devotee. It should not be reduced 
through miserliness. If he does not give any 
daksina, through avarice or delusion, his family 
becomes extinct. 


SAC AMMA SHriesd AicifereTe 
AA: Fal TASHA aq 220 ik 


The devotee, anxious for prosperity, should 
give away also grain in charity, according to his 
means, because the ceremony without the gift of 
grain brings famine on the sacrificer and his 
country. | 

SAC TUS Wee lea: | 
Go aferonea aaiet Gera FIT: 11 gee 

There is no greater enemy of mankind than 
an ill-conducted sacrifice; for the priests, 1f not 
versed in the rituals, are destroyed, and the 
devotee is destroyed by not giving Daksina, and 
the country is destroyed where food grain 1s not 
given in charity. 

A AUT: HAAS AL: Fafa 
TEM Ustat et ae Tate fas: Vez 


A man in narrow circumstances should 
never perform a sacrifice of a lac of offerings, 
for the spending of even a small fortune in that 
case leads to disease and distress. 


qa WARM gt aT a at aenfaten 
UaHaRaa Get AeA 
RIOT: WAST A AgACUaTAR 2231 


The sacrificer, with devotion, according to 
prescribed rites, should engage even one, two, 
or three Brahmanas, and the man in straitened 
circumstances may employ only one Brahmana, 
well versed in the Vedas whom he should 
properly honour and give full Daksina. 


314 


eae Hae sat fart weg 

UA: MAAC Hay HAT] fAATAT: 11 VLU 
Wad frac a arafeertagtt: | 
MAHCUMAT ABTA TATTATETAT AH 22 I 


The sacrifice of a lac of offerings should be 
performed only by that man who possesses a 
large fortune; for the man performing such a 
sacrifice accurately, according to the prescribed 
rites, attains all his desires. The man who does 
so, is venerated by Vasu, Adityas and 
Marutgana, in the realm of Siva, and attains 
emancipation after eight hundred kalpas. 


TA ATG Haleowtet Aaah 
Bot AMMA TEA TTI 826 It 


The man who performs this sacrifice of a lac 
of homas, with any object in view, attains his 
desires and goes to heaven, where he gets bliss. 


ae aaa Ya TATA eT TAT 
TAA MAA AA HAT A yet uN Ven 


The man desirous of sons, obtains sons, one 
desirous of riches, gets riches, the devotee, 
eager for a wife, gets a beautiful wife and if a 
maiden performs this sacrifice, she gets a good 
husband by virtue of it. 


TOUR Wes sta: PSreaTeyaTA 
qa yeaa ar a a wala yee: 
FEAT: Hed TAI MUL Tal Tesia Lec 


Further more, by the virtue of this sacrifice, 
a dethroned sovereign gets back his realm, the 
man hankering after prosperity gets prosperity, 
infact, the devotee, desirous of anything, gets 
that thing. But the one, who performs it without 
any object in view, attains the Supreme 
Brahman. 


ATS: Wen: alfesa: TaaTaT 
STAM: WAST STOTT: ery AN 288 


Kotihoma is described by Lord Brahma a 
hundred times more efficacious than the 


Matsya Puranam 


sacrifice of a lac of offerings. The money given 
away tn Daksina, and the effect and the result 
are a hundred times more than the last. 


4aCG = tf. ore | 


Stare Walt: FAM aA Wa a 
Husnusradmt fastaisa Fata Wn eoll 


In performing this bigger _ sacrifice, 
invocation and dismissal of Devas should be 
done as before. The same mantras are to be used 
in ablutions, offering libations and giving 
charity. I shall now describe the special mode of 
preparing sacrificial pond, altar and mandapa; 
listen to my words carefully. 


ales Udert Uta FT Aad: | 
Aransas ACA ANACTA 22 VI 


In the sacrifice of a crore of offerings, the 
receptacle should measure four hands and 
should be made of a conical shape, on a square 
base, and surrounded by three girdles; while the 
pond should have two openings. 


RTA BA MTA WEE ga: 

aynarera Agchadtar afcanteraru 22 VM 

SHAMAN DT FAT ATM 

SATo RT PEA: VAAL MAA LIM 

A wise man should make the first girdle two 

fingers high, the second three fingers, and the 
height as well as the thickness of the third one, 
should be four fingers. The thickness of the first 


and the second girdles should also be two 
fingers. 


feat at: ware veaatenretarege 
BUGB AA HAT UPA CAAT 22 VI 


The receptacle should be one vitasti (half a 
cubit, or 12 fingers) in extent, but the height 
should be of six or seven fingers. It should be 
raised in the centre as the back of a tortoise, and 
one finger high on the sides. 


THBASM Agarad feseaeae 
Ua AAT HUSH AAAI 224 


Chapter-93 


It should resemble the lips of an elephant in 
extent and in having a hole. Such will be the 
receptacle as regards all kinds of sacrificial 
ponds. 


Tah aaa seerectahayy 
aat a ales eanfgaetat BABA IE I 


Over the girdles everywhere, an altar of 4 
vitasti in measurement (i.e. 2 cubits or | yard) 
and of the shape of a peepal leaf, should be 
made. This is in the case of the sacrifice of a 
crore of offerings. 


agra arate faethe Wye 
SMTA Yates ACT A AMTAT LI 


In this form of sacrifice the altar should be 
made square, measuring four vitasti and having 
three girdles. Their height and extent should be 
as indicated before. 


TM WS: TSI Ua: | 
Yaant TAT Tg ATUTTTTN NII 


The mandapa should be made of sixteen 
cubits in extent and should have 4 doorways. 
On the eastern gate, a Brahmana, proficient in 
the Rgveda, should be located. 


Wafad wa areal vert armaferq 
MAA SA AKTAL TATAGT: 12S 


A Brahmana, versed in the Yajurveda, 
should be located in the south, one versed in the 
Samaveda in the west, one knowing the 
Atharvaveda in the north. 


Het Y era: Brat aeadarwates: | 
Ua gay fam: waearaeayest: | 
Waa THIRST SEANTTOTTATT: 11 23 0 11 


Eight more Brahmanas, well up in the Vedas 
and Vedangas, should be made to officiate as 
Homa-offering priests. These twelve 
Brahmanas should be sincerely honoured with 
Cloths, sandal, garlands and ornaments, as 
before. 


315 


Ua w Uk a Waa WAST 
YAM TBA: Mi VSATT PSST 1123 kN 
In the east, hymns from the Ratn-sikta, 
Raudra and Pavamana and Sumangala mantras, 
for the peace of the universe, should be chanted 
by one Brahmana versed in the Rgveda and 
facing north. 


Wikh Ve A Met wT ates ynfada a 
USaeRaIUTETL AAA ATTAINS VI 


A Brahmana, versed in Yajurveda seated in 
the south, should recite the mantras relating to 
Santi, God Indra, Saumya, Kausm4nda. 


qaoag aware Sa feary 
ASAT TAT MMT HAT: TTA ATI 3 31 


The Samavedi Brahmana, sitting in the west, 
should sing the hymns of Suparna Vairaja, 
Agneya, Rudrasamhita, Jyesthasima and peace 
chant. | 


With TAL A AM Mah YA 
Usa Be arora aT! 3 I 
The Atharvavedi Brahmana, seated in the 


north, should read the following mantras— Santi 
Siikta, Saura, Sakunaka, Paustika, Maharajya. 


Gary: aahay era; areatsa yaad 
GM MH OWA: TT We GATT BGT 


Five or seven Brahmanas should perform the 
homa sacrifice as before, (the remaining 
Homakas helping them). The mantras relating 
to bath and the gift are the same as before. 


qaantaandt a cared faforerd 
oma fafert aq alee areata 
Wary AMAT aa Faas TATINL3 E UI 


The Vasordhara or the way of letting the 
stream of clarified butter fall in the fire from a 
vase 1s the only peculiar rite of the sacrifice of a 
lac of offerings (as mentioned before. That 
should be done here also). One who performs 
this sacrifice of a crore of offerings, according 


316 


to the prescribed rites, attains all his wishes and | 


becomes united with Visnu. 
FT: USRHUPTENT WIAA AT: 
aaaafagygren Tela TSA LIN 


He who reads or hears this description of 
these three sacrifices of the Grahas (Planets) 
becomes purified of all sins and attains the rank 
of Indra. 


MMTASAOT TM At a afar 
Seal Aq Hear Alera ASV LI cI 


The benefits of this sacrifice are similar to 
those derived by the performance of 18,000 
Asvamedha sacrifices. 


TAeaAsain yOreeaaarta a 
CST ALAA AaTaeTAaTAATTI 3 Ft 


Siva has said that the sin of killing a crore of 
Brahmanas and of making 10 crores of 
abortions, is washed off by the performance of 
this sacrifice. 


avaaniwate Aataeateay 
TAISAE Fea AA: AMAT AATATTN Poll 
The sacrifice relating to the worship of the 
nine planets should be performed before the 
performance of the nites of Abhicara (sorcery), 
Uccatana! and Vasya Karma?. 
SIM Tes Wat A A Tad safad 
TTT fay TAATATTI LY vi 
Otherwise, no rite has the desired effect; so 
this sacrifice of ten thousand offerings to the 
planets should necessarily be performed as a 
preliminary. 
ad aleed HVS AMT A ayreanfor 
free dacerntfafserr Tes zi 
WSTAT: YTEAT HPT 


TAT ROT TE, FMAM ASA: 11k 3 


|. A magical incantation that causes a man to go away 
out of disgust. 
2. A magical spell that fascinates and subdues a foe. 


Matsya Puranam 


In the sacrifice connected with Vasikarana 
and Uccatana, the sacrificial pond should be 
made of the measure of a handful; it should be 
surrounded with three girdles, be circular in 
shape, and have one mouth, and the offering of 
the wood of Butea frondosa, sprinkled with 
honey, camphor, gorocana and agara, dissolved 
in water, mixed with saffron, should be made. 


armergarnal facet aunt a 
Uae Blarch Waca TAA Lv 


An offering of woodapple (Bael) and 
lotuses, mixed with honey and clarified butter 
should be made. Brahma has said that ten 
thousand offerings should be made in such 
Sacrifices. 


ayranin facart wart da mttaer 
Qrafran a arg siteera sft STATUS G I 


In a sacrifice for Vasikarana, the offerings of 
woodapple (Bael) and lotuses should be made, 
and the Sumitriyana Apa osadha mantra should 
be recited in offering Homa. 


TO a are TT HOTT 

Br Valet: Hea HTS TE gve it 
HUSTA: Warthfawry WATT 
WANA SAA YT Wa: AHSAN 


No sprinkling with holy waters or location 
of a pitcher of water should be made in these 
forms of sacrifices. A householder should bathe 
in the water mixed with herbs, dress in white, 
put on white flowers, worship the Brahmanas 
with gold threads. They should also be given 
fine costumes and Daksina of gold. A white 
cow should also be given. 


a AHA AaMATAAT 
atqarvaty fearon erase WATS eZ cll 


This sacrifice subdues the worst of enemies, 
endears those who have no love and dispels uls. 


fageuishrat a frau queftea 
fat AUS SAA A AAT Ue 


Chapter-93 


The sacrificial pond for the performance of 
the sacrifice intended for Abhicara and 
Vidvesana!, should be triangular in shape, 
measuring one hand, surrounded by two girdles, 
and having openings towards the vertices. 


are Heletat Fa THAT ACT: 
Fata SAONAT SA SATATATTTUT: 1124 0 11 


Then the Brahmanas wearing red garland, 
red sandal, red sacred thread, red turban and red 
raiments, should perform the sacrifice. 


FAA ATS AAT ATA AT: | 
Aaa AMET PATI A TAT: | 
Se Yn Arata Fat gy VN 


With three vessels containing the blood of 
the young crows before them, bones of the 
hawks in their left hand and sacrificial fuel in 
the other, and their hair loose, the Brahmanas 
should perform the sacrifice, all the while 
thinking ill of the enemies at the time of making 
these offerings. 


afHraareTe Ue cer Gufs a 
PAATRTNTAATT AL AAT AG 
wired fiat; aan ator Uftariad 
Freer prncraaray fart Farag gs 31 


With the syenamantra, durmitriydstasmai 
santu humphata’, the razor should be sanctified; 
with this the image of the enemy should be cut 
piecemeal and offered to the fire. 


TEMA Wea: | 
fagTUt AAMT Haadear WAPATTTN 4 XII 
Having performed the sacrifice of the 

Grahas, the proper Abhicara sacrifice should be 
performed. Such is the rule for “Vidvesana” 
sacrifice as well. 

Seq Wee WANA NTT 

TTT SCT TATRA OG GH 


|. A spell that causes friction. 


317 


Such deeds only bear fruit in the present life 
and do not beget good results in the next, so a 
man, desirous of ultimate good, should not 
indulge in such deeds. 


TAMA HAUAIKARAT WAG: | 
G fae: Tenet TATARSTAN 84 & I 


One who performs the worship of the stars, 
along with the prescribed sacrifices, without 
any object in view, goes to the clime of Visnu, 
from where he never returns to this world. 


q se HOM fae Magis AAA: | 
TTT ASUS CATA DT TTATA: 1124 It 


One who hears or relates this to others, 
never suffers from any pain, owing to the evil 
influence of the planets or to the destruction of 
friends. 


qaqa Ne fafad aa fasta 
TUS TA Tea TAN TD TTT AG cl 
The children of the house in which these 
sacrifices are written down, never suffer from 


any ill, mental or physical, or any other 
calamity. 


saat FA: sarafaanrgrry 

alfesta fae: wat afmnienmeimer ey VII 
ITH Wecetas AIT: | 
BlQMedaatgaqqeda: CAT i2& oll 


The sages are of opinion that this sacrifice of 
a crore of offerings begets fruits of many a 
sacrifice and dispels all ills; it 1s the giver of 
worldly prosperity and final emancipation. The 
sacrifice of a lac of offerings gives the benefit 
of the Asvamedha sacrifice. The sacrifice 
performed in course of a twelve days and the 
sacrifice connected with the worship of stars, 
give equal benefits. 


ehavatd a IE RIDEALL TAA TH ALR 


318 


Thus I have told the mode of the sacrifices 
of the Nine Grahas and the Abhiseka in divine 
sacrifices (the sprinkling of the devotee with the 
holy waters). These are to be done to dispel all 
ills and hindrances to ceremonies of rejoicing. 
These purge all sins. One who reads or listens to 
it subdues all his foes and gets longevity and 
health. 


aft Soe TeTATTOt Aart ATA 
fHAaaA A SEAT: 112 Bil 


KR 


CHAPTER 94 


Description of the form of nine planets 
fora Saver 
UST: WRT: WaT aL: 
Ua: Waa fet: TaeaaTTa: 11 811 
Siva said~ The image of the God Sun who 
causes the lotus to bud, should be made as 
seated on a lotus (Padmasana),! with colour like 
that of a lotus, with two hands, with a lotus in 
one hand and the other hand raised in the 
posture of giving blessings, and having seven 
horses in His chariot, drawn by seven reins. 


ya: TATTLE : AT  AATSA: | 
Terafuifgaresy ee ATE: PIV I 


The image of the Moon, the giver of boons, 
should be made in white colour, dressed in 
white robes, seated on a white chariot, having a 
white horse for His conveyance, having two 
hands, one holding a club and the other raised in 
the posture of giving blessings. 


THUICTTATAT: VIRAY CT ATA: | 
SAS: ATS: ATTA 113 1 


The image of the Mars should be made, 
having white hair, four hands, armed with a 


1. These are the various Asanas or postures in which a 
Yogin sits to practise his devotion. Asana is that in 
which he crosses his legs underneath him and lays 
hold of his feet on each side with his hands. 


Matsya Puranam 


spear, a lance and club, with the fourth hand 
raised in the posture of giving blessings, 
wearing red robes and garland. 


Waar; aforencarafe: | 
Grae: Fe AAT FTA 


The image of the Mercury should be made 
yellow, dressed in yellow robes and wearing a 
yellow garland, with four hands armed with a 
sword, shield and club, and the fourth hand 
raised in the posture of giving blessings, and 
having a lion for his conveyance. 


cadens Tea Py 
afosat axel aral MqAHAUSeTIY MI 


The Venus and the Jupiter should be made 
in white and yellow respectively. They should 
have four hands, holding staff, rosary and 
kamandalu, and the fourth hand raised in the 
posture of giving blessings. 


Sead: Wet Atel Paared: | 
ATAU; HUA STA RTATINE I 


The Saturn should be of the colour and the 
lustre of an emerald, having a vulture for His 
conveyance and four hands armed with a lance, 
bow and arrow, and the fourth hand raised in 
the posture of giving blessings. 


RUA: STAN ATM: | 
TAPAS TETA TETRA Ht 
qo tgaTea: Wa feat fanaa: | 
Tora Feat Att: BAW 1S 1 


The image of Rahu should be made, having 
a terrible mouth or appearance, seated on a 
blue-coloured lion, having four hands, armed 


2. The ascending node; in mythology the son of 
Sinhikd, a Daitya, with the tail of a dragon whose 
head was severed from his body by Visnu, but being 
immortal the head and tall retained their separate 
existence and being transferred to the stellar sphere, 
became authors of eclipse the first specially, by 
endevouring at various times to swallow the sun and 
the moon. 


Chapter-95 


with a sword, a leather shield, a spear, and the 
fourth hand raised in the posture of giving 
blessings. The image of Ketu should be made of 
smoky colour, with a vulture for His 
conveyance and having two hands— one hand 
holding a mace and the other raised in the 
posture of giving blessings, and having a 
distorted face. 


ad faiter: art yet cafearaer: | 


ageritega: Aa MAMTA AAT 


All the planets should be made with a crown 
on their head, and the images should be two 
fingers high (or, of the height of one's own 
finger). The mantras relating to the planets 
should be recited on the rosary 108 times each. 
(It may also mean that the size of the planets 
should be 108 fingers or digits in height. If the 
anguli be one inch in length, the images will be 
nine feet high; if the measure of the anguli be 
3/4th of an inch, then the height will be 4.5 feet. 
The sense 1s obscure). 


ATA ATS: NS YI 


kK *E* 


CHAPTER 95 


Method and merit of the ordinance of Siva- 
caturdasi 


we sara 
MT AMAT TITTY TAHA 
UPAy Hea Aa HAS Ta VI 
Narada said— O Lord, presiding over the 
Past and the Future! please tell me about some 


other ordinance that may be the giver of 
happiness and emancipation. 


CAMS TA TTS TAFT: 
TATRA AT TAT TOA 
qgisa GaAdoT Tat ATT Woe: | 
THATS HHA ARTIS 


319 


Hearing the above words of the sage, Lord 
Siva, the knower of all things, understood the 
inclination of Narada and said— “O Narada! 
This sacred bull, who 1s my principal attendant 
and who has become unified with me on 
account of his asceticism and knowledge of the 
Sruti and the Puranas, will explain to you the 
rituals connected with my — ordinance 
(Mahesvara Dharma). 


Wa SATA 
SRM Caeayrasaraaaa 


aAReisty fe Yaar 
Marea free ag Meat ATTN 


Lord Matsya said— Having said so, that Lord 
of the God of gods, vanished then and there. 
Narada also, being anxious to hear, asked 
Nandikesvara thus~ O Nandikesvara, you have 
been ordered by Siva, therefore, tell me the 
Mahesvara vrata. 


Arcot Sara 


TOA EA TAT TAT ATLTT TA 
fay wireng fererean aren foreraqesttny i 


Nandikesvara said— Hear with attention, O 
Brahmana! | shall tell you the Mahesvara vrata. 
It is well-known in all the three worlds by the 
name of Siva Caturdasi. 


Unightaaevar fader: | 

MATLACAR TAS YITT TT NG I 

Uda MUTE: AANA VIET 

qaugay seat Heals wT ase i 

Ud FaAA ea Waa AA: | 

In the month of Margasira, on the thirteenth 

day of the bright fortnight, the devotee should 
take his meals once and pray to Siva with this 
Sankalpa mantra, “O Lord of all the Deities! | 
take refuge in you. Tomorrow, the Caturdasi 
day, I shall observe a complete fast, without 
eating anything, and worship Siva. [ shall also 


give away a bull, made of gold, and then take 
my meals the next day.” 


320 


PRAAAT: WGA AS WET 
Gaara: Maa: 116 1 


Having made this Sankalpa, the devotee 
should go to bed and then rise early on the next 
morning and worship Siva along with His 
Consort (Uma), with white lotus flowers, 
sandal, etc. 


rel aH: fprarafa for: walert a: 
farrarata Farfor cree Bea AAI 
YErreyaratd aeavsrit HAT 
RaeTas HOt F aMearT SF Yo 
Taal es MAHA 

TH AT HTAT TAMAS BHATTI! 
Wal aaa Aya @ afer) 

HB APATAC A TAMA 2 2 
TATA ATA Cela ger: 

VOT At Se Tea SAAT AA 1123 
AAMT AMY UW WAT 

7a: Yel AH Teal ais wT evi 


(1) The feet should be worshipped, after 
reciting ‘Sivaya namah’ (2) the head, after 
reciting ‘Sarvdtmane namah’ (3) the eyes, after 
reciting ‘Trinetradya namah’ (4) the forehead, 
after reciting Haraye namah’ (5) the mouth, 
after reciting ‘Indumukhdya namah’ (6) the 
throat after reciting ‘Srikanthaya namah’ (7) the 
ears, after reciting Sadyojdtdya namah’ (8) the 
arms, after reciting “Vamadevdya namah’ (9) 
the heart, after reciting ‘Aghcrahrdaydya 
namah’ (10) the breasts, after reciting 
‘Tatpurusdya namah’ (11) the stomach, after 
reciting “Jsdndya namah’ (12) the ribs, after 
reciting Anantadharmdya namah’ (13) the 
waist, after reciting ‘Jndnabhutdya namah’ (!4) 
the thighs, after reciting | Ananta 
Vairdgyasimhaya namah’ (15) the knees should 
be worshipped, after ‘reciting 
‘Anantaisvaryanathaya namah’ (16) the legs, 
after reciting “Pradhdndya namah (17) the 


Matsya Purdnam 


ankles, after reciting “Vyomdtmane namah’ (18) 
the hair, after reciting “Vyomakesdtmariipdaya 
namah (19) the back, after reciting ‘“Pustyai 
namah’ and (20) Tustyayi namah’. 


TAY GUM CURHNTTA AAT 
- — 
wetaaeach TROT Frere gh I 
Then the devotee should give to the 
Brahmanas; a golden bull, along with a pitcher, 


full of water, white garments, Paficaratna and 
various kinds of eatables. 


aa fanaa TearHt: WATT 
Geared AMP TATMTGSTGS 1126 
UHI Ad: WT AW Yallt ara: | 
TAPIA VATU A Aa TATA RG 


Really good Brahmanas should be invited 
and well-fed, after which curd mixed with 
clarified butter, saved from the sacrificial 
offerings, should be taken by the devotee, who 
should sleep on the ground, with his head 
towards the north. On the full moon-day, he 
should feed the Brahmanas and then take his 
own meals in silence. Similarly, he should do 
on the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight. 


agerly waty galqtaceay 
ag ara fag: weafaaa wasn i 


The worship should be performed in the 
same way all the fourteenth days of each 
fortnight of every month. Now the special 
mantras to be recited in each month will be 
explained. 


anighaifenrag sareagaad 

WRU AHA THR BLATT 
AG TAY WEA: WTI 
TAMAS Vella Wis A Ad: TT 
qT: UTA AA ATA YA TA: 

TA WATS AT: BAT SATATAT 2 2 
TA MATT Sela AMS POAT: | 


Chapter-95 


Commencing with the month of Margasira, 
the mantras hereafter mentioned should be 
pronounced one by one- I. Sankaraya namah 
(in Margasira); 2. Karavirakdya namah (Pausa); 
3. TIryambakdya namah (in Mé§agha); 4. 
Mahesvardya namah (in  Phalguna); 5. 
Mahddevaéya namah (in Caitra); 6. Sthdnave 
namah (in Vaisakha); 7. Pasupataye namah (in 
Jyestha); 8. Nathdya namah (in Asadha.) 9. 
Sambhave namah (in Sravana); 10. Namaste 
Paramadnanda (in Bhadra); ll. 
Somardhadharine namah (in Asvina); 12. 
Bhimadya namah (in Kartika). I am at your 
Mercy. These names should be recited one by 
one, each month, from Margasira. 


Tiga Ware ait afr ata: HeeHqNe VU 

Tare adt faced HU UTS Tat: 

fret: Foray Tatras BAT: BAT 

MATA Aqevatcnsy MGT ATTN 3H 

The devotee should offer as Prasana— (1) 

cow’s urine, (2) cow-dung, (3) milk, (4) curds, 
(5) clarified butter, (6) water mixed with kusa- 
grass, (7) paficagavya, (8) woodapple (Aegle 
marinelos), (9) camphor, (10) aguru, 
(Aquilaria agallocha) (11) barley, (12) black- 
sesamum, on the Caturdasi of each month. 


TATA AAT TATA 
fargartrytrcar wiper TWectssI 
THY: CHETALT PTA TART 
Weheart Ae var cel aeaea A ATTN 2G A 


The worship of Siva should be conducted 
from the month of Maérgasira onward, by 
offering the following flowers, turn by turn, viz. 
(1) Mandara,' (2) Jasmine, (3) Dhattra, (4) 
Sambhala (Sindulvara), (5) Asoka, (6) Mallika,’ 
(7) Patala,’ (8) Arka flower, (9) Kadamba,” (10) 
lotus (Satapatri), (11) Kamalini (Utpala). 


1. Hibiscus Rosesinansis. 
2. Jarminum Sambae 
3, Sleriospermum Suaveolens 


321 


Sof) 8 TATA HVE 


Again, when the month of K4rtika arrives, 
the Brahmanas should be fed with various kinds 
of eatables and offered garments, ornaments 
and garlands. 


a Aergqarat sey fata at: 
sae Ft Tat AW Nat BEI! 


Afterwards, the devotee should let loose a 
black bull, in conjunction with the Vedic rites. 
A golden image of Siva and Paravati should be 
made and given away to a Brahmana, along 
with a bull and a cow. 


Tanepagd faaavetgary 
TATA MAT TENT HOTATTNR CU 
A bedstead, with the following things, 


should also be given away: Eight white pearls, 
sheets, pillows, and a vase full of water. 


TMUTATTAT YA: MifeTaTUgeTAyTT 
wre fama Meda AeaTAT TT AN 221 


The images of Siva and Parvati should be 
placed in a copper vessel, full of rice and then 
located on top of the pitcher of water, after 
which they should be given away to a 
Brahmana versed in the Vedas, observing 
ordinances and having a calm disposition. 


vagamfae ta Tanah cafe 
TOR Alaa caer Araataea3 ot 


It is best to give it to one acquainted with 
SAmaveda; it should never and on no account be 
given to a hypocrite. Only one versed in the 
Vedas, knowing the Vedic principles, is fit to 
receive such an offering. 


HASTA AAI eat Heaorereah 
Cea Wyss TeraTaeaTaTT: 113 VI 


A Brahmana, free from deformity and of 
simple habits, should be worshipped, along with 


etd PICS 4% & 


4. Nauclea Parviflora 


18 


WTA YARRA: Wet 4 BS Wa TH 
VASA HAUTASAT AACA TAT TOT: 22M 


Out of them, Vasu named Apa, had four 
sons known as Santa, Danda, Samba and 
Manivaktra, all of whom were the protectors of 
yajna (sacrifice). 

Gael Get: YAR Aa: VTE 
gaunt Trae ICTATAAT TAT 23 M1 
HeMUTA Tat: MUTT TAT: Fes HT aT 
WAST AUGAAATTT Bt; Ta VI 

Out of the rest of the Vasus, Kala, the son of 
Dhruva had been quite well known. From 
Soma, Varcca was born. Dhara produced from 
his wife two sons named Dravina and 
Havyavaha. Then Manohara, the son of Hari, in 


union with Dhara, gave birth to three sons 
named Prana, Ramana and Sisira. 


forat watered yaafagenfa qa 
HAT AAT FA VGH 


Siva on the other hand in union with Anala, 
produced Manoyava and Avijnatagati, the two 
sons who were illustrious like the fire. 


PATA: HATE MRT TTT 
Tel VIG faye Vy WaT BEI 
Kumara, the son of Agni was born in the 
forest of reeds. His younger brothers were 
Sakha, Visdékha and Naigameya were well 
known. 


Ue ofa I aise: Ba 
Wega @ ele: Yat fayatera eae: | 
faye paraet Ta: Fred) warata:1 2001 


Vasu Pratyiisa, had two sons named Devala 
and Vibhu, who in future became the great Rsis. 
Visvakarma was the son of Prabhisa who 
became Prajapati in building architecture. 


MID ICECEIDICUIC RIEL 
ASIATTHUY Wa: MISATAAia 1 VU 


Matsya Puranam 


He was known as the main architect of the 
gods for the construction of palaces, buildings, 
orchards, images, ornaments, tanks and lakes, 
besides the wells or stepwells. He was known as 
the chief architect of the gods. 


sttauietedeat faamatsa tad: | 

CO TERY ART TAN 

Ural Tay PATA, ATTA | 

Ud SH: AAA WaT TTT: 113 oN 

Waal Aare fageracentory 

PSU AAA AAT: 11 3 8 

Ajaikapada,  Ahirbudhnya, — Virtipaksa, 

Raivata, Hara, Bahuripa, Suresvara, 
Trayambaka, Sdvitra, Jayanta, Pinaki and 
Aparajita were the eleven Rudras also known as 
GaneSvaras. They were the mind-born sons of 
Brahma, besides being the wielders of the 
tridents and known as GaneSsvaras, produced 


eighty four crores of sons who were ail 
considered to be imperishable. 


fea watg & tet yaar ToT: 
YAUACAAA GOTTA: 13 VA 
These eleven Rudras born of the holy cow 


Surabhi, had sons and grandsons known as 
Ganesvaras, protect all the directions. 


Sta sired Target sifeet aqegraat AA 
UAHA A A 


kk * 


Chapter-6 


CHAPTER 6 
Description of the Kasyapa dynasty! 


WW sara 

HVIUT VARIN Va: VATA 
aifefatctacasta sitet ATAT FAT ght 
eat TEA BTA ST 
age Yeagaa TAT AaTTN 21 


Sita said, “O Saunaka and other Rsis, now I 
shall narrate the sons and the grandsons born of 
the wives of Kasyapa. Kasyapa had thirteen 
wives known by the names of Aditi, Diti, Danu, 
Arista, Surasé, Surabhi, Vinataé, Tamra, 
Krodhavasa, Ira, Kadru, Visva and Muni. Now 
you listen to the details of their sons. 


fea ATT SY CANT. AAT | 
ATAASAL At MM HSM BAT: 1 3 


During the life time of Caksusa Manu, there 
were the gods known as Tusitéa. They came to 
be known as the twelve Adityas in the 
Vaivasvata Manvantara. 


SA ate wreas frase seo aA: 
fararafan wat siya fata Axi 


They were known by the names of Indra, 
Dhata, Bhaga, Tvastaé, Mitra, Varuna, Yama, 
Vivasvan, Savita, Piisé, Ansuman and Visnu. 


Ud Ueafaron snfaca Hey Wat: 
WAM PAMTATY Yara STATI & 


All of them have a thousand rays each and 
are known as the twelve Adityas. Aditi gave 


|. The complete series of the different dynasties 1s 
found elsewhere only in the Vayu, the Brahmanda, 
(which 1s the same), and the Bhagavata Puranas. The 
Brahma Purana and the Hari Vamsa, the Agni, 
Linga, Ktrma and Garuda Puranas have lists of 
various extent, but none beyond the families of 
Pandu and Krsna. The Markandeya contains an 
account of a few of the kings of the solar dynasty 
alone; and the Padma, of a part of the solar and lunar 
princes only, besides accounts of individuals. 


19 


birth to the best of the sons, in union with 
Kasyaya, the son of Marict. 


PUTA UAT: VAT CAVSTOT: BAT: | 
ud caro fat: wiaAT ANE 
SU Vetad aed Hed wa al 


The sons of the sage Krsasva came to be 
known as Devapraharanas. These gods emerged 
in each kalpa* of the Manvantara and vanished 
at the same time. 


fafa: Yaga wt aayaurfeta a: saqHoN 
feromaiorg da ferrenet ata a 
PCM RIESECIOM EDGED ETPAL 
VelewMyered Uglal Ble Ua TN 


We have heard Diti, in union with the great 
sage Kasyapa, gave birth to Hiranyakasipu and 
Hiranyaksa, the two great sons. Hiranyakasipu 
had four sons who were valorous like him and 


were known by the names of Prahlada, 
Anuhlada, Sanhlada and Hlada. 


Veeya sgesyifaatact Wa AN 
fares a afet WaUTetar| 
Fel: YAMA ATA SOTSAE Aa FEST: Qo 
Out of them Prahlada had four sons known 
as Ayusman, Sibi, Baskala and Virocana, the 
fourth one. The said Virocana had achieved 


Bali as his son. Bali had a hundred sons and 
Bana was the eldest of all. 


TATTRTM TAT SATAT STATO: 

PSA Teer: slaratar Favtrear: 11 VV0 

UAMTENEY Teal ATOTSAST TOTAL: 

AMT: USAMA VATA TOTATT: 11 22 UI 

Besides that, he had several other sons like 

Dhrtarastra, Sirya, Candra, Candransu- tapana, 
Nikumbhanabha, Gurvaksa, Kuksi-  bhima, 
Vibhisana and many others sons like him, who 
were younger to Bana but possessed all the best 


2. A day and night of Brahma, a period of 
4,320,000,000, Solar-sydereal years or years of 
mortals measuring the duration, of the world and as 
many, the intervals of its annihilation. 


322 


his wife, garlands and 


ornaments. 
Tet aft Yes Teas FETA 
7 faered Halt HaavATTT AT 113 VU 


These things might be given to the preceptor 
(Guru), if there be one; otherwise, to a really 
good Brahmana, free from all feeling of 
miserliness; for such a feeling leads one to the 
lower region. 


ar fate aq Halharaaqeyy 
STATE Tet We AAA 113 31 


One who observes the Siva Caturdasi 
ordinance, according to these rites, gets the 
benefit of a thousand ASvamedha sacrifices. 


Teeiah faseaqrcaya at Hay) 
faghrutgtratta acre ATSTaTeATAI3 ¥ 


And the sins of killing a Brahmana and also 
against the parents, committed in this or in the 
previous life, are destroyed in a moment. 


crargreragerragts- 
TARAS UGY Ay 

Tonferard fefa aerate 
VATA TENT PST 3 4 I 


The devotee gets long life, health, domestic 
prosperity and promotion in his husbandry. He 
then eventually goes near the Lord of four 
hands, whose chief attendant he becomes; and 
then after, passing crores of kalpas in the 
heaven, he becomes unified with Siva. 


T FSM: 
Gefral + fraretste any 
au fagmisact 7 ae 


afe fagrarcnreatshe aert113 & 1 


Even the sage Brhaspati, the Devas, like the 
mighty Indra and Brahma, cannot adequately 
describe the glories of this ordinance. Siddhas 
are not able to explain it and even I cannot do 
so with ten crore of tongues. 


with garments, 


Matsya Puranam 


VARTA: Ustad A: BALET Ter 
TUNA feat: MaeUTa AAA 
aut fereraqesimacantattcnted: 
ata mrad fay Warde: Aaw3 
One who void of jealously reads, hears or 
thinks about the glory of the Sivacaturdasi 
ordinance which is dispeller of all sins, becomes 
beloved to the Devas and crore of Divine 
Consorts venerate him; those who bring this 
into pracice, what to say about them? 


TT AT At Hats haraca 
TAAL Tay Tea 
AIT Waa 
Ut Ue arte fHATATTOT CI 
If a woman who observes this ordinance 
with great devotion taking the permission of her 


husband, son or the preceptor also attains bliss 
by the grace of Siva, the holder of Pinaka bow. 


ofa stared vergrrat fraagesttad aa 
Cereal SEAT: 112 & UI 


KK * 


‘CHAPTER 96 


The greatness of giving up of all fruits 
Area Sava 
GANTT Tea AKASH ATE 
Tews Wt cle PARA HAISTI VI 
Nandikesvara said— O Narada! Also hear the 
benefits that accrue to the devotee in his next 
life, by his relinquishing the fruits of this 
ordinance. 


aright yet afar qiterat Wy aa 
BSVAAAT A MTeVaTAAT aT 
AAP HUTA HA MATA ATTN 2 I 


O Sage! the ordinance (vrata) should be 
commenced on any one of the following days, 
in the month of Margasirsa; the third, the 
twelfth, the eight or the fourteenth day of the 


Chapter-96 


bright fortnight, after invoking the Brahmanas. 


array fe aay yoay WP 
Vea Waar Aeon ANZ I 


O Narada! In other auspicious months also, 
the devotee should, to the best of his ability, 
feed the Brahmanas with rice cooked in milk 
and mixed with sugar, and then satisfy them 
with Daksina. 

ARTEL AAT THT | 
aaa F A STANTON 
Uda GRA BF TNT A ANAT 

The prohibited grains of eighteen kinds and 
fruits and roots should be avoided for a period 
of one year; but there is no harm in taking 
anything in the form of a medicine. A golden 


image of Siva and a bull should be made. The 
image of Dharmaraja should be made similarly. 


HOS Wes U ais WA AAMT 

MGA HTM He sAT ACTHANG It 

TAAIAIe Wa Hacc 

SIVA Visa aM Healey FST 

The following sixteen kinds of fruits should 

be made in gold, according to the means of the 
devotee, viz.— pumpkins, Citrus Medica, egg- 
plants, bread-fruits, mangoes, hog-plums, 
woodapples, Indra grains, cucumbers, coconuts, 


the holy figs, the jujubes, the lemons, the 
plantains, saffron and pomegranates. 


Peres sales SNE 

AHEM STATING 
sheer af ASA Fete 
Ven Haas HAMA HST I 


The following should be made of silver, 
according to the means of the devotee, viz.— 
Muli (Radish, Raphanus Sativus), Emblic 
Myrobalans, Jambul, tamarind, Karaunda, 
Kankola, cardamom, cotton, bamboo, Kutaya, 
Sami, Udumbara (Fig tree), coconut, grapes, 


323 


two kinds of egg-plants (Solanun Indecum). 
Ue Aethet HatattedHesa a 
PTUSTATSe TM AUTH I 
Taqaaas W arang a fatten 
Poa TEheMeaetst Wer ot 
ATTA HAC RICA | 
aTETfUT arevtafa arcareaitHat AT: VV 


The fruits of the following should be made 
of copper, according to the means of the 
devotee:— Palms, Agasti grandiflora, 
Kayaphala, Gambhari, esculent root, the red ° 
esculent root, a bulbous root, svamakhiri, ™ 
cucumber, citravalli, Salmali, mango, aston 
kidney-bean, fig tree, patola (a species of 7 
cucumber). 


SHU GT HAS waaay 
TAT HAGA AMAT FarTAT RW 
Two pitchers of water, covered with cloth, in 

should be placed on grain, and a bed should ld 
also be arranged and covered with cloth. 

VATA AA VATA AT 

ra Wes VAT fawrar qlee 

Waters ae yoaste farraeaqiie3 it 


On some sacred day, the devotee should ue 
give away all these things as well as three food od 
plates, the images of Dharmaraja, Siva, with th 
that of the sacred bull and a cow, to a aes ‘ul 
Brahmana couple who may have a big family, 'Y 
having first worshipped them. 


AMT HT Hay TUITE: | 
TM VARIA a: Past Aes 


“As the numberless Devas dwell in all kinds 
of fruits, so let my devotion be to Siva, as a 
consequence of my performing this vrata of °! 
relinquishing the fruits of my actions.” 


aa forasy ass Ware 
THAT at MATa W ATAST NG I 


de 


a, 


e, 


ids 
. a 


324 


“Siva and Dharmaraja are known to be the 
great Givers of boons; let them therefore confer 
boons on me for giving away these likenesses, 
together with these appropriate fruits in 
charity.” 


IM GARTH fray AaaT 
TMT HMA TTT APTN I 


“As in the devotees of Siva are always (to be 
found) endless fruits, so let me also have fruits 
endless, in life after life.” 


aan dé 7 Upete frafawadoeniry 
TMT AAT THAI ViHT: VHT: WaT Vit 


“! do not make any (invidious) distinction 
between Siva, Visnu, Sun, Brahma; let the Lord 
Siva, the soul of the universe, bless me with 
eternal happiness. ” 


ofa creat a aaa a AT: 
Wma SEM MSTA TAN RC I 
ara elle Batata fae: 


Tender frat a aArEAtee 


famed erat ystlt araraterataary 
SIA AAT Arata iad FSANZ oN 


The articles (to be given away) should be 
given to the Brahmana, having first decorated 
him. The devotee may also give a bedding, with 
all its requisites, if he had the means to do so, 
otherwise he may only give away the fruits 
mentioned before. The golden images of Siva 
and Dharmaraja being given to the Brahmana, 
with the pitchers of water, he should feed 
himself on food devoid of oil, by observing the 
vow of silence, and should also feed the 
Brahmanas, according to his means. 


Udettant 7 Aaah 
wet aawHeTaMad Aafaal fags? VW 
This is the way of a devotee of Visnu, Sun 


or a Yogi or a Bhagvat to relinquish the fruits of 
their actions, as laid down by the Brahmanas 


Matsya Puranam 


versed in the Vedas. 
TMS BATT Ariel fay gal 
waaay fafates ars Wa at 
SAM HAS AGAMA 2 
“Q Sage Narada! This ordinance should be 
observed, to the best of their ability, by the 
womenfolk, too. There is no ordinance like this 


that can give such everlasting boons in this 
world, as well as in the next. 


Aaa Aat: TTT: | 
Wahd MUAY wey GATT 
TSTASAMUT GR WelaT 2 3H 
“OQ Sage! the devotee remains in the region 
of Siva for as many thousand Yugas as there are 
atoms of gold, silver, and copper in this world, 
when these latter are ground to a powder. 
Waa. SATAT- 
Waa WHT WT Wael VAI 
weary 7 yafaarng :G- 
UG AT A UCSC HATA I 


This ordinance washes off all the lifelong 
sins of the devotee. He never has the pain of 
losing his son, and he attains the region 
inhabited by Gods. 


A ar Yonft Yeasears: WSeT 
VATAAT MATT AT ATAHATOTTA 
Trearreqa wary ASTANA 


The poor man who hears or reads this, either 
in some sacred place (place of a God), or in the 
house of a pious man, goes to the region of Siva 
where he gets into the place of Deities and 
enjoys, after being liberated from all his sins. 


Sfa stared VEIT Ma HeINTATETea ATT 
HOUTA ATA SEATAT 118 & 


KKK 


Chapter-97 


CHAPTER 97 
The method of Sunday ordinance 
ate 3dld 
TENT Yat AAATHAITA 
Tarda TWAT AS AIM ARTI! 
Narada said—- O Nandikesvara! Please 
describe to me the ordinance that may be the 


giver of peace, health and everlasting benefits to 
the people. 


aAfeaat sara 
MAMA MA UL Tel GAA 
Wala aera ss FTN 
qaneal TTY fam weft yet Aan 
TATE AAANT Wel AMAIA WAT A 


Nandikesvara said— That which is the eternal 
abode of the soul of the universe, 1s known as 
the Sun, the Fire and the Moon, in this world; 
by the worship of these a man attains happiness. 
The devotee observing it should always take his 
meals at night time only on Sundays. 


Tal FAT AFM AM GAA FT AAT 
ael Vitter Halen FAAT SI 


In the case of the asterism Hasta falling on 
Sunday, the devotee should take his meals only 
once on Saturday, purging his heart of all 
vanity. 


THAMean Aratfarar FATAL 
WAgleMaarh Ta caT TANG I 
On Sunday night, the devotee, after feeding 


good Brahmanas, should draw a lotus of twelve 
petals with red sandal. 


fatrer fara aaeartor yeaa: 
featent aurea faacaaa: WANE I 
wi q tad ca AaUT UB een 
TesAhtel Ageert A AAAT IN 
WaT F AAeATOT fara 


325 


afurargaar q Tal TOTATATINC I 
afanisearart urivs aft. en 
Set gq va ta aftr wR 
To the east of it he should place, after iter 
salutations, the Sun (Strya), to the south-east ast 
Divakara, to the south Vivasvana, to the south- ‘uth 
west Bhaga, to the west Varuna, to the north- >rth 
west Mahendra, to the north Aditya, to the the 
north-east Santa. In the forepart of the lotus, the . the 
horses of the Sun should be inscribed, in the the 
south the Aryama Devas, in the west Martanda, nda, 
and on the northern petal Ravi Bhaskara on the | the 
pericarp of the lotus. 
THIN Arar 
aera Aat Seat TTS TAT oI 
Afterwards, red flowers, red sandal, ial, 
sesamum, mixed with water, should be poured ured 
on the lotus, and the following mantra should be d be 
recited at the time. 


aT Taye sere fawrrya: | 
THTSM SUK: US FATA aI 


“O Divakara (the giver of day)! You are the > the 
soul of time, creation and the Vedas. You have "ave 
your face turned to each direction. You are of € of 
the form of Indra and Agni: therefore shelter elter 
me.” 


sae AREpAaaa UW ATA 

ay safe are aad TalferaTaT eI 

area arat faguae Fin tafaafser 

Yt TNT IJ HSA HAT 

Tee AT SOT HAR AAT I 

“Agnimile namastubhyamisetvorjje ca Ca 

bhdskara.” “Agna Gdyahi varada namaste 'aste 
jyotisampate.” With this mantra Arghya should ould 
be offered, and the Deity dismissed. He should ould 
take his meals at night free from oil. When aen a 


year has elapsed in this way, he should make a'ke a 
lotus of gold and an image with two hands. 


326 


fast 
Teal; @t: aiaetet Waray 
WU yeeat aaa 
Para Val Yes AT CEU Y I 
He should then give away in charity a milch 
cow, with her horns covered with gold, the 
hoofs with silver, along with her calf, and a 
mlking vessel of bell metal, while the lotus and 


image should be placed in a pot of copper 
completely full of molasses. 


AUT THAT Naat The STS: 
Ugeutean Yes Waal TNA 
seaeary frafara Hetay SAAT FATA VG 
The devotee, after worshipping — the 
Brahmana with red cloth, sandal, garland, 
incense, etc., should bestow his gifts, viz.— the 
lotus and the image, etc., on him, he having a 
large family, and being free from deformity and 


pride, and able to restrain his passions and the 
object of charity in many other vratas. 


AM AG: UTGfaAgAra 

faa Tae aa 
arden faa 

TAMETTATA STATA VE 1 


At that time, the devotee should utter the 
following words:— ““O Dispeller of sins, the Soul 
of the universe, your chariot drawn by seven 
horses, the vase of Rk, Yaju and Sama Vedas, 
the boat of the ocean of universe, I salute you 
oft and often.” 


sertt faferat Wareat- 
eneatte eq Wa: | 
aistetiett faTeHeNe: 
FAA FAATATACT: 19 


One who observes these rituals and keeps up 
this vrata for a year, is freed from all sins and 
goes to the solar region fanned by camara. 


Matsya Puranam 


queerana yura: Pies areata: | 
strana: YA: Graaf Fars 22 1 
On the consumption of his store of piety he 
becomes the sovereign of the seven Dvipas, and 


never gets pain, suffering or disease. He 
becomes most powerful and virtuous. 


TU MpTEcaaaa 
SAN fa eaTHATALA 
aly Manat gare 
feat ANS Tat APA 
O Narada! The woman who is devoted to 
her husband, God and preceptor, and observes 
this ordinance, and eats at night only on 


Sundays, undoubtedly reaches the solar region, 
which is honoured by the Devas. 


q: usety sunt Ara: 
USUATAaT Aaa 
Biste yeayaatearaisat: 
Wed Fatt aera feta ot! 
The person who reads or hears, or approves 
of the reading of this ordinance, also goes to the 
region of Indra where he is served by the 


Devas, and remains there for innumerable 
kalpas. 


ofa siimeat vargeat snfeerantaea AM 
PAA AAA SEATA: 112 9 tt 


KES 


CHAPTER 98 


The process of bringing Samkranti to a close 


Arenal Jared 
OTST AAMT THAN HOTT 
TENA UL Mh MARAT 


Nandikesvara said— O Narada! I shall now 
describe to you the way how the ordinance of 
Samkranti, which in the next world gives 
everlasting boons of all kinds, 1s to be brought 


Chapter-98 


to a close? 
ary fag arta darttarareg 
TART SAAT LTH 
Waldcarat Water: Vt faataa et 


The Samkranti ordinance should be 
observed on the day of equinoxes or solstices. 
The day, prior to Samkranti, the devotee should 
have his meals only once; and on the following 
day, he should bathe in water mixed with 
sesamum, after brushing his teeth. 


Cea Sat eT 
Wai Weal Hahafarrareasaqs i 


On the day of the Samkranti, the devotee 
should draw on the earth a lotus of eight petals 
with sandal, in the centre of which pericarps 
should be made, where the presence of the Sun 
should be invoked. 


aiurearat aaegeet Yaa: | 

aA SONY AY AT BEVSeTaA Alvi 

Ta: Afat THA ATU AT TA: | 

ATTA FMT AAA TA: GAAP I 

Tea faopie faacren 

TREATeT Hea: TafoSet TaeAT NG HN 

The Sun should be located in the pericarp, 

Aditya in the east and salutations should be 
made in the south, after reciting ‘Usndrise 
namah, Rngmandalaya namah’, “Savitre 
namah” in the south-west, “Yapandya namah” 
in the west, Bhaga in the north-west should be 
located and worshipped constantly. Martanda 
should be located in the north and Visnu in the 


north-east. These should be adored with 
incense, flowers, fruits and eatables, on an altar. 


fara Beant a gaara fecoray 
ane quan arta Faeatqiiot 


A golden vessel of clarified butter, with a 
pitcher of waler, should be given away to the 
Brahmana; and the lotus should also be made of 
gold, according to the means of the devotee, and 


327 


given away to the Brahmana. 
aetna saree zag 
fagra fasrsura fase tanya 
TTNSAT AA AA HATTA SA 


Afterwards, the Arghya, consisting of water, 
sandal and flowers, should be placed on the 
floor as an oblation to the Sun, by reciting the 
following mantra: “Visvdya  Visvartipdya 
Visvadhdmne Svayambhuve Namo’nanta namo 
dhdatre Rksam Yajusampate.” 


amt fata aa mf ate wart 
FAASAA HATA FSV ATF A 


This ritual should be observed each month, 
or at the end of the year. All the twelve vratas 
should be done at the same time. 


Paratid yauraras 

ware afg farygaten 

WA TUATT TAT 20 I 
Waa: Vileraitay TEM 

gu: RULE EES hl Ba 
TMAalsy al Wa Wearelearer 

TTCATATT AT T TUSTAGTRH 12 
ater: aAfreraetani 

FAAS ATAU ATT 21 
eut a ceneyfaedt agra 

Wreard SANT at MATa! 
Ustrera: wheat fae 

Aargau My Weer 
4 farmed Yeatsa Har 

HAAH Alt A AMASANLI 


Then libations of rice cooked in milk and 
sugar, should be poured into the fire and 
Brahmanas should be satisfied with eatables. 
On that occasion, twelve pitchers of water, with 
a few gems, twelve golden lotus flowers and 


328 


twelve milch cows of gentle disposition or only 
8. 7 or 4 such cows (in the last case, the cows 
being dressed and garlanded), according to the 
means of the devotee, should be given to a poor 
and deserving Brahmana, after their horns being 
covered with gold, their hoofs with silver, along 
with milking pots of bell metal. In case, the 
devotee be a very poor man, he may give only 
one milch cow. Afterwards, an image of earth, 
along with that of the serpent Sesa, should be 
made in gold, silver, copper or even of kneaded 
flour, according to the means of the devotee, 
and given away to the Brahmana, along with a 
golden image of the Sun. As far as possible, no 
miserliness should be exercised in this ritual; for 
the man doing so, inspite of having riches 
undoubtedly goes to hell. 


MAAS SMa Ts: 
weat o aerate faq 
add a TATU : 
TOIT AS AAYBIL3 I 


© Narada! One who observes this ordinance, 
enjoys in heaven the honour and respect by all 
the Gandharvas, for as long as Indra and other 
gods, earth and the seven oceans, the Himalayas 
and other mountains survive. 


TAY HUAN TA- 
UME: TAL Hewgnlergyw: | 
Yeyasagay: WA: 
WHATAT AAA AST: ULSI 


His piety being consumed, the devotee is 
born, in the beginning of creation, a sovereign 
of good family, endowed with all kingly virtues 
and blessed with handsome form (devoid of 
deformity) and many a child, wife, friend and 
relation. 


Sa vata sont ara sacar 
fatanftact tadane yar 
afaate a zerft aiste ea- 


Matsya Puranam 


THAT WITT ANG 


One who reads or hears about the ordinance 
of Strya Samkranti with devotion, or also 
advises others to perform it, 1s honoured by the 
Devas in the realm of Indra. 


Stet strareet METy TUT 
EOC IMEICIC RBIS CICA 1D MIL SAL 


KR 


CHAPTER 99 
The vow of Visnu-vratam, known as the 
Vibhiti-Dvadasi 
Afechat sara 
TU AE aaah fants yy 
fayfergrett AT Aaa TAN I 
Nandikesvara said— "O Narada! I shall now 
relate to you Visnu-vratam, known as the 


Vibhiti-Dvadasi vrata, which is held in 
veneration by all the Devas.” 


aifaes MAAS UT A BTA 
ATS AT SMA F WHA MISA: | 
HA WA AAT TRAIT TTI 
On the tenth day of the bright fortnight, in 
the month of Kartika, Caitra, Vaisakha, 
Margasirsa, Phalguna or Asddha, the devotee 
should have a light meal; and in the day time, 


after performing his evening prayers, make the 
following resolution. 


Taree Arent: Aa TATE 
glare: fara: after aiert faani3i 
“Oh God, on the eleventh day I shall keep a 
rigid fast and worship Janardana. | shall break 


the fast on the twelfth day, in company of the 
Brahmanas. 


Tafa FA Wet Ve Ayr 
TM ANd ara a tauar Ffeiwi 


“O KeSava! Let there be no hindrance in the 


Chapter-99 


observance of my fast.” He should utter “Om 
namo Naradyanaya namah” (Om, Salutations be 
to Narayana) before retiring to bed. 


ad: Wt SAMA Haar: BFA: 
Yaad YOST YH ATCM TIT NG I 


On getting up in the morning, he should 
recite Gayatri 108 times, and then worship Lord 
Visnu with white sandal and flowers. 


faye AM: Wreragiart a AAT 

74: frarere o faaot 7a: afeqg 
aeaus AA AUifacaa AA: Arh 
alata AeA BT RAtit 
Tear fant: Hvsqeavst +A: 
HTT WE AyraAaria Ac | 

"Ss Meat saul avers ai 

THATE Mog eeAl aa A eTATUTOTET| 

fort: Walery gaay seahrgTIqe | 


The feet should be worshipped after reciting 
“Vibhitaye namah’, the knees after reciting 
“Asokdya namah”, the thighs after reciting 
“Sivaya namah,” the waist after reciting 
“Visvamirtaye namah,” the male organ of 
generation after reciting “Kandarpadya namah,” 
the hands after reciting “Aditydya namah’, the 
stomach after reciting “Ddmodardya namah,” 
the breasts after reciting “Vdsudevdya namah,” 
the chest after reciting “Mddhavdya namah,” 
the neck after reciting “Utkanthine namah,” the 
mouth after reciting “Sridhardya namah,” and 
the hair after reciting ““Kesavdya namah,” the 
back after reciting “Sarangadhardya namah,” 
the ears after reciting “Varaddya namah,” the 
head after reciting “Sarvdtmane namah,” with 
His other names, viz., “Sarikapdnye namah”, 
“Cakrapaénye namah,” “Asipdnaye namah, 
“Gaddpdnaye namah,” and “Padmapdnaye 
namah.” 


WRaqeayth St eal FT Mad: 
SEGA HTT: TATA: 1120 1 


329 


A golden fish should be made and also a 
lotus of gold, according to the means and 
wishes of the devotee; and a pitcher, full of 
water, should be placed in front of It. 


Tend frets farceartratoar 
Tat AERUT Hatfatraraaeasarn ge 


Afterwards, a vessel, full of molasses and 
covered with a white cloth, together with some 
sesamum, should be placed. The devotee should 
keep up the night with the recitation of Itihasas. 


WUATA F Waal Tera Hela 
aaa ta Genet Faeaquee 
On the following morning the golden fish 
and lotus, along with the pitcher of water, 


should be given away to some good Brahmana 
with a large family. 


Ga + yeaa ea Val Tafariaty: | 
TM ATAU AAMAS ATTN 23 I 


At that time, the devotee should pray: “As 
you, O Lord Visnu, are never devoid of any 
prosperity (Vibhiti), so please extricate me 
from the meshes and manifold calamities of this 
world.” 


SMTA TRUTUT WATT HATTA 
SAAT AM SATA AAT 
SMe AA AacaVSyawaq i Vv 


The devotee should give away one in each 
month of the year the golden images of the ten 
incarnations (of the supreme God) as well as of 
Dattatreya and Vedavyasa, along with a lotus of 
gold. During this period the devotee should 
avoid the company of rogues and the wicked. 


AGS AMPA BSN Bayt: TAs 
Aaa eau AAPA! 
VA CAATAAS Wa TATA NG A 
After observing the fast like this for twelve 
months, on each Dvadasi, the devotee at the 


conclusion of the year, should give away to his 
preceptor a bedding, a mount of salt and a cow. 


330 


WM w yimaresala at waaay 
TS Toe faragearergsreyaat: 1! 2 It 
A man of means may also give away a 


village or a house and honour his preceptor with 
diverse raiments and ornaments. 


FIAT AMS Arataa FATA 
MMagAME Tae: | 
Aa AAPA Wilh Kits WATATAN I 
Other Brahmanas should be _ feasted, 
according to the means of the devotee and 
satisfied by being given clothes, jewels, money, 
omaments, cows etc.. A man with limited 


means should give only as much as he can 
afford. 


agenda f:ta: Crease Wiel 
YU A PAS ATEAAN LS I 


A very poor man, but having sincere 
devotion to Lord Madhava, may worship Lord 
Visnu for a couple of years with flowers alone. 


arr fataat aq fauftgragtary 
paarafaraye: Meo ALATA TN Le I 
SAM VTaTea A MHA 
40 aetaaea 7 afte a aT 
One who observes the Vibhiti-dvadasi 
ordinance like this, liberates himself from all 
sins and also frees hundreds of his ancestors. He 


is not oppressed with grief, disease or poverty 
during thousands of births. 


qenrat ay Mat at waeraht AAPA ot 
MAT TACAN MATA TAT 
Maat TAA AMATI? 2 


He is always born as a devotee of Visnu or 
Siva, and after spending 108 thousand yugas in 
heaven, is born as a king. 


Sta sineead Tere fawrsd are 
AAA ATA SEATAT: 112 2 1k 


xk *EX* 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 100 
Description of the vow of Visnu-vratam 
Wena Jara 
WT WR Hed Tara TATE: | 
TET Tene FASATEA TAT TAA: 1 81 
Nandikesvara said— In the days gone by, 
during the Rathantara Kalpa, there lived a 


mighty king, as illustrious the Sun, who was 
known by the name of Puspavahana. 


ATM TA IPA AGAGAT ATTA 
aut HIST St AMAT FAN 
O Narada! Brahma, being pleased with his 


asceticism, presented him with a lotus of gold 
that could move about at will. 


Ach: UAedaary: Beat FT: 
Stahl Brees UW AMS SATA I 


(With its help) the king began to wander 
about at his pleasure in the seven dvipas as well 
as in the abode of the gods, in company of his 
citizens. 


Heat AAG Be Tea Yea as: | 
Clean A Usd Te YeRTa STAY I 
At the beginning of the kalpa, the kingdom 
of this king, who lived in the lotus, was the 
seventh dvipa:— on account of the great praise 


and honour given to it by the people, it came to 
be known as Puskara dvipa. 


Sar TSO Sei AAA TaSTaAT 
UMTS TEA t CARTAN 1G UI 


The king was called Puspavahana by the 
Devas and the Danavas on account of his 
having received the lotus for his conveyance. 


Tremere FAST 
TUGAA TUSTATAT 

Yat & Tea FATS 
ATTA THATS PT 


Chapter-100 


Tea BT Mavaad aya 
MW Wadtagaqar WaT I 


Owing to his powers, acquired by the 
practice of penances, no place in the three 
worlds was inaccessible to him, seated on his 
lotus given by Lord Brahma. His queen, 
Lavanyavati, was worthy to be honoured by 
thousands of ladies. In beauty and womanly 
virtues, she had no equal. She was like the 
Goddess Parvati, the noble Consort of the Lord 
Siva. 

TAM Iya 
TATA: 
TAI: AANA Tat 
Yedefaarmarearar 
aswarTd ater yma 
Wada AaaS AAT 


The king became the father of ten thousand 
virtuous princes, who all were renowned in 
archery. The king began to wonder at his 
incomparable prosperity. One day, seeing the 
great sage Praceta, approaching, he addressed 
him thus: 


Taare 


HAT A eafahrarac ya 
Tat WaeTtTaT afar 
an WATGayS A Als Aaic it 
Pootrsnfir ation 
ROC EEEM IDRC TIE RL 
at Peat oh TTA Se- 
TPT Aa: UAT: VHS I 
O Sage! how is it that there is such an 
abundance of prosperity in my house? How 
have I got a queen who is venerated even by the 
Devas, and who has no equal even among the 


goddesses? Why has Brahma become so much 
pleased with my little asceticism as to present 


331 


| me with such a lotus, (vast wonderful), that 


when myriads of kings, with ministers, 
elephants, people and chariots entered into it, 
they appear small indeed, like so many galaxies 
of twinkling stars with the moon herself in the 
immeasurable expanse of the firmament. 


Te PadeAAteterat 
aaah HaIyrTHeeed : | 
WTA TAAAATS AAT 
UE Acdehaet BIT WAA:Io lI 
“Hence, O Lord, what is the use of being 
born in the separate womb of the mother? To 
obtain endless (good) results, | have performed 


many a religious rite. Now please tell us what is 
of ultimate good to me, my wife and sons.” 


TABATA Marae Bez 
yaad: Wage Taay 
WAL Ta Y TeTHersterant 
MATa eey Taet UTTHTTT aI 
Hearing the above words of the king, the 
sage, after meditation, spoke the following 
words, about the wonderful former lives of the 
king: “King! Previously you are were born in 


the house of a hunter, and you led a life of sin 
from day to day. 


ATA TS FA: TRF ATT 
SUT ATAT AAT! 

TU a Tea Qdagt 7 A- 
RASH TAT A Haat DW AAMT IW 


Your body was hard, rough and also 
offensively stinking. Snakes coiled all over it. 
You had no friend, nor sons; neither kinsmen, 
nor sisters, nor parents. All were abused and 
cursed by you. This beloved consort of yours 
was also against you. | 


aaa TTA 
faye vate ta atfateeny 
MSTA TAS Ve 


332 


welfare art 
arifsdaa wer 7 faty- 
STAM AACA 23 1 
Then the land was visited by a terrible 
drought, when you were over-whelmed with 
hunger, but could not get grain, fruits, flesh or 
any kind of eatables to quench it, though you 
searched for them everywhere. 


UIE Aa Ger 
TA: Wt ASMA ey I 
On that occasion you came to a tank, full of 
muddy banks, but which was abundantly full of 
lotus flowers. You called a heap of lotuses out 
of that tank and carned them home to Vaidisa 
the city in which you lived. 


Weal TAM PATS RTATaT | 
hea THT BAIT Ae: 
TA YH TUTTI es 1 


You wandered about the whole city to sell 
those lotuses, but could not find a purchaser. 
Eventually you were overpowered with hunger 
and fatigue. 


TfarKataeaaaa TaaTeTT 
HA HET CLA TAY ARTA RE 


And you went and sat with your wife in the 
courtyard of some one where in the night you 
heard some nice and auspicious sound. 


Hae Wars Wee 
aa HUSH fawnrtatact fendi V9 11 


You went to the spot where the sound was 
heard with your wife. There you saw the 
worship of Lord Visnu conducted in a mandapa. 


apastradt aH fayfagreritary 
TAA ATA AUT ATTN RC 


Matsya Purd4nam 


The worship in question was the concluding 
chapter of Vibhiti-dvadasi ordinance, in the 
month of Magha, which was kept up by a 
courtezan, named Anamgavati. 


Racaat axa yRat arreararearary 
AHA CHa MAMTATATST AN Le I 


At that time, she was giving away the mount 
of salt, the bedstead along with other things, the 
decorated image of the merciful Lord Visnu and 
the golden Kalpa tree, to her preceptor. 

ot SB aaemantad a Uletaaay 
fant: aaet: ard at Faw HAN ol 
On seeing all that, you said to yourself, 


“What would I now do with these lotus flowers, 
I should better offer them to Visnu. 


Sta aiReaT Gre TETRA TUTfera 
THAIN ACA AVS TAUTETCT 
WAT BT TIL: TAT ET Tele 112 a 
O King! Thus devotion came to the hearts of 
both of you; and you worshipped the Lord as 


well as the mount of salt, the bedding, and even 
the earth with your lotus flowers. 


VIASAM FHT TAA TTT 
STATA HATTA 21 
A Yeld AANA AMAT AT AAT 
SAGA T PARA egherT 

STAT Ae AA PRIMA TTT 3 1 
aa | date wah Mesa F aA 


WASTEUATAT FATT YEAS NV 


The courtezan was very much pleased with 
your devotion and offered you 300 gold coins 
which both of you did not accept, as you were 
both then filled with sattvaguna (i.e. your hearts 
became pure), at which the courtezan became 
still more pleased with you, had four kinds of 
delicious foods brought and asked you to eat. 
You again declined to partake of her hospitality 


Chapter-100 


and said— “We shall have food at some other 
time. We are exceedingly glad today with your 
acquaintance and the keeping fast. | 


HTT UTE HATO Fea 
AAAI THAME ASAT GU 


Hitherto we have been carrying a vicious life 
and have been sinners all along.” By her contact 
you had then acquired some virtue. 

Sit ANNU ANAT aaragTeg aT 
MAA DT AA SAT VA AeTAUTPACT 2 & I 
Tay Wea wan favy grevta a 
SAAT MT ATAU AAT: 29M 

In that way, you Kept up all the night with 
that courtezan and, on the following morning, 
she gave the mount of salt and the bedding as 
well as villages to her preceptor and to a dozen 


Brahmanas, garments, ornaments, kamandalu 
and cows. 


WH WU Geant: WAT 
qa Sener Yatacan frase cit 


After that, she fed her friends, poor men, 
blind men, misers, compeers and kinsmen, and 
at the same time she also honoured in the same 
way and dismissed you both. 


a WaerA At: Teta TINT: | 
TR OAUAT ATA A ATTN 8 


King! Owing to this worship of Kesava by 
lotus flowers, the same hunter and his wife have 
been now born in the persons of yourself and 
your consort. 


ABT Ta YT 

TA TAT WSeMerwt ATA FT3 ol 
TTA Set ATA TYG 
PYLAT TK TAT HATE: I3 VN 


You have been freed of all your sins by the 
virtue of your little self-denial and purity of 
heart. Hence this wonderful lotus moving at 


333 


will. This has been given to you by Janardana, 
the Lord of creation in the person of four faced 
Brahma, because he was pleased with you. 


Mead Aya BMA AAA! 
UAT VATA TAM: Mifare sar 
AAA AHATATTTATS 2 


That courtezan is now the rival of Rati, the 
wife of Cupid, and is known as Priti. She is the 
giver of happiness to the womanfolk, and 1s 
venerated by the Devas. 


THATS Uetsg Yet TAretet 
Tarte aMnfarer fasrirgreytary| 
He Uns Fratorraysd Braces 311 


O King! Even now abandon this Puskara- 
dvipa and observe the vibhiti-dvadasi fast on 
the banks of the Ganga river, so that you may 
attain final beatitude (Nirvana). . 


AFeeat Jara 
SRM U UPerearaeaaa 
TWA GAH A ATH IAT SAT 113 VI 


Nandikesvara said— “O Narada! That sage 
vanished then and there, after telling all that to 
the king, and the latter observed the ordinance, 
as dicated.” 


SEMA TA AAUSTT ATT 

TaTHaA A HATS STS & 1 
areal: Vitadl car faye aferons ae 

4 feargiad Halt Maa Tea AT GH 


QO Narada! The devotee, observing this 
ordinance, should keep up the penance and 
perform the rites with molasses of any kind 
whatsoever, as prescribed, for 12 months, and 
give alms to the Brahmanas, without any feeling 
of miserliness. KeSava is pleased with devotion 
alone. 


ght aepatctarconstaT- 
afta wade sunt arr waa 


334 


afrata a earl cacttas 
aaa A Allegas AAMT 3 9 11 


One who reads, or listens to it or also 
advises to others to observe this ordinance, 
which dispels all sins of the men, remains in the 
heaven for a hundred crores of years. 


Sta ster Herat fanfrgiesitad aa 
WaATASEMTT: 1120 01] 


KR 


CHAPTER 101 


Prescribing of the sixty vratas and the 
related glory 


Theat Sara 
MA: AAAI THAT ATTA 
TRUM eet Feet ARTI TANT gH 


Nandikesvara said— “O Narada, now, | am 
going to describe the best of the sixty vratas, 
about which Siva has himself spoken, which are 
divine and are the remover of all the sins. 


Tae Ula J WaT Are Hele 
en wh faryet a cenfenra STATI 
fraaeraistay: frac a aad 
Waeaa ATT MSTA I 
aaah Ta fra Saga 
ey frerrel cerca Te athe WAT 
Uagaae AT UTI MTTATS I 


A person, who consuming food once in the 
night, gives away in charity two cakras of gold, 
a trident, a cow to the Brahmanas with family, 
he is turned in the form of Siva and enjoys all 
the pleasures with us. This is the destroyer of 
grave sins, and 1s like the god himself. A person 
who taking food once in a day gives away in 
charity a cow with the bull he indeed achieves 
Sivaloka. It destroys the sins and the ailments 
and is known as Rudravrata. 


Matsya Puranam 


Te aera Vt yenrasagyay 
Una AAT FTATTT| 
a aod we aif ceradtad BATTING I 
A person who takes food once on alternate 
days and at the end of the year, gives away in 
charity a gold lotus with a vase filled with sugar 
and the bull, he achieves Visnuloka. 


MASS AAAS ATTA: | 
UAATAL CENT Alt Wa Bt: 
HY Mifeteny AUTt wifetora rere I 


A person, who starting from the month of 
Asadha, does not apply oil on the body for four 
months, and gives away in charity the good 
stuffs, he achieves the abode of Sri Hari. He 
becomes loveable of all in this world and this 1s 
known by the name of Pritivrata. 


aeafecen wet wey aferaiteyarery 
SOSAUT error LAUTAN AIAN tI 
arose fanfiest whe 3 stenfafin 


Udelttad AA Wartleeneraay Ne I 


A person who in the month of Caitra, does 
not use curd, milk, ghee and sugar, and feeds a 
Brahmana couple appropriately and gives away 
in charity fine clothes to them, he achieves the 
place of Gauri. 


Yerat Taal Hea Ah Tat YA: 
WN HST CaMeyAh SMT 
fama aeaaah Wet: wraaatay 

ced faryag feren fergta: RIGHT: 
UteAMad AT Wel MeHlaargrrqi ot 


A person who on the thirteenth day in the 
Pusya constellation, takes food once in the 
night, and making an Asoka tree of ten fingers 
in gold, gives away in charity for the pleasure of 
Pradyumna, he resides in Visnuloka for a kalpa. 
He becomes free from grief, gets his desires 
fulfilled. 


Chapter-101 


aMeelead We aaa TT 

amc a aqura weafaderarqi 22 
aaa AIH Telos area 

O eaeenarcta foraaatas BAT I 


A person who in the caturmdsad (four 
months) starting from Asadha from full moon 
day, to the end of he month of K4rtika does not 
have a haircut, and also does not eat brinjal, and 
then gives away in charity on the full moon day 
of Karttika, pitchers filled with ghee and a 
brinjal of gold to a Brahmana, he achieves the 
place of Rudra. This is called Sivavrata. 


aude yortor Saas , 


WAT A ACTA Heal MEAT DA ASAT 3 

TMeigaraaeal Maat feraaayrat 

Seal Ut us Uf AragAS BATU I 

A person who does not make use of the 

flowers in autumn and the winter season, and on 
the full moon day of the month of Karttika, 
getting three gold flowers made as per his 
competence, offers to lord Siva in the evening 
for the pleasure of lord Kesava, with this 
intention, he achieves the highest position. This 
is called the Saumya-vrata. 


TIPS FAA AAV TET awa! 

TAA PRA CMTS ATH LG I 

aay fantayt wart raat 

Wile FaeHeT Maa CATH Fe I 

A person who starting from the third day of 

the month of Phalguna, discontinues the use of 
salt and upto the end of the rainy season, adores 
a Brahmana couple with household utensils, 
besides the bed, he resides in the abode of Gauri 
for a kalpa. This is called Saubhdgya-vrata. 

CATA Tt: Hea AAPA FARA! 

aaa freravet gana Paaaqi eet 

aad Ve als GrTahagesry 

UAT TA ATA UAE AH TN VC 1 


335 


A person who follows the rule of keeping 
silence during the evening and at the end of a 
year gives away in charity a pitcher filled with 
sugar, two cloths, seasamum, and a bell to a 
Brahmana, he, getting free from the cycle of 
birth and death, achieves the position of a 
Sarasvata. This vrata is called Sdrasavata, 
which bestows beauty, learnings and 
knowledge. 


CATT WATTS AAT: 

CAA SAH SMT AA AAT 29 I 

aq amd ué aia cettarsenral 

UAT ATAST UTA IAT 2 011 

A person who on the fifth day of a fortnight, 

remaining without food, adores Laksmi, and on 
the last day of the year, gives away in charity, a 
gold lotus with a cow, he achieves Visnuloka 
and in each and every future birth, he enjoys all 


the riches. This is called Sampadvrata, which 
destroys all the griefs and sufferings. 


PATA WATT: HAT A 

Maas VAM WeTeaATTN 21 
Wag BUA ARMA: fat Ta 
Uaad AT AAATANTARAN 2 


A person who after plastering the earth 
before the images of Kesava and Siva, gives 
away in charity a pitcher filled with water and a 
cow, he becomes a king for ten thousand years 
and after his death, he achieves the place of 
Siva. This is called the Ayuvrata, which fulfills 
all the desires. 


ae Wat TST Wor aa: | 
Vath A: HAaeaA IAAT 3M 
gat farted wet eran 

gat facora cercaaterael ova 
Unrated ATA WfetentferenemarT 2 XI 


A person, who for a year, remaining free 
from jealousy, taking food once in a day, 
keeping silence, adores the pipal tree, Ganga 


336 


and the sun, and at the end of the vrata gives 
away in charity to a Brahmana couple, three 
cows and a tree made of gold, he achieves the 
reward of performing the Asvamedha sacrifice. 
This is called Kirtivrata which bestows glory 
and fortunes. 


Wa A Halal Aaa TI 
STAT: agent: FT WUT 


AAMT TaN AAT Ta SATA 2 EM 


A person who making a diagram with cow 
dung, adores lord Siva or Kegava with ghee, 
offering flowers, unbroken rice etc. and at the 
end of the year gives away in charity the cow 
with sesamum, besides a lotus flower made of 
gold having the length of eight fingers, to a 
Brahmana well-versed in Sdmaveda, he 1s 
established in the abode of Siva. This is called 
Sdmavrata in the world. 


TART J HA HAUT VMfeHe:| 
WA MASSMA CMSA UHATTAT 2 91 
en fag a fama erat feraug aa 
HTS FRI: VATA: | 
Udahtad AM ART A AMSA c I 


A person who on the ninth day of the moon, 
taking food once in a day, feeding the girls as 
per his means, gives them in charity the seats 
and the bodices embroidered with gold wire, 
besides the sdris, and also gives away a lion 
made of gold to a Brahmana, he surely achieves 
the place of Siva. He achieves beauty for a 
hundred crores of years becoming invincible. 
This 1s called Viravrata and bestows comforts 
to the women. 


MAM Tae Faas wala: 

Ud AGH MT Tate: 112 21 
arate a fags eSATA 

UT Ala aera oes Faq ara 


Matsya Puranam 


SAT TAT: WAMATAA AS APTA ol 
AANeAa UTAH SENS AAT 

Gard Uf TaMeAaTAAA aA TN VI 
facrara fart a geletc wera 

HUT TOA ASAT TATE 


A person who lives on taking milk for a year 
on full moon days, and performs Sraddha at the 
end of the year, and gives away in charity the 
red garments, giving away in charity the 
milching cows with water vases, he achieves the 
place of Visnu, redeeming his manes for a 
hundred generations. Then after the lapse of a 


.kalpa, he becomes the king of kings on earth. 


This 1s called Pitr-vrata. A person who starting 
from the month of Caitra, gives in charity water 
without being asked for the same, and at the end 
of the vrata gives away in charity an earthen 
pitcher with cereals and cloth, a vase filled with 
sesamum seeds, besides the gold, he 1s 
established in the abode of Brahma. After the 
lapse of a kalpa, he surely becomes a king. This 
is called Ananda-vrata. 


Ganga But Feat Parat Fawr: | 

ad Wee Wargds feng 3 

fama Sarasa WA Ue Ait Wray 

Te Taft Heard seraahas BTN vit 

One who bathes the images of the lord with 

Pancadmrta. Then after a year the one who gives 
away in charity a cow with Pancdmrta, a cow 
and a conch to a Brahmana, he achieves the 


place of Siva and becomes a king on earth after 
a kalpa. This is called Dhrti-vrata. 


ata TAA Met AeA 
qegayT SAaSAMHeT HTT 
Seaaaayeh BETA TAAMATINS & UI 
A person who becoming vegetarian and 
leaving meat eating, and gives away a cow in 


charity at the end of a year together with a 
golden deer, he becomes entitled to the reward 


Chapter-101 


of Asvamedha sacrifice. He becomes a king at 
the end of a kalpa. This 1s called ahimsd-vrata. 


Tangara AM Hea sere 
TAA AMPA ATTA TA ATAU: | 


Gaeta aad Plaats BT TNI EN 


A person who in the month of Magha, 
taking bath in the early morning, feeds a 
Brahmana couple as per one’s means, adores 
the couple with flower garland, clothes and 
omaments, he remains in Saryaloka for a kalpa. 
This is called Surya-vrata. 


sTaTeeaqara Wea: SA AeaT: | 

fatty att cencniiteat met wae 

a dona ve ala faraatre WTNZ 01 

A person who starting from the month of 

Asadha has a lotus bath for four months 
continuously, and serves food to the Brahmanas 
and gives away in charity a Cow in the month 
of Ka§rttika’s full-moon day, he achieves 
Visnuloka. This 1s called Visnu-vrata which 
bestows welfare. 


WAT TagaeTA a 

qed YS Gea Aes FZ CI 
aren ferarad wesigaTa FAITTA 
Unasterad AM Pe aAHCTAS AN 81 


A person who discards the use of ghee and 
flowers from one half year to another half year, 
and at the end of the vrata gives away in 
charity, cow decorated with flower garlands, 
ghee and other eatables made of gnee and milk 
to a Brahmana, he achieves Sivaloka. This is 
called Sila-vrata, which bestows humility and 
body without ailments. 


TENA Tey AAT aot faawiae 
Gard aiftent SAH TARY ol 
aman a fase are a vafee 
MaMa Aas BATU vi 


A person who gives away in charity a lamp, 


337 


discards the use of oil or ghee and at the end of 
the year gives away to a Brahmana in charity a 
cakra, a trident, two pieces of cloth, besides the 
lamp, he becomes illustrious in this world and 
after his death, he achieves the place of Rudra. 
This 1s called Dipti-vrata. 


iMag MPA MAATAT A! 
Teh MCN MT TATU VI 
Tile Taenct Aa Tet wafesl 


Waggad ATT Wal BHeAVTATAH AIS 3 1 

A person who with the start of the month of 
Karttika, on the third moon day, consumes the 
stuff made of cow’s urine as well as barley, 
follows the Nakta-vrata and gives away in 
charity a cow at the end of the year, he lives in 
Gauriloka for a kalpa, and then becomes a king 
on earth. This is called Rudra-vrata which 
bestows welfare always. 


aMAAAMTA TA WANACIAA| 
Yin Weayat rat fawra facareah 
AUT USATG Seaais BAAN VI 
A person who discards the use of fragrant 
oils etc. in the month of Caitra, and at the end of 
the vrata, gives away in charity two pieces of 
white cloth and fragrant materials as per his 


means, he achieves the place of Varuna. This is 
called as Drdha-vrata. 


SMS YAU aetfarara TMAe: | 
wean fawyre act fear ws wate 
Une fetat AT aatecteat rE ALY & I 


One who discards the use of salt in the 
month of Vaisdkha, besides the flowers and 
gives away in charity a cow at the end of the 
vrata, he after living for a kalpa in the abode of 
Visnu becomes a king on earth. This is called 
Kantivrata. It bestows grace and glory. 

Tavs HSA Heat facrafyranay 
We fiewel wean aie AT BSAA GI 


338 


aaa farenued weraeafayant | 
wfdterreeed ferurem steratafaiy io 
quaste ced a Ut Fal arayaA 
Uagelad AMT Faroraearraqs ct 


A person who on an auspicious day, gives 
away in charity a globe made of three palas of 
gold and establishes it on his own rdasi and 
serves food to Brahmanas to their satisfaction, 
for three days; on fourth day he gives away in 
charity to a Brahmana couple, the flower 
garland, cloth, ornaments, adoring the couple 
appropriately, for the pleasure of the supreme 
soul, and then gives away the globe, he 
achieves the place of Brahman, getting relieved 
of the cycle of the birth and death. This is the 
Brahma-vrata which bestows salvation. 


BMA CEMA, MAHA TATA 
fat wataatersea aft we WaT 
eget AT PATA Age Ty 8 

We Wat aa Fara ast HITT! 

Utes ANTE THe 

Gal TRUE Ait House BAAN ol 

A person who consumes the milk and gives 

away in charity a two faced cow made of gold 
or a cow with a calf, he indeed achieves the 
highest position. This is called Dhenu-vrata a 
person who consuming milk for three days, 
gives away in charity a kalpavrksa made of a 


pala and keeping it over a heap of rice, he 
achieves Brahmapada. 


Taare Bt Carey fara weary 
a aang ue ala Haas BATTING I 
A person who remains without food for a 
month, gives away in charity a beautiful cow to 
a Brahmana, he goes to the place of Visnu. This 
is called Bhimavrata. 


CaMayaceea Nel Heat J AHSAN! 
fet waraafasgaetcs Teta 


Matsya Puranam 


MaMa Wh AAACUMAT TANG 2 
A person who performs Payavrata during 
the day, and then gives away in charity an 
image of earth in gold, he gets established in 
Rudraloka. This is called Dhard-vrata, who 
follows the donor for seven hundred kalpas. 


AMY WTasaaT Ua Teswal WaT 

TSaeTa aa Weta Asta 

Welad ae ATT UAT SHIA AINY 3 

A person who performs the Gudavrata on 

the third monday of the month of Caitra and 
gives away in charity the Gudadhenu, he gets 
established in the Gauriloka. This is the great 
vrata which bestows the supreme bliss. 


wararat a centers afar 
Tactanacta tararq ghey 
SA TA: NSM AS BAAN V1 


A person who remaining without food for a 
fortnight, gives away in charity two tawny 
coloured cows, he achieves Brahmaloka and 
after the lapse of a kalpa he becomes an 
emperor on earth. This is called Prabhdavrata. 


A AAG AMAA: | 
frac aeracd wide BTN I 


A person who takes food once in a day for a 
year, and at the end of the vrata gives away in 
charity a vase filled with water together with 
eatables, he remains in the abode of Siva for a 
kalpa. This 1s called Praptivrata. 


TAT MBA Weed I aye: 

Weat Ut aft Aaa ATG & 1 
A person, who on the eighth day of the 
moon, takes food only once in a month, and 
gives away in charity a cow at the end of the 


year, he achieves the abode of Indra. This 1s 
called Sugati-vrata. 


farrereel Ae aaa AEA 
West AAW Tal Tesi 


Chapter-101 


SAAT AMT WACTOPAATSTAL 9 It 


The one who starting from the rainy season, 
gives to the Brahmanas, the burning wood for 
four seasons, and also gives in charity ghee and 
a cow at the end of the vrata, he achieves the 
supreme Brahman. This is_ called the 
Vaisvdnara-vrata, which relieves one of all the 
Sins. 


Unerat BAI ah farracad 
ward aod Vn a fae: TeATeyaTd! 
UHM AT HUT THIATAATNY oH 


The one who on the eleventh day of the 
moon having food once at the night, getting a 
cakra made in gold, gives it away in charity, he 
achieves the place of Visnu, and after the lapse 
of a kalpa, he becomes a king on earth. This is 
called Arsna-vrata. 


Waa AAT F SEMgWTA WT 
Micah Sreatad BITTY 


A person, who consuming pdyasam as food, 
gives away in charity two cows to a Brahmana, 
after the lapse of two years, he achieves the 
abode of Laksmt. This is called Devi-vrata. 


TAT TCM AT TT Tare 
qatararenta MAAS BITTE 01 


The one who takes food only once in the 
night on the seventh day of the moon, and at the 
end of the year gives away in charity a milching 
cow, he achieves the abode of the sun. This is 
called Bhdnuvrata. 


STA AYMARA STATON 
ad Saas AMT foracteHHeMaT NG 2 

A person who taking food one on the fourth 
day of the moon, gives away in charity an 
elephant made in gold, he achieves the place of 
Siva. This is called Vindyaka-vrata, which 
bestows Sivaloka. 


Tenet Tera aaa PEs 
et Saiki SENTRA AAPATT 


339 


Uae Head AMT fawnyeiraHeTSAINS 21 


A person who in the Caturmdsd (four 
months of the rainy season) discards five 
important fruits and making the fruits of gold, 
gives them away in charity together with two 
cows, he surely achieves the place of Visnu. 
This is called Phala-vrata because it bestows 
the fruits. 


BATA AAA TAA SATS 
Ty f wfendl CATS AAS ASAT: | 
Une Wad AM WaeATHCAS ANE 311 
A person who fasting on the seventh day of 
the moon, at the end of the year, gives away in 
charity, as per his means, a gold lotus, food and 
cows with water pitchers, he achieves the abode 


of the sun. This is called Saura-vrata because it 
bestows the place of the sun. 


BIEN Faviate WATAaU wy 
Tamara Wrest AT: 
UT Wane famraatas BATE VI 


A person who fasting on the twelve 
Dvadasis (twelfth day of the moon), gives away 
in charity, as per his means, cows, costumes and 
gold, adoring the Brahmanas, he achieves the 
supreme position. This is called Visnu-vrata. 

Sldaat TFN Heal Ah WATT 
Vea Vanarena anaatas ya & 1 

A person who on the day of Karttika- 
Pairnima, performs the Nakta-vrata releasing a 
bull, he achieves Sivaloka. This is called Varsa- 


vrata. 
HOI WH: HAA Weed: Tay 
TAM VrAT AT WaTTATAS TANG G1 
ATeya J AHI ara MIA: | 
Va vanaratia Taraeafas TATE I 


A person who on the conclusion of the 
Krechra-cadndrdyana-vrata, giving away a cow 
in charity, feeds the Brahmanas as per his 


340 


means, he achieves the place of Siva. This is 
called Prajdpatya-vrata. A person who on the 
night of the fourth moon day, consumes food 
only once in a day and gives away in charity a 
cow at the end of the year, he achieves the place 
of Siva. This is called Tryartbaka-vrata. 


Aatalea zegrnest Rca 
GaAae Wedelentaneawayis <1 


A person who fasting for seven nights and 
gives away to the Brahmana, a pitcher filled 
with ghee, he achieves Brahmaloka. This 1s 
called Ghrta-vrata which bestows access to the 
abode of Brahma. 


SMITA ANY AMAT Wal 

Warlh Tafaatrgaaas BATTING 81 

SEPA Faraa J At ATs 

TH cat framafa yrrghtgeny 

Se UH Yat saraatae BAT ol 

A person, who sleeps in the open in the 

rainy season, and at the end of the vrata gives 
away a milching cow in charity at the end of the 
vrata, he resides in Indra’s place for all times to 
come. This 1s called Jndravrata. A person who 
on the third day of the moon, consumes the food 
cooked in fire and gives away in charity a cow 
at the end of the vrata, he achieves the abode of 
Siva, which is free from the cycle of birth and 
death. This is called Sreya-vrata which bestows 
delight to the people. 

o5 vergaeed TUT PaAT 

Sad HATTA: Tafel HeIM TAT 

Her UA: VeTsaAS BAA V1 


A person who by fasting completely, getting 
prepared a chariot in gold with two horses, and 
gives it in charity, he lives in the heaven for a 
hundred kalpas and at the end of that period he 
becomes an Emperor of the kings. This is the 
called Asva-vrata. 


TSM Se AVA Wayd A: 


Matsya Puranam 


Uae THY Hed AeA Yoh: 
WaSUaa Yea Aitaaas BATTING 


Similarly a person who getting a chariot 
yoked with two elephants, made in gold and 
gives it to a Brahmana, he resides in Satyaloka 
for a thousand years and thereafter he becomes 
a king one earth. This is called Karivrata. 


THe UIT Ta Met WaT 
FATAUIATNA Yaad VAAN 31k 


Similarly a person, who at the end of the 
year, discarding fasting, gives away a cow in 
charity, he becomes the lord of Yaksas. This 1s 
called Sukha-vrata. 


fate Great Het ATA War AMat Aa 
ATE HATA AUT AAAI I 


A person, who remains in water for the 
whole night and gives away a cow in charity tn 
the morning, he achieves the place of Varuna. 
This 1s called Varuna-vrata. 


AGM FT a: Hasta aca 
TAMAS Wi UTAH 4 Ut 


A person who, after performing the 
Candrdyana-vrata gives away in charity the 
moon of gold, he achieves Candraloka. This 1s 
called the Candravrata because by performing 
the same, a person achieves access to 
Candraloka. 


ih sem thnk ies 
MAE UTEval VAAAAS TAATNG I 


A person who on the eighth and the fourth 
lunar days of the month facing the five fires, 
gives away in charity a gold cow in the evening, 
he achieves the heaven. This 1s_ called 
Rudravrata. 


Gaara Hard Titra fear 
Aart ayet Alt Tartare 99 1 


A person who on the third day of the moon, 
fixes a canopy in a Siva temple and gives away 


Chapter-102 


a cow in charity at the end of the month, he 
achieves the place of Bhavani. This is called 
Bhavani-vrata. 


are Fpagaran: Tar AAA wel wag 
fafa aortas Te MM Wat TATNVCI 


A person who on the seventh day of the 
moon, remains clad in wet cloth and gives away 
a cow in charity in the morning, he spend a 
kalpa in the heaven and then becomes a king on 
earth. This 1s called Pavana-vrata. 


frraraifaa cer wey vat YT 
MINHA ATAAAAS BIATIN Vt 


A person who fasting for three nights, on the 
ful! moon day of the month of Phalguna, gives 
away in charity a beautiful house, he achieves 
the Stiryaloka. This vrata is known by the name 
of Dhaéma-vrata. 


freed Wea eaequardt fayact:| 
aa TE BM aeatraafesiic of 


A person, who fasting completely for the 
day (morning, noon and the evening) adores the 
Brahmana couples, he achieves much more of 
cereals (food) and cows, as compared with 
Indra-vrata and he achieves moksa as well. 


@ Telli. eile 4 | 


qral 

ward Awet ata fama feraaret 

HUT WAT: CAM AATAAS BATIIC el 

A person who on the bright second day of 

the moon, for the sake of the moon gives away 
in charity a vase filled with salt, to a Brahmana, 
and at the end of the year, gives away a cow in 
charity, he surely achieves Sivaloka and after 


spending a kalpa there, he becomes the 
emperor. This is called Somavrata. 


Waa Ward HiT: | 
ams aia Frags BAT VI 


A person who on the first moon day 
consumes food only once, and at the end of the 
year gives away in charity a tawny cow, he 


34] 


proceeds to the Vaisvanaraloka. This is called 
Siva-vrata. 

SMM AAT SATS: 

fever Aree pEMUSTeayaT 
Unleaded AA ASTANA 311 

A person who on the tenth day of the moon, 
consumes food only once, and at the end of the 
year, gives away ten cows in charity together 
with ten gold images of the ten directions, he 


becomes the lord of the globe. This is called the 
Visnu-vrata which destroys the grave sins. 


A: USePoparaa SaaS ATTA 
Tea Aste Meraterafaraqic vi 


A person who performs the Sasti-vrata of 
sixty days, reads it or recites it, he becomes the 
lord of Gandharvaloka for a hundred 


manvantras. 
asad ATE YUaAAY 
dated fasta 
ad cram agatranty 
frag frarseerteratetic 4 


Q Narada, this Sasti-vrata is extremely 
meritorious and is beneficial for all the living 
beings. I have explained the same to you. In 
case you are desirous of listening to something 
else, then I shall explain the same to you, 
because nothing is inexplicable to the near and 
dear ones. 


Sta street wergor afpadtercal 
ATMA AT ASAT: 1120 Vl 


KR 


CHAPTER 102 
Method of taking bath and the performing of 


farpana 
Afeaat sara 
ed wages far ar 7 fae 
TAA fag ees SATAY fever 811 


342 


WT HIagta Het: AA AAA 
ad a acwiisan Ferran wafad 
AA ANAT FTAA SATSTSN I 


Nandikesvara said—~ “OQ Narada, without 
taking the bath, the body cannot become clean 
nor does the mind get purified. Therefore for 
the purification of the mind, in all the Vratas 
provision for taking of the bath, has been made. 
One should take bath with the water drawn out 
of the well or the water from a tank or the river. 
A person well-versed with the mantras, should 
imagine the water of the sacred place in the 
water with which he 1s going to take bath. Om- 
namo-Ndrdyandya— this is called the mila 
mantra. 


euUTfored fataar Sard: Wad: Bra: 
Ue Ith ATTA AAA: | 


OT 1S I 


ie PJif. J Pi - 


A person should initially perform dcamana 
holding Kusd in hand. Then with a pure mind, 
controlling all the sense organs, one should 
draw a square diagram around himself and 
should imagine a sacred place therein. Then the 
Ganga should be invoked reciting the mantras. 


faent: Wenge aera faaeam 
TS AAA ATS ATT OTT S A 
fra: Hlensgalet a datat arqraate 
fefa qerafet a att a aba arafany i 


‘“O Goddess you have appeared from the 
feet of lord Visnu. You are called Vaisnavi and 
Visnu happens to be your lord. Therefore you 
protect us from the sins starting from the birth 
to death. O Daughter of Jahnu, Vayudeva has 
spoken of three and a half crores of sacred 
places in the heaven, earth and the space. All of 
them reside in you. 


APetieta Fart cay afertift ai 
aan eat a faam fayarasgar forariig i 


Matsya Puradnam 


faaratt Gaga dar fara 
aa a Weal da MT Mba I 


You are known as Nalini and Nandini 
among the gods. Besides these, you are also 
known by the names of Daksa, Prthvi, Vihaga, 
Visvakaya, | Amrta, Siva, Vidyadhari, 
Suprasanté, Visvaprasddini, Ksema, Jahnvi, 
Santa and Santipradayini. 

Unit WAM See Weare 
wacatatedt Ta Wet FITTS I 


At the time of taking the bath, these 
auspicious names should be recited and by 
doing so, the Ganga will be present there. 


THAIN HLASAT TT: | 

Yet Haloaet Patera saa 

ar Haber agers g faa ue 

Closing the hands, one should utter these 

names seven times. Thereafter one should 
sprinkle water over his head thrice, four, five or 
seven times. Thereafter the earth should be 
invoked appropriately and then applying the 
earth over the body one should take bath with 
water. 


waPAid ward faweard TAN 

fateh St A We Aaa St HFATINolI 

seagate STU FON Vdaleal 

afc Teena HIVAVATT AAT 

ee WA Malor Ae UG Wasa eM 

Oita fe 4: fe wate aa vias 

TH Uae WHAT TaN 2 

The mantra for invoking her is as follows— 

Q Earth, you are purified at the time of 
collecting of the fire, you are purified by the 
horse. You have been purified with the chariot 
of Siva, and with the foot of Visnu during his 
boar incarnation. All the riches are enshrined in 


your womb. Therefore whatever sins have been 
committed by me, you kindly wash them out. O 


Chapter-102 


Earth, Lord Visnu with a hundred hands, taking 
to the form of Varaha (boar) of dark 
complexion, had redeemed you from Patala. 
Again the sage Kasyapa, after invoking you 
gave you over to the Brahmanas. Therefore, you 
riding over my limbs remove all my sins. O 
Earth, all the articles of the world are enshrined 
in you. Therefore you grant us the progress. O 
Suvrata, you are the cause of the birth of all the 
living betngs. You are the form of Arani, 
salutation to you. 


Ud Maca Ad: Wrenn a aad: | 
SUS ATH Ws Wes FT Ua ah 
TAY TU Had AHSMAATT B23 i 
Thus applying the earth over the body, one 
Should take bath and thereafter, one should 
perform the dcamana appropmiately. Then 


getting out of the water, he should wear two 
pieces of clothes of white colour. 


Cay GAA ATT WRAL AAT: | 

HU: WN: YOY Aa Waar: GT v 

RATA. HATA TTA ATT OTIC 

FRAT S Bat: UY at TT AG I 

TTA aa Aete AAT 

HATA caveat Pal AP ware: VE 1 

TYATATUA RAM TATTATTET TAT 

GARY ACY TAA TATA: 1291 

afresrgfaa aig: tafgracn 

aa F GMa WEAAMSAT ANT ee | 

Thereafter for the satisfaction of the three 

worlds, one should perform oblation thus. Then 
he wearing the sacred thread, should initially 
perform oblation for Pitrs and should recite 
these mantras— the Gods, Yaksas, Nagas, 
Gandharvas, Apsaras, Demons, horrible 
serpents, Garuda and other birds, trees, jackals, 
other besides the creatures living on air, or the 


water, those which roam in the sky or without 
support, and the beings engaged in sin and 


343 


dharma, | am offering the water for the 

satisfaction of the same. Thereafter the 

yajnopavita should be worn like a garland. 

Thereafter he should aspire for performing of 

tarpana for the rsis, like Sanaka, Sanandana, 

Sanatana, Kapila, Asuri, Paficasikha, Vodhu, 

who should accept the water given by me. 
a 1 wae | 

Wadd Aas BU yy Aes a 
AI 


Thereafter, there is a provision for offering 
oblation of Marici, Atn, Angird, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Kratu, Praceté, Vasistha, Bhrgu and 
Narada, who happen to be Brahmarsis or 
Devarsis. Oblation should be offered to them 
with water. 


TTT Tt: Hea A AAT Yerer 
STATA ATT SAO A AATSTUT: 11.2 0 1 
Galert aera apa: WA: 

Thereafter placing the yajfiopavita over the 
right shoulder, and kneeling with the left knee, 
oblations should be offered to Agnisvata, 
Saumya, Hatvsman, Usmapa, Sukali, Barhisad, 
Ajyapa and other Pitrs. The water mixed with 
sandal paste, etc., should be offered to them. 


TTT: Fae rea Ufeteteenr at: 112 VN 
Tea GIT Fad URTH a 

AAA HIATT AAA AT 2A 
sigara asa aera weasel 

gaia fara faayert a AA: 
euaifored ferfert frqrraega: 1123 11 


Again, a person with wisdom, holding kusa 
in hand, oblation should be offered to the divine 
Pitrs, who happen to be fourteen in number. 
They are Yama, Dharmaraja, Mrtyu, Antaka, 
Vaivasvata, Kala, Sarvabhitaksaya, 
Audumbara, Danda, Nila, Paramesthi, 
Vrkodara, Citra and Citragupta. After offering 
these fourteen Pitrs, one should offer his 


elu Fata Pre EY. LIES." 


344 


salutation to them. 

faardrareiar aa araraerara 

Waal fae WaT SA WATSTATI IVI 
YSATA IAT AT ASAT BTA: | 


T GAAS AT ATTA TAT STTI FG I 


Thereafter reciting the names of his father 
and maternal grandfather, oblation should be 
offered to them with devotion, reciting the 
mantra— “Those who had been my relatives, 
during this birth, or those who had been born int 
he same family, or had been related to me in 
earlier births, or anyone else who would be 
expecting the water from me, let them all be 
completely satisfied. 


qagrena fafaareraaraad: | 
HAM: ATM: MA SUEPSAT 
Te SANTA TAT ARAAT ING I 
Tret faopears var fama 
ea Pest AAA Waa VI 


Thereafter performing the dcamana 
appropriately drawing a sketch of lotus on the 
ground, one should adore the sun appropriately, 
reciting the names of the sun at the same time. 
Then he should offer the water mixed with red 
sandal paste to the sun. He should then offer 
prayer to him thus— “O Siaryadeva, you are the 
form of Visnu, salutation to you. You are the 
face of Visnu, salutation to you. You have the 
thousand rays, you are the abode of all the 
lustres, I always offer my salutation to you. 


Tree fora WaT THEA TaaTT 
WAAAY TSA 2 CI 


WI THIS HUSA TT 
TM Tseng Ts faa? 8 11 


O Lord of all, you are adorned with the 
divine sandal paste. You are the form of Rudra 
Siva. You bestow welfare on all the living 
beings and have the fatherly affection for them. 
Salutation to you again and again. O 


Matsya Puranam 


Padmasana, you are always decorated with 
kundalas and the armlets. Salutation to you. 
You are the lord of all the lokas. You are 
responsible for awakening the entire universe, 
salutation to you. 


Tat ged da ad uyata wat 
IS AURIS WHS AT ATRATIN Of 
PATH TURASEY WATT ARIST 7 
Ud Wa eel fa:-qHrava walerory 
feat Th SISA WET aat fawopyS TAT I 
QO Satyadeva, you move everywhere. You 
are the witness of the good or bad deeds of all 
the living beings. Salutation to you. O 
Bhaskara, be pleased with me. O Divakara 
salutation to you.” Thus after offering prayer to 
the sun, circumambulating thrice, one should 
offer his salutation to the sun. Thereafter, 
touching the Brahmana, cow and the gold, one 
should go to his abode. 
ofa sitet wergarat Hrafaterara 
PUTA ATASEATT: RO QU 


kk 


CHAPTER 103 


Anxiety of Yudhisthira, his meeting with the 
sage Markandeya 


Mt FT Fal Fa WAT PTE 
Valea WH Halal FAT 
WIM ATTA TA: WA: 

AA TAA WAT Wee eT ara: 113 1 
TA VAS GEM: Va a Pt Tat: 
aged UUrer er Hae WOSAT: 11 


Nandikesvara said— “O Narada, hereafter, | 
am going to narrate the glory of Prayaga, which 


Chapter-103 


in earlier times was narrated by Maharsi 
Markandeya to Yudhisthira the son of Pandu. 
After the end of the Mahdbhdrata_ war, 
Yudhisthira— the son of Kunti became the king, 
in the mean time Yudhisthira, feeling grieved of 
the death of his brothers, repeatedly lamented 
about them— “‘Alas! The king Duryodhana, who 
had at his command eleven aksauni-army, who 
put all of us variously in precarious situations, 
has gone to the jaws of death with all his 
associates. Taking refuge in Vasudeva, only 
five Pardavas have escaped death. 


Sa Wey wT i a aol wa Aeraca 
Soe I Ua YAMS Aa aA I 
tart fea: ae & art waa: 

fe at we Mifaes fe anteitads amg tt 


O Govinda, we have the great warriors like 
Bhisma, Drona, immensely valorous Karna, 
besides Duryodhana with his sons and brothers, 
have been killed by other valorous kings. Under 
these circumstances, what have we to do with 
the kingdom. Now what is the use of pleasure 
and the life? 


faa apinfa dias te aRerTTT: 
fates Frecae: fafatterera: 191 
Alas! what a disgrace, we have been placed 
in a precarious condition.” Thus thinking 
Yudhisthira was upset. He became motionless 


and was devoid of enthusiasm. He kept on 
sitting there lowering his head for sometime. 


ae Tel tat fa A YA: TA: 
aa fara at Fae aera ai 
ae VTA Hererdcafatearard 

aa fara aa arta fame aaT TA 8 I 


Then the king Yudhisthira after regaining 
consciousness, started thinking thus. “what 1s 
the type of repentance, vrata or the holy place 
serving which, I could atonce be relieved of the 


345 


grave sin or which is the place visiting which a 
person could achieve the best of Visnuloka. 
aa yeaa a aw ae anftais eae 
SAS GA Yeas TAT YAM SAA Voll 
For this purpose, I should consult Krsna, 
because it is he who has made me to move in 
this way. I cannot enquire of Dhrtaradstra— the 


grand-sire, because a hundred of his sons have 
been killed already.” 


Ud aareaneal THT SaST: | 
SCA MUSA: TA MIM HATTA: ai 


Thus thinking Dharmaraja Yudhisthira was 


upset completely. All the frve Pandavas started 
crying at the grief of their brother. 


YW aa UI: Wad: Wosar: War: 
Gail FT goat da Ya Aa AAA: | 
quit Fata: Aa Boa WHAT LVM 
All the noble people, who had arrived there 
to meet Yudhisthira including Kunti, Draupadi 


and others surrounded Yudhisthira while crying 
and fell on the ground. 


ARTO ATHUSALT Ara AAG: | 
TM ASTANA WAAR S:FaA U3 
At that point of time the sage Markandeya 


was stationed at Varanasi. He came to know, 
the way Yudhisthira was upset and crying. 


fava Areva WHVSAT WeTAUT: | 
GOMTAT SUeAA YE TAS DATA Vv 


Then Markandeya the great sage reached 
Hastinapura rapidly and stood at the royal 
entrance. 


SRUreiste ¢ et Ua: afarary FI 
cat SHIM UrehUSl ate feeaerat APA: 
rafal TATA AAMT: TTT Va I 


On his arrival, the gate-keeper atonce went 
to the king and informed him—- “Markandeya— 
the great sage 1s waiting at the gate to meet 


346 


you.” On hearing this Yudhisthira at once 
reached the gate. 


qafet sara 

aM F AAMT Tara A TENA 

TI A Aho TA a A AA HoT VE 11 
aa Y faarySTeaa eB Aare 

ME Uteeshar AraaM WE SHAAN VM 


Yudhisthira said— “O Excellent one, You are 
welcome here. O Great sage, you are welcome. 
O Great sage, By meeting you my life has met 
with success. Today my entire race has been 
redeemed. My manes have been pleased today. 
By having an audience with you my body has 
been purified.” 


Area sara 
Faerat VATA Urayiberretatetsy: 
qfatet vera a yoraTara a ATTN cll 
Nandikesvara said— “O Narada, thereafter, 
Yudhisthira— the great, made the sage 


Markandeya to occupy a lion-throne. Then he 
washed his feet and adored him appropriately. 


aa: WAR Mus: Ofte ¢ FUT 
sree aha waar Ved aM 
at at faaeratya: ar aver a feaafrerqn 2e 
Having been satisfied with the adoration, 
Markandeya— the great sage, asked the king 
Yudhisthira, “Why are you crying, O Great 
King? Who has made you upset? Which one of 
the obstruction is causing pain to you? What 


type of misfortune has befallen on you? You 
speak out to me atonce.” 


Tater sara 
Tas de Teg TTT TEN 
ware faferat q faRTAMTUMTA RON 
Yudhisthira said~ “O Great sage, I feel 


anxious for the way we have conducted 
ourselves, for the gaining of the kingdom. 


Matsya Puranam 


WUSs SAI 

TO] Ta HATS ATH TAT TAT 

tat SE TOY UM BeTATATRT a1 2 Ut 
fae GAT Trertior arta fergrert: 

Tea Sa Hea TAMCATG F fata 2 2M 
aa Bfafett Tea worn fercar BATT 
Wes faa: AATAHATTATI 2 3 At 


Markandeya said— “O Immensely valorous 
one, you better listen to the duties of the 
ksatriyas. According to the same, while fighting 
in the battlefield, no sin has been prescribed for 
an intelligent person. Then according to the 
Rdjadharma and especially for the ksatriyas 
fighting in the battle-field, there is no question 
of committing of a sin. Thus thinking in your 
mind, relieve yourself of the feeling of having 
committed a sin in the battlefield.” Thereafter 
the king Yudhisthira bowed in reverence to the 
sage Markandeya and then questioned him quite 
humbly about the means to get himself relieved 
of the sins so earned. 


Gast sara 
Tea wat Mae Fret Aerator 
aay a UAT Bt eae fateaara 2x1 
Yudhisthira asked— “O Intelligent one, you 
are always omniscient, therefore I am asking 
you. You kindly tell me in brief such of the 


means, following which, I could be relieved of 
the sins.” 


WdhvSy Jara 
TU] UATe ae MATA 
WATT AS AUT TORAH 24 I 
Markandeya said— O Warrior with great 
arms, O King, you please listen, for the sinless 
people, a pilgrimage to Prayaga, relieves them 
of all the sins. 


Sta stared Wergerel warrarereet 
SUA ITAT AAT: 11 20 3 11 


Chapter-104 


CHAPTER 104 


The glory of Prayaga and description of 
various sacred places 
qarat Jara 
WTA TUT et Ba TTA 
TAO SATS Tararafrd FA VN 
SA TAT WT ALOT aA HSI 
Fat al Meteta Sart aa fH HTN I 
Yudhisthira said— “O Fortunate sage, in the 
ancient kalpa, what was the position of 
Prayaga-ksetra, and the way Brahma the best of 
gods, had described about it, [ would like to 
listen to the same. O Sage, how should the 
pilgrimage of Prayaga be performed? What is 
the method for the sages to conduct themselves 


there? What type of position is achieved by a 
person meeting with his death there? 


Y aaha wart ¢ gfe aat a fH wer 
Ur wanes wt algect fe WUBI 


What type of merit is achieved by taking a 
bath there. The people who always live in 
Prayaga, what type of reward is received by 
them. You kindly explain the whole of it to me, 
because | am anxious to learn about the same. 


Wass Sava 
Say A act Tease aT AeA 
ae fe Aafawon Haart WaT HAAN YU 


aT WAMTMABTATAT WUT AHSaTA 
HATA AM AMT SEAR: | 
Vaart: at Fy ctey fare 4 
Markandeya said— “Whatever are the sacred 
places in Prayaga and the type of reward are 
achieved by visiting those places, I have heard 
about the same from the sages and _ the 
Brahmanas. I am going to speak out the same. 
The region at Prayaga from Pratisthanapura to 
the region of Vasuki which is inhabited by the 


347 


serpents like Kambala, Asvatara, Bahumilaka, 
is known as the Prajapati-ksetra. 


aa taal fea ara Ft garasqaar: | 
TA TENA Sat att Haha ARATE I 
By taking a bath there, people, achieve the 
heaven. Those who meet with their death there 
they are never reborn. The gods like Brahma 


and others protect the people who live there, 
collectively. 


wt WU agaeM: AaAITTET: WaT: 

1 We: fae Weragatgraeha 
AAU WaT WaT FT HAT 9 
Seat: Asatte ast Talat VTAaNT! 
aaa tata al Alaal VAaEA MUCH 


O King, besides this, there are several sacred 
places, which are auspicious and remove all the 
sins of the people, which cannot be described 
even in hundreds of years. Therefore I am going 
to describe Praydga in brief. Sixty thousand 
armed warriors protect the Ganga here. The sun 
mounted over a chariot driven by seven horses, 
looks after the river Yamuna. 


wart g fagraut wer wat araa: 
Tose wate eftdad: We ASAIN 
Indra particularly is engaged in_ the 
protection of Prayaga. Accompanied with other 


gods, Sri Hari, protects the entire region of 
Prayaga. 


ad ae wether Wet Weraoew: | 

TH what & tat: AAT PATI Qo 
IdUTGa Meh Ta Teall ATE 
TIT WT at J Tarai 

TAM CAAT AAA MAAN 21 
Soe TeeaT Aaa aTe TT 
Ura SAG AL: WATT AMI 22 


Lord Mahesvara, holding a trident in his 
hand, always guards the banyan tree. The gods 


348 


remain engaged in the protection of the 
auspicious place, therefore, a person having 
been overpowered with sins fails to enter the 
region of Prayaga. In case one has the smallest 
of the sin or even smaller than that, it vanishes 
merely with the reciting of the name of Prayaga, 
because it has been prescribed that with the 
mere look at Prayaga or by reciting its name, or 
with the touch of its dust, a person is relieved of 
his sins. 


Wa HVS Wary Tat Tel FT TEAM 
VATE MAG FT UT Ava TATU 231 
O Indra among the kings, there are five 
kundas (Enclosed space for the sacrificial fire) 
in the Prayaga region, through which flows the 
Ganga. Therefore the sins of a person are 
washed out with the mere entry of a person in 
Prayaga. 
AMAT TEAT WET: TACOTAT: | 
ST SHAH T AA UAT ATTN Vwi 
ahiarpead UeeSRT Ag Uvate 
HAT A Ua T TATA HeTAI V4 
Irrespective of one’s being a grave sinner, in 
case he remembers Ganga thousands of yojanas 
away, he attains the highest position. With the 
mere mention of the name of the Ganga, one is 
relieved of all the sins. By having a look at the 
Ganga, one comes across many auspicious 
occasions in the life. By having a bath in the 


Ganga, one redeems and purifies his seven 
generations. 


uearal franiat afearat ater: | 
SOTA TAM WareUTf|d Wl VEU 
TgrayTate Ea Tort fester 
Ta Fae ATH 29 11 
aa TAT WAPT | Aacarherearay 
gerd aed faqeaty we 
STATA ATTA SATA RC I 
TUTET Ye Set fay eiteay forge 


Matsya Puranam 


SATA Te BTA Aa TT 
aa Ufatedt Fret Marea TBAT Vet 


A truthful person, being free of anger, 
follower of ahimsd (non-violence), religious 
minded, well-versed in tattvas, always engaged 
in the welfare of the Brahmanas, when takes 
bath at the confluence of the Ganga and 
Yamuna, he gets relieved of all the sins and the 
one who mentally thinks of the same, the 
maximum of his desires are fulfilled. Therefore 
by visiting the Prayaga ksetra which is guarded 
by all the gods, following Brahmacarya the one 
should live there for a month, offering oblation 
to the Pitrs, while staying there, wherever a 
person goes, he gets the desired things. The 
auspicious Yamuna-— the daughter of Sirya and 
well known in the three worlds has arrived there 
in the form of a river. Lord Siva, always resides 
there. 


Sorel Ue: Ys wart | Afarez 
eaeMareaal waa: FARA: | 
AgUyy4 TTS ANAT AT AAI 2 0 UI 
Therefore, O Yudhisthira, the auspicious 
Prayaga is inaccessible for the human beings. O 
Indra among the kings, with the mere touch of 
the water of the Ganga, the gods, demons, 


Gandharvas, rsis, siddhas, cdranas and others 
reach the heaven. 


Sta STA WENT WaTTaTeT 
ATTA MATA SATA: Hl Qo XU 


KKK 


CHAPTER 105 


Position of those who die at Prayaga and the 
importance of giving a cow in charity 


WreuSa sara 
TU UTI Hee YAS TT 
TAHA TAMU Fert AA APA: 


Markandeya said— “O King, you again listen 
to the glory of Prayaga, listening to which all 


Chapter-105 


the sins are washed out, there is no doubt about 
it. 
ard fe afta Fister 
WMH TAT FT ART FT HATA 2 
For the people suffering variously, the poor 
and for the welfare of those engaged in various 


types of trades, the region of Prayaga 1s said to 
be the best. This fact should not be revealed to 


anyone. 
aaa afe at sat Tat ata werat: 
TARA ag MTAHT 3 


It is said by the best of the Rsis that when an 
ailing person, a miserable one or the one having 
been overpowered by old age, ends his life at 
the confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna, he 
mounting over the glittering planes having the 
lustre of the sun, reach the heaven and enjoys 
all the pleasures with the Gandharvas and 
apsards in the heaven. While living there he 
achieves all his desires. This 1s the statement of 
the great rsis. 


TA TTA CATT ATT HC 
AUST ST MTT 1 
Tiarefarrata: waa: wieraere 
Waa Bd WA Taal Wea & Ih 


There in the heaven, he boarding the divine 
plane studded with gems, having flag of 
different colours, crowded by the apsards, 
having auspicious symbols, enjoys all the 
pleasures and is woken up from sleep with the 
playing of the auspicious and sweet music. Thus 
he remains in the heaven till he remembers his 
earlier birth. 


ad: Tameahye: ettoraat Peasy: | 
eral age Wad Hel 


349 


dca WA Ae BRUT TTA ll 


Thereafter with the decline of his merits, he 
falls from the heaven. Thus having been 
relieved of the heaven, the jiva, is born in a 
prosperous race possessing enough of gold and 
gems. In due course of time he is reminded of 
the same birth as a result of which has again to 
travel to the Prayaga region. 


core afe anus facreatsaan Wel 
TART BATTS TA aay WOTHAR ATA 
TAHA acted AAT SAT: NS 


The excellent sages say, that irrespective of 
a person being in the foreign land or in his own 
country, in the house or in the forest, incase he 
remembers Prayaga, while meeting his end, he 
surely achieves Brahmaloka. 


Waa he Fal Wet aa feroran 
Baa Waa: agra wh A Wesan ei 


“He proceeds to such a region, where the 
land is of gold, where the trees yield fruits as 
per the desires of the people, and which 
happens to be the dwelling place of the rsis, 
sages and the Siddhas. 

Aaa TA Talfaa’S WN 
Tat AAT: We Ths BAUM on 

He, with the influence of the deeds 
performed by him during this birth, enjoys all 
the pleasures over the bank of the Mandakini 
river getting associated with thousands of 
damsels. 


fagarorrard: yeaa feta tact: 

Ta: TAME Tragroafataqi 220 
ad: WI aur fasta: Wt UT 
TOA A Was A AMAT VV 


He, in the heaven is adored by the gods, 
Siddhas, Cadranas and Gandharvas. Then at the 
decline of his merits, falling from the heaven, 
he becomes the lord of Jambidvipa on earth. 


350 


During this birth he is reminded again and again 
of his auspicious deeds, as a result of which he 
surely becomes meritorious and possesses all 
the riches. Such a person follows the truthful 
dharma with his action, thought and behaviour. 


HAUT AAA APA THAI: | 
TST Aa A TET TT ATTA 23 1 


A person who gives away a cow in charity, 
while performing the welfare ceremonies, at the 
confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna, or does 
something for the pleasure of the Pitrs or after 
the adoration of the god, he remains in the 
heaven for the number of years, comparable 
with the hair on the body of the cow. 


Fauraforyey aarT SA 
Taare figard at gaanaasty an 


Aho TAT AA AMA TTA Vv It 
ud ale 3 y@arequarsraddy a 
Fftg a Bay MAA AaehaT G I 


In case a person receive a cow in charity, 
receives gold, gems, beads, or any other 
materials, as charity, then till such time the 
relevant riches remain with him, his firtha upto 
that time becomes infructuous. In this way it 
would not be appropriate for a pilgrim to accept 
charities in the place of pilgrimage, the 
auspicious temple of a god, or one auspicious 
occasions. A Brahmana in this connection 
should remain especially alert. 


Hie Wea Ae IT Waal 
wqubygt thera araetey Taree 86 I 
WA SS Bat Trefaca senferen 
Yea Vt THs ATITPTTTN BOM 

Ot WAS Wee TETAS 
area a Teter tas fataenta a ec 


A person who at Prayaga intends to donates 
a tawny coloured milching cow, with the horns 
covered with gold and hoofs covered with silver 
sheets, with a milking pot of bronze, at the 


Matsya Puranam 


confluence of Ganga and Yamuna, then such a 
cow should be given to such a Brahmana, who 
should be srotriya, having noble temperament, 
wearing white costumes, peaceful, religious 
minded and is well-versed in all the Vedas. The 
precious costumes, several types of gems and 
diamonds should also be given with the cow. 


MAST AAT AM: AT TAT ATA 
MACUASATT Tatettes AeTaAAI V3 


O Best of the kings, one remains lodged in 
the heaven for the number of years, equivalent 
to the hair on the body of the cow. 


Taal MMA AAT AT heres 
To Upafe fat Ash aA BATT 

SH A SMT Wad HTATATH 2 0 I 
Ta MaaeaeM Tea TAS 
TAPS FAA TAT MT ATA 2 2 


Thereafter, wherever, he is born, the cow 1s 
also born with him. With the influence of the 
auspicious deed, a person does not have even to 
look at the hell. On the contrary he enjoys all 
the pleasures in the Uttarakuru country. The 
giving of a milch cow is far better than the 
giving away of the lakhs of cows because such 
a cow redeems, the sons, women and even the 
servants. 


Temeady aay was g fates 

any fary art Tera aaTA 

Tita wi Hed Tee FETA 2 A 

This is the reason, that of ail the charities, 

the giving away in charity of a cow, has the 
special significance. It is the cow alone, which 
can protect a person, at the inaccessible places, 
in terrific situations, or at the time of the 
committing of a grave sin. Therefore a person 


should give away in charity a cow to the best of 
Brahmana. 


Sta STA Mera WarTaTeTaz 
USAT SEATAT: I 20 & I 


Chapter-106 


CHAPTER 106 


Glory of Prayaga and description of various 
auspicious places 


Taet Save 
FMAM WANT Urea He AM 
TAA WAS HATO APTA: 
was faferat wet edad: 
want at fata: wrneat gfe Fert 21 


Yudhisthira said— “With the narration of the 
glory of Prayaga, I am getting relieved, 
gradually of my sins. O Great sage, how should 
a person having deep faith in dharma go on 
pilgrimage to Prayaga. You kindly speak out the 
method prescribed in the scriptures for the 
purpose.” 


WhUSa Jara 
SATAN a Wereearata eee 
seu faeAy BASE AAMT TN 3 1 


Markandeya said— “O King, I am speaking 
out the method of visiting Prayaga, as has been 
seen or heard by me about visiting Prayaga- 
tirtha. 


WAMTAATA A; Wafer AL: Fara 
TUACAATRS: YO] TLAT TAHT v1 


A person from whichever place proceeds on 
pilgrimage, riding over a bull, you listen the 
merit that 1s received by him for the purpose. 

WH AAA AN Tat carer fF aroun 
Ulett Ta Vera Tracers CG I 
OT TARA ATT TTT 
TNT TM Aa oT fay area & it 

Such a person is the destroyer of the bred of 
cows and as such the Pitrs do not accept the 
oblation of water, offered by such a person. 
Because the anger of the cows is quite terrific. 
A person who appropriately makes his sons and 


grandsons to take bath at Prayaga, consumes the 
water of the Ganga, and gives away the 


351 


charities to the Brahmanas like himself, he 
enjoys the merits of visiting the sacred place. 


UAANTASTET TSE AY AT: 
Pepe cea ate we faasstaqi 9 


A person for the sake of greed, or out of 
delusion, sitting over vehicle takes to 
pilgrimage in Prayaga, for him that pilgrimage 
is destroyed or becomes infructuous. Therefore 
the use of the vehicle should be discarded. 


TSA AE HA Wereala 
amdura faa aanfaraaeraqii ci 
TO Uvala fat As aA SOM 
SAT HOTA Wet HAA! 
WARN wud ara STATA eI 


A person who donates a daughter as 
prescribed in the scriptures or by the Reis, 
according to his own means, he does not have 
to face the hell because of the merit of the same. 
On the other hand, he reaching the country of 
Uttarakuru, enjoys all the pleasures for all times 
to come. Besides this, he also achieves the 
religious minded sons and besides a beautiful 
wife. 


a GH Varied Gaara 

a delet da Gad AT Aya: 

eat fret Way WaaMAAAAT! Yo I 

Therefore, O Lord of kings! one should give 

away the charities in Prayaga according to one’s 
own means and by doing so, the merit of the 
visit to the sacred place is increased. The donor 
lives in the heaven upto the time of dissolution. 

qe ANA BY wWontagata 

Tea Vee A Weal VI 


A person, who meets with his death under 
the Aksaya-vata at Prayaga, he discarding all 
the auspicious lokas reaches the abode of 
Rudra. 


aa A Beer STAT: | 
facet wears aeqet A TAA VI 


352 


At the time of dissolution twelve Adityas 
taking refuge in Rudra, start issuing lustre, they 
all reduce the entire universe to ashes. But they 
are unable to cause any harm to Aksayavata. 


AWaSayas Fer des 
wad aa a fame: GA: TA V3 
When at the time of dissolution, the sun, 
moon and all the fourteen Bhuvanas, get 
destroyed, and the entire universe is drowned in 
water, at that time also lord Visnu, remains 


present at Praydga, keeps on performing the 
yajna again and again. 
edeMaadal waa: Fagan: | 
Tel Vata Aalst WATASAT evil 
All the gods, Gandharvas, Rsis, Siddhas and 


caranas, always serve at the confluence of the 
Ganga and Yamuna. 


aat Teast THR WAP Wea Ae 

TA TaNeat sar wT: FAUNTOT 1 Gt 

HUTA ATT PUA HATA: | 

CAHATA STATS TTA: 1 2G I 

MSTA TM TAA: Te 

TM AMT: BUOY Fg aT A Yo 

arn: Alea: Ser AMT faeearcey a 

Bf WTATATEN WTOP AT BCI 

Tea YSN TT BIT 

TAM Tega fay ercny fasyarr 

TA: YUMA Aer FAY StH ATU VV 

Therefore, O Indra among the kings! the 

place where reciting the praise of Prayaga, the 
gods like Brahma and others, Rsis, siddhas, 
cdranas, Lokapalas, Sadhyaganas, the manes, 
Sanatkumaras and other Rygis, like Angira, 
Maharsis and other Brahmarsis, Nagas, Garuda 
and other birds, siddhas, the creatures flying in 
the sky, the oceans, rivers, mountains, serpents, 


vidyadharas and Sri Hari with Branma, always 
reside here, therefore one should always visit 


Matsya Puranam 


Prayaga. O Bharata, Prayaga is quite famous in 
the three lokas. Therefore, there is no other 
merit bigger than visiting Prayaga in the three 
worlds. 


TAM TS aera AAS TATE 

SAAIAATEIG AL: UTA ASAT 2 0M 

aaa A: Hal WEY viladad:| 

Ted HAST TTA AAT: 11 2 Ut 

With the mere uttering of the name of 

Prayaga, by reciting its name, or with the mere 
touch of its dust, a person is relieved of all his 
sins. A person performing the vratas, where has 
a dip in the confluence, he earns the merits of 


performing the Rdjastiya or Asvamedha 
sacrifices. 


4 CaaaA At A HATA TT 
AftrecHauean J WAMTTAT WHT 2 eH 


O Dear one, therefore, neither because of 
any prescription of the Vedas, nor because of 
the pressure from the people, you should not 
change your ideas about the death in Prayaga. 


aM didaganitr ats areaeara: | 
At ARATAT AAT HSTSA 231 


The ten thousand prominent sacred places 
on earth, dwell in Prayaga alone, O Son of the 
Kuru dynasty. 


A MATT ATT TAT: 
Ol MARAT: OT TETAS AI 2 


A person who meets with his death at the 
confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna, he 
achieves beautitude as is achieved by a truthful 
person well-versed in yoga. 


10 Saha atasfere aa arate 
J Wart FT MMTaT ay Sty SPAT V4 I 
O Yudhisthira, the persons who have not 
made a pilgrimage to Praydga, they seem to 


have been cheated in the three worlds and their 
life in this world is of no consequence. 


Chapter-106 


Ud SBI FT ad a Want UTA Ter 
Tad AAU Pps SA TYTN VEIN 
Thus by having a look at this firtha 
resembling the final emancipation, a person 1s 
relieved of all the sins in the same way as the 
moon is redeemed after the eclipse. 


SATA At faye AAT 
TA GAT B Wea TF AAT: MEAT VI 


The two serpents known by the name of 
Kambala and Asvatara, live on the eastern bank 
of Yamuna. Therefore, a person, by taking a 
bath there is relieved of all the sins. 


aa Weal TAI Tareas farsa 
TAMA TA SM VAY SMTA BSI 
By making a pilgrimage to the place of 
Mahadeva at Prayadga, a person redeems his ten 
past and ten future generations. 


PAI FAL: MIATA AT 
CAV CATAAATN AAS AAATATT I 2 8 


yaury q WeTateay cy ATTA 
au da q AGS Maer a fagqaq3 ol 
A person who takes a bath there, he enjoys 

the merit for performing an Asvamedha 
sacrifice and he lives in the heaven till the time 
of dissolution. O Bharata, on the eastern Bank 
of the Ganga, there is an oceanic well which is 
well known in the three worlds, besides 
Pratisthanapura (Jhansi). 


Tara frawtarara ate frst 
AAU SAT BSAA AAT 3 VN 


In case a person spends three nights there, 
performing Brahmacarya controlling all the 
senses, his soul is freed from all the sins, and he 
gets purified and attains the reward for the 
performing of the Asvamedha sacrifice. 


SRO WSEAS Wale: 
SAMI ATT At AeA 3 2 


353 


SIA Aa FAA AA 
Way Tas Aa aT WetaT 3 31 


© Bharata, on the eastern bank of 
Bhagirathi, to the north of Pratisthanapura 
(Jhansi), there 1s a sacred place known by the 
name of Hansaprapatana, well known in the 
three worlds. By merely taking a bath there, one 
achieves the merit of performing _ the 
Asvamedha sacrifice and the person concerned 
is established in the heaven, till the sun and the 
moon last. 


sae yo fayer FAUTgt 
Ulcer A: WUT SOT AAT HOTA 3 VI 
Similarly a person who ends his life at 
Urvasiramana or Hansapandura— the auspicious 


places, you listen about the merits earned by 
him. 

afraraean afseaagrat a 

Berd fast: are carters Tafa 34 1 

Tat FT Vel Up Kes ATTA 

Gerd Vad Tr afar 3G 

He 1s served with the Pitrs for sixty six 

thousand years and in the heaven, he always 
looks at Urvasi. O Son, at the same time, the 


sage Yudhisthira, Gandharvas and Kuinnaras, 
adore him. 


ad: TAMUB: atorant Pease: | 
TAM ASMA FT HAA AAT PAT FVII 
Tel AeA AgAT UTA 
STATA Ub Matt APT: 3 C1 
After the decline of his merits, he becomes 
the ruler of ten thousand villages. He remaining 
with thousands of damsels, serves as a husband 


to them. A hundred daughters resembling 
Urvasi are born to them. 


HBA FAISA wig eat 
TRA F AQT TAT F138 


=a VW Ww w =< 


354 


He is woken up with gingling sound of the 


anklets and waistbands. Thus enjoying 
enormous pleasures, he again makes a 
pilgrimage to Prayaga. 


yecraen fet faa: Pearse: 
Us alet d WATS afaaferaq x ol 


A person who lives at Prayaga, clad in white 
costumes, controlling all the senses 
following all the rules, consuming food once in 
a day, he becomes a king in many births. 


aera | ATT AAT PTA 

yreararagarar Terqfrafaiadi ¥ en 

ATA Sta att FreTT: | 

qe 7 faqeTsiients oad FAS 

He becomes an emperor of the land upto the 

ocean. He achieves hundreds of damsels 
decorated with gold omaments. Then he 
achieving all the riches and cereals, performs 
charities daily. Thus enjoying all the worldly 


pleasures for long, he again makes a pilgrimage 
to Prayaga. 


ay Wala TA Tera fara: 
STATA Va: WA Tele AATCTATTH 3 
Thereafter he remaining without food, 


observing Brahmacarya, performs sandhyd. 
Ultimately he attains the region of Brahma. 


altel MATA TET HOTTA eT 
HUCAUACATOT Latch ASAI YI 


One who meets the end of his life at Kot- 
tirtha he remains in the heaven for thousands of 
crores of years. 


aa: Tanieafwae:; eitureant frags: | 
avnforgmedaHet AAT WIA Yk I 


After the decline of the’merits, he falls from 
the heaven and then taking to a beautiful form, 
adomed with gold ornaments studded with 
gems, 1s reborn in a high family. 


and 


Matsya Puranam 


at AMAA WaT AHA TI 
apart ATT ae AaTIT AAT ve I 


Thereafter, to the north of Vadsukihrada, and 
to the north of Bhogavati-tirtha, he comes 
across another firtha of the name of 
Dasasvamedha. 


PUMA A AIsTvIe MNT 
STEN BUA SAT STA aha aA: i viol 


A person who takes his bath there, he earns 
the merit of performing the Asvamedha 
sacrifice. He possessing all the riches and 
beauty, becomes a donor, clever and a religious 
minded one. 


MEA F A Tal WHAT AHA ¥ I 


The merit one earns with the study of all the 
Vedas, as well as with the speaking of the truth, 
and the following of the ahimsd-vrata, all the 
said reward is achieved with the merit of 
making a pilgrimage to Prayaga. 


HEAATA WET AA GATT 
HAAN Aa CAAT ASA S SN 


Wherever a person takes a bath in the 
Ganga, the Ganga there yields reward like 
Kuruksetra. But when it is associated with the 
Vindhya mountain, the Ganga them bestows 
merit ten times greater than Kuruksetra. 


Ta Tet WME Tedta TIAA 
fasad fe aga ae aral faery ol 
The most auspicious and meritorious Ganga 
flows through the several sacred places, such 


places should be treated as siddha-ksetras. 
There is no scope of thinking otherwise. 


fat Aaa Aaa TTS aT 
fefa aad cares frat BAT eI 


The Ganga redeems the humans on earth, 
the serpents in the nether world and the gods in 
the heaven. Because of this, she 1s called 


Chapter-107 


Tripathaga. 
Tacs twrat frsta fe yretor: 
MARTASATT Tact WSTATG 2 


The period upto which the bones of the dead 
remain lodged in the Ganga, for the same 
number of years the person remains lodged in 
the heaven. 


aa: TaMeaeaBy agrrafasiad 
aart J Ut Aet AAT FT Feet 
TAT MATA AST TTA ATATT I & 3 


Thereafter falling from the heaven with the 
decline of the merit, he becomes the lord of 
Jambivipa. Ganga happens to be the best of all 
the holy places, the great (auspicious) river of 
all the rivers and washes away the gravest of the 
sins, besides the bestower of the moksa. 


WME Va ATA 
aa Siren fee arlet A YaTeASTAMAT: 14 vw 


Though the Ganga is found at several places, 
but it is inaccessible at Haridvara , Prayaga as 
well as the confluence of Gangasagara. By 
having a bath at these places, the people reach 
the heaven and those who meet with their end 
here, they are freed from rebirth. 


Aaata WaT UratTeTaT a 
TA ASTATOTAT Ae TBTAAT AAT GT 
Those, whose minds have been overpowered 
with sins, and are struggling for redemption, for 
all of them there is no other go, except the 
Ganga. 
Waa Waa a Age A Age 
TSA AAUTTST VAT GG I 
Having fallen from the locks of hair of lord 
Siva, the auspicious Ganga, washes away all the 
sins. She is the most auspicious one out of all 
the auspicious rivers, and is the form of welfare. 


aft stared META TTOT WaTTaTE Tea 
TSH STAT AAT: ti 20 & II 


355 
CHAPTER 107 
Description of the various sacred places of 
Prayaga 
WHVST Sara 
TT TAIT Wee TAL I 


TAHA TAMU HOTT AA APA: A kN 
Markandeya said— “O King, you listen once 
again the glory of the sacred places of Prayaga, 
listening to which, a person is surely relieved of 
all the sins. There is no doubt about it. 


WMG Aa ae ces AAT Sat Ae 
TAA Yat HAHAH 2 I 


Over the northern bank of the Ganga, there 
is a tirtha known as Manasa. By fasting there 


for three nights, a person who lives there, gets 
all his desires fulfilled. 


TMfETaersy AeHet WAAL: | 
O ARAMA Tete STA TAL BH 
The reward a person gets by giving away in 
charity, the cow, land and the earth, the same 


reward is achieved by merely remembering that 
Manasa firtha. 


STATA AT AeAray at Warat ars fae 
Were HA THT ATH A UVa vl 


A person who dies in the current of the 
Ganga, with or without any desire, he proceeds 
to the heaven and he does not have to look at 
the hell. 


TTT: Yaa wire 
Seana faa a Tesi 
ACAVASATOT Tat TAR SATII G I 


He proceeds on to Devaloka boarding plane 
driven by swans and cranes. He is woken up 
there with the sweet songs of the apsards. O 


King thus he enjoys the comforts of the heaven ° 


for thousands of years. 


‘C 
1, 


oO Oo 


[S 


in 
1e 


le 
1s 
at 


1¢e 


_) 


356 


ad: Tanteatway: ettornat feasadt: 
qauraforgenred aad faget Hetil & I 


Then with the decline of his merits, he falls 
from the heaven and is reborn in a high race 
possessing enough of gems, jewels and beads. 


aedragarter afratererare | 
Trae Tea ATI TAT 9 I 


In the month of Magha sixty six thousand 
tirthas assemble at the confluence of the Ganga 
and the Yamuna. 


Ta WIAeae Wea Aer 
TART WIAA T ASA TAHT CH 


Therefore a person who achieves the merit 
by giving away in charity a lakh of cows, the 
same merit is achieved by a person by taking a 
bath at the confluence of the Ganga and 
Yamuna at Prayaga. 


Treat Hal ae TAT 
SEAN BAT Tela aT: 1 8 


A person who performs tapas at the | 


confluence of the Ganga and Yamuna with the 
burning of the cow dung cakes, his all the five 
sense organs become healthy and the five 
organs of activity are well grown. 


Matt Wea ae MAT Vea: 
TMAGUASAUT Tae HEATH Qo It 


He lives in the heaven for the number of 
years equivalent to the number of hairpits over 
his body. 


ad: TaN UTET Taga 
G Yaa fay ATTA VAT TA 80 
With the decline of the merits, he falling 
from the heaven, becomes the lord of 
Jambtidvipa, where, he, enjoying all the 
comforts, again remember the holy place of 
Prayaga and then he reaches there. 


HAMA A: HA ATT erenfasya 
Tenet aa ae fag: wafeafeay: 1 22 


Matsya Puradanam 


AaearaTeHa BA Ve Beal 
MANA SENUT Torte Walaa 231 
Tent a Yenetenstergrrreard aad 
CRUE WHS WTS Wad Hell evi 


At the time of the lunar eclipse, a person 
who enters the water of the confluence of the 
Ganga and Yamuna, he getting relieved of all 
the sins, achieves the abode of the moon and 
enjoys all the pleasures with the moon. Again 
he lives in the heaven for sixty thousand years, 
served by the Rsis and the Gandharvas. He is 
then established in the Indraloka. O Indra 
among the rulers, after falling from the heaven, 
he 1s reborn in a high family. 


ae: foreg at saTerqedare: feat: 
VAACAEAMOT Talos WATT Vu I 


O Rajendra, the one who, tnhales the fire at 
Prayaga, raising his feet upwards and the head 
on the ground, he gets established in the heaven 
for a lakh of years. 


TRUE UNS Bsa Aaa: 
TRA I AQT Ta TA 2 I 
Then falling from the heaven he becomes an 
Agnihotri on earth. Then, he, enjoying 


enormous pleasures here, again goes to Prayaga 
tirtha. 


GT: aes T chica Vener: wereoha 
faatreaees JOT AAT AeHTTI VII 


A person who removing the flesh out of his 
body, feeds the birds with it, then you listen to 
the merit such a person earns because of his so 
doing. 


Wt ACASATOT Bae Tela 

aearety uftaret wat data atta: ect 
Tar wraat fagiey frararra: | 
THAT FT AAAS Mat TA 88 


He is established tn the abode of the moon 
for a lakh of years. After his fall from there, he 


Chapter-108 


becomes a meritorious king with a religious 
mind, possessing enough of beauty and the 
intelligence besides being sweet tongued. 
Thereafter enjoying enough of pleasures there, 
he again visits the sacred place of Praydaga. 


I At Het WAT | THAT 
RUA AT TA TT BATU ott 
There is a place known as Rnaprmocana- 


tirtha to the right of Prayaga and to the north of 
the Yamuna, which 1s treated to be the best. 


WaAed:; FAT HU: We: RAT 
TANTRA STFUT Wet AAAI 2 VW 
By staying there for a night and by taking a 
bath there, a person is relieved of all the debts. 


Having being relieved of all the debts, he 
proceeds to the heaven. 


Sta Stareea HRTAATUT WaAPTaTETeR 
UAH MATA SATA: 11 20 Ht 


K RR 


CHAPTER 108 
The glory of Prayagatirtha 


qratet sare 
UTI MET STAT OFLA rT 
fags ise ged WANTS | ATA aI 
Yudhisthira said— O Lord, “You have 
narrated the glory of Prayaga and by listening to 


the same and by reciting its name, by hearts has 
been purified. 


WAT HHS Te Waa ASIA 
ay canara fag: wafeafert: 11 21 


Now you tell me, as to what type of merit 
one earns by fasting at Prayaga and with the 
influence of the same, one getting free from all 
the sins, which one of the loka is achieved by a 
person? 


WaUsa Sara 
TO TATA J sargreHet fawn 


EF 


WIC Teal Ga ema aaa 3 0 
SEAMISERMY Tafa: | 
STMT TA Tee US WN 
HMA ALA SM Ta STAT 
Ferd TAU eda UT Taq GN 


Markandeya said— “O King possessing all 
the fortunes, a wise and faithful person, who 
controlling all the senses, observes the fasting, 
you listen to the merit earned by him. He has all 
the well developed limbs of the body and free 
of ailments. All his five organs of senses remain 
healthy. He achieves the merit of an Asvamedha 
sacrifice, by walking every step. He redeems his 
ten earlier and an equivalent number of future 
generations. Then, he getting relieved of all the 
sins, achieves the highest position. 

Teaet area 
Tamra fe ateyq aa aefa A yt 
Wea WAS TEAST § 1 

Yudhisthira asked— “OQ Lord, you are 
narrating to me the glory of dharma and 
according to the same, by making small efforts, 
one achieves enormous merits in dharma. On 
the other hand the same dharma can be 


achieved with th. performing of the best of 
vratas and anusthdnas. 


sn Tel: Wed Tacha 
out dere fora we algect fe M1 
(I have developed confusion in my mind 
because of this controversy). Therefore, you 


kindly remove this doubt of my mind because 
my mind is filled with doubt. 


WHvsy Sar 
TU WTA Beh Tea 
BOT faa vs BAA AT FAT C1 
Markandeya said— “O King in earlier times, 


[ have heard the speech of Brahma, which had 
been made by him before the rsis and the sages. 


Cb —? \s 


om) 


Cv — Sted 


358 


(1 am repeating the same). 
Gaara WaT J AUST! 
wfasnTd AeATaUA: We Tesh 


The region of Prayaga has been spread over 
an area of five yojanas. With the mere entry in 
that land, one achieves merit for performing the 
Asvamedha sacrifice at each and every step. 


STR AA Aaa ATE 

TRAM TAA WOTUTAATTI Qo 

Us Wea F WR al Fara Wa 

WAIT: WHAT: UTS: 

A Waa AI Tart SaTAATTN 8H 

A person who meets with his end at Prayaga 

tirtha, he, redeems his seven past and an 
equivalent number of future generations. 
Realising this a person should always remain 
engaged in serving Prayaga. O Rajendra, a 
person, who is devoid of faith, whose mind has 


been overpowered with the sins, such a person 
can never reach the scared place of Prayaga. 


qaet Sara 

Gelel FACET a T BAA WaT: | 

a Hae Aa HA YAMS AAT LAU 

fama: UAVS Bata: | 

WARY ar Ufreter Tar Ge TraraVNn 23 

Yudhisthira said— “O Grandsire, the people, 

who reaching Pray4ga are overpowered by 
passions or the greed for riches, what type of 
reward is achieved by them at the ftirtha and 
what type of merit is achieved by them? What 
happens to the persons who are unaware of their 
duties and the deeds which are prohibited, trade 


in various types of commodities. You please tell 
me the same in detail. 


Wahwsa sare 

TU WTA e TAMIA TATA 
Was Fa: Sasa Fada: 
Tat MATA: FT THAT TAT Vv 


Matsya Puranam 


Markandeya said— “O King, the matter is 
quite secret and is the remover of all the sins. | 
am going to speak out the same. You listen, a 
person, who controlling all the senses, 
becoming non-violent, having been filled with 
faith, with humility and auspicious intentions 
takes a bath at Prayaga for a month, he is 
relieved of all the sins and earns the highest 
position. 


faMSTaca T WANT OT AcHeTyL 
frarea Cita sent AeA 
fara: Gert wart 7 A AeA eI 
Hear what Prayaga does to a man who 
treacherously kills another. He undoubtedly 
frees himself from his sins by living on alms 


and bathing three times a day, for a period of 
three months. 


FARA I Vea Aaah wae 
CaaS I Mate wea 
WI a Me Fret ara 26 


One who repairs to a_ holy place 
unintentionally, goes to heaven, and, after 
spending all his store of virtue there, is born in a 
well-to-do family. 


Ua AAA AAT: Wal Tat ATTA 
afta: farcedat ALaneaTATART: 1 V9 U 
One who goes to a_ sacred place 


intentionally, always remains happy and rescues 
all his ancestors from hell. 


Saat Tat: Teor WA: WA 
ATA AAS TAMARA BC 


O incarnation ot Dharma and knower of all, 
in compliance with your repeated enquiries, | 
have unfolded to you the ancient virtue for your 
benefit. 


qearet sara 
a Y Met HAT tal HW anhts Hery 
Walssaryerstar stares FAA Ve 


Chapter-108 


Yudhisthira said— O Sage, I was not born in 
vain, my family has been redeemed, | have 
become delighted by meeting you. Indeed, you 
have shown me very great kindness. 


ARIA TAA] ASS rel feateaara 
Ser ST MA WTA AACA 2oll 


O Pious one! I have been liberated from my 


sins by meeting you; and I now feel myseli 


sinless. 


WIS Tara 

foe ¢ Met ST few at ated Her 

HAT TOS ATIVAN 2 2 

Markandeya said- By your own destiny 

your soul has become elevated and your family 
has been redeemed. By the narration of the 
greatness of Praydga one’s store of virtue is 
increased, and his sins are decreased by 
listening to it. 


qeret sara 
erat 3 Foe fs we | WaT 
UA VANES BIMSS FMMAATN 2 2 


Yudhisthira said— O Great Sage, please tell 
me, as seen or heard by you, the greatness of the 
Yamuna. 


WhUeg Saray 
TTL Ya Salt fay cteng ferga 


AARSTA Ae THAT AA FET 2 3 
Markandeya said—- The Yamuna, the 
daughter of the Sun, renowned in all the three 
worlds 1s known as the great river of that name. 
aa Fgar wT aa TATA 
USAT Weay altar TATA 2 vt 


The Yamuna has come from the same 
source as Ganga, and she also dispels all sins by 
the mere utterance of her name, from a distance 
of 1000 yojanas. 


aa Sra B Meat @ AyArat afeeat 
aicaeeat TOS SBT aTrOT Tear 24 I 


359 


The virtue is attained by bathing in, drinking 
the waters and relating the greatness of the 
Yamuna. The sight of her gives happiness. 


HAM FT UAT A TATA ery! 
MOTT TEA TA TAT TAT UG I 


His seven generations are purified by once 
plunging into and sipping the holy waters and 
emancipation is obtained by dying there. 


sitar ayareferct ae 
UY SUT TS I ATH BATH Vl 


On the south of the Yamuna lies the 
Agnitirtha and Dharmardja-tirtha. Naraka is 
situated on her western bank. 


wa Sen feat At I Yareaswatar:| 

ua aelageanitn aqarafery Fe 221 

SAT Wait snfeereat Wee: | 

wet FSH ATA Ba Sal: WATAAT 1 2PM 

Tad TH eat a frat fe afefor 

eat: Vata aq ae FI art faq Tat 3 ol 

One goes to heaven by bathing there; by 

dying there he is not born again. Similarly, there 
are thousands of tirthas on the southern bank of 
the Yamuna. I am now describing the Tirtha on 
the northern bank known as the Nirafyana tirtha 
of Aditya, where the Devas, along with Indra, 


perform sandhya three times a day and worship 
the tirtha; otherwise men do the same. 


TRATAT aT He AAA 

sel T TeaeHM: WANTS: Wat: 

ag Sie feet aha I WaTSASTAMAT: 11 3 VN 

Tet U APA Ua SY Tea Tal 

hat VBMAT Wet WaT TAA 3 21 

You should also get yourself devoutfully 

sprinkled with its holy water. There are many 
other tirthas, by bathing into which a man goes 
to heaven. Those who die there are not re-born. 
The Yamuna, too, has been described to be 
sacred like the holy Ganga, but the latter is held 


more in veneration as the older of the two, by 
all classes everywhere. 


360 


Ud HHT AI Tada 
Mata We AAUTeAa THAT 3 


Yudhisthira! you should sprinkle yourself 
with the holy waters of each tirtha, by doing 
which all the sins of life will be consumed. 


Tea AI FMT Vad a sons aI 
Tad Tau: Tess TW Weal 3 vi 


One who reads or hears this Mahatmya, in 
the morning, is freed from all his sins and goes 
to heaven. 


Sta strareal wargTat 
VATA ETAAS BUT MTAA ATS EAT : 1 Qo CU 


KR SR 


CHAPTER 109 


Glory of Prayaga in preference to other 
tirthas 


Whusa Jara 

at Y TAO WH YUU Tal ABTA 
qatat I Aeertor wats Faas a 
aa oar: Ulam Asay WAT BAT gi 


Markandeya said— “O Rajendra, I have 
listened to the Puranas which were composed 
by Brahma and which emerged out of his mouth 
that the number of the sacred places has been 
spelt out as hundreds, thousands and sometimes 
the lakhs. 


TATAATIT AA ST TATA 2 


All of them are auspicious and sacred. (By 
taking a bath in each one of them) a person 1s 
said to achieve salvation. Out of all these the 
Soma ftirtha is extremely auspicious and 1s the 
remover of all the sins. By merely taking a bath 
in the soma, a person redeems a hundred 
generations. Therefore one should always take a 


Matsya Puranam 


bath there, making all the efforts. 
Barer sara 

Yiaeat Aire qoanret UT UeATT 

TAO Arent Hes fatyereadii 3 

Raitt a Ger Bats werara 

AMATO FT AATHAA ATTA TAN ¥ 

Tia o Unt feat amiga aatcaary 

Panera ae mt weraral 

Ua US We AAG SMATTNG 

Yudhisthira said—“O Great sage, two places, 

i.e. Naimisaranya on earth and Puskara in space 
have been considered to be sacred. Besides 
Kuruksetra has been known to be of special 
importance in all the three worlds. But why do 
you praise Prayaéga alone, leaving aside 
Kuruksetra. At the same time you also claim 
that by visiting these places, one has his desires 
fulfilled in entirety. This statement made by you 
seems to me without any evidence, devoid of 
faith and improper. Why are you, for the sake of 
achieving little dharma, praising the same? 
Therefore whatever you might have heard or 


seen, on the basis of the same, you remove our 
doubt. 


WchUed sara 
WI A awed wears waa 
ATRIA Ueda AAG 
SESE MUA uaa ToT | 
Ud Weta: Wa We Mit AAT 91 
TU TAMAS AMES TATA 
Wael UT Utlel waar Afaeaat ci 
Wass UT ANGE BTA! 
Wa WATT Heat A YsId ATTA 
fared aoa ta APTA AT 
TUITE ANT CAAT AAA: 11 Qo tl 


Markandeya said- “O King, a person 
without faith, or the one whose mind has been 


Chapter-109 


overpowered with the sin, and the event which 
happens in front of such a person, it should not 
be taken as without faith. The people who are 
devoid of faith, unclean, evil minded and are 
devoid of welfare activities are called the 
sinners. (It appears that you are being 
overpowered by some sin) as a result of which 
you have spoken such words. Now listen about 
the glory of Prayaga, as has been seen or 
listened by me. I am going to repeat the same. 
You listen from me. Whatever things have been 
seen clearly or unclearly, or have been heard 
about, they should be put in use with the 


evidence of the scriptures for your own welfare. 


One who does not do so, he has to suffer and he 
fails to meet with success in yoga. 


TM ATAU AM cata Aa: | 

Te Balter Tony area: warasheli Vai 
a aha at art anata Wa: 

WAM J YARIS Ta Taft AAT VM 


You can achieve it in thousands of yogas 
and sometimes it cannot be achieved even in the 
thousands of yogas. A person who donates all 
types of gems to the Brahmanas, but he cannot 
achieve yoga even with the merit of the same. 
But a person who meets with the end of his life 
at Praydga, he gets everything so easily. 
Nothing happens to the contrary. O Bharata, I 
am going to speak out the main reason for it. 
You listen to 1t with faith. 


WA AA TIA A ATTA 
IM AAT YT Tal Waa SPA 231 


As the Brahman remains present in all the 
living-beings and a special part of the same 
remains present in a Brahmana, because of 
which all of them are called Brahman. 


Tent asta atenseareata area 
Wd May Udy Tal Aaa Wail Vv 
wan Bay cilay wat Wea: | 
Wad TAA AAAS FATT Vu 


36] 


Tent aaa Fed want AeA 
MATANTMTAT FT UTaAfenferaetatll VE I 


As Brahman 1s adored conceiving him to be 


-present in all the living beings (and the 


Brahman is adored particularly) similarly, the 
people with wisdom, consider Prayaga to be of 
special significance, of all the holy places. O 
Yudhisthira, Prayaga— the king of the 7irthas 1s 
really adorable. Because Brahma also thks of 
the same holy place everyday, that is why wise 
men after attaining the sacred Prayaga do not 
feel inclined for anything else. 


al fe cacaarare Wasa ferantafa 
sAtdues a araft gfe 
TM JOT Aer Aa BAT AIT oI 
© Yudhisthira! whoever wishes to be 
classed among the mortals after becoming one 
with the Devas? You will surely understand by 
these examples why | have described Prayaga to 


you as the most sacred and a ready dispeller of 
sins among the various tirthas. 


qatst sare 
gd de aa We fareaass WA: YA: 
HA AA AA: TTA HAUT VC I 


Yudhisthira said— | have heard the greatness 
of Prayaga and am wondering, by what virtue 
the holy tirtha is obtained and how one goes to 
reside in heaven? 


Sa A AAA AI Ti AT AHA: HTT! 
af Hato Geary Wat: WET WET Ve tt 


I venture to enquire from you the means by 
which the giver of charity enjoys the world, 
with a store of happiness, by constantly being 
born in It. 


Wanvsy Jaret 
STO] THAT TAHA Wey 
TAA Telot Weal Hat Aleta aa Qo 
Tat faat da a Frere acer: 


20 


of the virtues. Bana had a thousand hands, and 
he was well-versed in archery or warfare. 


TTT aaa MET Ot Tal eT 
Terareramracareal asy Trafar:1 V3 
Having been pleased with his tapas, lord 
Siva dwelt in his capital city. By the grace of 
Siva, he had achieved the position of Mahakala, 


which was comparable to the position of Siva 
himself. 


feral Yalsyeea: wenfrera 
TATATTS TANT TH OVI 
Us: GACT sea: Beata: | 
TRACT USTATAT ATATRT WStSTT: 11 24 UI 


Hiranyaksa, the second son of Diti had four 
sons named Ulika, Sakuni, Bhiita-santdpana 
and Mahanabha. The number of the sons and 
the grandsons born to them was seventy seven 
crores. All of them were immensely valorous, 
having gigantic bodies, being illustrious and 
could take to any form at will. 


Sq: YAR aH Hvaurgcafherys 
feraferfa: WeNatssyeret We ARTA: I VE I 


Similarly, Danu in union with Kasyapa, 
gave birth to a hundred powerful sons. The 
valorous Vipracitti was the foremost of all. 


fargt weasta cen Mga: 
STMNTS: WAT HTT ATT EAATI! R91 
Wifataata Sify 
fagrernsy = TE aaa: MABE s MU VEU 
Sahat GANT A 
Umemal ASTRA RATATAT 28 I 
aera Fear a frgatony weg: | 
MPAA AM WARM Sal: FAT ol 
. Besides _—ihim, Dvimurdha, Sakuni, 
Sankusirodhara, Ayomukha, Sambara, Kapisa, 


Vamana, Marici, Meghavan, [ragarbha-sira, 
Viddravana, Ketu, Ketuvirya, Satahrada, 


Matsya Puranam 


Indrajit, Saptajit, Vajranabha, Ekacakra, 
Mahabahu, Vajraksa, Taraka, Asiloma, Puloma, 
Bindu, Bana, the great asura, Svarabhanu and 
Vrsaparva besides several others were the sons 
of Danu. 


TMA VAT HAM Vat aa TAM 
STG WARTAT AAT TST Hs I 2 VI 
Wits Get da wa a FaUaT:| 
TNT Hera da Sart fe TUN 


Out of these, Svarbhanu had Prabha as his 
daughter, Puloma had Saci, Maya had 
Upadanavi, Mandodari and Kuhu; Vrsaparva 
had Sarmistha, Sundari and Candra, Vaisvanara 
had Pulomda and Kalaka as his daughters. 


aga Hera anferes ule 
TAH: VPTACAUT SHAT 2 3 1 


Out of these Puloma was very strong and 
having a number of issues. Puloma and Kalaka 
were the wives of Kasyapa. In earlier times, 
both of them gave birth to sixty thousand 
Danavas. 


Weeraarerenaay ANS TAT 

aa ASAT SF fEcTqgranhaay: 1 Wi 
Uqy aaa eM fast J 
fartatt: Arena aSHrarsT TTI 2 4 A 


In earlier times, Kasyapa, the son of Marici, 
had produced the Danavas known as Paulomas 
and Kalakeyas, who dwelt in Hiranyapura and 
receiving boons from Brahma, became infallible 
from the gods. But they were killed by Vijaya 
(Arjuna). Vipracitti on the other hand produced 
from the womb of Simhika the demons known 
as Sairnhakeyas, who were thirteen in number. 


fewaatyard a watrareraresm 

AT: HUY Wes Ae areata A VE I 
Sede AVaIa APTA ETM 

TH: HAA ATAU ATi Vt 
aaiaesy fawerat eqayaagay: | 


Chapter-6 


gees J cere Fara: Bats VW 

They were the sister’s sons of Hiranyakasipu 
and were known by the names of Vyaya, Kalpa, 
Rajendra, Nala, Vatapi, Iivala, Namuci, 
Svasrpa, Ajana, Naraka, Kalanabha, Saramana 
and the well known Kalavirya. All of them 
spreaded the Danu dynasty. The sons of Daitya 
Samhlada, came to be known as Nivatakavacas. 


HAA: AACA WAATCTAT ATA 
Ysa MATT AAT TOMA 28 
All of them were infallible from the gods, 
Gandharvas, Nagas and the Raksasas. But 


Arjuna, taking refuge with Siva, drove them 
over the way to Yama. 


Ae HA HAMA AAT ATTA: 


Yaa Patt Barat A WUlat Yet Ya: 3 ol! 


Tamra on the other hand in union with 
Kasyapa gave birth to six daughters, known by 
the names of Suki, Syeni, Bhasi, Sugrivi, 
Grdhrika and Suci. 


Yul Yah VATA Ta: 
PAA PAA WTA FLUATTSASAAT! 3 2 


Tat PAA Wtradiaesar 
STATA CASA 3 2 


Out of them, Suki in union with Dharma, 
produced Sukas and Ulikas (parrots and owls). 
Syeni produced the eagles, while Bhasi 
produced the Cuckoo birds and Grdhri gave 
birth to vultures, ducks and the pigeons. Suci 
gave birth to swans, cranes and Kraufica as well 
as the water fouls. 


SPATE Gilat aA 
We aera: Wheat featarat Frater 3 31 


Sugrivi produced goats, horses, rams, 
camels and asses. Thus the genealogy of 
Tamra’s race has been defined. Now listen to 
the tradition of the race of Vinata. 


Tes: Udal AM: SHUT UAT! 
Meret wat aan Aa safes fasgar 3 v0 
RUT WeTBT STURT Yaraunt 


21 


AUATAT TT Vit TAM Fea 3 4M 

WeTTT: aAfUteae: wears a fersqat 

ATA THU THUS ATA 1 3 & A 

AUT YACHT 

Ga: Wee FJ AANA 3911 

Garuda and Aruna, the two sons of Vinata, 

happen to be the lords of the birds who fly in 
the sky. (Their third generation) happens to be 
the girl named Saudamani, who is well known 
in the region of the sky. Aruna got two sons 
named Sampati and Jatayu. The sons of Sampati 
were known as Babhru and Sighraga. Jataéyu 
had two sons named Karnikara and Satagami. 
Besides them Jatayu had three more sons named 
Sarasa, Rajjupala, and Bherunda. The number 


of sons and grandsons of these birds 1s beyond 
counting. 


Usa Hy: Aes UAT Yar 
Waray faa: erage eea 3 ci 


O Suvrata! both Sirasé and Kadru gave birth 
to a thousand serpents each, having a thousand 
hoods. Out of them all, twenty six are more 
famous. 


Thc Lele : cs aKelo Fu | 

SAAN Serdar caetaay: I 3 2H 

UeNUAN SAAT ASAT: | 
TATHAGATA: MY 0 I 


ae a age ana: Wore 

Me SANT Uae STAT: y VU 

TENAaMaaa Yaa 

WIT AIM ST TATATAPSTI YI 

They include Sesa, Vasuki, Karkotaka, 

Samkha, Airavata, Kambala, Dhananjaya, 
Mahanila, Padma, Asvatara, Taksaka, Elapatra, 
Mahapadma, Dhrtarastra, Balahaka, 
Sarnkhapila, Puspadamstra, Subhanama, 
Sankuroma, Bahula, Vamana, Panina, Kapila, 
Durmukha and Patanjali. There were 


362 


T Aa ENTS MATA: 1 eh 


Markandeya said— O King! Brahma has said 
that the wicked who despise the earth, the cow, 
the fire, the Brahmana, the Sastras, the gold, the 
water, the women, the mother and the father, do 
not reach to the higher regions. 

Us aT TMs TAGE 
Testa Ata a I AT: TTT: 112 21 


Similarly the attainment of Yoga has been 
said to be very difficult. Those who follow a 
sinful life go to the worst region in hell. 


Sea MASTS AUT CTSA 

Wea SW AT WME Wala 23 

40 Teofa a cat apart aa a: 

STTHHUOT Feo: Ted ACH TAN Vv 

The one who steals elephants, horses, cows, 

bullocks, jewels, pearls and gold, and then gives 
them in charity, never goes to heaven where the 
giver in good faith enjoys himself. They 


become addicted to many (sinful) act and go to 
hell. 


Ua at a ad wt at a Aaa 
GM AAA AT Steet ATA AeHCTAL 
Pach F Nae Als TATAYAN V4 I 


Similarly I am telling you about Yoga, 
Dharma, chief traits of a donor, the truth and the 
untruth and good and evil fruits; as enunciated 
by the Lord Sun in ancient times. 


ofa sitet werqeret warraterezt 
AATAH MATA SATA: I Qo VI 


K* * 


CHAPTER 110 


Dwelling of all the auspicious tirthas at 
Prayaga 


Wavsa Javea 
TT TATA Wes TA FI 
fret gent da unde FrearTeqi en 


Matsya Puranam 


TH BT dad Ua WTA TI 

Ud Ul a agat J a Yo: feereaay: 1 VI 
aM aelaeertor Fryienteaeat UT: 

wart Tera Feraa gs faaT: 11 3 


Markandeya said— “O King, you listen again 
about the glory of Prayaéga. The people with 
wisdom say, that all the ten thousand sacred 
places, the auspicious mountains _ besides 
Naimisaranya, Puskara, Gotirtha, Sindhusagara, 
Gayatirtha, Dhenuka (a place located close to 
Gaya) and Gangasagara reside at Prayaga. 


for arataauss Aet Heat 7 Aaah 
TAMA Aaa AAT ¥ UN 


There are three fire altars, through which the 
auspicious Ganga which is adored by all the 
tirthas flows through Prayaga. 


THTET Ye eat fay city faa 
AAT WTA Als ATA CHATS & I 
TTA Yea TH TIAL 
TAP WAM Het ATeleT VSPA GN 
fra: mleaisgatesy datat arated 
fefa youre u acted aaa BATH 91 


Similarly Yamuna— the daughter of Strya 
which is well known in the three worlds joins 
the Ganga at Prayaga. The centre of the Ganga 
and the Yamuna 1s considered to be the hip of 
the earth. O lion among the rulers, there are 
three and a half crores of firthas in the heaven, 
space and the earth, but all of them cannot 
equate even the sixteenth part of the Ganga at 
Prayaga. This has been declared by the wind 
god. 


Tat AAS Aaa 
UTA A UIT Ata WATT SH 


Therefore Ganga has been considered to be 
the supreme. There is Jhunsi at Prayaga which 
is the abode of the serpents named Kambala and 
Asvatara. The Bhogavati firtha here, happens to 


Chapter-111 


be the pedestal of Prajapati Brahma. 
aa aay aay URN aiatee 
MATA UA AA ATTA: 1 8 1 


© Yudhisthira, the Vedas in human form, 
besides the rsis, perform the yajras there. 


Ta HYMAN VT FAT: 
aa: Toast FAG AR ATTA Qo 


OQ Bharata, the gods and the Cakravarti 
kings, besides the emperors, perform the yajrias 
there. 


Wrardadesa: wyracatarch fast 
SH aeaeentar fra: BSTAITAT 1 V2 


O Excellent one, there are no other ftirtha 
more auspicious than the sacred place of 
Prayaga. The most influential of all is the 
Ganga which flows at that place. The country is 
like the tapas filled with the best of Sattvas. 


TA WMT HSMM A SPRATT 

fagasd a fag tierdtcantaart 22 

3é Ud farriareenraresy a 

eee Waeay HT ANITTAT TU 831 

Se gated taniine aatte War 

Se Yas qe wad AHA Oxi 

The zone contigious to the banks of the 

Ganga is known as the siddhaksetra. The glory 
of the same should be treated as truthful and it 
is there quite appropriate to speak out the same 
by whispering in the ears of the mendicants, 
one’s friends, besides the pupils. The glory of 
Prayaga 1s graceful, bestower of the heaven, 
truthful, bestower of comfort, auspicious, quite 
religious one, pure, form of the best of dharma 
as well as the destroyer of all the sins. This is 
quite secret for the great sages. 

Twos Tel AAU! 

Re a fRaswetafater: THATETATI BG 

a sg HOA Ae yous Ber Wha: 


363 


Raat TM AHI WT Alea 211 


By reciting its glory daily the Brahmanas, 
Ksatriyas and Vaisyas, getting relieved of the 
sins, achieve the heaven. One who, with a pure 
heart, listens everyday to the greatness of this 
tirtha, remembers his past lives and enjoys 
heaven. 


wert at dai ata: forersefety: 
cife alg ater 4 a aanfadan vot 
aT UT Wag WPA aled a war fav 
faareanitat: Wet ata a fara ect 


The good only attain this tirtha, therefore, O 
Yudhisthira, you should also bathe in these 
tirthas after discarding all misgiving. O King! | 
have explained all this as asked by you, you 
have saved your ancestors by putting all these 
questions to me. 


TINT J Aa F Hen Aer VST ee ii 

Ue A ST aey chet car Blerteat 

TSI BRIT IA Ahr Ut TAA 

Praet Wad A Cates aia 201 

OQ Yudhisthira! The tirthas enumerated 

before do not reach even 1/16th the sanctity of 
Prayaga. The pilgrimage to these tirthas 
removes all adverse tensions and one attains 


knowledge and go to the upper region by virtue 
of bathing in these tirthas. 


Stet ATTRA TATTTOY WarTaTeTeat 
SUT VTA SEAT : 11 220 UI 


KER 


CHAPTER 111 


Stay of Brahma, Visnu and Siva at Prayaga 
qatet sara 

aa Wathe wea WANTED WENA 

UWia: Taanente aan fe wa aah VN 


Yudhisthira said— “O Great sage, you have 


364 


spoken all about the glory of Prayaga. What 1s 
the reason for it? You speak out the same to 
enable me and my family get salvation. 


TWHuey Sava 
TT Wa WaT FWA Walas GATTI 
TEN FATA SAAT: WYLSTT A I 
Markandeya said— “You listen to the cause 
of the same. It is stated that the entire universe 
lives at Prayaga. The most competent and 


eternal Brahma, Visnu and Siva, besides all the 
gods live here. 


Ta Galt YN Wet FA A Ad 
TTA Ut cites Fay: Peat WAT SN 
Heard A MTG fe BA: Wert WAI 
Tel WANT ast A Helfasrvatan vi 

Whatever moveable and immovable 


creatures are created by Brahma, are maintained 
here on earth by Visnu. At the end of the kalpa 
Siva destroys the entire universe. But the place 
of Prayaga never gets destroyed. 


Sut: Taya A: Wyatt WT Tvald 
aerrt faster Fat UTA ANG 


The one who 1s lord of all the living beings 
and takes care of them, and the people who live 
here with this idea, they achieve salvation.” 


qratet sara 
arene Y aaraed ater fester sate: 
al AT HO FART HATA 1G I 
Yudhisthira said— “O Sage, how do the best 


of the gods live in Prayéga? You tell me about 
the same, as provided 1n the scriptures.” 


WhUSs Save 
wart Faaaed Taras: | 
SU Aq Waera yoy art Bfasz 91 
Markandeya said— “The purpose for which 


Brahma, Visnu and Mahesvara, live at Prayaga, 
I am going to reveal the same. You listen from 


Matsya Puranam 


me the relevant tattvas. 
Ga ahaa wars J WTS 
faar WONG UTA STOTT A ¢ 1 
SMO WAST Tel frst 
qUTTTTRA J Trae festa <i 


The region of Prayaga is spread over an area 
of five yojanas. The aforesaid gods reside here 
for the removal of the sins and for the protection 
of the people. Brahma lives to the north of 
Pratisthanapura. Lord Visnu is present in 
Prayaga in the form of Beni-Madhava. 

WAT ael wear fast TAT: | 
at cat: Wral: Fase we: | 
Tara Hose Pet WTA AUTH Ro I 

Then lord Siva is lodged at Prayaga in the 
form of Aksaya-vata. Besides them, all the 
gods, with Gandharvas, Siddhas and the groups 
of the great sages, protect Prayaga for the 
removal of the sins. 

aa Fel aa UG a a Uvahe 
Us Fa A fee WaT FT ASAT Vel 
AAT: AAR WaT elect 
TaTOTEY faB TT AAT ATA 22 IN 

A person, who-performing homa with his 
sins, does not have to cast a glance at the hell, 
similarly all the gods like Brahma, Visnu, 
Mahesvara, the seven islands, the seven oceans, 


all the mountains on earth, stay at Prayaga till 
the time of dissolution, protecting itt. 


4 art aga: ad fetta atatet 
gira arenes Fata tertheah: 93 0 


O Yudhisthira, besides them such of the 
gods, who, taking refuge in the land, live here, 
the dwelling places for them were built by these 
gods. 


maraaite at warfare fasyery 
Urq Ww ufad a wart a afafet 


Chapter-112 


TA HS THER MIG: feist Vv 


Prayaga is the region of Prajapati Brahma. 
This is well known. O Yudhisthira, the place of 
Prayaga is quite auspicious and sacred. O 
sinless Rajendra, you better take care of your 
brothers and the kingdom. 


Sta stared WergTey WaPTATeTa 
WTSI PTAA ASAT: VL 


KER 


CHAPTER 112 
Glory of Prayaga as described by Vasudeva 


Acat Tare 
May: Bed: Adee WE vara 
SAUNA AHI TR] CAAT 2 
Nandikesvara said— “O Narada, then the 
king Yudhisthira together with his brother and 
Draupadi, offered his salutation to the 


Brahmanas and pleased the gods as well as the 
preceptors with the oblations. 


arqeashe Waa AOAANTT ETAT 
Usa: Ufed: Wat: TATA Wa I 


At the same time lord Vasudeva also |. 


reached there. Then all the 
collectively adored lord Krsna. 


HOT Ufet: Aa: VACA Vera: | 

aaa: TT aT TGA Sanse: 11 31 

uaftraat da ordedar wernt 

at: TARA AAA FT AUST YI 

Thereafter, Lord Krsna, — enthroned 

Yudhisthira over the kingdom. In the mean 
time, the sage Markandeya, uttering “welfare on 
you, you may meet with all the pleasures.” Thus 


speaking, the sage Markandeya suddenly left 
for his abode. 


gfafsasta ante wrgi: afettsaaa 
Tat AAT Seal THA ATT I 


Pandavas 


365 


Thereafter the great king Yudhisthira gave 
away enormous charities and started living there 
with his brothers. 


Ofead Hed IMA Wes Wad ATs 
Tat Wa et a ald UT Way 
Tad TAMA Vgc FT THANE N 
A person, who getting up early in the 
morning recites this mahdtmya, he achieves the 


salvation. Getting relieved of all the sins he 
proceeds on to the abode of Rudra. 


aged Jara 

WY aed U ared WENT Tare 

fret Sua Bera Wart fartasaz: 9 1 

want wat a fret werentrafafet 

Tae wreate Tes Tate A ATTIC 

Lord Vasudeva said— “O Yudhisthira— the 

great king, you follow the words which are 
being spoken by me. You go to Prayaga, where 
you should free yourself from grief, recite the 
name of the lord daily, perform homa and 
discuss with us about Prayadga daily. O 


Rajendra, by doing so you would yourself 
achieve the heaven. There 1s no doubt about it. 


TITAS TAT AT AT AT: 
USUAL aT Seta TW Mesa eA 


A person who goes on pilgrimage to 
Prayaga, or lives there, his soul is relieved of all 
the sins and he proceeds on to the abode of 
Rudra. 


Wiareeaga: Met ad: Wha: 
MESTATAT F AeHTAPAAI oI 
The one who becoming unmindful of 

receiving charities, remains contented, 
controlling all his senses, gets purified and freed 
himself from pride, he achieves the reward for 
visiting the sacred place. 

TAY AI AIact GSAT: 

AAT TAT A AAA APATI 82 


366 


The one becoming free from anger, remains 
honest, truthful, firm and treats all the people 
like himself he gets entitled to receive the merits 
of visiting the firtha. 


mfatt: cada: wheat Saenhe aera 

4 fe pram afer Bal: WT AEtTa V2 II 
ARUHUN AAT ATA ALAT | 

Werd Usatd: Apgar At: safer 3 


O Lord of the earth, the yajnas, which have 
been prescribed by the gods and the sages, these 
yajnas cannot be performed by the poor people, 
because a large number of materials and 
parapherneia are required for the purpose. Such 
yajnas can be performed by rich people or by 
the kings. 


ay afegeta fafa: prea: wr AtaT 
Gea Aataet: Yost cafaars Sas evi 
OQ Yudhisthira, the king, the method by 

which a yaifa can be performed by a poor 
people and the method by which a person could 
achieve the merit of performing a yajna, | am 
going to speak out the same. 

RATT UT Tae WTA 

Harpe yo aerate fafgrera gk 


O Best of Bharatas, the auspicious 
pilgrimage is quite secretive even from the 
sages and yields rewards better than the 
performing of the yajna. 

au aagenter fra: HSTAATISSTT: | 
TTGTA Tea BTA TTI BE A 


O King! ten thousand tirthas and three crores 
of rivers go and dwell in the Ganga during the 
month of Magha. 


EN Ta MENT YeVa TeaTHveny| 
TARA WAR AAA farsa: 11 Volt 


O King! you will also repeat visiting 
Prayaga, after performing sacrifices and ruling 
over your dominions with a _ balanced 


Matsya Puranam 


disposition. 

Area sara 
SSA WT UTA AThUSal ATAU: | 
GAA FUAAATAM ATH 26 I 
AAA MATT TAO AAT FT: 
aera fata wat Frafrarraq 2¢ tt 


Nandikesvara said— After having described 
the glory of Prayaga, that great seer 
Markandeya disappeared then and there; then 
the King Yudhisthira attained great happiness 
by going to, and bathing at, Prayaga along with 
his retinue following the prescribed rules. 


aM waahy sae WaTTATST a 
aI F Ha HHA wsgeAA 2 ott 


O Narada! you are also in Prayaga. Sanctify 
yourself by sprinkling the holy waters. 


aa sara 
VATA TATA TT 
ARASH FATTY] WAPTAT TS STATIN 2 2 


Siita said— O Rsis! After thus narrating the 
whole thing to Narada, Nandikesvara vanished 
at the spot, and the former instantly went to 
Prayaga. 


aa Creat I Wea a fafsepa sao 
aM aral FEA Wad: TANS AMT 2 2M 


Thereafter, bathing and giving alms to the 
Brahmanas, he returned to his abode. 


CHIC MGRUIN IDA RE&OT 


KEE 


CHAPTER 113 


The description of Jambidvipa and its 
mountains and varsas 


RA Sd: 
ait BT: AYR AT Taat at afer wan 
ferater ca qatar Ay AST ST: BAT: 1 il 


Chapter-113 


TENPAAAT Seas TI" 
ata Ufcarot a MATT SAATH 21 
Udesale a: wa fae aarifad 
ASTHMA AAMAS TAT 3 
The Rsis asked— “O Lord, what is the 
number of islands in this world? What is the 
number of mountains and oceans? What is the 
number of varsas (regions on earth?) What is 
the number of prominent rivers? What is the 
vastness of this earth? What is the type of 
Lokaloka mountain? What is the nature of the 
sun and the moon besides their size? You kindly 
speak out the same to us exhaustively because 


you are quite knowledgeable. We intend to be 
enlightened on the subject from your mouth. 


aa sara 
ENeaealUl VA ATA a 

A We HAS a a Tact WTI I 
Waa J Wa TaeIe: Te 

ANT ARTA ATO WTR & 


Sita said— “O Rsis, there are thousands of 
types of the islands but they come under the 
purview of the main seven islands. It 1s not 
possible to describe the entire universe in detail. 
Therefore, I am going to speak out the seven 
islands with the relative planets. At the same 
time, I am going to speak out about their size as 
per the human imagination. 


AM: Ger I Waa ach TTA 
Way: Ul Fed Achaea HAUT € I 


Because that what is unthinkable, one 
should not try to estimate the same by 
intelligence, jndna and estimation. The one 


1. Name of a mythical belt or circle of mountains 
surrounding the outer most of the seven seas and 
dividing the visible world, from the region of 
darkness (as the sun is within the wall of montains 
they are light on one side and dark on the other). 
MW p.907. 


367 


which 1s beyond the Prakrti it denotes the 
symptom of unthinkable. 


ae aut aeaa araga aera 
fait Wet tea aes ol 


Now I am starting the description of the 


seven varsas. First of all Jambtdvipa is the 


biggest of all in size. 1 am going to speak about 
it, which should be listened by you. 


AAMT Asatler Vet ETA fae: 
TRMRPUeTaOt Utes fafeaet: WA 
Jambidvipa is spread in a lakh of yojanas 


and has a large number of beautiful countries 
and cities. 


fagarcoragiat vacant 
SUICIDE EOE forearreraa at RT 
The siddhas and cdranas reside here. It has 
many metals enshrined in its land and a large 


number of mountains with (different types of} 
rocks are lodged therein. 


udamranfeg Tain aa: 
WTA ASTI: ated ada: 1 90 II 


The rivers issuing from these mountains are 
spread on all the sides. There are six vast and 
gigantic munitions known as varsas. The 
Himavan mountain which spreads from east to 
west extends upto the seashore. Its peaks always 
remain covered with snow. 


TaTS BIT: ATS yaaa 
ferme feral SHE SAAN Vel 
aauaey Mau Welesa: OT: 
adfapracentn farciiol a aqfeerq gz 


Thereafter there is the Hemakita mountain 
which is covered with gold. Thereafter there is a 
vast Nisadha mountain, which looks beautiful 
from all the sides. There is a mountain peak on 
one side. On the side of it is lodged the Meru 
mountain, the back of which is of four colours 
and is considered to be like a womb. It 1s spread 


368 


upto twenty four thousand yojanas on all the 
four sides. 


GMAT Uta: AAS: | 
Arena; A; UP wraraferronn are: 11 23 tt 


The top of it is circular m shape and the 
lower part is quadrangular. The rear part of it 
has plains of different colours. As a result of 
which it looks like possessing the qualities of 
Prajapati. 

TATA TONSA: 
Vad: AAA TTA ART TT SU evi 


It has emerged out of the navel of Brahma. 
Its eastern part is of white colour, which reflects 
its association with Brahma. 


Uiasy eaurrat aa ayarataear 


ofgeatata vet anata: 
TATAT Vise FagT ATARI 


Its southern part is of yellow colour which 
reflects the quality of Vaisyatva possessed by it. 
Its western region is black like the wing of the 
black wasp, which represents the quality of its 
being Sidra. From the point of view of artha 
and kama, it is comparable with the Meru 
mountain. 


Waa THaT Taya: | 
TAT Aaa: Tarfefa aUrt: WathetaT: 1 Ve 


Its northern quadrant is naturally of red 
colour, therefore it has the properties of 
Ksatriyas. Thus the four colours and castes have 
been enumerated. 


Arey aeetna:sa: Ua fecora:| 
TACGCAU MAAN: FW AFA Vol 


The mountain Nila is studded with lapis- 
lazuli. The mountain Sveta is yellow and full of 
gold. The mountain Smgavan is made of gold 
(Satakaumbha) and has the colour of the tail of 
a peacock. 


Ud vara: fagaroratad: | 


Matsya Puranam 


TATA ATASCAT ATI BCI 


These mountains are the kings among their 
kind, and are the abode of Siddhas and Caranas. 
Their inner diameter 1s 9,000 yojanas. 


TA fractad AMA Weal: AAA: | 
agayracentar faedtat Bat: AA Ve 


The varsa Ilavrata stands in the middle and 
encircles the Maha Meru on all sides. Its 
expanse 1s 24,000 yojanas. 


Tel a WeMefaqy sa Waa: 
dee afeut WETS AAATTN Voll 
In the centre of this (llavrata) stands the 
Great Meru, shining in its majestic glory, like 
the fire blaze, devoid of smoke. Its southern 


portion 1s called the Daksina Meru and the 
northern the Uttara Meru. 


quit ata aa dai dt adadad:| 
AC CCRC MEPIS UC OES 


Each of these seven varsas (zones) has ¢ 
boundary mountain of its own, which from 
north to south extends to 2,000 yojanas, and the 


southem ones are 2,000 yojanas’ in 
circumference. 
aaah arate Sea 


Tey Foesta vat SAT FUN 


The sum of breadths of these varsas and 
mountain ranges 1s breadth of the Jambtdvipa, 
as mentioned above. Of these Nila, Nisadha are 
the longest and those that come after them 
diminish in length. 


Hey erHey Tara ray s: 
ATRIA UT: UTAH 2 3 


So are Sveta, Hema Kita, Himavan and 
Smgavan. Rsabha (Meru) is said to have the 
same extent as Jambidvipa. 


qaNe gear sanetste sa 
ferenfasrrt vanes wetae 


Chapter-113 


STATA SAHel AVP: 1 Vwi 


Hema-kita is shorter (than Meru) by 12,000 
yojanas, and Himavan is shorter (than Meru) by 
20,000 yojanas. The great Hema-kita is 88,000 
yojanas. 


Aifaerarset sat: Yat 
greq Woscirarcwragal Weather 24 I 


The mount Himavan 1s 80,000 yojanas, from 
east to west. The dvipa (Jambidvipa) being 
spherical, this difference in extent of the 
mountains has sprung up. 


salt waar a aats aA! 
Vat WA TATSTeAA ARO A AN VEN 


As there is a distribution of the mountains, 
so there is a distribution of the Varsas (along 
with them) one after another. Many peopled 
districts are in them. These varsas are seven 1n 
number. 


wunfaatedey vada FI 
OA Al ASOT TATA 2191 


They (the varsas) are surrounded by 
precipitous and insurmountable mountains. All 
the seven are mutually inaccessible by different 
rivers. 


aaa ag Grail AAT WaT: 
ay gnad ay ard AT fara Vc 
In those regions, various species of animals 
are found everywhere. This varsa of the 
Himavat is known as Bharata. 
—e — | 
erected Fwd eftat TEA VM 
Beyond that, up to Hema-kita, is the land 


(varsa) of the Kirnpurusas! and from the 
borders of Hema-kiita up to Nisadha* is the 


1. Low man. A mythical being, with a human head and 
the form of a horse. 

2. Hard. Name of a mountain. Name of a country 
governed by Nala. 


369 


Harivarsa?. 


Bhagat ata wise afeergay 
SAAMI Tet Tach ATA TaqAAN 3 ott 
The other limit of Harivarsa is Meru, and 


further on is Ilavrata, beyond which extends 
Ramyaka to the Nila mountain. 


Taerent ae fast ahegrrrey| 
ferment da YeohHT VAT 3 VU 
Next to Ramyaka stands the Sveta mountain 
in whose region is Hiranyaka (varsa) and next 
to it, is SmMgasaka, which is also known as 
Kuru. 


aq: Ta 7 faga cat eferorat 
Sao TET AAT Heat aeeTSA TN 3 21 


On the north and south there are two bow- 
shaped continents, extending over 400 yojanas 
and Ilavrata stands in the middle of them. 


yaa Frag aerg claret BT 
Utfeactlad UNS FT ASATTN 331 


In the east of Nisadha mountain, half of it 1s 


Daksina Vedi and the western side of [lavrta is; 


called Uttaravedi. 
qamel g fagat teas racrary 
aferors g ateres Freerearator qu 3 vi 


Between them is Meru in [lavrta, to the — 


south of Nila mountain and to the north of 
Nisadha. 


FEMA UR AeTarAas Tae 
Sagal ASAT Wahea ATT TG 


The Mount Malyavan, stretching north to 
south, which is 32,000 yojanas in length enters 
the sea on the west. 


Wedard Wea steward: | 
Baraan aye: Waa TATSA I 3G I 


Malyavan is a thousand yojanas from Nila to 


3. One of the nine divisions of Jambidvipa. 


PD OQ 


S 


ee 


x 


of 


TS 


379 


Nisadha and Gandhamadana 1s 32 yojanas. 
ufmuseradel We: Hara: | 
UTAUTA AUIATA: AAPA: Zt 
Within their circumferences is the square 


and lofty golden Sumeru mountain, which is of 
fourfold colour, like the four castes. 


Traut: A UAT Yara at Fea 
Wet J carat tea leary OTA 
IM TA TH A sft quraaraa acl 
There are different colours on its sides; on 
the east it is white, on the south, it 1s yellow, on 
the west, it is like the wing of the black-bees, on 


the north, it is red. These are the different 
colours. 


Tee Wye feat waa 7 afea: 
SMSRTTSOTATA FATA Sa WAR 381 
The Mount Meru shines out like the rising 


sun or the blaze of fire without smoke, in the 
heart of those Mountains, like a divine king. 


UMA AAMT Ag Tyra heH AT: 
Wag: Gemeateptagtataedsd: 1 ¥ ol 


That Sumeru is 84,000 yojanas high, 16,000 
yojanas deep underground and 28,000 yojanas 
broad. 


FARTS TU TET UOT: WAT: | 
G Vaal Weteca fecttafraatad: iy a 


Its circumference is double its breadth. It is a 
great divine mountain, abounding in celestial 
medicines. 


Ta: Tea | 
TA SATUS WA ATTATAT: | 
WT Wed PaaS TAA TITY IH 


It is surrounded on all sides by lands of 
golden effulgence. On this king of mountains, 
the Devas, the Gandharvas and the Raksasas 
enjoy and carry on their pastimes in the 
company of Apsaras. 


Matsya Puranam 


aq We: uftgat yates: 
TAY ATU SH AATAAY APTA: 1 ¥ 3 
Wa Wed da Ae a UAT 
SHUT ALIA: HATTAM AAA: | ¥ VI 
That Sumeru is adorned by the Bhita and 
Bhavana worlds, and has four realms on its 
sides, viz.— Bhadrasva (in the east), Bharata (in 


the south) and Ketumala in the west and the 
sacred Kuru on the north. 


PATA MEAS TIA CT: | 
fags quar wacerfeaerat: yt 
The subjacent hill are- Mandara, 


Gandhamadana, Vipula and Suparsva, all full of 
precious stones. 


seute wae a fade agai 
aaa Mea Mia MT aA AU SE 


And on these mountains there are four lakes 
and forests known as Arunoda, Manasa, Sitoda 
and Bhadra. 


AAT UAHA Usd TATE 
Tagua fagetsa Fe: TAN Yt 


And there are big trees of turmeric, rose- 
apple, Asvattha on the Gandhamadana and 
banyan on the Vipula. 


TITTSATE J UTASHTTUSA: | 
BaMaaeeNiet UT: Add: WA ¥en 


Amaragandaka is west of Gandhamdadana 
which is 32,000 yojanas, equally on all sides. 


TA A MHA: AGT: UF LAAT: | 
aA Hee: Aa ARaaT ATA 3 I 


There reside the well-known Ketumalas, the 
doers of blessed deeds— there everybody 1s like 
the destructive Fire of high spirit and great 
strength. 


Pearse: Waa: Haeeray:| 
aa feat Helge: UA TTT: NY ol 
The ladies of that place are beautiful like the 


Chapter-113 


lotus and lovely. On that mountain there 1s a 
divine jackfruit tree, looking effulgent through 
its leaves. 


TS Weal Hera Vala TATA 
Te Megat: UI yas yal 7 afosan 
Eiiayret MeAOT AAT Yr EAT IG VII 
The people of that region live up to 10,000 
years by drinking the juice of those fruits. To 


the east of Malyavan flows the river Gandaki 
which is 32,000 yojanas in length. 


Tapes fare Fret aera: 
VAM TA HUCTGT Wega: WG VU 


The inhabitants of Bhadraésva (khanda) 
always remain happy and the Bhadramila forest 
lies in the same clime, where there is a huge and 
black mango tree. 


aa t TOM: YA TeTaa AelaeT: | 
ara: yea: Wad: MISA: 30 
The people of that place are white in 
complexions and very sturdy and strong. The 


womenfolk are the most beautiful, like white 
lily and very agreeable to look at. 


TSUMET RA: TORTS AAT: | 
AMAT TAA ATCT TREAT 1G XI 


They possess the radiance and colour of the 
moon, their faces are like the full moon, and 
their body cool, as the moon, smells like lotus. 


CHAU ASATUT STRAT TATA 
HINT TH Wheat Fa PTAA GI 


They live upto 10,000 years in good health. 
By drinking the kala mango juice, they always 
remain in full bloom of youth. 
ad sata 

SPHATI Te altos a Frat: | 


ye ATeRaS: fer aoa ay GI 
Sita said- O Rsis! Brahma has thus 
described the nature of the continents to the 


371 


Rsis, and the same Brahma who had previously 
favoured me (with describing the same). Now, 
what am I to narrate to you next? 


Uae TET FT VT: AigATAT: | 
MAHA: Ha WTA Felhaagr: 4 ol 


All the self-restrained seers, hearing these 
words of Sita, became curious, and said with 


great joy. 

RA sd: 

yatatt werent at eet dt aa at 
FAUT FT ARO UA A AAT NG SI 
arene At aural I a Vadantaa: | 
Wage fae ASAT: 1 8 I 


“O Sage! Be pleased to say all about the two 
countries, eastern and western, which have been 
already mentioned by you and of the northern 
varsas and mountains, besides which, we are 
also desirous of hearing the account of the men 
living on those mountains.” On being thus 
urged by the seers, Sita again resumed the 
string of his narration. 


ad sara 

qua att aati yatenh a a wan 

aferars g Alert Fae TU g oN 

Stita said— Listen to (the account of) the 

varsas which have been already referred to by 
me to the south of the Nila and to the north of 
Nisadha. 

ae WU A At Ga St WaT 

Tawar fare Beat Ba AMAT: | 

Ysa: Te F PASSAT: 11g VI 


That is Ramanaka (varsa) and _ the 
inhabitants of that place are very handsome and 
given to amicable delights, and of pure birth. 


catty a Verge =a URI WET 
Tete a Hea frat arate feng 2 


372 


There, too, is a huge banyan tree and the 
people of that place, live by drinking the juice 
of the fruits of it. 


SAAT SPATS eA 
Safa F USM: Met BHT ATTA BH 


These best of men of great parts live happy 
for ten thousands of years and ten thousands of 
centuries. 


SHOT | MTA Ue TTA aTaTH 
ad feqwad AM aa eWaat ASI XII 
To the north of Sveta mountain and to the 
south of Srnga (Smgin) is the Hiranyavat 
continent (varsa) where flows the river 
Hiranvati. 


Tela Aetarat fAed AleTAAT: | 
Vaasa: Ta Taga EG I 


The people of Hiranyavat are very strong 
and of high spirit. They are of pure and noble 
birth and are a good-looking and happy lot. 


Uae ASAlOT AaOT FATT: | 
MAAN Sart Pe AT WT ANE EI 


These first class men live up to the age of 11 
thousand and 1,500 years. 


aeray Helse Cael: TAMA: | 
TT Ua TA Aa Salat AAT: 11 § 9 


In that continent, there is a great bread-fruit 
tree of nice foliage, by drinking the juice of the 
fruits of which men live on. 


FMEA Ife aftr aT werfat ah 
Us Ufrad aa Uh F HaHa 
WATTS eh YATHUMMITATTI & 6 It 
The Mount Smiga (Smgin) has three lofty 
peaks. One of them is full of precious stones, 


the other one is studded with gold and the third 
one, full of all gems, is adorned with the worlds. 


SAL UT PTA AAA a eAeTTH 
aera Tee Tos fg afarqn & 8 


Matsya Puranam 


The country situated to the north of this 
Smga, to the south of the sea, is the renowned 
Kuru varsa where the saints (siddhas) have 
fixed their abode. 


aa FAT ATH ATA STMT: | 
SAT A MEAT HCAMATOTAT TN 9 0 tl 


It also has trees producing sweet fruits, and 
the water of the rivers is like divine nectar. 
Those beautiful trees produce raiments and 
ornaments by their frutts. 


AARAMETA: Afra WAT: | 
Sat atfeon AM garreta WANA: | 
2 ether Tel att TATSMTFATTAT I 9 gi 


Some of those beautiful trees are the givers 
of all the fruits of one’s desires, and the others 
are called Ksirina, always beautiful to look at, 
produce milk (juice) with the six tastes and 
sweet as paficamrta (the five best products of 
cow’s milk), productive of nectar like milk. 


Val afore ata: Went arerareyenn 
Waa TER Feat: TAA: FMT IN 
The whole land of that place is full of gems 
and is inlaid with fine gold dust. There, the 


wind is most pleasant and salubrious and 
noiseless. 


CAMA AT AAT: IST: 
Yecirarraat: Wa A PAAAAT: 1119 3 1 
The people falling down from Devaloka are 


born there. They are of pure and noble descent, 
having permanent youth. 


fag werent Peraereacareen | 
Aa AF attfrort ait frat MATA Ovi 
There, the daughter and the son are born as 
twins, and husband and wife like the 
manifestations of Gandharva and Apsara. 


There, they drink nectar like milk of trees 
overflowing with them. 


Chapter-114 


Vateatad I ad da frag 
at wi a viet a aa da fata anew 
The twins are born m a day. They grow 


together and are possessed of like beauty and 
character. They die together. 


Chay Uehara TTI 
SATA SMT Fret APSTATAT: 119 & 


They are attached to each other with the 
fondness of the ruddy geese. They are heaithy, 
without bereavement and happy. 


SHAUASANUT SHARMA AT 
Safa WT Wgraral A UM Gt Vardi oil 


These great souls live for 11,000 years, and 
are ever devoted to their own wives. 
ad sate 
vata Frant & aaron ae aT 
SB: Ueda: fea yar: HAIMA aici 
Sita said— O Rsis! The nature of these 
continents of the Bharata-varsa has been 


brought to your notice. O greatly pious ones! 
What more te you wish to hear now? 


MMM RAATIT: AAFAUT TACT 
HAA YE: WP: YAFSTTNG SI 
The Rsis, bemg thus asked by the 
enlightened son of Sita again questioned him, 


being desirous of hearing something more in 
answer. 


Sfa seed weTgral grafeaurst ara 
HASH a TATA SEAT : 11 223 UI 


KR 


CHAPTER 114 


Description of Bharatavarsa, Kimpurusa and 
Harivarsa 


RAT ded: 
fee and at aeaaTEa: | 
ages Wa: MATT Tefen gi 


373 


Wagar: THI Fa 
TAA TA: Wels ACATAT 21 
The Rsis asked— “O Suvrata, Buaratavarsa, 
where Svayambhuva and other Manus have 
appeared, who created the people, we would 
like to know about them from your mouth. At 
the same time, O Siita— the best of orators, after 
this, you also speak out about Bharatavarsa and 
other varsas. 


CATA BATT Y Wadteetreattn: | 
UTR eTST et TOT ATPSTATTATAN 3 1 
Tam frarea agen fagya a yt: WA: 
PAY HATA SAAATT AMT I 


Listening to the auspicious words of the 
Rsis, Stita— the son of Lomaharsana, repeatedly 
thinking with his wisdom, he started speaking 
about the varsas of the north. 


ad sald 

Be ANTENA AUS TA ATTA AT 

TUNA UAT SAAT G 

Sita said— “O Rsis, presently I am going to 

speak about the people who are bor in 
Bharatavarsa. Because of the feeding of these 
people, Manu has been designated as Bharata. 

Prema at aed BATA 

qa: Tales Wee pea fe AAEM 


On the basis of the unspoken words, this 
Bharatavarsa has been given the name 
accordingly. A person living in Bharatavarsa, 
achieves the heaven, moksa and the position 
between the two. 


1 Gras Meat yet Haas: BA: 
UTA FHT Aa VerhaaTA 9 


Except in the land of Bharatavarsa, the 
prescription of the performing of karmas has 
not been commanded anywhere. There are nine 
parts of Bharatavarsa. 


374 


Saat: Ayre ATT TATATATT 

AMT GAN WAARAT STE 1S 

aa 7 TAHA EIT: APA: | 

UGA Tes J gases seroAT: 118 

They are known by the names of Indradvipa, 

KaSeruman, Tamrararna, Gabhastiman, 
Nagadvipa, Saumyadvipa, Gandharvadvipa and 
Varunadvipa. These are the eight dvipas and 
ninth is the Bharatavarsa, which is surrounded 


by the ocean. This continent is spread from 
south to north by a thousand yojanas. 


MAA HATA Wea: Waerater:| 
feredyed q farettot: agenfor esta qu rol 
Its expansion starts from the place of origin 
of the Ganga to the Cape Kumari. It has been 
spread above upto ten thousand yojanas in a 
slanting way. 


gat qefafapisd weraratgy WaT: | 
Tees feaaeney TaA YATE 82 


The boundaries of this dvipa, are inhabited 
by the Mleccha dynasties. On its eastern and 
western sides Kirdtas and Yavanas are dwelling. 


Tan: atrar ayer wet YRS APTI: | 
SRI TaUTM IS TAAA ATA: LU 


In the central region of this varsa, there live 
the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and the 
Siidras, and they live on their respective 
occupations. 


St A AAS Set | TTT 
qMarragea AAT TF TARTAN V3 I 


The mutual dealings of these castes are 
based on the dharma, artha and kama. They 
remain engaged in their respective professions. 

USCITAA |F STATON TeTTafer 
Se cama wafatte ATTA evi 


Together with the kalpas, all the five varnas, 
(Brahmacarya, house-hold, vdnaprastha, yogis 


Matsya Puradnam 


and Sanydsis are followed appropriately. The 
activities of the people are meant for achieving 
the heaven or moksa. 


aeaad Waal gute: wartfera: 1 
TWA Wad Heel T AMMSta Alerts Wt 
This dvipa which has been spread in a 


triangular manner, when conquered by 
someone, he is called the emperor. 


oS HAY Ft ToS ersta BPA: 
TaUSat Bat oes: Yraeatt free eet 


This loka 1s known as the conqueror of 
Antariksa, which in its tum is known as 
Svarada. I shall explain this at full length. 


aa afarrerad fag: Hera: | 

Weal WT: Vel: MHAAATAPTTI Von 

foray uftaray seid Hea: | 

TH ACA USAT WATT R 

There are seven principal mountains in this 

continent, viz., Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, 
Saktiman, Rksavan, Vindhya and Pariyatra; and 
there are thousands of smaller ones adjacent to 
each of these. 


aera fagenBarara: | 
SY WA: UTA Bear Srarasifar: il 221 


Some of these are known to have fine peaks 
and tablelands, covered with many kinds of 
trees, etc. The smaller ones are less productive 
and are distinguished from the bigger ones by 
contrast. 


Safin WUET sal teres Wad: | 
foata agen Tat Tet fy: Ata ol 
MAGIK A AGA ACTRTAT| 

Ueraet fara a fare sheen sg: 2 gH 
TAA atta A ager A TET 

aalfgrent ¢ Tatar a Fayen west aM 
SAeiaaaeray HeraaPa A: FAT: yA 


The Mlecchas and the Aryan reside there 


Chapter-114 


mingling with each other without distinction 
and they drink the waters of many rivers, such 
as the Ganga, the Sindhu, the Sarasvati, the 
Sutlej, the Candrabhagé, the Yamuna, the 
Sarayt, the Airavati, the Vitatsa, the Devika, 
the Kuhu, the Gomati, the Dhautapapa, the 
Vahuda, the Drisadvati, the Kausiki, the Trtiya, 
the Niscald, the Gandaki, the Iksu, the Lauhita 
(all these having their source in the snow-clad 
mountains of the Himalayas). 


demhiartadt gaat fryta a 
UUM Adel da Blatt Hed AMT WIM 


UT FT raha fagar aopycaiy 
Foret wat Sait a uifcaraseat: Bars BVI 
The Vedasmrti, the Vetravati, the Vrtraghni, 
the Sindhu, the Parnasa, the Narmada, the 
Kaveri, the Mahi, the Para, the Dhanvati, the 
Rupa, the Vidusa, the Venumati, the Sipri, the 
Avanti, the Kunti (all these nvers having their 
source in the Pariyatra mountain). 


Welle Seo a faawHer ata aI 

arat fore yeast aan feraterenfa a 24 

faren eae ea aT a aeanfeatl 

Wrst Yat coat Yer siearht a 

RTT TIAA ARSAAAT: FTN AE I 

The Mandakini, the Dasara, the Citrakita, 

the Tamasa, the Pippali, the Syeni, the 
Citrotpala, the Vimala, the Cancala, the 
Dhutavahini, the Saktimanti, the Suni, the Lajja, 
the Mukutaé, the Hradika (these having their 
source in the Rsyavan mountain). 

art wate Fafeear fer a seat ach 

OT aa ae fearaTe Hye V9 

Ta da Heri Star F feen Ta 


FRATEMATEM: Hat: MAT: WAT ALI 
The Tari, the Payosni, the Nirvindhyd, the 
Ksipra, the Rsabha, the Vena, the Vaitarani, the 
Visvamala, the Kumudvati, the Toyd, the 


375 


Mahagauri, the Durgamé, the Sila (these rivers 
of cool water having their source in the Vindhya 
muontains). 


Melat TM FONT a aye 

TMA YET aM Bat da Fh 

SAUTUT AEA: MAA eats: Fares ti 2 2 It 

The Godavari, the Bhimarathi, the 

Krsnaveni, the Vanjula, the Tungabhadra, the 
Suprayoga, the Vahya, the Kaveri (these rivers 
in the south having their source in the Sahya 
mountains). 


HAT TTT Paar Bread 
UATMTAM AIM: Wal: MAA: FAT Zo 
The Krtamala, the Tamraparni, the Puspaya, 
the Utpalavati (these rivers of the cool water 


having their source in the Malaydcala 
mountain). 


Barn sfaaeat a sya fafearaem 

ATAU AAT Yet wat fare TAM 

USAT: Tat: MAA: MSTA: 3 

AUG THAT MT AAT Wathen 

SU A Uist da MAA AT 3 VI 

The Tnbhaga, the Rsikulya, the Iksuda, the 

Tridiva, the Calatamraparni, the Mili, the 
Sarava, the Vimala (these having come from the 
Mahendra mountain), the Kasika, the Sukuméari, 


the Mandaga, the Mandavahini, the Krpa, the 
Pasini (these having come from Saktimanta). 

Bal: QUAM: YOM: AAMT AAT: | 

Fao WAT: Wal: AAV: YT 33 

All the rivers named above are sacred, and 

fall into the sea and their waters are pure and 
sacred; and every one drinks from them. They 
are the mothers of the universe and purge the 
sin of the world. 

TAT AQUA VAAISA AAT: | 

TRAN HAAN: Wicaa AATF: 3 VI 


376 


WRRAT ARH STM: ARISEN: | 

TT: FRAT: HOTT Fre: Steer TET: I 
TST aise YRslarta: Wel 

TASH TAIT: MIST: Ube taT 3 GN 


From these rivers thousands of rivers are 
branched off, and into them thousands of 
tributaries fall. On their banks are situated the 
following (janapadas) places : Pancala, Kuru, 
Salva, Jangala, Siirasena!, Bhadrakara, Vahya, 
Pattacara, Matsya*, Kirata, Kulya, Kuntala°, 
Kasi, Kosala, Avanti, Kalinga*, Muka and 
Andhaka’. Thus I have described almost all the 
countries of Madhyadesa®. 


AMMA add At Meat zat 
Yrarcantt Geena A Wee AACA: Zl 
GA Weasat AA Wea WATT: | 
Tatras ceaiar gar feorretateelt: 113 ci 


Now the following are between the Sahya 
mountain and the Godavari, most charming 
lands in the whole world, where there are (the 
mountains) Govardhana, Mandara and 
Gandhamadana as well as the celestial trees and 
herbs, for Rama’s benefit. 


age Afar freneraathta: | 
at: UOT SHAT AA TATA 3 8 It 


These were brought down by Bharadvaja 
Muni, for Rama’s good, and by him was created 
a pleasant country decorated with flowers. 


Metal ACMA SVT: Alea: | 
YA UR Wea RITSUSaT: II ¥ oN 


——— 


. Name of a country about Mathura. 

2. Another name for Virata— the country lying to the 
west of Dholpur. 

3. South-west portion of Hyderabad, Deccan. Avanta 
country to the north of Narmada. 

4. Nothern Sircars. 

5. Modern Telangana. 

6. Madhyadesa the central region, the country lying 

between the Himalaya and the Vindhya. 


Matsya Puranam 


Tent aaa fears: | 

Wet FEM: Yferawy UTE rea: It ¥ It 

TAS: HUSA Hea SH AAT: | 

afrararayaey Ava; WHOM Av VW 

HANSA WET: WAT: ALAC: | 

MUA Aa: WE Wee 

Ud SMM SCTCAT EY MISA AUT AANTA 1 3 I 

Bahlika’, Vatadhana, Abhira®, Kalatoyaka, 

Purandhara Sidra, Pallava, Atta Khandika, 
Gandhaéra, Yavanas, Sindhu’,  Sauvira, 
Madraka, Saka!°, Druhya, Pulinda, Parada, 
Harmirtika, Ramatha, Kandakara, Kaikeya!!, 
Dasanamaka, Prasthala, Daseraka, Lampaka, 
Talagana, Sainika, Jangala, and other places 
peopled by Bharadvaja Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, 
Vaisyas and Sidras— These places (janapadas) 
are on the north. Now hear of those on the east. 


eT Agi Maa aratatcaterrat 
Ta: Vata APTaP TACT: WY YI 
WAI YOST facerearerat: | 
WICAUPERIAEL: Wea HAUT: SATUS I 


Anga!?, Vanga!?, Madguraka, Antaragiri, 
Bahirgin, Suhya, Uttara Praviyaya, Marga, 
Vageya, Malava, Pragjyotisa, Pundra, 
Videha!4, Tamraliptaka, Salva, Magadha!> and 
Gonardda are the ancient janapadas on the east. 


ANT Ut HATET StaroTTTaT aA: | 
WSuey Atle Be: HeIeAIa ANE 


7, Bahlike = Balkha. 

8. Abhira— south of Sri Konkana and on the western 
bank of the Tapti is the land of the Abhiras on the 

— Vindhya hills. 

9. Sindhu = The country of the upper Indus. 

10.Saka = The countries on the north-western frontier. 

11.Kaikeya = Bordering on the Sindhu Desa. 

12.Anga is near modern Bhagalpur. 

13. Vanga also called Samatala is in eastern Bengal. 

14. Videha, country lying to the north-east of Magadha. 

15.Magadha is modern state of Bihar. 


Chapter-114 


Val: Brawla Hon afsranharat: | 
Tater Ufsfier: afswla WaT: 1 vol 
HUST Teale STAT: MATT 
yferer faaufien det qush: Weve 
aera facies SUA: Tel 

aa afattesla We AAT Y 8 
afta Y wel Fy daresay: | 


Those lying to the south (or in the 
Daksinapatha) are— Pandya!, Kerala2, Cola?, 
Kulya, Setuka, Sitika, Kupatha, Vajivasika, 
Navarastra, Mahisika, Kalinga, Karusa, Aisika, 
Atavya, Savara, Pulinda, Vindhya, Pusika, 
Vidarbha*, Dandaka, Kuliya, Sirala, Ripasa, 
Tapasa, Taitirika, Karaskara, Vasika and the 
countries on the banks of the Narmada. 


WSh: AACA: As AACA & oll 
HTH AA UIST Sa sae: Tel 
Sad ATM JOT SY PTAA NG 8 

The following countries lie on the west— 


Bharukaccha, Sama&heya, Sdrasvata, Kacchika, 
Saurastra>, Anartta and Arbuda®. 


WIA HRI Vencisleaet: Fel 

HUST AAT STOTT aT: fenfena: AEN y VU 
Rigen: araersa Ay afegrea 
TUT aT URAT Ae: AEN G BN 

SSI: PilUsheey alsa Staats: | 

Ud WaTeT: Garret fererge Panter: 4 Yi 


The following countries are on the western 
extremity of the Vindhyacala— Malava’, 


1. Modern Tinnevelly. 

2. Modern Malabar, 1.e., the strip of land between 
western Ghats and the sea north of the K4veri.. 

3. Modern Tanjore. 

4. A district in the Deccan between the Narmada and 
the Godavari. 

5. Modern Kathiawar in south Gujarat. 

Abu in Rajasthan. 

7. Modern Malwa belt in Madhya Pradesh. 


on 


377 


Karusa, Mekala, Utkala®, Aundra, Masa, 


Dasara’, Bhoja, Kiskindhaka!®,  Togala, 
Kosala!!, Traipura!*, Vaidisa, © Tumura, 
Tumvara Padgama, Naisadha, Aripa, 
Saundikera, Vitihotra and Avanti!3. 

sat Sora Tearataoey A 


FRET: WAM HVAT STATA & & I 
HUMANA TUNA: WYRAT: | 
frat deersla farerat: Wen ye 


The following countries are situated on the 
mountains— Nirahara, Sarvaga, Kupatha, 
Apatha, Kuthapravarana, Urna, Darva, 
Samudgaka, Trigarta, Mandala, Kurata and 
Amara. 


aeaht ad at ait Pras TAT 
Hi Ia gt a atest aay 
aat frat aeatt safeted HTT Ol 


There are four ages of the world viz.— Satya, 
Treté, Dvapara and Kaliyuga. I am now going 
to give you an account of each!. 


Wea Tara 
Urea F BIT Sat WA A 
WTTARTT ET WH TSETOTTH & CI 


The Lord said— O King! Hearing this, the 
sages, desirous of hearing the narration, began 
to enquire from Sita, the son of Lomaharsana. 


8.State of Orissa. 

9.The country through which the Dasan river flows. 

10.A city in the Deccan. 

11.The country along the banks of river Sarayu. 

12.Modern Tevur. 

13.Country to the north of the Narmada. 

14.The duration of each age respectively is 1,728,000; 
1,296,000, 864,000 and 482,000 years of men, the 
four together comprising 4,320,000 years which 1s 
equal to a Mahdyuga. The regularly descending 
length of the Yugas represents a corresponding 
physical and moral deterioration in the people living 
in each age, the present age being Kaliyuga— the Iron 
Age. 


378 


RAT dd: 

Tea fant at eftad ata a 

MTS AN Tae ft AT AIT 81 

wees frat qarerat faciar 

Curt aifaat Aai sao WaalfE As & oft 

The seers said— O Stta! You have told us 

about Bharatavarsa, now be pleased to tell us 
something about Kimpurusa varsa and Hari 
varsa; besides this, be good enough to tell us 


about the Jambidvipa, etc., as well as about 
their people and the trees that grow there. 


ypead der fardenedt fasted: 
Jara BATES TTOTTAT AAT & Vi 
Thus exhorted by the Brahmanas, Sita 


began to relate to them what was in accordance 
with the Puranas and approved by the Rsis. 


ad sated 
Waray Ate: years: 
argad: FRET: WAASATTT: 1G 21 
Stta said- O Rsis! As you desire to hear 
these things, listen to me attentively. The 
Kimpurusa of Jambidvipa is as great in 
magnitude as the Nandana-vana. 


em adagarter fata: fanged aya 
Wt AAAAA YA HAH TAT: 116 3 
The people of Kimpurusa-khanda have a 


complexion like that of heated gold, and they 
live up to 10,000 years. 


ay fayed yor wre wyae: Baa: 
rey feyeet: Be frat TAP ATATT S XII 


A stream of honey flows from a Plaksa tree, 
in that sacred Khanda, which the Kinnaras 
residing there drink. 


SAT eens et Area: | 
FAVA AT: FART: PAT NG GI 


On account of which they remain so healthy, 
without any grief and happy, and cheerful in 


Matsya Puranam 


their minds. The people have a_ yellow 
complexion like shining gold, and_ the 
womenfolk are known as Apsaras. 


aa: Ut faqearghtae werard 
TEATS AA AA AAT: 11 § & UI 
caer : Wa AKU Way: | 
Shag at: ad fraxiard YT oN 


Beyond Kimpurusa is Harivarsa, the 
inhabitants of which are silvery white in 
complexion. They are the fallen people of 
Devaloka. They all drink the juice of the 
sugarcane. 


TAT aad aa aA state a facy 
Ware eet ara: wentferrqn g 2 


They do not get old and consequently they 
live for a very long time. Their average age is 
11,000 years. 


Tea AAT Wh AAT aurea 
Toa Ta FT AAT AAT NG BI 
Ilavrta Khanda is the middle, where there 1s 


no strong sunshine and of which men have little 
knowledge. 


SEDC EICECINIUCKIEC GT 

UIA: WAU: Taraafa eros: 1119 0 It 
TRY Wad aa Ad a AAT: 
WTRATHENT SAT; QA A119 8 
Caeleya: Aad TAA: | 

FAM ASA Fao A AVA VU 


The sun, the moon, as well as the stars are 
seldom seen in []Avrta. The people of that place 
are handsome like the lotus and their eyes are 
like the same, and their body, too, emits a scent 
like that of the lotus. They seldom get excited 
and drink the juice of the  rose-apple, 
(jambuphala). They, too, are the fallen people of 
Svarga and wear silvery white garments, and 
live upto 13,000 years. 


AIAN Vata Aq ad sera 
TA STUY OPT PRATT ATI 9 3 


Chapter-114 


Gayrt ae Were: WAT: 
Preamernentad: fag areoratad: ite ¥ 


To the south of Meru and north of Nisadha 
stands the roseapple tree (jambuvrksa), which 1s 
called Sudarsana. It 1s a huge tree, and always 
abounds in flowers and fruits, and 1s frequented 
by the Siddhas and Caranas. 


TEA AAT AAA Vag TTT 
ASA Asa BW MAM A AFA 


Jambidvipa is so called after this huge tree. 
It rises to a height of thousands of yojanas. 


saat garner feanraca fasha 
TE TITHATAT Tat Year WAUFeTI 9 € I 


The tree is so high and big that it seems to 
cover all the heavens, and the juice of its fruits 
flows in the form of a river. 


WS Wet Hear WOM TAT YA: 
a frata Wer wet WeaTaeTaA 99 11 


It flows round Sumeru, and then waters the 
root of the tree, and people of [lavrta drink it 
with great pleasure. 


MHA Wea A TAT aTTAS HT ATT! 


TMT A HT aT Fg: w waarqcit 


By drinking it, they neither get infirm, nor 
do they ever feel hungry, tired or miserable. 


aa Was AM HA SATU 
SRNTHAAIN Wad WTC A ATU? 
Aaa FUGA YA: HCA FI 
ta J GSA YS Wad CayeUTT ¢ oll 


There 1s to be found a kind of gold, called 
the Jambianada, which is the ornament of the 
Devas. It 1s red like the Indragopa (insect). The 
fruits of this tree produce the best juice of all 
the fruits of trees of other varsas. This tree 
exudes a gummy sap, like gold, which 1s also 
the ornament of the Devas. 


379 


aa Wa TS at feeapra B WaT: | 
SMTA TAI J ANC 


By the grace of God, the soil of that place 
swallows the excreta of the people and the dead. 


Ta :fagireat Aen Aa SAaATT A 
era F fag Weal: ACAI 2 


The Raksasas, and the Pisacas live (in the 
dales) of Himavata. The Gandharvas and the 
Apsaras are the inhabitants of Hemakita. 


aa aT Fraad MrarafenaaraT: | 

Te Tafeag HlSt AMA: WATS TT 
ftererguaenstery feat TeMaisrey 
CaM CAAA BWA: Wat TAA cI 


Sesa, Vasuki, Taksakas and the Nagas, all 
haunt the Nisadha mountain, and the 33 blessed 
Yajnyias (Devas) sport on Mahdmeru. On the 
Nila mountain, where sapphires abound, live the 
Siddhas, Maharsis and Danavas. The Sveta 
range is said to be the resort of Daityas. 


Tear Uaaae: faq wirtat: | 
Seda Wala AaaAOT MITA S&H 
qatte faraa afratra garfor a 

wat gigdgiaa Grad <aaya:| 
AVM UST ASA T THAT c 


Srigavan, the best of the mountains, is the 
haunt of the Pitrs. These are the nine continents 
in the world. The changeable (plains) and the 
fixed (mountains) are inhabited by various 
creatures. Men and Devas see numerous 
increase in them. They cannot be counted, but 
should be taken on trust, by one who wishes his 
own good. 


ATE MTTAH STATA SEAT: ROG A 
KKK 


380 


CHAPTER 115 


Story of the earlier birth of Purtirava 


Qt 

Utd GAGA Water WAT AAA! 

TT: Meglatt: YT: MAUTTTTIA: 11 2 

Fa: WEIMAR: thet SAT F AAT 

PONSA A FAA Al 2 

TAM BH ATA FATT Ayal 

aiqect AYA TAT Tes 3 Ut 

at RAAT FY UT YRAT: | 

TAT May BI TIA ATA 

CaAYaSSTY WIA TAA 

TaN VSM TAT Tass F TTT GU 

Manu asked— “O Janardana, I have heard 

from your mouth the story of Purtirava, the son 
of Buddha and also heard about merits of the 
auspicious performing of the srdddhas, besides 
the donation of the cows with calves, or the 
black buck skin, besides the releasing of a bull, 
but, O Kesava, by listening to the story of 
Puriirava the son of Buddha, I have become 
desirous of listening further about it. Because of 
that I am asking you. Therefore you kindly tell 
me the deed with the performing gf which 
Pururava achieved such a beautiful form and the 
fortunes, which attracted Urvasi to him, 


discarding the Gandharvas and the gods, and 
was united with the king Purtirava.” 


Act] Sata 
TT aufaaea Aa Wal RTA: 
SAT ASST WT ATTA AAT € 
Lord Matsya said— “I am going to speak out 
to you the reason because of which the king 


Purtirava achieved the best of beauty and the 
fortunes. You please listen. 


Milt WA YT Ass TT TRtaT: | 
Yara sft wart ascent fe Au 


Matsya Puranam 


NYTAAS TA ATT AAT 
a a FUTUR: Haet MTA AT CI 


The king Purirava was also known by the 
same name in his earlier birth. He was born in 
Caksusa Manvantara in the family of Caksusa 
Manu and was the ruler of Madradesa (North 
west of Punjab). (Salya was the king of that 
place and Madri was the wife of Pandu). At that 
point of time he had all the qualities of a king 
no doubt but he was ugly’. 


ANT Sd: 
TRA AAU: HAUT St Uefa: 
aS HAUT HA BUA TAA 8 


Rsis said— “O Sita, with the reward of 
which one of his merits, the king Purirava 
became the lord of Madra country and because 
of what action did he become beautiful. You 
please tell me. 


Wa sara 
fay RT ATT UTATATAT: | 
TM: Fel AEN: Ta Trfera: 11 got 


Stta said- “O Sages, in earlier birth 
Purtrava was an excellent Brahmana and lived 
in the village located over the bank of the river. 
At that point of time also he was known by the 
same name of Purtirava. 


OT Aaa Wat AA AAT YEA: 
afengraral fam geyat ¢ WarszTAH Ve 


O Sinless one, the king of the country of 
Madra was known by the name of Purtirava. He 
as a Brahmana, with the desire of achieving 
kingship, used to perform fasting on the day of 
Dvddasi and adore lord Visnu. 


SUT UAT TTA HATE ATL 
GA MTA TAMAS TAR AN 22 


|. (The context in which lord Matsya had to speak 1s 
being spoken by Sita at the instance of the rsis. 
Therefore the same story has been repeated 
thereafter. } 


of 


Chapter-116 


STATA Tet AAHVTHT| 
THAR TIE SATA 23 Ut 
Once, he observing fast applying oil over the 

body, took his bath, as a result of which he 
achieved the unobstructed kingdom of the 
country of Madra, no doubt, but because of his 
applying oil over the body while fasting, he was 
born ugly. 


t 
i : Pea = a)‘ PJ 4ach 4 


ee 


Therefore, a person observing the fast, 
should make all the efforts not to use oil while 
fasting because it destroys beauty. 

Wie: aad Wa Gaga Ya 
TPAC FO] ART TST 1 4 


Thus I have repeated the story of his earlter 
birth. Now you listen from me the subsequent 
story relating to his becoming the lord of Madra 
country. 


TA TTT: ad: AAU TTT: | 
SATU Aaa UST THT SU VE It 


Inspite of his royal qualities, he was not 
loved by his subjects, on account of his 
ugliness. 


SUaIa: A ATeATa Hasya: | 
Tea Ufa Seat wa festa VN 


He then decided to go and practise penances 
for the attamment of personal beauty, in the 
Himalaya, after making over charge of his 
realm to his ministers. 


AMAA AY TAT WAG: | 
38 a alae faward wah Acty 
Ueadta faenat ceuifrrarcanq 22 
That far-famed king, with his own 
enterprising spirit as the only companion, went 
on foot to that home of all the tirthas (1.e., 
Himalayas), and at the end saw the renowned 


381 


and beautiful river Airavati. 
Feafintiwat Wéea 
SICSUM IESE R ISM CGAL 
aera: AL SIM TAT Vet 


The king, whose fame was like that vast icy 
region, saw that river of the mighty Himalayan 
torrent, whose waters are cold like the rays of 
the moon and white like snow. 


Sta stored eral ata ATA 
WASH AH STATA SEAATET 1 QVGA 


KKK 


CHAPTER 116 


Description of Airavati river 
Ud sata 
T aay Tal Yoat fort erat TATA 
Tea UTAatO Fed weaker Aang vn 
aemedtant aay fear 
TAT Waa AeA ANT 2 


Sita said- O Sages, the auspicious and 
sacred river Airavati issues from the Himalaya 
mountain. It is over crowded with the 
Gandharvas who collect there for the taking of 
the bath. It is served by Indra and it looks 
graceful having been anointed by the fluid of 
the elephant Airavata, it was glittering in the 
centre like the rainbow. 


AUTAMTLTTT AT Marae aT 

See ATTN WERT: FETA BU 
fadearatcreasal Hrgovara say 
eafafrenttre a at Uveitis wet Tat xi 
quar yin eat ara: wifratety 
ragiaqa Tat arghatrarerg 4A 
Geasiaaritat fyragrraferary 

qa feraa: set aaretfatarerisrarqn & 1 


382 


MYATT ATTA HATTA 
MISA: AO PaHCATASAAI 9 
stat aagafedt weferorafaary 
AHA AGTH AAAS CI 
feat Wael cee AHA erfreary 
Teancaetdt Tai area 8 


The hermitages of the sages had been made 
over its bank. It was being served by the best of 
Brahmanas and was glittering like the molten 
gold. Such a type of river was spotted by 
Pururava. It was covered with lines of white 
swans which appeared like the chowries of the 
flowers of long reeds and was being bathed by 
the noble people. The king was pleased by 
looking at it. The auspicious river was filled 
with cool water, attracted the mind and 
increased the delight of the mind, had the 
decline and the overflow of water, pleasant, 
appeared bright like the second moon, 
extremely cool, flowed with force, filled with 
water, served by the Brahmanas and the birds, 
like the best of the daughters of the Himalaya, 
looking graceful with the unstable waves, 
having the sweet water resembling the nectar, 
graced by the ascetics, like the step for reaching 
the heaven, remover of all the sins, the chief 
queen of the best of oceans, served by the 
Maharsis, one which caused anxiety in the 
minds of all the people, extremely pleasant, one 
which bestowed welfare on all, bestower of the 
path to the heaven, having the herds of cows 
over the bank, extremely beautiful, free from 
aquatic plants. 


SAAAAST eSATA 
INT: AOTETAT ATT Ro 1 
SACTTAT 
fearrhaaeat t TATA 
AMAIA ATA A ATA 22 


leh a Uells 4 | 


SATA QUT AAACN 2A 


Matsya Puranam 


With the echoing of the sound of swans and 
the crane birds, looking beautiful with the lotus 
flowers, having deep whirlwinds like the black 
wasps, having two banks like the thighs, having 
the blue lotus flowers resembling the blue eves, 
having the blossoming lotus flowers like the 
face, having the foam like the bright snow as 
the costume, having the lips like the sheldrake 
bird, bestower of welfare, having the line of 
skylarks resembling the teeth, having the lines 
of fish resembling the eyebrows, having the 
pleasant breasts formed of whirlpools in the 
water, having the anklets in the form of Swans 
and having the armlets in the form of lotus 
stalks. 


TA SITTIAT WIAA: Aa 
TANGA Ws] AIS ATCATAT TOT: 11 23 


O king at the noon time, the apsards in 
groups, getting intoxicated with their beauty, 
always sported with the Gandharvas. 

aman fattie ted AgHT WT 


TU WVU 


"; dd od LS eLUIE? ‘4 
" G 


The river carried in its water the saffron 
used by the aspards over their bodies, besides 
the flowers of different colours in the trees 
grown over its banks, which issued fragrance. 


J eb | OrISFIT 


rer} 
Gears PeHeTSATTATTN 84 


The flowers falling from the trees had 
covered the surface of the water as a result of 
which it was difficult to look at the reflection of 
the sun in the river water. 


vet RE 4 9- -} 
& 
4 


Wat Vleret TAM: TETSHTA CATH RE I 
Such a magnificent stream, in which flows 
the ichor of the Airavata, the elephant of Indra, 
and the sandal perfume of the consorts of the 
Devas, is swarmed by a train of sweetly buzzing 
bees. 


Chapter-117 


TARA FAT: ATTRA AAT: | 
AUTEM AMAT EAT ACT: It 9 
Tet teat Ala Wel AMA OMT: | 
AQT MUA SAT: WATT: tl Vc Ii 


The ascetics, the seers and the Devas, in 
company of the Apsaras, derive happiness on 
her banks, where the humming bees were 
attracted by the aroma of sweet flowers of the 
trees on her banks and where the intoxicated 
deer gratify their passions. 


etd BA YaTeT cava: Mara: | 
Tey AAG: TaSMtT AAT: 1 28 


The celestial women, with their face like the 
lotus, and the moon, become sanctified by a 
bath in her water and are honoured by the 
Devas. 


am fauft der aa taagraifeay 
Yfereqrags arrgemifsrqi ol 
ATAU TATA ATT 

O at Ware THT Tariana 2 i 
Taree: HI: Wierayaay: | 

Trad fafeaerant cet AT WeTgT: 

a vel fataafarcaanta Freer 220 


The water of this river is not disturbed by 
the Devas, Pulindas, (kings) and tigers, etc., is 
decked with lotus flowers, illumined by the 
reflection of the moon and stars. The king 
continued his journey while seeing this river, 
which satisfies the desire of the sages. On her 
banks, the groups of Devas and Brahmanas 
were sitting under the branches of trees, whuse 
kasa flowers look like the rays of the moon. 


Ol A Wel Paciaaarsi 

WATT Acar 
agra areal fe Herat 

ASTI Beat fe TAS Vl 
a fe gaa wit WI 


383 


TM a yat wad ferag: | 
MA Yat Wat Ate 
at a wt: cafgara fare an evi 


Ta A Hal: Aaeae4 
wagatereMs Gauge 


TAY] Witdielda- 


hamemnuhieees 


The king, who is famous like the moon, saw 
that the river was inundated with many rivulets 
and was the dispeller of sins of the devotees and 
worshipepd by many sages, which gives 
nourishment to the people, as a mother does to 
her sons, and which is surrounded by the Devas, 
and by other people, seeking their own benefit, 
which is sported by the lions and the elephants, 
whose waters are full of Parijata trees, and 
which is never increased or decreased by the 
heat of the sun. 


ofa stared Tegal yarane Qelauls aa 
OSH TATA SEAT: 2 2E UI 


KR 


CHAPTER 117 


Description of the astonishing splendour of 
Himalaya 

ad sald 

Meee Tal YUM ATTA: | 

a reed cant fanart Tete en 

Sita said— “The fatigue of the king Pururava 

was removed with the touch of the wind 
blowing through the water of the river Alravati. 
He was moving forward looking at the said 


sacred river and at the same time he spotted a 
great mountain known as Himavan. 


waferrafaaghrgd THE wast: 
vermnata dartfen fran yer eI 


It had a number of high peaks, of yellow 
colour and quite bright almost touching the sky. 


384 


These peaks were inaccessible to the sages but 
not the birds. 


TaITATS MATT ST Tee: WATT: 
HATA FT Mada TATA 3 
Besides this, the Himalayas echoed with the 
thundering sound of the rivers falling down in 
cascades and which rendered all the other 


sounds inaudible. The Himalayas looked quite 
charming with the lakes of cold water. 


aaereatet: Gea YT 

Tartare Bet Set A AMATI 

PMITHUNON UHI Fahad 

feanteaare sarge & i 

Pedals SAMS FAM 

vine Frerasta frenfancager 

Aetna Bet ATT; aT g 

— — | 

aie: qatar: frat alee aeqiion 

FAA GMATTUY: THrSTraH UMMA 

Suid aa Wee: fearon wet: safaqi ci 

MO wearer Fara 

yet: Garant feeherquyntarqi 8 

Galera: wea: SIA Ta Fara 

Brea: AAT WAST FATA 20 11 

The blue forests of Devadaru trees, appeared 

like its lower costume, while the clouds 
appeared as the upper garment, then while 
clouds appeared as a turban, and the sun and the 
moon represented the diadem. Its body was 
covered with snow, which served the purpose of 
necklace while the minerals enshrined therein 
scattered here and there looked like serving the 
sandal paint. It provided coolness even during 
the hot weather. It was decorated with massive 
rocks, at places imprinted red with the foot 
prints of apsards. Some of the places were lit up 


with the sun and others were covered with 
darkness. The drinking water could be found 


Matsya Puranam 


somewhere through the deep chasms, adorned 
with the multitude of playful Vidyadharas, and 
the prominent Kumaras at places looking 
beautiful with flowers of the heaven, fallen 
from the Gandharvas, the apsards, while they 
engaged themselves in drinking and elsewhere 
covered with flowers, pressed down by the 
Gandharvas while rising from their slumber and 
thus they looked charming. 


TRIMERS Be 

qafred HAMA HUITeAL PTA Vz 

AURA Vet afaarafrectay 

Warahed afar aq 221 

aa fares Te ATE Taq 

Svat TM GMT TAA HTN V3 1 

At places, the mountain was covered with 

blue grass, without a breath of wind. This 
mountain happens to be the refuge of ascetics 
and is beyond the reach of lovers. Herds of deer 
gaze at the foot of the rocks, whose trees are 
broken down by the tusks of the elephants, who 


are disturbed with lion roars and make noisy 
uproar. They are never restful. 


TERY ATT HAC AMT: | 
THE TAMA ANA HATI Vv Ut 


In the entire valley, the bowers were 
enshrined the meditating seers and the precious 
stones from those places adorn the three worlds. 


sero Peamsarraraay 
se: Uae FARE THAATETII 2b I 


[t is the place of refuge of the great people 
and is served by the great people. The great 
people find this mountain with enormous Jewels 
and precious stones. 


aed are aa fag Wea ATTAT: | 
TET SARA TAHOMA VE I 
TSUTOMU TATE | 

aR: Ver genre rarararaqi wo 


Chapter-118 


The hermits accomplish their course of 
asceticism in short duration. All the sins vanish 
merely by the sight of this mountain. The wind 
makes the landscape pleasant by blowing the 
sprays of water of its water-falls. 


Uae: Te: eatery wae: 
PATA TT ATTA FTTH CI 


(It is) decorated somewhere with summits 
bristling with waterfalls; at other places, with 
peaks, which, owing to hot sun shining are 
inaccessible, except by the wind. 


TCTOURTAM ARTOIS + 
AMMA: WEVTSTMTATTN 82 
er MUTA ASAT 
MANTA ATK FASTA 20M 


At places it looked beautiful, with clusters of 
the great overshadowing Devadarus which, 
owing to their thickness, looked like clusters of 
bamboos. At other places were huge icicles, 
hundreds of thundering’ waterfalls 
fountains, as well as caves, with their mouths 
sealed with snow. 


apa tf are frarayia 
Tara: AT Aaa: | 
aya ata Yet WAM: 
TI dar feafaereare 2 20 


The great King of Madra roamed about, 
seeing that beautiful valley, and (after a time) 
sat down for a time at a certain place. 


sft stared HeTgeaT yarae fenaguls are 
TACHA MATA SETA: 11 2 9H 


KKK 


and 


385 


CHAPTER 118 


Description of the astonishing beauty of 
Himalaya and the hermitage of the sage Atri 


aa sara 
THA TACHA Wes YATTA| 
MTA UAAT AAA TATA: 11 VU 


Sita said- “O Sages, king Purirava, 
suddenly reached one of the beautiful places, in 
that mountain, which was beyond the reach of 
an ordinary person. 


tiradt aftaser weregnfghrtan 
TERA Bt Sot FASTA: | 
The place from where the river Atravati 


issues, is also beautiful in appearance like the 
clouds with plenty of trees and the thickets. 


WTA RATT HATTA: ARTA: 
— foray: — N31 


” “auth waa. Thal 
Telracaen Prarie : 
CACTOUSTGATAAT HUATHT 14 I 
waesrettaed: afr THe: | 
TATA Te AT TATA: 1 GU 


It has enough of the following types of trees 
including Sala, Tala, Tamiéla, Karnikara, 
Sasamala, Nyagrodha,  Asvattha, Sirisa,” 
Simgapa, Slesmataka,’ Amalaka, Haritaka, 
Bibhitaka,  Bhirja,° Mufijaka, = Bana, 
Saptachhada,, Mahanimba,’ Nimba, Nirgundi, 
Hari, Devadaru, Kaleyaka, Kadamba, Candana, 


after: Weng: Wetter saft- wave: 
. Mimosa Sirisa Roxb. 
. Dalbergia latifolia. 
. Cordia ablequa 
. Terminalia Belerica 
. Betula Bhoyaptra 
. Alstonia scholarts 
. Melea azenderech 


> ee ee ed ee 


3386 


Bilva, Kapittha, 
Aristha,” Aksota, Abdaka, Arjuna, 


Brera: Wa: alfaant: Ware: 
Wren ch; ATS: 191 
Gatalfcnetsy frarermatdtcagye | 
aerated: sree craforar etait <1 


Hastikama, Sumanasa, Kovidara, 
Pracinamalaka, Dhanaka, Samarataka, 
Kharjura, Narikela, Priyala, Amarataka,” 
Inguda, Tantumala, Dhava, Bhavya, 
K aSamiraparni, 


Ate: Wel: HaHa ACT | 
Tet: aifaaney faye: HAATTA 18 
qa: Vifraaadaaaaa : 
THATS Tea: AAMAS: 1 oN 
Jatipahala, 
Lavaliphala, 


Pugaphala, 
Mandara, 


oes Hingu, Priyangu, 
r= +: | 

wean 3 mircewvewh: Tkxa) 
fart: fenfgereey ther: serena: 
aera Tales rates: 221 
Fa aT HAAS AT TTT 
WATE PTTL: ARANAATA: 1183 1 
Wrafraa da yeaa ae 
AT AAA A TACT TAT: 11 PU 
Areca ed Capel TATE ITS | 
TM AMAT: SATA: 1 
YH THet: uieteTa: | 
arracta: Het: Herat eHSst: 1 GN 


1. Acacia catechu 
2. Sapindus Trifoliatus 
3. Buchanania Latifolia 
4. Spondias Mangifera 
5. Prunas Mahaleb 


Raktacandana, Mata, Amra, 


Katphala, 
Kimsuka, 
Kusumamsuka, Yavasa, Samiparnasa, Vetas, 


Matsya Puranam 


Asoka and red flowered Asoka, Akalla, 
Avicaraka, Mucukunda,° Kunda, Ataris, 
Pariska,  Kirata, | Kinkirata,’ © Ketaka, 
Svetaketaka, Sobhafijana, Ajijana, Sukalinga, 
Nikotaka, Asana, Sarakdra, Yuthika, Jati, 
Campaka, Tumbara, Atumbara, Mocha, Loca, 


Lakuca, Tila, KuseSaya, Cavyaka, Bakula, 
Paribhadra, Haridraka, §Dharakadambuka, 
Kutaja, Kadamba. 


sees: BM: HHT: BMA: | 
HeMcaetaidatahta AelsTAct: Il VOI 
Th: Weta: Adalfetarorangy | 

TIRY URI: HARA FT AAT Vc 
Han: —e 
ERS tt 


a-| B 


drag cattery 

farasy wfafarass araTrenfaarteh: il 20 I 
aa WMT AaT Fee ay: | 
TTA: BLATT 1 VU 
Hafan fattfacd: wage: | 
farrier othafase: attfrega:1 221 
VATA LAT HHT : yaa_A: | 
Vectdargaadena: Faas 230 
ae: HAA awH NTA: | 
CHAMAAS A: WATS: TATA VI 
Helencaney aA: UL 

wart: Troe a ATAPI APT ITH A&I 
TTT Ta TettaatetHay TAT 

AATST HEM 
TWA A WA: Wet: YT. 
SHUSA WAY Sera AM Fafaqi lt 
FEET WATT Wale Taeere | 
HAAaAAY Achgaditaet 1 VWI 


Tei(hlQusuyia a 
2 


6. Patero sperumam 


7, fafaurdt fa: Wah: Waysh: | ATH: 


Chapter-118 


alenyeatenaed fafa 
= — 


ie wf cifeenke creer 


Adityamustaka, Kumbha, Kumkuma, 
Katphala,’ Vadara, Nipa, Palivata, Dadima, 
Campaka, Bandhuka, Subandhuka, Kufyakajati, 
Patala, Mallika, Karavira, Kurabaka, Jambu, 
Nrpajambu, Bijaptira, Karpura, Aguru, Bimba, 
Pratibimba, Santanaka, Vitdnaka, Guggula,’ 
Hintala, Iksu (of white colour), Karavira 
(without thorns), Cakramarda (relieving pain), 


Pilu, Dhataki,” Ciribilva, Tintidika,* Lodhra,° 
Vidanga, Ksirika, ASmantaka, Jambira, 
Svetaka, Bhallitaka,° Indrayava, Valguja, 


Nagakesara, Karamarda, Kasamarda, Aristaka, 
Varistaka, Rudraksa, Putrajivaka (having seven 
synonyms), Kamkolaka, Lavanga, Parijataka, 
Pippali, Nagavalli, Marica, Navamallika, 
Mrdvika, Attmuktaka, Trapusa, Nartikapratana, 
(Creepers) Kusmanda, Alabu, Cirbhita, Patoli, 
Karavellaka,° Karkotaki, Vdartaka, Brhati, 
Kantaka, Milaka and various kinds of edible 
roots. Kallaras, Vidari, Rurita, (having tasteful 
thorns), Bhandira, Vidtsara, Rajajambuka, 
Baluka, Suvarcala, Sarsapa, 


Acerca GAA Aaeszan 
HAMA A: AHA AH TS Il 3 2 
AMT attach Heya ATA 
yeoman AaaACAM TT: 113 2 


AAI A 


srqenfrtreafideutig =ofim 938 
TUITE: FRIAS TT 


. Myrica Sapida 

. Balsamodendron mukul 
. Wood Fordia Floribunda 
. Rhus Parviflora. 

. Symplcos Racemosa 

. Marking Nut 

. Cassia Occedentalis 

. Monordica Charantiea 


os) HN ON fe WH NO — 


387 


ATTA HAMMETT: 13 KN 
TA AUT TAT HHUA: 

IN: MM SHMY Wao TFs i 
HTT Tene : 
HUTA SIA VT ANB GA 
aM BT Hechauedtenfisaay : 

TA WHA: West: gead: 1 30 
STUN: FATA AT AMT: | 
TUM IA RT GUTS 3 CU 
Taurgeasy aa aftercare: 

HATA ETUH: ATA: WHAT 3 2H 
TATA: HATHA | 

He TMTAUATAT: GaP: vo 


Kakoli, Kesirakakoli, Chattra, Atichatra, 
Kasamardi, Ksirasaka, Kalasaka, Simbidhanya 
and various other kinds of grain and medicinal 


| herbs which prolong life, procure fame, give 


strength, and remove the fear of old age, death 
and hunger; and give every kind of happiness. 
There are also Venulata, Kicaka, Venu, Kasa, 
Sara clusters, Kuga, Iksu, Karpasa of various 
species, Kadali groves, as well as grassy plots 
(lawns) known as Marakata. There are also 
flowers of Ira, Kurmkuma, Tagara, Ativisa, 
Mamsagranth, Suragada, Suvarna, 
Bhimipuspa. There are also Jambira, Bhustrina, 
and Saguka, Srigavera, Ajamoda, Kuveraka, 
Priyalaka, as well as sweet smelling lotuses of 
various colours. 


sees: Wage 
TOA TAaUY Stra ETA AT: It ¥ VN 


Some of the blooming lotuses looked like 
the rising sun, some like the moon and the sun. 
some looked like bright gold, and some 
resembled the San (hemp, or Crotalaria juncea) 
flower. 


YR: WAT ATT: 
qaaut: anrattdganteta Ay It 


388 


The place was full of growing lotuses, of 
which some looked like the leaf of a Surisa 
(Suka), some having five colours, others many. 


TEeatenye: FyerTAhAM: 
TM afaterarnrtttaaateaet: WA ws 
There were Kumuda flowers, too, pleasing 
to the sight of the observer and looking like the 


moon lotuses, resembling the glow of fire, and 
like mouth of an elephant were there also. 


Aeerct: AEST ATTRA 
TCHYUNCAT HLe. THAT NS 
aad: watt: wa: wiaier 


fafaesta Frartyreerrferan ¥ 4 I 


The species of blue lotus, Kahlaras, the 
Gufijataka berry, Kaseri, Srigataka, Mrindla (a 
species of louts), Rajotpala (a kind of lotus), 
various kinds of fruits, flowers and roots 
thriving in water as well as on land, various 
species of rice fit for the use of the Rsis, 
abounded on that mountain. 


T grt TAS AT Ae A A eT 
A Pe TA Hes TAT TH TTT vg I 
O King! There is no such grain, grass, pot- 


herb, fruit, berry and herb that did not thrive on 
that mountain. 


Aenea feet AetrHve FT AA 
sue atrel a aa Aare Ufa vio 


The varieties of berries and fruits, grown in 
the world of the serpents, in the world of men, 
and the products of water and of forest, all 
flourished on that mountain. 

TAT YMA HAAG ATT: | 
TRAC: A Sa ATA AAT Ue 
The King of Madra, Purirava, by virtue of 


his asceticism, thus saw all those fruits and 
flowers of the season there. 


SEN A AM AA AAA UahavTT: | 
TAY aaa Hetlagis Alfa ¥ 2 


Matsya Puranam 


del mica Cay AAS Gatlear| 
UU HAH WEAK ATTA & 0 
TASHA SAY TAPS THT 
qTgigeaTcRis Rear (eleCHr] AEP 4 Vl 
qatrary cregary Meaty 
UTA BAA ALT GasaGrL | 2M 
MAITMHATA AT THAT FAT | 


TGS CYS HAE HHPIREAI | 3 
; ca Fl “> id cw UI 

YI MUM Wesr fettsary AAMT ¥ 

Wactitacheaery ATA AT 

Ua Tae Werag WAST G & II 

He also saw the following birds and animals 

living there— The peacock, the wood-pecker, the 
sparrow, the cuckoo, the goose, the swan, the 
lapwing, the wagtail, the osprey, the Kalakita, 
the civet cat, the goksavaidaka, the kumbha, the 
parrot, the crane, the Dhatuka, the ruddy-goose, 
the Katuka, the Tittibha, the Bhata, the Putra- 
priya, the heron, the Gocarma, the Girivartaka, 
the pigeon, the Kamala, the Sarika, the Cikora, 
the quail, the duck, the Raktavartma, the 
Prabhadraka, the cock, the blue jay, the fowl, 
the Kunkumactidaka, the large bee, the 
porpoise, the Bhulinga, the Dindima, the crow, 
the gallinule, the Datytha, the sky lark, the bees 
and several other birds, etc. 


amaer fafa grist Fer 
aN Han: Fer Tt: VAM FAME 
RAMA Te MTS Ta 
WMA PHI ARAN AAA: NG Ol 
aM Wa AMS Alea Waar Far 
SA YAH TA MTG G C1 
TU TM WY ASA HATA! 
Iq USM SUA PTY 8 


+ 
TANTO UT PITH Oa | 


UCT ATAM A Heyes ATCO & 0 UI 


Chapter-118 


CELT AUT FASTEN 

VAMeERN faegey TATA & 2H 

wfaegra eB faers wet sat 

TMAATS YOST GAA: TT FANE VM 

The king also beheld the following wild 

beasts— The dog, the deer, the leopard, the lion, 
the tiger, the elephant, the rhinoceros, the wolf, 
the bear, the ape, the monkey, the rabbit, the 
agile cat, the buffalo, the cow, the bull, the 
Camara, the Srivara (a species of deer), the 
white mule, the Urabhra, the ram, the antelope, 
the blue ox, the doe, the Sambara, the wild boar, 
the horse, the ass, the donkey. Besides them, he 
also saw the beasts, which are naturally hostile 
to one another, living in mutual friendship. He 
was very much amazed to see this. Sometime 
ago, the sage Atri had his hermitage there. 


AAMT ASAT 
fara fe 3 art feared WITT 31 
On account of the glory of that sage, the 
place was full of plants, and animals which, 


though naturally hostile, did not exercise 
hostility to one another~ men and Raksasas. 


Hee: Wu Ad ACHAT: | 
Pafrareta Aaa PAU ASTI G YI 


There all carnivorous beasts lived on fruits 
and milk. In such ways their character was built 
up by the influence of the Great sage Atri. 


Venfaraegy Aaa TT FT: 

Ta: ated Tt feoaA aT GAVE & & 
SAAR FAAS WAT: | 

Foret: aittor AAU SEAT TA aT aes GI 


King Ptrurava himself passed several days 
on the slopes of those mountains, where cow- 
buffaloes and she-goats gave out milk, and 
where even the thorns had the flavour of 
ambrosia. Everywhere, O king, the rocks are 
full of streams of milk and curds. 


389 


AVIA MTA THEMTTT: | 
aufa an feet vay fanctea4:€ ott 


The King Pirurava was charmed to see that 
mountain. There also he saw the beautiful rivers 
and streams. 


Wonca aeons vite at ATT: | 
HAUT T VTA THM We Teng ci 


There were hot and cold water springs and 
cosy caves at every turn, worth being made use 
of 


fara A aaltet BAA Wear AAA 
suerary seret forever FT fara SN 
TAT WaT WaT WS 
fanart Gat Aa Hart Aled: Aa Voll 


Snow did not fall within a radius of (five 
yojanas) and valleys were not visible near the 
peaks, for the thick clouds incessantly pour 
forth perpetual snows there. 


TART AUN TE AA AAS EAT 
Fravantradtar forenta: frat arqii9 a 
qCAT WAS GA AMET AAT 

TUG TARSGA AST: HET: 119 2 


Close to it, on a different peak, thick clouds 
pour out diurnal showers of rain. Its rocks are 
extremely beautiful. The land of this enchanting 
hermitage (of Atri), was the giver of all desires 
and the trees of which place bore fruits 
successfully, for they were worthy of being 
eaten by the Devas. 

Raniawat yeatafad Ty 
TAMIA eas WEAN 31 

That mount 1s, indeed, the dispeller of all 
sins, and is adorned by the Devaganas and the 
buzzing bees. 


amt: MISA Toeyraaaa 
FAUST: Havata WlAATATAT: 1119 ¥ 


The spot shines white, like the rays of the 


that 
vers 


and 
use 


five 
the 
our 


_— 


yuds 
, are 
iting 
sires 
ruits 
eing 


f all 
| the 


{ the 


390 


moon, on account of heaps of ungathered ice; 
while, here and there, the frolicsome herd of the 
white monkeys played about. 


qa Wasted fete: 
vera: Utara Wy: AAT 4 I 
The hermitage of Atri is almost impassable 


to a human being, owing to the pile of snows 
and inaccessible mountains surrounding It. 


Ya Taratsa WET: TRA: | 
ACTA MAY SAAT AST: 9G A 


The King Purtrava, by virtue of his devotion 
and by the grace of God, reached the sacred 
hermitage. 

| —— 
Talet: HAAMATH HAT 
yaag a fe sest  ARTEN VOI 

That lord of Madra saw that exquisitely 
enchanting, blessed hermitage, which 1s 
beautified with hundreds of flowers, and which 


removes all fatigue, and which was built by 
Maharsi Atri himself. 


ATATETS TAHA ASAT 1 OVC 


REE 


CHAPTER 119 


Entry of Puriirava in the hermitage, 
description of the grandeur of the 4srama 
and the tapas performed by Pururava 


aa sara 

aa at at aeryet werautt werfent 

Tareas J Aa YeTATT TTT 8 
Pearse aenrattatay 
TeaMagarron feet art a UA 
rareraTaT ere frat UTEe STAT 


Matsya Puranam 


pa aldaltaret faa verata: 30 


Stita said— O Rsis, there were two peaks of 
different colours which were covered with 
snow. There was another peak in between them, 
which was very high and had no clouds over it, 
as a result of which its slabs always remained 


hot. At the bed of that peak, to the west, there 
were the clusters of trees. In their centre, there 
was a beautiful cave, which was covered with 


the Jasmine creepers, looking at the same, the 


king Purtirava was surprised and he entered the 
cave. 


TM Midhias Acadia Taser 
ACA AHA TATU YI 


The road in it was four hundred hands in 


width covered with darkness and access to the 


same was quite difficult. After covering the 
aistance of four hundred hands, the king 


reached at a place which was illumined by 


itself. 
TAPAIMTAT TSN Ua 
Tat Teel A fata ASAT I 
aanta feaereant weanryt aaefrery 
SMM AUTATOT ATT a feet & 
TOA ART Be J Aiea 
Grant wedgefaga aren ot 
AATMOTETR TY: GTATATTU SIT | 
Te USN WARTS TI ci 
TARMAC GA TAT AAA 
Watney WTI 8 
UTR Fat ATT TTRUT Ufa 
aera A AH Al AMAA! Yo 
AMR SO STAT ATTA 
HUfeHAT YHA YRATAT A ASTI Vel 
TAU WU UCT WUSTAT HU: WEI 

It was quite high, quite deep and circular and 


was spread in an area of a kosa. Though the sun 


and the moon never rose there but it remained 


Chapter-119 


illumined like the day. There was a lake there, 
which looked graceful with the trees of gold, 
silver and coral colours. The flowers of 
different spices were blossoming over them 
with beautiful lustre. The pedestals of stone 
slabs had been built around the serial lake. O 
King the lotuses of various species were 
blossoming in the lake, which looked like the 
rubies and diamonds with sweet scents and their 
pericarps were made of gold. Not only was the 
bed of the lake, made of diamond, but it was 
also full of various gems. The cowrie shells, 
oysters and conches were found there, besides 
the terrific crocodiles, fishes and tortoises. 


CA WHA AVS FAUT A USAMA VV 
Wen Merten Unfera 

TOIT aarfor aA THeAreeATA AN V3 
TARA F GUS TMT MTT TTT: 
TAMA TTT TATED STENT OI 
Tagartasa ate aunty aT: 
PVA TT STE AT ATTIT UG 


There were places of emerald slabs, 
thousands of diamonds, rubies, sapphires, topaz, 
karkotakas, pieces of Tuthakas stone, pieces of 
ivory, diamonds, of the first water as well as of 
inferior kind of yellow stone, sun stone, moon 
stone and syamantaka gems. 


Raman wafeHer Wa a 
TMeaMHa A Te TAAT AN VG I 
Aga ATA TAT 

AMAA I GTA TA TAAUTATH Vo 
TATRA FA ATA TeAMATOTATN VC I 


Surora gavalaksa, crystal, Gomeda, 
Dhilimarakata,  Pittaka, lapis lazuli, 
Saugandhika (a kind of ruby), Rajamani, 
Brahmamani Mukhyamani, and starry pearls of 
various kinds. 


Tarn da aq aed Sarasa 
ae Fe Weal ATAETAT SIAATH 29 II 


39] 


Its water 1s also lukewarm, and removes all 
feelings of cold. The site of the lake, in the 
midst of lapis lazuli stone (Vaidtryamani) 
looked beautiful indeed. 


MTT TAT AT TS A Tay yA 
ATTA FMT Tea ara Faftaats faa 2 0 tt 
It 1s a beautiful square piece of land, 
measuring 800 cubits (200 Dhava), and has 
been formed by the asceticism of the sage Atri. 
faraaat oe aa aa fearon: | 
WEN: BT Wary HT aay TAT 2 aN 
TA WOH TAN Ae TA foreach 
AAT HeTaT Fer 2 2 
O King! The entire locality was full of gold 
(or looked like gold), as the entrance cave was. 
There was a certain place in that beautiful, 


region, where, below the rock, flows a lovely 
pond of cool water adorned with lotus flowers. 


AMATMTT TAVITA AAS 


TATAg a TAG AY Vik ATTA 230 
This pond, O King, was in shape of a 
beautiful square and resembling the sky in 
clearness, the water of which is most delicious, 
cold and perfumed. 


4 feronft aot aus afer arocaeaa 
Ge fart UAT PA A Wed TSA Vv 
Without injuring the throat and without 


overfilling the stomach (or belly), it gives 
pleasure to mind and body. 


Tal J TEM: ware Fafa avers fom 
BATA TATA TPT 24 I 


In the centre of the pond, the sage Atn, by 
virtue of his austerities, has built a palace, 
which can be reached by a golden bridge, 
studded with precious stones. 


WMA: Tere Ware Tart Ferg 
THACAAT AGUAS 2 € It 
SAME Wada ena 


392 


amiga: Catt Tat SSAA VII 
Was AT MTA aca GATE: | 
MMA: Matera: Bo 
Wal @ Gfadedal cacaey Ais: | 
WUTTafafapisatadasy TATA 221 
ARTS TAS TT PTAA MTA: 
HUTT AMAATE: HATA: 11 3 0 UI 
SSATP IST 

Us a tacaey fata 7 warteaq3 at 


ES SIRE OR UG EMULE 
fanfsrernfard cea aifreprentherrg 3 21 
gears Yet Ter es | aT TTI 


AATAATHAA TUM ATUTT 3 3 1 


The palace was of silver, white like the rays 
of the moon; its stairs are of beautiful 
Vaidiryamani (lapis lazuli); its pillars of the 
coral and sapphire, its altars (or quadrangles) 
are studded with emeralds Markatamani. The 
reflection of the diamonds made it very 
beautiful and pleasant to the sight. In this 
(enchanting) palace, the Lord of all, the serene 
Janardana, decorated with every ornament, 
reposed in the midst, all the luxuries of the 
luxurious, with one of his knees drawn up and 
the foot placed on the King of Serpents, the 
other (foot) resting on the lap of Laksmi (the 
Goddess of wealth). While thus sleeping on the 
coils of Sesa, the Lord had one of His hands, 
adorned with bracelets, on the hood of the 
Snake, another, stretched out, supported His 
sacred head (laid) on the back of his fingers, the 
third one resting on the knee-cap of the half 
raised leg, touched his navel. Now hear how the 
fourth hand was placed. It held a celestial 
(santana) flower and was raising to the nose. 


MM AAAS: WTA: ats 
WAAAY HS STCATTTATAN 3 VII 
afad a aa eaNseCCAG: | 


Matsya Puranam 


hy PAICe DIE’. : e 


AU 3&1 


Goddess Laksmi-— is devotedly shampooing 
Her Lord of the Universe in His Serene repose 
with Her lotus hands. He was adorned with the 
garland of santana (kalpa) flowers, and with 
necklace, bracelets, rings, (Hara, Keyura, 
Angada, Angulaka); while His head, glittering 
with the decorations of precious stones, rested 
on the hood of Sesa. 


Ua: Waeied: fackort: AAT 39 
Tifa a Sager 
qa: WARGO Aas A ATT CI 


King Purtrava went in front of the God, and 
made his salutation to the One, who was of 
mysterious character, consecrated there by Atnri, 
worshipped by the seers, adored by the ascetics, 
always offered the Kalpa santana flowers, 
covered with divine sandals, offered the 
incense, his right side covered with the best 
sappy fruits, offered by the anchorites (Siddhas) 
and having a bed of lotus flowers for His 
pillow. 


arat force da arat afr aerfaten 

TEM ACA Tal FHA ATASTTN 3 21 

wafer ash MT Teas WA: WA: 

TRATA SBT AAATATAT TAO 

factafetet aitsrertaer Garey 

TTA Ata WHATS ¥ i 

The king saluted the Sacred One with his 

knees and head touching the ground, and 
pleased the Lord by his recitations of the hymns 
in His praises, containing his thousand names, 
and repeatedly circumambulated Him. He rested 
a little in that hermitage. Then, taking his 
residence in a beautiful cavern, outside the 
entrance to the cave, commenced his austerities 


Chapter-120 


and worship of Madhustdana. 
ATA fee eTAT yet: wert: UNA: 
Pret ROTATE ATTA ATATT: 1 2 Ut 
CaaTGe: Hated MOTTON) 
TAU Hea J APHIT 3 


The king, in process of time, gave up every 
kind of food, engaging himself only in the 
worship of Fire to whom he offered various 
kinds of fruits, flowers, incense, roots and 
cow’s milk, after bathing thrice a day and 
sustaining himself on the water of the pond. 


SARIS cated Aah urfera:| 
HEN hasa act daral JT: 
TTT THAT ATT ACTA YI 
Ud Y Ua Wa WAM: 
WoMaat Waal 
TAY TATA SAfSr 
TAMU FMA SATA YG I 
He slept, without any bedding, on the bare 
floor in the cavern, and lived only on water, 
having discarded all the eatables. The king did 
not experience any ailment in course of that 
period of life and most marvellously carried on 


his devotion of Visnu by residing in that 
hermitage for sometime. 


Stet HATA METI Waray straarauts 
AMAA ITAA STATA: 1 222 


KER 


CHAPTER 120 


Tapas of the king Purirava, sports of . 
Gandharvas and apsardas, arrival of the sage 
Atri, the boon granted to the king 


Ud said 
W ARMAS TA ATEN : | 
HISAR WI: TRATCATAT Tel 2 
Sita said— “O Rsis, in this way the king 


Purtrava, discarding the royal paraphernalia 
and the food, started living in that charming 


393 


hermitage. He also enjoyed the opportunity of 
observing the sports of Gandharvas and 
apsaras. 


HM WOterad wie yaaa aa Sat: 
amy Frag Fara werdsererer Zeti 2 11 


The king used to make the garland after 
plucking of many flowers, and offered them to 
lord Visnu first together with the arghya and 
then handed them over to the Gandharvas. 


YURI Hist AIT! 
OS AMAT: THAT A Uva BH 


He ignored the apsards engaged in various 
types of sports carried out by them in various 
poses. 


lead WM Teal Mae ate 


TENA Ger Hrtaeay STAT 
ACHAT NT FATA 


Tee srs UPA Fer 


Some one of the apsards while collecting 
the flowers was caught up on the creepers and 
her maids left her in the same condition and 
departed. Her husband then arrived there and 
freed her. Fragrance of a lotus flower was 
emerging out of the body of an apsard as a 
result of which the black wasps were hovering 
over her because of the fragrance tn her breath. 
Her face had almost been covered with the 
black wasps. She was somehow saved by her 
husband. 


TACT AeA 
PAA Ae AATOTT & It 


The flower dust had fallen in the eyes of an 
apsarad which was removed by her husband by 
blowing air from his mouth. 


alfageata yerfor eet cares ofa 
HATTA: YR WT HANSTI 


A damsel collected flowers and handed them 
over to her husband. Then she decorated her 


394 


head with the flower garland made by her 
husband. 


TT AGIA HAA HAPS 
PAPA aaa Wy AAA ¢ ht 


A husband made the flower garland with his 
own hands and decorated the head of her wife. 
By this she felt beholden to him. 


aa Wet Hat fafsHnqar oan 
aifeea tet ater TAU FRAT eI 


Some one was plucking flowers from the 
branch of the tree lowered by her husband and 
with this she considered herself possessing the 
best of virtues in her. 


araaaladea HYA fareradi 
Rana; HUAI AA Aa TOMTAAN Vo I 


Some of the beautiful damsels sporting 
separately with the Gandharvas, were looking at 
the king in the cluster of lotus flowers. 


clareayata yOret Aferaty WAH TAH 
SAAT THACATAT GANTAT: 11 VM 


Some one of the damsels, was splashing 
water over her husband while the husband was 
splashing water over the wife, which delighted 
both. 


aiaentsachirdgeaat Water 
TSUN wr Wit aarfereareratn 2 
A damsel was splashing water over her 
husband with a disturbed mind. With the 
splashing of the water over the husband, the 


locks of hair were dishevelled as a result of 
which her face was covered with the hair. 


aalead UT ASAT Waal ATTA 
HEPAT AT ASPAT AT ATATET | 23 UI 


When the maidens ran down, their husbands 
became sad, and it was seen that as they heared 
breathing of their breasts which rose and fell. 


ry 305 8 wes ! 
~~? 


Matsya Puranam 


aH wis aatfta vertex 


Some of the apsards looked as beautiful as 
the lotus surrounded by the black wasps as their 
tresses of the long hair, streamed on their long 
faces after being loosened, by their lords in 
course of posture. 


TAY Aa: YH: Wasa Aer 
DTA Cheap HUTA ART AAT VG UI 


Some of them were hidden in the lotus 
groves which resembled their eyes and were 
discovered by their lords after a long search. 


SAAT BATTS Sather WeTSAT TPT! 
THUMCTgt Uh Tastee FATT LE I 
Some kept their lords in a close embrace for 


a long time, on the pretext of feeling cold after 
their bath. 


AAS Vase Bharata 
Ea WA Uh Sitter, AA AAAI VI 
Some, of an enchanting smile, thrilled the 


observer (lord) with amorous feeling by 
wearing the finest wet garment on her person. 


SUSUMU: Alfa Arar HeTATAhA 
FEU THOT WTS AATAN CU 
Some apsara was laughing at her lord, who 


fell down into the water as the garland was torn 
which he was pulling. 


alae Wateray Sot Tara 
WYPA BAT AMAT cferxar FTN Ae 1 
With their knees having been scratched by 
their companions, some bent low and modestly 
took shelter for a long time in the company of 
their lords. 


alfa VeAMeca sayeth 
FoATACTTA AAT SET SATA TEAR 2 0 I 


Some began to dry her wet hair by turning 
her back on the sun and was seen from a rock 
by her lord with eyes full of love and desire. 


Chapter-120 


+ Brafect = | 
TarallStarda WT A AUSHTIN vi 
At that time the lake with its water full of 
garlands of the nymphs fallen in it and mixed 
with the saffron washed out of their breasts, 
looked beautiful like a maiden after amorous 
enjoyment with her lover. 


YAMA ra CaATAMTOTT aTI 
GRIT W ge Cada TATAAN VI 


Purtrava saw the group of Devas, 
Gandharvas and the consorts of the Devas 
worshipping Visnu after their bath. 


prfeel ceyl Wa Ma Weta: fears: 
TOSAa: TANAMOT HATA ALATA: 112 31 


He also saw some of the nymphs sitting in 
the bowers of the creepers and dressing and 
decorating themselves, their minds being 
engrossed with (the thoughts of) their lords. 


aifaereyirad SM sitar 
Tad HATA F FAT TAI 


Some while looking at the mirror heard the 
news of their lords through their maids with rapt 
attention. 


aifaq Arafat gear yaurrat ferrari 
Halon aq Gael WANS wAAT 24 A 


Some at the hint of the maid began to put on 
their ornaments hurriedly without being 
conscious that they put them wrongly, their 
mind was so engrossed with passionate desire. 


iid, Teh Dee TUT 

alfa frat cast Ata everett 
UAT TAU Tat Alfergersar 

alfa Tat ater arTaforaafarz 2911 


Pururava also saw some of the nymphs 
sitting on the blue grass amidst nicely smelling 
flowers and drinking wine there; some of these 
beautiful nymphs made their lovers drink from 


395 


their own hands, while others drank the wine 
offered by their lords. 


alfa Tae Ta: 
Ua UES THVT Bh Mat at WATT CI 
ada What at Tafaera TU aT 
aM fate Peragta atisa WHT? 
Some while drinking water saw _ the 
reflection of her lotus eyes in it and afterwards 
began to enquire from her lord where her two 
lotuses disappeared, and on being told by him 
that they were undoubtedly drunk by herself 


became bashful as she realised with pleasure his 
meaning. 


alfa arated Gy: arataras aay 
Bava UT Gt WTAE 01 
Some of them (with beautiful eyebrows) 
drank with great relish the desire producing 
wine offered by their lords after they had drank 
of them. 


STUNG aa Aa A ATA: | 
yore fafad ad Tatartararsrnis eh 
The king also heard in that drinking place 


the songs of the nymphs with stringed 
accompaniments. 


WelTAaY ay cada Ware 
TH Vere eaea AAT ATT Ts AAT 13 UU 


Those nymphs, O King, dance on music 
before Lord Visnu in the evenings. 


arma Ta Tat fafrier: Terran 

STAY GYM: At: Tee haaT TEINS 31 
AAPM ate AAR TTA 
AMMaraAMAAT HAAHCATVSATA 3 ¥ 1 


And as the night advanced they coming out) 
of that cave began to retire into their beautiful 
caverns where they pass the night in the 
pleasant company of their husbands, reclining 
on the plushy mattresses strewn with various 
kinds of sweet flowers and decorated with 


396 


lovely sweet scented creepers. 


VanATal Way Alisa A Wat 
TTA WETS AMAIA: 113 4 I 


King Purirava thus saw all the pastimes of 
those nymphs on that mountain, went on with 
his devotion, his mind firmly fixed on Visnu. 


TTA WAM WAATAT TOTT:| 
Tey Tani Sey WaT RAT TAN GI 
aa fe a werent aaa: aie aT 
TAC Te Wes fase Ale at YAZ I 
The train of the Gandharvas in company of 
their consorts went to the king, and said— “O 
King! You have come to this region resembling 
the heaven, we shall grant you the boons of 
your desire after which it would be left to your 
pleasure either to stay here or to go back to your 
country.” 
Taare 
MEA: Ae Maat eae: 
at farted Ware WFASATATNZ CI 
The King Purirava said~ “All of you have 
superhuman powers, your presence is never in 


vain. I therefore beseech yon to give me the 
boon that I may please Visnu.” 


wanfearanrnet: AT WA FRtay: | 
AAAS GAT A WAY SATAN 81 


They all unanimously gave the desired boon 
and the king stayed there for another month, 
worshipping Janardana in a happy mind. 


fa Va Acaraipacacat FT: 
TAT A WAY UP eA BATU o 1 


He became a great favourite of the 
Gandharvas and their consorts, who were 
pleased with his firm devotion (to Visnu). 


Wael Wa WTI: wWav- 
Way Taaearaay | 
areaTerTRTA Qa ATH 


Matsya Puranam 


Maa JI WPT ATS 8 
IAAT Ta aA GRAM: | 
aaa tage Feared PTT I 
Taree atararataon cat ACA 
aa USRTAET Hage Vsgearais 31 


After a month, that king entered a lovely 
hermitage, decorated with innumerable gems, 
where he lived on water alone till the end of the 
bright fortnight in the month of Phalguna, when 
he heard the following words of Visnu in a 
dream-— “At the close of the night you will find 
the Sage Atri, in whose company you will get 
your desire.” 


Tard F TeifagET cafe: | 
yeamenret fatiay Bt: W WaT SII 
PAPA AMA Waa WA AT 
ceuiita aft Tat weaat aeat eS 4 I 
That king, powerful as Indra, having thus 
dreamt, got up early in the morning and with his 
senses under control, had his bath, and having 


performed daily duties worshipped Janardana, 
after which he came across the great sage Atri. 


waa 7 tata aera aaa: 
AA: YMA TH CAAA AATTTINY & I 
He then told him of his dream and heard the 
following words of the Devas. 


Wadareraret At Aral fareareom 
Ud Wale Bae saCaAATSATN YI 
HAA WaT TAT HARA: | 
UaAMMATISa ATER HPAL 6 
“OQ King! It is just what it should be; there is 
not the least doubt about it.” Thus getting the 
boons of his desire from Lord Visnu, he 


worshipped the Lord and poured his oblations 
in the Fire and attained his object. 


sft Start MTT yarale Uereaurt Aa 
PAPA STAT A SEATS: 1122 01 


Chapter-121 


CHAPTER 121 


Description of Kailasa and Ganga besides 
Jambudvipa 


dt sate 


STITT Lr Tad: | 
AAAS: TS: HETGAAA AT: 11211 
Tea fered: US Hera AM Waa: | 
aeataaata starHat: We We 


Sita said— “O Rsis, to the north of the 
hermitage, in the middle of the back of the 
Himalaya, the mountain Kailasa is lodged, 
where lord Siva, the destroyer of Tripura 
resides. Its peaks possess enormous gems and 
the Kalpavrksas are also grown there. Kubera 
lives there with Guhyakas. 

TRUST TA TA Tet A ATTT | 
SAAT YOST ile WATTS 

Thus Kubera, the lord of Alkapuri, being 
followed by the apsards remains delightful. A 
lake named Mandolaka has emerged out of the 
valley at the foot of the mountain, having the 


pure water which is clean and spotless besides 
being cool. 


Tele ATA AT: Wag aferafay 
Teateed fee at Ha YTS 


The water is bright like the curd. The divine 
and auspicious Mandakini river issues from the 
same lake. 


feat Ut et aT CaM AEA 

MTT ernest areas Fay 

Raengqua feet qaet wet wie 

age AT FATS: Pal Tara: 1g 1 

There is a great forest over the bank of the 

river, which is known as Nandanavana. To the 
north east of Kailasa, there is a mountain known 
as Candraprabha, which shines like the heap of 
gems. It is decorated with all types of metals. 


The same is spreading upto the divine Subala 
mountain. 


397 


arate Ue feerreare ara fasyeary 
TeTMAd Fee Tat eres FAT! 


A divine lake known by the name of 
Acchoda is located close to it. A divine river 
called Acchoda, the bestower of welfare starts 
from that lake. 


TATA OH feet Wea WIT 
areaq fret Frerafa arfomag: Bere 1 
BATAATAA HA Tech UTA TA 
On the bank of that river, there is a divine, 
beautiful and great forest known as Caitraratha. 
The army commander of Guhyaka, known by 


the name of Manibhadra, lives there with his 
followers. 


Yom Weal AMT Act eealeaT YT 

TEMS J Was J Aelehery 

heraaent wreat foraaatata fr go 1 

Ta forema feet Waet Wad wie 

cifedt saya fa: Gewat WEI eI 

Te Ue Heleed cited FASTA: 

THTATAd YOM wifeaya Al ASA 

fecarag faire a aver at aes 

after frat Raafa aart aftent agitiie3 

area: genta qerch: uftarta: 

STATIN HATATTATATAT: 11 Pe 

HAUT UT VA BUM HH: | 

Taal AHS Ber frames whe ey it 

The auspicious Mandakini and __ the 

Acchoda— the bestower of welfare, both the 
civers flowing through the middle part of the 
earth fall in the great ocean. To the south east of 
the Kailasa mountain, there is a vast mountain 
known as Hemasrmga possessing all the 
ausadhis and facing the Candraprabha 
mountain. The mountain, Hemasrnga, near it 


shines red like the sun, below which there 1s a 
large lake of the red water out of which comes a 


398 


big river called the Lauhitya, (Brahmaputra) on 
the banks of which is located a great heavenly 
forest known as Visoka. The Yaksa Manidhara 
resides there. He remains there with his well 
behaved and auspicious attendants. To the north 
west of Kailasa, lies the Mount Kukudméan, 
where there are plenty of herbs, because of the 
birth of the great bull of Rudra there. In front of 
this the Trikanda mount ts the mount of Anjana 
of three peaks. 


Raa GUN aga FT: 

Ter We Welest ad fargafaa 2 | 

TATA YR ATAU 

TAME at feat aunt ama fayaTq go 

There is the Mount Vaidyuta, full of all 

kinds of ores, below which 1s the most lovely 
Manasarovara lake which is resorted to by the 
siddhas. The sacred Sarayi runs from that lake 


and purifies the people. On its bank is the 
Vaibhraja forest. 


HATTA Terra APT 
Terra Fraata WerarsaafasHAy: 11 Vc ti 


In that forest resides the most valiant demon 
(Raksasa), Brahma-dhaté, the attendant of 
Kubera and the son of Prehita. 


Horacasrarae fect: Batatarre:t 
RT: TACABY Hera: 1128 I 


The Aruna mountain to the west of Kailasa 
is the most important one. It is full of 
efficacious herbs and gold and shines red. 


Wa chat: AarTaat Saray: 
mraaremafesd: Foremaret: Wafer: 112 011 


Mount Sriman, of golden colour, is the 
favourite of Siva and is covered with lines of 
gold quartz. 


Wee: Feieatraleay 
TATA ST: Vet Wethert: ye 
dreatant Faata fatten greet: 


Matsya Puranam 


TA Treva Seve AT AAT 
Next comes the great inaccessible Smgavan 
(full of peaks) Mount. Hundreds of its lofty 
golden peaks touch the sky. It is the abode of 
Dhimralocana, lord of the mountain and below 
it is the lake Sailoda. 


qed YOM Tat Preset WAN 
TH aera warded wfeor wisrareferq 2 311 


Out of which flows the sacred river 
Sailodaka which is also known as Caksusi and 
flowing between these two mountains falls into 
the Western Sea. 


WIM deraesa: Tateat FA: 
Te 7 aes efter wT I 


To the north of Kailasa 1s the blessed Mount 
Sarvausadha near which is a majestic snow clad 
mountain full of yellow orpiment (Haritala). 


fees: querreettaterrar frre: 
TA US Ueleel ML: BIBAATTAAN GI 
Tal fargat AM aa Ta AAT: 
Tea Oy Walaeara Ager: AA EI 


There is mountain with golden peaks 
teeming with herbs below which 1s the lake of 
golden (coloured) sand and known as beautiful 
Bindu lake. Here King Bhagiratha remained for 
a long time for the advent of the river Ganga. 


fed arerq 4 ued werarareqerferar: | 
aa foam tat wert 7 wfafsati Vol 


He said— “May my ancestors attain heaven, 
their bones being drenched with the Ganga 
water.” The Ganga which goes three ways made 
her first appearance on that very spot. 


ATTA TAT AT TAM MTT 
aT Morraretsa faut FeO TAT Vc 


The Ganga coming out of Somapada divided 
Herself into seven streams. There are sacrificial 
posts (yupa) of precious stones and vimanas 


Chapter-121 


(heavenly cars) of gold. 

aaa Ha: Pag: Vea: TA: Ae 

TAVSTAIA TA ASAT TF AUST 2 

ayad AAU Wat eat frat J an 

arate fed da arafacan Yerrat 3 ott 

Indra attained bliss by performing sacrifices 

on that spot along with the Devas. Here is the 
milky way of heaven, the centre of the starry 
nebula. The Ganga appears to shed splendid 
lustre there at night. She has descended on the 


earth, having purified the Heaven and sky 
(Antariksa). 

Taras Ufa Weal ATA 

wean a faca: chfaepara: oftat qfai 3 en 

ai I dager faa: aq 

TAA Vga Tar ASAT FAT 3 2 

Wea TEM Bins at Senterat ferry 

faren fagnte uraret BAT Yar STN 331 

She first descended on the head of the 

mighty Lord Siva, who curbed Her force by His 
glory. Her waters falling on the Earth, owing to 
Siva’s anger, formed the Bindu lake. When she 
was thus suddenly stopped by Siva, she became 
angry as she understood his unkind motive and 
made an attempt to force Herself into the lower 


regions, having engulfed Siva in her tumultuous 
current. 


AMAA FT AAT TAT: Ha VST: 


frivnafad aheuratagy at ACTIN S wi 
Realising this proud attitude of the Ganga, 
the Lord thought of absorbing Her within 
Himself. 


Waleaa Bet F SPT UAT: | 
anttetd ettot gereareferarearq 3 4 I 

But, at the same moment, He perceived 
King Bhagiratha standing in front of Him. He 


appeared lean, his veins becoming visible, 
troubled and hungry. 


399 


St aaee A Yat 7 
THA ALAA F Aa: HIT ATTA FE 1 
The Lord then remembered that the king had 
first pleased Him by his austerities to get the 
sacred river- Ganga— which boon He had a 


already granted to him. He therefore suppressed 
His wrath. 


TAN A Mea Few acaaany 
dal faasrarara Weal aa Aram 3 ot 


Moreover, as He was absorbing the sacred 
stream, He heard the entreaties of Brahma. He, 
therefore, freed the current from His hold. 


Tat eet Tra ater: 

aat faasaTATa TA Alaa WAT 3 CI 

afr wretafya| witet toate a 

Sate ATA WATT AAA 3 8 

Being pleased with the devotion of 

Bhagiratha, the Lord, for his sake, let the river 
loose into seven branches, three of which went 
to the East, three to the West (and one near 


Himself), thus the three-wayed Ganga become 
flowed in seven streams. | 


afer eiteat da West da wea 

Tiel wag Farge Frere a WARM 1 ¥ ol 

ae ATT AAT SAU sea 

TATA Tt wfawr aferorrefearqi x a 

WA da: waa ad F fara 

WHAT: AA AMET WT faa: IN 

Nalini, Hladini and Pavani flow in the East, 

Sita, Sindhu and Caksu in the West, and the 
seventh followed the King Bhagiratha to the 
South. Hence the name Bhagirathi which falls 
into the Daksina Samudra (southern waters) 


washing the Himavarsa. Seven holy rivers trace 
their origin from the Bindu Sarovara. 


TOI HAART TH TMT AAT: | 
AAI TaaAARIGAS AA ¥ 3 


400 


Yfercniey ea ssesaaTT AA 
ean fear frat vferot eferuieferqn vx 
Those seven rivers having pierced through 

the Himalayas fall into the Daksina Samudra 
(southern waters) after flowing through the 
Mleccha countries of the mountains, viz., 
Kukur!, Randhra, Barbara, Yavana, Khasa?, 
Pulika, Kulattha and Angalokya. 


ay amesa arfernista wferar 
TRIBES EAC Su 
Uaeaay: witatacatats Tan 

RES WMATA YE I 


Soll 


The Caksu stream of the Ganga before 
entering the sea waters enters the following 
countries— Vira (China?), Maru, Kalka, Silika, 
(Culaka?), Tusara, Barbara, Pahlava, Parada, 
and Saka, while Darada, Urja, Guda, Gandhara, 
Atrasa, Kuht, Sivapaura, Indramaru, Vasat, 
Samtaija, Sindha, Urvasa, Barva, Kupatha, 
Bhimaramaka, Sunamukha and Urdhamaru 
form the basin of the Sindhu stream. 


Jf his 


TATE N¥ON 
HATA TAT FNM RATAT| 
fertratey Oferaigt Het ATATATT Xe 

; Tea UW 
TaN agg aafeateata AN oft 
WSATEAMATST Aaa YAM 

aa: Witeat fared wferer aferoireferqu & en 


The abodes of the Gandharvas, Kinnaras, 
Yaksas, the Raksasas, Vidyadharas, Sarpas, the 
countries of Kimpurusa, Naras, Kuiratas and 


5 Tal Ue aa re 


1. Kukur = Darsaha. 
2. Khasa or Khasa is a mountainous country in the 
north of India. 


Matsya Puranam 


Pulindas, Kuru, (Bharaba), Pancdlas, Kausikas, 
Matsya, Magadha, Anga, Brahmottara, Vanga 
(Bengal) and Tamralipta, these Aryan janapadas 
aer watered by the sacred Ganga, which striking 
against the Vindhya Hills falls in the southern 
walers. 


aay Slleat Ya wera sat 

wraaauaisa Fareraty wae: 21 

qagraga dn teen 

ates fara da feng 3 

HARUM AHO SHlyearea sit! 

MH Set MAT A Yat TF MAM vi 

The Hladini Ganga runs eastward into the 

sea after passing through the following 
countries— the countries of Upaka, Nisadha, 
Dhivara, Rsika, Nilamukha, Kekara, Ekakarna, 
Kiradta, Kdalanjara, Vikarna, Kusika and 
Svargabhaumaka. 


ae afer aria write fegt aah 
HUM ATTA AT SRT ATTA & GH 
TM TAPS MAASAI 
TAA HMAC § I 


The Nalini stream, too, runs to the east of 
the sea through the following countries— 
Kupatha, Indradyumna Sarovara, Kharpatha, 
Ketra Sankupatha, Ujjanaka, Maru, Kutha, 
Pravarana. 


Sze | vfawt wauitaterqy 

TAT USAT WATS AAT FIG Wit 

area BT SAAT EA 

yarerigy dart frat a ae Pic 

HUTA TA ATS & 2 Ut 

faa Taare at wat fae 

WaUSAS FU Maw AAT eI 

The swift running Pavani Ganga passes 

eastward thruogh JTomara, Hansamarga, 


Samthaka, various mountains and other eastern 
countries; and then through Karna, Pravarana, 


Chapter-121 


Asvamukha, Sumeru Mountain, the land of the 
Vidyadharas; when the mighty stream has 
entered the Saimimandala kostha, a big lake. 


TA ATTA: VAMST ASAT: | 
SHH A Aa Sat aS ATTA: 1G ott 


Thousands of tributaries and rivulets spring 
from the main streams. The God of rain— Indra 
draws out His store of rainwater from there. 


an agieanra: Aare qeAT 
feunyst gata faa alacat apis en 
aMedd: Weta: Asay: | 
Tan: Uftger fergfearermers: 11 & 2 
HAUTAT Oa AAAS: | 
wana 7 fag fate: waaarfearqis 31 
Ueencey feo aes: ATTA AAT: 

The Surabhi forest stands on the banks of 
the river Vansaukasaraé. There _ resides 
Hiranyasringa the most powerful and learned 
follower of Kubera who has been forbidden to 
take any part in the sacrifices. Surrounded by 
the learned (progeny of Atrt) and the 
Brahmaraksasas, the four attendants of Kubera 
reside there. The residents of the hills and the 


mountains attain double powers (by practice) as 
compared to other folks. 


eUHe YS FT MUO A AL: BAAN vi 
Weed waht Teaser T aT 
aM QAI: Ay Taos 4 I 
At the back of the Hemaktta is the lake of 
the snakes (sarpa) out of which flow the two 


rivers, Sarasvati and Jyotismati falling to the 
eastern and western seas respectively. 


att faye ame Freel waar 
TANI Wala WealyHet WANE 
A little further on is the lake Visnupada on 
the Nisadha Mount. Both these lakes (Naya and 


Visnupada) are the favourite resorts of the 
Gandharvas. 


401 


WU: UPA Fars Ae 

Hava Tal QM TA Waa BAT g oI 

Wataey Bel Wet: TWA: yostaary 

YUStarraerer TASS ATTAINS Ct 

MA AAA AAA 

PARAM FT AMSg AMAA TN VI 

The lake Candraprabha and the sacred 

Jambi river- the bed of Jambiinada gold, have 
their source in the Sumeru Mount. The two blue 
water lakes, the Payoda and the sacred 
Pundarika, are the mothers of two sister lakes 
one of which 1s called the Uttara Manasa from 


which the rivers Mrgyaé and Mrgakanta trace 
their origin. 


Gal: Hey aa: WH: | 

ATA tt AT ATT BIRR AT AAMT: 1119 0 

TA: Wei WU Wa Ug Aat ATA 

FRyeaeNnts AA Ay sar 7 aha en 

SACS Waera AAET: | 

In the Kuru country there are twelve lakes 

under the name of Vaijaya that are full of lotus 
beds and fish, etc. They are all like the ocean (in 
extent). The rivers Santi and Madhvi spring 
from them. There is no rainfall in the eight lakes 


Kimpurusa. They are full of water and (aquatic) 
vegetables. 


AMEE HAM Uhl AAs Wa Ai 2Wkl 
fatafast: widtest Porat aogier 
The Mounts Valahaka, Rsabha, Cakra, 


Mainaka, pervading in all directions merge into 
the sea. 


TAT ARTA HOT; ART Fee eTT: 119 3 
SHAM Sera YF Bae Veretery 
The Mounts Candrakanta, Drona and 


Sumahan are spreading in the North till they 
have merged into the Great Northern ocean. 


Wel AataAa Ta ATT: Wo VI 
wmiraraaea & witsred etefera 


22 


innumerable sons and daughters to these 
serpents. But in ancient times, Janamejaya burnt 
out most of them in the serpent sacrifice. 


TAT HAA CAAT ASAT | 
Sfpunt Fad at Ta ATS TATA y 3 
Krodhavasa on the other hand produced a 


lakh of serpents with teeth, who were destroyed 
by Bhimasena. 


SHOT A TOT ARRAS TATA: | 
GUAT HVAT, TATTATU ¥ 


The disciplined Surabhi, in union with the 
sage Kasyapa, produced Rudraganas, the 
beautiful cows and the buffaloes. 

“AGA BT MUT TONTCATTAT TUM 

TM fHATHTAANSTATTA SET ¥ 4 I 
TOGA THAT Aa AT 

fer 7 aerate waaraTea alesse I 
ad UAMUSTed: HPATTELA: | 
SAAT THAT AAA ATARI ¥ 9 Ul 


The sage produced the sages as well as the 
groups of the apsards. Similarly Anista, 
produced several of the Gandharvas and 
Kinnaras. The grass, trees, creepers as well as 
the shrubs were produced by her. Similarly 
Visva produced crores of Yaksas, and the 
Raksasas, while Diti, in union with Kasyapa 
produced forty-nine Maruts who were quite 
religious and devoted to the gods. 


ofa stat Targa snfeat ayauraat aA 
OB TSEATT: 11 I 
kER 
CHAPTER 7 
Birth of Maruts and description of Madana 
Dvadasi 

AAT Sd: 

fet: Yat: Get WaT Weal CaaeMT: | 

Ca ATA; HAT ATTAIN 2 


The Rsis asked, “O Sita, how could the 
forty nine sons of Diti, the mother of the 


Matsya Puranam 


Daityas, known as Maruts become dear to the 
gods? Then how could they be friendly with the 
gods, who were their step brothers?” 


Ua ara 
HT sarge FE aay eto Ys! 


YAUAG lena Wea eiePAAAN 2 It 
ATH AI ATAITTS TN 


TCM TT ST AAMT Bl FU 
aelfefrerraran safrtor Yaa 
GHENT AAT Freas APTANA ¥ it 


Sita said, “O Noble sages, in the ancient 
time, during the war between the gods and the 
Daityas,! Diti was filled with grief, after killing 


1. The mythological account of this war between the 
gods and the demons or the Suras and Asuras 1s as 
follows : 

Visnu, the lord of the creation, wanted to make his 
favourites the gods, immortal and powerful. He 
asked them to churn the ocean of milk so that 
ambrosia might be provided. The demons offered 
their services to the gods which they did not decline. 
When ambrosia was produced Visnu, assuming the 
form of a beautiful damsel, distributed the whole 
amongst the Suras. Hence the quarrel arose. It 
continued for thousands of years."The demons were 
very powerful and some of them became invincible 
and unconquerable by the grace of their god Siva. 
Though they could not exterminate the gods, yet 
they defeated them often, drove them from the 
celestial region and took possession of it. 

There were supposed to be thirty three millions of 
gods and goddesses but Indra was their king and 
Lord. After the defeat of the Danavas on the shore of 
the churned ocean the gods lived in happiness for 
several years till a great Danava was born, who was 
known by the name of Vitrasura. He collected ail the 
demons under his banner and declared war against 
the Devas. [t went on for years and the gods were 
greatly assailed. Indra then went to Brahma for help 
who advised him to go to Dadhici for his bones to 
make an weapon with them. Dadhici agreed and 
Indra drove the demons away with that dreadful 
weapon. 

Many years passed in peace when the demons again 
gathered round a leader named Taraka. Siva helped 
them and the gods grew weakened gradually. The 
celestials, .after holding a council, thought of 
arousing Siva from his Yoga-Sleep through the help 


Chapter-7 


of her sons and the grandsons, at the hand of 
Visnu. Then she went to the earth in the 
Syamantakaksetra at the bank of the river 
Sarasvati, and sterted attending her husband 
Kasyapa who was engaged in tapas there. She 
also performed hard tapas herself as well. At 
that point of time, she conducting herself like 
the ascetic, lived on fruits and roots like the 
sages and performed Archhra-cdndrdyana 
vrata. 


Maga WT AeA 
Aa: A ATA TAT APABTSIAT SSA 4 I 
In this way Diti felt disturbed because of the 
old age and grief and performed severe tapas, 


for a hundred years. Feeling upset with the 
tapas, she asked Vasistha and other sages. 


COR RE MIC IC EINE ET 
ad Mrrermeretteets TA ANGI 


“O Rsis, you kindly speak out to me about a 
vrata by which | could be relieved of the grief 
of the sons and could achieve fortunes in this as 
well as the other world. 


HYAAGMGT Aergle vlad 
TAT: WraTeTaya Preafaatsarai oi 


Then Vasistha and other sages enlightened 
her about the glory of Madana-dvddasi, with 
the influence of which, she was relieved of the 
grief of her son. 


of Madana, the god of love. Mahadeva awoke and 
beget Kartikeya or Uma. He became the commander- 
in-chief of the celestial army and defeated the 
demons. 

Again the demons grew powerful under two Danava- 
chiefs named Sumbha and Nisumbha. At this time 
Durga went to the battlefield and destroyed the 
Danavas. 

There is however a spiritual significance about the 
story. The war between the gods and demons going 
on eternally means the struggle between good and 
evil that we find in this world. The gods are the 
representatives of good spirit and the demons those 
of the evil. The final triumph of the gods means the 
ultimate victory of good over evil in this world. 


23 


Ra Ad: 
HGH YI AgaMaTy 
Gaara ot felt: Wc 


The Rsis asked, “O Sita, we would like to 
listen about Madana-dvdadasi vrata, performing 
which Diti again gave birth to the forty nine 
SONS. 


Ud sald 


Terese: yo fad: afar 
faeatur aeas UATMPASTA eI 


Sita said, “O Sages, in the ancient time, the 
best of vrata, which Vasistha and other sages, 
narrated to Diti, you better listen about it in an 
exhaustive manner. 


aa ata fad wet grevat Fada: 
Taga HI FaadrgealTAA Yo tt 
AMHead Tglegyers aarady | 
Paras Parararaar 8 at 


The performer of the vrata, in the month of 
Caitra, on the twelfth bright moon-day, should 
consecrate a pitcher filled with white rice. It 
should be plastered with the sandal paste. It 
should be covered with two pieces of cloth. It 
should be surrounded by seasonal fruits as well 
as the pieces of sugarcane. 


APATAAAT Afewvs I Biead:t 
aaa Tere aera Fraga 220 


Different types of food items should be 
placed there. The gold pieces according to one’s 
own means should be placed in the pitcher. 
Thereafter a copper vase filled with sugarcane 
balls should be placed over it. 


THNSUT HI F Aaoiacaaay 
HAGA Ut AAT AT ANT V3 
Above it should be placed a banana leaf 
bearing an image of Kamadeva, and to its left 


should be placed an image of Rati which should 
be made of sugar. 


402 


The Mounts Cakra, Vadhiraka and Narada 
spread in the West till they have also merged 
into the Great Western Ocean. 


sya gravee Brera: 11194 
MAA Hele: ATX Sfert wie 
The Mounts Jimita, Dravana, Mainaka and 


Candra are spreading towards the South till they 
have submerged in the Daksina Samudra. 


Centenary fafa Aafaroraet it 9 & I 

aa Mareal aa aisha: frat ATT! 

ai: Tyga sitatsat asap: 11 vit 

Sed Waelfapwerant wauietery| 

PaAAG WY TT SHA SI MATT ct 

A FT GVA Wey Yael Hot AAA: | 

Between the Mounts Cakra and Mainaka in 

the southern portion of the heaven is the 
Samvartaka Agni (volcanic mountain) which 
drinks the water of the seas. The Agni 
(volcanic) mountains Aurva, Vadava mukha too 
are submerged into the Lavana Samudra. These 
four mountains merged into the ocean (for 
safety) when Indra began to destroy their wings 


(by His thunderbolt) and they are still visible on 
particular days in the bright and dark fortnights. 


Y MAT ALT Net AA Waalfarar 9 
Solera Svat BI aa ile: 


The divisions of the Bharatavarsa are thus 
described. Those named within the limits of 
Bharatavarsa are visible there and the rest are 
described elsewhere. 


Se THEA Tt ol 
ATA WATT TT: HUTA SAT: 
antares weal Ay AKT APTS BN 
aad AAs aT Way AA a 
Seale Gat ates Feat c 8 


The more northern (one of those mountains) 
the region, the better it is. The people residing 
there are healthy, pious, longlived and 


Matsya Puranam 


possessed of the sterling qualities (Dharma, 
Artha, Kama, etc.). Various classes of people 
live in those khandas. The universe thus holding 
the various regions on her 1s known as Prthvi or 
Jagat (Earth). 
ofa sitet Verge Yarare Waghraurt 
Teen Feary fer SEATE: 1 Rit 


KR 


CHAPTER 122 
Description of Sakadvipa, Kusadvipa and 
Salmalidvipa 

ad sata 

Mages aay aarates Parr 

aera Praleed yrs te fester: a 

Sita said— “O Brahmanas, now I am going 

to speak about Sakadvipa, in a realistic manner. 


All of you should collect information about 
Sakadvipa, as spoken by me. 


Hee THKATT STO ETE FRAT: | 
PRAM UTS: AAAT VI 


Sakadvipa is double in the area as compared 
with the Jambudvipa and has an expansion on 
all the four sides measuring three times. 


Aga: AARSA Aer Aa aHT: | 
aa YUaT WaTeT farereet Frat WA 3 
qe Ua a ghiel arrange 


Sakadvipa is surrounded with the ocean of 
salt. There are several auspicious Janapadas in 
Sakadvipa. The people of that country enjoy 
long life. How could there be a possibility of 
famine where the people are illustrious, large 
hearted and compassionate? 


aaa Waa: Yt: WHA fore TAT: Ws 
Wragg ay MA WA TTA 
sear: Mffegt Ffawr THTaAT: 1G 
THRUST: AAA Aelfaay: | 


Chapter-122 


There are seven mountains in this Dvipa 
which are decorated with gems. These 
mountains are of white colour. In the three 
Dvipas including Sakadvipa, there are seven 
mountains in each one of them, which are 
spreading in all the four directions. All these 
mountains are called Varsa mountains. The 
Varsaparvatas have the names like Ratndkaras 
and others, have high peaks and the trees. 


uated: wftfest grafaencarsag: 11 § It 
SWaATaMat W MaueTarTt 
wes Ba q aes aa freq Wea ot 


These Dvipas are spread vastly equally in all 
the four directions, extending upto the ocean of 
milk as well as the ocean of salt. Now I am 
going to describe the seven divine mountains of 


the Sakadvipa. 


ata: WIRY Weer 
WMT: A Mal Seal AMT Wat NN 


Meru happens to be the first of all the 
mountains, which is served by the gods, Rsis 
and the Gandharvas. It is a gold like mountain 
and spreads to the east. Udaigiri is its other 
name. 


TA WA GR WaT 
TAN QA AAT AATTAT 1 8 


The clouds reach there for the pouring of the 
rain and disappear after pouring the rain. To the 
west of the same, there 1s a vast mountain, 
possessing all the ausadhis and is known by the 
name of Jaladhara. 


a a ay: Wea: aleferaarad: | 
TANAATG AAA; WT FETT Qo 


It is known by the name of Candra. Indra 
extracts the maximum of water from that river. 


Atel AA eareAY Stgtett Were: 
aaa AYA Yas ASMA Ven 


There is a great mountain known by the 
name of Narada, which is also known as 


403 


Durgasaila. Both the mountains known as 
Narada and Durgasaila, were born here. 


TATTLMT BHAT] VATA AT TeTeTHT: 
WA VAAARTTAT: MST: YatTaT: FeAeTN LIU 


There is another mountain known as Syama, 
which is quite vast, where all the people became 
dark complexioned. 


a Va Fara yaaa aay: | 
Way: WT ae sefrenfSt: Tt: V3 


There 1s a mountain named Dundubhi 
having the black colour, where in earlier times 
the gods resorted to the beating of the big 
drums, the sound of which caused death to the 
enemies. 


THAT ATA: MATA 
AAT Tara WET FAT: BAA Ov 
Heaps of gems are enshrined in_ their 
wombs. Silk cotton trees are grown over the 


same. The great Astacala is beyond that which 
is like the silver. 


a a aa sant cadargd WM 
yt ST et aT UTA Wea BG 
It is the same place, where Garuda in earlier 


times had, for the benefit of his mother, stolen 
away the nectar. 


TAM Ultaha: Waa A WA: 

faroment arent aftrsser Frafedt: 11 26 

sacha Ut Ta: aatefaraafac: 

faut AAEM: Baleaed Tear PAT: 1 Ven 

Tangund aaa WT Bad: 

Was Heal Bal aT: Warf AN ec 

Adjacent to it stands the Mount Ambikeya, 

also known as Sumand, where the demon 
Hiranyaksa was killed by the Lord Vardha. 
Near it stands the crystal mountain, Vibhraja, 
which is full of herbs and gems. It is a volcano, 
that is why it is called Vibhraja (fire agitator); it 
is also called Kesava. The wind there is very 
strong. 


404 


aat aalfor aaa wdarat feta: 
TUE ATTRA AMTACTTAM: 1 V8 tt 
I shall now name the mountains with the 


divisions, O holy twice borns! and hear it 
attentively. 


frmrda aif ate freer 
seaeed at rath FeTATI 201 
Those khandas have double names like the 
mountains. The mountain as well as varsa of 
Udaya is known as Udaya and Jaladhara. 
WAT NAG ATT AT Aq WIT WaT 
fEaa AIM THAN BAAN 2 VN 
Udayakhanda is called the Gatabhavakhanda 
and the Jaladhaéra khanda is known as the 
Sukumara. 
aaa Migr aM ae a Ufa 
ANG A AAR AT T YSAAAN 2 2 


That is called the (Saisira) Sitala khanda, 
and Kaumara khanda is in the Narada mountain 
which is also known as Sukhodaya. 


yadda AearraAratt VTA! 
arreatata wren Tea GAT: PTT 3M 
Anicaka is the name of the khanda on which 


is the Syama mountain which has also been 
called the Anandaka by the sages. 


ama wt ad fags Hea 
Teaaaah Ft AHA ATTN Ww 
Kusumotakara is the khanda on which lies 


the Somaka mountain which 1s also known as 
Asita. 


aaa Aah a es AAT 
aes Gafaeqeh ae faureraiaT 24 i 
Mainaka is the khanda of the mount 
Ambikeya. It is also called Ksemaka. The 


khanda of the Vibhraja mountain 1s called 
Dhruva as well as Vibhraja. 


eae ufone a seaderana aI 


Matsya Puranam 


HAG Ue TT Te area 2G 
Weal ATT AIG: WATT AST: | 
Way sara: FSA AE AT Voi 
faatht Tad U SPINY 4: Wel 

TA YUM TATA AVA AA AAT 1 CU 


Of the same dimensions as Jambidvipa is 
the huge Saka tree in the centre of the Dvipa 
itself, frequented by the people. Those regions 
were frequented by the Devas, the Gandharvas, 
the Bards (caranas), and the Siddhas 
(anchorites), who freely enjoy the beauty of the 
place. It contains many janapadas peopled by 
the four varnas. 


ag Aa aaa what WaT: 
fgaren da at: Wal Wet: WAfaM: BATU 
There are seven rivers in each one of these 
mountains which fall into the sea and each one 


has a duplicate name; of which the Ganga is an 
exception, being sevenfold. 


MINT YHA AST aT WAM 
UPA A ATLA AT MUA TAATATATIN 3 0 1 
First one is the Sukumari Ganga whose 


waters are clear and blessed. It is also called the 
Munitapta. 


THU Tate TEA ATA: Act 
Tel UW Waal wa sara ufcatfarar3 a 


The second one is called the Sukuméri 
Tapsiddha and Sati, the third one is the Nanda 
which 1s also known as Pavani. 


forfarat a daa taretelaen a YA: Bart 
SUT US Ha Wa UA: Hes 3 Vl 


The fourth one is called the Sibika and 
Dvividha, the fifth one is known as Iksu and 
Kuhi. 


OAT AGA Ae VST afer 
Ua a MAE a Met ofa 3 3 


The sixth one is known as Venuka and 
Amrta and the seventh one is called the Sukrta 


Chapter-122 


and Gabhasti. 
Wat: Wa Tern: wired Fyrareat: 1 
Waal WH Wa Meagan 3 vi 


Of the above-mentioned seven rivers one 
flows in each sub-division of the Sakadvipa, 
and they all purify the people of those regions 
with their sacred waters. 


TTS AVM Aart: Brita a 
TRCHUTATAT Aa ANAT ATATA 3 4 


There are myriads of other rivers, and 
rivulets as well as lakes, formed by copious 
supply of rain water-let fall by Vasava (Indra) 
into these. 


arat FATA UTA ata a 

TMT UA WOM: ARS TAT 3 EI 
a: frat War Ea AsV a 

Ud MAMA: Wheat: Wet a a a fear: zon 
we Yowa anaes Aa: Tel 

SOUTH TAT Syed AA FAT: BSI 


It is very difficult to enumerate and give 
proper measurements of all those mvers and 
rivulets. They are all sacred. The people of the 
janapadas who drink their waters get happiness. 
Santabhaya, Pramoda, Siva, Ananda, Sukha, 
Ksemaka, and Nava; such are the seven 
janapadas situated there, where all the rules and 
customs (Acara) of Varna and Asrama are 
observed. 


ara aera we WUTatstaT: | 
saeco + tater walataet Tn 3en 


Tae GNM UTA Fahad 
FATTAA: HTM TA Wada ¥ ot 


The people are healthy, robust, and free 
from the clutches of death; neither are they 
prone to growth and decay. There the four ages 
do not prevail in succession. The age of Treta is 
eternal there. 


405 


Meng atey wa Uaeay Way: 

Coes J faa rer: Tafa: BA ¥ VN 
Tay Et: aires: safer 

THY MSNA Car RaT: WATS Vit 

T Ay ATA CNT AT SeaTTAT at e: 
faredat + date de tana BAA Y 3 I 
ale 4a a Aa F aust A a aTusa: | 
TATU ST TAT Whe WTA SII 


Almost similar is the condition of age in the 
other five Dvipas, regard being had to the 
superiority and otherwise of the khandas. There 
is no confusion in the varnas there, and the 
people of that place are happy, as they seldom 
deviate from the path of virtue. There are no 
such things as fraud, greed, jealousy, fear and 
malicious fault finding. The country 1s free from 
vices and is truly natural. There is none to 
inflict punishment ‘there, nor on whom 
punishment should be inflicted. The people 
being virtuous, get mutual protection from their 
own virtuous deeds. 


UST Waray a Herds: 
Adhaet: Uftad: waaay: wy It 


waaiahaay ufinfagayfad: 
aragy fafaarant tetas eal ¥ & I 


The Kusadvipa is very” great in 
circumference. It is full of rivers, lakes and 
snow clad mountains, in which are to be found 
various kinds of minerals, gems, trees and 
countries (janapadas). 


qa: YR: Waal ETA 
Pred FRAT: AAT AATTAT: 11 Yo 1 
The flowers, fruits, various varieties of trees, 
grains and wealth are in plenty there. The trees 


are always full of flowers and fruits; gems of 
every kind are there. 


aad: Tata: weataTasy Tae: 
ATTA AMES FrarAAN ¥ 


wS — ww — =a ww — \ Ww 


406 


WY Tals aN HT A Pw: 
HME ale: Mat: UCase 


It is also full of domestic and wild animals. 
Now, hear, by degrees, a brief description of the 
Kusa dvipa. I am going to give you an entire 
description of the third varsa,- Kusadvipa. It 1s 
surrounded on all sides by the Ksirasamudra. 


wenger facrefeqer watad:: 
aaa Yaa: Wa faye THAT & of 


It is double, in its dimensions, of Sakadvipa — 


and there are seven mountains containing 
various kinds of precious stones. 


THETA AAA ATT TTT 
RATA Fa VrHgld Ba TAT & VW 


The number of rivers- the home of 
innumerable gems,— is also seven and the 
mountains have double names as in Sakadvipa, 
VIZ.—- 


WAN: WAST: HAST ATT Tele: 
fagureda Seen: MT Ua A AAT NG UI 


The first is the Mount Kumuda, shining like 
the Sun and is also called the Vidrumoccaya. 


waeangay: aye: foremareraaad | 

fetta: Weereta Saat ATA faye UG BH 

enudd Soh: W Ua a We: 

Biro: FSET WAT: 1G 

aH MITA FATT: | 

SATA: WH: A Ue DT ASRIT NG GN 

The second mountain, containing all the 

metals and rocky peaks, is known as the Unnata 
or Hema and is covered with the yellow 


orpiment. The third is the Balahaka or the 
Dyutiman, full of black pigment or antimony. 


aga: Waal gro aateeat Terre 
FACTS Aa YAASet TAT 4 & It 
Yaa Baten: Vad: Wretfert: | 
SS TAGS Usa AM ATATTN 4 Ol 


Matsya Purdnam 


GMT St WA: WA: A Yfaatay: | 
frcrgerncital feerar erase: 4 61 


The fourth is the Drona mountain, also 
known as the Puspavan, on the summit of which 
there are medicinal herbs efficacious in curing 
the wounds caused by the arrows 
(Visalyakarani) as well as the herbs that give 
now life (Mrtasafijivani). The fifth one is the 
Kanka or the Kusaisaya mountain. It is also full 
of choice herbs, fruits, flowers and creepers. 


Wee Wael afeat TerataT: | 

G Ua FW: Went afeheeataaga: ny ei 

aferaistarraata atest arr atscgst: | 

BAA: Vaasa HHA FE ATT oll 

wet: Va faa: Baga: YT: 

Te SIT A AACA WAIST: 11 G VI 

aut faeroredta Wet: @ Fred 

qT THR TAS Tete ATA NG VI 

MATA UTATSA WANA fercerceareary| 

AUTH FETT: AYSTET IG 30 

The sixth one is the Mahisa or the Hari. It 1s 

black like the clouds; and Mahisa Agni 
(volcano?) begotten from the water (rising from 
the sea?) lives there (in the form of fire). And 
the seventh one is the Kukudmana also known 
as the Mandara. It is full of all kinds of minerals 
and precious stones, guarded by Indra Himself. 
The root ‘manda’ means water and since it 
scatters water, it 1s called Mandara, in company 
of Brahma, for the good of the people. The 


internal dimensions of these mountains are 
double. 


Seid Tae: AA MEY Wats: | 
vat aatfor aeata ada q faarrst:e xi 


. These are the seven mountains of Kusadvipa 
and now their sub-divisions will be enumerated. 


SUS Vd: Ma saa WBA: 
TAT F fag at onfarsH TN € GI 


Chapter-122 


auavStaga aaa urate 

AMER Gy: TATATCATTCTAT A & & 
QUTY Bits AMT AAV DM YA: TMT! 
agente aca gfrreda AAT € 1 


Svetadvipa is the name of the region where 
lies the Kumuda mountain. It is also known as 
Unnata. The second one is the Lohitakhanda 
also called the Venumandala, where lies the 
Unnata mountain. Jimtita or Svairathak4ra is the 
khanda of the Balahaka mountain. Harika or 
Lavana is the khanda of the Drona mountain. 
Kakuda or Dhrtimat is the khanda of the Kanka 
mountain. 


Tied aieeeMe Yass waTATAN 
area Te ater ars fasyerq s ci 
Mahisa or Prabhakara is the khanda of the 


Mahisa mountain and Kakudmana or Kapila is 
the khanda of the mountain Kakudman. 


Caray atest Wa BA YH Yaa 
auifar udale aateag Frater & ¢ it 


Thus 1n every dvipa there are seven khandas 
with an equal number of rivers and mountains. 


aaa za: ada viaad fe at: Wat: 
AMAA: Fat: Pal: WAIT: WaT: 90 


There are seven rivers tn each khanda. Their 
waters are pure and sacred and each one has a 
duplicate name. 


qq Act aa afela yA: Byam 
ant fata fagrat at da fe From wari ei 


The first one 1s Dhitapapa which 1s also 
known as Yoni. Sita or Nisa is the second. 


wart geiter fagran fagenta a at yA: 
Aqal Sucaeqe WT sit AM BAT VU 


The third one is Pavitra also called Vitrsna. 
The fourth one is Hladini or Candrabha. 


fagred teat wheat weer da faurer 
quel wet 7 faye yava fawradtiio an 


407 


The’fifth one is Vidyuta or Sukla, the sixth 
one 1s Pundra or Vibhavati. 


Ted Aaa Mreat Yasar gf: BAT 
STATANASHT AMAT: PAPISA ASAT: 19 ¥ it 


The seventh one is Mahati also called Dhrtt. 
There are thousands of their branches that run 
where Indra pours down rains. 


afrresta a vat sat auf area: | 
SUG AAA A: AMET AUT: N94 
Wenger fast: WeeTeT GATT: | 
HMI: ARN YATVSadT AME I 


Thus I have described the Kusadvipa. Its 
measurement has been described while 
describing the measurement of Sakadvipa. It is 
surrounded by the Ghrtamanda sea. 


Wad: YAerawargacai caw: | 
faRMTTUSHeda area Wa: 1919 1 


This huge dvipa, thus surrounded, looks like 
the moon and is twice as great as the Ksira 
Samudra (sea) in its magnitude. 


dd: Ut Waeata aise ser dem 
Hg Uy aero faeat: N91 


Now I shall speak of the Krauficadvipa 
which is double the size of Kusadvipa. 


Wdlen: AA a wiaaey Wad: 
SHAT FA FAA AAT: 198 


This Krauncadvipa surrounds the Ghrtodaka 
ocean like the tyre of a wheel. 


aeaae AT: Sat Saat fatter 
CHAT Whaat AT Wa oll 


The people of this Dvipa are of a superior 
class. Devana is the first mountain beyond 
which stands the Govinda. 


THAT Aree Mera FAy: 
HBL UA: WAAR: Nc I 


Further on, from Govinda 1s the beautiful 
Kraunca mountain, after which is the Pavanaka 
and beyond it is the Andhakaraka. 


408 


AISI Aly carga Waa: 
ealgd: WONG gosta Fea e VU 
Ud THe: We Hae WaT: | 

UT FeO fae aH 1 3H 


Next to Andhakdraka is the Devavrta 
mountain, after which ccomes the mighty 
Pundarika. All these seven mountains of the 
Kraunca Dvipa are full of gems, each being 
twice the size of that preceding it. 


aay eq seals ATaey Frater 
RISA HMA SM AAA TAS TNS Yi 
TASTER VoreqaashT A Tea 


TOMA Wa: WAT THG 1S GI 
TARAS TACHA: | 
Ufreymeat aie wrert SST CK 
fagaroragint mew: yest: 
aaa TAY Was WAT: YM yt 

The sub-divisions of that dvipa are— Kusala, 
Manonuga, Vamana, Usna,  Pavanaka, 
Andhakaraka, Munidesa and Dundubhisvana. 
Dundubhisvana khanda is full of far 
complexioned men, and peopled by holy 


persons, and siddhas and caranas. There is a 
sacred river in each khanda. 


Tet sagt da wea TARTAN 


GMa UW YOStal BT MET Aaa BAT oct 
They are— Gauri, Kumudvati, Sandhya, 
Ratri, Manojava, Khyati, Pundarika. They are 
known as the seven Ganga. 
ATA ASAT AE: UAT: | 
STD T MW AN ART TEATS VI 
det raat Serararyyedor Aa: 
T Wet ferererate aerating ot 
ant aay Waa | WEN Bw ay a 
Thousands of rivers arising out of them flow 
close by. All of them are very deep. Nobody, 


even in course of centuries, would be able to 
describe fully all the countries through which 


Matsya Puranam 


these rivers pass, with the rise, growth and 
decay of the people inhabiting them. 


aa Set Vaarria yreceret Frater e ei 
mene fan gta: cAlsrerrer free 
ufraral Wags F efemustad Tera 18 I 


I shall now describe to you _ the 
Salmaladvipa, which is double the size of 
Kraufica, and is surrounded by the Dadhi 
Ocean. 


aa Yuet waverertrer frat aA: 
ga Ua F steel amrasivaar fe ane si 


The people residing in the sacred janapadas 
of that region are very long-lived. There are no 
visitations of famine there, and the inhabitants 
of that place are very forbearing, merciful and 
illustrious. : 


WI: TAASTT: FAA ATA Vat: | 

Gere Tea: Hera MAT Ue vi 
eT Waal am feettakerrarad: | 
qrasa dant ysaaher fae 
Gran teat arr feeat fatratt fe a: 
Ga: HME IM: Falah: FSET NEA 
Cant aeqtraeg Ugur are fesye: 

TA WR eS Wt aaa II 


maTafrgaraya wear freee 
A Ma WET AUT Vila aT A AEN cI 


The following are the mountains of that 
region— The Sumana, shining like the sun, and 
of yellow colour. Kumbhamaya, the central one 
is also called Sarvasukhaa. It is full of herbs. The 
third is the great Rohita, of red hue (like that of 
Bhmga patra) and full of gold. The Kusala is 
the varsa of the Sumana mountain, while 
Sukhodoya is that of Kumbhamaya and Rohina 
of the Rohita mountain, the precious stones of 
which are under the direct watch and ward of 
Indra, who, with Prajapati, gladly performs his 
duty there. Clouds do not rain there, there 1s 


Chapter-123 


neither summer nor winter. 
aUSTATOTT arat at rg grey fare 
T Wel TA Use SANTA TF TAMU 


There is no prevalence of the Varna or 
ASrama in those regions. No stars, planets or the 
moon shine there, nor is there any such thing as 
jealousy, hatred or fear. 


Srerqearad fitrerauntt = 
MN ISA TA ANT TATU 20 of 


There are fountains in the mountains, other 
sources of water, as well as the vegetable world. 
The people of this region obtain the best 
victuals of all the six flavours, without making 
any efforts on their part. 


HAA A Aad A A a UATE: 
AVATAR WATAGA AT: 1 2o VI 


The people there are all of equal rank, 
neither high nor low, they are not greedy; nor 
do they store things. 

fargiacentar arat fafgarfert:) 
Garay Be a atyel aa Al 20 VI 
They are all healthy, powerful and happy, 


attaining all siddhis of the mind, for a period of 
30,000 years. 


meTerdy fata guy fay Wad: 
MANA: Wear garry fate: W710 
unnusery goes anacatatya: | 

quest ays feo Arad: i Yo vi 


The next three Dvipas enjoy the same 
happiness, life, beauty, virtue and prosperity. 
Thus I have described all the sacred Dvipas up 
to Salmala (i.e., five). The Salmaladvipa is 
encircled by the Sura Ocean, which 1s twice its 
SIZe. 


Sit ATR HET Yarae goautsy ara 
IC MIGICCMEGUISCIV ARE Ea 


RR 


the area and 1s 


409 


CHAPTER 123 
Description of Gomedaka and Puskaradvipa 
at Jara 
Maa Waeaty aes Ae aT: | 
QUeHayR WAST WATT: I Vi 
wrens J facareratgyureres faxaz: | 
aferare gq fagat udat gh amnfedtn 20 


Sita said— O Rsis of Tapovana, now [ am 
going to speak about the sixth Gomedaka-dvipa. 
The Surodaka-sagara is surrounded by 
Gomedaka-dvipa. The area of its expansion is 
three times of Salmali-dvipa, in which there are 
two mountains with high peaks. You should 
know about it. 


TIA: AAA AT AASATAATT: 
fade: ayer art water aa 1 3 
Out of these two, one is known as Sumana. 
This mountain is black like collyrium, while the 


other one is known as Kumuda, having all types 
of ausadhis grown over It. 


waa: ste faa: guetta: 
MPAA FA MAST ASI 


wT J AAR YUareaqory a 
tat HYaVa CTA AfareTAT 4 


It is gold like graceful and has enough of 
trees and greenery. The Gomedaka-dvipa as 
compared to the sixth Surodasagara, has double 
surrounded by  Iksura- 
sodasagara. There are two vast regions in it 
known as Dhataki as well as Havyaputra. 

atest wert ad arcenhavetead 
arate: Cyd Ae WO WATT TNE 
The first varsa of Sumana mountain ts called 


Dhataki khanda. The first mountain of Dhataki 
is also known as the first varsa. 


1. Wood Fordia Floribunda. 


410 


Wie aged ast aA Taga F Ad! 
aueel fates fated Hye Ad: 91 
The varsa known as Gomeda, 1s also known 
as Sarvasukha. After that the second 


Kumudaparvatra region is known by the name 
of Kumuda. 


Ut at ual get Het aerafercth 
GAOT ART AURA AMAT: Uae: TAC 
mrauararad: Wereargatatt ead: | 
We Yes wana Para se 


Both the mountains are higher than the other 
mountains. In the eastern region of the 
Gomedha-dvipa, the mountain of Susumna is 
lodged which is extended from east to the 
western ocean. Thus in the west half of this 
Dvipa the mountain named Kusuda is located. 


Ud: Udaeey Beet a Reva: 
afer FT MAASAI! Qo It 
At the foot of these mountains, the country 


is divided into two parts. The southern half of 
this dvipa is called dhataki-khanda. 


HA Tt Tea feta aga 
Wat WaTel Bt y MST J fag vei 


To the northern half of the same there 1s the 
second excellent varsa also known as Kumuda. 
Both the regions of Gomedaka, are considered 
to be quite vast. 


aa; UT waaay Vad grea 

Aya Va Marat FE Augen 

sige fasta ga: yeat: yentda:| 

TR Ga: satbraTTASTeAAT: 11 23 

Hereafter I shall speak about the seventh and 

the best of the Dvipas, which having been filled 
with the lotus flowers is known by the name of 
Puskara. It is double in size as compared to 
Gomedaka-dvipa and is located surrounding 


Iksurasodaka ocean. In the Puskara-dvipa there 
is a great mountain with astonishing peaks. 


Matsya Puranam 


pesrauforaa ; POTTS SRS 
greta 7 Vale farang: ferar ver exit 


It looks graceful with types of peaks with 
astonishing heaps of rocks. This great mountain 
is located in the eastern half of Citrasanu-dvipa. 


ufmuseragentar fein: aatastia: | 
SA A A AGAMA WETaT: AG I 


This great mountain is spread in the twenty 
seven yojanas and is twenty four yojanas in 
height. 


grea uftfert: waa aa faz: 
feat serena 7 yaery salar: 126 i 


The western half is covered by the Manasa 
mountain, which looks like a full moon rising 
near the sea coast. 


OAM AAT Arg Targreteaya: | 
TA Yat Nelata: Trae es TaraTi V1 
Its height is 5,500 yojans. The mount 


Mahavita is its son which guards the western 
portion of this region. 


Yate waaay feat Sere WT ya: 
Caractere Tea: UAT kc 


The half of the region lying east of this 
mountain is divided into two parts. The 
Puskaradvipa is surrounded by the sea, the 
water of which 1s tasteful. 


farnecteda Wee A 
faretacantar ay stated WaT: 1 281 


Its dimensions are double of _ the 
Gomedadvipa. The people of this dvipa live up 
to 30,900 years. 


fardal a dated Waanntad BAI 
ams Taare wat fafa: oll 
There are no exceptional changes there to 
this natural rule and the people are healthy, 


happy and have attained perfection in all the 
qualities of the mind. 


Chapter-123 


Tangy ea a fag gg wast: 
TUT A ALATA FONT A ALATA: 1 2 VN 


The people of the three superior dvipas are 
all equal in happiness, life, beauty and bravery. 
There is no air of superiority or inferiority in 
them. 


7 aa aeagat Tahar wet aM 
TANT TW SN aT A Be: USN 


Besides this, there 1s none to kill or be killed 
there, and there is a total absence of hatred, 
envy, fear, greed, pride, hypocrisy, enmity, etc. 


Wad A Aaa anal ata a 
SUT APA A UTES aforey Hla: 230 


They are free from the differentiation of 
truth and untruth, virtue and vice. The order of 
Varna and Asrama, the practice of rearing up 
domestic animals, trade, husbandry are also not 
in existence there. 


Tata GUSAtlt: Yat aus Wa A 
A aa Ae AEN AT Marat a + fae evi 


teegqeaa winiraants a 
TUE F HCTAT J AAT 24M 


The three kinds of knowledge, criminal laws 
and punishments are also not known there. It 
does not rain there, neither there are rivers in 
that region. The climate is also not influenced 
by heat or cold. The water supply and plant life 
of the country depends on the hill waterfalls. 
The seasons are the same as in Uttara Kuru. 


Wat: YSTNSA Meret faatsste: | 
whey ararans Uetald As AN EM 


Happiness pervades all round. The troubles 
of old age are also unknown there. Such 1s the 
life in the Dhataki and Mahavita Khandas. 


Ua HOT: BAKE BA ATA: | 
RUM VY AAR S11 VON 
Ue AagR OT Bega WATT 


411 


aT da MygANATAR St Mia VI 


Thus the seven dvipas are surrounded by the 
seven oceans. The dimensions of a dvipa tally 
with the dimensions of the sea preceding it (1.¢., 
surrounded by it). Both the dvipas and the 
oceans have thus gradually grown in magnitude, 
a vast store of waters being called the ocean. 


RAGGA ANG WT aa aafaan: | 
afafieta TH ada AT a 281 


The root ‘Rsi’ means to wander about in 
happiness; hence in these Varsas all the four 
classes of people live happily. 


searat ya | AAR: Yat Aen 
WAAAY eer airaaseaad A Ai 3 oll 
sree elerrer tenia 

aa Sf atreaarat | area BUT ATI 3 VI 


When the moon rises in the East, the sea 
begins to swell. The sea becomes less when the 
moon wanes. When the sea swells, it does so 
with its own waters (and not with additional 
water) and when it subsides, its swelling is lost 
in its own water (and does not actually lose any 
water). 

SEMTTA ATTTTITTY TIT TATATT 

TM AT ATaShs Tad pilots 3 Va 
SAAT THAT FAT UI 
SEASTAAY WT: VATA: MSTA: 3 3 
easel WRA viivrahars TM 

SAU VSS TSA MATA AN 3 VI 
aot af: Aa Sw: AYR F Wag 
feacacegat Ear serectteheal: WAU Ba 


On the rising of the moon, the sea increases 
as if its waters have really increased. During the 
bright and dark fortnights, the sea heaves at the 


| waxing of the moon and becomes placid at the 


wane of it, but the store of the water remains the 
same. The sea rises and falls, according to the 
phases of the moon, and 150 angulis (three- 


412 


forths of inches, or 112 and half inches) is the 
measure of its rise and fall, on the two parva 
days (ie., full moon and new moon days 
respectively). The place between two seas is 
called a dvipa. The sea is called Udadhi, on 
account of its containing water. 


frttutared frat vaarired aedat: | 
WMHay T AMG: Wary MATH 3 GI 


The mountains are called Gin because they 
swallow (1e., hide everything Nigirna); and 
because they fill up (space), therefore they are 
called Parvata. The Mount Saka is in 
Sakadvipa, and is named as such. 


HME HMETA WA TAIT TI 
aaa fart: clsreaet are Frrarau 3911 
Thus is Kusastamba in the midst of the 


janapada in Kusadvipa. The mount Kraufica 
stands in Krauficadvipa, and 1s named after it. 


Mee: MATE Yat BH AEA: | 
MAE F WAS: WaT MAMI 3c 
A gigantic Salmali tree stands in 


Salmalidvipa and there is the mount Gomeda in 
the dvipa of that name. 


ANT: TERE WaT A Bd: | 

TRA A MEAT AMM SSTAATTT: I 3 SU 

afer Haat Te MA: ATS WaT: 

aa Cal SUA TAeaTATNpAA: NX oN 

There is a banyan tree in the shape of a lotus 

in Puskaradvipa. The banyan tree has sprung up 
from the potency of Brahma, and is adored by 
all the Devas; but really its origin is hidden in 
mystery. Prajapati Brahma resides in 
Puskaradvipa in company of the Sadhya. He 1s 
adored by the 33 Devas, along with the 
Brahmarsis. 


@ a Woad tat cadefaaat: | 
Mag Wart Tors fafaantt ax en 
aty ay Wag SAT HAT a 


Matsya Puranam 


AAAI UIA BW TAT ANY 
smrargeraromsant feet feToT Aa: 
gig ay wag sale THAT Assit 
Tua Wate Ad: Tenatwysd: | 


WA MIMI Tel TAATOTAATTI ¥ ¥I 


Thus all the great Rsis and the Devas 
worship Brahma there. Various kinds of jewels 
are produced in Jambidvipa and circulated 
therefrom to other dvipas. The people of these 
dvipas, in order of their precedence, excel one 
another twofold in simplicity, chastity, 
truthfulness, self-control, health, and long life. 
In all the sub-divisions of those dvipas the 
inhabitants are protected by their own natural 
learning. They all get their food without any 
care to obtain it. 


wed aera aa A Yad FAT: 

TUT VERT SGT AAAT ASL G 

CHAU A AAA AT 

Taree Ulta: Were UTAVS eT: HE It 

THVT Cable: AW Teal 

MANA Math UT ATelHetd: WN YI 

They eat the wholesome food, of the six 

flavours. Beyond Puskaradvipa is the sea of 
sweet water surrounding it, behind which 1s the 
mount Lokdloka, both dark and bright, and at 


some part it is lighted up, while the other part 
beyond it is full of darkness. 


Maa J VNS F ATet: 
viresa UA Sahat WEIN von 


It takes up the outer half of the populated 
land and 1s surrounded on all sides by the sea. 


THM TOTEM: AAMT TAT TPT 
eM SYN: aa ACAI 


The water is ten times land and it protects 
the earth from all directions. The fire is ten 
times water which is upheld by the former 
everywhere. 


Chapter-123 


AASHTO SATS RAAT TT: 
frah A AUSeT AYMARA ATTN G 0 Ut 


The air is ten times fire which it holds. It 
spreads itself at an angle in the space where it 
encircles and holds the beings. 


SM TAT AANA ATTA 

TMS MA ANT ACTEM STH & 21 
atta TATU Meg ATTA 

Vedra SAR HSA F AMAA 2 
srereraad ferarered fernrfcory 
qearea faanrd Uffarat: WATT Y 311 


The Sky which is ten times the air, holds all 
beings; and ten times greater is Bhutadi 
(Ahankara) which surrounds the Akaéa, and ten 
times the Bhutadi 1s Mahakasa which stands 
holding them in turn, while it is itself held by 
the unmanifested eternal. The mahatattva, etc.., 
are called vikara and vikari (producer of change 
and that in which the change is produced) in 
turn in relation to the support each gives and 
takes from the other. 


weeasa wae WITT 

Us WAT Met A UTAH G YI 
TAY Wasreasarei aaa Para Aa: 
MT Sfareey Fagan SAIPAN & & A 


The Vikaras, such as earth, etc., are 
circumscribed and limited, and each is greater 
than one preceding it which it permeates; each 
is produced from the other and is upheld by it. 
They are held together by their mutual 
attraction. They are really separate (molecules), 
but by mutual contact look welded into one 
homogenous whole. 


PNY FRAT: Uavared TT A 
TAT; UA Meh: Aad: BTN G GI 
Of these, the elements, earth, water, fire and 


air, are well defined and limited. The higher 
elements are only seen as lights. 


TM Siete Strang Ultra Tay: | 


413 


Wa Weta warfor sar arta ANG ol 
VARA UTA 

TAT GTC STATS NATTA TATA: HG CU 
PARMA aa searaeafeanhs 
MaMa Tas AMAA HATH & 8 
We WER ydearAiy a 
Weareae Feat sArateart faerti 01 


These lights, i.e., Akasa and others elements, 
too, are well defined. But, like smaller leaves 
which, though separate are not separately seen, 
being concealed in a larger vessel, these higher 
light-like elements, though separate and each 
supporting the other, are not visualised as such. 
They too excel each other, in the order of their 
precedence. The creation of the universe 
depends on their existence. The origin of life is 
in these Tattvas; hence without them there can 
be no life and action. 


Ted Ufa Weal: Tal: HrateraAT a 
a HUTS TYMAT MeSTTT: 1G VI 
Thus we understand that these elements, 


Mahat, etc., partake of twofold characters, viz., 
cause and effect. 


Sela AAA ST YLT ATT: 
RASTA BATA SF HATING 2 
fascia waar aa fe 


faxed verre afearotaetor: 6 31 
Waray Afaaerey Wa Mea Wea: 
Udled sitet ufaagrer wifsan & xu 


The position of the Earth and its 
circumference, with seven Dvipas and _ their 
extent, circumference and other measurements 
have thus been described. Such is the situation 
of only one part of the universal Pradhana 
Tattva, O King! this much 1s to be heard of the 
position, etc., of the Earth. I shall next tell you 
about the movements of the Sun and the Moon. 


Stet AAT ABTTATUT AHN Waa gH AM 
TATA STAT STATENS ATT 1 22 3H 


414 
CHAPTER 124 
Speed of the Sun and the Moon described 
Ud sata 


ad sed vaenia qaregranitey 
Garaget At Bares Fl gi 
AAS Tagg OT gar Ale Tae: 
freee pfreareg WeaaIT GRA IH 


Siita said— “O Rsis, Now I shall speak about 
the speed of the sun and the moon. The sun and 
the moon move around the seven continents and 
the seven oceans, besides the entire half of the 
globe and the areas beyond the same illumining 
them with their light. 


waraufeanay a ashes wearer: 

watauriaay gees fea: BAHN 

ay ovary wa arr Fat areafaerac: 

BAT WHI sere ta: Basi 

Both of them spread their light at the last 

boundary of the world. The learned believe the 
heaven to heaven to have a_ similar 
circumference. The sun throws its light in the 
three worlds in a moment. He is called Ravi for 


issuing instantaneous light and__ thereby 
protecting the creation. 


TA Ta: Waly waTOt TTA: | 
Ufencaraeapent Bread Faved 4 


TT AAA faa ae 
WUSet UH AAT AAT & I 
TAIRA fae HUST TI 
faearrd frente uftoretsa ATSetIi oI 


I shall impress upon you again and again 
about the magnitude of the sun and the moon. 
Because of the magnitude the word mahat has 
been used in this connection. The circumference 
of the sun is equal to the diameter of 
Bharatavarsa (?) It is 90,000 yojanas in 
diameter and three times as much in 
circumference. 


Matsya Puranam 


fH MTAUSeeAg UATE TUT: STAT 
att: Ufreat eat wWarot AAT: TAC 
BAeagR fast WSs TI 
Seatas AEM Foot UAT: eI 


The moon is twice as much bigger in 
circumference and diameter of the sun(?) I shall 
now speak out the measurements in yojanas of 
the terrestrial globe, comprising of the seven 
dvipas, and the seven oceans as stated in the 
Puranas. 


ARAN WATT A ATA: 
ARTA Mela A AeA AAA aS 20 1 
edeatdand SMa a 

THATS dca AAAI 2 It 
fearea Ufaan a ANd FT| 
Watachlecfacaret Yfaat HAM: Ba 21 


I shall now speak on the Sampratas as well 
as the Abhimanis(?) Abhimai gods of the past 
ages, are equal in number of Sampratas in the 
form and the name. Therefore | shall describe 
the surface of the earth and the Sadmpratas in 
their entire distribution. The entire magnitude of 
the earth 1s fifty crores of yojanas. 

TRMMTAMMUT T AUaTA ATT 
Tidal wtifest aifeter 7 A BATH V3 

The half of the terrestrial globe lies north of 
the Mount Meru, while inside the Meru every 
direction extends to a crore of yojanas. 


TM VaAeATUNMAraaa a WA: 

Uae Aeartar were fara: 1 vi 
yfyen fart act aerteafaaterd 

fret: mareaed ferearereeearareg TATE 84 1 
aur 
VARTA: Yea: AT TART GI 


The extent of half terrestrial orb 1s 89,50,000 


TrHTUuc ‘ acl | 


yojanas. The extent of the world 1s 3,79,00,000 
yojanas. This is the length of the seven dvipas 


Chapter-124 


and the seven oceans. This is the length of the 
seven dvipas and the seven oceans. 


fart fryut da yreraTaTseTy 

TO ASAT FT HSTKAHTSM TAT: 11 Vol 
TM MASAO VatAMTeTeT AT: 

See WA OSATUS CAN 2c 1 


The magnitude of the interior orb 1s thrice of 
its whole extent, and 1s 11 crores and 37 lacs 
(yojanas?). This is the internal magnitude. 


aaa feta aay WSeT 
TaaAayeaA YALA AUSTIN 89 I 
The space in the firmament studded with the 


stars 1s equal in circumference to the magnitude 
of the entire earth below. 


waraaiarar a yaeqed fea: BAT 

WU: Wreat femrat F AAT SAN 2 ott 

TRAHAN West Ta SAAT 

SOT TATA F BAI I 

aatad faata aa: Gay Wh 

wae F YAMA J ASP 2 2M 

a A Ua TA THOTT AT: | 

farce Wg WAT TAA 231 

In other words, the Earth has the same 

measurement as the Heaven. To the east of 
Meru, on the Manasottara mountain, 1s 
Vastveka-Sara, the city of Mahendra. It 1s full 
of gold. To the south of Meru 1s the city of 
Dharmaraja, called the Samyamana, on the back 
of the Manasa mountain. Vaivasvata 
Dharmaraja resides there. To the west of 


Sumeru, on the top of the Manasa mountain, 1s 
the fair city of Varuna named Sus. 


Tem Tes Brea fara 
WAAAY F AHaTeT EMA 2% 
TAA THSTAMT HH aATOTT TT 
HAUTE Maat SUT 24 I 
RTT Tas Meer Frater 


cferotucny wa: famafta ada 261 
TAUAaT AswAera Aad Urea he 
TATA Bal WalsT ATT: II 
aatad Wat JIA: Teva 
arama fanaa a ect 


North of the Meru, on the top of the Manasa 
mountain, is the Vibhavari city of Moon 
(Sirnea). It is like the city of Mahendra. To the 
north of the Manasa mountain, are the 
Lokapadlas in the four directions, for the 
propagation of virtue and the protection of the 
universe. At the time of the Daksinadyana!, the 
sun travels over the Lokapalas. Now hear about 
it. This sun, with the Jyotiscakra (circle of 
light?) travels southwards, at the speed of a 
swift arrow let loose from the bow. When He 
reaches the centre of Amardavati then He is seen 
to be rising in the Dharmaraja’s Sammyamapuri, 
to be setting in Vibhavari. That is the midnight 
time in Susapuri. 


aaead Haat Hea J eaden 
GUAT ARMAS T FAT VM 
farang ta WERT a 
Aaa arava wee J asen3 of 
Tama argarahreta fawreag: 
TESTA Raa TEATAAT: 11 3 2 
Teta Faad ava A 
OMT Tale MATT AHATI 3 21 
TaAyAAON wah ad a: 

Va wad wag cay AVA 3 31 


When it is midday in Dharmarayas city of 
Samyama, it is dawn in the Susapuri of Varuna. 
When there 1s midnight in Vibhavari, it 1s sunset 
in the city of Indra. When it 1s midday in the 
Susapuri of Varuna, the sun rises in Vibhavari. 
When the sun rises in the Amaravati of Indra, it 
is midnight in the Sarnyama of Dharmaraja and 


1. The sun's progress south of the equator. 


416 


sunset in the city of Varuna. Thus, like a fiery 
wheel, the sun moves with great rapidity and 
even visits the pleiades (the Great Bear). He 
thus goes round the (Manas) on four sides. 


seared araratisid WH: Yas 

are WITs a at Bt Carewal FT A Iwi 
Wate FT HANS Mata a TSA: | 
Saat agarteas aad Ta Z 4 
Ha: UL BATE A Teale 
JANATA FT WA YATE | AUIEI 


The sun goes regularly to his two abodes, 
Udaya (rising) and Astamaya (setting) and his 
rays fall on three cities of the Devas, in the 
morming, at noon, and in the afternoon 
respectively. The rays of the rising sun grow 
stronger and stronger until at noon they reach 
their greatest intensity. After noon time He 
trudges along with subdued rays until He sets 
down. The sunrise and the sunset create east 
and west respectively. 


Mea ASeIS FT UAT: | 


GMM SPAT AM A Sea: BAZ 
WUOTGT Weasd TT ANT: A Tea 
Aaa ecttenreteel TTT 3 Ci 
PagTMTaT A TULA MAT A 

HTT THA TAMA Wat A SPAT 3 VM 


The sun gives out heat equally in all 
directions, in the front, sideways and backward. 
He is said to rise at a place where He 1s first 
seen and set where He (finally) disappears. The 
mount Meru is northernmost place, though 
south of the Lokaloka mountain. He 1s at a vast 
distance from the Earth and His rays too in their 
passage here (are obstructed by) go to other 
things; consequently, He is not visible at night. 


ae ViTaeay: ae weve 
Va YR J Al Tait AAT Voll 


The sun appears high (on the horizon) when — 


He reaches the centre of Puskaradvipa. 


Matsya Puranam 


fagrart a Aiea Wet A Teoh 

Qo Bea Sai Meat Fraverd x vit 

WU waaeaMafaged A BAT 

Used ASANO TATA ATT ANS VU 

Tiafaent micelar eer gy fae 

Ut HAA Bel HBT F STOTT v3 UI 

He travels over the 1/30th of the world in 

one muhirta (a period of 48 minutes). That 1s to 
say, the speed of the sun in one muhirta (48 
minutes) is 31,50,000 yojanas (1/30 of 


9 45,00,000). Thus gradually He marches to the 
south. 


uforafa qatsal ard arergqateant 
TAT VR YA SOTA YI 
WAAR Start TOT BATA! 

Aaa SATO FT HUBTAT aAfararerT wt 


In His southward course (Daksinayana), He 
travels in the space between Manasotara and 
Meru thrice as much as in the centre of Puskara. 
Now hear of his southward course. 


Ta Hel: WHS Aer: ufTosery 

TM MACACA MATT TSI ANSE I 

errareaager Merce Feqetred| 

efaonfeehadisal fayaent ser wa: 

ete AAAS fast ATT 

qusel faqacanta atartetfrarerai ¥ <1 

He covers the whole circumference of the 

earth, 9,45,00,000 yojanas, in course of day and 
night. After finishing his southward course 
when he comes at the equator (Visava rekha), 
he travels over lights up the north of the 


Ksiraségara, as well as the Visuvamandala, 
whose extent all of you now hear. 


fra: alex: 7 aa fagaenty qosery 
aa Vcaeeter fagreranerenhs Fuse 
MAT AAT Bi FaawTTaay Aa 
MASA UTE Sat @ fest ATTN oll 


Chapter-124 


SATA: TAT FT HSA AVS TI 
aferornrcaeaia aif farerrererenayi & 21 

WI Wea Wet TATA 

Sart afer Fafeefie aad & 21 
ATA Seat Maratreq’ eferom 

SY SATS F SAAN TAT 1G 31 
sated: Tati Aa TAT AA: | 

aaa fra BA ANTS: WAT & YN 
Ufavarst gafera amatfatta Ban 

FRNA Yrs alata aera AAT G 


It is 3,21,00,000 yojanas. In the month of 
Sravana, the sun in his northern course travels 
over Puskaradvipa, which is beyond the 
Gomedadvipa. The extent of the northern, 
southern and the middle of this journey should 
be noted as below. Jaradgava is in the middle, 
Airavata in the north and Vaisvanara in the 
south. Nagavithi is the Uttaravithi (i.e. northern 
course begins with Nagavithi?). Ajavithi is the 
Daksinavithi, with Ayavithi begins _ the 
southward course? The asterisms Pirvasadha 
and Uttarasadha, as well as the Mula, Asvinti, 
Bharani and Krttika form the Nagavithi. Rohini, 
Ardra and Mregasgira are also Nagavithi?. In 
other words, the three vithis of which Abhijit is 
the East, namely, Ayavithi, Mrgavithi and 
Vaisvanaravithi form the southern course. 
While the three vithis beginning with Nagavithi 
form the northern course. And when the sun 
passes on to the asterism Pusya, Aslesa and 


— 


. Moon's path through the astricism svati (or Asvini, 
Bhurani and Krttika. 
Name of one of the three divisions of the southern 
paths or one of the three paths in which sun, moon 
and plents move comprehending the estericism Mila 
Pirvasddha and Uttarasadha MW p.9. 


2. The two Asddhas and the Mala (constituting the vithT 
called Vaisvanara, along with the two vithis west of 
it namely), beginning with Ajavithi (that 1s, Ajavithi 
and Mrgavithi) or the two vithis, East of Abhijit and 
ending with Svati are the three vithis north of the 
Nagavithi. 


417 


Punarvasu, then He is said to be on the 
Airavativithi. 
fray ata gat Saat sea 
TAT BHAT Wa WaT Taq & It 
These three vithis comprise the Uttaramarga 
(northern course). When the sun is in Parva and 


Uttaraphalguna and Magha, the vithi is called 
Arsabhi. 

qaraeneuat Weta Tat BAM 

FA A AAS A ASU A WTRATN 4 OI 

Wane arate wera At sea 

SMTA TM Tart Meats SAT G 21 

SIT fagmvar Ba a WTA qareaa 

Yet Yahrrars Stet Sart WaT 4 8 

Purva and Uttaraprosthapada and Revati are 

the Govithi; while Sravana, Dhanistha and 
Varuna are the Jaradgavavithi. These three 
Vithis form the middle course of the sun. Hasta, 
Svati and Citra are the Ayavithi; Jyestha, 
Visakha and Maitra are the Mrgavithi; Mala, 


Parva and Uttara Asadha re the 
Vatsvanaravithi. 
Cpaeceg ateareat art f eferct ya: 
HBA dageAd AAT: WANG oll 
These three Vithis form the southern route 
of the sun; now the (chordal) distance between 


the extreme points of these (Vithis) each should 
be noted. 


UIA I AAT 

Wate ator ar Taha Ag VI 
HGANCA Sra Weather 
AISAASAHS Say SeroTAT g VI 
tae wera Urey Frater 
Uhm Ag HAM TAT: 1G BH 
AsaUfaent A AAS: Waargria: 
AGH: SAIS AMATI & ¥ I 
AMT A Valt ASA TATATT 


418 


Ae SATs Aad WATTS & & It 
AAMC A MMe AUSetsAT | 
NAM A Walt HAd AUST TNE EI 


This is 31,03,300 yojanas. Now hear of this 
distance along the course, south and north of the 
equator. Such distance between the ecliptics and 
the equators in the centre is 1,025 yojanas (i.e., 
between the solstices and the equator). The sun 
travelling north and south of the (equatorial) 
line has a course of 8,000 mandalas during 
Uttarayana; but its southern course, called also 
the outerward course, 1s similarly traversed by 
the sun. 


WTO quseTeNty asa Frater 

GAA ACAGT SH AT TA VATA G wil 
MH IBUS A Fa TAs 

fasnen wuserata free ag fadtadg cit 
WEY WA WI: Yat a Dect HAT! 
HAMIL FMT AR TATA & 8 


Now hear of the magnitude of these 
mandalas. Each mandala is 18,058 yojanas in 
extent, being obliquely inclined to the equator. 
In the nave (or centre) of the mandala, the sun 
completes one rotation in a day, like the potter’s 
wheel; such is the case with the moon also. 


afer aenearceeaa Viret Frareit 
TRNAS AT FT ATEATCU Tesla 9 o tt 
In His Daksinadyana march, the sun travels 
very fast, like a wheel, and that is why he 


traverses over a vast area within such a short 
duration. 


Gat gayi: vie Fenclerorea 
THEM Tet Ath ASHI 9 eI 
TSM eT BATU AHABTE TTT 
HATTA FM TS WAU 2M 


In other words, the sun in his southward 
course rapidly goes over thirteen and a half 
asterisms in 12 muhirtas (in day time), and in 


Matsya Puranam 


18 muhirtas at might, in _ travelling 
comparatively at a slower speed, like the lump 
of clay in the centre of the potter’s wheel. 


SEMI FMT Wa: ANd Wefan: | 
TEATETLT SATA YT AISeAT Wafer 9 3 tk 
Talswraircal Fer oeTay 

TAMA Weal A MATT AT Wa: 
Tere BANU Tat BeMHETTTI OMI 


In His Uttarayana course, the sun moves on 
slowly and consequently, He is only able to 
cover a short distance during 2 long time. Then 
he goes over only 13 (and a half?) asterisms in 
18 muhirtas in day time, and at night He goes 
over the same number of asterisms in 12 
muhirtas!. 


AA HAAt AVA Meh TWA YA: 
Ufeugs Sa HTN WAASAt FaRAMTII 9 & I 


Like the mound of clay on potter’s wheel, 
the pole star moves more slowly than either of 
them. 


Vena Mace Tat WA 
BAN: HBA FA OSE TN kt 


The pole star completes one day and night of 
30 muhirtas in revolving on the orbit between 
the two extremes. 


THATS feat Want: BA 
Tae T GH MT Was oF Aft iow 


When the sun is on His Uttarayana course, 
His movement in the day is slower and in the 
night it is faster. 


|. In other words, the total length of the day and night 
begin 30 muhirtas, a muhirta is equal to 5/4 of an 
hour. The longest day, 1.e., 21st June, is said to be of 
18 muhirtas, or 14 hours, 24 minutes, when the 
shortest might will be of 12 muhirtas, or 9 hours and 
36 minutes. The longest night will be 14 hours, 24 
minutes on 21st December, and when the day will be 
the shortest, 1.e., of 9 hours and 36 minutes. This 1s 
true for the latitude of 35°N. Looking to the map of 
India, it is, somewhere in Kasmira. 


Chapter-124 


aferorny arta fear vite faeiraci 
ft: WA aS AH Wet arly faeterai 9 c tt 
And in His Daksinayana course, His 
movement in the day is faster and in the night it 
is Slower. 


Ud Tafagraut fart Tae TI 
SSA SAO MINA ATTAIN 9 8 Ut 
With this different speed, the sun creates day 


and night (of different length) in Ajavithi in the 
south and on the north the Lokaloka mountain. 


haa BT AMATI ELE : 
Sieataann at yeaerTatall ¢ ot 
Outside the Vaisvanara path (the Solstice of 
Cancer), the light comes on the world from the 


Loka mountain. It is day time when the light of 
the sun spreads from the Puskara. 


UPA Aeldeaerialeasy Tat: | 
GAM Bearer aped areal PAT c VN 
THVT Waa: UUs: 

AAAT ATA WEEATTT: ASI ¢ 2M 
IAA WHT nets & fit: 
Umar one ParetHetd: TT 3H 


The Mount Lokaloka is 10,000 yoyanas high 
and extends sideways and outwards. The 
mountain is partly illumined and partly dark, 
and is round in shape; the inner portions of the 
Lokaloka mountain are illumined by the sun, 
the moon and the stars. This is the Aloka 
mountain, and the mount Niraloka is beyond It. 


wile Aletlent Mata aeeneaeha 

cacteal F Ward TTA: UPMATN ¢ vi 

TAIRA MATERA STS AaTAT 

aT Ufa: wer fatelfeantt ate: BATTS 4 

The verb loka means to see; aloka is 

opposite of loka. The sun in his journey creates 
this loka (light) and aloka (darkness); hence this 
time is called sandhya (joining light and 


darkness), i.e., twilight. Usa is the night and 
Vyisti is the day according to the wise. 


419 


fapenret HEM Beet ST US A 
ern sherentteararat sat Faunce 
TAA easel J A Bd 
remyaMed figura 7 duc 
Wed: BARAT: Ale AUTEN TH aI 
THAME: AGATA CS 
ils ini is 

Walt BTU si 
arecoula areca she 
AUTGAMA eT lea: ATA A TAM ofl 
ames Fevlal YEttaa Us a 
amiayed 4 ater fags Bry < 


One muhirta consists of 30 kalas, and a day 
has 15 muhirtas. The day increases or decreases 
as the twilight muhiirtas increase or decrease, 
owing to difference of three muhirtas in the 
course of sun’s journey through the line 
(equatorial), etc. (The day is divided into five 
parts, each of three muhirtas). The first three 
muhtrtas is Pratah (morning), the next three 
muhiirtas, is known as Samgava. Three 
muhirtas after that is called the Madhyadhna 
(noon) and a similar number of muhirtas after 1t 
bring about the afternoon called apara by the 
sages; this is followed by evening of the last 
three muhurtas. The day 1s of fifteen muhtrtas 
on the equator. 


aga FAA star afarorrat 
HEE TAA TA UWA WAT SSF VI 


The days vary in duration when the sun 1s 
travelling south or north of the equator. When 
the days are long the nights are short (1.e., 
Daksinayana), and when the nights are long he 
days are short (in Uttarayana). 


mgadaed faye q facta 
Mead: Wal lal Meares SAMI 31 


The equinoxes (Visuva) come in the autumn 
and spring, i.e., the days and nights are of equal 


a 
w/ 
w/ 


a 
ww 


NM - Cv _ ae er) ee) er) 


n 
il 


420 


duration at the autumn and vernal equinoxes. 
Beyond darkness is light and beyond light 1s 
darkness. 


HUTT: Feet Silent Te: 
TAT TEARS ATT ATT 8 


The Lokapdlas are located in the centre of 
the Lokaloka mountain. Of these Mahatmas, 
four are there till the annihilation of the world. 


Barn da aut: HEAT wae: 

feTTAeT WA: ATAATTAT FSI 
Ree Petter Prerst Peace: 

cirenaren: farareat Cente UAreerq eI 


The first 1s Vairaja Sudhama; the second one 
is the Prajapati Karadama; the third one is the 
Hiranyaroma Parjanya, the fourth one is Rajasa 
Ketumana. These four are free from the feeling 
of opposites (e.g., pleasure and pain, etc.), of 
conceit, sloth, of grasping. Each one of the four 
quarters is occupied by each of them on the 
Mount Lokaloka, 


Tt TEMA YS Cara fary 
fagannt: Wd: Tat agATMTeas:11 2 91 
The Northern peak of the Agastya mountain 
which is inhabited by the Devarsis and which 


lies outside the Vaisvanara path, is the way of 
the Pitrs. 


aaTad Warenra wear Astararfat: | 
ae Vata: fagarat uf Fara neci 
On this Pitryana reside the Agnihotri Rsis, 


desirous of progeny and procreators of the 
people of the universe. 


TA BH srfgresy fargrad 
Wer MHA Gat: @ sae 


O King, these Rsis, who originate progeny, 
begin the works of creation and uplift humanity. 
They move about in Daksinapatha. 


afer a yaad warcatead BT AM 
arate da Wala: FAT Ali ool 


Matsya Puranam 


They establish the order of duty in each 
yuga (Dharma), when it is disturbed, with their 
learning, piety and asceticism. 

Aaa Ud & UAT Wey al 

versa ydat aread Perftarai go gh 
TAMA AAA ATT | 

ART MA ASATUT BATT FEAT Qo 21 
Afaqefant Arras aera 

fratadt waeter & yao ATH go 3 
MAA TATRA A 
SONA AAT SH Qo XII 

aM Haale AaAgeaes a 

Sead: HUT: Fag: PAMTATTS AAT Rok I 

The previous Lokapalas are born in the 
house of their late compeers. In their absence, 
the latter take their place in this way; by mutual 
succession they continue till the destruction of 
the world. 88,000 of these Rsis, who live the 
life of a householder, remain on the Daksina 
(south) path of the sun till the end of the world. 
I have thus enumerated those Rsis whose 
funeral ceremonies have been performed. 
According to the usages of the world (to stand 
as examples) these Rsis (Siddhas) have passed 
through the experience of birth, feelings of like 


and dislike, lustful passions, sexual and other 
worldly enjoyment and death. 


msifeur; Wada gratteae TAT 
Gat FT ATCT ACT 11 208 I 


The seven Rsis desiring progeny took birth 
in the age of Dvapara and conquered death, as 
they despised the work of propagating children. 


ABV ASAT TTA TT ATT 

SET FT VAAN ATA 20 91 
q Tea ey a ASAT 
SUT A FASTAATAATTI Yo CI 
AAS ARMAS TERIA 

Sad: HU: Yewisgaad fe Ht 208 


Chapter-125 


aaa Fae 
Fereatatrearen fe a Graton 22011 


qerMnearaguarast: TTI 
AYTASTARA J Vitel MATT: VLAN 


88,000 Rsis have gone into the path of those 
seven Rsis by becoming Urdhvareta (perpetual 
celebates). They will live till the destruction of 
the world on the northern path of the sun. They 
became immortal as by their example they 
taught the people the sacrifice of lust, passion, 
likes and dislikes, abstaining from procreation, 
and other worldly enjoyment, by showing their 
worthlessness. Those who remain till the end of 
the universe are called immortals. They exist so 
long as the three worlds exist. Not so the 
mortals who follow the path of the Mara, such 
as lust, great sins like the slaying of embryonic 
cells and great virtues like the performance of 
Asvamedha yajna_ (horse-sacrifice). The 
immortals or the Urdhvaretas go into 
unconsciousness at the time of the dissolution of 
the universe, and not before!. 


Sage gal wararerd: | 
Waters feck Tart ST AAT 2221 
Dhruva (pole-star) is north of, or above the 


region of the seven Rsis. It 1s the illustrious foot 
of Visnu. It is third Lighigiver of the world. 


OA Weal A Vite age: Wet weTy 
ad gam fasta a q atm wife: ees 
Those who reach that highest seat of Visnu, 
transcend all sorrows, so, all those who desire to 
reach the world of Dhruva, remain in the path of 
virtue. 
sta store ergy yaar dgadyaatacad aA 
Aa AMAA ATA SEATT 11 22% 


KK 


1. The three lights of the world are first, the light of the 
Fathers (Pitrs), second, the light of the Ordhvaretas 
(solitaries) and third, the light of Visnu or the 
Bhaktas, who perform duties for the sake of duty. 


421 


CHAPTER 125 


Description of the movement of the sun and 
his chariot 


WS gen ae fecarrgaretrefiiory 
TATA ATO Aa WAT: 1 VU 


Thus listening to story of the movement of 
the sun and the moon, besides the planets, 
Saunaka and other rsis spoke to Sita, the son of 
Lomaharsana. 


AAA ad: 
Tifa mamas Safar canoe 
Ata Talo TAN AAT AN 21 
aay UMA Aft watt ate at TTI 
Utara eda Te BATA 3 


The Rsis asked- “OQ Stita— the best of the 
orators, how do the planets and_ the 
constellations move about in the solar system? 
Do they move about collectively or separately? 
Does anyone make them move, or they move of 
their own. We are anxious to learn about this 
secret. You therefore please speak out the 
same? 


Ud area 
yadaed cra W Fraverd 
weeny aps aq Wales a WaT vA 


Stita said— O Sages, this is the subject which 
confuses the people, because inspite of its being 
visible, it still confuses the people. 


aise aareraty feral arate: 
SATTETAS a Aaya gar fetes i 
Ge A Wad walerdt We: Tel 
THAT AUT ATAU DT AeHATI G I 
TAS TAM At a yard THAT TT: | 
anaes ag: auf ot 
at Ney ay Tat sree Paya: 
STENTATAA TAT STS SAAOTTAT IC I 
faqaeueauly adtaegatra 


422 


STAT ATT A HAT ASA GATT: 11 8 


I am going to explain the same. Among the 
fourteen stars, there 1s the planetary porpoise or 
cakra (Sisumara). The son of Uthanapada, has 
taken the form of this sacrificial post (Medhi) in 
the sky and is known as Dhruva. It revolves and 
causes the sun, the moon and other planets 
revolve as well. The stars also follow it in its 
wheel-like movement. These luminaries move 
on owing to the will force of Dhruva, being tied 
to it by the aerial chord. Their separation and 
the period of union; rising and _ setting, 
disturbances, movements southwards, 
northwards and in the central region, besides the 
eclipses are directed by Dhruva. 


fadta staeq arqdered eaferatarar: | 

Sat GeMaared searglasat StfTi go i 

Sate Aa ITA: Wath: 

YA Ta aT AT SY MT: WA AAT: 1 221 

vant Verfosat a Uda WelTaM 

RAMA AZSMAT YAM ATTASATTN 22 Mi 

TERT A UAT FeTAAMATTT | 

Yona AMT ANUS PETA: 3H 

TATRA STN TTATT 

HUA TAAL: HOUMA TST: tt PVA 

ARAM AGT A AGA: HeTaTAT: | 

GAAS WAT WeHArAMA AST 2G 

The clouds of Jimita beget life. These 

clouds remain suspended on the air Avahana. 
They change shape, (condensed) and on moving 
for a yojana from them, they form into rain and 
are called the source of rain. The clouds 
Puskardvrata are born out of the wings (of the 
mountains). These wings are named Puskara 
and preserve in themselves a huge volume of 
water. Because of this they earn their name. The 
powerful Indra cut off the wings of the 


mountains, which could fly at will and caused 
disaster to the coming generations. These 


Matsya Puranam 


clouds could assume various forms, creating 
thundering sound, cause excess of rains at the 
end of the kalpa and could subside the fire. 
They support the air, are full of immortality and 
cause the end of kalpa. 


UeargTe MAA: TAT WT: 

TAATVSHITCTA As TET: Weal heraT: tt VE I 

SUTTON TT: Aaa STAT : | 

TT HBT TETAS FETT: 11 Vol 

The bursting of the Brahma’s egg out of 

which came forth the four headed Brahma 
Himself, produced other clouds; they are the 
outer crust of egg and are called Megha 
(clouds). Without distinction their chief source 


of nourishment is smoke. The most important of 
them 1s Parjanya. 

TAM Vaart a Aart aT: ae 

Heh feed AAT Met BAAN ci 

Uta fermna saat vitasrayi 

Garay alia Fal Taaggan Ve 

There are four elephants too, (Diggaja). 

There are two divisions of elephants (Hast), 
mountains (Parvata), clouds (Megha) and 
serpents (Bhogi). They originally sprang from 
the same common stock. Their ongin lies in 
water. The Parjanya clouds and Hasti wax 


during Hemanta season and pour out showers of 
snow born of cold, to promote the growth of 


grain. 
a: Uftaet ATT aT ETaT WUTqTT | 
ASA fathl ATA ASTATATTMATTN 2 oH 
feeargaaent quar: fraantate fasqara 
aren Freated are ferran: gate: Hts 2 en 
Vary Watala ae sit @ Wa: 
afarara faftatsat gaa sft Baya 221 
sehmad: sera da efaat 
Us AM Aare MAAS aggai 231 


Chapter-125 


Tay Wadd aS Ay THAT RAT 

mat fenadt arated qa WARAAN Vv 

sara fasart vehi 

Peraaitea see AA: TON VGH 

The sixth air Parivaha 1s their chief support. 

The same air holds the Akasa-Ganga, whose 
waters are holy, nectar like and pass in three 
directions. The elephants hold down (Diggayas) 
her sacred waters in their bulky trunks and 
throw them diffused by the air and the same 1s 
styled dew. The mount Hemakita is 1n the south 
(of Meru?); to the north and south of the snow 
clad mounts (Himavata) is the Pundra cloud 
which greatly increases the stock of rain. All the 
rain formed there converts itself into the snow. 
The wind on the Himavata draws by its own 
force these snow flakes and pours them on the 
great mountains. Beyond the Himavata there 1s 
little rain. 


SMa wat: wifed wafagean 
ated Wane Warafpfagsai VEN 
Next to it 1s another cloud named [bhi that 


helps the growth of beings. These two clouds 
enhance the amount of rains. 


Tea da Aaa Weald 
Wa Wa FT FS BT AyUavad Vw 


Thus I have described to you the clouds and 
how they are fed. The Sun is said to be producer 
of rain. 


ad ad fad ufa ara da fet am 
WITTE Tal Aa Waitt VC Ik 


Rain, heat and cold; night, evening and day; 
prosperity and adversity, all originate from 
Dhruva. 


ganas: wat a yer fasta 
AAA FATT MATA: 11 23 
Seay die WeAMTAY a 

ATA A Mar Fenraaite WaT: 113 ol 


423 


The sun from his position draws water of 
Dhruva in molecular form, remains in the 
bodies of various beings, and goes out in every 
direction in the form of smoke when they burn 
the Sthavara (immovables) and the Jangamas 
(moveabies). 


oF UT SA WAST TTT 
TM: Area ated TPAC 3 8h 


This (smoke) forms itself into clouds. The 
sun is the centre of clouds. He absorbs the water 
by His bright rays. 


AGATA SATA TTA: | 
AARTTAM Sater Ufa eaTHT: 113 VI 
FrerepeaTaT Wenz: Wer: Waered TART: 
ATM: WAM STAT AASTATAT 113 3 


His rays with the help of air draw out water 
from the ocean. But by means of white rays He 
obtains rain from the clouds in due seasons. The 
waters from the (vapours) of the clouds when 
brought into contact of the wind fall in the 
shape of rain. 


aa sata wooTaaa yaaa 
aaa: taht da fageeatrat: ByAar:3 v1 


Such rain falls for six months for the good of 
the creation. Wind roars and electricity 1s 
produced. Fire is said to be the source of 
lightning. 


Terre fagatarterd agar a 
1 Weert aa Meee & Pate: 
aesa strates gaunfetsat a3 41 


Meghas are called so on account of their 
sprinkling the landscape (with water). This 
expression is formed from the root Miha (to 
sprinkle). That which does not throw down 
water 1s called Abhra. Hence Abhra is 
stationary. The sun established by Dhruva is the 
creator of rain. 


gaunfatgat agate Wet Wa: 
TEAM Tay ATA BAAVSATN 3 « I 


424 


aard fash qaor wafasa 
AA: FATT BAAN Weare 3 9 


The air from Dhruva drives away the rain. 
The circle of stars comes out of the sun and the 
planets moves away from them; in the end, it re- 
enters the sun established in Dhruva. Hence the 
chariot of the sun 1s seen near. 


Rada aaa Gator Fron 
ferorerop & steeple 

TAT AAMT YA: VAT WATT 3 cI 
Wearaeal AAMT SAA 

TRIO A TATA SVS ; WATOTT: 11 3 8 I 


It rests on a wheel with five spokes and three 
naves (or triple nave). It has eight wheels under 
the same circumference. They have a common 
axle dotted with the particles of gold. The sun 
moves in such a glorious chariot. It extends to a 
lac of yojanas. The pole (Isddanda) of the 
chariot is double in its longitude. 


BTA TAUN FRI TA Wass a 
aa: Hie eet FH: Waa ¥oll 


1. Both in the axle and yoke, there are two levers, one 
horizontal, the other, perpendicular. The horizontal 
arm of the axle has a wheel at one end; the other 
extremity is connected with the perpendicular arm. 
To the horizontal arm of the yoke are harnessed the 
horses; and its inner or right extremity 1s secured to 
the perpendicular. The upper ends of both 
perpendiculars are supposed to be attached to 
Dhruva, the polestar, by two aerial cords, which are 
lengthened in the sun's southern course, and 
shortened in his northern; and retained by which to 
Dhruva, as to a pivot, the wheel of the car traverses 
the summit of the Mdéanasottara mountain, on 
Puskaradvipa, which runs, like a ring, round the 
several continents and oceans. The contrivance 1s 
commonly compared to an oil-mill, and was, 
probably, suggested by that machine, as constructed 
in India. As the Manasottara mountain is but 50,000 
leagues high, and Meru, 84,000 while Dhruva is 
1,500,000 both levers are inclined at obtuse angles to 
the nave of the wheel and each other. In images of 
the sun, two equal and semi-circular axles connect a 
central wheel with the sides of the car. 


Matsya Puranam 


That chariot of the sun has been created by 
Brahma for necessity. It is made of gold, pure 
and unmixed drawn by most handsome horses 
that run with the speed of wind. 


TITAS AUT TT: | 
STRUT THAG HAT: ASV As VN 
The Vedic metres are the steed to whom the 


wheel is attached. The chariot resembles the 
vehicle of Varuna in all details. 


rat ata aah arearaied fefar 


WMS TF TAA WIS WT A 
Hartenada: aferatt sarerrzi x 2 AI 
The sun moves about in the heaven every 
day on that chariot. Now the various parts of the 


sun as well as of his chariot denote the various 
parts of the year. 


TT WA VHT SBA: 
SHAT WA: TSA: BAT ¥ 3 tt 
Day is one of the naves of His chariot’s 


wheel. Years are the spokes of the wheels. The 
Six seasons are its peripheries. 


Ufaaea THs saat Sed Sra: 
HARA TAT SAAT: HET: BFA NVI 


Night is its fender; Dharma is the high 
banner; the yugas of the axle and pins, the kalas 
(parts) which carry the artas(?)’. 


TR BIBT BAT OT axTUtS ATO a 
FOGTTHSISE SAT TET HET TAT It 
amerhiat + Tea selena ya 
TUTE Tet ATATTAT & EH 
Treat da fagy a wapAda a 

Use Fett da sorta J AAT Vell 


Kasthas are the nostrils of the horses; 
moments (ksands) are their row of teeth; 
Nimesa is the (anukarsa) floor; Kala, the pole 
(Isa). Artha and Kama are the pins of the yoke 


2. This line seems to be a corrupt reading. 


Chapter-126 


and axle. [The Vedic metres are the seven horses 
that like the air swiftly glide with the chariot. 
Gayatri, Tristupa, Jagati, Anustupa, Pankt, 
Brhati, Usnik the seventh. 


cena Fag 7 ga wer: wafed: | 
Teel WAIT; Malet Walt FAs ¥e i 
The wheel is attached to the axle and the 


axle to Dhruva. The axle revolves with the 
wheel and Dhruva revolves with the axle. 


BA: Wed Ua TAdsat Tartar: 
Tada Aaa WA FV 


The axle moves along with the wheel 
propelled by Dhruva. The chariot has been thus 
designed owing to some special reason. 


aM Pars Peat st aT WT: 
TISa aurea WA: AA aT Go 
amarante t ae Sa VT FI 
TAA Maat Tat a AHIMA FH & eh 
WS WAS GUT Weal TI 
HUTT HUSA MAAS TATN & 2 
ameraleal t TT aA TTT TI 
Tata Tavet WSset Aaa & 31 
THAT TH A AUSet TATATH 

aga STAT TAT AUST FUG vit 
BM Wag WH VET A 
qa Mela at Teal area TTY GI 
aA Ter ay Tar anfaiwea 

TT ASAT Fat Tat AUSeeT TUG KU 
AMAAVSAYA ASA STAT 
qaupeaat FAT WPA Ay wl 
we Tet: Tat wad Tusenhs FI 
See Ala Huse I MTN CI 


The success of the sun’s chariot 1s due to the 
conjunction (with Dhruva). Thus this divine 
solar chariot moves about in the heaven. The 
pins of the yoke and axle are on its south. The 


4725 


pair of reins of the yoke and the wheel of this 
aerial chariot revolve round and round in all 
directions like the potter’s wheel. The pins of 
the yoke and the axle traversing about the four 
quarters revolve round Dhruva by the force of 
the wind. The reins of that travelling chariot 
shorten on the Northern orbit and lengthened on 
the Southern. The pair of reins are fastened to 
the pins of the yoke and axle and are held by 
Dhruva, who thus attracts the sun. When the 
reins are drawn in by Dhruva the sun covers on 
either side of the line (diameter) 8,000 yoyanas. 
When the reins are released by Dhruva the sun 
begins to move on most swiftly the outer orbits. 


sta stored wergTet Waray WaraeeAAMy ATs 
Wafer grea ern MAA SEATAT: 1 224 HI 


R*RK 


CHAPTER 126 


Riding of different gods over the Sun’s 
chariot in different months 


Wa sara 

a wistatadt sanifa wits aereany 
Tat Aaa ASTRA: WEN VN 
TATA TUATAUTTETa : 
wd aera & ae aret st gt eT ae 


Suta said— “O Rsis, different gods preside 
over the chariot of the sun in different months. 
Therefore 1t moves carrying a large number of 
Rsis, Gandharvas, apsards, Nagas, serpents and 
the demons with the sun. All these gods stay 
with the sun for two months at time. 


ATLA Yea Yotesy WATT 

sun argfava agiista agai 31 
Teekava weatraa ah 
PRAM AT A A TSA vi 
TUS WPT AS ATA 

Tet eta: wefaer argeraraat BATH & 


A group of two gods named Dhata and 


426 


Aryama, Prajapatis— Pulastya and Pulaha— the 
two Rsis, two Nagas, Sarkirna and Vasuki the 
two singers, Tumburu and Narada _ the 
Gandharvas, two apsards— Kratusthala and 
Pufjikasthala, two grdmanis— Rathakrta and 
Rathafija, two Raksasas— Heti and Praheti, 
travel over the chariot of the sun during the 
months of Caitra and Vaisakha. 


Temas To aah ATT 
aaa yo at aret fisey aemey an gt 
at strategy AMT aarHT TEA 
Tcl USGA A Bel RR TAA ON 


WA WA weds Agu 
yearel aaa Aqarat q at atc 


During the two months of the summer 
season, viz., Vaisaékha and Jyestha, the gods 
known as Mitra and Varuna, the Rsis named 
Atri and Vasistha, the Naga named Taksaka and 
Rambhaka, the apsards named Menaka and 
Sahajanya, Gandharvas like Haha and Huhu, 
gramanis like Rathantara and _ Rathakrta, 
Raksasas named Purusada and Vadha, remain 
with the sun for wo months. . 


Ud aah af ye area: Bfergyena:| 
at: Ga TM Paar Bl SaaS 
saad fara afen yyta a 
UNGAR AY: VUE TAT: ol 
fagraqaot a waste wasy fe 
reese Freres FF SI VV 


AeA Sreaesta F Aaa 
PITTA FATA V2 


Similarly in the months of Sravana and 
Bhadrapada, the gods like Indra and Vivasvan, 
Rsis like Angira and Bhrgu, Nagas named 
Elapatra and Sarnkhapdla, Gandharvas like 
Visvavasu and Susena, Grdmanis like Prata and 
Ratha, apsards like Pramloca and Nimlocanti, 
besides Heti and Vyaghra~ the demons, ride the 
chariot of the sun. 


Matsya Puradnam 


Urat gt tad: wt sara a pred 
Usa VST A AT: ANAT VS 
foray Teac at Waray a: 

fagrelt a gare @ St a YOseRTT evit 
ata faye THe: | 

CafsteT TRUE VARA AOT ETAT 2 UI 
al aM gaat Aga Bye 
aed Ba Wa Ureaey freawrsstay: 11 Vg 


During the winter season, for two months, 
the gods live with the sun, who are known as 
Parjanya and Pisa, besides the rsis like 
Bharadvaja and Gautama, Gandharvas named 
Citrasena and Suruci, the apsards with 
auspicious symbols named Visvaci and Ghrtaci, 
the nagas named Dhanafjaya and Airavata, 
Senajit and the commander Susena, the demons 
named Apa and Vata travel over the chariot of 
the sun in the months of Asvin and Karttika. 


auf UT at rat erate feareat 
Sy BT gaat HVAT HIT AH Vou 


For the two months of the dewy season, 
Agrahayana and Pausa, the Devas Amsa and 
Bhaga; the Rsis Kasyapa and Kratu, reside 
there. 


THAT Te: WT: HaleHeaM 
fare Ia: YUASA Ve 
TAT: Yatatasy Taal Yast A an 
AAAS VATA TOT ATH BS I 
ferry aga argarat y at Ayan 
Ge dd Wea WT qarad fearatii oll 
ame fate ait areattaata a 
rae feenpsrettafeonitraretda a 2 2 
ageal AMT AMT HraeTPTAT 
Taal GB WaaaT AAA 2 21 
freirrareatsa eat TS AAITAN 
TAU Teafsteclal Aeafsted ARTA 2 BH 


Chapter-126 


Tatay J wi aHiacea a 
sera fraatet at gt et arat fearati xii 


As well, the serpents Mahapadma and 
Karkotaka; the Gandharvas, Citrasena and 
Pirnayu; the nymphs Purvacitti and Urvasi, the 
charioteers Taksaé and Aristanemi; and the 
terrible demons Vidyut and Sirya. During the 
two winter months of Magha and Phalguna, the 
Devas Tvasta and Visnu; the Rsis Yamadagni 
and Visvamitra; the two sons of the serpent 
Kadru, viz. Kambala and Asvatara; the 
Gandharvas Dhrtarastra and Siryavarca; the 
nymphs Tilottama and Rambha; the charioteers 
Rtayita and Satyayjita; the demons Brahmopeta 
and Yajnopeta live there. In this way the Devas 
etc., inhabit the solar realm for the two months 
in their respective turn. 


WMA Sa WON gles AAaAT: 


TAMA ATA AT FATT 24 1 
ade aah tata wea war 
TATA Weyer oaraAg 2 & I 


The groups of the seven couples (1) Devas, 
(2) Rsis, (3) Gandharvas, (4) Apsaras, (5) 
Nagas, (6) Charioteers and (7) Raksasas, that 
reside there for two months in their turn, are 
called the Sthanabhimanis!. Of these, the 
twelve Devas (six couples for six seasons) lend 
their fiery lustre to the Sun. The Rsis adore Him 
by reciting pleasant hymns of praise; the 
Gandharvas and the Apsardés show _ their 
devotion by their singing and dancing. 


FreaTatOr Bat: PacIVaty ayer 
aul: at &t wa AAA Th V9 


The charioteers hold the reins of the horses; 
the serpents move to and fro; and the demons 
follow Him in His track. 


aefaen Taare ufarateagay 
Wasa Vara AMT Ss AM AT WI 


|. The occupants of the place for the time. 


427 


OM AT BM ITF AM Aa AM TAI 
AAT ATTA Bea ATA 281 
Besides these, the Valakhilya2 Rsis salute 

the Sun and accompany Him from His nise till 
He sets. The Sun shines and sheds heat and 
lustre with increased brilliancy with the 
powerful blaze of the gigantic bonfire of the 
potency, asceticism, Yoga, Dharma, knowledge, 
power and valour of these Devas. 


qeararayye wa sate tacsran 
Wart yteldigad ett J Ano 
The Sun drives away all the troubles of the 
beings by His radiance. The sins of men are 
reduced to ashes by His fire. 
aha wera artera safercatar 
Ut Aer Far wart arpTfSfan 3 2 


AY TOY Bay Ft WaT: | 
MOAT OT YA Set YH TAT 3 VM 


He also takes away the sins of those whose 
conduct is good; and they roam about in the 
heavens along with Him. Those Devas out of 
mercy, protect all the beings 1n their every walk 
of life, and make them perform asceticism, 
mutter japas and fill their hearts with joy. 


IRMA SARI WARY a 
AAA A Add AA T ANZ 3H 


During the several manvantaras, the seats of 
the Abhimani Devas are thus changed. This 
order is always the same; whether in the future, 


| or in the past, or at present. 


Ud aaa & ae Aaa ATE 
ATENG Ada TUN WAAAY Bi 3 vi 


Thus the seven sets of two dwell 
respectively in the fourteen manvantaras 


2. The Valakhilyas are a class of divine personages of 
the size of a thumb and produced from the Creator's 
body and said to precede the Sun's chariot (their 
number is said to be sixty thousand). 


428 


respectively. They all are fourteen in number 
and change their places thus in course of 14 
manvantaras. 


Hea fet a aaty yar 
an feng at a fet fers 
THAIS UGA TWH 
Caray Aa YAU 
Wael UM FN Aas :HATT 
arena da YT: PTarAN 3 4 I 
Wed Teagan We 
ares cgay wert 7 
asad aeaaz: rata 
aT AAT Aaa ATCT 3G 
aan MMe faatgeats- 
te: Wate aafeparh: | 
SeMiagery waite hy 
Wea SMTA ae TAT 39 1 


The Sun in His diurnal course as He moves 
on, sheds His strong heating rays during the 
summer, causes cold during the winter and rains 
during the monsoon. He brings about night and 
day and spreads His rays far and wide as He 
travels. Thus by His rays, He brings in peace 
and satisfaction to all, the Devas, Pitrs and 
human beings alike. The days and nights, as 
they revolve, cause the bright and dark 
fortnights. The Sun stores up nectar every 
month in His rays. This nectar, pure and 
agreeable, the Devas drink in their appropriate 
fortnightly seasons. The Devas, the Pitrs, the 
Saumyas and the Kavyas, after having drunk 
this nectar in the shape of the Sun’s rays, and 
replenished themselves, cause thereby good rain 
on this earth and make the plants, ordinary and 
medicinal, grow and satisfy the hunger of all 
beings. 

Taya FATT 
Ta Taree: Tare Fao 


Matsya Puranam 


AT Waa ARM: 
aa: fart af fant mA 3 cH 


The Devas are satisfied with ambrosia by the 
sacrificial oblations once offered into the Fire 
every fortnight and poured after the recitation of 
the prescribed formulae suffixed by svaha. The 
Pitrs are satisfied by the libations of water 
offered to them, once every month (.e., 
monthly oblations are offered and they get 
satisfied for one month). The men live day and 
night on these grains and herbs. The Sun 1s the 
sustainer of all beings and He nourished them 
by His rays. 


Sag Ucrechot Bae wate 
AT THA: TUASA fever 3 


Thus the Sun moves on in His one-wheeled 
chariot swiftly drawn by His horses and at the 
end of a day returns to His abode. 


fraraasat ett: Ween 
WA: Waa ay at at: 
B Wea Bfthreqart: 1 ¥ ott 


He always has (tawny) greenish yellow 
horses yoked to His chariot. He drinks water 
through thousands of His rays and ceases to 
draw it when it passes the point of saturation. 
Then He discharges them again in the form of 
rain. 


TENA Waraaadant F TAT 
URAUAAS MA: AAT TN ¥ 8h 


The Sun in course of one single day and 
night goes swiftly over the world consisting of 
the seven oceans and the seven islands, seated 
in His one-wheeled chariot and drawn by seven 
horses. 


Persuy Aadays aa: Fete: 

SUSU: Aer: HAA ATA MY UA 
ahdreaa: frstateerantats:t 
TeMasAa das Huse faa: HANS 3 


Chapter-126 


The seven horses yoked to the Sun’s chariot 
are no other than the seven Chandas (metres); 
they can assume forms at their will; they go as 
they like; their speed is swift as wind; their 
colour 1s tawny; and being once yoked they go 
on incessantly; they never get tired a bit. They 
are the gods declaring the glory of Brahma. 
Ascending on such a chariot the Sun travels the 
earth in course of one day (24 hours). 


HOUEl AGH AEA TA TAT 
MAA Asay Td WAS TUS 
aot: Taerariasy Waal Tretaty: | 
Vad Wages Weary WT yy 


The horses were yoked at the beginning of 
Kalpa and carry on the Sun till the end of the 
Great Dissolution (Maha Pralaya). Thus He 
goes on round and round, day and night, 
surrounded by the Valakhilya Munis. The great 
Rsis recite praises to Him in the chosen words 
composed by them; the Gandharvas and 
Apsaras sing and dance round Him. 


Uas: Uaareaon eee: 
SATATOT ATK ARTAMOT AMT YIP WE I 


Thus the Sun is carried on by the horses 
flying like birds. Similarly, the Moon moves on 
in the several asterisms that are divided into 
several vithis. 


Bagg Wael WH: aaa: | 
Frassranisas faye: VAPAT AI Yol 


The Moon has also been described to wax 
and wane according to His positions with 
respect to the Sun. There are three wheels in the 
chariot of the Moon and the horses are yoked at 
both the ends. 


AU WHATTA Wl: A: WAR: | 
Rerteteatarheamh: Yaeaea so 


The Moon has been born from waters along 
with His chariot, horses and the charioteer. That 
chariot 1s decorated with fine garlands and 


429 


yoked with excellent white horses, rests on 
three wheels. 


TTT Syst tI 
Ape WW Aa aSATATI MATA ¥ 8 I 


The swift running divine horses yoked to the 
Moon's chariot are ten in number; they run as 
swift as wind and they are without any 
attachment; once yoked, they carry the car till 
the end of the Great Dissolution. 


BAG! w TRIAS : TAT al 
PARATTHAT ET Teed PIGATA 14 oI 
The fair Caksusrava is the charioteer; and 


the horses looking white like shells and of one 
colour, draw the chariot. 


amy frousta gut aii at ga: 
AYA HANGS TA ATP TTT 4 2 
Seat ATA SOTA TAT: 
Ud Ure ta Salt PATTMAATN & 2 
Aja, Tripatha, Vrsa, Vaji, Nara, Haya, 
Amsuman, Saptadhatu, Harnsa and Vyomamrga 


are the names of the ten horses attached to the 
chariot of the Moon. 


ea: Uftad: am: fight: ae mesha 
AAT VrearTal UAL UTA: FAG 3 
sma Ut AT: AMT F Sea 

ad: Witera BT Braga Ta NG vA 
Wet Waayg a USAT TAT: | 
AY St AA APT ATS ATTN & I 
GINA Yat TET St Herr: 
TATA Ft FO Yael PATI AN & I 
Sea aa ATTA A: 
Wurst Weyl VeT: ACUTE: IG VI 
VARTA A: Waa: TAT 

met fared Agere ATEN G CI 

MT ATTA TATA 
Treguy Sat Ney A AMTTATTINY 8 


430 


Aya EAA syd Tarawa 
MATAR A TUTATATUTaAT I & 0 

Thus He goes on surrounded by the Devas 
and the Pitrs. In the bright fortnight the Moon 
gets ahead of the Sun and whatever of Him 
waned during the dark fortnight becomes filled 
up again, digit by digit, by the Solar ray, day 
after day. Thus He becomes nourished by the 
one seed-ray of the Sun named Susumna when 
He beccemes full and circular on the full-moon 
night. Similarly in the dark fortnight, the Moon 
wanes daily from the second day till the 
Caturdasi tithi (the fourteenth day after the full 
moon) when the Devas drink up the soft and 
excellent nectar of the Moon, sweet like honey 
and consisting of the essence of the watery 
juice. For half the month the nectar becomes 
stored up in the Moon by the Sun’s ray, so that 
the Devas would be able to drink it; and the 
quantity of this nectar becomes maximum on 
the full-moon night when the Devas adore the 
Moon for another supply of the same, gathered 
from the Sun’s radiance in course of a fortnight. 


Ward Ou: are faghratates a 

Aa FTIATSt MHUSTS sig VI 

wetted Ut Mean Waa 

Tay AMAT Arg TAAVTSSATAT TUE 

waftagny Ueertor eat: are Arata at 

Sele TT HOT Tahar AT: HEAT 1G 3H 

ated U dd: Wa: FONT Pasar A 

ua fercarry ie Scent Frere g wi 

For one night the Devas, the Pitrs and the 

Rsis worship the Moon. From the beginning of 
the dark fortnight the Moon turns back, wanes 
and becomes dull; His digits decline owing to 
His nectar being drunk up day by day. 33,330 
Devas drink the lunar ambrosia. The Moon thus 
declines during the dark fortnight and waxes 


until he becomes complete in the bright 
fortnight. 


Matsya Puranam 


Creare Tesh sera ay A 
fratsirafastar srarareat Freeney & i 
Thus, drinking the nectar, the Devas, at the 

end of the fortnight, go away elsewhere on the 
Amiavasya (dark) night when the Pitrs come to 
Him. 

aa: Uses art faferde Frere 

TASUTS frat aeaeas WANE Gil 

Toate Tenet ret Terere Hee AT: | 

fart: ge marae mafevararargaqi § 91 

ASMA | Ua Teta ASHAA! 

ANAT: Aeraga siearey I BAT g cI 

HAMS F A wheat: fT: Wa Va a 

Tay A Hew: Waren a fH: Barge 

When the still small portion of the 15th part 

of the Moon is left, they drink that in the 
afternoon on the next day for a brief period of 
two kalas and go away after the completion of 
this dark fortnight. The Saumyds, Barhisadas, 
Agnisvattés and Kavyas, are the Pitrs. Those 
who preside over the year are known also as 
Kavyas. So also the Dvijas performing good 


works can become Kavyas. The Saumya-pitrs 
are rigid ascetics. 


ater: qaral Har: hear afereea 
siamese figeaiterar fest: 1119 0 1 


Barhisada, Saumya and Agnisvattas are the 
well-known threefold Pitr creation who are 
recognised as twice-born (Brahmanas). 


fag: Wana weal 7 a ae 
Maer Aad TATAUT: THE MeT Te Vl 
AMSA FA AAT SAAT Tad TT: 
Sfaart & waret weyat wig: adh 
Wa Tafa a aga Fryratie zi 


The 15th portion of the nectar of the moon 1s 
drunk by the Pitrs. The sixteenth part of the 
Moon is recognised as the junction of the two 


Chapter-127 


(dark and bright) fortnights, when the final 
waning takes place and fresh waxing begins. 
Thus the waxing and waning of the Moon uncer 
the influence of the Sun have been described. 


sft sierra TETITOT yatary alam arg 
He T A TATA S ATT 2G I 


KR 


CHAPTER 127 


Description of the chariot of the planets and 
praise of Dhruva 
qd sald 
ARTE aa Tae TH WA: | 
ay aT: Wy: anya @ THN 
Sita said— O Sages, I shall now speak to you 
about the chariots of planets, Rahu and stars. 


The chanot of Buddha (Mercury the son of 
Moon) is brilliant and white. 


Thi ea: farsa enfrataea:| 

at: fase: arest Are: vara facie: 1 

ay Bava Fadl gfarta a 

Suey Mea eae: 1 3 

It is drawn by ten horses, which are quite 

swift like the wind. The horses are of the 
colours like white, reddish, brown, spotted, 
dark-blue, black, purple, white, greenish, dark 


and variegated colours. These horses are noble 
and excellent. They are born of the wind. 


Tat MAT STF: ASA: Wd: 
apfaeiteda: TearaaTa | 
AUASa HA A Aya aH: it Xi 


The huge chariot of Mars is made of gold, 
having eight wheels and is driven by eight red 
horses born of fire. It is decorated with flags 
and banners. 


seMfsta fag carat Geeta: | 
TAR 7 Tato wee fasta 4 
TAO aT ATR: 


431 


ater aafa at Us Tafagt aa Tela § I 
PATINA A aaa 

Ta fares anaes Tes 9 

dd: WAIsae: Pactattea: | 
HONG AA at Beat Wei 


The young Mars moves in this chariot. His 
motions are direct and very swift. Brhaspati- 
the son of Angira and the learned preceptor of 
the gods, moves in golden chariot with flags 
hoisting on the same, which is driven by eight 
white horses born of fire. The Jupiter remains 
for one year in each one of the twelve zodiac 
signs and moves on his chariot towards his 
destination. The chariot of Venus (Sukra) is 
brilliant like fire and is decorated with flags. He 
moves on in a swift moving chariot. The chariot 
of Saturn (Sani) is made of iron and he moves 
riding on his chariot which is drawn by the 
horses with the speed of the wind. 


TMA VAST: HOT A AMSA: | 

TH TAM TT ART GA TST MAT UI 

Mag We: AT Wasit Tar 

Sean Barer AHAISATY Ta Volt 

at: HYNARIM Bet A AAA: | 

VMI: ATA: YTV: 11 LAU 

The chariot of Rahu 1s of dark coloured and 

is drawn by eight steed of smoke colour, which 
move like the wind. He dwells close to the sun, 
travelling in the dark fortnight towards the 
moon. He returns to the sun after a fortnight. 
Ketu has a chariot of eight horses, which are 
quite swift having the colour of smoke. They 


are hideous indeed besides being fiery and have 
the speed of the wind. 


Ua Sel AE A AA wrent TW: Tel 

ad ga Fagred Fagrareciyahr: gai 
Wa t UNAM Barat aera ah 
TAMAS VAT: WAT STATS: 11 B30 


432 


In this way the chariots and the steed of the 
planets have been described by me. They are 
attached to the Pole with the ropes of the wind. 
The cords which are made of air are invisible 
and make many chariots move, with them. 


ured TarTeTetata 
Marat ya a TNA TUT: evi 
MN Aaa Ae Sea Ver 

TM SaTEnO RET ATA TT 

TaN Wed Satter caver Shai ek tt 


All the stars are linked with Dhruva, which 
move on propelled by Dhruva. The sun and the 
moon move on in the celestial firmament 
prompted by the currents of the strong wind. 
They glide on remaining tied to Dhruva. Their 
movements around the pole are brought out 
with the ropes of wind. The stars and the 
luminous spheres, studded in firmament are the 
abodes of the gods and they float in the celestial 
atmosphere like the boats floating in the river. 


TATA AT: RATATAT TTT: | 
Valgarragreadl Yaa WAT Tl Ve I 


The rays of the Pole star extend to the 
farthest limit where the stars are visible and 
they all move on tied to the Pole and thus cause 
others to move on. 


das TM Uh Wad waa ai 

TMT aT SAAT arte SI AAT: 1 Vt 
Hea a Aaa I 
GaNsaed A WAST A BAI cI 


The stars and planets tied to the Dhruva 
(Pole) revolve and make others revolve as oil 
mill while revolving itself makes others revolve. 
The air that causes them to move and makes 
them look like a fiery circle (made by a fire- 
brand being waved round in the air) is known as 
Pravaha. 


Ud ga fagentsat wad Sather Tre: 
Wa ARTA: Wren: forget gar fafa ee 


Matsya Puranam 


In this way the stars move on, attached to 
the Pole. These stars are situated on the body of 
Sisumara!, who lies (sleeps as it were) on the 
celestial firmaments. ) 


Teel Hed UG a apr Fr Fafa 

FOAM START TTAT ETAT: 11 2 0 

auifor apt sila aacaneras a 

Forerarreaa Hear Waar Wag: tl 2 

The sins committed in the day are swept 

away by the sight of this Sisumara cakra in the 
night. The man who sees the stars fixed on the 
Sisumara cakra lives for as many number of 
years more than his proper life period as the 
stars he sees; and one should know therefore the 
form and the location of the different limbs of 
this Sigsumara cakra fully. 

SAAT FAHA: AAT SI: 

aT FATA TAT STATES: 2 VM 

gfe Anant: Great ast yaureat: 

RUTTAT ea UA THT ATS 2B 


Thus is His form— Uttaéna-pada 1s the chin of 
Sisumara, Sacrifice is the lower lip, Dharma is 
the forehead. Narayana and the Sadhyas are 
enshrined in the heart; the Asvins form the two 
feet on the eastern side (the nght foot). Varuna 
and Aryama form the two legs towards the west 
(the left foot). 


MRSECCICMECUBEESIMIER ICCA 
yeasty ueae ata: ByTTT ga Vw 
Wa ahaa: TAT AAT A ATTA 
AIATSTAT TETRA: TBI V4 
Teta: wa aye feta Tea: 
gaunfatsasta gata weferorq 2 & it 


The Devas, Samvarsa and Mitra, form 
respectively the fore and hind private parts; and 
Agni, Indra, Marici, Kasyapa and Dhruva form 


|. Sigumara is known as the zodiac personified and is 
no other than the child Visnu. 


Chapter-128 


His tail. There 1s no rising nor setting of these 
stars. They remain fixed at one place. The 
Moon, the Sun, and other stars and planets are 
situated in the form of a circle facing this 
Sigsumara cakra in the firmament. All the stars 
are presided over by Dhruva and circumbulate 
Him. 


uf Ges Nahe ga feta 
MATH PAA F Aa A UTA Taz Volk 
Wea Ue sare BATS 


SEO CRIP RICCO INIC A REAL 
Tenetadaa wearer weferorq 220 


This pole star ts the support and sacrificial 
pillar of these stars. The Dhruva ts the best 
amongst the Agnidhras and Kasyapas. He 
moves singly above the summit of Sumeru with 
His head downwards round the summit of 
Sumeru, as if looking at it, dragging at the same 
time along with Him the zodiac and the cluster 
of stars. 


Blt SHAT TTY TOT oA TANT ATATA 
Ca aygreaITH HATA SEAT: VIE 


RK 


CHAPTER 128 


Movements of divine planets and the speed of 
the sun and the moon 

RAT Sd: 

Trea We at AIA: | 

aa sayertor ay: yavatdife aura: 1 en 

The Rsis asked— O Sita, we have heard 

completely whatever has been spoken by you, 
but we would like to know about the types of 
the abodes of the gods, because we are anxious 
to know about the same. Therefore you kindly 


speak exhaustively on the luminous spheres (or 
the stars). 


ad sated 


Ud Ud waaay qatar 


433 


BM SAS AY: HAART 2 

FAQ TM a TANSeHAa AM 

AMPA AAA TTATSATI 3 

aadrarrestar gem wafatse 

TATA TA AleaeaA TTS: 1 XI 

Garrett fraratanta afar 

Waly Heuleterad: Get A AAT Gt 

Sita said— “O Rsis, | shall now speak out 

you about the planets, the movements of the sun 
and the moon, besides the abodes of the gods, 
sun and the moon. In the start of the kalpa there 
was neither day or night, in the universe which 
had been covered with a thick sheet of darkness. 
The Avyakta Brahma, did not manifest any 
element till then. Four elements were left which 
were presided over by Brahma. The self born 
lord then desired to create various lokas and for 
that purpose in view, he wandered about in the 
form of a firefly. Then he thought within 
himself and realised that the fire had merged 


itself in the waters and the earth at the start of 
the kalpa. 


a eee wearer fren Geatsea YA: 

Urateal eq eansteary Usa: aisha € i 
aga TA aa RIESE a di 

aga at: Ara ayaa: 9 1 
ETAT Hi Hear 
andere fer: ashe: yeas waa: it 


In order to extract fire out of them, he 
collected water and earth. Ultimately he could 
extract three kinds of fire of equal quantity viz., 
Pacakagni, used for cooking things and it was 
extracted from the earth. The second was 
Sucagni, emerging from the sun and the third 
was Jatharagni or the fire in the belly which 
digests all the things eaten by a person. It was in 
the form of beautiful electricity, which could 
not be produced out of any fuel. Some electrical 
fire 1s increased, with the fire enshrined in the 
body itself whereas some others kindle even 


434 


without any fuel. The fire which is produced by 
rubbing two pieces of wood 1s called 
Nirmathya-Agni, which could be subsided with 
water. 


afer weaistarg Fret: where: 
BA HUSA Vert FRAT A Waa 8 
WTA J UTer ated aria fearents 

ATA TAY TATA: WATT ot 


The celestial fire in the body ts resplendent 
having no flames and is beautiful. This is the 
light in the white disc of the sun. It is devoid of 
heat and is not manifest. When the sun sets, a 
fourth of its lustre enters the fire. This 1s the 
reason that the fire looks as bright at night. 


set FA: Wa Hoe wala 
Wet AMAT BATT FEAT VeH 
Ward a aad a alae go ara 


UeR Ma Magee Fear 82 


With the rising of the sun a fourth of the 
heat of the fire enters into it as a result of which 
the heat is imported by the sun during the day 
time. The mutual infusion of the heat and lustre 
by Fire and the sun, causes the days and nights. 


TA Aa YAS aM Bhar fern 
Sfaait Ta: Ga Ufaenfagrea Wa: V3 


When the sun rises over the northern half 
and the south of the universe, the night merges 
into the waters. Therefore the water looks like 
having the copper colour during the day. 


TAT AT WaATa feaniawa grate! 
Te Ta TA: Bes tet A whayrend: i wi 
TEMA VA: VSO OMT Bat MAT: | 
Wat BAA YTS STOTT BG A 


Again with the sunset, the day enters into the 
water. Because of this the water looks bright, 
shining during the night. Similarly in the same 
sequence with the rising and setting of the sun 
in the north pole and south pole of the earth, the 
day and night merge in the water respectively. 


Matsya Puranam 


STA A Sela fayeTT: | 

agrat aad Ta: Bisa: fata yay: ug i 

UCAUTEEAISH THAT Fs 

aed a q ATstat USAT WA: 1) V9) 

BU AAAAHA BEHUA Ua Ui 

SCORIREC CS WRC CLILUIC RL: CAIRLAL 

The fire in the Sun is like a red-coloured jar 

and it has thousand legs. When the sun shines, 
He draws water by the rays of this fire. It 1s this 
fire that draws in waters of the rivers, wells, 
oceans, tanks, lakes, etc. through His thousand 
rays. 

ATA UAV ASAT At PTT: | 

POTAA VAN HATTA 89 I 

SYA Waa; Pal WHA STATHT: | 

Sua AIT Wattage: Ga: 

GAMUT; Wa Weal MAPNTETT | 2 oll 

Tal Tea elferar farawsrar: | 

seas Hse Way fargesy a: ze 

PSA ATT: WAAMA TATA: | 

ttaufa fe at: dat waaream: FATT 2 VI 

These thousand rays cause heat, rains and 

cold; of these, four hundred rays look like nadis 
(tubular veins and arteries) and are of variegated 
forms; these cause rain. Candana, Medhya, 
Ketana, Cetana, Amrta and Jivana are all rain- 
producing rays. Three hundred rays produce 
cold; and they are drunk (absorbed) by the 
moon, stars and planets. These are the middle 
rays. The other rays are all white and gladden 
the hearts of beings. They cause heat. They are 
three hundred in number and known by the 
names Kukubh, Go, Visvasrt, Sukla and others. 


They sustain and protect the Devas, Pitrs and 
human beings. 


Taras Taran a FoqarT 
THAT AU Aaraat UAT ATI 231 


The sun always satisfies men by producing 


Chapter-128 


herbs, the Pitrs through the libations of water 
svadha and the Devas through the sacrificial 
offerings svaha. 

aat da Wey a wt: ated Pa: 

aay waa aa: aeraes A Vw 

ered forfort da fener: Ta: 

During spring and hot weather the sun 

imparts heat by his three hundred rays; during 
the rainy season and autumn causes rain by his 


four hundred rays; during the dewy and winter 
season imparts cold by his three hundred rays. 


SHAY Tet IA Yat A MAM TA Va 
waisaraanyed rareay Frereaia 
Us UpHaee I Mt creearera EN 


fed RATA Asa TCT WA: | 
He imparts strength in the herbs and plants, 
bestows nectar to svadha, and imbues 


immortality in the nectars of the Devas. Thus 
He benefits the three worlds by His this three- 
fold action. His thousand rays thus perform 
different functions in the different seasons, 
causing good to half the Lokas. 


Sea WUSet Yao Mat MHA ATTN VOI 
TATE WhaBTA AS aT 
UFRUIT: Ua fatal: FAASTAT NI 

Such is the white shining solar orb known in 


the worlds. From Him emanate the stars, planets 
and the moon, and they are preserved by Him. 


aye waeieral after migrated 
Bhat: Yea at a aaNTAT 28 


It is by the Susumnai ray of the Sun that the 
Moon waxes again, day by day. [he stars are 
born from the eastern ray of the Sun, named 
Harikesa. 

alert faraat 7 tyrant 
fauna a; warepea ay A TYAN oN 


The Visvakarma ray of the sun 1s in the 
south; He is the sustainer of the planet Mercury. 


435 


The Visvavasu ray of the Sun is tn the west; and 
He is the originator of the planet Venus. 


dager at wea: a afters a 
wee aautsaaita: a fe Teer:3 vi 


The Samvardhan ray is the originator of 
Mangala (Mars); the Asvabhi ray, the sixth 
one, 1s the producer of Jupiter. 


wat Granta wearer Wel 
T ad Ae TAA Bari 3 201 
The Surata ray nourishes Saturn. Because 


these never fade, therefore they are called 
Naksatras (stars). 


sarah f qeareatar mea eaha 
Safe Aaa Tat AAA AA: 3 30 


These are the fields, the regions of the sun; 
their rays fall incessantly unto Him; and the Sun 
accepts them also as His; hence they are named 
Naksatras. 


TAMIYA YHA 
AUTATLCAT BAT: Wee YATE: 11 3 I 


Those persons who perform good and 
meritorious works in this world, go to these 
planets and stars (the Naksastras) after they 
leave their mortal coils and these are saved; 
hence these Naksatras are called Tarakas. And 
as they are white in colour, they are named 
Suklikas. 

feat Wlaari a dgrat da aay: 
TUARTA Aaa Slt WEA 34 I 
Sala: Bs a aTaee Fre 
SAINTS SATA Alaa SHAT 3 Gl 


The Sun is called Aditya on account of His 
having the lustre of the fire and asceticism of 
the holy kings of this earth as well as those of 
Heaven. The root 'Srava’ means "to pour out, to 
ooze” and the Sun is called ’Savita” because he 
sheds, pours out tejas, fire. 


“SS CO Gand 


436 


TUT S SAT aT MTT HAA 
Yared Aaa A wired SSAST AN Zon 


The root 'candra’ has various meanings; it 
connotes whiteness, nectar, cold and pleasure. 
The word Candrama (the moon) has come out 
of this root. 


qaiararatfeet Wesel wreat GN 
HIATT Re STAT BN 3 C1 


The shining mandalas of the sun and the 
moon in the divine firmament are luminous, 
white, full of water and fire. They look 
handsome like white pitchers. 


aad HAA WAR aT: 


Tay Tay wef TTTA 1 38 

aft cayerr @: waren var fe 

at qaisfageeard area arta A ¥ ol 

Vis Yaar weet WTA 

TMladerd FI cilfed ata oifea: nv a 

All those Rsis who attained Devahood by 

their karmas in the several Manvantaras have 
become the above luminous spheres. Their 
abodes in the firmament are _ termed 
‘Devagrhas”. The Sun has got his abode as the 
Sun; so the Moon has got his ’Saumya” abode; 
the planet Venus has got his Saukra abode. This 
Saukra abode is shining and has sixteen spokes 
(16 petalled lotus). Jupiter has attained his 
*Brhat” (big) abode. Mars has got his red abode. 


WIS Pt FAM 

gas F GCI WT TMA ANY 2 
await a aalfor aeraroenfargiat a 
THATS YHarad HA SATE AU ¥3N 


Saturn enters into the Saturn” mandala; the 
Budha into the Budha and the Rahu (ascending 
node) into the solar abodes. All the stars enter 
into their mandalas respectively; so these 
luminous spheres in the firmament are known 
as Devagrhas of those persons who performed 
highly meritorious works 1n this world. 


Matsya Puranam 


IM fish Baan eTay 
Tang aay ta aA ans xi 


The Devagrhas, mentioned before, exist in 
every Manvantara till the time of dissolution. 


sar fash aft eat: WA: WA: 

Tae Meee: Wet: Yt: AUG M 

ava aaa yt: arg 7 enh: 

Wal eat faaaiy aerated: WANE I 

The Devas occupy these Devagrhas again 

and again by their “Abhimana” (presiding) 
capacities; the past Devas occupied their places 
along with others with their past presiding 
capacities; the present ones with their present 
presiding capacities; the future ones will reign 
with their future presiding capacities. (But all of 
them preserve their respective characteristic 


features of their different abodes). Vivasvan the 
Sun, is the eighth son of Aditi. 


Sardar al tat Tg: Tye: 
Want dered fagat arratsqTanta: 11 Vl 


The luminous Moon is known as Vasu; He 
is qualified with Dharma. Sukra or Bhargava is 
the priest of the demons. 


IeMftdann cararaistet: aa: | 
aa Waresa VIA A BAUS 


Brhaspati, of great fiery asceticism, is the © 
priest of the Devas and ts the son of Angira; the 
handsome Budha is the son of the Moon. | 


wrant faa dag faatad: | 
aftafanyal Tat q garat stfentaa: use 


The ugly Saturn was born of the womb of 
Sajiya by the Sun. Mangala was born of the 
womb of Vikesi by Fire. 


AATTEA: AAT STAMITVT: WaT: Be: 


wang: fataroat wees ge: 4 ol 


All these stars are born from the womb (of 
the firmament and are the progeny of Daksa. 


Chapter-128 


Rahu, the destroyer of beings, is the demon 
born of Simhika. 

WHAT Weal tetet | 

wrath ara wate Saas Vi 


These are the Abhimani Devas (the Masters; 
the presiding Deities) in the spheres of the 
moon, the sun, the stars and the planets. Thus 
the above abodes of the Devas are described. 

yaritad feat aeaieifaaca: 
Wea Mag:; AAAS AAT AAT G 21 

The abode of the thousand-rayed Sun is 

divine, fiery and of white colour. The abode of 


the Moon is thousand-rayed, bright, energetic 
and full of waters. 


Sa water tareaye Peay 
Wen: Wemiyaeg se sat MUTT 4 3 


Budha (Mercury) lives with the Sun. The 


abode of Sukra (Venus) is sixteen-rayed and 
watery. 


cifedt Tareq WATE 7 Ae a 
TECHS Seay TF ATAU Y VII 
The abode of Mangala (Mars) consists of 
nine rays and is red in appearance; water is also 


there. Brhaspati (Jupiter) has 12 rays and the 
colour is turmeric yellow; His abode 1s big. 


TSM FO Feu 
TEATRO & & I 
The abode of Saturn is eight-rayed, black 


and is made of iron. Rahu’s abode is also made 
of iron and He causes pain to all beings. 


GRUNT WAT ATTA: | 
AULT: Ble: Yee ATTAT 1G & I 
All the asterisms are the refuge of the 
virtuous. Their rays are silvery and as they are 
the redeemers of all the beings, they are called 
Tarakas: also called Suklikas on account of 
their white colour. 


437 


Taare faa: afar: a: 
quset far art fae MATT TUG VI 
The diameter of the Sun is nine thousand 


yojanas and its circumference is three times that 
(27,000 yojanas)!. 


faq: Tafaeaifge: vise: We: 
yO Tose wey ayeITS A: WANG cl 
The diameter of the Moon is twice the 


diameter of the Sun; its circumference is thrice 
its diameter. 


wart Frost ausenha x area: 
ARATSTAONA AANA TOTAT ING VI 


The stars are situated above all and their 
diameter is one-half yojana. 


Tea Year F Tay ereereraTa ta 

sega Ufa orat faforat queef & ot 

gen ffir war gd ¢ wana 

aTerace ¢ fears ant meshes Tea g 2 

seat Attest WA: By waa 

CTT Tad TETRA A VPA 2 

The size of Rahu is the same with the stars: 

He travels below them. His place is made up of 
the shadow of the early by Brahma; it is full of 
Tamas (darkness). Rahu enters into the Sun in 
the bright fortnight; in the dark fortnight it 
emerges from the Sun and enters into the Moon. 


It is named Svar-bhanu, because it urges 
forward by its own rays. 


Wad: AST VI alae fata 
PRRTUSeds BAA F A BANG SM 


The diameter and the circumference of 
Venus are one-sixteenth (1/16) of those of the 
Moon in yojanas. Sukra is the 16th part of the 
Moon. The diameters and circumferences are 
measured all in yoyjanas. 


|. According to Sirya Siddhanta, the diameter of the 
Sun 1s 6500 yojanas and the diameter of the Moon ts 
480 yoyanas. 


438 


untae fagat a geeata: | 
eM: West agasrait Bat & wi 


The diameter and the circumference of 
Jupiter are one-fourth less than those of Venus; 
Mars and Ketu are one-fourth less than those of 
Jupiter. Rahu and Mercury’s dimensions are 
one-fourth less than those of Mars and Ketu (the 
descending node). 


freITUsenal J WegreTaag: | 
aera ayers aT ag & 
gaa arent frameset 
ATTAASUTT BAT | UTAATAN  & I 
Vell Tear Beant aftr & dada wy 
wataht Foss noses F Aa oll 
Aarne wat Sta 7 fara 

SO TEY A Tat Nel A ACTA NG ch 


The diameter and circumference of each of 
the stars are the same as those of Mercury. 
Some stars also have dimensions of five 
hundred, four hundred, three hundred, two 
hundred, one hundred yojanas; there are some 
also having dimensions of one-half yojanas. No 
stars exist less than these. Now I will describe 
those melefic and benefic planets that are 
situated above them. 


arenfetar sent fagrat wea TOT: 
TASTE MAN: GAT ASTRA: HG 8 i 
an: wat gaa arta ye: | 
Matt da BANU HlSMeANaa ATA ofl 


Saturn, Jupiter and Mars are slow-going 
planets (superior planets). Below them the 
Moon, Sun, Mercury and Venus are the quick- 
moving planets (inferior planets). There are as 
many crores of Tarakés as there Rksas 
(asterisms). 


Raat F Aero SF Tatsereararaaier 
faeiul quset Heat Te UTA Vit H 9 gk 


The Sun moves lowest down of all the 


Matsya Puranam 


planets. Above Him the Moon travels. 

TaAUSeH UG Arareet aah 

TAA Tasted r genoa ted Pg ata 2H 

aa wae aeeed Geel: 

Tere sarareaare Fra: 19 3 1 

WHET BA HA BATIVSeTA 

aafna gasied ane fated qanoxi 

The stars travel above the Moon; above 

Moon, travels Mercury; above Mercury, travels 
Venus; above Venus, travels Mars; above Mars, 
travels Jupiter; above Jupiter, travels Saturn. 
The Saptarsis (the great Bear) exist above 
Satum; and above the great Bear exists the Pole 


(Dhruva). The three worlds are tied on to this 
Dhruva. 


farvly WeAy INA Way al 

TEATS AAAHUSCANL |G & Ut 

ATTSTT UT CTT TENT AT 

Tay waqal a fefa feeds ara GI 

TAG A ert Tea Pa 

AAHICATA AAAS ATTA: 11 1919 

ary a Ie UW UparT ZAVT IT: 

went fant ae BI FT WTA 91 

sagt fagedat array a get: 

saa Taam af yfsroa vafcat gt Tne 

Sarees A Vaart aa a 

agian a AAT a a a ay qatar aco 

The stars in the firmament are two lakh 

(2,09,000) yojanas apart from each other. The 
planets above them are also placed similarly 
apart. The Sun, Moon and the planets run 
towards the stars and get merged in them. They 
remain in their Uccha and Nica _ houses 
(aphelion and perthelion); and while entering 
into or coming out of them, they look on the 
beings. So these are situated with regard to each 


other. The learned should know exactly their 
various conjunctions. Thus have been described 


Chapter-129 


all about this earth, Dvipas, oceans, mountains, 
years, rivers and the inhabitants thereof. 


seaishasria Uae SATAN 
Mead: ARN Wel AAA Ta Ae vi 
waaay facut gaan gather: | 
waderaeraeatater farted: ic 


The several locations of the luminous 
spheres of the firmament are brought on by the 
influence of the Sun. In its central part, there 
exists the wind termed Avarta. This pervades, in 
the form of a circle all the Naksatra mandalas. 
This has been so ordained by the Almighty God 
for the use of His several beings. 


aeuet afayd J wifadisat wararsyan 
Seay Aaa A Uae TAA BH 


The stars, the earth, etc., were located thus 
by Brahma in their proper places at the 
beginning of the Kalpa. 


aed aA Ulconelsel a: Wa 
cat Wet 7 MeN saat afar 
TATA TRIO STAT AT TAATAT ¢ I 
All these locations are assigned by the 
Supreme Being; no one can exactly describe the 
vastness of the infinite nature of this Universe. 


No human being with his fleshy eyes can know 
exactly its true nature. 


Sia Sareea VETO yarae eaygauls 
ATE ea A HATA SEAT: 1 22 SI 


KK 


CHAPTER 129 
The building of Tripura 
RTT ad: 
ae TT TET ed eT: 
ale a ay catia fart aaii ei 
Gare Fd Ud AGMA: WA: 
fat wan at wanrenfatatora 


439 


CATHY VS AM A as UMN VMI 


The Rsis said— “O Sita, extending grace to 
all, why did lord Mahesvara, become inimical 
to Tripura, and how did he destroy the same? 
You kindly speak out the same to us 
elaborately. We are requesting you with all the 
respect as to how did Siva destroy the forts of 
Tripura which were built by Maya-danava. You 
kindly relate the relevant story in detail. 


Ua sara 
sued frat cat aararhtaar wa: 

TA ATT VTA TATA AHN TA 3 Ut 
Fatssid: Hq GMa AAG UT aT: 
Trea I at fam Serasraazera vt 


Stita said— “O Rsis, | am going to speak out 
the way, lord Siva had torn out Tripura. You 
please listen. Maya was a great asura who was 
well-versed in various types of illusions. He had 
been defeated by the gods in the battlefield, 
after which he was engaged in performing 
severe tapas. O Brahmanas, finding him so 
engaged in fapas two other demons also started 
performing the tapas in sympathy with him for 
the same purpose. 


Tae HPyfeya a: Tot a: 

lage T AAAS STS & I 

Wada: AAA TTA 

Hal Sa AM WMATA SATA € I 

Both of them were known as Taraka and 

Vidyunmali who were quite valorous. Both of 
them getting attracted with the lustre of Maya, 
started performing seated at his back. At that 
point of time because of their having been 


excited with the tapas, they appeared like the 
three fire flames in worldly forms. 


Chad ATTA ATA RTT: | 

Sod WAN He haat qT 9 

qa DT TAMAS ATaTa: fra: 
Tar: Hees Enfit a wens ac 


440 


All the three demons, causing pain to the 
world were engaged in the tapas. They in the 
winter season slept in the water and in the 
summer season faced the five types of fires, 
while in the rainy season they used to keep on 
standing in the open under the sky. In this way 
they dned up their bodies which are loveable by 
all. They lived on the fruits, roots, flowers, and 
water. Sometimes they went even without food. 


HATA CAST: USAkataeHe: | 
wT: Yaretasy fanen farcry ae i 
Their berk garments were covered with dust 


and inspite their having the spotless bodies, they 
remained dirty in the mud of reeds. 


Protas adl Ara: HHT earraay: | 
AS AT: MMTAT Wafer AAMT Pol 
Pont 7 WI Teraseaay 
SMa ela aieafrelranrahey 1 Ve 
TM Wey: Weya: fra: 

TA: MAHAL: MET ACAPTATN LIM 


Because of this the flesh on their bodies had 
been worn out. They had become so weak that 
the veins of their bodies had come out. Because 
of their tapas the entire universe was terrified. 
Thus finding the entire world in flames with the 
fire of their tapas, Brahma- the great sire, 
appeared before him. Then the Daityas finding 
Brahma before them suddenly spoke to him. 

wa framed caret 4 qpata a 

AT dretardell TAT MIATA 83 Ul 
Sa SATU SITUS ETT 

aaSS fF St ACATAT EAT SATA BI 
farardiicad tea aes ATTA! 
SATA F Moa PATS Bu 

They siarted offering prayer to him. At that 
point of time, the eyes and faces of Brahma 


Started blossoming and he spoke to the Danavas 
also who were shining like the sun, because of 


Matsya Puranam 


their tapas and said— “O Sons, I am extremely 
pleased with your fapas and have arrived here 
to grant you the boon. Therefore you ask for the 
boon you desire.” At these words of Brahma, 
Maya the architect of the demons felt delighted. 


fayarnl Wa: We Mea 

Sa CM: UU Sat; AAT ATTA Rg 
fisareantsasta serrata 
AAU Tae Meat Waa: VI 
Wut a BG: wat at prune: 
WSS ATWATAA Aq Waa Aa AN Vet 


SeoUH che aagh aeaahe Gea 
afenay Fayt ot Aad Herat aT Ve 
TIM HAA A MTT BATA 
CAMS A SAAT A WANNA oll 
Hearing these words of Brahma, Maya, 
capable to build anything, was rejoiced and 
said— “In days gone by, in the great Tarakamaya 
war that ensued between the Devas and the 
Daityas, the former were victorious and 
mercilessly killed the latter with their weapons. 
The Devas always oppress us on account of 
former enmity. We then fled away with terror. 
In our hour of trial and misfortune we could not 
rely on any one for help and protection. Finding 
no source of solace, we have now resorted to 
this practice of penances and now with the help 
of our asceticism and through Your Grace, we 


wish to erect a most solid and impregnable fort 
which would defy the Devas. 


aera wag faye ate a fray 
fast sfa wien: @ der fagadomi 2 eh 
TAT METAS TA SeTTU TVET 
wala tarhta sraegaet SAAN 2 211 
Tenaga fe gurate faery 
framed: sear aca array Wa 23 
Wael: TAS Fav Waray 


wren gt apy Feeeq yen 


Chapter-129 


ag a Wat eAeael Haat waa 
Vanteata aeyarat Wa ea: PATA: BGI 
The name of this would be Tripura. Now, O 

Lord! grant me this boon that when the fort is 
completed it will be quite safe from the attacks 
of those residing on land and in water as well as 
from the curses of the sages and Munis and 
from attacks of the Devas.” Hearing those 
words of Maya, capable to build another 
universe by his Maya, Lord Brahma said 
smilingly—~ “O Maya, leader of the demons! It 1s 
impossible to become immortal, where 
everything is not everlasting; knowing this, you 
can build your fort with mud.” Maya again 
addressed Brahma with folded hands— “If this 
fort be not quite impregnable, then let it be that 
it would be destroyed by one arrow only, shot 
once by Siva, in the course of warfare.” Brahma 
said, “Be it so” and then went away. 


tae] eral aaat a aaareghd aan 
Te Faas Seat WaT Tee: 2G 
Sega ATA Tea: | 

O Wael Herghgetal FIAT: Voi 


The Lord disappeared from the spot as 
vanishes the wealth obtained in dreams. Having 
obtained the boon, those powerful Daityas, then 
healthy and shining like Sun, began to look 
more brilliant with their power of asceticism. 


at atad: Halal Ufa 
aa A Maga ara AGT HAT VI 
The highly intelligent and powerful Maya 


then began to prepare plans for building the 
Tripura fort. 


area Tye feet Aa AR ATT: | 
GM UHGOT TT AIT A fe SATU 
eae famed tar afaferarcory 
FARA ATMA HAT WT TZ ol 


He said to himself— “I, alone, should live in 
that Tripura fort. It ought to be built in such a 


441 


way as no one amongst the Devas might be able 
to destroy it with a single arrow.” He thought 
also “I should make each of the three fortresses, 
100 yojanas in length and breadth. 

area ot faemBad Wray 

yer Fata geo a afacata 3 a 

yea w feta waead WaT 

TRA Se AAT ATA STRAT 3 2 

YeTeamerea Meats Pretreata 

MTG J fefettet Watt J ATA 3 3B 

TARA Ata Arar FTA 

va fafa: gta fat aafaeaia 

3 ACCTACAI 3 VI 


The building would be commenced and 
completed under the Yoga of the asterism 
Pusya, when the above three cities would rise 
and meet the celestial firmament and whoever 
would get hold of and attack the above cities 
under this Pusyayoga! would be able to destroy 
them by means of only one arrow shot by him. 
The lowest fort, that on earth, is to be made of 
iron; the one in the celestial firmament 1s to be 
made of silver; and the topmost one 1s to be 
built of gold. These three combined would be 
known as the ‘Tripura’ fort. The length and 
breadth of this is to be one hundred yojanas 
each; and it will be impregnable to all. 


ECT ea AMAT 
TAMA TAH TAT 
Beat Ray 
Was: AaITAAAN 3 & 1 


3 olive me 


WAGE Fat Tea 
Tea WWE afSsatteraa 
al Aa Sd FAG AH 


Yara fat TTT ITN 3G I 


|. When the Moon, the star Pusya and the forts come tn 
One line in conjunction. 


24 


Ta EU Aa Celt Are ST HAT 
AEH HA HAHA TAAAT It LVI 


Then the adoration should be made offering 
fragrance etc. followed by dance and music. 
(Due to financial problems) in case it is not 
possible to arrange for dance and music, one 
should arrange for the narration of the story of 
Kamadeva and Visnu. 


TATE ETA ATTRACT 
TH Qt I 


While adoring Visnu as Kamadeva, he 
should be bathed with the fragrant water. White 
flowers, unbroken rice, sesame seeds, should be 
offered to lord Madhustidana appropriately. 


BUTT Wel MST VS Aaa 
3S SRM Graaf Ft fem e¢ 1 
BCUATATIT Be: | 

Ye WIE Be WMT Ai Voll 
Ta: Veale aifereafets aera 

aa: WU FT HST Gerona Fae ve it 


At that point of time, Kamadeva has to be 
conceived in the feet of Visnu, as 
Saubhagyadata (the bestower of the fortunes) in 
the thighs, Smara in amples, Manmatha in the 
waist, Svacchodara in the belly, Ananga in the 
chest, Padmamukha in the mouth, Paficasara in 
the arms, and Sarvatma in the forehead. 
Salutation should be offered to all of them. In 
this way all the limbs of the lord Kesava should 
be adored. Thereafter that pitcher should be 
given away in charity to a Brahmana. 


TMI aM Tas A Maca 


Tea Y exon ented Wasa ve 
Thereafter the Brahmanas should be fed 
with devotion. Thereafter he should consume 
food which is free of salt. Then he should utter 
‘the mantra, saying, “The lord who staying in 
the hearts of all the living beings, is known by 
the name of bliss, the same lord Janardana in 


I DYAi¢ a4 THC 


Matsya Puradnam 


the form of Kama, be pleased with my 
anusthdna. 


Waa STAT SATE: | 

Cea VAYAT F Sats HHA 2 0 
am fafa ad aifa wife ad at 
STATE TAPIA AUT ASATT NH 2 vit 


The Madana-Dvaddasi-vrata should be 
similarly performed every month. On the day of 
Dvadasi, he should consume a single fruit and 
should lie down over the floor. He should then 
adore the imperishable lord Visnu on the day of 
Trayodasi. 


He A MMT glayat Fret FAUT 
ATAHEH MT FTAA AAT 2 VM 
Wat SMART Aaa TayATT | 
A HM UW MHI A AT Tae 3M 
On the arrival of the thirteenth month, he 
should offer, collecting all the materials and 
should give away in charity the gold image of 


Kamadeva together with a milching white cow 
to a Brahmana. 


areihefaeraed Yet wrace faye: 
WAM ash TETAS 2 ¥ I 


At that point of time he should also give 
away in charity the costumes and ornaments to 
a Brahmana couple, according to his means, 
together with the bed and fragrance. 


am: yafiet: ard: arnt aba 
TAM Baa AATAaA BT Tfaqn 2 I 
faeat Ser cafgrened frase 
SYCUSM COMMA VifeaT 1 2 I 


Thereafter, the religious performer of the 
vrata should perform the homa, with the 
pdyasam made of the milk of the white cow and 
the white sesame seeds, to please Kamadeva. 
One should feed the Brahmana, leaving the 
miserliness. They should further be pleased 
offering the sugarcanes and flower garlands 
according to one’s means. 


Chapter-7 


FT: HAGA Tetra vera 

O VaMGa eh: Wet BATAAN 291 

SE Meh ATARI TA 

I: GN: Waal AST AAT RSH 

One who performs the Madana-Dvddasi 

vrata in this manner, he getting relieved of all 
the sins, achieves the position parallel to lord 
Visnu. He achieves the best of the sons and 
other fortunes in the world. The lord who has 
been described as Smara, Anandadtma, Visnu 


and Mahesvara, he should be adored by a 
person desirous of comforts in the world. 


Tat area Bee 
Were NTA afer: MAG TT: 28 
HVA STATA UAT FAT 


TAN HAM YA BUSTA 3 o UI 
Having been attracted with the vrata of Diti, 
Maharsi Kasyapa reached before her and with 
utmost pleasure, and turned her as a beautiful 
young female, urging her to ask for a boon. 


ATCT A FT Fa Tat AT! 

Ut veRaTaa AAA TAT ATH 3 eI 
aT Tera Waray 

SATA HYITT Sa SATAAAHATN 3 VI 


Feeling desirous of seeking a boon from the 
sage, Diti said, “O sage, I seek such a type of 
son as a boon from you who should be able to 
kill Indra, besides being immensely valorous, 
having enormous self confidence and be the 
destroyer of all the gods.” On hearing this 
Maharsi Kasyapa spoke to her- “O Auspicious 
one, I shall bestow on you an enormously 
valorous son, who could be able to kill even 
Indra. 


yareragnag faxcdafsraat wi 
MITE: Hay FAA Facil 3 31 
faerenht adt WMATA 
ATTA Yas eaUnferenrN 3 XI 
SHVANAAA Fela A Aa! 


25 


cet Wafat eran faq: TAT CHAT 113 & tl 


But you should in consultation with the sage 
Apastamba perform a _ Putresti-yajfia. O 
Auspicious one, at the end of the Yajna, I shall 
make you conceive with my semen and bestow 
a son who would be able to kill Indra.” 
Thereafter the sage Apastambha, arranged for 
the extremely exhaustive Putresti-yajna. He 
made the final offering saying, “Let there be a 
son who should be inimical to Indra, who 
should be born to you. (With this yajna, the 
gods should have been panicky) but they felt 
pleased with this on the ground that the Daityas 
as well as the Danavas would be deprived of the 
effect of this yajna. 


farat THAME HVAT: Wes At TA: 

AM Tal faerrean ADA WH AT 3g I 
Hand aaa Taya 

Ta Ta ARR Utes araftirn 3 on 
re 

+ EYAL 
saa arate gear waste 
aera A fase A AAT Haq 3 V1 


At the conclusion of the yajiia, Kasyapa 
made Diti to conceive and then said to her, “O 
Beautiful one, you have to perform a tapas for a 
hundred years for the protection of the 
pregnancy. O Excellent one, the pregnant 
woman should not take food in the evening 
time. She should not be seated at the root of the 
tree, nor should she go near it. She should not 
sit on a broom stick or a pestle.! She should not 
enter in deep waters and should also avoid 
entering in a lonely house. She should avoid, 


Tie sTa) ¢ 


|. The Ulikhala or mortar is a large wooden bowl on a 
solid stand of timber, both cut out of one piece; the 
pestle is also of wood; and they are used chiefly for 
bruising or threshing unwinnowed corn and 
separating the chaff from the grain. As important 
agents in household economy, they are regarded as 
sacred, and even hymned in the Vedas. 


442 


It will be decorated with many palatial 
buildings, various instruments, various 
weapons, Sataghnis, cakras, spears, upalas, 
kampanas and various other arms. Hundreds of 
towers and turrets would be built to make the 
cities look like the great Mandara and Meru. 
Who can destroy, save the three-eyed Bhagavan 
(Siva), these three cities, touching the Heavens, 
and so well-guarded by myself, Taraka and 
Vidyunmalt? 


Sia stead wera faqironens 
Waa eT ATA SATA: 11 223 I 


KR 


CHAPTER 130 
Building of Tripura by Maya-danava 
Ua sara 
ofa ferargat erat fecarareamerast 
HN AGT SH WA ANTM 2 
Wanisst Ut se aA WITT! 
SE Meciermane AeA TAI 2 


Stta said-- “O Rsis, thus giving the matter a 
deep thought, Maya-— the great architect, with 
the influence of the divine methods beside the 
thoughts of his own mind, got ready to build a 
castle named Tripura, which could move at will. 
He thought, “whether on the road a boundary 
wall should be built or a gopura. At some 
places the whether canopy should be built or the 
main gate of the fort? 


Ta saate fagenraanata 
TANITA: UAT Ss Mea Wa ANSI 
Soa: SATA TI 

Was TSN Pa a: BUA Axi 


There should be a vast kings way, and there 
should be wide roads with foot paths and the 
lanes. There should be a platform here, and this 
place is fit enough for the inner apartments. The 
temple of Siva should be lodged here, the tanks 
with banyan trees, step wells and the lakes 
should be built here. 


Matsya Puranam 


STITAT WMA SAMI at AVM 
SUAVE SHAM VARA WASTING HI 


The orchards, the assembly hall, and the 
gardens should be built here. There should be a 
pleasant road for the movement of the 


Danavas.” 
Sed We daar Wate 
Te A OE frat trata 3: ATTN EI 


Thus Maya was fully competent in the: 


making of the Cities and created Tripura with 


his mental thinking alone. This 1s what has been | 


heard by us. 
anand oy waa fated yey 
ASUS AAT PALIT STATI 9 


The city built by black iron by Maya was 
owned by Tarakdsura. Then he controlling the 
city kept on living in the same. 


fae waa fate trararge: 1121 


The second city of silver which was shining 


like the silver, was owned by Vidyunmali. [ | 


appeared like the cluster of lightening. 
Fanifapd sear war fated TH 
TING TARA WAST: WT 
AHA Yt AA VATA 
FaeAeTat UT PAA AAASATI Qo I 


The third city built by Maya was made ¢ 
gold. The valorous Maya occupied the sam 
and became its lord. As the castle of Taraka we 
located at a distance of a hundred yojanas fro 
that of Vidyunmali, similarly the cities | 
Vidyunmali and Maya were located at 
distance of a hundred yojanas from each othe 
The city of Maya Danava looked like the Me 
mountain. 


TRUSTe TANT Wt Ted 


GTA ATCA A WT: TATU LA 


the 
a 4 


the 


the 
ith 
en 


vas 
the 


In} 


Chapter-130 


As the three eyed lord Siva had crated 
Puspaka in the earlier times, similarly Maya- 
danava, with the combination of the Pusya 
constellation, arranging for the time built 
Tripura. 


araeayt tetera: Yer sa 

a MA Tat att WHAT: YT VAT LI 
WHAT daa Areva: Fa 
CATSATAAT DW AMSA ASA: | 23 Ut 


While building the city, whenever he went 
from one Pura to the other by a particular route, 
thousands of buildings in gold, silver and iron, 
started building by means of the garland of 
jewels presented by Varuna to Maya. 


Terran et TTA argent 
WATE MATSTT HEM He Tl VV 


Thus with the use of the gems in the 
construction work, the palaces of the enemies of 
gods looked quite graceful. They had hundreds 
of palaces with multi-storey rooms. 


Vda aM |: Wdetentenhs a 
ara AITAa TAT A 84 


All the people moved quite freely there. 
Their beauty and attraction surpassed the beauty 
of all the lJokas. They had enough of gardens, 
step-wells, wells and the lakes with lotus 
flowers. 


MHA calendar Tl 

PEN ICU CMICIC MGR IGLC me ORLA 
VAS Achaea AAA a 
TATA Vaca? All Volt 


It abounded with the groves of Asoka trees 
with cuckoos and nightingales singing in them. 
There were many _ painters’ studios, 
quadrangular spaces enclosed by buildings, 
rows of seventeen or eighteen-storeyed houses, 
with various flags, banners and garlands, all 
built by Maya. 


fafsuitsreyegs Weald Wetted A 


443 


Tears yore a ec 
ARTATATUT AHPOTASTST TI 
TITAN SACSKHAMT Ti Ve i 
reef oor wee fe 
TTA ae AAMT MAST 2 oI 


The palatiai buildings resounded with the 
sounds of hundreds of small tinkling bells; they 
were filled with the perfumes of various sweet- 
scented flowers. The houses were neatly 
plastered and looked beautiful with various 
flowers and offerings to the Deity. The white 
houses of the fort Tripura were all covered with 
smoke arising from sacrificial offerings; jars full 
of water were arranged there in rows thus 
making them look like rows of swans. The rows 
of pendant garlands, pearls and jewels on the 
several buildings made them defy the splendour 
of the Moon. 


a TOOTS) eI Telaiiadd ° 


q 
Wasaga at: weyedtean 2 ei 
rat 7 
Weartteagt arery farrercatas: 2 21 
VHA ASANO Bt TAT 
Woaaaaa eyed PPTTATI 2 31 
Tater Faget TTT 

CAMA THAT TA SANTA A Vwi 


The houses decorated with flowers, Mallika 
and Jati, etc., and scented with nice perfumes 
and dhipas made them look like good persons, 
endowed with five senses, and looking on all 
with equal sight. Round the three fortresses 
were built three enclosure walls that looked like 
mountainous structures. These walls were built 
respectively of gold, sliver and iron and 
omamented with gems, jewels and collyrium. 
Hundreds of Gopuras (entrance gates) existed 
there in every fortress, decked with flags and 
banners and looking like mountain tops. The 
inner compartments for women resounded with 
the sounds of tinkling bells on their anklets; and 
these were more beautiful than the Heavens. 


444 


aratey farertsr ASTTAS AAR: | 

aUfey ates araTa se 24 1 
Pears AANA TT 
Ue BUMS T ATT 

UA MATS: Hal AAA TUT: 1 2 & 


In these compartments, there were many 
resting-places, Viharas (places of enjoyments), 
tanks, banyan trees, quadrangular-marts, pools, 
lakes, gardens and forests. All sorts of excellent 
divine objects of enjoyment were there; and 
they were decorated with various gems and 
jewels. The outlets of the three fortresses were 
rendered beautiful with various flowers. and 
they were surrounded by hundreds of deep 
ditches and moats. These moats were equipped 
with various weapons to defeat enemies’ 
designs. 


FTA Tag Maar TH 
a Waa ea 
fed: Gat cantata: 
ASEAN: WOT AHA: It V9 11 
When the sons of Diti, of unrivalled valour 
and the great enemies of Indra heard that the 
Danava Maya, of wonderful valour and deeds, 


had built such a fortress, they came in hundreds 
and thousands and took refuge there. 


aeratetardtoreds- 
SATE: PetH aA: | 
aya TOT ayy TAT YT 
TOTAL PPA AAT HI 


That Tripura fort, then became quite full of 
the Asuras, the tormentors of people and the 
destroyers of their enemies; and it looked 
gigantic like elephants and mountains as if the 
sky had been overcast with dark clouds about to 
shower rains. 


sfa stareat wargarat frqtrareart 
fayrefaren ada SearT 1 23 ofl 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 131 


Comfortable living of the Daityas in Tripura, 
witnessing of the dream by Maya and torture 
of the people by the Daityas 


Ud sald 
Pind fagt gt weargeteteom 
aaah etait wy Taat: Arges a 
Sita said— “O Rsis, in this way, Maya— the 
architect of the demons built the castle named 
Tripura. But ultimately, the gods who were 


bound with the enmity of the demons, the said 
castle became inaccessible for the gods. 


TRAM: AAT MAAS ARTA 
Tafema fafagryerr efamney a 21 


At that point of time all the Daityas who 
were terrific like Yama, at the command of 
Maya, entered the (newly built) houses with 
their sons and wives. 


faaranttarna Wat sa APTA 
TWaararest: wera Wad: 3 
Taare AIT STATA: 

Fat WeHet Tt SeralferarHeTyN ¥ 


As a number of lions overpower the forest, 
several crocodiles overpower the ocean, besides 
the anger and harshness, combined overpower 
the body, similarly the castle was inhabited by 
the powerful Daityas— the enemies of the gods. 
Thus the city of Tripura was filled with 
innumerable Daityas. 


ately eI WAAC 
STAT: Taree a a Pros aT: 1G It 


Ts wea ae Tae TAT 
TS TT Wada Waar facet Bi 


At that point of time, the Danavas come out 
of Sutala and Patala, besides those of the 
Daityas who spent time or lived over the 
mountains, appeared there as the displaced 
persons, having the cloud like complexion. 


Chapter-131 


Because of their taking refuge in Tripura, 
whatever was desired by each one of the asuras, 
it was fulfilled with the illusion of Maya. 


Way UT aay Aaa AT wT 

STAG AAT AWAAAAT A 9 

PAUSE Ast: AAT Sal 

WMA FTAA | Cl 

Premier: frerenraristetasrera etsy: 

AM: Beat Tamla SAAT: 8 

The Danavas with well-built bodies, having 

been plastered with sandal paste, who were 
decorated with shining ornaments and bright 
costumes, and who appeared like the 
intoxicated elephants, in the evenings of the 
moonlights, could be found over the banks of 


the lakes, in the mango groves, in hermitages, 
enjoying all the pleasure with their wives. 


Te faftrd WI AIeHAT AeTaT: 
ae TH TT a Payer Tt: TTT Volt 
Thus the great Daityas enjoyed all the 
comforts living in the city built by Maya- 


Danava. All of them had engaged themselves in 
dharma, artha and kama. 


amt fagrqri fagt fremnfore 
Salt TH TE Het: LAMA TM TAT Vek 


The time of the demons living in the city 
built by Maya, passed so comfortably like those 
of the gods in the heaven. 


gard fpr: went wre 
Taya MAT: WATT 82 


The sons served the fathers while the wives 
served their husbands. They never quarrelled 
amongst themselves. They loved one another. 


TRUM wat aaa 
UM fet: WAAAY STAI 23 
Uae eR TAT 
ATA AUST 2¥ I 


445 


Baa FANT faa HAHN: | 
Fat SASS Tat TIT WaT Vu I 


The irreligious act never obstructed the 
performance of the people of that place. The 
Daityas with their wives and sons, adored Siva 
in the Siva temple and recited the Vedic 
mantras besides the welfare songs. They loudly 
chanted the Vedic hymns and played on Vind 
and flute in union with the tinkling of the 
anklets. They always enjoyed the company of 
their consorts and their hearts were always 
delighted with the pleasing peals of laughter of 
the ladies. 

aaa Ca ATAU ATA 

THIS ATT HSL TAS ATTA 2G I 
WMATA A Taya ala a 

ata acesa frat fafag: den een 
wane Mawr Fat A waa: | 
THEATY: AA AT: BATT AMS SHAT HS 
aa Ud fared Wet AAT! 

TAG WAST SA BAMA SAIN V1 


In this way they passed their days in the 
worship of the Devas and Brahmanas and in the 
enjoyment of Artha, Dharma and Kama. Thus a 
very long time passed away. Sometime after 
befriended by evening, poverty, jealousy, greed, 
disunion and the kali stmultaneously entered the 
fortress of Tripura and settled down in the 
bodies of the Danavas like so many diseases. 
Maya saw all these very dreadful things in a 
dream. 


Sfat a Usagi yaaa Tall 

TA: AANA HTHTATAATETS: 1 2 0 1 
Teach Ta sired wauratise 

SET: HBA: Js AFA TAT 2 i 
Uae fact Waa: 
SUA Had Se: HeraTfaan 22M 


446 


In the morning when the sun arose with all 
his glory, Maya came to his audience hall and in 
company of the two other Danavas looked 
beautiful like the cloud between two suns and 
took his seat on the beautiful throne, bedecked 
with gold and looking like the peak of the 
Mount Meru. Taraka and Vidyunmali took their 
seats on each of his sides as the two young 
elephants appear by the two sides of a big 
elephant. 


Td: WMA: Paso TOMA 

sufae eg fag erarcagara: 11 2311 

Tay Ady YETTA 

Wat WeMfasterh Sara T SAAN VI 

When the three Asuras took their respective 

seats, 1t seemed that the clouds rested on the top 
of the summit of the golden mountain. Then, 
one by one, all the Asuras, with their strong 
armours and military dress, very violent, came 
there to Maya’s assembly. And when everyone 


sat down on his seat, Maya the maker of Maya 
addressed them as follows. 


GAT: WET A AY AANA TAT: | 
Pye TARISA WAT SBT WAAR BGI 


“Hear, O sons of Daksayani! wanderers in 
the air! you, that roar in the celestial regions! 
the dreadful dream that | felt last night. 


ada; VACA FA AeA Waraet: | 
ATTA: Maw ea TET: 1 EH 
I saw in my dream four women, three of 


them very terrible and belonging to this earth, 
racing like fire, enter the Tripura fortress. 


Saya efaared Be WUagetaaa: | 
MaBrere ToT Yat ATA: oH 
mt fagt ae TT AAA) 
aye VE TEN: BETTI WATT ICI 


On entering this city, they began to torment 
the people thereof. Their valour 1s indomitable; 


Matsya Puranam 


they entered with rage into the city and divided 
themselves into many forms and entered into 
the bodies of the demons. This whole city, it 
seemed, was covered over with darkness. You 
all, with your houses and everything were 
drowned in the ocean. 


SAH VAT AN TAISSHST GT TUM 
qe: fagirorasiaieareacirert: 112 8 11 


I saw one owl and a fan naked woman on a 
donkey; I saw also a man with a mark of red 
powder on his forehead; he was four-footed and 
three-eyed. 


a Ul Wet Tat ae da faalfera: 

SaMl WAT SMT MAT Aa WATARTH 3 oll 

we gefra: tact est ao fefaaat: 

gu: aa fe aera srquront sfaeafai 3 en 

afe aise at wan afee der afar 

Pale Gara A Mra 3 UH 

ard deat a a a staat Afar a 

aeal ea a at wy urate a fea 330 

The woman, seen before, was chased by this 

man. | awoke then. O sons of Diti! Thus this 
dreadful woman appeared. Thus the dream was 
dreamt by me. I do not know whether this 
dream portends future disasters to the Asuras? 
Whatever this may be, if I be fit to be your 
Emperor and if you consider my words 
beneficial to you, then, I advise you not to be 
jealous of each other. Avoid lust, anger, 
jealousy, envy and hold fast to truth, self- 


restraint, Dharma and behave yourselves like 
Munis. 


WR WRIA Wat T Wea: 

fe AMT Ta Ba BATA aa 3 vi 
HAd A Ta VE Cacateacreat:| 
WsenioT BT Svat Aa ATATTS TT ZG 
HME AMAT AIHA AIT ITA 
Talad Wied HITSTAATT aN 3G 


Chapter-131 


Spread peace everywhere and worship Siva. 
Who knows, that by observing these, all the 
forebodings of evils would be averted! From the 
dream, it appears that the three-eyed Rudra, the 
Deva of the Devas, is angry with us; for, O 
Asuras, I see clearly what will befall this 
Tripura castle. So vou all should avoid quarrels, 
acquire sincerity and see how this dream fares 
with us. 

Sea STATAVTAT Sere TENT TTT 
FUIANAM BAT TIT A ATTA ZN 
PAA TAA TATA AT AT 
aaa SBT ASAT Pena aero: 3 2 
ay saa Sa eaTATCAT: | 
feral Vet A ad wT sararoaly BAT: 3 eI 

Hearing these words of Maya, they looked 
agitated with anger and hatred which predicted 
their downfall. Overcome by misfortune, they 
looked on one another with eyes reddened with 
anger, though they were thoroughly convinced 
of their impending ruin and destruction. Those 
demons, thus overcome by destiny, abandoned 


the path of truth and their course of virtue and 
started on the path of vice. 


fgart GeO Guar a areata fe carat: 
Té da 4 Wed WAT ATG BAT: volt 


First, they began to hate the holy 
Brahmanas; they gave up their daily course of 
worship; they ceased to pay their respects to 
their preceptors and began to be angry with one 


another. 
HAT UW AT TTY Tart a 
want a Frere sefaerea area: iy ei 
TAPS ATE UFSTAT: | 
WRATAIATTA AT UT ATTAINS UI 


They became addicted to habits of 
quarrelling with one another; they mocked their 
religion; they abused one another; and every 
one of them played the master. They began to 


447 


insult their elders, and despise the objects of 
their everyday adoration. They ceased to 
perform good deeds and were vexed at mere 
trifles and their eyes overflowed with tears. 


teresa afvent a uf 

TAT DW VT Bese: TIAA v3 

We PAT AGHA WCET 

Gavia w yrearg yirareanfaasstar: i ¥ XI 

AeHatad Wards TAT aT: 

arat Weal 7 Ysa Telghty FATT yy 

They ate at night curds, barley porridge, 

milk and wood-apple; slept with their unclean 
bodies; they left off washing their feet and 
hands after answering calls of nature; they 
retired to bed without cleaning themselves. 
They began to fear cats like mice and never 
cleaned their persons after enjoying themselves 
in company of their consorts and never 


observed the rules of decency in dallying with 
their women folk. 


UT AMAT Yea A Ss MeaTUNTAT: | 
SAAS Seed FIAT: 1 XG I 


Thus, they became a corrupt lot, though they 
had led virtuous lives before; and they now 
began to trouble the Devas, sages and hermits. 


Tet areraronta ot Paarerg area: | 
fatraroda fermrort Hato: cActeAPAUT: I Yi9 I 
aunt Tea Ua da daa aA 

AM A ATM TATHAAT ANC 

tat a cada yaeaasn: | 

fara WHS ANS S I 
PACA UT UMMA TI 
ATMA Mg Wea ATAT eS: 0 Mt 


Though prohibited by Maya, they began to 
commit acts incurring the displeasure of the 
Brahmanas and thus went on in their path of 
destruction. In their anger, they devastated, 
Vaibhraja,  Nandanavana, = Citrarathavana, 


448 


ASsokavana, VaraSokavana, which gave fruits 
and flowers in all the seasons, and they 
destroyed groves of hermits though they were 
masters of these places. They destroyed the 
abodes of the Devas, hermits and devotees. The 
whole universe looked devastated like a field 
infested with locusts. 


ofa sited neray frqvrorerst ¢:tacesh 
ATA Ie felch HATA SEATTAT : 11 BB IN 


KEK 


CHAPTER 132 


Atrocities of the Daityas of Tripura, taking 
refuge of the gods with Brahma and moving 
of the gods with Brahma to Siva and their 
prayer 


Wa sara 
aretiery NEEY STAY FUT 
HATE ANITA Al 2 


Sita said- “O Rsis, the virtues of the 
Danavas had already declined and they were 
fully infested with wickedness. The evil-minded 
Daityas then started destroying the /okas as well 
as the hermitages of the sages. 


fagare area ay aide TTT 

Aeaay MAAS TAS ASIGIMTAI 21 

Sera Aaa: TAT: Foe we TTT: 

Wal: PROTA TENT WIAA 3 Ut 

They uttered the lion’s roars in the sky, 

which frightened all the living beings. In this 
way when all the three worlds was non-plussed 
because of fear, and the darkness was spread 
everywhere, then the frightened Adityas, Vasus, 
Sadhyas, Pitr-ganas and Marudganas—_ all 
combined went to take refuge with Brahma. 


a of aU TANT VATA: | 
THAT Aled: VHA ATUATTN VI 


The five faced Brahma was seated over the 
golden lotus throne. Reaching close to Brahma 


Matsya Puranam 


the gods offered their salutation to him and 
narrated the atrocities of the demons to him. 


ACTATAAAS SAATAT TAT: | 

ASTANA AAS ATETING 

arg Bart gar WT: Faewatea 

Sar WAT TREMT HIATT € I 

They said— “O Sinless, Grandsire, the 

Danavas of Tripura, enjoying safety because of 
your boons, are humiliating us like the slaves. 
Therefore, you stop them O Grandsire, as with 
the arrival of the clouds the swans flee and with 
roaring of the lion, the terrified deer flee, 
similarly because of the terror of the Danavas, 


we people are playing the game of hide and 
seek, here and there. 


GAOT Ae HEATON Ata TT 
amaurararorrat faagentt aatsaeii 9 i 


O Sinless Brahma, having been driven out 
by the Danavas, we have forgotten even the 
names of our sons and wives. 


CAAT ST STV UI 

erates: fat T WaT ACI 

afe 7 aaa wilcé adfagt FT 

Seo Free FETT SATAN 8 UI 

The Danavas have been blinded with greed 

and confusion, are destroying the abodes of the 
gods and the Rsis, who are wandering here and 
there. In case you do not immediately protect 
the Jokas being destroyed by the Danavas, then — 


the entire universe, besides the gods and the 
humans, will get destroyed.” 


sad freshen: ware: faa: 

Teas SMAI GIOIAA: Ws Lol 
WIT A at eat Wat Afaaat ac: 
TAT UT GMAT Ts YR FAT ATA Va 
ed aaMaert frat Frege: 
WATT Gare ATSTSTA: NIU 


When the gods so prayed to Brahma, born of 


Chapter-132 


a lotus, then the all powerful Brahma having the 
face as bright as the moon, spoke to Indra and 
other gods, “O Gods possessing the best of 
wisdom, the end of the boon which had been 
granted by me to Maya, is nearing and I had 
informed them earlier about the same. Tripura, 
their abode is going to be destroyed with the 
shooting of a single arrow. There is no need of 
shooting many arrows over It. 


Vad UT Was HAA AMT: | 

A UHV WL TARTSAAA! 23 tt 

faut aerator wast sf POT TI 

Uh FRAT eles ASM MoTUAATTN gv 

aq aa afe set a mgfasias ae 

aaa: Aen ea fat a efter eu 

But O gods, I do not find anyone among you 

who could destroy Tripura with the demons, 
with the shooting of a single arrow. None else 
except lord Siva, can destroy Tripura with the 
shooting of a single arrow. In case you and 
other gods collectively go to Siva— the destroyer 
of the yajna of Daksa, and pray him for the 
destruction of Tripura, he would surely do so. 

a: TUT FAH AAT Met TT 

FM UATE Fla I HIT TI WEA 

TSR Beat aA ana Fl 


Because, each of the three castles of Tripura 
are 100 yojanas in diameter and all three of 
them were constructed during the conjunction 
of the asterism Pusya with the Moon, you 
should, therefore, devise that plan which may 
lead Siva to destroy them in one arrow. 


dat Cay Wal AAMT Sta F:FaA:u Yon 
foarte t: Bet WaaearTa: | 

af eg aergt faite Pera Be 
WaT MAM Ag AAT FT WTA 
aera a Tkxal 


2 JPOP epe 


eit er lake 
i 


449 


TATA PRA ACA 2 0 1 

TT ae Sa Ft Alerter 

Wat ALS PT Maher Trea Vn 

Then the Devas all proclaimed at once with 

sorrowful minds— “We will all go to Him.” 
Brahma also accompanied them to get their 
object fulfilled and they all went to the abode of 
Siva. They beheld that supreme and glorious 
Siva, the lord of the past, present and future in 
company of His noble consort, Parvati, and the 
high-souled Nandikesvara. In other words, the 
Devas were bedazzled with the sublime glory of 
the mighty Siva. He was of a fiery colour, 
unborn, of three eyes resembling the three pits 
of fires, with the splendour of one thousand 
suns, decked with five-coloured ornaments, 
having the crescent Moon on His forehead, and 
his face looking sweet like the Moon. The 
Devas considered themselves blessed by seeing 
the Lord, the Unborn One, the Nilalohita (of 
blue and red colour) ready to grant boons, the 
Lord of Parvati, the Lord of gods, the Deva 
Svayambhu whom they now began to adore 
with their devotional hymns. 


cal Se: 
TG MATA Wala BAT ATCT TI 
Oya wae Prergara a HUET VIN 
Telcara Was Aa A MIR 
SUT WAAR AAI THAM ATI 230 
Aeitara siarr aaa sear Tal 
HAAMAAT HAUAAHA All 2 VI 
farifana gars Aa HAART a 
fret Aeforavsta wert fecal 241 
sua Frare ferwaar gaa 
Baa ana AACA All 2E I 
quay quer afer gerenteor 
TAMA Uetet TATA TN 291 
fagen fargs farager fas 


. Universe, 


450 


THISey Feerenra wera FESTA VI 
ITA Bras Tara Aaa 
aeniqenors Fret fag AAMTATI 2 81 


They then said— “O Master of all! O Bhava! 


O Sarva! O Rudra! The Giver of all boons, O 


Lord of all creatures! O Eternal One! O You 
terrible. O You, wearing braided and matted 
hair! we bow down to You again and again. O 
Great Deva! Bhima Tryambaka, the Image of 
Peace, Isana, the Destroyer of all ills, the 
Annihilator of Andhaka! we salute You. O 
blue-necked, O Penetrating One! O Destroyer 
of the enemies of Kumara Kartikeya! O 
Begetter of Kumara! O Red One! O Dhumra! O 
Vara! O Krathana! O Eternal One! O 
Nilasikhanda! O Trident-holder! O Divyasayi! 
we bow down to You. We salute You. O Uraga, 
Three-eyed, O Hiranya! O Vasureta! O 
Unthinkable! The Lord of the Mother of the 
adored by all the Devas. O 
Vrsadhvaja! O Munda! Having long hair, O 
Brahmacari! O Ascetic! O Brahmanya! we all 
salute You. Our salutations to You, O 
Unconquered One! O You, the Soul of the 


- Universe! The Creator of the Universe! the 


Pervader of the Universe! Who assumes Divine 
forms, the Supreme Lord! The Divine 
Svayambhi, O You who are the worthy object 
to be approached! the worthy object to be 


— desired! to be adored and worshipped. O You, 


who show mercy to the devotee!. O You Eternal 
one, the Giver of one’s desired objects! we bow 
down to You again and again.” 


Sia stared wergurot faurere genfeaadacn- 
Tea Tea AMT Bra yra fern gra SEATTT: 11 23 VN 


KKRE 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 133 


Building of a surprising chariot of Siva for 
the killing of ITripurasura 


Ud sata 

gaa: waa sadal WEA: | 

waTaAyaae Cat Faq Wa Tac VI 

Sitita said~ “Having been so prayed by 

Brahma and other gods, Mahesvara the god of 
gods, said to Brahma, the Prajapati, How could 
the great gods like you have to face such a 
danger? 

W tat: TAM AS TA el AAPA! 

Maca Were AeA TAM FS AVI 


O Gods, you are welcome. You better speak 
out the desire in your mind, which will surely 
be granted by me. Because there is nothing 
which cannot be given to you. 

qe Fatt gt a arate faaerie:| 
AU Tea Aeaiy UT AT 31 


O Best of gods, I always bestow welfare on 
you. Not only that, whatever the best and severe 
tapas is performed by me it is meant for your 
welfare alone. 


fafger at Wa eB: HET: ASUTHAT: | 
TATA: WM YT Aa Va ANI 
The people who are jealous of you they 
happen to be my avowed enemies. Therefore 
the one who frightens you, irrespective of his 


possessing the enormous strength, I have to put 
an end to him making you graceful.” 


UAHA Sat WO Mae: AT: | 
SGU ANTE: Ar Wa AU 
WTI TE TTT: | 
AAMT: BT Sl AT VOT WAT 

At the words so lovingly spoken by 


Mahadeva, all the gods with Brahma, then 
spoke to lord Siva, “O Lord, the terrific asura, 


Chapter-133 


performed the terrific tapas, because of which 
he is troubling us. Hence, we have arrived here 
to take refuge with you. 


Wat A fad: Garris Herehra: | 
fayt ar aagt gat TUgTTGTT I 
qatar Ot at eran ahaa: | 
aS Aes WAAC FAM CI 


O three-eyed Siva, you are well aware of the 
fact that Maya— the son of Diti 1s quite 
quarrelsome. It is he who has built a Tripura 
castle with yellow gate. Taking refuge in the 
castle of Tripura, the Danava has become 
fearless because of the boon. O Mahadeva, he 1s 
troubling us the most like orphans. 


SEMI UW MA TAIT AT Al 
STATA; Wal TSE SAE AT NS 


The Danava has destroyed Nandana and 
other gardens and has kidnapped Rambha and 
the other best of aspardas. 


S54 AWAY WH: HICSAAaT: | 
UUAATENTEM CATA AAT ol 
y TUS eas TeATAt | 


HAY SHS A WANA TAT: 1 8 


© Mahesvara, he has snatched away the 
elephants Kumuda, Anjana, Vamana and 
Airavata from Indra. The prominent steed 
which were yoked in the chariot of Indra have 
been usurped by him. These steed are now 
being yoked in the chariot of the demon. 


aw a mela a: feat ag ser A: 

Tat ued cet: Ura Sifad TA ei 
Whatever the chariots, elephants, damsels, 
besides the riches were possessed by us, have 


all been usurped by the Daityas. Presently we 
are doubtful about our own lives.” 


fa Va Be Sa: WHT: | 
Jara SATA ACAT FAATSA: 11 V3 
AUTIY A Ca WeeaeT TANT 


451 


dee faut gee feraat agai ad ev 
aerasy Ta ek] AIT Weenay 
waa Wel Bare fares A eu 


When the gods like Indra and others, thus 
spoke, Siva- with three eyes, bestower of 
boons, using the bull as vehicle, the lord of 
lords, then spoke to the gods— “I shall burn out 
Tripura. But you do as I want you to do. Incase 
you so desire that Tripura should be burnt by 
me, then, you make for me a chariot, with all 
the means and well decorated. 


FATA TAA ATA ASAT: AT: 

TAY Vlea Uy et TTA! 26 I 

aT Hata gt J VPPATgAM 

seer fraat Wet Wa Ti Vl 

dys dad ooh ASAT 

PONT YAU AGAMA: | Vo 

WHE MCA TAIT: | 

Mega Uata GANA SAAT 28 

HSATIINA A AMMA Aaa 

UMaM SIA FAUSFG VI Ai Von 

WATT UA Aa T SATA: | 

ASS TA URMSRT WAT TI 2 2 

ga fefreran raat oratory 

AU Fa WETE: Ft i 

Accordingly, Brahma and _ others in 

obedience to His orders equipped at once an 
excellent chariot. They fixed the earth as its 
basis, the two attendants of Siva as the two 
poles of the chariot (to which the yoke 1s fixed), 
the Mount Meru, the seat in the chariot; the 
Mandara, the axle; the Sun and the Moon as the 
two silvery and golden wheels, the dark and the 
lunar fortnights as the two fellies of the wheels, 
all the Devas for the machinery of the chariot, 


the serpents Kambala and Asvatara as the tying 
rope of the chariot, Sukra, Brhaspati, Budha, 


452 


Mangala and Saturn as the conveyors of the 
chariot and the firmament as the fender (with 
which a chariot is provided as a defence against 
collision). The eyes of serpents became the 
golden piping instruments (made of bamboos) 
of the chariot; the cheerful Devas bedecked the 
chariot with gems, pearls and sapphires. 


Tet fay: Wag UAT Sa 

facet @ fauren a AAA MUSH AAT 231 

Wad faa a aa a Arata 

Vat: ALU: Wal AVA HAT TA vil 

The sacred rivers, the Ganga, the Sindhu, the 

Satadru, the Candrabhaga, the Iravati, the 
Vitasta, the Vipasa, the Yamuna, the Gandakj, 
the Sarasvati, the Devika and the Sarayii, were 
utilized in place of the bamboos in the chariot. 


SAMS YT AMT BT AVA: Har: 
aga: HoT Fa aA a tag VN 
TAU SAMOA TTT | 

HAT: VAT CAT ATA: Ht 2G It 


The Nagas (women) of the Dhrtarastra 
family became the prostitutes in the chariot; and 
the descendants of Vasuki, the various haughty 
serpents became the arrows of the bows and 
lodged themselves in the quivers. 


Feat UM agra wate a 

FM THAT AAT BY: AAMT AAMT VON 
TIAN A MGT ATE WATT: | 
TAT UA PHA ACT SATASTAT: UM 


Surasa, Sarma, Kadri, Vinata, Suci, Trsa, 
Bubhuksa, Sarvogra, Mrtyu, Sarvasama, 
Brahmavadhyaé, | Govadhyd, — Balavadhya, 
Prajabhaya, etc., went to the chariot of Siva in 
the form of darts and javelins. 


at HAG UA Uetamastaay: | 

UGA: MANA TT: TAUTHUSAT: 1 VSI 
mepT BATE TART waa 

TAUPU AVA AE FAA ASAIN 3 oll 


Matsya Purdnam 


The four Yugas took the place of the yoke, 
the four Hotras and four Varnas became the 
golden ear-rings, capable to do great works. 
That yoke illustrious like the ages rested on the 
fore of the chariot and was tied to 1t by means 
of the serpent Dhrtardstra that served the 
purpose of a rope. 


BIAS: MMA ASAT: | 
ASIAN Wad WAI CMAATI! 3 VI 
TACT ToT Als SA Alar 
TARAS AT RUT ASAT: 113 VI 
Walaa WaT MehieTTa 

AMT GYGLAT SAAT ATTAAT: 113 3 


The four Vedas, viz., Rk, Sama, Yajuh, 
Atharva became the four horses of the chariot. 
The various forms of charities were the 
ornaments of those horses and the serpents 
Padma, Mahapadma, Taksaka, Karkotaka and 
Dhanafijaya were utilized in tying the hair of the 
horses. 


SETAE AT WareAcHAshaT | 

SURAT: MATT: UT ATA TAT 3 vi 
AAT A CHT YT 
TAOIST ATA ASAT SG I 
WataIGR Warerat Sau 

Faataret See Weal TMA MAA PATI 3 & I 
NZI 


Jie LLICSIR Tes, TUNAHUeEUUIIC 


|. Sinivali - moon on the first day on which 1t 1s visible. 


Reveda 1.32.6. Gunga - a synonym of Kuhu the day 
of conjunction when the moon rises invisible. It 
would be seen if there phases of moon were 
identifiable with Indrani or Varunani or with both. 
(H.H. Wilson on Rgveda [1.32.8, p. 78). Sinivalt - 
The day preceding that of the new moon or that day 
on which the moon rises with a scarcely visible 
crescent @ Yaroracar wl fedtarcreaeraee - 
Aitareya Brahmana and 4 Sea: fetal a 
wysEe FE AST: TT 
TAA AA St Yaa: 


Chapter-133 


FOTIA I Wats sd asa a 
saan: Wala aa: Waateat: 1321 
The sacred mantras originating from Om 

and the various sacrifices, viz., the remedying 
of evils, the tying of beasts, etc., became the 
jewels, pearls and corals, of the chariot. The 
most holy Orh was the whip and Vasata formed 
its tip-knot. Sinivali, Kuhi, Amavasya, Raka 
and Anumati were employed as the reins of the 
horses; there were also the black, yellow, white, 
red, brown banners of the chariot. 


RIM Hi: Weheq: Pacriswaqi 
SAT PINTS Attar TAA FST 3 V1 


The year made up of six seasons became the 
bow and the deathless Ambika formed its fast 
string. 

alot fe way Baer UW Aaent fag: 


THNGA AATTATT TASHA ¥ 0 I 


Lord Rudra became the great K4la (time) 
and this Kala is the year; and His consort Uma, 
the Kalaratri became the deathless bowstring. 


at faut aa arate freer: 

W saawmparnifacaearmals Taq & 8 
SrA MiMaaed ATTA: | 

AHA: WHaASA VSAM TASTY it 
af ddged argfaatraniea: | 

qa: caeres a yaranfafaar faa x 31 


The arrow with which Siva consumed the 
castle Triprua was forged with the potency of 
the three Devas— (1) Maha Visnu (2) Soma and 
(3) Agni. Agni was the mouth of the arrow, and 
the Moon the dispeller of darkness, located 
Himself in the main portion of the shaft and 
Visnu presented Himself in the form of its 
violence and strength. The snake V4suki 
discharged his terrible venom into that arrow to 
make it more mortal. 


eM Sat wai ante feet ferred: 
enfeafrmad sé AAA GAAN YI 


433 


eAAsa Wiseatrata earagratard 
SEATUATAT SATA ATL  & U 


The Devas, having thus prepared the chariot, 
went to Siva and said— “O Conqueror of the 
demons and the enemies! we have got this 
chariot ready for you which will help to drive 
away the troubles of Indra and other Devas and 
thus preserve them.” 


a Warrant Tare! 

were earateats wa Uva Peat EN 
Tegel WH We WMleagaca Weye: | 

SAT VHA: TATA VI 
AGMST Wl: STAT THU WATT: | 
SoM CAMA ST Vite faeraarg nn wc 11 


The Lord Siva then said~ Well done! and 
then began to examine that huge divine chariot 
looking like Mount Sumeru and was highly 
pleased with it. He praised the skill of the Devas 
and said to them— “O Devas! You should soon 
provide this chariot with a skilful driver as 
well.” 


sya tacaa tar fag saat: 

ardedl frat aa Bratt TATU st 

geal alsa: Bl AMT AEM WaT 

TRA Unrad ee ATO SETA NG Ol 

The Devas were very much confused to hear 

those words of the Lord and looked as if they 
had been pierced by arrows. They began to 
think deeply on this point. They said to 
themselves— “Who can be the worthy charioteer 


of Mahadeva who save Visnu? So let us go and 
take His refuge.” 


ght Gent Salaun deat sa Vad: 
Farad: OU: Gea Hatafatt Taq 2 


Thinking thus, they looked like buffaloes 
with yokes on their necks and obstructed by 
mountains on their way and they heaved a deep 
sigh saying— “Alas! how can we accomplish 
this?" 


YS 


sh 


454 


CaSevaA SAY MHAMA TA 

HE AAA AATPATRATA SIT: 1G 2 
aat ta: Gad: fagatel Wea Hat: 
Magee AT TAM Aaa ATTN 3 
marty faag wer a fra 

TEM: YA SYR UTS TH NGI 
MEA WH Sa MA SONATGT: | 

AAT: Ofer ETAT Tata TPT 
eat Spa Aarenararearrar 

SEN MaArargyA sa FFAG Git 


Brahma seeing the Devas overpowered with 
anxiety and ready to go and stand on the pole of 
the chariot said— ‘‘] shall be the charioteer,” and 
with these words He took the reins of the 
horses, when all the Devas, assembled there, 
expressed their unbounded delight in, a loud 
chorus of exclamation. Brahma started the 
chariot and Lord Siva jumped into it saying— 
“Yes, He is the worthy charioteer of Mine.” 
When Siva seated Himself in the chariot, the 
horses through His weight knelt down to the 
ground until their faces were covered with dust. 
At that time, Lord Siva, finding those horses— 
the manifestations of the Vedas— falling down 
to the ground, lifted them up, as a dutiful son 
uplifts his distressed manes. 


ad: faetat yar aya waa: | 
HAST CAAT AAAS: 11 & ott 


Again a loud exclamation arose and all the 
Devas shouted frequently, “Victory, victory to 
Hara,” which seemed like the roaring sound of 
the billows of the ocean. 


AAAI Yer Ware ATE: MY: 

TINY: Wt ATTA TITAN CI 
TATA SATS HOOT Sa SATA 

TNA: VITA THAT SAAT NG VM 
eae aaa auf 

Saka ASM Waal: AAeHlet SATA 1g of 


Matsvya Puranam 


Then Brahma, the giver of boons, made the 
steeds go faster by smacking the whip of Om. 
The horses with their heads lifted up into the air 
and their mouths open, galloped away, hissing 
like ferocious serpents as if they would devour 
the Heavens. The horses goaded by Brahma and 
directed by Siva, flew like the wind blowing at 
the time of the destruction of the world. 


quae fafratet anatase 
WA Aa gare aascaaniig v1 
By the injunctions of the Lord Siva, 


Nandikesvara sat on the bull holding the stem of 
His illustrious banner. 


aManfstat tat coseett craw 
Ween I Wa Ver fieenifaritg 211 


Sukra and Brhaspati, of the lustre of the sun, 
anxious to win the pleasure of Siva, began to 
look after the chariot wheels. 


SUES TATA TS AAS ATTRA PROT 
WEE TH UT VT TRUTEAATING 311 


The serpent, Sesa, the destroyer of all evils, 
used to guard the chariot and Brahma’s bed on 
the chariot, with arrows in hand. 


ae ATM Aes Uitaraury! 
Fraonferafreatet geromaferat FRING v1 


Yamaraja appeared on His fiery buffalo, 
Kubera came on His serpents, and Indra came 
on His elephant Airavata; and they all guarded 
the chariot. 

WAC Maas AU Hated CHAT Ga 
Te ARMA ATA ATTA FATE KH 

Svamikartikeya, the granter of boons, came 

to guard His father’s chariot, nding on His 


Kinnara like resounding peacock, whose beauty 
defied that of hundred Moons. 


Tawa Wasa aA 
FORT UPA ATT STRIATE & 


Nandisvara held the bright trident and 


Chapter-134 


locked like Yama, the destroyer of all Lokas. 
He protected the back and the two sides of the 
chariot. 


WEAN: ASA SATIN: | 

BAY WH Mia AAT Sa ATTAIN 
Pramathas, the attendants of Siva, like 
volcanic mountains, ablaze like fire and robust 
like the snow-clad peaks of the mountain, 


followed the chariot of the lord. They all looked 
like formidable sharks in the deep. 


HY: TRA: TASTE: | 

UTM ATT TERT NG C1 
Want Waa Tals WI saTaTeAT1G & 
Bhrgu, Bharadvaja, Vasistha, Gautama, 
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Marici, Atri, Angira, 
Parasara, Agastya etc., pleased the Unborn and 
Indomitable Lord Siva with their nicely 
composed devotional hymns. At that time the 
chariot of the unconquerable Lord began to 


march towards the castle Tmpura, as the 
mountain with wings flies in the Heavens. 


afin farerataet 
aaa aaa: 
wT: ua cay 
TAMA: WAT: TACHA oN 


The attendants of Siva, the Pramathas, 
gallantly escorted the chariot protected by the 
Devas. They roared like lions and looked then 
like elephants, or like mountains or like Sun or 
like clouds. 


Tanthaataatsenad: 

Wes Sala ATSTIG: | 
aula wanisfaread 

NCC MIGU OIC ace RTICEI] 


45° 


Like the ferocious ocean at the time of the of ths 
destruction of the universe, full of crocodilegcodiles 
Timis and Timingalas, the extremely brillian brillian 
chariot of the Lord glided onwards full o full o 
radiance, rumbling deep, like the sound ound C 


thunder-clouds and lightnings. 
TAA ATH MATA SATA: 1123 3 


KEK 


CHAPTER 134 
Attack on Tripura by Siva and other gods, ¢ gods, 
Arrival of Narada in Tripura, Preparation 'ration 
for the war by the asuras 
Ud sald 
IAM W afar clahed TH fat 
WHAT AST aay A Alea eI 
Stita said— “O Rsis, thus boarding the charic charic 
which was adorable by the universe, Lore, Lon 
Mahadeva, proceeded on to attack Tripura. Thura. Th 


Pramathas at that point of time declared rlared 1 
lion’s roar—““This 1s correct, This is correct.” ect.” 


SUA ACH WeTga 
Wag fary TMT WAT TAT AN 


Nandi-— the great Bull, started thunderinunderin 
resembling the sound of Siva. Groups of ths of th 
Brahmanas started shouting the slogans cgans c 
victory, wnile the horses started neighing. g, 


LOTS UN AAAI cafeante: wT 
are waa Ie TAPAS 3 
At the same time Narada the divine Rsine Rs 


having the lustre of moon, reached in the city Ge city « 
Tripura, jumping from the battlefield. 


steanfaes J ceaat fat arid ga 
ANGST ATA TST ATONE 11 


Disturbances were being created in Tripur Tripui 
the city of the Daityas. Narada suddenkuddenl 
appeared there. 


456 


ad Wea AAA: Wager: 
SAANS SBT Sta aT AT: 1 
AHO BT UTE VATU AT: | 


ANE URAATGGAMUN ST AAT 1G I 


Finding the arrival of Narada having the 
lustre of the white clouds, all the demons got up 
in order to welcome him. Thereafter the 
fortunate Danavas offered pddya, arghya and 
madhuparka to Narada adoring him at the same 
time, as Brahma 1s adored by Indra. 


Ta A Us Ware: Weyer TIA: | 
ANG: WEN: BS WaT 


Then the adorable Narada accepted their 
adoration and he was made to sit over a 
comfortable seat. 


WAY TSA Ae ARTA 
Gare GMa: AeA eManfera i tl 


Thus after Narada— the son of Brahma, took 
his seat. Maya— the king of Danavas with other 
Danavas, took his seat. 


aaa AE WA WAKITT WTAE: | 
TIAA AH THVT: 118 I 
Thus finding that Narada has _ been 
comfortably seated, Maya, the great Danava, 
felt immensely pleased. His hair stood at ends 
with delight. His eyes and face blossomed with 
delight. Then he talked with Narada. 


eis TSM BMT AR Hated 
add adda ae of fe AMEN oll 
Sad WAT: TAG MRT UW aa: TTT 
faa A AIGA hd: Vat TAM Afi 


Then Maya said to Narada— “O Narada, you 
are well aware of the happenings in the past, 
present and future. Therefore you tell me, the 
type of disturbance which is being created in 
our city, could possibly never happen in other 
places. The frightening dreams are being 
witnessed here. The flags suddenly break and 


Matsya Puranam 


fall. The flags are falling on the ground without 
the touch of the air. 


ASA Jat AIA: ATT: | 
feafeata sad fires va|at: TIN 
The canopies with flags and the gates look 


like dancing. The sound of “kill him, kill him” 
are often heard 1n the city. 


Te faute tart Waray A 
Yah as WOT MMT STATIN I 


Inspite of that, I am not at all afraid even of 


| Indra and other gods except lord Siva, who is 


the lord and the bestower of the boon. 


TTA Aeaaryeaay TAT 
SAMA A MA ATA AAT: YY 
Tea TTA ae 
HIG UANT WAST T AIG I 
STAT ANSI TATA: NE 


O Sinless lord, you are not at all unaware 
about the cause of these disturbances, because 
you are well aware of the present, past and the 
future. O Best of the sages, these disturbances 
have become, the cause of fnghtening for us, 
about which I have spoken to you. O Narada, I 
take refuge in you. You kindly speak out the 
cause of the same.” Thus Maya Danava spoke 
to Narada, the indestructible one. 


ARE Javea 
NU Ae Mead waar aM 
etifreaeal aTyAtereat Wa Teed 
TU Varad ad we Preeadi vy t 
A SyITA TH streneufevad 
SATA UCT STATA TVA VC I 
sears faartary 
fearrorerer Freya sft aefarat fag: nee 
O Tae: Tear: | 
ATHY FAM HOY TA WSATTNol 
AAA SeUTaTafaMAy a 


Chapter-134 


SAHA BVI SAAR AHA AN 


Hearing such words of Maya, Narada said— 
“Hear the cause of such ill-bodings. The word 
‘Dharma’ is derived from a root meaning to 
“hold up” and “to express the glories of the 
Creator;” therefore, Dharma is the practice of 
virtue and the propriety of being magnanimous. 
The good and the great have described 
‘Dharma’ to be the cause of attaining one’s 
desired object and happiness, and, therefore, 
they have advised Dharma to be practised. 
Adharma, which is contradictory to Dharma’, is 
said to be the cause of all misfortunes and, 
therefore, ought to be avoided. The knowers of 
the Vedas have said that those coming to the 
path of virtue from the life of vice and again 
launching on the track of evil, perish. Therefore, 
you, inspite of being firm on your Dharma, are 
helping the Devas, who are your evil wishers; 
and you will be despised on account of these 
haughty Danavas that form your following. 
They will be of no help to you, and the 
misfortunes passing before you in course of 
your dreams are all dications of your coming 
evils. In other words, they indicate your 
annihilation along with your paraphernalia. 


Us SR: VAN Aeletaars WI 
Aad FATT SA AT AMTATATN2 21 
a Were fei wera WAIT 
AAA WE YAN Sa: WE AA! 


The Lord Siva is advancing towards your 
town on his great chariot embodying all the 
Lokas, and He will destroy you all. If you wish 
well, you should throw yourself, along with 
your followers and the members of your family, 
on His mercy, Who is eternal and of great 
strength. Thus you, with your sons and 
relatives, will go to His abode.” 


suanad Wa aaah wedi 
SAAT YAal SAM TEATS 


In this way, the sage Narada, after warning | 


457 


them of their coming misfortunes, returned to 
Mahadeva, the Deva of the Devas. 


Ae J WA Mea Wal AAAS: | 

Waa SAAS SAA 24H 

WT: a MATa: SA hdhel: A chal: 

qed tad: ag Haet aly at aAANE NI 

After the departure of the sage, Maya, the 

leader of the Danavas, advised his followers not 
to fear and said, “O Brave Danavas! we are 
born heroes; sons and grandsons are born to us; 
we have now done what ought to be done by us. 


Now quit all fears in this hour of crisis and fight 
with the Devas. 


frat aa ufaeaa adsarenrae: | 
aT ASHI SAM HHATHVATASS TT: NOM 


We will all attain heaven after conquering 
the Devas and will enjoy all the realms after 
killing Indra and other Devas. 


aTglereny U aa fewest PreraTOT: | 
efor Taga freed wera Fash 
Go up to the terraces of your houses with all 


your arms and await the hour of battle after 
putting on your armours. 


Wafer ator dens sarearg erat: 
ised cigttats wfaeara waior Bnei 
TATA BT cae fateat fe a: 
MT: Weer ATT Ferevata ATTA: 113 0 


QO Danavas! go up to your respective spots in 
all the three fortresses; for the places should not 
be left vacant. This will soon be attacked by the 
Devas. You will know the advance of the 
indomitable Devas in the aerial regions and I 
am confident of your being able to keep them at 
bay with your arrows.” 


Sa SAA Aaa 
AUTVTAUTATY FATE 
qafafaqwrasa 
TAGCGL Tear Frage TWAT} gM 


mamfarges fereat Bah: | 
WUT aed 


WeARTHAMCSA ATS 2 


Maya, after thus haranguing his followers, 
entered suddenly into his castle, full of the 
women folk, with a very heavy mind. After 
purifying himself, he performed the worship of 
the Lord Siva, the Digambara, who is white like 
silver, and praised Him with well-chosen words 
and placed himself under the refuge of the Deva 
of the Devas, who is the enemy of passion, and 
the killer of Andhaka and the destroyer of 
Daksa’s sacrifice. 


AeMATASN Aa: MTS 
a a feet Pla va araatsyai3 311 


The three-eyed Siva, holding Moon on His 
forehead and His third eye effulgent, did not 
take notice of the evil intentions of Maya, who 
took His protection and wanted freedom from 
fear. Siva granted to Maya his desired boon 
who then became quite free from any cares. 


sit sired weTTTa fargrere AaTTt ATH 
Aa AMS ATH TATA S ATT: 1123 1 


KER 


CHAPTER 135 


Attack on Tripura by Indra at the command 
of Siva, victory of the gods and the retreat of 
the Danavas to Tripura 


ad sate 
dat Tr eaqaet ARES ATA: | 
APTS Va ATAAATATT AAT: FATA I 
Sita said— thereafter, Narada, after his return 
from Tripura again joined the army of the gods 


in the battlefield. He himself appeared in the 
assembly of the gods. 


Matsya Puranam 


Selqaiata Wad aay faa 

Ta Val Acta Aer A PIT UEI 
cami waryfrat fay city fee 
facet: Haass MHAieat: Rat 31 


The vast region known as Ilavrtavarsa, 
where the yajfia of Bali had been performed, 
and where Bali was bound, the place was 
subsequently known as the birth place of the 
gods. The same I[lavrta-varsa the ceremonies of 
giving names and giving away of the daughters 
in marriage had been performed. 


Carat Fa Ga SMe als a 

TW fet val aa Berd: TST wi 
CaM: Bel aa TAT EAT ser 
malaga waaTa TT: 
SATA We MUTT TST HG I 
area aattont a fagt ufteyad 

fan Udreniredser WAT HAT INE 1 
Se Fae Tat algae TTT 

Ud sat fife: aHUsetatier: iol 


Lord Siva daily enjoys sports with his 
courtiers. The Lokapalas live here like the Meru 


; mountain. At the same place where lord 


Mahesvara, having the eyes yellow like the 
honey, who is adorned with the crescent as an 
omament, spoke to Indra as well as his ganas, 
“Q Indra, the Tripura of your enemies 1s visible 
here. It is decorated with planes, the flags and 
banners. It is quite strong. It is known about the 
same, that it cause sufferings like the fire. The 
residents of the same, use kirita-kundalas and 
look like the mountains. 


Weary sy aA ara: Feat: | 
SN wt MaeMra aot fanaa 1c 
Priard ott cer: agen fawrateor: 1 
The limbs of the people shine like the clouds 


and their faces are deformed. They are stationed 
at the gates, ramparts and house tops or at the 


Chapter-135 


end of the rooms. Look, all the Daityas, with the 
desire of being victorious, armed with weapons, 
are emerging out of the city. 


Ut QU: MG AAA ATT: 
TelKAAYMSANUEA WTA Lol 


Therefore, you accompanied with all the 
assistants, your watriors and my ganas, move 
forward and kill these Daityas. 


we A waa Peyeracrateaaet: | 
Ul: WUT TT Tareas arrays AVI 


I shall establish myself like an immovable 
mountain, over the chariot for the sake of your 
victory. | shall wait for any shortcoming of 
Maya standing before Tripura. 


Fel FT YHA Ved WT WTA 
Aca ACSA MeUtasT ATTA 


When all the three cities of the Daityas shall 
be in one line in the Pusya constellation, then I 
shall burn them with the shooting of a single 
arrow.” 


Set A WTA TAVIS YLAT: 
Tat afeagt Aq at BAT aA 3 1 
At these words spoken by lord Rudra, Indra, 
the god of gods accompanied with the vast 


army, marched forward for the defeat of 
Tripura. 


Warawtaed: ued: araai Tt: | 


\ 
AHA VSI 
& 


At that time of departure, terrific sound was 
created from the chariots of the gods and the 
ganas of Siva. All of them were creating 
thundering sound like the thundering of the 
clouds. 


oF Test FAYMEAT FRATCTaT: | 
SU Seale: AAEM: GS AMVATTN eH 


Hearing that sound, all the Danavas, holding 
the weapons, with the desire of waging the war, 
came out of Tripura and jumping in the sky 


459 


pounced upon the ganas of Siva. 

Sra TATA: Waa GY: | 

AAEMS Alea ATATATT HAT ALE Ul 

cant fagaesy Waaatal wer 

WAISHEATeS UAT Aaa V9 1 

Hearing which the demons, eager to fight, 

emerging from their strongholds, dashed against 
the Devas in the air. Most of them became 
infuriated and began to thunder and roar and by 


their noise drowned the martial music of the 
Devas, as the Moon ts enveloped by the clouds. 


aaleaean ad: Worara satura: 

FAL WHAT RUATTST AT RSI 

Weary yt aa Mg tahT at 

SSAA UNTeal Aiferetferraner: 1128 1 
CUTTY: WAT TAT: | 
chfaaetad STATA SANTST: oN 
SA Maat: faeqaaraa: | 

fetatete weep earat Temfirat: 112 eh 
farraa write wadated fe 7 
Wasa Are FARA AEN 2 


As the ocean swells under the influence of 
the Moon, the aspect of Tripura became awfully 
grim by the influx of the Asuras. Some of them 
were playing the music-of-war on the terraces 
of the palaces, on the tops of enclosure walls 
and on the gates. Some, wearing garlands of 
gold, roared like thunder-clouds and began to 
play the music-of-war. Some began to run 
about, waving their cloth in excitement, and 
some, remaining in their houses, began to 
enquire into the reason of that commotion. 
Others replied they did not know the cause of it, 
their sense of right understanding being 
muddled; in time, the whole thing would be 
revealed. 


aiswat qatar a fees ware: 
fase fagt urea eg earfatralfena: 112311 


460 


a waster a was an fen aay aie 

Ufe SAAT Bh Yeast Afaeaia2 vi 
sft assarearmifag] Sa aTT: | 

SMA Yaad TT SAATEAT TCA: 134 
TART CRATE TAT: | 

Farrar: aplaarerat factica TATE 


Others said, “Siva, seated like a lion in His 
chariot on the summit of Meru, has made His 
appearance to torment Tripura, as a disease 
cropping up in the body torments the system. 
Be whatever it may, why should we fear; what 
is the bitch, you come out with your arms, what 
do you wish to enquire from us? Our prestige in 
this war must be kept up.” The Danavas of 
Tripura thus hurriedly conversed among 
themselves; and, soon after, their compeers 
residing in the Tarkasura fortress emerged out 
of their stronghold, like infuriated serpents from 
their holes, under the generalship of the valiant 
Tarakasura. 


Prataaeq & cea: wrenferreart: 

Pregl Waa war Hafez: 1129 
aftarat master eftaraftreanttary 

SU WATTS TATA CI 
aa Fert VANTA UNATEIA Aa: | 

Pa eqcarahah: wrote: 112 81 


SBI SBI SAAT BUTT} ot 


Those advancing Daityas were kept at bay 
by Pramathas, the followers of Siva, as a herd 
of wild elephants is obstructed by multitudes of 
lions. At which the haughty Daityas in their 
excitement began to blaze like fire. And the 
archers of both the armies discharged their 
deadly arrows upon one other. The Danavas, 
who took pride on their own beautiful faces, 
began to laugh at the faces of the attendants of 
Siva. Some of whom looked like cats, some like 
deer, some were distorted and others looked 


sl TIT Ulaellellit 


Matsya Puranam 


terrible. 

are: afaret: Herat aya YT: 

Vay faa yeTSM Tg UABTUT: 113 U1 

Ua: wh I areasa sacra Fradary 

Sea RTA SAAT: TSUN 2 

The arrows discharged by the valiant arms 

penetrated into the warriors like the fishes 
getting into water and the birds in midst of the 
foliage. “Where will you fly and hide, wait; 
make room for us, we shall kill you; you will 


soon see us again!” with such harsh words, the 
Danavas addressed the attendants of Siva. 


fag: arrneient: qalorer saraar 
wren sia Fagen: faetastaawat:| 
ears 13311 


Ci 3 J = 


adic FaHerqareary) 
erated Tat Taal TITS v1 

They pierced the attendants of Siva with 
their barbed arrows, as the sun disperses the 
masses of clouds with His rays; and the valiant 
Pramathas, with their lion eyes, also in their 
turn, paid the Danavas back in their own coins 
by piling on them huge rocks and trees, etc. The 
inmates of Tmpura became dispersed and it 


appeared, then, that the sky was overspread 
with clouds or with pack of geese. 


fapparn cera: Gara weeferT 

SHUUNSA AT Hea SA SETTING Hl 

SUM AMSIAATST TAT Ya TOA: 

OHM SAAT CAVA ATCT: 113 § 1 

TIT FAA Ta ST TTe 

SUAS HEM CaM: BATTSSM SANZ VII 

The Daityas drawing their bows shot 

inultitudes of arrows. It looked ominous as 
clouds marked with rainbow indicate stormy 
days. The leaders of the attendants pierced by 


the arrows lost good deal of blood and looked 
like secretions discharged from mountains. The 


Chapter-135 


Daityas in their turn, were crushed to death by 
the trees, rocks, thunderbolt, trident, battle-axe 
and other weapons thrown by the Devas, as the 
glass is powered by the weight of stone. 


aca: Tota sarata:| 

fagt WHAM MTSAUTATAT: 113 C1 
TARE BaIeIG sft Sea Sa 
TIA BT SIA TW TUPNT N38 
after atftar arotatareataractrey 
PRS TTT SATS: 11 0 11 
atigoa: forties eaatyoasy vigt: 
Teuaad Araneae TAT y gH 


The Tripura swelled with the influx of the 
Asuras, as the ocean does at the sight of the 
Moon. The Daityas cried out “Victory to 
Tarakasura!” and the leaders of the Deva hosts 
cried out “Victory to Indra! Victory to Siva!” 
The brace warriors of both the armies mortally 
wounded with the arrows were breathing like 
the clouds full of rain. The battlefield looked 
fearful with the heap of chopped hands, heads, 
yellowish white banners, umbrellas and with 
flesh and blood. 


SUT TI AEA Aes ATs: 
Gslet: Uda SHAT: WAAAY 2H 
The aerial fight then went on; the soldiers of 
the Lord Siva and the Daityas clapped their 
hands, jumped in the air and took out their 


choice weapons and when the combatants fell 
down like the Tala fruit falling to the ground. 


fascia UOTE TATA: 
SSaeeaM: We Alea AH: 11% 3 1 
sreney faatt caesraretan 

Teal MAMA ATAT Sa TAT wv 


At the sight of this, the Siddhas, Caranana 
and celestial nymphs became gladdened and 
danced in the heavens with glee and cried 
“Bravo, Bravo.” The celestial drums sounded 


461 


without being beat. That hour it looked as 
beautiful as does when the dogs bark at the 
thunder of clouds. 


a after cen aa: faguafaan 

Tagd PRACT AHA THAT 

ARARATT AS AT: VAT: WATT: 

Ua UAT GT AU Sat MENTE NI 

The remaining Daityas retreated mto the 

fortresses, like the rivers falling into the sea and 
the serpents retiring into their holes. The 
powerful Devas, then clad with their arms fell 


on the Tarakaksa fortress as the mountains fall 
on their wings. 


qaata far frat Fae: 
faganel tava Wat a grass! 


The army of Siva divided into three 
divisions, marched on Tripura and _ started 
warfare at three places when Maya and 
Vidyunmali also appeared on the scene. 


fagrret a erat friecageata:| 
Mera Ute at aSaaTa ASAT cl 
4G Aal AAG UIT Fete: | 
Wad TAT Sieh: YT ARO BMT eH 
Vidyunmali looking like an_ elephant 
inflicted a severe blow on Nandi (the bull of the 
Lord Siva) with his huge Parigha weapon, 


which made him reel about like the demon 
Madhu by the blow of Narayana. 


Te Wet TA MUTT: aa areaT: | 
SETMIATATENT FAA TAG 0 1 


After Nandikesvara’s retreat, the valiant 
attendants of Siva made a vigorous dash on 
Vidyunmall. 


querer : MERU Meee UTR: 

TA Wh: AAMATOOATOTT HAIG QI 
Wal Wa: A fae WTAETA 

frat Pra STS ASAT ATHY 2 


462 


remerageat Act fora TTT: 

Gat HT aa: BIST faeraertATRaTY 311 
Baad Fal aT STAM AAT 

aa TAAMIS CATT WAG BIG vit 

a afaqubnh qrarmcfayiea 

WUT aaa aet aa Sere ATAU G GH 

q aatteat teat TAME TATA: | 

UOT TAMA: YUMA TATE: 1 & UI 


They were Ganapatis, Ghantakarna, 
Sankukarna and Mahakala and others. They 
were all pierced with the arrows of Vidyunmiéli, 
who, after harassing Ganapati, and others, 
began to roar like thunder clouds most hoarsely. 
Hearing the thundering growls of Vidyunmali, 
Nandikaisvara, shining like Sun, again, 
confronted him. He hurled the powerful fiery 
bolt, named Vajrastra at the Danava, given to 
him by the Lord Siva, which hit him in the 
chest, by the force of which that stalwart giant 
fell to the ground like a mountain blasted by the 
thunderbolt of Indra. 


eetat fatted afeat nerferm 
OHMS: WA FEA TUMPTAT: 114 VI 
Seeing, Vidyunmali rendered senseless by 
Nandikesvara, the Danavas raised a hue and cry 


which made the other leaders fly. The 
Ganapatis, then, pursued the Danavas. 


S:tamtaatiaret faganfets ofa 
savermeaty water: waaay 61 


When the general Vidyunmali was thus 
rendered senseless, the demons seething with 
wrath showered on the army of Siva, rocks and 
trees as the clouds send forth rain. 


& teat qefatnfttes welt: 
aed 4 fag: fafagerentrer Saiiy ei 
This utterly confused the Ganapatis and 


rendered them helpless for the time being, as the 
irreligious cannot understand the essence of the 


Matsya Puranam 


Brahmanas and the Devas. 
AUST: AAAS: WATT 
G aeun Prato SF Geranet BIH of 


Then the general Tarakasura, most valiant 
and powerful, came to the scene, looking like a 
high mountain and huge tree. 


PrAararSt Tora fHaUelfsareat: | 
fara aAaRTaTOT BAT ABT Vi 


The soldiers of Siva, with their heads, arms 
and legs separated from their bodies, looked 
like snakes brought under the influence of 
spells. 


Tat URNA GAT AVANT: | 
TAA TgMlen: TAL WHat SAE 2 
AMSTEL: SARA: HATTA 


Sale UW Get Aa MHA MAT: NG 31 
AAT STA PITAL TST TOT: 

TAT AAA RATTAN MIGHT: 118 WI 
TOL FAA AAT HOTTA TAT FAT: 1G 


The Ganapathis were seriously checked by 
the powerful Maya, the knower of Maya. Some 
of them began to reel about by the delusion of 
Maya as the singing birds hover about in their 
cage. Tarakasura began to consume the army of 
Siva as fire consumes dry wood. The soldiers in 
the Siva’s army became distressed, like the trees 
blown by a blast of wind, by the violence of 
arrows showered on them by Maya and 
Tarakasura. 


FA: AA AUT MEL AAT 
Press TAT MraATATAU ATTN & 1 
TRAMP sig: WaANa UI 

TA Waa WAI MAGNE I 


Maya afterwards produced fire by his power 
of Maya and let that loose on the army of Siva 
and also cast crocodiles, snakes, lions, tigers, 
mountains, trees, deer, locusts with burnt wings, 
the eighteen-footed Sarabha, water and air. 


Chapter-135 


TAS HAT ATTA 
Aya faa WITT: | 

Tt Upeded HET Ute” 
aatgarat Para: 1G 6 1 


The soldiers of Siva, inspite of their 
keenness to fight with the Danavas could not 
adequately do so owing to their being 
influenced by Maya’s delusion, just as the 
objects of senses become useless to the Rsis 
who practise self-restraint. 


KAT TAT TY TAT : | 
faaranrrentar fanited: 
TMA ETS TATA TUT: 116 8 
rey THY 
AMG Atay 
aad: AUTO water 
— Ftttetet afafag: weg: i901 
They were exceedingly bewildered by the 
force of water, fire, elephants, serpents, lions, 
tigers, bears and the demons; as a drowning 
man in the ocean gets confused. The Danavas 
raised a tumult of victory on finding their foes 
over-powered by them. Then, the following 


attendants of Siva advanced to the van to 
protect the Devas. 


Tal Weel TRULY ATEAT- 
TM HaIsatatedaa: | 
tag a Wh: fadamares: 
HAUT: ATAATSA: 1119 2 


Dharmaraja armed with His club, Varuna, 
Strya, Svamikartika surrounded by his Kot 
Devas, Indra seated on Airavata and armed with 
his thunderbolt came and joined the battle. 


a alga: wgat fearat: 
O Brahe areata: | 
AAT Tot WrafagyreregaT: 119 2 1 


463 


TM Tet AAV CAZA TIN 9 31 


Then the Sun, Moon, Saturn, Yama and the 
highly brilliant Siva, became excited and 
entered into the army of the Danavas. Like 
made elephants making their way into thick 
forests by uprooting trees, and like the brilliant 
Sun shedding His radiance in midst of the 
clouds charged with rains, like the lion making 
havoc on cows in a solitary place, the Devas 
began to pursue the Danavas and harass them. 


HUMEgtart aa 

aaKaead set fe wdet:| 
Tasattaat sarfaftarerary @fz- 

GM TAY NAT ALOT 9 


Then the Danavas became much distressed 
by the blows inflicted by the attendants of Siva 
and they fled in great disorder. The Devas threw 
the Asuras away to a great distance like the Sun 
dispelling the darkness. 


faye gen aca 
Frovant: Usagat 77:1 
adap UAT: Wa 
TAIT OT ATEAI9 4 1 
ICM CREEL 3) 
al Aer faetat Fer 
ae fart fast facrer- 
POAT: SITATATAT: 1119 € 1 
As the rising Sun drives away the nocturnal! 
darkness, as the Moon also takes away the 
darkness, similarly, the effect of the weapons of 
the Daityas was melted down by the grace of 
the Mighty Siva, and the power of the divine 
weapons made manifest, when the Dikpalas, the 


Lokapalas and the attendants of Siva raised a 
chorus of victory. Many of the Danavas were 


464 


lying deprived of their head, arms and legs. 
Their bodies were pierced through and through 
by arrows. 


tam caatfatian: 
Herat USy aT MT: 


aan wes a await: 
WERT A MEAT A HATA: 991 
SUST AAU UT TTT: 


UST UOT A ATTAAT 
Wet Herr FT aT 
SAU AAAS TAHT: 1119 S| 
TORT AAT: 
TOA aA ST aAATSTT : 
Qua SAT: TAT INOe H 
wey Care TTA 
Test eaa HATA! 
rer farrar a fe arcana 
O ARAATATA FATA oN 


The Déanavas wounded by the Devas 
suffered the agonies of an elephant entangled in 
a swamp. At the same time, Indra used His 
thunderbolt, Svamikartika His Sakti, 
Dharmaraja His terrific club, Varuna His 
formidable noose and Kubera His deathlike 
trident Sukesa, the attendant of Kubera by his 
sheer strength, and the Devas, like Ganapatis, 
by their wonderful fiery valour, like the fully 
blazing fire offered in Piirnahuti, began to crush 
the Daityas. It seemed, then, that the 
thunderbolt of Indra had fallen amongst the 
Danavas and were tearing them to pieces. Then 
Maya overpowering Svamikartika, the guardian 
of the Devas spoke to Tarakasura. 

HAM Wa Waynray art 
yt fe tery ae TH: 
FAM ATA 


i 


WA: aAfEMT Tr WTA 12 21 


Matsya Puranam 


I shall now enter Tripura after inflicting my 
blows on our foes; and take some rest. After 
which we shall resume our fight with the Devas. 
I feel belaboured by the enemy’s blows. 

aa fe yreaerafaterargt 

Papi ereaea aC ATET | 
Tafroret Wears 

TORT AHATTTN SC 21 


My weapons, banners and conveyance are 
all injured. And the Ganapatis, having gained 
victory are moving triumphantly and look 
brilliant by this defeat of ours. 


Tea sranfetar aca 
TENS PSTCT ATTA | 
faa aut frgt fea: eA: 
regen BAT THT 31 
Hearing the above words of Maya, the red- 
eyed Tarakasura instantly retired from his 
position in the sky to his stronghold in company 


with his army. Seeing this the Devas, the sons 
of Aditi, became very glad. 


ad: Apgar 
afaee Beat 
mary arewsiteTet 
aan fearenaraetteryiic ¥ 


They pursued Maya and resounded the air 
with their shells and drums, etc., which looked 
like the thunder of roaring lions and elephants 
in the Himalayas. 


Sta sitareat wera faryrere wetted Aa 
UST Sa felch STATA SEAT: 1123 GU 


KK* 


Chapter-136 


CHAPTER 136 


Anxiety of Maya, construction of a 
surprising stepwell, terrific war between 
Nandikesvara and Tarakasura 


Ud Jara 
WA: WEN Heal F AAal aT: | 
faa aut fared Aefraracqi ei 


Sita said— “O Sage the illusory Maya-— the 
best of the Danavas, attacking Kartikeya, atonce 
entered Tripura, as the clouds enter the blue 
sky. 


a degen Fg eared Team 
eat HAA WA hier Alot SATIT 


Reaching there he started breathing heavily. 
Then he looking at the Danavas who had 
arrived in Tripura, after fleemg from the 
battlefield, he looked like the second Yama 
appearing at the time of the second dissolution 
and thought. 


Saisie fasad oer erat aca: | 
@ ante Fert wat faganet TeragT: 113 1 


“Alas! Even Indra was frightened when 
Vidyunmali appeared in the battle ground, but 
he was met with his death. 


ad a fyrara a at faae 7 
TRATAGSAT: WaT A St Brot Hfax I 
There is no city or the castle in the three 

worlds, which could be compared with Tripura. 
But inspite of that, the misfortune has befallen 
on it. Therefore the castle is not the cause for 
the protection of life. 

Hea AN Wa St Sat | Ae 

Se Hea HA HreTaATT Ase AfawafanG 


Therefore, I feel that not only the castle, but 
even the things better than the castle, are 
governed by the time. Therefore when the time 
is not favourable, then how could we be saved 
by the time? 


465 


clay fay atentsact a aaorqgl 
Hea ARS alata Uarsar fate: 1 


The strength possessed in all the living 
beings as well as the three worlds, is all 
governed by the time. This is the rule of 
Brahma. 


afar: waa eeres tracer 
CR GH: WA: gd Sa TEMA 
What type of efforts could be successful 
against the time which is quite powerful and 
beyond subjugation? Could there be anyone 
who could overpower the time, except lord 
Siva? 
fate Fahy TATRROTA a fear 
ant dat F Sarat Saa: WASATCH 
I am not afraid of Indra, Yama and Varuna. | 
am also not afraid of Kubera. But it is difficult 


to overpower Mahesvara, the lord of all the 
gods. 


UR Het AANA FT THT 
mee aviary aagT: AAAI 


Still, when the Danava warriors are spread 
in all the four directions, one gets the reward for 
the achieving of the fortunes besides being their 
lord. I shall display the same. 


arya Yo Bet awtrat: | 
Sifaeata dat Seat: Waite tae: 112011 


I shall build a type of stepwell, filled with 
the nectar in place of water. Besides I shall 
invent some best of ausadhis. With use of the 
best of the medicine all the dead Daityas shall 
regain their lives.” 


Sit Wael THAT Urata AT: 
Waa West adi Tantra fTarqe:11 221 
Thus thinking the valorous Maya— best 
among those well-versed in illusion, created a 


beautiful stepwell in the same way as Brahma 
had created apsards like Rambha and others. 


466 


farsa sat yorarsrtasgary 
Miedarad faaeat HAAN 21 
The said stepwell was two yojanas in length 
and a yojana in width. Like the story with 
different events, it had steps for descending and 
ascending. 


Sel: fearorncda Farge 
OUT UTA TOTO ATS ATTN gM 


It was bright like the moon rays, sweet like 
the nectar and was filled with the fragrant water 
and appeared like a creeper with all the best of 
virtues. 


Tet: HA: welsai Greta 


TQS 


‘ 
ape r, oeLeiik a sae lic 


The blue and white lotuses of various types 
were blossoming in the same. They were 
shining bright like the sun and the moon. There 
were many flower and the rows of swans. 


Gitguray wean: | 
area afar Sire UT TAT 84 I 


It had a host of sweet singing birds of golden 
colours and seemed as if filled with beings 
eagerly wishing for their desired objects. 


at anit goa a Wal wera wea: 
TM Wee Tere Ta TSA: 11 RE Ul 


Maya produced such a wonderful well as 
Lord Siva brought down the river Ganga. 
Afterwards he washed the corpse of the general 
Vidyunmili in this tank. 


G aati Afaat Seat tagrderact:| 
SAME: Wat ed Satter Rll 


That greatly powerful enemy of the Devas 
was instantly recalled to life like a flame getting 
ablaze when clarified butter is poured over it. 


TAT Asiet Heal AAAS Hata: | 
faearctit Tat Tay ASAIN SU 
H Tal AE WM Fa: WATTS | 


Matsya Puranam 


TANMAISUPaMaST sa Sey aT FE Aegis 


The demon Tarakasura came and saluted 
Maya with folded hands; and Vidyunmali, 
getting up, said~ “Where is Siva? Where is 
Nandi surrounded by his jackal followers, the 
Pramathas? Where are the followers of Siva? 
We shall fight and crush our enemies; we will 
attain victory. 


sana UBT Vara: wafaeora: | 
dat farreat ax MAaeATA ARTETA: 112 01 
Either we shall become the sovereign of the 
universe by fighting face to face with them; or, 


we will go to the realm of Dharmaraja (Death) 
after being killed by His followers.” 


faster aera 

af Ufa Agel SAAS WATAT 112 2 
faeries 4 teaahad 7 sifaary 
waar faat veratal faa WeTATN 2M 
RTA ATT TAT TETAS 

OO Sac sat Saas 230 
fara vat der uyente aaettearigertery 
SUATATITET MATAISET THSUATAIN 2 YI 


Hearing those heroic words, Maya 
delightfully embraced Vidyunmali and said, “O 
Vidyunmali! without you, [ do not want 
kingdom, nor life even; what of other petty 
things? O hero! this pool of nectar made by me 
is life-giving to all the demons. To my great 
good luck, I consider it a matter of utmost 
gratification to find you return from the city of 
Yama. All my treasures plundered in my hour 
of misfortune will now be recouped and we 
shall enjoy them.” 


SBT ST Mat aM aaa Hata 
COAT Cera SF TTATAGTATUNRG 
eral year wat: we Fra: 

Ta fafa amt earl Battafaeafan2 i 


The chief Daityas then saw that well again 


Chapter-136 


and again, so well-designed by Maya and 
rejoicingly said— “O demon folks! now fight 
with the enemies without the least fear for this 
well will restore the dead to life.” 


aa: Margaret wt A 7 TART 


SMT Aaa Wat AT WA: WAI 
TAT TTS NT Tareas 
TUTAQ TET FAME MTA NSU 


Afterwards the demons sounded their terrific 
war-drums repeatedly like the roaring billows of 
the ocean. Hearing which all their compeers 
came out of Tripura instantly to resume fight. 


Cetnraaat: Hens forest: | 
A: HUSeeHeay alse: 112211 
THAT MATA Sacra Sa UTaACAT: | 


STA AMS HUY FStaeHAT: 113 1 
JHA Sa Fel Need Sa AaeT: 
airesat sa won: fret sa a Fata: 13 an 


They all were decorated with bracelets of 
iron, silver or gold studded with precious 
stones, the ear-rings, garlands and fearful 
coronets; and armed with weapons glittering 
like flashes, they became greatly excited. Thus 
arrayed, they came out powerful like acrobats, 
thundering like cloud and sounding like 
elephants with their tusks raised; and fearless 
like lions. 


Bal Sa TMT: at sa arhtar:| 
gM Sa U Segara Tet FedN3 21 


The demons steady like the deep reservoirs 
and powerful like the scorching Sun and 
stalwart like the huge trees, began to terrify and 
inflict pain on the Devas. 


Waa Siy Brearay WeeSrarararfaa: | 
FaetatsMatara SAA SAAT: 113 311 


The followers of Siva, on the other hand, 
also jumped like the Garuda and appeared 
before their foes to fight. 


467 


TERR WHAT SAT: | 
Uh: AeA GIT AAMT Fes AN v1 


Repeated battles were fought between 
Nandikesvara followed by the attendants of 
Siva and Tarakasura accompanied by _ the 
demons. 


aSfaRETSaSTH Voces: 
ay Saray: WHATS & I 
WUT GRAMM a area 
BUG WeeaA Ta aTTTS & U 
They hit one another with swords shining 
like Moon, the tridents glittering like flashes of 
fire and with the barbed arrows. The falling 


arrows and the flashes of the swords looked like 
falling meteors. 


wiinfiraece Freer sa uniter: 
Prater Frat: hod WATT 113191 
angus fattened a 
fereteqeat water or frftHe|r sara} ci 


The soldiers of both the armies falling on the 
ground under the blows of weapons, groaned 
with their last moans, which sounded like the 
cries of beings condemned to hell. The heads 
bedecked with coronets and the ears with ear- 
rings, falling on the ground looked like the 
mountain peaks rolling down on earth. 


Tea: Ufevier ety afte 

feoat: Afracrenre FUT TATE 81 
Tata Asal EI: Wet wT: | 
TTI FAT TATAAUEATNY 01 


The demons struck with the battle axes, 
swords, spears and hit with clubs, etc., fell on 
the ground like elephants. The soldiers of Siva 
rejoiced and roared. The Siddhas also joined in 
the Gandharva fight. 


aera Aa way efadt ata aaa 
Sfa GMa Area ANOT: THETTATINY I 


en 
of 
the 


ng 

of 
ng 
ike 


| —— 


he 
ed 
he 
ds 
ar 

he 


mmm DT i E_———i——iai‘<‘<‘saT TT" 


CT 


es, 
on 


pO 


va 
in 


468 


“OQ Pramathas! you are most valiant. O 
Demons! you are most haughty.” Thus the 
Caranas uttered on the battlefield. 


Ufented: afrena: WET: 
ard Bet aaa: TVA MARTA UY 21 
The soldiers of Siva crushed by the clubs of 


the demons vomited blood and looked like 
mountains ejecting gold. 


WHAT ATATAT: AUTAT: | 
aiey fafeyeey metered FAT: N¥ 3H 


Whereas, other followers of Siva killed and 
wounded the demons with their arrows, trees 
and rocks. 


Qeaaa aera aay gay: | 
Shara fafergaten waeraantteat: sx 


The demons deputed by Maya took away 
those Daityas that were killed and threw them in 
the life-giving well constructed by their lord. 


q Ulla WMkateed: Lae SANT: | 

SAAT ATED AGUA TON ANT: 1S 4 

AH AAT: WAT TAMA TUTTE! 

SMART PAGANS DW AAMAS TT 11% GU 

The dead demons restored to life rose like 

the devas from the heavens with bright bodies 
adomed with beautiful ornaments on_ their 
handsome and radiant forms. Thus, innumerable 


dead demons were recalled to life and instantly 
repaired thundering to the great battlefield. 


aAal: Waardsradd fararae 
earta fe ay art yrecitafeattiwe i 


Those demons shouted out, “O comrades! 
fight the enemy fearlessly. Do not tarry, the 
well will recall you all to life if you lie dead.” 


UE Ara VHT TEAS ATTATTT: | 
gitar cage aeTaTLN 6 1 


Sankukarana, Siva’s attendant of formidable 
shape, hearing those energetic words of the 


Matsya Puranam 


demons hurried to the Lord and said— 


em: Bam ca WaTYT wah 

staat gait: wea sa Tener: 11s 8 it 
site feet Wt ara WUrTyATarsTaT 
Peat feat aa frat Salat SAAT: 114 011 


“OQ Lord! The demons are being killed again 
and again by the Pramathas but they are revived 
again like the parched crops after being 
watered. There is, undoubtedly, a well of 
ambrosia in this fort where the dead demons are 
being thrown and regain their lives.” 


oft famed MgAU EAT 
WMACAATA SUA J STH 1G V1 
aearer: Bvitmant atktarear Braet 
MAMATAHS AEICATA WAY 2 


After Sankukarana had narrated this to the 
Lord, there was a great commotion in the army 
of the demons. The demon Tarakasura with 
terrific eyes, ran towards the chariot of Siva 
with his mouth wide open like an irritated lion 
with his gaping mouth. 

fagt ¢ AEM HiegTat aah 
ara Pagar SBT Sac YTANY 3M 

The great drum was sounded and the conch 

Shell was blown in Tripura; the demons 


emerged from Tripura and beheld the Devas in 
the chariot of Lord Siva. 


TRUM Mast TANS Te 

SBT AMATTGR: TAT FTATAS 114 WI 
ana eaahenamaad: A AA: | 
SAAT AL ASA TOTTI & 1 


At that time the earth quaked under the 
pressure of the armies, and the chariot of Siva 
went down and got stuck in the earth. At this, 
Siva and Brahma became much distressed. The 
chariot containing those two Devas began to go 
down and down without finding any support, 


Chapter-136 


like a learned man without finding an adequate 
place of his liking. 


oTaea 8a Fa We aTeafadiea 
Maes ata aw: Set faradt say G1 
It became supportless and looked dull, like 
the body devoid of potency, the small quantity 
of water during the hot weather, and love shown 
by a twice-born Brahmin. 


wey Text T WATT 

SHEN TSIATO Ta FRTATUTTN 9 1h 

del MAfgheay Ua Wares: | 

GIST HAHA Wi WS TETANY CI 

a faaromeat Feet Ta Were 

Tyaeet Wa Het Hera IMIG eH 

Then Brahma descending from the chariot 

made an attempt to raise it and became 
successful by His great power; and Lord 
Janardana, dressed in yellow garb, assumed the 
form of the bull and placed the yoke on his neck 


and lifted up the chariot by his horns, as an 
illustrious scion elevates his family. 


ararenste erat frig sa vera 
MAATE SA TAT SAAT B11G of 
The demon Tarakasura also jumped out like 


4 winged mountain and dealt a heavy blow to 
Brahma. 


a Aareed: Wale AT Har 
FIAT YETSMATS SHATCATATTINE 8H 
aa cetdertel arate ta: 
TTT TTT Gall HITT: 1G 2A 
Brahma putting aside his whip on the yoke 
began to gasp, seeing which the demons sent 


forth a shrilling yell and thundered like clouds 
to please Tarakasura. 


THAOTAUSA Verges Sway : | 
fafraraact fant ad foci vfs aya: 


469 


BAMA AAA 

HYSATeTH ISSA 
TaSTA A 

Carta afaagayt TAS ATTN I 

aa Ware oan Waara SATEA: | 

TEMA elas: MAM WL AAG 


Lord Visnu, the holder of the disc and 
revered by Siva, trampled over the demons and 
entered the Tripura, in the form of a bull and 
destroying the lotus beds, drank up all the 


Be 


nectar of the well to the bottom and emptied it _ ; 


as the Sun drives away the darkness. After 
drinking this, lord Visnu bellowed and came 
again before Siva. 


TASAT WTA ea: 

METAR ATUOTATTTT | 
WUT MAS: Her TW 

FAT AAV TATA TAT 1G & 

The Asuras, then began to be killed by the 
deadly attendants of Siva and rivers flowed 
tinged red with blood of the slain Daityas and 
all the demons took to their heels like the 


ignorant fool, getting illumined by the teachings 
of the learned. 


a Aareredemena F 
Tet Ue Waa AgAT: 
Ke wage J a wate 
GM WOT VaNSa WaT: 1G Ot 
Afterwards, Tarakaésura, Vidyunméali and 
Maya being overpowered by the showers of the 


arrows of the Pramathas went inside the 
Tripura. 


TOA METe USA 
TSTAITTUTST BA 
fatgeeiegs guar 
way ugefetat: BEN cl 


ter 
ne 


nd 
he 
he 


470 


When the principal attendants of Siva, viz., 
Mahendra, Nandisgvara and Svamikartika, etc., 
laughed a hearty laugh and cried out “we shall 
conquer along with the Moon and_ the 
Dikpalas.” 

ofa sttreed rergerat fayrare 
He fa MT eT MTA ATA SEAT: 1123 & I 


KKK 


CHAPTER 137 


Anxiety of Maya with the drying of the step- . 


well, Maya and other Danavas enter the 
nether world 


a sara 
waa: Ua fat FUT: | 
yt wfafagnifan: smasirrargeyi a 


Sita said— When the Pramathas of Siva, so 
wounded the Danavas of Tripura, who were 
inimical to gods, getting frightened, returned to 
Tripura. The Pramathas also destroyed the entry 
gates (gopuras) of Tripura. 


MUEET BM AMT AITET TAT FAT: | 
aa fare: eat Fe: eitoieaT FMT 1 
The Daityas with the attack of the Pramathas 
became almost lifeless as a serpent without 
fangs, the bull with broken horns, birds without 
wings and the rivers without the water. 


YAMIN Sea Sac ferHAAT:| 
ange fara: aa areata TAT 
FY ARAMA eT ATTA: | 
sara deat tearat wearers: x 
HTM Fares aator wat: WE Tat: | 
AS faAT AAT Ay WANA: ARNG 
qa Aga Cem: Ua Teaser: | 
fast aNt araTeTaaorateat: 116 11 


Their faces had been deprived and they 
spoke with disturbed minds- “What should now 
be done?” Then Maya— the emperor of the 


Matsya Puranam 


Daityas, with lotus like face, spoke to the 
Daityas with disturbed minds— O Daityas, there 
is no doubt that you earlier fought a terrific war, 
with the gods and Pramathas and pleased them. 
But subsequently you have been tortured by the 
army of the gods. Getting terrified from the 
gods, you have fled from the battle and arrived 
here. 


aia frac aah eda Wyre: 
aa AMT Wem: wags Praag 
Undoubtedly the gods are outwardly doing 
harm to us and because of the same the 
fortunate Daityas have fled and are now taking 


refuge in the forest, mountains, hiding 
themselves there. 


el fe arereal TEAR Brett fe Swe: 
BASMA THAT SUVS TATA: 112 1 


It is surprising, great is the force of the time. 
The time cannot be overpowered in any way. In 
case an obstruction has been created over a fort 
like Tripura, it is due to the change of time. 


Ta faaenrt ¢ AEN sarge 
AGM SM Tel SeeT TMA 


When Maya so spoke with his thundering 
sound with disgust, the Daityas became 
lustreless, as the other planets become lustreless 
with the rise of the moon. 


STOTT eA ASST AM: HTT SAAT: 


TATA Tetlemet: FIAT: 1120 HI 
At that point of time the guards of the 
stepwell, who looked terrific like Yama, came 
close to Maya and stood before him, with 
folded hands. 


al AGATA Tet ant a Fafaer ara 
ATA AITT AAA HATTS TT VI 
Wat Mt FIN Hafan 

at A Aad SwISTATAA SATZATIN I 


They said— “O Leader of the Daityas, you 
had built the secret stepwell and filled it with 


Chapter-137 


the water of nectar, having enough of the blue 
lotuses in it. It was filled with various types of 
lotuses and the fish. It has been dried up by a 
god in the form of a bull. Presently the step-well 
looks like a fainted damsel.” 


SUIT: Heat WASA SAMY: | 
aparanares fefnPersrata 23 | 


Listening to the words of the guards of the 
step-well, Maya the king of the Danavas spoke- 
It is painful, repeatedly. 


Wa Waaethal at War free afer 
faAET: TH A WeeeaANT SAAT MATIX I 


Then he said— In case the stepwell created 
by me through illusion, has been drunk by 
someone, then take it for granted that our 
destruction 1s imminent. 


Fgdifagarceramtiaara cae: 
Utal at afe at andl War @ Waaraan ect 
Alas! the stepwell which made the Daityas 
to regain lives after their repeated deaths, has 


been drunk, then it would have been drunk by 
none else than Visnu— who 1s clad in pitambara. 


SA VAT Tat ararrgar aay 

Urea faworafard aafaear WeraTTN eG 

Wren carat anerentated afar 

ay Ugrared fagtd 7 Fd A111 

Who other than the unconquerable Hari can 

drink up the nectar well, built by my 
extraordinary powers? Whatever secrets exist 
with the Daityas, are not left unknown to Hari. 
The boon that I asked for and obtained, no far 
sighted man could ever ask like that. But all this 


is now of no avail. Hari knows all my counsels 
and my mind. 


asa what ee Fgar Fgaraet: 
NAA: HAT TASCA: 1186 1 
a aa ate Wes ANMURasaT: | 
WAM Hela VENT: AAATTATN Le I 


471 


Waal A AANA ATTA Tar 
Pecaiet Aaeit VATIATAAT: 112 011 
qe Peat wa Ala a sfaerany 
AUTUISTAASTN: MATT AY ATCA i 


This 1s a beautiful level country; no trees, or 
raountains exist here; all obstacles are removed. 
But the Pramathas and the Devas have come to 
this place and are harassing me. O Demons! If 
you approve of my plans, I should go over the 
sea where we shall be able to bear the violent 
attacks of the force of Siva and His army like 
that of the wind; I think that their progressive 
strength will be quite checked by the ocean and 
they will feel cut off from their ambitions. The 
track of their chariot will be blocked. There we 
shall fight and kill our enemies. And in case we 
are compelled to retire from fear, we need not 
be anxious, for, this ocean shining and 
expanding like the firmainent will be our source 
of protection. 


Sqr a at de cerarafeareten 

fat sat qt are faa 211 

AU TTT SIT WE aT 

HATA: TOIT MOAT AU 3 UI 

aTaaid 7 fat fata: 

framreqarde aearefayncer i? vit 

Traras Fs Mle MTA aMat fe As 

Faget art tT Svat: BAU kM 

ad Ua fe at MaeAgIM F erat: | 

ad Ua TH TO wea oars I 

Maya, after addressing those words 

immediately repaired to the ocean with his fort 
Tripura; which was fixed there with its 
gateways, etc. When the fort Tripura was thus 
removed, Siva said to Brahma- “O Father of the 
Universe! the demons being afraid of me have 
moved on to the vast ocean; therefore, take my 


chariot there where they have shifted with 
Tripura.” 


472 


fagalé aa: Frat ear Ca TF AT! 

Untard aqeer: Aga: weTATePETN 211 

TASTING Ua Tet STAI 

TEA TTR ATL SAAN SI 

WT AeUMaHyad UegSragatady 

fairies tact fafaraen 7Agea BAT: 

Then, the Devas roared with mirth and 

carried the chariot and all the arms and 
ammunitions to the western ocean. In other 
words, the Devas along with the attendants of 
Siva followed their lord to the ocean where the 
demons had shifted. And when they reached 
there, they saw the fort Tripura with nice 
banners streaming and with drums beating and 
with conch shells being blown, they gave out 


sounds of victory and roared like thunder 
clouds. 


TAA STRONY AAATATATS STAT: | 
eaerafraretatarr: wfarferceyiereratarea: 113 0 It 
aT yarratatta: Wen 

MATT TAMER YAGI: | 
Freyrroraferearet Ba 

Pager Bea Pa MTT gh 


Later on, the demons also made a response 
from their fort by beating their tabors and 
uniting their chorus of thunder with the roars of 
the swelling ocean. Then, Lord Siva, the 
protector of the Devas readily thought out what 
ought to be done and found out how to destroy 
the demons, and seeing them hovering about in 
Tripura, He spoke to Indra. 


faeprrorad Frymaster 

faqiradd aan: wfaet:| 
BRC EIUCT LE UEC ESTE 

Ge MOT eat Aaea3 21 


“Q Indra! the Danavas have now entered 
within the Tripura fort, now go there and attack 
the ocean and destroy it with the co-operation of 


Matsya Puranam 


Yama, Varuna, Kubera and Svamikartika and 
other Ganadhipas. 


faferataentrarastd 
aH Were Ad: Tutor Tey: 
a waa wa: waa 
aeterrteagt FRETUGA 


wrayer safest: 113 X11 
asTenta washed: 
tata Fay USA: | 
TA TaTaaaA ger 
wiataaenta Gears ASTaN3 4 I 


Understanding that Bhagavan Bhava has 
come, in His supreme chariot to destroy the fort 
Tripura, see! those sons of Diti are now resting 
on the salt ocean. O best of the Devas! I am also 
following you, seated in my chariot, to conquer 
and destroy the Tripura fort along with the 
whole host of demons with arrows, clubs and 
thunderbolts; I will make all arrangetnents for 
the comforts of our troops who are ready to kill 
the enemies.” 


Sta Vaated 
SMAATaT: AGENT: | 
Fagegetsraraar att: 
Wrerenfrarcast Siterat TAT & I 


Thus addressed and encouraged by Siva, 
Indra with his thousand eyes full of joy, 
marched on to conquer Tripura. — 


Sta street vergurat frocenaot are 
Tafa ora lelen AAAS EAT: 1123 9 11 


REE 


Chapter-138 


CHAPTER 138 
Terrific battle between the gods and the 
Danavas and killing of Tarakasura 
Ud satd 
wee oF Peg TATU: 
MBM AY: Va MOTTA AAT: | VI 
SATE; Wa SUGIMaT AAT 
Tamara fated WaT SATIS: I 21 
Stita said- O Rsis, having been encouraged 
by Siva, Devaraja Indra, all the Lokapalas and 
Ganapalas, marched forward for the killing of 
asuras from all the sides. They jumped into the 


sky. Reaching in the sky they appeared like the 
flying mountains. 

WATE Sad MUTA SATTT: 

varsratrale: Worarcesrit 

Wea: YU SAT SOUTEAT TATA: 3 

Bt: WA salararar aera WeTAT: | 

SAY: WT ATA ATT: 1X I 

Thereafter, they with the blowing of the 

conches and the beating of the drums, marched 
forward in the same way as the ailments destroy 
the body. In the meantime the Danavas of 
Tripura, observed the forward movement of the 
gods. Then the valorous Danavas cried— “Siva 
has arrived”. Thus shouting, all of them felt 


disturbed like the oceans at the time of 
dissolution. 


Ayala Far SAAT HANSA: | 
FATA ATATATENRTAAT: HI Ut 


Then the Danavas in their terrific form, 
listening to the sound of the blowing of 
trumpets, playing several musical instruments 
started thundering aloud again and again. 


Vaated UAT HATA: | 
yacaey Say YeaAT: UTA G 


Then the Danavas and gods who redisplayed 
their strength started attacking one another. 


473 


STATISTT MAA aa cela 
Wd THA WENHAM: AAI I 
MIT Sale: Waders Saray: 
WaT sa AMR WT sa UfeATT: 
frist sa HOA Asia Sa asec ht 
TSA sa Wael: Wart sa Alaa: | 


VASAT: PAT SA ATTN 


The lion’s roars were being uttered in both 
the armies. Their bodies were falling after 
getting shattered. Then with the thundering of 
the attackers, a terrific war started. It appeared 
at that point of time that many of the suns were 
falling. The fires got in flames. The poisonous 
serpents were creating hissing sound. The birds 
were hovering over the sky, while the 
mountains were shaking, the clouds were 
thundering, the lions were yawning, the terrific 
storms were blowing, the rising waves were 
creating disturbance in the ocean. 


WHE Well eae Aelael: | 
FAGAN rad AA Sa AeA ol 


Thus the immensely valorous Pramathas and 
the valorous Danavas, were strongly fighting, as 
the Vajra remains immoveable inspite of attack 
by the mountains. 


arya faperat ayaqereun Tar: | 
RMIT Haat Aa Frat ATAATH VW 
As the clouds of the time of dissolution 
thunder with the pushing of the wind, similarly 


terrific sound was being produced with 
stretching of the cords of the bows. 


BNET Fe UT Mat: eq areata gat ala 
WeTy Peratseaa whe sea UST LzI 
Terr fare frenfa wre ang ara 
SUMS AAT WATT ATTA 83 


The warriors of either side were saying to 
one another— “Don’t be afraid, where shall you 
run for escape. You have almost been killed 


474 


presently. Attack atonce, | am standing here and 
display your prowess. Capture him, cut him, 
tear him out, eat up, kill him, tear him out.” 
Such words were being spoken. Then becoming 
disgusted they proceeded on to the abode of 
Yama. 


Gemuatetat: cfarehfatarar: Tes: 
HAART chhergretsreec: | VY 

ufeest: “feat: afarnfrapeataanttan:| 
GMAT: VICTeaTaT: Waal Sa Waa: 


POeaUae TTA TATARS CTH 8G A 


Some of the warriors had been cut off with 
the swords, some of them were dismembered 
with the axes, some of them were pounded with 
the mudgaras, some of them were struck with 
slaps, some of them were wounded with the 
pattisas while others were torn out with the 
tridents. The Danavas having the lustre of reed 
flowers, were falling like the forests over the 
mountains and in the ocean filled with fish. 


aa: gage: waar: wat: 
MAYAN PR: AAA ACTA: 1h 2G I 
TA Wear HATA SAT RATT OTT: | 
TA MEM AVN AVIA V9 


When the dying strong-bodied demons fell 
into the ocean there was a terrible noise like the 
thundering of clouds. Hearing which and 
attracted by the gush of blood the crocodiles 
and other huge monsters pervading the deep 
agitated deeply the ocean. 


WAT Hes Halon ATTA: | 
Td WII samt a otfeaq ei 


TI TT 3] cy 1 vd. NAL IA Tul d iiiie : 


FTAA SM HAGA ACTATHLN 28 Ut 
Te TATU A WAM Ward 
MASA TAM FH AeHsickent: | ott 
A WAR WMT: Wee 

TMT Wet FT: AASAT: | 


Matsya Puranam 


we Fart WE g 
AIA Heated falsracey: ti 2 2M 


And they fought among themselves for the 
flesh and the blood of the fallen heroes on 
which they lavishly feasted with satisfaction. 
Huge whales devoured the bodies of the 
demons with their chariots, horses, weapons, 
omaments, etc., after driving away the smaller 
monsters who had also collected there to have 
their share. The sea monsters fought among 
themselves for the sole monopoly of the flesh 
and the blood as toughly as the Devas and the 
demons did between themselves. So there was 
fighting going on in the sea as there was 
between the Devas and the Asuras above. They 
ran about scouring the ocean to pick the dead 
heroes, as did the fighting foes on the battle- 
field above; and the monsters bit each other 
with the same excitement as did the warriors in 
course of the battle. 


PUSH Bate: 
arg tenfatafecen 
Gal Tat AIRC: 
Gund: ASAT: 2 2M 


The ocean turned red by the stream of blood 
flowing from the bodies of the dead and the 
wounded heroes of both the armies, the Devas 
and the Danavas above, and the aquatic animals 
below. The ocean also swelled up, due to the 
blood falling in it from above. 

Us Ferrara 
a Wend AGT Ve: 
FUrST Ta Weal Tera 
FASANO Hea THA 2 3 I 


Indra, the lord of the Devas, and a very 
terrible one, with innumerable army resembling 
like high mountains and big masses of clouds, 
beseiged eastern gate and remained there. 


TAAL ASAT BTET 
AAMAS T TAT 


Chapter-138 


Ha: TEAM ES 
THIS YF WAAAY 


The bright Skanda, the son of Hara, and 
resembling like the rising Sun and the Jambu 
river, beseiged the northern entrance gate which 
looked like the setting Sun on the Asta peak 
with his big army. 


aay farnfeafasr zat 

CUSTaT: UTP 
AUT TS BT 

ana FT aeaeaaa FreaAN 24 Ut 


Yama and Kubera with club and noose 
respectively in their hands held the western 
entrance gate with great force. 


SA ERRATA TAT : 
a Waa SAW ea: | 
TRAVIATA: YA 
SHAT WTA AAT: 11 2G 
The three-eyed Lord Siva seated on his 
bright Deva chariot shining like ten thousand 


suns and the destroyer of Daksa’s sacrifice, took 
charge of the southern exit. 


Tei aya aargatir 
TU Herero 
Walesa: TWAMTAagI 
THaa Wal Sq AYAAT: 11 Vo 
The attendants of Siva held under their 
subjection the various other golden entrance 
gates and the high turrets of Tripura, the Kailasa 
of the Daityas, shining like the Moon, as the 


hailstone showering clouds hide the stars and 
the firmament above. 


SET BaTeT Verfor aaj 
ApeATeAAA eA 

wary wien age 
HIM: WAM FAAS VEN 


THT UTI ATA 
SIMIC TCUCIE RC TIC TOIT 
Fert s aa frat: gate 
ota areata frat aria 
CAAT AMT AAMT | 28 


The Pramathas dismantled the abodes of the 
demons resembling like the rows of mountains 
and decorated with sacrificial altars, and threw 
them into the ocean, thundering ferociously like 
the dark thundering clouds. The attendants of 
Siva also began to drown into the sea, the 
houses of the demons decorated with the trees 
and the foliage abounding with the chirping 
birds which made the women of the demons cry 
out— “O Son! O Brother! O Lord!” “O Father!” 
OQ Dear! O Beloved” and they began to curse 
the Pramathas. 


HAATACAAMTUTATS 


Ter Wt Tantra 
Werat: AAeIaM 
TOIT: BTTAT: WaT: 3 oft 
Thus a fierce battle ensued in that town of 
Tripura in course of which the boys and women 
folk began to perish, seeing which the demons 


angrily came out like the ocean to fight the foe 
and fought hand to hand with them. 


eee Fereraetsy 
EN GCC IRECICET 
WUTATAI Fart 
TE Wat SSATASAIN 3 2M 
As soon as they made their appearance, the 
aspect of the war became more furious in which 
axes, rocks, tridents, spears and thunderbolts 
were freely used and the bodies of the warriors 


were crushed to pieces and fell down dead on 
the battlefield. 


476 


aragtera fatedt a 
waa da fafrerat a 
Wel WaMeHaMi 
Sardar ANTGT 3 VU 
The Devas and the Danavas began to crush 
each other and pursued and attacked each other; 
ii seemed then, that tumultuous roars were 


heard liking the thundering noise of the ocean at 
the time of universal aissolution. 


qe adsl aad: 
HATH AAAS: | 
TURNS PUFA 
Yet Wes UW Tea 3 3H 
The Devas and Asuras bled profusely and 


roared loudly with their reddened eyes. Thus 
fighting went on and loud uproars were heard. 


WET: We cilfaranearen: 
TaqUipanranfean rarer: | 
HA YET YI Wd 
PATA: HTC 3 I 
SLUTTMAT: WY AAT: 
Weal Waar: ataeacia:| 
afery art areert Prva 
GG VAATSAAH ATTN 34 


The thoroughfares of Tripura that were 
covered with golden and marble pavement 
became now in an instant covered with the 
stream of blood; and in the twinkling of the eye, 
those demons became still more hideous with 
their heads, arms and limbs separated from 
them; then, the infuriated Tarakasura came out 
uprooting the trees and was instantly checked at 
the entrance by the all-powerful Lord Siva. 


A Fa WRC YA 


Matsya Puranam 


That valiant and wonderfully powerful 
demon came out of the town after killing those 
that were on the rampart wall and began to roar 
most furiously. 


Ad: W Casa AMSAT AMT Sa: | 

Paria axa fryederota: auf after: i 
That demon shining like the mountains 
though resisted like an elephant, made an 


attempt to catch the chariot of Siva and rushed 
out violently as an ocean floods the beach. 


wa: Geran fairey 

cag Gl a: a freee 
RRC UCC GIGI | 

at GAT AAMAS: 13 2 


Then the three-eyed Siva with bow in hand, 
Bhagavan Ananta Deva and Brahma came out 
to meet Tarakasura. They were infuriated as a 
sea gets infuriated by the force of wind. 


ret frie: atraTeT- 
STATO: AW TASTAT: | 
PAA AUTATAN 3 8 
Uh y Maa 
We ud ae grey a 
TM Wa: Meta OTA: 
We] TPA AAATATOT : WYoll 
Aal VATA AGA FHT TT 
Ud: WAT SMe Uifsareat Prefer y 8 
ad: Wild UY KAT Sat Wat dar 
TS; TAMAR ASVAATUTTAT WY UI 
Sesa, Giriga and Brahma began to pierce the 
limbs of the enemies from the air and thundered 
loudly. Siva, then with His eyes fixed on 
Tripura rested His one foot on the Rgveda 


personified as a horse and the other one on His 
Nandi; He drew His bow with arrows. By the 


Chapter-138 


weight of the feet of Siva, both the horse and 
the bull became oppressed and respectively the 
breasts and the teeth of the horse and the Nandi 
bull fell to the ground. It is since then that the 
teeth and the breasts of the bull and the horse 
are not seen and fixed in a way as to make them 
invisible. 

ANSTEY HATA TEAR ATTT: | 

Salita Teel AR aera y 3 

Tee deat 8 Aa ea 

TAATATA & AAT Mead WAT TMU YI 

Uepeed: YE: Vente: Weal aM 

Sale St FAT ATS TOITAN ¥& I 

agama fearase I TATE al 

aa: faeral at: yRagreRsy Ha: 

Tot: reat anes Fafa ¥ 

The awful red-eyed Tarakasura made a dash 

towards Siva but Nandi held him at bay. As a 
perfumer whets his sandalwood, so Nandi 
sharpened his battle axc and hit the demon 
Taraka with it. Thus struck by battle axe, the 
powerful Tarakdsura, with sword unsheathed, 
dashed against Nandi like a Sarabha of a 
mountain (an eighteen foot animal stronger than 
a lion). Then Nandi attacked him and severed 
him from his body as one tears away one’s 
sacred thread, and roared aloud. When 
Tarakasura was thus killed, the Devas blew the 


heavy conch shells and shouted out loud 
thundering noise. 


WMA Aa Afeaearaag Ui 
Waa: Trees faeanict WalsTaTN vio 
agaaiadt fave year 
Tat HAT ATA: | 
ag ae afsntery fa fane- 
FOTTAT FIAT YS 


Hearing this tumultuous uproar of the 
Pramathas, and the sounding of the drums, 
Maya asked Vidyunmali who was close by— “O 


477 


Vidyunmali! what is this sound that we hear, 
uttered by so many mouths, like the roar of the 
ocean? What is the cause of this sudden uproar’? 
The Devas are fighting and the Asuras are 
fleeing. What is the cause of this?” 


oid Haag Mere 
asm UMatrargrarei 
THI BAPTA: AAT 
PrrTcentrenis frat ¥ 8 
TTS KARA 
ta ara Preset area: 
Taya 
qarrerata fe areal WZ: 4 oft 
WISTS ARTS 
rer 
Glad aaheaca aad: 
WHAT A TAT ASIAN & Vit 


Vidyunmali who resembled Sun, hearing 
such words of Maya was oppressed in his heart 
and said, “O great hero! He who was powerful 
like Yama, Varuna, Mahendra and Rudra, who 
used to shine like a mountain in every battle, he 
who crushed his enemies, he who was the gem 
of your name and fame, that Tarakasura, the 
cruhser of the enemy, after fighting valiantly 
with the Pramathas and the Devas, has been 
killed by them at last. Hearing that Tarakdsura, 
terrible like fire and the Sun with widely 
extended eyes, has been killed, the Pramathas 
have become very glad, their mind and heart 
filled with joy and are now roaring like 
thundering clouds.” 


asa: A WaeTaUaTe 


THN eaaSAract 

We AINA ASAT G VM 
fagraicra 4: aret: ued Wage 
HUT PIUOATL STATA 3 


478 


Maya hearing those words of Vidyunméali, 
who used to behave himself like the white 
mountain in the  battle-field .said- “O 
Vidyunmali! Now we ought not to carelessly 
waste away our time. | will show my valour and 
make this city safe.” 


fase aa: Hal Wass faqta: | 


TONS Sheet: AieaeT verge NG YI 


The enraged Vidyunmali and Maya in 
company with the powerful demons went out 
and began to destroy the retainers of Siva. 


at aA dat fare ait was a: 
OF AT Ot OT Wa: wed: HATTNG GN 
Wherever Maya and Vidyunmali went, the 
Pramathas were severely beaten and they fled in 


preat disorder, making those passages free of 
Devas. 


BT TARTS ANG: Worafetrs aaa: 
Tataees fagaretaniras Gary: 1G GI 
Afterwards Yama, Varuna and the other 
Devas prayed to Siva. They played on their 


tabors, Mrdangas, Panavas, clapped their hands, 
roared and worshipped Siva. 


aeaigumaterafay : 
BTA: Waa 
days FATAT | 4 Ol 


Siva, thus adored by the high-souled Devas 
of immeasurable lustre like the Sun, the sons of 
Diti and praised by the truthful ascetics looked 
like the Sun in full splendour on the summit of 
Astacala. 


ofa stared wergurat fryrere atanrezaet 
BIEN CCTIGCEIA IDE REAL 
KK * 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 139 
Maya entrusts safety of Tripura to the 
Danavas convincing them again 
ad sata 
TAA Bt Tee SAM WATT: | 
Ja SAGA Wa: A YT WAFAT{N Vi 
msgs ad Parad serfer 
Teprel HA Us GON Aeaet: 11 21 
Tat Wed Alt WSS: | 
Tee frat wa eos ufawafern 31 
Sita said— O Sages, thus with the killing of 
Tarakasura in the battlefield, Maya somehow 
drove out the Pramathas from Tripura and then 
assuring the frightened Danavas, he said— “O 
asuras, | am going to speak out the duty of the 
valorous Danavas at the moment. All of you 
Should listen to me attentively. O Danavas with 
moon like faces, the time when the moon would 


be in the Pusya constellation, all the three cities 
will merge for a moment. 


aired fave: aired catfcnensifads a 
O Slt: VAT WT Ha Vt 


ale Ae Ve Waal Aah 


A GRAN SAG ATI 


The time for the merging of the three Puras, 
in the Pusya-constellation of the moon has 
already been prescribed by me. Therefore, at 
that point of time you should all apply the 
methods spelt out by the sage Narada, because 
during that period, whichever god would come 
to know of the merging of the three cities, he 
would destroy it with a single arrow. 


Hai MUN Te Tet a a a afeansaT:| 
apa FAA aa UTetaeaaS FTTNG I 


Therefore, O asuras, you should apply all 
the strength and force possessed by you keeping 
In view the entire enmity and jealousy, you 
preserve against the gods and sages yourself for 
the protection of Tripura. 


Chapter-139 


Tega wa Baws wtaurTy 
faqipdaad aa AAT WNT 
You turn back the horrible chariot of 


Mahesvara, with all the force at your command 
so as to prevent him from shooting the arrow. 


aa Vans enarergreta Ta 
watfaara frag: yerart featna: ci 
When we are able to protect Tripura in such 


a way, the gods per force shall have to wait for 
the next Pusya-constellation. 


fyra waa errata: | 
Ue: fared Hea WATTAATAT: 18 tt 
Listening to the speech of Maya-Danava, the 


dwellers of Tripura, resembling Yama, uttering 
the lion’s roar repeatedly, spoke to Maya. 


WIS aa Ve HAA WTA 
TM HA TMT VR A leat FX WTA Qo 
O King, all of us shall follow your words 
making all the efforts and shall act in a way that 
Rudra-Siva shall not be able to shoot the arrow. 
aa aa aa aga farsa: | 
Haat fat: Yat TOT PATHS: 1 ga 
aed Wad aT Ge Ft wad Fa 
Bea A Maa ARTAVTSAA AN 22 11 
We are moving for the killimg of Rudra in 
the battle ground, today itself. Either our 
Tripura shall remain floating in the air till the 


end of the kalpa, or like the three steps of 
Narayana it shall be free from the Danavas. 


aa a ad Brea areas AY wars 
eaqdteed Al Ach Bald AAT: V3 I 


Whatever duties are entrusted to us by you, 
we shall never fail in that responsibility. Today 
the people will find the earth either deprived of 
the gods or of the Daityas.” 


oft das eer Weifaaare: 
WEY ASAT Yea VHA ATATTATAN BI 


479 


The demons thus delightfully talking 
together went to their abodes and spent the 
night with delight enjoying the conjugal 
pleasures. 


YEAH Wed STAT ARTA: 
TATA TATA FRAT AISTATTN 84 I 
acre sar aa ata fargd 

faal aot arafasr aeeziforat wari 26 1 
fanaa a faatiot erate afer: 
qmaMe AMPA UaS AAR: 

Ted USAAISC TTI V9 


They said “The moon has made His 
appearance in the firmament dispelling all 
darkness as if a great jewel is travelling in the 
sky. The moon illumining the landscape with 
His splendour looks like the goose in a beautiful 
big reservoir adorned with lotuses, or the lion 
sitting on a rock of lapis-lazuli, or the garland of 
glittering jewels adorning the breast of Lord 
Visnu.” Thus risen in the blue firmament, the 
Moon, born of the eyes of Atri, began to shed 
powerfully the nectar of beautiful moonlight 
and bestow nourishment and beauty to al! the 
worlds. 


MaiMated Ty VATE YtSAT: 
TAY Mfetd AHSAN Al VC 


The demons began to beautify their houses — 
and bodies when the Moon emitting His cool — 
rays began to smile on them. 


Tag THAT wares Wey a 
UTTAR ATU SEMA TAT: 11 8S 


The dim oil lamps in the thoroughfares, 
palaces, squares, looked like the budded 
Campaka flowers. 


aal ASy FT aT: HSU: Walla: | 
Ta aaa MATT A 
SAAN AUT SeA AS FETs Voll 


But the lamps within the Mathas began to 


480) 


burn more vigorously. The palatial buildings of 
the Danavas were full of jewels and valuables 
and therefore, did not shine so well under the 
moonlight as the stars dwindle away in the 
firmament. 


agiefimtaararaétt: Garrat 
saga: Hetfaa wad faye wa 2 eh 


The darkness o7 that town was driven away 
by the lustre of the Moon above and the lights 
burning in the rooms below as feuds and chaos 
destroy a good family. 


aferat ft TEOMSTT UaeeaTa THUTTETT 
Taft & ap Wey Berga: grat fargsn 
In the first part of the night when the Moon 
began to laugh, as it were, very loudly 1.e., shine 


on that town in full splendour, the demons 
started their amorous pastimes with their ladies. 


fatten & q quenra wea Waa 
TARTU GAY CASISA: FASTA AWA:11 23 


At that moment the five arrows of Cupid, 
thrown before on Lord Siva, now themselves 
became afraid when they saw the amorous 
dalliances of the Danavas. Both the sexes 
perspiring and getting tired. 

HAUMATVY BSAA atormenay a ylesaeT| 
TNeTG alae Waco Weal ATT 


They under their influence began to sing and 
melodiously play Miarcchanas in their lutes; the 
cuckoo began to coo ravishingly his notes and it 
seemed, then, that the God of love armed with 
His bow and arrow began to be much agitated 
and distressed. 

aaifa smh gd Free 
Raa WTA 
G@ Ufeot at a frat wa 
TR: WAT: HoASERTATN 24 I 


The Moon mmstantly driving away the 
nocturnal darkness and diffusing His rays all 


Matsya Puranam 


over the landscape, reigned in heaven in 
company of His beloved Rohini. 


Pade Bra F eye 
Cafag teat TAHT 
fasted Ureat atte 
CA Ta AACS ATI 2G I 
Some of the women sitting at the feet of 
their lords and placing their palm of hand on the 


cheeks began to shed tears of love which made 
their faces look more beautiful. 


oe > . v. | 
CPM at Tt wa wat Tiara 2 
Some one looking her face in the mirror 
exclaimed “how lovely is my face” became 


quite pleased at the prospect of getting fit reply 
from her husband. 


thenfgeatratayat 


TATUNG AAT: | 
TUT GM Aha 22 UI 


Some being enamoured by the love of their 
husbands hurried straight to them as_ the 
darkness makes its appearance at the close of 
the day. 


Uuiae afacarafas 
fanfare a fret wean 
altad Mearanaraad Waa 
STM AATTY T ATAAT 28 


The lords of some made their better-halves 
drink and some of the women folk rejoiced by 
the conversation of their lords. 


TPA HE AST 

USS AAT TTT 
TATE SET GHG: 

CONG PATH: 3 ol 


The breasts of those women painted with 
sandal, incense and other perfumes looked 


Chapter-139 


handsome like the golden pitchers full of 
ambrosia. 


eT Se aaa UAT: | 
TAMURA THT: 
ALOT Wea YAfAaTeAT: 113 2H 
That night the Daityas played in the hands of 


their beloved and felt quite intoxicated by the 
sweet notes of Vina played by their consorts. 


NF WHA AT MAT 3 21 


Some women threw the arrow of Cupid by 
their enchanting notes and sang highly 
captivating songs from some sequestered nooks. 


We wet aq Tara 
cafe Tt A ATA 
haferat weairaTard 
MRA WA MT Waa 3 31 


Some of the demons pleased their helpmates 
and then enjoyed with them after singing to 
them the songs sung by other ladies. 


GTA: WRT: 
aa we a faye ae 

AA TET 
Wey Bata AlN 3 ¥ It 


The sweet aroma of mango flowers 
pervaded all over Tripura when the tinkling of 
the anklets and the jingling of the girdle of bells 
worn by the women, put to blush the sweet 
notes of the nightingale. 


ararer afar 
HUAAASIS TAT ANT 
Fareaeangnmecrar 
FATA ACH SI ATT ATT 3 & I 


431 


Some women tightly embraced by their 
lords looked exquisitely beautiful with their 
hairs standing on their ends like the earth 
smiling with fresh verdure sprouted by the 
showers of rain. 


Veg UT KUTA 

araTeaay TGA 
TRAN. Wea: 

TAT QAUGAT TAN 3 EM 
an faa efaanitaci 

aurerareitea a fer wAST 
amie & afin fagrett 

Uae HSS 3 


The women folk reposing at beautiful places 
looked highly charming under the influence of 
the moon. They, with their sweet and gentle 
voice, repeatedly said to their lords “Do you not 
see my cheeks, come and throw yourself on my 
beautiful and high-waist adorned with the girdle 
of smali bells.” 


aT VAT WU aeara 3 cll 


The group of the Daitya ladies looked 
exceedingly beautiful like the stars when the 
thoroughfares of the town were lit up by the 
radiance of the moon. They looked like so many 
stars twinkling before the brilhance of the rays 
of the moon. 


seeleceray a UTY 

gry URN Agee arard 
Uae BATT: 

WaT HATUTAAAATET! 3 2 
STATA aT aU 

Tata waishea a efeaATH 
APA ATA: BAN TACAT 

SUG UT BAST MET ANYON 


26 
sitting upon an anthill, and also avoid 
depression of mind. 


faferaa Tafs arettot 7 TERM 

4 Vale: Wer farses a faasstaqit x ol 
Teeny Aaa 
aaah AHatas: Aat Av 2 

T qmMayM fsa AYA: Here 
Taare A arate: Aas 2 


She should not write on earth with nail or 
with coal. She should not be lazy and should 
not remain sleepy always. She should not resort 
to hard work. She should not sit over place 
covered with coal, chaff, bones and should 
avold quarrelling and yawning. She should not 
keep her hair loose, nor her body unclean. She 
should not sleep with her head towards tne 
north. She should not remain impure. 


1 AAT AEET A MRATOT Ae 
AAPCA Acgra AU SAAT AAT ¥ 3 


She should not sleep naked or lowering her 
head. She should also not sleep with a disturbed 
mind or with the wet feet. She should not speak 
inauspicious words, nor should she laugh, 
aloud. 


galy yoysa Fed urges 
Raa: AIA AO SAAT YI 
ATA GHA A AMAIA 


fsaataent wy: rated Tatu xu 


She should always engage herself in the 
welfare jobs, serving the preceptors. She should 
take bath with the lukewarm water mixed with 
Ausadhis.| She should take good care of her 


safety and should remain well-dressed. She 


should engage herself in adoration. She should 
always have the cheerful face and remain 
engaged in the welfare of her husband. 


Se Tatar Wavy AMAT 
staged wear feargrtor g aston we I 


1. Herbal medicines. 


Matsya Puranam 


TY TAM wa: veradieqaa: | 
MT WHOA A AMATI SOI 


She should give away charity on the third 
day of the moon. She should perform vratas on 
the festival days as also the Nakta-vrata. A 
pregnant woman, who specially follows these 
principles, the son who is born of the same 
pregnancy, he is quite humble, having a long 
life. One who does not observe these rules, for 
her the possibility of abortion is always there. 


TARTU SAT WAS TATA 
TART TUM aa HATA FALUN 
Uva Taya TASTE 

ad: A HyaUihst fafaar BAfasan ve tt 


Let you meet with welfare. I am leaving 
now.” Diti accepted the command of her 
husband, then Maharsi Kasyapa disappeared in 
the full view of all those present there. Diti on 
the other hand following the rules prescribed by 
the sage Kasyapa, kept on spending her time. 


ay aeersiste fet: UeTIPTAA 
Fae CAR TTT: 4 ot 


Sec Taya d id ia : | 


USHACATT: VOATACAT Glas & 2 
On learning about this arrangement, Indra 
felt panicky, and at once deserting the heaven 
he reached before Diti and started living there in 
order to serve her. He always remained 
watchful about any shortcoming in _ the 
performance of Diti. Outwardly he was quite 

humble, peaceful with a delightful face. 


SAT THAT: START 
aa aga OT AA F feaaaR NG UH 


But inwardly without caring for the 
activities of Diti, he was concerned with his 
own selfish ends. In this way when only three 
days were left in the completion of a hundred 
years, then Diti thought that she had been 
successful in her mission. 


Chapter-7 


TH HAA Viet faterarran 
AHA Wa: Vikt WHAT WHAT & 31 
Pantene feararignt: Bla 
At the same time surprisingly, feeling 
lethargic overpowered with the sleep, without 


washing her feet, with loose hair, lowering her 
head, she went to sleep during the day time. 


AAAS MEAT WaT MATT WG VI 
ago Wa aa a mt frayrfera: 

Td: AAS Ft AAT: PANT: PATTING GI 
Set: VA Tt Ten Firat Pftareom 
TAS Beasts AAT SATAY EN 
frade Gaga a Wreteet feat: 
VAMATAT TAT T SHSYSTTN G9 


Then finding fault with Duiti, Devendra 
(Indra), the husband of Saci, entered the womb 
of Diti, and tore the womb to seven pieces, with 
Vajra. With those pieces, seven infants having 
the lustre of the sun were born. They started 
crying. But Indra stopped them from crying. 
But when they did not stop crying, Indra then 
further cut off each one of those pieces into 
seven pieces each. At that point of time too 
Indra was in the womb of Diti. Thus those 
pleces getting multiplied into forty nine, started 
crying aloud. 


Sal Farag Ut Wes WA: WA: 

ad: a facarara farafefa saan cit 
TU HA WAM: Asitfaareat 
Patera AAA HSARIS PATTI & 2 


Indra stopped them from crying again and 
again, but they could not be pacified. Indra then 
thought for the reason of the same. What was 
the cause because of which these continue to 
cry after having been cut with Vajra and 
become alive? Then by means of dhydnayoga, 
Indra came to realise that it was all due to the 
glory of Madana-Dvadasi-vrata. 


| 


PATTIE FUTSAL 
AGU Sat: eat A FAATTAATETT: 11 € ol 


URI HATATT TATSATS AAT 

TAA TAA F Tea wafrafai § en 

TAM Sede Vet Wa TAT: | 

Wea AT A AVA We ASHI G 21 

aa: Wats caer: aacater fet WA: 

saa WAI Wage HATH G 31 

Surely it has happened due to the influence 

of the adoration of Sri Krsna, because inspite of 
the womb having been hurt by Vajra the infants 
could escape death. Surprisingly enough they 
were multiplied into several (from one to forty 
nine). Therefore they shall be known by the 
names of Maruts and shall enjoy their share in 
the yajnas. Thus speaking, Indra came out of 
the womb of Diti. Indra then pleasing Diti 
begged forgiveness from her. Saying, “O 
Goddess, I have indulged into this misdeed 
because the arthasdstra ordains that a person 
with wisdom should always try to put an end to 
his enemies. These infants from today would be 
known as Maruts and would rank among the 
gods and would be entitled to their share in the 
sacrificial offerings as the other gods do. 


Gra Hog ead: AAMT: | 

feft famranter agarrateaqii & v1 
ATA AAT Were AAT ART: 

T WAGE GSAT: IG & I 


Thus Indra made Maruts, the gods and made 
Diti with her sons to mount the plane, he took 
them to the heaven. By this way the Maruta- 
ganas became entitled to receive their share in 
the yajnas. They did not join the asuras as a 
result of which they became favourites of the 
gods. 


ofa stared Hergarat anfeait wegent Heagleyitad 
AT AAAS: 1119 1 


x * * 


WN nN <a QO. Oo Dn 


PATA ATAU 81 


Some of the women laughing and burning 
with passion infused by the chiming of bells on 
the girdle of their waists began to tinkle their 
anklets in course of their amorous gambols and 
give suitable replies. The speech of the 
charming women wearing unfading beautiful 
garlands was as attractive as the notes of the 
geese in a reservoir. Their surpassing beauty, 
the sweet jingling of their girdle bells, and their 
attractiveness were the sources of their relief 
from the tortures of Cupid. 


fear eA STAT: 

VITA: WMS TTA 
Tareaynawurena- 

TANTTTRA AAT ATMS 2 


They with their beautiful garments, 
decorated hair, the beautifully ornamented form, 
looked handsome like the moonbeams 
beautified by the stars. 


STE RIMIRICH CAE 
arermafadfaterar feat 
ATT UPTO faperari ¥ 3 


Many of them enjoyed themselves in the 
see-saw when the strings of their ornaments 
broke and made their girdle of little bells falls 
down and the jewels to scatter on the ground 
which began to emit lustre on account of the 
scattered gems, thus it looked like the Moon 
surrounded by stars. 


Walsh ATay ware 
eae Tey A Ale! 
Wears Weal WIS ATAT 


WATS ASASTATT I % UI 


Matsya PurZnam 


The nightingale began to sing seated in its 
cosy foliage on the night lit up by the moon. 
The God of love exhausting His store of arrows, 
began to walk about in the town of the demons. 


Sta da YRSTARUTOTI 
aufe fe ufarrataat aera 
Witte wafasat a 
WATT: HTAAA STAOTTH ¥ & Uh 
The moonbeams turned to the west and the 
night of enjoyment was brought to a close; as if 


the demons would meet shortly with their 
discomfiture. 


frapraat fe ayer a ata 
Ted MIA satay A faaats1 we i 


The moon first turned red like the Kunda 
flowers; then looked like the garland of gems; 
then lost his light; then looked like clouds til at 
last he became invisible, just when the good 
luck fades away, a sick man looks pale. 


WTA ROTA 

VATA AAT: | 
Paratearnyge gta Tat 

mena fifidtaaet AEH vot 


At last Aruna, the charioteer of the Sun 
defeated the Moon. The golden Sun, like a disc 
began to shine fully on the Udayacala, as if He 
is going to overcome the army that was then in 
the ocean. 

het sarees wreTyRTM 


AISEATE. 1 23 Sil 


de CH] + as * ’ lon 


KKK 


Chapter-140 


CHAPTER 140 
War between Gods and Danavas, killing of 
Vidyunmali by Nandisvara 
Ud sata 
Sted 7 Weatgit At ararert Tah 
Teeaae Ace FAT SA ATT: 11 VI 
Sita said— “O Rsis, with the rise of the sun 
with a thousand rays, the entire army of the 


gods started shouting loudly like the thundering 
of the ocean at the time of dissolution.” 


Ua CAM: Veh: TCT 
Alarte: WaSoT ATT WIA BTN VM 
Cf ARTA WHSTPTATIT: | 
aq: faartahtatfeataertin 31 
Then lord Siva, the thousand eyed Indra, 
accompanied with Varuna and Kubera, marched 
towards Tripura. A number of Pramathas, in 
various forms, destroyers of the enemies, 


uttering lion’s roar and sounding the war band, 
they marched on. 


aa aaranfeaeraaatergy :| 
aug tert (eel Gt Welotd FTN VI 
With the sound produced from the musical 
instruments, the army of gods with umbrellas 
and trees appeared like a moving forest. 
AAT THA WZ Beat Te 
GANA SAAT ASAT TAT G 
Finding the vast and terrific army of the 


gods marching for the waging of the war, the 
crowd of Danavas, was disturbed like the ocean. 


cf Ua Ueeey VRAl: WSUS Tar] 
WATS SAOT TAT TACT TE I 
Wal HUTHAT: Aaa Sa Vaay: | 
PY: UATE VAT Sa TUT 


Then the eyes of the Danavas resembling the 
flying mountains, became red. They holding 
pattisa, sword, Sakti, Sula, danda, battle-axe, 


483 


bow, Vajra and the big clubs, started attacking 
Indra collectively, as the clouds rain after the 
end of the summer season. 


Uaganierredt & aaa feat: | 

Wea: Wadedaed: WAI 
Thus Maya with the Daityas— the enemies of 
the gods accompanied with Vidyunmali, 


delightfully engaged themselves in war with 
Danesvara. 


TARAS Hl AAA 
AIA ATMA CAMATA SAI Ut 


There was no hope for survival in their 
minds, therefore they got ready for death. The 
Danava army was devoid of strength like the 
limbs of the women. 


fast Sarelet arse Wesiaa: | 
WIG THM: WATHATT: 11 Qo 
The D&anavas having the complexion of 
clouds, well-versed in the warfare, were 


fighting attacking one another, while thundering 
like the cloud. 


rd Tacs sree Kaa: | 
AUG FEAST HEAT UTA 22I 
The warriors greedy for waging a war, using 
the weapons which were brilliant like the fire or 


the fire flames were attacking in anger over one 
another. 


qaeM: Way sores faethe: | 
ary faertawrh: waft Teese! 221 


Some of them having been wounded with 
Vajra, others getting injured with the arrows, 
while other having been dismembered with 
cakra were falling in the oceanic water. 


TOASTS WYSTATTRUT: | 
fatal det Vat WAT: AAT: VB 
The gods, the cords of whose garlands had 


been broken, whose costumes and ornaments 
had been destroyed, together with the Sivaganas 


484 


were falling in the oceanic waters infested with 
crocodiles and fishes. 


Tet YA AAT Tes 
aayesarart ueeyrat A Aaa ev it 
Phere a waa wa: | 
WaaMt Aa BIA Tatar 
STAT TSM: APTA TaAT V4 I 
TISAI BUTT THT: 
sae: feat PAA TEA VE 


The Danavas having complexion of smoke 
besides the lustre of the sun, shot the clubs, 
musalas, tomaras, vajra, Stila, pattisa, mountain 
peaks, stone slabs and other weapons in large 
numbers which were falling in the ocean. With 
the weapons forcefully used by the gods and the 
asuras, the constellations were frightened. The 
great destruction was going on. 


ATU MAMAS TAT Taft Wears: | 
TATU ag AAAS ATI 29 


At that hour, there was a tremendous noise 
made by the blows of the clubs, the battle axes, 
the bolts, the tridents, the javelins, bright as sun 
and emitting smoke, the big rocks hurled by the 
angry demons as missiles and the falling of the 
weapons and the dead soldiers into the ocean. 
The violent and powerful weapons projected by 
the Devas and Danavas looked beautiful like 
stars in the firmament, and began to make 
havoc on both the parties. The alligators and the 
fishes were crushed to death by the great war 
between the demons and the Devas as small 
beings suffer owing to the conflict between two 
elephants. 


fare a ata faganent sara: 

fag aeaatarel ACUATARAGA: HI RC 1 

at Mishtaat woTeaaAt aT: 

sara afer ytenfe erratstafary: ca: 11 28 


Vidyunmali dashed towards, Nandikesvara 
like a flash of lightning from the clouds. The 


Matsya Puranam 


eloquent Asura, shining like lightning and 
roaring like the ocean said to Nandikesvara 
whose face looked pleasant like Moon. 


Tera F Tease TAP TA: | 
afe faert 0 staapeare are 
7 farce aarti era 2 oll 


“OQ Nandikesvara! Vidyunmali anxious to 
fight has now appeared before you. You will 
never be able to get back with your life. 
Vidyunmali cannot be killed merely by a mere 
array of words in a battlefield.” 


Maat eet aaa aT: 

SATA WECKTA ATaCTSTLa GA: I 2 Vi 
aa Tara AaIsaaT STA 

WR ey aot wfteregsaran 2 21 
ate Maa Ys acts Tyee 
Sort Al Ha AG FT feel HISTO 23 11 
aM ata eat udaat fearact 


Gishe Ut weqarata wepat waar evi 


The eloquent Nandikesvara dealt a blow to 
him and said— “O Demon! This 1s not the place 
for displaying virtue, can you escape me on 
account of your sins? When you can be 
destroyed by me like a lower animal, should | 
not kill you, O destroyer of sacrifices! I shall 
kill you. One may swim across the deep ocean 
and bring down the Sun from the zenith to the 
nadir, but none can raise his eyes to see me 
fully (1.e., one is so terrified by my name).” 


sedated aa ahed fat act 
fatccngon dra: HUT SaTTSAN V4 It 
aaa: TMT GT STAT 


TARATAMTATT TEA FAT 2G A 


Hearing those words of Nandikesvara, the 
Daitya shot a powerful arrow at Nandikesvara 
which sucked the blood of his breast as the Sun 
by His rays evaporates, water of rivers. 


Chapter-140 


Bat Amercoy wert arfercifere: 

sett gayeed fasta marafsa 20 
adda: Fd qh: MOTE ART: | 
fagraicrentivad: Wart UTTAR ICI 


Nandikesvara surcharged with wrath 
uprooted a gigantic tree and hurled it as his 
formidable adversary; which went on in the air, 
showering flowers on its way; but Vidyunméali 
cut it into pieces by many arrows; the tree then 
fell on the ground like a big bird. 


gametes ¢ fea ares ataty: 

Teas Te: BAIS VM 

MIT BANA ayHaweyy | 

aaa Sd OT At Aes Wasa 3 oll 

Nandikesvara became still more enraged to 

see his huge missile thus cut by the powerful 
arrows of Vidyunmdali. He then got enraged, 
shouted out gravely and raising both his hands 
that looked like the Sun and the Moon dashed 


against that fierce and cruel demon as an 
elephant falls upon a buffalo. 


TMT ATT ATA Tea 
fasrrent wert: Wrarara areata 3 gi 
On seeing Nandi come towards him with 
great force, the powerful Vidyunmali hurled 


quickly on him hundreds of arrows and covered 
him with them. 


wrauctamet & vena: Aswad WA: 
A WW TA ed: Waa Tareq 3 2 
faetteacrant fate aftragy tor wa: 

aoa APT afer AAT 3 3 


Nandikesvara thus pierced with the arrows, 
valorously approached the chariot of 
Vidyunmali, and began to push it back with 
great force, which in course of its revolutions 
tumbled to the ground and the heads of the 
horses lowered down into the ground, as if the 
Sun’s chariot had fallen down with its occupant 
by the curse of some sage. 


485 


srrufatasa Wear a fed: Ue: 
SAAT Tal Waa Mette Wraheraqn 3 vi 


The demon then came out of his chariot by 
virtue of his Maya and hit Nandikesvara with a 
javelin. 


aa ¢ farener vite sitar 
fagraict wafers faera weerrait: 13 4 I 
qa firadqaron fatrareqaeatyl 
fae TUAS A FAST SARIN 3 GI 


Thus struck, Nandi took that javelin out of 
his breast and struck it besmeared with blood, 
with great force against his opponent. 
Vidyunmali, hit by it in the armoured chest, fell 
down to the ground like a mountain rolling 
down by the blow of the thunderbolt. 


fagantata Fed Pagar: | 
UY Weald Maa AST SATTATAI 3 19 1 


On the death of Vidyunmali, the Siddhas 
and the Kinnaras adored Siva and cried out 
“Victory! Victory!” 


Are Ofedt eet frst et Wa: 
Sale WAM aaa 3 Cl 


On  Vidyunméli being killed — by 
Nandikesvara, Maya consumed the army of 
Siva by his strategem as the fire consumes the 
forest. 


IE IRGIRCS ICG EES CA 
SUITS ge Uae WraToTa 38 
TY ARM wars: 

GU Tal Fa VOTE Te: 

oe 

Tatag: WAAAY ON 
At F Arnfead: ‘yrettet 

Tat faqrrgatr quryt 
aq a famtacid a fat 

THA TATA CaS & Bh 


486 


They fell into the ocean with their limbs 
dismembered by the trident, their heads 
pounded with the clubs and perforated with the 
showers of arrows. Afterwards, 
Dharmaraja, Kubera, Nandikesvara and 
Svamikartika attacked Maya, the great warrior, 
with various kinds of weapons. Maya roared 
like the clouds and quickly shot arrows after 
arrows and pierced Airavata— Indra’s elephant 
and also Kubera and Yama. 


aa: Bt: WATT Tra 
Arg CMIC CA 
Yaagrergt Tafyar 
TM FATA VIAN Y UI 
At that time, the Danavas, though strong and 
vigorous, suffered greatly from the weapons of 
the Devas and at last fled to take shelter in the 


fort Tripura, as Siva once had to retire on being 
shot by the arrows of Visnu. 


ane WaraHtnecd: 
afaeret eTyAAFaT: | 
uel Way: WTA 
PUTRI Sel AAATATT: HY 3 


When the news spread, that the Sons of 
Danu had retired, then, the Devas sounded their 
conches, tabors and cymbals and the sound thus 
echoed was like that of the thunderbolt. 


aT CATT YSN AY FI 
aS Uly Ha AI TTA Yl 
aat aot fren cateaeaereesd Be: 
Ware fat got faterwefaa: v4 
In the meantime, the asterism Pusya came in 
course of conjunction with the Moon over the 
Tripura fort when it was doomed to destruction. 
Then the three-eyed Siva quickly shot the 
destructive arrow, of the potency of the three 


Devas and the three fires (tejas), on the fort 
Triprua. 


Indra, 


Matsya Puranam 


aA Weer TOT SOTO 
SMAI TVS Had FAUT TATA YE A 
The sky turned red like the burnt gold and of 


the colour of the red cochineal with the radiance 
of the arrow mixed with the rays of the Sun. 


yarn frcaane fart rest: eT 
faragiata dard ae HEltta Faq volt 
aged cad apt vlenfattagd: | 

fatad fafa ures yrermnitt west xc 


Lord Siva, after discharging that invincible 
arrow from His bow, cried out in agony “What 
a pain! Fie to me!” and began to weep. 
Nandikesvara, seeing the Lord repenting like 
that asked Him the reason of it. 


a: WM sretH: HIT UTATAT 
Jara Ares wep: W alse fargeafau we 
FT TAIT TAT ATE eT 
we faucarenia frat waar 4 ot 
Siva, overburdened with grief, said— “Alas! 
my devotee, Maya, will today perish.” Hearing 
this, Nandikesvara darted like a gust of wind 


and entered the Tripura fort before the 
destructive arrow reached it. 


HAE wey WOT: Wie alata: | 

FHATPTRAT TTT TTT TATROT: 1 

AMA YU ATU Tae 

HM TAA FeAl TEM 

aa Jeqe fru aida: 4 2H 

And seeing Maya the lord of demons, he 

salid- “OQ Maya! the time of Tripura’s 
destruction has come; so you should now quit it 
with your quarters.” Hearing those words of 
Nandikesvara, that earnest devotee of Siva went 
out together with his abode. 


VSM: TAYSACNAT TATA 
FRAT Sa ATV T ATA ATAU & 3 
Meda Ta Tater PET gAT: | 


Chapter-140 


SATE Heed TMT TANG VI 


The arrow burnt the three cities as fire burns 
heaps of straw. The fire within that arrow 
divided into three parts, viz., Hutésa, Soma and 
Narayana and began to burn. The Tripura fort 
looked then like a good family brought to ruin 
by a wicked son. 


Teneldacwh Terra a 
Varrenaentar afer: MTA TG GH 
CTA TNT HETMAHNTT A 
Uae AAS Batata AN § tl 
TRATUAAI TAU TT 

Tenor afeareayt SAarTAUsA 

Ceed SEAM Cot ASAT GON 


Afterwards, the houses of Tripura looking 
like the peaks of Sumeru, Mandaracala and 
Kailasa, the beautiful places with gateways and 
perforated works and balconies, the pleasure 
rendezvous full of lovely ponds, the abodes of 
the demons decorated with banners, buntings 
and wreaths of gold were eaten up by the 
thousand-tongued fire. 


MATEY TAY TATTAAY T 
TATA ATA TT AUG CI 
THURS Ta TAU: Wel 

Set SAAT AIT AT: TETANY VU 
HAAS UIT SVT TA: | 

Ut: frerey waged Tenlraet TTI 
SAT PATA Areata Hastert: 
SATE Mas WT UAT 

qa etHeal A Ut Vapiretefan & gh 
wifad a ver ea ferret a Frama 

wir te gad We a efad fe Ane 


The women folk in the amorous embraces of 
their lords in their residences and pleasure 
groves, were also reduced to ashes. No women 
could go away elsewhere. They were also 


4387 


consumed by fire in the company of their lords. 
Some of them cried out with folded hands and 
with tears in their eyes— “O Agni! I am the wife 
of another; O You, the holy witness of all the 
things in the three worlds! You ought not to 
touch me. O Deva! my husband and myself are 
asleep; | have not done anything vicious and 
sinful; therefore, go away by another path 
leaving my home with my beloved.” 


Weal FAYE Mere eAaTFAM 
SAAT STATA SAITAMA & 31 
ATASA FAY Ta Wa TAR: 
Tee TTeTs afer TOA & wit 


One woman holding her infant stood, facing 
the fire and said “O Agnt! I have obtained this 
infant after great privations and it does not 
behove You to burn this darling of mine.” 


HUM AIA Usa SATA: | 
Proacauranel PeSrarfayeorn: 1 § & A 
ae Yate arate Ugelia a fagery 
Uesteayt A: Weresaeaay: 11 & 
aM gett Slenes: Aa We 
TM CAAEAUM UTeataAT SAT: NE VII 
TUM: HATH AUT 
aM 
we Uisfateay 
ee AFATUUTSATPAN & CU 
MUP ATUTAT RATATAT 
TATA AAT 
WHraAA A TAS HAPART 11 & 8 


Some of the women folk threw themselves 
into the waters of the ocean after forsaking their 
husbands. Many of the women shivered under 
the destructive influence of fire and exclaimed 
with bewildering excitement— “O father! O 
husband! O mother! O maternal uncle! etc.” As 
the heat emanating from the houses withers the 


Vita 


488 


lotuses springing in the ponds thereof, so 
consumed the fire at Tripura the lotus-like faces 
of those women along with their bodies. As the 
snow during winter eats up the lotus flowers, so 
did the fire burn the lotus eyes and faces of the 
beauties in Tripura. There was a great uproar 
when the women flew with their jingling 
ornaments and cried out in great consternation, 
on account of the fire produced from the 
destructive arrow of Siva. 
~ IG ~ 
fagiotecaiftr aaron 
SANA Veo Ta 
Udtat TAPAATOTATENIL 9 0 1 


The beautiful abodes of the demons 
picturesque like half moons, with altars and 
gateways, broke down and fell into the sea. 


IM Het Als GATrAT AI VI 


The waters of the ocean became heated by 
the burning fragments of the houses, etc., falling 
there, as a wealthy and good family becomes 
fused owing to the ignonimy of a wicked and 
Vicious Son. 

Ferd: saad WAAT- 
Aang aera 
faaraarara Terataasa- 
Are TASITTATLAY: ATTN VU 


The ocean got over heated and swollen; tts 
inmates, the fishes, the crocodiles, etc., became 
awfully distressed. Then, the whole fort Triupra 
that looked like the mountain Mandara fell 
down into the ocean. 


AMG WeTTeHeT: 
Weanaateayt Tats 
Ma WE ad: WTA 
Wes Ward VATA 31 


Matsya Puranam 


There was a tremendous noise when the 
gates, the compound wall and the various 
buildings inside Tripura, tumbled into the ocean 
with great violence. 


ee etat aera 
WeaTE: A SAAC: | 
\ 8 faat Waist 
SUPA NAT TAHA 9 ¥ 


That Tripura was majestic like the mountain 
with thousands of peaks. The very same Tripura 
with all its habitations became the morsel of fire 
and remained only in name. 


WEA FUT A 
WITUTA ea WAAL 

o:@ Testa Wena 
SATE FATT & 1 


The whole universe together with the Patalas 
became heated by the burning of Tripura but the 
quarters of Maya were rescued with great 
difficulty and found place within the sea. 


qeagt Fa: Acal Sal ARATE! 

VOMNG Aas MT Waalattrat: 19 € I 
AAMT A WIT AT VAG 
wae Taye Prada BaIsAct: in \9\9 11 


Afterwards, Indra hearing of the escape of 
Maya and his great palace saved under the sea, 
by the grace of the Lord Siva pronounced the 
following curse on his house-- “The abode of 
Maya along with him will not be safe. It will 
always be subject to perils and it will not be fit 
to be resorted to like fire.” 


TA TA FT SMA alata WTA: | 
seated ft TUS TAS ATT SAT: | 
AAMT Te MTATATAAT ATI cI 


Whichever countries will be defeated, the 
people of those perishing countries will there 
see this remnant of Tripura and even today that 
abode of Maya exists free from disease and 
sickness. 


| — —- _—— a - 


Chapter-141 


AAA ad: 
WaT Wat It Yeu wrenfad: | 
Tea Tt Maes AAT ATARI 9 I 
The Rsis said— “O Sage! please tell us the 
fate of the house through which Maya made 
good his escape.” 
Ud sated 
gyad sydd aa gama Waray 
eafee 7 Wad: @ ae aaa: 
AAA SAAS AAT Ft UA A Coll 
Stita said— The abode of Maya was visible at 
the place where Dhruva is seen, but the Deva- 
hating Maya shifted to another Loka for his 


safety where he could remain without any 
hindrance. 


aay caat: Alt STATA: WUT: | 
TAN TA Wel Ft eH TAA ¢ ah 
fea: UpT ye werrasa Jeter 
FART WEA: WHAT WIT 
TIA Fade a TWayTAN ¢ 21 
aaa fest: atez 


WAST FATHER NS 3H 
Faas Fat Aa Tey 

WI UG wager Yar 
care eet Bye 

fart Yt AAT Ae XII 


There also the Aryama Devas reside; so 
Maya could not go there. Maya then prayed to 
Siva for a quarter where he could reside; and 
the Lord Siva created another quarter for Maya. 
Seeing this, Indra became pacified and praised 
Siva and went to his realm peacefully. And the 
Lord Siva was worshipped by all the Devas. 
The Devas and the attendants of Siva all then 
caught hold of each other’s hands and began to 


489 


dance with joy. Afterwards when the fort 
Tripura, burnt by Siva’s arrow, fell down into 
the ocean, the Devas alighting from their 
chariots saluted Brahma and the Lord Siva, took 
up the bow of Siva and went to Heavens with 
all their attendants. 

a su aaata wad favaraey 

ferret TT HANG SAT FOEAT IC 4 

One who reads an account of this victory of 

the conquering Lord Siva gets victory and 
success in all actions by the grace of Siva. 


Fagot aha srgy a SH sratacata 
aT TT TOT WRN 
One who will repeat this at the time of the 
offerings made to the manes (Sraddha) before 


the Brahmanas, will reap the benefits of all the 
sacrifices and endless merits. 


S¢ taeda yuaiae Waat Wed 
Se Fen USAT BT Alt VAAN HATTII ci 
The narration of this sacred account is the 
best Svastayana (the way to safety) and causes 
the birth of a male-child, one who will read or 


hear it will go to the realm of Siva where he 
will have everlasting happiness. 


Sta strareet Teraeror faqtraneard faryxeret Ara 
A CTS ITAA A SATA i Yo MI 


KEK 


CHAPTER 141 
Purtirava’s union with the sun and moon 
RAY ad: 
aa Tasarararen ura ata fed 30:1 
Cet: Pata: Ta Tae ae ATT 
Uafeeae Als Wa TET AAAI gH 
The Rsis asked— “O Stita, how did the king 
Purtrava— the son of Id, goes to the heaven on 


the moonless day and how did he please his 
Pitrs’ We would like to know about the grace 


490 


of the influential king.” 

Ud sata 
Waa J Wea HY: HT ATTA 
Gaya Mars Ba aay FraAT 2A 


Sita said— “O Rsis, in earlier times, lord 
Manu has put the same question to lord 
Madhusiidana and I am going to repeat the reply 
he had given to Manu.” You please listen to me 
attentively. 


Wa Jaa 
TA Ae Waals were farertar g 
vere fefa dart aa BE atari 31 


Lord Matsya said— “OQ King, I am 
exhaustively speaking about the influence of 
Purtirava— the son of [4 and his union with the 
moon in the heaven, his achieving of the nectar 
from moon and the tale of the Pitrganas.” 


Aarerargeanta: Faq Tot ae 

Gren afeae: aren strana ax 
Tel UIA Tay AAO Tarra 

Marea Farad Waar AUST G 
Tel a Testa ae fearencreratt 
AMAA ATA aN It 


The Pitrs like Saumya, Bahirsada, Kavya 
and Agnisvata are satisfied with the nectar 
produced from the moon. When the sun and the 
moon are in conjunction with one asterism, the 
Amavasya or when it is moonless day/night, the 
king Purirava goes to see his grandfather and 
grandmother, the sun and the moon in the 
heaven (on every Amdvasya day). 


sara J at aa arerua: a fasta 
Weare Aa: Varafacar STATI 9 I 


Then offering his salutation to both the sun 
and the moon, he takes rest for sometime and 
then proceeds on to his journey after 
worshipping the moon in proper time. 


Ue: Tera fagrata srgfacarean 


Matsya Puranam 


aa: 8 fafa art a querer faqafan cit 
fara HEA a Tat ¢ fea as 
TU 


SLT Te a rm. 


e o 


In a particular month for the purpose of 
performing the srdddha, Purirava— the son of 
1l4, once went near the moon and the Pitrs in 
the heaven and he established both in kuha 
during the Amdvasyd. This is because in the 
Pitr-vrata when the evidence of Sinivali 1s 
short, the Amdvasyd is considered to be quite 
adequate. 


Hea qEw What equa 
SHUT Aa: ATT eV Weta Yo I 
Therefore, finding the arrival of Auhd time, 
he adores kuhii for the sake of the Pitrs. After 


that adoration, he waiting for the Kala, also 
waits for the moon. 


aay F Alarg THAT AT TAA 
ava: wail caqargautcad: | 
POIATA Wictgeld UTA: Vai 


While living there, for the pleasing of the 
Pitrs, he achieves the nectar from the moon. 
The nectar emerges from the fifteen eyes of the 
moon. The Pitrs who enjoy the srdddha like 
those rays very much, while other Pitrs are 
envious of the same. 


aanstrerta at Ala FEAT a a: 
Rares avg fren faferr 7 au ei 
Tage aha aaa | fay 

aean afene: are sitar Ti 23 1 


Pururava then offers the nectar which so 
emerges from the moon to the Pitrs at the time 
of srdddha, appropriately. Thus he offers the 
best of nectar to his Pitrs like Saumya, Kavya, 
Agnisvata and other Pifrs, pleasing them at the 
Same time. 


Ra: wal fared daca fag: 
HR RATATAT AMMATTATN OY 


Chapter-141 


The Maharsis call Rtu as Agni and Rtu is 
also called Samvatsara. The Rtu emerges from 
Samvatsara, while the Pitrs emerging from Rtus 
are called Artavas. 


forthialsaaren fastar aaa: 

foarte dal MATT: | 

MfaTAaT: BAT SAT; GATT FAUT: TAT Vu I 
Wen afer: hen satetarn efa fem 


The Artavas and Ardhamasa Pitrs are 
considered to be the sons of Rtus, while the 
grandsire is also like Rtu and the five Amdvasya 
are also the sons of Samvatsara. Prapitamaha 
and the five gods are considered to be the sons 
of Brahma. Saumya, Bahirsada and Agnisvatta 
pitrs have been thus defined. 


TEM A I Wart gadaawy a 
oper aferard ft eel Fare aT RG 


Those that are Artavas lead householder’s 
life and perform sacrifices and accept the 


sacrificial offerings and are known as 
Bahirsada. 
Tears Gat sittearaal: War: 


ATAU: BM: Teeated Patera V1 


Agnisvatta pitrs also lead householder’s life 
and perform sacrifices. They are also known as 
Artavas. The Kavya pitrs are known as the 
husband of Astakas. 


ay Mae ar: Berea ufTaea: | 
AAAS ATATATTAAT: 1 NC 
GRY ATEAT THT A ATTA: | 


MMT ARM: AAT FAL 221 


Now hear about the 5 years. Agni 1s the 
Samvatsara, the Sun is the Parivatsara, the 
Moon is Idvatsara’. the Wind is_ the 
Anuvatsara’, the Rudra is the Vatsara’. These 


1. A full year. 

2. The rainy season. 

3. 4th year in a 5 years' cycle; the 5th of 5 cycles of 12 
years, in Brhaspati cycle. 


49] 


are the cycle of 5 years. The Moon presiding 
Over them, in due time, sheds ambrosia. 


Ud Wat eaHaM: STATA a 
ATT THAT ATCT TAT: Hl 3 0 I 
TeraTad Ba Aha athe fared: | 
aa: INGA Ae faqut araafaary 
waa Barara wg da fF eM 


Wherever, Purirava stays and for whatever 
period, Soma satisfies for that period by his 
rays, Somapas, Usnapds and all the other 
Devas. The Moon sheds ambrosia every month 
and the Pitrs get satisfied by drinking it. Thus 1s 
described about the nectar and honey. 


aa: Wage aM Gatsaraayan 
MENT ATT AT FT ATAU 2 VI 


The Sun acts daily (in the bright fortnight) 
as a feeder through His Susumna ray when the 
store of lunar ambrosia is all drunk out by the 
Devas and the Pitrs. 


FA: ver a Het: Yat BraRUTTT 
QUA APTANA HAT 2 3 1 
Hel: AAT HOTT: Wao Meas a 
Usd A PSA AAT TAU VI 
The Moon waxes in his phases day by day 
by thus being fed through Susumnéa ray in the 
bright fortnight. The Moon wanes in the dark 


fortnight and waxes in the bright fortnight. The 
moon 1s nourished thus by the Sun. 


Wana B syad Wat: AEgUVSt: 

VSM: AT: YaeTIIsaS: HAT 

ea: Gage att yor wenferasas 24 
The Moon looks full and white on the full 
moon night (Pirnamasi). In this way, the Sun 
by means of His single ray increases the Moon 
and makes it full of nectar. The Devas first 


drink the nectar of the Moon; then the Sun 
drinks. 


4. A year, the month of Margasirsa. 


492 


Wa Uses J USHA AAT: 
TART APTATTAS - HATA 2 & Ut 
The Sun drinks every day one dight and 


does so for fifteen days; He, again in the bright 
fortnight, fills it up by His Susumna ray. 

CITI Yat Tat a He: 

THETA ft FON: Ya MANIA A VV 

VanTearad BG: attad a WA: WA: 

Tyga Gey Va: Wer HOTAT VI 

Sere AGMA: Va aaaaS 

ard: AE: BT TaTyATUTAg: 11 281 

The phases of the Moon that wax in course 

of the bright fortnight fed by Susumna, wane 
during the dark fortnight. In this way the Moon 
continues to wax and wane, consequently, the 
full-moon 1s called the receptacle of nectar. He 


is luminous with the fifteen nectar-giving 
phases. He is, therefore, called Pitrman. 


Id: WT waaahy yao Bey aT: 
GN Tat allot strgeiearaurad i 3 01 


Now the periodical junctions, Parva Sandhis 
will be described. These are like the knots of a 
bamboo or a sugarcane joined to one another in 
a circle. 


FATA AT: WaT Yer: POM SF VA: 
Wtotrearey A Wel WS: VT 3 I 
aanraea Valter fadrarradth a 
AMAA TATA THATT 3 2 
Tag Tao wet wawentaetery 

TS ATA Et Hat Het FAT 
Matglaa WHA: let HASTUTSA 13 31 


The year, the months, the dark and the bright 
fortnights and the full-moon night are the knots 
and junctions and the Tithis, the second, third, 
and so on, form the parvas of the fortnight. The 
Agnyadhan or the maintenance of the sacred 
Fire ought to be done in this Parva Sandhi. The 


Matsya Puranam 


periodical junction of the Anumati or Raka with 
Pratipada lasts for only two lavas (in the 
afternoon). 


Ua: FOIA Hieisaaswaea 
arene Wasee Barer: Torna 3 xi 


The Pratipada of the dark fortnight occurs in 
the afternoon and if it occurs in the evening it is 
called the period of Pirnamasi. 


edad fad qt eared IMRT 
airdded da ay craraht Fara 34 


When the Sun is on Vyatipata, the Moon is 
above the line of equator and is situated in the 
Yugdantara position. 


WUT aa Far Wea TTT 
aq a wirreraateranret SraTerat 3 & 
G da Aleman: WS: Arerstyatad 3 it 


The Pirnamasa and Vyatipata then see cach 
other. The Sun, Moon and the Pratipada tithis 
remain, then, in this state. Endless merits result 
if salutation be done to the Sun at this time. This 
period is known as the sixth Satkriya-kala. (It 1s 
known as the 6th period.) 


yore: wat ¢ ufraterg gfora 

TAMA Ae Toa PPTL NSC 

Tera Ut yaa wert fean 

PSNI J YUtarcaforat BAT 3 81 

Tear frat cad: Tel 

TESTA WUaTUTAT APATH ¥ ot 

On the completion of the phases, Pirnima 

occurs during the periodical junction of the 
Moon in the night when the Moon is full; hence, 
that night is called the full-moon night when the 
Moon 1s greatly pleased. When, by the mutual 
opposition of the Sun and the Moon, the 
Piirnima takes place in the afternoon, then, the 


evening is said to be the Pirnima when the 
Moon shines with all His phases completed by 


Chapter-141 


the Sun. The Devas and the Pitrs adore Him 
(the Moon); therefore, He is called Anumati and 
on account of the full-moon, it is called 
Ptirnima. 

seat Wad Tenorarea Front: | 

Grtedd eT Teaft Haat fag: en 


The Moon is highly luminous on the night of 
Purnima and therefore, He 1s called R4ka. 


ATAU F Tat geet 

Val USM Waa Ta: BAT 21 
Seva ATATATATeAaT er Sei WATT 
Fares WaT FT Seas SAAT 31 


The Sun and the Moon live together on the 
same asterism on the [5th tithi (lunar day), 
therefore, 1t is known as Amavasya during the 
dark fortnight. The Sun and the Moon during 
Amavasya face each other, therefore, it is also 
known as Darsa. 


at gt caramareat a are: date 
FIN: HEM Ware FWA YI 
After the Amavasya day the junction with 
the Pratipada (first day) lasts for two lavas and 
this period is known as Kuht for two letters in 


the word Kuhu correspond with the two lavas 
(the duration of Kuhd). 


SIA AMT WeATEMTAS a 

feat aged Wat J Wa wa T wT: 
Ga AsaRAT: WARATT AN wu II 
TOUT oral St T HeMarfaaeay Te: 
MarePaAUA FEAT: TAHUSCATN ¥ & I 


When the Moon 1s visible on any Amavasyi, 
He unites with the Sun in the afternoon and on 
the following morning in the Pratipada of the 
bright fortnight, He rises along with the Sun. A 
difference of a period of two lavas is seen at the 
noon time between the Sun and the Moon. 


Raa TaMUSeTITT a 
G aerated: Hel awe a ave: | 


493 


Wied HIATT F WATT voll 
feat Vat aaa atrorY’t gael a ah 
Tea TANTATEM Weld Al fearari wei 


When the Sun and Moon separate, that 
period is termed Anvahuti and is known as the 
time of Vasatkriya when the performance of 
Vasat has been ordained. This period in the 
Amavasya 1s known as Rtumukha or the face of 
the season when Sraddha should be performed. 
When the crescent Moon units with the Sun 
during the day, that is the time for the above- 
mentioned Parva. 


helt Aileaerane TAT ATATCAATEAT 

aeHTTH AAT BAT SATA HE: WATS 

Tettrarctrurot J attorerat Fryrent: | 

smaTaren fash fadtarett Tet PATH & ott 

APA Tat @ Peart Hee 

Uda tera: Het: HAAAT HE: TATUNG vi 

The time when the voice of the cuckoo 

“Coo” ceases, 1s called “Kuht”. When the 
waning Moon of the Amavasya enters into the 
Sun, that period is known as Sinivali. The 
periods Anumati, Raka, Sinivali and Kuhii last 


for only two lavas. Kuhi lasts as long as 
“Kuht” ts uttered. 


sea arent ad fea: Wa: 

YAU Torey Tear hrawefehay: 1G 2A 
azo A a ufo sh 
wMirreitraey Cetera TAT G 3H 


The union of all the Parvas lasts for two 
lavas and both the unions, before and after, are 
equal. The sacrifices and Vasat rites should be 
performed as prescribed during those periods. 
The Vyatipata yoga of the Sun and the Moon 
(1.e., their conjunction) and the Ptrnima (their 
opposition) are productive of the same fruits. 
The union in the Pratipata tithi lasts for a period 
of two lavas. 


494 


Ie: Hears: AWABl Rea: Ba: 
WAAAVSe BA Udchiet: Hel: BAT U4 vil 


Kuhi and Sinivali last for two lavas. When 
the Moon separates from the Sun, one Kala 1s 
known as the Parva period. 


Tee BA: Taevai J afore 
amie: tala Hentafearaardi & vit 


Every day the Moon waxes by one digit 
when on the fifteenth day He becomes full. 
Hence, that day is termed Pirnima. 


AUNTIE BA Het a ated atsyin 
aaa fay: TAevaT WaT ATG EI 


Then the fifteen digits of the Moon are 
visible. For this reason, it was stated that after 
the fifteenth tithi, the Moon wanes; there is no 
sixteenth digit of the Moon. 


seid frac ea: ara: UAT: | 
Mal RdalsAear Casas Fy oi 


These Devas and Pitrs are the drinkers of 
Soma (Moon) and the nourishers of Soma 
(Moon). Artavas, Rtus and Abda Pitrs are the 
nourishers. 


aa: TE wees faquareasreg a 
aati aa BT Vea Wile steer da ya 


Tart Wt: MAM Ae AT VATA: | 
amar fe wfaas fer qantaaegariy ei 


Now I shall narrate about the Pitrs who eat 
the libations offered to them during the Sraddha 
ceremony; how the libations reach them; what 
are their ways and future existences? and how 
great are their powers? Where the departed 
souls go and where they do not go cannot be 
ascertained even by rigid tapasya (austerities). 
What to speak about those things being seen by 
these mortal eyes? 


ary carfeacshd fart eitfenanr: Cat: | 
ae a Tea: ATASIT FEST oN 


Matsya Puranam 


afe TMNT WAY STATA 
wy Ua Welefat argahe ATT eI 
The Laukika Pitrs, by their severe penances 

in this world have been able to go above and 
join the Deva Pitrs, other Pitrs get satisfied 
when the people in this life, perform their 
Asramadharma and are wise and perform with 
faith their Sraddha ceremonies. 


TATA ATA AAT Mara hat 
sea fara da Uaera ARATE 211 


Celibacy, asceticism, sacrifice, begetting 
progeny, performing ceremonies with good 
faith, learning and the giving away of food are 
the seven kinds of Asramadharmas. 


SUA F VT AAI e UTA 
aed fugit: are yere : aad eta 
canter fafa aed figued sured & 3 


Those who practise these things for the 
whole of their lives, go to heaven, where they 
live in the company of Usmapa, Somapa, Pitrs 
and the Devas, and they enjoy bliss there. 

Wad Waa Se Atha T Al 

oat Frama act fe qenetstey GIs ew 
Waar fe YARRA area: | 
Ue Hae: AAT ATTRA AG I 

This is current amongst men that he who has 
got a son and who performs Sraddha with 
honey, tila and water, reap the above results. 
The Pitrs of the family get satisfied. These 


human Pitrs reside in the region of the Moon 
and eat the flesh offered in Sraddha. 


WAST Fa aa ASI: BAA 
TETTETG TaaTATET farerfsataAT: 11 & & I 
first 2S STAT: Maya TATA 
CGNOAT MA AAA: 11 & 9 
caigentayens yayeny fran: | 
eterarentasyared fargettad Treateta: 1 & Cl 


Chapter-141 


But, those, who on account of their narrow 
minds have fallen in their orders in course of 
their life of action, and have not uttered Svaha 
and Svadha, go to the realm of Dharmaraja in 
various forms and repent for their past deeds. 
These beings, with their long and thin bodies, 
having beards and void of garments, prowl 
about hither and thither oppressed by hunger 
and thirst. 


afeareiernt ventas aa: 
UVa eT: HAA SAAT NG 2H 
Being thirsty, they go about in search of 
rivers, lakes, tanks, wells, canals, etc., and being 
hungry, they go to various places in search of 
food. 


TAY UTA & AAT TT at 

MTT AAT A HTMTTTAS FATT 9 0 I 

sfaaaa Ua UTA: Ta: 

TAIT F TAT Ss: FaararaMPAATA 9 BN 

But they fail to get their desired objects. 

They are driven away from every place and the 
messengers of Yama throw them in various 
tormenting places, such as, Salamali, Vaitarani, 
Kumbhipaka, Ardhavaluka and Asipatravana. 


Thus they suffer all sorts of pain as a result of 
their karmas. 


Tt MARAT SRSA: 

Wade sy at: fovea ai 

WA Ta WTA SAN 9 2 Ut 

STAT AAA WET A a Pee 

The oblations of three balls of rice offered in 

the name of the friends that are suffering in 
hells reach them and are taken by them which 
give them relief and satisfaction. The kinsmen 
and sons, while offering oblations should offer 
them on the Kusa grass strewn on the earth; 


they are to recite their names and gotras and 
have their sacred thread on their right shoulders. 


we WaT SF Tate TAHA: 193 1 


495 


TREC tdi febary airg 
TaN Maat ATA AeaS ATI 9 ¥ i 
TATA A TA | WTA 
ale aaa Uy faferat wferafeaa 


Oblations should be offered, for those who 
are not suffering in the hell, but who are born as 
animals and birds, etc., (five lower animals and 
trees, etc.). The Sriddha oblations reach the 
Pitrs corresponding to those births, as their 
foods and give them satisfaction, wherever and 
whatever they may be. The gift of grain and 
food, earned honestly, given to a deserving 
person at a good hour 1s attained by the manes 
in the form of their food wherever and whatever 
they may happen to be. 


WATAAM ad TA TATaTAS iA & I 
TMT We WATE aca farate ATTA 
day TTS Bra Wa: mae FT TANG I 


As a calf recognises her mother cow in a 
herd, in the same way, the charity given after 
reciting the proper mantras in the prescribed 
way unmistakenly reaches the manes. It is the 
power of the mantra that carries the oblations to 
the manes. 


Ud Glanet Mg Agled TaTata 
TAHA: Wats Wareary WTA Volt 
TATA: WaT wha area aa fe 
PUTTKACT Ysa: TATA WaT 9c it 


The giving of food with good faith 1s 
equivalent to the performance of Sraddha. So 
Manu says— The Sraddha thus performed with 
devotion reaches the manes in every domain; 
this is what Manu has said and Sanatakumara 
corroborates it after realizing the passages of the 
departed souls with His supernatural vision. The 
dark fortnight forms the day of the Pitrs and the 
bright one their night. 


sed faaat car cay fray ai 
saratuat wa saws frat fefaive 


496 


in this way, the Pitr Devas and the Deva 
Pitrs are mutually their begetters. These and the 
human Pitrs live in the firmament and drink 
soma. 


Ue F faa sar AAEM: farts a 

foe frarmesta ata whose: coll 
sere fara: sep: foro area 
Uateaguerd fe yaar Fart MATIC eI 
Sag UAT AAPA: | 
wae aga da faq da TOTTN ¢ UH 


The fathers, grandfathers, great-grandfathers 
are the human Pitrs. Thus, I have described to 
you their greatness and about the Sraddha. | 
have now described to you how the king Ala 
conjoins with the Sun and the Moon; how he 
attains his Pitrs and performs Sraddha with 
devotion; the Pitr tarpanas, how the oblations 
offered in Sraddha reach the manes. 


Wau da A: Ble AAA Th 

AAA AAA WT WT VAT 3 

aaa a4 aad afad aaeiorany 

yet Uae set freA cv 

I have thus explained to you about the 

Parvas and the hells that form the part of the 
creation. Everything has, thus, been summarily 
described. It is very difficult to enumerate them 
adequately. The person desirous of this well- 


being should devote himself to all these things 
with good faith. 


Raa eae Wa At wal: 
faeoragetter a: fee SATA a4 


[ have thus briefly stated this chapter of 
creation of Svayambhuva Deva, now tell me, O 
Rsis! what more do you wish to hear? 


A aeAAT LOTS ea STATA SEATTET : NN OY 2H 
KR 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 142 
Description of the Yugas 
RAY ord: 
aaa BA A: Usd TaINAS A 
wet Fret deat a araftresre fara 2 
Rsis said— “O Stta, in earlier times, in the 
Svayambhuva Manvantra, four yugas have been 


mentioned. We would like to know about their 
creation and number, quite elaborately.” 


Wa sara 


gfrctgwagt Fat gy MTTSTETy 
Umeda waa gears Fara 
AMATO Waa Paes AAT 21 
Sita said- “O Sages, I have already 
described about these four yugas in the context 
of the earth and the sky. Still incase you are still 


eager to learn about them then I shall explain 
the whole of them exhaustively.” 


cifemet MANO Freres J ATE 
ale weer aaah q aT 3H 


Based on the worldly evidence of the 
humans and calculating on the same basis | am 
going to explain the duration of the four yugas. 


HUTT IM Tel ca 
fayred HBi WRIT TT 

fayrenctsya Waededheagra Was AAAI YI 

wants fata Yat arqacitferch 

TA: TAA Yat AE SHOTS I 


I shall first state about the measurements. 
Human years are determined by the ordinary 
experience of men. This is the unit. The extent 
of the four yugas will be expressed on the same 
unit. Fifteen twinklings of an eye, form one 
kastha, thirty kdsthas make one kdla. A 
muhurta 1s made of thirty kalas and a day and 
night consists of thirty muhurtas. The sun is the 
dividing factor of the day and night. The night 
is for sleep and the day 1s for work. 


Chapter-142 


frat wae ara: wfawnrreat: TA: 

PUTAACTA YA: TACT WaT € I 

faye Haat Hat: Gal ara: A eA 

We Ato ATA ap UNA Tl 

Ua: dara Be AAT faerie 

WAN WAT ao aad TAT 

faut aft aatfor eeearatha go atfor ot 

aM Ut Pallant Wrat: faders chifratu ci 

Cicer WATT steal Bl UTE: ya: 

Uateereltataeren afeet afte 

feat Tae ad sfaurreat: TA: 

ery Ageeda Taal afer 

Ud Tae feet Waa TA: TAI Qo 

One month of the human is equivalent to a 

day and night of the Pitrs. Its division is like 
this— The dark fortnight is the day of the Pitrs 
and the bright one is the night for them. Thirty 
human months make one month of the Pitrs. 
The year of the Pitrs consists of three hundred 
and sixty human months. One hundred human 
years are equivalent to 3 1/3 years of the Pitrs. 
One human year 1s equivalent to one day and 
night of the gods and its division 1s like this— 
uttardyana (six months, when the sun moves 
towards the north) forms their day and 


Daksindyvana (six months-- when the sun moves 
towards the south) becomes their night. 


Fagen ¢ aarfor feet arse WBA: 
MITA Piet Tea feet AAT a 
ada We dead feor we fate: Baya: Va 
ain auger afedateadta a 

feet: HaCaT SIT ATWO Weathers V2 
AO ACASATUT ATTA WATOTA: | 

fae aaifor wa: BAA: 11 V3 I 
Ta TA Bear aero wero aT 

aaa safasla gatarat: TAA LVI 


497 


Weta AseAMtor ARTO ATTNTCUT eT 

afeaa dean tern ¢ we 

foot Gee FT We: AeMfaal TAT V4 

Thirty years of men is one month for the 

gods. A century of men is three months and a 
few days of the gods. 360 human years make 
one year of the Devas. 3,030 years makes one 
year of the Sapta-rsis. 9,000 human years, make 
one year of Dhruva. It is called Dhruva 
samvatsara. 36,000 human years make one 
thousand divine years. 


sedated fer aera fea: 
fetta WAU Bae WenfeTe 2g I 
Seat at ae BMT HASTA 

Sa IA WI a ass ATTN voi 
yes Hat AM areata 

amt a afesta amit ufracraqi vc i 


The duration of the ages have been laid 
down on the Divine units. The Bharatavarsa 
notices four yugas or ages, viz., Krtayuga, 
Treté, Dvapara and Kaliyuga. Of these Krta or 
Satyayuga is the first, Treté 1s the second after 
which come Dvapara and Kaliyuga. 


TAA: AAMT ARTO AH PTA 

TT AAA TAT AAT TUTE: 11 28 

Sry TaRay Teg a PTT 

Wane Radd Aga WA AN oll 

at ator aeenior reenact fag: 

TTT TAM VAM TRA: ARATTT AA 2 2h 

Satyayuga consists of 4,000 Divine years. Its 

Sandhya’ consists of 400 Divine years and the 
Sandhyaméa’ of the same number of years. 
Treta consists of 3,000 Divine years. This 1s 


what has been said about it by those well-up in 
calculations. Its Sandhya 1s made up of 300 


1. Union, morning, evening, twilight, the period. 


preceding a yuga. 
2. Twilight, the period at the end of each yuga. 


Di 
SIL 


du 


498 


Divine years and the Sandhyamsa is also of 
similar duration. 


Ua Bet T Vea FT aa 

Usa ARNO Hota Walther: 

FVM A aaa MT MRA VRATAT: GAN 22M 
UM Bewaeat Bra FJ Aiea 

a FAT gat a ales BATAAN 2 311 


Dvapara consists of 2,000 Divine years and 
iis Sandhya and Sandhyamsa of 200 years each. 
Kaliyuga is of 1,000 Divine years and its 
morning and twilight are each of 100 years. 
Satyayuga, Treta, Dvapara and Kaliyuga taken 
collectively last for a period of 12,000 years of 
the Devas. 


TA VAT: WHT AAEM Aa 
gat a fa ta da dem 
AMAMASAT Het PTA AAT 2 ¥ I 
wa J maT yor g ares Fraga ya 
WOU AASANNT ATMA A ATA 
TATED TSI ATAU TAMA V4 
AS MAMTA THOTT ATTSTATT FT 

AG aTAAT AAT FIT FTA EM 
sent Faas waaiir ¢ afer 
Blayred aa Beato | AeA 
Uaenferyy WH AAT WATT: 11 29 


Now I shall teil you their age in the years of 
men. The age of Satyayuga in the years of men 
is 1,728,000 years; of Treta 1,296,000 years; of 
Dvapara 864,000 years and of Kallyuga 
432,000 years. 


UAT AYMARA AIGA Neer 
ATTA CMA TAT VAG: TENN 
UAT MPP TMSM F Aileen AH AAT: | 
HAAMCTAT A AANA 2 8 


The period of the four yugas along with the 
duration of their Sandhyads and Sandhyamsas 


Matsya Puranam 


have thus been described in the year of men. 
The four ages passing for seventyone times 
make one Manvantara. 


Tae TEN F TTT Prater 
Waar TAT HIST: ASMA: ATM FET: 113 
TM MAATATTT SM AMA ALTTT: | 

ASANO FT FlAayraaAABT TATA AM 3 gM 


I shall now explain to you the period of a 
Manvantara in the years of men. One Manu 
takes the place of another in 311,032,9801/2(?) 
years (it should be 306,720,000 years). 

ayia auifor arawtartereary vel 

TT GT TANT Weal feraT 3 20 

feat BT WAN Wagaradt TAT: 

AEA MAA: TA St USAT BB 
: — pert 

WOT See Tt: Ge Weather: 3 vt 

UST ATM F Afeear Maal: | 

HAUT UGA A TAT TAT 3 4 I 

Urea SoMa aaa: 

AA WHA: HA: AT VHT FET 3E I 

cacao feo Bat staf STAT 

ST ARNT Ht AAT 7 A 301 

Now I shall give you the duration of a 
Manvantara in the Divine years. It is 140,000(’?) 
years in course of which the four ages come and 
go 71 times when one Manu takes the place of 
another. At the completion of the kalpa which 1s 
14 times one Manvantara, the great dissolution 
of the world takes place which lasts for a period 


twice as much as one Kalpa. The age of the four 
yugas has been thus described. 


Taras wae grat afore = 
Braet gt fea ae A META ZCI 
SUM HATA A BTA! 
AAMAS AHA 3 8 I 


Chapter-142 


ARH AATAN Ye agate Frater 

Now I shall tell you the creation of Treta, 
Dvapara, Kaliyuga. I told you before about 
Satyayuga and part of Tretayuga. I did not tell 
you anything about the remaining portion of 
Tretayuga, Dvapara and Kalryuga, on account 
of my having been engaged in the narration of 
the generations of the Rsis. I, therefore, tell you, 
now, about the Tretayuga that was left unsaid. 


ay FATT WA: AAA A 

tt want yard FeO F Walfeaat: un ¥ ol 
SMe: Aaa: 
SMfeager att at WAdAS TAI ¥ VN 
WENT AH Ce ARATAIUT 
AUIAATARTA TA: TATTSTATS TANT ¥ 2 
GA TAA FAA ATA AM 


There was Manu in the beginning of the 
Tretd age and the then Rsis dictated Srauta and 
Smarta dharma by the light thrown on them by 
Brahma. They wrote on marrage, Agnihotra 
and other Srauta dharmas according to the Rk, 
Yajyuh and Sama Vedas. They also gave out the 
injunctions of the Smrtis, truthfulness, 
Brahmacarya (celibacy), Varnadsrama and other 
Acara dharmas. 


AN YAAATATATAOTT THAT BIS 3 
TART TAA Sat AAT Aa: | 
aagqyah a MAHA Ally it 
agra Wateytreacantate: | 
aifeaed J tart Meda” A ATU YG I 
mare Fagrrsret UT wari 


In the beginning of the Tretayuga, the Seven 
Rsis and Manu by their hard tapas got the 
knowledge of the motions and places of the 
planets and stars. Also all the mantras were seen 
by them and perceived in their hearts, by 
thinking about them once only. In the beginning 
of the first Kalpa, those mantras (or laws of the 


499 


Universe) arose of themselves in the minds of 
the Devas, in testimony whereof, those who are 
Siddhas (perfect) and others also can have the 
knowledge of the Mantras. 


TAA SAG HeUIT ASAT: | 
fA St Yea Maa TAT: IX & I 


In the past Kalpa there were one hundred 
thousand mantra yogas; by the power of the 
sages, even those who follow them, can realise 
them; and those mantras now lie hidden in the 
Pratimas or images of the Devas. 


al ala aah Waeeraore” AI 
aafatey a wket: Ta F AqTaaT von 


The Saptarsis enunciated the Rg, Yajuh, 
Sama and Atharvana mantras very accurately 
and the sage Manu similarly dealt with his 
Smrt. 


Yael Weal Aart: Haet ataaa:| 
Wasa Se FI a a 


In the Tretayuga, the four Vedas, the bridge 
of dharma, were all embodied in one. In the 
Dvaparayuga, owing to the short life and 
intellect of men, the Vedas were divided into 
four separate treatises. 


HITT AATASNTAMA AAT ¥ CI 
sriferet fee: Yes weal: TaeasTaT 
UMAGA: AAT SMT BT ATM 
fathead TaId J Aca TAN ¥ 8 It 


In days of yore, the Rsis, by virtue of their 
tapas, could study the entire Vedas in one day 
and night. The Vedas taught the duties of the 
people in each yuga. In ancient days, 
Svayambhu Brahma gave out the divine 
immortal Vedas with various Angas and 
containing the Svadharmas pertaining to every 
yuga. Under the influence of Time, by and by, 
the dharmas deviated from the Vedas and 
became perverted. 


mae: are sada fat: BAT: 
UTA: WRT ATTA TTT: 114 o It 


S00 


aa: WGfedt: autaarat adeno: | 
Raa: WaT: BTSI: ASAT Sn & 2 


The duty of Ksatriyas is to perform 
sacrifices, that of the Vaisyas is to perform 
haviryajfia, the Siidras to perform the sacrifice 
of service and the Brahmanas to perform the 
sacrifice of Japam (repeating the mantra) and 
understanding their meanings. The people and 
the Varnas in the Treta age thus performed their 
duties and prospered with children and wealth 
and were happy. 


arersisy fata after: afrafasr: 
CRIES HEC CMCC Mm CCCP ET] 


The Brahmanas by their kind behaviour 
should enlighten the Ksatrtyas and the latter 
should educate the Vaisyas and they should, in 
their turn, lovingly mould up the Stdras in their 
duties. 

WA: WATAATT TAT ATTA: | 
Asleadt ATA ATA AT FATHOM 
ATTY laet BHATT: Wrage G 3 


Their hearts were directed to Varnasrama 
Dharma. Their dharma was not fruitless and, 
therefore, all their actions were attended with 
success, merely by their Sankalpas or 
intentions. 

ay BG Tet Tat ss ecgtieran 
Vaart Matera TAFT T AUG v1 
AUT TA AAS HAA 
Gadel TM AAT SINT TA TATN 4 & I 


The people in their ordinary course were 
long-lived, healthy, handsome, sturdy, religious 
and modest. Brahma laid down the orders of 
varna and 4srama etc., with great accuracy. The 
sons of Brahma framed the Samhitas (or books) 
on medicine (how their health should be kept 
up), and practices of dharma and other mantras. 


Ufemey ae wat sefairaerot: et: 
aa: Marae Tal ga F SATE 


Matsya Puranam 


a: Wace Waa | 
faagehran arg taut FehTaT 
TARAS SAT BA: We Wat taT: 1 4 ON 


The Devas set on foot the performance of 
sacrifices from the very day when the Rsis, the 
sons of Brahma enunciated the Samhita, 
Mantras, etc. At the end of Svayambhuva 
Manu, Indra was the first to propagate the 
performance of sacrifices with various offerings 
in co-operation with the Devas, Yama, Sukla, 
Jaya and Visvasrka. 


Ae ATT SH YaTa F Sera 

Fel THA SAA VN AA TSA cl 

Wet A AST MMT AAA Tea: | 

ATACUST USAT ATA TRAST IG 2 

UTUATAA AT UA: WAST: | 

PTT WENA ATATATS TAA: 11 & 0 Ht 

Truthfulness, Japam, asceticism and charity 

are the extant dharmas. When they decline, 
adharma becomes dominant. When to drive it 
away and make dharma revive, most valiant and 
long-lived heroes take their births. They award 
just punishments, are great yogis, performers of 
sacrifices, Brahmavadis, have their eyes like 
lotues, broad forehead and big faces, well- 


formed limbs, lion-like chests, strutting like 
elephants and highly powerful and virtuous. 


Teas TAA THAT: | 

TAMA AMITTAVSAT: 11 § VI 

AMM F Wat ae Saat wala Tea 

eae Tapa TA Sd Te d oer: 

UTA: WTO AMITTAVS eT: NG 2 

aa wa Uforatal Ffaea area 

TRA WA UI Yes TATA TAS HATH & 3 

Thus in the Tretayuga, the cakravarti kings 

were great archers and endowed with all 


|. To pray to any deity in a low voice 


Chapter-142 


auspicious sings. Their regal splendour and 
prowess extends far and wide like the branches 
of the banyan tree. By Nyagrodha 1s meant 
arms; Vyasa means the extent of the arms 
outstretched. That is their growth and height 
measured as above. Cakra (discus), chariots, 
Queen, jewels, horses, elephants and gold 
formed their treasure and were counted as 
Ratnas (jewels). These gems were first attarned 
at the end of Svayambhuva Manu. 


fA Wet Yea aA: 
TARY Way MataArTAaT Fg wi 
YAMA Bate ACA aly a 
TAM TAT WaT onary Ng GI 
agua sat a faurerd Welferara 
HUA MAN Tet TH YE TATE & | 
RTM aes Wed FI: AAT! 

sat Tey aA ao fara wa ANI 
Vayeunforaast WSCA: | 

TAT ATA Ua UTES ar FBG C1 


Emperors in the world in all the 
Manvantaras (past, present and future) are born 
with the parts of Visnu inherent in them. They 
are extraordinary endowed with power, dharma, 
comfort and riches. Emperors had a vast store 
of Artha, Dharma, Kama, Fame and Victory 
without any of these going against another. 
Thus the kings endowed with power, defeated 
even the Rsis in their eight Siddhis, such as, 
Anima, Laghima etc., in their knowiedge of the 
Sastras and in their asceticism. 


aera AA CAAA! 
AUT HT STATA 1G 8 
ao: fat cette frat a afar 
PATA SER: AATMBMNEATTT: 1119 0 1 
MAGMA AACR GAGA 
Uforararoan Fe MTET AAA: 1119 Bi 
VaR F M_*Ul UT Teta: | 


901 


They were endowed with divine marks and 
signs and they defeated the demons and human 
beings by their extraordinary strength. They 
seemed to be very fortunate. They were born 
with handsome forms bearing all the lucky 
signs according to palmistry, viz., fine lines on 
the forehead and fine tongue, sombre radiance 
of the teeth, long ears, hands touching the 
knees, shoulders like that of a bull and a lion, 
with their feet marked with quoits and fish and 
the hands with conches, and Padma. 


UMA STUY Sa SISTA: 19 VA 

SRA BAST Wetet Wade A 311 

Sw SH AT: Vet FAIA St BAT: | 

They lived up to 85,000 years and did not 

know the troubles of the old age, and had 
accesses to the heaven, oceans, lower regions 
and mountains. Sacrifices, asceticism, charity 
and truthfulness were the four-limbed dharmas 


of the Treté age and were, unscrupulously, 
observed by them. 


dal Wed AA GUSTAfaTTST: 
WaAeraTAs BW AVSAlid: Ward vi 


Though in that age dharma _ reigned 
according to Varnasrama, yet there was also a 
criminal procedure code to justify and maintain 
the order of Varndsrama. 


CSUR HAT: Te SAAT: VOT: 
Wal sesaereeraat g fata: aya: 
All the people were healthy, wealthy, happy 


and contented. In this Tretayuga one Veda was 
divided into four. 


So Aeaearor Tad AT aT: WAT NO GH 
TAU aaaaON fad DT HAT aT: 


2 


Ue AATY Aare Frateraii 9 & I 


The people lived up to 3,000 years and they 
were all blessed with sons and grandsons and 
then they departed. Now, hear of its 


502 


characteristics. 


TATGTAMTAT GRATE Aa 
TANTS: LaMTaread Ase: Wes fashan ool 


The characteristic of the Tretayuga in 
Sandhya is one foot; and in the Sandhyamsa 
one-fourth of that of Sandhya. 


Sit ATR STITT eae HeU ATT 
Ferrari Core ferean gaa ATS eATA: 11 VY 2M 


KK 


CHAPTER 143 
Description of yajna and its method 

RAT cd: 

HA ATA AAA AT 

Yd Ways Wt aaaraas 7:11 VN 

safedat Peas We HAT fe 

HARA ASMA WA AATF TATU 2M 

The Rsis asked— “O Sita, during tenure of 

Svayambhuva Manu, in Tretayuga, what type of 
trend was there for the performing of the yajna? 
When at the end of Krtayuga, both Sandhya and 
Sandhyamsa, both appeared, then according to 


the movement of times, the combination with 
Tretayuga was achieved. 


Ny WT WAY Wad Seat 
Watsarat Anat AAT A TT AN 3 1 
At the time of the rainfall at that time the 


ausadhis were sprung up and varta-vrtti was 
established in the towns and villages. 


aUSTAMATH Hea Tay a: TA: 
Ufeared Gees aa aa: wale: 
UaeGTTA A: AAT ATA SATAN x 


Thereafter establishing Varndsrama- 
dharma, with the use of the traditional mantras 
the samhitas were collected, then how the 
tradition of the yajfias was established.” 
Hearing this Sita said— “I am going to reply to 
your question, which you please listen.” 


Matsya Puranam 


at sara 
Tara anafaa F sera a HAT 
TT Far ReT al MTT TST: 1G A 
tad: We deed Vaasa: | 
Tea Fee MATA STAT: I GA 


Sita said— “O Rsis, Indra— the consumer, 
using the mantras the present as well as the 
future worlds, equipped with all the means, 
started a yajna. With the start of the Asvamedha 
sacrifice by him, the great sages participated in 
it. In the yajnas, the priests were processing 
forward the same. 


UAHA IT HUVY Taf arse 
eau eaela set agtaedt ea: non 
Tray gay AMY eT YATH 


Uftaray YY SAT ENG Aci 


In the act of divine sacrifice at first, Rtvija 
started to pour several types of sacrificial items 
in the fire. The priests singing the Sdmagdna, 
were reciting with confidence (the Vedic 
mantras) 1n a loud voice. The priests were 
reciting the mantras with a low voice. 


MAST U HA FT AM TET a 
SMady U Cay ARYA AT ETAT e UI 


The herd of animals was being brought in 
the middle of the yajna-mandapa. The gods 
who were to participate in the yajva had been 
invoked. 


a Sareea Sat aITTET A 
Waar aal eat: Healey Tara Ai Qo 


The Indriyatmaka gods and the consumers 
of the portions of the yajna besides the 
Ajanadevas who emerge at the start of the kalpa 
were engaged in performing of the sacrifice. 


TAIT FT AIA TTT 
HEU AM SBT SIA UypTOT ea 
faust ape Het aafafercaan ei 
seat aera feat qcrar wal 


Chapter-143 


a: Upfatarearweda Aet YTAAN 22M 
SIT TUTTE WITET: Uy eeTaT 
are eat geaisa a fear at sear 
AMT Fa MG Weal Aches 23 


In the meantime the Rsis well-versed in the 
yajurveda and the performers of the homa 
started making efforts for the animal sacrifice. 
Then they groups of Rsis finding the helpless 
poor animals got up and they questioned Indra— 
the consumer of the world— “O Devaraja, what 
is the system of this yajna. You for the purpose 
of achieving Dharma, are resorting to the 
killing of animals and this 1s extremely beyond 
dharma. O best of the gods, there appears to be 
a new method for the killing of the animals in 
your yajna. It appears that by means of. the 
killing of the animals, you are bent upon the 
destruction of dharma. Thus is not dharma. 
This is totally adharma. The killing of the 
animals cannot be taken to be dharma. 
Therefore incase you are interested in following 
dharma, then do so as per the provision of the 
Vedas. 


fafaesa ar atonerass a 
aaa: GAS frertateaad: 1 evi 


O Best of the gods,. the yajna when 
performed according to the provision of the 
Vedas, which is devoid of evil, bestows the 
dharma, artha and kama. 


TH A WeaAIMS AAA SAA VGN 


O Indra, such type of yajna has been hailed 
by Brahma in earlier times.” When the Asis, 
well-versed in the fattvas so spoke, Indra 
refused to follow their words because he had 
been overpowered by pride and illusion. 


dat ferare: YA Tay STACI 
HEY: Wat: Ga ABeaaha ateAT ve I 


503 


aq faa fears ween get wees: 
PHT TAT WS: GE ATA Vol 
At that time, a great discussion ensued 

between the sages and Indra as to whether the 
sacrifices should be performed by offering the 
libations of the movable or the immovable 
things, i.c., animals or vegetables, roots and 
fruits. Those all powerful sages were much 
pained by the discussion and asked the king 
Vasu who lived in the sky to give his opinion 
on this point. 


RA ad: 
TEM AM SB: HA URfatasa 
aiarare wale Wert ATS WAT VCH 


The Rsis said— O King! O great wise one! 


How has the method of performance of sacrifice | 


(yajnavidhi) been witnessed by you? O son of 
Uttanapada! O Lord! Remove our doubts, O 
learned one! 


aa sara 
TAM Tat TTA ASAT 
SEMANA ANAATATA Fil 221 


Siita said— O King Vasu, without taking into 
consideration the relative significance and the 
strength of the two parties began to explain the 
truth of the sacrifice, in accordance with the 
injunctions of the Vedas. 


aaretcapeatata srarer Utea: | 

ager Uyeda yerHerta 2 0 tt 
fea carat aaa sft A aera: | 
waa wfaa wat fearferet wefata: 1 2 aN 
efor ara Arete tre ferta: 
THA TAT Mh TEATS AST 2 21 
ae warot tarda weraraanhs at feet: 
TM Wadd Gal BAM ASFA TAN IM 


1to 


he 
he 
he 


He said— The Sastras say that the sacrifices ces 
should be performed according to the prescribed )ed 


rites and with the offerings of good animals or 


OF 


504 


roots, fruits, etc. It is my experience, that the 
slaughter of animals 1s the nature of sacrifices. 
Rather the sacrificial mantras all advocate 
killing of animals. And what those great Rsis 
have laid down as the result of their long 
tapasya and experience of the bright bodies in 
the Heaven, ought to be taken as Pramanas or 
proofs, and I give out my opinion on those 
authorities. If you take those mantras as proofs, 
then, accordingly, perform the sacrifices; else 
what is the use of vain argumentation. 


Ud HART F FRM Ta era 
APIA SPT ATA AMARA PI 
SHA Jd: Waray Tara 
AIT JU YA TATTPAUTS AAT 2 & Ut 


AMAATAR FAT are AISI 
HOT UPA TAT ATLANTA 1 VE I 
TAA AA Bat Tee Aya: 
TMT THAT FRAT STM Thr: VM 
wena Ferg at: prea fe dated 
On hearing the reply of Vasu the sages 
foreseeing his future destiny cursed him to fall 
down. King Vasu, of higher regions, by the 
curse, went to Rasatala— the lower region. That 
virtuous king inspite of his being very wise, in 
removing the doubtful points of Sastras, went to 
the lower region for the fault of his plain 
speaking; it is not, therefore, wise for one 
individual though he is very learned, to pass a 
decided opinion on any subject having many 
phases; for, the analysis of dharma is extremely 
delicate and is very hard to be thoroughly 
known and more difficult to express it. 


CATIA TMTS TATAYATT ATTN VI 
cena fear ast wry: FT 
afratengentr aeaaialed TWAT: 28H 
aaa fears A wert Wea: 

SO Yet Het MAHGSU AAT: 1 3 ol 


Matsya Puranam 


Uderat favad: waters wfatear: | 
ARETE MT TAT YAS PTA 3 8H 
Te TT: MrT ToATST aTAT gee: 
WAU THAT AAT STATI 3 21 


No one except the Devas, Rsis and Manu, 
should, therefore, assert regarding any dharma 
with certainty. What the Rsis said of yore, about 
non-killing animals in sacrifices, that is then the 
best course. Rsis never perform any act of 
himsa in course of a sacrifice and many millions 
of them attained heaven by virtue of their 
penances. Taking all things into consideration, 
the great sages do not praise any act of himsa. 
The ascetic sages have gone to heaven by 
offering in sacrifices, roots, fruits, leaves, water 
and vessels that they collected by unchavritts 
(gathering in handfuls). The absence of greed, 
attachment, the practices of celibacy, 
compassion on beings, doing good to others, 
tranquillity of mind, Brahmacarya, cleanliness, 
abhorrence from anger, forgiving others, 
firmness are said to be the firm roots of the 
eternal dharma. 


FATA AAA MTT 
Tay CAAT SATS ATAT WA 33M 


Sacrifice consists of mantras and materials; 
and tapasya consists in viewing all with 
equality. Sacrifices lead one to the Devas; 
asceticism leads one to Virat Purusa (the cosmic 
soul). 


TAN: HUA MAHA aT 
WAAC Saesh USA Maa: Wars 3 Xi 


Renouncing the fruits of karma (works) 
leads one to Brahmapada (the state of Brahma). 
Having Vairagyam (dispassion) enables one to 
be dissolved in Prakrti (the Universal Divine 
Mother). And the knowledge, 1.¢., realisation of 
the glory of Brahma leads to Kaivalyam'. These 


1. Absolute independence or the state of being Alone or 


the attainment of emancipation after death or 


Chapter-144 


are the five-fold paths of beings. 
Ue fare: QreraqeAata| 
MAT SAAT A Yel TATA AAT 34 I 
In days gone by there had been serious 
differences between the Devas and the Rsis at 


the time of Svayambhuva Manu, on the subject 
of sacrificial rituals. 


ade HHA SET et TH Aclt TI 
SAAT TTT SF TIPTATN 3G I 


Afterwards, when the Rsis saw that virtue 
was being forcibly set aside, they paid no heed 
to the words of the Vasus and returned to their 
hermitages. 


may fray aT AATATCTT: | 
ord fe Ta: Fagl TAAATA FAIZ 9H 


When the Rsis went away, the Devas 
completed the sacrifice. | have also heard that 
many Brahmanas and Ksatriya kings became 
perfect by their tapasya and went to the 
Heavens. 


fragararrarel gat temfeaterery | 

Bare fearela PSUATARTATI 3 oI 

Wettate: We Blaagreal FAT: 

Ud MI Taga TUfMes WATS eI 

The king Priyavrata, Uttanapada, Dhruva, 

Medhatithi, § Vasu, Sudhama, —_-*Viraja, 
Sankhapada, Rajasa, Pracinabarhi, Parjanya, 
Havirdhana and others. The famous Rayjarsis of 


high renown went to heaven by virtue of their 
asceticism. 


Tada Te Vet alfa: wfatean 
TOMS ioTeaAd AAT: ALA AA Voll 


The glory of the Rajarsis is still renowned in 
the world; consequently, asceticism is superior 
to sacrifices. 


TAT TAT Ge wilgwAs TT 


detachment of the soul from matter or further 
transmigrations 


505 


TATA ASAT eras TATA ¥ I 


In days of yore, Brahma created the 
Universe by the power of His asceticism. But 
no such powers can be attained by sacrifice. So 
tapasya is the underlying root in this Universe. 


TAMA PAM CATAST ASAT 
TAMIA ARISs At: Arg Wahaus I 
In this way; the sacrifices were performed at 


the time of Svayambhuva Manu and since then, 
they are in vogue during all the ages. 


sta stead WE Waanaed eafedaret aA 
fracarfrore fern gra SEAT: Hl 8% 3 


RRR 


CHAPTER 144 


The temperament of Dvapara and Kaliyuga, 
the story of the king Pramati, start of 
Krtayuga 

Ud sata 
at Sea waaay graves fate WA: 
TA FATT Vitor Brae WATTS A 
geet wat F fatgeaargt J aM 
Utada BN afereaat: A a wOTvaA 2H 


Sita said— “Hereafter I shall speak about the 
temperament of Dvapara yuga.” At the decline 
of Tretaéyuga, there is the start of Dvapara. 
Towards the start of Dvaparayuga, the people 
can achieve success according to Tretayuga 
initially, but when the influence of Dvapara 
completely overpowers the earth then that type 
of success disappears. 


aa: Waftd AAT WaT Brat TAs 

AM Baatorgg Ararmfarwya: 1 3 
weesa aNlat HAT J Faas: | 

OAT AI: UA TUSl AAT SaTSATAT ToT Vl 


The people at that point of time get inclined 
towards the greed, impatient, engaging 
themselves in trade, war, discard principles, 
destruction of varnas, embracing of misdeeds, 


506 


tendency of begging, killing, drinking, 
punishing others, cheating, intolerance and one 
finds an increase in the Rajoguna and 
Tamoguna. 


TM THA YA: WEA BIT YA: 

SMe HA AMMASHer A AMA Wah 4 
BIA SATHeN Year woTgaht wet FA: | 
STAT BTL Tat eet AATSSHTAT 1G 
secre aa BT ate TATA 

fen afa: wofsta Favat arerreardii ot 
siarareTaareg aaa t ferent 

Mara Mawedt aed AAA oI 
urent fafraret ser fazer g1 

at sfpfatiaet: Hraeaaet Faraz et 


The sins which were unknown tn Krtayuga 
crop up in Treté. They become stronger in 
Dvapara and the people get troubled. Dharma 
shakes in Dvapara and disappears in Kaliyuga. 
The Varna-dharmas and dsrama-dharmas get 
weakened and doubts are raised in_ the 
interpretation of the srutis and the smrtis. With 
the confusion in the interpretation of Srutis and 
Smrtis the real intent of the dharma becomes 
obscure which divides the opinion of the 
people. The difference of opinion divides the 
men. The people get divided on account of their 
diversity of views and there pievails the chaotic 
condition. 


Wat aaagena: Heed Y YA: YA 
GATATTBIS SAT FIAT Yon 
aaagal J are geafey 

maga: Yader frend sfefawt:n gen 

aq F Meas: wacarter: 

Get HA: UA Aiearedrefatia: 1 VIN 
aartegareda eels: dafecraterd 
TAT HeTTATHUT SAMA A 23 tl 


Earlier in the Tretayuga a single Veda 
existed with four parts, because of the decline in 


Matsya Puranam 


age, Rk, Yajuh, Sama and Atharvan came into 
being. Then in Dvapara, the sons of the Rsis 
with different interpretation, again divided the 
Vedas (in Sakhds and Prasakhds). These Rsis 
then, on the basis of the Mantra-Brahmana, 
Svara and chronology, composed them 
separately again. Then again the Brahmanas 
with different ideologies changed the 
commentaries, the kalpastitras and sometimes in 
the reverse manner. 


at 7 Whereas ferret: | 
Braty wert: rareet: TSP Ov 


Some people supported them while others 
opposed them. Thereafter in each one of 
Dvapara, the Rsis with different ideologies, 
according to their own interpretation created 
differences in the commentaries of the Vedas. 


vam yearaiege J AA: 
areata: et WreaeeT FATT V4 
In earlier times, there was only one 
Yajurveda. The Rsis divided it according to 
their own ideologies as Krsna and Sukla- 


yajurveda, which created difference in the 
Veda. 


sea A WAAR Hertha 
aquarraur Ureat feared: aT Pert Ve 0 
Se gaat: faa frre: 

BIN Ulagd FT aat A Vat > Aci Voi 
vat fauetaterat ater gTTt TA: 

STA Va Aa SMTTFAT | VC 
aaa aael WaT Aa: 
Frctarssrad aet S:Tarterferearcoms 88 


Therefore, the Adhvaryu’s works are 
performed in different ways. The Sama and 
Atharva Vedas also were tuned and twisted 
owing to the want of knowledge of the Munis 
and their want of confidence. Thus the state of 
things in the Dvapara age was in a chaotic 
condition. And in the Kali age, the Vedas 
became extinct. Owing to the want of the proper 


Chapter-144 


knowledge of the Vedas, the various diseases 
and disorders and deaths, thereof, became 
visible. The people could not thwart them off by 
their minds, words and deeds; then, they 
became disgusted and disappointed. 


faarcorat drat arate 
SUT Sereda AAA STAT Bol 


TAA HAO ara Hegre wfasafan evi 


When they became disappointed, they 
sought means to get rid of their distress. As a 
consequence, they began to find faults with 
worldly things. Out of this fault finding, true 
knowledge arose. © 


oat Venfaat ys Het TaTIAS A 
TUES VAT Brat ufTaf az: 11 2 et 


Of the wise Munis in the Svayambhuva 
Manvanatara, some turned out in_ the 
Dvaparayuga as the opponents of the Vedas. 


siqdelaanrney serat varet a 
TAM AAR SAMA AHA 2 2 
Wiha BUPA MeIsentaancrsy| 
CMCAAMASET WRIT Ue Te 23 
Baa ard Water OTT 

Then Ayurveda (medicine), astronomy and 
the other limbs of the Vedas, political economy, 
logic, metaphysics, the ceremonies of the Kalpa 
Sutras, the glosses, the Smrtis, and various other 
Sastras became filed with doubts. No effort was 


crowned with success, unless the whole body, 
mind and deed were set to work. 


Bt HAYA Ble; SAMIT: Ta: 

cit gfrdforas ararrafarera: 1124 1 
ACMAMOTTT UAT AST 
aaa: AMT AST AU EN 

yor aaa & Tey RAAT OTT 

Fayre Bret ae VAT F TSA VON 
Tong fret ees ga zl 

Wa TAN West sirereat wfaea 2 


507 


seres J Vata: Gere a Fata 
BUTTS T MAUR: HeTTATU VW 


In the Dvapara age, people were generally in 
trouble and there was an increase in greed, 
ambition to trade and to possess worldly things, 
tendency to fight and inability to realize 
principles, the obscurity of the Vedas and the 
Sastras, the destruction of the order of 
Varnasrama and the increase of lust and anger; 
the people, at this time, lived up to a period of 
2,000 years. When some time of Dvapara was 
passed, then the Sandhya set in, in which period 
the dregs of the people are left. Then the 
Sandhyamsa set in. After this comes Kaltyuga. 
At the end of Dvapara and by the beginning of 
Kaliyuga, Kali became very strong. 


feat wang Hat eta qafeaarq 
Ud TAMA: WIA Tafa A AT: WAT Boll 
During Kaltyuga, people indulge in himsa, 
theft, falsehood, deceit, vanity, etc., and 


delusion, hypocrisy, vanity overshadow the 
people. 


US ad: Wa: Hee say ultra 
TAM SAO arat an: fagata at 7 arn} at 


And dharma becomes very weak in 
Kaliyuga and people commit sin in mind, 
speech and actions. And works done with whole 
heart and body sometimes become successful 
and sometimes not. 


cafe: WATT TT: Wet AT ATT! 
smgiersd da sort a fared: 3 211 


Quarrels, plague, fatal diseases, famines, 
drought and calamities appear. Testimonies and 
proofs have no certainty. 


T ware featreiter ger at Bt seth 
Ten fad apisyelterereqarat: 13 3 
Wrard wean frat a sett wT: 
ACUAAACT: UIT AST AMAT: 1 3 Vil 


There is no criterion left when the Kaliyuga 


508 


settles down. Some die in the womb, some in 
childhood and some in youth and some in old 
age. People become by and by, poorer in vigour 
and lustre. They are wicked, full of anger, 
sinful, false and avaricious. 


IAAT SMT FEI eat WaT: FRAT: 
Spee STANTS TTA: 11 3 & Ut 


Bad ambitions, bad education, bad dealings, 
bad earnings excite fear. The whole batch 
becomes greedy and untruthful. 


famront arated: MATT Had WAT 

FEAT UT eAeA A SHAS ATS ATATS TAT: 11 3 & I 

VEY HaT STA SA eT aA: 

Gat aaaseaed afearaal F PTT Zon 

The Brahmanas become demoralised. They 

have base ambitions. Their knowledge and 
learning are mostly defective. Their character is 
exceedingly low and by such ignoble conduct 
they prove very disastrous to the people. The 
people become saturated with jealousy, anger, 


vindictiveness, cowardice, greed, attachment. 
Lust increases during this age. 


Weed TMT ser a ar RAT: 
Saleha TM da ava: Wes FT asa 3c 


The Brahmanas do not read the Vedas nor 
do they perform sacrifices and the Ksatriyas 
deteriorate with the Vaisyas and become well 
nigh extinct. 


Wa Garey Ma Tet: Tel 
TaAS Tell Aasepeararaqanayrs 1 3 eM 


Sidras sleep with the Brahmanas, sit with 
the Brahmanas, eat and perform sacrifices with 
them and hold relations of mantrahood with 
them. 


THM: YAS: WIS WAT: | 
HMUAU YT FRSA HUTCH Bil ¥ ol 
Y Url cage a Hea: | 
fearauy a afaqaraet sfatefer: iw gi 


Matsya Puranam 


Many Siidras will become kings and many 
beretics will be seen. There will arise various 
sects, Sannydsis wearing red coloured cloths, 
Kapalis and various others holding themselves 
followers of some Deva or other and there find 
fault with religions. Many with them profess to 
be Brahmajnanis, because, thereby, they will 
easily earn their livelihood. Some hypocrites 
will mark their bodies with Vedic symbols also. 


Wefan o faerie het 7 
MAd AAT ACTH TAAAAT: 1 ¥ 2 


In the Kaliyuga any body will study the 
Vedas; Sidras will be experienced in the Vedas. 
So there will be many false religionists. 


Tat PAM UA: Wa: 
AAA Heal FAN AA WTAATAN ¥ 31 
The Sidra kings will perform Asvamedha 


sacrifices and the people serve their ends even 
by killing women, children and cows. 


SUE TAA AT ANT WaT: 
SEMA MMS: MATA MSY 
They will cheat each other, kill each other to 
serve their ends. The country will become 


desolate by repeated calamities, short lives and 
various kinds of diseases. 


seated wmlad het wy 

YSN WAT A AM Ma Waa v4 I 

TMA BI Weta Het FAN 

SAMA UT UTA: Met TUTTE Ul 

Every one will be miserable and addicted to 

adharma. Owing to the dominance of vice and 
Tamoguna, people will freely commit the sin of 
abortion on account of which there will be a 
decline in the longivities and strength of the 


people. The people will live up to one hundred 
years at most. 


Ta BA Tae Aer: Heys faen: 
SAMHSA AM Asal: Hach MAT: vol 


Chapter-144 


Inspite of all the Vedas being in existence, it 
would become as if there were no Vedas and 
the practice of performing sacrifices would be 
stopped. 


UT aera wear F Prater 
ay at g dad Aes faeasci 
GAMA: TAY Hahsra We: I 
TRAM: TANG TA ATAAATI & 8 UI 
Us VA Alot AMA FT FMT 
This is about Kaliyuga, now hear about its 
Sandhya and Sandhyamsa. In every age every 
three stages become void of siddhi, and during 
the Sandhya period only one part of the usages 
of the age exist, which becomes thus one part; 
in Sandhyarhsa, one pada of that of Sandhya 
exists. In this way, in the final Sandhyamsa of 


the Kaliyuga, one governor amongst the 
irreligious subjects arises. 


TAMA SIEM YIU aT set PRA 4 of 
TAU & USAaY AAT Walaa 
HATA Aa: TATABTASATI & VN 


King Pramati of the Bhrgu family and 
Candramasa gotra was born at the end of 
Svayambhuva Manu tn the Sandhyamsa period, 
to inflict proper punishment on the sinners. 


fea My: West TTT 

TAG TS VA TRA ATASHOTATI  2 
wygargearad: wagisa AeA: 

@ weal a: Usa terearTalfaaeTarT G 3 1 


That king travelled all over the earth for 
thirty years and collected arms and 
ammunitions, elephants, horses and chariots and 
marched with a vast army consisting of horses 
and elephants and accompanied by 100,000 
Brahmana soldiers armed with various kinds of 
weapons, against the Mlecchas and destroyed 
them. 


HSMN Wasa TA: WRT: | 
UAVS W Ae Malar: SAAT NG YI 


S09 


sent Y hfadaalSed BATT: | 

siete Uda AT ATT ATG 

Wray aa faeaTBTAT TAT I 

aaa eternal fasta: FENG EI 

TRINPUNGNA Ua TAHT 

qe ab Favs yc CES I& Ol 

aaa ada a 

VATA TAATAUNT AREA & CI 

fagren Vaya Wa aya 

WATS J AVN I FeaeS TAN 4 81 

After killing all the Sidra kings he 

annihilated all the hyporcites. After destroying 
all the sinners, and subduing the people living 
the North, central regions, the mountaineers, the 
inhabitants in the East and West, the residents 
on the Vindhyas, the Deccanis, the Dravidians, 
the Singhalese, the inhabitants of the Mleccha 
countries (Gandhara), the Paradas, the Pahlavas, 
the Yavanas, the Sakas, the Tusaras, the Svetas, 
the Pulindas, the Barbaras, the Khasas, the 


Lampakas, the Andhrakas, the Daradas, the 
Halikas, he exterminated the Sidras. 


yaw fares wafaars areas 

waa: A a aH: Wes ale Wy ol 

Biasiswafed ad went fag war: 

Fae AAMT WANT AAT: HG 2 

ea AAAS At yeast HITT HAUT 

Tee aleteAeaaT A & VI 

Ghee WEA A FT VAT wala Tel 

Tera Fats WAT PATA G 31 

King Pramati was born of Visnu’s part in 

Manu’s family and was famous as Candramasa. 
He roamed about earth for twenty years and 
killed all the wicked men in his 32nd year. After 
annihilating the greater portion of the world 
with violence when only a few survivors, the 


propagators of the future race, remained, the 
king with all his army attained final bliss in 


510 


Samadhi between the sacred rivers Ganga and 
the Yamuna. 


AAG THY TAT THAT 

TU Ura Wateeaday sf AAT & wit 

aa: Wea ler TTA I ATT 
furractatyerg witae safarateadq § 4 1 
AMSA Ft MET FAT: 

sufeata araet wear wea GG 
SUA BT FT AAA MATA 
WATS & Aet Wal: TTeATAATfeA: 1G VI 
MHA: WGA ATE gl 
Rarer Penrevaeyg faa: § ct 


When, thus, in the Sandhydmsa period, all 
acts of violence ended all the wicked potentates 
were slain, only a few survived here and there 
who, overwhelmed with greed, began to 
plunder one another and caused great 
consternation to the people without a king. They 
all left their homes and household goods and 
fled hither and thither to protect themselves. 
When the duties enjoined by the Srutis and the 
Smrtis came to an end, the people gave 
themselves up to lust and anger and became 
devoid of greatness, pleasure, love and shame. 


w MAA TH BMHLTAITT TT: 

fatater Facer freer FTaAUT 1G VI 
aB ad yiteat Bearer: Werfargrar: | 

farat erties Yaiey faareeaTHeIaT: 1119 0 
slate gard a arargegea ¢:ftaat:| 
AMAA GA Tea WATTS 9 2 


After the disappearance of dharma the 
remainder of the people were plunged into 
deeper misfortunes. Men and women became 
short statured and began to lose their lives at the 
early age of 25. They were all overpowered 
with distress. They quitted their wives and sons 
and even quitted their towns and went to 
mountains to find a shelter there. 


Matsya Puranam 


Ohta: ATT Aart Vaarahy 
SHOE Fate FATE: 119 2 
SAMATATTET: AST TCT: 
US HSMM DEIN: WATEAT: 119 31 
They built their houses near rivers, oceans, 
mountains and various other places. There was 
no rain and the people had to cover themselves 
with rags and deerskin. They left off karma, 
deprived of their possessions and void of 


Vamasrama and thus became very greatly 
oppressed; at last very few people remained. 


WaT Vaart g-aifadearry| 
GAA AT SVT Ha TaTAT: 1H9 ¥ I 


Animals oppressed by hunger wandered far 
and wide and at last took their abodes close to 
the above men. 

ad: WARY Mt: Wal AraTENT sata fel 
WIFATEPSUI A APT STAT: WGN 
The people also, being very hungry, became 


flesh eaters. They all began to eat flesh of deer, 
boar, bull, every thing whether allowed or not. 


VOANATEMAST AAAI aT 
Uys Cire ard Aaa ATT AT: 119 
Aste AeA STS BEN W Way: | 
AMAA WAU: WAT I 


They lived on all sorts of things without 
pausing to enquire under the influence of 
hunger whether it was worthy of being eaten or 
not. Those who lived close by rivers or oceans 
maintained their lives by taking fish. Thus by 
eating flesh and forbidden food, all the people 
became of one caste Varna. 


GMT HAT Yara, fener 

AM BIT VENTA: WATT C1 
Wa aay yor feet aat Aaa 

Refayed Usa AE J A Anos 
sty chelOT area UATOT: WyTereTaT 


Chapter-144 


Wea eat: Wa: Fefasesr WAMU col 


As there existed only one Varna in 
Satyayuga, similarly, all the people became of 
one caste at the end of Kaliyuga. In this way, 
the Divine century, i.e., 36,000 years of men 
passed away in course of which the hungry 
people devastated all the birds, fish, etc. 


sere way Hecafaray 

weary wfrax FF eareT AAT HAT VM 
at: WAY AB HATTA 
VAYAMA: Wa srcharesta Al 2M 
AHA AAA SI: VAT WaT: | 
Ufaret + aealet TAN AATT: 112 30 
Us ae Tart ATTEN MaTETAT 


MAAS Sil 


a 
Tice Vit a vir, 
- 


After eating up all the birds and fish, etc., 
that were left during the period of Sandhyarhsa, 
people began to eat roots and _ fruits 
(Kandamiila, etc.). They did not build their 
houses but covered themselves with barks of 
trees. They had no treasures and they slept on 
ground. They all perished in that plight and only 
a handful of them who survived, struggled on 
for a century. They got sufficient food and got 
nourished. 


Ua aug feet wearers arid 

Aa SAMA STMT: FAT: TATU 
fag ya: Wat Part Boa 

area frat af yaterat: WATT Aug 
WTAMTARTG Tat: Hara 

aM Tat Mao awa aa SAT col 


The period of Kali’s Sandhyamsa fasts like 
that for a Divine century. After this period, the 
men and women that were left began to produce 
many children. With the advent of these 
children, enters again the Satyayuga. All the 
previous people, the remnants of the Kali pass 
away. As the people reap the fruits of their 


511 


actions in heaven and hell, similarly, the 
persons in Satyayuga enjoy happiness or suffer 
pain. Thus Kahyuga disappears and Satyayuga 
steps in. 


SMTA Ve Hagia 

Ud GAS GAM: asa ATM cc! 
feared Fae: APA TAM 
AAA AAT: AAA SUVTCTAT 6 FN 
afeaiey daa aed Waa: | 
Maasaea VW AeA: HATA 2 ott 
SAAT Bal Taare 

Ut GRAMS TAHT TATA! He i 
fae yeaed AAT INA 


Wad Ff AA: HITT TF Ae 2M 


The remaining people in Kaliyuga gradually 
begin to discriminate and they get dispassion 
(vairagya). Then, they realise their knowledge 
of self and they become religious. So Satyayuga 
comes in to fulfil that which is to be done in 
future. The people thus become happy and 
enjoy things with their equality of sight which 
they did not enjoy in the past Kali nor which 
they would enjoy in the future Treté. Thus | 
bow down to Svayambhuva and I have narrated 
to you in detail all the characteristics of the 
several yugas in due order. 


Say: CHA ST WaT: CAO RIESE 
fasta de a fag sent fae ane si 
We wala Fda a a ater: 
TAAAAM: WAT AT FT Ss BAT vi 
Ta ATTA Ih HAAS AT ANSI 
AUAMTAT A AACA AAT: | 

ud ay fray vadsile t Hae I 


When the Satyayuga comes in, its people are 
procreated by those who remained at the end of 
Kaliyuga. The good and perfect persons that 
remained unnoticed amongst the Brahmanas, 
Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Siidras, they and the 


312 


Saptarsis now give instructions of dharma to the 
new people. In that way, the doctrines of the 
Rsis based on Srutis and Smrtis are propagated. 
They promulgated Varnasrama Dharma and 
other rituals on the lines of Srutis and Smrtis. 
The Saptarsis hold the dharma of the Srutis and 
Smrtis. 

street T ay Aaleereea 

q 7 eaeng fee Ht Toit 

Tamang fer wr a 

TIT sanerry Torerarasferatii ec tt 

SAAT WI SBT AaT Wey Wa: | 

Ua GMETA F VA VTS Vi 

Wait Mires eM aTTT: | 

Tarde BT TaAAM Wa All Qo oll 

PA It AA: Wel: BATT TI 

For promulgating dharma, the Satparsis are 

ever ready in every Satyayuga. These Rsis are 
now existing for the period of one Manvantara. 
As the roots of plants and trees vigorously 
germinate after being consumed by fire, 
similarly, there is a growth in the generation of 
people at the commencement of the Satya age. 
In this way, generations of the ages go on 
forever. The ideas appear and disappear. 
Comforts, life, power, beauty, dharma, Artha 


and Kama lose one fourth their quantitv in 
every Yuga. 


Seas wierd: aitftrey War FEAT: Ro BN 
aaa AAaAes WAT 

Vat AAG J Alora MHAAHA: | 20 WM 

HUTT US aea Walaa 

TMT J AAT Wales Fal A AAI 23M 
Tea TASTY YAR SATA 

ATT BMT Nal PASAT WaT All Qo Xi 


O Dvijas! I have thus related to you about 
the Pratisandhis’ which pertain to the four 


1. The period of transition between two ages. 


Matsya Puranam 


yugas only. One Manvantara is seventy-one 
times these four yugas. The four yugas make 
one cycle, and each yuga in every cycle is of 
one and the same nature. 


UTeMy Maa AA Waa 

SAT AGA A Uo AATTATAT Yo & 

at BT Aer Set WaT Waar aT: TUT 

TTT Yt: Ag TAT TIT: | 

SAACHAU WH UTA A AMSA Qo & I 

So the fourteen Manvantaras revolve. In all 

the yugas, the Asuras, evil-spirits, demons, 
Yaksas, the Pisacas and the R4aksasas and 
various others are born. All these persons are 


endowed with characteristics in accordance 
with what they had in previous yugas. 


Tran Ua 
PRIgM BreaMayrd 
aot a Uela Wactia: 
ATATCIVAT UTACATA: 11 20 Vit 
As the characteristics of yugas change, so 
the characteristics of the several Manvantaras 
change. These worlds of the jivas are always 


liable to change; they do not remain constant 
even for a moment. 


Ud PRaMa a: UST TaTHAT 
Tratt aeafaraet avait af aoc 


Thus I have descnbed to you _ the 
characteristics and changes of the yugas. I will 
tell you about Manvantaras at the time when | 
dea! with Kalpas. 


Sia Sea Teo wanalaaadt ATA 
FASTA TMAH MATA SEAT: I PY VI 


KKK 


Chapter-145 


CHAPTER 145 


Changes in the bodies, varna with the change 
of the yugas 
Ua Sara 
Ta a Wy: BeIHeT AGE 
AMAA PA Hea 


farnunaqeatea Rata ae at at 
aera a ASrara Meter Tifa 2 


Stita said— O Rsis, each one of the kalpa, has 
fourteen Manvantaras and those out of them, 
which have already passed or those which have 
yet to come, in each one of the yugas of those 
Manvantaras, what is the condition of the 
people there and their creation, besides the 
length of their age, are being narrated by me 
exhaustively to you in the chronological order. 


a 7 silahat =a aearagas a 
ATEN AMAA HAT Were 3 1 


Some of the living being out of them live 
upto the end of the yuga, while others have lives 
shorter than them. These two types of situations 
are usually witnessed. Similar is the situation 
during all the fourteen Manvantaras. 


AAMT TAT a ae wat: Tel 
AUNTS PTIAG AAT: YI 
According to the dharma of the yuga, the 


age of the humans, animals, birds and 
immoveables is always on the decline. 


qaarg: Ufa BI Tay: | 
aaa a seit SBT AAA ART aH 
WAY: Met ATMA Het BAT 
SOTACATMTT AAT TTA TATA: I & Ut 


In the age of Kali, according to the dharma 
of the yuga, the instability in the age of the 
living beings is witnessed and accordingly their 
maximum age has been prescribed to be a 
hundred years. In the Krtayuga, the gods, 
asuras, humans, Yaksas, Gandharvas and 


313 


Raksasas, have the same structures of the body 
including the height and are born as such. 


Ufone Fe AR F Hd AM 
OUST PEA Cea 9 
TATA Fea TATA 
WaRaMfak Fat waroTataaATAN ¢ It 


Out of them those who are born in the 
Devayonis, the height of their bodies 1s 
prescribed as ninety-six fingers and they are 
nine angulas in width. This is the natural size of 
their age. The size of other gods and asuras is 
of seven angulas each. 


THE GHA Prayers 

Sa HAT FT MAMA HAT 8 
TaUeiftasa alerstiyet: TTL 
MTA AA AAA AAT TN Lou 
Teen Aya eadthagead 

Tat a start da WfsTATAaATAATTN 2a 
artes fata Braga FT FA 
WMATA: UT THe TAT LI 


Those who are born in the portion of the 
evening in the age of Kali, are of eighty four 
angulas. The one who has the height of a 
hundred and eight angulas from the head to foot 
and the arms extend upto the knees, is respected 
even by the gods. In each one of the yugas, the 
decline or the expansion of the bodies of cows, 
elephants, buffaloes and other immoveable 
beings should be treated accordingly. 


ATAAA BMA Breet VIA: | 
Tet Wea J feeenieeragerT 3 1 
tT ees: WNRSAT UT: 
TAT MATT BATH AGI: 1 Vwi 
aeaaU F SAAT SPAS AASV | 
THM CAAT ART SAAT V4 


The height of the animal upto its hump is 
seventy six angulas. The height of the 


514 


elephant’s body is a hundred and eight angulas. 
The maximum height of the trees 1s a thousand 
and ninety two arigulas. As is the structure of 
the body of a human being, the same structure 1s 
found in the gods as per the family tradition. 
The body of the gods 1s conceived with much of 
intelligence. 


AM Afaeasa WT: HA Sea 
orld fe after: war & PeerarTAT: 11 eq 
The human forms are not so endowed with 

Buddhi or intellect. The Divine and the human 
bhavas are, thus, both similar and dissimilar. 

UM UfaroTt ca LATA A AAT: | 

matsapaey fasrar alert: Tero WT: 11 Voit 

Sra: fanaa aitafeas WaT: 

UMMA SAT AYA RS 

aut BUTT RUL ATU: PATAgT: 

Tate MT; Afaat qrafEtu ee 


Birds, animals, things, movable and 
immovable (ideas) are all built in the same way. 
Cows, goats, horses, elephants, birds, deer, 
these are all for work and are fit in every way 
for sacrificial purposes. The animals are for the 
use of the Devas. All things, movable, and 
immovable, are created as regards their form 
and measure, after the several Devas; they 
become all the more gratified when they get all 
these beautiful things. 


BY Wt: WAR AAT TAT ah 
TSO: Afrreasy Far UYYTT: | 
AT TAN PATA TAT: WaRTI 2 ot 
array a arty ten aetirengy a 
TSA Te: MATT SATII 2 VN 


Now something will be said about good men 
and Sadhus. The Brahmanas and the Vedas are 
considered as the Pasu mirtis or animal forms 
of the Devas. Brahma resides within their 
hearts; hence, these are Sat or good. The 


Matsya Puranam 


Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas, all 
of them direct their actions 1n accordance with 
the Srutis and the Smrtis and are busy in 
ordinary or in special functions. 


aay GHA Gaede tate 
saearat fe at qat AAA: MW eT 22M 
The dharma of the people devoted to 
Varnasrama in accordance with the Srutis and 


Smrtis and leading to Heaven is named Jnana 
dharma. 


feearat TIARA TAT 
SUT TEA: ASAT 2 3 tl 
qT TANS WAG: Wa: 

GAMA Aft: A: Bal ATA AAAI 21 


The Brahmacari given to good conduct and 
Acara and to do good to the preceptor (guru) 
performs divine functions; hence, the 
householder is known as “Sadhu”. Those 
ascetics who reside in the forest and are in the 
third order of religious life are known also as 
Sadhus. 


aqat quntd: wien: weet we faaeaa: | 
HMATMHMA VI TNT TAS 1 BEN 


One, who restrains his passions and practises 
Yoga, 1s known as Yati. By dharma is meant 
practical work and feeling. The Lord Bhagavan 
has denominated the good and bad actions both 
as Dharma. 


ay tay Wat eas ATT: 

ard gat aa aft gad AAR 2g I 
aaa areal arqdera Weyer 
REIN Vera Al ad: BF Freer Vi 
TAVITA ay streeteateyad 
AMAT Baa aPSaA I 2 C1 
THOMAS SAA TST TAT: | 
TA FA YRAEATATATA TTT I 2 8 


But the Devas, Rsis, and men, freely support 
their views and say— “This is not dharma.” 


Chapter-145 


Dharma is derived from a root which means to 
hold up and also connotes greatness. The 
Acaryas advise on that dharma which leads to 
one’s Ista (desired object). They do not advise 
adharma which leads one to evils. Those, who 
are hoary, free from avarice, self-restrained, not 
haughty, endowed with Divine knowledge, 
having a clear conscience and humility and 
following the path of virtue every day, are 
known as Acaryas. 


qigtatedt ma: stared faafaty: 

SUMATRA MAT HAUT 3 0 

Grd ana ae Frat: | 

YA Aafeags sted PALASTATN 3 vit 

KAN TAT AT Tes eT st ale: 

PEMA BAT THICTA TI 3 2 

TANIA: al eat aursTafaarryy: | 

Such Brahmanas versed in the doctrines of 

dharma, Srauta and Smarta, have enunciated the 
path of virtue. Sruti enjoins that a man should 
marry, perform Agnihotra and other sacrifices 
in company of his consort, and the Smrti says 
that a man should practise Yajna and observe 
the rules of varndsrama. After hearing from the 
learned, Acaryas have said that the three Vedas, 
viz. Rk, Yajuh and Sama are the part and parcel 
of Brahma. What the Saptarsis heard from the 
Rsis of the preceding Kalpa, that they narrated 
in the next Kalpa. Therefore, it is called Sruti. 
Manu remembered Rk, Yajuh, Sama, the Angas 
of the Vedas, Srutis, practised in the preceding 
Kalpa and then said those things. Hence, the 
Sastras of Manu is called Smrti Sastra. Smarta 
dharma is that which enunciates Manu’s dharma 
of the Smrtis; laying down varna and asrama on 
the retrospective bodies of the past Manvantara 
for the guidance of the coming one. 


wa a fefaent ad: forerean: @ Tear 3 31 
fortatdter Frernfesegred weer 


S15 


In this way, the two kinds of dharmas are 
called the Sistacdra. The expression Sista is 
made of the root svis and suffix kta. 

warty & forst se farsa after: 3s 
WA: Wada MlHeaeAreOT: | 

Those who remained in the preceding 
Manvantara, Manu, the propagator of the race 
and the Saptarsis are called the Sistas. The 
pious men during the Manvantaras and the 


Saptarsis along with Manu are said to be the 
promoters of the universe. 


feats o qatet aoe Arar 34 I 

a: fobafadt ad: wad a at ah 

TA Aral USAT: WATAUTSTAATATH 3 & 
forrerdt wereqasta wera 

ye: Yararared FETA: A MIT: 39M 


These persons, 1.e., Sistas establish dharma, 
which changes in Yuga after Yuga, by giving 
out the Vedas, message, livelihood, the criminal] 
procedure code and Varnasramacarya. At the 
end of a Manvantara, the Sista purusas establish 
the Vedika dharma by means of Varnasrama 
and authority. Thus coming down from Sistas to 
Sistas. This is the eternal Sisticara. 


2M ed at cial faaeat wet aA: 
Bt at aAfcarfor fErereancey AUNT 3 2 


These are the eight characteristics of the 
Sistas, viz., (1) Charity, (2) truthfulness, (3) 
asceticism, (4) learning, (5) sacrifice, (6) 
worship, (7) Dama or self-restraint, (8) want of 
greed. 


Foret Tae WY: MATT FI 
Tay way PTAC: BAT 38H 
fata: HAUTE: TALON Sea 
In all the Manvantaras these Sista Manus 
and Saptarsis practise the above-mentioned 
eight characteristics of dharma; hence, they are 


called Sistacdra. Srauta is derived from hearing; 
and Smarta from remembering. 


516 


SRN: Att: TAA ATTACH: ¥ ol 
WISI WARN TH IT MAUTTIY VI 


Srauta dharma is that which contains the 
Vedic mantras and the sacrificial rituals. The 
one dealing with the Varnasramas 1s the Smarta 
dharma. Now I shal! tell you the different parts 
of the dharma and their definitions. 


Seay Ua: UBT a fated 
MYA SATA AAI ¥ 21 


One who explains the dharma just as he 
knows and feels about it on being questioned is 
said to possess the fundamental attribute of 
truthfulness. 


Tart aut wt Frente a 
SAAATA BT Tat J STATA v3 


The Brahmacarya, Tapam, silence and fast, 
these very hard practices are called tapasya or 
penances. 


UV FAA TAM 
Haat sera a Pat aH SAA sv 
Yajia is the bringing together of wealth, 


animals, sacrificial offermmg, Rk, Sama and 
Yajuh Vedas, and the sacrificial presents. 


searaay a feast YTS A 
add Gad Ee: fear Aer ca BATH wu 
Dealing with others as if with one’s own 
self, always for the well being of all with 
gladness of heart is termed dayd or kindness 
and is the best of all acts. 


STHBISHEd MET ATHIeaS TST 

ASB aA wrafeahey: AT AAT BAATI EI 
ATT TATUM FT ATTA 
UAATATAAA Sit HAs YON 


One who does not feel upset and show wrath 
by mind, speech or demeanour, even on being 
provoked by others is really the ideal forgiver. 
This state is called Titiks4 or forgiveness. The 
servant who, does not misappropriate his charge 


Matsya Puranam 


left to his care by his master, sets an example of 
the absence of greed. 


TITRA HEPA eT 
Pafrgerrdt a aerasreer wc 


One who does not feel inclined to indulge in 
sexual pleasures by body, mind and deed and 
practices Brahmacarya shows signs of sama. 


SMTA AT TU aT Sais TET I 
fae A Ward SAR MeN Ye II 


One whose passions are not bruoght into 
play either for his own sake or for the sake of 
others shows signs of dama or self-restraint. 


Usitic Bt faad Hreat wrperaran 
A hala Wied: a fararear afaeafan § of 


One who does not get perturbed by five 
objects of senses and eight kinds of 
amorousness is known as the great subduer of 
self. 


qafepad sa ARAM UA 
TATA CAA ATETAATUTA I & VN 
fragrant fateat rat aortsrarera :| 
PTA ATS TASA ATTA UG 21 
One who gives away in charity to the 
deserving what is prized by him after storing it 
in a righteous way sets the example of an ideal 
charity. The best dharma is the one which 1s 
prescribed by the Sruti and Smrti and approved 
of Sista (pious) persons. 
EEN BABY ss a areata 
Mifaarafasrarat fatrafatercmath & 31 
GANT: HA ANA: Hast: Tel 
PUMPMALA J WOT AT FAI 4 XI 
Indifference to the good and evil and the 
non-attachment to object is virakta or 
dispassionateness. The renouncement of krta 
and akrta karmas or acts done or not done is 


Sannyasa; abandonment of ideas of cleverness 
or non-cleverness 1s termed Nyasa. 


Chapter-145 


oIchfeayrardaants eafaada | 
Ada AA WA AMT DW SAMUI 


When he knows all the Tattvas from 
Avyakta (unmanifested) down to particulars, the 
animate and inanimate objects, he is called 
Janni or wise. 


WIS J TT Meroe BATT 
mated: Ya: TATAYASATNG & 
These are the characteristics of dharma 


which were first enunciated by the learned Rsis 
during the Svayambhuva Manvantara. 


am at autfacata fata wade aI 
wa ager agar da fey ol 


Now something will be said about the 
Manvantara, Caturhotra and the ways of the 
four varnsas. 


Mira da safer feet 
ee aaifa ais aaraaacaTTN 4 cI 


During each Manvantara, fresh Srutis occur, 
but the Rk, Yajuh and Sama Vedas, rules, 
Devatas, Stotras (hymns), Homas, etc., remain 
the same as in the preceding Manvantara. 

fafa wa ta Yaad arta 
FARA TO Hea Aa TUG eI 
MarR KA aga 
Way Way AM aareafed Feu g ol 


Vidhistotra and Agmihotra remain as before. 
Dravyastotra, Gunastotra, Karmastotra and 
Kulastotra’ originate from the Vedas during 
every Manvantara. 


vertara Wat a Geet YA: WA: 
Ue HATOTAT FT AAeafeA aM & gN 


|. Vidhistotra = Code of rituals. Dravystotra = Code of 
materials. Gunastotra = Code of politics. 
Karmastotra = Code of business. Kulastotra = Code 
of domestic usages. Brahmastotra = Code relating to 
the knowledge of Brahma, The Srutis. Caturhotra = 
A sacrifice conducted by four priests. 


S17 


WISHAY A ache yaR WR 
From these the Brahmastotra, 1.e., the four 
Vedas, Rk, Yajuh, Sama and Atharvana, spring 
the fourfold mantras (formulae) as described in 
the four ways. 


BAO AAA FHT AT: TTASAITAN & 2 
dat: Medaael yarraacer fe 
STANT RAGS: Taeresteared TAM & 31 


The mantras of the preceding Manvantaras 
flashed in the hearts of the Rsis who performed 
very severe tapasyas. Being roused by the 
feelings of fear, trouble, moha (delusion), grief, 
discontent, when the Rsis began to practise 
tapasya with great effort and enthusiasm, the 
mantras came of themselves to them for their 
deliverance. 


BAU Ate AA HAVA Acasa 
ANT Maye fe Apa MATT & vA 
TAA A TSM Mh BATA 

TMT HAUT GVA MS WTA GU 
TOME add Aaa TaN 

Saar AeA vaTATAA & & I 

Wa GIaH Ag Ad Wai 

aad atau 7 AATATaaeAT Ng Olt 
Ward Bea a F BM Ueeearaan 
ada Wa Mata TOT 
HIATUS AMT TAT Wag & Ct 
fant faufact a der wearers 


I shall describe to you the characteristics of 
the Rsis. The Rsis, past and future, are of five 
kinds. Now, hear about the Rsis and the Arsas. 
When the Universal Dissolution takes lace, 
when Prakrti’s three qualities (gunas) are in a 
state of equilibrium, the division of the Vedas 
does not exist. All are in an undefined state of 
darkness (Tama). At that time the springing up 
of the animate objects unconsciously and of the 
embodied souls consciously, are both termed 


518 


Arsa. This is like fish and water; both exist like 
the container and the thing contained. The 
universe made up of qualities springs up, 
presided by consciousness. It flows on as cause 
and effect. 


IAT TUT HST SATO HT: 1G 8 
Uifargaretel Fal: HAV WeeTes: | 
It is kala (tume) that brings about the 


differentiation of the Prime Cause, the Mahat 


Senses and objects of senses are denominated as 
arthas. 


UeAIS MAST RATS SAMTUT EAN9 0 

WANE HAA wee J WAIT! 

Ufatgannt art wa va faa vu 

aatedeary facut Weare fet 

AM WAM: VAM: Blea BRUT 9 I 

From mahat evolves ahamkara (egoism); 

from ahamkara evolve the five subtle elements, 
the Tanmatras: from the Tanmatras come the 
five gross elements. These five gross elements, 
make up these varied forms by _ their 
permutations and combinations. Just as many 


trees are seen all at once by a torch, so by kala, 
all these souls are all at once manifested. 


TIAA Galt: AEA AAPA 

an figul dekh: Galt $4 WT TaN 31 
a Veen wea Wa 

WSARITT: Ut AAT EMTAAI 9 YN 


When these Ksettrajia jivas (souls) involve 
into the unmanifested state, they appear like fire 
flies in darkness. That high-souled Ksettrajna is 
shining in this world, assuming bodies and 
again it exists on the other side of the intense 
darkness. 


aad Urea fagrerrard sit aH 
afafaagrerel weer BAfaariio4 i 
We await edssia ae 


That state on the other side of darkness is the 


Matsya Puranam 


goal of tapasya. When at the time of creation, 
he begins to grow, His fourfold powers Jnana 
(knowledge), Varlagya (renunciation), 
Superhuman powers, and Dharma =§are 
manifested. These powers are natural for Him; 
they are not newly invented. 


Tifatgaradaht sats Ter a & tt 
WEI: Prive dead Fated 
Unit at: Vs aa TANT Tivo 

Ut PAA Ea AAA Tea 
Tague fe Tene ata Aci 


His body 1s all consciousness. Because, He 
resides in the heart of every Jiva, He 1s called 
Purusa; and because, He knows all the Ksettras 
(fields), He is called Ksettrajna. Because, He 
creates this world through dharma, 1.e., His 
nature, He ts called dharmika. 


Tifafaa wR a Gee AAT: 
wd faga: aaa: aa wahraaae ei 
Prghrererret J FUT AeA 

ast Uta waraisa fara arco 


The unmanifested conscious Ksettrajna does 
not become manifest by means of Buddhi. He, 
without any object in view, enters within the 
Ksettras (Prakrti) and seetng this. old 
unconscious Ksettra, thinks “all this is to be 
enjoyed by Me” and becomes thus endowed 
with consciousness. 


Riafearrdt aafaen Aet AT: TAT 
UT Ufa ARNT AT KGAA: hc 8 


Pgharaletted Tee AKT 
I WU AANA: BATS 


The Rsis denotes Himsa and movement. He 
who has acquired Brahmajnana, truthfulness, 
learning, tapasya and the knowledge of the 
Sastras is a Rsi. When this Rsi goes back and 
dissolves in the Highest Unmanifested by 
Buddhi yoga, he is called Paramarsi, the great 
Rsi. 


Chapter-145 

yi Cuds tide ! | 
TANT TTYAA Mer ETAT AAT 3H 
VAT: TAYSTM TSN AAT: Fas 
Parana Ter UTA: WT vi 


The Rsi denotes movement and signifies the 
ultimate place of rest of all the creatures. It 
signifies, also, that the Rsis has come (is born) 
of his own will. The mind-born sons of Brahma 
were born of [Svara Himself. They look the path 


of Nivrtti (renunciation of action) and took | 


refuge of the mahat (i.e., dissolved themselves 
in the Universal Cause). 


TATE US TATASRA: | 

SOTO Tae AAA SN C4 I 
BTA WTA TATA ETT : | 
RAAT MATT HAAR TS TAT: | 6 & It 


The word Rsi means supreme excellence. 
The sons of [Svara, both born from His mind 
and those begotten by Him, took refuge of that 
great mahat; hence, they were called Pramarsis. 
And as the mahat tattva comes after, it is also 
termed Rsi and those who are born of it are also 
termed Rsis. The sons of Rsis are also called 
Rsis. They are born from sexual union. 


Wad BHT A years reared: | 

era Gat a FT fase BGA: 1c It 
TM EH UAT ATR TCT : 
HAHA ASIA ASHI Aa Aci 
TAT AAT ST AAT AAT 

Seay aaited UHM ATA fasyati 2 8 


They also took refuge of the Mahat; hence, 
they are called Rsikas. The sons of Rsikas are 
called Rsiputrakas. Those, who hearing from 
others realise mahat tattva, are known as 
Srautrsis. The Rsis are of five kinds— 


1. Vedic sages. 


319 


Avyaktatma’, Mahatma, Aharhkara-atma’, 
Bhatatma’ and Indriyatma’. These different 
names are due to the differences in the natures 
of their knowledge. 


Tatas SSM: Toe: wg: 

Weal aaa YMG F APTN oll 

TAN AAT SA STAT: TTA: | 

UVAAGA TAN AAT AAAS TT: 1 8 2H 

SATO Ta aAT TT eM aa TA 

Bhrgu, Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulaha, Kratu, 

Manu, Daksa, Vasistha, Pulastya are the ten 
mind-born sons of Brahma, powerful like 
Isvara. They are styled Parama-Rsis on account 
of their being Rsis ever since their coming into 
existence and their recognising the mahat as the 


Supreme Excellence (Param). They are the sons 
of [Svara. 


IAN FEMA HYAATACTATN F 211 
SA ATMA seer: Alig eTAT 

He arethacsey fara: wage 3A 
Sed EI: WAAC Hea TWAT: | 

Aa YaTTateniey Waleratraaa eX 


Now hear about their sons who are also 
Rsis. They are— Sukrarcarya, Brhaspati, 
Kasyapa, Cyavana, Utathya, Vamadeva, 
Agastya, Visvamitra, Kardama, Balakhilya, 
Visrava, Saktivardhana who are Rsis by virtue 
of asceticism. Now hear of their sons begotten 
from women. 


a Wagga TET Flary 
archaea Fee: WET USM 
OUST: Greasy WAT AUTGTT: | 
TAU VG Uece WA GATOR 8 & Ut 


2. Unmanitested self, Subtle self, Primary self. 


3. Supreme spirit, Illustrious. 
4. Organic self. 

5. Elemental self. 

6. Self-consciousness. 


520 Matsya Puranam 
Viripa, Kavya, Mudgala, Utathya, Saradvana, 
Bayjisrava, Apasyausa, Sucitti, Vamadeva, Rsija, 
Brhachukla, Dirghatama and Kaksivana. These 
are 33 in number, and are the Mantrakrta Rsis. 


Sed Blah: Ta GAA WaT Ae: | 
Sa BUA Aste A a fag 
Ua Wad: Wa Heyy Fata 


YT; HVAT: WaT erat MTA 8 CI 
Salsa Waray ag: AAT AAT 
SBAUAAAT age: ASTIN 2H 
at: yyfeatarat searyeagirat 
Carat Pa AGMA: | Yo oi 


They are— Vatsara, Nagnahi, the spirited 
Bharadvaja, Dirghatma, Brhadvaksa, 
Saradvana, Vajisrava, Sucinta, Sava, Parasara, 
Smgi, Sankhapada, the king Vaisravana and 
they attained Rsihood by virtue of truthfulness. 
This is the progeny of ISvara and Rsis. Now 
hear about the mantra-krta Rsis. They are— 
Bhrgu, Kasyapa, Pracetaé, Dadhici, Urva, 
Jamadagni, Vedah, Sdarasvata,  Arstsena, 
Cyavana, Vitahavya, Vedhdsa, Vainya, Prithu, 
Divodasa, Brahmavan Grtsa and Saunaka. They 
are ninteen in number and of the family of 
Bhrgu. 


afetia Taney UTANST een: | 

PAATALAM WT: TA Hfata Ail Yo vl 

Teas APA Sree ea a 

TITS: Yoh: aad] Ted fo Vil 

MATS eat: Ba TI 

gaat faeusy HAST WAT Yo 3M 

SAAT WAT TAT ATAT ST 

aT: Brakes aMeaeAIa All Ro ¥I 

ait Grapes facie sift 

HAA AAMYTA MSTA AT 1 ok tt 

Now, listen to the chief ones of the family 

of Angirasa. They are- Angira, Inita, 
Bharadvaja, Laksmana, Krtavak, Garga, Smrti, 
Sankrti, Guruvita, Mandhataé, Ambarisa, 


Yuvanasa, Purukutsa, Svasrava, Sadasyavan, 
Ajamidha, Asvaharya, Utkala, Kavi, Prsacasva, 


Ud Wad: Bes arvaareg Fravern 

HIT: UA ATat FT Va A Vk I 

aifadl cacwla wed Terarter: | 

WATE WarAsa Afar: 1 Yoo 

cau ate: Faget Varley A: oC 

Sad aa: Wal Wath TNeda: | 

afaaaa winey FATT WUPIT: 11 20 8H 

ade SoMa: WIA ATE: | 

et TAA: TAA: HUSAGM! Vol 

sed ae fagar afar seranter: | 

feamaaey TAY SATA TT: 11 Vt 

aon fagrrear eferasaTaUT: | 

Ba cea Ya UAT Vez 

Cea Ca: Uy asta: | 

Foye WET: PST Ta AN Vedi 

Tare fasten aferst: atfyret at: 

STRANSA TSIEN SHATMAT All VV 

afaerrerat ed Fa: TUT: | 

The Rsis of the Kasyapa family are— 

Kasyapa, Sahavatsara, Naidhruva, Nitya, Asita 
and Devala. These six are Brahmavadi Munis. 
Attri, | Ardhasvana, Savasya, Gavisthira, 
Karnaka and Purvatithi, are the six Mantrakrta 
Rsis. Vasistha, Saktr, Pardsara, Indra, Pratima, 
Bharadavast, Mitravaruna and Kundina, these 
seven belong to the Vasistha clan and are 
Maharsis. Visvamitra, the son of Géadhi, 
Devarata, Bala, Madhuchhanda, Aghamarsana, 
Astaka, Lohita, Bhrtakila, Ambudhi, Devasrava, 
Devarata, Purana, Dhanaiijaya, Sisira, Mahateja 
and Salarnkayana, these thirteen belong to the 
Kausika clan. Agastya, Drdhadyumna, 
Indrabahu are the three Rsis of the Agastya clan 
devoted to Brahma. They are very illustrious. 


Chapter-146 


WAAR Ve TAT FATT VAG Ht 

afrarmni ait eat fagrat weararfesn 

WHY ATT: TFTA FT AAU LEI 

Ud WaAhal HAM Ava WaT: Tart 

afa frafa: wie Warder afetnat: i 22911 

Tea: ara avat wfrgataarera 

UAT Tal Sa AAATAT: TIA= UVM 

Vaivasvata Manu and king Aula of the 

Purtirava dynasty are said to be the great 
framers of the Mantras. Bhalandaka, Vasasva, 
Sankila are the chiefs of the Vaisya clan and are 
the great Mantrakrts. In this way these 92 being 
have been said to be Mantrakrtas or founders of 
the mantras. They have revealed various 


mantras. These are the sons of Rsikas and are 
known as Sruta-Rsis. 


Sta siareead ETT TOT Tata TaUAT ATS 
UST AA LTS eSATA SEAT OY GA 


KR 


CHAPTER 146 
Birth of Vajranga, his making captive by 
Indra and his release 
RAT ad: 
ae Wea alee aa War 
aera fara HIT FATS Ui 
The Rsis asked— “O Son of Sita, how did 
lord Matsya, describe the performing of the 


great adventure of killing Tarakasura? When 
was the story narrated?” 


ASAT HATTA TAT 
quia fraat gare A wea 
se WY warenle Were TAPIA 2 
O Sage, we don’t fell pleased with the 
listening of this nectar like story from your 
mouth, resembling the ocean of milk, by both 


our ears. Therefore, O Sita, possessing the 
enormous wisdom, you speak on the subject as 


521 


desired by us. 

aa sara 
GS WAT cal WTA TATE: | 
aa WAU Gat Sa: Seat farn sit 
Udy ae seat Unfererearftratera: | 
SAA WTS TATA STAT ¥ 


Sita said— “O Rsis, in the ancient times, 
Manu- the royal priest, put a question to lord 
Visnu, in the form of Matsya as to how was 
Svami Karttikeya born in the forest of reed?” 
Listening to the question from the mouth of the 
extremely illustrious Rsi, the resplendent lord 
Matsya spoke delightfully. 


Yee] sdid 

SAS ATS SRSA YT ATER: 

QUARAAA TET: A ABTA IG HI 

ate TANS BAP SAT: 

aay eg-gET Te AHA SE 

Lord Matsya said— O King, long time back a 

Daitya named Vajranga was born, who had a 
son named Taraka. The valorous Taraka, drove 
out the gods from their abodes, in the cities. The 


frightened gods went to Brahma. Finding the 
gods having been frightened, Brahma said— 


Weed FE cat: sce: TY: 
qrerracettaret errata aay 91 
O Gods don’t be afraid. Shortly a son of 


Siva and the grandson of Himalaya would be 
born, who will kill the Danava. 


aa: chet 7 afeafweaer a vem fea 
TAA AACA SAGAN CI 
After sometime the semen of Siva was 
discharged at the sight of Parvati, which was 


placed by him in the mouth of fire, in view of 
the future happenings. 


qand atgaet tat tarda 
faard womoaarasitet Fart FAs 


28 


CHAPTER 8 


Presiding deities of each sarga and the 
crowning of Prthu as king 


Aa ad: 
afer a: Ga alaat fae g 
yiarat a a Aaratearedraaes A: 11 v 


The Rsis asked, “O Sita, you have 
exhaustively narrated the details about the Sarga 
and Prati-sarga. You kindly spell out the names 
of the presiding deity of each one of these 
sargas. 


GAIA ATAT A ATAN VU 
AMAA ATT A BT 
Tat WY SHaOT A TRIN FH 
Sita said, “O Sages, when the king Prthu, 
occupied the place of the presiding deity of the 
universe, having been so consecrated, he 
became the lord of all. At that point of time, 
Hiranyagarbha Brahma, made the moon as the 
lord of Ausadhis, Yajnas, vratas, tapas, the 
constellations, stars, Brahmanas, trees, shrubs 
and creepers. He also made Varuna as the lord 


of waters. Kubera was made the lord of riches 
and the rulers. 


Tif a clenrferafesranrct 
FAIAATATTT A sei 
TAN Wa MOAT ITT YI 
Sear Sari 
tay ae faqUry 


? fis 


Matsya Puranam 


TayTrertar: WYATT 
AMT AT MCTATOTAN & It 


Visnu was made the lord of Adityas, while 
Agni was made the lord of Vasus. Daksa was 
made the lord of Prajapatis. Indra was made the 
lord of Maruts, Prahlada was made the lord of 
the Daityas and Danavas. Yama of the manes, 
Siva— the holder of the trident as the lord of 
pisacas or goblins, ghosts, Yaksas and the 
Vetalas. 


Weastet a Ufa freor- 

Te BAR AAA 
SESCIC ISR RIUIIE 

Ute Yara TAT & It 


Himalaya was made the lord of the 
mountains, the ocean was made the lord of big 
and small rivers, Citraratha was made the lord 
of Gandharvas, Vidyadharas and Kinnaras. 


AMTat arafanuars aalfed aeramfees 
Fay TATA TAN WTAE 9 
The immensely valorous Vasuki! was made 
the lord of the Nagas; and Taksaka was made 


the lord of serpents, Gajendra Airavata was 
made the lord of the elephants of the directions. 


qaoTaet Vara 
ISIE D RC CUM CAT 


wea YA: Aaa ATA <i 


Garuda was made the lord of birds, 
Uccaisrava was made the lord of horses, lion 
was made the lord of forest animals, the bull 
was made the lord of cows, Plaksa was made 
the lord of plants or herbs. 


SIG ERE CICH ICE IIGL 
1. A serpent, the king of snakes. In Mahabharata 


Vasuki is the king of a clan of barbarians called 
Nagas. 


Chapter-9 


yan feaurermanaray- 
AAT HTMOTTT TAN 8 Ut 
adistad Sferordeyenrt 
Aaa gUarwaTy 
B agrrd wt faritgraty- 
TA WT ATISTA: | Qo 
feroererarorgafiarityi 
yarafreargd Aart 
SMT Hater Eyraety: 
WAST TASHA 22 


Then Brahma at the start of the sarga, also 
consecrated the lords of all the directions. He 
established Sudharma, the killer of the enemies, 
as Dikpdla of the eastern direction. Thereafter 
Samkhapada, the lord of all was declared the 
lord of the southern direction, Ketum4n of the 
western direction, and Hiranyaroma as the lord 
of Northern direction. All of them protect the 
universe, destroying its enemies to this day. 


agree: YeATaea 

Tishaa: yet yey 
MASA MTA 

aaa UW: Vad 
Waal: ASA ATA 

AYA TaaTa Tg: 2M 


Various kings named above assembled 
together and joined the festivities of the 
crowning of the king Prthu. He was recognised 
as the sovereign of the world. The rule of the 
king Prthu continued till the end of the Caksusa 
Manvantara. He was succeeded by the king 
Vaivasvata Manu of the solar dynasty. 


Sta rat eTATOY areca 
ATATB USAT: Hg Ut 


kK * 


29 


CHAPTER 9 


Description of Manvantaras 
and seven Rsis 


ad sated 

Ud Weal AT: Wes WAS Ware 

Tae Ulta Ge WAT ATTEN VI 

Sita said, “O Sages, in this way, listening to 

the description of creation of the earth, lord 
Manu questioned lord Janardana, “O Lord, you 
kindly spell out the stories of the Manus, who 
had been born earlter.” 


TT SATE 
WATT Trg AIA Ae A Ae 
Wout ae Heres at BT a Baa I 
Uapferd: Wea YO) AUSSI 
SMT AT UT Sa ATARATA STATI 3 Ut 


Lord Matsya said, “O Rajendra, now I shall 
describe all the Manvantaras, the stories of all 
the Manus, the rule of each one of them and the 
details of the contemporary earth, in brief. You 
listen to the same with an attentive and peaceful 
mind. O Son of Martanda, in the ancient times, 
there had been the god known as Svayambhuva- 
Manvantara. 


Wha BVI: Ya FY Aes: Wa: 

AAIMATEA We: AAT Va Til 
PaO eferareeat Te Terferferey: | 
CARAT HAT AMAA HG 


Marici (Atri) and the like were the Saptarsis. 
This Svayambhuva Manu! had ten sons known 


1. The name Manu is specially applied to fourteen 
successive mythical progenitors and sovereigns of 
the earth described in the Code of Manu and in the 
later mythology as creating and supporting this 
world of moving and stationery beings through 
successive Antaras or long periods of time. 
Svayambhuva, who sprang from Svayambhu, the 
self-born or Brahma, who according to one account 
divided himself into persons, male and female, 


522 


While lodged in the mouth of Agni, the said 
semen satisfied the gods. Since it could not be 
digested by the fire, it came out of the belly of 
fire, by tearing it out. 


ufadt arahtatt Arey Wa 
TAY A ATA Tet AHI: 11 Volt 
Then it fell into the Ganga. While flowing in 
the Ganga, it reached the forest of reeds. Then 


Guha having the lustre of the sun was bor from 
the same. 


@ aafeaat arent Frater acaTgT 
Wea HA AA AT MTA LTA AT: 11 VAM 
The same child of seven days had killed 
Tarakasura. Listening to this astonishing talk, 


the best of the sages again spoke to Sita— the 
best of the sages. 


HIG SU: 

ATA TA HAT OTT TAT 

ferettor fe at afe areata USAT VV 

aagT Aa teas: HAT SRS: TT 

TINH: YA: AUT Tei 23 

The Rsis said— O Sita— extending grace to 

all, this story is full of surprises, besides being 
pleasant and the remover of the sins. We would 
like to listen to the same. Therefore, you kindly 
narrate the same elaborately in a realistic 


manner. In which race, Vajranga, having a 
powerful son named Taraka, was born? 


faftan: at aa UNA SeITAT T 
TRA F SE ABTA Te AAU evi 


What was the cause of his death. This as 
well as the story of the birth of Guha may 
kindly be elaborately narrated to us. 


aa sara 
TAA TAT: GAT SAT ATT TAT: | 
ae WswraaM ahaa A: FAT BW I 
eel MAM IMs HVAUTT TAM 
CHIC MID ROKCINCEC CDRA] 


Matsya Puranam 


2a agagaa & a afer ca 
& ayrara fase warafrad: Wy: Vol 
Siita said— Daksa Prajapati was the mind- 
born son of Brahma. He afterwards begot sixty 
daughters from his wife Vairini, out of whom 
he gave ten to Dharma, thirteen to Kasyapa, 
twenty-seven to the Moon, four to Aristanemi, 
two to the sons of Bahuka, two to the sage 
Angira and two to the learned Krsasva. 


afefafetrcafas waiter yca wan 
Geiafaran dea AMT STAG STN VSI 
HG MHA ATA MG AAT: 

TTA VAMC AA AS TAMATAATTN 88 I 
TAT ATTA Tats CHA: Bat: 
CoV: Tel ASfatra WAT: oll 


Aditi, Diti, Danu, Visva, Arista, Surasa, 
Surabhi, Vinataé, Tamra, Krodhavasa, Ira, Kadra 
and Muni; these thirteen were born of the 
consorts of Kasyapa who were the mothers of 
the three worlds and the cows. Through them all 
beings, moveable and immoveable, various 
Jivas and embodied beings were born. The 
Devas, Indra, Upendra, etc., were born of Aditi. 


fed: Wateertared fecoaatyrarea: 
SMaBy Sal: WaT WAT FRAT TAT: I 2 a 
Uferont faqaryaT WHEN: WAT: | 

APM: BETA HA: PTITASHT TAT | 2 PM 
AMINA Veh J TATCTOTTTT | 

faroaen forest AieaT WR Wea: 231 


Diti gave birth to the demons 
Hiranyakasyapa etc. Danu begot the Danavas, 
Surabhi the cows, Vinaté produced Garuda and 
other birds e.g., peacocks, etc. Kadru brought 
forth serpents like Sesa, etc., besides these other 
lower animals were given birth to by them. The 
demon Hiranyakasyapa ruled the Universe after 
conquering the three worlds along with Indra, 
the Lord of the Devas. 


Chapter-146 


aa: Say chert fexvarenforarea: | 

Free FACOTAT AST Pra GUT SAAT 11 BVI 

dat Preaqaratetra area 

WAL BPI Sa YAMA VeTACTTN 24 I 

GAL WeRsa GAT ASAT VE I 

faa ad % efa wee Brora 

SU ATS GARTH AT TAMSHUATI 291 

ae Fad TaN: Tea: TATE: 

SAAT: AT AAAI 2 CI 

Visnu, then, in time, killed the demon 

Hiranyakasyapa and the remaining Danavas 
were destroyed by Indra. When all the sons of 
Diti were destroyed, she felt grieved and sought 
from her Lord Kasyapa the boon of begetting a 
most powerful son who would annihilate Indra 
in battle, which Kasyapa granted on condition 
of her following certain prescribed rules with a 
pure mind for a thousand years; hearing which 
Diti regulated her life accordingly. Indra began 


to serve Diti vigilantly on her observing such 
severe austerities. 


SHAT Teas Tar feet: 
ara WR YMA ater aafs Pera eet 


When only ten years remained to complete 
the period of thousand years of her austerities, 
Diti became pleased and said to Indra- 


fefreara 
yaritraat war fate Ut wreaAgTe 
Afaeata BT Mla AT ASAT BAAN 3 oll 
Weed AM WAM Acad sAHveay 
See Fafa AOA SATII 3 8h 
wae Gera afaatsees TAT 

Oy CT AAA SST WAV HII 


Diti said- “O Son! I have well nigh 
completed the term of my vow; you will have a 
brother in conjunction with whom you may 
enjoy the riches of the universe undisturbed and 


923 


reign over the three worlds.” Saying this, Diti 
went to sleep and her long tresses of hair fell on 
her legs. As ill-luck would have it, Dit went 
over to sleep and Indra taking advantage of that 
loop-hole, entered into her embryo. 


Tat TaN WH alerts J cate! 
Uhh F WA: GUS VAN AAT FAS I 
UAE GAM ararenaera Tat fete: 
faqeRara UW Sa ATI: WaT TAT 3 YN 
Lord of gods, Indra, divided the womb into 
seven parts by his bolt. Afterwards out of rage 


he divided each part into seven. Diti awoke and 
said angrily— “O Indra! do not destroy my 


progeny. 
Taya feria: prem: Tera wreatereaa: | 
SATA SEA WAH Tel TATA 3 4 
Hearing those words, Indra came out of the 


embryo and stood with folded hands before his 
mother, shivering with fear. 


Wah Sara 

fea UN UTA: Welsnraeresen 
TAMA ades WH: Hel WAT 3 EM 
UAATA MHA AT SANT TAA: | 
arena vat wih fafa cacafran 3 01 


Indra said— “You went to sleep in course of 
the day with your hair unkempt. I have, 
therefore, divided your womb into 49 parts. | 
shall allot them places in the Heavens coveted 
by the Devas even.” 


SAM A Aer eat Hater 

Way eat Wa Tara AACA 3 6 I 

Ya marae ete Mensa esta 

Tt Aaya Tastateaarraarqi 3 8 


Hearing that, Diti said—- “Be it so” and 
afterwards went to her Lord and said— “O 
Prajapati! Grant me a powerful son who may 
have access to Heaven, may conquer Indra and 
be invulnerable to the Devas’ weapons.” 


524 


Sqm: 8 Alara at Ueifag faa 
— HA F ATA ¥ ol 


Te sOeliladucg:! 


om les Ufaa TAA Y 2 


The sage said to his grieved consort that she 
would beget such a progeny after practising 
penanecs for ten thousand years. “You will 
beget Vajranga whose body will be as massive 
as thunderbolt and iron, so no weapons would 
baffle him.” 


a 7 Maa at WT ATA AAAI 
STARA SATUT AT AUT AAT ¥ 2H 


Diti, after being thus blessed, repaired to the 
forest where she practised severe austerities for 
ten thousand years. 


AUS UNTAT AAT STAT 
UAT HATO AMSTEL Y 3 I 


At the close of her period of austerities, she 
begot a son who was of wonderful deeds, 
unconquerable and invulnerable even by the 
thunderbolt. 


O MAT VATA TATEATTTTT | 
SATS ATA WaT Wed: fee HLaTISAN vv 
He became thoroughly conversani in all the 
Sastras as soon as he was born and devoutly 


said to his mother— ““O Mother! direct me what I 
should do for you.” 


Tara at eer fafa a AM 

aa Y SAT: FAT: AGATA TAA I 

Ta a Mica a Wes yaaa Tl 

wefala aaa weg fated ae ve I 

Hl Ad: Ase UPA 

MARA IEMA: ATTT FAT it 

Diti said cheerfully- “O Son! Indra has 

killed several of my sons, you should go and 


take revenge and kill Indra.” That valiant 
demon on hearing those words said— “very 


Matsya Puranam 


well” and soon proceeded to Heaven. Going 
there that invulnerable demon tied Indra by his 
infallible noose weapon (Pasastra) and brought 
him before his mother as a lion carries away a 
small deer. 


Waar TAN HVAT MSTA: | 
AMT TA AAA Ara TATaTTALN ¥ 2 1 


At that time Brahma and the great sage 
KasSyapa went where the mother and the son 
were sitting fearlessly. 


eel Y Wate Tan HyaT Va a 
Wet Ua eas fae wa Se 
On seeing the Daitya both Brahma and 


Kasyapa spoke— “O Son! release this Indra. 
What have you do to with him’? 


STA aa: Wie: YA Tears TI 
STAR at Ant fats F Yara Ayo 


Disgrace is worse than death for an 
honourable man. He will get his release through 
our intervention which will be like his death. 


Wal TGR: PAU MATT 

Wada Yat aca fears fears A que vt 
Wed apna at tarter aftiom 
Urea F AA: MOAT AMA TATTN 4 21 


O Son! one, who gets his release through the 
intervention of others, bears on his head a 
crushing load. Although alive, he 1s really dead 
on account of his being conquered. The enemy 
ceases to be so, the moment he comes under the 
shelter of a magnanimous man.” 


TT HMA AM HAT FAM 
va TUT Ft WT WMTATAS NG I 


Hearing such words the demou Vajranga 
humbly said— I have nothing to do with Indra. | 
have only followed the imjunctions of my 
mother. O Deva! you are the Lord of the Devas 
and the Asuras and you are my grandfather. 


Chapter-146 


HY gal ea UT Wen: WaT: 

aaa 4 vada fast da A waq4 vi 

AMMA Maayan fay A: 

cere fered Set warts FATA 1G & UI 

I shall, therefore, abide by your commands. J 

hereby release this Indra. O, Deva! let my mind 
be eager to practise austerities which be 
gracious enough to let me pursue unmolested. O 
Lord! let there be happiness unto me through 


your grace.” After making this speech he 
became silent. 


Tararea 

TUR HUTA TTT aT 

ser feria Tt Wate WA: HOTA GI 
Sa WN: St Tava 
AAS Weal Ca: Usa Waa: 14 Ol 
Rigid A AAT: Hara: Trae: | 
TASS TA Aree TTT ATA SANG CI 


Brahma said— “O Son! following our advice 
you have practised rigid austerities and your 
heart is purified and you have reaped the fruits 
of your truth.” Saying so, Brahma created a 
damsel with beautiful eyes and gave her to him 
for his wife. She was named V4arangi by 
Brahma and afterwards the latter returned to His 
abode. Vajranga went with his wife to practise 
penances. 


AE: WT CergsataRaaa 
CA HATA: WT ASTAUT: 1G BH 
MAMA: Alot Tas ETT: | 
FREY ARATTRATTTPTTATIL & 0 1 
ad: USA Ush lel ALATA 
FARM WaT TAT UT Aaa & VI 
aaa at aaah aa 
Freert aat are waren Tareas 2 
wea wate anise favitfirer 
Ta J Whee TeATATS WSL g 31 


325 


That valiant Daitya practised penances for a 
thousand years with his hands uplifted. For 
another thousand years, he practised penances 
with his head cast downwards; for another 
thousand years, he warmed himself with the fire 
burning all round him and observing complete 
fast. For another 1000 years, he practise 
penances sitting in water and at the same time 
his wife seating herself on the bank of that lake 
also practised austerities by observing the vow 
of silence. She did not take any food and 
became deeply merged in tapasya. In the course 
of her austerities Indra appeared in the form of a 
very big monkey and terrified her. 


anh facie Fst Patrearsay| 

AAT ASU HU TTS & XI 

Tal YASWUUT GAT DT ATTA 

AURA St MATT HATTA GG I 

He began to make a noise by beating 

pitchers and broke down cucumber gourds and 
jars, etc., and afterwards began to terrify her in 
the form of a sheep and caused disturbances in 
the hermitage. Later on, he coiled round her 
legs in the form of a serpent and dragged her 


away to a great distance and made her go about 
at several places all over the world. 


TUAASM A TAT A ae TT BI 

AAT MATRUUT ARTATASTTAA & & I 

TAT WSU TEN: FH AASTAAA| 

SUE CURIE CAP SIBC CRUE MICHIE C TEAC 

Fane ael ta aareAtest Aan 

Wee Swat Wea YM aT CARAT G cI 

a wma esr yet: Westar: | 

SaTT At AUNT aT MrSaTT NG 8 

The powerful lady was strong with her 

tapasya, so Indra could not kill her. Indra next 
assumed the form of a jackal (or a frog) and 
began to pollute her Asrama. Indra, then, 


assumed the form of a cloud and drenched the 
monastery with rain and when Indra did not 


526 


cease to cause her annoyance, the consort of the 
Daitya Vajranga thinking it to be the mischief 
of the mountain she made up her mind to curse 
him (the mountain) when the latter appeared 
before her, in human form, and said fearfully. 


We AUST SB: Wess Bacher 
fawd F AIT SRA: WaAyTAA: 19 01 
“C) Varangi! I am not wicked. | am worthy 
of being adored by everybody. It is Indra who 


out of wrath is trying to terrify you and bring 
you under various delusions.” 


Wat ataant Aidt: le AAAS aS: | 
Tey TT q WTA HATA : | 
TE: War AAS TAT THAT 9 VI 
At this time, the period of thousand years 
was complete; Brahma being pleased with their 


austerities appeared before them on the banks of 
the lake and said to Vajranga. 


Taare 

aera adenied sfae fof 
Vaymetcrara ceraerrar Fife: | 
Jara Wisieratest VaearTAASAN 9 VI 


Brahma said— “O son of Diti! get up from 
the water; I shall grant you everything.” 
Hearing those words, that Daitya ascetic got up 
from the water and with folded hands said to 
Brahma, the Father of the Universe. 


qa Sara 
AT UT TMA: VY AT ATTA: 
ATA TASH WAI AAATN 3 I 
Vajranga said— “O Father! free me from the 
Asuric tendencies; and grant me eternal region. 


Let me always practise austerities and let my 
body be sustained.” 


wanteata Ft al ST HATTA 
aarmsta ware ¢ wate Perera: novi 
“It will be so”, having said thus Brahma then 


returned to His abode. Afterwards Vajranga 
also finished his course of austerities. 


Matsya Puraénam 


MEN Aa Tat A cays Taal 
enfae: A Ne Tet Waa SUG I 
Meld Ween Fa ate ena 
Sad at frat sat Ty weatearary 
a facta cers: Ware UfTaRaaq Vg I 
He felt hungry and went to his monastery 
with the intention of taking some food; but he 
did not see his wife; he entered into the thick 
hill forest and came across his wife who was 
crying in a very distressed condition. He 
consoled her and addressed her thus. 
TaN Sava 
at asuapd we aaeis fare 
a& OT aM waearta vires W gfe MARV 
Vajranga said— “O Dear! who has injured 
you? Who wants to go to the region of Death. 


What desire of your shall I fulfil, O beautiful 
one! tell me instantly. 


Sta Srey TVTTTTUT 
TETAS AH MAA SEAT MN YE 


KKK 


CHAPTER 147 
Birth of Tarakasura with the boon of 
Brahma 
anya 
Trancaufasihen afea wfsatt a 
USM SAU AAT FTI: RH 
Varangi said— “O Husband, Devaraja Indra 
is of cruel temperament and has frightened me 
in several ways like a helpless widow. He has 


humiliated me, tortured me and troubled me the 
most. 


STEUNNUA MUR ATTA 
Wa Fare Ue F:aeareTarT 2A 


Therefore finding no respite from my 
sufferings I am getting ready to end my life. 
Therefore you give me a son, who might be 
able to rescue me from the ocean of grief.” 


Chapter-147 


Uaqath: a 2a: HIATT: | 
wens carers wht FeTAT: 1131 
qa: Gq YAaea AAMT Tear: | 

Mea F AAT THT Fal HC FAV 
BATT Aal Aa Bara falar: 

ata Tet MTATANTATTAT PTT 


Hearing the words of his wife the heart of 
Vajranga, the ternfic Daitya, was upset in 
anger. Though Vajranga was himself strong 
enough to take revenge from Indra, but still the 
powerful Daitya decided to perform tapas 
again. Learning about the decision of the demon 
to perform the tapas again, Brahma reached the 
place where Vajranga— the son of Diti was 
lodged and spoke to him in sweet voice. 


Talara 
fan os sored Preant aeiresra 
MUA a Tat Fle WeTaAg I 
MAACA FATT AHA 
AU AA CNA AAS A ATA 9 I 
AM OMAHA AVA A AAMT TE: 
TN We UT AM HASTE CU 


Brahma said— “O Son! Why do you wish to 
practice again rigid austerities? Why do you not 
take your food? Tell me clearly. The benefits 
derived from a thousand years’ fast have already 
accrued to you by forsaking the victuals that are 
at your disposal. The renunciation of achieved 
objects is great than the abandonment of things 
unachieved.” 


MATTOS SA: Waferraare 
fearererren yet fe TATSTTAN 8 


Hearing the words of Brahma, Daityaraja 
Vajranga— the ascetic, thinking over the words 
of Brahma in his mind, then spoke. 


aan Jara 
Sas WaT SET AMAA aT TAM 
Ufeat fae sat Gadt YIRSTETETI 201 


927 


Vajranga said— “O Lord, after concluding 
my tapas at your command, | found Varangi, 
my chief queen seated under a tree crying 
miserably.” 


UW Waa F FAS SATA UAT 
fata ada te aad fa faarefan een 


I felt painful at the sight and I asked the 
beautiful lady, “Why have you been placed in 
such a condition? You tell me what is needed 
by you?” 


SAT A AA ea Wart Cafeearwa 
aaa Sra Ui AAS STA fat AN VM 
O Lord of Speech! when I so asked afraid 


Varangi, the beautiful one, spoke with shaking 
voice, the reason for the same. 


AFT 
Taneaquagien aire ufsate a 
USM SATA ABA ATT 1 83 
SC GIAAU a MOT STATA 
Ua Hah the Mess NTA Vv 


Varangi said~ I am frightened by Indra like 
an orphaned woman, frightened her variously, 
humiliated her, dragged her and caused 
sufferings to her variously. Finding no respite to 
her sufferings, she was about to end her life. 
Therefore she desired to have a son who could 
rescue her from the ocean of grief. 


Wage HYSTA: Ya ETA:| 
aT a aieeaia ware fafeataarqn 24 1 


Hearing her words, my mind was disturbed. 
Therefore, I shall perform severe austerities to 
beget a son who could conquer the gods. 


UTM Tat ea: VAM RaRTAT 
TART SATA WATT TAA 8G I 


The lotus-born and four faced Brahma 
hearing those words of demon-king spoke out 
cheertully. 


528 


Telrara 


atet FATA aea aT aerst seat farm 
Uae AA ATT Afar WaTaCT: 1 V9 N 
Brahma said— “O Son! consider the fruit of 
your intended austerities as accomplished. You 
need not undertake to practise any more ngid 


penances. You will be blessed with a most 
valiant son named Tarakasura.” 


cadet ¢ aftrecter farterct: | 
SoH STAT wioraer FTAA ke 
STTISaTATT Afea Bhar: | 
at Sea Hal TF WMT: TAT WAT Ve 1 
The hair on the head of the Deva women 
will always remain untied. The lord of Daityas 
hearing the benediction of Brahma cheerfully 


returned to his consort after saluting Him. They 
then both joyfully returned to their hermitage. 


aatnfed ma ait arafort 

Yul avast W aaMtat Wa Fol 
WIA F sels aerectaHyasT 2 VU 
Tale Aer Feat AAA WHAT 
ATMEET: Ud ATA ATT: 12 VM 
aya yfrare Ageaterg sate 
UTA WE: slfet VAtere FES AAT 23 
Wd Weret are we aie wer: 
STATA AAT ATALANTA: 1 2 
AYCTTAMAT ATP T TG 

aat VeleAa STAT ararat FRSTTAT HAG I 


Afterwards Varangi bore the child through 
the grace of her lord and held the babe for a 
thousand years in her womb. She then brought 
forth the valiant child; at the time of his birth 
the whole world with all the oceans and 
mountains trembled with fear and a strong wind 
began to blow. Worthy sages recited their ista 
(favourite) mantras, snakes and the deer, and 


Matsya Puranam 


other ferocious animals began to hiss and howl. 
The Sun and the Moon lost their lustre and all 
the quarters were enveloped in smoky shadows. 
On the birth of that valiant Asura all other 
Asuras and their wives repaired there with great 
glee. Asura women began to dance and sing 
with joy and there were great rejoicing and 
festivities in their houses. 


faroUTa Sat: WAS AaIa 

AU TATA SBT SAOTTTAT AAT VE I 

age 4 taafawd J Aa aM 

HATA CAAT VS TACT: 11219 1 

siufirniset: aad: aorerateataty: 

Tag TENT Yfratrerany: 1122 1 

BT Wel erst areal aT: 

Sara SAasIEr afHaemias FAN WI 

Indra and other Devas were sorrow-stricken, 

and passed their time with a grievous heart and 
Varanegi felt rejoiced to see her new-born babe. 
At that moment she did not consider it a 
difficult feat to conquer Indra. Tarakasura 
proved himself to be most valiant from the 
moment of his birth. Afterwards, the Asuras 
Kujambha and Mahisdsura who were so 
powerful as could uplift the world, annointed 
Tarakasura and acknowledged him as their 


suzereign. O Sages! Tarakasura after being thus 
annointed addressed the valiant demons. 


Slat ATTRA WRT AAT aera 
TATARSTAN SEAT: It B19 U 


KKK 


CHAPTER 148 


Performing of tapas by Tarakasura, 
receiving of his boon from Brahma and the 
preparations of war between the gods and 

the Daityas 


as Sara 
TOA: Aa Aaa WA Wea: | 
sara faaat afe: ad: qerer faa a 


Chapter-148 


aaa Cal: AAA SAAT: | 
a TaTat a fares ATHTTTN IN 


Taraka said— ‘“‘O Valorous Asuras, you listen 
to my words attentively.” All of you should 
think, initially about your welfare. OQ Danavas, 
the gods are in the habit of destroying our race. 
Therefore to oppose them is the dharma of our 
race. Our enmity with them 1s eternal. 


SIT MNT: GUO HAST aT 
CAAMSATATM A Tt WATATT 3 
fay Tava Feat Wass YTARAT! 
aeMtet arent aat art fed: Tawi 
TA: AURA MATS A TTT 
fercraray fe yea: feretete area 


All of us depending on the strength of our 
arms, we shall march on for the subjugation of 
the gods. There is no doubt about it. O sons of 
Diti, I do not think it proper to start a row with 
the gods without equipping myself with the 
strength of the tapas. Therefore, I shall perform 
the tapas initially and then we shall defeat the 
gods and enjoy all the comforts of the three 
worlds, because only a strong person can avail 
of the inaccessible strength. 


ad aa preaift coerce: fara: 

THM SAA: Ae TEA TAT YC FUG 

TY Weare Ta Sea: eT: | 

USTSIM AAT He: HATATATTI 9 

An unstable person with wisdom cannot 

protect the unstable fortunes. Hearing the words 
of Tarakadsura, all the Danavas and Daityas 
present there, felt surprised. Then all of them 
observed, “This is all-right”, “This is allright”. 


Thereafter Tarakadsura reached the cave of the 
Pariyatra mountain. 


Gag HaAraArel Arafat ay 
AMMAN AAA aa AAT TSAI © I 
Tet: Taal We Faraeagasrayt 


529 


Haag YAH TeHerHerTN 2 


The mountain had enough of flowers 
blossoming in all the seasons. There were 
various types of herbal medicines, falling of the 
various types of juices of the metals, having a 
large number of houses like the buildings, 
surrounded by thick forest trees on all the sides, 
decorated with kalpavrksas of various types, 
and colours, with different species of birds. 

AMITAANN ATA eaesTeT PTTL 
WI AeHat CePA fayet AW: Qoll 

Several springs -were flowing in_ the 
mountain and it had various types of lakes. 
Reaching the dark cave of the mountain, 
Taraka, started performing severe tapas. 


PRE: Taq: Taare: 
Wea Vt VAT F ATA isaATT VV 
Ta: TAaTegTHS ae ae fey for 
Tae Fetarat sat Fraraat wT VIM 


Initially he remained without food, with the 
sequence of a hundred years at a time, then he 
lived on the five fires, then consuming the dry 
leaves, then consuming the water alone, he 
performed tapas. Then he performed homa, by 
offering the pieces of flesh cut off from the 
body, as a result of which his body was 
deprived of the flesh. 


areataataat aed TAA aATT 
WAT: WANA GAT TAT TAA LIN 
Thus, with the removal of the flesh from his 
body, he appeared like the mass of tapas. With 


the lustre issuing from his body, all the living 
beings around him, started suffering. 


SE GU: Aa TTA Tes Atha: | 
Uda FSM WT AAT OI 


All the gods felt frightened and disturbed 
with tapas. At that point of time Brahma felt 
extremely pleased with his tapas. 


530 


AHA At Ald WTA Tarayerare 
weal a seni a ft: wether 
Sara ATH Sat FAT VITA FTI VGN 
Then he started from the heaven in order to 
shower boon on Tarakasura and reached the 
Pariyatra mountain. Then he, the lord of the 


gods, reaching the cave, where Tarakasura was 
performing tapas spoke in sweet voice. 


Garet TTA AST ATTA TAT 
at quia ofat ad wate ada 2g 1 
Brahma said— “O Son! now your penances 


are over, nothing further is left for you to 
accomplish. Ask for a boon what you desires.” 


SAMAR CT: MOTATATa fasyy i 
TAT WraeTyeaT WoT: VA faHA: 1 Vo 
Hearing those words of the Lord Brahma, 
Tarakasura saluted the Great Lord, and with his 


hands, joined together, said as follows. 
ath said 


za yaaa ater wetfaahoa 
PaMtaparcHiat MAT: MAM TT Vit 
aa a aft ator Hae: Wert: 

aay Fregtfeet drat: Ht: Grav afta 
TAME Waal watts A ata: een 
TAA: TAYATAA ATT FT AETATL 
BNE UAT AT AW AA ele Tai oll 
Ua ef cae At A Trad ae: 


Taraka said— “O Lord! you know what ts in 
the mind of everyone. Every one wishes to 
conquer his enemy in revenge. Natural enmity 
exists between the Devas and ourselves. For the 
former have driven away the latter from 
everywhere and well nigh annihilated them; I, 
therefore, long to be able to be the sole deliverer 
of the Asuras through your grace. That I should 
not die at anybody’s hands and by any kind of 
arms is the desire that 1s uppermost in my mind. 


Matsya Puranam 


I do not want any other thing. O, Lord of 
Devas! Grant this boon to me.” 


agarea al ert fate: Beas: 2 Vi 
1 yer fat get teat tera 
AAAS STI YS AANA MSA 2 2 


Hearing those words of Tarakasura, Brahma 
said— “O Great Daitya! No living thing can 
escape death, so you might seek your death 
from someone whom you do not fear.” 


ad: Ufa eas: fergie MATA 

aq Hea BeqMacrA fat: 112 3 1 

TAM AA at sat afenhraTaTy 
ary fated cat Seatsfe caenATeTAA VI 


Then that Asura thought a while and 
becoming haughty said— “Let me die then from 
the hands of a babe of seven days old.” 
Granting him the boon, Brahma went to heaven 
and the demon returned to his abode. 


Silo aoa F det Sea 

Una: Weare fefa caro aM V4 I 
aerate Were ah Ce 

HAA Oy Taree Ura fea 1 VE 
WMG-ASTSTS HHUA TAT: | 
HUAN AAA A AAAI ol 
uftagiurearont Fferg: wa vat fa 

HIM Tolaeaa gs AT YHEYAUTA 2 C1 
eeaUTeerals Nelteeret TAT 
SAT: BT YM Fated Aa ATEN VSM 


When Taraka returned after completing his 
penance, the other Daityas came and 
surrounded him. It seemed as if the Devas had 
surrounded Indra. When Tarakasura began to 
rule; the seasons, by his terror, seemed to be 
endowed with their qualities and became 
incarnate before him; the  Lokapalas 
acknowledged his sovereignty, and became his 
servants; lustre, beauty, intelligence, wealth and 
authority all began to serve openly the Danava 


Chapter-148 


lord and fixed their abode in him. The nymphs 
incessantly began to wave chowries over the 
head of the sovereign, seated on his throne with 
scent rubbed on his body, head decorated with a 
lofty crown and arms adorned with armlets. 


aseat STAY STAT A TEA: | 
PAASTATA A ATH ATAT: I 3 0 
Ua wants are a farted aTceATaT: | 
TAY AfrareeT: WATS: 11 3 2 


The Sun and the Moon served the purpose of 
lamps, wind that of fans and Dharmaraja acted 
as his foremost herald 1n all his actions. Having 
thus reigned for many years, Tarakasura 
haughtily said to his ministers. 
ath satd 


TR art fa 4 aa faery 
afar gtat ar oifteed TA 3 21 
YadseMts TATA aH Wa Fei 

ferooy: faret at Hater fereSd AT AAT 3 BH 
Taare: TAT: TherdtsaTaeeT: | 
areaet aferater fea wHsraay Taxi 
eA A A a: Hfegeaeabed AT: 

SAT TET gaa g fearyrer 34 i 


Taraka said— “What is the use of this empire 
without reaching heaven. I have no peace 
without waging war with the Devas. Even now 
do the Devas enjoy the sacrificial offerings in 
heaven and Visnu 1s not leaving Laksmi. He 1s 
sitting fearlessly! The lotus-eyed consorts of the 
Devas are enjoying the company of Their Deva 
lords in the celestial pleasure nooks! Even now 
they are enjoying by drinking wine and playing 
in play-rooms. Even now the lotuses are seen in 
their hands. He who, being born a man, does 
not show his strength in this world, 1s useless. It 
is better for such a man not to be bor at all. 


Wafage a aft BTA 
TMA Halla A aM 


331 


alfa fe at atestaa feat 
Tar B SASTS Ba Ag AN SEN 
One who does not fulfil the desires of his 
parents, does not drive away the troubles of his 
kinsmen, or does not earn fame, is indeed like a 
dead man inspite of his being alive. 
TAIATTAM Sar 
TASTE VITA 
. t * T * 
det TY sntaderany 
at UN AAS 
Sa TY AHaeasyi 3 91 
Consequently, I shall presently wage war 
and fight with the Devas to acquire the treasures 
of the three worlds. Make a chariot of eight 
wheels ready for me, and O, unconquerable 
Daityas! let the powerful Daityas join my army 
to give me support. Prepare my banner of 
golden cloth and make my umbrella with 
hangings of pearls.” 
ANG AT: ea TAA AT Sa: 
WATT TMT Deh THAT 3 
Med WT WNT Sea WAT: 
TUM ASAT ATBAa ATTN 3 <I 
yecmraateant aqahrafacgay 
ATS STA MWAATETATSTAN  0 N 
faurita caer Aid: Matsa: | 
SAAT Se Sea AVS TAHA: 11 ¥ 2 


Hearing those words of Tarakdasura, the 
Danava named, Grasana who was commander 
of the Daitya king carried out the orders of his 
lord. He mobilised instantly all the forces of the 
Daityas by beating his drum. Afterwards 
wherever Tdrakadsura made his appearance 
seated in his magnificent chariot of eight 
wheels, drawn by a thousand horses, draped in 
white and extending in 4 yoyjanas, there were 
various kinds of songs and ceremonies; and it 


932 


was provided with various amusement courts. 
The chariot of the Daitya king was as majestic 
as the vimana of Indra. It was followed by an 
army of 10 crores of chief Daitya warriors who 
were very valiant. 


SATAN AT HT: HASTA: | 

afee: Hat Wa: arerafafrera ¥ 2 

TE SH: YS SPAM ATA: 

STIS WATER Yaa ARTAT: 1 ¥ 3 I 

cera fiitantr: art AUST THAT: | 

TATAAASLUN ATATTATEATTCTT: HSB 

The army was under the command of the 

following ten chief Daityas viz., Jambha, 
Kujambha, Mahisa, Kunjara, Megha, Kalanemi, 
Mathana, Jambhaka, Nimi and Sumbha. 
Besides them there were other valiant Daityas 
to work as their lieutenants. Thus the huge army 
moved on. Besides these, hundreds of other 
ferocious and violent chiefs of the Danavas, 
looking like mountains marched with the forces. 
The ferocious demons were armed with various 
kinds of weapons; and they were very skilful in 
using them. 

ATHANTA TI UR: HART: | 

HTM AAU SATS HTT BU 

Ud WA dat WATT ea TT 

Gi fagaciitet Horerearagati YG I 

aera J Way Aled Aaa 

emia at 7 IMTS HOTA aSATI vo II 

SATA T ATTRA 

MAT MGA SATO SAAT ¥ 6 I 

THT TW el fafa 

wea ao fae A AST THT we 

SATA WH oe: freraaet: Gt: 

WY WTA F FTHAIIY ott 


The golden banner of Tarakasura was highly 
awe inspiring; that of Grasana bore the symbol 
of alligator and fish, that of Jambha was made 


Matsya Puranam 


of iron faced Pisaca; the symbols of an ass with 
a moving tail was on the banner of Kujambha, 
and then was a lofty iron crow in the banner of 
Sumbha. Similarly there were various kinds of 
symbols on the banners of other Daityas. A 
hundred swift running tigers adorned with 
golden garlands, were yoked to the chariot of 
Grasana; Jambha also occupied a_ similar 
invincible chariot carried by a hundred lions. 
Many asses were yoked to the chariot of 
Kujambha; camels to that of Mahisasura and 
horses in the chariot of Kunjara (Gajasura). 


Tee gait: Hat: areas: 
Gea: wares Fftrerrst: iy eh 
ademas: fered :| 
VACA: HO SSAA: 1 & 2M 
Farearataert Misra aferort faery 
PASTAS RY ATOPIC 1 3 
Tat AM ee: Use SAAT 

HTH: HUTS VATA: HG YI 
IAM FATT AAG : Wert: | 

SASH SAAT ANT ATAPI WG GA 


The chariot of Megha was drawn by many 
terrible rhinoceros, that of Kdalanemi by 
innumerable elephants and that of Nimi, by 
many mountain-like mad elephants. The 
Daityas ascended their respective chariots. The 
elephants were emitting juices from their 
temples, four-teethed, one hundred hands in 
measurement, well-trained, and terrible like 
clouds; the horses were brightly decorated with 
golden ornaments. The demon Mathana seated 
himself on the south side with a noose in his 
hands in a chariot decorated with a white flyflap 
and beautifully perforated work and _ floral 
garlands and his body decked in the sweet- 
scented sandal paste. Jambhaka took his seat on 
a camel decorated with bells and garlands. 
Sumbha seated himself on a big sheep coloured 
white and black. Besides them many other 


Chapter-148 


valiant warriors marched, seated on_ their 
respective conveyances. Those great Asuras 
were all furious, daring and of wonderful deeds. 


WAVS TAHA: HUSAITATTUT | 
ATAUAAAT AST ATTA TSTSTOTT: 1 & & I 
TATUM AATASTA TAT | 
TATA ATRIA HI 19 1 
AMMA GAT TTT: | 
tert safest aed STATI C1 
TITTUS UAEG: AST 
WRASHA SI AQUPTTATH TT & 8 1 


In front of that awfully arrayed army 
wearing earrings, various kinds of upper 
garments, highly perfumed garlands, followed 
by bards, exquisitely invigorating music began 
to play. The army excited by heroic words and 
pride inspiring songs of the bards relating the 
deeds of their ancestors, assumed a most 
formidable aspect. The Daityas were foremost 
and all were “Maharathas” (great warriors). 
That army of the demons agitated with chariots, 
ferocious horses and elephants and banners, got 
ready to fight the Devas and looked terrible. 


Uateraat AeaaATS ATCT 
Seal F Saat WTA TET VIPATAN G oll 
G Teal FT at feat WER era: 
WTA HE CAAT Tera WATT € vit 
Afterwards, the celestial messenger of the 
Devas, seeing the army of the Daityas went to 
give this information to Indra. On reaching the 


divine court of Indra, he delivered his message 
to the assembly. 


Tea Sate’ Prtfetafact a: 
qemfayardd Asst Set TENA: g 21 


Large-armed lord Indra, on hearing that 
news, closed his eyes for some time, and then 
said to Brhaspati— 


SF sara 


aorta fanetsa tari aaa: el 


533 


ard fara agate aeqoreraaarqi & 31 


Indra said~ “O Preceptor! The time for the © !e 
Devas to fight with the demons has come, ?"™*- 
Please, therefore, enlighten me as to what we t we 
should do now.” 


Udeseal J aa wee frat: 

STATA MATT FeeaerwaTTTT: 1 & 

renga Tye citheargegT wenferitey 

Raita Gas Patter PART & & UI 

OH HALIM SH SUA AGTAT! 

Tet sere Menara TAN & & I 

a Aa BAR ESTA: | 

TTATAUT aT set art Wah a fa GON 

VASAT SUSIsA aa as Tera 

Say Hat AG Weel A AAMT E Cl 

Wait AAT HT: AT Wee 

RAMU era Tatra G 8 

TR Sat Pet are anit wateare 

TATGSHATT AY SATU HT ATT: 1119 0 I 

aera feweat Beat WAT eTATT| 

Sat: TARA HeUd A ACTA gi 

WRIST MGT AM AeSseHsTA 

ud F agad Sfeglarisweracaary 9 21 

Vay: Wea Tanayars A 

arial A Usd wWaramaaan 31 

Hearing those words of Indra the wise W1S¢ 

Brhaspati, the master of speech, replied- “O° 
Lord of the Devas! those who want to conquer ‘U''*" 
the enemy having four fold armies as chariots, 1°": 
horses, elephants and infantry should resort to . to 
either of the four policies beginning with Sama >@!4 
(peace overtures). This is the eternal procedure. jure. 
Peace, dissension, gift and war are the four four 
policies in the Nitigastra (war politics). These hese 


four means are to be applied after due due 
consideration of the time, place and the strength "sth 


534 


of the enemy. Friendship and peace cannot be 
made with the Daityas. For they are well- 
established. You cannot sow dissension 
amongst them, for they are one intact body. You 
cannot give them gifts for they are endowed 
with wealth. So the last resource, 1.e., war 1s 
inevitable. If you, therefore, agree, to crush 
them would be the best thing, because, one who 
makes overtures for peace with the wicked, 
works in vain. When magnanimous men out of 
their liberal understanding and kind disposition 
makes overtures for peace, the wicked think that 
they do it out of fear. The good do not 
misunderstand and come round when persuaded 
to make peace but the case of the wicked 1s 
otherwise. The wicked always take it for 
granted that proposals of peace originate from 
fear; it is, therefore, best to fight with them and 
subdue them; then you can apply other means. 
Persuasion for peace 1s best in connection with 
the good; the wicked can never turn out good. 
The good may persuade themselves to change 
their natures on certain occasions but the 
wicked never do so. This 1s my advice, but you 
should also consider over the matter.” Indra 
after a long pause, thus addressed the Devas. 


SF Jara 
Aaa Wart SOT AHA: 
WIA AMHR AUS Fe eTAT: 1119 ¥ 1 
@ afater frat fret seat: Uf TaTeraar: | 
TAMA TTT SAAT: 19 G I 
Tai Aafetated evs wa faeraary 
fread GATT: Vt Aya ATE I 
TAA A PreaoT aaa: 
AA FAA ATT FEAT: Vol 
a Vaal Heal Vina feat: 

Indra spoke- “O Dwellers in heaven! hear 


my words with great attention. You are the 
partakers of the sacrificial offerings and of 


Matsya Puranam 


Sattvika natures, you are peaceful, contented 
and good. Always installed in your greatness, 
you carry on the work of this universe. The 
Danavas are causing you unnecessary pain. 
They can not be approached with the three 
policies of Sama, Dana and Bheda. They 
deserve being subdued in war. We should now 
lay down our plans. Arrange my army. Due 
reverence should be shown to the presiding 
Deities of arms and they should be worshipped. 
Get ready all the vehicles of war and 
conveyances. March on quickly after making 
Dharmaraja the commander of the army.” 


Se: Uae CaM FT WAT NCI 
SATA SAAS TTT 
TRBATONA Aes Aaeat: 198 
Ta Wafer Fae CATT SHAT 
amt ATA VA Aaa 2 ol 
iain Uftantea: | 


4 =) 


US UU 

SATS: ateaget — | 

THATS SHAVE FRAT: It 6 

AATAS) HEM WTaTAaTT 

ARTA SAT MATA freA 2 3 

Hemera Ha: Wat AAA: | 

Telaetal Sat SATA WEI 6 SI 

Hearing that, the principal Devas began 

preparations for war. They then made ready an 
invincible chariot drawn by 10,000 horses, 
decorated with golden bells and endowed with 
extraordinary powers. The chariot of Indra was 
brought out by the charioteer Matali in which he 
took his seat. Dharmaraja advanced forward on 
his bufallo. His followers, of very violent 
temper, surrounded him. The eyes of Yama 
began to burn as if flames were rising towards 
the sky at the end of a Kalpa. Agni sat on a goat 


armed with His Sakti weapon. Vayu came with 
all His force and armed with a goad. Varuna 


Chapter-148 


came riding on a serpent and the god Kubera 
presiding over the demons came armed with a 
sword and seated in a chariot drawn by men. 
Kubera came armed with a sharp sword and a 
terrible club, roaring like a lion. 


TleMaerat a Aatsaentaan 
Tit: Uearedteprarat STATS GI 
SHUTS ASSAY TATE: | 

AUS RGUST, SAAT NS I 


The Sun, the Moon and the Asvinikumaras 
came cut with Their Caturangini army and the 
Gandharvas shining like gold came along with 
their leaders and on their backs were hanging 
golden badges. They wore golden garments, 
peculiar armours, jewels; they were seated in 
chariots and armed, appeared in the field of 
battle with their banners bearing the symbols of 
fish, etc. 


HATCHES TATA THES: | 

Tea etal Frere fayeu: 1c 9 
Tacitaraeen Wl Mears oAT: 
ASTEAT AMT MIATeAT TST SC 
TM: FOALS ATA VT AKT: | 
MARAT WaT SATHANA: 116 8 
aiftenhnrag Fyrataet at 

META MTA AT TOTAAL & 0 1 
TAA AAT TETTa 
a ferrafaranfent: 11 2 2 


seaeereest fh Tatifersi¢ 2 
TAAL SETS TT 
UTM etaed MATT FTN 31 

etal Uheard Wid TaHMaraT 
FAN AST AAAS ARTA: 11 2 YI 


The valiant Raksasas came wearing red 
apparels of the colour of Java’ flowers with 


1. Hebiscus Rosa Sinensis 


935 


their red hairs streaming in the air, clad in iron ‘ron 
and with banner bearing the symbol of vulture, 4. 
The ferocious Nagas with their head dresses ; 
hissing like the clouds, appeared seated in In 
chariots, wearing armour, holding torches and 
armed with bolts, clubs, swords, etc. The 
terrible Yaksas came wearing black dress, 
armed with formidable bows and arrows, 'WS, 
decorated with gold and jewels and having the the 
symbol of a copper owl on their banner. The The 
Raksasas came wearing tiger skins and 
ornaments of bones with their banner streaming 1ng 
with the wings of vulture. They had Musalas in $ 1n 
their hands and they remained unseen by any. any. 
The Kumfaras came armed with clubs, clad in J in 
white and bearing a white banner having the the 
symbol of a bird (or arrow?). They were all all 
riding on infuriated elephants and had keen <een 
swords with them. A silver crane bedecked with with 
hangings of pearls was put on the banner of © of 
Varuna, and the banner of Kubera was was 
decorated with a jewelled tree ornamented with with 
precious stones, rubies, etc., and seemed to! to 
reach the heavens. The huge banner of Yama ama 
was decorated with the symbol of a wolf made 1ade 
of wood and tron. 


TRA Bete VIA Weare 
eae Sat MRTalarreAT 8 4 A 


The banner of the Lord of Raksasas was was 
adorned with a demon’s head, and those of the | the 
Sun and the Moon with golden lions. 


HS tafe qa 
Saag ad FaaTeTa PTT eG Ut 
eat Maa fararaesay 
CANTATAS ATTA PTL 8 19 
CAT AT SATA SHA TTA 
HEART Aes SAHA 8 CU 
fears faeorart 
Faure va 


536 


Amaccat 


“a 


HUA AM eHAAAH TI 8 8 I 
Feaerere rears 
Teraeteya Taya | 
fagieta ary tarcreyiae : 
TATA TTA ATS: 
AAG cagA AeA 
feafapas ort WAMTAA: 1 Qo of] 
Jewelled pitchers adorned the banner of 
ASvinikumaras and that of Indra with golden 
elephant, white camaras and bedecked with 
wonderfully variegated jewels and pearls. The 
army of the Devas consisting of serpents, 
Yaksas, Gandharvas, Nisacaras swelled to 33 
kotis and looked invincible. The thousand-eyed 
Indra clad in fine raiments and wearing 
beautiful ornaments with his arms adorned with 
armlets and attended by thousands of bards 
looked grand in heaven when he took his seat 
on his elephant Airavata, white like the 
Himalaya, adorned with a golden garland and 
marked with red vermilion and saffron on the 
temples and surrounded by a swarm of black 
bees. 


SERGE SIDE 
faaraaeasnfaronferat 

ST AM Sara AAA 
Pat AATTTAAS ETT Ro Vil 


Thus the army of the Devas consisting of 
horses and elephants and various other arms and 
having different kinds of weapons, were visible 
with white umbrellas and white banners, etc. 


Sf SHARAD MSTA TUT ATTA Tora 
ATP AAT Coe HTT A SEAT HL LC It 


KKK 


Matsya Puranam 


CHAPTER 149 


The start of war between gods and the asuras 
a Sate 

rarer Safar 7 

THUS STAT ATTA TATTATT 


Sita said— “O Rsis, at the time of the war 
between the gods and the demons, both the 
armies thundered aloud and started the terrific 
struggle. 


Tia Cae WEA a 
qa wa Frattatagrt a feds V0 
aud ager VA a 
PHANG TYR THs erTVTA TTI 3 


Both the gods and the demons were uttering 
the lion’s roar, besides blowing the conches and 
the trumpets. The elephants were trumpeting, 
the horses were neighing, the wheels of the 
chariot were creating rumbling sound and the 
cords stretched by the warriors were issuing 
cracking sound. With the combination of all the 
sounds, tumultuous sound was produced. 


AAA VT TETSTafaaT 
WaOATAAT AH aT AT ANT ¥ Ut 
UATE F aSaAet wearer fereirat:| 
TATA THA A TTA GH 

gett vette teat a Farage 
WAAR Sea TTS ARTA 
Uelfttat aginst Brae 

AA MTTTMT Teese TET 11 9 
vis regi eg fat: TPA 


atu wecka wevta Fel: ky 
TEAYATAT TH AAG PAA 
aera fer: Wareranrafrarariegi Yo tt 


Having been filled with the enormous rage, 


Chapter-150 


leaving all hopes of survival, with the desire of 
being victorious over one another, the armies of 
warriors of both the sides, started waging the 
terrific war facing each other. The difference 
between the high and the low had disappeared. 
The foot soldiers were moving with the 


charioteers, the horse riders moved with the | 


charioteers, the elephants with the foot soldiers, 
sometimes one charioteer was marching with 
the other charioteer and one elephant marched 
with the other, or an elephant with a number of 
horses, and a lonely warrior started struggling 
with a number of intoxicated elephants. The 
clubs, battle axes, tridents, quoits, pointed 
goads, swords, knives, spears and _ other 
weapons, were freely used. All the weapons 
were showered in the sky and darkness began to 
cover all the directions. 


T Wad Asasat afereae weet 
HR fg STA _ TT STA 8a 
Wad Brae rtrd wee 

Tat autsigas: Foray WHoset: 11 221 
THE: Wert: Taher: ferret 
STATA UB: Usaha WPA V3 1 


In course of time it grew so dark that none 
could recognise one another. The enraged 
warriors shot their arms without seeing and only 
weapons were visible on both the sides. The 
several banners, umbrellas, heads with ear- 
rings, elephants, horses, infantry men, fell on 
both sides. It appeared as if the lotuses were 
falling from the sky, serving as they liked. 


Toa MAH MyoacIyeat: | 
TH: WAT: UAT VATAAT: 11 VV Ut 
The elephants were with broken tusks and 
trunks and stream of blood was rushing out. 


They fell down on the ground like the huge 
mountain. 


WHATCUSAHIAM TT Weed: 
Ug: Wena AAAS ASAT LG 


537 
TASH TPAS EAT Yay WAATTA 
Tay Bearaal edar fotos 
AMA SAAT AAO LE UI 
The chariots were crushed, to small 


particles, with the breaking of wheels, axles, 
rods and yokes. Thousands of horses fell down 
and were turned into pieces. The pools of blood 
could be found on earth everywhere. Rivers 
started flowing with the blood of animals and 
humans. The flesh eating animals were 
delighted. The vetd/as and evil spirits danced in 
delight. 


Sta SAT MRTG ATAU SaaS 
ATH HIATUS AT A SEATT 1 LYN 


KK 


CHAPTER 150 
Battle between gods and the demons 

ad sated 

wa Tear aT: wlafaaasa: 

aad orator faseontaadrargi gi 

a fag aefratanrasts fran: 

HAMAHAHAM CAT ATA 2A 

Vat: TSA: PATO TATE 

a fafara sat aoe ee 3 

SUG wea TATE 

PARRA at faate wfrafaoi vi 

Stta said—- QO Resis, thereafter finding 

Grasana— the demon commander, present in the 
battlefield, Yamaraja was overpowered with 
rage. Then he started showering the rain of 
arrows resembling the fire, over Grasana. The 
immensely strong Grasana, getting wounded 
with the innumerable arrows, he strung his bow 
and shot five hundred arrows at Yama, injuring 
him at the same time. With the injuries caused 
by the five hundred arrows of Grasana, 


Yamaraja could measure his strength and he 
again caused pain to Grasana, with the shooting 


538 


of his arrows. 


fered PANU WHAT SAAT: | 
farrett at AAT TAT PATTI G I 
Then Grasana— the lord of Dé&anavas, 
shattered the rain of arrows shot by Yamaraja, 
with his own arrows. 
G fafadt wad THT TH Mi 
faaayRt Ut ATA TAT UT 
Then Yama, finding the shooting of his 
arrows to infructuous, then he stopped his 
arrows. Thereafter he shot a huge club at the 
chariot of Grasana with immense force. 
a df GR TATA 
WME AMER AW SAAN 
Wa Kt Yea BAT Uist FAM 
WATS ST A TUT Tela cI 
Finding the huge club approaching him, 
Grasana— the Danava, jumped out of his chariot 
intercepted the club in the sky holding it in his 
hand and in utter rage, he shot back the club at 


the he buffalo of Yama, with the strike of which 
it fell down on earth. 


STMT TATA AMAT TTT: 

Wea ASAT TAA Aer SSANI 
Yama then with a jump separated himself 
from the back of the buffalo. Then he caused a 


deep wound over the face of Grasana, with the 
spear. 


OF MAMET Areal agian 
Te Ufa SET AST ATTA: I oI 
ames fara wereranteafal 
THA VEU TATA GEN TST vel 


Finding Grasana having fallen on the ground 
becoming unconscious, the immensely valorous 
Jambha, shot a bhindipdla at the heart of Yama. 
Getting wounded with that attack, Yama started 
vomiting blood. 


Matsya Puranam 


HaaMed SST WerarovratEra: | 
Sat AAAI MTA TATU LV 


Finding Yama, having been so injured, 
Kubera— the lord of wealth, holding a club in 
his hand, attacked Jambha, with ten lakh of 
Yaksas, in rage. 

WT GA Aid SAA: | 
SAT Wat areT J ae Fevers fa Ys 


Observing the attack of Kubera, having been 
surrounded with Danava army, the intelligent 
Jambha, spoke sweet words like a lover. 


THA cease sae wifeotery 
Se viELTICININCLICCIE RR 


In the meantime Grasana regained 
consciousness and he attacked Yama with his 
club studded with gams and gold and was 
meant for the destruction of the enemies. 


aaNAeA Tes Wet usTaTes: | 

Tea: Mirena SATAN TST 24 I 
SUS HAT HT TATA ATCT 

G wet faa wer Wrage AAT VE A 


Finding the unprecedented club rushing 
towards him, Yama, the rider of buffalo, in 
order fructify the attack of the club, released his 
danda which could destroy the universe being 
quite terrific and issued the fire flames. 


Ugeavarean vemeana FAST 
ana FaatrgieaisamiaraTTH V9 11 
WIA AAMT Ad WATTS AM 
AONAM ABI TATGOHT AM STATI VC I 
PROT TAA TTT 

FRNA Net SHA THATS 281 
want fatal saaeage :| 

BF TA WET SBT Ahaha Faw: oll 
OUT Het Fa eefertopferey tere: 

Ta STATA AT; AAAS 2 2 


Chapter-150 


Yama's rod and the Demon's club struck 
each other in the air and a tumultuous sound, 
like that of the thunder, arose. The two weapons 
looked like two mountains in their encounter 
with each other. By their collision, the beings in 
all directions were rendered senseless. The 
universe trembled with the fear of being 
annihilated. Their friction produced a blaze and 
the sky looked terrible at that moment, as if 
meteors were going to fall. Sometime after, the 
missile of Dharmaraja breaking the club of the 
demon hit him on the head. Just as the ills of the 
wickea deprive them of pelf, similarly the 
demon was struck with the blow of that club. 
He fell down blinded by its force and was 
rolling in dust. After this there was a great 
uproar in both the armies. 


Tat FEAAAUT TAA: TTY CAAT 
AUVARA TT eA FATTO 2 21 
a ata fara aad wieenfafrary 
afge aegis yfa wit: uftaat cars 23 
Tenants Bans fart afer fernf ora 
TAM fad VARY WA: SAGA II 
TT St Maye aMaAY AT: 

Us iT AIA MT TST VG 
Gat HieevSst Yetar Trraha: 

TEA MCAS TT: WATT SAS: 1 EI 
WH afta Tea aAs TH 

UNA AG Fes THAT UMA TATA VI 


On coming back to his senses aiter a 
moment, Grasana finding himself so badly hit, 
his ornaments and cloth being scattered, 
determined to take revenge and thought- “My 
master's victory or defeat rests on a worthy man 
like myself. All these demon forces are under 
me. If I be defeated, all my army shall become 
extinct and my foe shall become independent. 
An unworthy man may act as recklessly as he 
desires; but a trustworthy man ought not to be 
reckless when time comes; he ought to do his 


539 


duty.” With these thoughts that valiant demon 
fixed his determinations and dashed against his 
enemy with fuli force. Gnmly resolved and 
armed with a ponderous club, gnashing his teeth 
with anger, and seated in a chariot, Grasana 
appeared instantly in the battlefield brandishing 
his club and began to fight with Dharmaraja. 


ava Heat Ue fara aah 

factrest Yat Stet aa: ATTA ICI 

ABI SEs Tat A Neat: | 

aaa st AUST AHO 281 

ara faa 7 Wee Aerts a 

aaent Feat Sar art feraranfearqii 3 ott 

SIT AT AT Wea: 

TH AMTetaa at fata ATTN 3 eI 

at anager gE aaa 

Fae THA: Bal ages ya: 113 211 

HOTA TST HTT ase: 

ieee Vert aifererore sat: 13 31 

cpiereras Weary WRATH: 

HAMAS STRUT RT SATTATN 3 ¥ I 

MN WMA HorgqagvSel 

forenfircat serge rasa: 113 4 

TENT TF MAY SMA TTSITAT 

amat Uist: os fen: wether ANB EI 

He hurled that fearful club at the head of 

Dharmaraja with great force, seeing which the 
latter evaded its blow. It, however, crushed 
several of his brave followers, seeing which 
Dharmaraja got greatly vexed and took up his 
formidable weapons to protect his followers. 
The demon Grasana, seeing the numerous 
followers of Yama, thought that the army was 
raised by the Maya of Dharmardja and began to 
shower arrows. He got enraged like the ocean 
getting ferocious at the time of the annihilation 


of the world and pierced some with the trident 
and some with his arrows. He powdered some 


540 


with his club and destroyed others with his 
formidable spear. Many were crushed by the 
blow of his arms. Whereas some of Yama's 
followers attacked with huge pieces of rocks 
and trees and very long tridents. Other followers 
of Dharmaraja began to bite the body of 
Grasana and inflict blows on his back. 


ATM MNT: HTS: | 
TO TA YTS Feds AEA: 1 ZO 
mies petal farararary| 
Oy eaRer WHA: AAMT 3 CI 
AMeataa TA: At Heat W Taareary 
MATT ATTY CUS ASTATA: 11 3 81 


Then the infuriated demon, thus made to 
retreat by his adversaries, pushed several of 
them and crushed them by his weight. He 
inflicted blows with his fists on many and after 
a time, got quite exhausted with fighting the 
army of Dharmaraja. Seeing the repulse of his 
army and the exhaustion of that demon, 
Dharmaraja armed with a mace appeared on the 
scene riding on his buffalo. 


THA AAMT TANT 
PAA Aceh TAT TRTAIS TAT ¥ 0 1 
HY WA WGArTGOST ANT: | 
TT GUSH ATA ¥ VI 
Ga: yareta fart eer As 
AHI WH der: warfeeaai WAY IN 
SH PATA ALATA STAT: 
AIST PAVIA Tetra ¥ 3 I 
Ta: aay a TEI ate: | 
gaara a wires GAs 
anishy Russa ces TT Ft 

ANT PATA ACHE TaTACT IY 4 I 
aa Ufa TTT 
SMa: ARTA TAYE I 
Tae fera tera we fanart 


Matsya Puranam 


ANITA Adal SAT: ARTAAHATAT Vio II 
faferte aetgs see: Unfsorenforisy: | 
WaT AIT ATS GAT FZ ve 


Seeing Yama coming, the demon Grasana 
struck his two legs. Yama, taking this lightly, 
hit the tigers yoked to the demon's chariot. The 
tigers thus belaboured by the mace could not 
advance with the chariot. The demon's chariot 
was then in a state of suspense like the mind of 
a doubtful person. Grasana thus anxiously left 
his vehicle and took his stand on the ground; 
and started wrestling with Dharmaraja. The 
latter also casting away his arms faced the foe. 
As the idea of prestige agitates a peaceful man, 
so the haughty Grasana holding the lower 
garment of Dharmaraja whirled him round most 
violently. The latter also holding the neck of the 
demon by his arms lifted him up in the air and 
whirled him violently. They both began to fight 
with blows. The demon was huge and bulky; 
Dharmaraja, therefore, got tired. He, placing his 
arms on the shoulder of the demon, began to 
take rest. The demon, finding Dharmaraja done 
up, threw him down, gave him blows after 
blows, and kicked him several times when 
blood ran out of his mouth. 


Pralfad A SBT ad: Ueiet Ca: | 
Ha Wealagt Seat Ale Fara WERT 
Afterwards, the demon taking Dharmaraja 
for dead, left him and raised a cry of victory. 


waa Ya ware cert fafiiraraet:| 
TATE TR UTHER HG oN 
faisaest: Bat VA aT Para 
TA: HAUTE GAM TASHAT & Vit 
ee face aot Weary 
any A Maan east TMA ANG It 
wairbas 

WG 3H 
Faia & aiwtfieam ae Tt: 
HY HY AGT SAMTAAGEATAI & Wi 


Chapter-150 


He then returned and stood like a mountain 
before his army. The infuriated demon Jambha 
shot fierce arrows at Kubera, and checked his 
advance in all directions and anmihilated much 
of his army. Kubera, also getting vexed, shot a 
volley of thousand fiery arrows on the chest of 
the demon and pierced the charioteer with one 
hundred arrows. He pierced his hands with 75 
arrows, cut his bow by ten sharp arrows and 
pierced his lion with a single arrow and another 
straight ten arrows, steeped in oil and marked 
with leaves, penetrated the demon all over his 
body. 


gfe aa amerer fafa: | 
TATE FASTA ATO TFS: 1G GH 
AARUTPTAMTY TT: ATTA: | 
faaned ate dlett: srtaeta ara: ny gi 
ane ara ara eeanaeraatal 
farade varadanst Aeaaas CHa 4 Olt 
TART CART CTATT : 
ferorrenta ferret Sa: AXHAATNY CI 


The demon was terrified somehow at this 
wonderful deed of Kubera, mustered up his 
presence of mind and took fearfully sharp 
arrows to subdue his foe; and drawing his bow 
angrily to his ears he discharged his arrows on 
the chest of Kubera, and killed His charioteer 
with a sharp arrow and cut Kubera's bow-string 
by another steeped in oil. Afterwards, he 
pierced the chest of Kubera by another ten 
violently sharp arrows. 


We Waal Tea cefag fe far: 

OT AUT TTHST WASTING VI 
faranrageantar Frgraitt staat 
far: @ fafemt weiarrgrani § ol 
Waa at Gere Waser 
SISTA UTA Vitae ATS & 8H 
frese ATRIA srrenfaareard 

aa GANT: WHS SAAT HATTIE 2 


i vy 7.4 ay: | 


341 


SIMA GA ATA: | 
aGRT Gea HY TARAS TAT G 31 
Tela Yat Hara SATA 
ACTA AMAT TEAM: WG YI 


Kubera was rendered senseless for a while, 
and then he picked up courage and drew his big 
bow, and let out thousands of arrows which 
pervaded every direction and descended on the 
soldiers of the demons. The sun was eclipsed by 
those myriads of flying arrows. The demon 
Jambha also discharged his shower of arrows 
cutting down those shot by Kubera. In a very 
short time, he rendered the valour of Kubera 
void, at which the latter was enraged and 
thinned the army of the demon by pouring out 
another volley of his fearful arrows. The demon 
then took up his ponderous club mounted with 
gold and powdered many of the followers of 
Kubera with its blows. 


q aaa tas YS Wa aR! 
aud: wa afta Sara: 11 4 
SBI SAtedread: Wet Wes sTRUTAL 
TA SIASATUT YSATATA AAT GI 
The attendants of Kubera being horrified, 
shouted out furiously and rallied round the 
chariot of their leader. Seeing his men in such 


an awful consternation, he took up his mighty 
trident and killed quickly thousands of demons. 


areaaraly eeay era: sareryese: | 

TTS UE Cea Wet CeafafgUrq € VI 

Oat faa ETT 
fersdafacrn cet arg: Ferafrarari sc 


The demon, seeing the annihilation of his 
army, boiled with rage, and took up his huge 
battle axe. That keen-edged battle-axe divided 
the chariot of Kubera into pieces, as a rat 
nibbles at a piece of glossy cloth and cuts it into 
many parts. 


Varfara fare rerarers WTA 
TeSaAMET SAMAAATISTATAN & 8 Ut 


542 


TET TATA TaeTOT ATL 
AMTEPSU Sa St aA aaT AAAI 9 0 1 
Pera yatrarat SATA! 

faara yet Saagl WATT J sATAT: 1 I 
MIR a VAetay afsetarrausany 
eal Tarheel weaghy WATT suo VI 
UAT HUM YUSt: Users 
CUHATT SRA Aga AVSlaHA: 1193 1 
MiG yA Pagar aera 

WAR TA TOA Helene gaa 9 ¥ I 
O aaedt MS Word WHat 
SAAT TL ATA TATA: 1119 & I 


Then Kubera, alighting on the ground, took 
up his enemy-destroying dreadful club which no 
one could wield and which was made of heavy 
iron and mounted with gold and was being 
worshipped with uncooked rice and sandal for a 
long time and scented with perfumes of flowers. 
He hit the forehead of the demon with it. The 
demon Jambha, seeing the dreadful club 
luminous like lightning by approaching towards 
him, discharged, with his hands decorated with 
bracelets, quoit, spear, Prasa, Bhusundi, Pattisa 
and various other missiles, in order to save 
himself from its blow. Inspite of the club being 
resisted by the missiles of the demon, it struck 
him in the chest as a great flash of light comes 
out of the cavern of a mountain. By the force of 
that blow, the demon fell close to the yoke of 
the chariot and a stream of blood flowed out of 
his mouth, ears, etc. 


at ¢ Fred teat qarestt trae: | 
TT eye ATTA TATA: 1119 & 
aa qos sitet feay werterres 
Frese arse Tasers: Fete: 99 


The demon Kujambha, considering his 
comrade killed, sent forth an echoing shrill and 
became enraged with Kubera’s taunting 


Matsya Puranam 


remarks. By his Maya, he spread 1n an instant, a 
network of arrows in all the directions and shot 
many sharp Ardhacandra (semi-lunar) arrows 
and cut to pieces all the arrows of Kubera. 


Ware aE y Tet aerial seit 

a i aca: ward fede Fafort: wtnoci 
Atha FT A SBT Mgt sara: | 

Vi TIs Seal SAITVVNTSeTAATN 9 8 tt 
RGM THe Cal rae AT 

Oat Fee a HAV WaT Bicol 
A PAM Tad AAMT CTT) 
fate: GORA TETRaMiaawil ¢ eI 
I Kes MAT TATA qrurtaery 

AA RMT SAAT THOT HiT NS VA 
wie Uget era; wie ferafereiay 
Oat OSs Se SAATTI C31 
meat aenratar waleaeaataom 
Patera ea BAA FAM Cv 

OF Uiserertt eT: UPC: 

FTO WANT Tat Tae FANS GM 


On the other hand, Kubera showered a 
volley of arrows on the demon which the latter 
cut down in return. On the arrows being thus 
rendered useless, Kubera took up his javelin 
(Sakti) bedecked with golden bells and holding 
it in his hand, decked with pearled bracelets, 
hurled it with great violence at Kujambha. That 
Sakti of Kubera rent the chest of his adversary 
and after fulfilling its mission, the javelin 
entered within the ground. After a mubhirta 
(moment) the demon came back to his senses 
and pierced the chest of Kubera with his 
sharpened spear (Pattisastra), as a wicked man’s 
words pierce through the heart, Kubera, like an 
old ox, fell down senseless on his chariot. 


aad J a SBT Trot ALaTSAAI 
Gamer Prafteat Pymaraensy ts GN 


Chapter-150 


shag aa Horst arate 

FT SBT T Fe PASM TAIT CVI 
aaa Saha eras wie 

G Sol Alea Gat AeA 6 1 
THT GTA MATT: | 

Geir BAe faaryrareaeagstl ¢ 31 
feresse fryaeanfin fatearfor wad: | 


shir ketene 


Ucairrra EER e 
aat fa sifeamrat facies taneifany 
TRA HAM GE TAT AAARATI 8 2 


Seeing the fall of Kubera Nirrti, the lord of 
the Raksasas, followed by his army with great 
violence, rushed towards Kujambha with sword 
in hand. The latter directed his army to 
encounter that of his foe. The lord of the 
Raksasas, illumined by the lustre of his 
ormaments, saw the army of Kujambha, armed 
with various kinds of weapons, became 
enraged, and contracting his eyebrows, jumped 
from his chariot and severed violently with his 
unsheathed bnght sword, the heads of many 
warriors of Kujambha, as if, he was cutting 
lotuses. He then advanced forward biting his 
lips with rage, and cut down many heroes. At 
that time, the demon Kujambha seeing his army 
reduced to small numbers, left Kubera and 
dashed towards Nurrti, the Raksasa lord. 


MAAASA TTT STATUS 
Seamer TWAS GAT UTS: AEA 31 
arate 7 tots fafaenta a ara: 
eat a feeats TAA ASAT Ne XI 
TAM MEAS MTA faetes TI 
FAST TTA 1 SG A 
aaa Wes feet aot wey aya 


War Sarit FT AT PARTTOTA & I 


943 


WT HHT PRET 

sr Spies aleat straaarq e911 
al VaTeTHel ANT WaT Wad: | 
a: HAT TA AMTAG AMAT 8 CI 
MMe STATA: | 
AAS rater Tae J UTA TNS 81 


Afterwards, the demon Jambha also got 
some relief and he captured thousands of his 
foes in his noose and took away their lives; the 
Danavas at that time, took many gems, Vimanas 
and conveyances of the enemy. Kubera came to 
his senses and seeing the atrocities of the 
demons, heaved a deep sigh and his eyes turned 
red with anger, and he took the Garudastra and 
let it out of his bow and threw it on the forces of 
the Danavas. A huge mass of smoke issued 
from that arrow which was followed by billions 
of fiery sparks. Afterwards that arrow pervaded 
all over the sky with its lustre and gradually 
became an unconquerable missile. All the space 
was covered with darkness. Then the lustre of 
the weapons ascended high up in_ the 
atmosphere and became revealed. The Celestial 
Beings began to admire its potency. 


PATA STATS FAUT HAT 
BMAMSTA AIA WaltsAS ASTI Yo ol 
TMAGE WAT set SBT TAHT: | 

qyd ABIATAT: UTAATATAUT: 11 20 VI 
Tt: VATA THe THAUSATA 

Tara Yaer ale Mafarahrarannqi 2o 2 


Seeing all that, the demon Kujambha rushed 
yelling towards Kubera on foot, who seeing the 
demon approaching towards him took to his 
heels, At that hour, the highly-jewelled crown 
of Kubera fell on the ground like the shining 
sun. 


WUT TATA TA 
Tet MAMAS AH TCITOTAA: 11 Yo 3M 


544 


oft ATT THN ATATSTAT ATTN: | 
qa: frat aan Fae Uae AAI Rol 
When the commander of the brave, takes to 
flight the warriors born of noble families 
consider it their duty to give their lives in 
defending the head ornament of their general; 
therefore, the Yaksas circled round the fallen 
coronet armed with various kinds of weapons. 


The haughty warriors took the course that 
Kubera had taken. 


AMAT ANT TACT We: | 

AMG ET WHA SARIS UAT: 11 20 4 I 

quel trarant year sermmTany 

Tero yee Freres FTAA Ro & I 

aA SA Yee Aaa TH 

AARTETAG ASA GACATEAN Qo 

eft Tora a ARPT 

ce Peart Seco 
The demons, seeing those haughty Yaksas 

of Kubera, angrily rushed at them and killed 
those that were guarding the crown of their 
Master, with terribly heavy Bhusundi weapons. 
After killing them, they took hold of the crown 
and placing it in chariot, were greatly delighted 


with their victory over Kubera. They captured 
various gems, pearls, jewels and other riches. 


META TafoT ATA Seay 

WT: Tae Sra: | 
aratint & fafretutassh 

HT SA: ATAATATHAN 20 SI 


Afterwards, the demon Jambha taking the 
wealth of the dead Yaksas returned with his 
army and Kubera meekly presented Himself 
before Indra with his hair streaming in the air. 


HANTT TAA WATT: | 
TRATAATTATT AT TAHA: 11 Qo VN 
WSIS Ses Sa TATA 


Matsya Puranam 


Ta fAHSAAT SHAM AMA TI Rott 
7 Vgaferd aa Telaia ue aan 

al AATAAUUT SAAT WATT VAI 
WIM Genial Cae 

aa Cay HAS Yooaa 221 


On the other hand, Nirrti was engaged with 
Kujambha and by his infallible Tamasi Maya 
created darkness all over and bewildered 
Kujambha. He blinded Kujambha by the 
darkness pervading everywhere. The whole 
Danava force could not see anything. The 
demons could not advance even a step on 
account of the prevailing darkness, when he 
began to destroy the army of the demons by 
showering many kinds of weapons on them. 
The charioteers of the demons began to die of 
extreme cold. In that way, the demons were 
killed and Kujambha was rendered senseless. 


Ufeal Ha HURTS a: | 


eA TAN Afar Ag TAOS 223 UI 
fageray afar ware weriory 
WONT AA AAA LVI 
asta franlergts TA: Heel SPAT 
MHC PICSTATACT ATA RAGA 
ATTA AMA CPA: MATT: 

GH: HU AAA arth: AAITATH VE I 
remitted fetter 

MSTA STATUS MMAR TATA 2 V9 tt 


Then the demon Mahisasura looking like the 
ferocious banks of clouds that gather to pour out 
volumes of water at the time of the dissolution 
of the world, shot the Savitri arrow shining like 
flashes of lightning. The radiance of the all- 
powerful excellent Savitri arrows dispelled 
darkness from the battlefield. That fiery missile 
drove away the darkness as the autumn season 
makes the sky clear and render the lotuses on 
the tanks bright with the rising rays of the sun. 
When the darkness was driven away the 


Chapter-150 


demons began to see and then fought with the 
Devas in a most wonderful manner. They 
angrily let out their bhujangastra and poisoned 
arrows from their ponderous bows. 


Sasarad feat wrt wet 
TAIRA ANT AVA T= 1 VC 
fora fafgrctatat: sarpitfaasitant: 
Ae A VM T Mey eT 228 II 
ferdera yraMraiterrar 

ere Ua eU FaAHATAT ET: 1 2Qoll 
UT MT AeA TH STeUTTaA 
HAT: HU AST MATRA AAAI V2 vit 
THAT ZA WATS EA: | 

GSN WE ANT PATA ATHSTAN 22 VI 
au alerausgarrandt fanaa 
anagagy Seat wettsfaraferateran 22 31 


The demon Kujambha took his exceedingly 
terrible bow and dashed straight towards the 
army of the Raksasas. The lord of the Raksasas 
seeing Kujambha making an advance, pierced 
him with the arrows poisoned with the venom 
of snake and no place of rescue was leit for 
him. The enemy could not make out what Nirrti 
was doing, he was placing and shooting his 
arrows so quickly. That Raksasas cut down the 
arrows of his adversary and also his banner. 
Afterwards he killed the charioteer and knocked 
him down with his spear (Bhalla), seeing which 
Kujambha got fearfully vexed and his eyes 
grew red with anger. He jumped from his 
chariot and took hold of his keen sword and 
shield mounted with ten iron pieces looking like 
rising moons. He then made way towards the 
lord of the Raksasas. 


a wastaata: wet yRtoreragter 

OF At WANT AT: ATTA 22 
AMAA STAN TM AA ITT: | 

B Yee MATa SaaS Hg VG 


545 


THES TAME WATTA OT TI 
arg Frafa teat sraarens fate 226 u 


Then Nirrti hit Kujambha on his approach ch 
with the blow of his club which made him faint jj; 
and swagger round. He remained still and yn 
motionless. Inspite of that, he did not lose his pj. 
presence of mind and stood up like a mountain ajp 
and in a couple of hours, on being fully ily 
composed, he jumped on the chariot and caught ont 
hold of the left arm of the Raksasa and putting it 9 it 
under his feet he pulled his long hair. 


qd: Gar a foredateseritr: | 
afaretett Sal THUTISUTAAZATN VGN 
WI Aaa TET FT YA! 

aa aayt dee femmcitpaareaqn 2c 
ASAT MEA CATS OTT 

BF At MAO AAT: TAT STATIN VU 


When the demon was about to severe ere 
Nirrti's head with the sword, Varuna instantly t)y 
appeared on the spot and tied down both the the 
demon’s hands with his noose and so all the jhe 
power of the demon was rendered void. jiq 
Afterwards, Varuna, forsaking all compassion, op. 
began to beat him with his club on account of - of 
which that demon began to vomit blood. 


aa BU Hees faganeteragay 
ACAI SBT HAT ATEATAT: 11 23 ol 
AGAASISMA WH Ta 

fraefa aout da dlautep rene: 1 23 vi 
TART TT Seer SAAT 
TAT TITS ta AST AATTAT 23 VN 
ya Ba wafenarqanar watagein 

a Pgh: FAT MOT UHM AATN 23 3 1 
Ha ea cell Tet wahygM: | 
THAR AHA FSAI: 11 23 VI 
Ua Vara: ye feragianveny| 
araed Uae aga fetrrenA g3 4 I 


546 


At that time, the demon assumed the form of 
clouds charged with electricity. Seeing 
Kujambha in that plight, Mahisdsura opened his 
huge mouth containing pointed rows of teeth 
with the intention of devouring both Kubera and 
Nirrti, the lord of the Raksasas. Both of them, 
realizing the intention of Mahisasura, jumped 
down from the chariot and took to their heels 
and went to their respective quarters. They were 
awfully horrified and flew into different 
directions. The Raksasa lord instantly went to 
take shelter with Indra. The infuriated 
Mahisdsura ran after Varuna and the Moon, 
seeing him to be a prey of death, darted his 
somastra, the store of chill. He also let His 
vayavyastra for a second time. 


aT aa VAN Aye Eas a 

cafaeat erat: Wea vitathesAT farareaT: 11 23 GI 

4 Seaford Wat Aravarenqaa a 

Velen weaMAad: 11 239 

TAUAQUAAAMA ET AAT: | 

Tfeat Freraered vitearenftrarry: 11 83 CI 

SAAT UVa GENTS : 

ae Prorat Sererqerar fara: 11 23.8 

Wrest TART Tee villares: 

TATA HCCI SHUT | ON 

Then, all the demons were baffled by the 

chill of the himastra, and vayavyastra of the 
Moon. They could not walk on nor could hold 
their weapons in hand. The demons were frozen 
with cold and began to feel unbearable pain all 
over their body under the influence of the 
arrows of the Moon. Mahisdsura also could not 
do anything. His body also began to shiver 
through cold. He sat down holding his chest (or 
chariot?) with his hands and with his head cast 
downwards. All the demons could not do 
anything. Thus overpowered by the Moon, the 


Daityas could not take any revenge. They all 
abandoned the ambition of war and stood up to 


Matsya Puranam 


save their lives when the furious Kdalanemi 
addressed them as follows. 


TW A: TSM: YT: Ae WAAC: | 
Weert ste aa Preead Fat Ve a 
Uist oat we SECTS TTATAL 
Uhh VatAT > Masha fectara: it ev IM 
He UL ACTS aA: 

fer wares fersedt MSHA 1 YY 3 

1 FHT FIP Te TATA 

TM AALS SAT ATLA THAT: HL SA 
ACA TONSA: WOM Stee 

VT ABYC UPATEUTSATEAATII 24 I 
TRAST WETS: | 

AST APACE CATA AMSAT OYE I 
Teal AIA Hl HIATT: | 

SAA Sal ATA Taal TI AVTAT: 1 Vw 
Tamra wr fem fate wa a 

FAY TAASM: WAL AHTAATN Yc 
feyey Waa Ws: QtaTa4la Uach | 

Aa VATA AS AMTAMTRTOT A 2% 8 I 
at TAT TEATS | 

aa: HAUT faTyiayheTATaAH VG oN 


He said “O brave warriors! you are skilled in 
warfare, expert in enjoying pleasures! Every 
one of you can singly uplift the world in the 
palm of your hand. You can devour the world if 
you like. The whole heaven cannot encounter 
1/16" of any one of you. You, with your 
renowned prowess, are standing here in the 
great field of battle to attain victory. Why are 
you then taking to your heels? Why are you 
sitting thus, defeated by the Devas? This is 
extremely unworthy to you! Tarakasura 1s your 
king and he can alone annihilate the universe. 
He is now sitting quiet. He will kill everyone of 
us if we turn our back on the battlefield.” At 
that time, the demons were shivering with cold 


Chapter-150 


and they could not hear; they could not speak. 
They were simply making noise by grinding 
their teeth. They could not hear Kdlanemi’s 
words. Seeing which Kalanemi thought what he 
would do and magnified his body by his Maya. 
He extended himself in all the directions and 
through his spell created thousands of suns. All 
the directions pervaded with heat and the 
universe began to suffer from it. That heat 
drove away the effect of the Moon and the 
freezing wind also ceased. 


Tact A TAA HTT: | 
ad OB cearia Mead fara: 
SATATHUTT AT: HTH HAT | RG 20 
The sun, the eyes of the world, on realizing 
the increase of the power of the demons by 


illusion of Kalanemi, angnly commanded his 
charioteer Aruna. 


fearent Save 
TATEUT TH VT Brera Aa: 
fareeta farnt afaar Pemera: 1 24 2H 
Walfat: VMTTSIST tact Teas 
The Sun said— O Aruna, take this chariot to 
that spot where is the chariot of K4lanemi. 
“Now there will be a tough fight and many 


heroes will be killed. Behold! The Moon has 
been conquered here, the refuge of all army.” 


SANTA TH WEST AT: 1 V4 3M 


wartagees: Farrar: | 
WTS wae fated Fs 11 Ve XII 
wet a gt Hert feomargifareri 


TARTAN GT ATO TAT AN GG 
farttarrgarert alfred ware BI 
TARA BUNT AUtrecteh FATT e& & It 
cant aa BU erat a chat 

Hearing those words the charioteer Aruna 


instantly drove swiftly the chariot yoked with 
horses wearing white camaras. The Sun took up 


347 


his huge bow and shot two divine arrows 
having the lustre and properties of serpents. The 


first was the sancara-astra thrown amongst the 


enemy's forces and second Indrajala-astra 
having the properties of magic. By the influence 


of the sancdra-astra the faces of the demons and | 


the Devas were changed into those of the Devas 


and Danavas. In other words, the faces of the | 
demons looked like those of the Devas and the © 
faces of the Devas looked like those of the © 


demons. 

Tea WURAARMT Te MTAATAATTH 24 19 
aera Galas: Healt sa Gara 
HIST HAUT HATTA ABH: 1 OG oH 
SUSTAIN: cH: TRL LG SI 
frrifa canfgeurtace 

A A AANA: | 
Hisar WA ATT 

HiBTRRN VATA: RE oN 
Tr fatearept af: tar ara: | 
BU TAY WUT AAT: Aaa Ve gM 
HA WATKAT BU A TRAM 
Wace APSR IeMAAST Si VG 2M 
afé Aft: qa Aa are faera ary 
Tam Mfedarht Pearafanan v6 31 
SAAT SUTTAMAUT BUTATAT Ye 
VAAANU HT GMa a TaAT 2G XI 


Under such circumstances, the demons 
taking their comrades to be the Devas began to 
slaughter one another. Kalanemi began to 
annihilate them like the angry Dharmaraja at the 
time of pralaya. He killed them with swords, 
arrows, Clubs, battle-axes; severing the heads of 
some, the arms of others and crushed the 
chariots and the charioteers by the force of his 
chariot. He killed several with his fist. Thus 
Kalanemi killed his own armies. The demons 


of 


the 
his 


) 
) 


US 
Ns 


on thus being fatally attacked by Kalanemi, and - 


548 


being horrified of the Devas began to yell and 
assume their proper forms. The angry Kalanemt 
could not recognise them when the demon 
Nemi said to him— “I am Nemi; recognise me. 
You have killed ten lacs of valiant demons 
through ignorance, whom the Devas even could 
not have killed. You should, _ therefore, 
discharge your Brahmastra, without delay that 
defeats all the other weapons.” 


Goa feel Ser: MATH: | 
anraare arot fe gereafafedt TM 24 i 
yar aie eer: W tae Yeaven: | 
TASCA ATT AMT WATATTI VE EI 
tam Ua Bates warty 

CaN A UV TATA TT VEN 
aerated Mea Weta eareAT: | 
URSA Ta TA ANC HTETTAI 2G cI 


e] Hy | 


AAT SMa MASATTMTTATN VE VI 

COB ICL IS REIT ercteL 

AaAlT SAI WHA A WY: Vol 

Hearing his words Kalanemi let out the 

Brahmastra arrow which pervaded every nook 
and comer of the universe. The whole of the 
army of the Devas was petrified with horror and 
the effect of the saficara-astra of the Sun also 
ceased and at the same time, the Sun became 
dull. At that hour, the Sun through his power of 
magic astra assumed billions of forms. His 
strong rays penetrated the three regions. The 
army of the demons was scorched. All the blood 
and marrow of the soldiers were dried up. Thus, 
they were much tormented. Afterwards there 
was a shower of fire which blinded the demons. 


TATA: UTA Ata 
gon Asay aabat weratsts a ge en 
SAAT Aletet MATA: | 
Teartacusa fro weaior A Yo 2M 


TIT = TO Tile; 
v 


Matsya Puranam 


arate: Weds arafreeratey: | 

Tae: Ut SPT ara HHeeilerferaA V9 31 
ui: feraafa wet a seataatet: | 

MTT Alero HAT SATA MTT: 1 VOW 


aa Wa Aaya Yat deta yan 
TAT WAT UATE TTT AAT: Ht V9 & I 


The huge elephants were ablaze and fell 
down charred. The horses horribly oppressed by 
the heat, began to faint and the warriors sitting 
in chariots also began to perspire and breathe 
hard. They all began to run about with thirst and 
felt inclined to sit under the shade of a tree or in 
a cavern of the mountain. The trees began to 
burn with conflagration of fire and the demons 
persecuted with the long tongues of fire could 
not reach the water that was in front of them 
close by. On thus failing to get water they died 
gaping. Everywhere the dead carcasses of the 
demons were visible and innumerable elephants 
and horses yoked to chariots also began to fall. 


fa AMAT Sera WeHAATTT: | 
SMa ASAT ASV WATT TH Wg 
Haat Saag aerate ae 
WATTS AAT ATA: ATTA GATT: 11 ROI 
MAHA: CHS: | 
Atl 9? Il 

TTT MAMA Vaart SATA 

Wt aad Ufetet aaa Wit Vo 

CUA SUA AULA: ATT 

AMAT SAMA: WT FAS TTAH Ve oll 

A stream of blood ran out of their mouths 

and thousands of demons were found lying 
dead. When those demons began to be 
destroyed like that, Kalanemi, with his eyes 
turned red with rage, created masses of clouds 
like those at the time of the dissolution of the 


world and raised a most thnilling yell. There 
flowed hundreds of rivers. The sky was thus 


a La | ‘4 Pie 


Chapter-150 


overcast and dispelled the glory of the Sun; a 
downpour of cold showers fell on the armies of 
the demons. This gave comfort to the demons, 
just as sprouts come out of the ground on 
setting rainwater. 


ad: WM Nae J Sierra: | 

Waals aagiat SarteAy Sts Ve VN 

TM GRMN GAIVMT Ses TETATT 

That ail WA UPA Ma: Maer san ec 201 
WR ATTA VST AAT: | 

WY Te Aetad WT FTG AN 31 

wy aE aa Fetter 

aot aiyitia: caeeaatearaay: le VU 


Kalanemi, at the same time, poured out a 
shower of missiles on the Devas just as clouds 
shower rain. The Devas, oppressed with the 
shower of fearful missiles, could not cope with 
the demons and looked like the cows oppressed 
with cold. They left their arms and embraced 
one another and threw themselves behind their 
horses, chariots, etc. They all hide themselves 
and most of them contracted their bodies and 
covered their faces with their hands. Others 
took to their heels. 


ST WMT ays fey ST 

welfare FMI Tye Sa Vc GI 
ad Ufal Yat MATA TA: 

fayan firagitetn fearesra: 1 92 & i 
farhenardat fiesta: | 
PRATER Sey TetarereTARAy: 1 Ac 9 
Brumeey tara fergar ait 

UAT Teel: AAA RTAT tl Re Ct 
HA HEAATATT WTA SMTA! 

SATO Vay AUT LAAT AT FA Re 81 
Tif mantis a fran AAATAL 
wet fopreqeara AACA FHA: ke ol 


549 


Afterwards, the Devas wandered hither and 
thither in utter dismay. In course of such a 
fearful conflict, a large number of the Devas 
were lost. Most of them were seen scattered on 
the ground with their limbs, arms, thighs 
severed and their heads smashed and legs 
broken. The train of banners was broken, the 
chariots were smashed and turned upside down 
and the horses and elephants with their severed 
bodies fell to the ground. The blood of the 
fallen victims of war spread all over the ground 
which presented an awful appearance. In that 
way, the valiant Kalanemi showed his strength 
in the field of battle. In the twinkling of an eye 
1,00,000 Gandharvas, 5 lacs of yaksas, 60,000 
Raksasas, 3 lacs most powerful and swift 
Kinnaras and 7 lacs of Pisacas were killed by 
the brave Kalanem1. 


SATA: ALM ene 

HAW ahlet: AHgisarerteraliag: 11 8 8 
Ud Ufa ait det aaa 

Uma tat ferareratassarett 88 21 
TT: WA eet FARATCTAA AT 
TATE Wr ae: VAT: Bt ee aN 
ae WY deuetrat ares 

ANAT AOTTANt: -W feafsaraeTaaA: tl Lev 
WME DHA doatt TATA 

TA Deu AISANAT frase THAT 24 I 
TTT IST: Peas TAT 

Tay PUA Sl AON AT TN 28 & I 
mraaeatrrasey: Fereretaerarereary 

qed GU AalesT fatera: ALTATATTN 229 
Wed BT BUA Valaraa4rary| 

TIME FRC WT HVS TaATTVTTN Be oI 

a dat rey a faerie via 

fF ARTA HATAT TATA 82 8 I 
RT Tat | at arrange aTarharth 

at wat og Patera ARSTeTAfaT: 200 


550 


STATA ION SAAT: | 

TAI HMPA Ser feast ferarferite 2 o VN 
aera I Wald ereahranorg| 

aa AAAS AT Weartafterauryi 2o VI 


Besides these, that valiant demon also killed 
innumerable kotis of Deva warriors. In that 
way, when the Devas were greatly defeated and 
almost annihilated, the two Asvinikumiaras, 
wearing a wonderful white armour, came out 
boiling with indignation; and each of them 
began to send forth a volley of 60 arrows at a 
time on that demon shining like fire. When the 
Asvinikumaras began to hit the demon with 
their arrows and pierced his chest, he was in 
great pain and took up the eight-edged keen 
quoit and with it pierced the yoke of the 
Asvinikumaras’ chariot and picking up his bow, 
he shot poisoned arrows on the forehead of the 
physicians and let out innumerable arrows in 
the air. The sky became overcast. Then 
Asvinikumaras also cut down the arrows of the 
demon by their own which amazed the latter. 
He got fearfully vexed and took his formidable 
club of iron and brandishing it with great force 
hurled it at the chariot of Asvivikumiaras, seeing 
which they vacated the chariot and_ the 
ponderous club powdered the chariots and 
crushed the earth. Seeing such heroic feat of the 
demons’ weapon, the Asvinikumaras let out 
their terrible vajrakhya-astra on the demon and 
over it bolts were showered. 


Ua Seg: UAT EAT: | 

TH AA ATH HaT UT ASAT 20 31 
erary faerett Sd Aaa Uva: | 

TGR GEHL HH Aishaat ara: Vo VN 
AANA TAA ATT TNS A 

AAA VATA SAAS AAT 2 04 I 
TL Wed AA HIATT 
lame srefaqafaat 7 wearawAN 2 0&1 


Matsya Puranam 


Maat Wald AeA wie 
Waal ATA J Ver wreafaafsstt 2 oi 


The shower of those bolts unnerved the 
demon. His chariot, banner, bow, quoits, golden 
armour were blown to atoms. In that way, he 
was subdued in presence of the army and at that 
instant, the demon discharged his Narayanastra 
which lulled the Vajrastra. Then the demon 
wanted to kill the Asvinikumaras at which the 
latter fled to take shelter with Indra. 


Taya Ser: CATT Ta | 
MEST WH AU CAMA Hl Voit 


ct Br way fargfagenht g 
Spr teres aq kt Ways FAT 208 
Wa MERA Tacs 
del: ferahtunt WEN: Wqecca ATCA! 2 oll 
wrTaafareray fey Pays euler: 
AT TeaGit SPT MTA] WHEAT: 1 2 V2 
ageless aaa fret 7 
SICTPMINI: TATE 12 22M 
VEGAS Bale aay: | 
SLT AAA HUTHTLATAAT: Il 2 23 
faye yeaa sats AATEATI 
SMA AAA ASA APTA TTATSHTTAL 2 YI 
PARAM AT SAT YUL ATT 
aaa SATA BG 


The fearful demon then pursued and came 
close to. the chariot of Indra followed by his 
army; seeing which, everyone was horrified and 
thought that Indra was about to be defeated. 
Mountains and meteors began to fall from the 
sky. Clouds began to thunder tn all the quarters; 
the oceans also swelled. Then Lord Visnu, 
seeing the universe in such an agony, left off his 
yogic slumber and awoke and sat on his couch 
of Sesa Naga. The Goddess Laksmi began to 
shampoo his legs by her hands. He looked like 
blue autumnal sky and like blue lotus. He had a 


> 


Chapter-150 


beautiful armlet and on his forehead, he wore 
Kaustubha gem and his arms adorned with 
armlets shining like the sun. The Lord awoke 
and seeing the atrocities of the demon 
summoned Garuda and shining with the lustre 
of weapons took his seat. Instantly, Garuda 
appeared before him. Visnu then rode on 
Garuda and came to the Devas. He saw that the 
violent and powerful Demons, looking like 
fresh rain clouds, had attacked Indra; and the 
Deva forces looked like persons surrounded by 
their unfortunate descendants. 


SSSA Tea: Wheaten’ 

aan fe yet atte grees: it 2 2G I 

UfaTorargy sd Gert aH FHT 

ITIVT Stat faata TAferavTeTAI 2 Vol 

praia Foy Sal 

Wa AAMT SAAT TAA 2 LCI 

THAT: HUTA ATA 

Aa AT MTA TATA AI 2 29 

AANA CHAU T AT: | 

aa a taaded faster stat: AA: 220 

Fa A SAAT Fat: *yrars fea 

WATT HAT ANAM ASAT: 2 

Afterwards, the demons saw the lustrous 

halo of the Lord in the sky as if the glory of the 
rising Sun was making itself visible on the 
Udayacala Mountain. All the demons were 
anxious to know what was that light. They all 
beheld the cloud-hued Lord seated on the 
Garuda shining like the destructive fire 
prevailing at the time of the dissolution of the 
universe. Seeing Him, all the demons felt highly 
gratified and they said “He is the Lord Visnu 
and the all in all of the Devas. By defeating him 
we will conquer the Devas. He 1s the annihilator 
of the demons. All the Devas, under His 


protection, partake of their share of sacrificial 
offerings.” 


351 


SYRAM sat: we afar Wadd: | 


Propeqrataerened TAATATEAI 2 2 il 


Saying so all the demons took their stand 
round Him and began to shower various kinds 
of weapons on Him. 


IAUATTAA SMT Cea AST: | 

TEM FAST ATTA HLCP ATE ATT 2 23 1 

Fatt: dt AOA BVAIS eT: Me: 

AHS TAA YA aeta AN evil 

vet erat: aa fawrchengt: wt 

CMAs AA Wey: ATS TH WM 

TAGS Tend farweraqes: | 

Wah Ga Tet veh: wefrerart: 112 2E 1 

Ten valiant demons like Kdlanemi, etc., 

known as Maharathas, began to fight. Kalanemi 
shot 60 arrows; Nimi shot 100 arrows; Mathana, 
8() arrows; Jambhaka, 70 arrows; Sambhu ten 
arrows and the rest of the demons a single 
arrow each, on Visnu and with ten arrows they 


pierced Garuda. Visnu, the destroyer of the 
Danavas, thinking of the impetuosity of the 


demons, pierced every one of them with six | 


arrows. He drew again His bow and pierced 
Kalanem with three arrows. 


sear arertfareahey: yt: 

ferent fercrrer gaa sHlergenfarciers: 2 VON 
TAT TATU Fal TAIT: | 
Tae SA ATT THAT 2 VI 
cath: fatserrent efame FAT 

Aad WT AN SAA SATATAATN 22M 


Then Kalanemi, with eyes red with anger, 
put arrows on his bow and drawing the string up 
to his ears let them off on His chest. Those 
golden arrows on the chest of the Lord looked 
beautiful like the rays of Kaustubha gem. 
Visnu, somewhat mortified with them, snatched 
His terrific club and after brandishing it, 
whirled and hurled 1t at the demon. 


id 
1s 


30 


as Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Saha, Savana, 
Jyotisman, Dyutiman, Havya, Medha, 
Medhatithi! and Vasu, who were responsible 
for the expansion of their race. 


Ui Seat TPA AT Tay 
UaRaays Yih Tarifa: TNE 
Tania Aaa Saas: | 

TM WAVE AMA: Aifragay: 9 


All of them, while creating the Pratisarga 
achieved the supreme position. Thus the 
Svayambhuva Manvantara has been described. 
Now I describe the Svarocisa Manu. Svarocisa 
Manu had four sons known as Nabha, 
Nabhasya, Prasrti and Bhanu, who had earned 
the glory like the gods. 


aa PYAATATa: YIN: HVAT Ua al 
stat gemfasta Gad BIA: BAT 
Sa AAA ATT BAT: TATU PeraAS HAT 
SRR: YHA TATA SAAT: STA 
ASA Ya: VA A WAIT: Be: 
fgatetacniad WaRAA: TTT Ql 

In this Manvantara, there were the seven rsis 


known by the names of Datta, Niscayavana, 
Stamba, Prina, Kasyapa, Aurva and Brhaspatl. 


whence was produced Virat and from him the first 
Manu, According to others Svayambhuva converted 
himself into the first man called Svayambhuva Manu 
and the first woman called Sata-Ripa. The first 
Manu is the author of the Manu Samhita. He 1s 
sometimes called Prajapati, Hiranyagarbha and 
Pracetas. 

. Medhatithi is the author of many hymns in the 
Reveda and we have therefore Brahmanas and 
religious teachers descended trom Ksatrtyas. 

2. Manu, according to the legend of his birth in the 
Markandeya Purana, was the son of Sv4arocisa, so 
named from the splendour of his appearance when 
born and who was the son of the nymph Varithini by 
the Gandharva Kali. The text, in another place, 
makes him a son of Priyavrata. The Vayu gives the 
names of the individuals of these two classes, 
consisting each of twelve. It furnishes also the 
nomenclature of all the classes of divinities and of 
the sons of the Manus in each Manvantara. 


aos 


Matsya Puranam 


The gods of this Svarocisa Manvantara came to 
be known as Tusitéa. The Maharsis of the age 
are known as Vasistha, Hastindra, Sukrta, 
Miurtti, Apa, Jyoti, Aya and Smaya. They were 
seven in number. Thus the second Manvantara 
has been described. 


ATA Waa TAT WaT OTT 

TA aar STATA 22 

Su See WMS Ya: yaa a 

Tay Wasa WANS AMT 221 
Ue: STATIS : aAlidagt: | 
WAATA CAT; VASA TATA: AAT: 23M 
paves Seay Ya: Yaesu: fea: 
faasy afar GAA BTASAT: 1 VXI 


Thereafter I am going to describe the 
Manvantara known as Auttami which bestowed 
welfare. Manu named Auttami ruled during this 
time. He had ten sons named Isa, Urja, Tarja, 
Suci, Sukra, Madhu, Madhava, Nabhasya, 
Nabhasa and Saha. Of these, tenth son Saha was 
the youngest and the race was carried on by 
him. The gods known as Bhavanas, were born 
in this Manvantara. The names of the 
contemporary Saptarsis were Kaukurundi, 
Dalbhya, Sarhkha, Pravahana, Siva, Sita and 
Sasmita. All of them were illustrious and the 
promoters of yoga. 


Watt Bas Tas ars fasay 

ala: aetanarean: atta a gui 

Wa AAA GAA: Wa ATA 

AAT SAM TA HMA EATA SHAT VE A 

ARTA TA AUT TTT: | 

TU RTT AT TUTTI TATUT 219 

THAT TUNA TAATTAT: AAT 

TAT YA: A SMA ATA: VE 

The fourth Manvantara is known by the 

name of Tamasa, in which there were seven 
sages known as Kavi, Prthu, Agni, Akapi, Kapi, 
Jalpa and Dhiman. The contemporary divine 
gods were known by the name of Sadhyas. 


Chapter-9 


Tamas Manu had ten sons known by the names 
of Akalmas, Dhanvi, Tapomitla, Tapodhana, 
Taporati, Tapasya, Tapodyuti, Parantapa, 
Tapobhogi and Tapoyogi. All of them 
possessed the noble conduct and expanded the 
race. 


UST TATE AT TTS FUT 

eaale: TaTey Tats: AAT AA ee 
fETUaT WAY Wad FA: al: 
COTTA RTA TTA: WAT RoW 


Now you listen to the details of the fifth 
Manvantara known as Raivata.! The Saptarsis 
of this Manvantara were known by the names of 
Devabahu, Subahu, Parjanya, Somapa, Muni, 
Hiranyaroma and Saptasca. The gods of the 
contemporary times were knows as Abhitaraja 
and all the six Prakrtis (people) were devoted to 
noble ways. 


Hea FT fara FAT: Bl: 
qe Frege: arat Fratetsea yenrgra: 1 2 ei 


Raivataka Manu had ten sons known by the 
names of Havyapa, Kapi, Yukta, Nirutsuka, 
Sattva, Nirmoha and Prakasaka. All of them 
were quite valorous and devoted to Dharma. 


Maacaa Bytt CaaS: | 

WT: TaN fawn: BMS Ta AN 2! 
facaritarean a YS AATATISTR| 
TTA SAT HAT AT OPRAH 23 I 


Thereafter, there was the sixth Caksusa 
Manvantara, in which the names of the seven 
sages had been Bhrgu, Sudhama, Viraja, 
Sahisnu, Nada, Vivasvan and Atinéma. The 
gods of the contemporary period were known as 
Lekha. 


1. Raivata, as well as his three predecessors, is regarded 
usually as a descendant of Priyavrata. The 
Markandeya has a long legend of his birth, as the son 
of king Durgama by the nymph Revati, sprung from 
the constellation Revati, whom Ritavak, a Muni, 
caused to fall from heaven. 


31 


EVaISA AMET aoe feat: | 
TATA Yih Saat We AAA BVI 
ROYATTAEMTTE TAT SIT 

Wien: AIS Ae A AAT Wada TAN 
SrA MG das A Ulta 

CAG THAT AeA TCA! 2 & I 
aia afasesr ayaat tea 
Wee anit fawn: VATA 21 
wef wad Urgd BAIT: | 

FA TATA Tet UT TaN VCH 


Thus in that Manvantara there were the five 
types of the gods known as Rbhava, Rbhadya, 
Varimila and Divaukasa. Earlier, I had 
described the first Svayambhuva Manu, who 
had ten sons, similarly Caksusa Manu too had 
ten sons like Ruru and others. Thus I have 
introduced you to the Caksusa Manvantara. 
Now I shall describe Caksusa Manvantara to 
you, which is presently known as Vaivasvata. In 
this particular Manvantara, there are seven rsis 
known as Atn, Vasistha, Kasyapa, Gautama, 
Yogi, Bharadvaja, Pratapi, Visvamitra and 
Jamadagni. All the seven rsis defining the 


dharma ultimately achieved the highest 
position. 
aren feast a Sale Wedt aaars haan 


SSR PUA SATO: VAT 122M 


In the Vaivasvata Manvantara, there are the 
seven gods viz. Sadhya, Visvedeva, Rudra, 
Marut, Vasu, Asvinikumdara and Aditya. These 
are the seven gods. 


RARITSIA aga: Bat Yiar 
Tatty Way AA A WEITZ oll 
HA TAI Waa WT TEN 
MATT VaR GAAS TATATAI 3 gH 


Vaivasvata Manu too had ten sons including 
Iksvaku and others, who are well known on 
earth. In this way there are always seven rsis in 


32 


each one of the seven Manvantaras, who after 
protecting the dharma, achieve the highest 
position. O Royal sage, I am now describing 
Savarni Manvantara. 


TATA MST aAlforent Mae 
WATS: HVAT WH BTA: BAT 3 VI 
grata: aut Geta a 
afaisa: aitaa: Yom Aa 3 3 
WaT SM UAT: Yat: Walia: 
CRUMP RC CARS CICA ERA] 
Sa: WANA: Yat Theat are afaeaer 


TM frgar eter ATT THAT 3 I 
AAT HSAAGaT TAY: SAT: 
EAT AAT ST PARVAT ATTA 3G I 


In this particular Manvantara, Asvatthama, 
Saradvan, Kausika, Galava, Satinanda, 
Kasyapa and Rama (Parasurama) are the seven 
Rsis. Savarni Manu shall have ten sons viz. 
Dhrti, Vartyan, Yavas, Suvarna, Vrsti, Carisnu, 
Idya, Sumati, Vasu and valorous Sukra. These 
will be his ten sons. Similar description has 
been provided for Raucya and other future 
Manvantaras. At that point of time, Raucya the 
son of Ruci, would be known as Manu. 
Similarly, Bhautya, the son of Bhiti shall be 
known as Manu. Thereafter, Meru-sdvarni, the 
son of Brahma shall be known as Manu. 
Besides them Rta, Rtadhama and Visvaksena 
will also be known as Manus. 


Aaa AAA: Ufa hea: 

Wet FTAA ATTTH F191 
MSM Taeqeaes ATA! 
aeaaa farsa Geard TOM AE cl 


The Manus rule over the earth for 994 yugas 
(in other words the duration of each one of the 
fourteen Manus, extends upto seventy one 
divine yugas). Thus all of them during their 
period of rule, create the mobile and immobile 


Matsya Puranam 


world, are freed with Brahma at the end of the 
Kalpa. 


Ud Baeard fart Yt: TA: 
Tarn fawrared arent areas J fT: 3 


O Brahmanas, thus all the Manus, are reborn 
after a thousand yugas one after the other and 
get destroyed as well. Brahma and other gods 
on the other hand achieve the Sdyujya devotion 
of Visnu. This process shall be repeated even in 
future. 


Sta stored Wer Waa ATT 
FAATSEATT: NS Ut 
kk * 
CHAPTER 10 
The story of the king Prthu and the milking 
of the cow 
RAT Sd: 
ae Aral YTTet: FAT TN 


Ufdar: Yfuatarnegiaral Het aera VN 

fenet a sat Gar a: fea Ufeniraan 

mite a feo Ua HeNgaS A VN 

The Rsis asked, “O Sita, it is learnt that 

several of the ruler have ruled the country and 
have been called as Parthivas or Prthvipatis, 
because of their association with the earth. But 
how did the name of the earth came to be 
known as Prthvi? Why was the earth also 
known as gau or cow? You kindly reveal its 
secret. 


Ua Tara 
agt taryaeariesy ara warrafer: | 
year afer tt oftottea Berra 3 i 
Gaea A AAMT AAT AT TA: TT 
TTT : 1 1 


Stita said, “O Rsis, in the Svayambhuva 
dynasty in ancient times, there had been a 
Prajapati known by the name of Anga; who 
married Sunitha, the daughter of Mrtyu. The 


"4Re ATT L 


Chapter-10 


face of Sunitha was quite ugly, but she gave 
birth to a powerful son named Vena who 
became a splendid king in due course of time. 
But he always engaged himself in evil ways. 


CaS BTN ATA : UTTER: | 
qararea Forsared arts Tera GN 


He always indulged in abducting and 
seducing others wives. In this way he kept on 
spreading adharma in the universe. Then the 
rsis humbly prayed Vena to embrace the noble 
ways. 


SAPAUASHG FT SelayaT A Al AA: | 
SIP ER ICID CCUMO CPIM EAT 


But because of his evil mind, he failed to 
agree to their request, then the sages killed him 
pronouncing a curse on him. 


TYAS TNH: | 
TATA PU ror aTSTITT: 1119 1 


The kingdom was thus deprived of a ruler. 
The sages then churned the body of Vena, 
getting apprehensive of disturbance. First of all 
the forces of Mlecchas emerged out of his body. 


WAL AA HONATATIT: | 
faqiorer wisest anftreat ectenfror: it ci 
TTA SUTRA: AMA Tah 


The barbarian race black as the soot, 
emerged out of the body of Vena due to the evil 
qualities of his mother. For the good qualities of 
his noble and auspicious father, a most brilliant 
figure appeared from the right hand wearing the 
armour studded with precious gems and holding 
the bow, arrow and a club in both the hands. 
This figure emerged out of the body of Vena, 
when it was quite carefully churned. He 
therefore came to be known as Prthu. 


 fagetaficat aa: Great FeTeUrAI Qo 
fara Fae WaT: | 


33 


Ftaraarcant Fras alert yarerqi 2211 
SCI ORR TMIESEMUIE TICE 
Tay TTT SY: TOMA ETAT 1 2A 


Though the Brahmanas had crowned him as 
the king over the kingdom of his father, but, 
still, he pleased lord Visnu performing the 
severe tapas. Then he, with the boon of lord 
Visnu, conquering all the mobiles and 
immobiles of the world, himself became the 
lord of the entire universe. When the king found 
that the earth was deprived of the Vedic rites, he 
was filled with mghteous indignation and 
endeavoured to destroy it with his infallible 
arrow. The earth then shook with fear. 
Assuming the form of a cow, she took to flight. 


YEASTS: TACT MATA: | 

aa: faedenest 7 fe atriife Uraatqi 231 
yytaacgeiitad fe Yad 

TA WA: Vile WAT ATT A evi 


She was followed by Prthu, the great archer. 
Finding that she was being followed by Prthu, 
the earth felt exhausted and standing there at a 
particular place, she spoke, “What should I do 
to please you, O Lord?” At this Prthu said, “O 
Noble one, you at once bestow the best of the 
king to the mobile and immobile world.” 


Ta Araeatgragares A THAT: 
Tah UO yaad Heart AIS ATTN VU I 
On hearing this, the earth said, “All night, 1t 

will be done accordingly. With the consent of 
the earth as cow, Prthu made Svayambhuva 
Manu as a calf and milked the cow in his own 
hand cup. The milched material became the 
spotless cereals, which made the people to 
remain alive. 


TRANS S VAT Sletfer Ia a 
aa aaa Aer: ATTA 2 I 
STEN Fee ATTA TA: | 
Cae AME SMT Sra FASTA VOI 


34 


Sal Aa: Waa ATH 
Cart HSA Ut Fao Tat TAT Ve 
Thereafter the process of milking the cow 

was started. The Rsis also milked the same cow. 
At that point of time moon was turned as a calf, 
Brhaspati became the milkman, Vedas became 
the vases and the milked material was the tapas. 
The gods also milked the cow, when Mitra 
became the milkman and Indra became the calf, 
while the prowess was the essence as milk. At 
the time of the milking of the cow, golden was 
the vase of the gods. 


SAAT AAT Ac: TaAT TA: 
AAU AMAT AAT ATTATS ATI 22 Ul 
fart att cal aren gas AAT: | 
THT TAIT PAUSAT 2 ot 


Then Antaka also milked the cow, when 
Yama became the calf, Svadha was the juice, 
the manes had the vase of silver. In the milking 
of the cow by the nagas, Dhrtarastra became the 
milkman, Taksaka, the lord of serpents became 
the calf, gourd was the vase, while pdyasam or 
poison was the milked material. 


Wa ARTAYEA: Weta fatter: 
aren fiat maria a yatta 2 gh 


The demons also milked the cow. They 
milked Maya used for the torture of Indra 1n the 
vase of iron. In that case Virocana, the son of 
Prahlada became the calf. Dvimtrdha had been 
the milkman, and pressed out Maya in an iron 
pot 


TST AKA SMT WTS Tg AT: 
Heal ATAU ACAATATTA Walaa 22 
Yaksas also milked the cow with the desire 
of becoming invisible. For this purpose, they 
made Kubera the calf and milked the cow in the 
vase of clay. 


TRAATTULG ET ATTRA CIOTY 
USANNSHAEA FATe AKT WT TN 


Matsya Puranam 


The goblins as well as the pretas milked the 
cow yielding a terrific flow of blood. For this 
purpose, Raupyanabha, a goblin, functioned as 
a milkman, the goblin Sumali became the calf. 


TST YT SM ATA ATA: | 

aed UA Heal WAIST AAT Vw 
SPa AEA TETAS UT: 
fatitegar set Ta fateh a I 
stent a teenth aren weer: 
aeaSug Marea Us Meret FAN VEU 


The apsaras as well as the Gandharvas, 
making Caitraratha as the calf milked the 
fragrance of the earth in a lotus leaf from the 
earth. During this exercise, a Gandharva 
Vararuci, the excellent dancer became the 
milkman. The mountains milked the precious 
gems as well as the divine ausadhis from the 
cow. Sumeru, the great mountain was used as 
the milkman, while Himavan acted as a calf. 
The vase was like the mountain. 


FAT TG SET att fsa 
UAHA SPT FT MAT: TIAA HTN VI 
ASMA Ac: Wager eared: | 
VAULT THE AST THM TATA 2c It 


The trees milked the power of regermination 
even after being lopped off, in a leaf of Palasa 
(Butea frondosa). For this purpose Sala 
(Shorearobusta) was made the milkman and the 
fig tree officiated as a calf. In the same manner, 
everyone who milked the earth, received the 
desired fruit. 


SE AS Bt Vat Tes werata 
4 afteter HBA Wit A a UTA 281 
ares fafacgat watt srate 
Fret wafeat citer &:wayienfaratatan: 11 3 of 
During the rule of the king Prthu, the people 
had long life, were quite well off and wealthy. 


No one was poor at that time. There were no 
ailments and no one indulged in the evil ways. 


Chapter-11 


During the rule of the king Prthu, there were no 
misfortunes or dangers and the people were free 
from sufferings and enjoyed a comfortable life. 


TTRIEM A Borsa A AAT: | 
Yaa AG aes Sear PereHTeTAT 3 i 


The valorous Prthu, getting inspired with the 
welfare of the people, raised the huge 
mountains with the bow and made the surface 
even. 


TCS TTT AT MATTE AAT: 

TAA ASS DW AAPA AAT 113 2M 
qua Sitch: Ut Wet Tora 
HMA A UAalUT AAT A WaT TaN 3 31 


During the rule of Prthu, there were no 
cities, towns or the forts, nor did the people 
carry the weapons for self protection. The 
ailments were totally absent; the science of 
political economy was unknown and had been 
neglected having no importance. All the people 
performed their duties and the prescribed rites. 
There was no trace of greed in them and they 
were all devoted to dharma. O Rsis, thus, | have 
narrated the story of the milking of the cow by 
Prthu and the milking vases, in which the milk 
was poured. 


Yat aa ofaaded dear fara 
UAAST Vag TAT Pas Pafarq 3 vi 


Whatever things are desired by the people, 
they should make offering of the same in the 
yajfias as well as in the Srdaddhas! of the manes. 


1. The Nirnaya Sindhu, in a passage referred to by 
Colebrooke (As. Res. VII.) specifies the following 
Sraddhas : 1. The Nitya or perpetual; daily offerings 
to ancestors in general; 2. The Naimittika or 
occasional; as the Ekoddista or obsequial offerings 
on account of a kinsman recently deceased; 3. The 
Kamya, voluntary; performed for _ the 
accomplishment of a special design (aftwafaza); 4. 
The Vrddhi; performed on occasions of rejoicing or 
prosperity; 5. The Sapindana; offerings to all 
individual and to general ancestors; 6. The Parvana 


35 


Shaded Te Tenegaetadt WEN 
carers yfrat fasyar get 34 


Thus the story of the milking of the earth has 
been narrated by me, by which the earth had 
become the daughter of Prthu. Therefore, 
because of the immense love of Prthu, the earth 
came to be known as Prthvi, by the learned 
people. 


Sta shred TergaTat azaUrat ATT 
SOTATSEATT: It Qo ll 
*** 
CHAPTER 11 
Genesis of the solar and lunar dynasties and 
the story of Ila 
RAT ad: 


Mea Ag Tt AAAI 
Aaa UW WAN AME TaN VI 


The Rsis asked, “O Stita, well-versed in 
tattvas, now you kindly describe in detail the 
solar and the lunar dynasties.” 


ad sald 


Sraddha; offerings to the manes on certain lunar days 
called Parvas or day of full moon and new moon and 
the eighth and fourteenth days of the lunar fortnight; 
7. The Gosthi; for the advantage of a number of 
learned persons or of an assembly of Brahmanas, 
invited for the purpose; 8. The Suddhi; one 
performed to purify a person from some defilement; 
an expiatory Sraddha; 9. The Karmanga; one 
forming part of the intiatory ceremonies or 
Sanskadras, observed at conception, birth, tonsure; 10. 
The Daiva; to which the gods are invited; 11. The 
Y atra Sraddha; held by a person going a journey; 
and 12. The Pusti Sraddha; one performed to 
promote health and wealth. Of these, the four which 
are considered the most solemn are the ite 
performed for a parent or near relative, lately 
deceased; that which is performed for kindred 
collectively: that observed on certain lunar days; and 
that celebrated on occasions of rejoicing : 34 
qeataestcataanah wgfattqa etl Nirnaya 
Sindhu, p. 271. 


36 


CF el Unitas Taig Tal WT AAT A 

© face Gat Tat tat BEA YT 

TC yer yard aye caret Gat Tar ATTN 
ay AT wa Bet T AYA: 

OC aaeait wa wae Aaa v I 


Sita said, “O Rsis, in the ancient times, 
_ Maharsi Kasyapa produced from his wife Aditi, 
bid Vivasvan Strya, who had three wives viz. 
Rajl Rajni, Sanjfid and Prabha. Out of them Raji, 
a ' the daughter of Raivata, produced a son named 
Ral\ Raivata, while Prabha gave birth to a son named 
—— Prabhata. Sanjiaé was the daughter of 
VIS\ Vigvakarma. She gave birth to Vaivasvata 
Mat Manu and Yama as the two sons besides a 
dauy daughter named Yamuna. 


Hl sraqerearara tagrinreharear 
TB TEU ATT wafer ATT 


Yama and Yamuna were the twins. After 
sometime when the beautiful Tvastri (Sanjna) 
could not bear the heat of the sun, then she out 
of her own body created an exceedingly 
beautiful lady who came to be known as 
Cha Chaya.! 


Tp yea: feat pr dan at yerara 
ST a AT Tae STAT GI 


Finding Chaya standing before her, Sanja 
said, “O Beautiful one, O Chaya, you should 
serve my husband, extending motherly affection 
to my children. You bring them up with loving 
care. 


M  oaaentt wen wees wer 
O« Saya F Ol SANTA Tao 


Chaya said, “All right, I shall do so.” Saying 
this, this, she went to Vivasvan, in order to serve 
nM. him. 


poarpomc{ 


said 
Serv 
to 1 
care 


LT 1. That 1s, her shadow or image. It also means 'shade'. 
C The Bhagavata, however, makes both Sanja and 
- Chay4 daughters of Visvakarman. 


Matsya Puranam 


aerrearara earshy aeaater Arse 
WAST AT FT YA A APA cI 


Vivasvan on the other hand, taking Chaya as 
Sanjna, kept on behaving well with Chaya. In 
due course of time he produced from the womb 
of Chaya, a son who was powerful like Manu. 


Wavraa Urafoaaaaaes a 
at: Vt a aad fats da wat qe 
Because of his possessing the figure and 

complexion of gold, he came to be known as 
Savarn. The sun taking Chaya to be Sanjna, 
produced from the womb of Chaya, a son 
named Sani and two daughters known as Tapati 
and Vistt. 

SATA AAT AAA ATT: 

BT TATA Ae AE WH Ft FAM Volt 

Yat AAT BAT A AA: Alaa: | 

AAMAS TAT UTeETT SATUTTN 2 aI 

WNT TA Sra lard: HATA: | 

WretsaMeAL Are Yerenforaerara: 11 22 1 


Chaya loved her son Manu much more than 
the other children. This step motherly treatment 
was tolerated by Manu the son of Sanja, but 
once Yama was enraged because of this and 
threatened Chaya to kick her with his left foot. 
At this Chaya pronounced a curse on Yama, 
“Your foot shall be eaten up by the worms. The 
blood and puss shall always ooze out of it.” 


Facamra fied: yrorentar:| 
FRAUMe WaT AAT Seah WaTATI 23 1 
TMG HACIA: TAT 

TA STATON WA VITTASTTSATN PY 
Wa A AAT ATMA PTGS Ae Se 
erste TT ea: fe eee TTA gu I 
Waa Fe: era Haale: 
SATA AACATT CAT HATSATT TTT VE 


Chapter-11 


On hearmg the curse, the enraged Yama, 
went to his father and spoke, “O Lord, the 
enraged mother has pronounced a curse on me 
for no reason at all. O Lord, because of my 
childish habit, I had raised my right foot once. 
At this, she, inspite of dissuading by the elder 
brother Manu, pronounced a curse on me. Since 
she has attacked me by means of a curse, 
therefore she does not appear to be our mother.” 
On hearing this the sun god again said to Yama, 
“O Intelligent one, what should I do? One has 
to suffer sometime due to some one’s own 
foolishness. Or otherwise one has to reap the 
reward of his own karmas. This rule is 
applicable over Siva himself, then what to speak 
of others. 


HHAUHNA St A: HAsaraera 
He UO Vfat da Sea aA I V9 1 


Therefore, O Son, I am giving you a cock or 
a peacock, which shall consume all the worms 
of your foot besides the blood and the puss 
emerging out of it.” 
UaTHATY TRS WTA: | 
Tewtael AeA FATS: 1 Re 
wT Hele Wagga TT 
at WHE: WIE: VETTATI 221 
At these words of the father, the immensely 
glorious Yama developed detachment in his 
mind. Then he went to the holy place of 
Gokarna living on fruits, leaves and the air, 
engaged himself in severe tapas. In this way, he 
adored lord Mahadeva for twenty thousand 
years. In due course of time, the trident bearer 


Siva, getting pleased with his tapas appeared 
before him. 


ad B cewtered Faget urea 
CANTATA AM WTA TATA 2 01 
Ud F MATa: | 
Prepon afer acer I TAT T TTT 2 I 


37 


Then Yama, in the form of a boon, achieved 
the position of a Lokapala, besides the lordship 
of the manes, and the powers of judgement for 
the performing of dharma and adharma by the 
people. Siva, the lord of the universe, bestowed 
all the boons on him. 


aaa AAT AAMT: HreAT! 
TAR: AUTEM AT UTS 2 2 
On the other hand, Vivasvan came to know 
about the reality about Sanjna and then went to 


Visvakarma and angrily narrated to him the 
entire course of events. 


TAT ARABS AaTe FETT: | 
TAMA WTAE THATS 2 31 
ASTUTE Tee STAM 
Preanftar wat at a wat da fearatn ex 
TES AMATAM AAT MATA 
THATS Wa YAR A aT 24 I 


OQ Brahmanas, then Tvasta reassuring 
Vivasvan, said to him, “O Lord, you are the 
remover of darkness and unable to bear the heat 
of your lustre, Sanja came to me in the form of 
a mare, but I did not allow her to enter my 
place, saying, “Since you have arrived 
stealthily, without the knowledge of your 
husband, therefore, you cannot enter my place. 


Wate SMTA Weaerataredn 
ASAT oer MUA 2 & I 


Thus getting disappointed from your as well 
my place, she is still wandering on earth in the 
form of a mare. 


TANTS HS Y ATSATTEA! 
TIAA A Aa GA Heat fara 2 
ed aq afeanta aearrcant wan 

Ta: A Taw wat Hear aTATAN VI 


Therefore, O Divaxara, in case, I am quite 
dear to you, then you should be pleased with me 
and then grant my request. O Lord, I shall 


Cv an) om 


a 


CD J ~\ 


38 


sharpen your unbearable lustre with the use of 
the yantra, reducing it at the same time. By this 
way you would become pleasant for the 
people.” When the sun accepted the request, 
Tvasta, with the use of his yantra, reduced his 
lustre to some extent. 


Yoh Man aah fanaAcrad 
Fayre AT Sa TATE THT 28 I 


With the lustre which was removed from the 
body of the sun, Tvastaé, made Sudarsana Cakra 
for Visnu, a trident for Siva and the Vajra for 
Indra for the subjugation of the Daityas and 
Danavas. 


Cea: MeacH CONTA 
BU UG Uh AR UIT Fel 3 ol 


In this way, Tvasta, leaving the feet, made 
the thousand rayed form of the sun more 
beautiful. 


T MAT TERE UTET Ta: WAI 

saree ad: Wet a alarenratcenfera 3 vi 

q: aalfa @ Utast afrarente fareary 

FRU creas hares IATA 3 2M 

At that point of time, he was unable to look 

at the lustre of the sun. Therefore the said lustre 
of the feet remained unchanged. Because of this 
the images of the sun are made without his feet 
and in case one does so, he, after his death, has 
to achieve an extremely sinful position. He 


suffering various ailments on earth ultimately 
attracts leprosy. 


qa aera fara a 
4 pferenraaret Saea eT ATT BU 


Therefore the people well-versed while 
making the images of the sun, the feet should 
not be cast. 


Ad: W AMAT TOA: 
STATA UAT Ha Wat fear: 13 VU 
BPS Aeal AAA A AAT: | 


Matsya Puranam 


Ua MW AAT ATT AASeM 3 & 
TRATES Usa WAT 
AAaea TaTaferfata FTA 3 & II 
SAY Aaa ATA ATT TT: | 
aren fata & ee GATT 
PAAR TT Ae Wala 3 oN 


On Tvasta's disclosing the whereabouts of 
Sanja, the sun god reached the earth, he 
produced Asvanikumaras from Sanjna. This is 
absolutely true. Because they were born from 
the nostrils of Sanjna, they were known as 
Nasatya and Dasra. After sometime, Sanjna 
finding the sun in the form of a horse, was 
extremely satisfied. She boarded the plane 
delightfully and proceeded on to the heaven. 


AaUT SHY ATTA AUNT: | 
VWAAUaATeTT WEA Aa: TUN gl 


Out of the issues born of Chaya, Savarni 
Manu is still present over the mountain Sumeru. 
Sani on the other hand, because of his tapas, 
was included in the list of planets. 


TAA Aa Wa YE AYA: | 
fatpanifaten agrnlenaddt area 3 211 


After a lot of time, both the daughters named 
Tapati and Yamuna, were turned as rivers. The 
third daughter known as Visti or Bhadra, 
attained blue colour and was located in time 
(hell). 


WAAC AAT TAT Wea: | 
So VANS WAT WAAAY oN 


Vaivasvata Manu produced ten powerful 
sons. Ila was the eldest of all. They were born 
as a result of the Putresti yajna. 


Seah: AIAN swt FE Va Al 
ART: HBT Wass AevacT: | 
ToT AMT: Ta A RATATAT: NY I 


The rest of the nine sons were known by the 
names of Iksvaku, KusSanabha, Arista, Dhrsta, 


Chapter-11 


Narisyanta, Kurisa, Saryati, Prsadhra and 
Nabhaga. All of them were quite valorous and 
divine. 


aiafires wy: Uafaet wae a anita: 
HTT ATS TA: A ASAT ¥ 21 


Attaining the old age, the noble Manu, 
crowned his eldest son over the throne and he 
himself retired for performing fapas in the 
forest over Mahendra mountain. 


am fanaa: wrearretaany 
THU ANU SAYA: AVATATI ¥ 3 1 
UAT PAPAS: ATT 
HeUgreMaA ATT YCATT Ae ¥¥ I 


The new king Ila,! with the desire of 
conquering the universe, started wandering on 
earth. He was wandering on all the islands, 
defeating the rulers. In the meantime the horse 
of the illustrious Ila, entered the orchard of 
Siva, which was filled with Kalpavrksas as well 
as the creepers. It was known by the name of 
Saravana. 


TH AA CAM: WY: AMATAIMGT:| 
SAT VATE TT MATT HAN we 
Yah Ue Ahreafseriaeaa at aa 
ALAN Aaa SHINAAVSeH! ¥ EI 


Lord Siva with the crescent adorning his 
head, was engaged in love sports with Parvati. 
Before starting the sports with Uma, in that 
forest, Siva had made it a condition that 
whosoever male entered in the ten yojana wide 
forest, he would be tured into a female. 


AMAA TA St: WCAG TT 
Taran faaa ACaa FATT wot 
year ei Wa cared faterar ya: 
Set AISHAAN WAAC STATI Y 2 


The king Ila was unaware of the above 
situation, and soon after his entry into the forest, 


|. According to the Matsya, no change of sex took 
place in the first instance. The eldest son of Manu 
was Ida or Ila (8S: or 8¢et:), whom his father 
appointed sovereign of the seven Dvipas. 


39 


he was turned into a female. Even the horse was 
turned as a mare. In a moment the manhood 
disappeared from the body of Ila. With the 
disappearing of the manhood from the body of 
Ila, he was surprised. The female then came to 
be known as []a, possessing immense beauty 
having the breasts developed like a woman. 

SACMUATTAT Veruaaderorr| 

WORSaS Tal PAT AAA ATUTI ¥ 2 I 

Toraa aaa AerehPaary aw 


TINA YAMA FSTSATATAVITN & 0 It 


She looked amazed to find herself turned as 
woman. Her thighs became stouter and the face 
started beaming like a moon which made her 
more attractive in that female form. She had 
curly hair, the hair on the body was soft and the 
teeth were quite pleasant. Her speech was quite 
sweet and deep. 


PAT quit SAATCOT MAT 
YAYTUAA TTOATSTI 4 VN 
She had the mixed complexion of her body 
between fair and dark. She could walk like and 
swan like an elephant. Both her eyebrows 


resembled the bow. Her nails resembled the 
colour of copper. 


Wat A at WaT MAN 

at Hy fUaSaaT Wat BAT A AAT wares & VU 
HE YTS THT FRET TAN 
FraaAt SEM ATTA ASAT & 3 
SORTA ATA 
TARACTAS ATH ATAU SA 1 & YI 


Thus the beautiful damsel, while wandering 
in the forest, started thinking, who is my father 
or the mother or a brother in this lonely forest. 
Who is my husband, to whom my care has been 
entrusted or who is my husband? For how long 
shall I have to remain on this earth?” When she 
was thus thinking at the same time, Budha the 
son of the moon spotted her and he became 
anxious to get her. 


40 


fafgrsreanrtarcust Was yeTa: | 
HART 


Budha then took to a special form of a 
Dandi or an ascetic holding a staff. He carried a 
kamandalu as well as the book. In the pole of a 
bamboo, he had tied a number of articles. 


fasren: fort gal Frreauiquect: | 
aehenfadt Arh: AfaegeTHMaa: 14 
He was in the form of a Brahmacari,! having 
a long and a thick tuft. Using the sacrificial 


stick, flowers, kusa, and water, he was reciting 
the Vedas with his pupils. 


facntarat afarargera a afer 
Seated: fH WaTAVSeI & 9 II 


He projected himself as a_ researcher, 
searching for something in the forest. In this 
way he seated himself in the cluster of trees 
outside the forest, he started attracting the 
attention of []a. 


RAMA ATTA aS 
AAT AANAT GF TAT APSA & CI 
oa fagntaen at atearata ATT 

Welle FIRST ATM HT STATING VI 
Sa Maa dent faarade ada 
FAIA YUASE YE WAGON 

WM adie Aan 


AA AU wat Het AW AT ASAT VI 


When [la approached Budha, he getting 
confused, complained to her, “O Beautiful one, 
why have you entered my abode, leaving aside 
the task of serving others?” On hearing this, [la 
said, “I have forgotten myself, yourself, my 
husband and my race, I have forgotten all, 
therefore, O Sinless one, you therefore 
introduce me about your race as well as that of 
mine.” 


|. First stage in the life of a Brahmana, student of the 
Vedas. 


Matsya Puranam 


ag: Ward at walter wa avatar 

He A BGA AMT Agiaa FT: TAG 2 

aaa: Get Va: foer A aero: | 

Sit Al AAT THAR FAAATAI G 311 

Tremere errata 

Sol HAKATA AAT & KI 

At these enquiries of Ila, Budha said to the 

beautiful damsel. “O Beautiful one, you are 
known as la, while I am known as Budha and 
am well-versed in many lores. I have been born 
in an illustrious race.” At these words spoken by 
Budha, Ili believed in him and she entered his 
abode having the pillars of gems, which were 
built with the divine Maya. Reaching the abode, 
she felt herself as quite fortunate. 

Hel FAAS BIN TAS! He 

Wy OUT TW AAS TATA & & I 

Ta OT at aanftareten aa: 

AAMT Te AA RATT TATE GI 


She uttered, “What a beautiful conduct 1s 
there? What an astonishing beauty 1s there! 
Look at the enormous riches. How high 1s the 
race? How beautiful am I and my husband?” 
Thereafter Ila, enjoyed all the pleasures in the 
luxurious house of Budha, and spent time with 
him comfortably, as 1f dwelling in the abode of 
Indra. 


ATYAATE STI SEAT: I 221 
CHAPTER 12 


The story of Ila and description of 
Iksvaku dynasty 


Ud sara 
MAGA UA WA AAT: | 
SATHIT WYMAT VCAUTIAHAI 811 
qaed Bay: Va asaya: Feary 


Chapter-12 


CATATONIA TATA 2 1 


Te TM AT ST AT ATA 
STARSATTTA ht SPT 

aaa HareTEAUT Ue eT YUTTAN XI 
fafteaeyfat aq amfaat at 
araBsaaietes SET AEUATAATATH & Ut 


Stita said, “O Rsis, when the king did not 
return to his kingdom for long, his brother 
Manu and son Iksvaku became apprehensive, 
while searching for the king Ila, all of them 
reached the outskirts of the Saravana forest. All 
of them found a beautiful mare on the path. Her 
body made of gems was issuing lustre. Then 
recognising the saddle, all the relatives felt 
surprised and started talking among themselves, 
“This is the horse Candraprabha, which belongs 
to our king Ila. How is it that it has been turned 
in the form of a mare?” Then all of them 
returned and enquired from their family priest 
Vasistha, “OQ Great sage, you are the best 
among those having been well-versed in the 
yogic practices. How could this astonishing 
event happen? You better speak out the secret 
about the same?” Then the sage Vasistha, learnt 
about the event with the use of his yogic power 
and spoke to Iksvaku and others. 


TAT: VYShataAT: Vea TT 
I: WA Wager W AaraTCeaTATI & I 


He said, “O Princes, in earlier times, Uma, 
the spouse of Siva, had made a condition for 
this forest, that whomsoever male would enter 
it, he would be turned as a woman. 


SITS ARKAATGIAT AeS Th 

WA: YRraaes Saal SASTTA: N19 1 
qa wa: aieamnaa Prana 
aaea UAT BIT SAT MEAT CH 


Because of the same, the horse together with 
the king Ila have been turned to female forms. 


4} 


Therefore all of you should adore Siva, in order 
to relieve the womanhood of [14 like Kubera. At 
the command of the sage Vasistha, all the sons — 
of Manu reached in the abode of Siva. 


qWafatad: Ta: Wada 
Maategassa WaT: fd ATTAIN ei 
STATE Ache ARAeTAaT: | 

erat feanreat ait: @ AAMAS oll 
ATTA eT ASAT 
SAARI ct: feReTSaSAATI 221 


Reaching there, all of them adored Parvati 
and Mahesvara, reciting various stotras. Getting 
pleased with their prayers, both Siva and Parvati 
said, “O Princes, though no one has the strength 
to surpass this rule made by me, but, for the 
removal of the same, I am going to speak out a 
method to you. In case the reward of the 
Asvamedha Yajiia is dedicated to us fully, then 
the king would become a kinnara.” On hearing 
this the sons of Vaivasvata Manu, returned 
saying, “All right” to their abode. Reaching 
there, they arrange for an Asvamedha yajna. 
The reward of the same was dedicated to both 
Siva and Parvati as a result of which [ld was 
transformed as a Kimpurusa. 

Waa TA a: a ATTA: 
geen rat fcrafaett WHETS AAT 22 

Thereafter, he remained a man for a month 
and in the next month he was turned into a 
woman. He remained as a woman in the palace 


of Budha, and in such circumstances [la had 
been conceived. 


STATA ea OTT 
qa Ft Ut Tae: Il 23 1 
An extremely virtuous son was born of that 


conception. After that Budha returned from 
earth to the heaven. 


SA ATT TeMTAeTgaTATaT 
AAA MASTS ATTA Ht OY 


42 


Since that time Varsa was named as I[lavrta 
after the name of Ila. Thus at the start of the 
solar and the lunar races, [la the son of Manu 
was the first king. 


Ud Veta: TAMAR TaST: | 
SETTLAAET TA TCAT: 11 8G A 


O Rsis, performing the great tapas, as 
Purtrava who was born of [14 in his male form, 
expanded the lunar dynasty, similarly, the king 
Iksvaku, was responsible for the spreading of 
the solar dynasty. 


Sa feryened U Tay sft area 

YA: YAAT TARTAN 2 I 
TH St TAGS aa 
THATA HA ATT WAT J TAT TAT Voit 


While functioning as Kimpurusa, [la was 
known as Sudyumna. This Sudyumna got three 
invincible sons known by the name of Utkala, 
Gaya and the valorous Haritagva.! 


semen feayat faa Hert: Tel 
Urrsristiftrena U YR TAT VI 
WMtelgd Ah as feo 
SATHASeTA TATSMAATAAT 22 I 


Out of the four sons, [la bestowed the 
kingship of Utkala to Utkala, Gayapradesa to 
Gaya and eastern region of Kurupradesa to 
Haritasva. Then he established Puritirava, his 
eldest son as the king of Pratisthanapura, he 
himself retired to Ilavartavarsa for consuming 
the roots and fruits there. The eldest son of 
Manu, known as Iksvaku, became the lord of 
Madhyadesa. 


1. The Matsya calls the name of third Haritasva; the 
Vayu- Vinatasva; the Markandeya- Vinaya; and the 
Bhagavata- Vimala. All but the last agree in stating 
that Uktala (Orissa) and Gaya in Bihar are named 
after the two first. The Matsya calls the third the 
sovereign of the east, along with the Kauravas; the 
Vayu makes him king of the west. The Bhagavata 
calls them all three rulers of the south. 


Matsya Puranam 


TUETA YAS EPA AM Telarc: 
AMRIT FTCA A YAAAAI oll 
Sana yaa WIE atary 
Out of the other sons of Manu, a valorous 
son was born to Narisyanta. Nabhaga had the 
son named Ambarisa, while Dhrsta had three 


sons named Dhrtaketu, Citranatha and 
Ranadhrsta. 


APA AT Vala: Tara es ATATAATI 2 VI 
MAA AMAATA TAI: TATA 
APA AT SRSA A MACHU 2 21 


Saryati had a son named Anarta, besides a 
daughter named Sukanya. Anarta had a glorious 
son named Rocaman. The country ruled by 
Anarta, came to be known as Anarta-Kusasthali 
= Dvaraka was its capital city. 

Tae WaSUEaY Tat Wa Ul 
HHA AA AT TIS: VATA Al 23 

Reva was the son of Rocaman, who was 

known by the name of Raivata or Kakudmi. 


He was the eldest of the hundred sons of 
Rocaman. 


Tact TT A HA Aa WTA faye 
HON J HEMT Gea: sa Yfau evi 


He had a daughter named Revati who was 
married to Balarama. Kariisa had many sons 
who were known on earth as Karisas. 


Sa METER ROTM TET 
RATA FATT TUTE: 11 BG I 


Prsadhra, due of the killing of a cow, was 
turned as a Sidra because of the curse of the 
preceptor. O Best of the sages, now I am going 


2. According to the Vayu, the brothers of Raivata 
founded a celebrated race called Saryata, from 
Saryati. The Brahma Purana says they took refuge in 
secret places (gahana); for which the Hari Vamsa 
substitutes (parvatagana) mountains. The Vayu has 
neither and says merely that they were renowned 1n 
all regions : fara fea warg 


Chapter-12 


to describe about the Iksvaku dynasty, you 
please listen to me carefully. 


sara: Gaara ferepfarary Sara 

TUB: TANT VSI WT AAT EI 
Wiredtated J AAT: UAT: | 

UTM UGH TANTEI 29 
Trcaurd A ad Wa: Bana: 

TAB: BHAA ANITA TT TAA 2 It 


Devaraja Vikuksi was born as a son of 
Iksvaku and was the eldest of the hundred sons 
of Iksvaku. Vikuksi had fifteen sons who ruled 
to the north of the Sumeru mountain. Vikuksi 
had a hundred and fourteen sons, who ruled the 
southern side of the Sumeru mountain. The 
eldest son of VikuksI was known by the name 
of Kakutstha. He had a son named Suyodhana. 


Te UA: Yaa farmer yal: as 
SST FT VAST APATANS HATH 2 2 
Prthu was the son of Suyodhana. Prthu had a 


son named Visvaga, Indu was the son of 
Visvaga, while Yavanasva was the son of Indu. 


MART AEM THAT AS TAT 
fatter aa stare mMSeet FRSTRTAT: 113 011 
MARCIE CAS THAT RTS ATT 
TITAS BT: TAT 3 Vl 
TS VARA WAT FSA SVS Va a 


afrerasy faenal area: Tatar 3 2 


Sravasta was the son of Yavandsva, who 
was also known as Vatsaka, O Brahmanas, It is 
he who established the town of Sravasti in the 
Gauda country. From Sravasta was born 
Brhadasva, and from him was born Kuvalasva, 
who having been killed by Dhundhu in the 
earlier times, came to be known as 
Dhundhumara. Drdhasva was the son of 
Dhundhumara, besides Danda and Kapilasva. 
These were the three sons of Dhundhumara. 


43 


GEAR WAT SAVARD UT: | 
Sava as yea yaaa MAI 3-3 


Pramoda was the son of Drdhasva, while 
Haryasva was the son of Pramoda. Nikumbha 
was the son of Haryadsva. A son named 
Samhitasva was born to Nikumbha. 


APMVA Wiyasy Aeayagargan 
FATA TNT UPMAT ST AALS HATH 3 ¥I 


Samhitasva had two sons named Akrtasva 
and Ranasva. Out of them Randasva had a son 
named Yuvanasva, who produced a son named 
Mandhata. 

WRT: TeReasygues Wa: | 
Waray fat: WA VATA 34 1 
Mandhata had the sons named Purukutsa, 


king Dharmasena and the glorious Mucukunda, 
the destroyer of foes. 


Tene Yalsyggal TWerate: | 
OTA VATA A AANSHATI 3 I 


Out of these Purukutsa had a son named 
Vasuda, the lord of Narmada. Sambhiti was his 
son and Tridhanva was born to Sambhit. 


AAT: Yat AAACN Stet AA 
TANCAAAA AT ASIA: BA ZI 
TS Yat Steers eftergqa Ufed: 

Venta Feat Wal FaTES TATA 3 2 
AMAT VASAT OTT 

BML ATCT WT TAT TAT Vt 


Trayyaruna was the son of Tridhanva, who 
had a son named Satyavrata. Satyaratha was 
born as son to Satyavrata. Hariscandra was born 
to Satyaratha, Rohita was the son of 
Hariscandra. Rohita had the son named Vrka, 
while Bahuka was born to Vrka. Sagara was the 
son of the king Bahuka who was quite religious. 
He had two wives known by the names of 
Prabha and Bhanumati. 


TATA: Yatatsha: WRT 


552 


aMagetao faaeda Vt: Me: 
ferada freret: Hegl THTATOTETATATTI 23 ol 
The demon, seeing it approaching, divided it 


into pieces by his arrows and, thereby, showed 
the force of his arms. 


aat fanny: venta: wrt sae ta 
OA SIA FET ASAT MSA 23 Vl 
Then Visnu angrily took up His spear, the 

terrific Prasa weapon and pierced his chest. 

MOT MSTA HASTAC: | 

Vit WE Aeurat SaaTverseaary 23 2 

aa ari fawoiferte fefraea:t 

A: MM YHA SAMO SAAT 23 31 

WERT Har faye: 

at fae: wenfuat sere faget aq: 23vi 

AA SMB AAU Tae: | 

ore ged uefafaeaa a fafa: mtn 234 

agi: antares east daar ufo 

BNA TATA AT yet er A PAV 23 EI 

U feral eet me cent afeiereinge:| 

QATHTSOIMNY: USHA: It 2 39 

Kalanemi, regaining consciousness, took up 

his sharp trident, the sharp Sakti ringing with 
golden bells and hurled it on Visnu. It chopped 
off the left arm of the lord and on that wounded 
arm the blood stains looked beautiful like the 
armlet studded with rubies. Afterwards Visnu 
became very angry and took up His heavy bow 
and put seventeen deadly arrows to its strings 
and hit the demon’s chest with nine arrows, 
killed the charioteer with four, cut the banner 
with one arrow, his bow with two and pierced 
his left arm with one arrow. The demon felt 
great agony on being thus wounded. Blood 


gushed out of his chest and took the appearance 
of the rising sun. 


aay Wredta aifer: feagrengy: | 
AUTH Tel SME APTA VBI 


Matsya Puranam 


at a an faao arent wit 
ar aura forceger fagen arertaa: 2381 


wana traps a: 
AHI SAMA AAT | VV ON 
wea wwe fads: Foresite: 
Ufa THT ata SHTETH 2 eH 


He began to shiver like the Kirhsuka tree 
blown by the wind. Visnu seeing him shivering 
like that took up His club; and threw it with 
great violence at the chariot of Kalanemi which 
struck his forehead and smashed his coronet to 
pieces. A large volume of blood gushed out of 
his body which looked like vermilion coming 
out of the mountain and he fell down senseless 
in his broken chariot. He was only heaving his 
last breath. 


Peay aTAS ATG UHI: WY: 

Trearet fagnists Bred Sita Fra 2% IH 
Ad: TAC Gel BENS AAT: | 

Uteaseal AKI ata: Areva: | 

ATA TH FTAA AAT: tl 2B 3 Ul 


The Lord then laughed a little and addressed 
Kalanemi- “O demon! retire from here 
fearlessly, save your life for the present. You 
are destined to die at my hands after a short 
time.” Hearing those words, Kdalanemi’s 
charioteer took him away in his chariot to a 
great distance. 


UST Se eT STATA SATA: 11 2G OH 


KEK 


Here ends Vol. I comprising of chapters 
1-150 of Matsya-Purana 


