७ 


ed 


‘Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and. 


co) RGVEDA SA 


"Y 


AE 


Ivi 


L 


N 
EN 


ना Ps न्ह 
hE 


^ [ : 
हन Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


English translationlaccording to 


H:H: WILSON 
& 
BHASYA OF SAYANAGARYA 


bi Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


294-5922 IS 77674 
wWIL- R-S 


SQ e 5. 


है 5. CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


b 
obit itized by 2, a Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
LIY: DILI 

WIL- ठ FABIA : 

गुरुकुल काँगडी विश्वविद्यालय, हरिद्वार 


आगत संख्या / ४.८. Zl 


पुस्तक विवरण को तिथि नीचे अंकित है । इस तिथि 
पुस्तक पुस्तकालय में वापस आ जानी 
पेसे प्रति दिन के हिसाब से विलम्ब 


वर्ग SAT... 


सहित ३० 4 दिन यह 


चाहिए अन्यथा ५० d 
दण्ड लगेगा | 
बज eps EE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


^ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


= by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


ऋग्वेद-संहिता 
RGVEDA SAMHITA 


SANSKRIT TEXT, ENGLISH TRANSLATION 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


——— e — 0 5 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


७ ७-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Parimal Sanskrit Series No. 45 


ऋग्वेद-संहिता 
RGVEDA SAMHITA 


VOL. III 
[MANDALAS — 6,7,8] 


SANSKRIT TEXT, ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND NOTES 


According to the translation of 


H. H. WILSON 


and 


BHASYA OF SAYANACARYA 


Edited & Revised with an exhaustive introduction and notes 


by 137761 
RAVI PRAKASH ARYA 
— K. L. JOSHI 
umm ^. 
PARIMAL PUBLICATIONS 


DELHI 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Published by 
PARIMAL PUBLICATIONS 
27/28, SHAKTI NAGAR 
DELHI 110007 (India) 
Phone: 7445456 
Fax: 7862183 
E-mail: parimal@ndf.vsnl.net.in 


(RR 2 
| - 69 2 } Iz 
29 ॥ २-% publishers 
Sis 
UJ । L Second Revised Edition 2001 


ISBN: 81-7110-141-7 (Vol. IIT) 
81-7110-138-7 (Set) 


PRICE Rs. 450 Each Vol. 
Rs. 1800 (Sct of Four Vols.) 


um 5 


Laser typesetting and Printing 


{ Himanshu Laser System, 46, Sanskrit Nagar, Sect. 14, Rohini i 
Delhi 110085, Phone : 7862183 | 


n CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


E ||| 


137761 

CONTENTS 
Page No. 
Sixth Mandala (Süktas 75) 1-164 
Seventh Mandala (Süktas 104) 165-345 
Eighth Mandala (Süktas 103) 346-662 
Index of verses 663-706 


1. 00 In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


3 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


॥अथ षष्ठं मण्डलम्‌॥ 
SIXTH MANDALA 


ANUVAKA 1 
[सूक्त] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज वार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- अनुष्टुप्‌; ११ शक्वरी|] 
E EY ` ^ x sir | 
४३६९. त्व ह्य॑ग्ने प्रथमो मनोतास्या धियो अ दस्म eid! 
> a ^ c | श्वस्मै à सह॑से | ध्ये 
cd सी वृषत्रकृणोर्दुष्टरीतु सहो विश्वस्मै सह॑से सहध्यै।।१॥। 

1. You Agni, are the first of the gods; a deity to whom their 
minds are devoted; pleasing of aspect, you are the invoker of the 
deities at this rite: showerer (of benefits), bestow upon us 
unsurpassable strength, where with to sustain all (hostile) prowess. 

Tvam hi Agne prathamo manotd: the last lord is interpreted 
devdndm mano yatrotam, sambaddham, where, on whom, the mind of the 
gods is attached; or, as more fully explained in the scholia on the Aitareya 
Brdhmana, on this and other texts which occur, ii.10.1; devandm 
manamst etani drdhapravistáni. yasyam devatdydm sa manotd, the 


divinity on whom the minds of the gods are fastened, that is, firmly 
concentrated, he is called Manotd.! 


४३७०. अधा होता न्यंसीदो यजीयानिव्स्पद इषयन्नीड्य: सन्‌। 
तं त्वा नर: प्रथमं देवयन्तो महो राये चितय॑न्तो अनु ग्मन्‌॥२॥ 

र 2. Offerer of the oblation, frequent celebrator of sacrifice, now 
sit down on the foot-mark of 1/2, accepting the (sacrificial) food, 
and being glorified: devout men, expectant of great riches, have 
recourse to you as to the first (of the gods). 

L E जागृवांसो 
४३७१. वृतेव यन्तं बहुभिर्वसव्यै३ स्त्वे रयिं जागृवांसो अनु ग्मन्‌। 
रुशन्तमग्नि दर्शतं CHE द्‌ dice दीदिवांस॑म्‌ 
मग्निं दर्शतं बृहन्तं वपावन्तं विश्वहा दीदिवांसम्‌।।३ ।। 
: 3. Those who are assiduous in (worshipping) you for riches 
ollow you, going with many Vasus by the path (of the firmament); 


you, the radiant Agni, of goodly aspect, mighty, fed with burnt- 
offerings, and blazing every day. 


Ser een eee कक e ev 
१. अग्निः सर्वा मनोताग्नौ मनोता: संगच्छन्ते (ऐ० Ao २.१०)! 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


2 Rgveda Samhita 
७ | 1 
४३७२. पदं देवस्य नम॑सा व्यन्त॑ः श्रवस्यवः श्रव॑ आपन्नमृक्तम्‌। 
= E g = E n = wa 
नामानि चिद्दधिरे यज्ञियानि भद्रायां ते रणयन्त TEST 
4. Men desirous of food obtain abundance unopposed when 
repairing to the station of the divinity with oblations; and when 
delighting, Agni, in yours auspicious presence, they repeat those 
your names which are to be uttered at sacrifices. 
They Repeat those your names which, Etc.— Namáni cid dadhire 


yajfityáni, that is, such appellations as Jatavedas, Vaisvanara, and atevials 
or means of adoration, stotráni namanasddhandni. 


४३७३. त्वां व॑र्धन्ति क्षितय॑ः पृथिव्यां त्वां राय॑ उभयांसो जनानाम्‌। 
त्व ता त॑रणे चेत्यों भूः पिता माता सदमिन्मानुंषाणाम्‌।।५।। 

5. Men exalt you upon earth: they exalt you for both kinds of 
affluence, (cattle and treasure, which you bestow upon) men: you 
who extricate (us from evil) are to be known as our preserver, as 
the unfailing father and mother of mankind. 


Which You Bestow upon, Men— Janánám may also mean, for the 
gift of men, that is, of male posterity. 


४३७४. सपर्येण्यः स प्रियो विक्ष्वशग्निहो्ता मन्द्रो नि षसादा यजीयान्‌। 
तं त्वां वयं दम आ दीदिवांसमुप ज्ञुबाधो नम॑सा सदेम।।६।। 
6. Agni, who is adorable, affectionate, the offerer of oblations 
amongst men, the giver of delight, the celebrator of worship, has 


sat down (upon the altar): let us approach you, kindled in our 
dwellings, on bended knees, with praise. 


४३७५. d त्वां वयं सुध्योर नव्य॑मग्ने सुम्नायव॑ ईमहे देवयन्त॑ः। 
त्वं विशों अनयो दीद्यांनो दिवो अग्ने बृहता रोंचनेन॑।॥७॥। 


7. Intelligent, hoping for happiness, and devout, we glorify 


you, adorable Agni; do you, shining with exceeding lustre, lead 
men to heaven. 


४३७६. विशां कविं विश्पतिं शश्वतीनां नितोशनं वृषभं च॑र्षणीनाम्‌। 
प्रेतोषणिमिषयन्तं पावकं राजन्तमग्नि य॑ज॒तं र॑यीणाम्‌।८॥। 

8. (We glorify) the lord of men of ever-existing men; the wise, 

the destroyer (of foes) the showerer (of benefits) on mankind, the 


moving, the bestower of food, the purifier, the resplendent, Agni, 
who is worshipped for (the sake of) riches. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 1 

The Lord of Men— Vispatim visám sasvatinám; the epithet is 
explained nitydndm rtvigyajamdnalaksandndm, perhaps, their regular and 
perpetual observance of religions institutes. 

ईजे 1 || || 
४३७७. सो अग्न ईजे शशमे च मर्तो यस्त आनट्‌ समिधां हव्यदातिम्‌। 
आहुतिं EY नमोंशि | त्वोत॑ 
य आहुतिं परि वेदा नमोभिर्विश्वेत्स वामा द॑धते त्वोतः 11९ 11 
9. The man, Agni, who worships you, who praises you, who 
offers oblations to you with kindled fuel, who presents burnt- 
offerings to you with prostrations, he verily, protected by’ you, 
obtains all desired wealth. 


४३७८. अस्मा उ ते महिं महे विधेम नमोभिरग्ने समिधोत हव्यैः। 
वेदी सूनो सहसो गीर्भिरुक्थैरा d भद्रायाँ सुमतौ यतेम।।१०॥। 
10. To you, mighty Agni, we offer exceeding adoration with 
prostrations, with fuel, with oblations: (we glorify you) on the 


altar, son of strength, with hymns and with prayers: may We be 
successful in our efforts (to gain) you auspicious favour. 


४३७९. आ यस्ततन्थ रोद॑सी वि भासा श्रवोभिश्च श्रवस्य KA: 
बृहद्भिर्वाजैः स्थविरेभिरस्मे रेवद्भिरग्ने वितरं वि भाहि।११॥ 

. ll. Do you, Agni, who have spread heaven and earth with 

light, who are the preserver (of man), and (who are) to be glorified 


with praises, shine brightly upon us with abundant food, and with 
substantial riches. 


४३८०. नृवद्दसो सदमिद्धेह्यस्मे भूरि तोकाय तन॑याय पश्च:। 
पूर्वीरिषो बृहतीरारेअंघा अस्मे भद्रा सौश्रवसानि सन्तु।१२।। 


12. Possessor of wealth, bestow upon us at all times opulence 
conjoined with dependants, and (grant) abundance of cattle to our 
sons and grandsons: may there be to us abundant food, satisfying 
our wishes, and free from blame; and may there be auspicious and 
reputable (means of subsistence). 


४३८१. पुरूण्यग्ने पुरुधा त्वाया वसूनि राजन्वसुतां d अश्याम्‌। 
पुरूणि हि त्वे पुरुवार सन्त्यग्ने वसु विधते राज॑नि 1123 11 


13. Royal Agni, may I obtain from you your many and various 
treasures whereby to be enriched; for, Agni, who are the desired of 
multitudes, infinite are the riches (aggregated) in you, fit, 
monarch, for your worshipper. 


3 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


L by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

4 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त- २] 

[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बारहस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द अनुष्टुप्‌; ११ शक्वरी] 

४३८२. त्वं हि क्षेतंवद्यशो5ग्नें मित्रो wen 

त्वं विचर्षणे श्रवो वसो पुष्टिं न पुष्यसि।॥१॥ 

1. You alight, Agni, like Mitra, upon the oblation offered with 


the dry fuel: therefore, beholder of all, possessor of riches, you 
cherish us with food and nourishment. 


४३८३. त्वां हि ष्मां चर्षणयों यज्ञेभिंगीिरीळते। 
त्वां वाजी यात्यवृको र॑स्तू्वश्च॑र्षणिः।।२।। 
2. Men verily worship you with sacrifice and with praises: the 


inoffensive sun, the sender of rain, the beholder of the universe, 
proceeds to you. 


The Sun..... Proceeds to you— The sun, it is said, at the evening 
enters into fire, whence it is that the latter is visible throughout the night: 
the term for sun, in the text, is, vajin, he who goes swiftly, and it is an 
appellative also of fire and wind, as by another text, agnirvdyuh süryas te 
vai vdjinah,' fire, wind, the sun, they verily are vájins. 


४३८४. सजोषस्त्वा दिवो नरो यज्ञस्य॑ केतुमिन्थते। 
यद्ध स्य मानुषो जन॑ः सुम्नायुर्जुह्दे अध्वरे।।३।। 
3. The offerers of praise, sympathizing in satisfaction, kindle 


you the banner of the sacrifice, when man, the descendant of 
Manu, desiring happiness; invokes you to the rite. 


४३८५. ऋधद्यस्ते सुदान॑वे धिया मर्तः शशमते। 
ऊती ष बृहतो दिवो EA अंहो न kir N 
4. May the mortal prosper who propitiates you (his) 


benefactor, by holy rites: through the protection of you who are 


resplendent, he overcomes those who hate him, as if they were 
mortal sins. 


Samaveda, 365, but the reading of the first line is a little different. 
४३८६. समिधा यस्त आहुति निशितिं मर्त्यो नरशत्‌। 
Ee at 
वयावन्तं स पुष्यति क्षय॑मग्ने शतायुंषम्‌।॥५॥। 
Gl. ie न 
१. अमिर्वायु: सूर्यस्ते वै वाजिनः (do ro १.६.३.९)। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


g 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sūkta 2 5 

5. The mortal who feeds your consecrated burnt offering with 
fuel enjoys, Agni, a dwelling peopled with descendants, and a life 
of a hundred years. 

त्वेषस्ते || षञ्छक्र Ada ! 
४३८७. त्वेषस्ते धूम ऋण्वति दिवि षज्छु a 
E र 5 1 रोच॑से 
सूरो न हि द्युता त्वं कृपा पावक HE H 

6. The pure smoke of you the resplendent spreads through the 
firmament, matures (in clouds), and you, the purifier, shine with 
radiance like the sun, when propitiated by praise. 

Shine with Radiance, etc.— Dyutd tvam krpá rocase, you shine with 
light by praise; krpá is of rather doubtful import: it occurs subsequently in 
the unmistakeable sense of diptyá, with lustre, as if the word was properly 
in the nominative Arp; Sayana here explains it by stutyd, by praise, 
metaphorically, or literally, by that which is able to compel the presence 
of a deity, abhimukhikarana-sdmarthya; occurs in a passage quoted, in 
the Nirukta, 6.8, where it apparently the sense of praise; but there is no 
explanation beyond its derivation from krp, to be able or capable; 
Mahidhara; Yajus, 17.10, explains krp, sámarthyena, diptyá vd, by ability, 
power, or by lustre. 

क्ष्वीड्यो. I ` L 
४३८८. अधा हि विक्ष्वीड्योञसि प्रियो नो अतिथि:। 
al JË | | 
रण्वः qua जूर्यः सूनुर्न त्रययाय्यः 1७11 

7. You are now to be praised among the people, for you are 
our well beloved guest, venerated like an elder in the city, and to 
be cherished like a son. 

Venerated like an elder in a City— Ranvah puriva jüryah, stinur na. 
trayayayvah; the first part is interpreted nagarydm vrddho hitopadesta 
raja tva ramaniyah, to be had recourse to as to an old Raja giving good 
council in a city: the second half. putra iva pálaniyah, to be cherished like 
a Son; or trayaydyya' may be explained, endowed with three merits, 
learning, Penance, devotion; or one having had three births, the natural, 
investiture with the sacred string, and initiation or preparation for sacred 
rites, diksd. 

द्रोणें J 1 
४२८९. क्रत्वा हि द्रोणें अज्यसेज्ग्नें वाजी न कृत्व्य:। 
1 
परिज्मेव स्वधा गयोउत्यो न ह्वार्यः शिशु: 1८ 11 

8. You are manifested in the timber, Agni, by the act of 

attrition: you are the bearer (of the oblation) as a horse (is of his 


१. मातुरग्रेऽधिजननं द्वितोयं मौज्ञाबन्थनात्‌। तृतीयं यज्ञदीक्षाया इति जन्मत्रयं स्मृतम्‌ (e 
२.१६९)॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
6 Rgveda Sainhità 


rider): you are like the circumambient wind: you are food and 
dwelling; you are like a (newborn) babe, and variable (in 
movement) as a horse. 

You are Food and Dwelling— Svadhd gayah are rendered annam 
grham ca; there is no verb, but the Scholiast supplies bhavasi, you arc. 


४३९०. त्वं त्या चिदच्युताग्ने पशुर्न यव॑से। 
धामां ह यत्ते अजर वनां वृश्चन्ति शिक्कंसः।।९।। 
9. You consume Agni, the unfallen (trees) as an animals 


(feeds) upon pasture, When, undecaying deity, the flames of you 
who are resplendent shear the forests. 


४३९१. वेषि हांध्वरीयतामग्ने होता दमे विशाम्‌। 
समृधों विश्पते कृणु जुषस्व॑ हव्यम॑ङ्गिरः।।१०॥। 

10. You enter as the ministrant priest into the habitations of 
men who wish to perform sacrifice: render them prosperous, 
benefactor of mankind: be propitiated, Avigiras, by the oblation. 
४३९२. अच्छा नो मित्रमहो देव देवानग्ने वोच॑: सुमतिं रोद॑स्योः वीहि 

स्वस्ति। सुक्षितिं दिवो fe अंहांसि दुरिता तरेम ता तरेम 
तवाव॑सा तरेम।।११।। 

11. Divine Agni, reverenced as a friend, who are abiding in 
heaven and earth, communicate our praise to the gods: conduct the 
offerer of adoration to domestic felicity; and may we overcome 
our adversaries, our iniquities, our difficulties; may we overcome 


those (sins of a prior existence); may we overcome them by your 
protection. 


My we overcome those (Sins)— The text has (à tarema, may we 
cross over those, which Sayana interprets janmdantarakrtani papani. 


[सूक्त-३] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- AE] 
४३९३. अग्ने स क्षेषदूतपा ऋतेजा उरु ज्योतिर्नशते Sage 
यं त्वं मित्रेण वरुण: सजोषा देव पासि त्यज॑सा मर्तमंह:।।१॥। 
1. The offerer of sacrifice, born for religious TES who lives 
devoted, Agni, to you, obtains abundant light, and is a man whom 


| you, sympathizing in satisfaction with Mitra and Varuna, protect 
4 by your shield from iniquity. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 3 7 
By your shield, Tyajasd, which is explained, tydjanasddhanena 

dyudhena, by a weapon which is the instrument of causing abandonment 
or escape. 

E zi ` yif धद्वारायाग्नये || || 
४३९४. ईजे यज्ञेभिंः शशमे शमीभिर्क्र ददाश। 

oS ae उन यशसमर्नुक्टिनाहो a ni x | 

एवा चन तं यशसामजुष्टिनाहो मर्त नशते न प्रदृप्तिः।।२॥ 

2. He who has presented (oblations) to Agni, the possessor of 
desired (wealth), sacrifices with (all) sacrifices, and is sanctified 
by (all) holy acts: him, the wand of excellent (posterity) does not 
afflict, nor does sin or pride affect a mortal. 

EN यदेतिं 
४३९५. सूरो न यस्य॑ दृशतिररेपा भीमा यदेति शुचतस्त आ धीः। 
N ` ` 1 व॑सतिर्वनेजा 
हेष॑स्वतः शुरुधा नायमक्ता: कुत्रा चिद्रण्वो सातवनेजाः।।२॥। 

3. When the fearful flames of you, whose appearance is (as) 
faultless as (that of) the sun, spread on every side as (if they were) 
the lowing heifers of the night, then this Agni, the asylum of all, 
generated in the woods, is everywhere beautiful. 

Spread on Every side as if they were, Etc.— Hesasvatah Surudho 
na ayam aktoh kutrá cid ranvah, is not very intelligible: according to 
Sayana, surudhah means obstructors, or removers of sorrow, i.e., cows, 
Sokasya rodhayitr gah; aktu, night, he considers pur for night-walkers, 
Ráksasas raksasadeh svabhütà dadati, she, night, gives them their 
properties, is understood; ranvah is an epithet of ayam, this, Agni, 
ramaniya, agreeable, beautiful. 

तिग्मं I 
४३९६. तिग्मं चिदेम महि वपाँ अस्य भसदश्वो न यमसान आसा। 
विजेह॑मान जिह्वा Uu 
वेजेहमानः परशुर्न frat द्रविर्न द्रावयति दारु AL 

4. Sharp is his path, and his vast body shines like a horse 
champing fodder with his mouth, darting forth his tongue like a 
hatchet, and burning timber to ashes, like a goldsmith who fuses 
(metal). 

Like a Goldsmith who fuses (Metal)— Dravir na dravayati dáru 
dhaksat, is, literally, as a melter causes to melt, he bums the timber; or, as 
Sayana explains it, yatha svarnakarah svarnádikam dravayati tathdgnir 
vanam bhasmasát karoti, as a goldsmith fuses gold and the rest, so Agni 
reduces the wood to ashes: perhaps something more than simple fusion of 


um is implied: the alchemical calcining or permutation of them would 
€ more analogous to the burning of timber, or its reduction to ashes. 


४३९७. स इदस्तेव प्रतिं धादसिष्यञ्छिशीत तेजो5यसो न धाराम्‌। 
चित्रश्रजतिररतिर्यो अक्तोर्वेर्न Suet रघुपत्मजंहा: 1५11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


8 Rgveda Samhita 


5. He casts (afar his flames) as an archer (his arrows), and 
sharpens when about to dart his radiance, as (a warrior whets) the 
edge of his iron (weapons), he who, variously moving, passes 
through the night, like the light-falling foot of a bird perched upon 
a trec. 

The Edge of His Iron (Weapons)— Ayaso na dharam, ayas has 
here the force of the Latin ferrum. 


४३९८. स ई रेभो न प्रतिं वस्त उस्राः शोचिषां रारपीति मित्रम॑हाः। 
नक्तं य ईमरुषो यो दिवा नृनमंत्यों अरुषो यो दिवा FL 1 
6. Like the adorable sun, he clothes himself with brilliant 
(rays): diffusing friendly light, he crackles with (his fame): (he it 


is) who is luminous by night, and who lights men (to their work) 
by day; who is immortal and radiant; who lights men by day. 


४३९९. दिवो न यस्य॑ विधतो नवींनोद्वृषां रुक्ष ओष॑धीषु नूनोत्‌। 
| I रोद॑सी | . I 
घृणा न यो ध्रज॑सा पत्मना यन्ना रोद॑सी वसुना दं सुपत्नी।॥७।। 
7. Of whom a sound is heard when scattering his rays like 
(that) of the sun: the brilliant showerer (of benefits) clamours 
among the (burning) plants; he who, moving not with a shifting, 


variable motion, but, humbling (our foes), fills the well-wedded 
carth and heaven with wealth. 

Fills your well-wedded earth and Heaven with Wealth— à rodast 
vasund supátni, Sobhanapatikd dydvd prthivyau dhanena purayati is the 
amplification of the comment, he fills with wealth heaven and earth, both 


having a brilliant husband or lord: who that is, is not specified, unless it 
be Agni or Indra. 


४४००. धायोभिर्वा यो युज्येभिरकैंविंधुन्न दविद्योत्स्वेभि: शुष्मे: 
शर्धो वा यो मरुता ततक्ष॑ ऋभुर्न तवेषो र॑भसानो deduc 
8. He who (goes) with sacred (rays), as if with self-harnessed, 
well-governed (steeds), who shines like lightning with his own 


scorching (flames), who impairs the vigour of the Maruts, he 
glows radiant and rapid as the-wide-shining sun. 


As the Wide-shining Sun— Rbhur-na is explained uru bhdsamdna 
stirya iva. 


[सूक्त-४| 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- ARTI 
४४०१. यथां होतर्मनुषो देवतांता fd: सूनो सहसो यजासि। | 
एवा नो अद्य संमना स॑मानानुशन्नग्न उशतो fr देवान्‌॥१।। | 


i CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 4 9 

1. Son of strength, invoker (of the gods), in like manner as at 
the worship of the gods by Manu, your did offer worship with 
sacrifice so now, Agni, with willing mind, worship for us the 
assenting deities, regarding them as your equals. 


४४०२. स नो विभावां चक्षणिर्न वस्तोरगिनर्वन्दारु वेद्यश्चनो धात्‌। 
विश्वायुर्यो अमृतो मर्तयूषर्भुद्भदतिंथि्ातवेदाः॥२।। 
2. May that Agni, who, like the illuminator of the day, is 
resplendent and cognizable (by all), grant us commendable food; 


he who is the life of all, immortal, who knows all that exists, who 
is our guest, waking among men at dawn. 
| ति भासांसि ^ 
४४०३. द्यावो न यस्य पनयन्त्यभ्वं स्‌ वस्ते सूर्या न शुक्र:। 
T Io ह थत्पूर्व्यारणि 1 
वि य इनोत्यजरः पावकोऽश्रस्य चिच्छिश्र 11३ ।। 

3. Whose great deeds his worshippers now celebrate, who is 
clothed with light, radiant as the sun, exempt from decay, the 
purifier, he illumes (all things), and destroys the ancient cities of 
the dispersed (evil beings). 

Of the Dispersed (Evil Beings)— Asnasya cid: from as to pervade, 
vydpanasilasya, of the pervader, that is, according to Sayana, rdksasddeh, 
of the Raksasas, and the like, it may possibly be intended for a proper 
name. 


४४०४. वद्मा हि सूनो अस्यंदमसद्वां चक्रे अगिर्जनुषाज्मात्रम्‌। 
स त्वं न॑ ऊर्जसन ऊर्ज धा राजेंव जेरवृके Ferd: 11४1! 

4. Son of strength, you are to be praised: Agni, sitting upon the 
(sacrificial) viands, has given (to his worshippers), from their 
birth, habitation and food: giver of strength, bestow strength upon 
us: triumph like a price, so that you may abide in our unassailed 
(dwelling). 

| 
४४०५. नितिक्ति यो वारणमन्नमत्ति वायुर्न राष्ट्रयत्येत्यकून्‌। 
तुर्याम यस्त॑ आदिशामरातीरत्यो न हुतः पतत: परिहुत्‌। I 

5. He who whets his (gloom) dispersing (radiance), Who eats 
the (offered) oblation, a sovereign like Vayu, overcomes the 
nights: may we prevail (over him) who is not a donor of the 


oblations that are due, (Agni), to you, and do you, (Swift) as a 
horse be the destroyer of the foes assailing (us). 


४४०६. आ सूर्यो न भानुमद्विरकेंरग्ने ततन्थ रोद॑सी वि भासा। 
| चित्रो न॑य॒त्परि तमांस्यक्तः शोचिषा पत्म॑त्रीशिजो न ALR 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


10 Rgveda Samhita 


6. You over spread, Agni, heaven and earth with radiance, like 
the sun with his lustrous rays: the wonderful Agni disperses the 
glooms like the adored (sun) moving on his path, imbued with 
light. 


४४०७. त्वां हि मन्द्र्तममर्कशोकैर्ववृमहे महिं नः श्रोष्य॑ग्ने। 
इन्द्र न त्वा शव॑सा देवतां वायुं पृणन्ति राध॑सा eii: Lo UI 
7. We celebrate you, who are most adorable, with sacred 
praises: hear, Agni, our laudation: the leaders (of rites) earnestly 


honour you with offerings, you who are divine like /ndra, and like 
Vayu in strength. 


With Sacred Praises— Arkasgokaih, prasasyair diptikaranaih 
stotraih with excellent illustrating praises, or it may be an epithet of Agni 
with yukta understood, endowed with, or possessed of, excellent radiance; 
prasasyair diptibhir yuktan: agnim: Mahidhara, Yajurveda, 33.13, 
explains it Jarkavat sucante, which shine like the sun; and hence 
Jarkasokaih means, he says, mantraih, with prayers. 

नों 1 वेषि पर्ष्यह | 
४४०८. नू नों अग्नेऽवृकेभिः स्वस्ति वेषि रायः पथिभिः THE: | 
sa 1 ति मदेंम | सुवीरों 
ता सूरिभ्यों गृणते रासि सुम्नं मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीरों:।।८॥ 

8. Quickly conduct us, Agni, by unmolested paths, to riches 
and prosperity: (convey us) beyond sin: those delights which you 
give to your adorers (extend) to him who (now) glorifies you, and 


may we, living for a hundred winters, and blessed with excellent 
posterity, be happy. 


[सूक्त-५] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- त्रिष्ठुप्‌।] 
४४०९. हुवे व॑ः सूनुं सहसो युवानमद्रोघवाचं मतिभिर्यविष्ठम्‌। 
य इन्व॑ति द्रविणानि प्रचेता विश्ववाराणि पुरुवारो अघ्रुक्‌ ॥१ ।। 


1. I invoke you, Agni, the son of strength, the youthful, the 
irreproachable, the very young; you who are wise, the sought of 
many, the merciful, who bestow treasures acceptable to all. 


1 
४४१०. त्वे वसूनि पुर्वणीक होतर्दोषा वस्तोरेरिरे यज्ञियांस:। 
क्षामेव a यस्मिनतसं E = 
a विश्वा भुव॑नानि यस्मिन्त्सं सौभगानि दधिरे पांवके।।२।। 
4 2. Bright blazing Agni, invoker of the gods, to you the adorable 
deities have appropriated, by night and day, the riches (on the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ह by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 5 11 
oblation): they have deposited in the purifier (Agni) all good 
things, as they have placed all beings upon earth. 

The Adorable Deities— Yajüiyüsah, yajnarhah, entitled to 
sacrifices, an appellative ordinarily applied to the devas; but here the 
Scholiast would render it yajamánah, the sacrificers, a sense obviously 
incompatible with what follows. 


४४११. cd विक्षु प्रदिवः सीद आसु क्त्वं रथीरभवो वार्याणाम्‌! 
अत॑ इनोषि विधते चिकित्वो व्यानुषग्जातवेदो MIR 
3, You, abide from of old in these people, and by your deeds 


have been (to them) the conveyer of good things: thence, Sage 
Jatavedas, you bestow continually wealth upon the sacrificer. 


४४१२. यो नः सर्नुत्यो अभिदासंदग्ने यो अन्तरे मित्रमहो वनुष्यात्‌। 
तमजरेभर्वृषीभिस्तव स्वैस्तपां तपिष्ठ तप॑सा तप॑स्वान्‌1॥४।। 
4. Do you, protector of (your) friends, who are most 
resplendent, blazing with radiance, consume with your own 


imperishable flames him who injures us abiding in secret, or when 
near to us design us harm. 


४४१३. यस्तै यज्ञेनं समिधा य उक्थैरर्केभिः सूनो सहसो दर्दाशत्‌। 
स मर्त्येष्वमृत प्रचेता राया द्युम्नेन श्रव॑सा वि भांति।५॥ 


5. He who propitiates you, son of strength, with sacrifice, with 
fuel, with prayers, With praises, shines immortal amongst men, 
eminent in wisdom and possessed of splendid opulence and 
(abundant) food. 


तत्कृंधीषितस्तूर्य॑मग्ने 
४४१४. स षेतस्तूर्यमग्ने स्पृधो बाधस्व सह॑सा सहंस्वान्‌। 
यच्छस्यसे द्युर्भिरक्तो वचोभिस्तज्जुषस्व जरितुर्घोषि sus 
6. Accomplish quickly, Agni, that for which you are solicited: 
endowed with strength, oppose by strength our adversaries: be 


pleased, you who are anointed with radiance, by loud vociferation 
of you worshipper, by whom you are adored with hymns. 


४४१५. अश्याम d कार्ममग्ने तवोती अश्यार्म रयि र॑यिवः सुवीरम्‌। 
अश्याम वाज॑मभि वाजय॑न्तोऽश्यामं ्युम्नम॑जराजरं ते।।७॥। 
F T. May we obtain through your protection, Agni, that which we 
esire: giver of riches, may we obtain of your riches and 


१. अग्नौ वामं वसु सं न्यदधत (do Wo 2.4.2.2) 1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


= by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
12 Rgveda Samhita 


descendants: desiring food, may we obtain food: may we obtain, 
imperishable Agni, imperishable fame (through you). 
Yajurveda, 18.74. 


[सूक्त-६] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
४४१६. प्र नव्य॑सा सह॑सः सूनुमच्छां यज्ञेन॑ गातुमव॑ इच्छमानः। 
gaat कृष्णयाम॑ रुश॑न्तं वीती होतारं दिव्यं जिंगाति।।१।। 
1. He who is desirous of food has recourse with a new 
sacrifice, approachable son of strength (Agni), to you the consumer 


of forests, the dark-pathed, the bright shining, the ministrant (to 
the gods) of (sacrificial) food, the divine; 


४४१७. स श्चितानस्तन्यतू रोचनस्था अजरेभिनांनंदद्धिर्यविष्ठ:। 
यः पावकः पुरुतमः पुरूणि पृथून्यग्निर॑नुयाति भर्वन्‌।।२।। 
2. {You who are) white-hued, vociferous, abiding in the 
firmament, (associated) with the imperishable, resounding (winds), 


the youngest (of the gods), Agni, who, purifying and most vast, 
proceeds, feeding upon numerous and substantial (forests). 


४४१८. वि ते विष्वग्वातजूतासो अग्ने भामांसः शुचे शुच॑यश्चरन्ति। 
तुविम्नक्षासों दिव्या नवग्वा वनां वनन्ति धृषता रुजन्त॑ः।।३।। 
3. Pure Agni, your bright flames, fanned by the wind, spread 


wide in every direction, consuming abundant (fuel); divine, fresh- 
rising, they play upon the woods, enveloping them in lustre. 
ते 1 > | 1 
४४१९. ये ते शुक्रासः शुच॑यः शुचिष्मः क्षां वर्पन्ति विषितासो अश्वां:। 
| | | 
अध भ्रमस्त उर्विया वि भाति यातय॑मानो अधि सानु पृश्नेः ।॥४।। 
4. Resplendent Agni, your bright rays, horses let loose (from 
the rein), shear the earth; yours (band of flame), mounting above 
the high-lands of the many-tinted (earth), blazes fiercely. 
Shear the Earth— Ksdm vapanti, mundayanti, lit, shave the earth, 
the plants of which constitute the hair: see vol. I. verse 752-53. 
Mounting above the highlands, Etc.— Yatayamáno adhi sānu 
prsneh, bhumer-upari — parvatagrádikam prati svakiyam agram 
vydpdrayan, displaying its own point or flame upon the summit, and the 


like, of the mountains upon the earth: volcanic eruptions may be possibly 
alluded to. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 7 B 


४४२०. अध॑ जिह्वा पांपतीति प्र वृष्णों गोषुयुधो नाशनिः सृजाना। 
शूरस्येव प्रसितिः क्षातिरग्नेुर्वतुर्भीमो दयते aA 
5. The flame of the showerer, (Agni), repeatedly descends like 
the hurled thunderbolt of the rescuer of the cattle: like the prowess 
of a hero is the destroying (energy) of Agni: irresistible and fearful, 
he consumes the forests. 
४४२१. आ भानुना पार्थिवानि ज्रयाँसि महस्तोदस्य धृषता ततन्थ। 
स बांधस्वाप भया सहोभिः स्पृधो वनुष्यन्वनुषो नि जूर्व।॥६ 11 
6. You overspread the accessible places of the earth with light 
by the energy of you powerful, exciting (influence): do you 


disperse all perils, and, baffling (our) adversaries by your mighty 
(powers), destroy (our) foes. 
४४२२. स चित्र चित्रं चितयन्तमस्मे चित्रक्षत्र चत्रत॑मं वयोधाम्‌। 
चन्द्रं रयिं पुरुवीरं बृहन्तं चन्द्र चन्द्राभिर्गुणते sete ii 

7. Wonderful Agni, of wonderful strength, bestower of delight, 
grant to us, and to him who praises you with gratifying (praises), 
wonderful, most wonderful riches, conferring fame, supplying 
food, comprehending male descendants, delectable and infinite. 

In the first half to the stanza the word citra, wonderful, in the second, 


candra, delightful, are illiteratively repeated, sa citra citram citayantam 
asme citraksatra citratamam, and candram rayim candra candrábhih, etc. 


[सूक्त-७] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- वैश्वानर अग्नि। 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌; ६-७ जगती।] 
मूर्धानं I अरतिं E 
४४२३. मूर्धानं दिवो र पृथिव्या वैश्वानरमृत आ जातमग्निम्‌। 
कवि सम्राजमतिथिं जनानामासन्ना पात्रं जनयन्त देवा:11१॥ 
h 1. The gods have generated Vaisvanara, Agni, as the brow of 
00 RE unceasing pervader of earth, born for (the celebration 
" Sacrifice, Wise, imperial, the guest of men, in whose mouth (is) 
e bo (that conveys the oblation to the gods). 
iis amaveda, 67, 1140; Yajurveda, 7.24: Mahidhara's explanation is to 
Sue effect as Sayana's, only more fall. 
€ Gods— Deya may also be applied to the priests who generate 


Agni trition: Vaisvz z 5 T 
Agni by attrition: Vaisvanara is variously explained, but it most usually 


Implie: 5 Tor x 
(n ES what or who belongs to or is beneficial to, all (visa) men 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


L by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
14 Rgveda Samhita 
al > 1. mor | ed | 
४४२४. नाभि यज्ञानां सदनं रयीणां महामाहावमभि स नवन्त। 
3 ७ i i. I केतुं | 
वानरं रथ्यमध्वराणां यज्ञस्यं केतुं जनयन्त देवाः।।२॥। 

2. (The worshippers) glorify together, (Agni), the bond of 
sacrifices, the abode of riches, the great receptacle of burnt- 
offerings: the gods generate Vaisvanara, the conveyer of oblations, 
the emblem of sacrifice. 

Sdmaveda, 1142. 

The Bond of Sacrifices— Nabhim yajndndm; nabhi is here 
explained vahanam, bandhakam, the connecting Jink or binding of 
different religious rites. 

` ` ien 1 
४४२५. त्वद्ठिप्रों जायते वाज्यग्ने त्वद्वीरासों अभिमातिषाहः। 
` 1 | 1 
वैश्वानर त्वमस्मासु धेहि वसूनि राजन्त्स्पृहयाय्यांणि।।३।। 

3. The offerer of (sacrificial) food becomes wise, Agni, from 
you from you heroes become the vanquishers of foes: therefore do 
you, royal Vaisvdnara, bestow upon us enviable riches. 


४४२६. त्वां विश्वे अमृत जायमानं शिशुं न देवा अभि सं न॑वन्ते। 
तव क्रतुभिरमृतत्वमांयन्वैश्वांनर यत्तित्रोरदीदेः।।४।। 
4. All the worshippers together praise you, immortal, Agni, 


when born like an infant: when you shine Vaisvanara, between the 
parental (heaven ana eartl) they obtain immortality through your 


(sacred) rites. 
४४२७. वैश्वानर तव तानि व्रतानि महान्यग्ने नकिरा द॑धर्ष। 
यज्जाय॑मानः पित्रोरुपस्थे5विन्द: केतुं वयुनेष्वह्वाम्‌। I 
5. Agni, Vaisvanara, these your mighty deeds no one can 
resist: when born on the lap of your parents, your have stationed 


the banner of the days on the paths of the firmament. 


When Born on the Lap of your Parents— That is, according to the 
Scholiast, in the Antariksa, or firmament. 


४४२८. वैश्वानरस्य विमितानि चक्ष॑सा सानूनि दिवो अमृत॑स्य केतुनां। 
तस्येदु विश्वा भुवनाधि मूर्धनि वया इव रुरुहुः सप्त fE: lS 
6. The summits of the firmament are measured by the light of 
Vaisvanara, the manifester of ambrosial (rain): all the regions are 


overspread (by the vapour) on his brow, and the seven gliding 
(streams) spring from thence like branches. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


= by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 8 15 


All the Regions are Overspread, Etc.— This idea has occured 
before: the smoke that rises from sacrificial fires becomes clouds in the 
atmosphere, whence rain falls and rivers arc filled. 


४४२९. वि यो रजांस्यमिमीत सुक्रतुरवैश्वानरो वि दिवो रोचना कविः। 
परि यो विश्वा भुर्वनानि पप्रथेञ्दब्धो गोपा अमृतस्य रक्षिता।।७।। 

7. Vaisvanara, the performer of sacred acts, is he who made 
the regions; foreseeing (he has made) the luminaries of heaven. 
and has spread throughout all worlds: the irresistible guardian (of 
all), the protector of ambrosial (rain). 

[सूक्त-८] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- वैश्वानर अग्नि। 
छन्द- जगती; ७ त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
४४३०. पृक्षस्य qui अरुषस्य नू सहः प्र नु वोचं विदथां जातवेंदसः। 
à 1 मतिर्नव्य॑सी es ` K 
वेश्वानराय मतिर्नव्यंसी शुचिः सोम॑ इव पवते चारुरग्नये।।१।॥। 

1. 1 commemorate promptly at the holy ceremony the might of 

the all-pervading Jatavedas, the showerer, the radiant: new, pure, 


Ed graceful praise issues (from me) like the Soma juice (from the 
ilter), to Agni Vaisvanara. 


1 ` 
४४३१. स जायमानः परमे व्योमनि व्रतान्यग्निरत्रतपा अरक्षत। 
च्यः -R क्षममिमीत सुक्रतुर्वे BREEN | 
१न्तरिक्षममिमीत सु्रतुनश्वानरा महिना नाकमस्पृशत्‌ ।।२।। 
2. That Agni who, as soon as born in the highest heaven, the 
Protector of sacred rites, protects the pious acts (of men), he has 


ma ifold f EN f x 
hen the manifold irmament: Vaisvanara, the performer of good 
ceds, has attained heaven by his greatness. 


४४३२. व्य॑स्तभ्नाद्रोद॑सी मित्रो अद्धुतोऽन्तर्वाव॑दकृणोज्ज्योतिंषा तर्म:। 
वि चर्मणीव धिषणे अवर्तयद्वैश्वानरो विश्वमधत्त वृष्ण्यम्‌ l 


fa z as Blend (of all), the wonderful (Agni), has upheld heaven 

me. ; he has hidden darkness within light; he has spread out 

Ds Sustaining (worlds heaven and earth), like two skin; 
ara comprehendi all (creative) energy. 


४४३३. अपामुपस्थे महिषा अंगृभ्णत विशो राजानमुर्प तस्थुऋम्मियम्‌। 
आ दूतो अगिनर्मभरद्िवस्वतो वैश्वानर मातरिश्वा परावर्त: 1४1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E —— iac: 


"3 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
16 Rgveda Samhita 


4. The mighty Maruts have seized upon him on the lap of the 
waters (in firmament), and men have acknowledged him as their 
adorable sovereign: Matarisvan, the messenger of the gods, has 
brought Agni Vaisvanara, (hither) from the distant (sphere of the) 
sun. 


४४३४. युगेयुगे विद्य गृणद्धयो5ग्नें रयिं यशसं धेहि नव्य॑सीम्‌। 
weld राजन्नघशंसमजर नीचा नि da वनिनं न तेज॑सा।|५।। 


5. To those, Agni, who repeat new (praises) to you, the object 
of their worship from age to age, grant riches and famous 
(posterity): strike down, undecaying sovereign, the sinner with 
your blaze like the thunderbolt, as if he were a tree. 


४४३५. अस्माकमग्ने मघव॑त्सु धारयानामि क्षत्रमजरं सुवीर्यम्‌। 
वयं ज॑येम wi सहस्तिणं वैश्वानर वाज॑मग्ने तवोतिभिंः।|६।। 
6. Grant, Agni, to us who are affluent in (offerings), wealth 
that cannot be taken away, that is exempt from decay, and that 
comprehends excellent male descendants: may we obtain, Agni 


Vaisvanara, hundreds and thousands of viands through your 
protection. 


४४३६. अदंब्धेभिस्तव॑ गोपाभिरिऐे5स्मार्क पाहि त्रिषधस्थ सूरीन्‌। 
रक्षा च नो ददुषां शर्धो अग्ने वैश्वानर प्र च॑ तारी: स्तवांन: 1191! 
7. Adored Agni, present in the three worlds, protect your 
worshippers with your irresistible protections, preserve the 


strength of us who offer (oblations): glorified (by us), Agni 
Vaisvanara, transport us (beyond evil). 


[सूक्त-९] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- वैश्वानर अग्नि। छन्द- feu] 
४४३७. अह॑श्च कृष्णमहरर्मुनं च वि ddd रज॑सी वेद्यार्भि:। 
वैश्वानरो जाय॑मानो न राजावातिरज््योतिंषाग्निस्तमासि।।१।। 


1. The dark day and the light day revolve alternate, affecting 
(the world) by their recognizable (properties): Agni Vaisvanara, 
manifested like a prince, dispels darkness by his lustre. 


४४३८. नाहं तन्तुं न वि जानाम्योतुं न यं वयन्ति समरेऽत॑मानाः। 
कस्य॑ Raga इह वकत्वांनि परो वदात्यवरेण पित्रा।२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Fi 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 9 17 


2. I understand not the threads (of the warp), nor the threads of 
the woof, nor that (cloth) which those who are assiduous in united 
exertion weave: of what (man) may the son declare the words that 
are to be spoken in the next world, (instructed) by a father abiding 


below. 
The first half of the stanza reads naham tantum na vijandmy-otum, na 


yam vayanti samare atamdndh, and implies, according to those who know 
tradition, sampraddyavidah, says Sayana, a figurative allusion to the 
mysteries of sacrifice: the threads of the warp, tantu, are the metres of the 
Vedas, those of the woof, otu, the liturgic prayers and ceremonial, the 
combination of which two is the cloth, or sacrifice: the dtamavidah, or, 
Vedantis, understand it, as alluding to the mysteries of creation, the 
threads of the warp being the subtile elements, those of the woof the 
gross, and their combination the universe: either interpretation is 
sufficiently intelligible, but the former harmonizes best with the character 
of the Veda: it is less easy to give intelligibility to the second half, kasya 
svit putra iha vaktvani, paro vadati avarena pitrd and the Scholiast does 
not materially help us: of whom (may) the son (say) in this world the 
words that are to be said, (which) the subsequent (may say) by the father 
being after of below, is. with a little assistance, the literal translation: 
Sayana explains putra by manusya, a man, vaktváni by vaktavydni, para 
by parastát, or amusmin like vartamdno yah süryah, the sun who is 
abiding in the other or future world, he being instructed, anusistah san, by 
the father abiding below, or in this world, pitra avastát asmin loke 
vartamánena, that is, by Agni Vaisvanara, vaisvánara agnind, as it is 
elsewhere said, vaisvanarasya putro cásau parastád-divi yah sthitah he is 
the son of vaisvanara, who is stationed above, or in heaven; all that may 
be intended is, that no human being can explain the mysteries of sacrifice, 
although the sun may be able to do so, having been intended is, that no 
human being can explain the mysteries of sacrifice, although the sun may 
be able to do so, having been instructed in them by Agni, his parent or 
source, the sun being no more than the Agni of heaven; as regards the 
Mysteries of creation, Sayana explains the passage, no man, however 
taught by a father bom after creation, can rightly know any thing previous 
to his birth, either in this world or the next. 


ORS. स इत्तन्तुं स वि जानात्योतुं स वकत्वान्यूतुथा व॑दाति। 
य ई चिकेतदमृतंस्य गोपा अवश्वर॑न्परो अन्येन पश्य्॑‌॥३।। 


oe E. ae ily knows the threads of the warp and or the woof, he 
(universe). Ep what is to be said, who comprehends all this 
bo a Who is the protector of ambrosial water, sojourning 
differs € and below, and contemplating (the world) under a 
erent (mani festation). 
a he os blaine the worlds under a different manifestation— Or 
» whilst upon earth Agni or Vaisvanara is manifest as fire. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Fi 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


18 Rgveda Samhita 
४४४०. अयं होतां प्रथमः पश्यतेममिदं ज्योतिरमृतं मर्त्येषु। 


अयं स ज्ञे ध्रुव आ निषत्तोऽमर्त्यस्तन्वार वर्धमानः ।।४।। 

4. This Vaisvanara is the first offerer of burnt offerings: 
behold him: this is the light immortal amongst mortals: he has 
been born in a bodily shape, immoveable, all-pervading, immortal, 
ever increasing. 

t ज्योतिर्निहितं > ति ` | जविष्ठ | 
४४४१. ध्रुवं ज्योतिनिहिंतं दृशये कं मनो जविष्ठं पतयत्स्वन्त:। 
3l | सकेता B I | 
विश्वे देवा: समनसः सकेता एकं क्रतुमभि वि यन्ति साधु।।५।। 

5. A steady light, swifter than thought, stationed among 
moving beings to show (the way) to happiness all the gods being 
of one mind, and of like wisdom, proceed respectfully to the 
presence of the one (chief) agent, (Vaisvanara) 

A Steady light, Etc.— According to the Vedantin view of the text 
the light is Brahma, seated spontaneously in the heart as the means of true 
knowledge, to which all the senses, together with the mind and 


consciousness, refer, as to the one cause of creation, or Paramátmá 
supreme spirit. 


४४४२. वि मे कर्णा पतयतो वि wasted ज्योतिर्हृदय आहितं यत्‌। 
वि मे मन॑श्चरति दूरआंधी: कि स्विद्वक्ष्यामि किमु नू मनिष्ये।।६।। 
6. Mine ears are turned (to hear him), mine eyes (to behold 
him); this light that is placed in the heart (seeks to know him); my 


mind, the receptacle of distant (objects) hastens (towards him): 
what shall I declare him)? How shall I comprehend him? 


४४४३. विश्वे देवा अंनमस्यन्भियानास्त्वामग्ने तमसि तस्थिवांसम्‌। 
वैश्वानरोंऽवतूतये नोऽमर्त्योऽवतूतयें नः।।७।। 


7. All the gods, alarmed, venerate you, Agni, abiding in 
darkness: may vaisvdnara preserve us with his protection: may the 
immortal Agni preserve us with his protection. 


[सूक्त- १०] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि! 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, ७ द्विपदा विराट्‌।] 
४४४४. पुरो वों मन्द्रं दिव्यं सुवृक्ति प्र॑यति यज्ञे अग्निमंध्वरे द॑धिध्वम्‌। 
पुर उक्थेभिः स हि नों विभावां स्वध्वरा क॑रति जातवेंदाः।।१॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 10 19 


|. Place before you at the progressive, uninterrupted sacrifice, 
the divine, adorable, perfect Agni, with prayers; for he, the 
resplendent Játavedas, makes us prosperous in sacred rites. 

४४४५. wd qn: पुर्वणीक होतरग्ने अग्निभिर्मनुंष इधानः। 
स्तोमं यम॑स्मै ममतेव शुषं घृतं न शुचिं मतय॑: पवन्ते।1२ | 

2. Brilliant, many-rayed Agni, invoker of the gods, kindled 
with many fires, (hear) this (praise) of men; which delightful 
praise, pure as the clarified butter (that has been filtered), his 
worshippers offer unto him as Mamata (formerly offered it). 
४४४६. पीपाय स श्रव॑सा ues यो अग्नये ददाश विप्र उकथैः। 

चित्राभिस्तमूतिभिश्चित्रशोंचित्रजस्य साता गोम॑तो दधाति॥३॥ 

3. He thrives in abundance amongst men, who, pious, presents 
to Agni (oblations) with prayers: the wonderfully radiant Agni 
places him with marvellous protection in the enjoyment of 
pasturage full of herds of cattle. 

४४४७. आ यः पप्रौ जाय॑मान उवी दूरेदृशा भासा कृष्णाध्वा। 
अध॑ बहु चित्तम ऊर्म्यायास्तिरः शोचिषा ददृशे IR: 

4. The dark-pathed, as soon as generated, filled with his afar- 
seen light the two spacious (worlds): he, the purifier, is now beheld 
dispersing with his radiance the thick glooms of night. 

४४४८. नू न॑श्वित्रं पुरुवाजाभिरूती अग्ने रयिं मघवद्धयश्च धेहि। 
ये राध॑सा श्रव॑सा चात्यन्यान्त्सुवीयंभिश्चाभि सन्ति जनान्‌। UI 

5. Bestow quickly, Agni, upon us who are affluent (in 
oblations), wondrous wealth, with abundant viands and 
protections, such as enrich other men with wealth with food, and 
with male descendants. 

४४४९. इमं यज्ञं चनों धा अग्न उशन्यं त॑ आसानो जुहुते हविष्मान्‌। 
भरद्वाजेषु दधिषे सुवृक्तिमवीर्वाजंस्य गध्यस्य WAI 

6. Agni desirous (of the offering), accept this sacrifice, this 
food which the presenter (of the oblation), sitting down (before 
you), offers unto you: accept the blameless (praises) of the 


Bharadvaja (race), and favour them that they may obtain many 
sorts of food. 


४४५०. वि द्वेषांसीनुहि वर्धयेळां मदेम शतहिमा: सुवीरा:11911 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


"3 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
20 Rgveda Samhita 


7. Scatter (our) enemies; augment our abundance: and may we, 
blessed with virtuous male descendants, enjoy happiness for a 
hundred winters. 


[सूक्त- ११] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- AE] 
४४५१. यजस्व होतरिषितो यजीयानग्ने बाधों मरतां न प्रयुक्ति। 
आ नों मित्रावरुणा नासंत्या erat होत्राय॑ पृथिवी वंवृत्या:11१ ii 
1. Agni, invoker of the gods, do you who are adorable, being 
instigated by us, worship at our present rite the foe-repelling 


(troop) of the Maruts, and bring to our sacrifice Mitra and Varuna, 
the Nasatyas, and Heaven and Earth. 


४४५२. त्वं होतां मन्द्रतमो ना अध्रुगन्तर्देवो विदथा मर्त्येषु। 
पावकया जुह्वाई वहिरासाग्ने यज॑स्व तन्वंश तव स्वाम्‌।।२।। 
2. You are amidst mortals at the celebration (of sacrifice), the 
invoker of the gods, you who are) most deserving of praise, a 


divinity doing us no harm: the bearer (of the oblations) offers (the 


gods), Agni, your own body with purifying flame as if with their 
mouth. 


४४५३. धन्यां चिद्धि त्वे घिषणा वष्टि प्र देवाञ्जन्म गृणते यज॑ध्यै। 
NA अङ्गिरसां यद्ध विप्रो मधुच्छन्दो भर॑ति रेभ sgh 
3. Praise solicitous of wealth, is ever addressed, Agni, to you, 
inasmuch as your manifestation (enables) the worshipper to 
sacrifice to the gods, when the pious sage, the most earnest adorer 


amongst the Avigirasas, the reciter (of the hymns), repeats at the 
ceremony the gratifying measure. 


४४५४. अदिद्युतत्स्वपांको विभावाग्ने यज॑स्व रोद॑सी उरूची। 
आयुं न यं नम॑सा रातहव्या अञ्जन्ति सुप्रयसं पञ्च SA: r 
4. The brilliant Agni, mature in wisdom, has shone 
resplendently: offer worship to the wide-spread heaven and earth, 


you whom, well-fed, the five races of men, bearing oblations, 
Propitiate, with (sacrificial) food. as if you were a mortal guest. 


४४५५. A ह यन्नम॑सा बहिरग्नावयांमि खुग्धतवती सुवृक्ति:। 
अम्यक्षि सद्म सद॑ने पृथिव्या अश्रायि यज्ञः सूर्ये न चक्षु: ।५॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E - 

#2 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Founded bod A 
Mandala 6, Sükta 12 wt Z ds pe) ड z 21 


5. When the holy grass has been cut, (to be presented) to Agni, 
with the oblation; when the well-trimmed ladle, filled with butter, 
has been lifted up; then your receptacle, (the altar), has been 
prepared on the surface of the earth, and the sacred rite is had 
recourse to, as light (concentrates) in the sun. 


४४५६. दशस्या न॑ः पुर्वणीक होतर्देवेभिरग्ने अग्निभिरिधानः। 
रायः सूनो सहसो वावसाना अति स्रसेम वृजनं नांहः।।६।। 

6. Agni, many-rayed, invoker of the gods, blazing with brilliant 
fires, bestow upon us riches; and may We, Son of strength, clothing 
you with oblations, overcome iniquity (like) a foe. 

[सूक्तर ९२] 137761 
eh 2 P Y 5, 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- faex] 
४४५७. मध्ये होतां दुरोणे बर्हिषो राळग्निस्तोदस्य रोदसी यजध्यै। 
अयं स सूनुः सह॑स ऋतावां दूरात्सूर्यो न शोचिषां ततान।।१।। 

1. Agni, the invoker of the gods, the lord of sacrifice, abides in 
the dwelling of the institutor of the rite, to offer sacrifice to heaven 
and earth: he, the Son of strength, the observer of truth, has 
overspread (the world) from afar, like the sun, with light. 

Of the institutor of the Rite— Todasya, from tud, to torment or 


distress, he who is distressed by ascetic devotion, fapasd pidyate, that is, 
the yajamána. 


४४५८. आ यस्मिन्त्वे स्वपांके यजत्र यक्षद्राजन्त्सर्वतातिव नु zt: 
त्रिषधस्थस्ततरुषो न जंहो हव्या मघानि मानुषा यजंध्यै।।२॥ 
. 2. Adorable and resplendent Agni, to whom, mature in 
wisdom, the worshipper offers oblations at every sacred rite, do 
you, who are present in the three (worlds), move with the speed of 


the traverser (of the sky, the sun), to convey the valuable oblations 
of men (to the gods). hos pr 


४४५९. तेजिष्ठा यस्यारतिर्यनेराट्‌ gaa वृधसानो stet 
अद्रोघो न द्रविता चेतति त्मन्नमंत्यो5वर्त्र ओषधीषु 1३11 
3. He, whose pure and spreading flame- blazes in the forest, 
shines with increasi ng intensity, like the sun on his (celestial) path: 


rushing like the innoxious (wind) amongst the plants, immortal, 
unimpeded, he lights up (all things) by his own (lustre). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
22 Rgveda Samhita 


Like the Sun— todo adhvan na: here toda is said to signify the sun 
as the sarvasya preraka, the urger, impeller, or animator of all. 

Like the innoxious Winds— Adrogha na may also mean, according 
Sayana, as of one not liable to be oppressed or harmed, adrogdhavya, or it 
may imply the vital air, the non-injurer, the sustainer of all, prdnartipena 
sarvesam adrogdha, that is, the wind, vdyuh. 

४४६०. सास्मार्केभिरेतरी न शूषैरग्निः Ba दम आ जातवेंदा:। 
wel वन्वन्‌ क्रत्वा नार्वोस्रः पितेव॑ जारयायिं यज्ञैः।।४।। 

4. Agni, who knows all that exists, is propitiated in our 
dwelling by our praises, like those gratifying (commendations 
which proceed) from one soliciting (a favour): feeder upon trees, 
consumer of forests, impetuous in act as the bull, the (progenitor of 
calves), he is glorified by the celebration of sacrifices. 

From one soliciting a Favour— कय na etari is explained gantari, 
a goer; yacamane puruse vidyamanàni stotrani yatha atyantam sukha- 
Karáni, like praises which being present in a man soliciting, going, or 
applying to another, are the yielders of very great pleasure. 


४४६१. अधं स्मास्य पनयन्ति भासो वृथा यत्तक्षदनुयातिं पृथ्वीम्‌। 
सयो यः स्मन्द्रो विर्षितो धवीयानृणो न तायुरति धन्वां राट्‌।।५।। 
5. They glorify his flames in this world: when, easily thinning 
the woods, they spread over the earth; he, who glides along 


unarrested, and rapid in movement as a fast flying thief, shines 
over the desert. 


४४६२. स त्वं नों अर्वन्निदाया विश्वेभिरग्ने अग्निभिरिधानः। 
वेषिं रायो वि यांसि दुच्छुना मदेम शतहिमाः gR: 11६ 11 
6. Quick-moving Agni, kindled with all (your) fires, (guard) us 


from reproach: you bestow riches, you scattered adversaries: may 


we, blessed with excellent male descendants, enjoy happiness for a 
hundred winters. 


[सूक्त- १३] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- Req] 
४४६३. त्वद्विश्वा सुभग सौभ॑गानयगने वि यन्ति वनिनो न वया: 
TA रयिर्वाजो gagd दिवो वृष्टिरीड्यो रीतिरपाम्‌।।१।। 


1. Auspicious Agni, all good things proceed from you like 
branches (from the trunk) of a tree, renowned riches, vigour for the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 13 23 
destruction of foes, the rain of heaven: you are to be glorified the 
sender of the waters. 
७ =| I रलमिषे परिज्मेव दस्मवर्चा 
४४६४. त्वं भगो न आ हि रत्नमिषे परिज्मेव क्षयसि T 
“I मित्रो dea PESNI EA 2 
अग्ने मित्रो न ded ऋतस्यासि क्षत्ता वामस्य देव भूरः।।२॥। 

2. Do you, who are adorable, bestow upon us precious wealth; 
beautiful with radiance, you pass (around) like the circumambient 
(wind): you, divine Agni. are like Mitra, the giver of abundant 
water and ample wealth. 

Who are Adorable— Tvam Bhago na might be rendered, you like 


Bhaga; but the Scholiast makes the first an adjective, bhajaniya, to be 
worshipped or propitiated, and considers na as nah, us. 
[| 1 ` विप्रो भर्ति | 
४४६५. स सत्प॑तिः शवसा हन्ति वृत्रमग्ने विप्रो वि पणेर्भरति वाज॑म्‌। 
ति ec TS n हिनोषिं 1 
यं त्वं प्रचेत ऋतजात राया सजोषा नप्त्रापां हिनोषि 11३ 11 
3. That man, the protector of the virtuous, destroys, Agni, his 
enemy by his strength, and baffles, intelligent, the might of (the 
Asura) Pani, whom you, the wise, the parent of sacrifice, 
consentient with the grandson of the waters, encourage (in the 
hope) of riches. 
Consentient with the Grandson of the Waters— Sajosd 


naptrápám, the grandson of the waters is said here to mean the lightning, 
vidyutagninà sangatás-tvam you associated with the lightning-fire. 


४४६६. यस्तै सूनो सहसो गीर्भिरुक्थैर्यनैर्मर्ती निशितिं वेद्यानट्‌। 
विश्वं स देव प्रति वार॑मग्ने धत्ते धान्यं पत्यते sued: I 
4. The mortal who by praise, by prayers, by sacrifices, attracts, 


pae strength, your heightened (radiance) to the altar, enjoys all- 
sufficiency and corn, and abounds in wealth. 


४४६७. ता नृभ्य आ सौंश्रवसा सुवीराग्ने सूनो सहसः पुष्यसें धा:। 
कृणोषि यच्छव॑सा भूरिं पश्चो वयो वृकायारये FARA II 
5. Grant, Son of strength, to men (who praise you), those 
abundant viands and excellent descendants, (that may contribute) 
to their prosperity: grant also that copious sustenance from cattle, 


Which by your strength you take away from a churlish and 
malignant adversary. 


४४६८. वद्या सूनो सहसो नो विहांया अग्नें तोकं तन॑यं वाजि नों दा:। 
विश्वांभिर्गीभिरभि पूर्तिमश्यां मदेम शतहिमाः सुवीस: u 1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F3 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


24 Reveda Samhita 


6. Agni, Son of strength, do you who are mighty be our 
councillor; give us sons and grandsons, together with food; may I, 
by all my praises, obtain the fulfilment of my desires; may we, 
blessed with excellent male descendants, enjoy happiness for a 
hundred winters. 


This is the same passage as occurs in Sūkta IILV.11. 
[सूक्त- १४] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- अनुष्टुप्‌; ६ VaR] 
४४६९. अग्ना यो मर्त्याँ दुवो धियं जुजोष धीतिभिंः। 
e A n a 
भसन्नु घ प्र पूर्व्य इषं वुरीतावसे I 


1. May the mortal who propitiates Agni by devotion and 
worship, together with praises, quickly become distinguished as 
first (amongst men), and acquire ample food for the support (of his 
children). 

४४७०. अग्निरिद्ध प्रचेता अग्निर्वेधस्तम ऋषिंः। 
अग्नि होतारमीळते यज्ञेषु मनुघो विशः।।२।। 
2. Agni verily is most wise; he is the chief performer of 


religious rites, a holy sage: the progeny of men glorify Agni as the 
invoker of the gods at sacrifices. 


४४७१. नाना ह्यग्नेऽवसे स्पर्धन्ते रायो अर्यः। 
तूर्वन्तो दस्युमायवो sd: सीक्ष॑न्तो अव्रतम्‌।1३ ।। 
3. The manifold treasures of the enemy (detached from them) 
are emulous, Agni, for the preservation (of your worshippers): men 


who worship you, triumphing over the spoiler, seek to shame him 
who celebrates no sacred rite by (their) observances. 


४४७२. अग्निरप्सामूतीषहं वीरं द॑दाति सत्प॑तिम्‌। 
यस्य त्रसन्ति शव॑सः सञ्चकषि शत्र॑वो भिया।।४।। 


4. Agni bestows (upon his worshippers) a male descendant, 
(the performer of good) works, the subduer of foes, the protector 


of the virtuous, at whose appearance his enemies tremble through 
fear of his prowess. 


४४७३. अगिनर्हि विदमनां निदो देवो मर्तमुरुष्यतिं। 
सहावा यस्यावृतो रयिवजिष्ववृत:11५ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 15 J 


5. The mighty and divine Agni, endowed with knowledge 
protects the mortal from reproach whose rich (offerings) dre 
unobstructed (by evil spirits), and unshared by other (offerers) at 
sacrifices. 

अच्छां | मित्रमहो देवानग्ने सुमतिं 
४४७४. अच्छां नो मित्रमहो देव दे वोच॑ः सुमतिं रोद॑स्योः। वीहि 
स्वस्तिसुदि क्षिति 2 द्वि नन्द्रिषो . अंहांसि ka zi 
वस्तिसुक्षिति दिवो नन्द्रिषो अंहांसि दुरिता तरेम ता तरेम तवावसा 
TALE II ६ 

6. Divine Agni, revered as a friend, who, abiding in heaven and 
earth, communicates our praise to the gods, conduct the offerer of 
adoration to domestic felicity, and may we overcome our 
adversaries, our iniquities, our difficulties: may we overcome them 
by your protection. 


[सूक्त- १५] 

[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य अथवा वीतहव्य आङ्गिरस। देवता- अग्नि! 
छन्द- जगती, ३, १५; ६ अतिशक्वरी; १०, १४, १६, १९ 
Breq; १६ IJET; १८ gedti] 

४४७५. इममू षु वो अतिथिमुषर्बुधं विश्वासां विशां पर्तिमृञ्जसे गिरा। 
वेतीहिवो जनुषा कच्चिदा शुचिर्ज्योकिंचदत्ति गर्भौ यदच्युतम्‌॥॥१॥ 
l. Propitiate by praises this guest who wakes at dawn, the 
cherisher of all people, who on every occasion descends, pure of 


origi i 
T from heaven, and, present as the embryo (in the wood of 
rition), consumes immediately the offered (oblation). 


मित्रं > l. 
४४७६. मित्रं न यं सुधिंतं भृग॑वो दधुर्वनस्पतावीड्य॑मूर्ध्वशोंचिषम्‌। 
> सुप्रीतो os = T 
स त्वं सुप्रीतो वीतहव्ये अद्धुत प्रश॑स्तिभिर्महयसे दिवेदिवे1२॥ 
5 £ S 
Bhr, Wonderful Agni, whom, adorable and upward flaming, the 
“Sus regard as a friend, deposited in the wood of (attrition), be 


pleased B Vi 2 c hi z 
aes ce itahavya, since you are glorified by (his) praise 


Vitahavya— Ifappli rU Me 2 E 
pplied to Bharadvaja this will be pellative, h 
by whom oblations are offered. 1 EK c 


४४७५. स त्वं दक्षस्यावृको वृधो भ्यः परस्यान्तरस्य तरुषः। रायः सूनो 
सहसो मर्त्येष्वा छर्दिर्यच्छ dade mA भरडांजाय 
सप्रर्थ:।।३।। : necu 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


> 


a by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


26 Rgveda Samhita 


3. Do you, who are unresisted, become the benefactor of him 
who is skilled (in sacred rites), his defender against a near of 
distant enemy; Son of strength, who are ever renowned, grant 
wealth and a dwelling to Vitahavya, the offerer of the oblation. 

To Vitahavya, the offerer of the Oblation—vitahavydya 
bharadvajaya, either of these may be taken as the name or the epither; to 
Vitahavya, the bearer, bharat, of the oblation, vaja, or to Bharadvaja, by 
whom is offered, vita, the oblation, havya. 


४४७८. द्युतानं वो अतिथि स्वर्णरमग्नि होतारं मनुष: स्वध्वरम्‌। 
विप्रं न द्युक्षवंचसं सुवृक्तभिव्यवाह॑मरतिं देवमृञ्जसे Lv I 
4. Propitiate with pious praises the radiant Agni, your guest, 
the guide to heaven, the invoker of the gods (at the sacrifice) of 
Manu, the celebrator of holy rites, the speaker of brilliant words 


like a learned sage, the bearer of oblations (to the gods), the lord, 
the divine. 


४४७९. पावकया यश्चितयन्त्या कृपा क्षामंत्रुरुच उषसो न भानुनां। 
TA यामत्रेतंशस्य नू रण आ यो घृणे न ततृषाणो IFR: I4 I 

5. (Propitiate him) who shines upon the earth with purifying 
and enlightening lustre, as the dawns with light; him, who like (a 
warrior) discomfiting (his foes) quickly blazed forth in the contest 
in defence of Etasa; him, who is satiated (with food), exempt from 
decay. 

In Defence of Eíasa— See vol. I. verse 707: Mahidhara, Yajus. 
10.10, explains efasa by its other meaning, a horse, but his interpretation 
of the passage is not very distinct. 

४४८०. afii वः समिधां दुवस्यत प्रियंप्रियं वो अतिथि गृणीषणिं। उप॑ 
वो गीर्भिरमूर्त विवासत देवो देवेषु वनते हि वार्य देवो देवेषु वनते 
हि नो gd: 


6. Worship repeatedly the adorable Agni with fuel (him) who 
is ever your dear friend, your guest; approach the immortal Agni 
with praises, for he, a god among gods, accepts our homage. 


४४८१. समिद्धमग्नि समिधां गिरा गुणे शुचिं पावकं पुरो अंध्वरे धुवम्‌। 
विप्रं होतारं पुरुवारमदुहं कविं सुम्नैरीमहे जातवेदसम्‌। 19 11 
7. Y glorify with praise the kindled Agni, pure purifying, 


permanent, (placed) before (us) at the sacrifice; let us celebrate 
with pleasant (hymns) the wise Agni, the invoker of the gods, the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


~ 


Fi by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 15 27 
adored of many, the benevolent, the far-seeing, him who knows all 
that exists. 
४४८२. त्वां दूतमग्ने अमृतं युगेयुंगे हव्यवाहँ दधिरे पायुमीड्य॑म्‌। 
देवासंश्च मर्तासश्च जागृविं विभुं विश्पतिं नम॑सा नि षेदिरे।८॥ 
8. You, Abs have gods and men in every age retained as thier 
messenger, immortal bearer of oblations, beneficent, adorable; 


they have placed him with reverence (upon the altar), vigilant, 
pervading, the protector of mankind. 
४४८३. विभूष्॑नग्न उभयाँ अनु व्रता दूतो देवानां रज॑सी समीयसे। 
यतते धीतिं सुंमतिमांवृणीमहेऽधं स्मा नस्त्रिवरूथः शिवो भंव॥९ ।। 
9. Showing grace, Agni, to both (gods and men), and at each 
sacred rite the messenger of the gods, you traverse earth and 
heaven: inasmuch as we offer you worship and praise, therefore do 
you, who are the guardian of the three (regions), be auspicious to 
us. 
This and the two preceding stanzas occur in the Samaveda, 1569. 
४४८४. तं सुप्रतींक॑ सुदृशं स्वञ्चमविद्वांसो विदुरं सपेम। 
स यक्षद्विश्वां वयुनानि विद्वान्प्र हव्यमग्निरमृतेषु वोचत्‌।।१०॥ 
10. We of little wisdom adore the most wise Agni, the well- 
ormed, the well-looking the graceful-moving; may Agni, who 


knows all things that are to be known offer the sacrifice; may he 
announce the oblation to the immortals. 


४४८५. तमंग्ने पास्युत तं पिपर्षि यस्त आन॑ट्‌ कवयें शूर धीतिम्‌। 
यज्ञस्य॑ वा निशितिं वोदितिं वा तमित्पृणक्षि शव॑सोत राया॥।११॥ 
1 L. You cherish, you protect, Agni, that may who offers 
worship, hero, to you, the far-seeing; you reward with strength and 


with riches him (who undertakes) the institution, (who effects) the 
accomplishment, of the sacrifice. 

m Who Effects the Accomplishments of the Acrifice— Yajnasya và 
nisitim vá uditim vā: the first is explained by Sayana, sariskdra, 
Perfection, accomplishment the second, udgamanam, going up or over, 
Perhaps, finishing: the relation of either to yajna is questionable, as they 
are both separated from it by the disjunctive, vd, or. 


४४८६. त्वमंग्ने वनुष्यतो नि पाहि cmi नः सहसावत्रवद्यात्‌। 
सं त्वां ध्वस्मन्वदभ्येतु पाथः सं रयिः स्पृहयाय्यः सहस्री।१२॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


28 Rgveda Sarihita 


12. Protect us, Agni, from the malignant, preserve us, mighty 
one, from wickedness; may the offering come to you free from 
defects; may desirable riches, by you sands, (reach us). 


४४८७. अमिनर्होतां गृहप॑तिः स राजा विश्वा वेद जनिमा जातवेंदा:। 
देवानामुत यो मर्त्यानां यजिष्ट: स प्र यंजतामृतावां।।१३॥। 


13. Agni, is the invoker of the gods, the lord of the house, the 
ruler, who knows all that is, knows all existing beings; he is the 
most assiduous worshipper amongst gods or men; let him who is 
observant of truth offer worship. 


४४८८. अग्ने यदद्य विशो अंध्वरस्य होतः पाव॑कशोचे वेष्ट्वं हि यज्वां। 
ऋता यजासि महिना वि यद्धूहव्या ae यविष्ठ या तें अद्य।।१४।। 


14. Agni, minister of the sacrifice, bright with purifying lustre, 
approve of that (worship) which is this day celebrated by the 
institutor of the rite: you verily are the sacrificer, therefore address 
the worship (to the gods); and since by your greatness you arc all- 
pervading, therefore, youngest (of the gods), accept the oblations 
which are today (presented) to you. 


४४८९. अभि प्रयांसि सुधितानि हि ख्यो नि त्वां दधीत रोद॑सी यजंध्ये। 
अवा नो मघवन्वाज॑सातावग्ने विश्वानि दुरिता तरेम ता तरेम 
तवाव॑सा तरेम।।१५।। 


15. Look, Agni, upon the (sacrificial) viands duly deposited 
(upon the alter): Heaven and earth detain you to sacrifice (to the 
gods): opulent Agni, protect us in battle, whereby we may pass 
safe over all evils: may we pass over those of a prior existence; 
may we pass over them by your protection. 

See the last verse of the of preceding आहाच. 


४४९०. अन्ने विश्वेभिः स्वनीक देवैरूर्णावन्त प्रथम: सींद योनिम्‌। 
कुलायिनं 5 ति 
कुलायिनं घृतवन्तं सवित्रे यज्ञं न॑य यज॑मानाय साधु।।१६।। 

16. Bright-rayed Agni, sit down first with all the gods, upon 
the altar lined with wool, a nest (of perfumes) and suffused with 
ghee, and rightly convey (to the deities) the sacrifice of the 
institutor of the rite, of the presenter of the oblation. 

Lined with Wool, Etc.— urnávantam, kulayinam ghrtavantam; the 


stanza is quoted in the Aitareya Brahmana, with a partial explanation, 
which is amplified by Sayana; the altar is built up like the nest of a bird. 


७ ७-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


3: 


MAL der den 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 15 29 
kulaya, with circles, pardhayah, of the wood of the khayar or devadaru, 
in which, avisambandah romavisesah, sheep's wool; and fragrant resins, 
the materials of incense (guggulu dhupát dhanam) are placed, ete 
uttaravedyám sthápitah, these appurtenances are placed in the northern 
altar. 

Of the presenter of the Oblation— Savitre yajamdndya, according 
to Sayana should be in the genitive case, sastyarthe caturthyesa; but in 
his comment on the Brdhmana he explains the terms anustdtre 
yajamdndya tadupakárártham, for the sake of the benefit of the 
sacrificing institutor of the ceremony. 

Wandering Deviously, but not Bewildered— Arikuyantam amuram: 
the first refers, according to the Scholiast, to the legend of Agni’s 
attempting at first to run way from the gods, devebhyah pdlayamanam. 


1 थर्ववर्टग्नि " i = | 
४४९१. इममु त्यमथर्ववदग्नि मन्थन्ति वेधस:। 
WAS, कूयन्तमानयन्नमूरं श्याव्याभ्यः ।।१७।। 
17. The priests churn you, Agni, as was done by Atharvan, and 


bring him from the glooms of might wandering deviously, but not 
bewildered. 


४४९२. जनिष्वा देववीतये सर्वतांता स्वस्तये। 
आ देवान्‌ व॑कषयमृताँ ऋतावृधों यज्ञ देवेषु पिस्पृशः।।१८।। 
18. Be bom, Agni, at the sacrifice, for the welfare of the 
offerer (of the oblation) to the gods: bring hither the immortal 


deities, the augmenters of the (sacred) rite present our sacrifice to 
the gods. 


1 अर्कर्म 1 i 
४४९३. वयमु त्वा गृहपते जनानामग्ने अकर्म समिधा बृहन्तम्‌। 
गार्हपत्यानि तिग्मेन॑ 1 नस्तेजसा ० [| 
अस्थूरि नो गार्ह सन्तु तिग्मेन नस्तेजसा सं शिशाधि।।१९।। 
. 19. Lord of the house, Agni, we, amongst men, promote your 
increase by fuel: may our domestic fires be supplied with all that is 
essential: eliven us with brilliant radiance. 

With all that is Essential— Asthari for asthürina gárhapatyáni 
ee isthuri is properly a one-horse car or waggon which bring either the 
: oma plant or fuel; with the negative prefix asthüuri it implies a non-one- 
Orse cart, that is a earth with a full team, and, metonymically, its 


०० fi A f ape 
ee or a full supply of what is wanted for a perfect sacrifice, such as 
ildren, cattle, riches, asthürini putra-pasu-dhanádibhih saripürnàni. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


30 Rgveda Samhita 
ANUVAKA II 


[सूक्त-१६] 


[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- गायत्री; १, & वर्धमाना; 
२७, ४७-४८ अनुष्टुप्‌; ४६ FET] 
४४९४. त्वमग्ने यज्ञानां होता विश्वेषां हितः। देवोभिर्मानुंषे जनें।।१॥ 
1. You, Agni, have been appointed by the gods, the ministrant 


for men, the descendants of Manu, at all sacrifices. 
Samaveda, 2, 1474. 


४४९५. स नौं मन्द्राभिरध्वरे जिह्वाभिर्यजा मह:। 
आ देवान्वक्षि यक्षिं च।।२॥ 


2. Therefore do you at our sacrifice offer oblations to the great 
deities with exhilarating flames; bring hither the gods; offer them 
worship. 

Samaveda, 1475. 

N anda 1 1 देवाञ्जसा E यज्ञेषु 
४४९६. वेत्था हि वेधो : पथश्च | अग्ने यज्ञेषुं सुक्रतो।।३।। 

3. Agni, doer of great deeds, creator, you know (how to travel 
over) with speed (great) roads and (little) paths at sacrifices. 

a Road and Paths— Adhvanah pathasca are explained severally 
mahdamargan, great roads, ksudra margamsca, little roads or paths; that is, 


according to Sayana put the sacrificer into the right way when he is going 
wrong in the ceremonial or sacrifice. 


४४९७. त्वामीळे अर्ध टता भरतो वाजिभिंः शुनम्‌। ईजे यज्ञेषु यज्चियम्‌।॥४। 
4. Bharata, with the presenters of the oblation, has joyfully 


praised you in your (two-fold capacity), and has worshipped you, 
the adorable. with sacrifices. 


Bharata— Sāyaņa considers Bharata here to be the Raja, the son of 
Dusyanta. 


In your (०-०० capacity— In the character of bestowing what is 
wished for and removing what is undesired, is twofold; ista praptyanista- 
parihdrartipendgnir dvidha. 


४४९८. त्वमिमा वार्या पुरु दिवोंदासाय सुन्वते। भरद्वाजाय दाशुषे Ms I 


5. As you have conferred these many blessings upon Divodasa 


when presenting libations, (so now grant them) to the (actual) 
offerer, Bharadydja. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ER 2o — —— RA. 


E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sukta 16 3i 


४४९९. त्वं दूतो अमर्त्य आ der दैव्यं जन॑म्‌। शुण्वन्विप्रस्य सुष्टुतिम्‌।६ 11 
6. Hearing the adoration of the sage, do you, who are the 
immortal messenger, bring hither the celestial people. 
४५००. त्वामग्ने स्वाध्यो३ मर्तासो देववीतये। यज्ञेषु देवमीत्ठते | 19 11 
7. Pious mortals invoke you, divine Agni, at sacrifices, to 
convey their (sacrificial) food to the gods. 
४५०१. तव प्र यक्षि सन्दृशमुत क्रतुं सुदानव:। विश्वे जुषन्त कामिन॑;।।८।। 
8. I glorify your splendour, and the acts of you the liberal giver 
all who, (through your favour) enjoy their desires, glorify you. 
४५०२. त्वं होता मनुर्हितो वहिरासा विदुष्टर:। अग्ने यक्षि दिवो विश॑ः।।९॥। 
9. You have been appointed by Manu, the invoker of the gods, 
the most wise bearer of oblations (to them) by your mouth; 
worship, Agni, the people of heaven. 
४५०३. अग्न आ याहि वीतयें गृणानो हव्यदांतये। 
नि होता सत्सि बर्हिषिं।॥१०।। 


10. Come, Agni, to the (sacrificial) food: being lauded, (come) 
to convery the oblation (to the gods); sit down as the ministrant 
priest upon the sacred grass. 

Sdmaveda, 1 & 660 the stanza is twice translated by Mr. Colebrooke 
in his ‘Essays on the Religious Ceremonies of the Brahmans’. Asiatic 
Researches, vol. v., p.364; vol., p.272. 


४५०४. तं त्वा समिद्धिरङ्गिरो घृतेन॑ वर्धयामसि। बृहच्छोचा यविष्ठय।।११।। 
E 11. We augment you, Avigiras, with fuel and with cutter; blaze 
lercely, youngest (of the gods). 
Sdmaveda, 661, Yajurveda, 3.3 
४५०५. सन॑ श्रवाय्यमच्छां बृहदग्ने सुवीर्यम्‌ 
- स नः पृथु श्रवाय्यमच्छा देव विवाससि। बृ सुवीर्यम्‌।।१२॥ 
12. Divine Agni, bestow upon us (wealth), excellent, great, and 
(comprehending) worthy male descendants. 
i dmaveda, 662; suvira or suvirya always implies having male 
descendants, bonos viros habens, or bonorum virorum possessio. 
त्वामग्ने 
४५०६. ने पुष्करादध्यथर्वा निरमन्थत। मूर्ध्नो विश्व॑स्य वाघत॑:।।१३॥। 
13. The sage, Atharvan, extracted you from upon the lotus- 
leaf, the head, the support of the universe. 


$ Tvam puskardd adhi atharvo niramanthata, murdhno visvasya 
vaghatah: the verse occurs in the Samaveda, 9. and the Yajurveda, 2.32: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


32 Rgveda Samhita 


according to Sayana, puskarddadhi means puskaraparne, or the lotus- 
leaf, as by the text puskara-parne, Prajdpatir bhümim aprathayat, upon 
the lotus-leaf Prajdpati made manifest the earth, which probably 
suggested one of the accounts of the creation in Manu 1: hence, as it 
supported the earth it may be termed the head, miirdhan, or the bearer, 
vdghata for vahaka, of all things; Mahidhara cites a text to show that 
atharvan means práma, vital air extracted fire or animal heat from the 
water, prána udakasakasad-agnim nisesena mathitavan; to vaghata he 
assigns the usual import of rtvij, ministrant priest, and explains the last 
sentence, all the priests churned you out of the head or top of the wood of 
attrition; he gives also another explanation, which agrees with that of 
Sayana. 


४५०७. तमु त्वा दध्यङ्ङ्ूषिः पुत्र ईधे अथ॑र्वणः। वृत्रहणं पुरन्दरम्‌।।१४।। 


14. The Rsi, Dadhyaric, the son of Atharvan, kindled the slayer 
of Vrtra, the destroyer of the cities of the Asuras. 


४५०८. तमु त्वा पाथ्यो वृषा समीधे दस्युहन्त॑मम्‌। धनञ्जयं रणेरणे।।१५।। 


15. (The Asi) Pathya, the showerer, kindled you the destroyer 
of the Dasyu, the winner of spoil in battle. 

४५०९. एह्यषु ब्रवाणि तेऽग्न॑ इत्थेत॑रा गिर॑ः। एभिर्वर्धास इन्दुभि:॥॥१६।। 

16. Come, Agni, that I may address to you other praises in this 
manner: augment with these libations. 

Other Praises in this Manner— Jtthetard girah ittha, anena 
prakdrena, thus, in this manner; tiara, other may mean also, according to 
Sayana, offered by others, or by the Asuras, asuraih krtà: in his 
commentary on the Aitareya Brdhmana, where the verse is cited, 3.49, he 
understands it differently, or, other than those offered to the gods, or 


adverse to the gods, propitiatory of the Asuras, asurebhiyah hitah 
devavakyaditara devavirodhinya ityarthah. 


| e 
४५१०. यत्र क्क च ते मनो दक्ष॑ दधस उत्तरम्‌। तत्रा सद॑ः कृणवसे।।१७।। 
17. Wheresoever, and upon whatsoever your mind is directed, 
you bestow uncommon vigour, and there you make your abode. 


४५११. नहि तें पूर्तमक्षिपद्धुवन्नेमाना वसो। अथा sat वनवसे॥।१८ ।। 


18. Let no! your full (blaze) be distressing to the eye, giver of 


dwellings to your humble votaries, and, therefore accept our 
worship. 


=e 


Distressing to the Eye— The text has nahi purtam aksipadbhuvat; 
aksi-pat, aksno patakam vindsakam, the offender or destroyer of the eye; 


the verse occurs Sámaveda, 707, and Yajurveda, 26, 13 the preceding 
verse also occurs in the former 11.56. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


z by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 16 33 
भार॑तो Jai द्विदासस्य I 
४५१२. आग्निरगामि भारतो वृत्रहा पुरुचेतन: | सस्य सत्पतिः।।१९।। 
19. Agni, the bearer, (of oblations), the destroyer of the 


enemies of Divopdsa, the cognizant of many, the protector of the 
good, has been brought hither (by our praises). 


४५१३. स हि विश्वाति पार्थिवा रयिं दार्शन्महित्वना। 
वन्वन्नवातो अस्तृंतः।।२०॥। 
20. Surpassing all earthly things, may he bestow upon us 


riches, destroying his enemies by his greatness, unresisted, 
unassailed. 


४५१४. स प्रलवन्नवीयसाग्ने चुम्नेन॑ संयता। बृहत्ततन्थ भानुना।।२१ UI 

21. You, have overspread, Agni, this vast (firmament) with 
radiant concentrated lustre, recent like that of old. 
४५१५. प्र व॑ सखायो अग्नये स्तोम॑ यज्ञं च॑ धृष्णुया। 

अर्च गाय॑ च वेधसें।।२२।। 

22. Sing praise and offer sacrifice, my friends, to the foe- 
discomfiting, the creator, Agni. 

४५१६. स हि यो मानुषा युगा सीदद्धोता कविक्रतुः। 
दूतश्चं हव्यवाहंनः।।२३॥। 

23. May that Agni indeed sit down (at our sacrifice), who in 
every age of man has been the invoker of the gods, doer of wise 
deeds, the messenger of the gods, the bearer of oblations. 

४५१७. ता राजांना शुचिंत्रतादित्यान्मारुतं गणम्‌। वसो यक्षीह रोद॑सी।२४।। 


_ 24. Giver of dwellings, worship on this occasion the two regal 
divinities, Mitra and Varuna, whose acts are holy, the Adityas, the 
Company of the Maruts, and heaven. 


४५१८. वस्वीं ते अग्ने सन्दृष्टिरिषयते मर्त्याय। ऊर्जा नपादमूतस्य।।२५।। 


_ 25. Son of strength, Agni, the glorious radiance of you who are 
Immortal, bestows food upon (your) mortal worshipper. 


४५१९, क्रत्वा दा अस्तु श्रेष्ठोऽद्य त्वां वन्वन्त्सुरेकणां:। 
मर्त आनाश सुदृक्तिम्‌॥२६॥ 


26. May the donor (of the oblation), propitiating you by his 
acts toady, be exalted, and (rendered) very opulent: may (such) 
Mortal be diligent in (your) praise. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ERE REE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


34 Rgveda Samhita 
४५२०. ते तें अग्ने त्वोतां इषय॑न्तो विश्वमायुं:। 
तर॑न्तो अर्यो अरातीर्वन्वन्तो अर्यो अरातीः।।२७॥। 
27. Those, Agni, who are protected by you, wishing for the 


whole (term of) life (obtain it), overcoming hostile assailants, 
destroying hostile assailants. 


४५२१. अग्निस्तिग्मेन शोचिषा यासद्विश्वं न्यशैत्रिणम्‌। 
अग्निनोँ बनते रयिम्‌।।२८॥ 


28. May Agni, with his sharp flame, demolish the devourer (of 
the oblation); may Agni grant us riches. 


४५२२. सुवीरं रयिमा भ॑र जात॑वेदो विचर्षणे। जहि रक्षांसि सुक्रतो।।२९॥। 
29. Jatavedas, all-beholder, bring us wealth with good 

posterity; doer of good deeds, destroy the Raksasas. 

४५२३. त्वं न॑ः पाह्यंहसो जात॑वेदो अघायत:। रक्षा णो ब्रह्मणस्कवे।।३०॥। 


30. Preserve us, Játavedas, from sin; enunciator of prayer, 
protect us from the malevolent. 
Enunciator of Prayer— Brahmanaskave is explained mantrasya 
Sabdayitd, or sounder or articulator of prayer; for Agni, it is said, 
generates articulate sound, and the Smrti is cited as authority; manah 
kayagnim ahanti, sa prerayati manutam, marutas-tu urasi caran, 
— mandiam janayati svaram, mind excites the fire of the body, that excites 


the collective vital airs, and they, passing into the breast, engender 
agreeable, articulate sound. 


४५२४. यो नों अनने दुरेव आ मतों वधाय दाश॑ति। 
तस्मान्नः पाह्यंह॑सः।।३१।। 


31. The malevolent mortal who threatens us with murderous 
weapon from defend us, and also from sin. 


४५२५. त्वं तं देव जिह्वया परि बाधस्व दुष्कृत॑म्‌। 
मर्तो यो नो जिघांसति।३२॥। 


32. Scatter, divine Agni, by your flame, that evil-doer, the man 
who seeks to kill us. 


४५२६. भरद्वाजाय सप्रथः शर्म यच्छ सहन्त्य। अग्ने वरेण्यं वसुं॥३३।। 


33. Subduer of foes, grant to Bharadvaja infinite happiness 
and desirable wealth. 


CC-0. in Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 1 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 16 3 


४५२७. अमिर्वुत्राणि जङ्घनददरविणस्युर्विपन्यया। 


समिद्धः शुक्र AET: 11३४1 
34. May Agni, propitiated by praise, desirous of (sacrificial) 
affluence, kindled, bright, and fed with burnt-offerings, destroy all 


adversaries. 
Samaveda, 4, 1396; Yajurveda, 33.9: Mahidhara interprets the first 
i part somewhat differently, Agni entirely destroys all by manifold worship. 


४५२८. TH मातुः पितुष्पिता विंदिद्युतानो अक्षरें। सीदन्रृतस्य योनिमा॥।३५।। 
35. Radiant in the embryo of the maternal (earth), on the 


imperishable (altar); the cherisher of the paternal (heaven), sitting 
on the seat of sacrifice. 

The Cherisher of the Paternal Heaven— he mdtuh, pituspitá: here, 
as before, the mother of Agni is the earth, the father is heaven: Agni is 
said to be the father or fosterer of his parent heaven, by transmitting to it 
the flame and smoke of burnt-offerings: also Sámaveda, 1397. 

४५२९. web प्रजावदा भर जात॑वेदो विचर्षणे। अग्ने यद्दीदयंद्विवि 11२६ I 

36. Bring to us, Jatavedas, all-beholder, food with progeny; 
such (food) as is brilliant in heaven. 

Sdmaveda, 1398. 

४५३०. उप॑ त्वा रण्वसंन्दृशं प्रय॑स्वन्तः सहस्कृत। अग्ने ससुज्महे गिर्र:11२७। 

37. Strength-begotten Agni, we, offering (sacrificial) food, 
address praises to you who are of pleasing aspect, 

Sdmaveda, 1705. 

४५३१. उपच्छायामिव घृणेरगन्म शर्म d वयम्‌। 
अग्ने हिर॑ण्यऽसन्दृशः।।३८।। 

38. We have recourse, Agni, to the shelter of you, the lustrous, 
the golden-feathered, as to the shade (of a tree). 

B रुरोजिथ 1 
४५३२. य उग्रईव शर्यहा तिग्मशृङ्गो न वंसंगः। अग्ने पुरो रुरोजिथ 11३९ ।। 
39. You, Agni, who are like a fierce archer, or like a sharp- 


horned bull, have destroyed the cities (of the Asw.as). 

_ The Scholiast here identifies Agni with Rudra as the destroyer of the 
cities of Tripura; the identification is authorized by the Vedic text, Rudro 
va eso yad Agnih, also Samaveda, 1707. 


४५३३. आ यं हस्ते न खादिनं शिशुँ जातं न बिश्रति। 
विशामग्नि स्वध्व॒रम्‌।1४०॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


B" — 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
36 Rgveda Samhita 


40. (Worship) that Agni whom (the priests) bear in their hands 
like a new-born babe; the devourer (of the oblation), the (conveyer 
of the) holy sacrifices of men. 


४५३४. प्र देवं देववीतये भर॑ता वसुवित्त॑मम्‌। 
आ स्वे योनौ नि Weg ie ti 


41. Conduct the divine (Agni), the bestower of infinite wealth, 
to (receive charge of) the food of the gods; let him sit down on his 
appropriate scat. 


४५३५. आ जातं जातवेदसि प्रियं शिशीतातिथिम्‌। 
स्योन आ गृहप॑तिम्‌।।४२।। 


42. (Welcome him) as soon as born, like a beloved guest, and 
place the lord of the mansion upon the sacred (altar) whence 
wisdom is derived. 

This and the preceding verse are to be recited, it is said, when the fire 
that has been produced by attrition is applied to kindle the ahavaniya, or 
fire of bumt-offerings they are both quoted in the Aitareya Brahmana, 
i.16, and with Sayana’s gloss to this effect, but some of the terms are 
differently explained and applied; thus, Agni is to be considered as the 
guest, not of the sacrificer, but of the Ghavaniya fire, and Játavedasi is 
also applies to the latter, as knowing the birth of the churned fire, to 


whom it is a giver of delight, syona, sukhakara, by giving him a welcome 
reception. 


४५३६. अग्ने quar हि ये तवाश्चासो देव साधव॑:। अरं वहन्ति मन्यवे।॥४३। 


43. Hamess, divine Agni, your well-trained horses, who bear 
you quickly to the sacrifice. 


To the Sacrifice— Manyave, 
yahah; Mahidhara, Yajus, 13,36, 
also Sámaveda, 25. 


४५३७. अच्छा नो याह्या वहाभि प्रयासि वीतयें। आ देवान्त्सोम॑पीतये।४४।। 


44. Come, Agni, to our presence; bring hither the gods to 
partake of the (sacrificial) viands, to drink the Soma juice. 


४५३८. उद॑ग्ने भारत द्युमदजंस्नेण दविद्युतत्‌। शोचा वि ERIM II 


45. Blaze up, Agni, bearer of oblations; shine, undecaying 
Agni, radiant with undecaying lustre, 


४५३९. वीती यो देवं मीं दुवस्येदग्निमंळीता्वरे हविष्मान्‌। 


होतार सत्ययजं रोद॑स्योरुतानह्तो नमसा विंवासेत्‌।४६।। 


Synonymous With yajiidya, as manyur, 
gives the same interpretation; it occurs 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


= 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 17 
46. Whatever mortal, offering oblations, worships a deity with 
(sacrificial) food, let him at the ceremony also worship Agni, the 
invoker of heaven and earth, the sacrificer with truth; let him adore 
(Agni) with uplifted hands. 
am x हविर्हदा a jd 
४५४०. आ तें अग्न ऋचा हविर्हदा तष्टं भरामसि। 
>) > NI 
ते तें भवन्तृक्षण ऋषभासों वशा ITIS 
47. We offer to you, Agni, the oblation sanctified by the heart, 


and (identified) with the sacred verse may the vigorous bulls and 


the cows be (as such an oblation) to you. 

May the Vigorous Bulls and the Cows, Etc.— Te te bhavantu 
üksana rsabhdso vasa uta, may these vigorous bulls or the cows be for 
you; the Scholiast intimates their being offered to Agni as victims 
rsabhavasárüpena parinatam san tvabhaksa náya (havir) bhavatu, let the 
oblation, matured in the from of bulls or cows, be for your food. 


४५४१. अग्नि देवासो अग्रियमिन्धते वृत्रहन्तमम्‌। 
येना वसून्याभृता तृळहा रक्षांसि वाजिनां।।४८।। 


48. The gods kindle Agni as the chief (of them); as the especial 
destroyer of Vrtra; by whom the treasures (of the Asuras) are 
carried off; by whom the Raksasas are destroyed. 


[सूक्त-१७] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र! 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌; १५ fever faex] 
४५४२. पिबा सोममभि यमुग्र तर्द ऊर्वं गव्यं महिं गृणान इन्द्र। 
वि यो gon वधिंषो वज्रहस्त विश्वा वृत्रममित्रिया शवोभिः!॥१॥ 
1. Fierce Indra, glorified by us, drink the Soma, (animated) by 
which you have discovered the vast herd of cattle (stolen by 


Panis), and, overcomer of enemies, wielder of the thunderbolt, you 
have slain, by your strength all opposing foes. 


lc 
४५४३. स ई पाहि य ऋजीषी deat यः शिप्रवान्‌ वृषभो यो मंतीनाम्‌। 
चित्राँ zs 
यो गोत्रभि्ज्रभृद्यो हरिष्ठाः स इन्द्र चित्राँ अभि तृन्धि वाजान्‌॥२॥ 
2. Drink it, Indra, you who enjoy the flavourless Soma; you 
who are the preserver, the handsome-chinned, the showerer (of 
benefits) on those who praise you; who are the breaker of 


mountains, the wielder of the thunderbolt, the curber of steeds, do 
you bestow upon us various food. 


37 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


38 Rgveda Samhita 
४५४४. एवा पाहि प्रलथा मन्द॑तु तवा श्रुधि ब्रह्म वावृधस्वोत गीर्मि:। 
आविः सूर्यं कृणुहि पीपिहीषों जहि wat गा इन्द्र तृन्धि॥३॥। 
3. Drink it as of old, and may it exhilarate you; hear our 


prayer, and be exalted by our praises; make the sun visible, nourish 
us with food, destroy our enemies, rescue the cattle. 


| 
४५४५. ते त्वा मदां बृहदिन्द्र स्वधाव इमे पीता उक्षयन्त द्युमन्तम्‌। 
महामनूनं तवसं विभूतिं मत्सरासों जर्हृषन्त प्रसाह॑म्‌।।४॥ 
4. Abounding in food, Indra, let these exhilarating draughts 
copiously bedew you, the resplendent; let the inebriating juices 


delight you who are mighty, deficient in no (excellence), powerful, 
manifold, the overcomer of foes. 


४५४६. येभिः सूर्यमुषसं मन्दसानोऽवांसयोऽपं दृळहानि दद्रत्‌। 
महामद्रिं परि गा इन्द्र सन्तं नुत्था अच्युंतं सद॑सः परि स्वात्‌।।५।। 
5. By which (juices) being exhilarated you have appointed the 
sun and the dawn (to their offices), driving away the solid 


(glooms); you have penetrated, Indra, the mountain, unmoved 
from its own seat, concealing the cattle. 


४५४७. तव क्रत्वा तव तइंसनांभिरामासुं पक्रं शच्या नि दींधः। 
AR उस्नियांभ्यो वि दुळहोदूर्वाद्गा अंसृजो अङ्गिरस्वान्‌।६।। 
6. By your wisdom, by your deeds, through your power, you 
have developed the mature (milk) in the immature (udders), you 


have opened the strong doors for the cattle (to come forth); 


associated with the Avigirasas, you have liberated the cows from 
their fold. 


४५४८. पप्राथ क्षां महि दंसो व्युशर्वीमुप द्यामृष्वो बृहदिन्द्र स्तभायः। 
अधारयो रोद॑सी देवपुत्रे प्रत्ने मातरां यही sedie di 

7. You have filled the wide earth, Indra. With (the of) your 
deeds; you, the mighty one, have propped up the vast heaven; you 
have sustained the heaven and earth, whose children are the gods, 
(and who are) the old and mighty parents of sacrifice. 

The old and mighty parents of sacrifice— Pratne métard yahvir 
rtasya, which may be also rendered, according to Sayana, the ancient 


parents, the offspring of Brahma; rtasya, brahmana, yahvi putryau, yahu 
being a synonym of Apatya, Nighantu, 2.2. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Stu ————————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sukta 17 39 


४५४९. अध॑ त्वा विश्वै पुर इन्द्र देवा एकं तवर्स दधिरे भराय। 
अदेंवो यदभ्यौहिष्ट देवान्त्स्वर्षाता वृणत vum 
8. All the gods then placed you, Indra, as their mighty chief in 


front for battle; when the impious (Asuras) assailed the deities; the 


Maruts supported Indra in the conflict. 
The Maruts supported Indra in the conflict— According to the 
legend the gods ran away, the Maruts alone stood by /ndra. 


४५५०. अध द्यौश्चित्ते अप सा नु वञ्राद्द्वितानमद्धियसा स्वस्य मन्योः। 
अहिं यदिन्द्रों अभ्योहसानं नि fead: waa जघान॑॥॥९।। 
9. The heaven bowed down in the two-fold dread of your 


thunderbolt, and your individual wrath, when Indra, the giver of 
food, struck to the sleep (of death) the assailing Ahi. 


४५५१. अध त्वष्टा ते मह उंग्र वज्रं सहस्रभृष्टिं ववृतच्छताश्रिम्‌। 
निर्काममरमंणसं येन नवन्तमहिँ सं पिणगृजीषिन्‌।।१० | 
10. Fierce Indra, Tvastá constructed for you, the mighty one, 


the thousand-edged, the hundred-angles thunderbolt, wherewith 
you have crushed the ambitious audacious, loud-shouting Ahi. 


४५५२. वर्धान्यं fad मरुत॑ः सजोषाः पच॑च्छतं महिषाँ इन्द्र तुभ्यम्‌। 
पूषा विष्णुखीणि सराँसि धावन्वृत्रहणं मदिरमंशुमस्मै। ११ I 
11. For you, Indra, whom all the Maruts, alike pleased, exalt, 
may Püsan and Visnu dress for you a hundred buffaloes, and to 


him may the three streams flow with the inebriating, foe- 


destroying Soma. 

Dress for you a hundred Buffaloes— Pacai satam mahisdn 
tubhyam, may he cook for you a hundred male animals; pum-pasun pacet 
is the explanation; there is no nominative except Püsan, which is in the 
following hemstitch, and which is followed by Visnu without a 
copulative. 

Three Streams— Trini saramsi mean, according to the Scholiast, 
three cups or vessels called Ahavanis, holding the Soma which has been 
purified or filtered into the pitcher, the dronakalasa. 


४५५३. आ क्षोदो महिं वृतं नदीनां परिष्ठितमसूज ऊर्मिमपाम्‌। 
S E uid 
तासामनु प्रवर्त इन्द्र पन्थाँ प्रादँयो नीचीरपस: समुद्रम्‌।।१२।। 
12. You have set free the greatly obstructed and arrested water 
of the rivers, the flux of the waters; you have directed them, Indra, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


40 Rgveda Samhita 


upon their downward paths; you have sent them rapidly down to 
the ocean. 


४५५४. एवा ता विश्वां चकृवांसमिन्द्रै महामुग्रमजुर्य संहोदाम्‌। 
सुवीरं त्वा स्वायुधं सुवज्रमा ब्रह्म नव्यमवंसे ववृत्यात्‌।।१३ i 


13. May our new prayer bring to our protection you, Indra, 
who are the maker of all these (things that exist); who are mighty, 
fierce, undecaying, the giver of strength, having excellent 
descendants, the Maruts, well-armed, the bearer of the thunderbolt. 


४५५५. स नो वाजाय श्रव॑स इषे च॑ राये fe gad इन्द्र विप्रान्‌। 
TER Jad इन्द्र सूरीन्दिवि च॑ स्मैधि पाये न इन्द्र॥१४।। 


14. Do you, resplendent Indra, uphold us who are devout, for 
(the obtaining of) food, of sustenance, of nourishment, of wealth; 
bestow upon Bhardvdja pious posterity, with numerous attendants; 
be with us, Indra, every future day. 

For Food, Sustenance, Nourishment, Wealth— Vajaya, saravase, 
ise ca ráye; the three first are synonyms, meaning food. 


४५५६. अया वाजँ Safed सनेम मदेम शतहिंमाः सुवीरांः।।१५।। 


15. May we, by this (praise), obtain food granted by the deity; 
may we, blessed with excellent male descendants, be happy for a 
hundred winters. 


[सूक्त- १८] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र । 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌; १५ द्विपदा त्रिषटुप्‌।] 
४५५७. तमु ष्टुहि यो अभिभूत्योजा वन्वन्नवातः पुरुहूत FE: | 
अषाळहमुग्रं सहमानमाभिर्गीसिर्वर्ध वृषभं चर्षणीनाम्‌।।१।। 
1. Praise him who is Indra, the invoker of many, endowed with 
overpowering vigour, the destroyer (of foes), unharmed by them; 


exalt with these praises the irresistible, fierce, victorious Indra, the 
showerer (of benefits) upon mankind. 


४५५८. स युध्मः सत्वां खजकृत्समद्वा तुविम्रक्षो नंदनुमाँ ऋजीषी। 
बृहद्रेणुश्च्यवनो मानुंषीणामेकंः कृष्टीनाम॑भवत्सहावां।।२।। 


2. He is ever the combatant, the donor, the engaged in battle, 
the sympathizer (with the sacrificer), the benefactor of many, the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


= 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 18 T 


loud-sounding, the partaker of the stale libation, the stirrer up of 
dust (in strife), the chief protector of men the descendants of 
Manu, the endowed with strength. 
त्वं 1 ` दस्यूँरैक कृष्टीरवनोरायय EN if 
४५५९. त्वं ह नु त्यददमायो दस्यूरेक: कृष्टीरवनोरायय | 
|| ari el || || 1 ` 
अस्ति faq वीर्य तत्त इन्द्र न Racha तदूतुथा वि वोचः 11३ 11 

3. You are he who has quickly humbled the Dasyus: you are 
the chief one who has given posterity to the Arya: but, Indra, is not 
verily your power such? If it be not, then in due season confess. 

Not beholding /ndra, the Scholiast says, the Rsi begins to question 
his attributes and power; in the succeeding verse he expresses his belief in 
their existence. 

N EN | 
४५६०. सदिद्धि तें तुविजातस्य मन्ये सह; सहिष्ठ तुरतस्तुरस्य॑। 
1 AEN N 
उग्रमुग्रस्य तवसस्तवीयोडर॑ध्रस्य रप्रतुरा नभूव।४॥। 

4. Yet, most mighty one, I believe that power is verily always 

in you, who are manifest at many rites, and are the enemy of (our) 


enemies; (the power) that is fierce in the fierce one, most mighty 
in the mighty one, most unassailable in the subduer (of foes). 


| ४५६१. a: प्रत्नं सख्यमस्तु युष्मे इत्था वर्दद्धिर्वलमङ्गिरोभि:। 
हन्नच्युतच्युद्दस्मेषयन्तमृणोः पुरो वि gu अस्य faa: 
5. May that our ancient friendship with you ever endure; as 
when, along with the Avigirasas, celebrating your praises, you, 
beautiful Indra, caster down of the immoveable (rocks), did verily 


Slay Bala, hurling (his darts against you), and force open his cities, 
and all his gates. 


४५६२. स हि धीभिर्हव्यो अस्त्युग्र ईशानकृन्महति वृत्रतूर्ये। 

स तोकसांता तन॑ये स वज्री वितन्तसाय्यो अभवत्समत्सुं॥६॥। 
: 6. Fierce /ndra, maker of rulers you are he who is to be 
Invoked with praise in a great conflict; you are he (who is to be 


invoked) for sons and grandsons, he, the wielder of the 
thunderbolt, who is to be especially glorified in battles. | 


४५६३. स मज्मना जनिंम मानुषाणामर्मर्त्येन नाम्नाति प्र संखे। | 
स चुम्नेन स शवंसोत राया स वीर्येण नृत॑मः समोंकाः।॥७। | 


7. With immortal, foe-humiliating might he has promoted the 
(multiplied) birth of mankind; he, the chief of leaders, dwells in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


p" ती 


Ü 


Se जा 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


42 Rgveda Samhita 


the same dwelling with fame, with strength, with riches, with 
heroism. 


I चुमुरिं s धुनिं 
४५६४. स यो न मुहे न मिथू जनो भूत्सुमन्तुनामा चुमुरि धुनिं च। 
वृणकिपप्रुं शम्बरं शुष्णमिन्द्रः पुरां च्यौत्नाय शयथाय नू चित्‌।।८ ।। 
8. He who is never perplexed, who is no engenderer of that 
which is in vain, whose name is renowned, who promptly (exerts 
himself) for the overturning of the cities (of the Asuras), and for 
the destruction (of his foes); you, (Indra), have indeed slain 


Cumuri, Dhuni, Pipru, Sambara, and Susna 
All these have been mentioned before, see vols., I. and II. 


४५६५. उदाव॑ता त्वक्ष॑सा पन्य॑सा च वृत्रहत्याय रथमिन्द्र तिष्ठ। 
धिष्व ost हस्त आ दक्षिणत्राभि प्र म॑न्द पुरुदत्र गायाः।।९।। 


9. (Endowed) with upward-rising, foe-thinning, and glorified 
(vigour), ascend your car for the destruction of Vrtra; take the 
thunderbolt in your right hand, an baffle, giver of wealth, the 
devices (of the Asuras). 


४५६६. अग्निर्न शुष्कं वर्नमिन्द् हेती रक्षो नि धक्ष्यशनिर्न भीमा। 
गम्भीरय॑ ऋष्वया यो रुरोजाध्वांनयद्दुरिता दम्भर्यच्च।।१०।। 
10. In like manner as Agni consumes the dry forest, so, Indra, 
your weapon (destroys your enemies); as (formidable as you) 


Due fearful shaft, consume the Raksasas; you who have shouted aloud 
(in the combat) and demolished all evil things. 


४५६७. आ wed पथिभिरिन्द्र राया तुविद्युप्न तुविवाजेभिरर्वाक्‌। 
याहि सूनो सहसो यस्य नू चिददेव ईशें पुरुहूत योतों:॥॥११॥ 
11. Opulent, Indra, Son of strength, the invoker of many, 
whose union (with energy) the impious is unable to disjoint, come 


down to us with thousands of riches by very powerful 
conveyances. 


Very Powerful Conveyances— Pathibhistuvi vdjebhih: Sayana 
renders the first by váhaih, vehicles, or sometimes horses, so considered: 
the epithet he translates bahubalaih, very strong or powerful 


४५६८. प्र तुविद्युम्नस्य स्थविरस्य घृष्वेर्दिवो ररप्शे महिमा पृथिव्या:। 


नास्य शत्रुर्न प्रतिमानमस्ति न प्रतिष्ठि: पुरुमायस्य सह्योः।।१२।। 


12. The vastness of the affluent, ancient (एकाद), the 
demolisher (of foes), exceeds that of the heaven and the earth; 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 19 43 


there is no antagonist, no counterpart, no recipient of him 
abounding in wisdom, victorious (in war). 


४५६९. प्र तत्ते अद्या कर॑णं कृतं भूत्कुत्सं यदायुमतिथिग्वमस्मै। 
पुरू सहस्रा नि शिंशा अभि क्षामुचूर्वयाणं धृषता निनेथ 1॥१३॥। 


13. That exploit is celebrated in the present day (which you 
have) achieved for Kutsa, for Ayu, for Atithigvave: to him you 
have given many thousands (of riches), and you have quickly 
elevated Turvayána over the earth by your power. 

Turvayána— The same as Divodds, to whom Indra gave the spoils 
of Sambara. 

४५७०. अनु त्वाहिघ्ने अध॑ देव देवा मदन्विश्वे कवितमं कवीनाम्‌। 
करो यत्र वरिंवो बाधिताय॑ दिवे जनाय we गृणानः।।१४।। 

14. Divine Indra, all the gods have glorified you, the wisest of 
the wise, for the destruction of Ahi; when propitiated, you have 
given wealth to the distressed worshipper, and to his posterity. 

When Propitiated, you have given Wealth, Etc.— Yatra varivo 
badhitaya dive janáya tanve gruánah karah is explained yasmin kale 
piditya stotre janáya, tat-tanayaya ca dhanam sttiyamdno adadah, as 
translated in the text; but Sayana admits another rendering, which he 
makes, when being praised, you have given ease to the celestial people 
through the relief, tanve, Sobhayai, caused by the demolition of Ahi. 


४५७१. अनु द्यावापृथिवी तत्त ओजो$मर्त्या जिहत इन्द्र देवा:। 
कृष्वा Hot अकृतं यत्ते अस्त्युक्थं नवीयो जनयस्व यञ्ञैः॥१५॥ 
15. The heaven and earth, and the immortal gods, acknowledge 


your might; doer of many deeds, do that which is yet undone by 
you, give birth to a new hymn at (your) sacrifice. 


[सूक्त- १९] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- freu] 
४५७२. महाँ इनदरं नुवदा चर्षणिप्रा उत द्विबही अमिनः सहोंभि:। 
अस्मद््यगवावृधे वीर्यायोरुः gg: सुकृत: कर्तृभिरभूत्‌॥१॥ 
the 1 F bee zho Ed ae Eo s 
; e hither; may he who is mighty over the 


p (realms of space), uninjurable by (hostile) offers, increase (in 
apacity) for heroism in our presence; may he who is great (in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


44 Rgveda Samhita 


body), eminent (in qualities), be honoured by the performers (of 
pious acts). 

Yajurveda, 7.39; Mabidhara’s explanation is to the same purport, 
although he renders some of the epithets rather differently. 


४५७३. इन्द्रमेव धिषणां सातयें धादबृहन्त॑मृष्वमजरं युवानम्‌। 
अषांळहेन शव॑सा शूशुवांसं सद्यश्चिद्यो वावृधे असांमि॥२।। 
2. Our praise encourages Indra to munificence, the vast, quick- 


moving, undecaying, ever-youthful Jndra, mighty with 
unsurpassable strength, who rapidly grows to greatness. 


४५७४. पृथू करस्ना बहुला गभ॑स्ती अस्मद्र्यशक्सं मिंमीहि श्रवाँसि। 
यूथेव॑ पश्च: पशुपा दमूना अस्माँ इन्द्राभ्या ववृत्स्वाजो || 
3. Extend towards us your long, active, and bountiful hands, 


(to bring us) food; be about us, lowly-minded Indra, in battle, as a 
herdsman (tends) the herds of cattle. 


. 1. 1 शाकैरिह ति [| N 
४५७५. तं व इन्द्रं चतिनमस्य शाकैरिह नूनं वाजयन्तो हुवेम। 
यथां चित्पूर्वे जरितारं आसुरनेद्या अनवद्या अरिष्ट: 11४ 


4. Desiring sustenance, we invoke you, the renowned /ndra, on 
this occasion, the destroyer (of enemies), together with his 
powerful allies (the Maruts); as his ancient adorers have been, 
(may we be), exempt from blame, irreproachable, unharmed. 


धृतव्रतो सोम॑वृद्ध 1 
४५७६. धृतव्रतो धनदाः S: स हि वामस्य वसुनः Yee: | 
ज॑म्मिरे e = 
सं जग्मिरे uem web अस्मिन्त्समुद्रे न सिन्धवो AET: LA 
5. In him who is observant of pious rites, who is a giver of 
wealth, who is exalted by the Soma beverage, the (lord) of 


desirable riches, the distributer of food, (in him) the treasures fit 
(for his worshippers) congregate like rivers flowing into ocean. 


४५७७. शविष्ठं न आ भर शूर शव ओजिष्टमोजो अभिभूत उग्रम्‌। 
1 Th TS 
विश्वा चुम्ना वृष्ण्या मानुषाणामस्मभ्यं दा हरिवो मादयध्यै।।६।। 
6. Bestow upon us, hero Indra, most vigorous vigour; subduer 


(of enemies, bestow upon us) most energetic and fierce energy; 


grant, lord of steeds, all the bright and invigorating (treasures) fit 
for men, to make us happy. 


४५७८. यस्ते मद: पृतनाषाळमृध्र vu तं न आ भ॑र शूशुवांस॑म्‌। 
येन॑ तोकस्य तन॑यस्य सातौ मंसीमहि जिगीवांसस्त्वोता:।।७।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E: by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sukta 19 45 


7. Impart to us, /ndra, that your invigorating exultation which 
overcomes enemies, and is irresistible, where by, protected by vou, 
triumphant we may glorify you for the sake of (obtaining) sons and 


grandsons. 
४५७९. आ नों भर वृर्षणं शुष्ममिन्द्र धनस्पृर्त शूशुवार्स सुदक्ष॑म्‌। 
येन वंसाम पृत॑नासु शत्रून्तवोतिभिरुत जारमारजांमीन्‌।।८॥। 

8. Bestow upon us, Indra, vigorous strength, the realizer of 
wealth, great and propitious, wherewith, through your protection, 
we may destroy our enemies in battles, whether they be kinsmen or 
strangers. 

४५८०. आ ते शुष्मों वृषभ dg पश्चादोत्तरादधरादा पुरस्तात्‌। 
आ विश्वतों अभि समेत्वर्वाडिन्द्र gA स्वैर्वद्धेह्मस्मे ।॥९॥। 

9. May your invigorating strength come from the west, from 
the north, from the south, from the east; may it come to us from 
every quarter; grant use riches combined with felicity. 

४५८१. Jad इन्द्र नृत॑माभिरूती वंसीमहिँ वामं श्रोमतिभि:। 
ईक्षे हि वस्व॑ उभयंस्य राजन्धा रत्नं महिं स्थूरं बृहन्त॑म्‌।।१०॥। 

10. We enjoy, Indra, through your guiding protection, 
desirable affluence along with descendants and reputation: grant 
Us, sovereign, who rule over (earthly and heavenly) riches, vast, 
desirable, and infinite treasures. 

४५८२. मरत्वन्तं वृषभं वांवृधानमर्कवारिं दिव्यं शासमिन्द्रम्‌। 
विश्वासाहमव॑से नूतनायोग्रं सहोदामिह d हुवेम॥॥११ | 

11. We invoke on this occasion for his present protection, that 
Indra who is attended by the Maruts; who is the showerer (of 


benefits); augmenting (in prowess); the unreviled of foes, radiant, 
ruling, all-subduing, fierce, the giver of strength. 


ज A " 
४५८३. जनं वज्रिन्महि चिन्मन्य॑मानमेभ्यो नृभ्यो रन्धया येष्वस्मि। 
अधा हि त्वां पृथिव्यां शूर॑सातौ हवांमहे तन॑ये गोष्वप्सु।।१२॥ 
12, Wielder of the thunderbolt, humble that man who looks 
Upon himself as the greatest amongst those men of whom I am; we 


ke you now to (descend) upon the earth at the time of battle. 
nd for (the sake of obtaining) sons and grandsons. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
46 Rgveda Samhita 
~ | | NI शत्रोरुत्तर | 
४५८४. वयं त॑ एभिः पुरुहूत सख्यैः Wal: शत्रोरुत्तर इत्स्याम। 
e Zz = Y 3 त्वोता 
घ्नन्तो वृत्राण्युभयानि शूर राया AA बृहता त्वोता: 118311 
13. Invoked of many, may we, through these your friendly 
(praises), ever be superior to successive foes, destroying, oh hero, 


both (classes of) enemies, (kindred or unallied); and may we, 
protected by you, be happy with abundant riches. 


[35-39] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्ठुप्‌; ७ RE] 
a भूमार्यस्तस्थौ lu 1 
४५८५. &ौर्न य इन्द्राभि भूमार्यस्तस्थौ रयिः शवसा पृत्सु जनान्‌। 
ति 1 c > Ts I 
तं न॑ः सहसखभरमुवरासा दद्धि सूना सहसो वृत्रतुरम्‌।।१।। 

1. Indra, Son of strength, grant us (a son), the possessor of 
thousands, the owner of cultivated lands, the subduer of foes, the 
riches that may overcome men in battles by strength, as the radiant 
(sun) overspreads the earth by his rays. 

Grant us a Son— The text has no substantive, but the epithets 
evidently allude to some one individual, or, as Sayana understands them, 
to a son, putram, who is metaphorically the riches of a family, and its 


defence against enemies, putrarüpam dhanam, rayir yo Savasd Savasa 
satrün akramet. 


४५८६. दिवो न तुभ्यमन्विन्द्र ampi देवेभिर्घायि विश्व॑म्‌। 
अहिं यद्वृत्रमपो वंट्िवाँसं हन्नुजीषिन्विष्णुना सचान: 112 11 
2. To you, Indra, as to the sun, all strength has verily been 


given by the gods; so that, drinker of the stale Soma, associated 


with Visnu, your mightest slay the hostile Ahi obstructing the 
waters. 


Given by the Gods— Devebhih, Sayana renders by stotrbhih 
observing, stotrailt stuyamánà devatā balavati, a deity becomes strong, 
being praised with praises. 


The Hostile Ahi— Ahim vrtram may be also rendered the destroyer, 
hantáram,Vrtra. 


४५८७. तूर्वनोजीयान्तवसस्तवीयान्कृतत्रह्यन्द्रो वृद्धम॑हाः। 
I ` UNE PU 
राजाभवन्मधुनः सोम्यस्य विश्वासां यत्पुरां दर्लुमाव॑त्‌।।३।। 
3. When Indra, the destroyer, the most mighty, the strongest of 
the strong, the giver of food, the possessor of vast splendour, 


received (the thunderbolt), the shatterer of all the cities (of the 
Asuras), he became the lord of the sweet Soma beverage. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


M 1. ~ 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 20 47 
31 1 Is Seer pe 
४५८८. शतैरपद्रन्पणय इन्द्रात्र दशोणये कवयेऽर्क॑सातो। 
mi e सय पित्वो FE नारिरचीत्कि 
वधैः शुष्णस्याशुषस्य मायाः पित्वो ch चन WI 

4, The Panis, Indra, fled, with hundreds (of Asuras). from the 
sage, your worshipper (and ally) in battle; neither did he, Undra), 
suffer the deceptions of the powerful Susna to prevail over his 
weapons, nor did he (leave him) any of his sustenance. 

From the Sage, your Worshipper-- Dasonaye kavaye; the 
Scholiast asserts that the dative is put for the ablative, and that the terms 
are equivalent to bahu kaviskat medhavinah, from the wise man offering 
many oblations, that is tvatsaháyakutsát, from kutsa, your ally; in verse 8 
of this Sukta, Dasoni occurs, as elsewhere, as the name of an Asura. 

` ` 1 art [ fa cm [ES ! 
४५८९. महा gel अप विश्वायु धायि स्य यत्पतने पादि शुष्णः। 
७ T. | सुर्यस्य सातो 
उरु ष सरथं सारथये करिन्द्रः कुत्साय सूर्यस्य सातौ।।५॥ 

5. When Susna passed away upon the falling of the 
thunderbolt, then the universal strength of the great oppressor was 
annihilated; and Jadra enlarged their common car for (the use of) 
his charioteer Kutsa. for (the sake of) the worship of the sun. 

For the sake of the worship of the Sun— stiryasya sátau, bhahane 
nimittabhite is the explanation of Sayana, and samdnuratham, vistirnam 
akarot is his interpretation of the uru sa saratham kar of the text; Kutsa is 


the reputed author of the hymns to Surya and Usas see vol. I. Sukta 113 
and 115. 


४५९०. प्र श्येनो न मंदिरमंशुम॑स्मै शिरो दासस्य नमुचेर्मथायन्‌। 
प्रावन्नमी साप्यं ससन्तं पृणग्राया समिषा सं स्वस्ति।६।। 

6. And the hawk bore to Indra the exhilarating Soma, when, 
bruising the head of the oppressor Namuci, and protecting the 
slumbering Nami, the son of Sapya, he provided, for the well- 
being (of the sage), riches and food. 

४५९१. वि पिप्रोरहिंमायस्य दूळहाः पुरो वज्रिञ्छवसा न दर्दः। 
सुदांमन्तद्रेकणो अप्रमृष्यमूजिश्चने दात्रं दाशुषे दा:11911 

7. You have scattered by force, wielder of the thunderbolt, the 
Strong cities of the deadly-deluding Pipru; you have given. 
bountiful Indra, uninjurable wealth to rijisvat, the donor of 
Sacrificial gifts. 

Pipru— See vol. I. verse 604. 

४५९२. स वेतसु दशमायं दशोणिं तूतुजिमिन्द्रः स्वभिष्टिसुम्न: | 
आ तुग्रं शश्चदिभं द्योतनाय मातुर्न सीमुर्प सृजा इयध्यें 1८1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
48 Reveda Samhita 


8. Indra, the granter of wished-for felicity, compelled the 
many-fraudulent Etasa and Dasoni, Tütuji, Tugra, and Ibha, 
always to come submissivelv to (the Aajd) Dyotana, as a son 
(comes before a mother). 


४५९३. स ई स्मृधों वनते अप्रतीतो बिभ्र वृत्रहणं गभ॑स्तौ। 
तिष्ठद्धरी अध्यस्तेव गर्ते वचोयुजां वहत इन््र॑मृष्वम्‌।।९।। 
9. Bearing in his hand the foe-destroying thunderbolt, Indra, 
unresisted, demotishing those his adversaries; he mounts his two- 


horse (car), as a warrior (ascends) his chariot; harnessed at a word, 
his steeds, convey the mighty Indra. 
ES 1 | l "n 
४५९४. सनेम तेऽव॑सा नव्य इन्द्र प्र पूरव: स्तवन्त एना यज्ञैः। 
c शारदीर्दर्दधन्दासीं c l 1 | 
सप्त यत्पुरः शर्म शारंदीदद्धन्दासीः पुरुकुत्साय RINTI ।। 

10. (Favoured) by your protection, Indra, we solicit new 
(wealth); by this adoration men glorify you at sacrifices, for that 
you have shattered with your bolt the seven cities of Sarat, killing 
the opponents (of sacred rites), and giving (their spoils) to 
Purukutsa. 

Men— Puravah is the term of the text rendered manusyah in the 
comment, 

Sarat— sarat is said to be the name of an Asura. 


४५९५. त्वं वृध इन्द्र पूर्व्यो भूर्वरिवस्यत्नुशने काव्याय॑। 
== परा नवंवास्त्वमनुदेयं महे पित्रे द॑दाथ स्व॑ नपातम्‌।॥११ i 
11. Desirous of opulence, you, /ndra, have been an ancient 


benefactor of Usanas, the son of Kavi; having slain Navavastva, 


you have given back his own grandson, who was (fit) to be 
restored to the grandfather. 


A धुनिरिन्द्र 1 धुनिमती%णोरप 
४५९६. त्वं धुनिरिन्द्र EU: सीरा न स्रव्॑तीः। 
1 1 m Thi : 
प्र यत्समुद्रमति शूर पर्षि पारयां तुर्वशं यदुं स्वस्ति।१२।। 

12. You, Indra, who make (your enemies) tremble, have 
caused the waters, detained by Dhuni, to flow like rushing rivers; 
So, hero, when, having crossed the ocean, you have reached the 
shore, you have brought over in safety Turvasa and Yadu. 

Samudram atipraparsi, samudram atikramya pratirno, bhavasi, when 
you are crossed, having traversed the ocean, you have brought across 


Turvasa and Yadu, both Standing on the further shore, s 


f amudrapare 
tisthantau apárayah. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


z by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 21 49 
1 [| A ^ ^ 
४५९७. तव॑ ह त्यदिन्द्र विश्वमाजौ सस्तो धुनीचुमुरी या ह सिष्व॑प्‌। 
दीदयदिद्नु टी anf N भीतिरि 1 [| र्त कै 
रीदयदितुभ्यं सोमेंभि: सुन्वन्दभीतिरिध्मभृतिः पक्थ्य१ कै:11१३॥ 
13, All this, Indra, has been your work in war; you have put to 
sleep, (in death), the slumbering Dhuni and Cumuri; and thereupon 


Dabhiti, pouring the libation, preparing the oblation, and supplying 
the fuel, has glorified you with Soma offerings. 


[सूक्त-२१] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र; ९, ११ विश्वेदेवा। 
छन्द- feu] 
४५९८. इमा उं त्वा पुरुतमस्य कारोर्हव्यं वीर हव्या हवन्ते। 
धियो रथेष्ठामजरं नवीयो रयिर्विभूतिरीयते वचस्या।॥१॥ 
1. These earnest adorations of the much-desiring worshipper 
glorify you, hero, Indra, who are adorable; mounted on you car, 


undecaying, ever new, and to whom the wealth (of sacrifice), the 
most excellent opulence, proceeds. 


४५९९. तमु स्तुष vu यो विदानो गिर्वाहसं गीभिर्यज्ञवृद्धम्‌। 
यस्म दिवमतिं महा पृथिव्याः पुरुमायस्य रिरिचे मंहित्वम्‌॥२॥ 

2. I glorify that Jndra who is propitiated by praises, exalted by 
Sacrifices, who knows all things; the magnitude of whom, the 
possessor of various wisdom, exceeds in vastness (that of) heaven 
and earth. 

४६००. स इत्तमोऽवयुनं त॑तन्वत्सूर्येण वयुन॑वच्चकार। 
कदा ते मर्ता अमृत॑स्य धामेयक्षन्तो न मिनन्ति स्वधावः 11३ 11 


i 3. He who made the indistinct, wide-spreading darkness 
distinct with the sun; whenever, possessor of strength, mortals are 
seeking to adore the dwelling of you who are immortal, they harm 
hot (any living being). = 

They Harm not (any living being)— The text has only na minanti, 
na himsanti: the Scholiast supplies the object, kim api pranijatant. 


४६०१. यस्ता चकार स कुह॑ स्विदिन्द्रः कमा जनं चरति कासुं विक्षु 
कस्तें यज्ञो मन॑से शं वराय को अर्क इन्द्र कतमः स gau 
4. What is he, the /ndra who has done these deeds? What 


re a fi >. D 
od does he frequent? Among what people (does he abide)? 
at Worship, Indra, gives satisfaction to your mind? What praise 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


नि”... | 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
50 Rgveda Samhita 


is able to gratify you? which of your invokers (is most acceptable 
to you)? 


1 I 1 
४६०२. इदा हि ते वेविषत: पुराजाः प्रलास आसु: पुरुकृत्सखाय:। 
ये मंध्यमास उत नूतनास उतावमस्य॑ पुरुहूत बोधि।।५।। 

5. Doer of many deeds, these adders, born in former times, 
engaged in sacred rites, have been, as they are now, your friends; 
so have those of mediaeval and those of recent (date); therefore, 
invoked of many, take notice of your (present) humble (adorer). 
४६०३. d पृच्छन्तोऽवरासः पराणि प्रत्ना d इन्र श्रुत्यानु येमुः। 

अर्चामसि वीर ब्रह्मवाहो यादेव विद्य तात्त्वा महान्त॑म्‌।।६।। 

6. Humble (worshippers), adoring him, commemorate, Indra, 
your excellent, ancient, and glorious (deeds); so, hero, who are 
attracted by prayer, we praise you who are mighty, for those great 
actions with which we are acquainted. 

Who are Attracted by Prayer— Brahmavdah is explained 
mantrairvahaniyah, to ve borne or conveyed by prayers. 

४६०४. अभि त्वा पाजों रक्षसो वि त॑स्थे महिं जज्ञानमभि तत्सु तिष्ठ। | 
तव प्रलेन युज्येन सख्या वज्रेण धृष्णो अप ता नुंदस्व।।७॥। 

7. The strength of the Raksasas is concentrated against you; 
bear up well against that mighty manifested (effort); scatter them, 
valiant (Indra), with your old associate, your friend, the 

mie 
thunderbolt. 
४६०५. स तु श्रुंधीन्द्र नूत॑नस्य ब्रह्मण्यतो वीर कारुधाय:। 
vi ह्याड पिः प्रदिवि पितृणां शश्वद्बभूथं सुहव whi ।। 

8. Supporter of (your) worshippers, hero, Indra, listen (to the 

praises) of your present adorer, for you have always attended to 


invocations at sacrifices in ancient times, as the kinsman of our 
forefather. 


As the Kinsman of our Forefathers— Pitrmám āpih, bandhuh: 
according to Sayana the Avigirasas are intended. 


४६०६. प्रोतये वरुणं मित्रमिन्द्र मरुत॑ः कृष्वावसे नो अद्य 
प्र पूषणं विष्णुमग्नि पुरन्धिं सवितारमोषधीः पर्वतांश्च ।॥९॥ 
9. Propitiate today, for our protection and preservation, 


Varuna, Mitra, Indra, and the Maruts, Püsan, Visnu, Agni, of 
many rites, Savita, the herbs, the mountains. 


i CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, 50519 22 51 


1 E] भ्यर्चन्त्यरकै E 
४६०७. इम उ त्वा पुरुशाक प्रयज्या जरितारो अभ्यचन्त्यक:। 
श्रुधी हवमा हुवतो हुवानो न त्वावाँ अन्यो अमृत त्वदस्ति।॥१०॥। 
10. Indra, of great power, and to be devoutly worshipped, 
these your adorers glorify you with hymns; do you, who are 


invoked, hear the invocation of (him) invoking you, for there ts no 
other divinity than you, immortal (/ndra), such as you are. 
1 af x ` IA 
४६०८. नू म आ वाचमुप याहि विद्वान्‌ विश्वेभिः सूनो सहसो यजत्रे:। 
ये अग्निजिह्वा ऋतसाप॑ आसुर्ये मनु चक्रुरुप॑रं uii 
11. Come quickly, Son of strength, you who know (all things), 
upon my prayer; together with all the adorable (divinities); they 
who, with the tongue of Agni. are partakers of the sacrifice, who 
rendered Manu (victorious) over his adversaries. 
Who rendered Manu Victorious, etc.— Ye Manum cakrur uparam 


dasáya satrünám, or dasyindm uparibhavam, who made Manu the Rája- 
rsi, manum rájarsim, over, or the overcomer of enemies, or the Dasyus. 


~| बोधि ` zig 1 Li 
४६०९. स नो बोधि पुरएता सुगेषूत दुर्गेषु पथिकृद्धिदान:। ये अश्रमा स 
उरवो वहिष्ठास्तेभिर्न इन्द्राभि वक्षि AMAIR I 
12. Constructor of paths, who are cognizant (of all things), be 
our preceder, whether in easy or difficult (ways); bring to us food, 


Indra, with those your (steeds), who are unwearied, large, and 
bearers of great burthens. 


[35-33] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- fae] 
४६१०. य एक इद्धरव्यक्वर्षणीनामिन्द्रै तँ गीर्भिरभ्यर्च आभि:। 
a: पत्यते वृषभो वृष्ण्यावान्त्सत्य: सत्वां पुरुमायः सह॑स्वान्‌।।१।। 
lI glorify with these praises, Indra, who alone is to be 
invoked by man; who comes (to his worshippers) the showerer (of 


benefits), the vigorous, the observer of truth, the subduer of foes, 
the possessor of manifold knowledge. the mighty. 


पितरो t 
४६११. तमु न: पूर्वे पितरो नव॑ग्वाः सप्त विप्रासो अभि वाजयन्तः। 
Lc Ree सर्वतेष्ठामद्वोघवाचं क 1 
नक्षद्दाभं ततुरि laard मतिभिः शविष्ठम्‌।।२ l! 
2. To him the seven sages, our ancient progenitors, performing 


the nine days’ rite, were offerers of (sacrificial) food, celebrating 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


A eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
52 Rgveda Samhita 


with hymns the very strong (/ndra), the humiliator of foes, the 
traverser of the heavens, the dweller in the clouds, whose 
commands are not to be disobeyed. 


४६१२. तमीमह इन्द्रमस्य रायः पुरुवीर॑स्य Jed: पुरुक्षो:। 
यो अस्कृधोयुरजरः स्वर्वान्तमा भ॑र हरिवो मादयध्यै।।३।। 

3. We solicit that Indra for wealth, comprehending numerous 
descendants, followers, and much cattle, and which is undisturbed, 
imperishable, and the source of felicity; such riches, lord of steeds, 
bestow upon us to make us happy. 

४६१३. तत्नो वि वोचो यदि ते पुरा चिंज्जरितारं आनशुः सुम्नमिन्द्र। 
कस्ते भाग: किं वयो gu fas: पुरुहूत पुरूवसोऽसुरघ्नः।॥४।। 

4. If, Indra, your worshippers have formerly obtained felicity, 
confer that also upon us; irresistible Indra, subduer of foes, 


invoked of many, abounding in wealth, what is the portion, what 
the offering (due) to you who are the slayer of the Asuras? 


४६१४. तं पृच्छन्ती वज्रहस्तं रयेष्ठामिन्द्रै वेपी वक्व॑री यस्य नू गीः। 
तुविग्राभं तुविकूर्मि र॑भोदां गातुमिषे नक्षते TS Ih 
5. He whose ceremonial and culogistic hymn is 
commemorating Indra, the holder of the thunderbolt, seated in his 
car, the accepter of many, the doer of many great deeds, the 


bestower of strength, proceeds promptly to acquire happiness, and 
— encounters (with confidence) the malevolent. 


४६१५. अया ह त्यं मायया वावृधानं मनोजुर्वां स्वतव: पर्वतेन । 
अच्युता चिद्वीळिता स्वोजो रुजो वि दूळहा धृषता विरप्शिन्‌।।६।। 
6. Self-invigorated Indra, you have crushed by your knotted 
(thunderbolt), quick a thought, that Vitra, growing in strength by 
this cunning; very radiant and mighty (Indra), you have 


demolished by (your) irresistible (shaft) the unyielding, compact, 
and strong (cities of the Asuras). 


Growing in strength by this Cunning— Aya māyayā vavrdhanam, 
by this guile or deception, but what that was is not specified. 


४६१६. तं वों घिया जव्य॑स्या शविष्ठ wet प्रत्नवत्प॑रितंसयध्यैं। 
स नो वक्षदनिमानः सुवहेन्द्रो विश्वान्यति giei 


7. (1 have undertaken) to spread around with a new hymn, as it 
was done of old, (the glory of) you, the ancient and most mighty 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Ic umac— ———— — 


D M 


Digitized by Ae Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sukta 2. 


| 


(Indra); may that Indra, who is illimitable, and is a sure 
conveyance, bear us over all difficulties. 


४६१७. ST TAT Gent पार्थिवानि दिव्यानि दीपयोऽन्तरिक्षा। 
तपां वृषन्विश्वर्त: शोचिषा तान्त्रह्यद्विषे शोचय क्षामपश्च॑।।८।। 
8. Make hot the regions of earth, of heaven, of mid air, for the 
oppressive race (of the Raksasas); showerer (of benefits), consume 


them everywhere with your radiance, make the heaven and the 


firmament (too) hot for the impious. 

The Impious— PBrahmadvise; the Scholiast explains bráhmana- 
dvestre, the hater of Brahmans, but it may also import the enemy or hater 
of the Veda, or of prayer. 


४६१८. भुवो जन॑स्य दिव्यस्य राजा पार्थिवस्य जगतस्त्वेषसन्दृक्‌ । 
धिष्व वज्रं दक्षिण इन्द्र हस्ते विश्वां अजुर्य दयसे वि मायाः।।९॥। 
9. Bright-flaming Indra, you are the king of the people of 
heaven, and of the moving races of earth; grasp in your right hand 


the thunderbolt, wherewith, /ndra, who are beyond all praise, you 
baffles all the devices (of the Asuras). 


४६१९. आ संयतमिन्द्र णः स्वस्ति शत्रुतूर्याय बृहतीममृप्राम्‌। 
यया दासान्यार्याणि वृत्रा करों वज्रिन्तसुतुका नाहुषाणि।॥१० UI 
10. Bring to us, /ndra, concentrated, vast, and unassailable 
prosperity beyond the reach of enemies, and by which, wielder of 
the thunderbolt, you have rendered human enemies, whether Dasas 
Or Aryas, easy to be overcome. 


४६२०. स नो नियुद्धिः पुरुहूत वेधो विश्ववाराभिरा गहि प्रयज्यो। 
न या अदेंवो वरते न देव आभिर्याहि तूयमा मद्रयद्विक्‌ ॥११॥। 
11. Invoked of many, creator, object of sacrifices, come to us 


With your all-admired steeds, whom neither Asura nor deity 
arrests; come with them quickly to our presence. 


[35-33] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- FET] 
४६२१. सुत इत्त्वं निर्मिश्ल इन्द्र सोमे स्तोमे ब्रह्मणि शस्यमान उक्थे। 
यह युक्ताभ्याँ मघवन्हरिंभ्यां Faves बाहवोरिन्द्र यासि॥१॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


s pr o 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
54 Rgveda Samhita 
1. When the Soma juice, Indra, is being effused, the sacred 
hymn chaunted, the prayer recited, be you prepared (to harness 


your horses), or, Maghavan, with your horses ready harnessed, 
come (hither), bearing the thunderbolt in your hand. 


४६२२. यद्वां दिवि पार्ये सुष्विमिन्द्र वृत्रहत्येऽवसि शूरसातौ। 
=f x: |e भ्यद्र॑न्‍्धय x im || 
"gr दक्ष॑स्य बिभ्युषो अबिभ्यदरन्धयः शर्धत इन्द्र दस्यून्‌।।२।। 
2. Or as, although engaged in heaven in the hero-animating 
conflict with foes, you protect the offerer of the libation, and 


humblest, undaunted Indra, the Dasyus, the disturbers of the pious 
and terrified worshipper, (so do you come when the Soma is 
effused). 

(So do you come when the Soma is Effused)— There is no verb in 
the text, but the commentator considers that ‘come’ is brought on from 
the preceding stanza, and adds, when the Soma is poured forth. 


४६२३. पातां सुतमिन्द्रो अस्तु सोमं प्रणेनीरुग्रो जरितारमूती। 
कर्ता वीराय सुष्व॑य उ लोकं दाता वसुं स्तुवते कीरये चित्‌।।३।। 
3. May Indra be the drinker of the effused Soma, he who is the 
fierce conductor of the worshipper to security; may he be the 


donor of the world to the presenter of the libation, the giver of 
wealth to the man who adores him. 


४६२४. गन्तेयान्ति सवना हरिभ्यां बभ्रिर्वज्रं पपिः सोम॑ ददिर्गाः। 
Sn कर्ता वीरं नर्य सर्ववीरं श्रोता हर्व गृणतः स्तोमवाहा:11४॥। 

4, May Indra, with his steeds, come to as many (daily) rites (as 
may be celebrated), bearing the thunderbolt, drinking the Soma, 
bestowing cattle, granting manly and multiplied posterity, hearing 
the invocation of his adorer, and being the accenter of (our) 
praises. 

४६२५. अस्मै वयं यद्वावान तद्ठिविष्म इन्द्राय यो न॑ः प्रदिवो अपस्कः। 
सोमे 5 = अप धनं ए E z 
सुते सोमे स्तुमसि शंसदुक्थेन्द्राय ब्रह्म वर्धनं यथासत्‌। ५॥। 
5. To that Indra, who of old has rendered us good offices, we 


address (the praise) that he is pleased by; we celebrate him when 


the Soma is effused, repeating the prayer that the (sacrificial) food 
(offered) to Indra may be for his augmentation. 


४६२६. ब्रह्माणि हि चकृषे वर्धनानि ताव॑त्त इन्द्र मृतिभिर्विविष्म:। 
सुते सोमे सुतपाः शन्तमानि Wea क्रियास्म वक्ष॑णानि यञञैः।।६॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a — 0 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
wiandala 6, Sükta 24 


6. Since, /ndra, you have made the (sacred) prayers (the 
of) your augmentation, we address such to you, along with our 
praises; may we, drinker of the effused libation, offer gratifying 
and acceptable eulogies with (our) sacrifices. 

al बोधि ` पुरोळाशं . I . गोक्रजीकमिन्द्र I - 
४६२७. स नो बोधि शं रराण: पिबा तु सोमं गोक्रजीकमिन्द्र। 
० बर्हिर्यजमानस्य I an: 1 H 1 AFA, 
एदं बहिर्यजमानस्य सीदोरुं कृधि त्वायत उ लोकम्‌।७॥। 

7. Accept, Indra, who are condescending, our cakes and butter; 
drink the Soma mixed with curds; sit down upon this sacred grass 
(strewn by) the worshipper; grant ample possessions to him who 
depends upon you. 


४६२८. स म॑न्दस्वा ह्यनु जोर्षमुग्र प्र त्वां यज्ञास इमे अश्नुवन्तु। 
प्रेमे हवास: पुरुहूतमस्मे आ त्वेयं धीरवस इन्द्र यम्या:1८ I 
8. Rejoice, fierce Indra, according to your pleasure; let these 


libations reach you; invoked of many, may these our invocations 
ascend to you; may this praise influence you for our protection. 
> A ` aan $ a भोजमिन्द्रम्‌ 1 
४६२९. d d: सखायः सं यथां सुतेषु सोमेभिरीं पृणता भोजमिन्द्रम्‌। 
E सुष्विमिन्द्रो Is 
कुवित्तस्मा असति नो भराय न सुष्विमिन्द्रोऽवसे मृधाति।।९॥। 

9. Friends, when the libations are effused, do you satisfy that 

liberal Indra with the Soma juices; let there be plenty for him, that 


(he may provide) for our nourishment; /ndra never neglects the 
care of him who presents copious libations. 


४६३०. एवेदिन्द्रं; सुते अंस्तावि सोमे भरद्वाजेषु क्षयदिन्मघोन॑ः। 
असद्यथा जरित्र उत सूरिरिन्द्रो रायो विश्ववारस्य दाता॥।१०॥ 

10. Thus has /ndra, the lord of the opulent, been glorified by 
the Bharadvajas, upon the libation being effused, that he may be 
the director of his eulogist (to virtue), that Indra may be the giver 
of all desirable riches. 

ANUVAKA III 
[सूक्त-२४] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- Sal छन्द- त्रिष्‌] 
ऋजीषी 
४६३१. वृषा मद इन्द्रे श्लोक उक्था सचा सोमेषु सुतपा ऋजीषी। 
अर्चत्रयो मघवा नृभ्य॑ उक्थैद्युक्षो राजां गिरामक्षितोतिः।।१॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


n 
I 


Rgveda Samhita 


1. At the rites at which the Soma (is offered) the exhilaration 
(produced) in /ndra is a shower (of benefits to the offerer); so is 
the chaunted hymn with the (recited) prayer; therefore the drinker 
of the Soma, the partaker of the stale Soma, Maghavan, is to be 
propitiated by men with praises; dweller in heaven, he is the lord 
of sacred songs, unwearied in the protection (of his votaries). 


४६३२. ततुरिर्वीरे नर्यो विचेताः श्रोता हवं गृणत उर्व्यूति:। 
वसुः शंसों नरां कारुधांया वाजी स्तुतो विदथे दाति वाज॑म्‌।।२।। 
2. The surpasser (of foes), a hero, the friend of man, the 
discriminator, the hearer of the invocation, the great protector of 
his adorers, the giver of dwellings, the ruler of men, the cherisher 


of his worshippers, the bestower of food, grants us, when glorified 
at the sacrifice, (abundant) sustenance. 


४६३३. अक्षो न चक्रयोः शूर बृहन्प्र तै महा रिरिचे रोद॑स्योः 
वृक्षस्य नु ते पुरुहूत वया eq) तयों रुरुहुरिन्द्र पूर्वी:।।३।। 
3. Mighty hero, by your magnitude, (the extent) of heaven and 


earth is exceeded, as the axle by the (circumference of the) wheels; 


invoked of many, your numerous benefits, Indra, spread our like 
the branches of a tree. 


४६३४. शचीवतस्ते पुरुशाक शाका गर्वामिव wad: सञ्चरंणी:। 
वत्सानां न तन्तय॑स्त इन्द्र दाम॑न्वन्तो अदामान॑ः सुदामन्‌।।४।। 

4. Accomplisher of many acts, the energies of you who arc 
(ever) active (congregate from all directions), like the converging 
tracks of cattle; they are the bonds (of foes), themselves unfettered, 
munificent Indra, like the tethers of (many) calves. 

The Energies— Sakah Saktayah, abilities, energies; the following 
text has no verb; the Scholiast supplies sarvatah samcaranti, come 
together from all sides, and he explains the simile gavam iva srutayah 
Sancaranth by dhentindm margah yatha sarvatra sancdrino bhavanti, as 
the paths of milch kine are everywhere going together. 

Like the Tethers of Many Calv 


es— Vatsanam na tantayah, like long 
ropes used to tie a number of calves 


together, is Sáyana's translation. 
कर्वरमन्यदु 
४६३५. अन्यदद्य कर्वरमन्यदु श्वोऽसच्च सन्मुहुराचक्रिरिन्दर:। 
मित्रो नो अत्र वरुणश्च पूषार्या वशस्य पर्येतास्ति। ५11 


5. Indra achieves one act toady, another tomorrow, evil and 
good repeatedly; may he, and Mitra, Varuna, Püsan, Arya, be on 
this occasion promoters of the desired result. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| SS — उ XA 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 24 
४६३६. वि त्वदापो न पर्वतस्य पृष्टादुक्थेभिरिन्द्रानयन्त यज्ञै:। 
तं त्वाभिः सुष्ट्तिभिर्वाजर्यन्त आजिं न ज॑गुगिर्वाहो Aa 
6. By praises and by sacrifices, Indra, (men) bring down 
they desire) from you, as the waters (descend) from the top of the 


mountain; desirous of food, they approach you, who are accessible 
by praise, with these their eulogies, as (eagerly as) coursers rush to 


battle. 
The verse occurs in the Sdmaveda, 68, but with some variety of 


reading, and is there addressed to Agni. 
४६३७. न यं जर॑न्ति शरदो न मासा न द्याव इन्द्रमवकर्शयन्ति। 
वृद्धस्य चिद्वर्धतामस्य तनूः स्तोमेभिरुक्थैश्व शस्यमाना।।91। 
7. May the person of that vast nan celebrated by praises and 


prayers, ever increase; Indra, whom neither years nor months 
make old, nor days enfeeble. 
४६३८. न वीळवे नम॑ते न स्थिराय न शर्धते दस्युजूताय स्तवान्‌। 
अज्रा इन्द्र॑स्य गिरयश्चिदृष्वा गम्भीरे चिंद्धवति गाधमस्मै। ८ | 

8. Glorified by us, he bows not down to the robust, nor to the 
resolute, nor to the persevering (worshipper) Who is instigated by 
the (irreligious) Dasyus; the lofty mountains are easy of access to 
Indra; to him there is a bottom in the (lowest) deep. 


४६३९. गम्भीरेणं न उरुणामत्रिन््रेो यन्धि सुतपावन्वाजांन्‌। 
स्था ऊ षु ऊर्ध्व ऊती अरिषण्यन्नक्तोर्वयुष्टौ परितकम्यायाम्‌।।९ I 
9. Powerful Indra, drinker of the Soma juice, (actuated) by a 


profound and comprehensive (purpose), grant us food and 
Strength: be ever diligent, benevolent Indra, for our protection by 


day and by night. 
“४६४०. सच॑स्व नायमव॑से अभीकं इतो वा तमिन्द्र पाहि fii 
अमा चैंनमरंण्ये पाहि रिषो मदेम शतहिमाः JAR: Ro li 
10. CS Indra, the EE in battle for his protection; 
defend him against a near (or distant) foe; protect him from an 


enemy, whether in (his) house or in a forest, and may We, blessed 
With excellent male descendants. be happy for a hundred winters. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Po COMM Mme क z 2 


ii eee ee eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
58 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त-२५] 

[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।| 

| | 1 | ध्यमेन्द्र | 
४६४१. या त ऊतिरवमा या परमा या A शुष्मिन्नस्तिं। 

[| z E NI 3 hend [| Ai 
ताभिरू षु वृत्रहत्येऽवीर्न एभिश्च वाजर्महान्न SUI ।। 
1. Powerful Indra, with these (your protections), whether the 

protection be little, great, or middling, defend us for the 


destruction of our foes: supply us, fierce Indra, who are mighty, 
with those viands (that are needed). 


४६४२. आभिः स्पृधो मिथतीररिषण्यन्नमित्र॑स्य व्यथया मन्युमिन्द्र। 
आभिर्विश्वा अभियुजो विषूंचीरार्याय विशोऽव तारीर्दासी:।।२॥। 
2. (Induced) by these (praises), protecting our assailing host, 


| baffle, Indra, the wrath of the enemy: (induced) by them, 
| overthrow, on the part of the Arya, all the servile races everywhere 


abiding. 
४६४३. इन्द्र जामय उत येऽजांमयोऽर्वाचीनासों वनुषो युयुज्रे। 
त्वमेषां विथुरा शवांसि जहि वृष्ण्यानि कृणुही RE: 11३ ।। | 
3. Annihilate, /ndra, the strength of those who, whether 
kinsmen or unrelated, present themselves before us, exerting 


themselves as adversaries: enfecble their prowess, put them to 
m. flight. 


४६४४. शूरो वा शूरं वनते शरीरैस्तनूरुचा तरुषि यत्कृण्वैते। 
तोके वा गोषु तन॑ये यदप्सु वि क्रन्द॑सी उर्वरासु ब्रवैते eI 
4. The hero, (favoured by you), assuredly slays the (hostile) 
hero by his bodily prowess, when, both excelling in personal 


strength, they strive together in conflict, or when, clamorous, they 


dispute for (the sake of) sons, of grandson, of cattle, of water, of 
land. 


४६४५. नहि त्वा शूरो न तुरो न धृष्णुर्न त्वां योधो मन्य॑मानो युयोध॑। 
इन्द्र नकिष्ट्वा प्रत्यस्त्येषां विश्वा जातान्यभ्य॑सि efl ti 
5. But you (no one) resists, neither the hero, nor the fleet 
runner, nor the resolute, nor the combatant confiding (in his 


valour); neither of these, Indra, is a match for you: you are 
superior to all these persons. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 26 
४६४६. स Wem उभयोर्नुम्णमयोर्यदी वेधसं: समिथे हव॑न्ते। 
वृत्रे वा महो नृवति क्षयें वा व्यच॑स्वन्ता यदि वितन्तसैते |॥६ 11 

6. Of both these (disputants), that one acquires wealth whose 
priests invoke (/ndra) at the sacrifice, whether the content emuleus 
for (the overthrow of) a powerful enemy, or for a dwelling peopled 
with dependants. 

४६४७. अर्ध स्मा ते चर्षणयो यदेजानिन्द्र त्रातोत भवा वरूता। 
अस्माकांसो ये नृत॑मासो अर्य इन्द्र सूरयों दधिरे पुरो dte! 

7. Therefore, /ndra, when your people tremble (with fear). 
protect them; be to them a defender: may those who are our chief 
leaders be enjoyers (of your favour), as well as those (your) 
worshippers who have placed us foremost (to perform the 
sacrifice). 

Ix 
४६४८. अनु ते दायि मह इन्द्रियाय सत्रा ते विश्वमनु qaedii 
अनु 1 ` Td देवे ` 
अनु क्षत्रमनु wel यजत्रेन्द्र देवेभिरनु ते जृषहये।८॥। 

8. All (power) has been successively conceded verily to you. 
Indra, who are mighty, for the destruction of the foe: suitable 
vigour, suitable strength in battle (has been given) to you, adorable 
Indra, by the gods. 

४६४९. एवा नः स्पृधः umen समत्स्विन्द्र रारन्धि मिंथतीरदेवीः। 

विद्याम वस्तोरवसा गृणन्तों भरद्वाजा उत त॑ इन्द्र LN I 
& 9. So (glorified by us), /ndra, animate us (to overcome) our 
nemies in battle: overthrow our impious, malevolent (foes), and 


may we, Bhdradvajas, praising you, assuredly possess habitations, 
With (abundant) food. 


[सूक्त २६] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज वार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- Agyi] 
४६५०. श्रुधी न॑ इन्द्र हयूमसि त्वा महो वाज॑स्य सातौ वावृषाणा:। 
सं यद्विशोऽयन्त शूर॑साता उग्रं नोऽवः पार्ये अह॑न्दाः।१॥ 
1. Hear us, Indra, when, offering libations, we call upon you 


for obtain f i i 
A r obtaining abundant food: grant us decided protection when on a 
ture day men are assembling for battle. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


po —————— — 


232 ee eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


60 Rgveda Samhita 
४६५१. त्वां वाजी ह॑वते वाजिनेयो महो वाज॑स्य गध्यस्य सातौ। 
त्वां वृत्रेष्विन्द्र सत्प॑तिं तरतं त्वां चष्टे मुष्टिहा गोषु JAR I 
2. The son of Vajini, (Bharadvaja), offering (sacrificial) 
viands, invokes you for (the sake of) acquiring obtainable and 
abundant food: (he invokes) you, /ndra, the preserver of the good, 
the defender (from the wicked), when enemies (assail him): he 


depends upon you when, lifting up his fist, he is fighting for (his) 
cattle. 


. कविं SESS र्क॑सांतौ ति | l. Al 
४६५२. त्वं कविं चोदयोर्कसातो त्वं कुत्साय शुष्णं दाशुषे वर्क्‌। 
त्वं fud] अमर्मणः परांहन्नतिथिग्वाय शंस्यं करिष्यन्‌।।३।। 


3. You have animated the sage with (the hope of) obtaining 
food: you have cut to pieces Susna for Kutsa, the donor of the 
oblation: you have struck off the head (of Sambara), imagining 

| himself invulnerable, intending to give pleasure to Atithigvan 

Imagining Himself Invulnerable— The text has only amarmanah, 
which the commentator explains marmahinam átmanam manyamánasyd, 
of him thinking himself devoid of any fatally vulnerable part: he applies it 
also to Sambara. 


PPS 1s धमृष्वमावो ध्यः a : 1 
४६५३. त्वं रथं प्र भरो यो युध्यन्तं वृषभं दशद्युम्‌। 
. in | . तुजिं 1 a 
vd qi वेतसवे सचाहन्त्वं तुजि गृणन्तमिन्द्र तूतोः ।।४।। 
4. You have brought to Vrsabha a great war-chariot; you have 
> protected him warring for ten days: you have slain Tugra along 
with Vetasu: you have exalted Tuji glorifying you. 
Vetasave sacá: Vetasu' is in other places the name of an Asura, and it 
may be so here, the fifth case being used for the third, or Vetasund saha; 
but Sayana suggests that it may be the name of a Raja, of whom Indra is 


the ally against Tugra, whom he has slain for the sake of Vetasu; Vrsabha 
is also said to be the name of a prince. 


४६५४. त्वं तदुक्थज्ञमिन्द्र बर्हणा क: प्र यच्छता सहस्रा शूर दर्षि। 
अव गिरेर्दासं शम्बरं हन्प्रावो दिवोदासं चित्राभिरूती।।५।। 


5. Indra, who are the subduer (of foes), you have achieved a 
glorious (deed), inasmuch as you have scattered, hero, the 
hundreds and thousands (of the host of Sambara), have slain the 
slave Sambara (when issuing) from the mountain, and have 
protected Divodása with marvellous protections. 


१. (Ho Ho १०-४.४)। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OO ———— —— 


of 


G Q 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 27 | 
a Le > 31 भीत॑ये 1 
४६५५. त्वं श्रद्धाभिर्मन्दसानः सोमद चुमुरिमिन्द्र सिष्वप्‌। 
5 EE पिठीनसे दशस्यन्पष्टि 1 
त्वं रजिं से दशर सहस्रा शच्या सचाहनू।।६।। 

6. Delighted by libations offered with faith, you have 
consigned Cumuri to the sleep (of death) on behalf of Dabhiti, and, 
bestowing (the maiden) Raji upon Pithinas, you have, by your 
contrivance, destroyed sixty thousand (warriors) at once. 

Pithinas-- Rajim Pithiinase dasasyan: Raji explained by the 
Scholiast etadakhvam kanydm a made called; or it may be a synonym of 
rájyam, kingdom, dominion. 

By your Contrivance— Sacya, which the Scholiast renders 
prajndaya, but it may also import karmand, by act or exploit: as to the 
number of slain, although probably Asuras are intended. yet the 
specification intimates familiarity with numerous armies and sanguinary 
conflicts. 

. 1 . 1 s 
४६५६. अहं चन तत्सूरिभिरानश्याँ तव ज्याय इन्द्र सुम्नमोज: | 
La a वीयलि E Es 1 
त्वया यत्स्तवन्ते सधवीर SA नहुषा शविष्ठ। II 

7. May I, with my fellow-worshippers. obtain that your most 
excellent felicity and vigour, which, most mighty Indra, associate 
of heroes, the pious celebrate (as bestowed) by you, who are the 
humiliator (of foes), the protector of the three (worlds). 


४६५७. वयं ते अस्यामिन्द्र द्युम्नहूतौ wala: स्याम महिन प्रेष्ठो:। 
प्रातर्दनि: क्षत्रश्रीरस्तु श्रेष्ठी घने वृत्राणां सनये धर्नानाम्‌।८ di 
र 8. May we, adorable /ndra, ycur friends, at this your worship. 
offered for (the acquirement of) wealth, be held most dear to you: 


may Ksatrasri, the son of Pratardana, (my patron) by most 


illustrious through the destruction of foes, and the attainment of 
riches. 


[9-29] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र, ८ अभ्यावर्ती चायमान 
(दान स्तुति)। छन्द- feu] 
४६५८. किम॑स्य मदे किम्व॑स्य पीताविन्द्रः किम॑स्य सख्ये च॑कार। 
रणां वा ये निषदि किं ते अंस्य पुरा बिंिद्रे किमु नूर्तनास:11१ ।। 


1. What has Indra done in the exhilaration of this (Somay? 


What has ue TANE TU : 
What has he done on quaffing this (libation)? what has he done in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Le ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
62 Rgveda Samhita 


friendship for this (Soma)? What have former, What have recent 
adorers obtained from you in the chamber of this (libation)? 

According to Sayana the Rsi here expresses his impatience at the 
dealing of the reward of his praises: in the next verse he sings his 
recatation 


४६५९. सदस्य मदे सद्व॑स्य पीताविन्द्रः सदस्य सख्ये चकार। 
रणां वा ये निषदि सत्ते अस्य पुरा बिंविद्रे सदु नूतनासः।।२।। 


2. Verily, in the exhilaration of this (Soma) Indra has done a 
good deed; on quaffing the libation (he has done) a good deed; (he 
has done) a good deed in friendship for this Soma: former as well 
as recent adorers have obtained good of you in the chamber (of the 
libation). 


४६६०. नहि नु d महिमन॑: समस्य न म॑घवन्‌ मधवत्त्वस्य॑ fami 
न राधसोराधसो नूतनस्येन्द्र नकिर्ददृश इन्द्रिय dii 
3. We acknowledge no one, Maghavan, of greatness equal to 
yours, nor one of like affluence, nor one of equally glorifiable 
riches, none has (such as) your power been ever seen (in any 
ether). 
४६६१. एतत्त्यत्त इन्दियमचेति येनाव॑धीर्वरशिंखस्य शेष॑ः। 
वञ्जस्य अत्ते निहतस्य शुष्मांत्स्तनाच्चिंदिन्द्र परमो ददार॑। ४1 
4. Such as your power (is) it has been comprehended (by us) as 


that wherewith you have slain the race of Varasikha, when the 


boldest (of them) was demolished by the noise of your thunderbolt 
hurled with (all your) force. 


Varasikho— The name of an Asura, but the context would rather 

imply the name of a tribe or people. 
धीदिन्द्रो ] शेषों5 ध्यावर्तिनें 
४६६२. वधीदिन्द्रो वरशिखस्य शेषोऽभ्यावर्तिने चायमानाय शिक्षन्‌। 
cd) 1 यद्धरियूपीयायां & = Sem z 
'वृचीवता यद्धरियूपीयायां हन्पूर्वे अर्धे शि Tila N 

5. Favefling Abhydvartin, the son of Cayamana, Indra 
destroyed the race of Varasikha, killing the descendants of Vrcivat 
(who were stationed) on the Hariyupiya, on the eastern part, whilst 
the western (troop) was scattered through fear. 

Abhyavartin, Cayamana— The names of Rajas. Vreivat is the first- 
born of the sons of Varasikha, whence the rest are named: Hariytpiva is 
the name either of a river or a city according to the comment. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EE ae m 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 27 
त्रिंशच्छतँ be. वर्मिर्ण . 1 ० 
४६६३. त्रिंशच्छतं वर्मिण इन्द्र साक यव्यावत्या पुरुहूत श्रवस्या। 
p A a LEN 1 F E I H 1 
वृचीवन्त: शरव पत्यमानाः पात्रा भिन्दाना AAA UR 11 
6. Indra, the invoked of many, thirty hundred mailed 
(were collected) together on the Yavydvati, to acquire glory, but 
the Vrcivats advancing hostilely, and breaking the sacrificial 
vessels, went to (their own) annihilation. 
Thirty Hundred-— Trimsac-chatam varminah: Sáyana makes the 
number one hundred and thirty, tririsada-dhikasatam, of kavacabhrtas, 


wearers of breastplates or armour. 

Yavyávatt- - The same as the //ariyrpiya, according to Sayana. 
४६६४. यस्य गावांवरुषा सूयवस्यू अन्तरू षु चरतो रेरिहाणा। 

स सृञ्ज॑याय तुर्वशं परांदाद्वृचीव॑तो दैववाताय शिक्षन्‌। 1911 

7. He those bright prancing horses, delighted with choice 
fodder, proceed between (heaven and earth), gave up Turvasa to 
Sriijaya, subjecting the Frcivats to the descendant of Devavata, 
(Abhyavartin). 

Sriijaya— There are several princes of this name in the Puránas: one 
of them, the son of //aryasva, was one of the five Páricála princes: the 
name is also that of a people, probably in the same direct‘on, the north- 
west of India, or towards the Punjab: Visnu Purdna, pp.193. 454: what is 
meant by the phrase, he gave up. parddat, Turvasa to Srijaya, may be 
conjectured but is not explained. 


४६६५. द्वयाँ अग्ने रथिनों विंशतिं गा वधूमतो मघवा महयं सम्राट्‌। 
अभ्यावर्ती चायमानो द॑दाति दूणाशेयं दक्षिणा पार्थवार्नाम्‌।८ ui 


8. The opulent supreme sovereign Abhydvartin, the son of 
Caévamadna, presents, Agni, to me two damsels riding in cars, and 
twenty cows: this donation of the descendant of Prthu cannot be 
destroyed. 

__ Two Damsels riding in Cars and twenty Cows- Dvaydn rathino 
vimsati ga vadhümantah is explained by the Scholiast, rathasahiuan 
vadhiimatah striyuktan, dvayan mithunabhitan, being in pairs. having 
Women together with cars: twenty animals, pastum: the passage is obscure 
and might be understood to mean that the gift consisted of twenty pair of 
oxen yoked two and two in chariots: the gift of females to saintly persons. 
however, is nothing unusual: see Mandala 1. Sükta 125. 

This Donation. . . . . Cannot be Destroyed— Dandsevam duksind 
Parthavanam: ndsayitum asakyd is the translation of the first: the last 
implies Abhyavartin, as descended from Prthu, the plural being used 
honorifically: the name of this member of the race of Prthu does not 
Occur apparently in the Puranas. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ho eee Lo 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


64 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त-२८] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- गौएँ; २, ८ इन्द्र अथवा गौएँ। 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌; २-४ जगती; ८ अनुष्टुप्‌।] 
४६६६. आ गावो अग्मन्नुत भद्रमक्रन्त्सीदन्तु AÈ रणयन्त्वस्मे। 
प्रजावतीः पुरुरूपां इह स्युरिन्द्राय पूर्वीरुषसो दुहानाः।।१।। 
1. May the cows come and bring good fortune; let them lic 


down in (our) stalls and be pleased with us: may the many- 
coloured kine here be parboiled milk for Jandra on many dawns. 
I ` | क्षत्युपेद्ददाति i + d 
४६६७. इन्द्रो यज्वने पृणते चं शि न xd मुंषायति। 
भूयों ` | cenit भन्ने 1 ` 
भूयो रयिमिदस्य वर्धयन्नभिन्ने खिल्ये नि दधाति देवयुम्‌।।२।। 
2. Indra grants the desires of the man who offers to him 
sacrifice and praise; he ever bestows upon him wealth, and 
deprives him not of that which is his own: again and again 
increasing his riches, he places the devout man in an inaccessible 
fortress. 
In An Inaccessible Fortress— Abhinna khilye: The first is explained 
Satrubhirabhetavye, not to be breached by enemies: and the second is 
considered the same as khila, commonly, waste land, but here said to 


mean apratihatasthánam, an unassailed or unassailable place, one, rich is 
unapproachable by others, eantumasakye sthale. 


। ` 
= ४६६८. न ता नशन्ति न दभाति तस्क॑रो नासामामित्रो व्यथिरा द॑धर्षति। 
देवाँश्च याभिर्यजते ददाति च ज्योगित्ताभि: सचते गोप॑तिः सह।।३॥। 
3. Let not the Cows be lost: let no thief carry them away: let no 
hostile weapon fall upon them: may the master of the cattle be 


long possessed of those with which he sacrifices, and which he 
presents to the 2005. 


Let not the Cows be lost— Na 14 nasanti: in this we have the third 
person plural of the present tense indicative mood, but Sayana assigns it 
the force of the imperative, na nasyantu: in the following. na dabhati 
taskarah, na vyathir ádadharsati, we have the Vedic imperative, Let. 


अर्वा रेणुर्ककारो 1 b 
४६६९. न ता अर्वी रे अश्नुते न संस्कृतत्रमुपं यन्ति ता अभि। 
fee F AS = = 
उरुगायमभयं तस्य॒ ता अनु गावो मर्तस्य वि च॑रन्ति यज्वनः 1 I 
4. Let not the dust-spurning (war) horse reacn them nor let 


them fall in the way of sacrificial consecration let the cattle of the 
man who offers sacrifice wander about at large and without fear. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ST 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Mandala 6, Sükta 28 65 
Nor let them Fall, Etc.— Na samskrtatram abhyupayantt: Sayana 
interprets vigasanadisamskadisamskaram nábhyupagacchantu, let them 
not go night to the consecration of immolation and the rest, as if he 
understood the Veda to authorize the sacrifice of cattle as victims: but the 
use of metonymy is so common, that perhaps by cows, in this place, we 
are to understand their produce, milk and butter, which are ] 
offered. 
४६७०. गावो भगो गाव इन्द्रौ मे अच्छान्‌ गाव: सोम॑स्य प्रथमस्य॑ भक्षः। 
3 z z 1 1 x A. I E te 
इमा या गाव: स जनास इन्द्र इच्छामीद्धृदा मनसा चिदिन्द्रम्‌। ll 


5. May the Cows be (for our) affluence: may /ndra grant me 
cattle: may the Cows yield the food of the first libation: these 
Cows, oh men, are the /ndra, the Indra whom I desire with heart 
and mind. 

These Cows are the Indra — I rather strong personation, and which 
the Scholiast weakens by understanding it to mean that the cows may be 
considered as Indra, as they nourish him by their milk and butter 
presented in sacrifices: so, perhaps, the first phrase, gave bhayah, which 
he renders mahyari dhanam bhavantu, may they be to me affluence, may 
mean the cows are Bhaga, the impersonations of the deity of good fortune 
and riches. 

४६७१. यूयं गावो मेदयथा कृशं चिंदश्रीरं चित्कृणुथा सुप्रतीकम्‌। 
wd गृहं कृंणुथ भद्रवाचो बृहद्वो वय॑ उच्यते सभासुं॥६॥ 

6. Do you, Cows, give us nourishment: render the emaciated, 
the unlovely body the reverse: do you, whose lowing is auspicious, 
make my dwelling prosperous: great is the abundance that is 
attributed to you in religious assemblies. 

Great is the Abundance that is, Etc.— Brhad vo vaya ucyate 
sabhásu: great of you the food is said in assemblies: Sayana understands 
it rather differently, great is the food given to you in assemblies, it is 
given by all, sarvair diyate ityarthah. 

४६७२. प्रजाव॑तीः सूयव॑सं रिशन्तीः शुद्धा अपः सुप्रपाणे पिबन्तीः। 
मा व॑: स्तेन ईशत माघर्शसः परि वो हेती रुद्रस्य AIH 

7. May you, Cows, have many calves grazing upon good 
pasture, and drinking pure water at accessible ponds: may no thief 
be your master: no beast of prey (assail you), and may the (fatal) 
Weapon of Rudra avoid you. 

Rudra is here said to be the Supreme Being identical with time, 
Kalatmakasya paramesvarasya. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
66 Rgveda Sarhhita 
उपेदमुंपपर्चनमासु 1 गोषूप॑ 
४६७३. उपेदमुपपर्चनमासु गोषूप FATHI 
i रेतस्युपेन्द्र 1 
उप॑ ऋषभस्य रेतस्युपेन्द्र तव॑ e 
8. Let the nourishment of the Cows be solicited, let the vigour 
of the bull (be requested), Indra, for your invigoration. 
Let the Vigour of the Bull, Etc.— That is, the milk and butter which 
are required for /ndra's nutriment are dependent upon the cows bearing 
calves, 


[सूक्त-२९] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र । छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
४६७४. इन्द्र वो नर॑ः सख्याय॑ सेपुर्महो यन्त॑: सुमतयें चकानाः। 
महो हि दाता वज्रहस्तो अस्ति महामुं रण्वमव॑से यजध्वम्‌ ।।१।। 

l. Your priests, (oh worshippers), propitiate Indra for his 
friendship, offering great (praise), and desirous of his favour: for 
the wielder of the thunderbolt is the giver of vast (wealth): worship 
him, therefore, who is mighty and benevolent, (to obtain) his 
protection. 


Offering Great Praise and Desirous of his Favour— Maho yantah | 


sumataye cakanah, may also, according to Sayana, be rendered mahat 
karmma — anutisthantah, performing great 
sabdayantah, soupling or uttering praise. 


४६७५. आ यस्मिन्हस्ते नयाँ मिमिक्षुरा रथे हिरण्यये रथेष्ठा:। 
आ रश्मयो गभस्त्यो: स्थूरयोराध्वन्रश्वासो वृष॑णो युजानाः।।२।। 
2. In whose hand (riches) good for man are accumulated, the 


chariot-mounted in a golden car; in whose arms the rays of light 
(are collected); whose vigorous horses, yoked (to his car, convey 
him) on the road (of the firmament), 

In whose Hand— Yasmin havee ma’ 
to a note cited from Yaska, Nirukta. IETS 
yasmin hantari. 


४६७६. श्रिये ते पादा दुव आ mayest शब॑सा दक्षिंणावान्‌। 
वसानो | ति Rage zT नृतविषिरो 
गी अत्कं सुरभिं दृशे कं स्वर्णं d ब॑भूथ ।।३।। 
3. They offer adoration at your feet to acquire prosperity, for 
you are the overthrower of enemies by (your) strength, the wielder 
of the thunderbolt, the bestower of donations: leader (of rites), you 


are like the rolling sun, Wearing in the sight (of all) a graceful and 
। ever moving form. 


worship, and  stutim 


y also be interpreted, according 
“in whom, the slayer of foes,” 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| T E 5 1. 0 आ 


Ul Sees a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 30 67 
Wearing ...- a graceful and ever moving from—- Vasano atkam 
surabhim: the commentator explains satatagamanasilam | prasastam 
rüpam, sarvesam darsandrtham ácchádayan, putting on, for the sake of 
the secing of all, an excellent form endowed with perpetual movement 


` | ` [ N | 
४६७७. स सोम आमिश्लतमः सुतो भूद्यस्मिन्पक्तिः पच्यते सन्ति धाना:। 
E TENTE, E 
इन्द्र नर: स्तुवन्ता ब्रह्मकारा SFA शसन्ता दववाततमा;।।४।। 

4. That libation is most perfectly mixed when, upon its being 
effused, the cakes are baked, and the barley is friend, and the 
priests, glorifying Indra, offering the (sacrificial) food, and 
reciting holy prayers, are approaching most nigh to the gods. 

^ ts [aay रोद॑सी 
४६७८. न ते अन्तः शव॑सो धाय्यस्य वि तु बांबधे रोदसी feci 
F 1 Teme Tel 7 
आ ता सूरिः पृणति तूतुजानो यूथेवाप्सु समीजमान ऊती।।५।। 

5. No limit of your strength has been assigned; heaven and 
carth are intimidated by its greatness: the pious worshipper, 
hastening (to sacrifice), and earnestly performing Worship. 
gratifics you with the offering, as (the cow-keeper satisfies) the 
herds with water. 

With the Offering— Üti for ütya, is here explained tarpakena havisd, 
with the satisfying oblation. 

एवेदिन्द्र 1 1 ` अस्तूती andi 1 | 
४६७९. : सुहवं ऋष्वो अस्तूती अनूती हिरिशिप्रः सत्वां। 
= F धा. 1 हनति । 
एवा हि जातो अस॑मात्योजाः पुरू च॑ वृत्रा हनति नि दस्यूत्‌॥६॥। 

6. Thus may the mighty Indra be successfully invoked; he, the 
azure-chinned, the giver of wealth, whether by coming or not 
coming (to the sacrifice); and may he who is of unequalled 
strength destroy, as soon as manifested, many opposing (evil 
spirits) and (hostile) Dasvus. s 

The Azure-Chinned— /Jirisipra, haritavarnah Sipro | yasya: he 
whose chin or nose is of a green colour, alluding possibly to the sky. 
considered as a feature of Indra. 

Whether by coming or not coming— 1 
āgamanena, andgamanena, by coming or not coming: 
anagato api stotrbhyo dhanam prayacchati, whether he may 
himself or not, he gives wealth to the praisers. 


[सूक्त २०] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र | छन्द Aga] 
४६८०. भूय इद्वावृधे वीर्यायँ एकों अजुर्यो द॑यते वसूनि। 


Ut anüti are explained 
svayam dgato 
have come 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


DOO o y 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
68 Rgveda Samhita 
रिरिचे | ध॑मिर्दस्य रोदसी | 
प्र रिरिचे दिव इन्द्रः पृथिव्या अर्धमिदस्य प्रति रोदसी उभे।।१।। 

1. Again has Jndra increased (in strength) for (the display of) 
heroism: he, the chief (of all), the undecayable, bestows riches (on 
his votaries): Indra surpasses heaven and carth: a mere portion of 
him is equal to both earth and heaven. 


४६८१. अधां मन्ये बृहदसुर्यमस्य यानि दाधार नकिरा मिनाति। 
दिवेदिव सूर्यो दर्शतो भूद्वि सद्यान्युर्विया सुक्रतुर्धात्‌। 1 

2. I now glorify his vast and Asura-destroying (vigour): those 
exploits that he has determined (to achieve) no one can resist: (by 
him) the sun was made daily visible; and he, the doer of great 
deeds, spread out the spacious regions (of the universe). 

The Sun was made daily Visible— That is, by Jndra’s breaking 
asunder the clouds. 

४६८२. अद्या faq चित्तदपों नदीनां यदांभ्यो अर॑दो गातुमिन्द्र । 
नि पर्वता अद्मसदो न सेदुस्त्वया दृळहानिं सुक्रतो रजासि॥३।। 

3. At present, verily as of old, that act, (the liberation) of the 
rivers, is effective; whereby you have directed them on their 
course: the mountains have settled (at your command) like (men) 
seated at their meals: doer of great deeds, by you have the worlds 
been rendered stationary. 

mese ४४८३. सत्यमित्तन्न त्वावाँ अन्यो अस्तीन्द्र देवो न मर्त्यो ज्यायान्‌। 
1 < R = 
अहन्नहिं परिशयानमर्णोऽवांसृजो अपो अच्छा समुद्रम्‌।॥४।। 
4. Verily it is the truth, Indra, that there is no other such as 


you, no god nor mortal is (your) superior: you have slain Ahi 


obstructing the waters, you have set them free (to flow) to the 
ocean. 


४६८४. त्वमपो वि दुरो विषूंचीरिन्द्रं दुळ्हमरुज: पर्वतस्य। 
1 EUER EES 
राजाभवो aaoi साकं सूर्यं जनयन्‌ RL ५11 
5. You have set the obstructed waters free to flow in all 


directions: you have fractured the solid (barrier) of the cloud: you 


are lord over the people of the world, making manifest together the 
sun, the sky, and the dawn. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


D. 4 eee NES 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 31 69 


[सूक्त- ३१] 

[ऋषि- सुहोत्र भारद्वाज। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌; ४ शक्वरी। | 

४६८५. अभूरेको रयिपते रयीणामा हस्त॑योरधिथा इन्द्र कृष्टी:। 
NN LEN EN E चर्षणयो 
वि तोके अप्सु तनय 4 सूरवाचन्त चर्षणयो faala: 112 1 

1. You, lord of riches, are the chief (sovereign) over riches: 
you hold men in your two hands, and men glorify you with various 
praises for (the sake of obtaining) sons, and valiant grandsons, and 
rain. 

A defi 1 ` t. 
४६८६. त्वद्धियेन्द्र पार्थिवानि विश्वाच्युता चिच्च्यावयन्ते रजाँसि। 
द्यावाक्षामा पर्वतासो वानि विश्व दुळ्हं भयते अज्मन्ना dim 

2. Through fear of you, Indra, all the regions of the firmament 
cause the unfallen (rain) to descend: the heavens, the earth, the 
mountains, the forests, all the solid (universe) is alarmed at your 
approach. 

> saa शुष्णमिन्द्राशुषं > गविष्टौ E 
४६८७. त्वं कुत्सेनाभि शुष्णमिन्द्राशुपं युध्य कुय॑वं 
दशं प्रपित्वे अध सूर्यस्य मुषायश्चक्रमविवे रपाँसि॥३॥ 

3. You. Indra, with Kutsa, have warred against the 
inexhaustible Susna: you have overthrown Kuvava in battle: in 
conflict you have carried off the wheel (of the chariot) of the sun; 
you have driven away the malignant (spirits). 

You have carried off the wheel, Etc.— See vol. I. verse 1368. 

७. N न्थाप्रतीनि ^ 1s 
४६८८. «d शतान्यव शम्बरस्य पुरो जघः दस्यो:। अशिक्षो यत्र 
ˆ शचीवो दिवोदासाय dae jnre Mie 
शच्यां शचीवो स्‌ yad सुतक्रे भरद्वाजाय गृणत 
वसूनि॥४॥। 

4. You have destroyed the hundred impregnable cities of the 
Dasyu, Sambara, when sagacious Indra, you, who are brought by 
the libation, have bestowed in your liberality riches upon Divodása 
presenting to you libations, and upon Bharadvaja hymning your 
praise. 

The Dasyu, Sambara— Sambara is more usually styled an Asura, 
and hence it would appear that Dasyu and Asura are synonymous, so that 
the latter is equally applied 10 the unbelieving or anti-Hindu mortal 
inhabitant of India. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EO =< 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


70 Rgveda Samhita 


४६८९. स संत्यसत्वन्महते रणाय रथमा तिष्ठ तुविनृम्ण भीमम्‌। 
याहि प्रंपथित्नवसोप मद्रिकप्र च॑ श्रुत श्रावय चर्षणिभ्य॑:।।५॥ 


5. Leader of true heroes, possessor of infinite wealth, mount 
your formidable car for the arduous conflict: come to me, pursuer 
of a forward path, for my protection: do you who are renowned, 
proclaim (our renown) amongst men. 


[35-33] 
[ऋषि- सुहोत्र भारद्वाज। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
४६९०. अपूर्व्या पुरुतमान्यस्मै महे वीराय तवसें quu 
विरण्शिने वज्रिणे शन्तमानि वचाँस्यासा स्थविराय तक्षम्‌।॥१॥ 

l. I have fabricated with my mouth unprecedented, 
comprehensive, and gratifying praises to that mighty, heroic, 
powerful, rapid, adorable, and ancient wielder of the thunderbolt. 

This verse occurs Sdmaveda, 322, but the reading of the last portion 
somewhat varies in the printed edition: instead of vacdrisi asa sthavirdya 


taksam, we have vacárisi asmai sthavirva taksuh, they have fabricated 
praises to that ancient, etc 


४६९१. स मातरा सूर्येणा कवीनामवांसयदुजदद्रि गृणान:। 
स्व्राधीभिऋर्कभिर्वावशान उदुस्तियांण्मसृजन्निदान॑म्‌।।२।। 


2. He has obtained the parent (worlds, heaven and earth), with 
the sun, for the sake of the sages, (the Arigirasas), and, glorified 
(by them), he has shattered the mountain: repeatedly wished for by 


his adorers intently meditating (upon him), he has cast off the 
fetters of the kine. 


४६९२. स atrini शश्वन्मितजुभिः पुरुकृत्वा जिगाय। पुर॑ः पुरोहा 
सखिभिः सखीयन्दुळ्हा रुरोज कविभि: कवि: सन्‌।।३।। 


3. He, the achiever of many deeds, together with his 
worshippers ever offering oblations upon bended knees, has 
overcome (the Asuras) for (the rescue of) the cows: friendly with 
his friends (the Avigirasas), far-seeing with the far-seeing, the 
destroyer of cities has demolished the strong cities (of the Asuras). 


४६९३. स नीव्याभिर्जरितारमच्छां महो वार्जेभिर्महरद्धिश शुष्मैं:। 
पुरुवीराभिवृषभ क्षितीनामा गिर्वण: सुविताय प्र याहि t 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


LE ua 33S ४. 


d 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 33 71 


4. Showerer (of benefits), propitiated by praise, come to him 
who glorifies you to make him happy amongst men with abundant 
food, with exceeding strength, and with young (mares) with 
numerous colts. 

With Young Mares with Numerous Colts— Nivydbhih 
puruvirabhih are translated by Sayana, navatarabhin | bahünàm 
virayitribhir-vadavabhih, with very new or young mares bearing male 
progeny of many. 

४६९४. स सर्गेण शव॑सा तक्तो अत्यैरप इन्द्रो दक्षिणतस्तुराषाट्‌। 
इत्था सुंजाना अन॑पावृदर्थं दिवेदिवे विविषुरप्रमृष्यम्‌।॥५॥ 

5. Endowed with natural force possessed of (swift) horses, 
Indra, the overcomer of adversaries, (sets free) the waters at the 
southern (declination): thus liberated the waters expand daily to 
the insatiable goal whence there is no returning. 

The Waters at the Southern Declination— The text has only apo 
daksinatah, the waters from or at the south: there is no verb: Sayana 
considers the daksinayana to be intended the sun's course south from the 


northern limit of the tropics, which, in India, is in fact the commencement 
of the rainy season. 


[3-33] 
[ऋषि- शुनहोत्र भारदाज। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- FET] 
४६९५. य ओजिष्ठ इन्द्र d सु नों दा मर्दों वृषन्त्स्वभिष्टिदास्वान्‌। 
सौवंश्व्य यो वनवत्स्वश्वो वृत्रा समत्सु सासहदमित्रान्‌।॥१ l 
l. Showerer (of benefits), Indra, grant us a son who shall be 
Most vigorous, a delighter (of you by praise), a pious sacrificer, à 


liberal giver, who, mounted on a good steed, shall overthrow 
numerous good steeds, and conquer opposing enemies in combats. 


४६९६. त्वां ही$ न्द्रावसे विवाचो हव॑न्ते चर्षणयः शूरसातौ। 
त्वं विप्रेभिर्वि पर्णाँरशायस्त्वोत इत्सनिता वाजमर्वी NR t 
2. Men of various speech invoke you, Indra, for their defence 


in War: you, with the sages, (the Arigirasas), have slain the Panis: 
Protected by you, the liberal (worshipper) obtains food. 

a Men of Various Speech— Vivacah, the commentator renders 
vividhastutirtipa vdco yesam, they of whom the speech has the form of 
many kinds of praise, which meaning he assigned to the same word in the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
72 Rgveda Samhita 


first verse of Sukta XXXI; he is probably right, although the more simple 
explanation would be, “01 various speech.” 


४६९७. त्वं ताँ इन्द्रोभयाँ अमित्रान्दासा वृत्राण्यार्या च RI 
वधीर्वनेंव सुधितेभिरत्कैरा पृत्सु दर्षि नृणां नृतम।॥।३॥। 
3. You, hero, Indra, destroyed both (classes of) enemies, 
(both) Dasa and Arya, adversaries: chief leader of leaders, you cut 


your foes in pieces in battles with well-plied weapons, as (wood- 
cutters fell) the forests. 
४६९८. स त्वं न॑ इन्द्राकवाभिरूती wal विश्वायुरविता वृधे भू:। 

स्वर्षाता यद्ध्वयामसि त्वा युध्य॑न्तो नेमधिता पृत्सु vitii 

4. Do you, Indra, who are all-pervading, be a friend, and a 
protector with irreproachable protections for our prosperity; when 
warring in number-thinning conflicts, we invoke you for the 
acquirement of wealth. 

When Warring in number-thinning Conflicts— Yudhyanto 
nemadhitd prtsu, nema is synonymous with ardha, a half, or here, some, 
katipayah purusd dhiyanta esu, in those battles, prtsu, in which some men 
are engaged or killed; the first case plural, nemadhitd, or, properly, 
nemadhitaya, being used for the seventh case plural. 

For the Acquirement of Wealth— Svarasátà is explained susthu 


araniyam dhanam tasya sambhajandrtham, very precious wealth for the 
sake of enjoying it, that is, by the spoils of the enemy. 


४६९९. नूनं न॑ इन्द्रापरायं च स्या भवां मृळीक उत नो अभिष्टौं। 
इत्था गृणन्तो महिनंस्य शर्मन्दिवि ष्याम पार्य गोषत॑मा:।।५॥ 
5. Do you, Indra, now and at (all) other times be verily ours; 
be the bestower of happiness according to our condition: and in 


this manner, worshipping at dawn, and glorifying you, may we 


abide in the brilliant and unbounded felicity of you who are 
mighty. 


* 


Worshipping at Dawn— Gosatama is left unexplained by Sayana, 
unless he intends-to explain it by vartamdnd bhavema, may we be 
present, but this may merely express they sydm of the text, may we be, 


Or may we abide: the word is unusual, and the rendering is conjectural 
only, one sense of gosa being the dawn. 


[सूक्त- २३४] 
[ऋषि- शुनहोत्र भारदाज। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- freu] 
४७००. सं च त्वे जग्मुर्गिर इन्द्र पूर्वीच च त्वद्यन्ति विभ्वों मनीषाः। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


= 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 34 ES 
> 1 "hub. c 1 E 
पुरा नूनं च॑ स्तुतय ऋषीणां पस्पृध्र इन्द्र अध्युंकथार्का॥।१॥। 

1. Many praises, Indra, are concentrated in you; from you 
abundant commendations diversely proceed; to you, formerly and 
at present, the praises of the sages, their prayers and hymns, vie (in 
glorifying) Indra. 

From you Abundan commendations diversely proceed— Vica 


tvad yanti manisáh, tvattah stotrndm approbations of the praisers 
variously go forth, is the explanation of Sayana. 


^ 1 t x | I यज्ञे 
४७०१. पुरुहूतो य: पुरुगूत Bal एक: पुरुप्रशस्तो अस्ति यञ्ञेः। 
` I~ xl ~| EX 
रथो न महे शवसे युजानो३ स्माभिरिन्द्री अनुमाद्या भूत्‌॥२॥ 

2. May that Indra ever be propitiated, by us who is the invoked 
of many, mighty and chief, especially honoured by sacrifices, and 
to whom, as to a conveyance, we are attached for (the attainment 
of) great strength. 

७ हिंसन्ति 1 AN वाणीरिन्द्रं ७ र्धयन्ती 
४७०२. न यं हिंसन्ति धीतयो न वाणीरिन्द्रं नक्षन्तीदभि वर्धयन्ती:। 
y Li > L गिर्वणसं spare: ios 
यदि स्तोतारं: शतं यत्सहस्रं गृणन्ति गिर्वणसं श॑ तदस्म I 

3. All praises contributing to his exaltation proceed to Indra, 
whom no acts, no words can harm, since hundreds and thousands 
of adorers glorify him who is entitled to praise, and so afford him 
gratification. 

1 i 3id | न्ययामि सोम॑ 
४७०३. अस्मां wka: र्चेवं मासा मिमिक्ष इन्द्रे न्ययामि win: 
Eun 1 UE T धुर्हवंनानि 
जनं न धन्वन्नभि सं यदाप: सत्रा वावृधु यज्ञ Irs! 

4. The mixed Soma juice has been prepared for Indra, (to be 
offered) on the day (of sacrifice), with reverence-like adoration, 
when praises, together with offerings, yield him increase, as when 
Water (revives) a man in a desert waste. i : 

. With Reverence-like Adoration— Divyarceva masa is explained 
divase sautye ahani arcana-sádhanena stotreneva mánena, with respect, 
like praise, the instrument of worship on the day for the libation; the 
Scholiast cites in illustration a mantra beginning Vrtraghna, slayer of 
Vrtra, etc., but he also proposes another explanation, divi dyotake. arceva 
arkah, sürya iva, másá-másas candramah sa iva, which, with the 
following word, mimiksa, explained vrsiyudakünám sekta, the sprinkler of 
Fain-waters, is applied to Indra, va Indro vartate, that Indra who is the 
Shedder of rain, like the sun and the moon in heaven: this 15 scarcely mote 
Satisfactory than the interpretation first given, although that is not very 
explicitly. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


po हा. = 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
74 Rgveda Samhita 
४७०४. अस्मां एतन्मह्यड्भूषम॑स्मा Sala स्तोत्रं मतिभिरवाचि। 
असद्यथां महति वृत्रतूर्य इन्द्र विश्वायुरविता वृधश्च॑।।५॥। 
5. To this Indra has this earnest eulogy been addressed by the 


devout, in order that the all-pervading Indra may be our defender 
and exalter in the great conflict with (our) foes. 


[सूक्त-२५] 
[ऋषि- नर भारद्वाज। देवता- इन्द्र । छन्द- AE] 
४७०५. कदा भुवत्रथक्षयाणि ब्रह्म कदा स्तोत्रे सहरूपोष्य TT: 1 
कदा स्तोमं वासयोऽस्य राया कदा धिय॑: करसि वाज॑रत्नाः ।।१।। 
l. When may our prayers (be with you) in your chariot? When 
will you grant to your adorer the (means of) maintaining 


thousands? When will you recompense my adoration with riches? 
When will you render sacred rites productive of food? 


४७०६. कर्हि स्वित्तदिन्द्र यन्नृभिरनन्वीरैवीरान्नीव्ठ्यासे जयाजीन्‌। 
्रिधातु गा अधि जयासि गोष्विन्द्र gi स्वर्वद्धेह्यस्मे।॥२ ।। | 
2. When, Indra, will you bring together leaders with leaders, 
heroes with heroes, and give us victory in battles? When will you 
conquer from the enemy the threefold-food-supplying cattle? 
(When will you grant) us, Indra, diffusive wealth? 


Threefold-food-supplying Cattle— Tridhatu gáh: cows having 
three elements of nutriment, as a milk, curds and butter. 


४७०७. करहि स्वित्तदिन्द्र यज्जरित्रे विश्वप्सु ब्रह्म॑ कृणव॑: शविष्ठ। 
कदा धियो न नियुतों युवासे कदा गोम॑घा हनानि गच्छाः।।३।। 
3. When, most vigorous Indra, will you grant your worshipper 


that food which is all-sufficing? When will you combine (in 


yourself) worship and praises? When will you render oblations 
productive of cattle? 


४७०८. स गोम॑घा जरित्रे adaa वाजंश्रवसो अधिं धेहि yet: 
पीपिहीष: सुदुघामिन्द्र धेनु भरद्वाजेषु सुरुचो ररच्याः।।४॥ 
4. Grant, Indra, to your adorer (abundant) food, productive of 


cattle, pleasant with horses, and renowned for vigour: multiply 


nourishment, and (cherish) the kine easily milked, and render them 
so that they may be resplendent. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—— 85 |m— — dÀ— € अय 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 36 75 
. 1 
४७०९. तमा नूनं वृजनमन्यर्था चिच्छूरो यच्छक्र वि दुरो गृणीषे। 
enti 1 धेनोर्राङ्गिरसान्त्रह्मणा 1 E 
मा fr शुक्रदुघस्य धेनोराङ्गिरसानत्रह्मणा विप्र जिन्व1५॥ 

5. Direct him who is actually our adversary into a different 
(course): mighty Jndra, who are a hero, the destroyer (of enemies), 
therefore are you glorified: never may I desist from the praise of 
the giver of pure (gifts): satisfy, sage Indra, the Arigirasas with 


food. 

Into a different Course— That is, consign him to death, a course 
different from that of living beings. 

Never may I desist from the Praise— Ma niraram sukradughasya 
dhenoh is, literally, may 1 not cease from the cow the yielder of pure 
milk; but dhenoh is interpreted by the Scholiast in this place vacas, 
stotrat, from praise; or he wishes as an alternative, may I never depart 
from the milch cows given, Indra, by you. 


[सूक्त-३६] 
[ऋषि- नर भारद्वाज। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द-त्रिष्ठुप्‌।] 
४७१०. सत्रा मदांसस्तव॑ विश्वजन्याः सत्रा रायोऽध ये पार्थिवासः। 
j सत्रा वाजानामभवो विभक्ता यद्देवेषु धारय॑था असुर्यम्‌॥।१॥ 
1. Truly are your exhilarations beneficial to all men: truly are 
the riches which exist on earth (beneficial to all men): truly are 


you the distributor of food; wherefore you maintain vigour 
amongst the gods. 


४७११. अनु प्र येजे जन ओजो अस्य सत्रा द॑धिरे अनु वीर्याय। 
स्यूमगृभै दुधयेऽर्वते 4 क्रतुं वृज्ञन्त्यपि FRAIR H 
2. The worshipper praises especially the strength of that Indra, 
verily they rely upon him for heroic deeds: they offer sacrifices to 


him as the seizer of an uninterrupted series of foes, their assailant, 


their subduer, and also for the destruction of Vrira. 

: Seizer of an Uninterrupted Series of Foes— Syümagrbhe, syütàn 
avicchedena vartamánan satrün grhnate, to him who seizes enemies 
being lines or threads without interruption. 


5 Li Li 
४७१२. तं सध्रीचीरूतयो वृष्ण्यानि पौंस्यानि fad: सस्भुरिन्द्रम्‌। 
co T [us विंशन्ति 
समुद्रं न सिन्ध॑व उकथशुष्मा उरुव्यचंसं गिर आ TEAT 
3. The associated Maruts, heroic energies, virile strength, and 
the Niyut steeds, attend upon Indra, and, praises powerful in sacred 
Song centre in him as river flow into the ocean. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


76 Rgveda Samhita 
४७१३. स रायस्खामुप॑ सृजा गृणानः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य त्वमिन्द्र aed: 
पतिर्बभूथासंमो जनांनामेको विश्वस्य भुवनस्य TA N 

4. Glorified by us, Indra, let flow the stream of much 


delighting, home-conferring affluence, for you are the unequalled 
lord of men, the sole sovereign of all the world. 
४७१४. स तु श्रुधि श्रुत्या यो दुवोयुद्यौर्न भूमाभि web अर्यः। 

असो यथां नः शवसा चकानो युगेयुंगे वय॑सा चेकिंतानः।।५।। 

5. Hear, Indra, (the praises) that may be heard (by you), you, 
who are gratified by our adoration, and, like the sun, (prevail) over 
the ample riches of the enemy: endowed with strength, being 
glorified in every age, rendered comprehensible by (sacrificial) 
food, be to us no other (than such as you have been). 

Like the Sun, Prevail, etc.— Dyaur-na bhiimabhi ráyo aryah; arer 
dhanani bahutarani sürya iva abhibhavasi: the prefix abhi, as is frequent 
in the Veda, being put for the compound verb abhibhu. 

By to us no other— Aso yathā nah is, literally, not he as to us: 
Sayana, to make this intelligible, says, yena prakdrena asmákam 


asddhdrano asi sa tathd sah sydh, in what manner you are especially of 
exclusively ours, so may you be that, our property or friend. 


[यूक्त-३७] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- AE] 
४७१५. अर्वाग्रथं विश्ववारं त उग्रेन्द्र युक्तासो हर॑यो वहन्तु। 
कीरिश्चिद्धि त्वा हवते स्वर्वानधीमहिं सधमादस्ते अद्य ।॥१॥ 
1. Fierce Indra, let your harnessed steeds bring down your all- 
desired chariot: your devoted adorer verily invokes you: may we 


today, partaking of your exhilaration, increase toady (in 
prosperity). 


४७१६. प्रो द्रोणे RA: कर्माग्मन्पुनानास ऋज्य॑न्तो अभूवन्‌। 
zi 
इन्द्र नो अस्य पूर्व्यः पपीयादद्युक्षो मद॑स्य सोम्यस्य राजा॥२॥ 
2. The green Soma juices flow at our sacrifice, and purified, 


proceed direct into the pitcher: may the ancient illustrious Indra, 


the sovereign of the exhilarating Soma libation, drink of this our 
offering. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 38 77 
४७१७. आसस्राणासं: शवसानमच्छेन्द्रं सुचक्रे रथ्यासो Aa: | 
1s NOR ` i ` 
अभि श्र्व ऋज्यन्तो वहयुर्नू faq वायारमृत वि दस्येत्‌। Ril 

3. May the everywhere-going, straight-proceeding, chariot- 
bearing steeds, bring the mighty /ndra in his strong-whecled car to 
our rite: let not the ambrosial Soma waste in the wind. 

Let not the Ambrosial Soma waste in the Wind--- The Soma Juice, 
it is said, if allowed to remain some time in the vessel containing it, may 
be dried up by the air: /ndra is therefore urged to drink it before it 
evaporates. 

४७१८. वरिंष्टो अस्य दक्षिणामियर्तीन्द्रो मघोनों तुविकूर्मितम:। 
ययां वज्रिवः परियास्यंहो मघा च॑ धृष्णो दय॑से वि सूरीन्‌। re 

4. The very strong Indra, the performer of many great deeds, 
instigates the donation of this (institutor of the ceremony) amongst 
the opulent, whereby, wielder of the thunderbolt, you remove sin, 
and, firm of purpose, bestow riches upon the worshippers. 

४७१९. इन्द्रो वाज॑स्य स्थविरस्य दातेन्द्रो गीर्भर्वर्धतां वृद्धमहा: । 

नदर वृत्रं हनिष्ठो अस्तु सत्वा ता सूरिः पृणति तूतुजानः।।५।। 
3 5. Indra is the donor of substantial food; may the very 
illustrious /ndra increase (in glory) through our praises: may 
Indra, the destroyer (of menies), be the especial slayer of Vrtra: 


may he, the animator the quick-mover, grant us those (riches 
which we desire). 


[सूक्त- ३८] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- FET 
४७२०. अपादित sd नश्चित्रतमी महीं भर्षद्द्युमतीमिन्द्रहतिम्‌। 
पन्य॑सीं धीतिं दैव्य॑स्य यामञ्जन॑स्य रातिं व॑नते सुदानु:11१1 
1. May the most marvellous ine drink from this (our cup): 
may he acknowledge our earnest and brilliant invocation: may the 


munificent (Indra) accept the offering and the praiseworthy 
adoration at the sacrifice of the devout worshipper. 


| ४७२१. दूराच्चिदा व॑सतो अस्य कर्णा घोषादिन्ट्रस्य तन्यति ब्रुवाण:। 
एयमेनं देवहूतिर्ववृत्यान्मद्र्य गिन्द्रेमियमूच्यमाना N 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


po ` _` ००२१२; 7 २ २ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


78 Rgveda Samhita 
2. Reciting (his praise, the worshipper) calls aloud, that by the 
sound he may reach the ears of Indra, although abiding afar off: 


may this invocation of the deity, inducing, him (to come), bring 
Indra to may presence. 


४७२२. तं वो धिया परमयां पुराजामजरमिन्द्रमभ्यनृष्यर्के:। 
ब्रह्मा च गिरो दधिरे सम॑स्मन्महाँश्च स्तोमो अधि वर्धदिन्द्रे॥३ ui 
3. I glorify you with hymns and with pious worship, the 


ancient undecaying /ndra, for in him are oblations and praises 


concentrated, and great adoration is enhanced (when addressed to 
him). 


४७२३. वर्धाद्यं यज्ञ उत सोम इन्द्रं वर्धाद्रह्म PR उक्था च मन्म। 
वधहिनमुषसो यामन्रक्तोर्वर्धान्मासा: शरदो द्याव FA Y l 
4. Indra, whom the sacrifice, whom the libation exalts, whom 


the oblation, the praises, the prayers, the adoration exalt, whom the 
course of day and night exalts, whom months, and years, and days 


exalt. 
४७२४. एवा जज्ञानं सह॑से असामि वावृधानं राध॑से च श्रुताय॑। 
महामुग्रमव॑से विप्र नूनमा विवासेम वृत्रतूर्येषु।1५।। 
5. So, wise Indra, may we today propitiate you who are 
manifested, to overcome (our foes), you who are greatly 


augmenting, mighty and free, for (the sake of) wealth, fame, and 
protection, and for the destruction of (our) enemies. 


[3-38] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।| 
1 fer ` x 
४७२५. मन्द्रस्य कवेर्दिव्यस्य वहेविप्रंमन्मनो वचनस्य मध्व॑;। 
i IR TES 
अपां नस्तस्य॑ सचनस्य देवेषों युवस्व गृणते गोअंग्रा:।।१।। 

1. Drink, Indra, of that our sweet, exhilarating, inspiring, 
celestial, fruit-yielding Soma, commended by the wise, and 
entitled to praise and preparation; bestow upon him who glorifies 
you, divine (Indra), food, the chiefest of which is cattle. 

Sweet, exhilarating, etc.— Several of the epithets in the text are 
unusual, and, agreeably to European notions, very inapplicable to a 


beverage; they are, severally, mandra, exhilarating, kavi, explained 
vikranta, heroic; divya, divine; vahni rendered vodha, bearing fruit; 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 39 79 


vipramanman, of which sages are the praisers, stotdrah; vacana laudable, 
stutya; sacana 10 be served or honoured, sevya. 

The Chiefest of which is Cattle— Iso yuvasva gyrate go agrah is 
explained annam sanyojaya, combine or supply food to the praiser: 
yásám isam gávo agre, of which viands, cows are in the first place; is this 
to be understood literally? And were cows, in the time of the Vedas, a 
principal article of food? Of course, a Brahman would interpret it 
metonymically, cows being put for their produce, milk and butter: Sayana 
is silent, but there does not seem to be any thing in the Veda that militates 
against the literal interpretation. 

४७२६. अयमुंशानः पर्यद्रिमुला ळतधीतिभिक्रतयुग्युजान:। 
रुजदर्रुग्णं वि वलस्य सानुं पर्णीर्वचोभिरभि योधदिन्द्रः।।२।। 

2, Determined (to recover) the cattle hidden in the mountain, 
associated with the animated by (their) veracious (praise), this 
(Indra) fractured the infrangible rock of Bala, and overwhelmed 
the Panis with reproaches. 

४७२७. अयं द्योतयदद्युतो व्यशक्तून्दोषा वस्तो: शरद्‌ इन्दुरिन्द्। 
इमं केतुम॑दधुर्नू चिदहां शुर्चिजन्मन SAFRI II 

3. This Soma, Indra, (quaffed by you), has lighted up the 
unlustrous nights, and days and nights, and years: (the gods) of old 
have established it as the ensign of days, and it he made the dawns 
generated in light. 

This Soma— The text has ayam Induh, which, as a synonym of 
Soma, implies both the moon and the Soma juice: it is the former that is 
here held in veiw at the expense of consistency: according to Sayana, 
Soma is here candrátmá nabhasi vartamánah, the same as the moon 
present in the sky, and as, candragatyadhinatvat tithivibhagah, the 
divisions of lunar days are dependent upon the motions of the moon, it 
may be said to be the cause of days, weeks, months and years, the first 
term, aktun, is said by the Scholiast to imply fortnights, months and years, 
or the longest periods of time: the phrase in the parenthesis is not in the 
text, but is supplied by the Scholiast, tvayd piyamanah, to be drunk by 
you, but it is justified by the pronoun ayam, this which could not apply as 
something present to the moon. 


४७२८. अयं रोचयदरुचो रुचानोईयं वासयदव्यूई तेन पूर्वी:। 
अयमीयत ऋतयुग्भिरश्वैः स्वार्वदा नाभिना चर्षणिप्रा:। ४11 


4. This radiant (Indra) has illumed the non-radiant (worlds): he 
has pervaded many dawns with true lustre the benefactor of men 
moves in (a chariot) drawn by horses, harnessed by praise, laden 
With riches. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


po 0 00 NN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


80 Rgveda Samhita 


४७२९. नू गृणानो गृणते प्र॑त्न राजन्निष॑ः पिन्व वसुदेयाय पूर्वीः। 
अप ओष॑धीरविषा वनानि गा अर्वतो नृनृचसें रिरीहि।।५॥ 
5. Sovereign of old, do you, when glorified, bestow upon him 
who praises you, and to whom affluence is due abundant food: 


grant to the worshipper water, plants, innoxious woods, cattle 
horses, and men. 


[सूक्त-४०] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- FET] 
४७३०. इन्द्र पिब तुभ्यं सुतो मदायाव॑ स्य हरी वि मुंचा सखांया। 
उत प्र गाय गण आ निषद्याथां यज्ञाय॑ गृणते वयो धाः।।१।। 
1. Drink, Indra, (the Soma) that is effused for your 


exhilaration: stop your friendly steeds: let them loose; sitting in 
our society, respond to our hymns; give food to him who lauds and 
worships you. 
Sitting in our Society, respond to our Hymns— Uta pra gaya gane 
à nisadya: pragáya is explained asma@bhih krtam stotram upaslokaya, 
return verses to the praise made by us. 
| | | अपिंबो 
n. ४७३१. अस्य fus यस्य॑ जज्ञान इन्द्र मदाय क्रत्वे अपिबो विरप्शिन्‌। 
1 अद्विरिन्दुं समह्यन्पीतये समस्मै 
तमु ते गावो नर आपो $ मीतये IRI 
2. Drink, Indra, of this (libation), of which you, mighty one, 
have drunk as soon as born, for excitement to (great) deeds: that 


Soma juice which the kine, the priests, the waters, the stones, 
combine to prepare for your drinking. 


४७३२. समिद्धे अग्नौ सुत इन्द्र सोम आ त्वां वहन्तु हर॑यो वहिंष्ठा:। 
त्वायता मनसा जोहवीमीन्द्रा याहि सुविताय॑ महे न॑:।।३॥ 
3. The fire is kindled; the Soma, Indra, is effused let your 


vigorous horses bring you hither: I invoke you, Indra, with a mind 
wholly devoted to you; come for our great prosperity. 


४७३३. आ याहि शश्वंदुशता यंयाथेन्द्र महा मन॑सा सोमपेयम्‌। 
उप ब्रह्माणि शृणव इमा नोऽथां ते यज्ञस्तन्वे$ वयो oT I 


4. You have ever gone (to similar rites): come now with a 
great mind disposed to drink the Soma: hear these our praises: may 


the worshipper present to you (sacrificial) food for (the 
nourishment of) your person. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 41 81 | 
४७३४. यदिंन्द्र दिवि पार्ये यदृधग्यद्वा स्वे सदने यत्र वार्सि। 
अतों नो यज्ञमव॑से नियुत्वान्त्सजोर्षा: पाहि गिर्वणो मेरुद्धि: | I 
5. Whether, Indra, you abide in the distant heaven, in any | 
other place, or in your own abode, or wheresoever (you may by), | 
from thence do you, who are propitiated by praise, putting to your 


steeds, protect, together with the Maruts, well pleased, our 
sacrifice, for our preservation. 


[सूक्त-४१] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्ठुप्‌।] 
४७३५. अहेळमान उप॑ याहि यज्ञ qui पवन्त इन्दवः सुतास:। 
गावो न वंज्रिन्तस्वमोको अच्छेन्द्रा गहि प्रथमो यज्ञियानाम्‌॥१॥ 
1. Unirascible (Indra), come to the sacrifice; the effused juices 
are purified for you: they flow, thunderer, (into the pitchers), as 
cows go to their stalls; come, Indra, the first of those who are to be | 
worshipped. | 
४७३६. या तें काकुत्सुकृता या वरिष्ठा यया शश्वत्पिबंसि मध्व॑ ऊर्मिम्‌। | 
तयां पाहि प्र ते अध्वर्युरस्थात्स d वजर वर्ततामिन्द्र गव्युः॥२॥ 
2. Drink, Indra, with that well-formed and expanded tongue 
wherewith you ever quaffest the juice of the sweet (Soma); before 


you stands the ministrant priest; let your bolt, /ndra, designed (to 
recover) the cattle, be hurled (against your foes). 


४७३७. एष द्रप्सो वृंषभो विश्वरूप इन्द्राय वृष्णे समकारि सोम: | 
AR is = z F = 1 
एतं पिंब हरिवः स्थातरुग्र यस्येशिषे प्रदिवि यस्ते अन्नम्‌॥३॥ 

3. This dropping, omniform Soma, the showerer (of benefits), 
has been duly prepared for Indra, the showerer (of rain): lord of 
steeds, ruler over all, mighty (Indra), drink this over which you 
have of old presided, which is your food. 

४७३८. सुत: सोमो असुतादिन्द्र वस्यानयं श्रेयाञ्चिकितुषे रणाय। 

एतं तितिर्व उप॑ याहि यज्ञ तेन विश्वास्तविंषीरा पुणस्व।1४11 
_ 4. The enused Soma, Indra, is more excellent than that which 
IS not effused: it is better (qualified) to give pleasure to you, who 


are capable of judging: overcomer (of enemies), approach this 
Sacrifice, and thereby perfect all your powers. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


po a n id 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


82 Rgveda Samhita 


| त्वेन्द्र याह्यर्वाङरं सोमस्तन्वं I 
४७३९. ह्वयामसि त्वेन्द्र रं ते सोमस्तन्वे ei 
शत॑क्रतो 1 Ror | | 
शतक्रतो मादयस्वा सुतेषु प्रास्मा अव पृतनासु प्र विक्षु। 1५ ।। 

5. We invoke you, Indra, come down: may the Soma be 
sufficient for (the satisfaction of) your person: exult Satakratu 
with the libations, defend us in combats, and against the people. 

Defend us in combats and against the people— Pra asmán 
avaprtanásu pra viksu: pra is put for prasaks, especially protect us, na 
kevalam sangramesu kintu sarvàsu prajásu, not only in wars, but in or 


against all people this looks as if the religious party had opponents 
amongst the people in general. 


[सूक्त-४२] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- अनुष्टुप्‌; ४ - बृहती।] 
४७४०. प्रत्यस्मै पिपीषते विश्वानि विदुषे भर। 
अरङ्गमाय जग्मयेञ्पश्चाद्दघ्वने ARI UI 


1. Offer, (priests), the libation to him who is desirous to drink; 
who knows all things; whose movements are all-sufficient; who 


goes readily (to sacrifices); the leader (of holy rites), following no 
one. 


Samavyeda, 352 1440. 
४७४१. एमेनं प्रत्येतन सोमेभिः सोमपातमम्‌। 
अमत्रेभिर्क्रजीषिणमिन्द्रै सुतेभिरिन्दुभिः।।२॥ 


2. Proceed to the presence of that deep quaffer of the Soma, 
with the Soma juices; to the vigorous Indra with vessels (filled) 
with the effused libations. 


This and the two following verses also occur in the Sdma, 1441-43. 
४७४२. यदीं सुतेभिरिन्दुभिः सोमेभिः प्रतिभूष॑थ। 
वेदा विश्वस्य मेधिरो धृषत्तन्तमिदेषते।।३।। 


3. When, with the effused and flowing Soma juices, you come 
into his presence, the sagacious (Indra) knows your wish, and the 
suppresser (of enemies) assuredly grants it, whatever it may be. 


Tam tam id esate: the repetition of the relative with reference to the 
antecedent kKamam may perhaps be so rendered. 


४७४३. अस्माअस्मा इदन्धसोऽध्वर्यो प्र भ॑रा सुतम्‌। 
कुवित्समस्य जेनय॑स्य शर्धतोऽभिशस्तेरवस्परंत्‌।४।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 43 83 


4. Offer, priest, to him, and him (only) this libation of 
(sacrificial) food, and may he ever defend us against the malignity 
of every superable adversary. 


| [सूक्त-४३] 

| [ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र | छन्द- उष्णिक्‌।] 
४७४४. यस्य त्यच्छम्बरं मदे दिवोंदासाय रन्धरयः। 

। अयं स सोम॑ इन्द्र ते सुतः पिब॑।।१॥ 


1. This Soma, in the exhilaration of which it is known that you 
have subdued Sambara for (the sake of) Divodasa, is poured our, 
Indra, for you: drink. 

It is Known— Yasya tyacchambaram made: tyat is explained by 
Sayana as equivalent to tat prasiddham yatha bhavati tatha, such as that 
which is notorious. 

Sdmaveda, 392. 

^ 5 H e In 
४७४५. यस्य॑ तीव्रसुतं मदं मध्यमन्तं च रक्षसे। 
> ` ! 
| अयं स सोम॑ इन्द्र ते सुतः frail 
2. This Soma, the exhilarating draught of which, when fresh 
effused (at dawn), or at noon, or at the last (or evening worship), 
you cherish, is poured out, Indra, for you: drink. 
A 1 
४७४६. यस्य गा अन्तरश्मनो मदे दुळ्हा अवासृज:। 
० x EY | 
अयं स सोमं इन्द्र ते सुतः fusil 
3. This Soma, in the exhilaration of which you have liberated 
j the cattle, firm (fastened) within the rock, is poured out, Indra, for 
you: drink. 
sl. ` 1 
४७४७. यस्य॑ मन्दानो अन्ध॑सो माघोनं दधिषे शव:। 
. | 
अयं स सोम॑ इन्द्र ते सुतः Faire 
4. This Soma, exhilarated (by drinking) of which (sacrificial) 
food you possessed the might of Maghavan, is poured out, Indra, 
> for you: drink. 
The Might of Maghavan— Maghonam savas, the rank of office of 
Indra, is engendered by the Soma, Somam Indratvam jatam. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar f 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
84 Rgveda Samhita 
ANUVAKA IV 
[सूक्त- ४४] 
[ऋषि- viz बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, १-६ अनुष्टुप्‌; ७-९ 
विराट्‌; ८ त्रिष्टुप्‌ अथवा विराट्‌।] 
४७४८. यो र॑यिवो रयिन्त॑मो यो चुम्नैर्चुम्नवत्तम:। 
सोम॑ः सुतः स इन्द्र तेऽस्ति स्वधापते मरदः।।१।। 

1. Opulent Indra, the Soma that abounds with riches, and is 
most resplendent with glories, is poured out: it is your exhilaration, 
Indra, lord of the offering. 

Lord of the Offering— Svadhapati may also mean the cherisher or 


protector of the Soma libation, svadhdyd annasya somalaksanasya 
pálanát; also Sámaveda, 351. 


४७४९. यः शग्मस्तुविशग्म ते रायो दामा मतीनाम्‌। 
सोम॑ः सुत: स इन्द्र तेऽस्ति स्वधापते मद॑ः॥।२॥। 
2. The Soma, possessor of felicity, which gives you delight, 


and which is the bestower of riches on your votarics, is poured out: 
it is your exhilaration, Indra, lord of the offering. 


४७५०. येन॑ वृद्धो न शव॑सा तुरो न स्वाभिंूतिभिंः। 
सोम॑: सुतः स इन्द्र तेऽस्ति स्वधापते मद॑ः।।३।। 
3. The Soma, whereby you are augmented in strength, and, 


together with your defenders, (the Maruts), are victorious (over 


your foes), is poured out: it is your exhilaration, Indra, lord of the 
offering. 


४७५१. त्यमु वो अप्रहणं गृणीषे शव॑सस्पतिंम्‌। 
न्द्रं विश्वासाहं नरं मंहिष्ठं विश्वचर्षणिम्‌।॥४1। 
4. (Worshippers), for you I glorify that Indra who disappointed 


not (his adorers); the lord of strength, the all-subduing, the leader 
(of rites), the most beautiful, the beholder of the universe. 


४७५२. यं वर्धयन्तीदिरः पतिं तुरस्य राधस:। 
तमित्र्वंस्य रोदसी देवी शुष्म॑ सपर्यतः।।५।। 


5. The divine heaven and earth adore that vigour of his, which 
our hymns augment, the appropriator of the riches of the foe. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sukta 44 85 
| 1 बर्हणेन्द्रायोपस्तृणीषर्णि 1 [| 
४७५३. dg उक्थस्य | 
विपो यस्योतयो यद्रोहन्ति | 
विपो न यस्योतयो वि यद्रोहन्ति सक्षित॑:।।६।। 

6. (Worshippers), the efficacy of your eulogy is to be 
manifested to that /ndra, whose protections, like (those) of a 
sensible man, are displayed as abiding along with him. 

Like those of a sensible Man— Vipo na, medhdvirat iva; that is, the 


protective measures or expedients of a sensible or wise man are capable 
for all affairs, sarva karyakusalah. 
४७५४. अविदद्दक्षं मित्रो नवीयान्पपानो देवेभ्यो वस्यों अचैत्‌। 
ससवान्त्स्तौलाभिर्धौतरीभिरुरुष्या पायुरंभवत्सखिंभ्यः।।७॥। 
7. Indra, appreciates him who is skilled (in holy rites): a recent 
friend, quaffing (the libation), he heaps excellent (wealth) upon the 
devout: partaking of (the sacrificial) food, (and brought) by his 


robust agitators (of the earth, his steeds), he, through his 
benevolence, is a protector to his friends. 

By his Robust Agitators— Sthaulabhir dhautaribhih explained 
sthilabhih kampanakarinibhih, with the stout causers of trembling: the 
Scholiast supplies vadavábhih yuktah, joined with such mares; or the 
epithets, although feminine, the Scholiast says may be applied to the 
Maruts. 

१४७ मनाँसि देवासो 
५५. ऋतस्य॑ पथि वेधा अपायि श्रिये मनासि देवासो अक्रन्‌। 
धानो EY वचोजि अर्वपुर्दशयें I [| 1 
दधानो नाम महो वचो वेन्यो ala: 11८ 11 

8. The Soma, creator (of all), on the path of sacrifice, has been 
drunk: the worshippers have presented it to gratify the mind (of 
Indra): may he, the humiliator (of his foes), possessing a vast 
body, propitiated by our praises, become manifest to our view. 


४७५६. द्युमत्तम दक्षं धेह्यस्मे सेधा जनानां पूर्वीरराती:। 
वर्षीयो वय: कृणुहि शचीभिर्धन॑स्य सातावस्माँ af L 
9. Bestow upon us most brilliant vigour: oppose the numerous 


enemies of your worshippers: grant us, for our pious acts, abundant 
food: secure us in the enjoyment of wealth. 


४७५७. इन्द्र तुभ्यमिन्मंघवन्नभूम वयं दात्रे हरिवो मा वि daz! 
नकिरापिर्ददृशे मर्त्यत्रा किमङ्ग रभ्रचोर्दन cie: lito ।। 
10. Indra, possessor of affluence, we have recourse to you, the 
bountiful, lord of steeds, be not unfavourable to us: no other 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


rF -—— n 118 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


86 Rgveda Samhita 


kinsman is beheld (by us) amongst men: who else have they called 
you the bestower of wealth? 


४७५८. मा जस्व॑ने वृषभ नो ररीथा मा तें ved: सख्ये रिषाम। 
yale इन्द्र निष्षिधो जनेषु जह्यसुष्वीन्प्र वृहापृणतः।।११ ।। 
11. Give us not up, showerer (of benefits), to the obstructor (of 
our rites): relying upon the friendship of you, lord of riches, may 
we be unharmed: many are the hindrances (opposed) to you 


amongst men: slay those who make no libations, root out those 
present no offerings. 


४७५९. उदभ्राणीव स्तनयन्नियर्तीन्द्रो राधांस्यश्व्यानि गव्यां। 
त्वम॑सि प्रदिव॑ः कारुधांया मा त्वांदामान आ द॑भन्मघोन॑ः।।१२।। 
12. As Indra, when thundering raises the clouds, so he (heaps 
upon his worshippers) riches of horses and cattle: you, Indra, are 


the ancient upholder of the sacrificer: let not the opulent wrong 
you, not presenting (oblations). 


४७६०. अध्वर्यो वीर प्र महे सुतानामिन्द्राय भर स ह्य॑स्य राजां। 
यः पूर्व्याभिरुत नूर्तनाभिर्गीभिर्वांवृधे गृंणतामृषीणाम्‌।।१३।। 
13. Ministrant priests offer libations to the mighty Indra, for 


= he is their king, he who has been exalted by the ancient and recent 
hymns of adoring sages. 


४७६१. अस्य मदे पुरु वर्पासि विद्वानिन्द्रो वृत्राण्यप्रती जंघान। 
तमु प्र होषि मधुमन्तमस्मै सोमं वीराय॑ शिप्रिणे पिब॑ध्यै।।१४।। 
14, In the exhilaration of this Soma, the wise Indra, 


irresistible, has destroyed numerous opposing enemies: offer the 


sweet-flavoured beverage to that hero, the handsome-chinned, to 
drink. 


I सोमं > 
४७६२. पाता सुतमिन्द्रो अस्तु सोमं हन्ता वृत्र वज्रेण मन्दसानः। 
ISS oT = = z 
गन्तां यज्ञं परावर्तश्चिदच्छा वसुर्धीनामविता कारुधांयाः।।१५।। 
15. May Indra be the drinker of this effused Soma juice, and, 
exhilarated by it, become the destroyer of Vrtra by the thunderbolt: 


may he come, although from afar, to our sacrifice, (he who is) the 
giver of dwellings, the upholder of the celebrator (of religious). 


४७६३. इदं त्यत्पात्रमिन्द्रपानमिन्द्रस्य प्रियममृतमपायि। 
मत्सद्यथां सौमनसाय देवं व्यशस्मदद्वेषो preme: 11१६ ।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 44 87 


16. May this ambrosia, the appropriate beverage of Indra, of 
which he is fond, be quaffed (by him), so that it may inspire the 
divinity with favourable feelings (towards us), and that he may 
remove from us our adversaries, and (all) iniquity. 

४७६४. एना म॑न्दानो जहि शूर शत्रूज्ञामिमजामिं मघवत्नमित्रान्‌। 
अभिपेणाँ अभ्याइँदेदिशानान्पराच इन्द्र प्र मृणा जही iit 

17. Exhilarated by it, valiant Maghavan, slay our unfriendly 
adversaries, whether kinsman or unrelated (to us): put to flight, 
Indra, hostile armies menacing us (with their weapons), and slay 
them. 

fees | . 000 
४७६५. आसुष्मा णा मघवन्निन्द्र पृत्स्व१ स्मभ्य महि afta: सुग o: 
अपां तोकस्य तन॑यस्य जेष इन्द्र सूरीन्कणुहि स्मा नो अर्धम्‌॥१८॥ 

18. Affluent Indra, facilitate to us (the acquirement of) vast 
riches in these our battles: (enable us) to gain the victory: make us 
prosperous with rain, and with sons and grandsons. 

४७६६. आ त्वा हर॑यो वृष॑णो युजाना वृषरथासो वृष॑रश्मयोऽत्यां:। 
अस्मत्राञ्चो वृष॑णो वज्रवाहो वृष्णे मदाय सुयुजों वहन्तु॥१९॥। 

19. Let your vigorous steeds, harnessed of their own will, 
drawing your wish-bestowing chariot, guided by shower-yielding 
reins, quick-moving, hastening towards us, youthful, thunder- 
bearing, well-yoked, bring you to the bountiful, exhilarating 
(libation). 

४७६७. आ ते वृषन्वृषणो द्रोण॑मस्थुर्घृतप्रुषो नोर्मयो म्दन्त:। 
इन्द्र प्र gei वृषभिः सुतानां वृष्णे भरत्ति वृषभाय सोर्मम्‌॥२०॥। 

20. Showerer (of benefits), your vigorous water-shedding 
steeds, like the waves (of the sea), exulting, are harnessed to your 
car; for they, (the priests), offer to you, the showerer (of benefits), 
ever youthful. the libation of the Soma juices expressed by the 
stones, 

. | 
४७६८. वृषासि दिवो juu: पृथिव्या वृषा सिन्थूनां वृषभः स्तियानाम्‌ 
X che m E. m i 
वृष्णे त इन्दुर्वुषभ पीपाय स्वादू रसों मधुपेयो ARR I 
21. You, Indra, are the showerer of heaven, the berewer of 


€arth, the feeder of the rivers. the supplier of the aggregated 
(waters): for you, showerer (of desires). who are the most excellent 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


eee eee a i 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


88 Rgveda Samhita 


shedder of rain, the sweet Soma, the honcy-flavoured juice, is 
ready to be quaffed. 

In this and the two preceding stanzas we have the usual abuse of the 
derivatives of Vrsa, to sprinkle, to rain; Jndra’s horses are vrsana; they 
draw a vrsa ratha, and are guided by vrsarasmayah: again, the steeds are 
wsana, explained, nityatárunnu, always young, and Indra is vrsan, WS, 
and wrsabha, the showerer of rain or of benefits: in most of the instances a 
grosser sense is probably implied. 


४७६९. अयं देवः सहसा जाय॑मान इन्द्रेण युजा पणिम॑स्तभायत्‌। 
अयं स्वस्य पितुरायुंधानीन्दुरमुष्णादर्शिवस्य मायाः।।२२॥ 

22. This divine Soma, with Indra for its ally, crushed, as soon 

as generated, Pani by force: this Soma baffled the devices and the 


weapons of the malignant secreter of (the stolen) wealth, (the 
cattle). 


अयम॑कृणोदुषस 1 al. धाज्ज्योतिरन्त a! 
४७७०, : सुपलारय qi अदधाज्ज्यातिरन्त: | 
° 1 I ५ | त्रितेषु 1 विन्ददमृतं निगूंळहम्‌ 
अयं त्रिधातुं दिवि रोचनेषु त्रितेषु fae ळहम्‌।।२३।। 
23. This Soma made the dawns happily wedded to the sun: this | 
Soma placed the light within the solar orb: this (Soma) has found | 
the threefold ambrosia hidden in heaven in the three bright regions. 
>>> Ayarı tridhatu divi rocanesu, tritesu, tritesu vindat amrtam nigülham; 
according to the Scholiast, this may merely mean that the Soma becomes 
as it were ambrosia when received or concealed in the vessels at the three 


diurnal ceremonies, which ambrosia is properly deposited with the gods 
abiding in the third bright sphere, or in heaven. 


४७७१. अयं द्यावांपूथिवी वि ष्कभायदयं रथंमयुनकसप्तरश्मिम्‌। 
अयं गोषु शच्या पक्वमन्तः सोमो दाधार दशंयन्त्रमुत्सम्‌।।२४।। 

24. This (Soma) has fixed heaven and earth: this has harnessed 
the seven-rayed chariot (of the sun): this soma has developed of 
its own will the mature deeply-organized secretion in the kine. 

This has Fixed Heaven, Etc.— These functions are ascribed to the 
Soma as being the source of the energies of /ndra. Who is the real agent, 
both in this and the preceding verse, this Indra has made the dawns, etc. 

Deeply-Organized Secretion — Dasayantram utsam is literally a 
well with ten machines: here utsa is explained by Sayana, utsaranasilam, 
having the Properly of flowing forth, payas, milk: the epithet 
dasayantram is of a less precise purport, and is somewhat mystified: in 
one sense it implies aggregated bodily existence, or organs and functions 
of the body, which are the result of the nutriment furnished to the child by 
the matured milk agreeably to a khila, or supplementary verse quoted by 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 45 39 


the Scholiast: caksusca srotram-ca, manasca, vak-ca, pránápanau, deha, 
idam Sartram, dvau prat yancávanulomau visargdy-etam tam manye 
disayantram utsam, 1 consider the eye, the ear, the mind, the speech, the 
two vital airs, the form, the body, the two creations inverted and direct, as 
the tenfold utsa, or state of being: another explanation makes the phrase 
imply the Soma's being offered with nine texts to Indra and other deities 
at the morning sacrifice: (Aitareya Brahmana, 3,1. 


[सूक्त-४५] 


[ऋषि- शंयु वार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र; ३१- ३३ बृबुतक्षा। छन्द- गायत्री, 
२९ अतिनिचृत्‌, ३१ पाद Mad (गायत्री), 33 aret] 
४७७२. य आन॑यत्परावत: सुनीती तुर्वशं यदुम्‌। 
इन्द्र: स नो युवा सखा।।१।। 
1. May that youthful Indra, who, by good guidance, brought 
Turvasa and Yadu from afar, (be) our friend. 
४७७३. अविप्रे चिद्वयो दर्धदनाशुनां चिदर्वता। इन्द्रो जेतां fed धन॑म्‌॥२॥ 
2. Indra gives sustenance, even to the undevout he is the 
| conqueror of wealth accumulated (by enemies) though (going 
against) them with a slow-paced steed. 
४७७४. महीरस्य प्रणीतय: पूर्वीरुत प्रशस्तयः। नास्य॑ क्षीयन्त ऊतर्य॑ः।।३।। 
3. Vast are his designs, manifold are his praises, his 
protections are never withdrawn. 
४७७५. सखायो ब्रह्मवाहसेऽर्चत प्र च॑ गायत। स हि नः प्रमंतिर्मही N 
4. Offer worship and praises, friends, to him who is to be 
attracted by prayers; for he verily is our great intelligence. 
र ` 1 
४७७६. त्वमेक॑स्य वृत्रहन्नविता द्वयोरसि। उतेदृशे यथां वयम्‌॥५॥ 
5. Slayer of Vrtra, you are the protector of one (adorer), or of 
two, and of such as we are. 
थशंसिन सुवीर 
४७७७. नयसीद्वति fed: कृणोष्युकथशंसिन:। GH: सुवीर उच्यसे।६॥ 
6. You remove (far from us) those who hate us: you prosper 


those who repeat your praise: bestower of excellent male 


descendants, you are glorified by man. 

Bestower of Excellent male Descendants— Suvira is here explained 
Sobhanair viraih putrapautradibhir dátavyair-upetah, endowed with or 
Possessed of sons, grandsons, and the like to be given. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MEI NM one का... 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
90 Rgveda Samhita 


४७७८. ब्रह्मणं ब्रह्म॑वाहसं गीर्भिः सखायमृग्मियम्‌। गां न दोहरों हुवे।|७॥ 


7. 1 invoke with hymns Indra, our friends, who is Brahma, 
who is attracted by prayer and entitled to adoration, to milk him as 
a cow. 


Brahma— Brahmánam, the Scholiast interprets Parivrdham, great, 
mighty. 
| 
४७७९. यस्य विश्वानि हस्तयोरूचुर्वसूनि नि द्विता। वीरस्यं पृतनाषह : ।।८ ।। 
8. In the hands of whom, the heroic subduer of hostile armies, 
(the sages) have declared, are all the treasures in both (heaven and 


earth). 
४७८०. वि दुळ्हानि चिदद्रिवो जनानां शचीपते। वृह माया अंनानत।।९।। 
9, Wielder of the (105 ना, lord of Saci, demolish the strong 
(cities) of men: (baffle), unbending (/ndra) their devices. 
४७८१. तमु त्वा सत्य सोमपा इन्द्र वाजानां पते। अहूमहि श्रवस्य्व॑ः।।१०॥ 


10. Veracious /ndra, drinker of the Soma, provider of 
sustenance, we, desirous of food, invoke such as you are. 

Such as your Are— Tam tvà ahümahi, we invoke you (who are) 
that, or such as has been described in the preceding verses. 


४७८२. तमु त्वा यः पुरासिंथ यो वां नूनं हिते धने। 
हव्यः स श्रुंधी TATU 
11. (We invoke) you, such as you are, you who have been 


invocable of old, and who are now to be invoked for the wealth 
held (by the foe): hear our invocation. 


४७८३. धीभिरवैद्धिरवतो वाजा इन्द्र श्रवाय्यान्‌। 
त्वया जेष्म हितं धन॑म्‌।।१२॥ 


12. (Favoured) by you, Indra, (who are propitiated, by our 
hymns, (We overcome) with our steeds the steeds (of the enemy), 
and we conquer abundant food, and the wealth held (by the foes). 


The stanza is literally, with praises, by horses, horses food, excellent 
Indra by you, we conquer deposited wealth. 


४७८४. अरू वीर गिर्वणो महाँ इन्द्र धने हिते। भरें वितन्तसाय्य: | १३ I 


13. Heroic and adorable /ndra, verily you are mighty in battle, 
and victor of the wealth held (by the enemy). 


४७८५. या त॑ ऊतिरमित्रहन्मक्षूज॑वस्तमास॑ति। तयां नो हिनुही रथ॑म्‌।।१४॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EES SE eee co 4 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sukta 45 91 

14. Destroyer of enemies with that your velocity, which is of 
exceeding swiftness, impel our chariots (against the foe). 

४७८६. स रथेन रथीत॑मोऽस्मार्केनाभियुर्वना। 
जेषिं जिष्णो हितं धन॑म्‌।१५।। 

15. Victorious /ndra, who are the chie1 of charioteers, conquer 
the wealth that is held (by the enemy) with our assailing car. 
४७८७. य एक इत्तम॑ Ble कृष्टीनां विचर्षणि:। पतिर्जज्ञे वृष॑क्रतु:।।१६॥। 

16. Praise that Indra who alone has been born the supervisor 
(of all), the lord of men, the giver of rain. 

४७८८. यो गृंणतामिदासिंथापिरूती शिव: सखा। 
सत्वं नं इन्द्र मृळय।।१७।। 

17. Indra, who has ever been the friend of those who praise 
you, and the insurer of their happiness by your protection, grant us 
felicity. 

४७८९. धिष्व वज्रं गभस्त्यो रक्षोहत्याय वज्रिव:। 
सासहीष्ठा अभि स्मृध॑ः।।१८।। 
18. Wielder of the thunderbolt, take the bolt in your hands for 


the destruction of the Raksasas, and utterly overthrow those who 
defy you. 


zu] Tám a 5 कीरिचोर्दनम्‌ A 

४७९०. प्रत्नं रयीणां युजं सखायं कीरिचोदनम्‌। ब्रह्मवाहस्तमं हुवे।।१९।। 
19. I invoke the ancient Indra, the giver of riches, (our) friend, 

the encourager of his adorers, who is to be propitiated by prayer. 


४७९१. स हि विश्वानि पार्थिवाँ एको वसूनि पत्य॑ते। 
गिर्वणस्तमो अध्रिंगुः।।२०॥। 


20. He alone rules over all terrestrial riches, he who is entitled 
to especial praise, he who is irresistible. 


४७९२. स नो नियुद्धिरा पृण कामं वार्जेभिरश्विभि:। 
गोमद्धिर्गोपते TATE || 


4 21. Lord of cattle, (coming) with your mares, satisfy our 
paises completely with (abundant) food, with horses, and with 
ine. 


४७९३, Tel गाय सुते सचां पुरुहूताय सत्वने। शं यदवे न शाकिनें1॥२२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


द 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


92 Rgveda Samhita 


22. Sing praises, when your libation is poured out, to him who 
is the invoked of many, the subduer (of foes), giving him 
gratification, like (fresh pasture) to cattle. 

Sámaveda, 115. 


४७९४. न घा वसुर्नि य॑मते दानं वाज॑स्य गोम॑तः। यत्सीमुप श्रवद्विरः।।२३॥ 


23. The giver of dwellings verily withholds not the gift of food 
conjoined with cattle, when he hears our praises. 


४७९५. कुवित्सस्य प्र हि ब्रजं गोम॑न्तं दस्युहा गम॑त्‌। 
शचीभिरप॑ नो वरत्‌।।२४।। 


24. Then the destroyer of the Dasyus, proceeds to the cattle- 
crowded folds of Kuvitsa, and by his acts opens them for us. 

Samaveda,1668: kuvitsa is termed merely a certain person who does 
much (Kuvit) harm, (syati). 


४७९६. इमा उ त्वा शतक्रतोऽभि प्र णोनुवुर्गिर:। 
इन्द्र वत्सं न मातरः।।२५।। 
2S 107 performer of many exploits, these our praises 
repeatedly recur to you as parent (cows) to their young. 
E ४७९७. दूणाशं सख्यं तव गौरसि वीर गव्यते। अश्वों अश्वायते NARS 


26. Your friendship, Indra, is not easily lost: you, hero are (the 


giver of) cattle to him who desires cattle (of) horses him who 
desires horses. 


४७९८. स मन्दस्वा हवान्धंसो राध॑से तन्वां महे। न स्तोतारं निदे क॑रः।।२७॥। 


27. Delight your person with the (beverage of the) libation 
(offered) for the sake of great treasure: subject not your 
worshipper to his reviler. 


४७९९. इमा उ त्वा सुतेसुते नक्षन्ते गिर्वणो गिरः। 
वत्सं गावो न धेनव॑ः।।२८।। 


28. These our praises tend, as the libations are repeatedly 


poured out, eagerly to you who are gratified by praise, as the milch 
kine (hasten) to their calves. 


l . स्तोतृणां 
४८००. पुरूतमं पुरूणां स्तोतृणां विवांचि। वाजेभिर्वाजयताम्‌।।२९।। 
29. May the praises of many worshippers offered at the 


sacrifice, (accompanied) by (sacrificial) viands, invigorate you, 
destroyer of multitudes. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


iS pans ene 5:05 — 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sukta 45 93 


At the Sacrifice— Vivdci, at the sacrifice called Vivac, because 
various praises and prayers are then repeated. 
|| ON || 
४८०१. अस्माकमिन्द्र भूतु ते स्तोमो वाहिष्ठो अन्त॑म:। 
अस्मात्राये महे हिंनु।।३०।। 
30. May our most elevating praise be near, Indra, to you, and 
urge us to (the acquirement of) great riches. 


Most Elevating Praise— Stomo vahisthah, vodhrtama, most 

bearing, uplifting, elevating. 
Ta. aft ्धन्नस्थात्‌ 
४८०२. अधि gg: पणाना वर्षिष्ठे मृधन्नस्थात्‌। उरुः कक्षो न MFA: 11३१ I 

31. Brbu presided over the high places of the Panis, like the 
elevated bank of the Ganges. 

Brbu panindm varsisthe mürdhan adhyasthát, he stood over upon the 
high place, as if it were on the forehead of the Panis, mürdhavat ucchrite 
sthale: the Panis May be cither merchants or traders, or Asuras, so 
termed: for Brbu see note on verse 33 

Like the Elevated Bank of the Ganges— Uruh kakso na gàngyah is 
explained by the Scholiast galigdydh kule vistirne ivd, as on the broad 
bank of the Ganges, that is, as the bank is high above the bed of the river. 


४८०३. यस्य॑ वायोरिंव द्रवद्धद्रा रातिः defen सद्यो दानाय मंहते॥३२॥ 
32. Of whom, prompt as the wind, the liberal donation of 


thousands (of cattle) has been quickly given to (me) soliciting a 
gift. 
४८०४. तत्सु नो विश्वे अर्य आ wel गृणन्ति कारव॑:। 
& cil 5 

| बृबुं सहख्रदात॑मं सूरिं संहस्रसात॑मम्‌।।३३॥। 
l 33. Whom, therefore, we all, who are the profferers and 
[ bestower of praise ever commend, as the pious Brbu, the donor of 

thousands (of cattle), the receiver of thousands (of laudations). 

. This and the two preceding stanzas from a Trica in praise of the 

liberality of a person named Brbr: to Bharadvája, the Rsi of the hymn: 

jana calls him the Taksá the carpenter or artificer of the Panis: the 

gend 15 preserved by Many, 10.107, the illustrious Bharadvája. with his 
॥ Be distressed by hunger in a lonely forest, accepted many cows from the 
1 E PE the Niti Manjari tells the same story, and attributes the 
ला As eon of Bharadvdja: the moral of the illustration in Manu 
E Manjari is, that Brahmans, in times of distress, may accept 
might be Tom persons, of low castes: the object of the Sukta, although it 
bore EE understood, is rather that persons of inferior condition 
| | 100 ठग SC by liberality: in which sense Sayana interprets it jatito 
d bez pt dütrtvàt Sarvaira srestho bhavati, a person inferior by caste 

omes everywhere distinguished by generosity. 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Xv 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


94 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त-४६] 


[क्रषि- शंयु बार्हस्पत्य | देवता- इन्द्र। 
छन्द- बार्हत प्रगाथ- (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)।| 
है ne | | 
४८०५. त्वामिद्धि हवामहे साता वाजस्य कारवः। 
E वृत्रेष्विन्द्र | सत्प॑तिं ० 
त्वा न्द्र सत्प॑तिं नरस्त्वां काष्ठास्वर्वतः ।।१।। 

1. We worshippers invoke you for the acquirement of food: 
you, Indra, the protector of the good, (do) men (invoke for aid) 
against enemies, and in places where horses (encounter). 

Where Horses Encounter— Kaásthasu arvatah, in the quarters or 
regions of the horse, where horses are engaged, or, according to Sayana, 
the field of battle: Mahidhara, Yajurveda, 27, 37, separates the two words, 
and explains them, as men invoke you for victory. 


24) वज्रहस्त स्त॑वानो | 
४८०६. स त्वं AGA वज्रहस्त धृष्णुया महः स्तवानो अद्रिव:। 
Uu l~ . 1 m = n x: जिग्युषे 
गामश्वं रथ्यमिन्द्र सं किर सत्रा वाजं न जिग्युषे।।२।। 
2. Wonderful wielder of the thunderbolt, Indra, the lord of 


clouds, mighty in resolution, being glorified by us, grant us cattle, 
and horses fit for chariots, as (you grant) abundant food to him 
who is victorious (in battle). 

The Lord of Clouds— Adrivas is, more properly, wielder of the 
thunderbolt, but we have just had that epithet in vajrahasta. 

Abundant Food to him who is Victorious—Satrá vájam na jigyuse: 
the Scholiast has sat: å, prabhütam, abundant: Mahidhara, Yajus, 27, 38, 
makes it an pleases him also to understand jigyuse, valorous, nol as 
applicable to a man, purtsdya, but to a horse or elephant, asvaya hastine 
vd, which is quite gratuitous: see also Samaveda, 810. 

४८०७. यः संत्राहा विचर्षणिरिन्द्रं d हूमहे वयम्‌। 
Tea तुविनृम्ण सत्पते भवां समत्सु नो वृधे।।३।। 

3. We invoke that Indra who is the destroyer of mighty foes, 
the supervisor (of all things): do you, the many organed, the 
protector of the. good, the distributor of wealth, be unto us (the 
insurer of) success in combats. 

Samaveda, 286: this is said to be the first verse of Prayatha. 


४८०८. बाध॑से जनान्‌ वृषभेव॑ मन्युना ws मीळह ऋचीषम। 
अस्माकं बोध्यविता महाधने तनूष्वप्सु सूर्ये। [४ 


4. Such, Indra, as you are represented in holy texts, assail (00) 
adversaries with fierceness like (that of) a bull in close conflict: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 46 95 


regard yourself as our defender in war, (that we may long enjoy) 
posterity, water, and the sight of the) sun. 

Represented in Holy Texts— Rcisama is explained by Sayana 
rgyadrsarmi rüpam pratipádayati tàdrg-rüpendrah: such form as the Re 
exhibits, such in form is Indra. 

Posterity water and Sun— The text only tanusu apsu, sürye, in 
descendants, in waters, in the sun, but they may be connected with what 
precedes, asmakam bodhi avità mahadhane, know yourself to be our 
protector in battle, in descendants, etc., that is in securing to us these good 


5 things and long life. 
४८०९. इन्द्र ज्येष्ट न आ t ARE पपुरि श्रव॑:। 
x येनेमे चित्र वज्रहस्त रोद॑सी ओभे सुशिप्र प्रा: 1५11 
ls, 5. Indra, bring to us most excellent, most invigorating and 
nutritious food, wherewith, wonderful wielder of the thunderbolt, 
the handsome-chinned, you sustain both heaven and earth. 
४८१०. त्वामुग्रमवसे चर्षणीसहं राजन्देवेषु हूमहे। 
of विश्वा सु नो विधुरा पिब्दना व॑सो5मित्रान्त्सुषहान्कृधि ।॥६। 
९, 6. We invoke for protection you, royal /ndra, who are mighty 
m among the gods, the subduer of men; granter of dwellings, repel all 
| evil spirits, and render our enemies easy of discomfiture. 
he aei con 
४८११. यदिन्द्र नाहुषीष्वाँ ओजों qmd कृष्टिषु। 
यद्वा पञ्च क्षितीनां चुम्नमा भ॑र सत्रा विश्वानि ife uto 1 
ds i 7. Whatever strength and opulence (exist) amongst human 
ne beings, whatever be the sustenance of the five classes of men, 
bring /ndra to us, as well (as) all great manly energies. 
1 N ` ३ 1 
४८१२. यद्वां Tail मंघवन्‌ Za जने यत्पूरौ कच्च quei 
अस्मभ्यं तद्रिरीहि सं नृषाह्रो5मित्रान्पृत्सु तुर्वणे 11८1 
25, ; 8. Whatever vigour, Maghavan, (existed) in Trksu, in Druhyu, 
he in Puru, bestow fully upon us in conflicts with foes, so that we 
he may destroy our enemies in war. 
| t H 
४८१३. इन्द्र त्रिधातुं शरणं त्रिवरूथं स्वस्तिमत्‌। 
छर्दिर्यच्छ मघव॑द्भयश्च महाँ च यावया दिद्युमेभ्यः11९ |i 
9. Give, Indra, to the affluent, and to me also, a sheltering and 
Prosperous dwelling combining three elements, and defending in 
ur) three ways and keep from them the blazing (weapon of our foes). 
ict: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


m E """C7C"C"— 


— HR! 


igiti j Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
96 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foun Ro उ 


४८१४. ये गव्यता मन॑सा शत्रुमादभुरभिप्रध्नन्ति धृष्णुया। 
अध॑ स्मा नो मघवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणस्तनूपा अन्त॑मो भव।।१०।। 


10. Affluent Indra, propitiated by praise, be nigh to us, as the 
defender of our persons (against those) who assail (us as) enemics, 
with a mind bent upon carrying off (our) cattle, or who assault us 
with arrogance. 


४८१५. अध स्मा नो वृधे भवेन्द्र नायमंवा युधि। 
यदन्तरिक्षे पत॑न्ति पर्णिनो दिद्यवस्तिग्ममूर्धान: 1128 11 
11. Indra, be (favourable) at present to our success: protect our 


leader in battle when the feathered, sharp-pointed, shining shafts 
fall from the sky. 
४८१६. यत्र शूरासस्तन्वो वितन्वते प्रिया शर्म पितृणाम्‌। 

अध स्मा यच्छ तन्वे तनें च छर्दिरचिर्च यावय द्वेष॑;।।१२।। 

12. When heroes rest their persons (until abandoning) the 
pleasant abodes of their progenitors: grant us, for ourselves and 
our posterity, an unsuspected defence, and scatter our enemies. 

The Pleasant Abode of their Progenitors— Priya Sarma pitrndm is 
explained priydni sthandni janakanám sambandhini, the beloved places in 

z> relation with progenitors, but the want of a verb makes the sense doubtful: 
the Scholiast extends to it the government of vitanvate, tanvo vitanvate, 
they spread out or rest their persons; or they spread out, he says, before 
the enemy the sites won by their forefathers until they abandon them, 
parityajanti yavat: perhaps it should be, until they, the enemy, desist from 
the attack. 

An Unsuspected Defence— Chardiracittam the commentator 
renders Kavacam satrubhir ajfidtam armour unknown by the enemies; the 
connexion of the sense runs through the two following verses: the 
unknown armours is solicited when a charge of horse takes place: it may 
possibly allude to the superiority of the arms of the Aryas, the mail worn 
by them being unknown to the Dasyus, or barbarians, like the steel 
helmets or caresses of the Spaniards to the Mexicans and Peruvians. 


४८१७. यदिन्द्र सर्गे अर्वतश्ोदयांसे महाधने। 
असमने अध्वनि वृजिने पथि vif इब ATEN: IRI 
13. (At the time) when, in the effort (made) in an arduous 


conflict, you urge our horses over an uneven road, like falcons 


darting upon their food through the difficult path (of the 
firmament). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 47 97 


४८१८. सिन्धुरिव प्रवण आशुया यतो यदि कलोशमनु ष्वणिं। 
आ ये वयो न वर्वृतत्यामिषि गृभीता बाह्वोर्गविं।।१४।। 
14. Rushing rapidly like rivers in their downward course and 
although reiging loudly through terror, they yet, tight-girthed, 


return repeatedly (to the conflict) for cattle, like birds darting on 
their prey. 


[सूक्त-४७] 


[ऋषि- गर्ग भारद्वाज, देवता- इन्द्र, १-५, सोम, २० देवभूमि, बृहस्पतिः 
इन्द्र, २२-२५ सांर्ज्य प्रस्तोक (दान स्तुति) २६-२८ रथ, २९-३० दुंदुभि, 
३१ दुंदुमि तथा Sal छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌ १४ - वृहती, २३ अनुषटुप्‌,२४ 
गायत्री, २५ द्विपदा त्रिष्टुप्‌, २७ जगती।] 

४८१९. स्वादुष्किलायं मधुमाँ उतायं तीव्रः किलायं रस॑वाँ उतायम्‌। 
3 | z I पपिवांसमिन्द्रं हि . T T 1 
उतो न्वशस्य पंपिवांसमिन्द्र न कश्चन संहत आहवेषु॥१ Ii 
1. Savoury indeed is this (Soma); sweet is it, sharp, and full of 


flavour: no one is able to encounter Indra in battles after he has 
been quaffing this (beverage). 
. यस्येन्द्रों वृत्रहत्ये 
४८२०. अयं स्वादुरिह मर्दिष्ठ आस यस्येन्द्रो वृत्रहत्यै ममाद। 
X I न॑वर्ति a | देह्यो 
पुरूणि यश्च्यौला शम्बरस्य वि नवतिं नर्व च calle हन्‌॥२॥ 

2. This savoury Sona, drunk on this occasion, has been most 
exhilarating: by drinking of it Indra has been elevated to the 
slaying of Vrtra, and it has destroyed the numerous hosts of 
Sambara and the ninetynine cities. 

Ninety-nine Cities— Dehyah is the term in the text for dehth, 
explained by Sayana, digdhah, the smeared or plastered, implying purih, 
cities; as if they consisted of stuccoed or plastered houses: the ninety-nine 
cities of Sambara have frequently occured: see Vol. II. verses 2199 etc. 


४८२१. अयं में पीत उर्दियर्ति वाच॑म॒यं म॑नीषामुशतीम॑जीग:। 

अयं षळुर्वीरमिमीत धीरो न याभ्यो भुव॑नं कच्चनारे।३।। 
न 3. This beverage inspires my speech; this develops the desired 
intelligence: this sagacious (Soma) has created the six vast 
conditions, from which no creature is distinct. 


Six Vast Conditions — They are said to be heaven earth, day, night. 
water, and plants. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


क — 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
98 Rgveda Samhita 
. वरिमार्ण वर्ष्माणं दिवो अकृणोदयं n 
४८२२. अयं स यो वरिमाणं पृथिव्या वर्ष्माणं दि दयं सः। 
ति पीयूषं | सोमों | 
अयं पीयूषं तिसृषु प्रवत्सु सोमों दाधारोरवन्तरिक्षम्‌।।४।। 

4. This it is which formed the expanse of the earth, the 
compactness of the heaven: this Soma has deposited the ambrosia 
in its three principal (receptacles), and has upheld the spacious 
firmament. 

Three Principal Receptacles— In plant, water, and cows. 

Has Upheld the Spacious firmament— Sec Rg: i, 91. 22! here, as in 


that Siikta, there is an obviously designed confusion between the Soma 
plant, and Soma the moon. 


४८२३. अयं विंदच्चित्रदृशींकमर्णः शुक्रसंद्मनामुषसामनींके | 
अयं महान्महता स्कम्भनेनोद्‌ द्यम॑स्तभ्नाद्‌ वृषभो मरुत्वान्‌।५॥ 
5. This makes known the wonderfully beautiful and inspiring 
(solar radiance) at the appearance of the dawns, whose dwelling is 


the firmament: this mighty (Soma) has sustained the heaven with a 
powerful support, the sender of rain, the leader of the winds. 


४८२४. धृषत्पिंब कलशे सोममिन्द्र quer शूर समरे वसूनाम्‌। 
माध्यन्दिने सवन आ वृषस्व रयिस्थानों रयिमस्मासुँ fedis ।। 
6. Hero, Indra, who are the slayer of foes in contests for (the 


acquirement of) treasures, drink boldly from the pitcher: drink 


copiously at the noonday rite: receptacle of riches, bestow riches 
upon us. 


1 > 
४८२५. इन्द्र प्र ण: पुरएतेवं पश्य प्र नो नय प्रतरं वस्यो अच्छ। 
f अतिपारयो = 5 
भवा सुपारो अतिपारयो नो भवा सुनीतिरुत वामनीति:।।७।। 

7. Like one who goes before us, Indra, (on the road), look out, 
bring before us infinite wealth; be our conductor beyond the 
bounds (of want), convey us safely over (peril); be our careful 
guide, our guide to desirable (affluence). 

Look Out— Pra nah pura eteva pasya, like one who is preceding us, 
look: the Scholiast says, look after the travellers under the charge of the 


margaraksaka, the protector of the road, an escort, or, possibly, the leader 
of a kdfild, may be intended. 


1. त्वमिमा ओषधी: सोम विश्वास्त्वामपो अजनयस्त्वं गा:। त्वमा ततन्थोर्वन्तरिक्षम्‌ (xo o 
1.91.22)1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Eun. 1 1 E 


3 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 47 99 
४८२६. उरु नों लोकमनु नेषि विद्वान्त्स्वर्वज्ज्योतिरभयं स्वस्ति। 

ऋष्वा त॑ इन्द्र स्थविरस्य बाहू उप॑ स्थेयाम शरणा बृहन्ता॥॥८ । 

8. Do you, Indra, who are wise, conduct us to the spacious 
world (of heaven), to a blessed state of happiness, light, and safety: 
may we recline in the graceful, protecting, and mighty arms of you 
the ancient one. 

TS qu धा 1 
४८२७. ABA इन्द्र वन्धुरे धा वर्हिष्ठयो: शतावन्नश्वयोरा। 
इषमा वं्षषा वर्षिष्ठा मा नंस्तारीन्मघवन्रायो अर्यः।1९ di 

9. Place us, possessor of riches, in your ample chariot, 
(behind) your powerful horses: bring to us from among all viands 
the most excellent food: let not, Maghavan, any opulent man 
surpass us in wealth. 

४८२८. vd मुळ ud जीवातुमिच्छ चोदय धियमयंसो न धाराम्‌। 
यत्किज्ञाहं त्वायुरिदं वदामि तज्जुषस्व कृधि मां देववन्तम्‌।॥१०॥ 

10. Make me happy, Indra; be pleased to prolong my life: 
sharpen my intellect like the edge of an iron sword: whatsoever, 
desirous (of propitiating) you, I may utter, be pleased by it: render 
me the object of divine protection. 

४८२९. जातारमिन्द्रमवितारमिन्द्रै हवेहवे सुहवं शूरमिन्द्रम्‌ 
हृयांमि शक्रं पुरुहूतमिन्द्रं स्वस्ति नों मघवां धात्विन्द्र:॥११॥ 

11. I invoke, at repeated sacrifice, Indra, the preserver, the 
protector, the hero, who is easily propitiated, /ndra, the powerful, 
the invoked of many: may Indra, the lord of affluence, bestow 
upon us prosperity. 

Samayeda, 333; Yajurveda, 20.50. 

v gael 

४८३०. इन्द्र: सुत्रामा स्ववाँ अवोभिः सुमृळीको भ॑वतु विश्ववेदाः। 

बाघ॑तां द्वेषो अभ॑यं कृणोतु सुवीर्यस्य पतयः eame 
i 12. May the protecting, opulent /ndra be the bestower of 
clicity by his protections: may he, who is all-knower of felicity by 
his protections: may he, who is all-knowing. foil our adversaries: 
may he keep us out of danger, and may we be the possessors of 
excellent posterity. 

5 सौमनसे 1 

४८३१. तस्य॑ वयं सुंमतौ यज्चियस्यापि भद्रे सौमनसे स्याम। 

स सुत्रामा स्ववाँ इन्द्रो अस्मे आराच्चिद्‌ Ba: सनुतर्युयोतु।।१३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


अ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
100 Rgveda Samhita 

13. May we continue in the favour of that adorable (deity) 
even in his auspicious good-will: may that protecting and opulent 
Indra drive far from us, into extinction, all those who hate us. 

See Yajurveda, 20. 52. 

४८३२. अव त्वे इन्द्र प्रवतो नोर्मिर्गिरी ब्रह्माणि नियुतो धवन्ते। 
= 7 L x [| [s वज्रिन्युवसे 1 
उरू न राध: सवना पुरूण्यपो गा वज़िन्युवसे समिन्दून्‌। I || 

14. To you the praises and prayers of the worshipper hasten 
like a torrent down a declivity; and you thunderer, aggregate the 
immense wealth (of sacrificial offerings), copious libations, and 
milk, and the juices of the Soma. 

Apo gah yuvase samindün: the first is explained vasativari which is 
said by Katyayana, Sutra, 8,9,7-10, to be portions of water taken from a 
running stream on the evening previous to the ceremony, and kept in jars 
in different parts of the sacrificial chamber, to be mixed with the Soma: 


see Yajurveda, 6.23, and the Taittiriya Yajus, Prapáthaka गा. Anuvaka 
XII. 


४८३३. क ई स्तवत्कः पृणात्को य॑जाते यदुग्रमिन्मघर्वा विश्वहावेत्‌। 
पादाविव प्रहर्नन्यमन्यं कृणोति पूर्वमपरं श्चीभिः।।१५।। 


15. Who may (adequately) praise him? Who may satisfy him? 

Who offer worthy adoration? Since Maghavan is daily conscious 

S of his own terrible (power): by his acts he makes first one and then 

the other precede and follow, as (a man) throws out his feet 
(alternately in walking). 


Makes first one and then, Etc.— That is, Indra, ai his pleasure, 
makes the first of his worshippers the last, and the last the first. 


४८३४. शुण्वे वीर उग्रमुग्रं दमायन्नन्यर्मन्यमतिनेनीयर्मान:। 
i a = 
एधमानद्‌ विळुभयस्य राजा चोष्कूयते विश इन्द्र मनुष्यान्‌।।१६।। 
16. The hero Indra is renowned: humiliating every formidable 
(foe), and repeatedly changing the place of one (worshipper) with 


that of another; Indra, the enemy of the arrogant, the sovereign of 


both (heaven and earth), calls again and again (to encourage) the 
men who are his worshippers. 


४८३५. परा पूर्वेषा सख्या वृणक्ति विततुराणो अपरेभिरेति। 
अनांनुभूतीरवधून्चान: PHS: शरदस्तर्तरीति। १७ 


17. Indra rejects the friendship of those who are foremost (in 
pious acts), and, despoiling them, associates with (their) inferiors: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—smn—  áa—À—  ÀL.e4A440 


F 


i zed.hy Arya, Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Digiti 
Mandala 101 


or (again) shaking off those who neglect his worship, /ndra abides 
many years with those who serve him. 
४८३६. रूपंरूपं प्रतिरूपो बभूव तदस्य रूपं प्रतिचक्ष॑णाय। 

इन्द्रो मायाभिं: पुरुरूपं ईयते युक्ता ह्य॑स्य हर॑यः शता दर्श।।१८॥। 

18. Indra, the prototype, has assumed various forms, and such 
is his form as that which (he adopts) for his manifestation: Indra, 
multiform by his illusions, proceeds (to his many worshippers), for 
the horses, yoked to his car are a thousand. 

Indra has Assumed Various Forms— Indra presents himself as 
Agni, Visnu, or Rudra, or any other deity who is the actual object of 
worship, and is really the deity to be adored: he is identifiable with each. 

Horses Yoked to his Car are a thousand— His chariots and horses 
are multiplied according to the forms in which he manifests himself: 
agreeably to the Vaiddntika interpretation of the stanza, Indra is here 
identified with Paramesvara, the supreme first cause, identical with 
creation. 


४८३७. युजानो हरिता रथे भूरि त्वष्टेह रांजति। 
को विश्वाहां द्विषतः val आसत उतासीनेषु सूरिषु॥१९॥ 
19. Yoking his horses to his car, Tvasid shines in many places 
here in the three worlds: who (else), so-journing daily amongst his 


present worshippers, is their protector against adversaries? 
Sayana regards this name as, in this place, an appellative of Indra. 


४८३८. अगव्यूति क्षेत्रमागन्म देवा उर्वी सती भूमिरंहरणाभूत्‌। 
1 
बृहस्पते प्र चिकित्सा गर्विष्टावित्था सते जरित्र इन्द्र पन्थाम्‌।।२०।। 
20. We have wandered, gods, into a desert where there is no 
track of cattle: the vast extant earth has become the protectress of 


murderers: direct us, Brhaspati, in our search for cattle: shew the 


path, /ndra, to your votary being they astray. 
Garga, the author of the Sikta, having, it is said, lost his way in a 
desert, repeated this stanza to Brhaspati and Indra, who thereupon 


enabled him to regain his road. 
No Track of Cattle— Agavyati ksetram, gosaricararahitam desam, a 
place devoid of the grazing of cattle. 


४८३९. दिवेदिवे सदृशीरन्यमर्ध कृष्णा अंसेधदप mi जाः। 

अहन्दासा वृषभो व॑स्नयन्तोदव्रे वचिनं शर्म्बरं WIR 
x 21. Indra, becoming manifest from his abode (in the 
irmament), dissipates, day by day, the resembling glooms, (so that 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
102 Rgveda Samhita 


he may distinguish) the other portion, (or the day); and the 
showerer has slain the two wealth-sceking slaves, Varcin and 
Sambara, in (the country of) Udavraja. 

The Country of Udavraja— So Sayana explains Udavraja, desa- 
visesah, a sort of country, one into which the waters flow, udakdni 
vrajantyasmin. 


४८४०. प्रस्तोक इन्नु राध॑सस्त इन्द्र दश कोशंयीर्दर्श वाजिनोऽदात्‌। 
दिवोंदासादतिथिग्वस्य राध॑ः शाम्बरं वसु प्रत्यग्रभीष्म॥२२ li 
22. Prastoka has given to your worshipper, Indra, ten purses 
of gold, and ten horses, and we have accepted this treasure from 
Divodas, the spoil won by Atithigva from Sambara. 


Ten Purses of Gold— Dasa kosaih, suvarna-pürnan dasakosan, the 
ten bags or chests full of gold. 


Atithigva— Prastoka, Divodása, and Atithigva, are different names 
of the same person, a Raja, the son of Srzijaya. 


४८४१. दशाश्चान्दश कोशान्दश वस्राधिभोजना । 
दशों हिरण्यपिण्डान्दिवोंदासादसानिषम्‌।।२३।। 


23. I have received ten horses, ten purses, clothes, and ample 
food, and ten lumps of gold from Divodása. 


४८४२. दश रयथान्प्रष्टिमत: श॒तं गा अथर्वभ्यः। अश्वथः पायवेऽदात्‌।।२४।। 
24. Asvattha has given to Payu ten chariots with their horses, 
and a hundred cows to the priests. 


To the Priests— Atharvabhyah is the term in the text which Sayana 
explains, to the Rsis of the Atharvagotra: Páyu is the brother of Garga; 
Asvattha is the same as Prastoka. 


४८४३. महि राधों विश्वजन्यं दधानान्‌ भरद्वाजान्त्सार्झयो अभ्य॑यष्ट।२५।। 
25. The son of Srñjaya has reverenced the Bharadvájas who 
have accepted such great wealth for the good of all men. 
४८४४. वन॑स्पते वीड्वङ्गो हि भूया अस्मत्संखा प्रतरण: सुवीर:। 
गोभिः सन्नद्धो असि वीळय॑स्वास्थाता तें जयतु जेत्वानि।।२६।। 
26. (Chariot made of the) forest lord, be strong of fabric; be 


our friend; be our protector, and be manned by warriors; you are 


girt with cow-hides: keep us steady; and may he who rides in you 
be victorious over conquered (foes). 


Be Manned by Warriors— Suviro bhava, Sayana explain surabhatt 
aih putradibhir và yuktah, joined with warriors, or with sons and the rest: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i 


COCHE OK M-——— t 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 47 ins 


(he latter could scarcely be predicated of a car, except as the source, 
figuratively speaking, of prosperity, and so far of descendants. 

You are Girt with Cow-Hides— Gobhih sannaddhosi; literally, you 
are bound together by cow: but both Sayana and Mahidhara, Yajurveda, 
29, 52, explain this govikaraih, by what are formed from cattle: so, in the 
next verse, gobhiravrtam is interpreted carmabhih parita avestitam, 
encompassed round with hides, as if the exterior of the war-chariot 
especially were so strengthened: Mahidhara gives us an alternative, 
encompassed with rays of light, or with splendours, gobhih, tejobhih. 


४८४५. दिवस्पृथिव्या: पर्योज sad वनस्पतिभ्यः पर्याभूत Ed 
अपामोज्मानं परि गोभिरावृतमिन्द्रस्य वज्र हविषा TË यज।।२७॥। 
27. Worship with oblations the chariot constructed of the 
substance of heaven and earth, the extracted essence of the forest 


lords; the velocity of the waters; the encompassed with the cow- 
hide; the thunderbolt (of /ndra). 
४८४६. इन्द्र॑स्य वज्रो मरुतामनीकं मित्रस्य गर्भौ वरुणस्य नाभि:। 

सेमां नो हव्यदातिं जुषाणो देव॑ रथ प्रतिं हव्या TAIRE 

28. Do you, divine chariot, who are the thunderbolt of Indra, 
the precursor of the Maruts, the embryo of Mitra, the navel of 
Varuna, propitiated by this our sacrifice, accept the oblation. 

The Precursor of Maruts, Etc.— Marutam anikam, Mitrasya 
garbho, Varunasya nabhih: anikam the Scholiast interprets agrabhitam, 
being before, out-stripping in speed; Mahidhara explains it mukhyam, 
principal or leader; the garbha of Mitra-Sayana endeavours to make sense 
of, by saying, the car is to be considered as contained by Mitra, the ruler 
of the day, as moving by day, whilst by the nabhi of Varuna it is 
intimated to be a fixed point or centre for the deity ruling over the night, 
when the car of Indra or Sürya stands still: Mahidhara derives garbha 
from gr, to praise, and considers mitrasya garbha equivalent to suryena 
stüyamána, to be praised by the sun: nabhi he derives from nábh, to 
injure, and translates it, the weapon of Varuna: both Scholiasts labour 
superfluously to attach meaning to what was never intended to have any. 


४८४७. उप॑ श्वासय पृथिवीमुत द्या dem d मनुतां विजितं जगत्‌ 
स Soh सजूरिनद्रेण देवैदूरादवीँयो अप॑ सेध TEURS I 
29. War-drum, fill with your sound both heaven and earth; and 
let all things, fixed or moveable, be aware of it: do you, who are 


associated with Indra and the gods, drive away our pope रय 
remotest distance. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
104 Rgveda Samhita 
बलमोजों al I 
४८४८. आ क्रन्दय | न आ धा निः निहि दुरिता बाधमानः। 
अप प्रोथ दुन्दुभे दुच्छुना इत इन्द्रस्य मुष्टिरसि वीळय॑स्व।।३०।। 
30. Sound loud against the (hostile) host: animate our prowess: 
thunder aloud, terrifying the evil-minded: rapid, drum, those 
whose delight it is to harm us: you are the fist of Indra: inspire us 
with fierceness. 
४८४९. आमूरज प्रत्यावर्तयेमाः केतुमद्‌ दुन्दुभिर्वावदीति। 
समश्चंपर्णाश्वरन्ति नो नरोऽस्मार्कमिन्द्र रथिने जयन्तु।।३१।। 
31. Recover these our cattle, Indra: bring them back: the drum 
sounds repeatedly as a signal: our leaders, mounted on their steeds, 


assemble: may our warriors, riding in their cars, Indra, be 
victorious. 


This and the two preceding verses occur in the Yajus, 29, 55-57. 
[सूक्तः४८] 


[ऋषि- viz बार्हस्पत्य, देवता- १-१० अग्नि, ११-१५, मरुद्गण अथवा 
(१३-१५ लिङ्गोक्त देवता, १६-१९ पूषा देवता) २२ पृश्नि, द्यावाभूमि अथवा 
मरुद्गण। छन्द- प्रगाथ १, ३, ५, ९, १४, १९, २० बृहती; २, ४, 
— 10 १२, १७ सतोबृहती; ६, c, महासतो बृहती; ७, २१ महाबृहती 
११, १६, ककुप्‌, १३,१८ पुरउष्णिक १५ अतिजगती, २२ अनुष्टुप्‌।] 
४८५०. य॒ज्ञायज्ञा वो अग्नये गिरागिरा च दक्षंसे। 
प्रप्न चयममृतत जातवेदसं प्रियं मित्रै न शंसिषम्‌ 11 
l. At every sacrifice (honour) the mighty Agni with your 


reiterated praise, whilst we glorify him, the immortal, who knows 
all things, our dear friend. 
Samaveda, 35, 703. 


४८५१. ऊर्जा नपातं स हिनायम्॑मयुदाशिम हव्यट!तये । 
वाजेष्वविता pice gs 
भुवद्‌ जता भुवदवृध उत त्राता तनूनाम्‌।।२।। 
2. The son of strength, for he verily is propitious to us, to whom let 
us offer oblations as to the conveyer of them (to the gods): may he 


be our defender in battles: may he be our benefactor and the 
grandsire of our offspring. 


४८५२. वृषा हयग्ने अजरों महान्विभास्यचिषा। 
अज॑स्रेण शोचिषा शोशुचच्छुचे सुदीतिभिः सु दीदिहि।।३॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 48 105 


3 Agni, who are the showerer (of benefits), mighty, and 
exempt from decay, you shine with (great) splendour; you are 
resplendent, brilliant (Agni), with unfading lustre: shine forth with 
glorious rays. 

= देवान्यजंसि [ 1 जज 
४८५३. महो देवान्यजसि यक्ष्यानुषक्तव क्रत्वोत दंसना। 
aa: सीं कृणुह्यग्नेऽव॑से रास्व वाजोत व॑स्व।४।। 

4. You sacrifice to the mighty gods: sacrifice (for us) 
continually, for (sacrifice is perfected) by your wisdom and your 
acts: bring them down, Agni, for our salvation: present (to them) 
the sacrificial food, partake of it yourself. 


४८५४. यमापो अद्र॑यो वना गर्भमृतस्य पिप्रंति। 
सह॑सा यो मंथितो जायंते fi: पृथिव्या अघि सार्नवि॥५।। 
5. (You are he) whom the waters, the mountains, the woods, 
nourish as the embryo of sacrifice; who, churned with strength by 


the performers (of the rite), are generated in the highest place of 
the earth. 

Whom the waters, the Mountains, Etc.— Yam dpo, adrayo vand 
piprati, may bear the more humble meanings of the water prepared to mix 
with the Soma, the vasativart, the stones for grinding the Soma, and the 
wood for attrition. 

X रोद॑सी तिरस्तमो 

४८५५. आ यः पप्रौ भानुना रोद॑सी उभे धूमेन॑ धावते दिवि। तिरस्तमों 
UE Et. EM = Es 
ददृश ऊर्म्यास्वा श्यावास्व॑रुषो वृषा श्यावा अरु वृषा 1(६।। 

i 6. He who fills both heaven and earth with light, who mounts 
with smoke into the sky, this radiant showerer (of benefits) is 
beheld in the dark nights dispersing the gloom: this radiant 
showerer (of benefits) presides over the dark nights. 

भरद्वाजे 
४८५६. बृहद्धिरने अर्िभिं: शुक्रेण॑ देव शोचिषां। भरद्वाजे समिधानो 
E z i 2 z < 
"ms रेवन्न: शुक्र दीदिहि द्युमत्पावक दीदिहि11911 

. 7. Divine, resplendent Agni, youngest (of the gods), when 
kindled by Bharadvája, shines with many flames, with pure lustre, 
(conferring) riches upon us; shine, resplendent purifier. 


४८५७. विश्वांसां गृहपतिर्विशामसि त्वम॑ग्ने मानुंषीणाम्‌। शतं पूर्भिर्यविष्ठ 
T 5E समेद्धार : Si CU [US = 
पाह्यंहसः समेद्धार wd हिमां: स्तोतृभ्यो ये च ददति।॥८॥ 
8. You, Agni, are the lord of the dwelling, and of all men the 
descendants of Manu: protect me, youngest (of the gods), when 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
106 Rgveda Samhita 


kindling you, with a hundred defences against iniquity. (grant me) 
a hundred winters, (as well as to those) who bestow gifts upon 
your worshippers. 

The Lord of the Dwelling— Grhapati, master or protector of the 
house. 


४८५८. vd न॑श्चित्र ऊत्या वसो राधांसि चोदय। 
अस्य रायस्त्वमग्ने रथीरसि विदा गाधं तुचे तु F: 
9. Wonderful (Agni), giver of dwellings, encourage us by 
(your) protection, and (the gift of) riches, for you are the conveyer, 
Agni, of this wealth: quickly bestow permanence upon our 


progeny. 
Samaveda, 41, 1623. 


४८५९. पर्षि तोकं तन॑यं पर्तुभिष्टमदंग्वैरप्रयुत्वभि:। 
अन्ने हेळांसि eat युयोधि नोऽदेवानि ह्वरांसि च।।१०॥। 


10. You protect with uninjurable, irremovable defences (our) 
sons and grandsons: remove far from us celestial wrath and human 
malevolence. 

m Sámaveda, 1624. 


Lu सबर्दुघां 
४८६०. आ संखाय: सबर्दुघां धेनुमजध्वमुप नव्य॑सा वच॑ः। 
| 
सुजध्वमनपस्फुराम्‌।।११।। 

11. Approach, friends the milk-yielding cow with a new song, 
and let her loose unharmed. 

The Milk-Yielding Cow— The milch cow, dhenu, is here introduced 
because this is the first of a series of stanzas of which the Maruts are the 
deities, either with reference to the milk which is their appropriate 


offering at sacrifices, or to Prsni, the mythological mother of the Maruts, 
in the form of a cow. 


४८६१. या शर्धाय मारुताय स्वभानवे श्रवो5मृत्यु धुक्षत। 
या मूंळीके मरुता तुराणां या सुम्मैरैवयावरी।।१२।। 

12. She who yields immortal food to the powerful, self- 
irradiating band of the Maruts, who (is anxious) for the 
gratification of the self-moving Maruts, who traverses the sky with 
(the passing waters), shedding delight. 

Who Traverses the Sky . . . . Shedding Delight— The text has only 


sumnair-evaydvari: the first is explained by the Scholiast, being with the 
means of the happiness, sukhahetubhuaih, the substantive being implied 


७८-७0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 48 107 
in the compound attributive of dhenu, or evayávari, from eva, who or 
what goes, as a horse, or the water of mad-air, the rain, and ydvarf, she 


who goes with, saha yáti ya, that is, who proceeds with rains, giving 
pleasure to others, anyesdm sukhdrtham vrstijdlaih saha gacchanti. 


४८६२. भरद्वाजायार्व धुक्षत द्विता। 
धेनुं च॑ विश्वदोहसमिर्षे च विश्वभोजसम्‌॥१३॥। 
13. Milk for Bharadvaja the twofold (blessing), the cow that 
gives milk to the universe, food that is sufficient for all. 


४८६३. d d इन्द्र न सुक्रतुं वरुणमिव मायिनम्‌। 
अर्यमणं न मन्दरं सृप्रभोजसं विष्णुं न स्तुंष आदिशे।।१४।। 
14. I praise you, the (company of Marts), for the distribution 
of wealth: (the company that), like /ndra, is the achiever of great 


deeds; sagacious like Varuna; adorable as Aryaman, and 
munificent as Visnu. 

४८६४. त्वेषं शर्धो न red तुविष्व््य॑नर्वाणं पूषणं सं यथां शता। सं 

= कारिषच्चर्षणि ७ T Eur CR Hos 1 

सहस्र पणिभ्य आँ आविर्गूळ्हा वसू करत्सुवेदा नो वसू 

करत्‌।।१५। 

15. I now (glorify) the brilliant vigour of the company of the 

Maruts, loud-sounding, irresistible, cherishing, whereby hundreds 

and thousands (of treasures) are bestowed collectively upon men; 


may that (company) make hidden wealth manifest; may it render 
the wealth easily accessible to us. 


४८६५. आ मां पूषन्ुप॑ द्रव शंसिंषं नु ते अपिकर्ण आघृणे। 
ह अर्यो अरांतयः।।१६।। 


16. Hasten, Piisan, to me: (repel), bright deity, (all) deadly 


assailing foes: close at your side I repeat your praise. 
. Close at your-side I repeat your Praise— Samstsam nu te karna, 
literally, I celebrate your praise quickly at your ear. 
वनस्पतिमशस्तीर्वि नीनंश 
४८६६. मा काकम्बीरमुद्वृहो वनस्पतिमशस्तीर्वि हि नीनश:। 
S 1 x: a s आदर्धते 
मोत सूरो अह एवा चन ग्रीवा आदधते वेः11१७॥॥ 

17. Uproot not, Pusan, the forest lord with its propeny of 
crows: utterly destroy those who are my revilers: let not the 
adversary ensnare me, as (fowlers) set snares for birds. 

Progeny of Crows— Kakambiram vanaspatim: the first is said by 
the Scholiast to amply metaphorically the author of the Sikta, with his 
children and dependants. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


108 Rgveda Samhita 


As Fowlers set Snares for Birds— Evd cana grīvā ddadhate veh 
even as sometimes they place snares for a bird: grivd is said to have here 
the unusual signification of damam, jālarūpam, a snare of the nature of a 
net. 


४८६७. दृतेरिव तेऽवृकम॑स्तु सख्यम्‌। 
अच्छिंद्रस्य दधन्वतः सुपूर्णस्य दधन्वत॑ः।।१८।। 


18. May your friendship be unbroken, like (the surfacc) of a 
skin without a flaw, containing curds. 

Skin containing Curds— Such a skin of curds, Sayana says, is 
always carried in Piisan 's chariot. 


४८६८. परो हि मत्यैरसिं समो देवैरुत श्रिया। 
अभि ख्यः पूषन्‌ पृत॑नासु नस्त्वमवां नूनं यथां पुरा॥।१९।। 
19. Supreme are you above mortals: equal in glory are you to 


the gods: therefore. Pusan, regard us (favourably) in battles: 
defend us at present as (you have defended) those of old. 


४८६९. वामी वामस्य॑ धूतयः प्रणीतिरस्तु सूनृतां। 
= देवस्य॑ वा मरुतो मर्त्यस्य वेजानस्य॑ प्रयज्यवः।।२०।। 


20. Maruts, agitators, especially to be adored, may your kind 
and true speech be our conductress; that pleasant (speech which is 


the guide) to desirable (wealth) for both gods and sacrificing 
mortals 


४८७०. सद्यश्चिद्यस्य चर्कृतिः परि द्यां देवो नैति सूर्य:। त्वेषं शवों दधिरे 
नाम॑ यज्ञियं मरुतों वृत्रहं शवो ज्येष्ट वृत्रहं शव॑ः।।२१।। 


21. Whose functions spread quickly round the heavens, like 
(the light of) the divine sun, since the maruts possess brilliant, foe- 
humiliating, and adorable foe-destroying strength, most excellent 
foe-destroying strength. 


४८७१. सकृद्ध द्यौरजायत सकृद्भूमिरजायत! 


Weal दुग्धं सकृत्पयस्तदन्यो नानु जायते।।२२॥ 
22. Once, indeed, was the heaven generated: once was the 


earth born; once was the milk of Prsni' drawn other than that was 
not similarly generated. 


1. पृश्नियै वै पयसो मरुतो जाता: (do Wo २.२.११.४) I 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 49 109 


Once Indeed was the heaven Generated, Etc.— This is rather at 
variance with the doctrine of the succession of worldly existences, but the 
Scholiast so understands it: sakrd ha dyaur ajdyata, utpadyate, and once 
born it is permanent, sakrd-utpannaiva sthita bhavati, or, being 
destroyed, no other similar heaven is born, na punas-tasyám nastáyám 
anya tat-sadrsi dyaur jdyate. 

Other than that was not Similarly Generated— Tadanyo 
F^ is explained; tatah param anyah padarthastatsadrso 
notpadyate, after that another object or thing like that (object or thing) is 
not produced. 


[सूक्त-४९] 
[क्रषि- ऋजिश्वा भारद्वाज। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- त्रिष्ठुप,१५ शक्वरी] 
४८७२. स्तुषे जनं ad नव्यसीभिर्गीभिमित्रावरुणा सुम्नयन्ता। 

त आ गमन्तु त इह श्रुवन्तु सुक्षत्रासो वरुणो मित्रो अग्नि: 11१ |i 

1. 1 commend with new hymns the man observant of his duty, 

and the beneficent Mitra and Varuna: may they, the mighty ones, 
Varuna, Mitra, Agni, come to our rite, and listen (to our praises). 

The Man Observant of his Duty— Stuse janam suvratam the 

Scholiast interprets daivyam janam, the divine people, devasarigham, the 


company of the gods, which is not incompatible with the purport of the 
hymn. 


४८७३. विशोविश ईड्यंमध्वरेष्वदृप्तक्रतुमरति युवत्यो:। 
fea: शिशुं सहसः सुनुमाग्न यज्ञस्य केतुमरुषं यज॑ध्यै॥।२॥। 
2. (I incite the worshipper) to offer worship to Agni, who 1s to 
be adored at the sacrifices of every man; whose acts are free from 
arrogance; the lord of two youthful (brides, heaven and earth); the 


child of heaven, the son of strength, the brilliant symbol of 
sacrifice. 
४८७४. अरुषस्य दुहितरा विरूपे स्तृभिरन्या पिपिशे सूरों अन्या। 

मिथस्तुरा विचरन्ती पावके मन्म ad नक्षत ऋच्यमनि।।३॥ 

3. May the two daughters of the radiant (sun) of various form, 
of whom one glitters with stars, the other (is bright) with the sun, 
mutually opposed, proceeding diversely, purifying (all things), and 
ae to our laudation, be pleased by the praise they hear (from 
us). 

The two Daughters— Day and night, who may be called the 
daughters of the sun, as, directly or indirectly, their cause. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a ee HEEN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
110 Rgveda Samhita 
४८७५. प्र वायुमच्छा बृहती मनीषा बृहद्रयिं विश्ववारं रथप्राम्‌। 

द्युतद्यांमा नियुतः पत्य॑मानः कविः कविमियक्षसि प्रयज्यो।॥४1। 


4. May our earnest praise proceed to the presence of Vayu, the 
possessor of vast riches, the desired of all, the filler of his chariot 
(with wealth for his worshippers): most adorable (Vayu), who are 
riding in a radiant car, and driving your Niyut (steeds), do you, 
who are far-seeing, show favour to the sage, (your adorer). 

Show Favour to the Sage— Kavim iyaksasi prayajyo: Mahidhara, 
Yajurveda, 33, 55 applies prayajyo to the priest, the Adhvaryu; worship, 
venerable priest, the wise Vayu, etc. 


४८७६. स मे वपुश्छदयदश्चिनोर्यो रथो विरुकमान्मन॑सा युजानः। 
` 1 25 Ki E 1 e NI = 
येन नरा नासत्येषयध्यैं वतिर्याथस्तन॑याय त्मनें च।।५।। 


5. May that splendid car of the Asvins, which is harnessed at a 
thought, clothe my form (with radiance): that (car) with which, 
Nasatyds, leaders of (rites), you go to the dwelling (of the 
worshipper) to fulfil his desires for his posterity and himself. 

'पर्जन्यवाता 
४८७७. पर्जन्यवाता वृषभा पृथिव्याः पुरीषाणि जिन्वतमप्यानि। 
! < 
सत्यश्रुतः कवयो यस्य॑ गीभिर्जगत: स्थातर्जगदा कृणुध्वम्‌।।६।। 

6. Parjanya aui Vata, showerers of rain, and from the 
firmament available waters: sage Maruts, hearers of truth, 
establishers of the world, multiply the moveable (wealth of him) 
by whose praises (you are propitiated). 

Multiply the moveable Wealth— Jagad ákrnudhvam: according to 
Sayana, jagat here comprehends fixed as well as moveable, all living 
things, jagat sthavara-jarigamatmakam sarvari pránijátam. 

i e 
४८७८. पावीरवी कन्या चित्रायुः सरस्वती वीरपत्नी feri धात्‌। 
ग्नाभिरच्छिद्रं शरणं सजोषां दुराधर्षं गृणते शर्म यंसत्‌। to | 

7. May the purifying, amiable, graceful Sarasvati, the bride of 
the hero, favour our pious rite: may she, together with the wives of 
the gods, well pleased, bestow upon him who praises her a 


habitation free from defects and impenetrable (to wind and rain), 
and (grant him), felicity. 


Amiable— Kanya, literally a maiden, is here explained! kamaniyd, to 
be desired or loved; the usual sense being incompatible with the following 


१. ग्ना: गायञ्यादीनि छन्दांसि। छन्दांसि d ग्ना: (Go Wo 4.29.2) 1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 49 111 
z vīrapatni, the wife of the hero, meaning, according to the 
Scholiast, Prajāpati or Brahmá; or it might mean the protectress of heroes 
or of men. 


४८७९. पथस्प॑थ: परिपतिं वचस्या कार्मेन कृतो अर्भ्यानळर्कम्‌। 
स नों रासच्छुरुधश्चन्द्राग्रा धियंधियं सीषधाति प्र Wer ui 


8. May (the worshipper), influenced by the hope (of reward), 
approach with praise the adorable (Piisan), protector of all paths: 
may he bestow upon us cows with golden horns: may Pusan bring 
to perfection our every rite. 

Yajurveda, 34.42: Mahidhara’s explanation differs in some respects 
from Sayana’s. 

Protector of all Paths— Pathaspathah paripatim: Püsan is 
especially customs viarum, see vol. I. Stikta 42. 


४८८०. प्रथमभाजं यशसं वयोधां सुपाणि देवं सुगभस्तिमृभ्वम्‌। 
होतां यक्षद्यजतं पस्त्यांनामग्नस्त्वष्टारं सुहवं विभावां।।९।। 

9. May the illustrious Agni, the invoker of the gods, worship 
(with this oblation), 79456, the first divider (of forms), the 
renowned, the giver of food, the well-handed, the vast, the adored 
of householders, the readily invoked. 

The Adored of Householders— Yajatam pastyánám: pastyam is a 


house, here used by metonymy for householder, according to Sayana, 
grhasthair yajaniyam. 


४८८१. भुर्वनस्य पितरं गीर्भिराभी wd दिवां वर्धयां रुद्रमक्तौ। 
बृहन्तमृष्वमजर॑ सुषुम्नमृधग्घुवेम कविनेषितासः।।१०॥। 

10. Exalt Rudra, the parent of the world, with these hymns by 
day; (exalt) Rudra (with them) by night; animated by the far- 
Seeing, we invoke him, mighty, of pleasing aspect, undecaying, 
endowed with felicity, (the source of) prosperity. 

४८८२. आ युवान: कवयो यज्ञियासो मरुतो गन्त गृणतो व॑रस्याम्‌। 
अचित्रं चिद्धि जिन्व॑था वृधन्तं इत्था नक्ष॑न्तो नरो अङ्गिरस्वत्‌।॥११॥। 
A. Ever youthful wise, and adorable Maruts, come to the 
Praise of your adorer: thus augmenting, leaders (of rites), and 
Spreading (through the firmament), like rays Jof light), refresh the 
Scanty woods (with rain). 


: Like Rays of Light— Naksanto aügirasvat the Scholiast renders 
angirasah, gamanasilarasmayah, rays endowed with motions: te yatha 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


TT manatee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
112 Rgveda Samhita 


sighram nabhastalam vyāpnuvanti tad vat, as they spread quickly through 
the sky, so) do the winds): or if avigiras retain its more usual signification 
of Rsi or Rsis, so named, then the property of rapid movement is assigned 
to them, yad và Rsayastad-vacchighragaminah. 

Refresh the Scanty Woods with Rain— Acitram cid hi jinvatha: 
citram is said to mean a place thick with shrubs and trees: with the 
negative prefix it implies the contrary, a place with little timber: the 
Maruts are solicited to satisfy such a place, with rain understood. 


४८८३. प्र वीराय प्र तवसें तुरायाजां यूथेव॑ पशुरक्षिरस्तम्‌। 
स पिस्पृशति तन्व श्रुतस्य स्तृभिर्न नाकं वचनस्य विप॑ः।१२।। 
12. Offer adoration to the valiant, powerful, swift-moving 
(company of the Maruts), as the herdsman (drives his) herd to their 


stall: may that (company) appropriate to its own body the praises 
of the pious worshipper, as the firmament (is studded) with stars. 


४८८४. यो रजाँसि विममे पार्थिवानि त्रिश्चिद्विष्णुर्मनवे बाधितायं। 
| शर्मन्नुपदद्यमांने E l = मंदेम m: m 1 lu F 
तस्य ते दद्यमाने राया मदेम तन्वारे तना च।।१३।। 
13. May we be happy in a horne, in riches, in person, in 


children, bestowed upon us by you, Visnu, who with three (steps) 


>>> made the terrestrial regions for Manu when harassed (by the 
Asuras). 


४८८५. तत्नोडहिर्बुध्न्यों अद्धिरकैस्तत्पर्वतस्तत्सविता चनो धात्‌। 
तदोष॑धीभिरभि रातिषाचो भगः पुरन्थिजिन्वतु प्र राये।।१४।। 


14. May Ahirbudhnya (propitiated) by (our) hymns, and 
Parvata and Savità give us food with water: may the bountiful 
(gods supply us), addition, with vegetable (grains); and may the 
all-wise Bhaga be propitious (to us) for (the acquirement of) 
riches. 

Ahirbudhnya— Budhna is explained Jantariksa, firmament, and 
budhnya is, what or who is there bom: ahi is interpreted he who goes, that 
is, in the sky, but the etymology is not satisfactory. 

Parvata— The commentator is rather at a loss to explain Parvata: it 
may mean, he says, the filler, parayitri, or the wielder of the thunderbolt, 
parvavad-vajram, tadván; or enemy of the mountain, gireh satru: in 
either sense it is obviously Indra. 

With Vegetable Grains— Tad osadhibhir-abhi; osadhayas tila- 
masddayah, the vegetables are sesamum, pulse, and the like. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 50 113 

४८८६. नू नो रयिं रथ्यं चर्षणिप्रां पुरुवीरं मह ऋतस्य॑ गोपाम्‌। क्रयं दाताजरं 
येन जनान्त्सपृधो अदेवीरभि च क्रमाम विश आदेवीरभ्यई 
शनवांम।।१५।। 


15. Grant us, (universal gods), riches, comprehending chariots, 
numerous dependants, many male offspring, (wealth) the giver of 
efficiency to the solemn rite, and a dwelling free from decay, 
wherewith we may overcome malevolent men and unrightious 
(spirits), and afford support to those people who are devoted to the 
gods. 


ANUVAKA V 
[सूक्त-५०] 
[ऋषि- ऋजिश्वा भारद्वाज। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- Freq] 
४८८७. हुवे वों देवीमदितिं नमोभिमृळीकाय वरुणं मित्रमग्निम्‌। 
अभिक्षदामर्यमणं सुशेवं त्रतृन्देवान्त्सवितारं भर्गं च।।१॥ 

1. I invoke with adorations, for the sake of felicity, the divine 
Aditi and Varuna, Mitra and Agni, Aryaman, the overthrower of 
foes, worthy of devotion, Savitd and Bhaga, and (all) protecting 
divinities. 

४८८८. सुज्योतिषः सूर्य दक्षपितृननागास्त्वे सुंमहो वीहि देवान्‌। 

द्विजन्मानो य ऋतसाप॑: सत्याः स्वर्वन्तो यज॒ता अग्निजिह्वाः।।२॥। 
2. Radiant Sürya, render the luminous deities, who have Daksa 
or their progenitor, void of offence towards us; they who are twice 


born, desirous of sacrifice, observant of truth, possessors of 


Wealth, deserving of worship, whose tongue is Agni. 

Who have Daksa for their Progenitor— Daksapitrn, daksah 
pitàmaho yesam, they of whom Daksa is the grandfather: the 
grandchildren of Daksa, however, were sundry sentiments and passions: 
see Visnu Purána, 55, and pitara, therefore, must here be understood, 
according to Sayana, only in the general sense of priority or seniority. 

. They who are Twice Born— Dvijanmdnah, they who are have two 
births, means agreeably to Sayana, they who are manifest or present in 
two spheres, heaven and earth. 


४८८९. उत द्यावापृथिवि क्षत्रमुरु बृहद्रोदसी शरणं सुघुम्ने। 
महस्करथो वरिवो यथां नोऽस्मे क्षयाय धिषणे अनेहः।।३।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


या अमल 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


114 Rgveda Samhita 


3. Or bestow, Heaven and Earth, vast strength: give us, Earth 
and Heaven, a spacious habitation for our comfort: so arrange, that 
infinite wealth may be ours, remove, beneficent deities, iniquity 
from our abode. 


४८९०. आ नों रुद्रस्य॑ सूनवो नमन्तामद्या हूतासो वसवोऽ धृष्टाः। 
यदीमर्भे महति वां हितासों बाधे मरुतो अह्वाम देवान्‌।४।। 

4. May the sons of Rudra, givers of dwellings, the unsubdued, 
invoked on this occasion, stoop down to us, inasmuch as we call 
upon the divine Maruts that they may be our helpers in difficulty, 
great or small. 

४८९१. मिम्यक्ष ay रोदसी नु देवी सिष॑क्ति पूषा अभ्यर्धयज्वां। 
श्रुत्वा wd मरुतो यद्धं याथ भूमां रेजन्ते अध्वनि प्रविक्ते।।५।। 

5. With whom the divine Heaven and Earth are associated; 

whom Ptisan, the rewarder (of his worshippers) with prosperity, 


honours: when, Maruts, having heard our invocation, you come 
hither, then on your several paths all beings tremble. 


४८९२. अभि त्यं वीरं गिर्वणसमर्चेन्द्र ब्रह्मोणा जरितर्नवेन। | 
श्रवदिद्धवमुप च स्तवानो रासद्वाजाँ उप॑ महो गृंणानः।।६।। 
6. Praise, worshipper, with a new hymn, that hero, Indra, who 


is deserving of praise: may he, so glorified hear our invocation: 
may he, so lauded, bestow upon us abundant food. 


४८९३. ओमानमापो मानुषीरमृक्तं धात॑ तोकाय तन॑याय शं यो:। 
यूयं हि ष्ठा भिषजों मातृत॑मा विश्व॑स्य स्थातुर्जग॑तो SAA: 11911 
7. Waters, friendly to mankind, grant uninterrupted (life) 
preserving (food) for (the perpetuation of our) sons and grandsons; 


grant us security and the removal (of all evil), for you are more 


than maternal physicians; you are the parents of the stationary and 
moveable universe. 


Security and the Removal of all Evil— Samyoh: the first is 
explained samanam upadravandm, the appeasing of oppressions Or 
violences; and the second, yavanam, prthak-karanam prthakkartvyanam, 
the making separate of those things which are to be kept off. 


४८९४. आ नो देव: संविता त्रायमाणो हिरण्यपाणिर्यजतो जंगम्यात्‌। 
यो दत्र॑वाँ उषसो न प्रतीकं व्यूर्णुते दाशुषे वार्याणि।८।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| ; 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 50 115 


8. May the adorable, golden-handed Savita, the preserver, 
come to us; he, the munificent, who, like the opening of the dawn, 
displays desirable (riches) to the offerer of the oblation. 


४८९५. उत त्वं सूनो सहसो नो अद्या देवाँ अस्मिन्रध्वरे व॑वृत्या:। 
स्यामहं ते सदमिद्रातौ तव॑ स्यामग्नेश्वसा gii 
9. And do you, son of strength, bring back toady the deities to 
this our sacrifice; may I be ever in (the enjoyment of) your bounty: 


may I, through your protection, Agni, be blessed with excellent 
male descendants. 


४८९६. उत त्या मे हवमा ज॑ग्म्यातं नासंत्या धीभिर्युवमङ्ग विंप्रा। 
afi Sie TS E 
त्रे न महस्तमसो5मुमुक्तं qed नरा दुरितादभीके tte t 
10. Wise Násatyás come quickly to my invocation (united) 


with holy acts: (extricate us) from thick darkness, as you did 
extricate Atri; protect us, leaders (of rites) from danger in battle. 
E ` EN N | 
४८९७. ते नो रायो द्युमता वाजवता दातारा भूत Ted: पुरुक्षोः। 
RCS वासो z गोर्जाता ENT 1 
दशस्यन्तो दिव्याः पार्थि T अप्यां मृळतां च देवाः।।११॥। 

! 11. Be unto us, gods, donors of splendid, invigorating riches, 

comprising male descendants, and celebrated by many: celestial 

Adityas, terrestrial Vasus, offspring of Prsni, children of the 

waters, granting our desires, make us happy. 

Celestial Adityas, terrestrial Vasus, Etc.— The text has epithets 
only, the Scholiast supplies the nomencalture: thus divyd, the celestial, 
that is, the Adityas; parthivasah, terrestrials, that is, the Vasus; go-jatah, 
cow-born, born of Prsni, the Maruts, apyáh, the aquatic, born in the 
firmament, the Rudras. 


४८९८. ते नो रुद्र: सरस्वती सजोषा मीळ्हुष्मन्तो विष्णुर्मुलन्तु वायु:। 
ऋभुक्षा वाजो दैव्यों विधाता पर्जन्यावार्ता पिप्यतामिर्ष न:11१२॥। 

12. May Rudra and Sarasvati, alike well pleased and Visnu 
and Vayu, make us happy, sending rain; and Ribhuksin, and Vaja, 
and the divine Vidhata: and may Parjanya and Vata grant us 
abundant food. 

: ` 1 
४८९९. उत स्य देवः संविता भगो नोऽपां नपांदवतु दानु पप्रि:। 
च = = a F dae 
त्वष्टा देवेभिर्जनिभिः सजोषा द्यौर्देवेभिः पृथिवी समुद्रे:11१३॥ 
13. And may the divine Savitd and Bhaga, and the grandson of 


the waters, (Agni), the prodigal of gifts, preserve us, and may 
Tvastá with the gods, and Earth with the seas, (preserve us). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


mue ee BERE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
116 Rgveda Samhita 
४९००. उत नोऽहिुध्न्यंः शृणोत्वज एकपात्पूथिवी संमुद्रः। fad देवा 
E > z% x > 2 
ऋतावृधों हुवानाः स्तुता मन्त्राः कविशस्ता अंवन्तु।।१४।। 

14. May Ahirbudhnya, Aja-Ekapád, and Earth and Ocean, hear 
us; may the universal gods, who are exalted by sacrifice, they who 
are invoked and praised (by us), to whom mystical prayers are 
addressed, and who have been glorified by (ancient) sages, 


preserve us. 
Yajurveda, 34,53. 


४९०१. एवा नपातो मम wed धीभिर्भरद्वाजा अभ्यंचन्त्यकें:। 
ग्ना हुतासो वसवोच्धृष्टा विश्वे स्तुतासो भूता यजत्राः।।९५।। 


15. Thus do my sons, of the race of Bharadvája, worship the 
gods with sacred rites and holy hymns; and so, adorable (deitics), 
may you, who are worshipped and glorified, the givers of 
dwellings, the invincible, universal gods, ever be adored, (together 
with your) wives. 


[सूक्त-५ १] 
[ऋषि- ऋजिश्वा भारद्वाज। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। 
— छन्द- AT, १३-१५ उष्णिक्‌, १६ अनुष्टुप्‌] 


४९०२. उदु त्यच्चक्षुर्महि मित्रयोराँ एति प्रियं वरुणयोरद॑ब्धम्‌। 
ऋतस्य शुचि दर्शतमनींक॑ रुकमो न दिव उदिता व्यद्यौत्‌।।१ i 
1. The expansive, illuminating, unobstructive, pure, and 


beautiful radiance of the sun, grateful to Mitra and Varuna, having 
risen, shines like the ornament of the sky. 


४९०३. वेद्‌ यस्रीणि विदथन्यिषां देवानां जन्म॑ सनुतरा fendi 
ऋजु मतेषु वृजिना च पश्यन्नभि P सूरो अर्य एवा्‌॥।२।। 


2. He who knows the three congziable (worlds); the sage (who 
knows) the mysterious birth of the divinities (abiding in them); he 


who is beholding the good and evil acts of mortals, he, the sun, the 
lord, makes manifest their intentions. 


The Diyinities Abiding in them— Of the Vasus on earth, the Rudras 
in the firmament, the Adityas in heaven. 


४९०४. स्तुष उ वो मह क्रतस्य गोपानर्दिति मित्र ui सुजातान्‌। 
अर्यमणं भगमदब्धधीतीनच्छा वोचे werd: पावकान्‌।।३।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OO e 


a by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 51 117 
3. I praise you, protectors of the solemn sacrifice, the well- 
born Aditi, Mitra and Varuna, and Aryaman and Bhaga; { celebrate 
the gods whose acts are unimpeded, the bestowers of wealth, the 
dispensers of purity; 

| læ I सत्पतीँरदब्धान्महो ` 1 1 
४९०५. रिशादसः सत्पर्तीरदब्धान्महा राज्ञः सुवसनस्य दातृन्‌। 
| Ix नृनादित्यान्याम्यदितिं Ine 
यून॑ः सुक्षत्रान्क्षयतो दिवो जृनादित्यान्याम्यदितिं दुवोयु 1४11 
4. The scatterers of the malevolent, the defenders of the 
virtuous, the irresistible, the mighty lords, the donors of good 
dwellings, ever young, very powerful, omnipresent, leader of 
heaven, the sons of Aditya: I have recourse to Aditi, who is 
gratified by mine adoration. 


४९०६. द्यौष्पितः पृर्थिवि मातरध्रुगग्ने भ्रातर्वसवो om नः। 
fad आदित्या अदिते सजोषां अस्मभ्यं शर्म बहुलं वि य॑न्त।५॥ 
5. Father Heaven, innocent mother Earth, brother Agni, and 


you, Vasus, grant us happiness; all you sons of Aditi, and you 
Aditi, alike well-pleased, bestow upon us ample felicity. 


४९०७. मा नो gala qa समस्मा अघायते रीरधता यजत्रा:। 
यूयं हि ठा रथ्यो नस्तनूनां यूयं दक्ष॑स्य वच॑सो बभूव॥६॥ 
6. Subject us not, adorable (deities), to the robber or his wife; 


not to any one designing us harm; for you are the regulators of our 
persons, of our strength, of our speech. 

To the Robber of his Wife— Mā no vrkaya vrkye riradhatd, the 
substantives are explained hirisak@ya, stendya,to the injurer, the thief, and 
tasya striyai, to his woman, or wife; or vrka may retain its ordinary sense 
of wild-dog, or wolf, aranya Svan, and vrki import its female. 

> तत्कर्म foxy 
४९०८. मा व एनों अन्यकृतं भुजेम मा तत्क॑र्म वसवो यच्चयध्वे। 
E n = 2 LS 
विश्व॑स्य हि क्षय॑थ विश्वदेवाः स्वयं रिपुस्तन्वं रीरिषीष्ट। (911 

7. Let us not suffer for the sin committed by another: let us not 
do that which, Vasus, you prohibit: you rule universal gods, over 
the universe: (so provide that) mine enemy may inflict injury on 
his own person. 


४९०९. नम इदुग्रं नम आ विंवासे नमो दाधार पृथिवीमुत द्याम्‌। 
नमो देवेभ्यो नम॑ ईश एषां कृतं चिदेनो नमसा विंवासे।८॥। 
8. Reverence be to the potent (company of universal gods): I 
offer (them) reverence: reverence sustains both earth and heaven: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Sis a आ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
118 Rgveda Samhita 


reverence be to the gods: reverence is sovereign over them: I 
expiate by reverence whatever sin may have been committed. 

Reverence sustains both Earth and Heaven— The Scholiast says 
that earth and heaven, by receiving the namas or namaskara, the 
reverential salutation or homage of mortals, continue throughout a long 
period for their enjoyment. 


४९१०. क्रृतस्यं वो WA: पूतदक्षानृतस्य॑ पस्त्यसदो अदब्धान्‌। 
ताँ आ नमोभिरुरुचक्षसो नृन्विश्वान्व आ न॑मे महो य॑जत्राः।।९।। 

9. Adorable (deities), I venerate with reverential salutations all 
you who are mighty, the mighty, the regulators of your sacrifice, 
of pure vigour, dwellers in the chamber of worship, unsubdued, 
far-seeing, leaders (of rites). 


The Regulators of your Sacrifice— Ritasya rathyai, yajñasya 
ranhitrn, netrn, the leaders or conveyers of the sacrifice offered to them. 


४९११. ते हि ग्रेष्ठवर्चसस्त उ नस्तिरो विश्वानि दुरिता नर्यन्ति। 
सुक्षत्रासो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निक्रतधींतयो वकमराज॑सत्याः।।१०।। 
10. May they, exceeding in splendour, so guide us, that all 
iniquities may disappear; they, the very powerful Varuna, Mitra, 


>>> Agni, practisers of truth, and faithful to those who are prominent in 
(their) praise. 


४९१२. ते न इन्द्र: पृथिवी क्षाम॑ वर्धन्पूषा भगो अदितिः पञ्च जना: 
सुशर्माण | 1 a 
सुशर्माण: स्वव॑सः सुनीथा भवन्तु नः सुत्रात्रासः सुगोपाः।।११।। 
11. May they, Indra, Earth, Pusan, Bhaga, Aditi, and the five 
orders of beings, give increase to our habitations; may they be to 


us granters of happiness, bestowers of food, guides to good, our 
gracious defenders and preservers. 


४९१३. नू सदानं दिव्य नंशि देवा भारद्वाज: सुमतिं याति होता। 
आसानेभिर्यजमानो मियेधैर्देवानाँ जन्म वसूयुर्ववन्द।।१२।। 


12. May the presenter of the oblation, Bharadvája, quickly 
obtain, gods, a celestial abode, as he solicits your good-will: the 
institutor of the ceremony, together with pious associates, desirous 
of riches, glorifies the assembly of the gods. 


४९१४. अप त्यं दूजिनं रिपुं स्तेनमंग्ने दुराध्य॑म्‌। 
दविष्ठमस्य सत्पते कृधी FTR 


७८-७0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 52 119 


13. Drive away, Agni, to a distance the wickes, felonious, 
malignant enemy: grant us felicity, protector of the virtuous. 

Sávaveda,105. 

1 EY Bi I 
४९१५. ग्रावाण: सोम नो हि कं सखित्वनाय rest: | 
I त्रिणं पणिं EN 
जही न्यशत्रिणं पणि वृको हि षः।।१४।। 

14. These our grinding stones are anxious, Soma, for your 
friendship: destroy the voracious Pani, for verily he is a wolf. 

Destroy the Voracious Pari, Etc.— Jahi ninatrinam panim vrko hi 
sah: Pani may here mean a trader, a greedy trafficker, who gives no 
offerings to the gods, no presents to the priests: hence he comes to be 


identified with an asura, or enemy of the gods: vrka may be also rendered 
a robber, an extortioner, from the root vrk, to seize or take away, adane. 


४९१६. यूयं हि छठा सुदानव इन्टरज्येष्ठा अभिद्यव:। 
कर्ती नो अध्वन्ना सुगं गोपा अमा॥।१५।। 

15. You are munificent and illustrious, gods, with Indra for 
your chief, be with us, protectors, on the road, and grant us 
happiness. 

४९१७. अपि पन्थामगन्महि स्वस्तिगार्मनेहसंम्‌। 
येन विश्वाः परि द्विषो वृणक्ति विन्दते ees I 
16. We have travelled along the road prosperously traversed 


and free from evil, and by which (a man) avoids adversaries and 
acquires wealth. 


[सूक्त-५२] 
[ऋषि- क्रजिश्वा भारद्वाज। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, ७-१३ गायत्री, १४ जगती] 
४९१८. न तद्दिवा न पृथिव्यानु मन्ये न यज्ञेन नोत शमींभिराभिः। 
उब्जन्तु d gea: पर्वतासो नि हींयतामतियाजस्य॑ A N 
1. I do not regard it as worthy (of the gods) of heaven: or 
(those) of earth, as (fit to be compared) with the sacrifice (I offer), 
or with these (our) sacred rites: let, then, the mighty mountains 
Overwhelm him; let the employer of Atiydja be ever degraded. 
Let the Employer of Atiyaja be ever Degraded— According to 


Sayana, Rjisvan here pronounces an imprecation upon Atiydja, a rival 
priest. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ड _ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


120 Rgveda Samhita 
४९१९. अति वा यो मरुतो मन्यते नो ब्रह्म वा यः क्रियमाणं निनित्सात्‌। 
तपूंषि तस्मै वृजिनानिं सन्तु ब्रह्मद्विष॑मभि तं शोचतु di: 


2. Maruts, may the energies of that man be enfecbled: may 
heaven consume that impious adversary who thinks himself 
superior to us, and who pretends to depreciate the worship that we 
offer. 

That impious Adversary— Brahmadvisam, and again, in the next 
verse, brahmadvise: the first is explained by Sayana simply tam satrum 
that enemy, with reference to the word brahma, which has gone before, 
religious act or praise, the enemy or obstructer of prayer or praise: in the 


second place he interprets it brdhmana-dvestd, the hater or enemy of the 
Bráhmanas. 


४९२०. किमङ्ग त्वा ब्रह्मणः सोम गोपां किमङ्ग त्वांहुरभिशस्तिपां H: 
किमङ्ग न॑ः पश्यसि निद्यमानान्‌ बरह्मद्विषे तपुषिं हेतिम॑स्य।।३।। 
3. Why have they called you, Soma, the protector of pious 
prayer? Why (have they called you) our defender against calumny? 


Why do you behold us subjected to reproach? Why do you behold 


ug us subjected to reproach? Cast your destroying weapon upon the 
adversary of the Brahman. 


४९२१. अव॑न्तु मामुषसो जाय॑माना अवन्तु मा सिन्ध॑वः पिन्व॑मानाः। 
अव॑न्तु मा पर्वतासो ध्रुवासोऽवन्तु मा पितरों देवहूतौ।॥४।। 
4. May the opening dawns preserve me: may the swelling 


rivers preserve me: may the firm-set mountains preserve me: may 
the progenitors (present) at the invocation of the gods preserve me. 


४९२२. विश्वदानीं सुमन॑सः स्याम पश्येम नु सूर्यमुच्चरन्तम्‌। 
करद्वसुंपतिर्वसूनां H देवाँ = 
तथां करद्वसुपतिर्वसूनां देवाँ ओहानोञ्वसागमिष्ठ:11५1। 
5. May we at all seasons be possessed of sound minds: may We 
ever behold the rising sun: such may the affluent lord of riches, 


(Agni), render us, ever most ready to come (at our invocation), 
charged with our oblation to the gods. 


४९२३. Sal नेदिष्ठमवसागमिष्ठ: सरस्वती सिन्थुभिः पिन्व॑माना। 
पर्जन्यो ओषंधीभिर्मयोभुरग्नि: सुशंस॑: ged: पितेव॑ 1६1 


6. May Indra be most prompt to come nigh for our protection, 
and Sarasvati dwelling with (tributary) rivers: may Parjanya, with 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EGE के RT bE si SN 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 52 . D 


the plants, be a giver of happiness; and may Agni, worthily praised 
and earnestly invoked, (be to us) like a father. 


४९२४. विश्वें देवास आ गंत शृणुता म॑ इमं हवम्‌। एदं बर्हिर्नि षीँदत।।७।। 
7, Come, universal gods, hear this my invocation: sit down 
upon this sacred grass. 


i im XR 1 Md 1 A I 

४९२५. यो वो देवा घृतस्नुना हव्येन प्रतिभूषति। तं विश्व उप गच्छथ।।८।। 

8. Come, gods, to him who honours you with the butter 
dripping oblation. 


` I | 
४९२६. उप॑ नः सूनवो गिरः शृण्वन्त्वमृतस्य ये। सुमृळीका भ॑वन्तु नः॥९॥ 

9. May the sons of the immortal hear our praises, and be to us 
the givers of felicity. 

Son of the Immortal— Ampitasya siinavah the Scholiast calls the 
sons of Prajdpati, the Visvadevas: see Samaveda, 1595, Yajurveda, 33, 
IA 

MON 1 I Vg ¢ 1 जुषन्तां ० PEN 
४९२७. विश्वे देवा ऋतावृध कतुभिहवनश्रुत:। जुषन्तां युज्यं पर्यः।।१०॥। 

10. Universal gods, augmenters of sacrifice, listening to 
praises (uttered) at due seasons, accept your appropriate milk- 
offering. 

Appropriate Milk-Offering— Yujyam payas, a mixture of milk and 
curds termed dmiksa, as the text, tapte payasi dadhydnayati sd 
vaisvadevydmiksd when the milk is boiled he brings the curds, that is, the 
dmiksd, proper for the Visvadevas. 

अर्यमा 
४९२८. स्तोत्रमिन्द्रो मरुद्रणस्त्वष्टेमान्‌ मित्रो अर्यमा। 
इमा हव्या जुषन्त नः।।११।। 

11. Indra, with the company of the Maruts, Mitra, with Tvasta 
and Aryaman, accept our praise and these our oblations. 

४९२९. इमं नो अग्ने अध्वरं होतर्वयुनशो यज। चिकित्वान्दैव्यं TRR 

12. Agni, invoker of the gods, cognizant (which of) the divine 
assembly (is be honoured), offer this our sacrifice according to the 
Proper order. ७ 


४९३०. विश्वे देवाः शृणुतेमं हवं मे ये अन्तरिक्षे य उप द्यवि EI 
ये अग्निजिह्वा उत वा यजत्रा आसद्यास्मिन्वर्हिषि मादयध्वम्‌।॥१३॥ 


13. Universal gods, hear this my invocation, whether you be in 
the firmament or in the heaven: you who (receive oblations) by the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
122 Rgveda Samhita 


tongue of Agni, or are to be (otherwise) worshipped: seated on this 
sacred grass, be exhilarated (by the Soma). 


४९३१. विश्वे देवा मम॑ शुण्वन्तु यज्ञियां उभे रोदंसी अपां नपाच्च मन्म॑। 
मा वो वचाँसि परिचक्ष्याणि वोचं सुम्नेष्विद्वो अन्तमा मदेम।।१४।। 


14. May the adorable, universal deities, and both heaven and 
earth, and the grandson of the waters, hear my praise: let me not 
utter words to be disregarded, but let us, (brought) most nigh unto 
you, rejoice in the happiness (you bestow). 

siat ७ धस्थै 
४९३२. ये के च ज्मा महिनो अहिमाया दिवो जंजिरे अपां सधस्थे। 
भ्य॑मिषये | 
ते अस्म विश्वमायु: क्षप॑ उस्रा व॑रिवस्यन्तु देवाः।।१५।। 

15. May those mighty deities, having power to destroy, 
whether they have been manifested upon earth or in heaven, or in 
the abode of the waters, bestow upon us and our posterity abundant 
sustenance both by night and day. 

Having Power to Destroy— Ahimdyah, is explained ahantr- 
prajnah, having the wisdom or knowledge that kills. 

Our Posterity— Asmabhyam isaye; the latter, isi, is derived from is, 


to wish, and is explained putradi, sons and the rest, asmabhydm tasmai 
ca, to us and to it, that is, posterity, as the object of desire. 


४९३३. अग्नीपर्जन्यावव॑तं धियं मेऽस्मिन्हवे सुहवा सुष्टुतिं न॑:। 
इळामन्यो 
मन्यो जनयद्‌ गर्भमन्यः प्रजावंतीरिष आ धत्तमस्मे।।१६ ।। 
16. Agni and Parjanya, prosper my pious acts: (accept), you 
who are reverently invoked, our praise at this sacrifice: one of you 


generates food, the other posterity: grant us, therefore, food 
productive of descendants. 

One of you Generates food, the other Posterity— Jldm anyo 
Janayat garbham anyah: Parjanya, by sending rain, causes the growth of 


com, and Agni, as the main agent in digestion, produces the vigour 
necessary for procreation 


४९३४. स्तीर्णे बहिंषिं समिधाने अग्नौ सूक्तेन महा नमसा विवासे। 
अस्मित्रो अद्य विदथे यजत्रा विश्वे देवा हविषिं मादैयध्वम्‌।।१७।। 


17. When the sacred grass is strewn; when the fire is kindled, 
and when I worship (you) with a hymn, and with profound 
veneration, then, adorable universal gods, rejoice in the oblation 
(offered) today at this our sacrifice. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


[SS mmm cM m रि सिके 


F 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 53 123 
[सूक्त ५३] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- पूषा। छन्द- गायत्री, ८ अनुष्टुप्‌] 
४९३५. वयमु त्वा पथस्पते रथं न वाजसातये। धिये पूपन्नयुज्महि ।।१।। 


1. Piisan, lord of paths, we attach you to us like a chariot, for (the 
sake of) bringing food, and of (accomplishing our) solemnity. 


` [4 | ne I ७ Lu गृहर्पतिं 
४९३६. अभि ना नर्य वसु वार प्रयतदक्षिणम्‌। वामं गृहपति नय।।२।। 

2. Conduct us to a gracious householder, friendly to men. 
liberal in (bestowing) wealth, the giver of pious donations. 

Liberal in Bestowing Wealth— Vasuviram, literally, a hero of 
riches, that is, according to the Scholiast, one who is especially the 
instigator of poverty to acquire wealth, dhanam abhipráptum viram 
dáridrasya visesena erayitàram. 

| अदित्सन्तं चिदाघृणे I ufa I 1 
४९३७. सन्तं चिदाघृणे पूषन्दानाय चोदय। पणेश्चिद्वि प्रदा मनः।।३।। 

3. Resplendent Piisan, instigate the niggard to liberality, soften 

the heart of the miser. 


४९३८. वि पथो वाज॑सातये चिनुहि वि gel जहि। 
l 1 
साधन्तामुग्र नो धियः।।४।। 
4. Pierce Piisan, select (fit) roads for the passage of provisions: 
drive away all obstructors, (thieves, or the like), so that our holy 
rites may be accomplished. 


४९३९. परि तृन्धि पणीनामारया हृद॑या कवे। अथेमस्मभ्यं रन्धय॥॥५॥। 


5. Pierce with a goad the hearts of the avaricious, wise Pusan, 


and so render them complacent towards us. 

Pierce with a Goad— Paritrndhi árayá: ard is described as a stick 
with a slender point of iron; pratoda, a goad; the common vernacular 
derivative, ardh, is a saw. 

अथेमस्मर्भ्य k 
४९४०. वि पूषन्नारया तुद पणेरिच्छ हृदि प्रियम्‌। अथेमस्मभ्यं रन्धय।1६ II 
6. Pierce with a goad, Pusan, the heart of the avaricious; 


generate generosfty in his heart, and so render him complacent 
towards as. 


४९४१. आ fu किकिरा कृणु पणीनां हृदया कवे। 
अधेमस्मर्भ्य रन्धय 1७11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


124 Rgveda Samhita 


7. Abrade, wise Påsan, the hearts of the avaricious; relax (their 
hardness), and so render them complacent towards us. 


४९४२. यां पूषन्ब्रह्मचोदनीमारां बिभर्ष्याघृणे। 
तयां समस्य हृद॑यमा fes किकिरा कृणु।।८।। 

8. Resplendent Pitsan, with that food-propelling goad which 
you bearest, abrade the heart of every miser, and render it relaxed. 
४९४३. या ते अष्टा गोओपशाघृणे पशुसार्धनी। तस्यास्ते सुम्नमीमहे ।।९।। 

9. Resplendent Piisan, we ask of you the service of that your 
weapon, which is the guide of cows, the director of cattle. 

४९४४. उत नों गोषणिं धियमश्वसां वांजसामुत। नृवत्‌ कृणुहि वीतये।।१०॥ 

10. Make our pious worship productive of cows, of horses, of 
food, of dependants, for our enjoyment. 


[सूक्त-५४] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- पूषा। छन्द- गायत्री] 
13 | 1 | | | 
४९४५. सं पूषन्‌ विदुषां नय यो अज्ञसानुशासति। य एवेदमिति FAAI 
— 1. Bring us, Piisan, into communication with a wise man who 
may rightly direct us, who may even say, this is so. 
Who may Even say, this is So— Ya evedam iti bravat: Sayana’s 
explanation of this is curious, and is justified by what follows: by Vidusd, 
a wise man, he understands a cunning man, a conjurer: the last phrase, he 
therefore interprets to mean, one who says, this, your property, has been 
lost, and the passage that precedes he explains as directing the way to the 


recovery of the lost or stolen goods: this is a new attribute of Pusan as the 
patron of fortune-tellers and recoverers of stolen property. 


४९४६. समुं पूष्णा गमेमहि यो गृहाँ अंभिशासंति। 
इम एवेतिं च URN 


2. May we, by the favour of Piisan, come in communication 
with (the man) who may direct us to the houses (where our goods 
are secreted), and may say, verily these are they. | 


४९४७. quis न रिष्यति न कोशोऽव॑ पद्यते। 
नो अस्य व्यथते पविः॥।३॥ 


3. The discus of Püsan does not destroy; its sheathe is not 
discarded, its edge harms not us. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


F 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 55 125 
४९४८. यो अंस्मै हविषाविधन्न तं पूषापि मृष्यते। प्रथमो विन्दते वस।४।। 

4. Püsan inflicts not the least injury on the man who 
propitiates him by oblations: he is the first who acquires wealth. 
४९४९. पूषा गा अन्वेतु नः पूषा रक्षत्वर्वत:। पूषा वाजं सनोतु न: 11५ l 

5. May Pusan come to (guard) our cattle, may Piisan protect 
our horses; may Piisan give us food. 
४९५०. पूषन्ननु प्र गा इहि यज॑मानस्य सुन्वन्त:। अस्माकं स्तुवतामुत।६।। 

6. Come, Piisan, to (guard) the cattle of the institutor of the 
rite presenting libations, and also of us repeating (your) praises. 
४९५१. मार्किर्नेशन्माकीं रिषन्माकी सं शारि केव॑टे। अधारिष्टाभिरा गंहि।।७। 

7. Let not, Püsan, our cattle perish; let them not be injured; let 
them not be hurt by falling into a well; come, therefore, along with 
them unharmed. 
४९५२. शुण्वन्तं पूषर्ण वयमिर्यमनष्टवेदसम्‌। ईशान राय ईमहे॥८ || 

8. We solicit of Prisan, who hears (our eulogies); who is the 
averter (of poverty); the preserver of that which is not lost, the 
ruler (over all). 

> 1 

४९५३. पूषन्तव॑ व्रते वयं न रिष्येम कदां चन। स्तोतारस्त इह स्म॑सि।।९।। 

9. May we never suffer detriment when engaged, Pisan, in 
your worship: we are at this time your adorers. 

Yajurveda, 33.41. 
४९५४. OR पूषा परस्ताद्धस्तं दधातु दक्षिणम्‌। पुनर्नो नष्टमाज॑तु॥१०॥ 

10. May Piisan put forth his right hand (to restrain our cattle) 


mom going astray: may he bring again to us that which has been 
ost. 


[सूक्त-५५] 
| [क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- पूषा! छन्द- गायत्री] 
| ४९५५. एहि वां विमुचो नपादाघृणे सं स॑चावहै। रथीक्रतस्य॑ नो aiit di 


l. Come illustrious grandson of Prajdpati to (me your) 
Worshipper: let us two be associated: become the conveyer of our 


Sacrifice, 
Grandson of Prajapati— Vimuco napát: the first is rendered by 
| Prajapati as he who, at the period of creation, lets loose, vimuñcati. 


Visrjati, all creatures from himself, svasakasat sarvah prajah. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


126 Rgveda Samhita 
Come to me, your worshipper— Ehi vam: Va, according to Sàyana, 


here means praiser, from the root va, to go, to have odour, vam gantdram 
stotaram mam, ehi, dgaccha. 


थीर्तमं कपर्दिनमीशांनं . सखांयमीमहे 
४९५६. रथीतं नं राध॑सो महः। रायः सरखायमीमहे।।२॥। 

2. We solicit riches of our friend, (Pusan), the chief of 
charioteers, the wearer of a braid (of hair), the lord of infinite 
wealth. 

The Wearer of a Braid of Hair— Kapardinam, kapardasciidd 


tadvantam; but it is more usually an epithet of Siva, importing a braid of 
hair, not the cada, or lock left on the crown of the head at tonsure. 


धीव॑तो | 

४९५७. रायो धारास्याघृणे वसो राशिरजाश्च। धीव॑तोधीवतः सखा ।!३॥ 

3. Illustrious Pūsan, you are a torrent of riches: you, who have 
a goat for your steed, are a heap of wealth; the friend of every 
worshipper. 
४९५८. पूषणं न्वश्जाश्चमुप स्तोषाम वाजिन॑म्‌। स्वसुर्यो जार उच्यते IPS 

4. We glorify Püsan, the rider of the goat, the giver of food, 
him who is called the gallant of his sister. 

Who is called the Gallant of his sister— Svasur yo jara ucyate, the 
sister of Påsan is the dawn, with whom he, as the sun, may be said to 

uy associate amorously. 
1 ति lie शुणोतु भ्रातेन्द्रस्य | 

४९५९. मातुर्दिधिषुमब्रवं स्वसुर्जारः शृणोतु नः। भ्रातेन्द्रस्य सखा मम ।५॥ 

5. I glorify Pūsun, the husband of his mother: may the gallant 
of his sister hear us; may the brother of Indra be our friend. 


The Husband of his Mother—- Maiur didhisum, ráreh patim, the 
lord or kusband of the night. 


The Brother of Jndra— As one of the Adityas, or sons of Aditi, he 
may be called the brother of Indra, who is also one of the number. 


४९६०. आजासं: पूषणं रथे निशुम्भास्ते ज॑नश्रियम्‌। 
देवं व॑हन्तु feda: uis 


6. May the harnessed goats, drawing the deity in his car, bring 
hither Pusan, the benefactor of man. 


[सूक्त ५६] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- पूषा। छन्द- गायत्री, ६ अनुष्टुप्‌] 


४९६१. य एनमादिदेशति करम्भादिति पूषणम्‌। न तेन॑ देव आदिशें।।१॥ 


1. No (other) deity is indicated by him who declares the 
offering of mixed meal and butter to be intended for वा, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


] 


hi iu ii 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sūkta 57 127 


Mixed Meal and Butter— Karambhat iti: karambha is said to be a 
mixture of parched barley-meal land butter. 


a 1 सत्पतिर्युजा B 
४९६२. उत घा स रथीत॑मः सख्या सत्पतिर्युजा। इन्द्रों वृत्राणि PARIR 
2. He, the chief of charioteers, the protector of the virtuous. 
Indra, destroys his foes, with his friend Pusan for his ally. 
Jos | D J 1 M ^ 
४९६३. उतादः परुषे गवि सूरश्चक्रं हिरण्ययम्‌। जयैरयद्रथीत॑मः॥।३।। 
| 3. He, the impeller, the chief of charioteers, (Pusan) ever urges 
[ on that golden wheel (of his car) for the radiant sun 
For the Radiant Sun— Paruse gavi: the first is explained parvayati, 
bhásvati và, the period-having or the shining: the second is rendered 
Aditya, he who moves or revolves, gacchatiti gaur-ddityah. 
४९६४. यदद्य त्वां पुरुष्ठत ब्रवाम दसर मन्तुमः। तत्सु नो मन्म॑ साधय |॥४॥। 


4. Since, intelligent Pasan, of godly aspect, the praised of 
many, we celebrate you today, therefore grant us the desired 
wealth. 


K 4 er I ` सीषधो आरात्‌ 1 

४९६५. इमं च॑ नो गवेषणं सातयें सीषधो गणम्‌। आरात्‌ पूषन्नसि श्रुतः11५ । 

5. Gratify this our assembly, desirous of cattle, by their 
acquisition: you, Påsan, are renowned afar. 

` ` 1 I 
४९६६. आ तें स्वस्तिमीमह आरे अघामुपावसुम्‌। 
Aim uix fi 

अद्या च॑ सर्वतातये us Igi 

6. We deserve of your well-being, remote from evil, 

९ approximate to wealth, both for the sake of general sacrifice toady, 
for the sake of general sacrifice to-marrow. 

s General Sacrifice today, Etc.— Adya ca sarvatátaye, svas-ca 
Sarvatdtaye: the substantive is explained yajfia, that which is conducted 
by all the priest, sarvair-rtvigbhis-tàyate; or it may mean for the 
dissemination of all enjoyment, sarvesam bhogánam vistáraya. 


g [सूक्त-५७] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र qun छन्द- त्रिष्ठुप्‌, २ जगती] 
४९६७. इन्द्रा नु पूषण वयं सख्याय॑ स्वस्तयें। हुवेम वाजंसातये॥१ ii 
1. We invoke you, Indra and Pusan, for your friendship, for 


our well-being, and for the obtaining of food. 
Samaveda, 202. 


४९६८. सोममन्य उपासदत्पात॑वे चम्वोः सुतम्‌। करम्भमन्य इंच्छति।।२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


128 Rgveda Samhita 


2. One (of you) approaches to drink the Soma poured out into 
ladles, the other desires the buttered meal. 
The Buttered Meal-Karambham: see the preceding Sita, note on I. 


४९६९. अजा अन्यस्य वह॑यो हरी अन्यस्य सम्भूता। 
I. [| 
ताभ्याँ वृत्राणि जिघ्नते।।३।। 


3. Goats are the bearers of the one, two well-fed horses of the 
other, and with them he destroys his foes. 
४९७०. यदिन्द्रो अन॑यद्रितों महीरपो वृष॑न्तमः। तत्र पूषाभ॑वत्सचां।।४।। 

4. When the showerer Indra sends down the falling and mighty 


waters, there is Piisan along with him. 
Samaveda, 148. 


४९७१. तां पूष्णः सुमति वयं वृक्षस्य प्र वयामिव। इन्द्र॑स्य चा रभामहे।५। 


5. We depend upon the good-will of Püsan, and of Indra, as 
(we cling) to the branches of a tree. 


४९७२. उत्पूषणं युवामहेऽभीशूँरिव सारंथिः। मह्या इन्द्र स्वस्तयें।।६।। 


6. We draw to us, for our great welfare, Piisan and Indra, as a 
charioteer (pulls tight) his reins. 


[सूक्त-५८] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- पूषा। छन्द- Pre, २ जगती] 
४९७३. शुक्रं d अन्यद्यजतं d अन्यद्विषुरूपे अहनी चौरिंवासि। 
विश्वा हि माया अव॑सि स्वधावो भद्रा ते पूपन्निह रातिरस्तु ॥१ l 


1. One of your forms, (Prisan), is luminous, one is venerable: 
so that the day is variously complexioned: for you are like the sun 
verily, bestower of food, you protect all intelligences: may your 
auspicious liberality be manifested on this occasion 

Samaveda, 75, also Nirukta, 12.17, Sayana follows Yaska. 


You are like the Sun— Pisan is here identified with both day and 
night, or is considered as their regulator. 


४९७४. AMA: पशुपा वाजपस्त्यो धियञ्जिन्वो भुवने विश्वे अर्पितः। 
smi पूषा शिथिरामुद्दरीवृजत्‌ सञ्चक्षाणो भुवना देव HNR I 


2. The rider of the goat, the protector or animals, in whose 
dwelling good is abundant, the propitiated by sacred rites, who has 
been placed over the whole (world), the divine Pzsan, brandishing 
his loosened goad, proceeds (in the sky), contemplating all beings. 


७ ०-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 59 129 
Placed over the whole World— Placed so by Prajdpati, according 


to the Scholiast, in his capacity of nourishing all things, posakatvena. 
Proceeds in the Sky, Etc.— As identval with the sun. 
sl ^I समुद्रे हिरण्ययीरन्तरि 1 
४९७५. यास्ते पूषत्रावो अन्त: संमु क्षे चर॑न्ति। 
भ्यास AO EI E 
ताभिर्यासि दूत्यं सूर्यस्य कामेन कृत श्रव॑ इच्छमांन:11३॥ 

3. With those your golden vessels, which navigate within the 
ocean-firmament, you discharge the office of messenger of the 
sun: desirous of the sacrificial food, you are propitiated by (that 
which is) willingly offered. 

Messenger of the Sun— Yåsi dütyám süryasya: Sayana relates a 
legend which says, that on one occasion, when Sirya, with the gods, had 
set out to fight the Asuras, he sent Pusan to his abode to console his wife, 
who was greatly afflicted by his going to the wars; for which office Pusan 
is here commended. 


४९७६. पूषा सुबन्धुर्दिव आ पृथिव्या इळस्पतिर्मघर्वा दस्मवर्चाः। 
यं देवासो ace: सूर्यायै कामेन कृतं तवसं TSAI 

4. Püsan is the kind kinsman of heaven and earth, the lord of 
food, the possessor of opulence, of goodly form; whom the gods 
gave to Surya, vigorous, well-moving, propitiated by (that which 
is) willingly offered. 

Propitiated by that which is Willingly Offered— Kamena krtah is 
the whole text; the Scholiast fills it up with pasvadivisayena stotrbhir 
vasikrtah asi, you are subjected or propitiated by worshippers by means 
of the Pasu and other offerings. 


[सूक्त-५ ९] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्राग्गी। 
छन्द- बृहती, ७-१० agga] 
४९७७. प्र नु वोंचा सुतेषु वां वीर्यार यानि चक्र्थुः। 
हतासो वां पितरों देवशत्रव इन्द्राग्नी जीवंथो युवम्‌1॥१॥ 
1. When the libation is effused I celebrate, Indra and Agni, 


your heroic exploits: the Pitras, the enemies of the gods, have been 


Slain by you, and you survive. 
. The Pitras-— By Pitras, in this place, the Scholiast says Asuras are 
intended, as derived from the root pi to injure, piyatir-hirisákarme. 


४९७८. बळित्या महिमा वामिन्द्राग्नी पर्निष्ठ आ। 
समानो वाँ जनिता भ्रात॑रा युवं यमाविहे्हमातरा॥२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
130 Rgveda Samhita 


2. Your greatness, Indra and Agni, is after this fashion, and is 
most deserving of praise: the same is your progenitor: twin 
brethren are you, having a mother everywhere present. 

Having a mother everywhere Present— Zhehamátarau, of whom 
the mother is here and there: Aditi is their mother, in common with all the 
gods, and she is here identified with the wide extended earth, vistirna 
bhümih, according to Sayana. 


४९७९. ओकिवांसां सुते सचाँ अश्वा सप्तीं इवादने। 
इन्द्रान्वशग्नी अव॑सेह वज्रिणा वयं देवा हवामहे।1३।। 
3. You approach together, when the libation is effused, like 
two fleet coursers to their forage: we invoke today Indra and Agni, 


deities armed with the thunderbolt, to this ceremony for our 
preservation. 
इन्द्राग्नी सुतेषु ७ स्तवत्तेष्वृतावृ 
४९८०. य इन्द्राग्नी सुतेषु वां धा। 
sues T c SUE 4 1 
जोषवाकं वदतः पज्रहोषिणा न देवा भसथश्चन।।४।। 

4. Divine Indra and Agni, augmenters of sacrifice by whom the 
acclamation (of praise) is received, you partake not of the (Soma) 
of him who, when the libation is effused, praises you (improperly), 
uttering unacceptable culogies. i 

Praises you Improperly— Yo vam stavat is explained by the 
commentator, he who may praise you badly, kutsitar stüyát. 

Uttering Unacceptable Eulogies— Josavakam vadatah : the first is 
explained, pritihetutvena kartavyam svay apritikaram vacam, speech to 
be uttered with the design of gaining affection, but of itself producing 
disaffection or dislike; so in the Nirukta, 5.22, as quoted by Sayana, ya 
Indragni sutesu vam somesu stauti tesu na tasya asnithah, of him who 
praises you two, Agni and Indra, when the Soma juices are effused you do 
not eat (the offering): the printed Nirukta has, you eat, omitting the 
negative: of josavakam, it is first said, avijndtandmadheyam josayitavyam 
bhavati, that being of unknown name is to be propitiated; and again, yo 
ayam josavakam vadati vijanjapah na tasya asnithah, this person who 
utters, josavakam, repeating incessantly, or silently, propitiatory prayer of 
various object, of that man, you two do not eat the of! fering. 


४९८१. इन्द्रानी को अस्य वां देवौ मर्तश्चिकेतति। 
विषूचो अश्वान्युयुजान ईयत एक॑ः समान आ AL I 


5. What mortal, divine Indra and Agni, is a judge of that (your 


act), when one of you, harnessing his diversely-going horses, 
proceeds in the common car. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


SU eee ee C e 


E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 59 s 


One of you. . - . - Proceeds in the Common Car— Vistico asván 
yuyujána iyate ekah samane rathe: the one is Indra, who, as identical with 
the sun, goes over the world in a car which is common to him and Agni, 
as being also identified with the sun: the same identity being kept in view, 
Indra yokes the multiform horses, months, weeks, days, to a monoform 
car, or the year. 

इन्द्राग्नी अपादियं ूर्वागात्पदवती al 
४९८२. इन्द्राग्नी ३ द्वतीभ्यः। 
हित्वी शिरो जिह्वया वाव॑दच्चरलिंशत्पदा न्यक्रमीत्‌॥६॥ 

6. This footless (dawn), Indra and Agni, comes before the 
footed sleepers, animating the head (of living beings with 
consciousness), causing them to utter loud sounds with their 
tongues, and passing onwards she traverses thirty steps. 

Animating the Head— Hitvī siras, literally, exciting the head, which 
is the whole of the text, is explained prāninām siro prerayitri, urging or 
animating the head of living beings: or it may apply to the dawn, as being 
headless, siras tyaktva svayam asiraská sati, she having abandoned the 
head, being of herself headless, though what they may mean is doubtful: 
so Sámaveda, 281, and Yajus, 33.93: Mahidhara, after proposing the same 
interpretation as Sayana, suggests another, in which he refers the epithets 
to vdc, speech, apad, footless, meaning prose, gadyatmika, and so on, but 


this is obviously fanciful. 
Thirty Steps— The thirty muhurtas, the divisions of the day and 


might. 
४९८३. इन्द्राग्नी आ हि त॑न्वते नरो धन्वानि बाह्ो:। 
मा नो अस्मिन्महाधने परा वर्क गर्विष्टिषु [७11 


7. Indra and Agni, men verily stretch their bows with their 
arms, but do not you desert us contending for cattle in the great 
combat. 


४९८४. इन्द्रांग्नी तप॑न्ति माघा अर्यो अरातयः। 
e द्वेषांस्या ae ues I 
अप द्वेषांस्या कृतं युयुतं सूयादधिं।।८।। 
8. Indra and Agni, murderous, aggressive enemies harass us: 


drive away mine adversaries: separate them from (sight of) the 
sun. 


४९८५. Fait युवोरपि वसु दिव्यानि पार्थिवा 
आ न॑ इह प्र य॑च्छतं रयि विश्वायुपोषसम्‌।1९ I | 
9. Indra and Agni, yours are both celestial and terrestrial 


treasures: bestow upon us, on this occasion, life sustaining riches. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
132 Rgveda Samhita 


४९८६. इन्द्राग्नी उक्थवाहसा स्तोमेभिर्हवनश्रुता। 
विश्वाभिर्गीभिरा गंतमस्य सोम॑स्य पीतयें।१०।। 


10. Indra and Agni, who are to be attracted by hymns; you, 
who hear our invocation (accompanied) by praise and by all 
adorations, come hither to drink of this Soma libation. 


[सूक्त-६०] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्राग्नी। 
छन्द- गायत्री, १-३, १३ त्रिष्टुप्‌, १४ बृहती, १५ अनुष्टुप्‌] 
४९८७. श्रथंदवृत्रमुत स॑नोति वाजमिन्द्रा यो अग्नी सहुरी सपर्यात्‌। 
इरज्यन्तां वसव्यस्य भूरेः सहस्तमा सह॑सा वाजयन्तां।1१॥ 
1. He overcomes his enemy, and acquires food, who worships 


the victorious Indra and Agni, the lords of infinite opulence, most 
powerful in strength, desirous of (sacrificial) food. 


४९८८. ता योधिष्टमभि गा इन्द्र नूनमपः स्व॑रुषसों अग्न ऊळहाः। 
fea: werd इन्द्र चित्रा अपो गा अग्ने युवसे नियुत्वांन्‌।२।। 
2. Indra and Agni, verily you have combated for (the recovery 
of) the cows, the waters, the sun, the dawns that had been carried 
away (by the Asuras): you reunitest, Indra, (with the world), the 


quarters of the horizon, the sun, the wonderful waters, the dawns, 
the cattle, and so do you, Agni, who have the Niyut steeds. 


४९८९. आ वृत्रहणा वृत्रहभिः शुष्मैरिन्द्र यातं नमोंभिरग्ने अर्वाक्‌। 
युवं राधोभिरकवेभिरिन्द्राग्नै अस्मे भ॑वतमुत्तमेभिं:।।३।। 
3. Slayers of Vrira, Indra and Agni, come down with foe- 
subduing energies, (to be invigorated) by (our) offerings: be 


manifest to us, Indra and Agni, with unblameable and most 
excellent riches. 


४९९०. ता हुवे ययोरिदं पप्ने विश्वं पुरा कृतम्‌। इन्द्राग्नी न म॑र्धतः।४।। 


4. I invoke those two, the whole of whose deeds of old have 
been celebrated: Indra and Agni harm us not. 
Sdmaveda, 853. 


४९९१. उग्रा विघनिना मृधं इन्द्राग्नी हवामहे। ता नों मृळात Segun 
5. We invoke the fierce Indra and Agni, the slayers of enemies: 
may they give us success in similar warfare. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


F 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 60 133 


Sdmaveda, 854. Yajurveda, 33.61. 
EN वृत्राण्यार्या 1 I 
४९९२. हतो वृ हतो दासानि सत्पती। हतो विश्वा अप द्विष॑ः।।६।। 

6. Counteract all oppressions (committed) by the pious: 
counteract all oppressions (committed) by the impious; protectors 
of the virtuous, destroy all those who hate us. 

Oppressions Committed by the Pious, Etc.— Hato vrtrdny-dryd 
hato dāsāni, vrtráni and dásáni, being neuter, can scarcely signify aryas 
and dásas themselves: therefore the Scholiast interprets them dryaih and 
dásaih kytani, things done by them severally, that is, upadravajátáni, 
things generated by violence or oppression and the like; also Samaveda, 
855. 

zu युवामिमे$ 1 ` पिब॑तं 
४९९३. इन्द्राग्नी युवामिमेरैभि स्तोमां अनूषत। पिब॑तं शम्भुवा सुतम्‌।।७।। 

7. Indra and Agni, these hymns glorify you both: drink, 
bestowers of happiness, the libation. 

४९९४. या वां सन्तिं पुरुस्पृहो नियुतो दाशुषे नरा। 
इन्द्राग्नी ताभिरा गंतम्‌।।८।। 

8. Indra and Agni, leaders (of rites), whose Niyut steeds are 
desired by many, come with them to the donor (of the libation). 

> नरोपेदं ० सोम॑पीतये 
४९९५. ताभिरा ग॑च्छतं नरोपेदं सव॑नं सुतम्‌। इन्द्राग्नी सोम॑पीतये।।९॥ 
9. Come with them, leaders (of rites), to the effused libation, to 


drink, Indra and Agni, of the Soma. 
This and the two preceding occur Sdmaveda, 991-93. 


४९९६. तमीळिष्व यो अचिषा वना विश्वां परिष्व्जत्‌। 
कृष्णा कृणोतिं जिह्वयां।।१०॥। 


10. Glorify that Agni who envelopes all the forest with flame, 
who blackens them with (his) tongue. 


४९९७. य इद्ध आविवासति सुम्नमिन्द्रस्य मर्त्य: | 
चुम्नाय॑ सुतरां अपः।।११॥। 
11. The mortal who presents the gratifying (oblation) to Indra 


in the kindled (fire), to him (Indra grants) acceptable waters for his 
sustenance. 


इन्द्रमग्नि वोळहवे 
४९९८. ता नो वाजवतीरिष आशून्पिपृतमर्वत:। इन्द्रमग्निं च IRRI 
12. May those two grant us strengthening food, and swift 
horses to convey (our offerings). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
134 Rgveda Samhita 


Samaveda, 1151. 
वामिन्द्राग्नी 1 || 1 ध्यै ! 
४९९९. उभा वामिन्द्राग्नी आहुवध्यां उभा राधसः सह मांदयध्य। 
उभा दातार॑विषां रयीणामुभा वाज॑स्य सातयें हुवे वाम्‌॥१३॥ 
13. I invoke you both, Indra and Agni, to be present at the 
sacrifice; and both together to be exhilarated by the (sacrificial) 


food; for you are both donors of food and riches, and therefore I 
invoke you both for the obtaining of sustenance. 


५०००. आ नो गव्येभिरश्व्यैर्वसव्यैडरुपं गच्छतम्‌। 
सखांयौ देवौ सख्याय शम्भुवेन्द्रागनी ता eame |l 
14. Come to us with herds of cattle, with troops of horses, with 


ample treasures, divine friends, Indra and Agni: givers of 
happiness, we invoke you as such for your friendship. 


५००१. इन्द्राग्नी शृणुतं हवं यज॑मानस्य सुवन्तः। 
वीतं हव्यान्या ग॑तं पिब॑तं सोम्यं मधुं।।१५।। 


15. Hear, Indra and Agni, the institutor of the rite as he offers 


the libation: partake of the offering: come, quaff the sweet Soma 
beverage. 


[सूक्त-६ १] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- सरस्वती। 
छन्द- गायत्री, १-३, १३ जगती, १४ त्रिष्टुप्‌] 
५००२. इय्म॑दाद्रभसमृणच्युतं दिवोंदासं aAa दाशुषे। 
या शश्वन्तमाचखादावसं पणिं ता तै दात्राणि तविषा संरस्वति।।१।। 


1. She gave to the donor of the oblations, Vadhryasva, a son 
Divodása endowed with speed, and acquitting the debt (due to 
gods and progenitors); she who destroyed the churlist niggard, 
(thinking) only of himself: such are your great bounties, Sarasvatt. 

Divodisa— The Visnu Purana makes the father of Divodasa, 
Bahvasva but this is a various or erroneous reading: it is another 
representation of the name Bandhyasva: a MSS, of the Vayu Purana is 
cited in the note for the reading of our text, Badhryasva; Visnu Purdna, 
p.454, note 51. iB 


The Churlish Niggard thinking only of himself— Pani as usual. 
५००३. इयं शुष्मैभिबिसखाईवारुजत्सानु गिरीणां तविषेभिरूमिभि:। 
पारावतध्नीमर्वसे सुवृक्तिभिः सरस्वतीमा विवासेम धीतिभि:॥।२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 61 135 


2. With impetuous and mighty waves she breaks down the 
precipices of the mountains, like a digger for the lotus fibres: we 
adore for our protection, the praises and with sacred rites, 
Sarasvati the underminer of both her banks. 

With Impetuous and mighty Waves— In the first stanza Sarasvati 
has been addressed as a goddess: here she is praised as a river: the 
confusion pervades the entire Sata. 

Like a Digger for the Lotus-Fibres— Bisa-khd iva, bisam khanati, 
who digs the bisa, the long fibres of the stem of the lotus, in delving for 
which he breaks down the banks of the pond. 


Like a Digger for the Lotus-Fibres— 
५००४. सरस्वति देवनिदो नि बर्हय प्रजां विश्वस्य बृस॑यस्य मायिन; | 
उत क्षितिभ्योऽवनीरविन्दो विषमेभ्यो अस्रवो वाजिनीवति॥।३॥ 


3. Destroy, Sarasvati, the revilers of the gods, the offspring of 
the universal deluder, Brsaya: giver of sustenance, you have 
acquired for men the lands (seized by the Asuras), and have 
showered water upon them. 

Brsaya— Brsaya is a name of Tyvasid, whose son was Vrtra: in 
Sayana’s introduction to the Black, Taittiriya Yajus, a curious legend is 
related, intended to illustrate the importance of correctly accentuating the 
words of the Veda: Indra, it is said, had killed a son of Tvasíd, named 
Visvarüpa, in consequence of which there was enmity between them, and, 
upon the occasion of a Soma-sacrifice celebrated by Tvasid, he omitted to 
include Indra in his invitations to the gods: Indra, however, came an 
uninvited guest, and by force took a part of the Soma libation; with the 
remainder Tvasíá performed a sacrifice for the birth of an individual who 
should avenge his quarrel and destroy his adversary, directing the priest to 
pray, now let a man be born and prosper, the killer of /ndra: in uttering 
ihe Mantra, however, the officiating priest made a mistake in the 
accentuation of the term /ndraghataka, slayer of Indra, in which se 
a Tat-purusa compound, the acute accent should have been placed upon 
the last syllable; instead of which the reciter of the Mantra placed the 
accent on the first syllable, whereby the compound became a Bahuvrihi 
epithet, signifying one of whom Indra is the slayer: consequently, when, 
by virtue of the rite, Vrtra was produced, he was foredoomed by the 
wrong accentuation to be put to death by Indra instead of becoming his 
destroyer: Taittiriya Yajus, p.43. 

You have Acquired for men 
avaniravindo visam abhyo asravah 
Interpretation, according to Sayana, or, you 
or destroyed them. 


५००५. प्र णों देवी सरस्वती वार्जेभिवाजिनीवती। धीनामवित्रयवतु। Ps 


nse, as 


the Lands, Etc.— Ksitibhyo 
may also admit of a different 
have shed poison upon them, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

136 Rgveda Samhita 

4. May the divine Sarasvati, the acceptress of (sacrificial) 
food, the protectress of her worshippers, sustain us with (abundant) 
viands. 

धने हिते ७ qaqa 

५००६. यस्त्वां देवि सरस्वत्युपत्रूते धने हिते। इन्द्रं न वृत्रतूयेँ। ५ ।। 

5. Divine Sarasvati, protect him engaged in conflict for the 
sake of wealth, who glorifies you like /ndra. 
५००७. vd देवि सरस्वत्यवा वाजेषु वाजिनि। रदां पूषेव॑ न: सनिम्‌।।६।। 

6. Divine Sarasvati, abounding in food, protect us in combat, 
and, like Pusan, give us gifts. 
५००८. उत स्या नः सरस्वती घोरा हिरण्यवर्तनि:। वृत्रध्नी वष्टि सुष्ट्तिम्‌।॥७। 

7. May the fierce Sarasvati, riding in a golden chariot, the 
destructress of enemies, be pleased by our earnest laudation. 


५००९. यस्यां अनन्तो अह्रुतस्त्वेषश्वरिष्णुर्णव:। अमश्चरति resque ।। 
8. May she whose might, infinite, undeviating, splendid, 
progressive, water-shedding, proceeds loud-sounding. 
५०१०. सा नो विश्वा अति द्विषः स्वसुरन्या ऋताव॑री। अतन्नहैव सूर्य: 1 11 
9. Overcome all our adversaries, and bring to us her other 
z=» Water-laden sisters, as the ever-rolling sun (leads on) the days. 
Bring to us her other water-laden sisters— Ati svasrranyd ylayari: 


ati is put, it is said, for atini, to lead over or beyond, or in the order of the 
text, ati dvisah, may the other sisters overcome those who hate us. 


५०११. उत न॑ः प्रिया प्रयासं सप्तसव॑सा सुर्जुष्टा। सरस्वती स्तोम्या भूत्‌॥१०। 
10. May Sarasvati, who has seven sister, who is dearest 


amongst those dear to us, and is fully propitiated, be ever adorable. 


Seven Sisters— Saptasvasa: either the seven metres of the Vedas, or 
the seven rivers. 


. ५०१२. आपप्रुषी पार्थिवान्युरु रजो अन्तरिक्षम्‌। सरस्वती निदर्स्पातु ॥११ I 


11. May Sarasyati, filling (with radianc?) the expanse of earth 
and heaven, defend us from the reviled. 


५०१३. त्रिषधस्था सप्तधांतुः पञ्च जाता वर्धयन्ती। 
वाजेवाजे हव्या भूत्‌।।१२।। 


12. Abiding in the three worlds, comprising seven elements, 


cherishing the five races (of beings), she is ever to be invoked in 
battle. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 62 137 


Seven Elements— Saptadhátu, as before, either the metres or the 
rivers. 
I चेकिते 
५०१४. प्र या महिम्मा महिनासु चेकिते द्युम्नेभिरन्या अपर्सामपस्तमा। 
EX 
vd इव वृहती विभ्वने कृतोपस्तुत्या चिकितुषा सरस्वती ।1१३॥ 

13. She who is distinguished amongst them as eminent in 
greatness and in her glories; she who is the most impetuous of all 
other streams; she who has been created vast in capacity as a 
chariot, she, Sarasvati, is to be glorified by the discrect 


(worshipper). 

Amongst them— Asu, amongst them, divinties, or rivers, devatdndm 
nadinám madhye. 

Vast in Capacity as a Chariot— Ratha iva brhati vibhvane krta: 
made great in vastness, like a chariot created by Prajapati, so created, 
vibhvane, vibhutváya, for greatness or vastness. 

५०१५. सरस्वत्यभि नों नेषि वस्यो माप॑ स्फरीः पयसा मा न आ धंक्‌। 
जुषस्व॑ नः सख्या वेश्यां च मा त्वम्क्षेत्राण्यरणानि गन्म।।१४।। 

14. Guide us, Sarasvati, to precious wealth: reduce us not to 
insignificance; overwhelm us not With (excess of) water; be 
pleased by our friendly (services) and access to our habitations, 
and let us not repair to places unacceptable to you. 

Reduce us not to Insignificance— Ma apa spharih: sphara, it is 
said, means increase, greatness, prosperity; with the prefix, it implies the 
reverse, apravrddhan má karsih, do not make us unimportant or adject. 


ANUVAKA VI 
[सूक्त ६२] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अश्चिनीकुमार। छन्द- fae] 
५०१६. स्तुषे नरां दिवो अस्य प्रसन्ताशचिनां हुवे जरमाणो अर्के:। 
या सद्य Sar व्युषि ज्मो अन्तान्युयूंषतः पर्युरू वरासि॥१॥ 
l. I praise the two leaders of heaven, the presiders over this 
world: I invoke the Asvins, glorifying them with sacred hymns, 


them, who are ever the discomfiture (of foes), who at dawn scatter 
the investing glooms to the ends of the earth. 


५०१७. ता यज्ञमा शुचिभिश्चक्रमाणा रथ॑स्य भानु ररुचू wifi 
पुरू वरांस्यमिता मिमानापो धन्वान्यतिं याथो ISHI H 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
138 Rgv?da Samhita 
2. Coming to the sacrifice with their bright splendours, they 


light up the lustre of (their) car; emitting vast and infinite radiance; 
they drive their horses over deserts (refreshing them) with water. 


५०१८. ता ह त्यद्वर्ति्यदरश्चमुग्रेत्या धिय॑ ऊहथुः शश्चदश्वैः। 
मनोजवेभिरिषिरैः शयध्यै परि व्यथिर्दाशुषो मर्त्यस्य।।३॥। 
3. Fierce Asvins, from that humble mansion to which (you 
have repaired), you have ever borne with your desirable horses, as 
swift as thought, the pious worshippers in some manner (to 


heaven): Let the injurer of the liberal man (be consigned by you) 
to (final) repose. 


५०१९. ता नव्यंसो जर॑माणस्य मन्मोप॑ भूषतो युयुजानसंप्ती। 
शुभं पृक्षमिषमूर्जं वह॑न्ता होतां यक्षत्रत्नो अध्रुग्युवाना ।४।। 
4. Harnessing their horses, bringing excellent food, 
nourishment, and strength, they approach (to receive) the adoration 


of their recent worshipper; and may the benevolent ancient invoker 
of the gods (Agni) sacrifice to the ever youthful (deities). 


५०२०. ता वल्गू SAT पुरुशाकंतमा प्रत्ना नव्य॑सा वचसा विंवासे। 
=- या शंसते स्तुवते शम्भ॑विष्ठा बभूवतुर्गृणते चित्रराती ui 
5. I worship with a new hymn those two quick-moving good- 
looking ancient (Asvins), the achievers of many exploits, who are 


the givers of great felicity to him who prays to (them), or praises 
(them); the bestowers of wondrous gifts on him who adores 


(them). 
५०२१. ता भुज्युं विभिरद्धय संमुद्रातुग्रस्य सूनुमूंहथू रजोभिः। 
अरेणुभिर्योजनेभिर्भुजन्ता पतत्रिभिरर्णसो निरुपस्थात्‌।॥६ ।। 
6. They bore up from the waters, from the ocean, by the 


winged horses attached to their car, (passing) by roads unsoiled by 


dust, Bhujyu, the son of Tugra; they (bore them) from out of the 
lap of the water. 


From out of the lap of the Water— Arnaso nirupasthat, from the 
womb of the water, jalasya yoneh, samudrad, adbhyo nir agamayatam: 


५०२२. वि जयुषा रथ्या यातमरट्रि i ed वृषणा वध्रिमत्याः। 
दशस्यन्ता शयवे पिप्यथुर्गामिति च्यवाना सुमतिं भुरण्यू। 911 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


lu uw o. 0 


F: 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 62 ET 


7. Riders in you car, you have penetrated the mountain by your 
triumphant chariot: showerers (of benefits) you heard the 
invocation of Vadhrimati: you have nourished, bountiful givers, 
the cow for Sayu—and in this manner displaying benevolence are 
you everywhere present. 

Vadhrimati- Sayu- Rathyd- See Rg. i, 116. 20 & 22 


यद्रोंदसी प्रदिवो हेव्ठों देवानांमुत 
५०२३. यद्रोदसी प्रदिवो अस्ति भूमा हेळो देवानामुत मर्त्यात्रा। 
` रुद्रियासो NON [व 
तदादित्या वसवो रुद्रियासो रक्षोयुजे तपुरघं दंधात 1८ 

8. Heaven and Earth, Adityas, Vasus, Maruts, render that dread 
anger of the gods which (has) of old (been directed) against 
mortals, destructive and fatal to him who is associated with the 
Ráksasas. 

Who is Associated with the Raksasas— Raksoyuje is explained 
Raksasam svdmine, prerakaya và; for, Raksobhir yuktáya yajvane, one 
who sacrifices, assisted for joined by the Raksasas. 

i मित्रो 1 NE 
५०२४. य ई राजानावृतुथा विदधद्रजसो मित्रो वर्रणश्चिर्केतत्‌। 
गम्भीराय रक्ष॑से हेतिमस्य द्रोघाय चिद्वचस आन॑वाय।।९।। 

9. Mitra and Varuna recognize him who of all the world 
worships the royal (4svims) in due season; he hurls his weapon 
against the strong Ráksasa, against the malignant menaces of man. 

Against the Malignant Menaces of Man— Droghdya cid vacase 


dnaváya is explained, abhidrohátmakáya manusyasambhandine vacandya 
eva. 


५०२५. अन्तरैश्चक्रैस्तनंयाय वर्तिद्युमता यांतं नृवता रथेन। 


सनुत्येन त्यज॑सा मर्त्यस्य वनुष्यतामर्पि शीर्षा ववृक्तम्‌॥१०॥ 

_ 10. Come with your shining and well-guided chariot, (fitted) 
with excellent wheels, to our dwelling, (to bestow upon us) male 
offspring: cut off with secret indignation the heads of those 
obstructing (the adoration) of the mortal (who worships you). z 

Well-Guided Chariot— Nyvata rathena, having a leader, a driver; 


Or nr may mean a horse. 
With Excellent Wheels— Antaraiscakraih, The commentator 
explains the adjective anikrstaih, with not inferior wheels. 
= With! (Secret त जग Sanutyena tyajasd are explained 
lirohiteng krodhena. : 


१०२६, आ परमाभिरुत मंध्यमाभिनियुद्धिर्यातमवमा्भिरवाक्‌ | 
दृळहस्य॑ चिद्‌ गोम॑तो वि व्रजस्य दुरं वर्त गृणते चिंत्रराती ॥११॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


140 Rgveda Samhita 


11. Come down, whether with the most excellent, or middling, 
or inferior Niyut steeds; set upon the doors of the fast-shut stall of 
the cattle: be bountiful to him who praises you. 


à [सूक्त-६३| 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, ११ एकपदा त्रिष्टुप्‌] 
५०२७. क्वशत्या वल्गू पुरुहूताद्य दूतो न स्तोमोंऽविदन्नम॑स्वान्‌। 
आ यो अर्वाङ्नासंत्या ववत प्रेष्ठा ह्यस॑थो अस्य मन्म॑न्‌।।१।। 
1. Where may our praise and oblations find today for a 
messenger, those two splendid (Asvins), the invoked of many, and 


bring the Nasatyds to our presence? Be propitiated (Asvins) by the 
adoration of this (your worshipper). 


५०२८. अरं मे गन्तं हवनायास्मै गृंणाना यथा पिबांथो अन्धं:। 
परि ह त्यद्वर्तियौथो RÀ न यत्परो नान्तरस्तुतुर्यात्‌।।२।। 


2. Praised, that you may drink the (sacrificial) beverage, you 
come promptly upon this may invocation: keep guard around the 
dwelling against (all) adversaries, so that neither one that abides at 
a distance nor a neighbour may do us harm. 


५०२९. अकारि वामन्ध॑सो वरीमन्नस्तारि बर्हिः सुप्रायणत॑मम्‌। 
उत्तानऱस्तो . > = 
उत्तानहस्तो युवयुर्ववन्दा वां नक्ष॑न्तो अद्र॑य आञ्जन्‌।।३।। 
3. (What is essential) for the copious effusion of (the 
sacrificial) food has been done for you: the very delicate sacred 
grass has been strewn: the (priest with) uplifted hands desirous of 


your presence praises you; the stones express (the Soma juice), 
designing it for you. 


५०३०. ऊर्ध्वा वामग्निरध्वरेष्वस्थात्त्र रातिरैति जूर्णिनी घृताचीं। 
प्र होता गूर्तमना उराणोऽयुक्त यो नास॑त्या हवीमन्‌।॥४॥। 


4. Agni is above for you: he is present at (your) sacrifices: the 
oblation flows diffusive and redolent of ght: deligent and zealous 


is the ministrant priest who is engaged, Nasatyás, in your 
invocation. 


५०३१. अधि श्रिये दुहिता सूर्यस्य रथ तस्थौ पुरुभुजा शतोतिंम्‌। 
प्र मायाभिर्मायिना भूतमत्र नरं नृतू जनिमन्यज्चियानाम्‌। ५ ।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Lo un E 


F: 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sukta 63 141 


5. Protectors of many, the daughter of Sürya ascended your 
chariot the defence of hundreds, for refuge: sagacious Jeaders and 
guides, you have excelled by your devices (all others) at this 
appearance of the adorable (deities). 

Leaders and Guides— Nard-nrtyu would be, literally, guides and 


dancers. 

You have Excelled by your Devices, etc.— It is not very clear what 
is intended: the Scholiast refers to the legend of the Asvins carrying off in 
their car the daughter of Sürya from the other gods, as narrated in the 
Aitareya Bráhmana iv.7. 


५०३२. युवं श्रीभिर्दर्शताभिराभिः शुभे पुष्टिमूहथुः gafa: 
प्र वां वयो वपुषेऽनुं पप्तन्नक्षद्वाणी सुष्टता धिष्ण्या वाम्‌।॥६ | 
6. You have provided with these beautiful splendours, 
gratification for the enjoyment of Strya, your horses have 


descended for felicity, deserving of praise, the laudation (of the 
Sages) has reached you glorified. 


५०३३. आ वां वयोञ्श्चासो वहिष्ठा अभि प्रयों नासत्या वहन्तु। 
प्र वां रथो मनोजवा असर्जीषः पृक्ष इषिधो अनु पूर्वीः।।७।। 
7. May your rapid burthen-bearing steeds bring you Nasatyas 


to the (sacrificial) food: your chariot swift as thought has 
dispensed substantial, desirable, abundant food. 


५०३४. पुरु हि वाँ पुरुभुजा देष्णं धेनुं न इषं पिन्वतमसंक्राम्‌। 
स्तुत॑श्च वां माध्वी सुष्टुतिश्च रसाश्च ये वामनुं रातिमग्मन्‌।॥८ 11 
8. Protectors of many, vast (wealth) is to be distributed by you: 
Sive us then nutritious and invariable food. Givers of delight, there 


are to you, adorers, and fit praise, and libations, which are 
prepared to acknowledge your liberality. 

Nutritious and Invariable Food— The expression is singular, 
dhenum na isam pinvatam askram, literally, give us a cow, food, that does 
not stray, Sàyana explains dhenu by prinayitri, gratifying: or isam may be 
the adjective for esaniyam, give us a desirable cow. 


| ५०३५, उत म॑ ऋज्रे पुर॑यस्य रघ्वी सुंमीळहे शतं पेरुके च॑ पक्का 
| शाण्डो दाद्धिरणिनः स्मद्दिष्टीन्‌ दश॑ वशासों अभिषाच॑ क्रष्वान्‌। I 
9. May the two straight-going, light-moving, (mares) of 


Puraya be mine: may the hundred cows belonging to Sumilha, may 
the dressed viands prepared by Peruka be for me: may Sanda 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
142 Rgveda Samhita 
bestow upon me ten handsome golden chariots, and obedient, 
valiant, and well-favoured (dependants). 

We have nothing in this verse but epithets; in the first half, yjre 
raghvi, two straight-right-going, require some such noun as vadave, 
mares: to safam, a hundred, the Scholiast supplies gavdm, of cows: and to 
pakva, for pakvani, he adds, anndni, viands: in the second half we have 
hiraninah vasmad, distin dasa, ten golden to us handsome, i.e., rathan, 
cars, understood; and again, vasasah abisáca rsvan, obedient, valorous, 
handsome—what? We must ask the Scholiast. The answer is, purusgán, 
men. If we render the stanza literally, it is utterly unintelligible: the 
greater part of the Stikta is very obscure. 


५०३६. सं वाँ शता नासत्या सहस्राश्चाना पुरुपर्न्था गिरे दात्‌। 
भरद्वाजाय वीर नू गिरे दांद्धता रक्षाँसि पुरुदंससा स्युः।।१०॥। 


10. May Purupanthd, Nàsatyás, grant to him who praises you, 
hundreds and thousands of horses: may he give them, heroes, to 
Bharadvaja: achievers of great deeds, may the Raksasas be slain. 


५०३७. आ वां सुम्ने वरिमन्त्सूरिभिः ष्याम्‌।।११ t 


11, May I be associated with the pious in the abundant felicity 
bestowed by you. 


— [सूक्त-६४] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- उषा। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌] 
५०३८. उदु श्रिय उषसो रोच॑माना अस्थुरपां नोर्मयो रुश॑न्तः। 
कृणोति विश्वं सुपथां सुगान्यभूदु वस्वी दक्षिणा मघोनी।॥१॥ 
1. The white and shining tints of the dawn have spread like the 


waves of the waters, for the beautifying (of the world); she renders 


all good roads easy to be traversed; she who is replete with delight, 
excellence, and health. 


५०३९. Nal द॑दृक्ष उर्विया वि भास्युत्ते शोचिर्भानवो द्यामपप्तन्‌। 
र > 
आविर्वक्षः कृणुषे शुम्भमानोष देवि रोच॑माना महोभि:11२।। 
2. Divine Usas, you are seen auspicious: you shine afar: your 


bright rays spread over the sky, lovely and radiant with great 
(splendours), you display your person. 


५०४०. वत्ति सीमरुणासो रुश॑न्तो गाव॑ः सुभगामुर्विया प्र॑थानाम्‌। 
अपेजते शूरो अस्तेव शत्रून्‌ बाध॑ते तमो अजिरो न वोळहां।।३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 65 143 


3. Ruddy and resplendent kine bear the auspicious, expanding, 
illustrious dawn: like a warrior, who, casting his darts, or a swift 
charger scattering enemies, she drives away the glooms. 

Kine— Gavah is rendered by Sayana, rasmayah, rays: one of its 
meanings it is true, but rather incompatible here with the verb vakanti. 
vehunt. 

NON Tan 1 ` 
५०४१. सुगोत d सुपथा पर्वतिष्ववाते अपस्तरसि स्वभानो। 
1 ^ ifü I feat D 
सा न आ वह पृथुयामन्रृष्वे रयिं दिवो दुहितरिषयध्यें ।॥४1| 

4. Yours are good roads and easy to be traversed in mountains 
and inaccessible places: you pass self-irradiating over the waters: 
bring to us, daughter of heaven, in your spacious and beautiful 
chariot, desirable riches. 

५०४२. सा ae योक्षभिरवातोषो वरं वहसि जोषमनु। 
> देवी cl _. 1 lu 
त्वं दिंवो दुहितर्या हं देवी पूर्वहूतौ मंहना दर्शता भूं:1५॥ 

5. Do you Usas bring me opulence, for unopposed you bear 
with your oxen (wealth to your worshippers), according to your 
Satisfaction: daughter of heaven, you who are divine, who are 
lovely, are to be worshipped at the first (daily) rite. 

N 1 ७५ 
५०४३. उत्ते वरयंञ्चिद्वसतेरपप्तरर्रश्च ये पितुभाजो व्युष्टौ। 
EY देवि मर्त्याय 
अमा सते वंहसि भूरिं वाममुषो देवि दाशुषे मर्त्याय।।६।। 

6. At your dawning, divine Usas, the birds spring up from their 

nests, and men who have to gain their sustenance (arise): you, 


divine Usas, bring ample wealth to the mortal who is nigh you, the 
offerer of the oblation. 


| [सूक्त ६५] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- उषा। छन्द- fau] 
५०४४. एषा स्या नों दुहिता दिंवोजाः क्षितीरुच्छन्ती मानुषीरजीग:। 
या भानुना रुश॑ता राम्यास्वज्ञायि तिरस्तमंसञ्चिदकून्‌।।१॥ 


| 1. This heaven-born daughter (of the sky), driving away the 
i darkness for us, makes visible human beings; she who with bright 
lustre is perceived dissipating the glooms, and (extinguishing) the 
planets (shining) in the ni ghts. 
E Makes Visible Human Beings— Udgirati manusih prajdh, is. 
literally, vomits them, i.e., brings them up out of darkness into light. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
144 Rgveda Samhita 


In the Nights— Ramyasu, for yamydsu, ratrisu, or being substituted 
for y: see the similar change in Burman articulation. 
तद्य॑युररुणयुरि ap E | | | 
५०४५. वि भरथ्रश्चित्रं भान्त्युषसश्वन्द्ररथा:। 
अग्रं यज्ञस्य॑ बृहतो नयन्तीर्वि ता बाधन्ते तम ऊर्म्यायाः।।२।। 

2. The Dawns in beautiful chariots drawn by purple steeds in 
pairs, shine gloriously as they proceed (along the heaven): 
bringing on the commencement of the great (morning) sacrifice, 
they disperse the darkness of the night. 

५०४६. श्रवो वाजमिषमूर्ज वहन्तीर्नि दाशुर्ष उषसो मर्त्याय। 
मघोनीर्वीरव॒त्पत्य॑माना अवो धात विधते रत्न॑मद्य॥३॥। 

3. Dawns, bringing fame, and food, and sustenance, and 
strength to the mortal, the donor (of the oblation), abounding in 
wealth, and proceeding (through the sky), bestow upon the 
worshipper today food, with male descendants and riches. 

५०४७. इदा हि वो विधते रत्नमस्तीदा वीराय दाशुष॑ उषासः। 
इदा विप्राय जरते यदुकथा नि ष्म मावते वहथा पुरा चित्‌।॥४1। 

4. Verily, Dawns, there is at present wealth to give to your 

worshipper, to the man offering (oblations) to the sage repeating 


your praise; if the praises (are accepted), then bring to him who is 
like me such wealth as has been formerly bestowed (upon myself). 


५०४८. इदा हि त॑ उषो अद्रिसानो गोत्रा गवामङ्गिरसो गुणन्ति। 
व्यर्केणं fagien च सत्या नृणार्मभवद्देव्हृति: 1५11 


5. Verily, Usas, the Arigirasas through your (favour) recover 
the herd of cattle from the summit of the mountain: by adoration 
and by prayer they have divided (the rock): unfailing was the 
praise of the gods uttered by the leaders (of rites). 


feat 
५०४९. उच्छा दिवो दुहितः प्रत्नवन्नो भरद्वाजवद्विधते मंघोनि। 
सुवीर रयिं गृणते Sex: ad 
सुवीरं रयिं गृणते रिरीह्युरुगायमधि धेहि sal A: 116 11 
6. Daughter of heaven, dawn upon us upon those of old: 
possessor of riches (down) upon the worshipper, as (you have done 


upon) Bharadvaja: grant to him who glorifies you, wealth with 
male descendants: give to us food that may be distributed to many- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


4 


णक 1i" 


2 


MEE ede 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 66 145 
[सूक्त-६६] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज वार्हस्पत्य। देवता- मरुद्गण। छन्द- त्रिष्‌] 
r 1 तच्चिकितुषे o || 1 
५०५०. वपुर्नु Eq" चिदस्तु समानं नाम धेनु पत्यमानम्‌। 
gus E am ot सकृच्छुक्रं A दुदुहे 1 
दोहसे पीपाय सकृच्छुक्रं दुदुहे पृश्निरूध:।॥१॥। 

l. May the like-formed, benevolent, all-pervading, all 
humiliating troop (of the Maruts) be promptly with the prudent 
man: the troop that ever cherishes all that amongst mortals is 
designed to yield (them) advantage; and (at whose will) Prsni 
gives milk from (her) bright udder once (in the year). 

That ever Cherishes all that, Etc.— The phraseology is obscure, 
marttesu anyad dohase pipdya. It is amplified by Sayana, tad rüpam 
(marutdm), martyaloke anyad osadhi-vanaspatyádikam kaman dogdhum 
dpydyagoti, that from of the Maruts causes one or other thing in the 
world, as herbaceous plants, forest trees, and the like, of flourish, so as to 
milk or yield what is desired. 

Prsni— Prsni is said here to imply the firmament, which, by the 
influence of the winds, sends down its milk, ie., rain, once, ie., at the 
rainy season. 


५०५१. ये अग्नयो न शोशुचनिधाना द्विय॑ल्रिर्मरुतों वावृधन्तं। 
अरेणवों हिरण्ययांस एषां साकं जृम्णैः पौंस्येभिश्व भूवन्‌।२ I 

2. Unsoiled by dust the golden chariots of those Maruts, who 
are shining like kindled fires, enlarging themselves (at will) 
twofold and threefold, and (charged) with riches and virile 
energies, are manifest. 

. | भरिध्ये 
५०५२. रुद्रस्य ये मीळहुषः fd पुत्रा यांश्चो नु दाधृविर्भरध्यै। 
प्र x m s 1 ES र्भमाधात्‌ 
विदे हि माता महो मही षा सेत्पृश्रि: सुभ्वे३ गर्भमाधांत्‌।३॥ 

3. They (who are) the sons of the showerer Rudra, whom the 
nursing (firmament is able) to sustain, and of whom, the mighty 
Ones, it is known that the great Prsni has received the germ for the 
benefit (of man). 

५०५३. न य ईषन्ते जनुषोऽया न्वशैन्तः सन्तोऽवद्यानि पुनानाः। 
TUN E 2- 
निर्यद्‌ दुहे शुचयोऽनु जोषमनुं श्रिया तन्वमुक्षमाणा:11४।। 
4. They who approach not to men by any conveyance, being 


already in their hearts, purifying their defects: when brilliant they 
Supply their milk (the rain) for the gratification (of their 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
146 Rgveda Samhita 


worshippers): they are watering the earth (manifesting their 
collective): from with splendour. 

Being Already in their Hearts— The Maruts are here regarded as 
identical with the Pranah, vital airs. 

ay दोहसे 1 धृष्णु [es धाना 1 
५०५४. मक्षू न येषु दोहसे चिदया आ नाम धृष्णु मारुतं दधाना:। 
अयासों | 1 
न ये स्तौना अयासों महा नू चित्सुदानुरव यासदुग्रान्‌ 1५ 11 

5. Approaching nigh to whom, and repeating the mighty name 
of the Maruts, (the worshipper is able) quickly to obtain (his 
wished): the liberal donor pacifies the angry Maruts, who are 
otherwise in their might the resistless plunderers (of their wealth). 

Plunderers of their Wealth— The words are unusual, and the 
construction elliptical and involved: he pacifies those na ye staund ayáso 
mahná nu cid, who now are thieves going with greatness verily ever. 


५०५५. त इदुग्रा: शव॑सा धृष्णुषेणा उभे युजन्त रोद॑सी सुमेके। 
अध स्मैषु रोदसी स्वशोचिराम॑वत्सु तस्थौ न रोक॑:।६।। 
6. Those fierce and powerfully arrayed (Maruts) unite by their 
strength the two beautiful (regions) heaven and earth; in them, the 
self-radiant, heaven and earth abide: the obstruction (of light) 


dwells not in those mighty ones. 


Unite by their Strength— By the rain, which may be said to form a 
bond of union between heaven and earth. 


५०५६. अनेनो वो मरुतो यामो अस्त्वनश्वश्चिद्यमजत्यरथी: | 
अनवसो अनभीशू रजस्तूर्वि रोद॑सी पथ्यां याति साध॑न्‌।।७।। 
7. May your chariot, Maruts, be devoid of wickedness; that 
which (the worshipper) impels, and which without driver, without 


horses, without provender, without traces, scattering water and 
accomplishing (desires), traverses heaven and earth and the paths 


(of the firmament). 
५०५७. नास्य वर्ता न तरुता न्व॑स्ति मरुतो यमव॑थ वाज॑सातौ 
तोके वा गोषु तन॑ये यमप्सु स ब्रजं दर्ता पार्ये अध द्यो:11८॥ 
8. There is no propeller, no obstructer, of him, whom, Maruts, 


you protect in battle: he whom (you prosper) with sons, grandsons, 


cattle, and water, is in war the despoiler of the herds of his ardent 
(foes). i 


Despoiler of the Herds of his Ardent Foe— Sa vrajam dartd parye 
adha dyoh, is explained, sa gavam sarigham darayita sangrame—dyoh, is 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


छ 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 67 147 
rendered by vijigisor vd Satroh, of one desirous to overcome, or an 
enemy. 

५०५८. प्र चित्रमर्क qud तुराय मारुताय स्वत॑वसे भरध्वम्‌। 
सहाँसि |] Pray 
ये सहांसि सहसा सहन्ते रेजते अग्ने पृथिवी मखेभ्य: 1९ 11 

9. Offer to the loud-sounding, quick-moving, self-invigorating 
company of the Maruts, excellent (sacrificial) food: (to them) who 
overcome strength by strength: the earth trembles, Agni, at the 
adorable (Maruts). 

५०५९. त्विषीमन्तो अध्वरस्येव दिद्युचतूपुच्यवसो जुह्णोर नाग्नेः। 
अर्चत्रयो धुन॑यो न वीरा भ्राजज्जन्मानो मरुतो अधृष्टा:11१०॥। 

10. The Maruts are resplendent as if illuminators of the 
sacrifice, (bright) as the flames of Agni: entitled are they to 
donation, and like heroes making (adversaries) tremble: brilliant 
are they from birth, and invincible. 

५०६०. d वृधन्तं मारतं भ्राज॑दृष्टि रुद्रस्य सूनुं हवसा विवासे। 
दिव: शर्धाय शुच॑यो मनीषा गिरयो नापं उग्रा अस्ृधरन्‌।।११॥। 

11. I worship with oblations that exalted company of the 
Maruts, the progeny of Rudra, armed with shining lances: the pure 
and earnest praises of the devout (adorer) are emulous in the 
invigoration (of the Maruts), as the clouds (vie in the emission of 


the rain). 

The Pure and Earnest Praises, Etc.— Divah Sardhdya Sucayo 
manisá girayo ndpa ugrá asprdhran, is, literally, of heaven of the 
strength pure praises mountains like waters fierce have vied: 539813 
renders divah by stotuh, of the praiser or worshipper; sardhdya, 
márutáya, for the strength of the Maruts: and giri by megha, a cloud: the 
line is a fair specimen of the whole Sükta, which is very elliptical and 


obscure. 
[सूक्त- ६७] 
[ऋषि- भरदाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- मित्रावरुण। छन्द- freq] 
५०६१. विश्वेषां व: सतां ज्येष्ठतमा गीर्भिमित्रावरुणा वावृधध्यै। 
संया रश्मेव॑ य॒मतुर्यमिष्ठ gi जनाँ असंमा बाहुभिः A:N 


1. (I proceed) by my praises to exalt you, Mitra and Varuna, 
the eldest of all existing things: you two, though not the same, are 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
148 Rgveda Samhita 


the firmest restrainers with your arms, and hold men back (from 
evil) as they check (horses) with reins. 


५०६२. इयं मद्वां प्र स्तृणीते मनीषोप॑ प्रिया नम॑सा बर्हिरच्छ। 
यन्तं नों मित्रावरुणावधूष्टं धर्दिर्यद्ठा वरूध्यं सुदानू।।२।। 
2. This my praise is addressed to you both, and proceeds to 
you beloved (deities) together with the oblation: the sacred grass is 
spread before you: grant us, Mitra and Varuna, an unassailable 


dwelling, that through your favour, munificent divinties, may be a 
(secure) shelter. 


५०६३. आ यांतं मित्रावरुणा सुशस्त्युप प्रिया नम॑सा हूयमांना। 
सं याव॑प्तः स्थो अपसेव जनाञ्छूधीयतश्चिद्यतथो महित्वा॥३॥। 
3. Come, Mitra and Varuna, beloved by all, and invoked with 


reverence to the propitious rite, you who by your bounty support 


men labouring for sustenance as a work man (maintains himself) 
by work. 


५०६४. अश्वा न या वाजिनां पूतर्बन्धू ऋता यद्‌ गर्भमर्दितिर्भरध्यै। 
प्र या महि महान्ता जाय॑माना घोरा मर्ताय रिपवे नि Aa: 11४1 


4. Who (are) strong as horses, accepters of pious praise, 
observers of truth, whom Aditi conceived: whom, mighty of the 
mighty at your birth and formidable to mortal foes, she bore. 


५०६५. विशवे यद्वां मंहना मन्द॑मानाः क्षत्रं देवासो अद॑धुः सजोषां:। 
परि यद्भूथो रोदसी चिदुर्वी सन्ति स्पशो अदब्धासो अमूराः।।५॥। 
5. Inasmuch as all the gods equally pleased and rejoicing in 


your greatness conferred strength upon you, and since you are pre- 
eminent over the wide heaven and earth, your courses are 
unobstructed, unimpeded. 

Your Courses are Unobstructed— 
Scholiast explains, spasah by rasmayas, ca 
goings, which are ahinsita, uninjured, amu 


Spaso adabdhàso amürá—A1he 
ra và, rays, or perhaps reins, or 
dha, not bewildered, 


५०६६. ता हि Sri धारयेथे अनु चून दुहे सानुमुपमादिव द्यो:। 
TÀ नक्षत्र उत विश्वदेवो भूमिमातान्द्यां धासिनायोः।।६।। 


6. You manifest vigour daily, you Strengthen the summit of the 
sky as if with a pillar; the solid firmament and the universal deity 
(the sun) replenish earth and heaven with the food of man. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


nc --—— —"—— — ` 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 67 15 
As if with a Pillar— Upamdd iva—upamdt is explained, sthüna, a 
post or pillar—the post to which a calf is tied, according to the 
commentator. 


५०६७. ता विग्रं धैथे जठरं पृणध्या आ यत्सद्म सभृतयः पृणन्ति। 
न मृष्यन्ते युवतयोऽवाता वि यत्पयों विश्वजिन्वा भरन्ते।॥७।। 


7. You two support the sage (worshipper), filling his belly 
when he and his dependants fill the sacrificial chamber; when, 
sustainers of all, the rain (is sent down by you), and the young 
(rivers) are not obstructed, but, undried, diffuse (fertility) around. 


५०६८. ता जिह्वया सदमेदं सुमेधा आ यद्वा सत्यो RREA भूत्‌। 
I. महित्वं 1 > | च॑यिष्टमंह 
तद्वां महित्वं घृतात्रावस्तु युवं दाशुषे वि HAT 
8. The wise man always (solicits) you his prayers for this 
(supply of water), when approaching you sincere in sacrifice: may 
your magnanimity be such that you, the feeders upon ghi, may 


exterminate sin in the donor (of the oblation). 
With his Prayers— Literally, with his tongue, Ji/rvayd. 
५०६९. प्र gi मित्रावरुण स्पूर्धन्प्रिया धाम॑ युवर्धिता मिनर्न्ति। 
न ये देवास ओहसा न मर्ता अयज्ञसाचो अप्यो न पुत्राः।।९॥। 

9. (Exterminate also), Mitra and Varuna, those who, 
emulously contending, disturb the rites that are agreeable and 
beneficial to you both: those divinities, those mortals, who are not 
diligent in adoration, those who performing works perform not 
sacrifices, those who do not propitiate you. à 

Exterminate Also— There is no verb to govern the objects specified, 
and the Scholiast brings on, from the preceding verse, vicayistam, 
vindSayatam, destroy: the expressions in the second half of the stanza are 
somewhat equivocal, na ye devdsa ohasá na martā ayajnasdco apyo na 
Putrdh: ohasd is explained, vahanasddhanena, by the means of 
conveying—wishes it may be supposed, ie., stotrena. by praise: apyalt 15 
rendered karmavantah, doing acts, from apas, opus, but not sacrificing or 
Sacrificing in vain; vrthá karmáni kurvantah: na putrāh, not sons, 1$ 
rendered aprnantah, not pleasing, Or satisfying. 


५०७०. वि agri कीस्तासो भरन्ते शंसन्ति के चिंत्रिविदों मनानाः। 
आदा ब्रवाम सत्यान्युक्था नकि्देवेभिर्यतथो महित्वा॥१०॥। 


10. When the intelligent (priests) offer praise, E some of 
them, glorifying (Agni and other deities), recite the Nivid hymns: 
such being the case, we address to you sincere adoration, for in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


150 Rgveda Samhita 


consequence of your greatness you do not associate with (other) 
divinities. 

You do not Associate with other Divinities— Na kir devebhir 
yatathah, you do not go, gacchathah, with other gods, anyair devaih 
saha; you are not associated with them at sacrifice. 


५०७१. अवोरित्था वाँ छर्दिषों अभिष्टौ युवोर्मित्रावरुणावस्कृधोयु। 
अनु यद्‌ गाव: स्फुरानृजिप्यं धृष्णुं यद्रणे वृष॑णं युनज॑न्‌।११॥ 


11, Upon your approach, Mitra and Varuna, protectors of the 
dwelling, your (bounty) is unlimited: when (your) praises are 
uttered, and the sacrificers add in the ceremony the Soma that 
inspires straightforwardness and resolution, and is the showerer (of 
benefits). 

Your Bounty is Unlimited— Yuvor askrdhoyu; there is no 
substantive: the Scholiast supplies yuvabhyam deyam grhadikam 
avicchinnam bhavati, that which is to be given by you, as houses and the 
like, is unchecked: askrdhoyu is explained by Yaska, long-lived, 
akrdhvayuh krdhu meaning short, or nikrttam, cut off; and he cities a text 
in which it is associated with ajara, as yo askrdhoyur ajarah svarvan, 
who is long-lived, free from decay, an occupant of heaven’. 


[सूक्त-६८] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्रावरुण। 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, ९-१० जगती] 
५०७२. gÅ at यज्ञ उद्य॑तः सजोषा मनुष्वद्‌ वृक्तबर्हिषो यज॑ध्यै। 
आ य इन्द्रावरुणाविषे अद्य महे सम्नाय॑ मह आंबवत्‌।।१॥ 
1. Mighty Indra and Varuna, promptly has the Soma returned, 
engaged conscientiously (with the priests) to offer sacrifice to you 


to obtain food for him by whom, like Manu, the sacred grass has 


been clipped: he who (invited you hither) today for exceeding 
happiness. 


५०७३. ता हि श्रेष्ठा देवर्ताता तुजा शूराणां शविष्ठा ता हि भूतम्‌। 
मघोनां मंहिष्ठा तुविशुष्म ऋतेन॑ वृत्रतुरा सर्थसेना॥॥२॥ 


2. You two are the 


| principal (divinities) at the worship of the 
gods; the distributors o 


f wealth; the most vigorous of heroes; the 


१. अस्कृधोयुरकृध्वायुः। कृध्विति हस्वनाम निकृत्तं भवति (निरु० ६.३) | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee RF 


2 


E Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 68 131 
most liberal among the opulent; possessed of vast strength; 
destroyers of foes by truth; entire hosts (of yourselves). 
नमस्येशि ES quf 
५०७४. ता गृणीहि नमस्येभिः À: सुम्नेभिरिन्द्रावरुणा चकाना। 
x I सिष॑क्तचन्यो ie 
वज्रेणान्यः शव॑सा हन्ति qd सिषक्तयन्यो वृजनेषु fmm 
3. Praise Mitra and Varuna, renowned for all glorious energies 
and enjoyment: one of whom slays Vrtra with the thunderbolt, the 
other, intelligent by his might, comes to the aid (of the pious 
when) in difficulties. 
५०७५. ग्नाश्च यन्नर॑श्च वावृधन्त विश्वे देवासो नरां स्वगूर्ता:। 
प्रैभ्य इन्द्रावरुणा महित्वा दयौश्च पृथिवि भूतमुर्वी। ४1 
4. When amongst mankind, both males and females, and when 
all the gods spontaneously striving glorify you, Indra and Varuna, 
you become pre-eminent in greatness over them, as do you, wide 
heaven and earth (surpass them also). 
५०७६. स इत्सुदानुः स्ववाँ ऋतावेन्द्रा यो वाँ वरुण दाशति त्मन्‌। 
द्विषस्तरेददस्वान्वंसंद्रयिं : t [i 
इषा स द्विषस्तरेद्दास्वान्वंसंद्रयि रयिवत॑श्च जनान्‌।५॥। 
5. He who spontaneously presents you, Indra and Varuna 
(oblations), is liberal, wealthy and upright: he has prosper With the 


५०७७. यं युवं दाश्च॑ध्वराय देवा रयिं धत्थो वसुमन्तं पुरुक्षुम्‌। 
E cd E वनुषामर्शस्ती 
अस्मे स इन्द्रावरुणावपि ष्यात्र यो भनक्ति वनुषामशस्ती: 11६ ।। 

6. May that opulence comprising treasure and abundant food, 
which you bestow, deities, upon the donor (of the oblation), that, 
Indra and Varuna, which baffles the calumnies of the malevolent, 
be ours. 

1 
५०७८. उत न॑ः सुत्रात्रो देवगोपा: सूरिभ्य॑ इन्द्रावरुणा रयिः ष्यात्‌। 
= > Tal < d She 
i शुष्मः पृतनासु साह्वान्प्र सद्यो द्युम्ना तिरते ततुरि:1191। 

7. May that opulence, Indra and Varuna, which is a sure 
defence, and of which the gods are the guardians, be ours, 
Celebrating our praise, whose destroying prowess in battles 
Victorious (over foes) speedily obscures (their) fame. 

०. रयिं 1 
५०७९. नू नं इन्द्रावरुणा गृणाना पृङ्क्तं रयिं सौंश्रवसाय देवा। 
id zx: Es Li 
इत्था गुणन्तो महिनंस्य शर्धोञपो न नावा दुरिता तरेम॥८ li 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


152 Rgveda Samhita 


8. Divine and glorified /ndra and Varuna, quickly bestow 
upon us wealth for our felicity; and thus culogising the strength of 
you two, mighty (deities), may we pass over all difficulties as (we 
cross) the waters with a boat. 


५०८०. प्र सम्राजे बृहते मन्म नु प्रियमर्च देवाय वरुणाय सप्रथ॑:। 
अयं य उवी मंहिना महित्रतः क्रत्वां विभात्यजरो न शोचिषा।।९।। 
9. Repeat acceptable and all-comprehensive praise to the 
imperial mighty divine Varuna, he who, endowed with greatness, 


with wisdom, and with splendour, illumes the spacious (heaven 
and earth). 


५०८१. इन्द्रावरुणा सुतपाविमं सुतं सोमं पिबतं मद धृतव्रता। 
युवो रथों अध्वरं देववीतये प्रति स्वस॑रमुप॑ याति पीतयें।।१०॥ 
10. Indra and Varuna, observant of holy duties, drinkers of the 
Soma juice, drink this exhilarating effused libation: your chariot 


approaches along the road to the sacrifice, (that you may partake) 
of the food of the gods and drink (the Soma). 


५०८२. इन्द्रावरुणा मधुमत्तमस्य वृष्णः सोम॑स्य वृषणा वृषेथाम्‌। 
इदं वामन्धः परिषिक्तमस्मे आसद्यास्मिन्बर्हिषिं मादयेथाम्‌।।११।। 
11. Drink, Indra and Varuna, showerers (of benefits), of the 


most sweet Soma, the shedder (of blessings): this your beverage, is 


poured forth by us: sitting on the sacred grass, be exhilarated (by 
the draught). 


[सूक्त-६९] 
[क्रषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र-विष्णु। छन्द- req] 
५०८३. सं वां कर्मणा समिषा हिनोमीन्द्राविष्णू अप॑सस्पारे अस्य। 
Rai यज्ञ दरविणं च धत्तमर्टिर्न: पथिभिः पारयन्ता। ugi 
1. I earnestly propitiate you, Indra and Visnu, by worship and 


(sacrificial) food: upon the completion of the rite, accept the 
sacrifice, and grant us wealth, conducting us by safe path. 


५०८४. या विश्वासां जनितारा मतीनामिन्द्राविष्णू कलशा सोमधानां। 
प्र वां गिर: शस्यमाना अवन्तु प्र स्तोमांसो गीयमानासो अर्के:11२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 69 T 
2. May the prayers that are repeated to you reach you, /ndra 


and Visnu: may the praises that are chaunted reach you: you are the 
generators of all praises, pitchers recipient of the Soma libation. 


५०८५. इन्द्राविष्णू मदपती मदानामा सोम॑ यातं द्रविणो दर्धाना। 
सं वामज्ञन्त्वक्तभिर्मतीनां सं स्तोमासः शस्यमानास उक्थै: 11३ 1 
3. Indra and Visnu, lords of the exhilaration, of the 
exhilarating juices, come to (drink) the Soma, bringing (with you) 
wealth: may the encomiums of the praises repeated along with the 
prayers anoint you completely with radiance. 
५०८६. आ वामश्वांसो अभिमातिषाह इन्द्राविष्णू सधमादो वहन्तु। 
जुषेथां विश्वा हव॑ना मतीनामुप ब्रह्माणि श्रुणुतं गिरों Arsi 
4. May your equally-spirited steeds, Indra and Visnu, the 
triumphant over enemies, bear you hither: be pleased with all the 
invocations of your worshippers: hear my prayers and praises. 
५०८७. इन्द्राविष्णू तत्पनयाय्यं वां सोम॑स्य मर्द उरु चंक्रमाथे। 
अर्कृणुतमन्तरिक्षं वरीयोऽप्र॑थतं जीवसें नो रजाँसि। UI 
5. Indra and Visnu, that (exploit) is to be glorified, by which, 
in the exhilaration of the Soma, you have strode over the wide 
(space): you have traversed the wide firmament: you have declared 
the worlds (fit) for our existence. 
५०८८. इन्द्राविष्णू हविषां वावृधानाग्राद्वाना नम॑सा रातहव्या। 
zd S ऱ्ह सोमधान 
घृतासुती द्रविणं धत्तमस्मे समुद्र: स्थ॑ः कलश: सोमधान: E 
6. Indra and Visnu, teeders upon clarified butter, drinkers of 
the fermented Soma, thriving upon oblations, accepting them 


offered with reverence, bestow upon us wealth; for you are an 
Ocean, a pitcher, the receptacle of the libation. 


५०८९. इन्द्राविष्णू पिब॑तं मध्वों अस्य सोम॑स्य दस्रा जठरं पृणेथाम्‌। 
आ वामन्धांसि मदिराण्य॑ग्न्नप ब्रह्माणि शुणुतं हवं FI 


7. Indra and Visnu, agreeable of aspect, drink of this sweet 
Soma; fill with it your bellies: may the inebriating beverage reach 


you: hear my prayers, my invocation. 
५०९०. उभा जिग्यथुर्न परां जयेथे न परां जिग्ये कतरश्चनैनोंः। 
Tda विष्णो यदप॑स्पृधेथां त्रेधा we वि RATLI 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


154 Rgveda Samhita 


8. You have both (ever) been victorious: never have been 
conquered; neither of you two has been vanquished: with 
whomsoever you have contended you have thrice conquered 
thousands. 

You have thrice Conquered Thousands— Tredhd sahasram vi tad 
airayethàm, vyakramethám: the passage is somewhat doubtful: the treble 
manner of kinds, it is said, mean the world, the Vedas, and speech; 
lokavedavágátmaná tridhà sthitam, being in three ways, consisting of 
speech, the Vedas, the world; sahasram, amitam, unmeasured, infinite. 
Sayana cites the Aitareya Brahmana for an explanation, which, with his 
own scholia, imports, that after /ndra and Visnu had overcome the 
Asuras, Indra said to them, we will divide the universe with you: 
whatever Visnu traverses with three steps shall be ours the rest shall be for 
you: to which the Asuras consented. With his first step Visnu traversed the 
three worlds: with his second he traversed, vicakrame, what that means 
must be left to the Brahmanas, the Vedas; and with the third he crossed 
over all speech: sarvasya vdco upari trtiyam pàdam prakrptavàn, so that, 
in fact, nothing was left for the Asuras: so far tredhà is somewhat made 
out; but what is the meaning of sahasram? To this it is answered, that it 
implies infinite, or the whole, which is necessarily implied by combining 
all worlds, all Vedas, all modes of speech. Sayana also quotes the 

Taittiriya, seventh Kanda, for the meaning of sahasra, being here, sarvan 
Jagat, the whole world. Ait. Brahm. vi.15 


[सूक्त-७०] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- द्यावा-पृथ्वी। छन्द- जगती] 
५०९१. घृतव॑ती भुरवनानामभिश्रियोर्वी पृथ्वी मंधुदुधे सुपेशंसा। 
द्यावापृथिवी वरुणस्य धर्मणा विष्कभिते अजरे भूरिरितसा।।१॥ 


1. Radiant Heaven and Earth, the asylum of created beings, 
you are spacious, manifold, water-yielding, lovely, separately 
fixed by the functions of Varuna, undecaying, many-germed. 

Sdmaveda, 378; Yajurveda, 34, 35. 


५०९२. असंश्चन्ती भूरिधारे पय॑स्वती घृतं den सुकृते शुचिंत्रते। 
राज॑न्ती अस्य भुर्वनस्य रोदसी अस्मे रेत॑: सिञ्चतं यन्मनुंहितम्‌।२॥ 
2. Uncollapsing, many-showering, water retaining, yielding 


moisture, beneficent, pure in act: do you two, Heaven and Earth, 


rulers over created beings, grant us vigour, that may be favourable 
to (the increase of) mankind. 


५०९३. यो वामृजवे क्रम॑णाय रोदसी मतो ददार्श धिषणे स सांधति। 
प्र प्रजाभिर्जायते धर्मणस्परि युवोः सिक्ता विषुरूपाणि सत्र॑ता।३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


CU em 55255 न — — 


i by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 71 es 


3. Firm-set Heaven and Earth, the mortal who has offered 
(oblations) for your straight-forward course, accomplishes (his 
objects), he prospers with progeny, and invigorated by your 
operation, many beings of various forms, but similar functions, are 
engendered. 

^ 1 ^ a_i) | 
५०९४. घृतेन द्यावापृथिवी अभीवृते घृतश्रियां घृतपृचां घृतावृधां। 
EIE > पुरोहिते fi e es $5 सुम्नमिष्टये 
उर्वी पृथ्वी egga पुरोहिते ते इद्विप्रा gad [1 [४ || 

4. You are surrounded, Heaven and Earth, by water: you are 
the asylum of water: imbued with water: the augmenters of water: 
vast and manifold; you are first propitiated in the sacrifice: the 
pious pray to you for happiness, that the sacrifice (may be 
celebrated). 

Pray to you for Happiness, Etc.— Ilate sumnam istaye, ask 
happiness for the sacrifice: for, Sayana observes, when there is happiness, 
sacrifices proceed, sukhe sati yagah pravartante. 

Tigrim | ^ [| ७ Lu धरते 
५०९५. मधु नो द्यावापृथिवी मिमिक्षतां मधुश्चुता मधुदुघे मधुव्रते। 
[RS EE is Re Ts सुवीर्यम्‌ 
दधाने यज्ञ द्रविंणं च देवता महि श्रवो वाज॑मस्मे सुवीर्यम्‌।५ i 

5. May Heaven and Earth, the effusers of water, the milkers of 
water, dischargers of the functions of water, divinities, the 
Promoters of sacrifice, the bestowers of wealth, of renown, of 
food, of male posterity, combine together. 


> पिन्वतां uot 
५०९६. ऊर्ज नो द्यौश्च॑ पृथिवी च॑ पिन्वतां पिता माता विश्वविदा सुदंससा। 
. EC रोद॑सी Re सनिं = le ax F 1 i 
संरराणे रोदसी विश्वशम्भुवा सनिं वाजं रयिमस्मे समिन्वताम्‌। ६ ।। 
6. May father Heaven, may mother Earth, who are all 
knowing, and doers of good deeds, grant us sustenance: may 


Heaven and Earth, mutually co-operating and promoting the 
happiness of all, bestow upon us posterity, food, and riches. 


[सूक्त-७१] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- सविता। छन्द- जगती, ४६ त्रिष्टुप्‌] 
५०९७. उदु ष्य देवः संविता हिरण्यया बाहू अयंस्त सव॑नाय सुक्रतुः। 
घृतेन॑ पाणी अभि प्रुष्णुते मखो gat सुदक्षो रज॑सो विधर्मॅणि।॥१॥ 
l. The divine and benevolent Savità puts forth bis golden arms 
for (making) donations: the adorable, youthful, sagacious (deity). 


Stretches out his hands, filled with water, in the various Service of 
the world. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


"a ——— H—D! 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
156 Rgveda Samhita 


५०९८. देवस्य॑ वयं संवितुः सवीमनि AB स्याम वसुनश्व दावनें। 
यो विश्व॑स्य द्विपदो यश्चतुष्पदो निवेशने प्रसवे चासि भूम॑नः।।२।॥। 
2. May we be amongst the progeny of the divine Savitd, and 
(have power) to offer him most excellent donations: for you are he 


who (are absolute) in the procreation and perpetuation of many 
(living beings), bipeds or quadrupeds. 


५०९९. अदंब्धेभिः सवितः पायुभिष्टं शिवेभिरद्य परि पाहि नो गय॑म्‌। 
हिरण्यजिह्वः सुविताय नव्यसे रक्षा माकिर्नो अघर्शस ईशत।।३॥ 


3. Do you, Savitd, prosper today our dwelling with uninjurable 
protections, confirming happiness: do you, who are golden- 
tongued, (be vigilant) for our present prosperity: protect us; let not 
any calumniator have power (to harm) us. 

Golden-Tongued— Hiranyajihva may also mean one whose speech 
is pleasant and beneficial, hita ramaniya! yak. Mahidhara says that jihva 


may imply jvald, flame, when the epithet will signify, he whose light or 
heat is beneficial.—Yajur,. 33.69. 


५१००. उदु ष्य देवः संविता दमूंना हिरण्यपाणिः प्रतिदोषम॑स्थात्‌। 
अयोहनुर्यजतो मन्द्रजिह्व आ दाशुषें सुवति भूरि वामम्‌।४।। 
4. May the divine, munificent, golden-handed, golden-jawed, 


adorable, sweet-spoken Savitd, rise regularly at the close of night: 
when he bestows abu.idant and desirable (food) upon the donor of 


the oblation. 
५१०१. उदू अयाँ उपवक्तेव॑ बाहू हिरण्यया सविता सुप्रतींका। 
रोहाँस्यरुहत्पृधि 5 
दिवो थव्या अरीरमत्पतयत्कच्चिदभ्व॑म्‌।।५।। 

5. May Savitd put forth like an orator his golden well-formed 
arms: (he who), from the ends of the earth, ascends to the summit 
of the sky, and, moving along, delights every thing that is. 

Like an Orator— Upavaktd-iva like one who addresses or advises. 

संवितर्वाममु 
५१०२. वाममद्य iy at दिवेदिवे वाममस्मभ्यं सावी:। 
; pn 
वामस्य हि क्षयस्य देव भूरैरया धिया वांमभाज॑: स्याम।।६।। 

6. Beget for us, Savitd, wealth today, wealth tomorrow, wealth 
day by day: you are the giver of ample wealth, of a (spacious) 
mansion: may We, by this praise, become partakers of wealth. 


१. हितरमणं भवतीति वा (निरु० २.१०)। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


É by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 6, Sükta 72 ia 


Yajurveda, 8,6; Mahidhara interprets Vama, which Sáyana renders 
dhanam, by karmaphalam, the reward of holy acts or sacrifice, both 
interpreting it as usual, vananiyam, that which it is desirable to obtain, 
and which will apply equally to wealth or reward: ksaya he renders 
residence, and bhüreh, bahukalinasya, long protracted, that is, residence 
in heaven, Svarganivásah. 


[सूक्त-७२] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- इन्द्र-सोम। छन्द- eT] 
५१०३. इन्द्रासोमा महि तद्वा महित्वं युवं महानि प्रथमाति चक्रथुः। 
युवं सूर्य विविदर्थुर्युवं स्वशविश्वा तमास्यहतं fres un | 
1. Great, Indra and Soma, is that your greatness, for you have 
made great and principal (beings): you have made known (to men) 


Sürya and the waters: you have dissipated the glooms and 
(destroyed) the revilers. 


५१०४. इन्द्रासोमा वासय॑थ उषासमुत्सूर्यं नयथो ज्योतिषा सह। 
उप द्यां सकम्भथुः स्कम्भनेनाप्रथतं पृथिवीं मातरं वि॥२॥ 
2. Indra and Soma, you have led on the dawns; you have 
upraised the sun with his splendour, you have propped up the sky 


With he supporting pillar (of the firmament); you have spread out 
the earth, the mother (of all). 


५१०५. इन्द्रासोमावहिमपः परिष्ठां हथो gard वां द्यौरमन्यत। 
प्राणँस्यैरयतं नदीनामा संभुद्राण पप्रथुः पुरूणि।॥३ ॥ 

3. Indra and Soma, you slew Ahi and Vrtra, the obstructer of 
the water; for which the heaven venerates you both: you have 
urged on the waters of the rivers until they have replenished 
numerous oceans. 

५१०६. इन्द्रासोमा पक्रमामास्वन्तर्नि गवामिर्दधथुर्वक्षर्णासु। 
जगृभथुरनपिनद्धमासु रुश॑च्चित्रासु जगतीष्वन्तः।४।। 

4. Indra and Soma, you have deposited the mature (milk) in 


the immature udders of the kine: you have retained the white 


णो, although not shut up within those many-coloured 
cattle. 


५१०७. इन्द्रासोमा युवमङ्ग तरुत्रमपत्यसाचं श्रुर्त्य रराथे। 
युवं शुष्मं नर्यं चर्षणिभ्यः सं विव्यथुः पृतनाषाहमुग्रा। ५॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


त मा का ळा 1 1 EE LS 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


158 Rgveda Samhita 


5. Indra and Soma, do you promptly bestow upon us 
preservative, renowned (riches), accompanied by offspring; for 
you, fierce (divinities), have disseminated amongst men, strength, 
useful to man, victorious over hostile hosts. 


[सूक्त-७३| 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- बृहस्पति। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌] 
५१०८. यो अंद्रिभित्॑थमजा ऋतावा बृहस्पतिराङ्गिरसो हविष्मान्‌। 
द्विबह॑ज्मा प्राघर्मसत्पिता न आ रोद॑सी वृषभो रोरवीति।।१।। 


1. Brhaspati, who is the breaker of the mountain, the first-born 
(of Prajdpati), the observer of truth, the descendant of Arigiras, the 
partaker of the oblation, the traverser of two worlds, abiding in the 
region of light, is to us as a father: he, the showerer, thunders loud 
in heaven and earth. 

In the first instance it is said Brhaspati was born of the seed of 
Prajdpati, afterwards from the Avigirasas, upon the authority of the 
Aitareya Bráhmana, where a strange and filthy legend is told of the origin 
of various deities from the seed of Prajdpati converted into burning coals: 
from some of these proceeded, it is said, the Avigirasas; and afterwards, 
from other cinders, not yet cool, Brhaspati: this, however, does not agree 
exactly with the text, in which Angirasa, as a patronymic, implies the 
descent of Brhaspati from Angiras. Aitareya Brahmana, 11.34. 


५१०९. जनाय चिद्य ईव॑त उ लोकं बृहस्पतिर्देवहूतौ चकार। 
घ्वन्वृत्राणि वि पुरो दर्दरीति जयज्छ्रमित्रान्पृत्सु MEL 
2. Brhaspati, who has appointed a region for the man who 


attends deligently at divine worship, destroying impediments, 


conquering foes, overcoming enemies, demolished various cities 
(of the Asuras). 


५११०. बृहस्पतिः समजयद्वसूनि महो व्रजान्‌ गोम॑तो देव एषः। 
दव ए 
अपः सिर्षासन्त्स्वः रप्रतीतो बृहस्पति्हन्त्यमित्रमर्कै: 11३ 1 
3. This divine Brhaspati has conquered the treasures (of the 


enemy), and the spacious pastures with the cattle: purposing 19 


appropriate the waters (of the firmament), he destroys with sacred 
prayers the adversary of heaven. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Cnm e NE जिल 


2 
ts, 
es 


he 


ed 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 74 159 


[3-6] 
[ऋषि- भरद्वाज बार्हस्पत्य। देवता- सोम-रुद्र। छन्द- fau] 
५१११. सोमारुद्रा धारयेंथामसुर्य प्र वामिष्टयो5रमश्नुवन्तु। 
दमेंदमे सप्त रत्ना दधांना शं नों भूतं द्विपदे श॑ चर्तुष्पदे।॥१ di 
1. Soma and Rudra, confirm (in us the strength) of Asuras may 
sacrifices in every dwelling adequately reach you: do you, 


possessors of the seven precious things, bestow happiness upon us: 
happiness upon our bipeds and quadrupeds. 


Possessors of the Seven Precious Things— Sapta ratnà dadhana: 
no explanation is given by the Scholiast as to what they are. 


५११२. सोमारुद्रा वि वृहतं विपूंचीममीवा या नो गयमाविवेश। 
आरे बाधेथां fifi पराचैरस्मे भद्रा सौश्रवसार्नि सन्तु॥२।। 

2. Soma and Rudra, expel the widespread sickness that has 
entered into our dwellings; keep off Nirrti, so that she may be far 
away, and may prosperous means of sustenance be ours. 

Keep off Nirrti— Nirrti is here interpreted alaksmi misfortune and 
poverty. 

५११३. सोमारुद्रा युवमेतान्यस्मे विश्वां qq भेषजानि धत्तम्‌। 
० 5 . कृतमेनों 
अव॑ स्यतं मुञ्चतं यन्नो अस्ति तनूषुं बद्धं कृतमेनों अस्मत्‌॥३॥ 

3. Soma and Rudra, grant all these medicaments for (the 
ailments of) our bodies: detach, set free, the perpetrated iniquity 
that has been bound up in our persons. 

Set Free, the Perpetrated Iniquity, Etc.— That is, disease is 


regarded as the consequence and evidence of some committed sin; and the 
removal of the malady is proof of its expiation. 


५११४. तिग्मायुधौ तिग्महेती सुशेवौ सोमारुद्राविह सु मृळतं नः। 
प्र नो मुञ्चतं वरुणस्य पाशांद्‌ गोपायत नः सुमनस्यरमाना।।४।। 


4. Sharp-weaponed, sharp-arrowed, profoundly-honoured 
Soma and Rudra, grant us happiness in this world: propitiated by 
Our praise, preserve us: liberate us from the bonds of Varuna. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


160 Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त-७५] 


[क्रषि- पायु भारद्वाज। देवता- (संग्राम के अंग) १ वर्म, २ धनु, ३ ज्या, 
४ आलीं, 4 इषुधि, ६ पूर्वा. सारथी, उत्त. रश्मियां, ७ अनेक अश्व, ८ 
रथ ९ रथ गोप, १० ब्राह्मण, पितृ, सोम, द्यावा-पृथिवी , पूषा, ११-१२, 
१५-१६ इषु समूह, १३ प्रतोद, १४ हस्तघ्न, १७ युद्धभूमि, ब्रह्मणस्पति 
तथा अदिति, १८ वर्म-सोम-वरुण, १९ देवब्रह्म . छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, ६-१० 
` जगती, १२, १३, १५, १६, १९ अनुष्टुप्‌, १७ पंक्ति] 
५११५. जीमूतस्येव भवति प्रतीकं ueri यातिं समदांमुपस्थे। 


| | > वर्मणो पिपर्तु 
अनाविद्धया तन्वां जय त्वं स त्वा वर्मणो महिमा पिंपर्तु।।१।। 

1. When the mailed warrior advances in the front of battles, his 
form is like that of a cloud: with his body unwounded to you 
conquer; may the strength of the armour defend you. 

In the front of Battles— Pratikam rüpam: Mahidhara, Yajurveda, 
29,58, explains it, front of the army, sendmukham: the whole Sikta occurs 
in the Yajus, with the exception of two stanzas, the ninth and fifteenth; the 


first four stanzas occur in the same order, as do 38 to 51; the 11th, 17th, 
18th are in the seventeenth Adhyaya, verses 45, 48, 49. 


५११६. धन्वना गा धन्व॑नाजिं ज॑येम धन्व॑ना तीव्राः समदो जयेम। 
धनुः शत्रोरपकामं कृणोति धन्व॑ना सर्वाः प्रदिशों जयेम।।२।। 
2. May we conquer the cattle (of the enemies) with the bow: 
with the bow may we be victorious in battle may we overcome our 


fierce-exulting (enemies) with the bow: may the bow disappoint 


the hope of the foe: may we subdue with the bow all (hostile) 
countries, 


Exulting— Samadah is explained either, 
exhilaration, or sam, entirely, and ad, who devours'. 


५११७. वक्ष्यन्तीवेदा गनीगन्ति कर्ण प्रियं सखांयं परिषस्वजाना। 


-योषेव > 
योषेव शिङ्क्ते वितताधि धन्वञ्ज्या इयं सम॑ने great I 
3. This bowstring; drawn tight upon the bow, and making way in 
battle, repeatedly approaches the ear (of the warrior), as if embracing 15 


friend (the arrow), and proposing to say something agreeable, as a woman 
whispers (to her husband). 


sa, with, mada, 


1. Nir. IX.17 & IX 18 For mantra 5117 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
tà Mandala 6, Sükta 75 161 
५११८. ते आचरन्ती समनेव योषां मातेव॑ पुत्र बिभृतामुपस्थे 
अप Wad विध्यतां संविदाने आलीं इमे विष्फुरन्ती अमित्रान्‌॥४।। 


4. May the two extremities of the bow, acting con- 
sentancously, like a wife sympathizing (with her husband), uphold 


| (the warrior), as a mother nurses her child upon her lap; and may 
they, moving concurrently, and harassing the foe, scatter his 
enemies. 


Like a Wife... the Warrior— Bibhrtam, Sayana explains rajanam 
dharayetam; Mahidhara, dhdrayatdm samam, support the arrow. 
Samaneva yosá he considers as the singular put for the dual, the two 
extremities drawing close to the archer, like two women to their lover, 
Striyau yathà kantam àgacchatah. 


an: I 
u ५११९. Fata पिता बहुरस्य पुत्रश्चिश्चा कृणोति समनावगत्य | 
ति c ` निनद्धो I 
इषुधिः संकाः पूर्तनाश्च सर्वाः पृष्ठे निर्नद्धो जयति प्रसूत:11५11 
5. The quiver, the parent of many, of whom many are the sons, 
clangs as it enters into the battle: slung at the back (of the warrior), 
prolific (of its shafts), it overcomes all shouting hosts. 
Shouting Hosts— Sarikah prtanah—Sayana explains sanka, 
sounding together, sarı kayanti; Mahidhara, following Yaska, Nir, 1X.14, 


derives it from sac, to be assembled, or sam, with, Kr, to be renowned, 
armies in which there are assembled, or celebrated warriors. 


५१२०. रथे तिष्ठन्नयति वाजिन॑ः पुरो यत्र॑यत्र कामयते सुषारथिः। 

भीशूनां bui a ai F i 
i ans] i पनायत मन: पश्चादनु यच्छन्ति रश्मय:11६ I 
at 6. The skilful charioteer, standing in the car, drives his horses 
>) before him whatsoever he will; praise the efficacy of the reins, for 
the reins from the back (of the car compel the steeds) to follow the 


intention (of the driver). 
Nir. IX.16. 


५१२१. तीव्रान्‌ घोर्षान्‌ कृण्वते वृषपाणयोऽश्वा रथेभिः सह वाजय॑न्तः। 
अवक्रामन्तः प्र्पदैरमित्रान्‌ क्षिणन्ति शतरँरनंपव्ययन्त: 1191 
| 7. The horses raising the dust with their hoofs, rushing on with 
n the chariots, utter loud neighings, retreating not (from the charge), 
is Be trampling with their fore feet upon the enemies, they destroy 
n hem. 
The Horses Raising, Etc.— Vrsapdnayo asvah, parisunam varsaka- 


Khura, with hoofs the showerers of dust: Mahidhara explains the epithet, 
45vavdra. riders: vrsab asvah haste yesam te asvavárah, and makes it the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
162 Rgveda Samhita 


nominative to Aynvate-ghosan, calling out, jaya, jaya; but he again refers 
the verb to áseva, the horses make a noise: hesddi Sabdan, neighing, and 
the like. 


५१२२. रथवाहनं हविरस्य नाम यत्रायुधं निहितमस्य वर्म। 
तत्रा रथमुप॑ शग्मं संदेम विश्वाहां वयं सुंमनस्यमांनाः।।८॥। 
8. The spoil borne off in his car, in which his weapons and 
armour are deposited, is the appropriate oblation of the warricr; 
therefore let us, exulting, daily do honour to the joy-bestowing car. 


The Joy-Bestowing Car— Rathavahanam, Mahidhara explains 
anas, a car, or truck on which the car is placed. 


al पितरो sf? शक्तीवन्तो 
५१२३. स्वादुषंसदः पितरो वयोधाः कृच्छेश्रित: शक्तीवन्तो गभीराः। 
चित्रसेना 1 | सतोवीरा उरवों 
चत्रसेना इषुंबला अमृध्राः सतोवीरा उरवों व्रातसाहाः।।९।। 

9. The guards (of chariot), revelling in the savoury (spoil), 
distributors of food, protectors in calamity, armed with spears, 
resolute, beautifully arranged, strong in arrows, invincible, of 
heroic valour, robust, and conquerors of numerous hosts. 

The Guards of the Chariot— Pitarah is the only substaintive in the 
text, which both Scholiasts render pdlayitdrah, guards, defenders, a body 
of spearmen, Saktivantah, apparently, attendants on the war chariot of the 


chief: Mahidhara's explanation of this verse is much the same as 
Sàyana's with some trifling variations. 


| | 
५१२४. ब्राह्मणासः पितर: सोम्यांसः शिवे नो द्यावापृथिवी अनेहसां। 
] = a Re 
पूषा न: पातु दुरिताद्‌ ऋतावृधो रक्षा माकिर्नो अघशंस ईशत।।१०॥ 
10. May the Brahmanas, the progenitors presenters of the 
Soma the observers of truth, protect us: may the faultless heaven 
es be propitious to us: may Piisan preserve us from 
misfortune, let no caluminator prevail over us. 
The Observers of Truth— Riāvrdhah raksa, which occur in the 
second half of the verse, are retained in their places by Mahidhara; of 


deities, deva, raksatasman, protect us: both commentators affirm that 


raksa in the singular is put for raksata in the plural: the verse, however 
seems out of place. 


५१२५. सुपर्ण वस्ते मृगो अंस्या दन्तो गोभिः सन्नद्धा पतति प्रसूता। 
यत्रा नर: सं च वि च द्रवन्ति तत्रास्मभ्यमिष॑वः शर्म यंसन्‌॥११॥ 


___ 11. The arrow puts on a (feathery) wing: the (horn of the) deer 
is 115 point: it is bound with the sinews of the cow: i: alights where 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ho. 0 — 9 Jo l 


a by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 6, Sükta 75 163 


directed: whenever men assemble or disperse, there may the shafts 
fall for an advantage. 

Deer is its Point— Mrgo asyá danta, the deer is its tooth: that is, 
according to Sayana, the horn of the deer: Mahidhara and Yaska make 
mrga an adjective, that which seeks or reaches the enemy. Nir. IX.19. 

With the Sinews of the Cow— Gobhih sannaddha: al the 
commentators agree that this means govikdraih sndyubhih, with tendons 
derived from the cow. : 

dm 1 ` 1 
५१२६. ऋजीते परि वृध नोऽश्मा भवतु नस्तनूः। 
NON 1 ^ ES] le 
सोमो अधि ब्रवीतु नोऽदितिः शर्म यच्छतु।।१२।। 

12. Straight-flying (arrow), defend us: may our bodies be 
stone: may Soma speak to us encouragement: may Aditi grant us 
success. 

1 ND. x 1 
५१२७. आ जङ्घन्ति सान्वेषां जघनां उप जिघ्नते। 
1 RES 1 1 
अश्वाजनि प्रचेतसो5 श्वान्त्समत्सु चोदय।।१३॥। 

13. Whip, with which the skilful (charioteers) lash their thighs 
and scourge their flanks, urge the horses in battles. 

Skilful Charioteers.— Pracetasa is applied by Yaska IX.20, and 
Mahidhara, to asvdn, the intelligent horses but Sáyana is better advised, as 
there is no other nominative to the verbs jarighanti and jighnate. 

A t 1 हेतुं 1 ध॑मान 
५१२८. अहिरिव भोगै: पर्येति बाहुं ज्यायां हेतुं परिबाधमान:। 
EU D TO 1 
हस्तघ्नो विश्वां वयुनानि विद्वान्‌ पुमान्मुमासं परि पातु विश्वतः।।१४॥। 

14. The ward of the fore-arm protecting it from the abrasion of 

the bow-string, surrounds the arm like a snake with its 


convolutions: may the brave man, experienced in the arts of war, 
defend a combatant on every side. 

So Yiska, IX.15. Mahidhara, suggests another interpretation, and 
explains hastaghna, a shield, as well as the guard of the fore-arm. 
; With its Convolutions— Ahiriva bhogaih: the latter is rendered 
Sarirena, with the body, by all the interpreters. 

I रुरुशीर्ष्ण्य 1 
५१२९. आलाक्ता या थो यस्या अयो मुखम्‌। 
> eh M I 
इदं पर्जन्यरेतस इष्वै देव्यै gea: IRA 

15. This praise (be offered) to the large celestial arrow, the 
growth of Parjanya, whose point is anointed with venom, whose 
blade is iron. 


_ The Growth of Parjanya— The stem of the arrow formed of the 
Sara reed or grass growing in the rainy season. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


164 Rgveda Samhita 
५१३०. अवसृष्टा परां पत शरेव्ये ब्रह्मसंशिते। 
गच्छामित्रान्प्र पद्यस्व मामीषां कं चनोच्छिषः 1126 11 
16. Arrow, whetted by charms, fly when discharged go: light 


amongst the adversaries: spare not one of the enemy. 
Sdmaveda, 1863; Yajurveda, 17, 45. 


| | 1 | 
५१३१. यत्र बाणाः सम्पर्तन्ति कुमारा विशिखाइव। 
| I I mi शर्म यच्छतु 
wal नो ब्रह्म॑णस्पतिरदिति: शर्म यच्छतु विश्वाहा शर्म 11१७॥ 
17. Where arrows alight like shaven-headed boys may 
Brahmanaspati, may Aditi, grant us happiness grant us happiness 
every day. 
Like Shaven-Headed Boys— Kumara visikha iva, like boys without 
the lock of hair left at shaving: mundità mundah, shom-headed; the point 
of comparison is not very obvious, but it may mean, that the arrows fall 


where they list, as boys before they are left with the lock of hair, before 


the religious tonsure, play about wherever they like, Sdmaveda, 1866; 
Yajurveda, 17, 48. 


मर्माणि 
५१३२. मर्माणि ते वर्मणा छादयामि सोमस्त्वा राजामृतेनानु वस्ताम्‌। 
उरोर्वरीयो वरुणस्ते ` TERN N 

उरोर्वरीयो वरुणस्ते कृणोतु जयन्त त्वानु देवा म॑दन्तु।।१८।। 
18. I cover your vital parts With armour; may the royal Soma 
invest you with ambrosia; may Varuna amplify your ample 

felicity: may the gods rejoice (at beholding you) triumphant. 
May Varuna Amplify your Ample Felicity— Uror-variyo varunas 
te krnotu, may Varuna make the increase of the large: that is, according to 


Sayana, sukham, happiness: Mahidhara applies the phrase to the varma, 
or mail, may he make it ample of ample. Samaveda, 1870; Yajurveda, 17, 
49. 


५१३३. यो नः स्वो अरणो यश्च निष्ट्यो जिघांसति। 
देवास्तं सर्वे धूर्वन्तु ब्रह्म वर्म ममान्तरम्‌॥१९॥ 


19. Whoever, whether an unfr 
desires to kill us, may all the 
armour. 


Samaveda, 1872: it adds to brahma varma mamantaram, Sarma varma 
mamantarm, my best happiness my armour. 


iendly relative or a stranger, 
gods destroy him: prayer is my best 


॥इति षष्ठं मण्डलम्‌।। 


End of the Sixth Mandala 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


॥अथ सप्तमं मण्डलम्‌॥ 
SEVENTH MANDALA 
ANUVAKA 1 
[सूक्त- १] 
[ऋषि-वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि, देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- विराट्‌, १९-२५ freut] 
५१३४. अग्नि नरो दीधितिभिररण्योर्हस्तंच्युती जनयन्त प्रशस्तम्‌। 
दूरेदृर्श गृहपतिमथर्युम्‌।।१ 11 


1. Men generate the excellent, far-gleaming master of the 
mansion, the accessible Agni, present in the two sticks by attrition 
with their fingers. 

Sdmaveda, 72; the printed copy reads, atharya: Sayana explains it, 
dgamya-atanavat, not spreading or dispersing. 

तमग्निमस्ते वसंवो I LES | 
५१३५. तम वसवो न्यृण्वन्त्सुप्रतिचक्षमवसे कुतश्रित्‌। 
A | 
दक्षाय्यो यो दम आस नित्यः।।२।। 

2. The dwellers have placed in the mansion, for its constant 
protection, that visible Agni, who has been from ever, who is to be 
honoured in every house. 

प्रेद्धों दीदिहि ` LU सूर्म्या 
५१३६. प्रेद्धो अग्ने दीदिहि पुरो नोऽज्रया सूर्म्या यविष्ठ। 
> | 
त्वां शश्वन्त उप यन्ति वार्जा: 11३ ।। 

3. Well-kindled, youthful Agni, shine before us with 
undecaying radiance: to you abundant sacrificial viands proceed. 

With Undecaying Radiance— Ajasraya surmyá-Mahidhara gives to 
surmi, for one meaning, samitkdstham, kindled wood; or it may mean an 
iron stake or post, red hot: it is therefore, figuratively, flame,' 


५१३७. प्र ते अग्नयोऽग्निभ्यो वरं निः सुवीरासः शोशुचन्त द्युमन्त:। 


यत्रा नरः समासते सुजाताः।।४।। LE ; 

4. Those radiant fires, at which the well-born saerificers 

assemble, shine more brightly, and are more bountiful bestower of 
Progeny (and other blessings), than the fires (of common life) 


R. See Yajurveda, 17.76: aiso Samaveda, 1375 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
166 Rgveda Samhita 


५१३८. दा नों अग्ने धिया रयिं सुवीरं स्वपत्यं संहस्य प्रशस्तम्‌। 
न यं यावा तर॑ति यातुमावांन्‌।५।। 


5. Vigorous Agni, grant to us, (in requital) of our praises, 
excellent riches, worthy male offspring, and descendants: (wealth), 
which an enemy attempting to assail, may not despoil. 


५१३९. उप यमेतिं युवतिः सुदक्षं दोषा वस्तोर्हविष्मंती घृताचीं। 
उप स्वैन॑मरमतिर्वसूयु :।।६।। 
6. Whom vigorous, the young damsel (the ladle) charged with 
the oblation, presenting the melted butter, day and night 


approaches; him, his own lustre approaches, favourable to (the 
bestowal of) wealth. 


५१४०. विश्वां अग्नेऽपं दहारातीर्येभिस्तपोंभिरद॑हो जरूथम्‌। 
प्र निस्वरं चांतयस्वामींवाम्‌।।७।। 
7. Consume, Agni, all enemics; with the same flames with 


which you have consumed Jarütha, drive away febrile disease, 


Jarütha— Jarütha is explained the harsh-voiced, or the threatening, 
Ráksasam parusasabdakarinam. 


५१४१. आ यस्तै अग्न इधते अनीकं वसिष्ट शुक्र दीदिवः पाव॑क। 
उतो न॑ एभिः स्तवथैरिह H: 


8. Eminent, pure, radiating purifier, Agni, be present (at the 


sacrifice) of him who lights up your blaze, and at ours, (who 
address you) with these praises. 


५१४२. वि ये ते अग्ने भेजिरे अनांकं मर्ता नरः पित्र्यासः पुरुत्रा 
उतो न॑ एभिः सुमनां इह स्यां:।।९।। 


9. Patriarchal mortals, leaders or rites have shared, Agni, you 


radiance in many places: (propitiated) by these our (praises, as by 
theirs), be present at this sacrifice. 


५१४३. इमे नरो वृत्रहत्येषु शूरा विश्वा अदेवीरभि सन्तु माया:। 
ये मे धिं पनयन्त प्रशस्ताम्‌।॥१०।। 


10. May those men who commend this my sacred rite, heroes, 
in battles with foes, overcome all impious devices. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 


E (004. — — — `` 4 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sūkta 1 167 
५१४४. मा शूने अग्ने नि ष॑दाम नृणां माशेषसोञ्वीरता परि त्वा। 
प्रजावतीषु दुर्यासु दुर्य।।११॥ 


11. Let us not sit down, Agni, in an empty dwelling, (nor in 
those) of (other) men: let us not be without successors; or, being 
without male posterity, let us, friend of dwellings, (by) 
worshipping you, (come to abide) in houses filled with progeny. 
५१४५. यमश्ची नित्यमुपयाति यज्ञं प्रजावन्तं स्वपत्यं क्षर्य नः। 

स्वजन्मना शेष॑सा वावृधानम्‌।।१२।। 

12. To whatsoever sacrifice the lord of horses regularly 
repairs, render, (Agni), our dwelling blessed with progeny, with 
excellent posterity, prospering with lineal successors. 

५१४६. पाहि नों अग्ने रक्षसो अर्जुष्टात्‌ पाहि धुर्तेरररुपो अघायोः। 
त्वा युजा पृतनायूँरभि vans 

13. Protect us, Agni, from the odious Ráksasas; protect us from 
the malignant, the illiberal, the iniquitous; may I, with you for my 
ally, triumph over the hostile. 

५१४७. सेदग्निरग्नरत्यस्त्वन्यान्यत्र॑ वाजी तन॑यो वीळुपांणिः। 
सहस्रपाथा अक्षरां wf itv UI 

14. May that fire (kindled by me) surpass all other fires, at 
which a vigorous son, firm-handed, possessing a thousand means 
(of living), co-operates in imperishable (praise). 

५१४८. सेदग्निर्यो व॑नुष्यतो निपातिं समेद्धारमंहस उरुष्यात्‌। 
सुजातासः परि चरन्ति SAT: 1184 UI 
15. Verily he is Agni, who defends from the malevolent and 


from heinous sin (the worshipper) kindling (the fire): he (it is) 
whom the well-born worshippers adore. 


1 
५१४९. अयं सो अग्निराहुतः Yea यमीशानः समिदिन्धे ह॒विष्मान्‌। 
परि यमेत्य॑ध्वरेषु होता।।१६॥ 
16. This is the Agni invoked in many places: whom the prince, 


presenting oblations to, kindles, whom the ministrant priest 
circumambulates at sacrifices. 


५१५०. त्वे अंग्न आहवनानि भूरीशानास आ जुंहुयाम नित्यां। 
उभा कृण्वन्तो दहतू मियेधें।।१७॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
168 Rgveda Samhita 


17. To you, Agni, may we, who are of exalted rank, offer many 
perpetual oblations, (employing) means, prayer and praise), 
attracting you to the sacrifice. 


५१५१. इमो अग्ने वीततमानि हव्याजस्रो वक्षि देवतांतिमच्छ। 
प्रति न ईं सुरभीणि व्यन्तु।।१८।। 


18. Do you, who are imperishable, bear these most acceptable 
oblations to the presence of the assembly of the gods; and may our 
fragrant (offering) gratify them severally. 


५१५२. मा नों अग्नेऽवीरते परा दा दुर्वाससेऽम॑तये मा नों अस्यै। मा न॑: 
क्षुधे मा रक्षस॑ ऋतावो मा नो दमे मा वन आ जुँहर्था:|॥१९।। 

19. Relinquish us not, Agni, to the want of male offspring: nor 

to deficient clothing: nor to such destruction: leave us not to 


hunger, not to the Raksasas: expose us not, observer of truth, to 
evil, whether in the house or in the forest. 


| | > 
५१५३. नू मे ब्रह्माण्यगन उच्छशाधि त्वं देव मघव॑द्भयः YE: | 
स्यांमो | तें > | 
रातौ स्यामोभयांस आ तें यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां Ae 1120 11 

3 20. Bestow upon me, Agni, quickly, abundant whole some 
ood: send sustenance, divine Agni, to those who are opuient in 
oblations: may we, both (priests and employer), be comprehended 
in you munificence: do you ever cherish us with blessings. 

Do you Ever Cherish us with Blessings— Yiyam pata svastibhih 
sada nah, the burthen of numerous Süktas, both prior and subsequent: 
yüyam is considered equivalent to tvam, the plural being put honorifically 


for the singular; but in a subsequent recurrence of the passage, verse 25, 


the Scholiast interprets it, you and your attendants, yüyam  tvat 
parivárásca sarve. 


५१५४. त्वमग्ने Wed रण्वसन्द्रक, सुदीती सूंनो सहसो दिदीहि। मा त्वे 
सचा तनये नित्य आ धड्मा वीरो अस्मन्नयों वि दासीत्‌।।२१।। 

21. Shine with bright lustre, Agni, son of strength, you who are 

eamestly invoked, and of pleasant aspect: consume not the 


begotten son with whom you are associated: let not our male 
offspring, beneficial to man, perish. 


५१५५. मा नो अने दुर्भूतये सचैषु देवेद्धेष्वग्निषु प्र वोच:। 
मा तै अस्मान्दुर्मतयो। भृमाच्चिददैवस्य सूनो सहसो AIR 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 2 169 
22. Command not the fires kindled by the priests with which 


you are united to work us evil: let not the displeasure, even in 
error, of you, the son of strength, who are divine, fall upon us. 


५१५६. स मर्तों अग्ने स्वनीक रेवानमर्त्यै य आजुहोतिं हव्यम्‌। 
I agafi > 
स देवतां वसुवनिं दधाति यं सूरिरर्थी पुच्छर्मान एतिं1॥२३॥ 

23. Radiant Agni, the mortal who offers oblations to the 
immortal becomes affluent: that deity (Agni) favours the presenter 
of (sacrificial) wealth, to whom the devout solicitant inquiring 
applies. 

To whom the Devout Solicitant Inquiring Applies— Yam sürir 
arthi prechamana, etc., the inquirer is supposed to ask, either where is the 
liberal giver of the wealth for which he prays, or who is that Agni to 
whom the petition is to be addressed. 

५१५७. महो नों अग्ने सुवितस्य॑ विद्वान्‌ रयिं सूरिभ्य आ der qeu 
येन॑ वयं संहसावन्मदेमाविक्षितास आयुषा सुवीरां:।।२४।। 

24. Agni, who are cognizant of our solemn and auspicious 
(worship), bring to the worshippers abundant riches, whereby, 
mighty Agni, we, blessed with uncontracted life, and excellent 
male descendants, may be happy. 

छि | 
५१५८. नू मे ब्रह्माण्यग्न उच्छशाधि त्वं देव मघवद्भ्यः सुषूद:। 
> Lu 
रातौ स्यामोभयांस आ ते यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां AIG di 

25. Bestow upon me, Agni, quickly, abundant whole some 
food: send sustenance, divine Agni, to those who are opulent in 
oblations: may we, both (priests and employer), be comprehended 


in your munificence: do you ever cherish us with blessings. 
This is a repetition of verse 20. 


[सूक्त- २] 


क्रिषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि, देवता- आग्री सूक्त (१ ईध्म , समिद्ध अग्नि, २ 
नराशंस, ३ ईळ; ४ बर्हि, ५ देवीर्दार ६, Gam, ७ दिव्यहोता- 
प्रचेतस्‌, ८ सरस्वती, भारती, ईळा-तिसो देव्यः, ९ त्वष्टा, १० वनस्पति, 
११ स्वाहाकृति)। छन्द- Pru] 

५१५९. जुषस्व नः समिर्धमग्ने अद्य iral qei धूममृण्वन्‌। 
उप॑ स्पृश दिव्यं सानु स्तूपैः सं रश्मिभिस्ततनः सूर्यस्य।॥१॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


bl Rgveda Samhita 


1. Be gratified, Agni, by the (sacred fire) kindled by us today, 
emitting abundant adorable smoke: touch with your scorching 
flames the celestial summit; combine with the rays of the sun. 

Kindled— Samiddham: here, as usual, it implies one of the Apris, or 
forms of fire, although used as an epithet. 


५१६०. नराशंसंस्य महिमानमेषामुप स्तोषाम यजतस्य यज्ञैः। 
ये सुक्रत॑वः शुच॑यो धियंधाः स्वदन्ति देवा उभर्यानि हव्या।।२॥ 
2. We celebrate with sacrifices the greatness of the adorable 
Narásamsa amongst those who are divinities, the performers of 


good works, the bright-shining, the upholders of rites, who partake 
of both kinds of oblations. 


Both kinds of Oblations— Oblations of ghi and libations of Soma, 
or other offerings. Nir. viii.6. 
isi ES l. | cs रोद॑सी I 1 
५१६१. ईठेन्यं वो असुरं सुदक्षमन्तर्दूतं रोदसी सत्यवाचम्‌। 
मनुष्वदग्नि | l समिद्धं [| सदमिन्महेम 
मनुष्वदग्नि मनुना समिद्धं समध्वराय हेम।।३।। 

3. Let us ever worship the Agni who is to be adored by us; the 
mighty, the destrous, the messenger passing between heaven and 
earth, the speaker of truth, kindled (of old) by Manu, as now by 
men, that (he may como) to the solemnity. 

Tanünapát, who usually comes next, is omitted, because, according 


to Sayana, the Sikta is called an Apri Sükta, Apra sabdoktatvan-idam 
Tantinapad rahitam. 


Agni who is to be Adored by Us— /lenyam Agnim is the Jlita of the 
other apri Suktas: the verb is mahema in the first person plural, the 
Scholiast says, substituted for the second, to you (priests) worship. 


५१६२. सपर्यवो भरमाणा अभिज्ञु प्र daa नम॑सा बर्हिरग्नौ। 
anehi 1 [LENTES E RC 
REM घृतपृष्ठं पृषद्वदध्वर्यवो हविषां मर्जयध्वम्‌।४॥। 
4. The worshippers bearing the sacred grass offer it with 


reverence, upon their knees, to Agni: worship him, priests, with 


oblations, invoking him to (sit down) on the spotted (grass), 
smeared with clarified butter. 


५१६३. स्वाध्योडै वि दुरो देवयन्तोऽशिश्रयू रथयुर्देवतांता। 
पूर्वी शिशुं न मातरा रिहाणे समग्रुवो न सम॑नेष्वञ्जन्‌।५॥ 


5. The devout performers of holy rites, desirous of chariots, 
have had recourse to the doors (of the sacrificial chamber): (the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F 


A. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 2 m 


ladles), placed to the east, are plying the fire with ghee at 
sacrifices, as the mother cows lick the calf, or as rivers (water the 
fields). 

The Doors of the Sacrificial Chamber— The doors are always 
named amongst the Apris: the second half of the stanza is obscurely 
constructed, although the sense may be made out, Purvi isum na mdtard 
rihdne samagruvo na samanesu-aijan: literally, the prior (or eastern) calf 
like two mothers licking rivers, like in sacrifices they anoint: the Scholiast 
explains pürvi-prágagre juhüpabhrtau, the two ladles—the juhu and 
upabhrt—placed at sacrifices with their ends to the east. 


५१६४. उत योष॑णे दिव्ये मही न॑ उषासानक्ता सुदुर्घेव धेनुः। 
बर्हिषदां पुरुहूते मघोनी आ यज्ञिये सुवितायं ATIR 
6. May the two youthful females, the divine and mighty day 
and night, the invoked of many, the possessed of wealth, seated on 


the sacred grass, entitled to adoration, be With us like an easily- 
milked cow for our welfare. 


५१६५. विप्रा यज्ञेषु मानुषेषु कारू मन्ये वां जातवेदसा यजंध्ये। 
wed नों अध्वरं कृतं हवेषु ता देवेषुं वनथो वार्याणि।॥७॥ 
7. Tam minded to adore you two sages, the ministrants at 
sacrifices of men, from celebrated, convey our offspring aloft, and 


acquire (for our use) the precious (treasures preserved) amongst 
the gods. 
५१६६. आ भारती भारतीभिः सजोषा इळां देवैर्मनुष्येभिरग्निः। 

सर॑स्वती सारस्वतेभिरर्वाक्‌ तिस्रो देवीर्बर्हिरेदं संदन्तु॥८॥ 

8. May Bharati, associated with the Bharatis: Ila with gods and 
men; and Agni and Sarasvati with the Sarasvatas, may the three 
goddesses sit down before us upon this sacred grass. 

Ili with Gods and Man— Ila devabhir-manusyebhir agni: the 
Scholiast here changes the order, and associates //2 with men, and Agr! 
has to do here amongst the goddesses, unless the name were in apposition 
with JJa, the Agni Ila. This and three following verses are repeated from 
the second Asaka, see verse 2487 ctc.: in such cases Sáyana does not 
usually repeat his comments, but here he says. as some interval has 
Occurred he does so summarily: he does so. also, with one or two 
Variations of explanation of no great importance. 


५१६७. तत्न॑स्तुरीपमध॑ पोषयित्नु देव॑ त्वष्टर्वि RM: स्य॑स्व। 
यतों वीरः कर्मण्यः सुदक्ष युक्तग्रांवा जाय॑ते देवकांमः।९॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


कि > कका. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
172 Rgveda Samhita 


9. Divine Tvastd, being well pleased, give issue to our 
procreative vigour, whence (a son) manly, devout, vigorous, 
wielder of the Soma-bruising stone, and reverencing the gods, may 
be born, 


५१६८. वनस्पते$व॑ सुजोप॑ देवानग्निर्हविः शंमिता सूंदयाति। 
सेदु होतां सत्यतरो यजाति यथां देवानां जनिमानि वेद॑।।१०।। 
10. Vanaspati, bring the gods night: may Agni, the immolator, 


prepare the victim: let him who is truth officiate as the ministering 
priest, for verily he knows the birth of the gods. 


५१६९. आ याहाग्ने समिधानो अर्वाङ्‌ इन्द्रेण देवैः mA तुरेभि:। 
बहिर्न आस्तामदितिः सुपुत्रा स्वाहां देवा अमृतां मादयन्ताम्‌।।११॥। 


11. Agni, kindled (into flame), come to our presence in the 
same chariot with Indra, and with the swift moving gods: may 
Aditi, the mother of excellent sons, sit down on the sacred grass, 


and may the immortal gods be satisfied with the reverentially- 
offered oblation. 


[39-3] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- freu] 
५१७०. अग्नि वों देवमग्निभिः सजोषा यजिष्ठ दूतम॑ध्वरे कृंणुध्वम्‌। 
यो मर्त्येषु निधुविक्रंतःवा तपुमूर्धा werd: पावकः।।१।। 
1. Appoint (gods) the most adorable, divine Agni, consentient 
with (all other) fires, your messenger at the sacrifice: him who is 


permanently present amongst men, the observer of truth, who is 


crowned with flame, the purifier, whose food is butter. 
Samaveda, 1219 3 


५१७१. प्रोथदश्वी न यवसेऽविष्यन्यदा महः संवरणाद्वयस्थात्‌। 
t > x = = E 
आदस्य वातो अनु वाति शोचिरध॑ स्म ते ब्रज॑नं कृष्णम॑स्ति।२॥ 
2. When, like a neighing steed about to feed upon the forage: 
(Agni) springs up from the vast-enclosing (forest) then the wind 


fans his flame: and black, (Agni), is your course. 
Samaveda, 1220; Yajurveda, 15.62. 


५१७२. उद्यस्य ते नवंजातस्य वृष्णोऽग्ने चरन्त्यजरा इधाना:। 
अच्छा द्यामरुषो धूम एति सं दूतो अग्न ईय॑से fe qmm I 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


हे 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 3 173 


3. The kindled undecaying flames of you, the newly born, the 
showerer, rise up: the luminous smoke spreads along the sky: and 
you, Agni, proceedest as their messenger to the gods. 

Sámaveda, 1221 


[28 टॅ E iqq जम्मैं 
५१७३. वि यस्य॑ ते पृथिव्यां पाजो अश्रेृषु यदन्ना समर्वृक्त जम्भै:। 
~| 1 H | 1 
सेनेव er प्रसितिष्ट एति यवं न दस्म जुह्वां aaf re i 
4. The light of whom quickly spreads over the earth when with 
his teeth (of flame) he devours his food: your blaze rushes along 
like a charging host, when Agni, of goodly aspect, you spreadest 
with your flame (amongst the trees) as if (they were) barley. 
You Spreadest with your Flame.—Yavam na dasma juhvd viveksi is 
explained, Darsaniyágner tvam yavam iva jvdlaya kasthadini bhaksayasi, 
when you eatest wood and other things like barley, with flame. 


५१७४. तमिद्दोषा तमुषसि यविष्ठमग्निमत्यं न मर्जयन्त नर: । 


निशिशाना अतिथिमस्य योनौ दीदाय शोचिराहुतस्य qui 


5. Men cherish that youthful Agni at evening and at dawn, as 
(they tend) a horse: lighting him as a guest in his proper station: 
the radiance of the showerer (of benefits), to whom the oblation is 
offered, shines brightly. 


५१७५. Gash स्वनीक प्रतीकं वि यदुकमो न रोच॑स उपाके। 
दिवो न तें तन्यतुरेति शुष्मश्चित्रो न सूरः प्रतिं चक्षि भानुम्‌॥६।। 
6. Resplendent Agni, when you shinest nigh at hanc like gold 


Your appearance is beautiful: your might issues like the 
thunderbolt from the firmament, and like the wonderful sun you 


, displayest your lustre 


५१७६. यथां वः स्वाहाग्नये दाशेम परीळाभिर्घृतवद्भिश्च हव्यैः। 
तेभिर्नो अग्ने अमितैर्महोभिः शतं पूर्भिरायसीभिर्नि पांहि।॥७॥। 

7. When we present to you, Agni, the sacred offering along 
With oblations mixed with milk and butter, then protect us, Agni 
With those vast unbounded, innumerable golden cities 

Protect us, Agni, with those, Etc.— Tebhir amitair mahobhih satam 


Purbhir-dyasibhir nipdhi is literally rendered in the text according to the 
interpretation of Sayana; he gives no explanation of what meant 


५९७. या वा ते सन्तिं दाशुषे अधृष्टा गिरों वा याभिर्नुवतीरुरुष्याः 
ताभिर्नः सूनो सहसो नि पाहि स्मत्सूरीज॑रितृज्ञातवेद: 11८11 


७८-७0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


174 Rgveda Samhita 


8. Son of strength, Jatavedas, with those unobstructed 
(splendours) which belong to you, a munificent donor, and with 
those praises wherewith you protectest people with their posterity, 
do you protect us your worshippers and praisers. 

५१७८. निर्यत्पूतेव स्वधितिः शुचिर्गात्‌ स्वयां कृपा तन्वार रोच॑मानः। 
आ यो मात्रोरशेन्यो जनिष्ट देवयज्याय सुक्रतुः पावकः।।९।। 

9. When the bright Agni, radiant with his own diffusive lustre, 

issues (from the touchwood) like a sharpened exe; and he who is 


desirable, the doer of great deeds, the purifier, is born of his two 
parents: (he appears) for the worship of the gods. 


५१७९. एता नों अग्ने सौभ॑गा दिदीह्यपि क्रतुं सुचेत॑सं वतेम। विश्वा 
स्तोतृभ्यों गृणते च॑ सन्तु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।१०।। 

10. Illume for us, Agni, these auspicious (riches): may we 

possess (a son) intelligent, the celebrator of sacred rites: may all 


(good things) be the your praisers, and to him who eulogizes (you): 
and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त- ४] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- Freq] 
५१८०. प्र d: शुक्राय॑ भानवें भरध्वं हव्यं मतिं चाग्नये सुपूतम्‌। 
यो दैव्यानि माजुषा जनूंष्यन्तर्विश्वानि विदाना जिगाति।।१।। 


1. Offer your sacred oblation, and praise the bright and radiant 


Agni, who passes with wisdom between all divine and human 
beings. 


५१८१. स गृत्सों अग्निस्तरुणश्चिदस्तु यतो यविष्ठो अजनिष्ट मातुः। 
5 | = 7 5 "3 
सं यो वना युवते शुचिंदन्‌ भूरिं चिदन्ना समिर्दत्ति सद्य: 1२ ।। 
2. May the sagacious Agni be our conductor from the time that 


he is born, most youthful, of his mother: he who, bright-toothed, 
attacks the forest, and quickly devours his abundant food. 


५१८२. अस्य देवस्य संसद्यनीके यं मर्तासः शेतं जंभे 
à पौरुषेयीमुवोच m = = 
नियागृभं मुवोच॑ दुरोकंमग्निरायवे शुशोच।३॥ 
3. Whom mortals apprehend as white (shining) in the principal 


station of that divinity; he who assents to manly adoration, and 
blazes for the good of man, and the discomfiture (of his foes). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


á by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Mandala 7, Sükta 4 175 
As white (Shining) in the Principal Stations— Asya devasya 
samsadi anike yam martásah syetam jagrbhre, is rendered literally 
according to the obvious purport of the words, confirmed by the 
Scholiast: what it means is not so clear. 


५१८३. अयं कविरकविषु प्रचेता मर्तेष्वग्निरमृतो नि धांयि। 
समाना अत्र जुहुरः सहस्वः सदा त्वे सुमनसः WAIKI 
4. This far-seeing, sagacious, immortal Agni, has been 


stationed among short-sighted mortals: harm us not, vigorous 
Agni, in this world, that we may ever be devoted to you. 


५१८४. आ यो योनिं देवकृतं ससाद क्रत्वा हयर ग्निरमृताँ अतारीत्‌। 
तमोष॑धीश्च वनिनश्च गर्भ भूमिश्च विश्वधायसं बिभर्ति।५॥। 
5. The herbs, and the trees, and the earth, contain as a germ 
that all-supporting Agni, who occupies a place provided by the 


gods, that by his functions he may convey (the offerings) to the 
immortals. 
ईशे || I San सुवीर्यस्य दातों 
५१८५. ईशे ह्यशग्निरमृतस्य भूरेरीशे राय: सुवीर्यस्य दातों:। 
n ^ 1 I 
मा त्वां वयं संहसावत्रवीरा माप्सवः परि षदाम मादुवः।६।। 

6. Agni has power to grant abundant food: he has power to 
grant riches with male posterity: vigorous Agni, let us not sit down 
before you devoid of sons, of beauty, of devotion. 

Devoid of Beauty— Mapsavah, rüpa-rahitah: apsas is a synonym of 
rüpa in the Nighantu.! 

परिषद्यं 1 u 
५१८६. परिषद्यं ह्यरणस्य रेकणो नित्य॑स्य रायः Wd: स्याम। 
NON EX 
न शेषों अग्ने अन्यजातमस्त्यचेतानस्य मा पथो वि दुक्षः।।७॥ 

7. Wealth is competent to the acquittance of debt: may we be 
masters of permanent riches: that is not offspring which is 
begotten by another; alter not the paths (of the generation) of a 
blockhead. : 

Wealth is Competent to the Acquittance of Debt— Parisadyam hi 
aranasya reknas, may also mean, anrnasya dhanam parihartavyam, the 
wealths of one not indebted is to be accepted. 

Alter not the Paths of the Generation of a Blockhead— 
Acetánasya md patho viduksa, is literally, consume not the paths of the 
universe; but Sayana, following Yaska, Nir. iii.2, explains it, avidusah 
Loc ec ree son ie ८ 5227: 

१. अप्स इति रूप नाम (निरु० ५.१३) 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ESSE —— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
176 Rgveda Samhita 


putrotpadana pramukhdn márgán mā vidudusah, change not (dus, 
vaikrtye) the principal paths of begetting a son of the unwise. 
५१८७. नहि ग्रभायारणः सुशेवोऽन्योदर्यो मन॑सा मन्तवा ॐ। 

अधां चिदोकः पुनरित्स एत्या नों वाज्य॑भीषाळेंतु नव्य॑:।।८।। 

8. One not acquitting debts, although worthy of regard, yet 
begotten of another, is not to be contemplated even in the mind (as 
fit) for acceptance: for verily he returns to his own house; therefore 
let there come to us (a son) new-born, possessed of food, 
victorious over foes. 

One not Acuitting Debts— Arana is explained in this place 
aramamdna, one not pleasing or delighting: in the proceeding verse it is 
rendered Anrna, one free from debt, implying not only literal debt, but the 
obligations due to men, progenitors and gods. 

Therefore Let there come to us a Son, Etc.— This looks like a 
prohibition of adoption, confining inheritance either to direct descent 
through a son, or to collateral descent through the son of a daughter: Nir, 


iii.3: this verse is considered as an explanation of the preceding, the drift 
of the two being the preference of lineal male descent. 


५१८८. त्वमग्ने वनुष्यतो नि पाहि त्वमुं नः सहसावन्नवद्यात्‌। 
> || n 9 
सं त्वा ध्वस्मन्वदभ्येतु पाथः सं रयिः स्पृहयाय्य: सहस्री ॥९।। 
9. Do you, Agni, defend us against, the malignant; do you, 
who are endowed with strength, (preserve us) from sin: may the 


(sacrificial) food come to you free from defect: may the riches that 
we desire come to us by thousands. 


५१८९. एता नों अग्ने सौभ॑गा दिदीह्यपि क्रतुं सुचेत॑सं वतेम। विश्वां 
भ्यों NS ers OT EE 
स्तोतृभ्यो गृणते च॑ सन्तु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः।।१०॥। 
10. Illume for us, Agni, these auspicious (riches): may we 
possess (a son) intelligent, the celebrator of sacred rites: may all 


(good things) be to your praisers and to him who eulogizes (you): 
and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 
See last verse of preceding Sikta. 
[सूक्त-५] 
[ऋषि- वसि मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वैश्वानर अग्नि। छन्दः freu] 
५१९०. प्राग्नये तवसें भरध्वं गिर दिवो अरतये पृथिव्याः। 


यो विशधेषाममृर्तानामुपस्थे वैश्वानरो वावृधे जांगृवद्धि:।।१ 11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 5 177 


1. Offer praise to the strong Agni, traversing without hindrance 
heaven and earth: he who (as) Vaisvdnarda prospers at the sacrifices 
of all the immortals, being associated with the awaking divinities. 


५१९१. पृष्टो दिवि धाय्यग्निः पृथिव्यां नेता सिन्धूनां वृषभः स्तियानाम्‌। 
स मानुंषीरभि विशो वि भाति वैश्वानरो वावृधानो वरॅण।।२।। 
2. Agni, the leader of the rivers, the showerer of the waters, the 
radiant, has been stationed in the firmament and upon earth: 


Vaisvanara augmenting with the most excellent (oblation) shines 
upon human beings. 
५१९२. त्वद्धिया विशं आयत्रसिंक्नीरसमना जहती भोजनानि। 
वैश्वानर पूरवे शोशुंचानः पुरो यद॑ग्ने RAAR: IR 
3. Through fear of you, Vaisvanara, the dark-complexioned 
races, although of many minds, arrived, abandoning their 


possessions, when, Agni, shing upon Puru, you have blazed, 


consuming the cities of his foe. 

Puru— In a former passage, Rg 1.63.7, Purave occurs as an epithet 
of Sudasa, one who fills or satisfies with offerings: Tridhatu is here 
interpreted Antariksam. 


५१९३. तव॑ त्रिधातुं पृथिवी उत द्ौरवैश्वानर व्रतमग्ने सचन्त। 
त्वं भासा रोद॑सी आ त॑तन्थाज॑स्रेण शोचिषा शोशुंचानः।।४॥ 

4. Vaisvanara Agni, the firmament, the earth, the heaven, 
combine in your worship: shining with undecaying splendour, you 
Overspreadest heaven and earth with light. 

५१९४. त्वाम॑ग्ने हरितों वावशाना गिर: सचन्ते धुन॑यो घृताची:। 
प्ति LA शि 2 रयीणां zi 
पतिं कृष्टीनां A रयीणां वैश्वानरमुषसां केतुमहाम्‌। nli 

5. The horses (of Indra), full of ardour, Worship you, Agni; the 
praises (of men), dispersers (of iniquity), accompanied by 
oblations, (honour you), the lord of men, the conveyer of riches, 
the Vaisvanara of dawns, the manifester of days. 

ति Lu 
५१९५. त्वे असुर्य वसंवो न्यृण्वन्क्रतुं हि d मित्रमहो जुषन्त। 
he न्यत E mST. ज्योतिर्जनयन्नार्यीय 
त्वं दस्यूँगेकेसो अग्न आज उरु ज्योतिर्जनयन्नार्याय l 
_ 6. Reverencer of friends, Agni, the Vasus have concentrated 
Vigour in you: they have been propitiated by your acts: generating 


vast splendour for the Arya, do you, Agni, expel the Dasyus from 
the dwelling. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


178 Rgveda Sarühita 
५१९६. स जाय॑मानः परमे व्योमन्वायुर्न पाथः परिं पासि सद्यः। 
त्वं भुव॑ना जनयन्नभि क्रन्नप॑त्याय जातवेदो दशस्यन्‌। 1७ | 


7. Born in the highest heaven, you ever drinkest the (Soma) 
beverage like Vayu: generating the waters, you thunderest, 
granting (his wishes) to your offspring, the worshipper. 

Drinkest the Soma ....like Va@yu— According to Sayana, in the cups 
dedicated to two deities the libation is offered first to Vayu or to 
Vaisvanara: or it may be explained, you drinkest or driest up water like 
the wind. 


५१९७. ताम॑ग्ने अस्मे इषमेरयस्व वैश्वानर द्युमतीं जातवेदः। 
यया राधः पिन्व॑सि विश्ववार yy श्रवो दाशुषे मर्त्याय।।८॥। 


8. Send to us, Agni, (who are) Vaisvanara Jatavedas, that 
brilliant sustenance whereby you conferrest wealth, and (grantest), 


all-desired Agni, abundant food to the mortal, the donor (of the 
oblation). 


५१९८. तं नों अग्ने मघवद्धयः पुरुक्षुं रयिं नि वाजं श्रुत्यं युवस्व। 
वैश्वानर महिं नः शर्म यच्छ रुद्रेभिरग्ने वसुंभिः सजोषांः।।९।। 
9. Bestow upon us who are affluent (in offerings), Agni, ample 


riches and renowned strength; associated with the Rudras, with the 
Vasus, grant us, Agni Vaisvanara, infinite happiness. 


[सूक्त-६] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वैश्वानर अग्नि। छन्द- ASTI] 
५१९९. प्र सम्राजो असुरस्य प्रशस्ति Ga: कृष्टीनामंनुमाद्यस्य। 
इ्नद्रस्येव प्र तवसंस्कृतानि वन्दे दारु वन्द॑मानो विवकिम।।१।। 


1. I salute the demolisher (of cities), glorifying the excellence 
of the powerful male, the universal sovereign who is the 


reverenced of all men: I proclaim his exploits (which are) like 
those of the mighty Indra. 


Samaveda, 78; the reading rather differs. 


I Salute the Demolisher of Cities— Darum vande: the first iS 
interpreted by Sayana, puram bhettaram. 


५२००. कविं केतु धासिं भानुमद्रेहिन्वन्ति शं राज्यं रोदस्यो:। 
पुरन्दरस्य गीर्भिरा विवासेउग्नेत्रतानि पूर्व्या महानि॥1२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


DAA whee MX 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 6 179 


2. They propitiate the wise, the manifesting, the sustaining, the 
enlightener of the pious, the giver of happiness, the sovereign of 
heaven and earth: J glorify with hymns the ancient and mighty 
works of Agni, the demolisher of cities. 


५२०१. न्यक्रतून्‌ ग्रथिनों मृध्रवाचः पर्णारश्रद्धां siqui अंयज्ञान्‌। 
रप्र तान्दयूँरग्निविवाय पूर्वश्चकारापराँ अर्यज्यून्‌।॥३ t 
3. May Agni utterly confound those Dasyus who perform no 
(sacred) rites, who are babblers defective in speech, niggards, 


unbelievers, not honquiring (Agni), offering no sacrifice: Agni 
preceding, has degraded those who institute no sacred ceremonies. 
1 ay | मद॑न्ती al [| tu 
५२०२. यो अपाचीने तमसि : प्राचीश्चकार नृतमः शचीभिः। 
तमीशानं N अग्नि | ~~ LESS po 
तमीशानं वस्वो ३ गृर्णापञ्नानत दमयन्त Yale I 

4. The chief of leaders has, by the benefits (bestowed upon 
them), guided those praising (him) through the accumulated gloom 
(of night): I glorify that Agni, the unbending lord of wealth, the 
tamer of adversaries. 

Guided those praising him, Etc.— Parvas-cakdra aparam ayayitun 
is explained, Agnir mukhyah san ayajamánán apardn jaghanyan cakára; 
or it may be rendered he who enlightens by the manifestation of dawn 
those praising him in the night. 


५२०३. यो देह्योई अन॑मयद्वधस्नैर्यों अर्यप॑त्नीरुषस॑श्रकार। 
स निरुध्या नहुषो यह्यो अग्निर्विशश्चक्रे बलिहृतः सहोभि: 11५ || 


5. The might Agni, who by his fatal (weapons) has baffled the 
devices (of the Asuras), who has created the lawns, the birds of the 
sun, having coerced the people by his strength, has made them the 
tributaries of Nahusa 

Baffled the Devices of the Asuras— Dehyo anamayat, has bowed or 
humbled, is the sense of the verb: that of Dehyah dehairüpacita, 
connected with, or collected bodies, is not so obvious: the Scholiast 
Interprets it, Asuri vidyá, the learning or science of the Asuras. 


५२०४. यस्य शर्मन्नुप विश्वे जनांस एवैस्तस्थुः सुमतिं भिक्षमाणा:। 
वैश्वानरो वरमा रोदस्योराग्निः स॑साद पित्रोरुपस्थम्‌।1६ 11 


6. Agni Vaisvdnara, whom all men approach with pious 
offerings soliciting his favour for the sake of (obtaining felicity). 
has come to the excellent station (intermediate) between his 
parents, heaven and earth. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
180 Rgveda Sarihita 
द्दे 1 I वै श्वानर | सूर्यस्य 
५२०५. आ देवो ददे बुध्त्या३ वसूनि वैश्वानर उदिता | 
"f ies परस्मादास्निर्दद ब्‌ आ X 
आ संमुद्राटवरादा परस्मादाग्निर्ददे दिव आ पृंथिव्याः।।७।। 

7. The divine Agni Vaisvdnara has removed from the 
firmament the investing (glooms) at the rising of the sun: he has 
removed them from the lower firmament of the earth, from the 
upper firmament of heaven. 

From the Firmament, Etc.— A samudrdd, avarád, à parasmád, 


diva à prthivyah, or it might be from the lower firmament, from the 
higher, from heaven, from earth. 


[सूक्त-७] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- frei] 
५२०६. प्र वो देवं चिंत्‌ सहसानमग्निमश्चं न वाजिन हिषे नमोभिः। 
भवां नो दूतो अंध्वरस्य॑ विद्वान्त्मनां देवेषु विविदे fadum 11 
1. I propitiate with oblations the divine, vigorous Agni, rapid 


as a horse: do you, knowing (our desires), be our messenger of the 


sacrifice: he, the consumer of forests, is known spontaneously 
among the gods. 


= ५२०७. आ यांने पथ्याईअनु स्वा मन्दरो देवानां सख्यं जुंषाणः। 
आ सानु शुष्मैर्नदयन्पूथिव्या जम्भेभिर्विश्चमुशधग्वर्नानि।।२ t 


2: Come, Agni, rejoicing by thine own paths, gratified by the 
friendship of the gods: roaring with withering flames above the 
high places of the earth: threatening to consume all the forests. 


५२०८. प्राचीनो यज्ञः सुधितं हि बहिः प्रीणीते अग्निरीळितो न होता। 
आ मातरा विश्ववारे हुवानो यतो यविष्ठ जज्ञिषे सुशेव॑ः।३।। 

3. The sacrifice is grass. 
lauded is satisfied, and 


desired parents of whom 
gods), are born. 


५२०९. सदयो अध्वरे रथिरं जनन्त मानुंषासो विर्चेतसो य एषाम्‌। 
ed z x - 
वेशामधायि विश्पतिर्दुरोणेररिनर्मन्द्रो मधुवचा rad tet 
: 4. Judicious men promptly generate at the sacred rite the 
directing (Agni), who (may convey) their (oblations): Agni, the 


lord of men, the giver of delight, the Sweet-spoken, the celebrator 
of sacrifices, has been established in the dwelling of the people. 


present; the sacred grass is strewn; Agni 
is the ministrant priest invoking the all- 
you, honoured Agni, the youngest (of the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 8 is 


Who may Convey their Oblations— The text has only ya esam, 
who their: the Scholiast supplies the rest. 


५२१०. असांदि वृतो वहिराजगन्वानगिनर्त्रह्मा नृषदने विधर्ता। 
aa यं पृथिवी वांवृधाते आ यं होता यज॑ति विश्वारम्‌।५।। 

5. Investes (with the priestly office), the bearer (of the 
oblation), Agni, the directing priest, the sustainer (of all), is seated 
in the house of man, he whom heaven and earth extol, and whom, 
the desired of all, the ministrant priests worship. 

५२११. एते द्युम्नेभिर्विश्वमातिरन्त मन्त्र ये वारं नर्या अर्तक्षन्‌। 
प्र ये विशस्तिरन्त श्रोषमाणा आ ये में अस्य दीधयन्नृतस्य ।।६ | 

6. These men nourish the universe with viands who offer (to 
Agni) fitting commendation; those people also who eagerly listen 
(to his laudation) augment (the plenty of the world), as do these 
my (associates), who are glorifiers of this truthful (deity). 

५२१२. नू त्वाम॑ग्न ईमहे वसिंष्ठा ईशानं सूंनो सहसो वसूनाम्‌। 
इषं स्तोतृभ्यो मघव॑द्धय आनड्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः।।७।। 

7. We Vasisthas implore you, Agni, son of strength, the lord of 

treasures, that you wilt quickly bestow food upon thine adorers 


who are affluent (in oblations), and do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[95-2] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- freu] 
५२१३. इन्धे राजा समर्यो नमोभिर्यस्य प्रतीकमाहुतं घृतेन॑। 
नरो हव्येभिरीळते सबाध आग्निरग्र॑ उषसांमशोचि।।१॥ 
. l. The royal (4 gni), the master (of the sacrifice), is kindled 
With praises, he whose person is invoked with (offerings of) butter, 
Whom men associated worship with oblations, Agni, who is lighted 


before the dawn. 
Samaveda, 70. 


५२१४. अयमु ष्य सुमहाँ अवेदि होतां मन्द्रो मनुषो यहो अग्निः। 
वि भा अंकः ससृजानः पृथिव्यां कृष्णप॑विरोष॑धीभिर्ववक्े॥२।। 


2. This great Agni has been known amongst man as invoker (of 
the gods), the giver of delight, the mighty: he has spread light (in 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
182 Rgveda Samhita 


the firmament), he, the darkpathed at large upon the earth, is 
nourished by the plants. 


५२१५. कयां नो अग्ने वि व॑सः सुवृक्तिं कामु स्वधामृंणवः शस्यमान:। 
कदा भ॑वेम पत॑यः सुद्र रायो वन्तारो दुष्टरस्य MÀ: 11३ di 
3. By what oblation, Agni, dost you clothe our praise? What 
offering dost you, when glorified, accept? When, giver of good, 


may we be the possessors and enjoyers of perfect and unmolested 
riches? 


५२१६. प्रप्रायमग्निर्भरतस्य॑ spud वि यत्सूर्यो न रोचते बृहद्धा:। 
अभि यः पूरं पृत॑नासु तस्थौ दयुतानो दैव्यो अतिथि: शुशोच।४॥ 
4. This Agni is greatly celebrated by the institutor of the rite 
when he shines resplendent as the sun: he who overcame Puru in 
battle, and shone glorious as the guest of the gods. 
Is Greatly Celebrated— Bharatasya synve, yajamánasya prathito 


bhavati, is Sàyana's explanation: Mahidhara, Yajus, 12.34, interprets it, 
yajamanasya áhvánam srnoti, he hears the invocation of the worshipper. 


५२१७. असन्नितत्वे आहव॑नानि भूरि भुवो विश्वेभि: सुमना अनीकैः। 
स्तुतश्चिदग्ने शृण्विषे गृणानः स्वयं व॑र्धस्व तन्वं सुजात।|५।। 

5. In you, Agni, are many offerings: do you with all your 
flames be propitious: favourably hear (the praises) of the 
worshipper; and do you of auspicious manifestation being 
glorified, spontaneously magnify (your) person. 

५२१८. इदं वचः शतसाः संस॑हस्रमुदग्नये जनिषीष्ट fel: 
शं यत्स्तोतृभ्य आपये भवाति द्युमदमीवचातनं seris 

6. Vasistha illustrious in both heaven and earth, rich with a 

hundred and a thousand (head of cattle), has addressed this hymn 


to Agni, that such fame-conferring discase-removing, fiend- 


destroying (laudation) may be (the means of) happiness coati 
eulogists and their kindred. 


Illustrious in Both Heaven and Earth— Dvibarhah, dvayoh 
sthanayor, mahán, is Yaska’s interpretation, cited by Sayana: w? 


himself proposes vidyakarmabhyam brhana eminent in both wisdom भा 
devotion. 


1 
५२१९. नू त्वामग्न ईमहे वसिष्ठा ईशान सूंनो सहसो वसूनाम्‌। 
k स्तोतृभ्यो \ = > 
इर्ष स्तोतृभ्यों मघव॑द्भय आनड्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां ANS 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


be les ee MES 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 9 183 
Is 7. We Vasisthas implore you, Agni, son of strength, the lord of 
treasures, that you wilt quickly bestow food upon thine adorers, 
who are affluent (in oblations), and do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 
Same as last verse of the preceding Sukta. 
nat 
yd, [सूक्त- ९ | 
E [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- freut] 
५२२०. अबोंधि जार उषसांमुपस्थाद्धोतां मन्द्रः कवितंमः पावकः। 
Nee Se Fii ना T 
दधाति केतुमुभय॑स्य जन्तोर्हव्या देवेषु द्रविणं सुकृत्सु।1१ |i 
! 1. The waster away (of living creatures), the invoker (of the 
ite gods), the giver of delight, the wisest of the wise, the purifier, 
in (Agni), has been manifested from the lap of the dawn: he gives 
consciousness to both classes of beings (men and animals), 
iito oblations to the gods, and wealth to the pious. 
il, aad गे ak 1 भोज॑सं z 
ji ५२२१. स सुक्रतुर्यो वि zu पणीनां पुनानो अर्क पुरुभोजसं नः। 
> s femi ` ` 1 
होतां मन्द्रो विशां दमूंनास्तिरस्तमों ददृशे राम्याणाम्‌॥२।। 
2. He, the doer of great deeds, who forced open the doors of 
the Panis, recovering for us the sacred food-bestowing (herd of 
our kine), he who is the invoker of the gods, the giver of delight, the 
the lowly-minded, is seen of all people dissipating the gloom of the 
ing nights. 
'कविरदितिर्विवस्वांनत्सुसंसन्मित्र 1, | 
५२२२. अमूरः तिर्विवस्वा अतिथि: शिवो 4:1 
E l. Z ति Ic ui विवेश 
चित्रभानुरुषसां भात्यग्रेऽपां गर्भ: wedi आ AARTI 
3. Upreplexed, far-seeing elevated, resplendent, right- 
h a directing, a friend, a guest, the bestower of prosperity upon us, the 
1111 wonderfully radiant he shines before the dawns the embryo of the 
nd- waters, he has entered into the nascent plants. 4 
the . He has Entered into the Nascent Plants— Prasva a vivesa: the first 
| 1s explained, jayamana osadhih. 
^ sl 
i ५२२३. इळेन्यों वो मनुंषो युगेषु समनगा अंशुचज्जातवेदाः। 
F dE m d समिधानं 1 
and सुसन्दृशां भानुना यो विभाति प्रति Wa: समिधानं बुंधन्त।॥४॥ 


4. You, Agni, are to be glorified in (all) the ages of men: you, 
Jatavedas, who are illustrious when engaged in battle: our praises 
Wake up the kindling (Agni), him who shines with conspicious 
Splendour. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


184 Rgveda Samhita 


५२२४. अग्ने याहि दूत्यं मा रिषण्यो देवाँ अच्छां ब्रह्मकृतां गणेन॑। 
सरस्वतीं मरुतों अश्विनापो यक्षि देवान्‌ रत्नधेयाय विश्वान्‌।।।। 
5. Repair, Agni, to the presence of the gods in your office of 
messenger, (sent) by the assembly engaged in prayer: neglect us 


not: offer worship to Sarasvati, the Maruts, the Asvins, the waters, 
the universal gods, that they may bestow treasures (upon us). 


५२२५. त्वाम॑ग्ने समिधानो वसिष्ठो जरूथं हन्यक्षि राये पुरन्धिम्‌। 
पुरुणीथा जातवेदो जरस्व यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।६।। 
6. Vasistha is kindling you, Agni: destroy the malignant: 
worship the object of many rites, (the company of the gods), on 


behalf of the wealthy (institutor of the sacrifice), praise (the gods), 
Jatavedas, with manifold praises, and do you ever cherish us with 


blessings. 
[सूक्त- १०] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- त्रिष्ठुप्‌।] 
I ५२२६. उषो न जारः पृथु पाजों अश्रेददविद्युतदीद्यच्छोशुंचान:। 


वृषा हरिः शुचिरा भांति भासा धियों हिन्वान उंशतीरजीगः।।१॥। 

1. Agni, like the lover of the dawn (the sun), radiant, bright, 
resplendent, displays extensive lustre, the showerer (of benefits), 
the receiver (of oblations), he shines with splendour, encouraging 
holy rites: he arouses (mankind), desiring (his presence). 


५२२७. स्वशर्ण वस्तोरुषसामरोचि यज्ञं त॑न्वाना उशिजो न मन्म॑। 
Je AE 
5 देव आ वि विद्वान्द्रवद्‌ दूतो देवयावा वनिष्ठः।।२॥। 
2. Agni, preceding the dawn, is radiant by day as the sun, and 
the priests celebrating the sacrifice repeat his praise: the divine, 


munificent Agni, the messenger (of the gods), cognizant of their 
birth, repairing to the deities, hastens in various directions. 


५२२८. अच्छा गिरों मतयो देवयन्तीरग्निं यन्ति द्रविणं भिक्ष॑माणाः। 
सुसन्दृर्श सुप्रतीकं स्वञ्चं हव्यवाहमरतिं मानुषाणाम्‌॥३।। 


Be Devout praises and hymns, soliciting riches, proceed to 
Agni, who is of pleasing aspect, agreeable form, of gracefi 
movement, the bearer of oblations, the ruler of men. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F 


OTS, 


int: 

on 
15), 
nth 


sht, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sukta 11 185 
५२२९. इन्द्रं नो अग्ने वसुंभिः सजोषां wd रुद्रेभिर वहा बृहन्तम्‌। 
आदित्येभिरदितिं विश्वजन्यां बृहस्पतिमृक्वभिर्विश्चवारम्‌। ४11 
4. Consentient with the Vasus, Agni, bring hither Indra, with 


the Rudras, the benevolent Aditi, with the Adityas and Brhaspati, 
the desired of all, with the adorable (Avigirasas). 


५२३०. मन्द्रं होतारमुशिजो यविष्ठमग्निं विश ईळते अध्वरेषु। 
स हि क्षपावाँ अभंवद्रयीणामत॑न्द्रो दूतो यजर्थाय देवान्‌। ५11 
5. Men desiring him celebrate at sacrifices the youthful Agni, 
the giver of delight, the invoker of the gods: he, the ruler of the 
night, has been the diligent envoy of the opulent (institutors of 
sacrifices) for the worship of the gods. 
[सूक्त- ११] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- freu] 
५२३१. महाँ अस्यध्वरस्य प्रकेतो न ऋते त्वदमृतां मादयन्ते। 
आ विश्वेभिः सरथं याहि देवैर्न्यग्ने होतां प्रथमः HE I 
1. Great are you, Agni, the manifester of the solemnity without 


you the immortals do not rejoice: come in the same chariot with all 
the gods: sit down here the chief, the ministrant priest. 


५२३२. त्वामीळते अजिरं दूत्याय हविष्म॑न्तः सदमिन्मानुंषासः। 
यस्यं देवैरासंदो बहिरग्ने5हान्यस्मै सुदिनां भवन्ति।।२ || 
2. Men offering oblations, ever solicit you the quick-going (to 


undertake) the office of their messenger, for to him, on whose 
Sacred grass you sittest with the gods, the days are prosperous. 


५२३३. त्रिश्चिदक्तो: प्र चिकितुर्वसूनि त्वे अन्तर्दाशुषे medial 
मनुष्वद॑गन इह य॑क्षि देवान्भवा नो दूतो अंभिशस्तिपावा॥३॥ 


3. In you, Agni, thrice in the day, (the priests) make manifest 
the treasures (of the oblation) for the (benefit of the) mortal donor: 
Worship the gods on this occasion, Agni, as (you didst) for Manu: 
be our messenger, our protector against malignity. 


५२३४. अग्निरीशे बृहतो अंध्वरस्यागनर्विश्चस्य हविष॑: कृतस्य॑। 
ag ह्य॑स्य वस॑वो जुषन्ताथां देवा द॑धिरे हव्यवाह॑म्‌॥।४॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


186 Rgveda Samhita 


4. Agni presides over the sokemn rite, over every consecrated 
oblation: the Vasus approved of his acts: the gods have made him 
the bearer of the offering. 


| 
५२३५. आग्नें वह हविरद्यांय देवानिन्द्रज्येष्ठास इह मांदयन्ताम्‌। 
इमं यज्ञं दिवि देवेषुं धेहि यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।५।। 
5. Agni, bring the gods to eat of the oblation: may they, of 
whom Indra is the cheif, be delighted on this occasion: convey this 


sacrifice to the deities in heaven, and do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[सूक्त- १२] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- AE] 
५२३६. अग॑न्म महा नम॑सा यविष्ठं यो दीदाय समिंद्धः स्वे दुरोणे। 
चित्रभानुं रोद॑सी अन्तरुवी स्वांहुतं विश्वत: प्रत्यञ्चम्‌।।१ I 
1. Let us approach with profound reverence the youngest (of 
the gods), who shines when kindled in his own abode; who 1s 


blazing wonderfully between heaven and earth, and, piously 
invoked, is coming from every quarter. 


५२३७. स महा विश्वा दुरितानि साह्वानग्निः ४वे दम आ जातवेंदा:। 
स नों रक्षिषद्‌ दुरितादवद्यादस्मान्गुणत उत नों मघोन॑:।।२।। 
2. May that Agni who by his greatness is the overcomer of all 


evils, who is praised as Játavedas in the (sacrificial) chamber, 


protect us, glorifying him, and affluent (in oblations), from all sin 
and reproach. 


५२३८. त्वं वरुण उत मित्रो अग्ने त्वां वर्धन्ति मतिभिर्वसिष्ठा:। 
त्वे वसुं सुषणनानि सन्तु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।३॥। 
3. You are Varuna, you are Mitra, Agni: the Vasisthas 


augment you with praises: may liberally distributed riches be» 


(extant) in you, and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 
Sdmaveda, 1304-1306. 


[सूक्त १३] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि, देवता- वैश्वानर अग्नि, छन्द- AST 
५२३९. प्राग्नये विश्वशुचे धियन्थे$सुरघ्ने मन्म॑ धीतिं भरध्वम्‌। 
भरें हविर्न बर्हिषि प्रीणानो वैश्वानराय यत॑ये मतीनाम्‌।१॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 23205 nS. 


3 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 14 Te 


1. Offer praise and worship to Agni, the enlightener of all, the 
accepter of pious rites, the destroyer of the Asuras: propitiating 
him, I now present the oblation on the sacred grass to Vaisvanara, 
the granter of desires. 

Is जाचिपा St Tidi ॥ 
५२४०. त्वमग्न शाचिषा शाशुचान आ रोदसी अपृणा जायमानः। 
> देवाँ भर्स्तेरमुञ्चो 3 d 
त्वं देवाँ अभिशस्तेरमुञ्चो वैश्वानर जातवेदो महित्वा॥२॥ 

2. You, Agni, radiant with lustre, fillest the heaven and earth 
(with light) as soon as born: you, Vaisvdnara, from whom wealth 
proceeds, hast by your mighty liberated the gods from malevolent 
(foes). 

५२४१. जातो यद॑ग्ने भुव॑ना व्यख्य॑ः पशून्न गोपा इर्यः परिज्मा। 
वैश्वानर ब्रह्मणे विन्द गातुं यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सर्दा T:R 

3. When you are born, Agni, the lord, the circumambient, you 
watchest over all creatures as a herdsman over his cattle: be 
Willing, Vaisvdnara, to requite our praise, and do you cherish us 
ever with blessings. 

Watchest over all Creatures, Etc.— Vaisvanara brahmane vinda 


gátum, know, or find, to go according to the prayer or praise: the sense is 
not very obvious. 


[सूक्त- १४] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता-अग्नि। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, १-बृहती] 
५२४२. समिधां जातवेंदसे देवायं देवहूतिभिः। 
हविर्भिः शुक्रशोचिषे नमस्विनों वयं दाशेमागनये॥।१॥। 
1. Let us, laden with oblations, offer worship with fuel and 


invocations of the gods to the divine Jatavedas, to the purely 
lustrous Agni. 


५२४३. वयं d अग्ने समिधां विधेम वयं दाशेम सुष्टुती य॑ंजत्र। 
वयं घृतेनांध्वरस्य होतर्वयं देव हविषां भद्रशोचे॥२।। 
2. May we perform your rites, Agni, with fuel: may we offer 
You, adorable 4 gni, pious praises: may we (gratify you), ministrant 


s the sacrifice, with clarified butter; divine Agni, of auspicious 
Ustre, may we (worship you) with oblations. 


१२४४. आ नो देवेभिरुप॑ देवहूतिमग्ने याहि वष॑ट्कृतिं जुषाणः। 
TA देवाय दाश॑तः स्याम यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सर्दा IH 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


188 Rgveda Samhitz 


3. Come to our sacrifice, Agni, with the gods, propitiated by 
the sanctified oblations: may we be the offerers (of worship) to 
you who are divine, and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त- १५] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता-अग्नि। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, गायत्री] 
५२४५. उपसद्यांय मीक्हुर्ष आस्ये जुहुता हविः। यो नो नेदिष्ठमाप्यम्‌॥१॥ 


1. Offer the oblation to the present Agni, the showerer (of 
benefits); pour it into the mouth of him who (bears) to us the 


nearest relationship. 
५२४६. यः पञ्च चर्षणीरभि निषसाद दमेंदमे। कविर्गृहप॑ति्युवां।।२।। 
2. Who, juvenile, ठाः the lord of the dwelling, abides with 
the five classes of men in every dwelling. 
५२४७. स नो वेदों अमात्यमग्नी र॑क्षतु विश्वत॑ः। उतास्मान्यात्वंह॑सः॥३॥ 


3. May he defend for us the wealth that has been acquired, and 
preserve us from iniquity. 


५२४८. नवं नु स्तोरममग्नयें दिवः श्येनाय॑ जीजनम्‌। 
वस्व॑: कुविद्वनाति नः।।४।। 


4. May Agni, to whom as to a (swift) hawk in heaven, 1 address 
this new hymn, bestow upon us am;e wealth | 


५२४९. स्पार्हा यस्य श्रियो दृशे रयिर्वीरवंतो यथा। अग्रे यज्ञस्य शोचतः1५1 | 


5. Of whom, blazing in the front of the sacrifice, the enviable 
honours are to be seen, like the riches of a man having male 


offspring 

५२५०. सेमां वेतु वर्षट्कृतिमग्निर्जुषत नो गिर॑;। यजिष्ठो हव्यवाहनः 116 l 
6. May that most adorable Agni, the bearer of oblations, accep! 

our offering, gratified by our praises 

५२५१. नि त्वा नक्ष्य विश्पते द्युमन्त देव धीमहि। सुवीरमग्न आहुत।!9। 


7. Divine Agni, the approachable: the lord of men, the invoked 


of all, we set you down (upon the altar), the resplendent 
righteously glorified 


The Approachable— Naksya upagantavya; naksati, vyap4 Eee 
from naks, to pervade 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F to 


dress 


:1५। | 


jjable 
male 


3T 
ccept 


C 
joked 
t, the 


» 


karma 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 15 189 

The Righteously Glorified— Suviram is here interpreted 
kalyánastotrkam, the object of auspicious or pious praise. 

1 र दीदिहि | 

५२५२. क्षप उस्रश्च दीदिहि स्वग्नयस्त्वयां वयम्‌। सुवीरस्त्वम॑स्मयुः।।८।। 

8. Blaze, Agni, night and day, that by you we may be 
possessed of sacred fires: mayest you, friendly to us, be 
righteously praised. 


५२५३. उप॑ त्वा सातये नरो विद्रांसो यन्ति धीतिभिं:। 
उपाक्ष॑रा सहस्तिणी।।९॥। 
9. Wise men approach you with sacred rites for the 


acquirement of riches: perpetual, infinite (praise is addressed to 
you). 

Praise is Addressed to you— The text has only updksard sahasrini, 
imperishable, thousand-fold, near: the Scholiast supplies the substantive 
vak, speech or praise, and the prefix upa implies the compound verb 
upayati, approaches. 

५२५४. अग्नी रक्षांसि सेधति शुक्रशोचिरमर्त्यः। शुर्चि: पावक deu: 1120 11 

10. May the bright, radiant, immortal, pur, purifying, adorable 
Agni, keep off the Raksasas. 

B ` 1 le 
५२५५. स नो राधांस्या भरेशांन: सहसो यहो। भगश्च दातु वार्यम्‌।११।। 

11. Son of strength, who are the lord (of all), bestow riches 

upon us: and may Bhaga give us wealth. 
वीरवद्यशों le 
५२५६. त्वम॑ग्न | देवश्चं सविता भग:। दितिश्च दाति वार्यम्‌।।१२॥ 

12. Do you, Agni, give us food along with male issue, and may 

the divine Savita, Bhaga and Diti, give us wealth. 

छ तपिष्ठेरजरों EX] 
५२५७. अन्ने रक्षां णो अंह॑सः प्रति ष्म देव रीष॑त:। तपिष्ठिरजरो दह।।१३॥ 
i 13. Preserve us, Agni, from sin: divine (Agni), who are exempt 
rom decay, consume (our) foes with (your) hottest flames. 

Sámaveda, 24. 

I 
५२५८. अधां मही न आयस्यनाधृष्टो नृपींतये। पूर्भवा शतभुजिः।।१४।। 


14. Do you, who are irresistible, be to us, for the protection of 
our posterity, like the vast spacious, ironwalled cities (of the 


Rdksasas). 


५२५९. त्वं नं: पाह्यहसो दोषांवस्तरघायतः। दिवा नक्त॑मदाभ्य।।१५।। 
15. Uninjurable Agni, dispeller of darkness, preserve us night 
and day from sin, and from the malevolent. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
190 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त- १६] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समा सतोबृहती) | 
` afi 1 हुवे 
५२६०. एना वों अग्निं नमंसोर्जो नपांतमा हुवे। 
E प्रियं चेतिष्ठमरतिं Ti n | 
प्रियं चेतिष्ठमरतिं स्व॑ध्वरं विश्व॑स्य दूतममूर्तम्‌।।१।। 

1. I invoke for you with this hymn, Agni, the son of strength, 
the kind, the most knowing, the unobstructed: the fit object of 
sacred rites, the messenger of all the immortals. 

The Unobstructed— Aratim gantaram, the goer, or Svaminam, 
lord; Mahidhara, Yajurveda, XV.32, explains it, either having sufficient 


understanding, paryápta matim, or one never desisting from activity, 


uparamarahitam sadodyamayutam: the verse recurs, also Samaveda, 
45.749, 


५२६१. स योजते अरुषा विश्वभोजसा स दुंद्रवत्स्वाहुत:। 
i ति देवं 
सुब्रह्मा यज्ञः सुशमी वसूंनां देवं राधो जनानाम्‌।।२।। 

2. May he harness his brilliant protecting (steeds to his car), 
when carnestly invoked: may he hasten (to bring the gods): may 
the sacrificial wealth of the worshippers (procced to) that deity 
who is the giver of abundant food, the adorable, the doer of great 
deeds. 

This and the preceding are curiously blended in point of arrangement 
in the Yajurveda, 15.32-34: also Samaveda, 750. Mahidhara’s especially 
as regards the last phrase, vasünám devam rddho janánam: Sayana 
explains it, tam dhanandm madhye devam atyantoparaksamánam dhanam 
yajamdndndm, may Agni, who harnesses, etc., be re gardful of the 
brilliant wealth of the worshippers amongst riches. Mahidhara, connecting 
it with what has preceded, renders the whole, Agni gocs quickly where the 


worship of the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas is celebrated, and the 
sacrificial wealth of the worshippers is offered. 


५२६२. उदस्य शोचिर॑स्थादाजुहानस्य मीळ्हुष॑ः। 
उद्धूमासो अरुषासो दिविस्पृशः समग्निमिन्धते T:N 
3. The radiance of that showerer (of benefits), repeatedly 


invoked, rises up, as does the fiery sky-lambent smoke when men 
kindle Agni. 


५२६३. तं त्वां दूतं कृण्महे यशस्त॑मं देवाँ आ वीतयें वह। 
विश्वां सूनो सहसो मर्तभोजना रास्व तद्यस्वेमहे। ४11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 16 191 


4. We constitute you our most renowned messenger: bring the 
gods to partake (of the oblations): bestow upon us, son of strength, 
all human blessings: whatsoever we solicit of you. 

५२६४. त्वमग्ने गृहपतिस्त्वं होता नो अध्वरे। 
त्वं पोतां विश्ववार प्रचेंता यक्षि वेषि च वार्यम्‌।५ 1 

5. All-desired Agni, you are the lord of the mansion: you are 
the invoker of the gods: you are the assistant priest: do you, who 
are wise, present (the oblation to the gods), and partake (of it 
yourself). 


The Assistant Priest— The Potd: he had just been called the Hora. 
Samaveda. 61. 
5 [i EY > lu 1 
५२६५. कृधि रत्नं यजमानाय सुक्रतो त्वं हि रत्नधा असि। 
आ न॑ ऋते शिंशीहि विश्व॑मृत्विजं सुशंसो यश्च दक्षते।।६॥। 

6. Doer of good deeds, bestow treasure upon the institutor of 
the solemnity, for you are the bestower of treasure:: inspire all the 
priests at our sacrifice: (prosper him) who, offering worthy praise, 
is prosperous. 

Who Offering Worthy Praise is Prosperous— Susanso yascha 
daksate, offering good praise, may indicate either a son or the Horr, 
according to Sayana, who completes the phrase thus, yo vardhate tam 
vardhaya, increase him who increases. 

५२६६. त्वे अग्ने स्वाहुत प्रियास॑: सन्तु सूरयं:। 
यन्तारो ये मघवांनो जनानामूर्वान्दर्यन्त गोनाम्‌।७।। 

7. Agni, piously invoked, may those devout worshippers be 
dear to you, who are liberal, opulent, and the bestowers upon man 
of herds of cattle. 

Who are Liberal, Opulent, and the Bestowers, Etc.— Yantdro ye 
maghavano jandndm पाण्या dayanta gonam, is rendered by Mahidhara, 
May those who, amongst men, are self-restrained, opulent, and donors of 
butter and offerings; translating arvan annavisesam puroddsddin, and 
understanding by gondm the products of the cow, Yajurveda, 33.14; also 
Sdmaveda, 38. 


५२६७. येषामिळां घृतह॑स्ता दुरोण आँ अपि प्राता निषीदति। 
ताँखायस्व सहस्य get निदो यच्छां नः शर्म दीर्घश्रुत्‌।॥८ 1 


8. Strength-bestowing Agni, protect from the oppressor and the 
revilers those in whose dwelling Ila, butter-handed, sits down 
satisfied, and grant to us felicity long renowned. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
192 Rgveda Samhita 


Ila, Butter-Handed— Jā ghrtahasta: the name is explained, 
annarüpa havirlaksand devi, a goddess, the impersonation of food, that is, 
of sacrificial food, or the oblation personified. 


५२६८. स मन्द्रया च जिह्वया वहिरासा विदुष्टर:। 
अग्ने रयिं मघर्वद्धयो न आ व॑ह हव्यदातिं च सूदय।।९॥। 
9. The most wise Agni is the bearer (of oblations), as the 
mouth of the gods with his graceful tongue (of flame): bring 


riches, Agni, to the affluent (in sacrifices): encourage the donor of 
the oblation. 


५२६९. ये राधांसि ददत्यश्व्या मघा कामेन श्रव॑सो महः। 
ताँ अंह॑सः पिपृहि पर्तृभिष्ट्वं शतं पूर्भिर्यविष्ठय ।।१०॥। 
10. Youngest (of the gods), protect With your protcctions from 


iniquity, (and reward) with numerous cities those who, through the 


desire of extended fame, bestow riches, comprehending horses and 
treasure. 


५२७०. देवो वों दरविणोदाः पूर्णा विवष्टयासिच॑म्‌। 


wei सिञ्चध्वमुप वा पृणध्वमादिद्वो देव ओहते।।११॥। 


11. The divine Agni, the giver of wealth, desires the ladle filled 
full. Pour out (the contents), and replenish (the vessel), and then 
the deity bears (your oblations to the gods). 

Pour out the Contents and Replenish the Vessel— Udva 
sincadhvam upa và prnadhvam, and sprinkle and fill up, is the whole of 
the text: the Scholiast would seem to apply the first to the vessel, and the 
second to Agni, Dhruva grahena hotr, tve tvayi camasam pürayata, sa 
Agnaye Somam yacchata, ityarthah : the meaning is, both fill the vessel 
with the dhruvágraha and present the Soma to Agni. Samaveda, 55.1513 


५२७१. d होतारमध्वरस्य प्रचेतसं व्हि देवा अंकृष्वत। 
| oot i oi 
दधाति रत्नं विधते सुवीर्यमग्निर्जनाय दाशुषें।।१२।। 
12. The gods have made the wise (Agni) the ministrant priest, 


and bearer of the sacrifice. Agni gives to the man who performs the 


prescribed rite and presents (the offering), wealth, with virtuous 
male posterity. 


Sámaveda, 1514 
[सूक्त १७] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- द्विपदा FET] 
५२७२. अग्ने भव सुषमिधा समिद्ध उत बहिरुविया वि स्तृणीताम्‌।॥१ t 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i 


j 


E uo 0 0 0005505050509 500 डिडिले 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 18 193 
1. Be kindled, Agni, with suitable fuel: let the (priest) strew the 
plentiful sacred grass. 

[| उशतीर्वि sal देवाँ 1 

५२७३. उत द्वार उशतीर्वि श्रयन्तामुत देवाँ उशत आ वहेह॥२॥ 
2. Let the willing doors and the chamber of sacrifice) be 
thrown open; bring hither the willing gods. 


५२७४. अग्ने वीहि हविषा यक्षि देवान्त्स्वध्वरा कृणुहि जातवेदः।३॥। 

3. Agni Játavedas, repair to the gods, worship them with the 
oblation, render them pleased by the sacrifice. 

५२७५. स्वध्वरा क॑रति जातवेंदा यक्षद्देवाँ अमृतान्पिप्रयच्च।४1। 

4. May Jdatavedas render the immortal gods, pleased by the 
sacrifice: let him sacrifice (to them), and gratify them (what 
praise). 

५२७६. वंस्व विश्वा वार्याणि प्रचेतः सत्या भवन्त्वाशिषो नो TAL L 

5. Bestow upon us, sage Agni, all desirable (riches): may the 

blessings (vouchsafed) to us this day be sacrificed. 


५२७७. त्वामु ते द॑धिरे हव्यवाहं देवासो अग्न ऊर्ज आ TATLI I 

6. The gods have made you, Agni, who are the son of strength, 
the bearer of the oblation. 
५२७८. ते तें देवाय दाश॑तः स्याम महो नो रत्ना वि द॑ध इयानः।।७॥ 


. 7. May we be the presenters (of offerings) to you who are 
divine: and you, the mighty one, being solicited, bestow upon us 


treasures. 
ANUVAKA II 
[सूक्त-१८] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र, २२-२५ सुदास पैजवन। 
छन्द- meu] 


५२७९. त्वे ह यत्पितरश्रिन्न इन्द्र विश्वा वामा जरितारो असन्वन्‌। 
त्वे गाव॑: सुदुघास्त्वे Wand वसुं देवयते वनिष्ठ:11१॥ 
1. Our forefathers, Indra, glorifying you, have obtained all 


desirable (riches); in your gift are cows easy to be milked, and 
horses, and you are the liberal donor of wealth to the devout. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


194 Rgveda Sarhhity 


In your Gift— Literally, in you, tve, tvayi. 
५२८०. राजेव हि जर्निभिः क्षेष्येवाव द्युभिरभि विदुष्कविः सन्‌। 
पिशा गिरों मघवन्‌ गोभिरश्रैस्त्वायतः शिशीहि राये अस्मान्‌॥२॥ 


2. You dwellest with your glories like a Raja with his Wives; 
Maghavan, who are wise and experienced, (reward our) praises 
with the precious metals, with cows, with horses: conduct us who 
are dependent on you for riches. 

With the Precious Metals— Pisa, silver or gold, and the like: 
rüpena hiranyddind vd, or rüpa may mean beauty. 


५२८१. इमा उ त्वा पस्पृधानासो अत्र मन्द्रा गिरों देवयन्तीरुप wi 
अर्वाची ते पथ्यां राय Ug स्याम॑ ते सुमताविन्द्र शर्मन्‌।।३॥ 

3. These gratifying and pious hymns, emulous (in earnestness), 
are addressed on this occasion to you, may the path of your riches 
lead downwards: may we, /ndra, (diligent) in your praise, enjoy 
felicity. 

५२८२. धेनुं न त्वां सूयवसे दुदुक्षन्नुप ब्रह्माणि ससृजे वसिष्ठ:। 
त्वामिन्मे गोपतिं विश्वं आहा न इन्द्रः सुमतिं गन्त्वच्छ।४।। 
4. Desirous of milking you like a milch cow at pasture, 


Vasistha has let loose his prayers to you: every one of my people 


proclaims you the lord of cattle: may Indra be present at our 
praises. 


५२८३. अणाँसि चित्पप्रथाना सुदास vul गाधान्यकृणोत्सुपारा। 
wid ७ E i 
शर्धन्तं शिम्युमुचथस्य नव्यः शापं सिन्धूनामकृणोदर्शस्ती:11५॥ 

5. The adorable Indra made the well-known deep waters (of 
the Pasrusni) fordable for Sudása, and converted the vehement 
awakening imprecation of the sacrificer into the calumination of 
the rivers. 

Converted the Vehement Awakening Imprecation, Ete 
Sardhantam simyum ucathasya Sapam sindhiinam akrnod aSastih, 7 
explained, utsahmdndm bodhamanam stotuh Sapam abhisastih sindhunam 
akarot, he made the exerting awakening curse of the praiser the 
imprecations of the rivers: some legend is perhaps alluded to, but it is not 
detailed: the only other explanation furnished by Sayasa 5 
visvarüpodbhavam átmano abhisapam, the imprecation on his (Indra) has 
its birth in visvarüpa. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a 


ess), 
ches 


njoy 


ure, 
ople 
our 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 18 195 
५२८४. पुरोळा इत्तुर्वशो यक्षुरासीद्राये मत्स्यांसो निशिता अपीव। 
श्रृष्टि चक्रुर्भगवो gada सखा सखायमतरद्विषूचोः।।६॥। 

6. Turvasa, who was preceding (at solemn rites), diligent in 
sacrifice, (went to Sudása) for wealth; but like fishes restricted (to 
the element of water), the Bhrigus and Druhyus quickly assailed 
them: of these two everywhere going the friend (of Sudasa, Indra) 
rescued his friend. 

Indra Rescued his Friend— The legend, such as it is, is very 
obscurely told : as Indra saved one of the two, Sudása, Sayana infers he 
slew the other, Turvasam avadhit, but why does not appear: not does it 
follow from another proposed rendering, understanding by Matsyaso 
nisitah, fishes limited to water, but the people of the country Matsya 
attacked by Turvasa, tena matsyajanapada badhitah: again, the 
expression, Srustim cakruh, as applied to the Bhrigus, is rendered either 
Asupráptim cakruh or sukham Turvasasya cakruh, making the Bhrigus 
and Druhyus the allies of Turvasa. 

५२८५. आ पक्थासौं भलानसो भनन्तालिनासो विषाणिन: शिवार्सः। 
आ योऽनंयत्सधमा आर्यस्य गव्या तृत्सुभ्यो अजगन्युधा नृन्‌। ७।। 

7. Those who dress the oblation, those who pronounce 
auspicious words, those who abstain from penance, those who bear 
horns (in their hands), those who bestow happiness (on the world 
by sacrifice), glorify that Indra, who recovered the cattle of the 
Arya from the plunderers, who slew the enemies in battle. 

Those who Dress the Oblations, Etc.— The terms so rendered are 
severally, according to the Scholiast, denominations of the persons 
assisting at religious rites, viz., Pakthdsah, the havisam pacakah, cooks of 
the butter offered in oblation; 2. Bhaldnasah, bhadra-vacinah, speakers of 
that which is lucky; 3. Alindsah, tapobhir apravrddhah, not eminent by 


austerities; 4. Visaninah, having black homs in their hands for the purpose 


of scratching kanduyandrtham, the same as diksitah, having undergone 
d 5. Sivdsah, yágádina 


the preliminary purification called Diksd; an a 
sarvasya lokasya sivakarah, the makers happy of all people by sacrifice 
and the like. 
अदिंतिं re परुष्णीम 
५२८६. दुराध्यो अदितिं स्नेवयन्तोञचेतसो वि जगृश्र । 
OESTE e: X ape 1 1 
महाविव्यक्‌ पृथिवीं पत्य॑मानः पशुष्कविरंशयच्चाय॑मानः॥॥८।। 

8. The evil-disposed and stupid (enemies of Sudása), crossing 
the humble Parusni river, have broken down its banks; but he by 
his greatness pervades the earth, and Kavi, the son of Cayamana, 
like a falling victim, sleeps (in death). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
196 Rgveda Samhita 


Sleeps in Death— Killed by Sudds: the application of these incidents 
to whom is entirely the work of the Scholiast. 


of र्थ ah pe जाम || 
५२८७. ईयुरर्थं न न्यर्थं परुष्णीमाशुश्ननेद॑भिपि 
NM अमित्रानरन्धयन्मानुषे | 
सुदास इन्द्रः सुतुकाँ न्धयन्मानुषे वघ्रिवाचः।।९॥। 

9. The waters followed their regular course to the Parusni, nor 
(wandered) beyond it: the quick courser (of the king) came to the 
accessible places, and /ndra made the idly-talking enemies, with 
their numerous progeny, subject among men (to Sudas). 

Indra is said to have reparied the banks of the river so that the 
waters—iyur artham na nyartham—went to their object, that is, their 


former bed, not below or beyond it: the enemies Amitrdn are called 
vadhrivácah, which Sayana explains jalpakàn. 


५२८८. ईयुर्गावो न यव॑सादगोपा यथाकृतमभि मित्र॑ चितास॑:। 
पृश्रिगावः पृश्चिनिप्रेषितास: श्रृष्टि चक्रूर्नियुतो रन्त॑यश्च।।१०॥। 


10. They who ride on particoloured cattle, (the Maruts), 
despatched by Prsni, and recalling the engagement made by them 
with their friend (Indra), came like cattle from the pasturage, when 


left without a herdsman: the exulting Niyut steeds brought them 
quickly (against the foe). 


५२८९. एकं च यो विंशतिं च॑ श्रवस्या वैकर्णयोर्जनात्राजा न्यस्त॑ः। 
दस्मो न सन्नि शिंशाति fé: शूरः सर्गमकृणोदिन्द्र एषाम्‌।।११।। 
11. The hero Indra created the Maruts (for the assistance of 
the Raja), who, ambitious of fame, slew one-and-twenty of the 


men on the two banks (of the Parusni), as a well-looking priest 
lops the sacred grass in the chamber of sacri fice. 


५२९०. अधं शरुतं कवर्ष वृद्धमप्स्वनु दुय नि वृणग्वज्बाहु:। 
वृणाना अत्र सख्याय॑ स॒ख्यं त्वायन्तो ये अमंदन्ननु WRR II 


12. You, the bearer of the thunderbolt, didst drown Sruta, 
Kavasa, Vrddha, and afterwards Druhyu, in the waters: for they, 


Indra, who are devoted to you, and glorify you, preferring your 
friendship, enjoy it. 


५२९१. वि सद्यो विश्वा दृहितान्येषामिन्द्र: पुरः सह॑सा सप्त द्॑दः। 
व्यानवस्य तृत्सवे गयं भाज्जेष्म॑ पूरं विदे मृध्रवांचम्‌।।१३॥। 


13. Indra, in his might, quickly demolished all their 
strongholds, and their seven (kinds of) cities: he has given the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 18 i 


dwelling of the son of Anu to Trtsu: may we, (by propitiating 
Indra), conquer in battle the ill-speaking man. 

Seven kinds of Cities— Purah sapta : would be rather seven cities: 
but Sáyana renders it nagarih sapta prakarah: perhaps the last should be 
prakarah, seven-walled. 

Conquer in Battle the IIl-Speaking Man—Jesma piirum manusyam 
mrdhravacam, which we have had before in the same sense of speaking 
imperfectly or barbarously: Sayana here renders it baddhavácam, which 
is rather equivocal, but may mean threatening, whose speech is 
obstructive or adverse. 


५२९२. नि गव्यवोऽनंवो gada पष्टिः शता सुषुपुः षट्‌ weil 
षष्टिवीरासो अधि षड्‌ दुवोयु विश्वेदिन्द्रस्य वीर्यौ कृतानिं।।१४॥ 
14. The warriors of the Anus and Druhyus, intending (to carry 
off the) cattle, (hostile) to the pious (Sudas) perished to the number 


of sixty-six thousand six hundred and sixty: such are all the 


glorious act of /ndra. 

Sixty-six Thousand six Hundred and Sixty— The enumeration is 
very obscurely expressed, sastih Sata Sat sahasra sastir adhi Sat, literally, 
sixty hundreds, six thousands, sixty, with six more: Sayana understand by 
Satani, thousands, sahasrénityartham. 


५२९३. इन्द्रेणेते तृत्सवो वेर्विषाणा आपो न सृष्टा अंधवन्त नीचीँ:। 
दुर्मित्रासः प्रकलविन्‌ मिमाना जहुर्विश्वानि भोजना सुदासे॥।१५॥ 
15. These hostile, Trisus, ignorantly contending with Indra, 


fled prouted as rapidly as rivers on a downward course, and being 
discomfited, abandoned all their possessions to Sudasa. 


५२९४. अर्ध वीरस्य॑ शृतपार्मनिन्द्रै परा शर्धन्तं नुनुदे अभि क्षाम्‌। 
इन्द्र मन्यं dep मिमाय भेजे पथो वर्तनिं पर्त्यमानः॥१६।। 

16. Indra has scattered over the earth the hostile rival of the 
hero (Sudasa), the senior of Indra, the appropriator of the oblation: 
Indra has baffled the wrath of the wrathful enemy, and the (foe) 
advancing on the way (against Sudása) has taken the path of flight. 
५२९५. आश्रेण चित्तदेक चकार fd चित्पेत्वेना जघान। 

z a. STS सुदासें 
अव॑ रूक्तीर्वेश्यावृश्वदिन्द्रः प्रायच्छद्विश्वा भोजना gS 

17. Indra, has effected a valuable (donation) by a pauper: he 
has Slain an old lion by a goat: he has cut the angles of the 
sacrificial post with a needle: he has given all the spoils (of the 
enemy) to Suddsa. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


198 Rgveda Samhita 


Indra has Effected a Valuable Donation, Etc.— Sayana says, these 
three impossible acts are specified as illustrations of the wonderful power 
of Indra, to whom they are possible. 


५२९६. शश्चन्तो हि शत्र॑वो रारधुष्टे भेदस्य चिच्छर्धतो विन्द रन्धिम्‌। 
मतीँ एन॑ः स्तुवतो यः कृणोर्ति तिग्मं तस्मिन्नि ज॑हि वज्रमिन्द्र ।।१८। 
18. Your numerous enemies, Indra, have been reduced to 
subjection, effect at some time or other the subjugation of the 
turbulent Bheda, who holds men praising you as guilty of 
wickedness; fiurl, Indra, your sharp thunderbolt against him. 


Bheda— Bheda, who breaks or separates, may mean, Sayana says, 
an unbeliever, ndstika; or it may be the name of an enemy of Sudas. 


५२९७. आवदिन्द्रं यमुना Teas wa भेदं सर्वताता मुषायत्‌। 
अजासंश्च शिग्रंवो यक्ष॑वश्च बलिं शीर्षाणि जन्रुरशव्यांनि।।१९।। 

19. The dwellers on the Yamuna and the Trtsus glorified Indra 
when he killed Bheda in battle: the Ajas, the Sigrus, the Yaksas, 
offered to him as a sacrifice the heads of the horses (killed in the 
combat). 

Offered to him as a Sacrifice, Etc.— Balim sirséni jabhrur-asvyáni 


may mean also, according to the Scholiast, they presented the best horses, 
taken; but bali more usually imports a sacrifice. 


| 
५२९८. न त इन्द्र सुमतयो न राय॑: सञ्चक्षे पूर्वा उषसो न नूलां:। 
देव॑कं का सिमामा SRT 
देव॑कं गानं ज॑घन्थाव त्मनां बृहतः शम्ब॑रं Iq Ro tI 

20. Your favours, Indra, and your bounties, whether old or 
new, cannot be counted like the (recurring) dawn: you hast slain 
Devaka, the son of Manyamany, and of thine own will hast cast 
down Shambara from the vast (mountain). 

५२९९. प्र ये गृहादममदुस्त्वाया पराशर: शतयातुर्वसिष्ठः। 
ते 3 MRE, 
न तें भोजस्य॑ सख्यं मुषन्ताधां सूरिभ्य॑ः सुदिना वयुंच्छान्‌॥२१॥ 

21. Pardsara, the destroyer of hundreds (of Raksasas), and 
Vasistha they who, devoted to you, have glorified you in every 
dwelling, neglect not the friendship of you (their) benefactor 
therefore prosperous days dawn upon the pious 


The Destroyer of hundreds of Raksasas— Satayatu; that is Sakti, 
the son of Vasistha, the father of Parasara, Visnu Purana, 8.4, and note: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 19 199 


५३००. द्वे नप्तुर्देवव॑तः शते Met रथां वधूमन्ता सुदार्स:। 
अर्हन्नग्ने पैजवनस्य दानं होतेव सद्य पर्येमि रेभ॑न्‌॥२२॥ 
22. Praising the liberality of Suddsa, the grandson of Devavat, 
the son of Paijavana, the donor of two hundred cows, and of two 


chariots with two wives, I, worthy (of the gift), circumambulate 
you, Agni, like the ministrant priest in the chamber (of sacrifice). 


५३०१. चत्वारो मा पैजवनस्य दाना: स्मदिष्टय: कृशनिनों निरेके। 
ऋज़ासों मा पृथिविष्ठा: सुदासस्तोकं तोकाय श्रवंसे वहन्ति॥२३॥ 
23. Four (horses), having golden trappings, going steadily on a 
difficult road, celebrated on the earth, the excellent and acceptable 


gifts (made) to me by Sudasa, the son of Paijavana, bear me as a 


son (to obtain) food and progeny. 

The Excellent and Acceptable Gifts made to Me— Smaddistayah, 
an epithet of Asvah, understood, is explained, prasastdtisarjand- 
sraddhadida@nangayukta, being or having part of a donation made in the 
belief of presenting what is excellent. 

S जीर्णाशी 1 
५३०२. यस्य श्रवो रोद॑सी अन्तरुवी शौर्ष्णेशीर्ष्ण विबभाजां विभक्ता। 
सप्तेदिन्द्रं न ्रवतों गृणन्ति नि युंध्यामधिमंशिशादभीके।।२४॥। 

24. The seven worlds praise (Suddsa) as if he were Indra; him 
whose fame (spreads) through the spacious heaven and earth: who, 
munificent, has distributed (wealth) on every eminent person, and 
(for whom) the flowing (rivers) have destroyed Yudhyamadhi in 
war. 

> दिवोदासं n I 
५३०३. इमं न॑रो मरुतः सश्चतानु दिवोंदासं न fiat सुदास:। 
3 1 x es P NE 
अविष्टनां पैजवनस्य केतं दूणाशं कषत्रमजरं दुवोयु॥२५।। 

25. Maruts, leaders (of rits), attend upon this (prince) as you 

did upon Divodasa, the father of Sudasa: favour the prayers of the 


devout son of Pijavana, and may his strength be unimpaired, 
undecaying. 


[सूक्त- १९] 
[ऋषि वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र छन्द त्रिष्ठुप्‌ i] 
५३०४. यस्तिग्मशृङ्गो वृषभो zi भीम ua: कृष्टीश्च्यावयति प्र विश्वा:। 
यः शश्च॑तो अदाशुषो गय॑स्य प्रयन्तासि सुष्वितराय वेद॑:11१॥ 


1. Indra, who is formidable as a sharp-horned bull, singly 
expels all men (from their stations): you Who are the despoiler) of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


200 Rgveda Samhita 


the ample wealth of him who makes no offerings are the giver of 
riches to the presenter of frequent oblations. 
५३०५. त्वं ह त्यदिन्द्र कुत्समावः शु्रूषमाणस्तन्वां समर्ये। 

दासं यच्छुष्णं कुय॑वं न्य॑स्मा अरन्धय आर्जुनेयाय शिक्ष॑न्‌॥२॥ 

2. Aiding him with your person, Indra, you had defended 
Kutsa in combat when you had subjugated Dasa, Susna and 
Kuyava, giving (their spoil) to that son of Arjuni. 

५३०६. त्वं धृष्णो धृषता वीतहंव्यं प्रावो विश्वाभिरूतिभिः सुदासंम्‌। 
प्र पौरुकुतिसत्रसद॑स्युमावः क्षेत्र॑साता वृत्रहत्येषु enisi 
3. Undaunted (Indra), you had protected with all your 


protections Sudása, the offerer of oblations: you hast protected in 


battles with enemies for the possession of the earth Trasadasyu, 
the son of Purukutsa, and Puru. 


५३०७. त्तं नृभिर्नृमणो देववीतौ भूरीणि वृत्रा हरयश्च हंसि। 
त्वं नि दस्युं चुमुरिं धुं चास्वापयो दभीतये gei 
4. You, the lord of horses, who are honoured by men, hast 
destroyed, along with the Maruts, numerous enemies at the 


sacrifice to the gods: you hast put to sleep with the thunderbolt the 
Dasyus, Chumuri, and Dhuni, on behalf of Dabhiti. 


५३०८. तव॑ च्यौलानि वज्रहस्त तानि नव eq नवतिं च Wa: | 
निवेशने शततमाविवेषीरहञ्च वृत्र नमुँचिमुताहन्‌। ५ t 
5. Such, wielder of the thunderbolt, are your mighty powers, 
that when you hadst quickly destroyed ninety and nine cities, you 


hast occupied the hundredth as a place of abode: you hast slain 
Vrtra: you hast also slain Namuci. 


५३०९. सना ता त॑ इन्द्र भोज॑नानि रातह॑व्याय दाशुषें सुदासें। 
gil ` 2 
TA ते हरी वृष॑णा युनज्मि व्यन्तु ब्रह्माणि पुरुशाक वा्जम्‌।६॥ 
6. Your favours, Indra, to Sudasa, the donor (of offerings), the 
presenter of oblations, are infinite: showerer (of benefits), I yoke 


for you (your vigorous) steeds: may our prayers reach you who are 
mighty, to whom many rites are addressed. 


५३१०. मा तें अस्यां संहसावन्परिष्टावधायं भूम हरिवः परादै। 
त्रायस्व नोञ्वृकेभिर्वरूथैस्तव प्रियास: सूरिषुं स्याम।७।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i 


2 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


| Mandala 7, Sükta 19 201 


f 7. Powerful /ndra, lord of horses, let us not be exposed at this 
ceremony, addressed to you, to the murderous despoiler: protect us 
with impregnable defences: may we be held dear among your 
worshippers. 


५३११. प्रियास zu मघवन्नभिष्टौ नरों मदेम शरणे सखाय:। 
| नि तुर्वशं नि याद्वं शिशीह्यतिथिग्वाय शंस्यं करिष्यन्‌।॥८ t 
8. May we, Maghavan, leaders in your adoration, regarded as 


dear friends, be happy in our homes: about to bestow felicity upon 
Atithigvan, humiliate Turvasa; (humiliate) the son of Yadu. 


५३१२. सचश्चित्रु ते मघवन्नभिष्टौ नर: शंसन्त्युकथशासं उकथा। 
थे ते हर्वेभिर्वि uh EA साज ताशे. 
येतेह पर्णीरदाशत्रस्मान्वृणीष्व युज्याय e ।।९॥। 
9. The leader (of rites), reciters of prayers, offer, Maghavan, 
prayers devoutly for your adoration: they by their praises have 


appropriated the wealth of the niggards: select us (as the objects) 


of your friendship. 

By their Praises have Appropriated the Wealth of the Niggards— 
Ye te havebhir, vi panin adasan: the connection of havebhir, stotraih with 
what follows is not very obvious the rest is explained, apraddnasilan 
vanijo api dhandni viSesenaddpayan, they have made to give, or have 
mulched, especially in their riches, those traders who are not donors of 


offerings. 
. cedi 1 
५३१३. एते स्तोमां नरां नृतम तुभ्यमस्मद्रयञ्चो ददतो मघानि। 
तेषामिन्द्र वृत्रहत्ये शिवो भूः सखां च शूरोऽविता च॑ जुणाम्‌॥१०॥ 
10. Chief leader (of rites), these praises of man addressed to 
you revert to us, who are the offerers of (sacrificial) riches: do you 
be propitious to such men, (/ndra), in conflicts with enemies: be 
their friend, their hero, and protector. 
1 
५३१४. नू इन्द्र शूर स्तव॑मान ऊती ब्रह्मजूतस्तन्वा वावृधस्व। 
के = स्तीन्यूयं 1 
उप॑ नो वाजान्सिमीह्युप स्तीन्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा न:।।११।। 
11. Hero, Indra, glorified on the present occasion, and 
propitiated by praise, be amplified in your person for our 
protection: bestow upon us food and habitations: and do you ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
202 Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त-२०] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्ठुप्‌।] 
५३१५. उग्रो जज्ञे वीर्याय स्वधावाञ्चक्रिरपो नर्यो यत्करिष्यन्‌। 
जम्मर्युवां नृषर्दनमवोभिसत्राता न इन्द्र एन॑सो महश्चित्‌।।१ [i 
l. The fierce and powerful (Indra) has been born for heroic 
(deeds): friendly to man, he is the accomplisher of whatever act he 
undertakes to perform; ever youthful, he invests the (sacrificial) 


hall with defences (against interruption): be our preserver, Indra, 
from heinous sin. 


५३१६. हन्तां वृत्रमिन्द्रः शूशुंवानः प्रावीनु वीरो जरितारमूती। 
कर्ती सुदासे अह वा ड लोकं दाता वसु मुहुरा दाशुषें भूत्‌।।२॥ 
2. Indra, dilating in bulk, is the slayer of Vritra: the hero 
defends his worshipper promptly with his protection, whether he 


be the giver of dominion to Sudása, or the donor repeatedly of 
wealth to the offerer (of oblations). 


५३१७. युध्मो अनर्वा खजकृत्समद्वा शूर: सत्राषाङ्जनुषेमषांळहः। 
व्यांस इन्द्र: पृत॑नाः स्वोजा अधा विश्व शत्रूयन्तं जघान ।।३ ii 
3. A warrior who turns not back in battle, a combatant, one 


engaged in tumults, a hero, victorious over (his) foes from birth, 


invincible, of great vigour, this /ndra scatters (hostile) hosts and 
slays all (his) adversaries. 


५३१८. उभे चिदिन्द्र रोदसी महित्वा पंप्राथ तर्विषीभिस्तुविष्स:। 
नि वज़मिन्द्रो हरिवान्मिमिक्षन्त्समन्धंसा मदेषु वा उवोच।|४।। 
4. Opulent Indra, you hast filled both heaven and earth with 
your magnitude, your energies: Indra, the lord of horses, 


brandishing the thunderbolt, is gratified at sacrifices by the 
(sacrificial) food. 


| ति 
५३१९. वृषा जजान वृषणं रणाय तमु चिन्नारी a4 ससूव। 
ir x: NM 
प्र यः सेनानीरध नृभ्यो अस्तीनः सत्वां गवेषणः स धृष्णु:।५॥। 
5. (His) progenitor begot Indra, the showerer (of benefits) for 
(of benefits) for (the purposes of) war: his mother brought him 


forth the benefactor of man: the leader of armies who is chief over 


men, he is the lord, the conqueror, the recoverer of the kine, the 
subduer of foes. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


2 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 20 203 
Alon ` al X oN ^ 
५३२०. नू चित्स श्रेषते जनो न रेषन्मनो यो अस्य घोरमाविवासात्‌। 
rr NECS da zdifa ES 
aad इन्द्रे दते दुवांसि क्षयत्स राय ऋतपा त्रतिजा:11६ ।। 

6. He who devotes his mind to the terrible Indra never falls 
(from his condition), nor will he perish: the protector of sacred 
rites, the progeny of sacrifice, bestows riches on him who offers to 
Indra praises and prayers with sacrifices. 

| ] dE. c 
५३२१. यदिन्द्र पूर्वो अपराय शिक्षन्नयज्ज्यायान्‌ कनायसा दष्णम्‌। 
इत्पर्यासीत 1 . fä | 
अमृत सीत दूरमा चित्र चित्र्यं भरा रयिं न:1७11 

7. That (wealth) Indra, which the prior has given to the 
posterior: which the elder may accept from the younger: with 
which (the son) yet living dwells far away (separated from his 
father), confer, wonderful Indra, such precious riches upon us. 

Which the Prior has given to the Posterior, Ete.— Yad Indra 
purvo aparaya siksan, what the father has given to the son, or the elder to 


the younger brother: and so in the next case, that which the father receives 
from the son or the elder brother from the younger. 


प्रियो ` ददांशदसन्निरेके ` 1 
५३२२. यस्त॑ इन्द्र प्रियो जनो ददांशदसन्निरेके अंद्रिवः सखा di 
-a = x E m 3 em. EE 
वयं तै अस्यां सुमतौ चनिष्ठाः स्याम वरूथे अध्नतों T 
8. May the man who is dear to you, /ndra, present (Oblations): 
may he be your friend, wielder of the thunderbolt, he (assiduous) 
in donations: may we be abounding in food through this favour of 
you who are devoid of cruelty, (may we be in the enjoyment of) a 
dwelling giving shelter to men. 
५३२३. एष स्तोमो अचिक्रददूवृषां त उत स्तामुर्मघवत्रक्रपिष्ट। 
> S उत्त xl js 
रायस्कामों जरितार त आगन्त्वमङ्ग शक्र वस्व आ शको नः॥९॥ 
9. For you, Maghavan, this showering Soma (libation) aS 
aloud: to you the worshipper has recited praises: the desire of 
riches has fallen upon thine adorer, do you, therefore, Sakra. 
bestow quickly upon us wealth. 
ts जुनन्ति 
५३२४. स न॑ इन्द्र त्वय॑ताया इषे धास्त्मनां च ये मघवानो जुनन्ति। 
Th mac 7 E 1 
वस्वी षु तें जरित्रे अस्तु शक्तिर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः।९०॥। 
10. Enable us, Indra, (to partake of) food granted by you, ® 
Well as those who, opulent (in sacrificial presentations), 
Spontaneously offer (you oblations): may there be power in thine 


adorer (to repeat) many laudations: and do you ever cherish us 
With blessings. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


204 Rgveda Samhita 


May there be Power in thine Adorer— Vasvi su te jaritre asty 
Saktih is explained atyanta prasastasu stutisu tava stotre samarthyam 
astu, as in the text. 


[सूक्त- २१] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- त्रिष्ट॒ुप्‌।] 
५३२५. असावि देवं गोळजीकमन्थो न्यंस्मिन्निन्द्रो जनुषेमुवोच। 
बोधामसि त्वा हर्यश्व eu नः स्तोममन्धसो WR UI 
1. I bright sacrificial food mixed with curds and milk has been 
poured out: Indra delights in it from his birth: lord of bay horses, 


we wake you up with sacrifices, acknowledge our praises in the 
exhilaration of the Soma beverage. 


५३२६. प्र य॑न्ति यज्ञं विपय॑न्ति बर्हिः सोममादो विदथे दुभ्रवांच:। 
न्यु भ्रियन्ते यशसों गृभादा दूरउंपन्दो वृष॑णो नृषाच॑ः।।२।। 
2. They repair to the sacrifice, they strew the sacred grass: the 
(grinding) stones at the ceremony are of difficulty suppressed 


noise: famous priests, whose voices are heard far off, bring the 
stones from the interior of the dwelling. 


५३२७. त्वमिन्द्र खवितवा अपस्कः परिष्ठिता अहिंना शूर पूर्वी: 
Talak रथ्यो३ न धेना रेज॑ते विश्वां कृत्रिमाणि भीषा।।३॥ 


3. You, hero, hast enabled the many waters arrested by Ahi to 
flow: by you the rivers rushed forth like charioteers: all created 
worlds trembled through fear of you. 


५३२८. भीमो विवेषायुधेभिरेषामपासि विश्वा नर्याणि विद्वान्‌! 
इन्द्र: पुरो ज्हषाणो वि दूधोद्वि वञ्रहस्तो महिना ज॑घान।४।। 


4. The formidable (Indra), knowing all actions beneficial to 
man, intimidated those (Asuras) by his weapons: Indra, exulting, 


shook their cities: armed with his thunderbolt he slew them in his 
might. 


५३२९. न यातव॑ इन्द्र जूजुवुर्नो न वन्द॑ना शविष्ठ वेद्याभि:। 
स शर्धदयों विषुंणस्य जन्तोर्मा शिश्रदेवा अपिं गुऋतं A: l 
5. Let not the Raksasas, Indra, do us harm: let not the evil 


spirits do harm to our progeny, most powerful (Indra): let the 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar | 


EUM onm S 


F by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 21 205 


sovereign lord, (/ndra), exert himself (in the restraint) of 
disorderly beings, so that the unchaste may not disturb our rite. 

Let not the Raksasas do us Harm— Na vandana vedyabhih are 
rendered by Sayana vandanani, raksansi, and prajabhyah. 

The Unchaste— Sisnadevah, abrahmacharya ityarthah, following 
Yaska, IV.19, but it may have the sense of those who hold the Linga for a 
deity. 

N भूरध — ~ व्यङमहिमानं Aifa 
५३३०. अभि क्रत्वेन्द्र भूरध ज्मन्न ते विव्यडर l 
` ७ 1 जघन्थ 1. E 
स्वेना हि वृत्रं शवसा जघन्थ न शत्रुरन्तं विविदद्युधा eiie 11 
l 6. You, Indra, by your function, presidest over the beings (of 
earth): all the regions (of the world) do not surpass your 
) magnitude: by thine own strength you hast slain Vritra: no enemy 
has effected your destruction in battle. 
देवाशि PI le. | | L 
५३३१. दे असुर्याय पूर्वेऽनु क्षत्राय ममिरे सहांसि। 
N 1 ` विषहोन्द्र > I सातौ 
Sal मघानि दयते विषह्यन्द्रं वाजस्य जोहुवन्त TMIN I 

7. The older deities have confessed your vigour superior to 
their destructive strength, Indra having subdued his foes, gives the 
rich spoils (to his worshippers): they invoke /ndra to obtain food. 

The Older Deities— Devas chit purve, the Asuras, who, in the 
received mythology, are considered as older than the gods. The 
construction is somewhat obscure, asüryaya ksatraya anumamire 
sahansi; anu, Sàyana of Panini: Hine, L4.86, they have confessed 
inferiority to your strength: tava balebhyo hina mamire; asuraya, he 


renders, balaya, to strength, and ksatraya he derives from ksadi, to injure, 
hinsayam. 


५३३२. कीरिश्चिद्धि त्वामव॑से जुहावेशानमिन्द्र सौभ॑गस्य भूरें:। 
अवो बभूथ शतमूते अस्मे अभिक्षतुस्त्वावंतो वरूता।८।। 
8. The worshipper has invoked you the sovereign Indra, for 
protection: protector of many, you hast been to us the guardian of 


0 great fortune: be our defender against every overpowering 
i (assailant) like to you. 


2 ५३३३. सखायस्त इन्द्र विश्वह॑ स्याम नमोवृधासो महिना deal 
वन्वन्तु स्मा तेऽव॑सा समीकेई 5भीतिमर्यो वनुषां शवासि॥९।। 
9. May we, daily increasing in reverence, be (regarded), indra, 
(as) your friends: through the protection of you, surpasser in 


Sreatness, may (your worshippers) repulse the attack of the foe in 
battle, the strength of the malevolent. 


MU LS Ss 


|| 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
206 


Rgveda Sarihitg 
५३३४. स नं इन्द्र त्वय॑ताया इषे धास्त्मनां च ये मघवानो जुनन्ति 

वस्वी षु ते जरित्रे अस्तु शक्तिर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः॥१०॥ 

10. Enable us, /ndra, (to partake of) food granted by you, as 

well as those who, opulent (in sacrificial presentations), 

spontaneously offer the (oblations): may there be ability in thine 


adorer (to repeat) may laudations: and do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[सूक्त-२२] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- विराट्‌, ९ Freq] 
५३३५. पिबा सोममिन्द्र मन्दतु त्वा यं d सुषाव॑ edan: 
सोतुर्बाहुभ्यां सुयतो metis | 
1. Drink, Indra, the Soma: may it exhilarate you, that which 
the stone tightly held like a horse (by the reins), by the arms of the 


grinder, has expressed, lord of bay horses for you. 
Samaveda, 398, 927. 


५३३६. यस्ते मदो युज्यश्चारुरस्ति येन वृत्राणि हर्यश्व efi 
p. स त्वामिन्द्र प्रभूवसो AAAI UI 


2. May the exhilarating beverage which is fit for an suitable to 


you, by which, lord of bay horses, you slayest Vritras, exhilarate 
you, Indra, abounding in riches. 
Samaveda, 278-29. 


५३३७. बोधा सु में मघवन्वाचमेमां यां ते वसिष्ठ अर्चति प्रशस्तिम्‌। 
इमा ब्रह्म सधमादे जुषस्व॥।३॥। 


3. Understand thoroughly, Maghavan, this my speech, this 


praise of you, which Vasistha recites; be pleased by these prayers 
at the sacrifice. 


५३३८. शरुधी हवे विषिपानस्याद्रेबोंधा विप्रस्यार्चतो मनीषाम्‌। 
कृष्वा दुवांस्यन्तमा सच्ेमा॥|४।। 
4. Hear the invocation of the (grinding) stone, (of Lo 
repeatedly drinking (the Soma), comprehend the hymn of t 


: fi - ii r 
adoring sage, and, endly (with us), take to your nea 
consideration these adorations. 


Of me Repeatedly Drinking the Soma— Srudhi havam 220 
adraht, the Scholiast inserts, mama as vipipana, the frequentative of p4: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


D ता ला — MES 
i 


2 by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


ue Mandala 7, Sükta 22 B 


drink, explained vipitavat or vipivat, would be not a very appropriate 
epithet of adri. 
II lake to your near Consideration these Adorations—- Krisva 
duvaisi antama sachema, is explained mani paricharanani antikatamani 


as 
is) buddhisthani sahayabhuta san kuru, the explanation is not very 
ine intelligible. 
है ` fir ` 1 ` 1 सुष्टतिमसुर्यस्य 
ith ५३३९. न d गिरो अपि मृष्ये तुरस्य न सुष्टुतिमसुर्यस्य विद्वान्‌। 
TENT TET LA D cd 5 
सदा ते नाम स्वयशो विवकिम।।५।। 

5. Knowing of your strength, I refrain not from the praise nor 
from the glorification of you, the destroyer (of foes), but ever 
proclaim your especial care. 

५३४०. भूरि हि ते सवना मानुषेषु भूरिं मनीषी ह॑वते त्वामित्‌। 

: मारे अस्मन्म॑घवञ्ज्योकर्क:।।६।। 

C = = 

he 6. Many are the sacrifices offered, Maghavan, to you amongst 
mankind; constantly does worshipper indeed invoke you; therefore 
be not far nor be a long time from us. 

This and the two preceding occur in Samaveda, 1798-1800. 

५३४१. तुभ्येदिमा सव॑ना शूर विश्वा तुभ्यं ब्रह्माणि वर्धना कृणोमि। 
iB त्वं नृभिर्हव्यो विश्वधासि tto 11 


te 7. To you, hero, I indeed offer these sacrifices, to you I address 
these elevating praises: you are to be in all ways invoked by the 
leaders (of rites). 


५३४२. नू चिन्नु ते मन्य॑मानस्य दस्मोदश्नुवन्ति महिमानमुग्र। 
न वीर्यमिन्द्र ते न राध॑ः।।८॥। 


के 8. Indra, of goodly aspect, none attain the greatness of you 
| Who are to be honoured, nor, fierce /ndra, your heroism, nor your 
wealth. 
I 
५३४३. ये च पूर्व ऋष॑यो ये qem इन्द्र ब्रह्माणि जनन्त विप्रा:। 
EE NUT So ait 
J अस्मे तें सन्तु सख्या शिवानि यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा il HI 
16 9. May your auspicious regards, Indra, be directed towards us, 
ar as they have been to those pious sages, ancient or recent, who have 
Originated (your) praises, and do you ever cherish us with 
a blessings. 
to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


208 Rgveda Samhita 


[35-33] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- Pre] 
५३४४. उदु ब्रह्माण्यैरत श्रवस्येन्द्रं समर्ये म॑हया वसिष्ठ । 
आ यो विश्वानि शवसा ततानोपश्रोता म ईवतो वर्चांसि ।।१।। 
1. (The sages) have offered prayers to (Indra) for food, 


worship Indra, Vasistha at the sacrifice: may that Indra who has 


spread out all (the regions) by his might, be the hearer of my 
words when approaching him. 


५३४५. अयामि घोषं इन्द्र देवजामिरिरज्यन्त यच्छुरुधो विवांचि। 
नहि स्वमायुंश्चिकिते जनेषु तानीदंहास्यतिं पर्ष्यस्मान्‌।२॥ 

2. When, Indra, the plants grow up, the sound (of praise) 
acceptable to the gods, (uttered) by the worshipper, has been 
raised: by no one among men, is his own life understood; convey 
us beyond all those sins (by which life is shortened). 


When the Plants Grow Up— Yacchurudho irajyanta is explained 
osadhyo varddhante: in a former passage surudh was interpreted, a cow. 


५३४६. युजे रथं गवेष॑णं हरिभ्यामुप ब्रह्माणि जुजुषाणम॑स्थुः। 
वि बाधिष्टस्य रोद॑सी महित्वेन्द्रों वृत्राण्य॑प्रती जंघन्वान्‌।।३ ।। 
3. I harness (by praises) the kine-bestowing chariot (of Indra) 


with his horses: (my) prayers have reached him who is pleased (by 


devotion): he has surpassed in magnitude heaven and earth, slaying 
the unresisting enemies. 


Slaying the Unresisting Enemies— vritranyaprati jaghanván: the 


meaning of aprati is not very obvious: Sayana explains it, dyandvani, 
twofold, doubled. 


| 
५३४७. आपश्चित्पिप्यु: स्तरयोर न गावो नक्षत्रुतं जरितारस्त इन्द्र। 
याहि वायुर्न नियुतों नो अच्छा त्वं हि धीभिर्दय॑से वि aia! 
4. May the waters increase like young: may your worshippers: 


Indra, possess water (in abundance): come like the wind with the 


Niyut steeds, for you, (propitiated) by holy rites, verily bestowest 
upon us food. 


- Yajurveda, 33. 18: Mahidhara gives a totally different meaning (0 ge 
first phrase, apaschit pipyuh staryo na gavah, the waters augment ut 
Soma juice as those Vaidik texts by which the Soma is effused. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


a gitized b a Samaj F eme A |; 
Mandala 7, zed by Ayy: maj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


५३४८. ते त्वा मदां इन्द्र मादयन्तु शुष्मिर्ण तुविराधसं जरित्रे 
एको देवत्रा दयसे हि मर्तानस्मिञ्छूर सवने मादयस्व ।५॥ 
5. May these inebriating draughts exhilarate you, /mdra: 
bestow upon the praiser (a son vigorous and wealthy): for you 


alone amongst the gods are compassionate to mortals: be 
exhilarated here at this sacrifice. 


209 


५३४९. एवेदिन्द्रं वृष॑णं वज्रबाहुं वर्सिष्ठासो अभ्यर्चन्त्यरकै:। 
f स नं: स्तुतो वीरवंद्धातु गोमद्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सर्दा न:॥६॥ 


6. In this manner the Vasisthas glorify with hymns Indra, the 
showerer, the bearer of the thunderbolt: may he so glorified grant 
us wealth, comprising male posterity and cattle: and do you ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


) Yajurveda, 20.54: the concluding phrase, which has so often 
l occurred, Mahīdhara considers addressed to the priests, yuyam Ritvijah. 
/ 
[सूक्त-२४] 
j [ सिष मैत्रावरुणि छन्दः 
ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- sal छन्द- Ag] 


योनिष्ट | 
५३५०. योनिष्ट इन्द्र सदने अकारि तमा नृभिंः पुरुहूत प्र याहि। 
असो यथां नोऽविता वृधे च ददो वसूनि ममदश्च सोमैः॥।१॥ 

I. A place has been prepared for you in the sacrificial 
chamber: proceed to it, invoked of many, along with the leaders 
(of rites the Maruts), inasmuch as you are our protector, (promote 
our) prosperity: grant us riches: be exhilarated by the Soma. 

भीतं c मधूनि 
i ५३५१. गभीत ते मन॑ इन्द्र faei: सुतः सोमः परिषिक्ता मधूनि। 
| विसृष्टधेना भरते सुवृक्तिरियमिन्द्रै जोहुवती मनीषा ।1२॥ 
2. Your purpose, Indra, is apprehended, you who are mighty in 


the two (worlds): the Soma is effused: the sweet juices are poured 
(into the vessels): this perfect praise uttered with loosened tongue 


amin, शिकार 


j propitiates Indra with repeated invocations. 

a Mighty in the two Worlds— Dvibhara, according to the Scholiast, 

t should be dvibarhasah, agreeing with te-dvayoh sthanayoh pari vrdhasya 
tava man grhitam, the mind of you who are enlarged in both is 

८ apprehended: what places is not explained: perhaps heaven and earth may 

e be intended. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


E. Rgveda Samhita 


N क्रजीपित्रिदं xj ta 
५३५२. आ नों दिव आ पृथिव्या ऋजीधिन्निदं बहिः सोमपेयाय याहि। 
वह॑न्तु त्वा हर॑यो मद्र्य्ञमाडगूषमच्छां तवसं edil 
3. Come, Rijishin, from the sky, or from the firmament, to this 
sacred grass , to drink the Soma: let your horses bear you who are 
vigorous to my presence to (receive my) praise and for (thine) 
exhilaration. 
५३५३. आ नो विश्वांभिरूतिभि: सजोषा ब्रह्म जुषाणो हर्यश्व याहि। 
वरीवृजत्‌ स्थविरेभिः सुशिप्रास्मे दधद्वृषणं शुष्म॑मिन्द्र nei 
4. Lord of bay steeds, propitiated by our praise, come to us 
with all your protections, sharing in satisfaction, handsome- 
chinned, with the ancient (Maruts), overthrowing repeatedly (your) 
foes, and granting us a strong and vigorous (son). 
५३५४. एष स्तोमो मह उग्राय वाहे धुरीई वात्यो न वाजय॑न्नधायि। 
इन्द्र त्वायमर्क ई वसूनां दिवीव द्यामधि नः श्रोम॑तं धा:।५॥ 
5. This invigorating praise, like a horse attached to car, has 
been addressed to you who are mighty and fierce, the up-bearer (of 


the world): this thine adorer desires of you, Indra, riches: do you 
grant us sustenance notorious as the sky in heaven. 


N 
h 


Notorious as the Sky in Heaven — Diviva dyam adhi na sromatam 
dhah: the Scholiast gives no explanation of the comparison: sromatam he 
Interprets sravaniyam, applicable either to food or famc. 


f As सुमतिं 
५२५५. एवा न इन्द्र वार्यस्य पूर्धि प्र ते महीं सुमतिं वेंविदाम। 
iB सुवीरां t I» T 
इषं पिन्व ma: सुवीरा यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा न:॥॥६।| 
6. In this manner, Indra, satisfy us (with the gift) of desirable 


(wealth): may we repeatedly experience your great giver: bestow 


upon us who are opulent (in offerings) food with male 
descendants: do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-२५] 
[ऋषि- वसिछ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द-- त्रिष्टुप्‌।| 
५३५६. आ तें मह gaa समन्यवो यत्समरन्त सेनां:। 
पतति दिदयुनर्यस्य rina ते मनो! विष्वद्र्यशग्वि aU 


1. Fierce Indra. when animated by like fierce armies. 
encounter them: let the bright (weapon) wielded by the arms of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 25 211 
you who are mighty and the friend of man descend for our 
protection; let not your all-pervading mind wander (away from us). 
५३५७. नि दुर्ग इन्द्र श्रथिह्यमित्रानभि ये नो मर्तासो अमन्ति। 

आरे d शंर्स कृणुहि निनित्सोरा नों भर सम्भरणं वसूनाम्‌॥२॥ 

2. Destroy, Indra, our adversaries in battle, those men who 


overpower us: remove far from us the calumny of the reviler: bring 
to us abundance of treasures. 


ol शिप्रिन्नूतय E Atel || 
५३५८. शतं तें शिप्रिन्नूतयः सुदासे सहस्रं शंसा उत रातिरस्तु। 
जहि वधर्वनुषो मर्त्यस्यास्मे द्युम्ममधि wi च धेहि॥३॥ 

3. May hundreds of your protections, handsome-chinned, be 
(secured) to the liberal donor (of oblations): may thousands of 
blessings be bestowed (upon me) us well as wealth: cast the fatal 
weapon on the mischievous mortal: grant us food and wealth. 

Wealth— Dyumnam may mean either food or fame. Nir. v.5. 

EN A ` 1 
५३५९. त्वाव॑तो हीन्द्र क्रत्वे अस्मि त्वाव॑तोऽवितुः शूर रातौ। 
= f F ७ x 23 र्धा 
विश्वेदहानि तविषीव उग्रँ ओक॑: कृणुष्व हरिवो न मर्धीः।४॥। 

4. I am (in dependence), Indra, upon the acts of such as you 
are, upon the liberality of a protector, hero, such as you: vigorous 
and fierce Indra, give us a dwelling for all our days: lord of bay 
steeds, do us no harm. 

EY सहों देवजूतमियाना | 
५३६०. कुत्सां एते हर्यश्वाय शूषमिन्द्रे सहो TA: 
E cec du i 
सत्रा कृधि सुहनां शूर वृत्रा वयं dea सनुयाम वाजम्‌। ५11 

5. These (Vasisthas) are offering grateful (adoration) to the 
lord of bay steeds, soliciting the strength assigned by the gods to 
Indra: make our enemies, Indra, easy to be overcome. and may 
We, safe from peril, enjoy abundance. 

EY महीं सुंमतिं " वेविदाम 
५३६१. एवा न॑ इन्द्र वार्यस्य पूर्धि प्र ते महीं सुम 
E = R 1 
Ti पिन्व मघव॑द्भयः सुवीराँ यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा A di 

6. In this manner, Indra, satisfy us with the gift of nested 
(wealth): may we repeatedly experience your great favour: bestow 
Upon us who are opulent in offerings food with male descendants: 
do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai andyeGRQgotr ronis 


[सूक्त-२६] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- fau] 
b. | 
५३६२. न सोम इन्द्रमसुतो ममाद नात्रह्माणो मघवानं सुतास:। 
तस्मां उक्थं ज॑नये यज्जुर्जोपन्नुवन्नवीयः शृणवद्यथाँ न: 11१ UI 
1. The Soma uneffused delights not Indra: the effused juice: 
please not Maghavan, unaccompanied by prayer: therefore I offer 
to him praise that he may be pleased with: that, like a prince, he 
may listen to a novel (strain). 
५३६३. उक्थउंक्थे सोम इन्द्र॑ ममाद नीथेनीथे मघवानं सुतास॑:। 
| यदी werd: पितरं न पुत्राः संमानदक्षा अव॑से SATA 
2. The Soma effused with reiterated prayer delights Indra: the 
effused juices, (offered) with repeated praise, (exhilarate) 
Maghavan: therefore (the priests), combining together and making 


like exertion, invoke /ndra for protection, as sons (apply) to a 
father. 


५३६४. चकार ता कृणवं्रूनमन्या यानि ब्रुवन्ति dud: सुतेषु। 

F जनीरिव x RIESEN AEN E z 

व पतिरेकः समानो नि मामृजे पुर इन्द्रः सु सर्वाः।।३।। 
i 3. Such exploits as his worshippers, when the soma is effused, 
! proclaim that he has achieved, let him now perform: may Indra, 


equal (to the task) and unaided, spossess all the cities (of the 
Asuras) as 8 1. isband his wives. 


५३६५. एवा तमाहुरुत शृण्व इन्द्र एको विभक्ता तरणिर्मघानाम्‌। 
Ska pud 
मिथस्तुर ऊतयो यस्य॑ पूर्वीरस्मे भद्राणि सश्चत प्रियाणिँ।॥४।। 
4. Such have they proclaimed him: Indra is still celebrated as 


the distributor of riches, the transporter (beyond calamity), of 
whom many and emulous are the protections: may acceptable 


benefits attend us. 
५३६६. एवा वसिष्ठ इन्द्रमूतये नृन्कृष्टीनां वृषभं सुते गृणाति। 
| सहल्तिण उप॑ नो माहि वाजान्‌ यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां A:I 
5. Thus does Vashishtha glorify Indra, the showerer (of 
benefits) upon the Worshippers for the preservation of mankind: 


bestow upon us, (/ndra), thousands of viands: do you ever cherish 
us with blessings. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sukta 27 213 


[सूक्त- २७] 
2 वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- 2-1 छन्द- fav] 
५३६७. इन्द्रं नरो नेमधिता हवन्ते यत्पार्या युनजते धियस्ता:! 
शूरो नृषाता श्वसञ्चकान आ गोम॑ति ब्रजे भ॑जा त्वं न:।।१।। 

1. Men invoke Indra in battle when those actions which lead to 
victory are performed: do you who are hero, the benefactor of 
man, the desirer of provess, place us in possession of pastures 
abounding with cattle. 

Sdmaveda, 318. 

५३६८. य इन्द्र शुष्मों मघवन्ते अस्ति शिक्षा सखिभ्यः पुरुहूत नृभ्यं:। 
त्वं हिदुळ्हा मंघवन्विचेता अपां वृधि परिवृतं न Willi 

2. Indra, who are the invoked of many, give to those men who 
are your friends that strength which, Maghavan, is thine: you, 
Maghavan, (hast forced open) the firm (shur, gates of cities): 
discover, discriminator (of truth), the treasure now concealed. 

Hast Forced open Firm shut Gates of Cities— The text has only 
tvam hi dridha maghavan, you, Maghavan, verily the firm (plur, acc. 
fem.). 

५३६९. इन्द्रो राजा जगतश्चर्षणीनामधि क्षमि विषुरूपं यदस्ति। 
ततो ददाति दाशुषे वसूंनि चोदद्राध उपसतुतश्चदर्वाक्‌॥३॥ 

3. Indra is lord of the earth and of men: (his is) the various 
wealth that exists upon the earth: thence he gives riches to the 
donor (of oblations): may he, glorified by us, bestow upon us 
Wealth. 

५३७०. नू fda इन्द्रो मघवा सहूती दानो वाजं नि य॑मते न ऊती। 
[Fl 320112: Fag 
अनूना यस्य दक्षिणा पीपाय॑ वामं नृभ्यो अभिवीता afa: 11 

4. May the affluent and liberal /ndra, upon being invoked 

together (with the Maruts), quickly bestow food for our 


reservation, he whose unlimited, experienced liberality yields 
desirable (wealth) to those men (who are his) friends. 


५३७१. नू ईन्द्र राये वरिंवस्कृधी न आ ते मनों ववृत्याम मघायं। 
गोमदश्वांवद्रथवद्व्यन्तो यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा Asl 
5. Indra, grant quickly wealth for our enrichment: may We 
attract your favour by our adoration: granting us (riches), 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


TTR ति 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
214 Rgveda Samhita 


comprising cattle, and horses, and chariots: do you ever cherish us 
with blessings. 


| [सूक्त-२८] 
| [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- freu] 
५३७२. ब्रह्मा ण इन्द्रोप॑ याहि विद्वानर्वाञ्चस्ते हरय: सन्तु युक्ताः। 
विश्वे चिद्धि त्वां विहवन्त मर्ता अस्माकमिच्छुणुहि विश्वमिन्व ।।१।। 
1. Indra, who are wise, come to our adoration: let your horses 


harnessed by before us: gratified of all (men), all mortals severally 
invoke you: hear therefore our (invocation). 


५३७३. हवं त इन्द्र महिमा व्यानड्‌ ब्रह्म यत्पासि शवसिन्रृषीणाम्‌। 
आ gs दधिषे हस्त॑ उग्र घोरः सन्क्रत्वा जनिष्ठा अषांळहः।।२॥। 


2. Endowed with strength, since you grantest the prayers of the 
Rsis, let your greatness, Indra, extend to thine invoker: and as, 
fierce deity, you holdest the thunderbolt in your hand, then 
formidable by your expolits you hast become invincible. 


1 प्रणीतीन्द्र जोहुवानान्त्सं Y 
== ५३७४, तव प्रणीतीन्द्र जोहुवानान्त्सं यन्तन रोदसी निनेर्थ। 

शव॑से x तृतुजिं 
| महे क्षत्राय शवसे हि जज्ेऽतूतुजिं चिचूतुजिरशिश्रत्‌। 1३ ।। 
i 3. Since, Indra, by your guidance, you hast conducted men, 
you zealous worshippers, over heaven and earth, you are born to 
(bestow) great wealth and Strength, whence the presenter of 


offerings overcomes him who offers them not. ! 
Hast Conducted men......over heaven and Earth — Nriti na rodasi 
san ninetha; the verb is explained sangamayasi, you bringest together; ' 
divi prthivyam ca stotrin pratisthapayasi, you establishest the worshippers 
in heaven and in earth: no notice is taken of the particle na: but it cannot 
well be the negative. 


५३७५. एभिर्न इन्द्राहभिर्दशस्य दुर्मित्रासो हि क्षितयः पव॑न्ते 


प्रति यच्चष्टे अनृतमनेना अव॑ दविता वरुणो मायी नं: सात्‌।४।। 

4. Grant us, Indra, with these days, (wealth), for unfriendly 
men approach: may the untruth which the wise and sinless Varuna 
observes in us, (through your favour, Indra), doubly disappear. 

Doubly Disappear— Dyita avasat: the verb is explained by 
vimochana, loosing, setting free; but there is no explanation of dvita or 


dvidha, twofold: perhaps it may mean now and hereafter, or body and 
mind, or word and deed. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 29 215 


a वोचेमेदिन्द्रै Wares महो रायो राध॑सो eda: 
यो अर्च॑तो ब्रह्मकृतिमविष्ठो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:1५॥ 
5. Let us glorify that opulent /ndra, that he may give us great 


and valuable riches, he who is the cheif protector of the pious rites 
of the worshipper: do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-२९| 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- fau] 
PENES in | हरिवस्तदोंका 
३७७. अयं सोमं इन्द्र qui सुन्व आ तु प्र याहि AT | 
| ac 1 
पिबा त्व१स्य सुषुंतस्य चारोर्ददो मघानि मघवन्रियान:11१॥। 

1. This Soma is poured out, /ndra, for you: come, lord of bay 
steeds, to that dwelling (where it is prepared) drink of the 
plentifully-effused and grateful libation), give us, Maghavan, when 
solicited for them, riches. 

^ ब्रह्मकृतिं ` उर्वाचीनो ^ LU 
५३७८. ब्रह्मन्वीर ब्रह्म॑कृतिं जुषाणोऽर्वाचीनो हरिभिर्याहि quu 
` ` 1 [| 
अस्मिन्नू षु सव॑ने मादयस्वोप ब्रह्माणि शुणव इमा lis |i 

2. Magnified hero, Indra, approving of the sacred rite, come to 
us speedily with your steeds: be exhilarated at this sacrifice; hear 
these our prayers. 

In the Variously Clamorous Strife— Vivdcr is explained vividha 
vaco yasmin pradurbhavanti tasmin yuddhe, in that war or combat in 
which many words are manifested: the nominative Sura, heroes, gives 
plausibility to the interpretation. 

For the ling Enjoyment of the Sun— Süryasya satum, cirakála, 
práptyartham, for the sake of having long life: Ayur atra sürya vivaksitah, 
Sürya her expresses life. 


५३७९. का तें अस्त्यरङकृतिः सूक्तैः कदा नूनं d मघवन्‌ दाशेम। 
विश्वां मतीरा त॑तने त्वायाधा म इन्द्र शृणवो हवेमा।।३॥ 


3. What satisfaction is there to you from our hymns? When, 
Maghavan, may we indeed present to you (oblations)? I expatiate | 
in all praises addressed to you: hear, Indra, these my invocations. i 


५३८०. उतो घा ते deem) इदासन्येषां पूर्वेामशृणोक्रिषीणाम्‌। 
अधाहं त्वां मघवञ्जोहवीमि त्वं ज॑ इन्द्रासि प्रम॑ति: पितेव॑ 16 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


216 Rgveda Samhita 


4. Friendly to man were those of the ancient Rsis whose 
praises you hast listened to; therefore I repeatedly invoke you, 
Maghavan: you, Indra, are well affected towards us as a parent. 

| ante मघवानमेनं sia | 
| ५३८१. i मघवानमेनं महो रायो राध॑सो यद्ददन्न:। 
| यो अर्च॑ते ब्रह्मकृतिमविष्ठो यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां ill 
5. Let us glorify that opulent Indra, that he may give us vast 


and valuable riches, he who is the cheif protector of the religious 
rites of the worshippers: do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त २३०] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- feu] 
al 1 1 1 
५३८२. आ नो देव शवसा याहि शुष्मिन्भवा वृध इन्द्र रायः अस्य। 
महे नृम्णाय॑ नृपते सुवज्र महि क्षत्राय पौंस्याय RI 1 
1. Divine and powerful (/ndra), come to us with your strength: 


be the augmenter of our riches: be to us, king of men, wielder of 


the thunderbolt, for (a source of) vigour, of great prowess, hero, of 
manhood. 


५३८३. हव॑न्त उ त्वा हव्यं विवांचि तनूषु शूरा: सूर्यस्य सातौ। 
> aly ne Peo € 
vd विश्वेषु सेन्यो जनेषु vd वृत्राणि रन्धया सुहन्तुँ।॥२ i 
| 2. Warriors invoke you, worthy to be invoked, in the variously 
| clamorous (strife), for (the safety of their) persons, and for the 


(long) enjoyment of the sun: you are a fit leader over all men: 
humble our enemies by the fatal (bolt). 


५३८४. अहा यदिन्द्र सुदिनां व्युच्छान्दधो यत्केतुमुपमं समत्सु। 
युच्छान्दथा यत्तेतुमुपम स 
afa: सींददसुरो न होतां हुवानो अत्र सुभर्गाय gant ।। 
3. When, Indra, fortunate days arise, when you advancest thine 


emblem in battles, the strong Agni, the invoker of the gods, 


summoning the gods hither for our benefit, sits down on the sacred 
grass. 


५३८५. वयं ते d इन्द्र ये च॑ देव स्तव॑न्त शूर दद॑तो मघानि। 
यच्छा सूरिभ्य उपमं वरूथं स्वाभुवों जरणामंश्रवन्त net 
4. We, divine Indra, who are thine, are they, hero, who are 


praising you and offering rich libations: grant to (your) pious 


C7 PAPPER an excellent abode: and may they, prosperous, attain 
old age. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 31 217 
a वोचेमेदिन्द्रै मघवानमेनं महो रायो राध॑सो यद्ददन्न:। 
यो अर्च॑तो ब्रह्मकृतिमविष्ठो यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11५11 
5. Let us glorify the opulent Indra, that he may give us vast 


and valuable riches: he who is the cheif protector of the religious 
rites of the worshippers: do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-३ १] 

[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री, १०-१२ विराट्‌|] 
५३८७. प्र व इन्द्राय Wed हर्यश्वाय गायत। सखायः सोमपात्रे।।१।। 

1. Sing, friends, an exhilarating hymn to Indra, the lord of bay 
steeds, the drinker of the Soma. 

Samaveda, 156, 716. 
५३८८. शंसेदुकथं सुदानंव उत gal यथा नर॑ः। चकृमा सत्यराधसे॥२॥ 

2. Repeat to the liberal /ndra such brilliant praise as other 
(men repeat): let us offer it to him who is affluent in truth. 
५३८९. त्वं नं इन्द्र वाजयुस्त्वं गव्युः शंतक्रतो। त्वं हिरण्ययुर्वसो ।1३ 1 

3. Do you, Indra, be willing to give us food: be willing, 
Shatakratu, to give us cattle: be willing, donor of dwelling, to us 
gold. 
५३९०. वयमिन्द्र त्वायवोऽभि प्र णोंनुमो वृषन्‌। 

विद्धी त्वशस्य नों tieni 


4. Devoted to you, showerer (of benefits), we glorify you: be 
cognizant, giver of dwellings, of this our praise. 
Sdmaveda, 132. 


५३९१. मा नों निदे च वक्तवेर्ञ्यो रन्धीरराव्णे। त्वे अपि क्रतुर्मम II 

5. Indra, who are lord, subject us not to the reviler, to the 
abuser, to the withholder of offerings: may my worship verily (find 
favour) with you. 

May my Worship Verily find favour with you— Tve api kratur 
mama, in you ever my act, means, says Sayana, asmadiyam stotran, 
bhavacchitte pravisatu, may my praise enter into your heart. 


५३९२. त्वं वर्मासि सप्रथः पुरोयोधश्च वृत्रहन्‌। त्वया प्रति ब्रुवे TIR 
6. Slayer of enemies, you, Indra, are our armour, Vast and our 
Preceder in battle: with you for my ally I defy (the foe). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


I EE करा 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

218 Rgveda Samhita 
w | | | EX रोद॑सी 

५३९३. महां उतासि यस्य तेऽनु स्वधावरी सह:। मम्नाते इन्द्र INI 


7. You verily are great; and heaven and earth abounding with 
food, respect, Indra, your strength. 


५३९४. d त्वां मरुत्वती परि भुवद्वाणी सयावरी। नक्ष॑माणा सह दयुभिः।।८॥। 


8. May the praises of thine adorers, accompanying you 


(wherever you goest), such as you are, and spreading around with 
radiance, reach you. 


५३९५. ऊर्ध्वासस्त्वान्वन्दवो भुवन्दस्ममुप द्यविं। सं तें नमन्त कृष्टय॑ः।।९।। 


9. The ascending libations proceed, Indra, to you, abiding in 
heaven, of goodly aspect: men bow in reverence before you. 


५३९६. प्र वों महे मंहिवृधे भरध्वं प्रचेतसे प्र सुमतिं कृणुध्वम्‌। 
विश॑ः पूर्वी: प्र च॑रा चर्षणिप्राः।।१०॥। 


10. Bring (libations) to the great (Indra), the giver of great 
(wealth): offer praise to the wise /ndra: fulfiller (of the desires) of 


men, come to the people offering many (oblations). 
Samaveda, 328, 1793. 


५३९७. उरुव्यचसे महिनें सुवृक्तिमिन्द्राय web जनयन्त विप्रा:। 
तस्य॑ व्रतानि न मिनन्ति id: ties 11 
11. The sages engender sacred praise and (sacrificial) food for 


| the wide-pervading, mighty Indra: the prudent impede not his 
| functions. 


५३९८. v वाणीरनुत्तमन्युमेव सत्रा राजानं दधिरे सहध्यै। 
हर्यश्वाय बर्हया समापीन्‌।।१२॥ 


2. Praises truly enable the universal monarch, Indra, whose 
wrath is irresistible, to overcome (his foes): urge your kinsmen, 
(worshippers, to glorify) the lord of bay steeds. 


[सूक्त ३२] 
क्रिषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि, २६ पूर्वार्ध ऋचा वसिष्ठ अथवा शक्ति वासिष्ठ। 
देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती), 


३ द्विपदा विराट] 
५३९९. मो घु त्वां वाघतंश्चनारे अस्मन्नि रीरमन्‌। 


आरात्ताच्चित्‌ सधमाद न आ गंहीह वा सन्नुप॑ aig N 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


` 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 32 219 

1. Let not, Indra, (other) worshippers detain you far from us: 
= from whatever distance to our assembly: present at this 
ceremony, hear our (prayers). 

3 [| ` धौ आसते 
५४००. इमे हि ते ब्रह्मकृतः सुते सचा मधौ न मक्ष आसते। 
इन्द्रे कार्म जरितारों वसूयवो रथे न पादमा दंधु:॥२॥ 

2. When the libation is effused for you, these offerers of 
sacrifice swarm like flies round honey: the pious praisers, desiring 
riches, fix their hope upon /ndra, like a foot upon a chariot. 
(Samaveda, 1676). 

५४०१. रायस्कामो वज्रहस्तं सुदक्षिणं पुत्रो न पितर हुवे॥३।। 

3. Desirous of riches, I call upon the benevolent wielder of the 

thunderbolt, as a son upon a father. 
५४०२. इम इन्द्राय सुन्विरे सोमांसो दध्यांशिरः। 
ताँ आ मदांय वज्रहस्त पीतये हरिभ्यां याह्योक आ॥४।। 

4. These Soma Juices, mixed with curds, are poured out to 
Indra: come, wielder of the thunderbolt, with your horses of our 
dwelling, to drink there for (thine) exhilaration (Samaveda, 293.) 

० 1 
५४०३. श्रवच्छुत्कर्ण ईयते agai नू fus मर्धिषद्‌ गिर: | 
= [E x s 1 
सद्यश्चिद्यः सहस्राणि शता ददन्नकिर्दित्सन्तमा मिनत्‌।॥५॥। 

5. May Indra, whose ear is ready to hear, listen to the suppliant 
for riches, and never disappoint our prayers: he who is the giver of 
hundreds and thousands: may no one ever hinder him when willing 
to give. 

५४०४. स वीरो अप्रतिष्कुत इन्द्रेण शूशुवे नृर्भिः। 
यस्तै गभीरा सर्वनानि वृत्रहन्त्सुनोत्या च धा्वति॥६॥ 
6. Slayer of Vrtra, the hero who offers sacrifices to you, who 


eagerly approaches you (with praises), he, (protected) by Indra, is 
unresisted (by any one), and is honoured by men. 
५४०५, भवा वरूथं मघवन्मघोनां यत्समजासि शर्धतः। 

वि त्वांहतस्य वेद॑नं भजेमह्या दूणाशों भरा गर्यम्‌।॥७।। 
Š 7. Be a defence, Maghavan, to the wealthy (offerers in 
3 lations), for you are the discomfiter of (our) adversaries: may we 
~ivide the spoil of the enemy slain by you do you, who are 


Indestructible, bring it to our dwelling. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

220 Rgveda Samhita 
वज्रिणे 
५४०६. सुनोतां सोमपान्ने सोममिन्द्राय वज्जिणे। 

पच॑ता पक्तीरव॑से कृणुध्वमित्पृणन्नित्पृणते मर्यः।।८।। 

8. Pour out the libation to Indra, the thunderer, the drinker of 

the Soma: prepare the baked (cakes) to satisfy him: do (what is 

agreeable to him), for he bestows happiness on (the worshipper) 


who pleases him. 
Samaveda, 285. 


I 1 B आतुजे 
५४०७, मा Sua सोमिनो दक्ष॑ता महे कृणुध्वं राय आतुजे। 
1 N 1 mac 
तरणिरिज्जयति क्षेति पुष्य॑ति न देवास: कवत्लवे।।९।। 
j 9. Offerers of the libation, do not hesitate: be active: sacrifice 
to the mighty benefactor for the sake of riches: the assiduous 
worshipper conquers (his enemies), dwells in a habitation, and 
prospers: the gods favour not the imperfect rite. 

The Gods Favour not the Imperfect Rite— Na devasah karatnave: 
karatnuh is explained Kutsita kriya, bad or defective act of religion: the 


Scholiast seems to render it men do not become gods by such means, 
devd na bhavanti, 


ae ५४०८. नर्किः सुदासो रथं पर्यास न रीरमत्‌। 
इन्द्रो यस्याविता यस्य॑ मरुतो गमत्स गोम॑ति व्रजे।।१०।। 
10. No one overturns, no one arrests the chariot of the liberal 


| sacrificer: he, of whom /ndra is the protector, of whom the Maruts 
(are the defenders), will walk in pastures filled with cattle. 


| ५४०९. THER वाजयन्निन्द्र मर्त्यो यस्य त्वम॑विता भुव:। 

| 1. L E. e F 

| अस्माक बोध्यविता रथानामस्माकं शूर नृणाम्‌।।११।। 
$ At Let the man of whom you, Indra, are the protector, 
invigorating (you with praise), enjoy (abundant) food: be the 
preserver, hero, of our chariots, (the preserver) of our people. 


Be the Preserver— Bodhi avitd: the Scholiast makes bodhi the 
second person singular imperative of bhu for bhava, b being substituted 


| for bh. 
५४१०. उदिन्वस्य रिच्यतँञ्शो धनं न जिग्युष:। 
य इन्द्र हरिवान्न दभन्ति d रिपो दक्ष॑ दधाति सोमिनि॥॥१२॥ 


_ 12. Verily (Indra's) share (of the Soma) exceeds (that of other 
deities) like the wealth of the victorious: enemies overcome not 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


j Mandala 7, Sūkta 32 2 


= who is the lord of bay steeds, who gives strength to the 
offerer of the libation. 


५४११. मन्त्रमखर्वं सुधितं सुपेश॑सं wu यज्ञियष्वा। 


f 
s पूर्वीश्चन प्रसितयस्तरन्ति तं य इन्द्रे कर्मणा RIR 
) 13. Address (to Indra), amongst the gods, the ample, well- 
uttered, and graceful prayer: many bonds entangle not him who, by 
his devotion, abides in /ndra. 
५४१२. कस्तमिन्द्र त्वाव॑सुमा मत्याँ दधर्षति। 
श्रद्धा इत्ते मघवन्पायें दिवि वाजी वाजं सिषासति।।१४।। 
9 14. What mortal, /ndra, injures him who has you for his 
S support ? He who offers you (sacrificial) food, Maghavan, with 
d faith, he obtains food on the day of the libation. 

Obtains food on the Day of the Libation— Parye divi vaji vajam, 
2: sisdsati, sautye ahani sa havisman annam sevate is the explanation of 
e Sàyana. 

), ५४१३. मघोन॑ः स्म वृत्रहत्येषु चोदय ये ददति प्रिया वर्सु। 
तव प्रणीती हर्यश्च सूरिभिर्विश्वा तरेम दुरिता।।१५॥ 

15. Animate (those men) for the destruction of their foes, who 

offer treasures which are dear to you, the abounder in wealth: may 
il we, lord of bay steeds, along with (your) worshippers, pass over all 
s difficulties by your guidance. 

५४१४. तवेदिन्द्रावमं वसु त्वं पुष्यसि मध्यमम्‌। 

सत्रा विश्व॑स्य परमस्य॑ राजसि नकिष्टवा गोषु वृण्वते।।१६।। 
à 16. Thine, /ndra, is the vast valuable wealth: you cherish the 

" middling: you rule over all that which is the most precious: no one 
e Opposes you in (the recovering of the) cattle. 

No one opposes you in the recovering of the cattle— Na kis tva 
® 80su vrinvate: the Scholiast explains it, gosu nimittesu ke api tvàm na 
d Yárayanti, none resist or oppose you on account of the cows. 

१४१५. त्वं विश्व॑स्य धनदा असि श्रुतो य ई भर्वन्त्याजय:। 
तवायं fad: पुरुहूत पार्थिवोऽवस्यर्नामं भिक्षते॥१७।॥ 
17. You are celebrated as the giver of wealth to all even where 
T attles Occur: all the people of the earth-desirous of protection, 
t Solicit of you, the invoked of many. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


222 Rgveda Samhita 


Art Celebrated as the giver of Wealth Etc.— Dhanada asi sruto ye 
im bhavantyajayah: The Scholiast explains the last, ye ete djayo yuddhani 
bhavanti tesu api dhanadáh srutosi. 


५४१६. यदिंन्द्र यार्वतस्त्वमेतावंदहमीशीय। 
स्तोतारमिद्दिधिषेय रदावसो न पापत्वायं रासीय।।१८॥। 


18. If I were lord of as much (affluence) as you are, Indra, 
then might I support (your) worshippers, dispenser of wealth, and 
not squander it upon wickedness. 

Saámaveda, 310, 1796. 


५४१७. शिक्षेयमिन्महयते RARA राय आ कुँहचिद्विदे। 
नहि त्वदन्यन्म॑घवन्न आप्यं वस्यो अस्ति पिता चन।।१९॥। 


19. May I daily distribute wealth to the venerable wherever 
abiding: no other, Maghavan, than you is to be sought by us: (no 
other is to us) a most excellent protector. 

Sdmaveda, 1797. 


५४१८. तरणिरित्सिषासति वाजं पुर॑न्ध्या युजा। 
आ व v पुरुहूतं न॑मे गिरा नेमिं तष्टेव सुदूवम्‌।।२०।। 
20. The prompt cffers (of praise), with solemn rites combined, 


acquires food: I bend down with adoration to you, Indra, the 


invoked of many, as a carpenter bends the wooden circumference 
of the wheel. 


Samaveda 238, 867. 
५४१९. न दुष्टुती med विन्दते वसु न स्रेध॑न्तं रयिर्मेशत्‌। 
सुशक्तिरिन्मंधवन्तुभ्यं मावते देष्णं यत्पायें दिवि।।२१॥। 


21. A man acquires not wealth by unbecoming praise: 
affluence devolves not upon one obstructing (sacrifice): in you, 


Maghavan, is the power whereby bounty (may be shown) to such 
as Tam on the day of libation. 


Sdmaveda, 868. 
५४२०. अभि त्वां शूर नोनुमोऽदुंग्धाइव धेनव॑:। 


ईशानमस्य जगत: स्वर्दुशमीशानमिन्द्र T: IRR 


22. We glorify you, hero, (Indra), the lord of all movable and 
stationary things, the beholder of the universe, with ladles filled 
with Soma), like (the udders of) unmilked kine. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 32 223 

Samaveda, 233, 680. Yajurveda, 27. 35. 

z Udders of Unmilked Kine— Adugdha iva dhenavo occurs in 
the first line, and Mahidhara, Yajus 27. 36, explains it, we praise you as 
unmilked kine praise their calves, which is not very intelligible: in order 
to make sense of it, Sayana inserts, the fullness of ladles, yathà dhenavah 
ksirapür-nodhastvena vartante tad vat somapürnacamastvena vartamdnd 
vayam bhrsam abhis—umah, as the cows remain with the state of the 
udders being full of milk, so we, abiding with the state of the ladle full of. 


Soma, glorify you. 
५४२१. न त्वावाँ अन्यो दिव्यो न पार्थिवो न जातो न जनिष्यते। 
अश्वायन्तों मघवन्निन्द्र वाजिनों गव्यन्तस्त्वा हवामहे।॥२३॥ 

23. No other such as you are, celestial or terrestrial, has been 
or will be born: desirous of horses, of food, of cattle affluent Indra, 
we invoke you. 

५४२२. अभी षतस्तदा Su ज्यायः कर्नीयस:। 
पुरूवसुर्हि मंघवन्त्सनादसि भरेभरे च gA: IRS II 

24. Elder Indra, bring that (wealth to me), being the junior, 
for, Maghavan, you hast form the beginning been possessed of 
infinite treasure, and are to be adored at repeated sacrifices. 

Sámaveda, 680; Yajurveda. 27. 36. 

५४२३. परां णुदस्व मघवज्नमित्रान्त्सुवेदा नो वसू कृधि। 


अस्मार्क बोध्यविता महाधने भवां वृधः सखौनाम्‌।॥२५।॥ 


25. Drive away, Maghavan, our enemies: render riches easy of 
acquisition: be our preserver in war: be the augmenter of (the 
prosperity) of (your) friends.. 


५४२४. इन्द्र क्रतुं न आ भर पिता पुत्रेभ्यो यर्था। 
शिक्षा णो अस्मिन्पुरुहुत याम॑नि जीवा ज्योतिरशीमहि LRS 1I 

26. Bring to us, Indra, wisdom, as a father (gives knowledge) 
to his sons: bestow wealth upon us on this occasion, you the 
invoked of many, so that we, living at the solemnity may (long) 
enjoy the light (of existence). 

Samaveda, 259, 1456. 
५४२५. मा नो अज्ञांता वृजनां gued माशिवासो अव॑ क्रमुः। 


त्वयां वयं प्रवतः शश्व॑तीरपोडतिं शूर तरामसि।२७॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
224 Rgveda Samhita 


27. Let no unknown, wicked, malevolent, malignant (enemies) 
overpower us: may We, protected by you, cross over many waters. 

Samaveda, 1457. 

This, although in some places rather obscure, is upon the whole 
intelligible enough, and seems to be a popular Sükta; thirteen of the 
stanzas have been adopted into the Samaveda, some of them twice over. 


[सूक्त-३३] 


[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि, १०-१४ वसिष्ठ पुत्रगण। देवता- १-९ वसिष्ठ 
पुत्रगण, १०-४४ वसिष्ठ गायत्री, 90-921 छन्द- AY] 


५४२६. श्वित्यञ्चो मा दक्षिणतस्क॑पर्दा धियंजिन्वासो अभि हि प्रमन्दुः। 
उत्तिष्ठन्वोचे परि बहिंषो नूत्न में दूरादवितवे वसिष्ठा:।॥१।॥। 


1. The white-complexioned accomplishers of holy ceremonies, 
wearing the lock of hair on the right side, have afforded me 
delight, when, rising up I call the leaders (of rites) to the sacred 
grass: the Vasisthas, (my sons) should never be far from me. 

White-Complexioned Accomplishers of Holy Ceremonies— The 
text has Svity, icah, which Sayana explains Svetavarnah, white-coloured: 
it is a curious epithet as applied to the Vasisthas. 

Wearing the Lock of Hair on the Right Side— Daksinatas 
kapardah: kaparda is the chuda or single lock of hair left on the top of 
the head at tonsure, which, according to the Scholiast, it is characteristic 


of the Vasisthas to wear on the right of the crown of the head, daksine 
Siraso bháge 


५४२७. दूरादिन्द्रेमनयन्ना सुतेन तिरो वैशन्तमति पान्तमुग्रम्‌। 


1 
पाशद्युम्नस्य वायतस्य सोमात्सुतादिन्द्रो$वृणीता वसिष्ठान्‌।।२।॥। 

2. Disgracing (Pasadyumna), they brought from afar the fierce 
Indra, when drinking the ladle of Soma at his sacrifice, to (receive) 
the libation (of Suddsa): Indra hastened from the effused Soma of 
Pasadyumna, the son of Vayata, to the Vasisthas. 

They Brought ..Indra— This is explained by a legend which 
relates, that when the sons of Vasistha had undertaken a Soma sacrifice to 
Indra on behalf of Sudas, they found that he was present at a similar 
solemnity instituted by the Raja Pasadyumna, the son of Vayata, on 


which they abused the Raja, broke off his sacrifice, and, by their mantras, 
compelled Indra to come to that of their patrons. 


५४२८. Wad कं सिन्धुमेभिस्ततारेवेन्नु क॑ भेदमेभिर्जघान। 
एवेन्नु कंदाशराज्ञे सुदास प्रावदिन्द्रो ब्रह्म॑णा वो वसिष्ठाः।।३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri | 
Mandala 7, 50119 33 225 | 


3. In the same manner was he, (Suddsa) enabled by them 
di to cross the Sindhu river: in the same manner, through them 
he easily slow his foe: so in like manner, Vasisthas, through your 
prayers, did Indra defend Sudasa in the war with the ten kings. 

He Easily Slow his Foe— Bhedam jaghana: Bheda may be a proper 
name. 

In the War with the Ten Kings— Dasarájne is explained Dasabhi 
rájabhih saha yuddhe: the same war is subsequently alluded to: see Sukta 
83 of this Mandala. 

Alita, SET | || ; 1 fim 
५४२९. जुष्टी नरो ब्रह्मणा वः पितृणामक्षमव्ययं न किला रिषाथ। 
यच्छक्वरीषु बृहता रवेणेन्द्रे शुष्ममदधाता वसिष्ठाः।४।। 

4. By your prayers, leaders (of rites), is effected the 
gratification of your progenitors: I have set in motion the axle (of 
the chariot): be not you inert, for by your sacred metres, Vasisthas, 
(chaunted) with a loud voice, you sustain vigour in Indra. 

| Of Your Progenitors— Pitrndm, in the gen., plur., may be used only 
honorifically, implying father, i.e., Vasistha. 

I have Set in Motion the Axle of the Chariot— Aksam avyayam, 
the Scholiast interprets rathasya aksam avyaydmi, cdlayami, I cause to 
move the axle of the car, ascribing the words to Vasistha, as announcing 
his intention to return to his hermitage. 


द्यामिवेचृष्णजो' 1 
५४३०. उद्‌ द्यामिवेतृष्णजो नाथितासो<दीधयुर्दाशराज्ञे वृतास:। 
वसिष्ठस्य स्तुवत इन्द्रो अश्रोदुरुं तृत्सुभ्यो अकृणोदु APAIN 
5. Suffering from thirst, soliciting (rain), supported (by the 
Trtsus) in the war with the ten Rajás, (the Vasisthas) made Indra 


radiant as the sun: /ndra heard (the praises) of Vasistha glorifying 
him, and bestowed a spacious region on the 7rtsus. 
५४३१. दण्डाइवेद्रोअज॑नास आसन्परिंच्छित्रा भरता अर्भकासः! 

अभ॑वच्च पुरएता वर्सिष्ठ आदितुत्सूनां विशों AATA LR 

6. The Bharatas, inferior (to their foes), were shorn (of their 
Possessions), like the staves for driving cattle, (stripped of their 
leaves and branches): but Vasistha became their family priest, and 
the people of the Trtsus prospered. 

The People of the 7rtsus— The Trtsus are the same as the Bharatas: 
according to the Mahabharata, Samvarana, the son of Rksa, the fourth in 
descent from Bharata the son of Dusyanta, was driven from his kingdom 
by the Pancalas, and obliged to take refuge with his tribe amongst the 
क on the Sindhu until Vasistha came to them, and consented to be 

© Raja's Purohit, when they recovered their territory. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


226 Rgveda Samhita 
भुर्वनेषु रेतस्तिस्र प्रजा ज्योतिरग्रा | 
५४३२. तरयः कृण्वन्ति भुवनेषु : प्रजा आर्या :। 
l स॒वाँ E | विदुर्वसिष्ठा 
wal घर्मास उषसं सचन्ते सर्वा sat अनुं विदुर्वसिष्ठा: 11911 

7. Three shed moisture upon the regions, three are their 
glorious progeny, of which the chief is night: three communicators 
of warmth accompany the dawn: verily the Vasisthas understand 
all these. i 

Three Shed Moisture—  Sàyana quotes Sdtydyana for the 
explanation of this verse: the three who send rain on the three regions of 
earth, mid-air, and heaven, are Agni, Vayu, and Aditya, and they also 


diffuse warmth: their offspring are the Vasus the Rudras, the Adityas, the 
latter of whom are the same with Jyotis light. 


५४३३. सूर्यस्येव वक्षथो ज्योतिरेषां समुद्रस्येव महिमा गंभीर:। 
वात॑स्येव प्रजवो नान्येन स्तोमों वसिष्ठा अन्वेतवे वः।।८।। 


8. The glory of these Vasisthas is like the splendour of the sun: | 
their greatness as profound as (the depth of) the ocean: your praise, 


Vasisthas, has the velocity of the wind: by no other can it be 
surpassed. 


५४३४. त इन्निण्यं हृदयस्य प्रकेतैः सहस्रवल्शमभि सं चरन्ति। 
3 । परिधिं 
यमेन॑ ततं परिधिं वयन्तोऽप्सरस उप॑ सेदुर्वसिष्ठाः ।।९।। 

9. By the wisdom seated in the heart the Vasisthas traverse the 
hidden thousand branched world, and the Apsarasas sit down 
wearing the vesture spread out by Yama. 

The Hidden Thousand-Branched World— Ninyam sahasravalsam 
abhisaricaranti, they completely go over the hidden, tirohitam, Or 
durjnanam, ignorant, sahasra valsam, thousand-branched, that is, 
sansáram, the revolving world of various living beings, or the succession 
of many births: an allusion is intended, the Scholiast appears to intimate, 
to the repeated births of Vasistha: the plural here being put for the 
singular, he having been first one of the Prajápatis, or mind-born sons of 
Brahma, and, secondly, one of the sons of Urvasi: or it may perhaps 
intend, à by the expression hrdayasya praketaih prajñānaih, internal 
| convictions or knowledge, to imply the detachment of Vasistha or his 
li sons from the world. z 
t3 The Apsarasas sit Down, Wearing the Vesture Spread out by 
Yama— Yamena tatam paridhim vayanto apsarasa upasedur vasisthdh is 
somewhat dark: vivsisthah has no business in this part of the construction, 
and must be connected with the first word in the verse, te vasisthah, those 


Vasisthas or that Vasistha: yamena is explained sarvaniyantra, by the 
restrainer or regulator of all: kdrandtmand, identical with cause, that is, by 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


BOUT ccc ne a 70.7 


<: 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
| Mandala 7, Sükta 33 227 


acts, as the causes of vital condition: the garb paridhim, vastram, spread, 
2 by him, is the revolution of life and death: janmddipravahah, 
weaving, vayantah, as the masc, plural, should agree with vasisthah, but 
Sayana connects it with apsarasah, the nymphs, or, more properly, the 


r nymph Urvasi, who sat down or approached in the capacity of a mother, 
; Jananitvena, wearing that vesture which he was destined by former acts 
| to wear: the general purpose is not doubtful, but it is obscurely expressed. 


५४३५. विद्युतो ज्योतिः परि सञ्जिहान मित्रावरुणा यदर्पश्यतां त्वा। 
तत्ते जन्मोतैकं वसिष्ठागस्त्यो यत्त्वां विश आजभार।१०॥। 

10. When Mitra and Varuna be held you, Vasistha, quitting the 
| lustre of the lightning (for a different form), then one of your 
births (took place), inasmuch as Agastya bore you from your 
(former) abode. 

Inasmuch as Agastya Bore you from your Former Abode— 

| Agastyo yat tva visa ajabhara is interpreted yada purvavasthánát tvam 

) djahdra, when Agastya took you from the former condition, the only 

| interpretation of which is mitrdvarunau-avam janayisydva, we two Mitra 

) and Varuna, will beget; or avábhyam ayam jáyeta iti samakalpatàm the 

4 two divinities determined this Vasistha shall be begotten by us: but what 
Agastya has to do with this is left unexplained. 


५४३६. उतासिं मैत्रावरुणो व॑सिष्ठोर्वश्यां ब्रह्मन्मनसो5धिं जातः। 
द्रप्सं स्कन्नं ब्रह्म॑णा दैव्येन fad देवा: पुष्करे त्वाददन्त 1११ li 


KEURNA iem) = 


2 ll. Verily, Vasistha you are the son of Mitra and Varuna, 

1 born, Brahmá, of the will of Urvast, after the seminal effusion: all 
the gods have sustained you, (endowed) with celestial and Vedic 

7 vigour in the lake. 

r Born of the will of Urvasi— The Pauranik version, which here 

» appears to be of Vaidika origin is well known: according to the Scholiast, 

n Urvasi, on seeing the birth of the Rsi, said to herself, let this be my son. 

^s Endowed with Celestial and Vedic Vigour— Brahmaná daivyena, 

e according to the Scholiast, requires the addition of yuktam, joined with, as 


the epithet of tvam, devasambandhina yedarasinahambhuva yuktam. Pus- 


i kara may meant the kumbha, or pitcher, used at sacrifice, or the 
s vasativara, the pool of water prepared for the same, but Sayana proceeds 
with a legend which seems intended to attach its usual sense to puskara, 
y the vessel running over, some contents fell upon the earth, and from them 
s Vasistha was bom: Agastya was bom of those in the vessel: the 
b overflowing fluid being collected together, Vasistha remained in the lake, 
i fato apsu grhyamanasu vasisthah puskare sthitah: Puskara is also the 
e name of the lake in Ajmer; but, according to the Padma Purána, it was 
y the site of the hermitage of Agastya, not of Vasistha: Srsti Khanda, c. 22. 


७८-७0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
228 Rgveda Samhita 


५४३७. स प्रकेत उभयस्य प्रविद्वान्त्सह्दान उत वा सदान:। 


यमेन॑ ततं प॑रिधिं वयिष्यन्नप्सरसः Of जज्ञे वसिंष्ठः।।१२।। 


| 12. He, the sage, cognizant of both worlds, Was the donor of 
| thousands: he was verily donation: wearing the vesture spread by 
Yama, Vasiştha was born of the Apsaras. 
| ५४३८. सत्रे ह॑ जाताविषिता नमोभिः कुम्भे ud: सिषिचतुः समानम्‌। 
H wal ह मान उर्दियाय मध्यात्ततो जातमूर्षिमाहर्वसि्ठम्‌।।१३।। 
| 13. Consecrated for the sacrifice, propitiated by praises, they, 
Mitra and Varuna, poured a common effusion into the water-jar, 
from the midst of which Mana uprose, and from which also, they 
say, Vasistha was born. 
Consecrated for the Sacrifice— Satre jàtau is explained yage 
Hi diksitau, prepared by preliminary purifications for the ceremony. 
| Mina— Mana is said to be a name of Agastya with reference to his 
| being of the measure of a span at his birth: as by the text udiydya tato 
Agastyah Samyamdtro mahitapah, mdnena sammito yasmdd mdnya 
। ihocyate, thence arose the great ascetic Agastya of the measure of a span, 
| as measured by a measure, (mana): he is thence called upon earth Manya: 
। Agastya is not reckoned amongst the Prajdpatis: According to one legend 
m- he was, in a preceding birth, the son of Pulastya; but he is evidently the 
! creation of a later date than Vasistha and the other primary Rsis, although 


of great and early celebrity, as recorded in both the Ramayana and 
Mahabharata 


| ५४३९. उक्थभृतं सामभृतं बिभर्ति ग्रावाणं बिभ्रत्र वंदात्यग्रे। 
| उपैनमाध्वं सुमनस्यमाना आ di गच्छाति प्रतृदो वर्सिष्ठः।।१४॥। 


| À 14. Pratrts Agastya comes to you; welcome him with devoted 
| minds, and he is the foremost station directs the reciter of the 


prayer, the chaunter of the hymn, the grinder of the stone, and 
repeats (what is to be repeated) 
Pratrts—The same as the Trtsus 


| In the Foremost Station—Agre, in front, ie., as their Purohit. 


ANUVAKA III 
। [सूक्त-३४] 


[ऋषि- वसिष मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विश्वेदेवा, १६ अहि, १७ अहिर्बुध्न्य। 
| छन्द- द्विपदा विराट्‌ २२-२५ त्रिष्टुप्‌] 


४४०. प्र शुक्रैतु देवी मनीषा अस्मत्सुतष्टो रथो न वाजी॥१ 1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


SELES IO eMe o coU a ee — — 


ooo oo 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Mandala 7, Sükta 34 229 
1. May pure and divine praise proceed from us (to the gods) 
F a swift well-constructed chariot. 


५४४१. विदुः पृथिव्या दिवो जनित्रै शृण्वन्त्यापो अध क्षरन्ती:11२।| 


2. The flowing waters having known the origin of earth and 
heaven: may they now hear (our praises). 

Waters have Known the Origin of Earth and Eaven—An allusion 
perhaps to the subsequently received cosmogony, as in Mánu, that water 
was the first of created things. 


५४४२. आपश्चिदस्मै पिन्व॑न्त पृथ्वीवृत्रिषु शूर मंस॑न्त उग्रा:11३॥ 

3. The vast waters offer nourishment to /ndra: fierce warriors. 
(combating) with foes, glorify him. 
५४४३. आ धूर्ष्वस्मै दधाताश्वानिन्द्रो न वज्री हिरण्यबाहु:11४ || 

4. Yoke for him the horses of his chariot, the Indra is the 

? wielder of the thunderbolt, the golden-armed. 

५४४४. अभि प्र स्थाताहेव यज्ञं यातेव पत्मन्त्मना हिनोत।५।। 

5. Proceed to the sacrifice like one who goes along the road; 
proceed of your own accord. 
५४४५. त्मनां समत्सु हिनोतं यज्ञं दधात केतुं जनाय वीरम्‌।॥६॥॥ 

6. Go of your own accord to battle: celebrate the significant 
and expiatory sacrifice for (the good of) mankind. 
५४४६. उदस्य शुप्माद्धानुर्वार्त बिभर्ति भारं पृथिवी न भूम॑।७।। 

7. From the force of this (sacrifice) the sun rises: it sustains the 
burden (of the world) as (earth) supports many (beings). 
५४४७. ह्वयामि देवाँ अयातुरग्ने साधत्रतेन धियं दधामि।८।। 

. 8. I invoke the gods, Agni, propitiating them by an inoffensive 

rite, I celebrate a pious act. 

By an Inoffensive Rite Etc.— Ayatuh sddhanrtena, the Scholiast 
Puts aydtuh into the instrumental case, ayátuna, and makes it the epithet 
of ritena, ahinsakena, yajfena, intending perhaps one without animal 


Victims: if taken as it stands, as the gen. of Aydiri, the meaning would be 
much the same by the rite of one not sacrificing victims. 


५४४८. अभि वो देवी धियँ दधिध्वं प्र वो देवत्रा वार्च कृणुध्वम्‌॥९ I 
9. Offer, (worshippers) your heavenly worship: earnestly 
address you praises to the gods. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


230 Rgveda Samhita 
५४४९. आ च॑ष्ट आसां पाथों नदीनां वरुण उग्रः सहस्रचक्षाः।।१०॥ 

10. The fierce Varuna, the thousand-eyes, contemplates the 
water of these rivers. 
५४५०. राजा राष्ट्रानां पेशों नदीनामर्नुत्तमस्मै क्षत्र विश्वायुं।॥११॥। 

11. He is the king of kings: the beauty of the rivers his all- 
pervading strength is irresistible. 
५४५१. अविष्टो अस्मान्विश्वासु विक्ष्वद्युं कृणोत शंसं निनित्सोः।।१२॥। 

12. Protect us, gods, among all people: render extinct the 
calumny of the malevolent. 
५४५२. व्येतु दिद्युद्‌ द्विषामशेवा युयोत विष्वग्र्पस्तनूर्नाम्‌।।१३ ।। 


13. May the blazing (weapons) of foes pass by innocuous: 
separate, (gods), universally (from us) the sin of our bodies. 


५४५३. अवीत्रो अग्निहव्यान्नमोभिः प्रेष्टो अस्मा अधायि स्तोम॑:।।१४।। 


14. May Agni, the feeder on oblations, propitiated by our 
homage, protect us: to him has our praise been addressed. 


५४५४. सजूर्देवेभिरपां नपातं सखायं कृध्वं शिवो नों अस्तु।।१५।। 


15. Glorify along with the gods our friend, the grand son of the 
waters: may he be propitious to us. 


५४५५. अब्नामुक्थेरहिं गृणीषे बुध्ने नदीनां रज॑ःसु षीर्दन्‌।॥१६।। 


16. 1 glorify with hymns the disperser of the clouds in the 
firmament: the water-born, sitting amongst the waters of the rivers. 

The Disperser of the Glouds in the Firmament— Ahim grnise 
budhne, dividing two words usually put together. Ahirbudhna: Sayana 
explains the former, maghanamahantaram, the latter, upon the authority 
of Yaska, the firmament, or the region in which the waters of rains are 
bound or detained, baddhd asmin dhrta dpa viti vyutpatteh: Nir. x. 44: in 
the next stanza the words are reunited as a name of Agni. 


५४५६. मा नोऽहिुध््यों RÀ धान्मा यज्ञो अंस्य खिधदृतायोः।।१७।। 


17८ Let not Ahirbudhnya be disposed to work us harm: let not 
the sacrifice of the worshipper be disregarded. 


५४५७. उत न॑ एषु नृषु शरवो धु: प्र राये यन्तु शर्थन्तो am: NRC 


18. May (the gods) bestow food upon our people let foes 
contending for our riches perish. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 34 231 


० Loe 1 महासेनासो aan 
E तपन्ति शत्रुं स्वशर्ण भूमा महासेनासो अमेभिरेषाम्‌।॥१९ | 
19. Leaders of great armies, by the power of these (divinities), 
consume their foes, as the sun (scorches) the regions. 
Of These Divinities— Esam, of these: the Scholiast supplies either 
Davanam or Marutam, of these Maruts. 


पत्नीर्गमन्त्यच्छा 1 सुपाणिर्दधातु 
५४५९. आ यन्नः पलीर्गमन्त्यच्छा त्वष्टा सुपाणिर्दधातु वीरान्‌॥२०॥ 

20. When the wives (of the gods) come before us, may the 
dextrous Tvastá grant us male progeny. 

Wives of the Gods— The addition of the comment, devdnam, seems 
somewhat superfluous: human wives would have been more in keeping 
with the prayer. 

hr. ES ` अरम॑तिर्वसूयु 
५४६०. प्रतिं नः स्तोमं त्वष्टा जुषेत स्यादस्मे अरम॑तिर्वसूयु:॥२१॥ 

21. May Tvastá be propitiated by this our praise: may he who 

is of comprehensive understanding be inclined to give us wealth. 


५४६१. ता नों रासत्रातिषाचो वसून्या रोद॑सी वरुणानी शुणोतु। 
वरूत्रीभिः सुशरणो नों अस्तु त्वष्टा सुदत्रो वि द॑धातु T: 1RR 
22. May they who are the givers of gifts bestow upon us the 
treasure (we desire) : may Rodasi and Varunam hear (our 


supplications): may the generous Tvasta together with these (our) 
protectresses, he our sure refuge: may be give us riches. 


५४६२. तन्नो राय: पर्वतास्तन्न आपस्तद्रातिषाच ओषधीरुत द्यौ:। 
वनस्पतिभिः पृथिवी स॒जोषा उभे रोद॑सी परिं पासतो न:।२३।। 
23. May the mountains, the waters, the liberal (wives of the 
gods), the plants, also the heaven and the earth, consentient with 


the forest lords and both the heaven and earth, preserve for us 


those (coveted) riches. : 
The Liberal Wives of the Gods— The wives of the gods, according 
to Sàyana. 


५४६३. अनु तदुर्वी रोद॑सी जिहातामनु gal वरुण इन्द्रसखा। 
अनु विशवे मरुतो ये सहासों रायः स्यांम धरुणँ धियध्यें1॥२४॥ 
T 24. Let the vast heaven and earth consent let the brilliant 
Varuna, of whom Indra is the friend consent: let all the victorious 


Maruts consent that we may be a receptacle for the retention of 
riches. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i 
I 
| 
| 
1 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


232 Rgveda Samhita 
aid धीर्व॑निनों जुषन्त 
५४६४. तत्र इन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निराप ओषधीर्वनिनो | 
" 5; F E m > T iP | 
शर्मन्त्स्याम मरुतामुपस्थे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः॥।२५॥। 

25. May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, the waters the herbs, the 
trees, be pleased by our (praise): may we, (reclining) on the lap of 
the Maruts, enjoy felicity: and do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


Do you ever Cherish us with Blessings— The burden of many 
previous Süktas. 


[सूक्त-२५] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विश्वैदेवा। छन्द- A] 
५४६५. शं न॑ इन्द्राग्नी भवतामवोभिः शं न इन्द्रावरुणा रातह॑व्या। 
शमिन्द्रासोमा सुविताय शं योः शं न इन्द्रापूषणा वाज॑सातौ।।१।। 

1. May Indra and Agni be (with us) with their protections for 
our happiness: may Indra and Varuna, to whom oblation are 
offered, (be with us) for our happiness: may Indra and Soma be 
(with us) for our happiness, our prosperity, our good: may /ndra 


and Pusan be (with us) in battle for our triumph. 
Yajurveda, 36. 11. 


May Indra and Agni be with us with their protections for our 
Happiness— The construction of the leading phrase through thirteen 
stanzas is the same, Sama na bhavatam, sometimes slightly varied, 
literally may they tow be our happiness: the commentator explains sam by 


Santyai for our peace or happiness; but the bolder expression is probably 
the more correct. 


५४६६. शं नो भगः शमुं नः शंसो अस्तु शं नः पुर॑न्धिः शमु सन्तु राय॑ः। 
5 | t ७. E Fi L 
सं न॑ः सत्यस्य सुयम॑स्य शंसः शं नो अर्यमा पुरुजातो अंस्तु॥२॥ 
2. May Bhaga (promote) our happiness: may Sansa be our 
happiness: may Puraridhi be (with us for) our happiness: may 


riches be (a source of) happiness: may the benediction of the true 


and virtuous yield us happiness: may the variously-manifested 
Aryaman be (with us) for our felicity. 


Sansa— For Narasarisa. 


Purandhi— The possessor of much intelligence: see vol. II. 3976. 
ति 3l 
५४६७. शं नो धाता शमु धर्ता नो अस्तु शं न॑ उरूची भ॑वतु स्वधाभिः। 
रोद॑सी Ea देवानी E 
शं रोदसी बृहती शं नो अद्रिः शं नों देवानां सुहवानि सन्तु॥३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


-—-———————————————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 35 233 


F May the creator be to us for happiness: may the 

discriminator (between virtue and vice, Varuna), be (with us) for 
our happiness: may the wide earth (contribute) with sustenance to 
our happiness: may the vast heaven and earth be (to us for) 
happiness: may the mountains (yield) us happiness: may our pious 
invocations of the gods secure us happiness. 


५४६८. शं नों अग्नर्ज्योतिरनीको अस्तु शं नों मित्रावरुणावश्चिना शम्‌। 
शं न॑ः सुकृतां सुकृतानि सन्तु शं न॑ इषिरो अभि वातु वार्त:11४11 
4. May Agni, whose countenance is light, be (with us) for our 
happiness: may Mitra and Varuna, may the Asvins be (present) for 


our felicity: may the virtuous be (promotive of) our happiness: 
may the restless wind blow for our happiness. 


५४६९. शं नो द्यावापृथिवी पूर्वहूतौ शमन्तरिक्षं दृशये नो अस्तु। 
शं न ओष॑धीर्वनिनों भवन्तु शं नो रज॑सस्पतिंरस्तु जिष्णुः।५।। 
5. May heaven and earth, the first invoked, (promote) our 
happiness: may the firmament be happiness to our view: may the 


herbs, the trees, (yield) us happiness: may the victorious lord of the 
world, (Indra), be (favourable to) our felicity. 
५४७०. शं न इन्द्रो वसुभिर्देवो अस्तु शमादित्येभिर्वरुण: सुशंस:। 
शं नों रुद्रो रुद्रेभिर्जलाषः शं नस्त्वष्टा ग्नाभिरिह JAUR 
6. May the divine (Indra), with the Vasus, grant us happiness: 
may the justly-praised Varuna, with the Adityas, be (friendly to) 
our happiness: may the grief-assuaging Rudra, with the Rudras, be 


(for) our happiness: may Tvasfa, with the wives of the gods, be 
(with us) for our happiness, and hear us at this solemnity. 
५४७१. शं नः सोमो भवतु ब्रह्म शं नः शं नो ग्रावाणः शमुं सन्तु यज्ञा:। 
REE ea ie TAN y 5i वेदिं 
शं नः स्वरूणां मितयों भवन्तु शं न॑ः प्रस्व१: शम्वस्तु वेर्दिः।।७॥ 
7. May the Soma be (offered for) our happiness: may the 
prayer be (uttered for) our happiness: may the stones (grind the 
Soma), the sacrifice be (solemnized for) our happiness: may the 
measured lengths of the sacrificial posts be (conducive to) our 
felicity: may the sacred grass be (strewn) for our happiness: may 
the altar be (raised for) our happiness. 
५४७२. शं नः सूर्य उरुचक्षा उदेतु शं नश्चत॑स्रः प्रदिशों भवन्तु। 
: EMT TEM ET fl 1 
शं नः पर्वता ध्रुवयो भवन्तु श॑ नः सिन्धवः शर्मु Wem: iei 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
234 Rgveda Samhita 


8. May the wide-seeing sun rise (for) our happiness: may the 
four quarters of the horizon (exist for) our felicity: may the firm- 
set mountains be (for) our happiness: may the rivers, may the 
waters, be (diffused) for our happiness. 


५४७३. शं नो अदितिर्भवतु व्रतेभिः शं नों भवन्तु मरुत॑ः स्वर्काः। शं नो 
= EET Sn T = - 

विष्णु: शमुं पूषा नो अस्तु शं नों भवित्रं शम्वस्तु वायुः।।९॥ 
9. May Aditi, with holy observances, be (for) our happiness: 
may the glorified Maruts be (friendly to) our felicity: may Visnu, 


may Pusan, be (promoters of) our happiness: may the firmament 
be propitious to us: may Vayu (blow for) our happiness. 


५४७४. शं नों देवः संविता त्राय॑माणः शं नों भवन्तूषसो विभातीः। शं नं: 
पर्जन्यो भवतु प्रजाभ्यः शं नः क्षत्रस्य पतिरस्तु शम्भुः।।१०॥। 

10. May the divine preserving Savita be (radiant for) our 

happiness: may the opening dawns (break for) our happiness: may 


Parjanya be (the granter of happiness) to our posterity: may 


Shambhu, the lord of strength, be (the conferrer of) happiness upon 
us. 


Sambhu— Sambhu is here said to imply sukhasya bhavayita, the 
causer of the condition of pleasure: it is ordinarily a name of Siva. 


५४७५. शं नो देवा विश्वदेवा भवन्तु शं सर॑स्वती सह धीभिरस्तु। 
re g esi 
शमभिषाच: शमुं रातिषाचः शं नों दिव्याः पार्थिवाः शं नो 
अप्याः।।११॥। 


í 11. May the divine universal gods be (favourable) to our 
elicity; may Sarasvati, with holy rites, be happiness: may those 
who assist at sacrifices, those who are liberal of gifts. Be 


(conducive to) our happiness: may celestial, terrestrial and aquatic 
things be (subservient to) our happiness. 


« _l 5 
५४७६. शं नः सत्यस्य पतयो भवन्तु शं नो अर्व॑न्तः शमु सन्तु गाव॑:। 
a 1 | ne Ei "E 
शं न॑ ऋभवः सुकृतः सुहस्ताः शं नों भवन्तु पितरो FAIR 
12. May the lords of truth be (propitious to ) our happiness: 
may horses, may cattle, (contribute to) our happiness: may the 


virtuous, the dexterous Rbhus, be to us (for) felicity: may the 


progenitors be (Promoters of ) our happiness at the seasons of 
worship. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 36 235 
५ एकपाद्देवो 1 EOS fed E 
å शं नों अज एकपाद्देवो अस्तु शं ASRA: शं संमुद्रः। 
शं नों अपां नपात्पेरुरस्तु शं नः पृश्निर्भवतु देवगोपा।॥१३।। 

13. May the divine Aja-Ekapad be (favourable to) our 
happiness: may Ahirbudhnya, may the firmament, be (promotive 
of) our happiness: may the grandson of the waters, the protector, 
be (the securer of) our felicity: may Prishni, of whom the gods are 
the guardians, be to us (a granter of ) happiness. 

५४७८. आदित्या रुद्रा वस॑वो जुषन्तेदं ब्रह्म क्रियमाणं नरवीय:। 
शृण्वन्तु नो दिव्याः पार्थिवासो गोजांता उत ये यज्ञियांसः।।१४।। 

14. May the Adityas the Rudras, the Vasus, be gratified by this 
new and now repeated praise: may celestial and terrestrial 
(beings), the progeny of the cow, (Prsni), and those who were 
entitled to worship, hear our (invocations). 

५४७९. ये देवानाँ यज्ञियां यज्ञियानां मनोर्यजत्रा अमृतां ऋतज्ञा:। 
ते नों रासन्तामुरुगायमद्य यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11१५॥॥ 

15. May those who are the most adorable of the adorable 

divinities, those who were the adored of Manu, those who are 


immortal, the observers of truth, bestow upon us this day (a son, of 
Widely-spread renown: and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-३६] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- Pre] 
५४८०. प्र ब्रह्मैतु सदनादृतस्य वि रश्मिभिः ससृजे सूर्यो गाः। 
वि सानुना पृथिवी we उर्वी पृथु प्रतीकमध्येधे अग्नि:1॥१॥ 
1. Let the prayer proceed from the nail of the sacrifice, for 
Sürya with his rays lets loose the waters: the spacious earth 


Spreads (studded) with mountains, and Agni blazes on the 
extensive plains. ! 

Agni Blazes on the Extensive Plans— Prtha 2220 CAE 
agnih; pratikam is said to be prthivyd avayavam a portion or member of 
the earth, 


See oe 
९८ याभिरादित्यस्तपति रश्मिभिस्ताभिः पर्जन्यो वर्षन्यो वर्षति (do आ० १०.६३) | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
236 Reveda Samhita 


५४८१. इमां di मित्रावरुणा सुवृक्तिमिषं न कृण्वे असुरा नवीयः। 
| इनो वामन्यः प॑दवीरद॑ब्धो जन॑ च मित्रो य॑तति gemi 
| 2. Powerful Mitra and Varuna. To you I offer this new praise 
as if it were (sacrificial) food: one of you, (Varuna). The invincible 
lord, is the guide to the path (of virtue) Mitra, when praised. 
Animates men to exertion. 


Mitra, when Praised, Animates men to Exertion— Janam ca mitro 
| yatati bruvdnah: the phrase has occured before: see Rg., 3111, 59.1. 


५४८२. आ वात॑स्य ध्रज॑तो रन्त इत्या अपीपयन्त धेनवो न सूदाः। 
महो दिवः सदने जायमानोऽचिक्रदद्‌ वृषभः सस्मिन्रूधन्‌। ।३ ।। 


| 3. The movements of the restless wind sport around: the milk- 
yielding kine are in good condition: the showerer generated in the 
dwelling of the mighty sun has cried aloud in that his place of 
il abiding, (the firmament). 

The Showerer Generated, Etc.— Acikradad vrsabhah sasmin 


üdhan, rendered, as in the text, parjanya has cried in that firmament, 
tasmin antarikse acikradat 


| ५४८३. गिरा य एता युनजद्धरी त इन्द्र प्रिया सुरथा शूर धायू। 
प्र यो मन्यु रिरिक्षतो मिनात्या सुक्रतुमर्यमणं ववृत्याम्‌।४।। 
4. Hero, Indra, (come to the sacrifice of the man) who, by his 
adoration, has harnessed (to your car) these your favourite, 


graceful, and vigorous horses: may I bring hither Aryaman, the 
doer of good deeds, who baffles the wrath of the malevolent. 


ii ५४८४. यज॑न्ते अस्य सख्यं वय॑श्च नमस्विनः स्व ऋतस्य धाम॑न्‌। 
वि पृक्षो बाबधे नृभिः स्तवान इदं नमो रुद्राय IAIN 
5. Let the offerers of adoration, engaging (in pious acts), 
worship (Rudra) in their own hall of sacrifice, (solicitous) of his 


friendship: praised by the leaders (of rites), he lavishes food (upon 
them): this most acceptable adoration is addressed to Rudra. 


५४८५. आ यत्साकं यशसों वावशानाः सर॑स्वती सप्तथी सिन्धुंमाता। 
न Ba 
याः सुष्वयन्त सुदुघाः सुधारा अभि स्वेन पय॑सा पीप्याना:॥॥६1। 
6. May the seventh (stream), Sarasvati, the mother of the 
Sindhu and those rivers that flow copious and fertilizing, 


bestowing abundance of food, and nourishing (the people) by their 
| waters come at once together. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—' o  ——— OOO 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 37 237 


The Mother of the Sindhu— Sindhu mátrá may mean, according to 
the Scholiast, apam madtrbhritd, being the mother of the waters. 


~ Al EN] L तोकं [| वाजिनो. 
५४८६. उत त्ये नो मरुतों मन्दसाना धियं तोकं a ऽवन्तु। 
मा नः परिं ख्यदक्षरा चरन्त्यवींवृधन्युज्यं ते रयिं stell 

7. May these joyous and swift-going Maruts protect our 
sacrifice and our offspring: let not the imperishable goddess of 
speech, deserting us, speak (kindly) to our (adversaries): and may 
both (she and the Marut associated augment our riches. 

Let not the Imperishable Goddess of Speech, Etc.— Ma nah 
parikhyad aksará caranti is explained by Sayana, aksard vydptd, caranti 
vagdevatà, asman parityaktva asmád vyatiriktd mà dráksit, let not the 
diffusive deity of speech, having abandoned us, look upon our opponents. 


N महीमरम॑तिं les: > I. sl 
५४८७. प्र वो महोमरमतिँ कृणुध्वं प्र पूषणं विदथ्यं१ न वीरम्‌। 

भर्ग धियोऽवितारं नो अस्या: सातौ वाजं रातिषाचं पुर॑न्धिम्‌।।८।। 

8. Invoke, (worshippers), the unresisting earth, and the 
adorable hero, Pusan: (invoke) Bhaga, the protector of this our 
sacrifice, and Vaja, the sustainer of old, the liberal of gifts to our 
solemnity. | 
५४८८. अच्छायं वों मरुतः श्लोक॑ एत्वच्छा विष्णु निषिक्तपामवॉभि:। 

उत प्रजायैं गृणते वयो धुर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11९ || 

ae May this praise come, Maruts, before you: (may it come) 
E Visnu, the guardian of the embryo, with his protecting 


faculties: man they both bestow upon (me), their adorer, progeny 
and food: and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


| [सूक्त-३७] 
l [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द-- Freq] 

१४८९. आ वो वाहिंछो वहतु स्तवध्यै रथों वाजा ऋभुक्षणो अमुक्त:। 

त्रिपृष्ठे सोमैमदे T = 
अभि त्रिपृष्ठैः सवनेषु सोमैर्मदे सुशिप्र महभिः पृणध्वम्‌।।१।। 

है 1. Vajas, possessors of energy, let your capacious, 

SS and unobstructed chariot bring you (hither): be 
, ieee handsome-chinned, with the copious triply-combined 
ation (poured out) for your exhilaration at our sacrifices. 


M. the Copious Triply-Combined Libations— Triprsthaih 
#, with Soma juices mixed with milk curds and meal. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
238 Rgveda Samhita 


५४९०. यूयं ह wi मघव॑त्सु धत्थ स्वर्दृ्श ऋभुक्षणो अमृक्तम्‌। 
सं यज्ञेषुं स्वधावन्तः पिबध्वं वि नो राधाँसि मतिभिर्दयध्वम्‌।॥२ ।। 
2. For you, Rbhuksins, beholders of heaven, preserve 
unmolested the precious (treasure) for us who are affluent (in 
sacrificial offerings}: do you who are possessed of strength, drink 


fully at (our) solemnities, and with (favourable) minds bestow 
upon us riches. 


५४९१. उवोचिंथ हि म॑घवन्देष्णं महो अर्भस्य वसुंनो विभागे। 
उभा ते पूर्णा वसुना गभ॑स्ती न सूनृता नि य॑मते वसव्यां।।३।। 
| 3. You, Maghavan, have determined what is to be given in the 
| apportionment of much or of little wealth, for both your hands are 


full of treasure, and your sincere (promises) of riches do not 
| restrain them. 


५४९२. त्वमिन्द्र स्वयंशा क्रभुक्षा वाजो न साधुरस्त॑मेष्यूक्ता। 
वयं नु ते दाश्चांस॑ः स्याम॒ ब्रह्म॑ कृण्वन्तों हरिवो वसिष्ठाः।।४।। 
4. Do you, Indra, who are Rbhuksin, and of especial renown, 
— who, like food, are the fulfiller (of wants), come to the dwelling of 


the worshipper: lord of bay horses, may we, Vasisthas, be today 
| the donors (of the offerings) to you, the celebrators of your praise. 


५४९३. सनितासि प्रवता दाशुषे चिद्याभिविवेंषो हर्यश्व धीभिः। 
ववन्मा नु ते युज्याभिरूती कदा न॑ इन्द्र राय आ द॑शस्येः।५।। 
| 5. Lord of bay horses, you are the giver of descending (wealth) 
|| to the donor (of the oblation), by whose sacred rites you are 


magnified: when may you bestow upon us riches: when may we be 
|| secure by your appropriate protections. 
| 1 ` > 
५४९४. वासयसीव वेधसस्त्वं न: कदा न॑ इन्द्र वच॑सो बुबोध:। - 
i र॒यिं सुवीर x 
अस्तं तात्या धिया रयिं सुवीरं पृक्षो नो अर्वा न्युहीत वाजी॥॥६।1 

|| 6. When, Indra, wilt you appreciate our praise: at present you 
i establish us (thine) adorers in our dwelling: let your swift horse, 
(influenced) by our protracted solemnity, convey to our abode 
riches, male offspring, and food, 

You Zstablish us your Adorers in our Dwelling— Vasayasiva 
vedhasas tvam nah is explained asman stotrn idanim svakiye stháne 


avasthápayasi, as translated: perhaps svakiye, own, may refer to /ndra in 
his own dwelling, that is, in Svarga. 


७ ७-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OOO CCC ———————————A——— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 38 239 


५४९५. अभि यं देवी निर्कन॑तिश्चिदीशे नक्ष॑न्त इन्द्रं शरद: qud: 
उप त्रिबन्धुर्जरदष्टिमेत्यस्ववेशं यं कृणवन्त मर्ता:11७ 11 
7. Indra, the upholder of the three regions, whom the divine 
Nirrti acknowledges as ruler, whom abundant years pass over, 


whom mortals detain from his own abode, approaches to (recruit) 


his decaying strength. 

The Upholder of the three Regions— Upa tribandhur jaradastim 
eti: trayandm lokdndm bandhaka is Sayana’s rendering of the epithet | 
tribandhu: jaradastim he explains jirmam rasanam, yasya balasya | 
hetubhütam tad balam upagacchati, he approaches that strength of which 
or of whose strength it is the cause: the explanation is not very clear. 

Nirrti— Nirrti is said here to mean the earth. 


५४९६. आ नो राधाँसि सवितः स्तवध्या आ रायो यन्तु पर्वतस्य रातौ। | 

सदां नो दिव्यः पायुः सिषक्तु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः।।८॥ | 

8. May riches worthy of laudation come, Savitd, to us; riches | 

that are in the bestow of Parvata: may the heavenly protector (of | 

all) ever preserve us; and, do you (Universal gods), ever cherish us 

with blessings. | 

E- ३८] 

[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि, देवता-१-५ तथा ६ के पूर्वार्द्ध- सविता, ६ 

उत्तरार्द्ध- सविता अथवा भग, ७-८ वाजिन्‌। छन्द-त्रिखुप्‌!] 
५४९७. उदु ष्य देव: संविता य॑याम हिरण्ययीममतिं यामशिश्रेत्‌। 
नूनं भगो हव्यो मानुषेभिर्वि यो रा पुरूवसुर्दधांति।।१॥। 
1. The divine Savita has diffused the golden radiance on high, | 


of which he is the asylum: verily Bhaga is to be absorbed by men | 
who, abounding in wealth, distributes treasures (amongst them). { 


५४९८. उदु तिष्ठ सवितः शरुध्यशस्य हिरण्यपाणे प्रभृतावृतस्यं। | 
f d म E Z j 

व्युश्वीं पृथ्वीममतिं सृजान आ नृभ्यो मर्तभोजनं सुवान:11२ 11 
2. Rise up Savitá: hear (our solicitations) upon the celebration 


of this ceremony, (you who are) diffusing light over the spacious 
earth, and bestowing human enjoyment upon men. 


१४९९. अपि ga: संविता देवो अस्तु यमा faa वस॑वो गृणरन्ति। । 
स नः स्तोमात्रमस्यश an धाद्विश्वेभिः पातु पायुभिर्नि सूरीन्‌।॥३ 11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


अ Ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
240 Rgveda Samhita 


3. Glorified be the divine Savita, whom all the gods praise: 
may that adorable (divinity) requite our praises (with) food: may 
he always protect the devout with all his protections. 

Whom all the Gods Praise— The text has yam visve vasavo grnanti, 
whom all the Vasus praise: Sàyana makes it Devah. 


५५००. अभि यं देव्यदितिर्गृणातिं सवं देवस्य॑ सवितुर्जुषाणा। 

| अभि सम्राजो वरुणो गृणन्त्यभि मित्रासों अर्यमा सजोषा: ।॥४1। 

| 4. Whom the divine Aditi, delighting at the birth of the divine 
Savitri, glorifies, whom the supreme sovereigns, Varuna, Mitra, 
Aryaman, (and other gods), consentaneously adore. 


Mitra and other Gods— Mitra occurs in the plural Mitrásali, 
meaning, according to the commentator Mitra and others. 


५५०१. अभि ये मिथो वनुषः सप॑न्ते रातिं दिवो रांतिषार्च: पृथिव्या:। 
अहिंबुध्न्य उत न॑ः शृणोतु वरूतयर्कधेनुभिर्नि पांतु।।५।। 
5. Whom those solicitous for wealth those enjoying (it), 


mutually worship, the benefactor of heaven and earth: may 
Ahirbudhnya hear us: may the protectress (the goddess of speech), 
| cherish us with excellent cattle. 
LE Ahirbudhnya— According to Sayana this is a name of Agni, of the 
middle region or firmament. 
। The Protectress, the Goddess of Speech— The text has only 
| varutra, which Sayana renders vagdevatd. 


| ५५०२. अनु तन्नो जास्पतिर्मसीष्ट Ti देवस्य सवितुरियान:। 
| भगमुग्रोऽवसे जोहवीति भगमनुग्रो अध॑ याति रत्न॑म्‌।।६।। 
6. May the protector of progeny, when solicited, consent to 


bestow upon us the precious (wealth of the divine Savita: the 


|| ardent (adorer) invokes repeatedly Bhaga for protection; the less 
i} ardent solicits Bhaga for wealth. 


ति नौं 4 
५५०३. शं नो भवन्तु वाजिनो हवेषु देवतांता मितद्रवः स्वर्काः। 

| जम्भयन्तोऽहिं वृकं रक्षांसि सनेम्यस्मद्युयवन्नमीवाः।।७।। 
| 7. May the Vajins, with slackened speed, bringing excellent 
। 000, be (disposed) for our happiness, upon our invocations at the 
worship of the gods: destroying the murderer, the robber, the 
Raksasas, and keeping from us ancient maladies. 

The Vajins— Sayana interprets the term etadabhidhayakadevatah, 


divinities so denominated: Mahidhara renders it asvah, horse Yajurveda, 
9. 16. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


NSS) 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sukta 39 241 
The Murderer, the Robber— Jambhayanto ahim vrkam Mahidhara 
renders literally, destroying the snake, the wolf: Sayana renders them 
hantdram,coram: vaje-vaje savesu yuddhesu: Sayana, sarvasmin anne 
upasthite when all food is nigh Mahidhara, Yajus, IX. 18. 


५५०४, वाजेवाजेऽवत वाजिनो नो धनेषु विप्रा अमृता ऋतज्ञा:। 
अस्य मध्व॑ः पिबत मादर्य॑ध्वं तृप्ता यांत पथिभिर्देवयानै: | ८ | 
8. Wise, immortal Vajins, observers of truth, defined us in 
very conflict, and for the sake of wealth: drink of this sweet (Soma 


beverage), be exhilarated (thereby) and satisfied; proceed by the 
paths traversed by the gods. 


[सूक्त-३९] 
[ऋषि- वसिष मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- त्रिष्ट॒प्‌।] 
५५०५. ऊर्ध्वो अग्निः सुंमतिं वस्वों अश्रेत्रतीची जूर्णिदेवर्तातिमेति। 
भेजाते अद्री रथ्येव पन्थांमृतं होतां न इषितो य॑जाति।।१।। 

1. Let Agni, risen on high, accept the praise of the worshipper: 
she who makes (all creatures) old, looking to the west, goes to the 
Sacrifice: the pious pair, like two riders in a chariot, follow the | 
path (of the ceremony): let the Hold, as enjoined, celebrate the rite. 

She who makes all Creatures Old— Pratici devatalion eti, 
Sarvasam prajdndm jarayitri the cause of the decay or age of all progeny, 


that is, Usodevatd, the dawn, whose successive revolutions constitute old 
age. 


EJ The Pious Pair— Bhejáte adri: The latter is explained, adriyantau, | 
Sraddhdvantau, the two reverencing or believing, that is, the Yajamdna 
and his wife. | 
वावृजे 
५५०६. प्र वावृजे सुप्रया बर्हिरेषामा विश्पतीव बीरिट इयाते। | 
विशामक्तोरुषर्स पूर्वहतौ E 1 j 
वेशामक्तोरुषसंः पूर्वहूतौ वायुः पूषा स्वस्तयें नियुत्वान्‌॥२।। | 
_ 2 The food-bestowir.z sacred grass of these (the worshippers) 
1S strewn: may the two lords of people, Vayu, with the Niyut 
Steeds, and Pusan, invoked before the dawn upon the close of the f 
night, appear now in the firmament for the welfare of mankind. 
5 The Two Lords of People— Vispative virite iydte, antrikse 
eam: Sayana says iva here means idanim now; but he states it may 
Ini 
jas 
7416 


i 
} 
timate, as usual, a comparison, comparing Vayu and Piisan to two | 
appearing amongst a crowd of attendants, yathd manusydndm gane | 
"au: So Mahidhara, Yajurveda 33. 44 and Yaska Nirukta, v. 28. | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————— Á—————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
242 Rgveda Sarhhita 


Upon the Close of the Night— Aktor usasah pürvahütau is 
explained by Sayana, rátreh sambandhinya usasah sakasát pürvasmin 
áhváne sati, there being the invocation preceding the proximity of the 
dawn in connection with the night: Mahidhara seems to understand it 
somewhat differently: Piisan, as the sun, appears after the prior 

| invocation of the dawn upon the lighting of the sacrificial fire: whilst by 
| Vayu is to be understood Agni, of whom he is the friend; and who is the 
divinity of the nocturnal sacrifice. 


५५०७. ज्मया अत्र वस॑वो रन्त देवा उरावन्तरिक्षे मर्जयन्त शुभ्राः। 
अर्वाक्‌ पथ उरुज्रयः कृणुध्वं श्रोता दूतस्य॑ जग्मुषों नो अस्य॥३॥। 
3. May the divine Vasus sport on this occasion upon the earth: 
the brilliant (Maruts) in the expansive firmament are being 


worshipped: swift-moving deities, direct your paths towards us: 
hear (the words) of this our messenger, (Agni), approaching to you. 


| ५५०८. ते हि यज्ञेषु यज्ञियास कमा: सधस्थं विश्वे अभि सन्तिं देवा:। 
| ताँ अंध्वर उशतो यंक्ष्यग्ने श्रुष्टी भगं नास॑त्या पुर॑न्धिम्‌।॥४।। 
4. These universal adorable guardian deities occupy a common 


| station at sacrifices: worship, Agni, those divinities, deservers (of 
oblations) at the ceremony, the swift Bhaga, the Nāsatyās and 


— Purandhi. 
Purandhi— Indra. 
५५०९. Sm गिरों दिव आ पृथिव्या मित्र॑ de वरुणमिन्द्रमग्निम्‌। 
आर्यमणमदितिं विष्णुमेषां = d d 
्यमणमदितिं विष्णुमेषां सर॑स्वती मरुतों मादयन्ताम्‌। 1५11 
| 5. Bring Agni, whether from heaven or earth, the adorable 
{ deities, Mitra, Varuna, Indra and Agni. Aryaman, Aditi and Visnu, 


(for the good) of these (worshippers): and may Sarasvati and the 
Maruts be delighted (by our offerings). 


५५१०. ररे हव्यं मतिभिर्यज्चियाना नक्षत्कामं मर्त्यौनामसिन्वन्‌। 
| 1 रयिमंविदस्यं d 2 E 
धाता रयिमविदस्यं संदासां संक्षीमहि युज्येभिर्नु देवैः।।६॥। 
_ 6. The oblation is offered together with praises to the adorable 
deities: may (Agni), unaverse to the desire of mortals, be present: 


bestow (upon us gods), unwasting, all-benefiting riches; and may 
we today be associated with the assembled deities. 


| ५५११. नू रोद॑सी अभिष्टुते वसिषठेऋतावांनो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निः। 
| यच्छन्तु चन्द्रा उपमं नों अर्क यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11911 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


वलि TSI M. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 40 243 
7. Heaven and earth are now glorified by the Vasisthas, as are 
Varuna, the object of worship, and Mitra and Agni: may they, the 
conferrers of joy, bestow upon us excellent food: and do you (all) 
ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्तः४०] 427764 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता-विश्वेदेवा। छन्‍्द-त्रिष्टुप्‌।] | 
५५१२. ओ श्रुष्टिर्विदथ्याई wg प्रति स्तोमं दधीमहि तुराणाम्‌। | 
यदद्य देवः स॑विता सुवाति स्यामांस्य vei विभागे।।१॥ | 
1. May the satisfaction derived from pious rites come to us as i 
we contemplate the glorification of the swift moving (divinities): | 
may we be included in the apportionment by that wealth- | 
bestowing deity (of the riches) which the divine Savita today र 
distributes | 
५५१३. मित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो रोद॑सी च द्युभक्तमिन्द्रो अर्यमा ददातु। | 
दिदेष्टु देव्यदिती रेकणों वायुश्च यन्नियुवैते भर्ग्च। I | 
2. May .Mitra and Varuna, heaven and earth, /ndra and | 
E! give us that (wealth) which is merited by brilliant 
(laudations): may the divine Aditi be disposed to give us riches, 
which Vàyu and Bhaga may preserve ever in our keeping. 
५५१४. सेदुग्रो seq मरुतः स शुष्मी wei पृषदश्वा अवांथ। 
उतेमग्निः सर॑स्वती जुनन्ति न तस्य॑ रायः पर्येतास्ति। di 
3. Maruts, whose steeds are the spotted deer, may the mortal 


whom you protect be resolute, be strong, for him Agni and 
Sarasvati also defend, and there be no despoiler of his riches. 


५५१५. अयं हि नेता वरुण ऋतस्य मित्रो राजानो अर्यमापो धुः। 


सुहवां देव्यदिंतिरनर्वा ते नो अंहो अति पर्षन्ररिष्टान्‌। l 
4. This Varuna, the leader of the rite, and the royal Mitra and 
Aryaman, uphold my acts, and the divine unopposed Aditi 
earnestly invoked: may they convey us safe beyond evil. 
५५१६. अस्य देवस्य॑ मीळ्हुषों वया विष्णोरेषस्य प्रभृथे हविर्भि:। 
विदे हि रुद्रो रुद्रियं महित्वं यासिष्टं वर्तिरश्चिनाविरावत्‌। १५ l 
5.1 propititate with oblations the ramifications of that divine 
attainable Visnu, the showerer of benefits: Rudra, bestow upon us 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


TT eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
244 Rgveda Samhita 


the magnificence of his nature: the Asvins have come to our 
dwelling abounding with (sacrificial) food. 

The Ramifications— Vayah, branches: all other deities are, as it 
were, branches of Visnu, anye devah sakha iva bhavanti: as by a text cited 
by the Scholiast, Visnu is all divinities, Visnuh sara devatd iti Sruteh.' 

| वरूत्री 1 | | 
५५१७. मात्र पूषन्नाघृण इरस्यो री यद्रातिषाचश्च रासन्‌। 
भुवों अर्वन्तो | वृष्टिं वातो 
मयोभुवो नो अर्वन्तो नि पान्तु वृष्टिं परिज्मा वातों ददातु।।६।। 
| 6. Resplendent Pusan, oppose not (hindrance) on this 
| occasion: may the protectress, (Sarasvati), and the liberal (wives 
of the gods), grant us wealth: may the ever-moving deities, the 


sources of happiness, protect us: may the circumambient Vata send 
us rain. 


| ५५१८. नू रोदसी अभिष्टुते वसिंह्ैक्रैतावानो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निः। 
| यच्छन्तु चन्द्रा उपमं नों अर्क यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:।७।॥। 
7. Heaven and earth are now glorified by the Vasisthas, as are 


Varuna the object of worship, and Mitra and Agni: may they, the 


conferrers of joy, bestow upon us excellent food: and do you (all) 
ever cherish us with blessings. 


— [सूक्त ४१] 
| [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- लिङ्गोक्त देवता, (अग्नि, इन्द्र, 
मित्रावरुण, अश्विनीकुमार, भग, पूषा, ब्रह्मणस्पति, सोम, रुद्र) २-६ भग, 
७ उषा। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌ जगती।] 
५५१९. प्रातरग्नि प्रातरिन्द्रं हवामहे प्रातर्मित्रावरुणा प्रातरश्चिनां। 
प्रातर्भर्ग ति ब्रह्मणस्पर्ति ee Se 
तर्भग पूषणं ब्रह्म॑णस्पतिं प्रातः सोम॑मुत रुद्रं हुंवेम।।१।। 
VIL3.8. The whole of this Sukta occurs in he Yajus, XXXIV. 34-40. 


A 1. We invoke at dawn Agni: at dawn Indra: at dawn Mitra and 
aruna: at dawn the Asvins: at dawn Bhaga, Pusan, 
| Brahmanaspati: at dawn Soma and Rudra. 


५५२०. प्रातर्जितं भगमुग्रं हुवेम वयं पुत्रमदितेर्यो विधर्ता। 
आभ्रश्चिद्यं मन्यमानस्तुरश्चिद्वाजा चिद्यं भर्ग भकषीत्याह।।२।। 


2. We invoke at dawn to be altorious fierce Bhaga, the son of 
Aditi, who is the sustainer (of the world), to whom the poor man 


१. विष्णुः सर्वा देवताः (Uo Mo १.१)। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


NN 


वि वास 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 41 245 | 


praising him applies, saying, give (me wealth), to whom the 
opulent prince (addresses the same prayer). 

To whom the Poor man, Etc.— Adhraschid yam manyanianas, 
turaschid raja cid yam bhagam bhaksity-aha: Mahidhara explains the 
terms somewhat differently: the Adhra he renders unsatisfied, hungry, or 
poor: tura he makes the same as atura, sick, or it may mean yama: raja is 
the same. 


«fa. e | भगेमां 1 I 
५५२१. भग प्रणेतर्भग सत्यराधो भगेमां धियमुदवा ददन्नः। 
x I ET. TAR y- भवन्त efi 
भग प्र णो जनय॒ भरश्वैर्भग प्र नृभिर्नृवन्तः स्याम।।३॥। 
3. Bhaga, chief leader of rited, Bhaga, faithful promn granting 


(our wishes), fructify ceremony, enrich us With cattle and horses: 
may we Bhaga, be eminent with male descendants and followers. 
उतेदानीं . | | 1 
५५२२. उतेदानीं भगवन्तः स्यामोत प्रपित्व उत मध्ये अह्वाम्‌। 
उतोदिता le. ० ० | सुमतौ I 
3 मघवन्त्सूवस्य वय दवाना सुमतौ MAIKI 

4. May we now have Bhaga (for our lord), whether in the 
forenoon or at mid-day, or at sun-rise: may we, Maghavan, enjoy 
the favour of the gods. 

May we now have Bhaga for our Lord— Utedanim bhagavantah 
E may we be now possessors of Bhaga; or it may mean, may we be 
possessors of wealth; in which sense Mahidhara understands 
bhagavantah, or, he says also, possessors of knowledge: jnanavantah. 


At Sunrise— Prapitve Sayana explains purvahne: Mahidhara, 
Süryasya prapatane, astomaye, sun-down, sunset. 
५५२३. भग॑ एव भग॑वाँ अस्तु देवास्तेन॑ वयं भर्गवन्तः स्याम। 
> ¢ इज्जोहवीति daz 
तं त्वां भग सर्व इज्जोहवीति स नो भग पुरएता ded. |i 
5. May Bhaga, gods, be the possessor of opulence, and, 
through him, may we be possessed of wealth, every one verily 
repeatedly invokes you, Bhaga: do you, Bhaga, be our preceder at 
this solemnity. 
May Bhaga be the Possessor of Opulence— Bhaga eva bhagavan, 
astu, dhanaván, having wealth. 


Do you, Bhaga, be our Preceder— Pura eta, puro-ganta, one who 
goes before: it may mean purohita, or family priest. 


५५२४. समध्वरायोषसों नमन्त दधिक्रावेव शुच॑ये पदाय। 
अवाचीनं वसुविदं भग॑ नो रथमिवाश्वा वाजिन आ वहन्तु॥६1। 
6. May the Dawn come to our sacrifice as a horse to a suitable 


UE as rapid steeds convey a chariot, so may the Dawns bring 
9 us Bhaga, down-descending, charged with riches. 


Se LS ER S m I m e Le a Mi e ar e n m ta NT IU TB m om 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 —— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
246 Rgveda Samhita 


To a Suitable Station— Sucaaye padaya, Sayana interprets 
gamanayogyaya sthanaya: Mahidhara supplies agnyadhanartham sucai 
padam, a pure place for the receptacle of the fire, as if he understood by 
dadhikra of the text, not any horse, although he renders it simply asve, 
but the one intended for sacrifice. 


| ५५२५. अश्वांतीगोमंतीर्न उषासों वीरव॑तीः सद॑मुच्छन्तु भद्रा: 
घृतं दुहांना विश्वतः प्रपीता यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।७॥। 
7. May the auspicious Dawns ever break, bestowing horses 


and cattle and male descendants, shedding water, and endowed 
with all good things: and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त- ४२] 
| [क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
| ५५२६. प्र ब्रह्माणो अङ्गिरसो नक्षन्त प्र age वेतु। 
प्र धेनव उदप्रुतों नवन्त युज्यातामद्री अध्वरस्य पेश: 112 ii 


1. May the Brahmanas, the Arigirasas, be everywhere present: 
may Krandanu be conscious of (our) adoration: may the rivers 


glide along, distributing water may the pious couple, (the 
Yajamána and his wife), conjointly appreciate the beauty of the 
sacrifice. 


Krandanu— Krandanu is said to be a synonym of Parjanya. 


The Rivers— Dhenavah is here explained Nadyah, consistently with 
what is said of udapruto navantah. 


५५२७. सुगस्तै अग्ने सनवित्तो अध्वा gear सुते हरितो रोहित॑श्च। 
बीरवाहों देवानां 1 T 
ये वा सद्यन्ररुषा वीरवाहो हुवे देवानां जनिमानि सत्तः।।२॥ 
| : 2. Pleasant, Agni, be your long-familiar path, invoke the 
libation the bay, the ruddy horses, who, brilliant shining, are the 


conveyers of (you), the hero, to the hall of sacrifice, where seated. 
I invoke the companies of the gods. 


५५२८. समुं वो यज्ञ महयत्रमोभि: प्र होता मन्द्रो रिरेच उपाके। 
i 2 : 
यजस्व सु पुर्वणीक देवाना यज्ञियामरम॑तिं ववृत्याः॥३।। 

3. The (worshippers) offer you, (gods), this sacrifice, with 
prostrations: the ministrant priest, who is near us repeating pious 
| praise, excels (all others): worship well the gods: resplendent 
(Agni), make the venerable earth revolve. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


SS nT ae a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 43 247 


५५२९. यदा वीरस्य॑ रेवतों दुरोणे स्योनशीरतिथिराचिर्केतत्‌। | 
सुप्रीतो अग्निः सुधितो दम आ स विशे दाति वार्यमियं्यै॥४।। 

4. When Agni, reposing at his ease in the dwelling of the 
Jiberal worshipper, is Welcomed as a guest, thus suitably placed in | 
the hall of sacrifice, he gives well-pleased, desirable (wealth) to | 
the people who approach him. | 

. ^ x t मरुत्स्विन्द्रे le n 
५५३०. इमं नो अग्ने अध्वरं जुंषस्व मरुत्स्वन्ट्रै यशसं कृधी नः। | 
आ नरां बर्हि: संदतामुषासोशन्ता मित्रावरुणा यजेह।॥५।। | 

5. Be gratified, Agni, by this our sacrifice: render our 

(worship) renowned among /ndra and the Maruts: let the days and | 


nights sit down on the sacred grass: worship (Agni), at this rite, 
Mitra and Varuna, desiring (the oblation). 


| 

$ 

५५३१. एवाग्नि सहस्यं१ वसिष्ठो रायस्कामो विश्चप्स्न्यस्य स्तौत्‌। ; 
=k if E ० EA 1 5 1 | 

sa र पप्रथद्वाजमस्म Tq पात स्वस्तिभि सदां न:।।६।। | 

6. Thus has Vasistha wishing for riches, glorified the vigorous | 
Agni for the sake of every sort of wealth: may be bestow upon us | 


EU riches, strength: and do you, (gods), ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[सूक्त- ४३] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- reu] 
५५३२. प्र वो यज्ञेषु देवयन्तो अर्चन्द्यावा नमोभिः पृथिवी इषध्यैँ। 
येषां बरह्माण्यस॑मानि विप्रा विष्व॑ग्वियन्ति वनिनो न शाखांः।।१।। 

l. Devout worshippers seek to attain you, gods, by praises at 
Sacrifices: they (worship) the heaven and earth, they of whom the 
diversified adorations spread everywhere like the branches of 
trees. 


५५३३. प्र यज्ञ Ug हेत्वो न सप्तिरुद्यच्छध्वं सम॑नसो घृताचीः। 
स्तृणीत बर्हिर॑ध्वराय॑ साधूर्ध्वा शोचीषिं देवयून्यस्थु:11२॥॥ 
2. Let the sacrifice proceed like a swift course (to the gods: 
elevate, (priests), with one occured, your ladles, charged with 


butter: spread for the solemnity the sacred grass: let the flames (of 
the burnt-offering) to the gods ascend on high. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


1 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
248 Rgveda Samhita 
५५३४. आ पुत्रासो न मातरं विभृत्राः सानौं देवासों बर्हिषः सदन्तु। 
आ विश्वाची विदथ्यांमनक्तवग्ने मा नों देवतांता मृधंस्क: 11३ ।। 
3. Let the gods Bit down on the summit of the sacred grass, like 
children nursed on the (lap of the) mother: let the full ladle, Agni, 


pour (the oblation) on the sacrificial flame: give us not up to our 
adversaries in battle. 
सीषपन्त 1 1 1 
५५३५. ते सीषपन्त जोषमा यजत्रा ऋतस्य धारा: सुदुघा दुहानाः। 
ज्येष्ठं वो अद्य मह आ वसूनामा ग॑न्तन समनसो यति EI! 

4. May the adorable deities, who are the bestowers of water, 
the shedders of showers, be fully propitiated (by our praises): may 
the most precious and commendable of your treasure (be ours) 
today: and do you with one accord come hither. 

And do you with one accord come Hither— Agantana samanasah 
are followed by yatistha, which are unexplained, apparently through a 
hiatus in the manuscripts: stha may be the second pers. plur. pres. of as, to 
be; but it is difficult to assign a meaning to yati, unless it be intended, or 


an error, for yadi, if, when the sentence may be rendered, if you are of 
one mind. 


५५३६. एवा नों अग्ने विक्ष्वा दंशस्य त्वयां वयं संहसावन्नास्क्रां:। 

| राया युजा संधमादो अररष्टा यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।५॥। 

| 5. Be glorified, Agni: grant us (wealth) among the people: may 
we, vigorous Agni, ever be undeserted by you, but always be 


| rejoicing and unmolested in the possession of riches: and do you. 
। (gods), ever cherish us with blessings. 


| [सूक्त- ४४] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- दधिक्रा; १ लिङ्गोक्त देवता (दधिक्रा 
| अश्विनीकुमार, उषा, अग्नि, भग, इन्द्र, विष्णु, पूषा , ब्रह्मणस्पति, आदित्य 
| द्यावा-पृथिवी आपः)। छन्द- ey, 3 जगती।] 
| ५५३७. दधिक्रां व॑ः प्रथममश्चिनोषस॑मग्नि समिंद्धं भग॑मूतयें हुवे। 
| इन्द्रै विष्णु पूषणं ब्रह्मणस्पतिमादित्यान्द्यावापृथिवी अपः स्व॑ः।।१।। 


1. For your preservation (worshippers), I invoke, first 
Dadhikra, then the Asyvins, the Dawn, the kindled Agni, Bhaga, 


Indra, Visnu, Püsan, Bramhanaspati, the Adityas, heaven and 
earth, the waters, the sun. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a तक - 


Se a a a तिरका पणा पण 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 45 249 
५५३८. दधिक्रामु नमसा बोधयन्त उदीराणा यज्ञमुपप्रयर्न्तः। 

gai देवीं बर्हिषि सादर्यन्तो5श्विना विप्रां सुहवां हुवेम॥।२॥ 

2. Arousing and animating Dadhikrd, proceeding diligently 
with the sacrifice: seating the divine //a on the sacred grass, let us 
invoke the intelligent and worthily-invoked Asvins. 

५५३९. दधिक्रावांणं बुबुधानो अग्निमुप ब्रुव उषसं सूर्य गाम्‌। | 
ae मँश्वतोर्व्ररुणस्य ay ते विश्वास्मद्‌ दुरिता यांवयन्तु ॥३ 1 | 

3. Propitiating Dadhikravan, I glorify Agni, Usas, the sun, the 1 


earth, the great brown horse of Varuna, who is mindful of his i 
adorers: may they put far away from us iniquities. 


५५४०. दधिक्रावां प्रथमो वाज्यवाग्रे रथानां भवति प्रजानन्‌। 
संविदान उषसा सूर्येणादित्येभिर्वसुभिरङ्गिरोभिः।४॥ 

4. Dadhikravan, the swift steed, the first (of horses), knowing 
(his office), is in the front of the chariots (of the gods), consentient 
with Usas, with Sürya, with the Adityas, with the Vasus, with the 
Angirasas. 

५५४१. आ नों दधिक्रा: पथ्यामनकत्वृतस्य पन्थामन्वेतवा S 
शुणोतु नो दैव्यं शर्धा अग्निः शुण्वन्तु विश्वै महिषा अमूराः।५॥ 

5. May Dadhikra sprinkle our path (with water), that we may 

follow the road of sacrifice: may Agni, the strength of the gods, 


here our (invocation): may the mighty, unperplexed, universal | 
deities hear it. 


[सूक्त-४५] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- सविता। छन्द- ETI] 
५५४२. आ देवो यांतु सविता सुरत्नो$न्तरिक्षप्रा वह॑मानो AÀ: 
हस्ते दधांनो नर्या पुरूणि निवेशर्यञ्च प्रसुवञ्च Ui 
1. Borne by his steeds, may the divine Savita, who is possessed 
of Precious treasure, and filling the firmament (with radiance), 
fone hither, holding in his hands many things good for man, and 
(both) tranquillizing and animating living beings. 
3 Both Tranquillizing and animating Living Beings— Nivesayan ca 
Prasuvan ca bhüma is explained bhitani ratrisu sve sthapayansca ahahsu 


Prerayansca, placing beings at night in their own stations, and urging 
them on by day. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
250 Rgveda Samhita 
` 1७ 
५५४३. उद॑स्य बाहू शिथिरा बृहन्तां हिरण्ययां दिवो अन्ताँ अनष्टाम्‌। 
० | 
नूनं सो अस्य महिमा पनिष्ट सूरश्चिदस्मा अनु दादपस्याम्‌॥२॥ 

2. May the outspread, vast, and golden arms of Savitd extend 
to the ends of the sky: verily his greatness is glorified (by us): may 
the sun impart energy unto him. 

May the Sun Impart Energy unto Him— Surascid asmd anudád 


| apasyam is explained, Süryo asmin Savitre karmecchám anudadatu, may 
! Sürgy subsequently give to that Savitá the desire for acts. 
| || सांविषद्वसुपतिर्वसूनि 1 | 
| ५५४४. स घां नो देवः सविता सहावा साविषद्वसुपतिर्वसूनि। 
। श्रयंमाणो अमतिंमुरूची R du d 
fa अमतिमुरूचीं मर्त रासते नः।।३।। 

3. May the divine Savita, who is endowed with energy, the 
lord of treasure, bestow treasures upon us concentrating infinite 
lustre: may he bestow upon us wealth, the source of the enjoyment 
of mortals. 

Appeaser of the Wind— Svapiváta, which is left untranslated by the 
Scholiast: it is somewhat difficult to assign it a meaning: Svapi may be 
derived from Svap, to sleep, and vata is usually the mind; or it may mean 
disorders arising from the windy humour which Rudra, as the deity of 


| medicines, may be supposed to allay: this, however, would be an early 
me indication of the humoral pathology. 


५५४५. इमा AK: सवितारं सुजिहं पूर्णगभस्तिमीलते सुपाणिम्‌। 
| चित्रं वयो बृहदस्मे द॑धातु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न: 11४1! 
| 4. These praises glorifv the eloquent-tongued, dextrous- 
handed, whose hands are full (of wealth): may he bestow upon us 
| manifold and abundant food: and do you, (gods), ever cherish us 
| with blessings. 
| [सूक्त- ४६] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- रुद्र। छन्द- जगती ४ freu] 
५५४६. इमा रुद्वाय स्थिरधन्वने गिर: क्षिप्रेषवे देवाय॑ स्वधान्ने। 
B = = 
i अषाळ्हाय सह॑मानाय वेधसे तिग्मायुधाय भरता शुणोतु न:11१॥॥ 


1. Qffer these praises to the divine Rudra, armed with the 
strong bow and fast-flying arrows, the bestower of food, the 
invincible, the conqueror, the creator, the wielder of sharp 
weapons: may he hear our (praises). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


| 
Mandala 7, Sükta 47 251 
५५४७. स हि क्षयेण क्षम्य॑स्य जन्मन: साम्राज्येन दिव्यस्य चेत॑ति। 
अवन्नवन्तीरुप नो दुरश्चरानमीवो रुद्र जासुं नो भव॥२॥ | 
2. He is known by his rule over those of terrestrial birth, by his | 
sovereignty over those of celestial (origin): protecting our progeny, 
Rudra, propitiating you (by praise), come to our dwellings, and be | 
to them a guardian against disease. 
५५४८. या ते दिद्युदवसृष्टा दिवस्परि क्ष्मया चर॑ति परि सा वृणकतु न:। | 


सहस्रं ते स्वपिवात भेषजा मा नस्तोकेषु तन॑येषु रीरिषः।।३॥। 
3. May your blazing (weapon), which, discharged from 


heaven, traverses the earth, avoid us: thine, appeaser of the wind, 
are a thousand medicaments: inflict not evil upon our sons and 


grandsons. | 
५५४९. मा नों वधी रुद्र मा परां दा मा तें भूम प्रसितौ हीळितस्य॑। 

आ नों भज बर्हिषि जीवशंसे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।[४॥॥ | 

4. Harm us not, Reda: abandon us not: let Us nof fall under the | 

| 


bondage of you when displeased: make us partakers of the life- 


E sacrifice: and do you, (gods), ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[सूक्त-४७] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- आपः। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
५५५०. आपो यं व॑ः प्रथमं देवयन्त॑ इन्द्रपानंमूर्मिमकृण्वतेळ:। 
तं वों वयं शुचिमरिप्रमद्य agi मधुमन्तं वनेम।।१॥ 
i l. We solicit from you, Waters, today, that pure, faultless, 
tain-shedding, sweet essence of the earth, which devout have first 


consecrated as the beverage of Indra. 


Sweet Essence of the Earth— Prathamam ürmimakrnvata ilah: 


Bs mt is said here to imply the Soma juice, bhimydh sarbhiitam, produced 
Tom the earth. 


तमूर्मिमापो LIS मर्धुमत्तमं ० 
१४६१. तमूर्मिमापो मधुमत्तमं वोऽपां नपांदवत्वाशुहेमां। 
यस्मिनिनद्रो वसुभिर्मादयाते तम॑श्याम देवयन्तों वो अद्य॥२॥ 
2. May the Swift-moving grandson of the Waters protect, 


e aoe Most sweet essence, wherewith may Jndra and the 
it), delighted: and may we, devoted to the gods, partake (of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————U'MN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


252 Rgveda Samhita 
५५५२. शतपंवित्राः स्वधया मदन्तीर्देवीर्देवानामपि यन्ति पार्थः। . 
ता इन्द्र॑स्य न मिनन्ति व्रतानि सिन्धुभ्यो हव्यं घृतर्वज्जुहोत॥।३।। 
3. The divine Waters, the purifiers of many, gratifying men 
with food, pursue the paths of the gods: they impede not the sacred 


rites of Indra: offer, (priests), the butter-charged oblation to the 
rivers. 


५५५३. याः सूर्यौ रश्मिभिराततान याभ्य इन्द्रो अरंदद्‌ गातुमूर्मिम्‌। 
ते सिन्धवो वरिंवो धातना नो यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।|४।। 
4. Waters, whom the sun has evaporized by his rays, for whom 
Indra has opened a path by which to issue, bestow upon us wealth: 
and do you (also) ever cherish us with blessings. 
Indra has Opened a Path by which to Issue— The sun having 


| converted the waters of the earth into clouds, Indra, by his thunderbolt, 
cleaves the latter, and the water condensed falls as rain, 


[सूक्त-४८] 


| [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- क्रभुगण, ४ विश्वेदेवा अथवा क्रभुगण । 
== छन्द- AT] 
| ५५५४. ऋभुक्षणो वाजा मादयंध्वमस्मे नरो मघवानः सुतस्य॑। 
आ वोऽर्वाचः क्रत॑वो न यातां विभ्वो रथं नर्यं वर्तयन्तु ॥१ N 
1. Rbhu, (Vibhu), and Vāja, leaders of rites, possessors of 


opulence; be exhilarated by our effused (libation): may your active 
and powerful (horses) bring to our presence your chariot, 
beneficial to mankind. 

Rbhu, Vibhu and Vaja— The text has Rbhuksano Vajah, the use of 


the plurals implying, according to the Scholiast, that the three brothers are 
intended. 


५५५५. क्रभुर्कभुभिरभि व॑ः स्याम विभ्वो विभुभिः शवसा शवांसि। 


| वाजों अस्माँ stag वाज॑सातावि्ट्रेण युजा तरुषेम वृत्रम्‌।।२॥ 

2. Mighty with the Rbhus, opulent with the Vibhus, may We 
overcome by strength the strength (of our foes): may Vaja defend 
us in battle: with Indra, our ally, may we destroy the enemy. 

Rbhus Opulent with the Vibhus— Rbhur rbhubhih vibhvo 
vibhubhih are rather unintelligible phrases: the commentator explains 
Rbhu and uru, great, and Vibhu, vibhavah, rich or powerful: but he leaves 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 49 25 


unexplained why the first should be in the singular and the second in the 
plural: it is an evident play upon words, as is the following, Vajo 
vájasátau. 
` 1 [5 çl || ` 
५५५६. ते चिद्धि पूर्वीरभि सन्ति शासा विश्वाँ अर्य उपरताति वन्वन्‌। इन्द्र 
| Ed sf n क पम = 
विभ्वाँ ऋभुक्षा वाजा अय: र्मिथत्या कृणवन्वि नृम्णम्‌।।३।। 

3. They verily, (/ndra and the Rbhus), overcome multitudes by 
their prowess: they overcome all enemies in the missile conflict: 
may Indra, Vibhvan, Rbhuksin and Vāja, the subduers of foes, 
annihilate by their wrath the strength of the enemy. 

In the Missile Conflict— Uparatdti: upara is explained upala, a 


stone: upalaih pasdnasadrsair dyudhais tdyate yuddham, war that is 
waged with weapons like stones, is uparatati. 


५५५७. नू देवासो afta: कर्तना नो भूत नो विश्वेऽव॑से सजोर्षाः। 
समस्मे इषं वसंवो E यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।४।। 
4. Grant us, deities, this day opulence: may you all, well 


pleased alike, be (ready) for our protection: may the exalted 


(Rbhus) bestow upon us food: and do you (all) ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


The Exalted Rbhus— The text has uasavahi, which might be Vasus; 
but Sayana explains it prasasyah, an epithet of Rbhavah understood. 


[सूक्त-४९] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- आपः। छन्द- Freq] 
५५५८, AISAS: सलिलस्य मध्यांत्पुनाना यन्त्यनिविशमाना:। 
न्द्रो या वज्री वृषभो रराद ता आपों देवीरिह माम॑वन्तु॥१॥ 
1. The waters, with their ocean-chief, proceed from the midst 
i the firmament, purifying (all things), flowing unceasingly: may 
he divine waters, whom the thunder-bearing Indra, the showerer, 


Sent forth, protect me here (on earth). 


in aoe the Midst of the Firmament— Samudrajyestha, salilasya 
adhyat: salila is said here to mean antariksa. 


५ आपों 
ASS. या आपों दिव्या उत वा स्रव॑न्ति खनित्रिमा उत वा या: स्व॑यञ्जाः। 
समुद्रार्था याः शुच॑यः पावकास्ता आपों देवीरिह माम॑वन्तु ॥२।। 


eue May the waters that are in the sky, or those that flow (on the 


those (whose channels) have being dug, or those that have 


७ ७-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


हल ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


254 Rgveda Samhita 


sprung up spontaneously, and those that seek the ocean. All pure 
and purifying, may those divine waters protect me here (on earth), 

Those whose Channels have been Dug— Khanitrimd, khananena 
nivrttah, formed, or perhaps stopped by digging, canals or reservoirs; in 
either case a proof of the practice of irrigation. 


५५६०. यासां राजा वरणो याति मध्यें सत्यानृते अंवपश्यञ्जनानाम्‌। 
मधुश्चुतः शुच॑यो याः पांवकास्ता आपों देवीरिह माम॑वन्तु।।३।। 
3. Those whose sovereign, Varuna, passes in the middle 
sphere, discriminating the truth and falsehood of mankind; those 


shedding sweet showers, pure and purifying; may those divine 
waters protect me here (on earth). 


| ५५६१. यासु राजा वरुणो यासु सोमो fad देवा यासूर्ज मर्दन्ति। 
| वैश्वानरो यास्वग्निः प्रविष्टस्ता आपो देवीरिह मार्मवन्तु।।४।। 


4. May they in which their king, Varuna, in which Soma, 
abides, in which the gods delight (to receive) the sacrificial food, 
into which Agni Vaisvanara entered, may those divine waters 
protect me here (on earth). 


[सूक्त-५०] 


[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- 9 मित्रावरुण, २ अग्नि, 3 विश्वेदेवा, 
४ गंगाद्या नद्यः। छन्द- जगती, ४ अतिजगती अथवा शक्वरी॥] 
. मित्रावरुणेह (GE 

५५६२. आमाँ ह रक्षतं कुलाययंद्‌ विश्वयन्मा न आ गंन्‌। 

अजकावं दुर्दशींकं 2 [२1:95 Se चळ = 

अजकावं दुर्दशीक॑ तिरो द॑धे मा मां पद्येन रप॑सा विदस्सरु: 11१ l 
ae 1. Mitra and Varuna, protect me here (in this world) let not the 
insidious and spreading (poison) reach me may the equally 
malignant and undiscernible (venom) disappear: let not the 
tortuous (snake) recognize me by the sound of my footsteps. 

Let not the Insidious and Spreading Poison Reach me 
Kulayayat visvayat mà na à gan: the first term is explained sthanam 
| kurvat, making a place or a nest; the second, visesena vardhamanam, 
1 especially increasing: the Scholiast supplies the substantive visam. 

Malignant and Undiscernible Venom— Here again we have only 
epithets, ajakavam, durdrsikam: the first is explained, ajaka nama 
rogavisesah, tad vat: ajakd is the name of a disease like that, a malignant 
poison, according to Sayana; the second is rendered durdarsanam, 


difficult or disagreeable to be seen: each verse of this Sukta is to be 
repeated as an antidote. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


J त d 


a ee Tr 72 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 50 255 


The Tortuous Snake— Tsarus, chadmagámi jihmagah sarpa 
ityarthah: tsaru means what goes stealthily or crookedly, that is to say a 
snake. ; 
५५६३. यद्विजामन्परुषि वन्दनं भुवदष्ठीवन्तौ uf कुल्फौ च देहत्‌। 

E B अगिनष्टच्छोचन्नप॑ E | र धतामितो = ae N bé 1 a 1 
अगिनष्टच्छोचन्नप बा मा मां पद्येन रपसा विदत्त्सरु: 11२ || 

2. May the brilliant Agni counteract that poison which is 
generated in the manifold knots (of trees) and the like, or which is 
smeared upon the knees or ankles: let not the tortuous snake 
recognize me by the sound of my footsteps. 

Poison Generated in the...Knots of Trees— Yad vijaman parusi 
vandanam is thus explained, vandanam etat sanjnakam visam: vardana is 
a poison so named: yad vividha janmani vrksádinám parvani udbhavet, 
which may originate in the variously-born joints of trees and others. 

Which is Smeared upon the Knees or Ankles— Asthivantau 
parikulphau ca dehat: the substantive are in common use for the knee and 
ankle: paridehat is explained, upacitam kuryat, let him smear: but there 
does not seem to be any nominative. 


५५६४. यच्छल्मलौ भव॑ति यन्नदीषु यदोष॑धीभ्यः परि जायते विषम्‌। 
fad देवा निरितस्तत्सुवन्तु मा मां पद्येन रप॑सा विदत््सरः।।३।। 
3. The poison that is in the Salmalr tree, in the rivers, or which 
is generated from plants, may the universal gods remove from 
hence: let not the tortuous (snake) recognize me by the sound of 
my footsteps. 
५५६५. या: प्रवतों निवतं sad उदन्वतीरनुदकाश्च याः। ता अस्मभ्यं पर्यसा 
= ee n देवीरशिपदा E m ki GA E a 
पिन्वमानाः शिवा देवीर भ॑वन्तु सर्वा नद्यो अशिमिदा 
> A > ७ र 3 
yagir il 
4. May the divine rivers, whether flowing down declivities, in 
hollow places, or upwards, whether filled with water or dry, 
nourishing all with their water, be auspicious to us communicating 


| not disease: may all the rivers be unproductive of harm. 
Communicating not Disease— Asipada bhavantu: sipada is said to 


Mu oe ye 


y be the name of a malady, may they be unproductive of the sipada 
1 complaint: perhaps it is the Vedic a form of slipada, the Cochin leg. 

t Unproductive of Harm— Asimidà bhavantu: simi, it is said, means 
vadha, killing, with the negative prefix, and da which gives: ahimsa 
e Prada, not doing harm or injury. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


256 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri Sai 
Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त-५ १] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- आदित्यगण। छन्द- freu] 
५५६६. आदित्यानामव॑सा नूर्तनेन सक्षीमहि शर्म॑णा शन्तमेन। 
अनागास्त्वे अंदितित्वे quu इमं यज्ञं दधतु श्रोष॑माणाः।।१।। 
1. May we, through the protection of the Adityas, be in the 
enjoyment of a new and comfortable dwelling; may the swift- 


moving Adityas, listening to our praises, preserve this their 
worshipper in sinlessness and independence. 


५५६७. आदित्यासो अर्दितिर्मादयन्ता मित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो रजिष्ठाः। 
अस्माकं सन्तु भुवनस्य गोपाः पिब॑न्तु सोममव॑से नो अद्य॥२॥ 
2. May the Adityas and Aditi, and the upright Mitra, Aryaman, 


and Varuna, be exhilarated (by the libation): may the guardians of 


the world be ours also: may they drink the Soma today for our 
preservation. 


५५६८. आदित्या विश्वे मरुत॑श्च fad देवाश्च विश्व॑ ऋभव॑श्च विश्वें। 
इन्द्र अग्निरश्चिना तुष्टुवाना यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11३॥ 

3. All the Adityas, all the Maruts, all the gods, all the Rbhus, 
Indra, Agni, and the Ashvins, (have been) glorified (by us): do you 
all ever cherish us with blessings. 

[सूक्त-५ 9] 

[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रा-वरुणि। देवता- आदित्यगण। छन्द- Ag] 
५५६९. आदित्यासो अदितयः स्याम पूर्देवत्रा व॑सवो मर्त्यत्रा 

सनेम मित्रावरुणा सनन्तो भवेम द्यावापृथिवी भंवन्तः।॥॥१॥ 


1. Adityas, may we be independent: Vasus, (dwelling) among 
the gods, may your protection (extend) to mortals: offering 
(oblations to you), Mitra and Varuna, may we partake (of your 
bounty): may we, heaven and earth exist (through your favour). 


५५७०. मित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो मामहन्त शर्म तोकाय तन॑याय गोपाः। 
P काय T 
मा वो भुजेमान्यजातमेनो मा तत्क॑र्म वसवो यच्चय॑ध्वे।।२।। 
2. May Mitra and Varuna bestow upon us felicity: (may they), 


the guardians (of all men, bestow felicity) upon our sons an 
grandsons: let us not suffer (gods), for offences committed by 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a a 


gir ized by Asya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 257 


Mandal! 
another: let us not, Vasus, do any act by which you may be 
offended. 
a feu k देवस्य 
५५७१. तुरण्यवोऽङ्गिरसो नक्षन्त vei देवस्य सवितुर्रियाना:। 
पिता च dal महान्‌ यजत्रो विशवे देवा: सर्मनसो TAIR I 

3. The Arigirasas, prompt (in worship), soliciting him obtain 
precious (wealth) from Savitd: may the mighty adorable parent, 
and the universal god alike favourable minded, approve (of the 


donation). 
The Mighty Adorable Parent— Pita may be Varuna, the father of 
Vasistha, or Prajapati, the father of all. 


[सूक्त-५३] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- द्यावा-पुथिवी। छन्द- eT] 
५५७२. प्र द्यावां यज्ञैः पृथिवी नमोभिः सबाधं ईळे बृहती यजत्र 
ते चिद्धि पूर्वे कवयों गृणन्त॑ः पुरो मही द॑धिरे देवपुत्रे।॥१॥। 
1. Attended by a concourse (of priests) I worship the adorable 
and mighty Heaven and Earth with sacrifices and praises, those 


two great ones of whom the gods are the sons, whom ancient sages 
glorifying have formerly detained. 


५५७३. प्र पूर्वजे पितरा नव्य॑सीभिीर्भिः कृणुध्वं सद॑ने ऋतस्य॑। 
आ नों द्यावापृथिवी दैव्येन जनेन यातं महिं वां Sem 
2. Place before (us) in the hall of sacrifice, With new songs, the 


ancient parents (of all beings): come to us, Heaven and Earth, with 
the celestial people, for vast is your protecting (wealth). 


५५७४. उतो हि वाँ रत्नधेयानि सन्ति पुरूणिं द्यावापृथिवी सुदासे। 
अस्मे ध॑त्तं यदसदस्कृधोयु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां T:R 
3. Many, Heaven and Earth, are the treasures fit to be given to 


the pious donor (of the oblation): give to us that wealth which is 
unlimited: and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-५४] | 
क्रिषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रा-वरुणि। देवता- वास्तोष्पति। छन्द- freut] | 
| १८७५, वास्तोष्पते प्रति जानीह्यमस्मान्त्स्वावेशो अनमीवो भ॑वा न:1 
| यच्वेमहे प्रति wal जुषस्व शं नों भव द्विपदे शं चतुष्पदे॥१ li 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
258 Rgveda Samhita 


1. Protector of the dwelling, recognize us: be to us an excellent 
abode the non-inflicter of disease: whatever we ask of you, be 
pleased to grant: be the bestower of happiness on our bipeds and 
quadrupeds. 

Protector of the Dwelling— Vastospati: pati, lord or protector of the 
Vastu, the foundation of a house, put for the house itself: this Sukta is 
translated by Mr. Colebrooke, Asiatic Researches, Vol. VIII. p. 390. 


| ५५७६. वास्तोष्पते प्रतरणो न एधि गयस्फानो गोभिरश्वैभिरिनदो। 
| अजरासस्ते सख्ये स्याम पितेव पुत्रान्प्रति नो जुषस्व॥२।। 


2. Protector of the dwelling, be our preserver and the 

augmenter of our wealth: possessed of cattle and horses, Indra, 

| may we, through your friendship, be exempt from decay: be 
। favourable to us, like a father to his sons. 


| ५५७७. वास्तोष्पते शग्मयाँ संसदा ते सक्षीमहिं रण्वयां गातुमत्यां। 
| ER Sah UR z = 
पाहि क्षेम॑ उत योगे वर नो यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।३॥। 

| 3. Protector of the dwelling, may we be possessed of a 
| comfortable, delightful, opulent abode, bestowed by you: protect 
} our wealth, whether in possession or expectation: and do you, 
— (gods), ever cherish us with blessings. 
I Opulent— Gatumatya is rendered by Mr. Colebrooke melodious, 

from ga, to sing: Sayana interprets it here by dhanavati, having wealth. 


| And do You God— Or yuyam may be put for tvam, do you 
| Vastospati, etc. 


[सूक्त-५५] 


[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वास्तोष्पति, २-८ इन्द्र (प्रस्वापिनी 
| उपनिषद्‌)। छन्द- १ गायत्री, २-४ उपरिष्टाद्‌ बृहती, ५-८ अनुष्ठुप्‌।] 

i VII. The occasion of this Sūkta is narrated from the Brhaddevatd: 
Vasistha coming by night to the house of Varuna, intended to sleep there: 
In the watch-dog barking, was about to lay hold of him, when he appeased 
the animal by this hymn: according to another story briefly told by 
Sayana, and found in the Niti Manjart, Vasistha had passed three days 
| without being able to get any food; on the night of the fourth he entered 
| the house of Varuna to steal Something to eat, and had made his way to 
the larder, the Kosfagara, when the god set upon him, but was put to sleep 


by these verses, wherefore they are to be recited on similar occasions by 
thieves and burglars. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


m5; 


SMB 42० 203 eo tae. । ०७ 


Digiti F ion C à : 
01010 Samal Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 259 


५५७८. अमीवहा वास्तोष्पते विश्वा रूपाण्याविशन्‌। 
सखां सुशेवं एधि न:11१॥ 
1. Protector of the dwelling, remover of disease, assuming all 
(kinds of) forms, be to us a friend, the granter of happiness. 
५५७९. यदर्जुन सारमेय दतः पिशङ्ग यच्छसे। 
al 3 1 Bay बप्सतो 1 
वाव भ्राजन्त ऋष्टय उप पु i नि पु SIRI 
2. White offspring of Saramd, with tawny limbs, although 
barking you display your teeth against me, bristling like lances in 
your gums, nevertheless, go quietly to sleep. 
White f= of Sarama— Sdrameya, progeny of Saarmá, bitch 


of Indra: he is called arjuna, white, as well as pirigala, tawny: the latter, 
according to Sayana, in some members, kesucidangesu. 


५५८०. स्तेनं राय सारमेय तर्स्करं वा पुनःसर। 
स्तोतृनिन्द्रस्य रायसि किमस्मान्दुच्छुनायसे नि षु uuum 
3. Offspring of Saramd, returning (to the charge), attack the 
pilferer or the thief: why dose you assail the worshippers of Indra 
? Why dose you intimidate us ? Go quietly to sleep. 


The Pilferer or the Thief— Stenam taskaram ca: the first is he who 
steals privily or hidden property, the latter carries it off openly. 


५५८१. त्वं सूंकरस्य॑ adie तवं दर्दर्तु सूकर:। 
्तोतृनिन्द्र॑स्य रायसि किमस्मान्दुच्छुनायसे नि षु स्व॑प।।४।। 


4. Do you rend the hog: let the hog rend you: why dose you 
assail the worshippers of Indra ? Why dose you intimidate us ? Go 
quietly to sleep. 


५५८२. सस्तुं माता सस्तु पिता सस्तु श्वा सस्तु विश्पतिः। 
ससन्तु wd ज्ञातयः सस्त्वयमभितो SA: IN 
5. Let the mother sleep let the father sleep, let the dog sleep, 
let the son-in-law sleep, let all the kindred sleep, let the people 
(who are stationed) around sleep. 


: Let the Son-in-Law Sleep— Sastu vispati: the latter is explained 
Jamatr, or, literally, the master of all: grhi, the householder. 


५५८३. य आस्ते यश्च चरति यश्च पश्य॑ति नो जन:। 
तेषां सं ह॑न्मो अक्षाणि यथेदं हर्म्यं तथा 11६11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and gGangotri 


260 gveda Samhità 


6. The man who sits, or he who walks, or he who sees us, of 
these we shut up the eyes, so that they may be as unconscious as 
the mansion. 


५५८४. सहस्रशङ्गो वृषभो यः संमुद्रादुदाचरत्‌। 
तेना सहस्येना वयं नि जनांनूत्स्वापयामसि ।।७।। 


7. We put men to sleep through the irresistible might or the 
bull with a thousand horns, who rises out of the ocean. 

The Bull with a Thousand Horns, Etc.— Sahasrasrügo vrsabho 
yah samudrdd uddcarat, the sun with a thousand rays: through the 


worship of the sun, at a later date, Kumara was the patron of house- 
breakers. 


५५८५. प्रोष्ठेशया वह्येशया नारीर्यास्तल्पशीवरी:। 
खियो याः पुण्यंगन्धास्ताः सर्वा: स्वापयामसि।।८।। 


8. We put to sleep all those women are lying in the courtyard 
in litter on the bed, the women who are decorated with holiday 
perfumes. 

The Women who are Decorated with Holiday Perfumes— Striyo 
yah punyagandhah, mangalya gandháh, wearing garlands of fragrant 
flowers on festival occasions, as at marriages and the like. 


। ANUVAKA IV 
[सूक्त- ५६] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रा-वरुणि। देवता- मरुद्गण। छन्द- ET, १-११ 
द्विपदा विराट्‌।] 
५५८६. क ई व्यक्ता नरः सनीळा रुद्रस्य मर्या अधा स्वश्चाः।।१॥ 


1. Who are these resplendent chiefs, the dwellers in one abode, 


the sons of Rudra, friends of man, at present well mounted ? 
Sdmayeda 433. 


५५८७. east जनूंषि वेद ते अङ्ग विद्रे मिथो जनित्र॑म्‌।।२।। 


| 2. No one indeed knows their origin, they alone respectively 
í know their birth. 


५५८८. अभि स्वपूभिर्मिथो वपन्त वात॑स्वनसः श्येना SELLR 


3. They go together by their own pure paths: roaring like the 
i wind, and fleet as falcons, they mutually rival each other. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ManQigitiZeSbk tary Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 261 


५५८९. एतानि धीरों निण्या चिकेत पृश्निर्यदूधों मही Rr | 


4. The sage may know those white-complexioned beings (the 
Maruts), whom the vast Prishni born at her udder. 

White-Complexioned beings, the Maruts— का ninya, which | 
Sayana explains, sveta varnant bhütàni marutdtmakani, white-coloured | 
beings, identical with, the Maruts. | 

Bore at her Udder— Udho babhdra: udhas may mean the 
firmament of the womb, according to Sáyana. 


५५९०. सा विट्‌ सुवीरां मरुद्धिरस्तु सनात्सहन्ती पुष्यन्ती नृम्णम्‌।५1। | 
5. May the people, through (the favours of) the Maruts, always | 


victorious, possessed of male posterity, and in the enjoyment of 
E! 


५५९१. यामं येष्ठाः शुभा शोभिष्ठाः श्रिया सम्मिश्ला ओर्जोभिरुग्रा: 1 N 
6. The Maruts rapidly repair to the place (of their destination), 


richly decorated with ornaments, invested with beauty, terrible by 
their strength. 


५५९२. उग्रं व ओज॑ः स्थिरा शवांस्यधा मरुद्धिर्गणस्तुर्विष्मान्‌।1७ 11 
7. Terrible be your strength, steadfast your energies, 
prosperous be the company of the Maruts. 


५५९३. शुभ्रो वः शुष्मः क्रुध्मी मनाँसि धुनिर्मुनिरिव शर्धस्य धृष्णोः।।८॥ 
8. Glorious is your vigour, unrelenting are your minds; (the 


exertion) of your irresistible force, the agitator (of the trees), is like 


(the manifold tone of the prayers of) a muni. 

Like the Manifold tone of the Prayers of a Muni— The text has 
dhuni muniriva, the agitation like a muni; the sounds produced by the 
shaking of the trees are like the varied intonations of a reciter of praises, 
is Sdyana’s explanation. 


५५९४. सनेम्यस्मद्युयोत॑ दिद्युं मा वों दुर्मतिरिह प्रणंडन: 11९ | 
9. Withhold from us your ancient blazing (weapon) let not 
your displeasure light upon us at this sacrifice. 
५५९५. प्रिया वो नाम॑ हुवे तुराणामा यत्तृपन्मरुतो वावशानाः।।१०॥। 
10. I invoke your beloved names, Maruts, destroyers (of foes), 
that they who are desirous of the offering may be satisfied. 
५५९६. स्वायुधास॑ इष्मिण॑ः सुनिष्का उत स्वयं wea: शुम्भमाना:।।११॥ 
11. Bearers are (the Maruts) of bright weapons, rapid are they 


in motion, wearers of brilliant ornaments, and self-radiators of 
their persons. 


4 CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
262 Rgveda Samhita 


५५९७. शुची वो हव्या म॑रुतः शुचीनां शुचिं हिनोम्यध्वरं शुचिंभ्यः। 
ऋतेन सत्यमृतसाप॑ आयज्छुर्चिजन्मानः शुर्च॑यः पावकाः।।१२॥। 
12. Pure oblations be offered, Maruts, to you who are pure: the 


shedders of water proceed by truth to truth, pure, purifying, of pure 
birth. 


अंसेष्वा खादयों | 1 
५५९८. अंसेष्वा म॑रुतः खादयो वो वक्षःसु रुकमा उपशिश्रियाणाः। 
sil | धैर्यच्छमाना | 
वि विद्युतो न वृष्टिभी रुचाना अनु स्वधामायुधेर्यच्छमानाः।।१३।। 
13. Bright ornaments, Maruts, are on your shoulders, shining 
(necklaces) are pendant on your breasts, glittering With rain, like 
lightnings, you are distributing the waters with your weapons. 
Bright Ornaments— Khadayo alankára visesah: khádi occurs 
before for a guard for the hand, I. 23. 4. 3. ; it is more usual to describe 
the Maruts as bearing lances on their shoulders. 
Shining Necklaces— The text has only rukma, rocamána, shining: 


the Scholiast supplies hara: elsewhere the Maruts are said to have golden 
cuirasses on their breasts, and possibly rukma here implies the same. 


५५९९. प्र बुध्न्या व ईरते महाँसि प्र नामानि प्रयज्यवस्तिरध्वम्‌। 
सहस्तियं दम्यं भागमेतं गृहमेधीयं मरुतो जुषध्वम्‌।।१४।। 
14. Your celestial splendours, Maruts, spread wide: objects of 


worship, you send down (the waters) that beat down (the dust): 
accept, Maruts, this your portion of the domestic worship of the 
household multiplied a thousand-fold. 

Waters that Beat Down the Dust— Namani tiradhvam, panstn 
namayanti; nàmáni udakáni: namani means waters, for they bend down 
the dust. 

Multiplied a Thousand-Fold— How can one portion become a 
thousand? Asks the Scholiast; and he answers by quoting a rather 
obscurely expressed text, which implies that the amounts of an offering is 
computed, not by its actual number, but by that assigned to it by the 


divinity to whom it is offered, yavad eka devata kámayate, ydvadekd 
tavad ahutih prathate. 


५६००. यदि स्तुतस्य॑ मरुतो अधीथेत्था विप्र॑स्य वाजिनो हवीमन्‌। 
मक्षू रायः सुवीर्यस्य दात नू चिद्यमन्य आदभदरांवा॥॥१५।। 


15. If, Maruts, you justly appreciate the praise of the devout 
offerer of (sacrificial) food, conjoined with oblations, then 
promptly bestow (upon us) riches, comprehending excellent male 
posterity, such as no unfriendly man can take away. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a SS TS 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 56 263 
५६०१. अत्यांसो न ये मरुतः स्वञ्चो यक्षदृशो न शुभयन्त मर्याः। 
ते eur शिशवो न शुभ्रा वत्सासो न प्रक्रीळिनः पयोधा:11१६।। 
16. The swift-moving Maruts are like rapid horses, shining | 


like men gazing at a festival innocent as children in the (paternal) 
mansion, frolicksome as calves, they are the dispensers of water. 


५६०२. दशस्यन्तों नो मरुतों मृळन्तु वरिवस्यन्तो रोद॑सी सुमेकें। 
आरे गोहा नृहा वधो वों अस्तु सुम्नेभिरस्मे व॑सवो नमध्वम्‌।।१७॥। 
z= May the munificent Maruts, fiiling the beautiful heaven 
and earth with their glory, make us happy: your fatal weapon, the 
render of clouds, the destroyer of men, be far from us: bend down 
to us, Vasus, with blessings. 
५६०३. आ वो होतां जोहवीति Ga: सत्राची रातिं मुतो गृणानः। 
य ईव॑तो वृषणो अस्ति गोपाः सो अद्व॑यावी हवते व उकथैः।।१८।। 
18. Praising your universal liberality, Maruts, the ministrant 
priest repeatedly worships you, seated (in the sacrificial chamber): 
he, showerers (of benefits), who is the guardian of the zealous 
(worshipper), he (the priest), who is void of insincerity, glorifies ] 
you with hymns. I 
५६०४. इमे तुरं मरुतों रामयन्तीमे सहः सहंस आ नमन्ति। 
इमे wid वनुष्यतो नि पान्ति गुरु दवेषो अर॑रुषे दधन्ति॥१९।। 
19. These, Maruts, give pleasure to the zealous (worshipper): 
these humble the strength of the strong man: these protect their 
adorers from the malignant: they entertain severe displeasure 
towards the withholder of offerings. 
५६०५. इमे i चिन्मरुतो जुनन्ति भूमि चिद्यथा वस॑वो जुषन्त। 
अप॑ बाधध्वं वृषणस्तमांसि धत्त विश्वं तन॑यं तोकमस्मे॥२०॥। 
20. These Maruts, encourage the prosperous man. they | 
encourage the (poor) wanderer: they, as Vasus, are pleased (with 


you): showerers (of benefits), dissipate the darkness: grant us 
Many sons and grandsons. 


1 
५६०६. मा वों दात्रान्मरुतो निरराम मा यश्चाईष्म रथ्यो विभागे। आ न: 
v = e x iz 
स्पार्हे भ॑जतना वसव्येई यदीं सुजातं quen वो अस्ति॥२१॥। 
21. Never, Maruts, may we be excluded from your bounty: let 
US not, lords of chariots, be last in its apportionment: make us 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


264 Rgveda Samhita 


sharers in that desirable opulence which, showerers (of benefits), 
in born of you. 


५६०७. सं यद्धन॑न्त मन्युभिर्जनास: शूरां यहीष्वोषंधीषु विक्षु। 
अध स्मा नो मरुतो रुद्रियासस्त्रातारो भूत पृर्तनास्वर्य: २२ ।। 


22. When heroic men, filled with wrath, assemble for (the sake 
of conquering) many plants and people, then, Maruts, sons of 
Rudra, be our defenders in battles against our enemies. 

Many Plants and People— Bahvisu, osadhisu viksu is explained, 
mahatisu osadhisu prajdsu jetavydsu in great plants and people to be 
subdued; by plants or vegetables, osadhi, we may perhaps understand 
cultivated lands. 


५६०८. भूरि चक्र मरुतः पित्र्याण्युक्थानि या व॑ः शस्यन्ते पुरा चित्‌। 
मरुद्भिरुग्रः पृतनासु साळहां मरुद्धिरित्सनिंता वाजमर्वी i83 ।। 
23. You have bestowed, Maruts, many (benefits) on our 
forefathers, which praiseworthy (benefits) have been celebrated in 
former times: by the (favour of the) Maruts the fierce (warrior) is 


victorious in combats: by the (favour of the) Maruts the 
worshipper ever obtains food. 

The Worshipper ever Obtains Food— Marudbhir, it, sanità vajam 
arya: the last word is explained, stotrair abhigantd, one who overcomes 
by praises; or it may have its usual sense of a house, when the sentence 


may be rendered, through the Maruts a horse is the obtainer (of success) 
in war. 


५६०९. अस्मे वीरो म॑रुतः शुष्म्यस्तु जनानां यो असुंरो विधर्ता। 
x WY 2: 
अपो येन सुक्षितये तरेमाध स्वमोको अभि व॑: स्याम।।२४।। 
24. May our male progeny, Maruts, be vigorous, one who is 


intelligent, the scatterer of (hostile) men, by whom we may cross 


the water (of enmity) to a secure dwelling: may we, your 
(servants), dwell in our own abode. 


५६१०. तन्न इन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अग्निराप ओषधीर्वनिनो जुषन्त। 
शर्मन्त्स्याम > 7 = 
शर्मन्त्स्याम मरुतामुपस्थै यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा न:11२५॥ 
25. May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Agni, the waters, the plants, the 


trees, be pleased with us: may we recline in happiness upon the lap 
of the Maruts: and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


12201. ee 


See a ee 

Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 57 265 

[सूक्त-५७] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रा-वरुणि। देवता- मरुद्गण। छन्द- Ag] 
५६११. मध्वों वो नाम मार्रुतं यजत्राः प्र यज्ञेषु शव॑सा मदत्ति। 
ये रेजय॑न्ति रोदसी चिदुर्वी पिन्वन्त्युत्सं यदर्यासुरुग्रा:॥॥१॥॥ 

1. Adorable (Maruts), the worshippers vigorously celebrate at | 
sacrifices your appellation of company of the Maruts, they who | 
cause the spacious heaven and earth to tremble, the clouds to rain, 
the move everywhere terrible. 

५६१२. निचेतारो हि मरुतो गृणन्तं WORT यज॑मानस्य Wil 
अस्मार्कमद्य विदथेषु बर्हिरा वीतये सदत पिप्रियाणाः।।२।। 

2. The Maruts verily are the benefactors of him who praises 
them, the gratifiers of the wishes of the institutor of the solemnity: 
do you, being pleased, sit down today upon the grass at our 
ceremony, to partake (of the sacrificial food). 

५६१३. नैताव॑दन्ये मरुतो यथेमे भ्राजन्ते रुकमैरायुँधैस्तनूर्भि:। 
आ रोद॑सी विश्वपिश॑ः पिशानाः संमानमञ्ज्यञ्जते शुभे FLIR 

3. No other (deities give) such (good things) as the Maruts, as 
they shine with brilliant (ornaments), weapons and persons: 
illumining heaven and earth, wide-radiating, they heighten their 
common lustre for (our) good. 

५६१४. ऋधक्सा वों मरुतो दिद्युदस्तु "E आग॑ः पुरुषता कराम। 
J 
मा वस्तस्यामपिं भूमा यजत्रा अस्मे वो अस्तु सुमतिश्वनिष्ठा 1४11 


4. May that blazing (weapon) of your, Maruts, be far from us, 
although, through human infirmities, we offer you offence: let us 
hot, adorable Maruts, be exposed to your (shaft): may your favour, 
the source of abundance. Ever be shown unto us. 


५६१५. कृते feed मरुतों रणन्तानवद्यासः शुच॑यः पावकाः। 
प्र णोऽवत सुमतिभिर्यजत्राः प्र वाजेभिस्तिरत पुष्यसे न:11५॥ 
5. May the Maruts who are irreproachable, pure, and 


Purifying, delight in this our ceremony: protect us, adorable 


Maruts, With favourable thoughts: be ever anxious to sustain us 
With food. d 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


266 Rgveda Samhita 
५६१६. उत स्तुतासों मरुतो वयन्तु विश्वेभिर्नामभिर्नरो हवीषि। 
ददांत नो अमृतस्य प्रजायै जिगृत रायः सूनृतां मघानि i 
6. May the glorified Maruts partake of the oblations, they who, 
accompanied by the bending waters, are the leaders of rites: 


bestow water, Maruts, upon our progeny, return suitable opulence 
for (the donation of sacrificial) riches. 
५६१७. आ स्तुतासो मरुतो विश्वं ऊती अच्छा सूरीन्त्सर्वताता जिगात। 

ये नस्त्मनां शतिनो वर्धयन्ति यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:1७॥। 

7. Glorified Maruts, do you all come at the time of sacrifice to 
the presence of the worshippers along with your protections, for 
you are they who, of your own will, multiply our hundreds: do you 
ever cherish us with blessings. 

Who...Multiply our Hundreds— Ye nas tmand satino vardhayanti, 


who increase us, that with sons, grandsons, and the like, we may become 
hundreds. 


[सूक्त-५८] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ट मैत्रा-वरुणि। देवता- मरुद्गण। छन्द- fau] 
५६१८. प्र सांकमुक्षै अर्चता गणाय यो दैव्य॑स्य धाम्नस्तुविष्मान्‌। 


उत क्षोदन्ति रोद॑सी महित्वा नक्ष॑न्ते नाकं निर्ऋतेरवंशात्‌।।१।। 


1. Offer worship to the company (of the Maruts), the 
associated dispensers of moisture, which is powerful over the 
celestial region: the Maruts, by their greatness, oppress both 
heaven and earth: they spread from the earth and the firmament to 
heaven. 

They Spread, from the Earth and the Firmament to Heaven— 


Naksante nākam nirrti ayarisdt: nirrti is here said to be a synonym of 
bhümi, and avansa of the antariksa. 


५६१९. Syst मरुतस्त्वेष्येण भीमांसस्तुविमन्यवोऽयांसः। 
प्र ये महोभिरोजसोत सन्ति fal वो याम॑न्भयते स्वर्दूक्‌।।२।। 


2. Formidable, high-spirited, quick-moving Maruts, your birth 
is from the illustrious Rudra: every gazer on the sun is alarmed 
with the course of you who are preeminent in lustre and strength 

Every Gazer on the Sun— Visvah svardrk, that is, all living 
creatures; or it may mean also, according to Sayana, what looks up to the 


sky, that is, a tree, trees being naturally alarmed at the approach of the 
wind. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| ; 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 59 267 
५६२०, FEA मघव॑द्धयो दधात जुजोषत्रिन्मरुत: सुष्टुतिं न॑:। 

गतो नाध्वा वि तिराति जन्तुं प्र ण॑ः स्यार्हाभिरूतिभिंस्तिरेत।।३॥। 

3. Grant, Maruts, to us who are affluent (in sacrificial offering) 
abundant food; accept complacently our earnest praise: the path 
you follow is not hurtful to living beings: may it increase our 
(prosperity) by (your) desirable protections. 

५६२१. युष्मोतो विप्रो मरुतः शतस्वी युष्मोतो अर्वा सहुरिः सहस्री। 
= wu हन्त qd प्र तद्दो अस्तु धूतयो देष्णम्‌।४॥। 

4. The pious man protected, Maruts, by you, is the possessor 
of hundreds: the assailant, overcomer (of his foes), protected by 
you, is he possessor of thousands: protected by you, the Emperor 
slays his enemy: may the wealth that is given, agitators, by you 
ever by abundant. 

५६२२. ताँ आ रुद्रस्य॑ मीळहुषों विवासे कुविन्नंसन्ते मरुतः पुर्न: | 

यत्सस्वर्ता जिहीळिरे यदाविरव तदेन॑ ईमहे तुराणाम्‌। ५11 

5. I adore those sons of the showerer, Rudra: may the Maruts, 
repeatedly invoked, again come to us: may we expiate (by praise) 
whatever we have committed secretly or openly against the swift- 
moving Maruts, by which they are displeased. 

५६२३. प्र सा वांचि सुष्टुतिर्मघोनामिदं सूक्त मरुतों जुषन्त। 
आराच्चिद्द्वेषो वृषणो युयोत यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।६।। 

6. The pious praise of the opulent Maruts has been recite: may 
the Maruts be gratified by this hymn: remove far from us, 
showerers (of benefits), those who hate us: and do you ever cherish 
us with blessings. 

[सूक्त- ५९] 

[xfü- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मरुद्गण, १२ रुद्र (मृत्यु विमोचनी)। 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समा सतोबृहती), ७-८ त्रिष्टुप्‌, ९-११ गायत्री, 
१२ aget] 

i l 1 इदमिदं देवांसो 5 
५६२४. यं त्रायध्व इदमिंदं देवांसो यं च नय॑थ। 
1 1 A E 

TH अग्ने वरुण मित्रार्यमन्मरुतः शर्म यच्छत।1१ ii 

1. Agni, Varuna, Mitra, Maruts, grant happiness, gods, to him 


whom you i ES 
preserve from (the perils of) this (world), whom you 
guide here (to the paths of virtuale : ! : 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 1 eee S 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


268 Rgveda Samhita 


From this World...to the Paths of Virtue— Yam tráyadhvam idam 
idam, yam ca nayatha: idam is explained, in the first place, by itas, from 
this, bhayahetoh, cause of peril; in the second, idam implies san-márgam, 
road of virtue. 


५६२५. युष्पार्क देवा अवसाहनि प्रिय ईननस्तरति द्विष॑ः। 
प्र स क्षय तिरते वि महीरिषो यो वो वराय दाशंति।॥२॥ 


2. Through your protection, gods, the man who worships on an 
auspicious day overcomes his adversaries: he who offers abundant 
(sacrificial) food to you to detain you (at his rite) enlarges his 
habitation. 


५६२६. नहि व॑श्वरमं चन वसिष्ठः परिमंसंते। 
अस्माकमद्य म॑रुतः सुते सचा विश्वे पिबत कामिन॑ः।।३।। 
3. Vasistha overlooks not the very lowest among you: Maruts, 
who are desirous (of the libation), do you all drink together today 


of our effused Soma juices. 
Samaveda, 241. 


५६२७. नहि व॑ ऊतिः पृत॑नासु मर्धति यस्मा अरांध्वं नरः। 
अभि व आवर्त्सुमतिर्नवीयसी तूयं यात पिपीषवः।।४।। 


4. Your protection, leaders (of rites), yields no detriment to 
him whom you defend in battles: may your latest favour return to 
us: come quickly, eager to drink the Soma. 


५६२८. ओ घु घृष्विराधसो यातनान्धांसि पीतयें। 
इमा वो हव्या म॑रुतो ररे हि क॑ मो घ्वरैन्यत्र गन्तन।।५।। 
5. Do you whose riches are connected together come to 


partake of the (sacrificial) viands, for, Maruts, I offer to you these 
oblations, therefore go not away to any other (sacrifice). 


५६२९. आ च॑ नो बर्हिः सद॑ताविता च॑ न: स्पार्हाणि दात॑वे वसु। 
HAMA मरुतः सोम्ये मधौ स्वाहेह मांदयाध्वै।।६।। 


6. Sit down on our sacred grass: come to bestow upon we 
desirable riches: doing no harm, Maruts delight in the sweet Soma 
libation presented at this season. 


५६३०. सस्वश्चिद्धि तन्त्र: शुम्भ॑माना आ हंसासो नीलपृष्ठा अपप्तन्‌। 
विश्वं शर्धी अभितों मा नि Xe नरो न रण्वाः सर्वने Hard: IN l 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OOOO I—a 1 : 


4 


to 


SC 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 59 2 


7. May the Maruts yet unrevealed, decorating their persons, 
descend like black-backed swans: let the entire company gather 
round me like happy men rejoicing together at a solemn rite. 


५६३१. यो नों मरुतो अभि दुर्हणायुस्तिरश्चत्ानिं वसवो जिर्घासति। 
ge: पाशान्प्रति स मुचीष्ट तपिष्ठेन हन्म॑ना हन्तना Wu 
8. The man, Maruts, who wounds our feelings, he who, 
rebuked by all, yet seeks, Vasus, to kill us, he would bind us in the 


wounds of (Varuna), the avenger (of iniquity), such a man do you 
destroy with a consuming fatal weapon. 


1 è हविर्मरुंतस्तज्जुजुष्टन L युष्माकोती 
५६३२. सान्त॑पना इदं हविर्मरुतस्तज्जुजुष्टन। युष्माकोती रिंशादसः।।९।। 


9. Maruts, destroyers of foes, this oblation is designed for you: 
do you, who are the devourers of enemies, (coming) with your 
protections, graciously accept it. 


गृहमे 1 मरुतो | युष्माकोती 1 
५६३३. धास आ गत मरुतो माप भूतन। युष्माकोती सुंदानवः।।१०।। 


10. Objects of domestic worship, munificent Maruts, come 
with your protections: go not away. 
> 5.4 | 1 c pej] [ES 
५६३४. See d: स्वतवसः कवयः सूर्यत्वच:। यज्ञ मरत आ वृण।।११॥। 
ll. Maruts, of independent strength, who are far-seeing, 
glorious as the sun, come hither, come hither, I invoke you to the 
sacrifice. 


Glorious as the Sun— The text has Surya tvacas, literally, sun- 
skinned. 


५६३५. त्र्य॑म्बकं यजामहे सुगन्धि पुष्टिवर्धनम्‌। 
उर्वारुकमिव बन्ध॑नान्मृत्योर्मक्षीय मामृतांत्‌।।१२॥ 

12. We worship Tryambaka, whose fame is fragrant, the 
augmenter of increase: may I be liberated from death, and, like the 
Urvaruka from its stalk, but not to immortality: let us worship 
Trayambaka, whose fame is fragrant, the augmenter of increase: 
may I be liberated from death like the Urvaruka from its stalk, but 
not unto immortality. 
ee According to the Scholiast the term streams the 
Wu s uka, of the three deities, Brahma, Visnu and Rudra: the Rg- 

¢ entifies him with mahatva: but the authority is of no great 

Weight. 
mas Fame is Fragrant— Sugaridhim is explained, 
Punya Kirtim, whose fame of virtue is spread; or as illustrated by 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


F Rgveda Samhita 


another text quoted in the comment, in like manner as the fragrance of a 
tree full in flower sheds sweetness, so spreads the gragrance of holy 
actions; the memory of the just, smell sweet and blossoms in the dust. 

The Augmenter of Increase— Pusti-vardhanam, the augmenter of 
nutrition, is interpreted, jagad-vijam, the seed of the world; but the simple 
meaning of the multiplier of good things subservient to objects of bodily 
enjoyment, as wealth, Sariradhanadivisayan vardhayati yah, is preferable. 

May I be Liberated from Death— Mrtyor maksiya may also mean, 
may I be liberated from the world, or the revolutions of life and death: 
may I attain moksa. 

Urvaruka— The urváruka is called also the karkati, a species of 


cucumber. 
But not to Immortality-— Mamyrtat ma d amrta, not to or until the 
| immortal or immortality, understanding thereby cither the long life of the 


gods or svarga paradise. The wish expressed being for final 
emancipation: this notion, and the denomination Tryambaka, are, in my 
opinion, decisive of the spuriousness of this stanza: the repetition of the 
| half stanza to make up a whole is something unusual; the verse occurs in 
| the Yajurveda, 3. 60, and is, in some instances differently interpreted: 

Tryambaka is termed ndtratrayopetam Rudram, the triocular Rudra: 
| sugaridhim, divya-gandhopetam,' of celestial fragrance: the urvaruka is 
said to mean the karkardhu, which, when ripe falls of itself from its stalk. 


| [सूक्त-६०] 

| [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मित्रावरुण, १ सूर्य। छन्द- त्रिषठुप्‌।] 
| ५६३६. यदद्य सूर्य ब्रतो5नांगा उद्यन्मित्राय वरुणाय सत्यम्‌। 

| वयं देवत्रादिते स्याम तव प्रियारों अर्यमन्‌ qnd: TIT 


l. Sarya, when rising today, declare the truth to Mitra and 
Varuna, that we are void of sin: may we, Aditi, be (approved of) 
among the gods: praising you, Aryaman, may we be dear to you. 


५६३७. एष स्य मित्रावरुणा गुचक्षा उभे उदेति सूर्यौ अभि ज्मन्‌। 
1 ` i = 
विश्व॑स्य स्थातुर्जगतश्व गोपा ऋजु मतेषु वृजिना च पश्यन्‌।।२ ।। 
| 2. This Sürya, the beholder of man, rises, Mitra and Varuna, 
| upon both (heaven and earth), moving (in the sky): he who is the 


preserver of all that is stationary or moveable, witnessing the 
upright acts or the sins of mortals. 


१. यथा वृक्षस्य संपुष्पितस्य दूराद्गन्धो वात्येवं पुण्यस्थ कृर्मणो दूरादगन्यो वाति (de आ० 
१०.९) 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


1575s 


Digitized by Ana Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sūkta 6 


५६३८. अयुक्त सप्त हरि्तः सधस्थाद्या ई वहन्त सूर्य घृताचीँ: 
धामानि मित्रावरुणा युवाकुः सं यो यूथेव जनिमाति चट्टे ॥३॥ 
3. He has harnessed his seven bay steeds, Mitra and Varuna. 
(to come) from your common dwelling-place, (the firmament): the 
horses that, shedding water, convey that Surya who, friendly to 
your both, (contemplates all) regions, and looks carefully upon 
living creatures as (a herdsman) upon the herd. 
= उदव पृक्षासो मर्धुमन्तो अस्थुरा सूर्या अरुहच्छुक्रमर्णः। 
यस्मा आदित्या अध्वनो रद॑न्ति मित्रो अर्यमा वरुण: सजोषां:।४।। 
4. For you, (Mitra and Varuna), the sweet-flavoured viands 
have been prepared: the sun has ascended the shining firmament, 


for whom the Adityas and the consentient Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman 
make ready the paths. 


५६४०. इमे चेतारो अनृतस्य भूरेमित्रो अर्यमा वरुणो हि सन्ति। 
इम कऋतस्व॑ वावृधुर्दुरोणे शग्मासः पुत्रा अर्दितेरदब्धा: | 1५11 
5. These (deities), Mitra, Arvaman, Varuna, are the detecters 


of much untruth: these unconquered sons of Aditi, dispensers of 
happiness, are magnified in the hall of sacrifice. 
५६४१. इमे मित्रो वरुणो दूळभांसोऽचेतसं चिच्चितयन्ति दक्षै:। 

अपि क्रतुं सुचेत॑सं वतन्तस्तिरश्चिदंहः सुपथां नयन्ति॥६।। 

6. These, the unsubdued Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, animate 
with energies the unconscious (sleepers): repairing to the 
intelligent performer (of pious acts), they lead (him), by safe paths 

) (to heaven), removing all iniquity. 


५६४२. इमे दिवो अनिमिषा पृथिव्याश्रिकित्वांसों अचेतर्स नयन्ति। | 
Want चित्रद्यो गाधम॑स्ति पारं नों अस्य विष्पितस्य॑ पर्षन्‌।।७।। | 


7. (Beholding) with unclosing eyes, and cognizant (of the 


271 


I, things) of heaven and earth, they conduct the ignorant man (to 
९ duty): in the lowest depth of the river, (through them), there isa 
e bottom: may they lead us to the opposite shore of the vast expanse. 


i To the Opposite Shore of the Vast Expanse— Vispitasya parsam: 
i former is explained only by vydptitasya, expanded: Sáyana supplies 
[o € substantive karmanah act duty. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
272 Rgveda Sarhhita 
५६४३. यद्‌ गोपावददितिः शर्म भद्र मित्रो यच्छन्ति वरुणः सुदासें। 
तस्मिन्ना तोकं तन॑यं दर्धाना मा कर्म देवहेळनं तुरासः।।८॥। 
8. Including our sons and grandsons in that preserving and 
auspicious felicity which Aditi, Mitra, and Varuna confer upon the 


liberal donor (of the oblation), may we never, acting precipitately, 
incur the displeasure of the deities. 


५६४४. अव वेदिं होत्राभिर्यजेत रिपः काश्चिंदवरुणध्ुतः सः। 
परि दवेषाभिर्यमा वृणक्तु uem वृषणा उ लोकम्‌।।९॥ 
9. Let my adversary desecrate the altar by (ill-expressed) 
praises: repelled by Varuna, may he (undergo) various sufferings: 


may Aryaman defend us from those who hate us: confer, showerers 
(of benefits), a vast region upon the liberal donor (of oblations). 


५६४५. सस्वश्चिद्धि समृतिस्त्वेष्येंषामपीच्येन सह॑सा सहन्ते। 
| युष्मद्धिया वृषणो रेज॑माना दक्ष॑स्य चिन्महिना मृळतां नः।।१०॥ 
| 10. The association of these (three deities) is of mysterious 
lustre: by their secret strength they overcome (all enemies): 


=~ showerers (of benefits), through fear (of you our opponents) are 
trembling: have mercy upon us in the mightiness of your strength. 
ब्रह्मणे सातौ 

| ५६४६. यो ब्रह्मणे सुमतिमायजाते वाज॑स्य सातौ प॑र॒मस्य॑ रायः। 

H Lu a "ih 5 T E a 

| सीक्ष॑न्त मन्युं मघवानो अर्य उरु क्षयाय चक्रिरे सुधातु॥११॥ 

। 11. These munificent (deities) conjointly accept the praise of 
the worshipper, and bestow a spacious mansion for a dwelling 
i upon him who, for the sake of food and excellent riches, devotes 
i his mind to your glorification. 

i Who Devotes his Mind to your Glorification— Yo brahmane 
j sumatim dyajdte is explained, yo yajamāno dadāti sobhanam buddhim 


yusmat stoktrüpáya, the institutor of the rite, who gives pure or pious 
understanding to the nature or form of your praise. 


| ५६४७. इयं देव पुरोहितिर्युवभ्या यज्ञेषुं मित्रावरुणावकारि। 
| विश्वानि दुर्गा पिपृतं तिरो नों यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न: NRR 
12. Excellent Mitra and Varuna, to you this adoration at 


sacrifices is addressed: remove from us all difficulties, and ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


| CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MSS" Sy ae ae णा, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 61 38 


[सूक्त-६ १] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मित्रावरुण। छन्द- Freq] 
५६४८. wg चक्षुर्वरुण सुप्रतीर्क देवयोरिति सूर्यस्ततन्वान्‌। 
अभि यो विश्वा भुवनानि चष्टे स मन्युं मर्त्येष्वा fika I 
1. Spreading around the beautiful light, Mitra and Varuna, of 


p? two divinities, Stirya rises: he who beholds all existing beings 
apprehends the acts of mortals. 
५६४९. प्र वां स मित्रावरुणावृतावा विप्रो मन्मानि दीर्घश्रुदियर्ति। 
यस्य ब्रह्माणि सुक्रतू अवांथ आ यत्क्रत्वा न शरद: FAA i 

2. The sage, the solemnizer of sacrifice, the ancient hearer (of 
holy prayer), earnestly repeats, Mitra and Varuna, your praises: he 
whose prayers, Guers of good deeds, you favour, whose acts (of 
worship) you recompense not for years. 

The Ancient Hearer of Holy Prayer— The text has dirghasrut, 
which is explained only by cirakálam srotd, a hearer for a long time, an 
epithet of Vasistha, but in what sense is somewhat uncertain. 

You recompense not for Years— A yatkratva na Saradah prnaithe | 
is explained, yat karma bahün samvatsarán apürayethe, whose act you 
fill or fulfil many years: the Scholiast passes by za, which may be the 
conjunction and as well as the negative not: in either case the sense is 
Obscure: it may mean that the merit of the worship is so great that it 
cannot be adequately rewarded except after a long period. 


५६५०. प्रोरोमित्रावरुणा पृथिव्याः प्र दिव waged: सुदानू। | 
स्पशो दधाथे ओष॑धीषु विक्ष्वृध॑ग्यतों अनिमिषं रक्षमाणा 11३ ।। 

3. You are vaster, Mitra and Varuna, than the ample earth, i 

vaster, bounteous donors, than the glorious and expansive heaven: || 


You maintain beauty in plants and in people, diligent observers of 


truth, and vigilantly protecting (us). {| 

You are Vaster— This is said to be implied by the preposition pra in | 
T text, put for prariricáthe, as in Sūkta (xi. Mandala i. verse 9) where 
ve have the compound verb praririce. 


१६५१. शंसां मित्रस्य वरुणस्य धाम शुष्मो रोद॑सी बद्दधे महित्वा। 
अयन्मासा अयज्वनामवीराः प्र यज्ञम॑न्मा वृजनं तिराते। [४ | 


b a Praise the splendour of Mitra and Varuna, whose strength, H 
Y ॥ mightiness, keeps heaven and earth asunder: may the days of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


vu Rgveda Samhita 


those who differ not worship pass without male descendants: may 
he who delights in sacrifice increase in prosperity. 


५६५२. अमूरा विश्वा वृषणाविमा वां न यासु चित्रं ददशे न यक्षम्‌। 
रुहं: सचन्ते अनृता जनांनां न वाँ निण्यान्यचिते अभूवन्‌। II 
5. Unperplexed, all-pervading showerers (of benefits), these 
(praises) are for you, in which nothing surprising, no adoration 
(worthy of you) is beheld: the insincere commendations of men 


serve as offences: eulogies of you, although offered in secret, are 
not unappreciated. 


५६५३. समुं वां यज्ञं मंहयं नमोभिहुँवे वाँ मित्रावरुणा सबाध॑:। 
प्र वां मन्मान्यूचसे नवानि कृतानि ब्रह्म जुजुषत्रिमानि । 1६11 
6. 1 offer sacrifice to you two with praises, I invoke you, Mitra 


and Varuna, when in trouble: may the present hymns be capable of 
gratifying you: may these (my) prayers be acceptable to you both. 


५६५४. इयं देव पुरोहिंतिर्युवभ्या aay मित्रावरुणावकारि। 
विश्वानि दुर्गा पिपृतं तिरो नों यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न: 11911 
7. To you, divine Mitra and Varuna, to you this adoration at 


sacrifices is addressed: remove from us all difficulties, and ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-६ २] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मित्रावरुण, १ सूर्य। छन्द- त्रिखुप्‌!] 
५६५५. उत्सूर्यी बृहदर्चीष्यश्रेत्पुरु विश्वा जनिम मानुंषाणाम्‌। 
समो दिवा द॑दृशे रोच॑मानः क्रत्वा कृतः सुकृंतः कर्तुभिर्भूत्‌।॥१॥ 
1. Surya spreads his vast and numerous rays over all the 
crowds of men: shining bright by day, he is beheld (by all) the 
same, the creator, the created, he is glorified by his worshippers. 


The Creator, the Created— Kratva krtah are explained, Sarvasya 
karta prajapatina sampaditah, the maker of all produced by Prajapat. 


५६५६. स सूर्य प्रति पुरो न उद्‌ गां एभिः स्तोमैभिरेतशेभिरेवै:। 
प्र नौं मित्राय वरुणाय वोचो$नांगसो अर्यम्णे amd TIR 


2. Rise up before us, Surya, with your glorious white horses: 
declare us free from sin to Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, and Agni. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


3 


Rol $$ ——— a» 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri [ 
| Mandala 7, Sükta 63 275 | 
F ५६५७. वि न॑ः सहस्रं शुरुधों रदन्त्वृतावांनो वर्णो मित्रो अग्नि: 

I > नों ¢ H 
यच्छन्तु चन्द्रा उपमं नों अर्कमा न: कार्म पूपुरन्तु स्तर्वानाः।।३॥। 

3. May Varuna, Mitra, and Agni, the alleviators of pain, the 
observers of truth, bestow upon us thousand (of riches): may they, 
the givers of delight, grant us excellent (food): glorified by us, may 
they fulfil our desires. 

a अदिते e AAN 1. ES 
५६५८. द्यावांभूमी अदिते त्रासीथां नो ये वाँ ag: सुजनिमान ऋष्वे। 
मा 22 भूम वरुणस्य वायोर्मा मित्रस्य प्रियतमस्य नुणाम्‌॥४॥ 

4. Indivisible and mighty heaven and earth protect us who, of 
fortunate birth, have knowledge of you both: let us not incur the 
displeasure of Varuna, or of Vayu, or of Mitra, the best beloved of 
j men. 

Wed ५६५९. प्र बाहवा सिसृतं जीवसें न आ नो गव्यूतिमुक्षतं घृतेन॑। 

आ नो जनें श्रवयतं युवाना श्रुतं में मित्रावरुणा हवेमा।।५॥। 

5. Stretch forth your arms for the prolongation of our 
existence, bedew with water the pastures of our cattle, render us 
honoured among men: ever youthful Mitra and Varuna, hear these 
my invocations. 

Yajurveda, 21. 9: Mahidhara's interpretation is to the same purport as 
Sàyana's, with slight variations. 


५६६०. नू मित्रो वरुणो अर्यमा नस्त्मनें तोकाय वरिवो दधन्तु। 
सुगा नो विश्वा सुपर्थानि सन्तु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।॥६॥। 
6. May Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman grant affluence to us and to 


our posterity: may all paths be easy of access unto us: and do you 
ever cherish us with blessings. 


e [3-8 3] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- १-४ तथा ५ पूर्वार्द्द- सूर्य, ५ उत्तराद्ध 
va तथा ६ मित्रावरुण। छन्द- AY] 
५६६१. उद्वेति सुभगों विश्वचक्षाः साधारण: सूर्यो मानुणाम्‌। 
चक्षुरमित्रस्य वरुणस्य देवश्चमेँव यः समविंव्यक्‌ तमाँसि।।१।। 


1. The auspicious Sürya rises, the eye of all, the common 
3. en) of men: the divine eve of Mitra and of Varuna, who 
reaks through the glooms as through (investing) skin 


CT od Ped NY 


it 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


216 Rgveda Samhita 


५६६२. उद्देंति प्रसवीता जनांनां महान्‌ केतुरर्णवः सूर्यस्य। 
समानं चक्रं पर्याविवृत्सन्यदेतशो वहति धूर्षु युक्त:।।२॥। 


2. The animator of men arises, the great rain-shedding banner 
of Surya rolling on the universal wheel, which the white steeds 
yoked to his car drag along. 

The Great Rain-Shedding Banner of Sürya— Mahan ketur, । 
arnavah süryasya, the banner or emblem of Sürya is Sürya, which is 
probably all that Sayana means when he maintains that we have here an 


arbitrary change of case, and that for Suryasya we should have Suryah in 
the nominative. 


५६६३. विश्राज॑मान उषसांमुपस्थांद रेभैरुदेत्यनुमद्यर्मानः | 
एष में देवः संविता चंच्छन्द यः संमानं न प्रमिनाति धार्म।।३।॥। 
3. Delighted by the praises (of his worshippers), the radiant 


sun rises from the lap of the dawns: that divine sun gratifies my 
desires, who limits not the lustre that is common (to all). 


५६६४. दिवो रुवम उरुचक्षा उदेति दूरेअर्थस्तरणिभ्राज॑मान:। 
नूनं जनाः सूर्येण प्रसूता अयत्र्थानि कृणवन्नपांसि ।।४।। 
4. The bright and glorious sun rises from the firmament far- 


going, traversing (the heavens), diffusing light: verily all beings 
animated by Sürya proceed and execute their assigned labours. 


५६६५. यत्रा चक्रुरमृता गातुमस्मै श्येनो न दीयन्नन्वेति पार्थ: । 


प्रति वां सूर उदिते विधेम नमोभिमित्रावरुणोत हव्यैः।।५।। 


5. He travels the path which the immortals have prepared for 
his course, darting along like a hawk: we worship you, Mitra and 
Varuna, when the sun has risen, with praises and oblations 


५६६६. नू मित्रो वरुणो अर्यमा नस्त्मने तोकाय वरिवो दधन्तु। 
सुगा नो विश्वां सुपथानि सन्तु यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां Wis l 


6. May Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman grant affluence to us and to 


our posterity: may all paths be easy of access to us, and do you 
ever cherish us with blessings 


[सूक्त-६४] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मित्रावरुण। छन्द- FST] 
५६६७. दिवि क्षयन्ता रज॑सः पृथिव्यां प्र वा घृतस्य निर्णिजों ददीरन्‌। 
हव्यं नों मित्रो अर्यमा सुजातो राजां सुक्षत्रो वरुणो जुषन्त।।१।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


SS ee ee os 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri | 
Mandala 7, Sükta 64 271 । 
2 Ruling over the water that are in heaven and earth, impelled | 
by you, (the clouds) assume the form of rain may the auspiciously 
manifested Mitra, the royal Aryaman, the powerful Varuna, accept 


our oblation. 
Impelled by You the Clouds Assume the form of Rain— Pra vàm 


ghrtasya nirnijo dadiran is explained, yuvdabhydm prerità megha 
udakasya rüpáni prayacchanti, impelled by you the clouds give the forms 
of water; or, according to another explanation, ghyta keeps its ordinary 
sense, the forms of butter, that is, oblations, are given to you. 


५६६८. आ राजाना मह ऋतस्य गोपा सिन्धुपती क्षत्रिया यातमर्वाक्‌। 
इळ नो मित्रावरुणोत वृष्टिमव॑ दिव इन्वतं जीरदानू।॥२ I 


2. Sovereigns, mighty preservers of water, powerful lords of 
rivers, come to our presence: send down to us munificent Mitra 
and Varuna, from the firmament, sustenance and rain. 


५६६९. मित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो देवो अर्यः प्र साधिष्ठिभिः पथिभिर्नयन्तु। 
बरवद्यथां न आदरिः सुदासं इषा मदेम सह देवगोपाः।।३।। 

3. May Mitra, Varuna, the divine Aryaman, conduct us by the 
most practicable paths, then, (when we desire their guidance), 
accordingly as Aryaman promises to the liberal donor (of 
oblations), may we, enjoying the protection of the gods, rejoice in 
abundance, together with posterity. 


Rejoice... .. Together with Posterity— Isa madema saha, with 
food rejoice, together with posterity, putradibhih, understood. 


५६७०. यो वां गर्त मन॑सा तक्षदेतमूर्ध्वां धीतिं कृणवद्धारयंच्च। 
उक्षेथां मित्रावरुणा घृतेन ता राजाना सक्षितीस्तर्पयेथाम्‌। né I 
4. Mitra and Varuna, bedew with water him who fabricates 


Your chariot in his mind, offering high praise, the Ege ल | 
affected towards him. | 
५६७१. एष स्तोमो वरुण मित्र तुभ्यं सोम॑ः शुक्रो न वायवेंड्यामि। 
अविष्टं जिगृतं ES ड पुरन्धीर्यूयं z 3 i । 

अविष्टं धियों जिगृतं पुर पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा sU | 

5. Varuna and Mitra, this praise, pure as the Soma libation, has 
been offered to you, and also, Aryaman, (to you): protect our aS 
be awake to our praises: and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


To Aryaman— The text has vayave: Vayu is said to be a synonym of 
Aryaman. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


————— —————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
278 Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त-६५] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मित्रावरुण। छन्द- त्रिषटुप्‌।] 
५६७२. प्रति वां सूर उदिते सूक्तैमित्रै ea वरुणं पूतर्दक्षम्‌। 
ययोरसुर्यरै मक्षित ज्येष्टं विश्वस्य याम॑त्राचितां जिगत्नु॥१।। 

1, When the sun has risen, I invoke Mitra and you, Varuna, of 
pure vigour, whose imperishable and superior might is triumphant 
in the crowded conflict over all enemies. 

५६७३. ता हि देवानामसुरा तावर्या ता नं: क्षितीः करतमूर्जयन्ती:। 
अश्याम मित्रावरुणा वयं वां द्यावा च यत्र पीपयन्नहां च।२॥ 

2. They verily are mighty among the gods: they are rulers: they 
below upon us a numerous posterity: may we obtain you, Mitra 
and Varuna, whether on earth or in heaven, and wherever the 
(passing) days may preserve us. 

भूरिपाशावनृतस्य सेतू दुरत्येतू रिपवे mela 
५६७४. ता वनृतस्य सेतू gu रिपवे | 
ऋतस्य॑ मित्रावरुणा पथा वामपो न नावा दुंरिता तरेम।।३।। 


3. Holders are you of many fetters, barriers against the 
irreligious, invincible by hostile mortals: may we cross over all the 
danger, Mitra and Varuna, ty the path of sacrifice, to you, as (we 
cross over) water by a boat. 


| ५६७५. आ नों मित्रावरुणा हव्यजुष्टिं घतैर्गव्यूतिमुक्षतमिळांभिः। 
प्रति वामत्र वरमा जनाय पृणीतमुद्नो दिव्यस्य चारो: Ire 
4. Come, Mitra and Varuna, to our offered oblation sprinkle 
our place of sacrifice with water and with viands (who) in this 


i world (may present to you such) excellent (donations) that you 


| may (thereby be induced to) gratify mankind with celestial and 
| beautiful water. 


This passage is very obscurely expressed, although the purpose may 

be guessed, with the aid of the Scholiast: it is literally, towards you two 

| here an excellent to man bestow of water celestial, beautiful (or flowing), 
prati vam atra varama janaya prnitam udnah divyasya caroh. 


५६७६. एष स्तोमो वरुण मित्र तुभ्यं सोम: शुक्रो न वायवेऽयामि। 
। अविष्टं धियो जिगृतं पुरन्धीर्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:।५।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


35 03 5 22 0 0 — — , 


ae 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 66 ET 


5. Varuna and Mitra, this praise, pure as the Soma libation, has 
been offered to you, and also, Aryaman, (to you): protect our rites: 
be awake to our praises: and do you ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-६६] 


= वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मित्रावरुण, ४-१३ आदित्यगण, १४- 
१६ सूर्य। छन्द- गायत्री, १०-१५ प्रगाथ (समा बृहती, विषमा सतोबृहती), 
ag पुर उष्णिक।] 

५६७७. प्र मित्रयोर्वरुणयोः स्तोमों न एतु शुष्य॑:। नरमस्वान्तुविजातयो:।1१ t 
1. May this our propitiatory praise, accompanied by oblations, 
proceed to you, Mitra and Varuna, of reiterated manifestations. 

Of Reiterated Manifestations— Tuvijdtayoh, repeatedly born, as 
presiding over day and night they may be said to be manifest repeatedly 

in daily succession. 
५६७८. या धारयन्त देवाः सुदक्षा दक्षेपितरा। असुर्याय प्रमंहसा।॥॥२॥ 

2. You whom the gods uphold for their invigoration, both 

mighty, masters of strength and of diffusive radiance. 


५६७९. ता न॑ः स्तिपा त॑नूपा वरुण जरितृणाम्‌। मित्र साधय॑तं धिय॑ः॥३॥। 


3. Protectors of our dwellings, protectors of our persons, Mitra 
and Varuna, perfect the rites of your adorers. 


1 
५६८०. यदद्य सूर उदितेऽनांगा मित्रो अर्यमा। सुवातिं सविता भर्गः।॥४॥। 
4. May Mitra, the destroyer of sin, Aryaman, Savita, Bhaga, 
bestow (upon us), today at sun-rise what (we pray for). 
Samaveda. 1351; Yajurveda, 33. 20. 
अंहो t 1 
५६८१. सुप्रावीरस्तु स क्षयः प्र नु यामन्त्सुदानव:। ये नो अंहो5तिपिप्रति। | | 
5. May this our dwelling be well protected, liberal deities, on 
your departure, you who purify us from sin. 
[i 
५६८२. उत स्वराजो अर्दितिरदंब्धस्य व्रतस्य ये। महो राजान RAII 
6. And who are sovereign over all, and, with Aditi, preside | 
Over this unobstructed and great ceremony. | 
Uta svarajo aditiradabdhasya vratasya ye, maho rajana isate, the | 
place of Aditi, is rather doubtful, as the text has no copulative: the | 
Scholiast proposes as one reading. Aditis tesdm mátd, of them Aditi is the | 


EN or that which follows, Mitradayo aditisca, Mitra and the rest and 
Aditi. = | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


280 Rgveda Sarhhita 
५६८३. प्रति वां सूर उदिते मित्रं गृणीषे वरुणम्‌। अर्यमणं रिशाद॑सम्‌।।७॥। 


7. I glorify you, Mitra and Varuna, and Aryaman, the 
consumer of enemies when the sun has risen. 


५६८४. राया हिंरण्यया मतिरियम॑वृकाय शव॑से। इयं विप्रा मेधसांतये।।८।। 
8. May this praise (be effective) for unimpeached strength, 


alone with golden treasure: may it (be effective), sages, for the 
fulfilment of (the objects of) the sacrifice. 


५६८५. ते स्याम देव वरुण ते मित्र सूरिभिः सह। इषं स्व॑श्च धीमहि।।९॥ 


9. May we be thine, divine Varuna: may we, along with pious 
worshippers, be, Mitra, thine: may we obtain food and water. 

May we Obtain Food and Water— Isham svas ca dhimahi is 
explained, annam udakam ca dharayamahe, may we retain food and 
water: this and the two preceding verse form a Trica, to be repeated at the 
morning sacrifice: they occur also Samaveda. 1067-69. 


५६८६. बहवः सूरचक्षसो5ग्निजिह्वा ऋतावृर्ध:। 
त्रीणि ये येमुर्विदर्थानि धीतिभिर्विश्वानि परिंभूतिभिः।१०॥। 


10. Manifold radiant as the sun, Agni-tongued augmenters of 
sacrifice, you who have limited the three universal sacrifices With 
comprehensive rites. 

Limited the three Universal Sacrifices, Etc.— Trini ye yemuh 
vidathani dhitibhih visvani paribhutibhih is explained, ye trini vyaptani 
Ksityadisthanani paribhavukaih karmahih prayacchanti, who give the 
three spread places , earth and the rest, with overcoming acts: it is not 
very clear what is intended: perhaps merely to say that Mitra and the rest 


are worshipped as the objects of three rites, with definite ceremonies or at 
definite seasons. 


५६८७. वि ये दधुः शरदं मासमादहर्यज्ञमकतुं चादृच॑म्‌। 
: ai ERIT 
अनाप्यं वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा api राजान आशत॥११ ।। 
11. Who have established the year, and then the month and the 


day, the Fe the night, and the holy text, they, the royal 
deities, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, enjoy unrivalled might. 


५६८८. Tel अद्य म॑नामहे सूक्तैः सूर उदिते। 
यदोहते वर॑णो मित्रो अर्यमा यूयमृतस्य रथ्यः।।१२।। 


12. Therefore today at sunrise we solicit you with hymns for 
(wealth), which Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, bearers of water, you 
convey. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 66 281 


| | CN EN EN] I 
५६८९. ऋतावान ऋतजाता ऋतावृधा घारासा अनृतद्विषंः। 
Nh E सुच्छर्दिष्टमे [ES ND 1 
तेषां वः सुम्ने सुच्छर्दिष्टमे नर: स्याम ये च॑ queis 

13. Accepters or rites, generated for rites, augmenters of rites, 
fierce enemies of the neglecter of rites, may we, as well as those 
E who are your adorers, be in (the enjoyment of) the highest 
felicity, all confirmed by you. 

Those Men who are Etc.— Tesdm vah sumne succhardistame, of 
those of you in the most blissful opulence, or in happiness, united with a 
most delightful dwelling, su&hatame dhane, atyantaramaniyagrhayukte 
sukhe vå. 

Lee I वपुर्दिव 1 प्रतिहरे 
५६९०. उदु त्यद्दर्शतं {व एति प्रतिह्वरे। 
a Ae LES Ls att 1 
यदीमाशुर्वहति देव एतशो विश्वस्मै चक्ष॑से अरम्‌।।१४।। 

14. That beautiful orb (of the sun) rises on the near margin of 
the sky as the swift, divine, white-coloured (steed) bears it along 
for the beholding of all men. 

A t6 eS जगतस्तस्थुषस्प्ति 4 al 1 
५६९१. शीर्ष्णः शीर्ष्णो स्पति समया विश्वमा WA: | 
> MA pina Sg ea MT 
सप्त स्वसारः सुविताय सूर्य वहन्ति हरितो रथे।।१५।। 

15. The seven gliding steeds convey the sun, the lord of every 

individual moving or stationary thing, traversing the whole world 
in his chariot for the good (of all). 
_ The Lord of Every Individual Moving or Stationary Thing— 
Sirshnah shirshno jagatas tasthushaspatim, the lord of stationary and 
moveable head by head: the Scholiast would apparently connect Siras 
With the horses of the sun, the ablative or genitive being put for the 
instrumental, shirasa, svasvashira sa vahanti süryam, they bear the sun 
by his own head; or the head, says, may be put for the being with a head, 
shirah shabdena tad-van padarthah, that is to say, the whole of such 
Objects, tasya-kartsnyam, or the best of all, sarvasya srestham: he seems 
rather puzzled: it probably implies only each or individual. 


५६९२. तच्चक्षुर्दवहितं शुक्रमुच्चरत्‌। 
पश्येम शरद॑: श॒तं जीवेम शरद: WLIS 


. 16. That pure eye (of the universe), beneficial of the gods, 
nises: may we behold it for a hundred years: may We live a nundred 
years. 

; M ajurveda, 36. 24. which adds, srinuyama Saradah Satam, prabravama 
Saradah Satam, adinah syama Saradah Satam, bhuyashca Saradah Satam, 


m c z 
Ra we hear, may we speak, may we be independent, for a hundred years 
more. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


पि Rgveda Samhita 


५६९३. काव्येभिरदाभ्या यात वरुण द्युमत्‌। मित्रश्च सोम॑पीतये।1१७॥ 


17. Unconquerable, resplendent Varuna and Mitra, (induced) 
by our praises, come to drink the Soma juice. 


५६९४. दिवो धामभिर्वरुण faan यांतमदुहां। पिब॑तं सोम॑मातुजी॥।१८॥ 

18. Gentle Mitra and Varuna, destroyers of foes, come from 

heaven with your glories, and drink the Soma juice. 
५६९५. आ यात मित्रावरुणा जुषाणावाहुतिं नरा। पातं सोम॑मृतावृधा॥।१९॥। 

19. Come, Mitra and Varuna, leaders of rites, propitiated by 
the oblation, and drink the Soma, augmenters of the sacred rite. 

[सूक्त-६७] 

[ऋषि- वसिष मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- Freq] 

५६९६. प्रति वां रथं नृपती जरध्यैं ह॒विष्म॑ता मन॑सा यज्ञियेन। 
यो बाँ दूतो न धिंष्ण्यावजीगरच्छां सूनुर्न पितरां विवकिम।।१।। 

1. Lords of men, (I approach) to adore your chariot with 
devout praise and oblation, I address it as if it were a messenger to 
awaken you, adorable deities, as a son (addresses) his parents. 
५६९७. अशोच्यग्निः संमिधानो अस्मे उपो अदृश्रन्तमसञ्चिदन्ता:। 

अचेति | E zi 
अचेति केतुरुषसः पुरस्तांच्छिये दिवो दुहितुर्जायमान: 11२ ।। 
2. Kindled by us, Agni blazes, the extremities of the darkness 


are seen nigh at hand, the banner (of the sun) is preceived rising 
with the glory on the east of the dawn the daughter of heaven. 


Ll 
५६९८. अभि वाँ नूनमंश्चिना सुहोता स्तोमैं: सिषक्ति नासत्या विवक्वान्‌। 
पूर्वीभिर्यातं A i 
पू पर्थ्याभिरर्वाकस्वर्विदा वसुमता ATR 
3. Verily, Asvins, the pious priest repeating (your praises) 
glorifies you, Nasatyas with hymns: come therefore by formerly- 


trodden paths to our presence with your chariot, familiar with 
heaven, laden with treasure. 


५६९९. Halal नूनमंश्चिना युवाकुर्हुवे uei सुते मांध्वी वसूयुः। 
आ वां वहन्तु स्थविरासो अश्वा: पिबांथो अस्मे सुषुंता मधूनि।॥॥४॥ 
4. Relying on you, Asvins, as protectors, desirous of wealth, 


Madhvis, 1 invoke you when the Soma is effused: may your stout 
horses bring you (hither): drink the sweet juice poured out by us. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


"n cu -—-—--— ह 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 67 283 
2 प्राचींमु देवाश्विना धियं मेऽमृध्रां सातयें कृतं वसुयुम्‌। 
विश्वां अविष्टं वाज आ पुरन्धीस्ता न: शक्तं शचीपती शर्चीभि:।1५ 11 
5. Divine Asvins, render my sincere and undisturbed adoration, 
offered for the sake of riches, (efficacious) for their acquisition: 


preserve all my faculties in (the time of) battle: protectors of pious 
acts (influenced) by our acts, bestow upon us (wealth). 


५७०१. अविष्टं धीष्वंश्चिना न आसु प्रजावद्रेतो अहयं नो अस्तु! 
आ वां तोके तनये तूतुजाना: सुरत्नासो देववीतिं गमेम।।६॥। 
6. Protect us, Asvins, in these pious acts, may our procreative 
power fail not: but (through your favour) possessing sons and 


grandsons, distributing desired riches and enjoying ample wealth, 
may we accomplish the worship of the gods. 


५७०२. एष स्य वाँ पूर्वगत्वेव सख्ये निधिर्हितो मांध्वी रातो अस्मे। 
अहेंळता मनसा यातमर्वागश्रन्ता हव्यं मानुंषीषु विक्षु।७॥ 
7. This treasure given by us has been placed, Madhvis, before 
you, like (an envoy) who has come to the presence (of a prince) for 


(acquiring his) friendship: come to our presence with benevolent 
thoughts, accepting the oblations offered among human beings. 


५७०३. एकस्मिन्योगे भुरणा समाने परि वां सप्त स्रवतो vel गात्‌। 

न वांयन्ति सुभ्वो देवयुक्ता ये वाँ धूर्षु तरणयो वहन्ति1 ८ ।। 
. 8. Nourishers of all, the chariot of you two, who are associated 
in a common purpose, traverses the seven flowing (streams): the 


excellent horses harnessed by the gods, who bear you rapidly, 
careering in the car, are never wearied. 
I > 
५७०४. असश्चतां मधवंद्ध्यो हि भूतं ये राया मंघदेर्य जुनन्ति। 
k सूनुताभिस्तिरन्ते = ^ T ` is 
प्र ये बन्धु सूनृताभिस्तिरन्ते गव्यां endi अश्व्यां wm 

s 9. Be propitious to those who are affluent (in oblatiens), who 
offer the wealth that is to be offered for the sake of riches: they 
who encourage a kinsman with kind commendations, distributing 
wealth of cattle and of horses. 

Be Propitious— Asashcata bhutam, Sayana says, here means 

e CR bhavatam; but he explain it kutrapi asajvamanau, being 
opha unoccupied, unattached, meaning, be unattached to, or 
ninterested in, any except the present worshippers. 


C Kinsman— Bandhu may also, it is said, mean the adhvaryu, or 
Strant priest, falena badhnati whom one binds by a reward. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


284 Rgveda Samhita 


è यासिप्र EHE श्रनाविरांवत्‌ || 
५७०५. नू मे हवमा xj युवाना यासिष्टं वर्तिरश्चिनाविरावत्‌। 
कु 3 [ 
धत्तं रत्नानि जर॑तं च सूरीन्‌ यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः।।१०॥। 
10. Ever youthful Asvins, hear today my invocation: came, 
Asvins, to the dwelling where the oblation is prepared: grant 


wealth (to the offerer): elevate the worshipper: and do you ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-६८] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार! 
छन्द- विराट्‌, ८-९ feu] 
५७०६. आ शुंभ्रा यातमश्चिना स्वश्वा गिरो दस्रा जुजुषाणा युवाकों:। 
हव्यानिं च प्रतिंभृता वीतं A:R 
1. Illustrious Asvins, lords of handsome horses, come hither, 


propitiated; Dasras, by the praises of your adorer, and partake of 
our consecrated oblations. 


amaia le > हविषों वीतयें 
५७०७. प्र वामन्थौसि मद्यान्यस्थुररं गन्तं हविषों वीतये मे। 
| तिरो अर्यो हव॑नानि श्रुतं न: 11२॥। 
| 2. The exhilarating viands have been prepared for you: come 


quickly to partake of my oblation: disregarding the invocations of 
an adversary, listen to ours. 


५७०८. प्र वां रथो मनोजवा इयर्ति तिरो रजाँस्यश्चिना शतोति: । 
अस्मभ्यं सूर्यावसू इयान:11३ ।। 


3. Your chariot, Asvins, in which you ride with Surya, E 
towards us at our solicitations, traversing the regions as swift a 
thought, and laden with a hundred blessings. 


| ५७०९. अयं ह यद्वां देवया उ अद्विरूर्ध्वी विव॑क्ति सोमसुद्युवभ्याम्‌। 
आ वल्गू विप्रो ववृतीत TÀ: 116 11 


| 4. When the stone, seeking to propitiate you two divinities, ! 
j 


| raised aloft, and loudly sounds, expressing for you the Soma juice, 


then the pious worshipper brings you back, beautiful divinities, bY 
his oblations. 

| ५७१०. चित्रं ह यद्वां भोज॑नं न्वस्ति न्यत्रये महिष्वन्त युयोतम्‌। 

| यो वांमोमानं दध॑ते प्रियः सन्‌।।५।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


m M २ 


f= 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 68 285 


5. Wonderful, verily, is the wealth that is yours: you have 
Jiberated from the cave Atri, who is dear to you, and enjoys your 
protection. 

You have liberated from the cave Atri— Nyatraye mahisvantam 
yuyotam, you separated the mahisvat from Atri: the Scholiast considers 
mahisvat as a synonym or ribisa, which has occurred before: it is among 
the 134 words at the end of the Nighantu of the Nirukta, of which there is 
no explanation; but in Mand. I. S. 116. verse 8, ribise is explained, 
apagataprakashe pidayantragrhe, in a dark house of implements of 
torture. Sayana elsewhere considers it equivalent to agni, or rather 
tushagni, or fire of chaff, as he explains, in the following Sakta 71. v.5, 
anhasas by ribisad agneh sakashot. Although the word does not occur, 
the incident is alluded to more than once in the first Mandala, Sukta 112. 
7, where the commentary says Atri was thrown into a machine-room with 
a hundred doors, where he was roasted; and again. 118. 7, the same 
explanation occurs, satadvare pidayantragrhe...tushagnim shitenodakena, 
avarayetham, you extinguished with cold water the chaff fire by which 
Atri was burnt when thrown into the house of machines of torture with a 
hundred doors. A reference is made to Mandala x. 39. 9. 


५७११. उत vagi जुरते अंश्चिना भूच्च्यवानाय प्रतीत्य हविर्दे। 
अधि age इतऊति Tea: 11६ 1| 
6. Such was your benevolence, Asvins, to Chyavana, praising 


and offering oblations, that you in requital rescued his body from 
departure. 


५७१२. उत त्यं भुज्युमंश्चिना सखायो मध्ये जहुरदुरेवासः समुद्रे। 
निरीं पर्षदरांवा यो युवाकु: ioni 
7. When faithless friends had abandoned Bhujyu in the midst 


of the ocean, you brought him to shore, devoted to and relying 
upon you. 


1 . EN 
५७१३. वृकाय चिज्जसमानाय शक्तमुत Ad शयवें हूयमांना। 
i यावध्यामर्पिन्वतमपो Te "p n; sif 
वध्न्यामपिन्वतमपो न स्तर्य चिच्छक्तथश्चिना शचीभिः।।८।। 
3 nS. You have granted (his desires) to Vrka, exhausted by his 
€votions: when called upon you have listened to Shayu: you are 


= Who have filled the barren cow (with milk) as (a river) with 
ater: you have (endowed her) with strength, Asvins, by your 


deeds. 
५७१४. एष स्य कार्स्जरते qa i [A 1 
3 al Tee बुधान उषसां सुमन्मा। 
EX I Ty x 
इथा तं वर्धदध्न्या पयोभिर्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:।1९ l 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


286 Rgveda Sarihiid 

9, This your devoted worshipper, waking before the dawn, 
praises with hymns: nourish him with food, and let the cow 
(nourish him) with her milk: and do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 

[38-83] 

[क्रपि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- Pre] 

५७१५. आ वां रथो रोद॑सी बद्दथानो हिरण्ययो वृर्षभिर्यात्वशै:! 
घृतव॑र्तनि: पविभी रुचान इषां वोळ्हा नुपर्तिर्वाजिनीवान्‌।१ N 

1. May your golden chariot, drawn by your vigorous horses, 

blocking up heaven and earth, come to us, following the track of 


the waters, radiant with (glowing) wheels, laden with viands, the 
protector of men, the receptacle of food. 


५७१६. स पंप्रथानो अभि पञ्च भूम॑ त्रिवन्धुरो मनसा यातु युक्तः 
विशो येन गच्छथो देवयन्तीः कुत्रा चिद्याम॑मश्चिना दर्धाना।२॥ 
2, Renowned among the five orders of beings, furnished with 
— three benches, harnessed at will, may it come hither: that (vehicle) 


wherewith you repair to devout mortals, whatsoever, ASVins, 
directing your course. ८ 


५७१७. Fal यशसा यातमर्वाग्दखा निधिं मधुमन्तं पिबाथ:। 
वि वां रथों वध्वाई यार्दमानोञन्तान्दिवो बांधते वर्तनिभ्याम्‌। २ l 
3. Well horsed and celebrated, come, ASvins, to our presence: 
drink, Dasras, the sweet pledge: your chariot, conveying you, with 


your spouse, furrows with its two wheels the extremities of the 
sky. 


५७१८. युवोः श्रियं परि योषांवृणीत सूरे दुहिता परितकम्यायाम्‌। 
यदेवयन्तमव॑थः शचीभिः परि प्रंसमोमना वां वयो TIE N 
4. The daughter of Surya made choice of your chariot at the 
approach of night: you defend the devout worshipper by your 


deeds, when the resplendent (sacrificial) food proceeds to you 1 
secure you protection. 


५७१९. यो ह स्य वीं रथिरा वस्त॑ उस्ना रथों युजानः gat वर्ति:। 
तेन॑ नः शं योरुषसो व्युशै न्यंश्चिना वहतं यज्ञे अस्मि 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ES the 
your 
0010 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 70 2 


5. Riders in the chariot, Asvins, come for our purification and 
welfare to this our sacrifice, at the dawn of day, with that chariot 
which is clothed in radiance, and which, when harnessed, traverses 
its (appointed) road. 

{$n 1 विद्युर्त ! "add 
५७२०. नरां गारव विद्युतं तृषाणास्माकमद्य सवनोप यातम्‌। 
l ele I ` ii f 
पुरुत्रा हि at मतिभिर्हवन्ते मा वामन्ये नि यमन्देवयन्त: ।।६।। 

6. Leaders of rites, like (thirsty) cattle, thirsting for the radiant 
(Soma), hasten today to our sacrifice: in many ceremonies to the 
pious propitiate you with praises: let not other devout worshippers 
detain you. 


५७२१. युवं भुज्युमर्वविद्ध समुद्र उदूहथुर्णसो अस्रिधानै:। 
पतत्रिभिरश्रमैरव्यथिभिर्दैसनाभिरश्चिना RAAN 
7. You bore up Bhujyu, Asvins, from the waters, when cast 


into the sea, bearing him to shore by your exertions with your 
undecaying, unwearied, unharassed horses. 


५७२२. नू मे हवमा शुंणुतं युवाना यासिष्टं वर्तिरश्चिनाविरावत्‌। 
धत्त रत्नानि जर॑तं च सूरीन्‌ यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।८॥ 
8. Ever youthful Asvins, hear today this my invocation: come, 
Asvins, to the dwelling where the oblation is prepared, grant wealth 


(to the offerer), elevate the worshipper, and do you ever cherish us 
with blessings. 


[95-0] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- Pre] 
| - ७. 
५७२३. आ विश्ववाराश्चिना गतं न: प्र तत्स्थानमवाचि वां पृथिव्याम्‌। 
अश्चो न वाजी शुनपृष्ठो अस्थादा यत्सेदथुँधरुवसे न योर्निम्‌।॥१ 1 

1. All-adored ASvins, come to our (sacrifice), to that place on 
carth which has been designated yours, which, like a swift, broad- 
backed horse, awaits you, and on which you are seated as firmly as 
Ina dwelling. 
é Like a ...... broad-backed Horse— Suna-prisihah is. the Scholiast 
ays, sukhakar a, pleasant, delightful, vipulactvat, from its breadth. 

As Firmly as in a Dwelling— A yat sadathur dhruvase na yonim is 


no ison i i i 
id y clear. The comparison is explained, dhruvaya nivasaya sthanam 
» like a place for a durable soil. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


am Rgveda Samhita 


5 | मनुषो दुरोणे 
५७२४. सिष॑क्ति सा at सुमतिश्चनिष्ठातापि घर्मो मनुषो दुरोणे। 
E = >- 
यो बाँ समुद्वान्त्सरित: पिपर्त्येतग्वा चिन्न सुयुजां युजानः।।२।। 

2. This excellent praise, redolent of food, propitiates you: the 
ewer has been heated in the dwelling of the worshipper, which, 
reaching you, fills the ocean and the rivers (through the rain it 
obtains), associating you (in the rite), like two well-matched horses 
ina chariot. 


The Ewer has been Heated— Gharma: Sce vol. Il. mantra 3869. 
The Scholiast connects it with pravarga,—gharmah pravargasca. 


EN यहीष्वोष॑ धीषु 
५७२५. यानि स्थानान्यश्चिना दधाथे दिवो यह्वीष्वोषधीषु विक्षु। 
2 3 T Ses des 
नि पर्वतस्य मूर्धनि सदन्तेषं जनाय दाशुषे वह॑न्ता।।३॥ 
3. To whatever places you may descend, Asvins, from heaven, 
whether amidst the spreading plants, or among men, or sitting on 


the summit of the clouds, be the bearers of food to the man, the 
donor (of the oblation). 


५७२६. चनिष्टं देवा ओषधीष्वप्सु यद्योग्या अश्रवैथे क्रषीणाम्‌। 
३ थुर्युगानि 
पुरूणि रत्ना दध॑तौ न्यस्मे अनु पूर्वाणि चख्यथुर्युगानि rs 1| 
4. Inasmuch, divine Asvins, as you accept that which is most 
acceptable in the plants and in the waters, and those (things) which 


are most suitable to you, (the offerings) of the Rsis, therefore, 


bestowing upon us ample riches, (favour us) as you have favoured, 
bestowing former couples. 


That which is most Acceptable in the Plants and in the Waters— 


Meaning, according to the Scholiast, the cakes of meal and the Soma juice 
offered in sacrifices. 


Former Couples—  Sacrificers, or 
yajamanas, and their wives. 


५७२७. शुग्रुवांसा चिदश्चिना पुरूण्यभि ब्रह्माणि चक्षाथे ऋषीणाम्‌। 
प्रति प्र पात वरमा जनायास्मे वामस्तु सुमतिश्वनि्ठा। ti 
5. Asvins, hearing the many prayers of the Rsis, you look 


(favourably) upon (us): come to the sacrifice of this man, and may 
your desired devour be (shevn) him. 


५७२८. यो वा यज्ञो नासत्या हविष्मान्‌ कृतब्रह्मा समर्योड भवांति। 
उप प्र यांतं वरमा वसिष्टमिमा ब्रह्माण्यूच्यन्ते युवभ्याम्‌।॥६ l 


institutors of sacrifices, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 Io SU no nen 05 — — 


F^ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 71 399 


6. Come, Nasatyas, to the excellent Vasistha, the worshipper 
who, accompanied by the priests, is present, offering oblations and 
repeating praises: these prayers are recited to (bring) you (hither). 


५७२९. इयं म॑नीषा इयर्मश्चिना गीरिमां सुवृक्ति वृषणा जुषेथाम्‌। 
इमा ब्रह्माणि युवयून्यग्मन्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सर्दा नः।।७।। 

7. This adoration, Asvins, this praise (is for you) be gratified, 
showerers (of benefits), by this laudation may these eulogies, 
addressed to you, reach you: and do you ever cherish us with 
blessing. 

ANUVAKA V 
[सूक्त-७ १] 

[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- fae] 

५७३०. अप स्वसुरुषसो नग्जिहीते रिणक्ति कृष्णीररुषाय पन्थाम्‌। 
अश्वांमघा गोम॑घा वां हुवेम दिवा नक्त शर्रमस्मद्युयोतम्‌।१ i 

1. Night retires before the dawn, the sister (of the As‘vins): the 

dark night leaves the path clear for the radiant (sun): upon you, 


who are affluent in horses, affluent in cattle, we call day and night: 
keep away from us the malevolent. 


५७३१. उपायांतं दाशुषे मर्त्याय रथेन वाममंश्चिना वहन्ता। 
युयुतमस्मदर्निराममीवां दिवा नरक्त माध्वी त्रासीथां A:R 
2. Come to the mortal, the donor (of oblations) bringing 


desired wealth in your chariot: keep afar from us famine and 
Sickness: day and night, Madhvis, protect us. 


५७३२. आ वां रथ॑मवमस्यां व्युष्टौ सुम्नायवो वृर्षणो वर्तयन्तु। 
स्यूमंगभस्तिमृतयुग्भिरश्वेराश्विंना वसुमन्तं वहेथाम्‌॥३॥ 
3. May your docile and vigorous (horses) bring hither your 


chariot at the approaching dawn: conduct hither, Asvins, your 
radiating, wealth-laden chariot, with your rain-bestowing steeds. 


५७३३. यो वां रथों नृपती अस्ति वोळ्हा त्रिवन्धुरो वसुमाँ उस्रयामा। 
आ नं एना नांसत्योप॑ यातमभि gi विश्वप्स्यो जिगांति।४॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


3$ Rgveda Samhita 


4. With that chariot, lords of men!, which is your vehicle, 
which has three benches, is laden with wealth, and is the precursor 
of day, come, Nasatyds, to us; with that chariot which traverses 
(the sky) as your all-pervading form. 

With that chariot which traverses, Etc.— Abhi yad vam visvapsnyo 
jigati is explained, yo ratho vam vyaptarüpo abhigacchati.: or it may 
mean, since Vasistha praises you,—visvapsnyah being a name of 
Vasistha. 

: Wwe जरसों : ted aq 
५७३४. युवं च्यवांनं जरसों5मुमुक्तं नि पेदव ऊहथुराशुमश्वम्‌। 
निरंहसस्तमंस: स्पर्तमत्रि नि जाहुषं शिथिरे धांतमन्तः।५।। 

5. You exempted Chyavana from decay: you mounted Pedu 
upon a swift charger: you extricated Atri from torture and 
darkness: you replaced Jahusha in his rebellious kingdom. 

Exempted Chyavana from decay— See Rg. 1.1 17.13. 

Mounted Pedu, Etc.— Niranhasa tamasah spartam Atrim; Sáyana: 
anhasah, ribisat tushagneh sakasat, tamasashcha guhantahsthitaccha: 
see Rg. 1.118.9. 

Replaced Jahusha— See Rg. i.116.20. 

५७३५. इयं मनीषा इयमंश्विना गीरिमां सुवृक्तिं वृषणा जुषेथाम्‌। 
इमा ब्रह्माणि युवयून्यंग्मन्‌ यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।६॥ 

6. This adoration, Asvins, this praise (is for you), be gratified, 

showerer (of benefits), by this Jaudation: may these eulogies, 


addressed to you, reach you: and do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[सूक्त-७२] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- freu] 
५७३६. आ गोम॑ता नासत्या रथेनाश्चावता पुरुश्चन्द्रेण यातम्‌। 
अभि वां विश्वां fad: सचन्त स्पार्हया श्रिया तन्वां शुभाना॥।१॥ 
1. Come, Nàsatyas, with your cattle-giving, horse-bestowing, 
wealth-yielding chariot: all praises gather round you, who ag 


resplendent with admirable beauty of person. 
All praises— Visva niyutah: niyut is here said to mean stuti, praise. 


१. नृपती Ui यजमानानां पालकौ (सायण) | 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 73 291 
EI देवेष 1 c ~ I aL 
2 आना Ted यातमवाक्‌ सजोषसा नासत्या रथन। 
युवोर्हि 1 1 1 1 
हैं नं: सख्या पित्र्याणि समानो बन्धुरुत तस्य ATIR I 

2. Sharing in satisfaction with the gods, come to our presence, 
Nasatyas, with your chariot, for the friendship (that prevails) 
between you and us is from our forefathers: a common ancestor (is 
ours): acknowledge his affinity. 

A Common Ancestor— Vivasvat and Varuna were both sons of 


Kasyapa and Aditi: the Adityas are the sons of the former, Vasistha of the 
latter, consequently they are first cousins. 


x, ts sl i | देवी 
५७३८. उदु स्तोमासो अश्चिनोरुप्रञ्जामि ब्रह्माण्युषसश्च देवी:। 
आविवांसत्रोद॑सी धिष्ण्येमे अच्छा विप्रो नास॑त्या विवक्ति॥३॥ 
3. Praises waken up the Asvins, kindred adorations (arouse 
them) and the celestial dawns: the sage, addressing these 


laudations to the adorable heaven and earth glorifies the Ndsatyds 
in their presence. 


५७३९. वि चेदुच्छन्त्य॑श्विना उषासः प्र वां ब्रह्माणि कारवों भरन्ते। 
ऊर्ध्वं भानुं संविता देवो अंग्रेद्वहदग्नय: समिधां R I 
4. When the dawns arise, your worshippers, Asvins, proffer 


you praises: the divine Savitd casts his splendours on high: the 
fires, with their (kindled) fuel, greatly glorify you. 
५७४०. आ पश्चातान्नासत्या पुरस्तादाश्चिना यातमधरादुर्दक्तात्‌। 
कर TE 5 T 1 
आ विश्वतः पाञ्चजन्येन राया यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा sl II 
; 5. Come, Nasatvas, from the west, from the east: (come), 
A$vins, from the south, from the north, come from every quarter 


With riches beneficial for the five classes of men: and do you ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-७३] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ सैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- Peut] 
५७४१. अतारिष्म तम॑सस्पारमस्य प्रति स्तोमं देवयन्तो दर्धानाः। 
पुरुदंसां पुरुतमां पुराजामर्त्या हवते अश्विना गीः।।१॥। 
1. Devoted to the gods, and hymning their praise, we have 
Crossed to the opposite shore of this (state of) darkness: the 


Worshipper invokes the Asvins, the doers of many deeds, the most 
mighty, the first born, the immortal. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


292 Rgveda Samhita 


५७४२. न्यु प्रियो मनुंषः सादि होता नास॑त्या यो यजते वन्दते च। 

अश्नीतं मध्वो अश्विना उपाक आ वा वोचे विदथेषु प्रय॑स्वान्‌।।२॥। 

2. The man who is dear to you, Násatyás, the invoker of the 

gods, has taken his seat, he who offers worship and repeats praise 
be nigh, Asvins, and partake of the libation supplied with food, I 
address you at sacrifices 
५७४३. अहेम यज्ञं पथामुराणा इमां सुवृक्ति वृंषणा जुषेथाम्‌। 

श्रुष्टीवेव प्रेषितो वामबोधि प्रति स्तोमैर्जरमाणो वसिष्ठः 11311 


3. Praising (the gods), we prepare the sacrifice for their 
coming: showerers (of benefits), be propitiated by this pious 
laudation: despatched like a swift messenger, Vasistha arouses 
you, glorifying you with hymns 


५७४४. उप त्या वहीं गमतो विशं नो रक्षोहणा सम्भृता वीळुपाणी। 
समन्धाँस्यग्मत मत्सराणि मा नों मर्धिष्टमा ग॑तं RAAI 


4. May those two, the bearers (of oblations), approach our 
people, destroyers of Rakshasas, well-nourished strong-handed 


accept our exhilarating (sacrificial) viands: injure us not, but come 
— with good fortune. 


५७४५. ओ पश्चातान्नासत्या पुरस्तादाश्चिना यातमधरादुदक्तात्‌। 
आ विश्वतः पाञ्चजन्येन राया यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।५॥। 


5. Come, Nasatyds, from the west, from the east: come, 
Asvins, from the south, from the north, come from every quarter 


with riches beneficial for the five classes of men; and do you ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-७४] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा 
बृहती, समासतो बृहती।] ` 
५७४६. इमा उ वां दिविष्टय उस्रा ह॑वन्ते अश्विना 
अयं वामह्वेऽवसे शचीवसू विशंविशं हि गच्छथः।।१।। 


1. These pious praises glorify you, radiant Asvins: I call upon 


you, who are rich, in acts for preservation, for you repair to every 
individual. 


Sámaveda, 304; 753: the whole of the Sika to termed a Pragatha. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 75 293 
P युवं चित्रं द॑दथुभोज॑नं नरा चोर्देथां सूनृतावते। 

अर्वाग्रथं सर्मनसा नि य॑च्छतं पिबतं सोम्यं मधु॥२॥। 

2. You are possessed, leaders (of rites), of marvellous wealth; 
bestow it upon him who sincerely praises you: alike favourable- 
minded, direct your chariot to our presence: drink the sweet Soma 
beverage. 

५७४८. आ यांतमुप॑ भूषतं wed: पिबतमश्चिना। 
दुग्धं पर्यो वृषणा जेन्यावसू मा नों मर्धिष्टमा km 

3. Come, Asvins, tarry near us, drink of the sweet libation: 

showerers (of benefits), by whom riches are won, milk the rain 


(from the firmament): harm us not: come hither. 

Yajurveda, 33. 88 
५७४९. अश्वांसो ये वामुप॑ दाशुषों गृहं युवां दीर्यन्ति fava: 

मक्षूयुभिर्नरा हयेभिरश्चिना देवा यातमस्मयू।४।। 

4. Yours are the horses that, conveying you, bring you to the 
dwelling to the donor (of the oblation): divine leader (of rites), 
favourable inclined towards us, come with your rapid steeds. 
५७५०. अधां ह यन्तो अश्विना पृक्षः सचन्त सूरय॑ः। 

ता यंसतो मघवंद्भयो धुवं यशश्छर्दिरस्मभ्यं नार्सत्या 1५ | 

5. The pious worshippers now approaching you unite to offer 
(you sacrificial) food: do you two, Nasatyás, grant to us who are 
affluent (in offerings) enduring fame and dwelling. 

५७५१. प्र ये ययुरवृकासो रथां इव नृपातारो जनानाम्‌। 
उत स्वेन शव॑सा शुशुवुर्नर उत क्षियन्ति सुक्षितिम्‌ ।। 

6. Those worshippers, the benefactors of men, doing injury to 
none who repair to you, like waggons (to the farm), either prosper 
by their own strength, or inhabit an excellent abode. 

Like Waggons— The text has only ratha iva, like chariots: the 


Scholiast adds, wihyadipurna yatha prapnuvanti svamigrham, loaded 
With rice and the like, arrive at the house of the owner. 


[सूक्त-७५] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- उषा! छन्द- faex] 
५७५२. व्युशैषा आंवो दिविजा ळतेनाविष्कृण्वाना महिमानमागात्‌। 
अप दुहस्तम॑ आवर्नुष्टमङ्गिरस्तमा पथ्यां अजीग:11१ N 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


204 Rgveda Samhita 


1. The Dawn, the daughter of heaven, has risen: she comes, 
manifesting her magnificence in light: she scatters our foes as well 
as the odious darkness, and relumes the paths that are to be trodden 
(by living beings). 

Relumes the Paths that are to be Trodden—Angirastama pathyah 
ajigah is explained, gantritama padavir udgirati, she throws up the paths 
that are to be most traversed, that is, praninam vyavaharaya prakashayati, 
she gives light for the transactions of living beings. 


५७५३. महे E सुंविताय॑ बोध्युषों महे सौभ॑गाय प्र य॑न्धि। 
चित्रं रयिं यशसं WA देवि मतेषु मानुषि श्रवस्युम्‌। २ ।। 
2. Be unto us today the cause of great felicity: bestow, Usas, 
(what is promotive) of great prosperity: give us wonderful riches 
and reputation: grant, divine benefactress of men, to mortals 


flourishing male posterity. 


Flourishing Male Posterity— The text has sravasyum, wishing for 
food: the comment explains it annavantam putram, a son having food. 


५७५४. एते त्ये भानवों दर्शतायाश्चित्रा उषसों अमृतांस आगु:। 
जनयन्तो दैव्यानि व्रतान्यापृणन्तो अन्तरिक्षा व्य॑स्थुः।।३॥ 
3. These wonderful, immortal rays of the beautiful Dawn 


appear, giving birth to the pious rites of divine worship, and filling 
the firmament, they spread around. 


५७५५. एषा स्या युजाना प॑राकात्पञच क्षिती: परि सद्यो जिंगाति। 
अभिपश्य॑न्ती वयुना जनानां दिवो दुंहिता भुवनस्य पत्नी ॥४॥ 
4. Exerting herself, the approaches rapidly from afar (to give 


light) to the five classes of men, witnessing the thoughts of men, 
the daughter of heaven, the benefactress of living beings. 


५७५६. वाजिनीवती सूर्यस्य योषां चित्रामंघा राय ईशे वसूनाम्‌। 
ऋषिष्टुता जरय॑न्ती मघोन्युषा उच्छति वहिंभिर्गणाना।।५।। 


5. The bride of Sürya, the distributress (of food), the possessor 
of wonderful wealth, she rules over treasures (of every kind) of 
riches: hymned by the Rsis, the waster away of life, the mistress of 
opulence, he rises glorified by the offerers (of oblations). 


५७५७. प्रति द्युतानामरुषासो अश्वाश्चित्रा अदश्रनुषसं वह॑न्तः। 
याति शुभ्रा विश्वपिशा रथेन दधाति wi विधते जनांय।।६।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E lu 2 585 हि. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


प 


Mandala 7, Sükta 76 29 
E The bright and wondrous steeds, conveying the resplendent 
Usas, are visible: she advances, radiant in her every-way-moving 
chariot: she bestows wealth upon the man who practises sacred 
rites. 
qe ॥ 6 ^ महद्धिर्देवी देवेि le यजत्रै 

५७५८. सत्या सत्येभिर्महती मह भर्यजता यजत्रि:। 

E a E: 1 3 1 " = 1 P n 

रुजद्‌ दृळ्हानि दददुखियाणां प्रति गाव SAM वावशन्त। (911 

7. True with the truthful, great with the great, divine with the 
deities adorable with the adorable, she disperses the solid 
(glooms), she displays (the pastures) of the cattle: all creatures. the 
cattle especially, are longing for the Dawn. 

True with the truthful, Great with the Great- Satya satvebhir, 
mahati mahadbhir, devi devebhir, yajata yajatraih, may also be 
understood, according to the Scholiast, either as applying to Kiran«ih. 
rays— the rays of the morning— or to anyair devaih, with other deities. 
associated with whom the Dawn is true, mighty, and adorable. 


५७५९. नू नो गोमद्वीरवद्धेहि रत्नमुषो अश्वांवत्पुरुभोजों अस्मे। 
मा नों बर्हि: पुरुषता निदे कर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11८।। 
8. Bestow upon us, Usas, wealth, comprising cattle and horses, 
abundant food, and male offspring: let not our sacrifice incure 


reproach among men: and do you (gods), ever cherish us with 
blessings. 
[सूक्त-७६] 

[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- उषा। छन्द- freu] 
५७६०. उदु ज्योतिरमृतं विश्वजन्यं विश्वान॑रः सविता देवो E GU 

क्रत्वा देवानामजनिष्ट चक्षुराविरकर्भुर्वनं विशवमुषाः॥१॥ 

1. The divine Savitá, the leader of all, sends upwards the 

immortal, all-benefiting light: the eye of the gods has been 


manifested for (the celebration of) religious rites: the Dawn has 
made all creatures visible. 


५७६१. प्र मे पन्थां देवयानां अदृश्रत्रम॑र्धन्तो वसुभिरिष्कृतास:। 
ag केतुरुषस: पुरस्तात्रतीच्यागादघि guid: 


2. The paths that lead to the gods are beheld by me, innocuous 
and glorious with light: the banner of Usas is displayed in the east, 
she comes to the west, rising above high places. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


296 Rgveda Sarihita 


Rising Above High Places— Unnatapradeshah— we might else 
have rendered it above the houses. 


| प्राचीनमुदिता सूर्यस्य 
५७६२. तानीदहानि बहुलान्यांसन्या प्राचीनमुदिता सूर्यस्य। 
| NI ` lea l 
यतः WR जारईवाचरन्त्युषो ददृक्षे न पुनर्यतीव 11 

3. Many are the days that have dawned before the rising of the 
sun, on which you, Usas, have been beheld like a wife repairing to 
an inconstant husband, and not like one deserting him. 

Like a Wife Repairing to an Inconstant Husband— Yatha pari 
jara ivacaranti.. na punar yantiva is explained, as in the world a 


virtuous woman is not seen abandoning a bad and vagrant husband, nor 
herself going astray. 


५७६३. त इद्देवानां सधमाद॑ आसन्नृतावानः कवयः पूर्व्यासः। 
गूळहं ज्योति: पितरो अन्वविन्दन्त्सत्यमन्त्रा अजनयन्नुषास॑म्‌।४।। 

4. Those ancient sages, our ancestors, observant of truth, 
rejoicing together With the gods, discovered the hidden light, and, 
reciters of sincere prayers, they generated the Dawn. 

५७६४. समान ऊर्वे अधि सङ्गतासः सं जानते न य॑तन्ते मिथस्ते। 
ते देवानां न मिनन्ति ब्रतान्यमंर्धन्तो वसुभिर्यादमाना: 1५ ।। 

5. When the common herd (of cattle had been stolen) then, 
associating, they concurred, nor mutually contended: they 
obstructed not the sacrifices of the gods, but, unoffending, 
proceeded with the light (they had recovered). 

What this means is not very obvious— it is literally in the common 
vast assembled they agree, nor do they strive mutually: they injure not the 


observances of the gods, not harming, going with treasures, or with the 
Vasus ; vasubhih means ushasam tejobhih, according to Sayana. 


| 
५७६५. प्रति त्वा स्तोमैरीळते वसिष्ठा उषर्बुधः सुभगे तुष्टुवांस:। 
l. I zn d 
गर्वा नेत्री वाजपत्नी न उच्छोषः सुजाते प्रथमा ALI |i 
6 Auspicious Usas, the Vasisthas, waking at dawn: and 
praising you, glorify you, glorify you with hymns: Usas, who are 


the conductress of the cattle (to pasture), the bestower of food, 
dawn upon us: shine, well-born Usas, the first (of the gods). 


५७६६. एषा नेत्री राध॑सः सूनूर्तानामुषा उच्छन्ती रिभ्यते a: 
dria रयिमस्मे दधांना यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न: 1191 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


rt 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sukta 77 in 


2 Usas, the object of the sincere praises of the worshipper, is 
glorified when dawning, by the Vasisthas bestowing upon us far- 
famed riches: do you (gods), ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-७७] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- उषा। छन्द- Freq] 
५७६७. उपो रुरुचे युवतिर्न योषा fad vid प्रसुवन्ती चरायै। 
अभूंदग्निः समिधे मानुषाणामकर्ज्योतिर्बाधमाना तमांसि।॥१॥ 
1. Usas shines radiant in the proximity (of the sun), like a 
youthful wife (in the presence of her husband), animating all 


existence to activity: Agni is to be kindled for the good of men: the 
light disperses the obstructing darkness. 
|. an | ` Ln 1 
५७६८. विश्व प्रतीची सप्रथा उदस्थादुशद्वासा बिभ्रती शुक्रमंशचैत्‌। 
| हिर॑ण्यवर्णा al l नेत््यह्मामरोचि | i 
हिरण्यवर्णा सुदृशीकसन्द्ग्गवा माता Us H 

2. Advancing towards all, and spreading widely, the Dawn has 
risen: clothed in pure and brilliant vesture, she expands: of golden 
colour and of lovely radiance, she shines the parent of sounds, the 
leader of days. 

The Parent of Sounds— Gavam mata: go may here mean speech or 
articulate sound, which at dawn is uttered by men and birds; or, in ils 
usual sense of **cow"', it may refer to the going forth at dawn of cattle to 
pasture. [Sayana adds that gavan mata may also mean “112 productress of 
sunbeams”: rashminam nirmatri. Compare the note at the end of this 
volume to v. 6 of the preceding Siikia.] । 

देवानां 1 ad नयन्ती 1 
५७६९. देवानां चक्षु: सुभगा वह॑न्ती श्वेतं नयन्ती सुदृशींकमश्चम्‌। | 
अंद RGA DA = sete 
उषा अदर्शि रश्मिभिर्व्यक्ता चित्रामघा विश्वमनु प्रभूता।।३।। | 

3. The auspicious Usas, bearing the cye of the gods (the light), 
leading her white and beautiful courser (the sum), is beheld, 
manifested by her rays, distributress of wonderful wealth, mighty 
Over all. 

Leading her... Courser the Sun— That is. "making the sun 
manifest". 

Mighty Over all— “Mighty over all," or, perhaps, "risen on 
account of the whole world (xiz,. for the good of the transactions of the 
world) Sayana: vivan anu, sarvam jagad anulaksya. prabhuta, 
Pravriddha ; sarvajagads yavaharayety. arthah. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
298 Rgveda Samhita 
अमित्रमुच्छोर्वी d | |. 
५७७०. अन्तिवामा दूरे अमित्रमुच्छोवी गव्यूतिमभयं कृधी नः। 
1 | धों E मंघोनि 
यावय द्वेष आ भरा वसूनि चोदय राधो गृणते BA 
4. Dawn, Usas, who are the bearer to us of desirable (wealth), 
and keep ovr adversary from us: render the wide carth free from 
peril: drive away those who hate us: bring to us treasures: bestow, 
opulent goddess wealth upon him who praises you. 


And keep our Adversary from Us— So as to keep our adversary 
from us: Sayana: yathamitro dure bhavati tatha vyucchety arthah. 


५७७१. अस्मे श्रेष्टेभिर्भानुभिर्वि भाद्युषो देवि प्रतिरन्ती न आयुँ:। 
इषं च नो दधती विश्ववारे गोमदश्वावद्र्थवच्च T: 11५ UI 
5. Divine Usas, illume us with your brightest rays, prolonging 
our existence, bestowing upon us food, (and granting us), you who 


are adored by all, affluence, comprising cattle, horses, and 
chariots. 


५७७२. यां त्वां दिवो दुहितर्वर्धयन्त्युषः सुजाते मतिभिर्वसिष्टा: | 
सास्मासु धा रयिमृष्वं बृहन्तं यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।६।। 
6. Well-manifested Usas, daughter of heaven, do you, whom 


the Vasisthas magnify with praises, bestow upon us brilliant and 
— infinite wealth; and do you, (gods), ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-७८] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- उषा। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
५७७३. प्रतिं केतव॑: प्रथमा sigaqeal अंस्या अञ्जयो वि श्रैयन्ते। 
wl अर्वाचा बृहता रथंन ज्योतिष्मता वाममस्मभ्यं वक्षि।१।। 


l. The first signs of the Dawn are visible, her rays are 
spreading no high: you bring us, Usas, desirable (riches) in your 
vast, descending and resplendent chariot. 


५७७४. प्रतिं षीमग्निर्जरते समिद्ध: प्रति विप्रासो मतिभिर्गुणन्त:। 
उषा याति ज्योतिंषा बाध॑माना विश्वा तमांसि दुरिताप॑ देवी॥२॥ 
2. The kindled fire increases everywhere, (and) the priests, 


glorifying (the dawn) with hymns: the divine Usas comes, driving 
away all the evil glooms by her lustre. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


B c — — dE 


Ae काटी ५-४ 


E 


5) 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 79 299 
५७७५. एता उ त्याः प्रत्यदृश्रन्‌ पुरस्ताज्ज्योतिर्यच्छन्तीरुषसों विभाती:। 
अजीजनन्त्सूर्य यज्ञमग्निम॑पाचीनं तमो अगादजुषटम्‌।।३।। 
3. These luminous (beams of the) dawn are beheld in the east 


diffusing light: (the dawn) engender sacrifice, fire; the odious 
glooms, descending, disappear. 


५७७६. अचेति दिवो दुहिता मघोनी विश्वे पश्यन्त्युषसं विभातीम्‌। 
आस्थादृर्थ स्वधयां युज्यमानमा यमश्वासः सुयुजो वह॑त्ति।४।। 
4. The affluent daughter of heaven is perceived: all ereatures 


behold the luminous dawn: she ascends her chariot laden with 

sustenance, which her easily-yoked horses draw. 

५७७७. प्रतिं त्वाद्य सुमनसो बुधन्तास्माकासो मघवानो वयं च॑। 
तिल्विलायध्व॑मुषसो विभातीर्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।५।। 

5. Affluent (in sacrificial offerings), actuated by one mind, we 
and ours awaken you, (Usas), today: luminous dawns, soften (the 
earth) with unctuous (dews) and do you, (gods) ever cherish us 
with blessings. 

“Actuated by one mind"— The text has sumanasan, i.e., according 
to Sayana, shobhanastutikah, ‘‘having (i.e., offering), excellent praises 
(or hymns).”’ 

Soften the Earth with Unctuous Dews— The text has only 
tilvilayadhvam, a nominal verb from a compound substantive, tila from 
Sesamum, or its oil and ila, earth:—- anoint or make the world possessed 
of bland or unctuous soil, Jagat snigdhabhumikam kuruta. 


[सूक्त-७९] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- उषा। छन्द- Frei] 
| I ति 
५७५०८. व्युशषा आंवः पथ्याई जनानां पञ्च क्षितीर्मानुषीर्वोधयन्ती। 
सुसन्दृम्भिरु Tn रोद॑सी 

सुसन्दृग्भिरुक्षभिर्भानुमश्रेद्वि सूर्या रोदसी चक्ष॑सावः।।१॥ 
1. Usas has dawned upon the paths of men, awaking the five 
Ses of human beings: She has shed light with her lustrous oxen: 
n makes heaven and earth manifest with radiance. 
JUGE pon the paths of men’’— The translation has rendered pathya 
M d as if the first word represented an acc. pl., probably on account 
follo apparently similar expression in verse 1 of hymn Ixxv.; but Sáyana, 


D ae the Pada text, takes here pathya for a nom. sing., agreeing with 
र्ग » Jananam sarvaprdnindm pathya pathi hità, usah, or jananam 


clas: 
the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


300 Rgveda Samhita 
hivaya, i.e., '*Usas had dawned beneficial on the path of men, or for the 
welfare of men. 

She has shed Light— Bhanum asret: She has resorted to the sun. 
अन्तेष्वक्तन्विशो N 
५७७९. व्य॑ञ्जते दिवो अन्तेष्वक्तून्विशो न युक्ता उषसो यतन्ते। 
z 4 F व॑र्तयन्ति TES यच्छन्ति ( ida 
सं ते गावस्तम आ व॑ ज्योत् ATA बाहू।।२।। 
| 2. The dawns send their rays to the ends of the sky. They 
advance like people arrayed (in martial order): your rays, Usas, 


annihilate the darkness; they diffuse light as Savitd (spreads out) 
his arms. 
| | मघोन्यजीजनत्‌ ! E 
५७८०. अभूदुषा इन्द्रतमा मघोन्यजीजनत्‌ सुविताय l 
feat N^ } 1 | | 
fa दिवो देवी दुहिता दधात्यङ्गिरस्तमा सुकृते ais 

3. The supreme sovereign, the opulent ushas, has risen: she has 
engendered food for our welfare: the divine daughter of heaven, 
most prompt in movement, bestows treasures upon the pious 
worshipper. 

Most Prompt in Movement— Angirastama is explained gantritama, 
most going, as in Sūkta lxxv. verse l; or, according to the Scholiast, it 
may refer to the Avigirasas, of whose race the Bharadvayas, a branch, are 
said to be cognate with the night, angirogotrair bharadvajaih saha 

m= ratrerutpattih, hence night is elsewhere termed Bharadvaji. ratrirva 
| bharadvaji Mandala x. 127. The epithet angirastama, most angiras, 15 
said to be applicable to the dawn because it is the same thing as the end of 
the night, ratryarasanasyo-sarüpatvat: here, however, as well as in the 
former instance, it is probable that the dawn is said to be per-eminently 
belonging, to or possessed of, angiras, because it is the especial season of 
fire-worship, of which the Arigirasas were the institutors. 

ताव॑दुषो अस्म |. यावत्स्तोतृ ` अर॑दो 
| ५७८१. गो राधों अस्मभ्यं रास्व भ्यो अरंदो गृणाना। 
| DUE ae = diy E = देणो E 
| यां त्वां जजुर्वृषभस्या रवेण वि दुळ्हस्य दुरो Hn 

4. Grant as much wealth as your have bestowed upon thine 
adorers when (formerly) praised by them: you whom (your 
worshippers) welcomed with clamour, (loud as the bellowing) ofa 
bull, when you hadst set open the doors of the mountains (where 


the stolen cattle were confined). 
देवंदेवं un राधसे EN 1 | 1 ईरयन्ती 
५७८२. देवंदेवं राधसे चोदयन्त्यस्मद्यक्सूनुता | 


व्युच्छन्ती नः सनये धियो धा यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां dall 


| १. रात्री कुशिकः सौभरो रात्रिर्वा भारद्वाजी (अनु० १०.१२७) | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Hi lu dams काड 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 81 3" 


E: Inspiring every individual devout (worshipper) with a desire 

for wealth, addressing to us the words of truth, diffusing the light 
of morning, bestow upon us understanding (fit) for the acquire- 
ment of riches: and do you, (gods), ever cherish us with blessings. 
Addressing to us the Words of Truth— Asmadryak sunrta irayanti, 
which words Sáyana explains, asmadryak, asmadabhimukham, sunrta 
vacamsi, irayanti prerayanti, i.e., **urging speech, (i.e., praises) towards 
us," ie., awakening our praises. In other passages sunrta is explained by 
the Scholiast, priyasatyavak, or priyasatyatmikavak, kind and truthful 
speech; and sunrtavat, one who holds kind and truthful speech, or 
stutivad, or stotri, one who hymns the gods. Compare note on. v.6, next 
Sükta. 


[सूक्त-८०] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- उषा| छन्द- eT] 
५७८३. प्रति स्तोमेंभिरुषसं वसिष्ठा गीर्भिर्विप्रासः प्रथमा अबुध्रन्‌। 
विवर्तयन्ती रज॑सी सम॑न्ते आविष्कृण्वतीं भुर्वनानि विश्वा॥।१।। 
1. The pious Vasisthas, first (of all worshippers) awaken with 


Prayers and praises (each succeeding) dawn spreading over the 
like-bounded earth and heaven making all the regions manifest. 


५७८४. एषा स्या नव्यमायुर्दधाना गूढ्वी तमो ज्योतिषोषा अंबोधि। 
अग्र Z x प्रार्चिकितत्यूर्य छ 
अग्र एति युवतिरह॑याणा प्राचिकितत्सूर्य यज्ञमग्निम्‌।।२॥ 
2. Bestowing new existence, dispersing the thick darkness by 
her radiance, the Dawn is awakened and like an immodest dam. 


sce comes before (the sun), and makes manifest Surya, sacrifice 
and Agni. 


५७८५. अश्वावतीर्गोमंतीर्न उषासों वीरव॑तीः सर्दमुच्छन्तु भद्रा: 
t 1 = Es A se = 
"d दुहाना विश्वतः प्रपीता यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।॥।३॥ 
3. May the auspicious dawns ever break upon us redolent of 


horses, of cattle, of male posterity, shedding moisture, yielding 


pests abundance: and do you, (gods), ever cherish us with 
essings. 


[सूक्त-८ १] 


(ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- उषा। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, 
समासतो बृहती)।] 


५७ 1 -i 
WS. Red अदर्श्यायत्युशच्छन्ती दुहिता दिव:। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————— —— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


302 Rgveda Samhita 


अपो महिं व्ययति चक्षसे तमो ज्योतिष्कृणोति सूनरी 118 11 

1. The daughter of heaven is everywhere beheld advancing and 
shedding light: she drives away the deep darkness that objects may 
meet the eye: the kind guide of man, she diffuses light. 

५७८७. उदुखिर्या: सृजते सूर्यः सचाँ उद्यन्नक्षत्रमर्चिवत्‌। 
तवेदुंषो व्युषि सूर्यस्य च सं भक्तेन॑ गमेमहि।।२।। 

2. At the same time the sun sends forth his rays, and, rising, 
renders the planets luminous: so, Usas, upon your manifestation, 
and that of Szrya, may we become possessed of sustenance. 

Renders the Plants Luminous— For, it is said, the moon and 


planets shine at night with light derived from the solar ray, saurena tejasa 
hi naktam chandraprabhritini naksatrani bhasante. 


५७८८. प्रति त्वा दुहितर्दिव उषों जीरा अंभुत्स्महि। 
या वह॑सि पुरु स्पा व॑नन्वति रत्नं न दाशुषे Wd: 
3. May we, prompt adorers, awaken you, Usas, daughter of 


heaven, bountiful divinity, who bring ample and desirable (wealth) 
and happiness, like riches, to the donor (of the oblation). 


= ५७८९. उच्छन्ती या कृणोषि मंहना महि प्रख्यै देवि स्व॑दृशे। 
तस्यास्ते रत्नभाजं ईमहे वयं स्याम॑ मातुर्न सूनव॑ः।।४।। 
4. Mighty goddess, who, scattering darkness, are endowed 


with power to arouse the world and make it visible, we pray that 


we may be dear to you, the distributress of wealth, as sons are to 4 
mother. 


५७९०. तच्चित्रं राध आ भरोषो यद्दीर्घशरुत्तमम्‌। 
यतते दिवो दुहितर्मर्तभोजनं तद्रास्व भुनर्जामहै ।५।। 


5. Bring Usas, such wondrous wealth as may be long 


renowned: bestow, daughter of heaven, that sustenance which is fit 
for mortals, such as we may enjoy. 


| e . be ति 
५७९१. Fa: सूरिभ्यो अमृतं वसुत्वनं वाजाँ अस्मभ्यं गोम॑तः। 
चोदयित्री मघोन॑: सूनृतावत्युषा उच्छदप fat: IS 
6. Grant to the pious immortal fame, conjoined with affluence: 


grant to us food and cattle: and may Usas, the encourager of the 
wealthy (sacrificer) the speaker of truth, drive away our foes. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


2 


h) 


ed 


) 8 


ng 
fit 


06: 
the 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 82 303 


“The speaker of truth: sunrtavati, which Sayana explains, 
priyasatyatmika vak sunrta, tadvati; sunrtavati may, therefore, also mean, 
**possessed of kind and truthful speech’, ie, possessed of hymns, or 
hymned, sell.. by the pious. Compare note on v. 5 of the preceding Sükta. 


[सूक्त-८२] 
[ऋषि- afte मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्रावरुण। छन्द- जगती] 
५७९२. इद्रावरुणा युवम॑ध्वराय॑ नो विशे जनाय महि शर्म यच्छतम्‌। 
दीर्घप्रयज्युमति यो व॑नुष्यति वयं ज॑येम पृतनासु दूढ्यः।।१॥। 

1. Indra and Varuna, bestow upon this man, our employer, a 
spacious chamber for (the celebration of) the sacrifice; and may 
we subdue in conflicts such evil-minded persons as may seek to 
injure him who has been long engaged (in your adoration). 


“A spacious chamber"— Or it may also mean great happiness: 
mahi, mahat, Sarma, grham sukham va. 


५७९३. सम्राळन्यः स्वराळन्य उच्यते वां महान्ताविन्द्रावरुणा महावसू। 
faa tard: परमे व्योमनि सं वामोजों वृषणा सं बल॑ दधुः।।२॥ 

2. One of you it titled supreme monarch, so is the other: 
mighty and most opulent are you, Indra and all the gods in the 
highest heaven, showerers (of benefits), have combined your 
united strength, (your) maid vigour. 

“Supreme Monarch"— The text says that Indra and Varuna are 
called Samraj and Svaraj the former title belonging to Varuna, as Sayana 
infers from ii. 41. 6 and the later to Jndra, as he infers from i. 61.9 Samraj 
is explained by him, Samyag rajamanah, i.e., thoroughly splendent, and 
Svaraj, surayam evanyanirapeksayaive rajamanah, i.e., self-splendent, or 
not dependent for his lustre on any one else. 


५७९४. अन्वपां खान्यतृन्तमोजसा सूर्यमैरयतं दिवि प्रभुम्‌। 
| ae pees frdd 
इन्द्रांवरुणा मदें अस्य मायिनोञपिन्वतमपितः पिन्व॑तं füd:i i 
3: Indra and Varuna, you have forced open by your strength 
the barriers of the waters: you have established Surya as the lord in 
heaven: in the exhilaration of the inspiring (Soma) you have 


teplenished the dry (beds of the rivers): do you also fulfil the 
Objects of our sacred rites. 


१७९५. युवामिद्युत्सु पृत॑नासु वह॑यो युवां क्षेम॑स्य प्रसवे मितज्ञ॑वः। 
ईशाना वस्व॑ उभयस्य कारव इन्द्रावरुणा सुहवां हवामहे।४॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


————————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


304 Rgveda Samhita 


4. The bearers (of offerings) invoke you, /ndra and Varuna, in 
wars, in battles: on banded knees (the Avigirasas invoke you) for 
the begetting of prosperity: and we, your worshippers, invoke you, 
who are entitled to respectful homage, the lords of both celestial 
and terrestrial treasures. 

“In baules"— The corresponding word of the text. priyasat is 
rendered by Sayana, satrusenasu among hostile armies. 

“Entitled to respectful homage; suhava, Sayana, Sakhena hvatavyau, 
easily accessible to invocation, easily invoked. 


[i 1 | | 
५७९६. इन्द्रांवरुणा यदिमानिं चक्रथुर्विश्चा जातानि भुवनस्य मज्मनां। 
क्षेमेण ]. e 1 | 
क्षेमेण मित्रो वरुणं दुवस्यति मरुद्भिरुग्रः शुभमन्य ईयते।।५॥। 

5. Indra and Varuna, inasmuch as you have created by your 
might all these beings of the world, therefore Mitra worships 
Varuna for prosperity, while the other, the fierce Indra, associated 
with the Maruts, acquires glory. 

Therefore Mitra Worships Varuna, Etc.— The sense of the passage 
is obscure, ksemena Mitro Varunam duvasyati marudbhir ugrah subham 
anya iyate: there is nothing very embarrassing in the words, which are 


rendered literally in the text. The last clause may also be rendered, 


according to Sayana, ‘‘along with the Maruts the powerful /ndra sends 
down rain.” 


५७९७. महे शुल्काय वरुणस्य नु त्विष ओजों मिमाते ध्रुवम॑स्य यत्स्वम्‌। 
अर्जामिमन्यः श्नथयन्तमातिरदभ्रेभिरन्यः प्र वृंणोति भूर्यसः।६॥। 

6. In honour of (Indra and Varuna) the sacrificer and his wife 

or (the obtaining of) great wealth, confer (by their praises) that 

strength which is peculiar to each of them, and ever-enduring: one 


of them, (Varuna), destroys the unfriendly man neglecting (his 


worship): the other, (Indra), with scanty (means), discomfits 
numerous (enemies). 


Discomfits Numerous Enemies— Pravrnoti | bhuyasah: the 
expression 1s equivocal, and may mean, according to the Scholiast, “he 
exalts many worshippers,” bahun yajamanan utkrstan karoti. 


५७९८. न तमंहो न दुरितानि मर्त्यमिन्द्रावरुणा न तप: कुत॑श्चन। यस्य॑ देवा 
1 ES = = 
गच्छथो वीथो अध्वरं न तं मर्तस्य नशते परिहवृति: 1191 
7. Sin contaminates not, difficulties assail not, nor distress at 


any time afflicts the mortal, Indra and Varuna, to whose sacrifices 


you, deities, repair, and of which you approve: such a man ruin 
never destroys. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 83 305 


E- “assail”, ‘‘afflicts’’, and  ''destroys" are 
amplifications— required in the English translation— of the word nasate, 
which, according to Sáyana, means, vyapnoti, encompasses, takes hold of 


५७९९. अर्वाङनरा दैव्येनावसा ad शृणुतं हवं यदि मे जुजोंपथ:। 
= युवोर्हि ee Sr Eo réf E I 
युवोर्हि सख्यमुत वा यदार्प्य मार्डा नि यंच्छतम्‌ [1८11 


8. Leaders of rites, come to our presence with divine ' 


protection: if you have any regard for me, hear my invocation: 
verily your friendship, your affinity, is the source of happiness: 
grant them, Indra and Varuna (unto us). 
५८००, अस्मार्कमिन्द्रावरुणा भरेभरे पुरोयोधा भवतं कृष्टयोजसा। 
> ^ 1 > [ety [| 
Eu हव॑न्त उभय अध स्पृध नरस्तोकस्य तनयस्य सातिषुं। RII 

9. Indra and Varuna, of irresistible strength, be our preceders 
in every encounter, for both (past and present) worshippers invoke 
you to defend them in war, or for the acquirement of sons and 
grandsons. 

EY ^ ¢ 524 | le 1 
५८०१. अस्मे इन्द्रो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा pei यच्छन्तु महि शर्म सप्रथः। 
> ज्योतिरदितेऋतावृ NC NM AN NS सवितुर्मनामहे 
अवध्रं ज्योतिरदितेऋतावृधों देवस्य श्लोकं सवितुर्मनामहे।।१०॥ 

10. May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman grant us wealth 
and a large and spacious habitation; may the lustre of Aditi, the 
augmentress of sacrifice, be innoxious to us: we recite the praise of 
the divine Savità. 


[सूक्त-८३] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्रावरुण। छन्द- जगती।] 
५८०२. युवां न॑रा पश्य॑मानास आय्य प्राचा गव्यन्तः पृथुपर्शवो ययुः। 
दासां च वृत्रा हतमार्याणि च सुदासमिन्द्रावरुणावसावतम्‌1१॥ 


1. Indra and Varuna, leaders (of rites), contemplating your 
affinity, and desirous of cattle, the worshippers, armed with large 
sickles, have proceeded to the east (to cut the sacred grass): 
destroy, Indra and Varuna, your enemies, whether Dasas or Aryas 
and defend Sudasa with your protection. 

i Armed with Large Sickles— Prithuparshavah is explained, 
vistirnasvaparsuhasta, holding large rib-bones of horses: the asvaparsu is 
an implement for cutting the kusa grass', either the rib of a horse, or an 
OE T TE MEER I 


१. अश्वपर्श्चा बर्हिरच्छैति (do Fo 34.2.2)! 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i  ___ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and e ng otri 
306 g y Ary: J Gar 


eda Samhita 
instrument like it: it is frequently alluded to in the Brahmanas and Sutras: 
on the Taittiriya Samhita, Kanda 1, Prapathaka 1, Anuvaka 2; the mantra 
ghoshad asi is said, by Baudhayana, to be addressed to the Asvaparsu, 
**you are the implement, the priest having taken it in his hand. Sayana, 
commenting on the term, understands it literally: asvaparsu, 
asvaparsvasthi, the rib-bone of a horse, the edge of which is as sharp as a 
sword, and fit for cutting: tac ca khadgavat tiksnadbaratvat lavane 
samarthah. 


५८०३. यत्रा नर: समयन्ते कृतध्व॑जो यस्मिन्नाजा भर्वति किं चन प्रियम्‌। 
यत्रा भयन्ते भुव॑ना स्वर्दृशस्तत्रा न इन्द्रावरुणाधिं वोचतम्‌।।२॥। 


2. Where men assemble with uplifted banners, in what-ever 
conflict, there is something unfavourable; where living beings, 
looking to heaven, are in fear, there, Indra and Varuna, speak to us 
(encouragement). 

There AS tare 

Sayana adds, ‘‘every thing is evil". The last part of this verse is 
somewhat differently rendered by him: yatra, ca, yuddhe, bhuvana, 
bhuvanani, bhutajatani, svardrishah, Sarirapatad urdhvam svargasya 
drastaro, vitash ca, bhayante, bibhyati, tatra, tadrishe sangrame, he 
indravarunau, no 'sman, adhivocatam, asmatpaksapatavacanau 
bhavatam, ie, ‘in whatever (battle) living beings and those seeing 


heaven (ie., gone to heaven, departed) are in fear, there, एकाच and 
Ie Varuna, plead our cause." 


५८०४. सं भूम्या अन्तां ध्वसिरा अदृक्षतेन्द्रावरुणा दिवि घोष आरुहत्‌। 
अस्थुर्जनानामुप मामरातयोऽर्वागब॑सा हवनश्रुता ग॑तम्‌।।३।। 


3. The ends of the earth are beheld laid waste: the clamour has 
ascended, Indra and Varuna, to heaven: the adversaries of my 


people approach me: having heard my invocation, come for my 
defence. 


५८०५. इन्द्रावरुणा वधनाभिरप्रति भेदं वन्वन्ता प्र सुदास॑मावतम्‌। 
ब्रह्माण्येषां शृणुतं हवीमनि सत्या तृत्सूनामभवत्पुरोहिंतिः।४।। 


4. Indra and Varuna, you protected Sudésa, over-whelming 
the yet unassailed Bheda with your fatal weapons: here the prayers 
of these Trisus in time of battle, so that my ministration may have 


borne them fruit. 
५८०६. इन्द्रावरुणावभ्या तपन्ति माघान्यर्यो वनुषामरांतयः। 


युवं हि वस्व॑ उभय॑स्य॒ राजथोऽध स्मा नोऽवतं पार्ये दिवि। i 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Te eee डि 


u—  — RR RR RE 


Mandala Digitized 89 Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 307 


5. Indra and Varuna, the murderous (weapons) of my enemy 
E me: foes among the malignant (assail me): you two are 
sovereigns over both (celestial and terrestrial) wealth: protect us 
therefore on the day of battle. 


५८०७. युवां ह॑वन्त उभयांस आजिष्विन्द्र च वस्वो वरुणं च सातये। 
क 1 adaf भर्निबाधि $ ESI DEN = 
यत्र राजभिर्दशभिर्निबाधित प्र सुदासमावतं तृत्सुभिः सह।।६।। 

6. Both (Sudasa and the Trtsus) call upon you two (Indra and 
Varuna), in combats for the acquirement of wealth, when you 
defend Sudása, together with the Trtsus, when attacked by the ten 
Rajas. 

५८०८. दश राजानः स्मिता अय॑ज्यवः सुदासमिन्द्रावरुणा न aay: | 
सत्या नृणामंद्यसदामुपस्तुतिर्देवा एषामभवन्देवहृतिषु uto 1 


7. The ten confederated irreligious Rajas did not prevail, Indra 
and Varuna, against Sudasa: the praise of the leaders (of rites), the 
offerers of sacrificial food, was fruitful: the gods were present at 
their sacrifices. 


५८०९. दाशराज्ञे पर्रियत्ताय विश्वर्त: सुदास इन्द्रावरुणावशिक्षतम्‌। 
2 र्त : 
faa यत्र नमसा कपर्दिनों धिया धीव॑न्तो अस॑पन्त तृत्सव:11८ I 
8. You gave vigour, Indra and Varuna, to Sudas when 
surrounded on all sides by the ten Rajas (in the country) where the 


Pious Trtsus, walking in whiteness, and wearing braided hair, 


worshipped with oblations and praise. 

Walking in Whiteness, Wearing, Etc.— Svit yancah kapardinas 
tr tsavah: the epithets are explained, svaityam nairmályam gacchantah, 
going in, or to, whiteness, or freedom from soil ; and jatilah, having 
braided hair. The Trísus are styled by Sayana priests, the pupils of 
Vasistha, Vasisthasisyah, etatsarijriah rtvijah. 


५८१०. वृत्राण्यन्यः संमिथेषु जिध्न॑ते व्रतान्यन्यो अभि क्षते सदां। 
हवांमहे वां वृषणा सुवृक्तिभिरस्मे ईन्द्रावरुणा शर्म यच्छतम्‌॥९।। 


9. One of you destroys enemies in battle, the other ever 
oe religious observances: we invoke you, showerers (of 
enefits), with praises: bestow upon us, Indra and Varuna, felicity. 


५८११. अस्मे इनदरो वरणो मित्रो अर्यमा GH यच्छतु महि शर्म सप्र्थः। 
अब्र ज्योतिरदितेकरतावृधो देवस्य श्लोक सवितुर्मनामहे 1१० N 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


दकल"... 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
308 Rgveda Samhita 


10. May Indra, Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, grant us wealth and a 
large and spacious mansion: may the lustre of Aditi, the 
augmentress (of sacrifice), be innoxious to us: we recite the praise 
of the divine Savitd. 


[सूक्त-८४] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्रावरुण। छन्द- जगती] 
५८१२. आ वाँ राजानावध्वरे व॑वृत्यां हव्येभिरिन्द्रावरुणा नमोभि:। 
प्र वां घृताचीं बाह्वोर्दधाना परि त्मना विषुरूपा जिगाति।।१॥ 


1. Royal Indra and Varuna, I invite you to the sacrifice with 
oblations and with praise: the butter-dropping (ladle), held in our 
hands, offers spontancously (the oblation) to you who are of many 


forms. 
५८१३. युवो राष्ट्र बृहदिन्वति chat सेतृभिररज्जुभिः सिनीथः। 
UR नो हेळो वरुणस्य वृज्या उरु न इन्द्रः कृणवदु AAIR 
2. Your vast kingdom of heaven gratifies (the world with rain), 


you who bind (the sinner) with bonds not made of rope: may the 
— wrath of Varuna pass away from us: may Indra prepare for us a 


spacious region. 
५८१४. कृतं नों यज्ञं विदथेषु चारँ कृतं ब्रह्माणि सूरिषु प्रशस्ता। 
EX] 7 q 
SH रयिर्देवजूतो न एतु प्र ण॑: स्पार्हाभिरूतिभिस्तिरेतम्‌।।३ U 
3. Render the sacrifice offered in our dwelling fruitful, the 


prayers uttered by the worshippers successful: may riches come to 


us sent by the gods: do you two give us increase by you desirable 
protections. 


५८१५. अस्मे इन्द्रावरुणा विश्ववारं रयिं thi वसुमन्तं पुरुक्षुम्‌। 
p र रु 
प्र य आदित्यो अनृता मिनात्यमिता शूरों दयते वसूनि।॥४॥ 
4. Bestow upon us. /ndra and Varuna, riches desirable to all, 


together with a dwelling and abundant food, for the hero, Aditya 


who punishes beings devoid of truth, gives (to the devout) 
unbounded treasures. 


Aditya— Aditya, or the son of Aditi, here means Varuna. 
५८१६. इयमिन्द्रं वरुणमष्ट मे गी: प्रावत्तोके तनये तूर्तुजाना। 
eu देववीतिं apc c 
सुरत्नासो देववीतिं गमेम यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:॥५॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a 


Moe MUS te 


2 


e 


le 


||, 
d, 


t) 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sūkta 85 309 


5. May this my praise reach /ndra and Varuna, and, earnestly 
offered (by me), preserve sons and grandsons: let us, possessed of 
affluence, present (their) food to the gods: and do you, (duties), 
ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-८५] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ट मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्रावरुण। छन्द- जगती।] 
५८१७. पुनीषे वामरक्षसँ मनीषां सोममिन्द्राय वरुणाय Fea 
घृतप्रतीकामुषसं न देवीं ता नो याम॑ननुरुष्यतामभीके।।१॥। 
1. I offer to you both adoration, uninterrupted by Raksasas, 
presenting the Soma to Indra and to Varuna,— (adoration), of 


which the members are radiant as the celestial dawn: may they two 
protect us at the time of going to battle. 


५८१८. स्पर्धन्ते वा उ देवहूये अत्र येषु ध्वजेषु दिद्यवः पर्तन्ति। 
युवं ताँ इनद्रावरुणावमित्रान्हतं पराचः शर्वा AYA: 
2. In the conflict where (combatants) strive against us, in those 
(contests) in which bright (weapons) fall upon the banners, do you 


two, Indra and Varuna, slay with your shaft those enemies who 
have been routed, and are scattered in various directions. 
५८१९. आपश्चिद्धि स्वयशसः सरदं:सु देवीरिन्द्रं वरुणं देवता धुः। 

कृष्टीरन्यो धारय॑ति प्रविक्ता वृत्राण्यन्यो अप्रतीनि हन्ति।।३॥ 

3. The divine Soma (juices), flowing like water, self renowned, 
(offered) at religious assemblies, support Indra and Varuna: of 
whom one regulates mankind, distinguished (as good or bad), and 
the other slays unresisted foes. 

Support Indra and Varuna— As by the commentary, 


Somendpydyitd hi devatáh sve sve sthdne avatisthante, “‘nourished by the 
Soma, the gods abide in their own several stations. 


५८२०. स सुक्रतुर्क्रतचिदस्तु होता य आदित्य शवसा वां नमंस्वान्‌। 
आववर्तदवंसे वां हविष्मानसदित्स सुविताय प्रयंस्वान्‌॥॥४।। 
4. May the devout worshipper derive benefit from sacrifice 
When offering adoration to you both, sons of Aditi (involved) with 


Strength: the who, liberal of oblations invites you for your 


satisfaction, may he, possessing abundance, be in the enjoyment of 
happiness. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
310 Rgveda Samhita 
प्राव॑त्तोके तन॑ये 1 
५८२१. इयमिन्द्रं वरुणमष्ट मे गीः प्रावत्तोके तनये तूतुजाना। 
i E F FE 1 
सुरलांसो देववीतिं गमेम यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदा T: 
9९ May this my praise reach Indra and Varuna: and carnestly 
offered (by me), preserve sons and grandsons: let us, possessed of 


affluence, present (their) food to the gods; and do you, (deities), 
ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-८६] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि, देवता-वरुण। छन्द-त्रिषटुप्‌।] 
५८२२. धीरा त्व॑स्य महिना जनूंषि वि यस्तस्तम्भ रोद॑सी चिदुर्वी। 
प्र नाकमृष्वं नुनुदे बृहन द्विता नक्षत्र पप्रथच्च AI d 
1. Permanent in greatness are the births of that Varuna who 


propped up the vast heaven and earth, who appointed to (their) 


two-fold (task) the glorious sun and beautiful constellations, who 
spread out the earth. 


Their Two-fold Task— Dvita, of giving light by day and by night. 
५८२३. उत स्वयां तन्वाई सं dà तत्कदा न्वर॑न्तर्वरुणे भुवानि। 
किं में हव्यमट्टणानो जुषेत कदा मृंठीक सुमनां अभि ख्य॑म्‌॥२॥ 
2. When may I in my person converse with the deity? When 
may I (be admitted) to the heart of Yaruna? By what means may 


he, without displeasure, accept my oblation? When may |, 
rejoicing in mind, behold that giver of felicity? 


५८२४. पृच्छे तदेनों वरुण दिदृक्षूपो एमि चिकितुषों विपृच्छम्‌। 
समानमिन्मे कवयंश्चिदाहुरयं ह तुभ्यं वरुणो ट्टणीते।३ I 
3. Desirous of beholding you, Varuna, I inquire what is mind 


offence: I have gone to make inquiry of the wise: the sages verily 


have said the same thing to me:— this Varuna is displeased with 
you. 


५८२५. किमाग॑ आस वरुण ज्येष्ठं यत्स्तोतारं जिघांससि सर्खायम्‌। 


प्र तन्मे वोचो दूळभ स्वधावो5व॑ त्वानेना नम॑सा तुर STA 


4. What has that great wickedness been, Varuna, that you 
should seek to destroy the worshipper, your friend? Insuperable, 
resplendent Varuna, declare it to me, so that, freed from sin, I may 
quick approach you with veneration. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 86 311 
a अव॑ दुग्धानि feat सृजा नोऽव या वयं च॑कृमा तनूभि:। 
i) oe ò i a x Sy ८ 2०2 ce 

अर्व राजन्पशुतृपं न तायुं सृजा वत्सं न दाम्नो वर्सिष्ठम्‌।५।॥ 

5. Relax (the bonds) imposed by the ill deeds of our fore- 
fathers, and those incurred (by the sins) which we have committed 
in our persons: liberate, royal Varuna, like a calf from its tether, 
Vasistha like a thief nourishing the animal (he has stolen). 

«Like a Calf from its Tether...Like a thief, etc." — Sayana 
supplies **and"' to the two comparisons: *'liberate Vasistha (i.e., me) like 
as a thief (is liberated), who (having performed his penance for the theft 
he has committed, at its termination) feeds the animals (with food), and 
(Le, or) like a calf from its tether”: pasutrpam na विणा, 
stainyapráyascittam | krtvàvasáne ghasadibhih pasündm tarpayitáram 
stenam iva; damno rajjoh, vatsam na, vatsam iva, ca vasistham, mám 
bandhakat papdt, avasrja vimurica. 

५८२७. न स स्वो दक्षो वरुण श्रुति: सा सुरां मन्युर्विभीदको अर्चिच्ति:। 
अस्ति ज्यायान्कनीयस उपारे स्वप्मञ्चनेदनृतस्य प्रयोता।६।। 

6. It is not our own choice, Varuna, out our condition, (that is 
the cause of our sinning); it is that which is intoxication, wrath, 
gambling, ignorance; there is a senior in the proximity of the 
junior: even a dream is a provocative to sin. 

Our Condition, that is the cause of our Sinning— The text has 
only na sa svo dakso dhrutih: the latter is explained, the condition 
appointed by destiny at the time of birth is the cause of the committal of 
sin, not our own power or will dhrutih sthirotpattisamaye nirmità 
daivagatih papapravrttau káranam na svabhitam balam : this would 
make the Veda authority for the popular notion of fate and consequent 
transmigration. 

Intoxication— Sura, literally, wine. 

Gambling— Vibhidaka, dice, a material of gaming. 

There is a senior in the Proximity of the Junior— Asti jydydn 
kaniyasa upáre: by the junior, according to the commentator, is to be 
understood, man, little and helpless; by the senior, his superior, God, 
exercising nigh at hand the restraining faculty, samipe niyantrtvena sthito 
Jyayan adhika Isvaro' sti; but who, according to Sayana, somewhat 
inconsistently, impels man to wickedness, sa eva tam pápe pravartayati: 
to this effect a text is quoted, esa hyevasadhu karma kárayati tam yam 


adho ninisate', him whom he wishes to lead downwards he causes to do 
evil acts. 


१. कौ० go 341 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


312 Rgveda Samhita 
Even a Dream is a Provocative to Sin— Anrtasya prayotd, 


promoter of the untrue: if so, says Sayana, how much more likely are we 
to commit sin when awake. 


५८२८. S दासो न मीळहुषें कराण्यहं देवाय भूर्णयेऽनांगाः। 
अचेंतयदचितों देवो अर्यो गृत्सं राये कवितरो जुनाति।।७।। 
7. Liberated from sin, I may perform diligent service, like a 
slave, to the divine showerer (of benefits), the sustainer of the 
world: may he, the divine lord, give intelligence to us who are 


devoid of understanding: may he who is most wise, guide the 
worshipper to wealth. 


५८२९. अयं सु तुभ्यं वरुण स्वधावो हृदि स्तोम उपंश्रितश्चिदस्तु । 
शं नः क्षेमे शमु योगें नो अस्तु यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।८॥ 
8. May this laudation, food-conferring Varuna, be taken to 


your heart: may success be ours in retaining what we have, and in 


acquiring more: and do you, (deities), ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[सूक्त-८७] 
— [क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वरुण। छन्द- Peu] 
५८३०. रदत्पथो वरुणः सूर्याय प्राणीसि समुद्रियां नदीर्नाम्‌। 
सर्गो न सृष्टो अर्वतीऋतायञ्चकारं महीरवनीरह॑भ्य:।।१॥। 
1. Varuna prepared a path for the sun: he set free the waters of 


the rivers generated in the firmament: hastening (to his task), as a 


horse let loose rushes to (a flock of ) mares, he divided the great 
nights from the days. 


: He divided the great nights from the Days— Varuna is here said to 
imply the setting sun, by whose departure day ends and night begins. 


५८३१. आत्मा ते वातो रज आ नवीनोत्पशुर्न भूर्णिर्यवसे ससवान्‌। 
dedi रोदसीमे E = 7 
अन्तर्मही बृहती रोदसीमे विश्वां ते धाम॑ वरुण प्रियाणिं।२।। 

2. Thy spirit is the wind: he sends abroad the waters: he, the 
cherisher of the world, is the feeder on (sacrificial) food, like an 
animal upon fodder: all your glories, Varuna, manifested between 
the vast and spacious heaven and earth, give delight (to all). 

The Spirit is the Wind— Atma te vátah,— the Scholiast explains;— 
the wind being sent abroad by you is the support of all living beings, in 
the form of breath. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 87 313 
ह 1 I ^ 1 रोदसी I सुमेके ` 
५८३२. परि स्पशो वरुणस्य स्मदिष्टा उभे प॑श्यन्ति रोदसी सुमेके। 
| =| धीरा प्रचेतसो I | 
ऋतावानः कवयां यञ्चधारा: प्रचेतसो य इषयन्त AAI 

3. The excellent spies of Varuna behold the beautiful heaven 
and earth, as well as those (men) who, the celebrators of rites, 
constant in sacrifice, wise and intelligent address (to him their) 
praise. 

The Excellent Spies of Varuna— Spasah smadistah ; the first is 
rendered carah, spies: the epithet is differently explained either 
prasastagatayah, of excellent movement, or sahapreshitah, despatched 
together: in a former passage. mantra 5065 spasah is explained, rasmayah 
rays, or reins. 

esr ET 1 1 
५८३३. ward मे वरुणो मेधिराय त्रिः सप्त नामाध्न्या बिभर्ति। 
N 1 1 
विद्वान्पदस्य गुह्या न वोचद्युगाय विप्र उपराय शिक्षन्‌। II 

4. Varuna thus spoke to me, possessed of understanding: the 
cow (speech) has thrice seven appellations: the wise and intelligent 
Varuna, giving instruction to me, his worthy disciple, had declared , 
the mysteries of the place (of Brahma). 

The Cow— AgAnyà is here understood to mean vdk, speech; a rather 
unusual application, although gauh, the synonym of aghnyd, has that 
meaning: the twenty-one appellations are said to be the seven metres of 
the Veda, as corresponding with the breast, throat, or head; or speech may 
mean the Veda, and as such imply the names of the twenty-one Vedic 

* sacrifices. Some explain here gauh by prthivi, earth, having also twenty- 
one synonyms. 
^ I अन्तरस्मिन्तिस्रो ^ 1 1 
५८३४. तिस्रो द्यावो निहिता अन्तरस्मिन्तिस्रो भूमीरुपराः षड्विधाना:। 
1 4 Sem i हिरण्ययं 
गृत्सो राजा वरुणश्चक्र एतं efa g हिरण्ययं शुभे कम्‌।५॥ 

E In him are deposited the three heavens, the three earths with 
their six seasons are shown in him: the most adorable, royal 
Varuna has made this golden sun undulating in the sky, he has 
made it to diffuse light. 

The three Earths— Best, middle most, worst see former passage 
(Rg. ii.27.8.)! 

तिम्रो भूमीर्धारयन्‌ 
5 aon has made it to Diffuse Light— Subhe kam, diptyartham: see Rg. 
Su i [Kam is explained by the Scholiast in his note on v. 3 of the next 
"Ma as sukham, or as an expletive.] 
r RUA NV Ct deco des 
१. अयो वा इमे त्रिवृतो लोका: (Wo Flo २.१७) । 


| 
| 
| 
| 
f 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


A Rgveda Samhita 


५८३५. अव सिन्धुं वरुणो dita स्थाद्‌ द्रप्सो न श्वेतो मृगस्तुविष्मान्‌। 
गम्भीरशंसो रज॑सो विमानः सुपारक्षत्र: सतो अस्य Vds (I 

6. (Radiant) as the sun, Varuna placed the ocean (in its bed) 
white as a drop (of water), vigorous as an antelope, objects of 
profound praise, distributor of water, the powerful transporter 
beyond sin, the ruler of this existing (world). 

White as a Drop of Water— Drapso na sveto mrgas tuvisman: the 
commentator seems to adopt a different construction, and to attach sveta 
to mrga: drapso na dravanasila udabindur iva: svetah, subhravarno 
mrgah, gauramrga iva; tuvismdn balavan 

‘Distributor of Water’’— According to Sayana ‘‘creator™ nirmata. 


५८३६. यो मुळयाति चक्रुषे चिदागों वयं स्याम वरुणे अनांगाः। 
अनुं व्रतान्यदितेर्क्रधन्तो यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11७11 
7. May we be free from sin against that Varuna, who has 


compassion upon him who commits offence, we who are duly 


observing the rites of the son Aditi: and do you, (gods), ever 
cherish us with blessings. 


“Of the son of Aditi?— Sayana takes Adifer as meaning here 
adinasya “of the mighty (Varuna) He usually explains it by akhandaniya. 


[सूक्त- ८८] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वरुण। छन्द- fre] 
५८३७. प्र शुन्ध्युवं वरुणाय Bei मतिं व॑सिष्ठ मीळहुषें भरस्व। 
य ईमर्वाञ्चं कर॑ते यज॑त्रं सहस्रामघं वृष॑णं बृहन्त॑म्‌।।१।। 
1. Offer pure and acceptable praise, Vasistha to the showerer, 


Varuna, he who makes the adorable (sun), she donor of thousands, 
the showerer (of benefits), the vast, manifest before (us). 


५८३८. अधा न्व॑स्य सन्दृर्श जगन्वानग्नेरनीकं वरुणस्य मंसि। 
d 
स्वशर्यदशमत्रधिपा उ अन्धोऽभि मा वपुर्दुशयै निनीयात्‌।२॥ 
2. Hastening into his sight, may I (worthily) glorify the 


aggregated radiance of Varuna, when he is the imbiber of the 


exhilarating beverage (expressed) by the stones: may he render my 
person of goodly aspect 


The Aggregated Radiance of Varuna— Agner anikam Varunasya 15 
rendered, Varunasya jvalasangham 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


कफ 


E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7. Sükta 88 ji 


५८३९. आ यद्रुहाव वरुणश्च नावं प्र यत्स॑मुदरमीरयांव मध्यम्‌। 


A 1 ईङ्खयावहै ^ 
अधि यदपां स्नुभिश्चराव प्र प्रेङ्ख ईल्लयावह शुभे FURI 

3. When (I, Vasistha) and Varuna ascend the ship together 
when we send it forth into the midst of the ocean, when we 
proceed over the waters with swift (sailing vessels), then may we 
both undulate happily in the prosperous swing. 

With Swift Sailing Vessels— Snubhis caráva, gantribhir naubhih, 
with going, viz., ships. 

Then may we both undulate happily in the Prosperous Swing-- 
Pra prenkha inkhayavahat subhe kam is literally rendered in the text after 
the Scholiast who explains it prenkhe, naurupayam dolayam eva 
prenkhayavahai, nimnonnatais tarangair itas cetasca pravicalantau 
saikridavahai, let us both sport, being tossed here and there by the up and 
down waves, as it were in a swing, in the form of a ship. 

५८४०. fid ह वरुणो नाव्याधादृषिं चकार स्वपा महोभिः। 
स्तोतारं विप्र: सुदिनत्वे अहां यान्नु द्याव॑स्ततनन्यादुषासंः।४॥ 

4. So Varuna placed Vasistha in the ship, and by his mighty 
protection made the Rsi a doer of good works: the wise Veruna 
placed his worshipper in a fortunate day of days, he extended the 
passing days, the passing nights. 

In a Fortunate Day of Days— Sudinatve is rather the stale or 
property of a lucky day by its being fruitful, falatvena. 

He extended the Passing Days, the Passing Nights— Yan nu 
dydvas tatanan yāduşāsah Varuna is here identified with the sun: usasahi. 
the Scholiast asserts, here intends rátrih, nights, yal is for yatah. 
gacchatah. 


! नौ Di 
५८४१. mi त्यानिं नौ सख्या dug: सर्चावहे यदंवृकं पुरा चित! 
sexi T i र AA d 
d मार्ने वरुण स्वधावः MEAE जगमा Te CITATI 
5. What has become of those our ancient friendships ? Let us 


r 3 1 1 fi > Vi 
EUM € them unimpaired as of old: ood-bestowing Varuna, may 
Pair to your vast comprehensive thousand-doored dwelling. 


५ आपिर्नित्यो 
OR | वरुण प्रियः सन्त्वामागाँसि कृणवत्सखा di मा त 
एनस्वन्तो = vs xad 
एन॑स्वन्तो यक्षिन्‌ भुजेम यन्धि ष्मा विप्रः स्तुवते TET l 
M lY he your unvarying kin, who Was ever dear, though 
cone ee against you, still be your friend; adorable 
एक, offending you, let us not enjoy (happiness) ; but do you, 


Who a z 
n = 
€ Wise, bestow on your worshipper a secure abode. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


dis Rgveda Samhita 


The Unvarying Kin— According to one legend, Vasistha is the son 
of Varuna. 

Let us not Enjoy Happiness— Ma ta enasvanto bhujema, let not us, 
offending you, enjoy--it is not said what: the Scholiast attaches the 
prohibitive to the verb, but gives a different turn to the sentence: *'being 
freed from sin through your favour, let us enjoy enjoyments." 
tvatprasádát paparahita eva santo bhogan bhunjamahai. 


| 1 ` | n {ox 
५८४३. ध्रुवासु त्वासु क्षितिषु क्षियन्तो व्य१स्मत्‌ पाश वरुणा मुमोचत्‌। 
EI अदितेरुपस्थाद्यूयं jube, T 1 
अवो वन्वाना अर्दितिरुपस्थाद्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा नः।॥9॥। 

7. While dwelling in these durable worlds, may Varuna loose 
our bonds: may we be enjoyers of the protection (which has been 
given by him) from the lap of Aditi, and do you (gods) ever cherish 
us with blessings. 

Aditi— Aditi is here explained Prthivi, earth. 

[3-68] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वरुण। छन्द- गायत्री, ५ जगती] 
1 1: . | H lu 
५८४४. मो षु व॑रुण मृन्मयै गृहं राजन्नहं गंमम्‌। मृळा सुक्षत्र TSAI 

1. May I never go, royal Varuna, to a house made of clay-grant 
me happiness, possessor of wealth, grant me happiness. 

May I never go to a House made of Clay— Mo su grham 
mrnmayam gamam, the Scholiast adds tvadiyam, thine, as if a temple of 
Varuna were intended: su he interprets susobhanam, suvarnamayam, very 
handsome, made of gold ; but its connection in the sentence is not very 
clear. 

Sayana seems to take su as meaning, **but to your beautiful house, 
i.e., one made of gold.” 

Grant me Happiness— Sayana explains mrlaya as *‘show mercy”. 

"fu 1 1 

५८४५. यदेमि प्रस्फुरन्निव दृतिर्न ध्मातो अंद्रिवः। मूळा सुक्षत्र ue HR UU 
23. When, Varuna, I am throbbing as if (with awe) like an 
inflated skin, grant me happiness, possessor of wealth, grant me 
happiness. 

3 “When I am Throbbing— The text adds an epithet, adrivas, armed 
with stones for slinging. After throbbing, Sáyana adds "with cold"; and 
instead of “‘I am” he has “I go bound by you”. The text seems to allude 


to the Varuna-pdsa, a kind of dropsy, (see vol. II, mantra 3051); cf. Ait 
Brahm. vii. 15, and Taitt. Samh. ii. 3. 11. 


| प्रतीपं j 
५८४६. spes समह दीनतां प्रतीपं जंगमा शुचे। मुळा सुक्षत्र genti 
C-0. In Public Domaif. Gurukül Kangri Collection, Haridwar - 


CT ५“ 


€ 


-gł 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sūkta 90 ae 


E Opulent and pure (Varuna), if through infirmity 1 have done 
what is contrary (to the law), yet grant me happiness, possessor of 
wealth, grant me happiness. 
५८४७. अपां मध्यें तस्थिवांसं तृष्णाविदज्जरितारम्‌। मृळा सुक्षत्र मृळय 11४1 

4. Thirst distresses (me) your worshipper in the midst of the 
waters: grant me happiness, possessor of wealth, grant me 
happiness. 

Thirst Distresses me your Worshipper— Continuing, according to 
the Scholiast, the allusion to Vasistha's sea voyage: he is thirsty amid the 
waters because the water of the ocean is saline and unfit for drink. 
Lavanotkatasya samudrajalasya pandnarhatvat. 


यत्कि M | X ON EX eris sii श्ररांमसि 
५८४८. यत्किं चेदं वरुण दैव्ये जने$भिद्रोहं मनुष्या श्वरामसि । 
|| अचिती le यूयोपिम I A iiu 
अर्चित्ती यत्तव धर्मा यूयोपिम मा नस्तस्मादेनसो देव रीरिष:।॥५॥ 
5. Whatever the offence which we men commit Varuna against 
divine beings, whatever law of thine we may through ignorance 
violate, do not you, divine Varuna, punish us on account of that 
iniquity. 
ANUVAKA VI 
[सूक्त-९०] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वायु, ५-७ इन्द्रवायु। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌ 
al शुच॑यो ot I 
५८४९. प्र वीरया शुचयो दद्रिरे वामध्वर्युभिर्मधुमन्तः सुतास: | 
1 ` नियुतों ` 
वह वायो नियुतों याह्यच्छा पिबां सुतस्यान्ध॑सो मदांय।।१।। 
» 1. The sweet and pure Soma juices are offered to you, the hero 
V äyu, by the priests ; therefore harness your Niyut steeds. come 
hither and drink of effused Soma for your exhilaration. 
, Yajus, 33. 70 Mahidhara explains the first line differently: pra viraya 
3 adrire vam adhvaryubhih: Sayana considers virayá a licence for viraya, 
d vam for te. Mahidhara makes virayd equivalent to vira, and vam. of 
us two, to the sacrificer and his wife, he patniyajamánau yuvayoh soma 


7 ire, your Soma libations, wife and sacrificer, are being effused— by 
the priests. 


८५०. ईशानाय प्रहुतिं यस्त आनट्‌ शुचिं सोमं शुचिपास्तुर्भ्य वायो। 
कृणोषि तं मर्त्येषु प्रशस्तं जातोजातो जायते वाज्यंस्य 11२ I 


2. Dri uice. Vi : 
ie of the Soma juice, Vayu, you elevate him who 
£ Mortals offers to you who are the lord an excellent 


am 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Bis Rgveda Samhita 


oblation, the pure Soma: repeatedly born, he is born for the 
acquirement of wealth. 
For the Acquirement of Wealth— Jdyate vajyasya, the latter is 
explained dhanasya práptaye. 
` . रोदसीमे 1 देवी agoi | धाति N 
५८५१. राये नु यं जज्ञतू रोद॑सीमे राये देवी धिषणां धाति देवम्‌। 
y | n z Sh m zi X E l afi fuk 
अध वायुं नियुर्तः सश्चत स्वा उत Ad wf Us t 
3. His own Nivut steeds bear to the place of poverty the white- 
complexioned dispenser of wealth, Vayu, whom heaven and earth 
bore for the sake of riches, whom the divine language of praise 
sustains as a deity for the sake of riches. 
Yajus, 27. 24, the explanation is much the same, except in the word 
nireke, which Sáyana renders dáridryam from nitaram riktata. Mahidhara 


makes it, a place crowded with people, bahujanakirne sthane, deriving it 
(rom nir, nirgata, and reka, sunyatd, emptiness. 


५८५२. उच्छन्नुषस: सुदिनां अरिप्रा उरु ज्योतिर्विविदुर्दीध्यांना:। 
ls चिदूर्वमुशिजो 
rol चिदूर्वमुशिजो वि वंत्रुस्तेषामनु प्रदिवः smi: ue tt 

4. The blameless dawns (ushering) bright days have broken, 
and, shining radiantly, (the Avigirasas) have obtained the vast light 
(the sun): desirous (to recover it) they have obtained their wealth 
of cattle, and the ancient waters have subsequently issued for their 
good. 

The Añgirasas—They are not named in the text, but Sayana refers 


the whole to them; by their praise of Vayu the dawn broke, the stolen 
cattle were rescued, and the obstructed rain set at liberty. 


` 1 
५८५३. ते सत्येन मन॑सा दीध्यानाः स्वेन॑ युकतासः क्रतुना वहन्ति। 
i वीरवाहं MS amm x S 
इन्द्रवायू वीरवाहं रथ वामीशानयोरभि gu: सचन्ते।५॥। 

5. Those (worshippers) illustrious by sincere adoration. 
assiduous in the discharge of their own duties, bring to you, Indra 
and Vayu, a hero-bearing chariot, and present to you, INO 
sovereigns, (sacrificial) food. : 

F A Hero-Bearing Chariot— Viravaham ratham, the first is explained 
either asvair vahaniyam, to be borne by your steeds, or stoi 5 


prüpaniyam, to be obtained by the worshippers ; ratham he renders 
yajnam, the sacrifice. 


५८५४. ईशानासो ये दधते स्वर्णो गोभिस्थ्रैभिर्वसुभिहिरण्यै:। 
इन्द्रवायू सूरयो विश्वमायुरर्वद्धिर्वीरैः पृतनासु A:I 


6. May those munificent princes who confer upon Un 


CCNA Babe bar. eum ape निकी e, gold. overcome: 


ion, Haridwar 


a 


E 
ght 
lth 
icir 


fers 
olen 


jon, 
ndra 
two 


ined 
rbhili 
nders 


0 ४9 
;ome- 


Digitized by apa Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sukt 319 


Indra and Vayu, the entire existence (of their enemies) in contests 
with horses and with heroes. 

‘“Treasure’’-— Sayana gives a second explanation of vasubhih, as an 
epithet of hiranyaih, “gold causing us to be settled, nivdsakaih 


५८५५. अर्व॑न्तो न श्रव॑सो भिक्ष॑माणा इन्द्रवायू सुष्टतिभिर्वसिष्ठा:। 
वाजयन्तः स्वव॑से हुवेम यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदा न:11911 
7. We, Vasisthas, (bearing oblation) like horses (bearing 
burdens), soliciting food, desiring strength, invoke With praises 


Indra and Vayu for (our) sure defence: do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 
[सूक्त-९ १] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वायु, ५-७ इन्द्रवायु। छन्द- fae] 
1 ` 1 ^ 1 1 
५८५६. कुविदङ्ग नमसा ये वृधासः पुरा दवा अनवद्यास आसन्‌। 
E ^ Is > 
ते वायवे मनव बाधितायावांसयन्नुषसं सूर्येण 11१ || 
1. Those venerable worshippers, who by prompted and 
frequently (adoring Vayu) with reverence were formerly free from 
reproach, have now illumined Usas and the sun for sacrificing to 
Vayu and (the preservation of) embarrassed mankind. 
For...The Preservation of Embarrassed Mankind— Manave 
bàdhitáya is explained as sons, etc, manusydndm badhitanam 
putrddindm raksanártham ; or it may be connected with the preceding 


word vdyave, to give oblations to Vayu at the-sacrifice of the hindered 
manu, badhitasya manoh prajdpater ydge vdyave hayimsi datum 


५८५७. उशन्तां दूता न दर्भाय गोपा मासश्र॑ पाथः शरदश्च पूर्वी:। 
इन्द्रेवायू सुष्ठुतिर्वामियाना मार्डीकमीट्टे सुवितं च नव्य॑म्‌॥२॥ 
2. Desiring (adoration), y roceeding (in the sky), preservers of 
mankind, be not disposed, In ira and Vayu, to do us harm: protect 


us through many months and years: our sincere praise, addressed 
to you both, solicits happiness and excellent wealth. 


पीवो: > EN 
५८५८. पीवोअन्नाँ रयिवृध: सुमेधा: श्वेतः सिषक्ति नियुतामभिश्री:। 
ते वायवे सम॑नसो वि तंस्थुर्विश्वेत्रर: स्वपत्यानि चक्रु:11२1 
क 3. The white-complexioned Vayu, intelligent, glorious with the 
- “Iyut steeds, favours those men who are well fed, abounding in 
ches, for they with one mind stand everywhere, ready to 


Senay) him, and leaders of rites, they perform all the 
monies, that are productive of excellent offspring. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
320 Rgveda Samhita 


“Glorious with the Niyut Steeds"— Sayana seems to explain 
niyutam abhisrih as the resort or lord of the Niyut seeds, niyutam 


abhisrayaniyah. 
Those Men who are Well-Fed— Yajus, 27. 23. Mahidhara applies 
the epithets to the Niyuts, Sayana to adhyajanán, wealthy men. 
1 | 
५८५९. यावत्तरंस्तन्वो? यावदोजो यावन्नरश्चक्षसा दीध्याना:। 
शुचिं Nd. 1 b. 
शुचिं सोम शुचिपा पातमस्मे दन्द्र्वायू सदतं बहिरेदम्‌।॥४।। 

4. As much as is your rapidity of body, as much as is your 
vigour, as much as the leaders (of rites) are illuminated by 
wisdom, (to such extent), drinkers of the pure (beverage) Indra and 
Vayu, drink this our pure Soma, and sit down upon this sacred 
grass. 

1 स्पाईवीरा | l 
५८६०. नियुवाना नियुतः स्पार्हवीरा इन्द्रवायू सरथ यातमर्वाक्‌। 
इदं हि वां प्रभूत मध्वो अग्रमर्ध प्रीणाना वि मुमुक्तमस्मे।५॥ 
5. Harnessing the Niyuts, whom the devout (worshippers) 
desire, to your common car, come, Indra and Vayu, hither: this the 
first (cup) of the sweet beverage is prepared for you ; and then, 
delighted (by the draught), liberate us (from sin). 

“Whom the Devout Worshippers Desire— Rather, "whose 

worshippers are objects of desire, sprhant) yastotrkan. 
iB . 
५८६१. या at शतं नियुतो याः सहस्रमिन्द्रवायू विश्ववाराः सचन्ते। 
LIS भरर्वाकपातं = T 
आभिर्यातं सुविदत्राभिर न॑रा प्रतिभृतस्य मध्व॑ः।।६।। 

6. Come to our presence, Indra and Vayu, with those 

munificent Niyut steeds, who, the desired of all, wait upon you 


both by hundreds and thousands: drink, leaders (of rites), of the 
sweet beverage placed near (the altar). 


५८६२. अर्वन्तो न श्रव॑सो भिक्ष॑माणा इन्द्रवायू सुष्टुतिभिर्वसिष्ठाः। 
वाजयःतः स्वव॑से हुवेम यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:11७॥। 
7. We, Vasisthas, (bearing oblations) like horses (bearing 


burdens), soliciting food, desiring strength, invoke with praises 


Indra and Vayu for our sure defence: do you ever cherish us with 
blessings. 


[सूक्त ९२] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- वायु, ५-७ इन्द्रवायु, छन्द- Beall 
५८६३. आ वायो भूष शुचिपा उप॑ न: सहस d नियुतों विश्ववार। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


CS 


a ax 


F 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eG 
Mandala 7 Sakis y | and eGangotri 3 


~ 1 I~ ` पूर्वपेयम्‌ ef 
उपो ते अन्धो मद्यमयामि यस्य देव दधिषे H I 

|. Drinker of the pure (Soma), Vayu, come to us as your Niyuts 
are thousands: oh, you who are desired of all, I offer you, the 
exhilarating (sacrificial) food, of which you, deity, have the prior 
drinking. 

Yajurveda, 7. 7. 

Offer You— Upayámi has a technical power as especially applicable 
to the Soma, which is brought in a vessel called upayama, upaydtam patre 
grhitam. 


५८६४. प्र सोता जीरो अंध्वरेष्वस्थात्‌ सोममिन्द्राय वायवे पिब॑ध्यै। 
प्र "gi मध्वों अग्रियं भरन्त्यध्वर्यवो देवयन्तः शचीभि:11२।। 


2. The prompt effuser of the libation offers the Soma to Indra 


.and to Vayu to drink at the sacrifices, at which devout priests, 


according to their functions, bring to you two the first (portion) of 
the Soma. 


५८६५. प्र याभिर्यासि दाश्वांसमच्छां निदुद्धिर्वायविष्टयें दुरोणे। 
नि नों रयिं सुभोज॑सं युवस्व नि वीरं गव्यमश्व्यं च TAR UI 
3. With those Niyut seeds, with which you repair, Vayu, to the 
donor (of the libation), waiting in his hall to offer sacrifice, (come 


to us), and bestow upon us enjoyable riches, bestow male progeny, 
and wealth, comprehending cattle, and horses. 


५८६६. ये वायव॑ इन्द्रमादनास आदेवासो नितोशनासो अर्यः। 
घनन्तं वृत्राणि सूरिभिः ष्याम सासहांसों युधा ूर्भिरमितरान्‌।४॥। 

4. Overcoming our enemies in war by our warriors, may we be 
the slayers of foes, through the pious (worshippers) who are the 
exhilarators of Indra and Vayu, the reciters of divine hymns, the 
destroyers of the adversary. 

am 3l शतिनींथि > 
५८६७. आ नों नियुद्धि: शतिनीभिरध्वरं संहखिर्णीभिरुप याहि यज्ञम्‌। 
वायो अस्मिन्त्सवने ति 
वायो अस्मिन्त्सवने मादयस्व यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां ALI I 

5. Come Vayu, to our imperishable sacrifice, with hundreds 

and thousands of Niyut steeds, and be exhilarated at this ceremony 


do you (gods) ever cherish us with blessings 


Do you Gods— Yajus, 27. 28 Mahidhara here supplies the ellipse 
with Rrvijah priests 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


35 Reveda Samhita 


[38-93] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्राग्गी। छन्द- Ag] 
५८६८. शुर्चि नु स्तोमं नव॑जातमद्ेन्द्राग्नी वृत्रहणा जुषेथाम्‌। 
उभा हि di सुहवा जोह॑वीमि ता वार्ज सद्य उशते ABTIN 1 
1. Slayers of enemies, Indra and Agni, be pleased today by this 
pious and newly recited praise: repeatedly do we invoke you both, 


who are worthy of invocation; you are the chief bestowers of food 
promptly upon him who solicits (it of you). 


५८६९. ता सानसी शंवसाना हि भूतं सांकंवृधा शव॑सा शूशुवाँसा। 
EN ` ७. N 
क्षय॑न्तौ रायो यव॑सस्य भुरे: qd वाज॑स्य स्थविरस्य घृष्वे:11२॥ 
2. You two are desired of all, the demolishers of (hostile) 
strength, augmenting together, increasing in vigour, lords of the 
wealth of corn: do you grant us substantial invigorating food. 


“The Demolishers of Hostile Strength?'— Sayana seems to explain 


Savasdnd hi bhütam as, “१०० acted like an army breaking enemies," (cf. 
Pan iii.\,11. vart.) 


Do you Grant us Substantial Invigorating Food— Prinktam 
vajasya sthavirasya ghrsveh is explained annasya, sthitlasya, satrundn, 
। gharsakasya, idrsam annam prayacchatám, give us such food as 18 
coarse, the destroyer of enemies. 
उपों I. 1 | 
५८७०. उपो ह यद्विदथं वाजिनो गुर्धीभि्विप्राः प्रमतिमिच्छमांनाः। 
अर्वन्तो > | जोहुंवतो 
घो न काष्टां नक्ष॑माणा इन्द्रानी जोहुंवतो नरस्ते।।३।। 
3. Those sage offerers of oblations, who, desiring your favour, 
celebrate the sacrifice with holy rites, hasten to worship you, like 
horse to battle, repeatedly invoking Indra and Agni. 


५८७१. गीर्भिविप्रः प्रमंतिमिच्छमांन $2 रयिं यशसं पूर्वभाजम्‌। 
इन्द्राग्नी =) भस्तिरतं c 
इन्द्राग्नी वृत्रहणा सुवज्रा प्र नो ed देष्णै: 116 UI 
4. The pious sage, desiring your favour, glorifics you with 
praises for the sake of formerly enjoyed riches, accompanied by 
celebrity: Indra and Agni, slayers of Vrtra, bearers of the 
thunderbolt, exalt us with precious donations. 


“Formerly Enjoyed Riches— Rather, “Riches desirable even In 
olden time,” pürvam eva sambhajaniyam. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


il j 


ss 


Digiti i ion C 7 
i M E VAS by Asya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 323 


= सं यन्मही मिंथती स्पर्धमाने तनूरुचा शूर॑साता यतैंते। 
अदेवयुं faci देवयुभिः सत्रा हतं सोमसुता HAIM I 
5. As two large, mutually defiant (armies), emulous in corporal 
vigour, may contend in war, so do you destroy, by the devout, 


those who are not devoted to the gods in sacrifice, and, by the man 
who presents libations, (him who does not offer). 


S 
à As two large, Mutually Defiant Armies, Emulous in Corporal 
d vigour— Sam yan mahi mithati spardhamane tanurucd sürasátà yataite, 
we have here a set of feminine duals without a substantive, literally two 
large reviling rivalling may strive together: in the best copies there is 4 
blank, which is also left in the printed edition, but in some copies we have 
sene, two armies. 
सोम॑सुतिमुप 1 1 1 ० सौमनसाय | 
५८७३. इमामु षु सामसु ज एन्द्राग्नी सौमनसाय यातम्‌। 
; RA LS 2s 
fafz i EX > श्वंद्धिर्ववृतीय ^ M 
10 नू चिद्धि परिमम्नाथे अस्माना वा राद्ध "mei: UR || 
à 6. Come with gracious minds, /ndra and Agni, to this our Some 
im libation: you are never regardless of us, therefore I propitiate you 
of with constant (sacrificial) viands. 
1 मित्रं वरुणमिन्द्रं | SON 
in ५८७४. सो अग्न एना नमंसा समिद्धोऽच्छा मित्र॑ वरणमिन्द्र वाच: । 
^ 1 तर्दर्यमार्दिति c 1 
ne यत्सीमागंश्चकृमा तत्सु मूळ : शिश्रथन्तु।|७।। 
7. Kindled, Agni, by this adoration, do you recommend us to 
Mitra, Varuna, and Indra: whatever sin we may have committed, 
do you expiate, and may Aryaman, Aditi (and Mitra) remove it 
(from us). 
1 1 ALCUN ' ' 
ur, ५८७५. एता अग्न आशुषाणासं इष्टीर्युवोः सचाभ्यश्याम IT 


ke न्द्र नो विष्णुर्मरुतः परि ख्यन्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां aie 
8. Diligently celebrating these rites, may we, Agni, (and 
Indra), at once arrive at your food: let not Indra. Vis, the 
Maruts, abandon us ; and do you (gods) ever cherish us with 


blessings. 
ith 
by [सूक्त-९४] 
E [क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- emi 
[an छन्द- गायत्री, १२ HIST 


५८७६. इयं वामस्य मन्मन इन्द्राग्नी पूर्व्यस्तुति:। अभ्राद्वृष्टिरिवाजनि॥॥९ ।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 


1. This chief praise, Indra and Agni, proceeds (copiously) from 
me your worshipper, like rain from a cloud. 
This and the two next stanzas occur in the Sdmaveda, 916-18. 


५८७७. शुणुतं जरितुर्हवमिन्द्राग्नी वन॑तं गिरंः। ईशाना पिप्यतं fd: IR 1 


2. Hear, Indra and Agni, the invocation of the worshipper ; 
accept his adoration. Recompense, lords, his pious acts. 


५८७८. मा पापत्वाय नो नरेन्द्राग्नी माभिशंस्तय। मा नों रीरधतं निदे॥३॥ 


3. Leaders of (rites), Indra and Agni, subject us not to 
wickedness, nor to calumny, nor to the reviler. 


५८७९. इन्द्रे अग्ना नमो बृहत्सुवृक्तिमेरयामहे। धिया धेनां अवस्यव॑ः।।४॥ 


4. Desiring protection, we offer copious oblations and praise to 
Indra and Agni, and prayers with holy rites. 
Sdmaveda, 800-802. 


५८८०. ता हि शश्च॑न्त ईळत इत्था विप्रांस ऊतयें। सबाधो वार्जसातये।५॥। 


5. Many are the sages who propitiate (/ndra and Agni) in this 
manner for (their) protection, mutually striving for the 
acquirement of food. 


५८८१. ता वां गीर्भिर्विपन्यवः प्रयस्वन्तो हवामहे। मेधसांता सनिष्यव॑:॥६॥ 


6. Eager to offer praise, bearing (sacrificial) food, desirous of 


| wealth, we invoke you, /ndra and Agni, with praises, in the 
| celebration of holy acts. 


५८८२. इन्द्राग्नी अवसा गतमस्मर्भ्य चर्षणीसहा। मा नों दुःशंसं ईशत।।७।। 


7. Overcomers of (hostile) men, Indra and Agni, come with 


food (to be bestowed) upon us: let not the malevolent have power 
over us. 


५८८३. मा कस्य॑ नो अररुषो धूर्तिः wore: मर्त्येस्य। 
इन्द्राग्नी शर्म यच्छतम्‌।।८।। 


324 


8. Let not the malice of any hostile mortal reach us grant US, 
Indra and Agni, felicity. 


५८८४. गोमद्धिरण्यवद्वसु यद्वामश्चावदीमहे। इन्द्राग्नी तद्वेमहि।।९।। 


9. We solicit you both for wealth, comprising cattle, gold and 
horses: may we obtain it of you, Indra and Agni. 


“Gold” — Sayana explains hiranyavat as suvarnair yuktam, cf. vol. 
IL. verse 3869. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EB o co—- F 


TAER itized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
= ^ 1 al द 
५८८५. यत्साम आ सुत नर इन्द्राग्नी अजाहवुः। सप्तीवन्ता सपर्यव॑:।।१० i 
E When adoring leaders (of rites), invoke you two, lords of 
horses, on the Soma being offered, (come hither). 


५८८६. उक्थेभिर्वूत्रहन्तमा या मन्दाना चिदा गिरा। 
आङगूपैराविवांसतः।।११।। 
11. Utter destroyer of Vrtra, exhilarated (by the Soma), you 


who are worshipped with prayers and hymns and songs, (come 


hither). 

“Utter Destroyers of Varuna’’— Sayana and Mahidhara take vrtra- 
hantama as àvarakanám hantrtamau, the latter adds pdpmdnam. 

With Prayers and Hymns and Songs— Angusair, ághosair anyais 
stotraih, with clamours, with other praises: Mahidhara, yajus, 33. 76, 
explains it /aukikavakstomaih, with praises in worldly or vernacular 
speech, not that of the Veda. 


® e दर्विद्वांसं os 1 
५८८७. ताविद्दुःशंसं मर्त्य दुर्विद्वांसं रक्षस्विनम्‌। 
Ace 1 . 1 
आभोगं हन्मना हतमुदधिं हन्मना हतम्‌।।१२।। 

12. Destroy with your fatal (weapons) the mortal who is 
malignant, ignorant, strong, rapacious: destroy him like a water jar, 
with your weapons. 

Rapacious— Abhogam, the Scholiast says, is he who enjoys good 
things taken from the worshippers. 


[सूक्त-९५] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- सरस्वती, 3 सरस्वान्‌। छन्द- freu] 
५८८८. प्र क्षोदसा धाय॑सा स्र एषा सरस्वती धरुणमाय॑सी पूः। 
प्रबाब॑धाना रथ्येंव याति विश्वां अपो महिना सिन्धुरन्या:11१।1 
l. This Sarasvati, firm as a city made of iron, flows rapidly 


with all sustaining water, sweeping away in its might all other 


Waters, as a charioteer (clears the road). 

Firm as a City made of Iron— Dharunam @yasi püh, ayasa nirmita 
puriva: dharunam for dharuna, dharayitrt, supporter: what is meant by 
the comparison is not very obvious. 


५८८९. एकांेतत्सर॑स्वती नदीनां शुचिर्यती गिरिभ्य आ संमुद्रात्‌। 
रायश्वेतन्ती भुव॑नस्य yes wal दुदुहे नाहुषाय।।२।॥। 


2. Sarasvati, chief and pure of rivers, flowing form the 
Mountains to the ocean, understood the request of Nahuya, and 


325 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


de Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and egangot 
3 S 


gvéda Samhita 
distributing riches among the many existing beings, milked for 
him butter and water. 

Flowing from the Mountains to the Ocean— ati giribhya a 
samudrat is the text. 

Milked for him Butter and Water— According to the legend, king 
Nahusa, being about to perform sacrifice for a thousand years, prayed to 
Sarasvati, who thereupon gave him butter and water, or milk, sufficient 
for that period. 


५८९०. स वांवृधे नर्यो योष॑णासु वृषा शिशुर्वृषभो यज्ञियासु। 
स वाजिन मघवंद्भ्यो दधाति वि सातयें तन्वं मामृजीत 1i 
3. The showerer Sarasvat, the friend of man, a showerer (of 
benefits), even while yet a child, continually increases among his 
adorable wives (the rains): he bestows upon the affluent 
worshippers) a vigorous son ; he purifies their persons (to fit them) 
for the reception (of his bounties). 


Sarasvat— Sayana says Sarasvat is the wind Vayu in the firmament, 
madhyasthàno Vayuh Sarasvat. 


५८९१. उत स्या नः सरस्वती जुषाणोप॑ श्रवत्‌ सुभगां यज्ञे अस्मिन्‌। 
मितजजुभिर्नमस्यैरियाना राया युजा चिदुत्तरा सखिभ्यः ।।४।। 
demo 4. May the auspicious and gracious Sarasvati hear (our 


d praises) at this sacrifice, approached as she is with reverence and 
with banded knees, and most liberal to her friends with the riches 


she possesses. 
| नमोः s स्तोमं 
५८९२. इमा जुह्वाना युष्मदा नमोभिः प्रति स्तोमं सरस्वति जुषस्व। 
तव शर्मन्प्रियतंमे दधाना उप॑स्थेयाम शरणं न JAIN 
5. Presenting to you, Sarasvati, these oblations with reverence 
(may we receive from you affluence): be gratified by our praise 


and may we, being retained in your dearest felicity, ever recline 
upon you, as on a sheltering tree. 


May we Receive from you Affluence— The text has only yusmad a, 
but an inseparable prefix, standing alone implies, in the Veda, the verb 
also: therefore, says the Scholiast, a is for adadimahi, may we receive: the 
rule is upasargasruter yogyakriyadhyaharah, an upasarga in the Veda is 
the indication of the conjenct verb. 


५८९३. अयमु ते सरस्वति वसिष्ठो द्वारावृतस्य सुभगे व्यांवः। 
वर्ष शुभ्रे स्तुवते रासि वाजान्‌ यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः॥६॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Rc c rn 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 96 a 


E Auspicious Sarasvati, for you Vasistha has set open the two 
doors (the east and west) of sacrifice: white-complexioned 
(goddess), be magnified ; bestow food on him who glorifies you: 
and do you (gods) ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-९६] 


[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- सरस्वती, ४-६ सरस्वान्‌| छन्द- १-२ 
प्रगाथ (१ विषमा बृहती, २ समासतो वृहती।) ३ प्रस्तार पंक्ति, ४-६ गायत्री।] 
५८९४. Jee गायिषे वचोऽसुर्या नदीनाम्‌। 

सर॑स्वतीमिन्म॑हया सुवृक्तिभिः स्तोमैर्वसिष्ठ रोदसी।॥१॥ 
1. Thou chauntest, Vasistha a powerful hymn to her who is the 
most mighty of river, Worship, Vasistha with well-selected praises, 
Sarasvati, who is both in heaven and earth. 


Who is both in Heaven and Earth— As a goddess, or as eloquence 
or as a river. 
` + c 1 1 
५८९५. उभे यत्ते महिना qa अन्ध॑सी अधिक्षियन्ति पूरव:। 
N ` ध्यवित्री ^ धों xt 
सानों बो मरुत्सखा चोद TH मघोनाम्‌॥२॥। 

2. Beautiful Sarasvat?, inasmuch as by your might men obtain 
both kinds of food, do you, our protectress, regard us: do you, the 
friend on the Maruts, bestow riches upon those who are affluent 
(in oblations). 

Both kinds of Food— Ubhe andhasi is said to mean fires celestial 


and terrestrial, or if food be intended, domestic and wild, grdmyam 
dranyam va. 


५८९६. भद्रमिद्धद्रा कुणवत्सरस्वत्यकवारी चेतति वाजिनीवती। 
गृणाना ज॑मदग्निवत्स्तुंवाना च॑ वसिष्ठवत्‌॥।३॥ 

3. May the auspicious Sarasvati bestow auspicious fortune 
upon us: may the faultless-moving food-conferring (goddess) think 
of us: glorified (as you have been) by Jamadagni, (be now) 
glorified by Vasistha. 

५८९७. जनीयन्तो न्वग्र॑वः पुत्रीयन्त: सुदान॑व:। सर॑स्वन्तं हवामहे n 

4. Desiring wives, desiring sons, liberal of donations, 

approaching him, now worship Sarsavat. 


५८९८. ये तै सरस्व ऊर्मयो मर्धुमन्तो yaa: | तेभिर्नोशविता siat tt 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


i Kgveda Samhita 


5. With those your waves Sarasvat, which are sweet-tasted, the 
distributors of water, be our protector. 


पीपिवांसं | श्वदर्शत क्षीमहिँ प्रजामिष॑म्‌ ॥ 
५८९९. पीपिवांसं सरस्वतः स्तनं यो विश्वदर्शतः। भक्षीमहि प्रजामिषम्‌।।६।। 
6. May we recline upon the protuberant breast of Sarasvat. 
Which is visible to all; that we may possess progeny and food. 
May we Recline etc.— Pipivamsam Sarasvatas stanam bhaksimahi, 
and stana here, according to the Scholiast, means of cloud, megha. 


Sayana renders this verse ‘“‘may we obtain the distend and 
loud-thundering [of breast-like] cloud of Sarasvat. Which is 
visible to all: (may we obtain) progeny and food. 


[सूक्त-९७] 
[क्रषि-वसिष्ट मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- बृहस्पति, १ इन्द्र ३, ९ 
इन्द्राब्रह्मणस्पती , १० इन्द्राबृहस्पति। छन्द- feu] 
५९००. यज्ञे दिवो नृषदने पृथिव्या नरो यत्र देवयवो मर्दन्ति। 
इन्द्राय यत्र सर्वनानि सुन्वे गमन्मदाय प्रथमं वरयश्च।।१।। 

1. At the sacrifice in the dwellings of man upon earth, where 
the devout leaders of (rites) rejoice, where the libations to /ndra 
are poured out, there may he descend before (other gods) from 
heaven for his exhilaration: (may his) swift (horses approach). 


“In the Dwellings of Men upon Earth"— Sayana has “91 the 
sacrifice which is the home of the priests upon earth. 


५९०१. आ देव्या वृणीमहेऽवांसि बृहस्पतिर्नो मह आ संखायः। 
a S 
यथा भवेम मीळ्हुषे अनांगा यो नो दाता प॑रावत॑: पितेव॑।।२।। 
2. Let us solicit, friends divine protections, for Brhaspali 


accepts our (oblations): so may we be without offence towards that 


showerer (of benefits) who is our benefactor from afar, as a father 
(of a son). 


५९०२. तमु ज्येष्ठं नमसा हविर्भिः सुशेवं ब्रह्मणस्पतिं गृणीषे। 
इन्द्रं शलोको महि दैव्य: सिषक्त यो ब्रह्मणो देवकृतस्य WAI! 
3. I glorify with homage and with oblations that most excellent 


and beneficent Brahmanaspati: may my praise worthy of the deity, 


attain to the mighty Indra, who is the lord of the prayers offered by 
the devout. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 97 329 
a स आ नो योनिं सदतु प्रेष्ठे बृहस्पति्विश्चवारो यो अस्तिं 
` सुवीर्यस्य ति दात्पर्षन्नो EY ` 
कामों रायः सुवीर्यस्य तं दात्पर्षन्नों अर्ति सश्चतो AREA 11 
4, May that best beloved Brhaspati, who is the desired of all 
sit down in our hall of sacrifice: may he gratify our desire of riches 


and of male posterity. Transporting us (at present) embarrassed 
uninjured beyond (the assaults of enemies) 
` ¢ 1 | जुष्टमिमे | | 
५९०४. तमा नों अकममृताय जु धासुरमृतासः पुराजाः। 
| शुचिक्रन्दं . i. | बृहस्पतिमनर्वार्ण |e ` 
d यजतं पस्त्यानां बृहस्पतिमनर्वार्ण हुवेम UI 

5. May the first-born immortals (by his command) bestow 
upon us the food that is necessary for existence let us invoke the 
unresisted Brhaspati, to whom pure praises are addressed, the 
adored of householders. 

“The First-Born’’— Rather, born of vore"' purd játah, purdjd. 


The Adored of Houscholders— Pastyánam yajatam is, literally, the 
adorable of houses, i.e., by metonyney householders. 
. ~| ` A NI 
५९०५. d WAS अरुषासो अश्वा बृहस्पति सहवाहो वहन्ति। 
E 21: 250 N Ts 2323) A 
सहश्चिद्यस्य नीलवत्सधस्थं नभो न रूपमरुष qun: 

_ 6. May his powerful brilliant horses, wearing a lustrous form 
like (that of) the sun, acting together, bring (hither) that Brhaspati, 
in whom strength abides like that of a substantial mansion. 

“In whom Strength abides like that of a Substantial Mansion’’— 
Rather, “10 whom belongs strength, and whose friendship bestow a 
dwelling.” It is interesting to notice, that although Sayama st milaya, and 
apparently derives it from m+b he yet presentense the correct sense 
as=nida. Such facts seem to move that he followed a traditional 
Interpretation, though he may the thought his own etymonsites. 


५९०६. स हि शुर्चि: शतपत्रः स शुन्ध्युहिरण्यवाशीरिषिर: स्वर्षाः। 
बृहस्पति: स स्वावेश ऋष्वः पुरू सर्खिभ्य आसुति ERE: Le 
7 He verily is pure, borne by numerous conveyances, the is he 
Purifier armed with golden weapons, the object of desire, the 
enjoyer of heaven: he Brhaspati is well domiciled, of goodly 
aspect, a most bountiful giver of ample food to his friend. 


Armed with Golden Weapons— Hiranyavasih may also be 
tendered, he whose speech is benevolent, hitaramaniya vak. 


५९०७, देवी देवस्य रोद॑सी जनित्री बृहस्पर्ति वावृधतुर्महित्वा। 
दक्षाय्याय दक्षता सखायः करद्‌ ब्रह्मणे सुतरां सुगाधा॥॥८ ॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


oan Rgveda Sathhita 


8. The divine heaven and earth, the generatrices of the deity 
have by their might, given growth to Brhaspati: magnify, friends, 
the magnifiable, and may he render (the waters) easy to be crossed 
and forded for (the attainment of) food. 


० e सुवृक्तिर्त्होन्द्राय वज्रिणे 
५९०८. इयं वां ब्रह्मणस्पते सुवृ वज़िणें अकारि। 
अविष्टं धियों जिगृतं पुर॑न्धीर्जजस्तमर्यो वनुषामराती: 1९ ।। 

9. This praise has been offered as prayer to you both, 
Brahmanaspati and Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt: protect 
our ceremonies: hear our manifold praise: annihilate the assailing 
adversaries of your worshippers. 

This Prayer has been offered as Prayer— Lyam suviktir brahma is 
explained iyam mantrarüpa stutil this praise in the form of a mantra, a 
sacred text or prayer. 

५९०९. बृह॑स्मते युवमिन्द्रश्च wed दिव्यस्येशाथे उत पार्थिवस्य। 
wd रयं स्तुवते कौरयें चिद्यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सर्दा नः।१०॥ 

10. You two, Brhaspati and Indra are lords of both celestial 

and terrestrial treasure: grant riches to the worshipper Who praises 


e you: and do you (gods) ever cherish us with blessings. 
| [98-92] 
[क्रषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्र, ७ इन्द्राबृहस्पती। 
छन्द- ATY] 


५९१०. अध्वर्यवोऽरुणं दुग्धमंशुं जुहोतन वृषभाय॑ क्षितीनाम्‌। 
गौराद्वेदीयाँ अवपानमिन््र विश्वाहेद्याति सुतसोममिच्छन्‌।।१।। 


| 1. Offer, priests, the shining effused Soma to him who is 
in eminent (among) men: knowing better than the Gaura where his 
distant drinking-place (is to be found). Indra comes daily seeking 
for the offerer of the libation. 

Knowing better than the Gaura where Etc.— Gaurád yediyan 
avapdnam, means avakramya sthitam dürastham patavyam somam 
gauramrgad api atisayena i.e, knowing the Soma that is to be drunk, 
through placed afar off, better than an ox or a deer knows the drinking 
place or pond which is assessment to go to. 


५९११. यद्दधिषे प्रदिवि rd दिवेदिवे पीतिमिदस्य वक्षि। 
उत हुदो ससा जाग तिद असतात पहि pum 


rukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 98 33i 


F The pleasant beverage that you, Indra, have quaffed in 
former days, you still desires to drink of daily: gratified in heart 
and mind, and wishing (our good), drink, Indra the Soma, that is 
placed before (you). 

E ES E 

५९१२. जज्ञानः सोमं सह॑से पपाथ प्र तें माता मंहिमान॑मुवाच। 
vd पप्राथोर्वशन्तरिक्षं युधा देवेभ्यो वरिवश्चकर्थ।।३॥। 

3. As soon as born, Indra you have drunk the Soma for thine 
invigoration: your mother (Aditi) proclaimed your greatness: hence 
you have filled the vast firmament. Indra. You have gained in 
battle treasure for the gods. 

«Your Mother Proclaimed your Greatness’’— This refers to 
Aditi's speech Rg. iv.18.4. 

५९१३. यद्योधयां महतो मन्यमानान्त्साक्षाम तान्‌ बाहुभिः शाशदानान्‌। 
यदवा Judd इन्द्राभियुध्यास्तं त्वयाजिं सौश्रवसं HA e 

4. When you enaole us to encounter mighty and arrogant 
(enemies). We are competent to overcome the malignats by our 
(unarmed) hands alone: and when you. Indra, surrounded by your 


attendant (Maruts), fight against them, we shall triumph, aided by 
you, (* ) that glorious war. 
(0 du वोचं | 
५९१४. 'न्ट्रस्य वोचं प्रथमा कृतानि प्र नूत॑ना मघवा या चकार। 
5 (दर्देवीरसंहिष्ट || i भवत्केवल सोमों 
ccc माया अथाभवत्केवलः सोमो अस्य।५।। 

5. I proclaim the ancient exploits of Indra the recent deeds that 
Maghavan has achieved: when indeed he had overcome the 
undivine illusion, thenceforth the Soma became his exclusive 
(beverage). 

The explanation of the scholiast is rather equivocal, the relation 
between the Soma and Indra thenceforth became common or special, 
peculiar: tadé prabhrtyeva Somasya indrasya ca asddhdranas sambandho 
Jdtah; but though in the especial degree the drink of Indra. It is often 
Presented to Agni and other deities. 


: ५९१५. तेवेदं विश्व॑मभित॑ः पशव्यंर यत्पश्यसि चक्ष॑सा सूर्यस्य। 
८, हासी हि pude 
गर्वामसि गोपतिरेक इन्द्र भक्षीमहिं ते प्रयतस्य वस्व॑:।।६॥ 
6. Thine is all this animal world around you, which you illume 


ee the light of the sun: you, Indra, are the one lord of cattle, 
ence may we possess wealth bestowed by you. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


332 Rgveda Saihità 


५९१६. बृहस्पते युवमिन्द्रश्च वस्वो दिव्यस्येशाथे उत पार्थिवस्य। 
wd रयिं स्तुवते कीरयें चिद्यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां A: 11911 
7. You two Brhaspati and Indra are lords of both celestial and 


terrestrial treasure grant riches to the worshipper who praises you: 
and do you (gods) ever cherish us with blessings. 


[सूक्त-९९] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- विषणु , ४-६ इन्द्राविषणु। 
छन्द- AV] 
५९१७. परो मात्र॑या तन्वां वृधान न तें महित्वमन्वश्नुवन्ति। 
उभे तें विद्य रज॑सी पृथिव्या विष्णों देव त्वं परमस्यं feum. 
1. Expanding with a body beyond all measure, Visi men 


comprehend not your magnitude: we know these your two worlds 
(computing) from the earth, but you, divine Visnu, are cognisant of 
the highest. 

Your two World Computing from the Earth— That is, the carth 
and the firmament, which are visible.! 


५९१८. न ते विष्णो जाय॑मानो न जातो देव॑ महिम्नः परमन्त॑माप। 
उदस्तभ्ना नाकमृष्वं बृहन्तं दाधर्थ प्राची ककुभं पृथिव्या:।।२॥ 
2. No being that is or that has been born, divine Visnu, has 
attained the utmost limit of your magnitude by which you have 


upheld the vast and beautiful heaven, and sustained the eastern 
horizon of the earth. 


Sustained the Eastern Horizon of the Earth— Part put for ine 
whole, the entire earth. Visnu's upholding the three worlds has been 
mentioned more than once. See Rg. i. 154. 4 


1 ७ 
५९१९. इरावती धेनुमती हि भूतं सूंयवसिनी मनुषे दशस्या। 
व्यस्तभ्ना रोद॑सी विष्णवेते दाधर्थ पृथिवीमभितों मयूखैः॥३।। 
3. Heaven and earth, abounding with food, abounding with 
cattle, yielding abundant fodder, you are disposed to be liberal to 
the man (who praises you): you, Visnu, have upheld these two 


heaven and earth, and have secured the earth around with 
mountains. 


2. See Rg. 10.82.5. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| F S ` 
| 


2 


h 


h 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 7, Sükta 99 33 


To the Man who Praises You— Manuse stuvate the Yajus, v. 16, 
reads manave, with a similar purport yajamdndya, to the institutor of the 


rite. 
Have secured the Earth Around with Mountains— JDadhartha 


prthivim mayukhaih; the last is explained parvataih, by mountains: 
Mahidhara says by his incarnations displaying his glory, fejorüpair 
avatáraih. 
५९२०. उरुं यज्ञाय॑ चक्रथुरु लोकं जनयन्ता सूर्यमुषास॑मग्निम्‌। 

दासस्य चिद्वृषशिप्रस्य माया जघ्नथुर्नरा पृतनाज्येषु।४।। 

4. You two, /ndra and Visnu, have made the spacious world 
for the sake of sacrifice, generating the sun the dawn, Agni: you 
leaders (of rites) have baffled the devices of the slave Vrsasipra in 
the conflicts of hosts. 

५९२१. इन्द्राविष्णू दृंहिताः शम्ब॑रस्य नव पुरो नवतिं च॑ श्नथिष्टम्‌। 
शतं वर्चिनं: सहस्रं च साकं हथो अप्रत्यसुरस्य वीरान्‌।५॥। 

5. Indra and Visnu, you have demolished the ninety-nine 
strong cities of Sambara: you have slain at once, without 
resistance, the hundred thousand heroes of the Asura Varcin. 

Varcin— See Rg. ii.14.6. 

CEN | ^ ` र्धयन्ती 
५९२२. इयं मनीषा बृहती बृहन्तोरुक्रमा तवसां वर्धयन्ती। 
ररे वां स्तोमं विदथेषु विष्णो पिन्व॑तमिषों वृजनेष्विन्द्र 1६11 
6. This ample laudation is magnifying you two, who are 


mighty, wide-striding, endowed with strength: to you two. Visnu 
and Indra. I offer praise at sacrifices; grant us food (won) in 


battles. 
IE IN कृणोमि 
५९२३. वषट्‌ ते विष्णवास आ कुणोमि तनमें जुषस्व शिपिविष्ट हव्यम्‌। 
वर्धन्तु Fa E =i 
वर्धन्तु त्वा सुष्टुतयो गिरो मे यूयं पात स्वस्तिभिः सदां नः।।७॥। 
Tell offer, Visnu, the oblation placed before you with the 
exclamation Vasa—: be pleased, Sipivista, with my offering: may 


my | audatory hymns magnify you ; and do you (gods) ever cherish 
us with blessings. 


SES a eia ssi adu 


१. See Taj. S. 3.4.5.1. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


334 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त- १००] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि , देवता-विषणु। छन्द-त्रिषटुप्‌।] 
५९२४. नू मर्ती दयते सनिष्यन्यो विष्ण॑व उरुगायाय दाशत्‌। 
प्र यः सत्राचा मन॑सा यजांत एतावन्तं नर्यमाविवांसात्‌।।१॥। 

1. The mortal desirous of wealth quickly obtains it who 
presents (offerings) to the widely-renowned Visnu, who worships 
him with entirely devoted mind, who adores so great a benefactor 
of mankind. 


‘ith Entirely Devoted Mind’’— Sayana says, with united praise, 
sahdncata stotrena. 


. सुमतिं मतिं | 

५९२५. त्वं विंष्णो सुमतिं विश्वज॑न्यामप्र॑युतामेवयावो मतिं दाः। 
1 
पर्चो यथां न: सुवितस्य भूरेरश्वावतः पुरुश्चन्द्रस्य TA: IR 
2. Visnu, granter or desires, show to us that favourable 

disposition which is benevolent to all, unmixed (with exception), 
so that there may be to us the attainment of easily-acquired, ample, 
steed-comprising, all-delighting riches . 


Granter of Desires— Evayávan, from eva, obtainable, desires ; 
ydvan, who enables to obtain. 


५९२६. विर्देवः पृथिवीमेष एतां वि चंक्रमे शतर्चसं महित्वा। 
3 विष्णुरस्तु तवसस्तवीयान्त्वेषं der स्थविरस्य नाम॑॥३॥ 
3. This deity, by his great power, traversed with three (steps) 
the many-lustrous earth ; may Vismu, the most powerful of the 
powerful rule over us, for illustrious is the name of the mighty one- 


Earth— Earth prthivi, according to the comment, is put for 
prthivyádin, or the three worlds. 


५९२७. वि चंक्रमे पृथिवीमेष एता क्षेत्राय विष्णुर्मनुषे दशस्यन्‌। 
Gaal अस्य कीरयो जनांस उरक्षितिं सुजनिमा चकार 11४! 
4. This Visnu traversed the earth for a dwelling which he was 


desirous of giving to his eulogist; firm are the people who are his 


praisers ; he who is the engenderer of good has made a spacious 
dwelling (for his worshippers). 

Which he was Desirous of giving to his Eulogist— Manuse 
dasasyan, according to the Scholiast, we are to understand by the fir st 
stuvate devagandya, to the company of gods praising him— Visnu having 
taken the three worlds from the Asuras to give to them. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 100 ads 


“The Engenderer of Good’’— Rather, to whom belong fortunate 

E 

EN] अद्य lu L 1 
५९२८. प्र तत्ते अद्य शिपिविष्ट नामार्यः शंसामि वयुनानि विद्वान्‌। 
S || || eps 1 E fi ` 
d al गृणामि सयन्तमस्य > पराक ॥५।। 

5. Resplendent Visnu, I, the master of the offering, knowing 
the objects that are to be known, glorify today your name: I who 
am feeble, praise you who are powerful, dwelling in a remote 
region of this world. 

The Sámaveda, 1626 has a slightly different reading, pra tat te adya 
havyam aryah samsami, 1, the lord, offer you today an oblation, instead of 
ndmaryah samsámi, 1, the lord, praise your name. The application of 
sürya is rather equivocal; Sayana explains it svdmi stutindm havisam vd, 
you master of the praises or of the oblation which many mean Visnu, or 
more probably the yajamdna. 

किमित E 1. 1 शिंपिविष्टो || 
५९२९. किमित्ते विष्णो परिचक्ष्यं yor यद्ववक्षे शिपिविष्टो अस्मि। 
वर्षो l 1 ^ 
मा वर्षी अस्मदप॑ गूह एतद्यदन्यरूप: समिथे बभूर्थ।।६।। 

, 6. What is to be proclaim Visnu, of you, when you save. | am 
Sipivista? Conceal not from us your real form, although you have 
engaged under a different form in battle. 

You have engaged under a Different form in Battle— Visnu is said 
to have aided Vasistha in battle under an assumed form, and, when 
questioned, to have said. I am Sipivista', a word to which two senses may 
be attached one unobjectionable, the other objectionable. In the preceding 
verse, and in verse 7 of the former Sikta, the word is explained, 
penetrated, or clothed with rays of light, rasmibhir arista, the radiant, the 
Splendid: in common use it means a man naturally without prepuce, in 
Which sense it may be here interpreted as implying comparison: in like 
manner as a man is so denuded, so is Visnu, according to his own 
declaration, uncovered by radiance—fejasa anáccháditah; but this is a 


refinement, and it is probably to be understood as usual: the expression is 
curious. 


५९३०. वष॑ट्‌ ते विष्णवास आ कृणोमि qe जुषस्व शिपिविष्ट हव्यम्‌। 
iq E Ene F 
वर्धन्तु त्वा सुष्टुतयो गिरो मे यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:1191। 
I offer, Visnu, the oblation placed before you with the 
exclamation Vasat; be pleased. Sipivista, with my offering: may 


my laudatory hymns magnify you and do you (gods) ever cherish 
Us with blessings. 


c ecl nS VE cc 
१. शिपयोउत्र रस्मय उच्यते तैराविष्टो भवति। (निरु० ५,७-८) I 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


————— —»—— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


336 Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त-१० १] 


[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि अथवा कुमार आग्नेय। 
देवता- पर्जन्य। छन्द- ATY] 
५९३१. RA वाचः प्र वंद ज्योतिरग्रा या एतहुहे मधुदोघमूरधः। 
स वत्सं कृण्वन्‌ गर्भमोष॑धीनां सद्यो जातो वृंषभो रोरवीति॥१॥ 

1. Recite the three sacred texts, preceded by light, which milk 
the water-yielding udder; for he, the showerer, (thereby) becoming 
quickly manifest, loudly roars, engendering the (lightning) infant, 
the embryo of the plants. 

The three sacred texts preceded by Light— The texts, it is said, of 
the three Vedas, preceded by Om. 

The Water-Yielding Udder— The cloud. 


The Showerer— Parjanya, pleased with the hymns, and in 


consequence sending rain. [For the “‘lightning embryo, see Vol. I. mantra 
2128, and vol II. 3630.] 


वर्धन धीनां EN ० ईशे 
५९३२. यो वर्धन ओषधीनां यो अपां यो विश्व॑स्य जग॑तो देव ईशें। 
| . शर्म यंसत्तिवर्तु i 
स त्रिधातुं शरणं शर्म यंसत्तिवर्तु ज्योति: स्वभिष्ट्यशस्मे ।1२॥ 
न 2. May he who is the augmenter of plants, the increase of the 
waters, who rules divine over the whole earth, bestow upon us 4 
three-storied dwelling and felicity: may he grant us the desired 
light (of the sun) at the three (bright) seasons. : 
A Three-storicd Dwelling— Tridhatu saranam is explained 
tribhümikam grham, a house with three earths, either chambers or floors. 
The Desired Light at the Three Bright Seasons— The rays of the 


| sun are said to be most powerful at dawn in the spring, at noon is the hot 
| season, and in the afternoon in autumn. 


fi ५९३३. स्तरीरु त्वद्धवति सूत॑ उ त्वद्यथावशं तन्वं चक्र एषः। 
| पितुः पयः प्रति गृभ्णाति माता तेन॑ पिता व॑र्धते तेनं पुत्र:॥।३॥ 
3. One form of Parjanyh is like a barren cow the other 


produces offspring, he takes whichever form he cleases: the 


mother receives the milk from the father thence the father, thence 
the son is nourished. 


१. त्रीणि वा आदित्यस्य तेजांसि प्रातर्ग्नीष्मे मध्यंदिने शरद्यपराहे (तै० We 2.2.24)! 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Comm coe Ff 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
| Mandala 7, Sükta 102 m 


E takes whichever form he Pleases— The firmament withholds or 
sends down rain at will. 

The Mother receives the milk etc.— The father is the sky, earth the 
mother, who receives the rain from the former, which, producing the 
means of offering libations and oblations, returns again to the parent 
heaven, as well as supports his offspring— all living creatures. [cf Vol. I. 
verse 814 and note thereon.] 


५९३४. यस्मिन्‌ विश्वानि भुवनानि तस्थुस्तिस्रो Wehen सखुराप॑:। 


त्रयः कोशांस उपसेचनासो मध्व॑ः श्रोतन्त्यभितो विरप्शम्‌।४।। 
> 4. In whom all beings exist ; the three worlds abide: from 


whom the waters flow in three directions (east, west, and south): 
the three water-shedding masses of clouds (east, west, and north) 


i pour the waters round the mighty (Parjanya). 
५९३५. इदं वच॑ः पर्जन्याय स्वराजें हृदो अस्त्वन्तरं तज्नुजोषत्‌। 
म मयोभुवो qud: सन्त्वस्मे सुपिप्पला ओषंधीर्देवगोपा: Ls 11 

5. This praise is addressed to the self-irradiating Parjanya: may 
it be placed in his heart; may he be gratified by it; may the joy- 
diffusing rains be ours: may the plants cherished by the deity be 
fruitful. 

रेतो 0000 1 

५९३६. स रेतोधा वृषभ: शश्व॑तीनां तस्मिन्नात्मा जग॑तस्तस्थुषश्र। 
a तन्म॑ ऋतं पांतु शतशारदाय यूयं पांत स्वस्तिभिः सदां न:॥६ di 
d . 6. May he, the bull, be the impreginator of the perpetual plans, 

for in him is the vitality of both the fixed and moveable (world): 
d may the rain sent by him preserve me for a hundred years: and do 
| you (gods) ever cherish its with blessings. 
e 3 May He— Sāyaņa makes the sentence indicative. “‘he is, etc.; and 
ot Instead of **for'* he has **hence, atas. 

In him is the Vitality— Tasminn-átma: the Scholiast interprets the 
latter deha, body ; probably for bodily existence, the life of the vegetable 
ul depending upon the rain, and that of animals upon corn and the 
Test. 

हे [सूक्त- १०२] 
16 [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि अथवा कुमार आग्नेय। 
qo 


देवता- पर्जन्य। छन्द- गायत्री।] 
५९२७. पर्जन्याय गायत दिवस्पुत्राय xxl 1 
पर्जन्याय प्र गायत दिवस्पुत्राय मीळ्हुषे। स नो यवंसमिच्छतु।।१॥। 


1. Sing aloud to the son of heaven. Parjanya, the sender of 


Tain: may he be pleased (to grant) us food. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Ex Rgveda Samhita 


५९३८. यो गर्भमोष॑धीनां गरवा कृणोत्यर्वताम्‌। पर्जन्यः पुरुषीणाम्‌।२ 1 


2. He who is the cause of the impregnation of plants, of cows, 
of mares, of women. 


t ° kh 
५९३९. तस्मा इदास्ये हविर्जुहोता मधुमत्तमम्‌। इळां नः संयतं करत्‌।३॥ 
3. Offer verily to him by the mouth (of the gods Agni,) the 
most savoury oblation, so that he may yield us food unfailingly. 


[सूक्त- १०३] 
[ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- मंडूक। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, Ige] 


VII. Vasistha, it is said, having praised Parjanya, in order to procure 
rain, observing the frogs to be delighted by his praises, addressed them in 
this hymn. 

ति pad) l 
५९४०. संवत्सरं शंशयाना ब्राह्मणा aR: | 
वाचं पर्जन्यजिन्विता प्र मण्डूकां अवादिषुः।।१।। 
1. The frogs, like Brahmanas, observant of their vows, 


practising penance throughout the year, utter aloud praises 
agreeable to Parjanya.! 


“Practising Penance"— Literally, ‘‘lying still", which Sayana 
explains as ‘‘performing penance for rain’’. 
यर्देनमायन्दूतिं . A | 
५९४१. दिव्या आपो अभि यदेनमायन्दृतिं न शुष्कं सरसी शयानम्‌। 
गवामह न मायुर्वत्सिनीनां मण्डूकानां वग्नुरत्रा समेति॥२॥ 
2. When the waters of the sky fall upon (the troop of frogs) 
sleeping in the (exhausted) lake like a dry water-skin; then 11863 


together the croaking of the frogs, like the bellowing of cows when 
joined by their calves. 


५९४२. यदीमेनाँ उशतो अभ्यवर्षीतृष्यावत: प्रावृष्यागंतायाम्‌। 
अख्खलीकृत्यां पितरं न पुत्रो अन्यो अन्यमुप व्द॑न्तमेति।।३॥ 
3. When the rainy season has arrived, and (Parjanya) has sent 
the rain upon them, thirsty and longing (for its coming), then one 
frog meets another croaking (his congratulations) as a child (calls 


to) its father with inarticulate ejaculations. 


With Inarticulate Ejaculations— Akhkhalikriyd making the 
imitative sound akhkhala. 


%. This hymn has been translated by Professor Müller, in his Ancien! Sanskrit 
Lit, p. 494. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


CUM em. 


F 
en 


krit 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai : 
Mandala 7, Sükta 103 nnai and eGangotri m 


५९४३. अन्यो अन्यमनु गृभ्णात्येनोरपां प्रसर्गे यदमन्दिषाताम्‌। 
मण्डको यदभिवृष्टः कर्निष्कन्यृश्रि: सम्पूछ़े हरितेन वार्चम्‌।४।। 


1, One of these two congratulates the other as they are both 
delighting in the forthcoming of rain; the speckled frog, leaping up 
repeatedly when moistened by the shower), joins greetings with 
the green one 


९४४. यदेषामन्यो अन्यस्य वाच शाक्तस्येव वदति शिक्षमाणः। 


सर्व तदेषां समृधेंवपर्व यत्सुवाचो वदथनाध्यप्सु।।५।। 


5. When one of you imitates the croaking of another as a 
learner (imitates) his teacher, when loud crying, you converse 
(leaping) upon the waters then the entire body is as 1t were 
developed 

Then the Entire Body....is Developed— During the dry weather 
says the Scholiast, the frogs shrink like a lump of clay; in the rains they 
expand to their full size 


५९४५. गोमांयुरेकों अजमांयुरेकः पृश्निरिको हरित एक एषाम्‌। 
समानं नाम बिभ्र॑तो विरूपाः पुरुत्रा वाचं पिपिशुवदन्त; |॥६।। 


6. One frog has the bellowing of a cow another the bleating of 
a goat; one of them is speckled, one 1$ green designated by a 
common appellation, they are of various colours and croaking, 
show themselves in numerous places 


५९४६. ब्राह्मणासों अतिरात्रे न सोमे सरो न पूर्णमभितो वदन्त:। 
संवत्सरस्य तदहः परि ष्ठ यन्म॑ण्डूकाः प्रावृषीणं बभूव ।1०1। 


7. Like Brahmanas at the Soma libation, at the Atiratra 
acrifice, you are now croaking around the replenished lake 
(throughout the night), for on that day of the year you frogs are 
everywhere about, when it is the day of the serving of the rains 

Croaking Throughout the Night ~ Rátrau sabdam kurvanah, is 
added by the commentator, apparently to make the comparison more 
appropriate, the Atirdtra rite being according 1o him, a nocturnal 
ceremony, when the priests recite the hymns at night: rátrim atitya vartate 
ityatirdtrah, yathatiratrakhye somayage Brühmaná ratrau stutasastránt 
Parydyena saüsanti. [For the sastras used at the 4४००, Sec Haug's 
translation of Aitareya Brahm. p. 264 


५९४७. ब्राह्मणास॑: सोमिनो वाच॑मक्रत ब्रह्म कृण्वन्त: परिवत्सरीणम्‌। 
अध्वर्यवों घर्मिण: सिष्विदाना आविर्भवन्ति गुह्या न के चित्‌॥८॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


———— ERE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
340 Rgveda Samhita 
8. They utter a loud cry, like Brahmanas when bearing the 
Soma libation, and reciting the perennial prayer: like ministrant 
priests with the gharma offering, they hid (in the hot weather) 
perspiring (in their holes), but now some of them appear. 

“The Perennial Prayer’’— Rather, **the year-long prayer.” Sayana 
make it refer to Gavam ayanam, sacrificial session, which commences 
and ends with the atirdtra and lasts a whole year. 

Perspiring— Adhvaryavo gharminah sisvidanah: the last may apply 
to the adhvaryus as well the frogs: there is a quibble upon the word 
gharminah, having or bearing the vessel, or performing the rite so termed; 
or suffering from gharma, heat, or the hot season. [For the pravargya 
ceremony and the gharma, see Haug's Ait. Brahm. trans. p. 42.] 


५९४८. देवहिंतिं जुगुपुर्दादशस्य॑ ऋतुं नरो न प्र मिनन्त्येते। 
dre dics ND अश्नुवते S 
संवत्सरे प्रावृष्यागतायां तप्ता घर्मा अश्नुवते विसर्गम्‌।।९।। 
9. These leaders of rites observe the institutes of the gods and 
disregard not the (appropriate) season of the twelve month; as the 
year revolves, and the rains return then, scorched and heated, they 
obtain freedom (from their hiding-places). 
५९४९. गोमायुरदादजमायुरदात्पृश्रिंरदाद्धरितो नो वर्सूनि। 
| गर्वा मण्डूका दद॑तः शतानिं सहख्सावे प्र तिरन्त ami: ite li 
— 10. May the cow-toned, the goat-toned, the speckled, the green 


(frog, severally) grant us riches! May the frogs in the fertilizing 


(season of the rain), bestowing upon us hundreds of cows, prolong 
(our) lives! 


In the Fertilizing Season of the Rain— Sahasrasáve is explained as 
the generator of thousands of plants, grains, and the like. 


[सूक्त १०४] 
li [ऋषि- वसिष्ठ मैत्रावरुणि। देवता- इन्द्रा सोम (रक्षोघ्न), ८, १६, १९: 
२२, २४ इन्द्र, ९, १२-१३ सोम, १०, १४ अग्नि, ११ देवगण, १७ 
| ग्रावा, १८ मरुद्गण, २३ (पूर्वार्द्ध ऋचा।) वसिष्ठ (Gawd ऋचा) प्रथिवी- 
अन्तरिक्ष। छन्द- Prev, १-६, १८, २१, २३ जगती, ७ जगती वा 
FART, २५ agea] 
५९५०. इन्द्रासोमा तर्पत रक्ष उब्जतं न्यर्पयतं वृषणा तमोवृ्ध:। 
परा शृणीतमचितो न्योंषतं हतं नुदेथां नि शिशीतमत्रिण:॥॥१॥ 


1. Indra and Soma, afflict, destroy the Raksasas; showerers (of 
benefits) cast down those who delight in darkness: put to flight the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by A 
8५९५६ 


Samaj Foundation Ch i i 
Mandala 7, Sak YA j ndation Chennai and eGangotri 


f 341 
stupid (spirits); consume, slay, drive away, utterly exterminate the 
ह 
५९५१. इन्द्रासोमा समघर्शंसमभ्यरघं तपुर्ययस्तु चरुरग्निवाँ ईव। 

ब्रह्मद्विषे क्रव्यादे घोरचक्षसे Eb धत्तमनवायं किंमीदिने।।२।। 

2. Indra and Soma, fall upon the destructive (Raksasa) and the 
performer of unprofitable acts, so that, consume (by your wrath), 
he may perish like the offering cast into the fire: retain implacable 
hatred to the hater of Bráhmanas, the cannibal, the hideous, the 
vile (Raksasa). 

“The Performer of Unprofitable Acts"— Or, as the same word, 
aghasamsa, is rendered in v. 4, “12 malignant." 

“To the Hater or Brahmanas"— Brahmadvise is explained by 
Sayana, brahmanebhyo, smabhyam dvestre 

“The Hideous’’— Ghoracaksase may also mean “‘rude in speech.” 

The Vile Raksasa— Kimidine is an unusual and rather unintelligible 
term: the comment explains it Kimidanim iti carate, to one who goes 
saying, What now? That is, Pisundya, a spy, an informer; or cruel, vile. 


EY ` ^ | 
५९५२. इन्द्रासोमा दुष्कृतों s अन्तर॑नारम्भणे तमसि प्र विध्यतम्‌। 
` ` ` 1 
यथा नात: पुनरेर्कश्चनोदयततद्वामस्तु सह॑से मन्युमच्छव: 11३ 11 
3. Indra and Soma, chastise the malignant (Raksasas), having 
plunged them in surrounding and inextricable darkness, so that not 


one of them may again issue from it: so may your wrathful might 


be triumphant over them. 
*Inextricable"— Perhaps rather bottomless dlambana-rahita. 
Compare Milton’s description of Satan falling in chaos. 


५९५३. इन्द्रासोमा वर्तय॑तं दिवो वधं सं पृथिव्या अघर्शसाय तर्हणम्‌। 
उत्त॑क्षतं सवर्य पर्वतेभ्यो येन॒ रक्षो वावृधानं निजूर्वथः।४॥। 

4. Indra and Soma, disperse from heaven your fatal (weapon), 
the extirpator from earth of the malignant (Raksasas) put forth 
from the clouds the consuming, (thunderbolt), wherewith you slay 
the increasing Raksasa race. 

५९५४. इन्द्रासोमा वर्तय॑तं दिवस्पर्यग्नितप्तेभिर्युवमश्महन्मभि:। 
तपुर्वधेभिरजरेभिरत्रिणो नि पर्शनि विध्यतं यन्तुं निस्व॒रम।५॥ 

5. Indra and Soma, scatter around (your weapons) from the 


Sky, pierce their sides with fiery searching adamantine (weapons), 
३० that they depart without a sound. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————— HEN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
342 Rgveda Sarhhità 


“Scorching’’— The text, after “‘scorching’’, adds another epithet, 
ajarebhih, ageless, undecaying. 
` e श्वतं | Y Ja 
५९५५. इन्द्रासोमा परि वां भूतु विश्वर्त इयं मतिः कक्ष्याश्वेव वाजिनां। 
> ति होत्रां I 
यां वां होत्रां परिहिनोमिं मेधयेमा ब्रह्माणि नृपतींव जिन्वतम्‌ 11 
6. May this praise invest you, Indra and Soma, who are 
mighty, on every side, as a girth (encompasses) a horse, that praise 
which I offer to you both with pure devotion: do you, like two 
kings, accept this my homage. 
५९५६. प्रति स्मरेथां तुजयंद्धिरेवै्हत॑ दुहो रक्षसों भडगुरावंत: । 
इन्द्रासोमा दुष्कृते मा सुगं भूद्यो न: कदा चिंदभिदास॑ति द्रुहा।॥७॥ 
7. Come with rapid steeds, slay the oppressive mischievous 
Ráksasas : let there be no happiness, Indra and Soma, to the 
malignant, who harasses us with his oppression. 
५९५७. यो मा पार्केन मन॑सा चर॑न्तमभिचष्टे अनृतेभिर्वचोंभिः। 
| आपंइव काशिना सङ्गभीता असंन्नस्त्वास॑त इन्द्र वक्ता।।८।। 
8. May he who with false calumnies maligns me behaving with 


t a pure heart, may such a speaker of falschood /ndra, cease to be, 
— like water held in the hand. 


l ५९५८. ये पाकशंसं विहरन्त एवैर्ये वां भदरं दूषय॑न्ति स्वधाभिंः। 
अहये वा तानू प्रददातु सोम आ वां दधातु निक्रंतिरुपस्थे।॥॥९॥ 
9. May Soma give to the serpent, or toss upon the lap of Nirrti, 


those who with designing (accusations) persecute me, a speaker of 


sincerity, and those who by spiteful (calumnies) vilify all that is 
good in me. 


“Those who by Spiteful Calumnies...in Me?— Rather, ‘‘those who 
with violence vilify me, acting uprightly. 
५९५९. यो नो रसं दिप्स॑ति पित्वो अग्ने यो अश्वानां यो गवां यस्तनूनाम्‌। 
रिपुः स्तेनः स्तेयकृदभ्रमेतु नि ष हीयतां तन्वा$ तना Re l 
10. May he, dis. Sun E to abus e essence of our 


| food, of our horse, of our cattle, of our bodies— the adversary, the 


thief, the robber— go to destruction, and be deprived both of 
person and of progeny. 


f | CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 104 343 


z पर: सो अस्तु तन्वार तनां च तिस्रः पृथिवीरधो अस्तु विश्वाः। 


प्रति शुष्यतु यशो अस्य देवा यो नो दिवा दिप्सति यश्च 
नक्त॑म्‌।।११॥ 

11. May he be deprived of bodily (existence) and of posterity; 
may he be cast down below all the three worlds; may his 
reputation, Gods, be blighted who seeks our destruction by day or 
by night. 

“May he be Deprived of Bodily Existence"'— Literally, “may he 
exist after his body and progeny,” i.e., continue severed from them. 
५९६१. सुविज्ञानं चिंकितुषे जनाय सच्चासंच्च वच॑सी पस्पृधाते। 

तयोर्यत्सत्यं य॑तरदूजीयस्तदित्सोमोंऽवति इन्त्यास॑त्‌।।१२।! 

12. To the understanding man there is perfect discrimination, 
the words of truth and falsehood are mutually at variance: of these 
two, Soma verily cherishes that which is true and right: he destroys 
the false. 

The preceding verses are considered to be a malediction upon the 
Raksasas by the Rsi. To account for the change of tone, Sayana gives an 
unusual version of the legend told in the Mahabharata of king 
Kalmasapáda being transformed to a Ráksasa, and devouring the 100 
sons of Vasistha: here it is said that a Raksasa, having devoured the Rsi 's 
sons, assumed his shape, and said to him, “I am Vasistha, you are the 
Ráksasa" ; to which Vasistha replied by repeating this verse declaratory 
of his discriminating between truth and falschood. 

“To the Understanding Man..Variance"— Literally, 10 the 
understanding man truth and falsehood are easily discriminated, their 
words are mutually at variance." 


५९६२. न वा उ सोमो वृजिनं हिंनोति न क्षत्रिय मिथुया धारयन्तम्‌। 
हन्ति रक्षो हन्त्यासद्वदन्तमुभाविन्द्रस्य प्रसितौ weis 


13. Soma instigates not the wicked; he instigates not the strong 
man dealing in falsehood: he destroys the Raksasa, he destroys the 
speaker of untruth; and both remain in the bondage of Indra. 


५९६३. ufi वाहमनृतदेव आस मोर्ध वा देवाँ अप्यूहे अंग्ने। 
किमस्मभ्यं जातवेदो gÀ द्रोधवाचस्ते Fred संचन्ताम्‌।।१४॥। 


_ 14. If I am one following false gods, it I approach the gods in 
vain, then Agni (punish me). If (we be not such, then) why, 
Jatavedas, are you angry with us? Let the utterers of falsehood 
Incur your chastisement. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


344 Rgveda Samhita 
५९६४. अद्या मुंरीय यर्दि यातुधानो अस्मि यदि वायुस्ततप पूरुषस्य। 
अघा स वीरैर्दशभिर्वि यूया यो मा मोघं यातुंधानेत्याह।।१५।। 

15. May I this day die if I am a spirit of ill, or if I have ever 


injured the life of any man: may you be deprived (Raksasa) of 
your ten sons, who have falsely called me by such an appellation. 


५९६५. यो मायातुं यातुधानेत्याह यो वां रक्षा: शुचिरस्मीत्याह | 
नरस्तं ह॑न्तु महता वधेन विश्व॑स्य जन्तोरंधमस्पंदीष्ट।।१६।। 
16. May Indra slay with his mighty weapon him who calls me 


the Yatudhdna, which I am not, the Raksasa, who says (of 
himself), I am pure: may he, the vilest of all beings, perish. 


५९६६. प्र या जिगाति खर्गलेव नक्तमप दुहा edi गृहमाना। 
वत्राँ अनन्ताँ अव सा पदीष्ट ग्रावाणो घ्नन्तु रक्षस॑ उपब्दैः।।१७।। 
17. May the cruel female fiend who, throwing off the 
concealment of her person, wanders about at night like an owl, fall 


headlong down into the unbounded caverns: may the stones that 
grind the Soma destroy the Raksasas by their noise. 


५९६७. वि तिष्ठध्वं मरुतो विक्ष्विच्छत गृभायत॑ रक्षसः सं पिनष्टन। 
| वयो ये भूत्वी पतयन्ति नक्तभिर्ये वा रिपो दधिरे देवे अंध्वरे ॥१८।| 
| 18. Stay, Maruts, amongst the people, desirous (of protecting 


them); seize the Raksasas, grind them to pieces: whether your fly 


about like birds by night, or whether they have offered obstruction 
to the sacred sacrifice. 


“Desirous of Protecting them’’—- Rather ‘‘be pleased (to destroy 
the Raksasas).”” 


५९६८. प्र वर्तय दिवो अश्मानमिन्द्र सोम॑शितं मघवन्त्सं शिशाधि। 


| 
प्रा्तादपां्तादधरादुदक्तादभि ज॑हि रक्षसः पर्वतेन।।१९।। 

19. Hurl, Indra, your thunderbolt from heaven: sanctify, 
Maghavan), (the worshipper) sharpened by the Soma beverage: 
slay with the thunderbolt the Raksasas, on the east, on the west, 08 
the south, on the north. 

५९६९. एत उ त्ये पतयन्ति श्वयातव इन्द्र दिप्सन्ति दिप्सवोऽदाभ्यम्‌। 
शिशीते शक्रः पिशुनेभ्यो वधं नूनं संजदशर्नि यातुमद्धय॑:॥२०॥ 

20. They advance, accompanied by dogs: desirous to destroy 
him, they assail the indomitable Indra: Sakra whets his 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 7, Sükta 104 345 
ह for the miscreants; quickly let him hurl the bolt upon 
the fiends. 

५९७०. इन्द्र यातूनामंभवत्‌ पराशरो ह॑विर्मथीनामभ्याई विवांसताम्‌। 
fi c ES 
अभीदु, शक्रः परशुर्यथा वनं पात्रेव भिन्दन्त्सत एति रक्षसंः।।२१॥ 

21. Indra has ever been the discomfiter of the evil spirits 
coming to obstruct (the rites of) the offerers of oblations: Sakra 
advances, crushing the present Raksasas, as a hatchet cuts down 
(the trees of) a forest, as (a mallet smashes) the earthen vessels. 
५९७१. उर्लूकयातुँ शुशुलूर्कयातुँ जहि श्वयातुमुत कोर्कयातुम्‌। 

सुपर्णयांतुमुत Ward दृषदेव प्र मृण रक्ष इन्द्र।२२॥। 

22. Destroy the evil spirit, whether in the form of an owl, or of 
an owlet, of a dog, or of a duck, of a hawk or of a vulture; slay the 
Raksasas, Indra, (with the thunderbolt) as with a stone. 

“A Duck’’— Literally, **a ruddy goose, cakravaka. 

५९७२. मा नो रक्षा अभि नंड्यातुमावतामपोच्छतु मिथुना या किमीदिना। 
पृथिवी नः पार्थिवात्‌ पात्वहसोञन्तरिंक्षे दिव्यत्पत्वस्मान्‌॥२३॥। 

23. Let not the Raksasas do us harm: let the dawn drive away 
the pairs of evil spirits exclaiming, ‘“What note is this” May the 
earth protect us from terrestrial, the firmament protect us from 


celestial, wickedness. 
Exclaiming—*‘What now is This?’’—Kimidina. See note on verse 2. 


५९७३. इन्द्रं जहि quis यातुधान॑मुत feri मायया शाशंदानाम्‌। 
विग्रीवासो मूर॑देवा ऋदन्तु मा ते दूशन्त्सूर्यमुच्चरन्तम्‌।।२४।। 
24. Slay, Indra, the Yatudhána, whether in the form of a man 


or of a woman doing mischief by her deceptions: may those who 


Sport in murder perish dissipated; let them not behold the rising 
sun 


“The Yatudhana’ ’— i.e., Raksasa 
५९७४. प्रति चक्ष्व वि चक्ष्वेन्द्रश्च सोम जागृतम्‌। 


रक्षोभ्यो वधमस्यतमशनिं यातुमद्भ्यः।२५॥ 


25. Soma, do you and Indra severally watch (the Raksasas), be 
Vary, be vigilant; hurl the thunderbolt at the malignant Raksasas. 


॥इति सप्तमं मण्डलम्‌॥ 
End of the Seventh Mandala 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Oe 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


॥अथाष्टमं मण्डलम्‌) 
EIGHTH MANDALA 


ANUVAKA 1 
[सूक्त- १] 


[ऋषि- १.२ प्रगाथ (घौर) काण्व, ३-२९ मेधातिथि-मेध्यातिथि काण्व, ३०: 
33 आसङ्ग प्लायोगि, ३४ शश्वती आङ्गिरसी ऋषिका। देवता- इन्द्र, 30- 
३४ आसङ्ग। BE- १-४ प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती), ४-३२ 

बृहती, ३३-३४ fare] 

५९७५. मा चिंदन्यद्वि शैंसत सखायो मा रिंषण्यत। 

इन्द्रमित्स्तोता वृष॑णं सचां सुते मुहुरुक्था च॑ शंसत॥।१।। 
1. Repeat, friends, no other praise, be not hurtful (to 
yourselves); praise together /ndra, the showerer (of benefits) when 


the Soma is effused; repeatedly utter praise (to him). 
i Sāmaveda, 242, 1660. 

e ० > : चर्षणीसहम्‌, 1 
hum. “९७६. अवक्रक्षिणं वृषभं य॑थाजुरं गां न चर्षणीसहम्‌। 
| 'विद्वेषणं संवर्ननोभयडकरं मंहिंष्ठमुभयाविन॑म्‌।।२।। 

2. A bull rushing (upon his foes), undecaying, like an OX, the 
overcomer of (hostile) men, the hater (of adversaries), the 
venerable, the displayer of both (enmity and favour), the 
munificent, the distributor of both (celestial and terrestrial riches). 

The Displayer of both— The text has only ubhayamkaram, which 
the commentator explains nigrahanugrahayoh kartaram. : 

The Distributor of both— Ubhayávinam. The Scholiast 1s rather 
puzzled how to interpret the duality here intimated— whether it means a 
in the text, or having the faculty of protecting both fixed and moveable 
things, or being honoured by both those who recite his praises and those 
who offer oblations. The epithets are in the accusative, being governed by 
the verb stota, **praise," in the first verse. Cf. Samaveda, 136. Benfey 
renders it, **Den schleundernden, wie einen Büffel stürmendan, Wie einen 
stier mensch-siegenden, den zornigen, siegenden, zwiefach handelnden, 


den hehrsten, zwiebegabeten''— it seems to me very barbarously, and no 
very intelligibly. 


५९७७. यच्चिद्धित्वा जनां इमे नाना हवन्त ऊतयें। 
अस्माकं ब्रह्मेदमिन्द्र भूतु तेऽहा विश्वा च वर्धनम्‌॥३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 1 347 
= Although these people worship you, /ndra, in many ways to 
(secure) your protection, (yet) may this our prayer be throughout 
all days your magnification. 


५९७८. वि तर्वूर्यन्ते मघवन्‌ विपश्चितोऽरयो विपो जनानाम्‌। 
उप॑ क्रमस्व पुरुरूपमा भ॑र वाजं नेदिष्ठमूतये।।४।। 
4. The sages (your worshippers), Maghavan, the overcomers 
(of foes), the terrifiers of (hostile) people, pass over various 


(calamities by your aid): come nigh and bring many sorts of food, 
and available for our preservation. 


५९७९. महे चन त्वामंद्रिवः परा शुल्कार्य देयाम्‌। 
न सहस्राय नायुतांय वज्रिवो न शतार्य शतामघ।।५।। 
5. Wielder of the thunderbolt, I would not sell you for a large 


price, not for a thousand, nor for ten thousand, nor, opulent bearer 
of the thunderbolt, for a hundred. 

For a Large Price— Sataya here signifies infinite, according to the 
comment. In the Sámaveda, 291 We have na parddiyase instead of na 
parádeyàm. 

be 1 
५९८०. वस्याँ इन्द्रासि मे पितुरुत भ्रातुरभुञ्जतः 
व॑सो राध॑से 
माता च॑ मे छदयथः समा व॑सो वसुत्वनाय VHS I 

6. You are more precious, Indra, than my father, or than my 
brother, who is not affectionate: you, giver of dwellings, are equal 
to my mother, for you both render me distinguished on account of 
celebrity and riches. 


५९८१. क्वेयथ क्वेदसि पुरुत्रा चिद्धि ते मन॑: 


अंगासिषु 

अलर्षि युध्म खजकृत्‌ पुरन्दर प्र गायत्रा TOT 

: 7. Whither has you gone? Where, indeed, are you now? Verily 
y Your mind (wanders) amongst many (worshippers): martial, 
y valorous Purandara, Come hither; the chaunters are singing (your 
" praise). 

|, Samaveda, 271. 

t ५९८२. प्रास्मै गायत्रमर्चत वावातुर्यः पुरन्दरः। 


याभि: काण्वस्योप॑ बर्हिरासदं यासद्वज्री AR: IK ॥। 
c 8. Raise the sacred chaunt to him who is the destroyer of the 
ities (of the foes) of his worshipper, (induced) by which may the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


348 Rgveda Samhita 


thunderer come to sit down at the sacrifice of the sons of Kanva 
and destroy the cities (of their enemies). 


५९८३. ये ते सन्ति दशग्विन॑ः शतिनो ये Hefe: 1 
अश्वासो ये ते वृष॑णो रघुदुवस्तेभिनस्तूयमा गंहि।।९।॥। 
9, Come quickly with those your horses which are vigorous 
and fleet, and which are traversers of tens, or hundreds, or 
thousancs (of leagues). 


'Traversers of Ten, etc.— Or rather, ‘“Which are traversers of ten 
leagues, and are numbered by hundreds and by thousands."' 


५९८४. Sm cuiu संबर्दुघाँ हुवे गायत्रवेपसम्‌। 
इन्द्र धेनुं सुदुघामन्यामिषमुरुधारामरङकृतम्‌।।१०।। 

10. I invoke to-day the all-sufficient Indra, as the milch cow 
yielding abundant milk, of excellent motion, and easy to be 
milked; or, as another (form), the vastdropping, desirable (rain). 

Of Excellent Motion— Gayatra-vepasam is explained prasasya- 
vegam, ‘‘of excellent speed’’; or it might have been thought to be à 
metaphor, having the form or beauty of the Gayatri, being the Gayatri 
personified. 

The Vast-Dropping, Desirable, etc.— Anyam isham urudharam is 
rather doubtful; the comment explains it,  uktavilaksamam 
bahüdakadharam esaniyam vrstim; this is followed by Alankrtam, which, 
being masculine, cane refer only to Indram, the doer of enough, all- 


sufficient. Cf Samaveda, 295. [Anyam may mean unparalleled, 
adrstapürvam, as in hymn 27 of this Mandala.] 


५९८५. यततुदत्‌ सूर एतंशं वङ्कू वात॑स्य पर्णिनां। 
वहत्‌ कुत्समार्जुनेयं शतत्रतु्त्सर॑द्‌ गन्धर्वमस्तृंतम्‌।।११।। 
11. When Sürya harassed Etasa, Satakratu conveyed (to his 


aid) Kutsa, the son of Arjuni, with his two prancing horses (swift) 


as the wind, and stealthily approached the irresistible Gandharva- 
The Irresistible Gandharva— A name of the sun. 
Etasa — See Rg. 1.61.15. 


५९८६. य ऋते चिंदभिश्रिष॑: पुरा जतुभ्ये आतृद:। 


1 ufu विहुुंतंपुनं 
सन्धाता सन्धि मघवां पुरूवसुरिष्कर्ता विहुतंपुनंः।।१२।। 

12. He who without healing materials before the flow of bloos 
from the necks was the effecter of the re-union, the opulen 
Maghavan, again makes whole the dissevered (parts). 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ees t 


- 


od 
ent 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 1 349 


To what this alludes is not explained, but possibly it intends to 
describe the restoration of Etasa, wounded in his conflict with the sun. 
The verse occurs in Sdmaveda, 244. The translation of Langlois. Benfey 
and Stavenson are very curious. 


५९८७. मा भूम निष्ट्याइवेन्द्र त्वदर॑णा इव। 
वर्नानि न प्रजहितान्यद्रिवो दुरोषांसो अमन्महि।१३॥ 
13. May we never be like the abject, Indra, through your 


favour, nor suffer affliction; may we never be like branchless trees; 
for, thunderer, unconsumable (by foes) we glorify you. 


५९८८. अर्मन्महीदनाशवोडनुग्रासश्व वृत्रहन्‌। 
सकृत्सु तें महता शूर राधसानु स्तोम॑ मुदीमहि।१४।। 
14. Neither rash nor irate, we verily glorify you, slayer of 


Vrtra; my we propitiate you, hero, for once (at least) by our praise 
with great (sacrificial) wealth. 
Ns I श्रव॑दस्माकमिन्द्रमिन्दव I 
५९८९. यदि स्तोमं मम श्रवदस्माकमिन्द्रमिन्दव:। 
पवित्र | `A 1 1 
तिरः पवित्रं ससृवांसं आशवो मन्द॑न्तु तुग्रयावृध: 1124 11 

15. If he hear our praise, then may our libations, flowing 
through the filter, dropping quickly, and diluted with consecrated 
water, exhilarate Indra. 

Through the Filter— The text adds an epithet of the filtering-cloth 
tiras, ie., placed slantingly. Asavah may mean quickly intoxicating. 

Diluted with Consecrated Water— Tugryávrdhah is explained 
vasativaryekadhanakhyabhir adbhir vardhamdndh, increasing with the 


Waters termed vasativari and ekadhand, water collected and kept apart for 
the ceremonial (Cf Ait. Brahm. 1.20]. 


५९९०. आ त्वरैद्य सधस्तुति वावातुः सख्युरा गहि। 
1 उप॑स्तुतिर्मघोनां प्न = 
मंघोनां प्र त्वावत्वधां ते वश्मि ERIS UI 
16. Come quickly to-day to the collected laudation of your 
devoted friend: may the subsidiary praise of wealthy (worshippers) 


Teach you, but now I wish (to offer) your complete eulogium. 


Laudation— ie., The laudation made by him together with many 
Other priests. 


its Subsidiary Praise— Sayana does not recognize this contrast 
tween the two praises, as the explains upastutih by stotram. 


“९१. सोता हि सोममद्रिभरेमेनमप्सु धांवत। 
गव्या वर्खेंव वासयन्त इन्नरो निर्धुकषन्वक्षणांभ्य: 11१७1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


350 Rgveda Samhita 


17. Extract the Soma juice with the brushing stones, wash it 
with the consecrated waters, (for by so doing) the leaders (of the 
rain, the Maruts) clothing (the sky with clouds) as with vesture of 
the hide of the cow, milk, forth (the water) for the rivers. 


५९९२. अध ज्मो अध॑ वा दिवो बृंहतो रोंचनादधिं। 
अया वर्धस्व तन्वां गिरा ममा जाता dedi पृण।।१८॥ 


18. Whether come from the earth or the firmament, or the vast 
luminous (heaven), be magnified by this may diffusive praise; 
satisfy, Satakratu, (my) people. 

Satakratu— The text has Sukratu as a similar name of Indra. 


५९९३. इन्द्राय सु मदिन्तमं सोमं सोता वरेण्यम्‌। 
शक्र dui पीपयद्विश्वंया धिया हिन्वानं न वांजयुम्‌।।१९॥। 
19. Pour out to Indra the most exhilarating, the most excellent 


Soma, for Sakra cherishes him who is desirous of food, 
propitiating him by every pious act. 


५९९४. मा त्वा सोम॑स्य गल्द॑या सदा याचंत्रहं गिरा। 
भूर्णि मृगं न सव॑नेषु चुक्रुधं क ईशानं न यांचिषत्‌।।२०।! 


20. May I never, when importuning you in sacrifices with the 
effusion of the Soma and with praise, excite you like a ferocious 
lion to wrath: who (is there in the world) that does not solicit his 
lord? 

Sümaveda, 207 but the reading of the first half in Benfey varies, and 
is apparently faulty; instead of ma tvd somasya galdayd sada yacan 
aham gird, it is a iva somasya galdaya sada yacanna aham jyd. Yt n 
easy to make sense of this passage, especially in connection with what 
follows. 

Excite you— Bharnim is explained by bhartaram, “my lord". 


५९९५. मर्देनेषितं मदमुग्रमुग्रेण शवंसा। 


श्रेषां ० 
विश्वेषां तरुतारं मद्च्युतं मदे हि ष्मा ददांति TURAN 
21. (May Indra drink) with invigorated strength, the SOR 


exhilarating (Soma) offered with animating (laudation): for 1 his 


delight he gives us (a son) the overcomer of all (foes), the humble! 
of their pride. 


५९९६. शेवारे वार्यी पुरु देवो मर्ताय दाशुषे। 
००० in PES S सतते च। रासते विक्षतो auget: URS I 


angri Golléttion, Haridwar 


a n 


= 


f 


ont 
od, 


the 
ous 
his 


and 
anit 
not 
what 


rong 
1 his 
101९. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 1 351 


22. The divine (/ndra), the accomplisher of all aims, the 
glorified by his foes, gives vast treasures to the mortal who 
presents offerings at the sacrifice, to him who pours out the 
libation, who hymns his praise 

The Glorified by His Foes— Ari probably: means prerayitri, one 
who utters a hymn. 


५९९७. एन्द्र याहि weed चित्रेण देव राधंसा। 
सरो न प्रास्युदरं सपीतिभिरा सोमेभिरुरु स्फिरम्‌॥२३।। 

23. Come hither, Indra, be exhilarated by the wonderful 
(libatory) affluence and with your fellow-topers (the Maruts) fill 
with the Soma juices your vast belly, capacious as a lake, 

५९९८. आ त्वां सहस्रमा शतं युक्ता रथें हिरण्ययें। 
EY 3 | x व निया ड ` Lu 7 सोम॑पीतये ७ 
ब्रह्मयुजो हर॑य इन्द्र केशिनो वह॑न्तु र IYI 

24. May your thousand, your hundred steeds, Indra yokes to 
your golden chariot, harnessed by prayer, with flowing manes, 


bring you to drink the Soma libation. 
Samaveda, with the two following verses, 245, 1391: 


५९९९. आ त्वा रथें हिरण्यये हरीं मयूरशेप्या। 
शितिपृष्ठा वहतां मध्वो अन्ध॑सो विवक्ष॑णस्य पीतये 1124 11 
25. May your two peacock-tailed, white-backed horses, yoked 


to your golden chariot, bring you to drink of the sweet 
praiseworthy libation. 


६०००. पिना त्वशस्य गिर्वणः सुतस्य पूर्वपा ईव। 


परिष्कृतस्य रसिन॑ इयमासुतिश्रारुर्मदांय पत्यते।।२६।। 


26. Drink you, who are worthy to be glorified, of this 
consecrated and juicy libation, like the first drinker (Vayu): this 
excellent effusion issues for your exhilaration. 

The First Drinker Vayu— According to the Scholiast, pürvapáh 
means Vayu, who, having arrived first in the racg,.drank the Soma before 
the other gods. The allusion is to the principal graha libation, called 
Aindravayava, which Indra and Vayu share together. [For the legend, see 
Aitareya Brahm. 11.25 ] 


६००१. य एको अस्ति दंसनां महाँ उग्रो अभि व्रतैः। 
गमत्स शिप्री न स योषदा गंमद्धवं न परि वर्जति।२७।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
352 Rgveda Samhita 


27. May he who alone overcomes (enemies) through (the 
power of) religious observances, who by pious acts is rendered 
mighty and fierce, who is handsome-chinned, approach: may he 
never be remote; may he come to our invocation; may he never 
abandon us. 


६००२. त्वं पुरं चरिष्ण्वं वधैः शुष्ण॑स्य सं पिंणक्‌। 
० | 
त्वं भा अनु चरो अध द्विता यदिन्द्र हव्यो भुवः।।२८ ।। 
28. You have broken to picces the moveable city of Susna with 
your weapons; your who are light have followed him; wherefore, 
Indra, you are in two ways to be worshipped. 


In Two Ways to be Worshipped— Dvita havyah, by praisers and by 
sacrificers, stotrbhir yastrbhisca. 


६००३. मम॑ त्वा सूर उदिते मम॑ मध्यन्दिने दिवः। 
मम॑ प्रपित्वे अपिशरवरे वंसवा स्तोमांसो अवृत्सत।।२९॥ 


29. May my prayers when the sun has risen, those also at noon, 
tnose also when evening arrives, bring you back, giver of riches (to 
my sacrifice). 

Also when Evening Arrives— The text, according to Sayana, adds a 
fourth time, ‘‘also in the night," sarvare kale’pi. For prapitvd, sec Dr. 
Goldstücker's Sanskrit Dict. under abhipitvd and apapitva. 


६००४. स्तुहि स्तुहीदेते घा ते मंहिष्ठासो मघोर्नाम्‌। 
Afaa: प्रपथी परमज्या मघस्य॑ मेध्यातिथे।।३०॥ 
30. Praise (me), praise (me), Medhyatithi, for amongst the 


wealthy we are the most liberal donors of wealth to you: (praise 


me as one) who outstrips a horse in speed, follows the right path, 
and bears the best arms. 


६००५. आ यदश्वान्वनन्वत: श्रद्धयाहं Gb रुहम्‌। 
उत वामस्य वसुनश्चिकेतति यो अस्ति Aa: TY: 1138 |i 
31. When with faith I harness the docile horses in the ९१ 


(praise me), for the descendant of Yadu, possessed of cattle, know 
how to distribute desirable riches. 

Praise Me— The Scholiast supplies tadanim mam evam stuhi, then. 
verily praise me. Y 

Possessed of Cattle— The text Yadvah pasuh, literally the fadava 
animal, but pasu, the commentator says, is to be understood as pasuman, 
having animals; or it may be considered as a derivative of pds for drs, 10 
see, a beholder of subtile objects, siiksmasya drasta. ` 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 2 353 


le x | | 
६००६. य ZA मह्यं मामहे सह त्वचा हिरण्ययां। 
Fe 89.८ भंगासङस्य स्वनद॑ 
एष विश्वान्यभ्यस्तु साभगासङ्गस्य स्वनद्रथः।।३२॥। 

32. (Praise me, saying,) “96 who has presented riches to me 
with a golden purse: may this rattling chariot of Asanga carry off 
all the treasures (of me enemy). 

This Rattling Chariot— Sayana, to save the accent of swandrathah, 
which, would make it Bahuvrihi, has to resort to a violent ellipsis of atma; 
to avoid this, Wilson has preferred to take it as a Karmadháraya, with an 
exceptional accent. 


६००७. अध प्लायोंगिरतिं दासदन्यार्नासङ्गो अग्ने दशभिः Wea: | 
अधोक्षणो दश मह्यं रुश॑न्तो नळाईव सर॑सो निर॑तिष्ठन्‌॥३३॥ 

33. (So praise me, saying,) ‘“Asariga, the son of Playoga, has 
given more than others, Agni, by tens of thousands: ten times the 
(number of) vigorous and brilliant exen (given by him) to me, 
issue forth like the reeds of a lake.” 


Ten Times—Sayana explains dasa as daSa-gunita-sahasra- 
sankyakah. 


६००८. अन्व॑स्य स्थूरं Cal पुरस्तादनस्थ ऊरुरवरम्ब॑माण:। 
शश्चती नार्यभिचक्ष्याह सुभद्रमर्य भोजन बिभर्षि।॥३४॥। 


34. Sasvati, perceiving that the signs of manhood were restored. 
exclaims, **Joy, husband, you are capable of enjoyment." 


[39-3] 
[क्रषि- १-४० मेधातिथि काण्व तथा प्रियमेध आङ्गिरस, ४१-४२ मेधातिथि 
काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, ४१-४२ विभिन्दु। छन्द- गायत्री, २८ agg] 
६००९. इदं व॑सो सुतमन्धः पिबा सुपूर्णमुदर॑म्‌। अनाभयित्ररिमा X11 11 


l. Giver of dwellings (Indra), drink this effused libation till 
your belly is full, we offer it, undaunted (Indra), to you. 


६०१०. नृभिर्धृत: सुतो अश्नैरव्यो वारैः परिपूत:। अश्वो न निक्तो नदीषु॥२। 
2. Washed by the priests, effused by the stones, purified by the 
Woollen filter, like a horse cleansed in a stream. 


६०११. तं ते यवं यथा गोभिः स्वादुम॑कर्म श्रीणन्त॑ः। 
१ ~ E A 
इन्द्र त्वास्मिन्त्स॑धमादे।।३॥। 
et We have made it sweet for you as the barley-cake mixing it 
With milk, and therefore, Indra, (I invoke) you to this social rite. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


354 Rgveda Samhita 


1 ard 1 
६०१२. इन्द्र इत्सोमपा एक इन्द्र॑ः सुतपा ferar: अन्तर्देवान्‌ EAN 
4. Indra verily is the chief drinker of the Soma among gods 
and men, the drinker of the effused libation, the acceptor of all 
kinds of offerings. 
The Chief Driuker of the Soma— Ekah somapáh, he alone is to be 


presented, it is said, with the entire libation; the other gods are only 
sharers of a part, ekadesa-bhajah. 


६०१३. न d शुक्रो न दुरांशीर्न qur उरुव्यचंसम्‌। अपस्पृण्वते सुहादंम्‌।५। 
5. (We praise him) a universal kind-hearted (friend), whom the 
pure Soma, the mixture (of it) made with difficulty, or other 
satisfying (offerings) do not displease. 
६०१४. गोभिर्यदीमन्ये अस्मन्मृगं न ब्रा मृगयन्ते। अभित्सरन्ति धेनुर्भि:॥६॥ 
6. Whom others pursue with offerings of milk and curds as 
hunters chase a deer (with nets and snares), and harass with 
(inappropriate) praises. 
६०१५. त्रय der सोमा: सुतास॑ः सन्तु देवस्य। स्वे क्षय सुतपावूर्न:11७॥ 
7. May the three libations be effused for the divine Indra in his 
won dwelling, (for he is) the drinker of the effused juice. 
६०१६. तरयः कोशासः श्रोतन्ति तिस्रश्चम्वर : सुपूर्णाः। 
समाने अधि भार्मन्‌।।८।। 


8. Three purifying vessels drop (the Soma), three ladles are 
well filled (for the libation), the whole is furnished for the 
common sacrifice. 


The verse alludes to the three daily sacrifices. [The three vessels are 
the three troughs used in the preparation of the Soma libations, the 
Dronakalasa, the Pütabhrt, and the Ahavaniya. The three ladles are the 
three sets of cups camasáh, used in the three libations.] 


६०१७. शुचिरसि पुरुनिः ष्ठाः क्षीरैमँध्यत आशीर्तः। 
दध्ना मन्दिष्ठः HERI UI 


9. You (Soma) are pure, distributed in many vessels, mixed at 
the mid-day sacrifice With milk, and (at the third sacrifice) With 
curds, the most exhilarating (beverage) of the hero (Indra). 


६०१८. इमे त॑ इन्द्र सोमास्तीव्रा अस्मे सुतास॑ः। 
शुक्रा आशिरं याचन्ते॥१०।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


— 7 


F at 
ith 


Digiti i ion C _ 
Mandala ॥ ged by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 355 


10. These sharp and pure Soma libations effused by us for you 
solicit you for admixture. 


६०१९. df आशिए पुरोळाशमिन्द्रेमं सोम श्रीणीहि। 


^ > | शृणोमिं 
रेवन्तं हि त्वां शुणोमिं।।११।। 
11. Mix, Indra, the milk and Soma, (add) the cake the this 
libation. I hear that you are possessed of riches. 
FE ^ दर्मदांसो || 1 
६०२०. हृत्सु पातासा युध्यन्त दु न सुरायाम्‌। 
c Ios 
ऊधर्न नग्ना जरन्त।।१२।। 

12. The potations (of Soma) contend in your interior (for your 
exhilaration) like the ebriety caused by wine: your worshippers 
praise you (filled full of Soma) like the udder (of a cow with milk). 

Like the Ebriety Caused by Wine— Durmadaso na surayam, like 
bad intoxications, wine, being drunk. The preparation of fermented 
liquors was therefore familiar to the Hindus, and probably amongst them 
was wine, the north-west of the Punjab, no doubt their earliest site being 
the country of the grape; but according to comment on Manu, an inferior 


sort of spirit. 


Your Worshippers Praise you, 
"The praisers praise like an udder,” is the literal rendering according to 


the Scholiast, but nagna usually means naked; here it is said to import 
stot@, a praiser, one who does not neglect or abandon the verses of the 


Veda, chandanisi na jahati. 

रेवाँ ` I 
६०२१. रेवाँ इद्रेवर्त: स्तोता स्यात्त्वावंतो miii Hg हरिवः ARa 
are opulent, be opulent; may 
ho is wealthy and renowned, 


ctc.—Üdhar na nagná jarante.' 


13. May the eulogist of you, who 
he even, lord of steeds, surpass one W 
like you. 

Sámaveda, 1804. 

Surpass one who is Wealthy and 
renders this last clause **the praiser of any one wealthy 
you would assuredly prosper (much more, then of you).”” 


e - 1 
६०२२. उक्थं चन शस्यमांनमगोररिरा चिंकेत। न गायत्रं गीयमानम्‌॥॥१४॥। 
14. (Indra), the enemy of the unbeliever, apprehends whatever 
prayer is being repeated, whatever chaunt is being chaunted. — 
Samaveda, 1805, but the reading of the printed text of Benfey varies. 


Our text has agor arir à ciketa, the enemy of him who does not praise, 
astotus Satrur Indrah— the Saman has nago rayir à ciketa, translated, 


Renowned like you— Sayana 
and renowned like 


GIU ee ene “अमर 4 


१. दुष्टमदा यथा पातारं मादयन्ति aped मादयितुँ परस्पर युध्यन्त इत्यर्थः। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


356: Rgveda Samhita 


welch Lied den Bos auch immer spricht, der Schatz beachtet's 
nimmermehr. 


६०२३. मा न॑ इन्द्र पीयलवे मा शर्धते परां दाः। 
शिक्षां शचीवः शचीभिः।।१५।। 


15. Consign us not, Indra, to the slayer, not to an 


overpowering foe; doer of great deeds, enable us by your acts (to 
conquer). 
Samaveda, 1806. 


६०२४. वयमु त्वा तदिदर्था इन्द्र त्वायन्तः सखाय:। 
कण्वां उकथेभिर्जरन्ते।।१६।। 


16. Friends devoted, Indra, to you we, the descendants of 


Kanva, having your praise for our object, glorify you with prayers. 
Samaveda, 157, 719. 


६०२५. न घेमन्यदा पंपन वज़िन्नपसो नविष्टी। तवेदु स्तोमं चिकेत ।1१७॥ 


17. (Engaged), thunderer, in your most recent (worship) I utter 


no other praise than that of you, the doer of great deeds, I repeat 
only your glorification. 


| This and the next occur in the Samaveda, 720-21. 
m= ६०२६. इच्छन्ति देवाः सुन्वन्तं न स्वप्नाय स्पृहयन्ति। 
यन्ति प्रमादमतन्द्रा:।।१८ ।। 


18. The gods love the man who offers libations, they desire not 


to (let him) sleep, thence they, unslothful, obtain the inebriating 
Soma. 


६०२७. ओ षु प्र याहि वाजेभिर्मा हणीथा अभ्यरै स्मान्‌। 
महाँ इव युवंजानि:1॥१९ 11 


19. Come to us quickly with excellent viands, be not bashful, 
like the ardent husband of a new bride. 


६०२८. मो ष्वशैद्य दुर्हणावान्त्सायं करदारे अस्मत्‌। 
अश्रीरईव जामांता।।२०॥ 


20. Let insiiperable, delay (coming to us) to-day until the 
evening, like an unlucky son-in-law. 


Let not Indra Delay, etc.— Who, being repeatedly summoned, 
delays his appearance till evening, is the Scholiast’s explanation. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| BENE ` 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 2 357 


a विद्या हास्य वीरस्यं भूरिदावरीं सुमतिम्‌। 
त्रिषु जातस्य मर्नासि।॥॥२१॥ 
21. We know the munificent generosity of the hero (/ndra): of 


the purposes of him who is manifest in the three worlds (we are 
aware). 
1 1 ७ I 
६०३०. आ तू पिञ्च कण्वमन्तं न घा विद्म शवसानात्‌। 
यशस्तरं शतमूतेः 11२२ L 

22. Pour out the libation to him who is associated with the 
Kanva (race): we know not any one more celebrated than the very 
powerful bestower of numerous protections. 

In the First Place— Alluding to the Aindravdyava graha, see st. 
6000. 

६०३१. ज्येष्ठेन सोतरिन्द्राय सोम॑ वीराय॑ शक्राय॑। भरा पिबन्नर्याय |॥२३॥ 

23. Offer, worshipper, the libation in the first place to the hero, 
the powerful Indra, the benefactor of man: may he drink (of it),— 
६०३२. यो वेदिष्ठो अव्यथिष्वश्वांवन्तं जरितृभ्य॑:। 

वाजँ स्तोतृभ्यो गोम॑न्तम्‌।।२४।। 

24. He who most recognisant of (the merit) of those who give 
him no annoyance, bestows upon his adorers and praisers food 
with horses and cattle. 

६०३३. पन्यपन्यमित्सोतार आ धांवत मद्याय। सोम वीराय RAIRA 

25. Hasten, offerers of the libation, (to present) the glorious 
Soma to the valiant, the hero (Indra), for (his) exhilaration. 

1, 
६०३४. पातां वृत्रहा सुतमा घां गमन्नारे अस्मत्‌। नि य॑मते शतमूति:11२६।। 


26. May the drinker of the Soma libation, the slayer of Vrtra, 
approach, let him not be far from us; let the granter of many 
Protections keep in check (our enemies). 


६०३५. एह हरी ब्रह्मयुजां शग्मा da: सखायम्‌। 
गीर्भिःश्रुतं गिर्वणसम्‌।।२७॥। 
27. May the delightful steeds who are harnessed by prayer 


bring hither (ours) friends (Indra), magnified by praises, deserving 
of laudation. 


Cf Sámaveda, 1658. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Rgveda Samhita 


358 
६०३६. स्वादवः सोमा आ याहि श्रीताः सोमा आ यांहि। 
qiga: शचीवो नायमच्छा सधमारदम्‌॥२८॥ 


28. Handsome-chinned (ndra), the honoured of sages, the 
doer of great deeds, come, for well-flavoured are the Soma juices; 
come, for the libations are ready mixed: this (your worshipper) 
now (invites you) to be present at this social exhilarating rite. 

Na ayam acchá sadhamadam, ‘‘now this (worshipper) in presence 


(invites) you to be exhilarated with (us), is the explanation of the 
Scholiast. 


६०३७. स्तुत॑श्च यास्त्वा वर्धन्ति महे राधसे नृम्णायं। 
इन्द्र कारिणं वृधन्त॑ः।।२९॥ 


29. They who praising you magnify you, Indra, the institutor 
of rites, and those (hymns which glorify) you have (for their 
object) great riches and strength. 


६०३८. गिर॑श्च यास्त गिर्वाह उकथा च तुभ्यं तानिं। 
स॒त्रा द॑धिरे शवाँसि।।३०॥। 


30. Upborne by hymns, those your praises and those prayers 
which are addressed to you, all combined, sustain your energies. 


६०३९. एवेदेष तुविकूर्मिर्वाजाँ एको बज्र॑हस्तः। सनादमृक्तो दयते॥३१।। 


31. Verily this accomplisher of many acts, the chief (among 
the gods), the wielder of the thunderbolt, he who has ever been 
unconquered, gives food (to his votarics). 


६०४०. इन्ता वृत्रं दक्षिणेनेन्द्रः पुरू पुरुहूतः। महान्महीभिः शचीभिः।।३२॥ 


32. Indra, the slayer of Vrtra with his right hand, the invoked 
of many in many (places), the mighty by mighty deeds,— 


६०४१. यस्मिन्‌ विशवाश्चर्णयं उत च्यौत्ना ज्रयांसि च। 
अनु घेन्मन्दी मघोन॑ः।।३३॥। 


33. He upon whom all men depend, (in whom) overwhelming 


energies (abide), he verily is the delighter of the opulent 
(worshipper). 


६०४२. एष एतानि चकारेन्द्रो विश्वा योऽति शुण्वे। 
वाजदावा मघोनाम्‌।।३४।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


5... ली 


OOO CC áo M -— ; B 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sukta 2 359 


F This Indra has made all these (beings), who is thence 

exceedingly renowned; he is the donor of food to opulent 
worshippers. 

Has made all these beings— Etdni visvani cakára, he has made all 
these, according to comment, either bhitajatani, all beings, or he has 
performed all these exploits the death of Vrtra, and the like. 

६०४३. WHat रथ गव्यन्तंमपाकाच्चिद्यमवंति। इनो वसु स हि वोळहां।।३५। 

35. He whom, adoring, and desirous of cattle, the protector 
(Indra) defends against an ignorant (foe), becomes a prince, the 
possessor of wealth. 

Desirous of Cattle— Ratham gavyantam, ratham is explained 
ramhanam, from vahi, to go. It cannot have its usual sense, a car, as it is 
the epithet of him who becomes the lord, the bearer of riches, ino vasu sa 
hi volahà. (इन: ईश्वरः) 


६०४४. सनिता विप्रो अर्वद्धिहन्ता qd तृभिः शूरः। 
सत्योंऽविता विधन्तम्‌।॥३६।। 
36. Liberal, wise, (borne by his won) steeds, a hero, the slayer 


3 of Vrtra, (aided) by the Maruts, truthful, he is the protector of the 


performer of holy rites. 
Wise, Born by his own steeds—Or rather, “wise, attaining his 
object by his steeds.” 


६०४५. यज॑ध्वैनं प्रियमेधा इन्द्रं सत्राचा मर्नसा। यो भूत्सोमै सत्यमंद्वा॥३७। 


37. worship, Priyamedha, with mind intent upon him, that 
Indra, who is truthful when exhilarated by the Soma potations. 
Truthful when Exhilarated by the Soma Potations—Somaih 
d satyamadvà, in vino veritas conveys a similar notion, but truth, or 
truthful, as applied to a deity in the Veda, means one who keeps faith with 
his worshippers, who grants their prayers; SO Indra, in his cups, is 
especially bountiful to those who praise him. 


६०४६. गाथश्रवसं सत्पतिं श्रव॑स्कामं पुरुत्मान॑म्‌। 
s कण्वांसो गात RAAL UI 
38. Sing, Kanvas, the mighty (Indra), of widelysung renown, 


the protector of the good, the desirous of (sacrificial) food, present 
1n many places. 


६०४७. य ऋते चिद्वास्पदेभ्यो दात्‌ सखा नृभ्यः शर्चीवान्‌। 
ये अंस्मिन्काममश्रिंयन्‌॥।३९।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


360 Rgveda Samhita 


39. He who, a friend (to his worshippers), the doer of great 
deeds, tracing the cattle by their foot-marks, being without (other 
means of detection), restored them to those leaders (of rites) who 
willingly put their trust in him. 

Without other means of Detection— Or rather, ‘‘tracing them, 

| though without their footsteps (to guide him)."' 


| > | 
६०४८. इत्था धीवन्तमद्रिवः काण्वं मेध्यांतिथिम्‌। 
1 | 
मेषो भूतो३भि यन्नयंः।।४०।। 
40. You, thunderer, approaching in the form of a ram, have 
come to Medhyatithi, of the race of Kanva, thus propitiating you. 
In the form of a ram— Cf Vol. I, mantra 600 and Sadvinsa 
Bráhmana, 1.1. [The legend is also found in the Baskala Upanisad, as 


given in Anquetil du Perron's translation. Dr, Weber compares the Greck 
legend of Ganymede]. 


Have come to— Or rather, “010 carry off,” ayah, i.e., agamayah. 
६०४९. शिक्षा विभिन्दो अस्मै चत्वार्ययुता ददत्‌। अष्टा परः MERTI? dl 


41. Liberal Vibhindu, you has given to me four times ten 
thousand, and afterwards eight thousand. 


— ६०५०. उत सु त्ये पैयोवृर्धा माकी रण॑स्य नप्त्यां। जनित्वनाय॑ मामहे ।॥४२। 
42. Y glorify those two (heaven and earth), the augmenters of 


water, the originators (of beings), the benefactors of the 


worshipper, on account of their generation (of the wealth so given 
to me). 


Those two Heaven and Earth—The text has tye payovrdhd maki 

ranasya naptyd janitvandya mamahe. There is no substantive; the 

| Scholiast supplies dydvaprthivyau, because, he says, thcy being pleased 

such a gift is obtained, tayoh prasannayor evedam danam labhyate. The 

M attributives are also in the fem. daul: two of them are unusual; maki is 

B i explained by  nirmátryau, makers, creators] and  naptyá by 
Hu anugrahasile, “‘inclined to be favourable''; ranasya, of or to the stotd. 


[3-3] 

[ऋषि- मेध्यातिथि काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, २१-२४ पाकस्थामा कौरयाण। 
छन्द- १-२० प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती), २१ अनुष्टुप्‌, २२ 
२३ गायत्री, २४ बृहती।] 

६०५१. flat सुतस्य॑ रसिनो मत्स्वा न इन्द्र गोम॑तः। 
आपिर्नो बोधि सधमाद्यो gaya अंवन्तु ते f: Lg 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 3 361 


F Drink, /ndra, of our sapid libation mixed with milk, and be 
satisfied: regard thyself as our kinsman, to be exhilarated along 
with us for our welfare: may your (good) intentions protect us, 
Samaveda, 239, 1421. 

As our Kinsman, etc.—Or rather, "As our kinsman, to be 
exhilarated along with us, think for our welfare." 
This verse is used as a Pragátha, as also are 2-20 of this hymn. From 
the number of Pragáthas which this Mandala supplies, it is sometimes 
called the Mandala of the Pragathas. 


६०५२. भूयाम॑ ते सुमतौ वाजिनों वयं मा न॑ः स्तरभिमांतये। 
अस्माञचित्राभिरवतादभिष्टिभिरा नं: सुम्नेषु TAR 

2. May we be offerers of oblations (to enjoy) your favour; 
harm us not for the sake of the enemy; protect us with your 
wondrous solicited (protections), maintain us ever in felicity. 

Sdmaveda, 1422 
६०५३. इमा उ त्वा पुरूवसो गिरों वर्धन्तु या मर्म। 

पावकर्वर्णा: शुचयो विपश्चितोऽभि स्तोमॅरनूषत । [३11 

3. (Indra), abounding in wealth, may these my praises magnify 
you; the brilliant pure sages glorify you with hymns. 

Sümaveda, 250, 1607. Yajurveda, 33.81. Mahidhara considers the 
Sükta to be addressed to Aditya: the epithet pavakavarna he renders, with 
Sayana, agnisamanatejaska, radiant as Agni. 

६०५४. अयं सहस्रमृषिभिः सह॑स्कृतः समुद्रईव पप्रथे। 

सत्यः सो अस्य महिमा गुणे शवों यज्ञेषु विप्रराज्येँ। I 
$ 4. Invigorated by (the praises of) a thousand Rsis, this (Indra) 
I8 as vast as the ocean: the true mightiness and strength of him are 
glorified at sacrifices, and in the realm of the devout. 

Sdmaveda, 1608. Yajurveda. 33.83. 

६०५५. इन्द्रमिद्देवतातय इन्द्र प्रयत्य॑ध्वरे। 
1. zs E 20 सातयें 
इन्द्र समीके वनिनों हवामह इनदरं धन॑स्य सातयें॥५।। 

5. We invoke Indra for the worship of the gods, and when the 
Sacrifice is proceeding; adoring him, we call upon Indra at the 
Close of the rite; we invoke him for the acquirement of wealth. 


m At the Close of the Rite— Samike sampurne yage, OF it may mean 
angrdme, in war. Samaveda, 249, 1587. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————— SERE 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
362 Rgveda Sarahita 
६०५६. इन्द्रो महा रोद॑सी पप्रथच्छव इन्द्र सूर्यमरोचयत्‌। 
नर ह विश्वा भुव॑नानि येमिर॒ इन्द्रै सुवानास AA: I 


6. Indra, by the might of his strength, has spread out the 
heaven and earth: Indra has lighted up the sun: in Indra are all 
beings aggregated; the distilling drops of the Soma flow to Indra. 

Indra has lighted up the Sun— According to the Scholiast, Indra 


rescues the sun from the grasp of Svarbhanu, extricates him from eclipse. 
Samaveda, 1588. 


६०५७. अभि त्वां पूर्वपीतय इन्द्र स्तोमेंभिरायव॑:। 
समीचीनासं ऋभवः समंस्वरन्‌ रुद्रा गुणन्त पूर्व्यम्‌। 1७11 
7. Men glorify you, Jndra, with hymns that you may drink the 


first (of the gods): the associated Rbhus unite in your praise, the 
Rudras glorify the ancient (Indra). 


समस्वरन्‌-तामेद सम्यगस्तुवन्‌। स्वृ शकापतापमोः। 
६०५८. अस्येदिन्द्र ववृधे वृष्ण्यं शवो मदे सुतस्य विष्ण॑वि। 
अद्या तम॑स्य महिमान॑मायवोऽं ष्टुवन्ति पूर्वथा ।॥८ ।। 


| 8. Indra augments the energy and the strength of this (his 
e: worshipper), when the exhilaration of the Soma juice is: diffused 
| through his body; men celebrate in due order his might to-day as 
they did of old. 

Samaveda, 1574. Yajurveda, 33.97. Mahidhara agrees with Sayan@ 
referring the increase of vigour to the Yajamana, asyaiva yajamánasya 
viryam vardhayati. He is more explicit in applying the incitement Io 
Indra, Somapánena matta Indro yajamánasya balam vardhayatityarthah. 
The term visnavi he agrees in considering an epithet of made, sarira- 
vyápake, diffused through the body, or, he says, it may be an equivalent 
of yajria, at sacrifice. 


1 
६०५९. तत्त्वां यामि सुवीर्यं तद्‌ web पूर्वचित्तये। 
X 4 
येना यतिभ्यो भृग॑वे धने हिते येन प्रस्क॑ण्वमार्विथ।।९.॥ 

9. 1 solicit you, Indra, for such vigour and for such food 8$ 
may be hoped for in priority (to others), wherewith you Dn 
granted to Bhrgu the wealth taken from those who had desiste 
from sacrifices, wherewith you have protected Praskanva. " 

Taken from those Who had Desisted from Sacrifice Yen 
yatibhyo. dhane hite, yatibhyah is here explained as La a 
uparatebhyo 'yastribhyo janebhyo sakasad dhanam dhrtya, having 


the wealth from men not offering sacrifices, or ceasing to perform hol 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E" ` 


Mee? 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 3 363 
E (Cf. Wilson's edition vol.I. p. 411 st. 5,6]; or yati may have its usual 
sense, and the passage may imply wealth given to Bhrgu, for the benefit 
of the sages, the Avigirasas. 
I समुद्रमसुंजो महीरपस्तरटिन्द 1 1 1 
६०६०. येना समुद्रमसृजो महीरपस्तदिन्द्र वृष्णि ते शव:। 
` | ur PER ` 
सद्य: सो अस्य महिमा न सन्नशे यं क्षोणीरनुचक्रदे Holl 
10. Wherewith you have sent the great waters to the ocean: 
such as is your wish-fulfilling strength: that might of /ndra is not 
easily to be resisted which the earth obeys. 
Such as is Your Wish-Fulfilling Strength—Or, “‘That Your 
strength wherewith, etc., is wish-fulfilling."* 


६०६१. शग्धी नं इन्द्र यत्त्वां रयिं यार्मि सुवीर्यम्‌। 
शग्धि वाजाय प्रथमं सिषांसते शग्धि स्तोमाय पूर्व्य।॥११ | 

11. Grant us, Indra, the wealth accompanied by vigour, which 
I solicit from you; give (wealth) first of all to him desirous of 
gratifying you, presenting (sacrificial) food; give (wealth), You 
who are of old, to him who glorifies you. 

६०६२. शग्धी नो अस्य यद्धं पौरमार्विथ धियं इन्द्र सिषांसतः। 
शग्धि यथा रुशमं श्याव॑कं कृपमिन्द्र wa: स्वर्णरम्‌।॥१२।। 

12. Give to this our (worshipper) engaged in celebrating your 
sacred rites, Indra, (the wealth) whereby you have protected the 
son of Puru: grant to the man (asp ring) to heaven (the wealth 
wherewith) you have preserved, O Indra, Rusama, Syavaka, and 
Krpa. 

६०६३. कन्नव्यो अतसीनां तुरो गृणीत मर्त्य: । 
न ही न्व॑स्य महिमान॑मिन्द्रियं स्वर्गुणन्त आनशुः।।१३॥। 

13. What living mortal, the prompter of ever-rising (praises), 
may now glorify Indra? No one of those heretofore praising him 
have attained the greatness of the properties of Indra. 

} 1 ` ` SN 
६०६४. hg स्तुवन्तं ऋतयन्त देवत ऋषिः को विप्र॑ ओहते। 
i5 
कदा हवं मघवन्निन्द्र सुन्वतः Se स्तुवत आ ग॑मः।।१४।। 


14. Who, praising you as the deity, (ever) hoped to sacrifice to 
you? What saint, what sage conveys (his praises to you?) When, 
opulent Indra, have you come to the invocation of one pouring out 
libations, of one repeating (your) praise? 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 
| स्तोमांस ईरते 
६०६५. उदु त्ये मधुमत्तमा गिरः स्तोमास ईरते। 
SAN अहि क्षितोतयो गे वाजयन्तो र | 
सत्राजितो धनसा अक्षितोतयो T IMZA |॥१५॥। 

15. These most swect songs, these hymns of praise ascend (to 
you), like triumphant chariots laden with wealth, charged with 
unfailing protections, intended to procure food. 

Like Triumphant Chariots, ete.—Vdjayantah annam icchanto 


rathd iva, the epithets are somewhat inapplicable to a car, but they are all 
plur. masec., and can only agree with rathah. Sdmaveda, 251, 1362. 


1 l सूर्यीइव श्रमिद्धीतमानशु mcr d 
६०६६. कण्वाइव भृगवः d विश्वमिद्धीतमानशुः। 
इनदरं स्तोमेभिर्महयन्त आयवः प्रियमेधासो अस्वरन्‌।१६।। 

16. The Bhrgus, like the Kanvas, have verily attained to the 
all-pervading (/ndra), on whom they have meditated, as the sun 
(pervades the universe by his rays): mer of the Priyamedha race, 
worshipping Indra with praises glorify him. 

Sámaveda, 1363. 


६०६७. युक्ष्वा हि वृत्रहन्तम हरी इन्द्र परावत॑:। 
अर्वाचीनो मघवन्त्सोमपीतय उग्र ऋष्वेभिरा AE 1120 l 


17. Utter destroyer of Vrtra, harness your horses come down to 


us, fierce Maghavan, with your attendants from afar to drink the 
>> Soma. 


Sdmayeda, 301. 


With Yours Attendants—Literally, “beautiful ones’ (rsvaih), € 
the Maruts. 


६०६८. इमे हि तै कारवों वावशुर्धिया विप्रासो मेधसांतये। 
स त्वं नों मघवनिन्द्र गिर्वणो वेनो न श्रृणुधी हव॑म्‌।।१८।। 
18. These wise celebrators (of holy rites) repeatedly propitiate 
you with picus praise for the acceptance of the sacrifice: do you, 


opulent Indra, who are entitled to praise, hear our invocation like 
one who listens to what he desires. 


Like one Who listens to What he Desires—Veno na (from vera, 
kunti-karmd), yathà jatabhilasah purusah kamayitayyam aikágryena 
Synoti, as a man full of desire listens attentively to that which is agreeable. 

NI $ 
६०६९. निरिन्द्र बृहतीभ्यों qa धनुभ्यो अस्फुरः। 
निरर्बुदस्य 1222 
य॒ मृगयस्य मायिनो नि: पर्वतस्य गा आंजः।।१९।। 
19. You have extirpated Vrtra with your mighty weapons; Y or 


have been the destroyer of the deceptive Arbuda and Mrgaya; Y 9% 
have extricated the cattle from the mountain. 


po nes ee डि In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ASA 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 4 365 
E निरग्नयो रुरुचुर्निरु gat निः सोम॑ इन्द्रियो रस॑:। 
निरन्तरिक्षादधमो महामहिं कृषे तदिन्द्र पौँस्यम्‌।।२०।। 

20. When you had expelled the mighty Ahi from the 
firmament, then the fires blazed, the sun shone forth, the ambrosial 
Soma destined for Indra flowed out, and you, Indra, did manifest 
your manhood. 

६०७१. यं मे दुरिन्द्री मरुतः पार्कस्थामा PRA: | 
विश्वेषां त्मना शोभिष्ठमुपेव दिवि धा्वमानम्‌।।२१।। 

21. Such wealth as Indra and the Maruts have bestowed upon 
me, such has Pakasthaman, the son of Kuraydna, bestowed, of 
itself the most magnificent of all, like the quick-moving (sun) in 
the sky. 

६०७२. रोहिंतं मे पार्कस्थामा सुधुरं कक्ष्यप्राम्‌। अदांद्रायो विबोर्धनम्‌।२२॥ 

22. Pakasthaman has given me a tawny robust beast of 
burthen, the means of acquiring riches. 


६०७३. यस्मा अन्ये दश प्रति धुरं वह॑न्ति TEA: 
अस्तं वयो न तुग्रय॑म्‌।।२३॥। 
23. Whose burthen ten other bearers (of loads) (would be 


required to) convey, such as were the steeds that bore Bhujyu 
home. 


See translation, Rg. i. 116. 4. 
६०७४. आत्मा पितुस्तनूर्वास ओजोदा अभ्यरञ्जनम्‌। 
तुरीयमिद्रोहिंतस्य पाक॑स्थामानं भोजं दातार॑मब्रवम्‌॥२४॥। 
24. His father’s own son, the giver of dwellings, the sustainer 
of strength like (invigorating) unguents, I celebrate Pakasthdman, 


the destroyer (of foes), the despoiler (of enemies), the donor of the 
tawny (horse). 


[सूक्त- ४] 


[ऋषि- देवातिथि काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, १५-१८ इन्द्र तथा पूषा, १९-२१ 
FORI छन्द- १-२० प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती), २१ पुर 
उष्णिक्‌।] 

६०७५. यरद प्रागपागुदङ न्यंग्वा हूयसे g: 
सिमा पुरू नृषूतो अस्यानवेऽसि werd तुर्वशें1॥१॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


E Rgveda Samhita 


1. Inasmuch, Jndra, as you are invoked by the people in the 
east, in the west, in the north, in the south, so, excellent Indra, 
have you been incited by men on behalf of the son of Anu; so, 
overcomer of foes, (have you been called upon) on behalf of 
Turvasa. 

Samaveda, 279, 1231 

Inasmuch As—Sayana, instead of ‘‘inasmuch as" and ''so," has 
**although"" and *'still."" 


६०७६. यद्वा रुमे रुश॑मे श्यावंके कृप इन्द्र मादय॑से सचां। 
S 1 E = 1 is स्तोम॑वाहस d L [| 
कण्वासस्त्वा ब्रह्मभिः il इन्द्रा यच्छत्त्या गहि।।२।। 

2. Inasmuch, Indra, as you have been exhilarated in the society 
of Ruma, Rusama, Sydvaka, and Krpa, so the Kanvas, bearers of 
oblations, attract you with their praises, (therefore) come hither. 

Sdmaveda, 1232. 

६०७७. यथां गौरो अपा कृतं तृष्यन्नेत्यवेरिणम्‌। 
आपित्वे नं: प्रपित्वे तूयमा ग॑हि कण्वेषु सु सचा पिब॑।।३॥ 

3. As the thirsty Gaura hastens to the pool filled with water in 

the desert, so, (Indra, our affinity being acknowledged, come 


quickly, and drink freely with the Kanvas. 
= E 
Sama., 252. 


६०७८. मन्द॑न्तु त्वा मघवनरिन्द्रेन्दवो राधोदेयाय सुन्वते। 
आमुष्या सोम॑मपिबश्चमू सुतं जयेष्ठं तद्दधिषे well! 
4. Opulent Indra, may the Soma drops exhilarated you, that 
you may bestow wealth on the donor of the libation; for taking 1t 


by stealth (when ungiven), you have drunk the soma poured out 
into the ladle, and have thence sustained pre-eminent strength. 


६०७९. प्र चक्रे सहसा सहो बभञ्ज मन्युमोज॑सा। 
fad त इन्द्र पृतनायवो यहो नि वृक्षाईव येमिरे।५।। 


5. By his strength he has overpowered the strength (of his 
foes), he has crushed their wrath by his prowess: all hostile amie 


have been arrested like trees (immoveable through fear), mighty 
Indra, by you. 


. Al Hostile Armies—Rather, “‘those wishing to fight,” priandyaval 
६०८०. सहस्रेणेव सचते यवीयुधा यस्त आनळु॑स्तुतिम्‌। 
1 का mil ecd 
पुत्र परवर्गं कृणुते सुवीर्ये दाश्नोति नमउक्तिभिः 1६1 


1 ee  — — In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 


ly 
of 


ne 


his 
jes 


hty 


ah. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 4 Ad 


6. He who has made his praise attain to you associates himself. 
with a thousand gallant combatants; he who offers oblations with 
reverence begets a valiant son, the scatterer (of enemies). 


६०८१. मा भेम मा श्रमिष्मोग्रस्यं सख्ये तव। 
महत्ते वृष्णो अभिचक्ष्यं कृतं पश्येम तुर्वशं यदुम्‌। ७11 


7. (Secure) in the friendship of you who are terrible, let us not 
fear, let us not be harassed: great and glorious, showerer (of 
benefits), are your deeds, as we may behold them in the case of 
Turvasa, of Yadu. 

1 id ` SS को ` 
६०८२. सव्यामनु सि वावस वृषा न दाना अस्य रोषति। 
मध्वा सम्पृक्ताः सारघेणं धेनवस्तूयमेहि द्रवा faa ic 

8. The showerer (of benefits) with his left hip covers (the 
world), no tearer (of it) angers him: the delightful (Soma juices) 
are mixed with the sweet honey of the bee; come quickly hither, 
hasten, drink. 

No Tearer of it Angers him— Na dano asya rosati, dano 
avakhandayitd,' or it may mean data, donor of the oblation. 

Delightful—Dhenavah, literally, milch cows. Soma equally 
agreeable is the explanation of the commentator, dhenuvat pritijanakah 
Somah. This and the preceding occur in Sdmaveda, 1606. [Sayana says, 
"mixed with milk sweet as honey.”] 

With his left hip— Cf translation, Rg. iii.32.11, where, for "flame," 
we should rather read "hips'' as the Scholiast explains sphigi in both 
places by Kati. 


६०८३. ओश्वी रथी सुरूप इद्‌ गोमाँ इदिन्द्र ते सखां। 
श्वात्रभाजा वयसा सचते सदा चन्द्रो याति सभामुप।।९।। 


9. He who is your friend, Indra, is verily possessed of horses 
of cars, of cattle, and is of goodly from: he is ever supplied with 
food-comprising riches, and delighting all, he enters an assembly 

Saámaveda, 277 
. "With Food-Comprising Riches— Rather, “‘wealth-associated 
food," Svatrabhaja? vayasd. 

` सोमं T i 
६०८४. ऋश्यो न तृष्यत्रवपानमा गहि पिबा सोमं वशाँ अनु। 
fida ARE 
नेमेघ॑मानो मघवन्दिवेदिंव ifii दधिषे सह॑ः॥१०॥। 
क Rance, Sebati aa 
१. दो अवखण्डने। 
२. श्चात्रम्‌ इति धननाम। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


———————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 
10. Come like a thirsty deer to the watering place, drink at will 
of the Soma, whence, daily driving down the clouds, you 
sustainest, Maghavan, most vigorous strength. 


६०८५. अर्ध्वर्यो द्रावया त्वं सोममिन्द्रः पिपासति। 
उप॑ नूनं युंयुजे वृषणा हरी आ च॑ जगाम वृत्रहा॥११॥। 

11. Quickly, priest, pour forth the Soma, for Indra is thirsty; 
verily he has harnessed his vigorous steeds, the slayer of Vrtra has 
arrived. 

Sdma., 308. 

६०८६. स्वयं चित्स म॑न्यते दाशुरिर्जनो यत्रा सोम॑स्य तृम्पसिं। 
इदं ते अन्नं युज्यं समुक्षितं तस्येहि प्र war पिनं॥१२।। 
12. The man who is the donor (of the oblation), he with (the 


gift of whose) libation you are satisfied, possesses of himself 


understanding; this your appropriate food is ready; come, hasten, 
drink of it. 


६०८७. रथेष्ठायांध्वर्यवः सोममिन्द्राय सोतन। 
अधि ब्रध्नस्याद्रयो वि च॑क्षते सुन्वन्तो दाश्च॑ध्वरम्‌।।१३।। 


13. Pour out, priests, the Soma libation to Indra in his chariot: 


the stones, placed upon their bases, are beheld effusing the Soma 
for the sacrifice of the offerer. 


Placed upon their Bases— Adhi bradhnasya adrayah miilasyd 
upari, upon the root or base; this is said to be a broad stone slab placed 
upon a skin, and called upara. 


दाशाध्वरमू dasa-donar, adhvara sacrifice. 
| ० 
६०८८. उप sti वावाता वृष॑णा हरी vemm वक्षतः। 
अर्वा SE 5 D कमाल सवनेदुप 
TAS त्वा सप्तयोञ्ध्वरश्रियो वह॑न्तु a 
14. May his vigorous horses, repeatedly traversing the 


firmament, bring Indra to our rites; may your steeds, glorious 


through sacrifice, bring you indeed to the (daily) ceremonials. — ॥ 
Glorious through Sacrifice— According to Sayana, adhvarasriyai 
means sacrifice-haunting, adhvaram sevamanah. 


६०८९. प्र पूषर्ण वृणीमहे युज्याय पुरूवसुम्‌। 
स शंक्र शिक्ष पुरुहूत नो धिया तुजें राये विंमोचन।१५॥ 


15, We have recourse to the opulent Pusan for his alliance: do 
you, Sakra, the adored of many, the liberator (from iniquity)» 
enable us to acquire by our intelligence, wealth and victory- 


NN In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 3 


368 


E: 
AS 


do 
p 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 4 369 
Püsan—Pusan may be here a name of Indra. 
PER | शिशीहि भुरिजोरिव . 1 ` | विमोचन 
६०९०. सं नः हे भुरिजोरिव क्षुरं रास्व रायो विमोचन। 
` 1 सुवेर्दमुखियं 1 ० क. हिनोषि मर्त्यम्‌ 
त्वे तन्न: सुवेदमुखियं वसु यं त्वं हिनोषि मर्त्यम्‌।।१६॥। 

16. Sharpen us like a razor in the hands (of a barber (: grant us 
riches, liberator (form iniquity), the wealth of cattle easily 
obtained by us from you, such wealth as you bestow upon the 
(pious) mortal. 

Sam nah sisihi bhurijor iva ksuram, that is, nápitasya báhvor iva 
sthitam ksuram iva, like a razor placed as it were in the two arms of a 
barber. 

af 1 SR x1 
६०९१. वेमिं त्वा पुषत्रृञ्जसे वेमि स्तोतव आघृणे। 
TN 100 La ` सञ्जाय A 
न तस्य वेम्यरणं हि तद्वसो स्तुष पञ्जाय साम्न।।१७॥। 

17. I desire, Pusan, to propitiate you; I desire, illustrious deity, 
to glorify you: I desire not (to offer) ungracious praise to any 
other; (grant riches), bestower of wealth, to him who praises, 
culogizes, and glorifies you. 

Who Praises, eulogises and Glorifies you— Stuse pajraya sámne! , 
the second is explained prarjakaya stotranam, to the deliverer (collector?) 
of praises, or it may be a proper name, that of Kaksivat, Sdman is 
rendered stotram, the possessive vat being understood, stotravate, to a 
praiser: dhanam dehi is required to fill up the ellipse. 

x b. 1 कच्चिदाघृणे frei रेकणो [4 
६०९२. परा गावो यवसं कच्चिदाघृणे नित्यं रेकणो अमर्त्य! 
k zt शिवो L vem TES वाज॑सातये 
अस्माकं पूषन्नविता शिवो भव मंहिष्ठो 1१८ I1 

18. Illustrious (Piisan), my cattle go forth occasionally to 

pasture, may that wealth (of herds), immortal deity, be permanent; 


being my protector, Piisan, be the granter of felicity, be most 
bountifui in bestowing food. 


६०९३. स्थूरं राध॑ः शतार्थ कुरुङ्गस्य दिविष्टिषु। 
राजस्त्वेषस्य सुभगस्य रातिषु तुर्वशेष्वमन्महि 1123 1 
19. We acknowledge the substantial wealth (of the gift) of a 


hundred horses, the donation made to us amongst men at the holy 
solemnities of the illustrious and auspicious Raja Kurunga. 


६०९४. धीभिः सातानिं काण्वस्य॑ वाजिन: परियमेधैरभिद्युभिः। 
षष्टिं सहस्रानु निर्मजामजे निर्यूथानि गवामृषिं:॥२०॥ 

डब्या की 

$- यद्ठां पज्रासो अश्चिना हवन्ते (Ho १.११७.१०) 1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
370 Rgveda Samhita 
20. I, the Rsi (Devatithi), have received subsequently the 
complete donation: the sixty thousand herds of pure cattle merited 
by the devotions of the pious son of Kanva, and by the illustrious 
Priyamedhas. 


६०९५. वृक्षाश्रिन्मे अभिपित्वे अंरारणुः। 
गां भ॑जन्त मेहनाश्वं भजन्त मेहनां।।२१।। 


21. Upon the acceptance of this donation to me, the very trees 
have exclaimed: (See these Rsis) have acquired excellent cows 
excellent horses. 

Have Acquired Excellent cows, Excellent horses—Gam bhajanta 
mehand asvam  bhajanta mehand, the attributive is explained 
manhantyam, prasasyam, commendable or excellent; or another sense is 
given, derived from a fanciful etymology, me iha na,! of me here not, that 
is, says the Scholiast, all the people, with the trces at their head, say, a gift 
such as this that has now been given was never given to me; ihdsmin 


rdjani tad danam mama násin mama nasid iti vrksa-pramukhah sarve pi 
Janah procur ityarthah. 


[सूक्त-५] 
[क्रषि- ब्रह्मातिथि काण्व। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार, ३७ उत्तरार्द्ध ३९ "d 
k कशु। BE- गायत्री, ३७-३८ बृहती, ३९ अनुषटुप्‌।] 
६०९६. दूरादिहेव यत्सत्यरुणप्सुरशिश्चितत्‌। वि भानु विश्वधातनत्‌।॥१॥। 


1. When the shining dawn, advancing hither from afar, whitens 
(all things), she spreads the light on all sides. 


६०९७. TRE मनोयुजा रथेन पृथुपाज॑सा। सचेथे अश्विनोषसंम्‌॥२॥ 


2. And you, Asvins, of goodly aspect, accompany the dawn 
like leader with your mighty chariot harnessed at a thought. 


६०९८. युवाभ्यां वाजिनीवसू प्रति स्तोमां अदृक्षत। वाचं दूतो यथोहिषे॥३॥ 
3. By you, affluent in sacrifices, may our praises be severally 
accepted: I bear the words (of the worshipper) like a messenger (to 
you). 
1 
६०९९. पुरुप्रिया ण॑ ऊतये पुरुमन्द्रा पुरूवसू। स्तुषे कण्वांसो अश्विना (४॥ 
4. We, Kanvas, praise for our protection the manyloved, the 
many-delighting Asvins, abounding in wealth,— 


2. निरु० ४.४। 


Ri In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


SO 0 


fo 


Digitized 
Mandala 84५ by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 371 


2 मंहिंष्ठा वाजसातमेषय॑न्ता शुभस्पती | गन्तारा दाशुषो EAH il 


5, Most adorable bestowers of strength, distributors of food 


lords of opulence, repairers to the dwelling of the donor (of the 


oblation) 
६१०१. ता सुदेवाय दाशुष सुमेधामवितारिणीम्‌। घृतर्गव्यूतिमुक्षतम्‌। ६ ॥॥ 

6. Sprinkle well with water the pure unfailing pasturage (ot his 
cattle) for the devout donor (of the oblation) 


६१०२. आ नः स्तोममुप द्रवततरयं श्येनेभिराशुभि | यातमश्चभिरश्चिना [1911 


7. Come, Asvins. to our adoration, hastening quickly with your 
rapid falcon-like horses 


६१०३. येभिस्तिस्र: परावतो दिवो विश्वानि रोचना । त्रॉरक्तून्परिदीयंथ:!1८1। 


8. With which in three days and three nights you traverse irom 
afar all the brilliant (constellations) 


६१०४. उत नो गोमतीरिष उत सातीरहर्विदा। वि पथः सातय सितम्‌ 11९ || 


bestow) upon us food with cattle, or 


9. Bringers of the day 
against aggression) upon 


donations of wealth; and close the path ( 
our gains. 

And close The Path, ete.—-Vi patha 
asmdkam gavādīnām labhaya tadupayarnpan mdargan 
badhnitam yathánye na pravisanti, or the vi may reverse the sense of 
sitam and imply open, vémuncatam pradarsayatam margan, Open, OF 
show to us the paths of profit 


६१०५. आ नो गोमंन्तमश्चिना सुवीरं सुरथं रयिम्‌। वोळ्हमश्रांवतीरिष:!1१०। 


ng cattle male 


h sátaye sitam 15 explained 
visesena 


ह 10. Bring to us, Asvins, riches compris! 
offspring, chariots, horses, food. 


६१०६. वावृधाना शुंभस्पती दसा हिरण्यवर्तनी। पिब॑त॑ सोम्यं मधु।११॥ 


ll. Magnificent lords of good fortune handsome ASvins, 
riding in a golden chariot, drink the sweet Soma beverage 
Magnificent Lords of Good Fortune Or lords of bright 


or 
naments, of water.” 


६१०७. अस्मभ्यं वाजिनीवसू मघवद्धयञ्च सप्रथ:। छर्दिर्य॑ततमदांभ्यम्‌।१२॥ 


12. Affluent in sacrifices, grant to US who are opulent (in 


0 
blations) a spacious unassailable dwelling 


१०८. नि षु ब्रह्म जनानां याविष्टं तूयमा गतम्‌। मोष्व र न्या seem 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


————————— GERE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
372 Rgveda Samhita 


13. Do you who ever carefully protect the Brahman amongst 
men, come-quickly: tarry not with other (worshippers). 

Who ever Carefully Protect, etc.— Brahma jandndm ya avistam: 
one explanation of the first is Bráhmana-játim, the Bráhmana caste; 
another is given, parivrdham stotram havirlaksanam annam va, the great 
praise or sacrificial food. 


६१०९. अस्य पिंबतमश्चिना युवं मद॑स्य चारुण:। 
मध्वों रातस्यं धिष्ण्या।।१४।। 
14. Adorable Asvins, drink of this exhilarating, delightful, 
swect (Soma beverage) presented by us. 
६११०. अस्मे आ ded रयिं शतव॑न्तं सहस्तिण॑म्‌। पुरुक्षु विश्वर्धायसम्‌।।१५। 


15. Bring unto us riches by hundreds and by thousands, desired 
by many, sustaining all. 


A à "n b 55 one 

Desired by Many-— Literally, “10 be praised by many,” bahubhih; 
or it may mean ‘‘giving a home to many,” bahunivasam. Benfey explains 
it “viele speisend.”” 


६१११. पुरुत्रा चिद्धि वाँ नरा विह्वयंन्ते मनीषिर्ण:। वाघद्धिरश्चिना गतम्‌।॥१६। 


16. Leaders (of rites), wise men worship you in many places: 
come to us with your steeds. 


६११२. जनासो वृक्तबर्हिषो हविष्मन्तो अरङ्कृत॑ः। 
युवां ह॑वन्ते अश्विना।।१७।। 

17. Men bearing the clipped sacred grass, presenting oblations, 
and completely fulfilling (their functions), worship you, Asvin. 
६११३. अस्मार्कमद्य वामयं स्तोमो वाहिष्ठो अन्त॑मः। 

युवाभ्या भूत्वश्चिना।।१८।। 


18. May this our praise to-day be conveyed successfully ० 
you, Asvins, and be most nigh to you. 


६११४. यो ह॑ वां मधुनो दृतिराहितो रथचर्षणे। तत: पिबतमश्चिना।॥१९।। 


19. Drink, Asvins, from the skin (filled) with the sweet (Soma 
Juice) which is suspended in view of your car. 


६११५. तेन॑ नो वाजिनीवसू पश्चें तोकाय शं गर्वे। aed AART: IRo l 


20. Affluent in oblations, bring to us with that (chariot) 


abundant food, so that there may be prosperity in horses, progeny» 
and cattle. 


es eee — In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar | 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 5 T 


EN] 1 E सिन्यूरहर्विदा ` P 
a उत नो दिव्या इष उत । अप द्वारेव वर्षथः २१1 
21. Bringers of the day, you rain upon us by the (open) door 
(of the clouds) the waters of heaven, or (with them fill) the rivers. 
>> SED S ज॑हितो 1 I 
६११७. कदा वां तोग्र्यो विधत्समुद्रे जहितो नरा। 
agi रथो विभिष्पतात्‌।॥२२।। 

22. When did the son of Tugra, thrown into the ocean, glorify 
you, leaders (of rites)? then when your chariot and horses 
descended. 

६११८. युवं कण्वाय नासत्यापिरिप्ताय हर्म्ये। श्वदूतीर्दशस्यथ; 1193 1 

23. To Kanva when blinded (by the Asuras) in his dwelling, 
you rendered, Nasatvas, effectual aid. 

Kanva Blinded— See Rg. 1.118.7. 

Nasatyas— The Scholiast cites Yaska for an unusual etymology of 
this title of the Asvins, which is generally explained, those in whom there 
is no untruth; here one meaning is said to be, born of the nose, 
Násikaprabhavau.! 

भ्रर्नव्यसीशि ^ l S 
६११९. ताभिरा यांतमूतिभिर्नव्यसीभि: सुशस्तिभिः। यद्वां वृषण्वसू हुवे॥२४। 

24. Rich in showers, come with your newest and most 

excellent protections when I call upon you. 
चित्कण्वमाव॑तं प्रियमें | 
६१२०. यथां ki प्रियमेधमुपस्तुतम्‌। अत्रिं शिञ्जारमश्चिना॥।२५॥। 

25. In like manner as you protected Kanva, Priyamedha, 

Upastuta, and the praise-repeating Atri. 
Sus ae Me ^ सोभ॑रिम्‌, 1 
६१२१. यथोत कृत्व्य धनऽशु गोष्वगस्त्य॑म्‌। यथां वाजेषु 11२६ II 

26. And in like manner as (you protected) Anshu when wealth 
Was to be bestowed, and Agastya when his cattle (were to be 
recovered), and Sobhari when food (was to be supplied to him),— 

: A ` 1 
६१२२. एताव॑द्वां वृषण्वसू अतों वा भूयों अश्विना। गृणन्तः सुम्नमीमहे।२७। 

27. So praising you, Asvins, rich in showers, we solicity of you 
happiness as great or greater than that (which they obtained). 
६१२३. रथं हिरण्यवन्धुरं हिरण्याभीशुमश्चिना। 


आ हि स्थाथो दिविस्पृश॑म्‌॥२८।। 
28. Ascend, Asvins, your sky-touching chariot with a golden 
Seat and golden reins. 


Sere ee T 
१, निरु० ६.१३। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


F Rgveda Samhita 


६१२४. हिरण्ययीं वां रभिरीषा अक्षों हिरण्यय॑ः। 
उभा चक्रा FETA HRS 1 


29. Golden is its supporting shaft, golden the axle, golden both 
the wheels. 


६१२५. तेन॑ नो वाजिनीवसू परावत॑श्चिदा ग॑तम्‌। उपेमां सुष्टुतिं म्म।॥३०॥ 


30. Come to us, affluent in sacrifices, from afar, come to this 
mine adoration. 


६१२६. आ व॑हेथे पराकात्पूर्वीरश्रन्तांवश्विना। इषो दासीरमर्त्या । ३१ ।। 


31. Immortal Asvins, destroyers of the cities of the Dasas, you 
bring to us food from afar. 

Pürvir asnantau dásih, the first word is rendered purih, or bahvih, 
many. [In the latter sense, the clause is explained as ‘‘taking away much 
food from the enemy, ye bring it to us"".] 


६१२७. आ नो द्युम्मैरा श्रवोभिरा राया यातमश्चिना। RAA नास॑त्या।।३२॥ 


32. Come to us, Asvins, with food, with fame, with riches, 
Nasatvas, delighters of many. 


६१२८. एह वौ प्रुषितप्सवो वयों वहन्तु पर्णिन:। अच्छा स्वध्वरं जन॑म्‌।।३३। 


33. Let your sleek, winged, rapid (horses) bring you to the 
presence of the man offering holy sacrifice. 


६१२९. रथं वामनुंगायसं य इषा वर्तते सह। न चक्रमभि बाधते।३४।। 


34. No hostile force arrests that car of yours which is hymned 
(by the devout), and which is laden with food. 


६१३०. हिरण्ययेन रथेन दुवत्पांणिभिरश्चैः। धीज॑वना नासंत्या।।३५॥ 


35. Rapid as thought, Nasatyás, (come) with-your golden’ 
chariot drawn by quick-footed steeds. 


६१३१. युवं मृगं जांगृवांसं स्वदंथो वा वृषण्वसू। 
ता नं: पृङ्कमिषा रयिम्‌।।३६॥। 


36. Affluent in showers, taste the wakeful desirable Soma: 
combine for us riches with food. 


६१३२. ता मे अश्विना सनीनां विद्यातं नवानाम्‌। 
यथां चिच्चैद्यः कशुः शतमुष्ट्रानां दर्दत्सहखा दश गोनाम्‌।1३७।। 


ee ee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8. Sükta 6 375 
37. Become apprised, Asvins, of my recent gifts, how that 

Kasit, the son of Cedi, has presented me with a hundred camels 
and ten thousand cows. 

a तत 1 ` ` अर्महत L 
६१३३. यो मे हिरण्यसन्दूशो दश राज्ञो अमंहत। 

À || Li ¢ अशि भतो ^ जर्ना 1 

अधस्पदा इच्चद्यस्य कृष्टरयश्चमम्ना 3 :11३८।। 

38. The son of Cedi, who has given me for servants ten Rdjds, 
bright as gold, for all men are beneath his feet; all those around 
him wear cuirasses of leather. 

Give me for Servitude ten Rājās— Having taken these Aájás 
prisoners in battle, he gives them to me in servitude; yuddhe pardjitdn 
grhitvà tán ddsatvendsmai dattaván. 

Wear Cuirasses of Leather-— Carmamnah is explained Carma- 
| mayasya kavacader dharane krtabhydsah, practised in wearing armour of 
leader; or carma may mean carana sddhandni asvàdini vahanani, means 
of going, vehicles horses, and the like, i.e. exercised in their management 
In War. 

माकिरेना MANN es 1 
६१३४. माकिरेना पथा गाद्येनेमे यन्ति चेदर्यः। 
` नेत्सूरिरोहते PR Is E TEN 3d 1 
अन्यो हते भूरिदावत्तरो जन: 11३९ || 

39. No one proceeds by that path which the Cedis follow, no 
other proud man as a more liberal benefactor confers (favour on 
those who praise him). 


j ANUVAKA II 
[सूक्त-६] 
[ऋषि- वत्स काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, ४६-४८ तिरिन्दिर पार्शव्य। 
छन्द- गायत्री।] 
६१३५. महाँ इन्द्रो य ओज॑सा पर्जन्यो वृष्टिमाईव। स्तोमैर्वत्सस्यं वावृधे ।॥१ t 
1. Indra, who is great in might like Parjanya the distributor of 


rain, is magnified by the praises of Vatsa. 
2: Samaveda, 1307. Yajurveda, 7.40. 


Li 
६१३६. प्रजामृतस्य पिप्र॑तः प्र यद्धरन्त वहंय:। विप्रां ऋतस्य RIR 
2. When his steeds filling (the heavens) bear onwards the 
Progeny of the sacrifice, then the pious (magnify him) with the 
hymns of the rite. 
Sámaveda, 1309. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


376 Rgveda Samhita 


Steeds— The text has vahnayah interpreted vahakah asvah. 
The Progeny of the Sacrifice— i.e., Indra, [Cf infra, v.28]. 
: | स्तोमैर्यज्ञस्य सा ध॑नम्‌ 
६१३७. कण्वा इन्द्रं यदक्रत स्तोमेर्य | 
Spit धम्‌ E Om 
जानि gaa आयुधम्‌।।३।। 

3. When the Kanvas by their praises have made Indra the 
accomplisher of the sacrifice, they declare all weapons needless. 

They Declare all Weapons Needless— Jami bruvata dyudham. The 
first is explained prayojanarahitam; or dyudham may imply Indra, 
ayodhanasilam Indram, when jami, put for jàmim, will have its usual 


sense, **kinsman.""—they call Indra bearing weapons, brother, bhrdtaram 
bruvate. Sámaveda, 1308. 


६१३८. सम॑स्य मन्यवे विशो विश्वां नमन्त ped: समुद्रायेव सिन्ध॑व:11४॥ 


4. All people, (all) men bow down before his anger, as rivers 
(decline) towards the sea. 
Samaveda, 137. 


६१३९. ओजस्तद॑स्य तित्विष उभे यत्सम्व॑र्तयत्‌। इन्द्रश्वर्मैव रोदंसी।५॥ 


5. His might is manifest, for Indra folds and unfolds both 


heaven and earth, as (one spreads or rolls up) a skin. 
Samaveda, 182. 


| 
६१४०. वि चिद्वुत्रस्य दोध॑तो वज्रेण शतपर्वणा। शिरो बिभेद वृष्णिना॥॥६।| 
6. He has cloven with the powerful hundred-edged thunderbolt 
the head of the turbulent Vrtra. 
Sdmayeva, 1652. 


६१४१. इमा अभि प्र णोनुमो विपामग्रेषु धीतय॑:। अग्नेः शोचिर्न दिद्युर्त:।७। 


7. In front of one worshippers we repeatedly utter our praises, 
radiant as the flame of fire. 


६१४२. गुहां सतीरुप त्मना प्र यच्छोच॑न्त धीतयं:। 
'कण्वां ऋतस्य धार॑या।|८।। 


8. The praises that are offered in secret shine brightly when 
approaching (Indra) of their own will: the Kanvas (combine them) 


with the stream of the Soma. 
६१४३. प्र तमिन्द्र नशीमहि रयिं गोर्मन्तमश्चिनम्‌। प्र ब्रह्म पूर्वचित्तये।॥९ UI 


9. May we obiain, Indra, that wealth which comprises cattle, 
horses, and food. Before it be known to others. 


Before it be known to others—- Rather, **so as to know it, Èe.. 
it, before other,” anyebhyah pürvameva jiianaya. 


eee ee — In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar } 


gain 


2 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 6 T 


1 J 2 In 
६१४४. अहमिद्धि पितुष्परि मेधामृतस्य॑ जग्रभ। अहं सूर्य इवाजनि॥१०।॥॥ 

10. I have verily acquired the favour of the true protector 
(Indra): I have become (bright) as the sun. 

Samaveda, 152, 1500. 

६१४५. अहं प्रलेन मन्म॑ना गिर॑ः शुम्भामि कण्ववत्‌। 
येनेन्द्रः शुष्ममिद्दधे ।११॥। 

11. I grace my words with ancient praise, like Kanva; whereby 
Indra assuredly enjoys vigour. 

Samaveda, 1501; reading janmand for manmand]. 

६१४६. ये त्वामिन्द्र न तुष्ुु्ऋष॑यो ये च॑ qug: ममेद्वर्धस्व सृष्टुत: 11१२1 

12. Amid those who do not praise you, Indra, amid the Rsis 
Who do praise you, by my praise being glorified, do you increase. 

Sdmaveda, 1502. 

६१४७. यद॑स्य मन्युरध्वनीद्वि qd पर्वशो रुजन्‌। अपः संमुद्रमैरयत्‌॥१३।। 

13. When his wrath thundered, dividing Vrtra joint by joint, 
then he drove the waters to the ocean. 

धर्णसिं E | 
६१४८. नि शुष्णं इन्द्र धर्णसिं वज्रं जघन्थ दस्य॑वि। वृषा हयुग्र शृण्विषे।।१४। 

14. You have hurled your wielded thunderbolt upon the 
impious Susna; you are renowned, fierce Indra, as the showerer (of 
benefits). 

६१४९. न द्याव इन्द्रमोज॑सा नान्तरिक्षाणि वज्रिणम्‌। 
Lu 
न विव्यचन्त भूम॑यः।।१५॥ 

15 Neither the heavens, nor the realms of the firmament, nor 
the regions of the earth, equal the thunderer /ndra in strength. 

The Realms . . . . . The Regions—The text has only the actual 
names, but in the plural —the heavens, the firmaments, the earths, na 
dyávo nantariksani na bhümayah. See Rg. ii,27.8. 

Lu 
६१५०. यस्त इन्द्र महीरपः स्तभूयर्मान आशयत्‌। 
B || 
नि तं पद्यासु शिश्वथः1।१६ t 
b 16. You, Indra, have cast into the rushing streams him who lay 
0 Structing your copious waters. 


६१५१. य इमे रोद॑सी मही संमीची समजंग्रभीत्‌। तमोभिरिन्द्र d गुंह:।1१७11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


———— UN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


378 Rgveda Sainhità 
17. You have enveloped with darkness, /ndra, him who had 
seized upon these spacious aggregated (realms of) heaven and 
earth. 


६१५२. य इन्द्र यतयस्त्वा भृगवो ये च॑ तुष्ठुवु:। ममेटुग्र श्रुधी हव॑म्‌॥१८॥ 
18. Amidst those pious sages, amidst these Bhrgus, who have 


glorified you, hear also, fierce Jndra, my invocation. 
Those Pious Sages— Sayana adds, “‘the Arigirasas.” 
1 श्र्यो . | l i पिप्यषी 
६१५३. इमास्त इन्द्र पृ घृत ced आशिरम्‌। एनामृतस्य 1पप्युषा:।।१९॥ 
19. These, your spotted cows, the nourishers of the sacrifice, 
yields, /ndra, their butter, and this mixture (of milk and curds). 
Samaveda, 187. 


Mixture of Milk and Curds— Or rather, ‘‘milk to mix (with the 
Soma). ` 


६१५४. या इन्द्र प्रस्वस्त्वासा गर्भमर्चक्रिरन्‌। परि धर्मेच सूर्यम्‌॥२०॥ 

20. These prolifie cattle became pregnant, having taken into 
their mouths, Indra, (the products of your vigour) like the all- 
sustaining sun. 

Having taken into their Mouths—The text is Wa dsd garbham 
acakriran, **you with the mouth the embryo they made.” According 0 

= the Scholiast, the plants that sprang up after the destruction of Vitra and 
the consequent fall of rain, were the vigour (virya) of Indra, and by 
feeding upon them the cattle multiply. [Sayana quotes a legend from the 
kathaka, ch. 36, to the effect that after Indra killed Vrtra, his virility 
(virya) passed into the waters, plants and trees. /ndrasya vai vrtram 
Jaghnusa indriyam viryam apakrámat, tad idam sarvam anupravisad apa 
osadhir vanaspatin, ctc.) The application of the simile is not very 
obvious, pari dharmeva süryam, as the rays of the sun generate the 
sustaining water above the solar orb, as if it was the germ or embryo of all 
things, dharma dhárakam posakam udakam rasmayo garbhariipend 
bibhrati tadvat; or the comparison may be, yatha dha sürydli paritah 
sarvam jagad dhatte tadvat krtsnasya jagato dharakam Indrasya viryam™, 


as the sun supports the whole world, so is the vigour of Indra, the 
sustainer of the universe. 


६१५५. त्वामिच्छवसस्पते कर्ण्वा उक्थेन वावृधुः। त्वां सुतास इन्द॑वः॥९१॥ 


21. Lord of strength, the Kanvas verily invigorate you e» 
praise: the effused Soma juices (invigorate) you. 


६१५६. तदवेदिन्द्र प्रणीतिषूत प्रशस्तिरद्रिव:। यज्ञो वितन्तसाय्यः 11२२ ।। 


22. Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt, excellent praise P 
addressed to you) on account of your good guidance, as is 8 MOS 
extended sacrifice. 


॥ MD oe Ne o In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


V OM AS mut S 


— 0 "रु NxN 


€ co m 


E 


15 
st 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 6 4i 


६१५७. आ नं इन्द्र महीमिषं पुरं न दर्षि गोर्मतीम्‌। उत प्रजां सुवीर्यम्‌॥२३॥। 
23. Be willing to grant us abundant food with cattle: (to grant 
us) protection, progeny, and vigour. 


६१५८. उत त्यदाश्चश्व्यं यदिन्द्र नाहुषीष्वा। अग्रे विक्षु AARE I 


24. May that herd of swift horses, which formerly shone 
among the people of Nahusa, (be granted), Jndra, to us. 


६१५९. अभि व्रजं न त॑लिपे सूरं उपाकर्चक्षसम्‌। यदिन्द्र मृळयांसि नः।।२५। 
25. Sage Indra, you spread (the cattle) over the adjacent 
pastures when you are favourably inclined toward us. 


६१६०. यदङ्ग त॑विषीयस इन्द्र प्रराज॑सि क्षितीः। महाँ अपार ओज॑सा॥२६।। 
26. When you pottest forth your might, you reignest, Indra, 
over mankind: surpassing are you, and unlimited in strength. 


> I | हविष्मतीर्विश ¢ I Al I 1 
६१६१. तं त्वा हविष्मतीर्विश उप ब्रुवत ऊतये। उरुज्जयसमिन्दुभि: |।२७॥। 

27. The people offering oblations call upon you, the pervader 

of space, with libations for protection. 
गिरीणां ` A विप्रो 
६१६२. उपहुरे गिरीणां सङ्गथे च॑ नदीनांम्‌। धिया विप्रो अजयत।।२८:। 

28. The wise (/ndra) has been engendered by holy rites on the 
skirts of the mountains, at the confluence of rivers. 

The Wise Indra—The text has only Vipra, the sage. Sayana supplies 
Indra, Mahidhara (Yajurveda, 26.15) understands medhávi Somah. He 
also interprets dhiyd understanding: the Soma is produced by the thought 
that wise men will perform sacrifice by me. Sayana’s conclusion of the 
purport of the verse is, that men ought to sacrifice in those places where 
Indra is said to be manifested. See also Sámaveda, 143. 


६१६३. अत॑ः समुदमु्रत॑श्चिकित्वाँ अव॑ पश्यति। यतों विपान एज॑ति॥२९॥ 


29. From the lofty region in which pervading he abides, Indra 
the intelligent looks down upon the offered libation. 

The Libation—Samudram, the sea: the common explains it here 
Samundana-silam, the exuding or affluent, the Soma. [Another 
explanation is, that Indra, identified with the sun, looks down from the 
firmament on the ocean (or world), enlightening it by his rays.] 


६१६४. आदित्रलस्य रेत॑सो ज्योतिष्पश्यन्ति वासरम्‌। 
परो यदिध्यते दिवा 1130 ti 


30. Then (men) behold the daily light of the ancient shedder of 
Water, when he shines above the heaven. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


os Rgveda Samhita 


The daily light— Indra is identified with the sun. Vasaram, as an 
epithet of jyotis, is variously explained as nivásakam, clothing, envelo- 
ping; or nivasahetubhitam, the cause of abiding; or [as an adverbial 
accusative of time ''during the day," atyantasanyoge dvitiyá,] 
krtsnamahar udayaprabhity ástamanam yävat, the light that lasts 
throughout the day, from sunrise to sunset: retasah is also differently ex- 
plained as gantuh, the goer, or udakavatah, water-having. [Samaveda, 20. 


६१६५. कण्वांस इन्द्र ते मति fad वर्धन्ति पौस्यम्‌। 
उतो शंविष्ठ वृष्ण्यम्‌।।३१ N 


31. All the Kanvas, Indra, magnify your wisdom, your 
manhood, and, most mighty one, your strength. 


६१६६. इमां म॑ इन्द्र सुष्ट जुषस्व प्र सु माम॑व। उत प्र व॑र्धया मतिम्‌॥३२। 


32. Be propitiated, Indra, by this my praise; carefully protect 
me, and give increase to my understanding. 


जीवसें 
६१६७. उत ब्रह्मण्या वयं तुभ्यं प्रवृद्ध वज्जिवः। विप्रां अतक्ष्म जीवसे lil 
33. Wielder of the thunderbolt, magnified (by our praises), We 


your worshippers have offered to you these prayers for our 
existence. 


D. ६१६८. अभि कण्वां अनूषतापो न प्रवता य॒ती:। इन्द्रै वनन्वती ti Rl 


34. The Kanvas glorify Indra; like waters rushing down 4 
declivity, praise spontaneously seeks Indra. 


६१६९. इन्द्रमुक्थानि वावृधुः समुद्रमिव सिन्ध॑वः। अर्नुत्तमन्युमजरम्‌।३५।! 


35. Holy praises magnify Indra, the imperishable, the 
implacable, as rivers (swell) the ocean. 


The Implacable— Literally, **whose wrath is unsubdued by others, 
parair anabhibhuto krodho yasya. 


० 1 
६१७०. आ नों याहि परावतो हरिभ्यां हर्यताभ्याम्‌। इममिन्द्र सुतं PaRa 


36. Come to us from afar with your beloved horses, drink, 
Indra, this libation. 


६१७१. त्वामिदवृत्रहन्तम जनांसो वुक्तबर्हिष:। हव॑न्ते वाजसातये LRO 


९ 59 
37. Destroyer of Vrira, men strewing the clipped sacred 8788 
invoke you for the obtaining of food. 


६१७२. अनु त्वा रोदसी उभे चक्रं न वर्त्येतशम्‌। 
अनु सुवानास इन्द॑व:॥॥३८॥ 


EE डी In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar y 


ilg 


(ass 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 6 381 

38. Both heaven and earth follow you as the wheels (of a car 
follow) the horse; the streams of the Soma poured forth (by the 
priests) follow (you). 

c x] शर्यणार्वति विव॑स्वत्तो 

६१७३. मन्द॑स्वा सु स्वर्णर उतेन्द्र शर्यणाव॑ति। मत्स्वा विव॑स्वतो मती।।३९।। 

39. Rejoice, Indra, at the heaven-guiding sacrifice as 
Saryandvat; be exhilarated by the praise of the worshipper. 

The Heaven-Guiding— or, “to be offered by all the priests,” 
svarnare, sarvair rtvigbhir netavye. 1 

Saryapàvat ~ According to the Scholiast, Saryana is the country of 
Kuruksetra, and Saryandvat a lake in the neighbourhood. 
६१७४. वावृधान उप दयवि वृषां वञ्गयरोरवीत्‌। वृत्रहा सोमपार्तम: 11४० 11 

40. The vast wielder of the thunderbolt, the slayer of Vrtra, the 
deep quaffer of the Soma, the showerer, roars near at hand in the 
sky. 

ऋषिर्हि 1 पूर्वजा um ` cd ओज॑सा 1 [| चोष्कूयसे [| 

६१७५. ऋषिहि पूर्वजा अस्येक ईशान ओजसा। इन्द्र चोष्कूयसे वसुं।४१।। 

41. You are a Rsi, the first-born (of the gods), the chief, the 
ruler (over all) by your strength: you give repeatedly, Indra, 
wealth. 
६१७६. अस्मार्क त्वा सुताँ उप॑ वीतपृष्ठा अभि प्रय॑:। 

शतं We हर॑य:।॥४२॥। 
) 42. May your hundred sleck-backed horses bring you to our 
libations, to our (sacrificial) food. 
६१७७. इमां सु पूर्व्यां feni मधोर्घृतस्य॑ पिप्युर्षीम्‌। 
I 
कण्वा उक्थेन वावृधु:11४३॥। 

43. The Kanvas augment by praise this ancient rite intended 
(to obtain) an abundance of sweet water. 

६१७८, इन्द्रमिद्विमहीनां मेधें वृणीत मर्त्य:। इन्द सतिष्युरूतये।।४४।। 

44. The mortal (adorer) selects at the sacrifice Indra from 
among the mighty (gods): he who is desirous of wealth (worships) 
Indra for protection. 

cl 
६१७९. अर्वाञ्चं त्वा पुरुष्ठत प्रियमेधस्तुता. हरी। सोमपेयाय वक्षतः।।४५।। 
45. May your horses, praised by the pious priests, bring you, 


Ww 2 ; 
ho are the praised of many, down to drink the Soma. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


382 Rgveda Samhita 


६१८०. शतमहं तिरिन्दिरे wed पर्शावा ददे। राधाँसि याद्वानाम्‌।४६॥ 


46. I have accepted from Tirindira, the son of Parasu, 
hundreds and thousands of the treasures of men. 

Treasures of Man— Yadvanam, from yadu, a synonym of manusya, 
yadava eva yadvah, or it may be rendered yadukulajānām, of those bom 
of the race of Yadu, who have been despoiled by Tirindira. [Or it might 
mean, ‘‘] among men have accepted,” etc.] 


६१८१. fet शतान्यर्वतां सहसा दश गोर्नाम्‌। ददुष्पज्राय साम्नें 1४७ 
47. (These princes) have given to the chaunter Pajra three 
hundred horses, ten thousand cattle. 
To the Chaunter Pajra— Pajraya Sümne, io Süman, the reciter of 


praises; or to one the race of Pajra, as the Rsi Kaksivat, the repeater of 
hymns. [Cf supra, verse 6091 and note.] 


६१८२. उदानट्‌ ककुहो दिवमुद्ञ्चतुर्युजो ददत्‌। श्रव॑सा याह जन॑म्‌। ४८ ॥ 
48. The exalted (prince) has been raised by fame to heaven, for 


he has given camels laden with four (loads of gold), and Yadva 
people (as slaves.) 


[सूक्त-७] 
[ऋषि- पुनर्वत्स काण्व। देवता- मरुद्रण। छन्द- गायत्री।] 
६१८३. प्र यहखिष्ठुभमिष मरुतो विप्रो अक्षेरत्‌। वि पर्वतेषु राजथ॥।१॥ 


1. When the pious worshipper offers you, Maruts, food at the 
three diurnal rites, then you have sovereignty over the mountains. 

Food at the three Diurnal Rites— Tristubham isam: the epithet I5 
variously explained—chief at the three daily libations, trigu sayanesu 
prasasyam; praised by the three deities, tribhir devaih stutam OF 
accompained by hymns in the tristubh metre, ie., the Some offering at the 
mid-day libation. 


६१८४. यद्ध तविषीयवो यार्म शुभ्रा अचिध्वम्‌। नि पर्वता अहासत॥२॥ 


2. When, glorious and powerful (Maruts), you fit out you 
chariot, the mountains depart (from their places). 

Mountains depart from their Places— Nyahasala, from ha gatath 
they move out of your way through fear. 


1 
६१८५. उदीरयन्त वायुभिर्वाश्रासः पृश्चिमातर:। धुक्षन्त पिप्युषीमिषम ae 
3. The loud-sounding sons of Prsni drive with their bree” 
(the clouds), they milk forth nutritious sustenance. 


eS eee डी In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, E Ene E 


ह 


atat 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 7 383 


With Their Breezes— Vayubhih, with the winds or the spotted deer, 
the horses of the Maruts. 


६१८६. वप॑न्ति मरुतो मिहं प्र वेपयन्ति पर्वतान्‌। यद्यामं यान्ति वायुर्भि:11४11 


4. The Maruts scatter the rain, they shake the mountains, when 
they mount their chariot, with the winds. 

६१८७. नि यद्यामाय वो गिरिर्नि सिन्धवो विधर्मणे। महे शुष्माय ARI. 11 

5. He mountains are curbed, the rivers are restrained at your 
coming, for the upholding of your great strength. 

Rather, **when the mountains are curbed at your coming, (and) the 
rivers are stayed for the sustaining of your great strength," —the sense 
running on from v.4. 

For the Upholding of your great Strength— Vidharmane mahe 
susmáya niyemire, vidharandya mahate yusmadiydya baldya svayam eva 
niyamyante. The mountains and rivers are of their own accord restrained 
for sustaining your great strength; they abide together in one place 
through fear of our coming and strength, yusmad-yámád balácca bhitya 
ekatraikasthane niyatd vartante. 


६१८८. युष्माँ उ नक्तमूतयें युष्मान्दिवां हवामहे। युष्मात॑यत्य॑ध्वरे।।६।। 
6. We invoke you for protection by night, (we invoke) you by 
day, (we invoke) you when the sacrifice is in progress. 
६१८९. उदु त्ये अरुणप्स॑वश्चित्रा यामेभिरीरते। वाश्रा अधि ष्णुनां दिव:1७॥ 
7. Truly these purple-hued, wonderful, clamorous Maruts 
proceed with their chariots in the height above the sky. 
६१९०. सुजन्ति रश्मिमोज॑सा wai सूर्याय यात॑वे। ते भानुभिर्वि तंस्थिरे॥८ 11 
8. They, who by their might openra radiant path for the sun to 
travel, they pervade (the world) with lustre. 
६१९१. इमां में मरुतो गिरमिमं स्तोम॑मृभुक्षण:। इमं में वनता हव॑म्‌।।३।। 
9. Accept, Maruts, this may praise, (accept), mighty ones, this 
my adoration, (accept) this my invocation. 
६१९२. त्रीणि ससँसि पृश्रंयो दुदुहे वज्रिणे मधुं। उत्सं कर्वन्धमुद्रिणम्‌।॥१०।॥ 
10. The milch kine have filled for the thunderer three lakes of 
the sweet (beverage) from the dripping waterbearing cloud. 
The Milch Kine— Prsnayah, the cows, the mothers of the 
Maruts—marunmátr-bhütà gávah, or it may be put for the sons of Prsni, 


the Maru ts. [Another explanation is madhyamika vdcah, the hymns at the 
mid-day libation being recited in a middle tone. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


S. Rgveda Samhita 


Three Lakes— The libations of milk, etc., mixed with the Soma at 
the three diurnal rites; or the libations of Soma; filling the three vessels, 
the Dronakalasa, the Adhavaniya, and the Pūtabhrt. 

The Dripping Water-Bearing Cloud— Utsam kabandham udrinam 
is explained, utsravanasilam, exuding, dropping; udakam, water; udrinam 
udakavantam megham, having water, a cloud. [It probably means, ‘‘(they 
have milked) the dripping water from the cloud. °] 


६१९३. मरुतो यद्ध वो दिवः सुंम्नायन्तो हवामहे। 
आ तू न उप॑ गन्तन।।११।। 


11. When, Maruts, desirous of felicity, we invoke you from 
heaven, come unto us quickly. 


६१९४. यूयं हि ठा सुंदानवो रुद्रां ऋभुक्षणो दमें। उत प्रचेतसो TXIRRI 


12. Munificent, mighty Rudras, you in the sacrificial hall are 
wise (even) in the exhilaration (of the Soma). 


Mighty Rudras— Explained in the commentary is the sons of 
Rudra, rudraputrd\. 


६१९५. आ नों रयि मंदच्युतं पुरुक्षु विश्वधांयसम्‌। इयर्ता मरुतो दिवः:॥१३॥ 


13. Send us, Maruts, from heaven exhilarating, many lauded, 
all-sustaining riches. 


६१९६. अधीव यद्‌ गिरीणां याम॑ शुभ्रा अचिंध्वम्‌। 
सुवानैर्मन्दध्व इन्दुंभिः।।१४।। 


14. When, bright (Maruts), you harness your car over the 
mountains, then you exhilarate (yourselves) with the effusing 


Soma juice. 
६१९७. एतावतश्चिदेषां सुम्नं भिक्षेत मर्त्यः। अदाभ्यस्य eft: IRA l 

15. A man should solicit happiness of them with praises of 
such an uncorqueable (company). 


A Man Should, etc.— Rather, “a man should solicit by his praises 


à 7 e 
the happiness which belongs to them, to such an unconquerab 
(company).”” 


६१९८. ये द्रप्साईंव रोद॑सी धमन्त्यनु वृष्टिभि:। उत्स दुहन्तो ATTIRE | 


16. They who, like dropping showers, inflate heaven and € 
with rain, milking the inexhaustible cloud. 


६१९९. sd स्वानेभिरीरत उद्रथैरुदु वायुभि:। उत्स्तोमै: पृश्रिमातर:॥॥१७।। 


Sa  — In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


3 


| 


he 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 7 385 


17. The sons of Prsni rise up with shouts, with chariots, with 
winds, with praises. 


६२००. येनाव तुर्वशं यदुं येन कण्वं धनस्पृतम्‌। राये wed धीमहि।।१८॥ 


18. We meditate on that (generosity) whereby for (the sake of 
granting them) riches you have protected Turvasa and Yadu and 
the wealth-desiring Kanva. 


६२०१. इमा उ वः सुदानवो घृतं न पिप्युषीरिष:। 
वर्धान्काण्वस्य मन्मंभिः।।१९।। 
19. Munificent (Maruts), may these (sacrificial) viands, 


nutritious as butter, together with the praises of the descendant of 
Kanva, afford you augmentation. 


६२०२. क्क नूनं सुंदानवो मद॑था वृक्तबर्हिष:। ब्रह्मा को व॑ः सपर्यति।।२०॥ 


20. Munificent (Maruts), for whom the sacred grass has been 
trimmed, where now are you being exhilarated? What pious 
worshipper (detains you as he) adores you? 


६२०३. नहि ष्म यद्ध वः पुरा स्तोमेभिर्वृक्तबर्हिष:। 
शधीँ ऋतस्य जिन्वंथ।।२१।। 


21. (Maruts), for whom the sacred grass is trimmed, it cannot 
be (that you submit to be detained), for you have derived strength 
from the sacrifice, formerly (accompanied) by our praises. 

For Whom the Sacred Grass is Trimmed Vrkta-barhisah' may also 
mean *'those by whom the grass has been trimmed''—the priests; when 
the sense will be, “It cannot be, for, priests, by your praises preceding 
(those of others) you have propitiated the energies of the Maruts, the 
Objects of the sacrifice." 

For You have Derived Strength, etc.— Or, “For by the former 


Praises (of others) you have nourished strength connected with the 
sacrifice.” 


६२०४. समु त्ये महतीरप: सं क्षोणी समु सूर्यम्‌। सं व्र पर्वशो दधुः॥२२॥ 
22. They have concentrated the abundant waters, they have 
held together the heaven and earth, they have sustained the sun, 
they have divided (Vrtra) joint by joint with the thunderbolt. 
They have Divided Vrtra, etc.— Sayana renders it “169 have 
Planted the thunderbolt in (Vrtra’s) every limb." 
क im ul eaten ae 
१. बर्हिरिति यञ्ञनाम। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


386 Rgveda Samhits 


पर्वशो पर्वताँ | 
६२०५. वि वृत्रं पर्वशो ययुर्वि पर्वताँ अराजिन:। 
चक्राणा वृष्णि पौस्य॑म्‌।।२३॥। 
23. Independent of a ruler, they have divided Vrtra joint by 


joint: they have shattered the mountains, manifesting manly 
vigour. 


६२०६. अनु त्रितस्य युध्य॑तः शुष्म॑मावन्नुत क्रतुंम्‌। अन्विन्द्रं वृत्रतूर्ये।|२४॥ 
24. They have come to the aid of the warring Trita, 


invigorating his strength, and (animating) his acts; they have come 
to the aid of Indra, for the destruction of Vrtra. 


६२०७. विद्युद्धस्ता अभिद्य॑वः शिप्राः शीर्षन्हिरण्ययींः। 
शुभ्रा व्यज्ञत श्रिये॥२५।। 


25. The brilliant (Maruts), bearing the lightning in their hands, 


radiant above all, gloriously display their golden helmets on their 
heads. 


६२०८. उशना य्परावत उक्ष्णो रन्ध्रमयातन दयौर्न चंक्रदद्भिया॥२६। 


26. Glorified, (Maruts), by Usanas, when you approach from 
afar to the opening of the rainy (firmament), then (the dwellers on 
=>» earth), like those in heaven, are clamorous through fear. 7 
Glorified by Uśanas— Usaná, Uśanasā kāvyena rsind stiyamandh, 
or it may be for usanasah, i.e., desiring worshipper, stotrn kamayamandh. 
Are Clamorous Through Fear— The text has only dyaur ng 
cakradad bhiyd, like heaven, calls out with fear. 


६२०९. आ नो मखस्य॑ दावने$ श्वैहिरण्यपाणिभिः। देवांस sd गन्तन।1२७।। 


27. Come, gods, to (shew your) Jiberality at our sacrifice with 
your golden-footed steeds. 


६२१०. यदेषां पृष॑ती रथे प्रष्टिर्वहति रोहिंतः। यातत शुभ्रा fee: REM 


s 
28. When the spotted antelope or the swift tawny deer convey! 


: F z UEM e 
them in their chariot, then the brilliant (Maruts) depart, and 
rains have gone. 


h 2 : «x flow 
And The Rains have Gone— Sayana explains rinan as they 
in every direction,” sarvatra pravahanti. 


1 
६२११. सुषोमे शर्यणावत्यार्जीके पस्त्यावति। ययुर्निचंक्रया नर:11२९।। : 
29. The leaders of rites have proceeded with downwat 


टु iyd; 
chariot-wheels to the Rjika country, where lies the Saryand" 
abounding in dwellings, and where Soma is plentiful. 


wo CEQEEME In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar हँ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 7 387 
F कदा ग॑च्छाथ मरुत इत्था विप्रं हव॑मानम्‌। 
मार्डीकेभिर्नाध॑मानम्‌।।३०।। 


30. When, Maruts, will you repair With joy-bestowing riches 
to the sage thus adoring you, and soliciting (you for wealth)? 


६२१३. कद्ध नूनं कधप्रियो यदिनद्रमज॑हातन। को व॑ः सखित्व ओंहते॥३१।। 


31. When was it, Maruts, who are gratified by praise, that you 
really deserted Indra? Who is there that enjoys your friendship? 

The You Really Deserted Indra— That is, they never deserted him, 
but alone of the gods stood by him in his conflict with Vrtra—an obvious 
allegory. Indra dispersed the clouds with his allies, the winds. In the 
Aitareya Bráhmana 3.20, or Adhyáya 12, Khanda 8, Indra desired the 
gods to follow him, which they did; but when Vrtra breathed upon them, 
they all ran away except the Maruts. They remained, encouraging Indra, 
saying, prahara bhagavo jahi virayasva, Strike, lord, kill, show yourself a 
hero; as embodied in Sukta 96 of Mandala 8. 


६२१४. सहो षु णो वज्रहस्तैः कण्वांसो अग्नि मरद्धिः। 
स्तुषे हिर॑ण्यवाशीभिः।।३२॥। 
32. Do you of our race of Kanva praise Agni together with the 


Maruts, bearing the thunderbolt in their hands, and armed with 

golden lances. 

६२१५. ओ षु वृष्णः प्रय॑ज्यूना नव्य॑से सुविताय॑। ववृत्यां चित्रवाजान्‌॥३३॥ 
33. I bring to my presence, for the sake of most excellent 


prosperity, the showerers (of desires), the adorable (Maruts), the 
possessors of wonderful strength. 


६२१६. गिरयश्चित्रि जिहते पर्शानासो मर्न्यमाना:। पर्वताश्चित्रि येमिरे॥३४॥ 


34. The hills, oppressed and agitated by them, move (from 
their places); the mountains are restrained. 

The Mountains are Restrained— Girayo nijihate parvatáscin 
niyemire: the nijihate is explained nitardm gacchanti marudvegena 
sthándt pracyavante, by the violence of the winds they fall from place; for 
niyemire, we have only niyamyante. Parvatah may be interpreted 
meghah, the clouds, or large hills mahdntdh siloccayah in contrast to 
girayah, which are ksudrah siloccayah small heaps of rock. 


६२१७. आक्ष्णयावानो वहन्त्यन्तरिक्षेण पर्ततः। धातारः स्तुवते वर्य:॥1३५॥। 


35. (Their horses), quickly traversing (space), bear them 
travelling through the firmament, giving food to the worshipper. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
388 


६२१८. अगिनर्हि जानि पूर्व्यश्छन्दो न सूरों अर्चिषां। 
ते भानुभिर्वि त॑स्थिरे।३६।। 


36. Agni was born the first among the gods, like the brilliant 
sun in splendour: then they (the Maruts) stood round in their 
radiance. 

The Scholiast intimates that this verse refers to the ceremony called 
Agnimaruta, when Agni is first worshipped, then the Maruts. 

Brilliant— Chandas is explained as upacchandaniya, the adorable. 


[यूक्त-८] 
[ऋषि- सध्वंस काण्व। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- AJEN] 

६२१९. आ नो विश्वाभिरूतिभिरश्चिना गच्छतं युवम्‌। 

दस्रा हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी पिब॑तं सोम्यं मधुं।।१।। 

1. Come to us, Asvins, with all your protections: Dasras, riders 

in a golden chariot, drink the sweet Soma beverage. 
६२२०. आ नूनं यातमश्चिना रथेन सूर्यत्वचा। 

भुजी हिर॑ण्यपेशसा कवी गम्भीरचेतसा।।२।। 


2. Asvin, partakers of sacrificial food, decorated with golden 
ornaments, wise, and endowed with profound intellects, come 
verily in your chariot, invested with solar radiance. 


६२२१. आ ald नहुषस्पर्यान्तरिक्षात्‌ सुवृक्तिभि:। 
पिबांथो अश्विना मधु कण्वानां सवने सुतम्‌।।३।। 


3. Come from (the world of) man, come from the firmament, 
(attracted) by our pious praises; drink, Asvins, the sweet Soma 
offered at the sacrifice of the Kanvas. 


3l ति 
६२२२. आ नों यातं दिवस्पर्यान्तरिक्षादधप्रिया। 
1 सोम्यं 
पुत्र; कण्व॑स्य वामिह सुषावं सोम्यं मधुँ।॥४1। 
4. Come to us from above the heaven, you who love the 
(world) below, (come) from the firmament; the son of Kanva has 
here poured forth for you the sweet Soma libation. 


You Who love The World Below— Adhapriya is explained 35 
“pleased by the Soma in the world below, or please by praise.” 


६२२३. आ नों यातमुपपश्रुत्यश्चिना सोम॑पीतये। 
स्वाहा स्तोम॑स्य वर्धना प्र क॑वी धीतिभिर्नरा।।५।। 


Rgveda Samhita 


IM ees सया In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 8 T 


E Come, Asvins, to drink the Soma at our sacrifice, you who 

are praised (by him) and honoured) by his pious acts, benefactors 
of the worshipper, sages and leaders of rites. 

The second part of the stanza is rendered intelligible by the Scholiast 
only by taking great liberty with some of the terms; and, after all, the 
meaning is questionable, sváhà stomasya vardhand pra kavi dhitibhir 
nara. Svaha he renders as the voc. dual, svdhdkrtau svahakarena istau, 
worshipped with the form svaha; or svaha may mean vd or stuti, vdcd 
stutau. Stomasya he renders by stotuh. Or the whole may be in the 
vocative, and connected with the first part. [Sáyana prefers to connect 
dhitibhih with a supplied imperative, or with nara, i.e., karmabhir yastuh 
pravardhakau bhavatam, or buddhibhir átmiyaih karmabhir và sarvesám 
netárau.] 


६२२४. यच्चिद्धि वां पुर ऋष॑यो जुहरेञ्वसे नरा। 
आ यांतमश्चिना गंतमुपेमां सुष्टुतिं मम UR 11 
6. Leaders of rites, when the Rsis formerly invoked you for 
protection, you came; so now, Asvins, come at my devout praises. 
६२२५. दिवश्रिंद्रोचनादध्या नो गन्तं स्वर्विदा। 


धीभिर्वत्सप्रचेतसा स्तोमेभिर्हवनश्रुता | I 

7. Familiar with heaven, come to us from the sky, or form 
above the bright (firmament): favourably inclined to the 
worshipper, (come), induced by his pious acts; hearers of 
invocations (come, induced) by our praises. 

Familiar with Heaven— Svar-vidd, explained as dyulokasya 
lambhayitarau, causing to obtain heaven. 

Induced by his Pious Acts.— Sayana connects dhibhih with the 
Asvins, **come with your minds (favourable to us).”” 


६२२६. किमन्ये पर्यासतेऽस्मत्स्तोमेभिरशचिनां। 
पुत्र: कण्व॑स्य वामृषिंगीभिर्वत्सो अंवीवृधत्‌।८ ।। 


8. What others than ourselves adore the Asvins with praises? 
The Rsi Vatsa, the son of Kanva, has magnified you with hymns. 


६२२७. आ वां विप्र॑ इहावसे5हृत्स्तोमॅभिरश्चिना। 


अरिप्रा वृत्रहन्तमा ता नो भूतं TAJATI I 
9. The wise adorer invokes you hither with praises, Asvins, for 


Protection; sinless, utter destroyers of enemies, be to us the sources 
of felicity. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


390 


६२२८. आ यद्वां योष॑णा रथमतिषठद्वाजिनीवसू। 
विश्वान्यश्विना युवं प्र धीतान्य॑गच्छतम्‌।।१०।। 


10. Affluent in sacrifices, when the maiden (sūrya) mounted 
your chariot, then, Asvins, you obtained all your desires. 


६२२९. अत: सहस्रनिर्णिजा रथेना यांतमश्चिना। 
वत्सो वां मधुमद्वचोञशंसीत्काव्यः कविः।।११॥ 


11. From wheresoever (you may be) come, Asvins, with your 
thousandfold diversified chariot: the sage Vatsa, the son of Kavi, 
has addressed you with sweet words. 

The Son of Kavi— Vatsah kávyah : kavyah is explained kaveh 
putrah, which may mean the son of the sage, that is, of Kanva. See v.8. 


६२३०. पुरुमन्द्रा पुरूवसू मनोतरां रयीणाम्‌। 
स्तोमँ मे अश्चिनाविममभि वहीं अनूषाताम्‌।।१२।। 


12. Delighters of many, abounding in wealth, bestowers of 
riches, Asvins, sustainers of all, approve of this mine adoration 


६२३१. आ नो विश्वान्यश्चिना धत्तं राधांस्यहया। 
T कृतं न॑ ऋत्वियांवतो मा नों रीरधतं निदे।।१३।। 


13. Grant us, Asvins, all riches that may not bring us shame, 


make us the begetters of progeny in due season subject us not to 
reproach 


६२३२. यन्नांसत्या परावति यद्वा स्थो अध्यम्बरे। 
अत: सहस्रनिर्णिजा रथेना यातमश्चिना।।१४।। 


14. Whether, Nàsatyás, you be far off, or whether you be nigh, 
come from thence with your thousandfold diversified chariot 


६२३३. यो वाँ नासत्यावूर्षिगीर्भिर्वत्सो अवींवृधत्‌। 
तस्मैं सहस्रनिर्णिजमिर्ष धत्त घृतश्चुत॑म्‌।।१५।। 

न 15. Give, Nasatyas, food of many kinds dripping with butter to 
him, the Rsi Vatsa, who has magnified you both with hymns 
६२३४. प्रास्मा ऊर्ज घृतश्चुतमश्चिंना यच्छतं युवम्‌। 

1. zi "d 
यो वाँ सुम्नाय तुष्टवद्वसूयाद्वनुनस्पती॥१६।। 


; 16. Give, Asvins, invigorating food, dripping with butter, b 
him who praises you, the lords of liberality, to obtain happiness 
who desires affluence. 


Rgveda Samhita 


ne See In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


= 


[0 
S; 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 8 391 


६२३५. आ नों गन्तं रिशादसेमं स्तोमं पुरुभुजा। 
कृतं न॑ः सुश्रियो नरेमा दातमभिष्टये॥१७॥ 

17. Confounders of the malignant, partakers of many 
(oblations), come to this our adoration; render us prosperous 
leaders (of rites); give these (good things of earth) to our desires. 
६२३६. आ वां विश्वांभिरूतिभि: प्रियमेधा अहूषत। 

राज॑न्तावध्वराणामश्चिना यामहूतिषु॥१८॥ 
18. The Priyamedhas at the sacrifices to the gods invoke you, 


Asvins, who rule over religious rites, together with your 
protections. 

Who Rule Over Religious Rights— A Brahmana quoted for the 
Asvins being the ministrant priests, the Adhvaryus, of the gods, asvinau hi 
devanam adhvaryu.' 

R x E 1 1 
६२३७. आ नों गन्तं मयोभुवाश्चिना शम्भुवा युवम्‌। 
le iif Est 
यो di विपन्यू धीतिभिरगर्भिर्वत्सो अवीवृधत्‌।॥१९ | 

19. Come to us, Asvins, sources of happiness, sources of 
health; (come), adorable (Asvins), to that Vatsa, who has 
magnified you with sacrifices and with praises. 


६२३८. याभिः कण्वं मेधांतिथिं याभिर्वशं दशंव्रजम्‌। 
याभिर्गोशर्यमावतं ताभिर्नेञ्वतँ RNR 
20. Leaders (of rites), protect us With those protections with 
which you have protected Kanva and Medhatithi, Visa and 
Dasavraja; with which you have protected GoSsarya; à 
Go$arya— Or Sayu, whose barren cow the Asvins enabled to give 
milk. See Rg. i. 116. 22 
६२३९. याभिर्नरा त्रसदस्युमार्वतं कृत्व्ये धने। 
ताभिः akei अंश्विना प्राव॑तं वाज॑सातये।२१॥ 


21. (And) with which, leaders (of rites), you protected 
Trasadasyu when wealth was to be acquired: do you with the same 
graciously protect us, Asvizis, for the acquirement of food. 


६२४०. प्र वां स्तोर्माः सुवृक्तयो गिरों वर्धनत्वश्चिना। 
पुरुत्रा वृत्रहन्तमा ता नो भूतं पुुस्पृहा।९२॥। 


१. do Ho ३.२.२.१। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


392 Rgveda Samhita 


22. May (perfect) hymns and holy praises magnify you, 


Asvins: protectors of many, exterminators of foes, greatly are you 
desired of us. 


६२४१. त्रीणि पदान्यश्चिनोराविः सान्ति गुहां परः। 
कवी ऋतस्य परत्मभिररवाग्जीवेभ्यस्परिं॥२३॥। 
23. The three wheels (of the chariot) of the Asvins, which were 


invisible, have become manifest: do you two, who are cognizant of 
the past, (come) by the paths of truth to the presence of living 
beings. 

By The Paths of Truth— Patmabhir is explained by padair, which 
meant wheels in the former line; rtasya is variously explained as truth, 
water, or the sacrifice, which the paths or wheels are said to cause, 
satyasya udakasaya vajnasya và hetubhiitaih padaih. 


[सूक्त-९] 


[ऋषि- शशकर्ण काण्व! देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- अनुष्टुप्‌, १, ४, 
६, १४-१५ बृहती, २, 3, ३०, २१ गायत्री, ४ ककुप्‌, १० त्रिष्टुप्‌, ११ 
विराट्‌, १ जगती।] 


६२४२. आ नूनमश्चिना युवं वत्सस्यं गन्तमव॑से। 


प्रास्मै यच्छतमवृकं पृथु च्छर्दियुयुतं या अरातयः।।१।। 

1. Come, Asvins, without fail, for the protection of the 
worshipper; confer upon him a secure and spacious dwelling; drive 
away those who make no offerings. 

For the Protection of the Worshipper— Vatsasya avase, as if it 
were the name of the Rsi. See note on Sadhvansa in the preceding Skid, 


[Or perhaps Sàyana may mean that vatsa is here used for stotd Cf 
Mahidhara’s note, quoted in s. vi.] 


६२४३. यदन्तररक्षे यद्दिवि यत्पञ्च मानुंषाँ अनु। नृम्णं तद्ध्तमश्चिना॥२॥ 

2. Whatever wealth may be in the firmament, in heaven, 0 
among the five (classes) of men, bestow, Asvins, (upon us). 
६२४४. ये वां दंसांस्यश्चिना fasta: परिमामृशुः। 

एवेत्काण्वस्यं बोधतम्‌।।३।। 


3. Recognize, Asvins, (the devotions) of the son of Kanva, ES 


(you have recognized) those former sages who have repeatedly 
addressed pious works to you. 


3 


है ii In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar Y 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 9 393 
2 le | स्तोमेन 
६२४५. अयं वाँ घर्मो अश्विना स्तोमेन परि षिच्यते। 
धुमान्वानिनीवसू i e 1 
अयं सोमो म येन वृत्रं चिर्कतथः।।४।। 

4, This oblation is poured out, Asvin, to you with praise; this 
sweet-savoured Soma is offered to you, who are affluent with food, 
(animated) by which you meditate (the destruction of) the foe. 

This Oblation— Gharma has for one explanation pravargyam, a 
ceremony so called. It is also the name of a sacrificial vessel, as well as of 


the oblation it contains, gharmasya havisa ddhdrabhito mahdviro 
gharmah. See note on V.2.16.15. 


६२४६. यदप्सु यद्वनस्पतौ यदोष॑धीषु पुरुदंससा कृतम्‌। 
तेन॑ माविष्टमश्रिना 1 


5. Doers of many deeds, Asvins, preserve me with that (healing 
virtue) deposited (by you) in the waters, in the trees, in the herbs. 

Healing Virtue Deposited— The text has only kritam, made of 
done, the Scholiast supplies bhesajam, a medicament. [Sayana, however, 
takes krtam as a Vedic form for the second person dual of the third part, 
akárstam.] 


६२४७. यन्नासत्या भुरण्यथो यद्वा देव भिषज्यर्थः। 
= विन्थते E 1 
अयं वाँ वत्सो मतिभिर्न विन्धते ह॒विष्म॑न्तं हि गच्छथः।।६।। 

6. Although, Nasatyds, you cherish (all beings), though, 
divinities, you heal (all disease), yet this your adorer does not 
obtain you by praises (only), you repair to him who offers you 
oblations. 


Yet This your Adorer, etc.— The Scholiast explains this to mean 
that praise, to be efficacious, must be accompanied by offerings. 


६२४८. आ नूनमश्चिनोऋषिः स्तोम॑ चिकेत वामयां। 
आ सोमं मधुमत्तमं घर्मं सिञ्चादर्थर्वण [911 
7. When verily you arrive, Asvins, the Rst understands with 
excellent (comprehension) the praise (to be addressed to you); he 
will sprinkle the sweet-flavoured Soma and the gharma (oblation) 
on Atharvan fire. 
And the Gharma on the Atharvan Fire— Gharmam sincád 
atharvani, in the innoxious fire ahinsake agnau; or in the fire kindled by 


the Rsi Atharvan, as by a previous text, (vam atharvo niramanthata. Rg- 
vi.16.13. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


394 Rgveda Samhita 


६२४९. आ नूनं रघुवर्तनिं र्थं तिष्ठाथो अश्विना। 
आ वां स्तोमां इमे मम नभो न चुंच्यवीरत।।८।। 


8. Abscond at once, Asvins, your light-moving chariot; may 
these my praises bring you down radiant as the sun. 


६२५०. यदद्य वाँ नासत्योकथैरचुच्युवीमहिं। 
यद्व वाणीभिरश्चिनवेत्काण्वस्य॑ बोधतम्‌।।९।। 


9. Acknowledge, Násatyás, that we may bring you down to- 
day by the prayers and the praises of the son of Kanva. 

Sayana explains ti, **Regard (the prayers) of me the son of kánva, 
that we may bring you down by these prayers and praises.”” 


६२५१. यद्वा कक्षीवाँ उत यद्वयंश्च ऋषिर्यद्वां दीर्घत॑मा जुहाव॑। 
पृथी यद्व वैन्यः सादनेष्वेवेदतो अश्विना चेतयेथाम्‌।।१०।। 


10. Consider (my praises) in the same manner as (you have 
considered) when Kaksivat praised you, when the Rsi Vyasva, 


when Dirghatamas, or Prthin, the son of Vena, glorified you in the 
chambers of sacrifice. 


६२५२. यातं छर्दिष्पा उत नं: परस्पा भूतं जंगत्पा उत न॑स्तनूपा। 
वर्तिस्तोकाय तन॑याय यातम्‌।।११।। 


11. Come (to us as) guardians of our dwelling, become our 
defenders, be protectors of our dependants, cherishers of our 
persons: come to the dwelling for (the good of) our sons and 
grandsons. 

Protectors of Our Dependants— Jagatpá jangamasya pránijdtasy? 
asmadiyasya pálakau, protectors of our moveable living beings—either 
our dependants, or, as M. Langlois renders it, our animals. 

For the Good our Sons, Etc.— Or, ‘come to the dwellings of our 


sons and grandsons. ”? 
६२५३. यदिन्द्रेण सरथं याथो अंश्चिना यद्वा वायुना भव॑थः समोंकसा। 
यदांदित्येभिऋभुभिंः स॒जोष॑सा यद्वा विष्णोर्विक्रमणेषु तिष्ठेथः।1१२।। 
. 12. Although, Asvins, you should be riding in the same chariot 
with Indra, although you should be domiciled with Vayu, a 
you should be enjoying gratification along with the Adityas an 


Rbhus, although you be proceeding on the tracks of Visi 
(nevertheless come hither). 


I a MU NEM In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar न 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 9 35 
६२५४. यदद्याश्विनांवहं हुवेय वाज॑सातये। 
यत्पृत्सु तुर्वणे सहस्तच्छेष्ठमश्चिनोरव॑:11१३॥ 


13. Inasmuch as I invoke you, Asvins, to-day for success in 
war (therefore grant it), for the triumphant protection of the Asvins 
is the most excellent for the destruction (of enemies) in battle. 


६२५५. आ नूनं यांतमश्चिनेमा हव्यानि वां हिता। 
इमे सोमासो अधिं तुर्वशे यदाविमे कण्वेषु वामर्थ।॥१४। 
14. Come, Asvins, these libations are prepared for you: those 


libation which were presented you by Turvasa and Yadu, they are 
now offered to you by the Kanvas. 
६२५६. यन्नासत्या पराके अर्वाके अस्ति भेषजम्‌। 

तेन॑ नूनं विंमदायं प्रचेतसा छर्दिर्वत्सायं यच्छतम्‌।१५॥ 

15. The healing drug, Ndsatyds, that is afar off or nigh, 
Wherewith (you repaired) to (his) dwelling for the sake of Vimada, 
do you who are of surpassing wisdom now grant to Vatsa. 

Sayana explains it, “‘together with that (drug) do you, who are of 


Surpassing wisdom, now grant a dwelling to Vatsa, as (you did) to 
Vimada.”’ 


६२५७. अभुत्स्यु प्र देव्या साकं वाचाहमश्रिनों:। 
व्यावर्देव्या मतिं वि राति मत्यभ्यः।।१६।। 


16. I awake with the pious praise of the Asvins; scatter, 


goddess, (the darkness) at my enlogy: bestow wealth upon (us) 
Mortals. 


६२५८. प्र बोधयोषो अश्विना प्र देवि सूनृते महि। 


यज्ञहोतरानुषकप्र 
प्र नुषकप्र मदाय Fal बृहत्‌।॥१७।। 
, 17. Usas, truth-speaking mighty goddess, awake the Asvins: 
invoker of the adorable (deities, arouse them) successively; the 
Copious sacrificial food (is prepared) for their exhilaration. 
यदुषो 
NUS. यदुषो यासिं भानुना सं सूर्येण रोचसे। 
आ हायमश्चिनो रथों वर्तियाति नुपाय्यम्‌।।१८ ।। 
18. When, Usas, you move with your radiance, you shine 
ay with the sun; and this chariot of the Asvins proceeds to the 
Of sacrifice frequented by the leaders (of the rite). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


396 Rgveda Samhita 


६२६०. यदापीतासो अंशवो गावो न ge ऊर्धभिः। 
wg वाणीरनूषत प्र देवयन्तो SPAT IRS ।। 


19. When the yellow Soma plants milk forth (their juice) as 
cows from their udders, when the devout (priests) repeat the words 
of praise, then, O Asvins, preserve us. 


शव॑से | शर्मणे | 
६२६१. प्र दयुम्नाय प्र शवसे प्र नृषाह्याय । प्र दक्षाय प्रचेतसा।।२०॥ 
20. Endowed with great wisdom, preserve us for fame, for 
strength, for victory, for happiness, for prosperity. 
For Victory— Sayana takes nrishahyaya as an epithet of sarmane, 
“for happiness to be borne by men," nrbhih sodhavyáya sukháya. 


६२६२. epi धीभिरंश्चिना पितुर्योनां निषीद॑थः। यदा सुम्नेभिरुकथ्या ॥२१।। 


21. Although, Asvins, you be seated in the region of the 
paternal (heaven engaged in) holy rites, or, glorified by us, (abide 
there) with pleasures, (yet come hither). 

In the Region of the Paternal— In the original, pituh, which is 
explained as dyulokasya, or yajamdnasya. In the latter sense we must 
render the clause. “If you abode with your praises in the sacrificial hall of 


the worshipper, or with the pleasure-conferring (oblations), then come 
hither.” 


[सूक्त- १०] 
eRe प्रगाथ काण्व। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- १ बृहती, २ मध्य 
ज्योति (ATY. ३ अनुष्टुप्‌, ४ आस्तार पंक्ति, ५-६ प्रगाथ (विषमा g 
समा सतो बृहती)|] 
६२६३. यत्स्थो दीर्घप्रसडानि यद्वादो रोचने दिवः। 
यद्वां समुद्रे अध्याकृते गृहेऽत आ यांतमश्चिना I 


1. Whether, Asvins, you are at present where the spacious halls 
of sacrifice (abound), whether you are in younder bright sphere © 


. ` e 
heaven, or whether you are in a dwelling constructed above th 
firmament, come hither. 


६२६४. "gl Fa THA संमिमिक्षथुरेवेत्काण्वस्य बोधतम्‌। 
बृहस्पति विश्वान्देवाँ अहं हुव इन्द्राविष्णू अश्विनांवाशुहेष॑सा Ril 


ik 1106 
2. In like manner, as you have prepared, Asvins, the aai 
for Manu, consent (to prepare it) for the son of Kanva; for J invo 


Ge a डी In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 3 


3 
zide 


h is 
must 
ll of 
ome 


halls 
re of 
e the 


TT 


rifice 
1५ oke 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 10 T 


Brhaspati, the universal gods, Indra and Visnu, and the Asvins, 
with rapid steeds. 


६२६५. त्या न्वशश्चिनां हुवे सुदंसंसा गृभे कृता। 
ययोरस्ति प्र ण॑ः सख्यं देवेष्वध्याप्यम्‌।॥३ 11 
3. I invoke those Asvins, who are famed for great deeds, 


induced (to come hither) for acceptance (of our oblations), of 
whom among the gods the friendship is especially to be obtained. 
६२६६. ययोरधि प्र यज्ञा अंसूरे सन्ति Wo 
ese 1 E E TS I सोम्यं 1 
ता यज्ञस्याध्वरस्य प्रचेतसा स्वधाभिर्या पिबतः सोम्यं मधु। 1४11 

4. Upon whom (all) sacrifices are dependent, of whom there 
are worshippers in a place where is no worship, those two familiar 
with undecaying sacrifices (I invoke) with praises, that you may 
drink the sweet juice of the Soma. 

Upon whom all Sacrifices are Dependent— Yayor adhi pra vajnah, 
asvinor upari sarve yagah prabhavanti, alluding, the commentator says, 
to a legend in which it is said that the Asvins replaced the head of the 
decapitated yajña.! 

There are worshippers in a place where there is no Worship— 
Asüre santi sürayah, stotr-rahite dese yayoh stotdrah santi is the 
explanation of the Scholiast. 


६२६७. यदद्याश्चिनावपाग्यत्प्राकस्थो वाजिनीवसू। 
यद्‌ हुह्यव्यन॑वि तुर्वशे यदौं हुवे वामथ मा गंतम्‌।५॥ 
5. Whether, Asvins, you abide to-day in the west; whether, 
opulent in food, you abide in the east; whether you sojourn with 


Druhyu, Anu, Turvasu, or Yadu, I invoke you; therefore come to 
me. 


६२६८. यदन्तरिक्षे पर्तथः पुरुभुजा यद्वेमे रोदसी अनुं। 
यद्वां स्वधाभिरधितिष्ठथो रथमत आ यातमश्चिना॥६॥ 


6. Protectors of many, whether you traverse the firmament, or 
Pass along earth and heaven; whether you ascend your chariot with 
(all) your splendours; come from thence, Asvins, hither. 


ne ea Erde पया 
R. Tait. Samhita, vi. 4.9.5. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


398 Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त- ११] 
[ऋषि- वत्स काण्व। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- गायत्री, १ (प्रतिष्ठा) गायत्री, २ 
वर्धमाना, १० त्रिष्टुप्‌।] 
६२६९. त्वम॑ग्ने व्रतपा अंसि देव आ मर्त्येष्वा। त्वं य्ेष्वीडय:।।१ ।। 


1. Agni, who are a god among mortals, (and among gods), you 
are the guardian of religious obligations: you are to be hymned at 
sacrifices. 

Among Mortals and Among Gods— The text has only mortals, and 
the Scholiast asserts that among gods in thereby implied. [Sayana rather 


says, “4877, you, the divine, are among mortals (and among gods) the 
guardian of religious rites. ] 


६२७०. त्वम॑सि प्रशस्यो विदथेषु सहन्त्य। अग्ने रथीर॑ध्वराणांम्‌॥२॥ 


2. Victor (over enemies), you are to be hymned at solemn rites: 
you, Agni, are the charioteer of sacrifices. 


६२७१. स त्वमस्मद द्विषों युयोधि जांतवेदः। अदेंवीरग्ने अरातीः।।३॥ 


3. Do you, Jatavedas, drive away from us those who hate us; 
(drive away), Agni, the impious hostile hosts. 


६२७२. अन्ति चित्सन्तमह यज्ञ मर्तस्य रिपोः। नोप॑ वेषि जातवेदः।४।। 


4. You desire not, Játavedas, the sacrifice of the man who Is 
our adversary, although placed before you. 


६२७३. मर्ता अमर्त्यस्य ते भूरि नाम मनामहे। वित्रासो जातवेंदस:।।५॥ 


5. Prudent mortals, we offer abundant homage to you, who are 
immortal and all-knowing. 


६२७४. विप्रं विप्रासोऽवसे देवं मर्तास ऊतयें। अग्नि गीर्भिहँवामहे ।॥६। 


6. Prudent mortals, we invoke the sage deity Agni with hymns 
to propitiate him for our protection. 


६२७५. आ ते वत्सो मनो यमत्परमाच्चित्सधस्थांत्‌। 
अग्ने त्वांकांमया गिरा।।७॥। 


7. Vatsa, by the praise that seeks to propitiate you: Agni, would 
draw your thought from the supreme assembly (of the gods). 

Atsa— Mahidhara interprets Vatsa by yajamana, the sacrificet deat 
to Agni, as a calf, or child; vatsa-samah priyah, Yajurveda, 12.115. ^ 

Would Draw their Thought— Mano yamat, mana ayamayati; ee íi 
Mahidhara more explicitly interprets it, mana  ahrtya grind" 


pS In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


E 


re 


ns 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 12 w 


manonigraham karoti. For tvàmkamayá gird, Benfey's text, Samaveda, 8: 
1166 reads tvam kamaye gird, I desire you with my hymn. 


६२७६. पुरुत्रा हि सदृङ्ङसि विशो विश्वा अनु प्रभुः। 
समत्सु त्वा हवामहे।|८।। 


8. You look upon many places, you are lord over all people: 
we call upon you in battles. 

You are Lord over all People— This and the next line are found in 
Samaveda, 1167-68. In the first stanza the printed Sáman reads disah for 
visah—countries for people. 

E 1५ E ES ang 1 
६२७७. समत्स्वाग्नमवसे वाजयन्ता हवामह। वाजेषु चित्ररांधसम्‌। IS 

9. Desiring strength, we call upon Agni for protection in 
battles; upon him who is the granter of wonderful riches (won) in 
conflicts. 


Wonderful Riches won in Conflicts— Benfey renders it "den 
schatzereichen in dem Kampf." 


६२७८. wel हि कमीड्यो अध्वरेषुं सनाच्च होता नव्य॑श्च सत्सि। 
स्वां चाग्ने wed पिप्रयस्वास्म्भ्यं च सौभगमा रयजस्व।।१०॥ 
10. You, the ancient, are to be hymned at sacrifices: from 
eternity the invoker of the gods, you sit (at the solemnity) entitled 


to laudation: cherish, Agni, your own person, and grant us 
prosperity. 
[सूक्त-१२] 
[ऋषि- पर्वत काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- उष्णिक्‌।] 
चेत॑ति 
६२७९. य इन्द्र सोमपातमो मद॑ः शविष्ठ चेत॑ति। 
येना हंसि न्यश्त्रिणं तमींमहे।।१॥। 

1. We solicit, most powerful Indra, who are the deep quaffer 
of the Soma, that exhilaration which contemplates (heroic deeds), 
whereby you slay the devourer (of men). 

We Solicit— tam imahe: the verb is the burthen of this and the two 
next verses, and so throughout the Sukta each tricha terminates with the 
same word. [Or it may mean, “We solicit you as possessing that 
exhilaration,” tádrn-madopetam tvām yācāmahe.] à 

That Exhilaration— Somapātamah madah: the first by its 


collocation, should be an epithet, though rather an incompatible one, of 
m ond but the Scholiast refers to fvam, you, understood. Sāmaveda, 
394. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


400 Rgveda Samhita 


६२८०. येना दशग्वमध्रिगुं वेपयन्तं स्वर्णरम्‌। येना समुद्रमाविथा TRIR 


2. We solicit that (exhilaration) whereby you have defended 
Adhrigu, the accomplisher of the ten (months' rite), and the 
trembling leader of heaven, (the sun), and the ocean. 

Adhrigu— See Vol. I, mantra 1235. 

The Trembling Leader of Heaven— Sayana explains it **darkness- 
dispelling, all-leading,'" tamárisi varjayantam sarvasya netáram stiryam. 


६२८१. येन सिन्धुं महीरपो रथाँ इव प्रचोदयं:। 
पन्थामृतस्य यात॑वे तमीमहे।।३।। 
3. We solicit that (exhilaration) whereby you urge on the 


mighty waters to the sea, in like manner as (charioteers drive) their 
cars (to the goal), and (whereby) to travel the paths of sacrifice. 


६२८२. इमं स्तोम॑म॒भिष्ट॑ये घृतं न पूतमंद्रिवः। 
येना नु सद्य ओज॑सा ववक्षिंथ।।४।। 
4, Accepts, thunderer, this praise (offered) for the attainment 


of our desires, like consecrated butter; (induced) by which, you, 
promptly bear us by your might (to our objects). 


i ६२८३. इमं जुंषस्व गिर्वणः समुद्रईव पिन्वते। 
इन्द्र विश्वाभिरूतिभिर्ववक्षिथ iy 11 

5. Be pleased, you who are gratified by praise, with this our 
eulogy swelling like the oceans; (induced by which), Indra, you 
bear us with all your protections (to our objects). 

६२८४. यो नों देव: प॑रावत॑ः सखित्वनाय मामहे। 
दिवो न वृष्टि प्रथयन्ववक्षिथ।॥६।। 

6. (1 glorify Indra) the deity, who, coming from afar, has given 
us, through friendship, (riches); heaping (them upon us) like rain 
from heaven, you have borne us (to our objects). 

६२८५. TARE केतव॑ उत वज्रो गभस्त्यो:। 
यत्सूर्यो न रोदसी अवर्धयत्‌।1७॥। i 
7. The banners of Indra, the thunderbolt (he bears) 10 ne 


hands, have brought (us benefits), when, like the sun, he has 
expanded heaven and earth. 


d 
He has Expanded Heaven and the Earth— When he has refreshe 
them both with rain, according to the comment. 


Mun o o o l In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar P 


Š 


nt 


‘ou 


jen 
ain 


his 
has 


hed 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 12 401 


६२८६. यदि प्रवृद्ध सत्पते सहस्रं महिषाँ अर्घ:। 
आदित्त॑ इन्द्रियं महि प्र वावृधे।॥८ 1 
8. Great Indra, protector of the good, when you have slain 


thousands of mighty (foes), then your vast and special energy has 
been augmented. 


६२८७. इन्द्र: सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिर्न्यर्शसानमोंषति। 
afda सासहिः प्र वावृधे।।९।॥ 


9. Indra, with the rays of the sun, utterly consumes his 
adversary: like fire (burning) the forests, he spreads victorious. 
21] ऋत्वियांवती धीतिरेति EU el ^ 
६२८८. इयं d ऋत्वियावती धीतिरेति नवीयसी। 
सपर्यन्ती मिर्मीत 
पर्यन्ती पुरुप्रिया मिमीत इत्‌।।१०।। 

10. This new praise, suited to the season, approaches, (Indra), 
to you; offering adoration and greatly delighting (you), it verily 
proclaims the measure (of your merits). 

Suited to the Season— Or, **connected with sacrifice,” rtviydvati, 

It Verily Proclaims the Measure— Mimita it, is the burthen of this 
and the two following verses. It is literally, **verily measures’’—it is not 
said what. Sayana explains it, Indra-gatan gundn paricchinatti, Yt, the 
praise, discriminates the good properties attached to Indra; máhátmyam 
prakhyápayati, it makes known his greatness. 

1 
६२८९. गर्भौ यज्ञस्य॑ देवयुः क्रतुं पुनीत आनुषक्‌। 
स्तोमैरिन्द्रस्य LU मिर्मीत 
मै वावृधे मिमीत इत्‌।।११ 

11. The devout praiser of the adorable (Indra) purifies in due 
succession the offering (of the Soma); with sacred hymns he 
magnifies (the might) of Indra; he verily proclaims the measure 
(of his merits). 


६२९०. सनिर्मित्रस्य॑ पप्रथ इन्द्र: सोम॑स्य पीतयें। 
प्राची वाशीव सुन्वते मिर्मीत इत्‌1 १२ 
12. Indra, the benefactor of his friend (the worshipper), has 


enlarged himself to drink the Soma, in like manner as the pious 


Praise dilates and proclaims the measure (of his merits). 

: Proclaims the Measure of his Merits— Literally, like the dilating 
Praise of the worshipper; it proclaims, etc. Pract is explained prakarsena 
Stutyam gunaganam prápnuvati. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Rgveda Sarbhita 


402 


६२९१. यं विप्रां उकथर्वाहसो5भिप्रमन्दुरायव॑:। 
घृतं न पिप्य आसन्यृतस्य यत्‌।।१३।। 


13. I pour the oblation of the sacrifice, like clarified butter, 
into the mouth (of that Indra), whom wise men, addressing with 
prayers, delight. 


६२९२. उत स्वराजे अदितिः स्तोममिन्द्राय जीजनत्‌। 
'पुरुप्रशस्तमूतय॑ ऋतस्य यत्‌।।१४। 


14. The excellent praise which Aditi brought forth for the 


imperial Indra, for our protection, is that which was (the product) 
of the sacrifice. 


Which was the Product of the Sacrifice— Or rather, ‘‘belongs to 
the sacrifice," yajfiasya sambandhi bhavati. 
६२९३. अभि dea ऊतये5नूंषत प्रशंस्तये। 
न देव विव्र॑ता हरी ऋतस्य LINRA I 
15. The bearers of the oblation glorify (Indra) for his excellent 


protection: now, divinity, let your many actioned horses (bear you 
to the offering) of the sacrifice. 


For his Excellent Protection— Or, ‘‘for the sake of his protection 
and praise.” 
६२९४. यत्सोममिन्द्र विष्ण॑वि यद्वा घ त्रित आप्त्ये। 
यहां मरुत्सु मन्द॑से समिन्दुभिः।।१६।। 

16. Inasmuch as you are exhilarated by the Soma shared with 
isnu, or when (offered) by Trita, the son of the waters, or along 
with the Maruts, so now (be gratified) by (our) libation. 

Sámaveda, 384. 
६२९५. Fal शक्र परावति समुद्रे अधि मन्द॑से। 
अस्माकमित्सुते रणा समिन्दुभिः।।१७।। 
17. Inashmuch, Sakra, as you are exhilarated (by the Soma) on 


the far-distant ocean, so be you gratified now, when the Soma E 
effused by our libations. 


On the Far-Distant Ocean— Sayana takes samudra as meaning the 
Soma, i.e., “If you are exhilarated by some distant (offering of) Soma. 


६२९६. "EH सुन्वतो वृधो यज॑मानस्य सत्पते। 
उकथे वा यस्य रण्यंसि समिन्द॑भिः।१८ 


Rl eee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ] 


CCC OOOO र??? क 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
hità Mandala 8, Sükta 12 a 
2 Inasmuch, protector of the virtuous, as you are the 
benefactor of the worshipper offering you libations, or by whose 
prayers you are propitiated, so now (be gratified) by our libations. 


p ६२९७. wed disdu इन्द्रमिन्द्रै गृणीषर्णि। 
vith Ws == = 
अधां यज्ञाय तुर्वणे व्यांनशु:1॥१९॥ 
19. I glorify the divine /ndra wherever worshipped for your 


protection: (my praises) have reached him for the prompt 


(fulfilment) of the (objects of the) sacrifice. 
the Divine Indra Wherever Worshipped— Devam devam Indram 
Indram. This, it is said, implies Jndra as being present at the same time at 


ict 
) different ceremonies, or in various forms, as in a former passage, Rg. 
ato vi.47.18. [The verse is addressed to the priests and the yajamdna.] 
ue j >; adi ` 1 
६२९८. यज्ञेभिर्यज्ञवाहसं सोमेभिः सोमपातमम्‌। 
होरत्राभिरिन्द्रै वावृधुर्व्यानशु: | Re II 
20. (His worshippers) have magnified with many sacrifices 
eat him to whom the sacrifice is offered, and with many libations the 
you eager quaffer of the Soma: (they have magnified) Indra with 


hymns, (their praises) have attained him. 
tion ६२९९. महीरस्य प्रणीतयः पूर्वीरुत प्रश॑स्तयः। 
विश्वा वसूनि दाशुषे व्यांनशुः॥२१॥ 
21. Infinite are his bounties, many are his glories: ample 
treasures have reached the donor (of oblations). 


ith ६३००. इन्दं वत्राय हन्त॑वे देवासो दधिरे पुरः। 
ye न्द्रं वाणीरनूषता समोजसे।1२२॥ 


22. The gods have placed Indra (foremost) for the destruction 
of Vrtra; their praise has been addressed to him to enhance his 


Vigour. 
e ८२ स्तोमेशि 1 
६३०१. महान्तं महिना वयं स्तोमेभिर्हवनश्रुतम्‌। 
e Z 

p अर्कैरभि प्र णोनुमः समोज॑से॥२३॥ 

_ 23. We repeatedly glorify with praises and adorations him who 
‘the 1S great with greatness, who hears our invocations, (to enhance) his 
११ vigour. 


६३०२. न यं विविक्तो रोद॑सी नान्तरिक्षाणि वज्रि्णम्‌। 
अमादिद॑स्य तित्विषे समोज॑सः॥२४॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


404 Rgveda Sarhhita 


24. The thunderer, from whom neither the heaven and earth 
nor the firmament are separated: from the strength of whom, the 
mighty one, (the world) derives lustre. 


६३०३. यदिन्द्र पृतनाज्ये देवास्त्वां दधिरे पुरः। 
आदित्ते हर्यता हरी ववक्षतुः।।२५॥। 


25. When, Indra, the gods placed you foremost in the battle, 
then your beloved horses bore you. 


६३०४. यदा वृत्रं नंदीवृतं शव॑सा वज्रिन्नवंधी:। 
आदित्ते हर्यता हरीं ववक्षतुः।।२६।। 


26. When, thunderer, by your strength you did slay Vrtra, the 
obstructer of the waters, then your beloved horses bore you. 
विष्णुरोजसा | | विचक्रमे 
६३०५. यदा ते विष्णुरोजसा त्रीणि पदा विचक्रमे। 
` ! 
aed हर्यता हरी ववक्षतुः।।२७।। 
27. When your (younger brother) Vismu by (his) strength 
stepped his three paces, then verily your beloved horses bore you. 
Visnu by His Strength— Yada te Visnur ojasd might be rendered, 
**when Visnu by your strength’’; but the Scholiast renders te tavanujah. 
Verily your Beloved Horses Bore you— The only reason, 


apparently, for this phrase—Ad it te haryatà (kantau) hari vavaksatuh—s 
its having served as the burthen of the tv/o preceding stanzas. 


६३०६. यदा ते हर्यता हरी वावृधातें दिवेदिंवे। 
आदित्ते विश्वा भुवनानि येमिरे।॥२८ II 


28. When your beloved horses had augmented day by day, 
then all existent beings were subject unto you. 


६३०७. यदा ते मारतीर्विशस्तुभ्यमिन्द्र नियेमिरे। 
आदित्ते विश्वा भुवनानि येमिरे।।२९॥। 


29. When, Indra, your people, the Maruts, were reguiated by 
you, then all existent beings were subject unto you. 


Regulated by you— Or, according to Sayana, subdued the world for 
you, tvadartham niyacchanti bhitajatani. 


६३०८. यदा सूर्यममुं दिवि शुक्र ज्योतिरधारयः। 
आदित्ते विश्वा भुवनानि येमिरे।॥३०।। 


30. When you had placed younder pure light, the sun, in the 
sky, then all existing beings were subject unto you. 


Fi In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 13 405 
F इमां त॑ इन्द्र सुष्टुतिं विप्रं इयर्ति EIGRA 
जामिं पदेव पिप्रतीं प्राध्वरे।।३१॥ 
31. The wise (worshipper), Indra, offers you this gratifying 


sincere praise along with plous rites at the sacrifice, as (a man 
places) a kinsman in (a prominent) position. 
| 1 प्रिये संमीचीनासो | 
६३१०. यदस्य धामनि प्रिये x अस्वरन्‌। 
|| [C ` 
नाभां यज्ञस्य दाहना प्राध्वर।।३२॥। 

32. When the congregated (worshippers) praise him aloud in a 
place that pleases (him) on the navel (of the earth), in the spot 
where the libation is effused at the sacrifice, (then). 

Then— Tadánim dhanam pradehi, connecting the verse with what 
follows—uttaratra sambandha. The second half of the stanza is very 
elliptical, nabha' yajfiasya dohaná prádhvare; the ravel is, as usual, the 
altar, yajfia is said to mean here the Soma, and dohana for dohane, 


abhisavastháne. This is probably an ancient hymn, both by its repetitions 
| and combination of simplicity and obscurity. 


६३११. सुवीर्य स्वर््व्यं सुगर्व्यमिन्द्र दद्धि नः। 

होतेव पूर्वचित्तये प्राध्वरे।।३३।। 
5 33. Bestow upon us, Indra, (wealth), comprising worthy male 
offspring, excellent horses, and good cattle: like the ministrant 


priest (I worship you) at the sacrifice, (to secure) your prior 
consideration. 


ANUVAKA III 
[सूक्त-१३] 
[ऋषि- नारद काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- उष्णिक्‌॥] 
६३१२. इन्द्र: सुतेषु सोमेषु क्रतुं पुनीत उक्थ्यम्‌। 
विदे वृधस्य दक्ष॑सो महान्हि षः।।१॥। 
or l. Indra, when the Soma juices are effused, sao त 


Offerer and the praiser for the attainment of increase giving, 
Strength, for he is mighty. 
hi Sanctifies the Offerer and the Praiser— Kratum puntta ukthyam, 
Which Sàyana explains karmandm kartdram stótáram ca, but he admits, 
16 DII OMNE oN 
© पृथिव्या नाभिस्थानीये। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


406 Rgveda Samhita 


as an alternative, the sacrifice called ukthya, ukthyakhyam ८९०. 
Samaveda, 381, puts Indra in the vocative—Indra punise, [So, too, in 
Samaveda, 746. 


६३१३. स प्रंथमे व्योमनि देवानां सदने वृधः। 
YR: सुश्रवस्तम: समप्सुजित्‌। 11 
2. Abiding in the highest heaven, in the dwelling of the gods, 


he is the giver of increase, the accomplisher (of works), the 


possessor of great renown, the conqueror of (the obstructer of) the 
rains. 


६३१४. तम॑ह्वे वाज॑सातय इन्द्रं भराय शुष्मिणम्‌। 
भवां नः सुम्ने अन्त॑मः Wat वृधे।।३।। 


3. L invoke the powerful Indra for (aid in) the food-bestowing 


combat: be nigh unto us for our happiness; be a friend for our 
increase 


This and the preceding occur in Samaveda, 747-48. [Sayana remarks 
that bhara may here mean "sacrifice," most of the words signifying 
combat” having this second meaning also.] 
For Our Happiness— Sayana says, ‘‘when wealth or happiness 15 
sought," sukhe dhane vd lipsite sati 
zm 
=- ६३१५. इयं तं इन्द्र गिर्वणो रातिः क्ष॑रति सुन्वतः। 
e 1 
मन्दानो अस्य बर्हिषो वि राजसि।४।। 
4. This gift of the offerer of the libation flows to you, Indra, 


who are gratified by praise, exhilarated by which you reign over 
the sacrifice. 


Over the Sacrifice— The text has barhisah, ‘‘over the sacred grass 
7 put for the rite at which it is strewn. 


६३१६. नूनं तदिन्द्र दद्धि नो यत्त्वा सुन्वन्त ईमहे। 
रयिं नश्र्चित्रमा भरा स्वर्विद॑म्‌।५॥। 


5. Bestow upon us, Indra, that which, when puring out the 


libation, we solicit of you; grant us the wondrous wealth that 15 the 
means of obtaining heaven 


Means of Obtaining Heaven— Syarvidam, svargasya lambhakar 
[the printed text has sarvasya]; or it may mean one who possesses 
communicates knowledge of heaven svargasya veditdram, 1.€., १ son 


६३१७. स्तोता यतते विचर्षणिरति प्रशर्धयदूगिर:। 
वयाइवानु रोहते जुषन्त यत्‌।।६।। 


a ee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 4 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


a Mandala 8, Sükta 13 407 
E 6. When your discriminating eulogist has addressed to you 
n overpowering praises, then, if they are acceptable to you, they 


expand like the branches (of a tree). 
Overpowering— Je., Able to overpower enemies, satriindm 
prahasanasamarthāh. 


६३१८. प्रलवज्ज॑नया गिर॑ः शृणुधी जरितुर्हवम्‌। 


ie मदेमदे ववक्षिथा सुकृत्वने। UI 
e 7. Generate your eulogies as of old; hear the invocation of the 
adorer: you bear in your reiterated exultation (blessings) to the 
liberal donor (of the oblation). 
Generate your Fulogies as of Old— Le., by granting the expected 
fruit. 
5 ६३१९. क्रीळन्त्यस्य सूनृता आपो न प्रवर्ता यतीः। 
अया धिया य उच्यते पतिर्दिवः।८॥ 
E 8. The kind and true words of him who in this hymn is called 
18 the lord of heaven sport like waters flowing by a downward 
is (channel). 
६३२०. उतो पतिर्य उच्यते कृष्टीनामेक इद्दशी। 
नमोवृधैर॑वस्युभिंः सुते WII 
_ 9. Or he, who is called the one absolute lord of men,—praise 
d him, when the libation is effused, with magnifying songs, 
er imploring his protection. : 
One Absolute Lord of Men— Sayana takes it, “‘who is called the 
One absolute lord of men by those who magnify him (with songs) and 
implore his protection." 
À : 1 
६३२१. स्तुहि श्रुतं विपश्चितं हरी यस्य॑ प्रसक्षिणा। 
गन्तांरा दाशुषों गृहं न॑मस्विनः।।१०।। 
be 10. Praise the renowned, the sapient (Indra), whose vietori0ns 
he horses proceed to the dwelling of the devout donor (of the 
libation). 
am ६३२२. तृतुजानो महेमते5श्वेभिः प्रुषितप्सुभिः। 
or aes | = = 
आ याहि यज्ञमाशुभिः शमिद्धि ते1॥॥११॥ 
Ro k of movement, 


son tt: Munificently minded, do you, who are quic 
“ome with shining and swift steeds to the sacrifice, 
'S gratification to you thereby. 


for verily there 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


408 Rgveda Samhita 


६३२३. इन्द्र॑ शविष्ठ सत्पते रयिं गृणत्सुं धारय। 
श्रव॑ः सूरिभ्यो अमृतं वसुत्वनम्‌।।१२॥। 
12. Most powerful Indra, protector of the virtuous, secure us 


who praise you in the possession of riches, (grant) to the pious 
imperishable all-pervading sustenance. 


६३२४. हवें त्वा सूर उदिते हवें मध्यन्दिने दिवः। 
जुषाण इन्द्र सप्तिभिर्न आ गंहि।॥१३।। 

13. 1 invoke you when the sun is risen; I invoke (you) at mid- 
day: being propitiated, come to us, Indra, with your gliding steeds. 
६३२५. आ तू गहि प्र तु द्रव मत्स्वां सुतस्य गोम॑तः। 

तनतु तनुष्व पूर्व्यं यथां विदे।।१४।। 


14. Come quickly; hasten; be exhilarated by the libation mixed 


with milk; extend the ancient sacrifice, so that I may obtain (its 
reward). 


Extend the Ancient Sacrifice— Cf Haug’s Aitareya Brahm., vol. I, 
Introduction, p. 74. 


६३२६. यच्छक्रासि परावति यर्दर्वावति वृत्रहन्‌। 
"gb समुद्रे अन्थ॑सोऽवितेद॑सि।।१५।। 


15. Whether, Sakra, you be afar off, or, slayer of Vrira, nigh at 


hand, or whether you be in the firmament, you are the guardian of 
the (sacrificial) food, 


You are the Guardian of the Sacrificial Food— Or, ‘‘you are the 


guardian (by drinking) of the Soma,” annasya somalaksanasya panena 
raksita bhavasi. 


६३२७. इन्द्र वर्धन्तुनो गिर इन्द्र॑ सुतास इन्द॑व:। 
x3 हविष्मतीर्विशो अराणिषुः।।१६।। 


16. May our praises magnify Indra! May our effused libations 


gratify Indra! May the people bearing oblations excite pleasure in 
Indra! 


Excite Pleasure in Indra— Or, “‘have rejoiced in Indra, ari arisisuh. 
६३२८. तमिद्िप्रो अवस्यव॑: प्रवत्वतीभिरूतिभि:। 
s E 
ws क्षोणीरंवर्धयन्वया इंव।।१७।। 


n 


है ii 7 In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 5 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


i Mandala 8, Sükta 13 ad 


E The pious, desiring his protection, magnify him by ample 
and pleasure-yielding (libations): the earth, (and other worlds, 
spread out) like the branches of a tree, magnify Indra. 
^ al. A ` 
; ६३२९. त्रिकंद्रकेपु चेत॑नं देवासो यज्ञम॑तनत। 

तमिद्वर्धन्तु नो गिर॑ः सदावृंधम्‌।।१८। 

18. The gods propitiate the superintending adorable (/ndra) at 
the Trikadruka rites. May our praises magnify him who is ever the 
magnifier (of his worshippers). 

Superintending— Cetana, explained cetayitri, causing to be wise. 


For the Trikadrukas, see. mantra 2112 and note; for the abhiplava, cf. 
Haug’s Aitareya Brahmana., vol. I. p. 285. 


६३३०. स्तोता यत्ते अनुव्रत उक्थान्यृतुथा दधे। 
शुचिः पावक उच्यते सो अद्धुतः।१९॥। 

19. Your worshipper is observant of his duty, inasmuch as he 
offers prayers in due season; for you are he who is called pure, 
purifying, wonderful. 

६३३१. तदिदुद्रस्य॑ चेतति यहं प्रत्नेषु धार्मसु। 
मनो यत्रा वि तद्दधुर्विचेतसः 11२० l 


20. The progeny of Rudra (the Maruts) is known in ancient 
t places, and to them the intelligent worshippers offer adoration. 


f ६३३२. यदिं मे सख्यामावर्र sued TR: 


6 येन विश्वा अति द्विषो अतारिम।।२१॥ 


3 21. If, (Indra), you choose my friendship, partake of this 
(sacrificial) food, by which we may pass beyond (the reach of) all 
adversaries. 


६३३३. कदा त॑ इन्द्र गिर्वणः स्तोता भ॑वाति शन्त॑मः। 
s कदा नो गव्ये अश्व्ये वसौं दधः॥२२॥। 
n 22. When, Indra, who delight in praise, may your worshipper 


be entirely happy? When wilt you establish us in (the affluence of) 
l. cattle, of horses, of dwellings? 


६३३४. उत ते सुष्टुता हरी वृष॑णा वहतो रथम्‌। 
अजुर्यस्य॑ मदिन्त॑मं यमीमहे।1२३॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
410 Rgveda Samhita 


23. Or, when will your renowned and vigorous horses bring 
the chariot of you, who are exempt form decay, that exhilarating 
(wealth) which we solicit? 

That Exhilarating Wealth which we Solicit— We have only & 
madintamam yam imahe, it is not very clear to what the epithet applies; 
the only substantive is ratam, but the Scholiast has madavantam tvam 
dhanam, “१०० exhilarated, wealth,” as if Indra was understood, and was 
the wealth that was solicited. [Sayana seems to take the verse, ‘‘Moreover 


sr 


your renowned and vigorous (or desire-showering) horses bring the he 
chariot of you who are exempt from decay, you, the greatly exhilarated, th 
whom we ask (for wealth)," atisayena mddavantam yam tvàm dhanam 
ydcdmahe tasya ta ityanvayah.] & 
६३३५. तमीमहे egi wd प्रत्नाभिरूतिभि:। 

नि बर्हिषि प्रिये संददध द्विता।।२४।। 

24. We solicity with ancient and gratifying (offerings) him Sd 
who is mighty and the invoked of many: may he sit down on the P 
pleasant sacred grass, and accept the two-fold (offering of cakes ee 
and Soma juice). th 
६३३६. वर्धस्वा सु पुरुष्ठत ऋषिष्टताभिरूतिभि:। th 

> - y 
= धुक्षस्व॑ पिप्युषीमिषमवां च 31: 114 11 ड 
25. Praised of many, prosper (us) with the protections hymned 
by the Rsis, send down upon us nutritious food. 
६३३७. इन्द्र त्वमवितेर्दसीत्था स्तुवतो अंद्रिवः। i 
ऋतार्दियर्मि c 
z ते धिर्य मनोयुज॑म्‌।२६।। र 

26. Thunderbolt-bearing Indra, you are the protector of him | bi 
who thus eulogises you: I seek through sacrifice for your favour, & 
which is to be gained by praise. 

६३३८. इह त्या संधमाद्यां युजानः सोम॑पीतये। 
हरी इनदर प्रतद्वसू अभि स्व॑र।।२७॥। b 

27. Hamessing your horses, Indra, laden with treasure and | ei 
sharing your exhilaration, come hither to drink of the Soma. Si 
६३३९. अभि स्वरन्तु ये तव॑ रुद्रासः सक्षत श्रिय॑म्‌। 

उतो मरुत्वतीर्विशो अभि प्रय॑ः।।२८ 

28. May the sons of Rudra, who are your followers, approach ६ 


Í and partake of the glory (of the sacrifice); and may (other celestial) 
ji people associated with the Maruts (partake of the sacrificial) food. 


fa E In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| | 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 13 4 


The Glory of the Sacrifice— Sayana explains sriyam by 
srayaniyam, sc. yajnam. 


६३४०. इमा अस्य प्रतूर्तयः पदं जुंषन्त यद्दिवि। 
नाभां यज्ञस्य सं gial विदे।।२९॥ 
29. May those who (are his attendants), victorious (over 
enemies), be satisfied with the station (which they occupy) in 


heaven, and may they be assembled at the navel of the sacrifice, 
that I may thence acquire (wealth). 
६३४१. अयं दीर्घाय चक्ष॑से प्राचि प्रयत्य॑ध्वरे। 

y मिमीते 2 [| T 1 X z 

मिमीते यज्ञमानुषग्विचक्ष्य 1130 11 

30. When the ceremony is being prepared in the hall of 
sacrifice, this (Indra), having inspected the rite, regulates (the 
performance) in due succession for a distant object. 

For a Distant Object— For a future rewards, but the phraseology is 
somewhat obscure; it runs literally, ‘‘this (/ndra) for a long prospect, in 
the east proceeding sacrifice, measures, having considered in succession 
the sacrifice," agam dirghdya caksase práci prayati adhvare mimite 
yajnam anusag vicaksya. 


६३४२. वृषायमिन्द्र ते रथ॑ उतो ते वृष॑णा edi 
वृषा त्वं शतक्रतो वृषा हव॑ः।।३१।। 
31. Your chariot, Indra, is a showerer (of benefits), showerers 


(of benefits) are your horses: you also Satakratu, are the showerer 


(of benefits) the invocation (addressed to you) is the showerer (of 
benefits). 


६३४३. वृषा ग्रावा वृषा मदो वृषा सोमो अयं सुतः। 
qui यज्ञो यमिन्व॑सि वृषा ea: 1182 
32. The stone (that bruises the Soma) is the showerer (of 
benefits), so is your exhilaration and this Soma Juice that is 
effused: the sacrifice that you accept is the showerer (of benefits), 
Such also is your invocation. 
In this and the two following stanzas we have the usual reiteration of 


iam E forth, 
e rsa yam Indra te ratha uto te vrsana havi, and so 
P'ained, as usual, kamanam varsitd. 


६३४४. वृषा त्वा quoi हुवे वर्ज्रिच्चित्राभिरूतिर्भि:। 
वावन्थ हि प्रतिष्ट्ति qur हव: 11२३ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
412 Rgveda Samhita 


33. The showerer (of the oblation) I invoke with manifold and 
gratifying (praises) you, O thunderer, the showerer (of benefits): 
inasmuch as you acknowledge the eulogy addressed to you, your 
invocation is the showerer (of benefits). 


[सूक्त- १४] 
[ऋषि- aight, अश्वसूक्ति काण्वायन। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री।] 
६३४५. यदिन्द्राहं यथा त्वमीशीय वस्व एक इत्‌। 
स्तोता मे गोष॑खा स्यात्‌।।१।। 
1. If, Indra, I were, as you are, sole, lord over wealth, then 


should my eulogist be possessed of cattle. 
Sámaveda, 122-1834. 


६३४६. शिक्षेयमस्मै दित्सेयं शचीपते मनीषिणें। यदहं गोप॑तिः PURI 
2. Lord of might, I would give to that intelligent worshipper 


that which I should wish to give, if I were the possessor of cattle. 


Sámaveda, 1835. 
I should wish to Give— ‘‘I would wish to give, I would present to 
that intelligent worshipper,’ sikseyam asmai ditseyam manisine. 


६३४७. धेनुष्ट इन्द्र सूनृता यज॑मानाय सुन्वते। गामश्चै पिप्युषी दुहे॥३।। 

3. Your praise, Indra, is a milch cow to the worshipper 
offering the libations; it milks him in abundance cattle and horses. 

Sdmaveda, 1836. 

६३४८. न ते वर्तास्ति राध॑स इन्द्र देवो न मर्त्य:। 
यद्दित्स॑सि स्तुतो मघम्‌।।४।। 

4. Neither god nor man, Indra, is the obstructor of your 
affluence, (of) the wealth which you, when praised, design to 
bestow 

३४९. यज्ञ इन्द्रमवर्धयद्यद्धूमिं व्यवरर्तयत्‌। चक्राण ओपशं दिवि।५॥ 


5. Sacrifice has magnified Indra, so that he has supported the 
carth (with rain), making (the cloud) quiescent in the firmament 

Cakrina opagam divi,—antarikse megham opasam upetya sayanam 
kurvan, is Sdyana’s explanation. Sameveda, 121-1639 


६३५०. वावृधानस्य ते वयं विश्वा धनानि जिग्युष:। ऊतिमिन्द्रा वृणीमहे Us |! 


6. We solicity, Indra, the protection of you, who are ever being 
magnified, the conqueror of all the riches (of the enemy) 


Ind 
६३५ 


foar 


Gad 
Pari; 
On 3 
stati 
Nan 
liber 
Bha, 
day 

deca 
Tait, 


eee ae S CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


er 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 14 413 


६३५१. व्यरैन्तरिक्षमतिरन्मदे सोम॑स्य रोचना। इन्द्रो यदर्भिनद्वलम्‌।।७॥। 


7. In the exhilaration of the Soma, Indra has traversed the 
radiant firmament that he might pierce (the Asura) Vala, 

Sdmaveda, 1640. [Sàyana explains the latter clause, ‘‘from which 
(exhilaration) he pierced Vala.”’] 


६३५२. Sel आजदङ्गिरोभ्य आविष्कृण्वन्गुहां सतीः। 
अर्वाञ्चं नुनुदे वलम्‌। ८ II 


8. He liberated the cows for the Angirasas, making manifest 


those that has been hidden in the cave, hurling Vala headlong 
down. 


६३५३. इन्द्रेण रोचना दिवो दृळ्हानि दूंहितानिं च। स्थिराणि न पराणुदे।॥९॥ 


9. By Indra the constellations were made stable and firm and 
stationary, so that they could not be moved by any. 


६३५४. अपामूर्मिर्मदंत्रिव स्तोम॑ इन्द्राजिरायते। वि ते मर्दा अराजिपु:11१०॥ 


10. Your praise, Indra, mounts aloft like the exulting wave of 
the waters, your exhilarations have been manifested. 


६३५५. त्वं हि स्तोमवर्धन इन्द्रास्युंक्थवर्धन:। स्तोतृणामुत भंद्रकृत्‌॥।११ 11 


11. You, Indra, are to be magnified by praise, you are to be 


magnified by prayer; you are the benefactor of those who praise 
you. 


3२५६. इन्द्रमित्केशिना हरी सोमपेयांय वक्षतः। उप॑ यज्ञं सुराध॑सम्‌।।१२।। 


12. Let the long-maned horses bring the wealth-bestowing 
‘ato the sacrifice to drink the Soma juice. 
3२५७. अपां फेनेन नमुचे: शिर इन्द्रोदवर्तय:। विश्वा यदर्जयः eg: 1123 di 
f 13. You have struck off, /ndra, the head of Namuci with the 
oam of the waters, when you had subdued all your enemies. 
Ga Struck off the Head of Namuci, ctc.— This legend, as related in the 
Er DEO of the Salya Parvan of the Mahabharata (printed edition, of 
ines 5 replications, vol. V) has been previously referred to (vol. il, note 
Stating they’ Sayana’s version of it slightly varies in the beginning, 
[ym at Indra, after defeating the Asuras, was unable to capture 
liberated on the contrary, he was taken by him. Namuci, however, 
Seo nim On the conditions which are enumerated in the 
day or fe that he Would not kill him with any EE or wet, de by 
PL र्यी aum evasion of his oath, Indra at twilight, or in a fog, 
airy Ret With the foam of water. [It is also told in ihe 


Inds 


hità, i 8 Sa. "e ai » 
CC-0. In Public Don C 000 RRA ied: Haridwar 


eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


M 

414 Rgveda Samhita 
1 be ] 
६३५८. मायाभिरुत्सिसृप्सत इन्द्र द्यामाररुक्षत:। अव SAAT 11 1 i 
14. You have hurled down, Indra, the Dasyus, gliding upwards d: 
by their devices and ascending to heaven. & 


६३५९. असुन्वामिन्द्र संसद fadi व्य॑नाशय:। सोमपा SAT भव॑न्‌॥१५॥ 
15. You, Indra, the most excellent drinker of the Soma, destroy 


the adverse assembly that offers no libations. y 

H S -i [II 1 
The Most Excellent Drinker of the Soma— Or it may mean “‘you ; 
who on drinking the Soma become pre-eminent.” Visücim may mean 


“discordant,” parasparavirodhena nānā gantrim. & 
[सूक्त- १५] 

[ऋषि- गोषूक्ति-अश्च सूक्ति काण्वायन। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- उष्णिक।] T 

६३६०. तम्वभि प्र गायत पुरुहूतं पुरुष्टुतम्‌! ti 

इन्द्र गीर्भिस्तविषमा विंवासत।।१।। S 

l. Glorify him the invoked of many, the praised of many; 

adore the powerful Indra with hymns; 

a 


Sdmaveda, 382. 


=> ` रादसी 
६३६१. यस्य॑ द्विबहँसो बृहत्सहों दाधार रोर्दसी। र 
गिराँरज्जाँ अप स्वेर्वृषत्वना ।।२॥। 
2. The vast strength of whom, powerful in both (regions), has 
sustained the heaven and earth, and by its vigour (upheld) the swift 
clouds and flowing waters. A ( 
The Swift Clouds— Girin ajran may mean also the quic 
mountains, i.e., before their wings were clipped. ६ 
| ६३६२. स रॉजसि पुरुष्ठतँ एको वृत्राणि जिघ्नसे। 
इन्द्र जैत्र श्रवस्यां च यन्तंवे। li ; 
3. You, the praised of many, reignest: you, single, have slain र 
| raany enemies, in order to acquire the spoils of victory an 
1 abundant food. 
| 2 पु ~ ६ 
। ६३६३. तं ते मर्द गृणीमसि quei पृत्सु सांसहिम्‌। 
उ लोककृलुमंद्रिवो हरिश्रियम्‌।॥४॥। À 
4. We celebrate, thunderer, your exhilaration, the showerer (o t 


benefits), the overcomer (of foes) in battle, the maker of the world; 


the glorious with your steeds; 


nN सिली CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 
| SSS 


any; 


, has 
swift 


quick 


slain 
| and 


Mandala RSL sra Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 415 


Samaveda, 383-880. [Lokakritnu would see to mean, according to 
Sayana, "the provider of a place (for his worshipper)”, sthanasya 
kartaram; and harisriyam, "him who is to be served by his steeds,” 
asvabhyam sevyam.] 

` ज्योतींष्यायवे E ` In विवेदिं 
६३६४. येन Waa मनवे च विवेदिथ। 
` हया ES || 
मन्दानो अस्य बर्हिषो वि रांजसि।५॥ 

5. Whereby you have made the planets manifest to Ayu and to 
Manu, and rule rejoicing over this sacred rite. 

Samaveda., 881. 

६३६५. तदद्या चित्त उकिथनो5नु ष्टुवन्ति पूर्वथां। 
en दिवेदिवे ES 8 
वृषपत्नारपा उ दर्वादव LIS rl 

6. The reciters of prayer celebrate that your (exhilaration) now 
as of old: do you daily hold in subjection the waters, the wives of 
the showerer. 

६३६६. तव त्यदिन्द्रियं बृहत्तव शुष्म॑मुत क्रतुम्‌। 
वज्रं शिशाति धिषणा वरेंण्यम्‌।।७।। 
7. Praise sharpens your great energy, your strength, your acts, 


and your majestic thunderbolt. 
Sdmaveda, 1645. 


६३६७. तव द्यौरिन्द्र diei पृथिवी व॑र्धति श्रव॑:। 
त्वामापः पर्वतासश्च हिन्विरे।।८।। 


8. The heaven invigorates your manhood, Indra, the earth 
(spreads) your renown; the waters, the mountains propitiate you. 
Sdmaveda, 1646. 


६३६८. त्वां विष्णुर्बृहन्‌ क्षयो मित्रो गृणाति वरुण:। 
त्वां शर्धी मदत्यनु METAL I 


9. Visnu, the mighty giver of dwellings, praises you, and Mitra 
and: Varuna; the company of the Maruts imitates you in 
exhilaration. 


Samaveda, 1647. 
६२६९. त्वं वृषा जनानां मंहिष्ठ इन्द्र जज्ञिषे। 
सत्रा विश्वां स्वपत्यानिं afit uito t 


10. You, Indra, who are the showerer, have been born the most 


bountiful of beings; you associate with you all good offspring. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


तामा GG OU 


[ 


416 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eRgngnirsarihitz 

You Associate with you All Good Offspring— That is, you give 
offspring, and all good things. 

६३७०. सत्रा त्वं degd एको वृत्राणिं तोशसे। 
नान्य इन्द्रात्‌ करणं भूय॑ इन्वति।।११।। 

11. (Indra), the praised of many, you alone destroy many 
mighty foes: no other Indra achieves such great exploits. 
६३७१. यदिन्द्र मन्मशस्त्वा नाना हव॑न्त ऊतयें। 

अस्माकेभिनृभिरत्रा स्वर्जय।।१२।। 

12. When (in the combat), Indra, they invoke you in many 
ways with praise for protection, then do you (so invoked) by our 
leaders overcome all (our enemies). 

६३७२. अरं क्षयांय नो महे विश्वां रूपाण्याविशन्‌। 
x जैत्राय हर्षया शचीपतिम्‌।।१३ 11 

13. ALL the forms (of Indra) have sufficiently entered into our 
own spacious abode: gratify Indra the lord of Shachi, (that he may 
give us) the spoil of victory. 

All the forms of Indra— That is, the various attributes celebrated in 
our praises. 

[सूक्त- १६] 
[क्रषि- इरिम्बिठि काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री] 
६३७३. प्र सम्राजं चर्षणीनामिन्द्रं स्तोता नव्यं गीर्भिः। 


नरं नृषाहं मंहिष्ठम्‌।।१।। 


1. Glorify with hymns the adorable Indra, the supreme king of 
men, the leader (of rites), the overcomer of enemies the most 
munificent. 

Samaveda, 141 


६३७४. यस्मिनुकथानि रण्यन्ति विश्वानि च श्रवस्यां। अपामवो न संमुदरे।।२॥ 


2. In whom all praises, all kinds of sustenance concentrate, like 


the aggregation of the waters in the ocean 
In Whom All Praises. . . . . Concentrate— Literally, “In whom (a5 
their object) all praises, and all kinds of offspring exultingly meet 


६३७५. तं dem विवासे ज्येष्ठराजं भरें कृत्नुम्‌। महो वाजित सनिभ्य:।२।। 


ar e सि In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


FS) Pa OA 


| | at 


lita Man तर 28608 Agya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 417 


2 3. I worship /ndra with pious praise, glorious amongst the best 
(of beings), the achiever of great deeds in war mighty for the 
acquirement (of wealth). 

^ 1 I शूर॑सातौ 
६३७६. यस्यानूना गभारा मदां उरवस्तरुत्रा:। हर्षुमन्तः [सातौ ।[४।। 

iny 4. Whose unbounded and profound exhilarations are many, 

protective, and animating in war. 


Animating in War— Sayana explains harsamantah as ‘‘exulting in, 
ie., eager for, war," harsayuktah sarigrdmotsukah. 


६३७७. तमिद्धनेषु हितेष्वधिवाकार्य हवन्ते। येषामिन्द्रस्ते जंयन्ति। I 
Any, 5. (His worshippers) invoke him to take part (in spoiling) the 


Our treasures deposited (with the foe): they conquer, of whom /ndra is 

(the partisan). 

६३७८. तमिच्च्यौलैरार्यन्ति d कृतेभिश्र्षणय॑:। एष इन्द्रो वरिवस्कृत्‌॥६॥ 

6. They honour him with animating (hymns), men (honour) 

our him with sacred rites, for /ndra is the giver of wealth. 
nay ६३७९. Fal ब्रह्मन्द्र ऋषिरिन्द्र: पुरू पुरुहूत:। महान्महीभिः aA: tue 
din ! 7. Indra is Brahma, Indra is the Rsi: Indra is the much- 

invoked of many, mighty with mighty deeds. 

Indra is Brahmà— Indro brahmá, parivrdah sarvebhyo ‘dhikah, 

“the augmented or vast, more or greater than all," is the explanation of 

the commentator. [He explains risi as the beholder of all the Aryas, 

Sarvasya Aryajátasya drastà.] 

६३८०. स स्तोम्यः स ह्य: सत्यः सत्वां तुविकूर्मिः। 

| £ ES 
एकश्चितसन्नभिभूतिः।।८॥। 

छ of 8. He is to be praised, he is to be invoked, he is true, powerful 
10st ws doer of many deeds; he, being single, is the overcomer (of his 

065). 

तमर्केभिस्तं 1 

m ६३८१. तमर्केभिस्तं सार्मभिस्तं गायब्रैश्वर्षणय:। इन्द्र वर्धन्ति क्षितयः 11९ UI 
fie रु 9. Men who are cognizant (of sacred texts) magnify Indra with 

Pious precepts, with sacred songs, and with prayers- | 
et á With Pious Precepts, with, etc.— Tam arkebhis tam sdmabhis tam | 

s Jatrais carsanayah ksitayah. The two last equally imply men, but the | 


ला understands the first to be an epithet of the second—the seers or n 
al! e er of Mantras, or texts, such as those of the yajus (arka), of 
Ayana (saman), and metrical prayers not chanted (Gayatra). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Sic 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
418 Rgveda Samhita 
६३८२. प्रणेतारं वस्यो अच्छा cedi vd: समत्सु। 
सासह्वास युधामित्रान्‌।।१०।। 
10. Him (they magnify) who brings before them the spoil, who 


gives lustre in combats, who overcomes enemies in battle. 
In Battle— Or, ‘by his weapon,” dyudhena. 


६३८३. स नः पप्रिः पारयाति स्वस्ति नावा पुरुहूत:। 


इन्द्र विश्वा अति द्विष॑ः।।११॥। 


11. May Indra, the fulfiller (of desires), the invoked of many, 
bear us beyond (the reach of) all our enemies, to welfare, as ifbya 
ship (across the sea). 

To Welfare— Sayama explains svasti as ‘ “happy,” ksemera. 


६३८४. स त्वं न॑ इन्द्र वाजेभिर्दशस्या च॑ गातुया च॑। 
अच्छा च नः सुम्नं नेषि॥१२॥। 


12. Do you, Indra, (endow) us with vigour, bestow upon us 
(wealth, enable us) to go (by the right way), lead us to felicity. 


[सूक्त- १७] 
E [ऋषि- इरिम्बिठि काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री, १४, १५ प्रगाथ 
(विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)|] 
६३८५. आ याहि सुषुमा हि त इन्द्र सोमं frat इमम्‌। 
एदं बहिः संदो मम॑।।१।। 
1. Come: we express, Indra, for you, the Soma drink: drink it: 


sit down upon this my sacred grass. 
Sdmaveda, 191-666. 


६३८६. आ त्वा ब्रह्मयुजा हरी वहतामिन्द्र केशिनां। उप ब्रह्माणि नः TIIR 


2. Let your long-maned horses, Indra, that are yoked by 
| prayers, bring you hither, and do you hear our prayers. 
i Sdmaveda, 667. 


| ६३८७. ब्रह्मणस्त्वा वयं युजा सोमपामिन्द्र सोमिन॑ः। सुताव॑न्तो हवामहे। २३ ।। 


3. We Brdhmanas, offerers of Soma, bearing the effused 
juices, invoke with suitable (prayers) you the drinker of the Soma. 

Sdmaveda, 668. 

We Brahmanas— I.e., brahmánah, explained in the commentary by 
brahmanah. 


a ee सिली In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


tā 


ho 


19, 
ya 


it: 


Magee aitized gaa Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 419 


६३८८. आ नों याहि सुताव॑तोऽस्माकं सुष्ठुतीरुष। पिबा सु शिप्रिन्नन्ध॑स: 11४1 


4. Come to us offering the libation, accept our earnest praises; 
drink, handsome-jawed, of the (sacrificial) beverage. 


६३८९. आ ते सिञ्चामि कुक्ष्योरनु गात्रा वि धांवतु। गृभाय जिहया TIR I 
5. 1 fill your belly (with the libation): let it spread throughout 


the limbs: take the honied Soma with your tongue. 

The Belly— Kuksyoh, in the dual, for it is said that Indra has two 
bellies, Indrasya hi dve udare, according to another text, fill both the 
bellies of the slayer of Vrtra: or it may refer only to the right and left 
sides, or the upper and lower portions of the same belly, yadvd ekasyaiva 
udarasya savyadaksinabhedena arddhvadhobhagena va dvitvam. [Cf 
vol.I, mantra 2106 ; vol. II, mantra 2912.] 


६३९०. स्वादु्टे अस्तु संसुदे मर्थुमान्तन्वेेतव॑ । सोमः शमस्तु d ृदे॥६॥। 
6. May the sweet-flavoured Soma be grateful to you, who are 


munificent; (may it be grateful) to your body may it be 
exhilarating to your heart. 


विचर्षणे oi सोम॑ 
६३९१. अयमुं त्वा विचर्षणे जनीरिवाभि संवृत:। प्र सोम इन्द्र सर्पतु।।७॥। 

7. May this Soma, invested (with milk), approach you, 
observant Indra, like a bride (clad in white apparel). 

Like a Bride—Janir iva, jaya iva, literally, “Jike brides”. Suklair 
vastraih samvrtah is the explanation of the comment. The text has only 
sarivrtah, covered, or invested by, as an epithet of Soma, 
payahprabhrtibhih, by milk and other ingredients. 

६३९२. तुविग्रीवों वपोर्दरः सुवाहुरन्धंसो मदे। इन्द्रो वृत्राणि जिघ्नते।८॥। 

8. Long-necked, large-bellied, strong-armed Indra, in the 

exhilaration of the (sacrificial) food, destroys his enemies. 


६३९३. इन्द्र प्रेहिं पुरस्त्वं विश्वस्येशान ओज॑सा। वृत्राणि वृत्रहज्ञहि ।॥९॥ 
9. Indra, who by your strength are the lord over ali, come to 
us, slayer of Vrira, subdue our foes. 
६३९४. दीर्घस्ते अस्त्वङकुशो येना वर्सु प्रयच्छसि। यर्जमानाय सुन्वते॥१०॥ 
10. Long be your goad, wherewith you bestow wealth upon the 
Sacrificer offering libations. 
_ Goad— Or rather *'crook"'; aikusa is explained by Sayana as an 
instrument for drawing towards us things out of reach. 
६३९५. अयं त॑ इन्द्र सोमो निपूतो E एहीमस्य द्रवा पिब।॥११॥। 
11. This Soma juice, purified (by filtering) through the sacred 
grass, is for you, Indra: come to it; hasten; drink. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


] 


t eedem 


eae TNE P तक 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
420 Rgveda Samhita 
| Purified through the Sacred Grass— Or rather *'purified (by being 
filtered through the cloth called dasa pavitra over the sacred grass 
(strewed on the vedi). 

Samaveda, 159-725. 

६३९६. शाचिंगो शाचिपूजनायं रणाय ते सुतः। आखण्डल प्र हूयसे।।१२॥। 

12. Renowned for radiance, renowned for adoration, this 
libation is for your gratification; destroyer of foes, you are 
carnestly invoked. ॥ 

Renowned for Radiance— Sdcigo is not very satisfactorily 
explained: saktd gdvo yasya, “11९ whose cattle are strong.’’ Sdcayah may 
also mean, according to Sayana, vyaktah, ‘‘manifest,’’ or prakhyatdh, 
**famous,"" and gdvah may mean rasmayah, rays, i.e., **of renowned or 
manifest brilliance.” So the next epithet, Sdcipijana, is explained 


prakhyátapüjana, “जि renowned adoration,” or ‘‘whose hymns are 
renowned.” Sdmaveda, 726. 


६३९७. यस्तै शृङ्गवृषो नपात्‌ प्रणपात्कुण्डपाय्य:। 
न्यस्मिन्दध्र आ मन॑:।।१३।। 


13. (Indra), who was the offspring of Srrigavrsa, of whom the 
kundapayya rite was the protector, (the sages) have fixed (of old) 
their minds upon this ceremony. , 

Offspring of Srügavrsa— Yas te Srngavrso napát pranapát 
kundapáyyah would be more naturally rendered, he who was, Sriganvrsa, 

— your grandson, your great-grandson, Kundapdyya; but Sayana quotes a 
legend which describes Indra as taking upon himself the character of the 
son of a Rsi named Srrigavrsa (or Srigavrsan), which is therefore here in 
the genitive case; napat, he says, means apatya, offspring generally, and 
is therefore not incompatible with putra, “5017”, Srügavrs may also mean 
the sun, ie., srigair varsati, **he rains with rays"; and na-pat may have 
its etymological sense, not causing to fall, na pdtayitd, i.e., he who was 
the establisher of the sun the heaven, Indra. Again, Kundapdyya, upon the 
authority of Panini, 3.1.130, means a particular ceremony, in which the 
Soma is drunk from a vessel called Kunda, and this is said to be te 
pranapat, tava raksità, **the protector of you, Jndra’’. The construction is 
loose, and the explanation not very satisfactory. Samaveda, 727. 


६३९८. वास्तोष्पते धुवा स्थूणांसंत्रं सोम्यानाम्‌। 
। द्रप्सो भेत्ता पुरां शश्वतीनामिन्द्रो मुनीनां सखा।।१४॥ 
14. Lord of dwellings, may the (roof) pillar be strong; may 
there be vigour of body for the offers of the libation; may /ndra, 
the drinker (of the Soma), the destroyer of the numerous cities (of 


the Asuras), ever be the friend of the Munis. 
Samaveda, 275. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri oo cum o Haridwar 


Maigitizes bsukyerSamaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
६३९९. पृर्दाकुसानुर्यजतो गवेष॑ण एकः सन्नभि भूर्यस:। 
भूर्णिमर्थ नयतुजा पुरो गृभेन्द्रं सोम॑स्य पीतये।।१५॥। 

15. With head uplifted like a serpent, adorable, the recoverer 
of the cattle, /ndra single is superior to multitudes: (the 
worshipper) brings /ndra to drink the Soma by a rapid seizure, like 
a loaded horse (by a halter). 

With head Uplifted Like a Serpent— Prddkusdnu is explained 
prdàkuh sarpah, a serpent; sa iva sdnuh samucchrtah tadvad 
unnatasiraskah, having the head lifted up in like manner. [Sáyana gives a 
second meaning of sdnu, as sambhajaniiya, to be served or propitiated as 
a snake is, with many gems, mantras, medicaments, etc.; sa yathd 
bahubhir manimantrausadhddibhis samsevyo nálpai evam Indro' pi 
bahubhis stotradibhir yatnais sevyah.] 

By a Rapid Seizure— Sāyaņa explains grbha as ''means of 
seizing,’’ i.e., a praise. 


[सूक्त- १८] 

[ऋषि- इरिम्बिठि काण्व। देवता- आदित्यगण, ८ अश्विनीकुमार, ९ अग्नि, 
सूर्य अनिल। छन्द- feri] 

६४००. इदं ह नूनमेषां सुम्नं भिक्षेत nei: आदित्यानामपूर्व्य सवीमनि 1१ L 


1. Let a mortal now earnestly solicit at the worship of these 
Adityas unprecedented riches. 


६४०१. अनर्वाणो dai पन्थां आदित्यानाम्‌। 
कि aue] S CT 
अदब्धाः सन्तिं पायवः सुगेवृधः 11२ ।। 
2. The paths of these Adityas are unobstructed and unopposed; 
may they yield us security and augment our happiness. 


६४०२. तत्सु नं; सविता भगो वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा। 
शर्म यच्छन्तु सप्रथो यदीम॑हे॥३।। 
3. May Savitd, Bhaga, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman bestow 
Upon us that ample felicity which we solicit. 


६४०३. देवेभिर्देव्यदितेअरि्टभर्मत्रा गहि। स्मत्सूरिभिंः पुरुप्रिये सुशर्मभिः।॥४॥ 
4. Divine Aditi, bringer of safety, beloved of many, come 


Propitiously with the wise and happy divinities. 
Bringer of Safety— Rather, ‘‘whose fostering care is unimpeded.” 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


न SE ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
422 Rgveda Samhita 


६४०४. ते हि पुत्रासो अदितेर्विंदुरदेंषॉसि योत॑वे। 
अंहोश्चिंदुरुचक्रयो3नेहस॑ : ।1५1। 

5. These sons of Aditi know how to drive away (our) enemics; 
and, deers of great de ds and donors of security, (they know how to 
extricate us) from sin. 

६४०५. अदिंतिर्नो दिवां पशुमदितिर्नक्तमद्वयाः। 
अर्दिति: पात्वंह॑सः सदावृधा।।६।। 

6. May Aditi protect our cattle by day, and, free from luplicity, 
(guard them) by night; may Aditi, by her constant favour, preserve 
us from sin. 

Free from Duplicity— Advayah is explained as Kapatarahita, {Cf v. 

14.] 

६४०६. उत स्या नो दिवां मतिरदितिरूत्या गमत्‌। 
हु Be n 
सा शन्ताति मयस्करदप feni: 119 1! 


7. May the monitress Aditi come to us for our prosecution by 
day: may she grant us tranquil felicity, and live away, (our) 
enemies. 

Samaveda, 102. 


See ६४०७. उत त्या दैव्यां भिषजा शं न॑ः करतो अश्चिनां। 
युयुयातामितो रपो अप fasi: e ui 


8. May the two divine physicians, the Asvins, grant us health: 
may they drive away from hence iniquity: (may they drive) away 
our foes. 


६४०८. शमग्निरग्निभिः करच्छं नंस्तपतु सूर्य: 
| शं बातों वात्वरपा अप fA: 11 
9. May Agni with his fires grant us happiness: may the sun 


beam upon us felicity: may the unoffending wind blow us 
happiness: (may they all drive) away our foes. 


| ६४०९. अपामीवामप खिधमप सेधत दुर्मतिम्‌। 
आदित्यासो युयोत॑ना नो SRE: Ro 


10. Adityas, remove (from us) disease, enemies, malignity; 
keep us afar from sin. 
Samaveda. 307. 


| 
| 
1 
| 
| CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri E NN Haridwar 
| 
1 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 18 
६४१०. युयोता शस्मस्मदाँ आदिंत्यास उतारमतिम्‌। 
ऋधग्‌ द्वेष॑ः कृणुत विश्ववेदसः।।११॥। 

11. Keep afar from us, Adityas, malignity, ill-will; do you who 
are all-wise keep afar those who hate us. 
६४११. तत्सु नः शर्म यच्छतादित्या यन्मुमोचति। 

एन॑स्वन्तं चिदेन॑सः सुदानवः ।॥१२।। 

12. Grant freely to us, generous Adityas, that happiness which 
liberates even the offending (worshipper) from sin. 
६४१२. यो नः कश्चिद्रिरिक्षति रक्षस्त्वेन मर्त्यः। 

स्वैः ष ud रिरिषीष्ट युर्जन॑ः।।१३॥। 

13. May that man who, from his diabolical nature seeks to do 
us evil-may he, injuring himself by his own devices, incur that 
evil. 

६४१३. समित्तमधमंश्रवददु:शंसं wed RPU 
यो अस्मत्रा दुर्हणांवाँ उप॑ gA: RENI 

14. May iniquity pervade that calumniating and hostile mortal 
who wishes to do us harm, and is treacherous towards us. 

Treacherous— Dvayu, double—he who professes kindness to our 


face and maligns us behind our back; pratyaksakrto hitam vadati 
paroksakrtas tu ahitam. 


६४१४. पाकत्रा स्थ॑न देवा हत्सु जानीथ मर्त्यम्‌। 
sd gu चाद्व॑युं च वसवः।।१५॥। 


15. Deities, you are (propitious) to sincere (worshippers). you 
know, Vasus, the hearts of men, and distinguish between the single 
and double minded. 


६४१५. आ शर्म पर्वतानामोतापां वृणीमहे। 
द्यावाक्षामारे अस्मद्रप॑स्कृतम्‌॥१६।। 


16. We solicit the happiness of the mountains and ० 
waters; Heaven and Earth, remove sin far from us. 


६४१६. ते नों भद्रेण शर्म॑णा युष्माकं नावा व॑सवः। 
अति विश्वानि दुरिता पिंपर्तन।।१७॥। 


È 17. Convey us, Vasus, in your vessel, with auspicious felicity, 
eyond all calamities. 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


f the 


EE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


424 Rgveda Samhita 
६४१७. तुचे तनाय तत्सु नो द्राघीय आयुर्जीवसें। 
आदित्यासः सुमहसः कृणोत॑न।।१८ 
18. Radiant Adityas grant to our sons and grandsons to enjoy 
long life. 
Samaveda, 395. 
६४१८. यज्ञो हीळो वो अन्तर आदित्या अस्ति मृळत॑। 
युष्मे इद्वो अपिं ष्मसि सजात्यें।।१९।। 
19; fhe duly-presented sacrifice is ready for you, Adityas; 


grant us, therefore, happiness: may we ever abide in near | 
relationship with you. 


६४१९. बृहद्दरूथं मरुतां देवं त्रातारमश्चिना। मित्रमीमहे वरुणं स्वस्तयें।।२०।। 
20. We solicit of the divine protector of the Maruts, of the 
Asvins, of Mitra, and of Varuna, a spacious dwelling for our 
welfare. 
अनेहो || मतरार्यमनरद्वरण 1 & 1] 
६४२०. अने TIER शंस्यम्‌। । 
त्रिवरूथं मरुतो यन्त नश्छर्दिः।।२१।। 


— 21. Mitra, Aryaman, Varuna, and Maruts, grant us a secure, 
excellent, and well-peopled dwelling, a three fold shelter. 

A Threefold Shelter— Trivarütham, a guard against heat, cold and 
wet; or it may mean, according to the Scholiast, tribhiimikam, *'threc- 
storied.” Sayana, therefore, did not believe that the Hindus of the Vedic 
period lived in hovels. 

| मृत्युबन्धव | | 
६४२१. ये चिद्धि मृत्युबन्धव आदित्या मन॑वः स्मसि। | 
| आयुर्जीवसें | | 
| प्र सू न आयुर्जीवसे तिरेतन।।२२।। 
i 22. Since, Adityas, we mortals are of kin to death, do you 
benevolently (exert yourselves to) prolong our lives. 


| [सूक्त- १९] | 
[ऋषि- सोभरि काण्व। देवता- अग्नि, ३४-३५ आदित्यगण, ३६-३७ 
त्रसदस्यु पौरुकुत्स्य। छन्द- १-२६ प्रगाथ (विषमा ककुप्‌, समासतो बृहती), 


२७ द्विपदा विराट्‌, २८-३३ प्रगाथ (समा ककुप्‌, विषमा सतोबृहती), ३४ 
उष्णिक्‌, ३५ सतोबृहती, ३६ «gu, ३७ पंक्ति] 


६४२२. d गूर्धया स्वर्णरं देवासों देवमरतिं दंधन्विरे। देवत्रा हव्यमोहिरे॥१॥ 


d o ns २ In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| SS 


MS Due eee o e coo 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 19 425 

1. Glorify (Agni), the leader of all (sacred rites): the priests 
approach the divine lord, (and through him) convey the oblation to 
the gods. 

Samaveda, 109-!687. 

भूतरातिं चित्रशोचिषमग्निमीळिष्व 
६४२३. विभूतरातिं विप्र चित्रशोंचिषमग्निमीळिष्व यन्तुरम्‌। 
अस्य मेध॑स्य सोम्यस्य सोभरे प्रेमध्वराय TARR I 

2. Praise, pious Sobhari, at the sacrifice this ancient Agni, who 

is the giver of opulence, the wonderfully luminous, the regulator of 


this rite, at which the Soma is presented. 
Sdmaveda, 1688. 


६४२४. यजिष्ठं त्वा ववृमहे देवं देवत्रा होतारममर्त्यम्‌। 
अस्य य॒ज्ञस्य॑ सुक्रतुंम्‌।।३।। 

3. We adore you, the most adorable deity, the invoker of the 
gods, the immortal, the perfecter of this sacrifice; 

Sdmaveda, 112; 1413. 

Sayana explains it ‘‘we edore you, the most adorable, the deity 
among deities, the invoker,”’ etc.] 

६४२५. ऊर्जो नपांतं सुभरं सुदी्दितिमग्निं श्रेष्ठशीचिषम्‌। 
स नों मित्रस्य वरुणस्य सो अपामा सुम्नं यक्षते दिवि।४॥ 

4. Agni, the great grandson of (sacrificial) food, the possessor 
of opulence, the illumer, the shedder of excellent light: may he 
obtain for us by sacrifice the happiness in heaven (that is the gift) 

| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


of Mitra, of Varuna, of the waters. 

Sámaveda, 1414. But it reads apam napdtam, instead of urjo 
"aptam, as in our text—from burnt-offerings the rains are generated; 
from them timber; from timber, fire. 


६४२६. यः समिधा य आहुती यो de ददाश मर्ता अग्नये। 
यो नम॑सा स्वध्वरः।।५।। 


_ 5. The man who has presented (worship) to Agni with fuel, 
With burnt offerings, with the Veda, with (sacrificial food, and is 
iligent in pious rites; 
NUS the Veda— Sayana explains vedena by vedddhyayanena, gor 
dying the Veda.” Professor Müller, however, says that it means a 
dle of erass.** See Ancient Sanskrit Literature, p. 28, note, and p. um 


६४२७. तस्येदर्वन्तो रंहयन्त आशवस्तस्य॑ gidi aa: | 
न तमंहों देवकृतं कुत॑श्चन न मर्त्यकृतं नशत्‌॥६॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


426 Rgveda Samhita 


6. Of him assuredly the rapid horses rush (on the foe): his is 
most brilliant glory: him no evil, whether the work of gods or of 
men, ever assails. 


६४२८. स्वग्नयो वो अग्निभिः स्याम सूनो सहस ऊर्जा पते। 
सुवीरस्त्वमस्मयुः 1191 | 
7. Son of strength, lord of (sacrificial) food, may we be | 
favoured with your various fires; do you, (Agni), endowed with 
energy, be well disposed towards us! 


Endowed with Energy— Sayana explains suvira by “३०० who are 
worshipped by noble heroes."' | 


६४२९. प्रशंसमानो अतिथिर्न मित्रियोःग्नी ver dedii 
त्वे क्षेमासो अपिं सन्ति साधवस्त्वं राजा रयीणाम्‌।।८।। 
8. Agni, when honoured like a guest, is gracious to his praisers; ( 
he is to be recognized as a chariot (bringing the fruit of the 
worship): in you verily the virtuous are confiding; you are the Raja 


of riches. 
In you the Virtuous are Confiding— Or, perhaps, **in you also are 


excellent protections,” tva ksemáso api santi sádhavah. | 

p ६४३०. सो अद्धा दाश्चंध्वरो5ग्ने मर्तः सुभग स प्रशंस्य॑ः। | 
स धीभिरंस्तु सनिता। 1९ ।। 

9. ट्री नि he who is the offerer of sacrifice obtain his { 

| reward: he, auspicious Agni, is worthy of commendation: may he s 


by his pious rites become the giver of wealth. 
May .... Reward— This is Sàyana's explanation of the indeclinable 
word addha: so addhd, satyaphalah sa bhavatu. [Sayana takes the second ६ 
i clause also as optative, ‘‘may he indeed by worthy of praise.”’] 
d The Giver of Wealth— This is in the original thc same word 
(sanità) as that rendered ‘‘effecter of his purposes,” in the next verse. 


| ६४३१. यस्य त्तमूर्ध्वो अंध्वराय तिष्ठ॑सि क्षयद्वीर: स सांधते। | 
| सो अर्वद्भिः सनिता स विपन्युभिः स शुरैः सनिता कृतम्‌॥१०॥ 


10. He over whose sacrifice you preside prospers, having his 
dwelling filled with male offspring: he is the effecter of his 
purposes through his horses, through his Wise (counsellors), his 
valiant adherents. 


Le 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Eee Haridwar 


a Oo 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 19 


६४३२. यस्याग्निर्वपुरगुहे स्तोमं चनो दधीत विश्ववार्यः। 
हव्या वा वेविंषट्विषः।।११।। 

11. (So is he) in whose dwelling the all-desired and : 

Agni receives praise and food, and conveys oblations to the all- 


pervading deities. 


` 1 


EER 
६४३३. विप्र॑स्य वा स्तुवतः संहसो यहो मक्षूत॑मस्य fi 
अवोर्देवमपरिमत्य ` J e N विविदुषो 1 
अवोदेंवमुपरिंमर्त्यं कृधि वसो विविदुषो aa: 112211 

12. Son of strength, giver of dwellings, place the prayer of the 
devout intelligent worshipper, who is most prompt in offerings, 
below the gods and above mortals. 

Below the Gods and above Mortals— ‘‘Spread it throughout the 
sky"' is the Scholiast’s explanation of avodevam upari-martyam, sarvam 
nabhah-pradesam vyápaya. 

` c हव्यदांतिः 1 NTC आह i 1 
६४३४. यो अग्नि हव्यदातिभिर्नमोभिर्वा सुदक्षमाविवासति। 
गिरा वाजिरशोचिषम्‌।1१३ || 

13. He who propitiates the powerful and quick radiating Agni 
with offerings of oblations, with reverential adorations and with 
praise, (is prosperous). 

६४३५. समिधा यो निशिती दाशददितिं धामभिरस्य मर्त्य:। 
विश्वेत्स धीभिः सुभगो जनाँ अति द्युम्मैरुदून ईव तारिषत्‌।।१४।। 
. 14. The mortal who propitiates Aditi with his (Agni’s) many 
forms by blazing fuel, prospering through his pious rites. shall 
Surpass all men in renown as (if he had crossed over) the waters. 
2 Aditi - Sayana takes Aditim as an epithet of Agni, i.e., akhandaniym, 
the insuperable.” His many forms are the gdrhapatya, etc. 
den छि 
६४३६. तदग्ने द्युम्ममा भ॑र यत्सासहत्सदने कं चिंदत्रिण॑म्‌। 
Sale d Cem MS i 
HA जनस्य दूढ्य:।॥१५।। 
15. Bestow upon us, Agni, that power which may overcome 


(be cannibal (entering) into our abode, the wrath of any malignant 
cing), 


१४३७. येन चष्टे वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा येन नासत्या भर्ग:। 
वयं तत्ते शव॑सा गातुवित्तमा इन्द्रत्वोता विधेमहि॥।१६।। 
16. Protected by Indra, well knowing the path that through 


you “ f र 2 
7 Power, (Agni), we should ollow, we adore that (radiances of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and Gan ri 
428 R 7९९0४ b arhità 


your, by which Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, the Nasatyás, and Bhaga 
shine. 
६४३८. ते भेद॑ने स्वाध्यो$ ये त्वां विप्र निदधिरे नृचक्ष॑सम्‌। 

विप्रासो देव सुक्रतुम्‌।।१७।। 


17. Those verily, Agni, are of approved picty who as your 
worshippers, sagacious deity, have established you as the 
contemplator of men, the performer of good works. 

zié आहुति sl. x 
६४३९. त इद्रेदि सुभग त आहुतिं ते सोतुं चक्रिरे दिवि। 
zzi भर्जिग्युर्महद्धनं EN | 
त इद्वाजेभिर्जिग्युर्महद्धनं ये त्वे कामं ARII 

18. Auspicious (Agni), they have set up the altar, have 
presented oblations, have expressed the libation on a (fortunate) 
day; they have won by their efforts infinite wealth who have 
placed their affection upon you. 

M CN ^ | 
६४४०. भद्रो नों अग्निराहुतो भद्रा रातिः सुंभग भद्रो HR: | 
1 
भद्रा उत प्रशस्तयः sl 

19. May Agni, to whom burnt-offerings have been made, be 
propitious to us: auspicious (Agni), may your gifts be blessings, 
may the sacrifice (we offer) be beneficial, may our praises yield us 
happiness. 

Samaveda, 111-1559. 

> 1 eis | 
६४४१. भद्रं मनः कृणुष्व qaqa यना समत्सुं सासह:। 
| रभतां ` 1 
अव॑ स्थिरा त॑नुहि भूरि शर्धतां वनेमा ते अभिष्टिमि:॥२०॥ 

20. Give us that resolute mind in conflict by which ame 
conquer in combats; humble the many firm (resolves) of our 1065: 
may we propitiate you by our sacrifices. 

In Conflict— Vrtratürye, “in conflict"; Sayana says, sangrame. 
Mahidhara, Yajurveda, 15.39, explains it papanásdya, *for the 
extirpation of sin." As for ava sthira tanuhi, Mahidhara takes greater 
license, and renders the phras, “‘make the strong bows without 
bowstrings,” sthirani dhanunsi jyārahitāni kuru. 


६४४२. ईळें गिरा मनुर्हितं यं देवा दूतमंरतिं ARI 
यजिष्ठं हव्यवाहनम्‌॥२१॥ 
21. I worship Agni, who has been established by Manu with 


praise, whom the gods have appointed their royal messenger, Who 
is the most adorable, the bearer of oblations. 


c न In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


1 


hi 


a 


IC 


ic 


८) 


ve 


d Digitized by fyya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 9, 


429 
1 i राजते प्रयों N 
६४४३. तिग्मजम्भाय तरुणाय राजते प्रयो गायस्यग्नयें। 
यः पिंशते सूनृताभिः सूवीर्यमग्निर्घुतेभिराहुत:11२२॥ 
22. Offer (sacrificial) food to that bright-shining, everyouthful, 


royal Agni, who, (when gratified) by sincere praises, and 
worshipped with oblations, bestows excellent male offspring. 


६४४४. यदीं घृतेभिराहुंतो वाशीमग्निर्भरत उच्चाव॑ च। 
असुर इव निर्णिज॑म्‌।।२३॥। 
23. When Agni, worshipped with oblations, sends his voice 


upwards and downwards, as the sun disperses his rays, (we praise 
him). 


६४४५. यो हव्यान्यैर॑यता मनुर्हितो देव आसा सुंगन्धिना। 
विवासते वार्याणि स्वध्वरो होतां देवो अम॑त्यः।।२४।। 

24. The divine (Agni), established by Manu, the offerer of the 
sacrifice, the invoker vof the gods), the divine, the immortal, who 
conveys the oblations in his fragrant mouth, bestows (upon his 
adorers) desirable (riches). 

६४४६. यद॑ग्ने मर्त्यस्त्वं स्यामहं मित्रमहो अम॑र्त्य:। सह॑सः सूनवाहुत![२५ i 

25. Agni, son of strength, shining with friendly radiance, and 


worshipped with oblations, may I, who, although mortal, am as 
you are, become immortal. 


Mayo Become Immortal— Agreeably to the text, ye yathd 
Jathopdsate te tad eva bhavanti, **as men worship, such they become.” 


[00 perhaps, the latter part should be, ‘‘May I, although a mortal, become 
as you, immortal."'] 


६४४७. न त्वां रासीयाभिश॑स्तये वसो न पापत्वार्य सन्त्य। 
3 M at 
न में स्तोतामतीवा न दुर्हित: स्यादग्ने न पापयां।।२६॥ 
26. May I not be accused, Vasu, of calumniating you, nor, 
8tacious (Agni). of sunfulness (against you); let not (the priest) the 
Teciter of my praises be dull of intellect or ill-disposed; (may he 


Bot err), Agni, through wickedness. 


al May I not be Accused, Etc.— Rather, ‘Let me not abuse you by 
ümny or wickedness,” na ryg rast lyabhi-sastaye na pápatváya. 


२४४८, पितुर्न पुत्र: सुभृतो दुरोण आ देवाँ dg प्र णो हवि:॥२७॥ 


dw z Cherished by us as a son by a father, let him (Agni) in our 
“ling convey promptly our oblation to the gods. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


कॅ. ही 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Sarihita 


430 
६४४९. तवाहमग्न ऊतिभिर्नेदिष्ठाभिः सचेय जोषमा व॑सो। 
सदां देवस्य ned: ।॥२८ ।। 
28. Agni, granter of dwellings, may I, who am mortal, ever 
enjoy pleasure through your proximate protections. 
६४५०. तव weal सनेयं तव॑ रातिभिरग्ने तव प्रशंस्तिभिः। 
त्वामिदाहुः प्रमतिं वसो ममाग्ने हर्षस्व दात॑वे॥२९॥ 
29. May I propitiate you, Agni, by worshipping you, by the 
gifts presented to you, by your praises: verily, Vasu, they have 
called you the benevolent-minded: delight, Agni, to give me 


wealth. 
They have called you, Etc.— Sayana explains it, “they (the pious 


sages) call you my protector," mama stot raksakam tvàm eva 
brahmavádinah kathayanti. 
६४५१. प्र सो अग्ने तवोतिभिं: सुवीराभिस्तिरते वाज॑भर्मभि:। 
यस्य त्वं स॒ख्यमोवरः।।३०।। 
30. He, Agni, whose friendship you acceptest, pr 
your favours, granting male progeny and ample food. 

Samaveda, 108, 1822. 

६४५२. wd दरप्सो नीलवान्वाश ऋत्विय इन्धानः सिष्णवा द॑दे। 
ci मंहीनामुषसामसि प्रियः क्षपो वस्तुषु राजसि।।३१।॥ 

31. Sprinkled, (Agni, with the libation), the dripping (juices), 
car-borne, agreeable, offered in due season, resplendent, have been 
presented to you: you are the beloved of the mighty dawns, 
reign over the things of night. 

Samaveda, 1823. [Sayana explains rájasi, 
“you illuminest."'] 

६४५३. तमागैतम सोभ॑रयः सहसमुष्कं स्वभिष्टिमवसे। 
सम्राजं त्रासंदस्यवम्‌।।३२॥। 

32. We, the Sobharis, have come to the thousand rà 
sincerely worshipped, the universal sovereign, the ally 9 
Trasudasyu, for his protection. 

६४५४. यस्य॑ ते अग्ने अन्ये अग्नय उपक्षितो वयाईव। 
विपो न दुम्ना नि युवे जनांना तव॑ कषत्राणि वर्धयन्‌।३२।। 


ospers through 


you 


‘you shine amidst," Or 


yed, the 


E. 0 ee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


mM “<< we क 


Cr 


the 
ive 
me 


ous 
eva 


ugh 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sūkta 19 ES 


33. Agni, on whom your other fires are dependent, like 
branches (on the stem of the tree), may I among men, magnifying 
your powers, become possessed, like (other) votaries, of 
(abundant) food. 


॥ यमादित्यामा ^ अद्रुह siani मर्त्यम्‌ 
६४५५. देत्यासो अद्रुहः पारं नयथ l 
“wad ail. 
मघोनां विश्वेषां सुदानव:11३४।। 

34. Benevolent and generous Adityas, amidst all the offerers of 
oblations, the man whom you conduct to the limit (of his 
undertakings obtains his reward). 

Whom you conduct to the Limit—The text has only yam nayatha 
param, **whom you lead to the opposite bank.” The Scholiast supplies 
the rest. 

si] ति I चिच्चर्षणीसह ^ bo. ] ५: I 
६४५६. TET राजानः क सहः क्षयन्त मानुषां अनु। 
वयं ते वो वरुण मित्रार्यमनत्स्यामेदृतस्यं TA: 134 I 

35. Royal (Adityas), overcomers of (hostile) men, (ye subdue) 

any one harassing those (who are engaged in sacred rites) and may 


we, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman, be the conveyers of the sacrifice 
(addressed) to you. 


६४५७. अदान्मे पौरुकुत्स्यः पञ्चाशतं त्रसदस्युर्वधूर्नाम्‌। 
मंहिष्ठो अर्यः सत्प॑तिः।।३६।। 


36. The magnificent lord, the protector of the virtuous, 


Trasadasyu, the son of Purukutsa, has given ine five hundred 
brides 


६४५८. उत में प्रवियोर्वयियो: सुवास्त्वा अधि तुग्व॑नि। 
तिसृणां संप्ततीनां श्यावः प्रणेता भुवद्वसुर्दियानाँ पति: 11२७1 
37. The affluent Syava, the lord of kine, has given to me upon 
the banks of the Suvastu a present of seventy three (cows). 
The printed edition was no comment upon this stanza. The MSS. are 


imperf: टु = : 
Et especially as regards the first half line, ufa me prayiyor 
loh. [Durga, in his comment on the Nirukta, explains the verse as 


follows, “Moreover, on the banks of the Savdstu (he has given) to me 


of three of Beasts of burden and garments; he, the affluent leader and lord 
explains Seventy noble dark-coloured (cows has given them to me)." He 
Phavayit e ey by dhanam asvádi; vayiyu by vastradi, bhuvadvasuh by 
“Ud vastindm prasastáh; Syamavarnanam, scil. gavám.] 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


(plenty) 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


AD Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त-२०] 


[क्रषि- सोभरि काण्व। देवता- मरुद्ण। छन्दः प्रगाथ (विषमा ककुप्‌, 
समासतो बृहती।] 


६४५९. आ गन्ता मा रिषण्यत प्रस्थावानो माप॑ स्थाता समन्यवः। 
स्थिरा चिंत्रमयिष्णवः।।१॥। 


|. Far-travelling (winds), alike wrathful, come hither, harm us 
not: benders of the solid (mountains), withdraw not from us. 


६४६०. वीळुपविभिर्मरुत ऋभुक्षण आ रुद्रासः सुदीतिभिंः। 
इषा नों अद्या गंता पुरुस्पृहो यज्ञमा sisi: us ।। 
2. Mighty sons of Rudra, Maruts, come with brilliant, strong- 


wheeled (chariots): desired of many, well disposed to Sobhari, 
come to-day to our sacrifice with (abundant) food. 


६४६१. विद्या हि रुद्रियांणां शुष्ममुग्रं मरुतां शिमीवताम्‌। 
विष्णोरेषस्य मीळहुषांम्‌।।३॥। 
3. We know the great strength of the active sons of Rudra, the 
Maruts, the shedders of the diffusive rain. 


Shedder of the Diffusive Rain— Visor milhusam is explained 
vyáptasya esaniyasya vrstyudakasya esasya sektrnám. 
पार्पतन्तिष्ठहुच्छुनो [| 1 रोद॑सी 
६४६२. वि द्वीपानि छुनोभे युजन्त । 
धन्वान्यैरत यदेज॑ 
प्र धन्वान्येरत शुभ्रखादयो थ स्वभानव: | | 
4. They fall upon the island: the firm-set (trees) are with 
difficulty sustained; they agitate both heaven and earth; they urge 
on the waters: bright-weaponed, far-shining, whatever (you 
approach) you cause to tremble. 
Sayana scems to explain this verse, “The islands fall asunder, 
firmest (trees) experience distress; they (the winds) distress heaven and 


earth; the water hurry onward, O bright-weaponed, self-shining ones: 
when you agitate them." 


६४६३. अंच्युता fal अज्मन्ना नानदति पर्वतासो वनस्मतिंः। 
भूमिर्यामेषु रेजते।५॥। 


5. At your coming the unprecipitated mountains and Wee 
resound; the earth shakes at your passage. 


the 


१० REC EE. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EE OOO 


ita 


1 us 


ong- 
hari, 


1, the 


ained 


with 
| urge 
(you 
er, the 


en and 
r ones. 


] trees 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 20 433 
६४६४. अमाय वो मरुतो यात॑वे द्यौर्जिहीत उत्तरा बृहत्‌। 
यत्रा नरो देदिशते तनृष्वा त्वक्षांसि बाह्वोजस:।।६।। 
6. (Alarmed) at your violence, Maries the heaven seeks to rise 


higher, abandoning the firmament, where (you) the strong-armed 
leaders (of rites) display the ornaments of (your) persons. 


६४६५. स्वधामनु fad नरो महिं त्वेषा अमवन्तो वृष॑प्सव:। 
वहन्ते अहुंतप्सवः।।७।। 

7. The radiant, strong, rain-shedding, undisguised leaders of 
rites display their great glory when accepting the (sacrificial) food. 
६४६६. गोभिर्वाणो अज्यते सोभरीणां रथे कोशें हिरण्ययें। 

गोबन्धवः सुजातासं इषे भुजे महान्तों नः SRA नु।८ || 

8. The voice (of the Maruts) blends with the songs of the 
Sobharis in the receptacle of their golden chariot: may the mighty 
well-born Maruts, the offspring of the (brindled) cow, (be 


gracious) to us regard of food, enjoyment, and kindness. 
The Voice— Sayana explains vana as ‘‘the lute,” vind. 


६४६७. प्रति वो वृषदञ्जयो वृष्णे शर्धाय मारुताय भरध्वम्‌। 
हव्या वृष॑प्रयाव्णे 11 ।। 


9. Sprinklers of the libation, present the offerings to the rain- 
bestowing swift-passing company of the Maruts. 


६४६८. वृषणश्वेन॑ मरुतो वृष॑प्सुना Wa वृषनाभिना। 
आ श्येनासो न पक्षिणो get नरो हव्या नो वीतयें गत।॥१०। 


10. Maruts leaders (of rites), come like swift-flying birds in 
a rain-shedding, strong-horsed chariot, whose wheels bestow 
Showers, to partake of our oblations. 


3४६९. समानमञ्ज्येषां वि भ्राजन्ते रुकमासो अधि बाहुएुँ। 
दविद्युतत्यृष्टय:॥११॥ 


11. Their decoration is the same; gold (necklaces) shine (on 
7 breasts), lances gleam upon their shoulders. 


३४७०. त उग्रासो वृष॑ण उग्रबांहवो AE ARRI 
स्थिरा धन्वान्यायुंधा रथेषु वोऽनीकेष्वधि HA: gz H 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


thei 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


434 Rgveda Samhita 


12. Fierce, givorous, strong-armed, they need not exert (the 
energy of their) persons: bows and arrows are leady in your 
chariots; the glory (of conquest) over (hostile) armies is yours. , 

They need not Exert the Energy, Etc.— Or rather, **they need not 
exert themselves to defend their persons," nakistantisu yetire. 

|| त्वेषं श्वंतामेकमिद्भुजे 
६४७१. येषामर्णो न सप्रथो नाम त्वेषं शश्वतामेकमिद्धुजे। 
frst | 
वयो न fist सहः।।१३।। 

13. One illustrious name is given to them all, as widely 
diffused as water for the gratification (of their worshippers), like 
invigorating paternal food. 

Like invigorating Paternal Food— Vayo na pitryam sahah. The 
latter is explained prasahanasilam, but the exect purport is not very 
obvious; apparently, it is intended to say that the worshipper may rely 
upon it. 


॥ wood s धुनीनाम्‌ | 
६४७२. तान्वन्दस्व मरुतस्ताँ उप स्तुहि तेषां हि | 
अराणां न चरमस्तदेंषां दाना महा तदेषाम्‌। 1१४।। 
14. Praise them, praise the Maruts, for we are (dependent) 
upon those agitators (of all things) as a menial is upon nis lords; 


therefore are their donations (characterized) by munificence; such 
are their (gifts). 


६४७३. सुभगः स d ऊतिष्वास पूर्वासु मरुतो व्युष्टिषु। 
यो वा जूनमुतासंति।।१५।। 


15. Fortunate was he, Maruts, who, in former days, was secure 
in your protections, as is he who now enjoys them. 


६४७४. यस्य॑ वा यूयं प्रति वाजिनों नर आ हव्या वीतयें गथ। 
अभि ष चुम्मैरुत वाज॑सातिभिः सुम्ना वो धूतयो नशत्‌।।१६॥ 

16. The sacrificer, to partake of whose oblations you approach, 
leaders of rites, enjoys, agitators of all things, the felicity you 
bestow, together with abundant viands, and the gift of strength. 
६४७५. यर्था रुद्रस्य॑ सूनवों दिवो वशन्त्यसुरस्य वेधस:। 

युवानस्तथेदंसत्‌।।१७।। 

17. May this (our praise) take effect, so that the ever-youthful 


sons of Rudra, creators of the cloud, (coming) frozi heaven, may 
be pleased with us. 


है...“ ति... CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 1 
j 7] 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


(a Mandala 8, Sükta 20 435 
= 1 ^ 
ie ६४७६. ये चाह॑न्ति मरुत॑ः सुदानंव: स्मन्मीळहुषश्चरन्ति ये। 
द 
य अत॑श्विदा न उप वस्य॑सा हुदा युवान आ वंवृध्वम्‌।।१८॥ 
lot 18. Youthful (Maruts), approaching us with benevolent hearts, 
grant prosperity to those liberal men who worship you, who 
zealously propitiate you, the showerers of rain, with oblations. 
६४७७. यून॑ ऊ पु नर्विष्ठया वृष्ण॑ः पावकाँ 
ly अभि सोभरे गिरा। गाय गाईव चर्कृषत्‌।१९।। 


ke 19. Praise, Sobhari, (and attract hither) by a new song the 
youthful purifying showerers, as (a ploughman) repeatedly drags 
the his oxen. 
ery As a Ploughman, Etc.— Sāyaņa says, “95 a ploughman repeatediy 
ely drawing the furrows (praises or addresses) of his oxen.” 
^ मुष्टिहेव 1 aay 
६४७८. साहा ये सन्ति मुष्टिहेव हव्यो विश्वासु पृत्सु होतृषु। 
` | 
वृष्णश्चन्द्रान्न सुश्रव॑स्तमान्‌ गिरा वन्द॑स्व मरुतो अह ।।२०॥। 


20. Propitiate with praise the Maruts, the senders of rain, the 


int) givers of pleasure, the liberal bestowers of food; who are ever 
rds; victorious in combats, and like a boxer who has been challenged 
uch over his challengers. | 


The Liberal Bestowers of Food— Or, “the most illustrious," 
susravastaman—Sayana explains the latter clause, "who are ever 
victorious in combats and ever challengers, like a challenge-worthy 
boxer.” 

| N | 
६४७९, गावश्चिद्घा समन्यवः सजात्येन मरुतः सबन्धव:। 
N 
रिहते ककुभो मिथः।।२१।! 

21. Maruts, who are of like wrath, offspring of the matemal 
cow (Prsni), related by a common origin, they severally spread 
through the quarters of the horizon. 
ach, | à Sámaveda, 404. [Or rather, ““Or Maruts, alike in energy, your 
you Kindred, the cows, severally lick up the quarters of the horizon.” Benfey 

understands by gavah, sun’s rays.] 


६४८०. मतश्निद्दो नृतवो रुक्मवक्षस॒ उप॑ भ्रातृत्वमायति। 
अधिं नो गात मरुतः सदा fe d आपित्वमस्ति निधुवि1॥२२॥ 


22. Maruts, dancing (through the air), decorated with golden 
breast-plates, the mortal (who worships you) attains your 
brotherhood: speak favourably to us, for your affinity is ever 
(made known) at the regulated (sacrifice). 


cure 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


436 Rgveda Samhita 
६४८१. मरुतो मारुतस्य न आ भेषजस्यं वहता सुदानवः। 
यूयं संखायः सप्तयः।।२३।। 


23, Generous fiends, Maruts, swift gliding (through the air), 
bring to us (the boon) of the medicaments that belong to your 
company. 

भिस्तूर्व भर्दशस्य 
६४८२. याभिः सिन्धुमवंथ याभिस्तूर्वथ याभिर्दशस्यथा क्रिविम्‌। 
भर्मयो | 
मयों नो भूतोतिभिर्मयोभुवः शिवार्भिरसचद्विषः।२४।। 

24. With those auspicious protections with which you have 
guarded the ocean, with which you have destroyed (your enemies), 
with which you provided the well (for Gotama), do you who are 
the sources of happiness, the unconquerable by your adversaries, 
bestow happiness upon us. 

The Unconquerable by your Adversaries— Sayana explains 


asasacadvisah as Satrurahitah, ‘‘destitute of enemies." —For Gotama, 
see vol. 1, mantra 945. 


६४८३. यत्सिन्धौ यदसिकन्यां यत्समद्रेषुं मरुतः सुबर्हिषः। 
यत्पर्वतेषु भेषजम्‌।।२५।। 

25, Whatever medicament there may be in the Sindhu, the 
Asikni, in the oceans, in the mountains, Maruts, who are gratified 
by sacrifice, — 

६४८४. विश्वं पश्य॑न्तो बिभृथा तनूष्वा तेना नो अधि वोचत। 
क्षमा CH मरुत आतुरस्य न इष्कर्ता बिद्युत पुन॑ः।।२६॥ 

26. Do you, beholding every sort, collect them for (the good 
of) our bodies, and instruct us in their (uses): let the cure of 
sickness (be the portion), Maruts, of him amongst us who for his 
wickedness is sick; re-establish his enfeebled (frame). à 

The Suktas of this Adhyaya are, for the most part simple. This last has 
exceptions. 

[सूक्त- २१] 
[क्रषि- सोभरि काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, १७-१८ चित्र। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा 
ककुप्‌, समासतो बृहती।] 
६४८५. वयमु त्वा-पूर्व्य स्थूरं न कच्चिद्धरन्तो5वस्यव॑:। 
वाजें चित्रं हवामहे I 


ee eee o In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Y 
च्य 


Al 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sukta 21 “i 


1. Unpreceded /ndra, cherishing you (with sacrificial food), 
desirous of your protection, we invoke you who are manifold in 
battle, as (men cal] upon) some stout (person for help). 

As Men Call upon some Stout Person for Help— Vaje citram, 
saigrame vividharüpam; the printed Sáman, 408 [L.5.1.2.10; H.1.1.22.1.}. 
(Benfey), reads vajrin, *'thunderer," for vaje-—Yatha Vrihyddibhir grham 
pürayanto jana annavisaye sthilam gunádhikam kañcit mánavam 
áhvayanti, '*as people filling a house with rice and the like call upon 
some stout, liberal man for 000, 7 is the commentator's amplification of 
the last clause. 

Unpreceded—Aparvya is explained "new," ie, ever new at the 
three oblations. 

६४८६. उप॑ त्वा कर्मचूतये स नो युवोग्रश्चक्राम यो धृषत्‌। 
1 Lk ^ Lu 
त्वामिद्धयवितारं ववृमहे सखाय इन्द्र WR 

2. We have recourse, /ndra, to you for protection at sacred 
rites: may he who is ever young, fierce, resolute, come to us! We, 
your friends. /ndra, rely upon you as our protector and benefactor. 


Sdmaveda, 709. 


६४८७. आ याहीम इन्दवोऽश्वंपते गोपत उर्वरापते। सोर्मं सोमपते पिब11३।। 


3. Lord of horses, of cattle, of corn-land, these libations (are 
for you); come, lord of the Soma, drink the effused Soma juice. 
६४८८. वयं हि त्वा बन्धुमन्तमबन्धवो विप्रास इन्द्र येमिम। 

` n तेति a aln T 
या ते धार्मानि वृषभ तेभिरा गहि विश्वेभिः सोमपीतये |1४॥॥ 

4. Intelligent, but destitute of kin, let us connect ourselves, 
Indra, with you, who abound with kinsmen: come, showerer (of 
benefits,) with all your glories, to drink the Soma. 3 
हैक Intelligent but Destitute of Kin— Or rather, “we your worshippers 
(viprdsah). destitute of kin.” 

६४८९ सीदन्तस्ते | ^ N गो aly M मदिरे विव क्षणे। 
पु ते वया यथा MAd मधा माद्र वि 
अभि त्वामिन्द्र नोनुमः।।५। 

5. Gathering like (a flock of) birds round your exhilarating 
heaven-bestowing Soma beverage mixed with curds, We repeatedly 
glorify you, Indra. 

Sámaveda, 407.  Vivaksane is explained by Sayana 
‘vargaprapanasile, **causing to obtain svarga. 


६४९०. अच्छां च त्वैना नम॑सा वर्दामसि किं मुटुंश्चिद्धि दीधयः। 
सन्ति कामासो हरिवो दष्टं स्मो वयं सन्ति नो धिर्यः1 ६11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


H 
t] 
२ 


€————————n—— He ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


438 Rgveda Samhita 


6. We salute you with this adoration: why do you so oft 
mediate (upon our requests)? Master of bay steeds, let our desires 
be granted. You are their bestower, we are your (suppliants) and 
our sacred rites are (addressed to you). 


६४९१. नूतना इदिन्द्र ते वयमूती अंभूम नहि नू d अद्रिवः। 
विद्या पुरा परीणसः।!७।। 


7. We verily are the most recent (objects) of your protection, 
Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt; we have not known of old one 
greater than you. 

We have not Known, Ete.—- Sayana seems to render this latter 
clause ‘‘we knew you not formerly as the mighty one (but now we know 
you).”” 


६४९२. विद्या संखित्वमुत vit भोज्यमा ते ता व॑ज़िन्नीमहे। 
उतो संमस्मिन्ना शिंशीहि नो वसो वाजें सुशिप्र गोमति। t 


8, We acknowledge, hero, your friendship, (the wealth) to be 
enjoyed through you, and solicit both, thunderer, of you: giver of 
dwellings. Indra of the handsome jaws, sustain us in all abundance 
and in (store of) cattle 


pe. ६४९३. यो नं इदमिंदं पुरा प्र वस्य॑ आनिनाय तमु व: स्तुषे। 
सखाय इन्द्र॑मूतये।।९ ।। 


9. I glorify friends, for your protection, that Indra who has 
brought to us of old this or that excellent (wealth). 
Samaveda, 400. 


६४९४. स वयति गव्यमश्व्यं स्तोतृभ्यो मघवां शतम्‌।।१०।। 


|, 10. That man glorifies Indra, the lord of bay steeds the 
protector of the good, the overcomer of enemies, who rejoices (in 
| the fulfilment of his wishes): may Maghavan bestow upon us his 
ji worshippers, hundreds of cattle and horses. 


६४९५. त्वया ह स्विद्युजा वयं प्रतिं श्वसन्तं वृषभ ब्रुवीमहि। 

संस्थे जन॑स्य गोमत:।।११ ।! 
। 11. With you, showerer (of benefits), for our ally, we bid 
defiance to one assailing us in a contest (on behalf) of a man 


possessing herds of cattle. 
Samaveda, 403. 


vo In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ESE by Arya pamaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


६४९६. जयेम कारे पुरुहूत कारिणोऽभि faim ge: 
qfi हन्याम॑ शूशुयाम चावेरिन्द्र प्र णो fd: 112R 
12. Indra, invoked of many, may we conquer in battle those 
contending against us; may We resist the malignant; may we, aided 
by the leaders (of rites, the Maruts), slay Vrtra; may we be 
prosperious, and do you protect our pious works. 


The Leaders of Rites—Sayana explains nrbhih as '*wielders of 

weapons,” ayudhanetrbhih, and vrtra as **the enemy.” 
` 1 | 
६४९७. अभ्रातृव्यो अना त्वमनापिरिन्द्र जनुषां सनादसि। 
धेदापित्वमिच्छसे 1 [| ^ 
युधेदापित 1123 11 

13. You, Indra, are by your birth brotherless: from ever are 
you without a kinsman: the kindred you desire is (that of him) who | 
engages in war. 

Sámaveda, 399-1389. [Sáyana renders this verse thus, “You, Indra, 
by your birth are from eternity without a foe, without a controller, without | 


a kinsman; you desire to show your kinsmanship only by war," ie., it is 
only by fighting that you are the friend of your worshippers.] 
ay l | पीय॑न्ति | ` 1 
६४९८. नकीं रेवन्तं सख्याय विन्दसे पीर्यन्ति ते सुराश्वः। 
यदा कृणोषिं नदनुं समूंहस्यादित्पितेव॑ हूयसे।।१४॥। 
14. You acknowledge no friendship for the wealthy man (who 
makes no offerings); those who are puffed up with wine offened 
| you: when you institute (the sacrifice), you expelled niggardliness, 
and you are invoked as a protector. 
Surásvah, suraya vrddháh paramattah, intoxicated; or ndstikdh, 
Atheists. For the second line, beginning Yada krnosi nadanum samühasi, 
the printed edition gives no commentary. One MS. reads (but no doubt 
; from some interpolators hand), Yada mdnavasya dánádiráhityam 
samühasi nirdkarosi yastritvam karosi, ““when you expelled the neglect 
of gifts of a man, you make the sacrificing’; but the construction is 
questionable. [The verse occurs in Sdmaveda, 1390; and Sayana there 
explains the clause, Yada krnosi nadanum samühasi, “when you utter the 
inarticulate sound of approbation (to the worshipper, implying, “He is 
mine’), you bring him (wealth).’? See Benfey's translation, note. 
Professor Müller thus translates the whole verse, Ancient Sanskrit Lit., 
D-542, ‘You never find a rich man to be your friend; wine-swillers 
despise you; but when you thunder, when you gather (the clouds), then 
| you are called like a father."'] 
As a Protector— Or, “958 father,” pitd iva. 


439 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


440 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai PNE 20५१ i 


EX] =| | EY 1 
६४९९. मा ते अमाजुरा यथा मूरास इन्द्र सख्य त्वावतः। 
1 1 
नि षंदाम सचा सुते।।१५।। 

15. Let us not, like foods, /ndra, be regardless of the friendship 
of such as you are; let us assemble together when the libation is 
effused. 

Let us not, Like Fools— Sayana interprets this, “Let not us who are 
your, Indra, be desolate as those who are ignorant of the friendship of 


such as you are md te amdjuro yathà mürása indra sakhye tvavatah. He 
explains amájurah as grhaih putraih dhanddibhisca saha jirnáh. 


६५००. मा ते गोदत्र निरराम राध॑स इन्द्र मा d गृहामहि। 
दुळ्हा चिंदर्यः प्र मृशाभ्या भर न ते दामानं आदभे।।१६।। 

16. Let us never, Indra, giver of cattle, cease (to benefit) from 
your wealth; let us not accept it (from another than) you: do you, 
who are the lord, confirm to us permanent (riches), bestow them 
upon us; your benefactions cannot be arrested. 


Another than you— Sayana explains te, as in the previous verse, 
vayam tava svabhitah, **we who are thine.”’ 


६५०१. इन्द्रो वा घेदियन्मघं सर॑स्वती वा सुभगां ददिर्वसु। 
त्वं वा चित्र दाशुषें।।१७॥। 


17. Is it Indra who has given to the donor (of the oblation) so 
much affluence? Is it the auspicious Sarasvati (who has given) the 
treasure? Or, Citra, is it you? 


६५०२. चित्र इद्राजां राजका इदन्यके यके सरस्वतीमनु। 
पर्जन्यइव ततनद्धि वृष्ट्या सहस्रमयुता दद॑त्‌।।१८।। 
18. Verily the Raja Citra, giving his thousands and tens of 
thousands, has overspread (with his bounty) those other petty 


princes, who mules along the Sarasvati, as Parjanya (overspreads 
the earth) with rain. 


[सूक्त- २२] 


[क्रषि- सोभरि काण्व। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, 
समासतो बृहती) ७ बृहती, ८ अनुष्टुप्‌, ११ ककुप्‌, १२ मध्येज्योति 
त्रिष्टुप्‌), ९-१०, १३-१८ प्रगाथ (विषमा ककुप्‌, समासतो बृहती) बृहती।] 


६५०३. ओ त्यम॑ह्न आ रथमद्या दंसिष्ठमूतयें। 
यम॑श्चिना सुहवा रुद्रवर्तनी आ सूर्यायै तस्थथुः।।१।। 


a 000 . In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Man पनि छ260179 Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 441 


1. 1 invoke to-day for our protection that splendid chariot, 
which, adorable Asvins, advancing on the path to battle, you 
ascended (to go to the wedding) of Surya. 

On the Path to Battle— Rudravartani, explained as having a path 
which causes weeping in battle,” of **whose paths are praised." 


६५०४, पूर्वापुर्ष सुहवं पुरुस्पृहँ भुज्युं वाजे पूर्व्यम्‌। 
सचनार्वन्तँ सुमतिर्भि: सोभरे विद्वेषसमनेहसंम्‌।२।। 


2. Celebrate, Sobhari, with praises (that chariot), the 


benefactor of former (encomiasts), the worthily invoked, the 
desired of many, the preserver, the foremost in battles, the relied 
| 
I 
| 
| 
i 


upon by all, the scatterer of enemies, the exempt from ill. 
६५०५. इह त्या पुरुभूत॑मा देवा नमोभिरञ्चिना। 
अर्वाचीना स्वव॑से करामहे TART दाशुषों Tell 
3k We incite by our adorations on this occasion the two divine 


Asvins, the overcomers of foes, that they may come down for our 
protection and proceed to the dwelling of the donor (of the 


offering). । 
६५०६. युवो रथ॑स्य UR चक्रमीयत ईर्मान्यद्वामिषण्यति। 


अस्माँ अच्छा सुमतिवाँ शुभस्पती आ धेनुरिंव धावतु॥४॥ | 

4. One of the wheels of your car moves in every direction; the | 
other, impellers of actions, remains with you: may your favour, । 
lords of rain, hasten towards us a cow (to her calf)! | 
i Impellers of Actions— /rmá is explained antaryd mitayd prerakau, 

urgers, or impellers, by the property of internal influence or 
Conscience"'; or it may mean udakasya prerayitdrau, **senders of water 
or rain.” [For the two wheels, see vol. I, mantra 347]. 
l 
६५०७. रथो यो वाँ त्रिवन्धुरो हिरण्याभीशुरश्चिना। 
1 zi i 
परि द्यावापृथिवी भूष॑ति श्रुतस्तेनं नासत्या गतम्‌।५1। 

5. Your celebrated chariot, Asvins, that is three banked, and 
Caparisoned with gold, graces heaven and earth: come with it, 
Nasatyas. 

Se: Three-Banked— Sayana explains trivandhura as “having three | 
SS On “having two poles, and a bar between them for fastening the 


harness ^ ट 
hamess, vandhura being sdrathisthanam ot dve ise tanmadhye 
“Wesajjanarthako dandah. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
442 Rgveda Samhita 
६५०८. दशस्यन्ता मनवे पूर्व्य दिवि यवं वृकेण कर्षथः। 
ता वांमद्य सुंमतिभिं: शुभस्पती अश्चिना प्र स्तुंवीमहि।।६।। 

6. Bestowing upon Manu the ancient (rain) from the 
firmament, you enabled him to cultivate (the soil) with the plough 
(and reap) the barely: now therefore, Asvins, lords of rain, we 
glorify you both with praises. 

And Reap the Barley— The text has yavam vrkena karsathah, **you 
till with the plough barley." 

६५०९. उप॑ नो वाजिनीवसू यातमृतस्यं पथिभि:। 
येभिस्तूक्षि वृषणा त्रासदस्यवं महे क्षत्राय जिन्व॑थः।।७।। 

7. Rich in food, Asvins, come to us by the paths of sacrifice, 
those by which showerers (of benefits), you went to gratify Trksi, 
the son of Trasadasyu, with vast wealth. 

६५१०. अयं वामद्रिभिः सुतः सोमो नरा वृषण्वसू। 
आ wid सोम॑पीतये पिब॑तं दाशुषों TRI 

8. Leaders (of rites), affluent in rain, this Soma has been 
expressed by the (grinding) stones for you; come to drink the 
Soma, drink it in the dwelling of the donor. 

६५११. आ हि रुहतमश्चिना रथे कोशें हिरण्ययें वृषण्वसू। 
युञ्जाथां पीर्वरीरिष॑ः।।९।। 
9. Asvins, who are rich in rain, ascend your golden chariot, a 
storehouse (of weapons); bring to us fattening food. 


Flattening— Pivarih, according to Sayana, ‘purifying,’ or “stout; 
pdvayitrni आपका và (annam). 


६५१२. याभिंः पकथमव॑थो याभिरध्रिगुं याभिर्बभ्रुं विजोषसम्‌। 
ताभिर्नो मक्षू तूय॑मश्चिना ग॑तं भिषज्यतं यदातुंरम्‌।।१०॥। 
10. With those protections with which you have defended 


Paktha, Adhrigu, and Babhru, when propitiating you, come to US, 
Asvins, quickly; administer medicine to the sick. 


६५१३. यदश्रिंगावो अध्रिंगू इदा चिदहों अश्चिना हवांमहे। 
वयं गीर्भिर्विपन्यव: ।॥११ 11 
11. At the time when hurrying, devout, we invoke you both 
speedily going to battle, at the dawn of day, with our hymns. 


Neg 5 In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i zm 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 22 28 


Hurrying, Devout, Etc.— The terms are unusual yad adhrigávo 

adhrigi havamahe. The first is explained, karmasu tvaramanáh, 

“hastening to acts of worship’; the second, satruvadhdrtham sangrame 

1९ tvaraya gacchantau; adhrigi being explained — etymoligically | 
adhrtagamanau, **whose going is unwith held." 


> NY MES" 1. t मंहिष्ठा 
re ६५१४. ताभिरा यांतं वृषणोप मे ed विश्वप्सुं विश्ववार्यम्‌। इषा cfe 
3 x क्रिवि = B E 
पुरुभूत॑मा नरा याभिः क्रिविं वावृधुस्ताभिरा TIRRI 
12. Then, showerers, come to my manifold all-propitiating in 
vocation with those (protections), with which, leaders (of rites), 
you, who are gratified (by oblations), munificent (in gifts), and the 
overcomers of numerous (foes), gave augmentation to the well; 
with such (protections) come hither. 
९, Gave Augmentation to the Well— Sec i. 112. 5. and note. [The 
ji, Asvins miraculously filled the well with water, and so rescued Vandana.] 


६५१५. ताविदा चिदहानाँ तावश्चिना वन्द॑मान उप॑ ब्रुवे! 
ता ऊ नमोभिरीमहे ।।१३॥। 


13. I address the Asvins, glorifying them at break of day; we 
solicit them with oblations. 


n 
ic ६५१६. ताविद्दोषा ता उषसिं शुभस्पती ता यामग्नुद्रवर्तनी। 
मा नो मर्ताय रिपवे वाजिनीवसू परो रुद्रावतिं ख्यतम्‌।।१४।। 
14. We adore those lords of water, leaders on the road of 
battle, in the evening, at dawn, and at mid-day; therefore, Rudras 


Who are rich in food, give us not up hereafter to a mortal 
a adversary. 


रुद्रवर्तनी- युद्धे रोदनशीलमागौं, स्तूयमानमागौं वा। 


६५१७. आ सुम्म्याय सुरम्यं प्राता रथेनाश्विनां वा सक्षणी। 
हुवे पितेव सोभ॑री।।१५।। 


15. Adorable Asvins, bring in your chariot at early dawn 


ed happiness to me, soliciting happiness: I, Sobhari, invoke you as 
E (did my) father. 


६५१८. मनोजवसा वृषणा मदच्युता मक्षुङ्गमाभिरूतिर्भि:। 
आरातताच्चिद्भूतमस्मे अवसे vef: पुरुभोजसा॥१६।। 


ae (Asvins,), who are swift as thought, the showerers (of 
its), prostrators of the arrogant, the givers of enjoyment to 


man ` X y 
Dr be €ver nigh unto us, for our security, with many and 
Pt protections. 


th 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


fr ————Á—— स 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
dd Rgveda Sarhhità 
६५१९. आ नो अरश्वांवदश्विना वर्तिर्यासिष्टं मधुपातमा नरा। 

iier हिर॑ण्यवत्‌।।१७।। 


17. Asvins, of goodly aspect, leaders (of rites), deep drinkers of 
the Soma juice, come to our dwelling abounding with horses, with 
cattle, with gold. 


६५२०. सुप्रावर्ग सुवीर्य yy वार्यमनांधृष्टं रक्षस्विनां। 
अस्मिन्ना वामायाने वाजिनीवसू विश्वा वामानिं धीमहि।।१८॥ 
18. May we obtain from you (wealth) spontaneously bestowed, 
comprising excellent strength, such as is desired by all, and 


unassailable by a powerful (foe): may we obtain from you who are 
rich in food, upon you coming hither, all good things. 


[सूक्त-२३] 
[ऋषि- विश्वमना वैयश्व। देवता- अन्नि। छन्द- उष्णिक्‌।] 
६५२१. ईळिष्वा हि प्रतीव्यंश्‍ यज॑स्व जातवेंदसम्‌। 
चरिष्णुूममगृभीतशोचिषम्‌।।१।। 
1. Adore him who resists (our foes), worship Jatavedas the 
m= diffuser of smoke, of unobstructed radiance. 
Who Resists our Foes— Prativyam, Satrusu pratigamana-silam 


agnim; Agni, who has the properly of going against enemies. Samaveda, 
102. 


६५२२. दामानं विश्वचर्षणे$ग्नि विश्वमनो गिरा। 
उत स्तुषे विष्पर्धसो रथांनाम्‌।।२॥। 


2. Commend with praise, all-beholding Visvamanas, that Agni, 
| who is the giver of chariots to the unenvious (worshipper). 
येषामाबाध J 
। ६५२३. Ta ऋग्मिय॑ इषः yea निग्रभे। 
वहिं्विन्दते 1 
उपविदा ते वसुं।।३।। 
3. The repeller (of foes), the glorified by hymns, arrests ik 
j food and drink, and the bearer of oblations takes away the wea 
(of those) of whom he foreknows (the neglect of sacrifice). . 1 
Takes away the Wealth of those, Etc.— Upavidá vindate vast 15 8 
the text has. The Scholiast explains the first by upavedanend, of 
| proximate knowing, that is, ete havinst devartham 


H ae É m ivi 
| prayacchantityetajnanena tesàm eva dhanam labhate, “These to s d » 
oblations to the gods"; by this knowledge he takes their wealth. [Sayar 


RS eee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


hità 


s of 
vith 


ved, 
and 
) are 


s the 


silam 
veda, 


Agni, 


ts the 
vealth 


wis all 
1d, by. 
1 na 
ot give 
Sayan 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sikta 23 s 


seems to understand the latter part, *'those non-sacrificers, whose food 
and its juices he arrests (sc. as not digesting them?), their wealth, too, he 
takes away by his divine knowledge (of their guilt). 


६५२४. उद॑स्य शोचिरस्थाद्दीदियुषो व्यरजर॑म्‌। 
तपुर्जम्भस्य सुद्युतों गणश्रिय: ure t 
4. The imperishable lustre rises of that Agni, who is radiant, 
bright with blazing teeth, resplendent, and glorious amidst troops 
(of worshippers). 


Troops of Worshippers—- Gansriyah is explained by Sayana ' ७५10 
visits troops of worshippers to take their oblations.” 


६५२५. Sd RE स्वध्वर स्तवानो देव्या कृपा। 
अभिख्या भासा वृहता MERA: in| 
5. Rise up with celestial splendour, you who are radiant with 


great and present lustre, who are worthily worshipped and 
glorified. 


६५२६. अग्ने याहि सुशस्तिभिर्हव्या जुह्दान आनुषक्‌। 
यथां दूतो बभूथं हव्यवाहन:11६1। 
6. Proceed, Agni, with pious praises, offering in due order the 


oblations (to the gods), for you are their messenger, the bearer of 
oblations. 


६५२७. अग्निं व॑ः पूर्व्यं हुवे होतारं चर्षणीनाम्‌। 
तमया वाचा गुणे तमु वः स्तुषे।।७।। 


7. I invoke for you, (worshippers), Agni, the ancient ministrant 
Priest of man, I praise him with this hymn, I glorify him for you. 


६५२८. यज्ञेभिरद्धुतक्रतुं यं कृपा सूदयन्त इत्‌। 
मित्रं न जने सुधितमृताव॑नि।।८।। 
8. (Worship him who is) of wondrous works, who, gladdened 
(by offerings), is present like a friend, whom (the priests) by their 


Sacrifices, according to their power, render propitious to the 
Worshipper. 


I क्रतावानमृतायवो = . जुजुषुर्नम॑सस्पदे 
६५२९. ऋ यज्ञस्य सार्धनं गिरा। उपों एनं जुजुपुर्नमसस्पदे । l 
2: Pious worshippers, at the place of offerings adore with 
praise him who is gratified by worship, the completer of the 
sacrifice, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a C »| 


ee EEE IS 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
446 Rgveda Samhita 


Adore with Praise— The text has jujusuh, **they have adored’’; but 
the Scholiast renders it upásevadhvam, expressly stating that the first (the 
third) person is here put for the second, madhyamapurusasya 
prathamapurusadesah 


६५३०. अच्छां नो अङ्गिरस्तमं यज्ञासों यन्तु संयत:। 
होता यो अस्ति विक्ष्वा यशस्त॑मः।।१०॥। 

10. Let our sacrificers, prepared (with their implements), 
present themselves before the chief of the Angirasas, who is the 
most renowned offerer of oblations amongst men. 

Sacrifices— Or ‘‘sacrifices,** yajfiah. 

६५३१. अग्ने तव त्ये अजरेन्धानासो बृहद्भाः। 
NW वृष॑णस्तविषीयव x | x 
अश्वाइव TAA [1१९ ।। 

11. These your vast blazing flames, undecaying Agni, are most 
powerful, vigorous as horses. 

६५३२. स त्तं न॑ ऊर्जा पते रयि रास्व सुवीरयम्‌। 
प्राव॑ नस्तोके तन॑ये समत्स्वा।।१२॥। 


12. Do you, who are the lord of food, give us riches, with male 
offspring: defend us, with our sons and grandsons, in battles. 
p Defend us, Etc.— Or, as Sayana seems to say, **defend our wealth, 
consisting in sons and zrandsons, and what has to be guarded in battles. 


६५३३. यद्वा उ विश्पतिः शितः सुप्रीतो मनुषो विशि। 
विश्वेदग्निः प्रति रक्षाँसि सेधति।।१३॥। 
13. When Agni, the lord of man, is sharpened (by sacrifice), 

and, well pleased, is present in the abode of a man, he verily 

i defends it against all evil spirits. 
Sdmaveda, 114. 

६५३४. श्रुष्ट्यग्ने नव॑स्य मे स्तोम॑स्य वीर विश्पते। 
नि मायिनस्तपुष रक्षसों दह।।१४।। 
| 14. Hero, Agni, lord of men, hearing this my present praise: 


consume the guileful Raksasas by your flames. 
Samaveda, 106. 


| ६५३५. न तस्य॑ मायया चन रिपुरीशीत मर्त्यः। 
। : वामया घार 0 15] 

| यो अग्नये ददाश हव्यदांतिभिः।।१५।। 
| य च्य 


Eo रि In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| = -— ख 


उ किक र रर 


), 


st 


ale 


ith, 


:९), 
ily 


ise, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation —: and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 23 26 


15. No hostile mortal shall have power by fraud over him who 
by the (sacred) offerers of the oblation presents (offerings) to Agni. 
Sámaveda, 104. 


| I | क्षण्युरप्रीणादूषि I 
६५३६. व्यश्वस्त्वा वसुविदमुक्षण्युरप्रीणादृषि: | 
महो राये तमु त्वा समिंधीमहि।॥१६।। 
16. The / Vyasva, desirous (of propitiating) the showerer (of 


rain), has gratified you, the bestower of wealth; so we too kindle 
you for (the acquirement of) ample riches. 


६५३७. उशनां काव्यस्त्वा नि हो्तारमसादयत्‌। 
आयजिं त्वा मर्नवे जातवेंदसम्‌।।१७।। 
17. Usaná, the son of Kavi, has established you, Jatavedas, as 
the ministrant priest, you as the offerer of sacrifice, for Manu. 


६५३८. विश्वे हि त्वां सजोष॑सो देवासो दूतमक्रत। 
श्रुष्टी देव प्रथमो यज्ञियों भुवः।।१८।। 
18. All the consentient gods have made you their messenger; 
may you, divine Agni, who are the first (of the deities), quickly 
become the object of their worship. 


Mayest you, Etc.— Sayana seems to take it, “may you quickly 
become worthy of the sacrifice, (as bearing our oblations to them).”” 


६५३९. इमं घां वीरो अमृतं दूतं कृण्वीत मर्त्य:। 
पावकं कृष्णवर्तनिं विहायसम्‌।।१९॥। 


19. The pious mortal has appointed this immortal, purifying, 
dark-moving, mighty (Agni), his messenger. 


६५४०. तं हुवेम यतस्नुंचः सुभासं शुक्रशोचिषम्‌। 
विशामग्निमजरं प्रलमीङ्य॑म्‌।।२०।। 


_ 20. Let us with uplifted ladles invoke him, the brilliant, bright- 
shining, undecaving, ancient Agni, who is to be adored by men. 


६५४१. यो अस्मै हव्यदातिभिराहुतिं मर्तोऽविधत्‌। 
भूरि पोषं स धत्ते वीरवद्यशः 11२१ ॥॥ 
21. The man who by the (holy) presenters of oblations makes 


Offerings to him, receives (from Agni) ample nourishment, with 
male progeny, and fame. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
448 Rgveda Samhità 
à जातवेदसमग्निं री 
६५४२. प्रथमं मग्निं यज्ञेषुं पूर्व्यम्‌। 
सुगेति \ 1 
प्रति खुगेति नमसा हविष्मती।।२२।। 
22. The ladle charged with the oblation proceeds with 
reverence at sacrifices to the ancient Agni, the first (of the gods), 


the cognizant of all that exists. 
With Reverence— Or, *^with the hymn,”’ stotrena namaskárena vd. 


६५४३. आभिर्विधेमाग्नये ज्येष्ठाभिर्व्यश्चवत्‌। 
मंहिष्ठाभिर्मतिभि: शुक्रशोंचिषे।।२३।। 
23. Let us, like Vyasva, glorify the brilliant Agni with these 
excellent and most pious praises. 
६५४४. नूनर्मर्च विहांयसे स्तोमेभिः स्थूरयूपवत्‌। 
ऋषें वैयश्च दम्यांयाग्नयें।।२४।। 
24. Rsi, son of Vyasva, adore the far-spreading domestic Agni, 


with praises, like Sthürayüpa. 
Sthürayüpa— Said to be the name of a Rsi. 


६५४५. अतिथि मानुंषाणां सूनुं वनस्पर्तीनाम्‌। 
विप्रां अग्निमवसे प्रत्नमीळते।।२५।। 


25. Pious men glorify the ancient Agni, the guest of men, the 
son of the trees, for protection. 


६५४६. महो विश्वाँ अभि षतोरभि हव्यानि मानुंषा। 
अग्ने नि ष॑त्सि नमसाधिं बर्हिषिं॥२६।। 

26. Sit down, Agni, on the sacred grass, in the presence of all 
those worshippers diligent (in pious works, induced) by their 
veneration (to accept) the oblations of men. 

६५४७. वंस्वा नो वार्या पुरु ded रायः पुरुस्पृह:। 
सुवीर्यर E प्रजावतो ER ह 
सुवीर्यस्य प्रजावंतो यशंस्वतः।।२७॥। 

27. Grant us (Agni) many desirable (things), grant us riches 
envied by many, (cimprehending) vigour, offspring, fame. 

६५४८. त्वं व॑रो सुषाम्णेऽग्ने जनाय चोदय। 
सदां वसो रातिं य॑विष्ठ शश्चते।२८॥। 
28. Agni, (who are) the desired of all, the humbler (of foes); 


the youngest (of the gods), ever bestow riches upon the tranquil 
and constant man. 


है. eee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


0 


m कक ७ र कि SATS see - 


RE 


he 


eir 


Digitized. byzyva Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 449 


Mandala 

Upon the Tranquil and Constant Man— Susdmne sasvate jandya; 
sobhanasamavate bahave prádurbhütaya stotrnám, is all explanation, 
except that to the first is added tava prasádát, **who enjoys tranquillity 
from your (Agni 's) favour.’ [Sayana may intent to explain the words as 
meaning “‘upon the various reciters of excellent hymns." The Gana- 
ratna-mahodadhi explains susdman as sobhanam sáma priyavacanam 


yasya (cf. Pan. 8.3.98). In v. 28 of the next hymn, susáman is the name of 


a king.] 
६५४९. त्वं हि सुंप्रतूरसि त्वं नो गोम॑तीरिष:। 
महो रायः सातिमग्ने अपां वृधि॥२९॥ 
29. You verily are a liberal benefactor: bestow upon us, Agni, 
food, with cattle, and the gift of abundant riches. 


> 1 
६५५०. अग्ने त्वं यशा अस्या मित्रावरुणा वह। 
ऋतावांना सम्राजा पूतदक्षसा।।३०॥। 
30. You, Agni, are renowned; bring hither the veracious, the 
purely vigorous, the resplendent deities Mitra and Varuna. 


Mitra and Varuna— This, according to Sayana, intimates the 
ordinary association of these two deities with Agni at sacrifices. 


[सूक्त- २४] 
[ऋषि- विश्वमना वैयश्च। देवता- इन्द्र, २८-३० वरु सौषाग्णि। 
छन्द- उष्णिक्‌, ३० अनुष्ठुप।] 
६५५१. सर्खाय आ शिषामहि ब्रह्मोन्द्राय वज्रिणे। 


स्तुष ऊ षु वो नृत॑माय gendi 


l. Let us earnestly, friends, address our prayer to Indra, the 
Wielder of the thunderbolt; for you I praise the chief leader Gn 


battles), the resolute (opposer of foes). 
Samaveda, 390. 


1 x X 
९६८२. शवसा हसि श्रुतो वृत्रहत्येन वृत्रहा। 
मधैर्मघोनो अति शूर दाशसि।।२॥। 
2. You are renowned for strength; from the slaying of Vrira, 


us are (famed as) Vrtrahan: you surpassest, hero, the opulent in 
© donation of your riches. 


३५५३. स न: स्तवान आ भ॑र रयि चित्रश्रवस्तमम्‌। 
निरेके चिद्यो हरिवो वसुर्ददि: 11३1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


_ न लता 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
450 Rgveda Samhita 


3. Praised by us, bestow upon us riches of wonderful variety; 
you, the lord of steeds, who, at the issue (of your weapons) puttest 
your enemies to flight, are the donor (of treasures). 

At the Issue of the Weapons— Nireke cid vasuh is the text; the 
Scholiast explains it tavayudhanirgamanád eva satravah paldyante. 

1 
६५५४. आ निरेकमुत प्रियमिन्द्र दर्षि जनानाम्‌। 
धृष्णो | | 
धृषता धृष्णो स्तवमान आ AII 
4. Burst open to your worshippers, Indra, the highly prized 


wealth: glorified by us, do you who arc endowed with resolution, 
bring (us wealth) with a resolute (mind). 


६५५५. न तें सव्यं न दक्षिणं हस्तं वरन्त आमुर॑ः। 
न परिबाधों हरिवो गर्विष्टियु | ५11 
5. Lord of steeds, in the recovery of the cattle the opponents 


resist not your left hand nor your right, your enemies (resist you) 
not. 


६५५६. आ त्वा गोभिरिव व्रजं गीर्भिऋणोम्यद्रिव:। 
आ स्मा कार्म जरितुरा मन: पृण।।६। 


6. I approach you, thunderer, with praises, as (a cowherd goes) 
with cattle to the pasture; gratify the desire, satisfy the mind of 


pem your adorer. 


६५५७. विश्वानि विश्वमनसो धिया नो वृत्रहन्तम। 

| उग्र प्रणेतरधि षू व॑सो गहि।।७।। 

i 7. Fierce destroyer of Vrtra, bringer (of wealth to your 
worshippers), subduer of enemies, preside over all (the offerings) 
of us, Visvamanas, with a (favourable) mind. 

i All the Offerings of Us— Sayana explains nah for mama, as 

| pūjāyām bahuvacanam. 

६५५८. वयं d अस्य वृत्रहन्विद्याम॑ शूर नव्यंसः। 

| वसो: स्पार्हस्य॑ पुरुहूत राध॑सः।।८।। 

| 8. May we, hero, slayer of Vrtra, invoked of many become 


possessed of this your new, desirable, and happiness producing 
wealth. 


| ६५५९. इन्द्र यथा ह्यस्ति तेऽपरीतं नृतो शव: 
| अमृक्ता रातिः पुरुहूत wmm 1९11 


है... eee. — In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


Digitized by Arya SEE) Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


ühità Mandala 8, Sükta 451 
iety; 9. As, Indra, inspirer (of men), your strength is irresistible, 
Ittest (so) invoked of many, your munificence to the donor (of oblations) 


cannot be marred. 

Inspirer of Men— The attributive is Nrto, voc, of Nrtu, dancer, or 
who causes to dance, i.e., agitator, exciter, from /ndra 's faculty of internal 
impulse in all beings, sarvasya antaryamitaya nartayitah: cf. supra, note 

n verse 4 in the 2nd Sukta 


६५६०. आ वृषस्व महामह महे नृतम THA 

ized दुळ्हश्रिद्‌ दृह्य मघवन्मघत्त॑ये।१०।। 

tion, 10. Most adorable, chief leader (of men), invigorate (yourself 
with the Soma) for (the conquest of) great wealth: consume, 
Maghavan, the strong (cities of the Asuras) for the rich spoil. 
६५६१. नू अन्यत्रां चिदद्विवस्त्वन्नो जग्मुराशर्स:। 

rents "mess तव तन्नं ऊतिभिः।।११।। 

you) 11. Wielder of the thunderbolt, our solications have been 
formerly addressed to other gods, than you: give us, Maghavan, of 
your (spoil, and guard it) for us with (your) protections. 
६५६२. नहाशङ्ग नृतो त्वदन्यं विन्दामि THA 

joes) राये द्युम्नाय शव॑से च गिर्वणः11१२।। 


10 of 12. Verily, impeller (of men), who are to be worshipped by 
praise, I apply to no other than you for sustenance, riches 
reputation, and strength 


६५६३. एन्दुमिन्द्राय सिञ्चत पिबाति सोम्यं ny 


; the 


your प्र राधंसा चोदयाते महित्वना॥१३॥। 

ings) 13. Effuse the Soma juice for Indra, let him quaff the Soma 
beverage; he by his might rewards (the donor) with wealth. 

a, as Sdmaveda, 36, 1544. The printed edition reads vadhdnsi codayate, 


for the r@dhasd codayate of the Rgveda text 
He by his might Rewards, Etc.— Sayana explains the construction 
svamahattvenaiva annena saha dhanádikam stotrbhyah prakarsena 


codayati, **he by his might abundantly sends to his worshippers wealth 
with food.” 
come 


icing ६५६४. उपो हरीणां पति दक्ष पृञ्चन्तमब्रवम्‌। 
a UT 
qi श्रुधि स्तुवतो अश्व्यस्य॑।।१४।। 
14. Let me address the lord of steeds, who associates his 
Strength (with the Maruts): now hear the words of the son of 
Vyasva praising you. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


A—————ÉEREERREN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
452 Rgveda Samhita 


Samaveda, 1510, reading radhah for daksam]. Asvya is explained as 
the son of Asva, or Vyasva. 


६५६५. FRA पुरा चन जज्ञे वीरतरस्त्वत्‌। 
नकीं राया नैवथा न भन्दनां।।१५।। 

15. No one, Indra, has ever been born more mighty than you, 

no one (surpassing you) in riches; no one (more powerful) in 


protection; no one (more entitled) to praise. 
Sdmaveda, 1411. 


६५६६. एदु मध्वों मदिन्त॑रं सिञ्च वाध्वर्यो अन्ध॑सः। 
एवा हि वीरः स्तव॑ते सदावृंधः।।१६।। 

16. Pour out, priest, the most exhilarating (draught) of the 
sweet (sacrificial) beverage, for he, the ever-mighty hero, alone is 
praised. 

Sdmaveda, 385, 1684. 


Evà hi virah stavate saddvrdhah. The commentator renders in as in 
the translation, but he does not notice sadávrdha. 


Lu स्थातर्हरीणां 
६५६७. इन्द्र स्थातर्हरीणां नर्किष्टे पूर्व्यस्तुतिम्‌। 
Lt. 
उदानंश शवंसा न भन्दनां।।१७।। 
17. Indra, ruler of horses, no one surpasses your ancient 
praise, either for force or for fame. 
Sámaveda, 1685, i.e., “None is mightier or more praiseworthy (or 
richer) than you." 


६५६८. d वो वार्जानां पतिमहूमहि श्रवस्यव॑ः। 
अप्रायुभिर्यज्ेभिर्वावृधेन्यम्‌। ।१८ | 


18. Desirous of food, we invoke your lord of viands, who is to 
be magnified by sacrifices (offered) by attentive (worshippers). 
Sdmaveda, 1686. 


| ६५६९. एतो न्विन्द्रं स्तवांम सखांय: स्तोम्यं नरम्‌। 
कृष्टीया विश्वा अभ्यस्त्येक इत्‌] १९॥ 


19. Come, friends, let us glorify Indra, the leader, who is 
| entitled to praise, who, single, overcomes all hostile hosts. 
i Sámaveda, 387. 


६५७०. अगोरुधाय गविषे द्युक्षाय दस्म्यं वर्च:। 
घृतात्स्वादीयो मधुनश्च वोचत॥२०॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


———— 0 ° t 


— — EET Int 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
| Mandala 8, Sükta 24 Š 


453 


20. Recite agreeable words, sweeter than clarified butter, or 
than Soma, to the illustious (/ndra), who is gratified by eulogy, 
who rejects not praise. 


६५७१. यस्यामितानि वीर्यारै न राधः पर्येतवे। 
ज्योतिर्न विश्वमभ्यस्ति दक्षिणा।।२१॥ 


| 21. Whose energies are unbounded; whose wealth cannot be 
carried away, whose bounty extends like the firmament over all. 
nl 1 थ्ववदनूर्मि वाजिनं 1 
६५७२. स्तुहीन्द्र AA IR यमम्‌। 
fists > EX] 
अर्यो गयं मंहमानं वि दाशुषे।।२२।। 

22. Glorify Indra, the unassailable, the powerful, the regulator 
(of man), as was done by Vyasva; he, the lord, give a spacious 
dwelling to the donor (of the oblation). 

To the Donor of the Oblation— Sayana explains yamam as 
stotrbhih suniyatam, “‘who is conciliated (१) by his praisers'"; and 
manhamánam gayam, as “‘honourable wealth," or “a house for the 
worship of the gods.’’ He gives a passive meaning to yama, but cf. viii. 
103.10. 

1 ३ > 1 
६५७३. एवा नूनमुप स्तुहि वैयंश्च दशमं नवम्‌। 
1 सुविद्वान्सं चर्कृत्यं al 
सुविद्वान्सं चर्कृत्यं चरणीनाम्‌।।२३॥ 
क 23. Praise verily at present, son of Vyasva, praise (/ndra), who 
is the tenth of the pervading (vital principles), the adorable, the all- 
wise, to be honoured repeatedly (by sacred rites). 

Tenth of the Pervading Vital Principles— The text has simply 
dasamam, the tenth; in explanation of which the Scholiast cites a text 
which states that there are nine vital airs in the human body, and that 
| Indra is the tenth; nava vai puruse prdnd manusyesu vartamáná Indras 

(कक्षा dasadhd, etc. [Cf Taitt. Brahm. i.3.7.4. and Taitt. Samh. 1.7.9] 
>` निऋतीनां 1 | 
६५७४. वेत्था हि निर्ृतीनां वज्रहस्त परिवृजम्‌। 
I To m 
अहरहः शुन्ध्युः परिपदामिव HY t 
| 24. You are cognizant, wielder of the thunderbolt, of the 
[ departure of evil beings, as the purifying sun day by day (is of 
that) of the Birds) flying in all directions (from their roost). 
Sdmaveda, 396. 


६५७५. तदिन्द्राव आ भ॑र येना दंसिष्ठ कृत्व॑ने। 
दविता कुत्साय शिश्नथो नि चोदय॥२५।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar f 


I की 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


454 Rgveda Samhita 


25. Indra, of goodly aspect, bring to the offerer (of the 
oblation) that (protection) wherewith to defend him you have twice 
slain (the foe) for Kutsa; show the same (care of us). 

Show the same Care of Us— Sāyaņa takes it, Bring to us that 
protection wherewith (you protect your) offerer; send to us (that 
protection wherewith) you have twice slain (the foe) for Kutsa.” 


६५७६. तमु त्वा नूनमीमहे नव्यं दंसिष्ठ सन्य॑से। 
स त्वं नो विश्वा अभिमातीः सक्षणिंः।।२६॥। 
26. (Indra) of goodly aspect, we implore you who are entitled 


to praise, for (our) preservation; for you are the overcomer of all 
our adversaries. 


६५७७. य क्रक्षादंहसो मुचद्यो वार्यात्सप्त सिन्धुषु। 
वर्ध॑दासस्य॑ तुविनृम्ण नीनमः।।२७॥। 

27. (He it is) who rescues men from the wickedness of evil 
beings, who enriches (the dwellers) on the seven rivers: now hurl, 
you who abound in wealth, your weapon at the Dasa. 

Dwellers on the Seven Rivers—Sapta sindhusu, i.e., the dwellers on 


the banks of the seven rivers, the Ganges, etc., or on the shores of the 
seven seas (Sayana) 


६५७८. यथां वरो सुषाणें सनिभ्य आव॑हो रयिम्‌। 
= व्य॑श्वेभ्य: सुभगे वाजिनीवति।।२८।। 


28. As you, Varu, have distributed vast wealth to those who 
have solicited (riches) on behalf of Susman, (so do you now 
| distribute) to the descendants of Vyasva; (and so too you), 
| auspicious food-bestowing (Usas). 
| On behalf of Susàman— Varu is said to have distributed these alms 
that his father, Susaman, might go to heaven. 

Auspicious Food-Bestowing Usas— The text has only Subhage 
vdjinivati. The comment supplies Usas, on the authority of Saunaka. 
[Sayana gives an alternative rendering, which is parallelled by v. 2 of the 
sixth Sukta of this anuvdka, making Varu himself address the stanza to 
Usas, and ask her to give him wealth for the sons of Vyasva, as she had 
i given to his father for his suppliants.] 


| ६५७९. आ नार्यस्य दक्षिणा व्य॑श्वाँ एतु सोमिन॑:। 
i स्थूरं wd: शतवत्सहस्रवत्‌।।२९ I 
i] 29. May the gifts of a humane (price), when offering the Soma 


libation, extend to the Vyasvas, yea, and substantial wealth by 
hundreds and thousands. 


७ ७-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri E ae Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 25 m^ 
the Humane— Sayana explains ndrya as narahitasyápatyam. 

t ६५८०. "rel पृच्छादीजानः कुंहया कुहयाकृते। 

hat एषो अपंश्रितो वलो गोमतीमव॑ तिष्ठति।।३०।। 


30. If any ask of you, (Usas), when anywhere present, where 
the sacrificer (Varu dwells), (reply) the powerful (prince), the 
refuge of all, a bides on (the banks of) the Gomati river. 

In Any ask of you— Sayana explains kuhaydkrte as meaning, “01, 
you who are honoured by those who ask where Varų dwells,” sa varuh 


led kutra tisthatityetadicchayabhilaksanapravrttair jijīäsubhih | puraskrte 
all (Usas). Valah he takes as varah, sc. svabalena avárakah satrünám, 
**overwhelmer of enemies." 
[सूक्त-२५] 
i [क्रषि- विश्वमना वैयश्व। देवता- मित्रावरुण, 9-92 विश्वेदेवा। 
Vi : 
irl, छन्द- उष्णिक्‌, २३ उण्णिगर्मा गायत्री।] 
० 1 ` ~ edd 1 | 
s ६५८१. ता वां विश्वस्य गोपा देवा देवेषु यज्ञिया। 
0 Š Re E = 


the ऋतावांना यजसे पूतद॑क्षसा।।१।। 


1. You two are the protectors of the universe, divine and to be 
adored among the gods; therefore, (Vishva manas), you sacrifice to 
the pair who are observant of truth and endowed with real power. 


६५८२. मित्रा तना न रथ्याई वरुणो यश्च॑ सुक्रतु:। 


ho 
ow सनात्सुंजाता तन॑या धृतत्रता I 
u) 2. Mitra and Varuna, doers of good deeds, (diffusers of) 
Ims riches, who are the charioteers (of men), well born of old, the sons, 
(of Aditi), observant of vows, (you are worshipped by me). 
1ge Charioteers of Man— Or, perhaps, ‘‘bringers, of riches," ‘ana 
rathya. 
ka. र $ 
E You are Worshipped by Me— The text has only the nouns, without 
to any verb, which is supplied by the commentator. [He supplies “you 
had Sacrifice to them” (d yajase from the previous verse.] 
श्ववेंदसासुर्याय जंजानार्दितिर्क्रतावरी 1 
६५८३. ता माता विश्ववेदसासुर्याय प्रमंहसा। मही ज॑जानादिति्ता्वरी॥३॥ 
3. The great and veracious Aditi, the mother (of the gods), 
Save birth to those two who are possessed of all affuence, and 
Shining with great splendour, for the (destruction of the) Asuras. 
ma 


by ६५८४. महान्तां मित्रावरुणा सम्राजा देवावर्सुरा। 
ऋतावानावृतमा घोषतो बृहत्‌।४।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


n——— ना 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


456 Rgveda Samhita 


4. The great Mitra and Varuna, the two Sovereign and 
powerful deities, the observers of truth, illume our solemn rite, 

Sovereign— Sayana, as usual, explains samraj as “perfectly 
resplendent,” samyag dipyamdnau; and so, too, in v. 7. 

Powerful— Asura is also explained as “impelling by being the 
indwelling principle,” antarydmitayd prerakau. 

Illume— The text has ghosatah, which Sayana renders svadiptyá 
prakásayatah. 


६५८५. नपांता शव॑सो महः सूनू दक्षस्य सुक्रतू। 
सृप्रदानू इषो वास्त्वधिं fira: Us | 


5. Grandsons of mighty strength, sons of energy, doers of good 
deeds, liberal benefactors, they preside over the habitation of food. 


६५८६. सं या दारूनि येमथुर्दिव्याः पार्थिवीरिष॑ः। 
नभ॑स्वतीरा वाँ चरन्तु वृष्टय: 11६ 1 


6. Bestow (upon us) good gifts, viands, whether of heaven or 
earth: may the water-shedding rains attend upon you. 


६५८७. अधि या बृहतो दिवोईभि यूथेव पश्य॑तः। 
ऋतावांना सम्राजा नम॑से हिता।।७।। 


7. (These are they) who look upon the great deities as (a bull 
md contemplates) the herd, sovereigns observant of truth and 
propitious to adoration. 


६५८८. ऋतावाना नि षेदतुः साम्राज्याय सुक्रतू। 
धृतव्रता क्षत्रियां क्षत्रमांशतुः।।८।। 

8. Observers of truth, doers of good deeds, they sit down for 
the office of sovereignty; ooservant of obligations, endowed with 
| strength, they acquire vigour. 

Cf Rg 1.25.10. 


They Acquire Vigour— Ksatriya ksatra.n ásatuh is explained 
balavantau balam vyäpnutah. 


| ६५८९. अक्ष्ण्िंद्वातुवित्तरानुल्बणेन चक्ष॑सा। 
| नि चिन्मिषन्ता निचिरा नि चिंकयतुः।।९।। 
9. Through knowers of the path, even before the eye (can sec). 


| causing (all beings) to open their eyelids, existing from of old, and 
shining with a mild radiance, verily they have been worshipped. 


E ee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


itd Mandala 8, Sükta 25 457 
Td A rather unintelligible verse, even with the help of the Scholiast. 
[Sáyana seems to understand it as referring to Mitra and Varuma as 
tly respectively presiding over day and night, a/mrátrayor vydptena tejasá.] 
c al देव्यटिंतिरुरुष्यतां I > I 
६५९०. उत नो देव्यदि नासत्या। 
the S ji TULIT 


EU [| 
उरुष्यन्तु Wed वृद्धशवसः।।१०॥ 
(ya 10. May the divine Aditi, may the Ndsatyds also protect us; 
may the rapid Maruts defend us. 


६५९१. ते नो नावमुरुष्यत दिवा नक्तं सुदानवः। 
अरिष्यन्तो नि पायुर्भि: सचेमहि।।११॥ 


0५ 11. Munificent and irresistible (Maruts), guard our vessel by 


d. day and night, so that we may be secure through your protection. 
Guard our Vessel— No návam urusyata; nàvam yajfityam occurs in 
x.44.6, and seems there to mean the sacrifice. 
Is LM [ES 
६५९२. अघ्नते विष्णवे वयमरिष्यन्तः सुदानवे। 
or = = = 
i ` पूर्वचित्तये BEN 
श्रुधि स्वयावन्त्सिन्धो पूः 11१२ ।| 
12. We, injured (through his protection, offer praise) to the 
liberal Visnu, who harms not (his 80005): do you who goes by 
thyself alone (to combat), and cause wealth to flow (to the 
ull worshipper), hear (our prayer) in behalf of him who has 
nd commenced the sacrifice. 
Sayana interprets Sindho as stotrn prati dhandndm syandanasila 
Visno, and pürvacittaye as prárabdhakarmane yajamándya. 
lc वृणीमहे वरिष्ठ ` || 
६५९३. तद्वार्य वृणीमहे ake गोपयत्यम्‌। 
वरुणो यर्दर्यमा 
m मित्रो यत्पान्ति वरुणो 112311 


ith 13. We solicit that ample, all-desired, all-guarding (wealth) 
Which Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman hold under their protection. 


६५९४. उत नः सिन्धुरपां तन्मरुतस्तदशचिनां। 
न्द्रो विष्णुर्मीढ्वांस: सजोष॑सः।।१४॥। 
14. Yea, may he who causes the waters to flow (Parjanya), the 


Maruts, the Asvins, Indra, Visnu, may all (these deities) together, 
the showerers (of benefits, protect) that wealth for us. 


di ६५९५. ते हि ष्मां वनुषो नरो5भिर्माति कय॑स्य चित्‌। 
तिग्मं न क्षोदः प्रतिष्नन्ति भूर्णयः।।१५॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OS 


———_ eee म 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
458 Rgveda Samhita 
15. Those desirable leaders (of men), rapid in movement, 
break down the haughtiness of any (foc) whatever, as an 
impetuous current (sweeps away all obstacles.) 
६५९६. अयमेक इत्था पुरूरु चष्टे वि विश्पर्ति:। 
तस्य॑ ब्रतान्यनु वश्चवरामसि।।१६।। 
16. This one, the lord of man (Mitra), contemplates many vast 
things: we follow his rites for you. 
६५९७. अनु पूर्वाण्योक्या साम्राज्यस्य॑ सश्चिम। 
मित्रस्य व्रता वरुणस्य दीर्घ्रुत्‌।।१७।। 


17. We observe the ancient rites of the imperial Varuna and 
the renowned Mitra, (rites) that are good for (our) dwelling. 

For our Dwelling— The text has only Okyd. The comment renders it 
Oko grham tasmai hitàni karmani. 


६५९८. परि यो रश्मिना दिवोऽन्तान्ममे पृथिव्या:। 
उभे आ पप्रौ रोदसी महित्वा।।१८।। 


18. (Mitra is he) who has measured with his rays the limits of 
both heaven and earth; who has filled both heaven and earth with 
his greatness. 


६५९९. उदु ष्य शरणे दिवो ज्योतिरयंस्त सूर्यः। 
अग्निर्न शुक्रः समिधान आहुंतः।।१९।। 


19. He, Surya, has uplifted his radiance in the region of the 


heaven; kindled and invoked with burnt offerings, he is bright, like 
Agni 


| Sürya— That is, according to the comment, Mitra and Varuna. Cf. Y. 
| 21. 
i ६००. बचों दीर्घप्रसद्यनीशे वाज॑स्य गोम॑तः। 


| ईशे हि पित्वोऽविषस्य॑ दावनें।।२०।। 


| 20. Raise your voice in the spacious hall of sacrifice (to him) 
j who is lord over food derived from cattle, who is able to grant 
| nutritious sustenance 
i 


In the spacious hall of Sacrifice— Sayana explains 
dirghaprasadmani as an epithet of yajne, vistrtam sadanam yasmin yajne. 


६६०१. dep रोदसी उभे दोषा वस्तोरुप gi 
भोजेष्वस्माँ अभ्युच्चरा TALI’ UI 


to NN In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


DM UTERETUR ut 
- Fe ISSO RE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 26 459 

21. I Glorify by night and day that sun (Mitra and Varuna), 
and both the heaven and earth; do you (Varuna) ever bring us to 
the presence of the bountiful. 

That Sun, Mitra and Varuna— Tat stiryam means, according to the 
Scholiast, the brightness of Mitra and Varuna. [Sayana's words are 
süryam suviryam, tat Varunam Maitram ca tejas.] 


` > ति 1 

६६०२. ऋज़मक्षण्यायने रजतं हर॑याणे। रथं युक्तमसनाम सुषार्मणि।।२२॥ 

22. We have received from the son of Susdman, the descendant 
of Uksan, the overcomer (of foes), a well-going chariot of silver, 
yoked (with a pair of horses.) 
६६०३. ता मे अश्व्यानां vivi नितोर्शना। उतो नु कृत्व्यानां FaSAT I 
d 23. Among bay horses these two are pre-eminently the 
destroyers (of foes), and of those eager in combat; the two strong 
bearers of men. 
६६०४. स्मर्दभीशू कशांवन्ता विप्रा नविष्ठया मती। 

महो वाजिनाववंन्ता सचांसनम्‌।।२४।। 

f 24. Through this new praise (of Mitra and Varuna) 1 have 
h obtained at the same moment of the mighty prince, two fast-going 
sagacious steeds, with whip and reins. 

Two Fast-Going Sagacious Steeds—Sáyana explains viprau as 
medhavinam ucitau, **worthy of the praisers of a deity." 


[सूक्त-२६] 
र [ऋषि- विश्वमना daa तथा व्यश्च आङ्गिरस। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार, २०- 
२५ वायु। छन्द- उष्णिक्‌, १६-१७, २१, २५ गायत्री, २० IFEN] 
६६०५. युवोरु पू रथ हुवे सधस्तुत्याय सूरिषु। 
अतूर्तदक्षा वृषणा वृषण्वसू।।१।। 


l. (Asvins) of irresistible strength, affluent showerers (of 
benefits), I invoke your chariot amidst the pious, who are 


st 


assembled to celebrate your presence. 
६६०६. युवं वरो सुषाम्णें महे तनें नासत्या। 
अवोभिर्या' 
s थो वृषणा वृषण्वसू।।२।। 


2. (Say), Varu (Thus), Nasatyds, senders of rain, affluent 
Se (of benefits), as you came to Susdman with your 
ctions to (grant him) great riches, (so come to me). 


sho 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee oe 


É———— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


460 Rgveda Samhita 


Say, Varu, Thus— The text has only Varu, in the vocative, which 
the commentator amplifies—He varunámaka rajan, evam brühiti Rsir 
vadati. 

To Grant him great Riches, so come to Me— Mahe tane, mahate 
dhanáya; mahyam ayatam is supplied by the Scholiast. 


६६०७. ता वामद्य हवामहे हव्येभिर्वाजिनीवसू। 
पूर्वीरिष इषयन्तावति क्षपः।।३।। 
3. Affluent in nourishment, we invoke you, who are desirous 
of (sacrificial) food, on this occasion at dawn with oblations. 


At Dawn— Ati ksapah ksapáya atikrame, **at the passing of night," 
usah-kale. 


६६०८. आ वां वाहिष्ठो अश्विना रथों यातु शरुतो न॑रा। 


उप स्तोमान्तुरस्य दर्शथः श्रिये।॥४।। 
4. Leaders (of rites), let your renowned al-conveying chariot 
come to us, and (do you) recognize the praises of the zealous 
(worshipper) for his prosperity. 
६६०९. जुहुराणा चिंदश्चिना म॑न्येथां वृषण्वसू। 
युवं हि रुद्रा पर्षथो अति ट्विष॑:।५।। 
ni 5. Asvins, affluent showerers (of benefits), detect the guileful; 
s verily, Rudras, vex your adversaries. 
६६१०. दसा हि विश्वमानुषड्मक्षूमिं: परिदीयंथ:। 
| fafa मधुवर्णा शुभस्पतीं ts | 
6. Dasras, who are gratified by sacred rites, of fascinating 
cimplexion, lords of rain, pass with your flect (horses) completely 
। round our entire (sacrifice). > 
| Of Fascinating Complexion— Madhuvarna is explained ye YE 
| rüpam pasyanti te tatraiva hysta bhavanti, **they who look upon your 
beauty are delighted." 


६६११. उप॑ नो यातमश्चिना राया विश्वपुषा सह। 
मघवाना सुवीरावनपच्युता।।७।। 


[o 2 4 : f are 
7. Come to us, Asvins, with all-supporting riches, 107 you 
opulent, heroic, overthrown of none. 


६६१२. आ में अस्य प्रतीव्यरैमिन्द्रनासत्या गतम्‌। 
देवा देवेभिरद्य सचन॑स्तमा।।८।। 


j 
f 


FN CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

phita Mandala 8, Sükta 26 461 

hich 8. Indra and Násatyás, who are most accessible, come to this 
Rsir may sacrifice: come, gods, to-day, with (other) divinities. 


६६१३. वयं हि वां हवामह उक्षण्यन्तो AATA 


ahate ; 
सुमतिभिरुप विप्राविहा गतम्‌।।९।। 

9. Desirous of you who are bestowers of wealth, we invoke 
you, as did (your father) Vyasva: come, sagacious Asvins, hither 
with favourable intentions. 

irous 


६६१४. अश्चिना स्वृषे स्तुहि कुवित्ते श्रव॑तो हव॑म्‌। 
ght,” नेदीयस: कूळयात: पर्णीरुत।।१०।। 


10. Praise the Asvins devoutly, Rsi, that they may repeatedly 
hear your invocation, and destroy the nearest (approaching 
enemies) and the Panis. 


lariot ६६१५. वैयश्वस्यं श्रुतं नरोतो à अस्य वेंदथ:। 
Es सजोष॑सा वरुणो मित्रा अर्यमा।।११।। 


11. Hear, leaders (of rites), (the invocation) of me the son of 
Vyasva, and understand its (purport); and may Varuna, Mitra, and 
Aryaman concurrently (grant me wealth). 
And Understand Its Purport— Sayana seems to explain it, "ye 
leful; recognize this my (invocation as devoted to you). 


६६१६. युवादत्तस्य धिष्ण्या युवानीतस्य सूरिभि:। 
अहरहर्वृषणा महं शिक्षतम्‌।।१२।। 


12. Adorable showerers (of benefits), bestow daily upon me 


nating (some) of that (wealth) which is given by you, which is brought by 
letely you for the worshippers. : 
७. यो t Wm ; 
20200 ६६१७. यो वाँ यञ्ञेभिरावृतोऽधिंवरत्रा वधूरिव। 
सपर्यन्तां ` 
1 your सपर्यन्ता शुभे चंक्राते अश्चिना।।१३॥। 


_ 13. The man who is enveloped in sacrifices (offered) to you. 
like a woman with additional raiment, rewarding him, Asvins, you 
place him in prosperity. 

With Additional Raiment— Adhivastra, “having another garment 
Over her ordinary clothes.” 


५६१८. यो वामुरुव्यचस्तमं चिकेतति नृपाय्य॑म्‌। 
वर्तिरश्चिना परि यातमस्मयू।।१४।। 


ou are 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


eee. n AN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
462 Rgveda Samhita 
14. Favourably disposed towards me, come, Asvins, to the 


dwelling of him who knows (how to prepare for you) the most 
copiously effused (libation) to be drunk by the leaders (of rites). 
> 1 t वर्तिर्नूपार्य्यम्‌ 
६६१९. अस्मभ्यं सु वृषण्वसू यातं | 
al I 
विषुदुहेव पञ्ञमूहथुर्गिरा।।१५।। 

15. Affluent showerers (of benefits), come to our dwelling for 
(the libation) to be drunk by the leaders (of rites), for you bring the 
sacrifice to completion by praise, as the fatal shaft (slays the deer). 

As the Fatal Shaft Slays the Deer— The text has only Visudruheva, 
which Sayana explains, visvdn hinasti satrün iti, sarah. [He explains the 
allusion as follows: fena (visudruha) yathá vyadho mrgam abhilasitam 
desam  prápayati tadvat stutyd yaiiiam | avaikalyena | samáptim 
prapayathah, **as a hunter by an arrow brings the deer to the desired spot 
(to its destination?), so ye by praise cause the sacrifice to attain 
completion."'] 

वाहिष्ठो > los. 1 ' l 
६६२०. वाहिष्ठो वां हवानां स्तोमो दूतो हुवन्नरा। युवाभ्यां भूत्वश्विना।।१६।। 


16. Asvins, leaders (of rites), among (all) invocations may my 
most earnest praise invoke you as a messenger may it be 
(acceptable) to you. 
ES श्रुतिमिन्में 
६६२१. यददो दिवो अर्णव इषो वा मर्दथो गृहे। श्र अमर्त्या ive t 
17. Whether, immortal (Asvins), you rejoice in the water of the 
— firmament, or ia the dwelling of the worshipper hear this my 
(invocation). 
Or in the Dwelling of the Worshipper— /so vagrhe, yuvam icchato 
yajan:dnasya is Sáyana 5 explanation. 
| ६६२२. उत स्या श्रेंतयावरी वाहिष्ठा वां नदीनाम्‌। सिन्धुर्हिरण्यवर्तनि:।।१८।। 


18. Verily this Svetayávari, the golden-pathed river, is of all 


rivers the especial bearer of your (praises). 

६६२३. स्मदेतयां सुकीर्त्यश्चिना श्वेतयां धिया। वहेथे शुभ्रयावाना।।१९।। 
19. Asvins, following a brilliant course, you acquire celebrity 

Í by the white river worthily praising you the enricher (of the people 

| on its banks). 3 z 

। The Enricher of the People on its Banks— The river is said to hav 


; S mST 2 11, 
praised the Asvins, as the Rsi lived on its banks. These banks are golde 
and consequently enrich those who live near. 


६६२४. युक्ष्वा हि त्वं रंथासहां युवस्व पोष्यां वसो। 
ES] I पिबास्माकं 1 
आन्नो वायो मधु पिबास्माकं सवना गंहि।।२०।। 


EE In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


mhita Mandala 8, Sükta 26 463 
) the 20. Yoke your chariot-drawing horses, Vayu; bring them, 
most Vasu, encouraged (to the sacrifice); then drink our Soma; come to 
5). our daily libations. 


६६२५. तव॑ वायवृतस्पते त्वष्टर्जामातरद्धुत। अवांस्या वृणीमहे।।२१॥। 


2]. We solicit your protection, Vayu, lord of sacrifice 


1g for wonderful son-in-law of Tvasta. 
ig the Wonderful Son-in-Law of Twashtri— Sayana explains Tvastá here 
leer). by Brahma, and refers for the connection to the Jtihdsas and other 
theva, authorities. Mahidhara (Yajurveda, 27.34) says, Vayu, or the wind, having 
ns the taken water from Aditya, fertilizes it, as rain, and is therefore as it were 
agitam his son-in-law, identifying Tvastá with Aditya. 
inti त्वष्टर्जामातरं a I. ईमहे 
६६२६. [तरं वयमीशानं राय ईमहे। 
H ^ . 1 
attain सुतावन्तो वायुं द्युम्ना जनांस:।।२२॥। 
22. We, the offerers of Soma, solicit riches from the sovereign, 
१६॥ the son-in-law of Tvastá; (may we become) wealthy. 
1५ nr A दिवो 1 1 
T i ६६२७. वायो याहि शिवा दिवो वहस्वा स्वश्व्यम्‌। 
Lu 1 I 
वहस्व महः YAT HIR I 
१७॥ 23. Establish, Vayu, happiness in heaven; bear quickly your 
1 p : 
of the well-horse (chariot); do you, who are mighty, yoke the broad- 
is my flanked (horses) to the car. 
Establish, Vayu, happiness in Heaven— Vayu being considered the 
icchato supporter of all the celestial luminaries, sarva-jyotisdm tvadadharatvat. 
* a EN [8५ (beter td] 
६६२८. त्वां हि सुप्सरस्तमं नृषदनेषु हमहें। ग्रावाणं नाश्चपृष्ठ महना॥।२४॥। 
॥१८॥| 24. We invoke you who are of graceful from, extending 
of all through your magnitude your limbs in all directions, to our 
religious rites, like the stone (for bruising the Soma). 
_ Extending . . . . The Limbs in all Directions— Asvaprstham is 
| | | literally, “borne on a horse's back’’; but Sayana here interprets ashva by 
Jebrity Vydpta, and prstha by sarvánga. 
> N N 1 
people ६६२९. स त्वं नों देव मन॑सा वायों मन्दानो अंग्रियः। 
kee | 
to have कृधि वाजाँ अपो धियः।।२५।। 
golden, 25. Divine Vayu, foremost (of the gods), exulting in your won 


mind, cause our rites to be productive of food and water. 

Cause our Rites to be Productive of Food and Water— Sayana 
RO to explain the latter clause, ‘‘Give us food and water, and so cause 
Our rites to be duly performed." 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


I ____ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


464 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त- २७] 


[ऋषि- मनु वैवस्वत। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, 
समासतो बृहती। ] 
६६३०. अग्निरुक्‍्थे पुरोहितो ग्रावाणो बर्हिरध्वरे। 
ऋचा यांमि मरुतो ब्रह्म॑णस्पतिं देवाँ अवो वरेण्यम्‌।॥१॥ 
1. Agni is the Purohita at the sacrifice: the stones, the sacred 
grass (are prepared) for the ceremony. I invoke with the holy verse 


the Maruts, Brahmanaspati, and all the gods, for their desirable 


protection. 
Samaveda, 48. Sayana explains purohita in its literal meaning, as 
**placed in front, (or one the east), on the uttara vedi.””] 


६६३१. आ पशुं गांसि पृथिवों वनस्पतीनुषासा नक्तमोष॑धी:। 
विश्वै च नो वसवो विश्ववेदसो धीनां भूत प्रावितार॑ः।।२॥ 


2. You come (Agni), to the victim, to the dwelling (of the 
worshipper), to the touchwood, to the Soma, at dawn and at night: 
universal deities, givers of wealth, knowing all things, be the 
defenders of our pious acts. 
| To the Dwelling of the Worshipper— Prthivim, which is explained 
=. idam devasadanam, “this chamber of the gods.” Osadhih may here also 

imply annual plants, according to Sayana. [Sayana renders usaásá naktam 
osadhih, (‘you comest) to dawn and might (these being the times for the 
offering), and the Soma-grinding stones.’’ He explains vasavah, as usual, 
by vásayitárh, **causers of habitations." '] 


| ६६३२. प्र सू d एत्वध्वरो३ ग्ना देवेषु wed: 
आदित्येषु प्र वरुणे धृतव्रते मरुत्सु विश्वभानुषु ॥॥३।। 
। 3. Let the ancient sacrifice proceed first to Agni, then to the 


gods,—to the Adityas, to Varuna, observant of obligations, to the 
all-resplendeut Maruts. 


६६३३. विश्वे हि ष्मा मन॑वे विश्ववेदसो भुवन्वृधे रिशादसः। 

SRM: पायुभिर्विश्ववेदसो यन्तां नोऽवृकं छर्दिः।४।। 
| 4. May the universal deities, possessors Of all opulen 
| destroyers of foes, be (nigh) to Manu for his prosperity: do you, 


. fi fi S 
who know all things, secure to us an abode safe from robber: 
through your unassailable protections. 


ce, 


Saas S In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


॥ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


hita Mandala 8, Sükta 27 465 
An Abode safe from Robbers— Avrkam stenarahitam; or it may 
imply, “‘free from any annoyances badharahitam.” 
६६३४. आ नों अद्य समनसो गन्ता विश्वे सजोषस:। 
ऋचा गिरा मरुतो देव्यदिते सदने wed ARINI 
5. Universal deities, united together and of one mind, come 
this day to us, (attracted) by the sacred praise addressed to you; 
and do you, Maruts, and the might goddess Aditi, (come) to the 
n dwelling, (our) abode. 
ers 1 : 
able ६६३५. अभि प्रिया मरुतो या वो अश्व्या हव्या मित्र प्रयाधन। 
ae आ बर्हिरिन्द्रो वरुणस्तुरा नर॑ आदित्यास: सदन्तु T:R 
6. Direct, Maruts, your beloved horses (to our rite): Mitra, 
(come to our) oblations; and may Indra, and Varuna, and the swift 
leaders, the Adityas, sit down on our sacred grass. 
e ६६३६. वयं वो वृक्तबर्हिषो हितप्रयस आनुषक्‌। 
the ED स m दु = 
ight: सुतसोमासो वरुण हवामहे मनुष्वदिद्धागनयः1191| 
| the 7. Bearing the clipt sacred grass, offering in due order the 
(sacrificial) food, presenting the effused Soma and having the fires 
कः kindled, we invoke you, Varuna, (and the rest), as did Manus 
n Varuna— When Mitra and Varuna are named singly, both are 
c intended, and sometimes even more of the Visvadevas, according to the 
ud] Scholiast. [For Man's sacrifice, cf. vol. I, mantra 293, and Satapatha 
e Brdhmana, i.8.1.] 
६६३७. आ प्र यांत मरुतो विष्णो अश्विना पूषन्माकीनया घिया। 
इन्द्र आ यांतु प्रथमः संनिष्युभिर्वृषा यो वृत्रहा गृणे॥८॥ 
o the 8. Maruts, Visnu, Asvins, Pusan, come hither (induced) by my 
o the praise: may /ndra, the first (of the gods), also come, the showerer 
(of benefits), he who is praised by (his) worshippers as the slayer 
of Vrtra. 
N देवासो ic E 
६६३८. वि नो देवासो अद्रुहोञच्छिद्ै शर्म यच्छत। 
वरूथमादधर्षति 
ence, न यद्दूराद्॑सवो नू चिदन्तिंतो वरूथमादधर्षति।९ N 
| you, d 9. Unoppressive deities, bestow upon us à mansion without 
bbers efect, so that, subduers (of foes), no one may injure our defences. 


Whether from afar or nigh 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


doc E 


रा eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
466 Rgveda Samhita 
६६३९. अस्ति हि व॑ः सजात्यं रिशादसो देवांसो अस्त्याप्यम्‌। 
प्र णः पूर्वस्मै सुविताय॑ वोचत मक्षू सुम्नाय नव्य॑से।।१०॥। 
10. There is identity of race among you, deitics, destroyers of 
foes; there is kindred (with me your worshipper); therefore utter at 


once the command for our former prosperity and for new 
happiness. 


There is kindred with me your Worshipper— The text has 
only asty ápyam, the Scholiast says, with the Rsi of the hymn. 
६६४०. इदा हि व उपस्तुतिमिदा वामस्य॑ भक्तयें। 

उप॑ वो विश्ववेदसो नमस्युराँ असृक्ष्यन्यामिव ue UI 


11. Deities, possessed of all wealth, I, desirous of offering 
worship, address to you verily unprecedented praise, for the sake 
of obtaining desired affluence. 


६६४१. उदु ष्य व॑ः सविता सुप्रणीतयोष्स्थादूर्ध्वो वरेण्य:। 
नि द्विपादश्चतुंष्पादो अर्थिनोऽविंशरन्यतयिष्णव॑ः।।१२॥। 


12. Devoutly praised (Maruts), when the adorable Savita has 
risen above you, then bipeds and quadrupeds, and the flying birds, 
seeking (their objects), enter (upon their functions). 


" ६६४२. देवन्देवं वोऽव॑से देवन्देवमभिष्टये। 

| देवन्देवं हुवेम वाज॑सातये गृणन्तों देव्या धिया।।१३॥। 

। 13. We would invoke each deity among you (gods) for 
| protection, each deity for the attainment of our desires, each deity 


for the acquisition of food, glorifying you with divine praise. 
Yajurveda, 33.91. 


| ६६४३. देवासो हि ष्मा मन॑वे समन्यवो विश्वे साकं सरातयः। 

| ते नों अद्य ते अपरं तुचे तु नो भर्वन्तु वरिवोविद॑ः।।१४। 

i 14. May the universal gods with one consent be together t 
givers (of riches) to Manu; may they, both to-day and hereafter, be 


1 the bestowers of wealth upon us and upon our posterity. 
| Yajurveda, 33, 94. 


| ६६४४. प्र d: शंसाम्यदुहः संस्थ उपस्तुतीनाम्‌। 
| न तं धूर्तिर्वरुण मित्र wef यो वो धामभ्योषविधत्‌।।१५।। 


he 


wa eee o In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
hità Mandala 8, Sükta 27 467 
15. I glorify you, innoxious deities, in the place of praises: no 

harm befalls the man who, Mitra and Varuna, offers (oblations) to 
your glories. 

s of ६६४५. प्र स क्षयं तिरते वि महीरिषो यो वो वराय दाशति। 

T af Made. DC EDS S = 

* प्र प्रजाभिर्जायते धर्मणस्पर्यरिष्टः सर्व एधते।।१६॥। 

16. He enlarges his dwelling, he has abundant food who offers 

has you (oblations) to obtain a blessing: through his pious acts he is 
born on every side in his children: all prosper (through your 
favour) unharmed (by enemies). 

3 pos भ्रर्यात्यध्व 

६६४६. ऋते स विन्दते युधः सुगेभिर्यात्यध्वन: | 

hig अर्यमा मित्रो वरुणः सरातयो यं त्रायन्ते सजो्षस:11१७।। 

ake 17. He gains (wealth) without war, he travels along the roads 
with quick (horses), whom Aryaman, Mitra and Varuna, alike 
munificent, and acting in concert, protect. 
६६४७. emi चिदस्मै कृणुथा न्यञ्चन दुर्ग चिदा सुंसरणम्‌। 

a एषा चिंदस्मादशनिंः परो नु सार्लेधन्ती वि नश्यतु॥१८।। 

rds, 18. You enable him (Manu) to proceed by an unobstructed 
road; you grant him easy access to difficult passes; May the 


weapon (of the foe) be far from him, and, inflicting no injury, 
perish. 


६६४८. यदद्य सूर्य उद्यति प्रियक्षत्रा ऋतं दध। 


for श्रवेदसो ध्यन्दिने 
E यन्निम्रुचि प्रबुधिं वि यद्वा मध्यन्दिने दिवः।।१९॥ 
19. Divinities of benevolent vigour, since you preside over the 
rite to-day, at the rising of the sun, since, possessors of all wealth, 
(you are present) at his setting, or at his waking, or at the meridian 
of the day. 
Since You Preside over the Rite— Sayana says, ‘‘since ye uphold 
i the house (rendered prosperous),”” grham kalyanabhütam dhdrayatha. 
mi 1 A दाशुषे 
i: ६६४९. यद्वाभिपित्वे अंसुरा ऋतं यते छर्दिर्येम वि दाशुषे। 


वयं del वसवो विश्ववेदस उप॑ स्थेयाम मध्य AIRE II 
20. Or since all-wise deities, you accepi the sacrifice, 
bestowing on the zealous donor (of the oblation) a swelling (such 
as We may worship in) then, possessors of all wealth, distributors 
Of riches, may we worship you in the midst (of that dwelling). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—— NN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

468 Rgveda Saiühità 

The construction is so loose, that it is impossible to do more than 
conjecture the meaning Yadvabhipitve asurd rtam yate chardir yema 
vidásuse is explained yadvà asmadyajriam prati yusmakam abhipraptau 
yajfiam gacchate havinsi dattavate yajamánáya grham prayacchatha, 
**since you give a dwelling to the donor of the oblation proceeding to the 
rite, which is to bring you to our sacrifice," or, “01 your approach to our 
sacrificc. 


६६५०. यदद्य सूर उदिते यन्मध्यन्दिन आतुचिं। 
वामं धत्य मन॑वे विश्ववेदसो जुहांनाय प्रचेतसे UR ।। 
21. (Gods), who are possessed of all wealth, bestow the 
desired (opulence) upon the intelligent Manu, offering oblations to 
you at sunrise, mid-day, and sunset. 


Sayana connects this verse with the next, “‘since ye give the desired 
(opulence) to Manu,”’ etc., ‘therefore we solicit of you,” etc. 


६६५१. वयं wg: सम्राज आ वृणीमहे पुत्रो न बंहुपाय्यम्‌। 
अश्याम तदादित्या TÀ हविर्येन वस्योऽनशामहै।।२२।। 
22. We solicit of you, resplendent deities, as a son (of a 
father), that which is to be enjoyed by many; offering oblations, । 


may we obtain that (wealth), Adityas, by which we may possess 
abundance. 


[सूक्त-२८] 
[ऋषि- मनु वैवस्वत। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- गायत्री, ४ पुर उष्णिक्‌] 
६६५२. ये त्रिंशति त्रय॑स्परो देवासो बर्हिरासंदन्‌। विदल्नहं द्वितासनन्‌॥१॥ 
1. May the three-and-thirty divinities sit down upon the sacred 
grass; may they accept (our offerings), and bestow upon us both 
| (sorts of wealth). 


Both Sorts of Wealth— Ze., cattle and money; or, may they give 


repeatedly, [Sayana explains vidan, 'ímay they acknowledge us 95 
offerers."'] 


६६५३. वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा स्मद्रांतिषाचो अग्नर्यः। 
पलींवन्तो वष॑ट्कृताः॥।२।। 


2. May Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman and the Agnis, with ee 
wives, honouring the donors (of the oblation), and addressed wit 
the sacrificial exclamation,— 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


NM EEE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 29 p^ 


६६५४. ते नो गोपा अपाच्यास्त उदक्त इत्था न्य॑क्‌। 


le 
4 पुरस्तात्सर्वया विशा।।३॥ 
C 3. Be our protectors, whether coming with all their attendants 
x from the west, from the north, from the south, from the east. 


From the West, Etc.— Sáyana artificially makes out six directions 
by taking nyak as the nadir, and understanding by itthá the south and the 
zenith. 


६६५५. यथा वर्शन्ति देवास्तथेदसत्तदेंषां नकिरा मिनत्‌। 
अरांवा चन मर्त्यः।४॥। 
4. Whatever the gods desire, that assuredly comes to pass: no 
d one can resist their (will), no mortal withholds (their) offerings. 


No Mortal withholds their Offerings— Or, perhaps, as Sayana 
takes it, ‘‘even the non-offering mortal (must give offerings if they will 


10: 
६६५६. सप्तानां सप्त EU: सप्त JAAT] 
: सप्तो अधि श्रियो RIAI 


5. Seven are the lances of the seven (troops of the Maruts), 


S : : 
seven are their ornaments, they wear seven surpassing glorics. 
[सूक्त २९] 
[ऋषि- मनु वैवस्वत तथा कश्यप-मारीच। देवता- विश्वैदेवा। 
छन्द- द्विपदा विराट्‌। | 
aede 1 

s ६६५७. बभ्रुरेको विषुंणः सूनरो + हिरण्यय॑म्‌।।१॥। 
h 1. One (Soma) brown of hue, all-pervading, leader of the 
nights, ever young, decorates (himself) with golden ornaments. 

ठ One Soma Brown of Hue— Babhru applies properly to the Soma 
plant, but the other epithets indicate Soma, the moon. 
15 Leader of the Nights— Sunara, which is explained susthu ratrindm 


neta. 
६६५८. योनिमेक आ संसाद द्योतनोऽनतर्देवेषु मेघिर:11२11 
2. One (Agni) intelligent, resplendent among the gods, is 
seated in his place (the altar). 
६६५९. वाशीमेको बिभर्ति हस्त आयसीमन्तर्देवेषु निश्चुविः॥३॥ 
3. One (Tvastá) immoveably stationed among the gods, holds 


his iron axe in his hand. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


RR 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
470 Rgveda Samhita 
६६६०. वज्रमेको बिभर्ति हस्त आहितं तेन॑ वृत्राणिं जिघ्नते।४।। 
4. One (Indra) holds his thunderbolt wielded in his hand, by 
which he slays the Vrtras. 


६६६१. तिग्ममेको बिभर्ति हस्त आयुधं शुचिरुग्रो जलांषभेषज: 1 N 


5. One (Rudra) brilliant and fierce, (yet) the distributor of 
healing medicines, holds his sharp weapon in his hand. 


६६६२. पथ एक॑ः पीपाय तस्क॑रो यथाँ एष ag निधीनाम्‌।६।। 


6. One (Piisan) watches the roads like a robber, and is 
cognizant of hidden treasures. 


Püsan Watches the Roads— Cf. Vol. L mantra 499 Sayana 
understands the roads to heaven or hell. 


६६६३. त्रीण्येक॑ उरुगायो वि चंक्रमे यत्र देवासो मदन्ति। ७।। 


7. One (Visnu) wide-stepping, has traversed the three worlds 
where the gods rejoice. 


६६६४. fafai चरत एक॑या सह प्र प्रंवासेव॑ वसतः।।८।। 


8. Two (the Asvins,) travel with swift (horses) along with one 
(bride Sürya), like travellers to foreign countries. 


६६६५. सदो द्वा च॑क्राते उपमा दिवि सम्राजा सर्पिरासुती ii 


9. Two of like beauty and of royal rank (Mitra and Varuna), 
worshipped with oblations of clarified butter, have taken their seat 
in heaven. 


६६६६. अर्च॑न्त एके महि साम॑ मन्वत तेन सूर्यमरोचयन्‌।।१० N 


10. Some (the Atris) when worshipping, call to mind the great 
Saman, wherewith they light up the sun. 


Sayana explains the Saman as the trivrt, paficadasa, cic. 
[सूक्त २०] 
[ऋषि- मनु वैवस्वत। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- १ गायत्री, 
२ पुर उष्णिक्‌, ३ बृहती, ४ अनुष्ठुप्‌। ] 
६६६७. नहि वो अस्त्यर्भको देवांसो न कुंमारकः। 
विश्वे सतोमंहान्त suit 


l. There is no one among you, gods, who is an infant or à 
youth; you verily are all of mature existence. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ls 


e 


) 


at 


at 


Do oM 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sikta 31 m" 


All of Mature Existence— Sato mahdntah, explained by Sáyana as 
sarvasmad vidyamánát prthivyam api ye mahántas te satomahánta ity 
ucyante, literally, "greater than all that is." 


६६६८. इति स्तुतासो असथा रिशादसो ये स्थ त्रय॑श्च fired i 


मनोर्देवा यज्ञियासः।।२।। 


2. Destroyers of foes, gods, adored by Manu, who are three- 
and-thirty, and are thus hymned. 


me . । [| fox 
६६६९. ते न॑खाध्वं तेऽवत त उ नो अधि वोचत। 
मा न॑: पथ: पित्र्यान्मानवादधि दूरं Ae परावत॑:।।३॥। 
3. Do you preserve us, do you protect us, do you direct us (to 


our good); lead us not afar from the paternal paths of Manu, nor 


from those still more distant. 

From the Paternal Paths of Manu— Manu is said to be the 
universal father, and the paths he enjoins are those of austerity and 
ceremonial. Brahmacarya agnihotrddi-karmdni yena márgena bhavanti 
tam eva asmánnayata. [Sáyana explains the latter line, **Lead us not away 
from the far-reaching paternal path of Manu, but away from any which is 
distant therefrom."'] 


६६७०. ये देंवास इह स्थन fad वैश्वानरा उत। 
अस्मभ्यं शर्म सप्रथो गवेऽश्वाय यच्छत।४॥ 
4. Gods, who are here present, all to whom this full sacrifice is 


offered, bestow upon us, upon our cattle and horses, happiness far 
renowned. 


ANUVAKAV 
[सूक्त-३ १] 

[ऋषि- मनुवैवस्वत। देवता- १-४ यज्ञ स्तुति तथा यजमान प्रशंसा, ५-६ 
दम्पती, १०-१८ दम्पती-आशीष। छन्द- गायत्री ९-१४ IJET , १० 
पादनिचृत्‌ , १५-१८ पंक्ति ] 

६६७१. यो यजाति यजात इत्सुनर्वच्च पचाति च! AREE ATAR 


1. He who offers oblations (to the gods, again) offers them: he 
Pours forth libations and presents (the sacred cake), he delights in 


reiterating the praise verily of Indra. $ 

The Sacred Cake— The pasu-purodasa is explained in the Nydya- 
mala-vistara as the cake, which is an essential part of the animal sacrifice 
पा the jyotistoma, pasu-devata-sanskarah. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————— I 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
472 Rgveda Sarhhitā 
६६७२. पुरोळाशं यो अंस्मै सोमं wa आशिरम्‌। पादित्तं शक्रो अंह॑सः।२॥ 


2. Indra protects from sin that man who offers him cakes and 
presents Soma mixed with milk. 


६६७३. तस्य॑ Gal अंसद्रथों देवजूतः स शूंशुवत्‌। विश्वा वन्वन्नमित्रिया1।३॥ 
3. A brilliant chariot comes to him, sent by the gods, with 

which, baffling all hostilities, he prospers. 

६६७४. अस्य॑ प्रजाव॑ती गृहेऽसंशचन्ती दिवेदिंवे। इळां धेनुमती दुहे।1४॥। 


4. In his house perpetual abundance, accompanied by progeny, 
(is present), and milch kine are milked day by day. 

Sayana explains it, **in his house perpetual abundance, accompained 
by progeny and cattle, is milked day by day’’; or //a may be taken as the 
goddess of cows, in which case duhe is explained, ‘‘milks forth, 
bestows.” 


६६७५. या दम्पती समनसा सुनुत आ च धार्वतः। देवासो नित्ययाशिरा॥1५॥। 
5. Gods, may the husband and wife, who with one mind offer 

libations and purify them, and (propitiate you) with the Soma ever 

mixed with milk,— 

६६७६. प्रति प्राशव्याँ इतः सम्यञ्चा बहिराशाते। न ता वाजेषु AA: 18 


6. Constantly associated, may they acquire appropriate 
— (sacrificial) viands; may they be able to offer sacrifice; may they 
never be wanting in food (given by the gods). 

May they never be wanting in food given by the Gods— The 
phraseology is not very perspicuous, na ta vajesu vayatah is explained 
devairdattesvannesu na gacchatah. sarvadà annasahitau tisthatam. 

देवानामपिं सुमतिं | श्रवों | 
६६७७. न देवानामपि ह्रुतः सुमतिं न जुंगुक्षतः। श्रवों बृहद्विवासतः।।७।। 

7. They retract not (their promises) to the gods, they withhold 

not your praise, but offer aboundant (sacrificial) food. 


६६७८. पुत्रिणा ता कुमारिणा विश्वमायुर्व्यश्नुतः। उभा हिर॑ण्यपेशसा।।८॥ 


8. Blessed with youthful and adolescent offspring, and both 


having their persons richly ornamented, they pass (happily) their 
whole life. 


६६७९. वीतिहोत्रा कृतट्ठसू दशस्यन्तामृतांय कम्‌। 

| समूधों रोशमं हतो देवेषु कृणुतो दुव॑ः।।९।। 

| 9. Offering acceptable sacrifices, obtaining the wealth ey 
solicit, presenting gratifying (oblations to the gods), for the sake 0 


sens In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| | 


- 


"^ ~ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 31 Bs 


immortality enjoying personal union, they (wife and husband) 


worship the gods. 

Offering Acceptable Sacrifices— Sayana explains vitihotra as 
“they whose sacrifices procure them happiness," and krtadvasu as 
pátresüpayuktadhanau, **bestowing your wealth on the suppliant." 

For the Sake of Immortality— Amrtdya; the comment explains it, 
for the increase of descendant, santanabhivrddhaye. 


६६८०. आ शर्म पर्वतानां वृणीमहे नदीनांम्‌। आ विष्णो: seine: tito ti 

10. We solicit the happiness (afforded) by the mountains, the 
rivers, and Visnu, associated (with the gods). 

६६८१. ऐतुं पूषा रयिर्भगः स्वस्ति सर्वधातम:। उरुरध्वा स्वस्तयें॥११॥ 

11. May the adorable Piisan, the possessor of opulence, the 
most benevolent patron to all, come auspiciously; may a wide path 
(be open) for our prosperity. 

६६८२. अरमंतिरनर्वणो fadi देवस्य मन॑सा। आदित्यानांमनेह FAR 

12. All men with (devout) minds are the unwearied (praisers) 
of the irresistible deity (Pisan), verily the (most) sinless of the 
Adityas. 

Unwearied Praisers— Sayana takes aramatih as for alam-matih, 
which he explains as paryápta-stutih. 

Verily the most sinless of the Adityas— Sayana explains this latter 
clause, **verily (the gifts) of the Adityas are void of evil, (therefore we 
praise Ptisan for the attainment of food, etc."") 

६६८३. यथां नो मित्रो अर्यमा वरुण: सन्तिं गोपाः। 
सुगा ऋतस्य TT: 1183 1 

13. Since Mitra, Aryaman and Varuna are our protectors, may 
the paths of the sacrifice be easitly traversed (by them). 
६६८४. अग्नि व॑ः पूर्व्य गिरा देवमीळे वसूनाम्‌। 

सपर्यन्त॑ पुरुप्रियं मित्र न क्षेत्रसाधसम्‌ I 

14. I worship the divine Agni, the preceder of you, (gods), with 
Praise, (for the sake) of riches; the worshippers (cherish him), the 
bountiful perfector of the sacrifice, like a friend. 

I 
६६८५. मक्षू देववतो रथः शूरो वा पृत्सु कासुं चित्‌। 
देवानां य इन्मनो यज॑मान इय॑क्षत्यभीदय॑ज्वनो भुवत्‌!॥१५॥। 
15. The chariot of the devout worshipper quickly (prevails), as 
© hero (prevals) in all combats whatever: the celebrator of the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


So EE THREE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
174 Rgveda Samhita M 


sacrifice, who desires to propitiate the mind of the gods 
ifi j 
overcomes those who are no sacrificers. 


I 
६६८६. न य॑जमान रिष्यसि न सुन्वान न देंवयो। 
देवानां य इन्मनो यज॑मान इयंक्षत्यभीदयज्वनो भुवत्‌।।१६।। 

16. Devoted to the gods, pouring out to them libations, you, p 
worshipper, shalt not perish: the celebrator of the sacrifice, who y 
desires to propitiate the mind of the gods, overcomes those who 
are no sacrificers. k 
६६८७. नकिष्टं कर्म॑णा नशत्न प्र योषन्न योषति। » 


देवानां य इन्मनो यज॑मान इयंक्षत्यभीदयज्वनो भुवत्‌।।१७।। ६ 


17. No one obstructs him by his acts, he is never driven (from 


his station), he is never separated (from his family): the celebrator P 

of the sacrifice, who desires to propitiate the mind of the gods, b 

overcomes those who are no sacrificers. E 0 

६६८८. असदत्र सुवीर्यमुत त्यदाश्चश्व्यम्‌। ६ 
देवानां य इन्मनो यज॑मान इयंक्षत्यभीदयज्वनो भुवत्‌।।१८॥। 

18. To him in this life is a valiant progeny, to him are swift 
herds of horses; the celebrator of the sacrifice, who desires to f 
propitiate the mind of the gods, overcomes those who are no & 

mmn. ifi 
sacrificers. 
[सूक्त-३२] 
] yi 
[क्रषि- मेधातिथि काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री। u 
६६८९. प्र कृतान्युजीषिणः कण्वा इन्द्रस्य गार्थया। मदे सोम॑स्य वोचत।।१॥ 

1. Celebrate with songs the great deeds of Indra, the drinker of ६ 
the stale Soma, when in his exhilaration. 

Sayana seems to explain this: **Proclaim the deeds of the stale Soma, Vi 
in the words of Indra when filled with exhilaration.” & 
६६९०. यः सृबिन्दमनर्शनिँ पिप्रुं दासमहीशुवम्‌। वधीदुग्रो RAT: UR 

2. The fierce (deity) who, liberating the waters, has slain m 
Srbinda, Anarsani, Pipru and the slave Ahisuva. & 

The Slave— Sayana makes Dasa another proper name. Dasam ca 
Ahisuvam ca. E 

diea V; 
६६९१. न्यर्बुदस्य fas वर्ष्माणं बृहतस्तिर। कृषे तदिन्द्र EAU 


mS In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


O 


n 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sūkta 32 a 


3. Pierce the rain-holding domain of the vast Arbuda: achieve, 
Indra, this manly exploit. 


६६९२. प्रतिं श्रुताय॑ वो धृषत्तृर्णाशं न गिरेरधिं। हुवे सुशिप्रमूतये re N 

4. I invoke the victorious handsome-jawed Indra for your 
protection, and to hear (your praises), as (a traveller invokes) the 
water from the cloud. 

As a traveller invokes the water from the Cloud— Turndsam na 
girer adhi. Sayana quotes Yaska 5.16. for turndsa! meaning udaka. We 
explains the sense, as a man in hot weather calls for water from the cloud, 
yatha gharme 'bhitaptah pumán udakam megham prati hvayati. 

` | s | . I दर्षसि 
६६९३. स गोरश्वस्य वि व्रजं मन्दानः सोम्येभ्यः। पुरं न शूर IU 

5. Exhilarated by the Soma draughts, you, hero, trirow open the 
pastures of the cattle and horses like a (hostile) city. 

Exhilarated by the Soma Draughts— Sayana explains somyebhyah 


by somarhebhvah, i.e., exhilarated you throw them open to those worthy 
of the Soma or to the worthy offerers of the Soma. 


६६९४. यदिं मे रारण॑: सुत उक्थे वा दध॑से wi 
AREY स्वधा गंहि। 1६11 
6. If you are propitiated by my libation and praise, and bestow 
food (upon me), come with viands from afar. 
६६९५. वयं घां ते अपि ष्मसि स्तोतार इन्द्र गिर्वणः। 
त्वं नों जिन्व सोमपाः।।७।। 


7. Indra, who are pleased by praise, We are your adorers; do 


you therefore, who are the drinker of the Soma, be generous unto 
us. 


Sdmaveda, 230. 
६६९६. उत नं: पितुमा भ॑र संरराणो अविक्षितम्‌। मर्घवन्भूरि ते वसु IC ti 


8: Gratified by us, bring us undiminished food, Maghavan, for 
Vast is your wealth. 


५६९७. उत नो गोम॑तस्कृधि हिर॑ण्यवतो अश्चिन:। इळांभिः सं र॑भेमहि॥९॥ 


9. Make us (Indra) possessed of cattle, of gold, and of horses: 
May We prosper with abundant viands. 


५६९८, बृबदुकथं हवामहे सृप्र्करस्तमूतयेँ। साधु कृण्वन्तमवसे।॥१०॥ 
SEN ee स 
fs तृर्णाशमुदकं भवति तूर्णमश्नुते (fio ५.१६) । 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


———— — 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


476 Rgveda Samhita 

10. We invoke /ndra, who is greatly to be praised, whose arm 
is stretched out for the protection (of the world), acting nobly for 
our defence. 

Samaveda, 217. 

संस्थे चिच्छतक्रतुरादीं 1 ७ कृणोतिं | 
६६९९. यः सं छतक्रतुरादी कृणोतिं वृत्रहा। 
1 I 
जरितृभ्यः FRAT 112 ।। 

11. The slayer of Vrtra, the accomplisher of a hundred exploits 
in war, achieves them that he may be the giver of much wealth to 
his worshippers. 


६७००. स न॑ः शक्रश्चिदा शंकद्दानवाँ अन्तराभर:। 


[ 
इन्द्रो विश्वांभिरूतिभिं:।।१२।। 
12. May Sakra give us strength, may the liberal Indra with all 
protections be the supplier of our deficiencies. 
Supplicr of our Deficiencies— Antardbharah is explained t 
chidranam ápürakah. or chidrapidhayi, the filler up or cover of flaws. t 
1 | | | | 
६७०१. यो रायोई वनिर्महन्त्सुपारः सुन्वतः सखां। तमिन्द्रमभि गांयत।१३॥ ६ 
13. Glorify that Indra who is the preserver of riches, the 
mighty, the converyer beyond (calamity), the friend of the offerer V 
of the libation; A | ६ 
ie The Conveyer beyond Calamity— Sayana is more often explained 
“ready to be brought by praise." 
c feat 1 श्रवोजित॑म्‌ | भुरेरीशांनमोज॑सा || 1 i 
६७०२. आयन्तारं महिं स्थिरं पृत॑नासु | नमोजसा ।1१४॥ y 
14. Him who comes nigh, the mighty, the firm in battles, the 
acquirer of fame, the lord of vast riches through his prowess. _ sc 
The Acquirer of Fame— Sravojitam might also mean *'the Winner ६ 
of wealth or 100१. 
| शचीनां > नकिर्वक्ता l : 
६७०३. नकिरस्य शचीनां नियन्ता सूनृतानाम्‌। नकिर्वक्ता न दादिति।॥१५। hi 
15. No one puts a limit to his glorious deeds, no one asserts pi 
that he is not generous. 
६ 


६७०४. न नूनं ब्रह्मणामृणं प्रांशूनामस्ति सुन्वताम्‌। 
न सोमों अप्रता TNE di 


16. Verily no debt is due (to the gods) by those sona c 
partaking Brahmanas offering libations; the Soma 1s not dru gr 
without the expenditure of boundless (wealth). र्‌ 


र eee In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Ihità 


arm 
for 


loits 
h to 


the 


nner 


Al 
erts 


ma- 
unk 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sūkta 32 puc 


Verily no debt is due, Etc.— A text is quoted to the effect that ‘‘he 
who has a son, or is chaste, is free from debt,” that is, to the gods and 
manes, a rno yah putri yadvà brahmacari.' 

Without the expenditure of Boundless Wealth— Apratà is 
explained avistirnadhanena, which would rather mean “by one who has 
not abundant wealth.'* 


६७०५. पन्य इदुप॑ गायत TA उकथानि शंसत। 
ब्रह्मा कृणोत पन्य इत्‌।।१७॥ 

17. Sing praises to the adorable (Indra), repeat, prayers to the 
adorable (/ndra), address hymns to the adorable (Indra). 
६७०६. पन्य आ दर्दिरच्छता सहस्रां वाज्यवृत:। 

इन्द्रो यो यज्व॑नो वृधः।।१८।। 

18. The powerful Indra, the discomforter of hundreds and 
thousands, unchecked (by foes), is adorable; he who is the 
benefactor of the sacrificer. 

६७०७. वि पू चर स्वधा अनुं कृष्टीनामन्वाह॒व॑:। इन्द्र पिब॑ सुतार्नाम्‌।॥१९ 11 
ु 19. Indra, who are to be invoked of man, come to their offered 

viands, drink of (their) libations. 

६७०८. fra स्वधैनवानामुत यस्तुग्रये सचां। उतायमिन्द्र यस्तव।॥२०।॥ 


20. Drink of the (Soma) purchased by the milch cow, that 
(Soma) which is mixed with water, that which, /ndra, is especially 
your, 

Purchased by the Milch Cow— Svadhainavanam dhenva krin 
Soman: as by the text, dhenva krnáti.? 


९७०९. अतीहि मन्युषाविर्ण सुषुवांसमुपारंणे। इमं रातं सुतं पिंब॥२१॥। 


21. Indra, pass by the man who offers the libation in anger, 


him who pours it out upon a spot disapproved of; drink this 
Presented Soma. 


Samaveda, 223, but with some variations]. 
१०९०. इहि तिस्रः Wad इहि पञ्च जनाँ अतिं। धेना इ्द्रावचार्कशत्‌।।२२॥ 


2 ` . 
द 22. Indra, who have beheld our praises, proceed in three 
rections from a distance, pass beyond the five orders of beings. 


१. 3 a 3 

: w वा अनृणो य: पुत्री यज्वा ब्रह्मचारिवासी (do Ho ६.३.१०.५)। 

^ पेन्वा क्रोगाति (तै० Wo ६.१.१०.२)। ु 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—777 7 rn 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


i Rgveda Samhita 


In three Directions from a Distance— /.९., Come to us from in 
(ront, from behind, and from the side. 


६७११. सूर्या रश्मि यथां सुजा त्वां यच्छन्तु मे गिर:। 
निम्नमापो न सभ्रयक्‌।।२३।। 


23. As the sun disperses his rays, do you disperse (wealth upon 
me): may my praises rapidly draw you, as waters (reach) the low 
ground 


६७१२. अध्वर्यवा तु हि षिञ्च सोमं वीराय शिप्रिणं। 
भरा सुतस्य UTA ns H 
24. Adhvaryu, quickly pour forth the Soma to the hero Indra 
with the goodly jaws; bring the Soma for his drinking. 
|| -फ॑लिंगं | be 1 
६७१३. य उद्नः फलिगं भिनन्र्य१क्सिन्धूरवासृजत्‌। 
यो गोषु पक्क धारयत्‌ ।।२५।। 


25. Who clove the cloud for (the issue of) the rain who sent 
down the waters, who placed the mature (milk) in the cattle 


६७१४. अहन्वृत्रमूचीषम और्णवाभमहीशुव॑म्‌। हिमेनांविध्यदर्बुदम्‌।।२६॥ 


26. The brilliant Indra slew Vrtra, Aur navabha, Ahisuva; he 
smote Arhuda with frost 


— The Brilliant In.ta— For reisuma, red diptyá sama Indi ah. see note 
on VI, 46 


६७१५. प्र d उग्राय॑ निष्टरे$षाळ्हाय प्रसक्षिणें। cad ब्रह्म गायत।।२७॥ 


27. Sing aloud (priests) to the fierce, victorious (Indra) the 
overpowerer, the subduer (of foes). the praise inspired by the gods 


६७१६. यो विश्वान्यभि व्रता सोम॑स्य मदे अन्ध॑सः। इन्द्र देवेषु चेतति।॥२८॥ 
28. Indra, who, in the exhilaration of the quaffed Soma makes 
known among the gods all pious rites 
६७१७. इह त्या संघमाद्या हरी हिर॑ण्यकेश्या। 
वोळ्हामभि wal हितम्‌।।।२९।। 
29. May those two golden-maned steeds together exulting 
bring him hither to the salutary (sacrificial) food 


६७१८. अर्वाञ्चं त्वा पुरुष्टुत प्रियमेधस्तुता हरी। सोमपेयाय वक्षतः 11३०॥ 


30. Indra, the glorified of many, let your horses praised by 


Privamedha, bring you down to drink the Soma 


a Ee oo In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ita 


in 


)on 
ow 


dra 


sent 


ting. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 33 ^" 


[399-33] 
[ऋषि- मेध्यातिथि काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। 
छन्द- बृहती, १६-१८ गायत्री, १९ अनुष्टुप्‌] 
६७१९. वयं घ॑ त्वा सुताव॑न्त आपो न वृक्तबर्हिषः। 
पवित्रस्य प्रस्नवंणेषु वृत्रहन्‌ परि स्तोतारं आसते ।।१॥ 

1. We are pouring forth to you the Soma juice like water: the 
praisers, strewing the clipt sacred grass, worship you, slayer of 
Vrtra, in the streams (falling) from the filter. 

Sámaveda, 864. 

६७२०. स्वर॑न्ति त्वा सुते नरो वसो निरेक उक्थिन:! 
कदा सुतं तृषाण ओक आ ग॑म॒ इन्द्र स्वब्दीव hdi 

2. The leaders (of rites), repeating praises, shout to you, Vasu, 

when the libation issues forth; when, Indra, bellowing like a bull, 


do you come to the dwelling thirsting for the Soma? 
Samaveda, 865, but with gamat for gamah. 
> g £ 


६७२१. कण्वेभिर्धृष्णवा धृषद्वाजं दर्षि सहस्िर्णम्‌। 
पिशङ्गरूपं मघवन्‌ विचर्षणे मक्षू गोमन्तमीमहे ।1३॥॥ 

3. Resolute (Indra), bestow abundantly upon the descendants 
of Kanva thousands of viands; wise Maghavan, we earnestly 
Solicit you for (wealth) of gold and cattle. 

Wealth of Gold and Cattle—Pisariga-ripam, *‘tawny-coloured,” is 


left unexplained by the commentary. 
Sámaveda, 866. 


६७२२. पाहि गायान्धंसो मद इन्द्राय मेध्यातिथे। 
संमिश्लो SAMT Acie 1 
यः संमिश्लो हर्योर्य: सुते सचां वज्री रथों हिरण्यर्यः।।४।। 

i 4. Drink, Medhyatithi, and in the exhilaration of the draught 
sing to /ndra, to him who has harnessed his horses, who, when the 
Soma is poured out, is present, the wielder of the thunderbolt, 
Whose chariot is of gold. 

.Sámaveda, 289, but the reading differs in some respects. as in the 
beginning, pāhi gà andhaso, instead of pahi gaydndhaso, and instead of 
Sule sacd vajri ratho, it has hiranyaya indro vajri. 

1 सुक्रतुर्गणे a 
६७२३. य: सुषव्यः सुदक्षिण इनो यः l 
T =a eS पूर्भिदारित 
य आकर: सहस्रा यः शतामघ Sat यः पूर्भिदारित: nsi 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—T 77777 __—_ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and 4851 otri 


480 gveda Samhita M 
5. He who is well-handed, both left and right, who is the lord, 
who is wise, the performer of numerous great acts, the glver of 
vast wealth, /ndra, who is the demolisher of cities, who is gratified p 
by praise, is glorified (by us). ; 
a 
६७२४. यो धृषितो योऽवृंतो यो अस्ति शमश्रुषु श्रितः। 
[0 


विभूतद्युम्नश्यव॑नः Wed: क्रत्वा गौरिंव शाकिन:।।६॥। 
6. He who is the subduer (of foes), the unresisted, practised in 8 
combats, possessed of vast wealth, the demander of the libation, 
the praised of many, who by his acts (of bounty) is like a milch 
cow to the competent (worshipper). 


Practised in Combats— Smasrusu sritah. Smasrusu is explained as & 
yuddha, a very unusual sense. 50 
The Demander of the Libation— Cyavana is literally he who (0 
causes to fall or flow, that is, the Soma. & 


६७२५. क ई वेद सुते सचा पिबन्तँ कद्यो दधे। 
अयं यः qi विभिनत्त्योज॑सा मन्दानः शिप्रन्ध॑सः।।७।। 


7. Who knows him drinking with (the priests) when the Soma yc 
is effused? What food has he partaken of? He, the handsome- (u 
jawed, who, exhilarated by the (sacrificial) beverage, destroys j ha 
cities by his might. yc 

Sdmaveda, 297, 1696. ६९ 

| | le 
> ६७२६. दाना मृगो न वारणः पुरुत्रा चरथं दधे। 
1 v 'श्वरस्योजंसा 1 
नकिष्ट्वा नि यमदा सुते गमो महाँश्चरस्योजसा।।८ |। 

8. As a wild elephant emitting the dews of passion, he a 
manifests his exhilaration in many places: no one checks you, m 
(Indra), come to the libation; you are mighty, and goes ६५ 
(everywhere) through your strength. 

Samaveda, 1697. 

६७२७. य उग्रः सन्ननिष्ट्टत: स्थिरो रणाय संस्कृंतः। 
यदि स्तोतुर्मघवा शृणवद्धवं नेन्द्र योषत्या AAG UI 3 
9. He who is fierce, unmoved (by foes) and firm, ready ६६ 


equipped for battle,—if Maghavan hear the invocation of his 
adorer, he will not go apart (from us) but come hither. 
Samaveda, 1698. 


६७२८. सत्यमित्था वृषेदसि वृष्षजूतिर्नोञ्वृत:। to 
वृषा ह्युग्र शृण्विषे प॑रावति qui अर्वावति श्रुत:11१०॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 
10- 
ys 


he 
OU, 


idy 


his 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Mandala 8, Sūkta 33 481 

10. Verily (/ndra), in this manner you are the showerer (of 
benefits), brought by vigorous (steeds) to us, unrested (by foes); 
fierce (/ndra), you are celebrated as a showerer (of bencfits) when 
afar; you are celebrated as a showerer (of benefits) when nigh. 

Samaveda, 263, but with avita for avrtah], The usual abuse of Vrsán 
occurs in this and the two following verses. ४ 


T als 1 हिरण्ययीं 
६७२९. वृषणस्त अभाशवा वृषा कशां | 
वृषा रथों मघवन्वृष॑णा हरी वृषा त्वं WEAR? I 
11. Showerers (of benefits) are your reins, such also is your 
golden whip, your chariot, Maghavan, is a showerer (of benefits), 


so are your two horses; and you, too, Satakratu, are the showerer 
(of benefits). 


६७३०. वृषा सोता सुनोतु ते वृर्षन्नजीपिन्ना भर। 
| ^ ति ^ 5 on 
वृषा दधन्वे quei नदीष्वा qvi स्थातर्हरीणाम्‌।॥१२ || 
12. Showerer (of benefits), may the offerer of the libation to 
you effuse the Soma as a showerer; straight-going (/ndra), bring 
(us wealth): arrester of your horses, the showerer (of the oblation) 
lias prepared the bountiful Soma to be mixed with the waters for 
you. 
] पीतये ` 
६७३१. एन्द्र याहि पीतये मधुं शविष्ठ सोम्यम्‌। 
नायमच्छा मघवां शुणवद्‌ गिरो ब्रह्मोकथा च॑ सुकरतुं:।।१३॥ 
13. Come, most powerful Indra, to drink of the Soma 


ambrosia, (for without coming) this Maghavan, the achiever of 
mz xploits : s 
Many exploits, hears not our praises, our chaunts, our hymns. 


1 
५७३२. वहन्तु त्वा रथेष्ठामा हर॑यो रथयुर्ज:। 
| c Y वृत्रहन्नन्येषां 
तिरश्चिदर्यं सवनानि वृत्रहत्नन्येषां या शंतक्रतो।।१४।। 
= 14. Satakratu, slayer of Vrtra, let your horses, yoked to your 
V ME you, the lord, riding in your chariot, (to our sacrifices), 
Oiding those Sacrifices (offered) by others. 
७ | अस्मार्कमद्यान्त॑मं Nd. 
६७३३. अस्माकमद्यान्तमं स्तोमं धिष्व महामह। 
अस्मार्क Ros 
अस्माकं ते सना सन्तु शन्त॑मा मदाय द्यक्ष सोमपा:11१५॥ 


l G *11* dri 

3 ™Teatest of the great, brilliant drinker of the Soma, accept 

jm this Our present praise; may our sacrifices be most 
ful in exciting your exhilaration. 


10-0; 
Suc 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—— स. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


im Rgveda Samhita 


1 ` | 
६७३४. नहि षस्तव नो मम शास्त्रे अन्यस्य रण्यति। 
| 
यो अस्मान्वीर आन॑यत्‌।।१६।। 

16. The hero (/ndra) who has (ever) guided us delights not in 
your punishment, nor in mine; nor in that of any other. 

Who has Ever Guided Us— Sdstra is explained Sdsana, governing 
or punishing. The Scholiast evidently takes it in the latter sense, as he 
adds, kintu raksana eva ramate, he, Indra, delights only in protecting or 
preserving. 

| तदब्रवीत्खरिया | ति | 
६७३५. इन्द्रश्चिद्घा त्रया अशास्यं मनः। 
l. 
उतो अह क्रतुं रघुम्‌।।१७।। 

17. Verily Indra said that the mind of a woman is not to be 
controlled, he declared also that her intellect was small. 

The mind of a Woman, Etc.— According to the comment, this 


refers to a legend that Asaviga. the son of Playoga, the patron of the Rsi, 
had been changed to a woman; sec the story in the beginning. 


६७३६. सप्ती चिद्घा मदच्युतां मिथुना dedi रथंम्‌। 
एवेदधूर्वृष्ण उत्तरा ।।१८॥ 
18. The two horses of Indra, hastening to the exhilaration (of 


the Soma), draw his chariot; the pole of the showerer rests upon 
them. 


=e ६७३७. अघः पंश्यस्व मोपरि सन्तरां पादकौ हर। 
मा तें कशप्लकौ दृशन्त्त्री हि ब्रह्मा बभूविंथ।।१९॥। 
19. Cast your eyes (son of Playoga) downwards, not upwards: 
keep your feet close together; let not (men) behold your ankles, for 
from having been a Brahma you have become a female, 


You have Become, Female— /ndra is supposed to say this t0 
Asanga as a female. 


[सूक्त- ३४] 
[ऋषि- १-१५ नीपातिथि awe, १६-१८ सहस्र वसुरोचिष्‌ अङ्गिरस्‌ 
देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- अनुष्टुप्‌, १६-१८ गायत्री] 
६७३८. Us याहि हरिभिरुप कण्व॑स्य सुष्टुतिम्‌। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो fet यय दिंवावसो।।१।। 


Lc : र ise of 

i. Come, Indra, with your horses to receive the praise aS 
Kanva: do you, ruling younder heaven, O radiant with 0018911072 
return thither. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


hita 


F in 


ning 
s he 
g or 


| (of. 
pon 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 34 433 

Do you, Ruling Yonder Heaven, Etc. This line, which constitutes 
the burden of the hymn, is singularly indistinct, divo amusya sásato divam 
yaya divavaso, literally, of heaven of that one governing go you to 
heaven, heaven-aflluent. The Scholiast is evidently perplexed; in one 
interpretation he laters the cases to divam amusmin (Indre) Sdsati, and 
adds, tatra vayam sukham dsmahe, (when Indra rules heaven we abide 
there happily). Divdvaso he interprets diptahaviska, The gives another 
explanation (which is followed in the text) dyundmakam amum lokam 
§asanam kurvanto yuyam svargam gacchata. In his comment on the 
passage in the Sámaveda, 348, 1807 he considers amusya as put for 
amusmat prthivi-lokat—from this world. None are very satisfactory; 
possibly it is intended to say merely that as /ndra 's presence is necessary 
in heaven, he is to be allowed to go back as soon as he has partaken of the 
Soma at the sacrifice on earth. [Benefy takes divam for the Soma-vessel, 
dyulokakhya-dronakalasa, and considers the line as addressed to Indra 
and his horses: **von Himmel jenes Herschenden geht ihr zum Himmel, 
Strahlender.**] 


६७३९. आ त्वा ग्रावा वर्दन्निह सोमी घोषेण यच्छतु। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिंबावसो॥२॥ 

2. May the grinding stone, yielding the Soma juice as it utters a 
sound, bring you hither with the noise; do you, ruling younder 
heaven, O radiant with oblations, return thither. 

Sámaveda, 1809. 

६७४०. अत्रा वि नेमिरेषामुरां न धूनुते वृर्क:। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो fed यय दिंवावसो।।३।। 

3. The circumference of these (stones) shakes (the Soma) at 
this (rite), as a wolf (terrifies) a sheep do you, ruling younder 
heaven, O radiant with oblations, return thither. 

Sdmaveda, 1808. 

६७४१. आ त्वा कण्वां इहाव॑से हव॑न्ते वाज॑सातये। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवँ यय दिवावसो ।[४।। 

4. The Kanvas invoke you hither for protection and for food; 
do you, ruling yonder heaven, © radiant with oblations, return 
thither. 

1 ७ ` 
६७४२. दर्धामि ते सुतानां वृष्णे न पूर्वपाय्यम्‌। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवँ यय दिवावसो।५॥ 


5. I make offering to you of the libations as the first drink is 
Presented to the showerer: do you, ruling yonder heaven, Oradan 
with oblations, return thither. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—— G7 7H 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
484 Rgveda Samhita 


To the Showerer— Vrisne, which the Scholiast explains as Vayu. 
[Cf Aitareya Brahmana, 11.25.] : 


६७४३. स्मत्पुरन्धि्न आ गहि विश्वतोधीर्न ऊतयें। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासंतो दिवं यय दिंवावसो।।६।। 
6. (Indra) master of the family of heaven, come to us: do you, 
who are the sustainer of the unverse, (come) for our protection: do 
you, ruling yonder heaven, O radiant with oblations, return thither, 


Master of the Family of Heaven— Smatpurandhi is interpreted 
svargakutumbin. 


६७४४. आ नों याहि महेमते सहस्रोते शतांमघ। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासंतो दिवं यय दिवावसो I 
7. Sagacious (Indra) bestower of numerous protections, 


granter of infinite wealth, come unto us: do you, ruling yonder 
heaven, O radiant with oblations, return thither. 


६७४५. आ त्वा होता मनुर्हितो देवत्रा वंक्षदीड्यं:। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिंवावसो।।८।। 

8. May (Agni) the invoker, adorable among the gods, the 
benefactor of man, bring you hither: do you, ruling yonder heaven, 
O radiant with oblation, return thither 

The Benefactor of Man— Sayana here explains manur-hitah as 


“placed by men in their houses,’” but he allows the meaning in the text in 
his Commentary on i.106.5. 


६७४६. आ त्वां मदच्युता हरी श्येनं wer वक्षतः। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिंवावसो।।९।। 

9. Let your two steeds, humiliators of the pride (of foes), bring 
you as (his) two Wings (bear along) the faclcon: do you, ruling 
yonder heaven, O radiant with oblations, return thither. 

६७४७. आ याद्यार्य आ परि स्वाहा सोम॑स्य पीतयें। 
दिवो अमुष्य शार्सतो दिवं यय दिवावसो।॥१०।। 
10. Come, lord, from whatever direction, to drink the Soma 


offered with svdhd: do you, ruling yonder heaven, radiant with 
oblations, return thither. 


६७४८. आ नों याह्युपश्र॒त्युक्थेषु रणया इह। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवं यय दिंवावसो।।११।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


" Ene E are Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 485 


11. Come to listen to our praises, when they are being 
recited,—bestow upon us delight: do you, ruling yonder heaven, O 
radiant with oblations, return thither. 

६७४९. सरूपैरा सु नों गहि ud: सम्भृताश्चः। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिंवावसो॥१२॥ 

12. Indra, who are possessed of cherished steeds, come to us 
with (your) well-fed and like-shaped horses: do you, ruling yonder 
2 O radiant with oblations, return thither. 

६७५०. आ याहि पर्वतेभ्यः समुद्रस्याधि विष्टपः। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिंवावसो।।१३॥। 
13. Come from the mountains, from above the region of the 


firmament: do you, ruling yonder heaven, O radiant with oblations, 
return thither. 


६७५१. आ नो गव्यान्यश्षयां सहस्रां शूर दर्दृहि। 
दिवो अमुष्य शासतो दिवं यय दिंवावसो।।१४।। 

14. Bestow upon us, hero, thousands of herds of cattle and 
horses: do you, ruling yonder heaven, © radiant with oblations, 
return thither. 

६७५२. आ न॑: सहस्रशो भरायुतानि शतानि च। 
दिवो अमुष्य शास॑तो दिवँ यय दिंवावसो।।१५।। 
15. Bring to us, by thousands, tens of thousands and hundreds 


(of good things): do you, ruling yonder heaven, O radiant with 
oblations, return thither. 


६७५३. आ यदिन्द्रश्च दद्वहे सहस्रं वसुंरोचिषः। ओजिष्ठमर्थ्य पशुम्‌।।१६॥ 
16. We, the thousand Vasurocisas, and Indra (our leader), 
when we obtain givorous herds of horses,— 
वात॑रंहसो सूर्या 
६७५४. य ऋज़ा वात॑रंहसोऽरुषासों रघुष्यदः। भ्राजन्ते सूर्या इव।1१७।। 
17. Such as are straight-going, fleet as the wind, bright- 
Coloured, light-footed, and shine like the sun,— 
६७५५. पारावतस्य रातिषुं द्ववच्चक्रेष्वाशुषु। तिष्ठं वनस्य मध्य आ॥।१८॥ 
18. Then (having received) the horses, attached to the rolling- 


ured chariot, given from afar, we depart to the middle of the 
rest. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


_ THERE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


486 Rgveda Samhita 


Given from Afar— Pardvatasya rátisu. Pardvaia is probably the 
name of a king; *'the gifts of Paravata."* 
[सूक्त २५] 
[क्रषि- श्यावाश्च आत्रेय। देवता- अश्वनीकुमार। छन्द- उपरिष्टात्‌ ज्योति 
(FEY), २२,२४ पंक्ति, २३ महाबृहती।] 
६७५६. अग्निनेन्द्रेण वरुणेन विष्णुनादित्यै रुद्रैर्वसुभिः सचाभुवा। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं पिबतमश्चिना।।१।। 


1. Associated with Agni, with Indra, with Varuna, with Visnu, 
with the Adityas, the Rudras, and the Vasus, and united with the 
dawn and with Surya, drink, Asvins, the Soma. 


६७५७. विश्वाभिर्धीभिर्भुवनेन वाजिना दिवा पृथिव्याद्रिभि: सचाभुवा। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोम पिबतमश्चिना ।।२ | 


2. Powerful (Asvins), associated with all intelligences, with all 
beings, with heaven, with earth, with the mountains, united with 
the dawn and with Surya, drink, Asvins, the Soma. 


६७५८. विश्वैरदेवैखिभिरेकादशैरिहाद्धिर्मरुद्धिर्भृगुभि: सचाभुवां। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं पिबतमश्चिना।।३।। 


Fe 3. Associated with all the thrice-eleven deities at this 
ceremony, with the waters, with the Maruts, with the Bhrgus, 
united with the dawn and with Surya, drink, Asvins, the Soma. 


६७५९. जुषेथा यज्ञं बोध॑तं हव॑स्य मे विश्वेह देवो सवनाव॑ गच्छतम्‌। 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं नो वोळहमश्चिना।।४।। 


4. Be gratified by the sacrifice; hear my invocation; recognize, 
deities, all the offerings in this ceremony; united with the dawn 
and with Stirya, bring us, Asvins, food. 


६७६०. स्तोमं जुषेथां युवशेव॑ कन्यनां fade देवौ सव॒नाव॑ गच्छतम्‌। 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं नो वोळहमश्चिना।।। 


5. Be gratified by our praise as youths are delighted (by the 

voices) of maidens: recognize, deities, all the offerings फा this 

1] ceremony; united with the dawn and with Surya, bring us, Asvins: 
| food. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


IC 


e 


is 


n 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 35 487 
` ` ० Ine ` देवौ E 
६७६१. गिरों जुषेथामध्वरं जुषेथां विश्वेह Sat सवनावं गच्छतम्‌। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चेषं नो वोळहमश्चिना। ६॥। 

6. Be gratified, deities, by our praises, be gratified by the 
sacrifice, recognize, deities, all the offerings in this ceremony; 
united with the dawn and with Surya, bring us, Asvins, food. 

६७६२. हारिद्रवेव॑ पतथो वनेदुप सोमं सुतं मंहिपेवाव॑ गच्छथः। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च विर्वर्ति्यातमश्चिना 1911 

7. You alight upon the effused Soma as the Haridrava plunges 
unto the water: you fall upon it like two buffaloes (plunging into a 
pool); united with the dawn and with Surya, come, Asvins, by the 
triple path. 

Haridrava—tThe Scholiast in a former passage (see Vol. I, mantra, 
598 and note) makes Aáridravá a tree; here it is a bird of a yellow colour 
probably. 

By the Triple Path— Trir vartir yātam, *the three daily 
ceremonies." [Or **come thrice to our dwelling." '] 

६७६३. हंसाविंव पतथो अध्वगाविव सोमं सुतं महिषेवाव गच्छथ:। 
FNAT d. M त्रिर्वर्तिर्यातमशि ju. 
सजोषंसा उषसा सूर्येण च त्रिर्वर्तिर्यातमश्चिना ue t 

8. As two geese, as two travellers, as two buffaloes (hasten to 
water), ye alight, Asvins, upon the effused Soma; united with the 
dawn and with Sürya, come, Asvins, by the triple path. 

६७६४. श्येनाविंव पतयो हव्यदांतये सोर्म सुतं मंहिषेवाव॑ गच्छथः। 
सजोषंसा उषसा सूर्येण च त्रिर्वर्ति्यातमश्चिना uS 1 

9. Ye hasten like two falcons to the offerer of the libation, ye 
alight upon the effused soma as two buffaloes (hasten to water); 
united with the dawn and with Surya, come, Asvins, by the triple 
path. 

६७६५. fudd च तृप्णुतं चा च॑ गच्छतं प्रजां च॑ Sd द्रविंणं च धत्तम्‌। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चोज नो धत्तमश्चिना॥१०।॥। 


i 10. Drink, Asvins, the Soma, and staiate yourselves; come 
hither; give us progeny; give us wealth; united with the dawn and 


With Surya, give us, Asvins, strength. 
६७६६. जय॑तं च प्र स्तुतं च प्र चांवतं प्रजां च॑ Ud द्रविणं च धत्तम्‌। 
स॒जोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चोज नो धततमश्चिना।।११॥ 


D C In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


488 Rgveda Sarihita 


ll. Conquer (Asvins,) your foes; protect and praise (your 
worshipper), grant progeny, give wealth, and, united with the dawn 
and with Sürya, give us, Asvins, strength. 

६७६७. हतं च शत्रून्यततँ च मित्रिणः प्रजां च sd द्रविणं च धत्तम्‌। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चोर्ज नो धत्तमश्चिना।।१२।। 

12. Destroy your foes, repair to your friends, grant pogeny, 
give wealth, and, united with the dawn and with Stirya, give us, 
Asvins, strength. 

६७६८. मित्रावरुणवन्ता उत धर्मवन्ता मरुत्वन्ता जरितुर्गच्छथो हव॑म्‌। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चादित्यैयतमश्चिना।।१३।। 

13. Associated with Mitra and Varuna, with Dharma, with the 


Maruts, repair to the invocation of the adorer; repair (to him), 
Asvins, united with the down, with Sūrya, and with the Adityas. 


६७६९. अङ्गिरस्वन्ता उत विष्णुवन्ता मरुत्वन्ता जरितुर्गच्छथो हव॑म्‌। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चादित्यै्यातमश्चिना ।१४।। 


14. Associated with the Afigirasas, with Visnu, with the 
Maruts, repair to the invocation of the adorer; repair (to him), 
Asvins, united with the dawn, with Sürya, and with the Adityas. 


६७७०. ऋभुमन्तां वृषणा वाज॑वन्ता मरुत्वन्ता जरितुर्गच्छथो हव॑म्‌। 
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चादित्यैरयातमश्चिना।।१५।। 


15. Associated with the Rbhus, and with the Maruts, repair, 
showerers (of benefits), dispensers of food, to the invocation of the 
adorer; repair (to him), Asvins, united with the dawn, with Surya, 

i and with the Adityas. 


६७७१. ब्रह्म॑ जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं धियो हतं रक्षासि सेध॑तममीवाः। 
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमं सुन्वतो अश्विना।।१६॥ 
16. Be propitious to prayer, be propitivus to sacred rites, slay 
the Raksasas, remedy diseases united with the dawn and with 
Surya, (drink), Asvins, the Soma of the offerer. 


Be Propitious to Prayer— Brahma jinvatam. The Scholiast renders 
the substantive by Brahmana. 


६७७२. क्षत्रं जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं red रक्षांसि सेध॑तममीवा:। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोम॑ सुन्वतो अंश्चिना॥१७।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Ss या या Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


[ 
| 


Mandala 8, Sükta 35 489 
a Be propitious to the strong, be propitious to men, slay the 
Raksasas, remedy diseases; united with the dawn and with Surya, 
(drink), Asvins, the Soma of the offerer. 
Be Propitious to the Strong— Ksatram jinvatam uta jivantam nrn. 
The first is explained Ksatriyam, the second yoddha, ‘‘warriors.”’ 


६७७३. धेनूर्जिन्वतमुत जिन्वतं विशो हतं रक्षीसि सेध॑तममीवा:। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण च सोमँ सुन्वतो अंश्विना।।१८।। 


, 18. Be propitious to the kine, be propitious to the people, slay 
the Raksasas, remedy diseases; united with the dawn and with 
Sürya, (drink), Asvins, the Soma of the offerer. 

Be Propitious to the People— Visah, by which Sayana understands 
the Vaisyas. 
अत्रॅरिव ७ cine 1 [i 
र ६७७४. AAA श्रृणुत पूव्यस्तुत श्यावाश्वस्य सुन्वतो मदच्युता। 
EST) | तिरो 1 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाश्चिना तिरोअह्यम्‌।।१९॥। 

19. Humblers of the pride (of your enemies), hear the earnest 
praise of Syavasva offering libations as (you did) that of Atri, and, 
united with the dawn and with Surya, (drink), Asvins, (the Soma) 
prepared the previous day. 

Soma Prepared the Previous Day— Tiro ahnyam, according to the 


Scholiast, is the Soma prepared the day before, and drunk at early dawn, 
at the worship of the Asvins,; cf. transl. Vol. I, mantra 541. 


६७७५. Wika सृजतं सुष्टुतीरुप श्यावाश्वंस्य सुन्वतो मंदच्युता। 
सजोषसा उषसा सूर्येण चाश्चिना तिरोअंह्यम्‌।॥२०।। 


20. Humblers of the pride (of your enemies), accept the earnest 
praises of Syavasva offering you libations as if you were accepting 
Oblations; and, united with the dawn and with Surya, (drink) 


ASvins, (the Soma) prepared the previous day. 
v 1 Li 
६७७६. रश्मीरिंव यच्छतमध्वराँ उप॑ श्यावाश्वस्य सुन्वतो मंदच्युता। 
सजोष॑सा उषसा सूर्येण चाश्चिना तिरोअहयम्‌॥२१॥ 


21. Humblers of the pride (of your enemies), seize the 
Sacrifices of Syavasva offering libations as you seize your reins 
and united with the dawn and with Sarva, (drink), Asvins, (the 


Soma) prepared the previous day 
६७७७. अर्वाग्रथं नि य॑च्छतं पिब॑तं सोम्यं मधु। 
आ यांतमश्चिना ग॑तमवस्युर्वामहं हुवे धत्तं THA दाशुषे॥२२॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


_ HR 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


430 Rgveda Samhita 


22. Direct you chariot downwards, drink the Soma nectar; 
come, Asvins, come (hither); desirous of your protection, I invoke 
you; give precious riches to the donor of the offering. 

६७७८. न्खमोवाके प्रस्थिते अध्वरे न॑रा विवक्षणस्य पीतयें। 
[ गंतमवस्युर्वीमहं | : हुवे . | दाशुषे 
आ यातमश्विना गतमवस्युर्वामहं हुवे धत्तं रत्नानि ।।२३॥। 

23. Come, leaders of rites, when the sacrifice, at which your 
adoration is recited, is commenced, to drink of the Soma offered 
by me; come, Asvins, come (hither); desirous of protection, I 
invoke you; give precious riches to the donor of the offering. 

Offered by Me—Sayana here takes vivaksanasya as an epithet of the 
speaker, i.e., ‘‘at the commenced adoration of me the offerer of libation™; 


elsewhere, as in viii. 21.5, he takes the word as an epithet of the Soma, 
“‘heaven-bestowing,”’ svargaprapanasila. 


६७७९. स्वाहाकृतस्य तृम्पतं सुतस्य देवावन्ध॑सः। 
आ यांतमश्चिना गंतमवस्युर्वामहं हुवे धत्तं रत्नानि दाशुषें।२४॥। 
24. Divine (Asvins), partake to satiety of the sacrificial 
beverage, consecrated with the exclamation Syahd; come, Asvins, 


come (hither); desirous of protection, I invoke you; give precious 
riches to the donor of the offering. 


— [सूक्त-३६] 
[क्रषि- श्यावाश्च आत्रैय। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- शक्वरी, ७ महापंक्ति।] 
६७८०. अवितासिं सुन्वतो वृक्तबर्हिषः पिबा सोमं मदाय कं शतक्रतो। यं ते 
भागमधारयन्विश्वा: सेहानः पृत॑ना उरु ज्रयः समप्सुजिन्मरुत्वौँ इन्द्र 
सत्पते।।१।। 


1. You are the protector of the effuser of the libation, of the 
strewer of the clipt sacred grass; drink joyfully, Satakratu, the 
Soma for your exhilaration—that portion which (the gods) 

| assigned you, Indra, lord of the virtuous, who are the victor over 
| all (hostile) hosts, the conqueror of many, the subduer of the 
। waters, the leader of the Maruts. 

The Conqueror of Many— Uru jrayas. Sayana explains jrayas hete 
as vega, but in viii.6.27 he alternatively explained urujrayas as 
yistirnayydpin, “‘the wide pervader." We might thus render the passage: 
“tthe victor over all hostile hosts and over wide space.’ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri a ee _- Haridwar 


ee MM ळा 


il 


IS 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 36 491 
६७८१. प्राव॑ Hak मघवन्नव त्वां पिबा सोमं मर्दाय कं शंतक्रतो। यं d 
T aie p ie हल iuro 
भागमधारयन्‌ विश्वाः सेहान: पृतना उरु Wu: समप्सुजिन्मरुत्वीँ vu 
सत्पते।।२।। 

2. Protect the worshippers, Maghavan, protect thyself; drink 
joyfully, Satakratu, the Soma for your exhilaration,—that portion 
which (the gods) assigned you, Indra, lord of the virtuous, who are 
the victor over all (hostile) hosts, the conqueror of many, the 
subduer of the waters, the leader of the Maruts. 

६७८२. ऊर्जा देवाँ अवस्योजसा त्वां पिबा सोमं मदांय कं शतक्रतो। यं d 
भागमर्धारयन्‌ विश्वां: सेहानः पृतना उरु ज्रयः सर्मप्सुजिन्मरुत्वाँ इन्द्र 
सत्पते 11३11 

3. You, Maghavan, protect the gods with (sacrificial) food, and 
yourself by your might; drink joyfully, Satakratu, the Soma for 
your exhilaration,—that portion which (the gods) assigned you, 
Indra, lord of the virtuous, who are the victor over all (hostile) 
hosts, the conqueror of many, the subduer of the waters, the leader 
of the Maruts. 

६७८३. जनिता दिवो ज॑निता पृथिव्या: पिबा सोमं मर्दाय कं शतक्रतो। d 
भागमधारयन्‌ विश्वां: सेहानः पृर्तना उरु wu: समप्सुजिन्मरत्वाँ इन्द्र 
enm 

4. You, are the generator of heaven, the generator of earth; 
drink joyfully, Satakratu, the Soma for your exhilaration,——that 
portion which (the gods) assigned you, Indra, lord of the virtuous, 
who are the victor over all (hostile) hosts, the conqueror of many, 
the subduer of the waters, the leader of the Maruts. 

६७८४. जनिताश्चांनां जनिता गवामसि पिबा सोमं मदाय कं शंतक्रतो। यं d 

à & nul 2 
भागमधारयन्‌ विश्वां: सेहानः पूतना उरु WA: समप्सुजिन्मरुत्वीँ इन्द्र 
सत्पते। II 
Fe 5. You are the generator of horses, the generator of the cattle; 
ink Joyfully, Satakratu, the Soma for your exhilaration,—that 
portion which (the gods) assigned you, Indra, lord of the virtuous, 


b ic 2 
ne are the victor over all (hostile) hosts, the conqueror of many, 
€ subduer of the waters, the leader of the Maruts. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


fo” NN | 


eee  EÁTSSSHEERENED 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


492 Rgveda Sarhhita x 
६७८५. अत्रीणां स्तोम॑मद्रिवो महस्कृधि पिबा सोमं मदाय कं शतक्रतो। यं 

ते भागमधारयन्‌ fal: सेहानः पूर्तना उरु जयः समप्सुजिन्मरुत्वौ T 

इन्द्र सत्पते।।६ ।। NH. 7 

6. Wielder of the thunderbolt, reverence the praise of the Airis; & 


drink joyfully, Satakratu, the Soma for your exhilaration,—that 
portion which (the gods) assigned you, /ndra, lord of the virtuous, 
who are the victor over all (hostile) hosts, the conqueror of many, 


the subduer of the waters, the leader of the Maruts. w 
६७८६. श्यावाश्च॑स्य सुन्वतस्तथा शृणु यथाशृणोरत्रेः कर्माणि कृण्वतः। 4 
ms 2 = ia a छ a 

प्र त्रसदस्युमाविथ त्वमेक इन्नूषाह्वा इन्द्र ब्रह्माणि वर्धयन्‌। to | नु 


7. Hear (the praises) of Syavasva offering the libations, as you 
have heard (those) of Atri engaged in holy rites: you alone, Indra, 
have defended Trasadasyu in battle, animating his prayers. 


ga 

[सूक्त- ३७] wi 

SO 

[ऋषि- श्यावाश्व आत्रेय। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- महापंक्ति, १ अतिजगती।] E 


६७८७. प्रेद wed वृत्रतूर्येष्वाविथ प्र सुन्वतः शंचीपत इन्द्र विश्वांभिरूतिमिं:। 
माध्यन्दिनस्य सव॑नस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य वज़िव:।।१॥ 


1. You protectest, Indra, lord of rites, with all protections in 4 
a 


combats with enemies, this sacrifice of him who offers you the e 
libations: slayer of Vrtra, irreproachable Wielder of the thunderbolt f 
drink of the Soma at the mid-day solemnity. Do 


Who Offers you the Libation— Siyana explains Brahma by 


Bráhmanan, and takes the whole clause as, “<Q Indra, protect these ६७ 
Brühmanas with all your protections in combats with enemies, (protect) , 
those who offer you the libation."' 


६७८८. सेहान उग्र पृतना अभि we: शचीपत इन्द्र विश्वांभिरूतिभि:। F 
माध्यैन्दिनस्य सर्वनस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य वञ्रिवः॥२ | pr 


2. Fierce Indra, defeater of hostile armies, lord of rites, (you| 
protectest) with all your protections, slayer of Vy ue 
irreproachable wielder of the thunderbolt, drink of the Soma at 


mid-day solemnity. ६७ 
1 
६७८९. एकराळस्य भुर्वनस्य राजसि शचीपत इन्द्र विश्वांभिरूतिभिः। 
माध्यैन्दिनस्य सर्वनस्य वृत्रहनननेद्य पिबा सोमस्य वज्रिव:। २ l 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


a Mandala 8, Sükta 38 493 
यं 3. You shine the sole sovereign of this world, Indra, lord of 
be rites, with all your protections; slayer of Vrtra, irreproachable 
wielder of the thunderbolt, drink of the Soma at the mid-day 
solemnity. 

s; ६७९०. सस्थावाना यवयसि त्वमेक इच्छचीपत इन्द्र विरश्वाभिरूति्भि:। 

at [5 citm a SSS AEG a 

: माध्यन्दिनस्य सर्वनस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबो सोम॑स्य वज्रिवः11४11 

y, 4. You alone, /ndra, lord of rites, separate the combined 


worlds (heaven and earth) with all your protections; slayer of 
Vrtra, irreproachable wielder of the thunderbolt, drink of the Soma 
at the mid-day solemnity. 


६७९१. क्षेम॑स्य च प्रयुर्जश्च त्वमीशिषे शचीपत इन्द्र विश्वाभिरूतिर्भि:। 


Qu मार्ध्यन्दिनस्य सवनस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य बञ्रिवः I 11 
"d, = aS 
5. You, lord of rites, are sovereign over our prosperity and 
gains, with all your protections; slayer of Vrtra, irreproachable 
wielder of the thunderbolt, drink of the Soma at the mid-day 
solemnity. 
] ६७९२. क्षत्राय त्वमवंसि न त्व॑माविथ, शचीपत इन्द्र विश्वाभिरूतिभि:। 
i माध्य॑न्दिनस्य सर्वनस्य वृत्रहन्ननेद्य पिबा सोम॑स्य वञ्िवः।।६।। 
6. You are for the strength (of the world); you protect with all 
dim Your protections, but you need no defender, /ndra, lord of rites; 
the slayer of Vrtra, irreproachable wielder of the thunderbolt, drink of 
yolt the Soma at the mid-day solemnity. 
But you Needest no Defender— So Sayana takes na tvamávitha. 
by Does it mean, “010 you not protect?" 
E ६७९३. श्यावाश्वस्य रेभतस्तर्था शृणु यथाशणोरत्रे: कर्माणि कृण्वत:। 
ect) , ee अपर = == = 
प्र त्रसदस्युमाविथ त्वमेक इन्नृषाह्वा इन्द्र क्षत्रा्णि THAT ING ii 
" 7. Hear the praises of Syavasva eulogizing you, as you have 
card those of Atri engaged in pious rites; you alone have 
| Protected Trasadasyu in battle, augmenting his vigour. 
you | 
tra, [सूक्त-३८] 
the 


[xfü- श्यावाश्व आत्रेय। देवता- इ्द्राग्नी। छन्द- गायत्री।] 
१9९४. यजस्य हि स्थ ऋत्विजा सस्ती वाजेषु कर्मस्‌। 
इन्द्राग्नी तस्य॑ बोधतम्‌।।१।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


हट का 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


M 
494 Rgveda Samhita 
1. Indra and Agni, you are the pure ministrants, (encouragers) Si 
in offerings and sacred rites,—hear (the praise) of this (your 
worshipper). zi 
Samaveda, 1073. 
६७९५. तोशासां रथयावांना वृत्रहणाप॑राजिता। इन्द्राग्नी तस्यं बोधतम्‌॥२॥ 
2. Destroyers (of foes), riding in one chariot, slayers of Vrtra, 
invincible: hear, Indra and Agni, (the praisc) of this (your ६, 
worshipper). 
Samaveda, 1074. 
६७९६. इदं वाँ मदिरं मध्वधुक्षत्द्रिभिर्नर;। इन्द्राग्नी तस्यं बोधतम्‌॥३॥ sa 
3. The leaders of rites have effused by the stones this sweet 4 
fu 


exhilarating (beverage) for you; hear, Indra and Agni, (the praise) 
of this (your worshipper). & 
Samaveda, 1075. 


६७९७. जुषेथां यज्ञमिष्टये सुतं सोमँ सधस्तुती । इन्द्रानी आ ग॑तं नरा॥४॥ 


4. Associated in praise, accept the sacrifice; leaders of rites, at 
Indra and Agni, come hither to the Soma effused for this th 
solemnity. as 

ति b. 
ar ६७९८. इमा जुषेथां सव॑ना येभिर्हव्यान्यूहर्थु:। इन्द्राग्नी आ गतं नरा॥५।। 2 
5. Accept these sacrifices whereby you have borne away the (न, 

oblations; leaders of rites, Indra and Agni, come hither. 

n गायत्रवर्तनि le सुष्टति p. 

६७९९. इमां गांयत्रव॑र्तनिं जुषे सुष्टुतिं मम॑। इन्द्रांग्गी आ गतं TIT 

6. Accept this my earnest praise, following the path of the di 


gayatri; leaders of rites, Indra and Agni, come hither. y 


६८००. प्रातर्यावैभिरा ग॑तं देवेभिर्जेन्यावसू। gate idi o1 


7. Rich with the spoils of victory, come, Indra and Agni; 0 & 
drink of the Soma, with the deities astir in the morning. 
sili E सोम॑पीतये 1 
६८०१. श्यावाश्वस्य सुन्वतोज्त्रीणां शृणुतं हव॑म्‌। इन्द्राग्नी Well 
8. Hear the invocation, Indra and Agni, of Syavasva pouring ह 
our the effused juice, (and) the Atris, to drink of the Soma. R 
सोम॑पीतये 
६८०२. एवा lug ऊतये यथाहुवन्त मेधिंराः। इन्द्राग्नी ॥९ : : 
= - - - v 
9. I invoke you both, Indra and Agni, as the sages 18 H 


invoked you, for your protection (and) to drink of the Soma. 


६८०३. आहं सरस्वतीवतोरि्द्राग्न्योखवों वृणे। याभ्याँ गायत्रमृच्यते iet 


BR 5 In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


e _™__™__ 


mhità 


igers) 
(your 


RII 
Vrtra, 
(your 


! 


sweet 
raise) 


| ४ ॥| 


f rites, 
r this 


Kl 
lay the 


gil 
of the 


[gni, 10 


yell 
2 नई 


i || 
25 have 


goll 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sūkta 39 495 
10. I solicit the protection of Indra and Agni, associated with 
Sarasvati, to whom this Gayatri hymn is addressed. 
Associated with Sarasvati— Sayana explains sarasvativatoh, 
“‘possessors of praise." 


[सूक्त-३ ९] 
[ऋषि- नामाक काण्व। देवता- अग्नि] छन्द- महापंक्ति। | 
६८०४. अग्निमस्तोष्यृग्मिय॑मग्निमीळा यजध्यें। अगिनर्देवाँ अनक्तु न उभे हि 
ES E I~ Zal [भन्तामन्यके = समे E 
विदथे कविरन्तश्चरति दूत्यंर नभन्तामन्य TIT 
1. I glorify the adorable Agni, (I invite) Agni with praise to the 
sacrifice, may Agni brighten the gods with the oblations at our 


sacrifice: the sage Agni traverses both (worlds discharging his 
function) as messenger of the gods; may all our adversaries perish. 


Is [| I ol) न्यराती | > 
६८०५. न्यग्न नव्यसा वचस्तनूषु शसमषाम्‌। न्यराती रराव्णां विश्वां अर्यो 
ठ या zu N = z 3 
रितो युच्छन्त्वामुरो नभन्तामन्यके FAIR I 
2. (Propitiated), Agni, by our new praise baffle the hostile 
attempts of these against our persons, consume the enemies of 
those who are liberal (at sacred rites); may all our foolish 
assailants depart from hence, may all our adversaries perish. 


All our Foolish Assailants— Siyana here explains ámurah by 
amudhah, but in iv.31.9 he explained it by badhakah Raksasas etc. 


६८०६. अग्ने मन्मानि तुभ्यं कं घृतं न jg आसनि। स देवेषु प्र चिकिद्धि 
fa SAA = न समे 

त्वं ह्यसि पूर्व्यः शिवो दूतो विवस्वतो नभन्तामन्यके समे।।३॥। 
3. I pour into your mouth, Agni, praises as others (fill it) with 
delicious butter; do you amidst the gods acknowledge (them), for 


you are ancient, the giver of happiness, the messenger of Vivasvat; 
may all our enemies perish. 
६८०७. तत्तंदग्निर्वयो दधे यथांयथा कृपण्यतिं। कर्जाहुतिर्वसूताँ शं च योश्च 
मयों दधे विश्व॑स्यै देवहूत्यै नभ॑न्तामन्यके wall 
: 4. Agni grants whatever food is solicited; invoked with 
offerings, he bestows on the worshippers happiness springing from 
penalty and the enjoyment (of objects of sense); he is requisite 
or all invocation of the gods: may all our adversaries perish. 
Happiness Springing from, Etc.— This is Sdyana’s interpretation 


of s ४ i z nae र 
sam ca yosca mayah, which he explains, Sdntinimittam visaya- 
Yogajanitam ca sukham. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—— _ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


496 Rgveda Samhita 


६८०८,स चिकेत सहींयसाग्निश्चत्रेण कर्मणा। स होता शश्चतीमा 
दक्षिणाभिरभीवृत इनोति च प्रतीव्यंद नभ॑न्तामन्यके समे।७॥ ` 

5. Agni is known by his most powerful and mainfold deeds: he 
is the invoker of the eternals; surrounded by victims, he proceeds 
against the foe: may all our adversaries perish. 

The Eternails— Sayana explains Sasvatindm as  bahvinám 
devatánàm. 

Against the Foc— This is Sdyana’s explanation of prativyam, but in 
viii.26.8 he explained it as yajfiam. Sayana explains daksinábhih by 
pasubhih. B. and R. by ‘‘Opferlohn.”” 


६८०९. अग्निर्जाता देवानांमग्निर्वेद मर्तानामपीच्यम्‌। अग्निः स द्रविणोदा 
अग्ना व्यूर्णुते स्वाहुतो नवीयसा नभ॑न्तामन्येके HÀ 

6. Agni knows the births of the gods; Agni knows the secrets of 

mankind: Agni is the giver of riches; Agni, duly worshipped with a 


new (oblation), sets open the doors (of opulence): may all our 
adversaries perish. 


: | s 
६८१०. अनिर्देवेषु संव॑सुः स विक्षु यञ्चियास्वा। स मुदा काव्या पुरु विश्व 
सीत पाऊ T [C am dà 
भूमेव पुष्यति देवो देवेषु यज्ञियो नभन्तामन्यके संमे।।७॥। 
7. Agni has his abode among the gods, he (dwells) among 
pious people: he cherishes with pleasure many pious acts, as the 


earth all (beings); a god adorable among the gods: may all our 
adversaries perish. 
॥ | j 
६८११. यो अग्निः सप्तमानुषः श्रितो विश्वेषु सिन्धुषु। तमागन्म त्रिपस्त्य 
म॑न्धतुरदसयुहन्तममग्नि = Se aad अन्तामन्यके di 
गातुरदस्युहन्तममग्नि यज्ञेषुं पूर्व्यं नभन्तामन्यके संमे।।८॥ 

8. Let us approach that Agni who is ministered to by seven 
} priests; who takes refuge in all rivers, who has a cipe duele 
| place, the slayer of the Dasyu for Mandhatda, who 1s oremost 1 
sacrifices: may all our adversaries perish. eft 

Ministered by Seven Priests—  Yo'gnih saptamánusah B 
unexplained by the commentator. The translation i$. conjec EN 
[Professor Müller, Hist. Sansk. Lit. p.493, takes it as “‘acting as 5 
priests.""] 


= ; e as 
Mandhatri— Sayana understands Mandhata is being the sam 
Mandhátá, the son of Yuvandsva. 


६८१२. अझित्रीणि त्रिधातूत्या क्षेति विदर्था कविः। स Rare 3 
यक्ष॑च्च पिप्रय॑च्च नो विप्रो दूतः परिष्कृतो नभ॑न्तामन्यके समे ॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


mhit4 
तीना 


1s: he 
ceeds 


vindm 
but in 
ih by 


वेणोदा 


ets of 
with a 
|] our 


; विश्वं 


mong 
as the 
ll our 


पस्त्यं 


seven 
elling 
ost in 


is left 
»ctural. 
; GERENS 
me 83 
शाँ इह 
| ust 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 40 497 


9. Agni, the sage, inhabits the three clementary regions; may 
he, intelligent, and richly decorated, the messenger (of the gods), 
here perform worship to the thrice eleven deities, and satisfy all 
our desires: may all our enemies perish. 

The three Elementary Regions— Zridhátüni, may mean only 
“threefold,” as in v.47.4; but cf. 1.154.4. 

«I आयपु B देवेषु 1 || 
६८१३. त्वं नों अग्न आयपु cd देवेषु पूर्व्यं वस्व एक इरज्यसि। 
I स्वसेतवो I ` Is 
त्वामापः परिस्नुतः aft यन्ति Wal नभन्तामन्यके संम॥॥१०।। 

10. You, ancient Agni, among men and gods, are alone to us 
the lord of wealth; the flowing waters confined within their own 
banks flow around you: may all our enemies perish. 


[स्‌क्त-४०] 
[ऋषि- नाभाक काण्व। देवता- इन्द्राग्नी। 
छन्द- महापंक्ति, २ शक्वरी,१२ AT | 
६८१४. इन्द्राग्नी युवं सु नः सहन्ता दास॑थो रयिम्‌। येन॑ दुळ्हा समत्स्वा 
वीळु चिंत्साहिषीमह्मग्निर्वनेव वात इन्नर्भन्तामन्यके संमे॥१॥। | 
i Victorious 167७ aud A gni, bestow upon. us riches whereby 


we may destroy our powerful enemies in combats as fire fanned by 
the wind consumes the forests: may all our enemies perish. 


६८१५. नहि वाँ वव्रयामहे5थेन्द्रमिद्यजामहे शविष्ठं नृणां नरम्‌। स न॑ः कदा 
चिदर्वता ma वाजंसातये गमदा मेधसातये नभन्तामन्येके 
Airu Eee 

2. Do we not invoke you both? We worship especially Indra, 
who is the strongest leader of men: he comes occasionally with his 


horses to bestow upon us food; he comes to partake of the 


Sacrifice: may all our enemies perish. 
t Do We not invoke you Both— Or rather, “we do not invoke you 
oth.” 


: To Bestow upon us Food— Sayana takes it, फि the receiving of 
ood.” 


६८१६. ता हि मध्यं भरराणामिन्द्रामी अधिक्षितः। ता उ कवित्वना कवी 
= ET धीतमश्नुतं = नभ॑न्तामन्यके 
पृच्छ्यमांना सखीयते सं धीतर्मश्नुतं नरा यके HAIR N 
3. They two, Indra and Agni, are present in the midst of 
battles: do you two, leaders of rites, who are really sages, when 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


———r rr RR 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


498 Rgveda Samhita M 
solicited (by the wise), accept the offering (from him) who seeks 
your friendship: may all our enemies perish प्र 
६८१७. अभ्यर्च नभाकवदिन्द्रानी यजसा गिरा। ययोर्विश्वमिदं जगंदियं द्यौ i 
पृथिवी मह्युरैपस्थें बिभृतो वसु नभन्तामन्यके HÀI I र 
4. Worship, like Nabhaka, /ndra and Agni with sacrifice and 
praise, of whom is this universe, upon whose lap this heaven and 
the spacious earth deposit their treasure: may all our enemies 
perish. t 
Nabhaka— The Rsi of the hymn is Nabhaka, perhaps a patronymic: t 
the text has here Nabhaka i 


६८१८. प्र ब्रह्माणि नभाकवदिन्द्राग्निभ्यामिरज्यत। या सप्तबुध्नमर्णवं 
जिह्यबारमपोर्णुत इन्द्र ईशान ओज॑सा नभन्तामन्यके संमे।५॥। 


f 
t 
5. Address like Nabhāka your praises to Indra and Agni, who t 
overspread (with their lustre) the seven-rooted ocean Whose gates 
are hidden, and of whom Indra by his might is the lord: may all l 
our enemies perish. “ 
Seven-Rooted ocean whose Gates are Hidden— There is no 1 
explanation of this. Ya saptabudhnam arnavam jihmabaram apornutah is 
explained saptamülam pihita-dváram arnavam tejobhir acchádáyatah. 


६८१९. अपिं वृश्च पुराणवद्‌ व्रततेरिव गुष्पितमोजों दासस्य॑ दम्भय। 
— वयं तद॑स्य॒ सम्भूतं वस्विन्द्रेण वि भजेमहि नभन्तामन्यके समे॥६॥ 
6. Cut off (the foe), Indra, as an old (pruner) the protruding 
(branch) of a creeper; humble the strength of the Dasa; may We 


divide his accumulated treasure (despoiled) by Indra: may all our 
enemies perish 


६८२०. यर्दिन्द्रागी जनां इमे विहय॑न्ते तनां गिरा। अस्माकेभिर्नूभिर्वयं 
सासह्याम॑ पृतन्यतो वनुयाम वनुष्यतो नभन्तामन्यके संमे।।७॥। 


7. Inasmuch as these people honour Indra and Agni with gifts 
and with praises, so may We, defying hosts, overcome (our foes) 
with our warriors; let us praise those seeking praise: May all our 
enemies perish 

Let us praise those seeking praise— Vanuydma vanusyatah the 
comment oddly enough explains stutim icchantah satrün vanuyama [The 
original rather means, ‘‘let us prevail over those desire to conquer ] 


६८२१. या नु श्वेताववो दिव उच्चरांत उप द्युर्भि:। इन्द्राग्न्योरनु व्रतमुहाना 
यन्ति सिन्धवो यान्त्सी बन्धादमुंञ्चतां नभन्तामन्यके wal! 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


I 1२ त्त... 


M angah Bt sek hy Ya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 499 


8. Offering oblations, (the worshippers) approach to the 
worship of /ndra and Agni, who are of a white complexion, and 
rise from below with bright rays to heaven: they verily have 
liberated the waters from bondage: may all our enemies perish. 


६८२२. पूर्वीष्ट इन्द्रोपमातयः पूर्वीरुत प्रश॑स्तयः सूनों fae हरिव:। 
वस्वों वीरस्यापृचो या नु साध॑न्त नो धियो नभन्तामन्यके HAIR 
9, Indra, wielder of the thunderbolt, instigator (of acts), may 
the numerous merits, the many excellences of you, who are the 


bestower of affluence and of male offspring, perfect our 


understandings; may all our enemies perish. 

The meaning of this verse, even with the help of the Scholiast, is far 
from intelligible. [Sayana would seem to take it thus: “‘Jndra, wielder of 
the thunderbolt, instigator (of acts), of you, the gladdener, the brilliant, 
the hero, the wealth-bestower, numerous (or ‘ancient,’ cf. IV.23.3) are the 
comparisons, numerous (or *ancient') are the praises, which exercise our 
understandings." In his Comm. on 1V.23.3 he takes upamátayah as 


dhanani.} 
> 1 शिंशीता p NES सत्वानमृग्मियम्‌' 1 ओज॑सा 
६८२३. तं शिशीता सुवृक्तिभिस्त्वेषं मृग्मियम्‌। उतो नु चिद्य मा 
शुष्णंस्याण्डानि भेद॑ति जेषत्स्वर्वतीरपो नभन्तामन्यके HÀ ॥१०।। 
liant adorable Indra, the 
breaks the eggs of Susna: 


| our enemies perish. 
**egg-born offspring": 


. 10. Animate with praises that bril 
distributor (of riches), who by his might 
may he conquer the celestial waters: may al 

The Eggs of Susna— Susnasya andüni, 
andajatani, according to the Scholiast. 
L . Li ओह॑त 
६८२४. d शिशीता स्वध्वरं सत्यं सर्त्वानमृत्विर्यम्‌| उतो नु चिद्य आहे 
आण्डा शुष्ण॑स्य भेदत्यजैः स्वर्वतीरपो नर्भन्तामन्यके संमे।११॥ 
11. Animate that Indra to whom sacrifice is due,—sincere, 
bountiful, adorable;; him who frequents sacrifices, who breaks the 
eggs of Susna; you have conquered the celestial waters: may all 
our enemies perish. 
मन्धातृवर्दङ्गिरस्वर्दवाचि 
६८२५. एवेन्द्राग्निभ्या पितृवन्नवीयो तृवर्दङ्गिरस्वदवाचि। 
त्रिधातुंना शर्मणा पातमस्मान्‌ वयं स्याम पत॑यो स्यीणाम्‌॥१२॥ 
12. Thus has a new hymn been addressed to Indra and Agni, as 


was done by my father, by Mandhatd, by Angiras; cherish us with 


a triply defended dwelling: may we be the lords of riches. — 
am Triply Defended Dwelling— Tridhdtund Sarmané, triparvand 
thena, "with a house of three joints, "— Stories? [In 134.6, tridhātu 


DUO का In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


UO UO mtn en ee emm 


—— NN .”... 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


500 Rgveda Samhita 


sarma is explained as vatapitta-slesma-dhátutrayasamana visayam 
sukham; in 1.85.12, Sarma tridhátüni is explained as prthivyádisu trişu 
sthdnesu avasthitàni sukhdni grháni và.] 


[सूक्तः४१] 
[ऋषि- नाभाक काण्व। देवता- वरुण। छन्द- महापंक्ति।] 
६८२६. अस्मा ऊ षु प्रभूंतये वरुणाय मरुद्भयोऽर्चौ विदुष्टरेभ्यः। 
यो धीता मानुंषाणां पश्चो गाईव रक्षति नभन्तामन्यके संमे।।१॥ 
1. Offer praise to that opulent Varuna, and to the most sage 
Maruts; (Varuna) who protects men by his acts, as (the herdsman 
guards) the cattle: may all our enemies perish. 


By his Acts.— The karmand in the Comm. seems to be a misreading 
for karmani, ‘‘who protects men's religious acts.” 


६८२७. तमू षु स॑मना गिरा पितृणां च मन्मंभिः। नाभाकस्य प्रशस्तिभिर्य: 

a सिन्ध॑नामुपोंदये T E p z | भन्तामन्यके उक जं स॑मे = 
सिन्धनामुपोदये सप्तस्वसा स मध्यमो न IRI 

2. (I praise) with a like praise, with the praises of (my) 

progenitors, with the eulogies of Nabhdka, that Varuna who rises 

up in the vicinity of the rivers, and in the midst (of them) has seven 
sisters: may all our enemies perish. $ [ 

Very unintelligible, although Yaska (x.5) is cited in explanation: 

sindhünám upodaye saptasvasd sa madhyamah. (Prof. Roth translates it, 


pum “der am Ausgang der flüsse ist, deer sieben Schwestern (cf. viii.69.12) 
Herr ist der mittlere.’”] 


६८२८. स क्षपः UR षस्वजे et माययां दधे स विश्वं af दर्शतः। 
तस्य वेनीरनु ब्रतमुषस्तिस्नो अंवर्धयन्नभन्तामन्यके BA UI 
3. He embraces the nights: of goodly aspect, and quick of 
movement, he encompasses the universe by his acts: all who are 
desirous (of his favour) diligently offer him worship at the three 
diurnal rites: may all our enemies perish. 


Quick of Movement— Sayana explains usrah as utsaranastlah. 
Bohtlingk and Roth's Dict. takes it as acc. plur. of usra, **morning. 


x : 
६८२९. यः ककुभो निधारयः पृथिव्यामधि दर्शत:। स d पूर्व्य पद 
तद्वरुणस्य सप्त्यं स हि गोपा वेर्यो नर्भन्तामन्यके wand 

4. He, who visible above the earth sustains the points of de 
horizon, is the mcasurer (of the universe); that is the ancient abo ; 
of Varuna, to which we have access; he is our lord, like the keepe 


of cattle: may all our enemies perish. 5 
The Measurer— Sayana explains mata by nirmátá, **the maker- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ell ग ग °. 02 


isu 


ge 
an 


ing 


SeS 
ren 


on: 


Mandala 8, Jakta 
६८३०. यो धर्ता भुवनानां य उ्राणांमपीच्यार वेद नामानि गुह्यां 
1 = E e 
स कविः काव्यां पुरु रूपं दयौरिव पुष्यति नभन्तामन्यके AIR 
5. He who is the sustainer of the worlds, who knows the 
hidden and secret names of the (solar) rays, he is the sage who 


cherishes the acts of sages, as the heaven cherishes numerous 
forms: may all our enemies perish. 


६८३१. यस्मिन्‌ विश्वानि काव्यां चक्रे नाभिरिव श्रिता। त्रितं जूती संपर्यत 
्रजे गावो न संयुजें युजे अश्वाँ अयुक्षत नर्भन्तामन्यके TÀI 

6. In whom all pious acts are concentrated, like the nave in the 

(centre of the) wheel, worship him quickly who abides in the three 


worlds: as men assemble the cattle in their pasture, so do (our foes) 
collect their horses (to assail us): may all our enemies perish. 
` ES |} 
६८३२. य आस्वत्क आशये विद्वां जातान्येंषाम्‌। परि धामाति मर्मुशद्दरणस्य 
पुरो गये fad देवा अनु व्रत नभन्तामन्यके समे।।७॥ 

7. He who, passing amidst those (regions of the firmament), 
gives refuge to all their races, and all the deities precede the 
chariot of Varuna, when manifesting his glories to perform his 
worship: may all our enemies perish. 

The commentary here is defective, and the passage very obscure; the 
translation is not entitled to any reliance. [Query, “who going through 
these regions (of space) rests on all their tribes, surrounding - all 
homes,—all the gods are engaged in worship before Varuna's dwelling: 
may all our enemies perish.''] 

[ESC अंपीच्य॑स्तुरो 1 1 रोहति 1 यजुर्दधे à 
६८३३. स संमुद्रो अंपीच्यस्तुरो द्यामिव रोहति नि यदासु "mieu! 
3 PASSO x B oe m 
स माया अर्चिनां पदास्तूणान्नाकमारहन्नभन्तामन्यके समे॥८।। 

8. He is the hidden ocean; swift he mounts (the heaven) as the 
sun) the sky; when he has placed the sacrifice in those (regions of 
the firmament), he demolishes with his brilliant radiance the 
devices (of the Asuras); he ascends to heaven: may all our enemies 
Perish. 

तरुणि पप्रतुर्वणस्य 
६८३४. यस्य॑ श्वेता विचक्षणा तिस्रो भूमीरधिक्षितः। र पप्रतु 
ध्रुवं सद: स संप्तानार्मिरज्यति नभ॑न्तामन्यके FRI 

9. Of whom, present in the three worlds, the brilliant rays 


pervade the three realms beyond, the eternal dwelling of Varuna, 
he is lord of the seven (rivers): may all our enemies perish. 


Digitized 0 Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


501 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Reveda Samhita 


502 


Sayana compares ii.27.8, and seems to explain trí, **of whom, the 
ruler, the brilliant rays pervade the three earths and the threc heavens 
above,—his dwelling-place is immoveable. 


६८३५. य: श्वेताँ अधिनिर्णिजश्चक्रे कृष्णाँ अनु व्रता। स धाम ei म॑मे यः 
स्कम्भेन वि रोद॑सी अजो न द्यामधारयन्नभन्तामन्यके संमे।।१० I1 
10. He who in his successive functions emits his bright rays or 
turns them dark, first made his residence (in the firmament), and, 
as the unborn sun the sky, supports with the pillar (of the 
firmament) both heaven and earth: may all our enemies perish. 


Emits His Bright Rays or Turns them Dark— As presiding over 
day and night. 


[सूक्त-४२] 
[ऋषि- नाभाक काण्व तथा अर्चनाना आत्रेय। देवता- १-३ वरुण, ४-६ 
अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- १-३ त्रिष्टुप्‌ , ४-६ अनुष्ठुप्‌। ] 
६८३६. ओस्त॑भ्नाद्‌ चामसुरो विश्ववेदा अमिंमीत वरिमाणं पृथिव्याः। 
anista भुवनानि सम्राड्‌ विश्वेत्तानि वरुणस्य sf us N 


1. The possessor of all wealth, the powerful Varuna, has fixed 
the heaven; he has meted the measure of the earth; he presides as 


supreme monarch over all worlds; these all are the functions of 
Varuna. 


६८३७. एवा व॑न्दस्व वरुणं बृहन्तं नमस्या धीरममृतस्य गोपाम्‌। 
ति 5 ति उपस्थे 
स नः शर्म त्रिवरूथं वि य॑सत्पातं नों द्यावापृथिवी STAR 
2. Glorify then the mighty Varuna, reverence the wise 
guardian of ambrosia; may he bestow upon us a thrice sheltering 
habitation; may heaven and earth preserve us abiding in their 
proximity. 
A Thrice sheltering Habitation—  Trivarütha is explained by 


Sayana in vi.46.9 as “‘sheltering from cold, heat, and rain’’; here as 
tristhanam. 


६८३८. इमां धियं शिक्ष॑माणस्य देव क्रतुं दक्षं वरुण सं शिशाधि। 


ययाति विश्वाँ दुरिता तरॅम सुतर्माणमधि नावँ रुहेम।।३॥ 


3. Divine Varuna, animate the sacred acts of me engaging 
this your worship: may we ascend the safebearing vessel by whic 
we may cross over all difficulties. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Ec 5 २. Haridwar 


n 


fc ग MMS Ll zi 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 43 503 
Animate the Sacred Acts.— Kratum daksam, Sayana, “‘sharpen the 
knowledge and power.” 
६८३९. आ वां ग्रावाणो अश्विना धीभिर्विप्रा अचुच्यवु:। 
1 i- सोमपीतये In भन्तामन्यके 3 ui 
नासत्या सोमपीतये न SETTE 
4. The acred stones, Asvins, the pious worshippers, Ndsatyds, 
have fallen upon their sacred functions, (to induce you) to drink 
the Soma: may all our enemies perish. 
६८४०. यर्था वामत्रिरश्चिना गीर्भिरविप्रो अजोहवीत्‌। 
नार्सत्या सोम॑पीतये नभन्तामन्यके AIA 
5. In like manner as the pious Atri, Asvins, invoked you with 
hymns, so (I invoke you), Ndsatyds, to drink the Soma: may all our 
enemies perish. 
६८४१. एवा वांमहन ऊतये यथाहुवन्त मेधिराः। 
नास॑त्या सोम॑पीतये नभन्तामन्येके समे।।६।। 
6. In like manner as the wise invoke you for protection, so do I 


invoke you, Nasatyds, to drink the Soma: may all our enemies 
perish. 
[सूक्त-४३] 
[क्रषि- विरूप आङ्गिरस। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- गायत्री। | 

६८४२. इमे विप्र॑स्य वेधसो$ग्नेरस्तृतयज्वन:। गिरः स्तोमास KAN 11 

1. These repeaters of laudations recite the praises of the wise 
creative Agni, the uninterrupted sacrificer. 

The Uninterrupted Sacrificer— Asirta-yajvan is more literally **the 
invincible sacrificer.”” 
६८४३. अस्मै ते प्रतिहर्यते जातवेदो विचर्षणे। अग्ने जर्नामि सुष्टतिम्‌॥२॥ 

2. Agni, Jatavedas, to you, the liberal offerer (of the oblation), 
the all-beholding, I repeat earnest praise. 

The Liberal Offerer— Sayana more frequently explains pratiharya 
as **to accept, desire." 
६८४४. आरोकाईव घेदह॑ तिग्मा अग्ने तव त्विष:। दद्भिर्वनानि बप्सति॥३॥ 

.3. Your fierce flames, Agni, consume the forest, as wild 

animals destroy (the plants) with their teeth. 


Wild Animals— Arokah is an obscure word, Sayana explains it as 
arocamandh pasavah, but the Comm. to Satap. Br., iii.1.2.18 explains it 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


504 Reveda Samhita 


as madhye chidráni. May it mean here ‘‘(your fierce flames) glancing, as 
it were, through the trees’’? Cf Bohtlingk and Roth, sub voce. 


६८४५. RA धूमकेतवो वात॑जूता उप द्यवि। यतन्ते वृर्थगग्नरय: 1४ 

4. The consuming smoke-bannered fires, borne by the wind, 
spread diversely in the firmament. 
६८४६. एते त्ये वृथंगग्नय॑ इद्धासः सम॑दृक्षत। उषसांमिव केतव॑:।।५।। 

5. These fires separately kindled are beheld like the tokens of 
the dawn. 
६८४७. कृष्णा रजाँसि पत्सुतः प्रयाणे जातवेंदसः। अग्निर्यद्रोध॑ति क्षमिं।।६॥ 


6. Black dust is raised by the feet of Jatavedas when he moves, 
when Agni spreads on the earth. 

When Agni spreads the Earth— Sayana translates Agnir yad 
rodhati ksami, **when Agni heaps (the dry trees) on the ground." 
Bóhtlingk and Roth take rodhati as from rush, sc. **whatever grows on 
the earth’; thus connecting these last words of v. 6 with v.7. 


६८४८. धासिं कृण्वान ओषधीर्बप्संदग्निर्न वांयति। पुनर्यन्तरुणीरपि tto 11 


7. Making the plants his food, Agni devouring them is never 
satiated, but falls again upon the young (shrubs). 


६८४९. जिह्वाभिरह नन्नमदर्चिषा जञ्जणाभर्वन्‌। अग्निर्वनेंषु रोचते te ।। 


8. Bowing down (the trees) with his tongues (of flame), and 
blazing with splendour, Agni shines in the forests. 


६८५०. अप्स्वग्ने सधिष्टव सौषधीरनु रुध्यसे। गर्भे सञ्जायसे पुन॑ः।।९॥ 


9. Your station, Agni, is in the waters: you cling to the plants, 
and becoming their embryo, are born again. 


६८५१. उद॑ग्ने तव तद्‌ घृतादर्ची रोचत आहुतम्‌। निंसानं Gals मुखें।1१०॥ 


10. Your lustre, Agni, lambent in the mouth of the ladle, shines 
when offered from (the oblation of) butter. 


६८५२. उक्षान्नाय वशान्नाय सोमपृष्ठाय वेधसे स्तोमैर्विधेमोग्नये।।११।। 


11. Let us adore with hymns Agni, the granter (of desires), the 
eater of the ox, the eater of the marrow, on whose back the libation 
is poured 


६८५३. उत त्वा नम॑सा वयं होतर्वरेण्यक्रतो। अग्ने समिद्धिरीमहे।।१२।। 


12. We solicit you, Agni, invoker of the gods performer of 
sacred rites, with oblations and with fuel 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sukta 43 505 

Performer of Sacred Rites— Sáyana takes varenyakrato, “0 you 
who possess desirable knowledge.” 

I भृगुवच्छुचे 1 I अङगिरस्वद्धवामहे 
६८५४. उत त्वा भृगुवच्छुचे मनुष्वदग्न आहुत। अङ्गिरस्वद्धवामहे 1123 11 

13. Holy Agni, to whom oblations are offered, we worship you 
in like manner (as you have been worshipped) by Bhrgu, by 
Manus, by Arigiras. 

05% fia EE विप्रेंण 
६८५५. त्वं ह्यग्ने अग्निना विप्रो विप्रेण सन्त्सता। 
1 E 
सखा सख्या समिध्यसे rev t 

14. You, Agni, are kindled by Agni; a sage by a sage, saint by a 
saint, a friend by a friend. 

A Saint by a Saint— San and Satd are explained by Sayana as 
respectively vidyamánah and vidyamánena; and he refers to a passage in 
the Aitareya Bráhmana, i.16, which describes how the fire produced by 
friction from the two aranis is thrown into the Ahavaniya fire, in the 
Atithyesti ceremony. ‘‘In the verse tvam hyagne, etc., the one vipra (a 
sage) means one Agni, the other vipra the other Agri; the one san (being, 
existing) means the one, the other san (in satd) the other Agni.” (Haug's 
transl.) 


६८५६. स त्तं विप्राय दाशुषे रयिं देहि सहल्लिणम्‌। 
अग्ने वीरवंतीमिष॑म्‌।।१५।। 
15. Do you, Agni, bestow upon the pious donor (of the 
oblation) infinite riches and food with male progeny. 


६८५७. अग्ने भ्रातः सहस्कृत रोहिंदश्व शुचिव्रत। 
इमं स्तोमं जुषस्व ÑIRE II 
16. Agni, (our) brother, who are elicited by strength, who have 
ted horses, and are (the performer) of pure rites, be propitiated by 
this my praise. 
६८५८. उत त्वाग्ने मम स्तुर्तो वाश्राय॑ प्रतिहर्यते। गोष्ट गाव॑ इवाशत।।१७।। 
17. My praises hasten to you, Agni, as cows enter their stalls 
(to give milk) to the thirsting calves. 
६८५९. तुभ्यं ता अङ्गिरस्तम faal: सुक्षितयः पृर्थक्‌। 
अग्ने कामाय येमिरे।।१८॥ 


18. To you, Agni, who are the chief of the Angirasas, all 
People have severally recourse for the attainment of their desires. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


506 Rgveda Samhita 


Have Severally Recourse— Yemire scems to be used here as in 
1.135. 1; iii.59.8. In the latter place Sayana explains it, “जील oblations.” 
Bóhtlingk and Roth render it in all three places, *‘sich fügen, gehorchen, 
true bleiben.'' 


६८६०. अग्नि धीभिर्मनीषिणो मेधिरासो विपश्चित:। अद्मसद्याय RERI 


19. The wise, the intelligent, the sagacious, propitiate Agni 
with sacrifices for the attainment of food. 


६८६१. d त्वामज्मेषु वाजिनं तन्वाना अग्ने अध्वरम्‌। 
a होतारमीळते।।२०।। 


20. Preparing the sacrifice in their mansions, (the worshippers) 
adore you, Agni, the powerful, the bearer (of the oblation), the 
invoker of the gods. 


६८६२. पुरुत्रा हि सदृङ्ङसि विशो विश्वा अनु प्रभुः। 
समत्सुं त्वा हवामहे।।२१॥ 


21. You are the lord, you behold all people alike in many 
places; we therefore invoke you in battles. 

This v. also occurs in viii.2.8. Sayana here reads prabhu for prabhuh, 
but against our MSS. 


EY > | 
६८६३. तमींळिष्व य आहुतोऽगिनर्विभ्राज॑ते घृतैः। इमं न॑ः शृणवद्धव॑म्‌॥९२॥ 
22. Adore that Agni who shines brightly when fed with 
offerings of butter, who hears this our invocation. 


६८६४. तं त्वां वयं ह॑वामहे शुण्वन्तं जातवेंदसम्‌। 
अग्ने घ्नन्तमप FN: 113 


i 23. We invoke you, Agni, who are Jatavedas, listening (to our 
| praises), exterminating our foes. 


६८६५. विशां राजानमरद्धतमध्यक्षे धर्मणामिमम्‌। 
अग्निमीळे स उ श्रवत्‌।।२४॥। 


24. 1 praise this Agni, the sovereign of men, the wonderful, the 
superintendent of holy acts; may he hear me. 


६८६६. अग्नि विश्वायुवेपसं मर्यं न वाजिनं हितम्‌। 
सप्ति न वांजयामसि।।२५।। 


SE पयन : : i is 
25. We in vigorate like a horse that (Agni) whose might 
everywhere present; who is noble, strong, and benevolent. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 43 7 


Strong— Sayana takes maryam na vájinam a “‘like a strong man." 
in Bohtlingk and Roth translate mari ‘“Hengst.”’ 


६८६७. ध्नन्मृभ्राण्यप॒ द्विषो दहन्‌ रक्षांसि विश्वहां। 
अग्न तिग्मेन॑ दीदिहि।।२६।। 


alli -* 26. Slaying the malignant, (driving away) our enemies 


gni everywhere consuming the Ráksasas, do you, Agni blaze forth with 
bright (radiance). 
६८६८. यं त्वा जनांस इन्धते मंनुष्वदङ्गिरस्तम। 
अग्ने स बोधि मे वच॑:।1२७॥। 
15) 27. Chief of the Angirasas, whose men kindle as did Manus; 


the Agni, hear my words. 
६८६९. यर्दग्ने दिविजा अस्यंप्सुजा वां सहस्कृत। d त्वां गीर्भिहवामहे ।२८।। 
28. We worship with praises you, Agni, who are born in 
heaven or in the waters, elicited by strength. 


Born in Heaven, Ete.— Sc. as the sun in heaven, as lightning in the 
iny waters, (1.e., in the firmament), and as generated on earth by friction. 


६८७०. तुभ्यं घेत्ते जनां इमे विश्वांः सुक्षितयः पूर्थक्‌। 


uh, 

धासिं हिन्वत्यत्त॑वे॥।२९॥ 
a 29. All these people, the inhabitants (of the earth), offer 
th severally to you (sacrificial) food for your eating and enjoyment. 


Prof. Wilson's translation of the eighth Mandala ends here; for the 
remainder the Editor alone is responsible.— Both trans, and notes.] 
A घेद॑ग्ने ES 1 I ot 
६८७१. ते घेदग्ने स्वाध्याऽहा विश्वा नृचक्षसः। तरन्तः स्याम दुगहा।।३० l 
30. Agni, through you, may we, skilled in sacrifices and 
our beholding men all our days, pass through (all) difficulties. 


Beholding men all our Days— Bothlingk and Roth explain arcaksa- 
sah and the Scholiast’s nrnam drastarah by “‘unter Menschen lebend.” 


६८७२. अग्नि मन्द्रं पुरुप्रियं शीरं पावकशोचिषम्‌। हृद्धिर्मन्द्रेभिरीमहे। 1३१ 11 
the 31. We invoke with cheerful and delightful (hymns) the 


gladdening Agni, dear to many, who abides in the sacrifice with 
purifying brilliance. 
६८७३. स त्वम॑ग्ने विभावसुः सुजन्त्सूर्या न रश्मिभि:। 

शर्धन्तमाँसि जिघ्नसे।1३२॥। 


t is 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


o 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
508 Rgveda Sarhhita 
32. Shining forth, Agni, like the rising sun, displaying your 
strength by your beams, you destroy the darkness. 
६८७४. तते सहस्व ईमहे दात्रं यन्रोपदस्यति। त्वद॑ग्ने वार्य Aaa 


33. We solicit from you, strong Agni, that desirable wealth 
which is in your gift and which decayeth not. 


[सूक्त-४४] 
[ऋषि- विरूप आङ्गिरस। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- गायत्री। | 
६८७५. समिधाग्नि दुवस्यत घृतैबोंधयतातिंथिम्‌। आस्मिन्‌ हव्या जुहोतन।।१॥ 
l. Honour Agni with fuel, awaken him, the guest, with 
(libations of) butter; offer the oblations in him. 
This hymn is found in the Vaj. Sah 3,1,12,30. 
६८७६. अग्ने स्तोमं जुषस्व मे वर्धस्वानेन मन्मना। 
प्रतिं सूक्तानि हर्य न:।।२॥। 


2. Agni, accept my praise, be invigorated by this prayer; be 
favourable to our hymns. 
अग्नि ति EN देवाँ सादयादिह 
६८७७. अग्नि दूतं पुरो द॑धे हव्यवाहमुपं sai देवाँ आ देह।1२॥ 
3. I set Agni in the front as the messenger, I adore him as the 
bearer of the oblations; my he cause the gods to sit down here. 
~al | 
६८७८. उतत बृहन्तो अर्चयंः समिधानस्य दीदिवः। अग्ने शुक्रास ईरते॥४॥। 
4. Brilliant Agni, as you are kindled, your great flames start 
blazing up. 
1 ai 1 घृताचीर्यन्तु ami i जुषस्व न:।५॥ 
६८७९. उप त्वा जुह्णो३ मम घु हर्यत। अग्ने हव्या DN "* 
5. Let my ladles, filled with butter, come near you, 
propitious one; Agni, receive our oblations. jna; he 
O Propitious One— Sayana takes haryata here as kamayamanas 
more usually explains it as ‘‘amiable,”’ ‘‘beloved,”” sprhaniya- 
. होतारमृत्विजं le चित्रभानु 
६८८०. Hg होतारमृत्विजं चित्रभानुं विभाव॑सुम्‌। 
अग्निमीळे स उ TALE | 
6. I worship Agni, the exhilarating invoker (of the £ 
priest, him who shines forth with various lustre, and 19 
brilliance; may he give ear. same 
The Priest— Sayana here explains rtvijam as ritau ववा, i riti 
who is to be worshipped in due season’’; in v. 22.2 he explainc 
yastaram, **he who offers in due season.” 


e ods), the 
$ rich 1n 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri — o Haridwar 


hita 


your 


calth 


Wet 


with 


or; be 


३।| 


as the 


Il 
s start 


:॥५॥ 
ou, 0 


ina; he 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 44 509 
EET CES जुष्टमग्नि Tr 1 
६८८१. Wei होतारमीड्यं जुष्टमग्नि कविक्रतुम्‌। अध्वराणांमभिश्रियंम्‌। toll 

7. (1 worship) the beloved Agni, the ancient adorable invoker 
(of the gods), the wise, the frequenter of sacrifices. 

The Wise— Kavikratum is here explained as krantakarmanam (him 
by whom rites are performed?); in iii.2.4, and iii.14.7, it was explained as 
krántaprajfia and sarvajna (cf. also i.1.5). It probably means ** possessing 
wise might.” 

` अँड्विरस्तमेमा [i ` ति 
६८८२. जुषाणो अङ्गिरस्तमेमा हव्यान्यानुषक्‌। अग्ने यज्ञं न॑य ऋतुथा।।८॥ 

8. Angi, best of the Avigirasas, do you, continually accepting 

these our oblations, conduct the sacrifice at the due seasons. 
1 1 4 1 £ 
६८८३. समिधान उ सन्त्य शुक्रशोच इहा वह। चिकित्वान्‌ दैव्यं जन॑म्‌।।९।। 

9. Brilliant-flamed giver of good, do you, the knower, when 
kindled, bring the host of the gods hither. 

६८८४. विप्रं होतारमदुर्ह धूमकेतुं विभाव॑सुम्‌। यज्ञानाँ केतुमीमहे।।१०।। 

10. We solicit the wise invoker (of the gods), the beneficent, 
the smoke-bannered, the resplendent, the banner of the sacrifices. 


६८८५. अने नि पाहि नस्त्वं प्रतिं ष्म देव रीषत:। 
faf द्वेषं: सहस्कृत।।११॥। 
11. Divine Agni, produced by strength, do you protect us from 
the injurer, tear asunder our enemies. 
६८८६. अग्नि: प्रलेन मन्मना शुम्भांनस्तन्वं१ स्वाम्‌। 
कविविप्रेण वावृधे ।।१२।। 


12. The wise Agni, beautifying his body with the ancient 
hymn, has grown in might through the intelligent hymner. 


६८८७. ऊर्जो नपातमा हुंवेऽग्नि पांवकशोचिषम्‌। अस्मिन्यज्ञे स्वध्वरे ।॥१३ 1 
13. I invoke Agni of purifying lustre, the son of (sacrificial) 


food, in this inviolable sacrifice. 


The Son of Sacrificial Food— For ürjo napdtam, see vol.l, mantra 
2668 and note. 


3l 
६८८८. स नों मित्रमहस्त्वमग्नें शुक्रेण शोचिषां। देवैरा सत्सि बर्हिषिं॥१४।। 
14. O Agni, adorable to your friends, sit down with the gods on 
Nr Sacred grass with your resplendent radiance. 
Adorable to your Friends— In viii.19.25, Sayana explained 


Mitr; E f RE ters 
Es amahas as anukuladiptimán. '*beneficently shining’; here as 
"rünám pijaniya. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Se 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


510 Rgveda Saihhità १ 
अग्नि 1 eil Xe मर्त सपर्यतिं 

६८८९. यो अग्नि तन्वो३ दमें देवं मर्तः सपर्यतिं। तस्मा FARAY INRA I : 

15. Whatsoever mortal worships the divine Agni in his house 
(for the attainment) of wealth, to him he gives riches. 

For the Attainment of Wealth— Tanvah dhanasya práptyartham 
(cf. Naigh. 11.10), so Sáyana; but this seems very doubtful; rather, **in his A 
own house." : 

c fea | 
६८९०. अग्निर्मूर्धा दिवः ककुत्पतिः पृथिव्या अयम्‌। 
. Xdifü n 
अपां रेतांसि जिन्वति।।१६।। 


16. Agni, the head (of the gods), the summit of heaven,—he ९ 
the lord ef the earth,—gladdens the seed of the waters. 


The Seed— Retárisi, the movable and immovable productions of the y 
crealive waters. & 
ज्योतीष्यर्चय॑ 1 
६८९१. उद॑ग्ने शच॑यस्तव॑ शुक्रा भ्राज॑न्त ईरते। तव ज्योतीष्यर्चय:।।१७॥ 
g 


17. Agni, your pure, bright, shining flames send forth your 
splendours. ६ 


६८९२. ईशिषे वार्यस्य हि दात्रस्याग्ने स्वर्पति:। 


r 
स्तोता स्यां तव शर्मणि।।१८।। 
18. Agni, lord of heaven, you preside over (all) that is to be 
desired or given; may I be your eulogist for happiness 
६८९३. त्वाम॑ग्ने मनीषिणस्त्वां हिन्वन्ति चित्तिभि:। f 
त्वां व॑र्धन्तु नो गिर॑ः।।१९।। 
19. You, Agni, the wise (praise), you they rejoice with (pious) ( 
rites; may our praises invigorate you. ६ 
cS | 
६८९४. अदंब्धस्य स्व॒धाव॑तो दूतस्य रेभ॑तः सर्दा। 
| = s 
अग्नेः सख्यं वृणीमहे।।२०।। 
e 
20. We ever choose the friendship of Agni, the unharmed, th 
strong, the messenger, the praiser (of the gods) ; 
६८९५. अग्निः शुचिंत्रततमः शुचिर्विप्रः शुचि: कविः। 
शुचीं रोचत आहुंतः।।२१।। a 
5 
21. The pure Agni shines forth when worshipped the P! 
| offerer, the pure priest, the pure sage : s “sag 
| The Pure Sage— I follow Prof, Wilson in rendering kavi a ts s 
8 rprets i र 


| (cf. Say. and R.V. 1.31.2). but Sáyana here, as more usually, inte 
krantakarman. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ] 


१111118 


R4 || 


house 


artham 
‘in his 


n,—he 


s of the 


\9 |] 


h your 


3 to be 


(pious) 


1९0, the 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 44 511 
६८९६. उत त्वां धीतयो मम गिरो वर्धन्तु विश्वहा। 
अग्ने सख्यस्य॑ बोधि नः॥।२२॥ 
22. May my rites also and my praises ever invigorate you; 
Agni, take thought of our friendship. 
६८९७. यद॑ग्ने स्यामहं vd त्वं वां घा स्या अहम्‌। 
स्युष्टे सत्या इहाशिर्षः ia t 
23. Agni, if I were you or you wert I, your wishes here should 


come truc. 
If I were you or you wert I— That is, of I were rich like you and 
you wert poor like me. 


६८९८. वसुर्वसुपतिर्हि कमस्य॑ग्ने विभाव॑सुः। स्याम ते सुमतावपिं। [२४1 
24. Agni, you are rich in splendour, the lord of wealth, and the 
giver of dwellings; may we too abide in your favour. 
६८९९. अग्ने धृतत्रताय ते समुद्रायेव सिन्ध॑वः। गिरों वाश्रास RAIRA 
25. Agni, my loud praises proceed to you, observant of pious 
rites, as rivers to the sea. 
६९००. युवांनं विश्पतिं कवि विश्वार्द पुरुवेप॑सम्‌। 
अग्नि शुम्भामि मन्मंभिः।।२६।। 
26. I glorify with hymns the ever-young Agni, the lord of men, 
the Wise, the all-devouring, the performer of many acts. 
The All-Devouring— Visvadam, the devourer of the entire oblation 
(Sayana). 
६९०१. यज्ञानाँ रथ्ये वयं तिग्मज॑म्भाय वीळवें। स्तोमैरिषेमाग्नये।॥२७॥। 
27. Let us seck with our hymns Agni, the conductor of the 
sacrifices, the mighty, the sbarp-jawed. 
६९०२. अयम॑ग्ने त्वे अपिं जरिता भूतु सन्त्य। तस्मै पावक YAIRI 


28. May this (my family) also be your worshippers, adorable 
Agni; O purifier, give them happiness. 

Adorable— Sayana here takes santya as bhajaniya, elsewhere he 
&nerally explains it as phalaprada. 

a lu 

६९०३. धीरो ह्यास्यद्यसद्‌ विप्रो न जागृविः सदां। अग्ने दीदय॑सि AIRS I 

29. You verily are wise, seated at the oblation, wakeful as the 
m (for the welfare of living beings); Agni, you ever shine in the 
S 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


— ———— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
512 Rgveda Saiihità 
N | 1 आयुर्वसो | 
६९०४. पुराग्ने दुरितेभ्यः पुरा BNA: कवे। प्र ण आयुर्वसो तिर॥॥३०।। 


30. Wise Agni, giver of dwellings, extend our lives, before sins 
or assailants (destroy us). 


[सूक्त- ४५] 

[ऋषि- त्रिशोक काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, १-इन्द्राग्नी। छन्द- गायत्री। ] 

६९०५. आ घा ये अग्निमिन्धते स्तृणन्ति बर्हिरानुषक। 
येषामिन्द्रो युवा mad it ।। 


1. Those (sages) who kindle Agni, those of whom the ever- 
young Indra is the friend, continually spread the sacred grass. 
Samaveda, 133; stanzas 1-3 occur in Sámaveda, 1338. 1-3. Cf. also 


Vaj. Samh. 7.32.33.24. s 
६९०६. बृहन्निदिध्म एंषां भूरि शस्तं पृथुः स्वरुः। येषामिन्द्रो युवा सखां॥२॥ 


2. Ample is their fuel, many their hymns, broad their sacred 
shaving,—whose friend is the ever-young Indra. 

Their Sacred Shaving— Svaru, which Sayana leaves unexplained, is 
the first shaving or splinter from the sacrificial post; see Indische Stud. 
IX, p.222. For its use in the sacrifice, see Katy, 6, 4.12; 6, 9,12. ६ 


. Li 
६९०७. अयुंद्ध इद्युधा वृतं शूर आज॑ति सत्वभि:। येषामिन्द्रो युवा FEIR 
3. Though before powerless to combat, the hero by his might 
now subdues one surrounded by allies, (if helped by those) of ६ 
whom the ever-young Indra is the friend. 


Powerless to Combat—Ayuddhah might mean **unopposed,' 
Sayana explains it as prág ayoddha eva, which seems to mean as In the 


? but 


text, though Sayana explains it differently in 1.32.6. £ 
> | 
६९०८. आ बुन्दं वृत्रहा द॑दे जातः पृच्छद्वि मातर॑म्‌। ; 
क उग्राः के ह॑ शरृण्विरे।४।। 
4. The slayer of Vrtra, as soon as he was born, seized p ६ 
arrow, and asked his mother, ‘‘who are the terrible, who ar 
renowned?’* a 


Samaveda, 216 


६९०९. प्रति त्वा शवसी वंदद्‌ गिरावप्सो न योधिषत्‌। 
यस्तै शत्रुत्वमांचके I * 
5. Your strong mother answered you, “he who wishes you t 


enmity fights as the elephant in the mountain.” 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


eee ENSEM ET T 


hità 


sins 


4 
also 
।२।। 
red 


d,is 
tud. 


I 
ight 
) of 


but 
| the 


his 
are 


your 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 45 513 


As the Elephant— Apsah is elsewhere explained by Sdyana as 
**personal charms,” "teeth," etc, (1.124.7), or "beauty" (v.80.6); here he 
explains it as ''a beautiful (elephant). Dose he take it as=rantin? 
Grassmann explains it as meaning the bosom, or rather that part of the 
dress which covers it; and hence he takes it here as meaning the cloud 
which covers the earth and the mountains (i.e., Vrtra). 


६९१०. उत त्वं मघवञ्छुणु यस्ते वष्टि ववक्षि तत्‌। 
यद्वीळयांसि वीळु तत्‌।।६।। 
6. O Maghavan, do you hear (our praise); whosoever desires of 
you, you bear to him his request; what you fix is sure. 
६९११. यदाजिं यात्याजिकृदिन्द्रः स्वश्चयुरुप॑। रथीत॑मो रथीताम्‌।७1| 
7. When /ndra, the warrior, goes to battle, desirous of gallant 
steeds, he is the foremost of the lords of chariots. 
६९१२. वि पु विश्वां अभियुजो वज्रिन्विष्वग्यथां वृह। 
भवां नः सुश्रव॑स्तमः।।८।। 
8. Thunderer, smite all your enemies that they may be 
scattered,—be to us a most abundant benefactor. 
६९१३. अस्माकं सु vd पुर इन्द्रः कृणोतु सातयें। न यं धूर्वन्ति धूर्तय:1९॥ 
9. May Indra, whom no foes can harm, send before us a 
beautiful chariot for the acquisition (of our desires). 
६९१४. वृज्याम ते परि द्विषोऽर ते शक्र दावनें। गमेमेदिन्द्र गोर्मत:11१०।। 
10. Strong Jndra, may we escape your enemies; may we come 
10 you abundantly for your gifts, rich in cattle. 
६९१५. शनैश्चिद्यन्तो अद्रिवो5 श्वावन्तः शतग्विन:। विवक्ष॑णा अनेहरस:॥॥११ II 
11. (May we come), thunderer, slowly approaching you,—may 
as be rich in horses, possessed of abundant treasure, ready to 
offer, and unharmed (by calamity). 
EN विमंह॑ते 1 
६९१६. ऊर्ध्वा हि तें दिवेदिवे सहस्रा सूनृतां शता। जरितृभ्यों विमंहते।१२॥ 
12. (The sacrificer) gives to your praisers day by day hundreds 
and thousands of excellent and auspicious gifts. 
६९१७. विद्या हि त्वां धनञ्जयमिन्द्र दुळ्हा चिंदारुजम्‌। 
आदारिणं यथा गयम्‌।।१३॥। 
13. We know you, Indra, as the conqueror of wealth, the 


br caker of firm obstacles, the opener, and (guarding from harm) as 
१ house, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


————— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
514 Rgveda Saiühità 
The Opener— Sayana explains ādārinam as ádartáram (cf. 
viii.24.4), and seems to connect it with dr/ha arujam. It is explained in the 
St. Petersb. Dict. as ''anziehend, reizend," and by Grassmann as 

**erschliessend, machend.”’ 

5 1 [| | 
६९१८. ककुहं चित्वा कवे मन्दन्तु धृष्णविन्दवः। 
1 पणि यदीमहे 
आ त्वां पणिं यदीमहे।।१४।। 

14. Wise (Indra), overcomer of enemies, when we solicit you 
the barterer, may the drops of the Soma exhilarate you the exalted 
one. 

The Barterer— Pani seems used here as in 1.33.3, where it is said, 
**Mighty Indra, bestowing upon us abundant wealth, take not advantage 
of us, like a dealer," md panir bhür asmád adhi, i.e., do not demand from 
us the strict price of your gifts. Here /ndra is represented as selling them 
for the offered Soma-libations 
६९१९. यस्तै रेवाँ अदांशुरिः प्रममर्ष मघत्तये। तस्य॑ नो वेद आ RINA 

15. Grant to us the possessions of that rich man who, through 
his niggardliness, reviles you as to your bestowal of wealth 

| Lu I सोमिन॑ | 
६९२०. इम उ त्वा वि चक्षते सखांय इन्द्र सोमिन:। 
पुष्टावन्तो 1 
पु यथां पशुम्‌।।१६।। 
mum. 16. These friends, effusing the Soma, look on you, Indra, as 


men with their fodder ready (look) on their cattle. 
Samaveda, 136 


६९२१. उत त्वाब॑धिरं वयं ग्रुत्कर्ण सन्तंमूतयें। दूरादिह ह॑वामहे।।१७।। 


17. We invoke you here from afar for our protection, who are 
never deef. and whose ears are always open to hear 


६९२२. यच्छुश्रूया इमं d दुर्मर्ष चक्रिया उत। भवेरापिनों अन्त॑मः।।१८॥ 


18. If you hear this our prayer, then display your invincible 
power and be our nearest kinsman. 


६९२३. यच्चिद्धि ते अपि व्यथिर्जगन्वांसो अमन्महि। 
गोदा इदिन्द्र बोधि नः।।१९।। 


vie : : fer our 
19. Whenever, repairing to you in our distress, We offer ० 
praises, attend to us, Indra, as a giver of cattle. 


६९२४. आ त्वां रम्भं न जित्रंयो ररभ्मा शंवसस्पते। 
उश्मसि त्वा सधस्थ आ।।२०॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 45 sis 


20. Lord of might, we lean on you as the aged on a staff; we 
long for you in the sacrifice. 


६९२५. स्तोत्रमिन्द्राय गायत पुरुनृम्णाय सत्वने। नकिर्य वृण्वते युधि॥२१॥ 


21. Sing the praise to Indra, who is rich in wealth and 
bountiful, whom nine can stay in battle. 


६९२६. अभि त्वां वृषभा सुते सुतं सुजामि पीतयें। 
तृम्पा व्य॑श्नुही मद॑म्‌॥२२॥। 
22. When the Soma is effused, I pour out the libation to you, 
showerer (of blessings), for your drinking; satiate yourself, enjoy 


the exhilarating draught. 
Samaveda, 161, 731 


अंविष्यवो ` | 1 
६९२७. मा त्वां मूरा अं मोपहस्वान आ दभन्‌। 
मार्की FEUER वन: 11२३ 11 
23. Let not fools, seeking protection, nor mockers trouble you; 
favour not the enemies of the Brdhmanas. 
Enemies of the Brahmanas— Brahmadvisah, which Sayana 


explains brálunanánám dvestrn. Benfey (Sama V. Lex.) T ranslates it, 
“Fiend der Frommen.’’ This and the next verse occur in Samaveda, 732 


६९२८. इह त्वा गोप॑रीणसा महे मन्दन्तु राधंसे। सरो गौरो यथां पिब।।२४।। 
24. Let (the worships) gladden you here with the Soma mixed 


with milk, for the attainment of great wealth; drink it as the buffalo 
a lake. 


६९२९. या वृत्रहा पंरावति सना नवां च चुच्युवे। 


ता संसत्सु प्र वोंचत।।२५।। 

25. Proclaim in our assemblies those perpetual and ever new 

riches which the slayer of Vrtra sends from afar. 
I I Lu सहस्रबाहवे अत्रादेदिष्ट पौस्य॑म्‌ 

६९३०. अपिबत्‌ aga: सुतमिन्द्रः E IRAU 

26. Indra drank the Soma offering of Kadru, (he smote the 
enemies) of the thousand-armed; there did his might shine forth. 

Sümaveda, 131—Sayana takes Kadravah as "belonging to a Rsi 
named Kadru’*; but it must be the gen, or abl. of Kadru, the well-known 
mother of the ndgas. Benfey takes the isolated sahasrabahve as a Vedic 
dative without guna in the sense of "battle." He translates the verse, 
"Der Kadru Trank hat einseschlürfl, Indra zur tausendarmgen 
Scholacht!™ The Samveda reads ádadista for adedista. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


l—EÓ—SSHHEEED 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


56 Rgveda Sarihitg 


: N mc 
६९३१. सत्यं ततुर्वशे यदौ विदानो अहवाय्यम्‌। व्यानट्‌ तुर्वणे श्मि।।२७।। 
27. Well knowing those (sacrificial) deeds of Turvasa 
Yadu, he overcame Anhavayya in battle. 
Turvasha, Yadu— These names are associated in 1.36.18; 54.6; 174, 
9; and elsewhere. Nothing is known of Ahnavayya. The St. Petersburg 


Dict. takes it as an adj. (काश), ‘‘nicht zu leugnen, nicht zu beseitigen." 
Perhaps the sentence may mean, **he prevailed indisputably in battle.” 


६९३२. तरणिं वो जनानां त्रदं वाज॑स्य गोमंत:। समानमु प्र श॑सिषम्‌।।२८।। 
28. I praise our common (Indra), the deliverer of your 
families, the slayer (of your enemies, the bestower) of riches in 


cattle. 
Samaveda, 204. 


६९३३. ऋभुक्षणं न वर्तव उक्थेषु तुग्रयावृध॑म्‌। इन्द्रं सोमे सचां सुते॥२९॥ 
29. (I praise) in hymns the mighty Indra, the augmenter of 


waters, for the attainment of wealth, when the Soma is effused 
with (song); 


६९३४. यः कृन्तदिद्वि योन्यं त्रिशोकाय गिरिं पृथुम्‌। 
गोभ्यों गातुं निरेंतवे।।३०॥। 


30. Who clove for Trishoka the broad womb-like cloud, (and 
made) a path for the cows to issue forth. 
The Cows— Go here means ‘‘water, rain.” 


६९३५. यहंधिषे म॑नस्यसिं मन्दानः प्रदिय॑क्षसि। मा तर्त्करिन्द्र मृळय॑।।३१॥। 


31. Whatever you undertake in your exhilaration, whatever 
you purpose in your mind or are thinking to bestow,—O Indra, do 
it not, but bless us. 

Do it not but bless Us— Sayana understands this, **do it not, for you 
have done it for us,—only make us happy." Could it be that the 
worshipper had a feeling of nemesis? Or would he monopolize all? 


६९३६. दभ्रं चिद्धि त्वाव॑तः कृतं शुण्वे अधि क्षमिं। 
जिगात्विन्द्र ते मन॑:।।३२॥। 


32. Indra, the least deeds of one like you are renowned in the 
carth; may your care visit me. 0 

The least deeds of one, Etc.— This seems to be sayang s 
interpretation; but Dr. Muir gives a more natural version (Sansk Texts, 
vol. v, 9.11), “litte has been heard of as done upon earth by one such as 
you are.” 


and 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


p oR 


= 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 45 517 


६९३७. तवेदु ताः सुंकीर्तयो$संन्रुत प्रशंस्तय:। यदिन्द्र मुळय़ांसि न:11३३॥ 


33. Yours be those ascriptions of praise, your those hymns 
through which, /ndra, you bless us. 


1 E 
६९३८. मा न एकस्मिन्नागसि मा द्वयोरुत त्रिषु। वधीर्मा शूर भूरिंषु॥३४॥ 
34. Slay us not for one sin, not for two, not for three; O hero 
slay us not for many. 


६९३९. विभया fe cada उग्रार्दभिप्रभङ्गिण:। दस्मादहमृतीषह: uia 1 


35. I am afraid of onc like you, terrible, the smiter of enemies, 

the destroyer, who endures hostile attacks. 
faz | 
६९४०. मा सख्युः शूनमा विद मा पुत्रस्य प्रभूवसो। 
| ` | 
आवृत्वदभूतु त मनः।।३६।। 

36. Wealthy (/ndra), may I never have to tell you of the 
destitution of my friend or my son; may your mind be favourable 
towards me. 

Sayana's interpretation of this verse is very obscure, as he explains 
Stinam by vrddham; but the verse is cleared up by his comment on 
11.27.17, where he explains sumam as sumyam, dáridryam, **may I never 


have to tell a kinsman's destitution to an opulent, kind, and munificent 
patron.”’ 


६९४१. को नु मर्या अमिथितः सखा सखायमत्रवीतू। 
जहा को अस्मदीषते।।३७।। 
37. **Who, O mortals, ° said (Indra), “unprovoked, has ever, 


as a friend, slain his friend? Who fleeth from me?" 

This is said by Indra in answer to vv. 34,35. 

A 3 sid 1 

६९४२. एवारें वृषभा सुते5सिन्वन्भूर्यावय:। eda निवता RAIN 

38. Showerer (of benefits), when the ready Soma was effused, 
you did devour much, without stint, rushing down like a gamester. 

Sáyana's Comm. is lost to much of this verse. He explains asinvan as 
na badhnan; in vii.39.6 he explained it is apratibadhnan, “not hindering 
the desires of mortals.” The St. Petersburg Dict renders it 
unersattlich.”” 


६९४३. आ त॑ एता वंचोयुजा ed गृभ्णे सुमद्रंथा। 


यर्दी wer इद्दद:11३९॥ 
39. I draw hither your two steeds, harnessed to a beautiful 


Chariot and yoked by hymns, since you give wealth to the 
rahmanas. 


B 


, 


७ ७-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


——————À 120000 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
518 Rgveda Samhita 
६९४४. भिन्धि विश्वा अप द्विषः परि बाधों जही मृध॑ः। 
वसु स्पार्हं तदा nell 


40. Cleave asunder all the hostile hosts, frustrate their 
destructive attacks, and bestow on us their desirable wealth. 
Samaveda, 134, 1074. 


| यत्पर्शने 1 1 स्पार्ह 1 

६९४५. यद्दीव्ठाविन्द्र यत्स्थिरे यत्पर्शाने पराभृतम्‌। वसु स्पार्ह तदा भर।४१॥ 

41. Bestow on us, /ndra, that desirable wealth, which is 
deposited in stronghelds, in fastnesses, and in places which can 
stand an attack. 

Sámaveda, 207, 1072. Sàyana explains parsdne as vimarsanksame, 
cf. Müller, var. lect. p.32. Benfey take it as “9 well" (so Schol. S.V. 
kupadi), and quotes a note from Stevenson, “when the English took 
Poonah ten lakhs of rupees belonging to the Peshva were found built into 
the side of a well.” B. and R. take it as  Abgrund, Kluft.” 

| श्वर्मानुषो RETA acta | स्पार्ह भेर 

६९४६. यस्यं ते वि भूरेर्दत्तस्य | वसु स्पार्हं तदा भेर॥४२।। 

42. Bestow on us, Indra, that desirable wealth which all men 


recognize as given abundantly by you. 
Saámaveda, 1071, with var. lect. 


[सूक्त-४६] 


[क्रषि- वश अश्व्य। देवता- २१-२४ पृथुश्रवा कानीत, २५-२८, ३२ AY! 
छन्द- गायत्री, १ पादनिचृत्‌ , ५ ककुप्‌ , ७ बृहती, ८ अनुष्टुप्‌ , ९ सतोः 
बृहती, ११-१३ प्रगाथ (बृहती, विपरीता पंक्ति), १३ द्विपदा (जगती) , १४ 
बृहती पिपीलिकामध्या, १५ ककुमन्यंकुशिरा, १६ विराट्‌, १७ जगती, १८ 
उपरिष्टाद्‌ बृहती, १९ बृहती, २० विषमपदा बृहती, २१-२४ पंक्ति, २२ 
संस्तार पंक्ति, २५-२८ प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समा सतोबृहती) ३० दविपदा 
विराट्‌, ३१ उष्णिक्‌, ३२ पंक्ति। | > 
VIII. 6.4. The Deity Vayu— The Schol. on v. 33. remarks that vay 
may be considered the deity of v. 21.24, since even where the gift is the 
direct subject, it must be regarded as the result of Vayu's favour. 


६९४७. त्वाव॑तः पुरूवसो वयमिन्द्र प्रणेत:। स्मसिं स्थातर्हरीणाम्‌।।१॥ 

1. O wealthy Indra, the leader (of rites), we belong to one like 
you, ruler of horres. 

Sdmaveda, 193. 

We Belong to one like you-— Sayana adds, ‘ ‘since none other is like 
You, we are Yours." 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 46 si» 


> I EY 

६९४८. त्वां हि सत्यमंद्रिवों विद्य दातारमिषाम्‌। विद्य दातारं रयीणाम्‌॥२॥। 

2. You, thunderer, we verily know to be the giver of food, you 
we know to be the giver of riches. 

ES महिमानं शत॑मूते x भर्गुणन्ति ¢ 

६९४९. आ यस्य॑ ते महिमानं शत॑मूते शतंक्रतो। गीर्भिर्गृणन्ति काररव॑ः।।३॥ 

3. O Satakratu, wielding a hundred protections, whose 
greatness the worshippers praise with their hymns. 
F सुनीथो घा स मर्त्यौ यं मरुतो यर्मर्यमा। मित्रः पान्त्यदुर्हः 1४1 

4. Fortunate in sacrifice is that mortal whom the guileless 
Maruts, whom Aryaman and Mitra, protect. 
६९५१. दर्धांनो गोमदश्व॑वत्सुवीर्यमादित्यर्जूत एधते। सदा राया पुरुस्पृहा। ५11 

5. He who is directed by Aditya ever increases, possessing 
abundance of kine and horses and vigorous children; he increases 
in wealth longed for by many. 
६९५२. तमिन्द्रं दान॑मीमहे शवसानमभीर्वम्‌। ईशान राय ईमहे॥६॥ 

6. We solicit a gift from this Indra, the displayer of might, the 
fearless; we solicit wealth from the lord. 
६९५३. तस्मिन्हि सन्त्यूतयो विश्वा अभीरवः सर्चा। 

तमा व॑हन्तु सप्त॑यः पुरूवसुं मदाय हर॑यः सुतम्‌। [911 

7. In him abide united all secure protections; lord of vast 
wealth, may his gliding steeds bear him to the expressed Soma 
juice for his exhilaration. 

All secure Protections— Sayana says that this may also refer to the 
troops of the Maruts who accompany Indra. 


६९५४. यस्ते मदो वरेण्यो य इन्द्र वृत्रहन्तम:। 
य आददिः स्वरैर्नृभिर्यः पृतनासु दुषटर॑ः।॥८॥ 
8. That exhilaration of your, /ndra, which is preeminent, which 
utterly destroys your enemies, which wins wealth from men, and is 
invincible in battles; 


From Men— Sayana explains nrbhih by Satrubhyah, “‘from your 
foes.” 


६९५५. यो दुष्टरों विश्ववार श्रवाय्यो वाजेष्वस्ति तरुता। 
स नं: शविष्ठ सवना व॑सो गहि गमेम गोमति seb di 


9. Which is invincible in contests,—O you desired by 
all,—well worthy of praise and the deliverer (from enemies); come 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


——— ला तक 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


520 Rgveda Samhita 


to our oblations, most mighty one, giver of dwellings; may we 
obtain a stall full of kine. 

The Deliverer from Enemies— Sayana explains ‘farutr’ in viii.1.28 
by jetr. 


६९५६. गव्यो षु णो यथां पुराश्वयोत रंथया। वरिवस्य महामह।।१०॥ 


10. Lord of wealth; visit us as of old, to give us cows, horses 
and chariots. 
Samaveda, 186. 


६९५७. नहि d शूर राधसोऽन्तं विन्दामिं सत्रा। 
दशस्या नों मघवन्नू चिंदद्रिवो धियो वाजेभिराविथ।।११।। 
11. Verily, hero, I find no limit to your wealth; O Maghavan, 


the thunderer, bestow (your gifts) quickly upon us, and bless our 
offerings with (abundant) food. 


६९५८. य ऋष्वः श्रावयत्संखा विश्वेत्‌ स वेंद जनिमा पुरुष्ठत:। 
तं विश्वे मानुषा Big हवन्ते तविषं यत्नुंचः।।१२॥। 

12. The graceful Indra, whose friends extol him, knows, 
praised of many, all births; him, the mighty, all men invoke at all 
times, seizing the ladles (for oblation). 

All Men—Sayana takes visve manusá as ‘all the priests, adhvaryus, 


etc., associated with men,’ sarve’py adhvaryvádayo manusyasam- 
bandhinah. 


६९५९. स नो वाजेष्वविता GSAT: पुरः स्थाता। मघवां वृत्रहा भुंवत्‌।१३॥ 


13. May Maghavan, the wealthy, the slayer of Vrira, stand 
before us as our defender in battles. 


६९६०. अभि वों वीरमन्ध॑सो मर्देषु गाय गिरा महा विचेतसम्‌। 
इन्द्रं नाम श्रुत्यं शाकिनं वचो यर्था।।१४।। 

14. At the time of the exhilaration of the Soma, sing, according 
to your hymns, with a loud voice, you wise hero Indra, the 
humbler of enemies, the strong, the ever worthy to be praised 

Samaveda, 265 

Your Wise Hero— Sayana takes vah as=yuyanr, or as yusmakam 
hitayd. vaco yathà he explains as “‘in the gdyatri or tristubh metre 
Benfey translates it, “im wahren Sinne des Worts.” Nama Sayan 
explains, but apparently without any necessity, satrunam namakam, & 


Benfey’s Gloss. vrsanamán. The St. Petersburg Dict. takes it as simply 
“freilich, gerade. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 46 ai 


AN N ददिर्वसु | ददिवजिंषु 
६९६१. «db रेकणस्तन्वें ददिर्वसुं ददिरवाजिषु पुरुहूत वाजिन॑म्‌। नूनमर्थ 1124 il 
15. (Indra), invoked by many, speedily give me wealth; give 
riches, give abundance of food in battle. 
Speedilty— It is curious that Sdyana seems to have misread the atha 
of the text for adya. 


श्रेषामिरज्यन्तं > l £d वर्पस 
६९६२. विश्वेषामिरज्यन्तं वसूनां सासह्वांसं चिदस्य वर्पसः। 
c 1 
कृपयता नूनमत्यथ 08 II 
F- (We praise you), the lord of all riches, the subduer of this 
obstructor waging (attacks),—speedily give us abundant (wealth). 
Abundant— Here again Sayana seems to read adydpi or apyádya for 
atyatha. Ati Should however be connected with the obscure word 
krpyatah. 
` अर॑मिषे [ १ मीळहुषे In 
६९६३. महः सु वो अर॑मिपे स्तवामहे मीळहुषें अरङ्गमाय जग्मये। 
यज्ञे गी A ufi 5 t E | 
ज्ञेभिर्गीभिर्विश्वमनुषां मरुतामियक्षसि गायें त्वा नमसा गिरा।।१७॥। 
17. I desire the coming of you, the mighty one; we give praise 
with oblations and hymns to the showerer who hastens readily (to 
the sacrifice); associated with the Maruts, you are worshipped of 
all men; I glorify you with adoration and praise. 
You are worshipped of all Men— Sayana explains visvamanusdm 
marutam iyaksasi as etair ijyase marutam sambandhi tvam. But it would 


be better to render it, “you show favour to all men and the Maruts™ (cf. 
vi.49.4), or “‘to the Maruts who are known to all men." 


६९६४. ये पातयन्ते अज्म॑भिर्गिरीणां स्नुभिरेषाम्‌। 
यज्ञं मंहिष्वणींनां सुम्नं तुंविष्वणीनां प्राध्वरे।।१८॥। 

18. (We present) the oblation to those loud-sounding (Maruts) 
who tush along with the streaming trains of the clouds; may we 
obtain in the sacrifice the happiness which those deep-roarers 
bestow. 

Streaming Trains— Sayana generally explains ajman by gamanam 
(as in i.166.5) or sañgrāma (as in i.112.17); here he explains it balair 
balakarair udakaih. Here it seems impossible to resist comparing Virgil's 

immensum coelo venit agmen aquarum. 7 


६९६५. प्रभङ्ग दुर्मतीनामिन्द्र शविष्ठा भर! 
रयिमस्मभ्यं युज्यं चोदयन्मते ज्येष्ठं चोदयन्मते।।१९॥ 


19. (We worship) the crusher of the malevolent; most powerful 
Indra, bring to us suitable wealth, O inspirer,— (bring) most 
excellent (wealth), O inspirer. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


eee eee O 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


A Rgveda Samhita 


0 Inspirer—- Codayanmate is explained by Sayana as dhanam 
prerayanti matir yasya, ‘you whose mind sends wealth to his 
worshipper." In v.8.6 it is applies to the eye.’’ and he there explains it, 
“having the mind as its instigator”, Bóhtligk and Roth compare v.43.9, 
and translate it, **die Andachtlietend, fórdernd."" 


६९६६. सनितः सुसंनितरुप्र चित्र चेतिष्ठ सूनुत। 
| 1 सहुरिं | ० ७ वाजेषु पूर्व्यम्‌ 
प्रासहा सम्राट्‌ सहुरिं सहन्तं भुज्युं वाजेषु IRo I 

20. O bountiful, most bountiful, mighty, wonderful, best giver 
of knowledge and supremely truthful, by your prowess, universal 
ruler, (bring to us) inconflicts ample wealth, overpowering those 
who attack us, and causing enjoyment. 

Two of the epithets in this verse, bhujyum and pürvyam, are applies 
in viii.22.2 to the chariot of the Asvins; and purvya is there explained by 


Sayana as *'going before (in battle), and bhujyu as *'the preserver of 
all." 


६९६७. आ स एंतु य ईवदाँ अदेंवः पूर्वमांददे। 
यथां चिद्दशो अश््यः पुथुश्रवंसि कानीतेईस्या व्युष्याददे॥२१॥ 

21. “Let him draw near, who, though not a god, would receive 
this complete living gift,—since Vasa, the son of Asva, receives it 
at the dawn of this (morning) at the hands of Prthusravas, the son 
of Kanita. 

This verse is supposed to be spoken by asva or his friends, Sayana 
explains ivat as usual by gamanavad, gavadilaksanam, and pūrlam as 
pürnam; but Bothlingk and Roth take ivat as=iyat, ‘‘such, so great’, and 
pürtam in its sense of ‘‘pious works.” 


Kinita— Kanita is also explained by Sayana as “he son of à 
maiden," kanyayah putrah. 


६९६८. षष्टिं सहस्ाश्य॑स्यायुतासनमुष्टाणां विशतिं शता। 
दश varia श॒ता दश त्र्यरुषीणां दश गरौ AEA 


22. “I have received sixty thousand horses, and tens of 
thousands;—a score of hundreds of camels— à thousand brow? 
mares— and ten times ten thousand cows with three red patches. i 

Sayana says, ‘having the head, back, and sides white (or bright) > 
also omits one dasa in his explanation. 

This and the two following stanzas are spoken by Vasa. 


६९६९. दश॑ श्यावा Buea वीतवारास आशर्व:। 
मथ्रा नेमिं नि वावृतुः।।२३।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ita 


am 
his 
» it 


3.9, 


ver 
= 
ose 


lies 
] by 
r of 


eive 
es it 

son 
yana 
m as 


, and 


of a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 46 n 


23. “Ten brown horses bear along the wheel (of my chariot), 
of mature vigour, of complete power, and trampling down 
obstacles. 

Of Complete Power— Siyana explains vitavdrdsah as krántabalah 
práptabala va; but it rather means *'having sleek tails.” 


६९७०. दानांसः पृथुश्रव॑सः कानीतर्स्य॑ सुराधस:। 
रथं हिरण्ययं ददन्‌ मंहिंषठः सूरिरभूदरर्षिष्ठमकृत श्रव॑ः।।२४।। 
24. **These are the gifts of the wealthy Prthusravas, the son of 


Kanita; he, bestowing a golden chariot, has proved himself most 
liberal and wise, he has won most abundant fame.” 


६९७१. आ नों वायो महे तने याहि मखाय पाज॑से। 
वयं हि तें चकृमा भूरिं दावनें सद्यश्चिन्महिं दावने।।२५।। 

25. Come to us, Vayu, to bestow great wealth and glorious 
strength; we have offered (libations) to you the giver of abundant 
(wealth), we have offered immediately to you the giver of great 
(gifts). 

६९७२. यो अश्वेभिर्वहते वस्त॑ उस्नर्त्रिः सप्त स॑प्ततीनाम्‌। 
एभिः सोमेभिः सोमसुद्धिः सोमपा दानाय॑ शुक्रपूतपाः॥२६।। 

26. He who is borne on horses and surrounds himself with 
thrice seven times seventy cows,—he comes to you with these 
Soma-libations and Soma-priests, to offer to you, drinker of the 
Soma, drinker of the bright pure Soma. 

He— Sc. Prthusravas. 

६९७३. यो म॑ इमं fag त्मनामन्दच्चित्रै दावनें। 
अरट्वे अक्षे नहुषे सुकृत्व॑नि सुकृत्तराय सुक्रतु:11२७।। 
27. He who of his own will has been pleased to give me this 


honoured gift, he, performer of good works, (has determined) on a 


pre-eminently good action, amidst Aratva, Aksa, Nahusa and 
Sukrtvan. 


Aratva, Aksa, Nahusa, Sukrtvan— These are either the officers of 
Prthusravas or other kings. 1 
६९७४. उचथ्येर वपुंषि यः स्वराळुत वांयो घृतस्ना:। 

अश्वेषितं रजेषितं शुनेषितं प्राज्म तदिदं नु TURCII 
28. He who is self-resplendent in his glorious body, who is 


b ht, O Vayu, like ghi, has given me this food, brought by horses, 
tought by camels, brought by dogs. 


brig 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


í———— SERRE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
524 Rgveda Sarhhita 


Self-Resplendent in his Glorious Body Sayana gives an 
alternative, ‘‘he who is lord over (the kings) Ucathya and Vapus.”’ 

Brought by Camels— The Schol, says that rajas means a camel or 
an ass. 


६९७५. अर्घ प्रियमिषिरायं षष्टिं सहस्रासनम्‌। अश्वानामिन्न वृष्णाम्‌।।२९ 1 
29. I have now reccived (a gift) dear to the beneficent king, 
sixty thousand bulls vigorous like horses. 


६९७६. गावो न यूथमुप यन्ति वध्र॑य उप मा य॑न्ति ARA: 130 II | 
30. As the cows to the herd, so repair the oxen; so the oxen i 
repair to me. f 


६९७७. अध यच्चार॑थे गणे शतमुष्ठाँ अचिक्रदत्‌। 
अध श्विलेषु विंशतिं शता।३१॥। 


31. Since, when the herd were wandering (to the wood), he { 
called a hundred camels (to give them to me), and two thousand 


a 
from among the white herds (of cows). 
ENGS E £ 
६९७८. शतं दासे बॅल्बूथे विप्रस्तरक्ष आ दंदे। 
ES देवगोपा 
ते तै वायविमे जना मदन्तीन्द्रगोपा मदन्ति देवगोपाः।।३२॥ 
32. I, the sage, accept the hundred from the slave Balbütha, the |; 
m- cowherd; we here are your, O Váyu,—those who have Indra and a 
the gods for protectors rejcice (though your favour). des bai 
The Cowherd— Sayana seems to take faruksa as gavasvadinam ६ 
tarakah, but itis given as a proper name in the guna to Pan. IV. 1.105. He 
says that **a hundred"' means here an indefinite number. 
६९७९. अध स्या योष॑णा मही प्रतीची वशंमश्ष्यम्‌। 
F p x V 
अधिरुकमा वि नीयते।।३३।। 
33. This tall maiden, adorned with gold, is led towards me; 
Vasa, the son of Asva. 
[सूक्त- ४७] 
उपा। M 
| [क्रषि- त्रित आप्त्य। देवता- आदित्यगण, १४-१८ आदित्यगण तथा उप : 
| छन्द- महापंक्ति।] a 
N था 
८०. महि वो महतामवो वरुण मित्र दाशुषें। यमादित्या अभि दुही OF 
६९८०. महिं दा 
st 


नेमघं नंशदनेहसो व ऊतय॑: सुऊतयो व कत: 11१ di 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ng, 


2 


he 
ind 


the 
and 


1am 
He 


116, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 47 sis 


1. Mitra and Varuna, you are great, and great is your 
protection to the offerer; no evil, Adityas, harms him whom you 
guard from the injurer; your aids are void of harm, your aids are 
true aids. 


६९८१. विदा देवा अघानामादित्यासो अपाकृंतिम्‌। पक्षा वयो यथोपरि 
व्यस्मे शर्म यच्छतानेहसों व ऊतर्य: सुऊतयो व ऊतर्य:11२॥ 

2. Divine Adityas, you know the averting of evils; as birds 
(spread) their wings over (their) young, grant us happiness; your 
aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 

६९८२. RA अधि शर्म तत्पक्षा वयो न यन्तन। विश्वानि विश्ववेदसो 
वरूथ्यां मनामहेऽनेहसों व ऊतर्य: YETA व FTA: IR 

3. Grant us that happiness of yours, as birds (spread) their 
wings; O you possessed of all wealth, we solicit all riches suitable 


for our dwelling; your aids are void of harm, your aids are truc 
aids. 


६९८३. यस्मा अरांसत क्ष्यं जीवातुं च प्रचेतसः। मनोर्विश्वस्य घेदिम 
आदित्या राय ईशते5नेहसो व ऊतर्यः सुऊतयों व Sad: i 

4. To whomsoever these wise Adityas grant a dwelling and the 

means of life, (for him) they master the wealth of every man; your 


aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 
Of Every Man— The Schol, adds, **who does not offer sacrifice.’ 


६९८४. WR णो वृणजन्नघा दुर्गाणि veil यथा। स्यामेदिन्द्रस्य 
शर्मण्यादित्यानामुताव॑स्यनेहसों व ऊतर्य: सुऊतयो व F:I 
3. May our sins avoid us as charioteers inaccessible place; may 


We abide in Indra’s happiness and in the protection of the Adityas: 
your aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 


परिहवृतेदना I 

६९८५. परि जनों युष्मादत्तस्य वायति। देवा अर्दभ्रमाश वा 
3 पोहा 3 = : 2 

यमादित्या अहेतनानेहसो व ऊतर्य: सुऊतयो व उतर्यः 11 i 
6. Only by painful means does a living man obtain the wealth 
ch you bestow; but he whom you, divine Adityas, visit, wins 

great (riches); your aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 

By Painful Means—Sc. by penance, religious observances, etc. 
with A living Man— Sayana explains ana as prdna-yukiah, “endowed 
be life, Just as in IV.30.3 he explained it pránarüpena balena; but it 
?ms better to take it in both places as the particle **certainly."" Might we 


whi 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


526 Rgveda Sarhhita 
translate the line, ‘‘verily men succumb through the loss of the wealth 
given by you?" In the second line Sayana unites dsa vah into one word, 
ásavah, ‘‘swiftly moving." 
ति तिग्मं त्यजो staf : | शर्म 
६९८६. न तं तिग्मं चन त्यजाँ न भि तं गुरु। यस्मा उ शर्म सप्रथ 
आदित्यासो अराध्वमनेहसो व aad: सुऊतयों व ऊतय॑ः।।७।। c 

7. Him fierce wrath touches not, nor heavy (calamity), to 
whom, Adityas, you have given great happiness; your aids are void 
of harm, your aids are true aids. 

Fierce Wrath— I have taken figmam as agreeing with the neuter 
tyájas. Sayana makes it agree with tam, and translates the sentence, ‘him 
though fierce (or harsh) wrath touches not." 

You have given great Happiness— Sayana here takes saprathas as 
a masculine nom. plural; but elsewhere (as 1.22.15; 94.13) he had 
explained it properly as a neuter nom, sing, agreeing, as here, with Sarma. 


ति एन॑सो 
६९८७. युष्मे देवा अपिं ष्मसि युध्यन्तइव वर्म॑सु। यूयं महो न एनसो 
भीदुरुष्यतानेहसों = (ese oe सुऊतयों 7 छु 
यूयमर्भादुरुष्यतानेहसों व ऊतय: सुऊतयो व ऊतयः।।८।। 

8. Deities, may we abide in you as Warriors in their armour; do 
you defend us from great evil, do you defend us from little; your 
aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 

tel 
६९८८. अदितिर्न उरुष्यत्वदितिः शर्म यच्छतु। माता मित्रस्य रेवतोर्ज्यम्गो 
वरणस्य चानेहसों व sad: सुऊतयो व F: N 

9. May Aditi defend us, may Aditi grant us happiness, the 
mother of the wealthy Mitra, Aryaman and Varuna; your aids are 
void of harm, your aids are true aids. 

. A | «| 
६९८९. war: शर्म शरणं यद्धं यदनातुरम्‌। त्रिधातु यद्वरूथ्य V8 
अ ` A > e 
वि यन्तनानेहसों व wed: सुऊतयों व ऊतय:11१०॥ 


10. Grant to us, deities, that happiness which is 8 rene 
auspicious, and free from sickness, which is threefold and fit 0 à 
(secure) shelter; your aids are void of harm, your aids are true alos. 

gayana’s note ON 


Threefold— This phrase tridhátu is explained by ४ agains 


varüthya in vi. 67.2, and trivarütha in viii.18.21, as protectin 
cold, heat, and wind or wet. ded 1 
| 
६९९०. आदित्या अव हि ख्यताधि कूलांदिव स्पश॑ः। सुती TE 
नो नेषथा सुगर्मनेहसों व sed: सुऊतयो व ऊतर्य:॥११॥ 


the 
iho look from 
e wh ous 


11. Adityas, look down upon us as thos 


; Ghá nduc 
shore; as (men lead) their horses to a secure hata, so ९० 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri ollechont वणा 


j 
I 
( 
/ 
4 


hits 


ealth 
vord, 


सप्रथ 


| 


), to 
void 


= 
“him 


d$ as 
; had 
rma, 


एन॑सो 


ir; do 
your 


र्यम्णो 


5, the 
ds are 


दस्मासु 


efuge, 
t fora 
6 aids. 
ote On 
against 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 47 5 


along a good path; your aids are void of harm, your aids are true 
aids. 

Who look from the Shore— Sdyana takes spasah as for spastah, 
*'visible."" It is derived from the lost root spas, **to see," preserved in 
common Sanskrit in the words spasa, 9 spy," and spasta, and the 
mutilated pasya, cf, spicio. Sayana explains the image ''as a man 
standing on the shore looks down on the water below or on some one in 
it 


६९९१. नेह Wd रक्षस्विने नावयै नोपया उत। गें च भद्रं धेनवे वीराय॑ च 
्रवस्यतेऽनेहसों व ऊतर्य: सुऊतयो व ऊतय॑ः।।१२॥ 

12. Let there not be prosperity here to our powerful (foe), nor 
to him who threaten or assails us; but let there be prosperity to our 
cattle, our milch kine, and our male offspring desirous of food; 
your aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 


Nor to him who threatens or assails Us— Rather, ‘‘neither to 
threaten nor to assail us." 


६९९२. यदाविर्यदंपीच्यंर देवांसो अस्ति दुष्कृतम्‌। त्रिते तद्विश्वमाप्त्य आरे 
अस्मद॑धातनानेहसों व ऊतर्य: सुऊतयो व ऊतरय॑:।।१३।। 

13. Deities, whatever evil is manifest, whatever is concealed, 
(let it be not found) in Trita Aptya, keep it far from us; your aids 
are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 

Sayana necessarily interprets the line in this way, as he holds that 
Trita Aptya is the Rsi of the hymn. Prof. Roth no doubt gives the true 
meaning when he says that Trita Aptya was a deity dwelling in remote 
distance, and consequently evil was sought to be transferred to him, cf. 
Atharva V. XIX.56.4. He would render it, **keep it far from us in Trita 
Aptya.” See Dr. Muir’s Sanskrit Texts, vol. v. p.336. 


६९९३. यच्च गोषु दुष्वप्यं यच्चास्मे दुहितर्दिव:। त्रिताय तद्रिभावर्याप्त्याय 
परां वहानेहसों व ऊतर्य: सुऊतयों व ऊतय॑:।।१४।। 

14. Daughter of heaven, (Usas), whatever ill-omened dream 
threatens our cattle our ourselves, keep it, O brilliant one, far from 
n ‘ua Aptya; your aids are void of harm, your aids, are true aids. 

Far from Trita Aptya— Here the dative Tritaya Aptyaya might 
Suggest the more appropriate rendering, "keep it far away for Trita 
Aptya.” Verses 14-15 are prescribed in ASvalayana’s Grhya Stitras to be 
recited after an unpleasant dream. 

६९९४. निष्कं वा घा quad खर्ज वा दुहितर्दिव:। त्रिते दुष्वप्यं 
सर्यमाप्त्ये < ES -, 3 = 
पत्ये परि ददमस्यनेहसों व ऊतय॑: सुऊतयो व ऊतर्यः॥१५।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


528 Rgveda Samhita 


15. Daughter of heaven, whatever ill-omened dream threatens 
Trita Aptya, we transfer it to the worker of gold ornaments or to 
the maker of garlands: your aids are void of harm, your aids are 
true aids. 

It is singular that here Sáyana gives an alternative interpretation, 
agreeing with Prof. Roth's explanation of stt.13,14, ‘whatever evil dream 
threatens the worker of gold ornaments or the maker of garlands, that evil, 
abiding in Trita Aptya (or the son of the waters), we Trtas throw off from 
ourselves.” This seems to mean, **we throw it off on Trita Aptya.”’ 


1 भागमुपसेदुपें E चोषों ; 
६९९५. तदन्नाय तद॑पसे d भागमुपसेदुषे। त्रितायं च द्विताय चोषों दुष्वर्प्य 
वहानेहसों व ऊतय॑: सुऊतयो व ऊेतर्यः।।१६।। 

16. Usas, bear (elsewhere) the ill-omered dream for Trita and 
Dvita, who eat and do )in dreams) that (which is eaten and done 
amiss when awake) and who obtain that (inauspicious) portion; 
your aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids. 

Bear Elsewhere— Ze., let the eating of honey ctc., perceived in a 
dream, produce happiness as in a waking state. 


Trita and Dvita— Here Sayana has only the proper interpretation. 
For Dvita cf. Sat. Bráhmana, i.2.3.1. 

६९९६. यथां कलां यथां शफं यथं ऋणं सन्नयांमसि। एवा दुष्वप्यं 
सर्षमाप्लै सं न॑यामस्यनेहसों व ऊतय॑: सुऊतयो व FTA: IRON 

17. As (in the sacrifice) we put severally together the proper 
parts and the hoofs, and as we discharge a debt, so we transfer all 
the ill-omened dream that rests on Aptya; your aids are void of 
harm, your aids are true aids. 

Sayana’s explanation is, “95 in the sacrifice they place together the 
kala, sc. the heart, ctc., as fit to be cut to pieces, and the sapha, sc the 
hoof, bones, etc., as unfit." He also proposes another explanation, n 
which the kala is the sapha or ‘‘hoof.’’ But the words sapha and kala 
occur together in the Taitt. Samhita, vi.1.10, where the process of buying 
the Soma is described; and Sayana there takes sapha as the eighth part of 
a cow, and kald as a very small portion. ; 

That rests of Aptya— Or we may take it, “we transfer all the ill- 
omened dream to Aptya.”” 


यस्मांदुष्वप्याद 
६९९७. अजेप्माद्यासंनाम चाभूमानागसो वयम्‌। उषो दुष्वप्यादभैष्याप 
तदुच्छत्वनेहसो व ऊतय॑: सुऊतयो व ऊतय:।॥१८॥॥ 
18. May we be to-day victorious, and obtain (happiness); may 


fi i १ a which We 
we be free from evil; Usas, may that ill dream depart, of E 
were afraid; your aids are void of harm, your aids are true aids- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


d]. 0. — 9 1. क कस 


Ihità 


lens 
r to 
are 


lion, 
ream 
evil, 
from 


Fr 


and 
Jone 
tion; 


ina 


lion. 


व्य 
I 

‘oper 
or all 
id of 


sr the 
c, the 
n, in 
kala 
uying 
art of 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 48 529 
[सूक्त-४८] 
[ऋषि- प्रगाथ काण्व। देवता- सोम। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, ५ जगती। ] 
६९९८. स्वादोर॑भक्षि वय॑सः सुमेधा: स्वाध्यो वरिवोवित्तरस्य। 
विश्वे यं देवा उत मर्त्यासो मधु ब्रुवन्तो अभि सञ्चर॑न्ति।।१।। 
1. May I, the wise and devout, enjoy the delicious, abundantly 


honoured Soma food, which all gods and mortals, pronouncing 
sweet, seck to obtain. 
६९९९. अन्तश्च प्रागा अदितिर्भवास्यवयाता हरसो दैन्य॑स्य। 
इन्दविन्द्रस्य सख्यं जुषाण: श्रौष्टीव धुरमनुं राय eT II 
2. You enter within, and unimpaired, you avert the anger of the 
gods; Soma, enjoying the friendship of Indra, may you bring us to 
wealth as a swift (horse) its burden. 


You enter within— Sayana adds, ''the heart or the sacrificial 
chamber.”’ 


1 a 1 ज्योतिरविदाम > 
७०००. अपाम सोम॑ममृतां अभूमागन्म ज्योतिरविदाम देवान्‌। 
किं [i 1 1 धूर्तिरमृत मर्त्यस्य 
किं नूनमस्मान्कृणवदरातिः किमु धू 1३ H 
3. We drink the Soma, may we become immortal; we have 
attained the light of (heaven), we have known the gods; what now 
could the enemy do to us, or what, O immortal, should the 
aggriever do to the mortal? 
Sàyana in his comment on this verse (7077, Samhitd, iii.2.5) says that 
“the past tense is used in the sense of wish," asanisadyotandya 
bhütarthanir desah. 


७००१. ख्य॑ उरुशंस धीर: प्र ण आयुर्जीवसे सोम तारी:11४11 
2 4. 0 Soma, drunk by us, be bliss to our hearts, as a father is 
indulgent to a son or a friend to a friend; O Soma, worthy of wide 
Praise, do you, wise one, extend our years that we may live. 
छि le. 
७००२. इमे मां पीता यशस॑ उरुष्यवो रथं न गाव: समनाह पर्वसु। 
ips 2 E 1 
ते मां रक्षन्तु fredaftaga मा स्रा्माद्यवयन्त्विन्दवः 1h HI 
5. May these glory-conferring protecting Soma-streams knit 
together my joints as cows draw together a chariot falling in 


Pieces; may they keep us from a loosely-knit worship; may they 
deliver me from sickness. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


530 Rgveda Samhita 


Cows— Gavah may equally apply to the Soma streams, as the Soma 
is mixed with milk, and may be thus considered the product of the cows. 

A Loosely-Knity Worship— When the Soma is drunk, the ceremony 
becomes consolidated. 


७००३. अग्नि न मा मथितं सं दिंदीपः प्र चक्षय कृणुहि वस्यसो नः। 
अथा हि ते मद आ सॉम मन्ये रेवाँइव प्र चरा ETI 
6. Soma, kindle me like the fire ignited by attrition, brighten 


(our eyes) and make us rich; 1 praise you now for exhilaration; 
come now, full of wealth, to nourish us. 


७००४. इषिरेण ते मन॑सा सुतस्य॑ भक्षीमहि पित्र्यस्येव रायः। 
सोम॑ राजन्‌ प्र ण आयूंषि तारीरहांनीव सूर्या वासराणिं।।७॥। 
7. May we partake of you, effused, with a longing mind as 


(men enjoy) paternal wealth; King Soma, prolong our lives, as the 
sun the world-establishing day. 


७००५. सोम॑ राजन्‌ मृळयां नः स्वस्ति तव॑ स्मसि sem wed विद्धि। 
अरतिं दक्ष उत मन्युरिन्दो मा नों अर्यो अनुकामं परां दाः।।८॥। 
8. King Soma, bless us for our welfare; we worshippers are 


your, do you recognize it; the enemy goes strong and fierce, O 
Soma; give us not over to him as he desires. 


टे 4 qm 1 
७००६. त्वं हि न॑स्तन्व॑: सोम गोपा गात्रेंगात्रे निषसत्थां नृचक्षा:। 
ae x [7 E || 
ww वयं प्रमिनाम॑ व्रतानि स नो मूळ सुषखा देव वस्य॑ः।।९॥ 
9. O Soma, you are the guardian of our bodies, you dwell ie 
each limb as the beholder of man; though we impair your rites, yet, 


divine one, bless us, you who are possessed of most excellent food 
and good friends. 


७००७. ऋदूदरेण सख्यां सचेय यो मा न रि्यदध्यश्च पीतः। 
>> a a ५ l 
अयं य: सोमो न्यधांय्यस्मे तस्मा इन्दर प्रतिरमेम्यायुः॥१०॥ = = 
10. May I obtain a wholesome friend who, when quaffed, will 


: n 
not harm me, O lord of bay horses; I ask of Indra à long 
permanence for this Soma which has been placed within us. 


७००८. अप त्या अंस्थुरनिरा अमीवा निरेत्रसन्तमिषीचीरभैघु:। 
आ सोमो अस्माँ अरुहद्विहाया अगन्म यत्र प्रतिरन्त आयु:॥११॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ten 
= 


are 


|| in 
yet, 
food 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 48 a 


11. May those irremovable sicknesses depart; let those strong 
(pains) which have made us tremble, be afraid; the mighty Soma 
has climbed into us, we have attained that (draught) by which men 
prolong life. 


७००९. यो न इन्दु: पितरो हृत्सु पीतोञमर्त्यो मत्यौँ आविवेश। 
तस्मै सोमाय हविषां विधेम मृळीके अस्य सुमतौ स्याम।।१२॥ 
12. That Soma which, drunk into our hearts, has entered, 


immortal, into us mortals,—to h im, fathers, let us do worship with 
oblations; may we abide in his bliss and favour. 


७०१०. त्वं सोम fugfi: संविदानो5नु द्यावापृथिवी आ ततन्थ। 
तस्मैं त इन्दो हविषां विधेम वयं स्याम पत॑यो रयीणाम्‌॥१३॥ 
13. Soma, you in conjunction with the fathers do stretch our 


successively heaven and carth,—to you let us do worship with 
oblations, may we be lords of wealth. 


७०११. त्रातारो देवा अधि वोचता नो मा नों निद्रा ईशत मोत जल्पि:। 
वयं सोम॑स्य fase frd: सुवीरांसो विदथमा व॑देम।।१४।। 
14. Guardian gods, speak favourably to us; let no dreams nor 


the censurer overpower us; may we be ever dear to Soma; 
possessed of brave offspring, may we utter our hymn. 


७०१२. त्वं नं: सोम विश्वतों वयोधास्त्वं स्वर्विदा विशा नूचक्षाः। 
त्वं न॑ इन्द ऊतिभिंः सजोषाः पाहि पश्चातादुत वां पुरस्तात्‌॥।१५।। 
15. You, Soma, give us food from every side; you are the 


bestower of heaven; enter us, beholder of men; O Soma, rejoicing 
with your protecting powers, guard us from behind and before. 


With your Protecting Powers— Sayana, as often elsewhere (of 
1.84.20), understands by ütyah the Maruts as gantdrah (ava gatau). 

[As Sayana gives no commentary here, the St. Petersburg Dict., 
Grassmann's Lexicon and translation and ludwig's translation and notes 
have been consulted for this translation. 

These eleven apparently spurious hymns are called the Valakhilya, 
Containing Vargas XIV-XXXI. They are not reckoned in the division by 
Mandalas and Anuvakas. Sayana takes no notice of them in his 
Commentary. Professor Wilson omitted these Khila mantras in his 
translation.] 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


5 Rgveda Samhita 


| VALAKHILYAS | 
[सूक्त-४९] 
[ऋषि- प्रस्कण्व काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमाबृहती , समा सतोबृहती।)| 
७०१३. अभि प्र d: सुराध॑समिन्द्रमर्च यथां विदे। 
यो ज॑रितृभ्यों मघवां पुरूवसुं: सहस्रेणेव शिक्ष॑ति॥१।। 

1. I would praise to you the bounteous Indra as is fit, the 
wealth-abounding Maghavan, who loves to help with thousandfold 
treasure those who praise him. 

७०१४. शतानीकेव प्र जिंगाति धृष्णुया हन्त वृत्राणि दाशुषें। 
गिरेरिव प्र रसां अस्य पिन्विरे दत्राणि पुरुभोजस: 11२ ।। 
2. He rushes on boldly like a weapon with a hundred edges, he 


smites the enemies of his worshipper; the gifts of him who feeds 
many, swell like the streams of a mountain. 


७०१५. आ त्वां सुतास इन्द॑वो मदा य इन्द्र गिर्वणः। 
आपो न वंज़्न्नन्वोकयंदै सर॑ पृणन्ति शूर राध॑से॥३॥ 
3. The expressed exhilarate Soma-juices, O Indra, lover of 


hymns, fill you for bounty, O hero, O thunderer, as the waters flow 
to their accustomed lake. 


७०१६. अनेहसं प्रतरणं विवक्षणं मध्वः स्वादिष्ठमीं पिब। 
आ यथां मन्दसानः किरासिं न: प्र क्षुद्रेव त्मना धृषत्‌।॥४।। 
4. Drink the incomparable, helpful, swelling beverage, the 
sweet of the Soma, that in your exultation you may pour out 


treasure for us, just as the mill-stone pours out meal. 
The St. Petersb. Dict. takes dhrsad as =dysad. 


७०१७. आ न: स्तोम॒मुप॑ द्रवद्धियानो अश्वो न सोतृभि:। 
A || 
यं तै स्वधावन्त्स्वदयन्ति धेनव इन्द्र कण्वेषु TTA: LA 
5. Come quickly to our praise—urged on by the Soma oa 
like a horse—which the milch-kine make sweet, for you, oma a 


A s S the 
of independent mighty; there are gifts [for you] among, 
Kanva's. 


1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee त: 7 


ita 


F 
old 


he 
205 


of 
ow 


the 
out 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sukta 49 533 
Grassmann proposes to read somam. 
७०१८. उग्रं न वीरं नमसोर्प सेदिम विभूतिमक्षितावसुम्‌। 
उद्रीव॑ वज्रिन्नवतो न Riz क्षर॑न्तीन्द्र धीतर्यः 1६ | 
6. We have approached you with homage like a mighty hero, 
the pre-eminent one, of imperishable wealth; O /ndra, thunderer, 


our prayers flow forth as an abundant fountain pours out its 


streams. 
Read si/icate unaccented. 


| > 1 EN 1 1 
७०१९. यद्ध नून "gl यस यद्वा पृथिव्यामधि। 
अतों नो यज्ञमाशुभिर्महेमत उग्र उग्रेभिरा गहि1191। 
7. Whether you are now present at a sacrifice, or whether you 
are abroad on the earth, come from thence with your swift steeds 


to our sacrifice, O you of lofty counsel; come, strong one, with the 
strong [steeds]. 


७०२०. अजिरासो हर॑यो ये त॑ आशवो वार्ताइव प्रसक्षिण:। 
येभिरपत्यं मनुंषः परीयसे येभिर्विश्वं स्वर्दुशे l 
8. Agile and swift are your steeds, overpowering like the 


winds; with which you encircle the race of Manus, with which the 
whole heaven becomes visible. 


Or perhaps ‘with which you encircle all, a very sun to (cf. 1X.61.18). 
1 e st 
७०२१. एतावतस्त इमह T2 सुम्नस्य गामतः। 
यथा wal मघवन्‌ मेध्यातिथि यथा नीपातिर्थि SAN 


9. O Indra, we long for such a bounty of yours, rich in kine; 
(help us), Maghavan, as you did help Medhyatithi with wealth, as 
you did help Nipatithi; 


७०२२. यथा कण्वें मघवन्त्रसर्दस्यवि यथां पक्थे दर्शव्रजे। 
यथा गोशर्ये अर्सनोक्रजिश्वनीन्द्र गोमद्धिरण्यवत्‌।॥१०।। 
10. As you, Maghavan, did give abundant kine and gold to 


Kanva and Trasadasyu, to Paktha and Dasavraja; as you did give 
them to Gosarya and Rjisvan. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


534 Rgveda Samhita 


[सूक्त-५०] 
[ऋषि- पुष्टिगु काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती। | 
७०२३. प्र सु श्रुतं सुराध॑समरचा शक्रमभिष्टये। 
यः सुन्वते स्तुंवते काम्यं वसुं सहस्रेणेव मंहते॥१ I 
IST would praise the far-famed, the bounteous Sakra, for the 


sake of his protection, who gives desirable wealth by thousands to 
the presser of the Soma and the offerer of hymns 


७०२४. शतानीका हेतयों अस्य दुष्टरा इन्द्र॑स्य समिषों मही:। 
गिरिर्न भुज्मा मघव॑त्सु पिन्वते यदी सुता अमन्दिषु:।।२।। 


2. Invincible are his hundred-edged weapons, the mighty 
arrows of Indra; he pours forth blessings on his liberal 
worshippers like a mountain rich in springs when the effused 
Soma has exhilarated him 


७०२५. यदौ सुतास इन्द॑वोऽभि प्रियममन्दिषु:। 


आपो न धायि सव॑नं म आ व॑सो दुघाइवोप दाशुषे ॥॥३॥। 
3. When the effused Soma-drops have exhilarated the beloved 


one, my oblation is offered abundantly like the waters, O gracious 
Indra—it is like the milch kine to the worshipper. 


७०२६. अनेहर्स वो हव॑मानमूतये मध्व॑ः क्षरन्ति धीतय:। 
आ त्वां वसो हव॑मानास इन्द॑व उप॑ स्तोत्रेषु ef 


4. The prayers which consecrate the Soma flow froth to the 
incomparable one who calls you for his favour the Soma-drops 
which invoke you, O gracious one, have set you in the midst of the 
hymns. 

This line is very obscure. 


७०२७. आ जः सोमें स्वध्वर इंयानो अत्यो न तोशते। 


यं तें स्वदावन्त्स्वदन्ति गूर्तयः पौरे छन्दयसे CAA I 


r 

5. H rushes hurrying like a horse to the Soma offered Reet 
festival, which the hymns make sweet to you, © you that = 
sweet viands, you approve the summons to the satisfying beverage 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F 


1€ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 51 s 


Paura may be a proper name (cf. Vol., III verse 4268), ‘You approve 
the summons to (the house of) Paura.’ 


७०२८. प्र वीरमुग्रं विविंचिं धनस्पृतं विभूतिं राध॑सो महः। 
उद्रीव॑ वज्रिन्नवतो व॑सुत्वना सदा पीपेथ दाशुषे 6 11 
6. Praise the mighty hero, wide-grasping, spoil-harrying, who 


has control over vast treasure; you, O thunder eve pour forth 
wealth to the worshipper like an abundant fountain. 


७०२९. यद्ध नूनं प॑रावति यद्वां पृथिव्यां दिवि। 
युजान इन्द्र हरिभिर्महेमत ऋष्व ऋष्वेभिरा EIN 
7. Whether you are in the far distance or in the earth or in 


heaven, O Indra, god of lofty counsel, yoke your steeds, come 
hither, lofty one, with the lofty. 
७०३०. रथिरासो हर॑यो ये a cafes ओजो वात॑स्य पिप्रति। 
येभिर्नि दस्युं मनुंषो निघोष॑यो येभिः स्व॑ः परीरयसे॥८॥ 
8. Your harmless steeds which draw you chariot, which 
surpass the strength of the wind, with which you silence the enemy 


of man and with which you goes round the sky. 
Or ‘of Manus,” dasyum manusah. 


७०३१. एताव॑तस्ते वसो विद्याम शूर नव्य॑सः। 
यथा प्राद ud कृत्व्ये धने यथा वशं दर्शव्रजे॥॥९॥ 
9. May we once more know you as such, O gracious hero, as 


when you did aid Etasa in the decisive battle, or Vasa against 
Dasavraja. 
A दीर्घनी दमूनसि 
७०३२. यथा कण्वे मघवन्‌ मेघे अध्वरे थे । 
= = RA am 1 
यथा गोशर्ये असिषासो अद्रिवो मयिं गोत्रं हरिश्रियम्‌॥१०॥ 

10. As you was willing to give, O Maghavan, to Kanya in the 
Sacrificial feast, or to Dirghanitha the friend of the house, as you 
was willing to give, O slinger, to Gosarya, so give to me a herd of 
kine shining like gold. 


[सूक्त-५१| 
[ऋषि- श्रुष्टिगु काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र! 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)! ] 
७०३३. यथा मनौ सांवरणौ सोममिन्द्रापिबः सुतम्‌। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
536 Rgveda Saibhità 
EN थौ lu श्रुष्टिगो E 
नीपांतिथौ मघवन्‌ मेध्यातिथौ पुष्टिगौ श्रुष्टिगौ सचा।।१।॥। 
1. As you did drink, O Indra, the effused Soma beside Manu, 
the descendant of Sarivarana, by Nipatithi and Medhyatithi, by 
Pustigu and Srustigu, O Maghavan [so do you drink it here]. 


७०३४. पार्षद्वाणः प्रस्कण्वं सम॑सादयच्छयांनं जित्रिमुद्धितम्‌। 
सहस्राण्यसिषासद्‌ गवामृषिस्त्वोतो दस्य॑वे वूर्कः।।२।। 
2. The descendant of Prsadvana entertained the aged 


Praskanva who lay rejected (by his kindred); aided by you the seer 
Dasyave-vrka desired to obtain thousands of cows. 
७०३५. य उक्थेभिर्न विन्धते चिकिद्य ऋषिचोरदनः। 

इन्द्रं तमच्छां वद नव्यंस्या मत्यरिष्यन्तं न भोज॑से॥३॥। 

3. Sing that Indra with the new hymn who has no lack of 
praises, who is wise and the inspirer of seers, who is as it were 
cager to enjoy. 

७०३६. यस्मा अर्क सप्तशीर्षाणमानुचुखिधातुमुत्तमे पदे। 
पौंस्यम्‌ | 
स fam विश्वा भुव॑नानि चिक्रददादिर्जनिष्ट ieri nd 

4. He to whom they sang the seven-headed hymn with its three 

parts in the highest region, he has made all these worlds tremble, 


and has thus brought forth his power. 
Le. sung by s+ 2n divine singers in heaven. 


७०३७. यो नों दाता वसूनामिन्द्रै तं हूमहे वयम्‌। 
विद्या eher सुमतिं नवीयसीं गमेम गोम॑ति व्रजे।॥५।। 
5. We invoke that indra who gives us wealth; for We know his 
new favour; may we obtain a stall rich in cows. 


७०३८. यस्मै त्वं ब॑सो दानाय शिक्ष॑सि स रायस्पोष॑मश्नुते। 
तं त्वां वयं म॑घवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणः सुताव॑न्तो हवामहे।।६।। 


6. He whom you help, O gracious one, to give, obtains 
abundance of wealth; bringing the Soma we invoke you, Indra, 
Maghavan, you that love hymns. 


७०३९. कदा चन स्तरीरसि नेन्द्र सश्चसि दाशुषे। 
उपोपेन्नु म॑घवन्‌ भूय इन्नु ते दानं देवस्य पूच्यते।191। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


SS 


F- 


a, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 52 537 

7. Never are you niggardly, /ndra, and give not to the worship- 
per; but your godlike gifts, O Maghavan, are poured forth more 
and more. 

B Tie भ्योज॑सा A l निघोषयन्‌ 
७०४०. प्र यो Aaa अभ्योजसा क्रिविं वधैः शुर्ष्ण [ 
यदेदस्त॑म्भीत्प्रथय॑त्रमूं दिवमादिज्जनिष्ट पार्थिव: 1121 

8. He who overpowered Krivi by his might and silenced Susna 
with his weapons, when he spread abroad yonder sky and propped 
it up, then first the dweller on earth was born. 

७०४१. यस्याथं विश्व आर्यो दास: शेवधिपा अरिः। 
तिरश्चिदर्ये रुशमे पवीरवि तुभ्येत्‌ सो अज्यते रयिः।।९।। 

9. That wealth, which every Arya here covets and every 
miserly Dasa, is sent direct to you, the pious Rusama Paviru. 
७०४२. तुरण्यवो मधुमन्तं घृतश्चुतं विप्रासो अर्कमानृचुः। 

अस्मे रयिः पंप्रथे वृष्ण्यं शवोऽस्मे सुंवानास इन्द॑वः।।१०॥। 

10. The zealous seers have sung a hymn, sweet with Soma and 
dropping ghi; wealth and manly strength have spread themselves 
among us, and so too the expressed Soma drops. 

[3-4 2] 
[ऋषि- आयु काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो वृहती)।] 
७०४३. यथा मनौ विवस्वति सोमं शक्रापिंबः सुतम्‌। 
1 S 1 id जुजोषस्यायौ Rr à मांदयसे | 
यथां त्रिते छन्द॑ इन्द्र जुजोषस्यायौ मांदयसे FA l 
1. As you, Sakra, did drink the effused Soma from Manu 


Vivasvat, as you did accept the hymn from Trita, so do you 
gladden yourself with Ayu. 


७०४४. पृषध्रे मेध्ये मातरिश्वनीन्द्र सुवाने अर्मन्दथा:। 
यथा सोमं दशशिप्रे दशोणये स्यूमरश्मावृजूनसि।1२1। 
2. You did enjoy, Indra, the effused drink with Prsadhra, 


Medhya and Matarisvan, just as you did drink the Soma with 
Dasasipra, Dasonya, Syumarasmi, and Rjunas. 


७०४५. य उकथा केवला दधे यः सोम धृषितापिबत्‌। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


538 Rgveda Samhita M 
यस्मै विष्णुख्रीणिं पदा विचक्रम उप॑ मित्रस्य धर्मभि: 11३11 

3. [It is Indra] who has appropriated the hymns for himself h 

who has bravely drunk the Soma, for whom Visnu strode the three D 

steps according to the ordinances of Mitra. ७ 


७०४६. यस्य त्वमिन्द्र स्तोमेंषु चाकनो smi वाजिञ्छतक्रतो। 
तं त्वां वयं सुदुर्घामिव गोदुहों जुहूमसि श्रवस्यव॑: 1४ | 
4. O Satakratu, you who are bountiful to him whose praises 


and oblations you delight in, we, desiring wealth, invoke you, as 
the milkers call a cow which bears abundant milk. 


७०४७. यो नों दाता स न॑: पिता महाँ उ ईशानकृत्‌। 
अर्यामनुग्रो मघवां पुरूवसुर्गोरश्वंस्य प्र दातु Wil 
5. He who gives to us is our father, the mighty, the strong, he ७ 


who acts as the sovereign, may he, the strong rich Maghavan, give 
us kine and horses, even without our asking for it. 


७०४८. यस्मै त्वं व॑सो दानाय मंहसे स रायस्पोषमिन्वति। n 
वसूयवो वसुपतिं शतक्रतुं स्तोमैरिन्द्रै हवामहे s p 
6. He to whom you give a present that he may give obtains ७ 


abundance of wealth; we, desiring wealth, invoke with our praises 


— Indra Satakratu, the lord of wealth. 
Cf. supra, 11.6. K 
७०४९. कदा चन प्र युच्छस्युभे नि पांसि जन्मनी। h 
तुरीयादित्य हव॑नं त इन्द्रियमा त॑स्थावमृतं दिवि।।७।। 6 
7. Never are you heedless, you guard both races, (gods and 
men); O fourth Aditya, to you belongs the Indra invocation, the 
ambrosia has risen to heaven. S 


Le., with Varuna, Mitra and Aryaman. 
ति दाशुषे 
७०५०. यस्मै त्वं म॑घवन्निन्द्र गिर्वणः शिक्षो शिक्ष॑सि दाशुषे । Š 
RI. es zi = Se 
अस्माकं गिर॑ उत defi वसो कण्ववच्छणुधी हवम्‌।।८॥। 

8. (As you hear) the worshipper who you favour, O Indra, à 
Maghavan, liberal one, you that love hymns, so, gracious one, hear र 
our hymns and our invocation of praise, like Kanva's. 
७०५१. अस्तावि मन्म॑ पूर्व्य ब्रह्मेन्द्राय वोचत। 


पूर्वीक्रतस्य बृहतीर॑नूषत स्तोतुर्मेधा असृक्षत।।९॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


SS" मग = =) 


hità 


self, 
hree 


ises 
EA as 


she, 
give 


ains 
1508 


and 
the 


dra, 
hear 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 53 m 


9. The old hymn has been sung, you have utter the prayer to 
Indra; they have shouted many brhati-verses of the rite, many 
hymns of the worshipper have they poured forth. 


७०५२. समिन्द्रो रायो बृहतीरधूनुत सं क्षोणी समु सूर्यम्‌। 
सं शुक्रासः शुर्चयः सं गवाशिरः सोमा इन्द्र॑ममन्दिषुः॥१०॥ 

10. Indra has heaped together vast stores of wealth, the two 
worlds and the sun; the bright pure Soma-drink mixed with milk, 
has exhilarated /ndra. 

[सूक्त-५३] 
[ऋषि- मेध्य काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)! 
७०५३. उपमं त्वां मधोनां ज्येष्ठञ्च वृषभार्णाम्‌। 
पूर्भित्त॑म॑ मघवन्निन्द्र गोविदमीशानं राय SRI I 
] We come to you, O Maghavan Indra, the highest of 


Maghavans, the strong of bulls, the mightiest breaker of forts, the 
provider of kine, the lord of wealth. 


दिवेदिंवे 
७०५४. य आयु कुत्समतिथिग्वमर्दयो वावृधानो दिवेदिवे। 
तं त्वां वयं हर्यश्चं शतक्रंतुं वाजयन्तों हवामहे॥२॥ 
2. You who, waxing in might day by day, did destroy Ayu, 
Kutsa, and Atithigva, we invoke you, Satakratu, with your bay 
horses, rousing you by our offerings. 
७०५५. आ नो विश्वेषां रसं मध्व॑ः सिञ्चन्त्वद्वयः। 
= Saas a || 
ये परावति सुन्विरे जनेष्वा ये अर्वावतीन्दवः॥३॥ 
3. Let the stones pour forth the honey-juice for us all, the 
Soma-drops which have been pressed by men afar or neag 
७०५६. विश्वा द्वेषांसि जहि चाव चा कृंधि विश्वे सन्वन्त्वा वसु। 
(E z मदिरासों eum es सोम॑स्य 
शीष्टेषु चित्त | अंशवो यत्रा सोमस्य gif inc 
4. Smite all our enemies and drive them away, may We all 


Obtain their wealth; even among the Sistas are you exhilarating 
Soma-plants, where you fill yourself with the Soma- 


७०५७. इन्द्र नेदीय एदिहि मितर्मेधाभिरूतिभि:। 
आ शैंन्तम शन्तमाभिरभिष्टिंभिरा स्वापे स्वापिभि:।५॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


540 Rgveda Samhita 
5. Indra, come very near with your firmly-wise protections; ^ 
come, O most healthfull, with your most healthfull aid, come 
good kinsman, with you good kinsmen. p 
७०५८. आजितुरं सत्पतिं विश्वचंर्षणिं कृधि प्रजास्वाभंगम्‌। 
प्र सू तिरा शचीभिर्ये त॑ उकिथनः क्रतुं पुनत ऑनुषक्‌।।६॥। i 
6. Make rich in children that chief of all men, who is 
victorious in battle and a strong protector; proper thoroughly: with 
your powers your singers who continually purify their minds. n 
७०५९. यस्ते साधिष्ठोऽव॑से ते स्यांम भरेषु ते। S 
वयं होत्राभिरुत देवहूतिभिः ससवांसो मनामहे ।।७।। 
7. May we be in battle as one who is the sure to gain your pro- m 
tection; we worship you with invocations and prayers when we S. 
obtain our desire. हु 
९ 
७०६०. अहं हि तें हरिवो ब्रह्म॑ वाजयुराजिं यामि सदोतिभि:। 
त्वामिदेव तममे सर्मश्चयुर्गव्युरग्र मथीनाम्‌। Ie t 
8. With your help, O lord of bay steeds, I always go into prayer be 
and into battle, seeking spoil; it is your whom I insist upon, when I sla 
go, longing for horses and kine, at the head of plunders. ७० 
— The St. Petersb. Dict. would read matindm for mathinam, ‘in the 
beginning of my prayers.’ 
[सूक्त- ५ ४] Us | 
[ऋषि- मातरिश्वा काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, ३-४ विश्वेदेवा। os 
७ 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)। ] P 
७०६१. wed इन्द्र वीर्य गीर्भिगृणन्ति कारव॑:। 
रुतं | 
ते स्तोभन्त ऊर्जमावन्‌ घृतश्चुतं पौरासो नक्षन्धीतिभिंः।।१।। dray 
1. The singers with their hymns, O Indra, this might of your Stre 
singing loudly, they have brought you sacred viands dropping with ७०६ 
; the offerers have drawn near with their prayers. 
i Or perhaps ‘the Pauras’, cf. sup. 11.5. 
I इन्द्रमव॑से येषाँ मन्द॑से 
| ७०६२. नक्षन्त इन्द्रमवसे सुकृत्यया येषां सुतेषु मन्दसे। jd 
यथां dad अमंदो यथां कृश एवास्मे इन्द्र मत्स्व॥२॥ ' ‘inex 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


hità 
Mandala 8, Sükta 54 541 
ons; f : 
me 2. They have drawn near /ndra with holy rites for hís 
- protection, they in whose libations you rejoice: as you did rejoice 
in Samvarta and Krsa, so now, Indra, do you rejoice in us. 
७०६३. आ नो विश्वे सजोष॑सो देवांसो गन्तनोप॑ न:। | 
: वसंवो रुद्रा अव॑से न आ गमज्छृण्वन्तु मरुतो FALI | 
a 3. You gods, come all with one accord to us; let the Vasus and | 
i Rudras come for our protection, let the Maruts hear our E? | 
७०६४. पूषा विष्णुर्हवनं मे सरस्वत्यवन्तु सप्त सिन्ध॑वः। 
आपो वातः पर्वतासो वनस्पति: शुणोतु पृथिवी हव॑म्‌।४।। 
4. May Paüsan, Visnu, Sarasvati, and the seven rivers, favour 
Un my call; may the waters, the wind, the mountains, the trees, the 
We earth, hear my call. 
७०६५. यदिन्द्र राधो अस्ति ते माघोनं मघवत्तम। 
तेन॑ नो बोधि सधमाद्यो वृधे भगो दानाय॑ वृत्रहन्‌।।५।। 
5. With yours own special gift, O Indra, best of Maghavans, 
ayer be you our boon-companion for good, our liberal benefactor, O 
en I slayer of Vrtra. 
1 ७०६६. आजिपते नृपते त्वमिद्धि नो वाज आ वक्षि सुक्रतो। 
© a wey 


वीती होत्राभिरुत देववींतिभि: ससवांसो वि festis n 
6. O lord of battle, lord of men, mighty in action, do you guide 
us in the conflict; far-famed are those who obtain their desires by 
Sacrificial feasts, by invocations, and by entertaining the gods. 


४०६७. सन्ति हार्य आशिष इन्द्र आयुर्जनानाम्‌। 
अस्मान्नक्षस्व मघवन्नुपा्वसे धुक्षस्व पिप्युषीमिष॑म्‌।।७॥ 


7. Our prayers abide in the true one, in Indra is the life of men; 


draw near to us, Maghavan, for our protection; milk forth the 
urs; Streaming drink. 


ith : भवि : 
v ७०६८. वयं d इन्द्र स्तोमेभिर्विधेम त्वमस्माकं शतक्रतो। 
महि स्थूरं शंशयं राधो अहय॑ प्रस्क॑प्वाय नि तोंशय॥॥८॥ 


8.0 Indra, we would worship you with hymns: O Satakratu, 
.pour down upon Praskanva great, solid, 
berant abundance. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


you are Ours; 
Mexhaustible, exu 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


542 Rgveda Samhita 
[सूक्त-५५] 
[क्रषि- कृशकाण्व। देवता- प्रस्कण्व। छन्द- गायत्री, 3,4 अनुष्टुप्‌। | 
७०६९. भूरीदिन्द्र॑स्य didi व्यख्य॑मभ्याय॑ति। राध॑स्ते दस्यवे वृक।।१॥ 
1. Great indeed is Indra’s might; | have beheld it; your gift 


approaches, O Dasyave-vrka. 
Sc. ‘O foe to the Dasyu.’ | 


७०७०. शतं श्वेतास॑ उक्षणों दिवि तारो न रोचन्ते। महा दिवं न तस्तभु:॥२॥ 
2. A hundred white oxen shine like stars in the heaven, by their | 
size they have almost held up the heavens. 
ति वेणूज्छतं | > चर्माणि | 
७०७१. शतं वेणूञ्छतं शुनः शतं चर्माणि म्लातानि। 
शतं में बल्बजस्तुका अरुषीणां चतुंःशतम्‌।।३।। 
3. A hundred bamboos, a hundred dogs, a hundred dressed 


hides, a hundred bunches of balbaja grass, and four hundred ted 
mares are mine. 


` [ salad E 1 
७०७२. सुदवाः स्थ काण्वायना वयोवयो विचरन्त:। 
अश्वांसो न HERTA \ 
— 4. May you have the gods propitious to you, O descendants of 


Kanva, living through youth on youth; step out vigorously like 
steed. 


७०७३. आदित्साप्तस्य चर्किरन्नानूनस्य महि श्रव॑ः। 
श्यावीरतिध्वसन्यथश्चक्षुंषा चन TAT Lu UI 
5. Let them praise the seven-yoked team, great is the strength 
of that which is not yet full-grown; the dark-brown mares haves 
rushed along the paths so that no eye can follow them. 
[सूक्त-५६] 
[ऋषि- py काण्व। देवता- प्रस्कण्व, ५- अग्नि, सूर्य _ \ 
; छन्द- गायत्री, ५- पंक्ति। ] 

| 1 धों अदर्श्यहयम्‌ dd प्रेथिना शर्व: Hg tt 

| ७०७४. प्रतिं ते दस्यवे वृक राधो अदर्श्यह॑यम्‌। द्योर्न प्रथिना शत: 


ka, its 
1. Your inexhaustible gift has appeared, 0 Dasyave-VIXa> 


fullness is in extent like the sky. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


rhhita 


E 


y their 


ressed 
ed red 


ants of 
y like 


rength 
. haves 


kal 


rka, 15 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 57 543 
e S दस्य॑वे नित्याद्वायो 5 
७०७५. दश मह्यं पौतक्रतः सहस्रा दस्यवे वृर्क:। नित्यांद्रायो अंमंहत॥।२।। 
2. Dasyave-vrka, the son of Putakrata, has given to me ten 
thousand from his own store; 
७०७६. शतं में गर्दभाना शतमूर्णावतीनाम्‌। शतं दासाँ अति erii || 
3. A hundred asses a hundred woolly sheep, a hundred slaves. 
beside garlands. 
७०७७. तत्रो अपि प्राणीयत पूतक्रतायै व्यक्ता। अश्वानामित्र यूथ्याम्‌।।४।। 
4. There too has been brought for Putakrata a well adorned 
mare, which is not one of the common horses of the herd. 


७०७८. अचेत्यग्नश्चिकितुह॑व्यवाट्‌ स सुमद्रंथः। अग्निः शुक्रेण॑शोचिषां 
वृहत्‌ सूरो अरोचत दिवि सूर्यौ अरोचत।।५।। 


5. The shining Agni has appeared, the bearer of the oblation, 
with his chariot; Agni has gleamed forth brilliantly with his bright 
flame as Sura, he has gleamed forth in heaven as Surya. 


[सूक्तः५७] 
[ऋषि- मेध्य काण्व। देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌। | 
७०७९. युवं देवा क्रतुना पूर्व्येण युक्ता रथेन तविषं यजत्रा। 
आगच्छतं नासत्या शचीभिरिदं तृतीयं सव॑नं पिबाथः॥१॥। 
1. You have come quickly, you two gods, with your car, 


endued with ancient might, O sacred Asvins; truthful ones, with 
your powers, drink this third libation. 


७०८०. युवां देवास्रय॑ एकादशास॑ः सत्याः सत्यस्य॑ ददृशे पुरस्तात्‌। 
अस्मां यज्ञं सव॑नं जुषाणा पातं सोममश्चिना दी्यगनी॥२॥ 
2. The three-and-thirty truthful gods saw you before the 


truthful one; O Asvins, gleaming with fire, drink the Soma, 
enjoying our offering, our libation. 4 

Le. before the Sun; the dawns are compared to ‘truthful active 
Women’ in Reveda, 1.79.1. 
७०८१. पनाय्यं तद॑श्विना कृतं वाँ वृषभो दिवो Gia: पृथिव्या:। 

सहस्रं शंसां उत ये गविष्टौ सर्वी इचाँ उप॑ याता पिबध्यै॥३॥ 

3. That work of yours, O Asvins, is worthy of wonder, the bull 

of the heavens, the firmament and the earth; and your thousand 
lessings in battle, for all these come hither to drink. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


५५ पो” Re A nee 


544 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and esangot E 
Rgveda Saihita 


Le., the Sun, which they may be said to reveal, 
earliest dawn. 


७०८२. अयं at भागो निहितो यजत्रेमा गिरों नासत्योप॑ यातम्‌। 
पिब॑तं सोमं मधुमन्तमस्मे प्र दाश्वांसमवतं शचींभि: 11४1 
4. O sacred ones, this your portion has been placed for you; 0 


truthful ones, come to these your praises; drink among us the 
sweet Soma; succour your worshipper with your powers. 


[सूक्त-५८] 
[ऋषि- मेध्य काण्व। देवता- विश्वेदेवा, १ विश्वेदेवा अथवा क्रत्विज्‌। 
छन्द- freq! | 
७०८३. यमृत्विजो बहुधा कल्पर्यन्तः सचेतसो यज्ञमिमं वहन्ति। यो 
अनूचानो MAM युक्त आसीत्का स्वित्तत्र यर्जमानस्य HERR 
1. He whom the wise priests bring, when they arrange the 


offering in many ways, who was employed as a learned Brahmana, 
what is the offerer’s knowledge regarding him? 


७०८४. एक एवागिनर्बहुधा समिद्ध एक: सूर्यो विश्वमनु प्रभूतः। 
एकैवोषा: सर्वमिदं वि भात्येकं वा इदं वि ब॑भूव सर्वम्‌।२।। 
म 2. Agni is one, though kindled in various ways: one is the Sun, 


pre-eminent over all; one Dawn illumines this all; one is that 
which has become this all. 


७०८५. ज्योतिष्मन्तं केतुमन्तं त्रिचक्रं सुखं vi सुषदं भूरिवारम्‌। 
जा i रिक्तं fud 
चत्रामंघा यस्य योगेंऽधिजन्ञे d वॉ हुवे अति रिक्तं पिबंध्ये।॥॥३॥ 
3. The brilliant chariot, diffusing splendour, rolling lightly on 
its three wheels, offering an easy seat, and full of many gifts, at 


whose yoking the Dawn was born, rich in marvellous treasures, I 
invoke that your chariot (O Asvins), come you hither to drink. 


[सूक्त ५९] 
[ऋषि- सुपर्ण काण्व। देवता- इन्द्रावरुण। छन्द-जगती। | 
+ ७०८६. इमानिं वां भागधेयांनि सिखत इन्द्रावरुणा प्र महे सुतेषु वाम्‌। 
यज्ञेयज्ञे ह सवना भुरण्यथो यत्सुन्वते यज॑मानाय शिक्ष॑थः।।१॥। | 


as they come with the 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


arhhitz 


vith the 


/ou; O 
us the 


EC 
[। यो 


(RU 


xe the 
mana, 


> Sun, 
s that 


३ || 

ily on 
fts, at 
res, 1 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 59 d 


1. These your offered portions stream forth, 0 Indra and 
Varuna, to your honour in the oblations; at every sacrifice you 
hasten to the oblations, when you help the offerer who presses out 
the Soma. 


७०८७. निषिध्व॑रीरोष॑धीराप॑ आस्तामिन्द्रावरुणा महिमान॑माशत। 
या सिस्रतू रज॑सः पारे अध्व॑नो ययोः शत्रुर्नकिरादेव NAIR 
2. The plants and the waters were efficacious; they have 
attained their power, O Indra and Varuna; you who have gone 


beyond the path of the firmament, no godless man is worth being 
called your enemy. 


७०८८. सत्यं तदिन्द्रावरुणा कृशस्य॑ वां मध्व॑ ऊर्मि दुंहते सप्त वार्णो:। 
ताभिर्दाश्वांसमवतं शुभस्पती यो amet अभि पाति 
चित्तिभि: 11३ 


3. True, 0 Indra and Varuna, is that saying of Krsa’s, ‘the 
seven sacred voices distil a stream of honey;' for their sake help 
the worshipper, O you lords of splendour, who reverences you 
devoutly in his thoughts. 

Cf. Rgveda, 1X.103,3, ‘the Soma streams through the sheep’s wool 
round the honey-dropping vessel, the seven voices of the sacred bards 
shout to it." 


७०८९. Yaya: सौम्यां जीरदानवः सप्त स्वसारः सर्दन Ell 
या ह॑ वामिन्द्रावरुणा घृतश्रुतस्ताभिर्धत्तं यज॑मानाय शिक्षतम्‌।४॥। 
4. The seven sister-streams of the Soma, in the hot the 


offering, pour forth ghi-dripping streams of yours, © /mdra 
Varuna, provide for and help the offerer. 


७०९०. अवोचाम महते सौभ॑गाय सत्यं तवेषाभ्यां महिमानमिन्द्रियम्‌। 
अस्मान्त्स्विन्द्रावरुणा घृतश्वुतत्रिभिः साप्तेभिरवतं शुभस्पती lis li 


. 5. To our great happiness we have declared to these two 
brilliant ones the true might of Indra; O Indra and Varuna, lords of 
Splendour, help us, the offerers of ghi, with the company of thrice 
seven, 

This obscure phrase occurs in a hymn to Indra (Rgveda, i.133,6), ‘O 


Iresistible One, you destroy not men with the warriors, with the thrice 
Seven Warriors.” 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OO 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
546 Rgveda Sarhhita 
७०९१. इन्द्रावरुणा यदृषिभ्यों मनीषां वाचो मतिं श्रुतमंदत्तमग्रे। 
यानि स्थानान्यसृजन्त धीरां यज्ञं त॑न्वानास्तप॑साभ्य॑पश्यम्‌।।६ 
6. O Indra and Varuna, 1 have seen what you formerly gave to 
the seers, wisdom, power of song, and fame, and the places which 
the wise have prepared for themselves, as they spread the web of 
the sacrifice with holy austerities. 
1 सौमनसमर्दुप्तं H रायस्पोषं यज॑मानेषु 
७०९२. इन्द्रावरुणा सौमन रायस्पोषं यज॑मानेषु धत्तम्‌। 
प्रजा पुष्टि भूतिमस्मासुं धत्तं दीर्घायुत्वाय प्र तिरतं न आयुं:।।७॥। 
7. O Indra and Varuna, give to the offerers cheerfulness 


without levity, and abundance of wealth; give to us offspring, 
food, prosperity; prolong our lives to length of days. 


ANUVAKA VII 
[सूक्त-६०] 
[ऋषि- भर्ग प्रागाथ। देवता-अग्नि। 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)।] 
७०९३. अग्न आ याह्यग्निभिर्होतारं त्वा वृणीमहे। 

आ त्वाम॑नक्तु प्रय॑ता हविष्मंती यजिष्ठ बर्हिरासदें।।१॥। 
1. Agni, come hither with the fires, we choose you as oun 
invoking priest; let the presented offering anoint you, the chief 


sacrificer, to sit down on the sacred grass. 
Sdmaveda, 1552. 


| 1 
. ७०९४. अच्छा हि त्वां सहसः सूनो अङ्गिरः खुचश्वरन्त्यध्वरे। 
1. घृतकेशमीमहे ग्नि 
ऊर्जो नपातं घृतकेंशमीमहेऽग्नि यज्ञेषुं yer I 

2. Angiras, son of strength, the ladles go to find you in the 
sacrifice; we praise the ancient Agni in our offerings, the grandson 
of food, butter-haired. m 

Butter-Haired— Similarly Agni is called ghrtaprstha, but 
backed,”’ in v.4.3. The pradipta-kalasa-sthaniya-jvalah of Sayana See 
to be a mislection for pradiptakesa, cf. v.37.1. 


७०९५. अग्ने कविर्वेधा असि होता पावक यक्ष्यः। 
मन्द्रो यजिष्ठो अध्वरेष्वीड्यो विप्रेभिः शुक्र A:R 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


~ ~ 


hhità 


ve to 
hich 
b of 


F- 
ring, 


our 
chief 


1 the 
dson 


utter: 
८९115 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 60 = 


3. Agni, you, wise, are the creator (of consequences); O 
purifier, you are the involving priest, worthy of worship; bright 
one, you are to be praised in our sacrifices by the priests with 
hymns, yourself the chief ministrant worthy to be rejoiced in. 
७०९६, अद्रोघमा वंहोशतो यंविष्ठ्य देवाँ अंजस्र वीतयें। 

अभि प्रयाँसि सुधिता व॑सो गहि मन्द॑स्व धीतिभि्हित: te 
4. Most youthful, eternal one, bring the longing gods to me 


guileless, to eat (the oblation); giver of dwellings, approach the 
well-placed food; rejoice, being set in your place With praises. 


1 EN त्रातरक्रतस्कवि 
७०९७. त्वमित्सप्रथा अस्यग्ने त्रातऋतस्कवि:। 
त्वां विप्रासः समिधान दीदिव आ विवासन्ति वेधर्स:।५॥ 
5. Deliverer Agni, you, the truthful and the seer, are widely 
spread; O kindled blazing one, the wise praisers wait on you. 
Sdmaveda, 41. 
शोचिष्ठ विशे I स्तोत्रे v असि 
७०९८. शोचां शोचिष्ठ दीदिहि विशे मयो wed स्तोत्रे महाँ असि। 
देवानां शर्म M. हि D Bo 
देवानां शर्मन्‌ मम॑ सन्तु सूरय॑ः शत्रूषाह: स्वग्नय: 1६ I 
6. Most resplendent (Agni), shine forth and illuminate (us); 
give happiness to your people, to your worshipper, for you are 
great; may my priests abide in the bliss of the gods, subduing their 
enemies, possessing bright fires. 
My Priests— Sayana explains sirayah 
asmákam putrddayo va. 


७०९९. यथां चिद्वृद्धमतसमग्न सञ्चू्वसि कषमि। 


एवा द॑ह मित्रमहो यो अंस्मधनुग्‌ दुर्मन्मा कश्च AARIN I 
F As, Agni, you. consuniest old timber on the earth, 50, 
cherisher of friends, do you burn our injurer, whosoever evil- 
mided wishes (our ill). 
७१००. मा नो मर्ताय रिपवे रक्षस्विने माघर्शसाय रीरधः। 
अखेंधद्धिस्तरणिभिर्यविष्ठ्य शिवेभिः पाहि fl: ni ॥। 
8. Subject us not to a strong mortal enemy, nor to the 
malevolent; O most youthful, guard us with your unharming 
delivering auspicious protections. 
७१०१. पाहि नों अग्न एक॑या WENA द्वितीयया। 
पाहि गीर्भिस्तिसुभिरूजाम्पते पाहि चतसूभिर्वसो।९ I 


by stotaro medhavinah, 


७८-७0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


548 Rgveda Sarühit 


9. Agni, protect us by one (rich), or protect us by a second 
lord of strength, protect us by threc songs; protect us glver of 
dwellings, by four 

This v. occurs in Sámaveda, 36, 1544; and in Yajurveda, 27.43. In the 
latter, Mahidhara explains the four as the Rk, Yajus, Sáman, and Nigada, 


७१०२. पाहि विश्वस्माद्रक्षसो अराव्णः प्र स्म वाजेषु नोऽव। 
त्वामिद्धि नेदिष्ठं देवतातय आपिं नक्षामहे वृधे।।१०॥। 


10. Protect us from every impious Raksasa, shield us in 
battles; we approach you, our nearest neighbour, our kinsman, for 
sacrifice and for increase. 

Impious— Literally, ‘‘not giving (sacrificial) gifts.’’Samaveda, 
1545. 


७१०३. आ नों अग्ने वयोवृर्थ रयिं पावक शंस्य॑म्‌। 
Weal च न उपमाते पुरुस्पृहं सुनीती स्वय॑शस्तरम्‌।।११॥। 


11. Purifying Agni, bestow upon us food-augmenting excellent 
wealth; and (bring) us, O meter-our of good, by auspicious 
guidance, (a treasure) desired by many and bringing its own fame. 

Samaveda, 43. 


७१०४. येन वंसाम पृ्तनासु शर्धतस्तरन्तो अर्य आदिश:। 
mee. स त्वं नों वर्ध प्रय॑सा शचीवसो जिन्वा धियो वसुविद:।।१२॥ 

12. By which we may escape and destroy in battles our 
impetuous weapon-aiming enemies; O you who by wisdom 
establish our rites, bless us with food, prosper our wealth-obtaining 
offerings. 

७१०५. शिशनो वृषभो य॑थाग्नि: शृङ्गे दविंध्वत्‌। 
तिग्मा अस्य हन॑वो न प्र॑तिधृषें सुजम्भः सह॑सो AE: 11831! 

13. Agni tosses his horns, sharpening them as a bull; his sharp 

Jaws are not to be resisted; he is mighty toothed, this son of 


strength. 


Sharpening them as a Bull— Cf. Virgil, Georg. 11.232 
Not to be Resisted— Sayana in his Comm. curiously takes za twice, 
once as-iva (hanava iva), and then again with pratidhrse. 


७१०६. नहि तें अग्ने वृषभ प्रतिधृषे जम्भांसो यद्वितिष्टसे। 
स त्वं नों होतः सुहुतं हविष्कृधि वंस्वा नो वार्या पुरु॥१४॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


F 


da, 


ur 
om 
ng 


ce, 


Digitized 0 nd Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sikia 60 549 


14. Since you spread out on all sides, your teeth, bull Agni, are 
not to be resisted; O offerer, do you make our oblation rightly 
presented; give us many precious (gifts). 

७१०७. शेषे वेषु मात्रोः सं त्वा मर्तास इन्धते। 
fis | = 
अतन्द्रो हव्या वहसि हविष्कृत आदिदेवेषुं राजसि।।१५।। 

15. You sleep within your mothers in the woods, mortals 
kindle you; unwearied you bear the offerings of the sacrificer, then 
you shine among the gods. 

Sdmaveda, 46. 


Your Mothers— This refers to the two aranis or pieces of wood 
from which the sacrificial fire is produced by attrition. Cf II.29.2. 


७१०८. सप्त होतारस्तमिदीळते त्वाग्ने सुत्यजमहयम्‌। 
भेनत्स्यद्रिं [| शोचिषा `A 7 
भिनत्स्यद्रिं तपसा वि शोचिषा प्राग्ने तिष्ठ जनाँ अतिं।।१६॥ 

16. The seven priests praise you, Agni, giver of good things 
and unfailing; you cleave the cloud with your fierce splendour; go 
forth, having overcome our enemies. 

Having Overcome our Enemies—  Sáyana gives another 


interpretation, taking janan not as asmddvirodhi-jandn but asmdn, 
“proceed to the gods with the oblation, having left us behind.” 
L अग्निमग्नि t 
७१०९. अ वो अध्रिगुं हुवेम वृक्तबर्हिषः। 
अग्नि पिट A x होतारं 
अग्नि हितप्रयसः शश्वतीष्वा होतारं चर्षणीनाम्‌।।१७।। 

17. Now that we have cut the sacred grass, let us invoke for 
you Agni, Agni the irresistible; having placed the oblations, let us 
Invoke Agni, abiding in many (places), the offerer of sacrifices for 
men. 


uy to the sacrificers or to the gods— Agni the offerer of 
Sacrifices—When Agni is satisfied, living beings obtain their desires by 
the rain which he causes. Cf. Manu, 111.76. 

केतेन शर्मन्त्सचते | 
७११०. केतेन शः सुषामण्यग्ने qui चिकित्वना। 
E हट नेदिष्ठमूतयें EN 
इषण्ययां नः पुरुरूपमा भ॑र वाजं नेदिष्ठमूतये।।१८।। 

18. (The sacrificer) worships you by praises, Agni, with the 
experienced (priests) in the rite celebrated with beautiful Süman 
hymns; bring us of your own accord for our protection food of 
Various kinds which may be always in our reach. 


७१११. अग्ने जरितर्विश्पतिस्तेपानो देव रक्षस॑ः। 
अप्रोषिवान्यूहपंतिमहाँ असि दिवस्पायुदुरोणयु: 11१९ 1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


$50 Rgveda Samhita 


19. Divine Agni, worthy of praise, you are the guardian of 
men, the consumer of the Ráksasas; you are great, you the never- 
absent guardian of the (worshipper's) house, the protector of 
heaven, ever present in the dwelling. 

Worthy of Praise—  Jaritr usually means “‘the singer of 
praises, "—here, as applied to Agni it is explained by Sayana as-stutya. 

Sdmaveda, 39. 

वेशीदाघृणीवसो ^ ` यातुर्यातुमाव॑ताम्‌ 1 
७११२. मा नो रक्ष आ वेशीदाघृणीवसो मा यातुर्यातुमावताम्‌। 
परोगव्यूत्यनिरामप क्षुधमग्ने सेध॑ रक्षेस्विन॑ः।।२०।। 

20. 0 you of brilliant wealth, let not the Raksasa enter us, nor 
the torment of the evil spirits; Agni, drive away further than a 
gavyuti from us poverty, hunger, and the strong demons. 

Gavyuti— This is a measure=two krosas, Sayana adds that it implies 
an unlimited distance. 


Hunger— Sayana explains ksudham unnecessarily as ksapayitaram, 
“the destroyer.” 


[सूक्त-६ १] 


[ऋषि- भर्ग प्रागाथ। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, 
समासतो बृहती)।| 
७११३. उभर्य शुणव॑च्च न इन्द्रो अर्वागिदं वच॑ः। 
सत्राच्या मघवा सोम॑पीतये धिया शर्विष्ठ आ WALI | 
1. May Indra listen to both these our hymns; may the mightiest 


Maghavan come to us, (pleased) with our devoted offering, to 
drink the Soma. 


Samaveda, 290, 1233. (Satrácyà dhiyà should rather mean, “come to 
us with your whole mind," cf. VIII.2.37). 


Both our Hymns— Ze., whether recited (४050) or sung praises 
(stotra). 
७११४. तं हि स्वराज वृषभं तमोज॑से धिषणे निष्टतक्षतु:। 
san Sune 1 
उतोपमानां प्रथमो नि षीदसि सोम॑कामं हि ते मन:11२॥ 
2. Him, self-resplendent, have heaven and earth formed as the 
showerer, him (they have formed) for strength; therefore you sit 


down first of your peers; your mind loved the Soma. 
Samaveda, 1234. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 


es 


ne 
sit 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 61 
७११५. आ वृंषस्व पुरूवसो सुतस्येन्द्रान्धस:! 
1 | ति 
विद्या हि त्वां हरिवः पृत्सु सासहिमधृष्टं चिद्धृष्वणिम्‌॥।३।। 
3. Indra, possessor of much wealth, pour the effused Soma 
within you; possessor of (bright) coursers, we know you, the 
overpowerer in battles, the unconquerable, the conqueror. 
७११६. अप्रामिसत्य मघवन्तथेर्दसदिन्द्र क्रत्वा यथा वर्शः। 
सनेम वाजं तव॑ शिप्रिन्नवसा मक्षू चिद्यन्तो अद्रिवः॥४।। 
4. Indra, Maghavan of unbroken truth, it ever comes to pass as 
you in your knowledge may’st desire; by your protection, O 


handsome-jawed, may we obtain food, speedily, O thunderer, 
subduing our enemies. 
७११७. शग्ध्यू$ षु शचीपत इन्द्र विश्वेभिरूतिभिः। 

भगं न हि त्वां यशस वसुविदमनु शूर चरामसि।५॥ 

5. Indra, lord of rites, give us (our desire) with all your helping 
powers; hero, we worship you as happiness, the glorious, the 
obtainer of wealth. 

Sdmaveda, 253, 1579. 

All your helping Powers— Sc. The Maruts. 

x 1 
७११८. पौरो अश्व॑स्य पुरुकृद्‌ गवांमस्युत्सों देव हिरण्यय:। 
E: renee षत s 1 
नकिर्हि दानं परिमर्धिषत्त्वे यद्यद्यामि तदा SIE I 

6. You are the increaser of horses, the multiplier of cows; you, 
deity, with your golden body are a very function; none can harm 
the gifts laid up for me in you; bring me whatever I ask. 

Sámaveda, 1580. 

७११९. त्वं dfe चेर॑वे विदा भगं वसुत्तये। 
श्र॑मिष्टये 
उद्धावृषस्व मघवन्‌ गर्विष्टय उदिन्द्राश्चमिष्टय।1७ u 

_ 7. You are (bounteous), come; may you obtain wealth to 
distribute to the worshipper; shower your bounty, Maghavan, on 
me desiring cows, shower it, Indra, on me desiring horses. 
line unexplained. In the 
which (like medhavin) 


St. Petersburg Dictionary 
240, 1581. 


tn 
ün 
= 


Sáyana's text leaves cerave in the first 
Sdmaveda Comm. it is explained celayitre, 
Probably only means “‘the worshipper- The 
gives it as **begehend (einheiliges Work). —Samavede, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


- —€ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
552 
७१२०. त्वं पुरू सहस्राणि शतानिं च यूथा दानाय॑ मंहसे। 
I ZA > 
आ पुरन्द्रं चकृम विप्रवचस इन्द्रं गायन्तोऽव॑से ।।८।। 
8. You grant many hundreds and thousands of herds as a gift 
(to the offerer). Uttering long praises, we, hymning /ndra, the 
destroyer of cities, bring him before us for our protection. 
Sümaveda, 1582. 


Uttering Long Praises— Benfey takes vipravacas as “Lieder der 
Lobsinger habend.” 


७१२१. अविप्रो वा यदविधद्‌ विप्रो वेन्द्र ते वर्च:। 
स प्र म॑मन्दत्त्वाया शंतक्रतो प्राचामन्यो अह॑सन।।९॥ 

9. Indra, whether it be the unskilled or the skilled who 
celebrated your praise, each rejoices in his desire for you, O 
Satakratu, whose wrath presses ever forwards, who meet the foe, 
proclaiming ‘it is I.” 

७१२२. उप्रबाहुर्रक्षकृत्वा पुरन्दरो यदि मे शृणवद्धवंम्‌। 
वसूयवो वसुपतिं शतक्रतुं स्तोमैरिन्द्रै हवामहे 120 11 
10. If the strong-armed slayer of enemies, the destroyer of 


cities, will but hear my invocation, we, desiring wealth, will with 
se, OUT praises call one Indra Satakratu, the lord of wealth. 


७१२३. न पापासों मनामहे नारायासो न जल्ह॑वः। 
यदिन्विन्ट्रं वृषणं सचां सुते सखांयं कृणवामहै।।११॥ 
11. We are not evil who worship him, nor too poor to offer l 


gifts, nor destitute of sacred fires,—since assembled together, 
when the Soma is effused, we make Indra, the showerer, our 


Rgveda Samhita 


friend. 

We are not Evil— Sayana takes manamahe as a transitive verb, of 
v.6.1; more probably it means ‘‘to appear, "—'*we do not appear evil, ‘ 
etc. 

a ci 1 सासहिमृणकातिमदां 1 
७१२४. उग्र युयुज्म पृतनासु साहमुणकातिमदाभ्यम्‌। | 


वेदां भूम॑ चित्सनिता रथीत॑मो वाजिनं यमिदू नशंत्‌।॥१२॥ 

12. We join (to our rite) the mighty Indra, the subduer of 
enemies in battles, the inviolate, him to whom praise is due as a 
debt; he, the best of charioteers, knows (among steeds) the strong 


racer, and (among men( he, the bounteous (knows) the offerer 
whom he is to reach. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 61 553 
Sayana’s explanation of this verse is obscure; he seems to lake 
vájinam twice over, with a difference in meaning in each clause, I have 
supposed that veda is to be repeated in the second Clause; but this is 
doubtful. 
Ios N A b. 
७१२५. "Ki इन्द्र भयामहे ततों नो अभ॑यं कृधि। 
|| | भर्वि S 
मघवञ्छग्धि तव तत्र ऊतिभिर्वि द्विषो वि मृधों जहि।।१३।। 
13. Indra, give us security from him of whom we are afraid; 
Maghavan, be strong for us with your protections; destroy our 
E destroy those who harm us. 
Samaveda, 274, 1321 (with ütaye for ütibhih). 
ति 1 ` Ls 1 
७१२६. त्वं हि राधस्पते राध॑सो महः क्षयस्यासि विधतः। 
H || ST गिर्वण a c 
तं त्वा वयं मघवन्रिन्द्र गिर्वणः सुतावन्तो हवामहे ।।१४।। 
14. Lord of wealth, you are (the bestower) of great wealth and 
a dwelling-place upon your worshipper; as such, we invoke you, 
bearing the Soma, O Maghavan, Indra, who are to be honoured 


with hymns. 
Sdmaveda, 1322 (with vidharta for vidhatah). 


७१२७. इन्द्र: स्पळुत वृत्रहा प॑रस्या नो वरेंण्यः। 


स नो रक्षिषच्चरमं स मध्यमं स पश्चात्पातु नः ENA 
15. Indra, the all-knower, the slayer of Vrtra, the protector, is 
iS) be chosen by us; may he guard our (son), our last (son), our 
middle (son), may he protect us from behind and before. 


७१२८. त्वं न॑: पश्चादंधरादुत्तरात्पुर इन्द्र नि पाहि विश्वतः 
आरे अस्मत्कृणुहि दैव्यं भयमारे हेतीरदेंवी:1॥1१६॥ 
16. Indra, protect us from the west, from the south, from the 


north, from the east, protect us from every side; keep far from us 
Supernatural alarm, keep far the weapons of the demons. 


Sayana in vi.19.9 explained the four terms in the text as referring to 
ihe four quarters; here his Comm. makes them refer to the six directions 
In space, "protect is from the west, from the east, from below (this 
includes the upper direction), from the north (this includes the south).”” 


3१२९. अद्याद्या a: श्व इन्द्र रास्व॑ परे च॑ नः। 
विश्वां च नो जरितन्त्सत्पते अहा दिवा नर्क च रक्षिषः।।१७॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
554 Rgveda Sainhita 
17. Save us, Indra, every to-day, every tomorrow, and every 
succeeding day; lord of the good, protect us, your praisers, in all 
days, by day and by night. 

शूरों | ^d सम्मिश्लो वीर्याय 
७१३०. प्रभङ्गी शूरो मघवा तुवीमघः सम्मिश्लो वीर्याय कम्‌। 
तै | ESI I 

उभा d बाहू quum शतक्रतो नि या व्र मिमिक्षतुं:।।१८।। 

18. Maghavan is the shatterer, the hero, great in wealth, and 
the conductor to victory (over our enemies). Satakratu, both your 
arms, which grasp the thunderbolt, are the showerers (of 
blessings). 

This and the previous verse occur in Sámaveda, 1459. 

The Conductor to Victory— Sayana’s interpretation of sammislo 
viryáya (samyak misrayità satrünàm viryakarandya) may, perhaps, mean, 
“bringing us into successful collision with our enemies,” cf. his Comm. 


on Samaeda. 289. The text more probably means, ‘‘mingling, or 
associated, with us to display his might." 


[35-8 2] 
[ऋषि- प्रगाथ काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- पंक्ति, ७, ९, बृहती। | 
७१३१. प्रो अंस्मा उपस्तुतिं भरता यज्जुजोषति। उक्थैरिन्द्रस्य wed वयों 
वर्धन्ति सोमिनो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑ः।।१।। 
1. Present the offering of praise to Indra, since he enjoys it; 


(the priests) augment the ample food of the Soma-loving Indra 
with their recited hymns; /ndra's gifts are worthy of praise. 


७१३२. अयुजो असमो नृभिरेक॑ः कृष्टीरयास्य॑ः। 
S 
TRR प्र वावृधे विश्वां जातान्योज॑सा भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑ः।।२॥ 

2. Without a fellow and unlike the other gods, he alone, 
unconquerable, surpasses the men of former times, he surpasses in 
might all beings; Indra’s gifts arë worthy of praise. F 

Unlike the other Gods— Sayana explains nrbhih By  devaih. 
Another interpretation takes ‘‘he’’ as the rs of the hymn, in which case 
nrbhih will mean its ordinary sense, **men," not ““gods.”” 


७१३३. अहितेन चिदर्वता जीरदानुः सिषासति। 
परवाच्यमिन्द्र तत्तव वीर्याणि करिष्यतो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातर्य:11३॥ 


3. He, the swift giver, wishes to bestow blessings (upon i 
with his unurged courser; your greatness, Indra, as you are 8 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri t — 5 — M Haridwar 


hhità 
Very 
n all 


and 
your 
(of 


nislo 
can, 
mm. 
, Or 


E 
out 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 62 555 
to display your powers, should be proclaimed; /ndra's gifts arc 
worthy of praise. 
७१३४. आ यांहि कृणवाम त इन्द्र ब्रह्माणि वर्धना। 
af E M 
भ॑: शविष्ठ चाकनों भद्रमिह श्रवस्यते भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातर्य।४।। 
4, Indra, come hither; let us perform for you our sacred rites 
augmenting your vigour; by which (rites), most mighty one, you 
desire to bless him who wishes for food; /ndra's gifts are worthy 
of praise. 
७१३५. धृषतश्चिद्धृषन्मन॑ः कृणोषीन्ट्र यत्त्वम्‌। 
dri: सोमे: सपर्यतो नमोभिः प्रतिभूषतो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय: li 
5. You have made your mind, /ndra, more resolute than the 
resolute, since you (wish to give the desires) of him who worships 


you with the intoxicating Soma juices and adorns you with 
adorations; /ndra's gifts are worthy of praise. 
I al ~ x^ i Lu [i सोमिन 
७१३६. Ad चष्ट ऋरचाषमोऽवतां इव मानुषः। जुष्ट्वी दक्षस्य सामनः 
nr DLE LUE 1 - Ce oe 
सखाय कृणुत युज भद्रा इन्द्रस्य रातयः।।६।। 

6. Indra, who is well-deserving of the hymn, looks down (with 
favour) upon us as a (thirsty) man (looks down) on wells; and 
being well-pleased he makes the energetic Soma-offerer his iriend; 
Indra’s gifts are worthy of praise. 

His Friend— Sayana takes yujam as átmánam; but the line rather 
means **he makes the skilled Soma-offerer’s friend his friend.” —Another 
interpretation is that he makes the Soma the friend of the worshipper. 


७१३७. fad त इन्द्र वीर्य देवा अनु क्रतुं ददुः। 
भुवो विश्व॑स्य गोप॑तिः पुरुष्ठत भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातर्यः 119 I 
7. Indra, by the example of your power and knowledge the 
gods attain the same; O hymned by many, you are the herdsman of 
the universe; /ndra's gifts are worthy of praise. 
The Heardsman— Sayana takes gopati as “1010 of waters’ or “of 


hymns”; but in VIIL69.4 he seems to adopt the common meaning. He 
would explain the construction of visvasya as if it characterized the go of 


Sopatih. 


७१२८. गृणे तदिन्द्र ते शब॑ उपमं देवतातये। 
यद्धं वृत्रमोज॑सा शचीपते भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑ः।।८॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


See 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
556 Rgveda Samhita 
8. Indra, I laud that might of your which is near at hand to the 
worshipper,—(I laud you) that you slewest Vrtra, O lord of rites 
by your strength; /ndra's gifts are worthy of praisc. 

Sdmaveda, 391 (with upamam). 

To the Worshipper— Or, ‘‘for the sake of the offering.” 

समनेव 1 
७१३९. समनेव वपुष्यत: कृणवन्मानुषा युगा। 
~ | d ॥ 1 
विदे तदिन्द्रश्चेतनमध श्रुतो भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य WU: 

9. As a woman who shows no partiality wins her lovers to her, 
so Indra confers periods of time on mankind; it is Indra who has 
performed that knowledge-giving achievement, therefore he is 
renowned; /ndra's gifts are worthy of praise. 

Who shows no Partiality— — Sayana takes samand as 
samdnamanaska yosit, and explains yuga as ‘‘years, half-years, seasons, 
months," etc.; but the explanation utterly breaks down. Prof. Roth 


explains the first line, **er macht die Menschen zue einem bewundernden 
Zuschauerkries, d. h. zieht aller Augen auf sich.”’ 


७१४०. उज्जातमिन्द्र ते शव उत्त्वामुत्तव क्रतुम्‌। 


भूरिंगो भूरि वावृधुर्मघवन्तव शर्मणि भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑ः।।१०॥। | 

10. Maghavan, rich in cattle, (those who abide) in your 
| happiness have greatly augmented your might when it was bor, ] 
pum. (they have greatly augmented) you, /ndra, and your knowledge; t 
Indra's gifts are worthy of praise. \ 

Greatly Augmented — By their Soma-offerings and hymns. 
७१४१. अहं च त्वं च॑ वृत्रहन्त्सं युज्याव सनिभ्य आ। 
S ond A 

अरातीवा चिंदद्रिवोऽनुं नौ शूर मंसते भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय:।॥॥११॥ i 
11. May I and you, slayer of Vrtra, be close you united until ८ 


wealth is obtained; hero, wielding the thunderbolt, even the 
niggard concedes (that our union gives wealth); Indra’s gifts are 
worthy of praise. 


5 वयमिन्द्र Y असुन्वतो y 
७१४२. सत्यमिद्वा उ d quftrs स्तवाम नानृतम्‌। महा असुन्वतो वधो भूर a 
| ज्योतीषि सुन्वतो भद्रा इन्द्रस्य रातय॑ः।।१२॥ ७ 

| 12. Let us praise that Indra with truth, not with untruth, oe 

| is the destruction of him who offers not but to him who ० 
| abundant Soma-oblations, Indra’s gifts are worthy of praise pim s 
Indra's Gifts are worthy of Praise— Sayana merely P m 2 
१७ 


who offers abundant Soma-oblations (bhari jyotinsi) great is 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


rhhita 


to the 
rites, 


0 E 
0 has 
he is 


is (9 
asons, 

Roth 
den 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 63 2 


conferred by Indra.” I have ventured to connect it with the last clause, as 
Sayana does not explain this recurring burden. A more natural 
explanation would be, “10 him who offers the Soma great are the 
blessings (bhari jyotinsi)." 


[35-83] 
[क्रषि- प्रगाथ काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र, १२ देवगण। 
छन्द- गायत्री, १, ४, ५, ७ अनुष्टुप्‌, १२ Frey ] 
७१४३. स पूर्व्यो महानाँ वेनः क्रतुभिरानजे। 
72 2 0 UN 1 
यस्य द्वारा मनुष्पिता देवेषु धियं आनजे॥1१ ।। 

1. He, (Indra), the chief of those to be honoured, desirous of 
our offerings, approaches; he, the doors of whose favour, the 
sacred rites. Manu, the (universal) father, attained among the gods. 

Sámaveda, 355. The Comm. there gives a different interpretation, as 
it explains the first dnaje by, dtmanam vyaktikaroti and the second by 


dgamayati; and Manuh, which is here left unexplained, is there=jfdrd 
sarvasyq Indrah. 


७१४४. दिवो मानं नोत्संदन्त्सोमंपृष्ठासो अद्रंय:। उकथा ब्रह्म च शंस्या॥२।। 
2. May the stones which press out the Soma never forsake 


Indra, the maker of heaven, nor the praises and hymns which are 
to be uttered. 


७१४५. स विद्वाँ अङ्गिरोभ्य इन्द्रो गा अंवृणोदप॑। सतुषे तद॑स्य EI 
3. He, the wise Indra, discovered the cows to the Angirasas; Í 


glorify that his might. 


i Discovered the Cows— When carried off by the Panis, see 1.6.5; 
TES: 


७१४६, स प्रत्नथां कविवृध इन्द्र वाकस्य॑ वक्ष्णि:। 
शिवो अर्कस्य होमन्यस्मत्रा गनत्वर्से।॥४।। 
4. As in former times, so now too is Indra the blesser of the 


Worshipper and the bearer of him who praises him may he come 
among us auspicious for our protection at the oblation of the Soma. 


2९४७. आद्‌ नु ते अनु क्रतुं स्वाहा वरस्य यज्य॑वः। 
धात्रमर्का अनूषतेन्द्र गोत्रस्य॑ aain lI 
5. Forthwith, Indra, as they offer to Agni the lord of Svahd, the 


ee Successively praise your deeds, for your attainment of 
ealth. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


1 


hii ie २ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


558 Rgveda Samhita 


As they Offer to Agni— Ze., as they make the oblation to you in the 
fire. 
७१४८. इन्द्रे विश्वानि वीर्या कृतानि कर्त्वीनि च। यमर्का अध्वरं विदु:॥६॥ 

6. In that Indra, whom the singers know as the unharming, all 
past and future powers abide. 

७१४९. यत्पाञ्च॑जन्यया विशेन्द्रे घोषा असृक्षत। 
| RENDERE Or || 1 
अस्तृणाद्‌ TEM विपो३ ऽर्यो मान॑स्य स Snell 

7. When praises are addressed to Indra by the men of the five 
classes, he destroys their enemies by his might; he, the lord, is the 
abode of the worshipper’s homage. 

७१५०. इयमु ते अनुष्टतिश्वकृषे तानि पॉस्यां। प्रावश्चक्रस्य वर्तनिम्‌॥८॥ 

8. This praise is your, for you have achieved those exploits; 
you have guarded the road of our chariot-wheel (to the sacrificial 
rite). 

` ० द्दे 
७१५१. अस्य वृष्णो व्योर्दन उर क्रमिष्ट जीवसें। यवं न पश्च आ ददे॥९॥ 

9. When the various sustenance, given by Indra, the showerer, 
is obtained, all men step our with wide strides for (dear) life; they 
receive it as cattle barley. 

c मरुत्व॑तो 
- ७१५२. तददधांना अवस्यवों युष्माभिर्दक्षेपितरः। स्याम॑ मरुत्वतो वृधे॥१०॥ 


10. Presenting our praise, and desiring protection, may We 
with you (O priests) be lords of food, to offer sacrifice to (Indra) 
attended by the Maruts. 


| 
७१५३. बळूत्वियांय धाम्न ऋक्वभिः शूर नोनुमः। जेषमिन्द्र त्वया GAIT 
11. Hero, by our hymns we offer praise to you, who appear at 


: ifi 3 sf as 
the time of sacrifice, and wear auspicious splendour; with you 
our ally may we conquer (our enemies). 


७१५४. अस्मे रुदर मेहना पर्वतासो वृत्रहत्ये भर॑हूतौ सजोर्षा:। 
यः शंसंते स्तुवते धायि पञ्ज इन्द्रज्येष्ठा अस्माँ अवन्तु देवा:॥१२॥ 


12. The Rudras, the showering clouds, and (ndr 2 e 
rejoices with us in the battle-challenge which brings ber 
destruction, and who comes in his might to the reciter and d 
of his praises—may these gods, with Indra at their head, pro 


us. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


arhhitd 


| in the 


:।।६।। 
ng, all 


E five 
, is the 


2 
ploits; 
rificial 


दे।।९ || 


)Werer, 
e; they 


Roll 


1ay we 
(Indra) 


[॥११ il 


pear at 
you as 


॥११॥ 
ग) who 
yrira' s 
] singer 
protect 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 64 559 


Sayana gives an alternative explanation of the first part of this verse, 
“May the showering mountain-like (or “filling.” ‘gratifying’ ) Maruts, the 
sons of Rudra, allies in the battle-challenge which brings Vrira's 
destruction.” This verse also occurs in Yajurveda, XXXIILS0, but 
Mahidhara’s Commentary differs widely from Sayana's. “May the gods 
who shower wealth upon us, the Rudras, and those who have stated 
festivals (parvatah), who are unanimous in the battle-challenge for the 
destruction of Vrtra,—may these gods with Indra at their head protect us 
and him who recites or mutters the praises, or having accumulated wealth, 
offers oblations." The St. Petersburg Dict. translates the clause yah 
samsate stuvate dhayi pajra Indrajyestha asmán avantu deváh, in pretty 
close agreement with Savana's interpretations as followed in the text. 
“Die Götter mit /ndra an der Spitze, der zu Gunsten des Anrufenden and 
Lobenden sich fiest macht (oder ‘feist’ d.h. *kráfgig ist’) mögen uns 
gnádig sein." 


[सूक्त-६४] 
[ऋषि- प्रगाथ काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री। | 
७१५५. Teal मन्दन्तु स्तोमां: कृणुष्व राधो ARA: 
अवं ब्रह्मद्विषो जहि।।१॥। 
1. May our praises exhilarate you; thunderer, make food for us, 


destroy the haters of the Brahmans. 
Sdmaveda, 194, 1354 


ofi < c 
७१५६. पदा पर्णीरराधसो नि बांधस्व महाँ अंसि। नहि त्वा कश्चन प्रति॥२॥ 
2. Crush with your foot the Panis who offer no oblations; you 


are mighty; there is none so ever like unto you. 
Sdmaveda, 1355 


७१५७. त्वमीशिषे सुतानामिन्द्र त्वमसुंतानाम्‌। त्वं राजा जनानाम्‌।1३ i 
3. You, Indra, are the lord of the Soma effused or not effused, 


you are the king of all men. 
Sámaveda, 1356 


७१५८. एहि प्रेहि क्षयों दिव्याई घोर्षञ्चर्षणीनाम्‌। ओभे पृणासि रोदसी 11४1 


4. Come hither, come forth from heaven to our dwelling, 
shouting for the sake of men; you fill both heaven and earth. 

, Come Hither . . . . of Men— Another interpretation is, "Come 
hither, and (having accepted the oblation) proceed gladly, praising the 
Sacrificer (sc. divi for divam). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 


You Fillest both heaven and Earth— Sayana adds, “with 
splendour or with rain." 


७१५९. त्यं चित्पर्वत गिरिं शतव॑न्तं refer वि स्तोतृभ्यो रुरोजिथ।५॥| 
5. Do you hurst, for your worshippers, the gnarled cloud with 
its hundreds and thousands of showers. 
The Gnarled Cloud— Parvata and giri both mean ‘‘cloud’’ as well 
as **mountain"'; but as the former is a yogarüdha pada (i.e., a compound 
term whose parts, when it is analyzed, have the same meaning as the 


whole), it is here taken in its analyzed sense as parvavat, “having knots," 
**gnarled."' 


७१६०. वयमु त्वा दिवां सुते वयं नक्त हवामहे। अस्माकं काममा YOT 
6. We invoke you when the Soma is effused by day, we invoke 
you by night; fulfil our desire. 
७१६१. क्वै स्य वृषभो युवां तुविग्रीवो अनांनत:। ब्रह्मा कस्तं संपर्यति॥०॥ 
7. Where is that ever-youthful showerer, strong-necked and 
bowing to none? What hymner worships you? 
Sámaveda, 142. 
Showerer— So Sayana, but usually vrsabha means ‘‘a bull." For 
tuvigriva, cf. i.187.5. 
| 1 स्वित्सर्वनं I ७ 1 
७१६२. कस्य स्वित्सवनं वृषा जुजुष्वो अव गच्छति। 
इन्द्र क उ स्विदा च॑के।।८।। 
8. To whose offering does the showerer come down pleased? 
Who can praise Indra? 
७१६३. कं d दाना असक्षत वृत्रहन्कं सुवीर्या। 
उक्थे क उ स्विदन्त॑मः।।९।। 


9. In what character, O slayer of Vrtra, do the sacrificial 
offerings honour you, or the brave praises in the hymn? Who t$ 
nearest (in time of battle)? 

Who is nearest in time of Battle— Sayana takes it thus, adding 
yuddhe to ka u svid antamah. But it would have seemed more natural (0 | 
connect these words with the preceding sastre. 


z | i 
७१६४. अयं ते मानुषे जने सोम॑: पूरुषं सूयते। तस्येहि प्र war पिब1॥१०॥ 
Ar pem EXE % 3 I 
10. For you is this Soma effused among men by me of morta । 


race; draw near, hasten, drink it. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Mo. Be न a j 


arhhita 

"with 
TI || 
d with 
as well 
ipound 


as the 
nots,” 


FO 


nvoke 


[IN I 
d and 


Hor 


'ased? 


ificial 
/ho is 


adding 
ural to 


io ll 


nortal 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 65 = 


Among men by me, Etc.— Sayana explains mánuse jane by mayi 
(but cf 1.48.11), and purusu by manusyesu madhye or Purunámasu 
rájasu 


७१६५. अयं d शर्यणावति सुषोमांयामधिं प्रियः। 
आर्जीकीयें मदिन्त॑मः।।११।। 


11. This is your beloved most exhilarating Soma which grows 
in the Saryanavat take by the Susomá river in the Arjikiya country. 

Saryanavat Lake— Cf. VIIL7.29— Sayana seems to have read adhi 
sritah for adhi priyah; he places this lake in the back part of Kuruksetra. 

In the Arjikiya Country— Sayana adds that the Soma thus grows in 
a very distant country (scil. to one in the South of India). According to 
Yaska, Nirukta, 1X.26 Arjikiya is a name of the Vipás; see Professor 
Roth's Lit and Hist. of the Veda, pp.137-140. 
७१६६. तमद्य राध॑से महे चारु मदाय घृष्व॑ये। एहीमिन्द्र द्रवा fud iia i 

12. Come to-day, /ndra, hasten, drink this grateful Soma for 
our great wealth, and for your own foe-crushing exultation. 

Grateful— Sayana explains cáru as cdranasila, **quickly moving"; 
but in IX.61.9 he explains it as kalyána-svarüpa. 

Foe-Rushing Exultations— Sayana takes ghrsvi as sutriindm ghars 
anasila; it more probably means “‘lively,’* ‘‘vehement.’” 


[सूक्त-६५] 

[ऋषि- प्रगाथ काण्व| देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री। ] 
७१६७. यदिन्द्र प्रागपागुदडन्यंग्वा हूयसे fui आ याहि तूर्यमाशुभिं:1॥१॥ 
1. Whether you are invoked by us, the leaders of rites, from the 
cast, the west, the north, or the south, come hither quickly with 


your rapid steeds. 
The first part of this verse occurs in Sámaveda, 279, 1231. 


७१६८. "gl प्रस्नत॑णे दिवो मादयसे स्वर्णरे। यद्वा समुद्रे अन्धस:॥२॥। 

2. Whether you rejoice in the ambrosia-fountain of heaven, or 
in some other heavenward-leading sacrifice (on earth), or in the 
Ocean-like firmament of the waters; 

Ocean-like firmament of the Waters— Andhas properly means 

food according to Sayana it here implies water as the cause of food. 
Yadva samudye andhasas might mean, **or in the Soma-vat 


४१६९. आ त्वां गीर्भिर्महामुरु हुवे ma भोजसे। इन्द्र सोम॑स्य पोतयें11३1 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
562 Rgveda Sarühita 
3. Indra, by my praises I invoke you, great and strong one, to 
drink the Soma, as a bull to eat (his fodder). 
महिमानं हर॑यो ^ 
७१७०. आ त॑ इन्द्र महिमानं हर॑यो देव ते मह:। रथे वहन्तु fasi 

4. Let your steeds, Indra, bearning you in your chariot, bring 
hither your might, (may they bring hither) your splendour, 0 
divine one. 

७१७१. इन्द्र गृणीष उ स्तुषे महाँ उग्र ईशानकृत्‌। एहिं नः सुतं पिब॑॥५॥ 

5. Indra, you are invoked, you are praised, the great, the 
strong, the wiclder of sovereignty; come hither and drink our 
libation. 

७१७२. सुतावन्तस्त्वा वयं प्रय॑स्वन्तो हवामहे। इदं नों बर्हिरासदे॥॥६॥ 

6. Bearing the effused Soma and the sacrificial food, we 
invoke you, Indra, to sit on our sacred grass. | 
७१७३. यच्चिद्धि शश्च॑तामसीन्द्र साधांरणस्त्वम्‌। तं त्वां वयं ह॑वामहे।७॥ 

7. Because you are common to many worshippers, therefore, 


Indra, we invoke you. 
Therefore we Invoke you— Sc. we invoke you before the others. 


७१७४. इदं ते सोम्यं मध्वधुक्षत्रद्रिभिर्नर:। जुषाण इन्द्र तत्पिंब ।।८ ॥। 
gum, 8. The priests have milked for you with their stones this nectar 
of the Soma; drink it, Indra, well pleased. 


७१७५. विश्वा अर्यो विपश्चितोऽतिं ख्यस्तूयमा गहि। 
अस्मे धेहि श्रवों FAL | 
9. Do you, the lord, pass by all other worshippers and come 


quickly to us, and bestow on us abundant food. 
Food. Sravas may also mean ‘‘glery.”’ 


७१७६. दाता मे पृष॑तीनां राजां हिरण्यवीनांम्‌। मा देवा मघवां रिषत्‌॥१०॥ 


10. May (Indra) the king give me cows adorned with gold; p 
gods, let not Maghavan be harmed. 


७१७७. wed पूर्षतीनामधि eri बृहत्पृथु। शुक्रं हिररण्यमा FRIR 


11. Upon a thousand cows I obtain gold, abundant, delightful 
wide-spread, and pure. 

Upon a thousand Cows I obtain Gold— The Scholiast ne 
explain this as if the cows came as it were laden with gold from ndra. 


5 10 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


arhhita 


one, to 


IKII 


, bring 
our, O 


| 

UA 
at, the 
nk our 


yd, we 
| 


[toil 
refore, 


hers. 


; nectar 


] come 


goll 
zold; 0 


a 
ightful, 


ems 19 
dra. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 66 Pre 
La el ET < सुराधंस s iens 1 

७१७८. नपाता दुगहस्य 4 सहस्रेण सुराधसः। Fal देवेष्व॑क्रत।।१२।॥। 

12. Plunged as I am in sorrow, my children, by the favour of 
the gods, obtain food, and are blessed with abundance in a 
thousand cattle. 

Sayana takes napdtah as a genitive singular=araksitasya, and would 
understand the verse, *'destitute of a protector as I am and plunged in 


sorrow, (my dependants) by the favour of the gods,” etc. But it is better 
to take napdtah as a nominative plural. 


[सूक्त ६६] 


[ऋषि- कलि प्रागाथ। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, 
समासतो बृहती), १५ अनुष्टुप्‌। | 


७१७९. तरोभिर्वो विदद्वसुमिन्द्रं सबाधं ऊतयें। 


बृहद्‌ गार्यन्तः सुतसोमे अध्वरे हुवे भरं न कारिणम्‌।॥१ L 
1. Thronging together, (worship) for your protection Indra full 
of might and the revealer of wealth; (worship him), chanting the 
Brhat-Saman at his sacrifice where the Soma is effused; I invoke 
him as (men invoke) a beneficent master of a household. 
Saámaveda, 237, 687. 


७१८०. न यं दुध्रा वरन्ते न स्थिरा मुरो मदे सुशिप्रमन्ध॑सः। 
य आदृत्यां शशमानाय॑ सुन्वते दाता जरित्र SFAR I 


2. He, the handsome-jawed, whom, in the intoxication of the 
Soma, the fierce (demons) withstand not, nor the firm gods, nor 
mortal (men),—who confers glorious wealth on him who 
reverently praises him, offers the Soma, and sings hymns; 


Sdmaveda, 688, but reading madesu sipram for made susipram.— 
Sayana does not explain ddrtya; but the St. Petersburg Dict. derives it 
from dri, ‘to tear,’ in the sense of ‘‘aufthuend d.h.mit offener Hand"; but 
Benfey prefers the usual meaning, and renders it “‘ehrfurchtsvill.~ The 
yah in the printed commentary should probably by placed before data, cf. 
Var. Lect. Adrtya can hardly be taken with madaya, as it is always 
construed with the accusative; but it may apply to Indra, ie., “who with 
favouring regard confers," etc., (cf. 1.103.6). Made also can hardly be 
other than a locative, though Sayana takes it as a dative, and seems IO 
connect it with adrtya. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


CTUM —"——XÀ———— ` 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


564 Rgveda Sarhhitg 


७१८१. यः शक्रो मृक्षो अश्यो यो वा कीजो हिरण्यय॑;। 
स ऊर्वस्य॑ रेजयत्यपांवृतिमिन्द्रो गव्य॑स्य वृत्रहा।।३।। 

3. He Sakra, who is the purifier (of his worshippers), and well- 
skilled in horses, who is wonderful and goldenbodied,—He, Indra, 
the slayer of Vrira, shakes the hiding-place of the numerous herd 
of kine. 

This is a very obscure stanza. Sayana explains mrksah by stotrnàm 
Sodhakah or paricaraniyah, and asvyah as asvakusalah; but he adds 
another explanation, which takes the two words together, as asvah praks 
álitah, **a well-washed horse." Again, he explains kijah as adbhutah, 
"*wonderful," but this seems only based on an etymological guess, kim 
asya katham jdta iti vacanát. The St. Petersburg Dict. takes mrksa as a 
currycomb or some such instrument, ""Striegel, Kamm oder ähnlich,” 
("Indra wird mit einem kratzenden Werkzeuge verglichen, das den 
Verschluss der Heerde aufreisst’’), and kija as some similar instrument. 

Numerous herd of Kine— Here, again, we have an obscure word in 
apdvrti. Sàyana explains it as apavaraniyam, “(० be opened,” referring 
apparently to the cave of the panis (1.6.5). 


७१८२. निखांतं चिद्यः पुंरुसम्भृतं वसूदिद्वप॑ति «mui 
ast सुशिप्रो हर्यश्व इत्‌ करदिन्द्रः क्रत्वा यथा वश॑त्‌।४।। 


— 4. He who verily pours forth to the offerer the buried wealth 
accumulated by many, he, Indra, the thunderer, handsome-jawed, 
borne on bay steeds, does as he pleases, (when propitiated) with 
sacrifice. 


Accumulated by Many— The Sarihitü text reads puru-sambhytam 
as a compound; Sayana in his Comm. divides the two words, “11९ buried 
wealth, plentious and accumulated." He takes the wealth as the 
accumulated stores from former sacrifices, 


When propitiated with Sacrifice— Sayana says that sacrifice 1s 
here the upadhi or necessary preliminary condition. 


७१८३. यद्वावन्थ PREM पुरा चिंच्छूर नृणाम्‌। 
वयं तत्त इन्द्र सं भ॑रामसि यज्ञमुक्थं तुरं वच॑ः।।।। 
5. Hero, praised of many, what of old time you did desire from 


your votaries, that, Indra, we hasten to bring to you,—oblation and 
recited praise. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


hita 


ell- 
lra, 
erd 


idm 
dds 


Jel 
1d 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 66 


565 

Sayana makes the construction rather complicated by taking chid ‘‘as 
(upamarthe, Nirukta, 1.4), “as of old time (you received'st) from your 
votaries, so now we hasten to bring you what you did desire.” 


७१८४. सचा सोमेषु पुरुहूत वज्रिवो मदाय द्युक्ष सोमपा:। 
त्वमिद्धि ब्रह्मकृते काम्यं वसु देष्ठः सुन्वते dii 
6. Bearer of the thunderbolt, invoked of many, radiant, drinker 
of the Soma, be present at our libations for your exhilaration; for 


you are an abundant giver of desirable wealth to him who utters 
your praises and effuses the 3 


` ` 5पीपेमेह 1 
७१८५. वयमेनमिदा ह्योऽपीपेमेह वज्जिण॑म्‌। 
| 1 . 4 ¦ 
तस्मा उ अद्य समना सुत भरा नून भूषत JAIN 
7. To-day and yesterday we have here refreshed him, the 
thunderer; bring to him to-day our libation effused for (success in) 
battle; let him now hasten hither on hearing our praise. 
For success in Battle— Saámaveda, 272, 1691: but reading savane 
for samand. Sayana takes the latter word as meaning “‘for battle,” but it 


is properly an adverb. The St. Petersb. Dict. translates it here, *‘in gleicher 
Weise.” 
[| 1 वयुनेंषु 
७१८६. वृकश्चिदस्य वारण उरामथिरा वयुनेषु भूषति। 
सेमं ~ 1. 1 
सेमं नः स्तोमं जुजुषाण आ गहीन्द्र प्र चित्रयां धिया॥८ 11 
8. The obstructing robber, the destroyer of travelling enemies, 
is obedient to him in his ways; hasten, Indra, (drawn) by our 
gorgeous rite, welcoming this our hymn. 
Sdmaveda, 1692. > 
The destroyer of Tavelling Enemies— This is Sayana's 
interpretation of vrkas cid várana urdmathih (thus connecting the last 
Word with the etymological root ur, 10 807"); but Yaska (Nirukta, v2 
takes the words literally, **the obstructing wolf, destroying the sheep, 
Which is far preferable. 


> Vi 5 LEM hi 
In his ways— Vayunesu may also mean prajiidnesu, “in his 
counsels.” 


3१८७. कदू न्वशस्याकृतमिन्द्रस्यास्ति पौँस्यम्‌। 
केनो जु कं श्रोमतेन न शुश्रुवे जनुषः परि queni 
9. What act of might is there, unperformed by Indra? Who has 


not heard of his famous (heroism)? He, the slayer of Frtra, (is 
renowned) from his birth. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 
| | तविषी 1 
७१८८. कदू महीरधृष्टा अस्य तविषीः कदु qued अस्तृतम्‌। 
I बेकनाटीँ अहर्दृशं | 
इन्द्रो विश्वान्‌ बेक SGU उत क्रत्वा पर्णीरभि।।१०॥ 

10. When were his mighty forces ever languid? When was 
aught undestroyed before the slayer of Vrtra? Indra by his energy 
overpowers all the huckstering usurers who see only this world’s 
days. 

Huckstering Usurers— Cf Nirukta, VI.26. The text may also be 
interpreted **usurers and hucksters’’. Ahardrsah, lit. **seeing the day,” is 
explained as seeing only the light of this world and dwelling in deep 


darkness after death. The Schol refers to Manu, VIII.102, for a censure on 
usurers and traders. 


७१८९. वयं घां ते अपूर्व्यन्द्र ब्रह्मांणि queni 
पुरूतमांसः पुरुहूत वज्रिवो भृतिं न प्र भ॑रामसि।।११॥। 
11. Indra, slayer of Vrtra, invoked of many, we, your many 
wershippers, offer new hymns to you, thunderer, as your wages. 
As your Wages— Siyana remarks that the use of wages as an 


illustration is not inappropriate, as both the hymns and the wages are 
given by a definite rule (niyamena). 


७१९०. पूर्वीश्चिद्धि त्वे तुविकूर्मित्राशसो हव॑न्त इन्द्रोतर्य:। 
— तिरश्चिदर्यः सवना व॑सो गहि शविष्ठ श्रुधि मे हवम्‌॥१२॥ 
12. Indra, doer of many great deeds, (other worshippers invoke 
the manifold hopes and protections which abide in you; but 


rejecting the enemy’s oblations, come to us bestower of dwellings; 
O mightiest, hear my appeal. 


७१९१. वयं घां ते त्वे इद्विन्द्र विप्रा अपिं ष्मसि। 
नहि त्वदन्यः पुरुहूत कश्चन मर्घवन्नस्ति मर्डिता॥१३।। 
13. Indra, we are your, therefore We, your Worshippers, depend 


on you; other than you, Maghavan, invoked of many, there is 10 
giver of happiness. 


७१९२. त्वं नों अस्या अमतेरुत क्रुधोड भिशस्तेरव॑ स्पृधि। 
त्वं न॑ कता तव॑ चित्रयां धिया शिक्षां शचिष्ठ गातुवित्‌॥१४।। 


: fi : - ojve us 

14. Deliver us from this poverty, hunger, and calumny; 8170 E 
(our desire) by your protection and wondrous working; 
mightiest, you know the right way. 


566 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—————————— SN 
ताजा 
Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


lita 2 
Mandala 8, Sukta 67 i 


O Mightiest— Sayana explains sacistha in 1V.20.9, as atisayena 
prájna, and in IV.43.3, saktimattara. 


७१९३. सोम xà: सुतो अस्तु कलयो मा बिंभीतन। 


vas 
By अपेदेष ध्वस्माय॑ति स्वयं घैषो अरपायति।।१५।। | 
S ६०62 NES EU l 
15. Let your effused Soma juice be only (for Indra); O sons of । 
be Kali, fear not; that malignant (spirit) departs, of his own accord he | 
MIS departs. 
eep 
: 01) [सूक्त- & ७] 
[क्रषि- मत्स्य साम्मद अथवा मैत्रावरुणि मान्य i अनेक मत्स्य 
जालनद्ध। देवता- आदित्यगण। छन्द- गायत्री] ] 
VII 7.8 Sammada— See Prof. Aufrecht in his edition of the Reveda, 
ny p.477, (but cf. Prof. Müller's transl., Pref. p. IXIV). 
७१९४. त्यात्रु क्षत्रियाँ अर्व आदित्यान्यांचिषामहे। सुमृव्ठीकाँ अभिष्टये।॥१।॥। 
an =e = wie s 
are 1. We solicit for protection those Ksatriyas, the Adityas who 
bless (their votaries) abundantly to the attainment of their desires. 
७१९५. मित्रो नो अत्यंहतिं वरुण: पर्षदर्यमा। आदित्यासो यथां विदु:॥२॥ 
2. May the Adityas, Mitra, Varuna, and Aryaman, bear us 
e across our distress, as they know it well. 
OK तेषां 5 ` त्यानामरङकृते 
but ७१९६. तेषां हि चित्रमुकथ्यंरै वरूंथमस्ति दाशुषें। आदित्यानामरङ्कृते॥३॥ 
85) 3. To those Adityas belongs wonderful wealth, worthy of all 
praise, (laid up) for the offerer of oblations and the sacrificer. 
७१९७. महिं वो महतामवो shor मित्रार्यमन्‌। अवांस्या वृणीमहे॥४॥। 
4. You are great, Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman, and great is 
and your protection; your protections we implore. 
no ७१९८. जीवात्रो अभि धेतनादित्यासः पुरा हर्थात्‌। कद्ध स्थ हवनश्रुत:।५॥ 
5. Adityas, hasten to us are our death, while we are yet alive; 
Where are you, hearers of prayer? 
Where are You— Sayana takes kat and ke, “who?” but the Nirukta 
"- (५.27) explains it as kva. 
0 ७१९९. ag: श्रान्ताय॑ सुन्वते वरूथमस्ति यच्छर्दिः। 
REI 
तेना नो अधिं वोचत।॥६॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


P 


—————— "NE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


568 Rgveda Samhita 


6. Whatever wealth, whatever dwelling is yours (to give) to the 
wearied offerer of libations,—with these speak to us a kindly 
answer. 

७२००. अस्ति देवा अंहोरुवस्ति रत्नमनांगस:। आदित्या अद्धुतैनस:।।७॥ 

7. Great, O deities, is (the guilt) of the sinner, but to the sinless 
is happiness; Adityas, you are void of sin. 

üd सिषेदयं 
७२०१. मा नः सेतु: सिषेदयं महे वृणक्तु नस्परिँ। इन्द्र इद्धि श्रुतो वशी।।८॥। 

8. Let not the snare bind us; may Indra, the renowned, the 
subduer of all, deliver us for a glorious act. 

७२०२. मा नों मृचा रिपूणां वूंजिनानांमविष्यवः। देवां अभि प्र HR 


9. O deities, ready to protect, mole us not with the destructive 
net of our wicked enemies. 

Sayana gives another interpretation of this verse, taking abhipramrks 
ata from mrj instead of mrs. ‘‘Let us not (be tormented) by the destructive 
net of our enemies, deliver us from it.” 


७२०३. उत त्वामंदिते मह्यहं देव्युप ब्रुवे। सुमृळीकामभि्ये।।१०।। 
10. I address you, who give abundant delight, the great 
goddess Aditi, for the attainment of my desire. 
pee ७२०४. पर्षि दीने गंभीर आँ उग्रपुत्रे जिघाँसत:। 
मार्किस्तोकस्य॑ नो रिषत्‌।।११।। 
11. You protect on every side; let not (the net) of the destroyer 
hurt our children, in this shallow water full of mighty offspring. 
Full of mighty Offspring— Sayana takes ugraputre as a loc. 
agreeing with ‘‘water’’; the St. Petersburg Dict. as a voc. agreeing with 
Aditi, **O mother of mighty children.” 
stad 
७२०५. अनेहो नं उरुव्रज उरूचि वि प्रसर्तवे। कृधि तोकाय॑ जीवसे॥१२॥ 
12. Wide-traversing, far-reaching goddess, put forth your 
power to come to us, innocent ones, that our children my live. 
| 
७२०६. ये मूर्धानः क्षितीनामव॑ब्धासः स्वरंशसः। व्रता रक्ष॑न्ते AR: IRA 
13. You who are the heads of men, unharming, and of self- 
tr sustained glory, who, benevolent ones, protect our rites. 
ad बद्धमिवादिते 
७२०७. ते न॑ आस्नो वृकांणामादित्यासो मुमोच॑त। स्तेनं बद्धमिंवादिते॥१४॥ 
ited: 14. Adityas, deliver us from the jaws of the destroyers like 8 
bound thief; O Aditi, (deliver us). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


uită Mandala 8, Sūkta 67 25 
the ७२०८. अपो षु ण॑ इयं शरुरादित्या अप॑ दुर्मतिः । अस्मदेत्वजध्नुषी11१५॥ 
dly 5 SHE - zi 


15. Adityas, let this net, let the malevolent design turn away 
from us innocuous. 


७२०९. शश्वद्धि d: सुदानव आदित्या कतिभिर्वयम्‌। 


CSS Cpe | भुज्महें EN] 
पुरा नून बुभुज्मह 8I 
AT 16. Bounteous Adityas, by your protections we have 
: continually possessed enjoyments from of old. 
the 


Ne Is प्रतियर्न्त चिदेन॑स I ` siad 

७२१०. शश्चन्तं हि प्रचेतस: प्रति :। देवां: कृणुथ Ril 

17. Wise deities, keep away from us, that we may live, the 
à many doers of sin who come against us. 
Ive This verse might be better rendered, **O wise deities, you help to life 
many a one who turns from sin." 

` ० 1 यन्मुमोचति 
७२११. तत्सु नो नव्यं सन्य॑स आदित्या | 
बन्धाद्‌ बद्धमिंवादिते।।१८।। 

18. Adityas and Aditi, let that which releases us as a prisoner 
eat from his bond, be ever the object of our praise and worship. 
That which releases Us— According to Sayana this may be either 


the net or your favour. In the form case the net itself is supposed by the 
favour of the gods to become as it were the instrument of deliverance. 


७२१२. नास्मार्कमस्ति तत्तर॒ आदित्यासो अतिष्कदें। 


yer यूयमस्मभ्यं मृळत।१९।। 
ठह Jr Not to us is there strength enough to burst from this (net); 
ith O Adityas, do you grant us your favour. 
७२१३. मा नों हेतिर्विवस्वत आदित्याः कृत्रिमा शरू:। 
d पुरा नु जरसों seq Ro l 
Ur 20. Let not this weapon of Vivasvat, this net made with hands, 


Adityas, destroy us before old age. 
H Vivasvat— Ie., Yama, properly the son of Vivasvat. : 
Before old Age—  Sayana says 'purd' purve ‘nu’ idanim, 


|f- Sarvadetyarthah, ‘jarasah’ idanim jirnan, “let it not destroy us, now and 
ofold infirm”; but this seems needlessly artificial. 
संहितम्‌ Lu 
al ७२१४. वि षु द्वेषो व्यंहतिमादित्यासो वि 
२3 | विष्वग्वि वृहता रप॑: 11२१ tt 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


B O o ë 


——— EGG 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
570 Rgveda Sarhhita 


21. Adityas, utterly destroy our enemies, destroy wickedness 
५ 
destroy the closely drawn net, destroy evil everywhere. 


[सूक्त-६८] | 


ऋषि- प्रियमेध आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र , १४-१९ कक्ष अश्वमेध। 
छन्द- गायत्री, १,४,७,१०॥ | 
७२१५. आ त्वा रथं यथोतये सुम्नाय॑ वर्तयामसि। | 
तुविकूर्मिमृतीषहमिन्द्र शविष्ठ सत्पते ।॥१ 11 | 
l Most powerful Indra; protector of the good, we bring you 
here, rich in achievements and subduer of enemies, as a car for our 


protection and weal. ) 
Sámaveda, 354, 1771 (with a slight variation). \ 


७२१६. तुविशुष्म तुविक्रतो शचीवो विश्व॑या मते। आ पप्राथ महित्वना।।२॥ 


2 Great in power, rich in deeds, mighty one, adorable, you 
have filled (all things) with your universal majesty. 

Sdmaveda, 1772. 

Adorable— Mate is left unexplained by Sayana, unless pujaniya, 
‘adorable,’ is its interpretation; he explains it as stotavya in VIII.18.7. The 
St. Petersburg Dict. reads visvayamati as an epithet of Indra, ‘[der überall 
seine Gedanken hat.”’ ) 


ae ७२१७. यस्य॑ ते महिना महः UR ज्मायन्तमीयतु:। \ 
हस्ता वज्रं हिरण्यय॑म्‌।।३।। 


3. You mighty one, whose hands in your might grasp the all- 

pervading golden thunderbolt. r 
Samaveda, 1773. \ 
The All-Pervading— Jmdyantam Sayana explains as prthivyam 

sarvato vyápnuvantam, the St. Petersburg Dict. as **bahnbrechend."' 


| ७२१८. विश्वान॑रस्य वस्पतिमनानतस्य शव॑सः। t 
| एवैश्च चर्षणीनामूती हुवे रथानाम्‌॥४।॥ 
| 4. I invoke (Indra) the lord of that might which subdues all a 


enemies and bows to none,—(I invoke him) followed by yous 
onsets as his soldiers and (surrounded) by the protection of yo"! 
chariots (O Maruts). \ 
| Samaveda, 364. The construction of the latter part is obscure- S 

1 

in the 


gives another interpretation, which takes vah as applying to the ga 
instead of the Maruts, “I invoke him to come with his protections 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OC __ या 


lhità 


1088, 


you 
‘our 


Is I 
you 


niya, 
The 
verall 


; all- 


yyam 


S all 
your 
your 


iyana 
ficers 
n the 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sukta 68 571 
onsets of your soldiers and chariots.” This partly agrees with Benfey, 
“Euren Gebieter allherrschender and unbeugsamer Gewalt ruf ich durch 
Lieder, dass or schützt die Manschen und die Wagen.” 

(ies Ties स्वंमीळहेषु E edi 1 जते 
७२१९. अभिष्टये सदावृधं स्व॑मीळहेषु यं R: नाना हवन्त FANINI 
5. (I invoke him) to come to our help, whose might ever waxes 
more and more,—to whom men appeal for aid in various ways in 
battles. 
परो्मात्रमृचीषममिन्द्रमुग्र 1 al po. ध॑सम्‌ न 5 1 
७२२०. मामन्द्रमुग्र सुराधसम्‌। S चिद्वसूनाम्‌! e tI 
6. (I invoke) /ndra the unlimited, worthy cf praise, the 
mighty, possessing exce!lent wealth, the lord of treasures (for his 
votaries). 
तंतमिद्रा LEN e चोदामि पीतयें 
७२२१. aa मह इन्द्र॑ चोद | 
पूर्व्यामनुष्टतिमीशें F aN कृष्टीनां F 
य: पूर्व्यामनुष्ट्तिमीशे कृष्टीनां नृतु:11911 
7. To him, to him, Indra, do I direct my praise, that he may 
quaff the Soma to may great gain,—to him, the bringer of success, 
Who rules over the praises of the offerers at the opening of the 
sacrifice. 


At the opening of the sacrifice— Sáyana explains pürvyám as 
yajria-mukhasthám, but it might be taken in its usual meaning “ancient . 


७२२२. न यस्य॑ ते शवसान सख्यमानंश मर्त्यः। 


नकिः शवासि ते नशत्‌।।८॥ 


BS mighty one, whose friendship no mortal reaches, whose 
Might no one attains. 


७२२३. त्वोतासस्त्वा युजाप्सु सूर्ये महद्धनम्‌। जयेम पृत्सु व॑ज्रिवः।९। 


9. Protected by you, O thunderer, with you as our ally, may we 
win great wealth in battles, that we may bathe in the water - 
behold the sun. 


Bathe in the water and behold the Sun— These words apsu surye 
“re explained by Sayana, ‘‘that we may perform our accustomed bathings 


in 
S Water, and, when the sun is risen, may set about our accustomed 
Tug 


5२२४. तं त्वां यज्ञेभिरीमहे तं गीर्भिगिर्वणस्तम। 
इन्द्र यथां चिदाविंथ वाजेषु पुरुमाय्य॑म्‌।।१०॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
572 Rgveda Samhita 
10. We address you with sacrificial gifts, (we address you with 
songs, O Indra most worthy of song, as you have protected me, the 
offerer of many praises, in battles. 


The Offerer of Many Praises— Purumdyyam, lit. "possessing 
much wisdom.”’ The St. Petersburg Dict. takes it as a proper name. 


७२२५. यस्य॑ ते स्वादु सख्यं स्वाद्वी प्रणीतिरद्रिव:। यज्ञों वितन्तसाय्यः॥॥११। 
11. You, the thunderer, whose friendship is sweet SEE too is 
your liberality, and your sacrifice pre-eminently to be performed. 
७२२६. उरु णंस्तन्वे$ तन॑ उर क्षयाय नस्कृधि। 
उरु णो यन्धि जीवसें1॥१२॥ 
12. Give ample (wealth) to our own selves, give ample 


(wealth) to our children, give ample (wealth) to our dwelling, grant 
us (our desire) that we may live. 

To our own Selves— Sayana here explains tanve tane as dimajdya 
tat-putraya; but in VI.46.12 and VII.104.10 he explains it as given in the 
translation. 

७ 1 : 1 छि 1 | देववीतिं 
७२२७. उरु नृभ्य॑ उरुं गव॑ उरुं रथाय पन्थाम्‌। देववीतिं मनामहे।।१३॥ 


13. We solicit a spacious (road) for our servants, a spacious 


(road) for our cattle, a spacious road for our chariot, and (an \ 
१ abundant) sacrifice. 
— i i 
७२२८. उप॑ मा षड्‌ द्वाद्वा नरः सोम॑स्य हष्यौ। तिष्टॅन्ति स्वादुरात्य:॥१४॥ 

14. Six princes come to me in pairs, bearing pleasant gifts, in t 

the exhilaration of the Soma. ; 

ऋणज़ाविन्द्रोत रोहिता 

७२२९. ऋज़ाविन्द्रोत आ दंदे हरी ऋक्ष॑स्य सूनविं। आश्वमेधस्य रोहिंता॥१५। 
15. I receive two straight-going steeds from Jndrota, tWo day t 

from the son of Rksa, two roan from the son of Asvamedha. 2 i 
Indrota, Etc.— These prices with their respective fathers are the six 

of V.14. The sons of Rksa and Asvamedha had originally commenced à 

sacrifice, but Indrota and his father Atithigva came to see it and dies \ 

their gifts. The sons alone are mentioned; the son is the father’s seco” 

self, pitr-putrayor abhedat. 

ke मीशु quia 
७२३०. सुरथाँ आतिथिग्वे स्वभाशूँराक्ष। आश्वमेधे STET f 
zd bi eae m pr जो n 3 

16. (I receive) two steeds with excellent chariots from the a i 

of Atithigva, two with excellent reins from the son of (१54, 

with excellent ornaments from the son of Asvamedha. : 


७२३१. षढश्चाँ आतिथिग्व इंन्द्रोते वधूम॑तः। सचां पूतक्रती सनम्‌॥१०।' 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar " 


amhita 


u with 
ne, the 


sessing 


IRI 


too is 
med. 


ample 
', grant 


majdya 
n in the 


३।। 
yacious 
nd (an 


1g% 


rifts, in 


T1141 
wo day 
> the six 
nced the 


d added 
; second 


the son 
sa, two 


gull 


N.S TREES 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 69 $5 


17. I have received together (with my other gifts) six horses 
with their mares from the pious Indrota, the son of Atithigva. 

Together— Scaha, ie. together with the gifis of Rksa and 
Asvamedha. The Schol. remarks that the use of this word implies that 
Indrota 5 gift is incidental and no part of the original sacrifice. 


मद हर चेतदवृर्षण्वत्यन्त्रज्रेष्वरुषी [EG Sen A 
७२३२. Ud चेतद्वृषण्वत्यन्तर्क्र | स्वभीशुः कर्शावती॥॥१८।। 

18. Among these straight-going steeds is numbered a mature 
roan mare with excellent reins and whip. 

With excellent reins and whip— Sayana takes kasdvati as drptd, 
**proud,"' ‘‘spirited.”” 

is धवो ` मर्त्य अवद्यमधि 

७२३३. न युष्मे वाजबन्धवो निनित्सुश्चन मर्त्यः। अवद्यमधिं दीधरत्‌।।१९।। 

19. O princes, givers of food, even the lover of calumny has 
thrown no censure on you. 


[3-8 9] 


[ऋषि- प्रियमेध आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र, ११ पूर्वर््धि- विश्वेदेवा, ११ 
उत्तराद्ध एवं १२ — वरुण। छन्द- अनुष्टुप्‌, २ उष्णिक्‌, ४-६ गायत्री, ११, 
१६ पंक्ति, १७, १८ बृहती। | 

I मन्दद्दीरायेन्दवे ` 
७२३४. प्रप्र वख्िष्ठुभमिर्ष मन्दद्दीरायेन्दवे। 
धिया वो मेधसांतये पुरन्ध्या विवासति॥1१ tt 
1. Present your sacrificial food with a three-fold song of praise 
to Indu, gladdener of heroes; he will bless you in your religious 
rites to the accomplishment of your sacrifice. 
Samaveda, 360 (with vandad-viraya for mandadviraya). Sayana here 


takes purandhya as bahuprajfiaya, but in VII. 97.9 he took purandhih as 
bahvir stutih. 

Indu— The Schol. explains this as Indra, **he who rules (ind) or 
besprinkles (und) with rain." Tristubham rather means here a song of 
Praise generally. 


७२३५. नदं व ओदतीनां नदं योयुवतीनाम्‌। 

पतिं वो mega धेनूनामिंषुध्यसि 11२1 
1 2. (Invoke) for yourselves the author of the dawns, (I invoke) 
-णि you the roarer of the rivers; (I invoke) for you the lord of the 
inviolable ones; (O sacrificer), you desire kine. 
Samaveda, 1512. Benfey translates it “एट Morgenróthen Singer, 


Ser der immer nahenden, den Herm der unverletzbaren, der Küh', 
€gehrest du für euch.” 


Sàn 
b 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
374 Rgveda Sarühitg 
The Author of the Dawns—Nada is here explained utpddaka; Indra 
is called the author of the dawns as being identified with the sun, as one 
of the twelve Adityas. 

The Inviolable ones— Aghnydnam, sc. cows. 

७२३६. ता अस्य सूद॑दोहसः सोमं श्रीणन्ति पृश्न॑यः। 
जन्म॑न्देवानां विशख्रिष्वा रोचने दिवः।।३॥ 

3. These white kine, giving milk wells, mix the Soma for him 
at the three oblations, rising (in consequence to the brilliant home 
of the sun, the birthplace of the gods). 

This verse occurs in the White Yajurveda, XII.55, and is there thus 
explained by Mahidhara. *‘These various in the text) which makes both 
these words equally mean pravrddha, **when the bright fertilizing rivers 
(or the white milch cows) flow with full waters (or with distended 
udders), then take, etc." In VL48.11 he explains dhenum srjadhvam 
anapasphurám as ‘release the cow unobstructed,’’ anapabádhaniyam as 
“release the cow unobstructed,” anapabüdhaniyam; and in IV.42.10, tam 
dhenum dhattam anapasphurantim; as ‘‘grant us that cow (riches) 
uninjured,” anavahinsitám. But Mahidhara in his comm. on this last 
verse in the White Yajurveda, VII.10, explains anapasphurantim as “nol 
going to another," ie, ''not running away," which will give a good 
sense in all the passages (cf. Prof. Goldstücker's Dict.). Similarly, the St 
Petersburg Dict. translates anapaurah as ‘‘not struggling against being 

jum. milked,” and apasphurám as ‘‘bursting forth," i.e., ‘‘when the while 


milch cows come without starting away, then take the gushing Soma for 
Indra to drink.” 


७२३७. अभि प्र गोप॑तिं गिरेन्द्रमर्च यथां विदे। सूनुं सत्यस्य सत्पतिम्‌।|४॥ 


4. Worship with your praise, as he himself knows —that lord 


of kine, Indra, the son of Satya, the protector of the good 
Satya=truth, Yajña 


७२३८. आ हर॑यः ससूज़िरे$रुषीरधिं बर्हिषि। यत्राभि सन्नवामहे | l 
t 
5. Let the brilliant bay (horses) drop him down on the cu 
grass, where we will hymn his praise 


७२३९. इन्द्राय गाव॑ आशिरं दुदुहे वज़िणे मधुं। यत्सीमुपहुरे विदत्‌॥६॥ 
4, 
6. The cows have milked the intoxicating draught for Indi 
the thunderer, when he finds it near him. 
७२४०. उद्यद्‌ ब्रध्नस्य favi गृहमिन्द्रश्च गन्वहि। 


मध्व॑ः पीत्वा संचेवहि त्रिः सप्त सख्यु: RINII 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Samhita 


a; Indra 
1, as one 


for him 
nt home 


106 thus 
kes both 
ng rivers 
listended 
jadhvam 
niyám as 
2.10, tam 

(riches) 
this last 
| as “101 
> a good 
y, the St. 
151 being 
he white 
Soma for 


mre UI 


hat lord 


Ul 
the cut 


॥६॥ 
r Indras 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 69 E 


7. When /ndra, and I ascend to our home, the world of the 
sun, then, having drunk the sweet (Soma), let us be united in the 
twenty-first sphere of the (universal) friend. 


७२४१. अर्चत प्रार्चत प्रियमेधासो अर्चत। 
अर्चन्तु पुत्रका उत पुरं न धृष्ण्वर्चत 11८1 
8. Worship Jndra, worship him pre-eminently, worship him, 


you of the family of Priyamedha; let your sons also worship him; 
worship him as a strong city. 


७२४२. अर्व स्वराति गर्गरो गोधा परि सनिष्वणत्‌। 
पिङ्गा परि चनिष्कददिन्द्राय ब्रहमोद्य॑तम्‌॥९।। 


9. The drum utters its sound, the leathern guard twangs, the 
tawny bowstring leaps to and fro; let the hymn be raised to Indra. 


७२४३. आ यत्पतन्त्येन्यःः सुदुघा अन॑पस्फुर:। 
अपस्फुरं गृभायत सोममिन्द्राय पात॑वे।।१०॥। 
10. When the bright fertilizing rivers flow with diminished 
waters, then take the overflowing Soma for Indra to drink. 


७२४४. अपादिन्द्रो अपांदगिनर्विश्चे देवा अमत्सत। 
Ej jos i संशि श्रीरिव 
वरुण इदिह क्ष॑यत्तमापों अभ्यनूषत वत्सं संशिश्वरीरिव।।११।। 

ll. Indra drank (the Soma), Agni drank it, the Visve Devas 
were gladdened; let Varuna fix his dwelling here, the waters have 
praised him as cows (low) meeting their calves. ; 

; The Waters— Another interpretation of apah is “hymns,” from a 
orced derivation, dpana-silah. 
| 
७२४५. सुदेवो असि वरुण यस्य॑ ते सप्त सिन्थव:। 
| e I3 | 
अनुक्षरन्ति काकुदं सूर्म्यं सुषिरामिंव॥१२।। 

12. You are a glorious god, Varuna, across whose palate the 
Seven rivers keep pouring as a fair-flowing (stream) into an abyss. 

Across whose palate the seyen Rivers, Etc.— The last words 
ST myam susiram iya are left unexplained in the Comm; I have followed 
Yaska’s interpretation, Nirukta, v.27. Sayana has given a current 
metaphorical explanation of them in his Introd. vol. I, p.38, where they 
are quoted as applied by the grammarians to enforce the need of studying 
Srammar, the seven rivers being taken to mean the seven declensional 


affixes (of Ballantyne’s Mahabhasya, p.34, where another explanation is 
Offered, "across whose palate the seven rivers keep flowing a (Be 


SES  $ In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


PS Rgveda Sarhhita 


penetrates and purifies) a beautiful perforated iron image’). Sayana 
however, here takes the seven rivers as the Ganges, ctc., and Varuna's 
palate as the ocean. Prof. Roth takes sürmyam susiram as fem. acc, 

` agreeing with kakudam, **welchem die seiben Flüsse zustromen, wie in 
einen schaumendan hohlen Schlund.” 


७२४६. यो व्यतीँरफाणयत्‌ सुयुक्ताँ उप दाशुोें। 
तक्वो नेता तदिद्वपुरुपमा यो अमुच्यत।।१३ 11 


13. He who directs towards the worshipper his well-yoked 
prancing steeds,—he, (Indra), the swift bearer of blessing, 
(produces) rain,—he, who being comparable only to himself is 
delivered (from all his enemies). 

Comparable only to Himself— Sayana obscurely interprets upamá 
as upamána-bhüta. The St. Petersburg Dict. takes it as an adverb, “in 
close proximity.”’ 


अतीदु ओहत | 
७२४७. अतीदु शक्र ओहत इन्द्रो विश्वा अति द्विष:। 
भिनत्कनीन ओदनं पच्यमानं परो गिरा।।१४।। 

14. Sakra verily overpowers; Indra overpowers all his 
enemies; he, worthy of love, abiding beyond, cleaves the cloud 
smitten by his thunder-voice. 

The Cloud Smitten— The words odanam pacyaménam would 

ame usually mean ‘‘rice when cooked’’; but Sayana takes odana as ‘‘a cloud 


on Yaska’s authority (Naigh., 1.10), and pacyamana as tadyamana, but ५ 
the next verse. 


७२४८. अर्भको न कुंमारकोऽधिं RBA रथ॑म्‌। 
स पक्षन्महिषं मृगं पित्रे मात्रे विभुक्रतुंम्‌।।१५॥। 

15. (Indra), like a young boy, has mounted his splendid 
chariot; he makes ready for his father and mother the great deer- 
like many-functioned cloud. र | 

He makes Ready— Here Sayana seems to take pac in ils usua 
signification, “10 cook, to mature”; he explains it as vrstyabhimukho 
karoti, “Indra makes the cloud ready for raining.” Mrga, ** deer-like, 
explains as **wandering hither and thither like a deer,” or “‘to be 500 
by all.” Perhaps we might translate the line as a ude metaphor 9 


PEN ffalo 
primeval times, **he roasts (with his thunderbolt) the wild mighty bu 
(the cloud) for his father and mother." 


७२४९. आ तू सुशिप्र दम्पते रथं तिष्ठा हिरण्ययम्‌। 
अधं gei संचेवहि सहस्रपादमरुषं स्वस्तगा्मनेहस॑म्‌।।१६।। 


है. — X 3 In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar | 


eee TSS ANTI 


Sarhhita 
Sayana, 
aruna’s 
m. acc, 
, Wie in 


-yoked 
FO 
self is 


 upamá 
rb, “in 


ill his 
: cloud 


would 
cloud” 
, but of. 


lendid 
t deer- 


s usual 
nukham 
ke," he 
‘sought 
shor 9 

buffalo 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 70 के 


16. Handsome-jawed (Indra), householder, mount your golden 
chariot; then let us meet mounted together on that bright thousand- 
footed brilliant auspiciously moving sinless (car). 


० afte I I 
७२५०. d घेमित्था न॑मस्विन उप स्वराजमासते। 
P A 
अर्थ चिदस्य सुधितं यदेत॑व आवर्तयन्ति दावनें॥१७॥ 

17. (The priests), presenting praise, thus worship that self- 
resplendent (/ndra); they obtain his well-stored wealth, when (his 
horses) bring him on his way for the offering. 

His horses— Or ‘their praises.”” 

७२५१. अनुं प्रलस्यौर्कसः प्रियमेधास एषाम्‌। 
पूर्वामनु प्रयति वृक्तबर्हिषो हितप्रयस आशत।।१८॥ 

18. The Priyamedhas have reached the ancient dwelling place 
of these deities, having strewed the sacred grass and placed their 
oblations after the manner of a pre-eminent offering. 

After the Manner of a Pre-Eminent Offering— Piirvdm anu 
prayatim; Sayana explains pürva by mukhya, “principal,” and anu by 
laksikrtya. But it might mean, ‘after the manner of former offerings,” cf. 
1.126.5. 


[355-80] 


[ऋषि- पुरुहन्मा आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- बृहती, १९६ प्रगाथ 
(विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती), १३ उष्णिक्‌, १४ अनुष्टुप्‌, १५ पुर 
उष्णिक्‌। | 

७२५२. यो राजां चर्षणीनां याता रथेभिरश्रिंगु:। 

विश्वासां तरुता पृतनानां ज्येष्ठो यो वृत्रहा TÀIR 
. 1. I praise that Indra who is the lord of men, who proceeds 
irresistible in his chariots, the breaker-through of all armies, the 
pre-eminent one, the slayer of Vrtra. 


Sdmaveda,273, 933. Sayana explains tarutd by tarakah, which may 
mean *'deliverer"'; in VIII.1.21 he explained it by geta, “conwneror. 


७२५३. ex त शुम्भ पुरुहन्मन्नवंसे यस्य दविता AARI 
हस्ताय aa: प्रतिं धायि दर्शतो महो दिवे न ूर्यः।२॥ 


2. Puruhanman, honour that Indra for your protection, for in 
holds in his hand (to 


your upholder there is a two-fold might; he t 
e his enemies) the glorious thunderbolt great as the sun फा 
eaven. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
578 Rgveda 5111115 
Sámaveda, 934, but with mahan devah for maho dive. 
A two-fold might— To smite your enemies and to favour your 
friends. 
fasi ig 1 1 धम्‌ 
७२५४. नकिष्टं कर्मणा नशद्यश्चकार सदावृधम्‌। 
? andy || dé 5 धृष्ण्वोजसम्‌ 
इन्द्रं न यसैर्विश्चगूर्तमृभ्वसम IRI 
3. None can touch him by his deeds, who has made Indra his 
friend by sacrifices,— (Indra) ever giving fresh strength, to be 
hymned by all, great, unconquered, of ever-daring might. 
Sámaveda, 243,1155, with a slight variation. 


| . 1 सासहिं 1 'यस्मिन्महीरुरुज्जय | 
७२५५. अषांळहमुग्र पृतनासु सास महार्ररुज्रयः। 
ति जायमाने क्षामो 
सं धेनवो जायमाने अनोनवुर्द्यावः क्षामो अनोनवुः।।४।। 

4. (I laud) him who is not to be withstood, the mighty, the 
conqueror in hostile hosts; whom, when he was born, the strong 
rushing cows welcomed and the heavens and the earths praised. 

Sdmaveda, 1156, with ksamih for ksamah. 

The Strong Rushing Cows— Benfey conjectures that these cows are 
the Maruts, the sons of Prsni; Sayana allows another interpretation, 
"*mankind offering oblations of clarified butter, etc." 


The Earths— The plural is used, because, according to a text, “the 
worlds are threefold,”’ trivrto lokah. 


ja ७२५६. यद्‌ द्याव॑ इन्द्र ते शतं शतं भूमीरुत स्युः। 
न त्वां वज्रिन्त्सहस्र सूर्या अनु न जातमष्ट रोद॑सी।।५।। 

5. Indra, were there an hundred heavens to compare with-you, 
or were there an hundred earths,—O thunderer, not even a 
thousand suns would reveal you,—yea, no created thing would fill 
you, nor heaven and earth. 

Sámaveda, 278, 862. 

Not even a thousand Suns— Sayana compares Katha Upan., v.15, 
“there (in Bráhmana) the sun shines not.” 

No created thing would fill you— Sāyaņa compares Chandogya 
Up., 111.14, **the soul within my heart is greater than the earth, greater 
than the sky, greater than the heaven, greater than all these worlds." 


७२५७. आ पंप्राथ महिना वृष्ण्यां वृषन्विश्वा शविष्ठ शव॑सा। 
अस्माँ अंव मघवन्गोम॑ति ब्रजे वज्रिञ्चित्राभिरूतिभि: 11६1 


i h 6. Mightiest showerer (of blessings), you have filled all E. 
i hosts) with your vast bountiful power; O Maghavan, thunderet, 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


CS 2 2 22 7 


arhhita 


T your 


ra his 
to be 


y, the 
strong 
d. 


ws are 
tation, 


t, ‘‘the 


1-४०ए, 
ven a 
ld fill 


; 


dogya 
greater 


] (our 
deren, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 70 e 


guard us with your manifold protections, (when we march) against 
the well-stocked cowpen of our enemies. 
Samaveda, 863. 


७२५८. न सीमर्देव आपदि दीर्घायो मर्त्यः। 
एत॑ग्वा चिद्य एत॑शा युयोजते हरी इनदर युयोजते॥७॥ 

7. O long-lived Indra, the mortal who has not you as his deity 
obtains no food; (he who praises not) that steed-borne Indra, who 
yokes to his car the two variegated, who yokes the two bay steeds. 

Samaveda, 268. with apa tad for dpad, etasah for etasa and indro 
hari for hart indrah. Sayana’s comm. on this verse seems to be corrupt. 

ee ^ महाय्यमिन्द्र | 
७२५९. त at महा महाय्यमिन्द दानाय॑ सक्षणिम्‌। 
e e ` ` वाजेष्वस्ति || 
यो गाधेषु य आरणेषु हव्यो वाजेष्वस्ति BA: 

8. Great (priests), worship that Indra who is propitiated by 
gifts; who is to be invoked in the shallows and in the depths, and 
who is to be invoked in battles. 

Is propitiated by Gifts— Dandya saksanim, lit. 
gift." 

` ` धसे 
७२६०. उदू षु णो वसो महे मृशस्व॑ शूर राधसे। 
उदू षु महौ म॑घवन्मघत्त॑य उदि शरवसे FEI 

9. O hero, giver of dwellings, raise us up to enjoy abundant 
food; raise us up, Maghavan, for abundant wealth; raise US Up. 
Indra, for abundant fame. 

७२६१. त्वं न॑ इन्द्र ऋतयुस्त्वानिदो नि तृम्पसि। 
मध्यें वसिष्व तुविनृम्णोर्वोर्नि दासं शिश्नथो हथेः11१०॥ 
10. Indra, who delight in offerings, you satisfy us abundantly 


With (the possessions of him) who despises you; O you e 
of vast wealth, shelter us between your thighs; you smite do 


Dasa with your blows. 
७२६२. अन्यत्रंतमर्मानुषमरयज्वानमदेंवयुम्‌। 
अव स्व: सखां दुधुवीत पर्वतः सुध्नाय दस 
11. May your friend, Parvata hurl down 
f ; 2 hi not 
Who follows other rites, the enemy of men, MF who offers 


price and who worships not the gods; may 
asyu down to the stern smiter (death). 


**who follows for a 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


580 Rgveda Samhita 


Parvata— In [.122.3, Sàyana identifies Parvata with Parjanya; in 
VII.37.8 he calls him a god, the friend of Indra; here he describes him as 
a rsi, the friend of Indra, tava sakhi-bhütah Parvata rsih. 

The Enemy of Men— Amdnusam, Sàyana explains it as **the enemy 
of the men who sacrifice to Indra.’ 


७२६३. त्वं न॑ इन्द्रासां हस्तें शविष्ठ दावनें। 
धानानां न सं गृभायास्मयुर्दि: सं गुभायास्मयुः।।१२।। 
12. Most powerful Indra, in your favour towards us, take these 


cows in your hand, as fried grain, to give to us; yea, take them 
twice in your favour towards us. 
| 1 1 | 
७२६४. सखायः क्रतुमिच्छत कथा राधाम शरस्य। 
। उर्पस्तुति भोज | 
उपस्तुतिं भोजः सूरिर्यो अहयः।।१३।। 

13. Associated priests, give good head to the sacrifice, for how 
can we (worthily) perform the praise of (Indra) the destroyer, who 
is the recompenser of enemies, the sender of reward, the 
unvanquished? 

The recompenser of Enemies— Bhojah, which Sayana explains as 
Satrinam bhojayitá; Prof. Wilson translated it in VIII. 3.24 *'the despoiler 
of enemies." In IL14.10, Sayana explained it phalasya dátáram 

i raksitdram ca. 


७२६५. भूरिभिः समह क्रषिभिर्बहिष्मद्धि: स्तविष्यसे। 
यदित्थमेक॑मेकमिच्छरं वत्सान्म॑रादद॑ः।।१४।। 

14. Indra, the common object of our worship, you are praised 
by many sacrificing Rsis; for it is you, destroyer of foes, Who thus 
give calves in succession to your worshippers. 

In Succession— Ekam ekam, “one by one," ie. according 10 
Sàyana “‘many.”’ He adds that ‘‘calves’’ here includes “cow.” 

७२६६. कर्णगृह्या मघवां शौर देव्यो वत्सं नख्रिभ्य आनंयत्‌। 
अजां सूरिर्न धात॑वे।।१५।। 
15. May Maghavan, taking them by the cars, lead the Co 


; मु c 
with their calves from our three (destructive enemies), 4S th 
owner leads a goat to drink. 


2 cris é f and 
Sayana in this interpretation reads vatsam na for vatsam nah, E 
explains it as vatsa-sahitah. Sauradevyah he explains as cow, 
connected with, or won in, battle (sauradevam). 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EB — — ee 


«————— M 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
hhita Mandala 8, Sukta 71 581 
Ja; in 
im as [सूक्त £ १] 


[ऋषि- सुदीति तथा पुरुमीळह आङ्गिरस यद्वा द्वयोरेकः। देवता- अग्नि। 


E छन्द- गायत्री, १०-१५ प्रगाथ (समासतो बृहती , विषमा बृहती ] 
LC ES uh ` 
७२६७. त्वं नों अग्ने महोभिः पाहि विश्वस्या अरति:। 
^ Ie 
उत द्विषो मत्यस्य।।१।। 
these l. kem you protect us by great wealth from every niggard 
Tien and mortal foe. 

Sdmaveda, 6. Sayana explains mahobhih by mahadbhir dhanaih, or 
by pijabhih, **by our worship.’ In his comm. on the Sdmaveda, he takes 
it as mahadbhih pálanaih, **by your great protections.’ Ardteh also may 
either mean *'from the non-giver," or ''from the non-giving (ie. 
niggardliness) of every one." 

ats ईशे || 
‘how ७२६८. नहि मन्युः पौरुषेय ईशे हि व॑ः प्रियजात। त्वमिदसि क्षपावान्‌।1२ UI 
who 2. O you who was born loved, no human anger can harm 
the you,—you only are the lord of night. 

Sayana explains this, that we will protect you from men by day, and 

Ins as you wilt protect thyself by night from evil spirits, as fire then burns 
poiler brightest. 

ar, ने gn EE 1 

aran ७२६९. स नो विश्वेभिदेवेभिरूजों नपाद्धद्वशोचे। रयिं देहि विश्ववारम्‌।३॥ 

3. Son of strength, auspicious in brilliance, associated with all 
the gods, give us all desirable wealth. 

With all the Gods— Sáyana reads sa no vasva upamdsi from V.9 for 

भ sa no visvebhir devebhih. 
alse ES E EN i 
"dus ७२७०. न तम॑ग्ने अरातयो मर्त युवन्त रायः। यं त्रायसे दाश्वांसम्‌। [४11 
4. That sacrificing mortal whom you, Agni, protect the 
ng 10 niggardly cannot separate from wealth. 
७२७१. यं त्वं विप्र मेधर्सातावग्ने हिनोषि धनाय। स तवोती गोषु TLN 

5. Wise (Agni), he whom in his performance of the sacrifice 
you incite to attain wealth, by your protection walks (lord) among 
crowds of cattle. 

cows Cf. 1.86.3. 
s the ७२७२. त्वं रयि पुरुवीरमग्नें दाशुषे मर्तीय। vi नय वस्यो अच्छ।६॥ 
4 6. You, Agni give to the offerer wealth comprehending many 
1, an male descendants; conduct us to affluence. 
| 1.८. 


७२७३. उरुष्या णो मा परां दा अघायते जातवेद:। दुराध्येई maiale i 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


i” —— 


एकलो. UU 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


582 Rgveda Samhita 


7. Defend us, Jatavedas; deliver us not over to the malevolent 
to the man whose thoughts are evil. 


७२७४. अग्ने माकिष्टे देवस्य॑ रातिमदेवो युयोत। त्वमीशिषे वसूनाम्‌।।८।। 


8. Agni, let not the godless take away the wealth which you, 
the divine, have given, for you are the Jord of treasures. 


७२७५. स नो वस्व उप॑ मास्यूर्मी नपान्माहिंनस्य। सखें वसो जरितृभ्य॑:।।९।। 


9. Son of strength, the friend, the giver of dwellings, you met 
our abundant treasure to us your praisers. 


अच्छा 1 शीरशोचिपं SU S uA 
७२७६. अच्छा नः d गिरो यन्तु दर्शतम्‌। 
EN 1. N 
अच्छा यज्ञासो नम॑सा पुरूवसुं पुरुप्रशस्तमूतयें1।१०॥। 

10. Let our voices come near the beautiful (Agni) him who 
bears devouring flames; let our sacrifices with our oblations come 
near him, for our protection, who is rich in wealth and rich in 
praise; 

Samaveda, 1554. 

afta > सह॑सो sl t वार्याणाम्‌ 
७२७७. अग्नि सूनुं सहसो जातवेदसं दानाय । 
दविता यो भूदमृतो मर्त्येष्वा होतां मन्द्रतमो विशि।॥११।। 
| 11. (Let them come near) Agni, Játavedas, son of strength, for 
— the giving of all desirable good things; who is doubly immortal as 
(perpetually burning) amongst priest amongst the sacrificers. i 

Sümaveda, 1555. Sāyaņa gives another interpretation, “who 18 
doubly immortal (amongst gods) and amongst men,"' a being equivalent 
to ca. Visi, which he explains as put for the plural viksu yajamana-rupasu, 
more probably means ‘‘in the 10052," or **in the family.” 

अग्नि al देवयज्ययाग्नि 
७२७८. अग्नि वो देवय प्रयत्यध्वरे। 
अग्नि | थममग्निमर्वत्यग्निं क्षेत्राय 
अग्नि धीषु प्रेथममग्निमट [य साध॑से।१२।। 

12. I praise Agni, (O sacrificers), for the inauguration of you 
divine offering; (I praise him) when the sacrifice is proceeding; ( 
praise) Agni first of the gods, at our rites; (I praise) Agni when the 
enemy approaches; (I praise) Agni for the attainment of land. 


For the attainment of land— Sc. as the fruit of the sacrifice. The St. 
Petersburg Dict. says “201 Regelung der Feldmark.”” 


७२७९. अग्निरिषां सख्ये द॑दातु न ईशे यो वार्याणाम्‌। 
अग्नि तोके तन॑ये शश्च॑दीमहे वसुं सन्तं तनूपाम्‌॥१३। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ho 
me 
in 


for 
as 
| is 
lent 
ISU, 


you 
;( 
the 


: St. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 72 di 


13. May Agni in his friendship give us food for he is the lord 
of all desirable things; we solicit abundance for our sons and 
grandsons from Agni, who is the giver of dwellings and the 
protector of our bodies. 

May Agni give us— Or taking nah for mahyam and sakhye as a 
dative (against the accent), **may Agni give food to me his friend.” 

अग्निर्मीव्ठिष्वावसे I~ | शीरशोचिषम्‌ 
७२८०. अग्निमीळिष्वावसे गाथाभिः 
अग्नि ` i ^ . ` f la ^ 
अग्नि राये पुरुमीळ्ह श्रुतं नरोऽग्निं सुंदीतयें छर्दिः।।१४।। 

14. Laud with your hymns for our protection Agni, whose 
splendour lie outspread; laud Agni for wealth, O Purumilha, for 
other offerers are lauding that far famed one on their own behalf; 
solicit of Agni a house for (me) Suditi. 

Whose splendours lie outspread— This is here Sáyana's 
explanation of sirasocisam (Sayanasvabhdva-rociskam), but he gave a 
different explanation iv v.10 (asana-sila-jvalam). 

Sdmaveda, 49. This verse is supposed to be addressed by Suditi to 
Purumilha. 

अग्नि PNE र “| गृणीमस्यग्नि i, दातवे 
७२८१. अग्नि द्वेषो योतवे नो गृणीमस्यग्नि शं योश्च | 
1 tava TE: E 
विश्वासु वि हव्यो भुवदवसतुर्ऋषृणाम्‌।।१५॥ 

15. We praise Agni that he may keep off our enemies; we 
praise Agni that he may give us joy and security; he may we be 
worshipped as the giver of dwellings to the Rsis, he who is as it 
were the protector of all men. 


[सूक्त-७२] 
[क्रषि- हर्यत प्रागाथ। देवता- अग्नि अथवा हवि स्तुति। छन्द- गायत्री। | 
७2 í 

७२८२. हविष्कृणुध्वमा गमदध्वर्युर्वनते पुनः । fagi अस्य प्रशासनम्‌11१॥ 

1. (Priests), present the oblation, for (Agni) has come; the 
Adhvaryu again offers (the sacrifice), well-skilled in its offering. 

| 

७२८३. नि तिग्ममभ्यंशुं सीदद्धोतां मनावधिं। जुषाणो अस्य सख्यम्‌॥२॥ 

2. The Hota sits down by (Agnis) hot flame, rejoicing in his 
friendship towards the offerer. 

Hot Flame— Sayana takes arisu as here equivalent to Agni; the St. 
Petersburg Dict. translates it “the stalks of the Soma-plant. 


७२८४. अन्तरिंच्छन्ति तं जनें wd परो मनीषर्या। गृभ्णन्ति frat EUR! 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


584 Rgveda Sarhhita 


3. For the sake of the offerer, they seek by their skill to Place 
Rudra in the fore front; they seize him, as he sleeps, with their 
tongues. 

With their Tongues— Sc. **with their hymns,"' the cause being used 
for the effect. 

७२८५. जाम्यतीतपे धनुर्वयोधा अरुहद्वनम्‌। wwe जिह्णयाव॑धीत्‌।।४।। 

4. (Agni), the giver of food, scorches the vast bow (of the sky); 
he mounts the water; he smites the cloud with his tongue. 

With his Tongue— Sayana here takes jàmi as pravrddham, sarvam 
atiricya vartamánam, but the true meaning is probably **him own." He 
gives another interpretation of the later part of the verse as referring to a 
forest-conflagration, in which case vanam and drsadam are taken in their 


usual acceptation, **he mounts the forest, he smites the rock with his 
tongue.” 


निंदातारं विन्दते वेति | 
७२८६. चर्वत्सो रुशन्निह निंदातारं न विन्दते। वेति स्तोत॑व अम्ब्य॑म्‌।५॥ 
5. Roaming like a calf and bright-shining, he finds here no 
hinderer; he seeks a chanter to praise him. 
Here— /ha ‘‘here’ may either mean ‘in this world,” asmin loke, or 


“‘in the sky,’’ antarikse; in the latter case Agni will mean the lightning, 
and the praiser (ambya) will be the thunder. 


७२८७. उतो न्व॑स्य यन्महदश्वावद्योजनं बृहत्‌। दामा रथ॑स्य ददुंशे॥।६॥ 


6. As soon as the great stout harness of his horses in seen (in 
the sky), the traces of his chariot. 
७२८८. दुहन्ति सप्तैकामुप द्वा पञ्च॑ सृजतः। तीर्थे सिन्धोरधिं ATL 

7. Seven milk one (cow), the two direct the five, on the 
resounding shore of the river. 

Ekam, “the one (cow), is explained as the gharma, or earthen 
vessel so called, which is used to boil milk, etc., in the Pravargya 
ceremony. The *'seven"' are the seven officiating priests or assistants, two 
of whom, the pratiprasthatd and the adhvaryu, are said to direct in the 
performance the other five, viz., the yajamana or institutor, the brahmana 
(or brahman), the hota, the agnidhra, and the prastota. The “resounding 


shore” refers to the exclamations used in the sacrifice performed by the 
rsi of the hymn. 


| ७२८९. आ दशभिर्विवस्वत इन्द्रः कोश॑मचुच्यवीत्‌। 
"i खेद॑या त्रिवृतां दिवः।।८।। 


Hi? 8. Invoked by the ten (fingers) of the worshipper, Indra nas 
i caused the cloud to fall from heaven by his threefold ray- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


en 
ya 


na 
ng 
he 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 72 TS 


The Ten— The fingers are called **the ten sisters” in HI.29.13. 

Indra— Sáyana says that Indra may also here stand for Agni or 
Aditya. 

His threefold Ray— Khedaya trivyta; Sayana explains khedaya by 
rasmind, ana trivrtà by tri-prakdravartanavatd, “revolving in three 
ways.’’ Khedayd occurs again in 77.3, and is there explained rajjvd. The 
St. Petersburg Dict. explains it as ‘‘vielleicht Hamme, Schlagel oderein 
ähnliches Werkzeug dem Indra zukommend.”’ 

७२९०. परि त्रिधातुरध्वरं जूणिरिति नवीयसी। मध्वा होतारो अङ्जते।।९।। 
9. The three-hued fresh impetuous (blaze) goes swiftly round 


the sacrifice; the priests anoint it with butter. 

Three-Hued— Sc. red, white, and black. 

७२९१. सिञ्चन्ति नमंसावतमुच्चाचंक्रं परिज्मानम्‌। नीचीन॑बारमक्षितम्‌।1१० l 

10. They pour out with reverence the inexhaustible cauldron, 
as it goes round circular above and with an opening below. 

Samaveda, 1604. 

The inexhaustible Cauldron— Sc. the gharma or mahdvira, the 
contents of which are thrown into the Ahavaniya fire. The St. Petersburg 
Dict. takes avata (which properly means ‘‘a cistern’) as a metaphor for a 
cloud (see under parijman). 


७२९२. अभ्यारमिदद्रयो निर्षिक्त पुष्करे मधुं। अवतस्य॑ विसर्जने॥११ I 
11. The reverent priests drawing near pour the superfluous 


butter into the large (spoon), when they set the cauldron down. 
Samaveda, 1603. 
The Large Spoon— Sc. the upayamani spoon from which the 
sacrificer drinks the milk. 
Down— Sc. on the stool, dsandyam. 


७२९३. गाव उपांवतावतं मही यज्ञस्य॑ र॒प्सुदां। उभा कर्णी हिरण्ययाँ॥१२।। 


12. Draw nigh, ye cows, to the cauldron; (the two kinds of 
milk) in the sacrifice are plentiful and fruit giving; both ears (of 
the vessel) are golden. 

White Yajurveda, 33.19. Sámaveda. 117, 1602, reading upa vadavate 
for updvatdvatam. 

The two kinds of Milk— The milk of a cow and a goat is poured 
into the Gharma or Mahavira. Rapsudd is a very hard word (see Benfey's 
glossary). Sayana gives several attempts to explain it; thus it may be 
Gripsoh phalaprade, ‘‘giving fruit to one who is about to begin," or 
lipsvor asvinor dátavye, **to be presented to those who desire to receive it 
(Sc. the Asvins)," or (since rap is "to praise"), mantrena ddfavye or 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


7०० M00 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Sarhhitg 

dohaniye, **to be rightly offered or milked (sud) with hymns.” Mahidhara 
gives a totally different explanation, which is adopted by Benfey; he takes 
rapsų as rüpa (but Naigh., 11.7 gives only psu), and renders the line “0 
cows, approach the altar-trench (catvala), for heaven and earth (mahi) 
give beauty to the sacrifice; both your ears are golden." 
७२९४. आ सुते सिंञ्चत श्रियं रोद॑स्योरभिश्रिय॑म्‌। रसा द॑धीत वृषभम्‌।।१३।। 

13. Drop into the milked (stream) the admixture, which 
reaches, (as it boils), heaven and earth; set the bull in the liquor. 

Sdmaveda, 1480. White Yajurveda, 33.21. 

The Admixture— This is the goat’s milk which is poured into the 
cow’s milk in the Gharma. 

Heaven and Earth— Or the Asvins. Cf. Nirukta, XII.1. 

The Bull in the Liquor— The ‘bull,’ vrsabha, is explained as Agni, 
and the liquor (rasa=rase) is the goat's milk. Sáyana adds, ‘‘The goat is 
dedicated to Agni, hence the contact of its milk with fire is proper.” 


७२९५. ते जानत स्वमोक्यंरै सं वत्सासो न मातृभि:। 
मिथो न॑सन्त जामिभिंः।।१४।। 


14. They know their own abode; as calves with their mothers, 
so they severally assemble with their kin. 
Sdmaveda, 1481. 


Know their own Abode— 7.e.a the cows come to the Gharma to be 
. ¢ ] 
a milked, as to their stall. 


७२९६. उप क्षु बप्सतः कृण्वते धरुणं दिवि। 
इन्द्रे अग्ना नमः uisi 


15. (The priests) minister in the sky the supporting (milk) to 
(Agni) who devours with his jaws; they minister all the food to 


586 


Indra and Agni. | 
Sdmaveda, 1482. झु \ 
All the Food— Or swar may be taken, like divi, as ‘‘in the sky. 

७२९७. अधुक्षत्पिप्युषीमिषमूर्ज सप्तपंदीमरि:। सूर्यस्य सप्त रश्मिभि:॥१६॥। | 
16. The wind by means of the sun’s seven rays milks the 

nourishing food and drink from the seven-stepped one. \ 


This is the Jiteral meaning of saptapadim, but Sayana explains 1t as 
“the middle tone with gliding foot, which is personified in the cow that 1s 
milked into the gharma," sarpana-svabhdva-padam madai 
vacam gharmadhugrüpenavasthitam. (The thunder is often called E | 
madhyamikà vk, and we have in 1.164.28,29 a similar comparison of 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


E 


Iz 


hid 


2. 2042000 ar, cca. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 73 587 


lowing cow, while being milked, to the cloud as it thunders while 
raining.) The cow (soma-krayant) which is given as the price of the Soma, 
has to take seven steps, and it is considered to be väk personified, see 
Taitt. Samhita, VI.1.7.8. The St. Petersb, Dict. takes saptapadim as an 
epithet of isam ürjam, “für alle Bedürfnisse genügend." 


७२९८. सोमस्य मित्रावरुणोदिता सूर आ दंदे। तदातुरस्य भेषजम्‌।१७।। 


17. Mitra and Varuna, 1 take the Soma when the sun is risen: it 
is medicine to the sick. 

I Take— Sayana explains adade as svikaroti, “11९ takes," unless we 
should read svikaromi. 

I - Is 1 निधान्यम्‌ > I 

७२९९. उतो न्वस्य यत्पदं हर्यतस्यं । परि द्यां निह्वयातनत्‌।।१८।। 

18. Agni,—standing in the place which I, the eager offerer, 
choose as the spot for presenting the oblations,—fills the sky on 
every side with his blaze. 

In the place— Sc. the uttara-vedi or altar outside the enclosure. 


[38-93] 
[क्रषि- गोपवन आत्रेय अथवा सप्तवधि । देवता- अश्चिनीकुमारौ। 
छन्द- गायत्री ] 
७३००. उदीराथामृतायते युञ्जाथामश्चिना xe अन्ति षद्भूतु sme: 11१ ।। 


1. Rise, Asvins, on my behalf, as I prepare to sacrifice: yoke 
your ear; let your protection abide near me. 


t 

७३०१. निमिषश्चिज्जवीयसा रथेना यांतमश्चिना। अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव: 11२ 11 

2. Come, Asvins, in your chariot which moves quicker than the 
twinkling of an eye; let your protection abide near me. 

fed. nidi 1 

७३०२. sd स्तृणीतमत्रये हिमेन घर्ममंश्चिना। अन्ति षद्भूतु AA: R 

3. Asvins, you covered the hot (fire) with cold (water) for Atri: 
let your protection abide near me. 

Water for Atri— Cf. Rgveda, 1.116.8. 
७३०३. कुहं स्थः कुह॑ जग्मथुः कुह॑ श्येनेव॑ पेतथु:। 

अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव॑:।।४।। 

4. Where are you? Whither are you gone? Whither have you 

flown like hawks? Let your protection abide near me. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


"ou um — —À———— 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


588 Rgveda Saihita 
कर्हि श्रूयात॑मिमं h 
७३०४. यदद्य कर्हि कहिँ चिच्छुश्रूयात॑मिमं हव॑म्‌। 
अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव॑:।।५।। d 
5. If to-day, at some time, in some place, you would but hear y 
my invocation, —let your protection abide near me. ^ 
७३०५. अश्चिनां यामहतमा ARE याम्याप्य॑म्‌। अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव॑:।।६।। V 
6. The Asvins are carnestly to be invoked in emergency; I enter 
into close friendship with them; let your protection abide near me. 
I Enter into close Friendship— CJ. var. lect., and the commentary on 
1.36.12. | 
अवन्तमत्रये || | ERIT. । d 1 ] th 
७३०६. 3 गृह कृणुतं युवमश्चिना। अन्ति षद्भूतु वामवः।७।। 
"E = » ७ 
7. Asvins, you made a sheltering house for Atri; let your 
protection abide near me. 
A sheltering house for Atri— Sayana adds, ** When being burned in 
the cell of the consecrated fire.” le 
७३०७. RA अग्निमातपो वद॑ते वल्ग्वत्र्ये। अन्ति weh वामव॑:।॥८॥ ७: 
8. You stayed the fire from its fierceness for Atri, while he 
praised you acceptably; let your protection abide near me. 
| 
७३०८. प्र सप्तवंश्रिराशसा धारांमग्नेर॑शायत। अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव:।।९॥ ho 
9. Through his praise of you Saptavadhri set the fire’s flame- 
mune, ८ र key tecti ८ 2 10 
point (to his basket); let your protection abide near me. ; 
Cf. Reveda, V.78.5. d^ 
७३०९. इहा गतं वृषण्वसू शृणुतं म॑ इमं हव॑म्‌। S 
1 ! 
अन्ति षद्भूतु AA: 1180 11 ae 
10. Come hither, lords of abundant wealth, hear this my 
invocation; let your protection abide near me. yay 
किमिदं |. 2 | 
७३१०. किमिदं वाँ पुराणवज्जर॑तोरिव शस्यते। अन्ति weh वामव॑:11११॥ ७३ 
11. Why is this (repeated invocation) addressed to you as if 
you were decrepit like old men? Let your protection abide near me. 
As if you were Decrepit—Sayana explains it, *'as we see In a 
world that an old man does not come, though often called, so too 151 W! as 
you." me 
A ७ 5 le l 
७३११. समानं वा सजात्यं समानो बन्धुरश्चिना। अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव॑:।।१२॥ ७३ 


ae तावा a 
12. Asvins, your relationship is common and you have 
common kinsman; let your protection abide near me. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
ita 
Mandala 8, Sükta 73 Pe 


Sayana’s Comm. is here obscure, but he explains the text as meaning 
that the two Asvins were both born from the wife of the sun (sc. Vicasvat). 
who had assumed the form of a mare. (Cf VIL72.2 and the passage from 
the Brhaddevatd quoted in the Comm.) He seems to explain the common 
kinsman as meaning either the sacrificial ladle or the rsi himself (cf. 
| VIIL.27.10). si 

` > रर्जास्यश्ि EX] रोद॑सी 
er ७३१२. यो वां रजांस्यश्चिना रथो वियाति | 
I 1 
अन्ति षद्भूतु AAA: 11१३ 11 

E Your chariot, Asvins, moves swiftly through the worlds, 

through heaven and earth; let your protection abide near me. 


७३१३. आ नो TARRA: सहसैरुप गच्छतम्‌। 
अन्ति षद्भूतु sme: te t 
14. Come to us with thousands of herds of cattle and horses; 
let your protection abide near me. 
७३१४. मा नो TARRA: सहस्रॅभिरतिं ख्यतम्‌। 
S अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव॑:।।१५।। 
15. Pass us not by with your thousands of herds of cattle and 
horses; let your protection abide near us. 
2- Pass us not By— I have adopted this explanation of má ati khyatam 


from Sàyana's Comm. on 1.4.3. He here takes atikhyah as for 
pratikhyah(pratyakhyah), **do not reject (or neglect) us,” ete. 


७३१५. अरुणप्सुरुषा अभूदकर्ज्योतिर्कतावरी। अन्ति षद्भूतु वामर्व:॥१६॥ 
16. The purple-tinted Dawn has appeared, the mistress of the 
Sacrifice spreads her light; let your protection abide near me. 


ar 


y Mistress of the Sacrifice— Rtávari is sometimes explained as 
yajnavati, sometimes as satyavati, *'truthful"'. 

| ७३१६. अश्विना सु विचाकशदवृक्षं परशुमाँ इव । 

if T A = E 

i अन्ति षद्भूतु ama: 1181911 

i 17. Asvins, the splendidly-brilliant (sun cleaves the darkness) 

5 as the woodman with his axe a tree; let your protection abide near 
me, 

| à 

३१७. पुरं न धृष्णवा रुज कृष्णयां बाधितो विशा। 


अन्ति षद्भूतु वामव॑ः।।१८॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


529 Rgveda Sarihitā 


18. O bold Saptavadhri, distressed by the entangling and 
detaining (basket), break through it as through a city; let your 
protection (Asvins) abide near me. 

This is supposed to be addressed by Saptavadhri to himself, or by 


\ 
Gopavana to Saptavadhri. 
Distressed by . . . . Basket— So Sayana; but krsnaya ye badhito visa 
probably means *'distressed by the black people.” | 
( 
[सूक्त-७४] | 
[ऋषि- गोपवन आत्रेय। देवता- अग्नि, 93-94 श्रुतर्वा आक्ष्य। 
छन्द- गायत्री, १, ४, ७, १०, 93-94 अनुषुप्‌। ] ( 
विशोविशो N . \ 
७३१८. विशोविंशो वो अतिथि वाजयन्त॑ः पुरुप्रियम्‌। 
अग्नि वो दुर्यं वच॑ः स्तुषे शूषस्य मन्म॑भिः।।१।। 
1. Food-desiring (priests, worship) Agni, who is the guest of all 
mankind, beloved of many; I address to him in your behalf a t 
domestic homage with hymns, for the attainment of happiness; 1 
Sdmaveda, 87, 1564. ६ 
Domestic— Duryam is explained by Sayana (11.38.5) as grhyam grhe 
bhavam. Should not the guhd hitam of the Comm. here be grhe or grhdya \ 
hitam “placed in, or suitable for, the house," cf. VIII. 1.11, grhebhyo 
A hita. a 
. fri प्रशंस॑न्ति प्रशस्तिभि 
७३१९. यं जनांसो हविष्मन्तो मित्रं न सर्पिरासुतिम्‌। प्रशंसन्ति प्रशस्तिभि:1२। 
2. (That Agni), to whom clarified butter is offered, whom man, à 
bearing oblations, worship with praises as a friend; 
Sadmayeda, 1565. ` 
As a Friend— Mitram na is also explained ‘‘like the sun.”’ 
७३२०. Tats जातवेंदसं यो देवतात्युद्यता । हव्यानयैर॑यद्विवि॥२।। ० 
3. Jatavedas, the earnest praiser of his worshipper, who sends X 
to heaven the oblations presented in the sacrifice. 
Sdmaveda, 1566. 
Lu 1. ज्येष्ठमग्निमानवम्‌ I h 
७३२१. आगन्म वृत्रहन्तमं । ; 
Po 3 j 
1 
यस्य श्रुतर्वा बृहन्नाक्षा अनीक एधते।॥४11 a 


; ightiest 
4. We have come to that most excellent Agni, might 


न z 3 0 
destroyer of the wicked, the benefactor of men, in whose army ( 
rays) Srutarvan, the mighty son of Rksa, waxes great. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar | 


11115 
and 
your 


or by 


9 Visa 


E! 
alf a 


grhe 


haya 
bhyo 


AIR I 


man, 


ends 


tiest 
y (of 


—M— — rer 


i i NS 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 74 ai 


Samaveda, 89, but with aganma for áganma, and reading the second 
line as ya sma Srutarvannarksye brhaddnika idhyate, “who with his host 
of rays is kindled in Srutarvan, the son of Rksa.”’ 


b sl . तिरस्तर्मासि 
७३२२. अमूर्त जातवेदसं तिरस्तमॉसि दर्शतम्‌। घृताहवनमीडयम्‌॥५। 
5. (We have come) to the immortal Jatavedas, who shows 


light across the darkness, well worthy of praise, and receiving the 
offerings of ghi; 


७३२३. सबाधो यं जनां इमेई5ग्नि हव्येभिरीळते। जुहांनासो ARA: 1 


6. That Agni, whom these crowding worshippers honour with 
oblations, offering to him with up-lifted ladled. 


७३२४. इयं ते नव्यसी मतिरग्ने अधाय्यस्मदा। 
मन्द्र सुजांत सुक्रतो5मूर दस्मातिंथे।|७।। 
7. This new hymn has been made by us for you, O joyful, well- 
born Agni, glorious in deeds, unbewildered, beautiful, the guest (of 
man); 


Has been made by us for you— Sayana explains adhdyy asmadd as 
"*has been borne (or conceived) in us for you,” asmásu dhrtam abhüt. 
y 1 | I | 
७३२५. सा ते अग्ने शन्तमा चनिष्ठा भवतु प्रिया। तया वर्धस्व सुष्टुत:।1८।। 
8. Agni, may it be dear to you, most pleasant and most 
agreeable— well praised by it, to you wax great. 
Most pleasant and most Agreeable— Sayana explains canisthd as 


atisayenánnavati, **most richly endowed with food," but in vii.70.2 he 
allowed in a similar phrase the alternative rendering kamaniyatamá. 


७३२६. सा द्युम्नेद्युम्निनी बृहदुपोप श्रव॑सि श्रव॑ः। दधीत वृत्रतू्येँ।।९ 11 


9. May this (hymn) the rich source of wealth, heap abundance 
on our abundance (with stores won from our enemies) in battle. 


७३२७. अश्चमिद्रां र॑थप्रां त्वेषमिन्द्रै न सत्प॑तिम्‌। 
यस्य श्रवांसि तूर्वथ पर्न्यपन्यं च कृष्टयंः।।१०॥ 
10. (Worship), you men, the bright (Agni), who goes like a 
horse and fills our chariots (with spoil), who protects the good like 


Indra, and by whose might ye ravage the stores (of your enemies) 


and all their wonderful (wealth). s 
___ Who goes like a Horse— Sayana explains gdm by gantáram, as in 
1121.9, and iv.22.8. 

Wonderful— Lit. “worthy to be praised,” panyam. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


» Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
592 Rgveda Sarnhita 
ति | गोपव॑नो चनिष्ठदग्ने 
७३२८. यं त्वा गोपवनो गिरा चनिष्ठदग्ने अङ्गिरः। 
स पांवक श्रुधी हव॑म्‌।।११।। 


11, Agni, Angiras, whom Gopavana by his praise has made the 
especial giver of food,—O purifier, hear his prayer. 

But with tam and janisthad or yam and canisthad; on the latter hard 
word cf. Benfey's Sama-V. Gloss. It would seem to mean 
gladdened" 


७३२९. यं त्वा जनांस ईळते सबाधो वाज॑सातये। स बोधि वृत्रतूयेँ।।१२।| 


12. O you whom the crowding worshippers praise for the 
obtainment of food, attend to them for the destruction of their 
enemies. 

For the Destruction of their Enemies— Or as in v.9) “in battle," 
vrtraturye. Sama V.,1565, 


dl श्रुतर्वणि मदच्युति 
७३३०. अहं हुवान आरक्षे g द्च्युतिं। 
शर्धांसीव स्तुकाविनाँ चतुर्णाम्‌ 
शर्धांसीव स्तुकाविनां मृक्षा शीर्षा चतुर्णाम्‌।।१३ ।। 

13. Summoned before Srutarván, the son of Rksa, the humbler 
of the pride of his enemies, (I stroke) with my hand the heads of 
the four horses (which he has given me), as (men stroke) the long 
wool of rams. f 

With my Hand— Sayana reads vrksá, which he explains kesavanti, 

— but he also gives another explanation, hastena, which might apply to the 
ime reading mrksd. In fact this word seems to suggest his supplied verb 


unmyjami. The St. Petersb. Dict. takes 70754), has the Ist person Sing. 
Imperative of mraks (for mrksáni), **let me stroke." 


७३३१. मां चत्वार आशवः शिष्य द्रवित्वव॑:। 
सुरथांसो अभि प्रयो वक्षन्वयो न तुग्रूयंम्‌ १४ 
14. Four swift horses of that most mighty king, yoked uot 
splendid car, bear me forth to seize the substance (of my enemies), 
as the ships bore home the son of Tugra. 


The Son of Tugra— For Bhujyu’s legend cf. Vol. I, verse 1216 
Vayah “‘birds’’ seems a poetical metaphor for ‘‘ships.”’ 


७३३२. स॒त्यमित्त्वा महेनदि परुष्ण्यव॑ देदिशम्‌। 
नेमापो अश्वदात॑रः शविष्ठादस्ति med: NRA l 
15. Verily I address you, O great river Parushni; 0 waters, 


५ this most 
there is no mortal who gives horses more liberally than this 1 
mighty (monarch). 


“has 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


rhhitg 


le the 


r hard 
“has 


२।। 


F the 
their 


ttle,” 


abler 
]s of 
long 


santi, 
o the 
verb 
Sing. 


to a 
ies), 


[216 


ers, 
10st 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 75 a 
[सूक्त-७५] 
[क्रषि- विरूप आङ्गिरस। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- गायती । ] 
७३३३. युक्ष्वा हि देवहूत॑माँ अश्वाँ अग्ने रथीरिंव। नि होता पूर्व्य: संदः।।१।। 
1. Agni, like a charioteer yoke your god-invoking steeds: eat 


thyself first, the invoker. 
White Yajurveda. 13.37. 
७३३४. उत नों देव देवाँ अच्छा वोचो विदुष्टर:। श्रद्विश्वा वार्या कृधि।२॥ 
2. Divine (Agni), proclaim us to the gods as profoundly killed; 
assure to us all desirable things;— 


Profoundly skilled— Sáyana explains vidustaras as vidyattaman: 
but it is really an epithet of Agni, **you most wise.” 


३३५. त्वं ह यद्यविष्ठ्य सहस: सूनवाहुत। ऋतावां यज्ञियो भुर्व:11३ di 


3. Since you are truthful and worthy of sacrifice, O most 
youthful, son of strength and everywhere honoured with offerings. 


७३३६. अयमग्निः संहस्तिणो वाज॑स्य शतिनस्पर्ति:। मूर्धा कवी र॑यीणाम्‌।४।। 

4. This Agni is the lord of hundredfold and thousandfold food; 
he is the head, the seer, (the lord) of wealth. 

Yajurv-V., 15.21 Mahidhara takes Murdha with rayindm, “you who 
are the head (or best) of wealth.” 
७३३७. d नेमिमृभवो यथा न॑मस्व सहूतिभिः। नेदीयो ER: I 

5. O Angiras, with the deities associated in the invocate on, 
draw this offering near you as the Rbhus (bend the circumference 
of a wheel. 

Cf. vii. 32.20. 

तस्मै S EI 1 | qui ` 

७३३८. qui नूनमभिद्यवे वाचा विरूप नित्यया। वृष्णे चोदस्व WERT l 

6. Virtipa, with constant voice address your praise to this well- 


pleased showerer (of blessings). 

With Constant Voice— Sayana naturally takes nityayd vacd as 
alluding to the eternal nature of the hymns, utpatti-rahitayd vaca 
mantrarupayd. 

5 Well-pleased— Sayana explains abhidyave here as abhigatatrptaye: 
his more usual explanation is abhigatadiptaye. 


७३३९. कमुं ष्विदस्य सेन॑याग्नेरपांकचक्षसः। पर्णि गोषु स्तरामहे 1191 
7. What strong enemy shall we Rx to win kine, by the 
help of the host of this Agni of unmeasured radiance? 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


A MESES कद nr 


E 


ACC 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 
The Host— Sayana explains “116 host” as the rays. 
७३४०. मा नों देवानां विश: प्रस्नातीरिवोस्ला:। कृशं न eh: 

8. May he not (forsake) us, the liegemen of the gods, as the 
milk-streaming cows (forsake not); the kine abandon not a little 
(calf). 

| | परिद्वेषसो अंहति 
७३४१. मा नः समस्य दूढ्य१: परिद्वेषसो अंहतिः। 
ऊर्मिर्न नावमा व॑धीत्‌।।९ ।। 

9. Let not the onset of any evil-minded adversary harm us as 
the wave (overwhelms) a ship. 

७३४२. नमस्ते अग्न ओज॑से गृणन्ति देव कृष्टय॑:। अमैरमित्रमर्दय।१०॥ 


10. Divine Agni, men utter your praises for the attainment of 
strength; by strength destroy the enemy. 
Samaveda, 11, 1648. 


संवेषिषो | 

७३४३. कुवित्सु नो गविष्टयेऽग्ने संवेषिधो रयिम्‌। उर॑कृदुरुण॑स्कृधि।११॥। 

1l. Agni, send us abundance of wealth to satisfy our desires; 
giver of free space, grant us abundant room. 

Sdmaveda, 1649. Sayana takes gavisti in its etymological sense as 
Savam esandya, I have given it a general meaning. 

संवर्ग . रयिं I 

७३४४. मा नों अस्मिन्महाधने परां वर्ग्भारभूद्यंथा। संवर्ग सं रयिं ज॑य॥१२॥ 


12. Leave us not in this conflict as a bearer his burden win for 
us the plundered wealth of our foes. 
Sdmaveda, 1650, with agne for asmin. 


७३४५. अन्यमस्मद्धिया इयमग्ने सिष॑क्तु दुच्छुना। 
वर्धा नो अम॑वच्छव॑:।१३।। 


13. Agni, may your plagues pursue some other to terrify him; 
increase our vigorous strength in battle. 


७३४६. यस्याजुषन्नमस्विनः शमीमदुर्मखस्य वा। तं घेदग्निवृधावति॥१४।। 


14. Agni especially protects (in battle) that praiser or zealous 
sacrificer whose offerings he has attended. 

Especially Protects— Sayana explains vrdha avati as ViSesend 
gacchati. Tt rather means **4gni protects him with blessing." 


संवतो EC MS 
७३४७. परस्या अधि संवतोश्वराँ अभ्या त॑र। यत्राहमस्मि ताँ अंव॥१५॥ 
15. Deliver us wholly from the hostile arr:y, shield those 


among whom I am (lord). 
Yajurveda, 11.71. 


594 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ihità 


E 


m; 


se 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 

Mandala 8, Sükta 76 595 
E ` पितुर्य 

७३४८. विद्या हि ते पुरा वयमग्ने पितुर्यथाव॑सः। अधां ते सुम्नमीमहे ॥।१६।। 

16. We know your protection, Agni, as of a father in former 
times, therefore we (again) desire of you that happiness. 

[सूक्त -७६] 
[ऋषि- कुरुसुति काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री! ] 

७३४९. इम जु मायिनं हुव इन्द्रमाशानमाजसा | मरुत्वन्तं न Jai H2 || 

1. 1 invoke now for the destruction of my enemies the wise 
Indra attended by the Maruts, ruling all by his power. 


७३५०. अयमिन्द्रों मरुत्सखा वि वृत्रस्यांभिनच्छिरं। वज्रेण शतपंर्वणा।।२।। 


2. Indra, attended by the Maruts, has cleft the head of Vrtra 
with his hundred-jointed thunderbolt. 


` win ^A 1 Lu 

७३५१. वावृधाना मरुत्सखन्द्र वि वृत्रमरयत्‌। सृजन्त्समुद्रिया AG 113 1! 

3. Indra increasing in might, attended by the Maruts, has torn 
Vrtra asunder, letting loose the waters of the firmament. 

> ` . br i इन्द्रेण सोम॑पीतये ` 

७३५२. अयं ह यन वा इद स्वमरुत्वता जितम्‌। ण्‌ Ire tl 

4. This is that Indra, by whom assisted by the Maruts, yonder 
heaven was conquered, to quaff the Soma. 

Yonder Heaven— Sayana gives as alternative renderings of svah 
“all (sacrificial) actions," and this world," sarvam karma yadvedam 
sarvam jagat. 


७३५३. मरुत्वन्तमृजीषिणमोज॑स्वन्तं विरण्शिनम्‌। इन्द्र गीर्भिहँवामहे | ५1 


5. We invoke with our praises the mighty Indra, accompanied 
by the Maruts, the vigorous accepter of the residue of the oblation 

The Residue of the Oblation— Rjisinam, the residue of the Soma 
(isa) being offered at the trtiya evening oblation 


७ सोम॑स्य पीतयें 
७३५४. इन्द्र प्रलेन मन्मना मरुत्वन्तं हवामहे। अस्य सोमस्य ATAI 
6. With an ancient hymn we invoke /ndra with the Maruts, to 
drink this Soma 


७३५५. मरुत्वाँ इन्द्र मीढ्वः पिबा सोमं शतक्रतो। अस्मिन्यज्ञे पुरुष्ुत 1०11 


7. Indra, Satakratu, showerer (of blessings) drink the Soma at 
this offering, accompanied by the Maruts, O invoked of many. 


७३५६. तुभ्येदिन्द्र मरुत्वते सुताः सोमासो अद्रिवः। 
हदा हूयन्त SAIC 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


NY... ra 


4 


we 
Sr 


^*x- 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
596 Rgveda Sarühita 
8. Thunderer Indra, to you with the Maruts are these Soma- 
libations effused,— they are offered to you in faith, with recited 
hymns. 
In Faith— Sayana explains manasa as bhaktya, 
पिबेदिन्द्र | > सोमं 1 ७ शिशान ओज॑सा 
७३५७. पिबेदिन्द्र मरुत्सखा सुतं सोमं दिविष्टिपु। वज्रं शिशान ।।९।। 
9. Drink, Indra, with your friends the Maruts, this Soma | 
effused on the recurring sacred days, and sharpen your thunderbolt 
with (renewed) vigour. 


Cf. 1.86.4. Divistisu may also mean “‘in these solemnities which are 
means to obtain heaven,” cf. viii.4.19. 


७३५८. उत्तिषन्रोजंसा सह पीत्वी शिप्रे अवेपयः। सोममिन्द्र चमू सुतम्‌॥१०॥ 
10. Rising up in your strength, Indra, you did shake your jaws, 
when you had quaffed the Soma Pressed between the two boards. 


Samaveda, 988. (Benfey, ‘‘schiittelst dic Lippen du,") Yajur-V., 
8.39. 


७३५९. अनु त्वा रोदसी उभे क्रक्षमाणमकृपेताम्‌। इन्द्र RERNA: 1R 

11. Let heaven and earth follow you, Indra, as you smitest, 
when you beat down the Dasyu. 

Sdmaveda, 989, with spardhamánam adadetam for kraksamánam 
akrpetàm. Sāyaņa takes anu akrpetam as anukalpayetàm. Grassmann 
derives it from krap, **heaven and earth longed after you, as you smotest, 
etc." 

७३६०. वार्चमष्टापदीमहं नर्वरक्तिमृतस्पूर्शम्‌। इन्द्रात्‌ परि qm 

12. I make this sacrificial hymn, reaching to the eight points 
(of the sky) and rising to a ninth (the sun in the zenith), though it is 
less than (the dimensions of) Indra. 

Sama-V., 990, with rtdvrdham for rtasprsam. Benfey takes. ast 
apadim navasraktim as referring to the metre of the hymn, ''einen 
achtfüssigen Gesang, aus neun Gliedern bestechenden Jicblichen web! um 
Indra ich.” Sc too Grassmann. 


[सूक्त -७७] 
[ऋषि- कुरुसुति काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री, १०-११ प्रगाथ 
(समा बृहती, विषमा सतोबृहती )। ] 
७३६१. जज्ञानो नु शतक्रतुर्वि पृच्छदिति मातर॑म्‌। 
क उग्राः के ह॑ शुण्विरे।।१।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


0 55 NN 


ühitā 
IMA- 
cited 


2 


1am 
ann 
lest, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sūkta 77 597 


1. As soon as he was born Satakratu asked his mother, who are 
the mighty, who are renowned? 

Cf. viii.45.4. 

७३६२. आदीं शवस्यत्रवीदौर्णवाभमंहीशुव॑म्‌ ते पुत्र सन्तु निष्टुर: 11२1 

2. His strong mother answered,—Aurnavabha and Ahisuva, be 
these, my son the foes whom you shalt overcome. 

Cf. viii.32,26. 

Whom you shalt overcome— Sayana explains nisturah as tava 
nistdraniydh; the St. Petersb. Dict. gives “०८ keinen Ueberwinder 
haben.” 

समित्तान्वृत्रहाखिंदत्खे 1 ol ~ I= | 
७३६३. समितान्वृत्रहाखिंदत्खे अराइव खेदया। प्रवृद्धो दस्युहाभवत्‌।1३ ।। 

3. The slayer of Vrtra dragged them along as spokes (are tied 
fast) with a rope in the nave of a chariot wheel; he swelled in 
vigour, the slayer of enemies. 

With a Rope— Cf note on viii.72.8. 

I I aaa सरांसि त्रिंशतम्‌ i ~ | 
७३६४. एकया प्रति सरांरि इन्द्र: सोम॑स्य काणुका LT | 

4. At one draught Indra drank at once thirty lakes filled with 
Soma. 

Yaska comments on this verse in Nirukta, v. 1]. He gives the 
explanation in the text as that of the ceremonialists (ydjnikah) which 
applies the verse to the thirty uktha vessels presented at the mid-day 
offering; the nairuktah take the verse as referring to the fifteen days and 
nights in which the collected light of the moon is gradually absorbed. 
Yaska is evidently uncertain as to the meaning of the word kdnukd, which 
he explains in several ways, either as a neuter plural agrecing with 
Saranisi, or as a nom, sing, agreeing with Indra. 

गन्धर्वमतृणदबु' I zs 
७३६५. अभि Ag रजः स्वा। इन्दर ब्रह्मभ्य ÀIN I 

5. In the realms (of the sky) where the foot finds-no resting- 
place, Indra shattered the cloud to bring increase to the 
Bráhmanas. 

The Cloud— The gandharva, Gandharvam. 

To the Brahmanas— Brahmebhyah. 


७३६६. निराविध्यद्‌ गिरिभ्य आ धारवत्पक्रमोंदनम्‌। इन्द्रो बुन्दं स्वाततम्‌॥६॥ 
6. Indra smote (rain) from the clouds with bis farstretched 

arrow, he secured boiled rice (for men). 

७३६७. श्तब्रध्न इषुस्तव॑ सहस्रपर्ण एक इत्‌। यमिन्द्र चकृषे ELIN 

mat single shaft of your, Indra, which you make your ally, 

is hundred-pointed, thousand-feathered. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Z o © तप 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


598 Rgveda Sainhità 


७३६८. तेन॑ स्तोतृभ्य आ भर नृभ्यो नारिंभ्यो अत्तवे। 
सद्यो जात ऋभुष्ठिर।८।। 


8. Forthwith increased (by our offerings), do you, mighty and 
firm, by that (weapon) bring (wealth) for sustenance to us your 
praisers, our children, and our wives. 


७३६९. एता च्यौलानि ते कृता वर्षिष्ठानि परीँणसा। हृदा वीड॑वधारयः।।९॥ 


9. These gigantic far-reaching efforts were put forth by you; 
you did fix them firm in your thought. 

These Gigantic Far-Reaching Efforts— Cyautndni is generally 
explained as balàni, ‘‘powers,’’ ''energies"; here Sayana takes it as 
referring to ‘‘the mountains," as the supporters or stays of the earth, 
bhümeh kila badhadharanani (see var. lect. cf. VIL99.3. 

७३७०. विश्वेत्ता विष्णुराभरदुरुक्रमस्त्वेषित:। 
cy c] ॥ीरपाकमोंदनं PESSI वराहमिन्द्र 
शतं महिषान्क्षी वराहमिन्द्र एमुषम्‌ RO lI 

10. The wide-traversing Sun, despatched by you, brings (to the 
world) all these (waters which you createst); he brings hundreds of 
cattle and rice boiled in milk; it is Indra who slays the water- 
stealing boar. 

The Scholiast offers two interpretations of this verse. The first, that of 
the grammatical school (nairukta), is given in the text. The sun (here 

E called Visnu), as the bringer of rain, is said to bring the cattle and food 
which the rain produces; the ‘boar’ yardha is one of the personifications 
of the cloud as smitten by Indra's thunderbolt (cf Nirukta, v.4). The 
mythological school (aitihasika) take the verse more literally, and their 
explanation is given in the Caraka Bráhmana. The legend is, however, 
told more distinctly in the Taitt. Samh., VI.2.4. It is there related that “the 
personified sacrifice concealed itself from the gods, and assuming the 
form of Visnu, entered the earth. The gods, stretching our their hands, 
sought in vain to lay hold of it; but wherever it turned, Indra, outstripping 
it, stood in front of it. It said to him, ‘Who is this that, outstripping me, 
always stands in front of me?’ He answered, ‘I slay in inaccessible places, 
but who are you?’ ‘I can bring out from inaccessible places.’ Then it said 
to him, “You say that you can slay in inaccessible places,—if this be eh 
the boar vamamosa (Vamamusa in Ch. Br.) guards for the asuras, behind 
the seven mountains, the wealth which the gods must obtain; prove your 
title by slaying that boar.’ Indra, seizing up a tuft of darbha-grass, pierced 
those mountains and slew him. Then he said to the sacrifice, ‘You said 
that you could bring out from inaccessible places; bring him out from 
thence.” It brought out all the instruments of the sacrifice (according to 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 0 7 


ita 


NNN =... see 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 78 ऊ 


the Comm. the altar, Soma-jars, cups, etc.), and gave them to the gods.” 
The legend of the Caraka only differs in making the boar hide behind 
twenty-one stone cities. The seven mountains, according to the Schol., are 
the four dīkşās or initiatory rites and the three upasads; the boar 
vamamosa (‘‘stealer of precious things”) is the personified ceremony of 
pressing the Soma-juice. The whole legend appears to have arisen from 
the present passage and that in [.61.7. 


० ०, b > I धुर्बुन्दो 
७३७१. तुविक्षं ते wed सूमयं ud: साधुर्बुन्दो हिरण्यय;। 
N t ES 
= तें बाहू रण्या सुसंस्कृत ऋदूपे चिंदुदूवृधा।।११॥ 

11. Far-darting is your well-made auspicious bow, unfailing is 
your golden arrow; your two warlike arms are ready equipped, 
destructively overthrowing, destructively piercing. 

This difficult verse is explained in Yaska's Nirukta, ५1.33; but his 
explanation of rdüpe cid rdüvrdhá is very doubtful and confused, cf. Prof. 
Roth's Comm. The St. Petersburg Dict. explains the words “‘like two bees 
delighting in sweetness,” taking rdu as for mrdu, sc. the madhu or Soma- 
juice. 

[95-62] 
[ऋषि- कुरुसुति काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री, १० बृहती )i | 
A " | a 
७३७२. पुरोळाशं नो अन्ध॑स इन्द्रं सहस्रमा भ॑र। शता च॑ शूर गोनाम्‌॥१॥ 

1. (Accepting) our offering of sacrificial viands, © hero Indra, 

bring us thousands and hundreds of cows. 
` . I हिरण्ययां 
७३७३. आ नों भर व्यञ्जन गामश्व॑मभ्यञ्जनम्‌। सचां मना हिरण्यया US UI 

2. Bring us condiments, cows, horses, and oil, (bring us) with 
them precious golden (vessels). 9 

Precious Golden Vessels— Sayana explains mana by mananiyant, 
the St. Petersb, Dict. takes it as “4 vessel" or “4 weight," Èe., “with a 
weight of gold.” 

कर्णशो 1 > श्रृण्विषे व॑सो 
७३७४. उत न॑: कर्णशोभ॑ना पुरूणि धृष्णवा भर। त्वं हि शृण्विषे sul 

3. O resolute one, bring us many ear-ornaments; giver of 

dwellings, you are renowned. 


७३७५. नकी वृधीक इन्द्र ते न सुषा न सुदा उत। 


नान्यस्त्वच्छूर T: 


4. There is no prosperer other than you, no divider of the spoil, 
No giver of boons: © hero, there is no (leader) of the sacrificer 
other than you. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


२... * Paes] 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
600 


Rgveda Saihita 


७३७६. नकीमिन्द्रो निकर्तवे न शक्र: परिशक्तवे! fad शृणोति पश्य॑ति।॥५।। 


5. Indra cannot be brought low, he cannot be over- 
powered, —he hears, he sees all. 


७३७७. स मन्युं म्त्यानामद॑ब्धो नि चिंकीषते। पुरा निदश्चिंकीषते 1 

6. Unharmed he brings low the wrath of mortals; ere any on 
can reproach him, he brings him low. 
७३७८. क्रत्व इत्पूर्णमुदरै तुरस्यास्ति विधत:। वृत्रघ्नः Mamet: tto 

7. The belly of the Soma-drinker, the eager slayer of Vrtra, is 
filled by the sacrificer’s offering. 

lu | [| सौ 1 | 

७३७९. त्वे वसूनि सङ्गता विश्वां च सोम सौभ॑गा। सुदात्वरिदृता।।८॥। 


8. In you, O drinker of the Soma, are treasures stored, and all 
precious things and unblemished gifts. 

Drinker of the Soma— le., Soma, here applied to Indra, as 
possessing it (somavén) or as identified with it after drinking it. 


A 
७३८०. त्वामिद्यवयुर्मम कामों गव्युहिंरण्ययु:। THIRRI ९ ।। 

9. To you my desire hastens, seeking barley, cows and 
gold,—to you it hastens seeking horses. 

Barley— Yuva Properly means barley, but may be here used c 
generally. The St. Petersburg Dict. remarks sub-v, that in the | 
Atharvaveda, and still more in the Brahmanas, yava and vrihi (rice) are l 

amen the principal kinds of corn, while rice is not mentioned by name in the I 
Rgveda. \ 
तवेदिन्द्राहमाशसा 1. द॑दे 
७३८१. द्रहमाशसा हस्ते दात्रं चना दंदे। 
दिनस्य वा मघवन्त्सम्भृतस्य वा पूर्धि यव॑स्य काशिनां।।१०॥ 

10. I take my sickle also in hand, Indra, with a prayer to you; t 
fill it, Maghavan, with a handful of barley already cut or piled. र 

It would appear as if the field were a barren one and the poet sought 
from Indra a harvest which he had not sown. 

0 
[सूक्त-७ ९] 
[ऋषि- कृत्नु भार्गव। देवता- सोम। छन्द- गायत्री, ९ are] k 
. काव्येन iC 
७३८२. अयं कूलुरगृभीतो विश्वजिदुद्धिदित्सोम॑:। ऋषिविंपरः ugu ९ 

1. This all-creating soma, obstructed by none, the conqueror of 
all, the producer of fruit, the seer, the wise, (is to be praised) with 8 a 
hymn. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


-a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 79 a 


The Conqueror of All, Etc.— Visvajit and udbhid are also the 
names of two special Soma ceremonies, and the Soma may be addressed 
under these names as the principal means of their accomplishment. 


७३८३. अभ्यूर्णोति यन्नग्नं भिषक्ति विश्वं यचुरम्‌। 
प्रेमन्धः ख्यन्निः श्रोणो भूत्‌॥२॥। 
2. He covers what is naked, he heals all that is sick, the blind 
sees, the lame walks. 
७३८४. त्वं सोम तनूकृद्भ्यो द्वेषोभ्यो5न्यकृंतेभ्य:। 
E यन्तासि वरूथम्‌।३।। 
3. Soma, you offer us a wide shelter from the wasting enmities 
wrought by our foes. 
Yajurveda, 5.35. Sayana seems to take yantdsi as bhavasi; Mahidhara 


explains it, **you the restrain (yanta) from enmitics, etc., you are a wide 
shelter.”’ 


७३८५. त्वं चित्ती तव दक्षैर्दिव आ पृथिव्या &जीपिन्‌। 
यावीरघस्य॑ fae द्वेष: 11 11 
4. O Rjisin, by your wisdom and might drive away the enmity 
of our oppressor from the heaven and the earth. 
O Rjisin— Ze., you who possess the remains of the Soma, offered in 


the third savana, cf. Taitt. Samhita VI.1.6. Rjisin is translated in the St. 
Petersburg Dict **vorstürzend, ereilend.”’ 


७३८६. अर्थिनो यन्ति चेदर्थं गच्छानिद्ददुषो रातिम्‌। 


वब्ज्युस्तृष्यतः SII I 
5. The petitioners seek for wealth, they attend the bounty of 
the liberal; (by you) men pour out the desire of the thirsty. 


७३८७. विदद्यत्पूर्व्य नष्टमुदामृतायुमीरयत्‌। प्रेमायुस्तारीदतीर्णम्‌।॥६ L 


6. (Soma) urges him on when the sacrificer obtains es 
offerings) him old lost wealth, he lengthens out his unending life. 


He Lengthens out his unending life— There, is no Comm. for this 
last clause, 


७३८८. सुशेवों नो मृळयाकुररदृप्तक्रतुरवातः। भवां नः सोम शं gl 


7. Most gracious and conferring joy, void of pride in your acts, 
and never failing, dwell, Soma, auspiciously in our hearts. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MR ,_ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


602 Rgveda Sarihitz 


७३८९. मा न॑ः सोम सं वीविजो मा वि बीभिषथा राजन्‌। 


| [ 
मा नो हार्दि त्विषा वंधी:।।८।। 
8. O Soma, cause us not to tremble, frighten us not, O king; 
smite not our hearts with your brightness. ! 
I देवानां दुर्मतीरी N A 
७३९०. अव यत्स्वे सधस्थे देवानां a | 
| मीढवो I 
राजन्नप fea: सेध मीढ्वो अप fast: सेध।।९।। 
9. When in my house I watch against the enemies of the gods, | 
then, O king, drive away those who hate us,—O showerer of 
blessings, drive away those who would harm us. ; 
Showerer of Blessings— Sayana explains midhvah ‘‘effuser of the 
Soma," somarasasya sektd, but it seems more natural to take it here as 
elsewhere (as II.8.1. of Agni) phalasya sektd, or (as VII.89.7. of Varuna) 
kàmanam sektd. 
[सूक्त-८०] | 
[ऋषि- vag नौधस। देवता- इन्द्र, १० देवगण। 


छन्द- गायत्री, १० त्रिष्टुप्‌ । | 
७३९१. नह्यन्यं बळार्करं मर्डितारं शतक्रतो। त्वं न॑ इन्द्र मृळय।।१॥ 
पणे l. Other than you, Satakratu, I know no bestower of 
happiness; /ndra, do you make us happy. ) 
७३९२. यो नः शश्वत्युराविथामृभ्रो वाज॑सातये। स त्वं न॑ इन्द्र FSAI 
2. O you, the invulnerable, who have always in former times 
protected us for the battle, do you, Jndra, make us happy. 
| 
७३९३. किमङ्ग रध्रचोदनः सुन्वानस्यावितेद॑सि। कुवित्स्विन्द्र णः Eh: liil 
3. Director of the worshipper, you are the guardian of the 
offerer; help us mightily. 
wat e 
७३९४. इन्द्र प्र णो रथमव पश्चाच्चित्सन्तमद्विव:। पुरस्तादेनं मे कृधि।[४॥ 


2 : it in 
4. Indra, protect our chariot; though now left behind, set it! 
the front, O thunderer. 


3 3 1 
७३९५. इन्तो नु किमांससे प्रथमं नो रथ कृधि। उपमं वाजयु श्ररवः।॥॥। 


PR food- 
5. Up, why sit you still? Make our chariot the first; our ० 
secking offering is near you. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


dita Mandala 8, Sükta 80 603 


Food-Seeking— Here, as elsewhere, Sáyana explains vdjayu by 
annam icchat; the St. Petersburg Dict. takes it as '*wettlaufend, eilig’’; 
Grassmann renders it **güterreich."" Sayana explains Sravas by annam as 


usual, Łe., havirlaksanam. The clause may perhaps mean “the race is 


ne glorious and swift.” 

७३९६. अवां नो वाजयुं vd सुकर ते किमित्परिं। 

अस्मान्त्सु जिग्युषस्कृधि।1६ 1 
F Protect our food-secking chariot; everything is easy for you 

E: to do; make us completely victorious. 
0. z 1 धीर्क्रत्वियावती 

७३९७. इन्द्र दृह्य॑स्व पूर॑सि भद्रा d एति निष्कृतम्‌। इयं धीर्क्रत्वियावती ito 11 
the 7. Indra, be firm (in battle), you are (strong as) a city; to you, 
as the repeller (of enemies), comes this auspicious sacrifice, offered 
na) in due season. 


You are Strong as a City— Or, according to another interpretation, 
“be firmly settled (in our sacrifice), you are the fulfiller of desires,” 
pürakah kamanam asi. 

The Repeller of Enemies— Niskritam is here taken a actively, ie., 
Niskartaram. It may be also taken passively, 05 auspicious sacrifice 
comes to your appointed (place).”” 


७३९८. मा सींमवद्य आ भागुर्वी काष्टा हितं धन॑म्‌। अपावृक्ता FTA IC UI 


8. Let not reproach reach us; far off is the goal; there is the 
of wealth stored; may our enemies be excluded. 
७३९९. तुरीयं नाम यज्ञियँ यदा करस्तदुश्मसि। आदित्पतिर्न ओहसे। 11 
| 9. When you assume your sacrificial fourth name, we long for 
it; then you forthwith carry us as a protector. 

Sacrificial Fourth Name— The four names are explained to be the 
naksatra or constellation-name, (ie, Arjuna, as connected with the 
n constellation Arjuneksu or Phaleunyau? see Satap Brahm., 1.1.2.1. 
where it is, however, called the hidden name guhyam ndma), the hidden 
name, the revealed name, and the sacrificial name somayajín. 


७४००. अर्वीवृधद्वो अमृता अमन्दीदेकद्यूर्देवा उत याश्च॑ देवीः। 
in wed उ wd: कृणुत प्रशस्त प्रातर्मक्षू धियार्वसुर्जगम्यात्‌।॥१०।। 

10. O immortal gods and all you goddesses, Ekadvü has 
| honoured you (with his praise) and rejoiced you (with his Soma- 


offerings); make his substance abundant: and may (Indra), who 
rewards pious acts with wealth, come speedily in the morning. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


congu ———-XXXQ—— U 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


604 Rgveda Samhita M 
[सूक्त-८ १] ७) 
[ऋषि- कुसीदी काण्व। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- गायत्री। ] 
७४०१. आ तू नं इन्द्र Grd चित्रं ग्राभं सं गृभाय। महाहस्ती दक्षिणेन ॥१॥ 
1. Indra, lord of the mighty hand, do you seize for us with your b 
right hand marvellous praise-exciting (riches), worthy to be seized, wi 


Sámaveda,167, 728, Sáyana supplies dhanam **wealth,"" and takes 
ksumantam as Sabdamantam — stutyam. Benfey takes — grábham 
(grahanárham) as referring to the thunderbolt, **ergreife nun für uns den de 
donnernden, den Flammengniff.”’ 


७४०२. विद्या हि त्वां तुविकूर्मि तुविदेष्णं तुवीमंघम्‌। तुविमात्रमवोभिः॥२।। 
2. We know you the achiever of many great deeds, the 
bestower of many gifts, the lord of much wealth, vast in size, and ७४ 


full of protection (for your worshippers). 
Sámaveda, 729 ex! 


७४०३. नहि त्वां शूर देवा न मर्तासो दित्सन्तम्‌। भीमं न गां वारयन्ते।॥३॥। S 


3. Hero, when you desire to give, neither gods nor men can 
stay you, as (they cannot stay) a terrible bull. 


७४०४. एतो न्विन्द्रं स्तवामेशांनं वस्व॑ः स्वराज॑म्‌। न राध॑सा मर्धिषन्न: 11४1 


sin 
कक» 4. Hasten hither, let us glorify /ndra the lord of wealth, the e 
self-resplendent, let none vex, us by his wealth. 
| जुगुरत्‌ 
७४०५. प्र स्तोषदुप गासिषच्छूवत्साम गीयर्मानम्‌। अभि राध॑सा जुगुरत्‌।५॥ (a 
5. May (Indra) sing the prelude, may he sing the accompani- Inc 
ment, may he listen to our hymn as it is chanted; may he, endowed sy 
with wealth, accept us favourably. 
May he sing the Accompaniment— Le., let him act as prastotd and 
the wpagata; for the functions of these assistants at a Sãman. sce Prof. sur 
Haug's notes, Ait. Brahm., 111.23; VILL. rite 
3l 
७४०६. आ नों भर दक्षिणेनाभि सव्येन प्र मृश। पे 
इन्द्र मा नो वसोनिभाक्‌।।६।। mk 
6. Bring us (gifts) with your right hand, and with your left = 
bestow them on us; exclude us not, Indra, from wealth. bo 
1 b 
७४०७. उप॑ क्रमस्वा भ॑र धृषता धृष्णो जनांनाम्‌। अर्दाशृष्टरस्य वेर्द:11911 st 
7. Come hither, and bring us, daring one, with your resolute 
© amongst 


(mind), the wealth of him who is pre-eminently a niggard 
men. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ita 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 82 605 
७४०८. इन्द्र य उ नु ते अस्ति वाजो विप्रेभिः सनित्व:। 
अस्माभिः सु तं सनुहि।।८।। 
8.0 Tndra, give us a abundantly that wealth which is your, and 
which is to be obtained by the wise (worshippers). 
७४०९. सद्योजुवस्ते वाजां अस्मर्ध्य विश्वश्वन्द्रा:। ala मक्ष जरन्ते।॥९ I 
9. May your all-rejoicing riches speedily come to us; full of 
desires, men immediately offer their praises. 
[सूक्त -८२] 
[ऋषि- कुसीदी काण्व। देवता- zx छन्द- गायत्री। | 
७४१०. आ प्र va परावतोऽ्वावतंशच वृत्रहन्‌। मध्वः प्रति प्रभ॑र्मणि॥॥१॥ 
1. Hasten, slayer of Vrtra, from afar or from nigh to the 
exhilarating (Soma-libations) in the sacrifice. 
७४११. तीव्राः सोमास आ गहि सुतासो मादयिष्णव॑:। 
पिबां दधृग्यथोचिषे।।२।। 
2. Come hither, the strong intoxicating Soma is effused: drink, 
since you are boldly devoted to it. 


७४१२. इषा मॅन्दस्वादु तेऽरं वराय मन्यवें। भुर्वत्त इन्द्र शं हृदे॥३॥ 
3. Rejoice yourself with this food,—may it forthwith avail to 


(quench) your foe-restraining anger, may it produce happiness, 
Indra, in your heart. 
७४१३. आ त्व॑शत्रवा ग॑हि न्युशक्थानि च हृयसे। उपमे रोचने दिवः॥४॥ 

4. O you who have no enemies, come hither; you are 
Summoned from the resplendent heaven to the hymns at this our 
rite near at hand in this world illumined (by the sacred fires). 

It would be more obvious to take upame rocaane livah, with the St. 
Petersb. Dict., as **in the highest splendour of heaven’. Sayana, however, 
takes divah as svatejasd dipyamandd dyulokat, “from the world of 
heaven illumined by its won splendour,” i.e., by the deities residing there; 
rocane as agnibhir dipyamáne loke, and upame as samipe, asmadiye 


Yajiie ca. 
४१४. तुभ्यायमद्रिभिः सुतो गोभिः श्रीतो मदाय कम्‌! 
प्र सोम॑ इन्द्र हूयते।।५।। 


aS की In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


pn —  HÁÁ——— OUO 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


M: 
$09 Rgveda Sarihita 
By, Indra, this Soma, effused for you by the stones and mixed 2 
with milk, is offered auspiciously (in the fire) for your 
exhilaration. ou 
| हव॑मस्मे ७२ 
७४१५. m श्रुधि सु मे हव॑मस्मे सुतस्य गोम॑तः। 
aa | 
वि पीतिं तृप्तिमश्नुहि।।६।। fe 
6. Indra, hear with favour may call; be present at the drinking wi 
of this our libation mixed with milk, and be satisfied. 
| सोम॑ tN 
७४१६. य ईन्द्र चमसेष्वा सोमश्चमूषु ते सुतः। पिबेदस्य त्वमीशिषे।।७॥ E 
7. Whatever Soma has been poured into the cups and the bowls thi 
for you, drink it, Indra—you are the sovereign. ७१ 
Samaveda, 162. 
The Bowls— The Soma libations are poured from two kinds of 
vessels, the camasas, i.e., cups, and the grahds, or saucers (here called V 
camu), cf. Haug, Ait. Br. trans., p.118. ७१ 
I सोम पिबेदस्य त्वमीशिषे 
७४१७. यो अप्सु चन्द्रमाइव सोम॑श्रमूषु ददूशे। पिबेदस्य ॥८॥ 
8. Whatever Soma is seen in the vessels like the moon w 
(reflected) in the waters, drink it,—you are the sovereign. | 
In the Vessels— ie., it is thus seen in the eight grahds. Sayana gives del 
another interpretation of apsu ‘‘in the waters’? as antarikse ‘‘in the sky, ७ 
क nirmalatayd, the Soma being likened to the moon for its purity. 
> d छ पिबेदस्य त्वमीशिषे 
७४१८. यं तें श्येनः पदाभरत्तिरो रजांस्यस्पृतम्‌। य IRI É 
9. Whatever Soma the hawk bore for you with its fect, havin 
won it, till then inviolate, from the (guardians of the) upper worlds, 5 
drink it,—you are the sovereign. a 
Whatever the Hawk Bore— This alludes to the legend given पा E w 
Taitt. Samhita, VII. (Cf. also Ait. Brahm., I11.25-27), which tells how 1 é 
Gayatri as a hawk brought the Soma from heaven. The portions Ni 
seized with her feet became the moming and the midday libation, 
which she seized with her bill became the evening libation. m 
[सूक्त-८३] 
[क्रषि- कुसीदी काण्व। देवता- विश्वेदेवा। छन्द- गायत्री। ] ७ 
देवानामिदवों वृणीमहे t saggi || 
७४१९. देवानामिदवों महत्तदा वृणीमहे वयम्‌। वृष्णामस्मभ्यमु : 
fr = EE deities 
1. We solicit that might protection of the desire-raiDIDg tt 


in our own behalf, for our own help. 
Sdmaveda, 138. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


mhità 
nixed 
your 


nking 


E 


105 of 
called 


al 
moon 


| gives 
sky," 


९ || 
laving 
'orlds, 


in the 
ow the 
ich she 
n, that 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 83 ah 


७४२०. ते न॑ः सन्तु युजः सदा वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा। वृधासश्र प्रचेतस:।1२॥ 


2. May those (deities) Varuna, Mitra, and Aryaman, be ever 
our allies and supremely wise helpers. 

७४२१. अर्ति नो विष्पिता पुरु नौभिरपो न पर्षथ। यूयमृतस्य॑ रथ्यः॥३॥ 

3, Charioteers of the sacrifice, do you conduct us through the 
many wide-spread (forces of our enemies) as in ships across the 
waters. 

Sayana’s comm. is not quite clear, but I have taken it as in 1.27.7. If 
we omit the words no’smadn (found only in B.) and take nah for asmákam, 
his interpretation will run, 'conduct our (sacrifices) to completion 
through the many widespread (forces of our enemies)."" 


७४२२. वामं नों अस्त्वर्यमन्वाम वरुण शंस्य॑म्‌। वामं हयवृणीमह।॥४॥। 
4. Be wealth ours, Aryaman,— wealth worthy to be praised. 
Varuna; it is wealth which we ask. 


७४२३. वामस्य हि प्रचेतस ईशानासो रिशादसः। नेमादित्या अघस्य यत्‌॥५। 


5. Mighty in wisdom, repellers of enemies, you are the lords of 
wealth; be not mine the wealth, Adityas, which belongs to sin. 

Be not Mine— I think that za is omitted in the Comm. before 
prápnotu. 
७४२४. wufüd: सुदानवः क्षियन्तो यान्तो अध्वत्रा। देवा वृधाय॑ हूमहे॥६।। 

6. Bounteous deities, whether we dwell at home or go abroad 
on the road, we invoke you only to be nourished by our oblations. 

Whether we dwell at home or go abroad on the Road— The 
Schol. explains this, "whether we remain at home to perform the 
agnihotra, ctc., or go forth in the roads to collect fuel, ete.” 

To be nourished by our Oblations— Or “to enrich us with 
wealth.” 


७४२५. अधिं न इन्द्रैषां विष्णो सजात्यानाम्‌। इता मरतो अश्चिना। tl 


7. Come to us, Indra, Visnu, Maruts, and Adityas, from the 
midst of these your brethren. 

Yajurveda, 33,47. 

Your Brethren— Sc. Mitra, etc. 
७४२६. प्र भ्रातृत्व॑ सुंदानवो5ध॑ fear संमान्या। मातुर्गर्भ भरामहे। I 

8. Bounteous (deities), we forthwith proclaim aloud thas 
brotherhood of yours in mother’s womb, (first) in common union, 
then as born in diverse manner. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


608 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and SOG imd 
S a Samhità 


This alludes to a legend partly given in Taitt. Samhita, V1.5.6, There 
Aditi is represented as offering a certain offering to the gods, and as 
conceiving four of the Adityas on eating the remainder which they gave to 
her. Thinking to conceive a still nobler offspring, she next eats the whole 
of the second offering herself, but she only conceives a barren egg. She 
then offers the third offering to the Adityas and conceives Vivasvat. But 
this legend says nothing of the birth of Pasar and Aryaman as alluded to 
by the Scholiast. 


७४२७. यूयं हि ठा सुदानव इन्द्रज्येष्ठा अभिद्य॑वः। अधां fag उत FIR 


9. Bounteous (deities) with Jndra as your chief, be present here 
in your radiance; again and again I praise you. 


[सूक्त -८४] 
[ऋषि- उशना काण्व। देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- गायत्री। ] 
७४२८. प्रेष्ठै वो अतिथि स्तुषे मित्रमिंव प्रियम्‌। अग्नि रथं न वेद्यंम्‌।॥१ || 
1. I praise Agni your most beloved guest, dear as a friend, who 


brings wealth as a chariot; 

Samaveda, 5, 1544. 
७४२९. कविमिंव प्रचेतसं यं देवासो अर्ध द्विता। नि मर्त्यष्वादधुः।।२।। 

2. Whom the gods have set like a wise seer in a twofold 
function among mortals. 

Samaveda, 1245, reading prashamsyam and iti for pracetasam and 
adha. $ 

A two-fold function among Mortals— Agni’s two functions are the 
Garhapatya and Ahavaniya fires, or it may refer to his offices connected 
with the sacrifice in heaven and earth. 


७४३०. त्वं य॑विष्ठ दाशुषो नूँ: पाहि शृणुधी fR: रक्षां तोकमुत GAIA 
3. Ever-youthful (Agni), protect your offerers, hear our praises, 
and thyself guard our offspring. 5 
Saámaveda, 1246; Yajurveda, 13.52. Benfey takes the last claus 


: ives as an 
“‘bewahre uns und unsern Spross," which Mahidhara also gives as 
alternative rendering. 


७४३१. कयां ते अग्ने अङ्गिर ऊर्जा नपादुपस्तुतिम्‌। वराय देव मन्यवें॥४॥ 


4. Divine Agni Angiras, son of food, with what voice (shall I 


utter) my praise to you, most excellent scorner of enemies? 
Samaveda, 1549. For a different explanation of vardya many 
VIII.82.3. 


'ave. 5९९ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


——————X ————— zu ७०44 PESCE" 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


mhita Mandala 8, Sükta 85 609 
There Son of Food— Sayana here as elsewhere gives the alternative 
nd as rendering *'grandson of the sacrificial offering.” 
ave to EI 1 "ad ` [e PET 
whole ७४३२. दाशेम कस्य मनसा यज्ञस्य सहसो यहो। कदु वोच इदं नम॑:। 
. She 5. Son of strength, what worshipper’s (offerings) shall we 
(. But present to you with devoted mind, and when shall I uiter to you 
led to this praise? [ 

Sámaveda, 1550. Benfey translates kasya manasd yajmasya “‘mit l 
॥९॥। welcher Feien Ersinnung?"" i 

धा त्वं ` | le 
ne ७४३३. अधा त्वं हि नस्करो विश्वा अस्मभ्यं सुक्षितीः। 
m वाजंद्रविणसो 1 E 
विणसो गिर: tis t 
6. Cause all our praises to bring to us excellent dwellings and 
abundance of wealth in food. 
Sdmaveda, 1551. 
1 . E EY EX `A 
T ७४३४. कस्य नूनं परीणसो धियो जिन्वसि दम्पते। 
। [| 

who गोषाता यस्य ते गिर:11911 


7. Whose many offerings do you gladden, Agni, you who are 
the lord of the house, and whose praises bring wealth of kine? 
| Sámaveda, 34, with parinasi and satpate for parinasah and dampate. 
f The lord of the House— Sayana takes dampate as jáyapatisvarüpa, 
fold since abides in the Garhapatya fire, but cf. VIIL69.16. The last clause may 
mean ‘‘whose praises are heard in the rite which brings wealth of kine.” 


and Br eee : 
ve ७४३५. तं मर्जयन्त सुक्रतुं पुरोयावांनमाजिषु। स्वेषु क्षयेषु वाजिनम्‌।॥८ || 
e the 8. They keep him bright in their houses, (Agni) famed for 
ected glorious deeds, the mighty one who presses forward in battles. 

७४३६. क्षेति क्षेमेंभि: साधुभिर्नकिर्यं घ्नन्ति हन्ति यः। 

|i — OU x c 0 MOSS 

s र अग्ने सुवीर॑ एधते।।९।। 
ECT 9. He who dwells at home with all-efficient protections, whom 
(inse none can harm, but who himself harms (his enemies),—he. Agni, 
san (your worshipper), waxes strong with heroic offspring. 

[सूक्त-८५] 
be [क्रषि- कृष्ण आङ्गिरस। देवता- अधिनीकुमार। छन्द- गायत्री। | 
I e छि सोम॑स्य पीतये à 

ze ७४३७. आ मे हवं नासत्याश्विना गच्छत॑ युवम्‌। मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये॥१ li 
१, See 1. Nasatyás, Asvins, come you to may invocation that ye may 


drink the exhilaration Soma. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
610 


Rgveda Samhita ? 
E स्तोममा E ET > I सोम॑स्य पीतयें 
७४३८. इमं मे नेमं में शृणुतं हवम्‌। मध्वः सोम॑स्य dedi 
2. Asvins, hear this my hymn, this my invocation that you may 


drink the exhilarating Soma. 
७४३९. अयं वां कृष्णों अश्विना हव॑ते वाजिनीवसू। 
मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतयें।।३।। 


3. Krsna invokes you, Asvins rich in sacrifices, that you may 


drink the exhilarating Soma. ; 
७४४०. शुणुतं जरितुर्हवं कृष्ण॑स्य स्तुवतो न॑रा। मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये।॥४॥। 

4. Leaders (of all), hear the invocation of Krsna, the hymner, 
who praises you,—that ye may drink the exhilarating Soma. ‘ 
७४४१. छदिंयन्तमदाभ्यं विप्रा स्तुवते न॑रा। मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतयेँ।॥५।। | 

5. Leaders, give to the sage who praises you an unassailable । 
dwelling that you may drink the exhilarating Soma. t 
७४४२. गच्छतं दाशुषों गृहमित्था स्तुंवतो अंश्चिना। 

मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतयें।।६।। \ 


6. Asvins, come to the house of the offerer who thus praises 
you, that you may drink the exhilarating Soma. 
७ 1. वीड्व॑ड्रे ` सोम॑स्य पीतयें 
== ७४४३. युज्ञाथां रास॑भं रथे P वृषण्वसू। मध्वः सोम॑स्य पीतये et | 
7. You who possess showering wealth, yoke the ass to your 
firmly built chariot, that ye may drink the exhilarating Soma. 
Yajurveda, 11.13, has part of this verse, but much of it is quite 
different. Sayana takes the verse as addressed to the Asvins, Mahidhara as 
addressed to the adhvaryu priest and the sacrificer, or to the sacrificer and 
his wife. 
त्रिवन्धुरेण 1 1 सोम॑स्य पीतयें 
७४४४. त्रिवन्धुरेण त्रिवृता रथेना यातमश्चिना। मध्वः सोमस्य TAC | 
8. Asvins, come hither with your three-seated triangular car, 
that you may drink the exhilarating Soma. 
Three-Seated triangular Car— For trivandhvrena cf. 1.34.9; p 
VIII.22.5, etc., Sayana continually vacillates in his interpretation; Lm 1 
takes it as triphalakasamghatitena, ‘‘compacted of three pieces. He é : ; 
gives as a second interpretation of 01976 **defended by three sets 
plates.” 


७४४५. जू मे गिरो नासत्याश्चिंना प्राव॑तं युवम्‌। मध्वः सोमस्य पीतयें॥९॥ 


७ ७-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar i 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


hità Mandala 8, Sükta 86 ae 


! 9. Nàásatyás, Asvins, hasten quickly to my praises, that you 
many drink the exhilarating Soma. 


nay 
[सूक्त-८६] 
[ऋषि- कृष्ण आङ्गिरस अथवा विश्वक कार्णि॥। 
देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- जगती। | र 
ney ७४४६. उभा हि TA भिषजां मयोभुवोभा दक्षस्य वच॑सो बभूवर्थु:। ता वां » 
विश्वंको हवते तनूकृथे मा नो वि यौष्टं सख्या मुमोच॑तम्‌॥१॥। 


1. Dasras, physicians, sources of happiness, you both were 

Don (the objects) of Daksa's praise; Visvaka now invokes you for the 
sake of his son; sever not our friendships, but fling loose (your 
reins and gallop hither). 

Objects of Daksa's Praise— This seems to allude to the thousand 
ble Rks uttered by Daksa or Prajdpati, i.e., the Asvind Sastra, which was won 
by the Asvins in a race, see I.116.2 (Comm.) and Ait. Brahm., Iv.7. 

Sever not our Friendships— Sc. as worshipper and the object of 
worship. 


| ७४४७. कथा नूनं वां विम॑ना उप॑ स्तवद्युवं fud ददथुर्वस्य इष्वे। ता वां 
33 विश्वंको हवते तनूकृथे मा नो वि यॉष्टं सख्या मुमोच॑तम्‌॥२।। 


2. How Vimanas once praised you, and you gave him 


Il understanding for the attainment of excellent wealth! Visvaka now 


our invokes you for the sake of his son; sever not our friendships, but 
fling loose (your reins and gallop hither). 
ule ७४४८. युवं हि wd पुरुभुजेममेधतुं विष्णाप्वे ददथुर्वस्यइष्टये। ता वां 
i = E > ats = pow मुमोच॑तम्‌ 
ind विश्वंको हवते तनूकृथे मा नो वि यौष्टं सख्या JAAT 


3. Gladdeners of many, you have given to Visnápu this 
prosperity for the attainment of excellent wealth; Visvaka now 
| invokes you for the sake of his son; sever not our friendships, but 

y t 


“ar, fling loose (your reins and gallop hither). 
Visnapu— This is the name of the Rsi's son or grandson. 
12; ७४४९. उत त्यं du धॅनसामुजीपिण दूरे चित्सन्तमवंसे हवामहे। यस्य 
he = = Te मरन E aw n मुमोचतम्‌। 
s स्वार्दिष्ठा सुमतिः पितुर्यथा मा नो वि AE सख्या मुमोचतम्‌।४॥। 


ero to our protection, (the enjoyer) of 
who now dwells afar off and 
ods) like his father's. sever 
and gallop hither). 


of 4. We summon that hi 
Wealth, the possessor of the Soma, 
Whose hymn is most pleasing (to the g 


|| t fri : TS 
not our friendships, but fling loose (your reins 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


_ SS UOU 


612 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and gango hits 
Ò ihità 
We Summon that Hero— The Rsi here prays for the presence of his 


absent son Visnápu. The Schol. only adds in explanation that 
son to protect the father." 

The Possessor of the Soma— Rjisin is generally an epithet of Indra 
and is always explained by Sayana as here, "possessor of the stale Soma” 
risa (cf. 111.32.1; 36.10, etc.); but there is a word ryisa in 1.32.6, applied 
to Indra, which Sayana there explains as "enemy-repelling,'* and rjisin 
must have some such meaning here. The St. Petersburg Dict. always 
explains it in the Rgveda as ‘‘vorsturzend, ereilend,”’ 


७४५०. ऋतेन॑ देवः संविता श॑मायत ऋतस्य श्रृज्मुर्विया वि पंप्रथे। ऋत॑ 
सासाह महि चित्पृतन्यतो मा नो वि यौष्टं सख्या मुमोचतम्‌। 1 

5. The sun-god by truth extinguishes his beams (in the 

evening): he spreads abroad (in the morning) the horn of truth; 

truth verily overcomes the might of the cager assailant; therefore 


sever not our friendships, but fling loose (your reins and gallop 
hither). 


“it is for the 


Sayana takes the stanza as a praise of truth, satyaprasamsa. He seems 
to explain the verse as implying that as the sun swerves not from his 
appointed course, and as truth or adherence to right conquers earthly foes, 
so the Asvins must fulfil the duties of ancient friendship and hear the Rsi’s 
prayer. 


[सूक्त-८७] 


- [क्रषि- कृष्ण आङ्गिरस अथवा द्युम्मीक वासिष्ठ अथवा प्रियमेध आङ्गिरस। 
देवता- अश्विनीकुमार। छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)।] 
७४५१. द्युम्नी वां स्तोमों अश्विना क्रिविर्न सेक आ ग॑तम्‌। 
मध्वः सुतस्य स दिवि प्रियो न॑रा पातं गौराविवेरिंणे।१॥ 

l. Asvins, your praise is filled with plenty as a well (with 
water) in time of rain; hasten hither; it is especially dear to the 
Soma when it is effused in the brilliant (offering); drink, leaders 
(of rites), as two Gauras (drink), at a pool. 

Cf. VIILA.3 : 

Your Praise is filled with Plenty—4e., it brings abundance to ihe 
worshipper. (In 89.2, dyumni is explained ‘‘glorious’’.) Another 
interpretation takes Dyumni as for Dyumniko. ‘‘Asvins, Dyumnika is your 
praiser.”” 

७४५२. पिबतं घर्म मधुमन्तमश्चिना बर्हिः ded नरा। 
Es E. टु : 
ता मन्दसाना मनुषो दुरोण आ नि पांतं Ader wii! 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


00 51555 २ 3 ॥ 


hità 


Chis 
‘the 


dia 
a 
lied 
isin 
‘ays 


a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 87 


613 

2. Drink, Asvins, the exhilarating (Soma) as it drops (into the 
vessels), —seat yourselves, readers, on the sacrificial grass; 
rejoicing in the house of the worshipper, drink the sacred beverage 
with the oblation. 

As it Drops = Gharma may also be taken for the earthen pot calied 
mahdvira, and signify the milk boiled in it, “Drink, Asvins, the 
exhilarating (Soma) and the milk.” 

In the house of the Worshipper— Literally “in the house of the 
man’ manuso durone, i.e., the sacrifice which is as a home to the deities, 
cf. ५.76.4. 

Drink the Sacred Beverage with the Oblation — Or this clause may 
mean ‘‘protect our lives together with our wealth.” 

. Lu धांभिरूति्भि 1 प्रियमें 
७४५३. आ वां विश्वाभिरूतिभिः प्रियमेधा अहूषत। 
वर्तिर्यातमुरप le ! [ वृक्तबर्हिषो E |. = 1 
ता वर्तिर हषो जुष्टं यज्ञं दिविष्टिषु।।३॥ 

3. The worshippers have invoked you with an protections; 
come in the early mornings to the dwelling of him who has clipped 
the sacred grass, to the offering loved (by all the gods). 

The Worshippers— Priyamedhah, literally **those whose sacrifice 
are acceptable." The commentator also suggests that it may refer to the 
Rsi Priyamedha (V11L68, 69), the plural being used as honorific. 

With all your Protections— Or visvabhir ütibhih may mean “with 
prayers for all desirable blessings.” 

1 firdd ^e 1 ated > 
७४५४. पिबतं सोमं मधुमन्तमश्चिना बर्हिः सीदतं सुमत्‌। 
1 ud > गौराविवेरिणम्‌ 
ता वावृधाना उप॑ सुष्टुतिं दिवो गन्तं गौराविवेरिणम्‌। 1४11 

4. Asvins, drink the exhilarating Soma, sit down in your 
radiance on the sacrificial grass; waxing strong (through the 
libation), come from heaven to our praises as two Gadras to a 
pool. 


> 1 
७४५५. आ नूनं यांतमश्चिनाश्रॅभिः प्रुषितप्सुभि:। 
wer हिर॑ण्यवर्तनी शुभस्पती पातं सोम॑मृतावृधा।५।। 
5. Come, Asvins, with your glossy steeds; Dasras, riding in 


golden chariots, lords of good fortune, upholders of truth, drink the 
Soma. 


७४५६. वयं हि वां हवामहे विपन्यवो विप्रांसो वाज॑सातये। 
" = SESS 1 
ता वल्गू दस्रा पुरुदंसंसा धियाश्चिना श्रुष्ट्या hull 


6. We, your wise praisers, invoke you to the enjoyment त 
sacrificial viands; come quickly, Dasras, at the sound of oui 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


— <<< 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


614 Rgveda Samhita 


praise, Asvins, graceful in your movements, abounding in mighty 
deeds. 


[सूक्त- ८८] 
[क्रषि- नोधा गौतम। देवता- इन्द्र। 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समा सतोबृहती)।] 
. al दस्ममृतीषहं H वसोर्मन्दानमन्ध॑स | 
७४५७. तं वो दस्ममृतीषहं दानमन्धसः | 
5 1. fame 
अभि वत्सं न स्वसरेषु धेनव इन्द्र गीर्भिर्नवामहे ।॥१ 11 

1. We offer praise with our hymns, as cows (low) to their calf 
in the stalls, to that handsome Indra of yours. (O priests), the 
overcomer of enemies, who rejoices in the excellent beverage, 

Yajurveda, 26.11; Samaveda, 236, 685. 

In the Stalls— Sayana takes svasaresu in this sense, but he quotes 
Yaska (Nir., ५.4) to show the word may also mean ‘‘days.’’ (Cf. Prof. 
Roth’s note in his edition, p.56.) Sayana takes it as ‘days’ in the first 
clause, **we praise you in the days,’ and ‘stalls’ in the second. 


In the Excellent Beverage— I take vasoh, or rather the gloss 
vasayituh, as Sayana explains it in vi.16.25. 


७४५८. दयुक्षं सुदानुं तविषीभिरावृत गिरिं न पुरुभोजंसम्‌। 
क्षुमन्तं वाजँ शतिं सहखिर्ण मक्षू गोम॑न्तमीमहे।।२।। 


2. We solicit the radiant bounteous (/ndra), surrounded by 
powers as a mountain (by clouds), the supporter of many,—(we 
solicit him) speedily for renowned food, rich in cattle, and 
multiplied an hundred and a thousand fold. 

Sámaveda, 686. 

The Supporter of Many— Or “‘to be fed by the offerings of many," 
purubhojasam. 

Renowned— Sayana’s explanation of kswmantam is not clear, but he 
seems to take it as **causing praises by means of the children which it will 
produce,"  sabdavantam, anena  putrádikam — laksyate, stotrádini 
kurvanam. Ksumantam vájam occurs in IL.1.10; 4.8, and is there 
explained sabdavantam — kirtimantam. | (Grassmann explains it as 
nahrungsreich’.) Sayana adds that another interpretation of the verse takes 
all the adjectives as agreeing with vájam. 


७४५९. न त्वां बृहन्तो अद्र॑यो वर॑न्त इन्द्र diga: 
यहित्संसि स्तुवते माव॑ते वसु नकिष्टदा मिनाति ते।।३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


«GC—«——— 


f Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
ü 


y Mandala 8, Sükta 89 615 

3. The vast firm mountains cannot stop you, /ndra, whatever 
wealth you would give to a worshipper such as I none can hinder 
you therein. 

Samaveda, 296 
७४६०. योद्धासि क्रत्वा शवसोत दंसना विश्वा जाताभि मज्मना। 

आ त्वायमर्क ऊतये ववर्तति यं MAA अजीजनन्‌।४।। । 
4, By your exploits and might you are a warricr you overpower 
all beings by your deeds and prowess, this hymn which the 
= Gotamas have made, causes you to turn hither for their protection 
Ic This Hymn which the Gotamas, Etc.— This seems the obvious 
meaning of the words a tvdyam arka titaye vavartat yam Gotama 
ajijanan. But Sayana hilding the eternity of the Veda, explains the line 
25 this hymn (or this praiser) brings you hither for their protection, whom 
f. they have made manifest (in their sacrifice) 
हर ७४६१. प्र हि रिरिक्ष ओज॑सा दिवो अन्तेभ्यस्परिँ। 
s न त्वां विव्याच रज॑ इन्द्र पार्थिवमनु स्वधां ववक्षिथ।५॥। 
5. Indra, by your might you extend beyond the limits of 
heaven, the region of the earth cannot contain you deign to bring 
us food. 
Saámaveda, 312, but with yo, sadobhyas, and ati visvam for hi 
y antebhyas, and anu svadhám; agreeing 10 the last clause with i.81.5 
e ७४६२. नकिः परिष्ट्मघवन्मघस्य d यद्दाशुष दशस्यसिं। 
d 
अस्मार्क बोध्युचर्थस्य चोदिता मंहिष्ठो वाजसातये॥॥६॥। 

6. None can hinder your bounty Maghavan, when you give 

: wealth to your votary; most liberal sender (of wealth) listen to our 
praise for the attainment of food 

1९ 
ll [सूक्त-८९] 
ni = 
é [ऋषि- नृमेध आङ्गिरस तथा परुमेध आङ्गिरस। देवता- Sal छन्द १४ 
5 प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समा सतोबृहती) , 1६ अनुष्टुप्‌, ७ gecdi] 
S ७४६३. बृहदिन्द्राय गायत मरुतो वृत्रहन्तमम्‌ 


येन ज्योतिसननयत्रृतावृधो देवं देवाय जागृति १ || 

1. Priests sing to Indra the most sin- 

by which the upholders of truth p 
luminary for the god 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


destroying Brhat-Saman, 


roduced the divine all-waking 


UG  ——X— ————— || 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


616 Rgveda Sarhhita 


Yajurveda, 20.30: Sdmaveda, 258. 

Brhat Siman— This is a certain Saman, but here it mcans 
hymn. 

By which the Upholders, Etc.— That is, the Visve devah produced 
the sun for /ndra by means of the Brhat Sáman. Mahidhara takes it as 
meaning that they produced /ndra 5 own wakeful radiance thereby. 


७४६४. अपांधमदभिशंस्तीरशस्तिहाथेन्द्रो द्युम्न्याभंवत्‌। 
देवास्त इन्द्र सख्याय॑ येमिरे बृहद्धानो मर॑द्रण।।२॥ 


2. Indra, the destroyer of those who offer not praise, has 
driven away the malevolent and has become glorious; I Jndra of 
mighty splendour, lord of the troops of Maruts, the gods press you 
for your friendship. 

Yajurveda, 3.3.95. 

The Malevolent— Sayana takes abhisastih as ‘injuries’ or ‘the 


injuries,’ sc. enemies. Mahidhara, as usual, takes it as ‘calumnics,’ 
abhisapan. 


The Gods Press You— Sayana explains yemire by tvam niyacchanti, 
but Mahidhara more correctly preserves the middle meaning (cf. v. 
32.10), **the gods anxiously devote themselves to win your friendship." 
Cf. Sayana's own explanation in VIII.98.3. 


७४६५. प्र व॒ इन्द्राय बृहते मरुतो ब्रह्मार्चत। 
qi हनति वृत्रहा शतक्रतुर्वज्रॅण शतप॑र्वणा।।३।। 
3. Priests, utter forth the hymn to your great Indra: let 


Satakratu, the slayer of Vrtra, smite Vrtra with his hundred-edged 
thunderbolt. 


Yajurveda, 33.96; Sdmaveda, 257. 
७४६६. अभि प्र भ॑र धृषता धृषन्मनः श्रव॑श्चित्ते असद्‌ बृहत्‌! 
अर्षन्त्वापो जव॑सा वि मातरो हनों aa जया xdi 
4. Daring-souled (Indra), there is abundance of food with 


you,—boldly bring it to us; let our mothers (the waters) 
impetuously spread over the earth; smite Vrtra, and conquer all. 


Our Mothers— The waters are called mothers from the passage in | 
the Taitt. Up., IL.1, “from the waters comes the earth, from the earth the 
plants, from the plants food, from food semen, from semen man. 


७४६७. यज्जाय॑था अपूर्व्य मघवन्वृत्रहत्याय। | 
तत्पृथिवीमंप्रथयस्तर्दस्तभ्ना उत द्याम्‌। ५11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar i 


a mighty 


S 


se 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sukta 90 d 


5. Maghavan, who had none before you, when you was born 
for the slaying of Vrtra, then you did spread abroad the earth, then 
you did prop up the heavens. 

Samaveda, 601, 1429. 


७४६८. तत्ते यज्ञो अंजायत तदर्क उत हस्कृतिः। 
तद्विश्वमभिभूरसि यज्जातं यच्च उन्त्व॑म्‌।६।। 
6. Then was the sacrifice produced for you, then too the joyous 


hymn; then did you surpass all, whatever has been or will be born. 
Sdmaveda, 1430. 
७४६९. आमासुं पक्रमैर॑य आ सूर्य रोहयो दिवि। 
घर्म न सामन्तपता सुवृक्तिभिर्जुष्टं गिर्वणसे wed! 

7. In the immature (cows) you produced the mature (milk), 
you caused the sun to arise in heaven, (Priests), excite (Indra) with 
your praises as men heat the Gharma with Saman-hymns; (sing) 
the acceptable Brhat saman to him who is to be honoured by song. 

Sámaveda, 1431. 

The Mature Milk— Cf 1.62.9. 

You caused the Sun to arise in Heaven— Sayana here repeats the 
legend of the Panis and the stolen cows of the Añgirasas. The Rsis 
implored /ndra for help, who, seeing that the stronghold of the Asuras 
was enveloped in thick darkness, set the sun in the sky to dispel it. 

As men heat the Gharma with Saman Hymns— For the ceremony 
of heating the Mahavira or Gharma pot, used in the Pravargya ceremony, 
see Prof. Haug’s Ait. Brahm., Vol. Il. p. 42. The Saman hymns repeated 
during the heating are given in Ait. Brahm., 1.21 


[सूक्त-९०] 
[ऋषि- नृमेध आङ्गिरस तथा पुरुमेध आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र! 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समा सतोबृहती)। | 
७४७०. आ नो विश्वासु हव्य इन्द्र॑ः समत्सु भूषतु। 
उप ब्रह्माणि सव॑नानि वृत्रहा deren EATA: NR I 


1. May Indra, who is to be invoked in all battles regard our 
hymns and our libations, he the slayer of Vrira, who crushes the 


Samaveda, 1.3.2.3.7; 11.7.1.2.1, but with Indra and its adjectives in 
the accusative for the nominative, and bhusata for bhusatu, ie., 
honour Indra, etc.” 

JL. NE In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| a 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


618 Rgveda Samhita Ma 


Who crushes the Mightiest Foes— P, 


aramajydh also occurs in mc 
VIILI.30. Sayana’s first explanation is inadmissible, ‘‘he whose aw 
bowstring (Jya) is most excellent (parama)”’ (cf. Wilson's transl., vol. V, 
p.428); but he adds another, taken in the text, rightly connecting it with for 


the root jyd, to which he gives the sense of Airisa. (Benfey in his Dict, x 
connects this root in the sense of ‘overpowering?’ with. The St, E 
Pertersburg Dict. explains it **die höchste Obergewalt hebend,”’ 


७४७१. त्वं दाता प्रथमो राध॑सामस्यसि सत्य ईशानकृत्‌। 


वृणीमहे शव॑सो s 
तुविद्युम्नस्य युज्या वृणीमहे पुत्रस्य शव॑सो महः।।२।। P 
RTT x ue = f E 
2. You are the chief giver of wealth, you are truthful and make 
your worshippers rulers; we solicit (blessings) worthy of you, lord 
of vast riches, mighty son of strength. 
Sámaveda, 1493. int 
Mighty Son of Strength— Sayana obscurely explains this phrase, pre 
"*son of strength, because produced as the cause of strength in order to edi 
destroy enemies" (cf VIII.92.14). This strength, or victory through 
strength, is the final cause of his production or manifestation by the rite; 
and the final cause being then taken for the efficient, ‘strength’ may thus 
be called the father. 
| | 
७४७२. ब्रह्मा त इन्द्र गिर्वणः क्रियन्ते अनतिद्धुता। ith 
1 1 4 
इमा जुषस्व हर्यश्व योजनेन्द्र या ते अमन्महि।।३।। E 
3 PARES iim = A a 
E 3. Indra, who are the object of hymns, unexaggerated praises bat 
are offered by us; lord of bay steeds, accept these fitting hymns, ret 
which we have meditated for you. 3 ate 
Unexaggerated— Anatidbhutd is an obscure word; Sayana explains wa 
it sarván atikramya na bhavanti, indragunavydpakani yathárthabhütani. the 
The St. Petersb. Dict. explain it **unübertroffen," and derives it from the 
atibhüta with an alliterative reference to adbhuta. ' aw 
Hymns— Yojana is also explained by Sayana as stotra in i.88.5. So 
५ म॑घवन्ननांनतो SER] i 
७४७३. त्वं हि सत्यो मंघवन्ननानतो वृत्रा भूरिं न्यझसें। 5 
A 21 s | 
स त्वं शविष्ठ वज्रहस्त दाशुषेऽर्वाञ्चं रयिमा कृधि।४।। the 
4. You are truthful, Maghavan; untumbled yourself, oe 
humble many enemies; most mighty thunderer, cause wealth S 
meet your PRT: enin gr 
७४७४. त्वमिन्द्र यशा अस्यृजीषी l ठ 
८: Ji हंस्यप्रतीन्येक ^ 1 | ur 
vi वृत्राणि हंस्यप्रतीन्येक इदनुत्ता चर्षणीधृ्ता।५।॥। 1 in 
x m F. m : 0 it 
5. You, /ndra, lord of strength, are the glorious possessor hi: 


the offered Soma; alone with (your thunderbolt), that protector of i 


LE... —  — an In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ] 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


imhità Mandala 8, Sükta 91 619 
urs in men, you smite the enemies that none else cloud oppose or drive 
whose away. 
vol. v, Samaveda, 248, 1411, but with savasas patih for pate, purvanuttás 
t with for anuttá, and carsanidhrtii for dhrtd. 
Dict, A 1 नूनम॑सुर प्रचेतसं + राधों भागमिवेमहे 
ie. St ७४७५. तमु त्वा नूनमर W राधां भा He | 
महीव 1 1 E E | 
महाव कृत्तिः शरणा त इन्द्र प्र ते सुम्ना नो AAAI l t 
6. Living one, who possess supreme knowledge, we verily ask ) 


you for wealth as though it were an inheritance your abode (in 
a Indra, is vast like your glory; may your blessings fill us. 
Samaveda, 1412. 
, lord Living One— Asura is explained balaván Pranvan. 
The Abode in heaven is vast like your Glory— This is Sáyana's 
interpretation, following Yaska, Nir., v.2 More probably it means "your 


make 


hrase, protection is as a vast cloak or “‘hide,’’ see Prof. Roth’s note in his 
Jer to edition. 

rough 

> rite; [सूक्त- ९ १] 

/ thus 


[ऋषि- अपाला आत्रेयी। देवता- Sal छन्द- अनुष्ठप्‌, १२ पंक्ति। | 
VIII.9.11. Sayana quotes a legend from the Satyayana Brahmana to 
illustrate this hymn. Apdla, the daughter of Atri, being afflicted with a 
disease of the skin, was repudiated by her husband; she returned to her 
father’s hermitage, and there practised penance. One day she went our to 


ae bathe, intending to make a Soma offering to Indra, and as she was 
P returning, she found some Soma plants in the road. She gathered them and 
3 ate them as she walked. /ndra, hearing the sound of her jaws, thought it 
ains was the sound of the Soma stones, and appeared to her, asking whether 
B there were any Soma stones bruising there. She explained the reason of 
2 the sound, and Indra turned away. She called after him, “why do you tum 
away? You go from house to house to drink the Soma, now then drink the 
Soma ground by my teeth and eat fried grains of barley." She then added, 
Without paying him respect, “‘I know not whether you are Indra, but if 
you come to my house I will pay you die honour.” Feeling however sure 
that it was really Indra, she addressed the latter half of the third verse to 
you the Soma in her mouth. Indra then, falling in love with here drank the 
h to Soma as she wished. She then triumphantly exclaimed (v.4): ^T have been 
repudiated by my husband and yet Indra comes to me." Indra then 
granted her a boon and she thus chose, “my father’s head is bald, his field 
is barren, and my body is destitute of hair; make these things grow. 
Indra granted the three boons. For this hymn and legend, cf. Prof. Kuhn 
r of in Indische Stud. Lpp.118,119, and Prof. Aufrecht, i, 1४.1-8: Grimm, in 
yr of. his Deutsche Myth., p.118-21, and Norddeutsche Sagen, p.443. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


620 Rgveda Samhita 
७४७६. कन्याई वारवायती सोममपि खुताविंदत्‌। | 


अस्तं भरन्त्यब्रवीदिन्द्राय सुनवै त्वा शक्राय॑ सुनवै त्वा।।१।। 
1. A young woman going to the Water found Soma in the path; 


as she carried it home she said, I will press you for Indra, I will + 
press you for Sakra. 


This verse is said by Apdld, as Indra comes up and questions her. 
७४७७. असौ एर्षि वीरको गृहंगृहं विचाकंशत्‌। 
इमं जम्भ॑सुतं पिन धानावन्तं करम्भिण॑मपूपव॑न्तमुकिथन॑म्‌।।२।। 
S = h E > ९ 
2. You who go from house to house a hero bright in your d 
splendour, drink this Soma pressed by my teeth together with fried 
grains of barley, the karambha, cakes and hymns. h 
Apdld says this as Indra turns to depart. tk 
The Karambha— A mixture of fried barley meal and batter er b 
eurds. Sl 
|| ud uia 16 
७४७८. आ चन त्वा चिकित्सामोऽधि चन त्वा । र 
शनैरिव शनकैरिवेन्द्रायेन्दो uf wel p 
3. We wish to know you, but here we know you not, O soma, 
flow forth for /ndra first slowly, then quickly. 
First Slowly, then Quickly— This is Sdyana's explanation of the 
> words sanair iva Sanakair iva; but it is better to translate them, with Prof. 
Aufrecht, **allámhlig und allmihliger tropfe.’’ s 


७४७९. कुविच्छक॑त्कुवित्कर॑त्कुवित्नो वस्य॑सस्करंत्‌। 

कुवित्पतिद्विषो यतीरिन्द्रेण सङ्गमांमहै ।।४।। 

4. May (Indra) repeatedly make us powerful, may He i be 
abundantly for us, may he repeatedly make us very rich; olten 


hated by our husband and forced to leave him, may we be united to 
Indra. 


७४८०. इमानि त्रीणि विष्टपा तानीन्द्र वि रोहय। र 
शिरस्ततस्योर्वरामादिदं म उपोदरे॥५॥ 

5. These three places,—do you cause them all to grow,—my is 
father’s (bald) head, his (barren) field, and my body. ete 
७४८१. असौ च या न॑ उर्वरादिमां तन्वं मम॑। | 

Vo 


अथों ततस्य यच्छिरः सर्वा ता रोम॒शा कृंधि।६।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar j 


ihità 


ath; 
will 


f= 
fried 


er er 


yma, 


f the 
Prof. 


> do 
ften 
20 to 


—my 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sikta 92 di 


6. This field which is our (father's), and this my body and the 
head of my father,—do you make all these bear a crop. 

Do you make all these bear a Crop— Lit. make them all hairy” 
romasani, Cf. Propertius. IV.2.14, et coma lactenti spicea fruge tumet.” 
७४८२. खे रथस्य DSTA: खे युगस्य॑ शतक्रतो। 

अपालामिन्द्र त्रिष्पूत्व्यकृंणो: सूर्यत्वचम्‌।1७।। 

7. Thrice, Satakratu, did you purify Apdld, in the hole of the 
chariot, in the hole of the cart, and in the hole of the yoke, and you 
did make here with a skin resplendent like the sun. 

Thrice did you Purify Apala, etc.— Sayana says that Indra dragged 
her through the wide hole of his chariot, the narrower hole of the cart, and 
the small hole of the yoke, and she east off three skins. The first skin 
became a hedge-hog, the second an alligator, the third a chameleon. I 
suppose, with Prof. Aufrecht, that the hole or space of the chariot and cart 
represents the opening between the four wheels; the hole of the yoke 
seems to me to mean the opening through which the animal's head 
passed, corresponding to Homer's II.19.406. 


[सूक्त ९२] 
[ऋषि- श्रुतकक्ष आङ्गिरस अथवा सुकक्ष आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र 
छन्द- गायत्री, १- Iggy ] 
७४८३. पान्तमा वो अन्ध॑स इन्द्रमभि प्र गायत! 
विश्वासाहं शतर्क्रतुँ महिष्ठ चर्षणीनाम्‌।।१॥। 


l. Sing priests, that /ndra, who drinks your offered 
beverage,—the foe-subduing Satakratu, most liberal of men. 


Sdmaveda, 155, 713. 

Most Liberal of Men— Or **to be most honoured of men,” Mamhist 
hacarsaninám. 
७४८४. पुरुहूतं पुरुष्ट्तं गांथान्यं£ सर्नश्रुतम्‌। इन्द्र इति AAAI i 


2. Proclaim that deity as Indra, who is invoked by many, who 


5 praised by many, who is worthy of songs and renowned as 
eternal. : 


Samaveda, 714. 
Ses. इन्द्र Sal महानां दाता वाजानां नृतुः। महाँ अंभिज्च्वा य॑मत्‌।३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


PP 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


622 Rgveda Sarhhità 


3. May Indra who causes all to rejoice, be the given of 
plenteous food to us; may he, the mighty, bring us (riches) up to 
our knees. 
Sámaveda, 715, with mahonám for mahdndm. 
Who causes all to Rejoice— Nrtuh=nartayitd, **he who causes all to 
dance," cf. 1.22.4. Sayana gives another explanations as ‘‘bringer (neta) 
of kine to your votaries." The St. Petersh. Dict. renders it ''lebhaft, 
beweglich.”” 
७४८६. अपांदु शिप्र्यन्थस: सुदक्षेस्य प्रहोषिण॑ः। इन्दोरिन्द्रो यवांशिर: re 
4. Indra, the handsome-jawed, has drunk of the dropping 
Soma-beverage cooked with barley, (the offering) of Sudaksa 
assiduous in sacrifice. 
Samaveda, 145. | 
Sudaksa— This is explained as the name of a Rsi. Benfey takes 
sudaksasya prahosinah as epithets of the Soma, ''des kraftigen, 
aufregenden.” 
७४८७. तम्वभि प्रार्चतिन्द्रै सोम॑स्य पीतयें। तदिद्ध्यस्य bm I | 
5. Loudly praise that /ndra that he may drink the Soma,—it is 
this which gives gim strength. 


७४८८. अस्य पीत्वा मदांनां देवो देवस्यौज॑सा। विश्वाभि भुव॑ना भुवत्‌॥६। | 
— 6. The god, having quaffed its exhilarations, by the strength of 


the divine (Soma) has conquered all worlds. 
0 गीर्ष्वायतम्‌ च्यावयस्यूतये = 

७४८९. em वः सत्रासाहं विश्वासु गीर्ष्वायतम्‌। आ यूतयें 1191 

7. Bring hither for our protection Indra the conqueror of many, 
who pervades all your praises; | 

Sümavede, 1.2.2.3.6; 1.8.1.10.1. This verse is addressed by the | 
sacrificer to the praising priest. 

bend नर॑मवार्यक्रतुम्‌ 

७४९०. युध्मं सन्त॑मनर्वा्णं सोपपामन॑पच्युतम्‌। नरमवार्यक्रतुम्‌।।८ l 

8. The warrior, whom none oppose and none can harm, the | 


quaffer of the Soma, the leader whose deeds cannot be hindered. 
Sámaveda, 1643. 


धने 
७४९१. शिक्षा ण इन्द्र राय आ पुरु विद्वाँ ऋचीषम। अवां नः पार्ये TAIT! i 


9. O you worthy of our praise, you who know all ue 
repeatedly give us riches, protect us by the wealth our enemies- 
Samaveda, 1644. 


७४९२. अतश्चिदिन्द्र ण उपा यांहि शतर्वाजया। इषा सहखंवाजया॥1१०।। 


-oo २. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar | 


, the 
d. 


IIR 


ings. 


3. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 92 2 


10. Come to us, /ndra, from thence with food of an hundred- 
fold strength, of a thousand-fold strength. 

Samaveda, 215. 

From Thence— Ze., from heaven or from our enemies’ abode. 

a LS ^ sdfz NES ` 

७४९३. अर्याम धीवंतो धियोऽर्वद्धिः शक्र गोदरे। जयेम पृत्सु व॑ज्रिवः।।११।। 

11. Sakra, let us go, proved in deeds, to deeds; thunderer, 
cleaver of mountains, let us conquer in battles by your steeds. 

By your steeds— Sayana says “४ steeds given by you." 
७४९४. वयमुं त्वा शतक्रतो गावो न यवसेष्वा। उकथेषुं रणयामसि।॥१२॥ 

12. We refresh you, Satakratu, with our praises, as (the 
herdsman) the cattle with (different kinds of) pasture. 


७४९५. विश्वा हि मर्त्यत्वनानुकामा शंतक्रतो। अगन्म वञ्रित्राशस:11१३।। 


13. All mortal natures, Satakratu, are moved by desire; we feel 
wishes. O thunderer. 


७४९६. त्वे सु पुत्र शवसोऽवृत्रन्‌ कार्मकातयः। न त्वामिन्द्राति रिच्यते।१४॥ 


14. O son of strength, men, uttering their desires, abide happily 
in you; none, /ndra, surpasses you. 

७४९७. स नों वृषन्त्सनिष्ठया सं घोरया द्रवित्वा। धियाविंड्डि RARS 

15. Showerer (of blessings), protect us by your action, which is 
most bounteous yet awful, foe-terrifying yet many-cherishing. 

So Sayana, who explains puraridhya by bahtinam dharayitryá: but he 
himself explains the word in V.35.8 (no ratham ava purandhyd) by 
Sobhanabuddhya. I should therefore prefer to translate the verse, 
“‘Showerer, protect us by your care, by your good providence, which is 
bounteous and yet awful and foe-terrifying.”” 


७४९८. यस्तै नूनं रांतक्रतविन्द्र द्युम्नितमो मर्द:। तेन॑ नूनं मदे मदेः1!१६॥ 
16. Rejoice us, Indra, Satakratu, as you rejoice in that most 
glorious exhilaration of the Soma; 
Sámaveda, 116. 
Rejoice Us— Benfey takes it **des rauschs berausche rich." 
1 
७४९९. यस्तै चित्रश्रवस्तमो य dep वृत्रहन्त॑मः। य ओजोदार्तमो मद: 11९७1। 


17. That Soma of your, Indra, which is most widely renowned, 


Most destructive of your enemies, and most renovating to your 
Strength. 


AL. OMNE In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
624 Rgveda Samhita 


७५००. विद्या हि wed अद्रिवस्त्वादत्तः सत्य सोमपा:। 
विश्वांसु दस्म कृष्टिषुं।॥१८॥। | 


18. Thunderer, smiter of enemies, truthful drinker of the Soma, 
we know (the wealth) which is given by you to all your votaries, 


1 मदन : भन्त 1 अर्कमर्चन्तु A 
७५०१. इन्द्राय मदने सुतं परि ष्टोभन्तु नो गिर:। अ FRA: HRS 11 
19. Let our voices praise on every side the (Soma) effused to ८ 
the exhilarated Indra; let the priests do honour to the (sema) 
honoured of all. 
Sdmaveda, 158, 722. I 
el 1 e | Ji 
७५०२. यस्मिन्‌ विश्वा अधि श्रियो रणन्ति सप्त संसदः। 
इन्द्र॑ सुते ह॑वामहे ।।२०।। र्‌ 
20. We invoke, now that the Soma is effused, that /ndra in 
whom all graces are at their height, and in whom the seven a 
associated priests rejoice. 
Samaveda, 723. : 
ale देवासो 1 ] 
७५०३. त्रिक॑द्रुकेषु चेत॑नं देवासो यज्ञमत्नत। तमिद्वर्धन्तु नो PR: 1RR UI t 
21. The gods extended the heaven-revealing sacrifice in the 
Trikadruka days,—may our praise prosper it. á 
Sdmaveda, 724. The verse has already occurred in VIII.13.18, and 
d Sayana there took yajriam Indra, sc. yastavyam. ७ 
Trikadruka Days— These are the first three days of the abhiplava, a 
religious ceremony which lasts six days and is a part of the Gavamayana fi 
sacrifice. The first three days are severally called jyotis, go and dyus, the 
last three go, dyus and jyotis. 
७५०४. आ त्वां विशन्त्विन्दंव: समुद्रमिव सिन्ध॑वः। " 
मिन्द्राति | 
न त्वामिन्द्राति रिच्यते।।२२।। 
22. Let the Soma-drops enter you as the rivers the sea: none, 
Indra surpasses you. w 
Sdmaveda, 197, 1660. 
quae सोम॑स्य न्द्र जठरेषु ते॥२३॥ 
७५०५. विव्यकथ महिना वृषन्भक्षं सोम॑स्य जागृवे। य इन्द्र AS ७ 
23. Indra, showerer (of blessings), wakeful one, you E. 
attained by your might the drinking of the Soma which enters in a 
your belly. | 
Samaveda, 1661. B 


A || 
७५०६. अर त इन्द्र कुक्षये सोमो भवतु वृत्रहन्‌। अरं धामभ्य इन्दवः।/२४॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ühità 


F 


२२।। 


have 
into 


२४1 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 92 ‘id 


24. Indra, slayer of Vrtra, may the Soma be enough for your 
belly, may the drops be enough for your (various) bodies, 

Sdmaveda, 1662. Sayana explains dhdmabhyah for your various 
bodies or splendours, ndndvidhebhyah Sarirebhyas tava tajobhyo va. 
७५०७. अरमश्वाय गायति श्रुतकक्षो अरं गर्वे। अरमिन्द्रॅस्य TAIRA 

25. Srutakaksa sings enough for a horse, enough for a cow, 
enough for a house of /ndra. 

Samaveda, 118, with gdyata srutakaksa or gáyati srutakaksah. 

Sings for a horse, cow, Etc.— It is not clear whether these gifts are 
past or future ones,—Sáyana allows both interpretations. He explains 
Indrasya dhámne as ‘for a house given by Indra.” Benfey takes it as 
Indra 5 heaven. 


. | ^ सोमेष्विन्द्र ^ 5 दावनें 
७५०८. अरं हि ष्मां सुतेषुं ण: सोमेष्विन्द्र भूष॑सि। अरं ते शक्र दावने॥२६। 
26. When our Soma-libations are effused, you are abundantly 
able (to drink them),—may they be enough for you, the bounteous. 
Abundantly Able— Sayana takes bhiisasi as for bhavasi, or 
as-prápaya, *'bring us abundant wealth.’’ The St. Petersb. Dict. derives it 
from bhis ‘‘sich ernstlich bemühen um." 
७५०९. पराकात्ताच्चिदद्रवस्त्वां नक्षन्त नो गिर:। अर गमाम ते वयम्‌॥२७।। 
27. May our praises reach you, thunderer, even from afar; may 
we obtain your (wealth) abundantly. 
वीरयुरेवा t | 
७५१०. एवा ate वीरयुरेवा sd स्थिरः। एवा ते राध्यं A:R II 
z 28. You verily love to smite the mighty, you are a hero and 
irm (in battle), your mind is to be propitiated (by praise). 
Sdmaveda, 232, 824. 
The Mighty— Benfey takes Virayu as ‘‘helden-liebend.”” 


७५११. एवा रातिस्तुवीमघ विश्वेभिर्धायि धातृभि:। 
अधां चिदिन्द्र मे सचाँ।।२९ II 


29. Lord of great wealth, your bounty is possessed by all your 
Worshippers; therefore, Indra, be also my ally. 
Sdmaveda, 825. 
ad 
७५१२. मो षु ब्रह्मेव॑ तन्द्रयुर्भुवो वाजानां पते। मत्स्वा सुतस्य गोमत:11३०।। 
30. Be not like a laze Brahmana, 0 lord of food; rejoice 
thyself by drinking the effused Soma mixed with milk. 


p, 1९4०, 826. Brahmana is explained here by Siyana as a 
"ahmana, but cf. Haug’s Ait. Brahm. pref., p.20, and his transl. p. 376. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


COUTE eee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
626 
७५१३. मा न॑ इन्द्राभ्याइदिशः wu अक्तुष्वा य॑मन्‌। 
त्वा युजा वनेम तत्‌।।३१।। 
31. Indra, let not the threatening prowling (demons) obstruct 


us at night; let us smite them with you as our helper. 
Sdmaveda, 128, with yamata for yaman. 


७५१४. त्वयेदिन्द्र युजा वयं प्रति बरुवीमहि स्पृर्ध:। 
त्वमस्माकं तव॑ स्मसि॥३२।। 
32: With you, Indra, as our helper, let us answer our enemics; 
you are ours, we are your. 
७५१५. त्वामिद्धि त्वायवोऽनुनोनुंवतश्चरांन्‌। सखांय इन्द्र कारव॑ः।।३३।। 


33. Indra, may your friends, the chanters, worship you, 
devoted to your service and again and again reciting your praise. 


[सूक्त- ९३] 
[ऋषि- सुकक्ष आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र, ३४ इन्द्र तथा ऋभुगण। 
छन्द- गायत्री। 
७५१६. उदूघेदभि श्रुतामंघं वृषभं नर्यापसम्‌। अस्तारमेषि सूर्य।।१।। 
AL 1. You ial O sun, on (the sacrifice of /ndra) the showerer 
(of blessings), the bountiful giver, famed for his wealth, the 


benefactor of men; हि 
Samaveda, 125, 1450. Indra is himself one of the twelve Adityas. 


७५१७. नव यो न॑वतिं पुरो बिभेद बाह्योजसा। अहिं च वृत्रहावधीत्‌॥२॥ 

2. Who cleft the ninety-nine cities by the strength of his arm, 
and, slayer of Vrtra, smote Ahi. 

Sdmaveda, 1451. 

The Ninety-nine Cities—Cf. II.19.6. 

Ahi— Sc. the cloud. 
७५१८. स न इन्द्रः शिवः सखाश्वावद गोमद्यवमत्‌। उरुधारेव दोहते॥।२॥ 

3. May Indra, our auspicious friend, milk for us, like a richly: 
streaming (cow), wealth of horses, kine, and barley. 

Sdmaveda, 1452. 

वशे 

७५१९. यदद्य कच्च॑ वृत्रहन्नुदगा अभि सूर्य। सर्वं तदिन्द्र ते वशे॥४॥। 

4. Whatsoever, © Sun, slayer of Vrtra, you have risen upon t0- 
day,—it is all, Indra, under your power. 


Rgveda Samhit4 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


irhhità 


struct 


a 
„ the 
s. 


ul 


arm, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 93 25 


Yajurveda, 33.35. Samaveda, 126. 
७५२०. यदा प्रवृद्ध सत्पते न मरा इति मन्यसे। उतो ere Ih 


5. When, swelling in your might, lord of the good, you think 
“J shall not die,” that thought of your is indeed true. 
Lord of the Good— According to Sayana “1010 of the naksatras.”” 


७५२१. ये सोमांसः परावति ये अर्वावति सुन्विरे। 
सर्वास्ताँ इन्द्र गच्छसि।६॥ 

6. You go at once, Indra, to all those Soma-libations which are 

effused afar or effused near. 
aftr ` हन्त॑वे 1 1 

७५२२. दरं वाजयामसि मह वृत्राय हन्त॑वे। स वृषा वृषभो भुवत्‌।॥७॥। 

7. We invigorate that (great) Indra for the slaying of mighty 
Vrtra; may he be a bounteous showerer (of wealth). 


Samaveda, 119, 1222. 


EX] 
७५२३. इन्द्र: स दामने कृत ओजिष्ठः स मदे हितः। 
चुम्नी श्लोकी स सोम्यः।।८॥। 
8. Indra was created for giving 
over the exhilarating Soma; he, the gl 


is worthy of the Soma. 
Samaveda, 1223, with bale for made. 


Indra was Created— Sayana adds 
creation." 


७५२४. गिरा वज्रो unde: सब॑लो अन॑पच्युतः। 


ववक्ष क्रष्वो अस्तृंतः॥९॥ 
9. The mighty (Indra), unassailed by his foes, hastens to confer 
wealth on his worshippers,—rendered keen by their praises as 8 


weapon, full of strength and invincible. 


Samaveda, 1224, with ugro for rsvah. 

७५२५. दुर्ग चिन्नः सुगं कृंधि गृणान इन्द्र गिर्वण:। त्वं च॑ मघवन्‌ वर्श:॥१० 
s do you, hymned by us, make 
t of difficulties, (hear us), 


he, the most mighty was set 
orious one the lord of praise, 


“by Prajdpati all the time of 


10. Indra, worthy of our praise, 
our path plain even in the mids 
Maghavan, if you love us; 


७५२६. यस्य॑ ते नू चिंदादिशं न मिनन्ति स्वराज्यम्‌। 
न देवो नाध्िगुर्जन:11९१॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


hr Se  . - 


628 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai LGR 


11. You whose command and rightful empire neither god nor 
irresistible hero can harm. 


Rightful empire— Sayana gives another explanation of svardjya as 
svargasvamitva. 


७५२७. अधां ते अप्रतिष्कुतं देवी शुष्मं सपर्यतः। उभे सुशिप्र रोदसी।१२॥ 


12. Yea, deity of the handsome jaw, the two goddesses, heaven 
and earth, both worship your resistless consuming might. 


७५२८. त्वमेतद॑धारयः कृष्णासु रोहिणीषु च। परुष्णीषु रुशत्‌ पर्यः।।१३।। 


13. It is you that keep this bright milk in the black, red, and 
spotted cows. 


७५२९. वि यदहेरधं त्विषो विश्वे देवासो अक्रमु:। 
विदन्मृगस्य ताँ अम॑ः।।१४॥। 
14. When all the gods fled in various directions from the 
splendour of the demon Ahi, and when fear of the deer seized 


them. 
Fear of the Deer— Cf 1.80.7; v. 32.3;; 43.2. 


७५३०. आदु मे निवरो भुंबदवृत्रहादिष्ट पौस्य॑म्‌। अजांतशत्रुरस्तृत:11१५॥। 
15. Then was my Indra the repeller; then did the smiter of 


Vrtra put forth his might, he who has no existent enemies, the 
invincible. 


७५३१. श्रुतं वो वृत्रहन्तम प्र शर्ध चर्षणीनाम्‌। आ शुषे राध॑से महे।।१६॥ 
16. (Priests), I bring to you men, for great wealth, that 
renowned and mighty one who utterly destroyed Vrtra. 
Sdmaveda, 208, with dsise for asuse. I should prefer to take carsa- 


ninam as governed by the epithets of Indra, ‘renowned and mighty 
amongst men.”’ 


| | 
७५३२. अया धिया च॑ गव्यया पुरुणामन्पुरुष्टुत। यत्सोमेसोम आभ॑वः।।१७।। 
17. O you bearing many names and praised by many, when 
you are present at our various Soma-libations, may we be endowed 
with a kine-desiring mind. | 
Samaveda, 188. | 
May We be endowed with a kine-desiring Mind— Sayana explains 
this to mean **may we obtain kine." Gavyayd should mean “witha desire 
for milk." Might it be rendered **Come with this mind, with this desire 
for milk, when you are present at our Soma offerings?” 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


mMaghiees, ७४४8311] Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 629 
७५३३. बोधिन्मना इदस्तु नो वृत्रहा भूर्यासुतिः। 
शुणोतुं शक्र आशिष॑म्‌।।१८॥ 
18. May the slayer of Vrtra, to whom many libations are 


offered, know our desires, —may Sakra hear our praises. 
Samaveda, 140, reading bodhanmandh. 


७५३४. कया त्वं न॑ ऊंत्याभि प्र म॑न्दसे वृषन्‌। 
कयां स्तोतृभ्य आ RIRS I 
19. Showerer (of blessings), with what coming of your do you 


gladden us, with what coming bring you (wealth) to your 


worshippers? 
Yajurveda, 36.7; Samaveda, 1586. 


७५३५. कस्य qui सुते सचां नियुत्वान्वृषभो र॑णत्‌। वृत्रहा सोम॑पीतये।।२०॥। 
20. At whose hymn-accompanied libations does the showerer, 


the lord of the Nivuts, the slayer of Vrtra, rejoice to drink the 
Soma? 


७५३६. अभी षु णस्त्वं रयिं मन्दसानः संहस्निण॑म्‌। 
प्रयन्ता बोधि दाशुषें।।२१।। 


2l. Rejoicing (in our oblations), bring us wealth a 
thousandfold; remember that you are the giver to your votary. 


७५३७. पत्नीवन्तः सुता इम उशन्तों यन्ति वीतयें। 


अपां जग्मिर्निचुम्मुणः।।२२।। 

22. These Soma-libations with their wives proceed (to Indra) 
longing to be drunk; the stale Soma, pleasing to the taste, goes to 
the waters. 

This a very obscure verse; Sayana follows the explanation given by 
Yaska, Nir, V.18. The epithet patnivantah '*with their wives or 
Protectresses'" is said to allude to the two kinds of water, the 
Vasativaryah and the Ekadhandh, used in the Soma offerings. (Cf. Ait. 
Br ahm., 11.20.) At the time of the Avabhrtha, or concluding ceremonies of 
Purification, the rjisa or stale Soma is thrown into the waters. The epithet 
mcumpunah, which Yaska explains nicamánena prnáti, is derived by 
Mahidhara (Yajurveda, 3.48) from the root cup "lente incedere, and 
Similarly the St. Petersb. Dict. explains it *senlópfrig." 


०५३८, इश होत्रा असृक्षतेन्द्रै वृधासों अध्वरे। अच्छांवभृथमोज॑सा॥।२३॥। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MI 1] nnn 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
630 Rgveda Samhita 


23. The sacrificing priests, invigorating (/ndra) by their 
offerings at the sacrifice, have by their might dismissed him to the 
Avabhrtha. 

Sdmaveda, 151, with vridhantah. 


७५३९. इह त्या संधमाद्या हरी हिर॑ण्यकेश्या। वोळ्हामभि eil हितम्‌।।२४।। 

24. May those two golden-maned steeds together exulting 
bring him to our wholesome offering. 

See viii.32.29. 
७५४०. तुभ्यं सोमांः सुता इमे स्तीर्णं बर्हिर्विभावसो। 

स्तोतृभ्य इन्द्रमा FTIRA I 

25. Resplendent (Agni), these Soma-libations are effused for 

you, and the clipt grass is spread; bring Indra hither for his 


worshippers. 
Sdmaveda, 213, but with some variations. 


७५४१. आ ते दक्षं वि रोचना दधद्रत्ना वि दाशुषें। 
स्तोतृभ्य इन्द्र॑मर्चत।।२६।। 


26. May he give strength and his brilliant heaven and precious 
things to you his worshipper, and to his praising priests; worship 
Indra. 


७५४२. आ तें दधामीन्द्रियमुक्था विश्वां शतक्रतो। 
स्तोतृभ्य इन्द्र मृळय।॥।२७।। 
27. 1 prepare, Satakratu, your strong (Soma) and all your 
praises; be gracious, /ndra, to your hymners. 
७५४३. भद्रम्भद्रं न आ भरेषमूर्जं शतक्रतो। यदिन्द्र मृठ्ठयांसि न:॥२८ 


28. Bring us what is most auspicious, Satakratu, (bring us) 
food and strength, if you have favour to us, Indra. 
Sdmaveda, 173. 


| 
७५४४. स नो विश्वान्या भर सुवितानिं शतक्रतो। यर्दिन्द्र मृळयांसि नः।।२९॥ 
29. Bring us all blessings, Satakratu, if you have favour to US, 


Indra. 


७५४५. त्वामिद्वृत्रहन्तम सुतार्वन्तो हवामहे। ales मृळयांसि नः॥।३०॥। 


30. Bearing the effused libation, we invoke you, mightiest 


slayer of Vrtra, 11 you have favour to us, /ndra. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EE EEE 


~ 53 CT m 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


Mandala 8, Sükta 94 an 
७५४६. उप॑ नो हरिभिः सुतं याहि मंदानां पते। उप॑ नो हरिभिः सुतम्‌।॥३१ 
31. Come with your steeds to our effused libation, lord of the 


Soma,—come with your steeds to our effused libation. 

Samaveda, 150, 1790. 

«258 Is 1 1 
७५४७. द्विता यो वृत्रहन्तमो विद इन्द्रः शतक्रतु:। 
उप॑ नो हरिभिः सुतम्‌।।३२॥ 

32. Indra, Satakratu, mightiest slayer of Vrtra, you whose 
power is known in a two-fold way, come with your steeds to our 
effused libation. 

Sdmaveda, 1791. 

Whose power is known in a two-fold Way— Ze., You are known in 
your terrible from as the slayer of Vrtra, etc., and in your merciful from as 


the protector of the world. Cf sup.70.2. The St. Petersb. Dict. explains 
dvita as ‘besonders.’ 


७५४८. त्वं हि वृत्रहन्नेषां पाता सोमानामसिं। उप॑ नो हरिभिः BIBS HI 
33. Slayer of Vrtra, you are the drinker of these Soma juices, 


come With your steeds to our effused libation. 

Sdmaveda, 1792. 

७५४९. इन्द्र इषे द॑दातु न ऋभुक्षण॑मृभुं रयिम्‌। वाजी द॑दातु वाजिन॑म्‌।।३४।। 

34. May Indra bring to us the bounteous Ribhu Rbhuksana to 
partake of our sacrificial viands; may he, the mighty, bring the 
mighty (Vāja). 

Sdmaveda, 199. 

Rbhuksana— Rbhuksana was the eldest and Vāja the youngest of 
the three brothers. The Rbhus have a share in the evening libation 
between Prajdpati and Savita, see Ait. Brahm., 111.30. This verse is 
addressed to the Rbhus in the evening libation on the ninth day of the 
Dvádasaha ceremony (ib., V.21). 


[सूक्त-९४] 
[क्रषि- बिन्दु अथवा पूतदक्ष आङ्गिरस। देवता- मरुद्रण। छन्द- गायत्री 
७५५०. गौर्धयति मरुता श्रवस्युर्माता मघोनाम्‌। युक्ता वही रथांनाम्‌।।१॥ 
1. The cow (Prsni), the food-desiring mother of the wealthy 


Maruts, drinks (the Soma),—she is worthy of all honour, who 


yokes (the mares) to their chariots, 
Sámaveda, 149. 
The Cow— Cf. 1.23.10; 1.34.2, etc. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MZ o 


0??? 1२ 0000 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
e Rgveda Samhita 
७५५१. यस्यां देवा उपस्थे व्रता विश्वे धारयन्ते। सूर्यामार्सा दृशे कम्‌॥२॥ 
2. She, in whose presence all the gods observe their functions, 
and the sun and moon move in peace to enlighten the world. 


७५५२. तत्सु नो विश्वे अर्यं आ सदां गृणन्ति कारव॑:। मरुतः सोम॑पीतये।।३ | 
3. Therefore all our priests in their worship always sing the 


Maruts that they may drink the Soma. ६ 
Sayana explains this verse, ‘tall our priests in their worship always 


V 
sing that (might of the Maruts) that they may drink the Soma; the Maruts 
(are to be invoked by us).”’ 
सोमों c 
७५५३. अस्ति सोमो अयं सुतः पिबन्त्यस्य मरुत॑:। 
हन्‌ N x Ti * IC 
उप स्वराजो अश्विनां।४।। 
4. This Soma is effused (by us); the self-resplendent Maruts 
drink of it, and the Asvins. 
Saámaveda, 174, 1785. The construction would rather indicate that ७ 
svardjah is an epithet of asya (somasya) not of marutah. 
| | 
७५५४. पिबन्ति मित्रो अर्यमा तनां पूतस्य वरुणः। तरिषधस्थस्य sme: l | sl 
> 5. Mitra, Aryaman, and Varuna drink (the Soma), purified by 


the straining cloth, abiding in three places, and granting posterity. 
Sdmaveda, 1786. 
Abiding in three Places— ‘‘The Soma juice, when it is extracted, is 
poured into the Adhavaniya, a kind of trough. Thence it is poured into a ७ 
cloth, in order to strain it. This cloth is called Pavitra or Dasapavitra. 
Below the cloth is another trough called Pütabhrt'" (Haug). These are the 
“three places”? of the text. 


Granting Posterity—Javatah is a hard word. Sayana explains it 50 
stutyajanavantam **having reference to praise-worthy persons’’; I have as 
adopted the rendering of the St. Petersburg Dict. ‘‘an Nachkommenschaft 
reich, der Nachkommenschaft geben kann." ७५ 


७५५५. उतो न्व॑स्य जोषमाँ इन्द्र: सुतस्य गोम॑त:। प्रात्होतेंव मत्सति।६॥ 


6. Indra also is eager in the morning to drink this effused 


(Soma) mixed with milk, as a priest (to praise the gods). to: 
Sdmaveda, 1787. , 


fi 
७५५६. कदत्विषन्त सूरयस्तिर आप॑इव fend: अर्षन्ति पूतद॑क्षसः।।७॥। 


7, When do the sages flash like waters across (to sky)? When 
do the Maruts, pure in vigour, destroyers of enemies, come to our 
offering? 


m UR सा In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 95 633 
७५५७. कद्टो अद्य महानाँ देवानामवों वृणे। त्मनां च दस्मर्वर्चसाम्‌।॥८ 1 
8. 0 shall I to-day possess your protection, mighty deities 
beautifully bright in yourselves (though unadorned)? 
७५५८. आ ये विश्वा पार्थिवानि पप्रर्थनोचना दिवः। मरुतः सोम॑पीतये॥।९। 
9. (We invoke) those Maruts to drink our Soma, who have 
spread our all the things of earth and the luminaries of heaven. 
७५५९. त्यात्रु पूतदक्षसो दिवो वों मरुतो हुवे। अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतयें1॥१०॥ 
10. O Maruts, I invoke you, resplendent, of pure vigour, to 
drink this Soma. 


७५६०. त्यान्नु ये वि रोदसी तस्तभुर्मरुतो हुवे। अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतयें।।११।। 


11. I invoke those Maruts to drink this Soma, who have 
established heaven and earth. 


७५६१. त्यं नु red गणं गिरिष्ठा वृष॑णं हुवे। अस्य सोम॑स्य पीतयें॥१२॥ 
12. I invoke that band of the Maruts, abiding in the clouds, the 
showerers, to drink this Soma. 


[सूक्त-९५] 
[ऋषि- fost आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- अनुष्टुप्‌ | 
७५६२. आत्वा गिरों रथीरिवास्थुं: सुतेषु गिर्वणः। 
अभि त्वा समनूषतेन्द्र वत्सं न मातर॑;।।१।। 
li; 0 worthy of puts when the Soma is effused our 
Songs hasten to you as charioteer (to his go, they low towards you 


as Cows towards their calves. 
Sdmaveda, 349. 


७५६३. आ त्वां शुक्रा अंचुच्यवुः सुतास॑ इन्द्र गिर्वणः। 
पिबा त्वर स्यान्धंस इन्द्र विश्वासु ते हितम्‌॥२॥ 


2. Indra worthy of praise, let the bright Soma-libations come 


to you; drink your portion of the beverage; Indra, in all places it is 
fit for you. 


5५९४. पिना सोमं मदाय कामन्दं vid सुतम्‌। 
त्वं हि शश्चतीनां पती राजां विशामसिं 11३ 11 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EE OE 


634 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and Fe 

3. Drink to your fill, Indra, the effused Soma brou 
hawk, you are the lord of all the divine hosts, you 
resplendent. 

Brought by the Hawk— Cf 1.80.2. 

The Lord of all the divine Hosts— Sayana taken sasvatinam with 
visām, as bahundm marudganan sarvesám devagananam ca. 


७५६५. श्रुधी हवं तिरश्च्या इन्द्र यस्त्वां सपर्यति। 
सुवीर्यस्य गोम॑तो रायस्पूर्धि महाँ अंसि।४।। 
4. Hear, Indra, the prayer of Tirasci who worships you, and 
satisfy him with wealth bringing gallant offspring and cattle,—for 


you are mighty. 
Sdmaveda, 346, 882. 


७५६६. इन्द्र यस्ते नवीयसीं गिर॑ मन्द्रामजींजनत्‌। 
चिकित्विन्मनसं धिय॑ प्रत्नामृतस्य॑ पिप्युषींम्‌।।५।। 
5. To him who has made for you this newest joy-giving hymn, 
do you, Indra, (extend) your ancient truthful providence to which 


all hearts are known. 
Sdmaveda, 884, with yas to Indra for Indra yas te. 


७५६७. तमु वाम यं गिर इन्द्रमुकथार्नि वावृधुः। 
पुरूण्यस्य then सिषासन्तो वनामहे।।६।। 


6. Let us praise that Indra whom our chants and hymns have 
magnified; we worship him, desirous to honour his many deeds of 
might. 

Samaveda, 885. 


७५६८. एतो fag स्तवाम शुद्धं शुद्धेन साम्नां। 
शुद्धैरुकथैर्वौवृध्वासं शुद्ध आशीर्वीन्ममत्तु।॥७॥। 

7. Come let us praise the purified Indra with a pure Saman and 
with pure recited hymns; let the pure (Soma) mixed with milk 
gladden him waxing strong. 

Saámaveda, 350, 1402, with suddhaih in the second line for suddha. 

Sayana illustrates this and the following verses by a egend from the 
Satyayana Brahmana. Indra, after the slaughter of Vrtra, being polluted 
by the guilt of Brahmanicide, begged the Rsis to purify him by their 
Sdman hymns. They accordingly said these verses and he became 
purified; and they then offered him the Soma, etc. 


ght, by the 
are the self- 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri mmm — 7 Haridwar 


M 


pt 


MMS NSF fies Ft St NN 


ind 
for 


an, 
ich 


ve 


nd 
ilk 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 96 es 


x | 
७५६९. इन्द्र॑ शुद्धो न आ गहि शुद्धः शुद्धार्भिरूतिभिः। 
= E 1 ट्‌ 
शुद्धो रयिं नि धारय शुद्धो म॑मद्धि सोम्यः11८ 11 

8. Come to us, /ndra, purified; purified with your pure 
protecting hosts; purified establish wealth in us; purified and now 
worthy of the Soma, rejoice. 

Sámaveda., 1403. 

The Pure Protecting Hosts—- The Maruts. 

७५७०. इन्द्र शुद्धो हि नों रयिं शुद्धो रत्नानि दाशुषे। 
ुद्धो वृत्राणि faerü शुद्धो वाजं सिषाससि॥९॥ 

9. Purified, /ndra, give us wealth; purified give to your 
worshipper precious things; purified you smite your enemies; 
purified you desire to give us food. 

Samaveda, 1404. 


[सूक्त-९६] 


[क्रषि- तिस्श्ची आङ्गिरस अथवा gari मारुत। देवता- इन्द्र, १४ चतुर्थ 
चरण- मरुद्वण, १५ इन्द्राबृहस्पती। छन्द- Pre, ४ विराट्‌] 
1 
७५७१. अस्मा उषास आतिरन्त याममिन्द्राय नक्तमूर्म्याः सुवार्च:। 
- = SY E b 
अस्मा आपों मातर॑: सप्त तस्थुर्नुभ्यस्तराय सिन्धवः सुपारा:॥१॥ 

1. For him the dawns prolonged their rising; for Indra the 
nights uttered auspicious voices by night; for him the waters, the 
mothers, the seven rivers, stood, offering an easy passage for men 
to cross over. 

The nights uttered auspicious Voices by night Sáyana's 
explanation is, ‘‘All men read the Veda, etc., in the latter half of the night; 
therefore the voices of the night were auspicious; they studied the Veda 
under Indra's direction." 


७५७२. अतिविद्धा विधुरेणा facem त्रिः सप्त सानु संहिता गिरीणाम्‌। 
न तद्देवो न मर्त्यस्तुतुर्याद्यानि प्रवृद्धो वृषभश्चकार IR I 


e By him the thrower, unaided, were pierced asunder the 
thrice seven table-lands of the mountains heaped together; neither 
80d nor mortal could do what he, the showerer, in his full-grown 


Strength has done. 
Pierced Asunder the thrice seven tablelands—For this legend 


compare surpra, note on VIIL8.8.10. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


^ शिक्का... 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Sarhhita 


[i I ` भूयिष्ठमोज॑ 
७५७३. इन्द्रस्य वज्रं आयसो निमिश्ल इन्द्र॑स्य बाह्रोर्भूयिष्ठमोज:। 
शीर्षनिनद्रस्य क्रत॑वो निरेक आसस्रेष॑न्त श्रुत्या उपाके I 
3. Indra’s iron thunderbolt is grasped firmly in his hand; 
cnormous strength resides in his arms: when he goes forth (to 
battle), there is ample employment for his head and his mouth, and 
(his followers) rush near him to hear his commands. 
Ample Employment for his head and his Mouth— Ze., his head is 


employed in fitting the helmet, etc., and his eyes in secing the enemy; and 
the mouth issues its various orders. 


मन्यें यज्ञियं 1 यज्ञियानां NI 1 I 
७५७४. मनये त्वा यज्ञियं यज्ञियानां मन्ये त्वा च्यव॑नमच्युंतानाम्‌। 
N 1 केतुं "à ० चर्षणीनाम्‌ 
मन्ये त्वा सत्वनामिन्द्र केतुं मन्ये त्वा वृषभं TIT 
4. I think you the most worthy among those worthy of 
sacrifice: I think you the overthrower of the imperishable 
(mountains); I think you, Indra, the banner of warriors; I think you 
the showerer (of blessings) to men. 
Of the imperishable Mountains— Sáyana adds another 
interpretation **of the heroes not to be overthrown.’ 


The Banner of Warriors— Another but less likely interpretation is 
Ee “the manifester of thyself to your worshippers.”’ 


७५७५. आ यदं बाह्वोरिन्द्र धत्से मदच्युतमहये हन्तवा ४। | 


636 


प्र पर्वता अन॑वन्त प्र गावः प्र ब्रह्माणों अभिनक्ष॑न्ते SSA UI | 

5. When, Indra, you grasp in your arms your pride humbling | 
thunderbolt to smite Ahi, when the mountain clouds loudly roar | 
and the cows loudly bellow, then the Brahmanas offer their | 


worship to Indra. 

The Cows— The cows are the waters pent within the clouds. 

The Bràhmanas-— Sayana explains brahmanah as “the 
Brahmanas,” or as **the mountains, etc.” 4 


७५७. तमु वाम य इमा जजान विश्वा जातान्यवराण्यस्मात्‌। i 
नरेण मित्रं दिधिषेम गीर्भिरुपो नमोभिर्वृषभं विशेम tue 

6. Let us praise that Indra who produced all the things, to um 

all beings are subsequent; may we maintain friendship with Indra 

by our hymns, let us bring the showerer (of blessings) near us by 

our praises. 2 z 

May We maintain friendship with Indra--- Sayana takes mitram 2 


fi E e ffi - 3 Uc /mns 
or maitrim; but he offers another interpretation, “let us say by our hym 
‘may we be friends with Midra.” 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 1 


ihità 


and; 
| (to 
and 


ad is 
and 


of 
ible 
you 


ther 


n is 


ing 
oar 
reir 


‘the 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 96 637 
७५७७. qued त्वा श्वसथादीर्षमाणा विश्वे देवा अजहुर्ये सर्वाय:। 
= = EXE z E F 
मरुद्धिरिन्द्र सख्यं d अस्त्वथेमा विश्वाः पृतना जयासि ।।७।। 

7. All the gods who were your friends forsook you, flying 
away at the snorting of Vrtra; O Indra, let there be friendship to 
you with the Maruts: then do you conquer all these hostile armies. 

Samaveda, 324. 


Friendship with the Maruts— Cf. Ait. Bráhm., 11.20. The Maruts 
alone did not leave him. 
1 =] r NI | 
७५७८. त्रिः षष्टिस्त्वा मरुतो वावृधाना Salsa राशयो यज्ञियासः। 
उप त्वेम: कृधि नों भागधेयं शुर्ष्मं त एना हविषां त्रिधेम।।८।। 

8. These sixty-three Maruts were worthy of sacrifice 
nourishing your vigour like cows gathered together: we come to 
you, do you grant us our portion; so will we produce strength in 
you by this offering. 

These sixty-three Maruts—- Trih Sastih would properly mean 
“thrice sixty,’ but Sayana takes it expressly as sixty-three, and explains it 
by adding that there were nine companies of the Maruts, each composed 
of seven. The White Yajurveda, 17.81-86 (cf. 39.7), gives six companies 
of seven each; and Sayana in his Comm. on 7077. Sarh., 1.5.11, where he 
quotes 11.2.5, (saptagana vai Marutah) similarly gives the same number 
(42), but with apparently differing names; he adds however, ‘‘the other 
dna is to be sought in another sakha.”’ Here he quotes five ganas from 
the Samhita, Iv. 6.5; a sixth, he says, is found in a Khila or supplementary 
portion, and the three ganas remaining to make up the total of 63 he takes 
from the Taitt Aranyaka. V .24,25. 


७५७९. तिग्ममायुंधं मरुतामनीकं कस्तं इन्द्र प्रति wi दधर्ष। 
अनायुधासो असुरा अदेवाश्चक्रेण ताँ अप॑ वप ऋजीषिन्‌।।९।। 
9. Your sharp bow, the host of Maruts, and your thunderbolt 
who, Indra, has ever withstood? The Asuras arc weaponless and 


abandoned by the gods, drive them away by your discus, O Ajisin. 
Cf. VIIL.86.4. 


3५८०. मह उग्रायं तवसे सुवृक्ति प्रेर॑य शिवतमाय पश्च:। 
गिर्वाहसे ES i & J 
से गिर इन्द्राय पूर्वर्धिहि तन्वे कुविदङ्ग वेद॑त्‌।।१०॥ 
_ 10. Send forth an excellent hymn to great (/ndra). the strong. 
might, and most fortunate, (that he may prosper) my cattle; utter 
many praises to Indra who is borne by praise, may he speedily 


a 
Sive much wealth to me. 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| ENSE . - 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
638 Rgveda Samhita 


Who is Borne by Praise— Cf. 1.30.5; 61.4. 
प्रवाहसे sd As al Crt 
७५८१. उक्थवाहसे विभ्वे मनीषां दुणा न पारमीरय नदीनांम्‌। 
| | 1 
नि स्पृश धिया तन्वि श्रुतस्य जुष्टतरस्य कुविदङ्ग वेदत्‌।।११।। 

11. Send forth your praise to mighty Indra who is borne by 
hymns, as (a sailor sends a traveller) in a ship across the rivers; 
bring to me by your rites that wealth which belongs to him 
renowned and beneficent; may he speedily give much wealth. 

Sayana illustrates this and the following verses by a legend that 
Indra, aided by Brhaspati and the Maruts, slew the asure Krsna, who 
with 10,000 other asuras had occupied the river Amsumati, which is said 
to be the Yamuna. He adds a different legend from the Brhaddevata, 
which, however, not being declared by a rsi, is not to be implicitly 
received. (On this cf. Müller's remarks in Var. Lectt.) This other account 
is to the effect that the Soma, being afraid of Vrtra, took refuge with the 
Kurus by the river Amsumati. Indra followed it with Brhaspati and the 
Maruts, and begged it to return. It however refused, and attempted to 
resist; but it was ultimately conquered and carried back to the gods, who 
drank it and in consequence vanquished the demons. Drapsa is a common 
word for Soma, ‘the dropping,’ and can hardly mean ‘swift-moving’ as 
Sayana takes it. Benfey refers the line to the cloud, taking Amsumati as 
the sunlight, “In die Ancumati sinkt niedereilend, herschreiten mit 
zchntausenden der schwarze." 


७५८२. wfafafg m इन्द्रो जजोषत्स्तुहि pi नमसा विवास। 
उप॑ भूष जरितर्मा tava: श्रावया वाचं कुविदङ्ग ARRI 
12. Perform those rites of your that Indra may accept them, 
praise him to whom praise belongs, worship him with your 
service; O priest, adorn thyself, grieve not (for poverty); let Indra 
hear your praise, may he speedily give much wealth. 
अंशुमतींमतिष्ठदियान EN ed 
७५८३. अव Gal अंशुमतीमतिष्ठदियान: कृष्णो दशभि: Wee: | 
आवत्तमिन्द्रः शच्या धमन्तमप स्नेहितीर्नुमणा अधत्त।१३॥ 
13. The swift-moving Krsna with ten thousand (demons) stood 


on the Arisumati; by his might Indra caught him snorting (in the 
water); he, benevolent to man, smote his malicious (bands). 


७५८४. द्रप्समंपश्यं विषुणे चरन्तमुपह्वरे नद्यो अंशुमत्यां:। 
नभो न कृष्णमंवतस्थिवांसमिष्यांमि वो वृषणो युध्यताजौ।॥१४।। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 4 


OL Ee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


: Mandala 8, Sükta 639 
ta $ 
14. “I have seen the swift-moving (demon) lurking in an 
inaccessible place, in the depths of the river Amsumati, (I have 
seen) Krsna standing there as (the sun) in a cloud; I appeal to vou 
showerers; conquer him in battle. 
This is /ndra 's speech to the Maruts. I suppose the simile means that. 
by though the demon thinks to conccal himself, he is seen as clearly by Indra 
१५) as the sun is behind a cloud 
im 
७५८५. अध द्रप्सो अंशुमत्या उपस्थे5 धारयत्तन्वं तित्विषाणः। 
hat विशो अदेवीरभ्या३ चरन्तीर्बृहस्पतिंना युजेन्द्रः ससाहे ।।१५।। 
i 15. Then the swift-moving one shining forth assumed his own 
body by the Ariisumati, and Indra with Brhaspati as his ally smote 


" the godless hosts as they drew near. 
i G à Z s S 2$ 
y The Godless House—- Sayana explains adevih as “not shining, 


m dark," or **not to be praised” (Virgil's *'illaudati"") 
the ७५८६. त्वं ह त्यत्सप्तभ्यो जायमानोऽशत्रुभ्यों अभवः Waal "ped 
(do द्यावापृथिवी अन्वविन्दो विभुमद्भ्यो भुवनेभ्यो रणं धा:1॥१६॥। 
zho 
iof 16. As soon as you was born, /ndra, you was an enemy to 
ui those seven who had no enemy; you recovered the heavens and 
ed earth when concealed (in darkness); you cause joy to the mighty 
mit worlds. 
Samaveda, 326. 
_ Those Seven who had no Enemy— Sc. Krsna, Vrira, Namuci, 
Sambara, etc. Another interpretation is **you was an enemy to those who 
had no enemy, on behalf of the seven sages (the Avigirasas), ie., in order 
to recover their cows." 
m; 5 ` त्यटप्रतिमानभोजों A | 
i ७५८७. त्वं ह त्यद॑ वज्जेण वज्रिन्धृषितो जघन्थ। 


e त्वं शुष्णस्यावातिरो वधत्रैस्त्व गा इन्द्र शच्येदविन्दः।।१७॥। 
17. Thunderer, you, the resolute one, did smite that unrivalled 


might with your bolt; you destroyed Susna with your weapons, you 
recovered the cows, Indra, by your wisdom. 


od ७५८८. त्वं ह त्यद्वृषभ चर्षणीनां घनो वृत्राणां तविषो बभूथ। 
he त्वं सिन्धूँरसृजस्तस्तभानान्‌ त्वमपो अजयो दासपली:11१८ 1 


18. You, showerer, was the mighty destroyer of the hindrances 
of your worshippers; you did set free the obstructed rivers, you did 
Win the waters which the Dasas had mastered 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| SS 
640 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and ९७80९६४ Sanhita 
७५८९. स सुक्रतू रणिता यः सुतेष्वनुत्तमन्युयों अहँव रेवान्‌। 
य एक इन्र्यपासि कर्ता स वृत्रहा प्रतीदन्यमाहुः।।१९॥। 
19. He who noble in his exploits rejoices in the Soma- 
libations, he whose wrath cannot be repelled and who is wealthy as 
the days, he who alone performs the rites for his worshipper,—he, 


the slayer of Vrtra, men say, is a match for all others. 


[ 
Who is wealthy as the Days— Sayana adds "wealth is produced in 


the days, not in the nights.” | 
3 dad [ SP le | 
७५९०. स बृत्रहेन्द्रश्नरषणीधृत्त सुष्टुत्या हव्यं हुवेम। 
स प्राविता मघवां नोऽधिवक्ता स वाज॑स्य श्रवस्यंस्य दाता।।२०॥। 


20. Indra is the slayer of Vrtra, the cherisher of men; let us 
invoke him worthy of invocation, with an excellent hymn; he is 


Maghavan, our protector, our encourager, he is the bestower of 
food that brings fame. 


CEREA 1 EY जज्ञानो हव्यों 
७५९१. स वृत्रहेन्द्र ऋभुक्षाः सद्यो जज्ञानो हव्यों बभूव। | 
कृष्वन्नपाँसि नर्या पुरूणि सोमो न पीतो हव्य: सखिभ्यः।।२१ || 
21. As soon as he was born, he, /ndra, the slayer of Vrtra, the 1 
chief of the Rbhus, was worthy to be invoked; he, performing 
स many sacred acts for men, is worthy to be invoked for his friends 


like the quaffed Soma juice. 
[सूक्त-९७] 
[ऋषि- रेभ काश्यप। देवता- इन्द्र। छन्द- बृहती ; १०, १३ अतिजगती; 
११-१२ उपरिष्टाद्बृहती; १४ AET; १५ जगती। ] | 
७५९२. या इन्द्र भुज THR: ede असुरैभ्य:। 
स्तोतारमिन्मघवत्रस्य वर्धय ये च त्ते वृक्तबर्हिषः।।१॥ 


1. Indra, lord of heaven, with those good things which you 
have carried off from the Asuras do you prosper, O Maghavan, 


your praiser and those who have spread for you the clipped grass. 
Sdmaveda, 254. 


७५९३. यमिन्द्र दधिषे त्वमश्वं गां भागमव्य॑यम्‌। 
यज॑माने सुन्वति दक्षिणावति तस्मिन्‌ d धेहि मा पणौ॥२॥ 


2. Those horses, those cows, that imperishable wealth wi 
; x c 
you have seized (from your cnemies),—bestoy them on t 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


hita 


the 


ng 


JU 


aa 


ma pigli E RAe Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 641 


sacrificer who offers the Soma and is liberal to the priests,—not on 
the niggard. 
JJ EN! 
७५९४. य इन्द्र सस्त्यव्रतोञ्नुष्वापमदेवयुः। 
3 एवैर्मुमुरत्पोर्ष्यं c I. if 1 E | 
स्वैः ष एरवैर्मुमुरत्पोष्य रयिं सनुतर्धेहि तं wd: 

3. Let him, Indra, who sleeps away careless of the gods and 
offering no sacrifices,—let him lose his precious wealth by his 
own evil courses, and then do you stow him away in some hidden 
place. 

By his own Evil Courses— Sayana adds **by gambling, ete.” 

1 यर्दर्वावति 1 
७५९५. यच्छक्रासि परावति यदर्वावति वृत्रहन्‌। 
Tih Seife I 1 x I 
अतस्त्वा गीर्भिदुगर्दिन्द्र केशिभिः सुतावाँ आ विंवासति।४।। 

4. Whether, Sakra, you are in the far-distant region, or 
whether, slayer of Vríra, you are in the lower,—the sacrificer 
longs to being you, Indra, from thence by his hymns as by heayen- 
going steeds; 

Samaveda, 264. 

Whether you . .. . Lower— Whether you are in the heaven or in the 
firmament. 

. Heaven-Going— Sayana takes dyugat as an instrumental plural with 
its case-termination dropped. The St. Petersb. Dict. takes it as an adverb 
“durch den Himmel her.” 


७५९६. यद्वासि रोचने दिव: संमुद्रस्याधिं विष्टपि 

यत्पार्थिवे सदने वृत्रहन्तम यदन्तरिक्ष आ ग॑हि।५॥ 
5. Or whether you are in the brightness of heaven, or whether 
in some region in the midst of the sea, or whether, mightiest slayer 


of Vrtra, in some abode in the earth, or whether in the 
firmament,—come to us. 


७५९७. स नः सोमेषु सोमपाः सुतेषुं शवसस्पते। 


मादयस्व राध॑सा सूनृतावतेनद्रं राया परीणसा ।॥६ 11 
3 6. Indra, drinker of the Soma, lord of strength, now that our 
oma-libations have been effused, do you gladden us with 
Wholesome food and ample wealth. क 
.. With whilesome Food — Sunritavata “परया, is also explained 
accompanied by truthful words"; Sayana adds that it really means 


‘accompanied by children." It should rather be “‘gladden us with 
generous gifts.” 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OSE SS 


642 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGengotri Sani 


७५९८. मा नं इन्द्र परां वृणग्भवां नः सधमाद!:। 
त्वं न॑ ऊती त्वमिन्न आप्यं मा न॑ इन्द्र परां वृणक्‌।।७।। 
7. Leave us not, Indra, but share our Joy; you 


protection, you are our kindred; Indra, leave us not. 
Sdmaveda, 260, with sadhamadye. Cf. also VIIL3.1. 


७५९९. अस्मे ईन्द्र सचां सुते नि ष॑दा पीतये मधुं। 
कृधी जरित्रे मंघवन्नवों महदस्मे इन्द्र सचां सुते।।८।। 
8. Sit with us, Indra, at the oblation to drink the Soma; 


Maghavan, perform a mighty protection for your worshipper, 
(seated) with us at the oblation. 


७६००. न त्वां देवास॑ आशत न मर्त्यीसो अद्रिवः। 
विश्वा जातानि शवंसाभिभूरंसि न त्वां ard ommum 


9. Thunderer, neither gods nor mortals equal you by their acts; 
you surpass all beings by your might, the gods equal you not. 
. e क्रुरिन्द्र राजसें 
७६०१. विश्वाः पृतना अभिभूत॑रं नर॑ सजूस्ततक्षुरिन्द्रै जजनुश्च wei 
क्त्वा वरिष्ठ वर॑ आमुरिुतोग्रमोर्निष्ठ तवसं तरस्विन॑म्‌।।१०।। 

10. The assembled (priests) have roused Indra, the leader, the 
conqueror in all battles; they have created him (by their hymns) to 
shine,—him the mightiest in his acts, the smiter of enemies for 
spoil, the terrible, the most powerful, the stalwart the furious. 

Samaveda, 370, 930, with several variations in the second line. 
७६०२. समां रेभासों अस्वरत्निन्द्रं सोमस्य पीतयें। 

स्वर्पतिं ° 
d यदीं वृधे धृतव्रतो ह्योजसा समृतिभिः।।११।। 

11. The Rebhas have together praised Indra that he may drink 
the Soma; when (they praise) the lord of heaven that he may MES 
strong (by the oblations), then he, observant of pious rites, 1s 
united to his strength and his protecting guards. 

Samaveda, 932, with samu and svah patih for sam im and svarpatim. 

Is United to his strength and his Protecting Guards— Sc. by the 


praises of the worshippers he acquires strength, and the Maruts are his 
guards. 


७६०३. नेमिं न॑मन्ति चक्ष॑सा मेषं विप्रा अभिस्वरां। 
सुदीतयों वो अदुहोऽपि कर्णे तरस्विनः समृक्कभि:11१२॥ 


are our 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Dhita 


Our 


na; 
per, 


cts; 


the 
) to 
for 


क 


tie e Ata Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Manda g झी 9g J 9 643 


12. At the first sight (the Rebhas) bow to him who is the 
circumference of the wheel, the priests (worship) with their praise 
(Indra) the ram; radiant and unharming, do you also, full of 
carnestness, sing in his ear with your hymns. 

Samaveda, 931, with abhsvare. 

The Ram Alluding to the legend of Zndra's carrying off 
Medhatithi in the form of a ram. Cf. 1.51.1; VIIL2.40 
७६०४, तमिन्द्रं जोहवीमि मघवानमुग्रं सत्रा दधानमप्रतिष्कुतं शर्वांसि। मंहिष्टो 

गीर्भिरा च यज्ञियों ववर्तद्राये नो विश्वा सुपथा कृणोतु वज्जी।।१३।। 

13. Again and again I invoke the strong Indra, Maghavan, who 
alone really possesses might, the irresistible; may he draw nigh 
through our songs, most bounteous and worthy of sacrifice; may 


he, the thunderer, make all things prosperous for our wealth. 
Samaveda, 460, with some variations. 


७६०५. त्वं पुरं इन्द्र चिकिदेना व्योज॑सा शविष्ठ शक्र नाशयध्यैँ। 
त्वद्विश्वानि भुव॑नानि वज़िन्‌ द्यावा रेजेते पृथिवी च॑ भीषा।।१४।। 
14. Indra, mightiest Sakra, you know how to destroy those 


cities (of Sambara) by your strength at you all worlds tremble, 
thunderer,—heaven and earth (tremble) with fear 


७६०६. TH क्रतमिन्द्र शूर चित्र पात्वपो न वंज़िन्दुरितातिं पर्षि भूरि। कदा 
नं इन्द्र राय आ दशस्येर्विश्वप्स्यस्य स्पृहयाय्यस्य राजन्‌ 11१५ I 


15. Indra, hero assuming many forms, may that truthfulness of 
your protect me; bear us, thunderer, over our many sins as over 
Waters; when, radiant Indra, wilt you give us some wealth 
desirable to all, manifold in its kinds? 


[35-84] 
[क्रषि- नृमेध आङ्चिरस। देवता- इन्द्र। 
छन्द- उष्णिक्‌, ७,१०-११ ककुप्‌, ९,१२ पुर उष्णिक्‌।] 
५६०७. इन्द्राय साम॑ गायत विप्राय बृहते बृहत्‌। 
धर्मकृते विपश्चिते पनस्यवें।।१।। 


1. Sing a Saman to Indra, a Brhat to the mighty sage, to the 


er of religious rites, the all-knowing one who longs for 
rais 


Sámaveda, 388, 1025, with brahmakrte for dharmakrte. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


GM — | 


644 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and ERRAN Saris 


I | > सूर्यमरोचय 
७६०८. त्वमिन्द्राभिभूरसि त्वं i 
श्वर्कर्मा geal v | 
वि विश्वदेवो महाँ असि।॥।२।। 

2. You are the conqueror, Indra; you has lighted in the sun; 
you are the maker of all, the lord of all the gods, the mighty 

Sdmaveda, 1026, For visvadeva compare supra v.82.7. 

भ्राजञ्ज्योतिंषा | रग॑च्छो रोचनं 
७६०९. वि स्वश्‌ चनं दिवः। 
fand 1 येमिरे 
देवास्तं इन्द्र सख्याय येमिरे।।३।। 

3. You have pervaded the light of the sky, illumining heaven 
by your splendour; the gods, Indra, submissively solicit your 
friendship. 

Sdmaveda, 1027. 

The Light of the Sky— I have here taken rocanam divah in its usual 
meaning. Sàyana explains the line **you have pervaded and illumined by 
your light heaven which manifests the sun (as being its receptacle). 


७६१०. एन्द्रं नो गधि प्रियः संत्राजिदगोद्वा: | 
गिरिर्न विश्वतस्पृथुः पतिर्दिवः।।४।। 


4. Come to us, Indra, beloved one, triumphant, and whom 
none can conceal—lord of heaven, vast on all sides as a mountain. 


= Sdmaveda, 313, 1247. 


७६११. अभि हि संत्य सोमपा उभे बभूथ रोद॑सी। 
इन्द्रासि सुन्वतो वृधः पतिर्दिवः।।५।। \ 
5. Truthful drinker of the Soma, you surpass heaven and earth; 


O Indra, you are the fosterer of him who prepares the libation, you 
are the lord of heaven. 


Samaveda, 1248. \ 
७६१२. त्वं हि शश्वतीनामिन्द्र दर्ता पुरामसिं। 
हन्ता दस्योर्मनोर्वृधः पतिर्दिवः।।६।। 


6. You, Indra, are the stormer of many hostile cities, the slayer 
of the Dasyu, the fosterer of man, the lord of heaven. \ 
Samaveda, 1249, with dharta for dartd. 
The Fosterer of Man— Sayana explains manoh as पाट man who 
offers sacrifice.” 


७६१३. अधा हीन्द्र गिर्वण उप॑ त्वा कार्मान्महः संसुज्महें। 
उदेव यन्त॑ उदभिं:।।७।। 


E — रा In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


sun; 


iven 
/Our 


sual 
dby 


10m 
in. 


rth; 
you 


ayer 


who 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 98 645 

7. Indra worthy of hymns, we send our earnest praises to you 
as men going by water (splash their friends) with handfuls. 

Samaveda, 406, 710, with some variations. 

Praises— Or “‘desires,”’ ‘‘prayers,’’ cf 1.81.8. 

Splash their friends with Handfuls— The Scholiast adds “in 
sport.” Sayana, in his Comm. on the corresponding phrase in the 
Samaveda, (not found in the Bibl. Ind. ed.), udeva gmanta udabhih, 
explains it “45 men going by the water, ie., a river, or the waters, ie., the 
sea (I read in Benfey’s quotation samudraloksanah), desire an eightfold 
gain." Benfey translates it “‘wir sprengten dir, wie Wellen übe Wellen 
gehn.” 

c tifa 1 
७६१४. वार्ण त्वा यव्याभिर्वर्धन्ति शूर ब्रह्मांणि। 
HS चिदद्रिवो दिवेदिवे is 
वावृध्वांसं चिदद्रिवो दिवेदिवे।।८।। 

8. As the lake (swells) with the rivers, so our praises, O hero, 
O thunderer, augment you as you grow more and more day by day. 

Sdmaveda, 711. 

Grow More and More— Sayana takes brahmáni vavrdhvámsam 
"swelling with our praises even more than the lake.” 

ह्रीं थयोरौ ७ | 1 वचोयुजा 
७६१५. युञ्जन्ति हरी इषिरस्य गाथयोरौ रथ उरुयुगे। इन्द्रवाहां 11९ || 


9. (The priests) by their hymn yoke in the swift deity’s yoked 
at a word. 
Samaveda, 712, adding svar-vida. 


७६१६. त्वं नं इन्द्रा भरँ ओजों नृम्णं शतक्रतो विचर्षणे। 
आ वीरं पृंतनाषह॑म्‌।।१०॥ 
10. Indra, all-beholding Maghavan, bring us strength and 


ealth; (we solicit you) the host-overpowering champion. 
Sámaveda, 405, 1169. 
The host-overpowering Champion— So Sayana, supplying tvam 
ayacdmahe. The true construction is undoubtedly “‘bring us a host- 
Overpowering champion,” sc. a son. 


0६१७, त्वं हि नं: पिता व॑सो त्वं माता शतक्रतो बभूविंथ। 
अधां ते सुम्नमींमहे।।११।। 


iit. You have been our father, O giver of dwellings, you our 
mother 0 Satakratu; we pray for that happiness which is your. 
Samaveda, 1170. 


Ww 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


bis Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and SC 
७६१८. त्वां शुंष्मिन्‌ पुरुहूत वाजयन्तमुप ब्रुवे शतक्रतो। | 
स नों रास्व सुवीर्यम्‌।।१२ ।। | 

12. Mighty TUE invoked by many, I praise you desirous : 


of offerings; do you give us wealth. 
Sámaveda, 1171, with sahaskrta for satakrato. 


[सूक्त-९९] ६ 
[क्रषि- नृमेध आङ्गिरस। देवता- इन्द्र। 
छन्द- प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती)।] 
७६१९. त्वामिदा ह्यो नरोऽपींप्यनवज्जिनभर्णयः। n 
स इन्द्र स्तोमवाहसामिह श्रुध्युप स्वसंरमा गंहि।।१ ।। 


1. Thunderer, your worshippers, ready with their oblations, S 
have to-day and yesterday made you drink (the Soma); listen, 
Indra, here to us who offer you praise and come you to our 
dwelling. M 
Sámaveda, 302, 813, with stomavahasah for-sam. M 
[ ! हरिवस्तदीमहे 1 धसं | 5 
be ७६२०. मत्स्वां सुशिप्र हरिवस्तदीमहे त्वे आ भूषन्ति वेधस:। | 


तव श्रवाँस्युपमान्युकथ्यां सुतेष्विन्द्र गिर्वणः।।२।। 
2, Handsome-jawed lord of steeds, rejoice (in the libation); we 
pray to you, your votaries come to you Indra, worthy. of praise, 
may your food be a pattern and excellent. 
Samaveda, 814, with ukthya for ukthyá Sayana takes upamant as 
upamadna-bhitdani; it means rather ‘magnificent.’ | th 


७६२१. श्राय॑न्तइव सूर्य विश्वेदिन्द्रस्य भक्षत। E 
चसूंनि जाते जन॑मान ओज॑सा प्रतिं भागं न dimi |! 
3. As the gathering (rays) proceed to the son, so (the Maruts x 
proceed) to Indra, and by their power divide all his treasures bs 
among those who have been or will be born; may we meditate on ac 
our share. $5 cr 
Sámayveda, 267, 1319, reading Jato janimani and didhimat 4 
Yajurveda, 33,41. 3 z. WER) 
This is an obscure verse and Yaska's interpretation (Nir, he 
throws but little light. Sayana gives another explanation, in which i 
takes bhaksata as=bhajata, and not as=vibhajante, “(© worshippers), 
he wealth © g 


the gathering (rays) proceed to the sun, so do you enjoy allt 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
hita a 
Mandala 8, Sukta 99 647 
Indra; and let us possess like an inheritance the treasures which by his 
power (he distributes) to him that has been or will be born." Mahidhara’s 
explanation seems much simpler and better, ‘‘the gathering (rays) 
rous proceeding to the sun distribute all Indra’s treasures (to living beings, sc. 
as rain, corn, etc.) may we too by our power leave those treasures as an 

inheritance to him who has been or will be born.” 


अनर्शरातिं ति 1 
७६२२. अन॑र्शरातिं वसुदामुपं स्तुहि भद्रा इन्द्र॑स्य रातय॑:। 
सो अस्य कार्म विधतो न रोषति मनो दानाय॑ चोदय॑न्‌।॥४।। 
4, Praise him the bestower of wealth, whose gifts are never 
evil; Indra’s gifts are fortunate; he directs his mind to the gift and 


mars not the desire of his worshipper. 
Sámaveda, 1320, with alarsiratim for anarsarátim. 


७६२३. त्वमिन्द्र परतूर्तिष्वभि विश्वां असि स्पूर्ध:। 


ions, 


sten, अशस्तिहा जनिता विश्वतूरसि त्वं तूर्य A:I 
our 5. Indra, you conquer in battles all opposing hosts O opposer 
who beat down those who would oppose you are the smiter of the 
wicked, the bringer (of evil to your enemies), and the destroyer of 
all. 
Sdmaveda, 311, 1637, with vrtratuh for visvatuh. Yajurveda, 33,66. 
Mahidhara takes tiirya as an imperative-máraya, not as a vocative. 
. I 5 क्षोणी शिशुं 
Be ७६२४. अनु ते शुष्मं तुरय॑न्तमीयतुः क्षोणी शिशुं न मातरां। 
alse, श्वस्ते = Fee, x 
विश्वास्ते wg: श्नथयन्त मन्यवें gi यदिन्द्र तूर्वसि 1६ ।। 
ni as 6. Heaven and earth follow your destructive energy as mothers 


their child: since you smite Vrtra, all the hostile hosts, Indra, faint 
at your wrath. 
Sdmaveda, 1638. Yajurveda, 33,67. 
Faint— The texts of R. V., S.V., and Y.V. read snathayanta, which 
aruts Properly means **to kill," but must here have a passive meaning. Sáyana 
and Mahidhara read sratha yanta, which they explain khinnd bhavantt, 


3 2 A i Ws affected.” Benfey translates it "sinkt kraftlos,” and 
: crath nd gee Grau) hat her Nes Pompeu die Bed. voi 
imah erschlaffen,"" Srathayanta is probably the right reading. 
v1) ७६२५, इत ऊती वों अजर प्रहेतारमप्रहितम्‌। 

ch he आशु जेतारं हेतारं रथीतममतूत PERTINI 

P a 7. (Worshippers), summon hither for protection him who never 


rows E : the 
Stows old, the repeller (of enemies), himself never repelled, t 
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar i 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
648 Rgveda Samhita 


swift conqueror, the driver, the best of charioteers, unharmed of | 
any, the augmenter of water. 
Samaveda, 283. 


७६२६. इष्कर्तारमनिष्कृतं सह॑स्कृतं शतमूतिं शतक्र॑तुम्‌। 


समानमिन्द्रमवसे हवामहे वस॑वानं वसूजुव॑म्‌ ।।८।। प 
8. We solicit for our protection /ndra, the consecrator of others \ 
but himself consecrated by none, produced by strength, possessing 
an hundredfold protection, possessing hundredfold knowledge, a 
common deity to many, hiding treasures in his store-house and 
sending wealth (to his votaries). 0 
The Consecrator of  others— Mahidhara (Yajurveda, 12.110) r 
explains iskartdram as yajnanispadakam, but Sayana takes it as satrünam ७ 


(१) samskartáram. As one of the meanings of samskadra is the investiture 
with the sacred thread, and vrátya is tne name for one in whose youth the 
customary observances have been omitted and who has not received his 
investiture with the sacred thread, the epithet aniskrtam may perhaps 


0 
illustrate the application of the term vrdtya to the Supreme Being in p 
Prasna Upan., 1.11, cf. Sankara's comm. ‘‘prathamajatatvad anyasya | te 

samskartur abhavad asamskrto vrátyas tvàm svabhávata eva suddhah."" 
e. Grassmann explains iskartaram aniskriam as ‘director, yourself e 

undirected.’ 
७ 
[सूक्त- १००] 

[क्रषि- १-३, ६-१२ नेम भार्गव; ४-५ इन्द्र। देवता- इन्द्र, १०-११ वाक्‌। 
छन्द- त्रिष्टुप्‌, ६ जगती, ७-९ अनुष्टुप्‌। | pt 
७६२७. अयं तं एमि तन्वां पुरस्ताद्विश्वै देवा अभि मां यन्ति पश्चात्‌) , 12 
i di XL. F £ 

यदा महयं दीधरो भागमिन्द्रादिन्मया कृणवो वीयौणि।।१॥। 

1. I here go before you with my son, the Visve devas follow pr 
after me; if, Indra, you keep wealth for me, then put forth your (b 
strength on my side. d of 

I here go strength on my Side— Ze., if you wish to give me the i 
wealth of my enemies, come and help me to overcome them. s 

EN I सोम 
७६२८. दधामि ते मधुनो भक्षमग्रें हितस्तै भाग: सुतो अस्तु सोम:। 
असंश्च त्वं द॑क्षिणतः सखा मेऽधा वृत्राणि जङ्घनाव भूरि॥२॥ 

2. I offer the beverage of the exhilarating drink first to you, let | yc 
the effused enjoyable Soma be placed within you; be you 4 frien | of 


on my right hand, then will we two smite our many enemies. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MRSS 


hita 


of 


ers 
ing 
, 4 
ind 


10) 
am 
ure 
the 
his 
aps 
dn 
sya 
i" 
self 


OW 
ur 


the 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 100 di 
७६२९. प्र सु स्तोमं भरत वाजयन्त इन्द्राय सत्यं यदिं सत्यमस्ति 
न्द्रो अस्तीति नेम॑ उ त्व आह क ई' ददर्श कमभि Fami 
3. Offer fervently, may war-loving companions, true praise to 


Indra, if he truly exists; Nema says ‘‘verily there is no Indra," 
who has cver seen him? whom shall we praise? 


७६३०. अयम॑स्मि जरितः पश्य॑ मेह विश्वा जातान्यभ्यस्मि महा। 
ऋतस्य॑ मा प्रदिशों वर्धयन्त्यादर्दिरो भुव॑ना दर्दरीमि।४।। 


4. (Indra speaks) **Here I am, worshipper, behold me here; I 
overpower all beings by my might; the offerers of sacrifice 
magnify me by their praises; I, the shatterer, shatter the worlds. 


Is 1 v nle c EN 
७६३१. आ यन्मां वेना अरुहन्रुतस्यँ एकमासीनं हर्यतस्य पृष्ठे 
ts | 
TRA g आ प्रत्य॑वोचदचिंक्रदञ्छिशुंमन्तः सखायः n. | 
5. When the lovers of sacrifice ascended to me sitting alone 
on the back of my well-loved (firmament), then my mind verily 
proclaimed to my heart, ‘my friends with their children are crying 
to me."* 
On the back of my well-loved Firmament— Haryatasya prsthe is 
explained by the Schol. as kantasya antariksasya prsthe. 
७६३२. विश्वेत्ता ते सव॑नेषु प्रवाच्या या चकर्थ मघवन्निन्द्र सुन्वते। 
I Meca T ER 
पारावतं यत्पुरुसम्भृतं वस्वपावृंणोः शरभाय क्रषिबन्धवे।६11 
6. Verily all those deeds of your, Maghavan, are to be 
proclaimed, which you have achieved for him who offers libations 
In the sacrifices; that wealth of Paravat, collected by many; you 
have opened to Sarabha, the kinsman of the Rsi. 
Püràvat— Sayana only adds “च certain enemy so called.” Paravata 
Probably means “brought from afar." 

Collected my Many—- Sayana takes puru-sambhrtam adverbially 
ut Perhaps only as an alternative rendering, see var. lect.); "that wealth 
S [dr avat you have opened to Sarabha, so that it now is collected by 
any.” He only adds that Sarabha was a Rsi. 


SR. प्र जून धावता पृथङ्नेह यो वो अर्वावरीत्‌। 
निर्षी PA मर्मणि वज्जमिन्द्रो अपीपतत्‌।॥७।। 


7. Haste now severally forward; he is not here who stopped 


टर Way.—has not Indra let fall his thunderbolt in the very vitals 
that enemy? 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


0 O 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
650 Rgveda Samhita 
I have ventured to give an independent version of this Verse, as I do 
quite understand Savana 's Comment. He apparently reads ni for na of the 
second line; and seems to explain the verse; ‘‘that enemy who was 
running forward and stayed not apart and did not hinder you,—Jndra has 
thrown (ryapipatat) his bolt in the vitals of that enemy." 


मनोजवा 1 ^d | 
७६३४. मनोजवा अयमान आयसीम॑तरत्पुरम्‌। 
fed सोम 1 
दिवं सुपर्णो गत्वाय सोमं वज्रिण आभ॑रत्‌।।८।। 

8. Suparna, rushing swift as thought, passed through the iron 
city; then having gone to heaven he brought the Soma to the 
thunderer. 

He brought the Soma to the Thunderer— This alludes to the 
legend of the Gayatri as a bird fetching the Soma from heaven. Sayana 
explains dyasim पाएर? as hiranmayim ‘‘golden,”’ in allusion no doubt to 
the other legend which represents the cities of the demons as made of iron 


on the earth, silver in the firmament, and gold in heaven (Ait. Brahm., 
1.23). 


७६३५. समुद्रे अन्तः श॑यत उद्ना वज्रों अभीवृंतः। 
RAA संयत: SIT बलिम्‌।।९।। 
9. The thunderbolt lies in the midst of the sea, covered with the 


waters; (the foes) flying in front of the battle bring offerings of 
submission to it. 
७६३६. यद्वाग्‌ वदन्त्यविचेतनानि राष्ट्री देवाना निषसाद॑ wu 

चत॑स्र ऊर्ज दुदुहे पयाँसि ms स्विदस्याः परमं ज॑गाम।।१०॥ 

10. When Vak, the queen, the gladdner of the gods, sits down 
(in the sacrifice) uttering things not to be understood, she milks 
water and food for the four quarters (of the earth); whither now 1s 
her best portion gone? 

Sayana quotes the Nirukta, X1.28, and explains Vak here as the 
thunder (cf: VIII.69.14); by the ‘‘best portion” he understands the ram, 
“which sinks in the earth or is taken up by the sun's rays." Toc Men 
appears to mean the same as Tennyson's lines in the **Talking Oak’ 

“Low thunders bring the mellow rain 

Which makes me broad and deep.’ ; 

The sacrifice brings rain ushered in by thunder; and then it is as 
“whither is the thunder gone now that it has passed?” 


७६३७. देवीं वार्चमजनयन्त देवास्तां विश्वरूपाः पशवों वदत्ति। 
सा नों मन्द्रेषमूर्ज दुहाना धेनुर्वागस्मानुप Edd it! 


ked 


1... २ In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


11115 Mandala 8, Sükta 101 él 
$ T do 11. The gods produced the goddess Vak; her do animals of 
bs every kind utter; may she, Vak, the all gladdening cow, yielding 
) Was meat and drink, come to us, worthily praised. 

a has Sayana adds to explain this verse, ‘‘ihe thunder entering into all 


beings, becomes the speaker of moral truth," esa mddhyamikd vak 
sarvapranyantargatà dharmabhivadini bhavati. 

Animals of every Kind— Sayana adds **whether their utterance be 
articulate or inarticulate.”’ 


1017 ७६३८. सखे विष्णो वितरं वि क्रमस्व द्यौर्देहि लोकं वज्राय विष्कभें। 
) the हनाव वृत्रं रिणचांव सिन्धूनिन्द्रस्य यन्तु प्रसवे fabris i 
12. O Visnu my friends, stride forth lustily; O heaven, give 


o t 

e. room to contain the thunderbolt; let us smite Vrtra, let us open the 

ibt to rivers; let them flow, set free, at the command of /ndra. 

fron Give Room to contain the Thunderbolt— Sayana here quotes the 

ähm., following passage from the Brhaddevata. “1970 had enveloped the three 
worlds and stood there in his fierce energy; Indra could not conquer him, 
and he went to Visnu and said, ‘I will smite Vrtra, do you stride forth and 
stand by my side, and let the heavens give room for my uplifted 
thunderbolt.’ Visnu consented and did so, and the heavens gave an open 
space. All this is related in this verse.” 

h the 

zs of [सूक्त- १० शु 
[ऋषि- जमदग्नि भार्गव। देवता- १ से ५ तृतीय चरण तक मित्रावरुण, ५ 

चतुर्थ चरण ६ आदित्यगण, ७-८ अश्विनीकुमार, ९-१० वायु, ११-१२ 

सूय, १३ उषा अथवा सूर्यप्रभा , १४ पवमान, १५-१६ गौ। छन्द- १-२, ५- 

own १२ प्रगाथ (विषमा बृहती, समासतो बृहती), 3 गायत्री, ४ सतोबृहती, १३ 

nilks बृहती, १४-१६ faut 

pu ७६३९. क्रधंगित्था स मर्त्यः शशमे देवतांतये। 

; the यो नूनं मित्रावरुणावभिष्ट॑य आचक्रे हव्यदातये॥१ 11 

rain, 1. That man verily consecrates the oblation for the sacrifice, 

verse who 


? brings quickly Mitra and Varuna to the offerer for the 
attainment of his desires. 


a Yajurveda, 33,87. Mahidhara differs from Sayana in his explanation, 
sked ठ PS it thus: “Verily that man who worships Mitra and Varuna for 
Se eC of his desires and the giving of oblations, becomes thereby 

“clly tranquil and able to perform the sacrifice” (rdhag devatátaye). 


७ 
१४०. afisaa उरुचक्षेसा नरा राजांना दीर्षश्रुत्तमा। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


SEA — 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


652 Rgveda Sarühita ) 

. | D M i 

ता बाहुता न दंसनां रथर्यतः साकं सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः।।२।। a 

2. Those two leaders of rites, great in might, far-secing, cx] 
resplendent, and most far-hearing, perform their deeds like two 

arms, by the help of the rays of the sun. as 

Like two Arms— Sayana adds, as an explanation, ‘‘that is, for 
they obtain the sacrifice as the arms accomplish an object.” ie 

[५ | A 1C 
७६४१. प्र यो वाँ मित्रावरुणाजिरो दूतो अर्द्रवत्‌। अर्यःशीर्षा मदेरघु:11३॥ us 

3. Mitra and Varuna, he who hastens to appear before you, 
becomes the messenger of the gods; he wears an iron helmet, he 
exults in his wealth. 

An Iron Helmet— Sayana says *'golden,"' as often elsewhere (ayas- glo 
Sisa). 

संपृच्छे ७६! 
७६४२. न यः संपृच्छे न पुनर्हवीतवे न संवादाय रमते। i 
तस्मात्रो समृतेरुरुष्यतं e 
तस्मात्रो अद्य समू बाहुभ्यां न उरुष्यतम्‌।॥४।। 

4. He who has no pleasure in questioning, nor in repeated (we 
calling nor in dialogue,—defend us to-day from him and from his alic 
encounter, defend us from his arms. Jim, 

= ७६४३. प्र मित्राय प्रार्यम्णे संचथ्यमृतावसो । 
| n स्तोत्रं 
वरूथ्यंद वरुणे छन्द्यं वचः स्तोत्रं राज॑सु गायत |I a 

5. O you rich in offerings, sing to Mitra, sing to Aryaman, a 
reverential hymn produced in the sacrificial chamber; sing 4 
propitiating address to Varuna; sing a hymn of praise to the kings. beat 

Samaveda, 255, with varüthye for varüthyam. pou 

Produced in the sacrificial Chamber— Sayana explains varüthyam 
as yajnagrhe bhavam; the St. Petersb. Dict. gives it as “Schutz "S 
gewahrend.”’ 

To the Kings— Sc. Mitra, Aryaman and Varuna. 

७६४४. ते हिन्विरे अरुणं जेन्यं वस्वेकं vd तिंसृणाम्‌। 
z = =. a ein 
ते धामान्यमृता मर्त्यानामद॑ब्धा अभि ANL Stee 

6. It was these who sent the red victory-giving Vasu, the vi milk 
son of the three (worlds); they the invincible, the immortal, 
overlook the abodes of men. ७६४ 


z Givi d Aor cted 
Victory-Giving— Elsewhere Sayana explains jenya when UT 51 
2 ००53 

with vasu as jetavya, **what is to be conquered or won, ef. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Xo +. 


hita 


'üs- 


ted 
his 


ne 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 101 653 
VII.74.3; here he takes it actively as jayasddhanam. The St. Petersh. Dict. 
explains it as **edel von Abkunft, ächt, wahr.” 

Vasu— Sayana by his explanation vasakam seems here to take Vasu 
as for Vasum, sc. the Sun, as one of the Vasus, as he adds “they send him 
for the dispelling of the darkness of the three worlds.” But it would be 
more natural to take it in its ordinary meaning ‘wealth,’ ie., gold. “Tt was 
these who sent the red gold victory-giving,”’ or ‘‘the reward of victory." 

^ ति 1 Lu le 
७६४५. आ म वचास्युद्यता द्युमत्तमानि कत्वा! 
fis THUS gd 1 1 चीतयें 
उभा यात नासत्या र प्रति हव्यानि ÑINI 

7. O associated Nāsatyās, come both of you to my uplifted 

glorious praises and my rites, come to partake of my offerings. 


७६४६. रातिं यद्वामरक्षसं हवामहे qan वाजिनीवसू। 
पराचीं होत्रीं प्रतिरन्तावित॑ नरा गृणाना जमर्दग्निना॥८ || 
8. Deities rich in food, when we solicit your bounty, that 
(wealth) which demons cannot thwart,—then, helping our praise 
directed to the east, come, leaders of rites, worshipped by 
Jamadagni. 
Helping— Perhaps rather "inspiring," cf. IV.6.1. 
७६४७. आ नों यज्ञं दिविस्मृशं वायो याहि सुमन्‍्म॑भि:। 
अन्तः पवित्र उपरिं श्रीणानोईयं शुक्रो अयामि dimi 
9. Come, Vayu, to our heaven-reaching sacrifice with it: 
beautiful hymns of praise; this bright Soma has been kept for you 


Poured out upon the middle of the straining cloth, 
Yajurveda, 33,85. 


७६४८, वेत्यध्वर्यु: पथिभी रजिष्ठैः प्रति हव्यानि वीतर्ये। 
अधां नियुत्व उभयस्य नः पिब॒ शुचि सोमं गवांशिरम्‌॥१०॥ 
10. The ministrant priest comes by the straightest paths, he 


beings the oblations for your enjoyment; then lord of the Niyut 
steeds, drink of both kinds, the Soma pure and that mixed with 


milk. 
The Priest Comes... że., from the havirdhdna, a car m the Soma. 
७६४९. बण्महाँ असि सूर्य बळांदित्य महाँ असि। 
महस्तें सतो म॑हिमा पनस्यतेऽद्धा देव महाँ अंसि॥११॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Te 


654 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and ह o 
11. Verily you are great, O Sun; verily, Aditya, you are great; 
the greatness of you, the great one, is praised; verily you are great, 
O god. 
Samaveda, 276, 1788, with panistama mahnna for panasyate addha, 
Yajurveda, 33.39. 


७६५०. बट्‌ सूर्य श्रव॑सा महाँ असि सत्रा देव महाँ अंसि। 
महा देवानामसुर्यः पुरोहितो विभु ज्योतिरदाभ्यम्‌॥१२॥ 
12. Verily, O sun, you are great in fame; O god, you are indeed 
might among the gods in might; you are the slayer of the Asuras, 


and the preceptor (of the gods); your glory is widespread and to be 
marred by none. 


Samaveda, 1789. Yajurveda, 33.40. 


The Slayer of the Asuras— Sayana explains asuryah by asurdndm 
hantd;, Mahidhara takes it “‘beneficent to living beings." The true 
meaning is no doubt that given in the St. Petersb. Dict. ‘‘unkérperlich, 
geistlich, göttlich.” 


७६५१. इयं या नीच्यर्किणी रूपा रोहिण्या कृता। 
चित्रेव प्रत्यदर्श्यायत्यैन्तर्दशसु sme 
13. She who was created beautiful and bright, bending 
downwards and receiving all praise, has been seen within (the 
world), like a brindled cow, advancing to the ten regions (spread 


our) like arms. 
She— This is explained to be Usas, the dawn, or the light of the Sun. 


७६५२. प्रजा हं तिस्रो अत्यायमीयुर्न्यशन्या अर्कमभितो विविश्रे। 
बृहद्ध wel भुवनेष्वन्तः पव॑मानो हरित आ विंवेश।।१४।। 


14. Three kinds of creatures went to destruction; the others 
came before Agni; the mighty one (the Sun) stood within the 
worlds; (Vayu), the purifier, entered the quarters of the sky. 


This very obscure verse is explained in the Satapatha Brahmana, 


11.5.1, which gives as legend to the effect that Prajapati desired to um 
and after intense meditation produced in succession three kinds 0 
creatures—birds, small snakes (sarisrpa), and serpents; but they all died. 
He then reflected on the cause of the failure; and, perceiving it to be the 
want of nourishment, he caused milk to be produced in his own breasts: 
After this he created a fourth kind which were thus fed and lived. The 
‘others’ are those whick thus survived. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


M 


sp 
wł 
ab; 


are 


hor 


hit 
७६ 


we 


७६ 


m 


dha, 


leed 
ras, 
) be 


nām 
true 
lich, 


I c 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 102 A 


The Mighty One— The mighty one’ is explained as the Sun, 
Sayana, however, adds that others (as, e.g. Satapatha Bráhmana) take it 
as Prajápati. 


७६५३. माता रुद्राणां दुहिता वसूनां स्वसांदित्यानांममृत॑स्य नाभिं;। 
प्र नु वोचं चिकितुषे जनाय मा गामर्नागामर्दितिं SE ॥१५॥ 


15. (She who is) the mother of the Rudras, the daughter of the 
Vasus, the sistér of the Adityas, the home of ambrosia,—I have 
spoken to men of understanding,—kill not her, the sinless inviolate 
cow. 


७६५४. वचोविदं वार्चमुदीरयन्ती विश्वाभिर्धीभिरुपतिष्ठमानाम्‌। 
देवी देवेभ्यः पर्येयुषीं गामा मावृक्त Wed दभ्रचेता:11१६॥ 


16. The divine cow, who herself utters, speech and gives 
speech to others, who comes attended by every kind of utterance, 
who helps me for my worship of the gods,—it is only the fool who 
abandons her. 


Gives speech to others— Sayana adds that men are silent while they 
are hungry, but begin to speak when they have eaten food. 


[सूक्त- १०२] 
[ऋषि- प्रयोग भार्गव अथवा अग्नि बार्हस्पत्य अथवा अग्नि-पावक अथवा 
सहसः पुत्र-गृहपति, यविष्टश्च यद्वा एकः। 
देवता- अग्नि। छन्द- गायत्री! | 
७६५५. त्वमग्ने बृहद्वयो दासि देव दाशुषें। कविर्गुहर्पतिर्युवा॥॥१ 1 


l. Divine Agni, the ever young, the wise, the protector of the 
Suschold, it is you who give abundant food to the worshipper. 


७६५६. स न ईळांनया सह देवाँ अग्ने दुवस्युर्वा। चिकिद्विभानवा वह॥२॥ 
d Resplendent one, do you, the all-knower, bring the gods 
er with this our reverential hymn of praise. 

1 
७६५७. त्वयां ह स्विद्युजा वयं AA यविष्ठय। अभि À वाज॑सातये॥३॥। 


3.0 ever youthful one, with you as our गाए, the sender of 


Wea f 3 food. 
lth, we Overcome (our enemies) for the attainment of food. 
Sámaveda, 403. 


७६५८, और्वभूगुवच्छुचिमप्नवानवदा हुँवे। अग्नि संमुद्र्वाससम्‌।॥४1। 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


hith 


निकास... 


656 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri Sun 
À amhità 


M 
4. Like Aurva Bhrgu and like Apanvan, | invoke the pure Agni, 
dwelling in the midst of the sea. 
Aurva Bhrgu— For the legend of Aurva, the descendant of Bhrgu a 
(he is sometimes called the son, sometimes the grandson, and sometimes 
only the descendant), see Muir’s Sanskrit Texts, 1.447,476. He became the 9) 
submarine fire. Benfey takes Aurvabhrgu as a dvandva compound, “‘like 
Aurva and Bhrgu." pr 
Apnavana— We have Apnavan mentioned as one of the Bhrgus in 
IV.7.1. 5 
Dwelling in the Midst of the Sea— Sāyaņa explains 
samudravdsasam by samudramadhyavartindm. It should prcperly mean rà 
“clothed or hidden by the sea.”’ he 
७६५९. हुवे वात॑स्वनं कविं पर्जन्यंक्रन्द्य सह:। अग्नि संमुद्ववाससम्‌। i tt 
5. I invoke Agni dwelling in the midst of the sea, the wise one, 
roaring like the wind, might, with a voice like Parjanya's. 
७६६०. आ wd संवितुर्यथा भग॑स्येव भुजि हुवे। अग्नि संमुद्रवांससम्‌।६॥ x 


6. I invoke Agni dwelling in the midst of the sea, like the 
energy of Savitd, like the enjoyments granted by Bhaga. yal 
Like the Energy of Savità— Sayana only explains savam savituh by 


\9 
prerakasya devasya prasavam, but cf. viii.100.12. ; 
e Like the Enjoyments Granted by Bhaga— Sayana only explains 
Bhagasyeva bhujim by Bhagakhyasya devasya bhogam iva. The St. 
Petersburg Dict. explains bhuji ‘‘Gewahrung von Genuss, Gunst,"—i.e., B 
“like the favour of Bhaga."* a 
अग्नि al l | 1 abun 
७६६१. अग्नि वो वृधन्तमध्वराणां पुरूतमम्‌। अच्छा TÀ INI 
7. (Draw) near to Agni the strong, the mightiest, him who s 
ar 


expands (with his flames), the grandson of the invincible ones. 
Sdmaveda, 21, 946, E ७६ 
The Grandson of the invincible ones— Sayana takes adhvaranam 

as ahimsydnam balinām. Benfey’s transl. is far better, ‘‘Eurem Agni, dem १ 

Segnenden, ihm dem Opferverschendsten, dem stürkereichen Enkel zu Joi 

(rufen wir an.) 


> | 
७६६२. अयं यथां न आभुवच्वष्टा रूपेव तक्षयां। अस्य क्रत्वा यशस्वतः।|८॥ 


= abi 

8. (Draw near) that he may deal with us as a carpenter deals 1 

with the timber he has to cut; may we become renowned by his is 

skill. ds 
Samaveda, 947. 

७६६३. अयं विश्वां अभि श्रियोञगिनर्देवेषुँ पत्यते। आ वाजैरुप नो गमत्‌॥॥९ |! Ss 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ] 


EL. —  — 2. ,5 २ 


nhità 
1gni, 
hrgu 
limes 


e the 
"like 


us in 


lains 
nean 


who 


nam 
dem 


m 


zu 
[८ || 


pals 
his 


९ || 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 102 ES 


9. Among the gods Agni has to do with all the successes (of 
men); may he come to us with abundance of food. 
Samaveda, 948. 
श्रेपामिह D ` A | असि x 
७६६४. विश्वेषामिह स्तुहि होतृणां यशस्तमम्‌। अग्नि aay To 
10. Praise at our rite Agni, the most glorious of all ministrant 
priests, the foremost in the sacrifices. 


७६६५. शीरं पावकशोचिषं ज्येष्ठो यो दमेष्वा। दीदाय दीर्घ्रुत्तम:11११॥ 
11. (Praise him) the dweller in the sacrifice, of purifying 


radiance, who shines, the chief of the gods and omniscient, in the 
house (of the sacrificers). 


७६६६. तमर्वन्तं न सनिसिं गृणीहि विप्र शुष्पिणम्‌। 
मित्रं न यांतयज्ज॑नम्‌।।१२।। 
12. O priest, glorify him, who is welcome and strong as a 
horse, and who like a friend conquers all our foes. 


Who Conquers all our Foes— The St. Petersburg Dict. explains 
yátayajjanam **die Leute vereinigend.”’ 


७६६७. sd त्वा जामयो गिरो देदिंशतीरहविष्कृत॑ः। 
वायोरनीके अस्थिरन्‌।।१३॥। 


13. The sister praises of the worshipper rise to you, 
proclaiming your glories; they stand kindling you in the presence 
of Vayu. 

Sámaveda, 13, 1570. 

In the Presence of Viyu— Sayana explains anike as samipe tvám 
Samedhayantyas. Benfey takes vayor anike ‘‘im Windesstrom.”’ 


७६६८. यस्यं त्रिधात्ववृतं बर्िंस्तस्थावर्सन्दिनम्‌। आपश्चित्रि द॑धा पदम्‌॥१४।। 


= 14. The waters find their place in him, for whom the triple- 
Jointed grass is spread unlimited and untied (in the sacrifice). 
Sámaveda, 1571. 

The waters find their Place in Him— The waters rest in S. who 
es as lightning in the firmament. 


Ee triple-jointed Grass . . . . United — Sáyana does not explain 
7 atu, but in the Samaveda, he explains it by triparvan. He adds that 
“acted grass is not tied in bundles in the sacrifice. 


8६९. पदं देवस्य॑ मीद्हुषोञ्नाधृष्टाभिरूतिभि:। भद्रा सूर्य RIRS 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


abid 


SS — 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 
15. Auspicious is the place of the god who pours forth all 
desires with his inviolable protections; auspicious 
appearance like the Sun's. 
Sámaveda, 1572. | 


७६७०. अग्ने घृतस्य॑ धीतिभिस्तेपानो देव शोचिषां। 
सा देवान्वक्षि यक्षिं च।।१६।। 

16. Divine Agni, blazing with radiance, through our oblations 
of ghi, bear (our sacrifice) to the gods and offer it. 
७६७१. d त्वाजनन्त मातरं: कविं देवासो अद्विर:। हव्यवाहमर्मर्त्यम्‌।।१७॥ 

17. The gods, as mothers, have borne you Angiras, the seer, 
the immortal, the bearer of the oblation. 
७६७२. प्रचेतसं त्वा कवेञ्ग्ने दूतं वरेण्यम्‌। हव्यवाहं नि धेदिरे॥१८।। 


18. The gods seat you in your place, O wise Agni, the seer, the | 
messenger, the most excellent, the bearer of the oblation. | 
Seat you in your Place— For ni sedire cf. iv.7.5. | 


७६७३. नहि मे अस्त्यघ्न्या न स्वधितिर्वनन्वति। अथैतादृग्भरामि ते।।१९॥ 


19. No cow is mine, and no axe is at hand to cleave wood, but 
yet I being both these to you. 
यदंग्ने [| | 
७६७४. यदग्ने कानि कानि चिदा ते दारूणि दध्मसिं। 
| 
ता जुषस्व गविष्ठय।।२०।। 
20. Most youthful (Agni), when we offer any kinds of timber 
to you, do you accept them all. 
This is partly found in Yajurveda, 11.73. 
Any kinds of Timber— Sayana here quotes a passage from the 
Taittiriya Samhità., v.1.10, to the effect that in ancient times they oniy 
offered to Agni wood cut with the axe, until the si Prayoga by this Verse 


caused him to accept wood blown down by the wind or by other 
accidents. 


७६७५. यदत्त्युपजिह्दिंका यद्दमो अंतिसर्पति। सर्व तद॑स्तु ते घृतम्‌।॥२१॥ 
21. Whatever timber the ant has gnawed, whatever the emmet 


has infested,—may it all be welcome to you as ghi. 
Yajurveda, 11.74. 


७६७६. अग्निमिन्थांनो मनसा धिर्य सचेत मर्त्यः। 
अग्निमीधे विवस्व॑भिः।।२२॥। 


658 


is his 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


hit 
th all 
| his 


itions 


KS 


Seer, 


r, the 


३ || 
, but 


nber 


| the 
only 
yerse 
ther 


met 


p" Á 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, Sükta 103 659 
22. Let a man, when he kindles Agni, perform the ceremony 


with a (devout) mind; he kindles him with the priests. 
Samaveda, 19, with indhe for idhe. 


[सूक्त- १०३] 


[क्रषि- सोभरि काण्व। देवता- अग्नि, १४ अग्नि तथा मरुद्वण। छन्द- 
बृहती, ५ विराड्रूपा; 6, ९,, ११, १३ सतोबृहती; ८, १२ HPT, १० 
हसीयसी (गायत्री), १४ अनुष्टुप्‌।] 

७६७७. अर्दर्शि गातुवित्तमो यस्मिन्त्रतान्यादिधु:। 
उपो षु जातमार्यस्य वर्धनमग्नि नक्षन्त नो PR: N 
1. He, in whom they offer the sacrifices, has appeared,—he 
who knows all ways; our praises rise to Agni, auspiciously born, 
the helper of the Arya. 
Sdmaveda, 47, 1515, with naksantu for naksanta. 
Arya— Arya here seems to mean the member of the Aryan race as 


opposed to the non-Aryan. Sayana explains it by uttamavarna, a man of 
the highest caste. 


७६७८. प्र दैवोदासो अग्निर्देवाँ अच्छा न मज्मनां। 
अनु me पृथिवीं वि वावृते तस्थौ नार्कस्य सान॑वि।२॥ 
2. Agni, when invoked by Divodása, ran along the mother 
Earth as with might, towards the gods; he took his place in the 
height of heaven. 


x Sdmaveda, 51, 1517 with deva Indrah for devan acchá, and sarmani 
Or sdnavi. 

This is an obscure verse, and Sayana does not explain it at all clearly. 
The Samaveda, text takes na not as a negative, but as ‘like,’ deva Indro 


na. Sàyana here leaves pravivavrte unexplained; the Comm. on the 
Samaveda, explains it anyarüpam karoti. I have followed the translation 


Suggested by the St. Petersb. Dict. 
७६७९. यस्माद्रेजन्त कृष्टयंश्रर्कृत्यानि कृण्वत:। 
सहस्रसां मेधसाताविव त्मनाग्नि धीभिः संपर्यत॥३॥ 


3. Since men tremble before those who perform the sacred 
Sacrifices, therefore do ye devoutly worship in the solemn rite Agni 
the bestower of thousands of kine. 

CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


CIE OS 


igiti j tion Chennai and eGangotri 
660 Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundatioi 390 Sate 


७६८०. प्र यं राये निनीषसि मतों यस्तै वसो दाश॑त्‌। 
स वीरं धते अग्न उक्थशंसिनं त्मना सहस्रपोषिण॑म्‌।।४।। 
4. Agni, bestower of dwellings, that mortal whom you wish to 
lead to wealth, and who gives offerings to you possesses of himself 


a strong son, a reciter of hymns and a lord of great wealth. 
Sdmaveda, 58, with yah for yam. 


A Lord of great Wealth— Sahasraposina explained as 
bahudhanam, but literally meaning ‘nourisher of thousands.’ 


७६८१. स दूळ्हे चिंदभि तृणत्ति वाजमर्वता स धत्ते अक्षिति श्रव॑:। 
त्वे देवत्रा सदां पुरूवसो विश्वां वामानिं धीमहि।॥॥। 
5. Lord of vast wealth, he (your worshipper) spoils with his 


steed food laid up even in strongholds, he possesses imperishable 
wealth; in you divine we ever possess all desirable treasures. 


७६८२. यो विश्वा दयते वसु होतां मन्द्रो जनानाम्‌। | 

मधोर्न पात्रा प्रथमान्यंस्मै प्र स्तोमां यन्त्यग्नयें1६।। 

6. To him the invoker of the gods, who ever rejoicing | 
distributes all wealth to men,—to Agni proceed our praises like the 


principal cups of the exhilarating Soma. 
Sámaveda, 44, 1583. 


० e ` मर्मज्यनते देवयव॑ 
७६८३. अश्वं न गीर्भी र्थ्य सुदानवो मर्मुज्यन्तें देवयव॑:। 
F » T मघोनाम्‌ 
उभे तोके तन॑ये दस्म विश्पते पर्षि राधों मघोनाम्‌।।७॥ 
7. The liberal worshippers with their hymns honour you 
harnessed to the ear like a horse; graceful lord of men, grant 
wealth to us rich in children and grandchildren. 
Sdmaveda, 1584. \ 
With their Hymns Honour you— This alludes to the commen idea 
that the chariots of the gods are yoked by the praises of their worshippers. 
Rich in Children and Grandchildren— So Sayana; but the Pada 
text takes ubhe and toke as dual, see Benfey’s note. 1 


७६८४. प्र मंहिष्ठाय गायत छतानें बृहते शुक्रशोचिषे। | 
उपस्तुतासो अग्नये।।८।। 


8. Singers of hymns, sing aloud to the mighty Agni, most 
bounteous, observant of truth and radiant with brightness. 
Samaveda, 107, 878. 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


B ccc | 


115 
le 


1g 
16 


u 
at 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Mandala 8, ükta 103 z 


७६८५. आ व॑सते मघवां वीरवद्यशः समिंद्धो द्युमयाहुत:। 
कुविन्नों अस्य सुमतिर्नवीयस्यच्छा वा्जेभिरागर्मत्‌। ९ 11 
9. The wealthy and glorious (Agni), when invoked and kindled, 


pours forth on his votaries abundance of food with children; may 
his ever fresh favour continually come to us with all kinds of food. 


Sámaveda, 879, with bhaviyasi for naviyasi. 
७६८६. प्रमु प्रियाणा स्तुह्यांसावातिंथिम्‌। अग्नि रथानां यम॑म्‌।।१०॥। 

10. Praise, singer of hymns, the guest, Agni, the dearest of the 
dear, the driver of chariots. 


Singer of Hymns— Sayana explains dsdva a stotd; the St. Petersb. 
Dict. takes it as ‘Somatrankbereiter.’ 


७६८७. उदिता यो निदिता वेदिता वस्वा यज्ञियो ववर्षति। 
दुष्टरा यस्य॑ प्रवणे नोर्मयों धिया वाजं सिर्षासतः॥११॥ 
ll. (Praise him) the knower, worthy of the sacrifice, who 
brings to us treasures which have come up (from the depths) and 
are far-renowned,—whose (flames), as he hastens to wage the 


battle by means of our sacred rite and hard to be passed through as 
Waves rushing down a declivity. 


Far-Renowned— Sayana explains niditd by srutani. The St. Petersb. 
Dict. gives it as **verwahrt, versteckt.” 


By Means of our Sacred Rite— Dhiyd is explained by karmand. 
The offering is supposed to give the god strength for the battle. 
NI 
3६८८. मा नो हृणीतामतिथिर्वसुरग्नि: पुरुप्रशस्त एष:। 
यः सुहोतां स्वध्वर:1॥१२॥ 


_ 12. May none hinder Agni from coming to us, our guest, the 
giver of dwellings, praised by many,—(Agni) who is the excellent 
Invoker of the gods, who offers an excellent sacrifice. 


Samaveda, | 10, reading Arnitha atithim for hrnitam atithih. 
58८९. मो ते रिषन्ये अच्छोक्तिभिर्वसोञग्ने केभिश्िदेवँ:। 
कीरिश्चिद्धि तवामीट्टे दूत्याय रातहव्यः स्वध्वरः॥१३॥ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


p 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
Rgveda Samhita 
13. Agni, giver of dwellings, let not those come to harm, who 
approach you in whatsoever manner with hymns of praise: the 


worshipper who offers his libation and duly performs the rite 
praises you that you may be the bearer of the sacrifice. 


७६९०. आग्ने याहि मरुत्संखा रुद्रेभिः सोम॑पीतये। 
सोभर्या उप॑ सुष्टुतिं मादय॑स्व स्व॑णरे।।१४।। 


662 


14. Agni, who have the Maruts as your friends, come with the 


Rudras to drink the Soma; come to the praises of Sobhari; delight 
> 2 2 
yourself at our solemn rite. 


॥इति अष्टमं मण्डलम्‌॥ 


End of the Eighth Mandala 


fet) fei) fe 0070 fe चाहा. GTS PA ‘OF A दर खा 69 6» 9 दा £9» £3 “5 £f f£: 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


oo 


he 
ht 


p NE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


INDEX OF VERSES OF RGVEDA PART-3 


तृतीयभागस्य मन्त्रानुक्रमसूची 


अंसेष्वा मरुतः खादयो ७,५६, १३ 
अकारि वामन्धसो ६,६३,३ 

अक्षो न चक्रचोः शूर ६,२४,३ 
अक्ष्णश्चिद्‌ गातुवित्तरा ८,२५,९ 
आगन्म महा नमसा ७,१२,१ 
अगव्यूति क्षेत्रमागन्म ६,४७,२० 
अगोरुधाय गविषे ८,२४,२० 

अमन आ याहि वीतये ६,१६,१० 
अग्न आ याह्यग्निभिः ८,६० , १ 
अग्न यदद्य विशो ६,१५,१४ 
अमना यो मत्यों दुवो ६, १४, १ 
अग्निमग्नि व: समिधा ६,१५,६ 
अग्नि देवासो अग्रियं ६,१६,४८ 
अग्नि वः पूर्व्यं हुवे ८,२३,७ 
अग्नि वः पूर्व्य गिरा ८,३१,१४ 
अग्नि विश्वायुवेपसं ८,४३, २५ 
अग्नि वो देवमग्निभिः ७, ३, १ 
अग्नि वो देवयज्यया ८,७१,१२ 
अग्नि वो वृधन्तमध्वराणां ८ ,१०२,७ 


अगिन सूनुं सहसो जातवेदसं ८,७१, ११ 


अग्नि प्रलेन मन्मना ८,४४,१२ 
अग्नि: शुचिव्रततमः ८ ,४४, २१ 
वरुणेन ८,३५, 
अलि दूत पुरो दधे ८/४ ३ 
अनिन द्वेषो योतवै नो ८,७१,१५ 
अग्नि धीमिर्मनीषिणः ८,४३,१९ 
आ न मा मथितं सं दिदीपः ८,४८,६ 
नरो दीधितिभिः७,१,१ 
अनिम्न वो अधिगुं ८,६० ,१७ 
८,३९,१ 


अग्निमिन्धानो मनसा ८,१०२,२२ 
अग्निमीळिष्वावसे ८,७१,१४ 
अग्नि AK पुरुप्रियं ८,४३,३१ 
अग्निरप्सामृतीषहं ६,१४,४ 
अग्निरिषां सख्ये ददातु न:८,७१,१३ 
अग्निरिद्धि प्रचेता ६,१४,२ 
अग्निरीशे बृहतो अध्वरस्य ७,११,४ 
अग्निरुक्थे पुरोहितः८,२७,१ 
अग्निर्जाता देवानामग्निः८,३९,६ 
आगिनर्देवेषु संवसुः८,३९,७ 
अगिनर्न शुष्कं वनं ६,१८,१० 
अग्निर्मूर्धा दिव: ककुत्‌ ८,४४, १६ 
अगिनर्वृत्राणि जङ्घनत्‌ ६,१६,३४ 
आगिनर्हि जानि पूर्व्यः ८,७,३६ 
अग्निर्हि विद्मना निदः६,१४,५ 
अग्निर्होता गृहपतिः ६, १५, १३ 
अग्निस्तिग्मेन शोचिषा ६, १६, २८ 
अग्निस्त्रीणि त्रिधातूनि ८,३९ ,९ 
अग्नीपर्जन्याववतं ६,५२,१६ 
अग्नी रक्षांसि सेधति ७,१५,१० 
अग्ने कविर्वेधा असि ८,६०,३ 
अग्ने घृतस्य घीतिमभिः८,१०२,१६ 
अग्ने जरितर्विश्पतिः८,६०,१९ 
अग्ने तव त्ये अजर ८,२३,११ 
अमे त्वं यशा अस्या ८,२३, २० 
अग्ने धृतव्रताय ते ८,४४, २५ 
अग्ने नि पाहि नस्त्वं ८,४४, ११ 
अग्ने भव सुषमिधा ७,१७,१ 

अग्ने भ्रातः सहस्कृत ८, ४२, १६ 
अग्ने मन्मानि तुभ्यं कं ८,३९, २ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ES 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


अने माकिष्टे देवस्य ८,७१,८ 
अग्ने याहि दूत्यं ७,९ ,५ 

अग्ने याहि सुशस्तिभिः८,२३,६ 
अग्ने युक्ष्वा हि ये तवा ६, १६,४३ 
अग्ने रक्षा णो अंहसः७,१५,१३ 
अग्ने वीहि हविषा ७,१७,३ 

अग्ने विश्वेभिः स्वनीक ६,१५,१६ 
अमे स क्षेषदृतपा ६,३,१ 

अमे स्तोमं जुपस्व मे ८,४४,२ 
अप्नते विष्णवे वयं ८,२५,१२ 
अङ्गिरस्वन्ता उत विष्णुवन्ता ८,३५,१४ 
अचेति दिवो दुहिता मघोनि ७,७८,४ 
अचेत्यगिनश्चिकितुः ८,५६,५ 

अच्छा गिरो मतयो ७,१० 

अच्छा च त्वैना नमसा ८,२१,६ 

अच्छा नः शीरशोचिषं ८,७१,१० 
अच्छा नो अङगिरस्तमं ८,२३,१० 
अच्छा नो मित्रमहो देव ६,२,११; १४,६ 
अच्छा नो याह्या वह ६,१६,४४ 
अच्छायं वो मरुतः७,३६,९ 

अच्छा हि त्वा सहसः सूनो ८,६०,२ 
अच्युता चिद्रो अज्मन्ना ८,२०,५ 

अजा अन्यस्य TEA: ६ ,५७, ३ 

अजाश्वः पशुपा वाजपस्त्यो ६,५८ ,२ 
अजिरासो हरयो ये त आशवो ८,४९ ,८ 
अजैष्माद्यासनाम __उपो ८,४७,१८ 
अज्रे चिदस्मै कृणुथा ८,२७, १८ 

अतः समुद्रमुद्वत:८,६, २९ 
अत:सहस्ननिर्णिजा ८,८,११ 

अत त्वे इन्द्र प्रवतो ६,४७, १४ 
अतश्चिदिन्द्र ण उपा ८,९२, १० 
अतारिष्म तमसस्पारमस्य ७,७३, १ 
अतिथि मानुषाणां ८,२३, २५ 

अति नो विषिता पुरु ८,८३,३ 

अति वा यो मरुतो ६,५२,२ 

अतिविद्धा विथुरेणा चिदस्रा ८,९६,२ 
अतीदु शुक्र ओहत ८,६९,१४ 


अतीहि मन्युषाविणं ८,३२,२१ 
अत्यासो न ये मरुतः ७,५६,१६ 

अत्रा वि नेमिरेषां ८,३४,३ 

अत्रीणां स्तोममद्रिवो मह ८,३६ & 
अत्रेरिव शृणुतं पूर्वस्तुति ८,३५,१९ 
अदब्धस्य स्वधावतः ८,४४,२० 
अदब्धेभिः सवितः६,७१,३ 
अदब्धेभिस्तव गोपाभिः ६,८,७ 
अदर्शि गातुवित्तमः ८ , १० ३, १ 
अदान्मे पौरुकुत्स्यः ८,१९,३६ 
अदितिर्न उरुष्यतु ८,४७,९ 

अदितिर्नो दिवा ८,१८,६ 

अदित्सन्तं चिदाघृणे ६,५३,३ 
अदिद्युतत्स्वपाको ६,११,४ 

अद्या fast चित्तदपो ६,३०,३ 
अद्याद्या श्वःश्व इन्द्र ८,६१,१७ 

अद्या मुरीय यदि यातुधानः ७,१०४,१५ 
अद्रोघमा वहोशतो यविष्ठ्य ८,६०,४ 
अधः पश्यस्व मोपरि ८,३३,१९ 

अध जिह्वा पापतीति ६,६,५ 

अध ज्मो अधवा दिवः८,१,१८ 

अध त्वष्टा ते महः६,१७,१० 

अध त्वा विश्वे पुरः ६, १७,८ 

अद्य द्यौश्चित्ते अपसा ६,१७,९ 

अध द्रप्सो अंशुमत्या उपस्थे ८,९६,१५ 
अध प्रियमिषिराय ८,४६, २९ 

अध प्लायोगिरति दासदन्यान्‌ ८,१,३३ 
अध मन्ये बृहदसुर्यमस्य ६,३०,२ 
अध यच्चारथे गणे ८,४६,३१ 

अध श्रुतं कवषं ७,१८,१२ 

अघ स्मा ते चर्षणयो ६,२५,७ 

अघ स्मा नो वृधे भव ६,४६,११ 

अध स्मारः पनयन्ति ६,१२,५ 

अध स्या योषणा मही ८,४६,३३ 
अघा ते अप्रतिष्कुतं ८,९३,१२ 

अधा त हि नस्करः८,८४,६ 

अघा न्वस्य संदृशं जगन्वान्‌ ७,८८, २ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


अधा मही न आयस्यना ७, १५, १४ 

अधा ह यन्तो अश्चिना ७,७४,५ 

अधा हि विक्ष्वीड्योऽसि ६,२,७ 

अधा हीन्द्र गिर्वेण:८,९८,७ 

अधा होता न्यसीदो ६,१,२ 

अधि न इन्द्रैपाँ ८,८३,७ 

afa qa: पणीनां ६,४५, ३१ 

अधि या बृहतो दिव:८,२५,७ 

अधि श्रिये दुहिता ६,६३,५ 

अधीव यद्गिरीणां ८,७, १४ 

अधुक्षत्‌ पिप्युषीमिषम्‌ ८,७२, १६ 

अध्वर्यवा तु हि पिज्च ८,३२,२४ 

अध्वर्यवोऽरुणं दुग्धमंशुम्‌ ७,९८ , १ 

अध्वर्यो द्रावया त्वं ८,४,११ 

अध्वर्यो वीर प्र महे ६,४४,१३ 

अनर्वाणो ह्येषां पन्या ८,१८,२ 

अनर्शरातिं वसुदामुप स्तुहि ८,९९ ,४ 

अनु तदुर्वी रोदसी ७,३४,२४ 

अनु तन्नो जास्पति: ७, ३८ ,६ 

अनु ते दीय मह इन्द्रियाय ६,२५,८ 

अनु ते शुष्मं तुरयन्तमीयतु:८,९९ ,६ 

अनु त्रितस्य युध्यतः८,७,२४ 

अनु त्वा रोदसी उभे ८,७६,११ 

अनु त्वा रोदसी उभे चक्रं ८,६,३८ 

अनु त्वाहिघ्ने अध देव ६,१८,१४ 

अनु द्यावापृथिवी ६,१८,१५ 

अनु पूर्वाण्योक्या ८ २५,१७ 

अनु प्रलस्योकसः ८,६९,१८ 

अनु प्र येजे जन ओजो ६,३६,२ 

अनेनो वो मरुतः६,६६,७ 
अनेहसं वो हवमानमूतये ८,५० ,४ 
अनेहसं प्रतरणं विवक्षणं ८,४९ ,४ 
नउस्व्रजे ८,६७,१२ 


अन्तश्च प्रागा अदितिर्भवा ८,४८, २ 
अन्ति चित्‌ सन्तमह ८,११,४ 
अन्तिवामा दूरे अमित्रमुच्छ ७,७७,४ 
अन्यदद्य कर्वरमन्यदु ६,२४,५ 
अन्यमस्मद्भिया इयम्‌ ८,७५, १३ 
अन्यव्रतममानुषं ८,७० ,११ 

अन्यो अन्यमनु गृभ्णाति ७,१०३,४ 
अन्वपां खान्यतृन्तमोजसा ७,८२,३ 
अन्वस्य स्थूरं ददृशे पुरस्तात्‌ ८, १,३४ 
अप त्या अस्थुरनिरा ८,४८,११ 

अप ei वृजिनं रिपुं ६,५१,१३ 

अप स्वसुरुषसो नग्जिहीते ७,७१,१ 
अपादित उदु नश्चित्रतम:६,३८, १ 
अपादिन्द्रो अपादग्निः८,६९,११ 
अपादु शिप्र्यन्धसः ८,९२,४ 
अपाधमदभिशस्तीः८,८९,२ 
अपाम सोमममृता अभूम ८,४८,३ 
अपामीवामप farti ८,१८, १० 
अपामुपस्थे महिषा ६,८,४ 
अपामूर्मिर्मदन्निव ८,१४, १० 

अपां फेनेन नमुचे:८,१४, १३ 

अपां मध्ये तस्थि वां सं ७,८९ ,४ 
अपि पन्थामगन्महि ६,५१, १६ 
अपिबत्‌ कद्रुवः सुतम्‌ ८,४५, २६ 
अपि वृश्च पुराणवत्‌ ८,४० ,६ 

अपि ष्टु सविता ७,३८,३ 

अपूर्व्या पुरुतमानि ६,३२,१ 

अपो पु ण इयं शर: ८,६७,१५ 
अप्रामिसत्य मघवन्‌ ८,६१,४ 
अप्स्वग्ने सधिष्टव ८,४३,९ 
अबोधि जार उपसां ७,९,१ 
अन्जामुक्थैरहिं७,३४,१६ 

अभि कण्वा अनूषत ८,६,३४ 

अभि HAR भूरध ७,२१,६ 

अभि गन्धर्वमतृणत्‌ ८,७७,५ 

अभि त्यं dit गिर्वणसम्‌ ६,५०,६ 
अभि त्वा पाजो रक्षसः६,२१,७ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ae 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Fgggdation Chennai and eGangotri 


अभि त्वा पूर्वपीतय इन्द्र ८,३,७ 
अभित्वा वृषभा सुते ८,४५,२२ 
अभि त्वा शूर नोनुम: ७, ३२, २२ 
अभि नो नर्य वसु ६,५३,२ 

अभि प्र गोपतिं गिरा ८,६९,४ 
अभि प्र भर धृषता धृषत्‌ ८,८९,४ 
अभि प्रयांसि सुधितानि ६,१५,१५ 
अभि प्र वः सुराधसः ८ ,४९ , १ 
अभि प्र स्थाताहेव ७,३४,५ 

अमि प्रिया मरुतो या ८,२७,६ 
अभि यं देवी निति: ७,३७,७ 
अभि यं देव्यदितिः ७,३८,४ 
अभि ये मिथो वनुषः७,३८,५ 
अभि वहय ऊतये ८,१२,१५ 
अभि वां नूनमश्विना ७,६७,३ 
अभि वो देवीं धियं ७,३४,९ 
अभि वो वीरमन्धसो मदेषु ८,४६,१४ 
अभि व्रजं न तलिषे ८,६,२५ 
अभिष्टये सदावृधं ८,६८,५ 

अभि स्वपू्िर्मिथो ७,५६,३ 

अभि स्वरन्तु ये तव ८,१३,२८ 
अभि हि सत्य सोमपा:८,९८,५ 
अभी षतस्तदाभर ७,३२,२४ 
अभी षु णस्त्वं रयिं ८,९३,२१ 
अभुत्सु प्र देव्या ८,९,१६ 
अभूदुषा इन्द्रतमा मघोनी ७,७९ , ३ 
अभूर्‌ वीर गिर्वणः ६,४५,१३ 
अभूरेको रयिपते ६,३१, १ 
अभ्यर्च नभाकवत्‌ ८,४० ,४ 
अभ्यारमिदद्रयः८,७२,११ 
अभ्यूर्णोति यन्नग्नं ८,७९,२ 
अभ्रातृव्यो अना त्वं ८,२१,१३ 
अमन्महीदनाशवः८,१,१४ . 
अमाय वो मरुतः ८,२०,६ 
अमीवहा वास्तोष्पते ७,५५, १ 
अमूरः कविरदितिः७,९,३ 

अमूरा विश्वा वृषणाविमा ७,६१,५ 


अमृतं जातवेदसं ८,७४,५ 

अयं देवः सहसा ६,४४, २२ 

अयं द्यावापृथिवी ६,४४, २४ 
अयं द्योतयदद्युतः ६,३९,३ 

अयं मे पीत उदियर्ति ६,४७,३ 
अयं यथा न आभुवत्‌ ८,१०२,८ 
अयं रोचयदरुचः६,३९,४ 

अयं वां कृष्णो अश्विना ८,८५,३ 
अयं वां घर्मो अश्विना ८,९,४ 
अयं वामद्रिभिः सुतः८,२२,८ 
अयं वाँ भागो निहितः८,५७,४ 
अयं विश्वा अभि श्रियः८,१०२,९ 
अयं स यो वरिमाणं ६,४७,४ 
अयं सहस्रमृषिभिः ८,३,४ 

अयं सु तुभ्यं वरुण स्वधावः ७,८६,८ 
अयं सो अग्निराहुतः७,१,१६ 
अयं सोम-_सुन्व आ७, २९, १ 
अयं स्वादुरिह मदिष्ठः ६,४७,२ 
अयं ह यद्वां देवया उ ७,६८,४ 
अयं ह येन वा इदं ८,७६,४ 

अयं हि नेता वरुणः ७,४० ,४ 
अयं होता प्रथमः ६,९,४ 

अयं कविरकविषु ७,४,४ 

अयं कृलुरगृभीतः८,७९,१ 

अयं त इन्द्र सोम: ८, १७,११ 
अयं त एमि तन्वा ८,१००,१ 

अयं ते मानुषे जने ८,६४, १० 
अयं ते शर्यणावति ८,६४,११ 
अयं दीर्घाय चक्षसे ८,१३,३० 
अयमकृणोदुषसः ६,४४, २३ 
अयमग्निः सहस्रिणः ८ ,७५,४ 
अयमग्ने त्वे अपि ८,४४, २८ 
अयमस्मि जरितः पश्य ८, १०० , ४ 
अयमिन्द्रो मरुत्सखा ८,७६, २ 
अयमु ते सरस्वति वसिष्ठ:७,९५, ६ 
अयमु त्वा विचर्षणे ८,१७,७ 
अयमुशानः पर्यद्रिं ६,३९,२ 


ae 1 — In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


OEE GIES Gt GIO O1 GI ७0 20150) ७ SO SG a fs Ay DA 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


667 
2o 
अयमु ष्य सुमहाँ ७,८, २ 
अयमेक इत्या पुरूरु ८, २५, १६ 
अया धिया च गव्यया ८,९३, १७ 
अयाम धीवतो घियः८,९२,११ 
अयामि घोष इन्द्र ७,२३,२ 
अया वाजं देवहितं ६,१७,१५ 
अया ह त्यं मायया वावृधानं ६,२२,६ 
अयुक्त सप्त हरितः ७,६० , ३ 
अयुजो असमो नृभिः८,६२,२ 
अयुद्ध इद्युधा वृतं ८,४५,३ 
अये विदच्चित्रदृशीकं ६ ,४७,५ 
अरं हि पा सुतेषु ण:८,९२,२६ 
अरंक्षयाय नो महे ८,१५, १३ 
अरं त इन्द्र कुक्षये ८,९२,२४ 
अरं दासो न मीळ्हुपे कराणि ७,८६,७ 
अरं मे गन्तं हवनायास्मै ६,६३,२ 
अरमतिरनर्वणो ८,३१,१२ 
अरमश्वाय गायति ८,९२,२५ 
अरुणप्सुरुषा अभूत्‌ ८,७३, १६ 
अरुषस्य दुहितरा ६,४९,३ 
अर्चत प्रार्चत ८,६९,८ 
अर्चन्त एके महि साम मन्वत ८,२९ to 
अर्णांसि चित्पप्रथाना ७,१८,५ 
अर्थिनो यन्ति चेदर्थं ८,७९,५ 
अर्ध वीरस्य शृतपां ७,१८,१६ 
अर्भको न कुमारकः ८,६९ , १५ 
अर्वन्तो न श्रवसो ७,९०, ७;९१,७ 
अर्वाग्रथं नि यच्छतं ८,३५,२२ 
अर्वाग्रथं विश्ववारं ते ६,३७, १ 
em देव्येनावसा ७,८२,८ 
अवाज्चं त्वा पुरुष्टुत ८,६,४५;३२,३० 
वृषभं यथाजुरं ८, १ ,२ 
अव चष्ट ऋचीषमो ८,६२,६ 
अव द्रप्सो अंशुमतीमतिष्ठ ८,९६, १३ 
अन दुग्धानि पित्या सृजा नो ७,८६,५ 
TE ८,७३,७ 
अवनु मामुषतो ६,५२,४ 
अव यत्वे सधस्थे ८,७९,९ 


अव वेदि होत्राभिर्यजेत ७,६० ,९ 
अव सिन्धुं वरुणो द्यौरिव ७,८७,६ 
अवसृष्टा परा पत ६,७५,१६ 

अव स्वराति गर्गरो ८,६९,९ 

अवा नो वाजयुं रथं ८,८० ,६ 
अवितासि सुन्वतो ८,३६,१ 
अविददक्षं मित्रो ६,४४,७ 

अविप्रे चिद्वयो दधत्‌ ६,४५,२ 
अविप्रो वा यदविधत्‌ ८,६१,९ 
अविष्टं धीष्वश्चिना ७,६७,६ 
अविष्टो अस्मान्विश्वासु ७,३४,१२ 
अवीन्नो अगिनर्हव्यान्‌ ७,३४, १४ 
अवीवृधद्वो अमृता ८,८० , १० 
अवोचाम महते सौभगाय ८,५९,५ 
अवोरित्या वां छर्दिषः६,६७,११ 
अवोर्वा नूनमश्चिना युवाकुः७,६७,४ 
अशोच्यग्निः समिधानो ७,६७,२ 
अश्याम तं काममग्ने ६,५,७ 

अश्वं न गीर्भी रथ्यं ८,१०३,७ 
अश्वमिद्‌ गां रथप्रां ८,७४, १० 
अश्वावतीर्गोमतीर्न ७,४१,७;८०,३ 
अश्वासो ये वामुप ७,७४,४ 
अश्विना यामहूतमा ८,७३,६ 
अश्चिना सु विचाकशत्‌ ८,७३,१७ 
अश्विना स्वृषे स्तुहि ८,२६, १० 
अश्वी रथी सुरूप इत्‌ ८,४,९ 
अषाळहमुग्रं पृतनासु ८,७०,४ 
असदत्र सुवीर्यम्‌ ८,३१,१८ 
असन्नित्‌ त्वे आहवनानि ७,८,५ 
असश्चता मघवद्भ्यो हि ७,६७,९ 
असश्चन्ती भूरिधारे ६,७० ,२ 
असादि वृतो वहिः ७,७,५ 

असावि देवं गोऋजीक ७,२१,१ 
अमुन्वामिन्र संसदं ८,१४,१५ 
असो च यान उर्वरा ८,९१,६ 
असौ य एषि वीरको ८,९१,२ 
अस्तभ्नाद्‌ द्यामसुरो ८,४२,१ 
अस्तावि म्म पूर्व्य ८,५२,९ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


अस्ति देवा अंहोरु:८,६७,७ 
अस्ति सोमो अयं सुतः८,९४,४ 
अस्ति हि वः सजात्यं ८,२७,१० 
अस्मभ्यं वाजिनीवसू ८,५,१२ 
अस्मभ्यं सु वृषण्वसू ८,२६,१५ 
अस्माअस्मा इदन्धसो ६,४२,४ 
अस्मा उ ते महि महे ६,१,१० 
अस्मा उषास आतिरन्त ८,९६,१ 
अस्मा ऊ पु भ्रभूतये ८,४१,१ 
अस्मा एतदिव्यशर्चेव ६,३४,४ 
अस्मा एतन्मह्याङगूषं ६,३४,५ 
अस्माकं सु रथं पुर ८,४५,९ 
अस्माकं त्वा सुतां उप ८,६,४२ 
अस्माकमद्य वामयं ८,५,१८ 
अस्माकमद्यान्तमं ८,३३,१५ 
अस्माकमिन्द्र भूतु ते ६,४५,३० 
अस्माकमिन्द्रावरुणा भरे ७,८२,९ 
अस्मे आ वहतं रयिं ८,५,१५ 
अस्मे इन्द्र सचा सुते ८,९७,८ 
अस्मे इन्द्रावरुणा विश्ववारं ७,८४,४ 
अस्मे इन्द्रो वरुणो ७,८२,१०;८३,१० 
असे रुद्रा मेहना ८,६३, १२ 
अस्मे वीरो मरुतः७,५६,२४ 
असे श्रेष्ठेमिर्भानुभिः७,७७,५ 
असम ते प्रतिहर्यते ८,४३,२ 
अस्मै वयं यद्वावान ६,२३,५ 
अस्य देवस्य मीळहुषः ७,४० ,५ 
अस्य देवस्य संसदि ७,४,३ 
अस्य पिबतमश्चिना ८,५,१४ 
अस्य पिब यस्य जज्ञान ६,४० , २ 
अस्य पीत्वा मदानां देवो ८,९२,६ 
अस्य प्रजावती गृहे ८,३१,४ 
अस्य मदे पुरु वर्पांसि ६,४४,१४ 
अस्य वृष्णो व्योदन८,६३,९ 
अस्येदिन्द्रो वावृधे वृष्ण्यं ८,३,८ 
अहं हिते हरिवो ब्रह्म ८,५३,८ 
अहं हुवान SMa ८,७४, १३ 
अहं च त्वं च वृत्रहन्‌ ८,६२,११ 


अहं चन तत्सूरिमिः ६,२६,७ 
अहन्‌ वृत्रमृचीषमः८,३२,२६ 
अहमिद्धि पितुष्परि ८,६,१० 
अहं प्रलेन मन्मना ८,६, ११ 
अहश्च कृष्णमहरर्जुनं ६,९,१ 
अहा यदिन्द्र सुदिना ७,३०,३ 
अहितेन चिदर्वता ८,६२,३ 
अहिरिव भोगैः पर्येति ६,७५,१४ 
अहेळमान उप याहि ६,४१,१ 
अहेम यज्ञं पथामुराणा ७,७३,३ 
आ क्रन्दय बलमोजो ६,४७,३० 
आ क्षोदो महि वृत्तं ६,१७,१२ 
आक्ष्णयावानो वहन्ति ८,७,३५ 
आ गन्ता मा रिषण्यत ८,२०,१ 
आगन्म वृत्रहन्तमं ८ ,७४,४ 
आ गाङ्गो अग्मन्नुत ६,२८,१ 
आ गोमता नासत्या रथेन ७,७२,१ 
आग्निरगामि भारतो ६,१६,१९ 
आग्ने गिरो दिव आ ७,३९,५ 
आग्ने याहि मरुत्सखा ८,१०३,१४ 
आग्ने वह हविरद्याय ७,११,५ 
आ घा ये अग्निमिन्धते ८,४५,१ 
आ चन त्वा चिकित्सामो ८,९१,३ 
आच नो बर्हिः सदता ७,५९,६ 
आचष्ट आसां पाथो ७,३४,१० 
आ जङ्घन्ति सान्वेषां ६,७५, १३ 
आ जनाय द्रुह्णणे ६२२८ 
आ जातं जातवेदसि ६१६)४२ 
आजासः पूषणं रथे ६५५६ 
आजितुरं सत्पतिं ८,५३,६ 
आजिपते नृपते त्वमिद्धि ८,५४,६ 
आ त इन्द्र महिमानं ८,६५,४ 
आत एता वचोयुजा ८,४५,३९ 
आते अग्न ऋचा हविर्हदा ६१६३४७ 
'आते वृषन्‌ वृषणो ६)४४,२० 
आते शुष्मो वृषभ एतु ६१९९ 
आते स्वस्तिमीमह ६५६६ 
आतू गहि प्रतु द्रव ८,१३,१४ 


pe NN In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| 


ROTOR OG) RONSON 61.161763, 09 Qe eae RO XU AL 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


आतून इन्द्र क्षुमन्त ८,८१ Ri 
आ तू पिञ्च कण्वमन्तं ८,२,२२ 
आ तू सुशिप्र दंपते ८,६९,१६ 
आते दक्षं वि रोचना ८,९३,२६ 
आते दधामीन्द्रियं ८,९३,२७ 
आते मह FATT ७,२५,१ 
आते वत्सो मनो यमत्‌ ८,११,७ 
आते सिज्चामि कुक्ष्यो:८,१७,५ 
आत्मा ते वातो रज ७,८७,२ 
आत्मा पितुस्तनूर्वास: ८, ३, २४ 
MAT सधस्तुतिं ८,१,१६ 
HALA सबर्दुघां ८,१,१० 
आत्वशत्रवा गहि ८,८२,४ 
आत्वा कण्वा इहावसे ८,३४,४ 
आत्वा गिरो रथीरिवास्थुः ८,९५ १ 
आत्वा गीर्भिर्महामुरुं ८,६५,३ 
आत्वा गोभिरिव व्रजं ८,२४,६ 
आत्वा ग्रावा वदन्निह ८,३४,२ 
आत्वा ब्रह्मयुजा हरी ८,१७,२ 
आत्वा मदच्युता हरी ८,३४,९ 
आत्वा रथं यथोतये ८,६८,१ 
आत्वा रथे हिरण्यये ८,१,२५ 
आत्वा रम्भं न जिव्रयो ८,४५,२० 
आत्वा विशन्त्विन्दवः ८,९२,२२ 
आत्वा शुक्रा अचुच्यवुः ८,९५,२ 
आत्वा सहस्रमा शतं ८,१,२४ 
आत्वा सुतास इन्दवो ८,४९,३ 
आत्वा हरयो वृषणो ६,४४.१९ 
आत्वा होता मनुर्हितो ८,३४,८ 
आ दशभिर्विवस्वत ८,७२,८ 
आदिरस्य रेतसो ८ ६, ३८ 

अव हि ख्यता ८,४७,११ 


669 


आदीं शवस्यव्रवीद्‌ ८,७७, २ 

आदु मे निवरो भुवत्‌ ८,९३, १५ 
आदूनु ते अनु क्रतुं ८,६३,५ 

आ देवो ददे बुध्या ७,६,७ 

आ देवो यातु सविता ७,४५,१ 

आ दैव्या वृणीमहे ७,९७,२ 

आ धूर्ष्वस्मै दधाता ७,३४,४ 

आध्रेण चित्‌ त्वेकं ७,१८,१७ 

आन इन्द्र महीमिषं ८,६,२३ 
आनःसहस्नशो ८,३४,१५ 

आनः सोमे स्वध्वर ८,५० ,५ 

आनः स्तोममुप द्रवत्‌ ८,५,७ 
आनः स्तोममुप द्रवद्धियानो ८,४९,५ 
आनार्यस्य दक्षिणा ८,२४,२९ 

आ निरेकमुत प्रियं ८,२४,४ 

आ नूनं यातमश्विना रथेन ८,८,२ 

आ नूनं यातमश्चिनाश्वेमिः ८ , ८७, ५ 

आ नूनं यातमेश्चिनेमा ८,९, १४ 

आ नूनं रघुवर्तनिं ८,९,८ 

आ नूनमश्विना युवं ८,९,१ 

आ नूनमश्चिनोऋषपि ८,९,७ 

आनो अग्ने वयोवृधं ८,६०,११ 
आनो अद्य समनसो ८,२७,५ 
आनो अश्वावदश्विना ८,२२,१७ 
आनो गन्तं रिशादसेमां ८,८,१७ 
आनो गन्तं मयोभुवा ८,८, १९ 
आनो गव्यान्यश््या ८,३४, १४ 

आनो गव्येभिरथ्ये: ८,७३, १४ 
आनो गव्येभिरश्व्यैर्वसव्यैः ६,६० ,१४ 
आनो गोमन्तमश्चिना ८,५, १० 
आनो दधिक्रा पथ्यां ७,४४,५ 

आनो दिव आ पृथिव्या ७,२४,३ 
आनो देवः सविता त्रायमाणो ६५०८ 
आनो देव शवसा ७, ३० , १ 

आनो देवेभिरुप देवहूतिम्‌ ७,१४, ३ 
आनो देवेभिरुप यातं ७,७२, २ 
आनो द्युम्नेरा श्रवोभि: ८,५,३२ 
आनो नियुद्धिःशतिनीभिः७,९२,५ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


आनो भर दक्षिणेनाभि ८,८१,६ 

आनो भर वृषणं शुष्म ६१९८ 

आ नो भर व्यञ्जनं ८,७८,२ 

आ नो मखस्य दावने ८,७,२७ 

आ नो मित्रावरुणा हव्यजुष्टिं ७,६५,४ 
आनो यज्ञं दिविस्पृशं ८,१०१,९ 
आ नो यातं दिवस्परि ८,८,४ 
आनो यातमुपश्रुति ८,८,५ 
आनो याहि परावतो ८,६,३६ 
आनो याहि महेमते ८,३४,७ 
आनो याहि सुतावतो ८,१७,४ 
आनो याह्युपश्रुति ८,३४,११ 

आ नो रयिं मदच्युतं ८,७,१३ 
आनो राधांसि सवित ७,३७,८ 
आनो रुद्रस्य सूनवो ६५० X 
आनो वायो महे तने ८,४६,२५ 
आनो विश्वान्यश्विना ८,८,१३ 
आनो विश्वाभिरूतिभिः ७,२४,४ 
आनो विश्वाभिरूतिभिरश्चिना ८,८, १ 

m». आनो विश्वासु हव्य ८,९० ,१ 

आनो विश्वेषां रसं ८,५३,३ 
आनो विश्वे सजोषसो ८,५४,३ 
आ पक्थासो भलानसो ७,१८,७ 
आ पप्राथ महिना ८,७० ,६ 
आपप्रुषी पार्थिवान्युरु ६६१,१२ 
आ परमाभिरुत ६६२,११ 
आ पशुं गासि पृथिवीं ८,२७,२ 
आ पश्चातान्नासत्या ७,७२,५;७३,५ 
आपश्चितिप्यु: स्तयो ७,२३,४ 
आपश्चिदस्मै पिन्वन्त ७,३४, २ 
आपश्चिद्धि स्वयशसः ७,८५,३ 
आ पुत्रासो न मातरं ७,४३,३ 
आपो यं वः प्रथमं ७,४७,१ 
आप्र द्रव परावतो ८,८२,१ 
आप्र यात मरुतो ८,२७,८ 
आ बुन्दं वृत्रहा ८,४५,४ 
आ भानुना पार्थिवानि ६६६ 
आ भारती भारतीभिः७,२,८ 


आमिः स्पृधो मिथतीः ६२५२ 
आभिर्विधेमाग्नये ८,२३,२३ 
आमां मित्रावरुणेह ७,५० ,१ 
आमा पूपन्नुप द्रव ६.४८ १६ 
आमासु पक्वमैरय ८,८९,७ 
आमूरज प्रत्यावर्तये ६,४७३१ 

आ मे अस्य प्रतीव्यम्‌ ८,२६,८ 
आमे वचांस्युद्यता ८,१०१,७ 
आमे हवं नासत्याश्विना ८,८५,१ 
आ यं हस्ते न खादिनं ६,६४० 
आ यःपप्रो जायमान ६१० )४ 

आ यःपप्रौ भानुना ६४८६ 

आ यत्पतन्त्येन्यः ८,६९,१० 

आ यत्सार्क यशसो ७,३६,६ 

आ यदश्वान्‌ वनन्वतः ८,१,३१ 

आ यदिन्द्रश्च दद्वहे ८,३४,१६ 

आ यद्रुहाव वरुणश्च नावं ७,८८,३ 
आ ugs बाह्वोरिन्द्र धत्से ८,९६,५ 
आ यद्वां योषणा रथं ८,८,१० 
आयन्तारं महि स्थिरं ८,३२,१४ 

आ यन्नः पलीर्गमन्‌ ७,३४,२० 

आ यन्मा वेना अरुहन्नृतस्य ८,१०० ,५ 
आ यस्ततन्थ रोदसी ६१११ 

आ यस्ते अग्न इधते ७,१,८ 

आ यस्मिन्‌ ते स्वपाके ६१२ 

आ यस्मिन्‌ हस्ते नर्या ६२९२२ 

आ यस्थ ते महिमानं ८,४६,२ 

आ यातं नहुषस्परि८,८,३ 

आ यातमुप भूषतं ७,७४, २ 

आ यातं मित्रावरुणा जुषाणा ७,६६,१९ 
आ यातं मित्रावरुण सुशस्ति ६९७, 
आयाहि कृणवाम त ८,६२.४ 
आयाहि पर्वतेभ्य: ८, ३४, १ ३ 

आ याहि सुषुमा हि ते ८,१७, १ 

आ याहीम इन्दवो ८,२१, ३ 

आ याह्यग्ने पथ्या अनु ७,७,२ 

आ याह्यग्ने समिधानो ७,२,११ 

आ याह्यर्य आ परि ८ ,३४, १० 


FORO कका ONTOS ला ON IGT (D. 6» 5 n nvonvon 


1 . In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


4 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


आ युवानः कवयो ६)४९ ११ 

आ ये विश्वा पार्थिवानि ८,९४,९ 

आ यो योनिं देवकृतं ७,४,५ 

आ राजाना मह ऋतस्य ७,६४,२ 

आ रिख किकिरा कृणु ६ ५३ ७ 

आरोका इव घेदह ८,४३,३ 

आलाक्ता या रुरुशीर्ष्णी ६७७५१५ 

आ वंसते मघवा वीरवद्यश ८,१०३,९ 

आवदिन्द्रं यमुना ७,१८,१९ 

आ वहेथे पराकात्‌ ८,५,३१ 

आवां ग्रावाणो अश्विना ८,४२,४ 

आ वां रथमवमस्यां व्युष्टौ ७,७१,३ 

आवां रथो रोदसी ७,६९,१ 

आ वां राजानावध्वरे ७,८४,१ 

आवां वयोऽश्वासो ६६३७ 

आ वां वाहिष्ठो अश्विना ८,२६, s 

आवां विप्र इहावसे ८,८,९ 

आवां विश्वाभिता ८८७३ 

आवां विश्वाभि_राजन्ता ८,८,१८ 

आवां सुम्ने वरिमन्‌ ६६३११ 

आ वातस्य धजतो ७,३६,३ 

आ वामश्वासो अभिमातिषाह ६६९% 

आ वायो भूष शुचिपा ७,९२,१ 

आ विश्ववाराश्विना गतं नः ७,७०,१ 

आ वृत्रहणा वृत्रहभिः ६६० ३ 

आ वृषस्व पुरूवसो ८,६१,३ 

आ वृषस्व महामह ८,२४, १० 

आवो वाहिष्ठो वहतु ७,३७,१ 

आ वो होता जोहवीति ७,५६,१८ 

आ शर्म पर्वतानां वृणीमहे ८ ३१,१० 

आ शर्म पर्वतानामोतापां ८ ,१८,१६ 

आ शुध्रा यातमश्विना ७,६८,१ 

आ संयतमिन्द्र ण: ६२२.१० 

आ स एतु यईवदाँ ८,४६,२१ 

आ सखायः सबर्दुघां ६४८ ११ 

आसवं था८,१०२,६ 
आसस्राणासः शवसान ६ ३७३ 

आसहस्र पथिभिरिन्द्र ६१८११ 


आ सुग्म्याय सुग्म्यं ८,२२,१५ 
आ सुते सिञ्चत श्रियं ८,७२, १३ 
आमु प्मा णो मघवन्‌ ६४४१८ 
आ सूर्यो न भानुमद्धि ६४६ 

आ स्तुतासो मरुतो ७,५७,७ 
आहं सरस्वतीवतोः८,३८,१२ 
आ हरयः ससूत्रिरे ८,६९ ,५ 

आ हि रुहतमश्चिना ८,२२,९ 
इच्छन्ति देवाः सुन्वन्तं ८,२,१८ 
इजे यज्ञेभिः शशमे ६३२ 

इत ऊती वो अजरं ८,९९,७ 
इति स्तुतासो असथा ८,३०,२ 
इत्या धीवन्तमद्रिवः ८,२,४० 
इदं त्यत्पात्रमिद्रपानम्‌ ६५४४१६ 
इदं वचः पर्जन्याय ७,१० १,५ 
इदं वचः शतसा:७,८, ६ 

इदं वसो सुतमन्ध:८,२,१ 

इदं वां मदिरं मधु ८,३८,३ 

इदं ह नूनमेषां ८,१८,१ 

इदं ते सोम्यं मधु ८,६५,८ 

इदा हि त उषो अद्रिसानो ६६५५ 
इदा हि ते वेविषतः ६,२१५ 

इदा हि व उपस्तुतिम्‌ ८,२७, ११ 
इदा हि वो विधते ६६५४ 

इन्द्र इत्सोमपा एक ८,२,४ 
इन्द्र इन्नो महानां ८,९२,३ 
इन्द्र इषे ददातु न:८,९३,३४ 
इनदर वर्धन्तु नो गिर ८,१३,१६ 
इनदरं वाणीरनुत्तमन्युमेव ७,३१,१२ 
इन्र वृत्राय हन्तवे देवासो ८,१२,२२ 
इन्द्रः स दामने कृत ८,९३,८ 
इन्द्र: सुतेषु सोमेषु ८,१३,१ 
इन्द्र: सूर्यस्य रश्मिभिः८,१२,९ 
इन्द्र: स्पळुत वृत्रहा ८,६१,१५ 
क्रतुं न आ भर ७,३२,२६ 
इन्द्र गृणीष उ स्तुषे ८,६५,५ 
इन्द्र जहि पुमांसं ८,१०४,२४ 
इन्द्र जामय उत ये ६२५३ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


इन्द्र ज्येष्ठं न आ ६,४६५ 

इन्द्र तुभ्यमिन्मघवन्‌ ६)४४,१० 

इन्द्र त्रिधातु शरणं ६,४६९ 

इन्द्र त्वमवितेदसी ८,१३,२६ 

इन्द्र qund पूरसि ८,८० ,७ 
इन्द्र नेदीय एदिहि ८,५३,५ 
इन्द्रं तं शुम्भ ८,७०,२ 

इन्द्रं नरो नेमधिता ७,२७,१ 

इन्द्रं नो अग्ने वसुभिः७,१०,४ 
इन्द्र पिब तुभ्यं सुतो & xo १ 
इन्द्रं प्रलेन मन्मना ८,७६,६ 
इन्द्र प्र णः पुरएतेव ६,४७७ 
इन्द्र प्र णो रथमव ८,८० ,४ 
इन्द्र प्रेहि पुरस्त्वं ८,१७,९ 
इन्द्रमित्केशिना हरी ८,१४,१२ 
इन्द्रमिद्देवतातय ८,३,५ 

इन्द्र fifa महीनां ८,६,४४ 
इन्द्रमुक्थानि वावृधुः८,६,३५ 
इन्द्र मूळ मह्यं ६)४७१० 
इन्द्रमेव धिषणा ६,१९.२ 

इन्द्र यउनुते अस्ति ८,८१,८ 
इन्द्र यथा ह्यस्ति ते ८,२४,९ 
इन्द्र यस्ते नवीयसी ८,९५,५ 
इन्द्रं वा नरः सख्याय ६२९ १ 
इन्द्र शविष्ठ सत्पते ८,१३,१२ 
इन्द्र शुद्धो न आ गहि ८,९५,८ 
इन्द्र शुद्धो हि नो रयिं ८,९५,९ 
इन्द्रश्चिद्‌ घा तदब्रवीत्‌ ८,३३,१७ 
इनदर श्रुधि सु मे हवं ८,८२,६ 
इन्द्रः सुत्रामा स्ववां ६,४७.१२ 
इन्द्र स्थातर्हरीणां ८,२४,१७ 
इन्द्रस्य वज्र आयसो ८,९६,३ 
इन्द्रस्य वज्रो मरुतामनीकं ६३४७२८ 
इन्द्राग्नी अपादियं ६५९.६ 
इन्द्रानी अवसा गतं ७,९४,७ 
इन्द्राग्नी आ हि तन्वते ६५९७ 
इन्द्राग्नी उक्थवाहसा ६ ५९ १० 


इन्द्राग्नी को अस्य वां ६५९५ 
इन्द्राग्नी तपन्ति माघा ६५९८ 
इन्द्राग्नी युवं सु न: ८ ,४० , १ 

इन्द्राग्नी युवामिमे ६६० ७७ 

इन्द्राग्नी युवोरपि ६५९९ 

इन्द्राग्नी शृणुतं हवं ६६० १५ 

इन्द्रा नु पूषणा वयं ६५७१ 
इन्द्रायगाव आशिरं८,६९ ,६ 
इन्द्राय मद्दने सुतं ८,९२, १९ 

इन्द्राय साम गायत ८,९८, १ 
इन्द्राय सु मदिन्तमं ८, १, १९ 
इन्द्रावरुणा मधुमत्तमस्य ६६८११ 
इन्द्रावरुणा यदिमानि चक्रथु:७,८२,५ 
इन्द्रावरुणा यदृषिभ्यो ८,५९,६ 
इन्द्रावरुणा युवमध्वराय ७,८२,१ 
इन्द्रावरुणा वधनाभिरप्रति ७,८३,४ 
इन्द्रावरुणावभ्या तपन्ति ७,८३,५ 
इन्द्रावरुणा ES ६६८५१० 
इन्द्रावरुणा 14,48, 
इन्द्राविष्णू तत्पनयाय्यं ६६९५ 
इन्द्राविष्णू दृंहिताः शम्बरस्य ७,९९,५ 
इन्द्राविष्णू पिबतं ६ ६९७ 
इन्द्राविष्णू मदपती ६ ६९ २ 
इन्द्राविष्णू हविषा ६ ६९ ६ 

इन्द्रासोमा तपतं रक्ष उब्जतं ७,१०४, १ 
इन्द्रासोमा दुष्कृतो ७,१०४, २ 
इन्द्रासोमा पक्वमामासु & 93 
इन्द्रासोमा परि वां भूतु ७,१०४, ६ 
इन्द्रासोमा महि तद्वां ६०२१ 
इन्द्रासोमा युवमङ्ग ६७२५ 
इन्द्रासोमा वर्तयतं दिवस्परि ७,१०४, 
इन्द्रासोमा वर्तयतं दिवो ७,१०४,४ 
इन्द्रासोमावहिमपः ६७२३ 
इन्द्रासोमा वासयथ ६७२९२ 
इन्द्रासोमा समघशंसं ७,१०४, २ 

इन्द्रे अग्ना नमो बृहत्‌ ७,९४, ४ 
इन्द्रेण रोचना दिवो ८,१४,९ 
इन्द्रेणैते तृत्सवो ७,१८,१५ 


|... “>> अ In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


aito peret po ent. cet eg 


An] 


| 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


EGA इद्रेविधानिवीर्या/ ६३६ | अद्भ 
इन्द्रो नेदिष्ठमवसा ६,५२६ 
Fal TAS ऋषि: ८, १६ ,७ 
इन्द्रो मह्या रोदसी ८,३,६ 

Fal यज्वने पृणते ६२८ २ 

इन्द्रो यातूनामभवत्‌ ७, १०४,२१ 
इन्द्रो राजा जगत: ७, २७, ३ 
इन्द्रो वा घेदियन्मद्यं ८,२१,१७ 
Fal वाजस्य स्थविरस्य ६३७५ 
इन्धे राजा समर्यो ७,८, १ 

इम इन्द्राय सुन्विरे ७,३२,४ 

इम उ त्वा पुरुशाक ६२१ १० 
इम उत्वा वि चक्षते ८,४५, १६ 
FAY त्यमथर्ववद्‌ ६,१५.१७ 
इममू षु वो अतिथि ६,१५.१ 

इमं स्तोममभिष्टये ८,१२,४ 

इमं घा वीरो अमृतं ८,२३,१९ 
इमं च नो गवेषणं ६ ५६५ 

इमं जुषस्व गिर्वण:८, १ 3,4 

इमं नरो मरुत: सञ्चतानु ७,१८,२५ 
इमं नु मायिनं हुव ८,७६, १ 

इमं नो अग्ने अध्वरं जुषस्व ७,४२,५ 
इमं नो अग्ने अध्वरं होतः ६५२.१२ 
इमं मे स्तोममश्चिना ८,८५, २ 

इमं यज्ञं चनो धा ६१० ६ 

इमा अभि प्र णोनुमो ८,६,७ 
इमा अस्य परतूर्तयः ८,१३,२९ 
इमा उ त्वा पस्पृधानासो ७,१८,३ 
इमा उ त्वा पुरूवसो ८,३,३ 
इमाउत्वा शतक्रतो ६४५२५ 
रमाउत्ता सुतेसुते ६४५.२८ 
रमा उ व: सुदानवो ८,७,१९ 
m उ वां दिविष्टय:७,७४,१ 
रमा वां मित्रावरुणा ७,३६,२ 


इमा जुपेथाँ सवना ८,३८,५ 

इमा जुह्वाना युष्मदा नमोभि:७,९५,५ 
इमानित्रीणि विष्टपा ८,९१,५ 
इमानि वां भागधेयानि ८,५९,१ 

इमां त इन्द्र सुष्ठुति ८,१२,३१ 

इमां धियं शिक्षमाणस्य ८,४२,३ 
इमामु षु सोमसुतिमुप ७,९३,६ 

इमां म इन्द्र सुष्टिति ८,६,३२ 
इमां मे मरुतो गिरं ८,७,९ 

इमा रुद्राय स्थिरधन्वने ७,४६,१ 
इमास्त इन्द्र पृश्नयो ८,६, १९ 

इमे चेतारो अनृतस्य ७,६० ,५ 

इमे त इन्द्र सोमा:८,२,१० 

इमे तुरं मरुतो ७,५६,१९ 

इमे दिवो अनिमिषा ७,६० ,७ 

इमे नरो वृत्रहत्येषु ७,१,१० 

इमे मा पीता यशस उरुष्यव:८,४८,५ 
इमे मित्रो वरुणो दूळभासो ७,६०,६ 
इमे Ti चिन्मरुतो ७,५६, २० 

इमे विप्रस्य वे धसो ८,४३,१ 

इमे हि ते कारवो ८,३,१८ 

इमे हि ते ब्रह्मकृतः७,३२,२ 

इमो अग्ने वीततमानि ७,१, १८ 

इयं या नीच्यर्किणी ८,१०१,१३ 

इयं वामस्य मन्मन ७,९४,१ 

इयं वां ब्रह्मणस्पते ७,९७,९ 

इयं त इन्द्र गिर्वणो ८,१३,४ 

इयं त ऋत्वियावती ८,१२,१० 

इयं ते नव्यसी मतिः८,७४,७ 
,१२;६१,७ 
इयं मद्वा प्र स्तृणीते ६६७.२ 

इयमिन्द्रं वरुणमष्टमे ७,८४,५;८५,५ 
इयमु ते अनुष्टुति:८,६३,८ 

इयं मनीषा इयमश्विना ७,७० ,७;७१,६ 
इयं मनीषा बृहती ७,९९,६ 

इयं शुष्मेमिर्विसखा ६६१.२ 
इयमददाद्रभसमृणच्युतं ६६१ १ 
इरावती धेनुमती ७,९९,३ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Lr c 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


इषा मन्दस्वादु ते ८,८२,३ 

इषिरेण ते मनसा ८,४८,७ 

इष्कर्तारमनिष्कृतं ८,९९ ,८ 

इष्टा होत्रा असृक्षत ८,९३,२३ 

इह त्या पुरुभूतमा देवा ८,२२, २ 

इह त्या सधमाद्या युजानः८,१३,२७ 

इह त्या सधमाद्या ८,३२,२९;९३,२४ 

इह त्वा गोपरीणसा ८,४५,२४ 

इहा गतं वृषण्वसू ८,७३, १० 

इहि fra: परावत ८,३२,२२ 

इहेह वः स्वतवस:७,५९, ११ 

ईळिष्वा हि प्रतीव्यं ८,२३,१ 

ईळे गिरा मनुर्हितं ८,१९,२१ 

ईळेन्यं वो असुरं ७,२,३ 

ईळेन्यो वो मनुषो ७,९,४ 

ईयुरर्थं न न्यर्थं ७,१८,९ 

ईयुर्गावो A यवसाद्‌ ७,१८,१० 

इशानाय प्रहुतिं ७,९०,२ 

ईशानासो ये दधते ७,९० ,६ 
ईशिषे वार्यस्य ८,४४,१८ 

ईशे ह्य१ग्निरमृतस्य ७,४,६ 

उक्थउक्थे सोम इन्द्रं ७,२६,२ 

उक्थं चन शस्यमानं ८,२,१४ 

उक्थभृतं सामभृतं ७,३३, १४ 

उक्थवाहसे विश्वे मनीषां ८,९६, ११ 

उक्थेभिर्वृत्रहन्तमा ७,९४,११ 

उक्षान्नाय वशान्नाय ८,४३,११ 

उग्रं युयुज्म पृतनासु ८,६१,१२ 

उग्रं व ओजः स्थिर ७,५६,७ 

उग्रं न वीरं नमसोप ८,४९,६ 

उग्रबाहुर्ग्र क्षकृत्ता ८,६१, १० 

उग्रा विघनिना मृध ६६० ५ 

उग्रो जज्ञे वीर्याय ७, २० ,१ 

उचथ्ये वपुषि यः स्वराट्‌ ८,४६, २८ 

उच्छन्ती या कृणोति ७,८१,४ 

उच्छन्नुषसः सुदिना ७,९० ,४ 

उच्छा दिवो दुहितः६६५६ 

उज्जातमिन्द्र ते शव ८,६२, १० 


674 


उत घा स रथीतमः ६५६२ | 
उत ते सुष्टुता हरी ८,१३,२३ | 
उत त्यं वीरं धनसामृजीषिणं ८,८६,४ 

उत त्यदाश्चश्ष्सं ८,६,२४ 

उत त्यद्वां जुरते ७,६८,६ 

उत त्यं भुज्युमश्विना ७,६८,७ | 
उत त्या देव्या भिषजा ८,१८,८ 

उत त्या मे हवमा ६५० Ro 

उत त्ये नो मरुतो ७,३६,७ 

उत त्वं मघषञ्छृणु ८,४५,६ 

उत त्वं सूनो'सहसो ६५० ९ 

उत त्वाग्ने मम स्तुतो ८,४२३, १७ 

उत त्वा धीतयो मम ८,४४,२२ 

उत त्वा नमसा वयं ८,४२३, १२ 

उत त्वा बधिरं वयं ८,४५, १७ 

उत त्वा भृगुवच्छुचे ८,४३,१३ 

उत त्वामदिते महि ८,६७,१० 

उत द्यावापृथिवी & 4o 3 

उत न एषु नृषु ७, ३४, १८ | 
उत न: कर्णशो भना ८,७८, ३ 

उत A: पितुमा भर ८,३२,८ 

उत नःपिया प्रियासु ६६१ १० 

उत न: सिन्धुरपां ८,२५, १४ 

उत नः सुत्रात्रो ६६८७ 

उत नो गोषणिं धियम्‌ ६५३१० 

उत नो गोमतस्कृधि ८,३२,९ 

उत नो गोमतीरिष उत ८,५,९ 

उत नो दिव्या इष ८,५,२१ 

उत नो देव देवान्‌ ८,७५, २ 

उत नो देव्यदितिः८, २५, १० 

उत नोऊहिर्बु EA: ६ ५० १४ 

उत ब्रह्मण्या वयं ८,६,३२ 

उत म ऋज्रे पुरयस्य ६६२९ 

उत मे प्रयियोर्वयियोः८,१९,२७ 

उत योषणे दिव्ये ७,२,६ 

उत सु त्ये पयोवृधा ८,२,४२ 

उत स्तुतासो मरुतो ७,५७,६ 

उत स्य देवः सविता ६५०१२ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


675 
| उतस्या नः सरस्वती घोरा ६६१} उत स्या नः सरस्वती घोरा | gisan 
| उत स्या नः सरस्वती जुषाणोप ७,९५,४ उदु त्यच्चक्षुर्महि ६५११ 
उत स्या नो दिवा ८,१८,७ उदु त्यद्दर्शतं वपुः ७,६६, १४ 
उत स्या श्वेतयावरी ८,२६,१८ उदु त्ये अरुणप्सव ८,७,७ 
उत स्वया तन्वा३ सं वदे ७,८६,२ ल ८,३,१५ 
उत स्वराजे अदितिः८;१२,१४ उदु ब्रह्माण्यैरत ७,२३,१ 
उत स्वराजो अदितिः७,६६,६ उदु श्रिय उषसो ६६४१ 
उतादः परुषे गवि ६५६३ SQ ष्य देव: सविता दमूना ६७०१४ 
उतासि मैत्रावरुणो ७,३३,११ उदु ष्य देव: सविता ययाम ७,३८,१ 
उतेदानीं भगवन्तः ७,४१ X Sq ष्य देव: सविता हिरण्यया ६७१ 2 
उतो घा ते पुरुष्या ७,२९,४ उदु ष्य वः सविता ८,२७,१२ 
उतो न्वस्य जोषमाँ ८,९४,६ उदु ष्य शरणे दिवो ८,२५,१९ 
उतो न्वस्य यत्पर्द ८,७२,१८ उदु स्तोमासो अश्विनोः७,७२,३ 
उतो न्वस्य यन्महत्‌ ८,७२,६ उदु स्त्रिया: सृजते सूर्या: ७,८१,२ 
उतो पतिर्य उच्यते ८,१३,९ उदु स्वानेभिरीरत ८,७, १७ 
उतो हि वां रलधेयानि ७,५३,३ उदू अयाँ उपवक्तेव ६७१७ 
उत्तिष्टन्नोजसा सह ८,७६,१० उदू षु णो वसो महे ८,७० ,९ 
उत्ते बृहन्तो अर्चय:८,४४,४ SQM आजदङ्गिरोभ्य ८,१४,८ 

| उत्ते वयञ्चिद्वसतेरपप्तन्‌ ६६४६ उद्देदभि श्रृतामघं ८,९३,१ 
उत्त्वा मन्दन्तु स्तोमाः ८,६४, १ उद्‌ द्यामिवेत्‌ तृष्णजो ७,३३,५ 
उत्पूषणं युवामहे ६५७६ उद्यद्‌ ब्रध्नस्य विष्टपं ८,६९,७ 
उत्सूर्यो बृहदर्ची्यश्रेत्‌ ७,६२,१ उद्यस्य ते नवजातस्य ७,३,३ 
उदग्ने तव तद्‌ घृतात्‌ ८,४३, १० उद्वां चक्षुर्वरुण ७,६१,१ 
उदग्ने भारत द्युमत्‌ ६१६४५ Sal पृक्षासो मधुमन्तो अस्थु:७,६० ,४ 
उदग्ने शुचयस्तव ८ ,४४, १७ उद्वेति प्रसवीता जनानां ७,६३, २ 
उदभ्राणीव स्तनयन्‌ ६४४१२ उद्वेति सुभगो विश्वचक्षाः७,६३,१ 
उदस्य बाहू शिथिरा ७,४५,२ उप क्रमस्वा भर ८,८१,७ 
उदस्य शुष्माद्धानुः ७,३४,७ उप च्छायामिव ६१६२८ 
उदस्य शोचिरस्थादाजुह्वा ७,१६,३ उप त्या वही गमतो विशं ७,७३,४ 
उदस्य शोचिरस्थाद्‌ दीदियुषो ८,२३,४ उप त्वा कर्मन्नूतये ८,२१,२ 
उदानट्‌ ककुहो दिवं ८,६ ve उप त्वा जामयो गिरो ८,१०२,१३ 
उदावता त्वक्षसा ६१८९ उप त्वा Fels मम ८,४४,५ 
उदिता यो निदिता वेदिता ८,१०३,११ उप त्वा रण्वसंदृशं ६,१६.३७ 

रिच्यते ७,३२,१२ उप त्वा सातये नरो ७,१५,९ 

उदारयन्त वायुभिः ८ ,७, ३ उप नःसुनवो गिरः ६५२९ 
उदीराथामृतायते ८,७३, १ उप नो यातमश्चिना ८,२६,७ 
उदु ज्योतिरमृतं ७,७६ , १ उप नो वाजिनीवसू ८,२२,७ 
उदु तिष्ठ सवित:७, ३८, २ उप नो हरिभिः Ta ८,९३,३१ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


| =a 


2 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


उप ब्रध्नं वावाता ८,४,१४ 
उपमं त्वा मघोनां ८,५३,१ 
उम मा षड्‌ द्वाद्वा ८,६८, १४ 
उप यमेति युवतिः७,१,६ 
उप श्वासय पृथिवीं & xo 38 
उपसद्याय मीळहुषः७,१५,१ 
उपस्तृणीतमत्रये ८,७३,३ 
उप स्रक्वेषु बप्सतः ८,७२,१५ 
उपहरे गिरीणां ८,६, २८ 
उपायातं दाशुषे ७,७१,२ 
उपेदमुपपर्चन ६२८८ 
उपो रुरुचे युवतिर्न ७,७७,१ 
उपो ह यद्विदथं ७,९३,३ 
उपो हरीणां पति ८,२४, १४ 
उभयं शृणवच्च नो ८,६१,१ 
उभा जिग्यथुर्न परा ६६९८ 
उभा वामिन्द्राग्नी ६६० १३ 
उभा हि दस्रा भिषजा ८,८६,१ 
उभे चिदिन्द्र रोदसी ७,२० ,४ 
=k उभे यत्ते महिना ७,९६,२ 
उरुं नो लोकमनु नेषि ६,४७८ 
उरं यज्ञाय चक्रथुरु ७,९९,४ 
उरु णस्तन्वे३ ८,६८,१२ 
उरुं नृभ्य उरं ८,६८,१३ 
उरुव्यचसे महिने ७,३१,११ 
उरुष्या णो मा परा दा: ८,७१,७ 
ऊर्ज नो द्यौश्च पृथिवी ६!०० ६ 
ऊजो नपातं स हिनाय ६)४८ २ 
ऊर्ध्वो वामग्निरध्वरेषु ६६३४ 
उलूकयातुं शुशुलूकयातुं ७,१०४,२२ 
उवाच मे वरुणो ७,८७,४ 
उवोचिथ हि मघवन्‌ ७,३७,३ 
उशना काव्यस्त्वा ८,२३, १७ 
उशना यत्परावत ८,७, २६ 
उशन्ता दूता न दभाय ७,९१,२ 
उपो न जारः पृथुपाजो ७,१० , १ 
ऊर्जा Cal अवस्योजसा ८,३६,३ 
ऊर्जो नपातं सुभगं ८,१९,४ 


ऊर्जो नपातमा हुवे ८,४४,१३ 

ऊर्ध्वासस्त्वान्विन्दवो ७,३१,९ 
ऊर्ध्वा हि ते दिवेदिवे ८,४५,१२ 

ऊर्ध्वो अग्निः सुमति ७,३९,१ 

ऋजीते परि वृङ्धि ६७५१२ 

ऋज्रमुक्षण्यायने ८,२५,२२ 

क्रज्राविन्द्रोत आ ददे ८,६८,१५ 

ऋतस्य पथि वेधा ६४४८ 

ऋतस्य वो रथ्यः ६५१९ 

ऋतावान ऋतजाता ७,६६,१३ 

ऋतावानमृतायवो ८,२३,९ 

ऋतावाना नि षेदतुः ८ ,२५,८ 

ऋतेन देवः सविता शमायत ८,८६,५ 

ऋते स विन्दते युधः ८,२७,१७ 

ऋदूदरेण सख्या सचेय ८,४८,१० 

ऋधक्सा वो मरुतो ७,५७,४ 
ऋधगित्या स मर्त्यः ८,१०१,१ 

ऋधद्यस्ते सुदानवे & 3 X 

क्रभुक्षण न वर्तव ८,४५,२९ | 
क्रभुक्षणो वाजा ७,४८,१ 

क्रभुमन्ता वृषणा वाजवन्ता ८,३५,१५ 

ऋशभुर्क्र भुभिरभि व: ७,४८,२ 

ऋश्यो न तृष्यन्रव ८,४, १० 

ऋषिर्हि पूर्वजा असि ८,६,४१ 

एक एवाएमार्मह,५८,२ 

एकं च यो विंशतिं ७,१८,११ 

एकया प्रतिधापिबत्‌ ८,७७,४ 

एकराळस्य भुवनस्य राजसि ८,३७,३ 

एकस्मिन्‌ योगे भुरणा समाने ७,६७,८ 
एकाचेतत्सरस्वती नदीनां ७,९५,२ 

एत उ त्ये पतयन्ति ७,१०४,२० | 
एतत्त इन्द्र वीर्य ८,५४,१ | 
एतत्त्यत्त इन्द्रियमचेति ६,२७,४ 

एता अग्न आशुषाणास ७,९३,८ | 
एता उ त्याः प्रत्यदृश्रन्‌ ७,७८,३ 

एता च्यौलानि ते कृता ८,७७,९ 

एतानि धीरो निण्या चिकेत ७,५६,४ 

एता नो अग्ने सौभगा ७, ३ , १०१४, १० 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


एतावतश्चिदेषां ८,७,१५ 

एतावतस्त ईमह ८,४९ ,९ 

एतावतस्ते वसो ८,५० ,९ 

एतावद्वां वृषण्वसू ८,५,२७ 

एते त्ये भानवो दर्शतायाः७,७५,३ 
एते त्ये वृथगग्नय्‌ ८,४३,५ 

एते दद्युम्नेभिर्विश्वं ७,७,६ 

एते स्तोमा नरां नृतम ७,१९,१० 

एतो Fas स्तवाम शुद्धं ८,९५,७ 
एतो न्विन्द्रं स्तवाम सखायः ८ , २४, १९ 
एतो न्विन्द्रं स्तवामेशानं ८,८१,४ 
एदु मध्वो मदिन्तरं ८,२४,१६ 

एना मन्दानो जहि ६४४,१७ 

एना वो अग्नि नमसो ७,१६,१ 
एन्दुमिन्द्राय सिञ्चत ८,२४,१३ 

Us नो गधि प्रियः ८,९८,४ 

एन्द्र याहि पीतये ८,३३,१३ 

एन्द्र याहि मत्स्व ८,१,२३ 

एन्द्र याहि हरिभिः ८ , ३४, १ 

एभिर्न इन्द्राहभि:७, २८, ४ 

एमेनं प्रत्येतन ६४२.२ 

एवाग्नि सहस्यं ७,४२,६ 

एवा जज्ञानं सहसे ६३८५ 

एवा तमाहुरुत ७,२६,४ 

एवा ता विश्वा चकृवांसमिन्द्रं ६,१७.१३ 
एवा न इन्द्र वार्यस्य ७,२४,६;२५,६ 
एवा नः स्पृध: समजा ६२५९ 

एवा नपातो मम तस्य ६५०,१५ 

एवा नूनमुप स्तुहि ८,२४,२३ 
एवा नो अग्ने विक्ष्वा ७,४३,५ 

एवा पाहि प्रलथा ६,१७३ 

एवा रातिस्तुवीमघ ८,९२,२९ 

एवारे वृषभा सुते ८,४५,३८ 

एवा वन्दस्व वरुणं ८,४२,२ 

एवा वसिष्ठ इन्द्र ७, २६,५ 
STAM ऊतये _ इन्वाग्नी ८,३८,९ 
एवा वामह्व ऊतये _नासत्या ८,४२,६ 
उवा ह्यसि वीरयु:८,९२, २८ 


एवेदिन्द्रं वृषणं ७,२३,६ 


एवेदिन्द्रः सुते अस्तावि ६,२३.१० 
एवेदिन्द्रः सुहव ६२९ ६ 

एवेदेष तुर्विकूर्मिः ८, २,३१ 
एवेद्राग्निभ्यां पितृवन्‌ ८,४० ,१२ 
Way कं सिन्धुमेभिः७,३३,३ 

एष एतानि चकारेन्द्रो ८,२,३४ 

एप द्रप्सो वृषभो ६,४१३ 

एष स्तोमो अचिक्रदद्‌ ७,२०,९ 
एष स्तोमो मह उग्राय ७,२४,५ 

एष स्तोमो वरुण मित्र ७,६४,५५६५,५ 
एष स्य कारुर्जरते ७,६८,९ 

एष स्य मित्रावरुणा नृचक्षाः ७,६० , २ 
एष स्य वां पूर्वगत्वेव सख्ये ७,६७,७ 
एषा नेत्री राधसः ७,७६,७ 

एषा स्या नव्यमायुर्दधाना ७,८० , २ 
एषा स्या नो दुहिता दिवोजाः ६६५.१ 
एषा स्या युजाना ७,७५,४ 

एह वां प्रुषितप्सवो ८,५,३३ 

एह हरी ब्रह्मयुजा ८,२,२७ 

एहि प्रेहि क्षयो ८,६४,४ 

एहि वां विमुचो ६५५.१ 

एह्यू पु ब्रवाणि ६१६,१६ 

ऐतु पूषा रयिर्भगः८,३१,११ 

ऐषु चेतद्वृषण्वती ८, ६८,१८ 
ओकिवांसा सुते सचां ६५८३ 
ओजस्तदस्य तित्विषे ८,६,५ 

ओ त्यमह्न आ रथं ८, २२,१ 
ओमानमापो मानुषी ६५० ७ 

ओ श्रुष्टिर्विदथ्या ७,४०,१ 

ओषु घृष्विराधसो ७,५९,५ 

ओ षु प्र याहि वाजेभिः८,२,१९ 

ओ षु वृष्णः प्रयज्यून्‌ ८,७,३३ 
ओर्वभृगुवच्छुचिं ८, १०२,४ 

कई वेद सुते सचा ८,३३,७ 

क ई व्यक्ता नरः सनीळा:७,५६, १ 

क ई स्तवत्कः पृणात्‌ ६४७,१५ 
ककुहं चित्त्वा कवे ८,४५, १४ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


_ आर... » 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


कण्वा इन्द्रं यदक्रत ८,६, ३ 
कण्वा इव भूगव: ८ , ३, १६ 
कण्वास इन्द्र ते मतिं ८,६,३१ 
कण्वेभिर्धुष्णवा धृषत्‌ ८,३३,३ 
कथा नूनं वां विमना ८,८६,२ 
कदत्विषन्त सूरयः८,९४,७ 

कदा गच्छाथ मरुतः ८,७,३० 
कदा चन प्र युच्छस्युभे ८,५२,७ 
कदा चन स्तरीरसि ८,५१,७ 
कदा त इन्द्र गिर्वणः८,१३,२२ 
कदा भुवन रथक्षयाणि ६३५, 
कदा वां तोग्र्‍यो विधत्‌ ८,५,२२ 
कदु स्तुवन्त ऋतयन्त ८,३, १४ 
कदू न्वशस्याकृतं ८,६६,९ 

कदू महीरधृष्टा अस्य ८,६६, १० 
कद्ध नूनं कधप्रियो यद्‌ ८,७,३१ 
Hal अद्य महानां ८,९४,८ 

कं ते दाना असक्षत ८,६४,९ 
कन्नव्यो अतसीनां ८,३,१३ 
कन्या वारवायती ८,९१,१ 

कमु ष्विदस्य सेनयाग्नेः८, ७५,७ 
कया ते अग्ने अङ्गिरः ८,८४,४ 
कया त्वं न ऊत्याभि ८,९३,१९ 
कया नो अग्ने वि वसः७,८,३ 
कर्णगृह्या मघवा शौरदेव्यः ८,७० ,१५ 
कर्हि स्वित्तदिन्द्र यज्जरित्रे ६३५३ 
कर्हि स्वित्तदिन्द्र यन्नृभिर्नन्‌ ६३५२ 
कविं केतुं धासि ७,६,२ 
कविमिव प्रचेतसं ८,८४,२ 
कस्तमिन्द्र त्वावसुं ७,३२,१४ 
कस्य नूनं परीणसो ८,८४,७ 
कस्य वृषा सुते सचा ८,९३,२० 
कस्य स्वित्सवनं वृषा ८,६४,८ 
काते अस्त्यरंकृतिः७,२९,३ 
काव्येभिरदाभ्या ७,६६,१७ 
किमङ्गत्वा ब्रह्मणःसोम ६५२३ 
किमङ्ग रध्रचोदनः ८,८०,३ 


किमन्ये पर्यासते ८,८,८ 

किमस्य मदे किम्वस्य ६.२७, 
किमाग आस वरुण ज्येष्ठं ७,८६,४ 
किमित्ते विष्णो ७,१००,६ 
किमिदं वां पुराणवत्‌ ८,७३,११ 
कीरिश्चिद्धि त्वामवसे ७,२१,८ 
कुत्सा एते हर्यश्वाय ७,२५,५ 
कुविच्छकत्कुवित्करत्‌ ८,९१,४कुवित्सु 
कुवित्सस्य प्र हि व्रजं ६,४५.२४ 
कुविदङ्ग नमसा ये ७,९१,१ 

कुह स्थः कुह जग्मथुः ८ , ७३ ,४ 
कृतं नो यज्ञं विदथेषु ७,८४,३ 
कृते चिदत्र मरुतो रणन्त ७,५७,५ 
कृधि रलं यजमानाय ७,१६,६ 
कृष्णा रजाँसि पत्सुतः ८,४३,६ 
केतेन शर्मन्त्सचते ८,६० ,१८ 

को नु मर्या अमिथितः ८,४५,३७ 
क्रत्व इत्ूर्णमुदरं ८,७८,७ 

क्रत्वः समह दीनता ७,८९, ३ 
क्रत्वा दा अस्तु श्रेष्ठोऽद्य ६१६,२६ 
क्रत्वा हि द्रोणे अज्यसे ६२८ 
क्रीळन्त्यस्स सूनृता ८,१३,८ 
क्वश्त्यानि नो सख्या ७,८८,५ 
क्वश्त्या वल्गू पुरुहूताद्य ६६३.१ 
क्व नूनं सुदानवो ८,७, २० 
FRA वृषभो युवा ८,६४,७ 
क्वेयथ क्वेदसि ८,१,७ 

कषत्रं जिन्वतमुत ८,३५, १७ 

क्षत्राय त्वमवसि ८,३७,६ 

क्षप उस्रश्च दीदिहि ७, १५,८ 

क्षेति क्षेमेभिः साधुभिर्नकिर्यं ८,८४,९ 
क्षेमस्य च प्रयुजश्च ८,३७,५ 

खे रथस्य खेऽनसः८,९१,७ 
गच्छतं दाशुषो गृहं ८,८५,६ 
गन्तेयान्ति सवना ६.२३४ 
गमद्वाजं वाजयन्निन्द्र ७,३२,११ 
गम्भीरेण न उरुणा ६२४९ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


679 


गर्भे नु सत्रन्वेपामवेद 218.2 
गर्भे मातुः पितुष्पिता ६१६ 3५ 
गर्भो यज्ञस्य देवयु:८, १२, ११ 
गव्यो पु णो यथा ८ ,४६ , १० 
गाथश्रवसं सत्पतिं ८,२,३८ 
गाव उपावतावतं ८,७२,१२ 
गावश्चिद्‌ घा समन्यवः ८ , २०, २१ 
गावो न यूथमुप यन्ति ८,४६,३० 
गावो भगो गाव इन्द्रो ६२८५ 
गिरयश्चिन्नि जिहते ८,७,३४ 
गिरश्च यास्ते गिर्वाह: ८,२,३० 
गिरा य एता युनजद्धरी ७,३६,४ 
गिरा वज्रो न संभृतः ८,९३,९ 
गिरो जुषेथामध्वरं ८,३५ ,६ 
गीर्भिर्विप्रः प्रमतिमिच्छमान ७,९३,४ 
गुहा सतीरुप त्मना ८,६,८ 
गृणे तदिन्द्र ते शव ८,६२,८ 
गृभीतं ते मन इन्द्र ७,२४,२ 
गृहमेधास आ गत ७,५९,१० 
गोभिर्यदीमन्ये अस्मत्‌ ८,२,६ 
गोभिर्वाणो अज्यते ८,२० ,८ 
गोमद्धिरण्यवद्वसु ७,९४,९ 
गोमायुरदादजमायुरदाद्‌ ७,१०३,१० 
गोमायुरेको अजमायुरेकः ७,१०३ ,६ 
गोर्धयति मरुतां ८,९४,१ 
THE यन्नरञ्च ६६८ 
ग्रावाणः सोम नो ६५११४ 
"RIS सोम्या ८,५९,४ 
घृतवती भुवनानामभि ६७० १ 
सृतेन द्यावापृथिवी ६१५० ४ 
अन्मृध्ाण्यप द्विषो ८,४३,२६ 
चकार ता कृणवत्नु ७,२६,३ 
चत्वारो मा पैजवनस्य ७,१८,२३ 
चनिष्टं देवा ओषधौषु ७,७० ,४ 
चरन्‌ वत्सो रुशन्निह ८,७२,५ 
चित्र इद्राजा राजका ८,२१.१८ 
Ma ह यद्वां भोजनं ७,६८.५ 


छर्दिर्यन्तमदाभ्यं ८,८५,५ 
जज्ञानः सोमं सहसे पपाथ ७,९८,३ 
जज्ञानो नु शतक्रतुः ८,७७,१ 

जनं वत्रिन्महि चिन्मन्य ६१९ १२ 
जनाय चिद्य ईवत 8153 2 
जनासो वृक्तबर्हिषो ८,५ ,१७ 
जनिता दिवो जनिता ८,३६,४ 
जनिताश्चानां जनिता ८,३६,५ 
जनिष्वा देववीतये ६१५ १८ 
जनीयन्तो न्वग्रवः ७,९६,४ 
जनूश्चिद्‌ वो मरुतस्त्वेष्येण ७,५८,२ 
जयतं च प्र स्तुतं ८,३५, ११ 
जयेम कारे पुरुहूत ८,२१,१२ 
जातो यदग्ने भुवना ७,१३,३ 
जाम्यतीतपे धनुः८,७२,४ 
जिह्वाभिरह ननम ८,४३, ८ 
जीमूतस्येव भवति प्रतीकं ६७५ o 
जीवान्नो अभि धेतना ८,६७,५ 
जुषस्व नः समिधमग्ने ७,२,१ 
जुषाणो अङ्गिरस्तमेमा ८,४४,८ 
जुपेथां यज्ञमिष्टये ८,३८,४ 
जुपेथां यज्ञं _ मे विश्वेह ८,३५,४ 
जुष्टी नरो ब्रह्मणा व:७,३३,४ 
जुहुराणा चिदश्चिना ८,२६,५ 
ज्मया अत्र वसवो ७,३९,३ 
ज्येष्ठेन सोतरिन्द्राय ८,२,२३ 
ज्योतिष्मन्तं केतुमन्तं ८,५८,३ 

त इद्देवानां सधमाद ७,७६,४ 

त इद्देदि सुभग ८,१९,१८ 

त इन्निण्यं हदयस्य ७,३३,९ 

त उग्रासो वृषण ८,२०,१२ 

तं त्वा वयं सुध्यो ६१७ 

तं त्वा समिद्धिरङ्गिरो ६१६११ 

तं पृच्छन्ती वञ्रहस्तं ६२२५ 

तं पृच्छन्तोऽवरासः६.२१६ 

तं वः सखायःसं ६२३.९ 
dura चतिनमस्य ६,१९४ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


"i SPT 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


तं व इन्द्र न सुक्रतुं ६,४८,१४ 

तं वृधन्तं मारुतं ६६६ ११ 

तं वो दस्ममृतीषहं ८,८८, १ 

तं वो धिया नव्यस्या ६२२७ 

तं वो धिया परमया ६३८३ 

तं वो महो महाय्यमिनद्रं ८,७० ,८ 

तं वो वाजानां पर्ति८,२४,१८ 

तं शग्मासो अरुषासो ७,९७,६ 

तं शिशीता सुवृक्तिभिः ८,४० ,१० 

तं शिशीता स्वध्वरं ८,४० ,११ 

तं सध्रीचीरूतयो ६३६३ 

तं सुप्रतीकं सुदृशं ६,५.१० 

तं सुष्टुत्या विवासे ८,१६, ३ 

तं हि स्वराजं वृषभं ८,६१,२ 

तं हुवेम यतस्रुचः८,२३,२० 

तं होतारमध्वरस्य ७,१६,१२ 

तं गूर्धया ८,१९,१ 

तं घेमित्या _ अर्थ ८,६९,१७ 
ae त इदुग्राःशवसा ६६६६ 

तच्चश्षुर्देवहितं ७,६६, १६ 

तच्चित्रं राध आ७,८१,५ 

ततुरिवीरो नयों ६.२४.२ 

तत्तदग्निर्वयो दधे ८,३९,४ 

तत्ते यज्ञो अजायत ८,८९,६ 

तत्ते सहस्व ईमहे ८,४३,३३ 

तत्त्वा यामि सुवीर्यं ८,३,९ 

तत्रो अपि प्राणीयत ८,५६,४ 

तत्सु नः शर्म यच्छता ८, १८,१२ 

तत्सु नःसविता _शर्म ८,१८,३ 

तत्सु नो नव्यं सन्यस ८,६७,१८ 

तत्सु नो qs ६४५३३ 

तत्सु नो -मरुतः८,९४,३ 

तत्सूर्य रोदसी उभे ८,२५,२१ 

तदग्ने द्युम्नमा भर८,१९,१५ 

तदद्या चित्त उक्थिनो ८,१५,६ 

तदन्नाय तदपसे ८,४७,१६ 


तदिद्रुद्रस्य चेतति ८,१३,२० 

तदिन्द्राव आ भर ८,२४,२५ 
तद्दधाना अवस्यवो ८,६३,१० 

तद्वार्य वृणीमहे ८,२५, १३ 

तद्विविड्ढि यत्‌ त इन्द्रो ८,९६, १२ 

तद्वो अद्य मनामहे ७,६६,१२ 

तद्वो गाय सुते सच: ६४५२२ 

तं तमिद्राधसे ८,६८,७ 

तं ते मदं गृणीमसि ८,१५,४ 

तं ते यवं यथा ८,२,३ 

तं त्वाजनन्त मातरः८,१०२,१७ 

तं त्वा दूतं कृण्महे ७,१६,४ 

तं त्वामञ्मेषु ८,४३,२० 

तं त्वा मरुत्वती परि ७,३१,८ 

तं त्वा यज्ञेभिरीमहे ८,६८, १० 

तं त्वा वयं हवामहे ८,४३,२३ 

तं त्वा हविष्मतीर्विश ८,६,२७ 

तन्नः प्रलं सख्यमस्तु ६,१८५ r 

तन्न इन्द्रो वरुणो ७,३४,२५;५६,२५ 

तन्नस्तुरीपमध ७,२,९ 

तन्नस्तुरीपमध ७,२,९ 

तं नेमिमृभवो यथा ८,७५,५ 

तं नो अग्ने मघवद्‌भ्यः७,५,९ 

तन्नो रायः पर्वताः ७,३४, २३ 

तन्नो वि वोचो यदि ६२२७४ 

तन्नोऽहिर्बुध्यो अद्धि ६४९.१४ 

तन्म ऋतमिन्द्र शूर ८,९७,१५ 

तपन्ति शत्रं स्वर र्ण ७,३४,१९ 

तमग्निमस्ते ७,१,२ 

तमग्ने पास्युत ६१५ ११ 

तमद्य राधसे महे ८,६४,१२ 

तमर्केभिस्तं सामभिस्तं ८,१६,९ 

तमर्वन्तं न सानसिं ८,१०२,१९२ 

तमह्वे वाजसातय ८,१३,३ 

तमागन्म सोभरयः८,१९,३२ 

तमा नूनं वृजनमन्यथा ६,३५ 

तमा नो अर्कममृताय ७,९७,५ 


CC-0. In Public गज था Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


—— er a 
m tee 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


तमिच्च्यलैरार्यन्वि ८,१६,६- 5 ७ त ee ,१६,६ 
तमिद्दोषा तमुषसि यविष्ठं ७,३,५ 
तमिद्धनेषु हितेषु ८,१६,५ 
तमिद्विप्रा अवस्यवः८,१३,१७ 
तमिन्द्रं वाजयामसि ८,९३,७ 
तमिन्द्रं जोहवीमि ८,९७,१३ 
तमिन्द्रं दानमीमहे ८,४६,६ 
तमीळिष्व य आहुतो ८,४३,२२ 
तमीळिष्व यो अर्चिषा ६६० १० 
तमीमह इन्द्रमस्य राय:६ २२३ 
तमीमहे पुरुष्टुतं ८,१३,२४ 
तमु ज्येष्ठं नमसा ७,९७,३ 
तमु त्वा दध्यङ्डृषिः ६१६१४ 
तमु त्वा नूनमसुर ८,९० ,६ 
तमु त्वा नूनमीमहे ८,२४,२६ 
तमु त्वा पाथ्यो वृषा ६१६ १५ 
तमु त्वा यः पुरासिथ ६४५ ११ 
तमु त्वा सत्य सोमपा ६४५ १० 
तमु द्युमः ६,१०.२ 
तमु नः पूर्वे पितरो ६२२.२ 
तमु ष्टवाम य इमा ८,९६,६ 
तमु ष्टवाम यं गिर ८,९५ ,६ 
तमु ष्टुहि यो ६,१८, 
तमु स्तुष इन्द्रं यो ६२१.२ 
तमूर्मिमापो ७,४७,२ 
तमू षु समना गिरा ८,४१,२ 
तँ मर्जयन्त सुक्रतुं A 
तम्वभि प्र गायत ८,१५,१ 
तम्वभि प्राचतिनद्रं ८,९२,५ 
तरणिं वो जनानां ८,४५,२८ 
७,३२,२० 
Wa विदइसुमिन्द्र ८,६६, १ 
तब (तव तद्दंसनाभि ६१७६ 
क्रत्वा सनेयं ८, १९ , २९ 
च्यौलानि वज्नहस्त ७,१९,५ 
वत त्यदिन्द्रिय बृहत्‌ ८,१५,७ 
पत त्रिधातु पृथिवी ७,५,४ 
E wet ८,१५,८ 


तव द्रप्सो नीलवान्‌ ८,१९,३१ 

तव प्रणीतीन्द्र ७,२८,३ 

तव प्रयक्षि संदृश ६,१६८ 

तव वायवृतस्पते ८,२६, २१ 

तव ह त्यदिन्द्र ६२०१३ 

तवाहमग्न ऊतिभिः८, १९,२८ 

तवेदं विश्वमभितः पशव्यं ७,९८,६ 

तवेदिद्ध प्रणीतिषूत ८,६,२२ 
तवेदिन्द्रावमं वसु ७,३२,१६ 

तवेदिनद्राहमाशसा ८,७८, १० 

तवेदु ताः सुकीर्तयो ८,४५,३३ 

तस्मा इदास्ये हवि: ७,१०२,३ 

तस्मिन्‌ हि सन्त्यूतयो ८,४६,७ 

TH नूनमभिद्यवे ८,७५,६ 

तस्य द्युमाँ असद्रथो ८,३१,३ 

तस्य वयं सुमतो ६४७१३ 

तस्येदर्वन्तो रंहयन्त ८, १९ ,६ 

ता अस्य सूददोहस:८,६९, ३ 

ता नः स्तिपा तनूपा ७,६६,३ 

ताँ आ रुद्रस्य मीळहुषो ७,५८,५ 

ताँ आशिरं पुरोळाशं ८, २,११ 

तां पूष्णः सुमति वयं ६५७५ 

ता गृणीहि नमस्येभि: ६६८ ३ | 
ता जिह्वया सदमेदं ६६७८ | 
ता नव्यसो जरमाणस्य ६६२४ | 
तानीदहानि us लान्यासन्‌ ७,७६,३ 

ता नृभ्य आ सोश्रवसा ६१ ३ ५ 

ता नो रासन्‌ रातिषाचो ७,३४,२२ 

ता नो वाजवतीरिष ६६० .१२ | 
तान्वन्दस्व मरुतस्ता ८,२०,१४ | 
ताभिरा गच्छतं नरो ६६० ९ 

ताभिरा यातं वृषणोप ८,२२,१२ 

ताभिरा यातमूतिभिः ८,५, २४ 

ता भुज्युं विभिरद्धय: ६६२६ 

ता भूरिपाशावनृतस्य ७,६५,३ 

तामग्ने अस्मे इषं ७,५,८ 

माता विश्ववेदसा ८,२५,३ 

ता मे अश्विना सनीनां ८,५,३७ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj a Chennai and eGangotri 


तामे अकष्यानां ८,२५.२३ | menses 7 अश््यानां ८,२५,२३ 

ता यज्ञमा शुचिभिश्चक्रमाणा ६६२६ 
ता योधिष्टमभि गा ६६०२ 

ता राजाना शुचिव्रता ६१६ २४ 
तावदुषो राधो अस्मभ्यं ७,७९,४ 
ता वल्गू दस्रा पुरु ६६२५ 

ता वां विश्वस्य गोपा ८,२५,१ 
ता वां गीर्भिर्विपन्यवः ७,९४,६ 
ता वामद्य हवामहे ८,२६,३ 

ता विग्रं धैथे ६६७७ 

ताविदा चिदहानां ८,२२,१३ 
ताविद्‌ दुःशंसं मर्त्य॑ ७,९४,१२ 
ताविद्दोषा ता उपसि ८,२२,१४ 
ता सानसी शवसाना ७,९३,२ 
ता सुदेवाय दाशुषे ८,५,६ 

ता ह त्युद्वर्तियंद्‌ ६६२.३ 

ता हि क्षत्रै धारयेथे ६६७६ 

ता हि देवानामसु ७,६५,२ 

ता हि मध्यं भराणां ८,४० ,३ 

ता हि शश्वन्त ईळत ७,९४,५ 

ता हि श्रेष्ठा देवताता ६६८२ 

ता हुवे ययोरिदं ६६० )४ 

तिग्मं चिदेम ६३)४ 
तिग्मजम्भाय तरुणाय ८,१९,२२ 
तिग्ममायुधं मरुतां ८, ९६,९ 
तिग्ममेको बिभर्ति ८,२९,५ 
तिग्मायुधौ तिग्महेती ६७४४ 
तिस्रो द्यावो निहिता ७,८७,५ 
तिस्रो वाचः प्र वद ७,१०१,१ 
तीव्राः सोमास आ गहि ८,८२,२ 
तीव्रान्‌ घोषान्‌ कृण्वते ६७५७ 
तुचे तनाय तत्सु नो ८,१८,१८ 
तुभ्यं सोमाः सुता इमे ८,९३,२५ 
तुभ्यं घेत्ते जना ८,४३,२९ 

तुभ्यं ता अङ्गिरस्तम ८,४३,१८ 
तुभ्यायमद्रिभिः सुतो ८,८२,५ 
तुभ्येदिन्द्र मरुत्वते ८,७६,८ 
तुभ्येदिमा सवना ७,२२,७ 


तुरण्यवोऽङ्गिरसो ७,५२,३ 
तुरण्यवो मधुमन्तं ८,५१,१० 
तुरीयं नाम यज्ञियं ८,८०,९ 
तुविक्षं ते सुकृतं ८,७७, ११ 
तुविग्रीवो वपोदरः ८,१७,८ 
तुविशुष्म तुविक्रतो ८,६८,२ 
तूतुजानो महेमते ८,१३,११ 
ूर्वन्नोजीयान्‌ & 3o ३ 

ते आचरन्ती समनेव ६७५७४ 

ते घेदग्ने स्वाध्यो ये त्वा ८,१९,१७ 
ते घेदग्ने स्वाध्योऽहा विश्वा ८,४३, ३० 
ते चिद्धि पूर्वीरभि ७,४८,३ 

ते जानत स्वमोक्यं ८,७२,१४ 

ते ज्येष्ठा यस्यारति & $33 

ते ते अग्ने त्वोता ६१६.२७ 

ते ते देवाय दाशतः७,१७,७ 

ते त्वा मदा इन्द्र ७,२३,५ 

ते त्वा मदा बृहदिन्द्र ६,१७४ 

ते न आस्नो वृकाणां ८,६७,१४ 
ते न इन्द्र: पृथिवी ६५१११ 

ते नः सन्तु युजःसदा ८,८३,२ 

तेन नो वाजिनीवसू परावतः ८,५,३० 
तेन नो वाजिनीवसू पश्वे ८,५,२० 
तेन स्तोतृभ्य आ भर ८,७७,८ 

ते नस्त्राध्वं ते ८,३० ,३ 

ते नो गोपा अपाच्याः८,२८,३ 

ते नो नावमुरुष्यत ८,२५,११ 

ते नो भद्रेण शर्मणा ८,१८,१७ 

ते नो रायो द्युमतो ६५०,११ 

ते नो रुद्रः सरस्वती ६५० १२ 

तेषां हि चित्रमुक्थ्यं ८,६७, २ 

ते सत्येन मनसा दी ध्याना: ७,९०,५ 
ते सीषपन्त जोषमा ७,४३,४ 

ते स्याम देव वरुण ७,६६,९ 


'ते हिन्विरे अरुणं ८,१०१,६ 


ते हि पुत्रासो अदितेः८,१८, ५ 
ते हि यज्ञेषु यज्ञियास ऊमा:७,२९, ४ 
ते हि ष्मा वनुषो नरो ८,२५,१५ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. poem का Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MEE “it —_ 


थ थे 9| 2] 2 231 21 31 31 ab avi 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


NE Se 
ते हि श्रेष्ठवर्चस ६५१ Ro 
तोशासा रथयावाना ८,३८,२ 
त्मना समत्सु हिनोत ७,३४,६ 
त्यं चित्पर्वतं गिरिं ८,६४,५ 
त्यं नु मारुतं गणं ८,९४,१२ 
त्यमु वः सत्रासाहं ८,९२,७ 
त्यमु वो अप्रहणं ६,४४.४ 
त्यात्रु क्षत्रियाँ ८,६७,१ 
त्यात्रु पूतदक्षसो ८,९४, १० 
त्यात्रु ये वि रोदसी ८,९४,११ 
त्या न्वशश्चिना हुवे ८,१० ,३ 
त्रय इन्द्रस्य सोमा: ८, २,७ 
त्रयः कृण्वन्ति भुवनेषु ७,३३,७ 
त्रयः कोशासः श्चोतन्ति ८,२,८ 
तरातारमिन्द्रमवितारमिन्द्रं ६४४७११ 
तरातारो देवा अधि ८,४८,१४ 
fa: षष्टिस्त्वा मरुतो ८,९६,८ 
त्रिकद्रुकेषु _नो गिरः८,९२,२१ 
त्रिकद्रुकेषु _ नो गिरः सदा ८,१३,१८ 
fria: पृथिवी ७,१०० , ३ 
तरिवन्धुरेण _ रथेना ८,८५ ,८ 
त्रिंशच्छतं वर्मिण ६२७ ६ 
त्रिश्चिदक्तोः प्र चिकितुः ७, ११, ३ 
त्रिषधस्था सप्तधातु:६६१ १२ 
त्रीणि पदान्यश्विनो: ८, ८ , २३ 
तरीणि शतान्यर्वतां ८,६,४७ 

A सरांसि पृश्नयो ८,७,१० 
WIS उरुगायो ८,२९ ७ 
ATH यजामहे ७,५९ , १२ 
त कवि चोदयो ६२६३ 
लं कुत्सेनाभि शुष्ण ६३१३ 
लं तं देव जिह्वया ६,१६.३२ 

तदुक्थमिन्द्र ६२६५ 
लेता इन्द्रोभयाँ ६३३३ 

त्या चिदच्युताग्ने ६२९ 

अमर्त्य आ ६,१६.६ 


त्वं देवि सरस्वत्यवा ६६१७ 

त्वं धुनिरिन्द्र ६२०१२ 

त्वं नः पाह्यंहसो जातवेदो ६,१६ ३० 
त्वं नश्चित्र ऊत्या ६४८९ 

त्वं भगो न आ हि ६१३.२ 

त्वं यविष्ठ दाशुषो ८,८४,३ 

त्वं रथं प्र भरो ६,२६४ 

त्वं रयि पुरुवीरं ८,७१,६ 

त्वं वरुण उत मित्रो ७,१२,३ 

त्वं वरो सुषाम्णे ८,२३,२८ 

त्वं वर्मासि सप्रथः७,३१,६ 

त्वं विक्षु प्रदिवःसीद ६५३ 

त्वं विश्वस्य धनदा ७,३२,१७ 
त्वं विष्णो सुमति विश्व ७,१००,२ 
त्वं वृधा इन्द्र पूर्व्यों ६२० ११ 

त्वं वृषा जनानां ८,१५,१० 

त्वं शतान्यव शम्बरस्य ६३१४ 
त्वं श्रद्धामिर्मन्दसानः ६,२६६ 

त्वं सूकरस्य दहि ७,५५ Y 

त्वं सोम तनूकृद्ध्यो ८,७९,३ 

त्वं सोम पितृभिः ८,४८,१३ 

त्वं ह त्यत्सप्तभ्यो ८,९६,१६ 
त्वं ह त्यदप्रतिमानमोजो ८,९६,१७ 
त्वं ह त्यदिन्द्र कुत्समावः७,१९,२ 
त्वं ह त्यदवृषभ ८,९६,१८ 

त्वं ह नु त्यददमायो ६१८३ 

त्वं ह यद्यविष्ठ्य ८,७५, ३ 

त्वं हि क्षैतवद्यशो ६२१ 

त्वं हि a: पिता वसो ८,९८,११ 
त्वं हि नस्तन्वः८,४८,९ 

त्वं हि राधस्पते ८,६१,१४ 

त्वं हि वृत्रहन्नेषां ८९३,३३ 

त्वं हि शश्वतीनामिन्द्र ८,९८, ६ 
त्वं हि सत्यो मघवत्ननानतो ८,९० ,४ 
त्वं हि सुप्रतूरसि ८,२३,२९ 

त्वं हि स्तोमवर्षन ८,१४, ११ 

त्वं होता मनुर्हितो वहि ६१६९ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


— 1. 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


त्वं होता मन्द्रतमो ६,११.२ 

त्वं ह्यग्ने अग्निना ८,४३,१४ 

त्वं ह्यग्ने प्रथमो ६१ १ 

त्वं ह्येहि चेरवे ८,६१,७ 

त्वं चित्ती तव दक्षे: ८ ,७९ ,४ 
त्वं दाता प्रथमो ८,९० ,२ 
त्वद्धिया विश आयन्नसि ७,५,३ 
त्वद्धियेन्द्र पार्थिवानि ६३१२ 
त्वद्विप्रो जायते ६७३ 

त्वद्विश्वा सुभगा ६१३ १ 

त्वं धृष्णो धूषता ७,१९,३ 

त्वं न इन्द्र ऋतयुः ८,७० ,१० 
त्वं न इन्द्र वाजयुस्त्वं ७,३१,३ 
त्वं न इन्द्रा A ओजो ८,९८,१० 
त्वं न इन्द्रासां हस्ते ८,७०,१२ 
त्वं नःपश्चादधराद्‌ ८,६१, १६ 
त्वं नः पाह्यंहसो दोषावस्तः७,१५,१५ 
त्वं नः सोम विश्वतो वयोधाः ८,४८,१५ 
त्वं नृभिर्नृमणो ७,१९,४ 

त्वं नो अग्न आयुषु ८,३९,१० 
त्वं नो अग्ने महोभिः८,७१,१ 
त्वं नो अस्या अमतेरुत ८,६६,१४ 
त्वमग्ने गृहपतिः७,१६,५ 
त्वमग्ने बृहद्वयो ८,१०२,१ 
त्वमग्ने यज्ञानाँ ६१६.१ 

त्वमग्ने वनुष्यतो ६१५१२ 
त्वमग्ने वनुष्यतो ७,४,९ 
त्वमग्ने वीरवद्यशो ७,१५,१२ 
त्वमग्ने व्रतपा असि ८,११,१ 
त्वमग्ने शोचिषा ७,१३,२ 
त्वमग्ने सुहवो ७, १,२१ 
त्वमपो वि दुरो ६३०५ 

त्वमसि प्रशस्यो ८,११,२ 
त्वमित्सप्रथा अस्यग्ने ८,६० ,५ 
त्वमिन्द्र प्रतूर्तिषु ८,९९,५ 
त्वमिन्द्र यशा असि ८,९०,५ 
त्वमिन्द्र खवितवा ७,२१,३ 


त्वमिन्द्र स्वयशा ७,३७,४ 
त्वमिन्द्राभिभूरसि त्वं ८,९८,२ 
त्वमिमा वार्या पुरु ६,१६५ 
त्वमीशिषे सुतानां ८,६४,३ 
त्वमेकस्य वृत्रहन्‌ ६,४५५ 
त्वमेतद धारयः८,९३,१३ 

त्वं पुर इन्द्र चिकिदेना ८,९७,१४ 
तवं पुरं चरिष्ण्वं ८ ,१,२८ 

त्वं पुरू सहस्राणि ८,६१,८ 

त्वया ह स्विद्युजा वयं ८,१०२,३ 
त्वया ह स्तिद्युजा वयं प्रति ८,२१,११ 
त्वयेदिन्द्र युजा वयं ८,९२,३२ 
त्वष्टुर्जामातरं वयं ८,२६,२२ 

त्वां दूतमग्ने अमृतं ६१५८ 
वर्धन्ति क्षितयः ६१५ 

| वाजी हवते ६२६२ 

त्वां विष्णुर्बहन्‌ क्षयो ८,१५,९ 
त्वां विश्वे अमृत ६७)४ 

ग शुष्मिन्‌ पुरुहूत ८,९८, १२ 

i हि मन्द्रतममर्कशोकै & xy 
त्वां हि सत्यमद्रिवो ८,४६,२ 
त्वां हि ष्मा चर्षणयो ६२२ 

हि सुप्सरस्तमं ८,२६,२४ 
त्वां ही३न्द्रावसे विवाचो & 33 
त्वामग्ने पुष्करादधि ६१६,१३ 
त्वामग्ने मनीषिणस्त्वां ८,४४,१९ 
त्वामग्ने समिधानो ७,९,६ 
त्वामग्ने स्वाध्यो ६१६७ 
त्वामग्ने हरितो ७,५,५ 
त्वामिच्छवसस्मते ८,६,२१ 
त्वामिदा ह्यो नरो ८,९९, १ 
त्वामिद्धि त्वायवो ८,९२,३३ 
त्वामिद्धि हवामहे ६)४६ १ 
त्वामिद्यवयुर्मम ८,७८,९ 
त्वामिद्‌ वृत्रहन्तम हवन्ते ८,६,३७ 
त्वामिद्‌ वृत्रहन्तम सुतावन्तो ८,९३,२० 
त्वामीळते अजिरं ७,११,२ 
त्वामीळे अघ द्विता ६१६४ 


3| 3| 3| 3| a} a} al al 


3l 


CC-0. In Public mE आ Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


oo 


NT RRS HN ४२९७७० क. ७ ७ MEN I 


Al, al. al. 


ai, al, 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


त्वामुग्रमवसे चर्षणीसह ६४६६ [ दमन कप gp = चर्षणीसहं ६४६ ६ 
त्वावतः पुरूवसो ८,४६, १ 
त्वावतो हीन्द्र ७,२५,४ 
त्विषीमन्तो अध्वरस्येव ६ ६६ १० 
त्वे अग्न आहवनानि ७,१,१७ 
त्वे अग्ने स्वाहुत ७,१६,७ 
त्वे असुर्य वसवो ७,५,६ 
त्वे वसूनि पुर्वणीक ६ ५२ 
त्वे वसूनि संगता ८,७८,८ 
त्वेषं शर्धो न मारुतं ६.४८ १५ 
१ त्वेषस्ते धूम ऋण्वति ६२६ 
त्वे सु पुत्र शवसो ८,९२,१४ 
त्वे ह यत्‌ पितरञ्चित्न ७,१८, १ 
त्वोतासस्त्वा युजाप्सु ८,६८,९ 
दण्डा इवेद्‌ गो अजनास ७,३३,६ 
ददी रेक्णस्तन्वे ८,४६, १५ 
दधानो गोमदश्चवत्‌ ८,४६,५ 
दधामि ते मधुनो ८,१०० , २ 
दधामि ते सुतानां ८,३४,५ 
दधिक्रां वः प्रथम ७,४४, १ 
दधिक्रामु नमसा ७ ४४,२ 
दधिक्रावाणं बुबुधानो ७ ४४,३ 
दधिक्रावा प्रथमो ७,४४,४ 
दभ्रं चिद्धि त्वावतः ८,४५,३२ 
देश महां पौतक्रतः ८,५६,२ 
दश राजान: समिता ७,८३,७ 
| SAT ऋधद्रयो ८,४६,२३ 
| देश रथान्‌ प्रष्टिमतः ६४७ २४ 
| मनवे पूव्यं ८, २२, ६ 
नो मरुतो ७,५६, १७ 
दशस्या नः पुर्वणीक ६,१ १६६ 
दशाश्वान्‌ दश कोशान्‌ ६ ४७२३ 
द त विश्वमानुषङ्‌ ८,२६,६ 
| नामगो erste 
| :पृधुश्रवस: 2.२“ 
:८,४६,२४ 
दानो अन्ने धिया रि ७,१,५ 


दामानं विश्वचर्षणे ८,२३,२ 
दाशराज्ञे परियत्ताय ७,८३,८ 
दाशेम कस्य मनसा ८,८४,५ 
दिवश्चद्रोचनादधि ८,८,७ 
दिवस्पृथिव्या पर्योज ६५४७२७ 
दिवि क्षयन्ता रजसः पृथिव्यां ७,६४,१ 
दिवेदिवे सदृशीरन्यमर्ध ६४७२१ 
दिवो धामभिर्वरुण ७,६६,१८ 
दिवो न तुभ्यमन्विद्ध ६२०२ 
दिवो न यस्य विधतो ६३७ 

दिवो मानं नोत्सदन्‌ ८,६३, २ 
दिवो रुक्म उरुचक्षा ७,६३,४ 
दिव्या आपे अभि ७,१०३,२ 
दीर्घस्ते अस्त्वङ्कुशो ८,१७,१० 
दुराध्यो अदितिं ७,१८,८ 

दुर्गे चित्रः सुगं ८,९३,१० 

दुहन्ति सप्तैकामुप ८,७२,७ 
दूणाशं सख्यं तव ६४५.२६ 
दूराच्चिदा वसतो ६३८२ 
दूरादिन्द्रमनयत्ना ७,३३,२ 
दूरादिहेव यत्‌ सत्य ८,५,१ 
दृतेरिव तेऽवृकमस्तु ६४८ १८ 
देवंदेवं राधसे ७,७९,५ 

देवंदेवं वोऽवस इद्धमिद्धं ८,१२,१९ 
देवंदेवं वोऽवसे ८,२७,१३ 
देवस्य वयं सवितुः ta 
देवहिति जुगुपुर्द्रादशस्य ७,१०३,९ 
देवानां चक्षुः सुभगा ७,७७,३ 
देवानामिदवो महत्‌ ८,८३,१ 
| असुर्याय ७,२१,७ 
देवासो हि प्मा मनवे ८,२७,१४ 
देवीं वाचमजनयन्त ८,१००,११ 
देवी देवस्य रोदसी ७,९७,८ 
देवेभिर्देव्यदिते ८,१८,४ 

देवो वो द्रविणोदा:७, १६, ११ 
द्यावाभूमी अदिते ७,६२,४ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


द्यावो न यस्य पनयन्त्यभ्वं ६४३ 
spei सुदानुं तविषीभिरावृतं ८,८८,२ 
चुतान वो अतिथिं ६,१५.४ 
द्युमत्तमं दक्षं ६,४४९ 

चुमी वां स्तोमो ८,८७,१ 

र्न य इन्द्रामि Ro R 
द्यौ३ष्पितः पृथिवीमातरधु ६५१५ 
द्रप्समपश्यं विपुणे ८,९६, १४ 
Fal अग्ने रथिनो ६२७८ 

द्विता यो वृत्रहन्तमो ८,९३,२२ 
दवे नपुर्देववतः७,१८,२२ 

धन्या चिद्धि त्वे ६,११३ 

धन्वना गा धन्वनाजिं ६७५ २ 
धायोभिर्वा यो युज्येभिरकै ६३ ८ 
धासि कृण्वान ओषधीः ८ ,४३ ,७ 
धिष्व वज्रं गभस्त्यो ६४५,१८ 
धीभिरर्वद्धिरर्वतो ६४५ १२ 
धीभिः सातानि ८,४, २० 

— धीरा त्वस्य महिना ७,८६,१ 

धीरो ह्यस्यद्मसद्‌ ८,४४,२९ 
घृतव्रतो धनदाः १९ ५ 
धृषत्चिद्‌ धृषन्मनः ८,६२, 
धृषत्पिब कलशे ६,४७६ 

धेनुं न त्वा सूयवसे ७,१८,४ 
धेनुष्ट इन्द्र सूनृता ८,१४,३ 
धेनुर्जिन्वतमुत ८,३५,१८ 

धुवं ज्योतिर्निहितं ६९५ 

धुवासु त्वासु क्षितिषु ७,८८,७ 
नकिः परिष्टि्मघवन्‌ ८,८८,६ 
नकिः सुदासो रथं ७,३२,१० 
नकिरस्य शचीनां ८,३२,१५ 
नकिष्टं कर्मणा नशद्‌ ८,७० ,३ 
नकिष्टं कर्मणा नशन्न ८,३१,१७ 
नकीं quim इन्द्र ८,७८,४ 
नकीमिन्द्रो निकर्तवे ८,७८,५ 
नकी रेवन्तं सख्याय ८,२१,१४ 
नक्षन्त इन्द्रमवसे ८,५४,२ 


न घा वसुर्नि यमते ६४५२३ 

न घेमन्यदा ८,२,१७ 

न त इन्द्र सुमतयो ७, १८,२० 

न तं तिग्मं चन ८,४७,७ 

न तद्दिवा न पृथिव्या ६५२.१ 

न तमंहो न दुरितानि ७,८२,७ 

न तमग्ने अणातयो ८,७१,४ 

न तस्य मायया ८,२३,१५ 

न ता अर्वा रेणुककाटो ६२८५४ 

न ता नशन्ति ६२८३ 

नते अन्तः शवसो ६२९५ 

न ते गिरो अपि मृष्ये ७,२२,५ 

नते वर्तास्ति राधस ८,१४,४ 

न ते विष्णो जायमानो ७,९९,२ 

न ते सव्यं न ८,२४,५ 

नत्वा देवास आशत ८,९७,९ 

नत्वा बृहन्तो अद्रयो ८,८८,३ 

न त्वा रासीयाभिशस्तये ८,१९,२६ 

न त्वावाँ अन्यो ७,३२,२३ 

नदं व ओदतीनां ८,६९,२ 

न दुष्टुती मर्त्यो विन्दते ७,३२,२१ 

न देवानामपि हुतः८,३१,७ 

नद्याव इन्द्रमोजसा ८,६,१५ 

न नूनं ब्रह्मणामृणं ८,३२,१६ 

नपाता शवसो महः८,२५,५ 

नपातो दुर्गहस्य ८,६५,१२ 

न पापासो मनामहे ८,६१,११ 

नम इदुग्रं नम आ विवासे ६५१८ 

नमस्ते अग्न ओजसे ८,७५,१० न 
नमोवाके प्रस्थिते ८,३५,२२ 
न यं जरन्ति शरदो ६,२४७ 
न यं विविक्तो ८,१२,२४ 

ज यं शुक्रो न दुरशी ८,२,५ 
न यं हिंसन्ति ६३४३ 

न यःसंपृच्छे ८,१०१,४ 

न य ईषन्ते ६६६)४ 

न यजमान रिष्यसि ८,३१,१६ 
न यं दुधा वरन्ते ८,६६,२ 


—h —h If कहे sf 


CC-0. In Public Domain. —— ` Kangri Collection, Haridwar í 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


नयसीद्वति द्विषः ६)४५ ६ 
न यस्य ते शवसान ८,६८,८ 
न यातव इन्द्र ७,२१,५ 
न युष्मे वाजबन्धवो ८,६८,१९ 
नरा गोरेव विद्युतं ७,६९,६ 
नराशंसस्य महिमानमेषां ७,२, २ 
नवं नु स्तोममग्नये ७,१५,४ 
नव यो नवतिं पुरो ८,९३,२ 
न वा उ सोमो वृजिनं ७,१०४,१३ 
न वीळवे नमते ६२४८ 
न स स्वो दक्षो ७,८६,६ 
न सीमदेव ८,७० ,७ 
न सोम इन्द्रमसुतो ७,२६,१ 
नहि ग्रभायारणः ७,४,८ 
नहि ते अग्ने ८,६० ,१४ 
नहि ते पूर्तमक्षिपत्‌ ६१६२१८ 
नहि ते शूर राधसो ८,४६,११ 
नहि त्वा शूर देवा ८,८१,३ 
नहि त्वा शूरो न ६२५५ 
नहि नु ते महिमनः ६ २७३ 
नहि मन्युः पौरुषेय ८,७१,२ 
नहि मे अस्त्यघ्न्या ८,१०२,१९ 
नहि व ऊतिः पृतनासु ७,५९.४ 
नहि वश्चरमं चन ७,५९,३ 
नहि वां वव्रयामहे ८,४० ,२ 
नहि वो अस्त्यर्भको ८,३० ,१ 
नहि षस्तव नो मम ८,३३,१६ 
नहि ष्म यद्ध व: पुरा ८,७,२१ 
TES नृतो त्वत्‌ ८,२४,१२ 
नह्यङ्ग पुरा चन ८,२४, १५ 
न्यन्यं बळाकरं ८,८० ,१ 
नाना ह्यग्नेऽवसे ६१४ 3 
नाभि यज्ञानां सदनं ६७२ 
नास्माकमस्ति तत्‌ तरः ८ ,६७, १९ 
नास्य वर्ता न तरुता ६६६८ 
नाहं तन्तुं न वि ६९.२ 

निखातं चिद्यः ८,६६.४ 
नि गव्यवोऽनवो ७,१८,१४ 


निचेतारो हि मरुतो ७,५७,२ 
नितिक्ति यो वारणमन्न ६४५ 

नि तिग्ममभ्यंशुं ८,७२,२ 

नित्वा नक्ष्य विश्पते ७,१५,७ 
नि दुर्ग इन्द्र श्नथिद्ममित्रानभि ७,२५,२ 
निमिषश्चिज्जवीयसा ८,७३,२ 

नि यद्यामाय वो गिरिः ८,७,५ 
नियुवाना नियुतः ७,९१,५ 
निरग्नयो रुरुचुर्निरु ८,३, २० 
निराविध्यद्गिरिम्य आ ८,७७,६ 
निरिन्द्र बृहती भ्यो ८,३,१९ 
निर्यत्यूतेव स्वधितिः, ७,३,९ 

नि शुष्ण इन्द्र ८,६,१४ 

fry ब्रह्म जनानां ८,५,१३ 
निष्कं वा घा कृणवते ८,४७,१५ 
नि्िध्वरीरोपधीराप ८,५९,२ 

नू अन्यत्रा चिदद्रिवः ८, २४,११ 
नू इन्द्र राये वरिवस्कृधी ७,२७,५ 
नू इन्द्र शूर ७,१९,११ 

नू गृणानो गृणते ६३९५ 

नू चित्स भ्रेषते ७,२० ,६ 

नू चित्र इन्द्रो ७,२७,४ 

नू चिन्नु ते ७,२२,८ 

नूला इदिन्द्र ते ८,२१,७ 

नू त्वामग्न ईमहे ७,७,७;८,७ 

नू देवासो वरिवः ७,४८,४ 

नूनं न इन्द्रापराय ६३३५ 

नूनं तदिन्ध दद्धि नो ८,१३,५ 

नू न इन्द्रावरुणा ६६८८ 

नू नश्चित्रं पुरुवाजाभिरूती ६,१०५ 
नूनमर्च विहायसे ८,२३,२४ 

नू नो अग्नेऽवृकेभिः ६,४८ 

नू नो गोमद्वीरवद्धेहि ७,७५,८ 

नू नो रयिं रथ्यं ६.४९ १५ 

नू म आ वाचमुप याहि ६२१११ 
नू मर्तो दयते सनिष्यन्‌ ७,१००,१ 
नू मित्रो वरुणो अर्यमा ७,६२,६;६३,६ 
नू मे गिरो नासत्याश्विना ८,८५,९ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foungation Chennai and eGangotri 


नू मे ब्रह्माण्यग्न ७,१,२०;२५ 


नू मे हवमा शृणुतं ७,६७,१०;६९,८ 
नू रोदसी अभिष्टुते ७,३९,७;४० ,७ 


नू सद्मानं दिव्यं ६५११२ 
नृभिर्धूतः सुतो ८,२,२ 

नृवत्त इन्द्र ६१९ १० 

नृवदस्रा मनोयुजा ८,५, २ 
नृवद्वसो सदमिद्धेह्यस्मे ६११२ 
नेमिं नमन्ति चक्षसा ८,९७,१२ 
नेह भद्रं रक्षस्विने ८,४७,१२ 
नैतावदन्ये मरुतो यथेमे ७,५७,३ 
न्यक्रतून्‌ ग्रथिनो ७,६,३ 

न्यग्ने नव्यसा ८,३९,२ 
न्यर्बुदस्य विष्टपं ८,३२,३ 

न्यु प्रियो मनुषः७,७३,२ 
पलीवन्तः सुता इम ८,९३,२२ 
पथ एक: पीपाय ८,२९ ,६ 
पथस्पथः परिपतिं & x8 ८ 

पदं देवस्य नमसा ६ १७४ 

पदं देवस्य मौळहुषो ८,१०२,१५ 
पदा पर्णीरराधसो ८,६४,२ 
पनाय्यं तदश्चिना ८,५७,३ 

पन्य आ दर्दिरच्छता ८,३२,१८ 
पन्य इदुप गायत ८,३२,१७ 
पन्यंपन्यमित्‌ सोतारः८,२,२५ 
पन्यांसं जातवेदसं ८,७४,३ 
पप्राथ क्षां महि ६१७७ 

पर: सो अस्तु तन्वा ७,१०४,११ 
परस्या अघि संवतो ८,७५,१५ 
पराकात्ताच्चिदद्रिवस्त्वां ८,९२, २७ 
परा गावो यवसं ८,४, १८ 

परा णुदस्त्र मघवन्र ७,३२, २५ 
परा पूर्वेषां सख्या वृणक्ति ६,४७.१७ 
परि णो वृणजन्नघा ८,४७,५ 

परि तृन्धि पणीना ६५३५ 

परि त्रिधातुरध्वरं ८,७२,९ 

परि पूषा परस्ता ६५४१० 
परि यो रश्मिना दिवो ८,२५,१८ 


परिषद्यं ह्यरणस्य ७,४,७ 

परि स्पशो वरुणस्य ७,८७,३ 
परिह्ृतेदना जनो ८,४७,६ 
परोमात्रमृचीपमं ८,६८,६ 

परो मात्रया तन्वा ७,९९,१ 
परो हि मर्त्यैरसि ६४८,१९ 
पर्जन्यवाता वृषभा ६४९ ६ 
पर्जन्याय प्र गायत ७,१०२,१ 
पर्षि तोकं तनयं ६४८ १० 

पर्षि दीने गभीर ८,६७,११ 
पाकत्रा स्थन देवा ८,१८,१५ 
पाता वृत्रहा सुतं ८,२,२६ 
पाता सुतमिन्द्रो प्रणेनी ६२३.३ 
पाता सुतमिन्द्रो _हन्ता ६४४१५ 
पान्तमा वो अन्धस ८,९२,१ 
पारावतस्य रातिषु ८,३४,१८ 
पार्षद्वाणः प्रस्कण्वं ८,५१२ 
पावकया यश्चितयन्त्या ६,१५५ 
पावीरवी कन्या ६)४९ ७ 

पाहि गायान्धसो मदे ८,३३,४ 
पाहि नो अग्न एकया ८,६०,९ 
पाहिनो अग्ने रक्षसो ७,१,१३ 
पाहि विश्वस्माद्रक्षसो ८,६०,१० 
पितुर्न पुत्रः सुभृतो ८,१९,२७ 
पिबतं सोमं मधुमन्तं ८,८७,४ 
पिबतं घर्म मधुमन्तं ८,८७,२ 
पिबतं च तृष्णुतं ८,३५,१० 
पिबन्ति मित्रो अर्यमा ८,९४,५ 
पिब स्वधैनवानां ८,३२,२० 
पिबा त्वस्य गिर्वणः८,१,२६ 
पिबा सुतस्य रसिनो ८,३,१ 
पिवा सोमं मदाय ८,९५,३ 
पिबा सोममभि ६१७१ 

पिबा सोममिन्द्र मन्दतु ७,२२,१ 
पिबेदिन्द्र मरुत्सखा ८,७६,९ 
पीपाय स श्रवसा ६,१० ३ 
पीपिवांसं सरस्वत ७,९६,६ 
पीवोअत्राँ रयिवृधः ७,९१,३ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


DO ` ; j 


TTT 


AT] QU SERA BIH Bd erie bog क. 5०5७४ ७४८४ CS sO 


————— २ मम निक क किम 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation oes and eGangotri 


पुत्रिणा ता कुमारिणा ८,३१,८ 
पुनीपे वामरक्षसं ७,८५,१ 
परं न धृष्णवा ८,७३, १८ 
पुराग्ने दुरितेभ्यः८,४४,३० 
पुत्रा चिद्धि वां नरा ८,५,१६ 
पुरुत्रा हिं सदृङ्ङसि ८,११,८;४३, 
पुरुप्रिया ण ऊतये ८,५,४ 
पुरुमन्द्रा पुरूवसू ८,८,१२ 
पुरु हि वा पुरुभुजा ६६३८ 
पुरुहूतं पुरुष्टुतं ८,९२,२ 
पुरुहूतो यः पुरुगूर्त ६३४ 
पुरूण्यग्ने पुरुधा त्वाया ६१,११३ 
पुरूतमं पुरूणां स्तोतृणां ६:४५ २९ 
पुरोळा इत्‌ तुर्वशो ७,१८,६ 
पुरोळाशं यो अस्मे सोमं ८,३१,२ 
पुरोळाशं नो अन्धस ८,७८,१ 
Tii सुहवं ८,२२,२ 
alata त्वे ८,६६, १२ 
पूर्वीष्ट इन्द्रोपमातयः ८,४० ,९ 
पूषणं न्वजाश्वं ६ ५५४ 
पूपन्‌ तव व्रते वयं ६५४९ 
WAT प्र गा इहि ६५४६ 
पूपा गा अन्वेतु ६५४५ 
पूपा विष्णुर्हवनं मे ८,५४,४ 
पूपा सुबन्धुर्दिव ६ ५८ ४ 
lam न रिष्यति ६५४३ 
पक्षस्य विष्णो अरुषस्य ६८ १ 
पृच्छे तदेनो वरुण ७,८६,३ 
a ६१९३ 

सानुर्यजतो ८ 
पृषधे मेध्ये नळ 
पृष्ठ दिवि धाय्यग्नि:७,५, २ 

अश्वस्य पुरुकृद्‌ ८,६१,६ 
म कृतान्यृजीषिणः ८,३२, १ 
क्षोदसा धायसा ७,९५,१ 
भ चक्रे सहसा सहो ८,४,५ 
म चित्रमर्क गृणते ६६६९ 

तवा कवे ८,१०२, १८ 


प्रजामृतस्य पिप्रत:८,६, २ 
प्रजावती: सूयवसं ६२८७ 
प्रजा ह तिस्रो ८,१०१,१४ 
प्रणेतारं वस्यो अच्छा ८, १६, १० 
प्रणो देवी सरस्वती ६६१४ 

र तते अद्य शिपिविष्ट ७,१०० ,५ 
प्र तत्ते अद्या कारणं ६१८१३ 

प्र तमिन्द्र नशीमहि ८,६,९ 

प्रति केतव:प्रथमा ७,७८,१ 

प्रति चक्ष्व वि ७,१०४,२५ 
प्रति ते दस्यवे वृक ८,५६,१ 

प्रति त्वा दुहितर्दिवः ७,८१,३ 
परति त्वाद्य सुमनसो ७,७८,५ 
प्रति त्वा शवसी वदत्‌ ८,४५,५ 
प्रति त्वा स्तोमेरीळते ७,७६,६ 
प्रति द्युतानामरुषासो ७,७५,६ 
प्रति नः स्तोमं त्वष्टा जुषेत ७,३४,२१ 
प्रति प्राशव्याँ इतः८,३१,६ 

प्रति वां रथं नृपती ७,६७, १ 

प्रति वां सूर उदिते मित्रं ७,६६,७ 
प्रति वां सूर उदिते सूक्ते:७,६५, १ 
प्रति वो वृषदज्जयो ८,२०,९ 
प्रति श्रुताय वो धृषत्‌ ८,३२,४ 
प्रति षीमग्निर्जरते ७,७८,२ 

प्रति स्तोमेभिरुपसं ७,८० , १ 

प्रति FRAT तुजयद्धिरेवे:७,१०४,७ 
प्र तुविद्युम्नस्य स्थविरस्य ६,१८ १२ 
प्रते अग्नयोऽग्निभ्यो ७,१,४ 
प्रलं रयीणां युजं ६४५,१९ 

प्रलं होतारमीड्यं ८,४४,७ 
प्रलवज्जनया गिरः८,१३,७ 
प्रलो हि कमीड्यो ८,११,१० 
प्रत्यस्मै पिषीषते ६,४२.१ 

प्रत्यु अदर्श्यायती ७,८१,१ 
प्रथमं जातवेदसमग्नि ८,२३,२२ 
प्रथमभाजं यशसं ६,४९९ 

प्र देवं देववीतय ६१६४१ 

प्र दैवोदासो अग्निः८,१०३,२ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Ea 


SS 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


द्यावा यज्ञैः पृथिवी नमोभि: ७,५३, १ 
प्र द्युम्नाय प्र शवसे ८,९,२० 

प्र नव्यसा सहसः सूनु ६६ १ 

प्रनु वोचा सुतेषु ६५९ १ 

प्र नूनं धावता पृथक्‌ ८,१०० ,७ 

3 पूर्वजे पितरा ७,५३,२ 

प्रपूषणं वृणीमहे ८,४,१५ 

रप्र वस्त्रिष्टुभमिषं ८,६९,१ 
परप्रायमग्निर्भरतस्य ७,८,४ 

प्र बाहवा सिसृतं ७,६२,५ 
प्रबुध्या व ईरते ७,५६, १४ 

प्र बोधयोषो अश्विना ८,९,१७ 

प्र ब्रह्माणि नभाकवद्‌ ८,४० ,५ 

प्र ब्रह्माणो अङ्गिरसो ७,४२,१ 

र ब्रह्मैतु सदनादृतस्य ७,३६,१ 
प्रभङ्ग दुर्मतीनां ८,४६,१९ 

प्रभङ्गी शूरो मघवा ८,६१,१८ 
प्रभर्ता रथं गव्यन्त ८,२,३५ 

प्र भ्रातृत्वं सुदानवो ८,८३,८ 

प्र मंहिष्ठाय गायत ८,१०३,८ 

3 मित्रयोर्वरुणयो ७,६६, १ 

पर मित्राय प्रार्यम्णे ८,१० १,५ 
प्रमे पन्था देवयाना ७,७६,२ 

प्र यं राये निनीषसि ८,१० ३,४ 

प्र यज्ञ एतु हेत्वो ७,४३,२ 

प्र यद्वस्त्रिष्टुभमिषं ८,७, १ 

प्र यद्वा मित्रावरुणा ६६७९ 

प्र यन्ति यज्ञं विपयन्ति ७,२१,२ 
प्रया जिगाति खर्गलेव ७,१०४,१७ 
प्र याभिर्यासि दाश्वांसम्‌ ७,९२,३ 
प्र या महिम्ना महिनासु ६६११३ 
प्र ये गृहादममदुस्त्वाया ७,१८,२१ 
प्र ये ययुरवृकासो ७,७४,६ 

प्रयो ननक्षे अभ्योजसा ८,५१,८ 
प्रयो वां मित्रावरुणाऽजिरो ८,१०१,३ 
प्र व इन्द्राय बृहते ८,८९,३ 

प्र व इन्द्राय मादनं ७,३१,१ 

प्र व उग्राय निष्टुरे ८,३२,२७ 


प्र वः शंसाम्यद्रुहः ८ ,२७,१५ 
प्र वः शुक्राय भानवे ७,४,१ 

प्र वः सखायो अग्नये ६१६२२ 

र वर्तय दिवो ७,१०४,१९ 

प्र वा रथो मनोजवा ७,६८,३ 

प्र वाँ स मित्रावरुणा ७,६१,२ 
प्रवां स्तोमाः: सुवृक्तयो ८,८,८२ 
प्र वामन्धांसि मध्यान्यस्थुः ७,६८,२ 
प्र वायुमच्छा बृहती ६,४९४ 

प्र वावृजे सुप्रया बर्हिरेषां ७,३९,२ 
प्र वीरमुग्रं विविचि ८,५० ,६ | 
प्र वीरया ए तवसे ६४९ १२ 

प्र वीरया शुचयो दद्रिरे ७,९० ,१ 

प्र वो देवं चित्सहसानमग्नि ७,७,१ 

प्र वो महीमरमतिं ७,३६,८ 

प्र वो महे महिवृधे ७,३१,१० 

प्र वो यज्ञेषु देवयन्तो ७,४३,१ 

प्रशंसमानो अतिथिर्न ८,१९,८ 

प्र श्येनो न मदिरम्‌ ६२० ६ | 
प्र शुक्रेतु देवी ७,३४, १ | 
प्र शुन्ध्युवं वरुणाय ७,८८,१ | 
प्रस क्षयं तिरते ८,२७, १६ । 
प्र सप्तवधिराशसा ८,७३,९ 

प्र सम्राजं चर्षणीनां ८,१६,१ 

प्र सभ्राजे बृहते मन्म नु ६६८९ 

प्र सम्राजो असुरस्य ७,६,१ 

प्र साकमुक्षे अर्चता ७,५८,१ 

प्रसा वाचि सुष्टुतिर्मघोनाम्‌ ७,५८, ६ 
प्र सु श्रुतं सुराधसम्‌ ८,५०,१ 

प्र सु स्तोमं भरत ८,१००,३ 

प्रसून एत्वध्वरो ८,२७,३ 

प्र सो अग्ने तवोतिभि: ८ ,१९,३० 
प्र सोता जीरो ७,९२,२ 

प्रस्तोक इन्नु राधसस्त ६,४७.२२ 

प्र स्तोषदुप गासिषत्‌ ८,८१.५ 

प्र हि रिरिक्ष ओजसा ८,८८, 
प्राग्नये तवसे भरध्वं ७,५,१ 
प्राग्नये विश्वशुचे धियंधे ७,१३,१ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


प्राचीनो यज्ञ: सुधितं ७,७,३ 
प्राचीमु देवाश्चिना धियं ७,६७,५ 
प्रातरग्नि प्रातरिन्द्रं ७,४१,१ 
प्रातर्जितं भगमुग्रं ७,४१,२ 
प्रातर्यावमिरा गतं ८,३८,७ 
प्राव स्तोतारं मघवत्रव ८,३६,२ 
प्रास्मा ऊर्ज घृतश्चुतम्‌ ८,८, १६ 
प्रास्मै गायत्रमर्चत ८,१,८ 
प्रिया वो नाम हुवे ७,५६,१० 
प्रियास इत्ते मघवत्रभिष्टौ ७,१९ ,८ 
प्रेदं ब्रह्म वृत्रतूर्येष्वाविथ ८,३७,१ 
Fal अग्ने दीदिहि पुरो ७,१,३ 
प्रनद्रस्य वोचं प्रथमा ७,९८,५ 
प्रेष्ठ वो अतिथि ८,८४,१ 
परेष्ठमु प्रियाणां ८,१०३,१० 

श्रो अस्मा उपस्तुतिं ८,६२,१ 
प्रोतये वरुणं मित्रमिन्द्रं ६२१९ 
प्रोथदश्वो न यवसे ७,३,२ 

रो द्रोणे हरयः & 392 
रोरोर्मित्रावरुणा ७,६१,३ 
प्रोष्ठेशया वह्येशया ७,५५,८ 
बट्‌ सूर्य श्रवसा ८,१०१,१२ 
बृळृत्वियाय धाम्न ८,६३,११ 
बळित्या महिमा वाम्‌ ६५९.२ 
बण्महाँ असि सूर्य ८,१०१, ११ 
बभ्रुरेको विषुणः८,२९,१ 
बहवः सूरचक्षसो ७,६६, १० 
बह्वीनां पिता ६७५५ 

बाधसे जनान वृषभेव ६,४६४ 
बिभया हि त्वावतः ८,४५,३५ 
वृबदुक्थं हवामहे ८,३२, १० 
बृहदिन्द्राय गायत ८,८९,१ 
बृहदु गायिषे वचो ७,९६,१ 
बृहद्भिरग्ने अर्चिभिः ६४८७ 
बृहद्वयो मघवद्भ्यो ७,५८,३ 
ESSI मरुतां ८,१८, २० 
बृहन्निदिध्म एषां ८,४५,२ 


691 


बृहस्पतिः समजयद्वसूनि ६३४३३ 
बृहस्पते युवमिन्द्रश्च ७,९७,१०;९८,७ 
बोधा सु मे मघवन्‌ ७,२२,३ 
बोधिन्मना इदस्तु ८,९३,१८ 

ब्रह्म जिन्वतमुत ८,३५,१६ 

ब्रह्मन्‌ वीर ब्रह्मकृतिं ७,२९,२ 

ब्रह्म प्रजावदा भर ६ १६३६ 

ब्रह्मा ण इन्द्रोप याहि ७,२८,१ 
ब्रह्माणं ब्रह्मवाहसं ६ xt ७७ 
ब्रह्माणस्त्वा वयं युजा ८,१७,३ 
ब्रह्माणि हि चकृषे ६२३६ 

ब्रह्मा त इन्द्र गिर्वणः ८,९० ,३ 
ब्राह्मणासः पितरः & 194 १० 
ब्राह्मणासः सोमिनो o, o 3,4 
ब्राह्मणासो अतिरात्रे ७,१०३,७ 
भग एव भगवाँ ७,४१,५ 

भग प्रणेतर्भग ७,४१,३ 

भद्रमिद्रद्रा ७,९६,३ 

भद्रं भद्रं न आ भर ८,९३,२८ 

भद्रं मनः कृणुष्व ८,१९,२० 

भद्रा ददृक्ष उर्विया ६६४२ 

भद्रो नो अग्निराहुतो ८,१९,१९ 
भवा वरूथं मघवन्मघोनां ७,३२,७ 
भिन्धि विश्वा अप द्विषः ८ ,४५ ,४० 
भीमो विवेषायुधेभिरेषाम्‌ ७,२१,४ 
भूयाम ते सुमतौ ८,३,२ 

भरद्वाजाय सप्रथः ६१६३३ 
भरद्वाजायावधुक्षत ६,४८.१३ 
भुवनस्य पितरं गीर्भिराभी ६५९,१० 
भुवो जनस्य दिव्यस्य राजा ६२२३ 
भूय इद्वावृधे वीर्या ६३० १ 

भूरि चक्र मरुतः७,५६,२३ 

भूरिभिः समह ऋषिभिः ८,७० , १४ 
भूरि हिं ते सवना ७,२२,६ 
भूरीदिनद्रस्य वीर्य ८,५५, १ 
मंहिष्ठा वाजसातमेषा ८,५,५ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Fggpdation Chennai and eGangotri 


मक्षू देववतो रथा:८,३१,१५ 

मक्षू न येषु दोहसे ६६६५ 
मघोनः स्म वृत्रहत्येषु ७,३२,१५ 
मत्स्वा सुशिप्र हरिवस्तदीमहे ८,९९,२ 
मदेनेषितं मदं ८,१,२१ 

मधु नो द्यावापृथिवी ६७० ५ 

मध्ये होता दुरोणे ६१२१ 

FET वो नाम ७,५७, १ 

मनोजवसा वृषणा ८,२२,१६ 
मनोजवा अयमान ८,१००,८ 
मन्त्रमखर्व सुधितं ७,३२,१३ 
मन्दन्तु त्वा मघवन्निन्द्रेन्दवो ८,४,४ 
मन्दस्वा सु स्वर्णर ८,६,३९ 

मन्द्रं होतारमुशिजो यविष्ठं ७,१० ,५ 
मन्द्रं होतारमृत्विजं ८,४४,६ 
मन्द्रस्य कवेर्दिव्यस्य ६३९ १ 

मन्ये त्वा यज्ञियं ८,९६,४ 

मम त्वा सूर उदिते ८,१,२९ 

मरुतो मारुतस्य ८,२०,२३ 

मरुतो यद्धवो दिवः ८,७,११ 
मरुत्वन्तं वृषभं ६१९११ 
मरुत्वन्तमृजीषिणं ८,७६,५ 

मरुत्वाँ इन्द्र मीढ्वः ८,७६,७ 
मर्तश्विद्दो नृतवो रुक्मवक्षस ८,२० ,२२ 
मर्माणि ते वर्मणा ६७५१८ 

मर्ता अमर्त्यस्य ते ८,११,५ 

मह उग्राय तवसे ८,९६,१० 

महः सु वो अरमिषे ८,४६,१७ 

महाँ अस्यध्वरस्य ७,११,१ 

महाँ इन्द्रो नृवदा ६१९ १ 

महां इन्द्रो य ओजसा ८,६,१ 

महां उतासि यस्य ७,३१,७ 

महान्तं महिना वयं ८,१२,२३ 
महान्ता मित्रावरुणा ८,२५,४ 

महि राधो विश्वजन्यं ६४७२५ 

महि वो मित्र दाशुषे ८,४७,१ 
महि वो. मित्रार्यमन्‌ ८,६७,४ 
महीरस्य प्रणीतयः_नास्य ६४५३ 


महीरस्य प्रणीतय-विश्वा 2 १२ २ 
महे चन त्वामद्रिवः८, १ ,५ 

महे नो अद्य सुविताय ७,७५,२ 
महे शुल्काय वरुणस्य ७,८२,६ 
महो देवान्यजसि ६४८४ 

महो द्रुहो अप विश्वायु ६२० ५ 
महो नो अग्ने सुवितस्य ७,१,२४ 
महो विश्वाँ अभि ८,२३,२६ 

मा कस्य नो अररुषो ७,९४,८ 
मा काकम्बीरमुद्‌ Fel ६४८,१७ 
माकिरेना पथा गाद्‌ ८,५,३९ 
माकिर्नेशन्माकी ६५४७ 

मा चिदन्यद्वि शंसत ८,१,१ 

मां चत्वार आशव:८,७४, १४ 
मा जस्वने वृषभ ६४४११ 

माता रुद्राणां दुहिता ८,१०१, १५ 
मातुर्दिधिषु ६५५५ 

मा ते अमाजुरो ८,२१,१५ 

मा ते अस्यां सहसावन्‌ ७, १९,७ 
मा ते गोदत्र ८,२१,१६ 

मात्र पूषन्नाघृण ७,४० , ६ 

मा चचा मूरा ८,४५,२३ 

मा त्वा सोमस्य ८,१,२० 

मा न इन्द्र परा ८,९७,७ 

मा न इन्द्र पीयलवे ८,२,१५ 
मान इन्द्राभ्यादिशः८,९२,३१ 
मा न एकस्मिन्नागसि ८,४५, २३ 
मा नः समस्य दूढ्य ८,७५,९ 

मा नः सेतुः सिषेदयं ८,६७,८ 

मा नः सोमं सं वैविजो ८,७९,८ 
मा नो अमे दुर्भूतये ७,१,२२ 
मा नो अग्नेऽवीरते ७,१,१९ 

मा नो अज्ञाता वृजना ७,३२,२७ 
मा नो अस्मिन्‌ महाधने ८,७५,१२ 
मा नो गव्येभिस्थ्ये:८,७२३,१५ 
मा नो देवानां विशः८,७५,८ 
मानो निदे च ७,३१,५ 

मा नो मर्ताय ८,६०,८ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


मा नो मृचा रिपूणां ८,६७,९ 
मा नो रक्ष आ ८,६०,२० 
मा नो रक्षो आ अभि ७, १०४, २३ 
मा नो वधी रुद्र ७ए ४६,४ 
मानो वृकाय वृक्ये ६५१६ 
मा नोऽहिर्बु et ७,३४, १७ 
मा नो हृणीतामतिथिर्वसु ८,१०३,१२ 
मा नो हेतिर्विवस्वत ८,६७,२० 
मा पापत्वाय नो ७,९४,३ 
मा भूम निष्ट्या इवेन्द्र ८,१,१३ 
मा भेम मा श्रमिष्मो ८,४,७ 
मायाभिरुत्सिसृप्सत ८, १४, १४ 
मा व एनो अन्यकृतं ६५८१७ 
मा वो दात्रान्मरुतो ७,५६,२१ 
मा शूने अग्ने ७,१,११ 
मा सख्युः शूनमा ८,४५,३६ 
मा सीमव आ ८,८० ,८ 
मा स्रेधत सोमिनो ७,३२,९ 
मित्रं न यं सुधितं ६,१५.२ 
मित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो देवो अर्यः ७,६४,३ 
मित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो मामहन्त ७,५२,२ 
मित्रस्तन्नो वरुणो रोदसी ७,४०,२ 
मित्रा तना न रथ्या ८,२५,२ 
मित्रावरुणवन्ता उत ८,३५,१३ 
मित्रो नो अत्यंहतिं ८,६७,२ 
मिम्यक्ष येषु रोदसी ६५० ५ 
मूर्धानं दिवो अरतिं ६१५१ 
मो ते रिपन्ये अच्छोक्तिभि ८,१०३,१३ 
मो षु त्वा वाघतश्चनारे ७,३२,१ 

षु ब्रह्मेव ८,९२,३० 

पु वरुण मृन्मयं ७,८९ 2 
मो ष्वद्य दुर्हणावान्‌ ८,२,२० 
य युवं दाश्वध्वराय ६६८६ 
य॑ वर्धयन्तीद्गिरः ६ ४४ ५ 
य: शग्मस्तुविशग्म ६४४२ 
य: सत्राहा विचर्षणि ६,४६३ 
य आपिर्नित्यो वरुण ७,८८,६ 
य आयु कुत्समतिथिग्व ८,५३,२ 


सप 


य आनयत्परावत:६ ४५ १ 

य आस्ते यश्च चरति ७,५५,६ 

य आस्वत्क आशये ८,४१,७ 
य इद्ध आविवासति ६६० 22 

य इन्द्र चमसेष्वा ८,८२,७ 

य इन्द्र यतयस्त्वा ८,६,१८ 

य इन्द्र शुष्मो मधवन्‌ ७,२७,२ 
य इन्द्र सस्त्यत्रतो ८,९७,३ 

य इन्द्र सोमपातमो ८,१२,१ 

य इन्द्राग्नी सुतेषु ६५९ ४ 

य इमे रोदसी मही ८,६, १७ 
यई राजानावृतुथा ६६२.९ 

य उग्रइव शर्यहा ६१६३९ 

य उक्था केवला ८,५२,३ 

य उक्थेभिर्न विन्धते ८,५१,३ 

य उग्रः सन्ननिष्ट्टतः८,३३,९ 

य उद्नः फलिगं PATH, ८,३२, २५ 
य ऋक्षादंहसो मुचद्‌ ८,२४,२७ 
य ऋज्रा मह्यं ८,१,३२ 

य॒ ऋजा वातरंहसो ८,३४,१७ 
य ऋते चिदभिश्रिषः ८,१,१२ 

य ऋते चिदगास्पदेश्यो ८,२, ३९ 
य ऋष्वः श्रावयत्सखा ८,४६, १२ 
य एक इत्तमु ष्टुहि ६,४५.१६ 

यह एक इद्धव्यश्चर्षणीनाम्‌ ६२२२ 
य एको अस्ति दंसना ८,१,२७ 
य एनमादिदेशति ६५६१ 

य ओजिष्ठ इन्द्र तं ६३३,१ 

यं विप्रा उक्थवाहसो ८,१२,१३ 
यःककुभो निधारयः ८ v é 
यः कृन्तदिद्वि योन्यं ८,४५,३० 
यः पञ्च चर्षणीरभि ७,१५,२ 
यः शक्रो मृक्षो SAT ८.६६,३ 
यःश्वेताँ अधिनिर्णिज ८,४१, १० 
यः संस्थे चिच्छतक्रतु ८,३२,११ 
यःसमिधा य आहुती ८,१९,५ 
यः सुषव्यः सुदक्षिण ८,३३,२ 
यः सृविन्दमनर्शनि ८,३२,२ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Me c | 


र IUU 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Popp dation Chennai and eGangotri 
5 


यच्च गोपु दुष्वप्यं ८,४७,१४ 
यच्चिद्धि ते अपि ८,४५,१९ 
यच्चिद्धि त्वा जना इमे ८,३,१ 
यच्चिद्धि वां पुर ८,८,६ 
यच्चिद्धि शश्वतामसीन्द्र ८,६५,७ 
यच्छक्रासि परावति _अतस्त्वा ८,९७,४ 
यच्छक्रासि परावति यद्वा ८,१३,१५ 
यच्छल्मलौ भवति ७,५० , ३ 
यच्छुश्रुया इमं हवं ८,४५,१८ 
यजध्वैनं प्रियमेधा ८,२,३७ 
यजन्ते अस्य सख्यं ७,३६,५ 
यजस्व होतरिषितो ६,११.१ 
यजिष्ठं त्वा ववृमहे ८,१९,३ 
यज्जायथा अपूर्व्य ८,८९,५ 
यज्ञ इन्द्रमवर्धयद्‌ ८,१४,५ 
यज्ञस्य हि स्थ ऋत्विजा ८,३८,१ 
यज्ञानां रथ्ये वयं ८,४४, २७ 
यज्ञायज्ञा वो अग्नये ६४८१ 
यज्ञे दिवो नृषदने ७,९७,१ 

€ यज्ञेभिरद्भुतक्रतुं ८,२३,८ 
यज्ञेभिर्यज्ञवाहसं ८,१२,२० 
यज्ञो हीळो वो अन्तर ८,१८,१९ 
यं जनासो हविष्मन्तो ८,७४,२ 
यक्तिं चेदं वरुण ७,८९,५ 
यत्तुदत्सूर एतशं ८,१,११ 
यत्ते पवित्रमर्चिवद्‌ ८,६७,२४ 
यत्त्वा पृच्छादीजानः८,२४,३० 
यत्पाञ्चजन्यया ८,६३,७ 
यत्र क्व च ते मनो ६१६१७ 
यत्र वाणाः संपतन्ति & (94 १७ 
यत्र शूरासस्तन्वो ६)४६ १२ 
यत्रा चक्रुरमृता ७,६३,५ 
यत्रा नर: समयन्ते ७,८३,२ 
यत्सिन्धौ यदसिक्न्यां ८,२०,२५ 
यत्सोमं आ सुते नर७,९४,१० 
यत्सोममिन्द्र विष्णवि ८.१२,१६ 
यत्स्थो दीर्घ प्रसद्मनि ८,१०,१ 
यथाकण्वे मघवन्‌ त्रसदस्यवि ८४९ १० 


यथा कण्वे मघवन्‌ मेधे ८,५० ,१० 
यथा कलां यथा शफं ८,४७,१७ 
यथा गोरो अपा कृतं ८,४,३ 
यथा चित्कण्वमावतं ८,५,२५ 
यथा चिद्‌ वृद्धमतसम्‌ ८,६० ,७ 
यथा नो मित्रो अर्यमा ८,३१,१३ 
यथा मनो विवस्वति ८,५२,१ 
यथा मनो सांवरणो ८,५१,१ 
यथा रुद्रस्य सूनवो ८,२०,१७ 
यथा वरो सुषाम्णे ८,२४,२८ 
यथा वशन्ति ८,२८,४ 

यथा वः स्वाहा ७,३,७ 

यथा वामत्रिरश्चिना ८,४२,५ 
यथा होतर्मनुषो देवताता ६५४, 
यथोत कृत्व्ये धने ८,५,२६ 
यदग्ने कानि ८,१०२,२० 

यदग्ने दिविजा अस्य ८,४३,२८ 
यदग्ने मर्त्यस्त्वं ८,१९,२५ 
यदग्ने स्यामहं ८,४४,२३ 

यदङ्ग तविषीयवो ८,७,२ 

यदङ्ग तविषीयस ८,६,२६ 
यदत्त्युपजिह्विका ८,१०२,२१ 
यददो दिवो अर्णव ८,२६,१७ 
यदद्य कच्च वृत्रहन्नुदगा ८,९३,४ 
यदद्य कर्हि कर्हिचि ८,७३,५ 
यदद्य त्वा पुरुष्टुत & 4& X 

यदद्य वां नासत्योक्थै ८,९,९ 
यदद्य सूर उदितेऽनागा ७,६६,४ 
यदद्य सूर उदिते यन्‌ ८,२७,२१ 
यदद्य सूर्य उद्यति ८,२७,१९ 
यदद्य सूर्य TA ७,६०,१ 
यदद्याश्चिनावपाग्‌ ८,१०,५ 
यदद्याश्विनावहं ८,९, १२ 
यदधिगावो अध्रिगू ८,२२,११ 
यदन्तरिक्षे पतथः८,१०,६ 
यदन्तरिक्षे यद्दिवि ८,९,२ 

यदप्सु यद्वनस्पतौ ८,९,५ 
यदर्जुन सारमेय ७,५५,२ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


यदस्य धामनि प्रिये ८,१२,३२ 
यदस्य मन्युरध्वनीद्‌ ८,६,१३ 
यदार्जि यात्याजिकृद्‌ ८,४५,७ 
यदा ते मारुतीर्विश ८,१२,२९ 
यदा ते विष्णुरोजसा ८,१२,२७ 
यदा ते हर्यता हरी ८,१२,२८ 
यदापीतासो अंशवो ८,९,१९ 
यदाविर्यदपीच्यं ८,४७, १३ 
यदा वीरस्य रेवतो ७,४२,४ 
यदा वृत्रं नदीवृतं ८,१२,२६ 
यदा सूर्यममुं दिवि ८,१२,३० 
यदिन्द्र दिवि पार्ये ६४० ५ 
यदिन्द्र नाहुषीष्वा ६४६७ 
यदिन्द्र पूर्वो अपराय शिक्षत्रय ७,२० ,७ 
यदिन्द्र पृतनाज्ये ८,१२,२५ 
यदिन्द्र प्रागपागुदङ्‌ आ ८,६५,१ 
यदिन्द्र प्रागपागुदङ्‌ सिमा ८,४,१ 
यदिन्द्र मन्मशस्त्वा ८,१५,१२ 
यदिन्द्र यावतस्त्वम्‌ ७,३२,१८ 
यदिन्द्र राधो अस्ति ८,५४,५ 
यदिन्द्र wif अर्वतः ६४६.१३ 
यदिन्द्राग्नी जना इमे ८,४० ,७ 
यदिन्द्राहं यथा त्वम्‌ ८,१४,१ 
यदिन्द्रेण सरथं याथो ८,९,१२ 
यदिन्द्रो अनयद्रितो ६५७४ 
यदि प्रवृद्ध सत्पते ८,१२,८ 
यदि मे रारणः सुत ८,३२,६ 
यदि मे सख्यमावर ८,१३,२१ 
यदि वाहमनृतदेव ७,१०४,१४ 
यदि स्तुतस्य मरुतो ७,५६, १५ 
यदि स्तोमं मम ८,१,१५ 
यदीं सुतास इन्दवो ८,५० 
यदी घृतेभिराहुतो ८,१९,२३ 
यदीमेनाँ उशतो ७,१०३,३ 
यदी सुतेभिरिन्दुभिः ६४२३ 
यासि भानुना ८,९,१८ 
प्रस्फुरन्निव ७,८९,२ 
यदेषामन्यो अन्यस्य ७,१० ३,५ 


FECE 


A 


4 BEI 


यदेषां पृषती रथे ८,७, २८ 
यद्गोपावददितिः ७,६०,८ 
यद्दधिषे प्रदिवि ७,९८, २ 
यद्दधिषे मनस्यसि ८,४५,३१ 
यद्देवाः शर्म शरणं ८,४७,१० 
यद्‌ द्याव इन्द्र ते ८,७० ,५ 

यद्ध नूनं यद्वा ८,४९,७ 

यद्ध नूनं परावति ८,५० ,७ 
यद्यो धया महतो ७,९८,४ 
यद्रोदसी प्रदिवो ६६२८ 

"Ig: श्रान्ताय ८,६७,६ 

यद्वा उ विश्पतिः८,२३,१३ 
यद्वाग्वदन्त्यविचेतनानि ८,१०० ,१० 
यद्वां कक्षीवाँ उत ८,९,१० 

यद्वा प्रवृद्ध सत्पते ८,९३,५ 
यद्वा प्रस्रवणे दिवो ८,६५,२ 
यद्वाभिपित्वे असुरा ८,२७, २० 
यद्वा यज्ञं मनवे ८,१०,२ 

यद्वा तृक्षौ मघवन्‌ ६४६८ 

यद्वा दिवि पार्ये ६.२३.२ 

यद्वा रुमे रुशमे ८,४,२ 
यद्वावन्थ पुरुष्टुत ८,६६,५ 

यद्वा शक्र परावति ८,१२,१७ 
यद्वासि रोचने दिवः८,९७,५ 
यद्वासि सुन्वतो वृधो ८,१२,१८ 
यद्विजामन्‌ परुषि ७,५०,२ 
यद्वीळाविन्द्र यत्स्थिरे ८,४५, ४१ 
यं ते श्येनः पदाभरत्‌ ८,८२,९ 
यं त्रायध्व इदमिदं ७,५९ , १ 

यं त्वं विप्र मेधासाता ८,७१,५ 
यं त्वा गोपवनो ८,७४,११ 

यं त्वा जनास इन्धते ८,४३,२७ 
यं त्वा जनास ईळते ८,७४,१२ 
यन्नासत्या पराके ८,९,१५ 
यत्रासत्या परावति_अध्यम्बरे ८,८, १४ 
यन्नासत्या भुरण्यथो ८,९,६ 
agi धीभिरश्चिना ८,९,२१ 
यमश्वी नित्यमुपयाति ७,१,१२ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


ESS" IN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


= 


यमादित्यासो अद्गुह: ८,१९,३४ 
यमापो अद्रयो वना ६४८ ५ 

यमिन्द्र दधिषे ८,९७,२ 

यमृत्विजो बहुधा ८,५८,१ 

यं मे दुरिन्द्रो मरुतः८,३,२१ 
ययोरधि भ्र यज्ञा ८,१० ,४ 

यस्त इन्द्र प्रियो ७,२० ,८ 

यस्त इन्द्र महीरपः ८,६, १६ 

यस्ता चकार स कुह ६२११४ 
यस्तिग्मशृङ्गो ७, १९, १ 

यस्ते चित्रश्रवस्तमो ८,९२, १७ 
यस्ते नूनं शतक्रतविन्द्र ८,९२,१६ 
यस्ते मदः पृतनाषाळ ६ १९ ७७ 

यस्ते मदो युज्यश्वारु ७,२२,२ 

यस्ते मदो वरेण्यो ८,४६,८ 

यस्ते यज्ञेन समिधा ६५५ 

यस्ते रेवाँ अदाशुरिः ८ ,४५, १५ 
यस्ते शृङ्ग वृषो ८,१७,१३ 

यस्ते साधिष्ठोऽवसे ते ८,५३,७ 
यस्ते सूनो सहसो ६,१३.१४ 
यस्त्वद्धोता देवि सरस्वत्युपब्रूते ६६१ ५ 
यस्मा अन्ये दश प्रति ८,३,२३ 
यस्मा अरासत क्षयं ८ ,४७,४ 
यस्मा अर्क सप्तशीर्षाणम्‌ ८,५१,४ 
यस्माद्रेजन्त HEA ८,१०३,३ 
यस्मिन्नुक्थानि रण्यन्ति ८,१६,२ 
यस्मिन्विश्वा अधिश्रियो ८,९२,२० 
यस्मिन्विश्वानि काव्या ८,४१,६ 
यस्मिन्विश्वानि भुवनानि ७,१० १,४ 
यस्मिन्विश्वाश्चर्पणय ८,२,३३ 

यस्मै त्वं वसो दानाय मंहसे ८,५२,६ 
यस्मै त्वं वसो दानाय शिक्षसि ८,५१,६ 
यस्मै त्वं मघवन्निन्द्र ८,५२,८ 

यस्य गा अन्तरश्मनो ६४३.३ 

यस्य गावावरुषा ६२७७ 

यस्य तीव्रसुतं मदं ६५४३.२ 

यस्य ते अग्ने अन्ये ८,१९,३३ 
यस्य ते नू चिदादिशं ८,९३,११ 


Ni he ee 


यस्य ते महिना मह: ८,६८,३ 
यस्य ते विश्वमानुषो ८,४५ va 
यस्य ते स्वादु सख्यं ८,६८,११ 
यस्य त्रिधात्ववृतं ८,१०२,१४ 
यस्य त्वमिन्द्र स्तोमेषु ८,५२,४ 
यस्य त्यच्छम्बरं मदे ६४३ १ 
यस्य त्वमूर्ध्वो अध्वराय ८,१९,१० 
यस्य द्विवर्हसो बृहत्‌ ८,१५,२ 
यस्य मन्दानो अन्धसो & x3 ४ 
यस्य वा यूयं प्रति ८,२०,१६ 
यस्य वायोरिव द्रवद्‌ ६४५३२ 
यस्य विश्वानि हस्तयोरूचु ६४५८ 
यस्य शर्मान्नु विश्वे ७,६,६ 

यस्य श्रवो रोदसी ७,१८,२४ 
यस्य श्वेता विचक्षणा ८,४१,९ 
यस्या अनन्तो अहुत ६६१८ 
यस्यागिनर्वपुर्गृहे ८,१९,११ 
यस्याजुषन्नमस्विनः ८,७५ ,१४ 
यस्या देवा उपस्थे ८,९४,२ 
यस्यानूना गभीरा ८,१६,४ 
यस्यामितानि वीर्या ८,२४,२१ 
यस्यायं fas amit ८,५१,९ 
यां पूषन्ब्रह्मचोदनीम्‌ ६५३८ 

या आपो दिव्या ७,४९,२ 

या इन्र प्रस्वस्त्वाऽऽसा ८,६,२० 
या इन्द्र भुज आभरः ८,९७,१ 
याः प्रवतो निवत ७,५० ,४ 

यातं च्छदि्ष्पा उत ८,९,११ 

या त ऊतिरमित्रहन्‌ & 4 AY 

या त ऊतिरवमा ६२५ १ 

याते HBT गोओपश ६५३९ 
या ते काकुत्सुकृता ६,४१२ 

या ते दिद्युदवसृष्टा ७,४६, ३ 

या दम्पती समनसा ८,३१,५ 

या धारयन्त देवा:७,६६, २ 
यानि स्थानान्यश्विना ७,७० , ३ 
या नु श्वेताववो ८,४० ,८ 

यां त्वा दिवो दुहितर्वर्धय ७,७७,६ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


यामिः कण्वं मे धातिर्थि ८,८,२० 
यामिः पक्थमवथो ८,२२,१० 

यामिः सिन्धुमवथ ८,२०,२४ 
याभिर्नरा त्रसदस्युम्‌ ८,८, २१ 
यावत्तरस्तन्वो ७,९१,४ 

या वां शतं नियुतो ७,९१,६ 

या वां सन्ति पुरुस्मृह_इन्द्राग्नी ६६०८ 
या वा ते सन्ति दाशुषे ७,३,८ 

या विश्वासां जनितारा ६६९ २ 

या वृत्रहा परावति ८,४५,२ 

या शर्धाय मारुताय ६५४८, 

याः सूर्यो रश्मिभिराततान ७,४७,४ 
यासां राजा वरुणो ७,४९,३ 

यासु राजा वरुणो यासु ७,४९,४ 
यास्ते पूषन्नावो ६५८.३ 
युक्ष्वा हि त्वं रथासहा ८,२६, २० 
युक्ष्वा हि देवहूतमां ८,७५ ,१ 

युक्ष्वा हि वृत्रहन्तम ८,३,१७ 
युगेयुगे विदथ्यं गृणद्ध्यो ६८५ 
युजानो हरिता रथे ६४७१९ 

युजे रथं गवेषणं हरिभ्याम्‌ ७,२३,३ 
युञ्जन्ति हरी इषिरस्य ८,९८,९ 
युञ्जाथां रासभं रधे ८,८५ ,७ 

युध्मं सन्तमनर्वाणं ८,९२,८ 

युध्मो अनर्वा ७,२० ,३ 

युयोता शरुमस्मदाँ ८,१८, ११ 

युवं वरो सुषाम्णे ८,२६,२ 

युवं श्रीभिर्दर्शताभि ६६३६ 

युव हि ष्मा पुरुभुजेममेधतुं ८,८६,३ 
युव कण्वाय नासत्या ८,५,२ 

युव चित्रं ददथुर्भोजनं ७,७४,२ 
युव च्यवानं सनयं ७,७१,५ 

युव च्यवानं जरसो ७,७१,५ 

युवं देवा क्रतुना ८,५७,१ 

पुवे भुज्युमवविद्धं ७,६९ ,७ 

युवे मृगं जागृवांसं ८,५ ३६ 

सुवा हवन्त उभयास ७,८३,६ 
युवादत्तस्य धिष्ण्या ८ २६,१२ 


युवानं विश्पतिं कवि ८,४४, २६ 
युवां देवास्त्रय ८,५७,२ 

युवां नरा पश्यमानास ७,८३,१ 
युवाभ्यां वाजिनीवसू ८,५,३ 
युवामिद्युत्सु पृतनासु ७,८२,४ 
युवोः श्रियं परि ७,६९ ,४ 

युवो रथस्य परि८,२२,४ 

युवो राष्ट्रं बृहदिन्वति ७,८४,२ 
युवोरु पू रथं हुवे ८,२६,१ 
युष्माकं देवा अवसाहनि ७,५९ ,२ 
युष्मा उ नक्तम्‌ ८,७,६ 

युष्मे देवा अपि ष्मसि ८,४७,८ 
युष्मोतो विप्रो मरुतः७,५८,४ 
यून ऊषु नविष्ठया ८,२०,१९ 
यूयं गावो मेदयथा ६२८६ 

यूयं राजानः कं ८,१९,३५ 

यूयं ह रलं मघवत्सु ७,३७, 

यूयं हि ष्ठा सुदानव अधा ८,८३,९ 
यूयं हि ष्ठा सुदानव कर्त ६५१,१५ 
यूयं हि ष्ठा सुदानवो रुद्रा ८,७,१२ 
ये अग्नयो न शोशुचन्निधाना ६६६ २ 
ये के च ज्मा महिनो ६५२,१५ 

ये गव्यता मनसा ६६,१० 

ये ते शुक्रासः ६६४ 

ये च पूर्व ऋषयो ७,२२,९ 

येन वृद्धो न शवसा ६,४४३ 

ये चार्हन्ति मरुतः८,२०,१८ 

ये चिद्धि मृत्युवन्धव ८,१८,२२ 

ये ते सन्ति दशग्विनः ८,१,९ 

ये ते सरस्व ऊर्मयो ७,९६,५ 

ये त्रिंशति त्रयस्परो ८,२८,१ 

ये त्वामिन्द्र न तुष्टुवु ८,६,१२ 

ये देवानां यज्ञिया ७,३५,१५ 

ये देवास इह स्थन ८,३०,४ 

ये द्रप्सा इव रोदसी ८,७,१६ 

येन चष्टे वरुणो ८,१९,१६ 

येन ज्योतींष्यायवे ८,१५,५ 

येन वंसाम पृतनासु ८,६० ,१२ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


D —— 


(नी त इक 7 | densa १२,३ 
येना दशग्वमधिगुं ८,१२,२ 
येनाव तुर्वशं यदुं ८,७,१८ 
येना समुद्रमसृजो ८,३,१० 

ये पाकशंसं विहरन्त ७,१०४,९ 
ये पातयन्ते अज्मभि ८,४६,१८ 
येभिः सूर्यमुषसं ६ १७५ 
येभिस्तिस्रः परावतो ८,५,८ 

ये मूर्धानः क्षितीनाम्‌ ८,६७,१३ 
ये राधांसि ददत्यश्ष्मा ७,१६ ,१० 
ये वां दंसांस्यश्चिना ८,९,३ 

ये वायव इन्द्रमादनास ७,९२,४ 
येषामणों न सप्रथो ८,२०,१३ 
येषामाबाध ऋग्मिय ८,२३,३ 
येषामिळा घृतहस्ता ७,१६,८ 

ये सोमासः परावति.सर्वास्ताँ ८,९३.६ 
यो अग्नि हव्यदातिभिः ८,१९,१३ 
यो अग्नि तन्वो दमे ८,४४, १५ 
यो अग्नि सप्तमानुषः ८,३९ ,८ 
यो अद्रिभित्रथमजा ६७३ १ 

यो अपाचीने तमसि o, e v 

यो अप्सु चन्रमा इव ८,८२,८ 
यो अश्वेभिर्वहते ८,४६,२६ 

यो अस्मै हविषाविधन्न ६५४४ 
यो अस्मै हव्यदातिभि ८,२३,२१ 
यो गर्भमोषधीनां ७,१०२,२ 

यो गृणताभिदासिथापि ६४५ १७ 
यो दुष्टरो विश्ववार ८,४६,९ 

यो देह्यो३ अनमयद्वधस्नै ७,६,५ 
योद्धासि क्रत्वा शवसोत ८,८८.४ 
यो धर्ता भुवनानां ८,४१,५ 

यो धृषितो योऽवृतो ८,३३,६ 
यो न इदमिदं पुरा ८,२१,९ 

यो न इन्दु: पितरो ८,४८,१२ 

यो नः कश्चिद्रिरक्षति ८,१८,१३ 
यो नः शश्चत्पुराविथा ८,८० ,२ 
यो नःसनुत्यो अभिदासद्‌ ६५४ 
यो नःस्वो अरणो यश्च ६७५ १९ 


MEM 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


698 


योनिमेक आ ससाद ८,२९,२ 
योनिमेक इन्द्र सदने ७,२४,१ 
यो नो अग्ने दुरेव ६,१६.३१ 
यो नो दाता वसूनाम्‌ ८,५१,५ 
यो नो दाता स नः पिता ८,५२.५ 
यो नो देवः परावतः८,१२,६ 
यो नो मरुतो अभि दुर्हणायु ७,५९,८ 
यो नो रसं दिप्सति ७,१०४,१० 
यो ब्रह्मणे सुमतिमायजाते ७,६० ,११ 
यो म इमं fag त्मना ८,४६,२७ 
यो मा पाकेन मनसा ७,१०४,८ 
यो मायातुं यातुधानेत्याह ७,१०४, १६ 
यो मृळयाति चक्रुषे: ७,८७,७ 
यो मे हिरण्यसंदृशो ८,५,३८ 
यो यजाति याजत इत्‌ ८,३१,१ 
यो रजांसि विममे पार्थिवानि ६४९ १३ 
यो रयिवो रयिन्तमो ६४४.१ 
यो राजा चर्षणीनां ८,७० ,१ 
यो रायो अवनिर्महान्‌ ८,३२,१३ 
यो वर्धन ओषधीनां ७,१०१,२ 
यो वां यज्ञेभिरावृतो ८,२६,१३ 
यो वां यज्ञो नासत्या ७,७० ,६ 
यो वां रजांस्यश्विना ८,७३, १३ 
यो वां रथो नृपती ७,७१,४ 
यो वां गर्त मनसा ७,६४,४ 
यो वां नासत्यावृषि ८,८,१५ 
यो वामुरुव्यचस्तमं ८,२६,१४ 
यो वामृजवे क्रमणाय ६७० ३ 
यो विश्वा दयते वसु ८,१०३,६ 
यो विश्वान्यभि व्रता ८,३२, २८ 
यो वेदिष्ठो अव्यथिष्व ८,२,२४ 
यो वो देवा घृतस्नुना ६५२८ 
यो व्यतीरफाणयत्‌ ८,६९,१३ 
यो ह वां मधुनो दृति ८,५, १९ 
यो हव्यान्यैरयता मनुर्हितो ८,१९,२४ 
यो ह स्य वां रथिरा ७,६९,५ 
रथं वामनुगायसं ८,५, २४ 
रथं हिरण्यवन्धुरं ८,५, २८ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


EE 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


699 
Ee 

= रथवाहनं हविरस्य ६०५८ वयं हि वां हवामहे उक्षण्यन्तो ८,२६,९ 

रथिरासो हरयो ८,५० ,८ वयं हि वां हवामहे विपन्यवो ८,८७,६ 

रथीतमं कपर्दिनम्‌ ६५५.२ वयं घ त्वा सुतावन्त ८,३३,१ 

रथेष्ठायाध्वर्यवः८,४,१३ वयं घा ते अपि ष्मसि ८,३२,७ 

रथे तिष्ठन्नयति ६७५ ६ वयं घा ते met ८,६६,११ 

रथो यो वां त्रिवन्धुरो ८,२२,५ वयं घा ते त्वे इद्‌ ८,६६,१३ 

TAA वरुणः ७,८७,१ वयं त इन्द्र ८,५४,८ 

ररे हव्यं मतिभिर्यज्ञियानां ७,३९,६ वयं तद्वः सम्राज ८,२७,२२ 

रश्मीँरिव यच्छतमध्वराँ ८,३५,२१ वयं ते अग्ने समिधा ७, १४,२ 

राजा राष्ट्राणां पेशो नदीनाम्‌ ७,३४,११ वयं ते अस्य वृत्रहन्‌ विद्याम ८,२४,८ 

राजेव हि जनिभिः७,१८,२ वयं ते त.देव ७,३० ,४ 

रातिं यद्वामरक्षसं ८,१० १,८ वयमिद्वः सुदानवः ८,८३,६ 

रायस्कामो वज्रहस्तं ७,३२,३ वयमिन्द्र त्वायवोऽभि ७,३१,४ 

राया हिरण्यया मति ७,६६,८ वयमु त्वा गृहपते ६१५१९ 

राये नु यं जज्ञतू ७,९० , ३ वयमु त्वा तदिदर्था ८,२,१६ 

रायो धारास्याघृणे ६५५३ वयमु त्वा दिवा ८,६४,६ 

रिशादसः सत्पतीँ रदब्धान्‌ ६ ५१४ वयमु त्वा पथस्पते ६५३१ 

द्रस्य ये मीळ्हुपः६ ६६.३ वयमु त्वामपूर्व्य ८,२१,१ 

रूपंरूपं प्रतिरूपो ६४७,१८ वयमु त्वा शतक्रतो ८,९२,१२ 

रेवा इद्‌ रेवतः८,२,१३ वयमेनमिदा ह्यो ८,६६,७ 

रोहितं मे पाकस्थामा ८,३, २२ वरिष्ठे न इन्द्र वन्धुरे ६,४७९ 

वंस्व विश्वा वार्याणि ७,१७,३ वरिष्ठो अस्य दक्षिणाम्‌ ६३७५४ 

वंस्वा नो वार्या पुरु ८,२३, २७ वरुणो मित्रो अर्यमा ८,२८,२ 

वक्ष्यन्तीवेदा ६७५ ३ वरेथे अग्निमातपो ८,७३,८ 

वचो दीर्घप्रसद्मनीशे ८,२५,२० वर्धस्वा सु पुरुष्टुत ८,१३,२५ 

वचोविदं वाचमुदीरयन्तीं ८,१०१, १६ वर्धाद्यं यज्ञ उत ६३८४ 

UTE बिभति ८,२९ ,४ वर्धान्यं विश्वे मरुतः ६१७११ 

वद्मा सूनो सहसो ६१३६ वर्षिष्ठ क्षत्रा उरुचक्षसा ८,१०१,२ 

वद्मा हि सूनो अस्य ६४४ ववक्षुरस्य केतवो ८,१२,७ 

वधीदिन्द्रो वरशिखस्य ६२७५ वषट्‌ ते विष्णवास ७,९९,७;१००,७ 

वनस्पतेञवसृजोप ७,२,१० वसिष्ठं ह वरुणो ७,८८,४ 

वनस्पते वीड्वङ्गो हि भूया ६ वसुर्वसुपतिरहि कम्‌ ८,४४, २४ 

वपन्ति मरुतो मिहं ८ ७.४ वस्याँ इन्द्रासि मे पितु ८,१,६ 

Wd तच्चिकितुषे ६६६१ वस्वी ते अग्ने संदृष्टि ६१६२५ 

तय त एभिः पुरुहूत ६२९ १३ वहन्ति सीमरुणासो ६६४३ 

वय ते अस्यामिन्द्र ६२६८ वहन्तु त्वा रथेष्ठाम्‌ ८,३३,१४ 

र्य वो वृक्तबर्हिषो ८,२७.७ वाचमष्टापदीमहं ८,७६,१२ 

तयं हि त्वा बन्धुमन्तम्‌ ८,२१.४ वाजिनीवती सूर्यस्व यो ७,७५,५ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 
700 


वाजेवाजेऽवत वाजिनो ७,३८,८ 
वामं नो अस्त्वर्यमन्‌ ८,८३,४ 
वाममद्य सवित ६,१६ 
वामस्य हि प्रचेतसो ८,८३,५ 
वामी वामस्य धूतयः & XC २० 
वायो याहि शिवा दिवो ८,२६,२३ 
वार्ण त्वा यव्याभि ८,९८,८ 
वावृधान उप द्यवि ८,६,४० 
वावृधानस्य ते वयं ८,१४,६ 
वावृधाना शुभस्पती ८,५,११ 
वावृधानो मरुत्सखेन्द्रो ८,७६,३ 
वाशीमेको बिभर्ति ८,२९,३ 
वासयसीव वेधसस्त्वं ७,३७,६ 
वास्तोष्पते धरुवा स्थूणा ८,१७,१४ 
वास्तोष्पते प्रतरणो ७,५४,२ 
वास्तोष्पते प्रति जानीहि ७,५४, १ 
वास्तोष्पते शग्मया ७,५४,३ 
वाहिष्ठो वां हवानां ८,२६,१६ 

वि चक्रमे पृथिवीमेष ७, १०० ,४ 
वि जयुषा रथ्या ६६२७ 

वि ते विष्वग्वातजूतासो ६६३ 

वि त्वदापो न पर्वतस्य ६,२४६ 
विदृळ्हानि चिदद्रिवो ६,४५९ 
विद्वेषांसीनुहि ६१०७७ 

वि चिद्‌ वृत्रस्य दोधतो ८,६,६ 

वि चेदुच्छन्त्यश्चिना ७,७२,४ 

वि तर्तूर्यन्ते मघवन्‌ ८,१,४ 

वि तिष्ठध्वं मरुतो ७,१०४, १८ 
विदद्यत्पूर्व्य नष्टम्‌ ८,७९,६ 

बिदा देवा अघानाम्‌ ८,४७,२ 
विदुः पृथिव्या दिवो ७,३४,२ 
विद्मा सखित्वमुत ८,२१,८ 
विद्या हि ते पुरा ८,७५,१६ 

विद्या हि त्वा तुविकूर्मिं ८,८१,२ 
विद्या हि त्वा धनंजयमिन्द्र ८,४५, १३ 
विद्या हि यस्ते अद्रिव ८,९२,१८ 
विद्या हि रुद्रियाणां ८,२०,३ 
विद्या ह्यस्य वीरस्य ८,२,२१ 


MINS 7... 
विद्युतो ज्योतिः परि ७,३३,१० 


विद्युद्धस्ता अभिद्यवः ८,७, २५ 

वि द्वीपानि पापतन्‌ ८,२० ,४ 

वि नः सहस्र शुरुधो ७,६२,३ 

वि नो देवासो अद्रुहो ८,२७,९ 

वि पथो वाजसातये ६५३४ 

वि पिप्रोरहिमायस्य दृळहाः ६ २० ७ 
वि पूषन्नारया ६५३६ 

विप्रं विप्रासो ऽवसे ८,११,६ 

विप्रं होतारमद्रुह ८ ,४४,१० 
विप्रस्य वा स्तुवतः सहसो ८,१९,१२ 
विप्रा यज्ञेषु मानुषेषु ७, २,७ 
fafital चरत ८,२९,८ 

विभूतरातिं विप्र ८,१९,२ 
विभूपन्नग्न उभयाँ ६,१५९ 
विभ्राजञ्ज्योतिषा स्व.देवास्त ८,९८,३ 
विभ्राजमान उषसामुपस्थाद्‌ ७,६३,३ 
वि मे कर्णा पतयतो ६९६ 

वि यदहेरध त्विषो ८,९३,१४ 

वि यद्धाचं कीस्तासो ६६७,१० 

वि यस्य ते पृथिव्यां पाजो ७,३,४ 
वि ये ते अग्ने भेजिरे ७, १,९ 

वि ये दधुः शरदं ७,६६,११ 

वि यो रजांस्यमिमीत ६७७ 

वि वृत्रं पर्वशो ययु ८,७,२३ 
विव्यक्थ महिना वृषन्‌ ८,९२,२३ 
विशां कविं विश्पतिं शश्वतीनां ६,१८ 
विशां राजानमद्‌भुतम्‌ ८,४३,२४ 
विशोविश ईड्यमध्वरेषु ६४९.२ 
विशोविशो वो अतिथि ८,७४, 
विश्वं पश्यन्तो बिभृथा ८,२०,२६ 
विश्वं प्रतीची सप्रथा ७,७७,२ 
विश्वदानीं सुमनसः स्याम ६५२५ 
विश्वा अग्नेऽप दहारातीः७,१,७ 
विश्वाः पृतना अभिभूतरं ८,९७, १० 
विश्वा द्वेषांसि जहि ८,५३,४ 
विश्वानरस्य वस्पतिं ८,६८,४ 

विश्वाँ अर्यो विपञ्चितो ८,६५,९ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


MR -— 


जा 37? ज जज जज जज जे जी 5०। 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


विश्वाति विश्वमनसो ८,२४,७ 
विश्वामिर्धीभिर्भुवनेन ८,३५, २ 
विश्वा हि मर्त्यत्वना ८,९२,१३ 
विश्वे त इन्द्र वीर्य ८,६२,७ 
विवेत्ता ते सवनेषु ८,१०० ,६ 
विश्वासां गृहतिर्विशां ६,४८८ 
| frr विष्णुराभरद्‌ ८,७७, १० 
विश्वे देवाः शृणुतेमं ६५२१३ 
विश्वे देवा अनमस्यन्‌ ६९५ 
विश्वे देवा ऋतावृध ६५२,१० 
विश्वे देवा मम शृण्वन्तु ६५.२.१४ 
विश्वे देवास आ गत ६५२७ 
विशवे यद्वां मंहना ६६७५ 
विश्वेषां वः सतां ६६७, 
विश्वेषामिरज्यन्तं वसूनां ८,४६, १६ 
विश्वेषामिह स्तुहि ८,१०२,१० 
विश्वे हि त्वा सजोषसो ८, २३,१८ 
विश्वे हि ष्मा मनवे ८,२७,४ 
विश्वेदेवैस्त्रिभिरिकादशे ८,३५,३ 
fag zit व्यंहतिम्‌ ८,६७,२१ 
वि पु विश्वा अभियुजो ८,४५,८ 
वि पू चर स्वघा अनु ८,३२,१९ 
वि सद्यो विश्वा दृहितानि ७,१८,१३ 
वीळुपविभिर्मरुत ८,२० ,२ 
वीतिहोत्रा कृतद्वसू ८,३१,९ 
बीती यो देवं मर्तो ६१६४६ 
वृकश्चिदस्य वारण ८,६६,८ 
बकाय चिज्जसमानाय ७,६८,८ 
IRA अभिपित्वे ८,४,२१ 
वृञ्जे ह यन्नमसा ६११५ 
वृज्याम ते परि द्विषो ८,४५,१० 
वृतेव यन्तं बहुभिर्वसव्यै ६१३ 
अस्य त्वा शवसथादीषमाणा ८,९६,७ 
वाप्यन्यः समिथेषु ७,८३,९ 
वृषणश्रेन मरुतो ८,२० ,१० 
MR अभीशवो ८,३३, ११ 
पयो ८,१३.३२ 
वृषण ७,२० ,५ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


aaa 


वृषा त्वा वृषणं हुवे sme, 13,33 
वृषा मद इरे श्‍लोक ६२४१ 
वृषायमिन्द्र ते रथ ८,१३,३१ 
वृषासि दिवो वृषभो ६४४२१ 
वृषा सोता सुनोतु ते ८,३३,१२ 
वृषा दाग्ने अजरो ६४८३ 

वेत्था हि निरतीनां ८,२४, २४ 
वेत्था हि वेधो अध्वनः ६,१६.३ 
वेत्यध्वर्युः पथिभी ८,१०१,१० 
वेद यस्त्रीणि विदथान्येषां ६५१ २ 
वेमि त्वा पूपन्रृञ्जसे ८,४, १७ 
वेषि ह्यध्वरीयतामग्ने & 3 o 
वैयश्वस्य श्रुतं नरोतो ८,२६,११ 
वैश्वानर तव तानि ६७५ 
वैश्वानरस्य विमितानि ६७६ 
वोचेमेदिन्द्रं मघवानमेनं e, 26,5; 39,5; 
३०,५ 

व्यञ्जते दिवो अन्तेष्वक्तून्‌ ७,७९,२ 
व्यन्तरिक्षमतिरन्‌ ८,१४,७ 
व्यश्वस्त्वा वसुविदम्‌ ८,२३,१६ 
व्यस्तभ्नाद्रोदसी मित्रो ६८3 
व्यस्मे अधि शर्म तत्‌ ८,४७,३ 
व्युच्छा दुहितर्दिवो ७,७९,९ 

व्युषा आवः पथ्या जनानां ७,७९,१ 
व्युषा आवो दिविजा ऋते ७,७५,१ 
व्येतु दिद्युद द्विषाम्‌ ७,३४,१३ 
शंसा मित्रस्य वरुणस्य ७,६१,४ 
शंसेदुक्थं सुदानव ७,३१,२ 
शग्धी न इन्द्र यत्ता ८,३,११ 
शग्धी नो अस्य यद्ध ८,३,१२ 
शग्ध्यू षु शचीपत ८,६१,५ 
शचीवतस्ते पुरुशाक ६२४.४ 

शतं वेणूञ्छतं शुनः८,५५,३ 

शतं श्वेतास उक्षणो ८,५५,२ 

शतं ते शिप्रिन्रूतयः७, २५, ३ 

शतं दासे बल्बूथे ८,४६, ३२ 
शतपवित्राः स्वघया ७,४७, २ 
शतब्रध्न इषुस्तव ८,७७,७ 


| 
| 
| 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


702 


शतमहं तिरिन्दिरे ८,६,४६ 

शतं मे गर्दभानां ८,५६, ३ 
शतानीका हेतयो अस्य ८,५० ,२ 
शतानीकेव प्र जिगाति ८,४९,२ 
शतैरपद्रन्‌ पणय ६२० Y 
शनैश्चिद्यन्तो अद्रिवो ८,४५,११ 
शं न इन्द्राग्नी ७,३५,१ 

शं न इन्द्रो वसुभिर्देवो ७,३५,६ 
शं नः सत्यस्य पतयो ७,३५, १२ 
शं नः सूर्य उरुयक्षा ७,३५,८ 

शं नःसोमो भवतु ७,३५,७ 

शं नो अग्निज्योतिरनीको ७,३५,४ 
शं नो अज एकपाद्देवो ७,३५,१३ 
शं नो अदितिर्भवतु ७,३५,९ 

शं नो देवः सविता ७,३५,१० 

शं नो देवा विश्वदेवा ७,३५, ११ 
शं नो द्यावापृथिवी ७,३५,५ 

शं नो धाता शमु धर्ता ७,३५,३ 
शां नो भगः शमु ७,३५,२ 

शं नो भवन्तु वाजिनो ७,३८,७ 
शं नो भव हृद ८,४८,४ 
शमग्निरग्निभिः करत्‌ ८,१८,९ 
शवसा ह्यसि श्रुतो ८,२४, २ 
शविष्ठं न आ भर ६१९६ 
शश्वद्धि व: सुदानव ८,६७, १६ 
Ward हि प्रचेतसः ८ ,६७, १७ 
शश्वन्तो हि शत्रवो ७, १८, १८ 
शाचिगो शाचिपूजना ८, १७, १२ 
शिक्षा ण इन्द्र राय ८,९२,९ 
शिक्षा विभिन्दो अस्मै ८,२,४१ 
शिक्षेयमस्मै दित्सेयं ८,१४,२ 
शिक्षेयमिन्महयते ७,३२,१९ 
शिशानो वृषभो यथाग्निः ८,६०,१३ 
शीरंपावकशोचिषं ८,१०२,११ 
शीर्ष्णः शीर्ष्णो जगत ७,६६,१५ 
शुक्रं ते अन्यद्यजतं ते ६५८, 
शुचि नु स्तोमं नवजात ७,९३,१ 
शुचिरसि पुरुनिश्ठा: ८,२,९ 


शुची वो हव्या मरुत;७,५६,१२ 
शुश्रुवांसा चिदश्चिना ७,७० ,५ 
शूरा वा शूरं वनते ६,२५४ 

शृणुतं जरितुर्हवं ८,८५,४ 

शृणुतं जरितुर्हवमिन्द्रागनी ८,९४, २ 
शृण्वन्तं पूषणं वयम्‌ ६५४४ 

शृण्वे वीर उग्रमुग्रं ६५४७१६ 
शेवारे वार्या ८,१,२२ 

शेषे वनेषु मात्रोः८,६०,१५ 
शोचा शोचिष्ठ दीदिहि ८,६० ,६ 
श्नथद्‌ वृत्रमुत सनोति ६ ६० 
श्रवो वाजमिषमूर्ज ६६५३ 

श्रिये ते पादा दुव ६२९३ 

श्रुधी न इन्द्र हयामसि ६२६, 
श्रुष्टी वां यज्ञ उद्यतः ६ ६८ १ 
श्यावाश्वस्य रेभतस्तथा ८,३७,७ 
श्यावाश्वस्य सुन्वतस्तथा ८,३६,७ 
श्यावाश्वस्य सुन्वतोऽत्रीणां ८,३८,८ 
श्येनाविव पतथो ८,३५,९ 

श्रवः सूरिभ्यो अमृतं ७,८१,६ 
श्रवच्छू,त्कर्ण ईयते ७,३२,५ 
श्रायन्तइव सूर्य ८,९९,३ 

Jd वो वृत्रहन्तमं ८,९३, १६ 
श्रुधी हवं विपिपानस्याद्रे ७,२२,४ 
श्रुधी हवं तिर्या ८,९५,४ 
श्रुष्ट्यग्ने नवस्य मे ८,२३,१४ 
श्वित्यञ्चो मा दक्षिणत ७,३३,१ 
qai आतिथिग्व ८,६८, १७ 
षष्टिं सहस्राश्वस्य ८,४६,२२ 

स आनो योनिं ७,९७,४ 

सं यद्धनन्त मन्युभि ७,५६,२२ 

सं यन्मही मिथती ७,९३,५ 

सं या दानूनि येमथु ८,२५,६ 

सं च त्वे जग्मुर्गिर ६३४, 

सं पूषन्‌ विदुषा नय ६४.१ 
संवत्सरं शशयाना ७, १० ३, ९ 

सं वां कर्मणा समिषा ६६९ A 

सं वां शता नासत्या ६६२,१० 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


४ का... ... 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


| 
| 
j 
| 


1 


स इत्तन्तुं स वि ६९ ३ 

स इत्तमोऽवयुनं ६,२१३ 

स इत्सुदानुः स्ववाँ ६६८५ 

स इदस्तेव प्रति धाद ६३५ 

स ई रेभो न प्रति ६३ ६ 

सई स्मृधो वनते ६२० ९ 

स ईं पाहि य ऋजीपी ६१७२ 
सकृद्ध द्यौरजायत ६५८,२२ 
सकृद्ध द्यौरजायत ६,४८.२२ 

स क्षप: परि पस्वजे ८,४१,३ 
सखाय आ शिषामहि ८,२४,१ 
सखायः क्रतुमिच्छत ८,७०, १३ 
सखायस्त इन्द्र विश्वह ७,२१,९ 
सखायो ब्रह्मवाहसे ६,४५४ 
सखे विष्णो वितरं ८,१००,१२ 
स गृत्सो अग्निस्तरुणश्चिद्‌ ७,४,२ 
स गोमघा जरित्रे ६३५४ 

स गोरश्वस्य वि व्रजं ८,३२,५ 
स घा नो देव: ७,४५, ३ 

सचस्व नायमवसे ६,२४.१० 
सचा सोमेषु पुरुहूत ८,६६,६ 

स चिकेत सहीयसा ८,३९,५ 

स चित्रचित्रं चितयन्तमस्मे ६६७ 
स जायमानः परमे व्योमनि व्रता ६८२ 
स जायमानः व्योमन्‌ वायुर्न ७,५,७ 
सजूर्देवेभिरपां ७,३४, १५ 
सजोपस्त्वा दिवो नरो ६२३ 

स तत्कृधीषितस्तूयमग्ने ६५६ 
सतु श्रुधि श्रुत्या यो ६३६५ 
सतुश्रुधीन्द्र नूतनस्य ६२१८ 
सत्यं TTA यदौ ८,४५, २७ 
सत्यं तदिन्द्रावरुणा ८,५९,३ 
सत्यमित्तन्न त्वावां ६,३० ,४ 
सत्यमित््वा महेनदि ८,७४,१५ 
सत्यमित्या वृषेदसि ८,३३, १० 
सत्यमिद्वा उ तं वयम्‌ ८,६२,१२ 
सत्या सत्येभिर्महती ७,७५ ,७ 
सत्रा मदासस्तव ६३६.१ 


nn 


सत्रा तवं पुरुष्टुतं ८,१५ 22 

सत्रे ह जाताविषिता ७,३३,१३ 
सत्वं दक्षस्या वृको ६१५३ 

स त्वं न इन्द्राकवाभिः ६.३३.४ 
सत्वं न इन्द्र वाजेमि ८,१६,१२ 
स त्वं न ऊर्जा पते ८,१३,१२ 

स त्वं नश्चित्र ६,४६,२ 

सत्वं नो अर्वन्निदाया ६१२६ 
सत्वं नो देव मनसा ८,२६,२५ 
सत्वं विप्राय दाशुषे ८,४३,१५ 
स त्वमग्ने विभावसुः ८,४३,३२ 
स त्वमस्मदप द्विपो ८,१०,३ 
सदस्य मदे सद्स्य ६२७२ 
सदिद्धि ते तुविजातस्य ६,१८.४ 

स gee चिदमि तृणत्ति ८,१०३.५ 
सदो द्वा चक्राते उप ८,२९,९ 
सद्यश्चिद्यस्य चर्कृतिः ६४८२१ 
सद्यश्चिन्नु ते मघवन्नभिष्टौ ७,१९,९ 
सद्यो अध्वरे रथिरं जनन्त ७,७,४ 
सद्योजुवस्ते वाजा ८,८१,९ 

स न इन्द्र त्वयताया ७,२०,१०;२१,१० 
सन इन्द्रःशिवः८,९३,३ 

स नईळानया सह ८,१०२,२ 

स नःपत्रिः पारयाति ८,१६,११ 
सनःपृथु श्रवाय्यम्‌ ६१६१२ 

स नः शक्रश्चिदा शकद्‌ ८,३२,१२ 
स नः सोमेषु सोमपा:८,९७,६ 

स न:स्तवान-रयिं:८, २४, ३ 

सना ता त इन्द्र भोजनानि ७,१९,६ 
सनितः सुसनितरुग्र ८,४६, २० 
सनिता विप्रा अर्वद्धि ८,२,३६ 
सनितासि प्रवतो दाशुषे ७,३७,५ 
सनिर्मित्रस्य पप्रथ ८,१२,१२ 

स नीव्याभिर्जरितारम्‌ ६३ २)४ 
सनेम्यस्मद्युयोत ७,५६,५ 

सनेम तेऽवसा नव्य & 3o १० 

स नो नियुद्धिः पुरुहूत ६२२,११ 

स नो नियुद्भिरा पृण ६,४५.२१ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


See 


ESS ea 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Mr don Chennai and eGangotri 


सनो बोधि पुरएता ६२११२ ang विश्वा दुरितानि ७,१२,२ 

स नो बोधि पुरोळाशं ६२३७ स मातरा सूर्येणा ६३२२ i 

स नो मन्द्राभिरध्वरे ६१६२ समान ऊर्वे अधि ७,७६,५ | 

सनो मित्रमहस्त्वम्‌ ८,४४, १४ समानं वां सजात्यं ८,७३,१२ | 

स नो राधांस्या भरे ७, १५, ११ समानमञ्ज्येषां ८,२० ,११ 

स नो वस्व उप मासि ८,७१,९ समित्तमघमश्नवद्‌ ८,१८, १४ 

स नो वाजेष्वविता पुरूवसुः ८ ,४६, १३ समित्तान्‌ वृत्रहाखिदत्‌ ८ ,७७, ३ | 

स नो वाजाय श्रवस ६१७२१४ समिद्धमग्नि समिधा ६१५७ | 

स नो विभावा चक्षणिनर्व ६४२ समिद्धे अग्नौ सुत ६४० ३ 

स नो विश्वान्या भर ८,९३,२९ समिधाग्निं दुवस्यत ८,४४,१ 

स नो विश्वेभिर्देवेभि ८,७१,३ समिधा जातवेदसे ७, १४, १ 

स नो वृषन्त्सनिष्ठया ८,९२, १५ समिधान उ सन्त्य ८,४४,९ | 

सनो वेदो अमात्यम्‌ ७,१५,३ समिधा यस्त आहुतिं ६,२५ | 

सन्ति ह्यर्य आशिष ८,५४,७ समिधा यो निशिती ८,१९,१४ | 

सं न: शिशीहि भुरिजो ८,४, १६ समिन्द्रो रायो बृहती ८,५२, १० 

स पत्यत उभयो ६२५ ,६ समी रेभासो अस्वरन्नि ८,९७, ११ | 

स पप्रथानो अभि ७,६९,२ समु त्ये महतीरपः ८,७,२२ | 
=  सर्पयेण्यःसप्रियो ६१६ समुद्रज्येष्ठाः सलिलस्य ७,४९,१ | 

सपर्यवो भरमाणा ७,२,४ समुद्रे अन्तः शयत ८,१०० ,९ > 

स पूर्व्यो महानां ८,६३,१ समु पूष्णा गमेमहि ६ ५४२ | 

सप्त होतारस्तमिदीळते ८,६० , १६ समु वां यज्ञ महयं नमोभि ७,६१,६ 

सप्तानां सप्त क्रष्टय:८,२८,५ समु वो यज्ञं महयत्रमोभि ७,४२,३ 

सप्ती चिद्धा मदच्युता ८,३३,१८ स मे वपुश्छदयदश्चिनोयों ६,४९५ 

स प्रकेत उभयस्य ७,३३,१२ सम्राळन्यः स्वराळन्य ७,८२,२ 

स प्रलथा कविवृध ८,६३,४ स योजते अरुषा विश्वभोजसा ७,१६,२ 

स प्रलवन्नवीयसा ६,१६.२१ स यो न मुहे न मिथू ६,१८८ 

स प्रथमे व्योमनि ८,१३,२ स युध्मःसत्वा ६१८२ | 

सबाधो यं जना इमे ८,७४, ६ स रथेन रथीतमो ६,४५.१५ 

सं भूम्या अन्ता ७,८३,३ सरस्वति देवनिदो ६६१३ 

समञ्मना जनिम ६१८ ७ सरस्वत्यभि नो नेषि ६६१,१४ 

समत्स्वग्निमवसे ८,११,९ स राजसि पुरुष्टुतँ ८,१५,३ 

समध्वरायोषसो ७,४१,६ स रायस्खामुप सृजा ६,३६४ 

समनेव वपुष्यतः ८,६२,९ सरूपैरा सु नो गहि ८,३४,१२ 

स मन्दस्वा ह्यनु ६२३८ स रेतोधा वृषभः७,१०१,६ 

स मन्द्रया च जिह्वया ७, १६,९ सर्गा इव सृजतं ८,३५,२० 

स मन्युं मर्त्यानाम्‌ ८,७८, ६ स वहिभिर्क्रक्वभि ६३२३ j 

समर्तो अग्ने ७,१,२३ स वावृधे नर्यो ७,९५, ३ 

समस्य मन्यवे विशो ८,६,४ स विद्वां अङ्गिरोभ्य इन्द्रो ८,६३,३ | 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


la zu ei ee en 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


स वीरो अप्रतिष्कुत ७,३२,६ 

स वृत्रहेन्द्र ऋभुक्षा: ८,९६,२१ 

स वृत्रहेन्दरश्वर्पणी धृत्‌ ८,९६,२० 
स वेतसुं दशमायं ६२०८ 
सव्यामनु स्फिग्यं ८,४,८ 

स श्वितानस्तन्यतू ६६२ 

ससंदृक्ते स्वनीक ७,३,६ 

स सत्पतिः शवसा ६,१३ 

स सत्यसत्वन्महते ६३१ 

स समुद्रो अपीच्य ८,४१,८ 

स सर्गेण शवसा ६३२५ 

स सुक्रतुर््तचिदस्तु ७,८५,४ 

स सुक्रतुर्यो वि दुरः पणीनां ७,९,२ 
स सुक्रतू रणिता यः सुतेषु ८,९६,१९ 
स सूर्य प्रति पुरो ७,६२,२ 

स सोम आमिश्लतमः ६ २९ ;४ 
सस्तु माता सस्तु पिता ७,५५,५ 

स स्तोम्यः स हव्यः८,१६,८ 
सस्वश्चिद्धि तन्व:७,५९ ,७ 
सस्वश्चिद्धि समृतिस्त्वेष्ये ७,६० , to 
MAR वृषभो ७,५५,७ 
सहस्रेणेव सचते यवीयुधा ८,४, ६ 
WES पृषतीनाम्‌ ८,६५,११ 

स हि क्षयेण क्षम्यस्य ७,४६,२ 

स हि धीभिर्हव्यो ६१८६ 

स हि यो मानुषा युगा ६,१६.२३ 

स हि विश्वाति पार्थिवा ६, १६ २० 
स हि विश्वानि पार्थिवाँ ६४५२० 
स हि शुचिः शतपत्र: ७,९७,७ 
सहो षु णो वज्रहस्तैः ८,७,३२ 
साते अग्ने शंतमा ८,७४,८ 

सा दुम्न्युम्निनी ८,७४,९ 

सानो विश्वा अति द्विष:६६१ ९ 
सातपना इदं हवि ७,५९,९ 

सा वह योक्षभि ६६४५ 

सा विट्‌ सुवीरा मरुद्धिरस्तु ७,५६,५ 
सास्माकेभिरेतरी ६.१२४ 
साहा ये सन्ति मुष्टिहेव ८,२० ,२० 


705 


सिञ्चन्ति नमसावतम्‌ ८,७२,१० 
सिन्धुरिव प्रवण आशुया ६४६ १४ 
सिपक्ति सा वां सुमति ७,७० ,२ 
सीदन्तस्ते वयो यथा ८,२१,५ 
सुगस्ते सुगस्ते अग्ने सनवित्तो ७,४२,२ 
सुगोत ते सुपथा ६६४५ 
सुज्योतिपः सूर्य दक्षपितृन्‌ o 2 
सुतः सोमो असुतादिन्द्र ६३४१.४ 
सुत इत्त्वं निमिश्ल ६२३ १ 
सुतावन्तस्त्वा वयम्‌ ८,६५,६ 
सुदेवाः स्थ काण्वायना ८,५५,४ 
सुदेवो असि वरुण ८,६९,१२ 
सुनीथो घा स मर्त्यो ८,४६,४ 
सुनोता सोमपाव्ने ७,३२,८ 
सुपर्ण वस्ते मृगो ६,७५.११ 
सुप्रावर्ग सुवीयँ ८,२२, १८ 
सुप्रावीरस्तु स क्षय:७,६६,५ 
सुभग:स व ऊतिषु ८,२०,१५ 
सुरथाँ आतिथिग्वे ८,६८, १६ 
सुविज्ञानं चिकितुषे ७,१०४, १२ 
सुवीरं रयिमा भर ६१६२९ 
सुवीर्य स्वश्ष्यं ८,१२,३३ 
सुशेवो नो मृळयाकु ८,७९,७ 
सुषोमे शर्यणावति ८,७,२९ 

सूरो न यस्य दृशतिररेपा ६३३ 
सूर्यस्येव वक्षथो ७,३३,८ 

सूर्यो रश्मि यथा सृजा ८,३२,२३ 
सृजन्ति रश्मिमोजसा ८,७,८ 
सेदग्निर्नँत्यस्त्वन्या ७,१,१४ 
सेदग्नियों वनुष्यतो ७,१,१५ 
सेदुगो अस्तु मरुतः ७,४०,३ 
सेमां वेतु वषट्कृतिम्‌ ७,१५,६ 
सेहान उग्र पृतना ८,३७,२ 

सो अग्न ईजे शशमे ६१९ 

सो अग्न एना नमसा ७,९३,७ 
सो अद्धा दाश्वध्वरो ८,१९,९ 
सोता हि सोममद्रिमि ८,१,१७ 
सोम इद्वः सुतो अस्तु ८,६६, १५ 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


LO CHEN 


EE EEE ............ 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


सोमं गावो धेनवो ८,९७, ३५ 
सोममन्य उपासदत्‌ ६ ५७३ 

सोम राजन्‌ मृळया न: ८ ,४८ ,८ 
सोमस्य मित्रावरूणोदिता ८,७२,१७ 
सोमारुद्रा धारयेथाम्‌ ६७४१ 
सोमारुद्रा युवमेतान्यस्मे ६,४३ 
सोमारुद्रा वि Fed ६७४२ 
स्तरीरु त्वद्भवति ७,१०१,३ 
स्तुतश्च यास्त्वा वर्धन्ति ८,२, २९ 
स्तुहि श्रुतं विपश्चितं ८,१३,१० 
स्तुहि स्तुहीदेते ८,१,३० 
स्तुहीन्द्रं व्यश्चवद्‌ ८,२४,२२ 
स्तेनं राय सारमेय ७,५५,३ 
स्तोता यत्ते अनुव्रत ८,१३,१९ 
स्तोता यत्ते विचर्षणि ८,१३,६ 
सतोत्रमिन्द्राय गायत ८,४५,२१ 
स्तोमं जुषेथां युवशेव ८,३५,५ 
स्थूरं राधः शताश्वं ८,४,१९ 
स्पर्धन्ते वा उ देवहूये ७,८५,२ 
स्मार्हा यस्य श्रियो ७, १५,५ 
स्मत्पुरंधिन आ गहि ८,३४,६ 
स्मदभीशू कशावन्ता ८,२५,२४ 
स्मदेतया सुकीर्त्यां ८,२६, १९ 
स्वग्नयो वो अग्निभिः८,१९,७ 
स्वधामनु श्रियं नरो ८,२० ,७ 
स्वयं चित्स मन्यसे ८,४,१२ 
स्वरन्ति त्वा सुते नरो ८,३३,२ 
स्वर्ण वस्तोरुषसा ७,१०,२ 
स्वश्वा यशसा यातमर्वाङ्‌ ७,६९ , ३ 


706 


स्वादवः सोम ८,२,२८ 
स्वादुषंसदः पितरो वयोधाः ६७५ ९ 
स्वादुष्किलायं मधुमाँ & xo 2 
स्वादुष्टे अस्तु संसुदे ८,१७,६ 
स्वादोरभक्षि वयस:८,४८, १ 
स्वाध्यो वि दुरो देवयन्तो ७,२,५ 
स्वायुधास इष्मिण:७,५६, ११ 
स्वाहाकृतस्य तृम्पतं ८ ,३५, २४ 
हंसाविव पतथो ८, ३५ ,८ 

हतं च शत्रून्‌ यततं ८,३५,१२ 
हतो वृत्राण्यार्या ६६०६ 

हन्ता वृत्रं दक्षिणेनेन्द्रः ८,२,३२ 
हन्ता वृत्रमिन्द्रः ७, २० , २ 

हन्तो नु किमाससे ८,८० ,५ 
हरयो धूमकेतवो ८,४३,४ 
हर्यश्वं सत्पतिं ८,२१,१० 

हवं त इन्द्र महिमा ७,२८,२ 
हवन्त उ त्वा हव्यं ७,३०,२ 
हविष्कृणुध्वमा गमद्‌ ८,७२,१ 
हवे त्वा सूर उदिते ८,१३,१३ 
हारिद्रवेव पतथो ८,३५,७ 
हिरण्ययी वां रभि ८,५,२९ 
हिरण्ययेन रथेन द्रवत्पाणि ८,५,३५ 
हुवे वः सूनुं सहसो ६५,१ 

हुवे वातस्वनं कवि ८,१०२,५ 
हुवे वो देवीमदितिं ६५० १ 
हत्सु पीतासो युध्यन्ते ८,२,१२ 
ह्वयामसि ers याहि ६,४१५ 
हृयामि देवाँ अयातु ७,३४,८ 


ANID; 
1 GS KU. 


— Ec SS 


A 


५ S 


y 


CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


———-———— र? 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


। CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


- क 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


पन सा ७ RIE! 
a lich 


आकि ` In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


BE In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 
i 


i 5-3 SR pU a ee SN 


Digitized by Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri 


SALIENT FEATURES OF THE PRESENT EDITION 


The present edition of Rgveda has become conspicous with the 
following features 
1. The present edition contains original text of Rgveda in Devandgart 
Script alongwith English translation of Wilson which is based solely upon | 
|| Savana Bhasya 
I 2. The old-English usage of Wilson's translation has been updated and 
|! || revised. With the revised usage, translation may be easily understood even 
by a lay scholar. For instance, old English pronominal forms like thee, 
thou, thy, thine etc. have been substituted with the corresponding terms of 
modem English. The old English usage of verbal forms has also been 
supplanted with the corresponding usage of modern English. 

3. The English translation of Wilson doesn’t provide the Sanskrit usage 
used in Romanised Style with appropriate Diacritical Marks. This creates 
lot of difficulty and confusion for readers of English to correctly 

| understand and pronounce the Sanskrit words. Keeping in view the same 
problem, in the present edition the Sanskrit words have been written 
alongwith appropriate Diaeritieal Marks. 

4, The editor has enhanced the value of present edition with his 
valuable remarks and notes given under footnotes regarding the translation 
and the other ancient works followed by Wilson, without referring to the 
actual sources incourse of his translation. & 

5. Last but not the least important features’of this edition is that it 
contains volume-wise index of Rgvedic Mantras. With this edition in hand, 
the readers and researchers will be able to refer to the original source in 

i|| caseof doubt or any critical or comparative study they would like to make 
1 | Thus all efforts have been made to make the present edition lucid 
asia || attractive and uptodate, | 
SM Ss Complete in 4 vols, Rs. 450 each 
Rs. I800 (Set) 


Y 


