THE 


VAYU  PURANA 

PART  II 


MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS  •  DELHI 


First  Edition  :  J>eM,  J960 


MOTILAL  BANARSIDASS 
Bungalow  Road,  Jawidur  Nagar,  DeUii  110  007 

SrofuhMs 

Chowk.  Vara&asi  221 001 
Aahok  Rajpath,  Patna  600  004 
24  Race  Goum  Road,  Bangalore  560  001 
120  Royapettah  High  Road,  Mylapore,  MadnuSOO  004 


UKEaco  coLiJcnoN  OP  REPMsaKTATivB  woRcs^Indiao  Series 
This  bock  has  been  accepted  in  the  Indian  Translation 
Series  of  the  Unesco  Collection  of  Representative 
Works  jointly  sponsored  by  the  United  Nations 
Eihicaiional^  Scientific  and  Cultural  Organization 
{UNESCO)  and  the  Government  of  India, 


PBIKTED  Of  Oa>lA 

■Y  jAmmaA  paasasr  jam  at  shiu  jainwdea  prssi,  a-45  NAaAiHA 
OCDOTTEtAX.  AUA,  PKASS  I,  HEW  DELHI  110028  AHD  PUBUSHBD  BY 
KABENDRA  PRAKAIR  TAJH  POR  MOTILAL  BAHAMlPAai,  DELHI  1 10  007. 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTERS 


1.  Manvantaras:  The  Milking  of  the  Earth  457 

2.  The  Dyanasty  of  Pfthu  474 

3.  Vaivasvata  Manvantara:  The  M&ricaCreation  479 

4.  The  Race  of  Prajipati:  Rebirth  of  Seven  Sages  483 

5.  The  Race  of  Dhamu  497 

6.  Curse  to  Jaya  Gods:  Nrsimba  Incarnation :  Race  of 

Hirapyakaiipu  :  Birth  of  Marut>gods  510 

7.  The  Race  of  Kasyapa :  Danu's  Progeny  522 

8.  Dynasties  Descended  from  Kaiyapa  525 

9.  The  Race  of  Sages  553 

10.  The  Procedure  of  Sraddba  561 

11.  The  Birth  of  Skanda :  Rules  Prescribed  for  Srad> 

dha  569 

12.  The  Procedure  of  Sraddha  (Continued)  580 

13.  The  Procedure  of  Sr&ddha  Performance  (Conti¬ 
nued)  584 

14.  The  Procedure  RegardingPerformanceof  Sr^dha: 

The  Five  Mahiyajfias  591 

15.  Sacred  Places  for  Sriddha  596 

16.  The  Sriddha  Ritual:  Purificatory  Rites  610 

1 7.  The  Test  for  Eligibility  of  a  Brahmana  (for  Sr&d- 

dha  Invitation)  618 

18.  Benefit  Derived  from  Charitable  Gifts  627 


CtmienU 


19.  Benefit  of  Sriddha  Performance  on  Various 

Tithis  63S 

20,  Benefit  of  Sr&ddha  Performance  under  Different 

Constellations  636 

2I«  Miscellaneous  Topics:  Qpatifications  of  a  Brah- 
ma^a  for  Sraddha-gifts:  Merits  of  Performance  of 
Sraddha  at  Sacred  Places  638 

22.  The  Race  of  Varuqa:  Birth  of  Aivin-gods  649 

23.  Creative  Activity  of  Manus:  The  Story  of  Sud* 

yumna  656 

24.  A  Dissertation  on  Music:  The  Definition  of  Mure* 

chan a  659 

25.  The  Science  of  Music:  The  Embellishments  666 

26.  The  Ik;vaku  Dynasty  672 

27.  The  Nimi  Dynasty  691 

28.  The  Nativity  of  Soma  and  Saumya  (Budha)  694 

29.  The  Lunar  Race:  The  Amavasu  Dynasty  698 

30.  The  Origin  of  Dhanvantari;  Varanasi  Cuned; 

Raji's  Exploits  708 

31.  The  Story  of  Yayati  717 

32 .  The  Birth  of  Kar  tavirya  72  7 

33.  The  Dynasty  of  Jyamagha  and  Vnni  732 

34.  The  Race  of  Vpsni  737 

35.  Wars  between  Suras  and  Asuras:  Bhrgu  curses 

Vi^Qu:  The  Eulogy  of  Sambhu  by  Sukra  758 

36.  Glorification  of  Visnu’s  Greatness  778 

37.  Royal  Dynasties  789 

38.  The  Manvantaras  and  Dissolution  of  the  Universe  827 

39.  Worlds  from  Maharloka  to  Siva*s  City  846 

40.  Dissolution  of  the  Universe  877 

4 1  •  Recreation  of  the  Cosmic  Egg  89 1 

42.  Dissipation  of  Vyasa*8  Doubts  899 

43.  The  Greatness  of  Gayi  910 

44.  The  Glory  of  Gay&:  The  Story  of  Gayasura  916 


ConUnts 


45.  Gayim&h&tmya  (Contd«):  The  Story  ofSili  924 

46*  Gay^ahatmya  (Contd.):  SUi-tlrtha  and  Other 

Sacred  Spots  929 

47*  Gayamahatmya  (Contd.):  The  Giory  of  Adigada- 

dhara  942 

48.  IVocedure  of  the  Pilgrimage  to  Gaya  947 

49.  Procedure  of  Che  Pilgrimage  at  Gaya  (Continued)  954 

50.  The  Glory  of  Gaya  965 

INDEX  973 


Abbfiviations 


GS  Gf}g^  Sutra  (preceded  by  the  name  of  the  author 

such  as  Apastamba) 

HD  HisUtfy  of  Dharma  ^tlstra,  P.  V.  Kane,  G.  0«  S. 

I A  Tho  Indian  Antiquary 

I  HQ,  Thi  Indian  Hisioruat  Quarterly 

JP  Fut/Im  (Journal  of  the  Kashiraj  Trust ),  Varanasi 

KA  Kautilya  Afthai&stra 

KP  Kflma  Furdna^  Vehkatejvara  Press  £dn.»  Bom* 

bay;  abo  Kashiraj  Trust  Edn.,  Varanasi,  1971 
LP  IdAga  Purd^f  GM,  1960;  also  MLBD,  Delhi,  1981 

Manu«  Mmusmfti 

Mbh.  Mahibhirata^  GIti  Press,  Gorakhpur,  VS  2014 

MkP  Mdrkas^d^ya  Purdij^a 

MN  Mahdbkdrata  Ndmdmikramar^i,  Gita  Press,  Gorakh¬ 

pur,  VS  2016 

MtP  MaUya  Purdr^^  GM,  1954 

MW  Monier  Williams*  Samkrit^ English  Dictionary ^  MLBD, 

Delhi,  1976 

NP  Ndradiya  or  Ndrada  Furd^a^  Venkafeivara  Press, 

Bombay 

PCK  BhAralavarfiya  Prdclna  Caritrakota^  Siddheshwar 

Shastri,  Poona,  1968 
Pd.P.  Padma  Purdr^aj  GM,  1957-59 

PE  Purdr^ic  EncycUpaediaf  V*  Mani,  Ei^lbh  version, 

MLBD,  Delhi,  1975 

PR  or  Puranic  Records  on  Hindu  Rites  and  Custom^ 

PRHRC  R.  C.  Hazra,  Calcutta,  1948 
RV  Rg-^Vedoj  Svadhyaya  Mandal,  Aundh 

Sat.Br.  Satapatha  Brdkmana 

SG  or  SMC  Smfti  Candrikd  by  Devanna  Bhatta 
SEP  Studies  in  Epics  and  Purdnas,  A.D»  Pusalkar,  Bhara¬ 

tiya  Vidya  Bhavan  (BVB),  Bombay 


vayu  purana 

PART  II 


CHAPTER  ONE 

ManoarUaras  :  The  Milking  of  the  Earth 
Obeisance  to  Sri  gaj^ia 

SdfhiapSyana  said  \ 

1.  I  wish  to  know  precisely  the  order  of  Manvantaras^  and 
all  the  respective  deities  pertaining  to  the  difTerent  Manvan- 
taras. 

Suia  said  ; 

2.  Listen  to  and  understand  as  I  recount  succinctly  and 
in  detail,  the  Manvantaras  which  have  gone  and  which  are 
yet  to  come. 

3.  The  first  Manu  was  Svayambhuva  and  thch  there  was 
Svarocisa  Manu.  Thereafter  the  Manus  were  A  uttama,  Tamasa, 


]  Manvanlara  n  a  period  during  which  a  Manu  presides  over  the 
world.  I(  (the  period)  consists  of  seventy  one  cycles  of  tour  yugas  (catur-yuei) 
or  on^fourteenth  part  of  god  Brahma's  day.  In  other  words  there  are 
fourteen  Manus  in  one  day  of  Brahmi  at  the  end  of  which  there  is  Pralaya 
(Dissolution)  of  the  universe.  Every  Manu  has  his  special  set  of  gods,  Indra, 
an  incarnation  of  Vi^nu,  seven  sages  (sapiar^).  Thus  in  the  1st  Manvantara, 
Svayambhuva  (the  son  of  god  Brahma}  was  the  presiding  Manu,  Yamas 
were  the  gods,  Yajha,  the  incarnation  of  Vin^u  officiated  as  Indra  and  the 
group  of  seven  sages  consisted  of  Marici,  Atri,  Ai'igiras,  Pulaha,  Kratu, 
Pulastya  and  Vasistha.  In  every  Maovantara,  though  the  set  of  these  func* 
tionarics  is  difTerent,  they  have  got  the  same  powers,  functions  and  the  lanie 
tenure. 

The  description  of  Manvantaras  is  one  of  the  five  essential  characteristics 
of  a  Puri3>a.  Thus  we  find  Puranns  Uke  Bh.  P.  vm.1.29,  NP.  1.40.17-37, 
VP.  Ill  chs.  1  and  2,  KP.I.5],  Bd.  P.  I.2.3G  describing  various  Manvantaras. 


458  PurSa^ 

Raivata  and  Cakfusa.  These  six  Manus  have  already  passed 
away.  I  shall  explain  the  eight  future  Manus.^ 

4.  They  are  the  Hve  Savarnas^  Raucya,  Bhautya  and  Vai- 
vasvata.  I  shall  explain  them  after  Vaivasvata  Manu. 

5.  Know  the  five  Manus  who  have  passed  away  to  be 
Manavas.  The  Manvantara  of  Svayaitibhuva  Manu  which  has 
already  passed  has  been  described  by  me. 

6.  Henceforth,  I  shall  describe  briefly  the  activity  of  crea¬ 
tion  by  Svaroci$a>  the  second  Manu  of  noble  soul.’ 

7«  In  the  Svarocisa  Manvantara,  there  were  the  Devas 
called  Tu$itas  and  the  learned  scholars  called  Paravatas.  Only 
these  two  are  remembered  as  the  groups  of  Devas. 

8.  They  were  bom  of  Tu^ita  as  the  sons  ofKratu,  the 
Svaroci9a(Manu)  .The  Parivatas  and  the  remaining  ones — these 
two  Gams  (gioups)  consist  of  twelve  each.  (Thus)  all  these 
Devas  together  are  remembered  as  chandajas  and  they  are  twen¬ 
ty-four  (in  number). 

9-10.  Dhaivasyaia,  Vamanya,  Gopa,  Devayata,  lord  Aja, 
the  powerful  lord  Durona,  Apa  of  powerful  arms,  the  vigorous 
Mahaujas,  Cikitvan,  Nibhria,  Viryav^,  and  Arhia :  these  were 
the  sons  of  Kratu.  They  were  then  the  imbibers  of  Soma. 

11-13.  Lord  Pracetas,  Viivedcva,  Samaflja  who  was  well 
known,  Ajihma  the  suppressor  of  enemies,  Ajihmwa  and  Mahi- 
yana  endowed  with  learning,  the  blessed  Aja  and  Usa,  Ya\dya 
of  great  strength,  Hotr  and  Yajva  were  the  Paravatas  of  great 
exploit.  These  all  were  the  deities  who  functioned  in  the  Svaro- 
ci|a  Manvantara. 

14.  At  that  time  these  twenty- four  Devatas  (deities)  were 
the  imbibers  of  Soma.  Their  Indra  (ruler  and  leader)  was 
Vaidha  who  was  world-famous. 

15-lG.  The  Soptarsis  (the  Seven  Sages)  were  Orja  the  son 
of  Vasistha,  Stambha  the  son  ofKaiyapa,  Drou  the  sonof 


1.  There  are  some  variatiozuia  the  names  of  future  Manus  in  some 
Puranas.  Our  Puraoa  gim  tome  di^!mnt  names  (such  as  Raucya  and 
Bhautya)  of  future  Mao  us. 

2.  Verses  $-22  enumerate  aud  describe  the  fiiucuoDariei  (gods,  Indra 
etc.}  during  the  second  Manvantara. 


1.17-28 


459 


R^bha  the  son  of  Ahgiras,  Dattatri  the  son  of  Pulastya,  Niicala 
the  son  of  Atri,  and  Dhavan  the  son  of  Pulaha. 

17-18.  Caitra,  Kaviruta,Kftanta,  Ravi»  Srhat,  Guha,  Nava 
and  Subha^:  these  nine  are  rememberd  as  the  sons  of  Svarocisa 
Manu  who  established  his  race.  They  have  been  enumerated  in 
the  Pura^.  Such  is  the  second  Manvantara. 

19.  The  Seven  Sage$>  Manu»  Devas  and  Pitfs — these 
four  constitute  the  root  (and  foundation)  of  a  Manvantara.  All 
the  subjects  are  subsidiary  to  them. 

20.  Deities  are  the  sons  of  Sages*  Pitrs  are  the  sons 
of  Devas  and  the  Sages  are  the  sons  of  Devas— This  is  the 
conclmion  of  tht  Sdstrof  (Scriptures). 

21.  K^triyas  and  Vaiiyas  were  born  of  Manu  and 
Brahmaitas  were  born  of  the  Seven  Sages.  Thus  the  Manvan¬ 
tara  has  been  described  in  brief*  not  indetaib. 

22.  The  detailed  description  of  the  Svarocisa  Manvantara 
should  be  understood  through  (that of)  Svayambhuva  Manvan¬ 
tara.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  it  in  detail  even  in  hundreds  of 
years,  since  the  progenies  are  many  in  every  family  and  they  are 
oft-repcated. 

23.  The  Manvantara  of  Auttama  is  the  third  among  the 
Manvantaras.*  There  are  five  1  shall  recount  them.  Under¬ 
stand  them. 

24.  The  Devas  are  Sudhamans,  Vaiavartins,  Pratardanas, 
!^ivas*  and  Satyas.  Each  of  these  groups  (Ganas)  consists  of  twelve 
(Devas). 

25.  The  names  of  the  twelve  constituting  Sudhamans  are 
Satya,  Dhfti,  Dama*  Duta,  K^ma,  Ksazna,  Dhrti  (Dhvani— 
Bd.P. ),  8uci>  Orjasy  Jyes^ha  and  Vapu$man  the  twelfth. 

26.  The  Vamiakarin  Devas  (Vasavartins)  were  Sahasra- 
dhara ,  V  i  ^  va  tma  n,  Sami  tara*  Brhad  va.su*  V i  ivadba,  Vi  $  vakar ma 
Manasvanta*  Virad.  Yasas*  Jyous*  Vibhavya  and  Kirtiman. 

27-28.  Pramardana  (Pratardana)  gods  are  glorihed.  They 
are* — Avadhya,  Arati,  Lord  Vasu,  Dhifnya,  Vivasvasu  (Vibha- 


1.  Aiper  A. 

2.  Verses  23-36  describe  the  Auttaou  or  Uttaou't  Manvantara.  As  noted 
in  V.  36  the  activities  of  creation  etc.  are  the  same  as  in  the  previous  Man- 
vaatara. 

3.  The  reading  dtvo  *God  not  worshipped  by  othess’  iimean- 

ix^less,  as  this  is  a  list  of  Pratardana  ffod^—^Pranutrdana*  in  the  text  is  an 


y^jfu  Pur/h^ 


460 

vasu  in  Bd.P.)  Dinakratu  (V^ttaand  Kratu  in  Bd.P.),  Sudb- 
anna>  Dhrtavama,  Yalasvina  (Yaiasvija  in  Bd.P.)  and  Kctu« 
mAn^. 

29-30.  Haihsa,  Svarat  Ahiba,  Pratardana,  Yadaskara,  Sudana 
Vasudana,  Sumafijasa^  Vifa  Jantuvahyati,  Suvitta  and  Sunaya — 
these  are  to  be  known  as  Sivas.  They  are  the  twelve  other  gods 
worthy  of  partaking  their  share  in  sacrifice. 

31-33.  Understand  the  names  of  those  constituting  the 
Satya  category  of  Devas>  as  agreed  (by  sages  of  yore) . 
They  are  Dikpati,  Vakpati,  Viiva,  §arhbhu>  SvamrdB^^*  Adhi- 
pa»  Varcodhas,  Muhyasarvaia  (?) »  Vasava,  Sadi  jva,  K^ema 
and  Ananda.  These  are  those  sacrifice* worthy  other  twelve 
(Devas)  famous  as  Satyas.  These  are  the  deities  who  lived  in  the 
Manvantara  of  Auttama. 

34-35.  Aja,  Paraiu,  Divya»  Divyau^hi,  Naya^  the  un¬ 
equalled  Devanuja,  Mahotsaha^  Auiija,  Vinita^  Suketu,  Sumitra, 
Subala  and  Suci — these  thirteen  were  the  noble -souled  sons  of 
the  Manu  Auttama.  These  were  the  progenitors  of  the  race  of 
Ksatriyas  and  made  them  flourish.  Such  is  the  third  Manvan¬ 
tara. 

36.  The  activity  of  creation  etc.  in  the  course  of  the  Auttama 
Manvantara  has  been  explained  through  (that  of)  Svarociia 
Manvantara.  Now  listen  and  understand  the  creation  etc.  in  the 
Tamasa  Manvantara  in  detail  and  in  the  proper  order. 

37.  In  the  fourth  period  of  Manvantara*  of  the  Manu 
Tamasa,  the  Gaus  were  four,  viz.  Satyas,  Svarupas,  Sudhis  and 
Haris. 

38.  In  the  Manvantara  of  Tamasa,  the  gardsons  of  Pulastya 
(manifested  themselves).  Eachof  these  Devaganas  consisted  of 
twentyfive  (gods). 


obvious  misprint  for  FraiardoM  a  mentioned  in  v.  24  above.  Verses  260'.  give 
the  list  of  the  twelve  gods  in  each  set  or  class  (fosa)  of  Devas.  The  reading 
in  our  text  does  not  satisfy  the  condition  o(  giving  twelve  gods  in  the  Pratar- 
dana  class.  Hence  the  reading  from  a  coirespcxuijDg  vene  in  Bd.  P.  (I.2.36. 
30b)  vis.  aoadh^*  oaratir  dno  is  accepted  here. 

1,  If  Vjtu,  Kratu  and  Rathonsu  from  the  readings  in  Bd.  P.  is  accepted, 
the  list  will  hive  twelve  names  (the  expected  number  of  this  group  of 
Devas). 

2.  Verses  37-43  deal  with  Tamasa  Manvantara. 


1.39*50 


461 


39.  The  hundred  Indriyas  (sense*organs)  and  the  eighth 
Tamas  (Darkness)  which  the  top-most  sages  who  value  truth  as 
life,  enuaciate>  are  remembered  as  the  Devas  in  that  Manvan- 
tara. 

40.  Sibithe  lord  of  (great)  exploit^  was  the  Indra  of  those 
Devas.  O  excellent  ones»  understand  the  seven  sages  of  that 
Manvantara. 

41  -42*  Harsa»  the  son  of  Kavi ;  Frthu»  the  son  of  Kasyapa ; 
Agni^  the  son  of  Atri ;  Jyotirdhaman,  the  son  of  Bhrgu ;  VanapUha^ 
the  son  of  Puliiha>  Gotra,  the  son  of  Vasis^;  and  Caitra,  the 
son  ofPulastya  were  the  (seven)  sages  in  theTamasa  Manvan- 

tara. 

43.  Janughapda,  Santis  Nara,  Khyati,  Bhaya,  Priyabhrtya^ 

Avakft,  Pntalodha,  Drdhodyata,  B^tabandhu  were  the 

sons  of  Tamasa  Manu. 

44.  In  the  Bfth  cycle  of  Manvantara  of  Carisnava  Manu^^ 
the  groups  of  Devatas  are  well  enumerated.  Understand  them. 

45.  Amrtabha,  Abhutarajas.  Vikun(haand  Sumedhas  were 
the  auspicious  sons  of  Cari$nu  alias  Vasisfha»  the  Prajapati. 
Their  shining  and  glorious  Ganas  were  fourteen  and  four  (i.e. 
eighteen)  (or  fourteen  for  each  of  the  four  Ganas) . 

46-47.  Svatra  ( Svapna  in  A.) ,  Vipra,  Agnibhas,  Pratyeti?tha, 
Amrta,  Sumatij  Vavirava,  Vacinoda,  Srava,  Pravirasl^  Vadaand 
Praja  were  the  fourteen  (?)  Am^tabhas  remembered  as  the  diucs 
in  the  Carisnava  Manvantara. 

48-49.  Mati,  Sumad,  B.ta,  Satya,  Avtti,*  Vivrd,  Mada, 
Vinaya,  Jeta,  Ji$nu,  Sahas,  Dyutiman  and  Sravasa — these  are 
the  names  of  Abhutarajas  Ganas  as  (they)  know. 

30.  Vna,  Bhetta,^  Bhima,  Suci,  Danta,Ya£d,  Dama, 
Natha,  Vidvan,  Ajeya,  Kria,  Gaura  and  Dhruva  are  glorified  as 
Vikundias.  Uundcrstand  the  Sumedlias. 


1.  Verses  44*55  describe  the  fifUi  Manvantara  which  the  text  calls  Cans* 
aava  i.e.  of  Manu  Caris^u  but  calb  the  Manu  as  Raivata  ia  verses  54. 
55  and  56.  Manus  Irom  Sviroctfa  to  Raivata  belonged  to  the  lineage  of 
Priyavfata. 

2.  Bd.P.  Ibid  v.  56  adds  ^Edhotut^  here  and  makes  up  the  number  fourteen. 

3.  Reading  in  Bd.  P.  accepted  to  make  up  the  number  ( 14) « 


Vdjm  Furdtfa 


51-52.  Medlia»  Medhatithi,  Satyamedhi,  Prinimcdhii,  Al- 
pamcdha,  Bhuyomedha  and  others  (7),  the  lord  I^ptimedhi^ 
Yaiomedba,  Sthiramedha,  S^rvamedhi,  Aivamedha,  Pratime- 
dhi,  Medh&van  and  Medhaharta  are  glorified  as  Sumedhas. 

53-54.  Vibhu  of  well  known  exploits  and  manliness  was 
their  Indra.  Then  the  (seven)  sages  in  the  fifth  Manvantara  of 
Raivata  Manu  were:  Vedabidiu^  son  (descedant)  of  Pulascya; 
the  sage  called  Yaju,  the  son  of  Kaiyapa ;  Hiranyaroma,  son  of 
Angiras;  VedaM,  son  of  Bhrgu;  Ordhvabahu,  son  of  Vasi?tha; 
Parjanya»  son  of  Pulaha;  and  Satyanetra,  son  of  Atri. 

55.  Mahapurat:iasanibh&vya,  Pratya^aparah&>  Suet,  Bala- 
bandhu,  Niramitra,  Ketubhr^a  and  Drdhavrata  were  the  sons 
of  Cariynava.  Such  is  the  fifth  Manvantara. 

56.  Svarocisa,  Auttama,  Tamasa  and  Raivatas — these 
four  Manus  belong  to  the  bmily  of  Priyavrata. 

57.  In  the  sixth  cycle  of  Gak$u^  Manvantara'  the  Devas 
are  remembered  as  consisting  of  five  Ga^  (classes),  via.  Adyas, 
Prasutas,  Bhavyas,  the  heaven^dwellang  Pfthukas  and  the 
Lekhas  of  great  dignity. 

58.  This  creation  ofheavenKlwcllcrsis  mentioned  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  the  names  of  their  mothers.  The  Ganas  of  those 
Devas  are  the  great-grandsons  of  Aranya,  the  Prajapati,  the  son 
of  Atri.  Each  of  these  groups  is  remembered  as  comprising  of 
eight  Devas. 

59.  Antarik§a,  Vasu,  Haya,  AtitM,  Priyavrata,  Srota,  Manta 
and  Sumanta — these  are  glorified  as  Adyas. 

60.  Sycnabhadra,  Paiya,  Pathyanctra  of  great  fame,  Suma- 
nas,  Suvetas,  Raivata,  Supracetas  and  Dyuti  of  great  prowess — 
these  are  mentioned  as  Prasutas. 

61.  Vijaya,  Sujaya,Mana,Udyana,  Sumati,  Supari,Vijflata 
and  Arthapati — these  Devas  are  remembered  as  Bhavyas.  Now 
listen  and  understand  the  Prthuka  gods. 

62.  Aji»ta^  the  Lord  Sakyana,  Van^r5tha,  Sankara,  Satya- 
dhr9?u,Visnu,  Vijaya  and  the  highlyblessed  Ajitaare  the  heaven- 
dwelling  Prthukas. 


I,  Venes  57-69 


theC&k|U|a  MaovutUnk. 


1.63-75 


463 


63«64.  I  shall  now  describe  Lekhas.  Understand  as  I  recount 
them.  Manojava»  Praghasa,  Pracetas  of  great  fame»  Vata»  Dhni* 
vaktiti,  Adbhuta  of  great  virilityi  Avana  and  Bfhaspati  are  glori¬ 
fied  as  Lekhas. 

65*66.  Manojava  of  great  virility  and  prowess  became  their 
Indra  then.  The  seven  sages  in  the  Caksu^a  Manvantara  were: 
Unnata,  son  (descendant)  of  Bhrgu;  Havi^5n»  son  of 
Atigiras;  Sudhaman,  son  of  Kaiyapa;  Virajas,  son  of  Vasis(ha; 
Atimana»  ion  ofPulastya;  Sahi^riu,  son  of  Pulaha,  andMadhura, 
descendant  of  Atri. 

67-68.  Uru,  Puru,  Satadyumna,  Tapasvin»  Satyavak,  K^ti, 
Agnisfut,  Atiratra  and  Sudyumna — these  nine  and  the  tenth  one 
Abhimanyu;  these  were  the  sons  ofCak$u$a  Manuborn  of  N&d- 
vail.  Such  is  the  sixth  Manvantara. 

69.  O  Bramanas,  the  creation  of  that  noble  soul  is  explain¬ 
ed  through  (that  of)  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  and  it  has  been 
explained  by  me  in  detail  and  in  the  proper  order. 

The  saga  requated  : 

70.  The  successors  and  heirs  of  Cak^u^a  Manu  were 
born  in  the  family  of  Kasyapa.  Please  mention  (enumerate)  to 
us  all  those  othen  who  were  born  in  his  family. 

SQta  said  : 

71.  It  behoves  you  to  hear  the  creative  activity  of  Caksu^ 
Manu  in  brief.  Pf  thu,  the  valorous  son  of  Vena,  was  born  in  his 
family. 

72.  Other  Prajapatis  and  Daksa,  son  of  Pracetas,  too  were 
born  (of  that  family)  •  Atri,  the  Prajapati,  adopted  Uttanap^a 
as  his  son. 

73-74.  The  son  of  Dak^ka,  the  Prajapati, became  a  king.  He 
was  given  in  adoptiem  to  Atri  for  some  reason  by  Svayarhbhuva 
Manu  after  the  advent  of  the  sixth  (Manvantara).  O  Brahma- 
9as,  having  reached  the  future  Manvantara  Ciksusa,  I  shall  now 
explain  it  by  way  of  introduction. 

75.  The  very  clever  daughter  of  Dhanna  and  his  wife 
Laktmi,  the  lady  of  sparkling  smiles  named  Sunrti  (Sunici), 
the  lady  who  could  produce  wealth,  bore  toUttanapada  a  son 
named  Dhruva  and  became  hb  auspicious  mother. 


464 


Viyu  Purdf/a 


76.  Uttanapada  begot  of  her  Dhruva,  Klrtiman^  Ayasxnan 
and  Vasu  and  also  two  daughters  of  sparkling  smilc8>  Manasviiii 
and  Svara.  Their  sons  have  been  already  mentioned. 

77.  The  valorous  Dhruva,  praying  for  (desirous  of)  exten¬ 
sive  fame,  performed  penance  for  ten  thousand  divine  years 
observing  fast. 

78-79.  In  the  first  Tretiyuga,  he  (Dhniva),  the  grandson 
of  Svayariibhuva  Manu,  controlled  himself  by  means  of  Yoga 
in  his  desire  to  win  great  fame.  The  delighted  Brahmi  granted 
him  the  excellent  abode  among  luminaries.  It  is  pleasing  and 
lasting  till  the  final  dissolution  of  the  Universe.  It  is  devoid  of 
setting  and  rising. 

80.  On  seeing  his  unlimited  glory  and  greatness,  Uianas, 
the  preceptor  ofDaityas  and  Asuras,  sang  this  Aoka  (verse). 

81.  *‘How  wonderful  is  the  prowess  of  his  penance  I  How 
commendable  is  his  learning  !  Wonderful  is  his  Huh  (Holy  rite) 
that  the  seven  sages  have  kept  Dhruva  above  ilicmsclvcs.  The 
firmament  depends  on  Dhruva.  He  b  the  controller  and  the 
lord  of  the  fi^namcnt’^ 

82.  Bhumibore  to  Dhruva  two  kings  (as  sons),  viz.  Pu^fi 
and  Bhavya.  The  powerful  lord  Pusfi  told  his  shadow,  “Be  a 
woman”. 

83.  At  his  truthful  utterance,  tlie  shadow  of  divine  body 
became  a  woman  immediately.  She  was  bedecked  in  divine 
ornaments. 

84.  Pufli  begot  of  his  Chaya  five  sinless  sons,  viz. 
Praclnagarbha,  Vr^ka,  Vrka,  Vfkala  and  Dhrti. 

85.  The  wife  of  Pr^nagarbha  named  Bhuvarca  gave  birth 
to  a  son  who  became  a  king  by  the  name  of  Ud^adM.  In  his 
previous  birth,  he  had  been  Indra. 

86.  He  used  to  take  food  but  once  at  the  end  of  every 
thousand  years.  Thus  the  lord  secured  Indra-hood  which  lasted 
a  Manvantara. 

87.  Bhadra  bore  to  Ud^adhl  the  son  Divafijaya.  Var^hgl 
bore  to  Divaiijaya  the  son  Ripu,  the  conqueror  of  foes. 

88.  From  Ripu,  BfhatX,  bore  a  son  Cak^u^  endowed  with 
all  types  of  brilliance.  Gik|u$a  begot  Manu  of  PufkariQl,  a 
descendant  of  Varu^a  and  the  daughter  of  the  noble-sou  led 
Prajapati  Arapya. 


1.89-102 


465 

89*  O  blessed  one,  Medu  begot  ten  auspicious  sons  of 
Nadvala,  the  daughter  of  Vairaja,  the  Prajapad. 

90.  The  sons  of  Manu  and  Nadvala  were  Uru,  Puru,  Sata- 
dyunona,  Tapasvin,  Satyavak,  Kavi,  Agni^pit,  Atiratra  and 
Sudyumna — these  nine  as  well  as  the  tenth  son  Abhimanyu. 

9L  Agneyi  bore  to  Cru  six  sons  of  great  brilliance,  viz. 
Ahga,  Sumanas,  Sv^ti,  Kratu,  Angiras  and  Siva. 

92.  To  Anga,  Sunitha  bore  a  single  child  Vena.  Due  to  the 
misdemeanour  of  Vena,  there  was  a  great  indignant  commotion. 

93.  For  the  sake  of  progeny,  the  sages  (churned)  his  right 
hand.  When  the  hand  of  Vena  was  pressed,  a  great  kii^  was 
born.  The  royal  descendant  of  Vena  was  glorified  as  Pfthu. 

94.  Pfthu,  the  son  of  Vena,  was  the  foremost  of  K^atriyas. 
He  was  born  with  a  bow  and  a  coat  of  mail.  He  appeared 
blazing  with  his  splendour.  He  protected  all  the  worlds. 

95.  He  was  the  first  among  kings  who  had  been  crowned  in 
the  Rajasuya  sacrifice.  He  was  the  ruler  of  the  Earth.  In  order 
to  eulogise  him,  the  clever  Suta  and  Magadha  (Bards)  were 
born. 

96-97.  For  the  sake  of  his  subjects  desirous  of  livelihood  the 
Earth  in  the  form  of  a  cow  was  milked,  yielding  all  sorts  of 
plants,  along  with  the Devas,  groups  of  Sages,  Pitfs,  Danavas, 
Gandharvas,  Apsaras-s,  all  Pu^yajanas,  creepers  and  mountains. 

98.  Being  milked  in  difTerent  vessels,  the  Earth  {Vasundhard 
— that  which  contains  rich  deposits)  yielded  milk  as  much  as 
they  desired.  Thereby,  he  sustained  the  world. 

The  sag€5  said  I 

99-100.  O  highly  intelligent  one,  narrate  in  detail  the 
story  of  the  birth  of  Pfthu  and  how  the  Earth  {Vasundhard) 
was  milked  formerly  by  that  noble-souled  (king)  along  with 
Devas,  serpents,  Brahmanas,  Sages,  Yakfas,  Gandharvas 
and  Apsaras-s. 

101.  To  us  who  solicit  (the  Information)  describe  their 
special  forms  of  vessels,  the  milker,  the  milk  and  the  different 
calves  (used  for  milking). 

102.  Please  mention  everything  to  us,  for  what  reason  the 
hand  of  Vena  was  pressed  formerly  by  the  infuriated  sages. 


Pura^ 


466 

SBta  said : 

103.  O  Br&hmat;ias,  I  shall  describe  the  origin  of  Pfthu, 
the  son  of  Vena.  O  excellent  Brihmanas,  listen  attentively 
with  minds  purified  by  austerities. 

104.  I  shall  not  describe  this  holy  narrative  to  an  impure 
person^  nor  to  a  sinful  one,  nor  to  one  who  is  not  a  disciple»  nor 
to  one  who  is  malevolent  and  never  to  (by  no  means  to)  one 
who  does  not  observe  holy  rites. 

105*106.  This  story  is  conducive  to  fame»  longevity  and 
attainment  of  heaven.  It  is  holy  and  on  a  par  with  the  Vedas.  It 
is  esoteric  as  the  sages,  have  said.  He  who  is  not  malicious  shall 
hear  it.  The  man  who  recounts  this  narrative  of  the  birth  of 
Pfthu,  the  son  of  Vena,  to  Brahma^  after  bowing  to  them  shall 
not  bewail  errors  of  commission  and  omission.  This  king  (i.e. 
Prthu)  was  a  defender  of  faith.  He  was  equal  to  Atri. 

107.  The  Prajapati  named  Ahga  was  born  in  the  family  of 
Atri.  Vena  was  his  son.  He  was  not  very  pious  or  faithful. 

108.  The  Prajapati  was  bom  of  Sunitha,  the  daughter  of 
Mftyu.  Vena  was  the  son  of  the  daughter  of  Kala.  Hence  on 
account  of  the  (hereditary)  evil  trait  of  his  maternal  grandfather, 
Vena  (was  cruel) . 

109.  He  turned  his  back  on  Dharma;  he  indulged  in  covet¬ 
ousness  as  he  pleased.  He  established  institutions  devoid  of 
Dharma  (Virtue  and  Piety). 

110.  Disregarding  the  Vedas  and  Sastras  he  was  engrossed 
in  sinful  and  evil  activities.  While  he  reigned  the  subjects  were 
devoid  of  Vcdic  study  and  utterance  of  Va^lkaras.  The  deities 
did  not  partake  of  the  sacrificial  offerings  nor  did  they  drink  the 
Soma  juice. 

111.  Yajfia  should  be  performed.  No  offerings  should 
be  oblated  to  fire’*.  This  was  the  cruel,  solemn  declaration  of  that 
Prajapati  when  his  (utter)  ruin  was  imminent. 

112*  He  proclaimed  :  ^^In  all  sacrifices,  I  deserve  to  be 
offered  sacrifice  (sacrificial  oblations)  and  worship,  by  all  twice- 
born  castes.  VajQas  should  be  performed  unto  me.  I  should  be 
invoked  while  (performing)  Homas.’* 

113.  When  he  crossed  the  limits  of  decency,  when  he  took 
up  an  improper  stand,  Mariciand  other  great  sages  told  him: 


l.U4<126 


467 


114«I15«  We  are  going  to  be  initiated  (into  a  rite  last- 
ing)  for  many  hundreds  of  yean.  O  Vena^  do  not  perform  un* 
righteous  acts.  This  is  not  the  eternal  Dharma.  In  the  (family  of 
the  God  of)  Death  you  are  undoubtedly  born  as  a  Prajapati.  It 
has  been  promised  by  you  formerly:  shall  protect  the  sub¬ 

jects.’  ”  While  they  talked  thus.  Vena  spoke  to  the  Brahmarri^: 

116-118.  The  evil-minded  but  eloquent  Vena  laughingly 
said  thus  :  **  Who  else  u  the  creator  of  Dharma?  Whose  words 
are  needed  by  me  ?  Who  is  there  on  the  Earth  equal  to  me 
in  prowess,  learning,  penance  and  truthfulness  ?  You  all  know 
precisely  that  I  am  inferior  to  none,  that  I  am  a  noble  soul.  I 
am  the  source  of  origin  of  all  the  worlds  and  particularly  of  all 
Dhamas.  If  I  wish  I  can  bum  the  entire  Earth  or  make  it  flood¬ 
ed  with  water.  I  can  create  it  or  swallow  (annihilate)  it.  No 
doubts  or  suspicions  need  be  entertained  in  this  matter.** 

119.  When  the  king  Vena  who  was  utterly  deluded  by 
stubbornness  and  sense  of  false  prestige,  could  not  be  dissuaded, 
the  great  sages  became  infuriated. 

120.  They  caught  hold  of  that  mighty  one  even  as  he  was 
dazzling  like  fire.  Highly  infuriated,  they  twisted  and  churned 
his  left  hand. 

121-123.  O  Brahmanas,  from  his  hand  that  was  being 
twisted  and  churned,  a  man  black  in  colour  and  very  shore  in 
stature,  was  born.  Formerly  it  was  beard  so  (by  us).  He  was 
agitated  in  all  his  sense-organs.  Frightened,  he  stood  there  with 
palms  joined  in  reverence.  On  seeing  him  confused  and  deject¬ 
ed,  (the  sages)  said:  down).  He,  of  infinite  valour, 

became  the  founder  of  the  dynasty  of  Nis^as  (a  hill  tribe) . 
He  created  Dhivaras  too  (the  fishermen)  bom  of  the  sins  and 
defects  of  Vena. 

124.  All  those  others  (hill  tribes)  res  iding  on  the  Vindhya 
mountains  such  as  Tuihburas,  Tuvaras  and  Khasas  and  persons 
interested  in  evil  actions  were  bom  of  the  sins  of  Vena. 

125.  Becoming  indignant  ^ain,  the  great  sages  pressed  and 
churned  the  right  hand  of  Vena  in  great  fury  as  though  it  were 
the  (a  pice  of  wood  used  to  kindle  sacred  fire  by  attrition) . 

126.  From  the  splendid  brilliance  originating  from  the 
pressure  exerted  on  the  right  hand,  PTthu  was  bom.  Since  he 


Fijiu  PufS(^ 


468 

was  bom  of  the  big  (PftAu)  hand  (palm)  he  was  called  Prthu.^ 
He  was  dazzling  with  the  brilliance  of  his  body  like  the  Fire* 
god. 

127.  He  wielded  the  primordial  bow  of  loud  reporti  named 
Ajagava.  Then  he  took  up  the  arrows  and  the  coat  of  mail  of 
great  lustre  for  the  sake  of  protection. 

128.  When  he  was  bom,  all  the  living  beings  became  high* 
ly  delighted.  When  the  great  king  was  bom,  Vena  went  to 
heaven. 

129.  Due  to  the  birth  of  that  intelligent  noble-souled  son, 
he  (Vena)  was  (elevated  as)  a  Xdjar/i  (a  royal  sage).  The  tiger 
among  men  (Pfthu)  then  protected  him  from  the  hdl  called  Put 
(by  being  born  as  a  son). 

130.  All  the  rivers  and  oceans  brought  gems  and  jewels  and 
came  there.  They  crowned  the  son  of  Vena  as  the  king.  With  a 
great  royal  kingdom,  he  became  an  Emperor  of  great  splendour. 

131.  That  Emperor  was  coronated  by  the  Devas,  the  sons 
of  Ahgiras.  The  valorous  son  of  Vena,  Pfthu,  became  the  fint 
king  and  a  great  Emperor. 

132.  The  subjects  who  had  been  antagonised  by  his  father 
were  won  over  by  him.  Hence  thanks  to  his  Anurdga  ( love  and 
affection)  he  got  the  namcRdjS  (king) . 

133.  When  he  rushed  against  the  ocean,  the  waters  stood 
steady  and  motionless,  and  mountains  crumbled  before  him.  He 
never  experienced  the  breakage  of  his  banner. 

134.  The  Earth  yielded  food^grains  without  being  cultivat* 
ed.  All  edible  things  were  achieved  on  mere  thought.  Cows 
yielded  whatever  one  desired.  Honey  was  obtained  in  every 
leaf-cup  (cluster  of  flowers  ?) 

135.  At  that  time,  in  the  auspicious  Yajfia  of  Pitamaha, 
the  highly  intelligent  Suta  was  bom  of  iV/i  (the  extraction  of 
Soma  juice)  on  the  day  intended  for  the  extraction  of  Soma 
juice.  The  intelligent  Magadha  was  also  born  in  the  same  great 
Yajfla. 


1.  Our  text  gives  a  number  popular  etymologies,  vidf  that  of  Nlsgda 
(io  V.  123)  aod  ofFithu  here. 


MS6-146 


469 

136.  With  the  Havis  of  Indra  the  Havis  of  Brhaspati  got 
mixed.  The  ofTering  was  made  to  Indra  by  the  Devas  and  there* 
by  Suta  was  bom.^ 

137.  The  Haiya  ofTeriz^  of  the  preceptor  which  was  mingled 
with  that  meant  for  the  disciple,  was  over^powered  by  the  dis¬ 
ciple’s  Havis.  On  account  of  the  (mingling)  acdvityof  the  lower 
and  the  upper,  a  mixed  caste  came  into  being. 

138.  A  Suta  (charioteer)  is  begot  of  a  Brahmaoas  lady  by 
a  K^atriya  who  belongs  to  an  inferior  caste.  Hence  Suta  is  pro¬ 
claimed  to  have  rites  of  the  latter  (K$attriya)  one. 

139.  It  is  the  middle  type  of  Dharma  of  a  Suta,  viz.  that 
of  Kfattriyas.  (He  has  these  duties:)  looking  after  and  mainte¬ 
nance  of  chariots,  elephants,  horses.  Practice  of  medicine  is 
(his)  lowliest  of  duties.  , 

140.  Both  of  them  (Suta  and  Magadha)  were  called  there 
by  the  Devas  and  Sages  for  eulogising  Pfthu.  All  the  sages  said 
to  them:  *‘May  this  king  be  eulogised.  This  is  abeHtting  activity 
of  yours.  He  is  also  a  person  deserving  praise”. 

141-142.  Then  Suta  and  Migadha  told  all  the  sages:  *^We 
shall  propitiate  the  Devas  and  the  sages  with  our  activities.  We 
do  not  know  the  performances,  characteristics  and  reputation  of 
this  (prthu)  king.  Wherefore,  O  Br^ma^,  can  we  eulogise 
this  brilliant  king  ?” 

143.  They  were  enjoined  by  the  sages  :*‘Let  him  be  eulo¬ 
gised  by  his  future  activities.  He  has  control  over  his  sense 
organs.  He  is  always  engaged  in  charitable  rites.  He  is  truthful, 
endowed  with  knowledge.  He  ismuniftcent  and  is  never  defeated 
in  battles. 

144.  Suta  and  Magadha  eulogised  him  by  composing  songs 
about  the  past  achievements  of  the  powerful  king  Prthu. 

145.  At  the  end  of  the  culog/,  the  delighted  Prthu,  the 
lord  of  the  subjects,  gave  the  land  Anupa  to  Suta  and 
Magadha  to  Magadha. 

146.  Ever  since,  all  the  kings  are  eulogised  by  Sutas 

1.  Venet  136-146  espUin  how  tad  %^y  the  mixed  clan  called  sOU  came 
mto  odstence  and  the  duties  angned  to  that  caste.  The  relation  between 
Migadha  and  the  land  called  Magadha  is  undentaodable  but  not  that 
between  SOta  and AnCpa  (South  M^wa). 


470  yifyu  Purd^a 

and  Magadhas.  They  are  awakened  by  Sutas,  Magadhas  and 
Bandis  (Bards)  with  benedictory  songs. 

147.  On  seeing  him  (King  Pfthu)>  the  subjects  were 
extremely  pleased.  The  great  sages  told  (them)  :  *^Let  this 
protector  of  men  (King),  the  son  of  Vena,  be  the  bestower  of 
livelihood  to  you’*. 

148-149.  Then  the  subjects  hurried  and  flocked  round 
(literally)  the  blessed  son  of  Vena  saying,  per  promise  of 
the  great  sages  you  make  arrangements  for  our  livelihood.  On 
being  hustled  by  the  subjects,  the  powerful  (king  Pfthu) ,  with 
the  desire  to  perform  what  was  beneflcent  to  the  subjects,  took 
up  his  bow  and  arrows  and  rushed  at  Vasudhd  (the  Earth). 
Being  afraid  of  being  hit,  the  Earth  assumed  the  form  of  a  cow 
and  fled. 

150.  Taking  up  his  bow,  Pfthu  ran  in  pursuit  of  the  fleeing 
Earth.  Frightened  of  the  son  of  Vena,  she  (the  Earth)  ran  to 
Brahmaloka  and  other  worlds  (but  Anally)  saw  in  front  of  her 
the  son  of  Vena  holding  the  bow  lifted  up. 

151.  He  had  his  splendour  brightened  up  by  the  biasing 
arrows  and  shafts.  He  was  of  never  failing  (power)  and  endow¬ 
ed  with  great  Yogic  power.  He  was  invincible  even  to  the  Devas. 
He  could  not  be  thwarted  by  anyone. 

152.  The  goddess  (Earth)  who  is  always  worthy  of  being 
worshipped  by  the  three  worlds,  could  not  get  succour  (from 
elsewhere)  and  so  yielded  to  the  son  of  Vena  with  palms  join¬ 
ed  in  reverence. 

153.  She  spoke  to  the  son  of  Vena  :  “O  king,  you  are 
not  aware  of  the  sin  inherent  in  killing  a  lady.  How  are  you 
going  to  sustain  the  subjects  without  me. 

154.  O  most  excellent  of  all  kings,  but  for  me  the  subjects 
will  be  ruined.  O  king,  all  the  worlds  rest  in  me.  The  whole 
universe  is  sustained  by  me. 

155.  O  protector  of  the  Earth,  if  you  wish  to  do  what  is 
benefleial  to  the  subjects,  it  does  not  behove  you  to  kill  me.  Pay 
heed  to  my  words. 

156.  All  undertakings  become  fruitful  if  they  are  begun 
with  proper  means.  O  king,  even  after  killing  me,  you  will  not 
be  competent  to  protect  and  look  after  the  subjects. 


1.157-169 


471 


157.  O  extremely  refulgent  one,  I  shall  become  the  pftK 
ducer  of  food.  Refrain  from  fury.  They  say  that  females  are  not 
to  be  kilted  even  from  among  the  hundreds  of  lower  animal 
species.  O  protector  of  the  Earth,  in  consideration  of this>  it 
does  not  behove  you  to  forsake  Dharma*^ 

1 58.  On  hearing  these  various  statements  the  noble-minded 
king  of  righteous  soul,  restrained  his  anger  and  spoke  thus  to 
(the  Earth)  : 

159.  **If  amy  one  destroys  a  single  life  or  many,  whether  his 
own  or  anyone  else’s  and  for  the  sake  of  one,  he  attains  enough 
sin. 

160.  O  auspicious  lady,  when  many  attain  happiness,  if 
one  man  is  killed  there  is  no  great  or  small  sin. 

161.  O  Earth  (repository  of  wealth),  if  you  do  not  act 
according  to  my  instructions  which  are  conducive  to  the  welfare 
of  the  Universe,  I  will  kill  you  for  the  cause  of  the  subjects. 

162.  If  you  turn  your  face  (disobey)  against  my  behest,  I 
shall  presently  killyou  with  an  (single)  arrow.  After  proclaim¬ 
ing  myself  (as  their  Lord),  I  sliall  sustain  the  subjects. 

163.  Hence,  O  excellent  lady,  foremost  among  the  up* 
holders  of  virtue,  paying  heed  to  my  words  will  enliven  the 
subjects  perpetually.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it  that  you  are 
competent  to  do  so. 

164.  Be  my  daughter.  This  is  the  great  and  excellent  step 
(in  the  circumstances).  O  furious-looking  lady,  I  control  you 
for  the  sake  of  (establishing)  piety**. 

165.  Thus  admonished,  the  chaste  lady,  the  Earth,  spoke  to 

the  son  of  Vena  in  reply:  king,  undoubtedly  I  shall  carry 

out  this  thus. 

1 66.  O  excellent  one  among  the  upholders  of  virtue,  give 
me  a  calf  so  that  I  cangive  milk  oui  of  affection.  Make  me  flat- 
surfaced  and  level  everywhere  so  that  1  can  spread  everywhere 
the  flowing  milk.** 

167.  With  the  tip  of  his  bow  the  son  of  Vena  pushed  away 
the  heaps  of  rocks  everywhere.  The  hills  were  raised  up  by  him. 

168-169.  In  the  past  Manvantaras  the  Earth  was  rugged 
and  uneven.  Naturally  some  parts  were  even  and  some  uneven. 
In  the  course  of  the  previous  creations,  there  was  no  demarca¬ 
tion  of  cities  and  villages,  as  the  Earth  was  uneven  and  rugged. 


472 


Vdyu  Pnrd^a 


I70»  In  the  Cikfu$a  Manvantara  there  were  no  plants^  no 
breeding  of  cows,  no  cultivation  and  no  trade  routes.  All  these 
occurred  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara. 

I7L  Wherever  there  was  evenness  (plain  ground)  the 
subjects  always  occupied  it. 

172.  The  diet  cansisted  of  fruits  and  roots.  Since  the  reign 
of  the  son  of  Vena  all  these  things  appeared  in  this  world. 

173.  When  the  medicinal  herbs  were  destroyed,  lord  Pfthu 
made  Cak^u^a  Manu  the  calf,  and  with  great  difficulty  milked 
with  his  own  hand,  the  Earth  (in  the  form  of  a  ccw)^  and  pro¬ 
duced  plants. 

174.  Food  grains  and  plants  were  milked  by  the  son  of 
Vena  from  the  Earth*goddess  after  making  C&k5U$a  Manu  the 
calf  and  the  bare  ground  the  vessel.  The  subjects  always  main¬ 
tained  themselves  with  that  food. 

175-176.  The  Earth  (The  holder  of  trea8ures)was  eulogised 
by  the  sages  and  milked  again.  Their  calf  was  Soma  (the  Moon) 
and  the  milker  (milkman)  was  Brhaspati.  The  vessel  was 
Gayatrl  and  other  (Vedic)  metres.  Their  milk  was  penance 
and  the  eternal  Brahman. 

177.  Again  (the  Earth  was)  eulogised  by  the  groups  of 
Devas  led  by  Purandara  after  taking  up  a  golden  vessel  and 
Amrta  (Nectar)  was  milked  by  them.  The  Devas  led  by  Indr  a 
sustained  themselves  with  that  alone. 

1 78.  The  Earth  was  eulogised  by  the  Mgas  (Serpents)  and 
milked.  Poison  was  the  milk,  Vasuki  the  son  of  Kadru,  was  the 
milkman,  on  behalf  of  those  highly  powerful  serpents. 

179.  O  excellent  Brahma^as,  the  fierce,  huge-bodied  and 


I.  The  story  Prthu  his  milking  oT  the  Earth  is  a  Porai^ic  pre(en« 
tadon  of  the  Vedic  conception  of  milking  of  the  \^aj  cow.  The  PtVJy  Ss/:/a 
(AV.  Vlir.lO)  forms  the  basis  of  this Puranic  legend.  The  Puranic  legend 
asserts  the  right  of sages  (public  leaders)  to  ronove  a  wilful  tyrant. 

This  Prthu  is  a  Vedic  king  and  ta  recorded  to  have  worshipped  the 
A^ins  in  hia  sacrificial  chamber  ( AV.  XX.140ii).  Tbe  milking  of  Vir^  cow 
by  Prthv  wiih  the  earth  as  a  milking  pail  and  Vaivasvata  Manu  as  a  calf  is 
mentioned  in  AV.  VIII.  10.24.  But  in  our  PuraQS  C&lpfusa  Manu  is  made 
the  calf.  See  v.  174. 

This  episode  is  depicted  m  various  Puripasas  in  Mbh  S&nti,  59.^-128, 
Bh.  P.  IV.18,  Mt.  P.  10.1-33.  Bd.  P.  12.36. 1 77*202. 


1.180-189 


473 


excessively  aggressive  ones  among  the  Nagas  and  Sarpas  sustain 
themselves  with  that  alone*  That  is  their  diet  and  sustenance. 
Their  conduct  and  prowess  were  in  accordance  with  that* 

180.  After  making  themselves  invisible!  the  Earth  was 
milked  again  by  the  Yak^as  and  Pupyajanas.  They  had  made 
Vaiirava:^  (Kubera)  the  calf.  It  was  an  unbaked  vessel  that 
they  milked  into. 

18L  The  milker  was  Jatunabha,  the  father  of  Ma^vara* 
He  possessed  great  strength  and  excessive  splendour.  He  had 
full  self-control.  He  was  the  son  of  a  Yak^.  The  great  sage 
said  that  they  sustained  themselves  with  that  milk. 

162.  The  Earth  was  milked  again  by  Raksasas  and 
Pilkeas.  Their  milkman  was  Kubera  endowed  with  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  Brahman. 

183.  The  calf  was  the  powerful  Sum&lL  Blood  was  the 
milk  yielded.  It  was  a  vessel  of  skull  that  the  R&ksasas  milked 
into  by  being  invisible.  All  the  Rkk^asas  sustain  themselves 
with  that  milk. 

184.  In  the  vessel  of  lotus  (leaves)  the  Earth  was  milked 
again  by  Gandharvas  and  the  groups  of  Apsaras-s.  They  made 
Gitraratha  the  calf,  and  pure  scents  was  the  yield. 

185.  Vi^v&vasu  who  was  the  pure  son  of  a  sage  and  who 
was  the  very  powerful  king  of  Gandharvas  and  who  was  a 
noble  soul  resembling  the  sun  was  their  milkman. 

186.  The  goddess  Earth  was  eulogised  and  milked  again  by 
the  mountains.  The  yield  was  the  medicinal  herbs  in  embodied 
form  and  various  lands  of  predotis  stones. 

187.  Mt.  Himavan  was  their  calf.  The  great  mountain 
Meru  was  the  milkman.^  The  mountain  itself  was  the  vessel. 
With  that  the  mountain  was  stabilised. 

188.  The  Earth-goddess  was  eulogised  and  milked  again  by 
the  trees  and  creepers.  They  took  the  leafy  cup  of  Palkia  as  the 
vessel.  The  milk  yielded  was  the  ability  to  grow  after  being  cut* 

1 89.  The  mountain  in  full  bloom  was  Kdmadhuk  ( the  milk¬ 
man  of  what  is  desired) .  Plak$a  tree  was  the  calf.  The  Earth 
(was  thus)  the  yielder  of  all  desires,  the  benefactress  of  all  liv¬ 
ing  beings  and  very  famous. 

I.  echoes  this io 1.2. 


474 


PurdM 


190.  SmA  is  the  Earth  (V^snndkard)  (the  possessor  of 
riches)  who  became  the  Z>AJtr{  (nurse) »  Vidhitri  (the  creative 
agent) »  and  Dharani  (the  support) .  We  have  heard  that  it 
was  milked  for  the  wel&re  of  all  the  people  by  Prthu.  It  be* 
caiQC  the  foundation  of  the  world  consisting  of  the  mobile  and 
the  immobile  beings  and  its  source  of  origin. 


CHAPTER  TWO 
Tki  Dynasty  of  Pfthu 

Sdta  said  : 

I .  It  is  reported  that  the  Earth  extended  to  the  oceans  as 
its  limit.  It  is  called  Vasudhd^  because  it  holds  riches  {Vasu — 
wealth,  DkdrayaU — holds) . 

2-3.  Formerly  the  earth  was  covered  with  the  iat  of 
Madhu  and  Kai^abha.  Hence  the  Earth  extending  to  the  oceans 
became  famous  as  Medini  {Moias — fat) .  Since  the  intelligent 
son  of  Vena,  king  Prthu,  adopted  her  as  his  daughter,  she  is 
called  Prthivu^ 

4.  The  division  of  this  famous,  beautiful  Earth  was  former¬ 
ly  made  by  King  Prthu*  The  Earth  consisting  of  a  series  of 
towns  and  mines  (of  various  natural  products)  and  populated 
by  people  of  four  castes  was  protected  by  that  intelligent  king. 

5.  That  excellent  king,  the  son  of  Vena,  had  such  prowess. 
He  was  worthy  of  being  bowed  to  and  worshipped  by  all  living 
beings. 

6.  Being  ancient  and  bom  of  Brahman,  Prthu  alone  :'s 
worthy  of  being  offered  obeisance  by  Br&hmanas  of  great  dig¬ 
nity  (and  fortuned  who  were  experts  in  the  Vedas  and  their 
Ahgas  (ancillary  subjects) . 

7.  The  primordial  king  I^diu,  the  valorous  son  of  Vena, 
should  be  bowed  to  by  the  excessively  blessed  kings  who  seek 
great  fame. 

1.  As  in  V.  190  of  the  previous  chapter,  etymologies  of  other  names  of 
the  Earth  are  ^ven  here. 


2.8-18 


475 


8.  Only  Prtbo,  tbe  fint  maker  of  men,  should  be  bowed  to 
by  the  warrion  also  seek  victory  in  battle. 

9.  The  warrior  who.  after  glorifying  Pfthu^  proceeds  to 
the  battlefield,  returns  safely  firom  the  terrible  battle  and  attains 
glorious  fame. 

10.  The  saintly  kingPrthu.  the  excessively  renowned  one, 
should  be  bowed  to  by  the  Vaisyas,  strictly  adhering  to  the 
avocation  and  duties  of  Vaiiyas,  as  it  was  he  who  gave  them 
livelihood  and  sustenance. 

1 1 .  These  different  calves  and  milkers,  milk  and  the  vessels 
all  have  been  described  by  me  in  the  proper  order. 

12.  At  the  very  outset  the  Earth  was  milked  by  the  noble- 
shouled  BrahmS  after  making  Viyu  the  calf.^  The  vessel  was 
the  surface  of  the  Earth  and  the  yield,  the  seeds. 

13.  Then  in  the  early  Sv&yambhuva  Manvantara,  the  Earth 
was  milked  by  Agnidhra^  after  making  Svayambhuva  Manu  the 
calf. 

14.  Formerly,  when  Svarocita  was  Manu,  the  Earth  was 
milked  by  the  intelligent  Caitra,  after  making  Svarocisa  Manu 
the  calf  The  yield  consisted  of  plants  and  foodgrains. 

15.  In  the  Auttama  Manvantara,  the  Earth  was  milked  by 
the  most  excellent  and  intelligent  Devabhuja,  after  making  the 
Manu  Uttama  the  calf.  The  yield  consisted  of  all  foodgrains. 

16.  Again  in  the  fifth  Manvantara,  via.  the  Tamasa  Man¬ 
vantara  the  Earth  was  milked  by  Balabandhu  after  making 
Tamasa  Manu  the  calf. 

1 7«  When  the  Manvantara  of  lord  Garis^va  Manu  arrived, 
the  Earth  was  milked  by  Purina  after  making  Cari^^va  Manu 
the  calf. 

i 

18.  When  the  Gak^u^a  Manvantara  arrived,  the  Earth  was 
again  milked  by  Purina,  after  making  Cak^usa  Manu  the  calf. 


1.  Verses  12-20  give  tbe  list  oipcnota  who  “milked**  the  earth  in  each 
Manvantara.  Each  ^milkicg*  shows  in  a  way  the  advancement  of  human 
dvilixatlon. 

2.  Bd.  P.  L2-37  reads  caw4  hi  '*al]  types  of  foodgtains  were 

the  milky  yield".  Here  probably  stands  for  Agnidhra.  But  tbe  milky 

yield  is  not  mentioned  in  our  teat. 


476 


Viyu  Purd^ 


19«  When  the  Cik  5u;a  Manvantara  elapsed  and  Vaivasvata 
Manvantara  arrived,  the  Earth  was  again  milked  by  the  aon  of 
Vena,  as  narrated  by  me  to  you* 

20.  Formerly  in  the  previous  Manvantaras  the  Earth  was 
milked  by  the  Devas  and  others,  by  human  beings  as  well  as 
by  the  Bhutas  (living  beings  or  goblins)  and  others. 

21.  Thus  the  Devas  should  be  known  in  all  the  past  and 
present  Manvantaras.  Now  listen  to  the  sons  of  Prthu. 

22.  Two  valorous  sons,  Antardhi  and  P&lin  were  bom  to 
Pfthu.  iSikhandini  bore  to  Antardhana  (Antardhi)  the  son 
Havirdbina. 

23.  Dbisat>a,  the  daughter  of  Agni,bore  to  Havirdhana  six 
sons,  viz.  Pracinabarhis,  Sukra,  Gaya,  Krs^a,  Vraja  and 
Ajina. 

24.  The  holy  lord  Pracinabarhis  was  a  great  Prajapati. 
Thanks  to  his  strength,  learning,  penance  and  prowess,  be  was 
the  sole  Emperor  of  the  Earth.  The  tips  of  his  Kuia  grasses 
pointed  to  the  cast  byfrequent  use  in  Yajhas.  Hence  he  is  called 
Pr&clnabarhis.^ 

25.  That  lord  duly  married  Savarna,  the  daughter  of  the 
ocean,  far  beyond  the  extensive  darkness.  From  the  Praj&pati 
the  daughter  of  the  ocean,  Savar^,  bore  the  ten  sons  of  Pracl« 
nabarhis. 

26«  All  of  them  are  named  Pracetas.  They  were  masters  of 
the  science  of  archery.  Performing  r^hteous  actions  (in  close 
association)  without  being  separated,  they  perfixmed  great  pen* 
ance  for  ten  thousand  years  lying  in  the  waters  of  the  ocean. 

27*  While  the  Pracetas  were  performing  penance  on  the 
Earth  the  trees  not  being  properly  cared  for  covered  the  earth 
resulting  in  the  decline  and  ruin  of  the  subjects. 

28.  When  (the  firmament)  was  obstructed  in  the  C^su^ 
Manvantara,  wind  could  not  blow.  The  sky  was  covered  with 
trees.  The  subjects  could  not  (carry  their  activities)  for  ten 
thousand  years. 

29.  On  realising  it  by  means  of  their  power  of  penance,  all 


1«  Cf  Bd.  P.  1.2J7.2^aa  etyxsology  to  explain  the  lignlficance  of  the 
Usg'snsizie. 


2.30-41 


477 


the  Pracetas,  endowed  with  Yogic  power,  became  infuriated  and 
created  wind  and  fire  from  their  mouths. 

SO.  Vayu  uprooted  those  trees  and  dried  them  up.  The  fierce 
fire  burned  them.  Thus  the  destruction  of  trees  took  place. 

31.  Learning  of  the  destruction  of  the  trees  (and  when 
only)  a  few  trees  survived,  king  Soma  (the  Moon-god) 
approached  these  Pracetas  and  spoke  to  them: 

32.  kii^s,  O  sons  of  Pracinabarhis,  give  up  your 
anger  after  considering  the  benefits  conferred  (by  flourishing 
trees)  fbr  the  continuance  of  the  worlds. 

33.  The  trees  will  grow  on  the  Earth.  May  the  fire  and  the 
wind  calm  down.  This  jewel  of  a  girl  of  fair  complexion  is  the 
daughter  of  the  trees. 

34.  Knowing  this  future  (contingency),  she  has  been  nurtur¬ 
ed  (and  brought  up)  by  me  with  my  rays.  She  is  named  Mirisi 
and  is  created  by  the  trees  themselves.  May  she,  nurtured  in  the 
womb  of  the  moon*,  be  your  wife. 

35.  By  means  of  a  moiety  of  your  splendour  as  well  as  a 
moiety  of  my  splendour,  the  learned  Prajapati  named  Dak^ 
will  be  bom  of  her. 

36.  He,  of  fiery  splendour,  shall  again  develop  the  subjects 
and  protect  the  Earthalmost  burnt  by  the  fire  of  your  brilliance.’* 

37.  Then,  at  the  instance  of  Soma  (the  Moon-god)  those 
Pracetas  curbed  their  fury  and  accepted  righteously  from  the 
trees  (their  daughter)  Marina  as  their  wife. 

38*39.  They  then  impregnated  Marina  mentally.  Dak^  the 
Prajapati  was  born  of  Mari^  and  the  ten  Pracetas.  He  posses¬ 
sed  great  splendour  and  virility,  thanks  to  the  part  of  Soma.  At 
first  Dakfa  created  progeny  by  mental  process  and  subsequently 
by  means  of  sexual  intercourse. 

40.  After  creating  the  immboile  beings,  mobile  beings,  bipeds 
and  quadrupeds  mentally,  Dak$a  created  Nvomen  (daughters) 
thereafter. 

41 .  He  gave  ten  (of  his  dai^hters)  to  Dharma,  thirteen  to 
Kafyapa  and  twenty-seven  engaged  in  the  movement  of  time 
(i.e.  the  twenty-seven  constellations)  to  the  moon. 

*i.e»  imyt  of  the  mooo’  (as  stated  ia  v.  34a} . 


478 


Vtya  Airdptf 

42.  After  giving  these  (daugh ten)  to  them  he  gave  four 
other  daughters  to  Ari^taaemi,  two  to  Bihuputra,  two  to  A^- 
ras  and  <me  daughter  to  Kii&iva.  Now  know  their  progeny. 

43.  By  this  time,  the  sixth  Manvantara  of  Cakiu^a  Manu 
ceases  giving  place  to  the  seventh  Manvantara  of  the  Praj&pati 
Vaivasvata  Manu. 

44.  In  them  (the  daughten  ofDakfa)  Devas,  birds,  cows, 
serpents,  Daityas,  Danavas,  Oandharvas,  Apiaras-s  and  other 
classes  of  beings  were  born. 

45.  The  creation  the  earlier  ones  was  due  to  thought, 
sight  and  touch.  Thenceforth,  the  subjects  in  this  world  were 
bom  sexual  intercourse.^ 

Th$  tagis  said  \ 

4648.  The  auspicious  birth  of  Devas,  Danavas,  Celestial 
Sages  and  the  noble*souIed  Dakja  has  been  narrated  by  you 
before.  It  was  mentioned  by  you  (before)  that  Dakya,  the  Pra- 
jap>ati,  was  bom  of  Pr^a.  How  did  he  who  had  great  penance 
subsequently  attain  the  status  of  the  son  of  Pracetas?  O  Suta, 
it  behoves  you  to  clarify  this  doubt  of  ours.  He  was  the  son  of 
the  daughter  of  Soma.  How  did  he  become  his  (Soma’s) 
father-in«law? 

% 

Suta  said : 

49.  O  excel  lent  ones,  birth  and  dissolution  (death)  occur 
perpetually  among  living  beings.  The  sages  and  those  men  who 
are  endowed  with  learning  are  not  deluded  in  this  matter. 

50.  O  Brahmaiias,  Dak^a  and  others  are  bom  in  every 
Yuga.  They  undergo  subsequent  death  too.  A  learned  man  is 
not  confused  in  this  matter. 

51.  O  excellent  Brabmanas,  formerly  there  was  neither 
•enkx'ity  nor  juniority  among  them.  Penance  alone  was  consi* 
dered  weightier  and  prowess  wbs  the  basis  thereof. 

52.  He  who  comprehends  this  creation  of  the  mobile  and 
the  immobile  beings  in  Cakfu^a  Manvantara  passes  his  life-span 
folly  and  is  l&onoured  in  the  heavenly  region  (after  it). 

1.  Thii  is  the  main  difTereoee  between  the  previous  lU  Manvantarai 
and  the  preMot  one.  With  this  chapter  closes  the  description  of  the  GUeyuia 
Manvantara. 


53»  This  creation  ofC&k^fa  Manu  has  been  succinctly  nar¬ 
rated.  Thus  these  six  cycles  of  creation,  in  the  form  of  Manvan- 
taras  have  elapsed.  They  have  the  Svayaihbhuva  Manvantara 
as  their  first  one  and  the  Cak^u^  Manvantara  as  the  last  one. 
They  have  been  briefly  narrated  in  the  proper  sequence. 

54.  O  excellent  Brahma^,  these  creations  have  been 
narrated  in  accordance  with  my  understandii^*  The  details  of 
these  creations  should  be  known  through  the  creation  in  the 
Vaivasvata  Manvantara. 

55.  All  the  creations  of  Vivasv&n  are  endless  and  non- 
different  (from  other  Manvaotaras)  ^in  the  matter  of states  of 
health,  duration  of  life,  virtue,  love  and  wealdi.  He  who  reads 
this  without  malice  attains  these  attributes. 

56.  Now  I  shall  describe  the  creative  activity  of  the  current 
nobIe«souled  Vaivasvata  Manu  succinctly  suid  in  detail  (as  the 
case  may  be).  Listen  and  understand  even  as  1  recount. 


CHAPTER  THREE 
Vaivasvata  Manvantara :  TTu  Mdriea  Crsation 
Suta  continued  : 

1 «  In  the  seventh  cycle  called  Vaivasvata  Manvantara,  the 
Devas  and  the  great  sages  were  bom  of  Kaiyapa,  son  ofMarlci.^ 

2.  The  eight  groups  of  Devas  are  remembered  as  follows: 
(l)Adityas,  (2)Vasus,  (3)  Rudras,  (4}Sadbyas  (5)  Visvedevaa 
(6)  Maruts,  (7)  Bhrgus  and  (8)  Angiras-s. 

3.  (Among  them)  Adityas,  Maruts  and  Rudras  are  to  be 
known  as  the  sons  of  Kaiy^a.  The  tlu^ee  groups,  viz.  Sadhyas, 
Vasus  and  Viivedevas  are  the  sons  of  Dharma. 

4.  Lord  Bhargava  was  bom  of  Bhtgu  and  Ahgira  was  the 
son  of  Ahgiras.  In  this  Vaivasvata  Manvantara,  those  Devas  are 


I .  Hence  the  title  of  the  chapter  ^MSHca  creation'. 


Pur^ 


480 


perpetually  Chandajas  (bom  according  to  their  own  will  or 
born  of  Vedic  €haru^ds^) . 

5.  The  current  auspicious  creation  should  be  known 'as  that 
of  the  descendants  of  Mznci.  Their  present  brilliant  Indra  is 
Mahabala  by  name. 

6.  Al!  the  Indras  in  the  different  Manvantaras  whether  of 
the  past  or  luture  or  those  who  exist  now  should  be  known  as 
having  equal  characteristics. 

7*  All  of  them  are  the  lords  of  past,  present  smd  future 
objects,  thousand-eyed  and  Purandara  (destroyers  of  the  cities 
of  enemies).  All  of  them  are  bountiful,  crested  (wearers  of 
crowns  witli  crests)*  They  hold  thunderbolt  in  the  hand.  All 
pciforxned  hundred  sacrifices  and  all  possessed  hundreds  of 
attributes* 

8*  They  establish  themselves  aAcr  excelling  all  the  living 
beings  in  the  three  worlds,  whether  weak  or  mobile,  for 
various  reasons  such  as  Dharma  (Piety)  etc. 

9.  I  shall  explain  everything  as  to  how  they  are  the  lords 
of  the  past,  present  and  future  by  means  of  splendour,  penance, 
intellect,  strength,  learning  and  exploits;  how  they  have  become 
powerful;  listen  and  understand  even  as  I  recount. 

10.  Three  worlds  have  been  remembered  by  the  Brahma^as 
as  BhQta^  Bhavya  and  Bhaoiffa.^  They  are  respectively  remember¬ 
ed  as  follows :  Bhurlokc  or  the  Eaith,  Bhuvarloka  or  the  firma¬ 
ment  and  Bkavya  or  the  heaven.  I  shall  explain  how  they 
have  been  accomplished. 

11-12.  This  was  uttered  at  the  outset  by  Brahma  who  was 
desirous  of  sons  and  who  was  meditating.  The  word  was 

uttered  in  the  beginning  and  this  Bhurloka  took  shape.  The  root 
BAfi  is  remembered  in  the  sense  ofSattd  (existence)  z.$A]soLoka 
DarSana  (visibility  to  the  pec^Ie).  Since  it  existed  and  was 
visible  it  became  Bhurloka^  hence  this  first  Loka  is  remembered 
asBAfi^,  because  it  existed. 

13*  When  this  (world)  had  taken  shape,  the  second  word, 
‘‘BAot^f”  wa:>  uttered  again  by  Brahma.  T^t  which  is  about  to 
take  shape  in  the  immediate  future  time  is  indicated  by  the 
word 

1*  Vtfsei  10-18  eKplain  these  terms  sad  hew  the  originated 

(V*  19). 


3.14-28 


481 


14.  The  word  Shoarloka  u  derived  from  bhavana  by  those 
who  know  MnAta  (Etymology) .  Hence  the  firmament  U  called 
the  second  Loka  i.e.  Bhuvarldca. 

15.  When  Bhuvarloka  had  taken  shape,  the  third 

word  was  uttered  by  Brahm^  and  then  the^Ao^a- 

loka  took  shape. 

16.  The  word  Bhavya  is  used  in  the  sense  of  what  has  not 
yet  come  about  (i.e.  the  future).  Hence  this  future  world  is 
remembered  by  the  name  Dita  (Heaven) . 

17.  Another  third  word  **Svalt**  was  uttered  (by  Brahmi). 
Then  the  Bhavyaloka  (future  world)  took  shape.  The  word  Bhatya 
is  used  in  the  sense  of  future  time. 

18.  The  Earth  is  remembered  by  the  word  BkSbi  the  firma* 
ment  is  remembered  as  BJaafo^;  the  heaven  is  remembered  as 
Bhavya*  This  is  the  set  of  three  worlds  in  a  nutshell. 

19.  By  the  utterances  in  combination  with  the  three  worlds 

the  three  Vydhftis{\.t,  the  mantras  Svalj)  originated. 

The  root  Nath  is  remembered  in  the  sense  of  ‘protection*  by 
those  who  know  the  (meanings  of)  roots. 

20.  Since  they  are  the  Lord  Protectors  of  the  BhUiOt  Bhavya 
and  Bhavat  worlds  they  are  the  Ndthas  (Protectors)  of  the  three 
worlds.  They  are  termed  as  Indras  by  the  Brahmaiias. 

21 .  The  Devendras  who  are  the  chiefs  in  the  Manvantaras 
as  well  as  those  Devas  who  are  their  (subordinates)  become 
partakers  of  shares  in  the  Tajflas, 

22.  Yak^s,  Gandharvas,  Rik^asas,  Piiacas,  Uragas  and 
Danavas  are  all  proclaimed  as  (the  products  of)  the  glory  of 
the  Devendras. 

23.  The  Devendras  are  the  elders  (preceptors),  protecton, 
kings  and  parents.  Those  excellent  Devas  protect  all  these  sub¬ 
jects  righteously. 

24.  Thus  the  characteristics  of  the  Devendras  have  been 
briefly  described.  I  shall  now  recount  the  seven  sages  who  are 
stationed  at  present  in  the  heaven. 

25-28.  They  are:  (1)  Viivainitra  of  great  penance,  the  inte¬ 
lligent  son  of  Gadhi  who  was  bom  of  the  family  of  Kuiika,  (2) 
Jaunadagni,  the  valorous  son  of  Oru  (Aurva)  the  scion  of  the 
family  of  Bhi  gu,  (3)  BhAradv&ja  of  great  penance,  the  son  of 
Brhaspati,  (4)  Saradvao  the  learned  and  the  virtuous  son  of  Uta- 


482  Vdyti  Pur^a 

tbya,  helongiQg  to  the  family  of  Gotama,  (5)  the  fifth  one 
Brahmakofa  (othenviee  known  as)  lofd  Atri^  son  of  Svayaihbhfi 
(Brahma,)  (6)  the  sixth  one,  the  son  of  Vasiftha  well  known  in 
ibc  world  as  Vasum&n,  and  (7)  Vatskra,  son  of  Kaiyapa.  All 
these  teyen  are  well  honoured  by  good  men.  These  seven  sages, 
all  of  whom  are  Siddhas^  exist  in  the  present  Manvmnsara. 

29-3  !•  Ik9vaku,  NaUiiga,  Dbftta,  Sary&ti,  the  famous 
Narifyanta,  N&Uxa,  Udditta,  Karufa,  Prsadhra  and  Vasuman 
the  tenth — these  arc  the  ten  sonsof  Vaivasvata  Mami  glorified 
bymc*  The  seventh  Manvantara  has  been  explained  by  xne«  O 
Brfthma:^,  the  second  Pada  has  been  described  by  me  in  detail 
and  in  the  proper  order.  What  else  shall  I  now  explain? 


SECJTION  3 :  ANU5ANGA  PADA 


CHAPTER  FOUR 

TTitf  Ract  of  Pr^dpati  :  Rebirth  of  Seom  Sagos 
Th$  Sagts  said  : 

h  On  hearing  the  second  section  (in  full)  as  narrated  by 
the  intelligent  Suta,  Sarhiapayana  thereafter  asked  him  about 
(the  subject  matter  of)  the  third  P^a  (Section). 

2.  **The  second  P4da  has  been  narrated  by  you  along  with 
its  sequel  (Appendix) ;  please  recount  the  third  Poda  in  detail 
along  with  the  (necessary)  introduction**  Being  requested 
thus,  Suta  began  to  speak  with  his  inner  soul  highly  del^hted. 

Suta  said  : 

3.  O  Brahmanas,  I  shall  recount  the  third  pada  in  detail 
along  with  (necessary)  introduction.  Even  as  I  recount  it, 
listen  and  understand  it  completely. 

4.  O  Brahmanas,  listen  in  details  and  in  proper  order  to 
the  creative  activity  of  the  present  Vaivasvata  Manu  of  noble 
soul. 

5*7«  The  (Manu)  period  is  already  calculated  as  being  of 
seventyone  sets  of  four  Yugas.  After  bowing  to  Vivasvto  (the 
Sun-god)  I  shall  narrate  the  Vaivasvata  creation  beginning  with 
Manu  and  ending  with  the  future  events.  It  comprises  Devst* 
gapas,  Sages,  Danavas,  Pitrs,  Gandharvas,  Rak$asas,  Bhuta- 
ganas,  human  beings,  animals,  birds  and  immobile  beings. 

&-9.  The  seven  great  sages  who  had  passed  away  in  the  first 
Sv&yambhuva  Manvantara  and  who  were  the  creators  and  initi¬ 
ators  then,  are  reborn  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  after 


484 


the  lapse  of  the  C&k^ufa  Manvantara.  It  ii  due  to  the  curse  of 
Maheivara  that  the  noble  souls,  Dak^a  and  the  very  powerful 
sages  Bhrgu  and  othen  manifested  themselves  (in  this  Manvan¬ 
tara). 

10.  The  seven  sages  were  bom  again  as  seven  mental  sons 
of  Brahma.  They  were  adopted  as  sons  by  Svayaxhbhd  (the 
self-born  god  Brahmi)  himself. 

11.  The  creative  activity  was  initiated  again  as  before  and 
in  the  proper  order,  by  those  noble  souls  who  manifested  them¬ 
selves  and  who  created  the  series  of  subjects. 

12.  I  shall  mention  the  progeny  of  those  people  of  pure 
knowledge  and  holy  rites  in  brief  as  well  as  in  detail  (according 
to  the  context)  and  in  the  proper  order. 

13.  This  world  consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings 
and  embellished  with  planets  and  stars  is  filled  with  beings  bom 
of  their  families. 

14.  On  hearing  these  words  a  doubt  arose  in  the  minds  of 
the  sages.  Overwhelmed  by  the  doubt,  the  sages  of  pxu^  holy 
rites  honoured  Suta  and  asked  him  for  the  sake  of  clarifica¬ 
tion  of  their  doubts. 

T7u  sages  said : 

15.  O  excellent  one,  how  were  the  seven  sages  bom  as 
seven  mental  sons  ac  the  outset  ?  How  were  they  adopted  as 
sons  ?  Please  explain  this  to  us. 

Thereafter,  the  highly-splendid  Suta  well  versed  in  Purapsis 
b^an  the  auspicious  narration. 

SuUt  said  : 

16-1 7«  How  the  seven  great  sages  who  hadbeen  great  Sidd- 
has  in  the  Svayaihbhuva  Manvantara,  failed  to  attain  the  fruit 
of  penance  in  tfae  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  (I  shall  narrate.) 
Overwhelmed  with  die  cuise  of  Bhava  (Siva}they  did  not  attain 
the  (fruit  of  the)  penance.  Once  they  gather^  tc^ther  in  the 
Jana  Loka. 

18-19.  In  the  Jana  Loka  all  the  great  sages  spoke  to  one 
another  :The blessed  ones  were  talking  to  one  another  in  thegrand 
sacrifice  of  Vsinnta:  **In  the  Cak^ufa  Manvantara  let  us  all  be 


4.20-27 


485 

born  as  tho  sons  of  Pitimaha.  Then  it  will  be  conducive  to 
weI&^e’^ 

20.  In  the  Sv&yambhuva  Manvantara  they  had  been  curs¬ 
ed  by  Bhava.  In  order  to  make  (the  curse)  truthful  (i.e.  fulfill¬ 
ed),  they  were  bom  again.  From  the  Jana  Loka  they  went  to 
heaven. 

21.  We  have  heard  that  in  the  Yajfia  of  the  great  lord, 
Brahmi  assumed  the  form  of  VaruM.  With  a  desire  for  progeny 
he  had  consigned  the  semen  into  the  holy  fire.  It  was  then  that 
the  sages  had  their  second  birth. 

22.  Bhf^,  Angiras,  Maries,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu,  Atri 
and  Vasiftha — these  eighth  were  the  sons  of  Brahma. 

23.  In  his  grand  elaborate  Yajfia  all  the  Devas  had  come. 
All  the  AAgas  (ancillaries)  of  the  Yajfia  and  Vofatkdra  had  assu¬ 
med  corporeal  forms. 

24.  The  Sdman  mantras,  thousands  of  Yajur  mantras  and 
the  ^Lgveda  embellished  with  Pada  and  Krama^  (Pashas)  were 
present  there  in  embodied  form. 

25.  The  Yajurveda  enriched  with  (relevant)  metres,  brilli¬ 
ant  with  Omkara  as  its  mouth  (face)  was  present  here  along 
with  Suktas,  Brihma^  and  Mantras  related  to  the  Arthas 
(objects  &  purposes)  of  the  Yajfia. 

26.  The  Sama  Veda  so  rich  in  (the  variety  of  Vedic)  me¬ 
tres  and  with  all  Mantra-Songs  (which  are)  to  be  sui^  at  the 
outset  was  present  there  along  with  Vi$vavasu  and  other  Gand- 
harvas. 

27.  The  Brahma  Veda  (Atharva  Veda)  was  (present  there) 
accompanied  by  terrible  rites.  (But)  due  to  (the  presence  of  the) 


1 .  There  are  two  ducrepancies  here.  Septar^  means  a  let  of  aeven 

sages  but  here  tiiht  sods  of  Brahma  are  enumerated.  Apart  from  this  discre¬ 
pancy  in  number  the  namca  o(  the  S^tarfis  ot  this  Manvantara  as  given  in 
w  25-28  of  the  last  chapter  are  different  from  this  list  even  though  v.  28  of 
that  chapter  asserts  that  ^^these  seven  sages  eiust  in  the  present  Manvan- 
tara**  (tU  siddhd  vartmU  simpr<kii*nUift)» 

This  previous  list  (3.2^28)  agrees  more  with  the  one  in  VP.lIl.1.92  if 
the  names  therein  are  regarded  as  gserar  of  the  sages. 

2,  Krama  is  a  special  method  of  reddng  vedic  texts.  It  is  so  called  as  the 
recitation  proceeds  from  the  first  member,  either  word  or  letter  to  the 
second,  thoi  the  second  is  repeated  and  connected  with  the  third  and  so  on. 


488  V^PwH^ 

Pratyangirasas,  it  appeared  to  have  a  single  bead  with  two 
bodies.^ 

26.  (The  following  details  aboutthe  recitation  of  the  Vedas) 
Lakfo^  (the  characteristic  topics) »  Svaras  (notes),  Siobkas 
(chanted  inteijections  in  a  Siman-song) ,  ^firmkta  (etymologies), 
Soarabhaktis  (insertion  of  vowel  sound  for  ease  in  pronunciation), 
Afraya  (resting  places  or  annexation),  Vofojkdra  (pitmouneing 
*Fs^e/’),  J{igraAa  (suppression)  smd  t^agraha  (vowels  not  subject 
to  Sandhi  niles)  (all  these  were  physicsJly  present). 

29-30.  The  brilliantly  shinif^  goddess  Earth,  the  quarters, 
the  intennediate  quarters,  the  Lords  of  quarters,  the  celestial 
virgins,  the  wives  of  Devas,  the  mothers  and  Ayu — all  these  were 
present  there  in  embodied  form  in  front  of  the  Lord  (Brahmi) 
who  was  performing  the  Yajfia  assuming  the  form  of  Varui^. 

31.  On  seeing  the  ladies,  the  semen  virile  of  Svayambhu 
fell  on  the  ground.  There  is  no  doubt  about  this  that  it  took 
place  on  account  of  the  dispensation  of  the  inevitable  in  the  case 
of  Brahmar^is  (Brahmanical  sages) . 

32.  Pitdmaha  (god  Brahmi)  then  lodL  it  up  by  means  of 
Sruks  and  Sruva  (sacrificial  spoons  and  ladles)  and  performed 
the  Homa  as  if  it  were  ghee,  reciting  the  mantras  duly. 

33.  Thereafter,  the  Prajapati  began  the  creation  of  living 
beings  (or  aggregate  of  elemenu) .  Due  to  the  splendour  chat 
was  beside,  the  fiery  things  were  brnn;  the  Gunas  Sattva  and 
Rajas  were  not  pervaded  by  tbe  Guna  Tamas. 

34.  From  the  Sagu^a  brilliance,  Tamas  stayed  perpe* 
tually  in  the  sky.  All  the  living  beings  were  bom  from  the 
Tamas  (darkness)  and  the  T^as  (brilliance). 

33.  When  the  sons  bom  of  iformon  were  created,  Brahma 
took  up  his  Semen  Virile  in  the  ghee-pot  and  performed  the 
Homa. 

36.  When  the  Semen  Virile  was  consigned  to  the  holy 
fire,  the  great  sages  manifested  themselves.  They  were  embodied 
and  very  brilliant.  All  the  seven  (sages)  had  the  attributes  of 
new  bom  infants. 

37.  When  the  Semen  Virile  was  once  poured  into  the  fire, 

TheAV.  caamu  of  two  sets  of  Maatias  :  the  auipicioui  ooes 

iAtharpam)  sad  tbe  cerriUe  ones  meant  for  the  dotruefioa  of  the  eoenues 
Hence  AV  is  said  to  hsve  two  bodies. 


4.38-47 


487 

Kavi  (i*e.  Venus)  came  out  of  the  flame.  On  seeii^  him 
cconin^  out  splitting  up  the  Bamc,  Hirajgiy^arbha  (Brahmi) 
said:  **You  are  Bbrgu'’«  Thereafter  he  is  called  Bhtgu.^ 

38.  Mah&deva  saw  him  coming  out  like  that  and  said  to 

Brahmi:  am  desirous  of  a  son  and  I  am  initiated.  He.  is 

bom  to  me,  O  lord.  Hence  may  lord  Bhrgu  be  my  son.'* 

39.  Mahideva  was  permitted  by  god  Brahmi  who  said: 
**So  be  it*’.  Mahadeva  adopted  Bh|^  as  his  sod.  All  the  descen¬ 
dants  of  Bhfgu  are  called  Vanity.  He  became  a  holy  lord 
(»W)- 

40.  A  second  (ladleful  of)  Semen  Virile  fell  on  the  burning 
coals.  Angiras  was  born  of  it  with  his  limbs  firmly  united  on 
fire  (burning  coals) .  Hence  he  is  known  as  Afigiras. 

41.  On  seeing  his  birth,  the  Fire-god  spoke  to  Brahmi:  **It 
was  I  who  held  your  Semen  Virile.  Hence  may  this  second  son 
be  mine.** 

42.  The  Fire-god  was  addressed  by  Brahmi:  ‘‘Let  it  be 
so”.  Hence^  we  have  heard  that  all  the  descendants  of  Angiras 
are  known  as  Agneyas. 

43.  When  the  Semen  Virile  was  consigned  to  the  holy  fire 
for  six  more  dmes  by  Brahma,  the  creator,  the  six  Brahmas 
(sons  of  Brahma)  were  bom.  So  it  is  beard. 

44.  Marici  was  the  first  among  them,  bom  from  the  rays 
(of  sacrificial  fire)  •  Since  the  (second)  son  was  born  in  the 
Kraiu  (sacrifice) ,  he  is  called  Kratu. 

45.  am  the  third*’  (Ahani-Trdya},  saying  thus  the 
third  son  was  bom.  So  he  is  called  Atri.  The  fourth  son  was 
born  with  sharp  pointed  hairs.  Hence  he  is  remembered  as 
Pulastya. 

46-47.  The  son  bom  with  loi^  hairs  is  remembered  as 
Pulaha.  He  who  was  bom  out  of  theVasu  ‘(fire  ?)  was  called 
Vasuman.  He  is  called  Vasi?(ha  by  those  who  know  the  truth, 
by  the  expounders  of  Vedas.  Thxis  these  six  great  sages  arc  the 
mental  sons  of  Brahma. 

1.  Cf.  Brhad-diif^a  V.  97-101  for  the  story  of  the  births  cTBlirgui,  Ahgiras 
and  Acri.  Etymologia  of  these  names  also  are  borrowed  therefrom  though 
grammarians  offer  different  derivations. 


488 


48.  They  tnaintam  the  cantinunity  of  the  w^lds,  Hiese 
fubjects  are  developed  and  nurtured  by  them.  Hence  Brahm&*s 
sons  are  mentioned  as  Prajapads. 

49*50.  Others  called  Pitrs  were  created  by  these  great 
sages  alone.  The  seven  groups  of  sages  are  well  known  in  the 
world,  viz.  Miiicas,Bhargavas,  Angirasas,  Paulastyas,  Paulahas, 
Vasi^thas  and  Atreyas;  these  groups  of  Pitrs  are  well-known  in 
the  world. 

51.  These  three  Ganas  have  been  briefly  mentioned  before: 

They  are  (Rare),Prcibdfjr  (Brilliant)  and  ^ti^mantas 

(Illuminated  ones) . 

52.  Their  king  is  lord  Yama  and  they  have  wiped  oflftheir 
sins  by  their  (religious)  observances.  There  are  other  Prajapatis 
also.  Listen  to  them  attentively. 

53*54.  There  are  other  Praj&patis  many  in  number,  viz. 
Kardama,  Kaiyapa,  8e$a  (?),  Vlkrtnta,  Suiruvas,  Bahuputra, 
Kum&ra,  Vivasvan,  Sueiiravas,  Pracetas,  Ari^fanemi,  Bahula 
and  many  others.^ 

55.  Kuioccayas  and  Valakhilyas  had  become  great  sages. 
They  had  the  speed  of  the  mind.  They  could  go  anywhere.  They 
became  Emperors. 

56.  The  groups  of  sages  called  Vaikh&nasas  are  honoured 
by  Brahma^as.  They  were  bom  of  the  sacred  ashes.  They  are 
engaged  in  penance  and  learning. 

57.  The  handsome  Aivinas  were  bom  of  his  ears.  The 
pure  ones  born  of  the  eyes  are  known  as  Ak^arajas. 

58.  The  elder  Praj&patis  were  bom  of  his  vessels.  The  sages 
were  bom  of  the  hair  pores  in  the  skin  and  the  sweat  dirt. 

59.  From  his  tears  and  cry  were  born  the  terrible  mouths 
Niryasas  (?),  the  junctions  of  fortnights^  years,  days  and  nights 
and  the  terrible  light  of  Pitrs. 

60.  Raudra  they  say  is  the  blood.  Lohita  is  remembered  as 
gold.  That  should  be  known  as  Maitra  also.  The  smoke  is 
remembered  as  animals. 

1.  DiCTsmit  PuricM  give  diflerent  Uta  of  Prajipetu.  For  example,  the 
Itia  in  Mbh.,  Mt.  F.  or  Gsrutja  diifo  frwo  our  text  (and  Bd.  P)  and  a. 


4.6!--73 


489 

6K  The  flames  are  Rudrasand  Adityas»  Divine  human 
beings  were  bom  of  the  burning  coal  and  the  flame. 

62.  Brahma  born  of  Brahman  is  the  primordial  being 
in  the  world.  Requesting  (for  the  band  of)  a  virgin^  the  sages 
told  him  who  bestowed  everything: 

63.  ‘‘Brahma,  the  eldest  among  Suras,  is  delighted  with 
Dcvas.  These  lords  will  be  giving  birth  to  all  the  subjects. 

64.  All  of  them  are  Prajapatis.  All  of  them  are  sages.  These 
rites  will  uphold  these  worlds  with  his  grace. 

65.  They  have  developed  couples  increasing  your  splend¬ 
our.  Among  Devas  there  arc  learned  ones  in  Vedas.  All  the 
saintly  kings  are  also  such. 

66.  All  of  them  are  devoted  to  the  Vedic  Mantras.  They 
have  been  born  out  of  the  attributes  of  Prajapatis.  The  infinite 
Brahman  is  the  Truth  and  the  greatest  penance. 

67.  O  lord,  all  of  us  are  your  own  children,  the  Brahman 
(Vedas) ,  the  Brahmanas  and  all  the  worlds  including  the  mobile 
and  the  immobile  beings. 

68.  Beginning  witli  Marici  and  including  all  the  sages,  we 
Devas  are  thinking  about  and  lolling  for  children  by  your 
(blessings )'’. 

69.  {Suta  said)  O  highly  blessed  ones,  Devas  along 
with  sages  identifying  (themselves)  with  the  abodes  and  the 
time  are  bom  in  this  family  during  the  Yajfla. 

70.  In  that  very  form,  they  may  not  establish  these  sub¬ 
jects.  They  may  be  stabilised  from  the  beginning  till  the  end  of 
the  Yugas. 

71.  Then  the  preceptor  of  the  world  (Brahma),  without 
any  further  thought,  spoke — ‘‘O  Devas,  it  was  after  deciding 
like  this  that  the  subjects  had  been  created  by  me.  There  is  no 
doubt  about  this.  These  sages  have  been  bom  in  your  ^ace'^ 

72.  Amoi^  them  I  shall  recount  in  detail  and  in  proper 
sequence  the  race  of  Bhrgu,  the  ancient  noble  soul  and  the  first 
Praj^pati. 

73.  Bhrgu  had  two  unequalled,  excellent  and  auspicious 
wives  of  noble  families.  One  was  the  daughter  ofHiranyakaiipu, 
famous  by  the  name  ‘Divya’  and  the  other  was  the  fair-com- 
plexioned  daughter  of  Puloman,  named  Pauloml. 


490 


Vfyu  Purdrta 


74-75.  Divya  bore  to  Bhrgu  the  planet  Sukra  (Venus)  who 
was  the  preceptor  of  Devas  and  Asuras,  who  was  the  son  of  Kavi, 
and  was  known  as  Kavya,  Sukra  and  U^anas.  He  was  the  most 
excellent  among  the  knowers  of  Vedas.  Sukra^s  wife  named  Angi 
was  the  mental  daughter  of  the  Soma-drinking  Pitfs  and  very 
famous.  She  gave  birth  to  four  sons. 

76-77.  He  was  endowed  with  Brahman’s  splendour  and  the 
most  excellent  among  the  knowers  of  Brahman.  Sukra  begot 
four  sons  of  her,  viz.  Tva$n',  Varutiin»  Sanda  and  Amarka. 
They  resembled  the  sun  and  in  their  prowess  they  were  equal  to 
Brahma. 

78.  Rahjana^  Pfthurahni  and  the  scholarly  Brhadgiras 
were  the  sons  of  Varutrin.  They  were  devoted  to  Brahman  and 
became  the  priests  of  Suras. 

79.  They  approached  Nlanu  with  the  motive  of  spoiling 
sacrificial  rites.  On  seeing  Dharma  being  violatedj  Indra  spoke 
to  Manu: 

80.  would  rather  have  the  sacrifice  performed  through 
you  than  through  these”*  On  hearing  these  words  of  Indra,  they 
fled  from  that  place* 

81.  When  they  absconded,  Indra  released  (their)  wife 
Cetana.  Then  he  followed  her, 

82-83.  On  seeing  them  come  there  again  with  the  evil  in¬ 
tention  of  killing  Indra,  he  struck  at  them  (while)  they  slept 
in  the  altar  of  the  lord  of  Devas  on  the  southern  side.  While  they 
were  being  devoured  by  (dogs,  jackals  and  wolves)  their  heads 
fell  down  simultaneously  and  became  dates* 

84.  Thus,  the  sons  of  Varutrin  were  killed  by  Indra  former¬ 
ly.  8ukra  begot  (of  his  wife)  YajanI  the  daughter  Devayani. 

83 «  The  three-headed  Visvarupa  was  the  great  son  of 
Tva$tr.  Visvakarman  is  remembered  as  the  younger  twin- 
brother  ofViSvarupa. 

86.  Twelve  sons  were  bom  to  Bhrgu  (and  were  known  as) 
Bhfgu  (Gana)  Devas^.  Lord  Kavya  begot  of  Devi  those  sons* 

1.  Mt.  P*  gives  s  different  list  of  these  12  Devs  Bhrgui  in  its 

hits  of  Gotras  and  Pravarti. 


4,87-95 


491 


87.  They  were — Bhuvaoa,  Bhivana,  Anya,  Anyayata, 
Kratu,  Sravaa^  Murdhan,  Vyajaya»  Vyasru^,  Prasava,  Aja  and 
the  twelfth  one  Adhipati. 

88.  These  twelve  sons  of  Bhrgu  are  remembered  as  twelve 
sacrificial  Devas,  Paulomi  bore  a  lordly  son  having  full  self- 
control  and  engrossed  in  Brahman. 

89.  Since  he  was  sickly  in  the  eighth  month  of  conception, 
he  was  forcibly  taken  out  of  the  womb  by  dire  means  and  so 
his  name  became  Cyavana.  He  became  conscious  due  to 
Pracetas.  Through  the  anger  of  Cyavana  (revived  by)  Pracetas, 
Cyavana  alias  Pracetasa  burned  the  man-eaters  through  anger^. 

90.  The  son  of  Bhfgu  (i.e.  Cyavana)  begot  of  Sukanya  two 
sons  honoured  by  saints,  viz.  Atmavana  and  Dadhlca. 

91.  The  son  S4rasvata  was  bom  to  Svasvati  and  Dadhica. 
The  blessed  lady  Ruci,  daughter  of  Nahu|a>  was  the  wife  of 
Atmav4na. 

92.  The  sage  Crva  (Aurva  in  Bd.  P.  and  Mbh.)  of  great 
renown  was  born  of  him  after  breaking  throi^h  the  thighs  (of 
his  mother)*  B>clka  was  the  son  of  Aurva.  He  was  brilliant  (in 
complexion)  like  a  blazing  fire. 

93-94.  When  the  caru^  (sacrificial  offerings)  pertaining  to 
Rudra  and  Vi^nu  (charged  with  specific  mantras)  by  Bh^u 
were  interchanged,  Jamadagni  was  born,  as  the  Caru  pertaining 
to  Vais^va  fire  was  (mistakenly)  eaten  (by  his  mother). 
Renuka  bore  tojamadagni  the  son  Rama  of  unmeasured  splen¬ 
dour.  He  was  equal  to  Sakra  (Indra)  in  valour  and  had  the 
traits  both  of  a  Brahmaoa  and  a  K$atriya. 

95.  Aurva  had  a  hundred  sons  of  whom  Jamadagni  was 
the  eldest.  Those  descendants  of  Bhrgu  had  thousands  of  sons 
due  to  mutual  alliance. 


1*  The  text  cfaoana^krodhdd  adhoOfiom  purufdddja^k  It  defective. 

For  thit  the  corresponding  text  from  Bd.  P.  acc^ted. 

2.  Mbh.  Adi  1 77  iaTormt  that  when  Haihayai  tried  a  genocide  of  the 
Bhfgu  clan,  Bhfgu  women  fled  to  failll.  While  ninning  Cyavaoa’i  wife 
Anifi  concealed  her  foetus  in  her  thl^  When  Haihaya  officen  arretted  her 
to  execute  her,  her  foetus— a  ton— t»oke  through  hit  motber'i  thigh  and 
blinded  all  Haihayat  with  hit  tuprcme  brilliaoce.  At  thit  child  broke  through 
hit  mother’t  thigh  (Oni),  he  was  called  Aurva  (one  bom  out  of  the  thigh). 

3.  wi — if  a  mitprint  for  rer«. 


492 


Vdjw  Purd^ 


96«  Among  other  sages  outside  (the  original  family)  there 
are  many  other  descendants  of  Bhrgu.  They  are  divided  into 
seven  Gotras,  viz.  Vatsa,  Viiva,  Aivise^i  Panda,  Pathya  and 
Saunaka.  These  seven  clans  are  alternatively  known  as  Bhvgavas. 

97.  Listen  to  the  narration  of  the  family  of  AAgiras,  the 
intelligent  son  of  Agni.  It  was  in  the  family  of  At^iras,  the 
intelligent  son  of  Agni,  that  Bharadv&jas  along  with  Gautamas 
were  bom.  The  most  important  Devas  belonging  to  the  family 
of  Angiras  are  Tvifimants  (?)  of  great  prowess. 

98.  Atharvan,  Angiras  had  three  wives,  viz.  Surup&  the 
daughter  of  Marica,  Svara(  the  daughter  ofKardama  and 
Pathya  the  daughter  of  Manu.  I  shall  mention  their  progeny. 

99.  The  heirs  of  Adiarvan  bom  of  those  wives  were  the 
uplifters  of  the  family.  They  were  born  as  a  result  of  the  great 
penance  of  that  purified  soul. 

lOO^lOL  Brhaspati  was  bom  of  Surupa  and  Svarat  gave 
birth  to  Gautama.  Pathya  gave  birth  of  Avandhya,  Vamadeva, 
Utathya  and  Uiija.  Dhisnu  was  thes  on  of  Pathya.  Sarhvarta 
was  the  mental  son  (of  Atharvan) .  Vicitta,  Ayasya  and  Sara** 
dvan  were  the  sons  of  Utathya. 

102.  Dirghatama  was  the  son  of  Aii.  Brhaduttha  was  the 
son  of  Vam^eva.  Dbisnu*s  son  was  Sudhanvau  and  his  son 
was  R^abha. 

103.  Rathak^as  (Charioteers)  are  remembered  as  Devas. 
They  are  well-known  as  Flsis  (^bhus  7).  Bharadvaja  of  very 
great  fame' and  well-known  was  bom  of  Brhaspati. 

104.  The  progeny  of  Sarhvarta,  (mental)  son  of  Angiras, 
are  considered  as  Devas.  Listen  to  them.  These  Angiras  Devas 
are  regarded  as  junior  to  Brhaspati. 

105-108.  Ten  own  sons  of  Angiras  were  born  of  Surupa. 
They  were  ten  and  their  names  are — Audarya,  Ayu,  Danu, 
Daksa,  Darbha,  Prana,  Havisman,  Havisnu,  Kratu  and  Satya. 
The  following  ten  and  live  (i.e.  fifteen)  are  to  be  known  as 
belonging  to  the  Fafya  (i.e.  Gofra)  of  Angiras — Ayasya,  Uta¬ 
thya,  Vamadeva,  Uiija,  Bharadvajas,  Sankrtikas,  Gargya, 
Kanva,  Rathitara,  Mudgalas,  Vi^^uvrddhas,  Haritas,  Vayus, 
Bhik^as  of  Bharadvaja  family,  Arsabhas  and  Kirhbhayas.  Many 
others  (external)  sages  (belonging  to  the  &milics  outside)  are 
remembered  among  other  sages. 


4.109-118 


493 


109.  1  shall  now  describe  the  race  of  Marlci  consisting  of 
excellent  men  as  its  scions.  In  his  race  was  born  the  Universe 
consisting  of  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

1 10.  Contemplating  on  the  waters  (Apal^)  with  a  desire  for 
progeny,  Marid  desired  the  waters.  The  lord  mentally  concei¬ 
ved  thus — son  bom  of  a  praiseworthy  woman,  endowed  .with 
all  good  qualities  and  having  good  tastes  is  honoured’’. 

1 1 1-1 12.  All  the  waters  were  called.  Thelord  dwelt  in  their 
company.  The  lord  procreated  an  unequalled  son  named 
Aristanemi  who  became  Prajapati  and  who  was  of  well-con¬ 
trolled  mind.  Vadhauveia^  (?)  begot  the  son  Marica«  having 
Che  splendour  of  the  Sun. 

113.  Contemplating  on  the  speech  of  good  men*  he  stay¬ 
ed  under  water  for  seven  thousand  years  with  a  desire  to  beget 
sons.  Hence  (the  son)  became  unequalled. 

1 14.  Ka^yapa  was  the  knower  of  the  sun  (?)  Hence  he  was 
on  a  par  with  Brahma.  In  every  Manvantara,  he  is  born  through 
a  part  of  Brahma. 

115.  The  subjects*  were  angered  byDak^a,  it  is  said  (?) 
for  the  sake  of  (his)  daughters.  Then  he  drank  wine.  The  word 
^Kaijfa*  means  wine. 

116.  Hafcikasoj  (?)*  should  be  known  as  Brahma's 
JCafya  is  remembered  by  Brahmarias  as  wine.  Because  he  drink 
Kafya  (wine)  he  is  called  Kaiyapa.* 

117.  He  used  hanh  words.  On  being  cursed  by  Dak^,  he 
became  infuriated  and  thereby  became  Kaiyapa, 

118.  On  being  requested  by  Kaiyapa  and  urged  by 
Brahma  Parame;piin,  Dak^a  gave  his  daughters  to  Kasyapa. 
All  of  them  were  expounders  of  Brahman.  All  of  them  were 
the  mothers  of  the  worlds. 


1.  Bd,  P.  reads  niraia  :  s6*psootU^<u  'who  performed  penance  in  waters'. 

2.  Chaste  goddess  Vitk  (Bd.  P.) . 

3.  Bd.  P.  (ibid.  v.  120)  reads  for  Frajdit  hereof.  It  means  'When 

the  holy  Lord  got  enraged  at  die  over-bearing  speech  for  his  daughters*. 

4.  HSUikAsa  is  obscure.  Bd.  P.  reads  hdfjn  kaiir  hi  vijntyo  'The  word  KaJi 
should  be  uaderstcod  in  the  tense  of  huoiour*. 

5.  A  fanny  derivation,  ‘fhe  sage  Kalyapa  is  so  dougnated  as  he  was  a 
drunkard  (gh^^wioe)  and  whif^Uke(ICala— a  whip)  hanh  in  speech. 


494 


Pufdifa 


119.  He  who  knows  this  holy  creation  of  R^is  through 
Varuu  becomes  long-lived  and  meritorious.  He  becomes  Puri* 
ficd  and  attains  excellent  happiness.  By  listening  to  this  aind 
retaining  this  (in  memory)  he  becomes  free  from  all  sins. 

120.  Then  all  the  sages  spoke  to Ramahar^as^i  *^When  the  sixth 
Prajasarga  (creation  of  the  subjects)  of  Cakfu^a  Manu  had  been 
dissolved}  the  creation  of  Vaivasvata  Manu  began  to  function 
( How  did  it  take  place  7)/’ 

Silta  said  : 

121.  When  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  arrived,  Dak$a 
was  commanded  by  the  self-born  lord  himself— Create  the 
subjects”.  Dak^a  created  mobile  and  the  immobile  living  beings. 

122.  Then  Dak$a  proceeded  to  create  the  four  types  of 

PtajSs  (subjects),  viz.  (viviparous)  ^An^ajas  (oviparous)  | 

Udbkijjas  (plants  that  pierce  the  ground  and  grow),  and 
Svedajas  (those  born  of  sweat) . 

123*123.  He  performed  severe  penance  for  ten  thousand 
years.  He  became  endowed  with  Yogic  power  and  more  parti* 
cularly  with  supernatural  powers  like  Animd  etc.  As  he  possesses 
glorious  power,  he  divided  himself  into  human  beings,  serpents, 
Rakfasas,  Devas,  Asuras  and  Gandharvas.  All  of  them  being 
endowed  with  divine  bodies  and  wealth  of  beauty  and  splend¬ 
our,  they  were  lords  eqixal  to  himself.  He  was  desirous  of  creat¬ 
ing  other  mental  living  beings  of  various  kinds. 

126.  (He  created)  sages,  Devas,  Gandharvas,  human 
beings,  serpents,  Rak^a’s,  Yakw,  Bhutas,  PKacas,  birds, 
animals  and  deer. 

127.  When  these  mentally  created  beings  did  not  flourish 
and  multiply,  he  was  rebuked  by  Intelligent  lord  Maliadeva. 

128*129.  He  became  then  desirous  of  creating  the  different 
subjects  by  the  process  of  sexual  intercourse.  He  took  to  himself 
as  wife  the  daughter  of  Virana,  the  Prajapati.  She  was  Asiknl 
who  was  endowed  with  great  penance  and  who  supported  the 
worlds.  The  entire  Universe  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  the 
immobile  beings  was  sustained  by  her. 

130*134.  In  this  matter  t^y  quoted  two  verses  about 
Dak^,  the  son  of  Pracetas.  When  Dak^  married  Asikni  the 
great  daughter  of  Vlra^,  he  created  a  million  mobile  wells 


4.135-145 


495 


along  with  those  identifying  with  them.  Creating  them  into 
rivers  and  mountams»  the  powerful  Dak^  pursued  them.  On 
seeing  him  the  sages  said»  will  establish  the  first  and  the 

second  sets  of  creation  of  subjects  of  Dak^  the  Prajapati.'^ 
Thus  af^er  creating  a  million  wells  Dak^  the  Procetasa 
married  Asiknl»  the  daughter  of  Virapa.  Dak^a  the  lord  Prace- 
tasa  begot  of  Asiknt,  daughter  of  Virata,  a  thousand  sons  of 
unmeasured  splendour. 

135.  On  seeing  those  subjects  desirous  of  flourishing  the 
extremely  powerful  celestial  Brahma's  son  Narada,  fond 
of  arguments,  spoke  evil  words  to  them  resulting  in  himself  be¬ 
ing  cursed. 

136.  The  Br^matia  (Narada)  is  sometimes  called  son  of 
Kajyapa.  Due  to  his  mean  action  the  Br^hmapa  sage  was 
afraid  ofDakfa's  cune. 

137-140.  Paramesthin  was  bom  as  Kaiyapa's  son.  Again 
due  to  the  fear  of  curse  of  Dak^a,  he  was  born  as  his 
mental  son.  His  second  birth  was  as  the  mental  son  of  Kaiyapa. 
He  was  formerly  born  a8Narada(son)of  Paramesthin.  Formerly 
Daksa’s  sons  famous  as  Haryasvas  were  destroyed  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  censure.  They  were  undoubtedly  annihilated.  Lord 
Dak  9a  became  infuriated  and  attempted  to  destroy  him 
(Narada).  Keeping  the  Bralimar^is  ahead,  he  (Dak^a)  was 
requested  by  Paramesthin  (not  to  kill  Narada) . 

141.  Then  Dak^a  stipulated  the  conditions  with  Parame- 
${hin:  ^^Lct  Narada  be  bom  of  my  daughter  as  your  son". 

142.  Then  Daksa  gave  his  beloved  daughter  to  Parame- 
sthin.  Narada  was  bom  thereof.  The  sage  became  calm  and 
ceased  to  be  afraid. 

143.  On  hearing  this  those  Brahmanas  became  curious. 
They  asked  Suta,  the  seer  of  truth,  the  foremost  among  the 
eloquent  ones: 

TTte  sages  enquired  : 

144.  How  were  the  sons  of  Prajapati,  the  subjects  born 
of  Pr^etasa  destroyed  by  the  noble-souled  Narada  ? 

143.  On  hearing  these  auspicious  truthful  words  born  of 
a  desire  to  know,  hi  {Suta)  spoke  these  sweet  words  endowed 
with  all  good  qualities  : 


Purd^ 


H6«  Haryasvasj  the  sons  ofDak^a^  desirous  of  procreating 
subjects,  the  extremely  powerful  ones  came  there  and  N^ada 
spoke  to  them:^ 

147.  **Alas,  all  of  you  are  childish.  You  do  not  know  the 
entire  surface  of  the  world.  What  is  within,  what  is  above  and 
what  is  below,  you  do  not  know.  How  will  you  create  the 
subjects? 

148.  What  is  the  extent  of  the  Earth  ?  What  are  the  things 
to  be  created  ?  Is  it  possible  to  create  without  knowing  these  ? 
Small  or  great  defects  are  sure  to  be  seen  therein**. 

149.  On  hearix^  his  words  they  went  away  to  various 
quarters.  On  reaching  the  aerial  zone,  they  were  utterly  non* 
plussed. 

150.  Wandering  (here  and  there)  intermingled  with  the 
(blowing)  winds,  they  have  not  returned  till  this  day.  Thus 
those  great  sages  are  wandering  after  reaching  the  aerial  zone. 

151.  When  his  sons  were  lost,  Lord  Dak^,  the  Pracetasa, 
begot  again  of  Vlrinl  a  thousand  sons. 

152*153.  These  sons  (known  as)  Sabalaivas  (having 
horses  of  diverse  colours),  desirous  of  multiplying  subjects  were 
told  the  same  words  by  NUrada.  On  hearing  those  words  all 
those  powerful  young  men  spoke  to  one  another— “The  great 
sage  has  said  well.  Undoubtedly  the  track  of  our  brothers 
should  be  followed. 

154.  After  knowing  the  magnitude  the  Earth  we  shall 
easily  create  the  subjects”.  They  too  went  the  same  way  to  all 
the  quarters.  Even  to  this  day  they  have  not  returned  like  the 
rivers  (not  returning)  after  falling  into  the  oceans. 

155.  Ever  since  then,  if  a  younger  brother  goes  in  quest  of 
a  lost  elder  brother,  he  too  gets  lost.  This  is  not  to  be  done  by 
one  who  knows. 

156*158.  When  the  ^bal^vas  were  lost,  lord  Dak$a 
became  infuriated  and  cursed  N^ada — “Be  ruined,  endure  the 


1.  According  to  Mbb  75.7*8,  NSrada  instructed  Hsryaivas,  the 
fint  batch  of  1000  tool  of  Dtktt,  in  Sa6kbya  Philosophy.  Thereby  all  be¬ 
came  recluses  and  frustrated  Dak|a*t  plan  of  populating  the  world.  Here 
(w.  147*48)  N&rada  advised  them  to  know  the  magnitude  of  the  earth, 
which  they  were  going  to  populate. 


4.159—5.9 


497 


pain  of  staying  in  a  womV’.  When  those  noble-souled  (sons) 
were  lost,  Dak^a  begot  of  Vlrini  sixty  daughters.  Those  daugh¬ 
ters  were  accepted  as  wives  by  Lord  Kaiyapa^  Dharma,  Lord 
Soma  (the  Moon  god)  and  other  great  sages. 

159.  He  who  knows  entirely  this  creation  of  Dak^a  precise¬ 
ly,  becomes  long-lived,  famous,  blessed  and  endowed  with 
progeny. 


CHAPTER  FIVE 
The  Rcce  of  Dhnma 

The  sages  requested  : 

1.  Please  narrate  in  detail  the  birth  and  origin  of  all 

Devas,  Danavas  and  Daityas  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvan- 
tara. 

SQta  said  : 

2-3.  I  shall  now  recount  the  progeny  of  Dharma. 
(Listen  and)  understand.  Dak^a,  the  son  of  Pracetas,  gave  these 
ten  daughters  to  Dharma  as  wives,  viz.  Arundhatl,  Vasu,  Yami, 
Lamba,  Bhanu,  Marutvati,  Samkalpa,  Muhurta,  Sidhya  and 
Vi^va. 

4.  Sadhya  bore  to  Dharma  twelve  sons  called  SUhyas.  The 
highly  fortunate  Sadhyas  were  bom  according  to  their  wish  and 
were  partakers  of  shares  in  Tajnas.  Those  who  are  conversant 
with  Devas  (Devata-lore)  know  them  to  be  greater  than  other 
Devas. 

5.  It  is  reported  that  the  Devas  (called)  Jayas  were  creat¬ 
ed  out  of  the  mouth  of  Brahma  through  the  desire  for  progeny. 
All  of  them  are  remembered  as  having  Mantras  as  their  bodies 
in  the  Manvantaras. 

6-7.  These  names  of  those  Jayas  are  famous  :  Darla, 
Paurnamasa,  Bfhad  Rathantara,  Citci,  Vicitti,  Akuci,  KQti, 
Vijflatr,  Vijft&ta,  Manas  and  Yajfta. 

8-9.  As  a  result  of  the  curse  of  Brahma,  they  were  bom 


498 


yjju  PurO^ 


again  in  Svayambhuva  Manvantara  as  Jitas;  in  Svarocisa  Man* 
vantara  they  were  bom  as  Tufitas;  and  in  the  Auttama  Man¬ 
vantara  tliey  were  born  as  Satyas.  In  the  Tamasa  Manvantara, 
they  were  born  as  Haris  and  in  the  Raivata  Manvantara  they 
were  bom  as  Vaikunthas.  In  the  Caksu^a  Manvantara  the 
Sadhyas  were  bom  as  Suras  as  per  their  will. 

10.  The  blessed  sons  of  Dharma,  the  twelve  deathless  ones 
(named)  S&dhyas,  had  been  formerly  born  in  the  Cak$u;a 
Manvantara. 

11-12.  The  highly  powerful  Devas  who  had  passed  away  in 
the  Sviroci^a  Manvantara  assumed  the  name  of  Tu^itas  in  the 
Manvantara  and  spoke  to  one  another.  When  the 
duration  of  Svaroci^a  Manvantara  remained  but  little,  the 
Tu^ita  Devas  conferred  with  one  another — shall  enter  the 
blessed  Sadhyas  and  be  bom  in  the  Manvantara.  That  will  be 
conducive  to  our  welfa^e’^ 

13.  After  saying  thus,  all  of  them  were  born  in  the  Cak^ 
fu$a  Manvantara  as  the  twelve  sons  of  Dharma,  son  of  Svayarh- 
bhu  (god  Brahma). 

14.  Kara  and  Narayaria  too  were  bom  there  again.  Vipai- 
cit  who  was  Indra  and  Satya  who  was  Hari  were  in  the  Svaro- 
ci^a  Manvantara  the  Tusita  gods. 

15-16.  When  Tu$itas  became  Sadhyas,  these  names  are 
mentioned — Manas,  Anumant^  Prana,  Nara,  the  power* 
iul  Y^a,  Gitti,  Haya,  Naya,  Hamsa,  Narayana,  Prabhava 
and  Vibhu.  They  were  bom  as  the  twelve  S^hyas. 

17-18.  In  the  Svayambhuva  Manvantara  at  the  outset, 
then  in  the  Svarocisa  Manvantara  these  were  the  names  of  the 
Tufitas.  (Listen  and)  understand  them.  They  were— Prana, 
Apana,  Udana,  Samana,  Vyana,  Gak^s,  Srotra,  Prana(?), 
Sparta,  Buddhi  and  Manas. 

19.  Formerly  only  these  names  of  Tusitas  were  remem¬ 
bered:  Praoa,  Apana,  Udana,  Samana  and  Vyana. 

20.  The  Vasus  were  the  sons  of  Vasu.  They  are  remember¬ 
ed  as  the  younger  brothers  of  Sadhyas.  These  are  glorified  as  the 
eight  Vasus— Dhara,  Dhruva,  Soma,  Apa,  Anala,  Anila,  Prat- 
yO^a  and  Prabh&sa. 

21.  Dravii^a  and  Hutahavyavaha  vrere  the  sons  of  Dhara; 


5.22*33 


499 


Dhruva’fl  son  was  Bbava  who  in  the  name  of  Kala  became  the 
impeller  of  the  worlds. 

22.  Soma’s  sons  were  lord  Varca  and  Budha  who  is 
known  as  a  planet.  These  two  were  bora  of  Rohi^I  and  are 
iamous  in  the  three  worlds. 

23.  Dh^ra,  Ormi  and  Katila — these  three  too  were  the  sons 
of  Candramas  (Moon  god).  Apa*s  sons  were  Vaitandya^ 
iSama  and  Swta. 

24.  Skanda  and  Sana&umara  were  bom  of  the  fourth  part 
of  Tejaa  (fire).  Agni’s  son  Kura^  was  born  in  the  Sara  grove 
(a  kind  of  reed) .  fiakha,  Viiakha  and  Naigameya  were  his 
younger  brothen. 

25.  Anila’s  (Wind  god)  wife  wasSivi  and  her  sons  were 
Manojava  and  Avijftatagati.  Anila  had  these  two  sons. 

26.  They  know  that  the  son  of  PratyQsa  was  sage  Devala 
by  name.  Devala  had  two  sons  K^mavw  and  Manikin. 

27*28.  Brhaspati’s  sister  was  an  excellent  woman,  celibate 
and  having  Yogic  Siddhis.  Unattached  (to  the  worldly  afiairs 
or  things)  she  roamed  the  entire  Universe.  She  who  became 
the  wife  of  Prabhasa,  the  eighth  among  the  Vasus,  had  a  son 
Vilvakarma  who  was  the  Prajapati  of  all  Silpis  (artisans  and 
sculptors). 

29.  He  is  the  maker  of  all  arts  and  crafts.  He  is  the  car* 
penter  of  the  Devas.  He  makes  and  causes  others  to  make  orna¬ 
ments. 

30.  He  makes  the  aerial  chariots  of  all  Devas.  The  human 
craftsmen  depend  upon  (and  emulate)  his  mechanical  arts. 

31-32.  The  ten  renowned  Visvedcvas  were  bom  of  Visva. 
They  were — Kratu^  Dak^a,  Sravas,  Satya,  Kala,  Kania,  Dhuni, 
Kuruv^,  Prabhavan  and  Rocamana.  [  They]  are  remembered 
as  the  ten  sons  of  Dharma.  They  were  the  auspicious  sons  born 
of  Viivi. 

33.  The  Marutvants  were  the  sons  of  Marutvatl.  The 
Bhanu  groups  were  remembered  as  the  sons  of  Bhanu.  The 


500  y^u 

Muburtas  (auspicious  hours)  were  bom  of  Muhurta^.  Laihb& 
gave  birth  to  Gho^. 

34.  The  learned  Samkalpa  (concepdoii)  was  bom  of  Sarh- 
kalpa.  The  Nagavithls  consisting  of  three  paths  were  bom  of 
Jami  (Yami) . 

35.  All  the  objects  on  the  Earth  were  born  of  Arundhatl. 
Thus  the  learned  and  eternal  creation  of  Dharma  has  been 
narrated. 

36.  O  men  of  holy  rites,  I  shall  mention  the  names  of  the 
MuASria's  and  TiiAis  along  with  their  presiding  lords.^  Even  as  I 
recount,  listen  and  tinderstand. 

37.  (Incidentally  I  shall  mention)  the  divisions  of  days 
and  nights,  the  constellations  in  brief  and  all  the  Muhurtas  and 
stars  that  appear  during  days  and  nights. 

38.  More  than  six  hundred  Kalas  are  mentioned  during 
days  and  nights.  The  manifestation  of  Rtus  is  based  on  the 
special  movement  of  the  Sun. 

39.  Those  who  know  Vedas  calculate  Ttthis  as  the  basis  of 
festivals.  For  the  purpose  of  charitable  gifts  on  behalf  of  PitfS, 
they  utilise  the  different  occasions  (even  if  no  apparent  peculia¬ 
rity  is  seen) , 

40*42.  The  divisions  (MuAurtas  or  J^Adgas)  in  the  day  are 
Raudra,  Sluva,  Maitra,  Pi^ya,  Vasava,  Apya,  Vaiivadeva, 
Brahma — these  AfuAfirtJs  cover  the  period  till  mid-day.  Praja- 
patya,  Aindra,  Indra,  Nirrti,  Varuna  and  Aryamna  and  Bhaga; 
these  Muhurtas  of  the  day  are  caused  by  the  Sun.  They  are  to 
be  known  in  accordance  with  their  magnitude  by  means  of  the 
gnomons. 

43-45.  Aja,  Ahir-Budhnya,  Pusa,  Yamadevata,  Agneya. 
Prajapatya,  Brahma,  Saumya,  Aditya,  Barhaspatya,  Vai$nava, 
Savitra,  Tva^tra  and  Vayavya — these  are  the  fifteen  Muhurtas 

i .  This  verse  and  w.  36-45  proeat  the  of  the  different  Muburtw. 

Mu/idria  shows  fit  for  performance  of  an  auapidous  act*.  The  names  of 
MuhOitaa  In  BraLmaw  vul  Smrtu  are  difierent.  The  names  of  the  15 
Muhfirtas  of  the  day  and  15  Muhanu  of  the  night  agree  ^th  those  in  Bd. 
P.  2.3.39-46.  But  of  these  MtP.  253.8^  mentioni  only  8  auspicious  Muhfirtas 
for  beginning  a  worL  Purit>at  regard  Muhurtas  as  deities  m  every  Muhfirta 
has  a  presiding  deity. 


5,4W0 


501 


occurring  in  a  single  night  in  order.  The  movements  and  rising 
of  the  moon  are  to  be  known  from  the  MlikA  or  the  Pida  of  its 
rise.  These  are  the  different  periods  of  time  remembered  as 
Muhurtas.  Their  presidii^  deities  (are  also  mentioned) . 

46-48.  Only  three  positions  have  been  assigned  for  all  the 
planets.  They  must  be  known  in  order  as  southern,  northern 
and  middle  ones. 

The  place  Jaradgava  is  the  middle,  the  place  Airavata  is  the 
northern  one  and  the  pKtee  of  Vaiivanara  has  been  indicated 
as  the  southern  one  (actually. 

The  constellations  Aivini^,  Krttika  and  Yamya  (i.e.  BharanI) 
are  remembered  as  Naga\dtld**.The  constellation  Pufya^Aile^a 
and  Punarvasu  are  considered  as  Airivati  Vitld.  These  three 
Vlthls  are  mentioned  to  be  in  the  northern  path. 

49*50.  The  constellations  Purvaph&lgunl,  Uttarapb&lgunI 
and  Magh4  are  remembered  as  Aryanu  (Vitlil) .  The  constdla*- 
tions  Hasta,  Citra  and  Sv&tl  are  termed  GovlthI) .  The  constel¬ 
lations  Jye$(ha,  Vijakha  and  Anuradha  are  remembered  as 
Jaradgavi  These  three ^thls  are  mentioned  to  be  in  the 

middle  path. 


1.  The  enumeration  of  Nakratras  horn  Aivinl  shows  that  this  portion  of 
the  Puriu^a  should  be  assigned  to  A  J).  300-400  as  the  Vedic  list  of  NakMi- 
tras  starts  from  Krttika.  Vidt  H.D.  V.l  pp.  501-504  for  a  comparative  table 
of  the  list  of  Nak^tras  in  Vedic  Saxikhitai»  their  deities,  their  modem  names 
etc. 

2.  VUhis  are  the  divisions  of  planetary  sphere  comprising  of  three  aster- 
isms,  e.g.  Asvini,  Bhara^i,  Krttika  coostitiUe  NSgaWthi.  Verse  48  states,  oUhU 
are  three  in  number  in  the  northern  path  but  actually  only  two  NSga  and 
Airivati  are  mentioned.  The  line  regarding  Gajavithi  seems  to  be  omitted. 

Verses  48-52  give  the  distribution  of  different  Naksatras  to  different  Vi  this. 
The  sky  is  divided  into  three  zones — the  northern,  the  middle  and  the  south¬ 
ern  designated  as  Airivati,  Jiradgari  and  Vaisv&nari  respectively.  Each  of 
these  have  three  (sub)  Vithis  and  to  each  (sub-Vitbi)  three  conitcllatioiu 
are  assigned  (3+3+ 3—27  Nak^tras) .  ' 

*Here  the  line  found  in  Bd.  P.  11.3-46a  UUhdrdrdta 

sori^fitUt  appean  to  be  omitted.  It  continues  the  series  of  constella¬ 
tions  after  Krttiki  mfuns  :  Tlie  constellationj  Rohioi,  Mrgaiiras  and 
Ardra  are  termed  Gajarithi”.  Unless  this  line  is  included  the  words  in  48.b 
tiSTdS  tu  uttar$  mdrgA 

would  be  meaningless  as  mly  two  ViMt  and  eat  three  are  mentioned  in  the 
Vi.  P. 


502 


y^u  Purdffa 


51*52.  The  constellations  MQIa,  Purvis^ha  and  Uttara- 
9adha  are  termed  AjavitU.  The  constellations  Srava^a,  Dhani* 
;(ha  and  Satabhifak  are  the  GarglV^thl.  The  constellations 
Purva  Bhiidrapada^  Uttara  Bhadrapada  and  Revatl  are  glorified 
as  Vaiivanarl  (Vlthi) .  These  three  Vithls  arc  remembered  by 
learned  men  tobein  the  southern  path. 


53.  The  twenty  seven  (constellations)  daughters  whom 
Dak^  gave  to  Soma  (Moon  god)  are  glorified  in  Astronomy 
as  Nahsatras  by  name  (i.e.  Stars).  They  all  bore  children  11  lu« 
minated  with  unmeasured  splendour. 


54.  From  the  daughters  (of  Dakja)  who  remained^  Kaiyapa 
married  fourteen^  blessed  ones.  All  of  them  arc  mothers  of  the 
worlds. 

55.  They  were  Aditi,  Did,  Danu,  KiUa,  Ari$ta»  Surasa, 
Surabhl,  Vinata,  Tamr5»  Krodhavaia*  Ira,  Kadru  and  Muni. 
O  knowers  of  Dharma,  listen  and  understand  their  progeny. 

56.  The  twelve  Vaiku^tha  gods  who  were  prominent  in 
the  G&ri^ava  Manvantara  that  has  passed,  became  Sadhyas, 
in  the  Cak9U9a  Manvantara. 

57*59.  When  the  present  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  had 
arrived,  they  were  propitiated  by  Aditi.  They  gathered  together 
and  spoke  to  one  another.  shall  enter  this  blessed  Aditi 
alone,  in  the  present  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  by  means  of  a 
moiety  of  our  Yagic  splendour  and  become  her  sons.  That  will 
be  conducive  to  our  welfare.  Those  who  are  bom  of  Aditi  will 
attain  the  status  of  Adityas’*. 


60.  After  saying  this,  all  of  them  were  born  as  the  twelve 
Adityas  from  Kasyapa,  the  son  of  Marici,  in  the  Caksu^  Man¬ 
vantara. 

61.  Satakratu  (Indra)  and  Vis^u  were  bom  again  as 
Nara  and  Narayana  in  the  present  Vaivasvata  Manvantara. 

62.  Death  and  birth  are  mentioned  to  happen  even  to 
those  Devas.  Just  as  the  Sun  rises  and  sets  in  this  world,  even  so 


l«  Though  the  Dumber  of  Ksiyapa'i  wives  is  stated  to  be  fourteen, 
V*  55  gives  the  names  of  Mfimi  only. 


5.63-74 


503 


there  is  manifestation  and  dissolution  to  Frajipatl  (Brahma), 
Vi^t^uand  Bhava  (^iva)  the  noble  souL^ 

63.  Since  they  are  attached  to  the  great  Vedic  tradition  as 
well  as  worldly  objects  like  sound  and  the  eightfold  super¬ 
human  powers  like  Ai!iimd  (minuteness)  these  Devas  were  bom. 

64*65.  The  attachment  to  sensual  objects  is  declared  as  the 
cause  of  birth.  Due  to  the  curse  of  Brahma,  the  Jay^  were 
born  in  the  Svayambhuva  Manvantara  as  Jitas.  In  the  Svaro* 
cisa  Manvantara,  they  were  born  as  Tu^itas  and  in  the  Auttama 
Manvantara  they  were  bom  as  Satyas.  Devas  were  born 
as  Haris  in  the  Tamasa  Manvantara,  Vaikupth as  in  the  Cans- 
^ava  Manvantara,  Sadhyas  in  the  Caksu$a  Manvantara  and 
Adityas  in  the  present  (i.e.  Vaivasvata)  Manvantara. 

66*67.  The  foUwing  are  remembered  as  the  twelve  Adityas, 
the  sons  of  Kalyapa:  Dh4t&,  Aryami,  Mitra,  Varu^a,  Arhia, 
Bh^a,  Indra,  Vivas  van,  Pu^an,  the  tenth  one  Paijanya,  Tva^tf 
and  Visnu  the  last  but  not  the  least  (i.e.  really  the  great) . 

68*70.  Purified  by  penance  and  blessed  by  Mahadevathe 
chaste  Surabhl  bore  to  Kaiyapa  the  eleven  Rudras.  They  were 
Angaraka,  Sarpa,  Nirrti,  Sadasaspati,  Ajaikapat,  Ahirbudhnya, 
Ordhvaketu,  Jvara,  Bhu  van  ei vara,  Mftyu  and  Kapala  who  was 
famous.  With  her  greatpenance,  Surabhl  bore  these  elven  Devas, 
the  Rudras,  the  lords  of  the  three  worlds. 

71.  Then  she  gave  birth  to  two  daughters,  viz.  RohinI  hav* 
ing  the  lustre  of  Rudra  and  Gandhar!  the  renowned. 

72*74.  Four  daughters,  very  famous  in  the  worlds  were  bom 
of  Rohi^,  viz.  Surupa,  Hariisaklla,  Bhadra  and  Kamadugha. 
Kamadugba  and  Surupa  gave  birth  to  two  sons.  Haihsakila  gave 
birth  to  Nrpa  (king)  and  sages  (?)  and  to  Bhadra  were  born 
the  famous  and  blessed  Gandharvas,  the  sons  of  Vajin  (horse)  • 
The  horses  Uccaii^ravaswere  born  then;  they  roamed  about  in 
the  firmament  with  the  speed  of  mind.  They  were  of  different 
colours,  white,  red,  tawny,  deer-colmired/ green  and  gray  and 
(also  of  the  lustre  of)  Rudra.  These  horses  were  of  Gandharva 
wombs.  They  were  the  vehicles  of  the  Devas. 

1.  Verses  62*64  (in  fact  verses  56*65)  stated  that  even  gods  like  BrahmS, 
Viffu  and  Siva  have  their  births  and  deaths  due  to  their  attachment  to 
lexuual  olyects.  Non-attachment  Is  the  way  toliberatioxi.  Gf.  w.  79*80  below. 


504 


Vdjn  JPttrd^ 


75.  Again  to  Surabhl  was  bom  (a  bull)  that  was  glorious^ 
and  had  the  good  lustre  like  that  of  tbemoon.  He  had  a  garland 
on.  He  was  lustrous  with  a  (big)  Iump«  He  was  born  of  the 
storehouse  of  nectar.  With  the  permission  of  Surabhl  he  was 
given  to  Maheivara  as  his  banner. 

76.  Thus  these  sons  of  Kaiyapa,  Rudras  and  Adityas  have 
been  glorified.  S&dhyas,  Viivedevas  and  Vasus  are  remem¬ 
bered  as  the  sons  of  Dharma. 

77.  Aristanemi’s  wives  had  sixteen  childern.  The  sons  of 
the  learned  Bahuputra  are  remembered  as  Vidyuts.  The  excell¬ 
ent  Rks  honoured  by  Brahmar^is  are  born  of  Pratyahgirasa. 

78.  The  sons  of  Kfiaiva,  the  celestial  sage»  are  remembered 
as  Devaprahara^.  These  are  bom  again  at  the  end  of  a  thous¬ 
and  Yugas. 

79-60.  O  Brahmapas,  all  the  thirty-three  groups  of  Oevas 
are  CAandaJas  (born  from  Vedtc  chandas  or  mantras).  These 
Devas  too  are  said  to  have  annihilation  and  birth.  Just  as  the 
sun  rises  and  sets  in  this  world,  so  also  these  groups  of  Devas 
are  born  in  every  Yuga. 

71s  jagesiftguir^  : 

81  -84,  (How  were)  S  ulhya^.  Vasus,  Viivcdevas,  Rudras 
and  Adityas  famous  :  by  tlie  nobility  of  their  birth,  greatness  of 
the  prowess  or  actions  ?We  wish  to  know  the  difierence  among 
Prajapati,  Vi^^u  and  the  noble-souled  Bhava  as  to  who  "excels 
whom  among  them  7  Who  originates  from  whom  ?  Who  is 
established  in  whom  7  Who  is  the  eldest  ?  Who  is  the  middle 
one  ?  who  is  the  youngest  among  them  ?  Who  is  the  most 
important  among  them  ?  Who  is  the  greatest  among  them  by 
means  of  actions,  nobility  of  birth  and  prowess  ?  Please 
mention  all  these  to  us  as  you  know  these  precuely. 


Suta  replied  : 

85.  In  this  context  I  shall  describe  the  difierence  that  is 
remembered  among  them.  Listen  to  what  I  am  going  to  say 
as  to  difference  among  Brahxni,  Vt$nu  and  Rudra. 

86.  The  bodies  of  the  Self-born  Lord  that  are  said  to  be 
born  from  time  to  time  are  proclaimed  as  Rijasa,  Tamasa  and 


5.87-96 


505 


S&ttvika.^ 

87.  O  excellent  BrahmanaS)  it  is  not  possible  to  state  the 
difference  among  these  bodies^  since  they  are  dependent  upon 
the  increase  of  (a  particular)  Gupa  and  the  two*foId  bondage 
due  to  Anugraha  (blessing  or  favouring)  ^dj^igraha  (control* 

88.  O  Br&hmapas,  in  accordance  with  my  ability  I  shall 

recount /Vccft/i  (activity),  (desistancc  from  activity)  and 

the  increase  of  the  Gunas  of  the  bodies.  (Listen  to  it)  and 
understand. 

89.  One  among  them,  the  Rajasa  body  creates  all  the  sub* 
jects;  the  Sattvika  one  staying  in  the  ocean,  blesses;  and  the 
Tamasa  one  swallows  the  subjects  and  overthrows  them  at  the 
proper  time. 

90.  When  god  Brahmamanifests  himself  with  the  resurgence 
of  Rajas  gupa,  the  Sattvika  body  which  is  called  Purufa 
vanishes. 

91.  With  the  excess  of  Tamas,  when  it  assumes  the  form 
of  Kala  (the  destroyer),  the  Rajasa  form  designated  as 
Brahma  disappears. 

92.  When  with  the  dominance  of  Sattva,  the  lord  be¬ 
comes  Purusa,  the  body  named  Kala  ceases  to  exist. 

93.  The  form,  name  and  activity  of  the  Lord  in  favouring 
and  controliii^  those  prevailing  in  the  three  worlds  disappear 
in  due  course. 

94.  When  Brahma  manifests  himself  the  difference  is 
mentioned.  When  the  lord  is  Brahma,  Purusa  does  not 
exist. 

93*96.  Just  as  the  crystal  jewel  assumes  various  colours  due 
to  its  purity,  and  as  a  result  of  the  contact  with  other  objects, 
the  colours  and  sizes  being  in  accordance  with  those  objects,  so 
also  the  self-born  assumes  shapes  and  sizes  due  to  the 


1.  Verses  86-121:  A  pbilosophie  synthesis  of  Brahmt,  Vi^iu  and  Siva« 
^Three  bodies  the  liii^e  self-bom  lord’  (v.  99)  for  the  three  activities  of 
creation,  protection  and  destruedon  (v.  104)*^Tbe  Vedas,  Dhanaa-iSatra, 
S&hkhya  and  Yogs  bold  unammouily  that  Reality  or  the  Supreme  Lord  is 
one.  Syntboisatioo  of  the  Trinity  of  go^  (BrahmS,  Vitpti  and  Siva)u  mani¬ 
festation  of  the  Supreme  Lord  (Brahoian)  is  a  favourite  rubjeetof  FurSoia. 


506  Vdjm 

Gupas*  In  its  singleness  and  separateness  this  is  the  example 
cited. 

97-98.  Just  as  the  cloud,  though  single,  remains  (or  seems) 
different  in  colour  and  form  so  also  the  self-born  Lord  though 
single  one  assumes  different  forms  due  to  Gunas  and  appears 
single,  double  or  triple.  The  single  entity  has  the  three  forms 
ofBrahmi  (the  creator),  armihilator  and  Purusa. 

99.  These  three  bodies  are  remembered  as  those  of  the 
single  self-born  Lord.  The  three  bodies  are  Brahma,  Pauru^ 
and  Antakari. 

100.  Herein  what  is  (known  as)  HisRajasa  body  is  verily 
the  creator  of  subjects  (i.e.  the  Universe).  What  is  called  the 
Tamasa  form  is  the  annihilator  of  the  subjects.  The  Sattvika 
form  called  Paurusa  is  remembered  as  the  bestower  of  bles¬ 
sings. 

I0L102.  From  the  Rajasa  part  of  Brahma  Marici  and 
Kafyapa  were  bom.  From  the  Tamasa  fonn  that  causes  dissolu¬ 
tion  was  boroBhava.  The  Sattvika  or  Paurusa  form  is  called 
Vimu.  These  three  bodies  of  the  self-born  arc  thus  remem¬ 
bered  in  the  three  worlds. 

103.  The  supreme  being,  Kal a,  assumes  states  for  dilferent 
functions  (such  as)  creating  the  subjects  in  the  capacity  of 
Brahma,  supporting  them  in  the  status  of  Vi^nu  and  devouring 
in  the  guise  of  Rudra,  the  subjects  who  had  been  blessed  by  the 
Vaisnava  form. 

104.  The  Self-bom  one,  Kala,  performs  three  activities 
through  the  three  (bodies).  It  creates,  supports  and  annihilates 
the  subjects. 

105.  Thus  the  three  bodies  of  the  self- bom  God  which 
are  called  Prajapatya  (belonging  to  Prajapati  or  god  Brahma) , 
Raudra  (belonging  to  Rudra)  and  Vaisnava  (belonging  to 
Visnu)  have  been  proclaimed. 

106.  Only  one  body  is  remembered  in  the  Vedas,  Dharma 
Sastras  and  in  the  ancient  (schools  of)  Sankhya  and  Yoga  by 
the  intelligent  s^es  who  could  see  (both)  analytically  and 
synthetically,  were  conversant  with  nobility  of  pedigree  and 
prowess  and  could  visualize  the  Reality. 

107.  In  the  matter  of  unity  and  diversity  people  are  of 


5.108-1 18 


507 


different  <^inicms.  Advocates  of  different  points  of  view  say 
**This  U  great  and  this  not  so**. 

108.  Some  hold  that  BrahmA  is  thecau8e(of  the  Universe) ; 
some  say  that  it  is  Prajapati.  Some  say  that  Siva  is  the  grea¬ 
test  while  others  call  Vi^riu  supreme.  Out  of  ignorance  and 
with  the  mind  vitiated  by  passion^  attachment  etc.  they  think 
like  this. 

109.  Considering  the  reality,  time,  place,  cause  and  effects 
precisely,  these  deities  are  declared  as  working  for  diverse 
purposes. 

110.  He  who  censures  ont  among  them  censures  them 
all.  He  who  praises  one,  praises  all  of  them.  They  call  him 
Brahmavadin  (propounder  of  Brahman)  who  undestands 
one  Puru^a. 

111.  The  attitude  of  non-censure  must  always  be  adopted 
towards  the  deities  by  one  who  knows  (the  Reality).  It  is  im¬ 
possible  to  know  I  ivar a  established  in  all  Axivarya  (prosperity, 
power  and  glory). 

112-113.  It  is  one  supreme  Soul.  He  becomes  three  and 
deludes  the  subjects.  People  sedc  difference  among  these  three 
Beings,  with  diverse  points  of  view,  curiously  testing  their  forms 
and  saying,  *‘This  is  the  greatest;  this  is  not(so}**,  out  of  deluded 
mind. 

114-115.  These  deities  permeate  even  Yatudhanas,  Pilacas 
and  human  beings.  The  Self-bom  stays  unified  and  separate 
deluding  the  subjects  by  means  of  the  bodies  solely  consisting 
of  the  Gu^.  He  who  worships  one  among  them,  worships  all 
the  three. 

116.  These  three  deities  remain  non-different  (iactually). 
So  where  is  separatness  or  unity  ?  Where  is  their  number  ? 
Whence  do  they  come  atul  go  ?  Who  is  competent  to  know 
their  unity  or  multiplicity? 

1 1 7.  Since  in  view  of  their  being  united  with  the  Gu^os 
they  create,  sustain  and  devour  the  subjects  in  the  three  units 
of  time,  the  supreme  Being  is  said  to  be  one. 

118.  Brahmai^as  call  that  one  lord,  Rudra,  Brahma,  Indra, 
guardians  of  the  quarters,  sages,  Danus  (Manus  inBd.  P.)  and 
Narayana,  in  diverse  ways. 


508 


yjjfu  Purd^a 


119.  The  Prajapatya  body  (Lc.  that  of  Brahma)  and  the 
Vai$^va  body  (iiC.  that  of  Vifnu)  recur  again  and  again  in  all 
the  Manvantaras  and  Kalpas. 

120.  In  splendour,  fame,  intellect,  learning  and  strength 
they  are  born  equal  to  Him.  Know  them  also. 

121.  With  the  Rajasa  part  of  Brahma,  Marici  and  Ka^yapa 
were  born.  It  is  said  that  Rudra  of  the  natiire  of  Kala  was  bom 
with  thcTamasa  part.  With  the  Sattvika  part  of  Puruja  Vi^u 
was  then  born  in  the  Yajfia. 

122-124.  The  bodies  bom  of  parts  of  Brahma  occur  in  all 
the  three  units  of  time.  Becoming  Kila,  Rudra  destroys  the 
subjects  again.  When  the  end  of  the  Kalpa  approaches,  the  sun 
of  seven  rays  becomes  the  Samvartaka  Sun  (the  sun  at  the  time 
of  world  dissolution)  and  bums  the  three  worlds.  With  changes 
in  name  and  form,  Vi ;nu  blesses  Le.  sustains  the  subjects.  In 
the  different  sittiations  he  is  the  cause  of  the  origin  of  different 
things. 

125.  With  the  Paurusa  body  of  Bahma  which  had  a  predo¬ 
minance  of  Sattva  guna,  the  god  was  born  here  in  the  first 
Svayambhuva  Manvantara  as  the  mental  son  of  Akuti.^ 

126.  Thereafter,  when  the  Svaroci^  Manvantara  arrived, 
he  was  born  of  Tufita  along  with  the  previous  Tufita  groups 
of  Devaaand  passed  away  along  with  them. 

127.  In  the  Auttama  Manvantara  also,  he  was  known  as 
Tu^ita.  Bom  along  with  Vaiavartis  (i.e.  Devas  of  that  name), 
Hari  was  again  known  as  Va^vartin. 

128.  He  was  bom  of  Satya,  as  Satya,  along  with  the  excel¬ 
lent  gods  Satyas.  When  the  Tamasa  Manvantara  arrived,  Hari 
himself  was  bom  of  Harya  along  with  the  Haris. 

129-132.  In  the  Carisnava  Manvantara,  I^rd  Hari  was 
again  bom  ofVaikundia  along  with  the  Abhutarajasas.  When 
the  Gak^u^  Manvantara  arrived  that  lord  Vaikuptha  was  bom 
as  Narayana,  Dharma  and  Sadhya  along  with  the  Sadhya 
group  of  gods.  When  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  arrived,  the 
lord  Sadhya  Narayana,  was  born  of  Aditi  and  Ka$yapa,  the  son 


1.  Vencs  125*132  itste  different  ineamadoos  of  Vi|pu  in  different  Mon- 
vancarai,  and  hii  achievement  as  Trivikrama.  But  the  unity  of  BrahmA, 
VSmaaa  and  the  great  Atman  is  emphasised. 


5.13S-142 


509 


ofMarici.  Visqu,  of  big  steps,  conquered  all  the  worlds  by 
means  of  three  steps  and  handed  them  over  to  Indra  and  the 
Devas.  Thus  these  seven  bodies  of  the  lord  have  appeared  in 
the  seven  past  Manvantaras.  Thereby  the  subjects  were  pro* 
tected. 

133*  Since,  at  die  time  of  his  birth,  all  the  worlds  were 
permeated  by  Vamana  (Lord  in  the  fonn  of  a  dwaif)  he  is 
remembered  as  Vi^QU^  The  root  Vvii  means  *to  enter,  to 
pcrmcatc\ 

134.  Thus  the  unity,  separatness  and  the  speciality  of 
Brahma  and  Vimana,  the  great  Atman  have  been  glorified. 

1 35.  The  deities  are  bom  of  the  part  of  other  deities.  They 
are  then  bom  equal  to  them  in  brilliance,  intellect,  learning 
and  strength,  thanks  to  their  blessings. 

136.  Know  that  whatever  being  exists  endowed  with  special 
riches,  glory  and  strength,  is  born  of  a  part  of  Vi$Qu*s  bril¬ 
liance. 

137.  Some  men  say  that  the  lord  alone  is  born  partially. 
Others  say  that  the  deities  arc  born  of  one  anoihers*  part. 

138.  Thus  arguing  with  one  another  they  say  after  seeing 
them.  For,  there  is  no  difTcrence  between  Manas  and  Cetas 
Hence  they  are  blessed.  They  become  K^etrajfias. 

139.  l^vara,  though  one,  becomes  manifold,  due  to  the 
power  of  his  lordship.  For  the  same  reason  after  becoming  mani¬ 
fold  he  becomes  one  again. 

140.  From  that  (Xjord)  of  good  intentions  and  the  diversity 
of  brilliance  are  bom  the  subjects  consisting  of  mobile  and  the 
immobile  beings  in  all  the  Manvantaras.  When  they  are  created 
once  at  the  beginning  of  Sarga,  they  continue  to  live  res¬ 
pectably  (7) 

141 .  Whenever  any  Kalpa  comes  to  a  close  Kudra  annihi¬ 
lates  the  subjects,  livaras  are  bom  by  means  of  Yogic  May& 
deluding  others. 

142.  They  are  moving  about  due  to  their  Ailvarya  and  the 
non-livaras  (those  devoid  of  Aiivarya)  are  deluded.  Hence 
there  is  nothing  proper  improper  in  things  where  faults 
spread. 


510 


143«  Tboie  who  spread  scandal  about  living  beings  are 
wicked;  those  who  are  favourable  to  living  beii^  are  middling; 
those  who  slight  and  disregard  living  beings  are  competent 
There  are  three  Vedas  for  those  who  are  eloquent* 

144*  (A  line  is  missing  from  the  the  Text.)  Because  it  is 
heard  firmly,  because  it  is  heard  before,  bacause  it  is  a  rumour 
and  because  it  is  worldly,  for  dicie  four  reasons  one  docs  not  get 
at  the  precise  truth. 

145.  Formerly  they  meant  and  were  used  in  another  sense, 
and  even  after  the  lapse  of  time  one  does  not  accept  the  new 
sense  out  of  spite. 

146*  He  who  is  a  solid  among  solids,  he  who  becomes  the 
attribute  therein,  he  who  is  the  creator  of  activities  and  minds 
and  he  who  is  great  due  to  pedigree,  are  glorified  by  those  who 
know  the  tradition,  for  these  four  reasons* 

147.  The  incompetent  and  the  infiuiated  know  the  deities 
only  partially.  They  state  these  two  verses  in  this  cmnection  in 
regard  to  Yogeivara  (Lord  of  Yogas). 

1 48*149.  The  Yt^efvara  m^es  replicas  of  himself  and 
others  in  thousands  by  means  of  Yogic  power.  He  moves  about 
among  them.  He  attains  the  (pleasures  of)  sensuous  objects 
performing  severe  penance.  Like  the  Sun  withdrawing  his 
brilliance  and  attributes  (of  beat  etc*)  he  annihilates  them  all 
again. 


CHAPTER  SIX 

Cursf  to  Jqya  Gods  :  J/fsirhha  Incarnation 
Race  of  Hirasffokaiipu  i  Birth  of  MaruUGods 

1  *  On  hearing  his  words,  the  sages  and  ascetics  of  the 
Naimi^a  forest  asked  the  most  excellent  one  (i.e*  Suta)  in  due 
course. 

The  sages  said: 

2-  How  were  the  Devas,  the  extremely  powerful  Adityas, 
the  chief  of  whom  were  Indra  and  Vi$pu,  bom  in  the  seven 


6.3-16 


511 


Manvaataras?  O  Romaharfa^»  please  narrate  all  this  in 
details  to  us. 

3.  Oil  being  urged  and  requested  by  the  expounders  of 
the  Brahman  (Vedas)  the  modest  Suta^  the  most  excellent 
among  eloquent  ones  spoke  in  accordance  with  the  query  of  the 
great  sages. 

Suia  narrated  : 

4.  All  the  Devas  created  from  the  mouth  of  BrahmJi  with 
a  desire  for  progeny  in  the  Manvantaras  had  their  bodies 
constituted  of  Mantras. 

5-8.  The  twelve  Manus,  the  twelve  sons  of  Brahma  were: 
Daria,  Paur^amasa,  Brhad,  Rathantara,  Akuta  the  first,  Akuti, 
Vitti,  Suvitti,  Akutt  (or  Akiita  the  second?),  Kuti,  Adhifta, 
AdlUti,  VijAati  and  VijAata.  These  are  the  cumulative  (names) 
of  years.  Seeing  them  Brahmi  said,  Jayas,  procreate  the 
Devas.  Perform  the  Agnikotra  Yaga  after  marriage**.  After  saying 
this,  Brahma  vanished  there  itself. 

9- 12*  But  they  did  not  act  in  accordance  with  the  instruc¬ 
tion  of  Paramesthin  (Brahma) .  They  found  out  defects  even  in 
those  who  abide  by  the  mental,  verbal  and  physical  activities 
of  a  truthful  nature;  they  saw  the  fruits  of  actions  excessively 
reduced;  they  hated  progeny  and  procreation.  They  were 
alert  but  free  from  the  sense  of  my-ness  (possession) ;  they 
aspired  for  permanence;  they  were  detached  (from  worldly 
objects) ;  they  saw  defects  (in  worldly  activities) ;  they  abandon¬ 
ed  wealth,  love  and  virtue;  they  adhered  to  knowledge 
pertaining  to  the  supreme  being  and  remained  with  their 
splendour  withdrawn* 

13.  On  realising  the  trend  of  their  thoi^ht,  Brahma  became 
angry.  Brahma  spoke  to  those  gods  in  despair. 

14.  ‘•You  have  been  created  by  me  for  the  sake  of  further 
procreation  and  not  otherwise.  I  have  already  told  you  to  pro¬ 
create  and  be  victorious. 

15-16.  You  have  disregarded  my  words  andh  ave  adhered 
to  detachment*  You  hate  your  own  birth.  Hence  you  do  not 

*The  is  obscure  Bd.  P.  reads  : 

dirdgnihfitrAtatk  pitatrajfajatiti  ea  is  better  and  bence  adopted  here. 


512 


Purdifa 


appreciate  (the  necessity  of)  progeny.  You  have  abandoned 
all  rites  in  your  ambition  to  achieve  deathlessness  (Immor* 
talicy)*  Hence,  having  dishonoured  (me)  you  will  be  born 
seven  times.** 

17.  On  being  urged  by  Brahmit  thus,  those  Devas,  the 
Jayas,  began  to  propitiate  him.  great  lord,  forgive  us  for 
what  has  been  done  through  ignorance**. 

1 8.  When  they  bowed  to  him  and  implored,  Brahma  said 
to  them  again:  ^^Who  deser\*es  (he.  is  capable)  to  be  indepen^ 
dent  in  this  world  without  being  permitted  by  me  ? 

1 9.  Everything  is  pervaded  by  me.  As  against  my  will  how 
will  living  beirgs  attain  anything  auspicious  or  inauspicious. 

20.  Whatever  exists  in  the  world  or  is  endowed  with 
Satlva  (existence)  or  Asattva  (non*existcncc)  has  been  per* 
vaded  by  me  with  intellect  and  soul.  Who  in  the  world  dare  to 
deceive  me  ? 

21.  Whatever  has  been  conjectured,  decided  or  considered 
by  the  living  beings  is  entirely  known  to  me. 

22.  The  entire  Universe  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  the 
immobile  beings  (created)  has  been  established  by  me,  thanks  to 
the  principle  of  hope  and  expectation.  How  can  I  approve  of 
cutting  it  off  ? 

23.  Since  I  liave  transformed  myself  for  the  sake  of 
creation  and  not  for  any  other  purpose,  who  will  be  free 
from  my  will  without  beginning  the  performance  of  holy 
rites?** 

24.  After  saying  this  to  the  group  of  Jay  a  Devas  who  ac* 
cep  ted  his  pimishment  and  who  were  dejected,  Prajapati  spoke 
again  to  them  (in  consolation)  • 

25.  ^‘Since,  after  open  declaration  to  me,  renunciation  had 
been  adopted  by  you  formeriy  and  since  excessive  effort, 
though  fruitless,  had  been  put  in  by  you,  O  Devas,  your 
future  births  wUI  result  in  ultimate  happiness. 

26*27.  O  excellent  Devas,  your  birth  will  be  in  accordance 
with  your  own  will.  la  the  six  Manvantaras  banning  with 
Svayadtbhuva  and  ending  with  Vaivasvata,  O  Suras,  all  of  you 
will  be  moving  ahead,  deluded  (by  Avidya)  **•  After  knowing 


6.28-39 


513 


them  (i.c.  their  reaction)  this  ancient  verse  was  recited  by 
Brahma. 

28«  ^ ‘Those  who  perform  holy  actions  such  as  the  study 

of  the  three  Vedas,  maintenance  of  celibacy,  procreation  of 
progeny »  performance  of  Sraddhas,  and  Yajftas  and  practice 
of  charity  become  free  from  sin  (Rajas)  and  arc  always 
praised  by  others**. 

29.  After  reciting  thus  the  verse  he  spoke  to  the  Dcvas, 
Jayas  again— “When  tl*e  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  is  over, 
you  will  come  here  near  me. 

30.  Then  you  will  attain  eternal  Siddhi  along  with  me  . 
After  speaking  thus  to  them,  Brahma  vanished  there  itself. 

31.  When  the  lord  had  disappeared  those  Devas  who  were 
endowed  withYogic  power  and  who  possessed  A^imd  and  other 
supernatural  powcr\  continued  practising  Yoga  fearlessly. 

32.  Thereafter,  their  bodies  turned  into  twelve  lakes. 
They  came  to  be  known  by  the  name  Jay  a  and  they  resembled 
the  oceans. 

33.  Then,  in  that  Svayaihbhuva  Manvantara,  those  Suras 
(Gods)  were  bom  as  the  sons  Ruci  and  Ajita.  They  were  twelve 
in  number  and  were  known  as  Aiitas.* 

34.  These  mental  sons  known  as  the  twelve  Ajitas  were 
Vidhi.  Munaya  (7),  K^cma,  Nanda,  Avyaya,  Praria,  Apana, 
Sudhama,  Kratu,  Sakti  and  Vyavasthita. 

35.  In  Yajftas  they  arc  proclaimed  as  the  partakers  of  the 
fruits  of  Yajftas  along  with  the  Suras  in  the  Svayarhbhuva 
Manvantra.  Again  in  the  Svarocisa  Manvantara,  they  were 
bom  as  the  sons  of  Svarocisa  and  Tu?ita. 

36-37.  They  were  known  by  the  names  Tusitas*  and 
Pranas.  They  were  the  Suras  and  partakers  of  Yajftas.  Again 
theses  Tu^itas  were  bom  as  the  auspicious  sons  of  Utlama  and 
Saty^  in  the  Uttama  Manvantara.  Then*  those  Devas  were 
remembered  as  Satyas  in  the  Uttama  Manvantara. 

38-39.  In  the  Dvapara  Yuga  of  the  third  Manvantara, 
they  became  the  partakers  of  Yajftas.  When  the  Tamasa 


].  Only  11  are  romaerated. 

2.  The  groufM  of  gods  are  named  after  thor  mothen — a  rd)C  of  laatriarcb- 
cal  sodecy  ? 


514 


Vdjni  Purdina 


Manvantara  arrived,  all  those  twelve  Devas,  'the  Satyas»  were 
bom  as  the  sons  of  Tamas  and  Harya  They  were  known 
by  the  name  Haris  and  were  partakers  of  Yajfta. 

40*  When  the  Ciri^^ava  Manvantara  arrived  those  Devas, 
the  Haris,  were  born  as  the  sons  of  Vaikunthk  and  Car i  9911. 
In  the  fiflh  Manvantara  those  Devas  were  known  by  the  name 
Vaikunjha*. 

41.  In  the  Cak^u^  Manvantara,  those  Devas,  the  Vaiku* 
Qfhas  were  born  as  the  twelve  sons  of  Dharma  and  S&dhya. 

42*45.  When  the  Cakfu^  Manvantara  elapsed  and  the 
Vaivasvata  Manvantara  arrived  at  the  beginning  of  the  first 
Treta  Yuga  (of  that  Manvantara),  these  Sadhyas  were  born  as 
the  twelve  Adityas,  by  means  of  their  parts  as  the  sons  of  Aditi 
and  Kaiyapa,  the  son  of  Marici.  Thus  those  who  were  origin¬ 
ally  Jayas  were  bom  as  Sadhyas  in  the  Svayambhuva  Manvan* 
tara  as  a  result  of  the  curse  of  (Brahma) .  Again  they  were 
born  in  the  Clik^u^a  Manvantara  and  were  bom  as  Adityas  in 
the  present  Vaivasvata  (Manvantara). 

46.  He  who  faithfully  reads  this  story  of  the  seven  births 
of  the  Devas  at  the  bidding  of  the  lord,  does  not  meet  with  any 
obstacle  or  sin. 

47.  Thus  the  seven  births  of  Jayas  with  seven  charac* 
teristics  have  been  narrated  by  me.*  What  else  do  you  wish  to 
hear  7 

The  sages  requested : 

48.  Narrate  to  us  the  origin  and  death  in  detail,  of  the 
Daityas,  Dmavas,  Gandharvas,  Serpents,  Rak$asas,  all 
the  Bhutas  (goblins),  Pisacas  (ghosts),  animals,  birds  and 
creepers. 

49.  Thus  requested,  Suta  told  these  exeellent  sages:  *'We  have 
heard  that  Did  bore  two  sons  to  Kasyapa. 

50-5 1 .  Those  two  sons  are  remembered  as  the  eldest  of 
all  the  sons  of  Kalyapa.  The  word  Kaiipu  means  ‘a  mat’. 

1.  The  ssme  vet  of  godi,  vis.  Jayas  ti  bom  ia  the  beginning  of  each 
ManvsnUm  with  different  names  such  as  *Tu^ta*  in  Sv&rociia,  'Satym*  in 
Uttaxna,  Aditya  in  Vaivasvata.  They  derived  their  names  bom  their  mothm. 

2.  It  ti  noteworthy  that  these  gods  also  are  named  aAer  their  mother. 


6.52-60 


615 


The  seat  of  the  chid^tvik  in  a  Tajiia  is  a  golden  mat.  Kaiyapa 
performed  an  Asvamedha  (horse-sacrifice) »  In  the  course  of 
that  sacrifice,  during  the  performance  of  Atiratra  sacrifice,  on 
the  day  of  Sutya  (the  day  meant  for  extraction  of  Soma  juice) 
the  son  of  Kasyapa  came  out  of  the  womb  of  Dili  and  seated 
himself  on  the  big  seat  of  the  Stvik  in  the  midst  of  the  assembly 
(of  the  priests).  As  a  result  of  this  action,  be  is  remembered  as 
Hirai:iyakasipu  / 

The  sages  said : 

52.  O  holy  lord,  mention  in  detail  to  us  the  name, 
origin  and  prowess  of  the  noble-souled  Daitya  Hiraoyaka^ipu. 

Sdia  said : 

53.  Formerly  the  holy  Aivamedha  of  Kasyapa  was  per* 
formed  at  Pu^kara.  It  was  graced  by  (the  presence  of)  deities 
and  Gandharvas. 

54.  For  the  purpose  of  discourses  etc.  in  accordance  with 
the  excellent  injunctions  (in  sacred  scriptures)  there  were 
five  golden  seats  kept  there. 

55.  Three  of  them  were  sanctified  by  means  of  Kuia  grass. 
The  (fourth  had  a)  bundle  of  Kusa  grass  (over  it)  and  (the 
fifth)  a  plank  (over  it).  The  four  seats  were  intended  for  the 
chief  Rtviks. 

56.  The  fifth  was  an  auspicious,  divine,  golden  one  intend¬ 
ed  for  the  Hotf,  It  was  covered  with  divine  cloth. 

57.  Diti  who  had  been  pregnant  for  ten  thousand  years 
was  occupying  the  seat  of  Paini  (i.e.  the  wife  of  the  saciiicer, 
vis.  Kasyapa). 

58-59.  The  boy  in  the  womb  came  out  of  the  belly  of  his 
mother  and  sat  on  the  golden  seat  intended  for  the  Hotf. 
Seated  there  he  narrated  the  verses  of  the  four  Vedas  and  the 
fifth  one,  the  Akhyanas  (Pura^ias)  likeKa^apa.  On  seeing  him, 
the  sages  gave  him  that  name. 

60.  Thanks  to  that  act,  he  became  renowned  as  Hiranya- 
ka^ipu.  Hiranyak^a  was  his  younger  brother.  Sirhhika  was  the 

1.  The  author's  fwr  p<^ulmr  etyxzsologics  (similar  to  thst  of 

Br&hmaoa-writers)  leads  him  to  create  such  stories  aa  in  vv.  5So59. 


516  Purd^ 

younger  sister.  She  was  the  lady  who  became  the  mother  of 
Rihu  after  marrying  Vipracitti. 

61.  Hiranyakaiipu,  the  Daitya  (son  of  Diti)>  performed 
severe  penances  for  a  hundred  thousand  years  without  taking 
any  food  and  standing  topsy-turvy. 

62.  Brahma  who  was  delighted  (at  his  penance)  gratified 
him  with  a  boon  (whereby  he  attained  deathlessncss  from  all 
living  beings).  O  leading  Brahma^,  conquering  Devas 
through  his  Yogic  power  he  attained  the  lordship  of  all  (Lit.  the 
state  of  being  all  Devas). 

63.  (He  requested  further:)  ^^May  Danavas  and  Asuras 
be  equal  to  Devas  and  attain  the  greatness  of  Marut  gods.  May 
tills  boon  be  granted.** 

64.  Thus  requested  Brahm&>  granted  him  what  he  wished 
and  after  granting  him  the  divine  boons»  he  vanished  there  it¬ 
self.  Hira^yakaiipu,  the  son  ofDiti^has  been  glorified  by  the 
ancient  people  by  means  of  verses. 

65.  *‘The  Devas  along  with  great  sages  made  obeisance  to 
that  quarter  which  is  resorted  to  by  King  Htra^yakalipu.** 

66.  O  Brahmariasj  Htra^yakaiipu>  the  lord  of  Daitya s, 

had  such  prowess.  In  ancient  times,  in  the  form  of  Man- 

Lion,  became  deatli  unto  him  (he.  killed  him) .  He  was  torn  by 
him  by  means  of  his  claws.  Hcncc  the  nails  are  remembered  pure^. 

67*68.  Hiranyaksa  had  five  valorous  sons  of  great  strength. 
Utkura,  Sakuni,  Kalanabha,  the  valorous  Mahanabha  and 
Bhutasantapana — these  sons  of  Hiranyaksa  were  invincible  even 
to  Devas. 

69.  Their  sons  and  grandsons  composed  the  group  (of  Dai- 
tyas)  named  Badeya.  They  were  a  hundred  thousand  in  number 
and  were  killed  in  (the  battle?)  T^akamaya^. 

70.  Hiranyakasipu  had  four  sons  of  great  strength.  Prahlada 
was  the  eldest  and  the  others  were  Anuhlada»  Samhrada  and 
Hrada.  Understand  the  sons  of  Hrada. 


1 .  Another  reading — HIi  naili  wm  neither  wet  nor  dry — Bd.P. 

2.  The  battle  fought  after  the  abduction  of  Brhatpati*s  wife  TSri  by 
Gandra.  In  that  battle  Daityas  tided  with  Gaoora. 


6,71^4 


517 


7L  Hrada  and  Nisurxda  were  the  sons  ofHrada.  The  valo* 
rous  Sunda  and  Upasunda  were  the  sons  of  Nisunda. 

72.  Brahmagbna,  Mahaviryaand  Muka  became  the  succes¬ 
sors  of  Hrada.  M^lca,  son  of  Sunda,  was  born  ofT^aki« 

73»  Tadak5  was  killed  by  the  powerful  Raghava  (R^a). 
Muka  was  killed  bySavyas^  (i.e.  Arjuna)  inKtrata  (i.e.  when 
Siva  assumed  the  form  of  a  hunter  to  test  Arjuna) . 

74.  Their  descendants  purified  themselves  by  means  of  great 
penance.  They  were  the  residents  of  Mapivarta  and  reached  the 
number  of  thirty  million.  Inviniciblc  to  Devas  they  were 
killed  by  Savyasac!  (Arjuna). 

75.  Anuhlada’s  sons  were  Vayu  and  Sinlvali.  Their  descen¬ 
dants  running  to  a  hundred  thousand  constituted  the  group  of 
demons  remembered  as  H&!5hala. 

76.  Vairocana,  the  son  ofPralilada,  had  five  sons.  Gave;(hl, 
Kalanemiy  Jarhbha,  Ba^kala  and  Sarhbhu  (who  was  the  youn¬ 
gest  of  them  all}  are  remembered  as  the  sons  of  Prahladi  (i.e. 
Vairocana) . 

77-78.  I  shall  mention  their  invincible  sons  in  accordance 
With  their  importance.  Sumbha,  Niiumbha  and  VJ^vaksena — 
these  were  the  sons  of  the  powerful  Gave^thin.Jaihbha^s  sons 
were  Satadundubhi,  Dak^  and  Kha^d^*  Those  three  were 
Jaihbha*s  sons. 

79.  Virodha,  Manu,  Vfk^&yu  and  Kuialimukha — these  were 
thesonsofBaskala.  Listen  to  the  (enumeration  of  the)  sons  of 
Kalanemi. 

80.  Brahmajit,  Ksatrajit,  Devantaka  and  Nar wtaka — these 
were  the  sons  of  Kalanemi.  Listen  to  the  progeny  ofSambhu. 

81 .  Dhanuka,  Asiloman,  Nabala,  Gomukha»  Gav^sa  and 
Goman — these  are  said  to  be  the  sons  of  Sambhu. 

82.  Virocana*s  son  Bali  alone  was  very  valorous*  A  hundred 
sons  were  bom  to  Bali.  All  of  them  were  kings. 

83-84.  Among  them>  four  were  very  imporant.  They  were 
valorous  and  extremely  powerful.  The  thousand- handed  eldest 
son  Baria  was  wealthy  and  honoured  (by  all).  The  others  were 
Kurobhanabha,  Gardabhak^a^  Kuii  and  others.  Sakuni  and 
Putana  were  the  two  daughters  of  Bali*  Bali’s  sons  and  grandsons 
numbered  hundreds  and  thousands. 


518 


Fdjm 


83.  They  constituted  a  group  of  demons  famous  by  the 
name  Paliga^.  They  were  va}(HX>us  and  manly«  Ba^a  whose 
mind  was  like  thatof  Indra,  had  his  capital  city  Lauhitya  (So:^- 
tapura  in  Assam)  • 

86.  Diti  who  lost  her  sons  gratified  Kaiyapa.  Well«propiti- 
ated  by  her,  the  delighted  Kafyapa  asked  her  to  choose  a  boon 
freely «  She  chose  the  boon«^ 

87.  The  holy  lord  granted  her  the  boon  requested  for.  The 
son  ofMarid,  of  fierce  splendour,  asked  her What  do  you  wish?** 

88-89.  She  said  to  her  gratified  husband,  Kaiyapa,  the  son 
of  Marlci,  with  palms  joined  in  reverence — “O  holy  lord,  my 
sons  have  been  killed  by  your  sons  bom  of  Aditi.  I  wish  for  a 
son  who  will  be  endowed  with  penance  of  long  duration  and 
who  will  kill  Sakra.  I  shall  perform  penance.  It  behoves  you  to 
impregnate  me.** 

90.  On  bearing  her  words,  Kaiyapa,  the  highly  brilliant 
son  of  Marict,  replied  to  Did  who  was  extremely  sad: 

91 .  **May  it  be  so.  Welfare  unto  you.  Be  pure,  O  ascetic 
lady.  You  will  bear  a  good  son  who  will  kill  Sakra  in  battle. 

92.  If  you  (condnue  to)  remain  pure  for  full  hundred  years 
you  will  bear  a  son  who  will  be  the  foremost  in  thethree  worlds**. 

93.  Afier  saying  this,  the  holy  lord  of  great  brilliance  had 
sexual  intercourse  with  her.  After  embracing  her,  the  holy  sage 
went  on  his  tour  of  the  three  worlds. 

94.  After  the  departure  of  her  husband,  that  extremely 
delighted  noble  lady  Did  went  to  the  forest  Kulala  and  perform¬ 
ed  a  very  terrible  penance* 

95.  Whileshe  was  performing  the  penance,  the  thousand- 
eyed  Indra,  the  most  excellent  among  Suras,  served  her  by 
means  of  his  rich  attributes. 

1 .  Vertex  86-1 94  dneribe  the  birth  of  Muut-gods  from  Did  and  her  final 
recoQciliation  with  Indra.  Indra’s  entry  into  Diti'i  ¥fomb  and  splitting  of  his 
prospective  killer  into  49  parts  and  the  derivation  of  the  name  ‘Manic’  from 
Indra’s  threat  roJty  (Don’t  cry)  is  a  Puraoic  elaboration  of  a  Vedic 
cone^t  where  the  seven  Maruts  are  said  to  be  seven  Pri^as,  Indra  being 
the  main  PrdM  controlling  the  Maruts  (5at.  Br.  9.9.1. 7) .  For  similar  ela¬ 
boration  cf.  VP.  1.21.32-41,  Mt  P.  cat.  7.  Bd.  P.  2.9.5.45-81  is  pracdcaliy 
identical  with  our  teat. 


6.96-106 


519 


96.  He  brought  and  gaveher  sacrificial  fire  and  twigs,  wood 
and  Kuia  grass,  fruits  and  roots.  The  thousand-eyed  lord  gave 
her  whatever  else  she  required. 

97.  By  massaging  her  limbs  and  by  assuaging  her  weariness, 
Sakra  served  her  on  all  occasions.  Thus  propitiated,  Diti  spoke 
to  Sakra  : 

98.  excellent  one  among  Suras,  I  am  delighted  with 
you;  O  dear  son,  only  ten  more  years  remain;  welfare  unto 
you;  you  will  then  see  your  brother. 

99.  On  getting  such  a  son  I  will  fulfil  mydesire  for  conquest* 
With  him,  O  son,  I  will  conquer  the  three  worlds. ’’ 

100.  Afier  saying  this  to  Sakra,  and  when  the  sun  reached 
midday,  the  lady  was  over-powered  by  slumber.  She  crouched 
down  keeping  her  head  on  her  kness. 

101.  Seeing  her  impure  inasmuch  as  her  hair  spread  over 
her  feet,  Sakra  laughed  and  rejoiced  on  getting  that  opportune 
moment. 

102.  Then  Purandara  (Indra)  entered  her  open  body.  Afier 
entering  and  seeing  the  immense  (unmeasurable)  foetus  of  great 
power,  Indra  of  great  fame  pierced  the  important  enemy  (?)  with 
his  thunderbolt. 

103.  On  being  split  by  the  thunderbolt  of  hundred  knots, 
the  foetus  cried  in  a  high  and  terrible  pitch,  quaking  again  and 
again.  Sakra  then  spoke  to  the  foetus-'^Do  not  cry  {MdRodiJ^Y** 

104.  With  his  thunderbolt,  Indra  cut  off  the  foetus  into 
seven  pieces  and  split  each  of  the  pieces  into  seven  pieces  again. 
Then  Diti  woke  up. 

105.  **It  should  not  be  killed.  It  should  not  be  killed’’,  so 
shouted  Diti.  With  due  deforence  to  the  words  of  his  mother, 
Indra  jumped  out  of  her  belly*  Armed  with  his  thunderbolt, 
Sakra  spoke  to  Diti  with  palms  joined  in  reverence  : 

106.  noble  lady,  you  went  to  sleep  in  a  defiled  state 
since  the  hair  were  spread  over  your  feet.  On  seizing  that  oppor¬ 
tunity  I  have  split  the  foetus  that  would  have  been  the  slayer  of 
Sakra  in  battle.  It  behoves  you  to  firgive  me/’ 


].  Cr.  VP.  1.21-99,  Mt.  P.  8.62  for  timflar  etymology  of  ^Marut*. 


520 


y^u  Purd^ 


107.  When  that  foetus  became  fruitless,  Diti  became  extre¬ 
mely  distressed.  Then  she  spoke  to  the  thousand-eyed  Indr  a 
these  consoling  words: 

108.  lord  of  Devas,  O  powerful  son  of  a  sage,  it  is  not 
your  foult,  if  the  foetus  had  been  rendered  incapable  as  a  result 
of  my  mistake. 

109.  There  is  no  sin  in  killing  an  enemy.  Hence,  O  (Indra) 
I  do  not  curse  you.  I  wish  to  do  what  is  pleasing  to  you.  Do  a 
favour  unto  my  foetus. 

1 10.  May  my  sons  have  seven  abodes  in  heaven.  Let  my 
seven  sons  roam  about  these  wind-regions  (ydlasiandkas)*  (Path¬ 
ways  of  wind).  May  they  be  renowned  as  the  seven  Maruts,  the 
seven  sets  of  seven. 

111.  May  the  Brst  Skandha  (r^on)  be  on  the  Earth,  the 
second  in  the  Sun,  the  third  in  the  Moon,  aud  the  fourth  should 
be  known  in  the  groups  of  luminaries. 

112.  May  the  fifth  SkandAa  be  among  the  planets,  the  sixth 
in  the  sphere  of  the  Seven  Sages  and  the  seventh  in  Dhruva. 
That  is  the  last  region  of  the  wind. 

113.  May  my  sons  roam  about  among  them  on  different 
occasions.  May  my  sons  walk  through  these  Vataskandhas. 

114.  The  6 rst  iS'kcnd/m  extends  from  the  Earth  upto  the 
clouds  and  it  is  called  Ava/ui,  May  the  first  set  of  my  sons  move 
therin. 

115.  The  second  Vatashandha  extends  from  the  clouds  upto 
the  Sun.  It  is  called  Praoaka.  Let  the  second  set  (of  my  sons) 
walk  in  the  second  Vdtaskandha, 

1 16.  Above  the  solar  r^on  and  eactending  upto  the  Moon 
is  the  Vdtaskandha  remembered  as  Udoaha.  May  the  third  set  (of 
my  sons)  walk  through  the  Vdtaskandha, 

117.  Above  the  lunar  region  and  extending  upto  the  stars 
is  the  fourth  Vdtaskandha  which  is  called  Suvaha,  O  lord,  may 
the  fourth  set  of  my  sons  walk  therein. 


1.  Hiii  piiiedMcienci5e  dattifleation  of  higher  space  into  seven  strata 
(vide  vv.  114-120)  and  the  assignment  of  a  Manit-god  per  stratum  b 
found  in  other  also. 


6.118*129 


521 


118.  Above  the  stellar  r^ion  and  extendit^  up  to  the  planets 
is  the  fifth  Sknndka  which  is  called  Vivafia.  O  dear  boy,  may  the 
fifth  set  (of  my  sons)  walk  through  the  fifth  Skarulha. 

1 19.  Above  the  planets  and  extending  up  to  the  Seven  Sages 
(Great  Bear)  is  the  sixth  Skandha  which  is  called  Patdhaia  {Am^ 
vdha  in  Bd.  P*)  •  May  my  sons  who  are  in  the  sixth  set  walk 
therein. 

120.  Above  the  Seven  Sages  and  extending  up  to  Dhruva 
(Pole  Star)  is  the  seventh  Vitashandha  which  is  called  Parivaha* 
May  my  sons  stay  therein. 


121.  May  my  sons  move  about  all  these  on  different  occa¬ 
sions.  There  let  these  be  known  by  the  name  Maruts.** 


122.  Then  the  mother  and  the  son  named  them  Maruts 
through  the  actions  performed  by  them.  They  separately  named 
the  seven  Maruts  of  each  set. 


123*125.The  fint  set  is  said  to  consist  of  these:  Sattvajyotis, 
Aditya,  Satyajyotis,  Tiryagjyotis,  Sajyotis,  Jyotifmkn  and  ano* 
ther  one.  Listen  and  understand  the  second  set.  The  second  set 
consists  of  ^tajit,  Satyajit,  SufCQa,  Senajtt,  Satyamitra,  AbhU 
mitra  and  Harimitra.  Listen  and  understand  the  third  set. 


126-128.  The  following  constitute  the  other  sets  ;  Krta> 
Satya,  Dhruva,  Dharta,  Vidharta,  Vidbaraya,  Dhvanta,  Dbuni, 
Ugra,  BMma,  Abhiyu,  Sik^pa.  This  is  known  as  Ahvayagana*, 
Idfk,  Any&di’k,  Y^rk,  Pratikrt,  Samiti,  Sariirarfabl^,  Idfk^ 
Puru$a,  Anyadrk^a,  Cetasa,  Samita,  Asamitadfk^,  Pratidrk^a 
and  others. 

129.  These  forty-nine  are  the  different  Maruts  with  their 
own  separate  names.  They  have  been  enumerated  by  Diti  and 
Indra. 


*There  are  some  ixedmiooi  and  scribal  confurioa  In  the  name*  aod  the  sett 
of  Manidgaoas  as  ^vea  here.  Bd.  P.  11.  3.5S6  and  37  state  :  The  fifth  set 
(of  Msrud«gaoas)  is  as  follows  :  (1)  Idfk*  (2)  Any&drk,  (3)  Sari^  (4) 
DnifflA,  (5)  Vrkfaka,  (6)  Mica  and  (7)  Samita. 

The  nth  class  is  u  follows  :  (1)  Idrk,  (2)  Puni|a»  (3)  NSnyadrk,  (4) 
Samaccetana,  (5)  Sammita,  (6)  Saiiiavrtt2»  (7)  Pratibartr. 

Bd.  P.  docs  not  give  the  nimca  of  the  fourth  and  seventh  groups  of  the 
Manidgacas. 

A  critical  edition  is  aseutial  for  supplying  the  lacunae. 


522 


ViljfU  Pufd^a 


130«  On  hearing  their  namesi  Diti  said  to  Iiidra»  aoii» 
may  my  sons  roam  about  in  the  Vataskandha,  May  my  sons  walk 
in  the  company  of  Devas«  Welfare  unto  you.** 

131.  On  hearing  her  words,  the  thousand^eyed  Purandara 
joined  his  palms  in  reverence  and  said:  *^Mother,  be  it  so. 

132.  Undoubtedly  all  this  will  happen  as  mentioned  by  you. 
These  sons  of  noble  souls  (shall)  become  Devas  and  will  be  ho¬ 
noured  by  Devas.  Similarly,  your  sons  will  become  partakers 
of  the  fruits  of  Yajftas  along  with  Devas.** 

133.  Hence  all  those  Maruts  should  be  known  as  Devas 
(shining ones), younger  brothers  of  Indra  and  Amofos  (deathless 
ones) .  All  of  them,  the  sons  of  Diti  were  ascetics  and  gods. 

134.  After  knowing  this  decisively,  the  mother  and  the  son 
of  ascetic  nature  went  to  heaven  delightedly.  Sakra  too  went  to 
heaven. 

135.  He  who  reads  or  listens  to  the  auspicious  origin  of 
Maruts  shall  become  lor^-lived.  He  never  meets  with  the  fear  of 
drought. 


CHAPTER  SEVEN 
'Du  Race  of  Ka^apa  :  Donums  Progeny 

Silta  said : 

1.  Henceforth,  I  shall  recount  the  sons  of  Danu.  Listen  to 
and  understand  them.  The  sons  of  Danu,  the  great  Asuras,  have 
been  famous  in  their  race. 

2.  There  were  hundred  demons  of  very  fierce  valour  of 
whom  Vipracitti  was  the  chief.  All  of  them  had  performed  good 
penances  and  had  been  endowed  with  boons. 

3.  They  were  truthful,  valorous,  ruthless  and  expert  in 
May5  (illusive  power).  These  Duavas  were  very  powerful, 
unfavourable  to  Brahma^as  and  disinclined  to  perform  Yajfias. 
I  shall  enumerate  them  all  in  accordance  with  their  importance. 
(Listen  to)  and  understancL 


7.4-22 


523 


4-13.  The  chief  of  the  sods  of  Danu  were  :  DvimOrdhi^ 
Sahkuvar^a,  Sahku>  Nirimayai  Sahkukar^,  Mahaviiva, 
Gavcfthi,  Dundubhi^  Ajamukha,  prosperous  Sila»  Viunanasa, 
Maiici,  Rak$aka»  Mahagargya,  Ahgiravrtai  Vik^bhya,  Suketu> 
Su>drya,  Suhrda,  Indrajit,  Viivajit^  SuravimardaDa,  Ekacakra, 
Subibu,  the  powerful  Taraka^  Vailvanara,  Puloman,  PraW^a, 
Mah^^iraS}  Svarbhanu,  Vr^aparvan,  the  great  Asura  Mup^aka, 
Dhrtaraftraj  Surya^  Candra»  ludra,  Tapina^  Suksma,  Nicandra* 
Ornanabha»  Mah&giri.  Asilonian,  Sukefa,  Sada»  BaJaka,  Adaia» 
Gaganamurdhan,  Kumbhan&bha,  Mahodara»  Pramodahai 
Kupatha^  the  valorous  Hayagriva»  the  Asura  Virupak^a,  the 
great  Asura  Supatha,  Aja,  Hira^maya,  $atamayu»  Sambara, 
Sarabhaand  Salabha.  Surya  (the  Sun)  and  Gandramas  (the 
Moon)  were  the  lords  of  Asuras  formerly  but  now  they  are  the 
lords  of  Suras.  Thus  the  important  scions  of  the  family  of  Danu 
have  been  enumerated.  Their  sons  and  grandsons  are  unending 
and  innumerable. 

14.  Those  who  are  the  sons  (descendants)  of  Diti  and  Danu 
are  (commonly  known)  as  Asuras.  Those  mentioned  just  now 
are  the  sons  and  descendants  of  Danu.  Svarbhanu  is  remembered 
as  the  son  of  Diti  (t.e.  aDaitya)  and  Anubhanuwas  the  son  of 
Danu. 

15-16.  Ekak$a»  R^bha,  Ari$^,  Prabandha,  Naraka>  In- 
drabadhana^  Keii,  Meru,  Samba,  Dhenuka,  Gave^thi,  Gavak^ 
and  powerful  Talaketu— these  were  the  sons  of  Danu  but 
followed  human  rites  and  activities.  So  I  remember. 

17-20.  The  following  sons  of  Vipracitti  born  of  Simhika 
became  terrible,  valorous  in  the  clashes  between  Daityas 
and  Dima vas.  They  are  well  known  as  Saimhikeyas.  They  are 
fourteen  great  Asuras,  viz.  Satagala,  Balavan,  Nyasa,  Samba, 
AntUoma,  Suci,  Vatapi,  Sitamiuka,  Hara,  ^Calpa,  Kalanabha, 
Bhauma  and  Naraka  and  the  eldest  of  all  of  them  Rabu  who 
oppresses  the  Moon  and  the  Sun.  Thus  these  arc  the  sons 
of  Simhika  invincible  even  to  Devas. 

21.  All  of  them  were  of  terrible  lineage,  ruthless  and  haters 
of  Brahma^as.  There  are  ten  thousand  other  Asuras  constituting 
the  Saimhikeya  group. 

22.  They  were  killed  by  the  powerful  son  of  Jamadagni  of 


524  Vdyu  Purd$a 

the  Bhfg;u  Gotra,  Prabha  waa  the  daughter  of  Svarbb&nu  and 
&Sicl  waa  the  daughter  of  Puloman. 

23*  Upadanavi  waa  the  daughter  of  Maya,  Sarmiithi  waa 
the  daughter  of  Vr^aparvao.  Pul<Hn&  and  Kiliki  were  the 
daughters  of  Vativanara. 

24*  Nahuja  waa  the  sod  of  Prabbi  and  Jayanta  was  the 
son  ofSacI«  Sarmifthi  gave  birth  to  Puni  and  Upad&navi  to 
Du^yanta* 

25«26.Pulom&and  Kiliki,  the  two  who  were  the  daughters  of 
Vaiiv&nara  became  the  wives  of  Marica.  Sixty  thousand  leading 
D&navas  were  the  sons  bom  of  them.  There  were  fourteen 
thousand  other  Asuras  residents  of  Hirapyapura. 

27.  The  Paulomas  and  Kalakeyai  were  D&navas  of  great 
strength*  They  could  not  be  killed  by  Devai,  but  were  slain 
by  SavyaslcI  (Aijuna). 

28«29«  All  the  sons  bom  of  Maya  were  heroic  and  valorous^ 
viz.  M&ya\^,  Dundubhi,  Vr$a,  Mahifa,  BaUka  and  Vajrakarpa. 
A  daughter  Mandodari  was  also  bom  to  him.  Thus  the 
creation  of  Daityas  and  D&navas  has  been  enumerated. 

30.  Five  sons  of  great  strei^th  are  remembered  as  born  of 
Danayu^a,  viz.  Arum,  Bali,  Jambha,  Virakya  and  Vifa. 

31 .  Aruru^s  son  was  a  crud  great  Asura  named  Dhundhu* 
It  is  reported  that  he  was  killed  by  Kuvalaiva  at  the  instance 
of  Uttanka. 

32*  The  two  sons  of  Bali  were  very  valorous  and  unequal^ 
led  in  splendour.  They  were  Kumbhila  and  Gakravarma.  (The 
latter)  was  Karna  in  his  previous*  birth. 

S3.  Virak^a  had  two  sons  Kalaka  and  Varavi^.  Varavifa 
had  four  sons  of  cruel  activities,  viz.  Sraddhaha,  Yajftaha, 
Brahmaha  and  Paiuha. 

34.  The  sons  of  Danayu^  have  been  enumerated.  Now 
understand  the  sons  of  Vftrawho  were  bom  of  the  terrible  breath 
of  Vftra  while  engaged  in  battle  with  Indra. 

35.  They  were  Rakfasas  of  great  strength  and  were  the 
rulers  mentally  famous.  They  were  a  hundred  thousand  in 
number  and  are  remembered  as  the  followers  of  Mahendra. 


^rather  the  future  birth**. 


7.36—8,8 


525 


36.  All  were  kaowen  of  the  Veda»  gentle»  righteoui,  subtle* 
formed.  All  were  immanent  in  the  subjects*  All  were  very 
righteous. 

37«  Thus  the  creation  of  Daityas  and  D&navas  has  been 
narrated.  Prav&hl  bore  sons  in  the  YajSa*  They  were  excellent 
in  singnig* 

38*39.  Sattvan,  Sattvitmaka^  Kalapa,  Vxryavan,  Kf ta^drya, 
firahmacarin,  the  seventh  'one  Supapd^^  Pana,  Taranya  and 
the  tenth  one  Sucandra :  These  ten  are  to  be  known  as  Devas 
and  Gandharvas.  They  have  been  enumerated. 


CHAPTER  EIGHT 
DyrmliiS  Dsscendii  From  KaSyap(^ 

Suta  said  : 

1-3.  The  holy  Gandharvas  and  Apsaras*s  are  gloriBed  as  the 
childrenof  Muni,  viz.  Citrasenat  Ugrasena,  Cniayu,  Anagha, 
Dhrtariitra,  Puloman,  Suryavarcas,  Yi^apat,  Tr^pat,  K&li* 
Diti,  Citrsiratha,  the  thirteenth  Bhramiliras,  the  fourteenth 
Patjanya,  the  fifteenth  Kali  and  the  sixteenth  Narada — these 
divine  Gandharvas  are  glorified  as  descendants  of  Muni. 

4-8.  There  are  their  thirtyfour*  younger  sisters,  the  aus¬ 
picious  Apsaras*8>  viz.  Antari,  Daravatyi,  Priyamukhya,  Surot- 
taini,  Miirakeii  Sad,  Par^iid,  Alambu$a,  Marica,  M^ic7» 
Putrika,  Vidyud,  Var^  Tilottama,  Adrika,  Lak^ana,  Detn, 
Rambha,  Manorama,  Suvar^,  Subkhu,  Piirtiita,  Suprati$thit5, 
Puitdarfica,  Sugandh&,Sudant&,Surasa,  Hemas^a,SutI,  Suvrtta* 
Kamala,  Subhuja,  Haihsaplula— these  are  the  woridly^Apsara$-s. 


1.  Tliis  cb^>ter  enumerates  Che  promioenc  memben  of  clans  of 
Gandharvas,  Apsaras-s,  Urdt,  serptfUs,  Yaksas,  Rshfasas,  PilScas,  YSCudbS- 
nas  and  odier  species  possessiag  supernatural  powers. 

2.  Even  after  splitting  VidyudvarpS  into  Vidyut  and  Var^^S  the  number  of 
these  Aptars»e  is  32  and  not  34  stated  here.  Bd.  P.  2.3.7«5  stata  twentyfour 
as  Che  number  of  Apsaras-s. 

3.  It  is  not  understood  why  the  sons  of  Muni  are  catted 
Gandheroas*  (Divine  Gandharvas)  vdule  their  sisters,  the  ^saras-s  are  called 


526  Puxd^ 

These  Gandharvas  azul  Apsaras*s  are  glorified  as  descendants 
of  Muni. 

9«  The  daughters  of  Gandharvas  had  been  (will  be)  narra* 
ted  by  me.  Now  listen  to  my  enumeration  of  their  names. 

10»  Suyafa  was  the  first  among  them.  Gandharvi  comes 
next.  Then  are  Vidyavatl,  CarumukhI  and  Sumukl^  of  ex* 
cellent  face. 

1 1.  The  sons  of  Suyaik  were  very  powerfiii  and  valorous. 
Yakuts  were  the  sons  of  Pracetas.  Listen  to  their  names. 

12.  Kambala*  Harikeia»  Kapila,  Kahcana  and  Megha- 
mail  are  said  to  constitute  the  group  of  Yak^as. 

13.  Suyaii^s  four  daughters  are  remembered  as  Apsaras^s. 
Listen  to  and  understand  their  names,  as  I  recount  them. 

14.  Loheylwas  the  eldest;  Bharatiwas  the  next.  Then 
were  Kriingl  and  who  were  unequalled  in  beauty. 

1 5«  From  them  other  four  groups  of  Yakjas  were  procreated 
by  the  valorous  and  noble-soul ed  Vii&l a. 

16.  Loheya,  Bharateya,  the  renowned  Kri&ngeya  and 
Viialeya  were  the  groups  ofYak^  famous  in  the  Purapa. 

17.  O  excellent  ones  among  the  knowers  of  Loka  and 
Aloka,  (the  worlds)  have  been  occupied  by  these  terrible  Asiu'as 
of  great  strength  and  prowess. 

18-19.  The  Gandharvas  called  Valeyas  were  procreated  by 
the  noble-souled  Vikranta.  They  were  the  leaders  of  great 
Gandharvas.  They  possessed  great  prowess,  and  were  richly 
endowed  with  valour  and  liberal-mindedness.  I  shall  mention 
duly  and  in  proper  order  the  names  of  those  highly  mighty  and 
valorous  Gandharvas. 

20.  They  were  :  Citrangada,  Citravanna  of  great  prowess, 
the  highly  fortunate  Citraketu  and  the  valorous  Somadatta. 
There  were  three  daughters  also.  Their  names  are  being  men¬ 
tioned. 

21.  The  first  was  Agnika.  Kambala  was  the  next.  Then 
was  Vasumad.  AU  these  had  unequalled  splendour. 


'mundane,  belonging  to  this  world*.  If  the  reading  ca  /auiKb^ 
be  emended  at  *not  of  Uut  world,  of  the  heavenly  world*  the 

equality  between  bre chert  (Gandbarvat)  and  sittert  (Apiara»-a)  will  be 
ettabliihed. 


8,22-37 


527 


22-23.  Three  other  important  groups  of  the  chief  Gandh- 
arvas  were  begotten  of  them  by  Kuznira,  They  were  valorous 
and  invincible  in  war.  They  were  Agneyas,  Kimbaleyas  and 
sons  of  Vasumati.  This  world  consisting  of  the  mobile  and  the 
immobile  is  pervaded  by  these  various  groups. 

24.  They  possessed  learning  and  Vere  procreated  by  the 
noble-soul  ed  Vikrinta.  They  were  blessed  and  were  richly 
endowed  with  beauty,  learning  and  wealth. 

25.  Listen  to  the  enumeration  of  the  names  of  those  noble- 
souled  Gandharvai  of  distinctive  prowess. 

26.  They  were  :  Hiranyaroman,  Kapila,  Suloman,  Mig- 
adha,  Candraketu,  Gahga  and  the  highly  powerful  Goda. 

27.  These  were  the  first  among  the  groups  who  were 
ascetics,  valorous  and  pure  on  account  of  deep  learning. 

There  were  two  daughters  also  of  beautiful  eyes. 

28-29.  They  were  Siva  and  Sumanas.  The  groups  Saiveya, 
the  valorous  and  Saumanasa  as  well  were  begotten  of  them  by 
the  noble-souled  Viiravas.  They  practised  learning.  This  world 
is  pervaded  by  these  three  groups  of  Vidy^haras. 

30.  From  these,  many  hundreds  of  groups  of  firmament- 
walkers  were  bom  in  the  world  due  to  the  activities  of  the 
Vidyadharas. 

31.  Horse- faced  Kinnaras  were  procreated  by  the  same 
noble-souled  Vikranta.  They  were  called  Aivamukhas  and 
Kinnaras.  (Listen  to  and)  understand  the  Kinnaras. 

32-33.  Samudra,  Sena,  Kalinda,  Mahanetra,  Mahabala, 
Suvarnagho^a,  Sugilva,  the  valorous  Mahagho^a  and  others 
are  the  leadii^  ones  of  the  noble-souled  Kinnaras  with  the 
fiicesorhorses.  They  are  being  glorified  as  extensive  (in  number) 
by  scholars. 

34.  O  S&rh^payana,  human-faced  Kinnaras  too  were 
similarly  procreated  by  the  noble-souled  Vikrtota. 

35-36.  Harise^a,  Suye^a,  the  valorous  V^i^epa,  Rudra- 
datta,  Indradatta,Gandradruma,Mahadruma,  Bindu  and  Bindu- 
sar a  were  the  Kinnaras  of  the  lunar  race.  Thus  these  excellent 
and  auspicious  Kinnaras  have  become  famous  in  the  world. 

37.  O  excellent  Brahma  pas,  in  this  world  there  are 
hundreds  of  clans  of  these  noble-souled  Kinnaras,  very  efficient 
in  dance  and  music. 


526 


38.  They  are  Yakiai  calmed  by  Yak^as  (?)  The  beautU 
ful  daughter  of  Loheya,  named  Suravindi  was  brilliant  and 
honoured  by  the  Siddhas. 

39.  (Defective  Verse)  The  groups  of  Bhutas  (goblins)  had 
been  procreated  by  the  terrible  Upiyaketana.  Listen  to  their 
names  (?)• 

40.  The  groups  of  Bhutas  (goblins)  should  be  known  as  those 
who  haunt  from  within  and  without  etc.  (ave^kas,  nive/akas). 
They  are  declared  as  being  visible  in  the  world. 

41.  Those  that  are  the  excellent  ones  among  Bhutas 
that  move  about  in  the  sky  are  to  be  known  as  the  leaders  of 
these  Bhutas  in  the  world.  Undoubtedly  they  move  about  in 
the  sky  up  to  the  tops  of  trees. 

42.  Almost  all  Devas  and  Gandharvas  have  been  nar« 
rated  by  me.  Those  famous  persons  should  be  known  as  engaged 
in  worshipping  Devas. 

43-45.  Along  with  Gandharvas,  Devas  who  are  clever 
musicians  and  experts  in  dance  and  music  stay  in  all  the  worlds. 
They  worship  N&rayana  who  is  Iotus-eyed>  free  from  Rajas 
and  the  foremost  of  gods,  god  Brahma  who  is  self-bom 
and  four- faced,  great  god  Sankara  who  is  Han  a  and  the 
lord  of  the  Universe.  (They  worship)  Rudras  and  Adityas 
led  by  Indra,  along  with  Vasus. 

46-48.  The  blessed  Vari|{ha  who  is  honoured  by  gods,  gave 
birth  to  eight  sons.  Hamsa  was  the  eldest  and  the  youngest  was 
another.  The  middle  ones  were  Haha  and  Huhu.  The  fourth  was 
Dhiya^a.  Then  Vasiruci  (was  bom).  Tumbuni  was  the  sixth 
among  them.  Then  Viivavasu.  These  Apsaras^(celestial  artiste) 
are  considered  as  divine  and  of  auspicious  characteristics. 

Arista  gave  birth  to  eight  (7)  daughters,  viz.  Anavadya, 
Anavaia,  Anvata,  Madanapriya,  Aru^a,  Subhaga  and  Bhasi. 

49-50.  Manovati  and  Sukesa  were  the  two  dai^hters  of 
Tumburu. 

The  following  ten  divine  (celestial)  Apsaras-s  are  called 
Paflcacu^^*  They  are  :  Menaka,  Sahajanya,  Partial,  Pufiji- 
kasthala,  GhrtasthaU,  Ghftadf,  ViivacI,  Purvad,  the  one 
well-known  as  Pramloci  and  Anumlocanti. 

51.  Urvafi  who  was  faultless  (exquisitely  beautiful)  in  every 


8.52-58 


529 


limb  and  waj  bom  of  tbe  thighs  of  the  beginninglest  and 
ondlesi  Naraya^a  is  remembered  as  the  eleventh. 

52.  Meoaka  was  the  daughter  of  Men&,  delightedly  engros¬ 
sed  in  meditating  upon  Brahman.  All  of  them  are  expounders 
of  Brahman  (Vedas)  and  great  Yoginls. 

53.  The  groups  of  the  holy  Apsaras-s  are  fourteen.  Among 
these  fourteen  ga^os  Ahutas  (is  the  first)  and  Sobhayands  is 
the  (fourteenth)^. 

54.  (Ahutas)  are  the  mental  dai^hters  of  Brahmi  and 
Sobhayantls  are  Manu*s  daughters.  Vegavanda  are  the 
daughters  of  Ari^ti  and  Agnisaihbhavas  are  the  daughters  of 
Urja.* 

55. ’  Ayutmantls  are  shining  groups  bom  of  tbe  rays  of  the 
aun.  The  groups  bom  of  water  i.e.  produced  from  Amfta  (water » 
nectar)  are  remembered  by  the  name  Ami^tas. 

56.  The  V&yu-born  groups  atre  named  Mudas,  those  bom 
of  the  Earth  are  Bbavas*  the  groups  Rues  are  bom  of  Vidyut 
(lightning)  and  the  daughters  of  M|tyu  are  Bhairavas. 

57.  The  group  Sobbayands  have  tbe  attributes  of  Kama 
(Cupid) .  Thus  the  fourteen  .groups  have  been  narrated.  They 
have  been  created  with  exquisitely  superb  beauty  by  the 
groups  of  Suras  including  Indra  and  Upendra  (Vi^u). 

58.  The  divine  lady  Tilottama  is  of  auspicious  features  and 
extremely  blessed.  The  celestial  damselPrabhlivad  richly  endowed 

!•  Our  text  hta  given  only  the  oamei  of  tbe  first  and  the  fourteenth  group. 
Probably  some  lines  miuing  in  our  text  are  found  in  Bd.  P.  2.3.7. 18*20a  as 
follows  ; 

meritorious  groups(gesas)of  Apsaras>s  are  well-known  to  be  fourteen, 
viz.  Ahfds  (Abuta  in  Va.  P.),  Sobhavatis,  V^avatis,  Orj&s,  Yuvatis,  Sruki 
Kurus,  BarlUs,  Amftis,  MudSs,  Mrgus,  Ruks,  Bhirus  and  Sobhayands*’.  But 
Che  list  in  VS.  P.  ii  incomplete  and  differetit.  * 

2.  The  text  needs  emendation  :  *The  Osjas  are  bom  of  the  Fire^god*  as 
CrJ&i  are  a  of  Apsaras-s  (vide  Bd.  P.  2.3.7 ..21) . 

3.  Some  lines  appear  to  be  misnng.  This  translation  is  of  the  printed  tex^ 
of  Va.  P.  The  missiag  linn  are  probably  the  same  as  Bd.  P.  2.3.7.21b  and 
22.  They  mention  the  rfiTi  of  divine  damsels, via.  Yuvads,  Kurui,  Sruki  and 
Barhii  who  are  respectively  horo  from  tbe  Sun-god,  the  Moon-god, 
Yajfta  (Sacriike)  and  Kuiavatl. 

Bd.  F.  2.3.7.23  corresponds  to  v.  5$  above  (of  the  VS.  P.) 


530  Purd^ 

with  beauty  and  youth 'and  renowned  in  the  worlds,  wai  bom 
from  the  sacrificial  fire-pit  of  Brahm&. 

59.  The  celestial  woman  of  great  lustre,  Vcdavati  by  name, 
was  bom  from  the  bottom  (sur&ce)  of  the  altar  of  the  intelligent 
four^faced  lord  (Brahma). 

60.  Similarly  the  daughter  of  Yama,  the  bright-eyed  celes¬ 
tial  woman  Hemi  had  the  lustre  of  excellent  gold  and  possessed 
beauty  and  youth. 

61.  Thus  there  arc  many  thousands  of  shining  groups  of 
Apsaras-s.  They  are  the  wives  and  mothers  of  Devas  and  Sages, 

62.  All  the  Apaaras-s  are  equally  fragrant  with  the  comple¬ 
xion  of  Campa  (Michelta  CAampatca),  During  the  course  of  their 
intercourse  with  their  lovers,  they  are  inebriated  without  imbib¬ 
ing  wine.  By  their  contact,  their  pleasure  increases. 

63.  Vinati  had  two  sons  Aru^a  and  Garud^  who  had  thirty- 
six  sisters.  They  are  remembered  as  their  younger  sisters. 

64.  Gayatri  and  other  chandas  (Vcdic  Metres),  birds  bom 
of  Garuda  and  also  the  Havyavaha  groups  present  in  the  quar¬ 
ters  (pertain  to  Vinata?) 

65.  Kadru^  g^ve  birth  to  a  thousand  serpents  both  mobile 
and  immobile.  They  arc  hydra-headed  noble  souls,  capable  of 
traversing  in  the  sky,  since  they  are  great  in  number.  They 
have  many  ziames  (but)  learn  the  chief  of  them. 

66-71.  The  most  important  of  those  serpents  are 
V^uki,  Taksaka,  Karnlra,  Jambha,  Afijana,  Vamana,  Airavata, 
Mahapddina,|Kambala,  Aivatara,Ailapatra,  Sankha,Karkotaka, 
Dhanafijaya,  Mahakar^,  Mahanila,  Dhftara^tra,  Balahaka, 
Kumara,  Pu^padanta,  Sumukha,  Durmukha,  Silimukha,  Dadhi- 
mukha,  Kaliya,  Salipindaka,  Bindupada,  Pundarika,  the  serpent 
Apurana,  Kapila,  Ambarlfa,  Dhrtapada,  Kacebapa,  PrahlUa, 
Padmacitra,  Gandharva,  Manasvika,  Nahu^a,  Khararoman  and 
Mani  and  many  others  like  them.  The  sons  of  Kadru  have  been 
enumerated  by  me.  Understand  those  of  Kha^a. 

72.  Khaa  gave  birth  to  two  sons  who  were  wcU-known  as 

1.  Verses  65-67  eaumerate  the  Aimes  of  most  importint  of  KadrO^s 
childrea,  vis.  serpents. 


8.73-83 


531 


maa-eatcrs.  The  eldest  was  in  the  latter  number  and  the  men  in 
the  east*  (7) 

73-76.  Atfint,  Khaia  gave  birth  to  a  very  terrible  son  of 
the  following  description  :  He  was  excessively  red  in  colour  and 
devoid  of  ears.  He  had  four  arms,  four  feet»  two  heads  and  two¬ 
fold  gait.  He  had  hair  all  over  the  body.  He  had  a  huge  body 
with  a  raised-up  nose  (like  a  snout)  and  a  big  belly.  The  head 
was  big,  the  ears  large  and  the  hair  like  Muflja  grass  in  accor¬ 
dance  with  his  desire.  The  lips  were  like  those  of  an  elephant. 
The  shanks  were  long.  His  fangs  were  like  those  of  a  horse.  The 
chin  was  huge;  the  tongue  red  and  the  eyes  had  matted  hair(?} 
The  mouth  was  huge  and  the  nose  long.  He  was  a  Guhyadca  (ke¬ 
eper  of  secrets  (?) ) .  The  ears  were  variegated  (?)  in  colour.  He 
was  extremely  delighted  and  had  a  great  Csce.  Khaii  gave 
birth  to  such  an  extremely  terrible  son. 

77-80.  Khali  gave  birth  to  his  younger  brother,  a  second 
son.  He  had  three  heads,  three  feet  and  three  hands.  His  eyes  were 
black.  The  hair  stood  upright.  The  moustache  was  green  in  colour. 
His  body  was  as  firm  as  a  rock.  He  had  a  huge  body  (short  in 
statute) .  His  arms  were  mighty  and  of  great  strength.  His  mouth 
was  slit  up  to  the  ears.  The  eyebrows  were  suspended  and  the 
nose  was  stout.  The  lips  were  big.  He  had  eight  fangs  and  two 
tongues.  He  was  pike-eared.  His  eyes  were  red  and  tawny-colou¬ 
red.  Hiscomplexion  was  tawny.  He  bad  matted  hair.  He  had  huge 
ears  and  broad  chest.  He  was  devoid  of  hips  and  the  belly  was 
slender.  She  gave  birth  to  the  younger  brother  who  had  claws 
and  whose  neck  was  red. 

81.  Immediately  after  the  birth,  they  increased  in  size. 
Their  bodies  became  mature  and  capable  of  sensual  enjoyment. 
With  their  bodies  thus  grown  up  in  size,  they  embellished  their 
mother. 

82.  The  elder  one  of  the  two  who  was  ruthless,  seized  his 
mother.  He  said  :  ^‘Mother,  I  am  distressed  with  hunger.  Come 
here  a$  my  prey.’’ 

83.  The  younger  brother,  however,  forbade  the  elder  one. 
He  said  frequently,  *^Save  this  Khasa,  our  mother”.  Seizing 
him  with  both  the  arms,  be  released  his  mother. 

*Obtc\ire.  But  Bd.  P.  (2.3.7.38)  :**The  elder  was  born  at  dusk  and  the 
younger  at  dawn".  Snffiam  pa^eiiruhsandl^jfdm  tu 


532 


Purina 


84»  At  this  time  their  father  (sage  Kaiyapa)  appeared  there* 
Oa  seeing  them  hideous  in  form^hesaid/^Bothofyou  atayhere*\ 

85.  Those  two  strong  ones,  on  seeing  their  father  hurriedly 
(shrank  in  size)  and  began  to  lisp,  clinging  to  the  lap  of  their 
mother,  by  means  of  their  Maya. 

86.  Then  the  sage  told  his  wife,  ‘Tell  us  at  the  outset,  how 
these  two  misbehaved. 


87.  A  son  ad<^cs  the  traits  of  his  maternal  uncle  and  a 
daughter  those  of  the  paternal  ancestors.  A  son  adopts  the  same 
conduct  of  life  as  that  of  his  mother. 

88.  Water  certainly  assumes  the  colour  of  that  (bed  of) 
earth  on  which  it  flows.  Children  become  diflemt  due  to  the 
defects  as  well  as  the  good  qualities  in  the  conduct  of  their 
mothers  or  through  their  faculty  of  discrimination. 

89.  Among  (my  wives),  Aditi  is  interested  in  righteousness 
mth  her  pious  conduct  and  (inherent)  strength^.  She  is  endowed 
with  piety,  good  conduct*  enlightenment  and  strength. 

90.  Ariffi  is  interested  in  music.  Danu  is  remembered  as 
fond  of  magic  and  illusiveness.  The  good  lady  Vinata  loves 
aerial  movement. 

91.  Surabhi  is  embellished  with  the  conduct  of  performance 
of  penance.  Kadru  is  of  a  furious  temperament.  She  is  of  unple¬ 
asant  conduct  due  to  anger. 

92.  The  conduct  of  Dan&yufi  is  characterised  both  by 
enmity  and  blessing.  O  blessed  gentle  lady,  you  are  considered 
as  of  furious  temperament  by  me. 

93.  The  children  adopt  or  change  their  character  naturally 
or  by  observing  other  men.  They  are  different  in  their  activities, 
attempts,  intellect,  features,  strength  and  patience.  Changes 
occur  due  to  the  force  of  the  objects  conceived. 

94.  The  forms  of  the  whole  Univene  are  naturally  Rajasika, 
Sattvika  and  Tamasika.  Your  sons  have  taken  after  their  uncle 
in  their  character  and  activities' ’• 

95.  After  saying  thus  to  the  incomparable  Rhafa,  he  called 
the  sons  and  made  them  fearless*  by  means  of  gentle  words. 

1.  Kslyspa  describes  (he  characteristics  of  bis  wives  like  Diti's  foDdnesi 
Ibr  fragrance  etc.  But  the  Una  U  mlsriog  in  the  tort.  Heace  the  apparent 
duplicadoo  of  adJecUvei. 

2.  tmam  is  obscure.  Bd.  P.  2.S.7.5B  reads  saiba  la 

ntaaitf  *  accorded  names  unto  them’. 


8.96-109 


533 


96.  Then  Khaia  told  him  what  had  been  done  by  them  to 
her.  As  the  mother  narrated  their  activities  severally,  the  sage 
who  saw  the  truth  gave  them  names  according  to  the  meaning 
of  the  roots. 

97.  The  **toeat  and  to  seize’*.  Since  he 

said  ^Yakfaye*  (I  will  eat) ,  he  will  be  a  Yak^. 

98.  The  root  y/  rafc;  means  **to  protect”.  Since  he  said 
*^Save  my  mother  Khali”,  your  (second)  son  will  be  known 
by  the  name  ”Rak|asa”. 

99.  Then,  on  seeing  them  like  that  and  searching  (further) 
he  was  surprised*.  The  Praj^ati  assigned  to  them  blood  and 
fat  as  their  diet. 

100.  On  seeing  them  hungry,  the  lather  granted  them  this 
boon:  ”Only  at  night  can  your  hands  feel  the  touch  of  anything. 

101.  You  will  move  about  and  take  your  food  during  the 
night.  By  day,  you  will  be  enjoying  sleep.  You  will  be  powerful 
during  the  night  and  will  be  sleeping  during  the  day  time. 

lOZ  Protect  your  mother.  Let  r^teousness  be  practised.” 
After  saying  thus  to  his  sons,  Kaiyapa  vanished  there  itself. 

103-105.  When  their  father  had  gone,  those  two  heroes, 
naturally  terrible,  began  to  behave  (smd  do)  what  was  exactly 
opposed  (to  their  father’s  directions),  eating  anything  they 
pleased  and  harassing  living  beings.  They  had  great  strength  and 
energy.  They  were  invincible  and  huge-bodied.  They  pKwsessed 
the  illusive  power.  Sometimes  they  would  be  visible  and 
immediately  they  would  vanish.  They  assumed  forms  as  they 
pleased.  They  were  terrible  and  hideous  naturally.  Both  of  them 
became  powerful  by  means  of  their  diet  in  accordance  with  the 
forms  (they  assumed). 

106-107.  They  used  to  roam  about  at  night  everywhere  and 
for  their  food  they  were  desirous  of  seizing  Devas,  Asuras,  Sages, 
Gandharvas,  Kinnaras,  Piiacas,  human  bein^,  serpents,  birds 
and  animals.  They  were  given  the  boons  by  Indra  of  not  killing 
(not  being  killed?) . 

108-109,  Once  thatYakfa  (Rik^asa)  (the  junior  brother) 
was  wandering  sdone  at  midnight,  desirous  of  getting  some  food. 
Hearing  a  sound,  he  followed  it.  He  met  two  Pilicas  both  of 

*A  reads;  'seeiog  them  both  hungry,  be  wet  surprised/ 


534 


Pur^ 


whom  were  congenitally  fierce.  Their  eyes  were  round  and  tawny 
and  their  hair  stood  upright  They  were  very  terrible. 

110^111.  Their  diet  consisted  of  blood>  flesh  and  fat  They 
were  man-eaters  of  great  strength.  They  were  accompanied  by 
their  two  daughters  with  a  desire  to  do  what  pleased  them.  The 
two  daughters  could  assiune  any  form  they  pleased.  Though  they 
were  splendid  (in  appearance) » their  behaviour  was  like  that  of 
(their  father) .  They  were  wandering  for  the  sake  of  food  in  the 
company  of  their  dai^hters. 

1 12*1 14.  There  they  saw  the  highly  powerful  Rakfasa  who 
could  assume  any  form  as  he  pleased.  As  they  met  one  another 
acddentally»  they  wanted  to  seize  the  other  and  save  themselves. 
The  father  told  the  daughters^  ‘‘Seize  this  young  fellow  alive* 
this  fellow  who  is  throbbing  at  every  step  and  bring  him  here 
quickly'\  Then  the  two  daughters  approached  him  and  seized 
him.  Caught  by  both  the  handsp  he  was  brought  to  the  presence 
of  their  father  by  the  daughters. 

1 15.  The  two  Pliacas  asked  that  Rakfasa  who  was  caught 
hold  of  by  the  hands  by  them,  “Who  are  you  ?  Whose  (son) 
are  you  ?“  He  told  them  everything. 

116.  His  antecedents  were  known.  After  knowing  him  as 
the  foremost  ofRaksasas,  Aja  and  Khanda,  the  two  Pisacas  who 
were  delighted  at  his  activity,  gave  him  those  two  girls,  their 
daughters. 

117.  (Defective  Verse)  By  means  of  the  Paiiaca  form  of 
matrimonial^  alliance  the  Rak^a  married  the  bright-toothed* 
(girls) .  Aja  and  Khanda  then  recounted  their  wealth. 

116.  Khanda  said,  “This  is  my  daughter  named  Brahma- 
dhana.  She  is  devoid  of  hair.  She  has  Brahmanas  (along  with 
their  wealth)  as  her  staple  diet.** 

119.  “This  is  my  daughter  beautiful  in  every  limb.  Her  name 
is  Jantudhana.  All  the  animals  are  her  diet  and  wealth^.  (So 
said  Aja.)  Thus  both  of  them  narrated  the  wealth  (of  their  dau¬ 
ghters). 


1 .  Out  of  the  eight  forms  of  marriage^  PaiUca  is  the  lowest  form  where- 
m  money  ti  received  by  tht  father  for  the  giri. 

2.  huJdha-oihdrta^^  in  the  text  is  obscure.  Bd.  P.  2.3,7.83  reads 
rudMpdwdMsdta  jsJ  *He  married  them  while  they  were  crying*. 


8.120-133 


535 


120.  The  daughter  Jantudhani  had  another  name  Sarvad- 
gakeil  (having  hair  on  every  limb).  The  daughter  who  was  cal¬ 
led  Brahmadhana  was  devoid  of  hair  and  had  no  tip  of  the  ears. 

121.  She  gave  birth  to  a  boy  Brahmadhana  and  a  girl  Dha- 
nani  ( ?)  Thus  the  two  daughters  of  the  Piiacas  gave  birth  to 
two  twins.  Listen  &nd  understand  even  as  I  recount  their  pro¬ 
geny. 

122-123.  Heti|  Praheti,  Ugra,  P^urufeya,  Vadha,  Visphurji, 
V&ta,  Apa,  Vyaghra  and  Sarpa — these  were  Rik^sas^  the  ten 
sons  of  Yitudhana.  They  were  the  followers  of  the  Sun  and  they 
whirl  along  with  him. 

124.  Lanku  was  the  son  of  Heti.  Lahku  had  two  sons,  Mal- 
yavan  and  Sumali.  Now  listen  to  the  sons  of  Praheti.  Praheti*s 
son  was  the  glorious  and  well-known  Puloman. 

125.  Vadha’s  son  was  Nikumbha  who  was  ruthless  Brahma- 
rlik$asa.  Vitals  son  was  Vir&ga  and  Apa’s  son  was  Jambuka. 

126.  Vyighra’s  son  was  Nirananda  who  caused  obstacles  to 
all  living  beings.  Thus  all  the  cruel  Riksasas  have  been  enu¬ 
merated. 

127-128.  Yatudhanas  have  been  mentioned.  Now  under¬ 
stand  the  sons  of  Brahmadhana.  They  were  Yajfta,  Pit^  Dhuni, 
K^ema,  Brahma,  P^pa,  Yajhaha,  Svakolaka,  Kali  and  Sarpa. 
They  were  the  ten  sons  of  Brahmadhana.  The  following  are  their 
sisters,  terrible  Brahmar^$asls. 

129.  They  were — ^Raktakarn^  Mahajihva,  Akyaya  and 
Upaharinl.  Brahmarak^as  were  bom  of  their  families  on  the 
earth. 

130.  Generally  they  are  found  on  the  Slesmataka  {Cardya 
Myxia)  trees.  They  live  there.  Thus  Rakfasas  have  been 
enumerated.  Understand  Yak$as. 

131-132.  Yak^  loved  the  Apsaras  Kratusthali  other¬ 
wise  known  as  Paficasthula  (stout  in  five  limba) .  Brooding  over 
her  and  desirous  of  securing  her,  he  wandered  in  the  parks  of 
Nandana,  Vaibhraja,  Surabbi  and  Gaitraratha*  In  the  park  of 
Nandana,  he  saw  her  seated  along  with  Apsaras-s. 

133,  He  did  not  know  of  any  means  of  acquiring  her  despite 
his  pondering,  because  he  was  defiled  (ugly)  in  form  and  defiled 
and  corrupt  in  his  activities* 


536 


1 34*  He  thought,  '‘All  living  beings  are  afraid  and  disgus¬ 
ted  with  me  who  am  noxious  and  hurtfuL  So  how  shall  I  secure 
this  lady  of  beautiful  limbs 

135.  He  thought  of  a  plan  and  hastened  to  put  it  into  ac¬ 
tion.  The  Guhyaka  (Yakfa)  assumed  the  honoured  form  of  a 
Gandharva.  Then  he  seized  Kratusthall  from  the  midst  of  (other) 
Apsaras-s. 

1 36.  Knowing  him  to  be  beautiful  in  form,  she  followed  him 
with  emotional  attachment.  Even  as  he  was  being  observed  by 
the  group  of  Apsaras-s,  be  was  embraced  by  her. 

137.  When  he  achieved  his  came  (i.e.  desired  object),  a  son 
of  full-flexed  sense-organs  and  height  was  bom  to  him  imme¬ 
diately.  New-born  though  he  was,  he  (as  if)  blazed  in  his 
glory. 

138.  He  spoke  to  his  father am  a  king.  I  am  N&bbi*\ 
The  father  replied,  ^^Since  you  are  bora,  there  is  no  fear*’. 

1 39.  When  the  son  emulated  his  mother  in  beauty  and  father 
in  valour,  Yaksa  was  overjoyed  and  due  to  that  exultation 
r^ained  his  original  form. 

140.  Big  Yakfas  and  Riksasas  regain  their  own  form  while 
dying,  when  asleep,  angry  or  frightened  and  when  extremely 
delighted. 

141.  Then  that  Guhyaka  smilingly  spoke  to  the  Apsaras — 
lady  of  beautiful  hips  and  excellent  complexion,  come  to 

my  house  along  with  your  son/’ 

142.  On  seeing  him  who  r^^ained  his  form  suddenly  after 
saying  this,  all  the  Apsaras-s  were  furious,  perplexed  and 
frightened  and  they  fled. 

143.  KratusthaU  followed  the  Apsaras-s  who  were  fleeing. 
But  the  son  consoled  her  with  his  words.  He  took  her  to  the 
middle  of  Gandharvas  and  Apsaras-s  and  returned. 

144.  On  seeing  the  birth  ofYaksa,  the  group  of  Apsaras-s 
spoke  to  Kratusthall — *You  are  the  mother  of  Yak^”. 

145.  Then,  accompanied  with  his  son,  Yak;a  went  back 
to  his  abode  named  Nyagrodharc^ipab  (growing  on  the  holy  flg 
tree)  where  Guhyakas  used  to  lie  down.  Hence  the  Nyagrodha 
tree  is  always  a  favourite  place  of  residence  to  the  Yakfas. 

146-148.  The  Yak^  Rajatanibha  was  the  grandfather  of 
Guhyakas.  He  married  Bhadra^  the  excellent  daughter  of  the 


8J49-163 


537 


Daitya  Anuhr&da.  She  gave  birth  to  two  sons — Ma^ivara  of 
good  aeIf-contro4  and  Ma^bhadra  who  was  equal  to  Sakra  in 
exploit.  The  wives  of  these  two  brothers  were  sisters —  two 
auspicious  daugb  ters  of  Kratusthali.  Their  names  were  Punyajanl 
and  Devajanl.  Punyajanl  bore  the  following  (twentyfour)  sons 
to  Manibhadra. 

149*152.  (They  were)  Siddhartha,  S&ryateja^  Sumanta, 
Nandana,  Kanyaka,  Yavika^  Manidatta^  Vasu^  Sarvinubhuta» 
Sankhai  PiAg&k^«  Bhlnii  Mandarasobhi,  Padma>  Candrapra- 
bha*  Maghapur^a,  Subhadra,  Pradyota,  Mahaujas»  Dyutiman, 
Ketuman,  Mitra,Mauli  and  Sudarlana.  Thus  there  are  twenty* 
four  auspicious  Punyajanas  bom  to  Mapibhadra.  All  of  them 
were  characteristically  meritorious.  Their  sons  and  grandsons 
were  the  auspicious  Yak^  and  Punyajanas. 

153*157.  DevajananI  (Devajanl)  bore  to  Manivara  the  fol* 
lowing  sons^PQrQabhadra,  Hemaratha»  Ma^iman,  Nandivard* 
hana,  Kustuxnburu,  Piiadgitbha,  SthQlakar^,  Mah&jaya»  Svetas 
Vi  pula,  Pu9pav4n,  Bhaykvaha,  Padmavarna,  Sunetra,  Yak  9a, 
Bala,  Baka,  Kumuda,  K^emaka,Vardham4iia,  Dama,  Padmana* 
bha,  Varanga,  Suvira,  Vijaya,  Krti,  Purnamasa,  Hiranyak^, 
Suriipa,  and  others.  These  sons  of  Manivara  are  remembered  as 
Yak^as  and  Guhyakas.  Some  are  handsome  and  some  are  ugly. 
They  are  garlanded  and  very  pleasing  to  see.  They  had  hundreds 
and  thousands  of  sons  and  grandsons. 

158.  There  were  other  sons  of  Kbala  who  became  Raksasas 
who  could  assume  forms  as  they  pleased.  Listen  to  and  under* 
stand  the  important  ones  among  them  as  they  are  being 
enumerated. 

159-162.  They  were — Lalavi,  Kuthana,  Bhima,  SumaU, 
Madhu,  Visphurjita,  Vidyujjihva,  Matahga,  Dhuznrita,  Cand* 
rarka,  Sukara,  Budhna,  Kapiloman,  Prahasaka,  Kruja,  Parana* 
nabha,  Gakraksa,  NUacara,  Trisiras,  Satadazn^^a,  the  Rak^asa 

the  Yalqa  Akamj>ana,  Durmukha  and  Silimukha. 
These  excellent  Rak^as  were  valorous.  In  the  form  of  groups, 
they  move  about  in  all  the  worlds.  They  have  the  ability  to  move 
on  equal  footing  with  the  Devas. 

163.  She  (Khaii)  had  seven  othcrdaughters.  Listen  to  them 
(their  enumeration)  in  order,  their  progeny  and  the  groups 
formed  by  them. 


538  Purdffa 

164.  Alanibij  Utkac&j  Kr^na,  Nirrt&,  Kaptli»  Sivi  and  the 
blessed  KciinI  are  the  seven  sisters  remembered. 

165.  The  following  auspjcioui  groups  of  Rakfasai  were  bom 
of  them.  They  are  the  devouren  of  pe<^le,  meat-eaten,  killers 
and  invincible  in  war. 

166.  The  group  called  Alambeya  was  cruel.  Similarly  the 
group  Utkaceya  was  also  cruel.  The  groups  of  excellent  Rak^- 
sas  were  the  Kirfneyas  and  Saiveyas. 

167.  The  group  ofR&k^asas  called  Nainta  comprised  the 
progeny  created  by  leading  Gapeivara  who  was  the  follower  of 
$iva. 

168.  These  Yak >as  and  Rideyas as  were  procreated  by  the 
powerful  (Ganesvaras).  They  were  valorous  and  endowed  with 
heroism.  These  Devarakfasas,  the  Nsuirtas  had  the  renowned 
Virupaka  as  their  leader. 

169.  Many  hundreds  of  these  proud  and  noble-souled  groups 
mostly  follow  Sankara,  the  lord  of  the  Universe. 

1 70-173.  TheKapileyas,  thcDaityar&kf  asas  of  great  prowess, 
of  huge  body  and  of  great  strength  and  exploit  were  procreated 
by  the  noble-souled  king  of  Daityas,  Kumbha.  The  Yakfa  Kam- 
pana  begot  of  Keiini,  very  powerful  Yak^as  and  Rak^asas. 
KeiinI’s  daughter  Nila  bore  to  Alambeya  Surasika  many  Rak^ 
sas  of  petty  mentality.  They  are  called  Nailas.  They  were  invin¬ 
cible  and  were  terrible  in  their  exploits. 

174.  Endowed  with  divine  and  worldly  power,  they  move 
about  on  the  entire  earth.  Since  they  are  innumerable,  the 
details  of  this  creation  cannot  be  recounted. 

175.  The  same  Nila  had  a  daughter,  the  demoness  Vikaca, 
naturally  devoid  of  hair  and  possessing  mediocre  strength  and 
exploit. 

176.  The  same  (Vikaca)  bore  terrible  Asuras  by  the  contact 
of  the  ugly  Naint^*  Listen  to  them  in  order. 

1 77-1 78.  They  are  Harakas,  Bhlsakas,  Kr^akas,  Vainakas, 
PlSacas,  Vabakas  and  Prasakas.  Ail  of  them  are  hideous  with 
their  terrible  fangs.  They  have  huge  ears  and  bellies.  These  are 
Bhumi-rakfasas  (Earthly  Demons).  They  possess  manly  exploit 
though  slow-witted. 

179.  They  assume  multifarious  forms  and  move  about  here 
and  there  unseen  by  others.  'Phose  whose  strength  and  energy 


8J80-191 


539 


&re  excellent  and  extraodinary  are  remembered  as  Khecaraa 
{'Moving  in  the  sky*). 

180»  Those  who  appear  to  be  very  small,  move  in  the  sky 
to  a  small  extent*  This  world  is  pervaded  by  these  in  hundreds 
and  thousands* 

181.  The  different  countries  all  round  are  infiuted  with 
these  fihumir&kfaiaa  and  petty  Rikfasas  of  diverse  forms  and 
shapes. 

182.  In  brief,  it  is  said  that  there  are  eight  Rikfasa  mothers. 
Therefore  there  arc  eight  well  •known  dans  (groups)  of  these 
(Rak^asas). 

183.  Some  constitute  the  Bhadraka  group  (BomofBhad- 
raki).  The  cause  of  their  origin  is  Yajfia*  (?).  They  are  m 
hundreds  and  thousands  and  they  move  about  in  the  human 
world. 

184.  There  are  many  terrible  Bbutas  having  the  same  traits 
as  their  mother  Putani.  They  harass  children  in  the  human 
world  like  the  evil  planets,  causing  dejectedness. 

1 85.  The  Skandagraha  and  other  groups,  the  Apakas,  the 
Trisaka  and  other  groups — all  these  are  to  be  known  as  Kaum- 
aras  ill-disposed  towards  children  like  evil  planets. 

186-187.  There  arc  hundreds  of  the  groups  of  thoc  evil 
(Raksasas)  like  the  deceitful  types  of  Skandagrahas  and  Bbfltat 
named  PutanJis,  Idchs  and  lakhs  of  them  roaming  about  in 
the  human  world.  They  wander  over  the  earth  annoying  the 
people. 

188-190.  There  are  Yaksas  called  Pupyajanas  and  others 
called  Guhyakas.  There  are  still  others  called  Devajanas.  All 
these  are  included  in  the  group  of  Guhyakas.  There  are  RU$a- 
sas  called  Agastyas,  Paulastyas  and  Viivamitras.  The  great  kii^ 
Kubera,  the  ruler  ofAlaka,  is  the  king  of  aU  these  Yak?as  and 
Rakfasas  including  Paulastyas  and  Agastyas. 

191.  Yak^  drink  blood,  and  swallow  flesh  and  fat  of  men 
by  merely  looking  at  them.  RJdc^asas  do  so  by  entering  the 
b^y  and  Piiicas  by  crushing  and  harassing. 

•Bd.  P.V.  157  reads  ««^{bcfo  of)  the  ijoorant  onci. 


V^Furdf/a 


540 

192-194^.  There  are  some  beings  of  the  following  characteris¬ 
tics  :  They  are  endowed  with  all  good  qualities.  They  are 
equal  to  Devas  in  the  matter  of  sphere  of  activities.  They  are 
brilliant  and  strong.  They  are  masterly  ones  who  can  assume  any 
form  they  please.  Awe-struck,  no  one  will  dare  to  speak  to  them 
directly.  They  are  valorous.  They  are  bowed  to  by  all  the 
people.  They  are  subtle  and  very  powerful.  They  are  pure  and 
worthy  of  Yajflas.  They  are  granters  of  boon.  All  these  having 
the  same  characteristics  as  Devas  are  remembered  as  Aturas.' 
Gandharvas  are  mferior  m  Devas  by  three-fourths  of  their 
prowess. 

195.  All  Guhyakas  are  inferior  to  Gandharvas  by  three- 
fourths.  All  Rakyasas  should  be  known  as  equal  to  Yak^as  in 
prowess.  Piikcas  are  three  times  less  powerful  in  their  Aiivaiya 
(prosperity  and  glory)  than  Yakfas. 

196-197.  Thus  in  wealth,  beauty,  longevity,  strength,  righ* 
teousness,  affluence,  mastery,  intellect,  penance,  learning  and 
exploits,  the  four  Devayonis,  b^inning  with  Gandharvas  and 
ending  with  Pi^acas  are  (consecutively)  three-fourths  inferior 
to  Devas  and  Asuras. 

Seia  said : 

198.  Welfare  tmto  you.  Henceforth,  hear  about  the  proge¬ 
ny  of  the  family  of  Krodha.  Krodha  gave  birth  to  twelve 
daughters.  They  became  the  wives  of  Pulaha.  Understand  them 
by  name. 

199.  They  were— Mrg^,  Mrgamanda,  Haribhadra,  Iravati, 
Bhuta,  Kapiia,  Daip;tr^  Tirya,  Sveta,  Svara  and  Surasa. 
They  are  well-known. 

200.  The  SODS  of  Mr^  were  the  different  types  of  deer,  viz. 

Harif^as^  Rurus  and  Pfsalas  as  well  as  such  other  animals 

as  hares  and  Sarabhas  (a  fabulous  eight-footed  animal) . 

1.  The  Purai9  a- writer  deserves  credit  for  recording  the  greatneu  of 
Afurai  and  their  equality  with  Devas. 

2.  Verses  192*  197  deacribe  the  gradation  (in  descendii^  order)  of  the 
divine  and  semi-diviae  beings  as  follows  : 

(i)  Devai  and  Asuras 

(ii)  Gandharvas  and  Apsaras-s 

(iii)  Guhyakas  (YaMss)  and  fUkvaias 

(iv)  Piiacai. 


8.201-211 


541 


201.  The  king  of  beasts  (lion)  was  the  son  of  Mrgamandk 
as  well  as  such  other  animals  as  Gav^as  (bluecows}i  buboes* 
cameb,  boars,  rhinoceros  and  Gautamukkas  ( a  kind  of  black 
monkey  with  white  face) . 

202  Hart's  (Bhadri't)  sons  were  Haris  (lions),  bears,  tig¬ 
ers,  hyenas,  different  varieties  of  monkeys,  Ktnnaras  and  Kiih- 
puru^as  and  many  other  animals*  Now  understand  the  sons  of 
Ir&vatl. 

203-205*  Bhauvana  (i*e.  Viivakarman)  brought  twoegg^ 
like  skulls  of  SQrya*  Keeping  them  in  his  hands,  he  sang  the 
Rathantara  hymn.  Suddenly  an  elephant  arose  out  of  the 
S&man  hynin.^  Bhauvana  presented  that  elephant  to  Iravatl  as 
her  son.  Being  thus  the  son  of  Irivati,  the  elephant  was  called 
Air&vata.  Since  it  was  the  vehicle  of  the  king  of  Devas,  it  became 
the  first  king  of  elephants.  It  had  the  lustre  a  pure  cloud. 
The  glorious  elephant  Air&vata  has  four  tusks. 

206.  (Defective  Verse)  Only  this  elephsmt  has  the  strength 
of  being  a  vehicle,  since  it  is  bom  of  water,  has  a  single  root, 
six  teeth  and  the  lustre  of  gold.  It  is  of  the  Bhadra  variety  of 
elephants. 

207.  Airiivata  had  four  sons,  viz.  Afijana,  Supradka,  Vi- 
mana  and  Padma.  His  mate  was  Abhramu. 

208.  Svet&  gave  birth  to  four  swift-footed  sons  who 
became  the  elephants  of  the  quarten.  They  belonged  to  the 
varieties  such  as  Bhadra,  Mrga,  Manda  and  Sadikirna. 

209-210.  Afijana,  though  belonging  to  the  Sahkir^  variety 
is  the  vehicle  of  Yama.  Supratika  who  belongs  to  the  Bhadra 
variety  and  is  green  in  colour  is  the  vehicle  of  the  Lord  of  Waters 
(Varuna) .  Padma  which  belongs  to  the  Manda  variety  and  is 
of  white  colour  is  the  vehicle  of  Ailavila  (Kubera) .  ( Vamana) 
which  was  dark-coloured  and  beloi^^  to  the  Mrga  variety 
was  the  vehicle  of  the  Fire-god  ( Agni)  •  , 

211.^  (Defective)  He  has  eight  sons,  viz.  Padmottara 

1.  Verses  20^235  coQUia  the  Puracic  Elephant  lore'*;  the  geographical 
location  of  foresti  assigned  to  diierent  types  of  elcphaoti  probably  mdicates 
that  that  type  was  found  in  that  particular  forest-area. 

2.  The  text  it  very  corrupt  and  is  translated  teotativtly  in  the  light  of 
Bd.  P*  w.  332-33a. 


542  yjjru  Purdpa 

(Padma4*Uttara?)»  two  Gajas  (Agata  and  Gajas  ?),  VaruQa» 
Gai^^  Upalepanamefa  (Upalq>ana  and  Me9a  ^  • 

212*  In  hUrace  dephants  possessing  Idty  stature,  white 
nails  and  hair,  yellowish  colour  are  bom*  I  shall  recount  Mata* 
hgaja  and  other  (types)  of  dephants  in  due  order. 

213.  The  elephant  Pupd^ha  was  grey-coloured  and 
Rath&nara  had  a  flowery  colour.  Their  tons  were  Supratiffha 
and  Pramardana. 

214«  (Defective  Verse)  Other  types  of  dephants — ^ar* 
shaped,  stout,  with  raised  heads,  having  white  (?)  hair  and 
nails,  strong  and  energetic.  They  are  called  AkuUka  dephants. 

215.  Puspadanta,  Brhatsaman,  ^addanta,  Dantapuspav&n 
and  T&mravar^a  were  his  sons  and  companion  tuskers. 

216. ^  In  bis  family  are  bom  dephantt  beautiful  in  appeara¬ 
nce  having  protruding  Ups,  dark-coloured,  fierce  and  able  to 
endure  diverse  kinds  of  ordeal  (7) 

21 7.  Vamadeva  was  as  dark  as  coliyritim.  From  S&xnan 
was  bom  V&mana.  His  wife  was  AAgadii  and  the  two  sons  were 
?*niavin  and  Lakfana. 

218.  These  elephants  were  fierce.  Their  necks  and  heads 
were  beautiful.  Their  chests  were  broad  and  they  were  swift- 
footed.  If  they  are  bound  by  men,  the  dephants  boro  become 
deformed. 

219.  There  is  no  other  elephant  equal  to  Supratika  in 
beauty.  He  had  three  sons,  vk.  Prahaii,  Sampad  and  Prthu. 

220.  The  animals  with  long  palate  and  lips  and  with 
symmetrical  portions  of  bead  and  belly,  of  gentle  birth  (?)  bom 
in  his  family,  become  Matafigajas. 

221*  Afljanawas  bom  to  Afijana  and  Afljanavati  to  Saman. 
The  mother  of  both  of  them  is  reputed  to  be  the  daughter  (s)  of 
Ayurajas. 

222.  In  his  family  were  bom  elephants  with  (distinctly 
divided)  symmetrica]  heads,  resembling  the  smooth  clouds, 

The  verse  enuxnf  rates  the  dght  sons  of  that  elephant  the  names  of  which 
are  as  follows:  Padma,  Uttana,  Padmagulma,  Ag^a*  Vitagaja,  Gaja,  Capala 
and  Ariifa. 

Pf^^U/uault  in  some  editions  h  obscure  and  should  be  emended  as 
Hvith  Urge  and  stout  (Ug)  faces  (heads)  as  in  Bd.  P.  V.  538. 


8.223-230 


543 


beautiful  to  look  at^  of  well-built  body  having  the  lustre  of 
lotuses  and  globular  in  shape.  They  are  stout  and  have  la]^e» 
yellow  faces. 

223.  From  Candramas  and  Saman  were  bom  Pi^ala  and 
Kumudadyuti.  Pingala’s  sods  were  Mah&padma  and  Crmi- 
malin. 

224.  Know  that  the  elephants  bom  of  his  family  have 
equal  and  unrivalled  tusks.  They  are  fierce.  Their  strength  is 
enormous.  Their  belly  is  large.  They  are  fond  of  elephant 
fights. 

225.  In  the  course  of  wars  between  Devas  and 
Asuras^  Suras  used  them  for  the  purpose  of  victory.  When 
they  achieved  their  object,  those  elephants  were  let  off  by  them 
and  they  went  to  different  directions  as  mentioned  before. 

226.  Devas  gave  unto  Lonup&da,  the  king  of  AAga 
and  author  of  a  Sutra  work,  elephants  born  in  these  families 
and  well-trained. 

227-228.  (The  various  names  of  elephants  are  to  be  etymo¬ 
logically  derived  as  follows :) 

Since  it  has  two  tusks  it  is  called  Duirada;  the  word  Hastin  is 
derived  from  hasta  (a  trunk  or  band)  ;  from  the  word  kara  (a 
trunk  or  hand)  the  word  Xorin  is  derived.  (since  it  protects) 

it  is  called  Vdrana.  Since  it  has  dantas  (tusks)  (prominently 
displayed)  it  is  called  Dentin.  It  u  called  Gaja  because  it  trum¬ 
pets  (garjantU).  Since  it  roams  about  in  the  hedges  (ICufija)  it  U 
called  Kurijara.  It  is  called  Xdga  because  it  is  antagonistic  to 
}{aga  (tree  or  mountain) .  Since  it  is  bom  of  Matanga  it  is 
called  Mdtakga.  Since  it  drinks  with  two  (i.  e.  trunk  and  mouth) 
it  is  called  Dvipa.  It  is  called  Sdmaja  because  (the  first  ele¬ 
phant  Air&vata)  was  born  of  a  Saman  hymn. 

229.  The  curvedness  of  their  tongues  and  their  muteness 
are  due  to  Agni’s  curse.  The  fact  that  they  aro  unaware  of  their 
strength  and  that  the  scrotum  is  concealed— these  two  are  due 
to  the  curses  of  Svayaiphhu  and  Suras. 

230.  Elephants  of  diverse  inherent  strengths  are  bom 
of  girls  of  Deva,  Danava,  Gandharva,  Pisaca,  Uraga  (Ser¬ 
pent)  and  Rakfaaa  tribes  through  their  union  with  the  ele¬ 
phants  of  the  quarters  {DiA^nggas) . 


544 


Vdjfu  Purina 


231.  The  stcxyofthe  origin^  development  and  derivation 
of  the  names  of  elephants  whose  king  is  Vibbavasu>  should  be 
known. 

232*  (Defective  Verse)  The  forest  in  the  east  bound  by 
the  rivers  Kautikl  and  Ganga  and  the  sea  belongs  to  AAjana 
and  the  family  of  elephants  of  which  he  is  the  founder  (or  of 
one  tusk  ?) . 

233.  The  forest  of  Supra tika  b  situated  north  of  Vin* 
dhya»  south  of  Ganga  and  in  beiweeo  the  land  of  Karufa 
and  the  source  of  Ganga. 

234.  The  fifth  forest  west  of  Uckalaand  extending  upto  the 
land  of  Vedi  is  remembered  as  the  forest  of  Vamana  who  is  the 
sole  Atman  (?) 

235«  The  forest  to  the  west  of  Lauhitya  extending  west¬ 
wards  upto  the  sea,  is  said  to  be  the  forest  of  Yama*  It  is  near 
a  mount^n. 

236*2 48.  Bhuti  gave  birth  to  Bhutas  (goblins)  who  are  the 
followers  of  lord  Rudra.  They  were  stout,  lean,  longish,  dwar¬ 
fish,  shores tatured  and  normal.  The  ears  of  some  were  hang¬ 
ing  down.  The  lips  of  some  were  suspended.  Some  had  tongues, 
breasts  and  bellies  han^ng  down.  Some  had  single  form,  some 
double  form.  The  hips  of  some  hung  down.  Some  had  stout 
calves  of  the  leg.  They  stayed  on  the  banks  of  rivers,  lakes  or  seas. 
They  were  of  all  colours,  black,  white,  blue,  grey,  red  and  pink. 
Some  were  smoke-coloured  and  some  had  variegated  colours. 
Some  were  terrible  like  Raksasas  and  Kadrus  ( ?) .  Some  had 
dbhevelled  hair  like  the  Mufija  grass.  Some  had  hair  standing 
up.  Some  wore  serpents  as  the  sacred  thread.  Some  had  eyes 
removed;  some  had  hideous  eyes.  Some  had  small  eyes.  Somehad 
only  a  single  eye.  Some  had  many  heads.  Some  had  no  head. 
Some  had  a  single  head.  Some  had  the  head  cut  off.  They  were 
fierce  and  hideous.  Some  had  no  hair.  Some  had  plenty  of  it. 
Some  were  blind*  Some  had  matted  hair.  Some  were  yellow. 
Some  were  dwarfish.  They  resorted  to  the  banks  of  riven,  lakes 
and  oceans.  Some  had  a  iingle  car,  some  had  large  ears.  Some 
were  spike-eared,  some  had  no  ear.  Some  had  fangs.  Some  had 
claws.  Some  had  no  teeth.  Some  had  two  tongues.  Sraie  had  a 


8.249*256 


545 


single  hand.  Some  had  two  hands.  Some  had  three  hands.  Some 
had  no  hand.  Some  had  a  single  foot.  Some  had  two  feet.  Some 
three  and  some  even  more.  Some  were  great  Yogins.  Some  were 
highly  dignified.  Some  were  very  strong.  Some  were  sutap^o^ 
{Sutapaskas  ?  ^of  good  penance*) .  They  could  go  everywhere. 
They  were  unimpeded.  They  were  the  knowers  of  Brahman 
and  could  assume  any  form  they  wished.  Some  were  terrible  and 
ruthless.  Some  were  pure,  holy  and  auspicious.  Some  disputed 
and  argued.  Some  had  the  Kuia  grass  in  their  hands.  Some  had 
huge  (long  T)  tongues,  long  ears  and  large  faces.  Some  ate  with 
their  hands,  some  with  their  nM>uths  and  some  with  their  heads. 
Some  wore  skulb  (round  their  necks).  Some  held  bows.  Some 
had  iron  clubs,  swords  or  spears.  Some  had  radiant  faces  axul 
bright  eyes;  some  wore  garlands  of  variegated  flowers  and  un¬ 
guents.  Some  ate  cooked  food;  some  raw  flesh.  Some  hadmsmy 
forms.  Some  had  handsome  appearance.  Some  roamed  about 
at  night  or  at  dusk.  Some  were  terrible.  Some  were  gentle, 
roaming  about  during  the  day.  Some  were  night  prowlers,  who 
were  very  terrible  (or  difficult)  to  look  at;  some  were  terrible 
night-wanderers . 

249.  Alt  of  them  directed  their  minds  towards  lord  Bhava 
(Siva)  as  the  greatest  god.  They  had  no  wives  or  sons.  All  of 
them  were  celibate  with  sublimated  sexuality. 

250.  These  Bhutas,  the  great  AtmayoginSf  numbered  a  hund¬ 
red  thousand.  Thus  all  these  noble-souled  sons  of  Bbuti  have 
been  recounted. 

251.  Kapisa,  Ku|ipindi  bore  to  twins  of  Pif- 

acas  who  were  tawny-coloured.  Because  they  were  brownish, 
they  were  called  Pisacas.*  All  of  them  were  flesh-eaters. 

232.  There  are  sixteen  other  twins.  Their  descendants  are 
living  now.  I  shall  mention  by  names  the  man-eaters  belonging 
to  their  fomily.  • 

233-256.  They  are  Chagala  and  Chagali,  Vakra  and  Vakra- 
mukU,  Sud  and  SQdmukha,  Kuibbhapatra  and  Kumbtu, 

1.  Bd.  F.  2.3*7.367  reads  tumanaska  'ofvery  good  minds*. 

2.  The  Purina  distinguishes  between  BkiUas  and  Piiicas.  Bhdtski  are 

Boble*iouled  sons  of  BbOti.  celibate  yogins  and  devotees  of  God  Siva.  Piiicu 
are  the  progeny  of  The  superstitioai  about  Pi^ai  current  at 

the  time  of  this  text  are  recoHed  in  vv.  1251-282. 


546 


Vdjfu  Purdfa 


Vajradainitra  tod  Dundubhi>  Upacara  and  Up>acara»  Ulukhala 
and  UlQkhall)  Anarka  and  Anarka,  Kukha^d^  &nd  Kukhandiki, 
P&^p&tra  and  Pk^ipatrii  Pithiu  and  P&ihfumad»  Nitunda  and 
Nitu^d^}  Nipun&  and  Nipuna,  Chalada  azxd  Uccbefati&,  Pras* 
kanda  and  Skandika.  The  $ixteen  clans  of  Piiacas  have  been 
narrated. 

257-259.  These  are  the  sixteen  iamilies  bom  of  Kupp&n- 
das  :  Aj&mukhas,  Vakramukhas*  Purins,  Skandins^  Vtpi- 
das,  Ahgirikas,  Kumbhapitras,  Prakundakas,  Upacarolukha- 
likas,  Anarkas,  Kukhandikas,  Pkmpatras,  N^tu^das*  Uri^ias, 
NipuQas,  and  Suclmukhocchesa^idas. 

260.  Those  who  are  bom  as  Sukalpas^  (?)  should  be  known 
as  Piiicas.  There  are  infinite  number  of  sons  and  grandsons  of 
hideous  nature  and  ignoble  activities.  Hence,  understand  the 
characteristics  of  PUieas* 

26  L  Fii&cas  have  hair  on  all  their  limbs.  Their  eyes 
are  round.  They  have  claws  and  fangs.  The*r  limbs  are  crooked. 
They  are  man-eaters  and  their  faces  are  turned  down. 

262.  The  Pii&cas  called  Rusrp&ndikas  are  devoid  of  hair 
on  their  heads  or  bodies.  Skins  and  hides  ccmstitute  their 
garments.  They  always  eat  pngelly  seeds  and  flesh. 

263.  Some  Pificas  have  curved  limbs,  and  feet.  They  walk 
in  a  zigzag  manner.  They  should  be  known  as  Vakrapiiacas. 
They  are  of  crooked  gait.  They  can  assume  any  form  as  they 
please. 

264.  Some  Pii^as  have  protruding  bellies.  Their  noses 
are  like  snouts.  Their  bodies  are  short.  Their  heads  and  arms 
are  small.  These  are  called  Nitutidakas.  Gingelly  seeds  form 
their  diet.  (They  are  fond  of  hearing  pleasing  things — 
Pt^a/rdvdfi?)* 

265.  Some  Piiacas  have  d%varfish  forms’.  They  are 
garrulous.  They  go  about  galloping.  They  are  Anarkamarka 
types  of  Piiacas.  They  are  fond  of  stayingon  trees  or  taking  food 
there. 

266.  Some  Pis&cas  keep  their  hands  lifted  up  (always) . 

1.  Bd.  P.  iStd  V.  3S4  reads  5aht{rdf  ^bclooging  to  the  lame  family  (?)* 

2.  This  is  obscure.  Bd.  P.  V,$69  reads  Pf(idi):/ai*fondof(drmjdng)  blood*. 

9.  Bd.P.  V.  990  reads  Vinardkrta^ft  'having  the  form  of  monkeys*. 


8.267-278 


547 


Their  hair  stands  upright.  Their  abodes  are  high  up  on  tall 
trees.  They  shed  dust  from  their  bodies.  These  Pilacas  art  called 
Pat/Uus. 

267.  The  PUicas  called  Upcviras  are  very  considerate 
about  their  veins*.  Thefr  bodies  are  dry.  They  have  plenty  of 
moustache.  They  wear  bark  garments.  Cremation  ground  is  their 
abode. 

268.  The  Udukhala  (Ulukhala)  types  of  Piiicas  have 
stable  motionless  eyes  and  long  tongues  with  which  they  lick 
their  lips.  Their  heads  are  as  large  as  those  of  elephants  and 
camels.  They  move  about  severally  or  jointly. 

269.  Those  Piiacas  are  call^  Kuihbhapatras,  who  take 
cooked  food  without  seeing  it  (invisibly  ?) .  They  are  small 
and  yellow-complexioned  with  hairy  bodies.  They  move  about 
visibly  and  invisibly. 

270.  The  Piiicas  called  I^Hpunas  enter  and  infest  those 
persons  who  go  alone.  Their  mouths  extend  upto  their  ears. 
The  eye-brows  are  long  and  the  noses  are  thick. 

271.  (A  line  is  missing  from  the  text)  The  Piiacas  called 
BdlSdas  (devourers  of  children)  are  short-statured  and  they 
attack  people  with  their  hands  and  feet.  Their  eyes  are  turned 
towards  the  earth.  They  resort  to  lying-in-chambers. 

272.  Those  Piiacas  called  PiiiUdas  (flesh  eaters)  drink  blood 
from  the  battlefleld.  Their  hands  and  feet  are  turned  back¬ 
wards.  They  are  short  and  are  as  swift  as  wind. 

273.  The  Piiacas  called  Skandins  are  naked  and  have  no 
fixed  abodes.  They  are  globular  in  shape  with  long  hair. 
There  are  other  types  of  Piiacas  eating  leavings  of  food.  Thus 
the  sixteen  types  of  Pi^acas  have  been  narrated. 

274.  On  seeing  these  types  of  PUacas  deficient  in  Intellect 
and  in  a  dejected  condition  among  his  progeny »  Brahma  sym¬ 
pathetically  granted  them  the  boons  of  vanishing  and  assuming 
forms  as  they  pleased. 

275-278.  He  permitted  them  to  move  about  at  the  time  of 
the  two  junctions  (viz.  dawn  and  dusk).  (I  shall  mention) 
their  abodes  and  way  of  maintaining  themselves.  Houses  in 


but  Bd.  P.  V.  392  resdi  Bkrcmari^smnthhdft  ‘like  black* 


Vdyu  Pur 


548 

nuns»  vacant  or  with  very  few  people  or  completely  dilapidated 
are  their  abodes.  They  live  in  those  houses  also  where  people 
do  not  follow  rules  of  good  conduct,  which  are  not  scrubbed 
and  cleaned  properly  or  not  whitewashed  or  painted  well. 
They  live  in  the  highways,  sidelanes,  kitchen  gardens,  quadrang* 
les,  portals,  attics,  paths  of  exit*  sidewalks,  pathways,  rivers, 
holy  centres,  trees  in  the  monasteries,  trunk  roads  (these 
are  assigned  as  their  abodes).  Pijacas  occupy  all  these 
spots. 

279-280.  Unrighteous  persons,  those  who  violate  the  dis¬ 
cipline  of  castes  and  stages  of  life  and  artisans  and  masons 
constitute  the  livelihood  of  these  Piiacas  as  ordained  by 
Suras.  These  PiUcas  will  be  the  presiding  deities  where  holy 
rites  are  performed  by  means  of  money  earned  by  unjustifiable 
means  sucli  as  breach  of  trust  and  theft  of  nectar^like  articles. 

281-282.  The  oblations  to  Pii&cas  consist  of  honey 
(wine),  flesh,  cooked  rice  mixed  with  curds,  powdered  gingelly 
feeds,  toddies  and  similar  (intoxicating)  beverages,  incense, 
turmeric,  K^^jaras  (i.e.  balls  of  gingelly  seeds  in  treacle), 
oil,  rice  mbeed  with  jaggery,  black  cloths  and  flowers.  At  the 
junctions  of  Parvans,  these  things  must  be  offered  to  Piiacas. 
Brahma,  the  lord,  ordained  thus. 

283.  He  made  the  trident-bearing  Giriia  the  lord  of  all 
Bhutas  and  Pijacas. 

The  lady  Damsfra  bore  as  sons  tigers  and  lions. 

284.  Panthers,  pythons  and  beasts  of  prey  are  also  her 
sons. 

Now  listen  to  the  progeny  and  procreation  of  B^sa  wholly. 
She  had  five  daughters.  Listen  to  their  names  : 

285.  Mini,  Mat5,  Vrtta,  Parivrtta  and  Anuvitta  are  to  be 
known  (as  her  daughters) .  Listen  to  (the  enumeration  of)  her 
children: 

286.  Sharks  and  crocodiles  with  a  thousand  teeth,  the 
types  of  fish  known  as  PdfAina,  Timi  and  PMta  and  other 
groups  are  callevl  Maina  (bom  of  Mina)  groups.  They  are 
extensive. 

287.  The  four  types  of  Gtdhas  (crocodiles) — ^Anujyef^a* 
kas,  Nifkas,  Siiumaras  etc.  were  bom  of  Mata. 


8.288-298 


549 


268.  Vrtta  gave  birth  to  different  types  of  tortoises  and 
other  aquatic  animab  as  well  as  varieties  of  conches. 

289.  Anuvrtti  gave  birth  to  different  types  of  toads  and 
frogs  as  well  as  different  varieties  ofsnaib  and  Afteyas  (black 
does)  and  Saihbukas  (shelb  and  noxious  insects) . 

290.  Parivrtta  gave  birth  to  different  varieties  of  oyster- 
shelbi  cowrie-shells  and  conchs. 

291.  She  produced  the  varieties  of  Kalakuta  poison  and 
leeches  as  well.  Thus  the  race  of  ^^a  consbdng  of  five  branches 
has  been  enumerated. 

292.  The  description  of  the  first  and  early  animals  and 
insects  is  very  extensive^.  The  varieties  of  sweat-bom  insects 
are  a  part  of  them. 

293.  O  Br&hmai>aS}  these  insects  are  born  of  the  bodies  of 
Svastipika^  (?) «  The  producers  are  human  beings.  The  insects 
known  as  Uianas  are  born  of  dirt  and  sweat  of  men.  So  also  the 
other  insects  and  groups  of  ants  moving  about  in  rows. 

294.  There  are  varieties  of  insects  bom  of  conchs^  pebbles 
which  work  like  nails.^  These  and  many  others  are  the  earthly 
groups  of  sweat-born  creatures. 

295.  Similarly,  these  creatures  are  born  out  of  water 
heated  by  the  sun  as  well  as  of  the  rain  water.  Many  of  these 
insects  are  born  of  the  bodies  of  other  animals. 

296-298.  The  following  tiny  creatures  are  born  both  of 
water  and  of  sweat  :  Small  shrimps  {mxnakd)^  ants,  (mosquito¬ 
like)  biting  or  stinging  creatures  {darhia) ,  Titiira^puifik&s  (tiny 
partridge- like  creatures?) .  The  Alakas  (hair)  are  bluish  or 
variegated  in  colour  {nUa^citrdh)  and  very  massive. 

The  insects  called  Nalada  which  are  many-faced  are  bom 
in  water  (stagnating)  near  the  Kasa  grass.  They  are  stated  to 
be  of  three  kinds — Sirhk<d<iSi  Rjmalas  (Hairy)  and  Pkckalas 
(Slimy) .  These  and  other  groups  of  species  ar6  remembered  as 
bom  of  water  as  well  as  of  sweat. 

1.  The  line  U  corrupt.  The  correspoodicg  line  in  Bd.  F.  V.  421  reads  : 
Ufy&tMtukam  c^fikur  bohmm  ce/iUs-9istarairil  *Tbey  say  that  there  is  an  eacieosive 
line  of  living  beings  procreated  by  l^a*. 

2.  This  obscure  word  is  a  ou^rtot  for  •SMcta^JClinna  *bom  of  bodies  mois- 
sten^  by  sweat*  (vtd  Bd.  P.  V.422). 

3.  *which  work  lik  naib’  in  the  text  is  rather  obscure.  Bd. 

P.  V.  423  b  reads  ^Pebbles  nnaUer  than  pins*. 


550 


VtyuPvrdi^ 


299.  Some  creatures  are  bom  of  ghee^  black  gram  and 
green  gram.  Some  are  born  of  the  fruits  of  Jambu  (Rose  apple) 
Bilva^  znango  and  arecanut. 

300.  Creatures  are  bom  of  the  dry  hollows  of  trees  and 
sJso  of  green  gram,  jack  fruits  and  rice  grains  when  kept  (for  a 
long  time). 

301.  Creatiu*es  are  bom  of  other  things  also  when  kept 
for  a  tong  time.  Germs  and  worms  are  bom  of  horses  and  other 
(animals)  and  even  from  poison  etc. 

302.  When  cowdung  is  kept  for  a  number  of  days^  O 
Brihmanas,  creatures  are  produced  from  them.  White  ants  and 
other  creatures  are  bom  of  (putrefying)  wood. 

303.  Various  kinds  of  blue  flies  are  bom  of  trees  in  due 
course.  The  creatures  Putrikis  (white  ants  ?)  are  bom  of  drying 
and  withering  things. 

304.  Everywhere  serpents  are  bora  seasonally  from 
Satikas  (?}.  Scorpions  and  sweat*bom  creatures  are  produced 
from  dry  cow-dung. 

305.  O  lord,  many  worms  are  born  of  the  bodies  of  cows 
and  buffaloes.  Different  types  of  fish  etc.  are  bom  of  eggs. 

306.  Different  types  of  leeches  are  bora  of  eggs  such  as 
C<dvlrikas  and  Gajas  and  many  other  subtle  creatures  too. 

307.  Different  types  of  flies  etc.  are  bora  of  eggs.  These 
are  laid  generally  on  the  leavings  of  food,  water  and  sloughs. 

308.  Different  types  of  mosquitoes  and  black  bees  are  also 
bom  of  eggs.  The  creatures  known  as  nits  {Putrik&s  and  Putra* 
bh&sakas)  are  produced  from  grass. 

309.  The  insects  Ma^icchedas  and  Vydlas  are  said  to  be 
produced  from  foetus  with  no  enveloping  membrane  {potajas) « 
Varieties  of  Sataveri  (?)  are  born  of  dry  cow-dung. 

310.  Thus  innumerable  groups  of  sweat-bom  creatures  have 
been  enumerated  by  me  in  brief.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that 
these  arc  bora  as  a  result  of  their  actions  in  a  previous  birth. 

311-312.  There  are  other  beings  Naiirta  nature  (i.e. 
bom  of  Nirrti).  They  are  remembered  as  Upasargajas  (bora  of 
paroxysm  due  to  possession  by  devils) .  Some  beings  are  bora 
of  womb  {Tcnijds)ajid  some  Autpattikas  (bom  spontaneously). 
Generally  all  Devas  are  to  be  known  as  Autpattikes,  Some 


8.313^29 


551 


Devas  are  bom  of  a  womb  {T<mja)  ^Oniy  somearebom  without 
cause. 

313.  The  children  of  Sarami  are  the  sons  Tulal&gha  and 
Kola  and  a  daughter  Siva*  They  are  known  as  Saramddi 
group. 

31 4.  The  Kadrukas  (?)  are  (dark<oloured) ,  Gabala 

(of  variegated  colour  (white) »  Harita  (green^coloured) , 

Kfp^  (black) I  DhQmrins^  (smoke-coloured  and  pink<oIoured-^ 
Aru^a),  Tulidagha  (7). 

315t  Surasa  gave  birth  to  a  hundred  (serpents)  with 
nectar  in  their  heads  mfUon).  The  king  ofSarpas  (serpents) 
is  Tak^aka  and  that  of  the  snakes  is  Visuki*  Thus  this  group 
belonging  to  the  family  of  Krodhavaii  is  mostly  of  Tamasa 
quality. 

316*  Now  understand  the  bosom  creation  of  Pulaha  from 
T&mri.  Many  well-known  daughters  were  born  of  Timri. 

317*  They  are — SyenI,  Bhisl>  Krauflcl»  Dhrtar&^pi  and 
Suld*  Syent  who  was  the  wife  of  AruQa  gave  birth  to  two 
excellent  birds  of  great  strength  and  prowess,  viz.  Sampati  and 
Jatayu. 

318.  Sampati  procreated  one  son  and  one  daughter* 
Crows,  vultures  and  Aivakartfins  (a  variety  of  vultures?)  were 
the  sons  of  Ja(ayu. 

3 19*  The  wives  of  Garutman  (Garuda)  were  Bhasi,  Kraufici, 
Suki,  Dhrtari^tii  and  Bhadra.  Their  sons  are  being  enumerated* 

320-322.  8uki  bore  six  vrell  known  sons  to  Garutm&n, 
viz*  the  sweet-faced  Triiira,  Bala,  Pntha  of  great  strength, 
Tri^ankhanetra,  Susukha  of  good  form  and  Surasa  the  power¬ 
ful.  The  sons  and  grandsons  of  these  ruthless  descendants  of 
Garuda,  the  noble-souled  serpent-eaters,  numbering  fourteen 
thousand.  By  procreation  of  sons  and  grandsons  their  family 
became  extensive.  * 

323-329.  I  shall  mention  in  due  order  the  lands  where  they 
spread  themselves — the  whole  of  Salmali  Dvipa,  the  mountain 
Devakuta,  the  leading  mountains  Ma^iman,  Sabasra-likhara, 
Parnamala,  Sukeia,  Sataifuga,  Kauraja,  Paficaiikhara  and 
Hemakuta — all  these  mountains  were  occupied  by  the  noble- 
souled  descendants  of  Garuda.  They  were  brightened  with  ruby 
stones  and  (wUIe  Hying)  they  produced  gusts  of  violent  winds* 


552  Viyu  Pur^ 

Bhisas  (the  bird  vulture)  Ulukat  (owli),  crows  and  cocks 
were  the  sons  of  Bhdsi. 

Peacocks,  JCalatfi/Uas  (sparrows),  doves  and  Ldoaj  and 
Tigris  also  were  bom  of  Bhlsl«  Kraufkci  gave  birth  to  VdrJ/ti^a 
birds  (black  birds  with  red  legs,  head  and  eyes).  Syenl  gave 
birth  to  ospreys,  Sdrasas  (a  kind  of  crane)  and  cranes;  she 
gave  birth  to  other  birds  of  prey  also  like  these. 

The  beautiful  lady  Dhrtarifpi  gave  birth  to  Hamsas 
(swans)  and  Kalahaihsas,  Cakraodkas  and  other  types  of 
(acquatic)  birds  too.  These  were  the  birds  given  birth  to  and 
their  sons  and  grandsons  were  infinite. 

330.  Ganida’s  children  have  been  enumerated.  Listen  to 
the  progeny  of  Iri.  Ira  gave  birth  to  three  daughters  with  eyes 
like  lotuses. 

331.  They  were  Lati,  Vatll  and  Vlrudhk.  They  are  the 
mothers  of  all  types  of  plants,  trees  and  creepers. 

332.  Lati  gave  birth  to  VasmpatU  i.e.  the  non-flowering 
plants  growing  on  the  banks  of  rivers  etc.  She  henelf  gave  birth 
to  Vrkfds  or  trees  with  flowers  and  fruits. 

333.  Vain  gave  birth  to  hedges,  grasses  and  bamboo  etc.  of 
the  same  species.  Virudhi  gave  birth  to  Virvdkds  i.e.  creepers 
spreading  all  round.  The  description  of  the  race  is  concluded 
here. 

334.  Thus  the  mobile  and  the  immobile  progeny  of  Kaj* 
yapa  have  been  enumerated.  The  whole  Universe  is  filled  with 
their  sons  and  grandsons. 

335.  Thus  a  portion  of  the  entire  creation  has  been  enumerat¬ 
ed.  The  Prajdsarga  of  Marica  (Kaiyapa)  has  been  succinctly 
narrated.  O  Brahmanas,  it  cannot  be  explained  (in  details) 
even  in  hundreds  of  years. 

336.  Aditi  was  of  righteous,  pious  temperament.  Diti  is  re¬ 
membered  as  strong-minded.  Surabhi  was  inclined  towards  the 
performance  of  penance.  Danu  was  of  a  deceitful  nature. 

337.  Kadru  was  of  ruthless  mind.  Krauftcl  was  disposed 
towards  learning.  Ira  had  the  receptive  capacity.  Danayu  was 
interested  in  taking  food. 

338.  Vinata  was  capable  of  bearing  burdens.  Tamra  was 
habituated  to  use  nooses  and  strings.  These  are  the  natures  and 
temperaments  of  the  mothers  of  the  worlds. 


8.339—9^ 


553 


339*  In  piety,  conduct,  intellect,  patience  and  strength  they 
had  the  traits  of  qualities  Sattva,  R&jas  and  Tamas.  Hence 
they  were  both  righteous  and  unrighteous* 

340.  The  bosom^born  pr^eny  of  Kaiyapa  were  bom  with 
the  traits  of  their  mothers,  (Tliey  were)  Devas,  Asuras, 
Gandharvas,  Yakfas,  Rak^asas,  serpents,  PlUcas,  animals,  deer, 
birds  and  creepers. 

34],  Since  these  were  bom  of  the  daughters  of  Dak|a  who 
were  human  beings,  hence  human  beings  are  the  most  accellent 
in  all  the  Manvantaras. 

342.  Human  beings  are  the  aspirants  of  Dharma  (Virtue) 
Artha (Wealth),  Kkma  (Love)  and  Nfok^  (Salvatitm),  There* 
fore,  Suras  and  Asuras  are  bom  as  Adha^sroias  (downward 
flow) . 

343.  They  are  bom  ag^  and  e^ain  among  human  beings 
for  the  purpose  of  achieving  their  object.  Thus  the  origin  of  the 
race  of  ascetics  has  been  recounted. 

344*346.  The  meritorious  story  of  Suras,  Asuras,  Gan* 
dharvas,  Apsaras-s,  Yak^as,  Rkk^asas,  Pii&cas,  Supar^as,  ser¬ 
pents,  birds,  pythons,  peacocks,  all  medicinal  herbs,  worms, 
germs,  insects,  insignificant  creatures  born  in  water,  animals  and 
glorious  Brabmaqas,  is  conducive  to  longevity  and  wealth.  It  is 
pleasing  and  beneficial.  It  is  meritorious.  It  must  be  heard 
always  and  retained  by  one  who  is  devoid  of  malice  and  jealousy. 

347.  He  who  r^;ularly  reads  this  story  of  the  race  (of 
ascetics)  of  noble  souls  in  the  assembly  of  Brahmanas  and  physi¬ 
cians  will  attain  children,  abundant  wealth  and  prosperity  and 
the  glorious  goal  after  death. 


CHAPTER  NINE 
TTii  Race  of  Sagts 

Sntafaid  : 

1^«  Thus  when  the  entire  mobile  and  immobile  crea¬ 
tions  had  been  created  and  established  by  the  noble-souled 
Kaiyapa,  he  the  chief  Praj&pad,  crowned  (the  chiefi  of  them) 


554  V/fyu  PurA9a 

a$  their  Lords  and  began  to  assign  them  their  respective  domains 
in  due  order«^ 

3.  He  crowned  Soma  (the  Moon)  in  the  kingdom  of  the 
twice^bom  Brahmanas,  Ksattriyas  and  Vai iyas,  creepers,  cons¬ 
tellations,  planets,  Yajftas  and  penance. 

4.  He  made  Brhaspati  the  lord  of  all  the  descendants  of 
Angiras.  He  crowned  Sukra  as  the  ruler  over  the  realm  of 
Bhrgus. 

5.  He  made  Vifpu,  the  lord  of  Adityaa;  Fire-god  the 
lord  of  Vasua;  Dak^  the  lord  of  Praj&patis;  and  V&sava 
(Indra)  the  lord  of  Maruts. 

6.  He  made  Prahlida,  the  delighter  of  Diti,  the  king  of 
Daityas  :  N&r&yaoa  the  king  of  S&dhyas;  and  the  Bull- 
bannered  lord  (Siva)  the  king  of  Rudras. 

7.  He  directed  Vipracitti  to  be  the  king  of  D&navas.  He 
ordered  Varu^a  to  be  the  king  of  waters.  He  made  Vaiiravatia 
(Kubera)  the  lord  of  Yak^,  Rik^asas  and  the  wealth  of 
(worldly)  kings. 

8.  He  coronated  Yama,  die  son  of  Vivasvin  (the  Sun) ,  in 
the  kingdom  of  Pitrs,  and  the  trident-bearii^  Giriia  in  the 
kingdom  of  all  the  Bhutas  and  Piiacas. 

9.  He  made  Himavan  the  ruler  of  mountains;  ocean, 
of  the  rivers;  and  Citraratha  the  ruler  of  Gandharvas. 

10.  He  crowned  UccaUiravas  as  the  king  of  horses,  tiger  as 
the  king  of  deer  and  cows,  and  bulls  the  lords  of  quadrupeds. 

1 1 .  He  made  Ganida  the  most  excellent  among  flying  be¬ 
ings,  the  lord  of  all  birds.  He  made  Maruta  the  lord  of  scents 
and  unembodied  beings. 

12.  He  made  Vayu,  the  most  excellent  among  strong  be¬ 
ings,  the  lord  of  sound,  sky  and  strength.  He  made  Se^a, 
the  lord  of  all  fanged  (reptiles),  and  V^uki  the  lord  of  serpents. 

13.  He  made  Taksaka,  the  lord  of  vipers,  serpents  and 
reptiles.  He  crowned  Paqanya,  one  of  the  Adityas,  as  the  lord 
of  oceans,  rivers,  clouds  and  rains. 

14-15.  He  crowned  Kamadeva  the  king  of  all  groups  of 
Apsaras-s. 

1.  Verses  1-20  enumer^^te  the  beads  of  diflerenC  categories  of  creatioo. 
Here  ooe  Is  reminded  of  the  Vibhfltiyoga  ( DG.X) . 


9J6-26 


555 


He  made  Sadivatsara  (Year)  the  lord  of  (seasons) » 
months  and  groups  of  seasons,  fortnights  {Ariavas)^  Vipakfos 
(che  day  of  transition  from  one  half  of  a  lunar  month  to 
another)  t  Muhurtas,  Parvans,  Kifth&s,  Kalis  and  their 
magnitudes,  the  movements  and  the  transits  (of  the  Sun) , 
of  mathematical  calculations  and  Yogas  (astronomical 
divisions  of  time  or  combinations  of  Stars)  • 

16.  The  Prajipati  crowned  Sudhaman,  the  &mou$  son  of 
Rajas,  as  the  king  in  the  eastern  quarter. 

17.  In  the  western  quarter,  be  crowned  the  noble^ouled 
Ketuman,  the  unerring  son  of  Rajas,  the  king. 

18.  He  made  Vaivasvata  Manu  the  lord  of  human  beings. 
The  entire  earth  consisting  of  seven  continents  along  with  the 
towns  therein,  is  being  ruled  r^hteously  by  them  in  their  res- 
pective  areas. 

1 9.  They  had  been  crowned  formerly  by  Brahma  in  the 
Svayaihbhuva  Manvantara.  Only  those  who  become  Manu  are 
consecrated  as  kings. 

20.  In  the  Manvantaras  that  have  passed,  these  kings  (had 
ruled  and)  passed  away.  When  the  Manvantaras  occur  again, 
others  will  be  crowned  again.  All  the  kings,  past  and  future,  are 
proclaimed  as  Lords  of  Manvantaras. 

21.  Ffthu  was  crowned  by  these  excellent  men  at  the  time 
of  Rajasuya.  The  valorous  king  was  made  so  in  accordance 
with  the  injunctions  of  the  Vedas. 

22-23.  The  lord  of  Praj&s,  Kaiyapa,  procreated  these  sons, 
for  the  purpose  of  the  continuity  of  the  progeny.  TbereaRer, 
desirous  of  his  own  lineage,  he  performed  a  severe  penance#  He 
contemplated — **May  sons,  the  founders  of  the  lineage,  be  born 
to  me”. 

24.  As  Kaiyapa,  the  noble  soul,  contemplated,  two  power¬ 
ful  SODS  bom  of  Brahma's  part  were  boro  to  him. 

25.  They  were  Vatsara  and  Asita.  Both  of  them  were  pro- 
pounders  of  Brahman.  Nidhruva  and  Raibhya  of  great  fame 
were  bom  of  Vatsara. 

26.  The  Raibhyas  should  be  known  as  the  (descendants)  of 
Raibhya.  Understand  (those)  of  Nidhruva.  Cyavana  begot 
Sumedhas  of  Sukanyi. 


556 


V/fyu  Purd^ 


27.  Nidhniva's  wife^  was  the  mother  of  KuQ^&payiiu* 
Brahmiftha  (Devala  in  Bd.P.)  was  bom  of  Ekaparpi  and  Asita. 

28.  On  hearing  (ie.  paying  heed  to)  the  words  of 

Devala  became  excessively  famous.  Nidhruvasi 
Sii^ilyas  and  Raibhyas  all  these  three  formed  the  K&l« 
yapa  Gotra  later*. 

29.  Vara  (Vajrl  i.e.  Indra  in  Bd.  P.)  and  other  Devas  are 
the  progeny  of  Devala.  These  subjects  function  in  Dvapara 
Yuga  that  remains  (i.e«  occurs)  after  eleven  cycles  of  the  sets 
of  four  Yugas  have  passed. 

so.  Carifyanta  (Nairifyanta  in  Bd.  P.)  was  the  son  of 
httnasa  and  his  son  was  Dama.  M&nasa  who  was  well-known 
as  Troabindu,  was  his  heir  and  successor. 

31.  In  the  beginning  of  the  third  Treti  Yugai  he  became 
the  king.  His  daughter  Idavidi  was  unrivalled  in  her  beauty. 
The  saintly  king  gave  her  to  Pulastya. 

32.  The  sage  Viiravas  was  bom  of  Idavida.  He  had  four 
wives  who  made  the  family  of  Pulastya  flourish. 

33.  Brhaspati,  the  preceptor  of  the  Devas>  had  a  famous 
daughter  named  DevavarQinl.  He  (Viiravai)  married  that 
girl. 

34.  He  (Viiravas)  married  Puipotkafa  and  Vak&»  the 
daughters  of  Malyavu  as  well  as  Kaikad,  the  daughter  of 
Malin.  Listen  to  their  progeny. 

35.  Devavarniid  gave  birth  to  his  eldest  son  Vaiirava^a 
who  had  divine  &te  and  saintly  leaming,  (but)  had  the  form  of 
a  Rik$asa  and  the  strength  of  an  Asura. 

36-37.  He  had  three  feet,  a  huge  body,  stout  head,  a  large 
chin*,  eight  fangs,  green  moustache,  pike-like  ears  and  red  com¬ 
plexion.  His  arms  were  ^ort  and  long  (i.e.  one  short,  one 
long) .  He  was  yellowish  in  colour  (?)  and  very  terrible  to  look 
at.  He  had  the  knowledge  of  the  illusory  world.  He  was  enlight¬ 
ened  with  knowledge. 

1.  Sumedhss  4S  per  fid.  P. 

2.  Bd.  P.  2.3.8.33  reads  for  poMi  here.  It  metni  ^Nidliruw, 

£Sodily^»  Baibhyas  aretliree  branches  of  Khiyi^a  Gotra*. 

3.  AfoASMNion  in  the  text  is  a  tautology.  It  should  be  mahMamn  as  in 
Bd.  P.  ibid  V.  42. 


9«3M8 


557 


38.  On  seeing  tuch  a  ton  assuming  a  cosmic  form,  the 
father  himself  said— ^*This  is  Kubera  (ugly-bodied  one) 

39.  The  word  *Ku*  is  used  to  indicate  contempt.  The  body 
is  mentioned  by  the  word  Beta,  Hence  he  is  called  Kubera  be« 
cause  bis  body  was  deformed. 

40.  Since  he  was  the  child  of  Vijravas  and  he  appeared 
like  Vilravas,  he  will  be  known  in  the  world  by  the  name 
Vaifravaoa. 

41.  Kubera  begot  of  ^ddhi  the  famous  (son)  Nalakubara, 
Kaikas!  gave  birth  to  four  children  Rivapa,  Kumbhakaixia  and 
Vibhl^a^a  (the  three  sons  and)  a  daughter  Surpanakhi. 

42-45.  (Rava^a)  had  pike-like  ears  and  ten  necks.*  He  was 
yellowish  in  colour  with  red  hair.  He  had  four  feet  and  twenty 
arms.  He  was  huge-bodied  and  very  powerful.  From  his  very 
birth,  be  resembled  collyrium.  He  had  fang-like  teeth.  HU 
neck  was  red.  He  was  like  Rajasena  (7)  and  was  endowed  with 
good  features  and  strength.  He  was  intellectually  truthful.  He 
had  a  firm  body.  He  (was  surrounded)  by  Rak$asas.  Naturally 
he  was  terribe  and  ruthless.  He  was  called  Ravana  because  he 
roared. 

That  king  was  Hira^yakaf ipu  in  his  previous  birth.  That 
R&k^a  king  ruled  for  thirteen  cycles  of  four  Yugas. 

46-48.  Hts  span  of  life  as  reckoned  by  Brahmanas,  experts 
in  calculation,  extended  to  five  crores  and  sixtyone  lakhs  of 
years.  For  sixty  laybif  of  years*,  this  Rava^  made  Devas 
and  Sages  terribly  sleepless  (by  means  of  his  atrocities).  In 
the  twenty-fourth  Tret&yuga,  when  his  merit  of  penance  declin¬ 
ed,  he  met  Rama,  the  son  of  Daiaratha,  (in  battle)  and  was 
slain  along  with  hU  followen. 


1.  Etymology  of  ‘Kubera’,  th«  god  of  wealth. 

2.  The  PurSca«writer  entertained  fantastic  ideal  about  R&vana.  J^a 
lUmfiyanas  give  a  sober  and  a  more  realistic  picture  of  RSvapa^  e.g.  RSvana 
was  one*beaded  but  due  to  the  reflection  of  bis  face  in  the  nine  precious 
stones  of  his  ne^lace,  he  was  (poetically)  called  'ten^eaded*. 


3.  RAvana’s  harrasment  is  not  thus  delioiited  ebewhm.  It  should  be  a 
part  of  his  ^an  of  life.  Bd.  P.  2.3.3.53  eorrecdy  reads  ^offirh  saiM  sahesreei 
’liaty  thousand  years*  as  a  part  of  Rivana’s  total  life.  For,  a  set  of  the  four 
Yugai»4320000  years,  thirteen  such  seu«  56 160000  years.  Rivana  it  credited 
with  this  spaa. 


Pur^ 


49«  Mahodara,  Prahasta,  Mah&pimiu  aod  Khara  ware  the 
sons  of  Puipotkafi  and  Kumbhlnasl  was  her  daughter. 

50.  TrUirasj  DQ^a,  the  Rikfasa  Vidyujjihva  and  the 
daughter  Aialiki  arc  remembered  as  the  children  of  V&k&. 


51  •  These  are  the  ten  Raktaia  descendants  of  Pulastya. 
They  were  cruel  in  their  activities.  All  of  their  followers  were 
terrible  and  unassailable  even  by  Devas. 

52^5.  All  of  them  had  secured  boons.  All  of  them  were 
endowed  with  sons  and  grandsons. 

Aidavida  (i.e.  Kubera)  whose  left  aide  was  yellowish  in 
colour  and  who  was  the  descendant  of  Pulastya  was  the  king  of 
all  these — all  the  Yak^,  all  the  R&k^as  belonging  to  the 
family  of  Pulastya,  the  cruel  Brahznarftk^asas  of  the  families  of 
Agastya  and  Viiv&mitra,  who  were  engaged  in  the  study  of  the 
Vedas  and  who  performed  penance  and  holy  rites. 

Then,  there  were  the  other  R&ksasas  called  Yajftamukhas. 
Hence  there  are  three  groups  of  R&kfasas:  Yatudb&nas, 
Brahmadh&nas  and  Virtai.  These  are  DipJcaras  (moving  about 
during  the  day).  There  are  four  groups  of  J^i/Ocaras  (those 
who  wander  in  the  night)  who  have  been  remembered  (by 
wise  sages) . 

56.  Thus,  there  are  seven  classes  of  Rfikfasas  (including  the 
above  three  and  the  following  four  groups)  :  Paulastyas, 
Nairftas,  Agastyas  and  Kauiikas. 

57-63.  I  shall  describe  the  natural  features  of  all  these 
(R&kiasas)  ^  :  They  had  round  eyes.  They  were  yellowish  in 
colour.  They  had  huge  bodies  and  bellies.  They  had  eight  fangs; 
pikelike  ears  and  hairs  standing  upright.  They  had  their  mouths 
extending  (as  if)  upto  thee  vs.  Some  had  hair  like  the  Mufija 
grass.  Some  had  smoke-coloured  upright  hair.  Some  had  stout 
heads  shedding  white  lustre.  Some  were  short-statured.  Some 
had  long  arms.  Some  had  copper-coloured  faces.  Some  had  long 
(danglii^  down)  tongues  and  lips.  Some  had  long  eyebrows  and 
stout  noses.  Some  were  blue-bodied  with  red  necks  and  majestic 
eyes.  They  were  terrific.  They  were  excessively  terrible-voiced 
and  hideous.  They  went  in  groups.  They  were  stout  with  promi- 


1.  Supenddons  about  RIksasas  current  at  the  time  of  VI.  P. 


9.64-73 


559 


nent  protruding  noses.  Their  bodies  were  sturdy  lilce  rocks.  They 
had  terrible  kixmnen  and  generally  they  were  cruel,  indulging 
in  painful  activities.  They  used  to  wear  (ornaments  like)  car* 
rings,  bracelets  and  coronets.  They  wore  crowns  and  turbans.  They 
had  divene  garments  and  ornaments.  They  wore  garlands  of 
variegated  flowers.  They  applied  StzgTznt  scents  and  unguents. 
Some  were  flesh  eaters  and  some  ate  cooked  food.  They  are  reme¬ 
mbered  as  man-eaters.  These  attributes  of  R^fasas,  common 
to  many  of  them,  have  been  enunciated  by  scholars.  The  full 
extent  of  their  strength  is  not  known  because  it  is  effected  by 

64-65.  The  deer,  all  the  fanged  beasts  of  prey,  Bhutas, 
Pifiicas,  serpents,  bees,  elephants,  monkeys,  Kinnaras, 
Yamaldihpurufas^(?)  and  all  those  mentioned  by  me  as  born  of 
Krodhavaj& — ail  these  were  Pulaba’s  tons. 

66.  In  that  Vaivasvata  Manvantara,  Kratu  is  remembered  as 
childless.  He  had  neither  a  son  nor  a  grandson.  He  remained 
with  fully  controlled  splendour  (semen)  (i.e.  He  was  celibate). 

67.  I  shall  now  recount  the  lineage  of  Atri*,  the  third  Praji- 
pati.  He  had  ten  chaste  and  beaudiul  wives. 

68-69.  Bhadraiva  begot  of  Gbi't&cl  the  Apsaras,  ten  daugh¬ 
ters.  They  wererBbadra,  Sudri,  Madri,  Salada,  Malada,  Vela, 
Khala,  these  seven  and  Gocapala,  Minarasa  and  Ratnakuta. 

70-71.  The  founder  of  the  lineage  of  Atri  was  famous  by 
the  name  of  Prabhakara  (the  originator  of  lustre).  He  was 
their  husband.  He  begot  of  Bhadra,  the  famous  son  Soma  (the 
Moon) .  When  the  Sun,  struck  by  R&hu,  was  falling  down  to¬ 
wards  the  earth  from  the  sky,  the  whole  world  was  enveloped 
in  darkness  and  it  was  be  (the  sage  Atri)  who  spread  light  every¬ 
where  whereby  be  got  the  name  Prabhakara. 

72.  While  the  Sun  was  falling  the  words  Velfare  unto  you’ 
were  addressed  to  him.  At  these  words  of  tke  Brihmana  sage 
Atri  (the  Sun)  did  not  fall  on  the  earth  from  heaven. 

73.  Atri  who  was  the  performer  of  great  penance  founded 
excellent  Gotras,  Among  YajAas  (the  one  called)  Atrighana  (?) 
is  initiated  by  Suras. 


t .  Miyu-K!ihpuri|4i  In  Bd.  P. 

2.  The  race  of  Atri  is  described  la  rv.  67-78. 


560  Purifa 

74*76.  He  begot  of  them  ten  tons,  all  equal  to  him.  They  had 
no  names*  All  the  ten  were  purified  by  great  penance.  They  were 
the  sages  famous  by  the  name  ^Svastyitreyas/  They  were  mas* 
tera  of  Vedas.  Among  them*  two  were  very  famous^  powerful 
and  expounders  of  Brahman  the  eldest  was  Datt&treya  and 
Durvasas  was  his  younger  brother.  The  youngest  daughter  was 
Abala  who  expounded  Brahman.  In  this  connection,  the  for- 
iper  ( ancient)  Paurariikas  cite  this  verse. 

77.  Those  who  are  conversant  %vith  Pur&pas  say  that  Atri^s 

son  Datt&treya  is  embodied  The  noble-souled  one  is  free 

from  sins  and  tranquil  in  mind. 

78.  Four  persons  born  in  his  spiritual  lineage  were  famous 
on  the  earth.  They  were  8yamas,  Mudgalas,  Balarakas  and 
Gavi$thiras.  These  are  remembered  as  the  groups  of  very  power* 
ful  men. 

79.  From  Kaiyapa  Narada,  Parvata  and  Amndhati  were 
tx>rn.  O  excellent  ones,  (listen  to  and)  understand  (thesons)or 
Amndhati. 

80.  Narada  gave  Arundbad  (in  marriage)  to  Vasiftha,^ 
Due  to  the  curse  of  Dak^,  the  brilliant  Narada  (was  compel* 
led  to  be)  celibate. 

81.  Formerly  v/htn  there  was  a  great  battle  between 
Devas  and  Asuras,  called  Tarakamaya,  the  whole  world  was  op¬ 
pressed  by  drought  and  Sakra  was  aggrieved  along  with 
Suras.  The  intelligent  Vasiftha  sustained  all  the  subjects  by 
means  of  bis  penance* 

82.  Making  use  of  the  medicinal  herbs,  ihiits  and  roots  (the 
sage)  sympathetically  enlivened  them. 

83.  (Defective  Verse)  O  Brahmanas,  Vasiftha  b^ot  Sakti 
of  Arundhad.  Adrfyanti  (wife  of  Sakti)  bore  Parilara  to  Sakti  on 
the  seashore  (?) 

84.  K&Il  bore  Ki^snadvaipayana,  the  holy  lord,  to  Para^ara. 
From  Dvaipayana,  Suka,  endowed  with  good  qualities,  was  born, 
at  the  Araid  (the  sacrificial  twig  with  which  fire  is  produced  by 
attrition). 

1.  Tbt  linesge  of  VasUtha  is  described  in  w*  80-90.  A  compsriion  of 
the  race  of  sages  at  given  in  other  Purftoas  e.g.  shows 

many  disiiinilaritiet  in  the  nanCM  of  dcscendanu  thou^  some  names  are 
common. 


9.85*-I0a 


561 

85-86.  Tbe  following  six  children  were  bom  of  Rvarf  to 
:  6ve  soos^  viz.  Bhuriiravas*  Prabhu>  &uiibhu,  Kr^oa  and 
Gaura  and  a  daughter  Kirtimati  by  name.  She  was  firm  in  her 
holy  rites  and  a  Yogic  mother.  She  was  the  wife  of  Sattvaguha 
and  the  mother  of  Brahmadatta. 

87.  There  were  eight  groups  (spiritual  lineage)  of  Par&iaras 
of  noble  souls.  They  were  Svetas,  Kr$nas,  Gauras,  Syimas, 
Dhumras,  Samulikas,  Diaakas^the  imbibers  of  hot  (drinks?) 
(Gsmapas)  and  Nilas. 

88.  Henceforth,  understand  the  progeny  of  Indrapratima. 
Kuflti,  who  was  born  of  Kaptfijall-GhrticI  to  Vasisthn  is  called 
Indrapratima. 

89.  Vasu  was  his  son  bom  of  Prthu*s  daughter.  Upamanyu 
was  his  son  whose  (descendants)  were  these  Upamanyus. 

90.  Kutidins  who  were  famous  as  descendants  o(  Mitri- 
Varutia  have  one  spiritual  lineage.  Others  are  well-known  as 
Vasiffhas.  These  are  the  eleven  Gotras  of  Vasifjhas. 

9 1 .  Thus  these  eight  renowned  mental  sons  of  Brahma  have 
been  recounted.  They  were  blessed  brothers  and  their  spiritual 
lineages  have  been  established. 

92.  They  sustain  these  three  worlds  consisting  of  groups  of 
Devas  and  sages.  Their  sons  and  grandsons  are  hundreds  and 
thousands.  By  them  the  entire  Earth  is  pervaded  as  with  the  rays 
of  the  Sun. 


CHAPTER  TEN 
TTii  Procedure  of  Srdddh^ 

1 .  After  hearing  this  narrative  of  Suta,  the  knower  of  Atman, 
the  Brahma^,  subsequently  asked  him  as  follows  : 

1.  Sfiddhe  ifl  a  form  of  aneettor  worship.  It  is  based  on  the  belief  in 
after^eath  survival  of  (he  deceased  ancestors  and  their  residence  in  a  pard- 
eular  region  called  It  is  an  important  topic  and  fonni  an  integral 

part  of  Hindu  Dha;*malii(ra.  This  belief  is  pre-Vedic  ai  it  dates  ba^ 
(o  die  Ind^lraaiao  period  (sidr  S.B.E.  IV,  p.  262).  Ancestofwonhip 
was  regarded  estendal  for  the  continuation  of  one*s  race  and  prosperity  to 


VijmPurd^A 


562 

SSMap^fona  said : 

2.  How  waj  Bhavinl  who  was  formerly  Sati»  bom  for  the 
second  time  ?  She  was  Daksiya^  at  first.  How  did  she  become 
UmS  ? 

3.  The  king  of  mountains  begot  her  of  Nfeni^  the  daughter 
of  Pitrs*  Who  were  these  Pitp  whose  mental  daughter  was 
Menh  ? 

4-5.  (Who  are  the  Pitps)  whose  grandson  was  Mainaka  and 
whose  grand-daughters  were  Uma,  Ekapania,  Ekapatala  and 
Gang&i  the  most  excellent  one  among  rivers  as  well  as  the  eldest 
of  them  all  7  Even  before  this,  all  this  has  been  already  desired 
to  be  pointed  out  (by  you) .  Please  listen  to  all  my  requests. 

6.  Are  there  many  Pitfs  And  then  where  do  they  stay  ? 
Welfare  unto  you.  I  wish  to  hear  the  great  procedure  of  Sr&ddha. 

7.  Whose  sons  are  they  {Pitrs)  remembered  to  be  ?  How  are 
they  the  Pitn  ?  How  were  the  Pitrs  born  and  whose  sons  were 
they  ?  Of  what  nature  are  they  ? 

8.  Are  there  other  Pitn  who  are  deities  (i.e.  worthy  of  wor¬ 
ship)  unto  the  Devas  in  heaven  ?  Thus  I  wish  to  hear  the 
excellent  creation  of  Pitfs  and  how  the  Sraddha  performed  by  us 
(as  per  prescribed  injunctions)  propitiates  Pitn* 

9.  What  is  regarded  (in  the  Smrtis)  as  the  reason  of  their 
being  not  visible  ?  What  types  of  Pitn  in  heaven  and  what 
types  in  hell  ? 

10-11.  What  Sraddhas  are  to  be  offered  (to  Pitrs)  ? 
How  do  these  Sr&ddhas  reach  Pitrs — the  Sraddhas  that  are 
offered  uttering  the  names  of  father^  fa  therms  father  and  great- 
grandfathter  against  the  three  rice-balls  {Pindas)  ?  How  are  they 
(Pitrs) » if  stationed  in  hell,  competent  to  grant  benefits  ? 

12.  Who  are  these  called  by  the  name  Pitrs  ?  Whom  shall 
we  worship  again  ?  We  have  heard  that  even  Devas  in 
heaven  worship  Pitrs. 


one*!  family.  The  Gfhy a  SCtras  and  old  Soiti!  like  Menu  and  Y^avalkya 
prescribe  the  procedure  of  SrSddha  which  is  generally  followed  in  Purinat 
iuch«A.P.  163.2-42,  G.PJ'210,  K.P.  II.  22.20-62,  N.P.  Gb.  28.,  Bd.P. 
2.3-C2hs.  9-20. 

!.  Verses  6-13  record  all  questions,  doubts  etc.  about  the  perfonnance 
ofSrftddba. 


10.1S-2S 


563 


13«  O  extremely  learned  one,  we  wish  to  hear  this  in  de» 
tail«  It  behoves  you  to  explain  the  significance  of  this  clearly* 

14«  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  sages^  Suta,  the  seer  of 
reality^  said  in  accordance  with  the  questions  and  the 
desire  in  the  minds  of  the  sages. 

Snta  said : 

15*  1  shall  describe  to  you  (in  detail)  what  I  have  heard 
(regarding  Sraddha) ,  in  accordance  with  my  intellectual  ability. 
In  every  Manvantara,  Pitn  are  bom  as  the  sons  of  Devas. 

16.  In  the  past  and  the  future  Maovantaras,  they  are 
respectively  the  eldest  and  the  youngest.  I  shall  precisely  recount 
the  Pttrs  who  have  gone  in  the  past  Manvantaras  along  with 
Devas  and  who  exist  at  present. 

17.  A  Srddilha  of  the  human  beings  is  what  is  offered  with 
faith.  Brahma  created  Devas  but  they  did  not  worship  him. 
They  forsook  him  and  desirous  of  frmts  for  themselves  created 
themselves*  (?) 

18.  They  were  cursed  by  Brahma^* deluded  onesi 
You  will  all  become  devoid  of  sense.**  They  did  not  know 
anything.  Then  the  whole  world  became  deluded. 

19.  All  of  them  bowed  to  god  Brahma  and  implored  him. 
In  order  to  bless  the  worlds,  the  lord  spoke  to  them  again. 

20.  ‘‘Perform  expiatory  rites  for  the  transgression  which 
has  been  comn^itted.  Ask  your  sons  and  therefrom  you  will 
attain  knowledge.** 

21.  Desirous  of  knowing  (the  procedure  of)  expiatory 
rites,  Devas  controlled  themselves  duly  and  asked  their  own 
sons  mutually. 

22.  Those  sons  who  were  conversant  with  real  Dharma 
and  possessed  self-control,  explained  to  them  the  various  modes 
d  expiatory  rites— verbal,  mental  and  physical. 

23.  The  heaven^wellen  who  regained  their  senses  became 
delighted  and  spoke  to  their  sons — ‘HTou  are  our  fathers  (Pitrs), 
since  we  are  enlightened  by  you.  What  boon  should  be  granted-^ 
virtue,  knowledge  or  love?**. 

*Bd.  P.  2.3.9.16  reads  They  worshipped  themselves  (instesd  of 

god  BrahmS) a  better  reading  chan  vtjan  of  our  text. 


564 

24.  Then  Brahmi  spoke  to  them — *‘You  are  the  speaken  of 
truth*  Hence  what  is  spoken  by  you  shall  be  so  and  not 
otherwise. 

25*  This  is  what  is  uttered  by  you — your  own  sons  have 
been  mentioned  by  you  as  your  Pitn  (fathers).  They  will  be 
your  Pitrs*  Let  this  boon  be  given  to  them.*’ 

26.  On  account  of  the  words  of  Brahm&i  Paramefthin*  the 
sons  (Pitrs)  attained  the  status  of  fathers  (of  Devas)  and 
Devas,  the  real  fathers,  the  status  of  sons. 

27.  Hence  it  is  declared  (in  Dharma«6astra)  that  the  sons 
(of  Devas)  are  Pitfs  and  the  status  of  Pitr^hood  is  proclaim 
med  about  them. 

After  declaring  in  this  manner  that  the  fathers  are  the  tons 
and  the  sons  as  Pitra  (fathers),  god  Brahmi  addressed  to  them 
again  for  the  development  of  their  own  sdves. 

28.  ’*If  anyone  will  perform  any  holy  rite  without  wonhip¬ 
ping  Pitfs  in  a  Sriddha,  Rikfasas  and  Dknavas  will  obtain 
the  fruit  (good  results)  thereof. 

29.  The  Fitfs  propitiated  and  developed  by  means  of 
Sr&ddhas  (develop)  the  imperishable  Soma.  Propitiated  and 
developed  by  you  all,  they  will  always  increase. 

30.  Soma  (the  Moon-god)  strengthened  and  developed 
by  means  ofSraddhas,  will  develop  the  people  and  the  entire 
world,  along  with  mountains  and  forests  surrounded  (» inhabit 
ted)  by  mobile  and  immobile  beings. 

31.  Those  men,  who,  desirous  of  nourishment,  perform 
Sraddhas  are  always  granted  development  and  progeny  by 

Pitrs- 

32-33.  Those  (Pitrs)  to  whom  they  (the  performers  of 
Sr^dha)  offer  three  balls  of  rice  {Pi^4^)  mentioning  their 
names  and  Gotra  up  to  great-grandfather,  they  (Pitfs)  who  are 
present  (everywhere),  strengthen  and  develop  their  progeny 
by  that  offering  of  Sr&ddha.” 

Such  a  behest  has  been  declared  fcMmerly  by  the  supreme 
god  {Paramifthi)  Brahma.  It  is  by  their  grace  that  i)dna(charit* 
able  gift),  Adhyayam  (Vedic  Study)  and  Tapas  (Penance) 
fructify. 


10^43 


565 

34.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  Pitfs  grant  you  perfect 
knowledge. 

In  thh  manner  Pitrs  are  Devas  and  Devas  arc  Pitfs.  Devai 
and  Pitn  are  reciprocally  Pitfs*^ 

35.  After  hearing  these  words  of  Suta  possessing  self* 
knowledge^  the  sages  aikedhim  again  subsequently : 

Tki  Sages  said  : 

36.  How  many  are  the  groups  of  these  Pitfs  ?  At  what 
time  did  those  groups  (come  into  existence) — Pitrs  who  were 
the  excellent  ancestors  of  Devas  and  who  developed  and 
strengthened  Soma? 

5*0/^  said  : 

37.  I  shall  recount  to  you  the  most  excellent  creation  of 
Pitrs.  This  is  the  same  question  which  had  been  formerly 
put  to  his  father  Brhaspati  by  Saihyu. 

38.  As  Brhaspati,  the  great  expert  in  all  fields  of  knowledge, 
was  seated,  hts  son  Sadiyu  endowed  with  humility,  put  this 
question. 

39.  Who  are  these  Pitrs?  What  are  their  names?  How 
were  they  bom?  How  did  they  attain  Pitr*hood? 

40.  What  is  the  reason  for  which  Pitrs  are  worshipped 
at  the  outset  in  every  Yajfta?  All  the  holy  rites  of  noble  souls 
begin  with  the  performance  of  Sraddhas. 

41.  To  whom  all  these  Sraddhas  are  to  be  offered?  What  is 
the  great  benefit  when  they  are  offered?  In  which  of  the  holy 
centres  and  sacred  rivers  does  the  Sraddha  performance  yield 
ever-Iasting  benefit? 

42.  What  are  those  holy  centres  in  Which  excellent 
Br&hmanas  (ought  to)  perform  Sr&ddha  to  obtain  all  (desired) 
benefits?  Wl^t  is  the  (proper)  time  for  Sradflba?  What  is  the 
procedure  to  be  followed? 

43.  O  holy  sire,  I  wish  that  what  has  been  enquired  by 
me  be  explained  in  detail  in  the  proper  sequence.'* 

1.  V«mt  20«34  explaia  the  psnulox  why  Pitrs  who  were  the  1001  of 
De^  because  the  fsthen  of  thetr  own  fathers  ?  Menu  111.  201|  however, 
diffen  ind  states  that  ^tfs  sprang  froa  Sages  and  from  Pitrs  were  bom 
Dem  (gods)  and  human  beings. 


566 


Vdjv  Pttrd^o 


44.  On  being  asked  thus  dearly  and  sped6cally,  the 
highly  intelligent  Brhaspad^  the  most  excellent  of  those  who 
understand  (the  implications  of)  questions,  answered  all  the 
questions  in  the  proper  order. 


Bfhaspati  said  : 

45.  O  dear  one  t  I  shall  explain  the  solemn  excellent 
question  which  you  ask  me  with  due  propriety  and  proper 
humilitv. 


46-47.  At  that  time,  there  was  neither  the  heaven  nor  the 
firmament,  neither  the  earth  nor  the  stars  nor  the  quarters, 
neither  the  sun,  nor  the  moon,  nor  the  day,  nor  the  night.  O 
dear,  the  whole  Universe  was  in  complete  darkness.  Brabmi 
alone  performed  an  austere  penance  difficult  for  others  to 
perform. 


48.  &uhyu  again  spoke  to  his  father  who  was  the  most 
excellent  among  the  knowen  of  Brahman,  who  always  performed 
holy  abluticMis  in  the  form  of  rites  and  who  was  the  most  ex- 
cdlent  of  all  knowers  of  perfect  knowledge. 

49.  *^What  sort  of  a  penance  did  Praj&pati,  the  lord  of  all 
living  beings  perform?** 


Thus  addressed,  BrhaspaH  of  excessive  refulgence,  spoke 
to  him. 

50.  Of  all  types  of  penance,  i.e.  Yoga  penance  ii 

die  most  excellent.  Meditating  on  it,  the  lord  then  created  all 
the  worlds  by  means  of  that  Yoga. 

51.  The  past  and  future  (items  of)  knowledge,  the  entire 
worlds  and  Vedas  were  created  after  practising  Yoga  byBrahmft, 
by  means  of  his  Yogic  vision. 

52.  The  worlds,  the  heaven  are  named  *Sini3sdkas^  where 
the  shining  deities  of  the  Devas  well-kno%vn  as  ^Vairajas*  stay. 

53.  Even  at  the  outset  then,  the  lord  Brahma,  endowed 
with  Yoga  and  penance,  had  created  Devas  after  practising 
the  eternal  Yoga. 

54.  They  are  well  known  as  Adideoas  (the  primordial  Devas) . 
They  have  great  splendour  and  energy.  They  are  the  bestowers 
of  all  desira.  They  are  worthy  (rfbeing  worshipped  by  Devas, 
Dinavai  and  human  beings. 


i  0.55-65 


567 

55.  There  are  seven  groups  of  those  Devai.  They  are 
worshipped  by  all  the  three  workb.  Three  of  them  are  AnSrtis 
(devoid  of  forms)  and  four  of  them  have  splendid  forms. 

56.  Hie  three  sets  which  have  conceptual  forms  {Bkdoa 
mOrtis)  are  stationed  above.  The  four  SukfmamUrHs  (having 
subtle  forzns)  sire  stationed  beneath  them. 

57.  Thereafter,  the  (common)  Devas  are  stationed  and 
then  the  earth.  This  is  the  situation  of  the  series  of  worlds. 
They  (the  groups  of  Devas)  are  stationed  in  this  world.  The 
clouds  take  their  origin  from  them>  rain«$howers  are  due  to 
them  and,  thanks  to  rain-showcrs>  the  worlds  (and  people)  are 
created  again. 

58.  Since  they  develop  and  strengthen  the  moon  and  the 
food-grains  and  make  them  flourish  by  means  of  Yogic  power, 
they  called  them  the  Pitrs  of  the  world.  They  (Pitrs)  are  the 
most  excellent  ones  in  the  world. 

59.  They  are  as  speedy  as  mind.  SvadhS  constitutes 
their  diet.  They  have  every  requisite  they  desire.  They  are 
devoid  of  greed,  delusion  and  fear.  They  are  certainly  devoid 
of  sorrow. 

60.  After  giving  up  Yoga,  they  have  attained  the  worlds 
beautiful  and  pleasant  to  look  at«  They  become  divine,  merit¬ 
orious  and  sinless  noble  souls. 

61.  At  the  end  of  a  thousand  Yugas,  they  become  expoun¬ 
ders  of  Brahman.  Regainix^  the  Y<^c  power  once  again.,  they 
attain  salvation  in  a  bodiless  state. 

62.  They  forsake  both  the  manifest  and  unmanifest  (bodies) 
by  means  of  their  great  Yogic  power  and  perish  (vanish)  like 
a  meteor  or  like  die  feding  flash  of  lightning  in  the  sky. 

63.  By  abandoning  all  the  bodies  (and  other  adjuncts)  by 
means  of  their  great  Yogic  power,  they  attain  the  state  of 
namelessness  like  rivers  merging  into  the  ocean. 

64.  Engaged  everyday  in  holy  rites  and  the  worship  of 
preceptors,  Pitrs  develop  tbrir  Yogic  p>ower  and  satisfyall  (make 
them  flourish). 

65.  Propitiated  in  Sriddha,  Pitfs  nourish  Soma  (the 
Moon)  making  use  of  their  Yogic  power  whereby  the  three 
worlds  sustain  their  lives. 


y^tyu  Portia 


568 

66*  Hence  Sraddhaj  muat  always  be  offered  to  Yogina^with 
(special  efforts) .  Indeed,  the  mainstay  of  Pitrs  is  Yoga  and 
from  (thanks  to)  Yoga  the  Moon  functions, 

67.  One  may  feed  thousands  offirahmapas  or  as  many  as 
do  come,  but  listen  that  one  knower  of  Yogas,  if  delighted, 
deserves  all  (propitiating  a  Yogin  is  as  fruitful  as  feeding 
thousands  of  Br&hma^s) « 

68.  What  is  taken  in  by  a  thousand  invited  (ordinary 
Brahma^as) ,  or  by  a  hundred  SnJiakof  (Brihma^as  initiated 
into  householder’s  life)  or  by  one  master  of  Yoga  saves 
one  from  great  fear. 

69.  One  Yogin  excels  a  thousand  householders,  a  hundred 
yinaprastAaf  (Forest^hermits)  and  a  thousand  Brahmacdrins 
(celibate  students) . 

70.  Prajapati  has  ordained  :  **(One  may  be)  an  atheist,  an 
evil-doer,  a  person  of  mixed  caste  or  a  thief,  (but)  he  cannot 
have  redemption*  (TOrai^am)  from  anything  else,  except  (by 
offering)  a  charitable  gifr  un(o  those  who  have  Yt^ic  power. 

71.  His  ancestors  are  delighted  like  the  husbandmen  by  a 
good  timely  rain,  even  if  his  son  or  grandson  feeds  a  (Yogic) 
meditator. 

72.  If  meditating  mendicants  arc  not  available,  one  should 
feed  twoBrahmacarins.  When  they  too  are  not  available,  one 
should  feed  a  householder  not  much  engrossed  in  worldly 
affain.’* 

73.  It  is  the  injunction  of  Brahma  that  a  meditating  Yogin 
is  greater  than  one  who  (performs  penance)  for  a  hundred 
years  standing  on  one  leg  and  taking  in  nothii^  but  air. 

74-76,  The  Siddhas  roam  over  the  Earth  in  the  guise  of 
Brahmans.  Hence  one  should  approach  the  in-coming  guest 
with  palms  Joined  in  reverence.  He  should  honour  him  with  the 
vessel  containing  materials  of  wonhip.  He  shall  offer  him  place  of 
residezice  and  food.  The  masters  of  Yoga  assume  diverse  forms 

1«  Vene»66-64  emphssize  the  Importance  of  feeding  a  Yogin  at  the  time 
of  Sr&ddha.  ‘ntisia  specifically  re-iterated  in  a  lattr  chapter.  It  showt  the 
deep  regard  for  Yogixtf  in  ancient  timea. 

Gf.  VP.  15.23-24,  Variha  F.  14.18-19. 

2.  irsr<KiMm  in  the  teat  is  irrelevant  and  obscure.  Hence  nrofum,  the 
reading  in  Bd.  P.  ibid  V.  71  ii  accepted. 


10.77— 1L4 


569 


and  always  roam  over  the  ocean-girt  earth.  They  are  (no  less 
than)  Devas.  They  protect  the  people  righteously.  Hence  every 
man  should  offer  charitable  gifts  to  a  Brahma^  guest.  1  shall 
recount  those  charitable  gifts  and  the  imits  thereof. 

77-79.  Housing  the  Yogins  is  far  better  than  thousands  of 
horse-sacrifices,  hundreds  of  Rajasuya  sacrifices  and  thousands 
of  Puod^riha  sacrifices.  The  first  of  those  seven  groups  of  Pitrs 
of  unmeasured  brilliance,  has  been  recounted.  This  group 
exists  always  with  the  conception  of  Time^  (?)  Henceforth 
1  shall  narrate  again  all  the  groups  of  PitrSi  their  progeny, 
their  situation  and  their  Bhdvand  (conception)  in  the  proper 
order. 


CHAPTER  ELEVEN* 

Tk$  Birth  of  Skanda : 

RuUs  Proscribed  for  SrMdha 

Suta  said : 

1.  In  heaven,  there  are  seven  excellent  groups  of 
highly  intelligent  Pitp.  Four  of  them  have  forms  and  three  are 
formless  {AmUria)  .*  Undentand  as  I  shall  recount  their  creative 
activity  in  the  world. 

2-4.  (X  shall  describe)  those  who  are  proclaimed  (in 
Smrtis)  as  their  daughters  and  daughters'  sons.  There  are  three 
excellent  groups  of  those  who  assume  Dharmic  bodies  and 
forms.  I  shall  briefly  recount  their  names  and  creative  activity. 
The  disembodied  groups  of  Pitp,  the  sons  of  Prajapati,  abide  in 
the  shining  worlds  named  Virajas.  O  Brahmanas,  they  belong 
to  Virajas.  Hence  they  are  famous  as  excellent  Vairajas.  I  have 
thus  mentioned  the  first  group  of  Vairajas. 


1.  'Sanctifying  the  worlds'— Bd.  P«  V.  76* 

2.  TUi  chapter  ii  textually  doular  to  &d.  ?.  94.10.  Reference  are  given 
to  verses  in  that  ebapter. 

3.  For  similar  seven  divisions  of  Pitp  mdr  Pd.  P.  V.9.2-3,  Bd.  P.  V-1. 


570 


5.  Their  fatr^mplexioned  mental  daughter  Meni  is  the 
wife  of  the  great  mountain  Himavan»  From  her  the  son  Mainaka 
was  born« 

6.  The  mountain  Mainika,  the  holder  of  all  medicinal 
herbs,  the  mine  of  all  gems,  the  holy  leader  of  mountains,  was 
born  of  her.  KrauAca  was  his  son. 

7.  The  kii^  of  mountains  procreated  three  daughters  of 
Mena,  via.  Aparna,  Ekapar^  and  the  third  Ekapafala. 

8.  Two  of  them  had  support  (They  had  their  permanent 
abodes).  But  Aparna  performed  penance  without  an  abode. 
Ekapar^ia  had  a  Nyagrodha  tree  as  her  abode  and  Ekap&fala  had 
Pii(ala  (trumpet  flower)  tree  as  her  abode.  For  a  hundred 
thousand  years^  they  performed  such  a  penance  as  was  difficult 
to  be  performed  even  by  Devas  and  Danavas. 

9.  A  single  leaf  was  the  diet  of  Ekapar^a  and  a  single 
Pifala  flower  (trumpet  flower)  was  the  diet  of  Ekap&fala. 

10.  Both  of  them  took  their  food  once,  (when)  a  thousand 
years  had  been  completed.  One  of  the  daughters  (viz.  Aparria) 
remained  without  taking  food.  Their  mother  spoke  to  her 
thus. 

11-12.  Out  of  affection,  the  distressed  mother  forbade  her 
with  the  words  **Afd**  (O  daughter  !  do  not) .  Since  she 
was  addressed  thus  by  her  mother,  the  blessed  gentle  lady  per¬ 
forming  the  difficult  task  (penance)  became  famous  as 
The  auspicious  lady  got  the  name  derived  frmn  her  action.^ 

13.  The  world  of  (supported  by  ?)  these  three  ladies  will 
survive  for  ever.  It  will  be  proud  of  (drpiam)  their  penance, 
while  the  earth  lasts. 

14.  All  the  three,  endowed  with  Vogic  power,  sustained 
their  bodies  by  means  of  their  penance.  All  those  blessed  gentle 
ladies  possessed  permanent  youth. 

15.  All  of  them  were  expounders  of  Brahman.  All  of 
them  were  celibate.  Umawas  the  greatest  (eldest),  the  most 
excellent  (girl)  of  the  fairest  complexion. 


1.  KSlidSsa  refen  to  this  in  KumSnuftiiibbava  1.2$ 

nifiddki  / 

umOk/rjf^  ntmMs  // 


1 1.16-26 


571 


16.  Endowed  with  great  Yogic  power^  she  attained  Mah&^ 
deva  (as  her  husband).  Her  adopted^  son  was  Uianas,  the  son 
of  Bhrgu. 

17.  Ekapar^i  was  the  wife  of  Asita.  She  was  chaste  and 
firm  in  her  holy  vows.  She  was  given  to  that  intelligent  master 
of  Yoga  by  Himavin.  She  gave  birth  to  the  mental  son  Devala 
who  was  engrossed  tn  meditation  on  Brahman^ 

18.  Ekapatala»  the  third  of  these  daughters,  wooed  Jaigl- 
favya,  the  son  of  SatajUaka»  as  her  husband. 

19.  His  sons  Sahkha  and  Likhita,*  are  remembered  as  not 
bom  of  the  womb.  Thus  (these)  are  the  blessed  and  auspicious 
daughters  of  Himavan. 

2O4  Rudr&t^  was  the  best  among  them.  She  excelled  others 
by  her  good  attributes.  Between  Uma  and  Sankara  the 
mutual  love  ( was  ideal) . 

21»  On  realising  that  they  were  in  close  embrace^  the  slayer 
of  Vrtra  (i.e.  Indra)  becsune  apprehensive.  (Fire-god)  was 
sent  near  them  by  Indra  who  was  afraid  of  the  birth  of  a  child 
firom  them  engaged  in  sexual  intercourse. 

22.  (He  said  to  Agni)  Fire-god,  create  an  impediment  in 
their  sexual  intercourse.  You  are  present  everywhere.  So  there 
cannot  be  any  blame  (on  you  in  your  goii^  there)*’. 

23.  When  he  was  told  thus.  Fire-god  acted  accordingly. 
Forsaking  (i.e.  aside  from)  the  body  of  Uma,  the  semen  virile 
was  discharged  on  the  ground  ( by  Siva). 

24.  O  Saih&tpayana,  then  Fire-god  was  cursed  by  the 
infuriated  goddess.  With  w<«ds  choked  with  anger^  she  spoke 
to  Fire-god  thus: 

25*  Fire,  since  you  have  caused  an  impediment  in 
sexual  intercourse  even  before  I  had  been  satisfied,  therefore  you 
have  committed  an  action  which  you  should  not  have  comxnitted, 
you  evil-minded  one  1  * 

26.  Since  the  lustrous  semen  virile  of  Rudra  has  not  been 
retained  (in  my  womb) ,  you  should  bold  the  foetus  yourself  by 
way  of  punishment  (for  this  act)”. 

1.  The  resding  is  obscure.  Bd.  P.  2»S.  10.18  reads  dattak^^ 

iMsr  etc.  is  clear  and  u  supported  by  PurSpas.  Hmce  its  acceptance  here. 

2.  Smitiwcrks  are  attributed  to  them,  though  the  antiquity  of  those 
works  is  doubtful. 


572 


VtyuPurS9a 


27.  Fire-god,  who,  due  to  the  wrathful  curse  of  Rud- 
ra^,  had  to  carry  the  foetus  within  himself,  retained  it  &r  a 
number  of  years,  O  Br^hma^as. 

28«  Approaching  (the  river)  Ga^;a,  he  said — “O  excellent 
river,  may  this  be  heard  Excessive  distress  is  caused  to  me  by 
the  retention  of  the  fbetus« 

29.  O  river,  for  my  relief  and  welfare,  please  carry  this 
foetus.  Due  to  my  gracious  fovcur,  your  trouble  will  be  ]es8’^ 

30.  Saying  be  it*\  the  highly  delighted  great  river  held 
the  foetus  (although)  with  a  mind  burning  (as  there  was  burn¬ 
ing  sensation  within  her) . 

31.  Distressed  by  the  great  pain  though  she  was,  she  retain¬ 
ed  the  foetus  for  a  long  time. 

32.  The  foetus  was  dropped  into  an  auspicious  crevasse  of 
Himavan  by  her.  There  is  an  auspicious  forest  named  Sarava^a 
where  diverse  trees  were  in  bloom.  It  was  there  that  she  depo¬ 
sited  the  foettis  that  was  blazing  like  fire. 

33.  It  was  there  that  the  son  of  Rudta,  Agni  and  Gahga 
was  bom.  He  had  rosy  lustre.  He  was  valorous  and  brilliant 
like  hundreds  of  suns. 

34.  When  that  blessed  son  (Kumara)  of  Jahna^  (Gahga) 
was  born,  the  sky  was  covered  (crowded)  with  aerial  cars,  as  if 
by  birds. 

35.  Celestial  drums  produced  sweet  sound  in  the  sky. 
Siddhas  and  Caranas  moving  about  in  the  d^y  discharged  sho¬ 
wers  of  flowers. 

36.  The  chief  Gandharvas,  Yak^,  Vidyadharas  and  all 
the  Siddhas  and  Kmnaras  sang  (laudatory  songs)  everywhere. 

37.  Thousands  of  great  serpents  and  excellent  birds 
approached  with  reverence  the  son  of  Sankara  born  through 
Agni.  Daily  as,  Danavas  and  Raksasas  were  struck  (down) 
by  him  by  means  of  his  prowess. 

38.  Even  at  the  very  outset,  the  son  of  Agni  was  observed 
by  the  wives  of  the  Seven  Sages(exceptii^  Arundhatl)  who  had 
come  there  for  their  ablutions. 

39.  The  lordly  son  of  Rudra*  resemblii^  the  rising  sun,  was 
surrounded  by  those  ladies  who  were  very  afiectionate  (towards 
him) ,  as  though  they  were  his  real  mothers. 


11.40-50 


STS 


40.  Desirous  of  seeing  all  those  ladies  simultaneooisly,  out 
of  affection  for  them,  the  extremely  lustrous  son  of  Jahna*^ 
created  six  faces  and  he  was  very  glorious.^ 

41.  He  was  glorious  and  he  resembled  the  midday  sun. 
He  had  eyes  like  the  petals  of  lotus.  When  he  was  bom,  the 
lustre  of  all  the  worlds  was  bedimmed. 

42.  The  groups  of  Danavas  who  could  not  brook 
Devas,  had  a  purge  {Skandita)  when  that  great  (deity)  was  bora 
and  (henc^)  that  valorous  (drity)  became  known  as^Skanda/* 

43.  Because  the  ancient  (deity),  the  slayer  of  Asuras,  had 
been  nourished  (breast-fed  and)  nurtured  by  the  Krttikas,  he 
became  famous  as  Kirttikeya. 

44.  While  that  enemy  of  Daityas  was  yawning,  his  (we¬ 
apon)  Sakti  (spear)  called  Aparijiti  (unvanquished)  came  out 
of  his  mouth,  blazing  with  Barnes  of  fire. 

45-46.  For  the  purpose  of  Skanda*s  play,  two  birds  named 
Prabhadrakas,  a  peacock  and  a  cock,  were  created  out  of 
Garuda  by  Vifnu,  the  powerful  god.  A  banner  was  given  by 
Vayu  (Wind-god).  A  great  Viu  (lute)  of  loud  sound  was 
presented  by  Sarasvatl.  A  goat  was  given  by  the  self-born 
(deity)  (i.e.  Brahma)  and  a  ram  was  given  by  Sambhu. 

47-48.  O  Brahmans,  when  the  (mountain)  Kraufica  was 
felled  down  in  his  sport  out  of  Maya  (his  illusive  power),  when 
the  rising  leader  of  Asuras,  Taraka  was  also  struck  down,  the 
lordly  son  of  Agni,  the  valorous  enemy  of  Daityas  was  crowned 
as  commander-in-chief  (of  their  army)  by  the  blessed  Devaa 
including  Indra  and  Upendra. 

49-50.  The  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  Devas 
is  also  called  Naranayaka  (the  leader  of  men) ,  the  harasser  of 
the  enemies  of  Devas,  Skanda  and  the  lord  and  master  of 
all  the  worlds,  by  Pramathas,  the  different  kinds  of  Devas 


1.  Mbh.  AnaiAscM  ehs.  65  &  86  ^tve  a  different  veraioo  of  Skanda^i 
birth  and  the  cause  of  bit  six  facet. 

2.  According  to  Mbh.  Am  66.14,  the  child  came  to  be  known  as  Skanda 
due  to  the  casting  off  of  the  semen  of  ^va  by  Agni  and  GaAgS  {skannaUdi 
fkandatdm  pr^Uk) 


574  iVJpj 

and  the  groups  Bhutas,  by  the  various  mothers  and  the 
groups  of  Vinayakas. 

[  ^Some  lines  are  missing  from  the  text] 

3L  (While)  Slipping  from  heaven  and  falling  down, 
she  saw  the  aerial  chariots  as  smadl  as  a  mote  and  in  them 
she  saw  the  fallen  Pitn- 

52.  They  were  very  subtle  and  unforsaken^?)  {a^paritfok^ 
/4a) .  They  were  like  sparks  of  fire  impoMd  on  sparks  of  fire* 
Falling  down  topsy-turvy,  she  appealed  to  them,  ^^Save,  ye**. 

53.  She  was  consoled  by  them— *-**Do  not  be  afraid^’.  When 
thus  urged,  she  became  steady*  Then  she  propitiated  those 
Pitrs  with  pitiable  words. 

54.  Those  Pitrs  spoke  to  the  girl  who  fell  down  from  her 

glory  due  to  her  transgression  :  lady  of  sparkling  smiles, 

you  are  fallen  from  your  prosperity  due  to  your  own  fault. 
(Hence)  you  fall. 

55*  Deities  (god)  attain  (experience)  the  fruits  of  their 
actions  by  means  of  the  same  bodies  with  which  they  perform 
those  actions. 

56.  In  the  case  of  Devas,  the  actions  fructify  inunediately* 
In  the  case  of  human  beings,  they  fructify  after  death.  Hence 
you  will  attain  the  status  of  the  child  of  Amavasu  after  death 
and  will  attain  the  fruit”. 

57.  On  being  told  thus  (by  her  Pitrs),  she  again  propitiated 
Pitrs.  After  meditating  (for  a  while),  they  took  pity  on  her 
and  became  pacified  and  pleased. 

1.  The  niisnng  Una  are  traceable  to  Bd.  P.  2.S.10.  w.  SS'b  to  58.  They 
are  translated  here  to  supply  Che  lacuna;  591^54.  “Xc  li  heard  that  the 
Pitrs  named  Barhisads  are  Miapcs  (imbibers  of  Soma)*  The  mental  daughter 
Kt  die  Pitn  was  the  river  naxn^  Acchoda. 

55*  Those  Pitrs  had  never  before  bem  seen  by  her.  She  was  boro  as 
thrir  1  daughter.  Hence  she  did  not  know  her  Pitrs* 

56-57.  Transgressing  those  real  Ktrs*  she  chose  Amivani  as  her  fr  ther. 
He  was  travernng  the  iky  accompanied  by  the  Apsaras  named  Adrikft.  He 
was  seated  in  an  aerial  chariot  in  die  firmament  But  due  to  her  trans- 
gresrion  (of  her  real  father),  she  was  unable  to  move  about  in  the  sky. 

58.  After  seeking  another  father  (vis*  Am&vasu)  she  lUpped  from  her 
Yogic  power  and  fell  down.** 

Afta  this  comes  verm  5l  in  our  text 

2.  But  *not  clearly  visible  or  manifest*  is  a  better  reading  in 

Bd«  P«  V.  59,  as  it  describes  their  subtlety* 


11.58-69 


575 


58*59 »  On  foreseeing  what  is  surely  destined  to  happen» 
Devas»  the  Soma^imbibing  Pitts  spoke  to  the  girl,  **You  will 
become  the  daughter  of  the  noble*souled  king  Amavasu  who  is 
bom  on  the  earth  as  a  human  being  and  thereafter  attain  these 
worlds  of  your  own. 

60.  In  the  twenty-eighth  Dvapara  Yuga  you  will  be  born 
of  the  womb  of  a  fish;  you  will  be  the  daughter  of  this  very 
same  king  Amavasu  and  (the  celestial  damsel)  Adrika. 

61.  You  will  give  birth  to  the  successor  of  the  sage  Para- 
iara.  That  Br&hmanical  sage  will  divide  the  single  Veda  into 
four  parts. 

62*63.  You  alone  will  give  birth  to  two  sons  who  will 
heighten  the  glory  of  Mahibhisa  (?)  8antanu — the  sons 
Vicitravlrya,  the  knower  of  Dharma,  and  Citrifigada,  the  king 
endowed  with  the  attributes  of  brilliance  and  strength.  After 
giving  birth  to  these  sons,  you  will  regain  your  own  worlds. 

64.  Due  to  your  transgression  towards  the  Pitts,  you  will 
attain  that  despicable  birth.  You  will  become  the  daughter  of 
the  very  same  king  and  Adrika. 

65.  After  becoming  (his)  daughter,  you  will  regain  these 
worlds.’* 

Thus  addressed,  she  was  bom  as  Satyavad,  the  daughter  of 
a  fisherman. 

66.  In  the  confluence  of  Gang^  and  Yamuna,  she  was  bom 
of  the  fish  Adrika,  She  was  bom  as  the  daughter  of  Amavasu 
in  Adrika  the  fish.^ 

67.  Indeed,  she  was  the  daughter  of  that  king  (being  bom 
of)  the  semen  virile  of  the  king. 

The  worlds  named  ^‘Virajas**  are  in  the  firmament.  There 
those  groups  (of  Pitts)  shine. 

68.  There  the  Pitts  are  the  Agnisvattas  of  shining  lustre. 
With  a  desire  for  (attaining)  escellent  fruits,  groups  of 
D^avas,  Yak^,  Rak^as,  Gandharvas,  Kinnaras,  BhOtas,  ser¬ 
pents  and  Pisacas  worship  them. 

69.  Thus,  these  Sons  of  Pulaha,  the  Prajapati,  have  been 
recounted.  These  groups  are  said  to  be  three.  They  are 
auspicious  and  assumers  of  Dharma-form. 

1.  In  the  musing  lines  in  the  text  supplemented  from  Bd.  ?•  (w»  55* 
58)  and  w.  51*66,  the  Purina  %mter«have  used  the  curte«motif  to  explain 
the  unusual  matdmonUl  Ufe  ^Satyavmd. 


576 


PUT^ 


70.  Their  mental  daughter  is  (will  be)  famous  by  the  name 
of  i^varl.  She  was  (will  be)  reputed  to  be  a  Yoginl^  a  Yogic 
wife  and  a  Yogic  mother. 

71.  In  the  (future)  twenty-eighth  Dviparayuga  {9,  sage) 
of  great  penance  named  Suka  will  be  born  in  the  family  of 
Parasara. 

72.  O  excellent  Brahmatias,  he  will  be  a  glorious  and 
great  Yogin.  Yoga  (will  spread)  from  him.  He  will  be  born  of 
Vy&sa,  from  the  Ara^  (a  piece  of  wood  used  for  the  production 
of  fire  by  attrition)  like  the  smokeless  fire. 

73*  In  the  (mental)  daughter  of  the  PitfSi  he  will  beget 
these  well-known  Yogic  preceptors,  viz.  Krsi^a,  Gaura,  Prabhui 
Saihbhu  and  Bhuriiruta. 

74.  He  will  beget  a  daughter  Kirtimat!  who  will  be  a 
Yogint  and  a  Yogic  mother.  She  will  become  the  queen  of 
Aouha  and  the  mother  of  Brabmadatta. 

75-76.  After  begetting  these  children  and  attaining  great 
Yogic  power,  he  will  become  a  great  Yogin  and  ascetic.  He  will 
attain  that  goal  from  which  there  is  no  return.  Like  the  rays  of 
the  sun,  he  will  attain  the  status  of  no  rebirth.  The  great  sage 
will  become  omnipresent  and  liberated. 

77.  These  three  are  the  disembodied  Pitrs  who  assume 
Dharmic  forms.  There  are  four  others.  (Listen  and)  understand. 

78.  O  excellent  Brahmanas !  The  Pitrs  whom  I  shall 
describe  assume  forms  of  great  lustre.  They  are  Kavyas*,  sons  of 
Agni,  Kavi  (the  wise  one  ?)  bom  of  Svadha. 

79.  These  are  the  Pitrs  shining  in  the  worlds  of  Devas 
with  their  lustre  amidst  the  luminaries.  They  are  richly 
endowed  with  all  desirable  objects  and  the  Brahmanas  revere 
them. 

80.  Their  mental  daughter  was  famous  in  heaven  by 

*The  reading  io  our  text  is 

uipaiuids  U  tu  ksnyd 

Here  the  nom.  pi.  K9qyi  (P)  cannot  be  construed  cogently  as  the  Pitfs 
are  men  (masculine) .  Bd.  P«  2*9.10.85  reads  'sons  of  Kavi*  (a  wiM 
person  or  Sukra?)  and  appean  plausible. 


1L81-88 


577 

the  name  of  Gau.  Kumiira  bestowed  an  army  on  her^»  bi. 
became  the  beloved  queen  of  Sukra» 

81.  There  were  thirty-one  Pitfs  who  heightened  the  glory 
of  Bhfgus.  Their  worlds  were  known  as  Maricigarbkas  ( having  rayi 
within)  which  envelop  the  heavens. 

82.  Those  sons  of  Angiras^  nourished  along  with 
SadhyaS)  are  remembered  as  the  Pitfs  Upahutas.  They  shine  in 
heaven.  Looking  up  to  them»  the  Pitf  Groups  of  K^itriyas, 
those  who  are  desirous  of  bench ts,  revere  them. 

83.  Their  mental  daughter  is  well  known  by  the  name  of 
Yaiodi.  She  was  the  wife  of  Viivamahin  and  the  daughter-in- 
law  of  Vlivaiarmin. 

84. *  The  gentle  lady  was  the  mother  of  tlie  saintly  king 
KhatvSihga  of  noble  soul,  in  whose  Yajfia  G&th&  (a  laudatory 
verse)  was  sung  formerly  by  great  sages. 

85.  After  seeing  the  birth  of  fire  (in  the  Yajfia)  of  the 
noble*  souled  Sandilya,  the  deathless  Devas  conquering 
heaven  with  purity  of  mind  observe  the  Yajamana  (under 
whose  auspices  the  Yajfia  is  performed)  DUipa,  the  noble  soul 
of  truthful  rites. 

86.  Ajyapaswere  the  Pitfs  of  Kardama,  the  Prajapati, 
who  was  bom  of  Pulaha.  They  were  born  of  him  again. 

87.  Moving  about  in  the  sky»  they  are  stationed  in  these 
worlds  that  go  about  as  they  please.  Groups  of  Vaiiyas  who  are 
desirous  of  benefits,  revere  these  in  Sraddha. 

88.  Their  mental  daughter  is  famous  by  the  name  of 
Viraja.  The  chaste  lady  was  the  wife  of  Nahu^a  and  the  mother 
of  Yayati. 

1.  This  ia  the  translation  of  *Da(laseni  Kumdtt^,'  The  absurdity  of  the 
teat  is  obvious.  Ed.  P.  ibid  V.  87  reads  Sanatkwndri^  'She  was  given 
by  Sauatkxiznara*.  The  reading  in  Bd*  P.  deserves  adoption  here  as  the 
next  line  reads  ''She  became  the  beloved.  ..of  Sukra^^*. 

2.  The  combined  vencs  can  be  constructed  as  follows: 

That  laintly  lady  was  the  mother  oS  the  noble-souled  royal  sage 
Khatvahga.  On  seeing  the  Inrth  of  the  aoble-souled  Sindilya  from  (sacri¬ 
ficial)  fire  at  his  sacrifice,  the  great  sages  Sang  the  (following)  laudatory 
verse  (Cdiha),  t 

''Those  immortals  who  see  the  Yajamina  (the  sponsor  of  the  sacrifice) 
Diilpa  with  full  CMicenlimtioa  (becon^)  the  conquerors  of  heaven-,  so  much 
is  noblc'Souled  DiUpa  trudifulin  the  observance  of  his  vows'*. 


Purd^a 

'89.  Sukalai  are  the  Pitrs  of  Vaaiftha,  the  Prajapati* 
They  are  the  sonj  of  Hirapyagarbha. 

90.  There  are  the  worlds  named  M&nasas  where  these  are 
stationed.  Their  mental  daughter  is  Narmada,  the  most 
excellent  of  rivers. 

91.  Flowing  in  the  southern  region,  she  sanctifies 
living  beings.  She  was  the  wife  of  Purukutsa  and  the  mother 
of  Trasadasyu. 

92.  Manu  became  the  lord  of  Manvantara  by  adopting 
these  (Pitfs)*  In  the  banning  of  Manvantara,  he  initiates 
all  types  of  SrSddhas. 

93.  O  excellent  Brahmai^,  (I  have  recounted)  all  the 
Pitfs  in  their  proper  order.  Hence  Sriddha  is  to  be  offered 
with  faith  in  accordance  with  one’s  Dharma. 

94.  A  8r&ddha  offered  in  silver  vessels  or  those  of  silver 
alloy,  af^er  profcrring  Svadhi,  propitiates  Pitfs. 

95.  By  the  propitiation  of  Soroa,  Agni  and  Vaivasvata 
(Manu)  and  by  the  performance  o(Homa  in  the  sacrificial  fire 
during  the  northern  transit  (of  the  .sim) ,  one  shall  attain  the 
fruit  of  an  Aivanudha  (a  Horse  Sacrifice) . 

96.  Pitrs  delight  him  who  propitiates  Pitrs  with  devo¬ 
tion.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  Pitrs  bestow  nourish¬ 
ment  or.progeny. 

97.  The  rites  of  pitrs  are  always  far  superior  to  the 
rites  of  deities.  It  is  ordained  that  the  propitiation  of  Pitrs 
mxist  be  given  priority  over  that  of  deities. 

98.  The  subtle  movement  (or  goal)  of  Yoga  or  the 
satiation  of  Pitrs  is  not  visible  through  the  physical  eye» 
Only  by  achievli^  special  Siddhi  by  means  of  penance  are  they 
to  be  seen. 

99.  Thus  Pitrs,  their  worlds,  their  daughters,  their 
grandsons,  their  Yajamanas  and  those  who  revere  them  have 
been  recounted. 

100.  (Out  of  the  seven  classes  of  Pitrs)  four  have  forms 
and  three  are  formless.  I>evas  honour  them  and  offer 
8raddhas  to  them  devoutly  and  assiduously.^ 

1.  The  ditexudon  about  the  seven  cUiaes  of  Pitri»  their  mental  daughten 
and  other  particulars  msy  be  tabulated  as  below : 


11.101-108 


579 


101-104.  All  the  Devas  includiiig  Indra  concentrate 
minds  on  them.  They  join  their  palms  in  reverence  and  de¬ 
votedly  worship  them.  VUvedevas*  SikataSi  Prlnijas,  SrAgins* 
KrsaaS)  Svetas  and  Ajas  worship  them  duly.  Desirous  of 
benefits,  the  subjects  Vataratenas^  Div&kirtyas,  Lekhas, 
Maruts,  Brahma  and  other  heaven-dwellers,  Atti,  Bhrgu, 
AAgiras  and  all  other  sages,  Yak^as,  N&gai,  Suparnas,  Kinnaras 
and  Rakfasas  always  worshipped  Pitp. 

105.  These  noble-soul ed  (Pitts),  if  duly  honoured  and 
worshipped  in  Sraddha,  grant  all  desires  hundred-fold  and 
thousand'fold. 

106.  These  grandfathers  (Pitts)  bestow  Yogic  Power  (and 
prosperity)  and  liberation  (from  Saihsara)  after  one  has  aban¬ 
doned  the  three  worlds  of  normal  existence  involving  old  age 
and  death. 

107.  Pitamahas,  the  deities  of  subtle  bodies,  grant  the 
means  of  salvation,  AiSvarya  ( prosperity) ,  complete  detachment 
and  infiniteness. 

106.  Practised  Yoga  hAiiimyai  and  Aiivaiya  is  the  excellent 
wealth.  Without  Yoga  and  AUvarya  liberation  (from  Saxhs&ra) 
is  impossible  (to  be  achieved)  • 


CZw  of  Pilff  Xamts  ^  ikeir  daugktns  md  oifur  parHetdan 

1.  Vair&jaa  M«n&,wife  oi  HimavSn,  mother  of  Umi, 

5iva*9  cDittort. 


2.  Barhiiads  AcchodS,  adopted  king  Axnivaiu  m  father; 

cuned  by  PItp;  became  SaCyavati,  mother 
^  Vylsa  and  queen  of  Santanu. 

3.  AgnJivattai  Plvari,  married  to  Suka,  VySsa’s  ion. 

4.  KSvyaa  (font  of  Agni  Yogotpatti  aliat  EkatrAgS  married  3ukra. 
and  SvadhS) 

5.  Upahetat  (toot  of  YaiodS,  queen  mother^of  king  KhaprSAga, 
AAgirat) 

e.  Ajyapai  (soot  of  Viraja,  married  to  king  Nahusa,  mother  of 
PuUha)  YigSd. 

7.  Sukila  (loot  of  NarmadS  (the  river),  wife  of  Purukutsa  and 
Vatiitha  mother  of  Traaad^datyu. 

Out  of  these  groups  (5),  (6)  and  (7)  are  ipedally  recommended  for 
wonhlp  to  Kiattriyas,  Vaiiyas  and  5(ldrai.  Manu  III.  193-198  slightly 
differs  in  the  angnroent  of  Vamas  to  Pitrs. 


580 


VdyuPurdfiA 


It  (Mokia)  is  as  impossible  as  the  movoaent  of  a 
ti^gless  bird  in  the  sky*  Af0k;4-Dharina  is  the  greatest  of  all 
Dhannas  and  eternal. 

110.  Pitamahas  (manes)  grant  thousands  of  aerial 
chariots  attended  by  groups  of  Apsaras*>s  and  richly  equipped 
with  all  desirable  things. 

111.  Intellect,  nourishment,  power  of  memoryi  brain, 
kingdom  and  health  can  be  attained  only  through  the  grace 
of  the  noble^souled  Pitfs. 

112.  Pitimahas  grant  crores  of  gems,  pearls,  l<^is 
loeuii,  garments  and  thousands  of  horses  and  elephants. 

113.  Pitamahas  always  bestow  on  men  chariots  fitted 
with  swans  and  peacocks,  studded  with  pearls  and  lapis  lazuli 
and  decorated  with  tinkling  belb  and  provided  with  perpetual 
flowers  and  fruits. 


CHAPTER  TWELVE 
Thi  Procedure  of  Srdddha  {Continued) 


BfkaspaH  said  : 

1.  It  is  said  (in  Dharma-Sastra)  that  the  vessels  of  (meant 
for)  Pitrs  should  be  made  of  gold,  silver  or  copper.  A  silver  or 
silver-coated  vessel  is  said  to  be  befitting  Pit^s.^ 

2.  Showing  or  gifting  away  of  silver  is  proclaimed  to  be 
a  suitable  Ddna  for  Pitps  and  it  is  conducive  to  the 
attainment  of  infinite  and  everlasting  heaven.  Good  sons  enable 
Pitps  to  cross  (hell)  by  means  of  this  Ddna  (religious 
gift). 

3 .  O  dear  one,  it  was  in  silver  vessel  that  Svadha  was 
formerly  milked  by  PItps  seeking  to  get  Svadha.  O  dear 
one,  if  that  is  gifted,  it  yields  everlasting  benefit. 

1.  Gf.  Vi9Qu  Bb.S.  79.14-15.  YAjfUvalkya  I.  236  ipecisUy  recommeadi 
filver  vesieli.  Gf  tUo  Mt.  P.  17.19-22.  Bd.P.  2.3.  U-1. 


12.4-10 


581 

4.  The  nearby  presence^  sight  or  gifting  away  of  tu 
hide  of  a  black  antelope  is  conducive  to  the  destruction  of 
Rak$asas.  It  increases  Brihina^ical  splendour  and  enables  Pitrs 
to  cross  (hell) . 

5.  Vessels  made  of  goId»  silver  or  copper,  gingelly  seeds, 
Kutapa  (i.e.  the  eighth  muhurta  of  the  day)  or  Kufa  grass, 
sesamum  seeds,  garments  and  Tridan^i  Toga  {i*e.  the  Yoga 
of  mind,  speech  and  body) — all  these  are  holy  objects. 

6.  In  the  holy  rite  of  Sraddha,  the  following  ritual 
prescribed  by  god  Brahma  is  the  most  excellent  and  eternal. 
It  is  conducive  to  increase  in  fame,  longevity,  progeny, 
intellect  and  lineage. 

7.  In  the  south-east  direction,  especially  at  the  intermedi¬ 
ate  point  (corner)  between  them,  (should  be  the  place — altar 
in  Bd.  P. — for  Sr^dha) .  It  should  be  well-situated  and  square 
shaped  with  sides  equal  to  an  Aratni  (the  distance  between  the 
tip  of  the  fist  and  the  elbow). 

8.  I  shall  mention  the  proper  spot  for  the  holy  rites  of 
Pitrs  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  of  the  scriptures.  It 
is  conducive  to  the  attainment  of  wealth,  health  and  longevity. 
It  enhances  strength  and  brightness  of  ccunplexion. 

9.  At  the  place  (intended  for  Sraddha) ,  three  pits  (should 
be  dug)  and  three  sticks  of  Khadira  wood  should  be  placed.  They 
(the  sticks)  should  be  an  Aratni  (distance  between  the  tip  of  the 
fist  and  the  elbow)  in  length  and  should  be  embellished  with 
silver  (bands).  (The  pits)  should  be  a  Vitasti  (the  span  or  the 
distance  between  thumb  and  little  finger  when  they  are  extend¬ 
ed  on  either  side)  in  depth*  and  the  four  sides  should  be  four 
Afigulas  (fingers)  each. 

10.  The  sticks  should  not  be  hollow  and  they  must  be  plac¬ 

ed  on  the  ground  with  their  faces  pointing  <o  the  south-east. 
(The  performer  of  iSraddha)  should  be  pure  and  should 
wash  them  with  holy  waters  or  water  rendered  holy  by  the  use 
of  the  ring  of  Darbha  grass  (called  worn  by  the  per¬ 

former  of  Sraddha. 

*Koiya  in  the  tat  but  from  Bd»  F.  2.3.11.10  is  better. 


582 


fl.  The  purification  {Sodhana)  may  be  cairied  out  with 
goat*smllk  or  cow's  milk  and  water.  By  means  of  this  Tor^o^  (holy 
water-ofiering)  the  satisfaction  (of  Pitrs)  will  be  permanenti 

12i  He  will  be  prosperous  here  and  hereafter*  He  will  be 
(blessed  with  the  fruits  of)  all  holy  rites*  If  a  person  always 
takes  bath  three  times  a  day  and  wonhips  Pitrs  with  Mantras 
as  per  prescribed  procedure,  he  gets  the  fruit  of  (performance) 
of  a  horse-sacrifice  {Aidomtdha)* 

13.  On  the  New  Moon  day,  the  Sraddha  materiak  should 
be  placed  in  the  pit  in  the  ground  four  AUgulas  square.  These 
rituals  are  called  Tfiffrsapia-yajfia  (Three-times  seven  Yajiia)  • 
All  the  three  worlds  are  sustained  by  tbem^ 

14.  He  will  attain  nourishment,  prosperity,  longevity  and 
progeny.  Various  types  of  fortune  will  resort  to  him  and  he 
will  gradually  attain  liberation  (from  Saxhsira). 

15.  It  removes  sins.  It  sanctifies.  It  has  the  same  fruit  as 
a  horse-sacrifice.  I  shall  mention  that  Mantra  composed  by 
Brahm&.  It  is  the  Awto  (immortal  or  nectarine)  and  it  is 
honoured  and  worshipped  by  Br^maoas  and  grants  (the  finiit 
of)  Aivamedha. 

16.  Thi  Mantra:  *‘Obcisance  to  all  the  deities,  to  Pifrs, 
to  the  great  Yogins,  to  Svadhi.  Obeisance  for  ever  to  Svahi.’\^ 

17.  At  the  be^nnjng  and  the  conclusion  of  the  Sraddha, 
this  Mantra  shall  always  be  repeated  three  times.  The  devotee 
shall  repeat  this  with  purity  of  mind,  when  he  offers  the  balls 
of  rice  also.  Pitis  arrive  quickly  and  Raksasas  flee. 

18.  Regularly  repeated  at  the  time  of  Sraddha  by  expoun¬ 
ders  of  Brahman,  this  Mantra  enables  Pifrs  to  cross  (bell) 
in  the  three  worlds. 

19.  A  person  desirous  of  kingdom,  should  always  repeat 
this  Mantra  with  alertness.  It  increases  virility,  purity,  we^th, 
sattvic  qualities,  prosperity,  longevity  and  streng^. 

20.  I  shall  mention  the  Mantra  Saptareis  that  is  auspicious 
and  that  bestows  all  desires.  By  repeating  it  regularly,  Pitfs 
are  propitiated. 

!.  Hemidri  regards  this  as  Saptards  Maatra  ;  Mm  Qiarar/«  CMifadst, 
Sfiddka  pp.  1079  and  1206.  This  mantra  it  accepted  in  Skanda  P.  VII.  U 
206;  114-116.,  GF.  (Aeira)  218.6,  A* 


12«2I-S2 


583 


21.  The  Saptarcis^  Mantra:  always  make  obeisance  .. 
those  who  arc  engaged  in  meditation  by  means  of  the  yogic 
vision,  to  the  embodied  and  tmembodied  Pitrs  of  brilliant 
splendour. 

22.  I  bow  to  the  Seven  Sages  and  Pitfs  who  fulfil  all 
desires  and  who  are  the  progemtors  of  Indra  and  other  (Oevas) 
and  ^Bhfgu  and  Mirica  (Kaiyapa) . 

23«24.  After  bowing  to  all  the  IHtrs  who  bestow  welfare  on 
Manu  and  other  lords  of  Suras  and  on  the  sun  and  the  moon,  I 
bow  down  with  palms  joined  in  reverence  to  Pitamahas,  the 
progenitors  of  the  constellations,  the  mobile  (and  the  immobile 
beings)  and  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth. 

25.  With  palms  joined  in  reverence  I  bow  down  to  those 
who  bestow  fearlessness,  to  those  wlm  are  revered  by  all  the 
worlds  and  to  the  progenitem  of  the  divine  sages. 

26.  With  palms  joined  in  reverence,  I  bow  down  to  Praji- 
pati,  Kaiyapa,  Soma,  Varu^a  and  to  the  lords  of  all  Yoga. 

27.  Obeisance  to  the  seven  groups  of  Pitrs  in  the  seven 
worlds.  Obeisance  to  the  self»bom  Brahmi  of  Yogic  vision.*^ 

28.  Thus  the  Mantra  honoured  by  the  groups  of  Brahmar* 
fis  along  with  the  Seven  Sages  has  been  mentioned.  It  is  highly 
holy  and  sanctified.  It  is  conducive  to  prosperity  and  destruc¬ 
tive  of  Raksasas. 

29.  The  man  who  (perfonns  Sraddha)  according  to  these 
injunctions  attains  three  boons.  Pitrs  grant  food,  longevity 
and  childem  (to  the  people)  on  the  earth. 

30.  He  who  is  endowed  with  great  devotion,  who  has  faith, 
who  has  controlled  his  senses  and  who  always  repeats  this  Sap^ 
tdreis  Mantra  with  purity,  becomes  the  sole  Emperor  on  the 
earth  consisting  of  seven  continents  and  oceans. 


31.  If  any  thing  is  cooked  in  the  house,  whether  a  dainty 
or  ordinary  eatable,  it  should  never  be  eaten  ih  that  house  with¬ 
out  first  offering  it  (to  deities). 

32.  Henceforth,  I  shall  describe  in  the  proper  order,  the 
vessels  intended  for  oblations  to  Htfs.  Even  as  I  mention  listen 


h  These  seven  verses  2U27  are  called  Of.  Bd.  P.  2.S.1 1 

23*29.  As  against  Heraidri  our  text  calls  this  Mantnu 


584 


VdyuPw^ 


^  tbe  respective  benefits  (in  using  oblations)  in  the  different 
vessels. 


CHAPTER  THIRTEEN 

Th$  Procedure  of  irdddha  Pirformanee 

{Contimud) 

Bfhaspati  said  : 

1.  It  is  cited  (in  scriptures  that)  a  leaf  of  the  Pali^a  tree 
{Buteafrondosa)  is  conducive  to  Brahmanic  splendour.^  That 
kii^om  is  conceived  (as  the  fruit,  if  leaves  of)  thcAivattha 
tree  (are  used)  :  The  lordship  of  all  living  beings  is  mentioned 
(in  using  the  leaves  of)  ^ak^  (citron-Ieaved  Indian  hg 
tree)  [i.e«  the  materials  of  oblations  must  be  placed  in  cups 
made  of  these  leaves  or  the  wood  as  in  the  case  of  some  of  the 
following]  . 

2«  Those  who  are  desirous  of  prosperity,  wisdom,  intellect 
and  power  of  memory  (shall  use  the  leaves  of)  the  banyan 
tree.  The  vessel  of  the  leaves  of  Rafrnar!  (a  large  tree  called 
Gambh&ri  also)  is  conducive  to  fame  and  destructive  of 
Riik$asas. 

3.  That  which  is  offered  in  Madhuka  (the  tree  Bassia 
latijblia)  is  considered  excellent  and  conducive  to  good  fortune. 
One  who  performs  Sraddha  in  the  vessel  of  Phalgu  (a  kind  of 
fig  tree)  attains  all  desires. 

4.  The  performer  attains  supreme  lustre,  particularly  all¬ 
round  brilliance  (if  the  sun«plant  is  used — Bd.  P.).  By  using  a 
Bilva  vessel,  riches,  intellect  and  longevity  are  always  attained. 

5.  If  Sraddha  is  performed  in  Bamboo  vessels,  Paijanya 
(cloud  or  the  lord  of  rain)  always  showers  in  his  fields,  parks, 
lakes  and  all  crops. 

6.  It  is  said  (in  Sistras  that)  those  who  make  Sraddha 


1.  Verses  1-6  enumerate  Che  diSnent  trees,  the  leaves  (i.e.  cups  of  the 
leaves)  of  which  (if  used  for  giving  oblations  to  PUrs)  confer  different 
beneSts.  The  Sriddha  SQtra  K&tySyana  recommends  the  use  of  (cups 
of  leaver  oO  saerideial  trees  for 


13.7-17 


585 


oHerings  even  for  once  in  these  excellent  vessels,  attain  the 
firuit  c£zll  YajfLas. 

7.  He  who  always  offers  Ctzgrzxii  garlands  to  Pitrs 
becomes  endowed  with  riches  and  glory,  and  shines  brilliantly 
like  the  sun. 

8.  He  who  offers  incense,  fragrant  gum-resin  and  other 
things  to  Pitfs,  along  with  honey  and  ghee  obtains  the 
fruit  of  a  horse-sacrifice. 

9.  One  who  offers  shining  fragrant  DhQpa  (incense)  to 
Pitrs  begets  children  of  his  wife  (beneficial  to  him)  here  amd 
hereafter.  Hence  he  shall  always  offer  it  to  Pitps. 

10-11.  He  who  always  offers  lamp  to  Pitps  assiduously, 
obtains  unequalled  auspicious  power  of  vision  in  the  world. 
He  becomes  brilliant  on  the  earth.  He  shines  in  Heaven 
with  splendour,  fame,  refulgence  and  strength.  He  rejoices  in 
the  aerial  chariot  surrounded  by  Apsaras-s. 

12.  He  should  offer  scents,  flowers,  incense  and  ghee.  After 
propitiating  at  the  outset,  Pitps  with  fruits,  roots  and  obeisance, 
with  purity  of  mind  and  body,  the  devotee  should  later  worship 
Brahmanas  with  food  and  wealth. 

15.  Always  at  the  time  of  ^iddha,  Pittoahas  (manes) 
assume  aerial  forms  and  on  seeing  Brihmaoas,  they  enter 
them.  Hence  I  am  saying  this«^ 

14-15.  Excellent  Brahmanas  should  be  honoured  with 
garments,  foodstuffr,  charitable  gifts,  food  and  beverages,  (gifts 
of)  cows,  hones  and  villages.  If  Brahmapas  arc  honoured, 
Pitrs  become  delighted.  Hence,  one  should  honour  excellent 
Brahmanas  duly. 

16.  In  the  holy  rite  of  Sriddha,  Brahmanas  should 

perform  diligently  the  ritualistic  scraping,  digging  and  sprink¬ 
ling  of  water  (with  Darbha)  {UlUkkana  and  Proksa^)  by  means 
of  the  left  and  the  right  hands.  ’ 

17.  A  learned  man  should  keep  ready  for  libation, 
Darbhas,  balls  of  rice,  foodstufis,  different  kinds  of  flowers, 
scents,  charitable  gifts  and  ornaments. 


1.  Hence  Brabma^at  are  to  he  worshipped,  fed  and  gified  at  the  time 
of  Sraddha.  The  belief  that  Pitps  assume  gaseous  form  s^d  enter  the  bodies 
of  the  invited  Bcabnuot  h  found  in  Auianasa  Smrti  V.  4-5.  Gf.  Manu  III.  189. 


V<fyuPuTS$o 


586 

18.  After  propitiating  the  persons  present  dulyi  the 
Brahmapai  shall  perform  the  Vaiiaade^  rite  and  then  perform 
the  rites  with  Abhyafiga  (oil  bath)  with  Darbha  (leaves  of  the 
Ku^a  grass)  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions. 

19.  The  excellent  food-ofiering  to  Pitrs  should  be  made  with 
reverse  wearing  of  the  sacred  thread.  After  pnmouncing  (the 
names  of  Pitrs)  the  thread  must  be  offered  to  all  of  them 
in  lieu  of  garments. 

20.  The  rites  of  Kha^4<^%  and  UlUkhana  are  to  be 

performed  only  once  in  the  case  of  Devas^  and  thrice  in  the 
case  of  Pitrs. 

21.  Wearing  a  single  Pavitra  (a  ringUke  loop  of  Kufa 
grass  worn  round  a  finger)  in  the  hand  and  reciting  the 
Cailamanira^  the  balls  of  rice  are  touched  once  for  each  of  the 
Pitrs.  Then  the  benefit  of  showing  (is  attained)  ( 7) . 

22.  Always  the  balls  of  rice  must  be  offered  on  the  ground 
along  with  ghee  and  gingelly  seeds.  The  devotee  performing 
Pitr-Sriddha,  kneels  on  the  ground  with  the  left  knee  touching 
it. 

23.  He  invokes  the  fathers,  grandfathers  and  great* 
grandfathers  and  all  ancestry  of  yore  and  properly  sprinkles 
all  round  the  balls  of  rice,  by  means  of  the  holy  water  {PitrtiTihdi 
carefully  from  the  right  to  the  left  (in  anticlockwise  manner) . 

24.  Some  men  desire  a  separate  Sraddha  for  maternal 
grand iathen  by  means  of  food,  water,  flowers  and  foodstuffs 
of  various  kinds. 

25.  He  should  offer  three  in  the  proper  order  (press* 
ing  them)  with  the  thumb.  They  are  conducive  to  the  en* 
hancement  of  nourishment.  He  should  offer  the  Pi^d^  (by 
means  of  both  hands  placed)  between  the  knees. 

26.  ( In  offering  the  Pin4cs)  the  left  hand  should  be  placed 

over  the  right,  repeating  the  Mantra^  vab  pitarab 

S^kpnaib^  (?)  always  carefully  in  this  manner, 

1 .  The  T«xt  dhsrmt  mMin  ca  paiyofcb  u  obscure  and  the  sentence  remains 
incomplete.  Bd.  P.  2.3.  U  .62  reads  Mrmhant  maiUram  uuam  ‘^ould  repeat 
the  mantra  (as  follows  for  the  sake  of  pouring  %rater  in  the  form  cd  a 
current)*. 

2.  A  reads  and  not  SSkftrmb* 

Tht  Mantra  in  A  is  recorded  In  Bloomfield*!  Vtdic  CoMrdMt,  p.  538  but 
no  mantra  with  *SSkpnai^  is  found.  It  b  obviously  a  scribal  error. 


13.27-37 


587 


27.  (Defective  Vene)  Carefully  repeating  the  Mantra 
vaf^  pitarali  (Obeisance  to  ye»  O  gentle 

Pitrt)  he  should  offer  the  first  Pt^a  with  both  the  hands  and 
place  it  in  the  southern  quarter. 

28*.  (Defective  Verse)  With  both  the  hands,  he  draurs  the 
outline  (?)  of  a  mortar  using  the  water  from  the  water  pot.  He 
must  be  careful  in  the  practice  of  piety. 

29.  He  should  offer  a  fresh  thread  of  silk  or  jute  or  a  cotton 
thread.  Woven  silk  such  as  coloured  cloth  and  Kauleya  sbotUd 
be  avoided  when  offering  thread  to  Pitn* 

30.  In  the  sacrifice,  the  thread  taken  even  from  a  freshly 
woven  cloth  shall  be  avoided.  These  do  not  please  Pitrs. 
Those  who  give  cannot  flourish  (7). 

31.  The  collyrixun  obtained  from  the  Triku^a  mountain, 
they  say,  is  always  excellent.  So  also  is  the  oil  extracted  from 
black  gingelly  seeds. 

32*  Sandal,  Agaru  (fragrant  aloe  wood),  Tam&la,  Uiira 
(fragrant  root  of  the  plant  Andropogon  Mimalta) ,  lotus,  fragrant 
incense,  gum  resin  and  (white)  Turufka— all  these  are  excellent 
articles  (for  use  in  Sr^dha) . 

33.  White  flowers  are  the  most  excellent.  So  also  the  red 
and  blue  lotuses.  All  other  flowers  can  be  used  if  they  are  frag¬ 
rant. 


34.  The  fiowen  China  Rose,  Bbiodl^a,  Upakama  and  Kur- 
apdaka  should  always  be  avoided  in  the  Sraddha  rite. 

35.  Odourless  flowers  and  flowers  of  obnoxiom  odour  should 
be  avoided  at  that  dme  by  one  who  seeks  prosperity. 


36.  The  Brahmanas  invited  on  that  occasion  should  inva¬ 
riably  face  the  north  wUle  sitting.  The  performer  of  the  Sriddha 
should  duly  face  the  south. 

37.  He  should  face  them  and  offer  ^e  Darbhas  and  the 


*Bd.  ?.  23.1 1-63-64  states  tbat  the  fint  is  to  be  moved  to  the  soudt 
with  the  mantra  :  nam  Jofdjn  and  the  other  two  with  the  mantra 

A  con^wiaoQ  with  the  text  in  the  Bd.  P.  2.3-11.$  ff.  shows  that  Ihougb 
the  tect  in  Vi.  P.  and  Bd.  P.  is  commoo^  the  tines  are  difTerently  dis* 
tributed  in  the  venes  of  these  texts. 


588  Pur^a 

He  should  worship  his  own  grandfathers  by  means  of 
tins  rite« 

38-39.  The  following  objects  are  said  to  be  essential  (in  a 
iSrSddha}:  Green  Pifljalls  (leaves  of  Kuia  grass)  as  smooth:  and 
soft  as  flowers^  about  a  JHatfti  in  size,  softened  and  straightened 
by  the  holy  water  (Pitftirtha),  blue  near  the  root  and  not  defiled 
by  pebbles  etc.  (should  be  med) .  So  also  Syiixnaka  and  ^nv&^a 
kinds  of  rice. 

40.  This  (story)  has  been  narrated  by  the  excellent  Praji- 
pati.^  His  hairs  fell  down  throi^h  the  path  of  the  sky  on  the 
earth. 

41.  Hence  the  Kaia  grasses  are  holy.  They  are  always 
honoured  in  the  Sraddha  rite.  The  Pi^^as  are  to  be  offered  on 
them  by  one  who  wishes  prosperity. 

42.  Those  who  do  so  become  free  from  sins  and  defects. 
Their  children  become  nourished  with  splendour,  fame  and 
refulgence. 

43.  The  devotee  should  sit  facing  the  south  and  spread  the 
Darbha  grass  once  for  the  Pin^.  The  tips  of  the  Darbbaa  should 
be  pointli^  to  the  south-east.  The  procedure  shall  be  mentioned 
as  follows : 

44.  A  learned  man  should  always  perform  Sr&ddha 
with  concentration  of  mind.  He  shall  neither  be  dejected  nor 
angry.  His  mind  should  not  be  distracted  or  diverted  elsewhere. 

45.  (The  following  Mantra  is  to  be  repeated.)  annihilate 
everything  that  has  impurity  in  it.  All  Asuras  and  Danavas 
have  been  killed  by  me.  All  Rak^as,  Yaksas,  groups  of 
PiiSacas  and  all  Yatudhanas  (demons)  have  been  killed 
by  me.*^* 

46.  All  Asuras  avoid  him  who  offers  food  to  Pitjrs  by 
repeating  this  Mantra.  Rakfasas  avoid  the  place  where  this 
Mantra  is  recited. 


1.  There  iisome  lacuna.  Bd.  P.  23.11.79-30  state  Uiat  formerly  Praj&- 
pati  assumed  the  tbrm  of  a  horse  and  his  hair  fell  on  the  ground  and  became 
Kuia  grail. 

2.  Quoted  in  Taitoa,  p.  235-  Verses  of  the  same  import  and 

textual  limiiariiy  are  quoted  by  Apar&rka  but  he  adds  the  Vedic  mantra 
Apdtaatf  (VSj.  Saihhit&  II.  29)  here. 


13.47-58 


389 


47.  A  Br&hmana  should  always  perform  SrUdha  accord¬ 
ing  to  this  procedure.  The  manes  {PitSmahas)  will  grant  whatever 
is  desired  in  the  mind  (by  him). 

48.  IfSr&ddha  is  always  performed  assiduously,  Pit|3 
become  delighted  in  mind  and  Rakyasas  become  dejected. 

49.  Sudras  should  always  avoid  the  followizig  in  Sr&d- 
dha:  Ksircc&h^  (trees  yielding  white  juice?),  trees  called  Balvaja 
{Eluesiru  Indiea,  a  spedes  of  coarse  grass  not  liked  by  cattle)  and 
other  kinds  of  grasses  such  as  Vdrai;ia,  Lava,  Lava-varsa. 

50.  They  shall  avoid  applying  coUyrium,  oil  and  unguents 
as  well  as  wearii^  garlands.  Their  rites  should  be  performed 
with  Kasas  which  grow  again  (when  cut).  All  the  benefits 
accrue  (to  them  thereby). 

51.  Kiiz  (grass)  and  the  regrown  K&ia  (grass)  are  (like) 
peacock’s  tail  and  its  r^rowth*.  (So)  Pitrs  are  Devas  and 
Devaa  are  Pit|^. 

52-53.  This  is  the  Mantra  intended  for  flowers,  incense, 
scents  etc.  Pulling  (the  vessel  of  materials  of  worship)  towards 
the  south  assiduously  for  the  sake  of  Homa,  he  (performer  of 
Sraddha)  should  repeat  the  mantra  **Svadh&  unto  Soma, 
the  Pitrm^  (having  Pi  tfs) .  Obeisance  to  AAgiras”.  He  should 
perform  the  Homa  of  non-heavenly  or  the  worldly  type  for  the 
purpose  of  the  fructification  of  the  holy  rite. 

54-55.  Homa  is  to  be  performed  after  placing  Samit 
(sacrificial  twig)  within.  The  devotee  should  keep  the  mind 
perfectly  pure  and  keep  the  holy  fire  scrupulously  pure,  repeat¬ 
ing  the  Mantra,  **Svadha  unto  ^ni,  the  bearer  of  Kavya.  Obeis¬ 
ance  to  Angiras.  Svadha  and  obeisance  unto  Yama  and  Ahgiras’*. 

56-58.  These  are  the  Mantras  in  order  intended  for 
Homas.  Hotnas  shall  be  performed  everyday  fn>m  the 
southern  direction  to  Agni  and  to  Soma  in  the  middle^.  In 
between  these  two  Homas,  a  Homa  should  be  performed  to 
Vivasvan  (the  Sun  or  his  son  Yama  ?).  Upacaras  (ways  of  render- 


1.  an^kfiram  ^milk  ot  a  variety  of  sheq>  called  Ati*  io  Bd.  P.,  ibid  V.  67 

2.  barbate  peacock*  i$  ratber  inapplicable.  Hence  barhi  (&}  'fire; 
kula  graia*  may  \U  the  probable  reading. 

3.  uitaraU^  •to  the  north*  in  Bd.  P.  tStd  V.  95. 


590 


V^u  Puritifa 

homage) ,  repetition  of  Svadhi  mantra,  UUekhana  (ritualistic 
scrubbing),  Homas,  Japas,  obeisance,  particularly  Prok^a^ 
(sprinkling) ,  applying  collyriumj  oil  bath  and  offering 

pi^tia5^(a]l  these  must  be  performed)  • 

59*  If  they  are  performed  with  Mantras,  they  have  the  same 
benefit  as  a  horse-sacrifice.  All  holy  rites  mentioned  above  shall 
be  assiduously  performed. 

60.  In  t^  blazing  fire  plenty  of  ghee  must  be  offered. 
Particularly  Homa  must  be  performed  in  a  smokeless  fire 
with  curly  leaping  fiames,  for  the  fructification  of  the  holy  rite. 

61.  We  have  heard  that  if  a  Tojorrtdtut  performs  Homa  in  a 
weakly  burning  smoking  fire,  he  becomes  blind  and  issuelcss, 

62.  If  there  is  deficiency  of  fuel,  if  the  flames  arc  scattered 
all  round  and  dried  up  or  if  the  flames  arc  defiled  by  smoke,  the 
fire  is  not  conducive  to  good  results. 

63.  If  the  fire  emits  bad  odour,  if  the  flames  arc  bluish  or 
particularly  black,  or  if  the  fire  makes  the  ground  crack,  know 
that  there  is  failure  (in  the  holy  rite) . 

64.  The  resplendent  fire  with  a  single  globular  flame,  yel¬ 
lowish  golden)  in  colour,  produced  by  the  ghee,  is  conducive 
to  the  fiiictification  of  the  rite.  The  flame  shall  be  smooth  and 
curling  clockwise. 

65.  (That  fire)  is  perpetually  honoured  and  worshipped  by 
both  men  and  women.  Thereby,  the  everlasting  pitys  become 
honoured  and  worshipped.  They  give  everlasting  benefits. 

66.  Mud-pots,  vessels  made  of  the  leaves  or  wood  of  the 
Udumbara  (Jicus  glcmsrata)  tree,  its  fruits  and  Satnits,  all  these 
arc  considered  very  holy  in  Sraddha,  They  arc  very  pure. 

67-69.  The  different  benefiu  of  the  various  kinds  of  vessels 
that  I  have  mentioned  as  regards  the  Sraddha  rite,  O  excellent 
Brahma^tas,  are  also  true  in  regard  to  the  holy  rites  of  nativity. 
With  regard  to  the  S^unils  also,  the  same  should  be  known.  The 
devotee  keeps  the  mind  pure  and  says  *I  am  performing  the  rite 
in  fire*.  Then,  after  being  permitted  by  excellent  Brahmans, 
saying  he  should  perform  the  Homa  Sn  the  fire,  accompa¬ 

nied  by  his  wile  and  sons. 

70.  The  following  trees  are  equally  sacrifice-worthy:  Palaia 
(Bd.  P.),  Plak^  Nyagrodha,  Afvaitha,  Vikaikata,  UduAbara, 
BUva  and  Candana, 


1S.71_14.5 


59t 


71«  The  following  trees  are  particularly  recommended  for 
the  purpose  of  Samits  (sacrificial  twigs)  :  Sarala,  Devadaru, 
S&la  and  Khadira. 

72.  Rural  thorny  trees  are  also  sacrifice-worthy.  Some  of 
them  are  honoured  for  the  purpose  of  Smits  in  accordance  with 
the  words  of  Pitrs. 

73.  Even  as  I  recount^  listen  to  the  fiiiit  of  the  holy  rite  to 
those  who  perform  Homa  with  the  Semits  of  the  KalkoUya 
(pomegranate)  tree* 

74-75.  The  Aloe  wood  is  to  be  desired  by  all.  It  has  the 
same  benefit  as  that  of  a  horse-sacrifice.  The  following  trees 
should  be  avoided  —  Sle^mitaka,  NaktamUa»  Kapittha,  Silmali, 
hnpa,  Vibhitaka  and  the  creepers  also.  Similarly  the  trees  on 
wUch  birds  reside  must  be  avoided.  Those  trees  which  are  consi¬ 
dered  unworthy  of  sacrifice  should  also  be  avoided. 

76.  In  the  course  of  the  sacrificial  rite,  the  word  SvadhA  is 
used  at  the  end  of  the  Mantra  pertaining  to  Pitrs  and  Sv&hit 
is  used  in  the  case  of  Devas. 


GBIAPTER  FOURTEEN 

Tkt  Procedure  Regarding  Performance  of  SrAddha  l 

The  Five  Mah^ajfias 

Sota  said  : 

1.  Brhaspati  declared  (in  reply)  that  as  per  (injunctions 
of)  the  Atharva  Veda,  Devas  are  Pitrs  but  there  arealso  other 
Pitfs. 

2.  One  should  especially  worship  Pitfs  before  Devas. 
(People)  in  the  world  do  worship  Pitp  before  Devas. 

3*  Dak^a  had  a  dat^hter  famous  in  the  world  by  the  name 
of  Vijva.  O  knower  of  Dharma,  she  wax  given  dxily  and 
righteously  to  Dharma.  It  is  well-known  that  her  sons  are  the 
noblc-souled  Viivedevas. 

4-5*  They  were  very  famous  throughout  the  three  worlds. 
They  were  revered  by  all  the  people  in  the  world.  On  the 


592 


V^Purd^ 


beautiful  peak  of  Himavin  resorted  to  by  Devas  and 
Gandharvas,  all  those  noble  souls  performed  a  very  severe 
penance,  performed  by  all  the  Apsaras^'S  and  resorted  to  by  all 
the  Devas  and  Gandharvas. 

6.  The  delighted  Pitfs  spoke  to  them  with  a  pure  (frank) 
mind — ^^We  are  delighted.  Request  for  a  boon.  What  desire 
(of  yours)  shall  we  fulfil?” 

7.  When  this  was  mentioned  by  PitfS)  Brahma,  the 
creator  of  the  three  worlds,  the  lord  of  the  subjects,  spoke  to 
theVifvas  (Visvedevas). 

Brahmd  said: 

8.  *^(Even)  Mahideva  of  great  brilliance,  has  been 
scorched  by  them  by  means  of  the  great  penance.  I  am  well- 
delighted  by  that  penance.  What  desire  of  yours  shall  I  ful¬ 
fil?” 

9.  Thus  urged  by  BrahmA,  the  creator  of  the  world,  all  of 
them  simultaneously  spoke  to  Brahma,  the  creator  of  the 
worlds. 

10.  *‘May  we  have  a  share  in  Sraddba.  This  is  the 
boon  desired  by  us”.  Then  Brahma  spoke  to  them  who  were 
worshipped  in  the  heaven. 

11-13.  What  you  desire  will  take  place”.  Pitrs  said  ”So 
be  it”,  and  continued,  ”There  is  no  doubt  about  it.  What¬ 
ever  is  performed  here  shall  be  for  you  too  alor^  with  us.  In 
the  Sraddha  intended  by  men  for  us,  you  will  get  the  priority 
in  being  seated.  We  are  telling  you  the  truth.  They  will 
worship  you  at  the  outset  by  means  of  garlands,  scents  and 
food  offerings. 

14.  Everything  will  be  offered  to  you  first  and  then  to  us. 
Our  ritualistic  farewell  will  occur  first  and  the  Devatas  (i.e. 
you)  will  be  ritualistically  dismissed  later. 

15.  The  protection  ^of  Srftddha  and  (according)  of 
hospitality— these  are  the  two  ceremonial  acts  to  be  performed 
in  the  rite  of  Sraddha  offered  to  Pitrs  and  Devatas  and 
Bhutas.  If  it  is  done  duly  according  to  iigunctioos,  everything 
shall  be  all  right.” 

16.  After  granting  them  the  boon  thus,  lord  Brahma,  the 


14J7-26 


593 


benefactor  of  all  living  beings*  went  away  happily  along  with  the 
groups  of  Pitfs. 

17*  Five  great  Yajfias  have  been  prescribed  in  the  Vedas* 
A  Man  shall  always  perform  these  five  Mahiyajftas. 

18.  (Listen  to)  and  understand  where  the  perfc^mers  (of 
chose  five  Yajflas)  go  and  where  their  abode  is*  They  attain 
the  abode  of  Brahman  that  is  fearless*  devoid  of  egotism* 
free  from  sorrow*  strainless  and  free  from  pain.  It  yields  all 
desires. 

19.  These  five  Yajfias  are  to  be  performed  by  a  Sudra  also* 
but  without  reciting  the  Mantras.  He  who  eats  (enjoys)  other* 
wise  (without  performing  them)*  eats  debts  everyday* 

20.  He  who  cooks  for  himself  b  a  sinful  soul  and  he  eats 
debts.  Hence  a  sensible  man  shall  perform  the  five  great 
Yajfias. 

21.  Some  wish  that  Haivtdya  (food^ofTcring)  should  be 
assiduously  offered  even  when  Pit|^  are  alive.  Oblation 
should  be  offered  along  with  libation  of  water.  The  water^'pot 
also  shall  be  offered. 

22.  The  oblation  should  be  made  well  annoimced.  It 
shall  be  scattered  by  throwing  it  far  above.  Small  oblations 
shall  at  first  be  offered  on  the  horns  of  cows  (7) 

23.  The  cannot  be  offered  as  Naivedya  to  PiCfs.  They 
should  be  duly  fed  by  offering  palatable  foods  and  edibles,  I 
am  emphatically  mentioning  this  as  the  procedure  laid  down  in 
the  Vedas. 

24-26.  These  groups  of  PitfS  are  noble  souls  and  lords 
of  Devas.  Some  preceptors  wish  that  Brahma^  should  be 
worshipped  first  evezyday*  and  then  the  should  be 

offered.  (But)  Bthaspati*  says  to  those  who  are  experts  in 
matters  of  Dharma  (practice  of  rituals)*  that  he  (the per* 
former  of  Sraddha)  should  offer  the  Find  a  first  and  then  feed 

*  These  verses  give  two  different  views  about  the  precedence  of  Brabmanas 
to  offering  of  Fi^d^* 

ted  hi  dharmdrlhakttialdn  itjruvdca  Bfpaspaiilfj 

should  better  be  emended  tt,.  ,Jharmdrlhakuiaio  ufyuttdta . as  in  Bd.  F. 

2.3.1 2.25  and  would  mean :  ^'Brbaspati  who  is  an  expert  in  affairs  of  Dhanzia 
(rituaiisdc  practice)  has  said  thst  it  (the  precedence  of  BrSbmaoa- 
worship  to  offering  of  Find*)  should  not  be  so**. 


594  Fifyu  Purdpa 

BtSimaa^Bs  later.  (For)  Pitsft  are  born  of  Yoga  (Yogjc 
Pdwer)  and  are  (themselves)  Yogic  souls  and  great  ones* 
Pitrs  strengthen  and  develop  ^ma  (the  Moon) . 

27.  Hence  he  (the  performer  of  Sraddha),  remaining  pure 
and  devotedly  attached  to  Yogins,  should  offer  the  Pindas  to 
Yogins.  This  shall  be  the  Havi  offering  directly  to  Pitn- 

28.  If  a  single  Yogin  be  in  the  seat  of  priority  among 
thousands  of  Br&hmanas»  he  will  enable  the  Yajamana  and  the 
Br&hma^as  partaking  of  the  food»  cross  (the  ocean  of  worldly 
existence)  like  a  boat  in  water. 

29.  Where  the  wicked  are  accepted  and  honoured  and 
where  the  good  are  disrespected,  a  terrible  punishment  meted 
out  by  the  Devas  befalls  them  immediately. 

30.  If  a  pious  (Brihmana)  who  has  come  as  a  guest  is  ItCt 
out  and  a  foolish  one  is  fed,  the  householder  forgoes  his  prior 
holy  rites  and  perishes  (Le.  despite  his  merit  in  a  previous  birth 
he  is  faced  with  ruin). 

31.  He  who  seeks  enjoyment  (of  worldly  pleasures)  should 
assiduously  consign  the  Pii^dx  to  the  sacred  fire.^  He  who  seeks 
progeny  shall  give  the  middle  Pioda  to  his  wife  but  after  per* 
forming  all  the  intervening  rites  and  mantras. 

32.  He  who  wishes  for  excellent  refulgence  always  offers  it 

(the  to  cows.  So  also  he  who  wishes  for  intellect, 

honour,  fame  and  renown,  offers  it  always  to  cows. 

33.  He  who  seeks  long  life  gives  it  to  crows.  One  derirous 
of  comeliness  offers  (oblations)  to  the  fowl. 

34.  Thus  the  beneftt  of  offering  Pindas  has  been  recounted. 
Or  the  devotee  shall  stand  facing  the  south  and  pacify  the  sky 
(scatter  the  oblations  in  the  sky)*.  The  abode  of  Pitfs  ia 
the  sky  and  their  quarter  is  the  south. 

35.  (Defective)  Further,  Brahmanas  mention  one 
procedure  of  lifting  up  the  Pi^d^-  After  beit^  permitted  by 
Brahmanas  who  say  ‘^Let  it  be  taken  up  dry*\ 


1 «  Vefsea  3n34  prescribe  tlie  dtiposal  of  Piodas  and  the  benefits  at 
ing  froia  it  Cf.  Mbh.  AnttHsana  )  25.38^,  BM.P*  220.1 50*52  for  acular 
views. 


2.  *or  scatter  them  ia  the  water*  if  (in  Bd.  P.)  for  *Sthitaii*  hereof  be 
accepted. 


14.36-42 


595 


36*  The  upper  layer  or  the  tip  of  flowerr,  fruita.  edibles  and 
cooked  food  shall  be  taken  up  and  ofiered  as  oblation  in  the 
aacred  fire. 

37.  After  consigning  the  edibles^  cooked  food,  beverage 
and  the  excellent  fruits  to  the  fire>  he  should  face  the  south 
and  offer  the 

38.  He  shall  propitiate  (them)  with  oily  edibles,  sweet 
scents  and  juices.  With  concentration  and  purity  of  mind,  he 
should  serve  them  standing  (there)  with  palms  joined  in 
reverence.  A  man  devoted  to  them  and  full  of  faith,  obtains 
the  desires. 

39.  The  grandfathers  (manes)  bestow  the  (following) 
qualities  on  him  :  the  state  of  not  being  mean  and  low  (non- 
pettiness),  gratefulness,  chivalry,  hospitality  and  the  (ability 
for  performance  of)  sacrifices  smd  religious  gifts. 

40.  Henceforth  I  shall  recount  the  Saumya*  (belonging 
to  Soma)  procedure  after  the  Brahmai^  have  taken  food,  in 
order.  Listen  to  it,  even  as  I  recount  it 

41-42.  The  devotee  attached  to  Pitrs  should  sprinkle 
the  ground  and  scrub  it  at  the  outset.  Then  he  should  scatter 
(auspicious  materials)  in  accordance  with  the  injunctions.  He 
shall  request  the  excellent  Brahmanas  to  chant  the  Svadha 
mantra  and  offer  them  plenty  of  DakfSQ&s.  He  shall  get  the 
permission  from  them  (as  to  what  should  be  done  with)  the 
remnants  of  the  food.  With  palms  joined  in  reverence,  he  shall 
follow  them  after  honouring  them  duly.  He  should  then  bid 
farewell. 


”Ai  there  U  no  'Lunar  procedure*  herein,  tbit  ibould  be  taken  u 
vocative  case,  *0  gentle  one',  instead  of  the  accusative  as  in  the 


596 


CHAPTER  HETEEN 
Saerfd  Placts^  for  Sriddha 


Vifyu 


Bfhaspati  said  : 

1 .  Pitn  worshipped  even  once  become  delighted* 
They  are  imperishable  Yogic  souls.  They  are  noble  souls  of 
great  power  and  free  from  sins  and  evils* 

2*3*  O  gentle  ones,  I  shall  recount  the  holy  lakes,  rivers, 
sacred  spots,  places  of  pilgrimage,  mountains  and  hermitages 
for  performing  Sriddha,  at  which  Pitfs  bless  him  (the 
perfcH'mer)  with  fulfilment  of  desire  for  profuse  riches  (in  this 
world),  attainment  of  heaven  aAer  death  and  liberation  from 
Sarhsara  in  due  course* 

4«5.  The  mountain  Amarakan(aka*  is  the  holiest  and  the 
most  excellent  in  the  three  worlds.  It  is  a  sacred  mountain 
resorted  to  by  Siddhas  and  C&ranas.  Formerly,  holy  lord 
AAgiras  performed  very  severe  penance  (difHcult  for  others  to 
do)  on  it,  for  thousands  of  years»  say,  millions  and  crores  of 
ycari. 

6.  As  long  as  the  earth  holds  (lasts),  the  god  of  death, 


I*  Due  to  their  association  with  the  founders  of  faith  or  with  tome 
great  persont  or  events  certain  places  have  been  regarded  holy  by  all 
peoples  of  the  world,  e.g.  Mecca  by  Muslims,  Jerusalem  by  Christians, 
Bodha  Oayd  by  Buddhists.  These  holy  places  have  a  deep  psychological 
effrct  on  rdigious^mindcd  persons.  Sr^dha  is  to  be  performed  in  one's 
own  house.  But  as  K.P.  II.  22.17  states,  h<dy  places  are  the  common 
property  of  all  and  not  of  a  particular  person.  A  list  of  such  holy  places 
is  recommended  in  diflerent  Puranas  like  KP.  11.  20^2*36,  Mt.  P.  C!b  22, 
Bd.  P.  2.3.13.  There  is  some  divergence  in  the  lists  but  there  is  a  great  deal 
of  overlapping  as  a  number  ofhdy  places  like  Prayaga,  VaripasI,  Gaya, 
Pu^kara  are  deeply  respected  by  all  Hindus. 

This  agO'Old  tradition  of  TIrtha-ygtrfi  claimed  the  fruit  of  certain  sacri¬ 
fices.  The  cas^  of  ablution  in  a  sacred  pond  or  river  and  itsd^m  of  equiva¬ 
lence  with  the  performance  of  a  sacrifice  adversely  afiTected  the  popularity 
of  and  tendency  to  perform  sacrifices^an  onerous  job, 

2.  A  mountain  i&Bila^ur  District  of  Madhya  Pradcfb.  Ftgtu  85« 
6  highly  glorifies  the  performance  xd  Sriddha  on  this  mountain.  Our  text 
and  Bd.  P.  2.3.13.4*5  give  the  credit  of  tu  sanctity  to  the  penance  of 
Afigiras. 


15J-16 


597 


Asuras  and  Rakyasas  have  no  access  there,  nor  is  there  any  fear 
or  misfortune  there. 

7«  That  excetlent  mountain  shines  >vith  brilliance  and 
renownjust  as  Samvartaka  fire  (Fire  at  the  time  of  the  annihila* 
tion  of  the  world)  blazes  on  the  peak  of  mount  Malyavan. 

8-9.  The  Ku^a  (growing  there)  is  famous  as  soft,  sweet* 
smelling,  pleasing  to  the  eyes  and  golden-coloured.  They  are 
well  known  as  'calm  and  quiet*  Darbhas.  Drinking  the  waters* 
of  Narmada  to  the  south  of  it,  the  holy  lord  Angiras  of 
great  brilliance  formerly  performed  Agnihotra  after  spreading 
those  excellent  Kusas  roimd  the  altar  and  he  saw  the  steps 
leading  to  the  heaven. 

10.  I  shall  recount  the  benefit  attained  by  that  intelligent 

man  who  offers  even  once,  on  the  Darbhas  on  the 

mountain  Amarakap^aka. 

11.  That  firaddha  becomes  everlasting,  increasing  the 
pleasure  of  Pitfs.  On  reaching  that  holy  centre,  they  vanish 
for  ever. 

12.  Even  today  the  holy  **JvdldTasa'*  is  seen  there  every¬ 
where.  The  river  thereof  (called  Viialya — a  branch  of 
Narmada)  makes  all  living  beings  free  from  darts  and  thorns 
(sins  and  miseries). 

13-14.  To  the  south-east  of  that  excellent  mountain,  there 
is  a  tank  with  a  whirlpool  in  that  part  contiguous  to  the 
land  of  Kalinga.  O  excellent  sages,  there  is  that  great  holy 
centre  Siddhak^etr a  which  increases  the  delight  of  Pitrs.  It 
is  the  greatest  on  the  earth,  aj^roved  of  by  both  Devas  and 
Daityas.  Uianas  has  sung  a  verse  on  it. 

15.  ^^lessed  are  those  men  in  the  world  who  being  devoted 
to  Pitrs  propitiate  them  in  Sraddha  after  ^reaching  Amara- 
kantaka. 

16.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  they  will  attain  Siddhi 
with  very  little  penance.  If  they  arc  worshipped  even  once  on 
Amaraka^faka,  Pitrs  attain  Heaven**. 


but  here  ^drinking*  b  itranee*  Bd.  P.  2.3.13.8. 
reads  the  south  of  Narmada*. 


598 


ySjfu 

1 7.  On  the  beautiful  Mahendra^  mountain,  there  is  a  holy 
centre  resorted  to  by  Sakra«  If  one  mounts  it>  Pitn  are 
delighted.  The  Sraddha  (if  performed)  there>  yields  great 
&uit. 

18.  If  one  practises  Yoga  on  its  lower  peak  named  Bilva 
(Vailata  in  Bd.P.),  one  gets  divine  vision.  He  becomes 
invisible  to  all  living  beings  and  roams  over  the  earth  like  a 
Deva. 

19.  If  a  man  takes  hti  holy  abludon  in  the  Saptagod&vara* 
and  in  the  penance  grove  Gokarpa*,  he  attains  the  benefit  of  a 
horse-  sacrifice  • 

20.  A  man  becomes  sanctified  after  taking  his  holy  dip  in 
Dhutapapa>  Rudra,  Maheivara,  the  1<^  of  DevaSi  performed 
a  penance  there. 

21.  In  the  holy  place  Gokartia,  a  proof  has  been  cited  by 
Brahmanas  for  (convincing?)  the  atheists.  If  a  non-Br&hmana 
recites  the  G&yatil  mantra,  he  perishes. 

22.  Those  who  regularly  ascend  the  peak,  the  abode  of 
Devas  and  sages,  resorted  to  by  Siddhas  and  G&ranas, 
attain  heaven. 

23-24.  Since  the  place  is  embellished  with  divine  sandal¬ 
wood  and  other  trees  and  since  the  water  mixed  with  the 
flavour  of  sandal  flows  cootinaously,  a  river  named  Tamrapar^* 
originates  from  them.  It  slowly  winds  its  way  to  the  southern 

1.  AltkougE  tbit  Qune  is  applied  to  the  oiouiitaui  nage  firom  Oriva  to 
Madura,  here  it  ii  fpecially  applied  to  the  range  of  hills  peparadng 
Mahina^  from  Ganjam  District.  It  U  regarded  ai  the  resort  of 

— De  119,  HD.  IV.  177 

2«  Sapta-Godavara :  (1)  The  seven  **moutlu'*  (branches)  of  the 
Godavatl  falling  into  the  sea;  (2)  St^ahgipur,  lixteen  miles  from  Pith&pur 
in  the  Godavari  District. 

^De.  178 

3.  Gokarpa  :  A  place  sacred  to  Siva  <m  the  western  coast  in  RiunfS 
Tehsil  North  Kaaara  District. 

-^HD  IV.  753 

4.  A  tributary  of  Gahgi  near  VirA^ail. 

5.  The  river  rises  in  the  Agastya^Kflta^mount^  Malay.  Flowing 
through  the  PSndya  country.  It  &Us  into  the  Gulf  of  Manar  famous  for 
peaf  1-fishery. 


— De  203,  HD.  IV.  812 


15.25-35 


599 


ocean  like  a  young  woman  extremely  dUtressed  ( while  going  to 
her  husband's  house  for  the  6rst  time?}« 

25.  The  waters  of  that  river  in  confluence  with  the  great 
ocean  become  conchs»  pearls  and  pearl-like  conchs. 

26.  People  bringing  its  waters  contaSning  concha  and 
pearls,  become  free  from  mental  agonies  and  physical  ailments 
and  go  to  the  heavenly  city  of  Amaravad* 

27.  According  to  Srud  (Veda),  the  charitable  gift  of 
sandal,  conchs  and  pearls  enables  Pitrs  to  cross  (hell)  even 
though  they  be  perpetrators  of  sins. 

28-29.  So  also  is  the  case  of  Candratlrtha,  (Kanya) 
Kumarl,  the  perennial  source  of  Kaveri,  the  holy  centres  of 
Sriparvata^,  the  mountain  Vaikrta,  and  the  mountain 
Ofiraparvata  where  the  trees  Paliia,  Khadira,  Bilva, 
Plakfa,  Aivattha  and  VikaAkata  are  seen  growing  in  one 
place.  (The  people  taking  ablutions  and  performing  holy  rites 
there  attain  heaven.) 

30.  O  excellent  BrAhma^as,  this  zone  of  holy  centres  is 
sacrifice-worthy  and  is  conducive  to  great  achievements.  A 
person  who  casts  his  mortal  coil  here,  quickly  reaches  the 
heavenly  city  of  Amaravati. 

31.  Holy  rites  performed  by  oneself  fructify  in  the  subse* 
quent  birth.  Rites  of  Pitfs  (though)  performed  with  defects 
become  as  beneficial  as  duly  performed  rites. 

32.  The  holy  river  Narmada,  the  most  excellent  of  all 
riven,  is  the  daughter  of  Pitfs*  Sraddhas  offered  there,  become 
everlasting  (in  yielding  benefits). 

33.  In  the  holy  forest  of  Ma^hara,  resorted  to  by 
Siddhas  and  Caracas,  they  do  not  vanish  because  they  are 
attached  to  that  great  mountain. 

34.  There  is  a  proof  (test)  for  discrimination  between 
the  pious  and  the  impious  on  the  holy  mtjimtain  of  Vindhya. 
Sinners  do  not  see  the  current  (waterfoU  ?)  Good  men  see 
the  current. 

35.  The  sins  of  some  sinners  are  seen  in  its  current.  Us- 


1.  Srilailam  in  Kumool  District  ia  Andhra  Pradesh.  It  is  one  d  the 
twelve  Jyotirlihgaj. 


600  Vdyu  PurdB^ 

ually  the  current  is  visible  in  the  case  of  those  of  meritorious 
activities. 

36.  In  Kauiala  there  is  the  tank  of  Matahga  named 
Papani^udim  (Remover  of  Sins).  Even  stray  birds,  flying 
as  they  please,  go  to  heaven  after  bathing  (casually)  in  that 
tank. 

37*39.  (Ablution)  in  the  Kum&rakoiala  lirtha  on  the 
mountain  Pilapafljara'  and  on  the  banks  of  Pan<Ju  near  the 
sea,  in  the  Pao^^taka  forest,  performance  of  good  actions  in 
the  Abhaya  Prabhava  which  is  pure  and  sinless,  daily  visit 
to  Sriv^kfa,  Grdbraku^a,  and  Jambumarga  and  in  the  holy 
centreof  Asita,  the  intelligent  preceptor  of  Yoga— performance 
of  Sraddha  (at  these  holy  places)— gives  everlasting  benefits. 

40.  Sraddha  in  Pu^kara^  is  ever-lasting.  Penance  there 
yields  great  fruits  and  the  same  is  true  of  the  holy  centre 
Prabhasa’  on  the  great  ocean. 

41.  In  Devika^,  there  is  a  well  named  Vrfa  resorted  to  by 
Siddhas.  Its  water  always  gushes  up  on  bearing  the  sound 
of  cows  and  bulls. 

42.  It  is  always  resorted  to  by  masten  of  Yogas  who  are 
beyond  all  sorts  of  sins.  1  shall  mention  the  benefit  resulting 
from  the  performance  of  Sraddha  therein. 

43-44.  The  Sraddha  ( there )  yields  all  desires  and  is  ever¬ 
lasting.  It  delights  Pitfs.  There  is  a  rock  of  Agoi  there 
called  Jiitavedahiila.  He  who  alters  the  fire  there  rejoices  in 


1.  Falaroafijara  in  Bd.P.-^car  Surparaka  or  Sop&ri  near  BacMin  in 
Thaua  district  of  Maharishtra. 

2.  A  sacred  lake  near  Ajmer,  Rajasthan.  It  is  famous  for  the  temple 
of  god  Brahmadeva. 

3.  Now  known  as  Somanatha  Pactaoa  io  Saurashtra.  Somanatha  is  a 
frmous  Jyotirlihga  which  vras  attacked  by  Muslim  rulers  from  the  days  of 
Mahmud  Gaznavi  to  Aurangzeb.  A  new  temple  was  built  near  the  original 
spot  by  Ahalyabai  Holkar  in  A.D«  1785  and  it  is  still  recognised  as  original 
Somanatha  by  all,  though  a  new  temple  on  the  original  spot  in  Its  original 
form  is  reconstructed  after  indepcndenceof  India. 

4.  Variously  identified  ss  a  tributary  of  Indus,  Gandok,  fiarayu 
by  different  scholar!  Its  identifieatioa  with  the  Deeg  or  Degh  In  the 
Punjab  is  accepted  by  Pargiter  and  Kane  (HD.  IV*  746;  De  55). 


15.45*53 


601 


heaven.  Once  the  fire  is  tranqaih  he  is  reborn.  Anything 
offered  there  gives  everlasting  ben^ts. 

45.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  the  sacrifices  performed 
at  the  holy  centres  called  Dalaivamedhika  and  Paficahrame- 
dhika  yield  the  benefits  as  indicated  (in  their  names,  viz.  fruits 
of  ten  horse-sacrifices  and  of  five  horse-sacrifices)  • 

46.  The  holy  centre  named  Hayasiras  is  famous  as 
granter  of  boon  immediately.  Sraddha  performed  there  yields 
everlasting  benefits.  The  devotee  rejoices  in  heaven. 

47.  Sraddha  is  said  to  be  everlasting.  So  also  are  Japas, 
Homaa  and  penances. 

48.  One  should  always  propitiate  the  Pitfsin  the  auspicious 
holy  centre  of  Ajatunga.  There  the  shadow  of  the  heaven-dweN 
lers  is  always  seen  on  Parvan  days.  Whatever  is  given  here 
becomes  everlasting  in  the  world.  The  Papd^vas  became  free 
from  ailment  here. 

49.  It  is  always  resorted  to  by  masters  of  Yogas  free  from 
all  sins.  I  shall  mention  the  benefit  of  performance  of  Sraddha 
there. 


50.  PitfS  worshipped  there  always  become  delighted.  He 
who  keeps  bis  senseK>rganj  under  control  in  this  world  shall 
rejoice  after  death  in  heaven. 


51.  The  lake  named  Siva  is  the  most  excellent.  Vyasa* 
saras  and  the  divine  lake  Brahma- saras  there  are  also  holy. 

52.  The  mountain  Ujjanta^  of  the  noble  soul  Vasisfha 
is  also  holy.  Centres  called  Kapota,  Pu^pasahvaya,  (and 
those  named  afrer  the  Vedas)  ^g»  Yajus,  Samanand  (Atharva-) 
Siras  have  been  created  by  god  Brahma,  After  the  creation 
of  these  the  fifth  Veda,  viz.  Pura^as  have  been  narrated  by 
him. 


53.  Afrer  going  there  a  Brahma^  becomes  free  from  sin 
like  the  eternal  Fire-god  Agni.  Sraddha,  Japas,  Homas  and 
penances  are  of  endless  benefits. 


1.  In  Apsrssiu  ai  per  HD.  IV.  815.  If  ideotified  wth  UJjayanta,  It 
ii  Mt.  Gimar— De  21 1 ;  but  it  is  not  auoclated  with  Vasiuha  but  with  Datta 
and  Nenunatha.  Hence  tdendficatlon  in  HD  probable.  . 


602 


FiSytt  PurS/fa 


54.  In  the  great  holy  centre  Puti^aiika,  one  attains  the 
benefit  (as  sweet  and  fragrant)  as  lotus*  One  gets  the  fruit 
of  a  horse-sacrifice  in  the  great  holy  centre  of  Brahtpa  Tlrtha  (by 
performing  Sraddha  there)* 

55.  In  the  confluence  of  the  Sindhu  river  and  the  ocean 
and  in  Paf^canadai  the  benefit  is  everlasting.  fLirakatma^ 
(in  Bd.  P.  Viraja)  and  Mandava  on  the  mountain  are  sacred 
spots  (?) 

56.  Sr&ddha  has  to  be  performed  in  the  holy  centre 
Saptahrada  and  particularly  in  Minasa.^  On  the  mountains  of 
Mah&ku(a,  Vanda  and  Trikakuda  also  (Sr&ddha  should  be 
performed). 

57.  In  Mahavedl  (Ma]i&na<U  in  Bd.  P.)  a  great  miracle  is 
seen.  It  does  notappear  to  one  who  hats  no  faith  (but)  it  does 
appear  to  a  person  who  it  firm  in  his  religious  vows. 

38.  The  eternal  rock  of  Agni  himself  is  there.  It  is  called 
Jatavedabfila.  Sriddhas  and  holy  rites  in  the  fire  performed 
there,  have  never-ending  benefits. 

59.  Going  there  everyday  in  the  evening,  one  who  seeks 
never-ending  benefits  should  always  offer  Sraddba  to  Pitrs  there. 

60.  A  man  of  purified  mind  or  otherwise  is  known  in  the 
holy  centre  called  Svargyamdrgapfada  (that  which  shows  the 
path  leading  to  heaven) »  It  grants  boons  immediately. 
Casting  off  their  mutual  enmity  in  it,  the  Seven  Sages  went  to 
heaven. 

61.  Even  today  signs  of  their  extinct  enmity  are  seen. 
Taking  bath  in  that  excellent  Tirtha,  a  man  attains  heaven* 

62.  There  is  a  famous  shrine  there,  resorted  to  by  Nandin 
and  Siddhas  (or  a  Siddha  named  Nandin).  The  image  of 
Nandlsvara  is  not  visible  to  men  of  evil  deeds* 

63.  Gk>]den  Tupas  (sacrificial  posts)  are  seen  there  at 
sunrise.  People  circumambulating  them  vanish  and  go  to 


t.  VairS^i,  but  ^garments*  in  Bd.  P.  V.  2.3.61  is  preferable  for  in  the 
next  verse  eetropt  ^enmity*  is  said  to  be  'visible  even  today.  Visibility  of 
abstract  things  is  doubtful. 

2.  Lake  Manai-tarovar  situated  in  KaUSsa  mountain  in  Tibet. 


— De  123 


15.64-72 


603 


heaven  (or  they^ — the  golden  posts — disappear  and  go  to 
heaven  when  devotees  complete  their  circumambulation  ?). 

64.  The  (land)  all  over  Kumk^etra^  is  especially  an  ex¬ 
cellent  holy  place  of  Sanatkum&ra,  the  noble-scaled  lord  of  the 
Yogic  cult.  It  is  glorified  as  yielding  ever-lasting  benefit  if 
Pitrs  are  offered  gingelly  seeds  (there). 

65.  Sraddba  performed  in  the  residence  of  Dharmaraja  is 
conducive  to  brilliance  and  it  is  never-ending  (in  yielding  bene¬ 
fit),  Sraddha  offered  on  the  New  Moon  day  in  accordance 
with  injunctions  and  in  the  proper  order  also  yields  never-ending 
benefits. 

66.  Moreover^  to  those  who  are  near  about  Kuruk;etra  it 
is  particularly  efficacious.  A  dutiful  son  who  worships  Pitrs 
there,  becomes  free  from  his  indebtedness  to  them. 

67-69.  Sr&ddha  should  be  performed  with  the  repetition  of 
OMcdra  by  persons  who  wish  for  ever-lasting  benefit,  at  the 
following  places  :  Vinaiana,*  on  the  Sarasvad  river,  Plakfa- 
prasrava^’,  Vy&satirtha  on  the  Sarasvati  and  especially  at 
Brahma  K^etra,  everywhere  on  the  (banks  of)  Gafiga  and  on 
the  excellent  mountain  Main&ka  and  at  the  source  of  Yamimi. 
One  gets  absolved  of  sins  (thereby).  The  proof  for  the  same  is 
the  excessively  hot  and  extremely  cold  water  there. 

70.  (Yamuni)  is  Varna's  sister  and  the  daughter  of  Mar- 
tanda  ( the  Sun-god) .  It  is  holy.  Sraddha  performed  there  is 
everlasting.  It  was  so  glorified  by  Pitfs  formerly. 

71.  One  taking  ablutions  in  the  lake  Brahmanuga  be¬ 
comes  a  Brahma^  immediately.  Sraddha,  Japas,  Homas  and 
penances  performed  there  are  everlasting. 

72.  Vasi$(ha  of  great  penance  performed  penance  standing 
still  like  a  stump.  Even  to-day  trees  are  seen  there  studded 
with  gems. 

1.  The  famous  sacred  place  ia  Haryana-^the  country  round 
Thaoeswar.  Some  of  the  holy  places,  e^;.  VyUa-tirtha  or  Dvaipiyana  Hrada 
are  ia  this  area.  Sarasvati  flowed  through  it 

2.  The  spot  in  the  sandy  desert  in  Sirbiod  district  where  Sarasvati 

disappears.  ~De  37 

S.  The  source  of  the  river  Sarasvati  in  the  hills  of  Sirmur  in  the 
Siwalik  range  of  the  HimiUyas. 

^DelflO 


604 


73«  There  a  weighing  balance  that  indicates  piety  and 
impiety,  is  seen.  People  who  get  themselves  weighed  by  Brah* 
maQas  in  it  derive  excellent  fruits. 

74-75.  The  daughter  of  Pitfs,  the  great  Yogini,  is 
famous  by  the  name  of  Gandhakall.  It  is  she  who  will  give  birth 
to  the  great  Yogin,  the  noble  souled  Vyiaa,  who  will  divide  the 
single  Veda  into  four,  who  will  be  an  intelligent  great  sage,  the 
great  scion  of  the  family  of  Par&iara  and  who  is  a  fourth  part 
of  Brahma. 

76.  There  is  the  lake  Acchodaka^  from  which  she  origina¬ 
ted  as  the  river  Acchodi.  Again  she  (Gandhakall)  was  bom  of 
the  womb  of  a  fish  at  the  instance  of  Varava*. 

77.  The  place  where  she  has  a  holy  hermitage,  is  resorted 
to  by  meritorious  persons.  Sraddha  offered  there  once,  is 
said  to  be  everlasting.  If  Sraddha  is  offered  there  even  once, 
it  causes  the  attainment  of  Yoga  and  Samddhi  (Trance) . 

78.  He  who  offers  Sraddha  in  KuberatuAga,  Vyamocca 
and  Vyasatirtha  is  a  holy  BrahmaQa.  The  ^riddha  yields  ever¬ 
lasting  benefits. 

79.  In  the  north-eastern  quarter  there  is  Nandavedl.  It  is 
resorted  to  by  Siddbas  for  ever.  It  is  not  visible  to  non-self- 
possessed  souls.  ( Those  who  perform  Sraddha  there)  do  not 
return  (i.e.  they  attain  liberation  from  Samsara). 

80.  In  the  holy  centre  Mahalaya,*  the  intelligent  Maha- 
deva  had  imprinted  his  foot.  It  is  a  Siddhak$etra  resorted  to 
(by  Siddhas).  People  who  go  there  do  not  return  (L.e«  attain 
Mok^a). 

81.  (Partially  defective)  On  (the  peak  called)  Umatuhga, 

in  the  shrine  of  the  goddess  (Uma)  has  performed  penance 
standing  on  one  foot  for  the  period  of  a  divine  without 

taking  any  food^.  And  the  water  (also)  stood  (for  that 
period?). 

1  •  A  lake  at  the  foot  of  Mt.  Gaodn^nabha  from  which  riTcr  Acchoda 
flows  out.  If  identical  with  the  Acchoda-iarovara  ia  Bias’s  it  b 

Acchivat,  six  milet  frcMn  MartaQ^a  ta  Kaahmir. 

2.  For  Vdrajw  Bd.  ?.  iSid  V.  78  reads  *fbr  some  purpose’  and  it 

is  a  meaningful  reading. 

S.  The  same  u  OibkaratiAtba  or  Amarefvara  in  M.P.  ^De  1 17 

4.  Our  text  reads  nMra  *saow*  %dtich  is  obscure.  Bd»  P.  reads  wiMra 

*  without  taking  food’.  It  is  relevant  to  penance,  hence  accepted  tentatively. 


15.82-92 


605 


82-83.  One  becomes  sanctiBed  by  visiting  Umatu^^ 
Bh|f  utuhga>  Brahmatui^^  Mahalaya,  K&dravatl^  Sa^diB 
V&mana’s  cave.  Sraddba  performed  there  yields  ever-lasting 
bencBt.  Japa,  Homa  and  meditation— everything  performed 
there  becomes  meritorious. 

84. Those  who  observe  Brahmaccrya  (celibacy),  those  who 
perform  sacrifice  and  those  who  are  devoted  to  their  {receptors 
for  a  hundred  years  (enjoy  good  benefits).  These  and  other 
similar  benefits  are  attained  immediately  by  taking  a  dip  in 
those  holy  waters. 

85.  (The  holy  river)  Kumaradhari^  there  removes  all  sins 
(at  its  very  sight).  If  one  goes  and  settles  there,  one  attains 
immediately  what  is  attained  when  it  is  seen, 

86.  By  regularly  visiting  Sailaklrtipura,  one  attains  all 
cherished  desires.  Like  Devas  he  remains  invuible  to  all  living 
beings  and  roams  in  the  earth. 

87.  Sr&ddhas  should  be  offered  everyday  by  one  who 
seeks  everlasting  benefits  at  the  great  holy  centre  of  K&iyapa 
well  known  as  Kalasarpi, 

88.  Sraddha  performed  all  round  Salagrama*  becomes 
ever-lasting.  It  is  not  directly  visible  to  sinful  persons, 

89-90,  The  place  is  forbidden  to  the  evil-minded  and  the 
good  ones  are  allowed  entry,  since  the  pure  divine  king  of 
serpents  dwelling  in  the  holy  lake  accepts  the  of  the  good 
and  not  that  of  the  bad.  Even  by  the  highly  illuminated  ser¬ 
pents,  the  food  cannot  be  eaten  (if  offered  by  the  bad) , 

91.  In  these  two  holy  centres,  Dharma  is  directly  seen. 
In  Devadaruvana^  too  the  same  proof  can  be  seen, 

92.  The  sins  shaken  off  are  visible  to  the  meritorious  soul* 

In  BhagIrathI  and  Pray^a^  (the  Sraddha  performed)  is  said  to 
be  of  ever-lasting  benefit.  * 


1.  Near  Vyasa*^  seat  for  dbyana  and  KSatipuri  or  ancient  Katbzaaqi^u 

in  NepaL  — De  69 

2.  A  place  near  the  source  of  Oandak,  the  place  where  Sage  Pulaha 
and  Bbarata  performed  penance. 

3.  Its  site  U  on  Gahga  near  Kedar  io  Garbwal;  Badarikftirama  is 
situated  in  this  ^Vana*. 

4.  Modem  Allahabad,  U.P. 


V3yu  PurS^ 


606 

9S«  Sr&ddha  should  be  offered  with  efforts  at  K&lafijara,^ 
Daiarna,  Naimifai  Kurujihgala  and  the  city  of  V&ri^as!. 

94.  In  that  city,  Yogeivara  is  present  for  ever.  Hence 
what  is  offered  there  is  ever-lasting.  Offering  Sraddhas  in  these 
holy  places,  one  becomes  sanctified.  The  Sraddha  yields  ever¬ 
lasting  benefits. 

95.  Penance,  Homa,  meditation,  nay  anything  performed 
in  Lauhitya,*  VaitaraQl  and  Svar^avedi,  becomes  meritorious. 

96.  Only  once,  is  (Sr&ddba)  seen  (performed)  near  the 
sea-shore  by  men  of  meritorious  actions.  So  also  in  Gaya, 
Dharmaprsfha  and  in  Brahmans  lake. 

97-98.  The  Sriddba  offered  in  Gayi  and  Grdhrakuta  yields 
great  benefit.  Snow  falls  all  round  it  upto  a  distance  of  five 
Yojanas  (1  Yojana  *  12  Kms.) .  The  forest  surrounding  the  her¬ 
mitage  of  Bharata  is  remembered  as  the  most  meritorious.  The 
foot-print  of  Matanga  is  seen  there  with  the  physical  eye. 

99.  This  spot  is  glorified  as  (conducive  to)  entire  righte¬ 
ousness.  It  is  an  example  for  this  world.  Similarly  the  PaAca- 
vana  is  very  holy.  It  is  resorted  to  by  men  of  meritorious  actions. 
The  holy  centre  PaQduvijala  is  also  a  ready  example. 

100.  (Defective)  The  persons  who  perpetrate  sins  come  to 
the  surface  (become  exposed)  by  means  of  weighing  balances,  by 
its  arcs’  and  by  various  scriptures  when  they  get  attached  (visit) 
to  that  Ixrtha  (?) , 

101.  Highly  efficacious  is  the  Sraddha  offered  at  the  silent 
(deep)  great  lake  Pavamaod^^  1^  the  (river)  Kauiik!  in  the 
third  quarter  on  the  third  TitAi  (day). 


1.  The  plsces  meadoned  are  ideodfied  as  follows : 

( 1)  Kalafljara^KaliAjw  in  Badausa  sub-dmsioo  of  Banda  distriett 
Bunddkhaod  (M.P.). 

(ii)  EasCera  N.  Malwa,  including  Bhopal  in  Madhya 
Pradesh.  Its  andeni  capital  was  VidifS. 

(iii)  Naioi^— Nlmsar,  43  miles  NW  of  l4iclcnow,  Uttar  Pradesh. 
(Iv)  Kurujihgalap^a  forest  country  situated  in  Sirhind,  NW  of 

Hastinapur.  ~De  110 

2.  Tht  fbHowing  are  identified  by  De  thus  :  Lauhitya  (Tlie 
Brahmaputra,  Assam);  Vaitaracl  (the  river  BaitaraQl  in  Orissa);  Jaipur 
stands  on  this  river. 

S.  It  appears  that  sinners  arc  supposed  to  be  weighed  in  the  balance. 


15.102-113 


607 

102.  After  performing  a  very  severe  penance  for  many  celes¬ 
tial  Yugas,  the  intelligent  deity  Mah^eva  set  foot  on  Mupda- 

103.  Within  a  very  short  time,  a  righteous  man  discards 
his  sin  quickly  like  a  serpent  casting  off  its  slough. 

104-105.  To  the  north  of  MoQ^aprKha,  there  is  a  holy  centre 
famous  in  the  three  worlds  by  the  name  Kanakanandi.  It  is  well 
protected  by  day  and  night  by  terrible  serpents  of  huge  bodies  and 
licking  with  their  tongues,  frightful  to  the  sinners  (but)  very 
delightful  to  Siddhas*  (£ven}  birds  flying  as  they  please  take 
bath  there  and  go  to  heaven* 

106.  Sraddha  offered  there  is  said  to  yield  everlasting 
benefit.  An  excellent  man  becomes  free  from  his  three-fold 
indebtedness  by  taking  his  bath  there. 

107.  On  the  banl^  of  that  lake,  there  is  a  great  shrine  of 
the  lord.  After  mounting  up  to  it  and  performing  Japas,  one  be¬ 
comes  a  Siddha  and  thereafter  goes  to  heaven. 

108.  After  going  to  the  noiihem  Manasa,^  one  attains 
excellent  Siddhi.  On  going  to  the  excellent  city^,  a  very  wonder¬ 
ful  thing  is  seen. 

109.  One  should  perform  Sraddha  there  according  to 
one’s  capacity  and  physical  strength.  He  should  attain  divine 
pleasures  and  the  means  to  liberation  (from  Sandra)  lor  ever. 

IIO-lll.  In  the  excellent  Manasa  lake,  a  very  wonderful 
thing  is  seen.  The  highly  blessed  goddess  Ganga  of  three-fold 
path,  slipping  dawn  from  heaven,  shines  in  the  sky.  Falling  off 
the  lunar  rays  on  to  the  earth,  it  appears  like  festoons  in  the  sky 
with  the  brightness  of  the  sun. 

112.  It  is  diving  with  golden  splendour.  It  is  like  the  gate 
to  heaven  thrown  wide  open.  It  is  from  this  place  that  it 
flows  again  towards  the  eastern  ocean  in  its  final  st^e. 

113.  It  sanctifies  all  living  beings  and  particularly  those 
who  know  righteousness.  Candrabhaga  (Chenab)  and 


1.  Can  it  be  the  Kara  Rul  of  northern  Pamiri  as  luggested  by  M.  All 
(AGP  P.71)?  The  so-called  Uttara  Manasa  at  Gay&  is  an  ordinary 
pond. 

2.  No  mention  of  any  city  is  here  in  the  context.  Bd.  P.  ikid  V.  U  7  reads 
SarAjrtffhs  that  excellent  lake’. 


608 


Vdyu  Purd^ 


Sindhu  both  these  are  like  Manasa  (in  sanctity).  The  divine 
Sindhu»  the  most  esccellent  of  rivers  flows  towards  the  western 
ocean. 

1 14-1 15*  There  is  the  motuitain  named  Himaviai.  It  is 
embellished  with  various  kinds  of  minerals.  It  is  said  that  it  ex¬ 
tends  to  eighty  thousand  Yojanas.  It  is  crowded  with  Siddhas 
and  Caracas.  It  is  served  and  resorted  to  by  Siddhas  and  Cara- 
nas.  There  is  a  Pu^karitu  (lake)  on  it»  well  known  by  the  name 
Susumna. 

116«  One  who  is  born  there  lives  upto  ten  thousand  years. 
Sraddha  offered  thereyiclds  ever-lasting  benefits^  and  great  pros¬ 
perity*  The  performer  of  SrMdhas  enables  ten  previous  genera¬ 
tions  and  ten  succeeding  ones  to  cross  (hell). 

117.  Everything  belonging  toHimavan  is  holy.  The  Ganga 
is  sacred  everywhere  (throughout).  The  ocean-going  rivers  and 
all  the  oceans  all  round  are  holy. 

118.  A  sensible  man  should  perform  8raddha  in  all  these 
places  and  at  similar  ones.  Even  by  talcing  bath,  he  becomes 
sanctified.  By  offering  (Sraddha*  7)  he  becomes  so  (all  the 
more). 

119-123.  Sraddha  can  be  performed  in  the  following  places : 
On  the  high  summits  and  ridges  of  mountains,  crevasses,  in  the 
solitary  $idcs»  springs  and  fountains,  on  the  sandy  banks  of 
rivers,  on  the  auspicious  anniversaries  of  the  beginning  of  Yugas, 
on  great  oceans,  in  cowpens,  in  (be  confluence  of  two  rivers,  in 
the  forests,  well- cleaned  and  scrubbed  ground,  pleasing  fragrant 
spots,  in  solitary  houses,  on  the  ground  polished  with  cow-dung, 
etc.  One  should  perform  Sraddha  in  these  places  in  accordance 
with  injunctions.  Those  who  seek  fulfilment  of  all  desires  shall 
perform  Sraddha  in  these  places  carefully.  They  should  perform 
circumambulation  in  all  the  quarters.  An  intelligent  man  per¬ 
forming  thus,  shall  attain  the  Siddhi  of  Brahmatva  (Brahmahood). 

124.  The  worship  of  Pitfs  becomes  fruitftJ  if  anger  etc. 


*MS.  Kba.  In  A  roau4  dattva  ddmm  ‘giving  a  religious  gift*,  for  dauvd 
of  our  text.  Bd.  P.iitdV.  *27  reads  tialtod  *by  olTering  oblaliont 
to  fire  and  by  religious  giAs’. 


15,125-133 


609 


is  eschewed,  the  duties  of  the  three  castes  are  performed  and  the 
discipline  of  castes  and  stages  of  life  is  maintaineil 

125.  Even  a  person  who  has  committed  sins  becomes  sanctU 
fied  tf  he  boldly  and  faithfully  makes  the  pilgrimage  to  the 
holy  centres  and  courageously  controb  his  senses.  What  need  be 
said  in  regard  to  a  person  of  meritorious  deeds  7 

126.  He  is  not  reborn  in  an  animat  womb.  He  is  not  bom 
again  in  an  impious  land.  A  Brahmana  attains  heaven  and  at¬ 
tains  the  means  to  salvation  (Mok^a) . 

127.  These  five  do  not  attain  the  benefit  of  pilgrimage  I 
those  who  have  no  faith,  sinners,  atbebtSi  permanent  doubters 
and  those  who  always  seek  a  cause  (for  everything)* 

1 28.  Great  Siddhi  is  acliieved  in  the  holy  centre  of  Guru  (the 
preceptor) .  He  is  the  most  exceiient  of  all  sacred  objects  and 
spots.  Meditation  is  a  stitl  greater  Tirtha.  It  is  the  eternal  Bra* 
hmatlrtha.^ 

129.  Meditation  is  greater  tlian  observance  of  fasts.  It  makes 
all  the  sense  organs  shun  (their  objects)  *  Those  who  are  wedded 
to  observance  of  fasts  are  reborn  again  and  again  along  with 
their  vital  breaths. 

130.  One  shall  equalise  Prana  and  Apwa.  One  should  res¬ 
train  in  mind  objects  and  the  sense  organs  and  restrain  the 
intellect  In  the  mind.  Then  every  sense-organ  recedes. 

131.  Understand  that  undoubtedly  Pr<}{y4Aara  (the  withdra¬ 
wal  of  all  sense  organs)  is  the  sure  means  to  salvation.  Among 
the  scnsc-orgam,  the  mind  is  the  most  terrible.  It  makes  the 
intellect  and  other  organs  function. 

1 32.  (The  restlessness  of  the  mind)  is  subdued  by  not  taking 
food.  Know  that  fasting  is  a  penance.  By  restraining  the  intel¬ 
lect  and  the  mind,  the  intellect  is  sublimated  (the  intellect  be¬ 
comes  beautiful). 

133.  When  all  the  sins  are  mitigated,  when  the  sense  oigans 
are  weakened  (subdued)  the  pure  soul  attains  bliss  of  libera¬ 
tion  like  fire  without  fuel. 

1.  The  influence  of  Yoga  is  so  profound  oo  the  Purapa  writer  that 
Yogic  medjutjoQ  is  regarded  superior  to  Tirlbay^tri  (vv.  [28-13I).  The 
importance  of  feeding  a  Yogm  at  the  ume  of  Sriddhas  has  been  already 
extolled  in  previous  chapters. 


610 


y^u  Purd^a 


134.  Akaower  of  Yogas  separates  the  individual  soul  from 
all  manifest  and  unmanifcst  causes  and  Gunas  by  means  of  his 
Yogic  power. 

135.  There  is  no  place  for  him  to  go,  whether  manifest  or 
unmanifest.  He  is  neither  Asa(  (non-existent)  nor  Sat^Asai,  No¬ 
thing  can  be  said  of  his  existence. 


CHAPTER  SIXTEEN 
TIu  Sraddha  Ritual :  Purificatory  Rites 

Bfhaspati  Said\ 

1 .  Henceforth,  I  shall  recount  the  various  types  of  Ddnas 
(religious  gifts)  and  the  benefits  thereof.  I  shall  also  mention 
the  pure  things  to  be  used  in  the  §raddha  rite  and  those  that 
should  be  avoided. 

2.  It  should  be  performed  on  snow-capped  precipice  (?) 
or  he  should  also  bring  snow  from  there  (?).  Hence  Agnihotra 
is  laid  down  (in  the  scriptures)  as  the  greatest  and  holiest. 

3*  One  si  tail  avoid  Sraddha-perfonnance  during  the  night. 
On  other  occasions  also,  since  Rahu  is  seen,  one  should  quickly 
perform  Sraddha  as  soon  as  Rahu  is  secn^  even  by  spending  one’s 
entire  possession. 

4.  He  who  does  not  perform  Sraddha  at  the  time  of 
eclipse  becomes  distressed  like  the  cow  (stuck  up)  in  mire. 
He  who  performs  it,  uplifts  sinners  like  a  boat  in  tlic  ocean  that 
saves  those  who  are  drowning. 

5.  During  the  sacrifice  to  Vi^vedevas  and  Saumyas,  the 
Havis  can  contain  plenty  of  meat.  But  one  should  avoid  the  horn 
of  the  rhinoceros  to  mitigate  the  malice  (of  Pitj-s)  (?) 

^8.  Formerly  while  Tvastr  was  being  prevented  by  the 
noble-souled  Lord  of  Devas  from  drinking  the  Soma  juice  meant 
for  Indra,  the  consort  of  SacI,  it  (some  part  or  drops  of  Soma) 

I.  Cf.  Bd.F.  2.3  J4.  S-4,K?.  IL  1C.8;  Drahma  P.  220-5U54  Eclipses 
are  the  proper  times  for  Sriddbas. 


16,9-15 


611 


fell  on  the  ground*  SySmakas  (a  variety  of  rice)  grew  up  that 
way  (from  drops  of  Soma).  They  arc  honoured  for  (the  propitia¬ 
tion  of)  Pitfs.  The  spray  (of  Soma  juice)  sticking  to  (and 
coming  out  of)  his  nostrils  fell  from  them  (and  became  ikfu — 
sugarcane).  Hence  sugarcanes  are  phlegmatic,  cool,  pleasing 
and  sweet. 

One  should  perform  all  the  Pitr-rites  with  Syamaka  rice 
and  sugarcane  for  the  fuhtUmenC  of  all  desires. 

He  who  performs  Agraya^a  i.e.  the  first  Soma  libation  at  tlie 
Agni$toma  sacrifice  (or  of  fruits  afrer  the  rainy  season)  (with 
Syaraaka  and  sugarcanes)  attains  the  fulfilment  of  his  desires 
quickly.^ 

9.  Syamaka  (rice),  Hastinaman  (?),  Papla  (fruit  of  Tn- 
chosanlhes  Diaotca) ,  fruits  of  Brhatl  (Brinjals)  and  the  crest  of 
Agastya — all  are  very  astrii^ent. 

10-1  la.*  Such  other  excellent  and  sweet  things  as  Ne¬ 
gara  (?),  Dlrghamulaka  (a  kind  of  radish)  should  be  offered  (at 
SrMdha).  So  also  tender  shoots  of  a  bamboo,  surasa^sarjaka 
(juicy  parts  of  the  Sala  tree)  and  Bhuslpja  {andropogen  seho- 

enanthus). 

1  lb-14.  I  shall  now  mention  those  things  that  should  always 
be  avoided  in  Sraddha.  Garlic,  carrots,  onions,  globular 
radish  and  Karajnbha  (groats  or  flour  mixed  with  curds)  and 
other  articles  devoid  of  smell  and  with  no  taste  should  be 
avoided  in  Sraddha.*  The  reason  is  also  mentioned  (as  follows)  : 

Formerly  in  the  hght  between  Devas  and  Asuras,  Bali 
was  defeated  by  Suras.  From  his  wounds  drops  of  blood 
gushed  out  and  from  them  these  articles  grew  up»  Hence  they 
are  avoided  in  the  Sraddha  rite. 

15.  The  exudations  mentioned  in  the  Vedas,  the  salts  found 
in  arid  lands  are  to  be  avoided  in  the  Sraddha  rites.  Women  in 
their  monthly  course  shall  not  take  part  in  Sraddhas. 


1.  For  the  lists  of  kiads  of  eoras  to  be  used  for  Sr^dha  food  vide  MKP. 
29-9-11  (quoted  by  Hemadri).  VP.  HI.  l(3.5-6.  Visnu  Dht.  80.1. 

2.  A  comparisori  of  our  text  with  Bd.  P.  2.3.14  shows  that  some  lines  are 
missing  here  while  others  are  mixed  up. 

3.  Cr.  Dd.P.  23,14.22-27;  Smfti  OuK^-^r^ddha,  pp.  415-416. 


612 


Faj/ti  Purd^ 


16«  Foul-smelling  water,  water  having  froth  and  foamSi 
water  from  puddles,  water  where  cows  are  disinclined  to  drink 
and  the  water  stored  in  vessels  the  previous  night  shall  not  be 
used  in  Sr^dha^. 

1 7.  The  milk  of  ewes,  deer,  camel,  single-horned  animals, 
buffalo  and  the  Camarl  deer  should  be  avoided  by  a  wise  man.^ 

18.  Henceforth  I  shall  mention  the  places  that  should  be 
avoided  assiduously.  1  shall  also  mention,  by  whom  Sraddha 
should  not  be  seen.  I  shall  also  recount  what  is  pure  and  impure 
in  a  Sraddha. 

1 9.  With  great  faith  one  should  perform  a  Sr^dha  by  means 
of  fruits,  roots  and  foodstuffs  available  in  forests.  Thereby  he  at* 
tains  desirable  country,  heaven  and  liberation  (from  Sarhsara) 
as  well  as  fame. 

20.  Places  full  of  noise-pollution  and  teeming  with  insects 
and  a  place  with  foul  smell  shall  be  avoided  for  the  performance 
of  Sraddha.^ 

21.  A  place  within  a  distance  of  twelve  Yojanas  from  all 
the  rivers  joining  the  sea  (i.e.  so  far  from  their  confluence  with 
the  sea),  a  door  at  the  south-east  as  well  as  the  land  of  Tris* 
aiiku,  should  be  avoided. 

22.  The  land  to  the  north  of  Mah^adl  and  to  the  south  of 
Kaikata  is  the  land  of  Triiahku.  It  is  forbidden  for  the  rite  of 
Sraddha.^ 

23.  The  lands  of  Karaiikara(iCarkaI  in  south  Kanara  Dist.) , 
Kalinga,  the  land  to  the  north  of  Sindhu  and  those  lands  wherein 
the  practice  of  the  pious  rites  of  different  stages  of  life  and  castes 
are  not  in  vogue,  should  be  avoided  scrupulously. 

24.  The  naked  and  similar  (apostates  and  non-Vedic  sects) 
people  should  not  see  the  Sraddha  rite.^  This  is  the  rule. 

1.  Mk.  P.  29.15-17 

2.  Gf.  Brahma  P.  220.169;  VP.  III.  16.11;  MK.P.  32.17-19. 

3.  Gf.  Mk.P.  29.19. 

4.  It  is  not  drar  why  places  like  Orissa^  Telaagana  or  regions  north  of 
Indus  were  declared  unfit  for  Sraddha* performance.  Were  they  beyond 
the  pate  of  Brahmanism  when  this  section  of  the  text  came  to  be  written?  Cf. 
Bd.P.  2.3.14.31.33. 

5.  As  explained  below  (w.  26ff),  tboK  who  do  not  have  the  prote^ 
dve  covering  of  the  Vedas.  The  term  includa  not  only  non-Vedic  sects  like 


16.25-32 


613 


Such  Sraddhas  as  are  seen  by  thcse^  do  not  reach  Pitrs  or 
Pitamahas. 

Sarhyti  said  : 

25.  O  holy  lord,  O  leader  of  important  Brahmanas»  please 
recount  in  detail  and  precisely  to  me  who  ask  about  the  naked 
and  similar  people. 

26.  Thus  requested,  Prhaspati  of  great  brillidnce  said  to  him : 
The  Trayi  (the  three  Vedas)  is  remembered  as  the  protec¬ 
tive  covering  unto  alt  living  beings. 

27.  Those  who  discard  it  out  of  delusion  arc  the  naked » 
O  excellent  Bralunana.  If  a  man  forsakes  chat  protection^  he 
becomes  supportless  and  is  ruined. 

28.  If  a  man  discards  Dharma  and  seeks  liberation  {Mok^a) 
elsewhere,  his  labour  therein  is  in  vain.  For  he  has  not  tht  cor¬ 
rect  perspective. 

29*30.  Formerly,  all  the  BrdhmaQas,  K$atriyas,  Vai^yas  and 
Sudras  were  made  heretics  and  placed  in  a  deformed  state  by 
Asurai  who  were  defeated  in  the  battle  between  Devas  and 
Asuras.  This  is  not  the  creation  of  the  self-bom  god 
Brahma*.  Nor  arc  these  : 

3 1 .  Those  who  do  not  praetbe  piety  come  under  the  category 
of  *'the  naked  and  similar  people”  (Nagnaday ah) .  A  Brahmana 
who  keeps  matted  hair  without  any  specific  aim,  who  shaves  off 
bis  hair  for  nothing  and  who  goes  about  naked  purposelessly  is 
also  called  so. 

32.  He  who  observes  holy  rites  in  vain,  he  who  performs 
Japas  in  vain  is  also  called  '^^Naked  etc.”  So  also  those  who  blow 
off  their  homes,  the  hunters  and  those  who  destroy  property 
(are  considered  so) . 


Jaina  and  Buddhists  but  includes  apostate  Brahmins,  atheists,  comjiaiuer  of 
ffrois  sins  {mahd-pdtakas).  GT.  Mbh.  Ajiutdsona  91  •43-44,  KF.  11.  21-32, 
23.4>35,  Vispu  Dh.  $.  89.3^*.  The  underlyii^  idea  is  that  the  sacred  food 
for  Sraddha  would  get  polluted  by  die  mere  sight  of  these  fallen  people. 
*Tbe  line  :  Pdfoo^vaikrtAUhiJU  nai^S 

STffih  MDayaMfawclil 
is  obscure.  Bd.  P.  2.3.14.39  reads 

Poseod^  voi  kfUs  tote,  Ufg/k  stfiih  prajfyak 
(The  defeated  Aiuras),  creat^  heretics.  Their  progeny  are 
pokes  (Dvi*^re^<lhake  is  mis*spr Hingh  Jiirgr<mthos  ( nud  e  J  ainas),  Sekyes  (followers 
of  Buddha)  and  Puffi-kai<oh4»ses  (?) 


614 


VifyuPuri^ 


33.  They  are  denounced  as  men  of  evil  ways  finding  fault 
with  every  action  committed.  The  Sraddha  performed  or  witnes* 
sed  by  these,  goes  to  men(and  not  to  Pitfs)  • 

34.  The  Brahmana-slayer,  the  ungrateful,  the  atheists,  the 
defilers  of  the  preceptor's  bed,  robbers  and  wicked  men  are  shun* 
ned  at  the  very  sight. 

35.  One  shall  avoid  ail  those  who  commit  sins  and  parti¬ 
cularly  those  who  indulge  in  slandering  Devas  and  the  divine 
sages. 

36-40.  Whatever  is  witnessed  by  these,  goes  over  to 
Asuras  and  Yatudhanas. 

Kttayuga  is  said  to  be  the  of  Brahmapas.  Tretayuga 
is  rememberedas  the  age  of  K^atriyas.  They  say  that  Dvaparayuga 
is  the  age  of  Vaisyas  and  Kaliyuga  is  remembered  as  the 
age  of  3udras. 

PitfS  said  : 

The  Vedas  are  to  be  worshipped  in  Krtayuga.  Similarly 
Suras  are  to  be  worshipped  in  Tretayuga.  Wars  are  always 
to  be  worshipped  in  Dvapara  and  the  heretics  in  Kaliyuga. 

There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  these  spoil  a  Sraddha  by  their 
mere  sight :  the  dishonoured,  the  unholy,  fowl,  domestic 
pig  and  dog.  The  Sraddha  materials  touched  by  calves  and 
the  people  having  pollution  and  chronic  ailments  are  defiled. 
Cooked  food  should  never  be  seen  by  dirty  or  fallen  persons.  If 
they  see,  it  cannot  be  used  as  Havya  and  Kavya  (otTerings  to 
gods  and  Pitn)  • 

41.  The  chief  materials  touched  by  them  become  desecra¬ 
ted.  Solidified  ghee  shall  be  avoided  at  the  very  outset.  Sprink¬ 
ling  with  water  mixed  with  clay  is  laid  down  (for  the  consecra¬ 
tion  of  materials  of  Sraddha). 

42.  Scattering  of  yellow  mustard  and  black  gingelly  seeds 
should  be  done.  The  articles  should  be  assiduously  shown  to  the 
preceptor,  the  sim  and  the  fire. 

43-47.  The  following  should  be  avoided  in  Sraddha  :  that 
which  is  trodden  upon  by  people  while  climbing  on  to  their 
seats;  that  which  i;  seen  by  the  mobile  beings  that  are  defiled; 
dried  up  and  stale  things;  partly  eaten  things,  defiled  objects; 
that  which  is  licked  at  the  tip;  that  which  is  defiled  by  gravel, 


16.48-58 


615 


pebbles  and  hair  or  worm-eaten;  cooked  rice  and  other  food** 
9t\xSs  in  which  salt  has  been  added;  gingelly  seeds  and  barley 
ground  and  powdered  like  oilcake;  and  things  shaken  off  from 
garments.  There  are  certain  people  who  profess  to  be  very  wise 
by  showing  their  opposition  to  the  Vedas.  They  are  to  be  termed 
^Ayajflapatis*  (non-masters  of  sacrifice).  They  are  as  thoi^h  the 
dusts  of  Sr^dha.  Forbidden  vegetables  mixed  with  curds,  as 
well  as  sour  gruel  or  fomented  liquids  are  avoided  in  a  Sraddha* 

48.  One  should  avoid  (the  egg-plant)  and  all  distilled 
liquors.  The  salt  extracted  from  the  ocean  (water)  and  from  the 
(waten  of  the)  Manasa  (lake)  (is  holy). 

49-50.  This  is  extremely  holy.  It  is  visible  directly.  It  is  put 
into  the  6re  and  then  taken  in  the  hands  aitd  carefully  pressed. 
It  is  to  be  applied  to  the  forehead.  This  is  remembered  asBrah- 
matirlha.  All  the  articles  for  Sraddha  should  be  sprinkled  and 
offered  in  the  sacriBce.^ 

51.  Arift^  (soap-berry),  Tumula,  Bilva,  Ihguda  and  Sva- 
dana  should  be  soaked  in  water  and  (water  be)  sprinkled  (out 
of  them). 

52.  All  sorts  of  baskets  (wicker-work)  should  be  purified  ac¬ 
cording  to  the  conventional  practice.  Vessels  made  of  tooth 
(ivory  )-bone>  wood  and  horns  should  be  scrubbed  and  scraped. 

53-54.  All  earthen  pots  should  be  burnt  again  (for  purifica¬ 
tion).  Gems,  diamonds,  corab,  pearls  and  conchs  are  to  be 
purified  by  (brushing  with)  the  residues  of  powdered  yellow 
mustai  d  or  gingelly  seeds.  The  same  can  be  used  to  purify  sheep 
wool  and  all  types  of  hair. 

55.  All  kinds  of  sheep’s  wool  can  be  purified  with  clay  and 
water,  (but)  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  purificatory  proces¬ 
ses  washing  with  water  is  recommended. 

56.  Purification  of  cotton  cloth  is  efiected  with  sacred  ashes. 
Flowers,  halts,  pins  and  rods  should  be  dipped  in  water. 

57-58.  Purification  of  the  earth  (ground)  is  by  sweeping, 
sprinkling  and  smearing  (with  cowdung)  •  Outside  the  village 
the  ground  (earth)  is  purified  by  the  wind.  Purification  (cleans¬ 
ing)  of  bow  and  arrows  is  efiected  by  (brushing)  it  with  clay. 
Thus  the  excellent  modes  of  purification  have  been  mentioned. 

1.  Verses  50*58  describe  the  process  of  piU’ifyiog  difierent  arUdes  to 
be  used  in  a  Sr^dha 


616  Pur^ 

Henceforth  I  shall  mention  further  modes  of  purification.  Listen 
to  it  even  as  I  recount* 

59.  One  should  evacuate  the  bowels  early  in  the  morning 
at  a  distance  of  an  arrow^shot  from  the  house  in  the  south-wes¬ 
tern  direction  and  within  the  view  of  the  house.  He  should  cover 
the  head  (with  a  cloth).  He  shall  not  touch  the  head  with  the 
hands.^ 

60-^1.  (Before  evacuating)  the  ground  should  be  covered 
with  dry  grass,  wooden  sticks  or  leaves,  bamboo  chips  or  broken 
mud  pots.  He  should  take  water  in  a  pot  and  hold  clay  also  in 
the  hand  in  complete  silence.  He  should  sit  facing  the  north 
during  the  day  and  the  south  during  the  night. 

62.  He  should  hold  the  water-pot  with  the  right  liand  and 
wash  the  anus  with  the  left  hand  applying  clay  three  times. 

63.  He  should  scrub  the  left  hand  with  clay  ten  times  and 
then  each  of  the  two  liands  five  times. 

64.  Washing  the  feet  after  applying  clay,  he  should  duly 
perform  Acamana  (sipping  of  water) .  He  should  then  pour  water 
down  three  times  with  (invocation  of)  the  sun,  fire  and  water. 

65.  A  sensible  man  should  always  keep  a  water-pot  handy. 
Subsidiary  actions  and  washing  of  the  feet  shall  be  done  by  means 
of  this  pot. 

66.  The  performance  of  Acamana  and  divine  duties  shall 
be  done  by  means  of  a  second  (vessel)  •  If  such  actions  are  per¬ 
formed  with  a  defiled  hand,  one  should  observe  fast  for  three 
nights. 

67.  In  protracted  cases  of  deiault,  the  rite  of  Kfcchra  is 
prescribed  for  expiation.  After  touching  a  dog  or  a  Candala 
one  should  perform  Taptakrcclira  rite. 

68.  If  human  bones  are  touched,  fasting  is  the  purification 
(for  it).  It  is  prescribed  that  if  (the  bones  are)  touched  deiibera- 


1 .  After  dealing  with  the  purificadoD  of  things  or  materials  for  Sraddha, 
the  author  deals  with  the  purification  of  the  man  perfimning  the  Sraddha 
in  w.  59  to  die  end  of  the  Chapter.  The  Pur&ha-writera  (in  fact  the  whole 
tribe  of  writen  on  Dharma-Sistra  in  the  mediaeval  period }  appear  to  have 
been  so  much  obsessed  Mth  ^purity-psychosis*  that  they  lost  sight  of  the 
social  necessity  of  assimUatiog  foreigners  or  backward  people  in 
Hinduism  and  prohibited  their  own  followers  firom  going  beyond  the  contrac¬ 
ting  geographical  limits  of  Brahmanism  (vide  w.  69-71). 


16.69-78 


617 


tely.  the  fast  is  to  be  observed  for  three  aights,  and  for  one  night, 
if  touched  unintentionally. 

69-71.  By  going  to  unholy  places,  one  acquires  all  sorts  of 
sins.  These  unholy  places  are — Karaskaras,  Pulindas,  Andhras, 
Sabaras  and  others,  the  land  of  Bhutilaya  (if  one  drinks  water 
there) ,  the  land  of  Yugandhara,  up  to  the  northen  borderlands 
of  Sindhu,  the  land  of  Divyantaraiata,  sinful  countries 
occupied  by  sinners  and  lands  devoid  of  good  men  such  as 
Brahman  as  who  have  mastered  the  Vedas. 

72-73.  Clarity  of  mind,  Are,  timely  whitewashing— these 
things  indicate  purity.  But  one  ts  always  ignorant.  If  one  makes 
default  in  the  purificatory  rites— except  out  of  ignorance,  undoub¬ 
tedly  the  benefit  goes  to  Pi^acaa  and  Y&tudh&nas. 

74-75,  One  who  has  no  faith  in  purificatory  rites  is  born 
among  Mlecchas.  Those  who  do  not  perform  Yajftas  and  sinners 
are  bom  among  the  lower  strata  of  animals.  A  man  gets  released 
from  sins  through  purificatory  rites  and  attains  heaven.  Devas 
indeed  desire  purity.  Tliis  has  been  declared  by  Devas  themselves. 

76.  Suras  always  forsake  the  hideous  and  the  unclean. 
Men  of  auspicious  rites  perform  three  types  of  purificatory  rites 
jmtifiably. 

77-78.  Pitff  delighted  with  them  for  their  pure  rites, 
increase  the  Yogic  power  and  bestow  all  cherished  things 
available  in  the  three  worlds,  on  these  people,  viz.  a  man  who 
reveres  Brahmanas,  one  who  receives  guests,  an  intelligent  man 
who  adheres  to  purity,  one  devotedly  attaclied  to  parents, 
one  who  possesses  self-control  and  one  who  is  sympathetic,  O 
Brahmanas. 


618 


Vdjm  Purd^a 


CHAPTER  SEVENTEEN 

The  Test  for  Eligibity  of  a  Brahma^ 

{JcT  Srdddka  Invitation ) 

The  Sages  said  : 

1.  O  intelligent  Suta,  the  Sraddhakalpa  has  been  recounted 
by  you.  The  Srdddhakalpa  glorified  by  sages,  has  been  heard 
by  us. 

2.  Its  extensive  details  have  been  particularly  narrated.  O 
extremely  intelligent  one,  please  mention  the  remaining  topics 
too,  according  to  the  opinion  of  that  sage. 

Suia  said  : 

3.  O  l)lessed  Brahmanas,  I  snat]  recount  the  opinion  of  that 
sage  in  detail,  in  regard  to  Srdddha.  Listen  to  it  from  me. 

4.  The  Sraddha  rite  as  well  as  die  mode  of  its  performance 
have  been  previously  mentioned  by  me.  I  shall  also  mention 
what  remains  in  the  proper  order  as  regards  the  Brahmanas. 

5.  It  is  not  that  Brahmanas  should  always  be  (subjected 
to)  tests  and  investigation.  But  in  regard  to  rites  pertaining  to 
gods  and  Pitfa  (employment  of)  tests  ha^  been  laid  down  in  the 
Sruti.^ 

6.  One  shall  scrupulously  avoid  that  person  in  wliom  de¬ 
fects  are  seen  or  who  is  shunned  by  good  men  or  who,  through 
contacts  or  staying  togetlicr,  is  known  to  be  wicked. 

7-8.  A  sensible  man  sliould  always  test  a  Brahmana  who  is 
not  known  before,  at  the  time  of  Sraddha.^ 


1 .  Since  the  daya  of  Grhya  Sutras,  there  wasiosisiencc  on  the  anteredents, 

learning,  character  of  (be  Invitees  (Br^mai^as)  Tor  rites  pertaining  to  Devas 
and  Phrs  ( Asvalayana  G.S.  IV  7.2,  Bamlhayana  G.S.  II.  8.2-3,  H  10.5-G). 
To  these  Smrtis  and  Purfnias  added  many  more,  bui  heredity,  personality, 
Vedic  learning,  character  remained  the  main  considerations  in  the  case  of 
such  invitees  (  cf.  Mt.P.  16.8-10,  NP.I,  28.0-10,  KP.  II.  21  and  Smfti  CendrikdX 
Srddfiha  — pp.  388-384) .  SelT^ontrol  was  the  /tRf-fuj.apa  of  :id  in¬ 

vitee.  Manu  (II  118}  declares,  *A  Jtrahmaqa  who  knows  only  the  GSyctri 
Mr.nifa  but  is  self-cvnu oiled,  is  preferable  lo  a  Br^hmana  who  knows  the 
three  Vedas,  but  lacks  in  self-control. 

2,  Cf.  Vl?ou  Dh.S.  82- J -2. 


17,9-17 


619 


Indeed  Siddhas  roam  over  this  earth  in  the  guise  of 
Brahmanas.  Hence  one  should  approach  the  in-coming  guests 
with  palms  joined  in  reverence.  He  shoiJd  worship  him  offering 
water  for  washing  the  feet,  oil  for  massage  and  food  for 
eating. 

9-10.  Dcvas  and  the  masters  of  Yoga  roam  about  the 
ocean-girt  earth  in  various  guisea,  virtuously  protecting  the 
subjects.  A  man  should  worship  and  offer  a  Brahmatia  guest 
different  types  of  food  and  vegetable  dishes  and  fruits  as  well.^ 

II.  It  is  heard  that  one  attains  the  fruit  of  Agnistoma 
(sacrifice)  by  offering  milk  (or  water)  to  a  guest.*  By  offering 
ghee  he  attains  splendid  vision  as  well  as  tlie  fruit  of  a  yajila  of 
sixteen-day  duration.  By  offering  honey,  he  attains  the  fruit 
otAfirdtra  sacrifice. 

I2<  A  devout  person  who  feeds  Brahmaijias  faithfully^ 
offering  them  all  desired  objects,  obtains  the  fruit  thereof.  He 
who  offers  all  his  possessions  to  all  guests  and  Brahmanas  enjoys 
for  ever  the  fruit  of  SarDamed/ia  sacrifice. 

13.  He  who  slights  a  guest  after  his  coming  at  the  time 
of  Sraddha  or  in  a  rite  for  Devas,  is  shunned  by  Dcvas  in  the 
manner  a  Hotr  disregards  another  man’s  wealth. 

14.  For  the  purpose  of  blessing  the  worlds  Devas,  Pitfs 
and  Fire-god  enter  those  Brahmanas  and  take  food. 

15.  Iftheyarenot  worshipped,  they  burn;  if  they  are 
worshipped,  they  grant  all  desires.  Hence  one  should  always 
worship  guests  by  offering  one’s  entire  possession. 

16.  A  forest -dweller,  a  houseltolder,  a  person  who  visits  the 
house,  children,  distressed  persons  and  an  ascetic— all  there  are 
to  be  known  as  Alithis  (guests). 

1 7.  An  Abhydgnta  is  the  guest  who  begs  for  something.  An 
Atithi  will  not  beg.  An  Aiithi  is  the  most  excellent  because  he 


1.  Verses  0*t0  mean  that  an  alitki  (an  uninvited  guest) — a  stranger- 
coming  for  food  at  the  time  of  Sraddha  is  exempt  from  the  qualificationa  on 
the  specious  ground  that  the  stranger  might  be  a  siddha  or  a  god  in 
disguise. 

t-  Such  chea*)  promises  of  getting  the  fruits  of  sacrifices  like  Agnistoma 
or  Atir^tra  by  offering  ordinary  things  like  milk  or  ghee  to  Dr^maeas  have 
adversely  affected  the  Vedic  institution  of  sacrifice.  For  the  duiinction 
between  Aiithi  and  Abkjdgata  vide  w.  1$-18  below. 


620  ^4)^  Purd^ 

has  no  Tii/ii  (fixed  daCe)  •  This  is  said  to  be  the  etymological 
meaning  of  AiOAi. 

18.  A  real  guest  is  neither  terrible  nor  of  a  mixed  castc» 
neither  devoid  of  learning  nor  a  very  learned  specialist,  neither 
has  he  too  many  children  nor  is  he  servile.  He  is  of  good 
conduct. 

19.  A  person  who  wishes  (the  fruit  of)  the  performance  of 
a  Yajfla  should  hospitably  receive  and  give  (food  etc.)  to  a 
guest  who  has  wandered  a  lot»  is  thirsty,  tired  and  extremely 
hungry. 

20*22a.  By  climbing  on  to  BhrgutuAga,  by  visiting  (and 
taking  holy  dip  in)  the  holy  river  Sarasvatt,  the  holy  river- 
goddess  Ganga,  MahanadI,  and  other  rivers  originating 
from  HimavAn  and  those  worshipped  by  sages,  as  well 
as  lakes  and  holy  centres,  one  becomes  free  from  sins  and  is 
honoured  in  heaven. 

22b-23.  It  is  said  that  there  is  pollution  due  to  death  for  ten 
nights  particularly  for  a  Brahmana.  It  is  prescribed  that  a 
K^atriya  has  twelve  days'  pollution.  A  Vaiiya  has  pollution  for 
lialfa  month  and  a  3udra  becomes  pure  after  a  month.^ 

24-25.  A  woman  in  menses  in  all  the  castes  becomes  pure 
in  three  nights.  It  is  laid  down  that  by  touching  a  woman  in 
her  menses,  a  woman  lying-in-chamber,  a  dog,  a  Cla^dnla, 
a  nudist  like  a  Digambara  Jaina  and  similar  people  and  those 
who  have  borne  a  dead  body,  one  gets  polluted.  He  must  take 
bath  along  with  his  clothes  and  smear  clay  twelve  times  on 
himself.  Then  he  becomes  pure. 

26-27.  The  same  puriheatory  rite  should  be  followed  inthe 
case  of  sexual  intercourse.  Clay  is  to  be  applied  nine  times. 
After  washing  hands  with  clay  (and  water) ,  a  person  shall 
perform  the  purificatory  rite.  After  washing  the  hands  with 
water  and  taking  bath,  a  sendble  man  shall  apply  clay  to  the 
private  parts  twice. 

28.  This  is  the  mode  of  purification  to  be  observed  by  all  the 
castes  for  ever.  One  should  smear  hands  and  feet  three  times 
and  sprinkle  them  with  water. 

29.  This  is  the  purificatory  rite  for  forest-dwellers 


1.  Venei  226-30  deal  with  penoaal  purificatioo 


1 7.30-42 


621 


(Vdnaprasthas) ,  HtMcfotih  I  shall  mention  the  procedure  for 
village-dwellers  (i.e.  for  householders).  Clay  is  applied  to  the 
hands  three  times  and  three  times  to  the  feet. 

30.  Clay  shall  be  applied  fifteen  times  to  the  hands  and 
other  unclean  parts.  Clay  shall  be  applied  to  the  uncleaned 
parts  and  it  shall  be  washed  with  water. 

31.  After  tying  a  cloth  round  the  neck  or  the  head,  if  any¬ 
one  walks  on  foot  along  the  street,  he  shall  wash  the  feet.  With¬ 
out  washing  the  feet,  even  if  he  performs  Acamana,  he  shall  be 
unclean. 

32.  After  washing  the  feet  and  setting  the  water  pot  down, 
he  should  perform  Acamana  and  then  sprinkle  it  with  water. 
The  materials  of  Sraddha  etc.  shall  be  sprinkled  again. 

33.  Sprinkling  is  recommended  on  flowers  etc.j  grass  and 
Havis.  Objects  brought  by  others  should  be  placed  down  and 
sprinkled  with  water. 

34.  In  a  Sraddha  and  rites  for  Devas  only,  those  articles 
that  are  sprinkled  with  water  should  be  used.  Whatever  is 
brought  to  the  altar  should  be  brought  at  the  northern  end  and 
taken  away  from  the  southern  end. 

35.  If  the  procedure  is  altered  in  the  rites  pertaining  to 
Devas  or  Pitfs,  it  (the  rite)  becomes  fruitless.  With  the  right 
hand,  one  should  touch  the  southern  altar*. 

36a  It  is  auspicious  to  scatter  ritual  is  tically  the  offering  to 
Devas  and  Pitrs  with  both  the  hands. 

36b.  (Acamana  is  the  purificatory  rite  in  the  following 
cases:) 

When  one  is  agitated  or  enraged;  after  getting  up  from 
sleep;  after  urination  and  evacuation  ofboweb; 

37-42.  when  one  spits;  after  taking  food;  when  feet  are  not 
washed;  after  conversing  with  a  person  excommunicated 
(by  others) ;  after  working  in  unclean  places  (?) ;  in  all  doubtful 
aces  such  as  when  the  tuft  of  hair  is  untied  and/or  one  is  with¬ 
out  the  sacred  thread;  when  the  lips  touch  the  teeth;  when  one 


*The  text  reads:  hasuna  daksiftdm  mdam  ilikhst  out  of  which  the 

Utt  three  words  are  confusing.  Bd.  P.  24.14.99  reads 
'should  touch  the  sou  them  altar*  which  is  more  appropriate  and  hence 
accepted  here. 


622 


Vtyu  Pur^ 


sees  Ca^dalas;  after  touching  things  clinging  to  the  teeth  with 
the  tongue ;snapping  the  fillers  loudly ;  wlien  seeing  while  bowing 
down  etc.  He  who  is  in  the  midst  of  a  sinful  action,  but  out  of 
delusion  performs  Acamana  is  also  unclean.  He  should  then 
squat  in  a  clean  place  and  bow  down  facing  the  north  or  the 
cast.  After  washing  the  hands  and  feet,  he  should  perform 
Acamana  between  the  knees  (keeping  hands  on  laps  ?).  He 
should  sip  the  still  water  thrice  with  concentration  and  purity  of 
mind. 

43.  He  should  perform  Mdrjana  (cleansing  with  water) 
twice  and  then  Abhyukfot^a  (sprinkling  with  water)  once  over 
the  sense  organs,  head,  hands  and  feet  as  well 

44-49,  Anything  not  considered  properly,  shall  besprinkled 
with  water.  In  tliis  manner  his  Acamana,  Vedas  ( Vedic  Study) 
YajAas,  penance,  charitable  gifl  8  and  vow  of  celibacy  become 
fruitful  If  an  atheist  performs  holy  rites  without  performing 
Acamana  out  of  delusion,  all  those  rites  shall  undoubtedly  be 
futile.  All  these  following  should  be  known  pure — that  which 
is  pure  in  words,  that  wliich  is  cleaned,  tliat  which  is  undefiled 
and  that  which  is  not  censured.  The  opposite  of  these  is 
impure.  A  hungry  Brahmana  should  never  be  told— ‘‘There  is 
nothing' \  If  anything  is  given  to  him  after  duly  honouring  him, 
it  is  called  a  sacrifice  without  erecting  a  sacrificial  post.  During 
Sraddhas,  an  indigent  but  non-begging,  solitary  and  shy 
Brahmana  should  always  be  fed  with  food  neither  over-cookcd 
nor  watery.  He  who  offers  food  to  the  low  castes  only,  is  a 
wicked  soul,  a  Brahmana-slayer. 

50-51.  Even  if  he  takes  a  hundred  births,  he  does  not  be¬ 
come  free  from  that  sin.  A  Brahmana  who  feeds  the  nobler 
and  less  dignified  Br^manas  in  the  same  row,  whether  urged 
by  others  or  not,  incurs  sin  Immediately.  Even  his  merit 
resulting  from  digging  wells  and  tanks  becomes  destroyed. 

52-53.  In  a  festival,  an  ascetic  Is  the  leader  of  all  Brah- 
manas.^  An  excellent  Brahma^  who  reads  all  the  Vedas  ^vitb 
Itih^  constituting  their  fifth  (Veda),  should  be  kept  next 


1.  Verses  52«54  state  the  precedence  to  be  given  to  Brahma^ai  according 
to  their  learning,  in  the  seating  arrangement  of  Brahmaoas  to  be  fed.  It  is 
notevwthy  that  a  recluse  or  a  Yogi  gets  (he  first  place  of  honour. 


17.54-59 


623 


to  him  by  one  who  knows.  ABr^mana  who  studies  three  Vedas 
comes  next  to  him.  One  (a  student)  of  two  Vedas  comes  next  to 
him. 

54.  Then  a  man  of  a  single  Veda  and  after  him  comes  a  per¬ 
son  who  studies  the  Nyaya  System.  For  the  purity  of  the  row, 
I  am  mentioning  them.  Understand.  I  shall  mention  those 
who  sanctify  the  row(?) . 

55-58.  Those  who  are  mentioned  before,  arc  mentioned  in 
their  order.  The  (those  who  sanctify  the  row  of 

diners)  are  the  following: — $adahg!  (a  person  who  has  learnt 
all  the  six  ancillary  subjects  of  the  Veda),  Vinayl  (the  discipli¬ 
ned  one) ,  Yogin,  S<irvatantrasvatantra  (he  who  has  mastered  all 
systems  of  philosophy)  and  Tdydvata  (a  wandering  mendicant 
saint) .  All  these  five  should  be  known  as  Pai^ktipdvanas,  He  who 
has  mastered  completely  one  of  the  eighteen  lores,  he  who  ful¬ 
fills  his  duty  duly— all  of  them  are  also  so.  The  Tnf,idciketas^  (a 
Brahtnana  who  learns  the  three  Vidyas  of  Naeiketas),  the 
Traividya  (he  who  has  mastered  tlu^ee  Vidyas) ,  the  Brahmana 
who  learns  Dlianna^stras,  the  Brahmai>awho  has  mastered  the 
Barhaspatya  scripture — all  these  Brahmarias  an:  said  to  be 
those  who  sanctify  the  row. 

59.  If  a  Brahmana  invited  in  a  Sraddha  indulges  in 
sexual  intercourse  with  a  woman,  the  Pitrs  lie  down  in  his  semen 
virile  for  the  period  of  that  month  (?) 


1.  It  was  believed  that  persoiu  of  specially  high  character,  merit, 
learning  etc.  purify  excommuoicated  or  degenerate  members  of  the 
society  by  associating  with  them,  by  siting  in  their  row  Ibr  dining  or  even 
by  their  beneficent  look  (v  91  bdow).  The  belief  was  probably  current 
before  the  time  of  Dharma  Sutras:  suSr  Apartarhba  Dh.  $.11.  7.1 7-22. 
Curiously  enough.  Gautama  (15J^),  Baudhayana  Db.S.  II.  8.2,  Manu  III. 
I83'1d6,  YSjfiavalkya  Smrti  (I.  21^  use  the  same  words  about  these 
sanctifiers  of  diners  {Pa^txpSoanas) ,  We  get  a  long  list  of  such  sanctifiers 
in  Mbh.  AnuSMna  90.25-31,  Mt.P.  16.7-23,  KP.  II.2M-I4.  Btl.P.  2.3.15.28- 
32.  Our  (ext  practically  repeats  the  same  lines. 

2.  Trindcikiia  is  alternately  expli^ed  as  : 

(i)  A  person  who  knows  the  J{aeik$td  fire. 

(ii)  A  person  who  has  thrice  kindled  the  fire. 

(ill)  One  who  has  studied  the  Anm^kd  called  VirajAS  (Tait.  Br.  111. 
11.7-8)  which  describes  the  Naclkata  fitc  and  the  Kory  of 
Naeiketas. 


624 


Vd^  Purdna 


60*  If  the  performer  of  a  Sraddha  or  he  who  takes  food 
in  a  Sraddha,  indulges  in  sexual  intercourse,  undoubtedly  the 
Pitfs  are  stationed  in  his  semen  virile  that  month. 

61^62»  HenceaDdAA  (reiigious  gift)  is  to  be  made  to  the 
guest  and  a  Brahmacarin  (celibate  person)  is  to  be  fed.  The 
J?dna  is  to  be  made  to  one  engrossed  in  meditation  and  having 
sympathetic  feelings.  In  the  Sraddha  rite,  a  righteous  ascetic  or 
a  Valakhilya  (a  mendicant  who  docs  not  hoard  anything) 
should  be  fed.  A  Vdnaprastha  (forested well er)  and  an  Upakur* 
vdna  (Brahmacarin  who  completes  his  studies  and  pays  his 
teacher  and  is  about  to  be  a  householder)  is  propitiated  by  mere 
worship* 

63.  If  a  householder  is  fed,  VHvedevas  are  worshipped. 
By  worshipping  a  V&naprastha,  sages  are  worshipped.  By 
worshipping  Valakhilyas,  Purandara  (i.e.  Indra)  is  wor« 
shipped. 

64.  In  worshipping  ascetics,  Brahma  himself  is  wor¬ 
shipped.  These  Airamas  are  holy.  There  arc  five  Ana  Sramas 
through  deceitful  ness  (?) 

65.  FourAiramas  (i.  e.  people  in  the  four  stages  of  life) 
are  to  be  worshipped  in  the  rites  ol  Devas  and  Pitfs.  A  Sraddha 
should  never  be  offered  to  those  who  are  outside  the  four  stages 
of  life. 

66.  Even  if  he  stays  hungry,  let  him  stay  so  outside  the 
four  stages  of  life.  The  non-ascetic  and  the  Salvationist— both  of 
them  arc  the  defilers  of  the  row.* 


1  >  Vmes  66-83  give  a  list  of  persons  wbo  are  dealers  of  the  row  of  diners 
,■  These  lines  are  common  to  Smttis  and  other  Purinai 
such  as  Manu  HI.  151-166,  Ylijriavaikya  I.  222-224,  Brhad  Yama  Smf. 
m.  34-38,  Mbh.  Anuidsana  90.6-U,  Mt.P.  16.14-17,  BM.P.  220.127-135, 
NP.  I.  30-4,  KF.  II.  21.27-46  to  mention  a  few.  Apart  from  the  textual 
similarity,  the  lists  are  interesting  from  a  sociological  point  of  view.  They 
indicate  what  class  of  persooi,  vocations,  ways  of  life  were  disrespected  by 
the  elites  of  those  times.  Sects  which  insist  on  long  fasts  (e.g.  Jainas), 
S^kliyas  (who  were  originally  atheists),  non-Br&hmanical  mendicants  like 
Bauddhas,  Juinas,  persevj  not  following  the  vocations  of  their  castes,  are 
regarded  as  unworthy  of  being  invited  to  a  Srgddba  or  receiving  religious 
gifts  (ddnd). 


17.67*78 


625 


67.  Those  who  shave  off  their  hair  in  vain,  those  who 
wear  matted  hair,  those  who  wear  all  sorts  of  robes,  those  who 
arc  devoid  of  mercy,  those  who  break  all  codes  of  good  con¬ 
duct  and  those  who  arc  indiscriminate  in  eating — are  to  be 
avoided. 

68.  In  the  matter  of  Havya  and  Katya^  one  shall  avotd 
Karukas  (a  Salva  sect)  and  men  of  no  disciplined  conduct  of 
life,  men  ostracised  from  the  Vcdic  Society,  musicians  and 
actors  (who  imitate  deities) . 

69-70.  A  person  who  has  social  and  other  contacts  with 
these,  attains  black  complexion  (taint) .  He  who  dines  with 
Sudras — all  these  arc  defilers  of  the  row  (of  diners) . 

71.  Killing  (of  animals  etc.),  destruction  with  force, 
agriculture,  trading  activities,  animal  husbandry,  secret  service 
to  a  person  other  than  the  preceptor — these  should  not  be 
followed  by  a  Brihmana. 

72.  Those  who  arc  real  Brahmanas,  punue  knowledge  and 
meditation.  ICven  if  they  are  born  as  Brahmanas,  those  who 
have  false  conceptions  are  of  evil  conduct. 

73.  The  preachers  of  wrong/hcrciic  doctrines  should  be 
avoided.  So  also  the  arrogant,  the  scandal-monger,  and  people 
defiled  by  minor  sins  and  great  sins  should  be  avoided. 

74-75.  Those  who  make  use  of  Vedas  as  a  means  of  em¬ 
ployment  out  of  greed  and  delusion  or  for  profit  arc  the  sellers 
of  Vedas.  They  are  to  be  avoided  in  the  Sraddha  rite. 

Study  of  Vedas  is  not  a  profession.  He  who  makes  it  a 
profession  is  a  sinner.  The  partaker  is  deprived  of  the  fruit  of 
Vcdic  study.  The  donor  is  deprived  of  the  frint  of  charity. 

76.  A  person  hired  to  teach  the  Vedas  and  one  who  is 
taught  by  such  a  person — both  of  them  do  not  deserve  invit¬ 
ation  to  a  Sraddha  as  the  sellers  and  buyers  of  the  Vedas. 

77.  Those  (Br^maiias)  who  buy  and  sell  for  the  purpose 
of  livelihood  are  despicable  ones.  This  is  the  profession  of  a 

Vaisya  but  a  sin  unto  Br^manas. 

78.  They  say  that  he  who  depends  for  his  livelihood  upon 
the  Vedas  and  he  who  depends  upon  those  who  know  Vedas 
for  livelihood  do  not  deserve  invitation  to  a  Sraddha.  The 
husband  of  one’s  daughter  also  shall  not  be  invited. 


626 


79.  He  who  goes  unto  his  wife  in  vain  (i.e«  an  issueless 
person)  and  he  who  perforins  Yajfta  in  vain — both  of  these  do 
not  deserve  an  (invitation  to)  a  Sraddha.  A  Brahmana  (who 
is)  an  atheist  also  shall  not  be  invited. 

80.  He  who  cooks  food  for  himself  only  and  he  who  does 
not  offer  anything  to  Devas  and  guests — both  of  them  are 
fallen  and  they  are  Brahmarak^as.  They  do  not  deserve 
(invitation  to)  a  Sraddha. 

81.  Those  whose  wives  eagerly  await  the  nights  and  those 
who  run  after  other  men's  wive3»  as  well  as  those  who  are 
mad  after  wealth  and  love  should  not  be  invited  to  a  Sraddha. 

82.  Those  who  are  opposed  to  the  discipline  and  the  duties 
of  the  four  castes  and  stages  of  Mft,  a  tlaief  and  he  who  indiscri¬ 
minately  performs  Yajila  for  everyone^ all  these  are  dc filers 
of  the  row  in  the  rite  ofSriddha. 

83.  Pitfs  do  not  partake  of  their  share  in  the  Sraddha 
if  the  invited  Brahmana  eats  like  a  boar«  or  eats  off  his  palm  or 
eats  with  his  left  hand. 

84.  The  leavings  of  the  Snaddha  food  should  not  be  given 
to  women  or  a  Sudra  unless  he  is  an  attendant.  If  anyone 
gives  out  of  passion  or  delusion^  it  never  reaches  Pitfs. 

85.  Hence  in  a  Sraddha  rite>  the  leavings  of  food  should 
never  be  given  except  curds  and  ghee  and  that  too  to  a  disciple 
and  a  son;  not  otherwbe. 

86.  Only  Uiat  which  is  not  left  over  should  be  given,  such 
as  food  particularly.  Pitfs  are  propitiated  with  flowers,  roots 
and  fruits  too  as  with  food. 

87.  The  foodstuffs  served  are  sanctified  as  long  as  they 
are  warm.  Pitrs  partake  of  the  food  as  long  as  the  invited 
Brahman  as  take  their  food,  with  control  over  their  speech. 

88.  Charitable  gifts,  acceptance  of  gifts,  Homa,  taking  food 
and  oblations  must  b<‘  made  with  the  thumb  (touching  them) 
lest  they  should  go  to  Asuras. 

89.  All  these  rites  and  particularly  the  rite  of  gifting  away, 
are  thus  performed.  The  rile  of  Acamana  is  performed  with  the 
hands  within  the  knees. 

90.  One  should  avoid  persons  with  shaven  heads,  matted 
hair,  and  ochre-coloured  robes,  at  the  time  of  Sraddha  rite. 


17.91—18.1 


627 


One  should  assiduously  offer  Sriddha  to  those  who  wear  tufts 
and  to  the  Tridan^in  type  of  ascetics. 

91.  Those  who  are  steadfast  in  their  holy  rites^  those  who 
seek  knowledge  and  are  engaged  in  meditations  and  the  noble- 
souled  devotees  of  Dcvas  do  sanctify  (others)  by  their  mere 
sight. 

92.  The  whole  of  the  three  worlds  is  pervaded’  or  ever  by 
the  masters  of  Yoga.  Hr  rice  they  (can)  observe  whatever  there 
is  in  the  universe. 

93-94.  The  noble  souls  keep  both  the  manifest  and  the  iin« 
manifest  under  their  control.  They  control  even  that  which  is 
greater  than  all.  Truth  and  falsehood  have  been  perceived 
by  them.  Snt^  Asat  have  been  seen  by  them.  All  knowable 
things,  absolution  etc.  arc  seen  by  the  noble  souls.  Hence  one 
who  is  devoted  to  them  attains  everything  auspicious. 

95,  He  who  knows  the  knows  the  Vedas.  He  who 
knows  the  Yajur  Mantras  knows  Yajha.  He  who  knows  Saman 
Mantras  knows  Brahman.  He  who  knows  Manasa  (?  mind) 
knows  everything. 


CHAPTER  EIGHTEEN 
Benefit  Derived  from  Charitable  Gifts 

Bfliaspati  saidx 

1 .  Henceforth  I  shall  recount  the  various  types  of  religious 
gifts  and  the  benefits  thereof.^  A  religious  gift  enables  all  living 
beings  to  cross  (the  ocean  of  worldly  exis^nce).  It  is  the  pleas¬ 
ing  pathway  unto  heaven. 


1.  Though  ancient  works  on  Dharma  Sistra  insist  upon  avoidance  of 
lavishncsa  in  later  Pur&^as  encour:^c  profuse  expenditure 

on  SrSddha,  e.g.  Pd.  P.  9.179-181,  Varaha  P.  13.50-51, 

VP.  III.  14.22-23.  Fitfs  are  r^rted  to  have  two  Gath^i  expressing  their 
desire  to  have  a  descendaot  who  would  bestow  on  Britlixnaoai  (for  the 
benefit  ofPitrs)  jeweb,  clothes,  land,  costly  veliides.  This  text  encourages 


628 


ydjm  PurS^ 


2.  That  which  is  the  most  excellent  in  the  world,  that 
which  is  conducive  to  the  attainment  of  heaven,  nay,  everything 
that  is  pleasing  to  oneself,  must  be  offered  to  Pitfs  by  one 
who  seeks  one's  own  eternal  salvation. 

3.  A  person  who  offen  cooked  rice,  derives  the  benefit  of 
attaining  a  divine  golden  chariot  dazzling  like  the  sun  and 
filled  with  divine  Apsaras^s. 

4.  He  who  gifts  a  cloth  fresh  from  the  loom  at  the  time  of 
the  3raddha  rite  attains  longevity,  ample  wealth,  beauty  and  a 
son. 

5.  The  knower  of  Dharmas  who  gives  a  sacred  thread  at 
the  time  ofSraddha  and  offers  water  to  all  Brahmanas  attains 
the  fruit  ofBrahmadana  (the  gift  ofVedic  learning). 

6.  If  anyone  offers  a  good  waterpot  at  the  time  of 
Sraddhas  to  the  Brlthmatjuu,  a  cow  exuding  honey  and  milk 
approaches  the  donor. 

7.  He  who  gives  a  circular  waterpot  at  the  time  of 
Briddha  obtains  a  milk^yielding  divine  cow  that  can  be  milked 
for  whatever  he  wishes. 

8.  If  anyone  gives  a  complete  bed-equipment  decorated 
with  garlands  of  flowers,  it  becomes  a  palace  and  follows  him 
as  he  goes  (to  heaven). 

9.  By  giving  a  house  full  of  gems,  furnished  with  bed* 
seats  and  food,  at  the  time  of  Sraddha  to  ascetics,  one  rejoices 
in  heaven. 

10-14.  He  obtains  pearls,  /afiis  la^i,  garments,  varieties  of 
precious  stones,  divine  vehicles,  hundred  thousands  and  trillions 
in  number  and  a  divine  aerial  chariot  that  dazzles  like  a  great 
blazing  fire,  that  has  the  lustre  of  the  moon  and  the  sun  and 
that  is  furnished  with  jewels  according  to  one’s  desire.  The 
aerial  chariot  has  the  speed  of  the  mind  and  can  go  anywhere 
as  per  his  pleasure.  It  is  surrounded  by  Apsaras-s.  He  rem^s 
at  the  head  of  the  aerial  chariot  eulogised  byeveyone  allround. 
The  Gandharva-s  and  Apsaras^  sprinkle  him  with  divine  scents 
and  showers  of  flowers.  They  sing  and  play  on  the  instruments. 


lavish  gifis  in  The  reward  promised  is  happiness  is  heaven. 

There  is  little  rational  co-relaiioo  between  religious  gift  (dina)  and  the 
reward  obtained. 


18J5-29 


629 


Youthful  and  prominent  maidens  accompanied  by  groups  of 
Apsaras«s>  wake  him  up  in  sweet  pleasing  voices. 

15.  By  the  gifts  of  a  thousand  horses,  a  hundred  chariots 
and  a  thousand  elephants,  a  man  lives  with  a  Yoginl. 

16.  He  who  offers  water  (and)  lamp  to  Pitp  and  Yogins, 
attains  the  fruit  of  the  gift  of  thousands  of  gold  coins. 

17.  No  other  gift  is  more  excellent  than  the  gift  of  life. 
Hence,  by  all  means  protection  to  life  should  be  given. 

18.  Non-violence  is  holier  than  all  the  Devas.  It  bestows 
everything.  Learned  men  say  that  the  gift  of  life  is  the  noblest 
unto  all  living  beings. 

19.  At  the  time  of  Sraddha,  one  should  give  golden  vessels 
having  good  characteristics.  Sweet  (divine)  juices  and  bevera* 
ges,  good  foodstulTs  and  good  fortune  approach  him. 

20.  One  shall  give  beautiful  metallic  ve.«sel  while  feeding 
in  Sraddha.  He  will  become  a  recipient  of  the  objects  of 
cherished  desires  and  of  beauty  and  wealth. 

21.  In  the  Sraddha  rite,  one  should  give  a  silver  or  gold 
vessel.  By  giving  itj  the  donor  gets  ample  virtue  (as  reward). 

22.  He  who  makes  a  gift  of  a  cow  that  has  calved  but 
once,  along  with  a  milking  pot,  at  the  time  of  a  Sraddha, 
obtains  several  cows  and  the  nourishment  of  the  cows. 

23-26a.  At  the  time  of  winter,  one  shall  offer  fire  and 
plenty  of  wood.  He  who  gives  fuel  to  Brahmans  at  the 
onset  of  winter,  becomes  always  victorious  in  battle.  He 
shines  with  glory.  One  should  honour  Brahmanas  and  offer 
fragrant  garlands  and  sweet  scents  as  well  as  vessels.  Great 
rivers  Bowing  with  fragrant  scents  and  all  sorts  of  happiness 
approach  the  donor.  So  also  youthful  maidens  of  pleasing 
manners  (approach  him) . 

26b.  Beautiful  beds  and  seats,  grounds  and  vehicles  (are  to 
be  given) . 

27-28.  He  who  gives  the  above-mentioned  articles  at  a 
Sraddha,  attains  the  benefit  of  a  horse-sacrifice.  In  ordinary 
^raddhas  or  at  the  time  of  Darsa  Sraddha,  one  should  give  to 
the  Briihmanas  of  good  qualities,  vessels  full  of  ghee  with  very 
great  respect.  He  shall  attain  good  memory  and  fine  intellect. 

29.  He  obtains  the  beneEt  of  many  cows  yielding  potfuU 


630  VSjm  Pyrd^ 

of  milk.  In  this  worlds  be  rejoices  with  chariots  and  good 
horses. 

30.  By  giving  the  thing  wished  for,  at  the  time  of  Sraddha* 
one  gets  the  benefit  of  the  sacrifice  called  Pundarlka*  By 
giving  a  beautiful  residential  place»  one  attains  the  fruit  of 
Rajasuya  sacrifice. 

3U33.  By  giving  a  forest  full  of  flowers  and  fruits,  one 
obtains  sweet  smelling  substances.  By  giving  wells*  parks*  tanks, 
fields*  cowsheds  and  houses,  one  rejoices  in  heaven  as  long 
as  the  moon  and  the  stars  stay.  By  giving  beds  and  bedsheets 
embellished  with  jewels*  one  attains  endless  heavenly  pleasure* 
PitfS  are  pleased  with  him.  lie  is  worshipped  (honoured)  by 
kings.  He  flourishes  with  wealth  and  grain. 

34-35.  Woollen  and  silk  garments*  excellent  blankets* 
deer-skin,  gold  brocade,  coloured  cloth  and  wool — these  should 
be  given  to  Brahma^as  after  duly  feeding  tlxein.  A  person  who 
has  faith  then  gets  the  benefit  of  a  hundred  Vajapeya 
Yajnas.i 

36.  Many  beautiful  women,  sons*  servants  and  attendants* 
nay  all  living  beings,  become  submissive  to  him  in  this  world. 
He  becomes  free  from  all  ailments. 

37.  He  who  gives  silk*  woven  silk*  cotton  and  velvet 
cloth*  in  Sraddhas  obtains  die  fulfilment  of  all  his  cherished 
desires. 

38.  He  dispels  all  inglorious  things  and  misfortunes  im¬ 
mediately  like  the  darkness  at  the  time  of  sunrise.  He  shines 
on  an  aerial  chariot  like  the  moon  among  stars. 

39.  A  garment  is  praised  by  all  Devas; garment  belongs 
to  all  the  deities.  In  the  absence  af  cloth*  no  holy  rite — neither 
Yajfias  nor  (study  of)  Vedas  nor  penances,  can  be  performed. 

40.  Hence  clothes  should  be  given  at  the  time  of  Sraddha 
particularly.  He  obtains  all  those  things — ^Vajfias,  the  Vedas 
and  the  penances. 


1.  Thepr(>iTiMe  of  the  fruit  of  sacrifices  (which  require  a  lot  of  trouble 
and  expenditure)  for  dena  must  have  resulted  ai  a  disincentive  for  perfor¬ 
mance  of  sacrifice  and  these  Brahnumical  advocates  of  such  cheap  and  easy 
ways  of  gaining  saerificia]  merits  get  the  dubious  credit  of  adversely 
affecting  the  Vedic  imtitution  of  Sacrifice. 


18.41-52 


631 


41.  He  who  always  gives  them  during  §raddhas  with  faith 
and  purity,  obtains  all  his  desires  and  all  realms. 

42^3.He  obtains  the  fruit  of  asacriSce  richly  equipped  with 
all  desirable  things.  He  who  gives  difierent  kinds  of  edibles, 
grains,  hour  mixed  with  curds,  flour  cakes,  ghee  and  sugar, 
milk,  milk  puddings,  Krsaras^  and  Madhuparka  and  pies  fried 
in  ghee,  obtains  the  fruit  of  Agni^foma. 

44.  Pitrs  are  eager  for  curds  and  other  milk  products 
and  different  kinds  of  edibles  and  cooked  rice  during  the 
rainy  season  and  at  the  time  when  the  constellation  Magha  is 
ascendant. 

45.  One  shall  feed  Br^ma^  with  ghee.  A  little  of  ghee 
must  be  poured  on  the  ground.  By  gifting  elephants  in  Gaya, 
one  can  be  free  from  all  worries  al>out  Sraddha. 

46.  By  giving  cooked  rice,  milk  pudding,  ghee,  honey,  fruits 
and  roots  as  well  as  different  types  of  food,  one  rejoices  here  and 
after  death. 

47.  Beaten  rice  mixed  with  sugar  and  milk  is  always  of 
everlasting  benefit.  If  MasUrdddl  and  Kfsara  (rice  cooked  with 
spices  and  pulses)  are  oifered,  Pitrs  will  be  pleased  for  a 
year, 

48.  Fried  grain** powder,  fried  rice,  pies,  cooked  horse*gram 
dishes — all  mixed  with  curds — He  who  gives  all  these  in  Sraddha 
obtains  the  treasure  ofKubera. 

49.  He  who  assiduously  gives  fresh  vegetables  in  Sr^dhas 
after  duly  honouring  the  guests,  attains  all  enjoyments.  He  is 
revered  when  he  goes  to  heaven. 

50.  The  mail  who  offers  the  most  excellent  foods  and  edibles, 
beverages,  iambatives  and  juicy  things,  becomes  the  most  excel¬ 
lent  of  all. 

51 .  The  flesh  of  the  rhinoceros  is  the  best  Havis  in  the  rites 
for  Visvedevas  and  Soma.  But  the  best  hdm  of  the  rhinoceros 
should  be  avoided  to  mitigate  the  malice  (of  deities)  7 

52.  The  devotee,  with  palms  joined  in  reverence,  should 
ofler  tlie  best  seat  to  the  guests  while  feeding.  He  shall  then 
attain  the  excellent  fruit  of  all  the  rites  and  Yajflas. 


I.  A  dish  con^utiog  ef  tesamum  and  grain  (mixture  of  rice  peas  with  a 
few  81) ices) --'MW,  p.  308. 


632 


Vajfu  Purd^ 


53.  Well^cooked  food  should  bo  served  hot  and  quick 
to  the  hungry.  It  should  not  be  over‘*cooked.  After  honouring 
him  assiduously  vegetable  dishes  soaked  in  ghee  should  be  of¬ 
fered  devotedly. 

54.  The  person  who  offers  food  attains  an  aerial  chariot 
resembling  the  midday  sun  and  fitted  with  swans  for  three  crores 
ofKalpas  (crores  of  maidens  in  Bd.  P.  )• 

55.  There  is  nothir^  here  greater  than  the  gift  of  food  and 
they  arc  sustained  by  it  without  any  doubt. 

56.  There  is  no  gift  nobler  than  the  gift  of  life.  The  set 
of  the  three  worlds  lives  by  means  of  food.  That  is  the  fruit  of 
offering  cooked  rice. 

57.  All  the  worlds  are  founded  (dependent)  on  food.  It  is 
the  fiuit  of  the  gift  of  the  worlds.  Food  is  Praj5pati  himself. 
All  these  worlds  are  pervaded  by  it.  Hence  a  gift  on  par  with 
that  of  food  has  never  been  before  nor  will  there  be  any  ever  in 
future. 

58.  A  man  devoted  to  Pitfs  immediately  attains  all  the  jewels, 
vehicles  and  women  on  the  earth. 

59.  One  should  with  palms  joined  in  reverence,  always  offer 
shelter  to  the  guests.  They  are  the  Devas  awaiting  in  thousands, 
for  the  divine  hospitality. 

60.  He  who  makes  all  gifts  (mentioned  before)  shall  be  the 
sole  emperor  on  the  earth.  He  shall  become  happy  even  if  he 
makes  three,  two  or  even  one  of  those  gifts. 

61.  Making  gifts  is  the  greatest  virtue  {Dharma).  It  is 
honourd  and  revered  by  good  men.  The  LiOrdship  of  the  three 
worlds  is  to  be  attained  only  through  Ddna. 

62.  A  king  regains  his  kingdom;  a  poor  man  gets  excell¬ 
ent  wealth;  a  man  about  to  die,  attains  longevity.  Whatever  a 
man  devoted  to  PitfS  desires  in  his  mind,  will  be  granted  by 
his  Pitrs. 


19,1.5 


633 


CHAPTER  NINETEEN 

The  Benefit  of  Sriddha  Performance 
on  Various  Tithis 


Bfkaspati  said : 

1.  Henceforth  I  shall  describe  the  various  types  of  Srdd^ 
dha^  such  as  Ajasra  or  /fitya  (daily*  regular),  Nnimittika  (oo 
casional,  condidonal)  and  Kdmya  ( ]>erformcd  with  some  desired 
object  in  view)  and  the  mode  of  worship  (in  them), 

2.  There  are  three  sets  of  AffakSs^  (the  7th,  8th  and  9th 
days  of  the  dark  half  of  a  month)  that  bring  about  marriage, 
birth  of  a  son  and  acquisition  of  wealth.  The  dark  half  of  a 
month  is  the  most  excellent.  The  first  Asfakd  is  called  Gitrl. 

3*4,  The  second  Affakd^  shall  be  Pr&j&patya  (with  Prajapati 
as  its  deity)  and  the  third  one  (is)  Vaiivadeviki.  The  first  Affakd 
sliall  always  be  performed  with  flour  cakes.  The  second  should 
always  be  performed  with  meat.  The  third  Aftakd  shall  be  per¬ 
formed  with  greens  and  vegetables.  This  is  the  injunction  regar¬ 
ding  the  articles  (for  Srdddha) .  The  Arwoffakd  (the  ninth  day  in 
the  dark  half  of  Pau^a,  M&gha  and  Phalguna)  of  the  Pitrs  is 
also  laid  down  permanently. 

5.  If  there  happens  to  be  a  fourth  Aslakd^  a  learned  person 
should  perform  a  special  ^rdddha  therein,  even  by  spending  his 
entire  possession. 

1.  The*A}aira*  Sr&ddba  must  be  performed  everyday,  e.g. 

in  daily  PancomahSjfajHcs,  Sriddha  to  be  performed  on  an  occasion 
which  is  uncertain  (e.g.  the  birth  a  son)  is  J^aimittika.  Sruddha  done 
with  a  desire  for  a  fruit  or  reward  (e.g>  progeny)  is  Komya. 

2.  The  word  *As(akd*  is  formed  from  ‘as^an^  But  according  to  Vartika 

9  on  Pacini  VII.  3.45,  it  means  'a  rite  with  Pitrs  as  deities'.  ASualdyana 
Gr.  $,  11.  4>1  informs  that  the  8th  day  in  the  dark  halves  of  seasons 
Hemanta  and  Siiira  are  As^ak&s,  As  a  season  coosists  of  two  months  there 
are  (aadsUc^ld  be)  four  But  most  other  Gphya  Sdtras  differ  and 

regard  the  8th  day  in  the  dark  halves  of  Margailr^a,  Pausa  and  Magha  as 
As  taka  days.  This  Pur&i^a  does  not  follow  Asvalayana.  Though  the  above- 
mentioned  V&rtika  regards  Pitfs  as  the  deities  on  these  days,  our  Puraqa 
regards  the  first  As tak&  as  Citr!  (Aiodrl?  u  in  Bd.P.],  the  second  has 
Prajfipati  and  the  third  has  Vilvedevas  as  the  deities  and  PitfS  are  cons* 
picuous  by  their  non-mention. 


634 


Fdyu 


6.  He  (the  performer  of  a  iJrflrfrfAd)  shall  always  be  happy 
both  here  and  hereafter.  The  worshippers  shall  attain  progress 
and  the  non-believers,  downfall. 

7.  Like  cows  approaching  a  water-trough,  all  these  Pitrs 
and  gods  approach  the  man  {who  performs  a  ^raddha) — Pi^s 
during  the  Parran  days  and  deities  on  different  Tithis* 

8.  Let  them  not  return  without  being  worshipped  during 

Tlie  world  (worldly  life)  will  be  in  vain  in  regard 
to  him  (who docs  not  worship).  Even  what  is  obtained  by  him, 
perishes. 

9-10.  Those  who  offer  worship  attain  Devas.  Those  who 
do  not  offer  are  reborn  as  lower  animals.  A  person  who  performs 
a  ^rdddha  on  the  Full  Moon  day  obtains  progeny,  nourishment, 
n^einory,  intellect,  sons  and  prosperity.*  He  enjoys  to  the  full. 
(The  iSrddd/u/  performed  on)  Pra/ipad  (the  first  day  of  a  fort* 
night)  is  conducive  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  What  he  has 
acquired  does  not  perish. 

11.  He  who  performs  a  Srddd/ia  on  the  second  day  of  the 
lunar  fortnight,  becomes  the  lord  of  bipeds.  The  third  day  (is 
to  be  selected  for  iSrddd/ia)  by  one  who  seeks  excellent  things, 
(for)  Trtiyd  (third  day)  is  destructive  of  sins. 


I.  Wrscs  10-19  the  benefit  accruing  from  performaticc  of  ^racldha 
on  different  from  thr  1st  to  the  15lh.  Apti^lmba  Dk.  S.  II.  7.16-22, 
Mbh.  Anuiasiina  87,  Cd.  P.  2.3.9-20,  BM.  P.  220.1  KP.II.  2017.22 
state  the  reward  a  man  gets  for  performance  of  Stdddka  on  these  Tithis,  But 
there  is  difference  of  opinion  among  these  about  the  bcnciiu.  For  example, 
see  the  comparative  table  of  rewards  of  Sraddha  performance  ou  various 


Tithis. 

The  Tilhi  Reward  as  per  our 

Text 

1.  Acquisition  of  wealth 

2.  Lor  Jship  over  bipeds 

5.  Destroys  sins 

4.  Discovers  weak  points 

of  his  enemies 

T).  Attaiii^  prosperity  and  glory 

6.  Reverence  froM  Bruhmaipas 

The  list  need  not  be  extenrle<l. 


Hewtjrd  as  per  K,P.  //.  20 

Auspicious  sons 
Begets  daughters 
Gets  animals 
Gets  small  animals  and 
things 

Begets  splendid  sons 
Blessed  with  lustre  and 
good  cultivation 


19.12-22 


635 


12.  He  who  performs  a  Sraddha  on  Caturthi  (fourth  day)  finds 
the  weak  points  of  his  enemies.  A  performer  of  a  Sr&ddha  on  the 
fifth  day  attains  great  prosperity  and  glory. 

13-14.  Br^manas  revere  him  who  performs  a  Sr&ddha  on 
the  sixth  day.  The  man  who  performs  a  Sr&ddha  on  the  seventh 
day  regularly  attains  the  fruit  of  Mah&satra  (great  Soma  sacri¬ 
fice)  .  He  becomes  the  lord  of  Ganas  (followers  of  Siva).  The 
man  who  performs  a  S^&ddka  on  the  eighth  day  attains  complete 
prosperity. 

15.  He  who  performs  a  on  the  ninth  day,  attains 

prosperity  and  a  beloved  wife.  He  who  performs  a  Sr&ddha 
on  the  tenth  day,  attains  the  glory  of  Brahman-hood. 

16.  He  shall  attain  (mastery  over)  all  the  Vedas  and  the 
destruction  of  sins.  The  D&na  (religious  gift)  ofiered  on  the  ele¬ 
venth  day  yields  prosperity  for  ever. 

17.  They  say  chat  be  who  performs  a  Sr&ddha  on  the  twelfth 
day  acquires  wealth,  a  kingdom  and  becomes  victorious.  He  who 
performs  a  Sr&d'lha  on  the  thirteentliday  attains  progeny,  intellect, 
cattle,  wisdom,  freedom,  excellent  nourishment,  long  life  and 
prosperity. 

18.  One  shall  ofler  a  Srdddha  on  the  fourteenth  day  to  those 
young  men  of  the  house  who  have  met  premature  death  and  to 
those  who  have  been  killed  by  weapons. 

19.  With  purity  one  should  always  offer  a  Sraddha  on 
the  New  Moon  day  to  those  children  unfavourably  born  (e.g.  a 
son  after  three  daughters  or  a  daughter  after  three  sons)  as  well 
as  to  twin  children. 

20.  One  who  regularly  performs  a  Sraddha  attains  all  cheris¬ 
hed  desires  and  infinite  heavenly  pleasures.  One  shall  always 
perform  on  the  New  Moon  day  the  rituals  and  those  great  rites 
that  involve  extraction  of  Soma  Juice  (or  that  are  conducive  to 
the  development  of  the  Moon  {  ?)  ) 

21.  Thus  developed,  the  Moon  sustains  the  three  worlds, 
being  regularly  eulogised  by  Siddhas,  Garanas  and  Gand- 
harvas. 

22.  (The  Moon)  is  eulogised  by  thousands  of  Apiareis-s  danc¬ 
ing,  singing  ard  playing  on  instruments,  by  means  of  eulogies, 
flowers  of  great  beauty  and  all  the  requisites  for  the  fulfilment 
of  desires. 


636 


Fdyu  Purd$a 


23.  Dcvas  and  Gandharvas  and  the  groups  of  Siddhas 
eulogise  that  devotee  of  the  steady  in  holy  rites.  They 
serve  him  by  means  of  aerial  chariots  for  sport. 

24.  The  devotee  of  Pitrs  shall  attain  all  cherished  desires 
on  the  Amdvd^d  (New  Moon)  day,  for  Pitrs  are  worshipped  by 
him  directly  always. 

25.  The  constellation  Magha  has  Pitrs  for  its  deities  Hence 

a  on  that  day  yields  everlasting  benefit.  The  wise  per* 

form  the  rites  for  Pitrs  particularly  on  that  day. 

26.  Hence  the  always  desire  Magha.  Those  who  are 
devoted  to  PUrs  and  deities  attain  the  greatest  goal. 


CHAPTER  TWENTY 

Bgntfit  of  Sr&ddha  Performanoi  undtr 
Differmi  Constsllations.'^ 

Bfhaspati  said : 

1.  Listen  to  a  detailed  account  of  all  those  Sraddhas  which 
Yama  mentioned  to  Saiabtndu.  They  are  to  be  performed  under 
different  constellations  severally.^ 

2.  He  who  maintains  the  sacrificial  fires  for  ever  and  per¬ 
forms  a  Sfdddha  (when  the  Moon  is)  in  conjuction  with  the 
Ktttikn  constellation,  becomes  free  fit>m  worries  and  ailments 
along  with  his  children. 

3.  A  person  desirous  of  children  should  perform  a  Srdddha 

under  Rohinl.By  performing  a  under  the  Saumya  (Mrga- 

1.  This  chapter  a  incorporated  from  Mbh.  AnuSdsana  89. 

2.  VifQU  Dh.S.  (76.8.15)  mentions  the  rewards  obtained  by  performing 
Srdddha  under  difTerent  constellations  from  Rrttika  to  Bhara^I.  YSjftavalkya 
I.  265-268,  MK.P.  30.8-16,  BM.P.  220.33-42,  KP.II.  20.9-15,  Bd.P.  2.3.18 
deal  with  the  same  topic  though  there  is  some  disagreement  about  the 
benefits  promiscf*. 

The  counting  nf  Nak^atras  from  Krttiki  and  not  from  Aivini  shows 
that  this  chapter  (and  also  the  Mbh.  chapter,  the  source  of  this  chapter) 
was  wtitten  some  time  before  500  A.D.  when  the  Vedic  counting  of  Nakiatras 
was  prevalent. 


20.4-13 


637 


liras)  c<^tellation  one  attains  vigour  and  vitality.  Generally 
the  man  of  ruthless  activities  performs  a  Srddika  under  Ardr&. 

4-5,  One  performing  a  Srdddha  under  the  Punarvasu  conste¬ 
llation  becomes  the  possessor  of  fields  and  begets  sons.  He  will 
be  blessed  with  wealth  and  food-grains  as  well  as  sons  and  grand¬ 
sons.  A  man  who  desires  satisfaction  and  contentment  should 
perform  Sriddha  under  Pu^ya  constellation.  One  shall  attain 
heroic  sons  by  worshipping  Pitrs  under  Aliena. 

6.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha  under  M^ha  becomes  the 
most  excellent  among  his  kinsmen.  A  man  worshipping  Piifs  in 
the  (Purvi)  Phalguni  constellation  attains  good  fortune. 

7.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha  under  Uttar&phalgunI 

constellation  becomes  the  leader  (in  bis  community)  along 
with  his  children.  He  who  performs  Tarpa^^a  to  Pitrs  under  the 
Hasta  constellation  becomes  the  chief  of  good  men. 

8.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha  in  the  Citri  constel¬ 
lation  sees  (has)  handsome  sons.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha 

under  the  Svati  constellation  becomes  a  scholar  and  attains 

profit. 

9.  A  man  wishing  for  sons  shall  perform  a  Srdddha  in  the 
Vilakhi  constellation.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha  in  the  Anu- 
radhi  constellation  extends  his  realm. 

10.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha  under  the  Jyestha  constella¬ 
tion  attains  lordship  and  excellence  for  ever.  Those  who  desire 
health  shall  perform  a  Srdddha  under  the  Mu  la  constellation. 
Those  who  desire  great  fame  should  perform  a  Srdddha  tinder 
Purvafadha. 

11.  A  man  performing  a  Srdddha  under  the  Uttarasadha  con¬ 
stellation  shall  be  free  from  grief.  By  performing  a  Srdddha  imder 
the  Sravana  constellation,  one  shall  attain  the  greatest  goal  in 
excellent  worlds. 

12.  A  man  who  performs  a  Srdddha  under  the  Dhani^tha 
constelladon  gains  a  kingdom  and  attains  enormous  wealth.  By 
performing  a  Srdddha  under  the  Abhijit  constellation,  (he)  ob¬ 
tains  goats  and  sheep  as  fruit. 

23.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha  in  the  Satabhi^ak  constel¬ 
lation  attains  success  as  a  great  physician.  He  who  performs  a 
Srdddha  in  the  Purva-Bhadrapadi  (Pros|hapada)  constellation 
attains  goats  and  sheep  as  the  fniit. 


638 


F3)>u  Purina 


14.  Me  who  performs  a  unfailingly  under  Uttara 

Bh&drapada  shall  obtain  thousands  of  cows.  He  who  per¬ 
forms  a  Srdddha  under  the  Revati  constellation  gets  much  wealth. 
By  performing  a  Srdddha  under  the  Asvin!  constellation  one  at¬ 
tains  horses.  He  who  performs  a  Srdddha  in  the  Bharani  constel¬ 
lation  attains  long  life. 

15.  By  performing  a  Srdddha  according  to  these  injunctions 
Saiabindu  attained  the  entire  earth.  After  attaining  the  entire 
earth  he  praised  him  (Yama). 


CHAPTER  TWENTYONE 

Miscellaneous  Topics  :  Qualifications  of  a  Brdkmana 
for  Srdddha^^gifls  x  Merits  of  Performance  of 
Srdddha  at  Sacred  Places 

Sarhyu  said : 

1.  O  foremost  one  among  tlic  cIoquents»  what  is  it  that 
offered  to  the  Pitfs,  delights  them  to  a  little  extent  7  What  deli¬ 
ghts  (them)  for  along  time  ?  What  is  it  that  is  conducive  to 
delight  them  infinitely 


I .  The  fiist  topic  discussed  is  about  the  v^ctarian  and  non«vegetariau 
dishes  liked  by  Piifs  and  therefore  ^ould  be  served  to  Br&hmaQas  while 
dining  at  a  Sriddha  (vide  w.  3-9). 

^pastamba  Dh.S.  (600  B.C.)  prescribes  flesh-eating  as  obligatory  at 
Srdddha  and  enumerates  the  animab  the  flesh  of  which  gratifies  Pitfs  for  a 
specific  period  e.g.  the  fleab  of  a  gaaaya  (a  cow-like  animal)  offered  in 
Srdddfta  gratifies  the  PUfj  for  a  year  {saihoatsaram  gavaytna  trptih).  For  other 
aaimals  and  the  period  of  gratiflcaiion  etc.*  see  Apastamba  Dh.S.  II.  7.1S- 
25;  n.l7.3«  For  refusal  to  accept  noa-vc^etarian  food  at  a  Srdddha  one  has 
to  go  to  hell  [yifrtudftarmoitara  i.  14tM9-50,  also  Manu  V.  35;  KP.  11.17.40). 

Manu  111.26 '^-272,  Yajfiavalkya  I.  15d-260,  Mbh.  Amddsana  Gh.  88, 
Kaiyayana’s.&<1fifd^-5fitra  (Kat^dika  7-8),  KP.  11.40-42,  Mt.  P.  17.31-35, 
Bd.P.  2.3.19,  VP.  III. 16.1-3  and  such  other  Puracas  specify  the  flesh  of 
ccri^  aniutab  served  at  Sr&ddha  and  the  period  of  gratiflcaiion  of  Pitri 
thereby.  Hem&dri  opines  that  greater  the  period,  greater  is  the  gratification 
{ihc  sarvatra pTtiyatii<tyo  tivakfitah^^riddha  p.  590). 


21,2-12 


639 


Bfkaspati  said  : 

2.  Listen  to  those  sacrificial  offerings  ^^hich  are  to  be  made 
atthetlmeofSraddha  as  theknowers  of  Sraddlia  have  under¬ 
stood,  Listen  also  to  the  benefit  of  these  in  accordance  with 
their  strength, 

3.  Grandfathers  arc  pleased  (or  a  month  by  a  Srftddha  in 
which  gingelly  seeds,  grains  of  rice,  barley,  black  gram,  water, 
fruits  and  roots  are  offered, 

4.  They  arc  pleased  for  two  months  if  fishes  arc  offered;  for 
three  months  if  venison  is  offered;  for  four  montlis  if  the  meat  of 
hare  is  offered ;  and  for  five  months  if  the  meat  of  birds  is  offered, 

3.  They  arc  delighted  for  six  months  with  the  flesh  of  boars, 
for  seven  months  with  goats*  flesh  and  for  eight  months  with 
the  flesh  of  a  spotted  doe. 

6.  The  manes  arc  delighted  for  nine  months  with  the  meat 
of  the  Rufu  deer.  They  will  have  comemment  lasting  for  ten 
months  with  the  meat  of  Gaoaya  (a  kind  of  ox) . 

7.  They  arc  propitiated  for  eleven  montlis  with  the  meat  of 
a  tortoise.  Know  that  Sraddha  with  (products  of]  cow's  milk 
lasts  for  a  year. 

8.  So  also  in  the  case  of  milk-pudding  along  with  milk  pro¬ 
ducts,  honey  and  ghee.  The  satisfaction  with  the  meat  of  a 
Vadhrhma  (a  rhino-like  animal  ?)  lasts  for  twelve  years. 

9.  With  the  meat  of  Khadga  (rhinoceros)  during  the  rites  of 
Pitrs,  the  pleasure  is  everlasting.  So  also  with  the  meat  of  a  black 
goat  and  an  alligator  provides  endless  pleasure. 

10.  In  this  connection,  those  who  know  the  ancient  lores 
mention  about  the  gaihds  (traditional  verses)  sung  by  Pitfs. 

I  shall  narrate  them  to  you.  Listen  and  understand  precisely. 

11-12.  {Piijs  sing)  “Will  a  son  be  born  iu  our  own 
family  who  will  give  us  on  the  (thirteenth)  day,  cooked 

food,  milk  putlding,  honey  and  ghee  on  fhe  occasion  of  Gaja^ 
cchSyil  Parviin  Or  give  the  same  with  the  meat  of  a  goat  dial  is 


In  Southern  India,  though  neither  MilaJqard  tsorKalpaUru  have  prohibited 
flesh-diet  at  ^rdddha,  strict  vegeUrtanism  is  observed. 

1 .  The  coiyg  iction  that  occurs  when  the  Moon  is  in  the  Maghi  constel¬ 
lation,  the  Sun  is  in  Hasta  and  the  Tiihi  is  the  I3ih  in  the  rainy  season,  it 
is  called  G^acthdyd  or  K'ufijwudi^. 


640 


V^u 


entirely  red  during  the  rainy  season  and  under  the  constellation 
of  Magha  ?  It  is  better  to  wish  for  many  sons.  At  least  one  of 
them  will  go  to  Gaya  or  marry  a  girl  eight  years  old  or  dis* 
charge  a  blue  ox^  (free  to  wander) 

Sarnyu  asked  : 

13.  O  dear  one,  recount  the  benefit  of  the  holy  centres 
Gaya  etc.  to  me  who  ask.  Please  mention  the  merit  entirely  that 
is  derived  by  performing  the  rites  of  Pitfs. 

Brhaspati  said  : 

14.  O  son,  a  Sr addh a  performed  in  Gayi  yields  endless 
htneRt.  Japas^  Hmas  and  penances  (performed  there)  are  also 
beneficial  endlessly.  Hence  on  the  anniversary  day  of  the  death 
of  father,  Sraddha  performed  there  is  remembered  as  everlasting. 

15.  A  son  begot  after  marrying  a  girl  of  eight  years 
sanctifies  twenty  one  generations.  Moreover,  he  sanctiBes  six 
generations  in  the  family  of  his  maternal  uncle.  This  is  remem* 
bered  as  the  beneiit  (of  such  a  marriage }. 

16.  I  shall  recount  the  benefit  derived  from  (discharging) 
a  bull.  Even  as  I  recount  listen  and  understand.  The  discharger 
of  the  bull  sanctifies  ten  previous  generations  and  ten  succeeding 
generations. 

17.  At  the  time  of  letting  free  the  bull  whatever  is  sprinkled 
with  water  as  it  emerges  from  water  on  to  the  ground,  is  said  to 
yield  endless  benefit. 

18.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  ail  those  things  touched 
by  water  tossed  about  by  its  tail  etc.,  give  endless  satisfaction  to 
Pitrs. 


1.  ThiB  is  called  *  the  rite  of  letting  free  a  bull*  (  For 

the  detail!  vide  Vif^u  Dh.  S,  86.1*20.  Vifts^dhamott^a  1.147.  1*19  repeat 
the  same  procedure.  Though  the  words  *niUim  are  translated  ai 

'blue  bull'  the  bull  is  not  blue  in  colour.  Though  the  adjective  *blue* 
( is  varioiuly  defined,  Mt.  P.  207.38  deftnes  it  at  *a  bull  having  white 
legs,  face  dc  tail  and  the  rest  of  the  body  as  red*  I  could  not  trace  the 
verse  IMio  yeatu  etc.  in  Bd.  P.  though  Kane  quotes  it  as  ascribed 

toU  (HD,  IV  p,54^fn  1215). 

For  the  benefit  accruing  from  yffotsarga  tee  the  following  w.  16*20. 


21.19-29 


641 


19.  The  ground  dug  up  by  the  bull  by  mean$  of  its  hoofs  or 
horns,  serves  as  canals  of  honey  perpetually  feeding  Pitp. 

20.  The  satisfaction  derived  by  Pitrs  at  the  rite  of  letting 
free  the  bull  is  more  than  that  when  they  bear  that  a  tank»  a 
thousand  Nalvas  square,  has  been  di^  (a  Nalva^AOQ  hands). 

21.  If  anyone  gives  gingclly  seeds  mixed  with  honey  and 
jaggery,  it  yields  everlasting  benefit. 

Brhaspati  said : 

22.  One  should  not  test  Brahmanas  always  in  order  to  give 
them  anything.  But  testing  is  heard  about  (i.e.  prescribed  in 
irutts)  in  regard  to  the  rites  ofDcvas  (gods)  and  Pitp.^ 

23-27.  One  should  invite  these  for  the  Sriddha  rite  :  Those 
who  have  studied  all  the  Vedas  and  who  have  performed  all  rites; 
the  Brahmanas  who  are  the  sanctifiers  of  the  row;  important 
Brahmanas  who  know  xhtBhd^yas  (Glosses  on  Aphorisms) ;  those 
who  regularly  study  Grammar;  those  who  study  Pura^  and 
Dharmaiastras;  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  three-Naci- 
ketas-Vidyas;  the  worshippers  of  five  fires;  the  Trist^amas^  the 
knowers  of  the  six  ancillary  subjects  of  the  Vedas;  a  son  of  the 
Brahma  form  of  marriage;  a  master  of  Vedic  Prosody  (or  chanter 
of  the  Vedas) ;  a  singer  of  thitjyestha  S^iinan\ one  who  has  taken 
baths  in  sacred  waters  (at  holy  places);  those  who  have  taken 
part  in  important  Yajfias  and  taken  the  concluding  {Avabhftha) 
ablutions;  tliose  who  observe  rites  immediately;  those  who  stri¬ 
ctly  adhere  to  their  own  duties;  those  who  arc  not  wrathful  and 
those  who  are  always  calm  and  quiescent.  And  those  who 
perpetually  observe  the  ten  meritorious  deeds  shall  also  be 
invited. 

28.  Whatever  is  ofiered  to  these,  yields  everlasting  benefit. 
These  are  the  sanctifiersof  the  row.  Those  Brahmanas  who  observe 
Yogic  rites  and  duties  should  be  revered  faithfully. 

29.  They  are  the  foremost  due  to  their  adherence  to  the 
duties  of  their  (specific)  stages  of  life.  In  regard  to  the  offering 

1.  Vend  22*3!  state  the  qualifications  of  the  Brahmins  eligible  for  m- 
vltation  to  Sr&ddba,  though  it  has  been  already  discussed  in  Ch.  17. 
Yogins  are  given  the  first  preference  as  Yogi-dharma  was  regarded  as 
the  foremost  among  Dharmas. 


642 


Vdjfu  Purd^a 


of  ffavjras  and  JCai^as,  they  arc  the  leaders.  He  who  worships 
them  worships  the  three  deities  firahma^  Visnu  and  Mahesvara. 

30.  One  who  worships  these^  worships  all  the  worlds  along 
with  the  Pitfs.  (togadAarma)  is  the  holiest  of  all  lioly  things,  the 
most  auspicious  of  all  auspicious  things. 

lU.  Xogadharma  is  mentioned  as  the  first  among  all 
Dharmas. 

I  shall  recount  those  who  cannot  be  included  in  the  row  (i.e. 
cannot  be  invited)  for  a  ^raddhfi}  Listen  and  understand  as 
I  recount  them  : 

32*36.  A  rogue,  a  drunkard,  a  patient  of  pulmonary  con¬ 
sumption,  a  cattle  breeder,  an  ugly  person,  a  common  servant  of 
all  in  the  village,  a  usurer,  a  professional  musician,  a  merchant, 
an  incendiary,  an  administerer  of  poison,  a  pimp,  a  seller  of 
Soma  juice,  a  person  who  undertakes  sea  voyage,  one  whose  skin 
is  defiled,  a  dealer  in  oil,  a  deceitful  person,  one  who  quarrels 
with  his  father,  one  who  has  a  co-husband  at  home,  a  calumnia¬ 
ted  person,  a  thief,  a  person  whose  livelihood  is  arts  and  crafts, 
a  tale-bearer,  a  person  giving  wrong  information  about  holy 
days,  one  who  is  malicious  to  his  friends,  a  group- beggar,  an 
atheist,  a  discarder  of  the  Vedas,  a  mad  fellow,  a  eunuch,  a 
knavish  fellow,  a  destroyer  of  foetus,  a  defiler  of  the  preceptor’s 
bed,  a  follower  of  the  physician’s  profession  for  livelihood,  a 
messenger  and  an  adulterer. 

37.  He  who  sells  the  Vedas,  religious  observances,  holy  rites 
and  penances — all  these  arc  defilers  of  the  row. 

What  is  gifted  to  an  atheist,  ungrateful  person  or  a  censurer 
becomes  lost. 

38.  What  is  given  to  a  trader  is  not  beneficial  here  or  here¬ 
after,  The  same  is  the  case  in  regard  to  a  person  who  misappro¬ 
priates  (deposits),  who  is  knavish  and  who  hates  the  Vedas. 

39-42a.  That  which  is  given  to  a  merchant  or  an  artisan 
devoid  of  virtue  becomes  a  merchant  despises  (underrates) 


1.  Verses  31-42  give  4  list  of  persons  unfit  for  invitation  to  a  Sraddba. 
T^g  lilts  of  such  unfit  persons  arc  given  by  Gautama  Dh.S.  XV.  16-19, 
Manu  in.  I50«16f^,  Yiljilavalkya  I.  222-224,  Mbh.  AnugUwa  90.6-11, 
Mt.P.  16.14-17,  KV.II.  21.23-43. 


21.42b*48 


643 


the  commodities  while  purchasing  and  praises  (the  same)  while 
selling.  Hence  a  merchant,  the  abode  of  untruth,  docs  not  deserve 
(invitation  to)  a  Sr^dha.  What  is  given  to  a  widow's  son  {after 
remarriage)  even  if  he  be  a  Brahmana,  is  like  what  is  oblated 
into  ashes. 

The  fallowing  persons  if  Invited  to  a  Sraddha  destroy  the 
merits  of  the  donor:  a  one-eyed  man  (destroys)  sixty  (merits), 
a  eumucli  a  hundred  (merits) ,  a  sufferer  from  leprosy  as  long  as 
he  sees,  a  sufferer  from  sinful  ailment  a  thousand  (meritorious 
acts).  A  donor,  by  being  childish,  falls  off  from  the  benefit  of 
Ddna, 

42b*43.  Brahma  has  ordained  that  he  who  covers  his  head 
while  taking  food  and  one  who  cats  food  facing  the  south,  he 
who  takes  food  with  shoes  on  and  he  who  offers  Ddna  scornftilly 
gives  the  entire  share  unto  the  leaders  of  Asuras. 

44.  Dogs  and  demons  should  not  see  the  performance  of  a 
Sraddha.^  Hence  it  should  be  screened  out  all  round,  and 
gingelly  seeds  should  be  strewn  around. 

45.  It  is  to  ward  off  Rak^asas  that  gingelly  seeds  are  strewn 
and  the  screen  is  to  prevent  the  dogs.  Boars  destroy  the  effect  of 
a  Sraddha  by  having  a  look  at  it  and  a  cock  by  fiuttcring  its 
wings  (or  by  the  fall  of  its  feathers  within). 

46.  A  woman  in  her  mondJy  course  destroys  the  Sraddha 
by  touching.  If  the  performer  of  a  Sraddha  becomes  angry,  he 
destroys  the  benefit  derived.  If  anyone  gets  his  friends  to  offer 
Sraddha  and  Havis,  they  do  not  please  Pitn  or  Devas.  Nor  does 
he  attain  heaven. 

47.  Grandfathers  (manes)  arc  delighted  with  what  is  given 
on  the  beautiful  banks  of  tlic  rivers  and  streams  as  well  as  of  the 
lakes  and  in  secluded  places. 

48.  One  shall  not  shed  tears  while  performing  a  Sraddha, 
nor  should  he  take  active  part  in  irrelevant  conversation.  One 
should  not  munch  or  crunch  anytliing  while  performing  a  Srad¬ 
dha.  One  should  avoid  mutual  rivalry  too. 

1.  Since  the  period  of  Dhama  Smas,  people  believed  that  food  for 
Sraddha  got  polluted  even  by  being  looked  by  certain  animals  and  cerUin 
categories  of  peOpKs  Tbc  lot  of  such  uawonbic*  i»  gi'  en  in  vv.  44-46— an 
echo  of  Gautama  Dh.S,  15.25-28.  Manu  III.  255-242,  and  PurAoM  like 
KP.  II.  22.34.33,  VP.  111.16.12-14,  Bd.P.  2.3.15,  43-44. 


644 


r4>K  PurAfa 


49.  While  performing  a  Sr^dha  the  sacred  thread  should 
be  worn  from  right  to  left  and  the  Darbhas  should  be  held  duly 
in  the  hands.  One  should  perform  a  Sraddha  till  one*8  death. 
Thus  one  delights  Pitrs. 

50.  At  the  outset^  he  should  formally  take  {permission 
of  the  preceptor  or  the  invited  Brahmair^s.  He  should  then  kindle 
a  fire  duly.  The  articles  to  be  offered  to  Pitfs  should  be 
placed  on  the  ground  over  a  winnowing  basket  or  on  a  Kuia 
mat. 

51.  During  the  bright  half  (of  the  month) »  the  Sraddha  is 
to  be  performed  in  the  forenoon  by  the  skilful  performer  of  a 
Sraddha.  During  the  dark  half,  it  should  be  performed  in  the 
afternoon.  In  any  case  the  Rauhi^a  period  (the  4th  MukQrta 
of  the  day) ,  should  not  be  transgi  essed. 

52.  Thus  the  great  and  noble  souls»  the  seers  of  time  and 
place^  the  Pitrs  of  great  Yoga  (yogic  power)  and  great  virility 
should  be  worshipped. 

53.  A  person  always  devoted  to  Pitrs  attains  the  excellent 
Yoga.  After  eschewing  both  auspicious  and  inauspicious  actions 
they  attain  salvation  through  meditation. 

54.  It  is  for  the  sake  of  (promotion  of)  sacrifices  that  after 
deluding  the  universe,  it  (Y<^a)  was  eschewed  and  kept  in  the 
cavity  (of  the  heart,  i.e.  kept  secret)  by  the  noble-soul ed 
Kajyapa. 

55.  O  excellent  one  among  the  knowers  of  Yoga,  that 
nectarine  (or  immortal)  Yoga,  the  eternal  great  Dharma  was 
promulgated  by  Sanatkixmara. 

56.  It  is  a  great  esoteric  secret  of  the  Devas.  It  is  the  grea¬ 
test  resort  of  the  sages.  It  can  always  (be  attained)  by  the  devo¬ 
tees  of  Pitrs  through  filial  devotion,  piety  and  endeavour. 

57.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  one  who  is  devoted  to 
Pitrs  shall,  with  endeavour,  attain  everything  of  that  Yoga  in 
essence. 

58.  To  whom  are  the  8raddhas  to  be  offered;  which  are  the 
things  that  yield  great  benefits  when  given;  what  are  the 
holy  centres  and  sacred  rivers  wherein  the  Srdddha  offered  bears 
everlasting  benefits;  by  what  means  does  one  attain  heaven — all 
these  have  been  mentioned  to  you  in  brief. 


645 


2L59-67 
Bfhaspati  said\ 

59.  The  man  who  after  hearing  this  explanation  of  the 
procedure  of  Sraddhas,  becomes  malicious^  is  an  atheist  envelo¬ 
ped  in  darkness.  He  will  drown  himself  in  the  terrible  hell. 

60.  He  who  has  perfectly  controlled  his  mind,  finds  all  his 
great  ailments  terminated.  He  who  is  not  mindful  of  the  Airamas 
(stages  in  life)  stated  in  the  Vedas  attains  the  Kuthbhika  hell. 
He  attains  the  status  of  a  thief  and  gets  his  tongue  cut. 

61.  Those  who  censure  Yoga  become  lumps  of  clay  in  the 
ocean^  and  decay  as  long  as  the  earth  exists.  Hence,  this  is  the 
Dharma  (virtue)  intended  in  the  Sriiddha  that  it  should  be  per¬ 
formed  by  a  man  with  faith  (in  it). 

62.  Scandalisationof  Yogins  should  be  scrupulously  avoided. 
By  scandalising  (them),  a  penon  becomes  a  worm  and  rolls 
there  itself. 

63.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  he  who  censures  Yoga, 
the  cause  of  salvation  unto  those  who  meditate,  goes  to 
terrible  hell.  He  who  listens  to  it  (the  censure),  also  falls  into 
the  hell. 

64.  By  denigrating  masters  of  Yoga,  a  man  certainly  falls 
into  the  hell  surrounded  by  darkness  and  terrible  to  behold. 

65.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it  that  he  who  pays  heed  to 
the  vilification  of  masters  of  Yc^a  of  fully  controlled  selves,  be¬ 
comes  submerged  in  the  Kumbhipaka  hell  for  a  long  time. 

66*  One  should  eschew  hatred  for  Yogins  mentally,  verbally 
and  physically.  He  will  reap  the  benefit  of  the  same  here  itself 
as  well  as  after  death.  There  is  no  doubt  about  it. 

67.  A  person  who  has  mastered  (all  lores)  does  not  get 
(realize)  the  Atman.  He  wanders  within  the  three  worlds  due 
to  his  own  actions.  A  person  who  has  mastered  ^gveda, 
Yajurveda,  Samaveda  and  all  their  ancillary  subjects  does  not 
attain  Brahman  which  is  devoid  of  changes  and  aberrations 
{auikdiom)  and  therefore,  becomes  distressed. 


1.  Verses  54>57,  and  w.  61 -71  show  the  blind  faith  of  Pura^ic  writers 
in  Yogins,  Since  the  timet  of  Vasi^tHa  Db.S.  XL  37,  Yatii  (recluses)  and 
Yogins  had  a  special  place  of  honour  araoug  the  invitees  to  a  Sriddba.  But 
Pur&oa  writers  have  prohibited  deoigratioa  of  Yogis  even  orally. 


646 


VHjni  Purd^ 


68.  (Defective  verse)'  He  who  has  crossed  the  bounds  of 
effects  (of  Prakrfi)  goes  beyond  Pra/fTli.  Mastery  of  the  three 
Vedas  leads  to  the  crossing  (of  the  limits?)  of  three  gunas  The 
(highest)  principle  is  beyond  the  twcniyfour  Yogas  (?). 
He  is  the  master  of  alh  who  has  passed  beyond  worldly  existe* 
nee.  (?) 

69. *  (Defective  verse)  By  means  of  his  Yogic  power,  a 
knower  of  Yogas  withdraws  unto  himself  the  diuolution  of  the 
Atman,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  entire  creation  of  the  princi* 
pics  by  the  Atman.  He  alone  becomes  the  master  of  all. 

70.  It  is  the  knower  of  Yogas  who  knows  the  Vedas  and  at¬ 
tains  the  knowable.  They  call  him  the  knower  of  the  Vedas,  and 
the  master  of  Vedas. 

71.  Aficr  duly  knowing  the  knowable  and  what  should  be 
known  (one  becomes  the  knower  of  Vedas).  They  call  him  the 
knower  of  the  Vedas.  All  others  arc  thinkers  of  the  Vedas. 

72.  A  person  devoted  to  Pitrs  attains  the  (fruit  of) 
YajAas,  Vedas,  all  cherished  desires,  different  kinds  of  knowledge, 
longevity,  progeny  and  riches. 

73.  He  who  invariably  reads  tius  Srddd/iakalpa  during 
Sraddha,  in  the  end,  gets  all  these  (benefits)  and  the  benefits 
of  charitable  gifts  at  the  holy  centres. 

74.  He  shall  be  the  sanctifier  of  the  row  (of  diners).  He 
shall  be  given  priority  in  being  fed  among  the  Brahmanas.  Or 
he  shall  (be  eligible  to)  teach  all  the  Brahmanas  and  attain  all 
cherished  desires. 

\,  The  text  is  defective  and  requires  slight  modifications  as  per  the  same 
verse  prmled  in  the  Bd.  P.  2.3.19.64  which  means:  ‘*One  who  has  mastered 
all  created  things,  the  products  of  Prakrti  (the  nature  known  as  AvidyA)^  one 
who  has  mastered  the  good  features  in  three  Vedas,  one  who  has  mastered 
the  three  (Sattva  etc.)  and  one  who  has  mastered  the  twentyfour 
principles,  is  the  person  who  has  crossed  the  Saihsara  to  the  other  shore  and 
is  the  master  of  academic  studies’*. 

2.  The  text  is  defective,  'ilie  corre^Hmding  verse  in  the  Bd.  F.2.3.19  6S 
(with  slightly  d’Horent  reading)  means;  **Oae  who  is  devoted  to  Brahman 
duly  and  whollv.  attains  it.  Sioularly  he  comprehends  the  state  where 
everything  is  merged  into  the  soul'*. 

The  second  line  of  verse  is  diflerent.  *It  means,  *^A  Brihmaoa  who 
does  not  uke  to  the  Path  of  Yoga,  cannot  become  the  master  of  everything 
that  comes  under  tne  per  view  ot  order,  by  knowledge.** 


21.75-86 


647 


75.  He  who  always  listens  to  this  after  subduing  anger, 
being  without  malice  and  becoming  free  from  greed  and  delusion, 
attains  endless  heavenly  pleasure. 

76.  He  attains  the  entire  benefit  of  visiting  holy  centres, 
and  making  charitable  gifts  etc*  This  is  the  most  excellent  means 
to  liberation.  This  is  the  greatest  means  of  attaining  heaven. 
He  shall  have  the  greatest  contentment  in  this  world  too.  Hence 
he  should  assiduously  perform  this. 

77.  He  who  reads  these  injunctions  about  (performance  of) 
Sraddha  attentively  and  with  purity  of  mind,  in  the  assembly 
(of  the  learned)  during  Parvan  days,  becomes  endowed  with 
children.  With  great  brilliance,  he  attains  the  same  region  as 
that  of  the  heaven-dwellers. 

78.  Obeisance  to  tliat  sdf-born  deity  by  whom  this  Kalpa 
has  been  prcscriljcd.  I  always  bow  down  to  the  great  masters 
of  Yoga. 

79.  O  dear  ouc,  these  Pitri  arc  the  deities  of  Devas.  Pitrs 
are  stationed  in  these  seven  abodes  for  ever.  They  are  free 
from  pain. 

80.  All  these  noble  souls  are  the  sons  of  Prajapati.  The  first 
group  is  that  of  Yogins.  That  is  eternal  and  is  ever  conducive 
to  the  increase  in  the  Yogic  Power  (of  Yogins). 

81.  The  second  group  is  that  of  Devas  and  the  third  is 
that  of  their  enemies.  The  other  groups  are  of  the  members  of 
(four)  other  castes  {yafn<is) .  Thus  all  have  l)cen  recounted. 

82-03.  All  Devas  worship  them.  They  arc  stationed  in 
them  (Pitrs).  The  four  Ahamas  too  successively  worship  them. 
The  four  castes  also  worship  them  in  accordance  with  the  injunc¬ 
tions.  Similarly  the  mixed  castes  and  the  Mlecchas  (alien  out- 
castes)  also  worship  them. 

84.  Pitrs  revere  him  who  devotedly  worships  Pitrs.  Pitrs 
in  the  form  of  grandfather  grant  nourishment,  progeny  and 
heavenly  pleasure  to  him  who  desires  nourishrnent  or  who 
desires  progeny. 

85.  To  a  son,  the  rite  for  Pitrs  is  preferable  to  the  rite  for 
Devas.  Pitrs  arc  to  be  propitiated  even  before  Devas. 

86.  The  subtle  movement  of  the  Yogic  power  of  Pini  is  in- 


648  PurO^ 

comprehensible  to  the  physical  eye  which  is  distant  (not  empo* 
wered  by)  penance. 

87.  To  all  of  them  a  silver  vessel  or  one  accompanied 
with  silver  is  ordained.  It  is  said  to  be  sanctifying  and  excellent 
(for  the  rites)  of  Devas  along  with  (those  of)  Pitfs. 

88-89.  The  three  Pinzas  which  the  kinsmen  offer  invoking 
the  names  and  Gotra»  which  they  place  on  the  ground  strewn 
with  Ku^a  grass  after  wearing  the  sacred  thread  from  right  to 
left,  delight  the  respective  parents  who  are  present  everywhere. 
What  constitutes  the  diet  of  the  creature  (i«e.  the  devotee  who 
offers)  is  the  diet  of  Pitfs  as  well* 

90.  Just  as  in  acowpen  the  calf  finds  out  its  lost  mother, 
so  also  the  Mantra  takes  those  articles  where  the  Jantu  (the  man 
for  whom  the  pin4a  is  intended)  stays. 

91.  The  name,  Gotra  and  Mantra  take  the  food  offered 
to  him.  Even  if  they  had  taken  a  hundred  births,  the  satisfaction 
follows  them.  (They  are  satiated  by  the  Sraddha  offering.) 

92.  Thus  this  convention  is  established  by  Brahma^  the 
supreme  god.  Tliis  first  creation  of  Pitrs  is  for  the  worlds 
that  seek  everlasting  bliss. 

93-95.  Thus  these  Pitfs  arc  Devas  and  Devas  arc  Pitrs.  O 
sinless  ones,  all  these  (following)  have  been  recounted  by  me— 
DcuhilfaSf  (i.e.  daughter's  sons),  Yajamanas,  worlds,  daughters, 
grandsons,  sons,  charitable  gifts,  along  with  the  mode  of  purity, 
holy  centres,  fruit  thereof,  everlasting  nature  of  the  benefit, 
(the  different  types  of)  Brahma^as  and  the  rules  governing 
Yayavaras  (wandering  ascetics).  Everything  has  been  mentioned 
in  the  manner  that  Brahma  prescribed  formerly. 


Bfhaspati  said  : 

96.  This,  Angiras  explained  in  an  assembly  while  the  sages 
sat  listening  ^vhen  he  had  been  asked  to  clear  the  doubts  regard¬ 
ing  Pitrs. 

97.  It  was  formerly  in  the  course  of  an  extensive  Satra  (sacri¬ 
fice)  lasting  for  a  thousand  years  wherein  the  lord  of  the  house 
was  the  deity,  Lord  Brahma. 

98.  It  is  heard  that  Brahma  presided  over  it  for  hundreds 


21.99-  22.5 


649 


of  yean.  The  folio wif^  verses  were  also  formerly  sung  by  Che 
sages,  the  expounders  of  Brahman  (Veda) . 

99.  **When  Brahma,  the  great  Atman,  presided  over  the 
Satra,  then  Pitp  were  born  for  the  benefit  of  the  worlds  seek* 
ing  everlasting  bliss,  through  Brahma  Parame$(hiQ/* 

Suta  said  : 

100.  Brhaspati  who  had  been  asked  by  his  intelligent  son 
formerly,  told  thus.  He  recounted  the  family  of  Pitfs.  What 
he  said  has  been  mentioned  (by  me).  Henceforth  I  shall  recount 
(the  race)  ofVaruria.  Understand  (it). 


CHAPTER  TWENTYTWO 

The  Race  of  Varuna  :  Birth  of  Aithn  Gods^ 

1.  The  s^es  to  whom  this  {Srddilha  Kalpa)  was  narrated 
became  very  much  delighted.  Extremely  eager  to  hear  further, 
they  asked  him  thereafter. 

The  Sages  said  : 

2.  Please  narrate  ( to  us)  in  proper  sequence  the  condition 
of  the  races  of  the  kings  of  unmeasured  spledour  as  well  as  valour* 
We  implore  you. 

3>4.  Thus  entreated,  SUta  Lomahatsana  an  expert  in  the 
narration  of  tales  and  proficient  in  the  art  of  speech,  (observed) 
the  desire  of  the  sages  to  hear  the  story  and  spoke  these  words  \ 

Hear  and  understand  as  I  recount  in  the  manner  the  sage 
recounted  to  me. 

5.  Even  as  I  recount,  listen,  and  understand  the  state  and 
position  of  the  dynasties  of  the  kings  of  unmeasured  splendour, 
in  the  proper  order  and  their  prowess. 

1.  Thii  chapter  correspoQ is  to  B<iP.  2.3.59;  only  vrne  numbers  from 
that  chapter  are  quoted  in  notes. 


650 


Vdyu  Pufdm 


6.  Varuna’s  wife  was  tbe  daughter  of  the  ocean  and  was 
called  ‘‘Sunode\d*’.  She  had  two  sons  Kali  and  Vaidya  and  a 
daughter  Suras undarl. 

7.  Kali  had  two  very  powerful  sons  (namely):  Jaya  and 
Vijaya.  Vaidya  too  had  two  sons  of  great  strength,  viz.  Ghfni 
and  Muni. 

8.  When  the  subjects  became  desirous  of  eating,  they  ate 
each  other.  Devouring  each  other,  they  perished. 

9.  Kali  begot  of  Suri  (a  son).  That  son  of  his  is  remembered 
as  Mada.  Hirhsa,  the  daughter  of  Tvas^fi  was  the  eldest  wife 
of  Kali.  She  was  known  as  Nikrti  (too) . 

10.  She  bore  four  other  man-eating  sons  to  Kali,  viz.  Naka, 
the  famous  Vighna,  Sadramaand  Vidhama. 

1 1 .  Among  them  Vighna  was  devoid  of  head;  Naka  had  no 
body;  Sadrarna  was  single-handed;  and  Vidhama  had  a  single 
foot. 

12.  Sadrama’s  wife  was  remembered  as  Putan&.  She  had 
Tamasic  qualities.  Kevad  was  the  wife  of  Vidhama.  Their  sons 
were  in  thousands. 

13.  Sak uni  was  the  wife  of  Naka  and  Ayomukb!  was  the 
wife  of  Vighna.  Raksas:LS  of  huge  heads  roaming  about  at  dawn 
and  dusk  (were  born  of  them). 

14.  The  sons  of  Rcvail  and  Putana  arc  remembered  by  the 
name  of  Nairrtas.  All  these  Rak$asas  were  evil  demons  known 
as  Grahas.  They  particularly  harassed  children  (by  haunting 
them).  With  the  permission  of  Brahma,  lord  Skanda  became 
their  overlord. 

1 5.  Brhaspati’s  sister  was  a  noble  lady  (named)  Yogasiddha- 
Observing  celibacy  and  being  detached,  she  roamed  over  the 
whole  universe. 

16.  She  became  the  wife  of  the  eighth  of  the  Vasus,  viz. 
Prabhasa.  Yisvakaruia,  the  creator  of  arts  and  crafts  was  bom 
as  her  son. 

17.  (He  was  known  as)  Tvaffi*.  He  created  many  forms.  He 
was  the  grandson  of  Dharma.  He  was  liberal-minded.  He  was 
the  creator  of  thor.sands  of  arts  <and  crafts.  He  was  the  Architect 
of  Devas. 

18.  He  made  aerial  chariots  for  ail  tbe  Devas.  Human  beings 


22.19-29 


651 


maintain  their  livelihood  by  following  the  craftsmanship  of  that 
noble  soul. 

19.  Tva^fr’s  wife  was  the  famous  daughter  of  Prahlada  and 
was  the  sister  of  Virocana  and  the  mother  of  Triiiras. 

20.  Maya,  the  son  of  the  intell^ent  preceptor  of  Devas  in 
craftsmanship  of  all  kinds,  as  remembered  as  Visvakarma  also. 

21.  His  youi^er  sister,  the  daughter  of  Tva$tr  (originally) 
famous  by  the  name  of  Surenu,  became  the  wife  of  the  Sun  and 
was  well  known  as  Sarhjfia. 

22.  With  the  power  of  her  penance,  she  bore  the  eldest  son 
Manu  to  Vivasvan  (the  Sun*god).  Then  she  gave  birth  to  the 
twins  Yama  and  Yamuna. 

23-24.  Assuming  the  form  of  a  mare,  the  noble  lady  went 
to  the  land  of  ICurus.  The  blessed  lady  bore  two  sons  to  the  Sun 
who  had  assumed  the  form  of  a  horse.  She  gave  birth  to  them 
through  nostrils.  They  were  the  twin  gods,  the  Aivins, 
Nksatya  and  Dasra.  Both  of  them  were  the  sons  of  M^tan^a  (the 
Sun-god). 

Thi  Sogis enquired : 

25.  Why  is  (the  Sun)  called  Martanda  by  learned  men? 
Why  did  she,  in  the  form  of  a  mare,  give  birth  to  them  through 
the  nostrils  ?  We  wish  to  know  this.  Please  explain  this  to  us 
who  ask  you. 

Suta  said  : 

26.  For  a  lor^  time,  the  tgg  did  not  break  (did  not  get 
hatched) .  It  was  broken  open  by  Tva^tr.  On  seeing  it,  Kasyapa 
became  sad  as  he  feared  that  the  foetus  was  killed. 

27.  When  the  egg  was  broken  into  two* parts,  he  looked  into 
it  and  said  to  Tvasp*,  “This  is  certainly  not  an  (ordinary) egg’ \ 
(Then  to  the  child  he  said)  *'0  Sinless  one,  be  Martanda**. 

28.  The  &ther  affectionately  said — ^Tndeed  this  (child)  in 
the  egg  is  not  dead**.  On  hearing  his  words,  the  relevancy  of  the 
name  has  been  imderstood. 

29.  Since  he  waa  addressed  by  the  father,  “Be  born  of  the 
dead  (broken)  egg*’,  when  the  egg  was  broken,  Vivasvin  is  caU 


652 


Vajyu  Purd^a 


led  M^ta^a^  by  those  who  know  the  Puranas« 

30.  Henceforth  I  shall  mention  the  progeny  of  Martanda 
Vivasvan.  Formerly  three  children  were  born  of  his  wife  Saihjfla 
to  Savitf. 

Sh  (Later)  the  younger  Manu  Savarm  and  Sanaiicara 
were  bom  to  (the  shadow)  Samj&a  and  the  twin  gods  Aivins  to 
(the  real)  Saihjha.  These  seven  are  remembered  as  the  children 
of  Marta^da. 

32.  Vivasvan  of  great  fame»  was  born  of  Kaiyapa  and  a 
daughter  of  Dak$a.  The  noble  lady,  the  daughter  of  Tva^r  be¬ 
came  the  wife  of  Vivasvan.  Originally  she  was  well  known  by 
the  name  Surcnu  and  later  came  to  be  known  as  Samjhk. 

33.  The  wife  of  lord  Marta^da  of  excessive  splendour  was 
a  woman  of  great  beauty  in  the  prime  of  youth.  She  was  dis¬ 
satisfied  with  the  dazzling  form  of  her  husband. 

34.  The  dazzlingly  brilliant  person  of  Martanda»  the  son 
of  Aditi,  coming  into  contact  with  her  body  was  not  very  pleas¬ 
ing  to  her. 

35.  Being  unaware,  Kaiyapasaid  out  of  affection,  ‘^Indeed 
this  (child)  in  the  e^  is  not  dead’\  Hence  he  is  called 
tanda. 

36.  The  brilliance  of  Vivasvan  increased  day  by  day  where¬ 
by  he,  the  son  of  Kasyapa,  scorched  the  three  worlds. 

37.  Ravi  (the  Sun-god)  begot  of  Saihjha  three  children, 
two  sons  of  great  prowess  and  the  daughter  Kalindl  (Yamuna) . 

38.  Manu  was  the  eldest  son  of  Vivasvan.  He  was  a  Praja- 
pati  and  known  as  Sraddhadeva.  Yama  and  Yarn!  were  bom  as 
twins. 

39.  On  seeing  the  whetted  brilliance  of  Vivasvan  and  una¬ 
ble  to  endure  it,  Samjha  created  her  own  shadow  of  the  same 
complexion  as  hers. 

40.  That  woman  of  earthly  form,  bom  of  her  shadow  came 
to  her  humbly  with  palms  joined  in  reverence  and  spoke  to 
Sarhjha: 


1.  The  Vedic  word  is  *  bora  of  ao  (apparently)  dead  egg  \ 

M&riaoda  is  a  Uier  Purioic  lorm,  though  the  derivation  is  the  same. 


22.41-55  653 

41.  *‘TeIl  me,  what  should  be  done  by  me  ?**  Sarhjfla  spoke 
to  her :  ^^Welfare  unto  you.  I  will  go  back  to  my  own  father^s 
house. 

42.  You  must  remain  in  my  house  without  any  hesitation. 
These  two  sons  of  mine  and  this  daughter  of  splendid  complex¬ 
ion  (should  be  looked  after) . 

43.  This  (arrangement)  should  not  be  mentioned  to  the 
lord,  my  husband*’. 

Thus  addressed,  the  earthly  form  of  Samjh5  spoke  to  Sarhjfia: 

44.  noble  lady,  until  the  hair  is  caught  hold  of,  I  will 
never  speak  your  secret  idea.  O  noble  lady»  go  back  to  your  own 
house”. 

45.  After  consoling  SaihjAa,  she  said,  ^*So  be  it”.  She,  the 
woman  in  a  pitiable  condition,  went  nearTva^tras  though  greatly 
ashamed. 

46.  On  seeing  her  come  back«  the  father  became  angry  and 
spoke  to  Saihjha:  ”Go  back  to  your  husband.  Do  not  hate  Divi- 
kara  (the  Sun-god)  «*’ 

47.  Though  urged  thus  by  her  father  and  compelled  (to  go) 
again  and  again,  she  lived  in  her  father’s  house  for  a  thousand 
years. 

48.  ”Go  to  your  husband’s  house”.  When  insisted  upon 
again  and  again  thus, that  uncensured  (praise-worthy)  lady  con¬ 
cealed  her  real  form  and  assumed  the  form  of  a  mare.  She  went 
to  the  northern  Kurus  and  b^an  to  graze  grass. 

49.  Considering  that  she  (the  shadow  of  Samjfta)  was  the 
real  Samjha,  the  Sun  begot  of  the  shadow,  the  second  Sarhjfl&, 
two  sons  of  the  splendour  of  Aditya  (the  Sun). 

50.  The  sons  were  Snitairava,  the  knower  of  Dharma, 
and  Snitakarman.  Both  of  those  lordly  ones  were  equal  to  Manu 
the  eldest-born. 

51.  Sruta^ravas  will  become  Savar^  Manu.  The  planet 
Sanatscara  (Saturn)  is  to  be  known  as  Srutakarman. 

52-53.  It  is  known  that  Savar^i  became  Manu.  The  earthly 
form  of  Saihjila  was  affectionate  only  towards  her  ( own)  sons  and 
not  towards  the  earlier  bom  ones.  Manu  bore  it  patiently,  but 
Yama  did  not  brook  it. 

54-55.  On  being  insulted  many  times  (by  the  step- 


654 


mother)  out  of  spitCi  Yama  became  distressed  and  threatened 
Samjfla  with  his  leg.  Out  of  anger  or  childishness  or  the  force 
of  the  inevitable  destiny,  that  lady,  having  the  same  complexion 
as  his  mother,  cursed  Yama  out  of  anger. 

56.  **Since  you  are  threatening  the  renowned  wife  of  your 
father,  this  leg  of  yours  will  undoubtedly  fall  off.’* 

57.  With  his  mind  deeply  afflicted  due  to  that  curse,  Yama 
of  virtuous  soul  reported  everything  to  his  father,  along  with 
Manu  (i.e.  accompanied  by  him.) 

58.  am  much  distressed  due  to  the  fear  of  the  curse  (tak¬ 
ing  effect).  I  have  been  defeated  (?)  by  the  (statement)  words 
of  Saihjfta.  (Tliis  mistake  is)  due  to  my  childishness  or  delusion. 
Sir,  please  protect  me. 

59.  O  lord  of  the  worlds,  foremost  one  among  those  who 
blaze,  I  have  been  cursed  by  mother.  May  your  grace  protect 
us  from  this  great  danger.” 

60.  Thus  implored,  lord  Vivasvan  spoke  to  Yama:  ”0  son, 
undoubtedly  there  will  be  a  great  reason  behind  this  (incident). 

61 «  That  was  why  anger  took  possession  of  you  who  are  the 
knower  of  virtue  and  the  speaker  of  the  truth.  The  words  of  your 
mother  too  cannot  be  falsified. 

62.  The  worms  will  take  away  your  flesh  and  go  to  the  earth. 
Then  you  will  regain  your  foot.  O  intelligent  one,  you  will  be 
happy  again. 

63.  In  this  way,  your  mothcr^s  words  will  be  true  and  effec¬ 
tive.  By  removal  of  the  curse,  you  will  ako  be  saved/’ 

64.  Aditya  then  spoke  to  Samjna,  ‘‘When  the  sons  are  all 
equal,  why  is  more  affection  shown  by  you  towards  one  ?” 

65.  Avoiding  (the  necessity  of  disclosing  the  secret)  she  did 
not  say  anything  to  Vivasv^.  But  by  means  of  his  Yogic  power 
and  concentration,  the  Sun  found  out  the  truth. 

66.  The  infuriated  Sun-god  was  about  to  curse  her  bringing 
about  her  destruction.  She  then  confessed  factually  everything 
to  Vivasv^. 

67-68.  Oil  bearing  it,  Vivasvan  was  enraged  and  hastened 
to  Tva?tr.  Tvastj'  honoured  with  due  formalities  the  Sun-god 
who  wanted  to  bum  down  everything.  He  pacified  him  slowly 
saying  :  “Your  present  form  which  is  excessively  dazzling,  is  not 
attractive. 


22.69-83 


655 


69.  It  is  because  she  could  not  endure  it  that  Samjfia  is 
wandering  in  the  forests  and  meadows.  You  will  see  your  wife 
of  auspicious  conduct  today  itself 

70.  O  lord  of  rays,  by  usii^your  Yogic  power,  you  will  see 
your  praise worty  wife  superbly  endowed  with  youthful  charm. 
Everything  will  be  favourable  if  my  condition  is  accepted. 

71-74.  O  suppressor  of  enemies  !  At  the  outset,  I  shall 
change  your  personal  form  into  an  excellent  one’*.  The  Covm  of 
Vivasvan,  then,  was  sideways,  upwards  and  below  (i.e.  the  rays 
were  diffused  everywhere).  Hence  Divaspati  (the  Siin-god)  was 
ashamed  of  that  form.  So  the  deity  of  great  penance  praised  the 
wheel  of  Tva^tf.  Tvastr  was  then  permitted  to  change  the  form. 
With  the  concurrence  of  the  Sun-god  (Martanda  Vivasvan) , 
Tva^jl*  mounted  him  on  the  wheel  and  whetted  his  brilliance. 
Then  the  brilliance  had  pleasant  refulgence  due  to  reduction  in 
dazzle. 

75.  The  refulgence  became  very  pleasing  to  behold.  What 
was  inauspicious  before  shone  splendidly.  Then  (the  Sun)  made 
use  of  Yogtc  power  and  saw  his  wife  in  the  form  of  a  mare. 

76.  She  had  been  invisible  to  all  living  beings  due  to  her 
brilliance  and  observance  of  rites.  In  the  form  of  a  horse,  Mar- 
tanda  approached  her  and  declared  his  love. 

77.  In  the  physical  activity  of  sexual  intercourse,  she  suspec¬ 
ted  him  to  be  someone  other  than  her  lord.  She  therefore  dis¬ 
charged  the  semen  virile  of  Vivasvan  through  her  nostrils. 

78.  From  that  semen  were  born  the  twin  gods  Alvins,  the 
excellent  physicians,  Nasatya  and  Dasra.  They  are  remembered 
as  Asvins. 

79.  They  are  the  sons  of  Martanda,  the  eighth  Prajapati. 
Bhaskara  (the  Sun-god)  showed  his  beautiful  form  to  her. 

80.  On  seeing  him  the  wife  was  satisfied  and  fascinated. 
Yama  was  much  afnicted  in  the  mind  due  tp  that  curse. 

81-83.  He  pleased  (all)  by  means  of  his  Dharma.  Then  he 
became  known  as  Dharmaraja.  By  means  of  his  auspicious  acti¬ 
vity,  he  became  extremely  refulgent  and  attained  the  lordship 
of  Pitrs  and  guardianship  of  the  quarters.  Savarni  Manu 
of  great  fame  shall  become  the  Manu  in  the  Savarnika  Manvan- 
tara.  Even  today  the  holy  lord  performs  penance  on  the  beautiful 
ridge  of  the  Mcru  mountain. 


656 


Vdyu  Purdt^a 


84.  Thdr  brother  Sanaiicara  attained  the  status  of  a  planet. 
With  the  (chopped  off)  brilliance  (of  the  Sun)  Tva^tr  made 
Vi$nu*9  discus.^  It  was  unobstructed  (irresistible)  in  battles  to 
check  Danavas. 

85.  Their  younger  sister  Yamuna  of  great  fame,  became  the 
excellent  river  Yamima,  the  purifier  of  all  the  worlds.* 

66.  I  shall  now  narrate  the  details  of  Vaivasvata  Manu  who 
was  the  eldest  among  them.  He  had  great  splendour  and  his 
creation  is  current  (and  he  presides  over  the  present  Manvan- 
tara) . 

87.  He  who  listens  to  or  reads  the  otigin  of  Devas,  the 
seven  powerful  sons  of  Vivasvin,  shall  be  released » if  he  attains 
misfortune.  He  shall  attain  great  glory. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYTHREE 

Creative  Activity  of  Manu:  The  Story 
of  Su^umtia, 

Suta  said : 

!•  When  the  Cak^usa  Manvantara  had  elapsed,  when  the 
Devas  ( pertaining  to  that  epoch)  too  had  gone,  the  kingdom  of 
the  earth  was  assigned  to  the  great  Vaivasvata  (Manu) 


1 .  The  creation  of  diKus  Sudarsana  from  the  pruned  part  of  the 

SuH'god  is  mentioned  in  VP.  III.  2.11. 

2.  This  story  of  the  SuQ*god,  his  %vifc  SaihjilS  and  Ghayi,  his  children 

from  them,  pruning  of  tlie  Sun*god*s  exceasive  lustre,  his  approach  to  his 
>vife  Saihjha  (who  was  in  a  mare’s  form)  and  birth  of  Alvin  gods«^these 
are  traditional  accounts  found  in  Mbh.  76,  150,  VP.  Ilf.  2 

and  Other  Purioaa. 

3.  Description  of  dynasties  of  Idnp  is  an  integral  part  of  a  PurS^a  of  five 
characteristics.  Vaivasvata  Manu,  being  the  progenitor  of  these  dynasties, 
ii  described  in  all  Pura^as. 

This  chapter  corresponds  to  Bd.P.  2.$^,  hence  only  vern  nos.  from 
Bd.P.  are  given. 


23,2-14 


657 


2.  O  BriLhma^s^  I  shall  recount  in  the  proper  order  the 
race  of  that  noble-souled  current  Manu»  the  son  of  Vivasvan. 
(Listen  to)  and  understand  what  is  being  narrated, 

3.  (I  shall  narrate  the  story)  now  taking  up  the  present 
creation  of  Vaivasvata  Manu.  The  first  bom  Manu  had  nine  sons 
equal  to  him, 

4.  These  nine  are  remembered  as  the  sons  of  Manu  : 
Ik^vaku,  Nahu^a,  Dhf^t^,  Saryati,  Nariman ta»  tha  tall  {Prdrf^u) 
Nabhaga,  Arista,  KarQsa  and  Pr^adhra. 

5.  Know  that  formerly  Manu,  on  being  urged  by  Brahmi, 
began  to  create  willingly,  but  he  was  unsuccessful. 

6.  Then  Prajapati,  desirous  of  sons,  performed  a  great  I/fi 
(Yajfia).  Manu  offered  the  oblation  (Ahuti)  In  the  share  of 
Mitra  and  Varu^a. 

7.  It  is  heard,  that  was  born  thereof.  She  wore  heavenly 
garmenu  and  was  bedecked  in  celestial  oriiaments.  Her  body 
too  was  divine, 

8«10.  It  is  remembered  that  Manu,  the  bearer  of  the  staff 
of  justice,  addressed  her  as  Tla*  and  said,  **Welfare  unto  you, 
I  shall  follow  you**.  Ila  replied  to  the  Prajipati  who  was  desirotis 
of  sons,  in  the  following  words  sanctioned  by  Dharma.  fore¬ 
most  of  the  eloquent  ones,  I  am  bora  in  the  share  of  Mitra  and 
Varuna.  I  will  (first)  approach  them.  May  not  Dharma  violated 
by  us  kill  us*’.  After  speaking  thus,  the  noble  lady  went  near 
(hem  (Mitra  and  Varutia). 

1 1 .  After  going  near  them,  the  beautiful  lady  spoke  these 
words  with  palms  joined  in  reverence:  “O  Devas,  I  am  bom  in 
your  share.  What  should  I  do  ? 

12-14.  I  have  been  requested  by  Manu,  thus,  ‘B’ollow  me’ 
When  the  chaste  lady  Ida  spoke  thus,  both  of  them,  Mitra  and 
Varuna  spoke  these  words:  ‘^Olair-complcxioned  lady  of  beautiful 
hips,  O  knower  of  Dharma,  we  are  delighted  by  your  humility, 
self-control  and  truthfulness.  O  blessed  lady,  you  will  become 
renowned  as  our  daughter”. 


1.  In  RV,  it  vas  used  in  the  tense  ‘refreshing  draught*  Later  on  it 
came  to  mean  ‘a  cow*,  and  *a  goddess  of  speech*.  In  $at.  Br.  14&  is 
Manu*s  daughter.  But  In  our  text  she  is  the  daughter  of  (*born  of  the 
ihare  of]  Mitra  and  Varupa. 


658 


Vdyu  Purdt^ 


15-1 6.  The  son  of  Manu,  the  righteous-souled  promoter  of 
Manu’s  race  is  the  beloved  of  the  universe.  He  who  is  revered  in 
the  three  worlds  is  famous  as  Sudyumaa.  He  has  attained  the  form 
of  a  lady.^  That  noble  lady  returned  to  her  father  after  securing 
the  boon. 

1 7.  After  getting  an  opportune  moment,  she  was  invited  for 
love  making  (sexual  intercourse)  bvBudha  (the  planet  Mer¬ 
cury)  .  From  Budha,  the  son  of  Soma^  Pururavas,  the  son  of  Ha 
was  bom. 

18.  After  giving  birth  to  the  son  born  of  Budha,  she  became 
Sudyumna  again.  Sudyumna  had  three  sons,  all  extremely 
virtuous. 

19.  They  were  Utkaia,  Gaya  and  Vinataiva.  The  land  of 
Utkala  went  over  to  Utkala.  The  western  region  went  over  to 
Vinatasva.  In  the  quarter  of  the  Wind-god  (north-west)  was 
Gaya,  the  city  of  Gaya,  the  saintly  king. 

20.  (Defective  verse)  When  Manu  was  abandoned  (created) 
the  Sun  (Divakara)  created  the  subjects  and  divided  the  whole 
region  of  the  earth  into  ten. 

21.  Iksvaku  had  ten  other  sons.  In  view  of  his  being  a  lady 
(as  well),  Sudyumna  had  no  share. 

22-23.  At  the  instance  of  Vasiifha,  the  establishment  of  the 
noble-soulcd  Sudyumna,  the  virtuous  king  of  great  lustre,  was 
( took  place)  in  Pratisthana.  After  getting  the  kingdom,  he,  of 
great  renown,  gave  it  to  Pururavas.  The  characteristics  of  wo¬ 
men  and  men  among  human  beings,  O  blessed  ones,  (will  be 
duly  manifest)  •  Sudyumna,  the  son  of  Manu,  attained  the  status 
of  a  woman  again. 

24.  On  hearing  this  the  sages  asked  thereafter:  “How  did 
Sudyumna,  the  son  of  Manu,  attain  womanhood 

Suta  said : 

25.  The  beloved  goddess  (Uma)  spoke  these  words  to  her 

lover  (Siva)  for  the  sake  of  his  love:  Lord,  the  man  who 

enters  my  personal  hermitage  will  certainly  become  a  woman. 
She  will  be  auspicious  and  on  a  par  with  the  celestial  damsels. “ 

1.  Thii  straage  gcory  of  Va]''afvata  Maou^i  bisexual  child  is  found  in 
Mbh.  Adi  75,  Anuiisana  147,  Bb.P.  IX.  i. 


23,26— 24.8 


659 


26.  All  the  living  beings  there,  PIsicas,  and  the  animals 
became  women  and  played  with  Rudra  like  heavenly  ladies. 

27-28,  That  king  who  had  gone  a-hunting  entered  Uma*8 
forest.  He  attained  womanhood  along  with  the  Piiacas,  Bhucas 
and  Rudras.  Hence  that  king  attained  womanhood.  By  the  grace 
of  Mahadeva,  he  shall  attain  the  lordship  of  the  Ganas. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYFOUR 

A  DisserMion  on  Music: 

The  Dtfiniiion  of  Mitrcchand^ 

SHia  said : 

1-3.  (Listen  to  and)  understand  the  details  of  Manuks  sons. 
Pr$adhra  tortured  the  cow  of  his  preceptor  and  ate  it.  Due  to 
the  curse  of  the  noble-souled  Cyavana,  he  attained  the  status  of 
a  Sudra. 

Karu^’s  son  Karu^a  was  a  K^atriya  invincible  in  war.  He 
became  as  valorous  as  the  group  of  a  thousand  K;atriyas.  Bhal- 
andana»  son  of  Nabhagarista*(  ?)  was  a  scholar. 

4.  Bhalandana  had  a  very  powerful  son  named  Prarh^. 
Prarii^u  had  a  son  who  became  well  known  as  Prajwi. 

5.  Prajanl  had  a  valorous  son  named  Khanitra.  His  son  was 
the  glorious  Ksupa  of  great  fame. 

6.  Ksupa *s  son  was  Vim^  who  had  no  one  equal  to  him. 
Vifnsa*s  son  was  Vivimsa,  the  righteous  performer  of  religi¬ 
ous  rites. 

7-  ViviriJa’s  son  was  the  virtuous-souled  and  valorous  Kha- 
ninetra.  In  the  beginning  of  Treta>iiga,  his  son  Karandhama 
was  born.  ' 

8.  Karandhama’s  son  was  the  vigorous  Aviksit.  By  means  of 
his  good  qualities,  Aviksit  surpassed  his  father. 


1.  The  tern  *MurcciMi*  means  the  diant;iag  of  key  or  modulation  of 
voice  (and  sounds)  in  the  Science  of  Music.  For  more  explanation  see 
Footnote  No  3,  p.  662. 

2.  A.  reads;  KSbh4ga  was  the  son  of  Ariita.  Bhalandana  was  a  scholar. 


660 


V^furdtfa 


9.  (His  son}  named  Manitta  was  a  virtuous^souled  king 
equal  to  an  emperor.  He  was  taken  to  heaven  by  (sage)  Sam- 
varta  along  with  his  friends  and  kinsmen. 

10*  In  this  connection  a  great  dispute  arose  between  Sam- 
varta  and  Brhaspati.  On  seeing  the  magnificence  of  the  Yajfia, 
Bfahspati  became  angry  with  him. 

1 1.  When  the  Yajfia  was  brought  to  a  successful  conclusion 
by  Sathvarta,  he  (Brhaspati)  became  more  furious.  He  was  in¬ 
tent  on  the  destruction  of  the  worlds  but  he  was  propitiated  by 
the  deities  (gods). 

12.  Emperor  Marutta  obtained  Narijyanta  (as  son).  Nari- 
9yanta*s  successor  was  the  king  Dama,  wielding  the  staff  of  jus¬ 
tice  and  punishment. 

13.  The  valorous  king  Rit^travardhana  was  his  son.  His  son 
was  Sudhrtin  and  Sud  hr  tin's  son  was  Nara. 

14.  Kevala  was  his  son  and  Bandhuman  was  the  son  of  Ke- 
vala,  The  vircuous-souled  king  V^avan  was  Bandhumiui's  son, 

15.  Budha  was  Vegavin’s  son  and  Tr^abindu  was  the  sou 
of  Budha.  He  became  king  at  the  beginning  of  the  third  Treta- 
yuga. 

16.  His  daughter  was  Dravii^a  (Idavida  in  Bd.  P.)  who  be¬ 
came  tlie  mother  of  Visravas.  He  had  a  son  also  named  Vi<4la. 
He  was  an  extremely  virtuous  king. 

1 7.  The  city  of  Visala  (Vaisali)*  was  built  by  king  Vi^ala. 
Vis4Ia's  son  was  the  king  Hemacandra  of  great  strei^th. 

18.  After  Hemacandra  (his  son)  Sucandra  became  very 
famous.  Sucandra 's  son  was  the  well  known  king  Dhumrasva. 

19.  Dhumrasva's  son  Srfijaya  became  a  great  scholar.  Srft- 
jaya's  son  was  the  glorious  and  valorous  Sahadeva. 

20.  Kfsasva  was  Sahadeva's  son.  He  was  extremely  righte¬ 
ous,  The  valorous  Somadatta  of  great  brilliance  was  Krsasva's 
son. 

21.  Janamejaya  was  the  son  of  the  saintly  king  Somadatta. 
Janamejaya's  son  named  Pramati  was  very  famous. 

22.  By  grace  of  Tf^bindui  all  the  kings  ruling  over 
Viiali  were  long-lived,  noble-souled,  valorous  and  very  righteous. 

1 .  Beiad  in  the  district  of  MuzalTsrpur.  The  name  ii  now  officially 
changed  as  ^VailUr,  though  local  people  still  call  it  Beaj. 


24.23-33 


661 


23.  Saryati  begot  twins,  a  son  and  a  daughter.  The  son  be¬ 
came  well  known  as  Anarta  and  the  daughter  was  Sukanya  who 
became  the  wife  of  Cyavana. 

24.  Anarta’s  successor  was  the  heroic  (king}  named  Reva. 
His  kingdom  was  Anarta^  and  the  capital  city  was  Kuiasthali. 

25.  Reva*s  son  was  Raivata.  He  was  very  virtuous  and  was 
also  known  as  Kakudin.  He  was  the  eldest  of  a  hundred  brothers. 
He  became  the  king  and  ruled  over  Ku^sthal!. 

26*27.  He  went  to  lord  Brahm&^s  presence  accompanied  by 
his  daughter  and  heard  the  musical  performance  of  the  lord  of 
Devas  for  the  duration  of  a  Muhurta  which  was  equivalent  to 
mzny  yugas  according  to  the  calculation  of  human  beings.*  He 
returned  to  his  own  city  in  his  own  prime  of  youth,  but  the  city 
had  been  occupied  by  Y&davas.  It  had  been  renamed  by  them 
as  Dvaravati,  a  beautiful  city  with  many  gates. 

28«30.  It  was  then  protected  by  Vasudeva  and  other  leading 
Bhojas,  Vrsnis  and  Andhakas*  On  hearing  the  story  (of  the  oc¬ 
cupation  of  Dvaraka  by  Yadavas)  with  all  the  facts,  Raivata, 
the  suppressor  of  enemies,  gave  hb  daughter  of  good  rites  named 
Revatl,  to  Balarama  in  marrl^^e  and  went  to  a  peak  of  mount 
Meru  and  became  engrossed  id  penance. 

Virtuous*  sou  led  Rama  (Balarama)  sported  with  Re  vati. 

On  hearing  the  story,  the  sages  enquired  thereafter. 

The  Sages  asked  : 

31.  O  son  of  Suta,  O  holy  lord,  how  is  it  that  even  after 
the  lapse  ofa  long  period  of  many  Yugas,  Revati  did  not  become 
old  7  How  did  her  hair  not  turn  grey  ? 

32.  After  going  to  the  mountain  Mem  bow  did  Saryati’s 
son  have  progeny  of  his  own?  How  did  they  survive  till  now  on 
the  earth  ?  We  wish  to  hear  preebely. 

33.  How  many  are  the  groups  of  gods  ?  How  are  the  Gan- 
dharvas  ?  How  was  that  music  on  hearing  which  Raivata  consi¬ 
dered  a  long  period  as  only  a  Muhurta  ? 


1.  Anarita,  old  name  of  Gujarat  (including  Sauriihtra)  and  Kuiasthali 
is  modern  DwSrki. 

2.  Accidentally  Einsrein  ii  anticipated  by  the  imaginative  Purina* 
writer. 


662 


Vdjru  PurS^ 


SQta  explained : 

34.  Td  a  person  who  goes  to  the  world  of  god  Brahma^ 
there  is  neither  hunger  nor  thirst.  He  has  neither  old  age  nor 
fear  of  death.  No  ailment  affects  him. 

35.  O  excellent  sages«  as  to  the  question  put  to  me  on 
Gandhnrva  (science  of  music) ,  I  shall  explain  it  precisely^  O 
good  sages  of  holy  rites. 

36.  The  Svara  Mandal<^  (the  whole  group  pertaining  to 
musical  notes)  is  comprised  by  seven  Svaras  (notes),  three 
Grdmaii^  (basic  scales),  twentyone  M^ircckand^  (the  modes  of 


1.  It  suggests  the  ascent  and  descent  cf  seven  notes,  known  as  Svere* 
sapteka.  See  v.  37. 

2.  Grdmtf  t  Gr4me  means  the  group  of  seven  notes.  The  three  Gtemas 
mentioned  In  PurSoas  are  (1)  $adja-griiiu»  (U)  Madhyama-grima  and 
(ilt)  GSndhara«grAma.  These  three  were  the  basic  scales— the  <fd*sca]e, 

A/O'Scaie  and  the  Ge-scale.  These  had  the  notes  Sd,  Mo  and  Go  at  the 
starting  points.  Thus  the  order  of  notes  in  these  scales  will  be  as  follows  : 

(i)  The  ^J-scale  :  Sd,  Ri,  Ga,  Mo,  Fa,  Dha, 

(ii)  The  Af^scale  :  Ma,  Pa,  Dha,  Mi,  Sd,  Ri,  Ga 

( iii)  The  Ge-scale  :  Ga,  Ma,  Pa,  Dho,  Mi,  Sd,  Ri 

Out  of  tiiese  Ga-scale  fell  into  disuse  later.  Dattila,  an  ancient  writer 
on  Music,  slates  that  it  U  not  found  in  this  world  while  later  Kholars  say 
that  it  went  to  Heaven.  They  say  that  due  to  the  extremely  high  and  low 
notes  it  disappeared.  But  for  the  reasons  given  by  later  writers  like 
Sargadeva,  it  seems  that  it  was  not  perfect  in  its  aspect  of  consonance.  And 
consonance  is  vitally  essential  for  the  melodic  music  of  India.  Bharata,  in 
his  Mdfyo^idstra  describes  the  ^e-scale  and  Afo>scale  on  the  basis  of  the  fourth 
[Sa~Ma  Sarkeddo)  and  the  consonance  of  the  fifth  ^Sa^Pa  Somodda),  In 
the  So'Scaie  the  consonance  of  the  hftb  was  more  prominent  (So-Pa,  Ri^Dha 
and  Ge-m)  while  that  of  the  fourth  m  the  Afe-scale  (Sa~Ma  and  Ri^Pa), 

The  number  of  ^rutis  (the  microtoaes)  in  the  Saptaka  fixed  by  Bharat^ 
is  22.  The  .^ruh  intervals  were  distributed  in  the  notes  ar  follows  t 

Sa-Seale  ;  45a,  3^i,  2Ga,  4Aftf,  iPa,  3Z)Ae,  2^i«22 

Mo-Scals  :  4Afa,  SPa,  ^Dha,  2Mt,  45e.  $Ri,  2Ga^22 

The  Sa~Ma  consonance  has  the  interval  of  9  ^rvtis  and  the  Sa*Pa  conso¬ 
nance  that  of  13  Srutis. 

3.  MSrcchand  : 

Mureehand  war  the  gradual  ascent  and  descent  of  the  seven  notes  of 
the  basic  scale.  The  vrord  is  derived  from  the  root  \/mi2frsA— ‘to  increase*, 
‘to  pervade*.  As  MQr«futads  started  from  each  note  of  the  scale,  there  were 
•even  MdfcthanSs  of  each  scale.  Thus  d<e  Mitnf hands  of  three  Crdmas 
numbered  twentyone. 


24.37 


663 


gradual  ascent  and  descent  of  the  seven  notes  of  the  basic 
scale)  and  fortyninc  Tdlas^  (Tanas) , 

37.  The  following  are  the  names  of  the  svaras  :  fa^ja  (Sd), 
flsabha  (Ri) ,  Gandhdra  (Ca\  Madkyama  (Afa)»  Pancama  (Pa), 
Dhaivata  (Dka),  and  J^ifdda  (Ni)*  These  are  the  seven  svaras 
(notes)  * 

(The  Text  dealing  with  Music  is  corrupt  and  obscure.  An 


For  example,  ihc  Sd^iC^it  M&rcchonds  would  be  : 

( 1 )  Sd  ai  Oa  Ma  Pa  Dha  J<fi . 

(2)  JVi  Sd  Pi  GaMaPa  Dha . 

(3)  Dha  Ni  54  Ri  Ca  Ma  Pa . etc. 

The  was  descending  baviog  the  notes  Ala  Ga  Ri  Sd  Dha  M 

Pa  as  per  A^dradfya  ^ik^d  (I.  5,  1  and  2).  Due  lo  the  influence  of  the  Sdman” 
scale,  therif  was  the  descending  order  followed  in  the  case  of  starting  notes 
of  (he  Mdrec hands.  Murcchands  served  as  the  basis  of  differetit  types  of 
lor.gs.  They  also  brought  in  the  notes  of  the  low  {^Mondra),  high  (Tdre) 
registers  If  the  first  Aidnthand  uT  the  is  rendered  Caking 

Ma  as  the  $a4ja  and  the  reinajidog  notes  accordingly,  then  it  would  be 
indicated  as  ; 

dSa,  3Ri,  ^Ga,  iMa,  2Pa,  SDfto.  2A‘i-22  ^rafif 

Thii  gives  tlie  Gandhdra  of  4  SmHs  called  Antara  Ca,  Its  consonant  note 
would  be  .Yf  of  4  Sfutis  called  Kdkali  JVi.  These  two  were  called  the 
Sddhdra^  notes.  Their  use  was  restricted.  Their  employment  was  allowed 
when  the  songs  had  two  Sruti  Ga  and  two  5ruh  /fi  notes  in  small  measure. 
The  Mdretha/niis  with  these  two  Sddhdrava  notes  were  called  Sddhdravtkrta 
Mur^chands, 

1 .  Tdla  or  Tdna  : 

Tdna  is  the  Mdrcchand  in  which  one  or  two  specific  notes  are  dropped. 
When  one  specific  Svara  (Note)  is  dropped,  it  is  called  ^d4<wa  7dna  (a 
T4na  consisting  of  six  notes)  and  when  two  specific  notes  are  dropped,  it 
is  called  Au^uva  Tdna  (a  Tana  coosbting  of  five  notes).  According  to 
Purai^as,  there  are  twenty  Tanas  of  Madhjama'-grdmai  fourteen  of  $a4ja^ 
grdma  and  fifteen  of  Gandhdra^gr&ma^  Thus  the  number  of  Tanas  of  the  three 
gramas  is  given  as  forty-nine. 

According  to  Bbarata  ^NdtyaSSsira)  when  th^  single  note  .Sd,  Ri,  Pa, 
or  JVi  is  dropped  frotu  the  MuHchands  of  the  Aiadkyama  Crdma,  twentyone 
fd^ava  Tanas  would  be  effected  (7x3—21). 

Dy  dropping  Sa  Pa  Ca  Aft  or  Ri  Dha  from  the  Murcchanas  of  the  5a«scale 
twenty- one  TdAOf  would  be  cfTected  (7x3«2]).  When  Ri  Dha  or 

Ga  JVi  are  dropped  from  the  MOrcchands  of  the  A^s-scale,  there  would  take 
place  fourteen  Auduva  Tdnas  (7x2»14).  Thus  the  total  number  of  the 
Tdnof  of  the  two  Grdmas  is  eighty-four  according  to  Bharata.  These  are 
given  as  Suddha  Tdnas  by  later  Aciryas. 


664  Vdjfu  PurdP^ 

attempt  is  made  to  emend  it  with  similar  verses  on  Music  in 
6d.  P.  and  other  Puranas.) 

38-39.  The  Mdrcthandi  of  the  Ma-scale  {Madhyama-gtdmiki) 
are  known  as  Saubirl  (Sauvfra  in  Bd.  P.)  of  the  Madhyama- 
grama,  Harii^sya,  Kalopabalopeta  (also  known  as  Kalopanata) 
the  fourth  Suddha-madhyama,  Sarngl,  Pavani  and  Drsjaka 
in  the  serial  order.  Murcchands  of  Madhyama-grama  are  ex¬ 
plained.  Now  understand  (the  Murcchanas  of)  the  Sa^scalt 
{i^ajja-grdma) . 

40.  Uttara-mandra,  Rajani,  Uttarayata,  Suddha-5a<^ja 
should  also  be  known  as  the  seventh.' 

41a.  Know  the  Murcchands  of  the  Ca^scalt  {Gandh&ra^grdmiki) 
as  they  are  being  described  by  me.* 

41b-48.  (The  names  of  the  Tdnas  are  as  follows  :) 

The  first  of  the  series  is  Agni$tomika,  the  second  is  Vajape- 
yika;  the  third  is  called  Paund^aka;  the  fourth  is  A^amedhUca; 
the  fiAh  is  Rajasuya;  the  sixth  is  Cakrasuvarnaka;  the  seventh 
is  Gosava  by  name;  Mahavr$tika  is  the  eighth;  Brahmadwa 
is  the  ninth;  the  next  is  Prajapatya;  the  later  should  be  known 
as)  Naga-pakfairaya,  Gotara,  Hayakranta,  Mrga-kranta;  the 
charming  Vif  nukranta,  the  most  excellent  Suryakranta,  Mat- 
takokila-Vadin,  Savitra,  Ardhniavitra,  Sarvatobhadra,  Suvarna, 
Sutandra,  Vi^nu,  Vaisnuvara,  Sagara,  Vijaya  which  is  charm¬ 
ing  to  all  beings.  We  know  Haihsa  and  Jyes^ha  as  dear  to 
Turhburu  (or ‘Tumbunipriya*  be  taken  as  a  separate  name), 
the  pleasing  Adhatrya. 

These  are  followed  by  Gandharvas,  desired  by  Alambu^  and 
dear  to  Narada.  It  is  mentioned  by  Bhimasena  that  they  are 
liked  by  citizens.  (Bd.  P.  takes  * HdgaTa^^priya^  as  the  name  of  a 
Tana.) 

49-50a.  (The  Tana)  called  Karopamta — Vinata,  Srili* 
Bha  rga  va-Priy  a. 

1.  The  text  omitted  the  names  Abhirudgata,  Matsarikrtaand  Asvakranca. 

2.  Strangely  enough  neither  our  text  nor  Bd.  P.  gives  the  MUrcchan&t  of 
the  Ga-scol*. 

N.  P.  II.50.35b*36a  records  them  as  follows  : 

Nidi*  Vis&l4.  Sumukhi,  Citra,  CStravatl,  Mukha  and  Bala.  Without  any 
Introduction  the  text  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  Tdnas  from  41b. 

The  Purapic  concept  of  a  TJne  is  differeot  from  that  of  today. 


24.50b-60 


66S 

The  Ma-sealt  {Madhjfoma^grAma)  coiuisU  of  twenty  (Tdnas) 
while  fourteen  {jTands)  constitute  the  Sorscalt  ^$a4ja-grdma) . 
They  desire  (opine)  that  there  are  fifteen  (TAta;)  belonging  to 
the  Ga-scali  (Gdndhdta-grdmdi. 

( Thi  deities  associatid  wHk  M^cehands) 

50b.  The  Mdrechand  Gandhaii  accompanied  with  Sauvira  is 
hence  sung  by  god  Brahma. 

51.  And  god  Brahma  is  the  presiding  deity  here  of  the 
Utlarddi^^svara, 

is  originated  in  the  region  of  Hari.  Murcchana 
Haripasya  has  Indra  as  its  presiding  deity. 

52.  The  M&reehmd  Kcropanita^vitatd  was  sung  by  Maruts  in 
Soarc^Manida.  That  is  Kdopunltd.  Hence  its  presiding  deity  is 
Maruta. 

53.  The  MUrechAndSuddha^madkyamd  originated  in  the  Manu 
(ru7)  deia. 

Stsddha  Madhyamd  is  the  note  here  and  the  presiding  deity  is 
Gandharva. 

54.  Since  it  moves  along  with  the  deer  for  the  guidance  of 
Siddhast  it  is,  hence,  called  Mdrgi,  The  Lord  of  animals  (the 
Lion)  is  its  deity. 

55.  As  the  MUrcchand  is  associated  with  hermitages  and 
also  with  the  various  (human)  voices  of  citizens,  it  is  called 
Rajani  due  to  its  association  with  rajas  (dust/atmosphere). 

56.  The  Tdla  (beating  time)  is  known  as  having  Saija  as 
its  deity.  Hence  Uttara-tdla  is  known  first  as  well  extended. 

Hence  it  is  Uttara-mandra  whose  diety  isDhruva. 

57.  Since  it  is  after  Apana  (?),  Uuarayana  having  Dha 
(Dhaivata)  as  the  starting  point,  is  the  Murcchana  the  deities 
of  which  are  Pitrs  (manes),  the  deities  (worshipped  in) 
Sraddhas. 

58.  The  great  sages  worship  the  Fire -god  with  the  Suddka- 
Sa4j^  (pure  iS*^-)  note;  it  should  be  known  as  Suddha-Sa4jika. 

59.  It  starts  from  the  PafUama  note  causing  delight  to  the 
good  people. 

The  MQrcchani  belonging  to  Yakuts  (female  Yak^s)  is 
called  Yak^ika  Murcchani. 

€0.  (Defective)  That  Murcchana  which  serpents  of  poiso* 
nous  eyes  do  not  approach  and  the  serpent* deities  become  as  it 


666  VdjfU  Purd^a 

were  drawn  by  Brahma,  is  called  the  Murcchana  of  serpents 
(AAi^murcc/iand)  and  here  the  deity  is  Varupa. 

6h  The  Murcchana  with  which  Kinnaras  (sing)  in 
imitation  of  birds,  is  the  excellent  (Cfttamd)  MQrcchand.  Its 
deity  is  the  Lord  of  Birds  (Garuda). 

62.  By  the  sound  of  Gandh^a  R.^a,  the  earth  (or  cow?) 
it  held  in  support.  Hence  it  is  called  Viluddha^GAndhaii  (of 
pure  Ca).  And  Gandbarva  is  its  presiding  deity. 

63.  The  Murcchana  Uttara«G&ndhar!  is  so  called  as  it  was 
created  after  G&ndhara.  Its  (presiding)  deities  areVasus. 

64.  The  $adja  Murcchana  Arst  approached  god  Brahma 
(Pitamaha).  Hence  its  greatness.  Its  deity  is  the  Fire-god. 

65.  The  Murcchana  called  Mandafa^^ha  is  divine  and 
extensive.  The  names  of  its  qualities  cannot  be  described.  Its 
deity  is  Paflcama  (the  note  Pa). 

66.  All  the  seven  Notes  (Svaras)  and  the  MUrcchands  are 
recounted  completely.  MUrcchanSs  with  Sadharapa  Svaras^ 
(e.g.  Antara  Gandhara,  Kakall  Ni^ada)  are  many.  Only  six  of 
them  are  known. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYFIVE 

The  Science  of  Music\  The  Embellishmnls 

1.  After  knowing  the  views  of  earlier  teachers,  I  shall 
explain  in  due  order,  the  tliirty  embellishments  of  music.  Listen 
to  them  while  I  am  expounding. 

2.  The  Alahkaras  (embellishments  of  music)  are  to  be 
explained  along  with  their  Vamas  (movements  of  notes  such 
as  ^steady%  ‘ascending*  and  others)  as  their  spcciBc  basis  and 
also  along  with  their  associated  configuration  {Sojhsthiina)^ 
always  in  regard  to  dramatic  performance^  etc. 

U  The  Sedhareoc  Svor<u  are  : 

(t)  AnUro  CindhOra  I.e.  modem  Suddka  GCndhera 

(ii)  KekdtMUAda  i.e.  raodem  Ttefo  MifCda 

2.  Bhavata*fi  Nefyeieetra  Volume.  IV,  pp.  79>92  (Baroda  Edition) 


25.3-9 


667 


3.  The  fulfilment  of  embellishment  is  achieved  by  the 
implications  of  sentences  and  connotations  of  the  word-com¬ 
binations. 

The  words  of  a  song  are  said  to  be  either  preceding  or 
following  the  embeUishment. 

4.  One  should  understand  that  there  are  three  place  of 
utterance.  They  are  the  chesty  the  throat  and  the  head.  The 
best  procedure  (of  production  of  notes)  begins  in  these  three 
places. 

5.  In  the  original  stage  {PTakfiau)^  there  are  four  vari^as 
(tone -pat terns)  with  fourfold  movement.  The  alternative 
movement  is  eightfold;^  and  gods  know  it  as  sixteenfold. 

6.  [  Thi  disignatxoTts  Vari}^ :  ] 

The  first  Varqa  is  StkAyin^  the  second  is  Pra-saik&finj  the 
third  \%  Avarohana  Avarokin)  and  the  fourth  Var^a  is  known 
by  the  experts  in  the  knowledge  of  Vardas  to  be»  Arohafta 
{•^Arokin) 

7.  There  is  one  (Varna  viz.  Sthl^n)  which  has  steady 
employment.  Sancara  is  a  mixed  movement.  One  should 
indicate  the  descent  of  Varrias  (i.e.  Svoras)  as  Avaroharui, 

8a.  And  the  experts  in  the  knowledge  of  Varnas  know 
(that  Varna)  as  the  Arohana  Varna  by  the  ascent  of  notes. 

8b.  Now  understand  the  embellishments  of  these  specific 
Varnas.® 

9.  There  are  four  embellishments,  viz.  Sthdpani^ 


1.  These  sre  mentioned  in  the  Furioas,  only  later  writers  do  not  refer 
to  them. 

2.  The  exigeocies  of  the  metre  have  led  to  the  change  in  the  order  of 
Va^^.  The  order  should  have  bem  : 

(i)  (i.e.  S&  S±  &I) 

(il)  Arohiti  (c.g.  SdM  Cd  etc.) 

(iii)  Aj>drohin  (c.g.  Dhe  Pd  etc.) 

(iv)  Sdficarin  ( e.g.  SA  Ri  SdRi  Gc  Ri  Si  etc. ). 

9.  Altliough  I  have  referred  to  the  section  on  AUAkArds  in  SdAgUa 
R€tnAk<Krd  (I.VI)  only  a  few  Aladkirai  like  Symd  (p.  139  of  S.  R.)  shed 
some  light.  Though  S.R.  is  much  later  than  Vk.P  or  Bd.P.*  I  cotisulted  it 
as  S.R.  preserved  some  of  the  Puriaic  traditions. 


668 


VdyuPurdt, 


Kramaujinay  Pramdda  and  Apramdda.  I  shall  (henceforth)  explain 
the  characteristics  of  these.  ^ 

10.  (Names  of  Alahkaras  still  continue  as  follows:)  Visvara^ 
Affakala*  which  has  an  interval  of  one  place  (from  its  original 
place!) .  Atfarla  Kramotpaiti — these  two  should  be  effected 

according  to  their  proportion* 

lla.  One  should  know  the  other  one  to  be  Kumdra  and 
Vistara* 

llb.  And  this  indeed  is  the  ApdAga  (Alahkira)  and 
Kutdreka  (?)  possesses  one  more  kala  (time-measure). 

12.  S^na  is  originated  as  having  one  interval  and 
situated  in  the  midst  of  M&tr^  of  a  Kala.  In  it  there  abides 
the  increase  in  the  order  of  the  note  different  from  it  (e.g.  Sd^ 
Pa,  Iti—Dha,  Gc-JVO . 

13.  Tlie  descent  of  the  Syena  AhAkdra  is  called  Uttara.  The 
AlaAkdra  called  Hindu  is  originated  due  to  the  measure  of 
Kal&s. 

14a.  One  Kalu  (measure  of  time)  should  be  employed  of 
the  V'arnas.  Then  it  would  be  Stkdpita  (Sthayin?)  (established). 

1 4b.  Durghafita  is  that  which  lias  the  note  even  in  the 
reverse  order. 

15a.  EkSntaru  (Ekoitara^svara)  has  the  highest  note  from 
Sa4ju. 

15b.  Akfepdskandam  should  be  effected  as  having  high 
amplitude  like  the  (hanh)  crowing  of  the  crow. 

16a.  The  two  belong  to  the  Var^  either 

as  the  cause  or  the  effect. 

16b.  Aksipia  belongs  to  the  category  of  the  descending 
(Avarohin)  Varna, 

1 7.  The  AlaAkafa  called  Pre^iholita  has  the  twelfth  place 
of  Kala  having  one  interval.  Thus  it  is  endowed  with  Sooras 
(Notes) . 

18a.  Puskala  is  said  to  be  due  to  the  transfer  of  the  notes. 

1.  Some  verses  after  this  must  have  been  lost  as  neither  our  teiv  nor 
Bd.P.  explains  these  anywhere. 

2.  Uftrakala  la  tlie  tact  being  obscure*  b  emended  as  per  Bd.  P. 

3.  The  tOLt  is  obscure  both  here  and  in  the  Bd.  P. 


25.18b-28a 


669 


1 8b,  Prakfipta  is  due  to  Kali - (?) 

19a,  It  is  called  Hrdsila  (Bhd^ia  in  6d.  P.)  in  which  there 
is  the  use  of  two  Kalas  as  before* 

19b.  VisvarUrUipul  {yisararU^)  has  got  eight  notes  in 
ascendance. 

20a.  That^  which  is  a  descent  from  high  or  low  register. 

20b.  These  are  placed  verily  with  one  interval  and  have 
the  same  note  at  the  end. 

2 lab.  Tht  AlaAk^f a  cdMcd  Makfipracchidana  is  declared  to 
have  a  group  of  four  Kalas.  Thus,  these  are  the  thirty  Alaiikdras 
explained. 

2lc«22.  Due  to  the  employment  of  Vafna  and  Sthdna 
having  the  measures  of  Kala  and  Matri  are  the  configuration, 
proportion,  modification  and  characteristics.  Thb  should  be 
known  as  the  purpose  of  embellishments  (of  music)  ^ 

23.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  beautification  (of  one*s  person) 
it  is  extremely  censured  if  it  is  used  at  the  wrong  place, 
similarly  unfavourable  (discordant)  embellishment  of  the  Vandas 
also  (is  censurable)  as  it  is  produced  by  oneself. 

24.  Just  as  with  the  use  of  various  ornaments,  a  woman 
gets  herself  beautified,  so  are  the  (musical)  embellishments  to 
a  Varna,  (but)  if  discordantly  used,  it  is  bitterly  denounced. 

25.  The  ear-ring  is  not  seen  (worn)  on  the  feet;  nor  a 
girdle  round  the  neck.  So  also  the  embellishment  (in  music) 
if  used  in  the  wrong  place,  is  reproached. 

26.  When  the  embellishment  is  effected,  it  should  indicate 
the  Raga  (melody)  ijust  as  the  path  intended  to  be  undertaken 
is  characterised. 

27a.  The  characteristics,  its  opposites  are  indicated  (with 
business  ?)  by  scribes  {Varnikdi) 

27b.  I  shall  describe  realistically  (as  it  is)— — —  ? 
( Obscure) , 

28a.  (Obscure)  Twenty-three  and  eighty  is  the  inversion 
(of  their  order  ?) 


1,  If  the  reftdlag  iVcm  Bd.P.  is  referred  to  the  name  of  this  AUhkl^ra  is 
But  I  am  not  sure  of  the  correctaess  of  the  reading  in  the  Bd.P. 

2.  Vtdi  I.  6.64  which  enumerates  R{tkiiMha  etc. 


670  Vtyu  Purd^a 

28b.  (Obscure)  Even  the  Sa4ja  becomes  a  deficient  note 
(in  the  middle?) 

29a.  Similarly  these  result  in  the  confusion  between  the 
Gramas  of  Sa4j<i  and  Madkyma. 

29b.  Obscure. 

30.  Obscure*. 

31a.  (Obscure)  Apart  of  \htTiOtt  Ma-Madhyama — is  the 
deviation  before  Rfabha? 

31b.  (Obscure)  Their  division  is  a  guide  {mUrgasanisthiia) 
to  songs  ? 

32a.  (Oi)scure)  and  Svardntara  have  been  indicated 

by  me.] 

32b.  The  reverse  would  cake  place  in  the  case  of  the  order 
of  seven  notes. 

33a.  The  four  Mandraka  gitas  (songs)  are  sung  with 
Gandhara  as  the  key  note. 

33bc.  In  Mandraka  gitas^  we  know  the  notes  Paficama  {Pa) , 
Madhyama  {Ma\  Dhaivata  [Dha),  ^isdda  (Ni),  Sa4ja  (S4)» 
fisabha  (Ri)  as  the  remaining  notes. 

34a.  One  should  know  two  Aparantika  songs. —  (The  rest 
is  obscure) . 

34b.  (Obscure  but  with  Bd.P.  text)  In  the  Aparantika 
songs,  Gdndhdra  {Go)  is  employed  in  the  original  and  modified 
form  by  Bute  playen  {Vaii^vd) .  [Bd.P  :  Gdndhdra  is  employed 
in  the  original  and  modified  forms.  ] 

35a.  The  Pada  has  got  three  forms  (7).  TheKai^ika  [ATsJ 
song  has  seven  forms. 

35b.  The  key->note  procedure  is  declared  with  the  entire 
use  of  Gdndhdra, 

35c.  This  is  also  the  order  intended  for  its  Madhyama  as 
the  key  note. 

36.  The  songs  which  have  been  mentioned  with  particular 
emphasis  on  the  form  should  be  effected  with  seven  notes  and 
the  [-i^]  of  the  sevenfold  form. 


*(A  tentative  translation:)  The  cmbellisbxneiil  of  Svaras  is  remembered 
as  the  experience  (?)  of  all  following.  The  external  muiie(?)  is  known  to 
have  five  deities. 


25.37a-45a 


671 


37a.  This  is  called  the  indication  of  the  component  parts 
(of  songs?) 


{The  Topic  of  Tala) 

There  are  two  even  measures. 

37b.  (Obscure) - themJ/rd  is  not  advanced  {cbhipratx^ 


sthita)? 


38.  In  Uttara  songs  in  the  original  form,  the  Mdtrd  is  thus 
deleted  (the  rest  of  the  v^^rsc  obscure) . 

39.  With  one  foot  (PaJa)  in  the  Matra  and  with  one  foot 

deficient - when  there  is  the  Upakanana  (deficiency, 

error?)  of  numbers  in  it,  it  is  called  Tdna. 

40.  The  second  break  in  the  foot  is  well  established  with 
Graha  (the  starting  point  of  the  song)  and  in  the  Aparantika 
(songs) .  The  first,  the  eighth,  the  third  and  second  are  esta¬ 
blished  with  Graha{T) 

41.  (Obscure)  With  half  of  the  equivalent  ofaPidaand 
in  the  one-fifth  portion  of  the  P&da,  the  Pdda-bhdga  (one  fourth 
of  the  Pada)  also  along  with  the  one  and  a  quarter  (of  a 
pada)  (?)  is  established  in  the  original  form) 

42.  In  the  Uttara  and  Mandraka  songs  in  their  original  form, 
the  Kali  exists  as  explained  of  the  Dakfina  Marga  (way  of  the 
Tala— procedure) 

43*.  Obscure  (both  here  and  in  Bd.P.) 

44.  When  there  is  the  use  of  one  and  the  use  of  two,  O 
best  of  Brahma^aSp  and  when  there  is  the  combination  of  many 
Patdkd^  etc.  are  declared. 


45a.  There  arc  three  Vftti^^CilTdyVfiti  mA  Dak^nd  (the 
text  is  obscure  and  hence  emended) . 

1.  Some  liaci  are  perhaps  misnng  (9idt  Bd.P.  2.3-62.40-4]). 

There  were  three  Mirgas  (ways  of  the  Tala-procedure)  viz.  Citri^  Vdrtikd 
and  Dakewd  having  the  KaU  of  two  mdtrdt,  four  mdtrds  and  eight  mdtrds 
respectively.  The  forms  Ekokala,  Dpikala  and  Citurkaia  were  associated 
with  M&rgas. 

2.  (Tentative  translation):  Theiwo  feet  and  their  AkorAoa[?)  beyond  this 
are  not  laid  down. 

3.  PaUAd  was  one  of  eight  mdtrds,  which  was  Indicated  by  moving 
the  hand  upwards.  These  mdtrds  were  to  be  employed  in  the  mdrgas  as 
specifically  directed. 

4.  The  Vfttu  are  the  styles  of  rendering  songs.  They  were  three  in 
number  viz.  Cifrd,  Vftii  and  IMfUtd.  They  were  associated  with  the  three 


672  Purina 

45b  The  SamaoSyas  (combinadoru  of?)  are  eight;  similarly 
the  Murccbana  is  Sauvlra. 

45c.  Obscure. 

(Last  foot  of  45c.)  Thus  the  Soara^mati^ala  of  seven  States 
(notes)  (is  explained)  • 


CHAPTER  TWENTYSIX* 

Thi  IkftdksL  Dynasty 

Siila  said  : 

1.  When  Raivata*  otherwise  known  as  Kakudmin,  went  to 
that  world  (of  Brahma)  the  entire  Ku jastbai!  was  over^run  and 
destroyed  by  Punyajanas  and  Rak^sas. 

2.  The  hundred  brothen  of  that  noble*souIed  virtuous 
king,  on  being  harassed  by  the  Rakfasas,  fled  away  in  great 
terror. 

3.  Fleeing  in  terror,  those  K^atriyas  established  their 
families  in  different  places.^  O  excellent  Brahmanas,  these 
families  were  very  great. 

4-3.  As  they  were  virtuous,  they  were  famous  in  all  the 
quarters  as  ^^Ptayaias^*^  (the  pure  ones) .  The  family  of 
Dhrfta,  the  Kfatriyas  named  Dbar^takas,  became  quite  invinci¬ 
ble  in  war.  Thus  there  were  three  thousand  groups  of  noble- 


MSrgtu  X  Ciira^  Vdrtika  and  Daksifia,  the  three  L^as  (Tempi)  and  Grahas 
etc. 

In  Citra  the  muiic  of  ftringed  ifutrument  was  prominent  and  song 
(vocal)  subservient.  In  DakfiftOf  the  song  was  prominent  and  instrumental 
music  subservient  and  in  Vftti  both  were  employed  with  equal  prominence. 

1.  TbU  chapter  corresponds  to  Bd.  P.  2-34113.  The  references  are  to  the 
verses  in  this  chapter. 

2.  Though  the  chapter  is  msdniy  concerned  with  the  Ikivgku  dynasty, 
w.  3-7  mention  a  dynasty  of  the  pre-Yaygei  period,  before  etna  3000  B.G. 
(Th»  Vtdic  Ag^y  p.  276,  BVB*s  T\i  HttS^ry  and  CvUm  e/  thi  Mian  FapU 
Vol.  1.) 

3.  S&ryStftinBd.P.  iiu/v.  5 


26.644 


673 


souled  Kfatriyas.  Nabhaga*$  successor  Nabhaga  was  very 
powerful. 

6.  Atbbarlfa  was  the  son  of  Nabhaga.  His  son  was 
Virupa.  Virupa*s  son  was  Pf^afva  and  his  son  was 
Rathitara. 

7.  These  (Rathitaras) ,  though  born  as  K^atriyas,  were 
known  as  Ahgiras-s.  The  prominent  members  (descendants) 
of  Rathitara  were  Brahma^as  with  K^triya-like  (heroic) 
prowess.^ 

8.  Formerly  when  Manu  sneezed,  Iksavaku  was  born.^ 
Ik^v&ku  had  hundred  sons.  All  of  them  were  liberal-minded 
(distributing  enormous  wealth  as  Dak^ipa) . 

9*  The  eldest  son  was  Vikukfi.  His  younger  brothen, 
Nemi  and  Da^d^  (two  were  famous).  He  had  6ve  hundred 
sons,  the  chief  of  them  being  Sakuni. 

10.  They  were  the  kings  and  protectors  of  the  land  of 
Uttarapatha  (northern  region) .  Forty-eight  of  them  ruled  in 
the  southern  region. 

1 1 .  Twenty  of  them  were  very  important.  They  protected 
the  whole  of  the  southern  region. 

Iksv&ku  ordered  Vikuksi  on  the  occasion  of  A?^ka.* 

12.  The  king  said  ;  O  powerful  one,  kill  deer  and  bring 
the  meat  worthy  of  the  Sraddha.  Undoubtedly  the  AffakS 
Srdddha  has  to  be  performed  today. 

13.  Vikuksi  who  went  a-hunting  at  the  instance  of  the 
intelligent  (king)  killed  thousands  of  deer.  Though  very 
powerful,  he  became  very  tired.  He  then  (billed  and)  ate  a 
hare. 

14.  When  Vikuksi  returned  with  the  meat  along  with  the 
army,  the  king  urged  Vasi^fha,  ^*May  the  meat  be  sprinkled 
with  the  holy  water’*. 

1.  This  iodicato  the  fiuklity  the  c»te-sy3teiu  iii  andeut  luUU. 

2.  From  v.  8,  the  ParAi^a  deter abes  the  Ik^vaku  dynasty.  His  three 

soAS^Vikukfi,  Nemi  and  bounded  separate  dynasties  at  Ayodhya 

(U.P.),  Videha  (Bihar)  and  Da^daka  (North  Dercan)  respectively.  Nemi 
is  mentioned  as  *Nixni’  io  Buddhist  J&takas. 

3.  The  Sriddha  performed  oa  the  7th,  dth  and  9th  days  afW  the  Full 
Moon  in  the  three  months  of  Fauta,  MA^ha  and  Phftiguna. 


674 


Vdjfu  Furd^a 


15.  Thus  urged  by  the  king^  Vasi^^a  said  *'So  be  It’*  and 
came  there  for  the  due  performance  (of  the  ^rddd/ia) ,  On 
seeing  the  meat  desecrated,  he  became  angry  and  spoke  to  the 
King: 

16.  king  of  great  lustre,  the  meat  has  been  desecrated 
by  your  son  (behaving  like  a)  Sudra.  The  meat  offered  by 
you  cannot  be  eaten,  as  he  had  eaten  a  hare. 

1 7.  O  excellent  king,  O  sinless  one,  a  hare  has  been  eaten 
by  the  wicked  one  before  (the  ^rdJd/ta)  at  the  forest.  Hence 
this  meat  has  been  dehled  and  made  unworthy  of  the  Pitrs.*’ 

18*19.  The  infuriated  Ikfvaku  then  spoke  thus  to  Vikuk^i: 
'^Commanded  by  me  for  the  purpose  of  the  rites  of  Pitrs,  you 
went  for  hunting  the  deer.  In  the  forest  you  mercilessly  ate 
the  flesh  of  a  hare  before  the  Sriddha.  Hence  I  banish  you. 
Go  away  along  with  your  fate  (as  a  result  of  your  own  action)/’ 
Thus  at  the  instance  of  Vastfiha  the  son  was  abandoned  by 
Ikfvaku. 

20*23.  When  Iksvaku  passed  away,  the  hare*eater  attained 
this  earth.  He  was  a  very  virtuous*SDuled  king  of  Ayodhya. 
Urged  and  guided  by  Vasi^fha,  he  ruled  over  the  kingdom. 
Thereafter,  being  full  of  that  sin,  the  king,  ruling  over  the  king* 
dom  declined  in  power  as  time  elapsed.^  After  understanding 
(the  import  of)  this  story,  no  one  shall  eat  (meat)  outside  the 
injunction.  Learned  men  explain  the  etymology  of  Mlbhsa 
(Meat)  thus — *In  the  other  world  that  will  eat  me,  Mdth  Sa 
{Bhaksajntd)  the  flesh  of  which  I  eat  here  now*.* 

24-25.  Sasada’s  successor  was  Kakutstba,  the  powerful. 
Formerly  he  had  sat  on  the  hump  of  Indra  who  had  assumed 
the  form  of  a  bull,  in  the  course  of  the  war  named  Adlbaka.* 

Hence  he  is  remembered  as  Kakutstha*  (The  occupier  of 
the  hump) . 

Anenas  was  the  son  of  Kakutstha.  Pfthu  was  the  son  of 
Anenas. 

1.  or  went  to  an  inferior  woHd  (bell)  after  death. 

2.  Quoted  ftom  Manu  V.  55. 

$.  — The  deadly  combat  fought  by  Vuittl^  and  VilvSmitra 

after  anuming  the  foriov  of  a  aod  Baka  (two  acquatie  birds).  Devas  and 
Afurai  fought  with  each  other  forming  an  alliance  with  Varistha  and 
Viivimitra. 

4.  lUUdasa,  however,  explains  the  epithet  KdtuUtk^  as  'one  who 


26.26-34 


675 


26.  Vr^^daiva  was  Prthu*s  $<m.  From  him  was  born  the 
powerful  Andhra.  Yavanaiva  was  Andhra’s  son.  Sravasta  was 
his  son. 

27.  Srivastawas  the  king  by  whom  Sravasti^was  built 
Sravasta’s  successor  was  BrhadaSva  of  great  fame. 

28.  It  is  heard  that  Kuvala^va  was  the  son  of  Brhadaiva. 
By  killing  Dhundhu  that  king  became  known  as  Dhundhu* 
mara. 

Th  Saga  said  : 

29.  O  highly  intelligent  one,  we  wish  to  hear  how 
Dhundhu  was  slain,  whereby  Kuvalaiva  attained  the  title  of 
Dhundhumkra. 

SQta  said  : 

30-32 .  Brhadaiva  had  twentyone  thousand  sons.  All  of 
them  were  experts  in  Vidyas.  Tlicy  were  powerful  and  invin¬ 
cible.  All  of  then)  were  righteous.  All  of  them  were  performers 
of  Yajftas  with  profuse  Dak ^na.  Brbadasva,  the  king,  crowned 
Kuvalaiva  who  was  very  powerful,  heroic,  excellent  and 
virtuous,  in  that  kingdom.  After  transferring  the  royal  position 
and  glory  to  his  son,  the  king  went  to  the  forest. 

33.  U  ctahka,  the  Brahmana  sage,  prevented  the  great  heroic 
king  Brhadaiva  who  was  excellent  and  virtuous  and  who  was 
proceeding  to  the  forest  (for  penance). 

UUafika  said  : 

34.  King,  protection  must  be  offered  by  you.  It  be¬ 
hoves  you  to  do  it,  I  am  unable  to  perform  penance  un¬ 
disturbed. 


occupies  a  prominent  place  among  kings*  in  RaghuvarhSa  VI.  71  as  follows: 

Ik^v4kif9a)hSya^  kdsudam  rtrpdpOm 
KJoiUiha  / 

Mallinitha,  (he  commentator,  correctly  mentioni  the  Puricic  episode 
(atdir  his  comm,  on  ibid^)> 

1.  Modem  Sahet-Mahet  on  the  lUpti  (ancient  AsrSvatl  or  Acirfcvatl) 
in  the  Gondi  District  In  U.P. 


676  y^u  Purd^ 

35*  In  the  wild  desert  region  near  my  hermitage,  there  is 
a  vast  sea  full  of  sand,  O  king.^ 

36.  There  is  a  huge-bodied,  extremely  powerful  being  lying 
beneath  the  ground  covered  with  sand.  He  cannot  be  killed 
even  by  Devas. 

37.  He  is  the  son  of  Manu.  His  name  is  Dbundhu.  He 
is  cruel  and  terrible.  He  is  performing  a  severe  penance  for 
the  last  hundred  years  for  the  destruction  of  the  worlds. 

38.  He  breathes  out  (once)  at  the  end  of  a  year.  But 
when  he  exhales  the  whole  earth  along  with  forests  quakes  and 
shakes. 

39.  A  great  column  of  dust  is  raised  by  the  air  exhaled 
by  him.  It  covers  up  the  path  of  the  sun  and  the  earth^quake 
continues  for  a  week. 

40.  It  is  accompanied  by  very  terrible  flames  of  ftrC)  sparks 
and  smoke.  O  Kii^,  I  am  not  therefore  able  to  stay  in  my 
own  hermitage. 

41 .  O  brawny-armed  king,  restrain  him  with  a  desire  for 
the  welfare  of  the  worlds.  The  great  deity  Vifnu  will  further 
develop  your  prowess  by  means  of  his  own  splendour. 

42.  The  worlds  will  be  happy  and  relieved  today  when 
the  Asura  is  killed.  O  King,  you  are  hence  competent  to  kill 
him. 

43-44.  O  Sinless  one,  a  boon  has  been  granted  to  me 
(that  you  would  help  me  by  killing  him)  formerly  by  Vi$nu. 
Hence  Dhundhu  of  great  virility  cannot  be  slain  by  anyone  of 
less  splendour  even  in  hundreds  of  years.  His  virility  is  so 
great  that  it  cannot  be  brooked  even  by  the  Devas.” 

45.  Thus  requested  by  the  noble-souled  Uttahka,  that 
saintly  king  entrusted  his  son  Kuvala iva  with  the  job  of  restrain* 
ing  Dhundhu. 


1 .  Verses  35*40  describe  a  saady  region  with  occasional  earthquakes  and 
something  like  volcanic  eruptions.  Scholars  differ  about  its  identification. 
B.C.  Law  conjectures  that  this  volcanic  pat  near  the  western  sea  was  nib- 
merged  with  sea* water  and  the  volcanic  action  ceased  by  the  elTorti  of 
Kuval&iva  (  Trikas  in  Avinii  /W/fl,  p.  12$) .  Pargiter  regards  this  as  a  shallow 
sand-filled  sea  in  Rajasthan  which  prevented  Aryan  expanvon  (AIHT 
pp.  260.61). 


26«46-58 


677 


46.  The  King  said,  **I  have  already  laid  aside  xny 
weapons*  Here  is  my  son.  O  Excellent  Br^mana,  he  will 
undoubtedly  become  the  slayer  of  Dhundhu.*’ 

47.  After  ordering  his  son  who  was  ready  to  slay  Dhundhu, 
the  king  of  praise*worthy  holy  observances  retired  to  the 
mountains  for  performing  penance. 

48.  The  righteous^souled  king  Kuvalasva*  obeying  the 
behest  of  his  father,  went  ahead  to  Dhundhu*s  haunt,  accom¬ 
panied  by  his  twentyoH'*  thousand  sons  and  Uttai^a,  in  order 
to  restrain  Dhundhu. 

49.  Due  to  the  imploring  entreaty  of  Uttanka,  and  with  a 
desire  for  the  welfare  of  the  worlds,  lord  Vi$];iu  entered  him 
with  his  own  brilliance. 

50.  When  diat  invincible  (king)  started,  a  loud  voice 
arose  in  heaven — ‘*This  king  shall  be  the  slayer  of  Dhundhu 
(Dhundhumara)  with  effect  from  today/* 

5U52.  The  Devas  honoured  him  with  divine  Bowers.  It 
was  a  wonderful  thing.  That  tiger-like  man  (the  king)  of 
great  prowess  went  to  that  vast  sea  of  sand  accompanied  by  his 
sons  and  dug  it  up  without  any  waste  (of  time) .  That  saintly 
king  had  already  been  developed  (empowered)  extra*otd  inaril y 
by  the  splendour  of  Narayana. 

53-54.  He  became  still  more  powerful  by  staying  under  the 
control  of  Uttahka.  Dhundhu  was  found  out  by  his  sons  who 
were  digging.  He  had  been  lyii^  hidden  beneath  the  sand  on 
the  western  side.  He  seemed  to  be  furiously  covering  the 
worlds  by  means  of  the  fire  coming  out  of  his  mouth. 

55.  O  excellent  one  among  the  imbibers  of  Soma,  by 
means  of  his  Yogic  power,  he  exuded  water  like  the  great  ocean 
at  the  time  of  Moon-rise.  It  was  a  vast  sheet  of  water  with 
currents  and  waves. 

56.  His  sons  exceptii^  three  were  burnt  by  the  Rak$asa. 
Then  the  king  of  great  strength  destroyed  all  the  attendants 
and  kinsmen  of  Dhundhu. 

57.  The  king  who  was  a  Yogin,  drank  up  his  behemence 
in  the  form  of  water*flood  (let  loose  by  him)  by  means  of  his 
Yogic  power  and  extinguished  the  fire  by  means  of  water. 

58.  Then  he  overpowered  the  huge-bodied  aquatic 


678  V^u  /hffdpa 

demon  by  means  of  his  strength.  The  kii^,  havii^  successfully 

accomplished  his  task,  showed  him  to  Uttanka. 

• 

S9-60.  To  the  noble-souled  king,  Uttanka  granted  the 
boons  of  everlasting  wealth,  invincibility  (in  battles)  by  his 
enemies,  perpetual  interest  in  Dharma  and  everlasting  resi* 
dence  in  heaven.  To  the  sons  who  were  killed  by  the  demon, 
he  granted  everlasting  worlds  in  heaven. 

61.  Drdhaiva  was  the  eldest  of  his  three  sons  who  survived. 
Bhadra^va  and  Kapilaiva  were  the  younger  ones. 

62.  Drdh&iva  was  known  as  Dhaundhumari  (son  of 
Dhundhumara) .  Haryaiva  was  his  son.  His  son  was  Nikumbha 
who  was  always  engaged  in  Kf&tra  Dharma  (military  Pro*' 
fession). 

63.  Saihhat&iva  was  the  son  of  Nikuihbha.  He  is  reputed 
as  an  expert  in  warfare.  Kfiiivsi  and  Akfayaiva  were  the  sons 
of  Saihhat&iva. 

64.  His  wife  was  Haimavatl  who  was  like  the  river 
Ofiadvad  to  the  minds  of  the  good.  She  was  famous  in  the 
three  worlds.  Her  son  was  Prasenajit. 

65.  Yuvanasva  was  his  son.  He  was  very  brilliant  and 
famous  in  the  three  worlds  as  highly  virtuous.  The  chaste  lady 
Gauri  was  his  wife. 

66.  She  was  cursed  by  her  husband  and  turned  into  the 
river  Bahuda.^  Her  son  Gaurika  became  an  emperor. 

67.  Mandhaia,  the  son  of  Yuvanasva,  became  a  king  con¬ 
quering  the  three  worlds.  In  this  connection,  Br^mapas  well 
versed  in  Furanas,  cite  these  two  venes. 

68.  *^The  entire  region  from  the  place  where  the  Sun  rises 
up  to  (the  place)  where  he  sets,  the  whole  of  it,  is  called  the 
territory  of  Mandhata,  son  of  Yuvanasva**. 

69.  People  who  know  the  (details  of)  different  races  also 
quote  this  verse.  ^^Those  who  know  Puranas  call  the  son  of 
Yuvanaiiva,  noblc-soulcds  a  performer  of  sacrifices  and  (a  king) 
of  unmeasured  splendour.  Mudhata  is  the  embodied  form  of 
Viwu.’* 

1.  Modem  DhuroeU  or  Burhs^Ri^Ki,  a  feeder  of  the  Rapti  in  Oudh 
(U.P.).  SageLikhita  \ud  bis  aznpuuted  arm  rej^ed  by  a  bath  in  this 
river.  Hence  ihe  is  Bihu^dd  *G'‘anter  of  anns*— De  16 


26.70-82 


679 


70.  His  wife  Gaitrarathi  was  Saiab indues  daughter.  She 
was  known  by  the  name  of  Bind  umati  also.  She  was  a  chaste 
lady  and  had  no  equal  in  beauty  all  over  the  earth. 

71.  She  was  the  eldest  sister  often  thousand  brothers.  She 
was  devotedly  attached  to  her  husband.  Mandhata  begot  three 
sons  of  her. 

72.  They  were  Purukutsa,  Am  ban  $  a  and  Mucukunda. 
Ambari$a*s  successor  was  another  Yuvanaiva. 

73.  Harlta  was  Yuvanasva*s  son.  Descendants  of  Harita 
are  remembered  by  the  name  Suns.  They  were  the  (adopted) 
sons  of  Ahgiras  (spiritual  lineage).  They  were  Brahmanas 
endowed  with  martial  qualities. 

74.  Purukutsa’s  successor  was  Trasaddasyu  of  great  fame. 
He  was  born  of  Narmada.  His  son  was  Saihbhuta. 

75.  Sarhbhutd*s  .son  was  the  valorous  Anara^ya.  He  was 
killed  by  Ravana  formerly  while  he  was  conquering  the  three 
worlds. 

76.  Trasadaiva  was  the  son  of  Anarartya.  His  son  was 
Haryaiva.  From  Haryaiva  Driadvati  gave  birth  to  king 
Vasumata. 

77.  His  son  was  the  virtuous  king  Tridhanva  by  name. 
The  scholarly  king  Trayyani^  was  the  son  of  Tridhanvan. 

78-79.  He  had  a  powerful  son  named  Satyavrata. 
Vidarbha*8  wife  was  abducted  by  him  after  killing  (i.e.  defeat¬ 
ing)  the  heaven-dwellers,  when  all  the  sacred  mantras  of 
marriage  ceremony  had  been  chanted  and  the  ceremonies  con¬ 
cluded.  Vi^nuvfddha  was  his  son  whence  his  descendants  are 
remembered  as  Vi^nuvrddhas.  They  were  also  the  (adopted) 
sons  of  Ahgiras  endowed  with  martial  qualities. 

80.  That  (sin)  was  committed  by  him  out  of  lust,  or 
(pride)  due  to  his  strength,  or  to  the  powerful  force  exerted  by 
the  inevitable  destiny,  though  he  was  intelligent. 

81 .  His  father  Trayy^uiia  banished  him  as  he  was  sinful. 
Being  infuriated  with  him,  he  repeated  many  times,  ^'Be 
degraded  (and  gone) 

82.  He  spoke  to  his  father  again  and  .again,  am  alone. 
Where  shall  I  go?’*  The  father  ordered  him  :  *^Live  among 
the 


Vdjfu  Purd^ 


83.  O  defiler  of  the  family,  X  don^t  seek  to  be  a  father  with 
such  a  son  z$  you.^’  On  being  repulsed  thus  by  the  words  of 
the  king,  he  went  out  of  the  city. 

84.  Vasi$thd,  the  holy  lord  and  sage,  did  not  give  him 
asylum.  The  bold  and  intelligent  Satyavrata,  discarded  by 
his  father,  lived  near  the  hutments  of  Cand&las.  The  father  too 
went  to  the  forest. 

85.  On  account  of  that  unrighteous  deed,  Indra  did  not 
bring  showers  to  that  land  for  full  twelve  years. 

86.  Vijv&mitra  of  great  penance  left  his  wife  in  that  land 
and  performed  a  severe  penance  in  the  marshy  land  near  the 
sea. 

87.  His  wife  tied  her  own  bosom-born  middle  son  (with  a 
rope)  round  his  neck  and  oflTered  him  for  sale  in  exchange  for  a 
hundred  cows  for  maintaining  (the  remaining  ones). 

88-89.  On  seeing  the  son  of  the  sage  tied  round  the  neck, 
the  excellent  man  of  good  rites,  the  virtuou8«^sonlcd  Satyavrata 
of  great  intellect,  got  him  released  by  being  sold.  He  nurtured 
him  in  order  to  propitiate  Viivamitra  and  gain  his  sympathy. 

90.  The  boy  came  to  be  known  as  Galava  because  he  had 
been  tied  round  the  neck  [Cola).  That  descendant  of  Kuiika, 
a  great  sage  of  severe  penance  had  been  redeemed  by  that 
powerful  (King). 

91.  On  account  of  his  (?)  sacred  vow,  devotion,  mercy 
and  solemn  declaration,  the  king  who  adhered  to  the  rules  of 
discipline,  sustained  Vilvamitra’s  wife  also. 

92.  After  killing  deer,  boars,  buffaloes  and  other  forest 
animals,  he  cooked  that  flesh  nev  the  hermitage  of  Viivamitra. 

93-94.  At  the  behest  of  the  father,  be  adopted  a  secret 
vow  {Updrfiiu  Vrata)  and  for  that  purpose  took  initiation  ex¬ 
tending  to  twelve  years.  As  the  king  (Satyavrata ’s  father)  had 
gone  to  the  forest,  the  sage  Vasistha,  in  the  capacity  of  the 
king’s  priest,  protected  Ayodhya,  the  kingdom  and  the  harem. 

93.  Out  of  childishness,  or  due  to  the  force  of  the  inevit¬ 
able  destiny,  Satyavrata  nursed  a  great  grudge  against  Vasiffha. 

96.  While  he  whs  crying  on  being  exiled  by  his  father  and 
banished  from  the  kingdom,  the  sage  Vasiftha  had  not  restrain* 


26.97-108 


681 


97.  The  Mantras  chanted  during  the  celebration  of  a 
marriage  are  concluded  at  the  seventh  step  (of  the  Saptapadi  T\tt) 
but  Satyavrata  abducted  her  (the  bride  of  Vidarbha)  at  the 
seventh  step. 

98«  ^Vasiftha  the  knower  of  Dharmas  does  not  wish  to 
repeat  the  Mantras/  So  Vasi^tba  was  inwardly  angry  with 
Satyavrata*  (?) 

99.  It  was  because  of  being  fully  mindful  of  his  position  as 
preceptor  that  Vasis^a  did  so  then.  Nor  did  Satyavrata 
understand  the  secret  vow  of  (the  sage). 

100-102.  (Defective  verses)  When  the  father  of  lofty  mind 
passed  away,  Indra  did  not  shower  for  twelve  years.  Thereby 
all  the  people  on  the  earth  became  weak.  All  these  years  the 
son  was  having  Dikfd  (i<e.  performing  holy  rites  in  accordance 
with  his  fathers*  injunction) .  Vasif  {ha  thought  that  the  people 
would  be  saved  if  he  was  crowned  again.  So  he  restrained 
Satyavrata  from  keeping  out  of  the  kingdom  further. 

103-106.  The  powerful  (younger  king)  performed  the  holy 
rites  for  twelve  years.  When  there  was  no  meat  avail¬ 
able,  the  son  of  the  king  saw  the  cow  of  the  noble-souled  Vasi- 
9tha,  Kamadugha  (i.e.  the  yielder  of  desired  objects).  Out  of 
spite,  due  to  delusion  and  exhaustion  andbecausehe  was  hungry, 
the  foremost  among  powerful  persons  who  had  adopted  the 
practice  of  Dasyus  (robbers  and  Candalas),  killed  the  cow.  He 
himself  ate  the  meat  and  fed  the  sons  of  Visvamitra  also.  On 
hearingit  Vasi^fha  abandoned  him  then.  The  holy  lord  Vasi^^ha 
spoke  also  thus  to  the  son  of  the  king  (i.e.  Satyavrata) : 

107.  ^*0  base  one  among  men,  had  it  not  been  for  the  fact 
that  you  have  already  three  Sankus  (sins) ,  O  cruel  one,  I  would 
have  let  this  iron  Sanku  (rod)  fall  on  you. 

108.  Your  transgression  (commission  of  sins)  is  of  three 
forms:  One  because  of  the  dissatisfaction  of  your  father,  the 
other  due  to  the  slaughter  of  the  preceptor’s  cow  and  (Bnally) 
due  to  the  partaking  of  unsanctified  (flesh).*’ 


*The  lin«  needs  emeodatioo  u  in  Bd.  P.  v.  97: 
iii  iatjasrot9  ro/em  txuifpit  'iUrel  / 

*5o  Satyavrata  entertained  anger  about  Vasi^tba  in  his  mmd\ 


682 


Vityu  Purdffa 


109.  Thus  (observing  out)  the  three  sins,  the  sage  of  great 
penance  called  him,  ^^Triia^u*’  by  which  name  he  is  remem« 
bered. 

110.  After  returning  (from  his  penance),  VHvamitra  was 
delighted  (on  hearing  that  Satyavrata)  had  looked  after  his 
wife  ( in  his  absence)  •  He  granted  boons  to  Tri iahku. 

1 1 1-1I2«  When  he  was  asked  to  choose  a  boon  as  he  plea* 
sed,  the  son  of  the  king  (Satyavrata)  requested  him  to  be  his 
preceptor.  When  the  darker  of  the  drought  lasting  for  twelve 
years  was  averted,  the  sage  (Vi^vamitra)  crowned  him  in  the 
hereditary  kingdom  and  presided  over  his  sacrifice.  Even  as 
Devas  and  Vasis^ha  were  watching,  the  holy  lord  Kau^ika 
(Vi^vamitra)  made  him  ascend  to  heaven  along  with  his 
physical  body. 

113.  To  Vasi^ha  who  was  watching,  it  was  very  surprising. 
In  this  connection,  people  well-versed  in  the  Puranas  cite  these 
two  verses: 

114-115.  By  the  favour  of  Viivamitra,  TrUanku  shines 
in  heaven  with  great  brilliance  in  the  company  of  Devas. 
It  is  the  result  of  the  blessing  of  that  intelligent  one. 
A  beautiful  woman  bedecked  by  the  moon  in  the  season 
Hcmanta  proceeds  slowly.  She  is  embellished  by  the  three 
Bhavas  and  adorned  by  the  heavenly  body — a  planet  (called) 
Trilahku. 

116.  Sat ya rata  hailing  from  the  Kekaya  family  was  his 
wife.  She  gave  birth  to  a  son,  Harilcandra,  the  sinless. 

117.  That  kii^  Harijcmdra  was  well  known  asTraisahkava 
(son  of  Trisanku).  He  was  renowned  as  an  emperor  and  a 
performer  of  Rajasuya  sacrifice. 

118.  Hari^candra’s  son  was  Rohita,  the  powerful.  Harita 
wa$Rohita*s  son.  Gancu  is  called  H^ta  (son  of  Harita) . 

119.  Vijaya  and  Sudeva  were  die  sons  of  Caheu.  Since  he 
was  the  conqueror  of  all  Ksatriyas,  he  is  remembered  as 
Vijaya. 

120.  Ruruka  was  his  son.  He  was  a  king,  a  great  expert 
in  matters  pertaining  to  religion  and  wealth.  Hrtaka  (or 
Dhftaka)  was  the  son  of  Ruruka  and  Bahu  was  born  of  him. 

121.  The  king  (via.  Bahu)  who  was  addicted  to  vice  was 


26.122431 


683 


defeated  by  Haihayas,  Talajaoghas^  Sakai,  Yavanas,  K&tbbojai, 
Piradas  and  Pahlavas. 

1 22.  Even  in  that  righteous  Satyayuga  that  king  was  not 
very  virtuous.  Sagara  was  born  as  the  son  of  B^u.  He  was  bom 
with  a  body  containing  poison  in  the  hermitage  of  Bhrgu. 
He  was  saved  by  Turva  ( Aurva) . 

123.  Afler  obtaining  the  missile  pertaining  to  Fire^god 
from  Bhargava,  the  king  Sagara  went  over  the  whole  of  the 
earth  and  killed  Talajanghas  along  with  Haihayas. 

]  24.  The  unerring  king  repudiated  the  Dharma  (code  of 
conduct,  rites  etc.)  of  Sakas  and  Pahlavas.  He  who  was  con¬ 
versant  with  Dharma  cast  out  the  Dharma  of  (his  opponents) 
K$atriyas  and  Paradas  (i.e.  excommunicated  them). 

The  Sages  enquired : 

125-126.  How  was  the  king  Sagara  (Sa-gara)  born  with 
poison  (inside)?  Why  did  the  infuriated  unerring  king  repudi¬ 
ate  the  traditional  holy  rites  of  those  powerful  K;atriyas  such  as 
the  Sakas  and  others? 

SUta  said : 

It  is  reported  that  the  kingdom  of  the  vicious  king  Bahu 
was  taken  over  by  Haihayas  and  Talajanghas  who  came 
along  with  Sakas  ? 

127.  These  five  clans,  viz.  Yavanas,  Paradas,  Kambojas, 
Pahlavas,  (and  Sakas)  attacked  him. 

128.  His  kingdom  was  plundered  and  taken  by  these 
powerful  leading  Ksatriyas.  King  Bahu  whose  realm  was  seized, 
renounced  the  world.  Accompanied  by  his  wife  the  righteous- 
souled  king  entered  the  forest  and  performed  penance. 

129.  After  some  time  the  king  once  went  to  fetch  water. 
Due  to  advancing  years  and  weakness  he  died  midway. 

130.  His  wife  Yadavi  who  was  pregnant  then,  followed 
him.  Poison  had  been  administered  to  her  by  her  co-wife  with 
a  desire  to  kill  the  foetus. 

131.  She  prepared  the  funeral  pyre  of  her  husband,  got 
him  placed  and  Ut  it  and  was  (about)  to  enter  into  the  hre, 
when  Aurva,  descendant  of  Bhrgu  made  her  desist  from  it  out 
of  sympathy. 


684 


ydjii  Purdpa 


132.  In  his  (Aurva’s)  hermitage,  she  delivered  the  foetus 
(child)  along  with  the  (administered)  poison*  Thus  she  gave 
birth  to  her  son,  the  mighty-armed  virtuous  Sagara. 

133*  Aurva  performed  the  post-natal  holy  rites  for  that 
noble  soul.  After  teaching  him  Vedas  and  S&stras  he  instruc¬ 
ted  him  in  the  use  of  miraculous  weapons  and  missiles. 

134.  Then  he  learnt  the  use  of  the  miraculous  missile  of 
Fire-god  from  the  son  of  Jamadagni  (in  fact  Aurva) — a  missile 
which  could  not  be  endured  even  by  Asuras.  Naturally  strong 
and  with  the  added  strength  of  those  missiles  the  infuriated 
king  killed  Haihayas  like  Rudra  destroying  Pafus  ( Indivi¬ 
duals}* 

135.  Then  the  king  attempted  to  exterminate  completely 
6akas,  Yavanas,  Kambojas,  Paradas  and  Pahlavas. 

136.  Being  harassed  and  victimised  by  the  heroic  and 
noble-souled  Sagara,  all  of  them  desirous  of  protection  sought 
shelter  and  protection  from  Vasi^iha. 

137.  Having  stipulated  some  conditions,  Vasisfha  agreed. 
Promisir^  them  protection  from  fear  (of  extermination  by 
Sagara) ,  the  great  sage  restrained  Sagara. 

1 38.  Remembering  his  own  vow  and  on  hearing  the  words 
of  his  preceptor,  Sagara  put  an  end  to  their  traditional  rites  of 
worship  and  made  them  change  their  dress  and  apparel.^ 

139.  He  got  half  of  the  heads  of  3akas  shaved  and  released 
them.  He  got  the  heads  of  Yavanas  and  Kambojas  comp¬ 
letely  shaven. 

140.  Paradas  were  compelled  to  keep  their  hair  dis¬ 
hevelled  and  Pahlavas  were  made  to  grow  their  beards. 
They  were  debarred  from  Vedic  study  and  the  use  of  Va^afkdra 
by  that  noble-souled  king. 

141-142.  Sakas,  Yavanas,  K^bojas,  Pahlavas,  Paradas, 
Kelisparsas,  Mahisikas,  Darvas,  Ck>la8  and  Khasas — all  these 
were  clans  of  Ksatriyas.  Their  traditional  religious  rites  were 
prohibited  by  the  noble-souled  Sagara  at  the  instance  of 

1.  Verses  I3t^«140  describe  the  ways  of  hslr^dresssng  etc.  of  these  tribes 
And  Attribute  to  Saga/A  (he  credit  of  imposing  these  non-k|Atriya  ways 
oo  them. 


26.143-154 


685 


143.  Conducting  his  conquests  righteously^  the  king  con¬ 
quered  the  earth  and  took  initiation  for  the  performance  of  a 
horse-sacri&ce.  He  let  loose  the  horse. 

144.  As  it  was  being  taken  round,  it  was  stolen  near  the 
shore  of  the  south-eastern  sea  and  made  to  enter  beneath  the 
earth. 

145-146.  The  king  made  all  his  sons  to  dig  the  whole 
area.  Then  ultimately,  in  the  great  ocean,  they  met  with  the 
primordial  Being,  Lord  Vtynu,  Lord  Hari,  Kr^na,  the  Lord  of 
subjects,  Lord  Hamsa,  Lord  Narayana,  in  the  form  of  Kapila. 

147.  They  came  within  the  range  of  the  vision  of  that 
brilliant  being.  Then  all  those  sons  (of  Sagara)  were  burnt  and 
four  of  them  survived. 

148.  They  were  Bar  hi  ketu,  Suketu,  Dharmarata  and  the 
heroic  Paflcavana.  All  these  continued  the  lineage  of  the  lord 
(Sagara) . 

149.  Lord  Hari,  Narayana  granted  him  boons  such  as 
the  everlasting  nature  of  his  race,  the  benefit  of  a  hundred 
horse- sacrifices,  the  all-pervading  Samudra  (ocean )  as  the  son 
and  perpetual  residence  in  heaven. 

150.  Taking  tlie  horse  with  him,  the  ocean,  the  lord  of 
rivers,  came  there  and  bowed  to  him.  On  account  of  that 
action  he  earned  the  tide  of^^Sagara”  (bom  of  Sagara) . 

151.  After  regaining  the  horse  from  the  ocean  the  king 
performed  horse-sacrifices  again  and  again  making  up  the  total 
of  one  hundred. 

152.  We  have  heard  (it  reported)  that  there  were  sixty 
thousand  sons.  Those  sixty  thousand  sons  were  burnt.  Those 
noble-souled  sixty  thousand  sons  entered  (merged  in)  the  divine 
brilliance  of  Narayana. 

The  Sages  enquired  : 

% 

153.  By  what  means  did  the  sixty  thousand  sons  of 
Sagara  become  powerful  and  valorous?  Please  narrate. 

S2ki  replied  : 

1 54.  Sagara  had  two  wives.  By  means  of  penance  they  had 
burnt  all  their  sins.  The  elder  of  them  named  Kefin!  was  the 
daughter  of  Vidarbha. 


686 


Purd^a 


155.  The  younger  wife  was  very  virtuous.  She  was  the 
daughter  of  Ari^t^nemi.  In  beauty  she  was  unrivalled  on  the 
earth. 

156.  Propitiated  by  meaiu  of  penance,  the  holy  lord 
Aurva  granted  them  these  boons — r**One  of  them  will  give  birth 
to  a  son  who  will  establish  the  lineage  and  who  will  be 
coveted.  'Phe  other  will  give  birth  to  sixty  thousand  sons.** 

157.  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  sage  in  the  king*s 
assembly,  Ke^inl,  the  elder  one,  chose  the  boon  of  a  sii^le  son 
who  will  be  the  cause  of  the  perpetuation  of  the  race. 

158.  Sumati,  the  sister  ofSuparna,  accepted  the  boon  of 
sixty  thousand  sons  from  the  noble -sou led  sage^  in  accordance 
with  her  wish. 

159.  After  some  time  the  elder  wife  gave  birth  to  the 
eldest  son  (subsequently)  famous  as  Atamafija  (Asamaftjasa), 
the  son  of  Sagara,  the  scion  of  the  family  of  Kakutstha. 

160.  Sumatip  the  famous  lady,  gave  birth  to  a  gourddike 
foetus.  From  the  gourd-like  foetus  all  the  sixty  thousand  sons 
came  out. 

161.  The  king  caused  (pieces  of)  the  foetus  to  be  depo« 
sited  in  (sixty  tliousand)  jars  of  ghee  and  engaged  as  many 
nurses  to  look  after  them  individually. 

162.  Then,  In  the  course  of  nine  months p  they  grew  well 
and  came  out  of  them  (Jars)  hale  and  hearty;  those  blessed 
sons  heightened  the  pleasure  of  Sagara. 

163-164.  After  a  long  time  those  sixty  thousand  sons  (of 
Sagara)  attained  youth.  Of  those  who  (later)  (closely)  followed 
the  horse  (of  Asvamedha)  the  eldest  son  of  Sagara  was  a 
tiger  among  men.  The  powerful  one  was  famous  as  Asamailja, 
otherwise  known  as  BarhJketu. 

165.  Since  he  was  engaged  in  activities  against  the  interest 
of  the  citizens,  he  was  banished  by  his  father  at  the  very  outset. 
The  son  of  Asamahja  was  the  po%verfui  Aihiuman. 

166.  His  son  was  a  virtuous  soul.  He  was  well-known  by 
the  name  of  Dilipa.  From  Dlllpa  was  born  Bhagiratha,  a  hero 
of  great  splendour. 

167.  Gahg^  the  most  excellent  of  rivers,  rendered  beauti¬ 
ful  with  aerial  chariots,  was  (brought  here  in  this  world)  by 
him.  She  was  given  the  status  of  a  daughter  by  the  (king),  the 


26.168-177 


687 


performer  of  the  sacrifice  (ijdnina)^  from  the  sea^(?)  In  this 
connection,  people  well-versed  in  Pur&w  cite  this  vene. 

168.  ^^Bhagiratha  brought  down  Ganga  by  means  of  his 
active  endeavour  Hence  Ganga  b  called  Bh^Irathl  by  those 
who  are  the  foremost  ones  among  those  conversant  with 
genealogies  (of  kings)*’’ 

169.  Bhagiratha’s  son  was  Sruta  by  name.  His  successor 
was  Nabhaga.  He  was  always  engaged  in  religious  activities. 

1 70.  Arhbarl^  was  his  son.  Sindhudvfpa  succeeded  him. 
It  is  well-known  that  the  knowers  of  the  Parana  of  genealogies 
sing  thus  ? 

171.  ^^Protected  by  the  arms  of  Ambarl^a,  son  of  Nabhaga, 
the  earth  became  completely  free  from  three  types  of  Tdpa 
(distress)”. 

1 72.  Ayutayu,  the  powerful,  was  the  son  of  Sindhudvipa* 
Ktuparna  of  great  fame  was  the  successor  of  Ayutayu. 

1 73.  He  was  the  knower  of  the  divine  Aksahfdaya  Mantra 
(the  Mantra  with  which  people  become  sure  winners  at  the 
game  of  dice) .  He  was  a  powerful  king  and  a  friend  to  Nala. 

There  are  two  Nalai  of  stead  ast  holy  rites,  very  famous  in 
the  Puranas. 

174.  One  of  them  was  the  son  of  VIrasena  and  the  other  a 
leading  member  of  the  Iksvaku  race*  Rtuparna’s  son  was 
Sarvakama  who  was  lord  of  the  people. 

175.  King  Sud  as  a  was  his  son.  *  He  was  Harfisamukha  (one 
with  the  face  of  a  swan)  Sudasa’s  son  was  the  king  Saudasa. 

176.  He  was  well-known  by  the  names  of  Kalma^apada 
and  Mitrasaha.  Vasi^tha,  of  great  brilliance,  begot  of  Kalma- 
$apaula’s  wife  the  son  A^maka,  for  the  purpose  of  making  the 
line  of  Ik  fvaku  flourish  (and  perpetuate). 

177.  Urakama  was  the  son  of  A^maka  and  his  son  was 
Mulaka.  As  regards  King  Mulaka,  they  cite  the  following 
(verse). 


1.  The  text:  Ijimna  samudrddvaiis  obscure  and  gives  an  awkward  meaning, 

especially  of  iomuiral.  Bd.  P.  v.lC7:  imidd  poi  etc.  ‘was  brought 

here  (in  this  world)  and  was  assigned  the  daughterly  status  from  the  lord  of 
Suras.* 

2.  ‘a  friend  of  Indra*  in  Bd.  P.  v.  175  u  better. 


688 


VSjm 


178.  ^|That  lordly  king,  frightened  of  Rtoia  (i.e.  Paraiu- 
rama)  always  stayed  surroimded  by  women.  Seeking  protection, 
he  abandoned  his  (manly)  apparel  and  had  the  coat  of  mail  (in 
the  form)  of  women.” 

179.  The  righteous  king  Sataratha  is  remembered  as  the 
son  of  Mulaka.  From  Sataratha  was  born  the  powerful  king 

Aidivid^* 

180.  The  son  of  Aidivida  was  the  glorious  and  valorous 
Krtaiarma.  He  had  a  daughter  also  and  his  son  was  Vi^vamahat 
(Visvasaha  in  Bd.P.) 

181.  Dillpa  was  hU  son.  He  became  well  known  as  Khat* 
vanga.  Having  attained  a  span  of  life  extending  to  a  Muhurta, 
he  returned  to  this  world  from  soarga  (celestial  world) .  By 
means  of  his  intelligence  and  truthfulness  the  three  worlds 
were  mastered  by  him. 

182.  Dirghab&hu  was  his  son  and  Raghu  was  born  of  him. 
Aja  was  the  son  of  Raghu.  From  him  (Aja)  was  bom  that 
powerful  lung  Dasaratha,  the  cause  of  delight  for  the  race  of 
Ikfvaku. 

183.  The  heroic  Rama»  the  knower  of  Dharmas,  well-known 
in  the  worlds,  Bharata,  Laksmatia  and  Satrughna  of  great 
strength  were  the  sons  of  Daiaratha. 

184.  After  killing  Lavai>a,  the  son  of  Madhu,  Satrughna 
entered  his  Madhuvana  and  founded  the  city  of  Mathura  there. 

185.  Subahu  and  Surasena,  bis  sons,  bom  of  the  princess 
of  Videha,  protected  the  city  of  Mathura,  accompanied  by 
(their  father)  Satrughna. 

186.  Angada  and  Candraketu  were  the  sons  of  Lak^mana. 
Their  territories  at  the  border  of  mountain  Himalaya  were  very 
prosperous  and  flourishii^. 

187.  Angadlya,  the  capital  city  of  Angada,  was  in  the  land 
Kirapatha.^  Gandravaktra,  the  city  of  the  mighty  Candraketu, 
was  very  auspicious. 

188.  Talqa  and  Pa^kara  were  the  heroic  sons  of  Bharata. 


1.  Modem  or  Bighin  on  (he  west  bank  of  the  loduSi  at 

the  foot  of  salt  range  called  Ni(i  hill  in  the  Bannu  district  (cf.  JfofhutxMa, 
XV-90) . 


— De92 


26.189-197 


689 

The  cities  of  those  two  noble*$ouled  ones  were  in  the  Siddha 
land  of  Gindhara. 

189«  The  beautiful  city  of  Takfa,  viz.  Tak^fila^  is 
renowned  in  all  the  quarters.  Pufkaravatl^^  the  city  of  the 
heroic  Pu$kara»  is  also  well-known. 

190.  The  people  who  know  the  Puranas  sing  this  G&tha 
(laudatory  verse):  ^‘All  the  principles  are  fettered  to  (con¬ 
centrated  in)  intelligent  R^a  due  to  his  greatness.’* 

191.  Riona  was  a  dark-complexioned^  youthful^  ted-eyed, 
bright-faced  hero  with  arms  extending  upto  the  knees.  With  a 
smiling  face  and  leonine  shoulders,  that  mighty-armed  (one) 
uttered  only  measured  words. 

192-193.  Rama  reigned  for  ten  thousand  years.  The  sound 
of  the  chanting  of  Saman  and  Yajur  Mantras  and  the 
twanging  of  his  bow  string  were  always  heard. 

^^May  it  be  given.  May  it  be  enjoyed’*.  These  utterances 
were  continuously  beard  in  tbe  realm.  While  staying  in  Jana- 
sthana^  he  carried  out  the  work  ofDevas. 

194.  Proceeding  in  search  of  Sita,  that  renowned  leader  of 
men  killed  the  (demon)  of  the  family  of  Pulastya,  who  had 
committed  sins  before. 

195.  Rama,  son  of  Dasaratha,  was  brilliant  with  his  own 
splendour.  He  possessed  Sattvic  qualities.  He  was  richly 
endowed  with  good  attributes.  He  surpassed  even  the  Sun  and 
the  blazing  hre  in  brilliance. 

196.  Thus  the  mighty-armed  scion  of  the  family  of  Ik^aku 
killed  Ravana  along  with  all  of  his  followers  and  then  went 
back  to  Heaven. 

197.  Srirama’s  son  was  called  Kuia,  He  had  another  son 
Lava  of  great  prowess.  Understand  (the  names  of)  their 
realms. 


1  Taxildi  iu  ibe  JiJtrict  Rawalpindi  in  W.  Paojab,  (now) 

Pakistan. 

2.  According  to  VR.  VII.  101.10-15  it  was  founded  by  Bbarata. 
Probably  the  same  as  ^Pouketaotea*  o)entk>cied  by  Greeks  as  being  sacked  by 
Alexander  the  great.  De  (p.  163)  identifia  it  with  Chartaddah.  eighteen 
miles  north  of  Peshawar,  on  the  Landi  near  its  junction  with  the  Kabul 
river. 

3.  Modem  Nasik  w  Paficavati  in  Mabir&sbtra. 


Purdfia 


198.  The  realm  of  Kuia  was  Koiali.  The  capital  city 
was  Ku^asthali.^  This  beautiful  city  was  founded  by  him  on 
the  ridges  of  the  Vindhya  mountains. 

199.  Uttara^Koiala  was  the  kingdom  of  the  nDble*souled 
Lava.  (His  capital)  8ravastl  was  renowned  in  the  worlds* 
Understand  the  descendants  of  Kufa. 

200.  Kuia’s  son  was  the  pious^souled  Atithi  who  loved  to 
receive  guests  hospitably.  Atithi’s  son  who  was  more  well- 
known  than  his  father  was  a  king  named  Ni;adha. 

201.  Nala  was  the  son  of  Ni^adha  and  Nabha  was  Nala’s 
son.  Pundatlka  was  bom  of  Nabha  and  Ksemadhanvan  was 
his  son. 

202.  The  valorous  king  Devanika  was  K$emadhanva*s  son. 
Devinlka*s  son  was  lord  Ahinagu  by  name. 

203.  Ahlnagu^s  successor  was  Pariy&tra  of  great  fame. 
His  son  was  Dala  and  from  him  was  bom  the  king  Bala. 

204.  Bala’s  son  was  a  pious-souled  (king)  Auhka*  by  name. 
His  son  was  Vajranabha  whose  son  was  Sankhana. 

205.  Sankhana’s  son  Dhyusitaiva  was  a  renowned  scholar. 
King  Viivasaha  was  the  son  of  Dhyu^taiva. 

206.  Hiranyanabha  belonged  to  Kosala.  His  son  was 
Vasistha.  He  was  remembered  as  the  disciple  of  the  grandson 
ofjaimini  in  all  auspicious  rites. 

207.  He  had  studied  five  hundred  Vedic  Sarhhit^.®  The 
Yoga  philosophy  was  learned  from  him  by  the  intelligent 
Yajfiavalkya. 

208.  Pu^ya,  his  son,  was  a  great  scholar.  His  son  was 
Dhruvasandhi.  Sudar^ana  was  his  son  and  Agnivarna  v/as 
born  of  Sudariana. 

209.  Agnivarna’s  son  was  Sighra  and  Manu  (Maru  in  Bd. 
P.)  is  remembered  as  the  son  of  Sighraka.  Manu  adopted 


1.  De  (p.  Iin  identifies  it  with  but  our  text  locates  it  on  the 

ridges  of  the  ^'lndhya  mount ai a. 

2.  *Uluka*  as  per  Bd.  P.v.  205.  Fargiter^  in  the  list  of  kings  of  Ayodbya, 
calls  him^Uktha'  (AlHTf  p.  149). 

3.  Dd.P.  V.  207  states  that  Paufyafiji  was  his  teacher  in  Sima  Veda. 
PausyaAji^  a  disciple  of  Sukarman,  taught  500  branches  of  the  Sima  Veda. 


26.210—27.3 


691 


Yogic  practice  and  stayed  in  the  village  Kalapagrtoa.^  In  the 
nineteenth  Yuga»  he  would  be  the  lord  who  originated  and 
made  the  K^atriya  race  flourish. 

210.  Manu*8Sonwas  Prasujruta.  His  son  was  Susandhi. 
Susandhi’s  son  was  Amar^,  otheiwise  known  by  the  name 
Sahasvan. 

21  !•  Sahasvan’s  son  was  the  king  known  by  the  name 
Viirutav4n.  Viirutavan^s  son  was  the  king  Brhadbala. 

212.  These  are  the  mostly  rememt^red  kings,  the  successors 
ofIk$vaku.  The  most  important  members  of  the  race  have 
been  enumerated  here. 

213-214.  One  who  reads  well  this  creation  of  Vivasvin, 
the  son  of  Aditi,  becomes  endowed  with  progeny.  He  attains 
identity  with  Vaivasvata  Manu,  lord  Sraddha-Deva  who 
bestows  prosperity  on  the  subjects.  He  becomes  free  from  sins 
and  Rajasic  qualities.  He  becomes  Iong*Iived  and  does  not 
swerve  from  the  righteous  path. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYSEVEN 
The  Nimi  Dynasty^ 

Suta  said: 

1-3.  Now  (listen  to  and)  understand  the  race  of  NimP> 
the  younger  brother  of  Vikukfi.  It  was  he  who  founded  a  city 
well  known  as  Jayanta  near  the  hermitage  of  Gautama.  It 
(the  city)  was  comparable  to  the  city  of  Devas.  In  his  race  a 
very  intelligent  son  named  Nemi  was  born  to  Iksvaku  of  great 


1.  Probably  a  fictitious  place.  It  is  regarded  to  have  beeo  situated 
somewhere  near  Badrinatb  in  the  Himalayas.  It  was  a  pleasure  haunt  of 
Urvali  and  Pururavas  according  to  our  text.  Maru  (Manu )  and  Devapi, 
the  last  kings  of  the  Solar  and  Lunar  races  are  practidng  Yoga,  waiting  to 
re*establisb  their  kjogdonu  at  Ayodhya  and  Hastinapur  after  the  incarnation 
ofKalki. 

2.  Tliis  chapter  corresponds  to  6d.  P.  2.3.64.,  so  from  Bd.  ?.  only  verse 
numbers  are  mentioned. 

3.  Nimi  it  a  respectable  king  in  Brahmatucal,  Dauddha  and  Jaina  tradU 
ttont.  As  a  popular  etymology,  Videba*  (mod.  Tirhut)  ii  traced  to  has 
being  bodilen  due  to  Vasinba't  curte  (tee  v.  4.5  below) . 


692 


Puf^a 


brilliance.  He  was  extremely  ptous-souled  and  revered  by  all 
living  beings.  He  was  bom  in  the  course  of  a  Yajfla,  the  pro¬ 
creator  {Janaka)  beii^  an  excellent  sage. 

4*5.  By  the  curse  of  Vasi^fha,  he  became  Vid$ha  (devoid  of 
body) .  His  son  named  Mithi  was  procreated  in  the  course  of 
three  Parvans.  This  king  of  great  fame  was  bom  of  Arani  (a 
piece  of  wood  from  which  lire  is  kindled  for  sacrificial  purpose) 
while  it  was  being  churned.  He  was  well  known  by  the  name 
of  Mithi.  Since  his  birth  was  of  this  type,  he  became  (known 
as)  Janaka. 

6.  Mithi  was  a  king  of  great  prowess  whereby  the  capital 
city  became  (known  as)  Mithila^  and  the  king  was  Janaka. 
Janaka^s  son  was  Udavasu. 

7.  From  Udavasu  was  born  the  extremely  pious-souled 
Nandi vardh ana.  From  Nandivardhana  was  born  the  heroic 
and  pious  Suketu. 

8.  From  Suketu  was  born  the  pious-soul cd  Devarata  of 
great  strength.  It  is  heard  that  the  pious-souled  Brhaduccha 
was  Devarata’s  son. 

9.  Brhaduccha^s  son  was  the  valorous  Mahavlrya.  Dhrti- 
man  was  the  son  of  Mahavlrya  and  his  son  was  Sudhrti. 

10.  The  pious-souled  Dhrstaketu,  the  oppressor  of  enemies, 
was  the  son  of  Sudhrti.  Dhr$(akctu*s  son  was  well  known  by 
the  name  of  Haryasva. 

1 1 .  Maru  was  Haryasva*s  son.  Pratitvaka*  was  Maru*s 
son.  The  pious-souled  king  Kirtiratha  was  the  son  of  Pratit* 
vaka. 

12.  The  son  of  lUrtiratha  was  well  known  as  Devamidha. 
and  Vibudhawas  the  son  of  Devamidha  and  Vibudha’s  son  was 
Dhyti. 

13.  Mahadhfti’s  son  was  mrtiraja,  a  king  of  great 
valour.  Klrtiraja’s  son  was  a  scholar  well  known  as  Maharomi. 


1.  Also  called  Ja&akapur,  capital  of  Videha  in  the  district  of  Darbhaiiga 
(Bihar).  It  famous  tor  its  Brahnoanical  Univenity  (upto  14th  cent. 
A.D.).  Now  a  new  Sanskrit  University  has  been  founded  there  some  yean 
back. 

2.  Pratimbaka  ia  Bd.P.  v.  1 1.  Pargiter  records  ^Pradndhaka*  u  hii  name 
(AIHT.p,  147). 


27,14-23  693 

14,  From  Maharom4  was  bom  the  famous  Svar^roma. 
5varnaroma*8  son  was  the  king  Hrasvarom^. 

!5»  It  is  heard  that  the  son  of  Hrasvaroma  was  the  scholar 
Siradhvaja,  While  this  king  was  ploughing^  S!ta,  of  great 
fame»  was  born.  She  became  the  chaste  queen  of  Rama.  She 
was  devoted  to  her  husband  and  a  virtuous  wife. 

Sdrhiap^ana  mquiud\ 

16.  How  was  Sita  of  great  fame  born  while  (the  field)  was 
being  ploughed.  Why  did  the  kir^  plough  the  field  wherein 
she  was  bom  ? 

Suta  Tipliid  ; 

1 7.  While  the  Agnik;etra  (the  field  where  sacrifice  was  to 
be  performed]  was  being  ploughed  in  accordance  with  the 
injunction  in  the  course  of  the  horse*sacrifice  of  the  noble  soul 
she  was  bom  out  of  it. 

18.  From  Siradhvaja  was  born  the  Maithila  (king  of 
Mithila)  named  Bhmuman.  His  brother  was  Kuiadhvaja,  tlie 
lord  and  king  of  Kafi. 

19.  Bhanumw's  son  was  the  valorous  Pradyumna.  His 
son  was  Muni  and  from  him  Orjavaha  is  remembered  (as 
born) . 

20.  From  Crjavaha  was  born  Sutadvaja.  SakunI  was  his 
son.  3akuni’s  son  was  Sv^ata.^  Suvarcas  is  remembered  as 
his  son. 

21.  Sruta  was  his  successor.  Susruta  was  his  son.  Jaya 
was  Susruta *s  son.  Vijaya  was  the  son  of  Jaya. 

22.  Vijaya’s  son  was  Rta  and  Sunaya  was  the  son  of  ]Rta. 
From  Sunaya  was  bom  Vitahavya,  and  Vltahavya’s  son  was 
Dhrti. 

23.  Dhrti’s  son  was  Bahulasva  and  Bahulasva*s  son  was 
Krti.^  It  is  with  him  that  the  race  of  Janaka  is  terminated.  Thus 
the  Maithilas  (kings  of  Mithila)  are  enumerated.  Understand 
the  race  of  Soma  also. 


1.  The  lUt  in  p.  144  shows  that  our  text  and  Bd.P.  jumped 

twelve  generationt  downwards  and  declared  Svigata  as  the  son  ofSakuni. 

2.  Krtakwa  in  A!HT.  p.  149. 


694 


Vdyu  Purdj;^ 


CHAPTER  TWENTYEIGHT 
TA€  of  Soma  and  Saumya  {Budha) 

Suta  said*, 

I.  O  Brahamanas,  the  progenitor  of  the  Moon-god  was 
Atri,  the  holy  sage.  He  surpassed  all  the  worlds  by  means  of 
his  brilliance.  He  was  a  holy  lord. 

2-3.  He  always  performed  only  holy  rites  physically,  men¬ 
tally  and  verbally.  We  have  heard  that  formerly,  for  a  period 
of  three  thousand  years,  he  performed  a  penance  that  was  indeed 
very  difficult  to  be  performed  in  the  worlds,  wherein  with  his 
arms  upraised  he  stood  firm  (unmoved)  like  (a  piece  of )  wood, 
a  wall  or  a  piece  of  rock. 

4.  The  highly  intelligent  Brahman  a  had  sublimated  his 
sexual  urge.  He  stood  without  even  winking  his  eyes.  His  body 
attained  the  status  of  Soma. 

5.  The  sage  of  sanctified  soul  in  the  state  of  Soma  rose  up 
(to  the  sky)  •  The  Soma  juice  exuded  from  his  eyes  illuminating 
all  the  quarters. 

6.  On  being  ordered  by  Vid hi  (Brahma),  the  ten  Devis 
(i.e.  the  quarters)  gathered  together  there  and  received  it  in 
their  womb  collectively,  but  could  not  do  so  (for  long) . 

7-8.  When  those  goddesses  (ladies)  were  unable  to  hold 
the  foetus  in  their  wombs,  the  foetus  endowed  with  lustre,  illu¬ 
minated  the  worlds  like  the  Moon  (now)  blessing  everyone;  it 
emerged  from  the  quarters  (womb  of  the  ladies)  and  fell  on 
the  ground  (assuming  the  form  of)  the  Moon  along  with  them 
(the  goddesses) « 

9.  On  seeing  Soma  falling,  Brahma,  the  grandfather  of  the 
worlds,  placed  him  in  a  chariot,  with  a  desire  for  the  welfare  of 
the  worlds. 

10.  O  Brahmanas,  indeed  he  (the  Moon)  was  aDeva(god) 
himself,  a  seeker  of  righteousness  and  truthful  to  the  promise. 
We  have  heard  that  (the  chariot)  was  (fitted  with)  yoked  to  a 
thousand  white  horses. 

II.  When  that  great  soul,  the  son  of  Atri,  had  fallen, 
Devas  and  the  seven  famous  mental  sons  of  Brahma  eulogised 
(him)  • 


28.12-24 


695 


12.  There  itself,  the  sons  of  Ahgiras  and  Bhrgu  eulogised 
by  means  of  Rks,  Yajur  mantras  and  many  Atharva  Ahgirasa 
mantras. 

1 3.  The  brilliance  of  the  shining  Moon  who  was  being  eulo¬ 
gised,  developed  further  and  it  purified  all  the  three  worlds. 

14.  In  that  prominent  chariot,  he  circumambulated  the 
earth  extending  upto  the  ocean  twenty-one  times. 

15.  His  splendour  that  reached  the  earth  became  medicinal 
herbs.  They  sparkle  by  means  of  his  brilliance. 

16.  O  excellent  Brahamans  !  He  sustains  subjects  of  four 
types  and  the  universe  with  them  (herbs).  Lord  Soma  is  indeed 
the  nourishcr  of  the  universe. 

17.  Having  acquired  splendour  throitgb  the  penance  (of 
Atri),  the  eulogy  (of  Devas  and  sages)  and  his  own  religious 
activities,  the  blessed  one  (Soma)  performed  penance  for 
ten  times  ten  Padma  years,  (one  Padma^dt  thousand  billion). 

18.  Soma  who  is  famous  by  bis  own  Karmans  will  be  the 
pervader  of  those  (ten)  gold-complexioned  goddesses  (viz. 
quarters)  who  sustain  the  whole  world. 

19.  Thereafter,  Brahma  the  foremost  among  the  knowers 
of  Brahman^  entrusted  him  with  the  kingdom  of  seeds,  herbs, 
Brahtnanas  and  waters. 

20.  Being  naturally  the  foremost  among  those  who  shine 
brilliantly  and,  thereafter,  being  crowned  over  a  big  kingdom, 
(Soma)  of  great  splendour  became  the  king  of  kings  and  puri¬ 
fied  the  worlds  and  developed  them. 

21.  Dak^,  the  son  of  Fracetas,  gave  twenty-seven  Daksa- 
yanjs  (daughters  of  Dak$a)  of  great  holy  rites  to  Indu  (the 
Moon).  They  (people)  know  them  as  Nak^atras  (constellations)  • 

22.  Having  attained  that  great  kingdom,  Soma  the  lord  of 
possessors  of  Soma  (i.e.  Br^manas)  performed  the  Raj  as  Qy  a 
sacriftce,  ^vlicrein  the  Dak;ii>a  amounted  to  hundred  thousands. 

23-24.  In  that  sacrifice,  Hiranyagarbha  was  the  Udgatr 
(the  presiding  priest  who  recites  mantras);  Brahma  occupied 
the  seat  of  Brahma  and  lord  Narayana  Harl  was  the  Sadasya 
(member  of  the  witnessing  assembly) «  He  was  surrounded  by 
Sanatkumara  and  other  leading  original  Brahmariis.  O  Br&h- 
marias,  we  have  heard  that  Soma  gave  the  three  worlds  as 


696  Vdyu 

Dak^i^i  (sacrificial  fee)  to  those  importaDt  Brahma^  sages 
who  were  the  members  of  the  Assembly* 

25*  Nine  Devis,  viz.  Sii^,  Kuhu^,  Vapus»  Pu^ti,  Prabhai 
Vasu»  Kirti»  Dhfti  and  Lakfm!  served  him* 

26.  After  finishing  his  concluding  ablutions  (of  the  sacri¬ 
fice),  he  became  free  from  worries.  He  had  been  revered  by  all 
Devas  and  sages.  That  supreme  emperor  of  emperors  shone 
over  the  ten  quarters. 

27.  After  having  attained  such  a  rare  glory  praised  even  by 
the  sages,  O  Brahma^as,  his  mind  became  confounded.  His 
humility  was  suppressed  by  his  immodesty  and  impertinence. 

28.  Slighting  all  the  sons  of  Ai^iras,  all  of  a  sudden,  he 
abducted  T&ri  of  great  fame,  the  wife  of  Brhaspati. 

29.  Though  implored  by  Devas  and  celestial  sages,  he 
did  not  give  up  T&ra  to  Angiras  (Brhaspati). 

30.  O  Brahmanas,  Uianas,  one  of  the  Afigiras  (?)  took  his 
side.  Indeed,  he  had  been  the  highly  brilliant  disciple  ofBfhas* 
pati’s  father. 

31.  Thanks  to  that  affection,  lord  Rudra  took  up  his  bow 
Ajagava  and  sided  Brhaspati. 

32.  The  great  miraculous  weapon  was  discharged  by  that 
noble  soul  aiming  at  the  diief  Brahma  tn  a  sage  and  Devas 
whereby  their  fame  was  destroyed. 

33.  There  ensued  a  great  battle  directly  (between  Devas 
and  Asuras).  It  was  called  T^akamaya^  (concemir^  Tara  ?)• 
It  caused  great  destruction  of  Devas,  Dwavas  and  all  the 
worlds. 

34.  Only  three  Devas  sundved.  They  are  remembered  by 
the  name  Tufitas.  They  sought  shelter  in  Brahma,  the  primor¬ 
dial  lord,  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds. 

35.  Then  Pitamaha  (Brahma)  himself  prevented  Uianas 
and  Rudra,  the  eldest  (deity)  Sankara,  (from  fighting)  and 
handed  over  Tara  to  Augiras  (Brhaspati) . 


1.  Sint  and  KuhQ  are  deities  presiding  over  (i)  the  day  preceding  the 
new  moon  day  on  v.hicb  the  moon  riies  with  acarcely  vliihle  crescent  and 
(ii)  the  new  moon  day  when  the  moon  ii  inviitble,  respectively. 

2.  Out  of  the  twelve  wan  between  Devas  and  Aiuras  this  was  the 
fifth  one. 


28.36-48 


697 


36«  On  seeing  that  the  lady  with  a  moon^like  face, 

was  pregnant,  the  Brahmana  Brhaspati  said:  *^Don*t  you  cast 
off  the  foetus  ? 

37.  In  (your)  body  belonging  to  me  another  foetus  shall 
by  no  means  be  held  in  the  womb.’*  Still  she  did  not  cast  off  the 
child  *Da^^hafUama*  (the  slayer  of  robbers) . 

38.  Like  the  hre  that  blazes  ailer  catching  the  I^ika  grass, 
the  son  surpassed  the  beautiful  bodies  of  Devas  at  the  very 
instant  he  was  born. 

39.  Their  suspicion  having  been  aroused,  Suras  spoke 
to  Tara  :  ‘‘Tell  us  the  truth,  whose  son  is  he,  Soma’s  or  Brhas- 
paU’s  ?’* 

40.  When  she,  out  of  bashfulness,  did  not  tell  Devas, 
‘yes’  or  ‘no’,  the  boy  Dasyuhantama  was  about  to  curse  her. 

41.  Preventing  him,  Brahmi  said  to  T&ra,  *‘(We  have) 
suspicion  that  it  is  Candra’s  (Moon’s),  O  Tarh;  therefore,  speak 
the  truth.  Whose  son  is  this  ?” 

42.  With  palms  joined  in  reverence,  she  said  this  to  lord 
Brahma,  the  granter  of  boons,  that  the  noble-souled  boy  Das¬ 
yuhantama  was  Soma’s. 

43.  Thereafter,  sniffing  at  the  head  of  his  son,  Lord  Soma, 
the  Prajapati,  named  his  intelligent  son  as  Budlia. 

44.  (Defective  verse)  While  rising  up  to  go  towards  the 
east*,  Budha  begot  a  son  of  the  princess  (Ila). 

45.  Pururavas,  his  son  of  great  brilliance,  was  bom  of  Ila. 
In  Urvan,  six  sons  of  great  prowess  were  born  (to  Pururavas). 

46.  Then,  being  violently  attacked  by  pulmonary  con¬ 
sumption  Soma  became  exhausted  and  helpless.  Overwhelmed 
by  consumption,  the  Moon’s  disc  became  pale  and  weak.  He, 
therefore,  sought  refuge  in  his  own  father  Atri. 

47.  Atri,  of  great  fame,  quelled  his  sin  (disease).  He  was 
cured  of  the  pulmonary  cmxsumption  and  so  he  shone  with  bri¬ 
lliance  all  round. 

48.  O  excellent  Br^imanas,  thus  the  origin  of  Soma  has 
been  recounted  by  me.  Listen  to  and  understand  his  race  that 
is  being  recounted  to  you,  O  excellent  Brahmanas. 

•The  reading  8d.  P.  v.  2.3.66-44:  PraOi/mriun..  .budha(i,  ^Buddha  riici  in 
the  east  everyday.* 


698 


Vdjv  PUrd^ 


49.  It  is  conducive  to  wealth,  health  and  longevity.  It  is 
holy  and  destructive  of  sins.  Only  by  listening  to  the  origin  of 
Soma,  one  is  relieved  of  all  sins. 


CHAPTER  TWENTYNINE 
TAs  Lunar  Race^  :  Tfu  Amitasu  Dynasty 


Suta  said  : 

1 .  Buddha  was  Sonia’s  son  and  his  son  was  Pururavas.  He 
was  very  brilliant  and  munificent  in  charitable  gifts.  He  per¬ 
formed  Yajnas  with  vast  amounts  distributed  as  Dakfind. 

2.  He  >vas  an  expounder  of  Brahman  (Vedas),  destro¬ 
yer  of  foes  and  invincible  in  battle.  He  regularly  performed 
Agnihotra  and  granted  gifts  of  lands  to  sacrificial  priests. 

3.  He  was  truthful  in  speech  and  intelligently  engaged  in 
holy  rites.  Handsome  in  features,  he  indulged  in  sexual  inter¬ 
course  in  great  privacy.  He  was  an  extraordinarily  dutiful  son, 
and  in  beauty  of  form  was  unequalled  in  all  the  worlds. 

4.  Eschewing  her  pride  in  personal  prestige,  the  renowned 
Urvafi  wedded  that  righteous,  truthful  (king) ,  conversant  with 
Dharmas  and  expounder  of  Brahman  (Veda) 

5-8.  The  vigorous  king  stayed  with  her  (in  all  for  sixty- 
four  years)  spending  ten,  eight,  seven,  six,  seven,  eight,  ten  and 
eight  years  in  the  beautiful  Gaitraratha  park,  on  the 
banks  of  Gahga,  in  the  excellent  forest  Nandana,  in  the 
extensive  Alaka,  at  the  foot  of  the  Gandhamadana  mouni:am, 
on  the  peak  of  the  excellent  mountain  Mem,  in  the  northern 
Kurus,  and  in  the  village  Kalapagrama  respectively.  With  great 


I.  The  pr«seat  chapter  which  corresponds  (o  Bd.P.  2.3.66,  op erj  with 
the  episode  sit  Pururavas,  the  founder  of  the  Lunar  race  and  Urvaij,  the 
celestial  nymph.  ThU  episode  gives  the  background  of  the  famous 
''Dialogue**  tOkta  iu  the  RV.  This  romantic  story  inipired  Kalidlia  to 
write  his  immortal  play  Fi^ramarso/p's. 


29.9-15 


699 


joy,  the  king  accompanied  by  UrvasI  sported  about  tn  their  main 
forests  and  parks  (usually)  frequented  by  Suras  (gods) . 

Thi  Sagis  asked  : 

9.  Urva^!  was  a  Gandharva  lady.  Forsaking  Devas, 
how  did  she  attain  the  king,  a  mere  human  being  ?  O  (sage) 
of  extensive  learning,  please  explain  it  to  us. 

Suta  replied  X 

10.  She  was  overwhelmed  by  the  curse  of  Brahma  and 
therefore  had  to  approach  a  htunan  being.  The  beautiful  lady 
(became  the  wife  of)  AUa  Pururavas  under  certain  stipulated 
conditions. 

11.  In  order  to  redeem  herself  from  the  evil  effects  of  the 
curse,  she  stipulated  that  she  should  not  see  him  naked 
except  at  the  time  of  sexual  intercourse  or  when  swayed  with 
passionate  love. 

12.  (She  said  fur  ther)  King,  two  rams  will  always 
be  kept  near  our  bed.^  My  sole  diet  will  be  ghee  which  I  shall 
take  only  once  a  day. 

13.  If  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  O  king,  as  long  as 
you  strictly  adhere  to  these  stipulations,  I  shall  stay  with  you. 
This  is  our  mutual  agreement’’. 

14.  The  king  scrupulously  adhered  to  her  conditions.  Thus 
that  beautiful  lady  stayed  with  Pururavas. 

15.  Deluded  by  her  curse,  Urvasi  became  a  human  lady 
and  stayed  with  him  devotedly  for  sixty- four  years.  The  Gand- 
harvas  became  worried  due  to  this. 


1.  Urvaii,  as  her  name  uidicatef,  seem*  to  have  WIed  from  the  ancient 
central  Asian  town  Ur.  It  appears  that  fashionable  ladies  from  Ur  had  a 
fascination  for  rams  in  the  fourth  milleimium  B.C.  In  his  excavation  at  Ur, 
Sir  Leonard  Wooley  discovered  in  a  queen's  tomb  of  3300  B.C.  a  pair  of 
rams,  ** beautifully  and  intricately  made.  Their  bodies  were  covered  with 
fleece  of  shell. . .  .tbetr  heads  and  legs  were  of  gold**  ( quoted  on  p.  8  in  A.  J. 
Karaxidikar*t  introduction  to  his  Marathi  book  Background  of  the  Mahibhdnta 

Pcona,  1980.  This  fascination  for  rams  maybe 
the  cause  of  the  inclusion  and  importance  atuebed  to  Ibis  term  in  the 
marriage-contract  between  Purflravas  smd  Urvafl. 


700 


Vdyu  Purd^a 


CandAarvas  said : 

16.  O  blessed  ones,  ponder  over  the  means  whereby  that 
excellent  lady,  the  ornament  of  heaven,  Urvail,  may  again 
come  back  to  Devaa. 

17- 19.  Then  the  foremost  of  the  eloquent  ones  (Gandhar^ 
vas) ,  named  VUadoasu  spoke  thus: 

sinless  ones,  I  consider  that  some  conditions  must  have 
been  stipulated  by  her  there.  I  shall  tell  you  the  means 
whereby  she  will  forsake  the  king  due  to  the  breach  of  agree¬ 
ment.  I  shall  immediately  engage  myself  to  achieve  your  task^^ 
After  saying  thus,  that  (Viivavasu)  of  great  fame  went  to  the 
city  of  Prat4thina. 

20.  He  came  there  at  night  and  cook  away  one  of  the  two 
rams.  The  lady  of  sweet  smiles  had  been  no  less  than  a  mother 
unto  the  two  rams. 

21.  On  realising  that  the  Gandbarva  had  come,  the  re¬ 
nowned  lady  (Urvail)  lying  on  the  bed  told  the  king,  **My 
son  is  being  taken  away*\ 

22.  Thus  requested,  the  king  thought,  ‘*The  queen  will 
see  me  naked  and  there  will  be  a  breach  of  the  agreement.’* 

23.  Then  the  Gandharvas  took  away  the  second  ram  as 
well.  When  the  second  ram  was  taken  away,  the  queen  spoke 
to  Aila: 

24.  Lord,  O  king,  my  sons  are  taken  away  as  though 
they  are  the  sons  of  a  helpless  woman”.  Thus  taunted  the  king 
got  up  and  rushed  out  (though  he  was}  naked. 

25-26.  The  king  rushed  out  seeking  the  sheep  taken  away 
by  the  Gandharvas,  whereupon  a  great  Maye'  sion)  was 

produced  by  them.  The  great  palace  became  Illuminated  sud¬ 
denly  and  she  saw  the  naked  king.  On  seeing  the  king  naked, 
the  Apsaralady  (UrvasI)  who  could  assume  any  form  she  wished, 
vanished  ( from  there) . 

27.  On  realising  that  she  had  vanishrd,  the  Gandliarvas 
abandoned  the  rams  there  and  disappeared  themselves. 

28.  On  seeing  the  abandoned  rams,  the  king,  the  lord,  took 
them  with  him  and  returned.  Unable  to  sec  her  there,  the  king 
became  extremely  dejected  and  lamented. 

29-30.  Seeking  her  here  and  there,  the  king  roamed  over 


29.31-41 


701 


the  earth.  The  powerful  king  saw  her  at  Runikfetra.  She  was 
taking  her  bath  in  the  deep  waters  of  Pu$karin!  (lotus  pond) 
in  the  holy  centre  of  Plaksatlrtha.  She  appeared  very  splendid, 
sporting  there  in  the  company  of  five  Apsaras. 

31-32.  The  lady  of  splendid  evebrows  saw  the  king  not 
very  far.  UrvaH  then  spoke  to  her  friends :  “Here  is  that 
excellent  man  with  whom  I  lived/*  She  pointed  out  the  king 
to  them.  Then  those  ladies,  the  Apsaras  (with  five  braids  of 
hair)  appeared  in  front  (of  him). 

33.  On  seeing  her  (Urvafi)  the  king  was  delighted.  He 
began  to  lament  in  diverse  ways,  “o  ^ri*cl  lady,  come  (unto 
me).  Stay  willingly,  stand  by  your  words.** 

34-33.  These  and  similar  subtle  words  they  exchanged. 
Urva^I  then  spoke  to  Aila  :  “O  lord,  I  have  been  rendered 
pregnant  by  you.  Undoubtedly  your  son  will  be  bom  within 
a  year.*’  The  king  stayed  for  a  night  with  her. 

36.  The  king  went  back  to  hb  city  with  great  delight. 
When  a  year  elapsed,  the  king  of  great  fame  came  to  Urvafi 
again. 

37.  After  staying  with  her  for  a  night,  the  lofty-minded 
king  became  overwhelmed  by  passionate  love.  In  a  pitiable 
tone  he  spoke:  “Be  mine  for  ever**. 

38.  Urvafi  then  said  to  Aila:  “Tlic  Gandharvas  will  grant 
you  (that)  boon.  O  great  king,  choose  that  boon  and  tell  them 
this  yourself: 

39*  U  choose  the  boon  of  Sdlokya  (having  the  same  world) 
with  the  noble-souled  Gandharvas*  **.  The  king  accepted  the 
suggestion  saying  **So  be  it*’,  and  requested  the  Gandharvas 
for  the  boon.  The  Gandharvas  replied,  “So  be  it*’. 

40.  After  filling  the  Slkdli  (mud-pot)  with  fire,  the 
Gandharvas  spoke  to  him:  “O  king,  performing  the  sacrifice 
with  this,  you  will  attain  that  world.*’^ 

41.  He  took  the  fire  and  went  back  m  his  city  along  with 
the  prince.  He  placed  the  fire  in  the  Ara^i  and  went  to  his 
abode  along  with  his  son. 

L  Aj  w.  40-45  ibow,  this  Pur&Qa  attributes  to  Puriiravas,  theixutitutioD 
(or  encouragefflsat)  ot  the  perfonnaoce  of  Yajfta  out  of  the  fire  created  from 
iSrssi  (of  Aivattha  wood)  by  atcritioo.  Bd.P.  2.3.66.19  gives  the  credit  of 
iotroduciag  three  fires  (Daksio^gni  etc.)  to  PurOravas. 


702 


Fdjiu  Purdffa 


42.  He  returned  and  saw  the  fire.  He  found  an  A$vattha 
(holy  fig  tree)  there.  On  seeing  the  Aivattba  neai'  it,  he  was 
surprised. 

43.  In  Order  to  inform  the  Gandharvas  about  itp  he  went 
to  heaven  with  the  fire.  On  hearii^  everything  they  asked  him 
to  make  use  of  Ara^ii. 

44.  They  said:  ^^Make  an  Arani  out  of  the  Aivattha, 
chum  It  and  kindle  the  fircp  in  accordance  with  the  in¬ 
junctions.  O  kingp  performing  the  sacrifice  with  it,  you  will 
attain  the  same  region  as  ours.  The  king  churned  and  prepared 
three  fires  and  performed  the  sacrifice. 

45.  After  performing  differeat  kinds  of  TajHas,  he  attained 
Sdlokya  with  the  Gandharvas.  It  was  in  the  Treta  Yuga  that 
this  great  (hero)  lived.  Originally  there  was  only  a  single  fire. 
Ailamade  (introduced)  three  tires. 

46-47.  O  excellent  Br&hmanas»  the  king  Aila  had  such  a 
prowess.  He  ruled  over  his  kingdom  in  Prayaga,  the  holiest  of 
lands  embellished  by  the  great  sages,  on  the  northern  banks  of 
Yamuna,  in  the  city  of  Pratisthana. 

48-49.  (He  had)  six  sons  having  the  brilliance  comparable 
Co  that  of  Indra  and  well-known  in  tlie  regions  of  Gandharvas. 
They  were  Ayu,  Dhimun,  Amavasu,^  Vi^vayu,  Satayu  and 
Gatayu — all  born  of  Urvasi.  Amavasu*s  son  was  king  Bhima, 
the  conqueror  of  the  whole  universe. 

50.  Sriman,  the  successor  ofBhlma,  waa  a  king  with  golden 
lustre  (otherwise  known  as  Kaficanaprabha) .  The  scholarly 
and  powerful  Suhotra  was  the  son  of  Kaficana  (i.e.  Kahcana- 
prabha) . 

51-35.  Jahnu  was  the  son  of  Suhotra,  bom  of  Keiika’s 
womb. 

While  his  elaborate  sacrificial  rite  was  going  on,  Gai^a 
turned  her  course  and  flooded  that  territory  on  account  of  the 
vision  of  the  inevitable  future  (events).  Seeing  the  sacrificial 
enclosure  flooded  all  round  by  Ganga,  the  son  of  Suhotra, 
the  gran te.  of  boons,  became  infuriated.  Flashing  red  eyes  he 
spoke  to  Ganga :  Ganga,  have  the  recompense  of  this  outrage 


1.  Amivaiv.  was  the  tbtJAder  of  K&nyakubga  kingdom— Parfiter,  ATTH, 
p.  144. 


29.56-67 


70S 


immediately.  I  shall  make  all  your  efforts  in  vain.  I  shall  drink 
up  your  waters.**  On  seeing  the  waters  of  Gahga  drunk  up 
the  saintly  king,  Suras  and  s^es  brought  out  the  blessed 
river  as  his  daughter  (and  known  asjahna%n).  Jahnu  married 
Kaveri,  the  gran  d-d  aughter  of  Yauvanasva. 

56-57.  It  was  a  result  of  the  curse  of  Yuvana$va  that 
Gahg^  was  produced  by  him.  Kaveri,  the  most  excellent  of 
all  rivers,  became  the  praise-worthy  wife  of  Jahnu.  Jahnu 
begot  a  beloved  righteous  son  named  Suhotra,  of  Kaver!. 
Suhotra’s  son  was  Ajaka. 

58.  Ajaka’s  successor  was  Balakaiva  of  great  fame.  Gaya, 
Slla  and  Kuia  are  remembered  as  sons  born  to  him. 

59.  Kusa  had  four  sons  brilliant  due  to  their  Vedic  know¬ 
ledge.  They  were  Ku^iva,  Kulanabha,  Amurtarayaias  and 
Vasu, 

60.  The  excellent  king  Kuiastamba  desirous  of  a  son, 
performed  a  penance.  When  a  thousand  years  were  completed 
he  saw  Satakratu  (Indra). 

61-62.  On  seeing  him  who  performed  severe  penance,  the 
thousand-eyed  Purandara  decided  to  become  his  son,  as  he  was 
competent  to  do  so.  The  enemy  of  P^a  (i.e.  Indra)  became 
his  son  and  took  the  name  Gadhi.  He  was  called  Kau^ilca  also, 
being  a  member  of  the  family  of  Kuia. 

63.  Kusastaniba*s  wife  was  Paurukutsa  and  Gadhi  was 
born  of  her.  Lord  Gadhi  gave  his  eldest  daughter,  the  splendid 
and  blessed  Satyavati,  to  Rcika  who  was  a  descendant  of  Bhrgu 
(Kavya?) . 

61-67.  Her  husband,  himself  a  descendant  of  Bhfgu  and 
the  delighter  of  the  Bhrgu  family,  prepared  Cam  (consecrated 
cooked  rice)  ibr  the  sake  (of  the  birth)  of  a  son  to  himself 
as  well  as  to  Gadhi.  The  courageous  sage^eika,  the  descendant 
of  Bhrgu,  called  (liis  wife  Satyavati  and  said):  splendid 

lady,  this  Cam  should  be  taken  by  you  and  this  by  your  mother. 
A  brilliant  leader  of  K$atriyas  will  be  born  to  her.  He  cannot 
be  conquered  by  Ksatriyas  in  battle.  He  will  be  the  destroyer 
of  prominent  K^triyas.  This  Caru  will  give  you,  O  splendid 
lady,  an  excellent  Brahmana  as  a  son.  He  will  be  courageous 
and  quiescent,  possessing  penance  as  his  wealth  (i.e.  he  will 
become  a  great  sage).** 


VtyuPvr^ 


704 

68*  After  laying  this  to  hiswifet  ^clkai  the  scion  of  the 
family  ofBhrgu^  ever  engaged  in  penance,  entered  the  forest 

69.  In  the  course  of  bis  pilgrimage,  king  Gadhi  came  to 
Rclka’s  hermitage  in  order  to  see  his  daughter*  He  was  accom¬ 
panied  by  his  wife  abo. 

70.  Satyavatl  brought  the  two  types  of  Carus  given  by  the 
sage  to  her  mother.  Delightedly  but  without  excitement,  she 
told  her  what  her  husband  had  mentioned  to  her  (about 
them). 

71.  As  fate  would  have  it,  the  mother  gave  the  Cam  intend¬ 
ed  for  her  to  her  daughter.  Out  of  ignorance,  she  took  in  the 
Caru  intended  for  her  daughter 

72.  Then  Satyavatl  conceived  in  her  womb  a  foetus  that 
was  splendid  but  competent  to  destroy  Ksatriyas.  With  her 
illuminated  body,  she  became  terrible  to  view. 

73.  On  seeing  it  and  pondering  over  it  by  means  of  Yogic 
power,  Rclka.  the  excellent  Brahmana,  spoke  to  his  fair- 
coroplexioncd  wife : 

74.  ‘^O  gentle  lady,  due  to  the  interchange  of  the  Carust 
an  extremely  terrible  son  of  cruel  deeds  will  be  born  as  your  son 
and  your  mother  will  be  successful  (in  getting  a  good  son) . 

75.  Your  mother  will  give  birth  to  such  a  saintly  son.  The 
entire  Brahman  (Vedic  knowledge)  has  been  instilled  into  it 
by  me. 

76.  Thus  warned  by  her  husband,  the  blessed  lady  Satya¬ 
vatl  propitiated  her  husband:  ^*May  my  son  never  be  like 
this.  Let  another  be  a  base  Brahina^’\  Thus  requested,  the 
sage  said  : 

77.  gentle  lady,  this  has  never  been  thought  of  nor 
desired  by  me  or  by  you.  The  son  may  be  one  of  terrible 
activities  due  to  the  fault  of  his  father  or  mother*’. 

78.  Thus  addressed,  Satyavatl  spoke  again  these  words: 

sage,  if  you  wish,  you  can  create  many  worlds.  What  then 

a  mere  son? 


1.  Thb  txplaios  why  Psraiurftms,  though  a  Brahmapa,  was  of  a 
militant  nature  and  Vifvimitrs,  though  by  birth,  attained 

B  r&hm  ao  a*hoocl. 


29.79-90 


705 


79.  O  holy  lord,  O  mastefj  it  behoves  you  to  grant  me  a 
son  who  will  be  quiescent  and  straightforward.  O  Lord, 
say  'Let  such  a  son  be  born*. 

80.  O  excellent  Brahma^a,  nothing  other  than  this  can  be 
done  to  me*\  Thereafter,  by  means  of  the  power  of  his 
penance,  he  made  her  delighted. 

81.  fair-complexioned  lady,  it  makes  no  difference  as 
far  as  1  am  concerned  whether  it  is  the  son  or  the  grand¬ 
son.  O  gentle  lady,  everything  shall  be  in  accordance  with 
the  words  spoken  by  you.** 

82.  Therefore  Satyavati  gave  birth  to  a  son,  the  scion  of 
the  family  of  Bhrgu.  He  was  Jamadagni,  the  quiescent  and 
self-controlled.  He  was  interested  in  penance. 

83.  Formerly  when  there  was  an  interchange  of  Raudra 
and  Vai$t;iava  Cams  in  the  Yajha  of  Bhrgu,  he  ate  (Jamandt) 
the  Vai^nava  fire  and  so  he  came  to  be  known  as  *Jamadagni\ 

84.  Having  obtained  Viiv&mitra  as  hU  successor,  G&dhi 
the  delighter  of.Kuiikai  (members  of  the  family  of  Kusika) 
attained  the  status  equal  to  that  of  Brahma^  sages.  He  was 
selected  to  be  such  by  Brahma. 

85-86a.  The  meritorious  Satyavati,  engaged  in  truthful 
rites,  became  the  great  river  well  known  as  Kauiiki.  Kau^ikl 
the  most  excellent  and  distinguished  river  began  to  flow  thus. 

86b-88.  There  was  a  king  in  the  race  of  Ik$vaku.  HU 
name  was  Suvenu.  His  daughter  was  a  blessed  lady  named 
Renuka  otherwise  known  as  Kamall.  Rclka’s  son,  Jamadagni, 
endowed  with  the  power  of  penance  and  fortitude  begot  of 
Kamall  alias  Renuka,  the  terrible  son  Kama  who  was  the 
most  excellent  of  those  who  bad  mastered  all  lores  and  the 
science  of  archery  as  well.  He  became  the  destroyer  of 
K^atriyas  and  shone  like  the  blazing  fire. 

89.  In  thU  manner,  the  Ic^ty-minded  Jamadagni,  the  fore¬ 
most  among  those  who  know  Brahman,  was  bom  of  Satya¬ 
vati,  thanks  to  the  semen  virile  of  Aurva  ^clka.  The  middle 
son  was  Sunab^pha  and  the  youngest  was  9unabpuccha. 

90.  The  pious-souled  Vifvamitra  is  remembered  by  the 
name  Viivaratha  also.  By  the  favour  of  Bhrgu,  he  was  born 
of  Kauiika,  as  the  perpetuator  of  the  race  of  Kauiika. 


706 


Vdjm  Purdffa 


91-93.  §una^j«pha  is  remembered  as  the  eldest  of  all  the 
sons  of  Vi^vamitra.^  He  became  a  sage.  In  the  Yaj!ia  of 
Harijcandra,  he  was  intended  (appointed)  as  the  sacrificial 
animal.  He  was  given  over  (to  Viivimitra)  by  Devas. 
Hence  he  became  Devarata.  Sunahlepha  is  remembered  as 
the  eldest  son  of  Viivamitra.  Madhucchanda,  Naya,  Krta, 
Deva,  Dhruva,  A^faka,  Kacebapa  and  Purana  were  the  other 
sons  of  Vii^mitra.  The  Gotras  (spiritual  lines)  of  those  noble* 
souled  Kau^ikas  are  innumerable.* 

94-97.  These  following  are  remembered  as  Kausikas: 
Parthivas,  Devaratas,  YajAavaIkyas»  Samar^nas,  Udumbaras, 
Udumlanas»  Tarakas,  YamamuAcatas,  Lohinyas,  Re^avas, 
Kari^us,  BabhruSj  PaQinsi  Dhyana-Japyas,  Snlavatyas,  Hirapya* 
kfas,  Syankrtas,  Galavas,  Devalas,  Yamadutas,  Salankayanas^ 
Ba^kalas,  and  many  other  descendants  of  the  intelligent  VHvi^ 
mitra.  They  entered  into  matrimonial  alliance  with  the 
families  of  other  sages. 

98.  Some  other  families  of  the  Brahmar$i  Kauiika,  the 
holy  descendant  of  Pururavas  are  :  So  Animas  and  Saindhava* 
yanas. 

99.  A^taka,  born  of  Driadvatl,  was  also  Vi^vamitra*s  son. 
As^aka’s  sons  (and  descendants)  constituting  the  Jahnu  family 
have  already  been  recounted  by  me. 

Th^  Sages  enquired : 

100.  What  are  the  cbaracterutics  of  Dharma,  penance  and 
learning  whereby  Brahmana-hood  was  attained  by  Visvamitra 
and  other  kings  ? 

101.  What  are  the  various  names  under  which  the 
K^triyas  who  had  attained  Brahmapa-hood  (are  known  ?).  We 
wish  to  know  the  special  features  of  the  penance  and  cliaritable 
gifts  (whereby  they  had  attained  the  same) . 


1.  Thii  confimis  the  suny  in  the  Brdhmatia,  though 

rcleaie  from  bonds  by  his  prayer  of  Varuoa  is  not  mentioned  here. 
Vilvlmltra  adopted  him  as  a  too. 

2.  The  list  of  Gotr^  ofKaufikaeUn  given  in  vv.  91-97  ii  incomplete 
(piA  Mi.  P.  A  Study,  pp.  406-409). 


29,102-114  707 

102,  Thus  requested,  he  (5u^)  spoke  these  meaningful 
wofdsx 

Even  if  a  man  is  desirous  of  acquirit^  Dharma  and  his 
mind  is  engaged  in  Yajfta,  he  does  not  attain  the  fruit  of 
holy  rites  if  he  gathers  the  requisites  thereof  by  means  of  illegal¬ 
ly  acquired  wealth. 

103-106.  A  sinful  soul,  a  base  man,  may  give  charitable 
gifts  to  Brahmanas  after  proclaiming  his  intention  to  perform 
righteous  deeds  to  the  people  out  of  hypocrisy.  An  uncontrol¬ 
led  man  overwhelmed  by  passion  and  delusion  may  perform 
severe  Japas  and  in  the  end  may  give  charitable  gifts  for  the 
purpose  of  sanctifying  himslf.  But  these  charitable  gifts  offered 
by  him  do  not  yield  fruits.  The  charitable  gifts  of  a  wicked- 
souled  man  indulging  in  violence,  do  not  stay  (i.e.  do  not  yield 
fruits)  even  if  he  engaged  himself  in  holy  rites.  Similarly  the 
Dinas  offered  by  one  who  has  amassed  wealth  by  painful 
violent  deeds  also  do  not  fructify. 

107-108.  Riches  acquired  by  just  (proper)  means  must  be 
gifted  to  pious,  deserving  persons.  If  one  performs  Yajhas  and 
makes  charitable  gifts  without  harbouring  any  specific  desire  in 
his  mind,  he  attains  the  fruits  of  that  Dina.  His  Dina  results 
in  happiness.  One  attains  enjoyment  through  DJna  and  goes 
to  heaven  through  truthfulness. 

109.  By  means  of  well-perfomied  penance  one  pervades 
the  worlds  and  stays.  After  fixing  himself  firm  in  the  worlds 
that  brilliant  person  enjoys  everlasting  (bliss) . 

110.  Tajia  is  more  beneficial  than  Dina  Penance  is  more 
beneficial  than  Tajna.  Renunciation  is  more  beneficial  than 
penance,  and  Jnana  (perfect  wisdom)  is  remembered  as  better 
than  that. 

111-114.  It  is  reported  that  the  twice-born  castes  who  were 
born  as  K^atriyas  attained  Brahmana-hood  by  penance,^  e.g. 
Viivamitra,  King  Mandhata,  Sankrti,  Kapl,  Kapi's  son  Puru- 
kutsa,  Satya,  Anrhavan,  Prihu,  Arstlsc^a,  Ajairudha, 
Bhaganya(?)  Anya,  Kaksiva,  Sijaya,  and  many  other  heroic 
ones,  Rachitara,  Runda,  V49uvrddha  and  other  kings.  These 
are  remembered  as  sages  with  K^atra  qualities  who  attained 


1.  This  it  an  e  vidence  of  social  mobility  in  ancient  India. 

2.  Bharsmfjema  in  Bd.  P. 


708  VijuPurSf^ 

sagehood  due  to  penance.  All  these  saintly  kings  attained  great 
Siddhis. 

Henceforth  I  shall  recount  the  race  of  AyU|  the  noble 
soul. 


CHAPTER  THIRTY* 

The  Origin  of  Dhanomtari^i  Vilrdnasi  Cursid\ 

RajVs  Exploits 

SHta  said  : 

U2*  O  Brahmanas,  five  noble^souled  sons  of  great  strength 
were  bom  of  Prabha  as  the  sons  of  Svarbhanu.  Nahufa  was 
the  first  among  them.  The  next  one  is  remembered  as  Putra« 
dharmi^.  Dharmavrddha*s  (K^travrddha’s?)  son  was  Suta* 
hotra  (Sunahotra?)  of  great  fame. 

3.  Sutahotra^s  successors  were  three  extremely  righteous 
ones,  viz.  Ka^a,  Sala  and  lord  Gitsamada. 

4*5.  8unaka  was  the  son  of  Gftsamada  and  his  son  was 
Saunaka.  In  his  race  Brahmanas,  Vaiiyas  and  Sudras  were 
born  as  a  result  of  their  diverse  Karmans.  O  Brahmana,  Salads 
son  was  Ar^Ji^na  and  Caranta  was  his  son. 

6.  The  Saunakas  and  the  Ar^tise^s  were  Br^ma^as 
endowed  with  qualities  characteristic  of  Ksatriyas.  Kama’s 
sons  were  K^aya,  Ras^  and  Dlrghatapas. 

7.  Dharma  was  the  son  of  Dlrghatapas.  The  scholarly 
Dhanvantari  was  his  son.  He  was  of  great  brilliance  due  to  his 


] .  This  Chapter  conesponds  to  Qi.  2.3.67  in  Bd.  P.  The  references  are  to 
Verses  of  the  chapter  in  Bd.  F. 

2.  As  stated  at  the  end  of  the  last  chapter,  this  chapter  describes  the  race 
of  Xyu  who  ruled  at  Kasl.  Dhanvantari,  the  famous  phyveian^king,  the 
founder  oS  the  systeiaatic  seieace  of  Ayurveda  was  born  in  Ayu^s  lineage. 
Hence  the  title  specifically  ref.;!!  to  him  in  preference  to  his  forebears. 

3.  Kfatravrddha  in  Bd.  P.  A  line  is  ntisfing  here.  Bd.  P«  supplies  the 
names  of  the  remaioing  three  sons  vis.  Raxhbha,  Raji  and  Aoenas  (Bd.P* 
Op^  Cit,  v,  2). 


30.8-15 


709 


penance.  He  was  bom  to  that  intelligent  king,  when  he  bad 
become  old. 

Then  the  sages  asked  Suta  in  the  following  words. 

Th$  Sages  asked: 

8.  How  was  Dhanvantari>  a  god>  born  among  human 
beings? 

We  wish  to  know  ibis.  Please  explain  this  matter  which  is 
pleasing  to  us. 

Suta  said  : 

9.  O  Br&hma^af,  may  the  origin  of  Dhanvantari  be  heard. 
He  was  born  formerly  when  the  ocean  was  being  churned  for 
the  sake  of  nectar. 

10.  He  was  born  prior  to  everyone.'  He  was  enveloped 
in  a  halo  of  glory  all  round.  On  seeing  him  with  perfectly 
shaped  limbs,  (gods)  stood  surprised  and  said,  **You  are  Aja 
(the  unborn)  Hence  he  is  remembered  as  Aja. 

11.  Aja  spoke  to  Vi^nu:  lord,  most  excellent  of 

gods,  I  am  your  son.  Please  assign  me  my  share  (in 
Tajna):^ 

12>14.  Thus  addressed,  the  lord  looked  at  him  and  said: 
^^Thc  share  in  Tajfia  has  already  been  allotted  by  Suras 
who  arc  worthy  of  Yajoas.  The  Hotna  in  accordance  with 
the  Vedic  mantras  has  already  been  laid  down  by  the  great 
sages.  It  is  never  posuble  to  arrange  for  another  Homa  similar 
to  it.  O  god,  you  are  a  later  born  son  (of  mine).  O  lord, 
your  name  alone  is  a  mantra^  You  will  become  famous  in 
your  next  birth. 

IS.  Even  while  in  the  womb,  you  will  have  the  Siddhi 
(spiritual  powers)  of  Assima  (minuteness)  etc.  O  lord, 
with  that  very  physical  body,  you  will  ^  attain  Deva-hood. 
Brahmanas  will  perform  TajHas  for  you  by  means  of  Cams, 
mantras,  ghee  and  scents  as  offerings. 


1.  'before  the  emerscace  of  the  pot  of  nectar*  a  bettei 
reading  in  Bd«P.  v<  U. 

2.  tapa  mantre  na  eei  prebho  *oo  mantra  is  anignablc  to  you*  (Bd.P.  v.  15}« 


710 


PutQ^ 


16.  You  ^vill  propound  the  Ayurveda  system  of  medicine. 
This  is  bound  to  happen  surely.  It  has  been  already  ordained 
by  the  Iotus«bom  deity  (Brahmi) . 

17.  In  the  second  Dvapara  Yuga.  you  wilt  undoubtedly 
be  born.*’  Then  after  granting  him  the  boon,  Vij^u  vanished 
from  there. 

18.  At  the  advent  of  the  second  Dvapara  Yuga,  the  king 
of  Ka^i  Dirghatapas  belonging  to  the  family  of  Sunahotra, 
performed  a  penance  with  desire  for  a  son. 

19.  The  king  propitiated  Deva  Aja  (i.e.  Dhanvantari)  for 
the  sake  of  a  son.  The  delighted  Dhanvantari  offered  the  king 
the  choice  of  a  boon.  The  King  requested: 

20.  lord,  if  you  are  satisBed,  be  pleased  to  be  born  as 
my  righteous  son/*  After  agreeing  to  it  saying  be  it’*,  he 
vanished  there  itself. 

21.  God  Dhanvantari  was  born  in  his  house.  The  great 
king,  king  ofK&ii  became  the  destroyer  of  all  ailments. 

22.  Sage  Bharadvaja  created  the  science  of  Ayurveda 
along  with  its  therapeutics/  The  king  divided  it  into  eight 
parts  and  taught  them  to  his  disciples. 

23.  Dhanvantari’s  son  was  famous  by  the  name 
Ketuman.  Ketuman’s  son  was  the  powerful  king  Blilmaratha. 
He  was  famous  by  the  name  Divodasa^  and  he  was  the  king  of 
Varanasi. 

24.  In  the  meanwhile,  the  city  of  Varanasi  had  become 
desolate  and  a  Rak^sa  named  Ksen^ka  occupied  it. 


1.  Though  our  text  does  not  menCioQ  it,  Bd.P.  2.3.67.  29-24  inforxiu  uj 
that  Dhanvantari  learnt  Ayunefia(iht  science  of  medidne)  along  with  ita 
therapeutics  from  Bharadvaja.  Dbanvantaii  divided  it  into  eight  sections 
and  taught  them  to  different  disciples. 

2.  He  b  regarded  as  the  contemporary  of  Daaaratha  of  the  Iksvaku 
dynasty  of  Ayodbyi  It  was  during  hb  reign  that  god  Siva  occupied  it  by 
Brsi  making  it  desolate  through  crafly  machinadoo  of  one  of  his  chief 
Gaou  (aptly  called  demon)  Ktemaka.  To  get  a  Bourbhiog  capital  city 
vacated  for  one’s  honey-moon  in  the  manner  described  later  (w.  36*53  ) 
b  not  creditable  to  a  great  god  ie.  &va. 


30.25-35 


711 


25«  Formerly  that  city  had  been  cursed  by  the  noble^souled 
Nikuihbha,  *The  city  (of  Varai^s!)  will  be  desolate  for  a 
thousand  year8^  He  had  repeated  the  curse  many  times. 

26.  As  soon  as  the  city  was  cursedi  Divodasa  the  king, 
founded  a  beautiful  city  on  the  banks  of  Gomatl,  near  the 
extremities  of  his  realm. 

The  Sages  said : 

27.  Why  did  Nikuinbha  curse  V^anasI  in  the  days  of 
yore  ?  Nikuihbha  was  a  righteous  soul.  Why  did  he  curse  the 
holy  centre  of  Siddbas  ? 

Suta  said : 

28.  After  gaining  the  city,  King  Divodasa,  the  saintly 
king  of  great  splendour  lived  in  that  flourishing  city. 

29.  In  the  meantime,  Mahesvara  who  had  married  (Um&) 
stayed  near  the  Devas*  and  desired  to  do  what  was  pleasing  to 
the  goddess. 

30.  His  attendants  and  the  saints  assuming  various  forms 
continued  to  delight  the  great  godddess  by  means  of  their 
diverse  forms  mentioned  before. 

3 1 .  Mahadeva  used  to  be  delighted  with  them,  but  Mena 
was  not  at  all  pleased.  Everyday  she  began  to  abhor  the  lord 
and  goddess. 

32.  (She  said  to  Uma)  **Your  husband  Mahesvara  is 
carrying  on  ill-mannered  activities  in  (my)  presence.  O  sinless 
girl,  he  is  by  all  means  very  indigent.  Without  wearying  him¬ 
self  out,  he  sports  and  dallies*’. 

33.  On  being  thus  taunted  by  her  mother,  she  did  not 
brook  it  as  was  but  natural  to  women.  After  smiling  (at  the 
words  of  her  mother)  the  goddess,  the  granter  of  boons,  went 
near  Kara  (Siva). 

34.  With  a  dejected  face  the  goddess  sjloke  to  Mahadeva: 
•‘O  my  lord,  I  will  not  stay  here.  Take  me  to  your  abode**. 

35.  Thus  requested,  the  great  god,  Mabeivara  of  great 
splendour,  surveyed  all  the  worlds.  O  excellent  Brahma^as,  he 


*A*  reads  Svaiit'antik4  *near  (at  the  residczwe  of}  hii  father-in-law*. 


712  VtyuPtffifta 

liked  Vara^asif  the  holy  centre  of  the  Siddhas  on  the  earth,  as 
his  residence* 

36.  On  knowing  that  that  city  was  occupied  by  Divodasa, 
he  called  K^emaka,  the  chief  of  Gsi^as  who  was  by  his  side  and 
spoke  to  him  : 

37*  lord  of  the  Ga^.  Go  to  Vara^sl  and  make  it 
desolate.  You  must  employ  soft  and  subtle  means.  That  king  is 
extremely  valorous 

38-39*  Nikumbha  then  went  to  the  city  of  VkranasI  and 
revealed  himself  to  a  barber  named  Mahkana  in  his  dream  and 
said,  sinless  one,  I  shall  bring  welfare  unto  you.  Assign  a 
place  for  me.  Make  an  image  of  my  form  and  place  it  at  the 
outskirt  of  the  city.*’ 

40.  O  Brahma^,  the  barber  did  everything  in  accordance 
with  what  he  was  told  in  dream.  After  gettii:^  the  permission 
of  the  king,  he  did  everything  duly  at  the  gate  of  the  city* 

41-42.  Everyday  splendid  worship  was  offered  with  scents, 
incense,  garlands  etc.  Food  was  offered.  The  whole  thing  was 
wonderful.  Thus  the  lord  of  Ga^  was  worshipped  there 
everyday. 

43.  He  used  to  grant  thousands  of  boons  to  the  people  of 
the  city,  such  as  sons,  gold,  longevity  and  similar  desires. 

44.  The  senior  quecn-consort  of  the  king  was  well-known 
by  the  name  Suyasa.  That  chaste  lady  was  urged  by  the  king 
and  she  came  (to  that  deity)  with  a  desire  to  have  a  son. 

45.  She  performed  (his)  worship  on  a  grand  scale  and 
requested  him  for  sons.  She  frequented  (the  shrine)  again  and 
again  for  (the  boon  of  getting)  a  son. 

46.  There  was  a  reason  behind  Nikumbha’s  not  granting 
sons.  If  the  king  were  to  be  infuriated  something  could  be 
done. 

47-50.  After  the  lapse  of  a  long  period,  the  king  became 
furious.  (He  thought)  *This  spirit  at  the  main  gate  delightedly 
bestows  hundreds  of  boons  on  the  town-people  but  does  not 
do  anything  (for  me).  In  my  city  he  is  worshipped  by  my 
people.  He  has  been  worshipped  by  my  queen  there  for  that 
specific  reason.  Though  he  eats  much,  he  does  not  grant  me 
a  son.  He  is  ungrateful.  Hence  he  does  not  deserve  further 


30.51-65 


713 


worship  at  all  by  me.  So,  I  shall  destroy  the  abode  of  the 
chief  of  Ganas.  He  was  evil-minded  (indeed) 

51.  Having  determined  thus  that  wicked,  sinful  and  evil- 
minded  king  destroyed  that  sacred  place  of  the  chief  of  Ganas. 

52-53.  On  seeing  the  shrine  shattered,  the  lord  {of  Ganas) 
approached  the  king  (and  said),  king,  since,  without  any 
offence  on  my  part,  my  shrine  has  been  destroyed  by  you,  the 
city  will  be  void  and  desolate  all  of  a  sudden”.  Then,  due  to 
that  curse  Varanasi  became  desolate. 

54.  Nikumbha  brought  Mahadeva  to  that  desolate  cursed 
city.  Maliadeva  rebuilt  that  desolate  city  by  means  of  (the 
powers  of)  his  great  soul. 

55.  The  city  was  bcBtting  the  Vibh&ti  (prosperity  and 
gloiy)  of  the  gfxldcss  and  the  lord.  The  goddess  sported  tlicre, 
even  as  lord  Mahe^vara  too  sported  there. 

56.  But  the  goddess  did  not  derive  (permanent)  pleasure 
due  to  her  surprise  at  the  (peculiar)  house.  For  the  sake  of 
playing  with  the  goddess,  lord  Isana  spoke  these  words. 

57-58.  shall  not  abandon  my  abode.  My  abode  is 
Avimukta^  (unabandoned^  He  laughed  and  spoke  again  to 
her:  ^^My  abode  is  Avimvkla^  O  Goddess,  1  shall  not  go  away 
(from  here).  You  may  go.  1  shall  sport  here*’.  Hence  indeed 
it  is  Avirmikta  since  it  was  said  so  by  the  lord  himself. 

59.  This  is  the  story  of  how  the  city  of  Varwasi  was 
cursed  and  then  glorified  as  *Avinmkta\  In  it  lives  the  lord 
revered  by  all  Devas  in  the  three  Yugas.  The  pious-souled 
Mahe^vara  is  accompained  by  the  goddess  also. 

bO.  He  vanished  during  the  Kali  age.  That  city  of  the 
great  soul  is  rcoccupied  by  the  people  when  the  lord  vanishes, 

61-63.  Thus  Varanasi  was  cursed  and  was  re-inhabited. 
King  Divodasa  killed  king  Bhadrasrenya’s  one  hundred 
sons  who  were  noted  for  their  mastery  in  anzhery  and  occupied 
(his  capital).  The  kingdom  of  Bhadrasre^ya  was  usurped  by 
that  powerful  king.  But  the  son  of  Bhadrasre^ya  named  Dur- 
dama  was  let  off  by  Divodasa,  out  of  mercy,  thinking  that  he 
was  only  a  boy. 

64-65.  Heroic  Pracardana  was  born  of  Divodisa  and  Dr^- 
1.  This  explains  why  Var^asl  b  called  'Avimukta*. 


714 


Vdja  Purd^a 


dvatl.  The  son  (of  Bhadrasrenya)  desirous  of  wreaking  revenge 
recaptured  it  (kingdom).  Pratardana  had  two  sons,  Vatsa  and 
Garga,  who  became  well-known. 

66.  Vatsa's  son  was  Alarka  and  his  son  was  Sannati.  These 
two  old  verses  are  sung  about  the  saintly  king  Alarka. 

67-69.  ^‘Alarka  ruled  as  excellent  king  of  KaS  for  sixtysix 
thousand  years.  He  was  endowed  with  handsome  features  and 
he  maintained  hisyouth(all  along).  Heattainedbis  great  longe¬ 
vity  by  the  grace  of  Lopamudra.**  At  the  end  of  the  period  of 
curse,  he  killed  the  Rak^asa  K$emaka  and  rebuilt  the  beautiful 
city  of  Varanasi. 

70.  Sannati*8  successor  was  the  righteous  king  named 
Sunitha.  Sun!tba*s  successor  was  the  pious  Suketu. 

71.  It  is  heard  that  Suketu *$  son  was  Dharmaketu.  Heroic 
Satyaketu  was  the  successor  of  Dharmaketu. 

72.  Satyaketu's  son  was  the  king  named  Vibhu.  Suvibhu 
was  the  son  of  Vibhu  and  Sukumara  was  his  son. 

73.  Sukumara’s  son  was  Dhrs^aketu.  He  was  very  virtuous. 
Dhr^taketu’s  successor  was  the  king  Venuhotra. 

74.  Venuhotra^s  son  was  Gargya.  He  was  very  famous. 
Vatsya  was  the  sen  of  the  intelligent  Vatsa. 

75.  The  sons  of  these  two  were  very  virtuous  Br^manaa 
and  K^atriyaa.  They  were  strong,  valorous  and  famoiis  for  their 
leonine  exploits. 

76.  Thus  these  kings  of  Kaii  have  been  enumerated.  Now 
listen  and  understand  the  (descendants)  of  Raji.  Raji  had  a 
hundred  sons.  Two  of  them  were  very  powerful  and  well-known 
on  the  earth  as  the  group  of  kings  **Rajcya’^  Those  Ksatriyas 
caused  terror  to  Indra  too. 

77.  When  a  terrible  war  broke  out  between  Devas  and 
Asuras^,  both  of  them  spoke  to  Pitamaha  (god  Brahma) . 

78.  “O  lord  of  all  the  tvorlds,  G  great  lord,  who  will  be 
vicloriotis  in  the  battle  belwc'cn  us.  Please  tell  us.  We  all  w’  b 
to  hear.’* 

Bra  Am  d  said  : 

79.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  they  on  whose  behalf 

1.  ThUb  the  twelfth  (sad  the  last)  war  between  Devu  and  Amrat  ai 
far  as  Furaoic  records  are  concerned. 


30.80-90 


715 


lord  Raji  takes  up  arms  in  the  battle  and  lights,  will  con« 
qucr  the  three  worlds. 

80.  Wlierc  there  is  Raji,  there  will  be  Laksm!  (fortune, 
wealth).  Where  there  is  Lak^t,  there  is  fortitude.  Dkarma 
abides  where  there  is  fortitude  and  where  there  is  Dharma^  there 
is  victory, 

81.  On  hearing  about  the  victorious  (•ness  of)  Raji,  Devas 
and  Danavas  approached  the  excellent  king.  They  eulogised 
him  as  they  wished  for  success. 

82.  With  a  delighted  heart,  all  Devas  and  Danavas 
requested  the  king:  ‘‘Please  lake  up  your  excellent  bow  for 
enabling  us  to  be  victorious.** 

Raji  replied  : 

83.  1  will  defeat  you  all  in  the  battle,  as  well  as 
Devas  led  by  Sakra.  I  shall  become  ilic  righteous*souled  Indra 
and  then  shall  I  fight  in  the  battle. 


Ddn 


ssaid  : 


84.  Our  Indra  is  Prahlada.  We  shall  be  victorious  on  his 
behalf.  O  king,  please  stand  by  this  agreement  urged  by  our 
Lord. 


85.  Even  as  he  was  about  to  say,  '*So  be  it'*  he  was  urged 
by  Devas  also.  He  was  invited  by  Devas  saying,  “After 
conquering  you  will  become  Indra.*’ 

86*88.  He  killed  all  the  Danavas  in  front  of  Indra  (who 
was  armed  with  thunderbolt) .  He  was  endowed  with  self-con¬ 
trol  and  the  greatest  prosperity.  Lord  Raji  killed  all  Dana¬ 
vas  and  redeemed  the  lost  glory  of  Devas.  Accompanied  by 
Devas,  Satakratu  (Indra)  spoke  to  Raji,  “I  am  Raji’s  son**, 
and  continued  as  follows,  “O  king,  there  is  no  doubt  in  this 
that  you  are  Indra  of  all  Devas.  O  dcstrc;ycr  of  enemies,  O, 
Indra,  I  shall  become  renowned  as  your  sou'*. 

89.  On  hearing  the  words  of  8akra,  Jie  was  deceived  by 
him  by  means  of  his  Maya.  The  delighted  king  said,  “So  be 
it’*. 

90.  When  that  king  who  was  on  par  with  Devas  attain¬ 
ed  heaven,  Raji’s  sons  took  away  ail  the  legacies  from  Indra. 


716 


Purd^a 


91.  Those  hundred  sons  forcibly  occupied  most  of  the 
region  of  Sv(7rga  (heaven) ,  the  abode  of  the  consort  of  Sad. 

92.  When  a  long  period  elapsed,  the  powerful  Indra  whose 
kingdom  was  seized  and  whose  share  in  sacrifices  was  conflscated 
spoke  to  Bfhiispati: 

93.  Br^mana  sage,  please  allot  Purod&^^  (sacrificial 
oblation)  unto  me  at  least  of  the  size  of  the  fruit  of  Badnrl  (the 
jujube  irce)  whereby  I  can  sustain  myself  with  my  splendour 
developed  further. 

94.  O  Brahma^a,  be  pleased  with  me.  My  kingdom  has 
been  seized  by  the  sons  of  Rnji.  My  food  has  been  taken  away. 
I  have  been  rendered  devoid  of  prowess,  emaciated,  eonlbunded 
by  the  sons  of  Raji.” 

95.  O  Sakra,  if  only  I  had  been  urged  by  you  earlier  in 
this  matter,  this  would  not  have  happened.  O  sinless  one,  tlicre 
is  nothing  that  should  not  be  done  for  the  sake  of  phrasing  you. 

96.  O  Devendra,  O  highly  spicndoured  one,  I  shall  ende¬ 
avour  for  your  welfare  so  that  you  will  regain  your  shntc  ui  the 
Yajila  as  well  as  your  kingdom  ere  long. 

97.  O  ^ukra,  I  shall  go  (now).  Let  not  your  njiud  be 
dejected. 

Thereafter,  he  performed  such  great  rites  ns  increased 
ludra’s  splendour. 

98.  The  Inghly  intelligent  (Brhaspati)  created  delusion  in 
the  iutcllecis  of  those  (sons  of  Raji).  They  became  devoid  of 
DJiarma  aiid  mad  with  passion. 

99.  They  became  haters  of  Bralunanas.  Hence  llxey  became 
deprived  of  their  virility  and  exploit.  So  (Zudra)  regained  the 
glory  of  Suras  and  liis  former  excellent  position  (of  Indra-hood). 

100.  He  killed  all  tlic  sons  of  Rajiwho  were  overwhelmed 
with  lust  and  anger.  He  who  listens  to  this  story  of  Raji  or  the 
holy  rehabilitation  of  Satakratu  will  never  meet  with  evil. 


3hN5 


717 


CHAPTER  THIRTYONE' 

TTu  Story  of 

The  Sages  said  : 

1.  How  was  his  daughter  given  to  the  king  by  Maruta,* 
the  great  soul  ?  Of  what  prowess  were  the  daughters  of 
Maruta  born  with  great  souls^  (?) 

Srda  sold : 

2.  Endowed  with  great  splendour  yet  desirous  of  food, 
the.  king  performed  the  sacrifice  Manti^Sonia  to  Prajesvava  every 
month,  for  sixty  years. 

3.  Thcreliy  the  Marut«gods  were  pleased  by  the  Marut- 
Soma  sacrifice  of  that  king,  and  granted  him  never-ending 
food  with  requisites  for  the  fulfilment  of  all  desires. 

4.  His  food,  cooked  once,  never  got  exhausted  during  that 
day  and  night  even  though  given  to  cnires  (of  people)  right 
from  sunrise. 

5.  Mitrajyoti  was  born  of  the  daughter  of  the  intelligent 
Maruta.  From  him  were  born  (sons)  of  great  strength,  knowers 
of  Dharnia  and  seen  of  salvation. 


1.  This  chapter  corresponds  to  Bd.P.  2.3.68.  Toe  comparison  or  reference 
only  the  verse  number  is  quoted. 

2.  This  immortal  story  witli  a  profound  moral  is  repeated  in  many 
Pur.ipas.  The  story  w  originally  given  in  details  in  Mbh  A^i.  Chs,  84  and 
85.  The  immortal  verse  uttered  by  Yayati  : 

najatu  kimoh  kamunSm  ttpahhogena  Mmyati  I 
kaoifd  krsoo^uarimeoa  bhUjea  epd'lfdodTdfuOe  // 
has  been  quoted  in  Puranas.  It  lias  been  the  main  theme  of  aii  epochs 
making  Marullil  novel  Tqydii  by  V.S.  Kbaodekar,  which  secured  the  much 
coveted  Bharatiya  JiiAi^apitha  Prize. 

3.  Verses  1-1 1  speak  of  Maruta  and  Mitrajyoti  *and  his  descendants.  But 
they  are  unrelated  to  the  main  story  of  tlus  chapter. 

4.  The  reading in  the  (ext  translated  above  is  contra¬ 

dictory  and  obscure.  If  emended  :  jdtd  mdruia-kanyard  (as  in  Bd.  P.  2. 3*88. 1) 
meaning  *(of  what  heroic  ability  were  the  noble  •soulcd  persons)  born  of 
tAtf  dr»ts*,  it  gives  cogentness.  The  references  to  the  Bd.P.  are 

(o  the  above-mentioned  chapter.  Only  verse  number  is  quoted  in  theie 
notes. 


718 


VByu  Purdpa 


6.  After  renouncing  domestic  rites  ( the  duties  of  house* 
holders) ,  they  resorted  to  detachment.  Maintaining  the  duties 
of  recluses  (stmnydsins) ,  they  attained  absorption  in  Brahman. 

7.  Anapaya  was  bom  of  him.  His  son  was  Dharmapradat- 
tavan.  Thereafter  was  bom  Ksatradharma  and  from  him 
Pratipak^a  (Pretipaka  in  Bd.  P. )  of  great  penance. 

8.  Pratipakfa’s  son  named  Sahjaya  was  well-known.  Jay  a 
was  the  son  of  Sat\jaya  and  Vijaya  was  born  of  him. 

9.  Vijaya’s  son  was  Jaya  ( the  second)  and  his  son  is 
remembered  as  Haryandvata  and  Haryandvata’s  sou  was  the 
valorous  king  Sahadeva. 

10.  Sahadeva*s  son  was  virtuous*souled.  He  was  well- 
known  as  Adina.  Adina*s  son  was  Jayatsena  and  his  son  was 
SaAkrti. 

11.  Sank|'ti*s  son  was  the  pious-souled  Krtadharma  of 
great  fame.  These  were  fully  endowed  with  K^^tra  qualities*. 
Now  understand  (the  descendants)  of  Nahu^a. 

12.  Nahum's  successors  were  six.  They  had  the  brilliance 
comparable  to  that  of  Indra.  These  sons  of  great  prowess  were 
born  ofVlraja,  the  daughter  of  the  PItrs. 

13.  They  were  Yati,  Yayati»  Saniyati»  Ayati  and  the 
twins  Viyati,  Ki  ti,  (Bd.  P.)  who  were  the  fifth- bom  (?)  Yati 
was  the  eldest  of  them  and  Yayati  was  the  younger  brother. 

14.  Yati  attained  Ga  (Gau)»  the  daughter  of  Kakutstha  as 
wife.  Samyati  became  a  sage.  Attaining  absolution,  he  became 
one  with  Brahman. 

15.  Among  the  (other)  five,  Yayati  became  a  king.  He 
attained  Devayam,  the  daughter  of  Usanas,  as  his  wife. 

16.  He  married  the  Asura  lady  Sarmi^tha,  the  daughter 
of  Vr?aparvan.  Devayani  gave  birth  to  Yadu  and  Turvasu. 

17.  Sarmistha,  the  daughter  of  Vr$aparvan,  gave  birth 
to  very  powerful  sons  comparable  to  divine  sons,  viz.  Druhyu, 
Anu  and  Puru. 

18.  The  delighted  Rudra  gave  liJm  a  divine  golden  charioi 
that  shone  briUiantly  and  that  could  never  get  stuck  up  (im¬ 
peded).  He  gave  him  two  great  inexhaustible  quivers  also. 

*were  the  descerdimts  of  Ksairadharma 


3L19-26 


719 


19.  That  chariot  was  fltted  with  horses  as  fast  as  the  mind. 
It  was  in  this  chariot  that  he  drove  at  the  time  of  his  marri^e. 
With  the  same  important  chariot  he  conquered  the  earth. 

20.  Yayati  was  invincible  in  battle  to  Devas,  Danavas 
and  human  beings.  That  chariot  belonged  to  all  the  Paurava 
kings. 

21 .  It  remained  with  them  upto  the  time  of  Kaurava  Jana* 
mejaya  i)orn  of  a  good  land(?)  The  chariot  got  lost  through  the 
curse  of  the  son  of  Gargd«  the  intelligent  sage,  when  Pariksit*s 
son  became  a  king. 

22.  The  unwise  king  Janamejaya  ( the  first)  who  was  evil* 
minded  and  was  known  as  Loha'^gaudhin^  (having  the  odour  of 
iron)  killed  the  (young)  sonofGargya. 

23.  The  saintly  king  with  iron  odour  began  to  run  here 
and  there.  He  was  al>andoncd  by  tlie  citizens  and  the  people  of 
the  land.  Nowhere  did  he  derive  happiness. 

24.  He  was  extremely  miserable.  He  did  not  get  peace 
anywhere.  Excessively  dejected,  be  sought  refuge  in  the  sage 
who  was  the  cause  of  liis  curse.* 

25.  The  sage  of  liberal  mind  was  famous  by  the  name 
Inclrota.  This  Indrota,  the  excellent  Brahmana,  a  descendant  of 
Sunaka,  made  the  king  perform  «an  Asvamedlia  for  the  sake 
of  purification. 

26.  After  reaching  his  abode,  the  iron-ore  odour  was 
quelled,*  That  divine  chariot  left  liim  and  reached  Vasu,  the 
king  of  Cedi. 


1.  Emend  as  in  Bd.P.  V.  22,  05  synuclically  the  text  here  is  obscure. 
The  text  i  Ltihagandham  mrddhipmn  b  emended  as  Lohn^andhi  narddkipahf  at 
in  Bd.P. 

2.  The  text  is  confusing.  The  king  did  not  take  resort  to  Gargya  who 

cursed  him  (ace  V.  22 abeve)  but  Indrota  ^aunaka  (tee  the  next  verse). 

The  reading  in  Bd.  P.68.24:  « r;«n— ‘he  resorted  to  the 
sage  Saunaka*  is  relevant  and  deserves  adoption. 

3.  Bd.  P.  V.  26  reads  atdthrAa  for  aimatha  hereof  and  roeani,  *The  king 
died  when  be  reached  (he  Avabhnba  stage  of  the  sacrifice*.  The  Bd.  P» 
reading  is  preferable  for  if  the  curse  of  iron  odour  was  removed  and  the 
king  was  rehabilitated,  the  divine  chariot  should  have  continued  with  him. 


720 


Pur^a 


27.  Then  it  was  obtained  by  Sakra  who  was  delighted. 
From  him,  Brhadratha  got  it.  Killir^  Jarasandha  afterwards, 
Bhima,  the  scion  of  Kaurava  family,  gave  that  excellent 
chariot  to  V^udeva  with  pleasure. 

28.  Attaining  old  age,  the  saintly  kingYayati,  the  son  of 
Nahu$a,  spoke  these  words  to  his  eldest  and  most  excellent  son 
Yadu : 

29.  dear  one,  old  ago,  wrinkles  and  greying  hairs  have 
come  over  (surrounded)  me  due  to  the  curse  of  Uianas, 
Kavya  (i.e.  Sukra).  Nor  am  I  fully  satiated  with  youthful 
age. 

30.  O  Yadu,  accept  all  my  sins  along  with  my  old  age. 
Take  my  old  agc'\  Yadu  replied  to  him  : 

31.  have  promised  to  give  alms  to  Bralimanas  but 
have  not  given,  Tliat  can  be  achieved  only  by  exertion.  (So) 
I  will  not  take  up  your  old  age. 

32.  There  arc  many  defects  and  ailments  in  old  age  aifcct- 
iiig  (the  abilility  to)  drink  and  eai.  Hcncc,  O  king,  I  am  not 
enthusiastic  enough  to  accept  your  old  age. 

33-34.  In  tlic  prime  of  youth,  Itio  not  wish  to  become  a 
pitiable  figure  with  white  moustache  <uid  beard,  shattered  (in 
every  limb)  by  old  age,  (skin)  with  many  a  wrinkle,  with  the 
body  bent  down,  faced  with  a  miserable  state,  the  very  form 
incHcafing  weakness,  and  incompetent  to  perform  any  action. 
I  would  be  ovcrwhclmc<l  (attacked)  by  great  fi  ightful  effects. 
I  do  not  desire  thru  old  age. 

35.  O  King,  O  knuwer  of  virtues,  you  do  have  many  sons 
even  more  beloved  than  lam.  May  they  take  it  up.  Please 
request  some  other  son’*. 

36.  On  get tii^  this  rebuflF from  Yadu,  (Yayati)  the  fore¬ 
most  among  the  most  eloquent  ones,  became  infuriated.  Censur¬ 
ing  his  eldest  son,  he  said  thus: 

37-39.  “What  other  A^rama  do  you  have?  What  other 
holy  rile  do  you  have  for  which  you  disregard  me  and  say 
thus?  O  evil-minded  one,  O  new  instructor  !'*  After  saying 
this  the  angry  king  cursed  Yadu  :  ^^Since  you,  though  born  of 
my  bosom,  do  not  pass  on  your  (youthful)  age  unto  me,  O  fool, 
your  progeny  shall  not  get  the  kingdom.**  (Then  he  said  to 
Turvasu)  “O  Turvaau,  accept  my  sin  along  with  my  old  age**. 


31.40-46 


721 


Turvasusaid  : 

40.  O  father,  I  do  not  like  old  age  that  destroys  the 
(worldly)  pleasures  of  love.  There  arc  many  defects  in  old  age 
affecting  (the  ability  to)  drink  and  cat.  Hence,  O  king,  I  am 
not  enthusiatic  enough  to  accept  your  old  age. 

T(rynti  said  : 

41 .  You,  though  born  of  my  bosom,  do  not  exchange  your 
(youthful)  age  with  me;  O  Turvasu,  your  progeny  will  meet 
with  utUT  ruin, 

42-43,  O  deluded  one,  you  will  be  a  king  <iinong  people 
of  mixed  religious  rites  and  practices*,  born  of  anti-caste 
marriages  and  other  mixed  castes,  who  arc  meat-eaters  and 
others.  There  is  no  doubt  that  you  will  be  a  rultT  of  the  brutish 
Mlecchns,  barbarians  and  out  cast  cs  who  arc  after  outraging 
the  mi)de«y  of  their  preceptors'  wives  and  wlio  (arc  destined 
to  bo)  born  as  lower  aniniah. 

Suia  said  l 

44.  After  cursing  liis  own  son  Tttrvasu  tlius,  Yayati  spoke 
these  won  Is  to  liis  son  Dnihyu  born  of  Sarmi§{h^* 

45.  ‘‘()  Druh^ii,  you  accept  iny  old  age  tlial  destroys  your 
complexion  an<l  beauty.  Giveumo  mein  exchange  your  youth 
for  a  period  of  one  thousand  years, 

46.  When  the  thousand  yeai-s  are  completed,  I  shall 
return  your  youth  and  take  back  again  my  sin  along  with  the  old 
age.” 

Druh^u  said  : 

47.  An  old  man  docs  not  enjoy  (a  ride  on)  elephants, 
chariots  and  horses,  nor  can  he  enjoy  a  woman.  He  has  no  one 
to  be  in  contact.  Hence  I  do  not  like  the  o\d  age. 

Tnyati  said  : 

48.  Since  you,  though  bom  out  of  my  own  bosom,  do  not 


ca  dhomt^  U  obscure  a*  in  a  compliment  and  not  a 

parlof  acurjc.  Bd.P.v.  43  reads  :  Uoi^Ovsfu  (a  dhams^a'.  ‘of  mixed  or 
impure  religious  practice*’  is  better.  Hence  accepted  here. 


722 


yityu  Pyrifia 


give  unto  me  your  (youthful)  age,  O  Druhya,  the  pleasures 
that  you  [love  and  seek  will  not  be  realised  by  you  any* 
where. 

49.  You  will  be  perpetually  staying  in  a  place  where  people 
move  about  in  canoes  and  rafts.  You  will  always  be  there  as  a 
aon*ktng  though  bom  of  a  royal  &mily.^ 

50.  (He  said  to  Anu)  O  Anu^  you  accept  my  sin  along 
with  my  old  age.  Thus  I  can  move  about  for  a  thousand  years 
with  your  youth. 

Anu  said  : 

51.  (Defective  verse)*  An  old  man  gives  (the  gift  of  age) 
to  a  child.  (If  I  give  up  my  youth)  I  shall  become  impure  with 
your  old  age.  An  old  man  does  not  perform  Homas  at  the 
proper  time.  I  do  not  like  that  (type  of)  old  age. 

said  : 

52*53.  Since  yoU|  though  bom  out  of  my  own  bosom  do 
not  give  unto  me  your  (youthful)  age,  all  those  defects  of  old 
age  mentioned  by  you  will  visit  (afflict)  you.  Your  children  will 
die  on  attaining  youthful  age.  You  will  have  to  devote  to  the 
scattering  of  Sre  like  this  (after  cremating  your  children) . 

54-56.  (He  then  spoke  to  Puru)  O  Puni,  you  accept  my 
sin  along  with  the  old  age.  O  dear  one,  old  age,  wrinkles  and 
greyish  hairs  have  overwhelmed  me  as  a  result  of  the  curse 
of  Kavya  Uianas  (Sukra) .  I  am  not  satiated  with  the  pleasures 
of  youth.  I  shall  enjoy  the  worldly  pleasures  with  your  youth. 
When  a  period  of  thousand  years  is  completed  I  shall  return 
you  your  youthiul  age.  1  shall  also  take  back  my  own  sin 
along  with  the  old  age. 

SSta  said  t 

57.  Thus  requested,  the  son  immediately  replied  to  his 
father,  father,  1  shall  do  as  you  wish. 


].  ofSJabkrSjMoHUs  Uam  in  the  text  li  ofaecure.  Bd.P.  v.  5!  reads  t  ar^d 
rdjoDC/hSas  tvam  which  is  better  and  is  accepted  here. 

2.  HSmaram  datU  is  obscure  though  translated  above.  For  this  6d. 
F.  92  TCadi : 

Hw  oldmaak  weak  like  a  child'. 


3h^*69 


723 


58.  O  king,  I  accept  your  sin  along  with  your  old 
age.  Take  from  me  my  youthful  ^e.  Enjoy  the  pleasures  as 
you  wish. 

59.  I  shall  become  disguised  by  your  old  age,  assuming 
your  form  smd  ^e.  Giving  up  my  youthful  age,  I  shall  carry 
out  what  would  be  suitable  (to  the  age  assumed) 

Tay^ii  said : 

60.  O  Puni,  I  am  pleased  with  you.  Welfare  unto  you. 
Delightedly  I  grant  this  unto  you.  All  the  subjects  in  your 
kingdom  shall  fiourisb  and  enjoy  all  pleasures  (or  your  progeny 
will  realise  their  desires,  be  affluent  and  rule  over  a  kingdom). 

SOia  said  : 

61.  Permitted  by  Puru  and  by  the  grace  of  Bhkrgava, 
kingYay&ti  transferred  his  old  age  to  Puru. 

62.  By  means  of  the  youthful  age,  Yayati,  the  son  of 
Nahu^a,  became  highly  delighted  and  enjoyed  all  worldly  plea¬ 
sures. 

63.  In  accordance  with  his  desire  and  enthusiasm,  in  a 
way  conducive  to  happiness  and  at  the  proper  time,  the  leading 
king  enjoyed  the  pleasures  without  prejudice  to  virtuousness 
(Dharma)  and  it  was  what  he  alone  deserved. 

64.  He  propitiated  Devas  by  means  of  Tajhas ;  PitfS  by  means 
of  ^rdddkas;  the  poor  people  by  favourable  presents;  and  the 
excellent  Brabmapas  by  whatever  they  desired. 

65.  He  delighted  guests  with  foods  and  drinks;  Vaisyas 
by  affording  due  protection;  and  Sudras  by  (prevention  of 
their  harassment)  showing  kindness.  He  checked  robbers  by 
restraining  and  klllii^  them. 

66.  Duly  delighting  the  subjects  by  means  of  virtuous 
actions,  Yayati  ruled  the  realm  like  another  Indra, 

67.  The  king  of  leonine  exploits  and  youthful  age  indulged 
in  worldly  pleasures.  Without  prejudice  to  Dharma,  he  enjoyed 
excellent  pleasures. 

68*69.  In  the  parks  of  Vaibhraja  and  Nandana,  he  sported 
with  (the  celestial  damsel)  Vifvici.  He  scrutinised  all  sexual 


724 


pleasures  to  find  out  the  hidden  defect^.  When  the  king  saw 
that  the  desire  to  enjoy  was  increasing  the  more  he  er^oyed  it| 
he  approached  Puru  and  took  back  his  own  old  age. 

70.  After  enjoying  the  pleasures  and  desires^  the  king  was 
both  contented  and  dejected.  Tlie  king  then  remembered  the 
stipulated  time-limit  of  one  thousand  years. 

7L  Counting  (even  the  small  units  of  time  such  as) 
Kalds  and  Kdsthds,  he  considered  that  the  time  limit  was 
complete  and  so  he  spoke  to  his  son  Puru: 

72.  son,  O  suppressor  of  enemies,  with  your  youthful 
age,  all  worldly  pleasures  have  been  enjoyed  by  me  in  accor* 
dance  with  my  zeal  befitting  the  time  and  in  a  way  conducive 
to  happiness. 

73.  O  Pfiru,  I  am  delighted.  Welfare  upto  you,  you  take 
back  your  own  youthful  age.  Accept  the  realm  too.  You  alone 
have  been  my  beloved  son  who  carried  out  what  is  pleasing  to 
mt*\ 

74.  King  Yayati,  the  son  of  Nahu^a,  took  back  his  old  age 
and  Puru  regained  his  own  youthful  age. 

75.  When  the  king  evinced  his  desire  to  crown  his  youngest 
son  Puru,  people  of  all  castes  with  Br^mai;ias  as  the  chief 
of  them,  spoke  these  words.^ 

76.  lord,  why  do  you  set  aside  (the  claim  of)  your 
eldest  son,  the  excellent  Yadu,  the  grandson  of&ukra,  the  son 
of  DevayanI,  and  bestow  the  kingdom  on  Puru? 

77.  Yadu  is  your  eldest  son.  Turvasu  was  bom  next  to 
him.  Sarmis{ha*s  eldest  son  is  Druhyu,  then  comes  Anu  and  then 
only  Puru. 

78.  How  can  the  younger  son  deserve  the  kingdom  super¬ 
seding  (the  claims  of)  the  elder  ones?  Hence  we  urge  you  to 
abide  by  the  (traditional)  Dharma/* 


1.  Bd.  P.v.  69  reads  :  atad^dofa^nidafiandt  ‘because  he  f^lcd  to  notice  the 
defects  (of  passionate  indulgence)*.  This  is  i  better  reading  as  it  states  why 
be  went  with  VijvSd. 

2.  Verses  75-86  show  that  lut^ects  did  not  allow  injustice  evenif  como^t- 
ted  by  the  king.  Sotoe  sort  of  public  sanction  seems  to  be  ntettakry  for 
appointing  a  new  king. 


3L79-90 


725 


TaydH  said: 

79.  O  people  of  all  casces  with  Brahmans  as  leaders! 
Let  all  of  you  listen  to  my  speech  why  I  do  xiot  intend  to  give 
the  kingdom  to  the  elder  ones. 

80.  Only  that  son  who  carries  out  the  words  (orders)  of  his 
father  and  mother  is  considered  praiseworthy.  My  behest  was 
not  obeyed  by  the  eldest  son  Yadu. 

81.  That  son  who  is  antagonistic  to  his  father  is  not 
honoured  or  approved  by  good  men.  He  is  the  real  son  who 
does  his  duties  to  his  parents. 

82.  I  have  been  slighted  by  Yadu  and  also  by  Turvasu. 
Much  discourtesy  was  shown  by  Druhyu  and  Anu  too. 

8!l.  I  have  been  specially  honoured  by  Puni  who  had 
carried  out  my  behest.  Though  he  is  the  youngest,  he  shall  be 
my  successor.  It  was  he  who  accepted  my  old  age.  It  was  he 
who  fulElled  all  my  desires.  Everything  has  been  done  by  Puru 
who  carried  out  his  duties  as  a  son. 

84.  This  boon  has  been  granted  by  Sukra,  Kavya,  Uianas, 
himself— highly  intelligent  one,  that  son  who  is  favourable 
to  you  shall  be  the  king  to  succeed  you.* 

85.  Permitted  by  you  alli  may  Puru  be  crowned  as  the  ruler 
of  the  kingdom.  The  son  who  is  endowed  with  all  qualities  and 
who  is  always  loyal  to  his  parents  deserves  all  welfare.  He  is  to 
be  the  lord  (the  king),  though  he  may  be  the  youngest. 

86.  ^*Puru  who  is  your  favourite  son  and  who  has  done 
what  is  pleasing  to  you,  deserves  this  kingdom.  Due  to  the 
boon  granted  by  Sukra,  nothing  more  can  be  said  (against  this 
decision).*’ 

87-89.  Thus  addressed  by  the  delighted  citizens  and  the 
people  of  the  realm,  the  son  of  Nahu|a  crowned  his  own  son 
Puru  in  his  own  realm.  He  established  Turvasu  in  the  south¬ 
eastern  territories.  The  king  established  the  eldest  excellent 
Yadu  in  the  south-western  territories.  Druhyu  and  Anu  were 
established  in  the  west  and  the  north.  After  conquering  the 
earth  consisting  of  the  seven  continents  and  the  oceans,  the 
son  of  Nahufa,  king  Yayati,  divided  it  into  five  regions  and  gave 
them  to  his  five  sons. 

90.  The  whole  of  this  earth  t^nsisting  of  the  seven  conti** 


726 


Purd^a 


nenti  and  (many)  towns  is  being  ruled  over  by  themi  the  knowers 
of  Dharma»  righteously  and  in  close  adherence  to  their  own 
r^pective  latids. 

9 1«  Thus  handing  over  the  earth  to  his  sons  and  transferring 
his  royal  glory  to  them,  king  Yayati,  the  son  of  Nahu?a»  be* 
came  delighted. 

92.  Leaving  aside  his  bow  and  arrows,  entrusting  his  kins¬ 
men  with  all  duties  and  responsibilities  and  his  sons  with  the 
kingdom,  the  king  became  glad. 

93.  In  this  connection  the  following  (verses)^  have 
been  sung  by  the  great  king  Yay&ti,  who  after  desiring  pleasures, 
withdrew  from  them  all  like  a  tortoise  that  withdraws  all  its 
limbs  (within  itself)* 

94.  ^^Never  can  lust  subside  by  enjoyment  of  pleasures. 
Just  as  the  fire  gets  ablaze  all  the  more  by  ghee*oblations,  so 
also  desires  get  increased  by  indulgence. 

95.  All  the  grains  and  barley  seeds,  all  the  gold,  all  the 
cattle  and  all  the  women  in  the  world  are  not  sufficient  for  even 
one  (penon).  He  who  realises  this,  does  not  become  deluded. 

96.  When  one  maintains  the  purifying  (auspicious)  atti¬ 
tude  to  all  living  beings  in  thought,  speech  and  action,  one 
attains  (realizes)  Brahman. 

97.  When  one  is  not  afraid  of  others,  when  others  are  not 
afraid  of  him,  when  one  neither  desires  nor  hates  (anything], 
one  attains  Brahman. 

98.  Happiness  comes  to  one  who  eschews  (cove¬ 

tousness)  ,  which  cannot  be  got  rid  of  by  evil-minded  ones, 
which  does  not  subside  even  when  one  grows  old  and  which  is 
a  foul  disease  full  of  fatal  faults. 

99.  When  one  grows  old,  the  hairs  grow  old;  the  teeth 
decay  along  with  old  age;  but  the  hope  for  loi^evity  and 
acquisition  of  wealth  never  grow  old. 

100.  Tlic  happiness  from  enjoyment  of  lust  or  by 

attaining  the  great  pleasure  in  heaven  does  not  deserve  even  a 
sixteenth  patt  of  the  happiness  resulting  from  the  destruction  of 
covetousness 

1.  Venes  94-100  are  cbe  itomortal  verses  quoted  in  various  works  and 
they  constitute  the  moral  of  this  episode. 


31, 101—32.6 


727 


101.  After  saying  thij,  the  saintly  king  went  to  the  forest 
along  with  his  wife.  He  p)erformed  a  great  penance  on  Bhtgu- 
tunga^  and  performed  hundreds  of  holy  rites.  Earning  great 
fame,  he  attained  Svarga. 

102.  His  races  are  five  thus.  They  are  holy  and  rever* 
ed  by  Devas  and  sages.  The  whole  earth  is  pervaded  by  them  as 
if  with  therays  of  the  sim. 

103.  An  excellent  Br&hmau  who  reads  this  entire  narra* 
tive  of  Yay&ti  or  listens  to  it,  shall  become  wealthy,  long-lived 
and  renowned.  He  will  be  blessed  with  children. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYTWO 
Th$  Bifih  of  K^taoiryef 

SUta  said  : 

1.  I  shall  recount  the  race  of  the  eldest  (son  of  Yay&ti) 
Yadu,  of  excellent  splendour.  Listen  2tnd  understand,  even  as  I 
recount  it  in  detail  and  in  the  proper  order. 

2.  Yadu  had  five  sons,  all  comparable  to  the  sons  of  Devas. 
Sahasrajit  was  the  eldest.  (The  others  were)  Kro^fu,  r^la,  Jita 
and  Laghu. 

3.  Sahasrajit's  son  was  the  glorious  king  named  Satajit* 
Satajit  had  three  sons  who  were  well  known  as  very  virtuous. 

4.  They  were  Haihaya,  Haya  and  the  king  Venuhaya.  It 
is  heard  that  Haihaya's  successor  was  Dharmatattva. 

5.  Dharmatattva^s  son  was  Kirti  and  his  son  was  Samjfteya. 
Saiiijfieya*s  successor  was  the  king  named  Mahi$man. 

6.  Mahi^man's  son  was  the  valorous  ^hadrafre^ya  who 
was  the  king  of  Varanasi  and  has  already  been  mentioned. 


1.  AiBouocainiu  Nepal  oa  the  eastern  bank  of  Gandak.  Here  was 
the  hermitage  of  Bhfgu.  (De  34). 

2*  This  chapter  deacribea  the  Haibaya  line  of  Yadu  in  which  the  greatest 
ruler  of  the  Nannadi  valley,  Kirtavlrya  Arjuna,  was  bom.  This  chapter  ii 
ed  after  that  illustnoui  king.  This  chapter  corresponds  to  Bd«  P. 


ca 


2.3.69  &  venei«timbers  in  the  notes  refer  to  that  ebi^ter. 


728 


ydyu  Furdrui 


7»  Bbadralrqjiya’s  successor  was  the  king  named  Durmada 
and  Durmada’s  successor  was  an  intelligent  (king)  well  known 
by  the  name  Kanaka. 

8-9.  Kanaka’s  successor  (sons)  were  four  and  they  were 
famous  in  the  worlds— KrtaWrya,  Kartavlrya,  Krtavarm&  and 
Krta  the  fourth.  Krtavirya*s  son  was  Arjuoa.  Bom  with  a 
thousand  arms,  he  was  a  king  who  ruled  over  the  seven  conti¬ 
nents. 

10.  He  performed  a  very  severe  penance  for  ten  thousand 
years.  Kirtvlrya  thus  propitiated  Datta,  bom  of  Atri. 

11-13.  Datta  granted  him  four  excellently  glorious  boons. 
At  the  outset^  (Arjuna)  chose  the  boon  of  (being  endowed 
with)  a  thousand  arms.  The  second  was  (the  ability  of)  the 
prevention  (of  the  world)  given  up  in  evil  by  good  people.^ 
(The  third  was  the  competence)  to  protect  the  earth  righteously 
after  conquering  it  in  the  same  (righteous)  way. 

The  fourth  was  victory  in  numerous  battles  after  killing 
thousands  of  enemies  but  meeting  death  in  a  battle  (fighting) 
with  a  superior  warrior. 

14.  The  entire  earth  consisting  of  seven  continents  and 
many  towns  and  surrounded  by  seven  oceans »  was  conquered 
by  him  in  a  manner  befitting  a  Kfatrjya.^ 

15.  When  he  started  fighting  in  a  battle,  banners  and 
chariots  befitting  it  and  a  thousand  arms  used  to  appear  by 
means  of  the  Maya  of  that  intelligent  one. 

16.  It  is  heard  that  without  any  difficulties  ten  thousand 
Yajfias  had  been  performed  by  that  intelligent  king  in  all  the 
seven  continents. 

17-18.  All  the  Yajnas  performed  by  that  mighty-armed 
king  were  profoundly  splendid.  All  of  them  were  provided  ivith 
golden  altars  with  golden  sacrificial  posts.  All  of  them 
were  graced  by  the  presence  of  blessed  Devas  seated  in  aerial 


1.  Bd.P.  2.3.69.  reads :  ability  to  prevent  one  from  evil  the  moment  he 
p!ani  it. 

2.  Verses  14-37  desmbe  the  ex|^its»  munificence,  righteousness  and  glory 
ofK&ru>drya.  The  OdiU/  sung  by  Nirada  about  him  (w.  20-22)  record 
in  a  nutshell  Aijuna'i  achievements.  Generally  these  G&th&s  are  quotations 

ancteac  traditkmal  verses. 


32.19^28 


729 


chariots;  all  of  them  were  always  rendered  splendid  and  attrac¬ 
tive  by  Gandharvas  and  Apsarstf-s  (celestial  damsels) « 

19.  After  observing  the  conduct  and  the  grandeur  of  that 
saintly  king,  N^ada  and  Gandharvas  sang  the  following 
verse(a)  of  glory  of  that  king. 

20.  ** Certainly  no  man  can  emulate  (none  can  attain) 
the  goal  or  status  of  KArtavirya  by  meams  of  Yajfias,  Dtoas, 
penances,  exploits  and  learning. 

21.  In  all  the  seven  continentt  be  is  seen  moving  about 
with  his  sword  drawn  and  the  excellent  bows  and  arrows  kept 
ready  as  well  as  seated  in  his  chariot.  Though  he  is  the  king,  he 
behaves  as  though  he  is  the  follower.* 

22.  While  he  was  protecting  the  subjects  righteously,  none  of 
his  subjects  lost  his  wealth,  no  one  was  grief-stricken  and  no 
one  had  any  confusion,  thanks  to  the  prowess  of  that  great 
king*'. 

23.  That  king  became  the  sole  monarch  and  emperor  of 
the  seven  continents  for  cightyfive  thousand  years. 

24.  ( In  his  realm)  he  himself  was  the  protector  of  cattle 
and  the  fields.  AsaYogin,  Aijuna  became  Parjanya  (Lord  of 
clouds  and  rains)  and  showered  in  plenty. 

25.  With  his  thousand  arms  rendered  tough  by  frequent 
contact  with  the  bowstringi  he  shone  like  the  Sun  with  his 
thousands  of  autumnal  rays. 

26.  Having  conquered  the  royal  assembly  of  (the  serpent 
king)  Karkotaka  in  Mahipnati  with  a  thousand  elephants,  he 
established  his  capital  there. 

27.  (Defective)  The  lotus-eyed  kii^  used  to  check  the  for¬ 
ceful  (speedy)  waves  of  the  sea  during  the  rainy  season  (when 
the  sea  is  stormy) .  In  a  happy  mood,  he  sportingly  spewed  out 
water  and  made  an  (artificial)  rainy  season* 

28.  Shaken  and  tossed  about  by  him  during  his  (water* 
sports) ,  Narmada,  wearing  garlands  with  golden  fillets 
approached  the  king  in  an  apprehensive  mannar,  with  eyebrows 
like  waves  producing  the  gentle  (murmuring)  sound. 


*Bd.P.  ibid  V  21  (by  mwis  of  hh  Yogic  Power)  for 

in  our  Text. 


7S0 


KJjpii  PurS^a 


29.  FcmnerJy,  following  its  (NarmadS^s)  coursC}  that  (king) 
had  plunged  into  the  great  ocean  and  flooded  the  forest  near 
the  shore  creating  ardflrial  rainy  season. 

30.  When  the  great  ocean  vfas  agitated  by  his  thousand 
arms,  the  great  Asuras  in  the  nether-worlds  used  to  become 
stunned  and  motionless. 

31.  Giant  fishes  and  great  serpents  concealed  under  great 
billows  were  crushed  and  scattered  in  the  flood  of  foam,  the 
eddies  and  whirlpools  which  were  unbearably  furious. 

32.  Agitating  it  by  means  of  his  thousand  arms,  the  king 
made  the  ocean  resemble  the  milky  sea  churned  by  Devas  and 
Asuras. 

33.  (Defective  verse)  On  seeing  the  terrible,  prominent 
king,  the  (aquatic  beings)  were  afraid  that  the  ocean  was  once 
again  being  churned  by  die  Mandara  mountain  for  the  sake  of 
Amfia  (nectar)  and  at  once  felt  uprooted  (utpdfUa  in  A) . 

34.  Great  serpents  bent  down  their  heads  and  stood  mo* 
tionless  tike  the  stumps  of  the  plantain  trees  standing  still  in  the 
evening  hours,  when  the  wind  does  not  blow. 

35.  (Defective  verse)  Proudly  he  went  to  Lanka.  With 
his  bow  and  five  hundred  arrows  be  overpowered  R&vana  along 
with  his  army.  He  defeated  and  brought  him  to  Mahi^matl  and 
imprisoned  him  there. 

36.  (Sage)  Pulastya  himself  went  to  Arjuna  and  propitiat* 
ed  him.  The  king  released  Paulastya  (Ravapa)  at  the  request 
of  Pulastya. 

37.  The  sound  produced  by  the  twang  of  the  bowstrings  by 
his  thousand  arms  was  like  the  thunder  at  the  time  of  the  dose 
of  the  Yugas,  when  the  trees*  of  the  clouds  of  dissolution  seem 
to  bunt. 

38.  Sad  indeed  that  his  thousand  powerful  arms  were  cut  off 
by  Bhargava  (Parajur&ma)  in  battle,  as  though  they  were  gol« 
den  palm  trees. 

39.  Once  upon  a  time,  the  thirsty  Sun«^od  begged  alma  of 
him.  The  Lord  of  the  people  bestowed  on  the  Sun-god  the  seven 
continents  as  alms. 


in  the  test  needs emendstioQ  u  Vmda  as  in  Bd.  P^v.  38.  It  means 
‘a  collection,  amass*  (of clouds). 


32.40-50 


731 


40.  With  a  desire  to  consume  (everything) ,  the  Sun-god 
blazed  at  the  tips  of  his  arrows  and  burnt  cities,  cowherd 
colonies,  vilh^es  and  all  the  towns. 

41.  Thanks  to  the  prowess  of  that  chief  of  men  (Arjuna) , 
the  (Sun-god)  of  great  fame  burnt  the  mountains  and  forests  of 
K&rtaidrya. 

42.  The  Sun-god  in  the  company  of  Haihaya  (Kirtavirya) 
burnt  everything  including  continents  along  with  forests.  He 
burnt  the  empty  hermitage  of  Varuo^’s  son  completely. 

43.  VaruQa  had  obtained  this  glorious  and  excellent  son 
formerly.  He  was  famous  by  the  name  of  sage  Vasiffha  other¬ 
wise  known  as  Apava. 

44-45.  Out  of  anger  the  powerful  Apava  cursed  Arjuna 
then,i  Haihaya,  since  you  have  not  spared  this  forest  of  mine 
another  man  will  set  aside  even  this  di(HcuIt  task  achieved  by 
you.  He  wilt  be  Kuntl’s  son  named  Arjuna.^  He  will  not  be  a 
king. 

46-47.  O  Arjuna,  the  extremely  powerful  Rama,  the  fore¬ 
most  among  those  who  strike  with  weapons,  will  cut  off  and 
shatter  your  thousand  arms.  The  powerful  Brahmana  and  Sage 
of  great  strength  will  kill  you.^’  Then,  as  a  result  of  the  curse 
of  that  intelligent  (sage) ,  Rama  became  the  cause  of  his  death. 

48.  Such  a  boon  had  been  chosen  by  the  king  himself  for¬ 
merly  (from  Datta).  He  had  a  hundred  sons,  five  of  whom  were 
great  war r ion. 

49-50.  They  were  Surasena,  Vrs(yadya,  Vi*^  and  Jaya- 
dhvaja.  All  of  them  were  well-trained  in  the  use  of  miraculous 
weapons.  They  were  heroic,  strong,  pious-souled  and  re- 


1.  The  curse  motif  and  that  of  boon  were  ver^  popular  with  Purfipa- 

writers  to  explain  an  unlilttly  or  miraculous  event.  Here  both  are  used  to 
explain  Klrtavirya’i  death  at  the  hands  of  Paraiur&ma.  K^tavirya  is  stated 
to  have  sought  such  a  boon  from  Datta  v.  13)  and  received  a  curse 

from  Apava  VaiiHha  (w.  46-47)  for  destroying  (i.e.  helping  the  Sun-god 
to  destroy)  his  hermitage. 

2.  Apava*i  curse  was  of  a  Iwofdd  nature.  iCartavlrya  Atjuna  will 
meet  physical  death  at  the  hands  o(  Para^ima  and  he  will  be  superseded 
in  reputation  by  another  Arjuna  (Kunti*s  son)  for  a  similar  act  (via.  burn¬ 
ing  of  Khftodava  formt). 


732  PufJpd 

« 

nowned.  Tliey  ruled  over  Avanti*  Kix^  Jayadhvaja*s  son  was  the 
valorous  Tilaja&gha. 

51-52.  He  had  a  hundred  sons  who  constituted  the  clan  of 
T&Iajanghas.  Five  families  among  those  noble-souled  Haihayas 
are  very  famous,  vis.  the  numerous  VIrahotras  (Vitihotra  in 
Bd.P.),  Bhojas  and  Avartis,  (he  valorous 

Tfilaja^has. 

53.  ^^rahotra*s  son  was  king  Ananta.  Duxjaya  was  his  son. 
His  son  was  AmitradaHana. 

54.  That  king  had  the  boon  of  never  losing  his  wealth. 
The  great  king  protected  the  subjects  by  means  of  his  prowess. 

55-56.  An  intelligent  person  who  recounts  the  story  of 
the  birth  of  Kirtavirya,  shall  regain  lost  wealth.  He  will  not 
lose  wealth  (further) .  He  will  be  rich.  His  Dharma  will  flourish 
and  he  will  be  honoured  in  heaven  like  Tva$tr  or  like  a  man 
of  charitable  inclination. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYTHREE 
Tks  Dynasty  ofjydmagha  and  Vfftfi 

The  Sages  said  : 

1.  Why  was  the  world  (hermitage)  of  the  noble-souled 
Apava  burnt  by  Kirtavirya  forcibly?^  Please  explain  it  to 
us  who  ask. 

2.  We  have  heard  that  the  saintly  king  was  a  protector  of 
his  subjects.  Being  a  guardian,  therefore,  why  did  he  destroy 
that  hermitage? 

Suta  said : 

3.  Ad  ity  a  (the  Sun-god)  desirous  of  satisfaction  (of  hunger) 
approached  KartaWrya  in  the  guise  of  a  Brahmapa  (and  said)^ 
‘^Please  give  me  food.  Undoubtedly  I  am  Aditya.” 


1.  Verses  1«1 3  ei^plain  in  deuiUagiin  why  the  hermitsge  of  Apava 
Vsiiytha  was  burnt  by  Klrtatdrya.  As  these  verses  deal  vnxb  the  curse  of 
J^va,  they  should  have  formed  a  part  of  the  last  chapter  after  v.  S9. 
Vv.  1*19  hereof  are  unr^ated  to  the  present  cb^>ter(Race  of  Kroftu). 


S3«4-l« 


733 


Tki  King  said : 

4.  O  Lord  Sun,  please  tell  me  with  what  you  wilt  be 
satisfied*  What  type  of  food  I  should  give  to  you ;  I  shall  serve  it. 

Ths  Sun  said : 

5.  O  most  excellent  one  among  donors,  give  unto  me  all 
the  immobile  beings  as  my  food*  1  shall  be  satisfied  only  there* 
by  O  king,  and  not  by  anything  else. 

The  King  said  : 

6.  O  the  most  excellent  one  among  those  who  blaze,  no 
fiery  splendour  of  human  beings  can  bum  down  all  immobile 
beings.  I  bow  unto  you, 

Aditya  replied  : 

7.  I  am  delighted.  I  shall  give  you  an  inexhaustible 
quiver  of  arrows  that  are  conducive  to  all  happiness*  and  that 
never  fail.  When  discharged  they  will  bum  because  they  are 
charged  with  my  brilliance* 

8.  When  it  is  conunanded,  it  will  dry  up  the  clouds  and 
the  oceans*  When  it  is  dry,  I  will  reduce  it  to  ashes  and  shall  be 
delighted  thereby,  O  king  I 

9*11.  Then  Aditya  gave  Arjuna  those  arrows*  Securing 
them,  (Arjuna)  burnt  all  tbegreat  immobile  beings, hermitages, 
villages,  cowherd  colonies,  cities,  penance  groves,  beautiful 
forests  and  parks  etc.  and  then  circumambulated  the  Sun«god. 
The  earth  burnt  down  by  the  splendour  of  the  Sun,  became 
trce«less  and  grass-less* 

12-13*  In  the  meantime  tbegreat  sage  (Apava)  who  had 
been  residing  imder  water  for  ten  thousand  years,  completed 
his  holy  observance.  Then  the  ascetic  of  great  splendour  emer¬ 
ged  out  (from  water).  The  great  sage  then  saw  his  hermitage 
burnt  down  by  Aijuna.  Out  of  anger  be  cursed  the  smntly  king 
as  already  recounted  by  me  to  you. 

SSta  said : 

14.  Listen  to  the  race  of  the  saintly  king  Krof^u  consi- 

*sgnaic*mtM^  'capable  of  facing  i.e.  going  in  all  direction*  in  Bd.P. 
2.3.70.7  is  a  better  reading  than  sanionMin  hereof. 


734  ydjm  PurOif^ 

Bting  of  excellent  men.  In  his  family  was  bom  the 

founder  of  the  dynasty  of  Vr$nis. 

15.  Kro^tu  had  only  one  son  Vijinlvan  of  great  fame* 
(The  people)  liked  the  son  of  Vijinlvan,  Svahi,  the  foremost 
among  those  possessing  Svaha  (Le.  performers  of  Yajftaswherein 
*Sv&hi*  is  repeated) . 

16.  King  Raiidu,  the  foremost  among  donors  was  the  son 
ofSvahi.  (The  people)  liked  Ghftamprasutaj  the  eldest  and 
the  best  son  of  Ra^adu. 

17.  He  performed  many  types  of  great  Yajftas  with  ade¬ 
quate  Dak^i^as.  His  son  Citraratha  was  also  endowed  with  (the 
inclination)  to  perform  diverse  holy  rites. 

1 8.  Thus  tite  heroic  Citraratha  performed  many  Yajftas 
giving  vast  wealth  as  Dakfipa.  His  successor  was  Saiabindu, 
who  followed  (the  footsteps)  of  saintly  kings. 

19.  He  was  an  emperor  of  great  prowess.  He  was  very 
powerful  and  he  had  many  children.  In  this  connection,  this 
genealogical  verse  has  been  cited  by  those  who  know  ancient 
traditions. 

20.  ^'Sajabindu  had  ten  thousand  sons.  They  were  all 
very  intelligent.  They  possessed  vast  wealth  and  great  splendour. 
They  were  worthy  (of  their  father) . 

21-22.  Six  of  them  were  very  important;  they  were  known 
as  *Pfthufafkas*  (six  men  who  had  theword  Prl/iu  i.e.  great  added 
on  to  their  name).  They  were — Prthuiravas,  Prthuyaias, 
Prthuftjaya^  Prthuklrti  and  Prthundata.  All  the  sons  of  Sasa- 
bindu  were  kings.  All  the  Puranas  praise  Antara  who  was  the 
son  of  Prthuiravas.  He  was  the  same  Antara  as  was  the  son  of 
Yajfta  formerly.” 

23.  After  getting  the  earth  (i.e.  having  become  king)  the 
same  pious-souled  excellent,  righteous  (king)  performed  a 
hundred  horse-sac  riiices. 

24.  His  son  was  Marutta^  vrho  followed  (the  footsteps  of) 
saintly  kings.  Heroic  Kambalabarhis  is  remembered  as  Marutta*s 
son. 


1.  Our  text  bai  dropped  two  generations  between  Anura  (Aktarain 
Bd.?.)  and  Mftrutu^ai^#  Bd.P.  2.3.70.23-25. 


33.25-3$ 


735 


25-26.  Scholarly  Rukmakavaca  was  the  son  of  Kaihbala- 
barhis.  This  Rukmakavaca  had  formerly  attained  excellent  glory 
by  killing  (many)  warriors  wearing  coats  of  mail  and  armed 
with  bows,  with  his  sharp  arrows.  He  attained  great  fame  as  a 
performer  of  hone-sacrifices  and  gave  profuse  wealth  (as  Dak^ina) 
to  fir&hmai^as. 

27.  From  king  Rukmakavaca  were  bom  five  very  strong 
sons  of  great  prowess  who  killed  heroic  enemies  without  turning 
away  (from  the  battlefield). 

28.  They  were  Rukme^Ui  Prthurukma*  Jyamagha>  Parigba 
and  Hari.  The  father  established  Hari  and  Parigha  in  (the  land 
called)  Videha. 

29.  Brahme^u^  (?  Rukmefu)  became  king  and  Pfthurukma 
became  his  dependent.  Banished  from  the  kingdom  by  themi 
Jy&magha^  lived  in  a  hermitage. 

so.  He  was  quiescent  (by  temperament) .  He  lived  in  the 
terrible  forest  but  he  was  actuated  by  a  Brahmana.  Taking  up 
his  bow  he  went  to  the  middle  of  the  land,  seated  in  his  chariot 
and  waving  his  flag. 

31.  He  (wandered)  along  in  the  marshy  place  on  the 
hanks  of  Narmada.  After  passing  through  Mekala  mountains 
and  the  mountain  ^savan^  he  entered  Suktimanya  (?) 

32.  Jyamagha*s  wife  was  ^bya  who  was  very  strong. 
Though  the  king  had  no  soa>  he  did  not  take  a  second  wife. 

33.  He  became  victorious  in  a  battle  and  won  a  girl  there¬ 
in.  The  king  then  came  to  his  wife  and  said,  ‘*Herc  is  your 
daughter-in-law*’. 

34.  On  being  addressed  thus  she  said, ‘^This  daughter-in 
law  of  yours  is  loveable.  She  will  be  tlie  wife  of  your  son  who 
will  be  born  (who  is  yet  to  be  bom).” 

35.  By  performing  a  severe  penance,  the  beautiful  chaste 
lady  Saibya  gave  birth  to  his  son  Vidarbha  in  her  old  age. 

36.  Vidarbha  begot  of  that  daughter-in-law  two  scholarly 

1.  Brahmsu  it  s  mistske  for  Rukmifu,  In  AIHT  p.  146  Par&vrt  is 
named  u  the  luccevor  of  Rukmakavaca. 

2.  JySmaghaV  dynasty  was  famous  but  be  is  personally  noted  as  a  hen¬ 
pecked  husband  in  PurSoas,  w.  32-34,  abo  Bd.P.  2.3. 7D.  33-36. 


736  Pur^ 

princes,  Krmthu  and  Kauiika  who  were  heroic  and  experts 
in  battles. 

37.  The  very  virtuous  (king  Vidarbba)  later  begot  a  third 
son  Lomapada.  Vastuwas  the  son  of  Lomapada  and  his  son  was 
Ahrti. 

38.  Gidi  was  the  son  of  Kauiika.  The  Caidya  kings  are 
remembered  as  his  descendents.  Kunti  was  the  son  of  Krathu 
who  was  Vidarbha's  son. 

39.  Dhf^ta  was  born  as  the  son  of  Kunti.  He  was  very 
proud  and  valorous.  Dhrtta’s  son  was  the  pious-souled  Nirvyti, 
the  slayer  of  brave  enemies. 

40.  His  son  was  Dajirha  who  was  very  strong  and  valiant. 
Daiirba’s  son  wsts  Vyoman  smd  his  son  is  called  JImuta. 

41  •  Jimuta^s  son  was  Vikiti  and  bis  son  was  Bbimaratha. 
BUmaratha*8  son  was  Rathavara. 

42.  He  was  a  donor  interested  in  Dharma  (holy  rite)  per- 
5>etually.  He  was  well-behaved  and  invariably  truthful.  His  son 
was  Navaratha.  Dalaratba  came  after  him. 

43.  His  son  was  Ek&daiaratha.  Sakuni  was  his  son.  From  him 
was  born  the  archer  Karambhaka.  Devarata  came  thereafter. 

44.  King  Devak^atra  of  great  fame  was  the  son  of  Devarata. 
Devana,  the  delighter  of  Kfatriyas,  was  born  as  the  son  of 
Devak^tra. 

45«46.  Madhu  was  bom  of  Devana.  His  son  was  Medha- 
rtha-sambhava.  Madhu  had  other  sons  as  well»  viz. 
Manu  of  great  brilliance,  Manuvasa,  Nandana  of  great  splen¬ 
dour  and  Mahipuruvaja.  Purudvan,  the  most  excellent  man, 
was  the  son  of  Puruvaia. 

47.  Furudvahd  was  born  of  Bhadravatl  as  the  son  of  Puru- 
dvan.  Aik$^i  was  the  wife  (ofPurudvan) .  Sattva  was  born  of 
her.  From  Sat tva  was  born  Sattvata  who  was  endowed  with 
Sattvagu^*  He  increased  the  lame  (of  the  race). 

48.  After  perfectly  understanding  this  creation  (race)  of 
the  noble-souled  Jyamagha,  one  obtains  chi  Id  era  and  attains 
Sdjnfiya  (identity)  with  the  intelligent  king  Soma. 


344-11 


737 


CHAPTER  THIRTYFOUR 
Thi  Raei  of 

Suia  said  : 

1-2*  Sattvata*s  wife  Kau£alya  gave  birth  to  handsome 
sonS)  viz.  Bhajin,  Bhajamana^  Divya^  Devavrdha  the  king^ 
Andhaka,  Mahabhoja^Vfsni  and  Yadunandana.  They  established 
four  races.  Listen  to  them  in  detaiL 

3.  Bhajamina  begot  of  SfAjayi  two  sons^  Bahya  and 
(the  next)  Bahyaka.  Bihyaka  married  Srf\jaya*s  two  daughters 

4.  His  wives,  the  two  sisters,  gave  birth  to  many  sons*, 
viz.  Nirni,,  Pa^va,  and  Parapurafljaya. 

5-6.  (Defective  verse)  Bhajamana  begot  of  Srfljayl  other 
sons  also,  viz.  Ayutiyutajit.  Sihasrajit,  Satajit  and  V&maka. 
Out  of  those  who  were  born  of  Bhajam&na,  king  Devavrdha 
performed  a  severe  penance. 

7.  Pie  bad  this  thought  in  his  mind,  *May  a  son  endowed 
with  all  good  qualities  be  born  to  me*.  ARer  concentrating  on 
this  in  Yoga,  he  touched  the  waters  of  the  river  Parnaii.* 

8.  On  being  touched  by  him,  the  river,  the  most  excellent 
of  all  rivers,  desired  for  the  wel&re  of  the  king. 

9-10.  Anxiously  engrossed  in  thought,  the  river  decided 
thus  :  do  not  6nd  any  woman  in  whom  a  son  like  this, 
endowed  with  all  good  qualities,  will  be  boro  to  the  king 
Devavrdha.  Hence  I  shall  myself  become  his  wife  {Sahavraid — a 
woman  who  performs  holy  rites  in  one*s  company).’*  She  assu¬ 
med  hands*  (i.e.  human  form)  in  accordance  with  her  intention. 

1 1 .  Taking  the  form  of  a  girl,  Savitrl(the  rivcr)repeated  the 

1 .  Tbii  chapter  comspoads  to  Bd.P.  2.3.71.  Heace  only  vers^aumbers 
of  this  chapter  are  mentioned  for  compojwa* 

2.  The  list  of  sotu  in  Bd.?.  (w.  $-6)  diffm.  It  gives  the  names  of 
the  sons  as  follows  :  Nimlod,  Kapka^a,  Dbrni,  Pa^purafijaya. 

3.  The  river  Banas  in  Rajasthan — a  tributary  to  Gbambal.  De  146. 

The  Pur&oa  writers  had  a  romantic  concept  of  showing  rivers  falling  in 

love  with  Kings  and  Sages  and  somedmei  marrying  them  in  human  form 
such  as  Gihgi  with  £antanu,  Nannad&  with  K&rtavlrya  Aijuna.  Koal, 
Bahudft  and  other  riven  had  dmilar  affairs. 

4.  translated  here  is  obscure.  Bd.  P»  2.3.71.11  reads  hrtstha  for  huto 
hereof.  It  means  (in  Bd.  P.)  11  her  emotional  attachment)  welled  up  in  her 
heart*. 


738  yHjm  furS^ 

great  words  (?)  She  thought  of  the  king*  The  king  desired  her 
(as  his  wife). 

12*  13.  The  liberal-minded  (lung)  rendered  her  pregnant* 
She  conceived  a  brilliant  (son).  In  the  ninth  months  the  most 
excellent  of  rivers  gave  birth  to  a  son  endowed  with  all  good 
qualities  as  desired  by  Devavrdha.  About  this  race>  the 
Brahmanas  who  know  the  Puranas^sing  thisG&tha  (glorihcatory 
verse). 

14-15.  People  of  noble  souls  glorifying  the  good  qualities 
of  Devavrdha  say — is  seen  at  close  quarters  exactly  as  he 
is  heard  from  a  distance.  Babhru  is  the  most  excellent  among 
men.  Dev&vrdha  was  equal  to  Devas.  Seventy  thousand  and 
sixty  five  men  of  the  line  of  Babhru  and  Devavrdha  attained 
immortality  (liberation  from  Sofftsdra) . 

16.  That  highly  fortunate,  most  valiant  hero  among  Sattva- 
tas,  was  a  performer  of  sacrifices,  thechief  of  the  most  prominent 
ones  among  the  donon  of  liberal  gifts,  a  brave  warrior,  a 
patron  of  Brahmanas,  truthful  in  speech,  scholarly  and  (most) 
famous  (in  the  world).** 

17.  (Defective  verse)  Sumahabhoj  ay  a  8  and  Imartikabalas 
were  bom  in  his  race^  (?)  Gandharl  and  MidrI  were  the  two 
wives  of  Vrsni. 

18-19.  Gandh^I  gave  birth  toSumitra  and  Mitranandana. 
Madr!  gave  birth  to  the  sons  Yudhajit,  DevamIdHusa  and 
Anaroitra.  The  two  (last  mentioned)  v/ere excellent  men.  Nighna 
was  Anamitra’s  son.  Nighna  had  two  sons. 

20.  They  were  the  blessed  Prasena  and  8akrajit.  Surya* 
(the  Sun-god)  was  an  intimate  bosom  friend  of  Sakrajit.’ 


1.  tarj^rmo^  sumoAd^^Jti^mdrtiJtd^eldft  in  the  text  is  obacizre,  Bd.  P* 
2. 3. 71. IS  read*  : 

^uma/idn  ^Acjd  yt  vUrutd^  fj 

'His  race  is  very  great.  The  longs  of  lus  line  are  well  known  on  the  earth 
as  Bhojas'. 

2.  Pfirvo  in  the  text  is  wroog.  SStya  (at  in  A  and  Bd.  P.)  is  acc^ted  here 
as  the  following  venet  also  confirm  it 

3.  Compare  the  Story  of  the  Syamaniaka  gem  in  Bh.P.  X.  Ghi.  S6  and 
57;Bd.P.  2.3.71.22-99. 


S4.2NS5 


739 


2L  Once^  at  the  close  of  a  nighty  the  king  who  was  driving 
in  his  chariot,  got  down  near  the  bank  (of  a  river)  in  order 
to  perform  the  worship  of  the  Sun  with  water  libation. 

22«  While  he  was  worshipping,  Vivasvan,  the  Sun-god,  the 
lord  with  his  brilliant  halo,  stood  before  him  but  his  form  was 
not  clearly  visible, 

23-24.  Then  the  king  addressed  the  Sun«^od  who  was 
standing  in  front  of  him:  lord  of  the  luminaries,  I  see  you 

in  iront  of  me  also  in  the  same  form  with  brilliant  halo  as  I  see 
you  in  the  sky.  What  special  significance  is  there  in  your 
coming  to  me  as  a  friend?** 

25.  On  hearing  this,  the  lord  took  off  the  excellent  jewel 
Syamantaka  from  his  neck  and  tied  it  round  the  king's  neck. 

26.  The  king  then  saw  the  Sun-god  in  his  actual  (physical) 
form.  He  gated  at  tite  form  for  the  duration  of  a  MuhQrta. 

27.  When  the  Sun-god  was  about  to  start  (on  his  journey) 
again,  kingSakrajit  requested  him,  ‘*It  behoves  you  to  present 
me  this  excellent  jewel  of  fiery  splendour  wherewith  you 
traverse  the  worlds'*. 

28.  The  Sun*god  thereupon  gave  him  the  Syamantaka 
jewel.  Wearing  it  the  king  rc-cntercd  the  city. 

29.  The  people  flocked  round  him,  saying,  ‘*Oh !  here 
comes  the  Sun-god**.  The  people  in  the  king's  assembly,  the 
city  and  the  harem  all  were  surprised. 

30.  Out  of  affection,  the  king  Sakrajit  handed  over  the 
excellent  divine  jewel  Syamantaka  to  his  brother  Prasenajit. 

31.  The  clouds  shower  at  the  proper  season  in  the  land 
where  the  jewel  Syamantaka  is  present.  There  is  no  fear  of  any 
epidemic  or  sickness. 

32.  Govlnda  (Kr9na)  desired  to  have  the  jewel  Syaman¬ 
taka  from  Prasena.  But  he  did  not  get  it.  Though  he  was 
powerful,  he  did  not  take  it  by  force. 

33.  Once,  bedecked  with  that  jewel  Prasena  went  a- 
huntii^.  For  the  sake  Syamantaka  he  met  a  terrible  death 
from  a  lion. 

34.  Jiuhbavin,  the  king  of  bears,  kiUed  that  lion.  Taking 
that  jewel  with  him  he  entered  his  den. 

35.  The  elders  of  Vripis  and  Andhakas  thought  it  to  be  the 


740 


work  ofKrna.  Considering  him  covetous  of  the  jewel,  they  all 
suspected  him  alone  (as  the  perpetrator  of  the  crime)  • 

36.  Unable  to  endure  the  false  accusation,  ^e  lord,  the 
powerful  slayer  of  foes,  roamed  about  in  the  forest  (to  trace 
Prasena) . 

37«40.  He  went  over  all  the  places  where  Prasena  was 
hunting.  With  the  help  of  trustworthy  men,  he  followed  the 
footsteps  of  IVasena  and  searched  the  great  mountain  ^k$av&n 
and  the  excellent  mountain  Vindhya.  He  became  completely 
exhausted  due  to  the  search.  The  noble*minded  (lord)  then  saw 
Prasena  (lying)  killed  along  with  his  horse.  He  did  not  get  the 
jewel  there.  The  lion  was  seen  lying  dead  not  far  from  the  dead 
body  of  Prasena.  Apparently  the  lion  had  been  killed  by  a  bear 
as  indicated  by  the  footprints.  The  scion  of  the  family  of  Yadu 
(i.e.  Kry^a)  traced  by  means  of  footprints  of  the  bear  and 
found  out  the  cave  of  the  bear. 

41.  He  heard  the  voice  of  a  young  woman  deep  inside  the 
great  cave.  O  Brahmanas,  the  nurse  had  been  playing  with 
the  infant  son  of  Jamba  van  along  with  the  jewel.  The  words 

(Do  not  cry)  were  uttered  by  her. 

TheNuTS0  saidi 

42.  The  lion  killed  Prasena.  The  lion  was  killed  by  Jamba* 
v&n.  O  tender  child,  do  not  cry.  This  Syamantaka  is  for  you. 

43.  (The  words  were  clearly  audible.)  As  soon  as  every¬ 
thing  was  made  clear  by  those  words,  he  entered  the  cave.  He 
had  already  seen  Prasena  (lying  dead)  torn  to  pieces  very  near 
that  cave. 

44.  Qpickly  entering  the  cave  of  the  bear,  the  liberal* 
minded  lord  saw  Jamba  van,  the  king  of  bears. 

45.  Vasudeva  fought  with  Jambavan  in  his  cave.  For 
twentyone  days  Govinda  had  a  hand  to  hand  fight  (with  him) . 

46.  When  Krina  entered  the  cave,  the  attendants  of  Vasu* 
deva  returned  to  Dv^vad  and  reported  (to  others)  that 
Kr$oa  (also)  was  killed. 

47.  After  defeating  the  powerful  Jfimbav&n,  Vasudeva  won 
the  hand  of  his  daughter  Jiihbavatl  with  the  permission  of  the 
king  of  bears. 


34.48-60 


741 


48.  Overwhelmed  by  the  splendour  oftbclord,J&iiibav&n 
gave  the  jewel  as  well  as  his  daughter  Jaihbavati  to  Vijvaksena 
(Kr?na) . 

49.  It  was  to  clear  himself  that  the  lord  took  the  Syaman- 
taka  jewel.  Consoling  the  king  of  bears,  he  came  out  of  the 
cave. 

50.  After  redeeming  the  jewel  thus  and  clearing  himself  of 
the  scandal  by  his  own  efforts,  the  lord  handed  over  the  jewel 
to  Satrajit  in  the  presence  of  the  Sattvatas. 

51.  Madhusudana  thereafter  duly  married  the 

girl  Jaihbavati.  Jan&rdana  got  himself  acquitted  of  the  false 
accusation. 

52.  He  who  knows  this  story  of  the  false  accusation  of 
Krspa  and  the  subsequent  acquittal  will  never  be  accused  frau¬ 
dulently. 

53.  Ahundredsonswere  bom  to  Satrajit  from  his  ten  wives 
who  were  sisters.  Among  them  three  were  famous.  Bhahgakira 
was  the  eldest.  The  others  were  the  heroic  Vratapati,  and 

Apasvwta  the  beloved  (Supriya) . 

54.  Bhahgak&ra’s  wife  named  Dvaravati  had  good  children. 
She  gave  birth  to  three  daughters  endowed  with  beauty  and 
good  qualities. 

55.  Satyabhama  was  the  most  excellent  of  all  ladies.  She 
was  steadfast  in  performing  holy  rites  and  severe  penances.  The 
father  gave  her  to 

56-57.  The  jewel  that  Kt5i^  (redeemed  and)  gave  to 
Satrajit  was  worn  by  Babhru  (?)  Akrura  who  was  desirous  of 
wealth,  coveted  the  jewel  Syainantaka,  requested  for  Satyabhama 
of  excellent  (unblamed)  beauty  through  Satadhanva  of  the 

Bhoja  family. 

58.  Therefore  the  mighty  SatadhanvS  killed  Bhadrakara 
{?  Bhadgakara)  at  night.  He  stole  the  jewel  and  handed  it  over 
to  Akrura. 

59.  Akrura,  a  prominent  person,  took  that  gem  and  entered 
into  an  agreement  (widi  Satadhanva) .  “This  should  not  be 
made  known  to  anyone  else  by  you. 

60.  Should  you  be  atucked  by  Kr«>a,  we  shall  help  you. 
Undoubtedly  the  whole  of  Dvaraki  will  be  under  my  control.” 


742 


61«  When  her  father  was  killed,  the  griei^stricken  Satya- 
bhitna  of  great  fame  got  into  a  chariot  and  went  to  Vara^- 
vata. 

62.  Telling  her  husband  about  the  (criminal)  act  of  Sata* 
dhatnvan  of  Bhoja  family,  the  distressed  (lady)  Satyabhimk 
stood  near  him  and  shed  tears. 

63.  After  offer ing  (obsequies  such  as)  the  water  libations 
to  the  Pand&vas  who  were  (supposed  to  have  been)  burnt  (in 
Varapavata),  Hari  (Krspa)  employed  S&tyaki  to  be  on  a  par 
with  his  brothers  (in  performance  of  remaining  rites). 

64.  Hastening  back  to  Dv&raki,  the  glorious  slayer  of 
Madhu  spoke  these  words  to  his  elder  brother  Balarama  (ffalin — 
one  armed  with  ploughshare) . 

65.  *Trasena  was  killed  by  the  lion,  Satr&jit  was  killed  by 
Satadhanvan  (all  for  the  sake  of  the  jewel,  Syamantaka).  I 
seek  that  Syamantaka  (as  the  legal  owner) .  O  Lord,  strike  him. 

66.  Hence  get  into  the  chariot  quickly.  After  killing  the 
mighty  Bhoja,  O  mighty-armed  one,  the  Syamantaka  will  be 
ours.** 

67.  Then  a  tumultuous  6^t  ensued  between  Bhoja  and 
Ktspa.  Satadhanva  (i.e.  Bhoja)  could  not  see  Akrura  anywhere 
round. 

68.  Both  Bhoja  and  Janardana  were  on  horseback  (while 
fighting) .  AkrQra  did  not  wholeheartedly  help  him  although  he 
was  competent  and  he  could  have  done  so.* 

69-72.  Hence  (Bhoja)  became  frightened  and  thought  of 
running  away.  Bhoja’s  mare  was  a  divine  one  named  VijAata- 
hrdaya  (that  which  understood  the  heart  or  mental  feeling 
of  the  rider) .  She  had  a  speed  of  a  hundred  Yojanas.  It  was 
seated  on  this  mare  that  he  fought  with  Krj^a.  On  his  speedy 
mare  Bhoja  went  a  hxindred  Yojanas  away.  On  seeing  the  quick 
motion  of  the  chariot,  Kfspa  liarassed  Satadhanvan.  Then  the 
mare  became  extremely  exhausted.  O  Brahmapas,  the  vital  airs 


*The  line  :  MhjM  oSrdkakydn  ndMrc '  is  obscure. 

Bd.  P.V.  70  reads  : 

Idfyad  hdrdUn  / 

^Though  he  was  cMnpetent  to  do  so,  AkrOra,  the  H&rdUsya,  did  not  do 
so  through  perfidy*. 


S473-S4 


743 


of  the  mare  rose  up  into  the  sky  (i.e.  it  died)*  Then 
spoke  to  Rknia. 

73.  ‘'O  mighty-armed  one,  stay  here*  The  defects  of  the 
horses  (mares)  have  been  observed  by  me*  I  shall  go  on  loot  and 
bring  away  the  excellent  jewel  Syamantaka*^ 

74.  Going  on  foot  alone,  Acyuta,  the  knower  of  great  mira* 
culous  weapons,  lolled  Satadhanvan.  the  king  of  Mithila. 

75.  He  could  not  see  the  Syamantaka  (on  his  person)  even 
after  killing  the  mighty  Bhoja.  When  Kr^na  returned,  the  bearer 
of  ploughshare  (i.e.  Rama)  asked  him,  **Give  me  the  jewe^^ 

76*  don*t  have  it**,  said  Kr^u.  Then  the  infuriated 
Rima  repeatedly  cried  ^Tie  upon  you'*,  and  spoke  to  Jankr* 
dana. 

77.  tolerate  it  (and  excuse  you)  as  you  are  my  brother. 
Welfare  unto  you.  I  am  going,  t  have  nothing  to  do  with 
Dvaraka  nor  with  you  nor  with  the  Vffnis**^ 

78.  Then  R5ma,  the  suppressor  of  enemies,  entered  MithiU. 
With  all  desirable  presents,  the  king  of  Mithili  hinuelf  wel¬ 
comed  and  honored  him. 

79.  In  the  meanlinie  Babhru  ( Akrura) ,  the  foremost  among 
the  intelligent  ones,  performed  unimpededly  difierent  kinds  of 
Yajfias. 

80.  The  son  of  Gadbi,  the  king  of  great  fame,  adopted  a 
coat  of  mail  in  the  form  of  Diksd  (initiation  for  sacrifices)  for 
self- protection,  in  order  to  preserve  the  Syamantaka  jewel. 

81.  In  the  performance  of  these  Yajfias  (which  continued) 
for  a  period  of  sixty  years,  he  utilised  (donated)  vast  wealth, 
excellent  jewels  and  different  kinds  of  materials* 

82*  These  Yajfias  of  that  aoblc-souled  (King)  became 
famous  by  the  name  ^^Akrura  Yajfia***  Much  food  and  wealth 
was  given  as  Daksi^*  All  of  them  fulfilled  the  cherished 
desires  of  all*  » 

83.  Thereafter  lordly  king  Duryodhana  went  to  MithiU 
and  underwent  divine  training  in  mace  fighting  under  Bala- 
bhadra. 

84*  O  Briduna^,  after  a  great  deal  of  persuasion  and 
pleading  (Balabhadra)  was  brought  back  to  Dvaraka  by  the 
leading  persons  among  Vf^pis  and  Andhakas  along  with 
the  noble-souled 


744 


V3jfu  Parana 


85.  After  killing  8atrughna  along  with  Bandhum&n  in  battle 
Akrura>  the  powerful  leader  of  men,  went  away  aloi^  with 
Andhakas. 

86^7 « These  two  occellent  men,  Satrughna  and  Bandhuman, 
were  the  sons  of  Bhangakara,  the  leader  of  Andhakas.  They 
were  bom  of  Kari,  the  daughter  of  Svaphalka.  They  were  very 
mighty  and  famous.  Kr^a  was  not  pleased  at  the  killing  of 
Bhahgakara. 

88.  As  he  was  apprehensive  of  a  split  amongst  bb  kinsmen, 

he  ignored  him  (AkrQra) .  After  the  departure  of 

Akrura,  Indr  a  did  not  shower  rain  there. 

89.  The  whole  land  was  oppressed  by  drought  and 
was  about  to  perish.  Then  Kukuras  and  Andhakas  paciiied  and 
consoled  Akrura. 

90.  When  (AkrQra),  the  lord  (the  most  prominent)  of 
charitably  dbposed  persons,  returned  to  Dv&ravatl,  Indra 
showered  everywhere,  even  within  the  ocean. 

91.  In  order  to  please  V&sudeva  AkrQra,  the  glorious  leader 
of  Yadus,  gave  him  hb  virgin  sister  of  approved  good  con« 
duct. 

92.  After  knowing  by  means  of  hb  Yogic  power  that  the 
Syamantaka  jewel  was  with  Babhru,  Kr$^  Janardana  said  to 
Akrura  in  the  open  assembly. 

93.  honourable  Lord,  please  hand  over  to  me  the  jewel 
which  has  come  into  your  possession.  Please  do  nothing  ignoble 
unto  me. 

94.  The  anger  raging  in  my  heart  for  the  last  sixty  years 
has  become  great  and  deep-rooted.  A  long  time  has  elapsed 
by  now.'* 

95.  Then  at  the  instance  of  Krs^a,  Babhru,  the  highly  in¬ 
telligent  one,  banded  over  the  jewel  without  any  demur  in  the 
assembly  of  all  the  Sattvatas. 

96.  The  suppressor  of  enemies  (Kr^a)  obtained  the  jewel 
from  Babhru  in  a  straightforward  manner.  With  a  delighted 
mind,  he  gave  it  back  to  Babhru  again. 

97.  The  son  of  G&ndinl  (i.e.  Akrura)  obtained  Syamantaka, 
the  excellent  jewel  handed  over  by  Kr^na.  Wearing  it  (round 
his  neck)  he  shone  like  the  Sun. 


S4.9&»U2 


745 


98.  He  who  knows  this  story  of  the  false  accusation  and  the 
subsequent  excellent  clearance  of  the  Ijord  will  by  no  means 
become  a  victim  of  false  accusation. 

99-100.  From  the  youngest  son  Animitra  (?  Anamitra)  of 
Sini  was  born.  His  son  was  Satyaka  who  was  truthful  in 
speech  and  endowed  with  truthiul  temperament.  Tlie  son  of 
Satyaka  (Sityaki)  was  Yuyudhana  and  his  son  was  Bhuti. 

101.  Yugandhara  was  Bhuti*s  son.  Thus  the  descendants  of 
Bhuti}  the  Bhautyas  have  been  recounted.  Pfini  had  two  sonsi 
Svaphalka  and  Citraka. 

102.  Wherever  the  pious-soulcd  great  king  Svaphalka  stay¬ 
ed^  no  sickness  or  fear  of  drought  oppressed  the  people. 

103*  O  excellent  Brahmanas^  once  Indra  did  not  shower 
rain  in  the  realm  of  the  lord»  king  of  for  three  years. 

104.  He  made  the  highly  honoured  Svaphalka  stay  there. 
Due  to  the  presence  of  Svaphalka,  Indra  showered  rain  there. 

105.  Svaphalka  married  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  K&fl. 
She  was  a  praise-worthy  (uncensured)  lady  named  G&ndinl. 
Everyday  she  gifted  a  cow  to  a  Brihmana.^ 

106-108.  It  is  said  that  she  remained  in  the  womb  her 
mother  for  many  hundreds  of  years.  She  did  not  come  out. 
The  father  said  to  her  even  as  she  was  in  the  wombi  **Be  bom 
quickly.  Welfare  unto  you.  Wherefore  do  you  stay  there?’* 
Remaining  in  the  womb  itself  the  girl  said»  shall  be  born 
if  a  cow  is  given  everyday.  O  Father,  do  you  desire  it?'*  The 
father  said,  **So  be  it”  and  fulfilled  her  desire. 

109.  Akrura  is  remembered  as  her  son.  He  was  munificent, 
a  performer  of  Yajfias,  learned,  heroic  and  fond  of  guests. 
Svaphalka  himself  was  very  liberal  in  giving  Dak^ina. 

110-111.  Svaphaika  had  other  sons  also — Upamangu, 
Mangu,  Mfdura,  Aritnejaya,  Girirak^,  Yak^a,  Satrughna, 
Arimardana,  Dharmabhft,  Sr^facaya,  Vargamoca,  Avaha  and 
Prativaha.  He  had  a  beautiful  daughter  Vasudeva  also. 

112.  Akrura  begot  of  Ugrascnl  two  sons  who  delighted  the 
family.  They  were  Deva  and  Anupadeva.  They  were  equal  to 
Devas. 


1.  A  popular  otyme^ogy  oi  the  name  'Glndioi*. 


Fdjfu  Purd^ 


746 

113-114»  Gitraka’s  sons  were  :  Prthu,  ViprthUi  Alvagrlvai 
Alvab&hu,  Supirivaka,  Gave^qa^  Ari|taneini»  Aiva»  Suvarm&i 
Varmabhftf  Garmabhrt,  Abhumi  and  Bahubhumi.  Sravi^tbi 
and  Srava^a  were  the  two  (daughters) . 

US.  The  daughter  of  (the  kix^  of)  Kail  bore  four  sons 
to  Satyaka,  viz.  Kakuda»  Bbajamana,  Samlka  and  Balabharhis* 

116.  Vnti  KakudaUson.  Vr^^’sson  was  Kapotaronia 
and  his  son  was  Revata« 

1 17.  His  son  was  a  scholar  and  a  friend  of  Tumburu.  He 
is  famous  by  the  name  Candanodakadundubhi.^ 

1 18-119.  His  son  was  Abhijit  and  his  son  was  Punarvasu. 
The  excellent  man  (King)  bad  performed  a  horse-sacrifice  for 
the  sake  of  a  son.  In  the  course  of  that  sacrifice,  while  the  rites 
of  Atiratra  were  being  performed,  he  was  bom  in  the  middle  of 
the  assembly.  Therefore  Punarvasu  became  a  scholar,  donor 
and  righteous  performer  of  Yajfias. 

120.  He  had  twin  children— Ahuka*  and  Ahuld  both  of 
whom  were  foremost  among  intelligent  ones.  They  say  that 
Ahuka  was  invincible,  thanks  to  his  (mighty)  arms  and  arrows. 

121-123.  About  Ahuka  the  following  verses  are  cited  :  *‘He 
had  ten  thousand  war-chariots  fully  equipped  with  quivers, 
martial  requisites,  banners  and  flagstaff,  rumbling  like  clouds. 
No  one  (in  his  fomily)  was  a  speaker  of  untruth,  non-^performcr 
of  Yajfias  or  non-giver  of  thousands  (as  Dakfina).  No  one  was 
imclean  or  unrighteous.  No  one  wsts  unlearned  or  emaciate.*’ 
We  have  heard  that  Dhrti  was  the  son  of  Ahuka. 

124-126.  (Partially  defective)  With  his  white-liveried 
retinue,  the  king  who  was  like  Ahuka,  marched  towards  the 
eastern  direction  displaying  (accompanied  by)  one  million 
and  eighty  youthful  horses  (cavalry).  He  surpassed  Bhoja's 
twenty-one  thousand  elephants  the  ropes  of  which  (elephants) 
were  made  of  gold  and  silver  (wires?).  An  equal  number  of 
thousands  (of  elephants)  of  Bhoja  (were  posted)  in  the  north. 
(The  bells  of  these  elephants)  made  a  tinkling  sound. 

1.  AJffT,  p.  150  records  ^Nsadaaodika-dundubhi*  si  hit  name.  His 
othex  aame  'Andhaka*  is  not  recorded  there. 

2«  Accordiog  to  the  genealogy  on  p.  105  of  AlHT^  Ahulta  is  the  of 
Funamiu* 


5^.127440  747 

127.  Ahuka  gave  hia  lister AbukI  toAhukandha.  Adaughter 
and  two  sons  were  bom  to  Ahukaodha*, 

128.  The  sons  were  Devaka  and  Ugraaena.  Both  of  them 
were  brilliant  as  if  bom  of  divine  womb.  Heroic  sons  compare 
able  to  Devas  were  born  to  Devaka. 

129.  They  were  Dev&naihdevai  Sudeva  and  Devarafijita. 
Their  sbters  were  seven  whom  he  gave  to  Vasudeva. 

130*131.  They  (the  sisters)  were  V^kadevi^  Upadevft^ 
Devarak$ita,  Srldeva,  fiantideva,  Mahideva  and  Devald  who 
was  the  seventh.  She  was  very  beautiful  to  look  at.  Ugrasena 
had  nine  nom,  the  eldest  of  whom  was  Kazhia. 

132.  The  others  were  Nyagrod ha ^  Sun&ma^  Kadvalahku, 
Bhumayaj  Sutanu,  R&$(rapala»  Yuddbatu^ta  and  Supuffiman* 

133.  Their  sisters  were  live:  Karmavatl,  Dharmavatl^ 
Sat&hku,  R&$trap^&  and  the  comely  lady  Kahv&. 

134.  Ugrasena,  who  was  born  of  Kukura  fdoiily  and  had  a 
large  number  of  children,  was  famous. 

A  man  remembering  this  race  of  Kukuras  of  unmeasured 
splendour  shall  make  his  own  race  vast  and  be  endowed  with 
children. 

135.  Bhajamana’a  sons  were  Rachimukhya,  Viduratha 
Rajyadhideva,  Sura  and  Vidura. 

1 36*1 38.  The  sons  of  Sura  were  more  powerful.  They  were 
Vata,  Nivata,  Sonita,  Svetav&hana,  Sami,  Gadavarma,  Nidlita, 
Sakra  and  Sakrajit.  Sami*s  son  was  Pratik;ipta  and  his  son  was 
Svayambhoja.  Htdika  was  bom  of  Svayambhoja.  Hrdika’s  ten 
sons  were  all  of  terrible  exploits; 

139*140.  Krtavarma  was  the  eldest  and  Satadhanvi  was 
the  middle  one.  The  other  sons  were  Devarha  (Devabahu  in 
Bd.  P.),  Vanarha,  Bhijak,  Dvaitaratha,  Sudanta,  Dhiy&nta, 
Nakavan  and  Kanakodbhava.  A  scholarly  son  Kamalabarbiia 
was  born  to  Devarha. 


*Tbis  seems  to  be  a  wrong  statement.  Xhuka  gave  his  sister  (to  the 
prince  of Avanti) .  Xhuka  married  princess  of  KUh  from  her  he  bad  two 
sons  Devaka  and  Ugrasena.  Bd.  P.  2.3.71.12$  clearly  states  : 

Ahukdt  d9cu  putrm/  samha^hOtfiiu^  , 

Vide  AJHT,  p.  105. 


748 


VijuPufSifa 


141.  Hit  sons  were  Asamaujas  and  the  famous  Susamaujas. 
Kr$oa  gave  Sudaih$^a  and  Surupa^  (as  sons  in  adoption)  to 
Asamaujas  to  whom  no  son  was  born  {ajfUafmtrdya).  Thus 
Andhakas  have  been  recounted. 

142.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  he  who  daily  glorifies 
this  race  of  Andhakas,  gains  an  extensive  race  for  himself. 

143.  Sura  begot  Devamanusi  of  Asmakl.  Sura  begot  of 
Ma^  (M^i^  in  Bd.  P.)  (the  son)  Dcvaznidhufa. 

144.  Ten  men  (i.e.  sons)  were  bom  of  Bhafl  (MarifI  in  Bd. 
P.),  the  daughter  of  Bhoj a,  and  Sura.  Themightyarmed  Vasudeva 
was  the  eldest.  He  was  originally  known  as  Anakadundubhi. 

145-146.  As  soon  as  he  was  born,  Dundubhi  (divine  drum) 
sounded  in  heaven.  A  loud  sound  of  inakas  (military  drums) 
rose  up  in  heaven.  A  heavy  shower  of  flowers  fell  in  the  house 
of  Sfira.  In  the  entire  human  world  there  was  no  one  equal  to 
him  in  handsome  features.* 

147*149.  The  fame  of  Vasudeva  who  was  foremost  of  men, 
was  as  brilliant  as  that  of  the  moon.  The  other  sons  were 
Dcvabhaga,  Deva^ravas,  Aiiidrf(i,  Kada,  Nandana,  Bhrfijina, 
Sylona,  Samika,  and  Gandu^.  Four  daughters,  all  excellent 
ladies,  were  also  bom,  viz.  Prtha,  Srutavedi,  8rutakirti  and 
Srutasrava.  There  was  another  (daughter)  Raj&dhidevl.  All 
these  five  became  mothers  of  heroic  sons. 

150-151.  Kunti  of  Bhoja  family  adopted  Pftha  as  his 
daughter.  Pandu  married  her.  Sura  bad  given  her  in  adoption 
to  the  aged  Kuntibhoja  as  he  had  no  child.  Hence  Prtha  be* 
came  known  as  Kunti  and  daughter  of  Kuntibhoja.  Papdu  the 
chief  of  Kurus,  a  great  hero,  took  her  as  wife  from  him. 

152.  Pf*tha  gave  birth  to  three  sons  who  were  brilliant 
like  fire.  They  were  heroes  with  none  to  match  them  in  the 
whole  world.  They  were  equal  to  Indra  in  exploit. 

1.  Sucaadra  and  VasurQpa  according  to  Bd.P.  v.  143. 

2.  Vasudeva’s  unparaJleded  handsomeness  Is  recorded  in  Jaina  works 
alio.  According  to  Jaina  records  Vasudeva  was  banished  by  bis  father,  as 
complaints  were  lodged  to  him  by  dtizens  of  Mathura  about  the  seductive 
eHect  of  his  beauty  on  thev  women.  A  Prakrit  work  called 

(drra  AD.  600)  makes  Vasudeva  a  hero  whose  wanderings  were  a  marriage 
ea^aign.  The  work,  however,  Is  a  Prakrit  version  of  Guoidhya'i  Pailici 
thou|dt  here  the  hero  is  Vasudeva  instead  <3t  NaravShanadatta. 


34J5S*171 


749 


153*  Prthi  gave  birth  to  Yudhi^^hira  from  Dharma>  to 
Bhima  (Vrkodara)  from  Maruta  and  to  Aijuna  (Dhanaftjaya) 
from  Indra. 

154.  It  is  wdl*knowa  that  Nakula  and  Sahadeva  were 
bom  of  Madravad.  Both  of  them  were  endowed  with  hand¬ 
some  features  and  inherent  strength  and  good  qualities. 

153.  The  powerful  and  heroic  lord  of  Karu$a  named 
Dantavaktra  was  bom  of  Srutadevias  the  son  of  Vrddhaiarman* 

156' 158.  Santardana  was  born  of  Snitaklrtii  the  wife  of 
the  prince  of  Kekaya.  Cckitana  and  Brhatk^atra  were  the 
other  two  mighty  (sons) .  Brothers  Vinda  and  Anuvinda  who 
were  very  powerful,  were  bom  of  the  king  of  Avanti  (?)  as 
sons  of  R&jidhidevf. 

The  king  of  Cedi^,  Siiup^a,  was  bom  of  Srutaravi  as  the 
son  of  the  saintly  king  Damagho$a.  His  manliness  is  well  known. 
He  was  formerly  the  ten-necked  (Riva^a) ,  the  slayer  of  enemies. 

159*  16 1.  Yaduiravi  and  Rujakanya  were  his  younger 
brothers.  Vasudeva  had  thirteen  excellent  ladies  as  wives.  Of 
them  Paurav!,  Rohi^,  Madiri,  Apar&,  Bhadra,  VatiakhT  and 
Devakl  the  seventh  (were  the  chief  queens) .  Two  lady  attendants 
Sugandhi  and  Vanaraji  and  two  others  (also  were  married  to 
him)  •  RohinI  and  Pauravl  were  the  daughters  of  V^ln^ka.* 

162-163.  The  blessed  lady,  the  eldest  wife  of  Anakadundu- 
bhi,  RohinI  gave  birth  to  eight  children.  The  eldest  son  was 
Rama.  The  others  were  Skrana,  Niiava,  Durdama,  Damana, 
9ubhra,  Pin^&raka  and  Kufltaka.  She  had  a  daughter  named 
Gitra. 

164- 165*  His  grandsons  bom  to  Rama  were  famous  as 
Ni^ta  and  Utsuka.  Rama  had  other  sons  as  well:  Parivl, 
Par^vanandl,  Siju,  Satyadhfti,  Mandabahya,  Ramona,  Girika, 
Gira,  Suklagulma,  Gulma  and  Daridrantaka. 

166-171.  Saraiu  had  five  daughter?  who  were  bom  prior 
to  these.  They  were  Arci^matl,  Sunanda,  Surasa,  Suvaca  and 
Satabala.  The  following  are  remembered  as  the  sons  and 
grandsons  of  RohinI  :  Bhadr&^va,  Bhadragupti,  Bhadra- 


1«  Bunddkhto4a  snd  the  a^isceat  territory  from  former  Central  Pro¬ 
vinces  (now  the  whole  of  Cedi  is  included  in  new  Madhya  Pradesh). 

2 .  'Younger  sisters  of  B&hlika*  as  per  Bd*  P.V.16S. 


750  Viyu  Pur^ 

vighnat  Bhadrabahu^  Bhadraratha,  Bhadrakalpa,  Suparivaka> 
Klrtiman^  RohitUva,  Bhadraja,  Durmada  and  Abhibh&ta. 

The  sons  and  daughters  of  Madira  were  :  Nanda^Upananda^ 
Mitra,  Kukfimitra)  Acala,  Sthita  (7)»  Pufti  and  Sudeva  (sons) 
and  Citra  and  Upacitra  (daughters) . 

Upabtdiba,  Biihbai  Sattvadanta  and  Mahaujas,  these  four 
were  the  powerful  and  famous  sons  of  Bhadra. 

172-173.  l3auri  (i.e.  Vasudeva)  begot  the  excellent  son 
Kaulika  of  Vailakhl.  He  begot  six  sons  of  Devald»  They  were: 
Su^epa,  KJrtimin,  Tadaya  (Udarii  in  Bd.P.),  Bhadrasena, 
Yajudiya  the  fifth,  and  Bhadravtt  the  sixth.  Kzixm  killed  all  of 
them. 

174.  Under  these  circumstances  Vi{i>u,  the  lord  of  the 
worlds,  lord  of  the  subjects,  was  born  as  the  long-lived 

175.  Afier  him  was  bom  Subhadra  who  used  to  speak 
pleasantly.  She  was  otherwise  known  as  Kr9na.  This  girl  of  the 
family  of  Vfftus  named  Subhadra  became  famous  as 

176.  The  heroic  Abhimanyu  was  born  of  Subhadri  and 
P&rtha  (Arjuna) .  Listen  and  understand  the  names  of  the 
other  heroic  sons  bom  of  Vasudeva  and  his  seven  highly  for¬ 
tunate  wives. 

1 77*1 78.  The  heroic  son  Bhay^kha  was  born  of  Sahadeva. 
S&rngadeva  gave  birth  to  Tambu.  Sauri  (thus)  begot  a  son 
who  made  the  family  flourish.  Four  more  sons  of  his,  viz# 
Upasanga,  Vasu,  Deva  and  Rak^ta  were  killed  by  Kaipsa*  Thus 
he  had  ten  sons.  Kamsa  killed  all  of  them. 

179.  Upadeva  gave  birth  to  all  these  blessed  sons  : 
Vijaya,  Rocana  and  Vardhamana.  (Bd.  P  adds  :  Devala.) 

180.  Vrkadevi  gave  birth  to  nobIe*souled  Svag^ava. 
(This  lady  was  known  by  these  names  as  well)  Agahi,  Svasa, 
6i£rayin!  and  Surupi. 

181.  Dcvak I  of  beautiful  nose  gave  birth  to  Bhu  (Sri- 
kripaT)  ^  her  seventh  son.  (Afterwards)  she  gave  birth  to  the 
blessed  Gave^i^a,  who  could  fight  in  battle  in  wonderfully 
diverse  ways. 

182.  6auri  (Vasudeva)  begot  of  Saibyi  the  immutable 
(economical  ?}  son  (Kautika  alias  Srfiddhadeva)  who  formerly 


S4. 183492 


751 


implanted  a  forest^,  O  Br&hma^* 

183.  Sugandhi  and  VanarAjl  (the  servanUmaids  mentioned 
before)  were  also  the  wives  of  ^uri.  Pu^dra  and  Kapila  were 
Vasudeva’s  sons  bom  of  Sugandhi  (Bd.P.v.  186).  Of  them  Puddl'd 
became  a  king  and  Kapila  went  to  the  forest. 

184.  Of  the  other  lady  (Vanaraji)  Vasudeva  had  another 
powerful  son  who  was  a  foremost  wi  elder  of  bow.  He  was  a 
king  called  Nifida. 

185.  Mah&bhiga  was  the  famous  son  of  Devar&ta.  They 
call  the  son  bom  of  Devairavas  as  one  honoured  by  scholars. 

186.  Nivarta  begot  of  Almaki  the  sons  An&dr9tl  ^f  S^cat 

fame,  add  hade  va  of  great  strength  and  Sakraiatnighna. 

187.  (Defective  verse)  ^  Sridhadeva  was  well  known  as 
the  founder  of  Niyadha  (Ni^ida)  (?)  kingdom.  Ekalavya  of 
great  prowess  was  nurtured  and  brought  up  by  Nif&das  (hunting 
tribes) . 

188.  With  pleasure  Kr^na  gave  his  sons  Ckrudes^a  and 
Skmba  who  had  all  praiseworthy  characteristics  and  who  had 
learned  the  use  of  miraculous  weaponSi  to  Ganduya  who  was 
childless. 

189.  Tantija  and  Tandmala  were  Kanaka’s  own  sons. 
Vasudeva  of  great  exploit  gave  them  to  Vast&vani  who  had  no 
child.  Sauti  gave  his  heroic  sons  8auri  and  Kauiika  to  him. 

190.  (Other  members  of  this  family  were)  Tapas,  Krod- 
hanUj  Virajas,  Syama  and  Srfijima.  Sy&ma  was  childless  and  he 
went  to  the  forest.  He  contemptuously  treated  his  status  as  a 
member  of  the  Bhoja  clan.  He  secured  the  status  of  a  Rajaryi 
(a  royal  sage) . 

191.  He  who  reads  this  story  of  Kr^^'s  birth  after  regu« 
larly  observing  rites,  and  also  narrates  it  to  Brahma^as  shall 
attain  great  happiness. 

192.  Lord  Nariyatia  of  great  splendour,  lord  of  Devas» 
the  lord  of  subjects  (Prajapati)  was  formerly  bom  among  men 
out  of  sportfulness. 


1.  Readiog  in  A  adopted. 

2.  Bd.  P.v,  190  gives  a  better  reading  and  meant:  *EkaUvym,  the 
highly  lucky  ton  was  bom  to  Sriddhadeva.  He  was  brought  up  by  Ni|Sdai 
( a  foreit  tribe)  and  so  he  wit  well  known  at  Natfldi.* 


752 


PwNtfa 

193.  The  !otus*eyed  lord  was  born  orDevaki  and  Vasudeva, 
thanks  to  their  penance.  It  should  be  known  that  he  had  divine 
form  with  four  arms.  He  was  endowed  with  glory. 

IS^.  Even  after  beo^ming  the  son  of  Aditi  (Devak!) ,  the 
delighter  (or  scion)  of  the  Yadavaclan  (Kx^j^)  is  weII«known 
as  god  VisQU,  the  younger  brother  of  lodra. 

195.  Though  Nariyatta  took  births  he  is  still  (the 

unchanging).  The  Lord  N&riya^a  is  still  eternal  even  after  be* 
coming  Hari. 

196.  It  was  he  who  created  the  primordial  being  Praj&pati 
formerly.  Even  after  becomii^  the  son  of  Aditi  (Devaki)  the 
delighter  (or  scion)  of  the  Yadava  clan  (Kffna)  is  well  known 
as  god  Vif  nu>  the  younger  brother  of  Indrsu 

197.  It  was  he  who  blessed  Aditi  with  his  grace  and  was 
bom  as  her  son  for  the  purpose  of  slaying  Daityas,  Danavas  and 
Riksasas,  the  enemies  of  Suras. 

198.  The  family  of  the  intelligent  Vasudeva,  bom  of  the 
race  of  Yayiti,  became  certainly  meritorious  and  holy  because 
Lord  Narayana  resorted  to  it. 

199.  While  Janardana  was  being  bom^  the  oceans  trembl* 
ed,  the  mountains  shook  and  the  sacrificial  fires  blazed. 

200.  While  Janardana  was  bom,  the  winds  blew  auspici* 
ously.  All  dust  subsided.  All  the  luminaries  shone  more  brilli¬ 
antly. 

201.  The  asterism  on  the  day  when  Janardana  was  born 
was  Abbijit  by  name.  The  night  was  called  JayantI  (the  8th  of 
the  dark  half  of  Sravapa  with  the  constellation  Robi^l  rising  at 
midnight) .  And  the  Muhurta  (the  specific  period  at  the  time 
of  his  birth)  was  Vijaya  by  name. 

202.  The  unmanifest,  eternal  Lord  Hari,  Narayapa,  Krs]?a 
fescinated  the  people  with  his  eyes  as  he  was  born. 

203.  The  lord  of  Devas  (Indra)  showered  flowers  from 
the  firmament*  Exilogising  Madhtisudana  (Kf  9^)  with  auspi* 
cious  words  thousands  of  great  sages  and  Gandharvas  offered 
prayer  unto  him. 

204.  Vasudeva  saw  lord  Adhokyaja  (whose  form  is  beyond 
the  ken  of  the  physical  sense-organs)  bom  at  night  as  his  son 
endowed  with  the  characteristic  curl  of  hair  called  Srivatsa  and 
accompanied  by  various  divine  signs  in  heaven. 


34«205-215 


753 


Vasudeva  thereaft^  requested:  “O lordi  withdrawyour  fonn« 

205.  I  say  this,  O  dear  one,  as  I  am  very  much  afraid  of 
Kaihsa.  My  sons,  your  elder  brothers,  were  very  wonderful  in 
appearance  but  were  killed  by  him*\ 

206,  On  hearing  the  words  of  Vasudeva,  the  lord  withdrew 
hb  form.  Permitted  by  him  (the  lord)  >  the  father  took  him  to 
the  abode  of  Nandagopa.  Abiding  by  the  suggestion  of  Ugra- 
sena,^  he  gave  (the  child)  to  Yaloda  then. 

20 7«  Yajoda  and  Devald  had  been  pregnant  simultane* 
ously.  Yaloda  was  the  wife  of  Nandagopa,  the  Lord  of  (herd  of) 
cows. 

208.  Yaloda  had  given  birth  to  a  daughter  in  the  same 
night  as  Kr^^a  was  born  as  the  lord  of  the  race  of  Vr^i. 

209.  Protecting  the  son  bora  to  him,  Vasudeva  of  great 
fame,  handed  him  over  to  Yalodi  and  took  the  daughter  with 
him. 

210.  Handing  him  over  to  Nandagopa,  (Vasudeva)  spoke, 
^^Save  me.  Thb  (adopted)  son  of  your  shall  be  the  bcstowcr 
of  all  happiness  to  Ysuiavas.  This  is  that  (long  expected) 
child  of  Devakt.  He  shall  put  an  end  to  all  our  pain  and  misery.** 

21 1 .  Anakadundubhi  took  that  girl  to  the  son  of  Ugrasena 
(i.e.  Kamsa)  and  informed  him:  **Tlus  is  the  girl  of  auspiciotu 
characteristics’*. 

212.  Kamsa  had  not  known  (till  then)  that  a  child  had 
been  born  to  his  sister.  The  wicked^minded  one  became  de¬ 
lighted  and  spared  that  girl. 

213.  The  foolish  one  muttered  within  himself:  *‘If  it  is  a 
girl  she  b  already  slain  !**  That  daughter  grew  up  well  respected 
in  the  abode  ofV|r$nis. 

214-215:  (Defective)  Just  as  gods  bring  up  gods^  they 
protected  her  like  a  son.  They  said  that  a  daughter  had  been 

1.  in  the  tact  ii  confusins*  Bd.  P.v.  212  reads 
(who  was  staying)  in  the  house  of  Ugrasena'*. 

2.  The  text  *PiUnnat  dioo  dfuSn  yoM  /*  translated  above  li 

irrelevant  to  the  context.  It  gives  cogent  sense  if  emended  as  in  Bd.  P.  2.3*72, 

220,  as  follows  : 

putroDct  dipf  dreM  imtdd  tadi 

^Tbentbe  goddess  (Devald)  gladly  brought  up  the  goddess  (Ekidall) 
like  (her  o%vn)  son.’ 


754 


Vdyu  Pwrdtfa 


duly  born  (Goddess)  Ekadaii  is  born  for  the  protection  of 
Keiava.  VN^th  delighted  minds  all  the  Yidavas  will  worship  her. 

the  lord  of  t>evas>  of  divine  physical  form  is  well  protected 
by  her.*^ 

Thi  Sagis  saidl 

216.  Why  did  Kamsa^  the  king  of  the  Bhoja  family^  kill  the 
sons  of  Vasudeva  even  when  they  were  (mere)  infants?  It  be¬ 
hoves  you  to  explain  this  to  us. 

SUta  saidl 

217«218«  Listen  why  the  foolish  Kaihsa  killed  the  infant 
sons  of  Anakadundubhi  (Vasudeva)  immediately  after  their 
birth.  (I  shall  explain)  bow«  out  of  fear,  the  mighty-armed 
Kffpa  was  taken  elsewhere  immediately  after  birth  and  how 
Govioda,  (though)  the  supreme  person  was  brought  up  among 
the  cows. 

219.  It  is  reported  that  Kanisa,  then  the  crown  prince, 
acted  as  a  charioteer  of  the  self-possessed  Vasudeva  along  with 
Devak]  (in  their  marriage) . 

220.  Then  there  arose  in  the  sky  a  divine  voice  of  some 
incomprehensible  person.  It  was  distinctly  loud  and  clear  and 
was  witnessed  by  all  people.  Thereby  Karhsa  remained  panicky 
perpetually  (throughout  his  life). 

221.  Kamsa,  the  seventh  (?)  child  of  this  lady  whom 
you  drive  in  your  chariot  out  of  affection,  will  be  the  cause  of 
your  death.** 

222.  On  hearing  that  (aerial)  voice,  the  foolish  Kaihsa 
became  distressed.  Unsheathing  hissword^  he  evinced  his  desire 
to  kill  her. 

223.  The  mighty-armed  and  valorous  Vasudeva  spoke  to 
Kaxnsa,  the  son  of  Ugrasena,  out  of  friendliness  and  affection. 

224-228,  **Itdoes  not  behove  any  Kfatriya  to  kill  a  woman 
at  any  time.  O  scion  of  the  family  of  Yadus,  I  have  seen  a  way 
out  in  this  matter.  O  King,  I  shall  hand  over  to  you  the 
sevenrit  child  that  will  be  bom  of  her.  You  may  do  whatever 
you  deem  fit  then.  Even  now,  O  liberal  one  in  giving  Dak^i^ii, 


34.22d-235 


755 


you  caa  do  as  you  wiahK  I  shall  (even)  promise  that  I  will  give 
you  all  her  childem*  O  excellent  man,  this  promise  mil  never 
be  falsified*’*  Thus  implored  and  propitiated  Kaihsa  (agreed  to 
the  proposal  of)  seizing  all  the  children.  Vasudeva  rejoiced  in 
having  got  back  his  wife  (alive).  So  Kaihsa,  the  foolish  man  of 
sinful  deeds,  went  on  killing  the  sons  (one  after  the  other) . 

Thi  Sagts  said: 

229.  Who  is  this  Vasudeva  who  begot  Vi$Qu  ?  Who  is  this 

Devakl,  the  lady  of  fame,  who  gave  birth  to  Who  is 

this  Nandagopa  and  who  is  thisfamous  lady  Yaiodi  who  brought 
him  up? 

Suta  said : 

230.  All  the  men  (of  the  Yadu  race)  were  the  incarnations 
of  Ka^yapa  and  all  the  women  of  Aditi^.  The  mighty*armed 
lord  (thus)  fulfilled  the  desires  of  Devakl. 

231.  The  lord  entered  a  human  body  and  moved  about  on 
the  earth.  By  means  of  his  Yogic  Maya  the  Yogic^^souled  lord 
infatuated  all  living  beings. 

232.  When  Dharma  declined,  Vi$QU  himself  incarnated  in 
the  race  of  Vr^nts  in  order  to  reestablish  Dharma  and  to  annihi¬ 
late  Asuras. 

233-234.  He  married  thegirl  Rukminl,  Satya  the  daughter 
ofNagnaJit,  Satyabhami  the  daughter  of  Satrijit,  Jambavati, 
Rohipl,  Saibyft,  SudevI,  MadrI,  Suilla,  Kalindl,  Mitravinda, 
Laksma^,  JalavasinI  and  others. 

235.  Thus  he  had  sixteen  thousand  wives.  After  consult¬ 
ing  Devas,  Sakra  had  sent  down  to  the  earth  the  most 


1 .  The  vrordi  tom  toidSnim  in  the  text  are  absurd  as  they  would  mean  free 
peunisnoQ  to  Kaihsa  to  kill  Devaki.  They  need  etnmdation  oo  naloid&tfm,  as 
inBd.F.  ibid  v.  253.  It  means  *‘Do  not  behave  now  in  the  way  you  wish*’. 
Vasudeva  wanted  to  save  Devaki*#  life  and  hence  requested  Kaibsa  not  to 
kiU  her. 

2.  Thisis  a  strangeiutemeat  Bd.P.  v.  238  states  that  Vasudeva  and 
Devakl  were  Kalyapa  and  Adid  in  their  former  life.  Our  text  does  not 
answer  who  was  Nandagopa  and  Yaiodi  but  Bd.P.v.  239  informs  that 
Nanda  ww  a  Vatu  called  Drooa  and  Yaiodi,  his  wife  Dhart.  Bh.  P> 
X.8.48.51  conBrm  it. 


756  VijmPura$a 

excellent  ones  among  the  celestial  damsdi  whom  it  if  said 
there  are  fourteen  groups* 

236.  In  order  to  become  the  wives  of  V&sudeva,  theyi 
were  born  in  royal  palaces.  These  were  the  blessed  ladies 
famous  as  Vifvaksena^s  wives. 

237-240.  Pradyumna»  Cirude^pa^  Sudefna,  3arabha»  O&ru, 
Carubhadra,  Bhadracaru,  and  Caruvindhya  were  the  sons  of 
Rukminl.  She  had  a  daughter  Cirumatl. 

Sanu,  Bhanu,  Alc^«  Rohita^  Mantraya^  Jarandhaka,  T&mra* 
vak^aSi  Bhaumari  and  Jarandhama  were  the  sons  of  theGaruda- 
bannered  lord  (Kr9pa)  and  Satyabhami.  They  had  four  sisters^ 
viz.  Bhanu,  Bhaumarika,  TamraparpI  and  Jarandhama. 

Now  listen  to  the  children  of  Jaihbavati. 

241.  Bhadra,  Bhadragupta^  Bhadravindra  and  the  famous 
Saptab&hu  were  the  sons;  Bbadr&vail  and  the  famous  Sambo* 
dhani  were  the  daughters.  These  should  be  known  as  Jamba vatl*s 
children. 

242.  Sahgramajit,  datajit,  and  Sahasrajit  are  glorified  as 
the  sons  of  Sude>d  and  Vi^vaksena  (i.e.  Kr^na). 

243.  Vfka,  Vrkalva,  Vfkajit^  Mitrabahu  and  Suidtha  were 
the  sons.  Vfj ini  and  Suradgana'  were  the  daughters.  These 
are  the  children  of  the  daughter  of  Nagnajit  (i.e.  Satya) . 

244.  Thus  know  that  be  had  thousands  of  sons.  (Some  say) 
that  Vasudeva  had  hundred  thousands  of  sons. 

245.  Ten  thousand  and  eight  of  them  (or  eighty  thousand 
of  them)  were  heroic  and  experts  in  battle.  The  family  of 
Janardana  has  been  recounted  to  you  factually. 

246.  Brhatl  (known  also  as)  Nartakonneyi  was  united  (in 
wedlock)  with  Sunaya.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Bfhaduktha 
the  noble*souled  scion  of  the  family  of  Suni  (Sauneya) . 

247.  Her  sons  were  three  in  number.  They  were  well  known 
as  shining  splendidly  in  war»  viz.  Angada»  Ktixnuda  and  Sveta. 
She  had  a  daughter  too  named  Svetd. 

248.  Avagaha’,  Gitra  and  the  heroic  Gitravara  (were 


1.  The  reading  oariAiond  in  Bd.P.  v.  2S2  implies  that  excelleatlr 
beaudfii]  Vijini  was  the  oaly  dau^ter  of  Satyf. 

2.  Bd.  P.v.  257  reads  and  implies  Qitra,  8ura  and  Gitravara 

as  hit  sons. 


34.249-257 


757 


f^ous  membersof the  race}  *  Gttravaras  son  waa  Gitrasena 

and  his  daughter  was  Gitravaci. 

249«  TVzmba  and  Tumbabioa  were  the  two  sons  of  Janas- 
tamba.  Vajr&ra  and  K^ipra  are  remembered  to  be  the  sons  of 
Up&hga. 

250.  Bhudndrasena  and  Bhuri  were  the  two  sons  of  Gave;a. 
Yudhi^thira’s  daughter  Sutanu  was  well-known. 

251 .  The  famous  son  of  A  iva  named  Vajra  was  bom  of  her. 
Vajra’s  son  was  Pratib&hu  and  Sucaru  was  bis  son. 

252.  Kkimi  (Princess  of  Kifi — ^Bd.P.)  gave  birth  to  the 
son  Sup&riva  and  S&mba  to  Tarasvin.  The  sons  of  the  noble- 
soul  ed  Yidavas  were  three  crores. 

253.  Six  million  of  them  were  extremely  valorous  and  very 
strong.  All  these  men  of  great  prowess  were  born  of  the  parts 
of  Devas. 

254.  They  were  bom  in  the  family  of  Y&davas  in  order 
to  exterminate  the  Asuras  of  great  penance  who  had  been 
born  among  human  beings  in  this  world  and  were  harassing 
them.  These  Asuras  had  been  killed  in  the  battles  between 
Devas  and  Asuras. 

255.  There  were  eleven  distinct  families  of  the  noble-souled 
Yadavas.  But  in  the  family  of  Vifnu  (i.e.  K^f^a)  all  of  them 
merged  as  though  into  one  family. 

256.  Visnu  was  their  authority  and  the  leader  for  them. 
All  of  tbem»  all  human  beings*,  obeyed  his  behests  and  abided 
by  his  directions. 

257.  Thus  the  progeny  of  Vr^Ois  has  been  glorified 
succinctly  and  in  detaib.  The  glorification  of  these  bestows  fame 
and  fulfilment  of  cherished  desires. 


*The  text  ii  a  bit  obscure.  in  the  2nd  line  it  emended  as 

(as  in  Bd.  P.v.  262)  itmeana  ‘suras  and  human  beingi  are 
bound  by  those  who  abide  by  his  (Kfsna**)  bebesu*. 


758 


CHAPTER  THIRTYPIVEi 

JVars  between  Suras  and  Asuras :  Bhfgu  curses  Vtf^ : 

The  Eulogy  cf  Sathbhu  by  Sukra 

1*3.  Understand  the  Devas  who  had  assumed  human 
nature  and  bom  as  they  are  being  glorified. 

Sathkar;a9a,  Visudeva,  Pradyumna,S&mba  andAniruddha — 
these  five  are  glorified  as  the  race*  (of  Vr$his). 

The  Seven  Sages,  Kubera,  the  Yakfa  Mai^vara,  Salaki, 
Badara,  the  scholarly  Dhanvaotari,  Nandin  Mah&deva  (?), 
S&lahk&yana,  Ji^itu  in  Bd.  P.),  the  primordial  god 

along  with  these  divine  beings  (are  being  narrated). 

The  Sages  said  : 

4.  Why  did  Vif^u  incarnate?  How  many  incarnations  are 
remcmbred?  How  many  are  the  future  manifestations  of  the 
great  soul? 

5.  Why  is  he  bom  in  Br&hmana  and  Kfatriya  families  at  the 
cloung  periods  of  the  Yugas?  Why  does  he  incarnate  again 
and  again  among  human  beings?  Please  explain  it  to  us  who 
(being  curious  to  know)  enquire  of  you. 

6.  We  wish  to  hear  completely  and  in  detail  all  the  acti* 

vities  of  the  intelligent  the  slayer  of  enemies  in  different 

bodies  (incarnations) « 

7.  O  Suta^  O  holy  lord,  it  behoves  you  to  narrate  in  the 
proper  order  his  various  activities,  the  different  manifestations 
as  well  as  hia  nature  to  U5« 

8.  How  did  that  lord  Vi^QU  (well-renowned)  among 
Suras  as  the  slayer  of  their  extern ie$r  adopt  the  state  of  being 
the  son  of  Vasudeva,  in  his  family? 

9.  O  Suta,  what  (special)  meritorious  act  was  performed 
by  the  deathless  Devas  who  invariably  perform  meritorious 
deeds,  as  a  result  of  which  (the  lord)  left  the  region  of  Devas 
and  came  over  to  the  world  of  mortals? 


K  Th»  chaptei*  eorretpoods  to  Bd.  P.  2.3,72;  the  reference*  are  to 
the  vcfve  numbers  of  that  chap  ter. 

2.  The  list  tbowt  the  influence  of  Paficarfttra  school  in  that  period. 


35.10-20 


750 

10.  Why  did  the  leader  of  Devas  ud  human  beiiigs^ 
Hari,  the  lource  of  origin  of  the  worlds  Bhu^  and  Bhuval^, 
install  his  divine  soul  in  a  human  womb? 

11.  It  is  he  who  makes  the  mental  cycles  of  human  beings 
revolve  and  function.  He  is  the  foremost  among  the  wieldcrs  of 
discus.  Why  did  he  decide  to  be  born  among  human  beings? 

12.  It  is  he  who  affords  protection  to  all  the  worlds*  and 
the  whole  universe.  Why  did  that  lord  Viypu  descend  to  the 
earth  and  emulate  (an  ordinary)  cowherd? 

13.  He  is  the  Atman  of  all  living  bdnga.  He  has  created 
and  sustained  all  the  great  Bhutas  (elements).  He  is  the 
Sfigarbha  (having  glory  and  splendouri  within  him).  How 
was  he  retained  in  the  womb  by  a  woman  of  the  earth? 

14.  It  was  he  who  measured  the  three  worlds  in  three 
paces  at  the  request  of  Devas.  It  was  by  him  that  the  three 
paths  of  the  worlds  consisting  of  the  three  Vargas  (i.e.  Dharma, 
Kama  and  Artha?)  were  laid  down. 

1 5.  At  the  time  of  dissolution  of  the  universe  he  assumed 
the  form  consisting  of  waters  and  drank  up  the  whole  universe. 
He  made  the  whole  world  a  vast  sheet  of  water  through  the 
visible  and  invisible  paths. 

16«  In  the  Puratt^  he  is  (eulogised  as)  PurUndMl  (the 
ancient  soul) .  He  assumed  the  physical  form  of  a  Boar. 
He  is  the  most  excellent  of  Suras  who  redeemed  the  earth 
and  gave  it  over  to  Suraa« 

17.  Hiranyakalipu,  a  demon  of  yore,  who  possessed  great 
prowess,  had  been  killed  by  him  assuming  a  leonine  body 
divided  into  two  (as  half  man,  half  lion). 

18.  Formerly,  the  omnipresent  lord  became  the  Aurva  fire 
(also  called)  the  Samvartaka  fire  (fire  of  dissolution),  and 
stationed  himself  in  the  nether  worlds  within  the  ocean.  He 
drank  Havis  (sacrificial  ofiezings)  in  the  form  of  water. 

19.  It  is  he  whom  they  (the  sages)  call  in  every  Yuga  as 
the  lord  with  a  thousand  feet,  thousand  rays,  the  lord  having 
thousands  (of  forms),  and  thousand  heads. 

20.  When  the  whole  world  was  a  vast  sheet  of  water,  the 
abode  of  god  Brahmi  (Pitkmaha)  came  out  of  hU  navel  even 
as  fire  comes  out  of  Ara^i.  It  (the  abode)  was  a  Paftkaja(a  lotus, 


760  Vdjm  Pufdfta 

but  literally  *one  botn  of  mud’)  but  It  was  not  born  of  any 
PaAka  (mud). 

21.  It  was  by  him  that  Daityas  were  killed  in  the 
Tarakimaya  battle^  after  ad<^ting  a  body  consuting  of  all  (the 
spirits  of)  Devas  and  holding  all  weapons. 

22.  The  haughty  Kalanemi  was  defeated  and  struck  down 
by  him  (the  lord)  seated  on  the  back  ofGaruda. 

Resorting  to  his  eternal  Yogic  power  and  enveloping  (every¬ 
thing)  in  dense  darkness,  be  reclines  (on  his  serpent  couch)  on 
the  northern  part  of  the  ocean  of  milk,  the  ocean  that  yielded 
nectar.  He  (wards  off)  the  great  darkness  (of  ignorance). 

23 .  (Defective  verse)  Thanks  to  the  intensity  of  her  penance, 
formerly  Aditi  ratained  him  in  her  womb  like  Arapi  (holding 
fire  within  it) .  When  Indr  a  was  surrounded  by  the  hosts  of 
Daityas,  it  was  he  who  saved  him  by  contemptuously  warding 
them  off  from  the  womb? 

24.  When  the  Wind-god*  (?)  deprived  (Daityas) 
of  their  hold  (from  all  positions)  in  the  world  and  made 
Daityas  remain  sub-merged  in  waters,  the  primordial  Lord 
made  Devas  the  resident  of  heaven  and  made  Indra  (Puru- 
huta)  the  Lord  of  Devas. 

25-26.  It  was  the  same  Adideva*  who  laid  down  the  process 
of  preparing  the  Ahavaidya  fire  by  means  of  Garhapatya  and 
Aiivaharya  rites.  He  created  the  altar,  the  Kufa  grass,  the 
prok/affiyainwd  (the  sacrificial  ladle  with  which  the  offering  is 
taken  or  holy  water  sprinkled)  and  the  materiab  for  Avabhfiha 
(the  final  ablution).  He  laid  down  the  rules  of  selectix^  the 
three  persons^  (?)  entitled  to  offer  Havya  in  a  sacrifice. 

27.  He  made  Suras  the  partakers  of  Havyas  and 
Pitn  the  partakers  of  Kavyas.  In  order  to  enjoy  (him- 

1.  The  battle  that  ensued  after  the  abduction  of  T&ri  by  Soma. 

2.  Purioas  do  xiot  attribute  thU  feat  to  the  Wind-god.  Bd.  P.  2-S.72.2S 

reads  for  yadd'niU  hereof.  Bd.  P.  reading  means  ‘He  mode  the 

regions  of  world  as  the  abodes  of  the  people’. 

3.  Venet  2^29  givetoViihu  the  credit  of  founding  the  iostitution 
of  ncrifiee. 

4*  The  readiog  ‘alM  <rSi  ike  (translated  here  at  ^selecting  three 

pefSont’)  is  wrong.  Bd.  P.  2.S.72.25  reads  ‘then  he 

created  sages’  (for  paftiopatioo  in  sacrifices) . 


35.28-36 


761 

self)  by  the  sacrificial  procedure^  he  himself  became  Yajfta,  in 
the  sacrificial  rite. 

28*29.  By  dint  of  his  supreme  power,  he  created  and  made 
resplendent  the  requisite  material  for  sacrifices  such  as  T^pas 
(sacrificial  posts),  tSomtU  (holy  tw^),  Stuo^  (sacred  ladles), 
Soma  (the  creeper  or  its  juice  called  soma),  Paviifc  (the  special 
holy  ring  of  Kuia  grass),  Paridhi  (the  holy  twigs  of  Palana  etc. 
laid  round  the  sacrificial  fire),  the  sacrificial  fires,  sada^s 
(members  of  the  sacrificial  assembly),  TajamSna  (the  performers 
of  sacrifices)  and  excellent  sacrifices  like  horse  sacrifice  and 
others. 

30*31.  Afier  creating  the  three  worlds  in  order  in  accoiv 
dance  with  the  Yugas,  he  made  all  the  following  things: 
(Measures  of  Time  such  as)  (moments), 

KdfthdSy  Kalds^  and  all  the  three  periods  of  time  (past,  present, 
and  future) ,  periods  of  time  such  as  MuhUrias  (periods  of  48 
minutes  each),  Tithis  (days  of  the  lunar  fortnight),  months,  days, 
years,  seasons,  various  specific  of  time,  the  three  kinds  of 

Pramd^  (means  of  valid  knowledge)  etc. 

32-34.  He  created  the  span  of  life,  K^flras  (?  fields) ,  increase^ 
characteristics,  beauty  of  fbrmi  intellect,  wealth,  heroism,  the 
ability  to  comprehend  the  sacred  lore,  the  three  castes,  the 
three  Vidyds  (Lores),  the  three  fires,  the  three  periods  of  time, 
the  three  rites,  the  three  and  the  three  Gu^as  (Sattva, 

Rajas  and  Tamas) .  It  was  by  his  infinite  power  (of  creation) 
that  he  created  the  worlds,  gods.  All  the  Bhutas  and  Gapas 
were  created  by  him  who  is  the  Aiman  (soul)  of  them  all  (living 
beings  and  Bhuta  Ganas). 

33.  He  sports  in  the  sense-organs  of  men  by  means  of  his 
Yogic  power.  He  is  the  lord  of  diverse  things.  He  is  present 
everywhere.  He  is  the  leader  of  arrivals  and  departures  (Gala 
and  Agata)  i.e.  all  sorts  of  movements.  ' 

36.  He  is  the  goal  unto  those  endowed  with  piety  and 
virtue  and  is  inaccessible  to  those  of  sinful  deeds.  He  is  ^  the 
source  of  origin  of  the  system  of  four  castes  and  protector  of  the 
same. 


*  Probably  Af Strife  ^ucuUof  time*  at  in  Bd.  F.  2.3.72.S2. 


762 


Purd^ 


37«S8.  He  Js  the  knower  of  the  four  Vidyaj,  viz*  /inulkf  tiff 
TrayU  Vdrid  and  Danimiti.  and  the  supporter  of  the  four  Airamas 
(stages  of  life).  He  is  the  space  between  quarters^  the  sky^  the 
earth,  the  waters,  the  fire,  the  wind,  the  quarters,  the  two  lu¬ 
minaries,  the  sun  and  the  moon*  He  is  the  lord  of  the  Yugas 
and  the  night  wanderers  (Rak^asa?)  *  In  the  Vedas  he  is  spoken 
ofas  the  great  lord  and  as  the  great  penance* 

39.  It  is  he  who  is  greater  than  penance;  they  call  him 
the  supreme  one,  the  possessor  of  the  great  soul*  He  is  the  lord, 
first  among  the  Adityas  (sons  of  Aditi)*  He  is  the  lord,  the 
destroyer  of  the  Daityas* 

40.  At  the  close  of  the  Yugas,  he  is  the  annihilator.  He 
is  the  slayer  of  the  destroyers  of  the  worlds.  He  is  the  bridge 
(or  the  boundary)  of  all  the  boundaries  of  the  worlds.  He  is 
the  purest  among  all  those  of  pure  rites* 

41.  HeisdteFs^e  (one  who  should  be  known)  for  the 
Vedic  scholars;  he  is  the  lord  of  all  powerful  persons*  He  is  the 
Soma  to  all  living  beings;  he  is  the  Agni  (Fire-god)  for  those 
of  fiery  splendour. 

42.  He  is  the  mind  of  men;  he  is  the  penance  of  the  asce¬ 
tics;  he  is  the  modesty  of  those  satisfied  with  good  policy  and 
he  b  the  splendour  of  the  refulgent* 

43-44.  He  is  the  Vigraha  (body)  [of  all  embodied  beings. 
He  is  the  goal  of  those  who  achieve  their  goaF. 

Vayu  is  bom  of  Akaia  (Ether)*  Hutaiana  (Fire)  has  Vayu 
as  its  vital  essence*  Devas  have  their  vital  essence  in  fire  and 
Madhusudana  (Krst^)  u  the  vital  essence  of  Agni. 

Rasa  (the  lymphatic  juice)  becomes  blood ;  flesh  is  deve¬ 
loped  out  of  blood.* 

45-47*  From  flesh  fat  b  produced  and  bone  b  developed 
from  fat*  Pith  and  marrow  are  developed  from  bone  and 
semen  virile  is  generated  from  marrow;  foetus  b  developed 
from  semen  through  the  asdmilative  activity  of  Rasa — bodily 
fluid  (or  through  the  activity  rooted  in  sexual  pleasure) .  At 


1*  Or  :  He  tt  the  velocity  of  those  which  are  in  motion* 

2.  Verses  44b37  deal  with  embryology  with  special  emphasis  on  Vi|QU*s 
power. 


35.48-57 


763 


first  it  is  in  fluid  stftte.  This  is  called  the  Saumya  Rdii.  It 
is  called  the  second  RUiwhenitis  heated  by  the  warmth 
(temperature)  in  the  womb.  Semen  should  be  known  as  of  the 
nature  of  Soma  (Moon)  and  menstrual  blood  as  of  the  nature 
of  fire. 

48.  These  two  secretions  (evolutes)  follow  Rasa  (lympha¬ 
tic  juice).  In  semen  (the  mixture  of  semen  and  menstrual 
blood)  there  are  Soma  (Moon)  and  fire.  Semen  comes  under 
the  category  of  Kapka  (phlegmatic  humour)  and  menstrual 
blood  comes  under  the  category  of  Pitta  (bilious  humour) . 

49.  The  receptacle  of  Xapha  is  heart.  Pitta  is  held  in 
navel.  Heart  in  the  centre  of  body  is  the  place  of  mind. 

50.  Lord  Hut&iana  (Fire)  b  stationed  in  the  umbilical 
cavity.  Mind  should  be  known  as  Prajapaii  (Brahmk)  and 
Kapha  is  considered  as  Soma  ( Moon) . 

51.  Pitta  u  considered  as  fire*  Hence  the  universe  consists 
of  Agni  and  Soma.  The  foetus  thus  originating  stays  there  like 
a  patch  of  cloud. 

52.  V5yu  enters  and  becomes  united  with  the  great  soul. 
It  is  divided  into  five  within  the  body  and  develops  (the 
foetus) . 

53.  The  five  divisions  are  Prlbyi^  Apdna,  Sarndna^  Uddna  and 
yydna.  Among  them  Prd^a  moves  round  and  develops  the 
great  soul. 

54.  Apdna  b  situated  in  the  lower  half  of  the  body.  Uddna 
circulates  in  the  upper  half  of  the  body.  Vydxta  b  called  so 
because  it  pervades  the  whole  body.  Samdna  is  present  in  all 
the  joints. 

53.  Thereafter,  the  five  elements,  viz.  Earth,  Wind, 
Ether,  Water  and  Fire  the  fifth  one,  are  attained  by  the  foetus. 
Then  it  becomes  perceivable  by  the  sense-organs. 

56.  All  the  sense-organs  enter  into  that  (foetus)  and  per¬ 
form  their  respective  functions.  They  call  it  then  the  earthly 
(physical)  body  and  the  vnnd  b  called  Prd^dtman  (having  the 
characteristic  form  of  Pra^,  the  vital  air) . 

57.  The  pores  of  the  body  have  Ether  as  the  source  of 
their  origin.  It  is  from  the  element  water  that  the  liquid  form- 


VdyuPwtS>f^ 


ation  (and  exudation)  in  the  body  take  place*  The  fiery  element 
enters  the  eyes  in  the  form  of  moonlight  (?)  The  groups  of 
objects  function  due  to  his  prowess* 


Thi  Sagts  enquirtd: 

58*  How  did  Vi^ou,  the  Puru^  who  creates  all  these  and 
all  the  worlds^  attain  human  state  in  the  mortal  world? 

59.  O  intelligent  one,  this  is  our  doubt.  Our  wonder  is 
excessive.  He  is  the  ultimate  goal  of  those  who  attain  their  goal 
{Mokfa).  How  did  he  come  to  assume  the  human  body? 

60.  We  wish  to  hear  about  the  very  wonderful  exploits  of 
Vif^uin  the  proper  order.  Vi$9u  is  described  to  be  so  by  the 
Vedas  and  Devas. 

61.  O  highly  intelligent  one,  please  tell  us  the  story  of 
the  wonderful  nativityof  Vi;pu.  May  the  wonderful  and  pleasing 
narrative  be  recounted. 

62.  The  manifestations  of  the  noble  soul  of  reputed  strength 
and  prowess  are  wonderful.  The  inherent  power  of  Vi^nu  who 
has  become  miraculous  on  account  of  his  wonderful  deeds  be 
please  narrated. 

Sata  said  : 

63.  I  shall  glorify  the  manifestation  of  the  noble  soul,  how 
that  lord  of  great  penance  was  bom  among  human  beings. 

64.  His  incarnations  in  the  human  world  as  a  result  of 
Bhrgu’s  curse  were  seventyseven  in  number*.  He  incarnates  at 
the  closing  periods  of  the  Yugas  for  realising  the  purpose  of 
Devas* 

65-66.  Listen  and  understand  (the  details  of)  the  divine 
personality  of  Vi;nu,  as  1  recount  it.  When  the  Tuga^Dkatma 
(practice  of  Dhatma — virtue — peculiar  to  a  Yuga)  gets  rever¬ 
sed  and  declined  and  the  time  becomes  slack  and  inactive,  the 
Lord  incarnates  in  order  to  stabilise  righteousness  (Dharma) 
in  human  beings.  (These  incamatioos  are)  due  to  the  curse  of 


*The  text  praktd  is  not  supported  in  the  subsequent 

narrative.  Bd.  P.  2.3.72.63  reads  bkrgu^4iri'pQdhA»doftffa  'due  to  his  (Vi|Qu*s) 
fault  of  kilting  Bhfgu^s  wife**  As  the  episode  is  given  in  the  following 

verse  the  reading  deKtves  adoption. 


35.67-74  765 

Bhrgu  brought  about  by  (the  mutual  struggle  between) 
Devas  and  Asuras. 

The  Sagis  enquired : 

67.  How  can  he  incarnate  as  a  result  of  the  mutual 
straggle  between  Devas  and  Asuras?  We  wish  to  know  this. 
How  did  the  mutual  clash  between  Devas  and  Asuras  take 
place? 

SUta  replied*. 

68.  Listen  and  understand  even  as  I  narrate  it,  the  clash 
between  Devas  and  Asuras  in  the  manner  it  has  taken  place. 

Formerly,  Hirapyakaitpu,  a  Daitya,  ruled  over  the  three 
worlds.' 

69.  Thereafter  the  suzerainty  over  the  three  worlds  was 
hereditarily  established  by  Bali.  There  was  great  friendship 
between  Devas  and  Asuras. 

70.  For  ten  Yugas  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  universe  mixed 
together  without  any  interruption.  Both  Devas  and  Asuras 
abided  by  the  directions  of  those  two  (Daityas). 

71.  (Later  on)  a  terrible,  violent  dispute  arose  between 
Devas  and  Asuras.  It  caused  horrible  devastation  to  both  of 
them. 

72.  Many  battles  were  fox^ht  between  them  for  their 
respective  share  in  the  patrimony.*  It  is  remembered  that  in 
this  Varaha  Kalpa  twelve  battles  endiiu;  with  the  participation 
of  $andamarka  (took  place). 

73.  Listen  to  them  even  as  I  am  recounting  them  succinctly 
by  their  names*  The  first  war  is  called  Narasimha  (that 
caused  by  the  Man-Lion) .  The  second  was  Varna na  the  act  of 
the  Dwarf  (incarnation  of  Vifnu.) 

74.  The  third  war  is  Varaha  (that  of  the  Boar  incarnation) ; 
the  fourth  was  at  the  time  of  the  churning  of  the  ocean  for 
ner.tar.  The  fifth  was  the  terrible  war  of  Taraldunaya  (on  the 
abduction  of  Tata  by  Candra). 

1.  Veries  68-70  show  thst  Asuras  and  Suras  were  eouun-claas  who  lived 
amicably  under  Aiura  Kings  also.  See  w.  68-92. 

2.  Verses  72«67  describe  (be  twdve  wart  between  Devas  and  Asuras, 

which  made  VtlQu  to  incarnate  to  help  Devas.  The  list  of  Viiou's  incar¬ 
nations  ii  di  Rerent  (vidg  Valmavism) . 


766 


Pur4rfa 


75,  The  sixth  war  was  A^ibaka  and  the  seventh  war  was 
remembered  as  Traipura  (that  of  the  burning  of  the  three 
cities) «  The  eighth  war  was  Andhakara  and  the  ninth  one  was 
Dhvaja  (Flag). 

76.  The  tenth  war  should  be  known  as  V&rta  (Vfirtra  ?) 
( pertaining  to  Vi^tra) ;  the  next  one  is  Hal&hala.  The  twelfth 
war  among  them  is  remembered  as  the  terrible  Kolkhala. 

77«  Hirapyakaiipu,  a  Daitya^  was  killed  by  Narasimha. 
Bali  was  bound  by  Vimana  when  the  three  worlds  were  over* 
taken  (were  measured  by  Vamana*s  steps)  • 

78,  Hira^iyik^  who  was  of  very  great  strength  and  prowess 
and  who  had  never  been  defeated  in  warSi  was  killed  in  a  duel 
(by  Vi^u  in  his  incarnation  as  the  Boar) ,  when  the  clash  with 
Devas  ensued. 

79,  It  was  then  that  the  Earth  was  lifted  up  on  his  curved 
fang  by  the  (divine)  Boar. 

At  the  time  of  the  ebuming  of  the  ocean  for  nectar  Prah- 
lada  was  defeated  in  battle  by  Indra. 

80,  Virocana,  the  son  of  Prahlkda,  always  attempted  to 
kill  Indra.  In  the  Tarak&maya  war  he  was  killed  by  Indra 
by  means  of  his  exploits. 

81,  Jambha  who  had  acquired  the  boon  of  avadhyatd  (the 
state  of  not  being  killed  or  immunity  from  death)  along  with 
special  miraculous  weapons  was  killed  in  the  sixth  war  by  Vi$nu 
who  entered  the  body  of  Sakra. 

82,  When  Devas  were  unable  to  protect  the  city  of  three 
gods*  (?)  all  Danavas  along  with  (the  demon)  Tripura  were 
killed  by  the  three-eyed  god  Siva, 

83-84.  In  the  eighth  war,  Asuras,  Rak^asas  who  were 
Andhakarakas  (causing  blindness^  invisible  ?)  were  defeated 


b  obscure  as  the  dty  called  Tripura  belonged  to  Asuras. 
fid.P.  2,3.72.81  b  reads 

tUakmaatsu  dtutfu  par^m  ^ddiotUom  / 

^Wken  Devas  became  unable  to  endure  (the  greatness  of)  Asutas.  If 
in  this  line  be  emended  as  *pm<on\  adesMtoa  pwam  would  means  *the 
dty  of  demou’  aad  that  %vouldtujt  the  context  better.  Scribes  many  times 
Ibtget  to  indicate  the  signs  of  the  vowels  -s-,  hHj 


S5.B5-95 


767 


by  Devas  and  human  bdnga  in  alliance  with  the  Pitrs.  All  these 
well  protected  Ddnavas  were  wholly  exterminated  by  Mahendra 
helped  by 

85'86.  The  mighty*armed  Vipracitti  began  to  fight  with 
Mahendra  hiding  himself  by  means  of  his  M&yfi.  Indra  aimed 
at  his  banner  and  cut  him  down. 

In  the  war  called  KoUhala»  Raji  was  surrounded  by  all 
Devas.  He  killed  all  Daityas  and  Diinavas  who  formed  an 
alliance:  By  means  of  the  nectar  (generated)  from  Yajfta^ 
$aod^  and  Amarka  were  defeated  by  Devas. 

87.  These  twelve  battles  took  place  between  Devas  and 
Asuras  resulting  in  exhaust both  Devas  and  Asuras.  They 
brought  about  misfortune  to  the  people  also. 

88.  Hiraoyakaiipu  shone  as  the  ruler  and  king  of  the  three 
worlds  for  one  hundred  and  seven  nullion  two  hundred  and 
eighty  thousand  years. 

89.  By  succession  Bali  became  the  king  and  he  ruled  for 
one  hundred  and  three  million  and  sixty  thousand  years. 

90. *  Prahlida  ruled  in  the  company  of  Asuras  for  as  many 
years  as  the  period  of  Bali’s  adminbtration. 

91 .  These  three  were  very  famous  as  the  Indras  of  Asuras. 
They  were  very  mighty.  All  these  worlds  were  under  Daityas 
for  a  period  of  ten  Yugas. 

92.  Then  the  entire  kingdom  was  free  fn>m  enemies  for  a 
period  of  ten  Yugas.  Then  the  three  worlds  began  to  be  pro^ 
tected  by  Mahendra  without  any  change. 

93«94.  When  the  kingdom  of  the  three  worlds  (inherited) 
by  Prahlada  was  taken  away  by  the  lapse  of  ttme^  when  the 
kingdom  of  the  three  worlds  came  to  Indra  (the  chastiser  of 
Paka)  by  rotation,  Yajfia  forsook  Asuras  and  went  over  to 
Devas. 

When  Yajfia  went  over  to  Devas,  those  Asuras  spoke  to 
Kavya  (Sukra),  their  preceptor: 

95.  *^Even  as  we  are  looking  on,  Yajfia  went  over  to 


1.  Produetlon  of  nectar  from  Yajfia  is  not  known.  Bd.  P.  2.S.72.87  reads 

'St  the  time  <^th6  valedictory — «laMrt^~bath^ 

2.  This  verse  should  hsve  been  69  as  Prahllds  succeeded  his  father 
Htrsoyakatfipu. 


768  PurS^ 

DevaS)  forsaking  our  langdom.  We  cannot  stay  here.  We  shall, 
therefore,  enter  Rasitala  (nether  worlds)  today/’ 

96.  Thus  addressed,  he  became  depressed.  In  consoling 

words,  he  spoke  to  them:  Asxiras,  do  not  be  afraid.  I  sh^H 

sustain  you  by  means  of  my  spiritual  brilliance. 

97.  Rainfall,  medicinal  herbs  and  the  two  things,  the  Earth 
and  Wealth — all  these  are  retained  by  me.  Only  a  fourth  of  it 
is  with  Suras.  I  shall  hand  over  to  you  everything  that  I 
hold’’. 

98-99.  On  seeing  Asuras  sustained  by  the  intelligent 
K&vya,  Devaa  consulted  among  themselves.  They  were  dis¬ 
pirited  and  desired  to  be  victorious  then.  They  said:  '^This 
Kavya,  spoils  everything  we  do,  by  his  strength.  Well,  we  shall 
go  there  quickly  lest  he  should  strengthen  them  further.  Killing 
them  forcibly,  we  shall  compel  those  who  are  left  off  to  flee  to 
Piitlila/* 

100.  With  great  fury  Devas  rushed  at  D^navas  and  killed 
them.  Being  harassed  by  them,  Danavas  hastened  to  K^vya 
(for  protection). 

101.  K&vya  saw  that  the  sons  of  Dili  were  attacked  by 
Devas  and  that  they  were  in  great  distress  because  they  were 
wounded  in  battle  by  various  weapons'. 

102.  On  seeing  Devas  also  standing  there  he  reflected 
over  the  fate.*  Remembering  the  previous  incidents,  he  spoke 
to  them  (Asuras) : 

103.  **A11  the  three  worlds  were  conquered  by  Vamana  by 
means  of  three  paces.  Bali  was  bound.  Jaihbba  was  killed. 
Virocana  was  slain. 

104.  In  twelve  great  and  terrible  battles  they  were  killed 
by  Suras.  By  various  means  most  of  the  important  persons 
have  been  killed. 

105.  Only  a  few  of  you  have  been  spared  in  these  latest 
battles.  1  shall  now  employ  a  great  strategy.  Please  wait  for  a 
short  while. 


1.  Bd.  P.  T.  103  (esdft  X  sathttfastAn  ^protected  the  frightened 

(sons  ofDid)* 

2.  Daivam  In  Bd.  P. 


S5«106-I17 


769 


106.  I  shall  go  to  Mab&dcva  for  acquiring  Mantras  for  the 
sake  of  your  victory.  Brhaspati  is  perforzning  Homa  and  wor¬ 
shipping  Agni  by  means  of  Mantras. 

107.  Hence  I  shall  go  unto  the  lord  Nilalohica  (Siva)  for 
the  sake  of  Mantras.  I  shall  bless  you  all  aAer  my  return. 

108.  All  of  you  perform  penance  in  the  forest  clad  in  bark 
garments.  Devai  will  not  kill  you  until  I  return. 

109.  After  obtaining  the  Mantras  that  will  never  go  against 
us,  from  Lord  Mahe^vara,  we  shall  6ght  Devas  again.  You 
will  surety  gain  victory.** 

1 10-112.  After  deliberating  thus  Asuras  spoke  to  Devas  : 

have  set  aside  our  dispute  with  you.  All  of  you  can 
occupy  the  worlds.  We  shall  be  clad  in  bark  garments  and  we 
shall  perform  penance  in  the  forest**.  On  hearing  these  words  of 
Prahlada,  Suras  believed  that  he  was  speaking  the  truth. 
Then  Devas  returned  without  fighting.  They  rejoiced.  When 
Daityas  laid  aside  their  weapons,  Devas  went  back  to  their 
respective  places  from  where  they  bad  come. 

1 13.  Then  Kavya  said  to  them:  **Wait  for  some  time  per¬ 
forming  penance  without  enthusiasm,  waiting  for  an  opportunity 
to  achieve  the  object  in  view.  All  Devas  including  Vwva 
are  in  my  father’s  hermitage.*** 

114.  After  instructing  Asuras  thus,  Kavya  approached 
Mahadcva.  After  bowing  to  the  lord,  the  cause  of  origin  of  the 
universe,  he  said: 

115.  lord,  I  wish  to  secure  such  Mantras  as  are  not  in 
the  possession  of  Bfhaspati.  I  want  them  to  be  the  bestowers  of 
fearlessness  on  Asuras.  I  wish  to  defeat  Devas**. 

116.  Thus  requested,  the  lord  said  :  Brahmana  t  do 

you  wish  for  the  Mantras  ?  Perform  then  the  holy  rites  indicated 
by  me,  with  purity  of  mind  and  observing  celibacy. 

1 1 7.  For  full  thousand  years  you  must  stay  in  a  topsy  turvy 
position  inhaling  the  smoke  &om  the  holy  sacrificial  fire-pit, 
Welfare  unto  you.  If  you  perform  (a  sacred  rite)  like  this,  you 
will  obtain  the  Mantra  from  me.** 


*Tblt  ii  a  itraiife  lUtemcDC  Bd.  P.  reads  relevantly  x  sem^ratik^aia 
i  **0  DSnavas,  stay  waitliig  (in  my  father's  hermittge).^ 


v» 


770  Fdjru  Purd$a 

118-119.  Thus  advised  by  the  lord  of  Devas,  Sukra  of 
great  penance,  touched  the  feet  of  the  lord  and  said:  **Yes»  my 
lord,  I  shall  perform  the  holy  rites  and  observe  all  the  other 
things  as  instructed.'*  Then  he  was  engaged  by  the  lord  in¬ 
haling  the  smoke  from  the  holy  fire-pit. 

120-12!.  When  Sukra  had  gone  to  Mahelvara  and  was 
staying  there  observing  celibacy  for  the  acquisition  of  the  Man¬ 
tras  with  the  welfare  of  Asuras  in  view,  Devas  understood 
that  the  kingdom  was  set  aside  by  Asuras  as  a  measure  of 
strategy.  Finding  that  loophole,  the  infuriated  Devas  attacked 
them.  They  had  sharp  weapons  in  their  hands  and  Brhaspati 
led  them  all. 

122.  On  seeing  Devas  armed  with  weapons  again  Asuras 
became  frightened  and  fled  suddenly. 

123*125.  have  laid  down  our  weapons  and  conceded 
victory  unto  them.  Our  preceptor  is  observing  holy  rites. 
Devas  have  abrogated  the  terms  of  agreement.  They  are  desirous 
of  slaying  us,  (their)  enemies.  Welfare  unto  you  all,  we  are  now 
without  a  preceptor  (to  guide  us).  We  had  been  credulous.  We 
remained  quiet  performing  penances.  We  are  clad  in  bark  and 
coarse  garments.  We  have  no  holy  rite.  We  have  nothing  to 
grasp  and  hold  on  to.  By  no  means  are  we  able  to  conquer 
Devas  in  war.  In  this  nasty  situation*  it  is  better  that  we  seek 
refuge  in  the  mother  of  Kavya. 

126.  We  shall  wait  here  till  the  return  of  the  preceptor. 
We  shall  tell  him  everything.  When  Kavya  returns  we  shall 
fight  with  Suras.** 

127-131 .  Saying  this  to  one  another,  they  sought  shelter  with 
the  mother  of  Kavya.  They  had  been  frightened  but  the  boon 
of  fearlessness  was  offered  unto  them  as  they  sought  shelter. 
(The  mother  of  Kavya  said:)  Daoavas,  do  not  be  afraid, 
do  not  be  afraid.  Cast  off  all  fear.  You  need  not  be  afraid  as 
long  as  you  are  with  me.*’  On  seeing  Asuras  frightened, 
Devas  pursued  them  earnestly  without  caring  for  strength  or 
weakness.  C^n  seeing  the  frightened  Asuras  being  harassed  by 
Devas,  the  gentle  lady  (the  mother  of  Kavya)  became  infu¬ 
riated  and  said  to  them  :  shall  cause  Jnindraiva  (the  state  of 


*Bd.  P.  ;  'without  beiof  Involved  in  fighting.* 


S5.IS2-142 


771 


Indralessness  i.e.  destruction  of  Indra)  She  made  Indra  imme* 
diately  benumbed  and  stunned  and  she  went  on  with  her  other 
activities. 

132.  On  teeing  Indra  in  that  helpless  condition  after  being 
rendered  motionless  like  the  sacrificial  postj  Devas  became 
afraid  and  fled  from  there. 

133.  When  the  groups  of  Surais  had  gone,  Vifnu  said  to 

Indra:  lord  of  Suras,  welfare  unto  you.  Enter  me.  I  shall 

take  you  away.*’ 

134.  Thus  advised  Purandara  (Indra)  entered  Vi^^u.  On 
seeing  him  saved  by  Vif^u,  the  infuriated  lady  spoke  these 
words: 

135.  Maghavan,  here  itself  t  will  burn  you  down 
along  with  Vi99u  even  as  all  the  living  beii^  observe.  May  the 
power  of  my  penance  be  witnessed.*' 

136.  The  lords  Indra  and  Vifi^u,  on  being  oppressed  by  ber, 
conversed  (under  their  breath)  •  Viyou  asked  Indra^^^How  can 
both  of  us  get  free  jointly  T\ 

137.  Indra  replied  :  lord,  kill  her  before  she  bums  us 

both.  Especially  I  have  been  attacked.  Hence,  kill  her.  Do  not 
delay.** 

138.  Then  on  seeing  her  (thus  intending  to  kill  them)  Vtfnu 
got  ready  (even)  to  kill  that  woman.  Caught  in  adverse  cir¬ 
cumstances,  the  lord  hurriedly  remembered  his  discus. 

139.  While  she  was  hastening  to  kill  them,  the  discus 
(Sudariana),  the  destroyer  of  the  enemies  of  Suras,  hastened 
still  more.  On  realising  the  ruthless  attempt  of  the  woman  (the 
mother  of  Kavya)  Vif^u  became  furious.  Taking  up  that  we¬ 
apon  the  husband  of  Ma  (i.e.  Lak^mi)  cut  off  her  head. 

140.  On  seeing  that  terrible  slaughter  of  a  woman  (his 
wife)  the  holy  lord  Bhrgu  became  furious.  Then  Vi|nu  was  cen¬ 
sured  and  cursed  by  Bhfgu  for  the  murder  of  his  wife. 

141.  ^*Since  (according  to  Dharma)  a  woman  should  not 
be  killed  and  that  you  have  killed  one  even  though  you  are  con¬ 
versant  with  what  is  Dharma,  you  will  have  to  take  birth 
among  human  beings  seven  times**. 

142.  Thereafter,  as  a  result  of  that  curse  he  incarnates 
again  and  again  in  the  world  (of  mortals)  for  the  welfare  of  all, 
whenever  virtue  (Dharma)  declines. 


772 


Vityu  Fur^ 


143.  After  speaking  thoie  words  of  curse  to  Vt^pu,  he  (i.e. 
Bhigu)  took  up  the  head  (of  die  lady)  himself  and  joined  it  to 
her  body.  Taking  up  water  he  said: 

144.  truthful  lady,  I  am  hereby  resuscitating  you  who 
had  been  killed  by  Vi^nu.  If  all  virtues  and  holy  rites  have 
been  understood  and  practised  by  me,  come  to  life.  If  I  speak 
the  truth,  come  to  life,  thanks  to  that  t^uth'^ 

145.  Thus  addressed  with  the  emphasis  on  truth,  the  gentle 
lady  regained  her  life.  Then  he  sprinkled  her  with  cool  water 
and  uttered,  ^'Gct  up’\ 

146.  On  seeing  her  getting  up  as  if  from  sleep,  all  living 

beings  loudly  applauded  done  !  Well  done  1*^  Such  an 

applause  of  invisible  (incorporeal)  voices  arose  from  all  the 
quarters. 

147.  Even  as  all  living  beings  were  observing,  the  lady  was 
resuscitated  to  life  by  Bhrgu.  That  was  really  miraculous. 

148.  On  seeing  his  wife  resuscitated  to  life  by  Bhrgu  with¬ 
out  the  least  agitation  8akra  was  not  at  all  happy,  because  he 
was  afraid  of  K&vya  (all  the  more). 

149.  Indra  had  no  sleep  at  all  (after  the  incident).  The 
intelligent  chastiser  of  P^a  (i.e.  Indra)  called  his  daughter 
JayantI  and  spoke  to  her. 

150.  **0  daughter,  this  Kkvya  is  performing  a  terrible 
penance  for  the  sake  of  my  destruction  (lit.  I ndra-lcss*ness) .  I 
have  been  rendered  much  dispirited  by  that  (Brahmana)  of 
great  fortitude. 

151.  Go  and  honour  him  with  auspicious  (services)  remov¬ 
ing  his  fatigue  and  by  rendering  alertly  and  deligently  service 
pleasing  to  his  mind’*. 

152-154.  The  gentle  lady  JayantI,  the  daughter  of  Indra, 
of  auspicious  conduct,  saw  Kavya  engaged  in  meditation. 
Although  he  was  weak,  he  was  quiet  and  self-possessed,  endowed 
with  fortitude,  as  her  father  had  already  mentioned  to  her.  She 
rendered  every  service  to  Kavya  in  accordance  with  the  behest 
of  her  father.  In  sweet  and  pleasing  words  she  eulogised  him. 
Frequently  she  massaged  his  body  and  served  him  in  various 
other  pleasant  ways.  Thus  she  stayed  there  for  many  years. 

155.  When  the  terrible  rite  of  inhaling  the  smoke  lasting 


35J56«164 


773 


for  a  thousand  years  was  completed^  the  delighted  Bhava  asked 
him  to  choose  a  boon  freely. 

156«160.  He  said  thus  Br&hma^a)  such  an  obser* 

vance  ( of  a  vow)  as  this  has  been  performed  by  you  alone  and 
not  by  anyone  (so  far).  Hence  you  will  excel  all  Devas  in 
penance,  intellect,  learning,  strength  and  brilliance.  O  son 
of  Bhrgu,  whatever  I  possess  by  way  of  the  esoteric  secret  of 
Yajflas,  Upanifads  etc.  along  with  their  ancillaries  and  esoteric 
secrets  {Raha^a)  will  be  known  to  you  alone,  from  the  beginn¬ 
ing  to  the  end  and  not  to  anyone  else.  Thereby  you  will  be¬ 
come  an  excellent  Brahmana  surpassing  alP*.  Thus  granting 
the  boons  one  after  the  other,  to  the  son  of  Bhrgu,  he  granted 
him  invincibility,  lordship  of  wealth  and  immunity  from  death. 
On  attaining  these  boons,  Kavya  became  exhilarated.  Hairs 
on  his  body  stood  on  their  end  due  to  excessive  pleasure. 

161.  Due  to  his  excessive  joy,  the  following  hymn  to  the 
lord  Maheivara  manifested  itself.  Prostrating  (before  the  Lord), 
he  eulogised  Nllalohita  (Lord  Siva): 

The  Hymn  to  $cimbh^  (Lord  Siva) 

162.  ‘^Obeisance  to  Sitikat^fha  (Blue-throated  god)  to 
SurUpa  (of  good  form),  to  Suvarcas  (of  good  brilliance),  to 
Ririhdna  (one  who  exhibits  the  mystic  mudrdot  frequently  lick¬ 
ing  with  the  tongue),  to  Lopa  (the  destroyer) ,  to  Vat  fare  (the 
presiding  deity  of  the  year),  to  the  Jagatpati  (the  lord  of  the 
universe). 

163.  To  /Capardin  (having  matted  hair),  to  Drdhvaroman 
(having  hair  standing  up  erect),  to  Haya  (the  horse),  to  Kataym 
(the  instrument),  to  Saihskfia  (the  consecrated),  to  Suiltlha  (the 
holy  centre) ,  to  Deua^deva  (Lord  of  Devas),  to  Rarhkas  (velocity 
personified). 

164.  To  Ufnfyin  (one  with  a  turban  turban-wearer),  to 
Suvaktra  (one  with  a  charming  face),  to  Sahasrdkfa  (god  with 
a  thousand  eyes),  to  Midhoan  (bountiful),  to  Vasureta  (distributer 


1.  Praiiiae  deity  by  giving  him/her  VArioui  attributes  is  found  common 
In  the  Mbh.  and  PurSoai.  This  hymn  of  Siva  is  strongly  influenced  by 
RudrSdhySya  from  Tsti.  SaMiU  IV.  ^  as  roost  of  the  epithets  of  Rudra 
roentioited  therein  are  ino^porated  here. 


774  Vdju  Purd^ 

(?)  of  wealth),  to  Jhidra  (terriBc  roarer),  to  the  performer  of 
penance,  to  Ciravdsas  (wearer  of  bark  garments). 

165-166.  To //rasva  (the  short),  to  MuktahSa  (one  with  un¬ 
tied  trcases  of  hair),  to  Sindni  (the  conunander-in-chief  of  the 
army  of  gods),  to  Kaoi  (the  poet),  to  Rdjavfddha  (the  old  ruler) , 
to  Takfokakf liana  (one  who  plays  with  Takfaka),  to  Girila 
(Lord  of  mountains),  to  Arkatutra  (god  with  the  sun  as  the  eye), 
to  the  ascetic,  to  Jdmbava*^  to  Suvrtta  (one  of  good  antecedents) , 
to  Suhasta  (one  with  good  hands) ,  to  Dhan^n  (one  wielding  a 
bow),  to  Bhdrgaj)a  (a  good  archer). 

167.  To  SahasrabdJm  (one  with  a  thousand  i.e.  iniinite  arms), 
to  Sahasrimalacakfus  (one  with  a  thousand  clean  eyes),  to  Sahasta^ 

(one  with  a  thousand  bellies),  to  Sahasracaraijia  (one  with 
a  thousand  feet) . 

168.  To  SahasraHras  (one  with  a  thousand  heads),  to  BahurUpa 
(multi-formed),  to  ViSoarupa  (immanent  in  the  universe),  to 
Sntia  (the  white  one),  to  Purufa  (primordial  man) . 

169.  To  J^ifadgin  (one  with  a  quiver),  to  Kavacin  (one 
wearif^a  coat  of  mail),  to  Sdkma  (the  subtle  one),  to  Kfapat^a 
( the  destroyer) ,  to  Tdmra  (the  copper-coloured),  to  Siva  (the 
benevolent  one) . 

170.  To  Babkru  (the  tawny-coloured),  to  Pilafiga  (reddish 
brown),  to  PiAgala  (yellowsih  brown),  to  Anp^  (  the  pink 
coloured),  to  Mahddeva  (the  great  god),  to  Sarva  (the  des¬ 
troyer),  to  Viiuarupaiiva^  (the  auspicious  omnipresent  god). 

171.  To  Hira^a  (the  golden  one),  to  Sift^  (the  self-con- 

trolled  one),  to  Sreffha  (the  excellent  one),  to  Madhyama  (the 
middling),  to  (wielding  the  bow  Pinaka),  to  I^umin 

(pK>sse85ing  arrows),  to  Citra  (the  miraculous  one  or  one  of 
variegated  colours) ,  to  Rohita  (reddish-tinged). 

172.  To  Dundubkya  (worthy  of  being  honoured  with  the 

sound  of  war-drums),  to  (single-footed),  to  Arka  (the 

deserving) ,  to  Buddhi  (the  intellect),  to  MigaiyOdha  (one  who 
has  assumed  the  form  of  a  hunter  of  deer  in  Dak^a’s  sacrifice), 
to  Sarpa  (the  serpent),  to  Sthdi^i  (motionless  like  a  tree-trunk 
in  meditation),  to  (the  terrible). 


*Bd.  P.  reads  ;  AjyapS  (Imbiber  of  ghee-o0eriog)» 


35.173-180 


775 


173.  ToBahur^p^  (the  muhiformed)^  to  Ugra  (the  fierce)i  to 
Trirutra  (the  three-eyed)^  to  livara  (the  aupreme  ruler),  to 
Kapila  (tavmy-coloured  or  identical  with  Kapila),  to  Ekavira 
(the  single  hero),  to  Mftyu  (thedeath)^  to  Ttyaihbaka  (the  three- 
eyed). 

174.  To  Vdsiofpati  (the  protective  deity  presiding  over  the 
foundation  of  a  house),  to  VMka  (one  beyond  heaven)^  to 
SaHkara  (the  benefactor),  to  Siva  (the  auspicious  one),  to 
Aranya  (the  forest-dweller),  to  Gfhastha  (the  householder),  to 
the  Brahmac&rin  (the  relipous  student  observing  celibacy) . 

175.  To  the  Sdfikhya  (one  accessible  through  the  Sditkhya 
system  of  philosophy),  to  Toga  (one  realizable  tlirough  the  Yoga 
system),  to  Dhydrnn  (the  meditating  one),  to  DAfUa  (the  initia¬ 
ted),  to  Antarkiia  (unmanifest,  hidden),  to  Sarva  (destroyer  of 
the  world),  to  Mdnya  (the  honourable),  to  M^Hn  (one  wearing 
garland). 

176.  To  Buddha  (the  enl^htened  one),  to  Suddha  (the 
pure),  to  Mukta  (the  liberated  one),  to  Kevala  (the  sole  one 
without  a  second),  to  Bodkas  (staying  on  the  mountain  slope), 
to  CtkUdna  (the  sentient),  to  Brahniffha  (merged  in  Brahman), 
to  Maharfi  (the  great  sage) . 

177.  To  CatufpOda  (one  having  four  feet),  to  Mediya  (one 

worthy  of  sacrifice) ,  to  Dharmin  (the  virtuous),  to  wearer  of  an 
armour  {Vamin  as  in  Bd.P.  v.  178),  to  Sighraga{one  going  fast), 
to  ^ikhandin  (one  with  tuA  of  hsur),  to  KapUla  (one  holding 
ihe  human  skull),  to  (one  with  curved  fongs),  to 

Viivamedhas  (of  universal  intellect). 

178.  To  Apratlgkdta  (the  unimpeded),  to  Dipta  (the  illumi¬ 
nated),  to  Bhdskara  (the  creator  of  lustre),  to  Sumdhas  (of 
excellent  intellect),  to  KrOra  (the  cruel  one),  to  Vihfta  (the 
deformed),  to Bibkatsa  (the  hideoiu),  to  Siva  (auspicious). 

179.  To  Saumya  (the  gentle  one),  to  Putffa  (the  meritorious) 
to  Dhdtmika  (the  righteous),  to  &ubha  (the  auspicious),  to 
Avadkya  (one  who  cannot  be  killed),  to  Mftdfiga  (one  whose 
body  is  dead?),  to  Nttya  (the  eternal  one),  to  ^Aivata  (the  perpe¬ 
tual  one). 

180.  To  Sddya  (one  with  a  beginning),  to  Sarabha  (the  eight¬ 
footed  fabulous  animal),  to  Sfl/ta  (the  trident-be^ing  god),  to 
Tficak^s  (the  three-eyed  god),  to  Samapa  (the  imbiber  of  Soma 


776  Purd^ 

juice)»  to  (the  imbiber  of  ghee),  to  DhSsnapa  (the  inhaler 

of  smoke),  to  0$mapa  (drinker  of  hot  stuff)* 

181.  To  ^uei  (the  pure  and  clean),  to  Rmhd^  (one  repea¬ 
tedly  licking),  to  Sa<fyojdia  (born  in  a  trice),  to  Mftyu  (death), 
to  P/AVaia  (tlie  meat-eater),  to  Kharva  (the  dwarfish),  to  Megha 
(the  cloud),  to  Vaidyuta  (the  lightning). 

182.  ToVydfrita  (having  no  dependent),  to  &raviffha(tht 
most  famous),  to  Bhdrata  (one  engaged  in  brilliant  light),  to 
Antarikfa  (the  firmament),  to  Kfama  (the  competent),  to 
Sahamdna  (the  enduring),  to  Sotya  (the  truthful) ,  to  Tepana  (the 
blazing  one) . 

183.  ^oTfipurcgkna  (the  destroyer  of  the  three  cities),  to 
Dipta  (the  illuminated),  to  the  Cakra  (the  discus),  to  Jiomaia 
(the  hairy  one),  to  Tigmifyudha  (having  sharp  weapons),  to 
Medhya  (the  cleanest) ,  to  Siddha,  to  Pulasti. 

184.  To  Roeamdna  (one  who  is  appealing),  to  Kha^da,  to 
Sphlla  (the  nourishing) ,  to  ^abha  (the  bull,  the  chief  one) ,  to 
Bhogin  (the  enjoyer),  to  Tui/jamdna  (the  united  one),  to  £dnta 
(the  quiescent  one) ,  to  Ordhwtreias (o(  sublimated  sexuality). 

185.  To  Aghaghm  (the  destroyer  of  sins),  to  Makhaghna 
(destroyer  of  Dak$a*s  sacrifice) ,  to  Mrtyu  (god  of  death) ,  to 
Tajniya  (one  belonging  to  sacrifice),  to  Kfidm  (fire),  to  Pracetd, 
to  Vahni  (the  fire,  bearer  of  offerings) ,  to  Kiiala{l) 

186.  To  (belonging  to  sand?),  to  Prasanna  (the 

delighted) ,  to  Varela  (the  most  excellent) ,  to  Cak^  (the  eye) , 
to  Kppragu  (having  a  fast  bull) ,  to  Pramedf^a  (the  excessively 
pure),  to Piva  (the corpulent  one?) 

187.  To  Rakfoghna  (the  destroyer  of  Rak^as) ,  to  PaSugkna 
(destroyer  of  animals) ,  to  Vighrut  (the  obstacle) ,  to  Dayana  (the 
lying  one),  to  VibkTdnta  (the  revolving  one),  to  MahdiUa 
(having  great  end),  to  Anti  (the  nearest  one),  to  Durgama 
(difficult  to  attain) . 

188.  To  Dak$a  (the  dexterous),  to  jaghanya  (the  last  one), 
to  the  lord  of  the  worlds,  to  Andmayaithe  non^ailing) ,  to  Ordkva 
(the  topmost  one) ,  to  Sadthatya  Adhiffhita  {to  one  estabilished 
in  masses). 

189*  To  Hiranyabdhu  (of  golden  arms),  to  Satya  (the  truth¬ 
ful),  to  ^arnwa  (the  tranquiliser) ,  to  Asikalpa  (one  like  a 


35.190-199 


777 

sword),  to  MSgha  (the  month  M&gha),  to  (?),  to 

Ekacakfus  (the  one-eyed). 

190.  To  ^riffha  (the  excellent  one),  to  KAnodm,  to  I^dna 
(supreme  ruler),  to  Dhimdn  (the  intelligent  one) ,  to  Mahdkalpa, 
to  Dipta  (the  illuminated) ,  to  Rodana  (the  crying) ,  to  Hdsa  ( the 
laughing). 

191.  To  Vftadkanocn  {Df^hadhmoan — ^having  firm  bow),  to 
Kavacin  (one  wearing  a  coat  of  mail),  to  Rathin  (havix^  a 
chariot),  to  VarUthin  (having  a  boat  of  army) ,  to  Bkfgundtha  (the 
lord  of  Bhfgu) ,  to  Sukra,  to  Vahnififta  (7) ,  to  DhimAn  (the 
intelligent) . 

192.  To  Agka  (the  sin),  to  Aghaiathsa  (the  despiser  of  sin) , 
to  VipHya  (having  no  beloved),  to  Priya  (the  beloved).  O 
f>tgo^ar( having  the  quarters  as  garments) ,  obeisance  be  to  you, 
the  wearer  of  elephant  hide  and  destroyer  of  Bhaga. 

193.  Obeisance  to  the  lord  of  Paius  (individual  souls),  to 
the  lord  of  living  beings.  Obeisance  to  Pra^a,  the  ^k,  the 
Yajus  and  the  Saman,  to  Svadhd  and  Sudhd  (nectar). 

194.  Obeisance  to  you  of  the  form  of  VafatkdTa,  Obeisance 
to  you,  O  Antdtman  (soul  of  all  ends) .  Obeisance  to  you,  the 
creator,  the  sustainer,  and  the  annihilator,  to  the  Hofy  dnd  the 
destroyer. 

195.  Obeisance  to  you,  of  the  form  of  Kila,  past, 
present  and  future.  Obeisance  to  Vasu,  S&dhya,  Rudra, 
Aditya  and  Aivin. 

196.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  Viiva  (Viivedevas) ,  to 
Maruts,  the  Atman  of  Devas.  You  are  Agni,  Soma,  Rtvik, 
IJyd  (sacrifice),  the  sacrificial  animal,  the  Mantra  and  the 
medicine. 

197.  You  are  Dak^ind^  Aoabhftha  (sacred  ablution  of  con¬ 
cluding  rites) ,  and  the  Tajtla  itself.  You  are  Tapas  (penance), 
Satya  (truth),  Tydga  (renunciation)  and  Seme  (self-control) . 

198.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  embodhnent  of  nonviolence 
and  non-covetousness.  You  are  of  good  demeanour,  die  surpass¬ 
ing  one.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  Yogdtman  (of  Yogic  Soul),  the 
soul  of  all  living  beings. 

199.  Obeisance  to  you,  of  the  form  of  all  worlds,  the  earth, 
the  firmament,  the  heaven,  Mahar,  Jana,  Tapas  and  Satya 
(Lokas). 


778 


Fijn  PurOfa 


200s  Obeisance  to  you,  the  unmanifest,  the  great,  the  ele* 
ment>  the  seme  organs,  the  Tanmatras,  the  end  of  the  MahaU 
Obeisance  to  you,  of  the  form  of  the  Reality. 

201.  Obeisance  to  you,  the  eternal  one,  the  Artbalinga  (of 
meaningful  index?),  the  subtle  one,  the  sentient,  the  pure,  the 
omnipresent,  the  permanent  soul. 

202.  Obeisance  to  you  in  the  three  worlds  beginning  with 
Bh&h  smd  ending  with  Svah  Bhuh»  Bhuvah  Sva^)  and 
in  the  four  worlds  beginning  with  Satya  and  ending  with  Mahah 
(i.e.  Satya,  Tapas,  Jana  and  Maha^t) . 

203.  O  lord,  you  are  friend  and  sympathiser  of  Br&hmai^. 
In  this  prayer  of  obeisance  both  correct  and  incorrect  things^ 
have  been  uttered  by  me.  It  behoves  you  to  forgive  everything 
thinking  like  **He  is  my  devotee**. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYSIX 
Glirrijicaium  of  Vipj^u^s  Greatness 


SUta  said  : 

U2.  After  propitiating  liana,  Nilalohita,  the  lord  of 
Devas,  Sukra  spoke  words  of  prayer  bowing  to  him  with  palms 
joined  in  reverence  uttering  (Vedic  Mantras) .  Siva 

who  was  delighted,  touched  the  body  of  K&vya  with  his  hand, 
accorded  him  a  full  vision  of  His  own  form  and  vanished  there 
itself. 

3.  When  the  lord  of  the  Devas*  had  vanished,  he  spoke 
the  following  words  to  Jayand  who  was  standing  near  him, 
with  palms  joined  in  reverence. 


1.  The  reading  *sad4sat*  Deeds  emendatioo  as  *yades<U*  as  in  Bd.P.  2.3.72, 
195  as  there  Is  no  point  in  begging  pardon  for  saying  correct  things. 

2.  The  obecure  reading  deveSSaeme  is  probably  a  scribal  error  aad  ihould 

be  emended  u  ^God  (&va)  along  with  bis  retinue’.  Bd.  P. 

2.9.73.3  supports  the  emendation  suggesied. 


36.4-19 


779 


4.  beautiiul  lady»  whose  (dat^hter)  are  you?  Whea 
I  was  distressed,  you  too  were  distressed.  Who  are  you?  What 
for  did  you  take  care  of  me  wheu  I  was  performing  the  great 
penance  ? 

5«  O  lady  of  beautiful  hips»  O  fair-complexioned  one,  I 
am  delighted  with  your  steady  devotion,  humility,  self-control 
and  affection. 

6.  O  beautiful  damsel,  what  do  you  wish?  What  is  your 
cherished  desire  which  should  be  fully  gratified?  Even  if  it  be 
very  difficult  to  be  fulfilled,  I  shall  get  it  realised  (for  you) 

7.  On  being  asked  thus,  JayantI  said  :  sage  merged  in 

Brahman^  it  behoves  you  to  know  it  by  mrans  of  the  power  of 
your  penance.  In  fact,  you  already  know  precisely  what  1  have 
desired  to  achieve**. 

8.  On  being  told  thus,  the  sage  saw  everything  by  means 
of  his  divine  vision  and  said:  *^0  beautiful  maiden,  you  are 
the  daughter  of  Mahendra.  You  have  come  here  to  render 
service  to  me. 

9.  O  woman  of  beautiful  lips,  O  lustrous  woman,  you 
desire  to  live  in  contact  with  roe  for  ten  years  without  being 
seen  by  any  other  living  beii^. 

10.  O  beautiful  lady  with  (brilliant)  compleaion  of  the 
Lord  of  Devas  and  of  fire*  I  O  lady  of  beautiful  eyes,  you 
choose  (the  fulfilment  of  your)  desire  from  me,  O  lady  of 
sweet  voice. 


$9 


11.  Let  it  be,  O  fascinating  woman,  we  shall  go  home 
Thereafter  the  holy  lord  returned  to  his  abode,  accompanied 
by  Jaywtl. 

12.  He  stayed  along  with  her  for  ten  years.  Being  envelop¬ 
ed  with  M&ya  ( illusive  power) ,  he  was  invisible  to  all  living 
beings. 


1 3.  On  seeing  (learning)  that  Kavya  had  returned  after 
realising  his  desires,  all  Daityas  delightedly  came  to  his 
house  desirous  of  seeing  him. 


•For  horeor,  B<L  P.  v.  10  resds 

*0  goddess  with  die  ihiniag  lustre  of  blue  sapphires'  wlueh  is  worth 
consideration. 


780 


Vdyu 


14»  Having  gone  there^  they  could  not  see  their  preceptor 
who  was  concealed  by  Jayanti.  Thinking  that  it  was  part  of 
his  clever  strategy*,  they  returned  to  their  respective  homes. 

15*16«  On  knowing  that  Kavy a  was  held  in  restraint  by 
Jayanti  for  ten  years  in  her  desire  to  do  what  was  beneficial  to 
her  father,  Brhaspati  knew  that  to  be  an  opportunity  offered  by 
Daityas.  He  assumed  the  form  of  Kavya,  the  preceptor  of  Daityas, 
and  spoke  to  Asuras. 

17.  Looking  at  the  Asuras  who  had  assembled,  Brhaspati 
said  :  ’^Welcome  to  my  dbctples  for  whom  I  perform  sacri¬ 
fices.  For  your  welfare,  I  have  come  back  to  this  place. 

18.  I  shall  teach  you  all.  That  (great)  Vidyi  has  been 
acquired  by  me*^  With  a  delighted  mind,  then  they  approached 
him  for  the  sake  of  attaining  theVidy&. 

19-20.  After  the  period  of  ten  years  was  over,  Sukra’s 
ambition  was  completely  realised.  (His  delusion  vanished) 
and  his  intellect  was  awakened  at  the  same  time.  At  the  end 
of  the  period  of  agreement,  DevayanI,  his  daughter  was  born 
(of  Jayanti).  ThenSukra  decided  to  look  after  his  disciples. 

21.  Sukra  said:  gentle  lady,  let  us  go  to  see  your 

disciples,  O  lady  of  sweet  smiles  and  of  tremulous  eyes,  O 
chaste  lady,  O  lady  of  large  eyes  of  three  colours’ 

22.  The  lady  replied  :  s^e  of  great  holy  rites,  please 

resort  to  your  disciples*  It  is  the  sacred  Dharma,  O  Brahma^a. 

I  shall  not  make  you  swerve  from  it” 

SSta  said : 

23.  Then  he  went  to  Asuras  and  saw  that  they  had  been 
deceived  by  the  intelligent  preceptor  of  Devas  by  assuming 
the  form  ofKavya.  He  spoke  to  Asuras  ; 

24.  dear  ones,  know  me  m  be  the  (real)  Kavya.  This 
is  tbeson  of  Angiras.  O  Dwavas,  in  spite  of  my  power,  you 
have  been  deceived”. 


But  laks<0am  (the  sign  of  hii  oo&*retum),  ia  Bd.  P.  ibid.  v.  14. 


36.25-37  781 

25.  On  hearing  him  speak  thus,  Daityas  were  confused. 
They  looked  at  both  of  them  smiling  pleasantly.* 

26.  They  stood  there  utterly  confused.  They  were  unable 
to  understand  anything.  When  they  were  (seen)  confused  like 
this,  Kavya  spoke  to  them  again  : 

27.  am  your  preceptor  Kivya.  This  is  the  praceptor  of 
Devas,  the  son  of  Ahgiras.  All  of  you  follow  me.  Leave  off  this 
Brhaspati'*. 

28.  On  being  addressed  thus,  all  the  Asuras  stood  gazing 
at  them.  They  could  not  see  any  difference  between  them. 

29-30.  Unperturbed  by  anything,  Bfhaspati  told  them:  ^*0 
Daityas,  this  is  Angiras.  I  am  Kavya,  your  preceptor.  This  is 
Bfhaspati  in  my  guise.  O  Asuras,  be  deludes  you  all  by  assum¬ 
ing  my  form*’.  On  hearing  hts  words,  they  consulted  one  another 
and  spoke  these  words: 

31  •  ^*This  holy  lord  and  sage  has  been  imparting  instruc¬ 
tions  to  us  continuously  for  the  last  ten  years.  This  Brahman  a  is 
desirous  of  coming  in  between*’. 

32.  Then  all  those  Danavas  bowed  to  and  paid  respects 
to  him  (Bfhaspati  in  the  guise  of  K&vya) .  Deluded  by  a  long 
practice  they  accepted  only  his  words. 

33.  All  the  infuriated  Asuras  spoke  to  him  (the  real 
Kavya)  (staring  at  him)  with  reddened  eyes:  ‘‘This  is  our 
preceptor  and  benefactor.  You  may  go.  You  are  not  our  precep¬ 
tor. 

34.  Whether  he  isBhargava  (son  of  Bhfgu)  or  Angirasa  (son 
of  Ahgiras)  let  him  be  our  preceptor.  We  shall  abide  by  his 
guidance.  Do  not  tarry  (here  any  longer) .  That  will  be  in  your 
interest.” 

35-37.  After  saying  this,  all  the  Asuras  resorted  to  Bfhaspati 
(as  their  teacher) .  When  the  Asuras  did  not  accept  his  sugges¬ 
tion  for  their  great  benefit,  Bhai^va  became  angry  at  their 
arrogance.  He  told  them  again  :  “O  Danavas,  although  I  had 
apprised  (and  instructed)  you,  you  are  not  resorting  tome. 
Hence,  you  will  become  deficient  in  sense  and  will  attain  defeat 
after  defeat”.  After  saying  this  to  them,  Kavya  went  away  the 
way  he  had  come. 

*The  word  siMu  is  obscure.  Bd.  P.  v.  2S  read  stkkSstnau  which 
means  firmly*. 


782 

38.  On  realising  that  the  Asuraa  had  been  cursed  by  K&vya. 
Brhaspati  got  his  object  fulfilled.  With  great  delight,  he  re* 
assumed  his  own  real  form.  To  his  great  contentment,  he 
realised  that  the  Asuras  had  fallen  and  doomed  and  he 
vanished  from  the  scene. 

39.  When  he  had  disappeared,  the  dismayed  Danavas 
spoke  to  one  another:  ^‘Oh  fie  upon  ust  In  this  matter  we  have 
been  deceived. 

40.  We  have  erred  in  our  duties.  So  the  fate  is  against 
and  we  have  been  struck  by  it.  We  have  been  used  (by  him 
i.e«  Brhaspati)  in  his  own  interest  and  burnt  by  means  of  his 
Miyi*’. 

4U42.  Then  the  Asuras  became  extremely  frightened  of 
the  Devas  and  fied  from  that  place.  Keeping  Prahl&da  at  the 
head,  they  approached  K&vya  again.  On  approaching  him, 
they  stood  there  with  heads  bent  down.  On  seeing  his  disciples 
(lit.  ones  for  whose  benefit  be  performed  Yajftas)  K&vya  said  to 
them: 

43.  'Tn  spite  of  being  cautioned  by  me  at  the  proper 
time,  you  did  not  honour  and  respect  me.  So,  on  account  of 
that  arrogance,  you  met  with  a  defeat*’. 

44.  Then  Prahlida  entreated  him:  Bhargava,  (please) 

give  up  (forget)  your  wounded  sense  of  honour.  O  Bhargava, 
do  not  forsake  us,  your  own  disciples,  particularly  attached  to 
you  with  devotion  and  prayerfulness. 

•  45^.  When  asked  by  you,  we  had  been  deluded  by  the 

preceptor  of  Devas.  Knowing  thb  by  means  of  your  long* 
ranged  vision,  it  behoves  you  to  save  us,  O  son  of  Bbrgu,  ifyou 
are  not  going  to  favour  us,  we  arc  (no  better  than)  cursed  by 
you.  So  we  shall  enter  Rasdtala  (the  nether  worlds)  to-day.” 

Sdta  said : 

47.  On  being  thus  implored,  eulogised  and  informed 
Kavya  realised  the  truth.  Out  of  mercy  and  sympathy,  he 
controlled  his  anger. 

48.  He  spoke  these  words  :  ‘‘Do  not  be  afraid.  Do  not  go 
to  Ras&tala.  Even  though  I  was  alert  this  incident  befell  you 
because  it  was  inevitable. 


36.49^0  7BS 

49*  Destiny  which  is  very  power ftj«  cannot  be  altered. 
The  sense  that  you  have  lost^  you  will  regain  now. 

50.  Brahmi  too  had  mentioned  that  the  period  adverse 
Co  you  had  arrived.  It  was  due  to  my  favour  that  you  had 
enjoyed  the  great  pleasures  of  the  three  worlds  (so  long). 

51.  For  full  ten  Yugas  you  have  reigned  over  Devas. 
Brahma  has  ordained  your  rulership  only  for  that  length  of 
period. 

52.  In  the  Savar^ika  Manvantara  you  will  again  have 
suzerainty.  Your  grandson  Bali  will  become  the  lord  of  all  the 
worlds. 

53.  It  has  been  mentioned  by  BrahmA  himself  to  me  that 
when  later  on  the  worlds  will  be  seized  from  him^  his  power  of 
penance  will  not  be  of  any  avail. 

54.  Since  his  activities  will  be  devoid  of  undue  attachment^ 
BrahmA  will  be  pleased  with  him  and  (the  kingdom)  will  be 
bestowed  on  him  in  the  SAvarnika  Manvantara. 

55.  The  lord  has  told  me»  ‘The  kingdom  of  Devas 
will  come  to  Bali*.  Hence  he  bides  his  time  remaining  invisible 
to  all  living  beings. 

56.  You  have  been  granted  immortality  by  the  delighted 
self-born  deity.  Hence,  without  exhibiting  undue  curiosity  and 
agitation  you  have  to  bear  with  the  change. 

57.  Before  the  (proper)  time,  it  is  not  possible  for  me  to 
save  you.  O  lord,  I  have  been  forbidden  by  Brahma  who  knows 
the  future. 

58.  These  two  are  my  disciples.  They  arc  equal  to  me,* 
and  Bfhaspati.  They  will  sustain  you  all  when  attacked  by 
Devas.’* 

59.  When  the  Daityas,  the  chief  of  ;whom  was  Prahlada, 
were  given  this  advice  by  Kavya  of  indefatigable  energy  and 
activity,  they  went  away  along  with  those  two  (disciples  i,c. 
8atida  and  Amarka). 

60.  On  hearing  about  the  inevitability  of  future  events 

*Probably  $ao4a  and  AmXrta  are  mmtxMied  here  as  will  be  dear  by 
later  verses  63  etc. 


784  FJ)iti  Purity 

from  Sukrat  O&aavas  took  the  words  of  Kivya  to  mean 
victory  for  them  (at  least)  for  once. 

61-62«  They  equipped  themselves  with  various  weapons 
and  the  coats  of  mail  and  challenged  Devas  for  fighting. 
On  seeing  Asuras  advanced  for  battle,  Devas  got  ready 
with  all  equipments  and  fought  them  in  return^  The  battle 
between  Devas  and  Asuras  continued  for  a  hundred  years. 
Asuras  defeated  Devas.  The  beaten  and  distressed  Devas  spoke 
thus  among  themselves. 

63-65.  Devas  said  :  do  not  know  the  (extent  of  the) 

power  of  ^itd  Amarka  on  Asuras.  Hence,  what  is 

conducive  to  our  welfare  must  be  done  by  preparing  for  a 
YajAa.  After  knowing  about  and  capturing  those  two,  we 
will  defeat  Asuras’’. 

Devas  then  invited  both  $aod&  and  Amarka  and  said, 
'^We  shall  invite  you  for  the  Yajfta.  O  Brahma^as,  forsake 
Asuras.  After  defeating  them  we  will  make  you  receive  a  share”. 

66.  In  this  manner,  and  Am&rka  thereafter  forsook 

Asuras.  Devas  were  victorious  and  Danavas  suffered  disastrous 
defeat. 

67-69.  After  defeating  Asuras,  Devas  approached  Sapdn 
and  Am&rka.  Asuras  who  had  already  been  over¬ 
whelmed  by  the  curse  of  K&vya  had  no  support  now.  Harassed 
by  Devas,  they  entered  Ras&tala.  Thus  Danavas  were  crippled 
and  rendered  inactive  by  Sakra. 

Thereafter,  whenever  the  cult  of  YajAas  and  other  holy 
rites  was  slack,  Lord  Vi$ou  incarnated  again  and  again  as  a 
result  of  Bhfgu’s  curse*,  in  order  to  stabilise  Dharma  and 
destroy  Adharma. 

70.  Lord  Brahma  pronounced  that  all  those  Asuras  who 
did  not  follow  the  directions  of  Prablada  would  be  killed  by 
human  beis^. 

71.  Hen»:e  Narayapa  was  born  of  Dharma  in  the  Cakfu^a 


*Vifau*s  incAmAtioas  were  due  to  Bbfgu^t  curse.  Verses  7  Iff.  give  the 
lilt  of  those  iocanutiooi  but  they  ere  difTefent  from  out  luual  list  (vidt 
Intro.,  VaiiuAvum). 


S6.72-80 


785 

Manvantara.  In  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara>  he  popularised 
Yajfla  in  Gaitya^  (sacrificial  shed) . 

72-73.  At  the  time  of  the  manifestation  of  the  other  (i»e» 
Prthu)  Brahma  himself  was  the  priest.  In  the  fourth  Yuga,  when 
Asuras^  were  in  distress,  he  was  bom  within  the  ocean  for 
the  purpose  of  killing  Hira^yakalipu*. 

The  second  (incarnation  was  that  of  the  terrible  Narasimha, 
keeping  Suras  at  the  head. 

74.  The  third  incamation«  that  of  Vkmanai  took  place 
in  the  seventh  Tret&yuga  when  all  the  three  worlds  had  been 
overrun  by  Daityas  and  were  ruled  over  by  Bali. 

75-76.  Withdrawing  alt  the  limbs  within  himself  (Assum¬ 
ing  the  form  of  a  Dwarf)  the  son  of  Aditi  approached  the  son 
of  Virocanai  Bali,  the  king  of  Daityas,  who  was  performing  a 
YajAa.  Brhaspaci  too  accompanied  him.  Assuming  the  form  of 

on  an  auspicious  occasion,  he  requested  Bali : 
^*0  king,  you  are  the  lord  of  the  three  worlds.  Everything  it 
in  you.  It  behoves  you  to  grant  me  (the  space  covered  by) 
three  paces'*. 

77.  will  give’*,  promised  the  king  Bali,  the  son  of  Viro- 
cana.  On  knowing  that  he  was  a  Vlunana  (dwarf),  he  was 
delighted  much. 

78.  But,  O  excellent  Brahma^,  that  lord  V&mana 
measured  the  entire  Universe,  the  Earth,  the  Heaven  and 
the  Sky  by  means  of  three  paces. 

79.  That  Bhutatman  (the  immanent  soul  of  all  living  beings) 
of  great  fame  excelled  even  the  sun  by  means  of  his  brilliance. 
He  illuminated  all  the  quarters  and  the  intermediate  directions 
with  his  refulgence. 

80.  The  mighty*armed  Janardana  brightened  up  all  the 
worlds  and  shone.  Seizing  the  royal  glpry  of  Asuras  from 
all  the  three  worlds,  he  forced  them  to  retreat  to  the  bottom 
of  the  nether-world  along  with  their  sons  and  grandsons. 

1. ^Vainya*  i.e.  King  Prthu  in  Bd.  P.  v.  72.  It^  a  better  reading  as  this 
and  other  ioure«»  give  the  credit  of  Yaj&a  to  Pfthu  in  this  Manvantara. 

2.  Sum  (in  Bd.  P.  v.  74}  is  the  correct  reading. 

5.  It  implies  VarUxa  incamatioii,  but  Variba  killed  Hiraeyftkfa  and 
Nrsubba  incamation  was  for  killing  Hiraoyakaiipu. 


786 


VdjmPuratfc 


81.  Namuci^  Sambara  and  Prahlada  (were  among  them). 
The  cruel  Danavas  were  killed.  Those  who  were  rudely  shaken 
were  forced  to  dee  in  various  directions. 

82«  Madhava^  the  immanent  soul  of  all  living  beings  showed, 
the  Brahmai^  there  a  great  nuracle,  vis.  all  the  great  elements 
with  their  special  features  and  the  entire  Time. 

83.  They  saw  the  entire  Universe  and  themselves  in  his 
cosmic  body.  There  was  nothing  in  the  worlds  which  was  not 
pervaded  by  the  noble-souled  lord. 

84.  Seeing  that  form  of  Upendra  (i.e.  V&mana)  Devas, 
Danavas  and  human  beings  were  fascinated.  All  of  them  were 
enchanted  by  Vif^u's  refulgence. 

85.  Bali  was  bound  with  great  nooses  along  with  his 
kinsmen,  friends  and  followers.  The  entire  race  of  Virocana 
was  consigned  to  P4t&la. 

86.  After  handing  back  the  entire  riches  and  glory  of 
Devas  to  the  noble*souled  Indra,  the  mighty  •armed  Janardana 
manifested  himself  before  the  human  world. 

87.  These  three  incarnations  of  the  lord  were  divine  and 
axispicious.  Listen  and  understand  the  seven  incarnations  as 
human  beings  as  a  result  of  the  curse. 

88.  In  the  tenth  Tret&yuga  when  Dharma  had  been  ruined 
be  had  his  fourth  incarnation  as  Dattatreya  with  Marka^id^y^ 
as  his  preceptor. 

89.  His  fifth  incarnation  was  in  the  fifteenth  Tretayuga  as 
Mandhatj*,  the  Emperor.  Tathya  (Utathya?)  was  his  preceptor. 

90.  The  sixth  incarnation  was  that  as  the  son  of  Jamadagni 
in  the  nineteenth  Tretayuga.  He  annihilated  all  the  K^atriyas. 
He  had  Viivamitra  as  his  preceptor  (Purobita) . 

91.  In  the  twenty  fourth  Tretayuga,  he  took  his  seventh 
incarnation  as  Rama,  the  son  of  Daiaratha.  In  his  sacrifice 
Vasi^thawas  his  priest.  It  was  for  the  purpose  of  killing 
RavaQa. 

92.  In  the  twentyeighth  Dvapara  Yuga,  Vifnu  took  his 
dghth  incarnation  as  Vedavyasa  bom  of  Paraiara.  He  had 
J&tukari^  at  the  preceptor. 

93.  Vifitu  who  had  been  bom  earlier  as  the  son  of  Adid 
andKaiyapa  took  his  ninth  incarnation  as  the  son  of  DevakI 
and  Vasudeva  with  the  Br&hmatia  Girgya  as  his  preceptor. 


36.94-104 


787 


94-95«  The  lord  is  Apram^a  (one  whocannot  be  measured). 
He  is  (freely  ordered  about  and  employed  bydevotees) « 

He  moves  about  as  he  pleases.  He  has  full  self^ontrcJ.  He 
sports  about  in  the  world  like  a  boy  playing  with  toys.  This 
mighty-armed  Madhusudana  cannot  be  measured.  There  is 
nothing  greater  than  the  cosmic  form  of  the  Lord. 

9&97.  In  the  twentyeighth  Dvapara  Yuga»  when  a  slight 
portion  of  the  end  of  Dvapara  rexnsuned  and  when  Dharma 
had  been  destroyed,  Lord  ^^9nu  was  bom  in  the  family  of 
Vnnis  in  order  to  establish  Dharma  and  destroy  Asuras.  By 
means  of  his  Yogic  Miya,  the  Yogic  soul  fascinated  all  livii^ 
beings. 

98.  Entering  human  womb,  he  moved  about  on  the 
Earth  fully  concealed  (from  the  view  of  ordinary  mortals)  for 
the  sake  of  the  sport  among  the  human  beings.  He  was  accom* 
panied  by  Sindipani  as  his  preceptor. 

99-100.  In  that  incarnation,  the  powerful  lord  slew  the 
following  Daityas  who  had  taken  human  bodies  ;  Kariisa, 
Salva,  Dvivida  the  great  Asura,  Arista,  Vr^abha,  Kejin  the 
horse,  Kuvalay&plda  the  elephant,  the  chief  of  wrestlers,  the 
officer  in-charge  of  the  abode  (ofKamaa)  (C&outa)  and  the 
demoness  Putani. 


101.  The  thousand  arms  of  Bwa  of  wonderful  exploits 
were  cut  off  by  him.  The  Asura  Naraka  and  the  powerful 
(K&la-)  Yavana  were  lulled  by  him  in  battle. 

102.  All  the  precious  gems  and  jewels  of  kings  were  con¬ 
fiscated  by  him  through  his  splendid  refulgence.  All  the  kings 
of  evil  conduct  in  Rasatala  were  killed  by  him. 


103-104.  These  incarnations  of  the  noble-souled  lord  were 
for  the  sake  of  the  benefit  of  the  worlds. 


In  this  Kaliyuga,  towards  its  close,  ^frhen  the  period  of 
junction  will  begin,  the  powerful  KaJki  will  be  bom  under  the 
name  Vifpuya^as,  as  the  son  of  Paraiara.  He  will  be  accom¬ 
panied  by  Yajftavalkya  as  his  preceptor.  This  is  his  tenth  and 
future  incarnation. 


•Better  'uncontreUsble;  one  who  cannot  be  ordered*  as  InBd.P. 

It  fits  here  with  an  Awgr^  (^)'~  sprmn^* 


788 


105*109*  He  will  be  leading  all  the  armies  consisting  of 
elephants,  horses  and  chariots.  He  will  be  surroxmded  by 
hundreds  and  thousands  of  Brahmanas  armed  with  weapons. 
He  will  be  killing  those  who  arc  not  very  religious  and  those 
who  hate  religion,  vi*.  the  norchemers,  those  of  the  middle 
lands,  those  who  live  to  the  west  of  the  Vindhya  'mountain, 
the  southerners  (such  as)  Dravidas  along  with  Simhaiese, 
G&ndharas,  Paradas,  Pahlavas,  Yavanas,  Salcas,  Tusliras, 
Barbaras,  Pulindas,  Daradas,Khaias,  Laihpakas,  Andhakas, 
Rudras  and  Kiratas.  The  powerful  lord  will  destroy  Mlecchas 
making  his  discus  whirl.  He  will  be  invisible  to  all  living 
beings  and  move  about  on  the  Earth. 

110.  Vtttjiu  will  be  bom  as  a  human  being  with  a  part  of 
the  intelligent  god.  In  the  previous  birth  he  would  have  been 
bom  as  the  powerful  Pramiti. 

111.  In  bodily  splendour  he  was  (will  be)  like  the  moon 
and  will  be  bora  when  the  Kaliyi^  is  complete.  Thus  the  ten 
incarnations  of  the  lord  have  been  recounted. 

112.  The  lord  takes  incarnations  in  the  different  periods 
with  a  part  of  his  powerful  splendour  in  the  three  worlds  for 
different  purposes  and  ends  in  view.  He  is  bom  in  different 
wombs  in  accordance  with  the  function  he  has  to  perform. 

113.  When  the  twentyfifth  Kalpa  has  started  and  twenty* 
five  years  have  elapsed,  he  will  be  Ulling  all  living  being  and 
men. 

1 14.  By  means  of  his  ruthless  activities  he  will  make  the 
Earth  left  with  only  the  seeds.  He  would  have  ( then)  mas¬ 
sacred  all  Vrsalas  and  almost  all  impious  persons. 

1 15-120.  Then  Kalki  will  have  achieved  his  object  along  with 
his  army.  The  subjects  then  would  be  destroyed  by  their  own 
actions.  But  they  will  become  Siddhas  again  by  themselves. 

Urged  by  the  inevitable  destiny,  they  will  become  un¬ 
reasonable^  infuriated  and  deluded,  causing  mutual  destruction. 
Along  with  his  followers,  he  will  undertake  eternal  rest  in  the 
middle  of  Gang!  and  Yamuni.  When  Kalki  passes  away 
the  kings  will  die  along  with  their  ordinary  soldiers.  People  will 


S6J2l-37,l 


789 


be  without  anyone  to  restrain  them.^  When  the  arrangement 
for  security  ceases  to  be,  they  will  loll  one  another  in  battle. 
The  will  lose  confidence  in  one  another.  They  will  be  fmtting 
and  fuming  and  will  be  extremely  distressed.  Having  no 
belonging  left,  they  will  leave  off  their  cities  and  villages  to¬ 
gether.  All  the  Vedic  Dharmas  will  be  defunct  All  the  rites  of 
castes  and  stages  of  life  will  be  extinct.  People  will  be  short  in 
stature  and  short-lived*  They  will  be  residing  in  forests. 

121-125.  They  will  be  resorting  to  rivers  and  mountains. 
Leaves,  roots  and  fniits  will  constitute  their  diet.  They  will  be 
wearing  leaves  and  barks  of  trees  or  hides.  There  will  be  a 
highly  indiscriminate  fusion  of  castes.  In  the  last  junction  of  the 
Kali  age  they  will  be  short-lived  and  highly  distressed.  Their 
means  of  sustenance  will  be  destroyed.  They  will  be  overwhel¬ 
med  with  many  advenities.  They  will  undergo  sufferings.  The 
people  will  be  completely  extinct  along  with  the  Kali  age. 
When  the  Kali  age  lapses  and  the  Krta  Yuga  starts  again,  all 
objects  will  regain  their  original  forms  naturally  and  not  other¬ 
wise.  Thus  I  have  recounted  the  activities  of  Devas  and 
Asuras.  In  the  context  of  the  narration  of  Yadu  race  the 
great  fame  of  Vi^u  has  been  recounted.  I  shall  now  recount 
the  race  of  Turvasu,  Puru  and  Druhyu. 


CHAPTER  THIRTYSEVEN* 

Royal  DynastUs 

{Conclusion  of  the  Anusahga  Seciion) 

SUta  said  x 

1.  Vahni  was  the  son  of  Turvasu.  Gobhanu  was  the  son 
of  Vahni’.  The  imconquered  heroic  Trisfinu  was  Gobh&nu's 
son. 


t.  Theie  venct  (to  the  tnd  of  the  chspttf)  describe  a  gloomy  picture 
of  the  society  at  the  end  of  Kali  Yi^.  All  PurSpas  are  unanimous  in 
depicting  the  terrible  state  of  the  putJic  as  Kali  advances. 

2.  *nus  chapter  correspond  to  Bd.P.  2.3.74.  Reference  are  to  verse 
numbers. 

3.  Genealogy  of  Turvasu  as  recorded  in  AFTH,  p.  149  shows  Garbba  u 
the  predecenor  id  Gobhiau. 


790 


2.  Kartndhama  was  the  son  of  Trisanu  and  hii  son  was 
Marutta.  Another  Manitta  mentioned  before  was  the  son  of 
Avik^it*  He  was  abo  a  kir^. 

3.  Marutta  was  childless.  I  have  heard  that  he  too  was  a 
king.  All  the  (people)  made  Du^krta^  a  descendant  of  PQru, 
his  8on« 

4.  ThuS)  due  to  the  curse  of  Yayid  in  connection  with  the 
transference  of  hu  old  age  the  line  of  Turvasu  merged  with 
that  of  Puru. 

5.  The  successor  of  Dufkfta  was  the  king  named  Sarutha. 
Af^  Sarutha  came  Jan^plda  and  he  had  four  sons. 

6.  They  were  P^dya»  Kerala^  Cola  and  Kulya  with  their 
kingdoms  named  after  them,  viz.  Pin^ya,  Kerala,  Cola  and 
Kulya. 

7.  Druhyu  had  two  heroic  sons  well  known  as  Babhruand 
Setu.  Aruddha  was  the  son  of  Setu  and  Ripu  was  the  son  of 
Babhru. 

8.  This  strong  (king)  Ripu  was  killed  in  war  with  very 
great  difficulty  by  Yauvanaiva.  Their  great  war  lasted  contU 
nuously  for  fourteen  months. 

9.  Aruddhab  successor  was  the  king  named  Gandbara 
after  whom  the  great  land  of  G&ndhira  took  its  name.* 

10.  The  horses  bred  in  G&ndhara  land  are  the  most  excel¬ 
lent  horses.  G&ndbarab  son  was  Dharma  and  Gbrta  (Dhf  ta) 
was  bis  son. 

1 1 .  Durdama  was  born  to  Ghrta  (Dhrta)  and  his  son  was 
Pracetas.  Ahundred  sons  were  bom  to  Pracetas.  All  of  them  were 
kings. 

12.  All  of  them  were  the  rulers  of  the  Mleccha  territory  in 
the  northern  direction  (region).  Anu  had  three  noble-souled 
8^15.  All  of  them  were  highly  righteous. 

13.  They  were  Sabhanara,  Pakfa  and  Parapak^a.  The  son 
of  Sabhanara  was  the  scholarly  king  Kal&nala. 

14.  Kalanala’s  son  was  ffie  pious-souled  Srfljaya  who  was 
righteous.  The  heroic  king  Purafijaya  was  the  son  of  S^*ftjaya. 


1.  Dufyaata  in  Bd.  Fv.  $• 

This  ihowi  that  Drukyu*!  detcendaoti  ruled  over  a  part  of 
Alkh^atan. 


S7;l5*24 


791 


15«  Janacnejaya  of  great  strength  and  vitality  was  the 
son  of  the  saintly  king  Purailijaya. 

16.  This  king  was  equal  to  Indra.  His  fame  was  established 
(even)  in  heaven.  Mahamanas  was  the  son  of  Mahai&la.  He 
was  very  pious. 

1 7.  He  was  the  lord  of  the  seven  continents.  He  was  an 
emperor  of  great  fame.  Mah&manas  procreated  two  famous 
sons. 


18.  They  were  Ufinara  the  knower  of  Dbarma  and  Titikfu 
the  righteous.  UHnara  had  five  wives.  They  were  born  of  the 
races  of  saintly  kings. 

19.  They  were  Mpgi  (Nrgi  in  Bd.  P.)»  Krtnl»  Navi, 
Darvi  and  Dr^advat!  the  fifth.  Usinara  had  five  sons  from 
them.  They  made  his  race  flourish.  They  were  virtuous  and 
grew  old  with  the  performance  of  great  penance. 

20.  Mrga  (Nrga  in  Bd.  P.)  was  the  son  of  Mrg&  (Nrg&), 
Nava  was  the  son  of  Nav&.  Knni  was  the  son  of  Kitnl  and 
Suvrata,  the  virtuous,  was  the  son  of  Darva. 

21-22.  O  Br&hznaoas,  the  son  of  Driadvati  was  (popular¬ 
ly  called)  Au&iaraSivi.  The  city  of  Sivi  was  famous  as  Siva- 
pura^  and  that  of  Mfg^  was  the  Yaudheya  city.  Navaraf(ram 
belonged  to  Nava  and  the  city  Krmila  to  Krmi.  That  of 
Suvrata  was  Vr9ta  ( Amba^^ha) .  Now  listen  and  understand 
Sivi’s  sons. 

23.  The  four  sons  of  Sivi  called  Sivis  were  very  popular 
among  the  people.  They  were  Vriadarbha,  Suvira,  Kekaya 
and  Madraka. 

24.  Their  territories  were  very  flourishing.  They  were 
Vr^adarbhas,  Sucidarbhas,  Kekayas  and  Madrakas.  Now  listen 
to  the  progeny  of  TitiUu. 


1.  Theie  placet  are  located  as  f<Mlows : 

Cl)  3ivap\ira-~The  country  of  Siapoih.  It  includes  Kafiristaa 
(DB.211}. 

(11)  Yaudheya^The  country  between  the  Hydatpo  and  the  Indus 
(DE  21$) 

(HI)  NavarSftra^Nausari  in  Baroacb  DUt.  of  Gujarat  (DB  139). 

(IV)  Krtnili  untraced. 


792 


25«  The  mighty-armed  $oa  of  Titik^  named  U^adratha 
was  the  well-known  king  in  the  eastern  quarter.  His  son  was 
Hema. 

26«S2«  Sutapa  was  born  to  Hema  and  Bali  was  the  son  of 
Sutapas*  (Bd.  P.) .  The  noble-minded  Bali  who  was  a  great 
Yc^in  was  bound  (by  Vamana) «  He  took  birth  in  the  human 
womb,  being  desirous  of  children,  as  the  family  was  nearing 
extinction  due  to  absence  of  issues.  He  begot  sons  who 
established  the  dlscripllnes  of  four  castes  on  this  earth.  He 
procreated  the  sons  Anga,  Vahga,  Sulha,  Pundra  and  Kalihga. 
These  are  called  B&leya  Ksatnu  (the  Kyatriyas  bom  of 
Bali)«  That  lord  had  BrAhma^a  sons  also  called  Baleya  Br&h- 
ma^as.  They  established  the  line  (of  Bali).  Many  boons  were 
granted  to  the  intelligent  Bali  by  the  delighted  Brahmi.  The 
boons  granted  were  MaAd^gittfa  (the  state  of  being  a  great 
Yogin) ,  longevity  of  life  lasting  for  a  Kalpa,  invincibility  in 
war,  great  inclination  towards  righteousness  and  piety,  the 
vision  of  the  three  worlds,  importance  among  his  descendants, 
unrivalled  state  in  strength  as  the  ability  to  see  the  true  prin* 
dples  of  Dharma.  ^*You  will  establish  the  (discipline  of)  four 
castes^^-on  being  thus  told  by  the  lord,  king  Bali  attained 
great  peace  (of  mind). 

33-34.  After  a  long  period  the  scholarly  Bali  went  back 
to  his  own  abode.  The  territories  of  the  sons  were  Angas, 
VaAgas,  Sulhakas  (Suhma),  Pundras  and  Kalingas.  They  were 
very  flourishing  territories. 

Listen  to  and  understand  thrir  race.  These  sons  were  his 
K$etrajas  (born  of  his  wife}  through  the  contact  of  a  sage. 
They  were  born  of  (sage)  Dirghatamas  of  great  virility  in 
Sude?^  (the  wife  of  Bali). 

7^0  Sag0s  said  : 

35.  O  holy  lord,  how  were  these  five  K^etraja  sons  of 
Bali  procreated  by  the  ssige  Dirghatamas  ?  Please  narrate  this 
to  us  who  ask. 


in  the  text  is  obscure.  Hence  the  fonn  Sutras  is  accepted. 


37,36-47 


793 


Suta  said ; 

S6«  Formerly  there  was  an  intelligent  and  renowned 
sage  named  Aiija.  The  wife  of  this  noble*souled  sage  was 
named  Mamata* 

37.  Brhaspati  who  was  the  younger  brother  of  Aiija, 
whose  splendour  was  great  and  who  was  the  preceptor  of  the 
heaven-dwellers  (gods)  coveted  Mamata. 

38-40,  Not  desirous  of  having  sexual  intercourse  with 
him,  Mamata  spoke  thus  to  Brhaspati  :  am  pregnant  due  to 

my  contact  with  your  elder  brother.  This  is  the  eighth  (month). 
O  Brhaspati*  this  great  child  in  the  womb  cries  much.  The 
son  of  Aiija  that  he  is,  he  has  learned  the  Vedas  with  their 
six  ancillaries  and  he  repeats  the  Vedtc  Mantras. 

Your  semen  virile  too  is  never-failing.  It  does  not  behove 
you  to  have  sexual  intercourse  with  me,  O  holy  lord,  when 
the  period  (of  gestation)  lapses  (you  may  do)  as  you  deem 
fit**. 

41.  Tliough  emphatically  told  thus  by  her,  the  noble- 
souled  Brhaspati  of  excessive  refulgence  did  not  restrain  him¬ 
self,  as  he  was  overwhelmed  by  passion. 

42.  The  virtuous-souled  Brhaspati  did  have  his  sexual 
intercourse  with  her.  Even  as  he  was  discharging  the  semen 
virile,  the  child  in  the  womb  spoke  thus  : 

43.  Sndtaka  (a  Br&hmana  who  just  had  his  sacred 
ablution  after  completing  his  Vedic  study)  shall  deposit  his 
(semen  virile)  here.  There  is  no  space  here  for  two.  You  too 
are  one  with  never-failing  semen  virile.  I  have  come  here 
first.** 

44.  Brhaspati,  the  sage  of  divine  attributes,  became  in¬ 

furiated  on  being  told  thus.  He  cursed  the  son  of  A^ija,  his 
brother,  who  was  yet  in  the  womb:  ^ 

45.  ^^ou  have  spoken  thus  to  me  on  an  occasion  coveted 
by  all  living  beings.  Since  you  have  spoken  thus  out  of 
delusion,  you  will  enter  a  long  period  of  darkness*’. 

46-47.  Due  to  that  curse,  the  sage  thereafter  came  to  be 
called  Dlrghatamas. 

Aiija  (son  of  Aiija— Dlrghatamas)  too  was  highly  renowned 
by  virtue  of  his  power  (of  penance)  like  Brhaspati,  He  too 


794 


Purd9a 


stayed  in  the  hermitage  of  hb  brother  observiog  celibacy.  He 
heard  of  Godkama  (the  law  of  cattle — ^behaving  like  a  bull 
or  cow)  from  the  buU^  the  son  of  Surabhi  (Kamadhenu). 

48.  Aiijab  brother^  hii  tincle>  had  built  a  house  for  him* 
While  he  was  staying  there,  a  bull  came  there  casually. 

49.  Surrounded  by  cows  he  grazed  the  Darbha  grass  that 
had  been  brought  for  the  Darta^  rituals.  Dlrghatamas  caught 
hold  of  the  quivering  bull  by  its  horns. 

50.  Caught  by  him,  the  bull  could  not  move  even  a  step. 

Then  the  bull  spoke  to  him  :  foremost  one  among  the 

strong  persons,  leave  me  off. 

51.  O  dear  one,  a  strong  one  like  you  has  not  been  met 
with  by  me  anywhere,  even  though  I  had  been  bearing  the 
three-eyed  lord  (everywhere) ,  as  a  result  of  which  I  have  come 
down  to  the  earth. 

52.  O  most  excellent  one  among  strong  persons,  leave  me 
off.  I  am  pleased  with  you.  Choose  a  boon**.  On  being  told 
thus,  the  s^c  told  the  bull:  Where  will  you  go  alive,  away 
from  me  ? 

53.  Hence  I  will  not  release  you,  the  quadruped  that  eats 
others*  wealth’*.  Then  that  bull  replied  to  Dlrghatamas: 

54.  dear  one,  to  u$  nothing  is  sinful.  There  b  no 
theft.  We  do  not  distinguish  between  what  should  be  eaten  or 
what  should  not  be  eaten  or  what  should  be  drunk  or  should 
not  be  drunk. 

55.  We  do  not  know  what  should  be  done  or  what  should 
not  be  done,  what  should  be  approached  or  what  should  not 
be  approached.  O  Brahma^  we  are  not  sinners.  Thb.  is 
remembered  as  the  Dharma  of  cows  and  bulb**.* 

56.  On  hearing  the  name  of  cows  mentioned,  he  became 
confused  and  released  him.  Thanks  to  his  devotion  to  the  cows 
as  ordained  by  the  Vedas,  he  propitiated  the  bull. 


1.  The  sJkCTi&cial  rite  to  be  perfonaed  on  the  New  Moon  Day* 

2.  Tbit  practice  of  open  and  unconcealed  leanial  intercourse  is  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  M.Bh.  (MW  S6SA}  and  seems  to  have  been  followed  by 
Dlr^MUmai.  The  Buddha  mentions  this  IMuuma  in  derision. 


37.57^66 


795 


57.  When  the  bull  went  awayi  fully  propitiatedi  he  began 
to  deliberate  on  the  Dharma  of  cows  devoutly*  He  was  fully 
engrossed  in  it  and  devoted  to  it  pondering  mentally  over  it 
again  and  again. 

58.  As  ill  luck  ^vould  have  it»  he  became  foolish  and  silly- 
minded  and  molested  the  wife  of  his  younger  brother  .  Auta- 
thya,  even  though  she  struggled  and  wept. 

59.  Considering  it  to  be  hts  arrogance^  Saradv&n  did  not 
brook  it.  Using  force  and  fc^owing  Godharma  (the  practice 
of  cattle )«  he  had  approached  his  daughter-in-law  (the  wife 

of  younger  brother) . 

60.  On  seeing  this  trespass*  Saradvan  reflected.  The  noble- 
souled  (8aradv&n)  knew  what  was  destined  to  happen.  So  he 
did  not  confer  death  on  him  (Dlrghatamas). 

61.  With  eyes  turned  red  due  to  anger^  he  shouted  to 
Dlrghatamas:  ^^You  do  not  distinguish  between  whom  to 
approach  and  whom  not  to.  Following  Godharma  you  have 
solicited  your  daughter-in-law. 

62.  You  are  a  man  of  despicable  conduct.  I  am  casting 
you  off.  Go  away  along  with  your  evil  action.  In  spite  of  being 
blind*  old  and  dependent  on  others  for  maintenance  you  have 
committed  a  deplorable*  sinful  action.  Therefore*  you  are  for¬ 
saken.  I  am  convinced  that  you  are  a  person  of  evil  conduct*^ 

SUta  said : 

63.  Thereafter  he  thought  of  a  ruthless  action.  After 
rebuking  Dlrghatamas  many  times*  he  caught  hold  of  him  by 
his  arms*  put  him  in  a  sealed  casket  and  hurled  it  into  the 
waters  of  Gangi. 

64.  For  seven  days  the  sealed  casket  was  wafted  by  the 

current.  Bali,  the  knower  of  the  principles  of  Dharma* 

who  was  in  the  company  of  his  wife*  saw  the  sinking  casket 
borne  towards  him  by  the  current. 

65.  Bali*  the  righteous-souled  son  of  Virocana*  saved  him 
and  took  him  to  his  harem  where  he  propitiated  him  with 
different  kinds  of  food  and  drinks*  and  looked  after  him. 

66.  The  delighted  sage  asked  Bali  to  choose  a  boon  accord¬ 
ing  to  his  desire.  The  leading  Dknava  chose  the  boon  for 
(blessing  him  with)  a  son. 


796 


yifw  Pwrdffa 


67.  Bali  said:  blessed  one,  O  oestower  of  honour,  it 

b^oves  you  to  procreate  in  my  wife  sons  endowed  with 
virtue  and  wealth,  so  that  my  line  will  be  perpetuated’’.^ 

68.  On  being  requested  thus  by  him,  the  sage  said  to  the 
king,  be  it”.  The  king  thereupon  sent  hii  wife  named 
SudefQi  unto  him  (the  sage). 

69.  On  seeing  him  blind  and  old,  the  queen  did  not  go  un* 
to  the  sage.  She  bedecked  her  servant-maid  in  ornaments  and 

her  with  him. 

70-73.  The  righteous«souIed  sage  of  good  self-control 
begot  of  that  Sudra  woman  two  sons  of  great  prowess, 
Kakylva  and  Calqus.  They  studied  the  Vedas  duly  and  be¬ 
came  masters  and  expounders  of  Vedas,  great  enlightened 
Siddhas  and  excellent  ones  with  direct  vision  of  Dharma.  On 
seeing  them,  Kakfiva  and  Cakyus,  the  king,  Bali,  the  son  of 
Virocana,  asked  the  sage,  **Are  these  my  sons?”  The  sage  said, 
excellent  Asura,  no,  that  is  not  the  case.  They  are  mine. 
Due  to  your  deception,  these  god- like  children  are  born  of 
Sudra  womb. 

74.  Considering  me  blind  and  old,  Sudeypa,  your  queen, 
sent  the  dudra  servant-maid  unto  zne  and  disrespected  me”. 

75.  Ball,  thereupon  propitiated  the  excellent  sage  again. 
The  lord  rebuked  his  wife  Sudeyi>i. 

76-78.  He  bedecked  her  in  ornaments  and  gave  her  unto 
the  sage.  The  sage  DIrghatamas  spdee  thus  to  the  queen  : 
splendid  lady,  if,  without  showing  aversion,  you  lick  from  head 
to  foot  my  naked  body  smeared  well  with  curds  mixed  with  salt, 
you  will  obtain  those  sons  mentally  desired  by  you”.  The  queen, 
thereupon,  carried  out  alt  his  instructions. 

79.  When  she  reached  the  anus,  her  aversion  was  so  great 
that  she  avoided  it.  Thereupon  that  sage  said  to  her  : 
auspicous  lady,  since  you  avoided  the  anus,  the  eldest  son  you 
will  give  birth  to  will  be  without  anus”. 

].  This  Pur&QA  has  nuxed  up  two  difftrtnt  Balii— Bali  or  MabSbali 
the  rival  of  Indra,  who  lioaated  three  ieet  of  land  to  Vamana,  was  not 
chUdlex.  Bioa,  Ul&'t  fktbcr,  wu  bis  son.  This  Bali  b  another  Bait  Indian 
Kiag  who  bdnfdiildleM  requested  thus  to  Dirghatamai. 


37.80-92 


797 


80.  Then  the  queen  repli^  to  the  sage  IXrghatamas^ 
blessed  one,  it  does  not  behove  you  to  give  me  a  son  like 
that’’. 

81-82*  The  sage  said:  gentle  lady,  this  is  your  own 

fault.  It  will  not  be  otherwise.  O  queen  of  good  rites,  I  shall 
bestow  a  son  unto  you.  Even  without  anus,  he  will  perform  all 
bodily  functions”.  Touching  her  belly,  the  sage  IXrghatamas 
continued — 

83-84.  lady  of  sweet  smiles,  since  you  have  licked  up 

the  curds  from  my  body,  your  womb  is  filled  like  the  ocean 
on  the  Full  Moon  Day.  Five  splendid  sons  comparable  to  the 
sons  of  Devas  will  be  bom  to  you.  They  will  be  refulgent, 
valiant  and  righteous  and  performer  of  sacrifices.” 

85.  Then  Anga,  the  eldest  son  of  Sudes^a,  was  born.  The 
other  sons  born  to  her  thereafter  were  Vafiga,  Kalihga, 

and  Brahma  (Suhma  in  Bd«  P.  v.  67) « 

86.  These  five  were  the  sons  bom  of  Bali’s  wife.  They 
perpetuated  his  line.  Thus,  they  were  given  as  sons  to  Bali 
formerly  by  DIrghatamas. 

87-88.  For  certain  reasons,  his  (Bali’s)  progeny  had 
been  prevented  by  Brahma,  saying,  **Let  there  not  be  any  off¬ 
spring  of  this  noble-souled  (king)  by  his  own  wives”*  That  was 
why  he  begot  children  of  human  wombs.  Then  the  delighted 
bull,  the  son  of  Kamadhenu,  spoke  these  words  to  DIrghatamas: 

89.  Since  you  have  done  this  after  pondering  over 
Godharma^  I  am  pleased  with  you.  I  shall  release  you  (from  the 
curse). 

90.  Hence,  look,  I  shall  remove  your  long  period  of  dark¬ 
ness  and  gloom,  as  well  as  the  curse  of  Brhaspati  along  with 
the  other  sins  that  may  be  lingering,  sticking  to  your  body. 

91.  After  sniffing  at  you,  I  shall  remove  your  fear  of  death 
and  old  age.”  As  soon  as  he  was  sniSed  at,  the  darkness  was 
destroyed  and  he  began  to  see. 

92.  He  regained  his  eye-sight.  He  became  a  young  man 


it  a  mUprint  for  ^^otrimdtmadSnfu 
Cf.  Bd.  P.  V.  69  :  mpotyama^  d&rtfu  tpipi  mS'Msi  nsAStmmft/ 


798  y^u  PwrdQa 

blessed  with  long  life.  Thus  that  Dti^hatamas  was  transformed 
by  the  bull  and  he  became  Gautama. 

93.  Thereafter  Kahsivan  went  to  Giripraja  (Girivraja — 6d» 
P.)  along  with  his  father.  He  performed  extensive  penance  for 
the  sake  of  his  father  as  conceived  (originally) . 

94.  AAer  a  loi^  period^  he  became  purified  through  his 
penance.  After  shaking  off  his  defects,  the  lord  (sage)  attained 
Brahmapahood  along  with  his  younger  brother. 

95«  Then  spoke  his  father:  Lord,  now  I  am  (really) 

one  blessed  with  a  son.  By  havii^  a  famous  and  good  son  (like 
you) ,  1  have  achieved  my  objective  (and  am  happy  and  con¬ 
tented)  in  life.*’ 

96.  With  his  soul  united  in  Yogic  practice,  he  attained 
Brahman-hood  and  extinction  of  (worldly  bondage) .  After 
obtaining  Br&hmana-hood  Kak^Iv&n  procreated  a  thousand 
sons. 

97-99.  Those  dark-skinned  Gautamas  (descendants  of 
Gautama)  are  remembered  as  the  sons  of  Kak^van.  Thus  the 
association  of  Dirghatamas  and  Bali,  the  son  of  Virocana,  has 
been  narrated.  So  abo  the  progeny  of  both.  After  the  corona¬ 
tion  of  his  five  sinless  sons,  the  contented  Bali  resorted  to  Yogic 
practice.  The  lord  of  Yogic  soul  bides  his  time  roamii^  (on  the 
earth)  while  remaining  invisible  to  all  living  beings. 

100.  Dadhivahana^  ibe  son  of  the  saintly  king  Afiga,  be¬ 
came  king.  Due  to  the  blunder  of  SudefQ&,  this  king  was 
Anapana  (devoid  of  anus). 

101 .  Kir^  Diviratha  is  remembered  as  the  son  of  Anapana. 
The  scholarly  son  of  Diviratha  was  king  Dbarmaratha. 

102.  It  was  this  selfsame  glorious  Dbarmaratha  by  whom 
Soma  (Soma  juice)  was  drunk  in  the  course  of  a  Yajfia  along 
with  the  noble-soul  ed  Sakra  on  the  mountain  Vi$rmpada. 

103.  Listen,  (the  soo)of  Dhannaratha  was  king  Gitraratha. 
From  Gitraratha  was  bom  king  Daiaratha.  He  was  fiimous 
as  Lomap&da  and  his  daughter  was  Santi.^ 


1.  Some  words  mistiag  herein  the  text  are  supplied  here. 

The  misiing  Unet  afier  v.  203  are  given  in  A  (p.  374).  They  are 
translated  as  !bUowi:~ 


37,104-111 


799 

104.  The  elephant  of  Sakra  was  bom  as  his  elephant 
Ga^^ika.  By  means  of  Mantras  (7)  he  brought  the  excellent 
vehicle  to  the  earth. 

105.  Haryahga's  successor  was  the  king  Bhadraratha. 
Bhadraratha’a  son  was  Brliatkanna,  the  lord  of  subjects. 

106.  Bfhadratha  was  his  son  and  Brhanmani  was  bom  of 
him.  Brhanmani  procreated  the  son  R&jendra. 

107.  He  was  otherwise  known  as  Jayadratha  and  from  him 
was  bom  king  Dpdharatha.  The  son  of  Drdharatha  was 
Janamcjaya.  the  conqueror  of  the  universe. 

108.  His  successor,  the  king  of  Adgas,  was  Kanpa.  Karna^s 
son  was  Surasena  and  Dvija  is  remembered  as  bis  son. 

Thi  Sages  said  : 

109.  How  was  Kar^ia  known  as  the  son  of  a  charioteer  and 
how  did  he  become  a  member  of  the  &mily  of  kings  of  AAgos  ? 
This  we  wish  to  hear.  Indeed  you  arc  very  efficient  (in  narra¬ 
tion)  . 

Suta  replied  : 

110.  King  Brhanmank  was  born  as  the  son  of  Brhadbh&nu 
(earlier  he  was  mentioned  as  Bfhadratha).  He  had  two  wives. 
Both  of  them  were  the  daughters  of  Caidya. 

111.  They  were  Yasodetd  and  Satya.  The  race  is  bifurca¬ 
ted  on  account  of  these  two  wives,  Jayadratha  otherwise  known 
as  Rajendra  was  bom  of  Yaiodcvi. 


104.  That  noble-minded  heroic  son  of  Daiaratha,  Gaturaflga,  the  pro¬ 
motor  of  his  iamily>  was  bom  through  the  grace  of  Rryaf 

105.  It  is  reported  that  PfthulSira  was  Gaturahga's  son.  The  son  of 
^thuUivawas  (7)  of  Campi.  The  (capital)  city  bf  Casnpi  was  beautiful. 
It  became  the  beaudful  MSlini  (real  came  of  CaxnpS) . 

106-107.  The  city  of  GampSvatt  (alias)  Campi  was  inhabited  by 
people  of  four  Vardas  (caites) .  They  lived  in  GampSvatf  for  sixty  thousand 
years.  By  Br&hmanas»  Ksattriyu^  Valiyas«  by  all.  their  o%vn  duty  (Dharma) 
was  followed.  All  were  devoted  to  Vifou  by  performing  penance  and 
following  the  dudes  of  thdr  (respective)  caste. 

Haryahga  became  his  too  by  the  grace  of  POrnabhadra. 

— V&.P.  (Anandashram^  Pune,  p.  374) 


V^Pw^a 


800 

112.  (Defective  verse)  Satyi  gave  birth  to  the  famous 
Vijaya  who  was  of  mixed  Brahmana-K$atriya  caste  (?)  Vijaya’s 
son  was  Dbrti  and  his  son  was  Dhrtavrata. 

113.  Dhrtavrata*s  son  was  Satyakarma  of  great  fame. 
Satyakarma*8  son  was  Adhiratha,  the  charioteer. 

114.  He  adopted  and  looked  siAer  Kar^ia.  Hence  Karpa 
was  known  as  the  son  of  a  charioteer.  Thus  everything  that 
had  been  asked  about  Karna  has  been  mentioned  to  you. 

1 1 5.  Thus  all  the  kings  in  the  family  of  Anga  have  been 
recounted  by  me.  Now  listen  to  the  progeny  of  Puru  in  detail 
and  in  the  proper  order. 

S&ta  said  x 

1 16.  The  mighty^armed  son  of  Puru,  Janamgaya  became 
a  king.  His  son  was  Aviddha  who  conquered  the  eastern 
region. 

117.  From  Aviddha  was  bom  as  son  the  great  hero 
Manasyu*  King  Jayada  was  the  son  of  Manasyu. 

1 18.  His  successor  was  the  king  named  Dhundhu.  Bahu- 
gavi  was  the  son  of  Dhundhu.  Saftjati  was  his  son. 

119.  Saftjati ’s  son  was  Raudraiva.  Understand  his  sons. 
Raudrajva  begot  ten  sons  of  the  celestial  damsel  Ghftacl. 

120-123.  They  were  Rajeyu,  Krteyu^  Vak^eyu,  Stha^dUcyu, 
Ghrteyu,  Jaleyu,  Sthaleyu  the  seventh,  Dliarmeyu,  Sannateyu 
and  the  tenth  son  Vaneyu.  He  had  ten  daughters  also,  viz. 
Rudra,  Sudri,  Madr&,  8ubha,  JamalaJi,  Tala,  Khala  (these 
seven  and  then) ,  the  daughter  who  is  remembered  as  Gopajali, 
then,  Tamrarasa  and  Ratnakud*  The  husband  of  all  of  them 
was  Prabhakara  by  name.  He  belonged  to  the  Atreya  line 
(Gotra) . 

Anadr$(a  was  a  saintly  king.  Riveyu  was  his  son. 

124.  Riveyu's  wife  named  Jvalana  was  the  daughter  of 
Tak$aka.  That  saintly  king  begot  of  that  gentle  lady  a  son 
named  Ranti. 

125-126.  Hand,  the  king,  begot  splendid  sons  of  his  tvife 
Sarasvatl.  They  were  Trasui  Pratiratha  and  Dhruva,  who  was 
exceedingly  righteous.  His  daughter  Gaud  is  fkmous  as  the 
splendid  mother  of  M&ndh&t&.  Dhurya  was  Pratiratha’s  son 
and  his  son  was  Kaptha. 


37.127-139 


801 

127.  (Defective  verse)  His  ton  was  Medh&tithi  from 
whom  the  Br&hma^as  K&Oth&yanat  origioated.  Itin&  (?)  was 
the  daughter  of  Anuyama (?) .  She  gave  birth  to  sons. 

128-129.  Trasu  obtained  his  favourite  son  Malina  who  was 
an  expounder  of  Brahman.  Thereafter  he  obtained  Upadati 
and  the  (following)  four  sons  of  Itina  (?)  :  Suzman ta^ 
Dufyanta,  Pravira  and  Anagha.  The  ton  bom  to  Dufyanta 
was  an  excellent  king  and  he  became  an  emperor. 

130.  That  son  Bharata  was  born  of  Salcuntala.  It  is  from 
him  that  (the  land)  took  its  name  Bharata.  A  disembodied 
(celestial)  voice  spoke  to  king  Du^yanta. 

I31-I32.  Du^yanta,  the  mother  is  but  a  leathern  pouch 
(or  bellows) .  The  son  belongs  to  the  father.  He  U  identical 
with  him  by  whom  he  is  batten.  Sakuntali  tells  the  truth. 
Maintain  your  son.  O  lord  of  men»  he  who  discharges  the  semen 
virile  redeems  the  son  from  the  abode  of  Yama.  You  are  the 
progenitor  of  this  child  in  the  womb.  Do  not  dishonour 
Sakuntal&*’. 

133.  Bharata  begot  of  his  three  wives  nine  sons.  ^These 
are  not  befitting  me".  Saying  this,  the  king  did  not  approve  of 
them.  (He  disowned  them). 

134.  Then  those  infuriated  mothers  slew  their  sons.  Thus 
the  births  of  those  sons  to  the  king  were  futile. 

135.  Then  the  powerful  son  Bharadvaja,  the  son  of  Brha- 
spati,  was  brought  over  there  by  the  Maruts  in  the  course  of  the 
sacrifices  and  handed  over  to  him. 

136.  In  this  connection,  they  cite  this  story  of  the  mtelli- 
gent  Bharadvaja,  his  birth  and  the  transfer  unto  Bharata  by  the 
Maruts. 

137.  When  his  wife  was  in  the  advanced  stale  of  preg¬ 

nancy,  it  is  said  that  Aiija  died.  Looking  at  his  brother’s  wife, 
Brhaspati  said  :  auspicious  lady,  embellish  your  body  with 

ornaments  and  give  me  (the  pleasure  of)  sexual  intercourse 
with  you.” 

138.  On  being  told  thus,  she  said  to  him,  holy  lord, 
1  am  pregnant  now.  The  foetus  has  reached  the  advanced  state 
of  maturity,  live  child  repeats  the  Vedic  Mantras. 

139.  You  too  are  one  whose  semen  virile  never  goes  in 


802 


vain.  This  activity  (of  sexual  intercourse  with  you)  is  despio 
able**.  On  being  told  thu8>  Brhaspati  said  smilingly : 

140.  ‘^You  need  not  at  all  instruct  me  in  good  behaviour**. 
With  great  delight,  he  forcibly  indulged  in  sexual  intercourse 
with  her. 

141.  father  (uncle)  Brhaspati**,  said  the  foetus  to 
Brhaspati  who  was  in  a  state  of  exhilaration,  am  already 
embedded  here,  having  come  here  before. 

142.  You  are  one  whose  semen  virile  never  goes  in  vain. 
There  is  no  space  here  for  two  (children)  .**  On  being  told  thus 
by  the  child  in  the  womb,  the  infuriated  Brhaspati  said  again : 

143.  * 'Since  you  prevent  me  at  such  a  time  as  this,  desired 
by  all  living  beings,  you  will  enter  a  long  period  of  darkness**. 

144.  The  (vaginal)  passage  of  his  mother  was  covered 
with  his  feet  by  the  child.  The  semen  virile  of  Brhaspati,  being 
obstructed  in  between  them  became  an  infant. 

145.  On  seeing  the  son  instantaneously  bom  Mamati  said, 
''O  Brhaspati,  I  am  going  to  my  house.  Bhara  (Nurture), 
Ov&ja  (that  which  is  born  of  two).** 

146.  When  she  went  away  after  saying  this,  he  (too)  for* 
sook  the  son  instantaneously.**  **Bhar<UDa  {Nurtart).  Badham 
(very  well)**.  Since  this  was  said,  be  came  to  be  known  as 
'Bharadvaja*. 

147.  On  seeing  the  infant  abandoned  by  both  the  mother 
and  the  father,  the  Maruts  Cook  away  the  child  Bharadvaja 
out  of  mercy. 

148-149.  At  that  time  Bharata  had  performed  various 
Yajfias  and  other  KSmya  and  J{aimUtika  (sacrifices)  with  the 
desire  for  obtaining  a  son.  In  spite  of  those  Yajfias,  the  lord 
did  not  obtain  any  son.  Thereafter  he  performed  the  Mamt^ 
Soma  Yajfia  for  the  sake  of  a  son. 

150.  Being  propitiated  by  that  Marut-Soma  sacrifice, 
the  Maruts  (gave)  him  Bharadvaja,  the  intelligent  son  of 
Brhaspati. 

151.  On  obtaining  that  son  Bharadvaja,  Bharata  said  ;  ''O 
lord,  with  you  as  my  son,  I  am  satisfied,  since  all  my  previous 
children  had  been  killed**. 

152.  The  births  of  his  (i.e.  Bharata*s)  previous  sons  had 


37.153.164  803 

been  in  vain  {viiaiha) .  So  Bharadvija  was  known  by  the  name 
Vitatha. 

153.  Hence  the  Divine  child  Bharadvaja  turned  into  a 
K^atriya  from  Brahmana-hood.  He  is  remembered  by  the 
names  Djnmukhytyana  (having  two  important  abodes)  and 
Dv^iifka  (having  two  fathers). 

154.  After  the  birth  (succession)  of  Vitatha,  Bharata  went 
to  heaven  (passed  away) .  Vitatha*s  successor  was  Bhuvamanyu. 

155.  Four  sons  comparable  to  the  Mahabhutas  (great 
elements)  were  bom  to  Bhuvamanyu.  They  were  BThatk^tra, 
Mahatdrya,  Nara  and  the  powerful  Gigra. 

156.  The  son  of  Nara  was  Saihkfti.  His  sons  were  very 
powerful.  Guruvirya  and  Tridcva  are  remembered  as  the  sons 
of  Saihkrti.  There  were  none  greater  than  they. 

157.  The  successors  of  G5gra  were  bom  of  Sinibaddha. 
Therefore  the  Gigryas  (descendants  of  Gagra)  are  remembered 
as  Brahmat^  with  the  traits  of  K$atriyas. 

158.  BhXma  was  the  ton  of  Mahavirya.  From  him  was  born 
Ubhak^aya.  His  wife  Vi^ala  gave  birth  to  three  sons. 

159.  She  gave  birth  to  TrayyaruQi,  Pu^karin  and  the  third 
son  Kapi.  Kapils  descendants  were  excellent  Kfatriyas  and 
those  of  the  other  two  are  said  to  be  great  sages. 

160.  The  descendants  of  Gagra,  Samkrti  and  Mahavirya 
were  Brahmanas  endowed  with  K^atriya  traits  too.  They 
merged  with  the  line  of  Ahgiras.  Now  the  line  of  Brhatk^atra 
will  be  recounted. 

161.  Brhatksatra’s  successor  was  a  pious  one  named 
Suhotra.  Suhotra^i  successor  was  one  named  Hastin.  Formerly 
this  city  named  Hastinapura  was  built  by  him. 

162.  Hastings  successor  were  three,  viz.  Ajamidha, 

Dvimldba  and  Purumidha.  They  were  all  extremely  devout 
and  pious  • 

163-164.  Ajaroidba’s  sons  were  splendid.  They  perpetua¬ 
ted  the  auspicious  line.  They  were  very  pious.  They  were 


1.  The  following  addltiocel  vene  numbered  167  in  A,  ii  truulated  u 
follows  : 

queens  of  Ajaxnl^hs  were  suaptcious  sad  perpetustort  of  the  Kuru 
race.  They  were  (by  name)  Nlltnl,  Keilni  axid  the  beautiful  DbOniinl*. 


Vlfyu  Purd^ 


804 

bom  to  the  great  king  in  his  old  age  after  a  great  penance, 
thanks  to  the  grace  of  Bharadvaja.  Listen  to  their  extension. 
Kan^ha  was  bom  to  Ajamidha  and  Kelinl. 

165.  Medh&tithi  was  his  son  and  from  him  were  bom  the 
Br&hmatias  called  Kanpiayanas.  King  Bfhadvasu  was  born  to 
Ajamidha  and  (his  second  wife)  Dhumini. 

166.  Bfhadvasu's  son  was  B^hadvi^nu  who  was  very  strong. 
His  son  was  Bfhat  karma  whose  son  was  Brhadratha. 

167.  His  son  was  Vilvajit,  whose  son  was  Senajit.  The 
four  sons  of  Senajit  were  well  known  in  the  world. 

168.  They  were  Rucir&^va»  K&vya,  Rama  of  steady  bow 
and  Vatsa,  the  king  of  Avantl  from  whom  the  Parivatsara  (era 
started) . 

169.  Rucirisva*s  successor  was  Prthu$e<ia  of  great  fame. 
P&ra  was  the  son  of  Prthufeoa  and  I^pa  was  bom  of  P&ra. 

1 70.  We  have  heard  that  a  hundred  sons  were  horn  to  lApa. 
They  are  called  'NIpas’.  All  of  them  were  kings. 

171.  The  most  glorious  king  among  them  who  raised  the 
fame  of  the  race  and  stabilised  the  race  was  Samara  with  his 
capita]  in  Kaxiipilya.  He  was  fond  of  war. 

172.  Samara  had  three  sons  endowed  with  all  good 
qualities.  They  were  Para,  Para  and  Sattvadaiva.  Para’s  son 
Vrsu  shone  well. 

173.  A  son  named  Sukrti  endowed  with  all  good  qualities 
was  born  to  Vr^u,  thanks  to  his  meritorious  activities.  Yibhr&ja 
was  his  son. 

1 74.  Vibhraja’s  successor  was  the  king  named  Anuha  who 
was  very  famous.  He  was  the  husband  ofRd  and  so  the  son-in- 
law  of  Suka. 

175.  Anuha’s  successor  was  Brahmadatta  of  great  penance. 
Yogasunu  was  his  son  and  his  son  Vi$vaksena  became  a  king. 

176.  Vibhraja’s  sons  became  kings,  thanks  to  their  merito¬ 
rious  activities.  Visvaksena’s  son  was  Udaksena. 

177.  His  successor  was  Bhallipi  by  whom  the  king  tvas 
killed  formerly.  Bhallafa’s  successor  was  king  Janamejaya.  On 
his  behsdf,  all  the  Nipaa  were  destroyed  by  Ugr&yudha. 


S7J78-189 


805 


Tk$  Sagis  asked  : 

178.  Whose  sod  was  Ugriyudha  ?  In  which  family  was  he 
bom  and  glorified  ?  What  were  all  the  Nipas  destroyed  by 
him  ? 

SUta  said : 

1 79-160*  The  scholarly  Yavioara  was  the  son  and  succes¬ 
sor  of  Dvimidha*  Dhrtiman  was  his  son.  His  son  was  Satya- 
dhrti*  Satyadhrti's  son  was  the  valorous  Drdhanemi.  The  king 
named  Suvarm&  was  Dfdhanemrs  son* 

181*  The  valorous  S&rvabhauma  (lord  of  the  entire  earth) 
was  Suvarm&’s  son.  He  shone  as  the  sole  lord  of  the  earth  and 
he  became  famous  as  Sirvabhauma. 

182.  In  his  great  family  was  bom  (a  king  named)  Mahat- 
pauravanandana.  King  Rukmaratha  is  remembered  as  the  son 
of  Mahatpaurava. 

183*  Rukmaratha’s  son  was  the  king  named  Supaiiva. 
Sup&riva^s  son  named  Sumati  was  very  virtuous. 

184.  The  son  of  Sumati  was  lord  Sannatiman,  the  right- 
eous-souled  king.  His  son  was  named  Sanati  and  Krta  was  hts 

son. 

185.  He  was  a  disciple  of  the  nobic-souled  Hiranyanabhi 
of  the  Kauthuma  branch  (of  Samavedic  study).  Twentyfour 
Saman-Saibhit^  were  expounded  by  him. 

186.  The  sons  of  Krta,  the  singers  of  S&man  hymns,  are  re¬ 
membered  by  the  name  Tracyas*  (Easterners) .  The 
heroic  Ugrayudha  was  one  of  the  sons  of  Krta.  He  was  the  scion 
of  the  family  of  Puru. 

187.  The  mighty-armed  lord  of  Patlealas  named  Nila,  who 
was  the  grandfather  of  PtH^ta,  was  killed  by  him  (Ugrayudha) 
(and  thereby)  he  exhibited  his  valour. 

108.  Ugrayudha’s  son  (successor)  was  a  very  famous  king 
named  K^ema.  Su^dra  was  bom  of  K^ema.  Suvlra^s  son  was 
Nrpaftjaya.  ^^raratha  was  bom  of  Nrpafijaya.  Thus  these  are 
remembered  as  Pauravas  (descendants  of  Puru). 

189.  King  Nila  was  t^m  of  Nllinl  (the  third  wife)  of  ^a- 
mIdha.  Sui&nti  was  born  of  Nila,  thanks  to  bis  severe  penance. 


806 


190.  Punij&nu  was  the  son  of  Sui&nd.  Rik$a  was  bora  of 
Purujinu.  The  following  were  the  sons  and  successors  of  Rih^a. 

191.  They  were;  Mudgala,  Srfijaya,  the  king  Brhadi;u» 
Vikranta  who  was  younger  to  him  and  KaThpUya^  the  fifth. 

1 92-193.  For  the  sustenance  and  the  upkeep  of  all  the  five, 
the  father  spoke  to  them  thus :  **Know  that  there  are  five  flouri¬ 
shing  territories  for  all  the  five  of  you.’*  Since  the  five  were 
sufficient,  all  the  territories  were  together  well  known  as  Paftca- 
las.*  Maudgalyas,  the  descendants  of  Mudgala,were  Br&hmat^s 
endowed  with  Kyatriya  traits. 

194.  These  were  known  as  Kanthamudgalas  and  they  mer* 
ged  into  the  A^irasa  Gotra.  Mudgala’s  eldest  son  was  very 
famous.  He  was  expressed  in  the  meditation  of  Brahman. 

195.  From  him  Indraseni  conceived  Badhyaiva.  We  have 
heard  that  Menaka  bore  to  Badhyalva  twins. 

19&-197.  They  were  Divodasa  the  saintly  king  and  Ahalyfi 
of  great  fame.  Ahalyi  bore  Satananda  the  excellent  sage  to 
Saradvata.  His  son  was  Satyadhrti  of  great  fame.  He  was  a 
master  of  the  science  of  archery. 

198.  On  seeing  an  Apsaras  (celestial  damsel)  in  front,  the 
semen  virile  of  Satyadhrti  was  emitted  in  the  bush  of  Sara-grasa 
and  twins  were  born. 

199-200.  Santanu  who  had  come  that  way  ahunting  took 
them  out  of  mercy  (Krp&}  •  The  boy  is  remembered  as  Krpa 
and  the  girl  Kfpl.  She  was  also  known  as  Gautaml.  Thus  the 
race  of  Gautama,  known  as  Siradvatas  and  ^tathyas,  has  been 
recounted. 


Henceforth  I  shall  recount  the  progeny  of  Divod&sa. 

201*  Divod&sa*s  successor  was  king  Mitrayu  who  was  en* 
grossed  in  meditation  on  Brahman.  Maitreya  was  bora  of  him. 
It  is  rememberd  that  these  too  got  merged  (in  other  faznilies). 


202.  These  too  got  merged  into  the  family  (of  Bhrgu). 
They  were  (Br&hmagas)  endowed  with  K$atriya  traits*  They 
were  known  as  Bhargavas.  King  Cyavana  was  bora  (in  that 
family) .  The  scholarly  Pratiratha  was  born  of  him. 


*PaJU4  (five)  +s<aiii(iuScicnt) 


37.203-217 


807 

203.  The  intelligent  Sud4sa  was  bom  of  Cyavana.  Sahadcva 
was  bom  as  the  son  of  Sudisa.  Somaka  was  his  son. 

204-205.  When  the  race  was  about  to  be  exdnctj  Ajsmidha 
was  born  again.  That  was  Somaka.  Soxnaka’s  son  was  Jantti. 
When  he  was  killed,  hundred  other  sons  were  born  to  the  nobie- 
souled  lord  Ajamidha  in  his  birth  as  Somaka.  The  youngest  of 
them,  Pr^ata  was  Dnipada’s  father. 

206-209.  His  son  was  Dhi^tadyumna  and  Dhr^^aketu  was 
his  son.  DhuminI,  the  queen  of  Ajamidha^  was  desirous  of  a  son* 
In  her  rebirth  she  performed  a  very  difficult  penance  for  a  hun¬ 
dred  years.  She  performed  Homas  in  the  fire.  She  kept  awake. 
She  ate  but  little  and  that  too  only  the  holy  food.  She  perform¬ 
ed  great  holy  rites.  Day  and  night  she  stayed  on  the  Kuia 
mattress  alone.  By  these  rigorous  activities,  she  became  smoke- 
coloured.  The  powerful  i\jamldha  begot  of  her  ^k^a,  a  smoke- 
coloured  son,  who  was  elder  brother  of  Sita  (one  of  white 
colour).  Samvara^a  was  born  of  Kuru  was  bom  of  Saih- 

varapa. 

210.  After  treading  on  (conquering)  Prayaga,  he  built 
Kurukyetra.  The  excess! ve-splendoured  king  ploughed  it  for 
many  years. 

211.  While  it  was  being  ploughed,  Sakra  shone  there  and 
granted  this  boon  :  Your  (Kurukyetra)  shall  be  beautiful,  holy 
and  resorted  to  by  meritorious  persons. 

212-213.  Persons  born  in  bis  family  were  excellent  kings 
famous  as  Kurus.  Kuni’s  beloved  sons  were  Sudhanvan,  Jahnu, 
Pariksita  the  great  king,  Putraka  and  Arimardana.  It  is  remem¬ 
bered  that  the  intelligent  Suhotra  was  the  successor  of  Sudhan¬ 
van. 

214-215.  Cyavana  was  his  son.  The  king  was  an  expert  in 
religious  affairs.  K|ta  was  the  son  of  Cyavana.  He  performed 
great  penance  and  many  Yajfias.  The  £ing  procreated  his 
famous  son  Vidyoparicara  who  claimed  friendship  of  Indra.  He 
was  a  great  hero  who  could  traverse  the  sky  and  was  known  as 
Vasu  too. 

2 1 6-2 17.  Girika  bore  seven  sons  to  Vidyoparicara — Bfhad- 
ratha,  a  great  warrior,  who  became  famous  as  the  king  of 
Magadha,  Pratyagrha,  Kuia,  one  whom  they  call  Ma^ivihana 
M&thailya,  Lalittba  and  Matsyakala  the  seventh* 


yi^ 


218.  BrliadrathA*8  successor  was  famous  by  the  name  of 
Kuiagra.  Kuiligra's  son  %vas  a  powerful  kii^  named  l^fabha. 

219.  |lfabha*s  successor  was  a  virtuous  king  z^amed  Pu|pa* 
v&n.  King  Satyahita  is  remembered  as  his  valotous  successor. 

220*221.  His  son  was  Sudbanvan.  From  him  the  valonnis 
Crja  was  bom.  Crja^s  son  was  Nabhasa  and  from  him  was  bom 
that  powerful  king  Jarasandha.  He  was  bom  in  two  pieces  and 
he  was  joined  by  Jar&.  Jarasandha  was  m^^hty^armed  because 
he  was  joined  by  Jari. 

222.  This  Jarlisandha  of  great  strength  was  the  conqueror 
of  all  K^atriya  kings.  Jar&sandha*s  son  was  the  valorous  Saha* 
deva. 

223.  Sahadeva^s  son  was  the  glorious  Som&dhi  of  very  great 
penance.  8ruta$ruva  was  the  son  of  Som&dhi  and  is  glorified  as 
M&gadha. 

SOta  said  : 

224.  Janamejaya  was  the  successor  of  Parikfita.  Sruta- 
sena^s  successor  was  named  BUlmasena.  (lines  missing). 

225.  Jahnu  begot  a  son  named  Suratha  who  became  a 
king#  Suratha* s  successor  was  the  heroic  king  Viduratha. 

226.  It  is  well  known  that  VidQratha’s  son  too  was  S^a- 
bhauma.  Jayatsena  was  bom  of  Sarvabhauma  and  Arddhi  was 
his  son. 

227.  Mah^ttva  was  bom  of  Aradhi  and  Ayutayu  came 
thereafter.  Akrodhana  was  the  ion  of  Ayut&yu.  It  is  remember* 
ed  that  Dev&tithi  was  bom  of  him. 

228.  It  was  Rksa  who  became  the  successor  of  Devatithi. 
Bhimasena  was  born  of  ^k|a  and  Dilipa  was  his  son. 

229.  PraUpa  was  the  son  of  Dillpa.  It  is  remembered  that 
three  sons  were  bom  to  him.  Those  three  were  Devapi,  8antanu 
and  Bahlika. 

230.  King  Saptabahlifvara  should  be  known  as  (the  son) 
of  B&hllkA.  Somadatta  too,  of  great  fame,  was  the  ton  of 
BkhUka. 

231.  Bhuri,  Bhuri^ravai  and  8ala  were  bom  of  Somadatta. 
With  a  desire  to  accumulate  virtue  Devkpi  (renounced  every* 
thing  and)  went  to  the  forest. 


37,232-245 


809 

232.  S^e  Devapi  became  the  preceptor  of  Devas.  To 
this  noble- souled  s^e,  two  sons  Oyavana  and  I^jaika  vftxt  bom, 

233.  Santanu  became  king.  He  was  a  scholar  and  a  great 
physician  (Mahdbhisa).  About  this  Mahabhiya  they  cite  this 
verse. 

234.  ^^Whomsoever  does  the  king  touch,  be  he  very  old  due 
to  the  efflux  of  time,  becomes  a  youth  again.  Therefore  they 
know  him  as  Sarfttanu  {Sam — happineasi  7anu~body).'* 

235.  Therefore  the  quality  of  his  being  ^arfUarm  was  well 
known  among  the  subjects.  That  righteous  king  Sazhtanu 
married  Jahnavl  (GaAga) . 

236.  The  lord  begot  a  son  her,  named  Devavrata  (who 
later  became)  Bhisma.  That  Bhisma  became  famous  as  the 
grandfather  of  the  P&od&vas. 

237-238.  After  some  time  Saihtanu  begot  his  most  favourite 
son  Vicitravirya  who  as  king  did  much  for  the  welfare  of  the 
subjects.  Krsnadvaipiyana  begot  of  ^^cit^avl^ya’s  wife  (kfetra)^ 
Dhftarastra,  Pandu  and  Vidura.  Gandhari  bore  to  Dhriariffira 
a  hundred  sons. 

239.  Duryodhana  was  the  eldest  among  them.  He  became 
the  lord  of  all  Ksatriyas.  Mkdri  and  the  queen  Prtbk  became 
the  wives  of  Pandu. 

240-24K  Sons  bestowed  by  gods  were  bom  oi  them  on 
behalf  of  Pandu.  Yudhisthira  was  bom,  thanks  to  the  grace  of 
Dharma;  Vfkodara  was  bom  of  Vayu;  Dhanaftjaya  whose 
valour  was  equal  to  that  of  Sakra  was  bom  of  Indra.  Sahadeva 
and  Nakula  were  born  to  Madil,  thanks  to  the  grace  of  Aivins. 

242.  Five  sons  were  bom  to  Draupadl  from  the  (five) 
P&ndavas,  Draupadl  bore  Srutividdha,  the  eldest  of  them,  to 
Yudbisthira. 

243.  Hidaihba  bore  her  son  Ghalotkaca  to  Bldmasena. 
Kaiya  too  bore  her  son  Sarvavrka  to  Bbimasena. 

244.  Vijaya,  the  princess  of  Madra  land,  bore  Suhotra  to 
Sahadeva.  Niramitra  was  bom  to  Karematl  of  Vaidya  (?)  as 
the  son  of  Nakula. 

245.  The  heroic  Abhimanyu  was  bom  of  Subhadra  as  the 
son  of  Pkrtha.  Parikfit  was  bom  of  Uttara,  the  princess  of 

as  the  son  of  Abhimanyu. 


810  Vdfu 

246*  King  Janamejaya  was  the  successor  of  ParlkiU.  He 
established  Vajasaneyika  Brahmans. 

247«248.  The  infuriated  Vaiiathp&yana  (said  to  him) , 
evil-minded  one,  your  directions  (rule)  will  not  remain  long 
here  in  this  world  without  an  enemy  (without  being  protested 
against) .  As  long  as  I  am  alive  in  this  world,  this  ( act  of  yours) 
cannot  be  praised.**  Thereupon,  Janamejaya  was  faced  with 
difficulties  all  round. 

249.  He  worshipped  lord  Prajapati  by  offering  Hacis  in 
the  Paurpamisa  Yajfta.  He  saw  that  the  different  materials 
were  offered  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  lord.  Still  he  was  in 
difficulties? 

250.  Janamejaya,  the  son  of  Parlk^it,  the  descendant  of 
Puru,  then  performed  Aivamedha  twice.  Thereafter,  he  made 
those  V&jasaneyaka  Br&hmaoas  function.  Janamgaya  was 
crippled  (defeated]  three  times. 

251.  Crippled  at  the  hands  of  Aivakomukhyas,  crippled 
at  the  hands  of  the  residents  of  Angas,  and  crippled  at  the 
hands  of  the  people  of  Madhyadda  (Middle  Lands),  Janame¬ 
jaya  became  Trikhervi  (crippled  three  times) .  He  was  distres¬ 
sed.  Being  cursed  along  with  those  Br&hma^as,  he  suffered 
ruin. 

252.  Satanika  of  truthful  exploit  and  strength  was  bis 
son.  After  him  ( Janamejaya )«  theBrahmanas  crowned  his  son 
Satknika. 

253-255.  The  powerful  Aivam  edhadatta  was  the  son  of 
Satanika.  Adhisiiinakrsna  was  bom  as  the  son  of  Aivamedha- 
datta.  He  conquered  the  cities  of  his  enemies.  He  is  the 
present  ruler,  of  righteous  soul  and  great  fame.  It  is  under  his 
rule  that  you  have  been  able  to  perform  this  Dfrg/iasatra  (sacri¬ 
fice  of  long  duration)  for  three  years.  It  is  very  difficult  to  be 
performed*  O  excellent  Brahman  as,  (besides)  there  is  another 
Satra  lasting  for  two  years,  which  is  being  performed  in  Kuru- 
k^tra  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Dr^advad. 

TTti  Sagts  saiJ  : 

256.  O  highly  intelltgent  Suta,  we  wish  to  bear  the 
fUture  events  of  the  subjects  along  with  the  kings.  The  past 
kings  have  been  already  mentioned  by  you. 


37.257-267 


811 


257-259.  Wc  wuh  to  hear  all  these— the  activities  that 
will  be  undertaken  by  them,  and  their  names,  the  kings  who  will 
be  born,  their  time  calculated  in  years,  the  extent  of  theYugas, 
their  good  points  and  thdr  defects,  their  happiness  and  misery 
and  those  of  the  subjects,  their  religious  activities  and  their 
passionate  pursuits  as  well  as  their  monetary  dealings.*  Enu¬ 
merate  all  these  to  us  who  ask  you. 

On  being  requested  thus,  Suta  the  most  excellent  among 
the  intelligent  ones,  mentioned  everything  in  the  manner  it 
would  occur  and  as  he  had  seen  and  heard. 

Suta  said  : 

260-261.  Even  as  I  recount  listen  and  understand  the 
future  events,^  the  Kaliyuga  and  the  Manvantaras  in  the 
manner  they  had  been  described  to  me  by  Vyasa  of  wonderful 
activities.  Henceforth,  I  shall  mention  tl^  kings  who  will  be 
born  in  future. 

262-265.  I  shall  mention  the  descendants  of  Aila,  Ikyvaku, 
Sudyumna  and  other  kings  in  whom  this  splendid  territory 
of  the  Ikfvikus  will  be  vested.  I  sbadl  mention  all  other  kings 
also  besides  these  who  will  be  bom  in  future,  viz.  Kyatriyas, 
Paraiavas,  Sudras  and  Brahmapas,  Andhas  (Andhras) ,  Sakas, 
Pulindas,  Tulikas,  Yavanas,  Kaivartas,  Abhiras,  Sabaras, 
and  all  other  Mleccha  (outcaste)  tribes. 

I  shall  mention  those  kii^s  by  names  and  the  duration  in 
years  of  their  rule. 

266.  This  present  king  Adhisamakr;na  is  a  king  belonging 
to  the  Puru  dynasty.  I  shall  mention  all  the  future  kings  in  his 
family. 

267.  Nirvaktra  will  be  the  son  of  Adhis&makr|M.  When 
his  city  Hastin&pura  is  swept  away  by  Gahg&  he  will 
abandon  it  and  live  happily  at  Kausambl. 


1.  Vem  260410  describe  the  ^future*  dynastiei  oTkinp.  The  dynasties 
mentioned  here  are  (1)  Brhadmha,  (2)  PradyoU,  (5)Si<unSka  (Sifuniga), 
(4)  Nanda,(5)  Maury  a,  (6)  Kiova  and  (7)  Andhra.  Guptas  (if  the  read¬ 
ing  be  correct)  are  merely  mentioned  and  Meccha  and  other  rukrs  are  abo 

refemd  to. 


812 


VijuPurd^ 


268.  His  son  will  be  Citraratha  will  be  born  of 

U^ia.  Sucidratba  will  be  bomofCitraratha^  and  Vrtiman  will 
be  born  of  Sucidratba. 

269.  Su^ena  of  great  fame  and  prowess  will  be  bom  there* 
after.  To  Su^epa  will  be  bom  the  Icing  named  Sutirtha. 

270.  Ruca  will  be  bom  of  SuUrtha.  Then  Tricak^a  will 
be  bom.  Tricak^’s  successor  will  be  Sukhlbala. 

271.  Sukhibala's  son  will  be  the  king  Paripluta.  King 
Sunaya  will  be  bom  as  the  sonof  Paripluta. 

272.  King  Medhi^i  will  be  the  son  of  Sunaya  and  Medha- 
vin's  son  will  be  Da^tdapipi. 

273.  Dapdapa^i’a  son  will  be  Niramitra  and  K?emaka  will 
be  the  son  of  Niramitra.  These  twentyHve  kings  (?)  will  be  born 
in  the  race  of  Puru. 

274*-275.  In  this  connection  the  following  verse  describing 
the  subsequent  race  has  been  cited  by  Brihmanas  who  know 
ancient  lore.  ^^This  race  which  has  produced  Br&hmanas  and 
K;atriyas,  and  which  is  honoured  by  Devas  and  sages,  will  be 
extinct  in  the  Kali  age  after  coming  to  KMmaka’\  Thus  the  race 
of  Puru  has  been  enumerated  precisely. 

276.  (The  race)  of  the  intelligent  son  of  Pandu,  the  noble- 
souled  Arjuna  (has  been  narrated) . 

Henceforth  I  shall  mention  the  race  of  the  Ik$vakus  of 
great  souls. 

277-278.  Bthadratha's  successor  was  the  heroic  king 
firhatk^tya.  His  son  vras  Kiaya.  Vatsavyuha  was  the 
son  of  Ksaya.  After  Vatsavyuha,  Prativyuha  became  king. 
His  son  is  Divakara  and  this  king  is  ruling  over  the  city  of 
Ayodhya  now. 

279.  Divakara^s  son  will  be  the  renowned  Sabadeva. 
Brhadaiva  will  become  the  successor  of  Sabadeva. 

280.  Bhanuratba  will  be  his  son .  His  son  will  be  Pratltaiva. 

V 

Supratita  will  become  the  son  of  Pratit^lva. 

281-282.  Sabadeva  will  be  his  son  and  his  son  will  be 
Sunak^atra.  Kinnara,  the  oppressor  of  his  enemies,  will  become 
the  son  of  Sunakfatra.  Antartk^a,  the  son  of  Kinnara,  will  be  a 
great  (king). 

283-284.  Supari^  will  be  born  of  Antariksa  and  Amitrajit 


37.285-294 


813 


will  be  bom  of  Supama.  His  son  will  beBharadvija.  Dharminwill 
be  hts  son.  A  son  named  Kftafijaya  will  be  bom  to  Dharmin. 
Vrata  will  be  the  son  of  Krtafijaya  and  his  son  wiU  be  Ra^afi- 
jay  a.  To  Raoa&jaya  will  be  born  the  her  me  king  Safijaya. 
3ikya  will  be  born  as  the  son  of  SaAjaya.  From  3ikya  will  be 
bom  Suddhodana. 

285.  In  the  family  of  3akya^  R&hula  will  be  bom  to 
Suddhodana  (?)  Then  Prasenajit  will  be  bom.  K^draka  will  be 
bora  then. 

286.  Kfulika  will  be  the  son  of  Kfudraka.  From  Kfulika 
will  be  bom  Suratha.  Sumttra»  the  son  of  Siiratha»  will  be  the 
last  king. 

287.  All  these  mentioned  are  the  future  Ik$v&ku  kings 
in  the  Kali  age.  They  will  be  bom  in  the  race  of  Brhadbala 
in  the  Kali  age.  All  of  them  will  be  heroic^  learned  and  truth-* 
ful.  They  will  be  the  conquerors  of  the  sense-organs. 

288.  In  this  connection  the  following  verse  describing  the 
subsequent  race  is  cited  by  those  who  know  the  future.  **This 
race  of  the  Ik^vakus  will  end  with  Sumitra.  After  coming  to 
the  king  Sumitra,  it  will  become  extinct  in  the  Kali  age.’*  Thus 
the  Kjetra  (domain  ?)  originating  from  Manu  and  descending 
from  Aila  has  been  described. 

289.  Henceforth  I  shall  mention  the  kings  of  Magadha, 
the  descendants  of  Brhadratba,  i.e.  the  kings  of  the  race  of 
Jarasandha  and  the  family  of  Sahadeva. 

290.  I  shall  mention  the  past,  present  and  future  kings 
in  accordance  with  their  importance.  Even  as  I  recount,  listen 
and  understand. 

291.  In  the  Mah&bharata  war  Sahadeva  fell.  His  son 
Somadhi,  the  saintly  king,  ruled  over  Girivraja. 

292.  He  ruled  over  the  kingdom  for,  fifty  eight  years.  His 
son  Srutasravas  ruled  for  sixtyfisur  years.  Ayutayu  ruled  for 
twenty  six  years.  Niramitra  enjoyed  the  earth  for  a  hundred 
years  and  passed  over  to  huven* 

293.  Sukftta  ruled  over  the  earth  for  fiftysix  years.  Bfhat* 
karman  ruled  the  kingdom  for  twentytbree  years. 

294.  Senajit  enjoys  the  kingdom  (now).  (His  son)  Srutaft- 
jaya  will  be  king  for  forty  years. 


295.  Mahabala,  the  mighty^armed  and  endowed  with  great 
intellect  and  easploit^  will  become  king  and  rule  over  the  earth 
for  thirCyfive  ycar3« 

296.  Suci  will  remain  in  the  kingdom  for  SfLyeight  years* 
K^ema  will  be  the  king  for  full  twentyeight  years. 

297.  Bhuvata  the  powerful  will  maintain  the  kingdom  for 
sixtyfour  years*  Then  Dharmanetra  will  be  the  king  for  full 
five  years* 

298.  Nipati  (7)  will  then  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  fifty- 
eight  years.  Suvrata*s  rule  will  be  for  thirtyeigbt  years. 

299.  Drdhasena  will  be  the  king  for  forty^  ten  and  eight 
(i.e.  fiftyeight)  years.  Then  Sumati  will  be  in  possession  of 
the  kingdom  for  thirtythree  years. 

300*  Sucala  will  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  twentytwo  years. 
Thereafter^  Sunetra  will  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  forty  years. 

301 .  Satyajit  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  eightythree  years. 
After  attaining  the  kingdom  Vlrajit  will  enjoy  it  ibr  tbirtyfive 
years. 

302.  Ariftjaya  will  be  in  possesssion  of  the  earth  for  fifty 
years.  These  thirtytwo  kings  will  be  the  future  rulers  in  the  line 
of  Bfhadratha. 

303*-904.  Altogether  they  will  rule  for  full  thousand  years. 
When  the  descendants  of  Brhadratha  cease  to  rule  and  when 
the  Vltahotras  occupy  the  throne^  even  as  all  the  K^triyas 
stand  gazing  Pradyota*  Munika  will  kill  his  master  and  crown 
his  own  son  as  the  king. 

305*  That  king  of  the  future  will  be  devoid  of  statesman¬ 
ship  or  just  policies.  All  the  vassals  will  bow  down  before  him. 
That  excellent  man  will  be  king  for  twentythree  years* 

306.  Thereafter  the  king  named  Paiaka  will  rule  for 
twentyfour  years.  Then  king  Visakhayupa  will  rule  for  fifty 
years. 

307.  The  rule  of  Ajaka  will  be  for  thirtyone  years.  His 
son  Vartivardhana  will  rule  for  twenty  years. 

308.  Thus  the  five  future  sons  (and  successors)  of 
Pradyota  will  rule  for  one  hundred  and  thirty  eight  years* 

✓ 

•As  pv  Bd.  P.  V.  12d»  Pradyota  is  the  prince  eathroned  and  Munika  was 
Ui  father. 


37.309-322 


815 


Destroying  their  Gime  entirely^  Si^unika  (&^uniga)  wUl  become 
king  (at  V&r&tud).* 

309-310.  His  son  will  attain  Girivraja  in  V&r&^asL  The 
suzerainty  of  Si iunika  (Siiuniga)  mil  be  for  forty  years.  His 
son  Sakavarpa  will  rule  for  thirtysix  years.  Then  for  twenty 
years  K^emavarmi  will  be  the  king. 

311.  Ajitaiatru  will  be  the  king  for  twentyfive  years. 
Thereafter  Kfatraujas  will  rule  the  kingdom  for  forty  yean. 

312.  King  Bimbuara  will  rule  for  twentyeight  years.  King 
Dariaka  will  rule  for  twentyfive  years. 

313.  The  next  king  will  be  Udi>l  who  will  rule  for  thirty- 
three  years.  In  the  fourth  year  of  his  rule»  he  will  build  his 
capital  city  named  Kusumapura  (Mod.  Patni)  on  the  southern 
bank  of  Gafigk. 

314  The  king  Nandivardhana  will  live  for  fortytwo  year8» 
The  king  Mahinandin  will  be  the  king  for  forty  three  years. 

315.  Thus  the  kings  of  the  Siiunkka  (Si^un&ga)  dynasty 
will  be  ten  in  number.  They  altogether  will  rule  for  three  hundred 
and  sixty  two  years. 

316.  All  the  members  of  the  Saifun&ka  (Saiiun&ga)  family 
will  be  the  contemporaries  of  the  following  kings  who  will  be 
kinsmen  to  K^atriyas. 

317-319.  Those  are  twentyfour  Ik^vaku  kings,  twentyfive 
Piftcalas,  twentyfour  Kilakas,  twentyfour  Haihayas,  thirtytwo 
Kaliiigas,  twentyfive  Sakas,  twenty  six  Kurus,  twentyeight 
Maithilas,  twentythree  Surasenas  and  twenty  Vitihotras.  All 
these  kings  will  rule  simultaneously. 

320.  Mah&padma  will  be  bom  of  a  fiudra  wife  of  Maba- 
nandin.  He  will  be  a  king  over  all  K^atriyas. 

32 1 .  Thereafter  all  the  future  kings  will  be  bom  of  Sudra 
wombs.  Mahapadma  will  be  the  sole  ruler  with  a  single  royal 
umbrella. 

322.  He  will  rule  over  the  earth  for  twentyeight  years. 


the  Ist  word  from  the  next  verse  (no.  309)  be  better 
connected  with  Sif  onigsN  becoming  a  king  at  Viri^^aii  to  avoid  coofuuon 
lav.  309. 


816 

Due  to  the  power  of  the  mevitable  future^  he  will  uproot  all  the 
Kfatriyas. 

323.  His  sons  will  be  thousands.  For  eight  years  twelve  of 
them  will  rule  as  kings.  In  succession  to  Mahapadma  they  will 
become  kings  in  order* 

324.  Kaufilya  will  exterminate  all  of  them  by  means  of 
the  twice  eight  of  them  (sixteen)  *  After  enjoying  the  kingdom 
of  the  earth^  for  a  hundred  years,  the  moon  in  the  form  of 
Nanda  will  set  and  fall  down* 

325*  Kau(ilya  will  instal  Candragupta  as  king*  King 
Candragupta  will  be  ruling  for  twenty  four  years* 

326.  Bhadras&ra  (7),  the  next  king,  will  be  kir^  for 
twentyfive  years.  King  Afoka  will  rule  over  the  men  for  twenty- 
six  yean. 

327.  His  son  Kunala  will  rule  for  eight  years.  Kun&la*8 
son  Bandhup&Iita  will  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  eight  years. 

328.  Bandhup&lita’s  successor  Indrapalita  will  rule  for 
ten  years  (?)  King  Dcvavarma  will  be  king  for  seven  years. 

329.  King  Satadbara,  his  son,  will  rule  for  eight  years. 
King  Bfbadaiva  will  be  the  ruler  for  seven  years. 

330.  These  are  the  nine  kings  who  will  enjoy  the  earth. 
The  earth  will  be  in  their  possession  for  full  ont  hundred  and 
tliirty  seven  years.* 

331.  The  general  Puspamitra  will  drive  out  Brhadratha 
and  will  rule  over  the  kingdom  continuously  for  sixty  years. 

332.  The  sons  of  Puspamitra  will  be  kings  for  eight 
years.  The  eldest  of  all  of  them  will  be  the  kii^  for  seven 
years. 

333.  Thereafter  Vasumitra,  bis  son,  will  be  king  for  ten 
yean.  Then  Dhruka  (?),  bis  son,  will  rule  for  two  years. 


1.  loatad  c(  bhukitfi  mahtm  hmotf  Fargiter*s  niggatioa  {Dyncstus  ^  At 
KaH  At$t  p«  26)  *hhukti  msAs*  ‘the  «artb  that  was  «i>joyed  (for  100 
years)*  is  m  better  readiof. 

2.  Reading  iomifyati  *from  them  the  earth  will  go  to 

dxiAgat.* 


S7.333-346 


817 


334.  After  him  the  Pulindakaj  will  rule  for  three  years. 
King  Ghofasuta  too  will  rule  for  three  years. 

335.  Thereafter*  Vihramamitra  will  be  king  for  many 
years.  King  Bhagavata  will  rule  for  thirty  two  years. 

336.  His  son  KfemabhQmi  will  rule  ibr  ten  years.  Ten 
Tunga  (?Sunga)  kings  will  enjoy  the  earth. 

337.  ( Defective  verse)  They  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  full 
hundred  and  twelve  years  and  it  perhaps  will  go  to  Sudeva  who 
will  not  be  a  (born)  king  but  an  indulgent  fellow  ever  since  his 
childhood.  He  will  then  become  a  king. 

338.  There  will  be  another  king  Devabbumi  among  the 
Srngas  (7  6uAga5).  He  will  be  aKanth&yana  (Ki^v&yana — 
^Belonging  to  Kanva  gotra*}  and  will  rule  for  nine  years. 

339.  Bhutimitra,  his  will  be  king  for  twentyfbur  years. 
After  him  king  N&riyana  will  rule  for  twelve  years. 

340.  His  son  Suiarma  will  rule  for  ten  years.  These  four 
kings  of  lofty  activities  will  be  Kapthiiyana  (KaQV&yana) 
BrahmaQas. 

341 .  They  will  make  the  vassals  bow  down  to  them.  They 
will  rule  for  forty  five  years.  After  the  change  of  their  rule, 
Andhras  will  come  in. 

342.  Driving  out  K^thayanas  (Kanvayanas) ,  over¬ 
powering  Suiarman  and  making  the  remaining  forces  of  the 
Srngas  (?  Sungas)  dwindle  down»  Sindhuka  of  the  Andhra  race 
will  gain  possession  of  the  earth. 

343.  King  Sindhuka  will  rule  for  twenty  three  years.  After 
him  Bhata  (Ktsna)  will  rule  for  ten  and  eight  years  ( ?) 

344.  His  son,  SrlsatakarQi  will  be  very  great.  Satakari>i 
will  rule  for  fifty  and  six  years. 

345.  Apadabaddha,  his  son,  will  rule  (first)  for  ten  years, 
(then)  for  twentyfour  years  and  (then)  for  six  years. 

346.  Nemikr^na  will  rule  ibr  twentyfive  years.  Then  for 
full  one  year  Hala  will  be  the  king. 


*Bd.  P.  V.  154  reads  for  tate  hereof.  But  Bd.  P.  reading  fixed  the 
period  Gi  the  king's  reign. 


818  Vijm  PurJ^a 

347.  Five  (or)  seven  kings  (of  this  race)  will  be  very 
powerful.  Putrika^a  will  rule  fortwentyfive  years. 

348.  S&takarni  will  be  king  for  one  year.  Sivasvaml  will 
rule  for  twentyeight  years. 

349.  King  Gautamlputra  will  rule  for  twentyone  years 
among  men.  Thereafter  YajAairi  of  the  S&takar^i  family  will  be 
the  king  for  nineteen  years. 

350.  After  him,  king  Vijaya  will  rule  for  only  six  years. 
Datk^airt  Sitakarni,  his  son,  will  for  three  years. 

351.  Pulova  (Pulumiyi)  will  rule  for  seven  years.  There 
will  be  other  kings  as  well.  Altogether  there  will  be  thirty 
Andhra  kings  who  will  enjoy  the  earth. 

352.  The  rule  of  the  Andhras  will  cover  a  period  of 
four  hundred,  five  and  six  (four  hundred  and  eleven)  years. 
There  will  be  five  families  of  the  Andhras  and  all  of  them  will 
be  (are)  equal  (in power). 

353*355.  There  will  be  ten  and  seven  Abhira  kings,  seven 
Gardabhins  (Gardabhillas) ,  ten  Sakas,  eight  Yavanas,  fourteen 
Maunas,  as  kings.  Andhras  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  two 
hundred  and  one  hundred  years.  Sakas  will  enjoy  the  earth 
for  three  hundred  and  c^hty  years. 

356.  Yavanas  will  enjoy  the  earth  for  eighty  years. 
It  is  remembered  (prophesied)  that  Tus&ras  will  be  in 
possession  of  the  earth  for  five  hundred  years. 

357.  Thirteen  Maru^da  iamilics  will  rule  for  four 
hundred  and  fifty  years  along  with  (other)  Sudras.  There  will 
be  other  Mleccha  tribes  as  well. 

358.  Eleven  of  those  Mlecchas  will  enjoy  (the  earth)  for 
three  hundred  years.  Then  the  8udra  tribes  (Kilakila)  Koli* 
kilas  (7)  will  rule  for  an  equal  period  (?) 

359.  Vindhyaiakti  will  take  over  the  administration  from 
Kolikilas.  Having  supervised  over  the  administration  for 
ninetysix  years,  he  will  pass  away. 

360.  Listen  to  and  understand  the  future  Sudra  clans 
called  Diiakas  (?)  Svarapurafijaya  will  be  the  son  of  8esa, 
the  king  of  serpents  (Vaidi^aka — residents  of  VidU&?). 

361-362.  That  kii^>  born  of  the  race  of  serpents,  will  be 
a  king  who  will  eitjoy.  The  following  kings :  Sad&candra 
who  will  be  a  part  of  the  moon,  Nakhav&n  the  second,  Dhana- 


87.363*375 


819 


dhaitna  the  next  one,  Viihlaja  the  fourth  and  Bhutinanda 
thereafter,  will  be  kings  in  the  foreign  land  (or  at  Vidi^a?) 

363.  At  the  close  of  the  rule  of  Nandana  of  the  Angas, 
Madhunandi  will  become  the  kii^.  His  younger  brother  will  be 
Nandiya^  by  name. 

364*365.  There  will  be  three  kings  in  his  family:  Dohitra, 
Siluka  and  Pravira.  3Uuka  will  rule  over  Punka.  The  powerful 
Pra^dra  will  be  the  son  of  Vindhyaiakti,  He  will  rule  over  the 
city  Kaficanaka  (along  with  the  others)  for  sixty  years. 

366.  They  will  perform  V^apeya  Yajftas  with  the  offerings 
of  excellent  Dakfi^ds.  His  four  sons  will  become  great  rulers  of 
men. 

367.  When  the  family  of  Vindhyakas  becomes  extinct, 
three  kings  of  BahUkas  will  enjoy  the  kingdom  for  thirty 
years.  Supratlka  and  NabUra  (will  be  the  prominent  kii^^)  • 

368.  The  king  named  Sakyamd  will  be  the  ruler  of  Mibi^Is. 
Pufpamitras  and  Pattamitras  will  rule  for  thirteen  years. 

369.  Seven  excellent  kings  will  rule  over  Mekald  (Amar* 
kapfaka).  The  kings  in  Komali  (Gomilta,  Bengal)  will  be  very 
strong  and  powerful. 

370.  Nine  kings  of  great  intellect  and  well  known  as  Meghas 
will  become  the  kings  oftbcNisadba  (Marwar,  De  140)  land. 
They  will  rule  till  the  end  of  the  Manvantara. 

371.  Those  strong  and  powerful  kings  will  be  born  in  the 
race  of  Nala.  Vilvasphani,  the  powerful,  will  become  the  rulerof 
Magadhas. 

372.  After  exterminating  all  the  other  kings  he  will  make 
Kaivartas,  Paftcakas,  Pulindas  and  Brahman  as  as  well  as  the 
other  castes  (rule  over  the  kingdom). 

373.  He  will  establish  kings  in  different  lands,  thanks  to 

his  excessive  splendour.  Viivasphani  will  be  very  powerful  and 
strong  in  war  like  Visnu.  * 

374.  It  is  said  that  in  external  appearance,  Vijvasphani 

will  be  like  a  eunuch.  He  will  destroy  the  existing  K$atriyaa 
and  make  other  clam. 

375.  After  propitiating  Devas,  Pitn  wd  Brahmapas  many 
timet  that  strong  king  will  reach  the  banks  of  Jihnavl  (Gahgk) 
and  cast  off  his  body. 


820  VJjfu 

376.  After  forsaking  his  body,  he  will  go  to  &ikra*s  repon« 
Thereafter,  the  nine  Naka  (Naga)  kings  will  enjoy  the  city  of 
Gampavatl. 

377.  The  seven  N&gas  will  enjoy  the  beautiful  city  of 
Mathura. 

Kings  bom  of  the  family  of  Guptas^  will  enjoy  all  the  terri* 
tories  near  Gahgi  such  as  Prayiga,  S&keta  and  Magadha. 

378.  The  descendants  of  Manidhanya  will  enjoy  the  terri« 
tories  of  Nifadha,  Yaduka,  Saifitaand  K&latopaka. 

379.  Devarak^itas  (?)  will  enjoy  the  territories  of 
Kojalas,  Andhras,  Pauiidras  and  Ttoraliptas  along  with  the 
oceans  as  well  as  the  beautiful  city  of  Campa. 

380.  Guha  will  protect  Kalihgas,  Mahisas,  Mahendra^* 
nilaya  and  other  territories. 

381.  (The  king)  named  Kanaka  will  enjoy  StTfrk9(ra  (the 
women’s  territory,  Kimarupa)  and  Bhak^yakas.  All  these 
kings  will  be  contemporaries. 

382.  Thereafter,*  the  untruthful  and  unrighteous  Yavanas 
of  great  fury  and  of  little  grace  will  rule  here  spreading  their 
religion,  spending  vast  riches  and  giving  vent  to  their  lust. 

383.  Those  kings  will  not  be  duly  crowned.  They  will  have 
all  the  defects  of  the  (Kali)  Age.  They  will  commit  evil  actions. 

384.  During  the  remaining  period  of  the  Kali  Age,  the 
kings  will  enjoy  the  Earth,  not  even  hesitating  to  kill  women  and 
children  and  to  destroy  one  another. 

385.  The  races  of  those  kings  will  gain  continuous  ascen* 
dancy  (at  some  time  or  in  some  places)  or  flourish  and  perish 
in  succession  in  due  course. 

386.  They  will  be  devoid  of  piety,  true  love  and  real  wealth. 
All  the  common  people  coming  into  close  contact  with  them, 
too  will  follow  the  customs  and  habits  of  Mleccba  (aliens  and 
outcastes). 

387.  They  will  be  acting  contrary  to  accepted  traditions. 

1.  Bd.  P.  V.  195  reads  Si^ta  for  hereof. 

2.  VerM  S82-405  depict  a  gruesome  picture  of  the  advanced  Kali  Yuga. 

The  detcripdoQ  (iaeludiog  identical  vtfses)  are  found  in  other  Purftoai  as 
well.  R.G.  Hasra  la  states  that  such  was  the  actual  coodition  of 

the  people  from  200  B.C.  to  200  AD  —the  period  in  which  these  Purhoas 
came  to  be  corx^Msed. 


37.388-399  821 

They  will  destroy  their  subjects.  The  kings  will  be  greedy  and 
devoted  to  mendacious  behaviour. 

388«389.  When  their  turn  is  over,  women  will  outnumber 
men  in  that  Age,  People  will  become  more  and  more  deScient 
in  learning  and  strength.  Their  span  of  life  will  grow  less  and 
less.  When  their  dedine  reaches  the  limit  the  ruling  kings 
overwhelmed  by  Kalawill  be  ruined. 

390.  Struck  down  by  Kalki,  all  the  Mlecchas  will  be 
destroyed.  All  the  heretics  and  the  unrighteous  will  be  doomed, 

391-393.  The  very  naune  king  will  disappear  when  the 
Kali  Age  comes  to  the  period  of  junction.  Only  very  few  people 
will  survive  and  they  will  be  helpless  and  destitute  without  any 
belonging,  as  Dharma  would  have  been  destroyed  by  that  time. 
There  will  be  none  to  console  them.  They  will  have  no  where¬ 
withals.  They  will  be  afRicted  by  diseases  and  sorrows.  They  will 
be  overwhelmed  and  ruined  by  drought  and  mutual  slaughter. 
They  will  have  none  to  support  them.  Being  distressed  (and 
due  to  fear)  they  will  forsake  their  avocations  and  professions. 
Deserting  their  own  villages  and  towns  they  will  resort  to 
forest, 

394-395.  When  the  kings  are  destroyed,  the  subjects  will 
leave  off  their  homesteads.  All  the  feelings  of  friendliness  and 
affection  will  be  lost.  In  acute  distress,  even  the  closest  of 
friends  will  become  bereft  of  affection.  The  discipline  of  castes 
and  stages  of  life  will  become  distrubed.  Terrible  mixture  and 
mingling  of  the  castes  will  result.  People  will  take  shelter  on 
mountains  and  liverbanks. 

396-397.  They  will  resort  to  rivers,  marshy  foreshores  of 
the  seas  and  mountains.  They  will  gather  together  in  the  terri¬ 
tories  of  Angas,  Vangas,  Kalihgas,  Kasmlras,  Kail,  Koialas, 
the  mountain  ravines  of  ^sika  and  other  places.  Men  will  seek 
shelter  on  the  ridges  of  Hicnavan  and  the  coasts  of  the  briny 
sea, 

398.  The  Aryas  will  flock  to  the  forests  with  the  Mleccha 
tribes.  Men  will  sustain  themselves  with  the  meat  of  deer,  fishes, 
birds  and  beasts  of  prey  as  well  as  with  sugar-cane  plants, 
honey,  greens,  fruit  and  roots, 

399.  Like  the  sages  (of  yore)  they  will  wear  different  kinds 


822 


of  leaves  and  barks  of  trees  as  well  as  hides  of  deer  which  they 
themselves  will  make« 

400.  Desirous  of  growing  foodstuffi  (grains)  through 
seeds»  they  will  dig  the  earth  deep  with  wooden  pikes.  They 
will  strenuously  rear  goats  and  sheep,  donkeys  and  camels. 

401.  The  men  then  will  resort  to  the  banks  of  rivers  for 
the  sake  of  water.  By  means  of  their  activities  they  will  harass 
one  another  as  well  as  the  rulers  of  the  land. 

402.  They  will  consider  it  honourable  to  be  issueless.  They 
will  not  observe  rules  of  cleanliness  and  good  behaviour. 
Then  the  men  will  be  engrossed  in  evil  actions  and  behave 
in  this  manner. 

403.  The  subjects  will  follow  the  worst  of  religious  obser¬ 
vances.  No  one  will  live  beyond  their  twentythird  year. 

404^5.  They  will  be  weak.  They  will  be  debilitated  and 
fatigued  due  to  sensuality.  They  will  be  overcome  by  (  premature) 
old  age.  Their  diet  will  consist  of  leaves,  roots  and  fruits.  Bark 
garments  and  deer  skins  will  constitute  their  clothings.  In  search 
of  livelihood  they  will  be  roaming  over  the  earth.  Towards  the 
end  of  Kaliyuga,  the  people  will  come  to  such  a  plight. 

406.  When  the  Kali  Age,  the  duration  of  which  is  a 
thousand  divine  years,  comes  to  a  close,  the  subjects  will  be 
annihilated  along  with  the  Kaliyuga.  When  it  expires  along  with 
the  period  of  junction,  theKrta  Age  will  come  in. 

407.  When  the  moon,  the  s\in,  Tijya  and  Jupiter  come 
tt^ether  in  a  single  sign  of  zodiac,  the  Krta  Age  will  set 
in. 

408.  Thus  the  past,  present  and  the  future  races  have  been 
enumerated  in  due  order. 

409-412*  From  the  time  of  the  coronation  of  Mah&deva* 
(Mahapadma?)  to  the  birth  of  Pariksit  the  duration  was  a 
thousand  and  fifty  years.  The  period  between  Mahapadma  and 
the  future  kings  ending  with  Andhras  whom  I  have 
narrated,  has  been  calculated  as  eight  hundred  and  thirtysix 
years  by  the  learned  sages,  the  knowers  of  Purapas. 


ia  Bd.  P.  v.  227. 


37.413-419 


823 


(Defective  verse)  The  Seven  Sages  then  said  that  a  hundred 
years  elapsed  when  Pratipa  was  king  (?)  You  should  calculate 
twentyseven  hundreds  again  (?) 

41 3«  The  stellar  mansiom  are  altogether  twentyseven. 
The  Seven  Sages  stay  in  each  of  thesCi  for  hundred  years  in 
succession.  This  is  remembered  as  the  Yuga  of  the  Seven  Sages. 
The  years  are  calculated  according  to  those  of  the  Devas. 

414.  (Defective  verse)  The  hundred  years  of  the  Seven 
Sages  are  equal  to  sixty  divine  years  and  seven  (divine)  days. 

415.  (?)  The  Seven  Sages  are  seen  in  the  east  at  first  and 
then  in  the  north  of  the  zone  of  the  constelladoni.  Thereafter 
they  are  seen  parallel  to  those  constellations  seen  in  the  middle 
of  the  firmament. 


416.  It  should  be  known  that  the  Seven  Sages  are  united 
with  it  (the  zone  of  the  constellations)  in  the  sky  for  a  hundred 
years.  This  is  the  evidence  of  the  union  of  the  Sages  and  the 
constellations. 


417.  In  my  opinion  the  Seven  Sages  were  stationed  in  the 
Magh&  (tenth)  constellation  at  the  time  of  Pariksit.  At  the  time 
of  Andhras  they  will  be  in  the  twentyfotirth  constellation 
(i.e.  Satabhisak)  .* 


418.  At  that  time  the  subjects  will  be  afflicted  very  much. 
They  will  be  doomed  through  their  mendacious  nature  in  the 
affairs  of  virtue^  wealth  and  love. 


419.  When  the  Vedic  and  Smarta  (pertaining  to  the 
Smrtis)  rituals  ( Dharma)  become  lax  and  the  rigorous  discip¬ 
line  of  the  castes  and  the  stages  of  life  becomes  very  loosCi  the 
deluded  subjects  will  be  weak  in  their  soul-power  and  undergo 
a  mixing  and  tningliog  of  the  castes. 


*Tiie  corretpoodiog  Bd.  P.  v.  230s  reads  : 

iadd  pit^  pdfik^ti  istam  / 

If  the  reading  b  accepted*  the  vefte  means  :  During  the  period  of 
ParihfUtbe  Saptaffis  were  in  the  Kbya  (Maghi)  constellation  for  a 
hundred  years.  Hence  the  period  of  the  dynuty  of  Andhru  will  be  two 
thousand  and  seven  hundred  yeui  7  The  words  in  our  text  need  eorrection, 


Fijm  Pitrd3?a 


824 

420.  Sildras  wiJl  become  merged  with  the  twice^bom 
castes.  BrAhma^as  will  begin  to  officiate  as  priests  in  the 
Yajfias  of  the  Sudras.  Budras  will  begin  to  compose 
Mantras. 

421-423.  Desirous  of  securing  means  of  livelihood,  Brah- 
ma^as  will  approach  them  reverentially.  Declining  gradually 
and  bit  by  bit,  all  the  subjects  will  be  destroyed  and  when  the 
Yuga  expires,  they  will  be  completely  destroyed. 

Kali  Yuga  had  started  on  the  very  day  when  Krn)a 
passed  away.  Understand  the  dxiration  of  Kali  Age.  Kali- 
yuga  is  said  to  be  of  the  three  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  years 
according  to  human  calculation. 

424.  According  to  divine  calculation  it  is  one  thousand 
years.  The  SandhyAihja  (the  period  of  junction)  is  also  men¬ 
tioned.  (That  period  is  extra.)  When  it  has  expired  completely 
Kfta  Age  comes  in. 

425.  The  races  of  Ai!a  and  Ik^vAku  are  said  to  become 
extinct  with  Sumitra. 

426-427.  Those  who  know  about  the  Lunar  race  know  that 
the  Kfatriya  race  of  Aila  will  become  extinct  with  Ksemaka. 
The  sons  and  descendants  of  the  Sun  of  the  past,  present  and 
future  have  been  glorified.  They  were  and  will  be  the  heighte- 
ners  of  their  fame.  In  that  race  there  were  Brahmans, 
Ksatriyas,  Vaiiyas  and  Sudras. 

428-429.  Many  noble-souled  kings  are  born  and  have  pass¬ 
ed  away  in  every  Yuga.  Tlieir  names  are  legion.  When  the 
members  of  every  family  are  calculated,  many  names  are  re¬ 
peated.  Hence  they  have  not  been  mentioned  by  me.  The  race 
of  Nimi  comes  to  an  end  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  itself. 

430.  I  will  recount  how  the  Ksatriya  race  originates  in 
this  Yuga.  Even  as  I  recount  listen  and  understand. 

431-432.  Devapi  will  be  bom  in  the  Kalapa  village.  He 
will  be  a  king  of  Puru*s  family  and  considered  (greater)  than 
Ikfvaku.  He  will  be  endowed  with  great  Yogic  power.* 


*The  correspoodixig  vme  of  Bd.  P.  (v.  250)  states  :  Devipi  belonging 
to  tbefafnily  of  POnt  and  Maru  who  bdongt  to  IkivUcu  famlly^thcM 
fvfoare  endowed  with  great  Yogic  Po%iref.  They  stayed  in  the  village  called 
RaUpa.'* 


S7.43S-446 


825 

Suvarca^,  the  son  of  Soma,  will  be  bom  in  the  family  of  Ikfv&ku. 
In  the  tweatyfourth  qrcle  ^  fotir  Yugas,  they  will  be  the 
founders  of  the  Kfatriya  race  and  traditions* 

433.  In  the  twentieth  Yuga  (?  cycle  of  four  Yugas  7)  there 
will  not  be  any  founder  of  the  Lunar  race.  Devipi  being  un* 
rivalledi  will  be  the  first  king  in  the  family  of  Aila. 

434.  In  the  four  Yugas  these  two  will  be  the  founders  of 
K^triya  race.  Everywhere  this  should  be  known  as  the 
characterisdc  feature,  for  the  sake  of  progeny  ( the  perpetuation 
of  the  line). 

435^36.  When  Kali  Yuga  declines  and  Kfta  Yuga 
sets  in  and  agsdn  in  the  firet  Tretfiyuga  they  will  be  the  acti* 
visors  of  the  K^triya  lines  along  with  the  Seven  Sages.  In  the 
Dv&para  period,  K^atiiyas  do  not  stay  along  with  the  s^es. 

437*438.  When  Krtayuga  and  Tret&yuga  decline,  the 
Seven  Sages  and  the  kings  will  take  birth  for  the  sake  of  seed 
of  the  Br&hmana  and  Kfatriya  races.  For  the  sake  of  progeny, 
they  (the  Seven  Sages)  abide  by  the  kings  in  all  the  Manvantaras 
in  every  Yuga. 

439.  The  annihiladon  of  Kfatriyas  leads  to  their  contact 
with  Br&hmanas  again  (?)  In  all  the  seven  Manvantaras  all 
the  progeny  have  been  heard  of  (  ?) 

440-442.  In  view  of  their  long  life  the  Seven  Sages  know 
the  series  of  Yugas,  the  origin,  activities  and  the  decline  of 
those  active  persons  belonging  to  Brahmapa  and  K^atriya  races. 
The  birth  of  the  Brahmanas  in  the  families  of  Aila  and  Ikfvaku 
is  in  this  manner  (?)  Bom  in  the  Trtth  Age  and  extinct  in  the 
Kali  Age,  they  will  follow  the  Age  till  the  end  of  the  Man  van* 
tara. 

443.  When  all  the  Kfatriyas  were  eliminated  by  Rama,  the 
son  of  Jamadagni,  the  K^atriyas  of  the  two  families  were  bom 
again.  I  shall  recount  them.  listen  and  understand. 

444.  The  families  of  Aila  and  Iksvaku  spread  once  sigain. 
A  series  of  other  kings  of  the  Kfatriya  race  became  mien. 

445.  A  hundred  families  undergoing  coronation  became 
famous  among  each  of  the  races  of  Aila  and  Ik^v&ku. 

446.  The  extent  of  Bhojasis  up  to  twice  of  that  (i.e. 
two  hundred).  Thus  there  were  three  hundred  Ksatriya 


826  Vtjm  Purd^ 

faznilies.  They  were  divided  into  four  according  to  the  four 
quarters. 

447-449.  Listen  and  understand  even  as  I  recount  the  past 
and  the  present  kings  among  them.  Pradvindhyas  were  a 
hundred;  N&gas  were  a  hundred;  Hayas  were  a  hundred; 
Dhrtaraft^as  were  a  hundred  and  one;  Janamejayas  were 
eighty;  Brahmadattas  were  a  hundred;  8lrins  aodVIrins  were 
a  hundred  (each);  then  Pulomans  were  a  bundml;  Svetas» 
Kaias,  Kuias  etc.  were  a  hundred;  the  other  Saiabindus  who 
passed  away  were  a  thousand. 

450.  All  of  them  performed  horse-sacrifices  with  lakhs  and 
lakhs  in  Dak^i^i.  Thus  hundreds  and  thousands  of  saintly 
kings  have  passed  away. 

451-452.  Know  that  the  descendants  in  this  world  of  the 
present  Vaivasvata  Manu  cannot  be  mentioned  in  detail  and  in 
full  even  in  hundreds  of  years. 

453.  In  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  already  twentyeight 
cycles  of  four  Yugas  have  passed  along  with  their  saintly  kings. 
Listen  aiid  understand  those  who  yet  remain. 

454-458.  Forty  excellent  kings  will  be  born  in  the  future. 
Then  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  will  come  to  a  close.  Inciden¬ 
tally  I  have  mentioned  everything  in  detail  and  in  brief.  Many 
are  repeated.  As  they  are  too  many  they  could  not  be  mention¬ 
ed  in  full.  The  twentyfive  iamilies  ofYayati’s  sons  were  highly 
beneficent  to  the  people.  They  have  been  glorified.  They  even 
now  sustain  the  worlds. 

He  who  listens  to  and  remembers  these  attains  rare  things 
of  the  world.  They  attain  longevity,  fame,  wealth,  sons,  heaven 
and  infiniteness*  O  Brahmapas,  thus  the  third  section  has  been 
recounted  by  me.  What  more  shall  I  say  ? 


SECTION  4 :  UPASAMHARA  PADA 


CHAPTER  THIRTYEIGHT 

Tki  Manvaniaras  &  DissoluHon  of  the  Universe 

1.  After  hearing  the  third  section  completed  (narrated  in 
full)  by  the  intelligent  Suta,  the  excellent  sages  asked  him 
about  the  fourth  Section. 


The  Sages  said : 


2.  The  third  section  called  Anusahga  PSda  has  been  com* 
pletely  narrated  out  of  affection  by  you.  Now  narrate  to  us  in 
details  the  fourth  Pdda  called  Sarhhdra  (annihilation  or  con* 
elusion) » 


3*4.  Please  recount  all  the  Manvantaras,  the  ones  that  bad 
elapsed  along  with  the  others  (the  future  ones),  the  Seven  Sages 
who  exist  now  in  the  current  Manvantara  and  the  details  of 
the  creation  and  expansion  of  the  noble*souled  Manu,  Narrate 
everything  in  detail  and  in  the  proper  order. 


SUta  said  : 

5.  O  excellent  sages  I  shall  narrate  everything  to  you 
precisely;  the  fourth  and  the  concluding  section,  along  with  the 
(description  of)  annihilatxon, 

6.  O  Brihmanas,  listen  to  the  creative  activity  of  the 
current  noble^ouled  Vaivasvata  Manu  in  detail  as  well  as  in 
proper  order. 

7.  Even  as  I  recount,  listen  and  understand  the  gist  of  the 
(past)  Manvantaras  along  with  the  seven  future  ones  as  well  as 
the  dissolution  of  the  worlds. 

8.  All  these  (past)  seven  Manvantaras  have  already  been 
recounted  by  me.  Now  listen  to  the  brief  description  of  the 
future  Manvantaras  from  me. 


828 

9.  I  diall  speak  about  tbe  current  Vaivasvata  Manu  and 
the  future  Savar^a  Manu  briefly*  Listen  and  understand* 

10-12.  The  future  Seven  Great  Sages  are  remembered  as 
follows :  Kuiika’s  descendant  G&Iava,  Jamadagni’s  son 
Bh&rgava  (Paraiur&ma),  Dvaipiyana  of  Vasi^fha  lineage,  K|pa 
the  descendant  of  Saradv&n,  Dlptiman  of  Atri’s  UneagCi 
Iflyyairnga  of  Kafyapa’s  lineage,  Dro^a^i  son  Aivatth&m&  of 
great  fame  and  belonging  to  Bhiradv&ja  Gotra — these  noble- 
souled  ones  are  the  future  Seven  Great  Sages* 

13*  There  will  be  three  groups  of  Devas,  via*  Sutapas, 
Amit&bhas  and  Sukhas  (?  Mukhyas)*  Each  of  these  groups 
consbts  of  twenty  Devas. 

14-15.  I  shall  enumerate  them.  Listen  and  understand 
attentively.  Rita,  Tapas,  9ukra,  Dyuti,  Jyotis,  Prabh&kara, 
Prabhiaa,  Bhisakyt,  Dharma,  Tejas,  Raimi,  Rtu,  Vir&t* 
Arcifm^i  Dyotana,  Bhanu,  Yaias,  Klrti,  Budha  and  Dhrti — 
these  twenty  Devas  constituting  the  group  Sutapas,  are  glorified 
by  their  names. 

16-17*  Prabhu,  Vibhu,  Vibhisa,  Jeti,  Hanta,  Ariha,  Ritu, 
Sumad,  Pramati,  Dlpti,  Samikhyata,  Mahas,  Mah&n,  Deha, 
Muni,  Naya,  Jyestha,  Sama,  Satya  and  Viiruta — these  are  the 
twenty  Devas  mentioned  as  Amit&bhas* 

18-19.  Dama,  D&ta,  Vida,  Soma,  Vitta,  Vaidya,  Yama, 
Nidhi,  Homa,  Havya,  Huta,  Dina,  Deya,  Dati,  Tapas,  Sima, 
Dhruva,  Sthina,  Vidhina  and  Niyama— these  twenty  are 
mendoned  as  consdtudng  the  Mukbya  (Sukha)  group  of 
Devas  in  the  first  Savar^a  Manvantara. 

20.  All  these  are  the  sons  of  die  noble-souled  Kaiyapa,  the 
son  of  Marici  who  exists  now*  They  will  be  bom  in  the  Sivan^t 
Manvantara. 

21-22.  He  who  was  formerly  Bali,  the  son  of  Virocana, 
will  become  their  Indra.  Nine  sons  will  be  bom  to  Savar^a 
Manu,  via.  \^ravan,  Avariyin,  Nirmoba,  Satyavik,  Krti, 
Gariy^urajya,  Vif^u,  Vaca  and  Suznati* 

23«24*  I  shall  mendon  nine  more  in  the  other  Sivan^a 
Manvantaras.  Other  Sivar^a  Manus  will  be  bom  as  Brahmi’s 
(future)  sons.  They  are  seen  as  Menisavaruis  by  those  end* 
owed  with  divine  vision*  They  are  the  grandsons  of  Dakfa, 
the  sons  of  his  beloved  daughter* 


25«  They  are  endowed  with  great  penance  and  great 
splendour*  They  live  on  the  ridges  of  Mem.  They  are  pro¬ 
created  by  Brahmi  and  other  (Devas)  as  well  as  by  the  intelli¬ 
gent  Dakfa. 

26.  They  were  bom  in  the  previous  Cik^ufa  Manvantara. 
These  noble  persons  had  been  in  the  Maharloka.  After  return¬ 
ing  from  there  they  will  resort  to  Meru. 

Thi  Sagis  said : 

27.  How  were  the  sons  procreated  by  Dakfa  in  his  own 
daughter  7  How  were  they  created  by  Bbava»  Dharma  and 
Brahma  the  noble  souls  ? 

Sota  said : 

28.  After  bowing  to  Pracetas.  henceforth>  I  shall  mention 
the  future  Manus  who  are  the  S&van^a  Manusi  their  origin  as 
well  as  their  prowess. 

29.  When  a  short  period  of  GAkfUfa  Manvantara  ren^ained 
and  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  had  begun,  those  who  will  be 
the  Manus  in  the  futive  Manvantara  were  born* 

30.  Of  those  Manus  who  are  the  daughter’s  sons  of 
PrAcetasa  Dak^a,  the  five  named  Savamas  and  four  are  bom 
from  great  sages. 

31.  One  SAvart^a  is  the  son  of  Samjfta  bom  of  VivasvAn 
(the  Sun-god) .  The  eldest  son  of  Samjfta  is  Lord  Manu,  son 
of  the  Sun-god  (VivasvAn) 

32.  Their  auspicious  manifestation  was  (took  place)  at  the 
advent  of  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara.  The  fourteen  Manus 
are  glorified  as  the  enhancer  of  fame. 

33.  These  Manus  are  described  in  the  Vedas,  Srutis*  and 
PurAnas  as  very  powerful  PraJApatis.  All  of  them  were  the 
lords  of  all  living  beings. 

34.  The  entire  Earth  consisting  of  the  seven  continents  and 
mountains  is  to  be  protected  by  these  kings  for  a  full  thousand 
Yugas. 

35.  Their  details  will  be  mentioned  along  with  their  progeny 


*Smrtis  in  Bd.  P.  V.  30. 


830  Vdyu  PurS^a 

and  penance.  These  creations  of  Sviyambhuva  and  others 
should  be  known  as  fourteen. 

36.  They  hold  ofiSce  as  the  presiding  Authorities  in  the 
Manvantaras  only  once  each.  After  the  tenure  of  their  office 
they  resort  to  Maharloka. 

37.  (Defective  verse)  Among  them  eight  have  already 
ceased  to  operate;  (excepting)  six  more  Manus  are  the  others 
who  will  come  in  the  future.  At  present  it  is  Lord  Vaivasvata 
Manu  who  rules. 

38.  I  shall  mention  those  who  remain>  those  who  are  the 
future  Br&hma^as  (Manus) »  along  with  Devas,  Danavas  and 
sages  as  well  as  their  (other )  creation  of  the  subjects. 

39.  The  details  of  the  creation  of  these  h^us  are  to  be 
known  throi^h  the  creative  activity  of  Vaivasvata  Manu,  since 
they  are  neither  inferior  nor  superior  to  those  of  Vaivasvata 
Manu. 

40.  I  am  not  recounting  their  details  for  fear  of  repetition 
and  due  to  their  multiplicity  in  both  the  past  smd  the  future 
Manvantaras. 

41.  I  shall  mention  them,  the  creative  activities  in  the 
different  families  only  partially.  The  remaining  things  should 
be  known  through  their  details  and  in  order. 

42.  Dak^  had  a  pious  daughter  who  was  well  known  as 
Suvrata*  Although  she  was  the  youngest  of  the  daughters,  she 
was  the  most  excellent  and  the  most  pious.  Once  the  father 
took  her  with  him  and  approached  Brahma. 

43.  He  was  in  the  Vairaja  region  seated  along  with  Dhartna 
and  Bhava.  Brahma  spoke  to  Dak^a  in  the  presence  of  Dharma 
and  Bhava. 

44.  Dak^,  this,  your  daughter  Suvrati  will  give  birth 
to  four  sons  who  will  become  the  auspicioiis  Manus  and  stabilise 
the  discipline  of  four  castes.** 

45.  On  hearing  the  words  of  BrahmA,  the  three — Dak^a, 
Dharma  and  Bhava  approached  that  girl  mentally  along  with 
Brahmi. 

46.  The  girl  immediately  gave  birth  to  four  sons  who  were 
similar  to  and  befitting  those  four  divine  personages  as  they 
were  of  truthful  meditation. 


36.47-59 


asi 


47.  Those  sotu  were  bom  hilly  endowed  with  physical 
bodies,  born  in  a  trice  but  capable  of  all  enjoyment,  and  com¬ 
petent  to  perform  all  activities.  They  were  endowed  with 
glory. 

48.  On  seeing  them,  chose  deities  who  had  realised 
Brahman  began  to  claim  **This  is  my  son.  This  is  my  son*^ 
They  began  to  tug  at  them  furiously. 

49.  Since  they  mentally  created  sons  through  meditation, 
they  said  to  one  another  :  ^^Let  us  select  that  boy  as  our  respec¬ 
tive  son  who  is  similar  to  us  physically. 

50.  If  a  boy  is  similar  to  one  in  features,  prowess  and  name 
as  well  as  complexion,  one  shall  take  him  as  one’s  gentle 
son. 

51.  A  son  emulates  the  features  of  his  father  invariably. 
Hence  the  son  is  born  taking  after  the  father  and  the  mother/* 

52-53.  After  coming  to  terms  like  this,  they  took  those  boys 
who  were  similar  in  complexion  to  them.  Since  the 

boys  were  similar  in  complexion  to  god  Brahma  and  othen, 
they  are  called  Skvarna.  Since  they  were  meditated  upon  and 
were  accepted  respectfully,  they  are  remembered  as  Manus. 

54.  When  the  Ckk^u^  Manvantara  expired  and  the 
Vaivasvata  Manvantara  set  in,  a  son  named  Raucya  was  bom 
to  Ruci,  the  Prajkpati. 

55.  He  who  was  bom  of  Bhuti  became  known  by  the  name 
Bhautya.  In  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara  two  sons  were  born  to 
Vivasvan. 

56.  One  is  well' known  as  Vaivasvata  Manu  and  the  other 
as  Savarna.  The  learned  Lord  Vaivasvata  Manu  was  the  eldest 
son  of  Sazhjflk. 

57-58.  The  other  Vaivasvata  Manu  was  the  son  of  Savarna 
(i.e.  Chayi,  the  shadow  of  Samj&a) .  The  four  Savarna  Manus 
born  of  the  great  sages  will  be  equipping  themselves  with  ( the 
power  of)  penance.  They  will  achieve  all  their  tasks  in  iheir 
respective  ftiture  Manvantaras. 

59.  (Defective  verse)  The  sons  of  the  first  Merusavarni 
Manu  who  was  the  son  of  Dakya  were  the  three  groups,  Mailci- 
garbhas,  Sularmana  and  Paras.  All  these  noble-souled  ones 
were  bom  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara. 


832 


VtyuPwrd$a 


60.  They  are  the  sons  of  RoUta,  the  Praj&pati^  the  son  of 
Dakfa-  In  future  each  of  these  groups  will  consist  of  twelve 
Devas. 

61.  (Defective)  Aiivarya-Sahgraha,  Riha,  Bihuvaia  (and 
the  remaining)  should  be  known  as  twelve  P&ra  gods.  Under* 
stand  the  later  ones. 

62*63.  Vijiya.  Vajijit.  Prabhuti»  Kakudi  (?),  Dadhikriva, 
Ayapakva>  ^aolta,  Vijaya,  Madhu,  Tejasm&n  and  two 
Nathavas — these  twelve  constitute  the  Maiicis.  I  shall  re* 
count  the  Suiarmans  mentioning  the  names.  Listen  to  (them) 
and  understand. 

64-65.  Varna,  AAgai  Viiva,  Muranya,  Vrajana,  Amita, 
Dravaketu^  Jambhostha,  Ajasra,  6akraka,  Sunemi  and  D)*uta* 
pas — these  twelve  constitute  Sularroans.  Their  future  Indra 
wilt  be  known  by  the  name  Adbbuta. 

66-69.  The  seven  sages  in  the  Rohita  Manvantara  were— 
Skanda  of  fiery  nature  and  resembling  Soma  and  otherwise 
known  as  K&rtikeya,  Medhitichi  of  Pulastya  lineage,  Vasu  of 
Kaiyapa  Gotra,  Jyotiym&n  of  Bhrgu  family,  Dyutixn&n  of 
Ahgiras  lineage,  Vasita  of  Vasi^tha  Gotra,  Havyavahana  of 
Atri’s  Gotra  and  Sutapas  of  Paulava  family. 

The  following  nine  are  glorihed  as  the  sons  of  the  first 
S&varpi — Dhftiketu,  DIptiketu,  Sapa,  Hasta,  Niramaya, 
Prthuiravasi  AtUka,  BhQridyumna,  and  Bfhadratha. 

70-71.  In  the  tenth  revolution  (i.c.  cycle  of  four  Yugas?) 
the  second  Sivar^i^  the  son  of  Dharma,  will  be  the  Manu.  In 
his  Manvantarai  there  will  be  two  groups  of  Devas,  viz. 
Sukhamanas  and  Viruddhas.  All  of  them  will  be  Tvi^ivamts 
('highly  effulgent’)  a  hundred  in  number  and  mutually 
equal(  ?)  —alike. 

72.  They  are  said  to  be  controlling  the  breath  in  (other  ?) 
penons  by  the  sages.  They  will  be  the  Devas  at  the  time  of  the 
Manu,  son  of  Dharma. 

73*74.  Their  Indra  will  be  the  great  scholar  S&nti.  The 
Seven  Great  Sages  will  be  the  glorious  Havifm&n  of  thePulaha 
family 9  Suldrti  of  Bhfgu  race,  ApomOrti  of  Atri  lineage,  Apava 
(T)  Vasiftha  fiunily,  Pratipa  of  Pulastya  family,  N&bhiga  of 
Kalyi^a  family  and  Abhimanyu  of  AAgiras  ikmily. 


S8.75-91 


8S3 

75»77.  The  ten  loni  of  Manu  will  be~Sukfetra»  Uttama- 
ujasi  Bhuri^e^a,  ^^ryavin«  Sat&nlka,  Niriimtra«  Vr^asenai 
Jayadratha,  BhOridyumna  and  Suvarcas*  In  the  eleventh  revo* 
lution  (cycle  of  four  Yugas)  when  the  third  Savar^i  will  be  the 
Manu^  the  following  three  groups  of  noble*iouled  Devas  will  be 
famous  :  NivtnAj}ATzti$i  Kaznajas  (KAmagas  in  Bd.P»}  and 
Manojavas. 

78-80.  Each  of  these  groups  consists  of  thirty  units*  The 
thirty  days  in  a  month  mentioned  by  the  poets  constitute  the 
Devas  Nirm&oaratii*  The  nights  (known  as  ?)  Vihahgamas 
(constitute  the  Kkmaja  Devas)*  The  Muhurtas  constitute  the 
Devas  Manojavas.  These  are  the  three  groups  of  Devas  men* 
tioned.  These  future  Manus  are  remembered  as  the  sons  of 
Brahma. 

81.  Their  Indra»  the  king  of  Suras,  will  be  called  Vryn* 
Listen  and  understand  their  Seven  Sages  who  are  being  glori* 
fied, 

82*86.  They  are — ^HavismAn  of  Kaiyapa  family*  Vapufroan 
of  Bh)^*s  race,  Varuni  of  Atri  lineage,  Bhaga  of  Vasittba's 
family,  Pusti  who  should  be  known  as  baiUng  from  Ahgiras 
family,  Niicara  of  Pulastya  race  and  Agnitejas  of  Pulaha  family. 
They  are  also  the  Devas  in  the  eleventh  Manvantara.  The 
folio wii^  are  the  sons  of  Prajipatya  (son  of  Prajapati)  Sivar^a 
Manu — Sarvavega,  Sudharmi^  DevAnIka,  Purovaha,  Kfema- 
dharroa,  Grhe$u,  Adarla  and  Pauj^d^'^ha* 

In  the  twelfth  revolution  (Manvantara)  ^^tusAvarpi,  the  son 
of  Rudra,  will  be  the  Manu.  He  will  be  the  fourth  S&var^i. 
Listen  to  the  Devas  in  that  Manvantara.  The  future  Devas  are 
said  to  consist  of  6ve  groups. 

87.  The  Devas  will  be — ^Haritas,  Rohitas,  Sumanas,  Sukar* 
mans  and  Suparas.  These  are  remembered  as  the  five  groups 
of  Devas. 

88-89.  They  are  the  mental  sons  of  Brahma.  Each  of  these 
groups  consists  of  ten  Devas.  The  following  ten  constitute  the 
Harita  group  of  Devas  :  Aruntija,  Hari  (?  Havi),  Vidv&n 
(whose  followers  are)  in  thousands,  Parvatanucara,  Apas,  Aznfu 
(prob*  ApidiAi  as  in  Bd.P*) ,  Manojava,  Uija,  Svi^,  SvadhA 
and  T&ri. 

90*91.  The  following  ten  constitute  the  Rohita  group: 


834  Pufd^a 

Tapaj,  J&iii*  Bhrti,  V&ca,  BandhUi  RajaSi  Rija,  Svar^p&da» 
Vyu^fi  and  Vidhi.  Know  these  to  be  the  Sumanas:  the  thirty- 
three  Devas  who  have  been  glorified  (before) «  viz«  Ufita  and 
others. 

92-93.  Understand  the  Sukarmans.  They  are — Suparva^ 
Vriabha^  Krpi,  Dyunma^  Vipaidta,  Vikrama,  Kanna» 

Nibhita  and  Kfinta.  These  Devas  are  Sukarmans.  Now  under¬ 
stand  their  sons  (i.e.  Suparas  7) 

94-95.  They  are  :  Varyodtta»  Jina,  Varcasvi,  Dyutim&n^ 
Havi,  Subha*  Havikita*  Praptii  Vy&pitha  and  Daiama  (?) 
These  are  the  mentally  created  ones  the  Suparas*  the  Devas 
mentioned  (before) .  ^tadhami  of  great  fame  should  be  known 
as  their  Indra. 

96-99.  The  Seven  Sages  are — ^Krti  the  son  of  VaaiKha, 
Sutapas  of  Atri's  family*  Tapomurd  of  the  Angiras  race*  Tapas- 
vin  of  Kaiyapa  Gotra,  Tapofyina  of  Pulastya  family*  Taporati 
of  Pulaha  Gotra  and  the  seventh  of  them  should  be  known  as 
Tapomati  of  Bhrgu  family.  These  are  the  Siddhas,  the  Seven 
Si^es  in  the  Savart>ika  Manvantara.  The  following  are  the  sons 
of  the  twelfth  (7)  Manu  :  Devavan*  Upadeva,  Devaire^fha* 
Viduratha*  Mitrav^n*  MitrabindUi  Mitrasena,  Amitraha* 
Mitrabahu*  and  Suvargas. 

100.  In  the  thirteenth  revolution  (Manvantara) ,  the  Raucya 
Manvantara*  three  groups  of  Devas  are  mentioned  by  the  self- 
born  deity  (Brahma). 

lOU  All  those  noble  souls  are  Brahma's  mental  sons.  They 
are  Sutramans*  Sudharmans  and  Sukarmans. 

102-103.  They  are  said  to  be  the  future  Somapayins  (Imbi¬ 
bers  of  Soma  juice)  *  the  groups  of  Devas.  Along  with  the  per¬ 
formers  of  Yajhas*  the  deities  are  thirtythree  in  numb«*. 
They  include  the  Ajya*  Pr^adajya  and  Grahajyeffha  groups  of 
Devas.  Listen  to  and  understand  that  the  thirtythree  Devas  are 
separate  ones. 

104-105.  The  Sutrkmans  are  the  present  Prayajyas  and 
Ajyapas.  The  Anuyajyas  and  those  who  partake  Pf^adijya  are 
Sukarmans.  The  Upayajyas  are  Sudharmans.  Thus  the  Devas 
have  been  recounted.  Divaspati  of  great  prowess  will  be  their 
Indra. 


sai06-nd 


839 

106-109*  *  The  soiu  of  Ruci  should  be  knovm  as  the  grand¬ 
sons  of  Pulaha*  The  Seven  Sages  in  the  thirteenth  Manvantara 
will  be — ^Dhrtim&n  of  Aiigiras  family »  Pathyavan  of  Pulastya 
nctp  Tattvadariin  of  Pulaha  ianuly»  Nmitsaka  of  Bhrgu  Gotra» 
Nifprakampa  of  Atri’s  familyi  Nirmoha  of  Kaiyapa  Gotra  and 
SvarOpa  of  Vasi^tha  lineage.  The  following  are  the  sons  of 
Raucya  Manu  in  the  thirteenth  Manvantara  :  Citrascna»  Vicitra, 
Tapas,  Dharmadhfta,  fibava,  Anekabaddha^  K^trabaddha» 
Surasa,  Nirbhaya  and  Pttha. 

i  10.  In  the  fourteenth  Bbautya  Manvantara,  the  future 
groups  of  Devas  are  five. 

HI.  The  five  groups  of  Devas  are — Cik^u^s^  Kani^thas, 
Pavitras,  Bh&jaraa  and  V&civfddbas. 

112-113.  Know  that  the  seven  different  parts  are  those 
named  Cikfu^s.  They  understand  Bfhada  and  other  S&tnans 
as  the  Kanifjhas.  The  seven  worlds  are  Paritras  (Pavitras  ?) 
The  Bhajiras  (Bbajaras)  are  the  seven  Sindhus  (oceans,  rivers)  • 
Know  the  sages  to  be  Vacavrddhas  belonging  to  Svayambhuva 
Manu  (?)  All  the  Indras  of  the  Manvantaras  should  be  known 
as  having  equal  characteristics  (and  powers). 

114.  Those  Indras  excel  all  the  mobile  and  the  immobile 
living  beings  in  the  three  worlds  by  means  of  their  splendour, 
penance,  intellect,  strength,  learning  and  exploits. 

115.  The  Indras  (or  Devas)  are  Bhutapavadins,  Hff(as, 
Medhyasthas,  Bhutavadins,  BbOtanuvadins.  The  three  Vedas 
are  competent  in  respect  to  Pravadins  (arguers  ?) 

116.  Agnidhra,  Kaiyapa,  PauJastya,  M&gadha,  Bhargava, 
Agnibahu,  8uci,  Ahgirasa,  Ojasvin,  and  Subala  are  the  sons  of 
Bhautya  Manu. 

117.  All  these  four  S&varoa  Manus  are  the  sons  of  Brahma. 
One  S&var^  Manu  is  called  the  son  of  Vivasvan. 

118.  Raucya  and  Bhautya,  these  two  Manus  belong  to 
Pulaha  and  Bhrgu  families.  While  Bhautya  rules  over,  the 
Kalpa  becomes  complete. 

Si^ta  said : 

1 19.  When  all  things  are  dissolved  completely,  when  all 
the  Manvantaras  come  to  a  close  and  many  Yugai  pass  on,  it  is 
called  SaAhdra  (Annihilation) . 


Vd)^  Pwd^a 


836 

120-122«  Then,  at  the  end  of  the  Manvantara,  the  leven 
Devafl  of  the  Bhfgu  &mily,  the  poweHul  iovereign  rulers,  who 
had  enjoyed  the  three  worlds  for  seventyone  cycles  of  four  Yugas 
by  remaining  within  them,  and  who  used  to  perform  Yajfias 
along  with  the  Pitrs,  Manus  and  the  Seven  Sages  will  then  aban* 
don  the  three  worlds  and  go  to  Maharloka  along  with  their 
devotees  and  those  who  perform  Yajfias.  'When  they  proceed 
upwards,  and  when  the  Manvantara  expires,  all  the  three  worlds 
will  be  rendered  without  any  support. 

123.  O  Brihmanas  !  Thereafter,  the  abodes  presided  over 
by  deities  become  vacant  and  fall  down  along  with  constella¬ 
tions,  stars  and  planets  getting  hurled  and  destroyed. 

124«125.  Thereafter,  when  the  lords  of  the  three  worlds 
including  the  eight  Indras  pass  away,  the  fourteen  groups  of 
Devas  beginning  with  (A}jita  and  others  and  ending  with 
Cftkiufas^he  Devas  who  were  very  mighty  and  full  of  splen* 
dour  in  all  the  Manvantaras — will  go  to  Maharloka  where 
they  will  become  identical  with  those  Devas  who  stay  there  till 
the  end  of  the  Kalpa. 

126-127.  It  is  reported  that  when  the  time  of  Sufhhdra  (lit. 
heaping  axtd  collision — S<i^ikalana)  comes  those  fourteen  groups 
of  Devas  will  forsake  Maharloka  and  go  to  Janaloka  with  (i.e. 
preserving)  their  physical  bodies  and  accompanied  by  their 
followers. 

128-129.  Thus  when  the  Devas  have  gone  from  Maharloka 
to  Janaloka,  when  BhUtddi  (Cosmic  Ego — Aharhkdra)  and  other 
(prime  causes  of  the  universe)  remain  and  (even)  immobiles 
have  come  to  an  end,  when  the  abodes  of  the  worlds  beginning 
with  Bhuh  and  ending  with  Mahah  have  become  void,  when  the 
Devas  have  gone  upward  and  become  united  with  the  Ksdp- 
av^ins  (those  who  stay  till  the  end  of  the  Kalpa), 

130.  after  withdrawing  (annihilating)  those  Devas,  Sages, 
Pitfs  and  Dinavas,  god  Brahma  with  his  powerful  vision  sees 
that  it  is  the  end  of  the  Yuga  and  puts  an  end  to  his  creation. 

131.  The  knowers  of  day  and  night  of  god  Brahma  under¬ 
stand  that  the  day  of  Brahm&  consists  of  a  thousand  cycles  of 
four  Yugas  and  similarly  the  night  too  consists  of  a  thousand 
cycles  of  four  Yugas. 

132.  This  PratisafUara  (Dissolution  &  Reabsorption)  ofaU 


38.133-14S 


8S7 

living  beings  is  of  three  types,  viz.  }faindttika  (periodical) ,  Prlikf^ 
tika  (pertaining  to  Prakrti)  and  Atyantika  ( the  ultimate  one) . 

I3S.  The  Ksimiitika  dUsolutton  is  the  burning  (of  the  Uni« 
verse)  at  the  end  of  the  Kalpa  and  complete  withdrawal  (of  all 
beings)  by  god  Brahmi.  destruction  of  Karstpas  (instni- 
ments  or  means  and  causes)  of  living  beings  during  ProHsarga 
(absorption)  into  Prakrti  is  called  Prikrta  type  of  dissolution. 

134.  The  dissolution  due  to  dawning  of  spiritual  knowledge 
is  said  to  be  the  ultimate  one  {Aijantika)  as  it  renders  the  seeds 
(  causes)  of  Sazhskra,  impossible. 

135.  After  dissolving  all  the  Devas  residing  in  the  three 
worlds  at  the  end  of  his  day  and  when  he  feels  the  urge  to 
sleep  (^ ,  Lord  Brahmk  destroys  all  the  subjects  and  dissolves  all 
the  creation. 

136.  Then  at  the  end  of  a  thousand  cycles  of  CaiiuyugaSt 
when  the  period  of  annihilation  of  Yuga  arrivei,  Prajkpati 
(Lord  of  subjects,  viz.  Brahmk)  begins  to  make  the  subjects 
abide  in  him  (i.e.  absorb  in  himself) . 

137-138.  Then  a  droi^ht  sets  in  lasting  for  a  hundred 
years.  Those  living  beings  on  the  surface  of  the  Earth,  (still 
left)  beir^  deficient  in  strength  become  dissolved  and  are  merg¬ 
ed  into  the  Earth.  The  Sun  then  rises  up  with  seven  rays  consti¬ 
tuting  his  chariot. 

139.  Lord  Sun  of  unbearable  rays  begins  to  suck  up  water 
through  hii  rays.  Those  seven  rays  will  be  green  in  colour  and 
of  dazzling  lustre. 

140.  Spreading  over  the  forest  ('thesky’ — Bd.P.)  gradually 
they  get  transformed  again.  The  wood  over  the  earth,  wealth 
and  refulgence  b^in  to  blaze  with  water  (?) 

141.  Hence  it  is  water  that  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of 
the  blazing  of  the  Sun.  With  drought  the  Sun  does  not  blaze. 
With  drought  the  Sun  has  no  halo(?)  ' 

142.  With  drought  the  lays  of  the  Sun  do  not  pick  up 
things  (from  the  ground).  The  Sun  blazes  with  water.  Hence, 
sucking  up  water,  the  Sun  blazes  in  the  sky. 

143»  His  seven  rays  suck  up  water  from  the  great  ocean. 
With  that  as  his  diet,  the  single  Sun  proliferates  into  seven 
Suns. 


Ypyi^Purd^ 


144.  Then  those  seven  rays  assuming  the  forms  of  seven 
Suns,  bum  the  four  quarters  and  the  four  worlds  like  fires* 

145.  The  fiery  rays  reach  the  top  and  bottom  (<^  the 
worlds) .  Seven  Suns  and  the  blazing  fires  of  dissolution  shine 
fiercely. 

146.  Ignited  and  tlluminated  by  means  of  the  water,  thous* 
ands  of  rays  envelop  the  sky  and  scorch  the  Earth. 

147.  Being  burnt  by  their  blazing  heat,  the  Earth  inclusive 
of  the  oceans  and  the  mountains  becomes  bereft  d  moisture  and 
viscidity. 

148.  The  nether  regions,  the  upper  regions  and  the  sides 
are  restrained  by  the  illuminated  rays  of  the  Sun  of  various 
colours  and  spreading  everywhere. 

149.  The  scorching  rays  of  the  Sun  and  the  leaping  flames 
of  the  fires  mingling  with  one  another  appear  to  be  a  single  unit 
with  a  single  flame. 

150.  That  fire  becomes  amass  of  fiery  zone  creatu^  the 
destruction  of  all  the  worlds.  With  its  brilliance  it  scorches  all 
the  four  worlds. 

151.  All  the  mobile  and  the  immobile  beings  get  dbsolved. 
The  Earth,  devoid  of  trees  and  even  grass,  appears  like  the  back 
of  a  tortoise  shell. 

1 52.  The  entire  univene  destroyed  and  affected  by  misfor¬ 
tune  appears  like  a  frying  pan.  The  whole  of  the  sky,  filled  with 
the  burning  rays,  blazes  fiercely. 

153.  All  the  living  beings  in  the  nether  worlds  and  in 
the  great  ocean  become  dissolved  and  one  with  the  Earth. 

154.  The  continents,  mountains,  sub-continents,  the  great 
oceans — all  these  will  be  reduced  to  ashes  by  that  cosmic  fire, 
the  soul  of  everything. 

155.  The  excessively  kindled  fire  sucks  up  water  from  every¬ 
where,  the  oceans,  the  rivers  and  the  nether  worlds.  Spreading 
over  the  Earth  it  blazes  up. 

156.  Then  the  big  Sazhvartaka  fire  (the  fire  of  (dissolution) 
transcends  the  mountains  and  destroys  all  the  worlds.  It  becomes 
a  terribly  kindled  fire. 

157.  It  then  pierces  through  the  Earth  and  dries  up  Rasa* 
taltii  After  burning  up  P&talas  it  bums  down  the  world  of 
serpents. 


38.158-170 


839 

158«  After  burning  the  Earth  from  below,  it  bums  the 
firmament  above  spreading  throi^h  thousands,  lakhs  and  tril¬ 
lions  o[  Yojanas« 

159.  Many  flames  leap  out  from  that  Saxbvartaka  fire. 
Glowing  fiercely  the  Samvartaka  fire  consumes  Gandharvas, 
Piiacas,  the  great  serpents  and  R&kfasas.  Everything  is  reduced 
to  a  huge  globular  mass  (of  ashes)* 

160.  The  deadly  fire  thus  bums  all  the  four  worlds,  viz* 
Bhurloka,  Bhuvarloka,  Svarloka  and  Maharloka  in  a  terrible 
manner. 

I6L  When  sill  the  worlds  are  enveloped  with  fire  on  all 
sides  and  above,  the  entire  universe  is  slowly  permeated  with 
brilliance  and  shines  like  a  (red  hot)  ball  of  iron* 

162.  Thereafter  the  terrible  Samvartaka  clouds  begin  to 
rise  in  the  sky.  They  assume  the  shapes  of  the  herds  of  huge  ele¬ 
phants  and  are  embellished  with  lightning  streaks* 

163.  Some  are  dark-coloured  like  the  blue  lotus.  Some  are 
like  the  white  lilies,  some  resemble  lapis  lazuli  and  others  are 
like  emerald  and  sapphire. 

164.  Others  are  (white)  like  the  conch  shell  and  the  kunda 
fiowers.  Some  are  (black)  like  the  natural  collyrium.  Some  clouds 
are  smoke-coloured  and  some  clouds  are  yellow. 

165.  Some  clouds  have  the  (grey)  colour  of  a  donkey,  some 
resemble  the  red  lac,  others  have  the  lustre  of  the  red  anenic 
and  there  are  dove- coloured  clouds. 

166.  Some  glow-wormcolotired  clouds  rise  up  in  the  sky; 
some  are  as  vast  as  the  expansive  cities  and  the  Earth  and  some 
are  as  huge  as  herds  of  elephants. 

167.  Some  clouds  are  like  mountains  and  some  are  like 
rocky  regions.  Some  resemble  large  basins  and  some  huge  shoals 
of  fish. 

168.  Terrific  in  appearance  and  mylti-^formed,  all  those 
clouds  thundering  terribly,  fill  the  entire  firmament  at  that  time 
(of  dissolution). 

169.  Then  the  terrific  fresh  clouds  identifying  themselves 
with  the  Suns,  organise  themselves  in  seven  groups  and  extin¬ 
guish  the  fire. 

170.  The  clouds  then  shower  energetically  and  quell  the 
entire  inauspicous  and  terrible  fire. 


V^Pur^ 


840 

17  L  The  universe  is  filled  with  waters  of  the  heavy  down* 
pour.  The  brilliance  of  the  bumiim;  fire  is  overcome  by  the 
waters  and  the  fire  enters  (i.e.  merges)  into  water. 

172.  When  in  the  course  of  a  hundred  years  the  whole  fire 
is  quelled,  the  clouds  that  arise  from  the  fire  inundate  the  entire 
universe  with  huge  qxiantities  of  showers. 

173.  Urged  by  the  se}f*bom  deity  (Brahm&),  they  fill  the 
universe  with  their  showen.  Others  assail  the  sea^shore  with 
large  quantities  of  water.  The  entire  Earth  with  its  continents 
and  mountains  is  covered  with  water.  ' 

174.  O  Brihma^as,  the  entire  quantity  of  water  showered 
by  the  clouds  enters  the  ocean.  There  it  is  sucked  up  by  the  rays 
of  the  Sun. 

175.  The  water  sucked  up  by  the  rays  of  the  Sun  clings  to 
the  clouds.  It  falls  again  on  to  the  Earth  whereby  the  oceans 
are  filled  up. 

176.  Then  the  oceans  overflow  their  shores  all  round. 
Mountains  crumble  down  and  the  Earth  sinks  into  the  water. 

177.  Whirling  up  suddenly,  a  violent  wind  of  terrible  nature 
envelc^s  all  those  clouds  in  the  sky. 

178.  In  that  (a  single  vast  sheet  of  water)  all  the 

mobile  and  the  immobile  beings  get  dissolved.  When  a  thousand 
cycles  of  (bur  Yugas  pass  away,  it  is  called  a  complete  Kalpa. 

179.  Learned  men  call  this  vast  sheet  of  water  whereby  the 
entire  world  is  enveloped,  Ekirj^va,  All  separate  entities  are 
lost  sight  of.  Neither  the  surfaceof  the  Earth,  nor  the  atmosphere, 
neither  the  wind  nor  the  firmament  is  visible  distinctly. 

160.  Objects  of  PSrtkiva  (Earthly)  nature,  waters  of  the 
ocean  and  all  Haima  (i.e.  of  the  elements  of  fire,  Gold  standing 
for  Tgas)  objects  form  one  unit  termed  Sc  (water) . 

181.  When  only  water  is  seen  flowing  hither  and  thither  it 
is  called  Salila.  When  it  stands  covering  the  whole  Earth,  that 
(mass  of)  water  is  called  Arnaoa  (an  ocean)  • 

182-183.  The  word  BhS  indicates  Vjfdpti  (pervasion)  and 
DipH  (splendour) .  Since  water  shines  atnd  pervades  all  the  ashes 
(of  the  universe)  it  is  called  Ambafu  The  root  ^Ar  means  multi* 
plieity  and  quickness.  In  that  Ekdrt^a9a  waters  are  not  quick* 
Hence  they  are  called  ^*Narfii*\ 


38.184-194 


841 

184«  At  the  end  of  that  period  of  a  thomand  sets  of  four 
Yugas,  one  day  ofBrahmi  passes  oC  During  the  whole  of  that 
period  the  entire  universe  becomes  sub-merged  in  the  Ekdtfiaoa, 
All  the  activities  of  Praj&pad  (Brahmi)  cease  (to  e3dst}« 

185-^186.  When  in  that  Ekdr^ava  the  mobile  and  the  im¬ 
mobile  beings  become  annihilated »  Brahmi  assumet  this  form 
with  thousand  eyes,  thousand  feet,  thousand  heads,  beautiful 
mind,  thousand  legs,  thousand  eyes  and  faces,  thotisand  speeches 
(ttmgues) ,  thousand  arms  and  the  lustre  of  the  Sun.  He  is 
called  the  first  Prajapad  and  the  Purufa  in  the  path  of  Trayl 
(three  Vedas) . 

187.  He  has  brilliant  complexion  tike  the  Sun.  He  U  the 
protector  of  the  worlds.  He  is  single  and  the  first  Turifdf  (fore* 
staller  of  the  enemies).  He  becomes  Hira^yagarUu,  the  great 
Purufa.  He  goes  beyond  the  darkness  (of  ignorsmee) . 

188.  At  the  end  of  the  period  of  a  thousand  cycles  of  four 
Vugas  when  everything  around  U  flooded  with  water,  the  lord 
becomes  desirous  of  sleep  and  creates  a  dark  night  without  light. 

189.  When  Brahma  lies  down  with  the  fotir  types  of  creation 
withdrawn  in  the  An4^  (Cosmic  Egg},  the  Seven  Great  Sages 
see  that  noble-souled  K&la  (god  of  Time  or  Death). 

190.  At  that  time  they  move  about  in  Janaloka.  By 
means  of  penance  they  have  gained  (divine)  vision.  They  are 
the  noble  souls^Bhfgu  and  others.  Their  characteriidca  have 
already  been  recounted  by  me. 

191.  With  their  divine  vision  only  they  see  the  seven 
worlds — Satya  and  others.  They  visualize  BrahmA  during  the 
great  n^hts  of  Brahma. 

192*  The  Seven  Sages  see  him  at  the  time  of  his  sleep.  He 
is  cited  to  be  the  first  Parame^thin,  because  he  stays  beyond 
all  Kalpas. 

193.  In  the  beginning  of  every  Kalpa,  he  becomes  the 
creator  of  all  living  beings  again  and  again.  After  withdrawing 
all  creations  within  himself  Prajapati  (creates  them  again). 

194.  The  excessivdy  brilliant  one,  the  creator  of  every¬ 
thing  takes  (withdraws)  everything  into  himself  and  thereafter 
stays  within  the  single  vast  sheet  of  water  for  the  whole  of  that 
night. 


VtyuPitrd$a 


842 

195*  Thea,  when  the  night  passes  off|  Pr^*&pati  wakes  up. 
He  is  induced  (in  his  mind)  with  the  desire  for  creadon  once 
again. 

196-198.  At  the  timeofthe  (periodic)  dissolution 

(by  Brahma)^  when  Prajapati  grows  calm,  in  the  course  of  with¬ 
drawal  effected  all  the  living  beings  get  separated  from  their 
bodies.  All  the  Bhiitas  become  burnt  by  the  rays  of  the  Sun;  even 
gods,  sages  and  the  excellent  Manus  (are  affected  by  it  in 
that  water  of  flood.).  In  that  collision  all  the  living  beings 
beginning  with  Gandharvas  and  ending  with  Piiacas  who  have 
not  been  scorched  in  the  beginning  of  the  Kalpa  resort  to  Jana- 
loka. 

199.  The  living  beings  of  the  lower  strata  of  aninxals  and 
those  that  have  fallen  into  hell— all  those  become  burnt  up 
and  get  absolved  from  sins.  As  long  as  the  universe  is  submerged 
in  water,  they  abide  in  Janaloka* 

200.  When  the  night  of  Brahma  whose  source  of  origin  is 
the  Unmanifest,  dawns  again  all  those  living  beings  are  bom 
again. 

201.  The  sages,  Manus,  Devas  and  all  the  four  kinds 
of  living  beings  (are  alike  in  this  respect) .  Those  Siddhas  too  die 
and  are  bom. 

202.  Just  as  the  Sun  is  rising  and  setting  in  this  world  (it 
happens  regularly) ,  so  also  the  living  beings  are  seen  to  have 
birth  and  destruction. 

203-205.  The  [rebirth  after  the  dissolution  of  all  living 
beings  is  called  Samsara  (worldly  existence).  Just  as  all  living 
beings  (e.g.  trees)  germinate  afrer  the  rains  fall,  so  also  the 
subjects  and  the  immobile  and  other  beings  are  bom  in  every 
Kalpa.  Just  as  in  successive  seasons  the  different  forms  of  the 
characteristics  of  the  seasons  appear  in  the  same  succession  as 
before,  so  also  at  the  time  of  (every)  creation  the  mobile  and 
the  immobile  beings  (appear  in  the  same  manner  as  they  were) 
before  Brahmans  nights  and  the  dissolutions. 

206.  All  the  living  beings  come  out  and  re-enter  the  creator 
of  subjects,  Brahmi,  the  great  lord,  Prajapati  of  great  Yogic 
power* 

207.  The  great  Deva  who  is  both  manifest  and  unnumifest 


38.208*216 


843 

becomes  the  creator  of  all  living  heings  again  azul  again  in  the 
beginnings  of  the  Kalpas.  The  entire  universe  is  his. 

208.  It  is  he  by  whom  the  waten  are  created  at  first,  the 
waters  that  reach  the  surface  of  the  earth  along  the  path  taken 
before. 

209.  Just  as  mortal  beings  revolve  through  those  .{T&nis 
or  births)  due  to  their  auspicious  and  inauspicious  activities,  so 
they  move  upwards  and  downwards  due  to  the  (pull  of)  the 
Sun,  as  transfer  from  one  body  to  another  is  inevitable. 

210.  ^So  also  Devas,  Manus,  Prajeias  and  other  Stddbas 
who  have  attained  heaven  naturally  assume  the  forms  of 
righteous  living  beings  on  being  subjected  to  the  inevitable 
future, 

2U .  Henceforth,  I  shall  recount  the  period  of  dissolution 
of  all  living  beings  (AbhiUasa^lava),  O  Brahama^as,  the 
Manvantaras  have  already  been  explained  by  me  along  with 
Prajfianisarga*  (creation  through  intellect. )  and  the  fourteen 
Manus. 

212,  All  the  Manvantaras  consist  of  a  thousand  cycles  of 
four  Yugas.  When  two  thousand  cycles  of  four  Yugas  are  com* 
pleted  it  is  said  that  a  Kalpa  is  finished  entirely. 

213,  This  should  be  known  as  one  day  of  Brahma*  Under* 
stand  its  calculation.  The  time  taken  to  utter  a  short  syllable  or 
to  wink  once  is  called  Niznefa.  It  is  equal  to  a  Matra, 

214,  Fifteen  such  Nime^as  of  human  beings  constitute  one 
Ka^lha.  One  Lava  is  equal  to  five  K^afias  and  twenty  Kayth&s 
constitute  three  Lavas 

215,  According  to  another  calculation  seven  and  a  half 
measures  (Frost Acs)  of  water  constitute  a  Lava.^  Thirty  Lavas 
should  be  known  as  a  Kali  and  thirty  Kalis,  one  Muhurta. 

216,  Thirty  such  Muhurtas  make  one  day  and  one  night 
or  nine  hundred  Kalis  make  one  day  and  one  nigbt,^ 

1,  Obscure.  So  is  the  correspoocUag  text  in  Bd.  P.3.41.207. 

2.  Pr^Mtar£a  ‘creation  of  lubjecti*  in  Bd.P.v.209. 

$.  Perhaps  it  indicates  that  the  taken  by  so  much  of  water  to  drip 
through  the  hole  ia  the  mechanical  device  used  to  calculate  time,  is  one 
Lm, 

4.  The  reading  here  ct  Utini  should  be  emended  as 

ityadhikM  etc,  meaniag  ‘six  (hundred)  increased  by  three  hundred*. 


Purd^ 


217.  The  movement  of  the  Moon  and  the  Sun  should  be 
known  by  counting  these:  Fifteen  Nimeyas  make  one 
Thirty  Kifth&s  make  one  Kali. 

2 1 8.  Thirty  Kalis  make  one  Muhurta.  Some  say  that  Kali 
is  a  tenth  part  of  a  MuhOrta.  Forty  Kalis  are  termed  (by 
others)  one  Muhurta. 

219-220.  Muhurtas  and  Lavas  are  determined  (thus)  by 
those  who  know  the  measure.  (Instead  of  the  above)  through 
water  also  time  is  measured.  Thirteen  Pal  as  of  water  make  a 
Prastha  according  to  the  calculation  current  in  Magadha.  Four 
Prasthas  of  water  make  one  Nilika  Ghaja  (a  jar  with  a  tube 
fitted  in)  • 

221.  The  bottom  plate  of  the  device  is  four  Afigulai  square. 
There  are  four  holes  in  it«  each  of  the  size  of  a  golden  mA^a 
(the  pulsCf  black  gram) .  Two  Nilika  Ghatas  of  water  flow 
through  those  holes  in  the  period  of  a  MuhQrta.  It  is  the  same 
both  in  the  day  and  in  the  night. 

222*223.  Thanks  to  the  special  movement  of  the  Sun»  the 
maximum  number  of  Kalis  is  six  hundred  and  five  in  all  the 
J^tus  always.  This  is  to  be  known  as  one  human  day.  The 
Stellar  day  contains  ten  more.  A  human  year  is  calculated 
through  Sivana  months. 

224.  It  is  decided  in  the  scripture  that  a  human  year 
is  one  day  and  one  night  for  the  Devas.  Through  this  day> 
the  months^  Ayana.^  and  years  should  be  calculated. 

225.  Knowledge  of  this  is  arrived  at  by  this  method.  The 
terms  given  are  only  indicative.  Since  Kali  constitutes  the  basic 
unit  time  is  mentioned  as  Kila. 

226.  One  day  ofBrahmi  is  constituted  by  ten  million  two 
hundred  and  ninety  thousand  divine  years. 

227.  On  hearing  this,  the  sages  were  very  much  surprised. 
They  asked  Suta  thereafter  to  make  their  knowledge  clearer 
numerically. 

Thi  S^gtssfid: 

228.  We  wish  to  hear  the  magnitude  of  the  period  of 
dinolution  on  the  basis  of  human  calculation,  briefly ,  consisting 
of  small  words  and  syllables. 


38.229-241 


845 


229.  On  hearing  their  w<Mtls»  lord  Viyu  endowed  with 
divine  attributes,  and  celestial  vision  and  engaged  in  thd 
welfare  of  the  worlds  spoke  in  brief. 

290.  '*The  day  and  the  night  Brahma  have  already  been 
mentioned.  I  shall  now  mention  their  duration  based  on  worldly 
calculation. 

231-233a.  According  to  human  calculation,  four  hundred 
and  thirty  two  crores  eight  millions  nine  hundred  and  eighty 
thousand  (4328980000)  human  years  constitute  the  period  of 
dissolution. 

233b-236.  Then  seven  Suns  rise  up.  All  the  four  types  of 
creations  become  merged  in  the  great  elements  of  the  worlds. 
The  universe  is  flooded  with  water.  All  the  mobile  and  the 
immobile  beings  are  destroyed.  After  completing  the  sumihi- 
lation  Prajapati  becomes  quiescent.  When  everything  is  burnt, 
light  vanishes  and  everything  is  surrounded  by  nocturnal  dark¬ 
ness.  The  entire  vast  sheet  o(  water  is  then  presided  over  by 
livara.  The  duration  of  the  period  of  Ekdrj^ava  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  day  of  the  lord.  Tht  period  of  night  is  as  long  as 
everything  is  submerged  in  water.  When  that  recedes,  it  is 
remembered  as  day. 

237.  The  night  and  day  of  Brahma  succeed  each  other. 
This  successive  period  of  night  and  day  of  the  lord  is  what  is 
called  Abkuiasaffiplava. 

238.  It  is  called  AbhUtasaihplava  because  whatever  living 
beings  there  be  whether  mobile  or  immobile  in  the  entire  range 
of  three  worlds  upto  the  elements  [bfaUas)  become  merged. 

239.  (Another  explanation)  Prajapati  is  called  Bhuta 
because  he  exists  at  the  very  outset  before  all  the  subjects  and 
creations.  Everything  floats  and  merges  in  BhUta,  Therefore  the 
the  final  dissolution  is  called  Abhutasarhplava. 

240.  The  word  AbhUUuarf^lava  is  also  used  in  the  sense 
of  permanency  and  death! essness  (?)  The  past,  present  and 
future  subjects  are  calculated  up  to  Apardfdka*  (infinite  number) 
by  means  of  divine  number. 

241 .  The  maximum  longevity  (of  Brahma)  is  mentioned  as 
twice  Parardha.  This  much  is  the  period  of  stay  of  Aja  (the 

*  Probably  the  reading  ia  '&-parirdha*  upto  ?arirdba---vide  v.  241. 


d46  Purd$a 

unborn)  Prajapati.  At  tho  end  of  the  stay  of  Brahmi,  Paraxne* 
fthin,  there  U  the  Pratisarga  (secondary  creation}* 

242.  Just  as  the  flame  of  a  lamp  is  blown  out  by  the 
gust  of  wind,  so  also  Brahmi  becomes  quiescent  as  a  result  of 
the  Pratiaarga. 

243«  (Defective)  The  principles  beginning  with  Mahat 
become  withdrawn  in  the  great  livara;  Mahat  merges  into  the 
Unmanifest  and  all  the  three  Ouoas  attain  equilibrium. 

244-245*  Thus  AbhQlasofttplava  has  been  recounted  by 
me  briefly.  This  withdrawal  by  complete  merging  in  water  is  a 
periodic  {/famitiika)  reabsorption  in  relation  toBrahm^.  What 
more  shall  I  tell  you? 

He  who  always  retains  this  in  memory,  he  who  Ibteos  to 
this  frequently,  shall  attain  great  Siddhi  sts  a  result  of  gto  rifle- 
ation  and  listening  attentively.** 


CHAPTER  THIRTYNINE 
Worlds  from  Maharloka  to  Sivi/s  Ci^ 

Vdyu  smd  : 

1-6,  Those  Brahmanas  of  acute  discernment,  who  are  of 
extra-ordinary  good  behaviour,  who  subsist  on  the  residue  of 
what  is  consigned  to  sacred  fire  in  Homat  and  who  maintain 
special  piety,  become  the  residents  of  Maharloka  along  with 
Devas. 

The  fourteen  Manus,  the  increasers  of  fame  who  had  been 
glorified  before,  and  who  belong  to  the  past,  present  and  the 
fiiture,  are  bom  here  again  and  again  along  with  sages,  Devas, 
Gandharvas  and  Rak^asas  and  take  up  their  duties  in  the 
Manvantams. 


1.  Thii  chapter  commends  to  Bd*  P.  9.4.2.  Only  verw  numben  from 
it  are  mendoiied  for  reference.  The  chapter  is  ao  epitome  of  BAvma 
Jtofe. 


39J.I2 


847 


Devas,  Seven  Sagea,  Manus  and  fitf$  pass  away  gradually 
and  resort  to  Maharl^ta  along  with  the  righteous  Br&hma^as^ 
Ksatriyas  and  Vailyas.  They  are  accompanied  by  those 
who  perform  truthful  actions,  who  are  faithful  and  devoid 
of  arrogance  and  who  regularly  maintain  Vedic  and  Sm&rta 
rites  and  who  maintain  the  rigorous  discipline  of  Varpas 
and  Aframas.  AAerwards  when  the  period  of  a  Manvantara 
expires,  they  cease  to  operate  in  their  offices  (and  go  to 
Maharloka)  • 


The  Sages  said : 

7»8.  O  Powerful  M&tariivan  (Wtnd^god),  of  what  nature 
is  that  world  which  has  been  called  Maharloka  by  you?  In 
every  world  many  (meritorious  souls)  will  be  predding.  Hencei 
O  Lord,  recount  to  us  with  pleasure,  how  many  are  those 
worlds  and  how  they  are  burnt  (if  at  all) .  You  alone  know  this 
precisely. 

9.  On  being  requested  thus  by  those  disciplined*souIed 
sages,  Vayu,  the  knower  of  reality,  spoke  these  sweet  and  truth* 
ful  words. 


Vayu  said: 

10.  There  are  only  fourteen  abodes  called  Lokafi  (worlds) 
described  by  great  sages  and  (meritorious  men)  stay  therein. 

11-12.  They  call  seven  of  them  Kfias  and  the  other  seven 
Akftas,  The  seven  worlds,  cQumerated  as  Bhuh  etc.  are  the 
Kftas.  The  seven  Akfias  are  the  Prakfta  ones  (created  by 


1.  Verses  10-48  describe  the  sereo  (worlds),  vis.  (i)  Bhur. 

(2)  Bhuvar,  (3)  Svar,  (4)  Mahar,  (5)  Jana,  (6)  Tapas  and  (7)  Satya. 
The  location  of  1-4  is  (1)  the  Earth,  (2)  the  space  between  the  Earth  and 
the  Sun,  (3)  the  space  between  the  Sun  aiid*Dbruva  (the  Polar  Star), 
(4)  the  space  between  Dhruvm  and  Jana^Loka. 


Verses  24*27  explvn  the  tignifieance  oS  Lolus  [  5-7  ] 

(5)  Jana^Birth-placeof  lulyeeu  SvSyaihbbuva  Manu  and  such  other 
people.  (6)  Tapas^Region  of  the  performert  of  penance  like  Rbhu, 
SaaatkumSra.  (7)  Satyau  SsiiS^lra  (pure  existence) ,  the  region  of  god 
Brahmi. 


God  Brahmi  created  these  worlds  by  uttering  seven  viz.  BhOr, 

Bbuva^i  Svab  etc. 


848  Fiyu  Furdfa 

Pt^krti).  Tlie  Krtas  are  the  abodes  created  along  with  their 
Sth^ins  (pmons  identifying  themselves  with  them). 

13.  The  Earthy  the  firmament,  the  heaven  and  what  is 
remembered  as  AfaAa^ — these  four  abodes  are  remembered  as 
Arwtfakas. 

14.  These  abodes  are  having  decline  and  increase.  Those 
not  endowed  so  will  be  mentioned  (later) .  Those  that  are 
^'aimiUikaf  (periodical  ones)  last  til!  the  final  dissolution. 

15.  Janay  Tapa  and  Satya — these  three  abodes  are  exclusive 
ones.  They  last  till  the  (final)  Prascrhyama  (dissolution) . 

16.  I  shall  mention  the  Vyakia  (manifest)  ones.  They  are 
the  seven  abodes.  BhUtloka  is  the  first  among  them.  The  second 
one  is  remembered  as 

1 7.  The  third  one  should  be  known  as  5^^;  the  fourth  is 
remembeted  as  Maha^.  Jana  is  the  fifth  world  and  Tapak  is 
considered  as  the  sixth. 

18.  Satya  is  the  seventh  world.  Beyond  that  there  is  dark* 

ness.  When  (Brahma)  said  Bh&rloka  originated. 

19.  Second  time  when  he  said  **BhuvQi}^\  firmament  ori« 
ginated.  For  the  third  time  when  be  said  *^Svafj^*y  heaven 
appeared. 

20-21.  By  means  of  these  three  VyUkdras  (utterances) 
Brahm&  created  the  worlds.  Hence  BhUlji  is  remembered  as 
PAfthiva  Loka  (Earth)  and  firmament  is  remembered  as 
Bhuaah^  Sj>aTloka  is  heaven.  This  is  the  conclusion  in  the 
Pur&nas.  Agni  (Fire-god)  is  the  lord  of  BhUtas,  Hence  he  is 
remembered  as  Bhutapati, 

22.  Vayu  is  the  lord  of  Bhuvch.  Hence  he  is  Bhwaspaiu  The 
Sun  is  the  lord  of  Bhavya  i.c.  Svo^y  hence  i^Divaspatu 

23.  When  he  uttered  “AfaAaA*’,  Maharloka  originated.  The 
residence  of  the  Devas  who  retire  from  their  offices  is  there. 

24.  Jana  is  the  fifth  Loka.  Janas  (people)  are  bom  there. 
It  is  called  Janaloka  because  the  subjects  of  Svayambhuva  Manu 
and  others  were  bom  there. 

25.  Those  subjects  of  Svayambhuva  Manu  and  others^ 
who  have  already  been  glorified,  set  out  for  Tapoloka  when 
all  the  worlds  are  consumed  by  the  fire  at  the  end  of  the 
Kalpa. 


39.26-38 


849 

26.  That  world  is  called  TapoUka  because  ^bhu»  Sanat- 
kuznira  and  other  holy  persona^fes  of  souls  purified  by  Tapas 
(penance)  and  of  sublimated  sexuality  stay  in  that  world. 

27.  The  word  Saija  refers  to  Brahm&.  It  refers  to  pure 
existence  as  well.  Hence  Brahm&'s  world  is  Satya.  It  is  the 
shining  seventh  world. 

28.  All  theDevas  are  the  residents  of  Spartoka  along  with 
Gandharvas,  Apaaras-s,  Yakfas,  Ouhyakas  and  Rak^asas.  All 
Bhutas,  Pij&cas  and  N&gas  arc  residents  of  the  Earth  along 
with  men. 

29*30.  Although  Maruts,  M&tarilvans  ( Wind-godt)»  Rudras^ 
(some)  Devas  and  the  Aivins  have  no  fixed  abode  and  they 
roam  about  in  the  atmosphere,  they  have  their  main  residence 
in  Bhuvarloka,  The  heaven*dwelling  Adityas,  ^bhus»  Vifve* 
devas,  Sadhyas,  Pitfs,  and  the  sages  of  Afigiras  Gotra  resort  to 
Bkuvarloka  also. 

31.  All  these  Devas  move  about  in  aerial  chariots  and 

reside  in  the  constellations  and  planets  also.  Thus  all  the 
(worlds)  bom  of  the  utterances  Bhuvafit  Sva^)  ofBrahm& 

have  been  recounted  in  order. 

32.  Bhdrloka  is  the  first  of  these  worlds  and  the  last  one  is 
Makarloka,  They  are  created  by  the  Tanm&tras.  They  are 
mutually  pure  i.e.  they  are  separated  from  one  another. 

33.  Those  who  have  gone  away  after  resorting  to  the  Earth, 
viz.  Sukra  and  others  ending  with  Caksusa  (Manu?)  reside  in 
Maharloka  till  the  end  of  the  Kalpa. 

34*37.  The  seven  Suns  bum  with  their  rays  those  worlds 
beginning  with  Bkurhka  and  ending  with  Maharloka,  All  the 
following  :  Marlci,  Kaiyapa,  Dak;a,  Svayaihbhuva,  Angiras, 
Bhrgu,  Pulastya,  Pulaha,  Kratu  and  others,  are  the  Praj&patis 
and  they  live  there  with  them.  They  are  devoid  of  possessions 
and  iree  from  the  feelings  of  my-ness.  They  are  of  sublimated 
sexuality.  |Lbhu>  Sanatkuznara  and  others  are  ascetics  of  great 
detachment.  These  worlds  are  the  causes  of  the  rebirth  of  all 
the  fourteen  Manvantaras  including  those  of  the  Savari^. 

38.  Practising  Yoga,  penance  and  truthfulness  and  medita¬ 
ting  on  the  soul,  they  return  to  the  sixth  Loka  (i.e.  Tapohka) 
then  at  the  end  of  the  day  (of  Brahm&  i.e.  during  dissolution). 


850 


S9»  Sa^a  U  the  seventh  Loka.  It  is  the  r^on  from  which 
there  is  no  return.  It  is  uziobatructed  (i.e.  eternal) .  It  is  god 
Brahma’s  Lioka. 

40.  In  (velocity?)  of  rotation  and  in  magnitude  BAOrlo/ta 
is  the  meeting  place  (i.e.  in  the  middle?).  The  firmament, 
the  space  between  the  Earth  and  the  Sun  is  remembered 
as  BAuva^  (-IjOka). 

41.  This  space  between  the  Sun  and  Dhruva  (the  Pole 
Star)  is  ,&farUka  (Heaven).  It  is  called  Dha  also.  The  space 
between  Dhruva  and  Janaloka  is  called  Makarloka. 

42.  The  seven  worlds  have  been  recounted  well.  Now  I 
shall  recount  the  Siddhis  of  those  worlds.  All  the  living  beings 
in  BA&floka  are  the  imbibers  of  juice  and  eaters  of  cooked 
food*grains. 

43<44.  All  the  residents  of  Bfmarhka  and  Svarga  are  the 
imbibers  of  Soma  and  Ajya  (ghee*oblations) .  Those  who  stay 
in  the  fourth  Loka,  MaAarloka,  should  be  known  to  possess 
the  mental  Siddhis  of  five  characteristics.  Everything  that  they 
desire  mentally  is  immediately  realised. 

45.  These  Devas  are  of  the  past,  present  and  future. 
They  mutually  worship  by  means  of  Yajfias. 

46.  The  middle  ones  wonhip  the  earlier  ones  (by  sacrifice) 
and  the  present  ones  worship  the  middle  ones.  When  the 
groups  of  Devas  pass  off,  the  contact  and  relations  cease  (to 
e^dat) . 

47.  It  should  be  known  that  they  still  retain  their  series  of 
mental  Siddhis  even  though  they  cease  to  hold  positiems  of 
authority.  Their  series  of  Siddhis  is  pure  and  should  be  known 
as  mental. 

48.  O  Brahmanas,  the  four  worlds  situated  lower  than 
Janaloka  have  been  briefly  recounted  by  me  to  you.  I  shall 
recount  them  again. 

said: 

49*50.  Markin  Kalyapa,  Dakia I  VaaUlha,  Afigiras,  Bbrgu, 
Pulascya,  PuUha,Kratu  and  others  are  bom  at  the  outset  as  the 


39.51-63 


851 


mental  sons  of  Brahmi.  After  establishing  their  subjects,  they 
resort  to  Jandoka.^ 

51-52*  When  the  worlds  b^inning  with  and  ending 
with  Makar  are  pervaded  by  the  fiames  of  Samvartaka  Bre  at 
the  end  of  the  Kalpa.  when  the  black  fires  blase  and  bum, 
Yima  and  other  groups  of  Oevas  residing  in  Maharloka  resort  to 
Janahka,  All  those  stationed  there  are  of  very  subtle  bodies* 

53«54«  The  (newcomers)  assume  the  same  features  and 
excellence  as  they  (the  residents  of  Janaloka)  and  move  about 
in  Janaloka  as  long  as  the  universe  is  submerged  in  water. 

55«  When  the  night  of  Brahmk  whose  source  of  origin  is  the 
Unmanifest,  dawns  into  day,  they  are  reborn  in  the  same  order 
as  before. 

56.  On  the  death  of  their  predecessors  all  those  aspirants 
beginning  with  Sv&yaibbhuva  (Manu)  and  endii^  with  Marici 
are  rebora. 

57-58.  Thereafter  the  Y&ma  groups  of  Devas  are  reborn  in 
the  (chronological)  order,  the  eldest  first  and  the  younger 
afterwards.  In  the  family  of  Devas  are  remembered  seven 
SarhbhUtis  (Manifestations)  •  These  Sajhhkatu  are  bom  with  the 
Kalpa — Kalpajd^.  Four  of  these  manifestations  have  passed 
away,  while  the  three  others  (still)  survive. 

59-61.  Undergoing  transmigration  again  and  again  upto 
ten  times  in  order  those  Devas  observe  the  evanescence  of  all 
created  beings.  Thanks  to  the  force  of  the  inevitable  future  and 
as  a  result  of  that  power  of  their  own  meritorious  deeds,  they 
attain  mental  equilibrium.  They  desist  from  all  activities  and 
leave  off  Janaloka  with  a  calm  mind*  They  then  attain  the 
Vairdja  Loka. 

62-63.  Practising  Yoga  perpetually,  performing  penance 
and  preaching  dharma  for  a  long  time,  ihey  are  bom  in  the 
families  of  meritorious  persons.  Whether  they  attain  Devahood, 
si^e-hood  or  human  form,  they  do  fulfil  the  duties  of  those 
respective  positions. 

1.  In  w.  49^9,  we  are  told  chat  at  the  end  of  the  world,  when  Mahar¬ 
loka  luffert  from  the  Saihvartaka  fire,  gods  etc.  resort  to  Janaloka.  Time 
being  endless,  the  process  of  the  same  sages  etc.  taking  re-mcamadons 
in  the  same  state,  continues  sd  vyhihen  ( except  for  the  Jlvai  who  attain 
Mokfa}. 


852 


V^Pwrt^ 


64«  Thus  these  groups  of  Devu  resort  to  the 
after  ten  repetitions  of  births*  There  they  stay  for  ten  Kalpas* 

65-66*  As  each  of  the  Kalpas  is  completed  in  the  Vwijaka 
(Kalpa)  (Loka?) ,  they  move  on  to  Brahmaloka  in  their  due 
order  of  priority*  In  the  world  of  Brahmi,  when  a  Kalpa  of 
VaifSjaka  (pertaining  to  Brahmi)  passes  away,  they  again  get 
assigned  a  position  lasting  for  a  Kalpa  in  Vairdja  (loka) . 

67*  Thus  in  the  order  mentioned  before  they  frequently  go 
to  Vair&ja  as  a  result  of  their  penance  up  to  ten  times  and  return 
to  Brahmaloka* 

68*  Thus  thousands  of  Devayugas  have  passed.  They 
attained  death  along  with  the  sages  in  Brahmaloka. 

^ta  said : 

69*  It  is  impossible  to  recount  them  in  detail  and  In  the 
proper  sequence  because  time  is  beginningless  and  it  is  impos¬ 
sible  to  count  everything  completely*  Still  you  need  not  have 
any  doubt*  Everything  has  been  mentioned  by  me  precisely. 

70.  On  hearing  that  statement  the  sages  were  over-whelm- 
ed  with  doubts.  They  then  spoke  to  Suta  who  was  conversant 
with  the  Pura^as,  whose  intellect  was  great  and  who  was 
Vy&sa’s  disciple. 

The  Sages  said: 

71*  Please  mention  precisely  what  constitutes  the  diet  of 
these  people  in  Vairdja  Loka,  what  the  extent  of  their  exploit  is, 
what  their  support  is  and  how  tong  they  stay  there* 


72*  On  hearing  the  statement  uttered  by  the  S^es^  Suta 
who  was  well-versed  in  the  Puratias  and  who  knew  the  reality 
of  the  world,  spoke  thus  with  humility* 

Suta  said: 


73*  Those  people  who  become  the  purest  of  the  pure  (by 
means  of  meritorious  actions)  attain  that  world  {Vairdja)  zni 
stay  there  fos  ten  AbhutasarhploBas  (periods  of  final  dissolution) . 

74*  All  of  them  have  only  subtle  bodies.  They  are  learned. 
Their  forms  and  features  are  like  those  of  clouds.  Since  they 
abide  in  a  permanent  world  there  is  no  BhQta  (the  elements) 
in  them* 


65S 


7M7.  When  a  change  is  mmunent  (i.e«  when  they  are 
about  to  leave) ,  Sanatkumara  and  other  Siddhas  of  Yogic  rites 
and  practice  mention  (reveal)  their  time  of  (periodic)  change. 
The  inclination  to  abandon  the  abode  occurs  simultaneously. 
Then  all  of  them*  of  pure  intellect^  say  to  the  Vairajsks  and  to 
one  another:  blessed  ones,  now  we  shall  enter  into  Praoava 

and  stay  in  Brahmaloka.  It  is  conducive  to  our  welfare  to 
proceed  to  Brahmaloka”. 

78*79.  After  saying  thtu,  all  of  them  striving  to  attain 
Brahman  practise  Yogic  rites  and  stay  there  uniting  the  Atman 
with  Paramdtman*  Like  the  flames  of  a  lamp  that  has  ceased 
to  bum  (for  want  of  oil),  they  become  extinct  and  become 
merged  in  Brahman  wherefrom  a  return  is  rarely  achieved* 
(There  is  no  return.) 

80.  After  attaining  that  world  full  of  meditationi  they  attain 
the  bliss  of  Brahman  and  the  state  of  immortality. 

81.  Brahmaloka  is  mentioned  to  be  six  times  higher  up  be* 
yond  the  Vair&ja  worlds.  And  god  Brahma  is  the  Purohiia  (one 
who  has  been  put  in  charge  beforehand)  • 

82.  All  of  them  are  /Vetk^^^ouled  (i.e.  have  concentrated 
their  souls  in  the  mystic  syllable  Om).  They  are  endowed  with 
enlightenment,  purity  and  penance.  After  deriving  the  bliss  of 
Brahman,  they  enjoy  the  state  of  deathless-ness. 

83.  They  are  not  affected  by  mutually  clashing  opposites 
(like  happiness  and  sorrow  etc.) .  They  are  devoid  of  the  three 
Bhdvas  (states  of  existence,  i.e.  birth,  growth  and  decay).  They 
possess  majestic  lustre.  They  are  in  every  respect  eqtial  to 
Brahma  except  in  the  matter  of  over*lordship.^ 

84.  They  are  endowed  with  majestic  lustre,  victory,  Aiivarya 
(divine  faculties  of  omnipotezice  etc.) ,  StkiH  (continuous  exis* 
tence),  Vairdgya  (non-attachment),  Darfana  (vision)  on  par 
with  Brahma. 

85.  Those  learned  men  of  holy  rites  and  activities  and  in 
an  enlightened  state  at  the  end  of  penance,  attain  the  goal  that 
transmutes  them.  When  the  PratisaHeara  (re-absorption)  in 

1.  Gf.  BrtfAms  IV. 4*  17*21  which  lUte  that  the  Liberated  Soul  bat 

all  the  poweri  of  Brahipi  except  that  of  creation  of  the  world. 


854  Fdfw  Purd^a 

Prakrti  is  imminent  they  flee  it  in  a  moment  and  get  dissolved  in 
the  Unmanifest  along  with  Brahma  and  Devas. 

86.  Thus  Devas  and  Sages  partake  of,  i.e.  worship  the 
Saitra  (the  sacrificial  session  in  the  form  of)  Brahman.  The 
Sattra  (i.e.  Brahman)  is  eternal  {smAtma)y  immortal,  resplen* 
dent,  ever-existent,  imperishable  and  immutable* 

87.  They  are  of  sublimated  sexuality*  They  traverse  a  path 
of  no  return.  The  purity  they  have  attained  by  means  of  the 
practice  of  holy  rites  is  supplemented  by  the  knowledge  of 
Vedantas. 

88.  There  they  engage  themselves  in  the  practice  of  Yogic 
union  (with  the  Supreme  Brahman) .  They  worship  the  highest 
goal.  They  abandon  their  physical  body  which  is  the  cause  of  all 
sins  and  proceed  ahead  to  (the  state  of)  immortality. 

89-90.  They  are  devoid  of  passion.  They  have  conquered 
anger.  They  are  rid  of  delusion.  They  speak  the  truth  in  variably. 
They  are  quiescent.  They  are  of  dedicated  soub  endowed  with 
mercy  and  sympathy.  They  have  conquered  the  sense  organs* 
They  are  devoid  of  attachment*  They  are  pure*  They  are 
remembered  as  ones  who  have  attained  (identity)  with 

Brahman.  They  are  the  heroic  souls  who  have  burnt  all  their 
sins  by  means  of  acts  of  penance  uncontaminated  by  desires. 
Theirs  are  those  worlds  which  there  is  no  fallii^  off* 

It  is  remembered  that  the  pleasure  therein  is  immeasurable. 

91.  This  is  the  immortal  region  of  Brahman.  It  is  superbly 
resplendent  in  the  most  exalted  firmament.  After  attaining  it 
along  with  Brahma,  Devas  cease  to  be  worried  and  sorrowful 
(i.e.  attain  Liberation— Mokfa). 

Thi  Sages  said  : 

92.  O  excellent  one,  whence  is  this  Parardha  (Infinite, 
Infinity)  ?  What  is  this  called  Para  (the  greatest)  ?  We  wish  to 
know  this.  Please  speak. 

SHia  said ; 

93-95.  Listen  from  me  the  definition  of  Pardrdha^  and 

1,*  Venes  dS- 104  give  the  technical  terms  for  numben  and  the  digits 
up  te  ParSrdAa. 


39.96*108 


855 


Para,  One»  Cen»  hundred  and  thousand  aire  the  (main)  numberi 
known  (well)  to  you.  Ten  tioses  thousand  make  Ayuta.  One 
hundred  thousand  is  called  J^iytUa  by  learned  men.  Similarly 
Arbuda  and  Kofi  can  be  calculated.  Hundred  Myutas  make  a 
Kofi  (crore).  Thonsand  }fiyutas  make  one  Arbuda  (one  hundred 
million)  •  Arbuda  is  ten  ito/u.  They  consider  hundred  Kofis  as 
Abja, 

96.  Learned  men  call  a  thousand  crores  a  Khatva  and  ten 
times  a  Khatva  make  u»}{ikharva. 

97-98.  A  hundred  thousand  Kotis  make  (what  is  called)  Sahku. 
People  who  know  numbers  (and  calculation)  say  that  a  thous¬ 
and  times  thousand  Kofis  multiplied  by  ten  make  a  Satnudra  (i.e. 
Jaladhi).  Ten  thousand  times  a  thousand  Ab/u  is  called  Madhya, 
A  hundred  thousand  times  a  thousand  Kofis  is  termed  Anta 
{Antya), 

99.  A  thousand  crores  multiplied  by  a  crore  is  called  Par^dha, 
Learned  men  call  twice  a  Pardrdha^  a  Para  (great)  • 

100-102.  The  number  hundred  they  say  is  Paridfdha  {Pari^ 
vrdha  in  Bd.P.) .  A  thousand  h Paripadmaka,  Tbereafler  the  other 
numbers  ( each  number  is  multiplied  by  ten  to  get  the  next 
number)  are  Ayuta^  Myutaf  Prayuta^  Arbuda,  Nirbudaf  Kharbuda, 
Khatva,  Kikharva,  Sahku,  Padma,  Samudra,  {Antya),  Madhyama, 
Pardrdha  and  Para,  In  calculation  these  are  the  eighteen  digits. 

103-104.  These  arc  the  terms  given  by  sages.  A  Pardrdha  (? 
yeats)  from  the  beginning  of  creatiem  constitutes  a  Kalpa  (?) 
of  Brahma  (only  aday).  A  period  extending  as  much  also  remains^ 
at  the  end  of  which  there  is  PraHsarga,  Thus  Para  and  Parardka 
have  been  (calculated)  explained  by  me. 

105-107.  As  Brahma’s  prowess  is  thegreatest»  his  loi^cvity 
this  highest,  (his power  of)  penance, strength,  piety  (or  Dharma), 
leammg,  fortitude,  knowledge,  realization  of  Brahman  and 
faculties  such  as  omnipotence  {aiivarya)  etc.  are  of  the  highest 
magnitude,  there  is  no  living  being  who  is  greater  than  Brahma. 
He  is  established  in  the  highest  position,  so  he  is  the  greatest  of 
all  objects. 

The  greatest  Brahmi  has  been  reckoned  (calculated  and 
explained)  by  me  (as  Para)  •  Half  of  Para  is  Parirdha. 

108.  The  countable  yet  ever  uncountable  is  the  trinity- 


VdyuPurd^a 


The  countable  is  observed  through  numbers.  All  numbers  up  to 
Parardha  can  be  expressed. 

109.  When  the  mass  is  seen  there  is  no  spedBc  number.  It 
is  the  characteristic  of  countless  ness.  If  we  say  as  many 
as  sand  particles  it  means  infinite.  These  are  the  five  characteri- 
sties  (  7) . 

110.  That  can  be  calculated  by  livaras  of  divine  vision  be* 
cause  of  their  purity.  Since  he  is  established  in  perfect  know¬ 
ledge,  Brahm^  sees  everything. 


111.  On  hearing  this,  all  the  sages  residing  in  Naimi^ 
forest  had  their  eyes  bedimmed  with  tears  (of  joy) .  Their  (voice) 
was  choked  up  due  to  delight. 

112*113.  Those  expounders  of  Brahman  asked  Matariivan 
(the  Wind-god)  :  ‘‘O  holy  lord,  we  wish  to  hear  precisely  how 
far  is  Brahmaloka  in  so  many  Yojanas.  What  is  the  magnitude 
ofYojanaand  Kroia?** 

1 14.  On  hearing  their  words,  Matariivan  ( V&yu)  of  hum¬ 
ble  speech  spoke  as  follows  in  sweet  words,  in  the  proper  order 
and  in  the  same  manner  as  was  seen  (by  him) . 


Vdyu  said : 

1 15.  I  shall  recount  thb  to  you.  Listen  to  what  I  intend  to 
say.  The  Vyakta  Bhdga  (that  which  is  manifest)  is  grosser  than 
Aoyakta, 

116.  There  are  ten  parts  of  MahaU  The  gross  part  is 
called  BkUiddi  (AhafAkdra  or  the  Cosmic  Ego) .  The  magnitude 
of  Paramd^  (an  atom)  is  little  more  than  the  tenth  part  of 

Bhmdi  (7) 

117.  A  Paramd^u  is  very  subtle.  It  cannot  he  seen  by  the 
(naked)  eye.  It  can  be  imagined ;  what  cannot  be  (ultimately) 
split  in  the  world  should  be  known  as  Paramdnu. 

118.  When  the  Sun’s  rays  enter  through  the  window,  the 
subtlest  dust  particle  that  is  seen  is  called  Paramds^u  It  is  the 
first  among  the  units  of  magnitude.  It  is  called  Paramdsfu. 

119.  When  there  is  an  aggregate  of  eight  Paramdsfus  it  is 
called  Trasars^  or  Padmarajas  (pollen-dust  of  a  lotus). 


39.120*130 


857 

120«  When  eight  Trasarg^  join  together  that  is  remem¬ 
bered  as  one  Rathaunu  (chariot  dust) .  When  eight  RaUiatejfm  are 
combined  they  form  what  is  remembered  by  learned  men  as 
one  BMgra  (tip  of  the  hair)  * 

121.  Eight  BMgras  form  aLt^J  (the  egg  of  a  louse) .  Eight 
Lik$ds  form  Tnki  (a  louse)  •  Eight  form  what  is  called  Tava " 
(a  grmn  of  barley)  and  e^ht  Tcrar  form  one  AAgula  (the  dis¬ 
tance  between  the  joints  in  a  finger). 

122.  Twelve  i4Agti4i-jomts  make  a  ViUisA  and  twentyone 

vlAgtt/a-joints  make  (a  cubit — the  distance  between  the 

elbow  and  the  closed  fist) . 

123.  Twentyfour  Ahgulat  form  one  Hasta  (the  distance  bet¬ 
ween  the  elbow  and  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger) .  Two  /^abitr 
or  fbrtytwo  AAgulas  should  be  known  as  a  Kifku. 

124.  Learned  men  say  that  ninetysix  AAguUs  form  one 
Dhanus{^  bow).  This  Dkanus  is  a  unit  used  in  measuring  GavydH 
(Explanation  in  verse  1 26) . 

125.  Dkanus^  Dan(la,  Tuga  and^d/f— all  these  contain  equal 
number  of  Aogulas.  Persons  who  know  calculation  say  thattlvee 
hundred  Dhanus  units  make  a  Naka. 

126.  It  b  taught  that  two  thousand  Dhanus  units  make  one 
GatyQti.  Eight  thousand  Dharms  units  make  one  Tojana. 

127.  The  measurement  of  the  distance  of  a  Tojana  is  based 
on  this  unit  of  Dhanus.  It  should  be  known  that  a  thousand  of 
these  Dhanus  make  the  dbtance  of  a  .^a^-JTro^a  (or  a  Kro^a). 

128.  Calculation  in  Tojanas  is  made  by  those  who  are  experts 
in  the  knowledge  of  numbers.  Luten  to  the  dbtance  of  Brahxna- 
loka,  in  so  many  Tojanas.^ 

129.  Divakara  (Sun)  b  a  hundred  thousand  Yojanas 

above  the  surface  of  the  Earth.  jVt/akarc  (Moon)  is  a  thousand 
Yojanas  above  the  disc  of  the  Sun.  » 

130.  The  entire  stellar  zone  shines  a  fiili  hundred  thousand 
Yojanas  above  the  Moon. 

1.  Verses  give  the  dltttnces  from  the  earth  to  oUier  planets  and 
their  locadoos.  Thou^  other  Puricas  endorie  this  infonoation,  it  is 
imaginary.  It  tbowt  the  limits  of  the  knowledge  of  Astronomy  in  those  times. 

The  same  remark  l^^es  to  the  distancei  to  Mahar  Loka  and  othtf 
mythical  worlds. 


V^Purd^ 


85B 

131 »  The  Meru  mountain  is  a  hundred  thousand  Yojanas 
high*  The  distance  between  planets  above  the  stellar  sone  is 
twice  this  (height)  and  they  are  one  above  the  other. 

132.  Budha  (Mercury)  moves  about  beneath  all  start  and 
planets.  Sttkra  (Venus)  moves  about  above  it«  Above  it  is  the 
planet  LdAito  (Mars). 

133-135.  Above  it  is  Bfhaspad  (Jupiter)  and  above  that 
is  Sonaifcara  (Saturn) .  A  hundred  thousand  Yojanas  above 
Saturn  shines  the  entire  zone  of  the  Seven  Ssiges  (Great 
Bear) .  A  hundred  thousand  Yojanas  above  the  Seven  Sages 
shines  Dhruva  (Pole  star),  son  of  Utianapgda.  He  is  the  main 
pivot  of  all  stars  in  the  heaven.  He  has  the  compact  divine 
stellar  aerial  chariot* 

136*137.  The  height  of  the  three  worlds  has  been  recounted 
by  mein  Yojanas.  In  the  course  of  the  Msmvantaras^  worldly 
Yajflas  are  performed  ibr  Dcvas  by  the  people  of  difierent 
castes  and  stages  of  life.  These  Yajhas  alone  are  conducive  to 
the  sustenance  and  stability  of  Devas. 

138.  The  set  of  the  three  worlds  has  been  explained* 
Understand  what  is  beyond  this.  Above  Dhrwaloka  is  Maharloka 
wherein  those  people  staying  till  the  endof  the  Kalpa  reside.  It 
is  ten  million  Yojanas  from  Dhruva — that  is  the  conclusion  (of 
wise  men). 

139.  Janaloka  is  twenty  million  Yojanas  from  Maharloka. 

In  it  stay  those  (aspirants) — Dak$a  and  others*  the  sons 

of  Brahma.  They  live  till  the  end  of  the  Kalpa. 

140.  It  is  remembered  that  Tapoloka  is  forty  million 
Yojanas  above  Janaloka.  It  is  here  that  the  Vairaja  groups 
of  Devas  stay.  They  are  exempt  from  the  efiects  of  burning  of 
all  living  beings  in  the  destruction  of  the  imiverse. 

141.  Sixty  million  Yojanas  from  Tapoloka  is  Sat^loka.  It 
is  called  Brahmaloka  of  those  who  are  devoid  of  death  and 
desire  and  so  who  never  return  to  the  Saihsara  therefrom. 

142.  It  is  remembered  (proclaimed)  that  the  space  above 
Brahmaloka  up  to  the  (upper  crust  of  the)  Cosmic  Egg  is  a  or  ore 
and  fifty  niyuta  (a  fifteen  million)  Yojanas. 

143-144.  The  lower  part  extends  to  fortysix  million  five 
hundred  thousand  Yojanas.  This  lower  half  consists  of  movement 
(of  stars*  planets,  etc.)*  In  the  upper  half  the  movement 


39.145-157 


859 


ceaMfl.  Ohruvaloka  and  its  top  haa  bean  oplained  as  has 
been  heard  by  me  mentioning  the  distance  in  Yojanas. 

145.  Now  1  shall  mention  the  allotment  of  abodes  to  those 
living  beings  who  deserve  falling  into  hells  due  to  their  cruel 
actions. 


I46«149.  The  following  are  the  hells^  :  Raurata^  Rodha^ 
Tdla^  Taptakufhbhaf  Adahdjvdla^  Sabala^  Vimocana^  Kfmi^ 
Kfmihhakfa^  L^Ubhakfa^  VUathsana^  Adha^Hrof,  Pifyavaka^ 
Rudhir^dKa.  Vaitarartaf  Asipatravana,  Agmjvdla^  MakHgkora^ 
Saihdathia^  S^ahkojma^  Tanas ^  KfffjjisQtfat  Astja^  Apratiflha^ 

Vieyaii>a  and  others. 

150.  All  these  dark  and  gloomy  hells  are  under  the  juris¬ 
diction  of  Yama.  Men  of  evil  deeds  fall  into  these  severally. 

151.  Alt  these  hells  Raurava  etc.  are  reported  to  be  beneath 
the  Earth.  A  perjuron  a  person  taking  up  a  side  by  making 
false  statements  and  untruths  falls  into  the  hell  Rauraoa  of 
ruthless  grasp* 

152.  A  slayer  of  a  cow»  a  destroyer  of  a  foetus  and  one 
who  commits  arson  in  the  city  fall  into  the  hell  Rodha.  A  slayer 
of  a  Brihma^a,  a  drink-addict  and  a  stealer  of  gold  fall  into 
the  hell  Sahara. 


153.  A  slayer  of  a  Ksatriya,  of  a  Vaisya  in  miserable 
circumstances  or  of  a  Brahoiana  as  well  as  a  defiler  of  the 
preceptor’s  bed  falb  into  the  hell  7a/c« 

134*  He  who  indulges  in  sexual  intercourse  with  his  sbter 
and  the  soldier  of  a  king  (i*e*  murderer  of  a  king)  fall  into  the 
hell  Taptakumbha.  A  trader  in  (stolen)  horses  and  protector 
of  one  who  is  kept  in  legal  bondage  fall  into  the  bell  Taplaloka. 

155.  He  who  sells  his  chaste  wife»  he  who  forsakes  a 
devotee  and  he  who  indulges  in  sexual  intercourse  with  his 
daughter  or  daughter-in-law  falb  into  the4xell  Mahdjodla. 

156-157.  He  who  sells  the  Vedas,  he  who  blasphemes  the 
Vedas,  those  who  abuse  or  disrespect  elders  or  hit  them  with 
wounding  words  and  one  who  carnally  approaches  forbidden 


1.  Vessel  146-184  deal  with  the  belli,  the  terturo  thereto  sad  the 
liiu  thst  Usd  to  these  hells.  The  totsl  number  of  hells  is  twentyetght. 


660  VtSyu  Purd^ 

women — all  these  fall  into  the  hell  named  Satala.  A  thief  or  a 
trespasser  falls  into  the  hell  Vimc/ia, 

158.  He  who  dismantles  or  q>oils  public  roads  fklb  into 
the  hell  JCi/aloAa.  Those  who  hate  Devas  and  Br&hmapas^  those 
who  do  not  worship  preceptors  and  those  who  contaminate 
precious  gems  fall  into  the  hell  JCpniAAaJtffa^ 

159.  He  who  eats  food  keeping  his  wife^  friends  and 
daughter  (starving)  falls  into  the  foul-smelling  hell  Ldldbhakfa. 

160.  A  manufacturer  of  arrows,  a  potter,  a  person  who  takes 
away  gold  coins,  a  professional  physician,  one  who  sets  fire  to 
a  garden — all  these  fall  in  (the  hell  called)  ViioJftsona. 

161 .  He  who  accepts  monetary  gifts  from  evil  men,  he  who 
officiates  as  a  priest  in  the  Yajfia  on  behalf  of  an  ineligible  man 
and  the  man  who  maintains  himself  by  stellar  calculation  fall 
into  the  hell  Adhomukka. 

162.  He  who  sells  milk,  wine,  flesh,  lac,  scents,  juices^ 
gingelly  seeds  and  similar  things  falls  into  the  terrible  hell 
Pifyauaha. 

163.  He  who  captures,  fetters  or  ensnares  fowls,  cats, 
boars,  birds,  deer,  rams  and  sheep  will  also  fiUI  into  the  same 
hell. 

164-166.  Learned  men  say  that  these  (followii^)  sinners 
fall  into  the  hell  Rudkirdndhai  a  Brahmapa  who  rears  goats, 
sheep  and  buffaloes,  handles  wheels  and  banners  or  makes  a 
livelihood  with  the  sale  of  dyes  and  colours  (or  by  staging  plays 
etc.) ;  a  dealer  in  birds;  he  who  performs  Yajftas  on  behalf  of 
all  and  sundry  in  the  village;  he  who  bums  other  men’s  houses; 
he  who  poisons  others;  he  who  makes  a  living  by  pimping  and 
pandering;  he  who  sells  Soma  juice;  a  drunkard;  a  flesh-eater; 
wilful  slayer  of  animals;  a  slayer  of  buffaloes  anddeer;  he  who 
creates  (imaginary)  festivals;  a  tailor  by  profession;  and  one 
who  is  treacherous  to  one’s  friends. 

167.  There  is  no  doubt  in  this  that  those  who  feed  the 
people  sitting  in  the  same  row  with  different  sorts  of  food-stuffs 
(and  thus  are  partial) ,  fall  into  the  terrible  hell  Vidbkuja. 

168.  He  who  invariably  utters  falsehood,  he  who  is  voluble 
in  scolding  others,  he  who  is  inauspicious— these  sinners  fall  into 
the  terrible  hell  named  Mdirdkirtfa^ 


S9.I6»-160 


861 

169*1 70«  Men  who  kill  those  who  offer  libations  of  honey^ 
fall  into  Vaitara^i.  Insane  persons,  persons  of  dejected  mind, 
those  who  are  devoid  of  purity  of  conduct,  persons  of  furious 
temperament,  persons  who  make  others  miserable,  persons 
given  to  deceitful  ways,  fall  into  the  hell  Asipatravana,  Persons 
killing  Urabhras  (rams)  or  hunting  deer,  are  cut,  mutilated, 
dragged  and  pulled  in  a  terrible  manner  in  that  hell. 

171.  Those  who  eat  and  drink  (forbidden  stuffs)  in  a 
hermitage  fall  into  the  hell  Agnijodla,  They  are  eaten  by  steel- 
beaked  crows  of  dark  and  diverse  colours. 

1 72.  Persons  with  the  vow  of  holy  rites  and  celibacy,  break¬ 
ing  those  vows  by  discharging  semen  even  in  dreams,  fall  into 
the  hell  SandaMa. 

173«  Those  who  are  taught  or  ordered  about  by  their  sons 
invariably  fall  into  the  bell  Soabhyana, 

174.  Those  who  perform  actions  contrary  to  the  rules  of 
castes  and  stages  of  life  on  being  urged  by  anger  or  elation,  go 
to  hell  (MVqyc). 

1 75.  The  hot-centred  great  hell  Raurava  is  white  (?)  from 
outside  and  terrible.  The  extremely  terrible  Topab  is  beneath  it. 
It  is  cool-centred. 

176.  Listen  and  understand  these  being  described  in  serial 
order.  Beneath  the  Earth  only  seven  hells  are  mentioned. 

177.  They  are  the  outcome  of  Adharma  (sin).  They  are 
Andkatdmisraka  and  othen.  Raur<wa  is  thefirstamong  them.  Then 
there  is  Mahdraureva, 

178.  Beneath  this  is  the  other  hell  which  is  both  cold  and 
scorching.  This  third  hell  is  KiUtsiUra  which  is  remembered  as 
Mahdhavmdhi^  also. 

179.  The  fourth  hell  is  Apraii^tha^  Avici  is  remembered 
as  the  fifth.  The  next  one  is  Lohapfftba  and  Avidh^a  is  the 
seventh. 

180.  The  fint  hell  is  called  Raurava  because  it  is  very  terrible. 
Although  it  contains  water,  it  is  remembered  as  one  that  scorches. 
Beneath  it  is  the  hell  Tapafu  that  is  terrible,  cold  and  very 
low. 


^mahdhifvividkab  (Bd.  P.v.  181 )  having  great  lerpeots  of  various  kinds. 


Vl^Puri^ 


181.  Biting  serpents  are  said  to  be  in  the  terrible  Kilasdtra. 
Nothii^  can  stay  in  the  hell  Aprati}tk<^.  There  is  a  terrible 
whirling  in  it. 

182.  Avici  is  said  to  be  very  terrible  because  the  sinners  are 
crushed  by  means  of  mechanical  contrivances.  The  hell  Loha 
{Pfftha)  is  still  more  terrible,  because  all  Karmans  are  exhaus¬ 
ted  in  it  (by  experiencing  the  fruit  thereof)  • 

18S.  (Defective  verse)  Though  the  beings  in  the  hell  are 
without  bodies,  the  harassment,  afflictions  and  sufferings  that 
they  undergo  in  the  Avidh^  hell  are  irremediable. 

184.  All  these  hells  are  as  terrible  as  mountains  and  devoid 
of  light  above.  In  all  these  the  misery  due  to  sin  is  very  intense. 

185-186.  These  two  worlds  on  the  top  are  devoid  of  any 
light  whatsoever.  Although  they  are  like  the  other  worlds,  the 
sufferings  in  these  two  worlds  by  means  of  fiery  piles  (?)  are  the 
worst.  They  take  up  bodies  capable  of  experiencing  these  suffer¬ 
ings  as  a  result  of  their  previous  actions.  Intensity  of  suffering 
is  common  to  all  these  worlds. 

187-188.  The  sufferings  of  the  beings  doomed  to  hell  are 
innumerable.  They  undergo  misery.  When  the  sins  have  been 
exhausted,  they  are  born  again  in  the  womb  of  lower  animals 
or  as  Devas.  Oevas  are  stationed  above  and  Narakas  (beings 
doomed  to  hell)  are  stationed  below. 

1 89.  Caused  by  Dharmas  or  Adhamas  they  develop  befitting 
bodies  for  the  purpose  of  experiencing  the  fruits  thereof. 

190.  Devas  see  the  hellish  beings  standing  topsy  turvy 
below  them.  The  hellish  beings  too  see  all  the  Devas  standing 
topsy  turvy. 

191.  There  is  no  distinction  in  Lokiloka  as  to  the  top 
or  bottom  because  these  worlds  have  no  tip  or  root.  They  are 
held  in  position  naturally. 

192.  This  situation,  this  SathjSd  (?  name)  is  natural  to 
Lokaloka  (?) . 

The  Brahma^as  who  were  performing  the  Satra  then  spoke 
to  Ykyu» 

Thi  Sag4S  said  x 

193-194.  Mention  completely  the  number  of  living  beings 


39.195*205 


863 


residing  in  Lokaloka  and  moving  about  in  the  world  of 
existence* 

On  hearing  the  words  of  the  sagesj  M&nita  spoke  these  words. 
Vdyu  saiJ : 

195-19&  O  excellent  ones  among  men,  all  the  creatures 
can  by  no  means  be  entirely  enumerated.^  They  are  beginning* 
less  and  endless.  They  are  jumbled  and  mixed  with  one  another. 
Only  a  general  inference  can  be  made  to  fix  their  number.  The 
number  cannot  be  positively  asserted.  They  are  mentioned  to 
be  numerous.  Even  with  a  divine  vision  they  cannot  be  known. 
How  can  I  with  limited  knowledge  and  ordinary  vision  fix  their 
limit  ? 

197.  Actually  no  question  is  asked  on  what  cannot  be  con* 
ceived  or  known.  Understand  what  has  been  named  and 
numbered  by  Brahmi. 

198.  The  earthly  worms  bom  of  SatAseka  (sprinkling  or 
watering)  etc.  form  about  a  thousandth  part  of  the  number  of 
immobile  beings. 

199.  This  has  been  decisively  arrived  at  that  all  the 
aquatic  creatures  together  come  to  about  a  thousandth  part  of 
the  creatures  bom  of  SarAseka. 

200.  All  the  worldly  birds  should  be  known  as  forming  a 
thousandth  part  of  the  number  of  aquatic  living  beings. 

201.  All  the  animals,  the  quadrupeds,  should  be  known  as 
constituting  a  thousandth  part  of  the  number  of  birds. 

202.  The  bipeds  (men)  in  this  world  should  be  known  as 
constituting  a  thousandth  part  of  all  the  quadrupeds. 

203.  Righteous  men  should  be  known  to  constitute  a  thou* 
sandth  part  of  the  entire  number  of  bipeds. 

204«  Of  the  righteous  men  only  a  thousandth  part  goes  to 
heaven.  Of  those  righteous  men  who  go  to  heaven  only  a  thou¬ 
sandth  part  qualify  themselves  for  absolution  (AfoJkfo) . 

205.  Persons  staying  in  the  abodes  of  torture  are  equal  to 
those  who  go  to  heaven.  Those  wicked  souls  who  fall  into  the 
dark  Haurava  after  death  are  harassed  by  both  chill  and  heat. 

1.  Verses  195*208  give  the  PurSpic  ootioos  about  the  number  of  Jim 
in  eachspedm. 


864 

206*  Th^  fluffer  bitter  pain.  The  bodies  of  those  who 
reach  the  abodes  of  torture  become  benumbecL  Jtauroffa  should 
be  known  as  hot.  Blazing  splendour  and  hot  liquids  flow  there. 

207*  The  Tttffa  hell  is  in  solid  form  and  always  chill.  Good 
and  righteous  people  going  to  heaven  are  very  rare. 

208.  This  fixation  of  number  is  made  by  the  self^born  lord 
I j vara  himself.  Human  calculation  recedes.  Only  the  calculation 
of  Brahmi  decides  (properly). 

TAs  Sag^  said : 

209«210.  Mahabj  Jana,  Tapah,  Satya,  Bhuta,  Bhavya 
andBhava — all  these  worlds  have  been  recounted  by  you.  Please 
mention  precisely  what  their  difference  is  and  what  the  distance 
between  them  is. 

On  hearing  these  words  of  the  si^es  of  sublimated  sexuality, 
Vfiyu,  who  has  seen  the  real  truth  mentioned  these  facts  to 
them. 

Vdjm  said: 

211.  Learned  men  see  that  manifest  through  inference;  the 
Yogins  see  it  direcdy  by  means  of  Yogic  power  and  those  who 
habitually  perform  holy  rites  observe  it  through  Pratydhdra 
(withdrawal  of  physical  senses),  meditation  and  penance. 

212«214.  The  enlightened  ^bbu,  Sanatkumara  and  others 
who  possess  pure  inteUect,  the  Virajas  (those  who  are  free  from 
Raj<^una)  free  from  sorrow,  those  excellent  saintly  men  like 
Brahma  himself  who  are  never  fading  (always)  full  of  delight, 
Yogins  adhering  to  Brahman,  and  the  sages  Valakhilya  and 
others — all  these  have  observed  the  residence  of  the  eternal  lord 
from  close  quarters.  That  residence  cannot  be  conceived  or 
argued  about.  It  makes  good  men  contented.  I  too  have  observ¬ 
ed  it  by  remaining  close  at  bamd. 

215-216.  Since  livara  is  so  subtle  as  the  atom,  he  can 
only  be  conceived  by  learned  men.  The  following  ten  everlast¬ 
ing  attributes  are  always  present  in  Sankara — JiUtna  (perfect 
knowledge),  Vdtrdgya  (detachment),  Aidvaiya  (overlordship  or 
possession  of  mystic  powers) ,  Tapas  (penance),  SaijMtm  (truth¬ 
fulness)  ,  Kfomd  (forgiveness) ,  Dhrti  ( fortitude) ,  DroftTi^ 


39.2 17^228 


885 


{supervision) »  Aimasatkbandha  (contact  with  the  soul)  and 
AdhifpUiAatoa  (the  state  of  being  the  support  of  all) . 

217.  He  is  Vibhu  (all-powerful  and  omnipresent)  •  The  fire 
of  Yogic  power  of  the  Yogins  is  kindled  by  his  blessings.  Assum¬ 
ing  physical  bodies,  he  helps  the  world  of  human  beings. 

218.  The  abode  of  that  eternal  lord  is  imperishablei  fixed 
and  untarnished  by  worldly  chaos.  It  is  the  eighth  (one  beyond 
the  seven  Lokas).  It  is  conceived  by  Miy&  and  the  greatest  of 
aU. 

219.  The  eightfold  Prakfti  and  its  creations  are  created 
by  him  through  M&yi*  Lord  Maheivara  is  MUyin  (Master  or 
possessor  of  M&ya).  The  withdrawal  (annihilation)  of 
Devas  is  done  there  (in  his  abode) . 

220.  Listen  to  and  understand  even  as  I  recount  in  detail 
and  in  the  proper  order.  The  distance  between  Bhurloka  and 
Brahmaloka  is  one  hundred  and  thirty  one  million  five  hundred 
thousand  Yojanas. 

221.  The  space  of  Brahm&pda  above  Brahmaloka  is 
fifteen  million  Yojaoas. 

222-223.  This  is  the  highest  point  that  can  be  reached* 
Beyond  that  no  one  can  go.  The  eternal,  uncountable,  subtle 
Prakrtis  supported  by  mutual  Gu^as  exist  there.  Their  attribute 
is  to  create  the  KfitrajHa  termed  Brahmi  who  makes  them 
function  and  is  present  there. 

224-226.  It  is  in  them  that  all  these  exist:  the  possessor  of 
Prakrti,  the  subtle,  supporting,  the  eternal  one,  the  unproduc¬ 
ed,  great  abode,  the  great  atom,  the  great  one  lying  down,  the 
undying,  the  unim^inable,  unembodied,  the  mental  form,  the 
manifestation,  the  disappearance,  the  maintenance  and  the 
blessing.  Vidhi  (Brahma)  cannot  be  compared  to  anyone  else. 
The  great  livara  is  like  Paramatiu.  With  his  brilliance  he  makes 
this  illuminated.  He  is  beyond  the  darkndss. 

227.  The  golden  egg  that  was  evolved  at  the  outset  as 
At^asargika  (a  relevant  adjunct)  was  very  huge  and  wholly 
circular.  It  was  evolved  out  of  livara. 

228.  The  germination  of  seed  is  from  Ifvara.  Ksetrajfla 
(individual  soul)  is  considered  as  the  seed.  They  speak  of 
^akfti  as  the  Tmi  (the  source  of  the  origin)  and  that  is  of  the 
nature  of  Nariya^a* 


866 


ViyuPufdQa 


229.  The  creator  of  all  the  worlds,  the  noble-souled  Omni* 
present  lord  in  contact  with  Plakiti  creates  Brahmaloka  and 
Brahm&9da  through  his  body,  for  the  purpose  of  the  creation 
and  maintenance  of  the  worlds. 

230«  Beyond  Brahmaloka  and  beneath  the  upper  crust  of 
the  Cosmic  in  between  these  two  is  the  Pura  (city),  his 

divine  abode  Manomaja  (consisting  of  the  mind) 

231 .  That  is  the  ab^e  ^  the  embodied  Ilvara  of  un¬ 
measured  splendour.  The  city  named  Siva  is  there  and  it  is  the 
refuge  of  those  who  are  afraid  of  rebirth. 

232.  O  excellent  Brahma^as,  it  is  full  one  hundred  thou¬ 
sand  Yojaoas  in  extent.  Within,  it  is  as  extensive  as  tlie  sphere 
of  the  Earth. 

233-34.  It  is  surrounded  by  a  massive  gold  rampart  of  solar 
splendour.  It  has  brilliance  of  the  mid-day  Sun  outshining  the 
lustre  of  all  others.  It  has  four  golden  portals  embellished  with 
strii^  of  pearls.  The  enclosures  are  well- construe  ted  with 
bright  golden  adjuncts. 

235.  That  divine  city  (shines  well)  with  the  sounds  of  bells 
reverberating  in  the  sky.  Neither  the  fear  of  death,  nor  distress 
nor  the  exhaustion  of  old  age  finds  a  place  there. 

236.  No  other  city  deserves  to  be  compared  fo  this  city.  It 
extends  to  a  hundred  thousand  Yojanas  to  the  ten  quarters. 

237.  That  city  is  pervaded  by  the  brilliance  of  the  bull- 
bannered  lord  and  so  it  stands  (firm).  The  creation  of  that 
golden  city  is  by  means  of  mental  conception. 

238-240.  The  city  shines  much  with  scattered  diamond 
dust.  In  the  gardens  and  parks  therein,  there  are  divine  lotuses 
which  have  the  lustre  of  the  autumnal  Moon,  which  resemble 
the  rising  Sun,  which  are  half  white  and  half  red  and  which  are 
made  of  gold.  With  their  stalks  having  the  lustre  of  Marakata 
(emerald)  gem  they  are  of  the  rize  of  the  wheels  of  chariots. 
In  fragrance,  beauty  and  tenderness  they  are  unequalled. 

241-242.  Some  lotuses  resemble  the  wings  of  a  bee;  some 
are  golden.  Some  are  half  black  and  half  red.  Their  inner 

1.  Venet  230-100  give  a  poetic  deecription  of  the  dty  of  Siva  and  the 
description  of  the  residents  therein. 


39.243-254 


867 


lurfaces  are  very  tender.  The  lotuses  covering  up  the  whole 
place  seem  to  be  so  many  umbrellas. 

There  arc  seven  great  rivers  there.  Understand  their  names. 

243.  The  foilomx^  are  the  beautiful  rivers  in  that  excellent 
city  :  Var&i  Vare^yi,  Varada>  Var&rha,  Varavaroinl^ 
Varama  and  Varabhadri. 

244.  The  excellent  rivers  contain  water  shinii^  like  split 
jewels.  It  is  mixed  with  the  petals  of  red  and  blue  lotuses. 
Foams  and  whirlpools  add  to  their  beauty. 

243.  Neither  Brahmartis  nor  Devas^  nor  Asuras  nor  Pitrs 
nor  othen  knew  that  city  of  the  inconceivable  lord. 

246.  Only  those  noble-souled  ones  who  perform  meditation 
without  agitation  and  who  have  conquered  their  sense-organs 
by  means  of  good  yogic  power,  see  that  city  of  the  bull-banner¬ 
ed  one. 

247-248.  There  is  a  splendid  golden  palace  in  the  middle 
of  that  excellent  city  of  unequalled  splendour.  It  is  divine  and 
it  resembles  the  great  Meru  mountain.  It  is  enveloped  in  graci¬ 
ous  glory.  It  has  a  thousand  Teet*  (columns) .  It  is  embellished 
all  round  with  incomparable  gems  and  jewels. 

249-254.  Its  splendour  all  round  is  increased  by  means  of 
invaluable  and  incomparable  gems.  It  is  embellished  in  some 
sections  with  crystals,  in  some  sections  with  lunar  stones,  in 
other  sections  with  lapis  lazuli,  in  some  sections  with  shining 
gems  resembling  the  Moon,  in  some  with  brilliant  gems  as 
beautiful  as  the  rising  Sun,  in  others  with  golden  jewels 
refulgent  like  fire,  in  some  sections  with  jewels  shining 
with  silver  lustre,  in  other  sections  with  blue  sapphire  gems  and 
in  some  sections  with  firmly  fixed  diamonds.  It  was  heightened 
in  splendour  by  means  of  brilliant  windows  and  ventilators  of 
various  sizes.  It  is  decorated  mth  festoons  and  flags  shining 
like  the  rays  of  the  Moon.  Sounds  of  golden  bells  reverberate 
in  it*  Joy  and  revelry  are  ever  present  there.  Its  refulgence  is 
heightened  by  the  residences  of  Kinnaras,  which  have  the  shape 
and  lustre  of  the  evening  clouds.  Just  as  the  mountw-lord 
Meru  shines  with  its  golden  peaks,  to  alto  the  palace  shines  with 
shining  water  currents  all  round  abounding  in  golden  flowers. 


Purd^a 


868 

The  whole  city  shines  with  golden  flags  and  banners.  Similarly 
the  lordly  palace  shines  with  its  terraces  and  landing  spots. 

255-257.  In  this  abode  of  the  three-eyed '  lord  th^  is  a 
statue  of  Vasanta  (Spring) .  The  goddesses  Laksm!,  Sri,  Kirti, 
Sobh&  and  Sarasvati  are  present  there  in  physical  bodies  (crea¬ 
ted  through  M&yi)*  These  eternal  goddesses  endowed  with 
beauty  and  fragrance  are  innumer^le  and  of  mutually  depen¬ 
dent  (complementary)  qualities.  They  are  the  ornaments  of  all 
precious  stones  and  source  of  the  origin  of  loveliness  and 
dalliance.  The  highly  blessed  goddesses  divided  theimelves  into 
a  hundred  crores  and  diligently  wait  upon  the  Lord  with  Uma. 

258.  They  have  thousands  of  other  maid-servants  behind 
them,  beautiful  and  endowed  with  splendour  and  glory.  They 
all  have  eyes  like  the  petals  of  lotuses. 

259.  They  rejoice  along  with  the  Ganas  as  huge  as  moun¬ 
tains  and  as  brilliant  as  Are;  they  exhibit  their  extremely  attrac¬ 
tive  amorous  gestures  and  sportive  activities. 

260-264.  Some  are  hunch-backed;  some  are  dwarfish;  some 
have  beautiful  bodies;  some  are  bone-faced;  a  few  are  slender 
like  the  red  variety  of  sugarcane;  some  are  hideous  and  terrible 
with  flat  faces;  some  have  loosely  hanging  bellies;  a  few  have 
short  arms.  Some  have  no  eyes,  some  are  small-footed;  a  few 
have  the  faces  of  the  lord  of  beasts;  others  have  faces  and  bellies 
like  those  of  elephants;  others  are  elephant-faced;  a  few  are 
lion-faced  and  tiger-faced;  some  have  red  eyes;  some  beauties 
have  huge  breasts  and  charming  eyes;  there  are  beautiful  ladies 
with  curly  locks  of  hair  and  comely  eyes;  others  can  assume  any 
form  they  wish.  There  are  women  with  different  dresses  and 
features.  They  are  worthy  of  the  abode  of  the  lord;  they  move 
about  everywhere  within  the  palace.  Lord  Maheivara  of  ten 
arms  sports  therein. 

265-266.  He  lives  with  Nandin  and  the  noble-souled  Gai^s 
of  universal  forms  as  well  as  Rudra-ga^as  of  equal  exploits  and 
liberal-minded  ness.  They  resemble  sons  of  fire.  They  have 
hideous  faces  with  curved  fangs  as  huge  as  the  sacrificial  posts. 
He  is  being  respected  and  diligently  worshipped  by  those  people 
moving  about  in  aerial  chariots. 

267-268.  He  wears  the  garland  of  flowers  of  every  season  on 
his  chest  and  inhales  their  fragrance.  He  is  of  a  dark  complexion 


39«269-279 


869 


like  the  blue  lotus*  His  eyes  are  large,  wide  and  copper-coloured. 
His  hanging  lips  are  a  bit  hideous.  His  sharp  curved  fangs  appear 
to  add  to  his  beauty*  His  eyes  are  turned  upwards.  It  is  impossi¬ 
ble  to  see  him  straight  in  the  face.  He  is  beautifully  clad  in  bark 
garments. 

269-270.  He  stands  with  his  right  arm  (hand)  clasping  the 
lef^  arm  (hand)  and  keeping  both  of  them  clinging  to  his  side-~ 
the  hand  that  has  destroyed  the  enemies  of  Devas  and  has 
never  exhausted  by  fatigue  in  battles.  In  his  left  hand  shines  the 
weapon  Pa^tifa  (a  spear  with  a  sharp  edge).  There  also  shines 
much  his  wonderful  bow  of  ten  colours,  the  twanging  sound  of 
which  is  very  terrible.  There  is  no  other  bow  to  equal  its  strength. 

271.  Again  there  is  hii  Trident  which  has  the  refulgence  of 
lightening.  It  never  fails  in  destroying  enemies.  It  has  the 
most  excessive  splendour  and  it  blaaes  brilliantly. 

272.  The  sword  of  the  noble-souled  lord  of  Devas  is  the  most 
excellent  of  all  shining  objects.  Similarly  does  the  cool-rayed 
Moon  shine  with  its  brilliant  splendour  and  gorgeous  body  like 
the  6ame  of  fire  in  the  sacrificial  altar. 

273.  In  front  of  the  lord  is  the  great  golden  Kamapd^lu 
(water  pot) .  It  is  full  of  water  and  it  shines  splendidly. 

274-275.  The  first  (or  the  bead)  female  doorkeeper  (port¬ 
ress)  of  the  goddess,  named  Vijayi  stands  there  shining  splen¬ 
didly  after  making  obeisance  to  the  lord.  She  is  a  blessed  lady 
with  four  arms.  She  is  very  popular.  She  wears  whitish  garments. 
A  sword  hangs  from  her  (waist).  There  is  a  great  pearl 
necklace  covering  her  chest*  She  shines  like  another  goddess  9ri. 
She  is  unequalled  and  great. 

276.  There  are  other  ladies  behind  her.  They  are  accom¬ 
panied  by  groups  of  celestial  ladies.  With  their  newly  wed  and 
beloved  husbands  they  worship  Sankara. 

277.  Groups  of  Gandharvas  endowed  with  all  characteristic 
features  and  accompanied  by  all  musical  instruments,  sing  songs 
of  prayer  before  the  lord  of  Devas. 

278.  The  Lord  of  bulls,  of  broad  chest  and  great  height, 
shines  there.  He  has  the  lustre  of  the  autumnal  cloud.  He  re¬ 
joices  much  in  his  (lord's)  house. 

279.  Then  there  is  Skanda,  his  son,  of  unmeasured  prowess. 


VOyuPtirafa 


870 

He  wean  red  garments.  He  is  glorious  and  his  eyes  resemble  the 
petals  of  an  excellent  lotua«  He  stays  there  with  his  foUowm. 

280-281.  He  has  four  followers  (attendants),  vis«  Sikha, 
VK&kha,  Naigameya  and  Asfav&n  (?)  'Riey  are  devoid  of 
vicious  indulgence.  They  are  not  cruel*  They  are  engaged  in 
protecting  the  subjects.  The  deity  having  peacock  for  his  vehicle 
(i.e.  Skanda)  shines  in  their  company.  He  has  great  prowess. 
There,  the  lord  having  faces  all  round  (i.e*  iix*faced)  sports  with 
big  serpents  as  his  toys. 

282-283*  Those  kings  who  make  gifts  of  gold  to  leading 
scholars,  those  householder  Brihmanai  who  live  at  home  ex¬ 
pounding  Brahman,  those  who  perform  their  Vedic  study  and 
penance  in  secret  and  those  who  maintain  themselves  by  glean- 
ing  (grains)  ~ali  these  become  the  honoured  councillors  of  the 
lord  of  Devas. 

284.  Many  Manvantaras  expire  and  new  Manvantaras 
come  (yet  the  assembly  of  the  lord  stays  as  it  was  before).  May 
the  excellent  and  wonderful  feats  of  Bhava,  the  lord  of  Devas, 
be  heard. 

285.  Tigers  are  his  follo%vers*  They  have  great  speed  and  the 
lustre  of  gold.  They  are  created  by  the  lord  himself  and  they 
move  about  as  they  please. 

286.  They  are  like  Death  unto  god  of  Death*  They  subdue 
the  arrogance  of  Yama.  Who  will  (adequately)  mention  the 
innumerable  superhuman  faculties  and  excellences  (of  the 
Lord)? 

287.  Henceforth,  I  shall  recount  again  the  excellent  and 
wonderful  activities  of  Bhava,  pursued  sympathetically  for  the 
sake  of  blessing  the  living  beings*  Listen  and  understand. 

288-292.  (Defective  verse)  There  are  a  thousand  living 
( beings)  created  through  M&ya  and  fettered  to  eight  pillars  in 
that  abode  of  the  three-eyed  lord.  They  have  the  excellent 
features  of  the  lords  of  the  quarters  by  having  these  attributes: 

1.  They  are  as  huge  as  the  Mandara  mountain  and  shine 
like  it. 

2.  In  strength  and  prowess  they  are  unequalled* 

3.  They  have  the  colour  of  pearl  necklace,  Kunda  flower 
and  the  Moon* 


S9«293-300  871 

4«  They  roar  like  the  rumbling  cloud  (illuminated  by) 
lightnii^. 

5.  They  wear  crystalline  jewels  on  their  heads* 

6.  They  have  cloud-like  dark  garments  (covering  their 
bodies). 

7.  They  are  marked  with  Snvatta  mark  in  Vajra  (adamant). 

8.  Their  fingers(toes)  with  theirclaws  resemble  the  Trident 
and  hence  they  are  termed  Sulapa^n  (armed  with 
trident). 

To  the  excellent  shining  columns  of  that  important  palace 
they  are  severally  tied  by  means  of  fiery  fetten.  Thus  they  live 
there  very  happily. 

Appreciating  these  words  of  V&yu,  the  surprised  sages»  the 
saints  residing  in  the  Naimi^a  forest  said: 

293.  omnipresent  lord^  O  holy  lordi  the  vital  air  of  all 
living  beings^  who  are  those  great  beings  in  the  forms  of  lions? 
Where  are  they  bom?  Of  what  forms  are  they? 

294.  What  is  their  guilt  for  which  those  lions  have  been 
severally  bound  by  means  of  Vaiiv&nara  (fiery)  fetters  by  the 
lord  of  all  living  ^ings?’* 

295.  On  hearing  their  words  V&yu  spoke  thus  i  **Those 
thousand  lions  are  the  embodied  forms  of  the  Furies  of  the  lord 
and  created  by  the  noble- soulcd  Ifvara  aAer  removing  them 
from  his  own  body.  They  are  given  the  physical  forms  of  lions. 

296-297.  After  granting  the  boon  of  freedom  from  fear  to  all 
living  beings^  they  had  been  fettered  formerly  by  means  of  the 
fiery  bonds.  When  (dispute  arose  with  Dak^a)  regarding  his 
share  in  the  Yajfia,  that  Yajfia  of  Bak^a  was  completely  destro¬ 
yed  sportfully  by  a  single  lion  that  had  been  released  from 
bondage  at  the  behest  of  Ifvara  after  knowing  that  the  wrath 
of  the  goddess  has  been  incurred  (by  him). 

298.  At  that  time  the  great  goddess  MahkkAli  came  out  of 
Mahadevi  (goddess  Uma) .  the  eternal  wimess  of  all  rites,  aloi^ 
with  the  Bhutas  (goblins)  as  her  followers. 

299.  That  fury  is  the  holy  lord  Vlrabhadra  who  perma¬ 
nently  resides  in  Rudra's  abode.  He  is  of  incomprehensible 
form.  He  is  the  wiper  (remover)  of  the  anger  of  the  goddess. 

300.  Thus  the  palace,  the  incomparable  residence  of  the 


872  FOjm  Fttrifa 

lord  of  Surai,  the  highest  secret  of  all»  has  been  recounted  by 
me  to  you. 

301-303.  Henceforth  I  shall  describe  the  other  residents  and 
objects  of  that  city  which  is  the  most  excellent  of  all  beautiful 
cities.  It  is  situated  in  the  atmospheric  r^ions.  There  are  many 
other  palaces  decorated  wonderfully  with  various  kinds  of  gems. 
There  are  many  flags  there  heightening  their  beauty.  The 
palaces  are  richly  endowed  with  things  fulfilling  all  desires. 
They  are  beautified  splendidly  by  parks  and  gardens.  Some  are 
made  of  silver  and  some  of  gold.  Some  are  like  the  evening 
clouds  (red)  and  some  resemble  the  Kailisa  mountain  (white). 
All  are  lofty. 

304.  In  those  excellent  palaces,  the  followers  of  Bhava  who 
perform  good  rites,  rejoice  enjoying  various  means  of  pleasures 
liked  by  them  such  as  sweet  melody  etc. 

305.  Different  kinds  of  auspicious  mythological  stories  are 
recounted  aloi^;  with  the  chanting  sounds  of  Vedas.  The  sounds 
of  songs  and  musical  instruments  are  heard  all  round;  chantings 
of  prayers  (echo  everywhere). 

306.  These  sounds  are  incomparable.  All  of  them  mingled 
together  (are  very  pleasing).  These  and  similar  things  occur  on 
the  tops  of  those  palaces. 

307.  The  palaces  are  auspicious  and  built  of  gold.  Each  of 
them  has  a  thousand  columns.  It  is  embellished  ail  round  with 
excellent  and  incomparable  gems  and  jewels. 

308.  They  are  beautified  with  crystals  like  the  Moon,  with 
brilliant  lapis  lazuli  stones  and  pieces  of  gold  resembling  the 
rising  Sun  and  having  the  lustre  of  fire.** 

309.  On  hearing  this,  the  ascetics  residing  in  the  Naimi^ 
forest  expressed  loudly  (their  wonder)  •  Their  doubts  being 
aroused,  they  spoke  these  words  to  the  Wind-god. 

Thi  Sag^  said  : 

4 

310.  Who  are  thoie  noble^ouled  followers  of  Bhava 
there  ?  Indeed  they  are  the  most  worthy  of  being  blessed.  Well 
do  they  rejoice  in  that  excellent  city. 


39.31 1-321 


Having  heard  the  worda  of  the  sagea,  Vdjm  spoke : 

311-314.  O  sages  t  May  this  be  heard.^  Only  the  follow¬ 
ing  have  att^ed  (residence  in  the  same  repon— that 

of  9iva)  with  Rudra,  the  eternal  and  never  changing  regi<m« 
They  alone  attain  identity  of  fcMins  and  excellent  fixtures  with 
Bhava.  They  are  the  people  who  are  devoted  to  the  lord  of 
Devas.  They  are  of  bashful  temperament  (ashamed  to  do  ainiul 
things).  They  are  powerfo!  but  not  covetous.  They  are  vigorous 
but  have  perfect  self-control.  They  observe  the  middle  cotuse 
in  taking  food  and  other  activities.  They  have  conquered  their 
sense  organs  and  they  revel  in  their  own  souls  (meditatii^  on 
souls).  They  are  far  above  the  influence  of  Doandvas  (mutually 
opposed  pairs  like  pleasure-pain)  .They  are  gentle  and  extremely 
enthusiastic.  They  are  devoid  of  jealousy  and  enmity.  They 
love  all  living  beings.  They  are  quiescenti  unagitated  and  they 
do  not  exert  themselves  (in  worldly  pursuits.)  Their  conscience 
is  pure.  They  are  pure  in  mind,  speech  and  activity.  With 
single-minded  attention  they  seek  refuge  in  Maheivara. 

315-318.  Those  who  live  in  fliva’t  palace  are  all  universal- 
formed  with  fire-like  faces.  They  have  kaparda  (matted  hair) . 
Their  throats  are  blue  in  colour,  the  neck  white  and  the  fangs 
very  sharp.  They  are  thre^eyed  with  the  crescent  Moon  form¬ 
ing  their  coronet.  Matted  hair  is  worn  by  them.  All  of  them  are 
heroic.  They  have  ten  arms  and  have  tl^  fi-agrance  of  lotus.  All 
of  them  resemble  the  midday  Sun  in  brilliance  and  wear  yellow 
garments;  all  of  them  are  armed  with  PinAka  bows.  They  ride 
white  bulls.  They  are  endowed  with  glory;  they  wear  ear-rings; 
they  are  embellished  with  pearl  necklaces;  in  brilliance  they 
are  superior  to  Devas;  they  are  omniscient  and  observers  of 
everything. 

*  319.  They  divide  themselves  into  various  forms  and  enjoy 
various  sports  and  pleasures,  rare  for  others.  They  are  devoid 
of  death  and  old  age. 

320.  They  can  go  anywhere  they  please.  They  are  great 
Siddhas  themselves  and  they  are  further  enlightened  by  other 
Siddhas.  Thus  the  attendants  of  the  eleven  Rudras  of  great  souls 
are  crores  and  crores. 

1.  APuricic  way  of  descril^g  (be  Solpk4i4,  Somifold  and  Soripod 
types  of  liberation. 


m 


Pur^ 


32  L  With  theoii  Mahelvara,  the  noble-souled  lord  of 
Deva9>  the  beloved  lover  of  Pirvati,  rejoices  there  fully  sympa- 
tbedc  with  his  devotees. 

S22«  I  do  not  find  any  difference  between  those  Rudraa  and 
the  noble-eouled  Bhava*  I  am  speaking  the  truth  unto  you* 

323*324.  The  lordly  Mataiiiva  (Wind-god)  thus  concluded 
the  holy  story*  All  the  sages  resplendent  like  the  SuiX|  considered 
that  they  attained  great  blessing  on  hearing  the  extremely 
meritorious  story  of  the  three-eyed  Lord.  They  were  delighted 
much.  Honouring  him  suitably  they  spoke  thus  to  Vayu  of 
great  strength, 

Th0  Sagis  said  : 

325-326.  O  highly  exalted  and  fortunate  Wind-God  I  The 
excellent  holy  Aupasargika  eighth  abode  of  livara  and  its  magni¬ 
tude  has  been  recounted  precisely  to  us  by  you.  It  is  redolent 
with  the  excellent  fragrance  of  the  great  Atman. 

327.  The  grandeur  of  Mahideva  is  difficult  to  be  under¬ 
stood  even  by  Suras.  Due  to  the  greatness  belonging  to  him¬ 
self,  the  lord  of  unmeasured  splendour  has  thousand  Ganas. 

328-329.  Non-delusion  is  effected  by  him  in  his  devotees 
in  order  to  bless  them.  In  the  abode  of  the  lord  of  Devas,  the 
VibklUi  (excellence,  grandeur)  that  assumes  a  cosmic  form 
shines  very  well.  It  is  unequalled  and  is  served  (attended) 
by  Brahmalak^mi  (the  glory  of  Brahma  or  Brahman)  itself.  It 
appears  like  the  Moon  that  pervades  the  sky  with  the  moonlight. 

330.  You  have  also  mentioned  everything  regarding  the 
noble-souled  Rudras  who  are  equal  to  NCahadeva.  All  these 
stories  came  out  of  your  mouth  like  nectar. 

331.  Without  drinking  it  devoutly,  of  what  me  are  our 
excellent  holy  rites  ?  There  is  nothing  (?)  which  is  not  known 
by  us.  O  Prana  (life-breath),  O  excellent  one  among  Devas, 
it  behoves  you  to  answer  our  question  precisely. 

^ia  said  : 

332.  That  lord  (Wind-god)  spoke:  What  else  shall  I 
esq^lain  again  ?  O  sages  of  excellent  rites,  what  should  be  re* 
eonnted  by  me  ?  I  shall  tell  it. 


39.335*343 


875 


Thi  Sag4S  said  : 

333*335.  Please  f>recuely  recount  to  us  what,  at  the  time 
of  AbhiitasathpUna^  will  be  the  state  of  the  Adityai  who  stand 
by  as  attendants  ( near  the  lord) »  the  lions  who  had  been  the 
outcome  of  the  lord^s  furious  outburst,  the  Vaiivanara  groups  of 
Bhutas  ( goblins),  the  dgers  and  other  followers  about  whom  you 
have  mentioned  along  with  the  groups  lions  and  tigers.  What 
will  be  their  state  as  well  as  the  state  of  those  who  have  attained 
Siddhi  at  the  time  of  the  terrible  dissolution,  when  all  livit^ 
beings  are  destroyed  ? 

^  (On  hearing  it)  Mdtariivd  {theWind-god)  said  : 

336*338.  This  is  the  greatest  and  (secret)  reality.^  I  shall 
recount  it.  Please  listen,  Those  who  have  gone  there  before,  the 
sons  of  Brahmi,  viz.  Sanaka,  Sananda  and  San&tana,  Vodhu, 
Kapila,  Asuri  of  great  fame,  Sage  Paficalikha  and  others  have 
known  the  existence  oflivara,  the  unmanifest  source  of  origin 
(and  attained  salvation) . 

339*341 .  Thereafteri  when  much  time  elapses,  at  the  dose 
of  theKalpas,  when  even  the  great  BAfifos  (Elements)  are  destro¬ 
yed  and  utter  annihilation  takes  place^  many  crores  of 
Rudraga^as  delightedly  (meditate  on)  Maheivara,  closely 
adhere  to  eight  types  of  truth  (7) ,  desist  from  enjoying  melody 
and  other  objects  of  pleasure,  enter  all  the  living  beings  through 
their  brilliance  accompanied  by  perfect  knowlet^e  and  attain 
the  unagitated  Vaihgyosap^a  (die  abode  of  firmament )  in  order 
to  bless  the  living  beings  sympathetically* 

342.  The  noble-souled  ones  attain  to  Mahefvara  of  the 
subtle  nature  of  ParamaQU  (Atom)  there.  They  cross  the  river 
of  births  and  deaths  of  great  eddies  and  whirlpools  of  terrific 
nature. 

343.  Then  they  see  5arva  and  the, great  Brahman*  They 
are  accompanied  by  those  seven  goddesses  who  have  been 
glorified  (before)  • 

1.  Here  is  a  descriptioa  what  h^pens  to  the  rendenti  of  5iva^s  dty 
afier  They  eater  l*ord  5iva  who  is  a  subtle  Pafomdew.  The 

concept  of&va  as  aa  atom  shows  Vaife|ika  ioflueoce.  Historical  S&Akhya 
teachers  like  KapUs,  Xsuri,  Paficalikha  are  eleeated  to  the  exalted  potidoa 
of  sages  like  SaoatkuiiUM,  Sanaka. 


876 


Purd^a 


344*^345.  Lord  Sankara  dra%^  within  him  the  thousand 
lions,  the  Adityaa,  the  Vaiivknara  groups  of  BhOiast  the  tigers 
and  his  own  followers  (the  Budraga^).  Thereafter  he  draws 
these  seven  Lokaa  that  rush  (towards  him)  and  the  five  Mahi- 
bhfitas  (the  great  elements). 

34^347.  Accompanied  byVi^Qu,  he  makes  (the  worlds) 
united  (sustained)  and  annihilates.  He  is  Rudra  who  is  of  the 
nature  of  Siman  andYajur  (Vedas).  He  is  warped  and  woofed 
both  within  and  without,  de^ively.  OBr&hma^ai,  he  is  the  only 
lord  and  leader.  He  is  beginningless.  He  is  the  annihilator. 

348«349«  Then  all  those  sages  (of  Naimisa  forest)  refulgent 
like  the  Sun  consecrated  the  sacred  fire  in  their  own  hermitage. 
They  thereafter  devoted  themselves  to  the  worship  of  Maheivara 
by  means  of  the  purity  of  their  inner  soul  mentally,  verbally  and 
physically. 

350*  They  were  merciful  towards  all  living  beings  and 
engaged  themselves  in  observing  fasts  and  holy  rites.  All  their 
doubts  were  cleared  and  the  unequalled  divine  Yoga  was  attain* 
ed  by  them. 

351.  After  attaining  these  by  means  of  the  mind  endowed 
with  perfect  knowledge  and  their  greatest  devotion,  the  Sdtckya 
formof  salvation  was  attained  by  them.  It  is  the  eternal  and 
unchanging  region. 

352-355.  He  who  reguisirly  reads  this  hymn  of  prayer 
narrated  by  Vayu,  whether  a  Brihma^a,  a  Kfatriya  or  a 
Vaiiya  but  observing  his  duties,  attains  Sdlokya  with  Rudra.  He 
will  be  endowed  with  devotion  and  be  free  from  ailments.  A 
Sudra  who  is  not  addicted  to  wine,  who  is  a  devotee  of  Bhava 
and  who  has  conquered  bis  sense  organs,  remains  till  the  time  of 
dissolution  without  obstacles  and  attains  the  leadership  of 
Ganas  or  the  abode  coveted  by  all.  If  he  is  a  wine  addict,  he 
rejoices  with  those  groups  of  Bhutas  who  are  drunksutb.  Being 
worshipped  on  the  earth  he  will  be  the  granter  of  boons  to  men. 
Thus  the  Wind-god  the  excellent  lord  spoke  these  words. 


40*N7 


877 


CHAPTER  FORTVi 
Dissolution  of  the  Umvirst 

Siita  soldi 

I«  I  shall  now  recount  the  process  of  dissolution  (PrafyOhdra) 
at  the  end  of  Para  (one  full  day  and  night)  of  the  s^-b^n  god 
Brahmi,  when  the  period  of  existence  of  the  Lord  comes  to  a 
close. 

2.  During  the  process  of  Pratjfdhdro^  Ifvara  swallows  the  un¬ 
manifest  ones*  entirely  and  clearly  (vjaktam)  in  exactly  the 
same  manner  as  he  does  the  subtle  ones. 

3-4.  *This  activity  of  re-absorption  of  creations  begins  even 
as  the  Kalpas  have  not  fully  expired.  This  terribly  critical  period 
sets  in  at  ^e  closing  period  of  the  tenure  of  the  office  of  the 
Manu  named  Druma  (?)  towards  the  end  of  Kaliyuga  then. 
The  entire  creation  merges  in  the  apratyakfa  (the  invisible 
i.e.  the  unmanifest).  It  is  called  annihilation. 

5-7.  When  that  period  of  *great  washing  off’  begins  to 
function,*  when  the  withdrawal  of  the  creation  is  imminenti 
elements  gross  and  subtle  {BhSHas  and  Tanmdtra^  are  destroyed* 
All  e volutes  beginning  with  Mahat  and  ending  with  ViUta  be- 


1.  This  chapter  corraponds  to  Bd.F.II1.4.S  Only  verse  numbers  are 
referred. 

2.  The  word  in  the  line:  grasatr  coofusioo* 

If  emended  as  as  in  Bd.P.v*2  the  verse  means  Muring  the  procen 

at  PratsOhdra,  the  Ai^fakta  (the  Unmaalfest  one)  iwallowt  the  Vyckta  (the 
Manifest  one,  the  whole  universe)  entirely  in  the  same  way  as  Ifvara  created 
the  manifest  univene  which  »  very  subtle.' 

3.  For  Parc^  tad  omMpdMdm  Bd.P.3  reads  PtfMa-dbystw- 

sampOrari  It  means  *  (when  the  extremely  drendAil  destruction)  of 
everything  beginning  vrith  molecules  of  two  atoms  and  ending  with  para 
(greatest  thing)  is  Inuninent  it  is  called  Sa/hhOra^ 

4.  Verses  ^$3  state  the  proceai  ofinvt^utlon  at  Tattoos.  Thus  at  the  end 
of  a  Kalpa,  the  element  Pftkot  h  swallowed  by  water;  Prithvt  loses  its  special 
quality,  via.  smell  and  merges  in  water*  The  procen  of  ‘Swallowing* 
a  lower  element  by  the  higher  element  may  be  tummarited  as  fbUows: 

The  element  P^vl  merges  in— ^  >Water  » Fire— Wind'  » 
Ether  -  ■  >  BhCUdi(Buddhi )  >  Mahat  ^Oupa^Stmya 

(equilibrium  of  Quoat— Sattva,  Rajas  axM  Tamai)  or  Prahrti. 


878 


Purity 


T. 


come  annihilated.  AH  this  happens  naturally.  At  die  outset  die 
vast  sheet  of  waters  absorbs  the  quality  of  smell  ofthe  (element) 
earth.  The  earth  devoid  of  smell  becomes  dissolved.  When  thus 
the  quality  of  smell  of  the  earth  is  dissolved,  the  earth  assumes 
the  form  of  water. 

8-9.  The  waters  of  great  velocity  and  loud  report  spread 
throughout  the  entire  universe  and  stay  by  awaiting  destruction 
( ?)  •  The  special  attribute  of  the  waters  *taste)  becomes 

merged  in  Jyoiis  (fiery  element).  At  the  destruction  of  the 
subtle  element  Rasa,  the  waters  too  get  dissolved. 

10.  When  Rasa  is  absorbed  by  T^as  (fiery  element)^ 
the  waters  become  merged  in  it.  When  the  waters  are  thus 
absorbedi  only  T$jas  is  seen  all  round. 

11.  The  fire  element,  pervading  everywhere,  absorbs  the 
waters.  The  entire  universe  is  gradually  filled  up  with  flames  of 
fire. 

12.  When  this  (entire  universe)  is  filled  with  flames,  the 

flames  spread  on  all  sides,  above  and  below.  V&yu  (the  wind 
element)  swallows  up  Rx^a  (colour  or  form) ,  the  luminous 
quality  of  (the  fire  element).  The  entire  fire  element 

merges  in  the  cosmic  air,  like  the  flame  of  lamp  in  the  great 
wind. 

13.  When  the  Rfipa  TanmAtra  (the  essential  quality)  is 
dissolved^  VibMvasu  ( the  element  of  Fire)  becomes  bereft  of 

(colour).  Tsjas  then  subsides.  The  great  Tsjas  is  then 
blown  off  by  V&yu. 

14.  When  the  entire  universe  thus  becomes  bereft  of 
light,  the  element  of  Tijas  having  merged  in  Vayu,  the  element 
of  Vayu  resorts  to  the  source  of  its  c^igin. 

15.  It  shakes  everything  above,  below  and  the  sides  in  all 
the  ten  quarters.  Then  Akdia  (Ether)  absorbs  the  quality  of 
Vayu,  viz.  Sparia  (Touch) , 

16.  The  element  of  Vayu  subsides  and  the  open  finnament 
alone  remains^  sons  colour,  sasis  taste,  sasis  touch  and  sans  smell. 
It  has  ho  physical  body  as  well. 

1^.  The  great  circular  hole,  the  Ak&ia,  characterised  by 
ill  quality  of  sound,  shines  filling  everything  with  its  sounds. 

18.  The  ^tfids-characterised  AkUa  envelops  everything  and 


remains  (steady)*  ThtuBhSUdi  (the  Cosmic  Ego)  absorbs  the 
the  qiulity  of  sotind  belonging  to  it* 

19*  Then  the  Bbiitas  and  the  sense-organs  get  merged  simul¬ 
taneously  in  Bk&tadu  BhUiddi  is  of  the  form  of  Cosmic  Ego* 
It  is  said  to  be  of  the  quality  of  Tamas. 

20*  The  principle  AfdAtf t  characterised  h^Bnddki  (the  cos¬ 
mic  intellect)  absorbs  BhUiadi.  The  Makat  principle  is  to  be 
known  to  be  of  the  form  of  Sarftkalpa  (conception)  and  Adhyaoa^ 
siya  (determination,  will). 

21*  Philosophers  who  ponder  over  reality  call  it  by 
the  r/uonymt  Buddhi  (Intellect),  iifcear  (Mind),  LiAga  (the  Sym¬ 
bol)  ,  Mahat  (Great)  and  Akfara  (the  Imperishable)  * 

22.  When  all  the  Bhutas  become  dissolved,  the  Gu^as 
remain  in  equilibrium,  the  entire  universe  becomes  dark  and 
gloomy;  the  groups  of  causes  of  the  syorlds  remain  merged  in 
Atman. 

23-24*  The  creation  becomes  re-absorbed  in  Prakrti;  neither 
the  beg  liming  nor  the  end  of  anything  U  perceived;  nothing  is 
seen;  no  name  or  form  remains;  even  those  endowed  with  perfect 
knowledge  do  not  become  aware  of  anything;  no  going  in  or 
coming  out  is  observed* 

25-27*  Such  a  situation  is  inferred  and  conceived  mentally 
and  the  following  account  is  given.  All  objects  become  established 
in  that  existent-cum-non-eacistent  (sad-asad^dtmika)  ettrnAl  great 
cause.  This  automotive  activity  cannot  be  pointed  out  through 
any  specific  cause.  The  dissolution  of  the  Seven  Prakrtis  occurs 
in  this  manner*  At  the  time  of  the  reabsorption  of  creation, 
they  enter  into  one  another*  That  by  which  the  globular  Egg 
is  enveloped  becomes  dissolved. 

28.  The  seven  continena,  the  seven  oceans,  the  seven 
worlds  and  the  sevenmountmns  are  enveloped  by  the  coverii^ 
of  water.  This  Udakdoara^  (water-covesing)  becomes  merged 
injyotis  (Fire)  * 

29.  (Defective  verse)  The  Taijasa  (fiery)  Avaratfa  (covering) 
is  absorbed  by  the  Wind  dement.  The  cover  of  the  wind  element 
is  absorbed  by  the  element  Ether. 

30*  BhUtSdi  (the  Cosmic  Ego)  absorbs  the  Ethereal  Avara$a. 
Mahat  characterised  by  cosmic  intelligence  (Buddhi)  absorbs 
BhaUdi. 


880 


VtyuPtir^ 


31«  The  Unmanifese  absorbs  the  principle  of  MaAat. 
Thereafter  the  Gu^as  attain  equilibrium.  This  annihilation  and 
extension  of  creation  is  pursued  through  the  unmanifest  Prakrti 
stationed  in  Brahman. 

32.  It  creates  and  absorbs  the  Vikiras  (created  objects)  for 
the  sake  of  creation  and  annihilation.  The  Siddbas  who  are  en* 
dowed  with  perfect  knowledge  have  all  instruments  in  the  activity 
of  annihiladon  (?) 

33.  Attaining  a  quick  motion  in  these  abodes  due  to  their 
self-control,  these  KfiMjMas  become  bereft  of  Karate  (sense 
organs  and  organs  of  activity)  • 

34.  They  call  the  Avyakla  (the  Unmanifest)  by  the  term 
k^itra  and  Brahma  (or  Brahman)  is  called  Kfitrajlia^  Their 
union  is  beginningless  but  is  caused  by  S^dhamya  (similarity 
of  characterisdea)  and  Vaidharmya  (dissimilarity  of  charac* 
teristics)  • 

35.  OBribmaQat,  it  is  thus  that  one  should  know  with 

regard  to  all  (creations)  and  By  the  knowledge 

of  the  Kfetras  separately  and  severally,  a  (man  with 

the  knowledge  of  Brahman)  should  be  known. 

36.  The  state  of  being  the  object  of  knowledge  {Vifayatva)9^Tid 
of  not  being  so  (Arnfayatw)  are  proclaimed  (as  the  characterise 
tics)  of  Kfetra  and  KfetrcjHa.  Brahma  should  be  known  as 
Aoifoya  (not  object  of  knowledge,  the  knower)  and  Kfetra  is 
call^  Visaya  (object  of  knowledge)*. 

37.  JT/drj  is  presided  over  by  Kfetn^fla  and  so  is  said  to 
be  for  his  sake.  Since  the  bodies  are  many,  the  ^arlrin  ( the  embo¬ 
died  soul)  is  remembered  as  many. 

38.  These  soub  are  stationed  without  any  arrangement 
(a^Skat)  and  are  unmized  (a-sakkardt)  like  luminaries.  Since 
there  is  the  perception  of  happiness  and  sorrow  severally  in  the 


*The  teat  in  V&.F.  condradieti  the  Ut  line  of  the  verse.  It  runs  thus  : 
Brakmd  tu  Pif0o  kfiirm  uovlf  *Br»hma  should  be  known  as 

Vifaya  (object of  knowledge)  and  Kfetrs  if  called  Aviiaya  (iioa*oldect» 
knovw). 

Bd.  P.  V.  S02  gives  correct  reading :  BrafmA  tesiftpe  JMgfp 
kfttrttm  If  iu  9ifcy^  be  emeaded  ash^esif^)^  and  the 

avagraha  after  is  dropped,  the  VA.P.  teat  will  not  be  a  contradiction. 


40^9-50 


881 

different  bodies,  the  multipUcity  of  Puruyas  should  be  known  by 
OM  who  is  wite« 

S9»  When  the  withdrawal  of  those  different  beings  sets  in^ 
that  is  brought  about  naturally  after  the  lapse  of  a  great  deal 
of  period. 

40.  At  that  time  the  passion  for  sustenance  of  the  worlds  of 
the  self-bom  god  Brahmi  recedes,  along  with  all  the  residents 
Brahmins  heaven. 

41.  Then  the  attachment  for  the  sustenance  of  those  resU 
ding  (in  meditation}  in  Atman  recedes  and  they  begin  to  see 
defects  therein  of  their  contem(>oraries. 

42-43.  Then  their  (sense  of)  detachment  is  aroused  and 
it  dispels  their  Atma^vdda  (egotism).  Bkojya  (object  of 
enjoyment)  and  (the  state  of  being  the  enjoyer) — 

through  this  they  comprehend  Sathsira.  They  have  been 
K$€trajlUis  due  to  their  vision  of  their  separateness.  Then  the 
residents  of  Brahmaloka  (see  the  multiplicity  of  individuals  but) 
they  are  beyond  the  cause  of  ^akfti. 

44.  Now  they  dwelt  in  the  Atman  alone.  They  are  quiescent 
and  endowed  with  (true)  vision.  AU  of  them  are  pure,  free  from 
blemish  and  in  conscious  or  imconscious  stage. 

45.  It  is  proclaimed  that  they  attain  complete  absolution 
there  itself  and  they  do  not  return  to  Sanuara  since  they  are 
devoid  of  Gu^  (state  of  nirgw^atva)  and  the  sense  of  identity 
with  the  body  {mrdimatva). 

46-47.  Thus  the  process  of  dissolution  by  the  Self^bora 
Brahmi  through  Prakrti  has  been  recounted.  In  this  Prasarhyama 
(final  curbing  and  restraint)  the  Kara^  (organs  of  activity)  of 
all  living  beings  differ.  Thxis  is  the  cuibii^  of  the  Tattvas 
(Principles)  along  with  that  of  theffcrc^as.  This  Taitvaprasarhyama 
is  remembered  as  capable  of  repedtion. 

SUta  said ; 

48-50.  Dharma  and  Adharma,  penance,  perfect  knowledge, 
the  auspicious,  the  inaxispicious,  truth,  falsehood,  superiority, 
inferiority,  happiness,  sorrow,  likes,  dislikes — all  these  are  mere 
attributes  of  one  who  has  gone*(i.e.  who  has  attained  salvation)* 

*PrapM^rthm  in  Bd.  P.  v.  26  *curre&t  ia  the  worldly  oditence*  is  logicrily 
a  better  readiag . 


882 


njii  Purina 


Whatwer  is  meritorious  and  sinful,  auspicious  and  inauspicious 
is  regarded  as  the  nature  of  Gu^as  of  the  (spiritually)  wise 
who  are  devoid  of  (attachment  to)  sense  organs — all  merits  and 
demerits  are  stabilised  in  Pralcfti.  It  is  the  Prakrti  which  is  the 
source  of  origin.  (Merit  and  demerit)  are  deposited  in  the 
nature  of  embodied  beings. 

51.  The  merits  and  demerits  of  living  beings  that  have  been 
stabilised  in  Prakrti,  are  declared  to  lie  unmanifested.  The  same 
merits  and  demerits  (in  different  situations)  join  thb  body  or 
the  next. 

52.  Dharma  and  Adhanna  (virtue  and  sin)  are  merely 
two  qualities  of  creatures.  They  flourish  in  the  form  of  the  body 
along  with  the  organs  of  sense  (JCara^)  of  creatures. 

53.  The  sentient  Gu^as  (i.e.  Sattva  etc.)  presided  over 
by  Kfetrajfla  get  dissolved  during  the  primary  creation  and 
secondary  creation  in  the  world.  The  creatures  come  into  con* 
tact  or  get  separated  from  their  JTafcnor  (organs  of  activity)  and 
they  move  about  (i.e.  undergo  worldly  existence  and  suffer- 

ing)- 

54.  The  (proclivities,  causes  of  activities)  are  three¬ 
fold  according  as  they  are  of  the  nature  of  Sattva,  Rajas  or 
Tamas.  They  function  on  beii^  presided  over  (and  activised) 
by  Puruya. 

55.  The  (attribute)  Sattva  of  the  divine  nature  is  conducive 
to  attain  the  upper  part  (heaven)  and  Tamas  is  of  the 
nature  of  (falling  off)  to  the  lower  part  (hell) .  The  activiser 
of  the  two,  in  the  middle  is  Rajas  which  moves  about  repeated¬ 
ly  in  this  world. 

56-57.  In  all  the  worlds,  within  all  the  living  beings  these 
three  types  of  emotional  activities  are  the  oripnal  causes  of  the 
nature  of  Guoas.  One  who  knows  need  not  entertain  much 
doubt  about  this.  Urged  by(?}  Avidya,^  activities  are 
pursued  by  men  and  they  derive  meritorious,  sinful  or  non¬ 
committal  goals  through  these  three. 

1.  Venet  56-72  diteun  the  aadtrc  of  Avidyi,  three  bondages  created  by 
it,  the  defects  tudi  ai  JUge  (Attachoieot),  Dai^c  (Hatred)  reniltiog  from  it 
and  leading  to  hell  (67-69)  and  birth  in  lower  spoelet  (76-72). 


40.58-67 


86$ 


58.  All  living  creature!  do  not  understand  the  reality  due 
to  their  being  overwhelmed  by  Tamas.  But  not  realising  the 
Tattva  (Reality) ,  they  are  fettered  in  three  ways. 

59.  He  is  bound  by  three  types  of  bondages; 

(i)  Prdkrta  Bandka  (bondage  of  Prakrti) 

(ii)  VaxkOrika  Bandka  (bondage  of  its  evolutes) 

(ill)  Bondage  called  Dakfif^  (a  technical  term  in  theS&^khya 
System  for  the  third  bondage). 

And  being  bound  thus ;  the  creature  turns  round  and  round 
here  (in  Saihsiri) . 

60-61.  These  are  the  three  types  of  bondage  due  to  ignora* 
nee.  The  following  are  the  usual  defects  (due  to  them) — ^ing 
p>ermanence  in  what  is  transcient;  perception  of  happiness  in 
what  actually  is  the  cause  of  misery;  feeling  of  possessiveness  in 
what  does  not  belong  to  one;  and  decisive  knowledge  of  purity 
in  what  is  impure.  Those  who  have  these  mental  defects  have 
the  defects  of  knowledge  through  misapprehension. 

62.  The  cessation  of  attachment  {JUga)  and  hatred 

is  called  knowledge.  Ignorance  is  the  root-cause  of  Tamas. 
Rajas  has  two-fold  Karman  (the  auspicious  and  inauspicious) 
as  its  result.  The  resumption  of  the  physical  body  once  again 
is  the  result  of  Karmas.  Thus  great  misery  begins  to  function. 

63.  The  various  sins  committed  by  ears,  eyes,  skin^  tongue 
and  nose  are  the  causes  of  the  rebirth  and  misery. 

64.  A  man  with  a  craving  is  said  to  be  a  Bdla  (an  imma¬ 
ture  or  ignorant  person) .  As  a  result  of  actions  committed  by 
himself,  the  individual  soul  goes  round  and  round  there  only  (in 
the  Saihsara)  like  the  bull  yoked  to  the  oil-pressing  machine. 

65.  Hence  it  is  taught  that  gross  ignorance  is  the  cause  of 
all  miseries.  Realising  that  it  is  the  sole  enemy  one  shall  endea¬ 
vour  to  acquire  knowledge. 

66.  One  renounces  {tyajaU*)  evcrythfiigby  perfect  know¬ 
ledge.  As  a  result  of  renunciation  the  intellect  becomes  detached; 
one  becomes  pure  as  a  result  of  detachment;  the  pure  one  be¬ 
comes  liberated  by  means  of  Sattva  Guttn. 

67.  Henceforth  I  shall  explain  Rdga  (passion  and  attach¬ 
ment)  that  overwhelms  living  lyings.  Due  to  this  attachment, 

^Retdlng  in  A.  io  our  test  is  rather  eonfuung. 


884  V^Purdfa 

all  living  beings  become  indulgent  in  worldly  pleasures  in  spite 
of  themselves » 

68*  Attachment  is  undesirable  and  calamitous  inasmuch 
as  it  yields  pleasure,  sufferings  and  dejection*  Suffering  is  due 
to  the  misery  that  befalb  (when  the  desired  olject  is  not  acquir* 
ed)  and  the  recollection  of  (previously  experienced)  happiness* 

69*  It  is  the  attachment  to  worldly  pleasures  that  b  declar¬ 
ed  as  the  cause  of  births*  In  all  the  physical  worlds  beginning 
with  Brahmi  and  ending  with  the  immobile  beings,  this  attach* 
ment  alone  u  the  cause  of  birth  and  that  is  the  result  of 
ignorance.  Hence  one  shall  avoid  ignorance. 

70*71 .  If  one  does  not  accept  the  words  of  sages  as  authority 
nor  has  r^rd  for  good  manners  as  practised  by  virtuous  and 
respectable  men;  if  one  is  opposed  to  the  discipline  of  (four) 
castes  and  stages  in  life;  andtfa  man  b  antagonbtic  to  wise  men 
and  scriptural  injunctions— that  it  the  cause  of  rebirth  in  lower 
species. 

72*  There  are  various  kinds  of  tortures  in  remaining  (or 
taking  birth)  among  the  rix  kinds  of  lower  animals.  There  b 
complete  obstruction  in  the  matter  of  cause  and  object  of 
knowledge  (7). 

73.  The  entire  noo*attainment  of  AUvarya  (^ory  and  pros* 
perity)  is  in  the  nature  of  PratighUta  (obstacle)  (to  the  desires)  * 
Thus  the  four  types  of  Timasa  proclivities  of  the  livii^  beings 
etc.  have  been  recounted* 

74*75.  The  mind  can  be  considered  mainly  S&ttvic  it  the 
Sattvic  traits  are  evinced.  Taitvas  can  be  comprehended  only 
after  viewing  them  in  accordance  with  reality.  And  the  know* 
ledge  of  the  multiplicity  (?  difference)  of  Sattva  Gu^a  and 
K^etrajfias  is  the  perfect  knowledge.  It  b  said  that  Yoga  origi¬ 
nates  from  perfect  knowledge* 

76.  Bondage  is  for  one  who  b  fettered  to  it  (the  worldy 
exbtcnce)  and  liberation  b  for  one  who  is  released  therefrom* 
When  theA^orldly  existence  recedes,  the  liberated  soul  b  releas* 
ed  even  from  the  Lihga  8arira  (the  subtle  frame  or  body  con- 
siiting  of  Pranas,  subtle  sense  organs  etc.)* 

77*  Devoid  of  any  Sarhb^ndha  (contact)  and  in  a  state  of 
being  unconscious  (of  the  extemsJ  world),  he  abides  in  hb  own 


40.78-87 


885 


self.  Even  while  remaining  within  hb  own  self,  he  b  touched 
(contaminated)  by  diversity  and  multiplicity. 

78.  Thus  the  characteristic  features  of  perfect  knowledge 
and  liberation  have  been  succinctly  explained.  That  liberation 
u  declared  by  those  who  see  truth. 

79-80*  The  first  one  b  the  separation  from  worldly  impres¬ 
sions,  thanks  to  perfect  knowledge.  The  second  one  b  due  to 
destruction  of  passion  (passionate  attstchment)  whereby  the 
liberated  soul  attains  Kmvalyap  because  even  the  LiAga  (Sarira 
(the  subtle  inner  body)  b  absent.  Through  Kaivafya  he  becomes 
J/iraSJana  (unsullied).  By  not  being  sullied,  he  becomes  Suddha 
(pure).  In  thb  state  of  liberation  there  b  no  guide  or  leader* 
The  third  type  of  cause  of  liberation  b  by  the  destruction  of 
(thirst)  (for  enjoyment) . 

8N82.  The  liberated  soub  do  not  experience  mbery  caused 
by  the  obstacle  to  the  worldly  objects  of  desired  melody  etc* 
These  eight  things  caused  by  Pralqti  adhere  to  the  KfitrajAds. 
They  are  called  Gu^s  and  Mdlras  (the  three  Cw^  and  the 
five  Tanmdtras), 

Henceforth  1  shall  explain  detachment,  arbing  firom  the  sight 
of  faults. 

83*  One  should  practice  non-hatred  and  absence  of  attach¬ 
ment  to  the  five  (objects  of  sensual  enjoyment)  of 

both  divine  and  human  nature,  after  seeing  the  defects  therein. 

84.  One  should  avoid  heart-bum,  pleasure  and  dejectedness* 
By  having  recourse  to  non-attachment  the  embodied  soul  be¬ 
comes  free  from  Mamatva  (the  feeling  of  my-ness  i.e.  possetsive- 
ness). 

85*  He  should  decide  in  his  mind  (intellect)  that  (the 
worldly  existence)  is  non-etemal,  inauspicious  and  conducive 
to  misery.  Then  with  ^ttvic  traits  be  should  perform  pure 
aedvities.  * 

SM7.  When  the  attachment  to  %vorldly  objects  of  pleasure 
becomes  firm,  he  becomes  able  to  see  defects  and  blemishes 
entirely. 

At  the  time  of  the  journey^  (i.e.  at  the  time  of  death)  the 
heat  in  the  body  becomes  virulent  due  to  conditioning  causes 

1.  Venes  87-92  describe  the  proce«  of  deatb. 


B86 


e.g.  Dc/as  (disorderly  state  of  the  buosours  in  the  body  produced 
by  causes  dependent  on  particular  circumstances)  • 


68.  Due  to  the  cbtUinesSi  the  virulently  excited  V&yu  (life 
breath)  pierces  the  centres  of  Pr&Ms  (vital  airs}^  cuts  off 
vulnerable  parts  of  the  body  and  rises  up. 

89.  It  is  the  breath  stationed  in  the  abodes  of  vital  airs  of 
all  living  beings.  By  contraction^  Jfi&na  (consciousness  and 
knowledge)  becomes  covered  up  and  the  activities  are  enshroud¬ 
ed. 


90.  The  Jiva  (the  individual  soul)  being  bereaved  of  the 
supporting  body«  is  induced  by  its  own  actions  committed  be¬ 
fore.  It  then  dislodges  the  Pr&pas  from  the  eight  limbs. 

91.  (In  the  end)  abandoning  the  body»  it  ceases  to  have 
breathing  activity.  Being  abandoned  by  the  vital  ain  thus^  the 
person  is  called  *^Dead*\ 

92.  This  is  something  like  this.  When  someone  holds  the 
glow-worm  in  his  hand  and  goes  about  here  and  there  he  too  is 
visible  in  its  light.  He  who  kills  it,  though  a  carrier  (of  the 
glow-worm)  ceases  to  be  a  carrier  (leader) . 

93-94.  The  third,  vis.  the  elimination  of  thirst  or  covetous¬ 
ness  is  spoken  as  the  characteristic  of  liberation.  It  is  the  (result 
of)  observation  of  defects  in  five  objects  of  sensual  pleasure  such 
as  sound  and  others.  Absence  of  hatred,  absence  of  intense 
attachment,  avoidance  of  pleasure  and  agony  (about  objects  of 
pleasure) — these  are  the  dissolutions  of  the  eight  Prakrtis 
(primary  essences  which  evolved  the  whole  Universe). 

95.  All  the  eight  Prakftis  mentioned  before  should  be 
known  in  order,  beginning  with  A^akta  (the  Unmanifcst) 
and  ending  with  BhStas  (Elements).  These  are  called  the 
dissolution  of  the  Prakrtis, 

96.  Those  who  follow  the  rigorous  discipline  of  the  four 
castes  and  stages  of  life  and  those  who  do  not  go  contrary  to 
the  injunctions  of  the  scriptures  are  called  Sif fas  {the  eminent 
and  the  distinguished) .  The  practice  amd  adherence  of  the 
discipline  of  Vartuis  and  Airamas  is  conducive  to  the  attain* 
ment  of  the  abodes  of  the  Devas  (i.e.  Heaven). 

97.  The  eight  groups  of  Devas  (and  their  abodes)  are  those 


40.98-107 


887 


beginning  with  Brahmi  and  ending  with  PIi&caa»  The 
Siddhjbi  conducive  to  AUvciya  (lupematural  powers) » 
(minuteness)  etc.  are  the  causes  eight  in  number. 

98-102.  Those  who  stay  in  those  abodes  do  not  experience 
the  misery  due  to  the  obstade  to  the  achievement  of  such 
desired  objects  as  sweet  melody  etc.  These  are  the  ei^t  Pr&krta 
forms  in  order.  They  come  into  contact  with  the  KfitrajHas^ 
They  are  of  the  nature  of  the  three  Gu^as  and  five  Tanmatr^* 
People  do  not  see  with  their  eyes  the  clouds  distinct  from  the 
water  therein  in  the  course  of  the  rainy  season.  (Similarly 
ordinary  people  do  not  see  the  individual  soul.  They  can  only 
infer.) 

The  Siddhas,  however  see  it  like  this  by  means  of  their 
divine  vision.  The  soul  takes  all  kinds  of  bodies  such  as  those  of 
Brahmaoas  and  those  of  Cii^alas*. 

Thus  he  moves  about  in  a  certain  order  up  and  down  as 
well  as  in  the  sides  (as  a  result  of  his  own  Karmans).  He  is 
called  by  these  various  names,  all  synonymic,  via.  Jtva  (indivi¬ 
dual  soul),  Prdfjta  (vital  mr),  JUAga  (the  symbol), 

(cause).  In  both  manifest  and  unmanifest  (worlds)  be  is  an 
authority. 

103.  After  realising  categories  ending  with  Atyakta  (the 
Unmanifest)  and  what  is  presided  over  by  the  KfitrajnOf  he  be¬ 
comes  pure  and  becomes  liberated  through  knowledge. 

104-106.  When  the  truth  is  realized,  the  principle  that  was 
obscure  comes  out.  But  in  different  bodies  that  have  completely 
ceased  to  exist,  the  Kdra^  ( the  individual  soul)  differs  from  the 
Avjakia  dJid  the  One  who  is  completely  liberated  from  the 

body  in  the  form  of  Gunas  as  well  as  Prfipa  etc*  does  not  take 
up  another  body,  just  as  sprout  never  comes  out  when  seed  is 
burnt. 

107.  Due  to  knowledge  he  becomes  bnlightened  and  pure 
of  the  four  Daids  (condidons) .  He  follows  the  Prakfti.  They 
say  that  Prakrti  is  the  reality,  while  Vikdres  (its  evolutes)  are 
unreal. 

*Tbe  resding  ioduiH  SoinapdnaAa  is  obscure.  B<L  P.  v.  78  reads  frftHHatttf 
fditiupMni  ^Siddbas  see..*evea  ai  they  take  food,  drinks,  enter  different 
yonis/ 


888 


108.  ItA  Sad-hhioa  (appareat?  existence)  should  be  known 
as  (unreal) .  SadhhSta  ( State  of  being  existent)  is  called 
Satya  (Reality).  Sa^a  (Brahman)  is  without  name  and  form.^ 
They  called  Kfetrajfl^P  as  possessing  name  and  form. 

109.  Because  he  knows  ( thoroughly)  th^Kfitra  (the  6eld 
i.e.  the  body)  he  is  called  KfHrajita,  K^trajHa  is  auspicious 
became  of  the  perception  of 

1 10.  Kfitrajlla  is  remembered.  Hence  it  is  mentioned  as 
Kfitra  by  those  who  know  it.  Kfiirn  is  seen  to  be  without  intelli¬ 
gence  but  Kfitrajfia  is  always  endowed  with  intelligence. 

1 1 1.  Those  who  know  Kftira  call  it  so  because  of  its 

(destruction)  I  (being  created) »  Kfataird^a  (protecdon 

from  wound),  Bhojyatva  (state  of  being  what  is  eaten  or 
enjoyed)  and  Vifayaiva  (state  of  being  the  object). 

112.  All  categories  beginning  with  Mahat,  ending  with 
VUifa  possess  variety  of  forms  and  they  are  characterised  as 
Vikdra  (an  evolute,  change).  Hence  they  are  p>eculiar  {Vila^ 
kfa^) .  Hence  verily  Aksara  (imperishable)  approaches  the 

(perishable)^. 

113.  That  evolute  (  Vikdra)  is  called  K^ara  as  it  wastes  away 
and  perishes.^ 

114.  Happiness,  misery,  delusion  are  called  Bhojya  (that 
which  is  to  be  experienced) .  It  is  Vi/qya  (object  of  enjoyment) 
as  it  is  insentient.  That  which  has  the  opposite  quality*  is  remem¬ 
bered  as  Vibhu. 

115.  It  is  called  Aksara  (imperishable)  for  the  following 
reasons  :  It  does  not  waste  away  {nak^iyate).  It  does  not 
perish  (no  kfamti) .  Evolutes  spread  from  it.  It  is  not  diminished. 


1.  The  compound:  is  ipHt  in  Bd.  P.  as 

andmardpm  and  KfttrcjdA, 

2.  Verses  10^130.  A  desultory  diseusKon  ofiTfrtrajila.  It  inddentally 

eaplains  the  terms  sadhhAoa,  kptrat  kara^  urpufa  and  otliers. 

3.  SAf^r^form  4tfa  m  in  the  teat  is  obscure.  Hence  the  reading  in  Bd 

P.  V.90,  kforam  tH  «/  is  accepted. 

4.  A  adds  as  v.  114  (ch.l02  in  A,  p.417)  here»  It  is  untraced  in  ourText. 
*Tbat  which  protects  man  from  SaihsSra  and  bells  and  also  from  (misery  is 
eaOod  Kietra.' 

S«  icdki  dharmavibkuk  smrtab  in  the  text  is  obecurt.  Hence  tad  tidkannd 
aiUmb  anr^  ic  corresponding  Bd.  P.  v.9$  is  accepted. 


40.116.127 


889 

116.  Since  it  lies  in  Pur  {puri  <tmU4U)  it  is  called  Purufa« 
The  term  Punisa  is  derived  also  as  follows:  Since  it  is  Pwapra* 
tyayika — that  is  the  Pra^ayi  (the  kaower)  of  the  Puru  (Body) » 
it  is  called  so. 

1 1 7*1 18.  He  is  other  than  what  can  be  called  existent,  non* 
existent^  bound,  liberated*  mobile,  stable.  As  he  is  devoid  of 
any  cause,  he  cannot  be  specified  (by  any  of  these  terms).^ 

1 19.  Since  he  is  very  pure,  he  cannot  be  indicated  specifi¬ 
cally.  Since  he  is  full  of  bliss,  it  is  of  equal  vision.  Since  he  is 
the  cause  (AVinff)  Atmapraiy^a  (the  knowledge  of  Atman),  no 
causal  expression  applies  to  it*  (?)  It  can  be  imagined  or  in¬ 
ferred.  Those  who  perceive  thus  are  not  deluded. 

120.  When  he  sees  the  knower  who  is  quiescent  in  regard 
to  all  objects,  who  is  of  the  nature  of  Vision,  and  who  is  the 
only  one  to  be  pointed  out  among  the  visible  and  invisible 
objects,  his  emancipation  (uplift)  takes  place. 

121-122.  After  having  realised  this  great  Being,  the  perfect 
knower  attains  quiescence  (calmness) .  He,  the  perfect  knower, 
does  not  see  the  separateness  in  the  effect,  cause,  the  physical 
objects  of  intellect  etc.,  that  is  in  contactor  severed,  and  him  who 
is  dead  or  alive.* 

123.  The  causal  Atman  controls  that  Atman  (the  individual 
soul)  by  means  of  his  own  self.  He  abides  in  the  Prakrti,  in  its 
cause  and  in  his  own  Atman. 

124-125.  He  exists.  He  does  not  exist.  He  is  he  or  he  is 
another.  He  is  here  or  he  is  hereafter.  He  has  oneness  or 
separateness.  He  isK^trajfia  or  Porusa.  He  possesses  Atman  or 
he  is  devoid  of  Atman.  He  is  sentient  or  non*sentient.  He  is  a 
doer  or  non-doer.  He  is  the  enjoyer  or  he  is  only  the  enjoyed. 

126.  On  realizing  the  unsullied  K^etrajfia,  there  is  no 
further  return  to  Sariisara.  It  is  called  Avdiya  (inexpressibe )  be¬ 
cause  it  cannot  be  described  by  means  of  dogic  or  by  ai^uments 
it  cannot  be  grasped. 

127.  It  is  (called)  Apratarkya  (that  which  cannot  be  argued 
about)  because  it  cannot  be  conceived.  After  attaining  that 

1.  Bd.P.  V.  90  reads:  JtUidfliaiuawmJUaft  'He  is  a  knower,  devoid  of 
ignorance*.  A  better  read^g. 

2.  Bd.  P.  V.  98  reads  njSnM  'not  deficient  and  not  caused^ 

^p  ontaneoui*. 

3.  Some  lines  in  the  text  mixed  up. 


890  Vltyu  Purdffa 

principle  along  with  the  mind,  he  (the  loul)  does  not  become 
attached  (to  other  objects) . 

]28«130.  When  the  Ksetrajfta  »  fttt  from  Gupas,  when  it 
is  pure,  quiescent,  unsullied,  exham  ted,  devoid  of  both  happi* 
ness  and  misery,  when  it  is  checked  and  attains  calmness  and 
when  it  becomes  Mrdtmaka  (devoid  of  ego  ?) ,  there  is  neither 
Vd^aiva  (state  of  being  expressed)  nor  Avd^aiva  (the  state 
of  not  being  expressed)  (?)  These  two,  annihilation 
and  creation  are  manifest  and  unmanifest.  Puruia  creates  and 
swallows  (the  entire  world) .  Everything  functions  again  with 
the  K^etrajtta  presiding  over. 

131.  At  its  end,  it  consciously  resorts  to  the  Adkiffhdna 
(substratum) .  Their  mutual  contact  is  known  as  being  brought 
about  by  SddharmyaBud  Vaidharmya  (similarity  and  dissimilarity). 
The  S<»hyoga  (contact)  of  the  great  Puruya  is  beginningless.* 

132.  As  long  as  creation  and  subsidiary  creation  last 
Prakrti  keeps  Purufa  restrained  and  stays;  At  the  outset 
it  functions  unintelligcntly  but  in  favour  of  it.  Its  function  is 
for  the  sake  of  Puru|a. 

133.  This  creation  and  dissolution  are  effected  by  Pradh&na 
as  well  as  by  If  vara.  But  it  is  beginningless  and  endless. 
Prakrti  approaches  the  Universe  even  while  terriiying  it  with 
the  feeling  of  identification. 

134.  Thus  the  third  creation  of  Prakrti  characterised  by 
Hiiu  (cause)  has  been  recounted.  One  who  strictly  adheres  to 
it  becomes  liberated  as  mentioned  by  poets  (seers) . 

1 35.  Thus  three  types  of  dbsolution  have  been  recounted 
to  you  in  detail  as  well  as  in  proper  order.  What  shall  I  explain 
further? 


*AA«r  ilighcly  correctiog  obvious  mitfskn,  with  the  help  of  fid.  P.  109. 


41.1-8 


CHAPTER  FORTYONE* 
JUmattM  of  tki  Cosmio  Egg 


891 


TAo  Sagej  said : 

1-4.  O  Suta»  a  great  narrative  has  been  recounted  by 
Your  Holiness.^  You  have  narrated  the  wonderful  deeds  of  all 
subjects  along  with  Manus,  of  Devas  along  with  sages,  of  PitrSi 
Gandharvaa,  Bhutas  (goblins),  Piiacas  (ghosts),  serpents, 
Rik^asas,  Daityas,  Dioavas,  Yak^as  and  birds.  Their  Vidhi- 
supported  decision  of  their  Dhartnas  and  their  excellent  and  line 
births  have  been  narrated  in  wonderful  stories.  Being  narrated 
to  us  in  your  sweet  voice  (or  in  charmingly  polished  words), 
O  son  of  Suta,  it  rendered  pleasure  to  our  ears  and  minds  for 
ever  till  the  end  of  the  creation  of  living  beings. 

5.  After  having  thus  propitiated  and  honoured  Suta,  all 
the  great  sages,  the  performers  of  the  Satra  (sacrifice)  asked  him 
about  the  process  of  creative  function.* 

8-7.  highly  intelligent  Suta,  how  does  creation  re¬ 
appear?  To  xis  who  ask  you,  please  narrate  bow  the  creation 
begins  again,  when  the  bonds  have  dissolved^  when  all  the 
Gunas  have  attained  the  state  of  equilibrium,  when  everything 
is  enveloped  in  darkness,  when  the  groups  of  Vikdras  (created 
beings)  have  become  inactive  and  stationed  in  the  unnsanifest 
Atman  and  when  all  the  K^etrajfias  have  attained 
(identity)  with  Brahman.’’ 

8.  On  being  thus  requested,  Suta  Lomahariapa  again  began 
to  narrate  the  process  of  creation. 

"This  chapter  correapoads  to  Dd.P.  3.4.4.  References  are  to  verse  nunbers 
therein.  , 

1.  The  speech  of  sagei  ibowi  that  this  mun  be  the  last  chapter.  They 

have  duly  honoured  Sflta.  They  performed  AvMttha  bath  and  went  to 
heaven  (42)  •  The  review  of  the  aatenu,  FhalaSntti  and  the  genealogy  of 
teacheit  who  down  the  text  of  this  PurSoa^^  these  confirm  the 

above  conclusion. 

2.  DUioiutloft  of  the  Universe  and  its  recreadoo  form  an  important 

characteristic  (f.abeas)  o(  a  Puripa.  As  the  topic  ot  recreadon  of  the 
Brahm&ods  was  not  properly  dealt  In  previous  dtapteti,  it  is  takcA  here  to 
fulfil  the  eriterioo. 


V3yu  Purdffa 


892 

9»  shall  recount  to  you  how  the  creation  functions 
(again).  The  order  of  the  creation  should  be  known  (to  occur) 
as  (it  took  place)  before. 

10.  I  shall  mention  what  is  seen  and  what  can  be  inferred. 
I  shall  mention  cogent  arguments.  From  it  (the  principle  of 
creative  function),  all  words  recede  without  reaching  it  along 
with  the  mind  (Le.  the  mind  cannot  conceive  it,  the  words 
cannot  express  it). 

11.  Just  as  the  unmanifest  is  invisible  and  incomprehensi¬ 
ble,  (the  objects  of  creation  too)  are  invisible  and  incomprehen¬ 
sible.  When  the  ViJtdras  (evolutes)  become  dissolved  they  are 
seen  nowhere.  The  Gupas  attain  equilibrium  and  the  created 
things  recede. 

12.  Pradh&na  stands  on  a  similar  footing  with  Puru^as.  The 
Dharmas  and  the  Adharmas  of  living  beings  too  merge  in 

(the  Unmanifest). 

13.  Their  Dharma  of  the  nature  of  Sattva  gets  settled  in 
the  Gut^a  of  Sattva,  while  Adharma  of  the  nature  of  Tamas 
(darkness)  abides  in  the  Guna  Tamas. 

14.  These  two  Gunas  are  devoid  of  distinction  when  the 
Gunas  are  in  the  state  of  equilibrium.  In  al!  the  functions  of 
Pradh&na  the  activities  will  be  backed  by  the  intellect. 

]  5.  The  K^etrajfla  will  preside  over  those  Gu^as  without 
the  (intermediary)  intellect.  Thus  the  Pura  (physical  body) 
will  be  attained  through  AiAimdaa  (the  act  of  identiiicatton) . 

16.  When  it  becomes  necessary  to  function  both^  the 
Kyetra  and  K^etrajfta  begin  to  interact  mutually;  •they  become 
united  together  in  the  relationship  of  Bhojya  (that  which  has  to 
be  enjoyed)  and  Bhoktf  (theeojoyer) . 

17.  The  only  refuge  for  them  is  the  Avyakta.  Stabilised 
in  the  state  of  equilibrium,  the  group  of  Gu^as  become 
presided  over  by  the  K^trajfta  (at  the  time  of  the  banning  of 
creation)  and  then  their  equilibrium  is  upset. 

18.  Then  both  K^tra  and  K^etrajfia  reach  the  state  of 

1.  After  describing  th«  itace  of  (BquUibrium  of  all  Gu^as), 

vv.  16ff.  deKiibe  how  that  staU  gets  disturbed  and  how  the  ev^ucion 
(creatioti)  of  the  Universe  takes  plaee.  The  influence  of  Ssekbyas  is 
obvious  in  the  description  of  evohitloo  and  involution  of  the  Univeise. 


41A^2B 


893 


lyakta  (oaaiiifestation}  •  Sattva  (Gu^a)  presided  over  by 
Kfletrajfta  will  produce  ViUra  (evolutes) . 

19.  The  twentyfour  principles  of  the  nature  of  Guimu 
beginning  with  Mahal  and  ending  with  Viieia  (which  are  called 
Vik&ras)  attain  the  Kfetrajha,  Pradbkna  and  Purufa. 

20.  Then  in  the  Brahmi^d^  (the  Cosmic  Egg)  I^vara  will 
be  bom  (manifest)  first.  He  will  be  the  lord  of  all  living  beings^ 
of  the  entire  knowable  universe.  He  is  Siva. 

2 1 .  He  is  the  overlord  of  all  liberated  souls.  He  is  the  great 
Brahmi  of  the  nature  of  Brahman.  He  is  the  primordial  lord 
and  it  is  said  that  his  manifestation  is  ibr  the  sake  of  blessing 
Pradhina. 

22.  K^etra  and  K^etrajfta  are  self*bom  and  beginning¬ 
less.  They  are  remembered  as  subtle.  Their  \mwn  isbcginningless. 
They  are  aware  of  all  K$etras. 

23.  They  are  joined  together  without  the  intermediation 
of  intellect  (Abuddhiparvakam)  like  Mafaka  (mosquito)  and 
Udumbara  tree.  They  are  stationed  beginninglessly  and  in* 
conceivably  like  water  and  fish. 

24.  The  creation  functions  again  as  it  had  functioned  before. 
The  Ajfia  (non-knowing)  Prakrti  transforms  itself  into  the 
universe  functioning  through  its  Gupasi  viz.  Rajas,  Sattva  and 
Tamas. 

25.  At  the  time  of  the  functioning  (of  Prakrti)  the 
Ksetrajfia  human  beings  are  overwhelmed  by  Rajas  GuQa 
and  attain  the  (benefit  of)  the  principles  of  Mahat,  Ahamkara 
etc.  ending  with  Viieia  and  the  sense  organs.  Then  the  Gu^as 
reach  their  end  (?) 

26.  God  Brahma  is  of  truthful  conception.  While  he  was 

meditating  on  the  Sat^  the  Gut^as  Rajas,  Sattva  and  Tamas 
though  mutually  dissimilar  became  manifest  as  caused  by  the 
Sat  ( the  existent) .  * 

27.  K^traj&as  (knowers  of  the  K$etra  or  body)  are  ever 
produced  both  at  the  b^inning  and  at  the  end.  AbhimOmns 
(Atmans  vfho  identify  themselves)  become  bom  with  instruments 
of  actions  readily  achieved. 

28.  All  beings  are  produced  from  the  Avfokia  (Unmanifest) 
at  the  outset  itself,  who  had  been  Sadhakas  (spiritual  aspirants) 
or  non-S&dhakas  (?) 


FA}>tt  PwrO^ 


894 

29«  All  of  them  undergoing  the  process  of  worldly  existence 
along  with  their  SthMas  (abodes)  and  Prakaroffos  (contexts?) , 
attain  their  efiects  and  are  bom  and  again. 

30.  Dbarma  and  Adhanna  are  solely  of  the  nature  of 
quality.  They  b^in  (give  rise  to)  each  other  through  boons  ud 
blessings. 

Sl«  All  are  equal  for  the  purpose  of  creation.  It  is  at  the 
beginning  of  creation  that  they  undergo  transformation.  The 
Gu^as  rush  to  him  and  hence  it  is  liked  by  him. 

32-33.  The  Ksetrajfias  attain  again  and  again  only  those 
qualities  which  they  had  in  the  previous  creation.  Being  created 
again  and  again  they  attain  only  them.  Qualities  of  violent  or 
non-violent  temperament »  softness  or  cruelty^  virtuousness  or 
sinful  nature,  truthfulness  or  falsehood — had  already  been 
conceived  by  them  (in  the  former  creation) ;  they  attain  them 
again  and  hence  they  appeal  to  them. 

34.  It  is  through  Gu^as  that  the  multiplicity  and  diversity 
in  the  great  Bbutas  (elements),  in  the  sense-objects  and  in 
physical  forms  as  well  as  the  separation  of  living  beings  take 
place. 

35.  Thus  I  have  recoimted  briefly  to  you  the  subsequent 
creation.  Now  1  shall  briefly  recount  the  birth  (manifestation) 
ofBrahm&.^ 

36.  From  that  At^yakta  (unmanifest)  cause  which  is  eternal 

one  and  of  thenature  of  Sat  and  (existence  and  non-existence) 

Maheivara  (the  great  Lord)  is  bom  through  Pradhana  and 
Purufa. 

37.  With  the  appellation  ^Brah1n&^  he  becomes  the  evolver. 
He  creates  the  worlds  once  again  of  the  nature  of  (ne.  characteri¬ 
sed  by)  Abhim^  (referring  all  objects  to  the  self)  and  Gui^ 
(Sattva  etc.). 

38.  Ahamkara  (Cosmic  Ego)  is  bom  o£  Mahat  (the 
cosmic  intellect)  and  Bhutas  are  bom  of  it  (Ahaihkflra) . 


1 .  Sau  narrates  the  recreation  <A  the  Ucuvenc  by  bringing  in  Purigic 
doticslike  Mahelvara  and  Brahmi  and  syntbcixiing  the  SA6khya  and 
Purlnic  tccouDti. 


4LS9-47 


895 


BbStas  and  Indriyas  (aenae  organ! )  are  bom  simnltan* 
eously  from  the  Atman*  The  difierent  living  beii^  are  bom 
fromBhOtas  (elements)* 

It  is  thus  that  the  creation  begins  to  function. 

39*  The  ramifications  of  these  are  extensive*  I  have  re* 
counted  to  you  in  accordance  with  my  intellect  and  in  the 
manner  I  have  heard  it  formerly*  Know  them  in  the  same 
manner*’* 

40.  The  sages  living  in  the  Naimifa  forest  heard  the  story  of 
the  origin^  maintenance  and  desQuction  of  the  worlds  and  then 
finished  the  holy  ablution  of  Apothrfha  in  the  Satra.  They 
became  pure  and  attained  the  meritorious  world*^ 

41.  In  the  same  manner,  you  worship  duly  Devat&s  (deities) 
etc.,  take  the  valedictory  bath  (Avabkftha)  after  the  sacrifice 
and  become  pure.  At  the  end  of, life  be  contented  (that  you 
have  done  your  duty),  abandon  bodies,  attain  the  meritorious 
world  and  proceed  (to  enjoy)  as  you  please* 

42.  All  the  residents  of  the  Naimisa  forest,  the  performers 
of  the  Saira  went  to  heaven  after  taking  the  ablution,  Avabkftha 
on  the  conclusion  of  the  sacrifice* 

43.  O  excellent  Brahma^a,  in  the  same  manner  you  will 
also  go  to  heaven  at  the  end  of  your  life  after  performing  the 
various  kinds  of  sacrifices  and  taking  the  Avabhrtha  bath  in  the 
end. 

44-45*  The  Wind-god  himself  who  is  engaged  in  the  wel&re 
of  the  worlds,  has  narrated  this  popular  PurUm  consisting  of  the 
four  Padas*  (sections) ,  viz*  Prakriyd  is  the  first  section,  where 
the  story  is  taken  up  (the  other  sections  are)  AnufaAga,  Upodgkata 
and  Upasathkdra, 

46-47*  He  narrated  it  to  the  sages  after  going  to  their 
Saira  in  the  Naimiia  forest*  It  is  due  to  his  favour,  O  excellent 
sages,  that  the  story  of  the  origin  and  dissolution  of  the  living 

1.  Conclusion  of  the  Saira  (sacrifieiftl  tessioa)  end  the  completion  oi 
the  narration  the  Purina  synchroabed.  Tlte  author  ezhorts  the  later 
audience  of  tiie  Purina  to  perform  sacrifices  and  go  to  heaven  just  as  die 
tiges  in  Ntimiiiranya  did  formeiiy. 

2*  A  brief  review  of  die  main  FoJos  (Sectioni)  of  the  Purina. 


896  Vijm  Pur^ 

beings  has  been  leamt  without  any  doubt*  After  clearly  undeiv' 
standing  this  creation  of  the  Pradhana  effected  by  livara,  an 
intelligent  man  will  not  be  deluded* 

48-49«  The  scholarly  BrAhmai^a  who  listens  to  or  narrates 
or  teaches  this  ancient  //lAJsa  rejoices  in  the  worlds  of  Mahendra 
for  eternal  years.^  After  attuning  S^jya  with  Brahman  along 
with  Brahma  he  becomes  liberated* 

50.  Eulogising  those  Praj^>adSf  the  famous  noble«souled 
lords  of  earth,*  he  attains  the  status  of  Brahman.* 

1.  Verses  48*5  7  contsia  the  of  liiteQmg  to  or  iXArrAting  tliii 

Pur&oa. 

2.  MS.  Kbs  used  by  A.  (Ansodairsms  edition)  coattini  the  following 
additional  venes: 

(1 )  The  learned  scholar  who  starratrs  (makes  other  bear)  this  (PurApa) 
attains  the  high  goal.  He  is  endowed  with  wealthy  food-grains» 
happinew  and  prosperity*  There  is  no  doubt  about  this. 

(2)  A  BrShmapa  will  attain  knowledge  (or  learning)  and  union  with 
Brahman*  A  K^atriya  attains  victory  (in battles)  and  excellent  position 
in  the  r^on  of  gods. 

(3)  A  VaiJya  will  get  (ample)  riches,  food^graios  and  money*  A  Sodra 
being  blessed  with  progeny  (sons  and  grandsons)  gels  happiness. 

(4 }  He  who  learns  or  bears  a  verse,  or  a  part  of  a  verse  of  this  Pur&pa 
goes  to  Vi|ou*s  dty  ( Vaikuotha)  af^  death  and  never  experiences 
grief— 4^.  sditim  p.  421. 

9.  A.  records  the  following  additional  verses  from  the  ame  (Kha)  MS. 
aAer  the  words  Brahmabh&yA;^  gauh^i  They  are  translated  from  p  421  of  A 
edition  as  follows; 

(1)  He  by  whom  the  sacred  Bh&rata  (Purina)  as  narrated  by  Viyu  is 
heard  (once  or)  frequently,  attains  heaven  by  the  grace  (of  the  Wind* 

god). 

(2)  He  who  devoutly  reads  thisVayu  PurS^a  will  be  blest  with  a  long 
life.  The  goddess  of  wealth  wtU  be  stable  (stay  permanently)  in  his 
house. 

(3)  After  writing  down  the  Fuiipa  or  getting  it  written  and  after  wort* 
hipping  it  ( the  MS  of  the  Viyu  Pur&oa)  duly,  there  is  no  fear  of  6re, 
thieves  or  fear  from  the  (unfavourable)  planets,  diseases  etc* 

(4)  All  those  (evil  influences,  fear  and  such  other}  troubles  get  destroyed 
till  the  moon  and  stars  exist  (to  tbe  end  of  the  world).  Being 
absolved  of  all  sins,  he  will  go  to  Vipou’s  city  ( Vaikuotha). 

(5*6)  There  is  not  the  least  danger  from  cholera.  will  get  h^pinesM 
everywhere.  He  wilt  be  blest  with  longevity,  health,  prosperity, 
wealth,  sons  and  grandsons  forever*  No  question  (doubt)  need 
be  raised  about  this* 


4LSU60 


897 


51*  This  Purina  narrated  by  Krwa  Dvaipayanai  the  ex¬ 
pounder  of  Brahman  (Vedas),  is  conducive  to  wealth,  fame, 
longevity  and  great  merit*  Xt  is  on  a  par  with  the  Vedas* 

52*  He  who  extols  the  lame  of  the  lords  of  Manvantaras, 
of  the  Devas  and  sages  endowed  with  enormous  wealth  and 
splendour,  is  released  from  all  sins.  He  shall  attaiil  great 
merit. 

53.  A  scholar  who  always  narrates  this  on  every  festive 
occasions,  shakes  off  his  dns,  conquers  heaven  and  becomes 
capable  of  being  merged  in  Brahman. 

54.  If  one  at  the  time  of  Sriddha  recites  a  section  of  this 
(Pur&oa)  to  Brihmatias,  it  ultimately  passes  on  to  Pitfs  bestow¬ 
ing  e\'ery thing  desired  and  everlasting  benefit. 

55.  The  word  Purina  is  derived  thus :  ananti  iiipurd^jamf 

i.e.  that  which  has  been  established  in  ancient  times.  He  who 
knows  this  derivation  becomes  liberated  from  all  sins. 

56«57.  Those  men  of  the  three  higher  castes  who  listen  to 
this  Purit^  and  turn  their  attention  to  virtuous  activities, 
rejoice  in  heaven  for  as  many  crores  of  years  as  there  are  hair- 
pores  in  the  skin.  After  attaining  S^jya  (absorption)  with 
Brahman  they  rejoice  along  with  Devas. 

58.  Brahmi  handed  over  to  Matariivan^  (Wind-god)  this 
sacred  text  of  the  ancient  Pur&^  which  dispels  all  sins,  which 
is  holy  and  meritorious  and  which  is  conducive  to  fame. 

59.  From  him  it  was  acquired  by  Uianas,  and  Bfhaspati 
secured  it  from  him.  Thereafter,  Bfhaspati  narrated  it  to  Savitf. 

60.  Savitf  recounted  it  to  Mityu  and  Mftyu  handed  it 
over  to  Indra.  Indra  narrated  it  to  Vasif]lia  and  he  taught  it  to 
Sarasvata. 


A  K^triya  who  studies  this  has  iacahaustible  fruit  (benefits). 

(7)  la  this  world,  he  get  exceUeot  reputation,  fie  becomes  victorious  (in 

battles).  He  geu  the  happiness  ^begettii^;  soos  and  having  grand¬ 
sons.  After  death,  be  will  dw^  in  (Heaven). 

(8)  If  a  noo-Sadra  (Sfidra,  if  the  Apagraha  [$]  ia  aJt^jfck*iQdra^  be  a 
misprint)  teaches  it  or  narrates  it  repeatedly,  the  goddess  of 
Wealth  stays  pennanendy  in  his  bouse.  This  is  true  ( definitely) ,  true 
and  not  otherwise* 

1.  Verses  58«66  give  the  gaealogy  of  teaeheis  who  handed  down  tbs 
Purina  up  to  Sflta,  the  present  narram. 


898 


61.  Sarasvata  handed  it  over  to  Tridhiman;  IVidh&man 
gave  it  to  8aradv&n.  Saradvin  taught  Trivi^t^  and  he  gave  it 
to  Antarik^a. 

62.  Antarikia  gave  it  to  Varw  and  he  gave  it  to  Tray- 
yaruM.  TVayyarupa  taught  it  to  Dhanafijaya  and  he  gave  it  to 
Krtaftjaya. 

63.  Tfi^aAjaya  got  it  from  Krtafijaya  and  he  gave  it  to 
fiharadv&ja.  Bharadvija  gave  it  to  Gautama  and  he  handed  it 
over  to  Niryantara. 

64.  Niryantara  narrated  it  to  V&jafravas.  He  handed  it 
over  to  Somafri^ma,  who  gave  it  to  Trpabindu. 

65.  Trpabindu  narrated  it  to  Dakfa  and  Dak$a  taught 
Sakti.  Even  as  he  was  in  the  womb,  Paraiara  heard  this  from 
frakti. 

66.  O  excellent  Br&hmaoas,  J&tukarna  learnt  this  from 
Par^iara.  From  him  holy  lord  Dvaip&yana  got  it.  From  Dvaipk- 
yana  this  was  secured  by  me. 

said: 

67.  Thus  the  words  uttered  by  Brahma,  the  first  prece* 
pt  or,  were  mentioned  by  me  to  my  son  Amitabuddhi  (of  un¬ 
measured  intellect) ;  it  is  narrated  orally  by  (aline  of  preceptors) 
of  whom  Brahma  was  the  fint. 

68-70.  Preceptors  should  be  earnestly  bowed  down  to  by 
learned  men.  This  story  is  conducive  to  wealth,  fame  and 
longevity.  It  is  meritorious  and  achieves  all  objects  (of  desire). 
It  destroys  sins.  This  must  always  be  regularly  listened  to  by 
Br&hma^as.  This  sacred  story  should  not  be  mentioned  to 
an  impure  person,  a  sinner,  nor  to  a  disciple  who  has  not  put  in 
at  least  a  year's  disciplined  student  life.  Nor  should  it  be  men¬ 
tioned  to  one  who  never  pays  heed,  nor  to  one  who  is  not  a 
scholar,  nor  to  one  who  has  no  son,  nor  to  one  who  is  inimical. 

71-73.  With  great  mental  purity,  I  bow  down  to  Brahma,^ 
the  first  Maheivara  whose  source  of  origin,  they  say,  is  Avyakta 


1.  This  salutation  to  Mahideva  who  is  identified  with  the  Primordial 
Purusa  shows  thatitis  aSalvaPuripa  The  MdiicUUer^tia  of  thU  Purlina 
payi  obeimnee  to  Lord  Siva. 


42.1-11 


899 

(the  Unmanifest)  I  whose  body  is  the  Manifest  Kala  that  has 
gone  in,  whose  mouth  is  Vahni  (fire) ,  whose  eyes  are  the  Sun  and 
the  Moon,  whose  ears  are  the  quarters,  whose  nose,  they  say,  is 
Vayu,  whose  words  are  Vedas,  whose  body  is  the  finnament, 
wb^  feet  are  the  earth,  whose  hair  pores  are  the  stars,  whose 
limbs  are  similarly  constituted,  all  the  Vidyas  are  the  tail,  who 
is  the  lord  of  Devas,  who  creates  people,  who  is  firmly  stationed 
in  all  the  worlds,  who  it  the  foremost  of  all  and  who  is  Maheivara, 
the  granter  of  boons. 


CHAPTER  FORTYTWO 

Dissipation  of  Vydsa*s  Doubts^ 

Thi  Sagts  jSaunaka  and  olhtrs  said : 

1*2.  O  Suta,  O  blessed  one,  eighteen  Pur&oas  have  been 
entirely  narrated  along  with  the  connected  anecdotes  in  the 
manner  of  C^sikr4ima  (banning)  nnd  Upasattdidra  (conclusion), 
by  you,  the  holy  one,  who  have  understo^  all  the  sacred  texts 
by  the  favour  of  Vy 

3*1 1 .  You  have  clearly  narrated  Afaljya  Purd^^  containing 
fourteen  thousand  verses;  the  Bhavifya  PurSi^  containing  an 
equal  number  of  verses  with  five  hundred  more;  the  beautiful 

1.  Thii  chapter  it  m  later  additioQ  at  it  it  foimd  only  in  one  MS(Ka) 
used  by  A.  The  very  fact  that  it  comet  alter  PholaSniti  and  formal  completion 
of  the  Purtca  ihowi  iti  iuppJementary  nature. 

2.  Verses  3*  1 1  give  a  list  of  1 8  MabipurSoas  aldng  with  the  total  number 
of  veises  in  each.  Here  only  the  PurO^a  U  narrated.  But  the  credit  of 
narrating  eighteen  Puri^  it  given  to  Suta.  'Hiis  being  a  mere  AppmcUx, 
various  topics  are  included  hereto.  These  verses  give  the  traditional  number 
of  verses  in  each  Pur&pa  without  verifying  them^  unless  we  presume  that  that 
much  number  of  verses  was  found  at  the  time  of  this  PurSna  writer.  Thus 
Kama  b  credited  with  17000  verses  but  actually  we  find  therein  only 
6000  versei;  the  BhOiovata  Pvr0$a  b  credited  to  have  18000  verses  but  actually 
it  has  Iw  than  15000  verses. 


Vdjfu  Ardffa 


900 

containing  nine  thousand  verses;  the  Brahmavaioaria 
containing  eighteen  thousand  verses;  the  Brahm3$4^  containing 
twelve  thousand  and  one  hundred  verses;  the  divine  BhAgavata 
containing  eighteen  thousand  verses;  the  Brahma  Purd^a  (the 
Purina  called  Brahma  of  ten  thousand  verses) ;  the  Pur&oa 
named  Vdmana  containing  ten  thousand  verses;  the  Adipurd^a 
containing  ten  thousand  and  she  hundred  verses;  the  dm7j 
( Vdyu)  Purdi^  containing  twentythree  thousand  verses  (?) ;  the 
J^dradiya  containing  twentythree  thousand  verses;  the  VainaUya 
{Garudo)  containing  nineteen  thousand  verses;  the  extensive 
Padmt^fd^  containing  fifty  five  thousand  verses;  the  beautiful 
KGrma  containing  seventeen  thousand  verses;  the  wonderful 
Satikara  (Vardha)  Purdpa  containing  twentyfour  thousand 
verses  and  the  extensive  Skanda  Purd^  containing  eigheyone 
thousand  verses.  Thus  eighteen  big  Pur&nas  have  been  narrated. 
In  these  Purinas  many  holy  rites  (Dharmas)  t  ave  been  explain* 
ed  by  you» 

12-15.  The  holy  rites  and  duties  (Dbarma)  of  those  with 
and  without  attachment^  those  of  ascetics^  the  religious  students, 
householders,  forest-hermits,  women  and  Sudras  have  been 
particularly  explained  by  you.  Similarly  the  rites  and  duties  of 
Brahmanas,  K^triyas,  Vaiiyas  and  the  mixed  castes  have 
been  recounted.  You  have  described  the  big  rivers  Gangi  and 
others.  Many  kinds  of  Yajfias,  holy  rites  and  penances  have  been 
explained  in  those  Purax^s.  Many  kinds  of  religious  gifts,  all 
kinds  of  Tamos  (restraints  and  holy  observances),  the  duties  of 
Yoga,  Sarhkhya  and  Bh&gavata  (pertaining  to  the  holy  devotee 
of  the  lord)  have  been  explained  in  them.  The  paths  of  devo¬ 
tion,  knowledge,  and  detachment  have  been  explained.  The 
procedures  for  the  Updsand  (special  forms  of  worship)  with  water 
and  wind  (i.e.  such  as  Pranay&ma  where  the  breath  is  control¬ 
led)  by  those  whose  minds  have  been  purified  by  holy  rites,  have 
been  mentioned. 


Though  our  text  reiteracei  18  aa  the  nuoiber  of  Mah&  Puraeai  actually 
a  liat  of  16  PurS^at  ii  given.  The  AdipurS^ta  hereof  is  either  Vjfou  Of  Agai 
or  Lihga  but  that  nuraber  of  venes  approximates  to  those  of  linga  Purina. 
The  ounber  of  vcfsea  attributed  per  Purftca  difiera  ia  diflerent  Purieat. 
But  that  it  a  poiat  as  theM  Pur&oa  writen  bad  no  opportanity  or 
inclioation  to  verify  the  actual  oumber  of  venes  ia  each  Purina. 


16.  The  lystems  (of  philosophy  and  devotion),  the 
Br&hma  (pertaining  to  Brahma),  &uva  (that  of  &va),  Vai^va 
(that  of  Vifnu) ,  Saura  (that  of  the  Sun) ,  SUtta  (that  of  Sakd, 
the  goddess },  Arhata^  (that  of  Arhat,  Jina),  the  six  systems  of 
philosophy  and  the  materialistic  philosophy — all  these  and 
many  other  things  have  been  explained  in  the  Pur&Qas. 

17.  It  is  not  known  whether  there  is  or  not  anything  be-' 
yond  this  that  U  excellent  and  worth  knowing. 

18*  Gould  it  be  that  Vyiia  or  you,  holy  sir,  are  hiding  any* 
thing  ?  Please  clear  our  doubts  in  this  respect,  since  you  are  a 
complete  Pauranika  (knower  of  Purinas). 

SUia  said  : 

19.  O  Saunaka,  listen.  I  shall  explain  this  intricate  pro* 
blem.  This  is  a  great  secret  of  divine  nature.  It  should  not  be 
mentioned  (to  anyone  and  everyone),  so  say  (the  sages). 

20.  AAer  writing  the  story  of  the  Pura^as  wherein  all  the 
meanings  of  the  Vedtc  passages  have  been  included,  Vyasa,  ion 
of  Par&iara,  thought  thus  in  his  mind.^ 

21.  **The  duties  of  the  differmt  castes  and  stages  of  life 
have  been  clearly  explained  by  me.  Different  paths  leading  to 
salvation  without  infringing  the  Vedic  injunctions  have  been 
mentioned  by  me. 

22.  In  my  decisions  (incorporated)  in  iiit  {Brahma  sHtta)^ 
the  (allied)  distinction  between  Jiva  (individual  soul),  I j vara 
and  Brahman  has  been  completely  refuted.  Brahman  the 
supreme  soul  has  been  explained  on  the  basis  of  Vedic 
passages,  cogent  aiguments  and  deliberations. 


1.  Mendoo  of  JaiDiim  and  non^mention  of  Buddhism  shows  that 
Buddhism  bad  either  dis^peared  from  India  at  that  dme  or  the  inclusion  of 
the  Buddha  as  an  incarnation  of  Vi^u  was  prolubly  regarded  a  suScient 
ground  not  to  mention  it  as  a  separate  system  of  philosophy.  I  believe  In  the 
fint  alternative  (disappearance  of  Bi^dhnm  oa  a  large  scale). 

2.  Cf.  Bh.  P.  I.4.2$*31  and  the  subsequent  two  chapters  5  &  6.  That 
episode  intheBb.F.  is  the  basis  of  thb  episode  of  VySsa’s  dejection.  The 
mention  otBrohna  Satras  shows  that  at  the  time  of  tbit  PurSca  the  authors 
of  the  MahSbb&fata,  the  PuriuisandtheBraAffiaiStra  were  believed  to  be 
one  si  ogle  individual  called  Krwa  DvaipSyaoa  Vylsa. 


902 


25.  Tht  supreme  Brahman  is  imperishable*  It  is  the 
supreme  soul,  and  the  greatest  region*  It  is  for  its  realisation 
that  the  religious  students,  forest*hermtts  and  ascetics  perform 
ho]y  rites* 

24-25*  H^hly  intelligent  persons  perform  (concen¬ 

tration)  of  difierent  types.  Leading  sages  perform  the  Aft^Aga 
(eight-limbed)  observance  for  the  sake  of  Brahman.  They 
nre^Asanc  (postme) ,  Pr4naro<lha  (restraint  of  breath),  Pratyih 
A4fa (withdrawal  of  the  senses) ,  Dhdra^  (concentration),  DhyUna 
(meditation),  Sam(ldhx  (trance,  ecstasy),  Toma  (restraint)  and 
J^iyama  (observance). 

26.  Those  who  strictly  adhere  to  the  injunctions  of  Che 
Vedas,  perform  holy  rites  only  for  the  sake  of  Brahman.  They 
are  fttt  from  desires  and  sins.  They  perform  the  holy  rites 
dedicating  the  fruit  thereof  to  the  greatest  soul. 

27*  Those  of  pure  rites  and  observances  resort  to  the  holy 
centres  of  GaAg4  etc.  in  order  to  wipe  off  their  sinful  actions 
and  to  know  the  supreme  soul. 

28-29*  That  Brahman  is  the  greatest.  It  is  pure.  It  has 
neither  beginning  nor  end.  It  is  free  from  ailments.  It  is  eternal 
and  omnipresent.  It  is  steady  like  the  summit  of  a  mountain.  It 
is  devoid  of  deception.  It  pervades  all  sense  organs  but  is  im- 
perceivable.  It  is  devoid  of  sense-organs  that  are  the  creations 
of  Prakrti.  It  is  undeflected  hy  Dik  (Space)  and  Kllla  (Time) 
etc*  It  is  eternal.  It  is  pure  consciousness.  It  is  unchanging. 

30-31.  The  whole  universe  is  super-imposed  on  it  like  the 
serpent  on  a  piece  of  cord^  and  hence  appears  so*  Brahman 
is  devoid  of  aberrations.  If  pondered  well,  foam,  bubble 
and  wave  will  be  found  not  different  at  all  from  water; 
similarly  considered  the  universe  too  is  not  at  all  different  from 
Brahman. 

32*  The  Nigamas  (Vedas)  declare,  ^Everything  is  Brahman 
There  is  no  multiplicity*.  It  is  from  Brahman  that  the  crores 
of  Brafam&nd^^  (Cosmic  Eggs)  are  created  and  dissolved* 


1*  This  ihowi  that  tUs  chapter  was  writtea  in  the  poit- 

SaAkara  period.  See  39  below. 


42.33-40 


90S 

33«  The  dissolution  and  creation  of  all  the  worlds  depend 
upon  the  UroM^a  (opening)  and  (closing)  of  Brah- 

man.i  The  great  Sakti  (the  divine  goddess  of  power)  is  station¬ 
ed  with  the  support  of  Brahman. 

34.  The  universe  Is  in  it.  It  originates  from  Brahman. 
It  is  Brahman  itself.  It  is  due  to  the  ignorance  of  Brahman 
that  the  universe  appears.  When  Brahman  is  realised  there  is  no 
universe. 

35*  The  universe  is  explained  ^  Asaija  (unreal) » 
(insentient)*  Duf^ha  (cause  of  misery)  and  Aoastu  (unreal,  un¬ 
substantial).  The  opponte  of  it  is  Saceiddiumdan&rH^^t 
embodiment  of  existence,  knowledge  and  bliss. 

36.  It  is  called  Viha  when  the  individual  soul  is  in  the 
wakeful  state.  It  is  remembered  as  Taijasa  when  the  individual 
is  in  a  state  of  dream.  It  is  called  PrdjHa  when  the  individual 
soul  is  in  the  state  of  dreamless  slumber.*  It  persists  in  all  the 
states. 

37.  It  is  the  eye  of  eyes.  It  is  the  car  of  ears.  It  is  the  Tvac 
(skin,  i.e.  organ  of  touch)  of  all  Tvacs.  It  is  the  tongue  of 
tongues.  They  consider  it  thePr&na  (vital  breath)  of  Pranas. 

38.  Human  beings  are  incapable  of  knowing  precisely  and 
attaining  it  by  means  of  intellect,  worldly  knowledge,  vital 
breath  or  physical  activity  for  ever. 

39.  Just  as  snake  (is  misconceived  as  such)  in  the  rope, 
mirage  as  water  in  the  desert,  and  blueness  in  the  sky  is  super¬ 
imposed  due  to  ignorance,  so  also  the  non-existing  universe  is 
superimposed  on  Brahman  and  hence  it  simply  appears  to 
exist. 

40.  The  vast  sky  appears  to  be  Afferent  inasmuch  as  it  is 
restricted  by  jars  etc.  Similarly  the  Jiva  is  the  restricted  form 
of  the  all-pervading  soul,  restricted  through  the  kdtya  (product 
e.g.  the  physical  body). 

1.  Apsrtiftl  quoUtion  from  VaiuguptxU  Kinkd  1,  but  attributes 

this  creetioa  and  dettruedon  of  the  Universe  to  9iva*i  Pari  Sakti— an  attenuit 
to  adapt  a  TVfta  concept  and  ad^t  it  in 

2.  The  terms  Taijam,  MJfia  etc.  used  h&t  are  of  Upaniiadie  antiquity 
( pidt  MindOkya  Up.  9,  10  and  1 1  )• 


904 

41 .  The  whole  Cosmic  Egg  is  an  incomparably  superb  paint¬ 
ing  drawn  on  Brahman  as  if  on  a  wall  by  the  Maya  (Illusion) 
of  wonderful  activities  possessing  diverse  Gti^as. 

42.  That  imperishable  Brahman  is  conclusively  arrived  at 
by  the  Vedic  and  Upanisadic  passages  and  principles. 
Brahman  is  beyond  those  who  rush  after  it.  It  is  beyond  the 
words  of  those  who  try  to  explain  it. 

43.  There  is  nothing  greater  than  the  Ak^ara  (indestructible 
Brahman) .  That  is  the  Acme.  That  is  the  great  goal.  So  it  is 
explained  in  the  Vedas,  when  (they  are)  closely  pondered  over. 

44-52.  I  have  heard  this  from  the  Vedas  with  whose  help  he 
became  cognisable.  Also  that  Lord  Krt^a  is  that  supreme  man 
(Purusa)«^  He  is  abiding  in  the  form  of  Atman  in  that  Ak^ara 
Atman  (imperishable  soul) .  He  is  of  the  form  of  the  mass  of 
Bliss,  the  embodiment  of  Ananda  (bliss  and  felicity).  He  takes 
interest  in  divine  sports  in  the  midst  of  the  cowhcrdesses.  He  is 
embellished  with  a  crown  decorated  with  peacock  plumes  and 
studded  with  shining  gems.  He  shines  with  the  two  earrings 
having  the  brilliance  of  lightnii^.  His  eyes  beautiful  like  the 
Kbaftjarl(a  (birds)  move  up  to  (are  longish  up  to)  the  ears.  He 
indulges  in  dalliance  with  the  beloved  cowherdesses  in  every 
flower-grove.  He  wears  a  divine  yellow  garment.  He  has  smeared 
himself  with  sandal  paste.  He  fascinates  the  cowhcrdesses  with 
the  notes  of  his  flute  sprinkled  with  the  nectar  oozing  out  of  his 
lips.  He  is  the  CidSnanJa  (the  bliss  of  knowledge).  He  suppresses 
the  arrogance  of  Ananga  (Cupid)  (by  means  of  his  beauty) .  He 
is  a  past-master  in  the  arts  of  love  of  crores  of  K&mas.  He  is  as 
pure  as  the  rays  of  crores  of  Moons.  Bees  and  deer  surround 
him.  Round  his  neck  with  three  lines  a  diamond  necklace  shines 
with  beads  interspersed.  To  control  cows  from  straying  away, 
he  runs  about  here  and  there  on  die  high  banks  of  Yamuni 
in  the  jungle  ofTamala  trees  and  trees  of  Kadamba,  Gampaka, 
A^oka  and  Parijata  that  appear  very  beautiful.  It  (the  forest) 
is  full  of  the  chirping  sounds  of  cuckoos,  parrots,  doves  and 
peacocks.  He  is  particularly  fond  of  sporting  with  Radhi. 

1.  Verses  44-55  show  the  influence  of  the  Ridhi-Krtpa  cult  or 
BhAgsvatism. 


42.53-66 


d05 


53.  He  sports  in  the  world  called  Goloka  which  is  Brah¬ 
man  itself,  the  Cit  alone,  free  from  difference  and  Gu^as.  1  have 
heard  it  so. 

54.  There  is  nothing  greater  than  He  as  mentioned  in 
Nigamas  and  Agaznas.  Still  the  Vedas  say  that  he  is  beyond  and 
greater  than  Akfara, 

55.  The  lord  who  is  the  resident  of  Goloka  is  called  greater 
than  Akfara.  Who  is  this  always  spoken  by  the  Vedas  as  beyond 
even  that  ? 

56.  How  is  the  special  meaning,  that  which  is  indicated  by 
the  words  of  the  Vedas  to  be  known?  Is  the  text  of  the  Veda  to 
be  interpreted  otherwise  as  it  implies  more  than  recorded  in 
words  ( ?) 

57.  Vyisa,  the  son  of  Satyavad,  became  doubtful  as  to  the 
meaning  of  the  6ruti.  He  pondered  over  it  for  a  long  time.  He 
could  not  undentand  it  precisely. 

Suta  said\ 

58.  Even  after  deliberating  (long)  the  sage  did  not  arrive 
at  the  decisive  meaning  of  the  Vedic  passage.  The  Veda  is 
NarayaiO^^  himself,  where  even  great  sages  (poets)  become 
confounded. 

59.  Still  he  underwent  great  distress  of  the  heart.  Then  be 
thought:  *Whom  shall  I  approach  7  What  shall  I  do  ? 

60«62.  I  do  not  see  anyone  in  this  world  who  is  omniscient 
and  who  sees  everything.*  After  not  knowing  anyone  in  the 
world  who  could  clear  his  doubts  he  went  to  a  cave  in  Mem  and 
performed  a  great  penance.  There  was  a  beautiful  forest  there. 
Although  there  was  blinding  darkness  within,  the  rocks  shed 
a  golden  brilliance  everywhere. 

63«66.  The  forest  was  resonant  with  the  chirping  sounds  of 
the  birds  among  the  groves  of  the  different  trees  and  creepers. 
It  was  devoid  of  the  sufferings  due  to  hunger,  tbint,  fear,  anger, 
distress  and  dejection.  Ponds  and  tanks  beautified  with 
lotuses  abounded  there.  Their  banks  were  set  with  golden  slabs 
on  which  the  birds  moved  about.  It  was  served  by  the  winds 
wafting  the  fragrance  from  the  lotuses.  It  was  devoid  of  beasts 
of  prey.  It  was  frequented  by  animals  having  auspicious  nature. 
The  place  was  devoid  of  crowds  of  people.  It  was  embellished 


Fdfm  Purdifd 


906 

with  pleasing  groves  of  divine  creepers*  The  chiiptng  fotmds  of 
parrotSf  doves  and  intoxicated  cuckoos  were  very  pleasing. 

67.  The  pollen  dust  particles  rose  up  and  rendered  all  the 
quarters  fragrant.  The  divine  golden  cave  of  very  great  splen« 
dour  was  there  (in  such  a  forest). 

68.  The  sage  entered  that  cave.  After  attaining  full  con* 
trol  over  his  mindf  posture  and  ui^  for  fbodi  be  meditated  on 
the  four  Vedas  with  great  concentration. 

69*73.  Even  as  he  was  meditatingi  three  hundred  years 
passed  and  then  the  four  Vedas  of  beautiful  appearance^ 
stood  in  front  of  him.  Their  eyes  were  resplendent  like  the 
petals  of  the  lotus.  Their  beads  were  embellished  with  matted 
hair  like  coronets.  Sacred  Kula  grass  was  held  in  the  fists  of 
their  lotus-like  hands.  Their  shoulders  were  adorned  with  deer 
skin.  The  splendour  of  their  mouths  was  heightened  by  means 
of  the  sixteen  Svara  (vowel)  sounds  intersprsed  with  Pranorc 
(Om)  •  Their  hands  with  five  fingen  to  each  were  constituted 
by  the  letters  of  the  guttural  and  the  palatal  classes  of  conso¬ 
nants.  Their  right  legs  were  constituted  by  the  labial  class 
consonants  and  the  lefr  legs  consisted  of  the  letters  of  the  dental. 
The  sides  of  their  belly  were  constituted  of  intermediate  and  last 
consonants  (of  each  group).  The  letter  J{a  constituted  their 
navels«  Their  backs  were  refulgent  (The  letters  endix^  with 
JT^  constituted  their  backs).  The  letter  Ma  was  their  stomach. 
The  letters  Tbjite,  La  and  Va  were  their  tied  up  hair  (tresses) . 
Afftibija  {tht  seed-like  Mantra  of  i^ni)  shone  in  their  right 
-shoulders.  The  Dkard  (Bija)  (the  seed-like  Mantra  of  the  earth) 
was  their  neck  and  the  Bhrta  (?  Mantra)  shone  on  their  (left) 
shoulders. 

74.  Their  joints  consisted  of  the  Antabstha  (semi-vowel) 
letters.  They  were  throbbing  with  Vaikhari  speech.  He  saw  (the 
city  of)  Mathura  marked  in  their  lotus-like  hearts. 

75.  Indeed  that  is  the  holy  centre  of  the  manifestation  of 
Lord  Hari  himself.  He  saw  (the  holy  place)  Kifl  in  the  middle 

1.  A  beautiful  yet  tignificant  dcscriptioQ  of  the  personaUty  of  the  Vedai. 
The  vitioa  of  leven  holy  eitiei,  ienportaot  or  nugor  sacrifices^  four  sacred 
fires  OQ  thdr  penos  is  interesting  as  it  shows  the  attritude  of  the  author  to 
ayntfaesoe  Puriok  and  Vedte  traditioot. 


42.76-86 


907 


of  thdr  eyebrows.  He  saw  the  city  of  Miyi  (Haridv&ra) 
stati<Kied  in  a  mystical  plexus  at  the  posterior  part  of  the 
body. 

76.  He  saw  the  city  of  K&ftci  in  the  region  of  their  penis; 
the  city  of  Avand  in  the  navel  region;  the  city  of  Dv&raki  in 
the  region  of  die  neds  and  the  city  of  Ih'ayiga  in  the  region  of 
IV&^  (vital  air). 

77.  To  their  left  and  right  flowed  the  rivers  Gang&  and 
Yamuni.  In  the  middle  Sowed  the  river  Sarasvatl  itself.  The 
holy  centre  of  Gayi  %vas  in  the  facial  regicm* 

78.  The  excellent  holy  centre  of  Prabhasa  was  in  the 
middle  of  the  neck  and  the  chin.  He  saw  the  hermitage  of 
Badary&^rama  in  their  Brahmarandhra  (cerebral  aperture). 

79.  The  holy  seats  of  Paundravardhana  (Pandua)  (Malda 
District)  and  Nepila  were  seen  in  the  two  eyes.  The  seat  named 
PQrpagiri  was  seen  on  the  forehead* 

80.  The  holy  seal  (Pttha)  of  Mathura  was  seen  in  the 
neck.  The  seat  of  K&flc!  was  stationed  in  the  hips.  The  Plfha  of 
J&landbara  was  seen  in  the  region  of  the  breasts* 

81.  The  Plfha  called  Bhrg^  was  in  the  region  of  the  ears; 
the  city  of  Ayodhyi  was  in  the  cup  of  the  nose.  The  holy  centre 
Brahmya  was  stationed  in  the  cerebral  aperture;  the  holy  centre 
Saiva  was  in  the  partition  on  the  crown  of  the  head* 

82.  The  holy  centre  S&kta  was  situated  on  the  tip  of  the 
tongue.  The  holy  Vait^ava  centre  was  in  the  lotus  of  the  heart; 
the  holy  centre  of  the  Sun  was  situated  in  the  region  of  the  eyes 
and  all  Bauddha  (Buddhistic)  holy  centres  were  stationed  in  the 
shadows. 

83.  He  saw  the  Sautrima^i  Yajfla  in  die  region  of  the 

neck;  the  Palubandha  in  the  chest.  He  saw  the  Vajapeya  sacri- 
flee  in  the  r^ion  of  the  buttocks  and  the  Agnihotra  in  the 
mouth  (?  fiice).  * 

84.  He  saw  Aivamedha  in  the  region  of  the  buttocks  and 
Naramedha  (human  sacrifice)  in  the  belly.  He  saw  R&jasOya  in 
the  region  of  the  head  and  Avasathya  in  the  lower  lip. 

85-86«  He  saw  Dakfipagni  on  the  upper  lip  and  the  Girha- 
patya  (fire)  in  the  mouth.  The  Hmy^  was  in  the  ears.  He  saw 
the  different  Mantras  stationed  in  the  bodily  hair.  He  saw  the 
Vedas  severally  revered  and  honoured  by  the  Puranas^  Nyiyas, 


908 


Vdjm  Purd^a 


Sadihitia  and  Tantra  texts  like  a  great  king  served  by  his  atten¬ 
dants.  He  saw  the  Vedas  who  blessed  the  people  through  holy 
riteSj  perfect  knowledge  and  Up&sanas  (modes  of  wonhip).. 

87.  They  had  the  divine  brilliance  of  Brahman;  they 

were  blazing  like  the  descending  (rays  of)  the  Sun  and  the 
shooting  flames  of  fire.  They  had  the  appearance  of  crores  of 
Moons  (put  together) .  On  seeing  themi  the  sage  (Dvai- 

p&yana)  became  greatly  struck  with  wonder. 

88.  He  got  up  suddenly  and  prostrated  himself  (before 

them),  while  saying  repeatedly  :  am  contented.  I  have 

achieved  my  object  (in  life) . 

89.  Since,  O  holy  Sires,  you  have  been  visible  to  me,  my 
birth  is  fruitful  today.  My  mind  is  satisfied.  My  life  (longevity) 
has  become  fruitful  today. 

90.  Whatever  there  is  whether  worldly  or  divine,  whatever 
is  worth  knowing  whether  past,  present  or  future  is  not  un¬ 
known  to  you. 

91.  You  all  are  not  the  mere  instructors  of  the  path  of 
action.  Even  if  you  show  die  path  of  action,  it  is  only  to 
restrict  the  haphazard  actions  of  those  who  are  passionate. 

92.  Your  words  of  injunction  and  prohibition  regarding 
the  status  of  Brahman  and  the  unreality  of  the  universe  are 
not  based  on  attachment  which  1$  unreal.  They  are  binding  as 
the  injunctions  and  prohibitions  (?) 

93.  Hence  the  objects  such  as  heaven  etc.  mentioned  by 
yourselves  have  been  censured  by  you,  saying  that  they  are  of 
a  perishable  nature,  while  the  truth  is  being  explained  by  you, 
the  benefactors  of  the  worlds. 

94.  By  teaching  the  path  of  action  and  the  path  of  know¬ 
ledge  to  different  individuals  according  to  their  capacity  and 
eligibility,  the  world  has  certainly  been  saved  by  you  whose 
person  is  constituted  of  the  revealed  word  of  the  supreme 
Brahman. 

95.  Hence  I  would  like  to  ask  you,  should  you  be  kind  and 
merciful  (towards  me).  With  regard  to  those  whose  minds  are 

with  desires  only,  thefruit  ordained  for  their  rites  is  Svarga 
(heaven). 

.96.  To  those  men  who  have  dedicated  their  minds  and 
souls  to  Ifa  (the  Lord) ,  the  fruit  of  the  action  performed  is  the 


42.97*106 


909 

purification  of  the  mind.  Thereafter  they  attain  perfect  know* 
ledge  and  subsequently  salvation. 

97.  Salvation  is  the  identity  with  Brahman  which  is 
Existence,  Knowledge  and  Bliss.  When  it  is  realised  whatever  is 
done  or  left  tmdone,  everything  comes  to  an  end. 

98.  It  is  unattached.  It  is  the  finnameot  of  knowledge  of 
the  nature  of  wisdom  unobscured  by  M&y&.  It  is  free  from 
desire.  It  is  steady  (immovable),  pure  and  devoid  of  Gupas. 
It  is  proclaimed  to  be  all-pervading. 

99.  When  products  (the  created  beings,  the  world)  are 
being  destroyed.  Brahman  (the  unchangeable)  does  not 
perish,  just  as  the  Sun  retains  its  splendour  while  the  whole  world 
becomes  plunged  in  blinding  darkness. 

100.  It  is  with  tlie  brilliance  of  the  Sattd  (the  existent 
Brahman)  that  the  univene  is  illuminated,  in  the  same  way  as 
a  piece  of  iron  is  ignited  by  the  solar  crystal  or  Arapi  produces 
fire. 

101.  It  manifests  in  the  form  otjivo  (the  individual  soul) , 
Ifvara  (godhead)  etc.  and  lo  !  in  the  form  of  the  universe  too  I 
When  everything  is  dissolved  the  firm,  motionless  Brahman  alone 
remains. 

102.  This  has  been  decided  by  you  and  undoubtedly  it 
must  be  so.  Still  I  have  a  desire  to  know  something  and  have  a 
doubt  in  my  mind. 

103.  Is  there  anything  greater  than  this  or  not  ?  O  blessed 
ones,  please  tell  it,  as  you  have  the  vision  of  reality. 

104.  The  listening  to  that  alone  shall  be  conducive  to  the 
success  and  fruitfulness  of  my  life.** 

When  Vyasa,  the  sinless  son  of  Satyavad,  said  thus  the 
Nigama  (Vedas)  exclaimed  *very  good,  quite  right*,  and 
replied  to  him: 

Vidas  said: 

105.  Very  well,  O  highly  intelligent  one.  You  are  Vi^pu, 
the  Atman  of  all  embodied  ones.  Though  unborn,  you  take  up 
birth  and  desire  to  bless  the  worlds. 

106.  Otherwise  why  should  you  be  fettered  by  the  worldly 
Karmans?  It  does  not  affect  you.  You  are  untouched  for  ever 
by  the  divine  M&yi  that  hides  perfect  knowledge. 


910 


107*108.  You  toko  up  forms  according  to  your  own  will 
and  you  withdraw  the  same  at  your  own  will.  Only  matter* 
accepted  by  us  have  been  revealed  by  you  in  the  Purkpas, 
Idh&sa  (Mah&bhirata)  and  the  (Brahma)  Sutras  in  variout 
ways.  The  imperishable  Brahman  is  supreme,  the  cause  (source) 
of  all  causes. 

109-1 10*  Like  the  fragrance  of  a  flower  or  its  taste  (juice) 
it  is  the  Atman  of  the  Atman.  Know  that  it  is  the  ultimate  form. 
This  has  been  experienced  by  us  when  the  dusolutioo  pertain¬ 
ing  to  Prakrti  took  place.  It  is  that  which  is  beyond  the  Akfora 
(the  indestructible) .  It  is  the  supreme  Rasa  alone.  It  is  beyond 
all  words  of  expression*  We  are  of  the  forms  of  words  and 
hence  incompetent  to  express  it  q>ecifically. 


CaiAPTER  FORTYTHREE 
Th$  (SrsaUiass  af 

VSjm  said: 

1 .  Henceforth  I  shall  explain  the  excellent  greatness  of 
Gay&^  on  hearing  which  one  is  absolved  of  all  sins.  There  is  no 
doubt  in  this. 

1.  This  is  ^  Stkai^Furd^  tbs  swertdam  of  GayS.  It  has  • 

tenuous  relation  with  the  Vi.  as  it  comet  after  the  Phala  inti  etc.  showing 
the  completion  of  the  Vi.  P.  Gayi,  as  a  sacred  place,  was  famous  in  pre- 
Buddhist  dmes  as  Auraavibha*s  mendoa  of  SamS^obapa,  Vifi^upada  and 
Gayifiras  (all  sacred  spots  at  Gayi)  ai  the  three  itepi  of  Trivikrama,  in  RV 
I.  22.17,  is  recorded  by  Yiska  {Rinikta  12*19).  We  have  Gq^  in 

Mbb.  Vaaa.  Gbs.  84-9S,  Garuda  Ghs.  82-86,  A?  Gfas.  114-116,  KP  11.35, 
NF  Utttrmbbiga  44-47.  A  number  of  verses  are  common  in  the  works.  It 
shows  that  probably  there  must  have  been  an  ancient  independent  Slhal^ 
PtffOaa  calM  Mskdtn^a  whidi  was  the  source  of  the  difikrent  Gayi 
Mihitmyas  in  these  wvks. 

2.  Ibe  name  indicates  that  it  must  have  been  the  site  of  the  herznitage 

or  cafdtal  of  King  Gaya.  A  pious  king  Gaya,  the  son  of  king  Samudravijaya 
of  R^agrha,  the  elevendk  Cakravartin  as  zomdoned  in  Sosra  a 

workof  ivetiihbarajaina  Xgama.  fiuddha^s  ridts  to  Gayidsa  (Oayifiria) 
and  hermitage  of  Kilyi^  at  Gayi  are  recorded  in  the  Pili  canon  (MahS^ 


43.2-8 


SOta  said  x 

2.  Once  upon  a  time,  the  cdestial  s^e  N&rada  was  acco- 
mpaiued  by  Sanaka  and  other  blessed  sages.  Bowii^  duly  to 
Sanatkum&ra,  he  enquired  thus: 

Jfirada  mquirsdx 

3.  O  Sanaticumira,  please  recount  to  me  that  holy  place 
which  is  the  most  excellent  of  ail  excellent  sacred  places  and 
which  saves  all  living  beings  who  read  about  it  or  listen  to 
it. 

Sanaikumdra  rsplitdx 

4.  I  shall  recount  the  holy  and  excellent  sacred  centre 
which  saves  all  by  means  of  (performance  of)  Srdddha  and  other 
holy  rites.  Listen  to  the  description  of  the  holy  jdace  Gayk 
which  is  superior  to  all  other  holy  centres  in  the  whole  of  the 
country. 

5.  Gaya,  the  Asura,  performed  penance.  He  was  requested 
(toofTerhis  body)  for  the  performance  of  a  sacrifice  by  god 
Brahma.  Dharma  placed  a  slab  of  stone  on  his  (Gaya's)  head| 
when  he  offered  (his  body) « 

6.  There  Brahma  performed  a  sacrifice.  In  order  to  keep 
the  demon  Gaya  steady  and  immovable  day  and  night  (for 
ever),  Gadidhara  (the mace- wielder  VisQu)  too  stayed  there 
assuming  the  form  of  the  (river)  Phalgu  and  other  sacred 
places,  along  with  prominent  Br&hma^as,  god  Brahmi  and  other 
Devas. 

7.  After  concluding  his  sacrifice,  Brahma  granted  houses 
etc.  to  the  Brahmapas.  He  had  performed  the  sacrifice  at  Gaya 
in  the  b^inning  of  the  Sveta  Var&hakalpa. 

8.  The  holy  centre  became  famous  by  the  name  Gaya 
after  (the  demon)  Gaya.  This  holy  centre  is  liked  by  god 

t>^ga'l.2\A  (abo  Aiv^io|a*i  Buddha^9riU  XII  >  87-8S,  XVII.d).  Tlut  Idna 
Gaya  ia  not  the  aame  Gaya,  the  VedieSeer  of  RV.  X.  63  and  64  as  hit  father’s 
name  was  Tlati. 

Gaya  belonged  to  the  ancient  Aaira  clan.  We  need  not  asK>eiate  evil  with 
the  Aiur a  clan,  as  we  have  very  pious  yet  powerful  Atura  kings  PrahUda, 
BaU,  B&9a.  Bven  Lord  Knoa  was  an  Asura  by  his  motherb  tide  (S.K. 
Ghattef)l^&lrs<rd  fVnfiiigr). 


912  Vijm  Fuftfia 

Brahmi.  All  manes  afraid  of  falling  into  hell,  desire  for 
sons. 

9»  'The  son  who  goes  to  Gaya  will  be  our  saviou^^  On 
seeing  their  sons  reaching  Gaya,  the  Pitrs  become  oveijoyed* 
(They  say)  'Even  by  touching  its  waters  with  his  feet,  what  is 
it  that  he  cannot  give  us?* 

10*  Tf  the  son  goes  to  Gay&  and  ofTers  balb  of  rice  (to  the 
Pitfs)  they  will  realise  the  benefit  of  (their)  having  such  a  son. 
If  the  son  remains  there  for  three  fortnights,  he  sanctifies  his 
family  till  the  seventh  generation.  If  that  b  not  possible,  let 
him  stay  there  for  fifteen  days,  or  seven  nights  or  (at  least)  three 
nights. 

1 1 .  Sins  accumulated  durif^  the  long  period  of  a  Mahi 
Kalpa  perish  on  reaching  Gayi.  One  should  offer  balb  of  rice 
to  the  Pitrs  and  others.  He  can  even  offer  the  to  himself, 

but  without  including  gingelly  seeds  in  that  case. 

12*  By  performing  the  Sriddha  at  Gay&,  all  the  sins  such  as 
those  resulting  from  Brahmaqa^slaughter,  addiction  to  wine, 
stealing  (gold),  intercourse  with  the  wife  of  the  preceptor  and 
those  due  to  the  association  with  those  sinners,  perish  com¬ 
pletely. 

13.  Whether  it  b  by  oneb  own  son  or  another’s  son,  if 
the  Pi^a  is  offered  in  one’s  name  anywhere  on  the  ground  at 
Gaya  at  any  time,  one  is  transported  to  the  eternal  Brahman. 

14.  There  are  four  modes  of  attaining  liberation,  viz.  (1) 
through  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  (2 )  through  performance 
of  Sr^dha  at  Gayi,  (3)  (by)  death  in  a  cowshed,  and  (4) 
through  residence  at  Kurukfe^d.^ 

15.  If  the  son  goes  to  Gaya,  of  what  avail  b  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman ;  what  is  the  necessity  of  dying  in  a  cowshed; 
and  what  b  the  need  for  a  residence  at  Ruruk$etra? 

16*17.  The  real  devotee  may  offer  Pipd^  Gay&  at  any 
time.  It  should  not  be  discarded  during  the  intercalary  month, 
or  on  one’s  birthday  or  when  Jupiter  and  Venus  are  set,  or 
when  Jupiter  is  in  the  Zodiac  of  Sixhha  (Leo) .  If  by  Ul*luck 
or  inadvertence  or  when  one  b  struck  or  wounded  (one  b  un- 


t.  Gf.  NP.  II  (UttMTM)  44.30;  AP,  113,5.6. 


43.18-26 


913 


able  to  perform  the  Sr&ddha  at  the  proper  time}»  one  is  eligible 
to  perform  afterwards  the  Sriddha  and  other  rites*  He  thereby 
attains  Brahmaloka. 

1 8*  Even  the  Opportunity  to  go  to  Gay&  once  or  to  offer 
Pioda  even  once  is  very  rare  to  achieve.  What  then,  if  one  is 
able  to  stay  in  it  for  ever? 

19.  If  accidentally  one  dies  in  this  holy  centre  which 
confers  salvation  even  upon  Brahma  and  others,  one  attains 
salvation  in  the  same  manner  as  through  the  realisation  of 
Brahman.  There  is  no  doubt  about  tthis. 

20.  In  order  to  redeem  the  Pitfs  who  might  have  died  due 
to  wormbites  etc.,  one  should  be  wise  enough  to  make  all  efforts 
to  perform  Sraddha  at  Gayi. 

21.  One  should  honour  and  propitiate  with  Hoxiyas  and 
Katyas  (offerings)  the  Brahmao^  who  had  been  assigned  the 
right  of  receiving  those  things  by  Brahmi  himself.  If  they  are 
pleased,  all  the  Pities  and  Devas  will  be  pleased. 

22.  Except  in  the  case  of  the  holy  centres  of  Kunikfetra, 
Viiala,  Viraja  and  Gay&  in  all  the  holy  centres^  it  has  been 
ordained  that  the  devotees  should  shave  off  their  head  and 
observe  fast. 

23.  A  Bhiksu  (a  recluse)  need  not  offer  balls  of  rice  after 
going  to  Gaya.  It  is  enough  if  he  shows  his  staff.  After  placing 
his  staff  at  the  feet  (the  footprint)  of  Vi^pu  he  becomes 
liberated  along  with  all  his  forefathers.^ 

24.  Really  the  staff-bearing  ascetic  (Sannyksin)  does  not 
incur  sins  or  acquire  merits.  Hence  he  renounces  all  activities 
and  meditates  on  Vi$ou  with  noble  thoughts. 

25.  One  may  renounce  all  Karmans  but  should  not  for¬ 
swear  the  Vedas.  He  should  shzve  his  head  outside  the  limits  of 
the  holy  centre  to  the  east,  west,  south  ortiorth. 

26.  The  area  of  the  sacred  place  of  Gayi,  as  declared  by 
Brahma,  is  two  and  a  half  kroias  ( 1  kroia^S  km.) ,  that  of  the 
holy  centre  Gaya  is  five  kroias  and  that  of  Gayaiiras  (Headland 
of  Gaya)  is  one  kroia.* 


1.  Gf.NF.  45.31. 

2.  Cf.  NF.  11.44.16;  AP.  1 1M2 


914 


27.  Whatever  holy  placet  there  are  ia  the  three  worldt 
are  pretent  within^  (the  area  of  Gay&iirat).  A  person  who 
performs  Sriddha  to  the  Pitn  in  the  holy  centre  of  Gayh 
comes  irte  from  indebtedness  to  them. 

28.  He  who  performs  Sraddha  at  Gayiiiras  uplifts  a  hundred 
generations  in  hit  family.  The  moment  one  starts  on  his  pilgri* 
mage  to  Gayi,  every  step  that  be  takes  (on  his  journey  of  Gayi) 
constitutes  a  flight  of  steps  leading  to  Svarga  to  his  Pitfs 
.  (ancestors). 

29.  At  every  step  taken  (by  the  son)  in  his  journey  towards 
Gay&,  the  fruit  of  Afvamedha  is  certainly  acquired  by  him. 
There  is  no  doubt  in  this. 

30*32.  Pi^das  in  Gayi  are  offered  by  means  ofmilkpuddingr 
Camr  (cooked  rice  soaked  in  ghee),  Saktu  (flour  of  fried 
grains),  Piffakaf  rice  grains,  roots  etc.  Powdered  gingelly  seeds, 
lumps  of  jaggery  with  ghee  or  mere  curds,  any  foodstuff  mixed, 
with  honey,  oilcake  with  j^^ery,  raw  sugar  and  ghee,  if  offered 
to  the  Pitn  yield  everlasting  benefits.  Or  worship  is  performed 
and  any  seasonal  fruit  is  offered  as  food  or  Havi^ya  food  is  also* 
offered  as  mentioned  by  the  sages. 

S3.  On  one  side  are  all  the  articles  of  offering  such  as  clo¬ 
thes  and  things  sweetened  with  tasty  honey.  On  the  other  side  is 
the  sacred  water  from  the  Phalgutirtha  brought  after  meditating 
on  the  lotus-like  feet  of  Gadadhara  (i.e.  Both  these  are  at  par 
with  each  other) . 

34.  The  procedure  of  the  Sraddhas  in  the  holy  centres  is 
this:  Seat  is  offered  to  Pi^d^!  Pindas  are  offered,  then 
Aoortijana  rite  is  performed  (water  is  ritualistically  sprinkled  on 
the  Darbha  grass) ;  Dakyi^  is  then  offered  and  then  the 
Annasathkalpa  (ritualistic  verbal  utterance  of  one’s  intention  of 
offering  food) « 

35.  In  the  Sraddhas  performed  in  the  holy  centres,  there 
is  no  ritualistic  invocation  to  Pitn^  As  there  is  no  defilement 
through  seeing  (i.e.  on  belr^  seen  by  others)  there  is  no  screen¬ 
ing  the  sides.  Intelligent  persons  should  perform  Sraddha 
with  due  sympathy. 

36.  In  other  places,  the  Pitrs  if  and  when  invoked  at  the 

1,  Thii  IS  the  cUlm  of  all  Sthd»s  even  of  tmer  imporUnee  such  as 
dune  of  Ksravlra,  Pandbarpur. 


49.37-44 


915 


proper  time,  go  there.  But  they  always  stay  in  the  holy 
centre.  Hence  there  is  no  (need  of  stny)  invocation. 

37.  By  aperson  desirous  of  fruits  and  performing  in 

the  holy  centres  all  the  rites  must  always  be  p^ormed  after 
eschewing  lust,  anger  and  covetousness. 

38.  One  who  observes  celibacy,  sleeps  on  the  bare  ground, 
takes  food  only  once  a  day,  speaks  only  the  truth,  remains 
always  pure  and  is  always  engaged  in  the  welfare  of  all  living 
beings,  attains  the  fruiu  of  visiting  the  holy  centres. 

39.  A  self-possessed  man  visiting  holy  centres  must  at  the 
outset  eschew  heresy.  A  person  who  does  everything  urged  by 
lust,  should  be  known  as  a  heretic. 

40.  Just  as  the  knowers  of  Brahman  engaged  in  the 
meditation  of  Brahman  with  single-minded  attention  attain 
the  knowable  object,  so  abo  the  self-possessed  persons  performing 
the  holy  rites  in  the  holy  centres  enter  Brahman  named 
Pareia  (the  supreme  lord). 

41.  The  river  VaitaranI  which  is  famous  in  all  the  three 
worlds,  has  descended  into  the  holy  centre  of  Gayk  for  saving 
Pitfs.  One  who  takes  the  sacred  bath  in  the  Vaitarai^  and 
gifts  away  cows  uplifts  three  times  seven  (i.e.  twentyone) 
generations. 

42.  The  devotee  should  go  to  the  Akyayava(a  (the  eternal 
holy  fig  tree)  and  propitiate  the  Br&hmanas  there.  One  who 
propitiates  the  Br&hma^  who  had  been  granted  the  right  of 
staying  there  by  god  Brahma  (shall  attain  the  fruit  thereof) . 
If  they  (those  Br^hmanas)  are  pleased  all  the  Devas  and  the 
Pitfs  will  be  pleased. 

43.  There  is  no  spot  anywhere  in  Gaya  where  there  is  no 
holy  centre.^  It  has  the  Sdnnidhya  (presence)  of  all  holy  centres. 
Hence  the  sacred  place  of  Gaya  is  the  piost  excellent  holy 
centre. 

44.  It  is  a  rare  achievement  that  cannot  be  had  anywhere 
else  in  the  three  worlds  if  one  could  offer  balls  of  rice  at  Gay& 
when  the  Sun  is  in  the  Zodiacs  of  Mina,  Mifa,  Kanyd,  Dhams 
and  Kuthbha. 


1.  Gf.AP.  116.28. 


916 


Atr2(M 


45*  Similarly  rare  is  the  opportunity,  very  rare  indeed  in 
the  three  worlds,  to  perform  Sr&ddha  at  Gaya  when  the  Sun  is  in 
the  Zodiac  Makara  and  also  at  the  times  of  the  eclipses  of  the 
Sun  and  the  Moon. 

46.  The  fruit  that  one  achieves  by  offering  balls  of  rice 
at  Gaya,  cannot  be  described  by  me  even  in  himdreds  crores 
of  Kalpas. 


CHAPTER  FORTYFOUR 

Th  Glory  of  GayH  :  Tfu  Story  of  Goydsura^ 

N&rada  irujuindx 

1 .  How  was  Gay&sura  (Demon  Gaya)  bom?  What  was 
his  power?  What  was  his  nature?  How  did  he  perform  the 
penance?  How  did  he  acquire  purity  of  the  body? 

Sanatkumdra  roplied: 

2.  Brahm&,  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds,  was  bom  of 
the  umbilical  lotus  of  Vi^pu.  Formerly,  at  the  instance  of  lord 
Visou,  he  created  the  subjects* 

3.  Formerly  he  created  the  Asuras  (Demons)  through  a 
demoniac  inclination.  Through  a  benevolent  disposition  of  mind 
he  created  the  Devas  of  gentle  minds. 

4.  Demon  Gaya  possessed  the  greatest  strength  and  exploit 
among  Asxu'as*  His  height  is  remembered  to  be  one  hundred 
and  twentyfive  Yojanas. 

*According  to  RajendrAlal  Micra,  the  story  of  Gayisura  is  an  allegory  of 
th*  Ky  Brahmanim  (Bodha-G^^  pp»  14-18)*  O. 

Malley  thought  it  to  be  ao  amalgamation  of  Brahmanism  and  popular 
demonolatry  which  preceded  Brahmaaism  (JASB  LXXII.  ill.  7,  1904). 
B.M.  Barua  regards,  this  as  an  inventiM  to  impress  the  sanctity  of  the  GayS 
range  hills  [0^  md  Buddha  Gojn,  19S4),  I  agree  with  B.  M.  Barua  as, 
whik  editing  cheJTeraD&e  AfiUdMire,  a  Stbalapur&o^  oi  Kolhapur,  1  found 
nmilar  creation  of  stories  to  justify  and  glorify  some  rites  etc.  of  Mah&lakimi 
(vidi  Intro.  19*29,  Pub.  &ivajt  University,  Kolhapur, 

1900) .  1  find  the  ume  claim  in  the  Sthaia  of  Pandharpur,  Tirupathi, 


44.5-14 


917 


5.  His  girth  was  sixty  Yojanas.  He  is  remembered  as  the 
most  excellent  of  all  the  devotees  of  Viftiu.  He  performed  a  very 
terrible  penance  on  the  excellent  mountain  Kol&hala  (Brahma- 
yoni  bill  including  Muttd^pntha  at  Gaya) . 

6.  He  remained  steady  for  many  thousand  years  without 
breathing.  Scorched  by  his  fiery  penance,  Devas  were 

4 

gready  agitated. 

7.  Devas  went  to  Brahmaloka  and  ii>oke  to  Pitamaha 
(god  Brahm&) ,  Lord,  save  us  fn>m  demon  Gaya**.  Then 
Brahma  spoke  to  the  Devas: 

8.  Devas,  we  shall  go  to  god  Sazikara.**  Brahma  and 
others  went  to  Siva.  At  Kail&sa,  they  bowed  to  him  and  said» 

Lord,  save  us  from  the  great  demon'*. 

9«  Sambhu  spoke  to  Brahma  and  others:  ^‘We  shall  seek 
refuge  in  Hari,  in  the  ocean  of  milk.  He  is  the  lord  of  all  Devas, 
He  will  do  something  conducive  to  our  welfare**.  Brahma,  Siva 
and  the  Devas  bowed  to  Vi$Qu  and  eulogised  him. 

Tk$  Dtvas  said : 

10.  Om  !  Obeisance  to  Vi^nu,  the  lord  of  all,  the  all- 
powerful,  the  radiant,  the  victorious  and  the  devourer  (destro¬ 
yer)  ofRaksasasand  others. 

1 Hail  to  the  sustainer  of  all  these  (worlds)  •  Bow  to  him 
who  leads  the  Yogins  beyond  (the  ocean  of  worldly  existence) . 
Obeisance  to  the  ever-increasing,  the  Infinite.  Hall  to  the 
resplendent  one. 

SanatkumSra  said: 

12.  On  being  eulogbed  thus,  Vksudeva  granted  vbion 
unto  the  Suras  (i.e.  manifested  himself  in  front  of  them).  **0 
Devas,  wherefore  have  you  all  come?**  On  being  asked  thus  by 
Vi^^u  the  Devas  said  to  him: 

13.  Lord,  save  us  from  the  danger  of  demon  Gaya**. 
Hari  said,  ‘‘May  Brahma  and  others  go  near  that  Daitya.  I 
shall  also  come  there**. 

14.  Seated  on  Garuda,  Kc4ava  started  in  order  to  grant 
a  boon  to  Gay&sura.  All  the  Devas  seated  themselves  on  their 
respective  excellent  vehicles  and  proceeded. 


918 


Fitrdfa 

15.  Viaudeva  aad  others  spoke  to  him:  demon  O^yu, 

what  for  is  this  penance  being  perfonned  by  you?  We  have  all 
arrived  here  fully  satisfied  (with  your  penance) .  Mention  the 
boon  (you  wish  to  have) 

Gqydsura  said: 

16*18.  O  Devas,  Brahmi,  Vit^u  and  Mahelvara»  if  you 
are  pleased,  may  I  be  ever  holier  than  these  :  than  all  the 
Devas,  and  Br&hmapai,  than  all  the  Yajfias,  holy  rivers  and 
mountains;  than  all  the  Devas;  than  all  the  sages;  than  even 
the  unchanging  Siva;  than  all  the  Mantras;  than  all  the  lords  of 
Devas;  than  all  the  Yogins;  than  all  the  renouncers;  than  all 
the  JCofTnins  (the  performers  of  holy  rites) ;  than  all  the  DAarmins 
(pious  ones);  than  all  the  holy  JfUnins  (wise  ones  and 
knowers) . 

19.  **May  you  be  pxire  and  holy*’.  After  saying  this  to  the 
Daitya,  the  Devas  went  to  heaven*  After  seeing  and  touching 
the  Daitya,  all  people  went  to  Hariri  city  (i.e*  Vaikuntha) . 

20.  All  the  three  worlds  became  vacant.  The  whole  of  the 
city  of  Yama  became  void.  Thereafter,  Yama  went  to  Brahma- 
loka  along  with  Indra  and  others. 

21.  All  the  Devas  displaced  by  Gay&sura  spoke  to  Brahm&: 

PiCamaha,  please  take  back  the  authority  which  has  been 

given  by  you  (to  us).” 

22*23.  Then  Brahma  spc^e  to  the  Devas;  ^*We  shall  go 
to  the  immutable  Vifnu”.  Brahma  and  others  said  to  Vi^u: 
^*Since  the  Asura  has  been  granted  the  boon  by  you,  all  the 
people  have  been  going  to  heaven  by  merely  looking  at  him.  All 
the  three  worlds  have  become  void.”  On  being  informed  thus 
by  the  Devas,  Visudeva  spoke  thus  to  god  Brahma: 

24.  and  request  the  demon  thus,  ^Give  your  body  for 
the  purpose  of  Yajfia*.”  Urged  by  Vi^Qu,  Brahm4  went  there 
accompanied  by  the  Suras  and  saw  the  great  Asura. 

25.  On  seeing  Brahmi  along  with  the  Devas,  the  demon 
Gaya  stood  up  and  duly  and  devoutly  worshipped  them. 

C^dbura  said  : 

26.  My  birth  has  become  fiiiitful  today*  My  penance  has 


44.27-39 


919 


become  fruitful  today,  since  Bratuni  has  come  as  my  guest* 
Everything  is  obtained  by  me  today. 

27*  O  Yogin,  O  knowcr  all  the  andUaries  of  Yoga,  O 
master  of  all  the  worlds,  O  father,  O  preceptor,  O  Brahini,  1 
shall  carry  out  the  work  for  which  you  have  come* 

Brahmd  said  l 

28*  All  the  holy  centres  of  the  earth  seen  by  me  while 
wandering  over  it,  are  not  as  pure  as  your  body,  for  the  purpose 
of  Yajfta. 

29*  Holiness  of  the  body  has  been  attained  by  you,  thanks 
to  the  grace  of  Viyou*  Hence,  O  Asura,  give  unto  me  your 
pure  body  for  the  purpose  of  Yajfta* 

GayHsura  said  : 

30*  O  lordofDevas,  I  am  blessed  since  my  body  is  being 
asked  for  by  you.  If  you  perform  Yiga  (sacrifice)  over  my  body 
the  Pitrs  in  my  family  shall  be  contented* 

31  *  It  was  by  you  alone  that  this  body  was  created*  It  was 
by  you  that  it  was  rendered  holy  and  pure.  The  Yaga  should 
necessarily  take  place  for  the  benefit  of  everyone. 

32*  After  saying  thm,  during  the  Sveta  Kalpa,  the  demon 
Gaya  fell  on  the  ground  in  a  south-western  direction  on  the 
mountain  KoUhala*^ 

33*  Keeping  his  head  in  the  north  and  the  feet  in  the  south, 
the  Daitya  (lay  there).  After  coUectii^  together  all  the  requisi¬ 
tes,  Brahma  mentally  created  the  l^tviks. 

34-39.  They  were :  Agniiannan,  Axnrta,  Saunaka,  Yifi- 
Jali,  Mrdu,  Kumuthi,  Vedakauodilya,  Haiita,  K&fyapa^  Krpa, 
Garga,  Kauiika,  Vasiftha,  the  unchanging  s^e  Bhargava,  Vrddha 
Paraiara,  Ka^va,  Miodnvya,  Srutikevala,  Syeta,  Sut&la,  Damana, 
Suhotra,  Kanka,  Lauk&kri  of  huge  mighty  arms,  Jai^^avya,  the 
Brahmana  Dadhipaftcamukha,  ^?abha,  Karka,  Katyayana,  Go- 
bhila  the  sage  of  great  fierce  rites,  Sup&Iaka,  Gautama,  Vedaii- 
rovrata,  JafimftUn,  Avyagra,  Gapiliasa  the  terrible,  Atreya, 

1.  The  Bfshfflsyoai  hill  ia  Gayi,  includiag  the  bill  called  Muodapmba 
which  contaios  the  impreisions  of  Gadadhara*!  feet— De  201. 


920  Purdfia 

AAgiraSi  Aupamanyu  of  great  holy  rites  >  GokarQa,  Guhiv&sa» 
Sikhan^in  and  Umavrata. 

40.  After  creatiog  these  and  other  leading  Brahmanas,  god 
Brahm&i  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds,  performed  the  Yaga  on 
the  body  of  Gay&sura. 

41*42.  Agniiarma,  without  wasting  his  penance,  created 
these  five  fires  from  his  mouth  :  Daksi^igni,  G&rhapatya, 
Ahavaidya,  Satya  and  Avasathya.  O  celestial  sage,  the  Yajftas 
are  founded  on  these.  To  stabilise  the  Yajfta,  he  gave  Dakfina 
to  the  Br&hmarias. 

43.  Afier  performing  the  POfnahuti  and  taking  the  ablution 
of  Avabhftha,  Brahma  caused  the  sacrificial  post  to  be  brought 
along  with  the  Suras  and  fixed  it. 

44.  The  auspicious  post  was  fixed  in  the  Brahmasaras  which 
is  the  most  excellent  of  all  lakes.  Shaken  and  surprised,  Brahma 
spoke  to  Dharmaraja: 

45.  ^^There  is  a  slab  of  stone  in  your  house.  Without  hesita¬ 
tion  bring  it  here  at  my  behest  and  fix  it  on  the  head  of  the 
Daitya.” 

46.  On  hearing  it,  Yama  placed  the  slab  on  the  head  of  the 
demon  to  keep  him  steady.  Even  when  the  slab  was  placed,  the 
demon  shook  along  with  the  slab. 

47.  He  spoke  to  Rudra  and  other  Devas,  Devas,  you 
all  stand  steady  on  the  slab**.  They  said  **Yes’*  and  stood  there 
(on  it) . 

48.  The  Devas  pressed  the  slab  with  their  feet  (?)  and  noted 
that  still  the  demon  quaked.  Then  the  distressed  Brahma  went 
to  Vi^nu  who  was  lying  down  in  the  ocean  of  milk.  Bowing 
down  and  honouring  the  lord,  he  eulogised  him. 

Brahmd  said  : 

49.  O  Lord,  O  sovereign  of  the  cosmic  egg,  I  bow'  down 
to  the  lord  of  the  worlds,  the  goal  of  persons  possessing  glory, 
the  panter  of  worldly  pleasures  and  salration. 

50.  Vifvaksena  spoke  to  Vi$nu,**0  Lord,  the  lotus-bom 
deity  eulogises  you**.  Hari  said,  **You  bring  him**.  Urged  by 
Vi(9u,  he  brought  him.  Hari  spoke  to  Aja  (Brabmfi) ,  ^'Tell  me 
why  you  have  come?** 


44.51-61 


921 

Brakmd  said  : 

51*52.  O  Lord  of  Devas,  when  the  Yaga  was  petformed 
the  demon  Gaya  moved  even  when  the  slab  of  stone  of  the 
form  of  the  Devas  was  placed  <a\  his  head.  Even  when  Rudra 
and  other  Devas  were  stationed  (over  it)  there,  the  demon 
quaked,  O  M&dhava,  be  pleased  to  make  it  steady  now. 

53.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Brahma,  lord  Hari  pulled  out 
a  MUrii  (physical  body/idol)  from  his  person  and  gave  it  to 
Brahma  to  stop  the  restless  quaking  (of  the  demon) . 

54.  Bringing  the  idol  with  him,  Brahmh  placed  it  on  the 
slab  of  stone.  Still  the  demon  quaked,  on  seeing  which,  he 
(Brahmi)  invoked  the  lord  again* 

55.  Vifou  came  from  the  ocean  of  milk  and  stationed  him¬ 
self  on  the  slab,  with  the  name  of  Jan&rdaoa  and  Pu^d^lha. 
The  primordial  Gad&dhara  (wielder  of  mace)  himself  stood 
there  to  steady  the  slab,  for  stabilising  (Gaya  or  his  body) . 

56-57.  For  stabilising  (Gaya  or  his  body) ,  Brahma  divided 
himself  into  five,  viz.  Prapitdmaha  (Great-grandfather) ,  PiUbnaka 
(Grandfather),  the  master  of  Phalgu,  Ked&ra  and  Kanakel- 
vara.  Brahm^  as  Viniyaka  stood  therein  the  form  of  an  elephant. 
The  Sun  divided  himself  into  three:  GaySditya,  Uttar&rka  and 
Daksip^ka. 

58.  Laksmi  stood  there  in  the  name  of  SSt&,  Gauil  in  the 
name  of  Mangala  and  Saras vatl  stationed  henelf  in  the  forms  of 
the  three,  viz.  Gayatri,  Savitrl,  and  Trisandhya. 

39.  Indra,  Bfhaspati,  Pusan,  the  eight  Vasus  of  great 
strength,  Viivedevas.  thetwoAivinl  Devas,  Maruts,  the  leader 
of  the  universe  and  Devas  'along  with  the  Yakfas,  serpents, 
and  Gandbarvas  remained  there  accompanied  by  their  respective 
SakHs  (powers)  * 

60.  Since  the  Daitya  was  made  steady  by  the  primordial 
club  and  Hari  stood  there,  he  is  fiunous  as  Adi-Gad&dhara.^ 

61.  Gay asura  spoke  to  the  Devas,  ^‘Whyhave  I  been  dece¬ 
ived  ?  The  pure  body  was  given  unto  Brahma  by  me  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  Yajfia.  Would  not  have  I  been  steady  at  the  sheer  ins¬ 
tance  of  Vijou? 

1*  Etymology  quoted  in  TSS  {Tfitthabrnt^) »  p.  S3B. 


922 


Vdjm  Fufdfa 


62»  Why  have  I  been  barasied  by  Surai  and  Hari  by 
means  of  the  club  ?  May  Devas  be  delighted  for  ever  now 
that  I  have  been  tortured/* 

63.  Gad&dhara  and  others  were  pleased.  They  all  simul¬ 
taneously  spoke  to  Gay&surai  **Speak  out  (choose)  a  boon*  We 
are  all  very  delighted**.  Gayasura  then  spoke  to  Devas: 

64.  *^As  long  as  the  earth  lasts,  as  long  as  the  mountauos, 

the  Moon,  the  Sun  and  the  scars  remain,  may  Brahm& 

and  Mahetvara  stand  on  the  slab  along  with  all  other  Devas* 
Let  the  holy  centre  be  named  after  me. 

65.  The  holy  centre  of  Gay&  shall  extend  to  five  krofas 
and  Gayaliras  to  one  krola.  Amidst  them  may  all  the  holy 
centres  grant  welfare  unto  all  men. 

66.  By  taking  ablution  etc.  and  performing  Tarpa^a  one 
should  offer  balls  of  rice.  Then  it  is  more  fruitful*  That  man 
becomes  a  great  soul  and  uplifts  a  thousand  members  of  his 
family. 

67.  All  of  you,  stay  (here)  ibr  ever  in  manifest  and  un- 
manifest  forms.  May  Gadadhara  himself  be  the  destroyer  of  all 
sins. 

68.  May  those  on  whose  behalf  the  Sraddha  has  been 
performed  and  Pindas  offered,  go  to  Brahmaloka.  May  the 
sins  due  to  Brahma^a  slaughter  etc.  of  those  who  report  to  this 
holy  centre  perish. 

69.  May  all  the  holy  centres  in  heaven,  firmament  and  the 
earth  such  as  Naimifa,  Pu^kara,  Ganga,  Prayaga,  Avimuktaka 
and  others  come  here  regularly,  O  Suras,  and  yield  welfare  unto 
all  men. 

70.  O  hosts  of  Devas,  of  what  avail  is  much  talk.  Unless 
one  of  you  Devas  stand  (on  this  slab) ,  I  too  will  not  be  steady- 
This  is  the  condition.  l*et  it  be  strictly  observed.** 

71.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Gay&sura,  Vi^iiu  and  other 
Suras  spoke,  *^A11  that  you  have  requested  for  shall  undoubt¬ 
edly  be  granted. 

72.  After  worshippii^  our  feet  (all  the  devotees)  will  attain 
the  great  goal.**  When  the  boons  were  granted  to  him  by  Devas, 
the  Daitya  became  delighted  and  remained  steady. 

73-76.  When  Devas  stood  steady,  the  urbom  deity 
(Brahmfi)  gave  unto  Br&hma^  fifty-five  villages  and  the 


44.77-86 


92S 


holy  centre  of  Gaya  extending  to  five  kroiat.  He  built  divine 
houses  endowed  with  all  necessities  o(  life  and  gave  Kdmadlum 
(wish-yielding  divine  cow) ,  Xdpaufkfa  (Kalpa-tree)  and  Parijita 
and  other  trees  also  were  given.  A  great  river  of  milk,  many 
streams  of  ghee,  exudations  of  honey,  streams  of  honey,  Isdces 
rich  in  curds  etc.,  a  lake  of  gold,  many  mountains  of  cooked 
food  etc.  were  given.  Brahma  created  different  items  of  food 
and  fhiits  and  gave  them  all  to  the  Br&hmariai.  While  giving 
these  things,  Aja  said,  leading  Brkhmatias,  do  not  beg  of 
othen”- 

77-78.  After  giving  away  all  these  things  and  bowing  to 
Adigad&dhara  Brahmi  went  to  Brabmaloka.  The  Brihma^as 
of  Gayi  officiated  as  priests  of  Dharma  in  his  sacrifice  at 
Dharm&ranya  and  later  begged  him  (for  Dakfi^i) .  Out  of 
covetousness  they  took  monetary  and  other  gifts  at  the  sacrifice 
of  Dharma.  Brahmi  came  there  and  cursed  the  Br&hmat^u.^ 

79-81.  BrkhmaiLas  even  when  everything  had  been 
given  by  me,  you  coveted  for  more.  Hence  you  will  always  be 
burdened  with  debts.  The  river  shall  flow  with  water  only  (and 
not  milk) «  The  mountains  of  foodstufis  will  turn  into  those  of 
rocks.  All  the  rivers  shall  flow  with  water  and  your  houses  will 
be  of  mud.  K&madhenu  and  the  Kalpa-tree  will  come  back 
to  my  own  region.’*  Cursed  thus  by  Brahma  all  those  Brahma^as 
imploringly  said  to  the  Unborn  deity: 

82.  “O  lord,  everything  that  bad  been  given  by  you  has 
gone  off  due  to  your  curse.  May  you  be  kind  enough  to  assign 
something  for  our  livelihood*’. 

83.  On  hearing  those  words,  the  sympathetic  Brahmi 

spoke  thus  to  the  Brahma^as:  ^*As  long  as  the  Moon  and  the 
Sun  shine,  you  will  be  maintaining  your  livelihood  by  means  of 
(the  earning  at  the)  holy  centres.  « 

84.  Those  meritorious  persons  who  perform  Sr&ddhas  in 
Gay&  will  attain  Brahmaloka.  I  will  also  always  be  considered 
worshipped  by  those  who  worship  you.” 

85-86.  The  stomach  of  the  Daitya  is  overlapped  by  the 
mountain  Viraja,  the  righteous.  Near  the  well  that  forms  its 


1.  The  itc^  is  repeated  in  NP.  It44.16.18,  AP.  114.36-38. 


924 


Fiyu  Purity 


umbilical  cavity »  goddes  Viraji  is  stationed.  One  who  offers 
Pinda  etc.  shall  uplift  t%^nty«ODe  generations.  His  (the  demcm’s) 
feet  had  been  made  steady  by  the  mountain  Mahendra.  A. 
man  who  offers  balls  of  rice  there  uplifts  seven  generations. 


CHAPTER  FORTYFIVE 
Gay^mdhdtmya  (Contd.):  Thi  Stoty  of  the  £ild 
/ifdrada  said: 

1.  What  is  the  origin  of  that  slab  whereby  Gay&sura  was 
kept  steady  and  submissive?  What  is  its  form?  What  is  its 
greatness?  Please  mendon  its  name. 

Sanatkumdra  said: 

2.  There  was  once  a  highly  refulgent  person  named 
Dharma.  He  had  mastered  all  sacred  lore.  His  wife  Viivarupa 
was  devoted  to  the  service  of  her  husband. 

3.  A  daughter  of  great  qualities  and  endowed  with  all 
the  auspicious  characteristics  like  Lak^mi  was  bom  of  her  to 
Dharma.  She  was  the  chaste  girl  named  Dharmavrata. 

4-5.  Whatever  good  qualities  there  are  in  the  three  worlds* 
were  present  in  her.  Dharma  searched  for  a  befitting  bride* 
groom  to  Dharmavrata  in  all  the  three  worlds*  but  in  vain. 
Then  he  told  her,  ‘^Perform  a  penance  for  the  sake  of  attaining 
a  bridegroom’’.  She  said,  *'So  be  it”,  and  went  to  the  forest. 

6.  That  girl  performed  a  very  severe  penance  which  could 
not  be  performed  by  anyone.  She  subsisted  only  on  the  air  and 
spent  ten  thousand  Yugas  in  that  Sveta  Kalpa. 

7.  During  the  course  of  his  wandering  over  the  earth*  the 
mental  son  of  Brahma,  well  known  by  the  name  of  Marici,  saw 
that  jewel  of  a  girl. 

8.  To  that  girl  who  was  endowed  with  beauty  and  youth 
and  who  was  engaged  in  the  greatest  penance,  Marici  asked, 
^Tell  me  who  you  are  and  to  whom  you  belong. 


45.9-20 


925 


9.  O  timid  lady^  of  excellent  vowa,  you  ere  a  fascinating 
one  by  this  beauty  of  yours.  1  am  the  son  of  Brahzzilt»  well- 
known  as  Marici.  I  have  mastered  the  Vedas/’ 

10.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Marici,  the  girl  replied  to 
the  s^e,  am  the  daughter  of  Dhaima.  My  name  is  Dhanna- 
vrata.  I  am  exulowed  with  penance. 

11.  O  leading  Brahmaqa,  I  am  performing  this  great 
penance  for  the  wooing  of  a  good  husband*’.  Marlct  thereupon 
sp>oke  to  Dbarmavrati  lovingly: 

12.  woman  of  axupicious  rites*  by  merely  looking  at 
me,  you  will  become  a  great  chaste  lady.  I  am  roaming  day 
and  night  on  the  earth,  only  with  a  desire  to  meet  with  a  chaste 
lady. 

13.  If  you  have  become  a  Pativrati,  I  shall  resort  to  you 
Come  unto  me  as  your  bridegroom.  There  is  no  other  girl  in 
the  world  like  you*  and  you  will  never  have  smother  bride¬ 
groom  equal  to  me. 

]  4.  Hence  O  Oharmavratk,  be  my  lawfully  wedded  wife 
now*’.  Dharmavrata  thereupon  told  the  sage,  sage  of  good 
rites,  request  Dharma  (for  my  hand).” 

15.  On  hearing  those  words,  he  went  to  Dharma.  Dharma 
saw  the  (prospective)  bridegroom  like  a  mass  of  refulgence.  He 
bowed  to  him  and  honoured  him  with  the  offer  of  seat  and 
materials  of  worship. 

16.  On  being  asked  ”Why  have  you  come  ?”  Marici 
replied  to  Dharma,  ^‘While  roaming  over  the  whole  earth  for 
the  sake  of  a  (marriageable)  girl,  your  excellent  daughter  has 
been  seen  by  me.  Give  that  daughter  unto  me.  You  will  have 
welfare  resulting  therefrom.” 

17.  After  honouring  him  with  Arghya  etc.,  Dharma  said 
to  him,  ”So  be  it”.  He  brought  Dbarmavrati  there  and  gave 
her  to  Marici. 

18.  He  granted  him  boons  as  well.  He  fulfilled  the  promise 
made.  The  Brahma^a  (Marici)  took  her  to  his  hermitage  along 
with  Agnihotra  (sacred  fire). 

19.  The  s^e  sported  in  her  company  like  Vif^u  with  Sri 
or  Sambhu  with  PirvaU  or  Brahm&with  Sarasvatl. 

20.  Marici  begot  of  her  a  hundred  sons  comparable  even 


926  PurU^ 

with  Viy^u.  Once  Marici  went  to  the  forest  for  the  sake  of 
flowers  and  fruits  and  returned  (very  dred) . 

21.  As  he  was  dred,  he  told  thus  to  his  chaste  wife,  ** After 
takingfood  massage  my  feet,  even  as  I  lie  down  on  the  couch'*. 

22.  Dharmavrata  said,  **So  be  it**«  As  the  sage  lay  down  on 
bis  bed,  she  rubbed  his  feet  with  ghee  and  b^an  to  massage 
them  with  eagerness. 

23-24.  Even  as  the  sage  was  becoming  sleepy  Brahmi 
came  to  that  place.  She  was  placed  in  a  dilemma,  **Shall  I 
continue  to  massage  the  feet  or  honour  the  Jagadguru  (the  pre¬ 
ceptor  of  the  world) Then  deciding  to  honour  him,  as  he  was 
Guru  of  Gurus,  she  stood  up« 

25.  She  offered  Arglgfa^  Pddyc  etc.  and  worshipped  Brahmi. 
Brahma  took  rest  on  a  couch  after  due  worship. 

26.  In  the  meantime,  the  husband  got  up  from  his  bed. 
Unable  to  see  Dharmavrata,  the  Brahmana  became  infuriated 
and  cursed  her. 

27.  ^'Abandoning  the  massage  of  my  feet  and  thereby  dis¬ 
obeying  my  behest,  you  have  gone  elsewhere.  Hence  you  will  be 
consumed  by  this  fire  of  curse.  Be  a  slab  of  stone." 

28.  On  being  cuned  by  her  husband,  she  spoke  to  Maiici 
in  a  great  fury,  "'While  you  were  sleeping,  Brahma,  your  father 
and  preceptor,  arrived  here. 

29-30.  It  was  yottr  duty  to  have  got  up  and  worshipped 
your  father.  O  sage,  strictly  adhering  to  pious  activities  (as  a 
wife),  I  carried  out  your  duty.  Hence  I  ara  gtultless.  Still  I  have 
been  cursed  by  you.  So  I  too  curse  you.  O  husband,  you  will 
have  that  curse  undoubtedly  from  Mabadeva." 

31-32.  On  seeing  her  husband  agitated,  she  too  became 
distressed.  She  went  to  Frajapati  and  bowed  to  him,  as  he  was 
lying  down.  She  kindled  the  fire  C^rhapatya  with  fuel  and  stood 
in  its  middle.  There  she  performed  a  very  terrible  penance. 
Similarly  Marici  who  too  had  been  cursed,  performed  a  terrible 
penance. 

S3.  Indra  and^thers  who  were  distressed  due  to  the  penance 
of  Marici  sought  refhge  in  Hart. 

34.  They  ^ke  to  Hari  who  was  sleeping  in  the  ocean  of 
milki^O  Ha^  we  sue  extremely  distressed  due  to  the  penance 


45.35-47 


927 

of  the  chaste  lady  and  the  sage.  O  Ke<ava,  save  the  three 
worlds.’* 

35.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Indra  and  others,  went 

up  to  Dharmavratft.  In  the  meantime,  Aja  (Brahmi)  woke  up. 
The  Devas  including  Keiava,  spoke  to  Dbarmavrati  who  was  in 
the  middle  of  the  fire: 

36.  chaste  lady,  who  has  the  capacity  to  perform 
penance  in  the  middle  of  the  fire?  But  that  has  been  achieved 
by  you.  It  is  really  a  thing  that  terrifies  all  worlds. 

37.  O  knower  of  Dharmas,  choose  any  boon  that  you  desire 
from  us’*.  On  hearing  the  words  of  Vi^ou  and  others,  Dharma- 
vrata  spoke  to  the  Devas : 

38.  am  unable  to  turn  back  the  curse  of  my  husband 
even  with  all  my  power.  Let  that  ctirse  given  by  Marxci  to  me 
recede,** 

39-41 .  On  hearing  the  words  of  Dharmavrati,  the  Devas 
spoke  to  her  again,  **0  daughter  of  Dbarma,  of  pious  rites, 
this  curse  has  been  given  to  you  by  a  great  sage.  It  cannot  be 
nullified  by  Devas  and  Br&hmaQas.  Hence  choose  any  other  boon, 
80  that  the  Dharma  proclaimed  by  the  Vedas  will  be  established 
in  the  three  worlds,  O  lady  of  auspicious  vows**.  On  hearing 
the  words  of  Devas,  Dhamavrata  spoke  to  the  Devas: 

42.  **0  immortal  gods,  if  you  are  not  able  to  redeem  me 
from  the  curse  of  my  husband,  please  grant  me  an  excellent  boon 
like  this. 

43.  I  shall  then  become  a  slab  of  stone  which  will  be  the 
most  auspicious  and  the  holiest  in  the  whole  of  the  Cosmic  Egg. 
I  shall  be  more  sanctifying  than  rivers,  lakes,  Devas  etc. 

44.  I  shall  be  holier  than  the  sages,  ascetics,  the  chief  of 
Devas  and  others.  Let  all  those  Lingas  in  the  three  worlds, 
whether  manifest  or  unmanifest,  abide  for  ever  on  my  body  in 
the  form  of  a  holy  place. 

45.  Let  all  the  holy  centres,  the  chiefs  of  the  constellations, 
all  the  Devas  and  the  Devis  (goddesses)  and  the  sages  stand  by 
(on  me). 

46-47.  Brahmi,  Vi^i^u  and  Rudra  shall  marit  their  footprints 
fci  me.  Thefivefires  andKumira  and  others  be  stationed  in  their 
multifbnni.  The  Devas  are  stationed  in  their  embodied  and 


928 


Pur^ 

unembodied  forms  fts  wdl  as  through  their  foot-prints.  They  are 
stationed  on  the  earth  over  the  slab  in  the  form  of  idols,  within 
the  dimension  of  a  kroia. 

48.  All  the  people  will  become  purified  on  seeing  that  slab 
which  is  the  destroyer  of  all  great  sins.  The  performer  of  Sradd* 
has  becoming  pure,  will  be  authorised  in  the  holy  rites  and  will 
attain  Brahmaloka. 

49.  Let  all  those  who  after  taking  their  baths  in  all  the  sac¬ 
red  waters  stationed  on  the  rocky  slab,  perform  Tarpapa  and 
then  the  Sraddha  along  with  the  offerings  of  Pi^^d a  attain  Brahma¬ 
loka. 

50-51 .  Let  the  visible  holy  centre  of  Gadadhara  be  the  most 
excellent  of  all  excellent  holy  centres.  May  those  who  stay  there 
or  die  there  go  to  the  region  oTBrabmk.  Let  the  holy  centres  of 
Var&oasI  and  Prayaga  stay  therewith  the  name  ofPurujottama. 
Let  the  holy  centres  named  GaAgas&gara  stay  in  the  holy  spot  of 
Phalgu.  The  holiest  of  spots  is  prerided  over  by  Gad&dhara.  By 
performing  Sraddha  of  dead  persons,  Pitrs  will  attain  salvation. 

52.  May  J’erdyu/ar  (viviparous  beings),  (oviparous), 

Svedajas  (sweat- born  beings)  or  Udbhids  (vegetable  kingdom) 
attain  the  form  of  Visou  after  abandoning  their  bodies  on  the 
slab. 

53.  Just  as  all  Yajftas  become  completely  accomplished 
when  Hari  Is  worshipped,  so  also  let  the  Sraddha,  Tarpapa  and 
ablution  be  everlasting  here. 

54.  Let  those  who  perform  the  Japas  of  the  mantras  of  the 
leading  Suras  on  my  body  become  Siddhas  and  the  masters  of 
Siddhis  ere  long. 

55.  It  is  certain  that  a  man  who  performs  Sr^dha  etc. 
uplifts  thousand  Pitfsof  his  family  including  himself  and  leads 
them  to  Vi^uloka,  theregicm  ofVifQU. 

56.  O  leading  Suras,  whatever  excellent  (sacred)  rivers 
there  are  such  as  Gahga  etc.,  whatever  auspicious  eddies 
there  are  whether  oceans,  or  important  lakes  such  as  Manasa 
etc.,  let  them  be  conducive  to  salvation  of  the  persons  who 
perform  Sriddhas. 

57-60.  l4et  the  Devatis<  go  in  their  embodied  forms  in  sooft 
placet  and  in  other  plsices  let  them  not  go;  Vtfnu  is  one  and 


45.61—46.2 


929 

single;  but  he  is  glorified  by  learned  men  as  having  three 
MarAs  (physical  forms).  Let  the  sages  and  all  the  groups  of 
Gandharvas  stand  on  the  slab  of  stone  along  with  the  Devas 
and  all  the  holy  centres.  The  Sil&  (slab  of  stone)  shall  be  called 
Samdeva-swUpa  (having  the  form  of  all  the  Devas).  Let  it  (the 
(slab  of  stone)  stay  as  long  as  the  Cosmic  Egg  lasts.  Those  who 
perform  Japa  and  penance  on  my  physical  body  in  the  form  of 
Rocky  Slab,  shall  also  be  permitted  to  perform  Homa  in  the  fire. 
May  it  be  eternal.  Let  the  Sraddha  be  eternal,  so  also  be  the 
Japas,  Homas  and  the  penances.  Let  them  stay  on  me  in  the 
form  of  huge  mountain’ ^ 

61-62.  On  hearing  the  words  of  the  chaste  lady,  the  Devas 
spoke  to  her,  * ‘Undoubtedly  whatever  has  been  requested  by 
you  shall  take  place.  When  you  remain  steady  on  the  head  of 
Gay&sura  we  shall  stay  there  in  the  form  of  footprints  and 
remain  there  steadily.”  After  giving  the  evidence,  of  having 
granted  the  boon,  the  Devas  vanished  there  itself. 


CHAPTER  FORTYSIX 

GaydmShUtmya  {Cmtd.)  ;  Sil&^Hriha  and  Other 

Sacred  Spats 


Sanatkumdra  said  : 

1.  O  Narada,  listen.  1  shall  recount  the  greatness  of  the 
slab  of  rock,  that  confers  salvation.  Devas  and  the  prominent 
sages  sing  of  the  greatness  of  the  slab. 

2.  That  rocky  slab  situated  on  the  earlh,  has  the  forms  dt 
Devas.  It  is  highly  sanctifying.  The  wonderful  Silatirtha^  is 
well  known  in  the  three  worlds. 


1.  SUS  Urtha.  tbe  same  si  Muod^nths,  ss  the  5ilS  wsi  pUeed  on  the 
bsck  of  the(fhsveu}headofGsys  (v.t2  below,  also  T5S,p.  337).  It  has  the 
combined  sanctity  of  Itself  and  that  of  the  lacred  bead  ef  Gaya  (v.6  below) . 
The  area  of  SiU  or  the  head  of  OaySsura  is  $  Sq«  Kms. 


930 


3«  On  touching  it,  all  the  people  in  the  worlds  went  to 
Hari’s  city  (Vaikuptha) .  When  the  three  worlds  became  void, 
Yama’s  city  became  empt/  thereby. 

4.  Accompanied  by  Indra  and  others  Yamawent  to  Brahma 
and  reported  (to  him)  the  wonderful  event,  Pit&maha,  take 
back  this  staff  of  office  as  well  as  the  assignment  offered  to  me 
as  Yama  (the  controller  of  the  world)/* 

5*  Brahma  then  said  to  Yama,  **Keep  it  in  your  house’*. 
Advised  by  BrahmA,  Dharmar&ja  retained  the  slab  in  his  house. 

6.  Yama  continued  to  carry  out  his  duty,  viz.  the  chastise* 
ment  etc.  of  the  sinnen.  Thus  the  weighty  slab  became  well 
known  in  the  universe. 


7.  The  slab  having  the  forms  and  features  of  Devas  is 
on  a  par  with  BrahmA,  Vifpu,  lord  Maheivara  and  Meru,. 
in  the  whole  of  the  Cosmic  Egg. 

8.  Since  it  was  held  (laid)  on  the  head  of  GayAsura  due  to 
its  heaviness,  the  happy  combination  of  two  holy  things  is  the 
bestow  er  of  salvation  on  Pitrs. 


Sacred  Placet  Connected  with  Sili 


Fart  iff  iht  ^ilS 

{Went  Nos*) 

Otfirr  dstoiii 

Middle  (Belly) 

MtAdipSla  (66) 

Middle  Region 

Mt.  NAga  (26) 

Foot 

Mt.  Prabhisa  (19)  Its  contact  with  the 

Phalgu 

RAma  Urtha 

Protruding 

(17). 

(1)  Pretm*3iLi  (15) 

Toe 

(?)  Pmbb&seia  ( 14) 

Left  Leg 

Psreta-Parvata  (70) 

Left  foot 

Mt.  Abhyudyantaha  (42) 

Right-band  side 

Mt.  Kunda  (95-96) 

l^hand 

Mt  Rhasma  KOta  ( 56 ) 

Mt  Udyantaka  ^46) 

Mt.  VAditmka  (44) 

Muodapritka 

Mt.  Grdhrak&ta 

Tlie  main  base  of  the  slab 

Vidyirtht  (p.6)  ia  the  tabular  statement  of  locational  and  iuiictionat 
elaboration  of  the  aacred  centre  at  OayA  includes  templet  of  RSma  andSiva, 
Yama’i  sacred  centre  and  die  famous  tree  (of  spirits)  under  R&ina*&U  (hill* 
cluster),  and  3iva,  GaoeSa,  Bralmu  KuQpa  and  Pbalgu  under 
RAmalili  (foot-hill  duster)  vdille  PretalUA,  Pretabhavinl,  Vifou,  Rlma* 
kuo^a.  KAka-bali  under  Preta  SUS  duster. 


46.9-20 


991 


9.  The  unborn  deity  (Bmhma)  performed  H^amedha 
(horse  sacrifice)  on  the  combination  of  the  two  holy  things* 
On  seeing  Vitnu  etc.  who  came  to  receive  their  due  shares  (in 
the  sacrifice),  the  slab  requested  : 

10.  ‘^All  of  you  take  the  vow  of  standing  on  the  slab  (for 
ever)  to  enable  Pitrs  to  attain  liberation'*.  Saying  **Sobeit** 
Viyt^u  and  other  Devas  stood  on  the  ;Sild  (the  slab  of  rock)  • 

11.  In  accordance  with  their  previous  promise,  Devas 
sta^Td  on  the  Silk  in  embodied  and  unembodied  forms  either 
through  their  idols  of  stone  or  footprints. 

12.  Since  the  Sild  was  stationed  on  the  top  of  the  tonsured 
head  of  the  Daitya,  it  was  called  MuQdapn(h&dri.  It  Is  the 
bestower  of  Brahmaloka  upon  Pitrs. 

13.  The  foot  of  the  Sild  is  concealed  by  the  mountain  Pra* 
bh&sa.  It  is  called  Prabhiisa  because  it  is  illuminated  by  Bhis* 
kara  (the  Sun-god) . 

14.  iSilddiiiffha  (the  thumb  of  the  SUd)  has  come  out  of 
Prabbasa  by  piercing  through  it.  The  lord  presiding  over 

ftha  section  is  glorified  as  Prabhaseia. 

15.  A  pordon  of  the  SildAguffha  is  remembered  as  Pretaiild 
(the  Rock  the  Dead).  If  Pitudasare  oiTered  to  the  dead  on  this 
rock,  the  dead  man  becomes  free  from  the  state  of  a  goblin. 

16.  A  devotee  should  perform  his  ablution  at  the  place 
where  the  Prabb&sa  mountain  meets  the  great  river.  Rama  had 
his  bath  here  in  the  company  of  the  gentle  lady  (i.e.  Sita). 
Hence  this  is  remembered  as  ^Ramatlrtha’. 

1 7.  Here  Rama  was  requested  by  the  great  river,  Rama, 
take  your  bath  (in  my  waters}.'*  Since  then  it  became  well 
known  in  the  three  worlds  as  ^Ramadrtha'. 

18.  Mantra — **Let  all  those  evil  sins  committed  by  me  in 
my  hundred  and  odd  former  births,  become  destroyed  due  to 
my  ablution  in  Ramadrtha." 

19.  A  man  who  takes  his  bath  repeating  this  Mantra  and 
performs  Sraddha  and  offers  Pinzas  in  Ramatirtha,  goes  to 
Vi^nuloka.  (When  the  great  river  requested  him),  Rama,  the 
elder  brother  of  Bharata,  said,  ^*So  belt"  and  stayed  here  accom¬ 
panied  by  Sltk, 

20.  If  a  devotee  repeats  this  Mantra — Rima,  O 


932 


Vdyu  Purity 


Rj&ma  of  mi^ty  long  arms,  O  the  bestower  of  fearlessnew  on 
Devas,  I  bow  unto  you,  the  lord  Devas.  Let  my  sin  become  des- 
troycd”: 

21.  If  the  devotee  takes  his  bath  repeating  this  Mantraand 

pcribnns  the  Sr&ddha  along  with  the  offering  of  his  Pitrs 

become  released  from  the  state  of  a  ghost  and  attain  Pitrtw 
(the  state  of  Pitrhood) . 

22.  Mantra—  lord  of  Oevas,  you  are  the  waters.  You 
are  the  lord  of  the  luminaries.  O  lord,  destroy  my  sins  commit* 
ted  mentally,  verbally  and  physically”. 

23.  After  bowing  to  the  lord  of  Prabhasa,  one  should  go 
unco  the  refu^nt  &va.  After  making  obeisance  to  Sambhu,  one 
should  perform  the  oblation  to  Yama. 

24*25.  When  Rama  had  gone  to  the  forest,  Bharata  came 
to  this  mountain  and  performed  the  offerings  of  to 

the  Pitrs.  The  lord  (Bharata)  installed  the  idols  of  Rama, 
l^akfma^a  and  the  sages.  In  the  holy  hermitage  of  Bharata,  the 
foot*print  of  Matahga  is  seen  by  all  men.  It  is  always  surround* 
ed  by  highly  meritorious  men. 

26.  It  is  established  as  a  model  for  people.  It  contains 
the  essentials  of  piety.  One  who  performs  Sriddha  in  Matafiga^ 
pdda  enables  all  the  Pitrs  to  cross  the  ocean  of  existence  (larft* 
sdra) . 

27.  A  man  who  takes  bath  in  Ramatirtba  and  wor¬ 
ships  Slt&  and  bows  down  to  Rameivara  b  not  reborn  as  an 
embodied  being. 

28.  The  middle  region  of  the  Sili  is  again  covered  by  a 
mountain.  It  was  urged  by  Dharmaraja  by  saying  ‘Wd  Gaceha — 
Do  not  go”.  Hence  it  is  called  J^aga  (mountain). 

29.  ^^Yamaraja  and  Dharmaraja  attempted  to  make  (Gaya- 
sura)  steady.  I  give  Bali  (oblation)  unto  them  for  the  sake  of 
liberation  of  (my)  ancestors. 

30.  There  arc  two  dogs  of  dark  and  variegated  colour. 
They  are  bom  of  the  family  of  Vaivasvata  (i.e.  of  Yama) .  I  am 
giving  Bali  unco  them.  May  they  refrain  from  violence. 

SI.  May  the  crows  stadoned  in  east,  west,  north-west- 
SDitth  and  soutb*west  accept  the  balls  of  rice  offered  by  me  (on 
the  groxmd). 


46.32-42 


933 


32.  O  strong  one,  you  are  Yama;  you  are  Yama*s  messen¬ 
ger.  You  are  a  crow.  Eating  the  oblations,  destroy  the  sins 
committed  during  the  seven  births.** 

33.  When  Rama  went  to  the  forest,  Bharata  came  to  this 
mountain.  After  offering  the  Pind^^  etc.  to  the  Pitrs,  Rameia 
was  installed  by  him  here. 

34t  After  the  bath  and  the  worship  of  Ramcia  acconq)anied 
by  R&ma  and  Slt&,  one  should  perform  Srdddka  with  the  offer¬ 
ings  of  Pit^ias.  Such  a  pious  soul  shall  go  to  Vifnu*s  abode  along 
with  the  Pitfs  and  hun^eds  of  the  members  of  his  family. 

35-36.  On  the  right-hand  side  of  the  Sild^  the  Kunda- 
parvata  (mountain)  is  established.  Various  deities  are  installed 
there.  Timir&ditya,  li&na,  Bharga — these  are  the  forms  of 
Maheivara.  The  Vahni»  two  Varupas  and  the  four  Rudras 
yield  liberation  unto  the  Pit|i<  After  going  to  the  hermitage  of 
Bharata,  the  devotee  should  bow  to  them  and  worship  them. 

37.  He  is  liberated  from  all  major  sins  as  well  as  minor 
ones  along  with  his  Pitn*  O  celestial  sage,  a  man  can  take  bath 
anywhere  in  the  hermita^^e  of  Bharata.  If  he  performs  a  Sfdddha 
etc.  the  fruit  thereof  is  not  lost  even  after  a  Kalpa. 

38.  Really  the  Srdddha  performed  anywhere  in  Gaya  is 
never  perishing.  Still  they  say  that  the  Japas,  Homas  and 
penances  and  anything  offered  (as  religious  gift)  at  Bharata*8 
hermitage  are  of  infinite  nature. 

39.  There  are  four  idols  of  Ravi  (the  Sun-god)  in  the  forms 
of  the  four  Yugas.  On  being  seen,  touched  and  worshipped, 
they  bestow  salvation  on  the  Pibrs. 

40.  There  are  two  deities,  viz.  Muktivimana  and  T^aka 
Brahman.  These  deities  are  the  boats  for  those  who  are  over¬ 
whelmed  by  the  ocean  of  worldly  existence.  Brahman  is 
Tiraka  (that  which  enables  one  to  cross  th^  ocean  of  Samsara) 
of  all  people  dead  and  alive. 

41.  He  who  secs  Trivikrama,  Puru^ottama  and  Brahm& 
becomes  a  pious  soul  and  attains  the  greatest  goal  along  with 

the  Pitrs* 

42.  At  the  left  foot  of  the  $Ud  there  is  the  mountain  Abhyu- 
dyantaka  established.  A  devotee  who  offers  Pipdas  there, 
leads  his  Pitn  to  Brahmapura. 


934 


Vdyu  Purihfa 


43.  Brahmi  perfonned  his  sacrifice  Bla^g  with  Suras 
near  the  Naimisa  forest.  That  Tlrtha  is  called  MukkyaHrtha  (the 
chief  of  holy  waters) .  Devas  are  stationed  at  its  feet. 

44.  O  N&rada,  the  excellent  among  the  sages,  whatever 
inauspicious  deeds  there  may  be,  perish  in  the  three  Padoj 
(spots)  in  those  holy  centres. 

45.  The  Naizxusa  forest  is  holy  and  resorted  to  by  meri« 
torious  persons  such  as  Vyisa,  Suka,  Paila,  Kaova,  Vedhas, 
3iva,  Hari. 

46.  By  their  mere  sight,  a  man  is  liberated  from  all  sins. 
On  the  right-hand  side  of  the  iitdp  there  is  the  Udyantaka 
mountain. 


Some  variants  {PdtkSntara  Vmes)^^addiiional  verses  after  verse  46. 

1-2.  This  mountain  is  established.  One  who  offers  Pit^das 
there  leads  Pitrs  to  the  city  of  god  Brahma.  Kupda  and  Udyan¬ 
taka  were  created  by  him  by  means  of  hii  penance.  Brahm& 
stayed  there  along  with  Savitr!  and  Kum&ra  (i.e.  Sanatkumara). 

3.  Haha  and  Huhu  and  the  others  made  the  sound  of 
music.  The  mountains  Kunda  and  Udyantaka  were  full  of 
songs  and  the  sound  of  musical  instruments. 

4.  It  is  here  that  the  holy  sage  Agastya  performed  an 
austere  penance.  From  Brahmi,  he  received  the  boon  of  great¬ 
ness  rarely  achieved  on  the  earth.  He  secured  Lopamudri  as  his 
wife  and  the  great  goal  (Mok^a)  to  his  Pitfs. 

5.  At  midday  the  devotees  should  take  their  bath  and 
worship  Savitii.  The  Brahmapa  %rill  become  a  master  of  the 
Vedas  and  very  rich  for  a  crore  of  births  (?) 

6.  By  taking  ablution  in  the  Agastya  Pada  and  by  offering 
Pindas  there,  one  becomes  a  pious  soul  and  attains  Brahmaloka 
along  with  the  Fitfs.  He  is  worshipped  even  by  the  heaven- 
dwellers. 

7.  A  man  who  enters  Brahmayoni  and  comes  out 
attains  the  greatest  Brahman,  He  is  liberated  from  the  miseries 
of  wombs  (i.e.  rebirth). 


935 


46  (Addl)  8*20 

8.  A  man  who  bowi  to  Gayakumira  attains  Brahmaoa- 
hood.  One  who  peifortos  ablution  in  Somakun^a  leads  the  Pitn 
to  Somaloka  (Lunar  world). 

9.  The  oblatira  to  the  crows  at  the  KnaSild  (the  slab  of 
crows)  is  conducive  to  freedom  from  indebtedness.  After 
bowii^  to  Svargadvireivara,  one  attains  Brahmapura  through 
heaven. 

10.  One  who  offers  Piud^ts  at  Vyomaga^i  becomes  free 
from  impurities  and  leads  the  Pitn  to  heaven.  There  is  a  heap 
of  Bhasma  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the  Sild,  O  Narada>  the 
devotee  should  take  bath  with  this  Bhasma  from  the  mountain 
called  BhasmakQfddrt. 

11.  Prapit&maha  (Brahmk)  b  stationed  on  the  Vafa  as 
Va|efvara  (Lord  of  the  holy  banyan  tree).  One  who  offers 
Piudas  at  the  holy  Matahgapada  leads  the  Pitrs  to  heaven. 

12*13.  Ahead  of  it  b  RukmiQl  Kupd*  wd  to  the  west  is 
the  river  Kapila.  KapUe^a  is  on  the  banks  of  the  river.  On  the 
new  moon  day,  one  should  take  bath  in  Kapilk  and  wonhip 
Kapileia.  If  he  perforins  Srdddka  in  M&heilkuudai  he  shall 
attain  heaven. 

14*1 5.  Gauri,  under  the  name  of  Madgala  there,  grants  all 
types  of  prosperity  and  glory.  Janardana  b  near  the  Bhamakdta^ 
One  who  offers  Pindas  in  his  hand»  with  mantras,  if  for  oneself 
and  without  gingelly  seeds,  in  the  left  hand,  if  for  otben  and 
mixed  with  curds  for  those  who  are  aliv^^all  these  attain  Vi^pu- 
loka. 

16.  Mantra — *^0  Janirdana,  this  Pi^d^  b  offered  by  me  in 
your  hand;  give  it  unto  him  who  dies  in  Gay&&$a*\ 

17.  Mantra — **Thb  PiQd^  has  been  given,  O  Janardana,  in 
your  hand.  At  Gayafir9a  thb  must  be  given  to  me  when  I  am 
d^d’*. 

18-19.  OJanirdana,  obebance  unto  you*  Hail  to  you  of 
the  form  of  the  Pitrs-  O  Lord  of  Pitrs,  obeisance  to  you.  Bow  to 
you,  O  cause  of  salvation,  O  Janardana,  O  lord  Lak^znl, 
you  assume  the  form  of  the  Pitrs  at  Gaya  yourself.  Obeisance 
be  to  you,  O  bestower  of  salvation  on  the  Pitfs. 

20.  After  meditating  on  Pu^darikakya  (Vifou)  one  becomes 
released  from  the  three  forms  of  indebtcdnesi.  Certainly  people 
attain  heaven  after  worshipping  PuudArikak^* 


936 


21«  Bhima  knelt  on  his  loA  knee  and  bowed  to  Janardana. 
After  performing  Srdddia  along  with  .the  offerings  of 
attained  Vifnuloka  along  with  hu  brothers. 

22-24.  On  the  right  foot  of  the  the  mountain  Preta* 
kufa^  is  held  by  Dhannarija  with  both  of  his  feet.  He  kicked  it 
off  with  his  feet  on  account  of  the  weight  of  sins.  In  the  forest 
of  Kara^grakaij^t  many  have  stayed  behind  (unliberated)  in  the 
form  of  departed  souls  (ghosts) .  They  are  the  cause  of  obstacles. 
The  Urtha  confers  salvation  on  the  Fitrs  through  the  perfor* 
mance  of  Sriddha  etc. 

25.  PretakGfa  attained  sacredness  due  to  the  contact  of 
the  Sild.  Devas  are  stationed  in  the  form  of  footprints  on 
Prttakdfa.  After  performing  Sriddha  etc.  there^  one  should  get 
the  Pitrs  released  from  gho$t*hood. 

26.  O  Br&hmaoa,  those  who  have  the  terrible  forms  of  a 
ghost  near  the  Sill  wander  over  the  earth  and  in  Yama’s 
world. 

27.  On  the  holy  head  of  Gay&sura  which  is  devoid  of  ghosts 
etc.,  Brahml  and  other  Devas  are  stationed  and  he  attains 
sacredness. 

28.  Among  Kikatas  (southern  Magadha)  Gaya  is  the 
holiest.  Rljavana  and  Rajagrha  are  holy.  The  hermitage  of 
Cyavanais  holy.  The  river  is  many  times  holy  (than  the  rest). 

29.  Hemadapd^  the  mountain  Hemakufa  are  in 

Vaikuntha.  One  who  performs  Sr&ddha  and  offers  Pinzas  etc. 
there  leads  the  Pitts  to  Brahmapura. 

30.  On  the  right  foot  of  the  6lli,  the  mountain  GfdhrakUfa 
is  held  by  Dharmaraja  in  order  to  stabilise  (Gaya) .  It  is  very 
holy. 

31-32.  Sages  performed  their  penance  there  in  the  form  of 
Grdhras  (vultures)  and  attained  liberation.  Hence  this  is  called 
Grdhrakuta.  Grdhrefvara  is  stationed  there.  A  man  who  sees 
Gi'dhrefvara  attains  l3ambhu*8  region.  After  bowing  down  to 
Grdhravata  one  shall  achieve  ooe*s  desire  and  attain  heaven. 

1.  FretakOta,  Grdbraklt«»  BhaAaakQta  etc.  are  the  tops  of  hillockt 
near  Gayl. 


9S7 


46  ( Addl )  33-38-46.47-5 

33.  He  who  ofien  in  the  Ordhraguhi  (vulture-caVe) 

attains  iSivaloka.  There  is  the  M&heivari  Dhari  (the  current  of 
Maheivara) .  He  who  offers  Pi^^as  there,  leads  the  Pitn  to 
heaven. 

34.  There  is  a  lake  called  Mulakfetra.  He  who  offers 
Piij^as  there,  attaint  Brahmaloka.  After  visiting  &va  he  attains 
freedom  from  indebtedness  and  salvation  ih>m  sins.  He  attains 
Siva  himself  after  visualizing  Siva. 

35.  The  middle  of  the  ^ild  (the  belly  portion)  is  over¬ 
lapped  (covered)  by  the  mountain  Adipala.  It  is  here  that 
Vighneia,  the  destroyer  of  obstacles,  stands  in  the  form  of  an 
elephant.  He  who  offers  Pi^^as  at  the  umbilical  region  (of  the 
god)  leads  his  PitfS  to  Brahmapura. 

36.  On  the  hips  (i.e.  ridges)  of  the  mountain  Mup^api^ytha, 
there  was  a  big  forest  of  Devadfcru  trees.  One  shall  destroy  one’s 
sins  by  seeing  the  mountain  Aravinda  on  Mui>daprftha. 

37.  A  certain  sage  performed  penance  here  in  the  form  of  a 
KrauiUa  (heron) .  The  mountain  was  marked  by  his  feet.  Hence 
it  is  called  Krauficapdda, 

38.  One  who  takes  bath  there  in  the  water  reservoir,  leads 
three  generations  to  heaven.  Lak9ndia  (Vispu)  is  stationed  on 
the  Sila  in  the  manifest  and  unmanifest  forma  along  vrith 
Devas.  Hence  the  SUd  is  full  of  Devas. 

[End  of  Addl.  Verses] 

47.  That  mountain  waa  brought  by  the  noble-souled 
Agastya.  Brahma  and  Hara  performed  a  fierce  penance  there. 

48.  There  is  the  excellent  Kunda  (Pool)  of  Agastya  which 
is  of  a  very  rare  excellence  in  the  three  worlds.  It  was  here  that 
the  eight  sages  achieved  Siddhi  after  performing  penance.  They 
attained  final  beatitude.  After  bowing  to  the  eight  sages  in  the 
Kuod^i  die  pilgrim  will  be  able  to  lead  the  fit^  to  Brahm&’s 
city. 

49.  O  celestial  sage,  an  auspicious  prominent  mountain 
was  established  on  the  left  hand  of  the  SUd.  It  is  always  re¬ 
sounding  with  the  sounds  of  musical  instruments  and  divine 
symphony.  It  is  called  mountain  Vdditraka. 

50.  Even  today  Vidyadharas,  accompanied  by  hosts  of 
Gandharvas  and  Apsaras-s  sing  divine  songs  in  chorus. 

51.  Mohana,  Suidtha,  Sailuja,  Mohanottama,  Parvata, 


938  Vdfytt  jhtr4(ta 

N&rada,  Dhyinl^  Sadgitx,  Pufpadantaka,  H&hi|  HQhu  and  othen 
perform  musical  concert. 

52.  Similarly  the  Gandhanrm  named  Gitraratha  surrounded 
by  all  the  Gandhsuvas,  sings  sweet  songs  of  great  festivities  on 
the  mountain. 

53.  Hence  that  mountain  is  resorted  to  by  Devas  for 
ever  even  today.  Hara,  the  lord  of  Devas,  is  desirous  of  applying 
BAama  all  over  the  body  like  an  unguent* 

54.  Rudra  accompanied  by  Parvatl  rqoices  on  that  moun« 
tain  resonant  with  music.  He  is  worshipped  as  he  is  the  greatest 
goal  of  the  Pitrs.  He  should  be  meditated  upon. 

55.  The  greatest  Atman  (Deity)  in  Gayk  is  either  the  lord 
of  the  cows  or  Gad&dhara  (the  wielder  of  the  mace).  O  sage, 
thanks  to  the  worship  of  Rudra,  the  M&yi  pertaining  to  Vi$QU 
becomes  quelled. 

56.  On  the  right^'hand  side  of  the  the  mountain 

Bhasmaku(a  is  held  by  Dharmar&ja.  Agastya  stays  there  with 
his  wife. 

57-58.  One  who  takes  bath  at  the  spot  of  Agastya  and 
offers  Findas,  goes  to  Brahmaloka.  It  was  from  Brahm&  that  he 
secured  the  excellent  boon  of  greatness  in  the  world,  LiOpamudri 
as  wife  and  the  highest  goal  (liberation)  to  his  forefathers. 
There,  on  seeing  Agastye^vara,  one  is  absolved  of  the  sin  of 
Brabma^a-slaughter. 

59.  On  seeing  Agastya  along  with  his  wife,  one  leads  the 
Pitrs  to  Brahmapura.  Dandin  performed  a  penance  on  the 
mountain  south  of  Sit&dri. 

60-61.  There  is  a  Vafa  (banyan  tree)  called  Vateivara. 
Prapitamaha  (god  Brahmi)  is  statiwed  there.  Beyond  that  is 
Rukminlkuod^-  To  the  west  of  it  is  the  river  Kapila.  Kapileia 
is  on  the  banks  of  the  river.  When  the  New  Moon  and  Monday 
coincide  with  each  other,  a  devout  man  must  take  bath  in 
Kapila  and  worship  the  lord  of  Kapila.  If  after  that, 
Sriddha  as  performed  and  Pi^dai  are  offered  the  Pitn  shall 
attain  salvation. 

62.  There  is  a  current  of  fire  coming  from  the  excellent 
mountain.  There  is  the  pool  called  Sirasvata  KuQde.  It  has 
been  created  by  Saratvatl. 


46.63-73 


*939 


63.  Lord  6ukr&  stayed  there  widi  his  sons  &^^da»  Amarka 

and  others.  O  excellents^>  a  man  who  performs  Srftddha  and 
offers  tn  the  various  spots  at  the  feet  of  the  eminent 

sages»  enables  the  Pitn  to  cross  (the  ocean  of  worldly  eaistexice}. 

64.  On  the  left-hand  side  of  the  ^ili  there  stands  the  moun¬ 
tain  Grdhrakata.  The  great  sages  assuming  the  form  of  cranes 
performed  penance  there  and  became  Siddhas. 

65.  Hence  the  mountain  is  called  Grdhrakuf  a.  The  deity 
Grdhreivara  is  stationed  there.  A  man  who  visits  and  bows 
to  Grdhrelvara  shall  achieve  the  region  of  Saihbhu. 

66.  He  who  offers  Pi^d^  on  GrdhrakQta  and  in  the 
oave,  attains  Sivaloka.  One  who  bows  to  the  Vafa  (the  banyan 
tree)  on  GrdhrakQta  attains  all  his  desires  and  goes  to  heaven. 

67.  On  seeing  Siva^  one  attains  freedom  from  indebtedness, 
release  from  sins,  and  goes  unto  Siva.  There  is  a  Soiak^etra 
(shrine  of  the  trident)  there.  One  who  offers  Pipd^  there,  leads 
the  Pitrs  to  heaven. 

68.  The  centre  of  the  Sila  is  overlapped  by  the  mountain 
Adipala.  Vighoeia,  the  destroyer  of  obstacles,  stays  there  is  the 
form  of  an  elephant.  On  visiting  him  a  devotee  is  freed  from 
obstacles.  He  leads  the  Pitrs  to  Brahmapura. 

69.  There  was  a  forest  of  Devadaru  trees  on  the  ridge  of 
the  mountain  Mu^d^Pf^tha.  After  visiting  the  mountains  Muq- 
dapr^tha  and  Aravindadrj,  one  quells  all  sins.  He  who  offers 
Pindas  in  the  umbilical  region  of  Gaya  called  Sufumni  (like 
the  nerve  Su^umn^  in  human  body)  leads  his  Pitrs  to  heaven. 

70.  On  the  left  leg  of  the  Sild,  the  mountain  Pretaparvata 
was  established  by  Dharmaraja.  The  mountain  is  called  Preta- 
iila  because  of  its  impurity  due  to  sins. 

71.  The  mountain  was  kicked  off  to  a  great  distance. 
Pretakuta  was  freed  from  sins  and  attained  sanctity  due  to  the 
contact  with  the  Sila. 

72.  There  is  a  pool  called  PretakuQdA  there.  Devas  are 
stationed  at  its  foot*  Performing  Sraddha  etc.  in  the  KuQd^>  one 
shall  relieve  the  Pitrs  of  goblinhood. 

73.  There  are  many  of  the  ghosts  staying  separately  and 
causing  obstacles  to  those  men  who  perform  Sriddha  etc.  for 
the  sake  of  the  liberation  of  Pitrs.  The  ghosts  assume  the 
form  of  archers  and  catch  hold  of  the  hands  (of  the  pilgrims) . 


Pvrd$it 


74.  There  is  a  rock  on  Mu^^apnfha  where  MahAdeva 
stays.  On  seeing  it  all  people  become  relieved  of  heinous  and 
lesser  sins. 

75.  GayAiiras  is  holy  and  devoid  of  all  sins.  It  is  devoid 
of  ghosts  etc.  Hence  it  is  highly  sanctifying  and  excellent. 

76.  In  the  KJkafa  land  (he*  the  territories  comprising 
southern  Bihar)  Gayi  is  the  holiest  centre.  The  RAjagrha  forest 
is  also  holy.  The  hermitage  of  Oyavana  is  another  holy  spot. 
The  river  Punahpuni  (?)  is  also  holy. 

77.  There  are  other  holy  spots,  via.  Vaiku^tha,  Lohadapda» 
Grdhrakftf^  and  Sonaka.  By  performing  Srdddha  etc.  here,  a 
pilgrim  leads  all  the  Pitrs  to  Brahmapura. 

78.  Auuming  the  form  of  a  heron,  a  sage  performed  peaa« 
nee  on  the  ridg^  of  Mu^dapntha.  Since  the  mountain  is 
marked  by  the  foot-prints  of  the  heron,  it  is  remembered  aa 
Krauftcapada. 

79.  One  who  takes  bath  in  the  water  reservoir  there,  shall 
lead  the  entire  family  to  heaven.  An  oblation  offered  to  crows 
on  the  rock  KakarilA,  is  conducive  to  relief  from  indebted¬ 
ness. 

80.  The  two  sages  Loma ia  and  Lomaharyand  performed  a 
great  penance  on  the  ridge  of  Mundaprftba.  Both  of  them 
attained  Siddhi  of  the  highest  magnitude. 

81-85.  Many  excellent  rivers  had  been  invoked  by  Lomaia^, 
viz.  Mahanadi,  Saravatl,  Vetravati,  Candrabhaga,  Sarasvati, 
Kaverl,  Sindhuvira,  the  excellent  river  Candana,  Vasi^thl, 
Sarayu,  Gang  A,  Yamuna,  Gandald,  Indira,  Mahavaitararii, 
Nik^ra  that  originates  from  heaven,  AlakanandA,  the 
northern  river  called  KanakA,  Kauiikt,  Brahmada,  all  these 
are  the  absolvers  of  everyone’s  sin.  The  two  rivers  Kt^QavalvA 
and  Carmavati  are  the  bestowers  of  salvation.  They  were  called 
the  most  excellent  of  all  rivers  by  Lomahar^a  daringly.  O 
excellent  sage,  by  means  of  the  power  of  his  penance,  NarmadA 
also  was  invoked  by  him*  He  who  takes  bath  in  any  of  these 
rivers  and  offers  Pinzas  leads  his  Pitn  to  heaven. 

1.  Like  other  Sthala-puriaas,  this  test  clahas  all  important  riven  in 
India  to  be  present  atGayl.  Small  streami  and  sueamiets  are  lupposed  to 
represent  big  riven  like  GaAgS,  Yamuai,  KSverl  etc. 


46.86-94 


941 

86.  A  man  who  eaten  the  holy  spot  Brahmayoni  and 
comes  out  of  it,  attains  the  greatest  Bttdiman  freed  from  the 
distress  of  wombs  (i.e*  re-birdi) . 

87.  A  man  who  bathes  in  the  PufkarinI  (holy  pond) 
Nik^ara  and  perfonxis  Sraddha  etc.  on  the  divine  Krauflcapada 
regularly  for  three  days«  leads  his  Pitn  even  if  diey  were 
Pahcapapins  ( those  guilty  of  the  five  heinous  sins)  to 
heaven. 

88.  Janardana  stays  in  BhasmakUta^  He  who  offers 
Pi^das  in  his  hands  whether  for  himself  or  ibr  others— if  it  is 
for  one’s  own  self  it  must  be  without  gingelly  seeds  (and  be 
offered)  with  the  sacred  thread  in  the  Savya  (hanging  from  the 
left  shoulder)  position;  and  if  for  those  who  are  alive,  it  must 
be  mixed  with  curds~ail  these  go  tp  Vi|puloka  (Vaiku^fha)  * 

89.  Mantra:  Jan&rdana,  the  Pii^da  that  I  offer  in  your 

hand,  may  please  be  given  by  you  to  that  person  for  whom 
I  have  given  it  to  thee  now.  It  be  given  to  him  after  he  is 
dead,  O  lord.^' 

90.  Mantra:  Janardana,  this  Pi^da  is  given  into  your 

hand  by  me.  When  I  reach  the  end  of  my  time  (when  I  am 
dead)  this  must  be  given  to  me  at  GayMiras.^ 

91.  O  Jan&rdana,  obeisance  to  you.  Bow  to  you,  granter 
of  liberation  to  the  Pitfs.  O  lord  of  Pitrs»  obeisance  to  you. 
Hail  to  you  in  the  form  of  Pitrs.*’ 

92.  In  Gay&i  Jan&rdana  assumed  the  form  of  Pitn 
himself.  On  visiting  that  Pundarikik^a  (lotus-eyed  god  Viffiti) 
one  is  released  from  three-fold  indebtedness. 

93.  Pupdaiikak^,  obeisance  to  you,  O  releaser  from 
the  three-fold  indebtedness.  O  Lakfinikanta  (Lord  of  Lakfail), 
obeisance  to  you,  be  the  granter  of  liberation  to  the  Pitrs.** 

94.  Kneeling  on  his  left  knee,  Bhima  bowed  tojan&rdana. 
After  peiforming  the  SfUddha  along  with  the  ofierings  of 

he  attained  Bralunaloka  in  the  company  of  his  brothers.  He 
became  a  pious  soul  and  uplifted  a  hundred  forefiithers  in  his 
family. 


Cr.  NF.  11.47.636^5. 


942 


PvribfA 


95.  On  the  Sild^  the  lord  of  Lakyn!  itayi  both  in  the 
manifest  form  as  well  as  in  the  uxunanifest  form,  along  with 
Devas.  Hence  the  SUd  is  Dmimayi  (full  of  Devas) . 


CHAPTER  FORTYSEVEN 
Gaydmdhitmya  {ConUl*)x  Tks  Glory  of  Adigadddhora 

Ndrada  onquind: 

1.  How  did  the  primordial  Gad&dhara  (wielder  of  the 
mace)  stay  in  the  manifest  form  7  How  did  be  stay  both  as 
manifest  and  unmanifest  ? 

2.  How  did  the  mace  (Gadi)  originate  and  how  did  he 
come  to  be  known  as  Adigadddhara  7  How  did  the  Gadalola 
spot  become  so  (sanctifying)  as  to  wipe  off  all  sins. 

Sanathtmdra  ropludl 

3.  There  was  an  Asura  named  Gada  whose  body  was  very 
hard  and  adamantine.  By  perferzning  a  very  terrible  penance 
he  secured  boons  from  Brahma.  When  he  was  requested,  he 
gave  up  to  Brahmi  the  bones  of  his  body  which  is  very  difficult 
to  part  with. 

4.  Urged  by  Brahmi,  Viivakarma  made  the  wonderful  club 
(out  of  it) .  He  turned  the  bone  of  the  demon  in  the  lathe  that 
could  crush  even  Vajra  (thunderbolt)  and  kept  it  in  the  heaven 
itself. 

5.  Afrer  a  great  deal  of  time,  in  the  Sv&yambhuva  Man- 
vantara,  the  demon  Heti,  the  son  of  Brahma,  performed  a  very 
terrible  penance.* 

&*7«  For  a  hundred  thousand  divine  years  he  subsisted  only 
on  the  air.  Then  looking  up,  he  stood  on  his  toes  with  bands 
raised  up.  Then  he  stood  on  a  single  foot  for  a  long  time  taking 
in  only  ^  or  dry  leaves.  Brahmi  and  others  were  pleased  by 

For  the  Story  of  Heti  cf  AP.  n4.2S.27  sad  NP.  II  (Le.  uttara) 

47.9.16. 


47.8-17 


948 


hi3  penance*  He  chose  the  boom  from  them,  the  bestowers  of 
the  boons* 

8.  should  become  very  mighty.  I  cannot  be  killed  by 

Devas,  Daityas,  or  human  beings  with  any  kind  of  S<istra  or 
Astra  (ordinary  weapom  and  miraculous  missiles)*  I  should  not 
be  killed  by  the  discus  and  other  weapons  of  , 

l^ina  and  others’*. 

9.  Saying  ^‘So  be  it*’,  they  vanished^  Heti  conquered 
Devas  and  began  to  rule  as  Indra.  Brahmi,  Kara  and  others 
became  afraid  (of  him) . 

10.  They  sought  refuge  in  Hari.  They  told  him,  ^'Kill 
Heti”.  Hari  said  to  them,  ”0  Suras,  this  Heti  cannot  be 
killed  by  Devas  or  Asuras. 

1 1 .  Give  a  great  weapon  unto  me  whereby  I  can  kill  that 
Heti”.  When  told  thus,  Devas  gave  the  (bone)  club  to 
Hari. 

12.  At  the  outset  he  held  that  (bone)  club,  so  he  was  call¬ 
ed,  ”Gad&dhara”  by  Devas.  After  striking  Heti  with  his 
(bone)  club,  he  went  to  heaven  along  with  Devas. 

13.  In  order  to  steady  the  rocky  slab  of  Gay&suraliras,  he 
went  there  armed  with  this  Gadi  to  stabilise  the  Sila.  Hence  he 
is  called  Adigadadhara.’ 

14-17.  Adigadadhara  is  manifest  in  the  form  of  Silds^ 
(rocky  slabs  and  mountains) .  Through  Mu^d^pr^tha  mountain, 
Prabhasa  mountain,  the  mountains  Udyanta,  Gitan&da,  Bhas- 
maku^a,  Grdhrakut^,  Pretakiita,  Adip&la  and  Aravindaka, 
Paftcaloka,  Saptaloka,  Vaiku^tfaa,  Lohadai^d^i  Krauflcap&da, 
Ak^ayava^a,  Phalgutirtha,  Madhxiiravi,  Dadhikulya,  Madhu- 
kulya,  the  great  river  Devika  and  Vaitaranl  etc.  Ad^adadhara 
becomes  manifest. 


].  This  etymology  does  not  explain  the  term  ia  Adjgadflrihara. 

2.  Near  GayS  there  is  a  chain  of  aacred  but  rocky  hillocks  and  their  tops 
are  called  Bhasmakflta,  Gfdhrakuta  etc.  Gayiiiras  condsti  of  this  chain  of 
hillocks  extending  to  about  two  miles. 

This  spot  was  well-knoim  before  the  Buddha,  as  we  find  the  record  of  the 
Buddha's  visit  to  Gayisisa  (Tkii  for  Gtyisina}  iu  Aiguttm  JViiS/a  VoL 
IV,  p.  302. 


944 


Vdfm  PnfO^ 


18*20.  The  following  are  manifest«cum*uiimanifest^ :  VifQu’s 
Pada  (footprint) » Rudrapada,  the  excellent  Pada  of  Brahman, 
K&<yapa’s  Pada,  which  is  divine  as  well  as  wherein  two  hands 
have  come  out,  the  Padas  of  the  five  fires,  the  prominent  Padas 
of  Indra  and  Agastya  and  the  Padas  of  Ravi,  Rfirtikeya, 
Kraufica  and  Matanga.  In  all  the  Lifigas  the  primordial  Gadi* 
dhara,  the  glorious  and  manifest  Gadadhara,  abides  in  manifest* 
cum •un manifest  form. 

21-25.  The  primordial  Gad^hara  is  stationed*  as 
GAyatrf,  Savitri,  Sandhyi,  Sarasvatl,  Gay&ditya,  Uttar&rka, 
Dakfiparka,  Naicnisa,  Svetirka,  Ga^anatha,  the  eight  Vasus, 
the  leading  sages,  the  eleven  Rudras,  the  Seven  Sages,  Soma- 
nitha,  Siddheia,  Kapardl^a,  Vinayaka,  Niriya^a,  Mahalakfm!, 
Brahmk,  Sripuruyottama,  Mirkai^deyeSa,  Kautlia,  Afigireia, 
Pitimaha,  Janlrdana,  MaAgali,  the  excellent  Pu^d^Ikakia 
etc.  (these  are  the  various  shrines  and  deities  in  Gayi) .  When 
the  Rkkfasa  Heti  was  killed  Vifnu  went  back  to  his  city. 

26.  When  the  Asura  was  rendered  motionless  by  Brahma  in 
the  company  of  Rudra  and  others,  Vedhas  (god  Brahma)  who 
was  overjoyed  eulogised  Adyagadap&ni  (the  primordial  wield  er 
of  the  club)  (as  follows)  : 

Brahmd  said: 

27.  I  bow  unto  Gad&dhara  who  is  the  bestower  of  boons, 
from  whom  Times  (Death^s)  blemishes  have  receded,  who  is 
stationed  in  Gay&,  whose  attributes  are  well  known,  who  poss¬ 
esses  many  attributes,  who  is  present  in  the  cavity  (of  the  heart), 
who  is  in  the  white- coloured  house  of  the  excellent  mountain 
and  who  is  worshipped  by  all  the  Ga^as  (groups) . 

28.  I  bow  unto  Gadadhara,  who  bestows  prosperity  on  the 
day,  who  grants  prosperity  on  the  hosts  of  Devas,  who  grants 
royal  glory  even  to  Bfaava  (iSiva),  whose  glory  tears  down 
Daityas,  who  bestows  glory  in  the  Kali  age  smd  whose  glory 

1.  Th^  vsnoos  Padat  (Ibotprints)  cffodi  and  sages  at  which  Pivdsi  are 
to  be  offered  are  the  msoifal-acin-UQiaaxuiest  fonni  of  Adigadadhara.  The 
idols  are  the  manifest  forms,  unmaaifest  in  fhalgu  (TSS  865). 

2.  These  arc  various  dddes  and  ihrioes  at  Gayi.  The  preseoee  of 
Gadidbart  is  thus  elahned  everywhere  io  G^yX. 


47.29-36 


945 

fuppreMa  the  impurities  of  the  Kali  age.  He  bestows  affluence 
on  those  who  seek  refuge. 

29.  I  bow  unto  him  who  is  both  steady  and  imateady,  who 
is  eulogised  regularly  by  masterly  persons^  who  possesses  wonder¬ 
fully  desirable  features,  who  is  vety  firm,  who  is  both  present 
and  not  present  in  the  traditions,  who  presides  over  flourishing 
persons,  who  cannot  be  approached  by  those  who  commit  sios^ 
who  has  his  own  abode  and  whose  spiritual  lineage  and  eulogy 
is  great. 

30.  I  perpetually  bow  to  the  supreme  eternsJ  Lord  Hari, 
who  is  incorporeal,  who  has  no  sense  organs,  who  has  no 
birth,  who  is  decorated  on  SUryavidt^  (altar  of  the  Sun) ,  to 
Gad&dhara  who  is  devoid  of  sound  and  face. 

31 .  I  bow  unto  Gadadhara  who  is  present  in  the  heart,  who 
is  faster  than  the  mind,  who  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  mind, 
who  is  always  without  a  second,  who  i$  eulogised  by  learned 
men  in  the  Ved&ntas,  who  is  Ciddimaka  (pure  consciousness) 
and  who  is  beyond  the  causes  present  in  Kali. 

SaMtkumdra  saidx 

32.  The  primordial  wielder  of  the  club,  on  being  eulogised 
thus  by  Brahma  along  with  Devas  said,  **You  choose  the 
boon’*  and  Brahm&  spoke  to  him  : 

33.  **We  will  not  stay  on  the  rock  of  divine  nature  and 
features  without  you.  We  will  stay  here  for  ever  along  with  you 
who  have  the  manifest  form.” 

34.  **So  be  it*’,  said  Gadadhara  and  stayed  there  along 
with  Sri  for  the  protection  of  the  worlds  and  for  the  salvation 
of  the  people.  The  manifest  form  Pupdarikiksa  (Vifpu)  b  weU 
known  as  Jan^dana. 

35.  The  primordial  and  eternal  form  that  is  incomprehen¬ 
sible  even  to  the  Vedas,  b  voy  clear  and  manifest  in  the  Sveta- 
kalpa,  will  become  unmanifest  in  the  Virahakalpa  although  it 
bad  become  manifest  before, 

36.  There  u  no  doubt  in  thb  that  he  will  be  clearly  manifest 
in  Gayaiiras  for  the  emancipation  of  the  worlds  and  the  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  Devas. 

1.  Refers  to  the  sacred  clt«ter  of  the  50rya  VidTarthl  p.  6. 


946 


Vdjm 


37.  Those  who  visit  lord  Adigadidhara  and  pray  to  him 
devoutly,  will  become  free  from  the  ailments  of  leprosy  etc.  and 
will  attain  Hari^s  abode. 

38.  Those  who  regularly  and  devoutly  visit  lord  Adigadi-^ 
dhara  will  attain  wealth,  food  grain,  longevity  and  good  health. 

39.  Men  who  bow  unto  Adigad&dhara  with  great  devotion 
and  &ith  achieve  good  qualities,  fame  and  happiness,  wives, 
sons  and  grandsons*  They  attain  Brahmapura.  They  wUl  enjoy 
the  fruits  of  a  heap  of  meritorious  action. 

40.  By  offering  scents,  one  will  be  rich  in  fragrance ;  by  offers 
ing  flowers,  he  attains  good  fortune;  by  offering  sweet  incense^ 
he  attains  a  kingdom  and  illumination  through  lamps. 

41.  By  gifring  fUgs,  be  becomes  free  from  sins;  by  under* 
taking  pUgrim^e,  he  attains  Brahmaloka.  He  who  performs  a 
SrUdha  and  offers  Pi^d^>  leads  his  PitfS  to  Vi^Qu. 

42.  Those  who  bow  to  Adigad&dhara  with  great  faith  and 
eulogise  him  and  wonbip  him,  lead  their  Pitrs  to  Madhava, 
Even  Siva  eulogised  Adigad&dhara  with  great  pleasure. 


^ivasaid  : 


43.  I  bow  to  Adlgad&dhara  who  though  unmanifest,  be¬ 
comes  manifest  in  the  form  of  MundaprHha  etc.  and  the  holy 
centre  Phalgutirtha  etc. 


44.  I  bow  down  to  Adigad&dhara  who  is  both  manifest  and 
unmanifest  in  the  forms  of  Padas  and  Mukhalihgas  etc. 

45.  I  bow  down  to  Adigadadhara  who  is  bom  naturally  on 
Mundstpr^tha  and  who  is  of  unmanifest  nature  in  the  form  of 
Jan&rdana. 

46.  1  bow  down  to  Gadadhara  who  is  stationed  in  the  &ilk 
of  divine  features,  who  is  worshipped  by  Brahma  and  other 
Suras  and  who  is  honoured  by  Devas. 

47.  I  bow  down  to  Adigadadhara  on  seeing,  touchii^,  wor« 
shipping  and  bowing  down  to  whom  people  attain  Brahmaloka. 

48.  I  bow  down  to  Adigadadhara  who  is  the  sole  cause  of 
Mahat  etc.  that  is  manifest  and  who  is  of  the  unmamfest  form. 

49.  I  bow  down  toAdigadadhara  who  is  devoid  of  physical 
body,  sense  organs,  mind,  intellect,  vital  airs  and  ego  and  who 
u  free  from  wakeful  and  dreammg  states. 


47.50--48.4 


947 

50*  I  bow  down  to  Adigadidhara  who  ia  free  from  the  eter¬ 
nal  aind  the  non-etemal(tCate)|  who  is  truth,  bliss  and  the  un¬ 
changing  state,  the  fourth  one,  the  luminous  Atman. 

SanatkumSra  said : 

51.  Eulogised  thus  by  Maheia,  Adigadidhara  became, 
delighted.  That  lord  stationed  himself  on  the  slab  along  with 
Brahmi  and  other  Devas. 

52.  Those  who  eulogise  and  worship  LiOrd  Adigadadhara 
who  is  stationed  on  the  mountain  Mu^^p^ftha  shall  attain 
Brahmaloka. 

53.  He  who  seeks  piety  shall  attain  piety;  he  who  seeks 
love  shall  secure  love  and  he  who  seeks  salvation  shall  get 
salvation. 

54.  Even  a  barren  lady  gets  a  sem  who  will  be  a  master  of 
Vedas  and  their  Ahgas  (ancUlaries).  A  king  attains  victory; 
a  Sudra  too  shall  attain  happiness. 

55.  By  worshipping  Adigadadhara,  a  person  who  seeks  sons 
gets  sons.  Everything  that  is  desired  by  the  mind  is  obtained 
throxigh  worship  etc*  of  Hari. 


CHAPTER  FORTYEIGHT 

Procidtffs  of  thi  Pilgrtmage  to  Gaya 
Sanathmdra  said  : 

I.  O  N&rada,  listen.  I  shall  recount  the  (procedure  of) 
pilgrimage  to  Gaya  which  yields  salvation.  Redemption  for  those 
who  perform  Sraddha  has  been  sung  by  Brahma  earlier. 

2-4.  If  one  makes  preparations  for  going  to  Gaya,^  one 
should  duly  perform  Sraddha  and  circumambtdate  the  vil¬ 
lage,  dressed  (^yin  loin  cloth  like  a  pilgrim.  He  should  then 
go  to  the  next  village  and  partake  of  the  remainder  of  the  Srftd* 

1.  Verses  2*5  deal  with  prelimioaries  before  itsrtsng  oopilgriinafe  to  Gayft. 


948 

dha.  TbereaAer>  he  shcnild  go  on  foot  everyday.  He  must  avoid 
taking  monetary  gifts.  He  who  abstains  from  taking  monetary 
gifts,  who  is  contented,  who  is  invariably  pure  and  who  is  devoid 
of  arrogance  enjoys  the  fruit  of  the  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  cen¬ 
tres. 

5.  Hewhc^e  hands  and  feet  are  controlled,  the  mind  is 
restrained  and  who  possesses  learning,  penance  and  fame,  attains 
the  fruit  of  the  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  centre. 

6.  At  the  entrance  to  Gaya  to  the  east  is  the  great  river 
Phalgu.  After  digging  upwater  (in  the  river  bed) ,  he  should  take 
his  bath  in  the  pure  water 

7.  After  pfenning  the  Tarpa^a  of  Devas  and  others 
and  after  performing  the  9riddha  in  accordance  with  the  injunc¬ 
tions,  one  should  recite  the  Vedic  passage  belonging  to  one^s 
own  branch  but  need  not  perform  ArghyepradSna  (offering  of 
Argfya)  and  Avahana  (invocation). 

8.  On  the  next  day  he  should  with  all  (bodily  and  mental) 
purity  go  to  Pretaparvata.*  The  intelligent  pilgrim  should  there¬ 
after  take  bath  in  Brahxnaku^d^  nnd  perform  Tarpa^a  of  Devas 
and  others. 

9.  With  all  purity,  he  should  perform  the  Sr&ddha  for 
those  who  are  Sapindas  (having  the  simitar  Pindas  i.e.  near 
kinsmen)  on  the  Pretaparvata.  The  intelligent  pilgrim  should 
face  the  southern  direction  and  wear  the  sacred  thread  as  Prd» 
cinSffiti  (from  the  right  shoulder  across  the  chest  and  passed  un¬ 
der  the  left  arm.) 

10-12.  **The  fire  with  Kavyabala  (?),  Soma,  Yama, 
Aryama,  the  Pitr-god,  like  Agnifvattas,  the  Barhi^ads  and  the 
Somapas  may  (please)  corner  you  are  the  deities  of  the  Pitrs»  O 
blessed  deities,  my  Pitfs  are  protected  by  you.  Those  kindred 
relations  born  in  the  family  are  to  be  offered  the  baU  of  rice.  I 


1 .  Versei6-7  deal  with  the  1st  dayof  the  YStrl.  VS.P.prescribei  only  bath 
b  Phalgu,  Srftddha  and  redtatkn  of  one's  Veda.  TSS.  (p.352)  prescribes 
vidt  to  PretaAlA  and  fifiddha  on  that  very  day  after  9rSddha  at  Hialgu. 

2.  The  rites  oa  the  2ad  day:  Visit  Co  PreUparvata,  bath  io  Brahma- 
kuo4a,  iriddha,  offeriag  of  Plodai  fine  to  oee*i  paternal  aascetors  ( w.  2S- 
25}  to  other  relatives*^  long  list  of  iriikb  is  given  in  W.3S-55.  The  UsC 
•bows  the  breadth  of  outlook  of  Che  ancients. 


48.1S-20 


949 


have  come  to  Gteyi  for  that  purpose.  Let  them  all  attain  perpe* 
tual  contentment  by  means  of  this  Sriddha*** 

1S«I4.  After  saying  this  and  performing  Acamana,  the  pil¬ 
grim  should  perform  Pringygma  with  effort,  in  order  to  obtain 
Brahmaloka  which  is  devoid  of  Ptmardoftti  (a  return  to  Sam* 
Sara  again)  *  After  performing  the  Sriddha  duly  in  this  manner, 
he,  should  invoke  the  Pitys  and  worship  them  with  the  mantras. 
Then  he  shotild  offer  the  balls  of  rice. 

15-16.  In  the  holy  centre,  on  the  Pretaiilk  etc.  the  place 
must  first  be  washed  with  PafUAgavya  separately  while  thdr 
mantras  are  being  recited.  Then  the  deities  must  be  worshipped 
mth  offerings  of  Caru  soaked  in  ghee.  So  long  as  the  gingelly 
seeds  are  taken  by  the  pilgrim  in  the  holy  rites  of  the  Pitfs, 
Asuras  run  off  from  the  place  of  holy  rites  like  deer  afraid  of 
lion. 

17.  The  Sriddha  of  die  mother^  should  be  performed  sep¬ 
arately  during  the  A^fakas  (i«e.  the  8th  day  of  the  three  months 
on  which  the  Pitrs  are  to  be  propitiated),  during  the  Vrddhi 
(increase)  days  and  on  the  day  of  the  death  at  Gaya.  On  other 
occasions  the  Sr&ddha  should  be  performed  along  with  that  of 
her  hiisband  (t.e.  one*t  father). 

18.  During  Vrddhi  Sraddba,  that  of  the  mother  should  be 
performed  first.  But  at  Gayk  that  of  the  father  should  be 
performed  first.  The  Sr&ddha  is  begun  with  the  offerings  of 
Padfa  at  the  outset  and  the  proper  laying  of  the  Kuia  grass  with 
the  tips  pointing  to  the  south  to  the  father  etc.  The  remaining 
part  of  the  Sraddha  is  to  be  performed  as  mentioned  in  the  res¬ 
pective  Gfhya  Sutras, 

19.  In  the  case  of  Sapind^,  the  Darbha  grass  is  duly  spread 
and  the  water  with  gingelly  seeds  is  offered  once  and  the  Sr&ddha 
is  performed  on  their  southern  side. 

20.  The  water  libation  is  offered  with  the  sacred  water  of 
the  Pitfs  holding  it  in  the  hollow  of  one’s  palms.  He  should  then 
offer  the  Akfajya  (ine^chaustible)  PiQda  with  a  fistful  of  powdered 
fried  grain.  The  other  kinsmen  are  then  to  be  invoked  in  the 
Kuia  grass  by  means  of  the  waters  with  gingelly  seeds. 

L  The  ipecjftl  SrSddhafor  one*i  mother  is  prescribed  during  theAftekas 
and  in  Vfddhi  Sriddba. 


PwrU^a 


21.  May  all  those  Devas,  sagei^  Pi  t|Y  and  human  beingSi 
mother*  and  maternal  grandfather!  and  others  beginning  vnih 
Brahma  and  ending  with  a  blade  of  grass,  be  propitiated  by 
this  water  libation. 

22.  May  this  be  the  water  libation  aloi^  withgingelly  seeds 
to  all  those  crores  of  past  (members  of)  families,  residing  in 
the  seven  continents  begmning  with  Brahmi  and  ending  with 
the  earth. 

23-24.  A  ball  of  rice  has  been  oflered  by  me  to  all  these: 
father,  grandfather,  great-grandfather,  mother,  grandmother, 
great-grandmother,  maternal  grandfather,  bis  father  and  hit 
grand&ther.  May  that  Pii;td^  be  of  everlasting  benefit. 

25-27.  At  Gayiliras  the  Piod^  ofiered  is  of  the  size  of  a 
first  or  that  of  the  green  emblic  myrobalan  fruit  or  that  of  the 
leaf  of  the  Sami  tree.  The  devotee  shall  uplift  seven  Gotras  and 
a  hundred  families.  The  Gotras — seven  in  number — are 
those  of  the  father,  mother,  one^s  wife  (before  marriage),  one’s 
sister  (after marriage) , one’s  daughter  (after  marriage),  and 
those  of  the  father’s  sisters  and  mother’s  sisters.  The  hundred 
and  one  families  are  as  follows:  father  and  his  twentyfour 
ancestors,  mother  and  her  twenty  ancestors,  wife  and  her  sixteen 
ancestors,  twelve  ancestors  of  the  sister’s  husband,  eleven  an¬ 
cestors  of  the  son-in-law,  seven  ancestors  of  the  husband  of  the 
sister  of  one’s  father  and  eight  ancestors  of  the  husband  of 
mother’s  sister. 

28.  There  is  no  invocation  in  a  Tirthafr&ddha  nor  is  screen 
erected  shutting  off  the  quarten.  There  is  no  defect  due  to  the 
viewing  of  others.  Clever  people  should  not  perform  the  Tirtha^ 
irdddha  out  of  pity. 

29.  This  following  is  the  proedure  in  the  Tirtka  Sriddkasi 
providing  seat  of  the  Pindas,  offering  of  the  Pmdas, 

jana  (ritualistic  sprinkling  with  the  Darbha  grass) ,  monetary 
gifts  and  the  Afmasaihkalpa  (ritualistic  expression  of  one’s  inten¬ 
tion  in  preparing  food). 

30.  Mantra:  invoke  all  those  members  of  our  family 

who  are  dead  and  who  have  no  other  way  of  salvation.  I  shall 


48.3N42 


951 


invoke  them  on  the  Darbha  gtw,  with  water  libatioiu  along 
with  gingelly  seeds. 

31.  I  invoke  all  those  persons  in  the  family  of  our  kinsmen 
who  are  dead  and  who  have  no  other  way  of  salvation.  I  shall 
invoke  them  on  the  Darbha  grass  with  water  libations  along 
with  gingelly  seeds’^ 

32.  Thus  the  pilgrim  should  meditate  on  the  Darbhas, 
repeat  these  mantras  with  the  offering  of  water  libations  along 
with  gingelly  seeds^  invoke  and  warship  the  Pitrs  and  offer  the 
Piodas  in  due  order. 

33.  am  offering  this  Pioda  in  order  to  uplift  those  per* 
sons  of  our  family  who  are  dead  and  who  have  no  other  means 
of  salvation. 

34.  I  am  offering  this  Pi^da  in  order  to  emancipate  those 
persons  of  our  maternal  grandfather’s  family  who  are  dead  and 
who  have  no  other  means  of  salvation. 

35.  I  am  offering  this  Pinda  for  the  uplift  of  those  penons 
belonging  to  the  family  of  our  kinsmen  who  are  dead  and  who 
have  no  other  means  of  salvation. 

36.  I  am  offering  this  Pi^da  for  the  uplift  of  those  persons 
who  (died)  before  cutting  teeth  and  those  who  were  afflicted 
even  while  in  the  womb. 

37.  I  am  offeriog  this  Pi^a  to  those  persons  who  were 
duly  cremated  and  who  were  not  those  who  were  struck 
dead  by  lightning  or  by  robbers. 

38.  I  am  offering  this  Pi^da  to  those  who  died  in  the  forest 
fire^  to  those  who  were  killed  by  lions  and  tigers  and  those  who 
were  slain  by  horned  and  fanged  (beasts  of  prey) . 

39.  I  am  offering  to  those  who  died  by  getting  hanged, 
who  were  killed  by  poison  or  by  weapons  and  those  who 
have  committed  suicide. 

4  I  am  offering  this  Pi^d^  to  those  who  died  of  hunger^ 
thirst  in  tlie  forest  path,  and  to  those  who  were  killed  by  gob* 
lins,  ghosts  and  other  evil  spirits. 

41.  lam  offerin  this  Pi^d^  for  the  upliftment  of  those 
persons  who  have  fallen  into  the  bells  csdled  Raurava,  Andha- 
t&xnisra  and  KilasQtra. 

42.  I  am  offerii^  this  Ptede  for  the  emancipation  of  those 


952  Fdju  PufO^a 

persons  who  have  fallen  into  the  terrible  helb  of  Asipatravana 
or  Kumbh!paka« 

43.  I  am  offering  this  Pip^a  for  the  uplift  of  those  persons 
who  are  stationed  in  the  various  abodes  of  torture  and  those 
who  have  gone  to  the  world  of  ghosts* 

44.  I  am  offering  this  Pi^da  for  the  uplift  of  those  persons 
who  are  stationed  in  the  various  abodes  of  torture  and  those 
who  have  been  taken  away  by  Yama’s  attendants. 

45*  I  am  offering  this  Pi^da  for  the  uplift  of  all  those 
penons  who  are  stationed  in  any  of  the  hells  or  abodes  of 
torture* 

46*  I  am  offering  this  Pi^da  to  those  who  are  bom  in  the 
animal  wombs  or  as  birds,  worms,  insects  or  reptiles  or  even  as 
trees. 

47.  I  am  offering  this  Ptoda  to  those  persons  who  are 
transmigrating  into  the  thousands  of  other  lives  as  a  result  of 
their  own  actions  and  to  whom  the  human  birth  has  become  a 
rarity. 

48.  I  am  offering  the  Pitida  to  those  Pitrs  who  are  stationed 
in  heaven,  firmament  or  on  the  earth  and  to  those  kinsmen  etc. 
who  have  not  been  cremated  duly  after  death. 

49*  May  all  those  Pitn  of  mine  be  propitiated  through  this 
Pinda  for  ever,  those  Pitts  who  exist  in  the  form  of  ghosts. 

50.  This  Pipda  has  been  offered  by  me  to  those  who  may 
or  may  not  have  been  my  kinsmen  in  this  birth  but  who  were 
my  kinsmen  in  the  other  births.  May  it  be  of  everlasting  benefit 
reaching  unto  them. 

5U53.  This  Pi^da  has  been  offered  by  me  to  all  those  who 
are  dead  in  my  fatberb  family,  to  those  who  sure  dead  in  my 
mother’s  family,  to  those  kinsmen,  elders,  fathers-in-law  or 
other  relatives  who  are  dead,  to  such  of  those  in  my  family  as 
had  neither  sons  nor  wives  and  hence  had  been  deprived  of 
Pi^d^  offerings,  to  those  who  had  been  defaulters  in  the  holy 
rites,  to  thofe  who  were  bom  blind,  to  those  who  had  been  lame, 
to  those  who  had  hideous  forms,  to  those  who  had  been  prema* 
turely  bom,  to  all  persons  of  my  family  known  and  unknown. 
To  all  those  the  Pii>d^  has  been  offered  by  me*  May  it  be  of 
everlasting  benefit  in  reaching  unto  them. 


4&54*62 


953 


34-55»  1  am  offering  thii  wth  Svfidhd  to  all  these: 

Those  who  are  bom  in  my  &ther*s  &mily  ever  since  the 
days  of  god  Brahmli:  those  who  are  bom  in  my  mother*s  family; 
those  who  had  been  my  servants  in  both  these  families;  to  those 
attendants  and  dependents^  to  the  friends,  ducipleSi  animals, 
trees,  birds  seen  or  not  seen,  those  who  had  rendered  help  unto 
me;  those  who  had  been  in  contact  with  me  in  my  previous 
births*^ 


56.  yfith  these  Mantras  the  pilgrim  should  offer  the  Pi^das 
to  the  women  too,  beginoing  with  mother.  In  that  case  he 
should  make  necessary  changes  in  the  substantives  and  adjec¬ 
tives  making  them  conform  to  the  feminine  gender. 

57.  Whether  in  one^s  own  Gotra  or  in  the  other  man*s 
Gotra,  the  offering  of  the  Pi  pdas,  the  performance  of  Sr&ddhas 
and  the  water  libation  is  futile  if  done  separately. 

58.  He  should  put  the  gingelly  seeds  in  the  vessel  of  Pipdas 
and  fill  it  with  holy  water.  He  should  perform  the  Parisicana 
rite  thrice  for  sdl  the  Pipdas  and  conclude  the  rite  by  prostra* 
ting  himself  (before  them) « 

59.  After  ritualistically  dismissing  the  Pitrs,  he  should  per* 
form  Jeamana  and  express  these  words  to  Suras  as  witnesses. 
‘*May  these  Devas,  Brahmi,  liana  and  others  be  my  witnesses. 
After  coming  to  Gaya  the  redemption  of  my  Pitn  has  been 
effected  by  me. 

60.  O  Lord  Gadadhara,  I  have  come  to  Gaya  for  the 
performance  of  the  rites  of  the  Pitrs.^  O  Lord,  you  alone  are 
the  witness  thereof.  I  have  become  free  from  the  threefold 
indebtedness**. 


61  •  O  Narada,  the  offering  of  Pipdas  in  all  the  places  should 
be  like  this  alone.  Beginning  with  the  Preta  mountain,  he 
should  do  it  in  all  the  holy  spots  in  due  order. 

62.  Thereafter,  O  celestial  sage,  he  should  throw  powdered 
fried  grains  mixed  with  gingelly  seeds  on  the  Pretaparvata, 
anticlockwise  and  facing  the  south. 


1.  To  requeft  pie  «upreme  ddty  of  CayS  to  ttaad  witness  to  one*i 
visit  may  appear  Amoy  to  socQe,  but  that  Penota  the  living  faith  of  the 
pilgrim  in  Gadidhara* 


954 


yijm  Amipa 


63.  Mantra:  ^^May  all  thota  Pitn  of  mine  be  pr<9ttiated 
by  meani  of  these  powdered  fried  grains  mixed  with  gingelly 
seeds,  those  Pitrs  who  exist  in  the  form  of  ghosts* 

64*65.  May  all  the  mobile  and  immobile  beings  begin¬ 
ning  with  Brahmi  and  endii^  with  a  blade  of  grass  be  propitia¬ 
ted  by  means  of  the  libation  offered  by  me.**  O  N&rada,  his 
Pitpi  shall  be  released  from  ghosthood.  Thanks  to  his  great¬ 
ness,  this  ghosthood  will  never  recur  in  his  family. 

66.  In  Gayaiiras  the  rocky  slab  Pretafili  is  well  known 
for  its  efficacy  in  bringing  salvation.  Adigadadhara  is  stationed 
in  the  form  of  the  holy  centre,  Mantra  etc. 


CHAPTER  FORTYNINE 
TAs  Proctdure  of  Pilgrimage  at  Gayd  {Continiud) 
SanatkwnAra  soldi 

1-3.  At  the  outset,  I  sbaU  mention  the  procedure  for  holy 
rites  in  the  five  holy  centres^  in  the  Uttara  (Northern)  Manasa.* 
The  pilgrim  should  perform  Acamana  and  sprinkle  water  over 
his  head.  Then  he  should  go  to  the  Uttaramanasa  and  perform 

1.  On  the  third  day  PotUatfrthS  rites  ere  to  be  observed.  The  6ve 
Urdus  are  Uttaramiaase,  Udldtirtha,  Kanakhala,  DakiieamSDasa  and 
Fha^pi*  TSS  (p.  360)  clarifies  that  five  baths  in  a  day  or  bath  in  each  of 
them  is  sot  necessary.  Phalgutirth  is  Gay&firas.  The  real  Kanakhala  is 
near  Hardwar.  Here  the  tank  u  supposed  to  represent  that  Himalayan 
Urdu. 

2.  As  I  stated  elsewhere,  these  Sthola  PurSaas  claim  all  the  sacred  spots 
in  the  three  worlds  as  being  present  in  their  loc^ty.  The  real  Uttva 
M&nasa  is  a  twia*Lake  of  Payoda  and  Pupdsiika.  It  b  modem 
Karakul  in  xtorthem  Pamirs  (AGP.70),  while  Southern  Manasa  is  the  twin 
take  M&nau-sarovam  and  RSksasa  Tala  of  the  KaiUsa  range.  But  this 
Purfioa  claims  two  ponds  at  Gay&  as  representing  those  two  magnificent 
lakes. 

The  Uttara«inisusa  tank  is  now  a  neglected  ^filthy  and  weedy  tank* 
(\^yardu21).  £v«a  Dakwa  Minasa,  Kanakhala  and  Udicl  Ttrtha  are 
partially  neglected  (Vidyarthi,  p.  19.  Table  S). 


49.4-12 


955 

the  holy  abhidon  repeating  the  following  Mantra;  am  tak¬ 
ing  foe  holy  bath  in  Uttaramhnaia  for  foe  purity  of  the 
soul  and  for  foe  achievement  of  SQryaloka  (the  r^ion  of  the 
Sun*god)  etc.  and  f<tf  foe  aalvation  of  foe  Pitri’\  After  prc^itia- 
ting  Devas  and  others  he  should  perform  Srkddha  along  with 
foe  offer  of  Pi^das. 

4.  Indeed  the  lake  Mknasa  is  here.  Hence  it  is  called 
Uttaraminasa.  The  devotee  shall  bow  to  the  Sun  and  wmhip 
him.  He  will  lead  the  Pitrs  to  foe  solar  sphere. 

5.  “Obeisance  to  the  lord  and  sustainer  (Sun)  who  assumes 
the  forms  of  foe  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus,  Saturn, 
R&hu  and  Ketu.’’ 

6.  From  Uttaraminasa,  the  pilgrim  should  go  to  the 
Southern  M&nasa,^  duly  observing  foe  rite  of  silence.  This  it 
oalled  Udlcltlrtha  (foe  Northern  Holy  Centre),  An  Audicya 
(Northern)  holy  centre  is  conducive  to  salvation.  A  man  who 
takes  the  holy  bath  here  goes  to  heaven  along  with  his  physical 
body. 

7.  The  holy  centre  Kanakhala  which  is  well  known  in  the 
three  worlds  is  there.  One  taking  bath  there,  shines  like  gold. 
The  man  attains  sanctity. 

8.  The  holy  centre  of  Dak^iparnknasa  is  on  the  south  of  it. 
Hence  Kanakhala  is  well  known  as  an  excellent  holy  centre. 

9.  These  are  three  holy  spots  in  the  Southern  Minasa.  The 
devotee  should  take  his  bath  therein  duly  and  perform  the 
Sraddhas  severally. 

10.  “I  am  performing  my  holy  ablution  in  the  Dak^ina 
Manasa  for  the  purification  of  the  Atman,  for  the  achievement 
of  the  solar  world  etc.  and  for  the  salvation  of  foe  Pitrs. 

11.  O  Divakara  (Sun) ,  I  am  taking  my  holy  bath  here  in 
Dakfuriamanasa  for  the  sake  of  freedom  front  the  torture  of  the 
sins  of  Brahmai^-slaughter  etc. 

12.  I  bow  down  to  the  Sun-god  for  the  propitiation  and 
redemption  of  the  Pitp  and  'for  foe  increase  of  sons,  grandsons, 
wealth,  prosperity,  longevity  and  health*’. 

1.  Dakfica  M&aaia  is  divided  into  three  separate  Ilnhas  :  the 
northern  part  is  the  Udid  Urtha,  the  middle  is  Kanakhala  and  the  southern 
part  u  Souther  a  N£inasa-.-T8S  559. 


956 


1S«  With  this  Mantra  the  pilgrim  should  perform  the  holy 
ablution*  worship  and  Sriddha  with  the  offering  of  Pind&s. 
After  bowing  silently  to  the  Sun,  he  shall  repeat  this  Mantra. 

14.  Thereafter  the  pUgrim  should  go  to  the  holy  centre 
Phalgutlrtha^  which  is  the  most  excellent  of  all  the  Urthas.  It 
yields  salvation  perpetually  to  those  who  perform  Sraddha  of 
Pitn  there. 

15.  Viwu  on  being  requested  by  Brahmi  formerly*  became 
Phalguka  (the  river  Phalgu?) .  When  its  dust  particles  were 
consecrated  in  the  Daksiptgtu*  it  came  to  be  known  as  Phalgu- 
ttrthaka. 

16.  There  the  wish-yielding  cow*  vis.  the  earth  bears  fruits 
in  the  form  of  water  through  Phalgu.  It  is  within  (underground 
hence  unseen) . 

17.  All  the  holy  centres  in  all  the  three  worlds  come  over 
to  Phalgutirtha  to  take  their  bath  along  with  Suras. 

18.  Gang!  is  the  %vater  oozing  out  from  the  foot  of  Vip^u. 
But  Phalgu  is  the  primordial  Gad&dhara  hinnelf.  He  assumes 
the  liquid  form  himself.  Hence  they  call  at  more  sacred  than 
Gahg&. 

19.  Even  he  who  performs  a  thousand  times  thousand  horse 
sacrifices  does  not  attain  that  fruit  which  one  attains  in 
Phalgutirtha. 

20.  perform  the  ablution  in  the  waters  of  Visnu*  in 
Phalgutirtha  with  due  respect,  in  order  to  secure  Viynuloka  for 
the  Pit|s  and  for  the  realisation  of  worldly  pleasures  and 
salvation’ ^ 

21 .  The  man  (the  pilgrim)  should  take  bath  and  perform 
Tarpa^  and  Sraddha  in  Phalgutirtha  in  the  manner  it  has 
been  mentioned  in  his  own  Sutra  (i.e.  Grhyasutra  he  follows) 
with  due  ofierings  of  Ptndas.  He  shall  then  bow  down  to 
Pit5maha. 

22.  ^^Obeisance  to  lord  Siva,  lia*  the  (great)  Purusa*  to 
Aghoravaqsadeva*  Sadyojata  and  Saxhbhu*’* 


1«  PbalguUrthii  u  Gayifirai  and  Its  boundaries  u  given  in  w.  26^29, 
from  N&gakata  to  GrdhrakQta»  there  to  Vflpa  aad  x^to  Uttars-mAnasa. 
It  is  beneath  the  mountain  Muo^^ntka-AP.  11^25-26  and  G.P.I.83.  4 
difier. 


49.23-33 


957 


23.  After  taking  bath  in  Phalgutirtha  and  visiting  lord 
'Oadadhara,  the  znan  (the  pilgrim)  shall  redeem  his  own  soul, 
ten  generations  of  the  past  and  ten  generations  of  the  future. 

24-25.  After  bowing  to  Lord  Gad&dhara,  one  should  wor¬ 
ship  by  means  of  this  Mantra:  **OfD,  obeisance  to  V&sudeva. 
Obeisance  to  Sankar^^la,  to  Pradyumna,  to  Aniruddha,  to 
Sridhara,  to  Vif  pu**.  After  performing  the  ablution  in  the  ^^five 
holy  centres’^  the  pilgrim  shall  lead  the  Pitfs  to  Brahmalcdta. 

26.  Futile  indeed  is  the  SridJha  of  that  person  who  does 
not  bathe  the  mace-bearing  deity  by  means  of  PafUSmtta  nor 
embellishes  it  with  flowers,  garments  etc. 

27.  From  the  N^akiita  mountain  to  GrdhrakOta,  from 
there  to  Tupa  and  from  there  upto  Uttaraminasa — This  is  men¬ 
tioned  as  Gay  &  liras.  It  is  otherwise  called  Phalgutirtha. 

28.  The  excellent  Phalgutirtha  is  beneath  the  mountain 
Muo^Aprffha.  AH  the  Pitfs  shall  attain  salvation  by  means  of 
the  performance  of  Sriddha  etc. 

29.  Thus  the  procedure  of  the  first  day  has  been  expliuned. 
Thi  Second  Day  X 

On  the  second  day^  the  pilgrim  should  go  to  the  Dharmi- 
rai>ya  since  it  was  here  that  Dharma  performed  the  Tc/fla. 

30.  O  Narada,  he  who  performs  ablutions,  Tarpof^a  and 
Srdddha  in  the  Matangavap!  (the  tank  ofMatahga)  obtains 
Brahmaloka  by  going  to  Dbarm&rapya. 

31-32.  After  going  to  Matahgav&pl  the  pilgrim  should  bow 
down  to  Matahgela  and  repeat  this  Mantras:  ^*May  the  deities 
be  the  authority  and  may  the  guardians  of  the  quarters  be  the 
witnesses  (to  the  fact  that)  I  had  come  to  this  Matahgav&pl 
and  the  redemption  of  the  Pill's  has  been  effected  by  me”. 

At  the  outset  he  should  perform  the  Sraddha  etc.  at  the  well 
(called)  Brahmatirtha. 

33.  (He  who  performs  the  'Sr&ddha  etc.)  in  between  that 
well  and  the  sacrificial  post,  enables  all  the  Pitrs  to  cross  the 
(ocean  of  existence).  After  bowir^  down  to  Dharma  and 
•Dharmelvara,  he  should  bow  down  to  the  tree  of  Mah&bodhi 
(the  great  enlightenment) . 

I.  The  lecond  day  of  Paftea  Urthl  YStri  b  the  4th  day  from  entrance 
at  Gayi.  NP.II.45.I03»104,  AP«  11S.$4»S7  mention  tbw  Tirthai  on  the 

^second  day*. 


Vdjm  Purd^ 


34t  **Obeisaxice  to  you  the  king  of  A^tthas  (holy  fig 
trees) ,  of  the  form  of  Brahma,  Vi^u  and  Siva,  the  tree  of 
enlightenment  {Bodhidrvmay  for  the  performers  (of  Sr&ddha 
etc*)  and  the  redeemer  of  the  Pitfs* 

Additional  Virsis 

1.  Repeated  Obeisance  to  the  Aivattha  (the  holy  fig  tree)t 
the  tree  with  tremulous  leaves,  the  cause  of  permanent  stabilisa* 
tion*  Obeisance  to  Yajfla,  the  Bodhisattva. 

2.  O  Pippsda,  you  are  the  eleventh  among  Rudras.  You 
are  the  fire  among  Vasus;  you  are  N&riya^a  among  Devas* 
You  are  the  king  of  trees* 

3*  O  Aivattha,  king  of  trees  since  N&rkyapa  stays  in  you 
perpetually,  you  are  the  most  auspicious  of  all  trees;  you  are 
blessed  for  ever;  you  are  the  destroyer  of  evil  dreams. 

4.  I  bow  down  to  Hari  who  has  assumed  the  form  of  a 
tree,  who  is  in  the  form  of  the  Alvattha  tree,  who  is  the  lord 
Pundarikaksa  ( Viynu)  wielding  Safikha,  Gakra  and  Gadi. 

[End  of  AddL  Verses] 

35.  As  a  result  of  seeing  and  touching  you,  may  our  kins* 
men,  of  our  family  or  our  mother’s  family  who  have  been  io 
distress,  attain  perpetual  stay  in  heaven. 

36.  O  king  of  trees  I  After  coming  to  Gaya,  the  three 
debts  have  been  repaid  by  me.  Thanks  to  your  grace,  I  have 
been  relieved  from  the  great  sin.  I  have  been  released  from  the 
ocean  of  worldly  existence.” 

The  Third Dajft 

37.  On  the  third  day*  the  pilgrim — the  son — should  duly 
take  bath  in  Brahmasaras  and  perform  Sriddha  with  the 
offering  of  Pipdns  repeating  the  Mantra  thereof. 


1.  The  Bodhidruzna  what  the  Buddha  evolved  Prattfi^amdipida,  bo* 
came  efdece  of  Sriddhel  It,  ho%mef,  ihowt  that  the  Buddha  was  ranpletely 

,  BrahsiaaiKd  by  the  time  of  this  Puriea. 

2.  The  3rd  day  of  PafieaUrch!  is  the  Sth  day  from  entering  Oayi.  Some 
at  Ae  cites  mentioned  here  are  found  in  AP»  115.  35*40  and  AiP«  II.  46. 


49je-47 


959 


38»  am  performing  the  ablution  in  this  holy  Tlrtha  for 
the  relief  from  the  three  debts*^  (Sr&ddha  performed)  in 
the  middle  of  (well)  and  Yupa  (the  sacrificial  post)  shall 
lead  the  Htp  to  Brahmaloka*’. 

39,  This  Yflpa  (sacrificial  post)  was  raised  by  Brahmi 
aficr  performing  the  sacrifice.  After  performing  this  Srflddha  in 
Brahmasarasi  he  redeems  all  the  Pitri. 

40,  After  circumambulating  the  Yupa,  one  attains  the  fruit 
of  V&japeya  sacrifice.  After  bowing  down  to  Brahmi^  he  wOl 
lead  the  Pitp  to  Brahmaloka, 

41,  ^'Obeisance  be  to  Brahmj^  the  unbom»  the  causal  form 
of  the  birth  etc,  of  this  universe.  Repeated  bows  to  the  re« 
deemer  of  the  devotees  and  the  Pitn**' 

42,  The  Mango  treer  growing  near  the  place  called  Gopra^ 
cara  were  planted  by  Brahma,  Merely  by  watering  them,  one 
shall  enable  the  Pitrs  to  attain  salvation, 

43,  Mantra  :  *^For  the  cause  of  the  salvation  of  the  Pitrs»  I 
am  watering  the  mango  tree  that  has  come  up  from  the  Brahma* 
saras  and  which  is  of  the  forms  of  Brahmi  and 

44,  (Like  a  Sage)  I  with  the  tips  of  my  hands  am  touching 
the  water  pot  and  the  Kuia  grass.  I  am  ofiering  water  at  the 
root  of  the  Mango  tree.  The  Mango  tree  is  watered  and  the 
Pitfs  are  propitiated.  One  action  alone  has  become  famous  as 
serving  two  ptirposes.** 

45*46.  Then,  with  a  controlled  mind,  the  pilgrim  should 
ofier  the  oblation^  to  Yama  with  the  Mantra:  ^'Yamaraja  and 
Dharmaraja  have  been  engaged  in  the  work  of  stabtllsii^ 
(demon  Gaya).  I  am  ofiering  oblation  to  both  of  them  for  the 
cause  of  the  liberation  of  the  Pitrs*’. 

O  Narada,  thereafter  the  pilgrim  should  offer  oblations  to 
the  dogs,  repeating  the  following  Mantra  f 

47.  ^^There  are  two  dogs  bom  of  the  family  of  Valvasvata 
(Yama).  They  are  dark  and  variegated  in  colotir.  I  am 
offering  oblation  to  them.  May  they  protect  me  for  ever^  on 
the  path”, 

I,  V.  45  ii  the  Maacra  foe  Yaznabali,  v.  46  for  (Bali  to  Dogs) 

and  V.  47  b  for  K4kaMi  (Ball  to  Grows) .  The  pIlgrizB  b  to  take  a  bath  (in 
Brahmasarat  thereof)'—  TBS  362«S63. 


V^PitrS^ 


4&49.  O  N&nida,  therttAer  the  pilgrim  should  offer  obla* 
tion  to  the  crows  repeating  the  following  Mantra :  **May  the 
crows  firom  the  quarters  of  Izwlra  (i.e«  East),  Varu^a  (West), 
V&yu  (North-west),  Yama  (South)  and  Nirrti  (South-west) 
accept  the  Pipda  placed  on  the  ground/* 


TTu  Fourth  D^x 

On  the  Fourth  Day/  the  pilgrim  should  perform  the  rites  of 
ablution  etc.  in  Phalgutirtha. 

50.  Then  the  pilgrim  should  perform  Sriddha  at  the 
foot  (ofVist^u)  in  Gayaiiras  along  with  the  offering  of  Pi^d^ 
The  real  Gay&iiras  is  within  the  limit  of  PbalguUrtha. 

51.  N&ga,  Janirdana,  Brahmayupa  and  Uttaram&nassi— 
these  delimit  the  holy  spot  called  Gay&iiras.  It  is  also  called 
PhalguUrtha. 

52.  That  area  of  Phalgutirtha  extending  from  the  seat  of 
Pitamaha  up  to  Uctaraminasa  should  be  known  as  difhcult  of 
access,  rare  even  to  Devas. 

53.  The  real  Gayaliras  extends  from  Krauficapada  up  to 
Phalgutirtha.  Since  this  is  the  lace  of  Gayksura,  the  Sraddha 
performed  here  is  of  everlasting  benefit. 

54.  The  region  below  the  mountain  Mundapr^tha  too  con¬ 
stitutes  Phalgutirtha.  It  is  here  that  the  primordial  Gadadhara 
as  stationed  in  both  manifest  and  unmanifest  forms. 

55.  The  foot-prints  of  Vi^u  and  otbm  are  there  conducive 
to  the  liberation  of  the  Pitrs.  This  Vi^upada  (the  foot-print 
of  Vi99u)  is  divine  and  destructive  of  sins  at  its  very  sight. 

56-58.  By  touchix^  and  worshipping  it  sins  are  dispelled. 
Whatever  is  given  unto  the  Pitfs  becomes  Akfoya  (of  inexhaus¬ 
tible  benefit) .  By  performing  the  Srdddha  along  with  the  Piriia 
offerings  one  leads  a  thousand  members  of  one’s  family  to  the 
divine  foot  of  Vispu  which  is  auspicious  and  infinite.  By  perfor- 
nwg  SfSddha  at  the  foot  of  Rodra,  a  man  takes  a  hundred 


1,  The  4tb  day  of  Fsacadrthi  k  the  6th  day  from  entry  into  GayS.  TSS. 
966  teUi  us  that  there  is  no  separate  6rSddha  oo  Gayftfiras  ^>art  from  the 
SrSddhss  st  Vifeupada  and  other  Gayifiras  is  the  boUettqiotat  Gnyk* 

It  extendi  from  Krauflcapsda  to  Phalgu  Hrlha  (v.  53) . 


49.59-68 


members  of  his  family  induding  himielf  to  Stva^s  city.  Similarly 
a  pilgrim  performing  the  iSrdddha  etc.  at  the  foot  of  Brahmapada. 
leads  hundred  members  of  his  family  to  Brahmaloka. 

59.  A  person  performii^  Srdddka  at  the  footprints  of 
Kaiyapa  leads  his  Pitrs  to  Brahmaloka.  A  person  performing 
8raddha  at  the  footprint  of  Daksin^gni  leads  Pitfs  to  Brahma- 
pura. 

60.  One  who  perforins  Sr&ddha  at  the  foot  (print)  of 
O&rhapatya  attains  the  fruit  of  V&japeya.  Alter  performing 
•SrAddha  at  Ahavanlyai  one  attaixxs  the  benefit  of  a  horse- 
sacrifice. 

61.  By  performing  8raddha  at  the  foot  of  (fire  called) 
Sabhya  one  attains  the  benefit  ofjyotiftoma.  He  who  performs 
8r&ddha  at  the  foot  of  Avasathya  leads  Pitts  to  Brahmapura. 

62.  Performing  Sr&ddha  at  Sakra^s  foot  leads  Pitrs  to 
Indraloka.  One  who  performs  Sraddha  at  Agastya’s  foot  leads 
Pitfs  to  Brahmapura. 

63.  He  who  performs  Sraddha  at  Krauftcapada  and 
Matangapada  leads  Pitis  to  Brahmaloka.  He  who  performs 
^r&ddha  at  the  foot  of  the  Sun-god  leads  even  the  perpetrators 
of  five  great  sins  to  the  city  of  Arka. 

64.  He  who  performs  Sraddha  at  the  foot  of  Kaitikeya 
leads  the  Pitrs  to  Sivaloka.  He  who  performs  i^raddba  at  the 
foot  of  Gai^teia  leads  the  Pit^s  to  Rudralolca. 


65.  One  who  performs  Tarpana  rites  in  the  holy  spot 
Oajakar^  leads  his  Pitfs  to  the  resplendent  heaven.  One  who 
performs  Sraddha  at  the  feet  of  otim  deities  leads  the  Pitrs  to 
Brahmapura. 

66.  Among  all  the  footprints,  those  of  Kaiyapa,  Visnu, 
Rudra  and  Brahma  are  glorified  as  the  most  excellent  of  all. 

67.  At  the  beginning  and  at  the  condusion  one  of  them  is 
remembered.  O  Narada,  it  is  condudve  to  the  welfare  of  the 
performer  of  the  Sriddha. 

68.  Formerly  sage  Bharadvaja  perfonned  Sraddha  at  the 
divine  feet  of  K&lyapa  began  to  offer  Pit^d^t  to  the  Pitri 
smd  others.^ 


1.  In  Older  to  esophuiie  that  Picdsi  are  to  be  offered  at  the  foot- 
priott  and  not  in  the  hands  of  the  dead  anceetor  even  if  he  come  ia  person. 


962 


FiSjmAnip» 


69.  Two  hands,  me  white  and  the  other  black,  out 

jutting  out  of  the  foot  (of  Kklyapa) .  On  teeing  the  two  (projeo 
ted)  hands,  the  sage  was  overwhelmed  with  doubts. 

70-71.  Then  the  great  sage  asked  his  mother  Sintk:  ‘'O 
nu^er,  is  the  Pi^da  to  be  offered  to  the  white  hand  or  to  the 
black  hand,  at  the  divine  foot-print  of  Kliyapa?  you  know 
father  (hence)  say.” 

4 

Smu  saidx 

Bharadvija  of  great  intellect)  give  the  unto  the 

black  one/’ 

72e  Then  Bhiradv&ja  attempted  to  give  the  Pinda  to  the 
black  one.  Then  the  white  one)  remaining  invisible  said,  *’You 
are  my  legitimate  boiom  son/’ 

73.  The  black  one  said,  **The  field  is  mine  (i*e.  the  wife) . 

Hence  give  thePipd^  to  me.”  Then  the  (wanton  woman  )• 

said  that  the  Pipdns  are  to  be  given  both  to  Kfetrin  (the  husband) 
and  the  Bljin  (the  procreator) . 

74.  Bhkradv&ja  thereupon  placed  the  Pi9dn  at  the  foot  of 
KUyapa.  Both  of  them  went  to  Brahmaloka  by  means  of  an 
aerial  chariot  to  which  a  swan  was  yoked. 

75.  Rama  attempted  to  offer  the  Pind^  At  the  sacrifice 
at  the  foot  of  Rudra.  His  father  Daiaratha  came  there  from 
heaven  stretching  his  hand. 

76.  Rima  did  not  offer  the  Pinda  unto  the  hand.  Then 
he  placed  the  Pi^dA  at  the  foot  of  Rudra.  Daiaratha  spoke  to 
Rama  who  was  afraid  of  tran^ressing  the  injunctions  of  the 
sacred  texts: 

77.  Son,  I  have  been  redeemed  by  you.  I  shall  attain 
Rudraloka.  If  the  PipdA  had  been  given  (deposited)  unto  the 
hand)  I  would  not  have  attained  heaven. 

78-79.  You  will  rule  over  the  kingdom  for  a  long  time  and 
protect  Br&hmaQas  and  other  subjects.  After  peiferming 
Yajfias  with  due  Dak^i,  you  will  go  to  Vifnuloka  along  with 
all  the  dtiaens  of  Ayodhyg  and  (including)  even  germs  and 
insects.” 

the  stories  of  Bhiradvija,  Rftma,  Bhlima  are  given  in  w.  68-82.  These 
ttoriei  are  given  is  NP.II.46.2a45. 


49.80-91 


963 


After  la^ag  this  Dtteratfaa  went  to  Rudralokt* 

60«81.  Bhlfma  invoked  hit  Pitr  (fitther)  at  the  excellent 
Viepupada  and  peiformed  the  3r&ddha.  When  he  attempted  to 
offer  t^Pindat  to  the  Pitri*  both  the  hands  of  hit  father 
3antanu  came  out  of  Gay&iirat.  Bhiyxna  did  not  offer  the  Pipd^ 
into  the  hands.  He  placed  them  at  the  foot*print  of  Vifou*  * 

82.  The  delighted  3antanu  said:  *‘You  are  definite  about 
the  meaning  of  the  sacred  text.  May  you  have  the  vision  extend¬ 
ing  to  the  three  times  (past»  present  and  future)  •  In  the  end^ 
may  Vi^iube  your  goaL 

83-88a.  You  will  have  death  at  your  will'’.  After  saying 
this  he  attained  salvation. 

By  worshipping  Kanakeia,  Ked&rat  Narasimha,  and  Vaxnana 
in  the  northern  path»  one  shall  redeem  all  the  Pitri. 

If  Pipd^  are  offered  at  Gay&iiras  invoking  their  name^ 
persons  (whoare  thus  invoked  if)  they  are  in  the  hell^  will  go 
to  heaven  and  those  that  are  (already)  in  heaven»  attain  liber¬ 
ation  (from  Sstihs&ra). 

If  anyone  were  to  offer  PiQd ^  of  the  size  of  3aml  leaf  at 
Gay&iiras  or  were  he  to  offer  fruits*  roots  etc.  he  shall  lead  the 
Pifrs  to  heaven. 

By  performing  Sr&ddha  along  with  the  Pipd^i  he  will  lead 
his  Pitrs  to  the  worlds  of  those  deities,  VisQu  etc.  at  whose  feet 
he  performs  the  Sriddhas.  Everywhere  the  mountain  Mupd^* 
prstha  lias  been  clearly  marked  by  these  footprints. 

88b-89.  All  the  Pitn  will  attain  Brahmaloka,  free  from 
ailments.  The  head  of  the  Asura  Hed  was  split  into  two.  Then 
the  Gada  was  washed  in  this  Tirtha.  Hence  it  is  conducive 
to  liberation.  It  is  called  Gad^ola^  It  is  the  most  excellent 
of  all  excellent  Urthas. 

90.  Since  the  Gada  of  Hari  waswashed  in  thatgreat  Urtha, 
it  was  called  Gadilola.  ^*I  am  taking  my  bath  for  the  realisation 
of  Siddhis.  1  shall  attain  the  imperishable  Pada  (station) 

Thi  FifthDayi 

91.  On  the  fifth  day*  the  pilgrim  shall  take  his  bath  in  the 

1.  TSS.  366  tell  ui  that  Gadilola  is  in  the  ftream  Pbaigu. 

2.  The  3th  day  of  PaftcaUrth!  is  the  day  ftom  eDtering  GayL  On 
dui  day  one  should  perfenn  Bath  and  Sriddba  at  Akfayavata,  hooour 


964 

holy  Tirtha  Gad&lola  and  perform  the  SrAddha  along  with  the 
offerings  of  He  will  (thereby)  lead  thePitrs»and  himself 

to  Brahznaloka« 

92«  The  devotee  shall  propitiate  the  Br&hmams  who  bad 
been  originally  assigned  the  duties  at  Gay&  by  god  Brahmi. 
He  should  propitiate  them  by  means  of  Havyas,  Kavyas  etc* 
Ifthey  are  satisfied,  all  the  deities  along  with  the  Pitfs  are 
propitiated 

93.  If  the  Sriddha  at  Akfayavafa  is  performed  with  great 
care  and  effort,  with  cooked  rice  alone,  the  pilgrim  will  lead 
the  Pitfs  to  the  indestructible  and  eternal  Brahmaloka. 

94.  If  a  single  Bridunapa  is  fed  near  that  Vatavrkia 
(banyan  tree)  with  vegetables  or  even  with  water,  it  is  as  fruitful 
as  feeding  a  crore  (of  Brahmaoas) » 

95.  Sixteen  types  of  gifts  should  be  made  to  the  priest  at 
Gayitlrtha  after  honouring  him  and  offering  him  clothes,  scents 
etc.  in  the  company  of  one’s  sons. 

96-99.  Whatever  ts  given  at  the  Vafa  tree  at  Gayftdrtha 
to  the  Pitfs  will  be  Ak^aya  (indestructible) .  By  seeing,  bowing 
to  and  worshipping  Vafeia  with  calm  and  composed  mind,  the 
pilgrim  will  lead  his  Pitn  to  the  indestructible  and  eternal 
Brahmaloka. 

Whatever  is  offered  to  the  Pitrs  at  Gayft,  Dharmapr$tha 
and  Brabmasaras  and  at  the  Vafa  at  Gayaflrja  is  Ak^aya  (in- 
exhaustible).  Obeisance  unto  that  Togaidjrin  (one  slumbering  in 
Yoga  sleep)  who  has  assumed  the  form  of  sm  infant  boy  and 
who  sleeps  on  the  top  of  the  Vata  tree  in  that  vast  sheet  of 
coswic  waters. 

100.  Obeisance  to  the  Ak^yava(a  which  is  a  weapon 
severing  the  tree  of  worldly  existence,  which  removes  all  the 
sins  and  which  gives  the  imperishable  Brahman. 

the  Gsyiwst  Brihmspss  with  offeriagi  and  fbod  and  get  their  bteuing  and 
worship  Pr^itSinaba.  CT.  AP.  115.  71-73. 

Thus  the  Gay&  YStri  Is  completed  within  seven  days.  3rSddba  at  Preta 
Silft  is  the  1st  rite  and  that  at.  Akfayavata  is  the  last  rite  culnunatiDa  in  the 
bkuing  of  the  Gayiwal^the  Brihmapa  privileged  by  god  Brahml  in  ^lii 
matter. 

there  are  sU^t  differences  In  the  order  of  Tirdms  to  be  vi^ted  in  A?  and 
NP  but  TSS  foUovfs  our  Text  (Vft.P.)  • 


50.^9 


965 


Jo  the  Kali  age,  people  are  the  follower!  o(  Mahefvara. 
Hence  Oad&dharahas  uiumed  the  form  of  a  Linga. 

1  bow  down  to  that  Prapitftmaha. 


CHAPTER  FIFTY 
Th0  Glpiy  of  Gdyd 


Sanaikwndra  saidt 


1.  The  king  Gaya,  performed  a  Yajfia^  wherein  Dakfi^ft 
was  offered  and  much  food  was  cool^»  It  is  impossible  to 
calculate  the  number  of  articles  made  use  of  in  it. 

2-4.  At  Gayi  there  were  twentyfive  mountains  of  cooked 
food  and  other  articles.  The  Brihina^ai  who  were  welI«honour« 
ed  in  the  difTerent  lands,  praise  it  like  this:  one  did  like 

this  before.  No  one  will  (can)  do  like  this  in  future.  The 
monetary  gifts  (in  gold)  coins  offered  were  innumerable  like 
the  sand  particles  in  the  world  and  the  stars  in  the  sky.  Formerly 
no  one  has  done  like  this.  No  one  will  be  doing  like  this  in 
future.” 


5.  The  Bryunaz^  who  were  well  propitiated  and  honoured 
well  in  the  different  lands,  praised  it.  VistLU  and  others  (gods)- 
who  were  pleased  spoke  to  Gaya,  ^^Mentiw  the  boon  you  wish 
to  choose.” 

6.  Gaya  requested  them,  **May  those  Brahmaj(^s  who  were 
formerly  cursed  by  Brsthmi,  become  sanctified.  Let  them  be 
honoured  in  the  sacrifices.” 

7-9.  For  the  performance  of  Gayairaddha  there  were 
BribnuiQias  of  fourteen  Gotras.  Even  Brahma  himself  has  to  carry 


L  Vemt  1-1  Im  give  the  itoryof  King  Gaya’s  munificent  sacrifice.  The 
object  of  the  story  is  to  infonnthatBriduBanas  who  were  cursed  by  Brahmafor. 
their  greed  were  abMlved  of  that  curse.  Verses  7-9  state  the  names  the  14 
Brihmaoaa— wlkcb  are  the  Gotras  of  present-day  OaySwali.  Out  of  these  1 1 
are  MSdhyandias,  2  SSmavedins  aad  only  ooe  Bgvedin  (follower  of  AivaU- 
yana  Sfitra) .  (Vidyarthl,  Appendix  IV,  p.  145) 


V^im  Parana 


966 

out  thdr  behes^.  They  were :  Gautama,  Kaiyapa,  Kautsa, 
Kauilka,  Ka^va,  Bhi^v&Ja,  Uianaa,  V&taya,  Pariiara, 
Haritktimira,  Mincjavya,  Lokakp  the  greatest  in  the  world, 
Vaaiftha  and  Atreya.  These  were  the  names  of  the  Gotras* 

10*  May  this  city  be  known  as  Gayk  after  my  name.  Let 
it  be  as  renowned  as  the  city  of  god  Brahma.*'  The  Suras  said, 
**May  this  be  so".  After  granting  the  boon  they  vanished. 

11.  After  enjoying  various  pleasures  Gaya  attained  the 
great  Vi^^uloka. 

There  was  a  king  named  in  the  city  called  ViiiU. 

He  had  no  sons.  He  spoke  to  the  Brabmapas  thus: 

12.  **How  can  I  beget  sons  etc.?**  The  Brahmapas  said  to 
VUaia,  '*You  will  have  everythir^  by  oflering  Pipdes  at 
Gaya. " 

13-14.  Viiala  offered  Pitides  et  Gayailffa  and  begot  sons. 
He  saw  in  the  sky  three  persons  white,  red  and  black  in  colour* 
He  then  asked,  ''Who  are  you?"  One  of  them,  the  white  one, 
said  to  Vijala,  "I,  the  white-one,  am  your  father.  I  have  come 
here  from  Indra's  world. 

15.  O  Son,  my  father  is  this  red  one.  He  had  slain  a 
Brahmaoa.  He  was  a  sinner.  This  black  one  is  your  grandfather 
by  whom  many  sages  had  been  killed. 

16*17.  They  bad  fallen  into  the  hell  called  A>dci.  They 
.have  been  liberated  by  your  offer  of  Fipd^s*  O  destroyer  of 
enemies,  you  offered  the  water  libation  saying,  shall  propi* 
tiate  my  Pitrs,  Pitamahas  and  Prapittoahas".  O  excellent  one, 
as  a  result  thereof  and  in  view  of  your  above  statement,  we 
have  come  here  simultaneously. 

Pdfkdniara  {Additional  verses) 

1.  All  of  us  have  been  liberated  by  you.  We  shall  go  to  the 
imperishable  heavenly  abode.  Accompanied  by  you,  the  good 
son,  all  of  us  shall  go  to  Brahmaloka. 

1.  Verses  llb*20a  give  the  story  of  the  child!  ea  lUng  VUsU,  how  by  per- 
Ibnsiog  Sr&ddha  And  Piodadins  at  GayS  he  got  a  son  and  promoted  hit 
father,  grandfather  and  great.graf^dMther  (though  siimm)  to  Brahmaloka. 
Story  repeated  in  AP.  115.M-59  aadNP.Il-44.26-42;  OF. 1. 64-54-39. 


.967 


50.  (Addl.  venes}.2— 50. 16*28 

2.  You  ahall  be  endowed  with  lona  and  grandaoni.  You 
will  rule  over  the  Idogdom  ud  then  go  to  heaven.  Becomix^ 
satiated  mtb  the  pleaiures  thereof^  you  shall  attain  salvation. 

[End  of  addl.  verses] 

18.  O  son,  liberation  has  been  effected  by  you.  We  shall 
go  to  the  excellent  heaven.  In  this  manner  the  excellent  liber* 
acion  of  the  Pitfs  mutt  be  effected  by  all  sons. 

19.  You  will  rule  over  the  kingdom  for  a  long  time.  You 
will  enjoy  the  rarest  of  pleasures.  You  will  perform  Yajfias  with 
suitable  Daktioas  and  goto Vif^u's city  (Vaiku^fha) thereafter.*^ 

20;  The  king  who  secured  the  boon  thus  ruled  over  the 
kingdom  and  went  to  heaven.  The  king  of  ghosts^  attained 
heaven  along  with  the  other  ghosts,  thanks  to  Gayftir&ddha. 

21  <*23.  In  order  to  secure  hii  liberation,  a  certain  ghost 
spoke  thus  to  a  certain  merchant:  *Tlease  offer  Pioda  in  my 
name  at  Gaykiiras  in  order  to  secure  for  me  release  irom  my 
ghosthood.  Take  (all)  my  wealth.  Taking  all  the  wealth  to  meet 
theexpenses  connected  with  the  Gayiiraddha.  I  have  given  you 
five-sixteenth  part  of  my  wealth  (as  your  remuneration).  I  have 
mentioned  my  name  (etc. )  in  the  proper  manner.** 

24.  The  man  went  to  Gayk  along  with  bis  kinsmen  and 
offered  Pi^du  to  the  king  of  ghosts  at  Gayiilrfa.  It  was  only 
after  that,  that  he  offered  the  Pipdas  to  his  own  Pitn. 

25.  The  ghost  was  libera  ted  from  ghosthood.  The  merchant 
came  back  to  his  house.  Thus  is  the  holy  centre  of  Gaya, 
of  Sambhu,  Vis^u  and  Ravi. 

26.  The  pilgrim  should  observe  fast  in  the  holy  centre  of 
Gayatri,  on  the  banks  of  the  great  river  Phalgu  (Mah&nadI) . 
After  taking  bath,  in  front  of  Gayatii,  one  should  perform 
Prdia^-Sandhy^  (Sandhy  a  prayer  to  be  per  fronted  at  dawn). 

27-28.  By  performing  the  Sraddba  along  with  the  offering 
of  the  Pi9d^>  the  pilgrim  shall  lead  his  faxhily  to  the  state  of 
being  favourabler  to  the  Bfahmaiyas.  After  taking  the  holy  dip 


1.  V«ria  20^25  tell  how  a  ghoit  attained  heaven  when  at  his  request 
(and for  coauderadoa  o£  tome  property)  an  unrelated  merchant  offered 
pindss  at  GayS. 

This  story  is  found  in  NP.1 1.44.44-50  and  in  AP.  115.60-6S,  OP  1.84 
32-33. 


968  Vi^Pur^ 

in  the  Samuditatlrtha  (in  the  holy  centre  mentioned)  in  front 
of  Sivitii  and  performing  at  the  midday  junction,  the 

pilgrim  leads  hundred  members  of  his  family  to  heaven.  Then 
with  a  desire  for  the  liberation  of  the  Pitn»  he  should  offer  the 
Piodas  tinto  them. 

29.  After  taking  bath  duly  in  the  holy  water  called  Pracl- 
•arasvatl  and  performing  the  Sandhya-prayer  in  the  evening 
the  pilgrim  shall  lead  the  Pitts  to  Vifpuloka. 

30-32.  A  person  who  has  incurred  sin  due  to  negligence  of 
performing  Sandhya  (prayer  to  be  performed  during  the  twilight 
period  e.g*  dawn  and  dusk)  in  many  births  becomes  libera¬ 
ted  by  performing  Sandhy&  on  three  occasions  in  the  holy 
centre  Lelihina,  in  Viiili  as  well  as  in  the  hermitage  of 
Bharata. 

A  person  who  takes  holy  ablution  and  offers  Pii^das  on  the 
ridge  of  the  mountain  Munda  (Ptf^ha)  marked  by  footprints 
and  near  Gadidhara,  in  the  holy  centre  Ak&iagahga  and  in 
those  called  Girikarnamukhas,  leads  hundred  members  of  his 
iamily  to  Brahmaloka.  He  who  takes  bath  in  the  celestial  river 
Vaitara^  leads  his  Pitfs  to  heaven. 

33-37.  A  person  who  takes  bath  and  makes  gifts  of  cows 
in  VmtarapI,  uplifts  twentyone  generations.  O  Narada  (I 
repeat  it  three  times  to  emphasize  that  at  is  true)  it  is  true  that 
he  who  takes  bath  in  VaitaranI  redeenis  twentyone  generations; 
they  say  so;  there  b  no  doubt  in  this.  The  river  Vaitaran!  which 
as  well  known  in  the  three  worlds  has  descended  down  into 
Gay&kfetra  for  the  redemption  of  Pitrs,  A  person  who 
performs  Sraddha  in  (on  the  bank  of)  the  God&varl,  Vaitaratf , 
Yamuna  and  in  the  celestial  river  Gangi)  in  the  holy 
centre  Gopraedera^  leads  his  Pitrs  to  heaven.  A  person  who 
offers  Plpd^s  in  Puskarinl»  in  Ghrtakulya  and  Madhukulyi,  in 
the  Kotidrtha  pertaining  to  Rukmini  leads  his  Pitrs  to  heaven 
by  observing  last  for  three  nights  and  visiting  the  sacred 
waters. 

38-39.  By  not  giving  gold  or  kine,  a  man  becomes  indigent. 
A  man  who  takes  ablutions  an  Ghrtakulya,  Madhukulyi, 
Deviki,  Mahinadl  (Phalgu)  and  in  the  celebrated  place  of 


50«40-50 


969 

meeting  of  Sili  (called)  Madhturavi,^  attains  the  benefit  of 
ten  thousand  Alvamedhas. 

40*  After  performing  the  Sriddha  along  wiA  the  ofiering 
of  the  man  uplifts  a  himdred  generatimu  in  bis  ftmily 

and  leads  them  to  Vif^uloka. 

41  •  One  who  offers  Pi^d^  ^  Dai&ivamedha,  Haxnsatirthat 
Amarakaptaka,  Koddrtha  and  Rukmakupda  leads  his  Pitn  to 
heaven. 

42*43.  By  taking  bath  in  V^tara^,  ffliftakulya,  Madhu* 
kulya  and  Kotidrtha  and  visiting  KotIfvara»  the  pilgrim  be* 
comes  a  rich  Br&hmapa  and  a  master  of  all  the  Vedas  fora  crore 
of  births*  Bowing  to  Mirimpdeyefa  and  Kofifa  he  shall  be  the 
redeemer  of  his  Pitrs* 

44*  Formerly  Safikara  sported  secretly  with  P&rvatP  in 
the  forest  called  Rukmapirijitavana  for  ten  thousand  Yugai* 

45*  Marici  went  to  this  Pirijatavana  for  gathering  fruits 
and  flowers.  He  was  seen  by  Maheia.  Since  he  had  become 
the  cause  of  the  obstruction  of  his  (Siva*s )  pleasure  he  was  curs* 
ed  by  Maheia. 

46*  '*You  shall  become  miserable***  This  was  the  cune* 
Afraid  of  him,  Marici  eulogised  Siva*  The  delighted  Sambhu 
spoke  to  him,  ^^Choose  an  excellent  boon*** 

47*  Marici  spoke  to  Safikara,  *^May  I  have  the  absolu* 
don  from  the  curse’*.  **At  Gayfi  you  will  have  the  liberation*', 
^ken  thus  by  Siva,  he  went  to  Gaya. 

48.  Marici  who  bad  been  cursed  by  Ifvara  formerly  attain¬ 
ed  Kf/natoa  ( blackness  of  coc^lexion) «  Seated  on  a  rock,  he 
performed  a  penance  very  difficult  for  anyone  eke  to  perform. 

49.  By  means  of  a  terrible  penance,  that  Brihmapa  attain* 
ed  ^uklatd  (whiteness  of  complexion) .  Hari  spoke  to  Marici, 

son,  choose  a  boon”. 

50.  Marici  said  to  Mfidhava,  ^*Wiien  you  are  satisfied, 
what  is  inaccessible?  I  have  been  relieved  from  the  curse  of 
Hara*  May  this  rock  be  sacred* 

1*  Venet  26^3  describe  other  sacred  ^ots  at  GayS  such  as  Giyatil- 
Urtha,  PrM-Satasvatl  Urth,  VittUj  LeJihIns  and  fiharata's  benxutafe  (30* 
32),  Muadaprftba,  AkSliaaagS  (26-32),  Vaitarap)  (33-37 )aDd  others. 

2.  Verm  44*51  tell  bow  Marid  was  absolved  of  tbe  cune  of  fiiva  by 
peribrmina  penance  at  Cayft. 


970 


Vdjnt 


51.  May  It  be  conducive  to  the  salvation  of  the  Pitrs'*. 
Saying  be  it*’  he  (Hari)  went  to  heaven.  A  man  approach¬ 
ing  Pu^karinl  of  the  heaven^dwellers  becomes  pure. 

52.  Whatever  is  offered  to  the  Pit|i  here  becomm  in* 
exhaustible.  He  who  takes  bath  tbere>  goes  to  heaven  with  hit 
own  physical  body. 

53.  He  shakes  off  his  sin  like  a  serpent  casting  off  its 
sloi^h.  That  fcnrest  of  clusters  of  lotuses  it  holy  and  is  resorted 
to  by  meritorious  persons. 

54.  The  slab  of  Pii^dn  (Pioduffli)  is  there.^  If  SrSddba 
is  performed  (at  P&Qdn^ila) ,  it  becomes  inexhaustible.  O  sage^ 
once  Yudhiithira  went  there  to  perform  $r&ddha. 

55.  At  that  time  he  was  requested  by  P&ndu»  **Give  the 
Pi^d^  into  my  hand/*  Avoiding  the  hand,  he  placed  the  Pi^d^ 
on  the  rock. 

56*58.  By  the  offer  of  the  Pinda  on  the  rock,  Vyisa’s  son 
(i.e.  Pa^du)  was  delighted.  He  granted  this  boon  to  his  son: 
^^Rule  over  the  kingdom  on  the  surfitce  of  the  earth.  May 
the  kingdom  flourish  perfectly  and  devoid  of  thorns  ( trouble¬ 
makers)  .  O  son,  you  are  my  saviour.  Go  unto  heaven  surround* 
ed  by  your  brothers  and  along  with  your  physical  boby.  Xiead 
those  in  the  hell  to  heaven  after  puriiying  them  by  means  of 
your  vision  alone”-  Saying  this,  Pi^du  attained  the  eternal 
immutable  region. 

59.  All  the  four  typesoflivii^  beings,  viz.  C/dMiJfas  (plants), 
SM/ajas  (sweat-bom  germs),  Ari{lajas  (eg^-bora  birds)  and 
Jof^jas  (womb-bom  animals)  who  approach  Madhu- 
srav5  shall  go  to  the  city  of  heaven  after  death. 

60.  By  performing  Sraddha  in  Dafaivamedhika  and 
Haihsatlrtha  one  goes  to  heaven.  By  bowing  to  Daii ivamedha 
and  Haihsa,  one  goes  to  8hrapura. 

61.  By  performing  Sriddha  in  the  hermitage  of  Bharata 
one  leads  the  Piers  to  the  abode  of  Brahma.  One  who  per¬ 
forms  Sraddfaa  at  the  footprint  of  Mataflga  leads  the  Pitpi  to 
Brahmaloka- 

1.  Vems  54-56  lUte  bo^  Yudbiftbira  dq^osited  the}  Pied*  at  the  6ili, 
not  10  the  band  of  Pipdu  though  he  appeared  penoaally. 


50.62-74 


971 


62*63.  After  churning  the  firewitUn  the  Sam!  tree  in  the 
company  of  Vi^jiu  and  others^  Vidbi  (Brahmi)  secured  the 
Tlrtha  for  the  purpose  of  Yajfia.  It  is  well  known  in  the  three 
worlds.  That  Tlrtha  named  Makha  (sacrifice)  yields  salva¬ 
tion  unto  the  Pitfs.  One  who  takes  bath,  performs  the  Tarpa^a 
rites  and  offers  Pindes  shall  attain  salvation. 

64.  After  bowing  to  Angaraka  (Mars)  and  livara 

(Siva)  at  the  Saiigma  (confluence),  the  pilgrim  leads  the  Pitrs 
to  heaven.  By  offering  at  Gayakftta  ^one  derives  the 

benefit  of  Aivamedha. 

65.  After  bowing  to  Bhasman&tha  at  Bhasmakuta.  one 
shall  redeem  and  uplift  the  Pitrs.  One  who  performs  ablutions 
at  Safigama,  shall  be  relieved  of  stni  and  he  becomes  liberated. 

66*67.  The  excellent  sage  Vai]$tha  performed  the  sacrifice 
called  Afvamedha.  fiaxhbhu  who  came  out  of  the  If  ft  (sacrifice) 
said  to  Vasiffha,  ^’Choose  a  boon'*.  Vasiytha  too  then  replied, 
^*0  Siva,  if  you  are  pleased  with  me,  O  lord  of  Devai,  you  stay 
here  (alone) Saying  be  it*^,  Siva  stayed  there. 

68.  One  who  offers  Pindas  at  the  footprints  of  K&madhttu 
in  Dhenukkra^ya  after  bathing,  bowing  down  and  worshipping 
them,  leads  the  Pitfs  toBrahmaloka. 

69.  By  taking  bath  and  performing  Sriddha  etc.  at  Karda- 
mala,  holy  centre  in  Oayknabhi,  near  the  ridge  of  the  mountain 
Mu^d^prstha,  one  is  absolved  of  debts  to  bis  Pitfs. 

70.  One  shall  wonhip  (the deities)  Phalgu,  Ca^dl,  Smaii* 
fikksl,  Mangali  and  others.  By  means  of  Vrfotsarga  (1^^^^  loose 
a  bull  calf)  one  shall  uplift  twentyone  generations  of  his 
family. 

71*74.  The  deities  and  the  sages  who  have  conquered  their 
sense  organs  are  stationed  here  and  there  (in  Gay&).  Meditating 
on  the  primordial  Gadidhara  and  offering  Pindas  etc.,  one  up¬ 
lifts  a  hundred  generations  in  his  fiunily  and  leads  the  Pitrs  to 
Brabmaloka.  The  six  Gay&s,^  viz,  Gaya*gaya  (Gayagaja),  Gaya* 

1.  Thii  enumerates  the  Six  GayMw  bat  worship  and  Pioda^ftna  lead 
to  muibi.  Gayip[aya  may  be  Oayl|aja.  If  so,  KSoe  tninki  it  may  a  itfemot 
to  the  pillar  with  a  figure  of  an  emhant  near  Oadidhara  temple— HD  IV. 
Foot  Note  150a.  This  vent  is  Anma  in  NF.  II.  47. 39-40. 


972  Pitrd^ 

ditya^  G&yatri,  Oadidhara,  G«y&  and  the  demon  Gaya— are  the 
bestowen  of  salvation. 

A  man  tvho  reads  this  holy  narrative  of  Gaya  continuously 
and  Ustezxi  to  it  with  faith  attains  the  greatest  goal.  A  man 
who  teaches  the  anecdote  ofOayh  to  the  Brahmapas  (or  who 
causes  Br&hmatias  to  read  it)  is  meritcMious. 

75-79.  Gayiiir&ddha  is  performed  by  himt  Certainly  it  is 
done*  He  who  studies  the  glnry  of  Gayh  with  purity  of 
has  actually  performed  R^asuya  and  Aivantedha.  O  Ntoula, 
Goddess  of  fortune,  Lakfoil,  vdll  stay  delightedly  in  the  house 
of  the  person  who  writes  this  book  or  %vorship8  it  or  causes  others 
to  write  it. 

If  this  book  containing  this  holy  anecdote  remains  in  the 
house,  there  is  no  fear  due  to  serpents,  fires  or  robbers  there. 

If  anyone  reads  this  glory  of  Gayi  at  the  time  of  Srdddha^  it 
Mali  be  considered  by  Pitrs  on  a  par  with  Gayairiddha  even  if 
it  is  against  strict  injunctions  in  the  Sistras. 

O  Sage,  if  anyone  knows,  shears  or  reads  the  anecdote  of 
Gay&,  all  the  Urthas  of  the  dtree  worlds  are  visited  by  him. 

SOta  said: 

80.  Sanatkumara  thus  narrated  the  holy  story  with  devo¬ 
tion  to  the  leading  sage.  He  then  bade  farewell  to  the  ^preceptor 
in  music  (i.e.  to  N&rada)  and  went  to  his  own  hermitage 
surrounded  by  holy  forests. 


c  —  capital 
h  »  huiband 


k  —  king 
1  —  lake 


mt  —  mountain 


o  ~  name 

p  —  page,  pp.  —  pages 


r  —  river 
f  ^  ion 

V  —  ve^  w.  —  vena 
w  —  wife 
Explan^n: 

Abhra— I(Part  I).  51  (Chapter  bl). 

27  (verse  no.  27) 


Abhra»  A  cloud.  Derivation  I.  51.27 
Abhuta-Saihplava,  Annihilatioa  of  all 
living  beings  It.  38. 237-240 
Abodes  of  gira,  I.  39 

Abuddhi-purvaka,  Unpremeditated 
(Creation)  1. 4. 68-78  Introd.  XXIV 
Accbod&»  a  river  (r)  L47.6 
Acehodaka,  a  lake  1.47.5 
Adhisima  (Asima)-  Kffoa,  (K.l 
P.  narrated  in  his  reign  I.l.f0-12; 
11.37,233-255 

A(jibaka,  Sixth  battle  between  Devas 
and  Asuras  11.35.75 
Adi-gadidhara,  The  chief  ddty  at 
Gay&,  The  story  of,  11.47 
Aditi,  Mother  of  g<^  II.  5.57-59 
Aditya,  The  Sun-god, o.  of  Kaiyapa  and 
Amti  11.22.34;  Names  of  Adityu 
II.5. 66-67 

Bom  ofKaiyapa  8c  Adid  21.5.57-60 
Advaita,  Sankaracirya't  philosophy 
11.42.28-39 

Agastya  (the  star  Can^HH)  1.50,  155- 
156 


Agf^  The  Fir^god,  Three  types:  Di¬ 
vine,  earthly  and  watery  1.53.5 

—  Tlie  race  of  1.29;  ibrt>mine  religi¬ 
ous  functions  of,  p.  165  Ftn.  1,2 

^  Agnis,  mutual  rations  IJ29.  Ftn.  2 

~Dhi|oyi  fires.  Division  intoVihan- 
niya  &  Upastheya  1.29.19  ff 

Agniohra,  (K)  The  first  K.of  JaihbO- 
dripa  1.33.11,37 

—  Divides  J.  dvlpa  into  nine  pans  and 
distribute  thm  to  his  sons  1.93.38- 
45 


Retire  for  penance  1.33.46 
Airivati,  Divine  dephant  nJ.20S- 
205, 207 

Ajatuh^  A  holy  centre  of  Sriddha 
11.15.48 


AkrOra,  Son  of  Gkchdini  11.34.106-109 
His  conspiracy  for  Syamantaka, 
I1.34.56-& 

—  His  generosity,  11.34.7942, 109 
Alaka,  Capital  (c)  of  Kubera 
Alakanandk,  (r)  1.42.25-40 
Amarakantaka,  A  mountain  (m)  sac¬ 
red  for  Sr&ddha  II.  15.4-1 6 

Amkvasu,  (K)  Fatbe  of  SatyavatL 
Vylaa's  mother  11.11.60.67 
Afhlumkn,  Grandson  of  Sagara,  son 
of  Aiamailjaia  11.26.165 

Anakaduodubhi,  (Vasudevt)  11.34. 

145-146,  159-161;  172-175. 

Andeat  Loie,  Intro.  XLVn-XLVIll 
Andhra,  N.  of  a  dynasty  11.37.34  IB- 
325 

—  N.  of  a  people  L45.124-131 
Afigiras,  One  of  the  Seven  Sage  1.91. 

16-18;  A  Vyksa  1.23.118 
Animal-Sacrifice,  Brahmanical  protet, 
King  Veu*s  assent  &  consequent 
folll.57.92-ni 

Annihilatioa,  Tht  extent  of  the  period 

L8.1 


Apava,  A  sage,  Cuxse  Sahasr&rjuna 
0.3143-47, 11.93.12-13 
Aruna,  Son  of  Vinatk,  Surya*s  chario¬ 
teer  n.6.63 

Arundhati,  W  of  Vasistha  0.9.80 
—  W  of  Dharma  11.6.2-3 
Aivaksrotas,  Creation  of  Mankind: 

4th  type  oS  creation  1.6.49 
Asamaniasa,SonorSagaiaand  Keiini 
0^26.154;  Banished  from  the  king- 
.  (k»L  0.26.163-165 
Astpatnvana,  N  of  a  hell  11.39.146- 
149 

Aftaka,  A  Sriddha  11.19.2;  p.  633, 
Ft.n.  2 

Asuri,  An  ancient  Sifikbya  teacher^ 


974 


V(^u  Purd^ 


Siva*idiidplel.2$.]$2.133 
Aimruif  Staffs  in  life,  clAisification 
and  duties  of  1.8. 154-1 81 
Astrooonw,  Arrangement  of  lumina* 
riei  I.S9 

Afvins,  Twin-godf,  Birth  story  of 
11.22.23-2^  32-79 

Aivini,  N.  of  a  cozutellation  11.5.4^ 
48 

AtharvaVeda,  No.of  Mantras  L€  1.69 
Alternative  Sarhhit&s  of,  1.61.54-55 
Genealogy  of  Teachers  1.61.49-54 
Avabhrtha,  Valedictory  Bath  after 
conclusion  of  a  sacrifice  11.41.40-43. 
Avidya,  Cosmic  aspect  (see  Creation, 
also  the  second  stage  of  meditated 
creation.) 

~  Tir^rotas  1.6.39-43 
^  Tne  third  stage,  Ordhvairotas 
ODeva-sarga,  creation  of  Devas) 
1.6.45-46 

»  The  fourth  creation  (Arvfiksr^ 
tai,  creation  of  mankind)  1.6.49-52 
^  the  fifth  creation,  Anugraha  Sarga 
1.6.53 

~  The  sixth  creation,  BhQtadi  1.6.54 
»  Five  joints  of  (viz.)  Tamai,  Moha, 
MahAmoha,  T&misra,  Andha- 
Tftmisra  1.6.35 

Ayu,  Son  of  Pururavaa  &  Urva^  11. 
29.48-49;  the  line  of  11.3 1 . 12  ff* 


^  Mountain  Systems  in  1.45.88-93 

—  River  systems  in  1.45.94-1 1 1 
^  People  in  1.45.115-134 
Bhaut)^  See  Manvantara 
Bhavini,  See  Sati  (Umi) 

Bhimasena,  A  writer  on  Music.  See 

Intro.  p.L 

Bhimaratbi  or  Bhima,  A  sacred  river, 
a  tributary  of  the  1.45.104 

Bhrgu,  A  mental  son  ^  god  BrahmA 
1.59.88 

—  Curses  Vifou  for  kilUag  hii  wife 

I. 1.137;  11.35.140-141 

—  Ratorcs  his  wife  to  life  11.35.148- 
147 

•—  Bhrgu's  da^hter  8ri  (I-ak^l) 
marries  Nkrayaoa  1.28.2 
^  Bhrgu's  Progeny  1.28.1  if 
Kugutufiga,  A  peuc  of  mt.  Himavtt 
I.23.196-I37.  A  Tirtha  specially 
meritoiious  for  Sr&ddba  ll.15.82 

Bbuvana-Koia,  11.39.10-48 
Kndusarai,  A  laka  at  the  foot  of  Kai- 
lasa  1.47.24 

Boar,  Divine  (See  Var&ha,  BrahmA) 
BrahmA,  god,  the  creator  of  the  Uni¬ 
verse  (Sometimes  identified  with 
Rudra  and  NAr&yana) 

Synthesis  of  Brahma,  Vi^>u  and  Siva 

II. 5.86.121 


Bali  (K),  Bali  promises  land  to  VA- 
mana  11.36.75-77 
.  bound  by  VArnana  11.36.85 
~  A  king  of  east  India.  Kingdoms 
Anga,  Vafiga  in  east  India  named 
after  his  ions  11.37.26-34 
BA^,  $.  of  Bali 

—arms  cut  off  by  11.36.  J  01 

Battles,  Twelve  b^ween  Suras  and 
Asuras  11.35.72-87 

Bbadrakara,  A  country  west  of  U. 
Kurus  1.45.41-66 

Bhadrasva,  A  Var|a  cast  of  Mcru 
(Mod.  China)  1.43.5-38 
Bh^ratba,(K)  S.  of  Dillpa,  Grand¬ 
son  of  AtbiumAn;  brought  Gaoga  to 
the  earth  11.26.167-168 
Bharaol  (YAmyi),  N.  of  a  constella¬ 
tion  II.5.46-48 

Bharata,  (K)  fUaldta^s  son  1.33.51; 
India  nam^  as  BhArata  1.33.52,  P. 
2S4Ftn.2 

Bhirata  Var^  India^  1.48.73-137 
^  Etymology  and  impOTtance  1.45. 
76-77 


BrahmA-NArAyaoa  sleeps  on  the 
Cosmic  waters  1.6. 1-3 

—  UpliAs  the  earth  as  a  divine  Boar 
1.6.1  J.27 

—  Bom  from  the  lotus  in  Vifnu’s 
navel  1.24.14 

—  Gontrovesy  with  Vi^ou  on  personal 
superiority  1.24.15-34 

—  Nine  creations  1.6.32-64 

—  Creates  nine  PrajApatii  for  World 
creation  1.9.61-63 

—  Creates  Devas  from  his  body  1.9.2- 

22 

—  Creates  other  creatures  from  him¬ 
self  1.9.23-51 

— Creates  Rudra  and  3akti  1.9.64-78 

—  (andVinku)  eulogize  Siva  1.24.^- 
164 

^  Prescribes  duties  for  different 
Aframas  (sta^of  life)  1.8.173-181 
Classes  of  society,  parts  of  BrahmA*s 
body  1.6.71 

BrahmacArin,  Duties  of  1.8.174  fT 

Brahmaloka,  II.S9.80-61 

Brahman,  The  concept  of  IL42.2&43 

Brahma-^varoi,  See  Manvantara 


Indix 


975 


Brahma-TlrthA,  A  holy  place  foe 
^ddba  It  15.51 

Brahma-Tuhga,  A  holy  place  for 
Sriddha  11.15.82-83 
Brhaipati,  The  preceptor  of  Devu 
-crapes  hk  brother^!  wife  Maznati 
II.37.S7-42 

^  His  wife  abducted  by  Somz 
11.26.28  ft 

—  deceives  Asurai  by  impenonatmg 
as  Sukra  11.36. 17>38 

Planet  Jupiter,  The  chariot  of 
1.52.77-78 

Budha,  his  birth-stoiy  11.28.27-43 
»  his  son  Fururavai  from  Ilk  11.23.17 

—  Planet  Mercury,  his  chariot  des¬ 
cribed  1.52.72  ff 

Buddhist  Bhik^us,  Intro,  p.  XLII 


GaiCraratha,  A  forest  1.47.6 
Cakfu  (r),  Countries  watered  by 
1.47.44 

Gikfuta  Manvantara,  See  Manvan- 
tara 

Candra,  The  mocm 
^  The  birth  story  of  11.28.1-11 
^  abducts  BrhasMti*!  wife  Tira 
11.28.28 

— '  married  to  tweaty-seven  daugbten 
of  Daksa  11.28.21 

-^Candra  and  Pitfi  (changes  in 
Moon’s  digits)  1.52.54-71 

—  His  position  11.39.129 

--  Gandra's  chaziot  1.52.50-54 
~  N.  of  a  Dvlpa  (Mod.  Tuva  in 
Siberia)  1.45.51-60 

—  N.  of  a  Urtha  sacred  for  Srkddha 
11.15.28-29 

Gandrabhkgi  (r).  The  Ghinab  1.45. 
94-96 

Gandraprabha,  N.  of  a  mountain 
1.47.4-5,  p.  304  Ftn.  3 

A  gToup  of  Brahiiuos  I.61.10. 

23-24 

Garmaovatl,  (r)  Ihe  Chambal  1.45.- 
97-98 

Qastes,  (Varoas)  Formed  in  the 
Tma  Yuga  1.8.154-164 
^  duties  of  castes  1.8.171-181 
^  Echo  of  Purusa  Sukta  L6.7 1 
Gbariots  (Divine),  Given  to  Yayiti  by 
Rudra  11.31.18 

.  Remained  widi  PfiTu’t  line  upto 
Par!k|it  and  disappeared  with 
anam^ya  and  reached  Vasu 
1.31.21 


^  Given  to  Brbadratha  of  Magadha 
bylndra  11.31.27 

— -  taken  by  Bhima  af^  killing  Jark- 
tandha  and  gifted  to  KrfQa  11.31 .27 

—  of  Planets  :  The  Sun  1.51.54  ff 
— Budha  (Mercury)  L52.72-73 

—  Sukra  (Venus)  1.52.74-75 
^  Ahgiras  (Man)  1.52.76 

~  Bfuitpati  (Jupiter)  1.52.77-78 

—  9am  (Saturn)  1.52.79 
—RAhu  1.52.60-81 

—  Ketu  1.52.82-83 

Qdes  of  gods  :  On  Mt.  Meru,  I.50.87- 

101 

Qouda,  Their  formation  1.51.22-26: 
Kinds  1.51.28-37 
Pufkarivartakas  1.51.39-40 
Paijanya  1.51.43-50 
Goratellatiom  (Naksatras)  as  diiti> 
buted  in  Vitw  IL5.46-53 
Construction  of  Towns,  Forts  etc. 

1.8.108-117 
Continents  (Dvlpas) 

Thar  logons  1.34.24-33 
Caturdvipi  Theory  1. 34.4^57.  Ft 
Note  2  p.  241 

Saptadvii^  Theory,  p.  239  Ft. 
Note  1 

Grcatkm 

by  Rudra  1.10.42-59 
by  Brahmk  1.4.68-78. 

Nine creatk«s(l }  Mabat,  (2 )  Tan- 
mktra  or  Uiuta,  (3)  Vuim  or 
Prak^  (4)  Mukhya  (of  immobile 
bemgt),  (5)  Tin^rotas  (of  ani¬ 
mals},  (6)  Urdhvasrotas  (of 
divine  bei^J,  (7)  Arviksrotas  (of 
mankind),  (8)  Amigraha  (Sattva 
and  Tamas),  (9)  KaumAra  (Both 
Prikrta  and  Vaikrta)  1.6.55^64 
See  also  under  Avidya  Creadon 
through  Prakfti  1.4.17-82 
Diffe^t  theories;  Introducdcm  pp. 

xxni-xxvi. 

The  Vedandc-Skhkbya  Theory 
I.4.l6fr  • 

The  Puranic  Theory  1.4.68-78 
The  SAhkhya  Thec^  1.5 
Creation  (Le.  recreadoo)  after  dis¬ 
solution  of  the  Universe  1.7.72; 
n.41.9-S8 

Gyavana,  Biva^s  dkdple  L23.162 

S.  of  Bhf^  Etymdogy  of 
the  N.  11.4  B9:  married  to 
Sukanyl  II.4.90 


976 


V3jii  PurSf^ 


Dftdhica,  A  npi  Advocate  of  &iva*< 
presence  at  Dak^a'i  sacrifice  1.30* 
103-104 

GuiwDak^  I.S0.106 
Daitya  (demons).  (Dinavas,  Yak^ 
G^dharvas,  Apsarat  etc.)  Tlteir 
origin  11.7)  n.8 

—  Daityai  etc.  Hieir  progeny  1L6.67* 
86)  11.7 

—  Daitya  dominatiofi  for  ten  Yogas 
II.35.9l 

»  Daityas  killed  by  Raji  11.30.86^88 
»  Daityas  killed  in  Tirakimaya  bat¬ 
tle  11.6.^ 

Dak^  (i)  God  Brahma's  son,  Sati's 
father,  instiiu  8iva 
1.30.46-49:  Sati's  sclf-im- 
moUtion  130-53-53;  cur¬ 
sed  by  Rudra  1.90.57-61; 
curses  Rudn  I.SO.62-64 
(ii)  S.  of  Praeetas  1.30.74-75; 
Performs  sacrifice  at  GaA- 
gidv&ra  1.30.94;  Dspute 
with  Dadhlea  about  Ru- 
dra'i  share  1.30.103-106; 
Dak^a’s  sacrifice  destroy¬ 
ed  at  Devi's  request 
L30.I39-159,  1.30.167- 

171;  Dakfa  submits  to 
Siva  and  is  pardoned 
LSO.  168-179  ;  2^294 
^  Dakpi  eulogised  Siva  1.30.180-284 
»  Progeny  of  Daksa's  daughters  II. 
6  7J& 

Dana,  Charitable  gifis  11.18 
Danu,  Dak^a’s  daughter  and  wife  of 
Kaiyapa,  progeny  of,  Z1.7 
Daiaratha.  iC.  of  Ayodhyi,  Esther  of 
Rima  11.26.162;  IL36.9I 
Da^aivamedha,  A  holy  centre  for 
Sraddha  (under  Vkra^asi)  11.15.45 

Death,  Process  ^ZL40.  87-92 
Devas,  Sons  of  Aditi  and  Ka^pa, 
The  race  of  Devas  1.31;  Hie  *n]ra 
groups  of  (Yama,  Sukra  andTfpti- 
manta)  1.31.5.61 

Devakl,  mother  of  Kfsua  but  Aditi  in 
former  birth  11.34.193-198 
Devi,  (SatL  Um&) 

(i)  Birth  from  1.30.40-41 ; 
married  to  Siva;  Self-immo¬ 
lation  at  Siva's  insult  L  30.46- 
55 

(ii)  Bora  of  Hiintt*in  and  Meni 

I. 30.70;  II.U.7 

(iii)  Performed  penance  for  Siva 

II. 11.10-16;  married  to  Siva 


1.30.70-73 

Deviki  (r)  Mod.  Deeg,  a  tributary  to 
Ravi  L45.94-96 

Dhanvantarl,  A  physidan,  king  of 
Varioasi  11.30.^22 
Dharma,  (i)  Duty,— General  concept 

1.59-21-32 
—as  practice  of 
tas  1.59.33-38 
— Qutracteristict  of 
Dharma  1.59.40- 
55 

(ii)  Duties  of  Castes  (Var- 
oai)  and  Stages  of  life 
(aframaa)  1.8. 154-181 

Dharma,  N.  of  a  Praj&paiL  Hia  race 

n.5 

Dhiimapritha,  N.  of  a  sacred  place 
at  Gayk  11.49,  95-99 
DhAtakl-Khai^dA)  N.  of  a  subcontinent 
L49.1 19-120 

Dhruvm,  (K)  Son  of  Utt&nap&da 
n.  1.75-77 

St  eternal  position  II.  1 .76-79 
le  Polar  Star,  the  pivot  of  heavenly 
bodies  1.52.83  ff;  controls  divine 
luminaries  I.52.B3-99 
Dbundhuraira  (King  Kuvalifva), 
killed  demon  Dhundhu.  Hence  this 
q^ithet  IL26.29-66 

Dirghatamaa,  A  sue,  son  of  Atija 
aMMamatk,  Birth  story  11.37.44-47; 
follows  the  Bull-cult  (Godhaima) 
n.37.47-59;  Punishment  and  rescue 
by  King  Bali-11.37. 60-65;  Procreates 
sons  for  Bali  11.37.8366;  Eyesight 
restored  and  named  Gautama  ll. 
37.90-92 

Dissolution  (Pralaya),  End  of  the 
World 

—  (i)  Nitya  (Daily  disappearance) 
—  (ii)  Naimittika  (Periotdcal)  L7. 

40-65;  n.38. 196-202, 244-243 
—  (ill)  Prak^tika  (of  Prakrti)  II. 
40.5^3 

*—  (iv)  Atyantika  (Final)  1.7.38: 
U.40.41-45 

—  Abhuta-Saihplava  11.36.211,  237- 
245;  11.39.336-351 
Intro,  pp.  XXVI-XXVII 
Diti,  W.  of  Ka^pa,  mother  of  Dai- 
Diti’s  progeny  II.6.49  ff 


Earth.  Gaturdvipl  theory  II.34.46fF 
Saptadvipl  theory  11.34.23-31 


Indtx 


977 


Milked  by  PrtlwUJ.96-97i  148«190 
Ek&r^&va,  Oceui  (doctrine) 

I. 6.1-3;  p.  43,  Ft.  n.  1 
Elepbant  Lore*  TI.8.20{^2S5;  Etymo- 

losy  of '  tynonymi  for  eleph^ti, 
ir6.227-226 
Embryology*  1.14.16*25 
Evolution  m  the  Univene;  Si&khya 
Tlteory  1.5 

The  Purioic  Theory  I.4.6S-78 

Food-articlei*  Prescribed  for  SriddhA 

II. 16.6.1U;  11.21. M2 
^Pr^bit^for  Sr4ddha  n.l6.U^ 

17 


GejeechAyk  (or  KuAjareechkyiL  a 
ipecial  occasion  (Pa^an)  11.21.11* 
12;  Ft.  Note  4*  p.  639 
Gaodakl  (r)  1.45.^96 
Gandhamiuiana  (1)  N.  of  a  mountam 
1.34.33*  p.  239  Ft.  N.  2 
Gandbarvas  ^)saras).  Birth  from 
Kalyapa  «  Muni:  Their  Names, 
descendants  etc.  11.8 
Gaoeia  (Nikuxhbha),  Siva’s  servant 
Vacator  of  Varanasi  II. 30. 30*53. 
Gang!,  Heavenly  1.47.26*29  •  Des* 
cent  &  held  up  by  Siva  t.47.S0*3^-' 
Three  ways  (Stages?)  of  flowing 

I.47.26-40*  p.  306*307 

•^^even  channels  (&  their  identifi* 
cation)  1.47.37-39,  P.  307  Ft.  n, 
1&2 

— The  regions  watered  by  1.47.45-49 
—Her  epithets  (with  etymology): 
Bhagi  rathl  47 .3 1  -40,  Jaimari 
51-55 

Gautama,  (i)  One  of  the  seven  sages 

1.3.25-28 

(u)  Transmitter  of  dwVa. 
P.  to  Niryantara  II. 
41.63 

(iii)  An  incarnation  of  Siva 
I.23.15M52 

(iv)  Name  of  XMrghatamas 

(See  ^rghatamas) 
Gayi,  A  famous  holy  place  in  Bihar 
»  Glory  (Mahitmya  of  Gaya)  U. 
Ghs.43  to50 

.  Gaylsura,  The  story  of-II.44 
^  The  story  of  Sill  on  Gtylsura’s 
head  n.45 

»  GayMiras  or  Fhalgu  Tirtha  n.49. 
2&^9 


^  Area  of  Gayi  and  GayUirti 
n.43.26 

^  Procedure  of  Pflgrimage  at  Gayi 
n.  Chs.  48  aod^;  Intro.?.  LXV 

Gayivalas,  Priests  ^pointed  by  Brah- 
mi  at  Gayi  11.4.73.81 

Geographical  divisioni  of  the  earth 
ara  their  first  rulers.  L33.^20,  p. 
231  Ft.  ns.  1*2*3 

Godivari  (r)  1.45.112;  Sacred  for 
8riddha  1L15.19 

Godhanna,  The  Bull-cult  11.37.47, 
54-55 

Gokaioa,  (i)  An  incarnation  of  Siva 

I. 23.161 

(ii)  A  holy  place  in  Kama* 
takiaomfor  Sriddha 

II. 15.21*22 

Gomati*  A  sacred  river  1.2.8*  L45.95 

Crima*  (a  musical  ten^  Basic  scales 
of  seven  notes.  TWegrimis: 
0)  ^ja  (2)  Madhyama  and  (3) 
^knohira.  See  Intro,  p.  XLIX  iad 
11.24.36  and  p.  662  Ftn.  2 

Guoas  (and  creation  of  the  Universe) : 
L5  and  Intro.  XXIV 


Haihaya,  (K)  n.32.4.Haihaya  line 
of  Yadu  11.32 

Haira^yata  (or  Hirapvat)  :  Goiintiy 
attociated  with  r.  Hirapvati  (a  Zar- 
aCshan)  adjacent  to  Sogdiana  1.45.6- 
20*  p.  2^ln.  2 

Hal&hala*  Deadly  poison  churned  out 
of  the  sea  1.54.56-62 
(also  Kalakuta}  Drunk  by  Siva 
1.54.89-94 

Harivarfa,  A  continent  1.34.29 
Hdls*  Names  of  Hells  n.39. 146-149 
Torture*  in.I.14.25-31 ;  IL39.  146- 
184 

^  Post-heU  evolution  1.14.33-39 
Honakuta  (m),  A  varsa-parvata* 
IJ4.24-27 

Himalaya,  Himav&n*  (i)  A  mountain 

I. 45.96;  1.34.24-27. 

(ii)  Padier  of  Utni 
1.30.70-71 

(lii)  Residence  of 
Sveta  an  incar¬ 
nation  of  Siva 
1.23.107*106 

HiraoyaluUipu*  A  demon-long:  Birdi 

II. 6.57-^;  N.  esmlained  n.6.^; 
FatberofPiahlkda  11.6.70;  Killed  by 


978 


Vd^ii  Purd^ 


KruitUia  IL6.66 

Hinu^yikm  Demon  killed  byVariha 
11.35*76 

~  Sons  of  Hin^yikH  1L6.67*68 
Hone*saciiiice»  of  Sann  11.26.163 
A  peopk  of  BHinu  Varia 
1.45.135-137 


Ikfu  (Cakiu  ?)  (r)  The  Oxus  L47.37- 
d9p.307Ftn2 

Dtyviku*  K.  Bom  of  Manu  11.23.4; 
11.26.8 

~  Hii  sons  Vikuk^i,  Nimi,  Dao^ 
II.26.9 

~  lk|v&ku  dynasty  11.26 
«  Dynasty  exdnct  Sucnitra  in 
Kali  Age  11.37.286-288 
Ili»  Daughter  of  Manu  11.23.7 

Marries  Budha^  mother  of  PuiUra- 
vaiU;23.15-17 

Tnutfformed  into  a  male  (Sudyu- 
mjia)  11.23. 18 

Ulvyta,  A  subcontinent  (Around  the 
Famirs)  1.46.11-16 
Incamatl^,  (1)  of  Visnu  11.36.68- 

111 

(ii)  of  Siva  I.2S.105- 
214 

Indras,  General  characteristics  and 
Powm  ofII.3.6-20;  Present  Indrm^ 
Mah&bala  11.3.5 

(il)  Vyisa  in  the  7th  Dv&pan 
1.23. 127-1 26 


Jahnu,  (K)  S.  of  Suhotia  and 
Ke^iki — drinks  up  the  GaAgi  11.29. 
51-55 

Jaigjtavya»  An  incarnation  of  Siva 
f;23.127-l28 

Jamadagni,  Exchange  of  Garus  and 
^nuidagni*t  birth  as  a  special  case 
n.29.64^2 ; — married  to  Repukil  — 
Birth  of  Paraiurima  11.29.86-88 
Jambudvipa,  Geography  of  JariibO- 
dvfpa  1.  Ohs.  34  &  35 
«  Mountain^ystems  in  1.34.13-27 
»  Divisions  of  Jaxhbudvipa  I.94.28-ff 
—  Founder  King  Agnidhia  1.33.1 1 
Tanaka  (K).  (1.27.4-5;  Founded  the 
dty  Midula  11.27.6 
Janamejaya,  $.  ofP^kiit — established 
Vi^)asaneyika  Brkhxnaoas  U.37.246 
~  cuned  by  Vaiiaihp&yana  &  crip¬ 
pled  1L37.24&25I 

Jaoamqaya»  (Lohagandhi)  11.31.22- 


24;  His  hon^eacrifiee  11.31 .25-26 
Lost  divine  chariot,  sought  refuge  in 
Indrota  11.31.25 

~  loses  divine  chariot  given  by  Indra 
toBrhadratha  11.31.27 

J5rudhi»  A  mountain  1.41.66-73 

Jatukaroa  (^--karoya),  Teacher  of 
Kffoa  DvaipAyana  in  Vi.  P.  Text 
TrammiMion  11.41.66 

Jaya  (gods),  Birth  from  Brahm&'s 
mouth  n.5.5;  6-4 

^  different  names  in  different  yugas 

11.5.8-19;  n.6  33-47 

— 'Neglect  of  Brahmk'i  advice  11.6.9- 
12 

^  Cuned  by  Brahmk  and  pardoned 
11.6.14-30 

Jayantl,  dau^ter  of  Ind^  Deputed 
to  Sukra  m  sendee  during  penance 
U.35. 149-151;  11.36.4-11. 

Jlvas,  Number  of.  in  each  species 
11.39.195-208 

Jvmra,  Fever,  types  of,  1.30.296-302 

Jyimagha,  (K)  Banished,  wandered 
IL3?.  29-31 

^  married  Saibyi»  a  henpecked 
husband  11.33.32.35 

—  His  race  11.33. 36-48 


Kadru,  Wife  of  Kalyapa,  mother  of 
Serp^is  1 1.6-65 

Kail&sa  (mt),  Location  1.42.2-22;  Des¬ 
cription  1.41,  1.4  7.1 
Kak^vin  &  C^sus,  Sons  of  a  SOdra 
woman  and  Dfrghatamas,  attain 
Brahminhood  11.37.70,73 
KakuCstha,  $.  of  King  Sai&da 
n.26.20-23 

Kala  (Time),  Nature  of  I.31.24ff; 
1.32.6-35:  UniU  of  1.57-6-20 
identified  with  Yuga  1.32.6 
Kaikgni,  fire  at  the  end  of  a  Kalpa 
IL38.156-16I 

KilafijarafBundelkhand,  M.P.),  Place 
sacra  tor  Sraddha,  Residence  of 
Sveta  11.15.93,1.23.191-192 
Kali  Age,  Life  in  1.58.31-74;  a  relie¬ 
ving  feature  11.36.115-125;  11.37. 
382-405 

Kalinga,  Orina-^A  deia  and  a  people 
in  Bbkrata  1.45.124-131 
Kalmiiapkda,  K.  Saudksa  turned 
demon  IJ2.10, 11.26.176 
Kalpa,  Seriiri  order  of  1.21.26-34, 
L22.9  ff ;  transition  between  2  Kalpai 
1.7;  1.21 


Indtx 


979 


—  the  end  ofIL38.120-201 

—  Identified  with  Rudnt's  incnmn^ 
tioni  1.23.57-74 

Karhia,  Hit  attempt  to  kill  DevakI  but 
spar^  on  Vasudeva*s  promise  II.- 
34.21^228.  killed  sons  of  DevaU 
IL34.172-173 

(Kanyi)  KunUiri,  Sacred  Place  for 
8riddha  11.15.28-29 
Kapila,  a  sage,  an  incarnation  of 
Viti>u,  burns  the  som  of  Sagara 
n.26J47 

Karma,  Identified  with  desdny  1.9.53- 
56  j  Law  of  Karman  inexorable 

I. 9.52 

K&rtavlrya,  Sahasrirjuna,  a  Haihaya 
King,  Son  of  Ki^virya  11.32.8; 
Boons  from  Datta  11.32. 10-13;  em¬ 
peror  of  seven  continents  11.32, 
21-23;  Exploits  11.32.14-37;  Capt2 
Mkhifcnat]  11.32.26;  lUvapa 
feated  and  taken  captive  11.32.  35- 
36;  cursed  by  Apava  11.32.38-47, 

II. 33.S-l  3;  Killed  by  Paralurima 
11.32.47 

Kaiyapa  (Mlirica),  Creation  of  11.3, 
11.5.54-76;  Wives  of  n.5.55;  Kaiya- 
pa*s  race,  Dili's  progeny  I1.6;Danu*s 
progeny  11.7;  Dynasties  of  Yaksa  usd 
Gandharvai  II.8 

KauiiUnbl,  A  city  (Mod.  Kosam, 
UJ*.)  11.37.267 

Kaverl  (r)  A  sacred  river  in  South 
India  1.45.104 
Ketu,  Chariot  of,  1.52.82.83 
Ketumlla,  A  Varsa,  1.35.34-41;  1.  44 
Kiihpuru^a,  a  Sub-^ntinent  1.46.4-7 
Kings,  Future  dynasties  of,  Intro,  pp. 

LIII-LIX  n.37.  289-377 
Kolahala,  The  twelfth  battle  between 
Devas  &  Asuras.  In  this  Raji  killed 
demons  11.35.85-86 
Krauftcadvipa,  A  continent  1.49.58- 
70, 134 

Kfcclira,  a  rite  of  expiation,  11.16.67 
Knoa,  His  birth,  11.34.174 

Visou’s  incarnation  11.34.192-198 
Celebrations  of  birth  XI.34. 199-203 

Krsoa  withdrew  hb  Vifou  fonn 

and  was  taken  to  Nanda  (il^ )  20^ 

210. 

Accused  of  Prasena's  murder  for 
Syamantaka  theft  (ibid)  35-40 
Qparrel  of  Balr.rama  for  Syaman¬ 
taka,  Involvement  in  Syanlancaka 
scandal  11.34.20-98;  Marries  Jksb- 
bavdn't  daughter  (iUd.)  4%51; 


Viwu*s  incarnation  (ibid.)  39-53» 
191-245. 

Krsoa*s  wivs  11.34.233-235 
Krf^'s  sons  (ibid)  234-245. 

Kftoa  Dvaipiyana,  S.  of  Kill  and 
Parftfara  L60.il;  II.9.84 

ICrlo3*Veoi,  (r)  (Mod.  Krio^)  a- 
sacred  river,  1.45.104 

Ktta  Age,  Cbvacteristics  1.8.49-63 
Transition  from  Kfta  to  Treti  1.8.69- 
76 

Ksattriyas  attaining  Brahminhood 
Ti.29.  IIMH. 

Kubera,  Lord  of  wealth.  Parentage, 
Etymology  of  name  &  Progeny  II 
9.35-41 

Kuni  (Uttara),  Watem  Siberia  II. 
45.11-42 

Kunikfetra,  Sacred  place  for  $r&ddhft 
11.1 5-64 

~  Sacrifidal  session  at  I.LlO-12 

Kuianlvipa,  A  continent  1.49. 48-57 

Kusumapura  (Mod.  Patna,  Bihar) 
11.37.313 


LakinU  (8rl),  Daughter  of  Bhfgu,  con¬ 
sort  of  Vifou  1.^.2 
Laohitya  or  LoUta  (r),  Brahmaputrk 
in  Assam  11.15.95 

Lavaoa,  A  demon  killed  by  Satrughna. 
11.26.184 

Lihga,  Appearance  of  1.55.19-27;  eu- 
lo^  by  Visnu  1.55.30-50 
Lohiti,  The  river  Brahmaputri  I. 
45.96. 

Loka,  The  higher  worids  11.39.  138« 
142 

—  The  Nether  worlds  11.39.143*184 
— >  Braiimaloka  11.39.80-81 

Vairija  Loka  11.39.61-79 

—  Distances  in  the  planets  and  Lokas 
11.39  128-142;  11.39. 211-223. 

Li^lloka  (mt.)  1.49.  144-H7,  157- 
159;  I.W.  20.5-207 

Lumiaariei.  Their  loeatioiu,  dimen¬ 
sions  ana  movements  1.31 
Arrangement  of  1.53;  It.  5.47-53 
Lunar  Mce.  11.29 


Madhu-Kai(abha,  Slaying  of  1.25.29- 
53 

Magadha,  N.  of  a  people  in  Bh5rata- 
varsa  1.45.123 
Mahi-meni  see  Meru 
Mahklaym,  Region  of  Siva  1.23. 


Purd^a 


166-67,  16fr>69;  (Oihkinn&tha  or 
Araareivan  in  M^. )  Sacred  place 
forSritdcUulU5.80»82. 

Mahinadi  alias  Manda^iimmi 
(r),  A  river  ruing  from 
{Uiia  mountain  1.45.107 
Mahi-pura^oi,  List  of,  11-42. 3*1 1 
Mahat,  The  fint  principle  1.4.25^7» 
42-45 

Mabendra  (mt.)  (i)  A  Kula^parvata 

in  Bbirata- 
varya  X.45.88 
(li)  mt.  sacred  for 
SriUldba  11.15. 
17 

M&hi|mati  (wMahe^vara^  M.P.) 

Kirtavirya'i  capital  11.52.26 
Malaya,  A  Kula-parvata  in  Bhir^ 
tavar^  1.45.88 
Minasa,  A  Lake  1.42.47-48 

Sacred  tanks  at  Gay&  11.49.1; 
n.49.M3 

Mandkkjnl(r)  1.45.99-101 
Mandara  (mt.)  in  Hhiratavarfa  1.45. 
90 

Mandehas,  Demons  daily  attacking 
the  Sun-god  L50.f62-lo5 
Manu,  Bon  of  half  the  body  of 
Brahna  1.10.7,  10-11;  His  wife 
SacarOpk  bom  of  Brahin5*s  other 
half  I.IO.  10-11 
His  progeny  I.tO.lS.fT 
Manu,  Vaivasvata,  Son  of  Vivarvan  k 
SazhjAi,  Brother  of  Yaxna  and 
Yamuna  11.22.37-38 
His  progeny  11.23 
Manvantara,  Man  u-pcriod— each 
period  consists  of  Manu,  seven  lagea, 
gods,  Indra,  sons  of  ^lanu  p.  457, 
Ftn.l 

—  14  in  ntiinber;  their  names  ILl.S-4 

—  period  74  Yugas  1.6  ]  .1 98-140 

«  Transition  from  one  Manvantara 
to  another  1.61.145-180 

—  Previous  Manu-periods  II.  1 .1-68 

—  Future  Manus  it.SS.OfT 

—  SivarQ]  Manu  IT.36.59  69 

—  Dharau  Savar^  11.38.70^ 

(Rudra)  Savaroi  lT.38.86-99 
^  Raucya  11.38.100.109 
n.38.110-118 
M&rica,  kace  of  11.13 
Man,  The  chariot  of  i.52.76 
Marut-gods,  Birth  story  n.6B4-110; 
Anignment  of  aones  to  Marut  gods 
II.6.111-134 

Meaiuremeot  of  diiUnce  (Usiti)  II. 
39.117-127 


Medhidthi,  Son  of  Sv&yazhbhuva 
Manu  1.33.9;  K.  of  Flakfa  continent, 
Seven  sons  assigned  seven  lub-cond- 
nents  I.33.32-S4 

Megastbenes  and  Gandragupta,  Intro. 
pp.LlX-LX 

Meru  (mt.),  Identihed  with  the 
Pamirs  1.34.13  if;  1.35 
Milking  the  Eanh,  List  of  persons 
milking  the  earth  11.1.148-190 
Milky  Way,  1.47.26-29 
MithUa,  Caplt^  (^Janaka  n.27.6 
Months,  Ancient  and  modem  names 
1.52.2-26;  p.  354-55  Ftn.  4 
Moon,  The  Lord  of  Start  (Dakta’a 
daughters)  II.5.S3 

»  His  chariot  and  movements  1.52. 

49-71 

Mountains,  Kulaparvatas  I.4.5.2  IT 
MuhOrta,  A  unit  of  Time  1.50.168- 
J74 

Mukhya  Sarga,  (Creation  of  immobile 
bdngi)  1.6.57 

Muod^pnihiu  (At  Gayk).  Place 
Sacred  f^riddha  n.15.102 
Music,  Sdence  of  11.  Ghs.  24  &  25; 
Inu^uction  pp.  XLVIH-Ll 


Nibhi,  K.  of  Himavarfa  I.I.74; 
139.41-50 

Nagna,  Nudes,  not  covered  by  Vedas 
n.16.27  ff 

^  Should  not  be  allowed  to  see  Srad- 
dha  food  IZ.  16.24 

Nahufa,  S.  of  king  Ayu,  1.2.23;  married 
to  Vir^a  TI.  11. 98;  His  progeny  II. 
Sl.llfr 

Naimisa,  (i)  Forest  on  the  Gomati, 

the  venue  of  the  Pur&oic 
Sattra  X.2. 8, 24-34 

^  Description  of  the  Sattra  1.2.24-33 
(ii)  Forest  in  Kuruk^etra 
11.10-12 


^Etymology  of  die  name  11.164-166, 
12.7-12 

Naimiieyas,  Brahmin  performers  of 
the  SiUtTa  in  Naimiya  forest  121  HI 
KiU  PurOravas  1.2.18^1 
Peribnnance  of  a  Sattra  12.23-32 
Nakyatras  (Constellations),  Distribu- 
don  in  Vithis  II.5.46-5S 
Nandana,  A  park  of  gods  136.11 
Nirada,  A  sage,  Son  of  Parameydun 
n.4. 137-140 

S.  of  Kalyapa^-xnental  ion  of 
Brahmi  I.l-llo 


Brothtf  of  Anmdhati  and  Pmata 
gra  Arundhati  to  Vui$tlu  II.9.79* 

Ixutnicts  Da^’t  lo&t  and  frutntes 
Dakya*!  migion  of  procreation  1L4» 
)  37-140, 146-159 
— Guncd  by  Dak|a  1144.150-158 
mmidan.  Intro,  p.  1 
Nlriyapa,  Etymology  of  the  name 
1.6.5 

Skm  on  Cosmic  Waten  L64t-S|  p. 
43  h 

Narmad&f  (i)  A  sacred  river  I.iS.OO- 

101 ;  AMociatktt  of  Sab- 
asriijuna  11.32.28-29 
(ii)  W.  of  Purukutn  and 
mother  of  Trasaddasyu 
n.26.74 

N&tya-$lstra,  mentioo  of,  Intro.  P.  L 
Fm.  3jP.LiFtn.  1 
Nethervorlds  (Narakai),  DeKription 
of  seven  1.50.10-54 

Nikuihbha,  Evacuator  of  Virioad 
for  Siva  n.30.30-53 
^  Son  of  Haryaiva  n.26. 62-63 
NlUkaT^tha,  Origin  of  the  epithet  X.544 
89-90 

Nimi,  S.  of  Iktvahu  n.26.9;  Ruler  of 
Videha  (Bihar)  11.27 
—  Founder  of  the  city  Jayaata  11.27. 
1-3 

Non-Vedic  Religioni,  Intro.  XLIXI 
Non-violence,  F^ioas  in  Bivour  of 
(even  in  sacrifices)  1.57. 9^101 
Nfitthhai  Incarnation  of  Vlfpu,  Kills 
Hiraoyakalipu  11.6,66 
Numer^  Tedmi^  namea  n.99.  93- 
102 


Omens,  Foreboding  death  1, 19 
Oihk&ra,  Dwription  of  1.20.1-22 
^  Esoteric  explanation  1.26 
^  Characteristics  of  realizadon  of 
Oihk&ra.  I.20J27-29 


Pallavas  and  P&radas,  Tribes  defeated 
and  punished  by  Sagan,  11.26.185, 
140 

FaftcalaktapM  fe  V&yu  Puri^  Intro. 

pp.  xxii-xxxn 

Paiicaiikha,  a  disciple  of  Siva  L2S4 
131-132  (Probably  a  Slhkbya 
teacher  Uhe  Kapila  and  Xsuri  moK 
tioned  there). 

Partilara,  Son  of  Sakti  and  Adflyand 


1.1.160;  n.9.83 
fether  of  Vylim  1.1.160;  II.9.84 
dacmdanti  of  11.9.84-87  * 
Paraiurfima,  Birth  II.29.86-89;  Cause 
of  his  Kiattriya  nature  1L29.64-77 ; 
KQJs  Karta\i^  11,32.47 
Parikfit,  SonofAbhimanyUj  Father  of 
Janamejaya  lL37.245,24o 
Puvani,  days  of  changes  of  the  moon 

I. 56.S2fr 

Pavitra,  a  ring  ofDarbha  grass  around 
finger  n.!2.10 

Phalairuti,  of  hearing  V&yu  Pur&oa 

II. 41.51-54,68-70 

--  of  Gayi  Mahhtmya  11.50.75-79 
PhaJgu  (r)  XL49.28  ft. 

PhlloS(»ny,  Advaita  11.42.  28-43 
Pilica  11.8.251;  Sixteen  Varieties  1I« 
8.253-256;  dcMription  II.6.261-273; 
Brahma  grants  boons  11.8.274-282; 
~an  ane^ote  of  Pittcai  fe  Rlksas- 
at  11.8.108-121 

Pitfyina,  Path  of  Pitp  16,187-189 
PitT^  Miuica,  Born  i^Svadha.  Ibeir 
birth,  their  classes  and  mental 
daughters  IL 1 1 .2-100 ;  Summary  in 
Ftn.  1  on  pp.  57^79;  Pitp:  amOrtas 
(fonnlen),  SamOrtas  (enoowed  with 
form)  11.10.55-56,  lU  1.100 
Pitt*  and  Devas  as  fathers  and  Sons 
11.10.18-23-34 

PiCrs-SapUrcis,  Their  Mantras  II. 
12.16,  21-27 
^sa  dvipa,  1.49 

Prabb&sa,  A  holy  place  in  Sauraitra 
1L15.40 

^rahlida,  Hirazmkaiipu’s  son  11.6,70 
Hii  period  of  rule  n.35.70 
Defeated  by  Indra  afeer  churning  of 
Amfta  11.35.79 

Praj&pati,  Stay  in  EkaroavaI.6.1-3 
Priikfta  Sarga,  The  first  creation  of 
Brahma,  Intro  XXVI;  1.6.58-61 
Pramad,  Incarnation  of  Vifou  to  kfll 
Mleccbai  1.56.73-74 
Pratisarga,  Divoldtion  and  recreation 
of  the  Universes  1.7 ;  II.40  and  41 
Pratyahaia,  Restraint  over  sexise- 
organs  II.15.131 

Prayaga,  Allahabad — a  sacred  |fiaoe  for 
SriMia  n.13.92 

Capital  ofiht  Kingdom  of  Purfiravaa 
059.46-47 

Priyavrata  (K.}j  Scm  of  Manu,  mar¬ 
ried  to  Kanyi  daughter  of  Kardama 
1.33.7-6 

^crowned  seven  sou  over  seven  con- 
tinenti  1.33.10  ff 


982 


Prthu,  King,  Son  of  Vena,  Stoiy  of 
birth  U.1.126 

^  The  first  emperor  coronated  by 
Devas  11.1.12^131 

»  Established  law  and  order  ILK  132* 
134 

—  Milked  the  earth  ILK150«174 

Pulaha  (asagt),  L3K1^18 

Pulastya,  1.31.16-13 

Purfioa,  Characteristics  of.  Intro,  pp. 
XXII-XXXII 

IPurOravas,  Son  of  Budha  and  lU  II. 
29.1 

-^Inherited  the  kingdom  of  Pratii* 
(hina  IL23.  22-23 

~  Greatneu  of  p.n.29.1-S 

—  UrvaH  marrio  PurQravai  U.2^.5• 

14 

«  Marriage  contract  broken  through 
Gandharvas  11.29. 16>27 
For  re-union  pcrfonru  Yajfias  II. 
29.3^5;  had  six  sons  from  Urvall 
11.29. 48-49 

Puikara,  a  lake,  a  sacred  place  for 
SrAddba  11.15.40 


Ridhi-K^a  cult,  1L42.44-53 
R&hu  -  His  chariot  1.52.80-81;  Joining 
to  the  Moon  on  the  full-moon  day 

I. 52.81 

Raji,  (K.)  helps  lodra  to  deleat 
Daityis  and  is  cheated  by  lodra 
about  Indra-hood  11.30.77-90 
R&k^asa  and  Yak^a,  Their  etymologies 

II. 8.97,98 

SonsofKhaik  11.8.156-187 
Rlk^asas-Seven  tribes  of  and  descri;^ 
tkms  IL9.57-63 

Rixaa,  S.  of  Jamadam,  Kfallrzya 
Nature  due  to  intffdoange  cam 
11.29.64-83 

Incarnation  of  V^sou  to  kill  Ktat- 
triyas  11.36-90 

Rkma,  S.  of  Daiaratha,  11.26.183; 
Incarnation  for  killing  Rivana  11. 
36.91 

Kills  Rivana  11.26  190-196 
RAma’s  sons,  Lava  and  Kuia  11.26. 
197 

Ramaoaka,  A  conthitnt  identified  with 
SMdiana  1.45.2-5 

Raudrl  Sndi  Rudra’i  creation  LIO. 
42-59 

Raurava,  A  hell  11.39.146 
Rivaoa,  His  descHpdon  and  his  pro^ 
vious  birth  11.9.42-45;  Span  of  l4fe 


Vdjfu  Pufiiffa 


1L9-46-48;  Killed  by  Rima  IL9.- 
46;  11.26.194, 196 

Recreation  of  the  Universe,  1.7.72, 
11.41-9-38,  Intxo.  p.  XXVI* 
Religioni  and  Fhilos^ihy  in  Va.  P. 
Intro,  pp.  LI-LllI 

Religious  sects  in  VA.  P.,  Intro,  pp. 
XLI-XLIII 

RenukA,  Princess,  Kamalim.  to  Jama- 
dagni,  ParaiurAma’s  mother  11.29. 
86b-66 

Review  of  the  contents  of  the  Purina 
II.4K44-45 

Rgveda,  Division  among  principal 
teacbm  1.60.24-31 
See  Ftns.  pp.  431-432 
River  System  in  BhArata  ( Sec  BhArata 
Varsa) 

Rksa^imta  (mt)  1.45.88;  Ftn.  1  on 

R^bba  (i)  An  incarnation  o  $iva 
1.23. 133-1 34 

(it)  of  King  NAbhi  and 
Marudevi,  father  of 
Bharata  1.33.51-52 

Rohipi,  (i)  A  constellation  (See  p. 
501  •Ft.note) 

(il)  Vaaudeva'i  wife  11.34. 
159-162 


Romaharsaoa,  the  SAta  LI. 13-17 
Royal  dynasties  of  Kali  age,  11.37 
Rudra,  A^ta-mArti  concept — Intro. 
XXXV  ;Tbe  'Crier'^Eleven  Rudrai 
1.9.71-73— These  Rudras  born  of 
Kaiyapa  and  Surabbi  11.3.68-70 
Sec  Intro,  pp.  XXXIV-XXXV 
Rudra-SAvarpi,  See  Manvantaras 
Ruknuni,  Princess  of  Vidarbha,  marries 
Krw  IL34.233 
Her  ions  IL34.237-240 


Sacrifices,  Spread  of  Yajfia-cult  1.29. 
12-13;  p.  187  Ftn.  2,3 
Sacrificial  horse  of  S^ara  11.26.143., 
163-164.  Loss  and  recovery  11.26. 
144-151 

Rima*!  Sacrifice  11.36.91 
Sacrificial  Settion  at  Naimiia 

IJ2J2M2 

Sagara,  Etym^ogy  11.26. 132 

(K.)  Son  of  BAnu,bom  in  Aurva's 
heritage  11.26.132 
Educated  by  Aurva  11.26.134 
attempts  to  exterminate  his  ene¬ 
mies  y/ho  seek  refuge  with  Vasif- 
tha  (Ibid)  135-137;  Pardoned 


Index 


98S 


but  widi  humilifttion  13^149. 
H»  hone  Mcrifice  (Ibdd)  14^ 
Socj  burnt  by  (it^) 

144-147*  Hii  grudson  Ajhiumlo 
propituttei  KapiU  mnd  bruigi  b*ck 
the  none.  KApila  granti  tea  lUtui 
of  Sagara*s  ton  II.26.1S0 

Saga,  Seven  (Saptarfk)  l.SLl&lS 
Rebirth  of  1L4.37-45 
Their  race  11.4.73  S,  Thdr  familks 
and  progeny  1.28;  Miod^born  laga 
I.9.6i*6o;  Race  of  Sam  H.9 
Sahya,  The  Watem  Ghaa.  A  Kula^ 

Ervata  in  India  1.45.88 

•dvipa,  A  Puriplc  continent  id- 
entifiea  with  ancient  Scythia  1.49. 
73-102 

§&kaiya,  A  Rgvedic  Sage,  Death  of 
1.60.35-60 

Sakrajit  and  Syamaotaka:  epbode,  !!• 
34  20.95 

Sakti,  (i)  Creation  X.9.69.70;  epithets 
of  Sakti  1.9.78-79 
(li)  S.  of  Vasiitha  andArun- 
dhatl  1.2.9 


Gunei  K.  Kalmapipada  1.2.10 
Father  of  Parklara  1.2.11 
Saiagrima,  (Near  Kedar,  V.P.) 

Place  sacred  for  ^riddha  11. 1 5.88 
Salmali  dvlpa,  A  Purapic  continent 
j  49.29.45 

Siru-Veda,  No.  of  Mantras  1.61.63, 
Intro  XLVII 

—  Schools  and  Teachers  of  1.6 1 .27«45, 
p.440  Ftn.  1. 

Samudra-Manthana  :  the  fourth  battle 
between  Devas  and  Asuras  11.35.74 
Saihvartaka,  (i)  World-drowning 

clouds  11.38.162- 
173 

(ii )  Fire  annihilating  die 
world  11.38.156 
Saihyu,  S.  of  Bfhaspati 

Interlocutor  in  Sraddha-Kalpa 
II.  Gh.  10  to  21 

Sanatkumara,  Brahmi's  Mind-bom 
son  like  Sanafca  1.9.65-66 
Narrator  of  Gayd  Mkhdtmya 
II.4S-50 

Sanda  and  Aniarka,  Sukra’i  sons 
n.4.76-77 :  side  with  Devas  11.36.63- 
66 

Sani  (Saturn),  son  of  Sun  and  Gh&yi 
11.22.50-51 

See  under  ^Chariot*  for  hit  chariot. 
Sli^khya,  A  Khool  of  Philosophy  II. 
40.2-3;  Intrd.  LII 


^nny&sa.  The  4th  Stage  of  liie.  Dudes 
ori.S.179 

E^^tioa  for  vt^tiiig^  he  rules  1. 18. 

The  last  stage  in  Yoga  L17 
Way  of  lacing  dea&  1.19.33-40 

Sapta  Godlvara,  Solangipur  (A.P.) 
or  the  confluence  of  the  Godivarl  In 
the  sea.  Placa  sacred  f<^  Sr&ddha 
11.15.19 

Sarasvati  (r),  A  river  in  Kurukietra 

I. 45.94-^ 

SarayO,  A  sacred  river  1.45.94^96 
Sarga,  See  creation 
Satadru  (the  Sutlej)  1.45.94-96 
SatarQpa,  Manu's  consort,  bom  of 
Brahma  (See  Manu) 

Sati,  $iva^$  consort  1.30.41-55 
SatziUlt,  Father  of  SatyaUi&m&  11.26. 
55.  Obtained  the  Syamantaka-jewel 
freen  Sun-god  11.34.20-28 
( For  Symmantalca  episode  see  Knpa) 
Satyabhama,  l^pa*!  wile  11.26.^ 
SaMvati,  PitfS  of  Satyavatx  (story) 

II. 5I-66 

Sbeatbi  around  the  Universe  1.49.152- 
156;  1.50.62-85 

Sila,  The  sacred  slab  at  Gaya,  the 
story  of  n.  45,  46 
$tU-Tiitba  11.46;  Ftn.  pp.  929-930 
Siiumara,  Gangetic  pcowise  imagi¬ 
ned  in  the  Sky  1.52.91-95 
Slta  (r),  Yarkwd-Tarim  (The  eas¬ 
tern  ^extenstoD*  of  Slta  is  Hwang-Ho 
of  China)  1.42.17-24 
Slta,  Kama’s  consort  (See  Daiarathi 
Rima) 

Siva,  Bom  as  Brahmi's  son  2.27.4; 
1.25.13-16 

—  Called  Rudra  'The  crier’  after 
birth  1.9.71-74 

—  Eight  names  and  eight  forms  of 
1.27.6-16,  49-58 

—  Created  non-procreating  progeny 
1.10.42-52 

—  «cf  his  blue  throatedness 
1.54.48-102 

^  Nama  of  his  forms  and  consorts  of, 
Intro.  XXXIV-XXXV 
^  The  suzmne  deity  1.1.185 
^  His  higtot  abode  (city)  11.39.230- 
309 

^  Siva’s  incarnations  R  disciples 
1.23.107-214 

Origin  of  hii  Lihga-image  1.55.19- 
27;  Intro.  XXX^ 

—  8iva-ViS0u  identity  1.25.14-29 


Fdjfu  Purd^ 


65-77 
Vif^u  1.24.90-164; 


Siva'i  cdogY 
^  by  L54. 

^  by  Bnhin&  aad  Vimi 
I 

— by  Dak^a  1.30. 180-284 
--  by  Sukra  11.35.162-203 
Skanda,  Birth-ttory  ILI  1.20-36;  Hk 
e3q)loitt  ILI  1.37-50;  Commander  of 
Deva  Army  ILI  1.47-48 
Hb  evolution  ai  a  ddtyi  Intro. 
XXXVII 


Solar  Chariot,  Significance  of  its  parti 
and  horses  1.51.54  ft 
Names  of  devu  etc.  accompanying 
him  1.52.1  fTand  p.  354  Ftni.  1-4 
Sriddha-Kalpa 

—  Proper  Time  for  1.56 

—  Procedure  ofIL10.15  ft;  11.12.7-92; 
II,  Ghs.  13  and  14 

—  Qpalificatiooi  of  invitee  11.21.22- 
31 

—  Precedence  among  invitees  1L17. 
50-58 

—  Ineligible  Br&hjnaoai  12.21.31-42 

—  Defilm  of  rows  of  invitees  11.17.66- 
83 

—  Yogini  preferred  as  inviteo  11.10. 
66-79 


—  Vesels  suitable  for  11.12. 1-5 

Articles  of  food  and  meat  recmn- 
mended  for  Sraddha  1L2I;  1.12; 
n.l6.6-na 

—  Articles  etc.  to  be  avoided  at  Sri- 
ddha  n.I6.nb-17 

—  People  polluting  food  for  Sr&ddba 
^  sight  11.16.24,  27-40 

—  Things  prohibit^  for  $raddba 
IL16.43-48 

—Purification  of  articles  for  Sriddha 
ILI  6.50-58 


—  Personal  purification  of  the  $rid- 
dha-performer  11.16.60-76 

—  Fruits  of  Sraddha-pefformance  un¬ 
der  various  constellations  and  days 
of  the  week  JL20 

—  Fruits  of  Srftddha  on  various  Tlthit 
ILI  9.10-1 9 

~  Holy  places  for  Sriddha  n.15.1- 
125 


—  Places  to  be  avoided  t<x  6riddha 
ILI  6.20-23 

Srifoilam,  Sriparavata  (Mt.  in  An¬ 
dhra  P^esh)  Place  sacred  for  Sril- 
ddha  11. 1 5.28.29 

Sudefoi,  Qpeen  of  K.  Bali  11.37.68; 
sends  a  maidservant  to  Dirghata- 
mai  n.37.69-74;  begets  Anenas  foom 


him  n.37.76-79 

Sudyumna,  A  fai-terual  too  of  Manu 
IL23.25-28 

Sukra,  Son  of  Bhrgu  and  Divy&  IL4. 
74 

—  Hk  other  names  11.4.75 

—  Hk  SGOS  II.4.76-77 

—  Obtains  Saihfivanl  Mantra  from 
8iva  11.36.  iT 

—  Duped  by  Jayanti  in  xnaniage 
IL36.G-12 

—  Curses  Daityas  11.36.3^37 

—  8uln*s  eulogy  of  Siva  11.35.162- 
203 

Sun  (SOrya),  12  Suns,  their  dktribo- 
don  one  per  month  L 52  (Gh.) 

Sun-worship,  Intro,  p.  XLI 

SOta,  Birth  during  sacrifice  as  a  mixed 
caste  1.1.28*33 

Syamantaka  epkode,  Syamantaka  je¬ 
wel  giffod  by  the  Sun-god  to  Satrajit 
n.34.20-28.;  Satr&jit  gives  it  to  & 
brother  Prai^jit  (ibid )  30 ;  Krfoa*i 
request  for  it  reused  (ibid)  32; 
Prasenajit  killed  inbundng  and  jewel 
taken  away  by  Jfimbavin  33-34.  To 
clear  the  people’s  suspicion  Kftoa 
brings  the  jewel  from  J&mbavaii, 
returns  it  to  Satrkjit  37 ;  ^tadhanvi 
kills  Satr&jit  tato  the  jewel  which 
Akrfira  takes  5^59;  Krw^ 
Satadhanvi  74;  Akrura  6ed  away 
with  the  jewel,  performed  Yajiiai 
and  outbreak  of  a  &mine  at  Dv&ra- 
k&  in  the  absence  of  Syamantaka 
79-90;  Akeura  returns  to  Dvaraka, 
Kffi>a*i  open  charges  in  the  Ass^ 
mbly  against  AkrSra  for  Syaman¬ 
taka  92-94;  Akrfira  hands  over  the 
jewel  in  the  Assembly  and  Krspa 
returns  In  to  Akrura  95-96.  (all 
r^.  from  ch.  34) 


Tala,  N»  a  nether  world  11.39.146, 
153 

Tilajangba,  S.  of  Jayadhvaja  JL52. 
50 

Hk  100  sons  known  as  T&lajahgbas 
n.52.51-52 

Tamravarbi,  (R.)  Tfimrapart^  in 
South  India  1.45.105 
Tapoi^a,  One  of  die  seven  higher 
worlds  11.39. 140 

Tirak&maya,  Battle  between  Devas 
and  Asuias  for  Tiri  abduettd  by 
Soma  II.35.74 


IiAss 


985 


Teacher-Trtntmittai  of  the  Vi.P. 

n.41.58^6;  Ifltro.  XXII 
Time,  Unitt  of»  11.38^213.226;  MuhO- 
ru  ud  otl^  Divnkms  n.6.37. 

46.  Syitms  of  calculAtiiig  :  Sftun» 
SftUffiya,  NIhiatra  lAd  Savant  (See 
Kila).  S^tarii  en,  Krauftca 
andDhruva  era  L57«17,  18 
TtryaktroUi,  Second  crea* 

non  (See  Greatioti] 

Traction,  Historical  in  Va.  P«,  n.37 ; 

Intro,  pp.  LIII'LIX 
Treti  Yuea,  Gharacteriitici  of  1.8.74 
ff;  1.5^9-125 

Agricultural  development  m  1.8. 
124.137 

.  Evolution  of  Vardas  (Casts)  1.8. 

154-164 

—  DutisofVamas  1.8. 171-181 
Trinity,  Synthesis  of  Brahmi,  Vifou 
and  M^a  11.5.86-121 
TriiaAku  (••Satyavrata)  X,  in  the 
S^r  race,  Sto^  of  II.76-1  IS 
Turvasu,  S.  ^Yayiti,  cuned  by  Yayi* 
ti  for  his  refusal  to  accept  iath»*s 
old  a«  11.31.40-43 
TuAgabbadri,  A  sacred  river,^  a  tri¬ 
butary  of  1.45.104 


Um&tuAga,  Mt.  sacred  for  SrAddba 
11.15.81 

Units  of  Time  1.57.6-20 
Upasaihh&ra,  See  Pratisarga  (Disac^ 
Jution  of  the  Universe} 

— Introd,  p.  XXVI 
Urvail,  A  cetetial  lady,  Her  contract 
marriage  with  Pururavas  11.29.  5- 
14.  Her  six  sons  29.48-49 
Returns  to  Gandharvas  11.29.16-27 
Uttarakuru,  A  sub-ccmtinent  of  Jaih- 
budvipa  (Gorrcspondiag  to  Western 
Siberia)  1.35.42-47;  1.45.21-50 


Vsukrta  creatioa  (asQrdhvasrotas)- 
See  Creadon 

Vai^navism,  Intro,  pp.  7QCXIX-XLI 

Vaiiarixp&yana,  Pr^ptor  cf  Yijoa- 
valkya,  Story  of  his  punohment  to 
Y,  1.61.17-19 

Vaivasvata,  A  Manvantara.  Creations 
in  II,  3&4 

Virioail,  A  sacred  place  ibr  Sr&ddha 
11.15.95-94 

Vasittha  (i)  Brahmi^a  mind-bom 

ion  1.9.61-63 


One  of  the  Saptariit  in 
Vaivasvata  *  i^nvan- 
tara  1L4.46-47 
Sakd’s  father  1.2-9 
Protects  tribals  from 
Sagaia  U.26.1 35-137 
(li)  AVyAsa  1.23.131-132 
(iis)  A  disciple  of  one  of  the 
incarnations  of  Siva 
1.23.149 

Vasu(Uparicara},  (K.)  ApknisKing, 
Fall  for  his  view  on  sacrificial  Hiih- 
sil.57.103-ni 

Vatudcva  (See  Anakadundubhl) 
V4sudeva  (See  Kfina) — exclwngei 
Km*  for  Nanda  Gom’i  daughter 
11.34.209-210 

— Kaihsa  spares  the  child  (ibid) 
211-213 

V&yu,  Narrator  of  the  VI.  P.1.2. 34-41 
Vdyu  PurSo^  Contents  1.1.4^177: 
t3.2-22 

PldisofI.4.12-14 

Vedas,  Compilation  of  and  diitribu- 
tion  among  disciples  I.BO-1 1-30 
~  Branches  of  Veda  and  their  tea¬ 
chers  L61.1-77  and  Ftns 
^  Personified  11.42.69-87 
Vena,  King  Prthu's  father:  puniibed 
for  his  bad  rule  11.1.107-125 

Vikukd,  Son  of  Ikfvftku.  Called  Sai- 
4dan.26.12-J9 

—  Ruled  in  Ayodhyi  11.26.20-23 
Vxndhya,  A  KiUaparvata  in  India 

1.45.88 

Vipaia,  (r)  the  Beas  1.45.99-101 
Virocana,  a  demon-king,  son  of  Bali 
(but  of  Prahlada  in  the  Text), 
Imled  hy  Indra  11.35.80 
Vifou— Vifou  and  &va  identified  I. 
25.19-29 

—  Grearness  of  Vip>u  11.35.4-57 

—  Sleeps  on  Cosmic  Waters  aflcr 
PraUya  1.24.5-14 

^  Vifou’s  incarnations  11.36.72  ff. 

—  ViKLu^lh  Bh^*s  wife  11.35.139 

—  Cuned  by  Kirgu  (cause  of  Vi^pu's 
incarnations  11.35.  140-141 

A  long,  Son  of  Sattvata  11.34. 
1-2;  Race  of  Vr.  II.  Gh.  34 
Vylaa,  Kr^oa  Dvaip&yana,  S.  of  Parl- 
sara  a^  Satyavad  11.9.84;  Classi¬ 
fied  the  Vedas  and  gave  to  his  dis- 
dplesL60.1]-23 1.61-47 
^  incarnations  called  Vy&ia  1.23, 
109^214 


986 


Vdyu  PtifdfUi 


Yadu,  Eldat  ton  of  Yayiti  11^1.16 
The  Haihaya  line  lL32.4;K&mvirya 
a  Haihaya  11. 31^10 
V&davaa,  The  race  of  Yadu  11.  Gb.  32 
YfjAavatkya.  A  tage,  Aiked  h>  recant 
the  Yajurveda  1.61.12-19 
^  Received  Yajurveda  from  the  Sun- 

Ed  1.61.21 

Upute  at  Jaaaka*i  lacrifice  1.66. 
35-62;  defeats  Sftkalya  1.60.50-59 
—  DUciplei  of  Yl^Aavalkya  (V^jts) 
1.61.24-26 

Yajurveda,  No.  of  Mantrai  1.61.64- 
66  and  for  white  Y^urveda  67^6. 
See  Intro,  pp.  XLVII-XLVIII 
Yaktaa,  (See  R&kiasas  &  Yak^) 
Yama,  God  of  death.  Son  of  the  Sun 
and  Saih>A&  11.22.29;  cuned  by 
GhayA  11.22.54-56;  approaches  hh 
father  11.22.57-63 

YamunA  (i)  Yama's  tUter  11.22.29 
(u }  A  sacred  river  1.45.94-96 
Yavanai,  ApewleofWestemBh&rata 
1.48.1  IM 19 


Yayiti,  S.  of  Nahui%itory  of  exchange 
ctf  youth  with  hii  Km  11.31.  2^101 
Yoga,  Mahe4vara  1.10.65-89 
— Hlupata  1,  Cbi.  11, 14, 15 
I>iiturbaaces  in  Yoga  1.12 
— ‘  Supreme  powen  attainable  in  Yoga 
L13 

— Rules  ofconductin  Yoga  1.16 

—  Expiadon  for  violadoa  of  rules  1.18 

—  T\ic  ultimate  state  in  Yoga  1.17 

—  YogK  way  of  death  I.19.3S-M 

—  Yogins  advised  to  attain  Om  1.20. 
21-26 

Y  uga,  CSharacterisdcs  of,  1.30.28-64 
-^Duration  of  Yugas  1.37.  23-28 
^  Condition  in  the  Ktta  Yuga  1.8. 
49-63 

~  Condition  in  the  Treta  Yuga  1.8. 
74  ff.,  1.57.39-125 

—  Conditions  in  the  Dv&para  Yun 
1.58.1-29 

~  Conditions  in  the  Kali  Age  1.58.31- 
74;  11.36.115-125;  11.37.382-405 


