a 


ae 


iS 


fist 
speete tet sete te Set tet 
ett pecectre steer 
ee grete ty pete 
Cabeas 
i oH 
rere 


% #55 i 
i 
et 


Ta 


aah 
oy 
: 


arate 


Heats 
ebildat 


7 


nikite 


NUNC COGNOSCO EX PARTE 


es 


4 


TRENT UNIVERSITY | 
LIBRARY 


PRESENTED BY 


PROF. R. E. CARTER 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2019 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/ramanujasvedarthO000rama 


RAMANUJA’S 
VEDARTH ASAMGRAHA 


Deccan College Monograph Series 


16 


RAMANUJA’S 
VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


BY 
J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


DECCAN COLLEGE 
POSTGRADUATE AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE 
POONA 


Jo bh ve: ZB Saal, wth hd e feat “Yh 
Los 


RAMANUJA’S ae Ae re 
VEDARTHASAMGRAHA ie. 


INTRODUCTION, CRITICAL EDITION 
AND ANNOTATED TRANSLATION 


BY 
J. A.B. VAN BUITENEN 


Sometime Sub-Editor, Dictionary of ‘Sanskrit 
on Historical Principles, Deccan College, Poona 


Tren? University tibrary 
PETERBOROUGH, ONT. 


POONA 
1956 


Code No. M. 54 


First Edition: 750 copies: October 1956 


All Rights Reserved 


Price Rs. 20/- 


Published by Dr. S. M. Katre, for the Deccan College Postgraduate and 
Research Institute, Yervada, Poona-6 
Printed at the G, S. Press, Mount Road, Madras 


TO 


THE EDITOR-IN-CHIEF AND THE STAFF 
OF THE SANSKRIT DICTIONARY ON 
HISTORICAL PRINCIPLES 
POONA 


PREFACE 


RaMANuJa’s Vedarthasamgraha marks a new era in Vedanta philo- 
sophy. It is the début of a thinker who, with all the force of his remarkable 
talents, set out to restate the theology of the Absolute in the terms of religion 
and worship. It was, according to tradition, in front of the sacred image of 
SriSailapati in the temple of Tirumalai that Ramanuja delivered this lecture 
on the interpretation of the Upanisads. We may suppose that it was first public 
appearance as a mature theologian. No doubt many years of erudite disputa- 
tions with the followers of Sankara and Bhaskara, of Yadaprakaéa and Pra- 
bhakara, and also with the Vaisnavas of his own milieu, preceded this func- 
tion. But now his doctrine was complete, his truth definitive: in this short 
but extremely rich lecture he was able to choose his principal adversaries 
and to outline a both philosophically and theologically sound refutation of 
their views. That he offered it to one of the multiple forms of the one God 
is characteristic of this deeply religious thinker. 


This Vedarthasamgraha is virtually unknown to Western scholarship; 
and even in India, where its usefulness as a compendious introduction to 
Visistadvaita has long been recognized in the pathasalas, it has not inspired 
to the study which it certainly deserves. I know of one old English transla- 
tion, exceedingly, even excessively literal, published by the South-Indian 
scholar VASUDEVACHARIAR in the issues of the Brahmavadin. This transla- 
tion, still more his Tamil rendering, is all but inaccessible in the West. 


The present work offers a critical edition of the Sanskrit text, a libe- 
rally annotated translation into English, and an Introduction. As the work 
was undertaken in connexion with my post on the Staff of the Sanskrit 
Dictionary Department of the Deccan College at Poona, I have made it my 
object to study the text primarily from the philological point of view: to 
which I was the more inclined by the consideration that without a sound 
philological basis the philosophical study of Indian thought and its compa- 
rison with other patterns of thought will never achieve finality. Therefore 
I have made the notes to the English translation as exhaustive in dealing 
with terms and references as was possible to me; not exhaustive enough 
by far: many studies like those which Hacker devotes to advaita will have 
to be made in all systems before the entire context of concepts in Indian 
thought is rightly intelligible. I have made full use of SupARSANASURI’s 
excellent commentary: Western scholars disregard these erudite studies by 
privileged colleagues with great disadvantage to their comprehension of the 
scholastic background of the studied authors. 


viii PREFACE 


In the Introduction I have sought to avoid all duplication and to centre 
the attention on relevant topics which so far have been dealt with insuffi- 
ciently or not at all. Special regard has been given to RamAnuja’s place 
in the history of Vedanta thought. The importance of Uddalaka’s Sadvidya 
for Vedanta as a whole and the variety of its interpretations led naturally 
to a more detailed description of Uddalaka’s teaching as a convenient start- 
ing-point. Ramanuja’s ancient predecessors have been studied anew and 
their fragments collected in an appendix. The relative date of the Vedartha- 
samgraha has then been established and Ramanuja’s sources, in the widest 
sense, have been investigated: in that connexion special interest has been 
shown to the place of Paficaratra and the doctrine of Yamuna. A chapter 
of observations on Ramdanuja’s hermeneutics concludes the introduction. 
Several Indexes will, I hope, enhance the usefulness of the book. 


This study has been made possible by my stay in Poona. The Minister 
of Education of the Netherlands, who granted me a travelling subsidy, the 
Curators of the State University of Utrecht, who arranged generously for a 
long study-leave, and the Council of the Deccan College Post-Graduate and 
Research Institute, who appointed me a Sub-Editor of the Sanskrit Dic- 
tionary, are the first to whom my gratitude is to be acknowledged. In the 
course of my daily routine in the Dictionary Department I have been able 
to benefit greatly by intimate contacts with Indian friends, colleagues and 
scholars; the readiness with which they have accepted me in their midst 
and shown me their friendship will for ever remain unforgettable to me. 
Professor V. A. RAMASWAMI SastTRI, whose liberal friendship I consider a 
privilege, has followed the work of this study with the greatest interest and 
sympathy; his helpfulness in matters pertaining to Karmamimamsa has been 
invaluable; I owe more to his advice and encouragement, and to our innu- 
merable neighbourly verandah discussions, than I am able to express. 


It is to Dr. S. M. Karrg, Editor-in-Chief of the Sanskrit Dictionary, 
who invited me to Poona, that my warmest thanks are due. I do not know 
a better way of expressing my gratitude to him, reputed scholar, under- 
standing friend and most charming host, than by dedicating this volume to 
the Staff of the Poona Sanskrit Dictionary, his creation. 


Poona, May 1955. J. A. B. vAN BuITENEN. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGE 
PREFACE ce eit 
BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES AND ABBREVIATIONS ET 
Part ONE: INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER 
I. The Sadvidya in Vedanta <4 o 
II. The Ancient Masters TMRRLLS 
$1. Bodhayana the Vrttikara ew ak) 
§ 2. Tanka the Vakyakara and Dramida the Bhasyakara .. 24 
§ 3. The views of the Ancient Masters Seah 429 
III. The Vedarthasamgraha co 
1. Its date eo 
2. Its sources ye 6 ORE 
A. Smrti 
§ 1. Function of Smrti ion a OO 
§ 2. Visnupurana “a <a ot 
§ 3. Influence of Pafcaratra Agama SOO 
B. Darsganas 
§1. Mimamsa: a. Sabarasvamin; b. Kumarila; 
c. Prabhakara. ey 
§ 2. Vedanta: a. Advaita; b. Bhedabheda; 
ec. Yamuna. AeA 
IV. Observations on the exegetical method and principles 
of Ramanuja eee AG 
§ 1. The authority of Sabda OU 
§ 2. All Srutis equally authoritative Pe eD | 
§ 3. Laksana can TOD 
§ 4. Context see OO. 
Part Two: TEXT 
Editorial Note be i 
Sanskrit Text re Cat 
Part THREE: TRANSLATION 
Contents of the Vedarthasamgraha saan Wit) 
Annotated English translation a UGE) 
‘APPENDIX 
§1. Fragments of Bodhayana’s Vrtti Prnistial 
§ 2. Vakya and Dramidabhasya .. 302 
INDEXES 
I. Notable Sanskrit terms ie 313 
II. Ancient Indian authors quoted oka 
318 


Addendum et corrigenda 


a 1 -s 
i bs 7 a; ee oe 
) ’ ‘ Pi AOD Ja, tS - 7 pt 


+ 


4 he, it} Boat wi ‘ .. 
uaeerey 


sertat (ippaenh: 
trv UW Sb, eal} 


; oA 
pimps ta ge 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES AND ABBREVIATIONS 


ABHYANKAR, Notes. 


Agamapramanya 
Annambhatta, TS. 


Apadeva, MNPr. 


ATHALYE, TS. 

Atmasiddhi. 

BELVALKAR, Lectures 
Vedanta. 


BhG. 


BrS. 
BrSBh. 


BrSiddhi : 
BUITENEN, J.A.B. VAN. 


DascupTA, Indian 


Philosophy. 
DE SMET 


DEusSSEN, System of 
Vedanta. 
DEuSSEN, Upanisads 


Dharmaraja, VedP. 


Fax, Namarupa. 


on 


V. S. AsBHYANKAR, Sribhasya of Ramanuja- 
carya, II, Introduction and Notes (Sans- 
krit) (Bombay, 1916). 

see Yamuna. 

Tarkasamgraha by Annambhatta. 

—Y. AtHatyr, Tarkasamgraha, edition and 
notes (Bombay, 1938). 

— A. Foucuer, Le Compendium des Topiques 
(Tarkasamgraha), text and French trans- 
lation (Paris, 1949). 

Mimansinyadyaprakasa by Apadeva, edited 
and translated by Franklin EpcEeRTon 
(New Haven, 1929). 

see Annambhatta. 

see Yamuna. 

S. K. Betvautkar, Lectures on Vedanta I (The 
Shree Basu Mallik Lectures), Poona, 
1929. 

Bhagavadgita. 

Brahmasttras of Badarayana. 

Brahmasitrabhasya. 

— Sankara’s bhasya, ed. by N. R. Acarya 
(Bombay, 1948). 

— Bhaskara’s bhasya, ed. by Pt. V. P. 
DvivepI, Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series 
70; 185; 209 (Benares, 1915). 

— Ramanuja’s bhasya, see Sribhasya (SBh). 

see Mandanamisra. 

Ramanuja on the Bhagavadgita (The Hague, 
1953). 

S. Dascupta, A History of Indian Philosophy 
III (Cambridge, 1940); IV (ib., 1949). 

R. V. De Smet, S.J., The Theological Method 
of Samkara (thesis Pontifica Universitas 
Gregoriana, Rome, 1953). 

Paul Drussen, The System of the Vedanta, 
authorized translation by Charles John- 
ston (Chicago, 1912). 

Paul Dreussen, Sechzig Upanisad’s des Veda? 
(Leipsic, 1921). 

Vedantaparibhasa by Dharmaraja Adhvarin, 
edited and translated by S. S. Surya- 
narayana Sastr1 (Adyar, 1942). 

Maryla Fatx, Nama-rupa and Dharma-rupa 
(Calcutta, 1943). 


xii BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


FoucHeEr, TS 

Ga 

Gautama, NS. 

GBh. 

Gonpa, Early Visnuism. 


Hacker, Untersuchungen. 
HACKER, Vivarta. 


HIRIYANNA. 
Istasiddhi. 


Isvarasiddhi. 
Jayantabhatta. 


Jua, Prabhakara. 


KuppuswamMI, Indian Logic. 


KMS. 
LacomMBe, ASV. 


LacomBe, La Doctrine. 


LACOMBE, Notes. 
MNPY. 

NS. 
Prakaranapancika. 


RADHAKRISHNAN, Indian 
Philosophy. 


RADHAKRISHNAN, Upanisads. 


Ramanuja, GBh. 


see Annambhatta. 

Bhagavadgita. 

Nydyasitras of Gautama, with Vatsyayana’s 
bhasya, ed. by Ganganath JHa, (Poona, 
1939). 
see Ramanuja. 

J. Gonna, Aspects of Early Visnuism (Utrecht, 
1955): 

Paul Hacker, Untersuchungen iiber Texte 
des friihen Advaitavaida, I. Die Schiiler 
Sankaras (Ak. Wiss. u. Lit. Mainz, Abh. 
G. u. Sw. Kl. 1950, 26) (Wiesbaden, 
1950). 

Paul Hacker, Vivarta, Studien zur Geschichte 
der illusionistischen Kosmologie und 
Erkenntnisstheorie der Inder (Ak. Wiss. 
u. Lit. Mainz, Abh. G. u. Sw. K1., 1953, 5) 
(Wiesbaden, 1953). 

see Suresvara. 

see Vimuktatman. 

see Vimuktatman. 

see Yamuna. 

Nyadyamanjart by Jayantabhatta, 
S.N.S. Suxita, Chowkhamba 
Series 106 (Benares, 1992/1936). 

Sir Ganganath JuHa, The Prabhakara School 
of Pirva Mimamsa@ (D.Litt. thesis Allaha- 
bad, 1911). 

S. Kuppuswami Sastri, A Primer of Indian 
Logic, according to Annambhatta’s Tarka- 
samgraha (Madras, 19517). 

Karmamimamsasitras of Jaimini, see Sabara. 

Olivier Lacomsse, L’Absolu selon le Védénta 

(Paris, 1937). 

Olivier Lacomse, La doctrine morale et méta- 
physique de Ramanuja (= annotated 
translation of Sribhasya, 1, 1, 1). (Paris, 
1938). 

Olivier LacomseE, Notes to La Doctrine, ete. 

see Apadeva. 

see Gautama. 

see Salikanatha. 

Ramanuja. 

S. RADHAKRISHNAN, Indian Philosophy,§ 2 vols. 
(London, 1951). 

S. RADHAKRISHNAN, The Principal Upanishads, 
annotated translation (London, 1953). 
Gitabhasya by Ramanuja, ed. with the 
Tatparyacandrika of Venkatandtha, by 
V. N. Apte (Anandasrama Sanskrit Ser. 

34, 3d ed., Bombay, 1936). 


ed. by 
Sanskrit 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES xiii 


Ramanuja, SBh. 


Ramanuja, VedantaD. 


Mandanamisra. 
Ramanuja, Vedantas. 


Ramanuja, Ved. 


ReEnovu, Gramm. Sct. 
Renou, Terminologie. 
RvuBEN, Philosophen. 


Ss. 
S) 


Sabarasvamin. 
Salikanatha. 


Sankara, BrSBh. 
Sankara, UpadeSas. 


Sankara, Upanisadbh. 


Samvitsiddhi. 

Sarvajnatman, 
Paficaprakriya 

Sarvajnatman, 
sarirakam. 

SBh. 

ScHRADER, Pajncaratra. 


Samksepa- 


SinHA, Psychology. 


Siddhitraya. 
Slokavarttika, 
Srinivasa, YID. 


SRINIVASACHARI, Bhedabhe- 


da. 


Sribhadsya by Ramanuja, ed. by V. S. ABHYAN- 
KAR (Bombay, 1915); reterences to SBh. 
1, 1, 1 are specified by page-numbers in 
this ed., and sometimes also by page- 
numbers of THIBAUT’S translation. 

Vedantadipa by Ramanuja, ed. Shree Acharya 
BHATTANATHASWAMyY (Benares Sanskrit 
Series 69; 70; 80; Benares, 1904). 

Brahmasiddhi of Mandanamisra, ed. by 
S. Kuppuswami (Madras, 1937). 

Vedantaséra by Ramanuja, ed. and translated 
by Narasimha AyyaANcaR (Adyar, 1953). 

Vedarthasamgraha by Ramanuja with Sudar- 
Sanasuri’s Tdatparya-dipika, ed. by 
S. S. P. S. Rama Misra Sastrr (Reprint 
from the Pandit,2, Benares, 1924); the 
Dipika is quoted acc. to this edition. 

Louis ReNovu, Grammaire sanscrite, 2 vols. 
(Paris, 1930). 

Louis Renou, Terminologie grammaticale du 
sanscrit, 3 vols. (Paris, 1942). 

Walter Ruspen, Die Philosophen der Upani- 
shaden (Bern, 1947), 

Sankara. 

SudarSanasuri, see Ramanuja, Ved. 
Mimadmsadarsana by Sabarasvamin, ed. by 
V. G. ApTE, 6 vols. (Bombay, 1929-34). 
Prakaranapancika by Salikanatha (Chau- 

khamba Skt. Ser.). 

see BrSBh. 

Upadesasahasri by Sankara, with Ramatirtha’s 
Padayojanika, ed. by C. Laxman Sastri 
PANSIKAR (Bombay, 1930). 

Upanisadbhasya by Sankara, ed. H. R. BHaca- 
vat (Poona, 1927-28). 

see Yamuna. 

The Pancaprakriyé of Sarvajnadtman, ed. by 
T. R. Curntamanit (Madras, 1946). 

The Samksepasdriraka of Sarvajiatman, ed. 
by H. N. AptE (Bombay, 1918). 

see Ramanuja. 

F. Otto Scuraper, An Introduction to the 
Pdicaradtra (Adyar, 1916). 

Jadunath Sinua, Indian Psychology: Percep- 
tion (London, 1934). 

see Yamuna. 

see Kumarila. 

Yatindramatadipiké by Srinivasa, 
H. N. AptE (Bombay, 1906). 

P. N. Srinivasacuari, The Philosophy of 
Bhedabheda (Adyar, 1950). 


ed. by 


xiv BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTES 


Suresvara, Naiskarmya- 
siddhi. 

Suresvara, 
BAUpBhVarttika. 

Eee 


Tatp. 


Stotraratna. 

Loa 

VaRADACHARI, Theory of 
knowledge. 

Ved. 

VedP. 

Vimuktatman. 


WE: 


Yamuna. 


NID, 


The Naiskarmyasiddhi of Suresvara, ed. by 
M. Hirryvanna (Bombay, 1925). 
The Brhaddadranyakopanisadbhasyavarttika of 


Suresvara. 
George Tuisaut, Veddanta-Sitras with Rama- 
nujas Commentary, SBE XLVIII 


(Oxford, 1904). 

Tatparyadipika of SudarsSanasuri, see Rama- 
nuja, Ved. 

see Yamuna. 

see Annambhatta, TS. 

K. C. Varapacuari, Sri Ramanuja’s Theory of 
Knowledge (Tirupati, 1943). 

Vedarthasamgraha, see Ramanuja, Ved. 

Vedantaparibhaisad, see Dharmaraja. 

Istasiddhi by Vimuktatman, ed. by M. Hirt- 
YANNA (Baroda, 1933). 

Visnupurana, ed. Gita Press (Gorakhpur, 
2009/1951). 

Agamapraémanya, reprint from Pandit, ed. by 
Pt. S. M. Rama Misra Sastrr (Benares, 
1994/1937). 

SIDDHITRAYA, consisting of Atmasiddhi, Isvara- 
siddhi and Samvitsiddhi, ed. by Pt. S. M. 
Rama Misra Sastrr (Chowkhamba Sans- 
krit Series, Benares, 1904). 

Stotraratna, ed. and translated by Swami 
ADIDEVANANDA (Madras, 1950). 

Yatindramatadipika, see Srinivasa. 


PART I: 


INTRODUCTION 


I. THe SapvipyA IN VEDANTA 


The moment that the ancient Indian speculations on the creation and 
origin of the world passed from a mythological stage to a more or less philo- 
sophical one is often, and in my opinion correctly, fixed by the first occur- 
rences of the term sat in cosmogonical Veda texts. This is of course not 
much more than a convenient landmark, the selection of which has been 
determined by the role of the term and conception of sat in later thought 
rather than by its significance in the Veda. Moreover, it would be too rash 
to assume a direct and complete evolution of cosmogonic speculations from 
a mythological to a philosophical plane: not only do mythological elements 
accompany the speculations on sat’s origin— elements which will persist, 
though later on they may conveniently be called theistic—, but also the 
manner in which they are introduced into some of the Vedic hymns creates 
the impression that the conception of sat and correlated ideas had already 
reached an advanced stage of elaboration before they were accepted in a 
Vedic context: in other words, that they derived from another milieu than 
that commonly represented by the Vedic poets. On the other hand, the 
strictly philosophical import of the notion of sat should not be exaggerated : 
it is anachronistic to render it as “being” in the sense of esse. It is a very 
concrete term with a distinct demonstrative value! and can perhaps best be 
rendered by “this which is here and now” —a meaning that can be followed 
through the Upanisads. 


The paramount importance in later Indian thought of the idea complex 
that is from the beginning connected with sat needs no proof. Although in 
other systems of philosophy its influence can be shown, it is most conspicuous 
in Samkhya and Vedanta. But when we survey these two darganas as the 
clear-cut systems of later date, we find that sat, or corresponding terms, 
have assumed different, even opposite, connotations which reflect the funda- 
mental difference between the darSanas: for Vedanta as a whole sat is the 
transcendent and immaterial, for Samkhya the immanent and material first 
cause of the world. Within the fold of Vedanta again the elaboration of the 


4. Cf. such formulae as sac ca tyac ca (TaittUp. 2, 6, where the context tempts 
us to understand asat by tyad), which is not merely a folk-etymology of the etymologically 
transparent satya but in which sat “that which is here” is also opposed to “that which 
is that or there”, e.g. Brahman (cf. BAUp. 3, 9, 9 katamo deva iti— prana iti — sa brahma 
tyad ity dcaksaté, where we may recall that ib. 2, 3, 1 sat as an embodied form is distin- 
guished from a disembodied form described as the wind and the sky: prdana as the micro~ 
cosmic counterpart of vdyu is quite well known). 


4 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


problems involved in the idea complex of sat as transcendent causa prima has 
led to extremely diverging solutions. We have therefore in the presystematic 
speculations about sat and its origin a convenient starting-point to seek a 
point of vantage from which we can survey the relation between Vedanta 
and Samkhya, and between the systems of Vedanta, among which especially 
Ramanuja’s system will interest us most. We shall try to sketch in broad 
outlines the complex of notions associated with sat in its presystematic usage 
to see if there is anything in it that may add to our understanding of the 
later differences. 


We may depart from the sadvidyé of Chandogya Upanisad 6, Uddalaka’s 
teaching of his son Svetaketu, easily the most celebrated Sruti text. It plays 
an important part in Vedantamimamsa, not only for its own sake, but also 
indirectly because it has been dealt with in the Brahmasitras, so that all 
system-building commentators had to explain it precisely. Their explanations 
concern invariably the relation between the first cause and the effected world, 
and in so far as this relation is the fundamental problem of Vedanta the com- 
mentaries on the drambhanddhikarana represent the central doctrines of the 
systems. The general interpretation is of sat as the self-existent, transcendent 
and absolute Brahman as an essentially perfect entity in opposition—of varying 
degree—to its effect, the phenomenal world. Modern scholarship, on the other 
hand, has long since recognized? that the same sadvidya represents an early 
stage of more or less ‘SAamkhyan’ speculations; and whereas translators like 
Bohtlingk, Deussen, Senart, Hume and Radhakrishnan render their text in 
a spiritualist sense, other scholars like Jacobi, Betty Heimann and Ruben? 
urge that this famous prapathaka voices a materialist tendency. We have to 
go beyond our text to discover its meaning in the context to which it belongs. 


The earliest form—but not necessarily the most primitive one—of the 
question of the provenance of “this which is” is found in Rigveda 10, 72: it 
is asked how the gods came to be. The poet describes how Bréhmanaspati 
forged these worlds as a blacksmith: for in the age before the gods sat origi- 
nated from asat, and after it, or rather along with it, originated the worlds.4 
The sequel shows that the poet had other, probably more congenial, cosmo- 
gonic associations in mind where Daksa and Aditi were the primeval progeni- 


2. cf. OLpENBERG, Die Lehre der Upanishaden, pp. 185f.; Jacost, Ueber das Vere 
hdltnis des Vedanta zum Sémkhyam, Festschrift Kuhn, p. 38, 

3. Jacosr, o.c.; Hermann, Studien zur Eigenart des indischen Denkens, p. 49; 
Ruse, Die Philosophen der Upanishaden, pp. 156ff., and again, but extremely tendentious, 
Geschichte der indischen Philosophie, pp. 87 ff. 

4, bréhmanaspdtir eta sim karméra ividhamat/devinam pirvyé yugé *satah sad 
ajayata (with c. cf. 10, 129, 6 arvig devd asyd (sc. sato) visdérjanena/ “the gods are since 
its emanation”)// tdd asa dnv ajadyanta. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA D 


tors from whom the worlds were born. The relation between sat and the 
personality of Brahmanaspati, who somehow assisted at its origination, re- 
mains obscure. His personality reminds us of RV. 10, 81 where creation is 
described as the handiwork of the divine artisan Visvakarman—who signi- 
ficantly is called Vacaspati> In this siikta the question is posed: what is 
the foundation, what the foothold on which Visvakarman created; and again: 
seek with your minds, O sages, for that on which he stood while supporting 
the worlds. This question is, it would seem, directly answered in RV. 10, 129; 
the sages found out that sat is fastened to asat. 


This famous hymn formulates elaborately and in an already advanced 
form the view that sat arose from asat. The progress made in this hymn 
concerns not so much the relation between sat and asat as that between both 
and the personality behind it: Bradhmanaspati and Visvakarman Vacaspati 
are succeeded by a vague and anonymous ddhyaksa or superintending person 
whose actual assistance at, and knowledge of, sat’s origination is questioned: 
under whose protection did it take place? and: he knows, or does he?® Hence- 
forth the question of a personal agency behind the creation of this world will 
remain connected with the question of the relation between sat and asat. 


The latter relation is expressed in this stikta in the terms of conception 
and procreation:? in the womb of asat, the dark hidden within the dark, in 
which the embryonic water was as yet ‘unaccidented’,® the one first embryo 
(abhi) is conceived with an excess of heat—orgasm; the procreative impulse 
(kama) takes shape in that germ which is the first germ of will (mdnas) :° 


5. Stt. 2 and 4 (see below), 3 (sém bahibhyadm dhamati sdm patatrair dyavabhiimi 
jandyan devd ékah), and 7 (vacdspdtim visvdkarmanam); Brhaspati, of course, is called 
vacaspati in such texts as MS. 2, 6, 6 and SatBr. 14, 4, 1, 23. Note that Ramanuja cites 
the ddhyaksa as the personal deity in the immaterial heaven (§§ 81; 127f.). 

6. 1 ¢ kédsya Sérmann; 7 iydm visrstir ydta Gbabhiivayddi va dadhé va nd/ yd 
asyadhyaksah paramé vydman s6 angd veda yddi.va né véda: 

7, Cf Getpner ad 10, 129 “das Bild der Zeugung und Geburt wird in dem ganzen 
Liede folgerichtig durchgefiihrt”; it is difficult, however, to decide to what extent it is 
just “Bild” or symbolic representation: could, in that mythological period, world creation 
be easily conceived in other terms than those of procreation? 

8. tdma dsit tdmasa gilhém dgre ’praketdm saliliém sdrvam a& iddm; GELDNER: 
apraketé “unerkenntlich” in the sense of “unterschiedslos” which is perhaps already 
too abstract. 

9. kéimas téd dgre sdém avartatidhi ménaso rétah prathamdm ydd dsit (4 ab); 
GrEtpNER: “iiber dieses kam am Anfang das Liebesverlangen, was des Denkens erster 
Same war,” where ydd is a loose relative conjunction; perhaps it is preferable to take 
sam-\/vrt in the attested sense of “to conglomerate, take shape in, become”: the pro- 
creative impulse took concrete shape in that which then became the first seed of mdnas 
(which is nearer to ‘will’ than ‘thought’); cf. this will-to-create personified as the first 
self-created creature AthV. 9, 2, 19ff.; cf. also 13, 1, 6ff. and 13, 2, 25ff. where the 
sun personifying tapas (rohita-) is the first creating creature. 


6 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


sages found out that this sat is fastened to asat—and one is inclined to add: 
with the omphalical cord.1° This intimate connexion between that which is 
sat and that which is not sat enables us to understand the somewhat enigmatic 
beginning of the hymn: asat “another than sat” is there only to account for 
sat’s origin and has no proper existence apart from sat, so that before sat came 
to be, its counterpart was not there either; it is rightly said that originally 
there was absolutely nothing, neither sat, or this which is here, nor another 
than this.4 Asat, the other, the womb from which sat arises, has been com- 
pletely abstracted from a primeval progenitrix; a reminiscence of a progenitor 
persists, though his function is questioned and he is at most, if at all, someone 
watching the process from the far-away sky. 


This tendency to do away with both the relicts of a creator person and 
asat as a necessary hypothesis for the origination of sat finds it conclusion in 
Uddalaka’s sadvidyd where for the first time the originality and eternity of 
this which is is posed in a polemical manner: originally sat was only here, 
nothing else: for how could it arise from asat?13 Something that is of a 
certain kind cannot arise from something else which is not of the same kind: 
sat is the irreducible, it is ‘kind’ itself, like in a clay pitcher clay is the ‘kind’ 
beyond which the pitcher cannot be reduced. 


How does Uddalaka account for this view in the terms of his age? He 
begins by asking his son: “What is the instruction by which the unrevealed 
is revealed, the not understood understood, the unknown known?” ‘The 
instruction is given in the following lessons which are summarized (4, 5) “this 


10. satd bdndhum dsati nir avindan (4c). 


11, I cannot quite believe in a mystical or alogical “neither being nor non-being” 
as generally translated, which renders the poet at once capable of admirable abstractions 
but incapable of logical thinking; the poet is neither “ganz barock” nor guilty of “geheim- 
nisvolle Gestammel” (Rusen, Philosophen, p. 161), but, trying to do away with asat as 
an independent magnitude but still allowing a beginning of sat, he reduces asat to sat ’s 
matrix, existing only by virtue of sat. 


12. This ddhyaksa in the sky must be a solar deity corresponding to Daksa in 
10, 72, Visvakarman ib. (cf. 10, 170, 4), Brahmanaspati in 10, 81 (cf. 2, 24, 3; 4, 50, 4; 
10, 68, 12); worth noting is also TaittBr. 2, 2, 9 where the sun originates from asat. 

13. As against the more or less contemporaneous contentions of TaitttUp. 2, 7, 1; 


BAUp. 1, 2, 1; ChUp. 3, 19, 1, that sat originated from asat, which was the old-fashioned 
position. 


14. Sruta- in a more technical sense of “known by or as Vedic revelation,” 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 7 


is what the ancient who knew it, those who were great in disputations and 
great experts in Sruti, have said: ‘Now there is no one who could name a 
single thing that is not yet revealed, understood and known;’ for they knew 
it by those (three colours): that which is red, they knew it for the colour of 
glowing-heat; that which is resplendent, they knew it for the colour of water; 
that which is black, they knew it for the colour of grown food; that which is 
not known (for anyone of these three colours), they knew it for a combination 
of these three deities.” 


It is clear that the instruction is primarily concerned with an inventory 
of the world under the three ‘aspects’ (ripa- “colour, coloured form”) of 
tejas “glowing-heat”, dpas “water”, anna “grown food”. These three aspects are 
described as the successive offspring of what is called sat. All the beings that 
in their turn went forth from the deities which are these ‘aspects’ (from tejas 
derives sun and all that is of sun etc.16) are described as “change proceeding 
from speech, or name.” What exactly is meant by this phrase becomes clear 
from the illustrations given by Uddalaka. His son asks what is the instruction 
which promises to reveal everything, and Uddalaka answers: “It is like this, 
my son: we can know all that is made of clay by knowing one lump of clay: 
the change is that which proceeds from speech or name: it is clay: that is the 
truth.” Similarly we know all that is made of topper by knowing a lump of 
copper ore,!” and all that is iron by knowing a nail-cutter. The last instance 
warns us that the point is not so much that we first are to know the first or 
rough material but that a small piece of the same kind is enough to classify 
the kindred; as indeed it is. 


15. mahasala mahégrotriyah; the former term is invariably translated “having 
great houses” (BOHTLINGK “grosze Hausherren”; Drussen even “Groszen an Reichtum”; 
_ Sewart “grands maitres de maison”; RADHAKRISHNAN “great householders”) but the 

term in this sense is pointless in this connexion; besides sala is “court, compound, enclo- 
sure, hall” rather than “house as living-quarters”, and used for receiving guests, etc., 
as place of meeting, teaching and discussion (cf. pathasald, etc.); in connexion with 
mahasrotriya I would suggest “he who entertains large parties of theologians in his hall 
and hence himself shining in disputations” or “whose hall-disputes are great”; cf. ChUp. 
Bibs 1/3, 

16. apdgdd agner agnitvam .. dditydd adityatvam, invariably translated “the quality 
of fire, etc. vanished from fire, etc.” can be understood much more significantly as 
describing further emanations: for this is the topic of this and the following khandas 
where creation by triplication is described (tejas/fire > sun and sun-like, moon and 
moon-like, lightning and the like); suffix °tva- in the sense of a collective (cf. REnov, 
Grammaire sanscrite § 187); esp. the translation of DrussEN, and those based on it (Hume’s, 
RADHAKRISHNAN’S) reveal a monistic bias more inspired by Sankara than by their texts. 

17. lohamani-; mani- “any more or less precious stone, or stone-like metal ore, that 
is mined or delved”; RADHAKRISHNAN “nugget of gold”, but “sold” is a late sense of loha 
borrowed from Sankara. 


8 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


When this is made clear Uddalaka declares: “only sat was here’® ori- 
ginally, nothing else; i.e., nothing that was not sat, ie., asat. “That wished: ” 
‘I will be many, I will beget,’ it begot tejas. That tejas thought: ‘I will be 
many, I will beget,’ it begot water. That is why whenever a man is hot then 
he sweats; consequently from the (engendered) heat water arises? Water 
wished: “I will be many, I will beget,’ it begot grown food. That is why 
whenever it rains, then there is plenty of food. Food and eatables consequently 
arise from water. All beings have three ways of being born, from an egg, 
a living being, or a plant. That first deity wished: “Well, now will I make 
separate forms and names by entering into these three deities as a living being 
myself: I will make each of them threefold.” So she entered and divided. 


We see that in this instruction an inventory is attempted of all beings 
under the three aspects or ‘elements’ tejas, water and food. These ‘elements’ 
however do not sum up the entire world: they are ‘classes’. Nor do they sum 
up sat: as the comparisons show sat is the field on which tejas works to 
produce water, and both to produce food. This vision was no doubt inspired 
by nature: sun, rain and food work from and on earth. Later commentators 
invariably take these three ‘elements’ to imply the classical five. But, if not 
more primitive,?° the series is of a different kind. Not only does it intend to 
distinguish the three spatial layers of sun, clouds and land, but also three 


18. idam adverbially, as its position would indicate; otherwise BéuTLincK, SENART, 
DEUSSEN cum suis. 

19. RADHAKRISHNAN’s comment that “aiksata, thought, lit. saw [but rather ~ akd- 
mayata, cf. SatBr. 14, 4, 2, 30, TaittUp. 2, 6, 1 etc.; Deussen rightly “beabsichtete”] indi- 
cates that pure being [abstract; but the term is a concrete “a being”, less equivocal 
“this which is”] is conscious” suggests more than there is to it and rather begs the 
question if these mythologizing thinkers were able to conceive of world creation in 
non-anthromorphic terms; RADHAKRISHNAN’s remark is inspired by BrS. 1, 1, 4 iksater 
nasabdam, 

19a. I follow here Edgerton’s translation (JAOS, 1915, p. 240f.). 


20, According to ChUp. 3, 11, Uddalaka Aruni was the eldest son of 
Aruna: this Aruna (his name “the ruddy one” is significant in view of 
his preoccupation with the sun) described the sun-power under five colours 
or aspects, under which the existent beings are classified: in this respect Aruna’s 
five correpond to Uddalaka’s three; noteworthy is moreover that his five colours are 
evidently built on the three mentioned by Uddalaka: they are 1. rohita (3, 1, 4); 
2. Sukla (3, 2, 3); 3. krsna (3, 3, 3); 4. parah-krsna (3, 4, 3); and 5. yad etadddityasya 
madhye ksobhata iva. Obviously father and son had a common starting-point; RusEn’s 
remark that Uddalaka “unter dem erdriickenden Eindruck der mythisch-mystischen 
Sonnenverherrlichung seines Vaters Aruna zu seinem realistischen Gegner werden 
muszte, weil der Sohn (= Svetaketu) unter der Grésze des Vaters litt” (Philosophen, 
pp. 158-59) is rather facile romance. 


21, So Senart ad ChUp. 6, 3, 2, note. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 9 


temporal events: hot season, rainy season, harvest time.22 The stage of 
Uddalaka’s speculations is yet more advanced: the three are also the three 
aspects under which the existent beings can be grouped according to colour, 
From this point of view the series shows affinities with that of the three gunas 
under which the world, constituted by the five elements, is classified as being 
bright, moving and stationary. It is interesting to note how the colours 
persist: Sveta$vatara ‘puns’ on an unborn male (aja- “constant self and 
purusa” or “he-goat”) who copulates with an unborn female (ajd- “constant 
matter” or “she-goat”) who is red, white and black;23 red, white and black 
threads woven in a piece of cloth will be the Samkhya’s stock-example of the 
material cause persisting in the effect, 


We may now ask: how does the sadvidya continue RV. 10, 129? Funda- 
mental is Uddalaka’s polemic against those who hold a more original asat to 
account for sat. So did the Vedic poet hold, but his asat is by no means 
original: originally there was nothing at all. Uddalaka’s did away with the 
hypothesis of asat: sat in the beginning—the beginning as far as the world is 
concerned, creation—was there alone. Is Ramanuja right in explaining 
advitiya as denying that there was a separate adhisthatr who was ‘instrumental’ 
to the process of creation?*4 In any case the vague watching person has dis- 
appeared. Yet we find traces of the original birth-process of sat as described 
in the sukta; but the events which in the Vedic hymn took place as successive 
stages in a conception are now represented as primary emanations of sat itself 
and the chronological sequence has become a causal chain. Nonetheless, the 
emanations of tejas, water and food are of a different kind from creation proper 
which only sets in after food has been produced and sat has entered the 
‘elements’.25 The parallelism is unmistakable: in the sikta the embryo which 
was conceived by an excess of heat (tépas)?6 in the formerly unaccidented 
water was the germ in which the primary creative impulse took shape: an 
order kama—tapas—Water—conceived germ presents itself clearly. In 
Uddalaka’s account these succeeding events are moments in a causal series 
proceeding from sat’s first impulse: sat desires to multiply and tejas appears, 
after and through tejas water, after and through water the fruit (anna). 


22. For the original three seasons, cf. e.g. Fituiozat, L’Enigme des 256 Nuits 
d’Asoka, J. As. 1949; OLDENBERG, 0.c., p. 185, makes in passing a similar suggestion. 

23. SvetUp. 4,5 ajdm ekdm lohitasuklakrspam bahvih prajah srjyamanam, etc. 
where sat has already completely become matter. 

24. Ved. §§16; 33. 

25. In this respect SvetUp. 4, 5 is illustrative: matter which is red, etc. starts 
to create. 

26. An important parallel is furnished by AthV. 13, 1 and 2 where rohita is a 
personification of tapas (cf. 2, 25) from which or whom agni, sun, etc. arise: 1, 48; 
2, 49 (with which compare ChUp. 6, 4, 4 and the note above 9). 


Vv. 2 


10 J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


Bearing the Vedic archetype in mind we could speak of sat’s self-creation, 
which is completed with the origination of anna. 


At this exact point we find a remark that is highly significant: there 
are three ways of being born, from an egg, as a living being, a plant. So long as 
we do not recognize that sat is creating itself, this remark seems irrelevant, 
and Senart was indeed led to regard it as an interpolation. But it is a neces- 
sary observation: how does the definitive birth of the now completely con- 
ceived sat proceed ? To each of its constitutive ‘elements’ corresponds a mode 
of birth: to tejas that of the brooded egg, to water that of the living being 
born in the embryonic liquid, to anna that of a plant.2” So naturally the next 
sentence reads: “I will now make separate names and forms (i.e. start creation 
proper) by entering the three deities as a living being myself.” The three 
constitutive events of conception elaborated as separate moments of a causal 
series are now again condensed and integralized, and it is sat, not anna, which 
starts creation by being born in the manner of a living being itself.*8 


It goes without saying that Uddalaka’s vision is not a mere recast of 
the Vedic archetype. The contents of the Vedic description are its structure 
rather than its contents: to use our terms, the events of a more or less symboli- 
cal creation by procreation provide the structure of a temporal-spatial coher- 
ence of the three layers of the world and three successive creative changes, 
which is integralized in the self-creation of sat. This self-creation is preceded 
by, or proceeds from, a phase of sat as abhi, a potentiality which actualizes 
itself by passing through a series of primary emanations, prototypes of the 
following creation by triplication; but these three prototypes form the triunity 
of the actual sat. Hence it is rightly said that in the final analysis sat is the 


27. The latter function of the egg in cosmogony is already announced early: cf. 
Aitareya Up. 1 in a very similar context dtma@ vd idam eko ’gra Gsin..so “dbhya eva 
purusam samuddhrtyamircchayat / tam abhyatapat tasyabhitaptasya mukham nirabhid- 
yate yathdndam/ mukhdd vag, etc. and more explicitly ChUp. 3, 19 in similar context: 
asad evedam agra dsit tat sad dsit tat samabhavat tad dndam niravartate tat samvatsa- 
vasya matram asayata tan nirabhidyate te dndakapale rajatam ca suvarnam cabhavatim; 
already ad RV. 10, 129, 4 GrLpNER remarks “im tdépas steckt zugleich die Vorstellung des 
briitenden Vogels” (cf. also Sayana ad ekam RV. 10, 82, 6 andabhiprayenoktam); the 
idea that tapas “heat, body-heat” was a creative power naturally led to creation being 
conceived as originating from the brooded egg.—How near the notion of originating from 
a plant was to Uddalaka himself shows 6, 8, 6 clearly. A fourth way of birth, men- 
tioned AitUp. 3, 3, origination from sweat, has a cosmic correspondent in Gopatha Br. 
1, 1 where the primaeval waters originate from Brahman’s sweat. 

28. I take dtmand as a reflexive pronoun; cf. a parallel passage in SatBr. 13, 1, 1, 1 
brahma vai svayambhi tapo *tapyate / tad aiksata—na vai tapasy anantyam Asti: 
hantaham bhitesv Gtmainam juhuvani bhitini catmani, etc., cf. also ReNov, On the word 
dtman, esp. §6 (Vak 2, Poona 1952); we may also compare such expressions as °atmanid 
if.c, in the sense of °bhavena, °tayd, °tvena “as being ..” 


Pere) . 
eer ances 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA ins 


anima, the irreducible stuff of which everything is made, root, meeting-place,29 
solidity, Atman of everything: the atomic minimum that remains after all 


successive products have inversely been dissolved in their causes, and “you 
are it, Svetaketu.” 


We have but lightly passed by the meaning of the phrase vacarambha- 
nam vikaéro naémadheyam, describing the process by which the effect emerges 
from its cause.*® This phrase has become the bone of content of the later 
commentators explaining BrS. 2, 1, 14 tadananyatvam arambhanasabdadi- 
bhyah. There can be little doubt that the term arambhana is taken from, or in- 
spired by, RV. 10, 81, 2 where it is asked: kim svid asid adhisthanam ardém- 
bhanam katamdt svit kathasit / ydto bhiimim jandyan visvikarma vi dyém 
atirnon mahima visvacakséh “what was the underlay or foothold, what the 
support, and how was it, out of which Visvakarman, producing the earth, sepa- 
rated the sky by his power, he the all-seeing One?’2! This question is 
repeated and illustrated (4): “What was the forest and what the wood, out 
of which they fashioned heaven and earth? Seek for that with your minds, 
O sages, on which he stood while supporting the worlds.” One reply was 
given in 10, 129: sat is fastened to asat. Uddalaka replies: the effect is vacd- 
rambhanam, i.e. nimadheyam. 


No doubt with this connexion of the Vedic hymn in mind Ramanuja 
tries to show that the sadvidya by advitiya denies a separate adhisthatr, and 
he quotes TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6 where the question of the Vedic poet was 
directly answered: brahman is the forest and the wood on which the creator 
stood, ie., the materia prima out of which he created. Madhva, even more 
explicitly, refers directly to the Vedic hymn,?? and though the use he makes 
of it is objectionable, GHaTE is wrong in declaring that “the topic is irrele- 
vant”.33 Arambhana is synonymous with adhisténa “the stable and solid 


29. ChUp. 6, 8, 6-7; dyatana in saddyatana can be more significantly translated 
than “abode” by deriving it from /yat +a “place where”: “the place where the beings 
meet, their common ground.” , 

30. Since this was written I have resumed the subject in greater detail in Vacd- 
rambhanam, Festschrift S. K. Cuatrerser Indian Linguistics vol. XVI (Poona 1955). 

31. Getpner “er der ganz Auge ist”; but Visvakarman / Daksa here represent the 
sun which separates earth from heaven by rising from night; cf. 10, 170, 4. 

32. He comments on the sutra: svatantrabahusddhané srstir loke drsta/ 
naivam brahmanah / _ svaripasdmarthyad evaitasya srstih / kimsvid .... kathasid 
ity aksepah / adhisthénddyukteh : “creation in the world proceeds in our experience with 
the aid of many instruments that have an independent existence; this is not so in brah- 
man’s case: his creation proceeds from his essentially self-sufficient creativeness: this 
is implicit in RV. 10, 81, 2 ab, because of the mention of adhisthana, etc., (which may 
be explained as ‘instrument’).” 

33. V. S. Guate, Vedanta, p. &1, 


12 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


foundation” which in Indian thought, where the notion of cause is insepa- 
rably linked up with that of a permanent, immobile and solid substructure, is 
virtually synonymous with our “material cause”. As the second quoted 
stanza shows arambhana is the materia prima from which things take their 
beginnings and in which, apart from some individual modifications, they 
consist. So one would translate: “Name is the effect, name which has its 
basis in speech”. We are reminded of the fact that Visvakarman, who 
created the worlds while standing on the drambhana was called the Lord of 
Vac and that Brahmanaspati, who forged the worlds when sat emerged from 
asat, is the Lord of Brahman, and that according to Taitt Br. that on which 
Vigvakarman stood was again Brahman. Sat, wishing to multiply, said: “T 
be many”, and it was many. Vac and Brahman, it seems, both*4 stand for 
the powerful and powerfully creative word that creates a thing in its indi- 
viduality by pointing it out and thus distinguishing it from the common 
stuff it is made of. He who names uses of the power of naming to create: — 
name is what he resorts to (@\/rabh) when singling out a new thing from 
the common undistinguished stuff. Uddalaka, doing away with the creat- 
ing and naming person, still preserves the power of naming to account for 
the emergence of new things out of the common stuff that is sat, or of sat: 
satya. 

Is this stuff, this sat that is the dtman of everything, a material or 
or immaterial entity for Uddalaka? In an interesting Sruti®> Uddalaka him- 
self replies to a similar question of king Asvapati: “Gautama, how do you 
conceive of the 4tman?” “As the earth.” Asvapati paraphrases this answer: 
Uddalaka’s A4tman is the solid basis,36 on which he stands solid himself, solid 
in children and cattle, and eats and enjoys life: but his 4tman is the atman’s 
feet. Important are other descriptions of sat: BAU. 1, 3, 28, ChUp. 8, 3, 5 
it is deathless (amrta), so BhG. 9, 12; BAUp. 2, 3, 1 it is Brahman’s embodied 
form, corresponding to that which is stationary and transient, this embodied 
form being distinguished from a disembodied one that is described as being 
wind and sky: sat is clearly the earth here. Later on, Prasn. Up. 2, 5; 4, 5; 
BhG. 4, 5 sat and asat simply sum up the entire world. 


34, The relation between vic and brahman is very close as witness RV. 10, 114, 
8d yaivad brahma tisthati tavati vik (GrLpNeR remarks: “brdéhman ist hier die Grundlage 
der vdce”); AitBr. 4, 21, 1, SatBr. 2, 1, 4, 10, BAUp. 1, 3, 20 vag vai brahma; TS. 7, 3, 
1, 4, etc., etc. One wonders if a detailed study of the relation brahman-véc as sacred 
and sacrally creative speech would not contribute materially to our understanding the 
‘evolution’ of the notion of brahman “sacred powerful speech, creative word, the word 
that is creation” to that of cause of creation, etc. 

35. ChUp. 5, 17, 1 atha hovacoddéilakam Arunim — Gautama kam tvam dtmanam 
upadssa iti/prthivim eva bhagavo rajann iti hovaca/eso vai pratisthdtma vaisvanaro yam 
tvam upisse, etc. 

36. pratisthda, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 13 


It is clear that Uddalaka’s teaching is not ‘spiritualist’ in the sense 
that the irreducible stuff at the bottom or root of all things is conceived as 
an entity different in kind from the matter of the phenomenal world and 
transcending it as an immaterial spirit that happens to be also immanent to 
some extent. Yet, no more can it be urged that the teaching is materialist. 
Matter and spirit —the term nearest to spirit is neither 4tman nor manas, 
but vac in vécérambhanam — are not treated as different or distinct. Actually 
the question of matter and spirit does not arise. Nor is the diversity emerg- 
ing from the stuff sat disparaged as being merely effects: there is nothing 
discreditable in things being created by naming out of their common sub- 
stratum: rather is the discovery of name as a principle of individuality a 
precious one. One might go further and suggest that Uddalaka’s main pur- 
pose was not to set forth the rather obvious unity of things in general, but 
just the manner of deriving diversity from it: his is after all a creation myth. 


Another point is worth interest: Uddalaka manages to elaborate a 
cosmic vision without once borrowing terms from ritual terminology. The 
majority of Upanisad thinkers cannot conceive of wide perspectives in both 
macrocosmos and microcosmos except in ritual terms: small wonder, for it 
was in these terms that the Brahmanas had described a coherent sacrocentric 
universe. Uddalaka, one may gather, did not care to depart from the ritually 
sacred, and his brahman was vac. 


We may read an essentially ‘SAamkhyan’ tendency in his discourse: 
Samkhya not in the sense of a coherent system with a psychology and escha- 
tology of its own, but rather of an attiude, an approach of study, an interest 
in classifying the world, a summing-up and inventorizing, indifferent to a dis- 
tinction between matter and spirit, or even sacred and non-sacred, but pri- 
marily concerned with this which is, or sat. 


Does this long analysis justify itself in helping us to understand the 
latter differences in interpreting the relation between the first cause and 
the effected world? I think it does. Though necessarily we must study the 
history of thought by the texts that have come down to us, we should while 
doing so never lose sight of the fact that the actual history moved on another 
plane, stages of which happened in passing to be fixed and perpetuated in 
texts while thought moved on. Indian culture was incomparably less 
livresque than the Western. The continuity of thought was at first served 
unconsciously by the thinkers, but when gradually the spirit changed, the 
time came when they began to return consciously to former thought as pre- 
served in ancient texts to receive inspiration from it and so to be better 
able to serve its continuity. Trends that had been partly or incidentally or 
not at all voiced in those texts had then been developed, and original 
visions of a more primitive, and hence often more comprehensive, character 


14 J.A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


been elaborated and distinguished. So texts came to be vehicles of views 
which, if expressed in them at all, had been part of a different context; and 
gradually the Word became really transcendent. 


When the inspiration of the Upanisad fragments, with their sudden 
apercus, cosmic imagery and criss-cross flashes of penetration, had given way 
to a spirit of systematization, and, after the example of Purvamimamsa, 
imposed on the kaleidoscopic teachings of the ancient. Later darSanas or 
outlooks distinguished themselves. Samkhya, from a more or less inde- 
pendent attitude, became a more independent inquiry. Among those prin- 
cipally interested in the sacred, distinction began to be made —though not 
yet contradistinction — between the study of the rites proper and the study 
of that comprehensive power hovering over the rites, their language, their 
function and their fruits, that more or less objective but mysterious and 
enigmatic object of speculations about the cosmic constancy correlated to 
the not less cosmic dynamics of the all-comprising ritual—the brahman. 
With this brahman dealt the updsanas of the upanisads and now this in its 
vastness unalterable constancy was sought to be grasped, described and 
defined on the basis of these texts — mainly, if not exclusively at first, on 
the basis of the Chandogya Upanisad.37 


Though we saw that Uddalaka did not conceive of his sat as an im- 
material entity, yet he must have been surrounded by thinkers who tended 
to do so.. A vedic poet already declared that ekam sat vipra bahudha 
vadanti.38 What he called sat was elsewhere named brahman or G&tman or 
Narayana.® It was conceived as the one principle existing par excellence 
as the stable foundation of cosmic ritual,4° which to recognize and command 
would secure release from the retributory effects of ritual, from world itself. 
In this respect the brahman, too, was satya “true, real” with the peculiarly 
Indian connotation of “permanently and underivably real”. Macrocosmically 
that vast, hidden power that supports the world, microcosmically the solid 
soul of the body, its character of basic constancy attracted the function of 
cause, which was inseparably connected with the notion of permanent, 
underlying solidity. Side by side, a brahma-centric and a more tellurian 
approach developed out of the sacrocentric cosmology of former ages, but 
in constant interaction. Sat was conceived of differently as cause. Simul- 
taneously a mythology of the creator god, of a strictly personal character 


37. cf. BetvatKar, Lectures on Vedanta, I, p. 141ff. 

38. RV. 1, 164, 46 “The visionaries give many names to the One that is”. 

39. AitUp. 1, 1 brahmaivedam agra Gsit; BAUp. 1, 4,1, atmaivedam agra asit; 
MahUp. 1 eko ha vai Narayana asit. 

40. The origin of this equation sat = brahman should be studied further. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 15 


which forbade microcosmic identifications, persisted and gained new import- 
ance with the rise of the religions. Though more allied to the Samkhyan 
spirit of lucid distinctions by names and forms, this personalism influenced 
the monistically tending brahmanical spirit profoundly and persistently. Such 
is the composite picture which the Gita shows, and in this picture belong 
historically the activities of the Brahmasitrakaras. They conceived synthe- 
tically of the mystic relation between this effected word of transitory pheno- 
mena and Brahman, the hypostatized constancy, as a relation of immanent 
causality. Brahman—never exclusively regarded as an undifferentiated 
abstract entity emanated the world; the effect grew upon it: while 
remaining essentially its constant and undisturbed self it passed by a process 
of parinama into the condition of effect.41 That in Badarayana’s collection 
this view is summarized under the ‘SAamkhyan’ sadvidya is not surprising: 
Uddalaka’s indifference did not preclude a dichotomy of matter and spirit, 
still less such a vague and pantheistic relation as envisioned by the sutras; 
and early Samkhya formed part and parcel of early Vedanta where it would 
remain its substructure. 


It took long before the logical difficulties of maintaining the imma- 
nence of a transcendent Absolute in an imperfect, relative and transitory 
world were recognized, and the parinéma doctrine was challenged. The 
doctrine of vivarta was formulated, at first it seems by Sabdadvaita,” and 
later elaborated in Sankara’s school. Hacker has shown that the vivarta 
doctrine was not yet fully accepted by Sankara who tended towards modify- 
ing parinadma in an illusionist sense.“ A more oldfashioned position was 
taken up by Bhaskara who maintained parindma in its full force, allowing 
upadhis or limiting conditions to render the absolute and perfect partly rela- 
tive and imperfect. Yamuna,“* and more systematically Ramanuja, repre- 
sented a very different view in which parindma took place not in the Abso- 
lute but in the phenomenal world of matter and souls which were eternally 
and really related to the Absolute as its natural modes. Madhva, at last, 
went one step further and rejected this relationship: he professed a radical 
dualism. 


However divergent these solutions, they show one basic agreement: 
all agree upon the primacy of the transcendence of the Absolute that is sat. 
We have reached the end of the development. 


41, That the Sutrakara adhered to the parinadmavada is now generally recognized. 
42. Hacker, Vivarta, §5, pp. 197 ff. 

43. Hacker, o.c. pp. 208 ff. 

44, See Ch. III. 


16 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


SRINIVASACHAR® in his useful study of bhedabhedavada says that 
Bhaskara’s philosophy marks a transition from Sankara to Ramanuja, but it 
is doubtful if such an evolution Sankara — Bhaskara — Ramanuja, suggested 
by the relative chronology of their works, can be maintained historically. 
One would hesitate even to speak of an evolution within Vedanta exclusively: 
for Sankara and Ramanuja at least one would rather assume influence, or 
inspiration, from without Vedanta. That Sankara was influenced by Buddhist 
thought is now generally recognized, and the inspirations of the popular 
Samkhya of the Puranas are manifest in Ram&nuja’s philosophy. Bhaskara 
would seem to represent a more traditional view of Vedanta which admitted 
parinama within the absolute and perfect Brahman, a view which both 
Sankara and Ramanuja declined to accept without profound modification. 
Sankara’s modification towards illusionism was perhaps the simplest and, on 
the given premisses, the most logical procedure: given the unique reality of 
Brahman as the eternal spirit, the reality of the phenomenal world with its 
plurality and variety of transitory material and conscient entities could not 
be of the same degree of ultimate reality. The world, obviously imperfect 
and relative effect of the perfect and absolute sat, could not be described 
as wholly sat; but somehow deriving its relative reality from its perfect 
cause, it could neither be described as wholly asat, but, for merely 
practical purposes, it could be taken at least provisionally as real. This 
view is, in the final analysis, a development of a more ancient Vedanta 
view — as represented later on by Bhaskara — in that it accepts some effect- 
ed change of and in Brahman, yet questions the ultimate validity of the condi- 
tions of this change and consequently of the change itself. 


Ramanuja’s thesis is essentially different from both Sankara’s and 
Bhaskara’s in that it attributes an ultimately valid, distinct and definable 
reality to the phenomenal world, and within the phenomenal world to the 
component orders of non-spiritual matter and individual spirits or souls. The 
souls are not real (or practically real) and conditioned projections of the 
absolute spirit, but fundamentally uniform spiritual monads, which in a 
beginningless process of causation (karman) happen to suffer degrees of 
change in their essential attribute knowledge. 


This thesis is basically SAamkhyan, but not dualistic for that. Even 
with regard to Samkhya itself one hesitates to subscribe to the qualification 
of dualism. Eternally soul and matter are interrelated in interaction; how- 
ever different both may be, soul is accessible to matter in its essential 
quality of knowledge. Though soul may be free from matter, still in 
potentiality it is vulnerable to it. The union of soul and body is no doubt 


45, SrINIvAsacHaRI, Bhedabheda, p. 7, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA i: 17 


brought about by a deception: the soul mistakes itself for a material ego. 
From the soul’s point of view the union is a deficiency, but from the ego’s 
point of view a harmony: the body obeys the orders of the captive soul to 
fulfil its purposes: it is completely dependent on the soul for its very 
existence, it is the mode and the particularization of the egotized soul, with- 
out which it is purposeless; and through the body the soul may ultimately 
rediscover itself in its essential difference. 


It is this microcosmic harmony of the soul, as the consciously directing 
agent and the body as its perfect instrument,4® which Ramanuja has elaborat- 
ed into an analogy for a macrocosmic harmony. It is remarkable that the 
conception of the body as the defect of the soul has hardly any significance 
for Ramanuja: the marvellous utility of the body is for him its most 
significant function. This attitude is the consequence of his positive inter- 
pretation of Release: it is not an escape from the evils of embodied life but 
a supreme hankering after a higher fulfilment in the loving adoration of 
God. So Ramanuja could conceive of a harmonious Universe, in which the 
harmony of body and soul was repeated in the harmony of matter and souls 
which form the body of God who himself is the directing spirit within it. 
This harmony is eternal; soul and matter exist, and have existed, eternally 
as modes of God, essentially dependent and subserving the single but 
supreme purpose of glorifying his Majesty. 


Sat at the beginning of creation is God Narayana as modified by soul 
and matter which both constitute His body. The vikara or parinama describ- 
ed by Uddalaka takes place only in God’s modes. God is His perfect self, 
with the modifying body that at the beginning of creation abides in the subtle 
or causal phase. Thus God is the material cause, though only his mode of 
matter undergoes transformation in its essence and his mode of soul in its 
attribute of knowledge. God is also the operative cause inasmuch as He is 
‘the inner Ruler, setting in motion and allowing to operate the causality of 
karman which brings about the diversity of the finished products, or the 
gross, effectual phase of God’s body. 


We are not concerned here with the question how far Ramanuja’s 
exegesis of the sadvidyd is the ‘correct’ one, but only with the developments 
of the idea-complex for which Uddalaka in the terms of his age had found a 
suggestive expression in the famous sixth prapathaka. The regularity with 
which the Indian thinkers have ever since returned to the sadvidya to inter- 
pret into it their own theses is proof of the fundamental significance for 


46, Ramanuja defines the body: “that substance (dravya) that a spiritual entity 
can use and support entirely for his own purposes and that in its essence is exclusively 
subordinate (Sesa-) to that entity, is the body of that soul”; cf. trsl. note 21, 


V.3 


18 J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


Indian thought of the concept which it expresses. Sat, originally determined 
neither as an impersonal law nor as a personal demiurge, took in the course 
of history either form without excluding the other completely. The divergen- 
cies between the different schools concern the degree in which the immanence 
‘of the transcendent is admitted. But basically they all agree that the 
transcendent is somehow present and accessible. Even the more radical 
advaitins, restating the satkaryavada as satkaranavada, allow that the 
Absolute be cause. The perfect is never completely unattainable to the 
imperfect, the absolutely real never wholly inaccessible to the relatively real. 
The instinct urge to Release of the soul implicated in sams@ra is a bridge 
between world and godhead. And sat preserves its ancient meaning through- 
out the fluctuations between an eminently transcendent, disembodied and 
unqualified Brahman and an eminently immanent, embodied and qualified 
Deity: the sat is the one that is present, the transcendent that is immanent. 


Uddalaka expressed sat’s immanence in creation to some extent as the 
soul’s presence within it, from which presence all this derives its satya: 
similarly Ramanuja formulated God’s immanence in the world as His inner 
presence as the soul of the Universe, His body. For Uddalaka sat was the 
anima, the subtlest possible reduction, for Ramanuja it is God whose body 
abides in the subtle phase of cause. Though in other respects their views 
are far apart, yet both thinkers have a common approach in dealing with the 
most ancient and most vital problem of Indian thought: the cause is approach- 
ed from the effect, not the effect from the cause. The formula in which their 
common approach is summed up is, not tvam tad asti “it is you”, but tat 
tvam asi “you are it”, 


It is not for merely polemical reasons that Ramanuja begins his exposi- 
tion of his views in his philosophical début the Vedarthasamgraha by a 
fresh interpretation of the sadvidya, but because he recognized the basic 
significance of this text, which for him, not less than for Sankara, expresses 
the profoundest truth that man is able to grasp. 


II. THe ANcIENt MASTERS 


Among the names which Ramanuja mentions in his list of ancient 
commentators,“ Bodhayana, Taka, Dramida, Guhadeva, Kapardi and 
Bharuci, only the three first mentioned are known as authors of specific 
commentarial texts, whereas of the others nothing but the names has been 


47, Wed. §93; Srinivasa, YID, I, p. 2 gives a similar list where Bodhayana’s name 
is followed by those of Guhadeva and Bharuci, then Brahmanandin’s (=Tanka) and 
Dramida’s: does he suggest that Guhadeva and Bharuci were the masters who summa- 
rized the Vrtti? 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 19 


saved from oblivion. Nonetheless, the identities of the first three are 
hardly less obscure and they have been obscured further by several attempts 
to clarify them. It would seem to be necessary, after KUPPUSWAMI’s interest- 
ing but unconvincing identifications*® and Dascupta’s critical but incomplete 
account,# to restate the problems and rearrange the available evidence. 


§1. Bodhayana the Vrttikara: 


Ramanuja declares in the first line of his Sribhasya®® that he will fol- 
low the interpretation that Bodhayana has given of the Brahmasttras in his 
extensive vurtti, which has been abbreviated by the ancient Masters. He 
quotes this Vrtti—to conform to the custom and use the class-name as 
its title—some seven times in his Sribhasya and nowhere else.®! These 
seven fragments, it would seem, are all that is known of a vrtti by a 
Bodhayana. Sankara, however, according to his commentators Ramananda 
and Anandagiri refers implicitly to a Vrttikara in several places of his 
Brahmasttrabhiasya.*2 They identify this author with an Upavarsa, 
possibly®? on the strength of a remark by Sankara ad BrS. 3, 3, 53: ata eva 
bhagavatopavarsena prathame tantre atmastitvabhidhadnaprasaktau ‘sarirake 
vaksyadma ity’ uddhara uktah “therefore the venerable Upavarsa declared at 
a point in the First Tantra where there was occasion to discuss the existence 
of the Soul: “We shall explain this in the Sariraka”. This remark is, ac- 
cording to KuppuswaMt, a clear indication that Upavarsa was the author of 


48. MM. S. Kuprpuswamr SastricaL, Bodhayana and Dramidicirya—two old 
Vedantins presupposed by Raémdanuja (Proc. & Tr. 3rd Or. Conf. Madras 1924), pp. 465. 

49. Dascupta, Indian Philosophy III, pp. 105 ff.; cf. also S. KrisHNASWAMI IYENGAR, 
Manimekhalai in its historical setting, pp. 91ff.; V. A. RamaswamMi SastrI, intr. to Vacas- 
pati’s Tattvabindu (Annamalai Un. Skt. Ser. 3, 1936), pp. 14 ff. 

50. bhagavadbodhiyanakrtim vistirnim brahmasitravrttim pirvaciryaéh samci- 
ksipuh / tanmaténusarena sutraksaréni vydkhyasyante; Abhyankar’s reading Baudh° is 
incorrect. 

51. Collected and shown against the relevant siitras in Appendix §1. 

52. BrSBh. 1, 1, 19/23/31; 1, 2, 23; S. quotes him by name ad 1, 3, 28 varnd eva 
tu sabda iti bhagavén Upavarsah. 

53. The utmost caution should be observed in assuming that comparatively late 
commentators knew works which have been lost long since; in many cases it is probable 
that they too inferred rather than knew. We should not even be too sure that S. knew 
Upavarsa’s complete commentary: both citations may easily have been current dicta in 
school-tradition ; his one citation varndé eva tu Sabda iti summarizes Sabara’s Upavarsa 
quotation ; his other one is also found in Bhaskara 1, 1, 1, (Chaukh. ed. p. 6) ata evo-. 
pavarsacadryenoktam prathamapide —atmavadam tu sdrirake vaksydma iti. If Upavarsa’s 
prestige was great enough to render these relatively unimportant citations significant, one 
wonders why his authority is not evoked in more controversial sections —if his views 
were known. That Bhaskara quotes Upavarsa in exactly the same connexions as §&. 
(though under different siitras) and only there makes it probable that Bh. quoted from S. 


20 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


vrttis in both karma— and brahmasitras and he proceeds to identify him 
with Ramanuja’s vrttikara Bodhayana. 


The question is, however, appreciably more complicated than at a first 
glance it would appear to be. An Upavarsa is mentioned by Sabarasvamin 
ad Karmasitra 1, 1, 5 in a discussion on the topic of what constitutes a 
word.®4 So, on the basis of Sankara’s and Sabara’s references and citations 
and of Ramananda’s identification, we may conclude that Upavarsa did 
indeed write a vrtti on both Karma- and Brahmasitras. Venkatanatha, 
writing in the 14th Century, suggests the identity of this Upavarsa with our 
Bodhayana, but it is noteworthy that he refers to him by quoting Sabara’s 
quotation.5> One wonders whether he knew much more of him than just that 
analysis of the word gauh, and whether, for that matter, Sankara’s com- 
mentators did. 


The citation from Upavarsa by Sankara is in itself most interesting. It 
is remarkably worded. Tantra may indeed mean “system, doctrine” but 
much more frequent is the sense of “chapter, part of a larger treatise”. If 
we accept this sense we shall be led to conclude that Upavarsa’s text con- 
tained both the Karma and Sarirakasitras as one context.6 KupPpuSWAMI 
just stops before this conclusion: ‘“Upavarsa was decisively in favour of 
treating the Karma-Mimamsa and Brahma-Mimamsa as forming the former 
and the latter parts of an integral whole”. Left at this the statement 
vaksyaémah means simply that Upavarsa contemplated writing a vrtti on the 
Sariraka part. Yet, to express such an intention of commenting on another 
work some time in the future is most uncommon with Indian commentators; 
but very frequent indeed are references to, and anticipations of, what is to 
follow later on in the same text. Reading the citation naturally we under- 


54. kah gabdah—gakéraukdravisarjaniya iti bhagavian Upavarsah: if, as is gene- 
rally accepted, the quotation of the Vrttikara (vrttikdras tv anyathenam grantham var- 
nayam cakre, etc.) runs to the end of bhdsya ad 1, 1, 5, then, Jacosr argues (the Dates 
of the philosophical sitras of the Brahmans, p. 17 (JAOS 1911); followed by P. V. Kane, 
Gleanings from the Sabarabhasya (JBBRAS 1921)), the Vrttikara quotes Upavarsa and 
cannot be identical with him; this is too cautious: it is clear from the context as well 
as Sankara’s reference 1, 3, 28 that this Vrttika€ra is Upavarsa; for an account of his 
views, cf. V. A. Ramaswami Sastri, Old Vrttikaras on the Pirva Mimaimsa Sitras (THQ 
1934), p. 431 ff. 

55. Tattvatika, p. 149. 

56. Another interpretation is possible by which prathama tantra comprises I-XII, 
a second tantra the Samkarsakanda XIII-XVI, and the Sariraka is appended as the third 
part; cf. this use is Prapaficahrdaya, p. 39. A third one is suggested by Bhaskara who 
has prathame pade where S. has prathamatantra-; ad 1, 3, 10 Bh. however uses tantra 
for the entire corpus of KM Siatras when quoting Upavarsa: prathamatantrasiddhatvac 
caitra sphotanirakaranam nisphalam sydt. The use of tantra as a whole of sutras “threads” 
is of course natural. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 21 


stand that Upavarsa postponed the discussion of a certain topic to a later 
chapter of the treatise on which he was commenting. But all our evidence 
points to the fact that Jaimini’s and Badardyana’s Sttras are not only 
different treatises by different authors but belong to two altogether different 


sastras; and any evidence extracted from one stray sentence crumbles before 
this firm fact. 


Suresvara, however, in his Naiskarmyasiddhi sambandhokti ad 1, 91 
makes incidentally a surprising statement: .. yato na Jaiminer ayam abhi- 
praya “dmndyasya sarva eva kriyartha’ iti: yadi hy ayam abhiprayo 
*bhavisyad ‘athato brahmajijndsd janmady asya yata’ityevamadi .. sarva- 
vedantamimamsanam srimaccharirakam néasitrayisyat;asitrayac ca “ Jaimini 
cannot have meant that ‘all scripture bears on acts’: if he had he would not 
interprets the sense of all Upanisads: but the fact is that he did!” In the 
light of this remark*” our explanation of Upavarsa’s statement as referring to 
one treatise of both corpora of Sutras becomes more plausible. 


Let us also consider the testimony of one of Bodhayana’s fragments: 
samhitam etac charirakam Jaiminiyena sodasalaksaneneti Sastraikatvasiddhih 
“that Karma- and Brahmasttras constitute one Sastra is proved by the fact 
that this Sariraka is incorporated in one treatise with Jaimini’s Sutras in 
16 Chapters”: the wording again is significant: etat must mean that Bodha- 
yana refers to the work on which he is commenting, whereas the pregnancy 
of the word-order Jaiminiyena sodasalaksanena can only be brought out in 
rendering it “Jaimini’s work, i.e. the one in 16 chapters”: in other words 
at least two forms of the Jaiminiya were already known to Bodhayana, one 
in 16 and one not in 16 chapters. 


There is little doubt that the 16 Chapters refer to KMSitras I-XII 
with Samkarsakanda XIII-XVI.°8 It follows that we have three corpora of 


57. S. K. BeLvALKar was the first to accept the direct sense of this remark (Jat- 
miniya’s Sdriraka-Sitra, Fest-Gabe Garbe “Aus Indiens Kultur”, Erlangen 1927), but 
he has not answered Hiriyanna’s pertinent objection to taking it literally: H. rightly 
points out that Padmapada, Suresvara’s contemporary, does not know a Jaiminiyasariraka 
(even denies it: cf. Paficapadika 40, 153-54 cf. also Sankara BrSBh. 1, 1, 4); Belvalkar’s 
summary condemnation of the traditional view that the pupil shares his teacher’s 
opinions and that Jaimini therefore may just stand for Badarayana may be right from 
the point of view of modern scholarship, but the question is what view Suresvara him- 
self held. On the other hand the fact remains that the point of Suresvara’s argumenta- 
tion is that Jaimini (and no other) did compose a sitra; striking also is the almost con- 
versational tone which suggests that it is a fact of common knowledge. 

58. I refer to V. A. Ramaswami Sastri, Sankarsakénda—a genuine supplement to 
the Parva Mimaimsa Sitra (THQ. IX, 1933). 


22 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


sutras known to Bodhayana: one in 12, one in 16, and one in 20 chapters 
including the 4 adhyayas of the Sariraka. Did he comment on the preceding 
16 Chapters of the Jaiminiya also? I doubt it. The quoted fragment II 
must have been connected with fragment I in some discussion like this: 
“Atha has the sense of immediate succession. [Objection: No; for Karmami- 
mamsa and Brahmamimamsa being different Sastras immediate succession is 
excluded. Reply: No;] that both constitute one Sastra is proved by the 
fact etc.” It is possible to explain sodasa° as 12 KMS. + 4 BrS., as Ramanuja 
clearly does.*® In that case we are to conclude that Jaimini wrote a Sariraka, 
which as we saw is quite possible, and that Bodhayana did not comment on 
that one but a different one, since otherwise the specific mention of Jaiminiya 
would be pointless; moreover Ramanuja, had he known about such a Sari- 
rakam, would no doubt have made the most of it because the continuity 
of the Sastras is the corner-stone of his system: that he does not think of 
it although it is implied by his own interpretation of sodasga proves that he 
did not know of the existence of a continuous treatise of Sutras that was 
commented on in its entirety by Bodhayana. As Ramanuja is the only 
author of whom we know that he consulted this vrtti, we have to accept his 
evidence—whether he was right or wrong—and leave it at that. 


There is other confusing evidence which contradicts this. The Prapafi- 
cahrdaya states that Bodhayana did write vrttis on both Sitras, even a 
complete extensive commentary called Krtakoti “Disputation on Karman”>%; 
this bulky commentary was abbreviated by Upavarsa, but slightly (kimcit), 
and further abbreviated—for the slow-witted—by Devasvamin.6? Then 
Bhavadasa was the first to comment the 16 Chapters of the Jaiminiya only; 
finally Sabarasvamin was the first to comment on the 12 Chapters only, 
leaving out the Samkarsakanda. How reliable is this account? We know 
nothing about the author and its age, but we gather that he was a Vaisnava 
bhakta following Samkhya and a tantric kind of Yoga, which would render 
his date rather late. Of the Vedanta systems he describes only an advaita 


59. Right after the quotation he remarks: atah pratipipddayisitarthabhedena sat- 
kabhedavad adhydyabhedavac ca purvottaramimamsayor bhedah, etc. “purva and uttara- 
mimamsa are distinguished according to their subject-matter like the division of (the 
12 chapters of KMS in two parts of) six adhyayas and in separate adhyayas”, 


59a. If we read it as a bahuvrihi: “(the commentary) in which arguments are 
made”. 


60. tasya vimsatyadhydyanibaddhasya mimamsasastrasya krtakotinémadheyam bha- 
syam Bodhayanena krtam/ tadgranthabaihulyabhaydid upeksya kimeit samksiptam Upa- 
varsena krtam/ tad api mandamatin prati duspratipidam vistirnatvad ity upeksya sodaga- 
laksanapirvamiméimsdasastramatrasya Devasvaminatisamksiptam krtam, — ete. Prapafica- 
hrdaya IV, p. 39. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 23 


school, which seems to be post-Sankara and he mentions the names of Sankara, 
Brahmadatta and Bhaskara. He is right about Sabara, at least partly right 
about Devasvamin of whom we have a commentary on the Samkarsakanda 
left.62 His other data conflict with what little evidence we have. Ramanuja 
did not know about a Sitra collection in 20 Chapters. Besides, the convinc- 
ing name of the Commentary is more probably that of Upavarsa’s, whom 
the Vaijayanti calls Krtakotikavi “author of the Krtakoti’.® His history 
of the Sutras and its commentaries sounds plausible, but some of the earlier 


names may have been filled in to make it stick. Withal its authority is 
dubious. 


To sum up. On our evidence the probabilities are that Upavarsa, 
author of a vrtti on both Sutras, probably entitled Krtakoti, is different from 
Bodhayana known from Ramanuja’s quotations; that Bodhayana did not 
compose a vrtti on the KMSiutras; that therefore he was later than Upavarsa, 
recognised the schism between the two sastras but did not accept it. Further 
we may consider the possibility that Upavarsa’s sdrirakam not only formed 
part of, but also went under the name of, Jaiminiyasitras; and finally that— 
abstracting from the dubious Devasvamin—since Sabarasvamin was the first 
commentator to explain the Purvamimamsiasittras only and therefore also 
recognised the schism, Bodhayana’s date will not be far removed from 
Sabara’s. 


Again we may ask: what is Ramanuja’s evidence worth? In other 
words, how much did he know of Bodhayana himself? ‘Tradition relates 
that Ramanuja had his pupil KureSa procure a copy of the vrtti from a 
Sarada Math in Kasmir:®© possibly it was purloined, for as soon as it was 
missing Ramanuja and KureSa were chased by the temple-keepers and the 
manuscript was recovered; meanwhile Kuresga had learnt it by heart. The 
‘circumstances of the story may be fictitious, but they would hardly have 
been invented unless Bodhayana MSS. were known to have been extremely 
scarce. And is it a coincidence that all the quotations are from the first 
adhyaya? Arguments ex silentio are seldom conclusive; but that neither 
SudarSanastri nor Venkatanatha quote once from the vrtti in their com- 


61. cf. p. 40 tato maiydsabalabrahmani samanvayad avirodho dvitiye; that he men- 
tions neither Ramanuja nor Madhva does not necessarily mean that he preceded both 
Vaisnava vedantins. 

62. He is usually dated much later than Sabara. 

63. ed. G. Oppert (Madras 1893) I, 3, Brahmanakanda, 158 cd. halabhitis tipavar- 
sah krtakotikavis ca sah.. 

64. Dascupta III, p. 102. 

65. Far from the battle-fields of India, KaSmir and, in the extreme south, Tra- 
vancore, have been traditionally the find-spots of rare or unique MSS. 


24 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


mentaries on a treatise that professes to have been inspired by it—whereas 
they do quote both the Vakya and the Bhasya, which are far less funda- 
mental to the Sribhasya—renders the conclusion that neither one ever saw a 
copy of it virtually unavoidable. Significant is also Ramanuja’s statement 
that Bodhayana’s supposedly extensive vrtti has been abbreviated by ancient 
Masters; he does not actually say that he is following the vrtti, but the vrtti 
as abbreviated. It is quite possible that Ramanuja, too, knew it only by 
fragments from quotations. This possibility is further increased by the 
comparative insignificance of the fragments quoted; except for I and II they 
hardly contribute anything to the argumentation and sometimes they are 
added as an after-thought. But they may conceivably have been found cited 
in early treatises which continued ancient traditions of interpretation. 


Against this background no special authority can be attributed to 
Venkatanatha’s identification Bodhayana = Upavarsa on which Kuppu- 
swami’s case rests but which Venkatanatha himself offers as a guess. 


Of interest also is another point. Yamuna, at the beginning of his 
Atmasiddhi,® gives a list of ancient Vedantins. Strangely enough he does 
not mention the Vrtti by which Ramanuja set great store and which must 
have enjoyed great authority—if only by report—in their common milieu. 
But he mentions a bhdsyakrt who had explained Badaradyana’s Sitras 
“briefly and profoundly”: bhagavaté Badaraéyanenedamarthany eva sitrani 
prantani vivrtdni ca tani parimitagambhirabhasina bhasyakrté. This 
bhasyakrt is always identified with Dramida the Bhasyakara, for which, as 
we shall see, there are no arguments. Ramdanuja declares that the urtti was 
an extensive one, Yamuna that the bhdsya was a brief one. Vrtti “gloss, 
scholion” is mainly distinguished from a bhasya “commentary” by its size: ®7 
a long vrtti will be very similar to a short bhasya. As Bodhayana’s omission 
cannot be accounted for in this context—where also a sub-commentary by 
a Srivatsankamisra, another ancient Master, is mentioned—I am inclined to 
think that Yamuna and Ramanuja both referred to the same work by 
- different descriptions; Ramanuja may have preferred the term vrtti to avoid 
confusion with Dramida’s bhasya. 


§2. Tanka the Vakyakara and Dramida the Bhasyakara : 


Apart from the Vrttikara and rarely if ever in the same context Rama- 
nuja quotes regularly from the Vakya of an anonymous vakyakara and 


66. Atmasiddhi, p. 8. 

67. Similar confusions happen oftener: cf. TrmatTHt, Tarkasamgraha, p. XV “San- 
karacharya styled his commentaries on Katha and Brhadaranyaka vrttis, yet as they are 
really bhasyas it appears that in old times both words were interchangeable”, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 25 


from a bhasya thereof by Dramida. Both are also known elsewhere. The 
Vakyakara is generally named Tanka, and he is identified by SudarSanasuri 
and others with Brahmanandin. Tanka’s name, which has the second place 
in Ramanuja’s list, does also occur in a list of Yamuna, but here he has the 
distinction of being mentioned the first of a series of adversaries and is put 
on a par with Advaitins like Bhartrhari and Sankara and with Dvaitadvaitins 
like Bhartrprapafica and Bhaskara.®8 Whatever his persuasion, we have no 
reason to doubt that Yamuna’s Tanka is identical with Ramanuja’s. That 
Ramanuja, who never introduces him as such, also regarded Tanka as the 
Vakyakara is indicated by the place which his name holds between Bodha- 
yana the Vrttikara and Dramida the Bhasyakara. Dramida, this is evident 
from the citations themselves, followed Tanka’s vakya scrupulously. This 
is another argument against identifying Yamuna’s bhasyakrt with Ramanuja’s 
bhasyakara. 


Besides, we can understand why Tanka was excluded by Yamuna and 
included by Ramanuja. Sarvajiatman, the author of the Samksepasariraka, 
quotes in 1,218 ff. a Vakyakara by name of Atreya who was commented upon 
by a Bhasyakara: beyond any doubt the latter is Dramida, for the quotation 
corresponds literally to one by Ramanuja.®? Nrsimhasramin’? commenting 
on the SamksepaSariraka identifies this Atreya with Brahmanandin to remove 
the last doubt of his identity. Sarvajnidtman’s reference reads: “Atreya’s 
Vakya tells us also that all effect is merely phenomenal, not of ultimate 
reality (samvyavahéramatram). The many defects inherent in the satkarya- 
vada cannot affect the mdyavada because it is contradictory: thus, if the 
effect is merely phenomenal, the defects inherent in the Samkhya view are 


68. Atmasiddhi p. 8: tathdpy acaryatankabhartrprapancabhartrmitrabhartrhari- 
 brahmadattasankarabhaskaradiviracitasitasitavividhanibandhanasraddhivipra labdhabuddha- 
yo na yathaivad anyatha ca pratipadyante; on Bhartrprapafica cf. M. Hirtvanna, Frag- 
ments of Bhartrprapaiica (Proc. & Tr. 3d Or. Conf., Madras 1924), p. 9; Bhartrmitra is 
known as a commentator of the Karmamimamsasitras and Kuppuswamt is inclined to 
see in him a precursor of Prabhakara (The Prabhakara School of Karma Mimamsa, Proc. 
& Tr. 2nd Or. Conf. Calcutta 1922), pp. 410f; Brahmadatta is reputed to have written 
on Karmamimamsa, cf. Prapaficahrdaya, p. 39 brahmakandasya bhagavatpadabrahmadat- 
tabhdskaradibhir matabhedenépi krtam, ie., Sankara, Brahmadatta and Bhaskara, but 
there can be no question of it but Br. preceded S.: further material in Hiryvanna’s paper 
Brahmadatta: an old Vedantin (J. Or.. Res. Madras 1928), p. 1ff.; on Bhatrhari see V. A. 
Ramaswamt Sastrr’s papers, Was Bhartrhari a Bauddha? and Bhartrhari as a pre-Sankara 
Advaitin (resp. All-India Or. Conf. Mysore 1935 and Trivandrum 1937), also Bhartrhari 
as a Mimamsaka (Deccan College Bulletin XIV, 1). 


69. Fragment XIII. 


70. Quoted by Kuppuswamr in the paper mentioned supra note 48; the Subodhini 
(Anandagrama ed.) identifies the Vakyakara with Brahmadatta; Hmryanna’s first alter- 
native (o.c. p. 7-8) that this is an error is certainly the right one, 


V. 4 


26 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


completely avoided. Hence the sage of Atri’s clan, who is well conversant 
with the stages of Vedanta, declares that the effect is merely phenomenal. 
The statement tat satyam in ChUp. 6, 8, 7 is based on the effect’s dependence 
on satya. His example of the sea and the foam should be understood on the 
basis of phenomenality (ie. the effect = foam is phenomenal, Brahman = sea 
is ultimately real). After the Vakyakara has described the effect (vikara-) 
he adopts immediately afterwards, and develops gradually, the view that alJ 
effect is merely phenomenal, and therefore he maintains non-duality 
(advaita-). The venerable Bhasyakara declares likewise that “the Venerable 
Lord the Supreme Deity is antarguna, i.e. pratyagguna “intrinsically real”.71 
And this agrees with our view of a Brahman without qualities, not with the 
view of a Brahman with qualities”. 


We understand that Sarvajfiatman refers to the Vakya on ChUp. 6, 
2 ff. and especially 6, 8, 7 aitadétmyam idam sarvam tat satyam sa atmda, 
where Atreya illustrates the relation between idam sarvam “this Universe” 
and its underlying principle by the example of the foam and the sea and 
explains it as satyasamaSrayatva: the Universe has its ontological basis in 
the ‘Real’ that is its cause (ChUp. 6, 2, 1). Sarvajfiatman applies his 
doctrine, or exegetical method, of the “didactic stages” (bhiimi-) ,” pretend- 
ing that Atreya was “well-conversant with the stages of teaching of the 
Upanisads”, and interprets the drstanta as the first stage or parinamavada 
(satkaryavada) and the comment corresponding to satyasamasrayatva as the 
second stage or vivartavida (mayavada), and so claims him a true-blue 
Advaitin. The Bhasyakara’s quotation is most probably taken from the com- 
mentary on Daharavidyé ChUp. 8, 1, 1 (tasmin yad antas tad anvestavyam) 
and antarguna- “in whom qualities inhere” explained as “who is essentially 
interior”. Sarvajnatman seems aware of diverging explications and 
emphasizes that it agrees with the nirgunavada. Foam-and-sea is a favourite 
example of the bhedabhedavadins, and I think it extremely probable that 
Yamuna excluded Tanka by name and Dramida by implication because they 
tended toward dvaitadvaita. For compare now a quotation by Bhaskara ad 
BrS. 1, 4, 25 (S. 26; R. 27) atmakrteh parinamat, where parinama is that of 
Brahman’s creative power: Bhaskara proceeds to say that this is the tradi- 
tional view taken by the authors of the Vakya and the Vrtti on the Chan- 
dogya, and quotes the Vakya: “There is an inner causal change (parizama) 


71. Madhustdana comments: gunasabdah svarwpaparah, anya devatah pardgripah 
paradevata tu pratyagdtmarupaparoksacidekarasety arthah. 

72. On Sarvajfiatman’s “stages of Vedanta”. Cf. Hacker, Vivarta, pp. 231ff. See 
Samksepasariraka II, 60 ff, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 27 


as in the case of curds etc.’”"> We may trust this statement which goes un- 
challenged by Ramanuja and fits in remarkably well with Sarvajfiatman’s 
exposition.”4 


Ramanuja, now, who addressed a larger audience of Vedantins than 
Yamuna, was no less a dialectician than Sarvajfatman and a far superior 
exegete. Though the expression nirbhugnadaivatam is difficult,” it is clear 
that Ramanuja’s interpretation of the common citation is the more natural 
one. Moreover, in his zeal to show that his system of Vedanta was the one 
favoured by the ancient Masters, Ramanuja was at pains to include both 
ancient commentators Tanka and Dramida, who enjoyed great esteem. This 
is also proved by Sankara’s references to Dramida in his Bhasyas’* and by 
Suregvara’s adoption of a story of his,”” the well-known one of the prince 
who, suffering from amnesia, lived with hunters until his memory returned 
and he recognized himself for what he was. We may conclude that both 
commentators were ancient Vedantins whose names were hallowed by tradi- 
tion. Certainly Taitka was not identical with the Tankacarya profusely 
quoted by Hamsayogin in his Gitabhasya:"8 one glance at the style of both 
will prove this immediately. 


73. sutrakdrah érutyanukart parinémapaksam sitrayambabhiva / ayam eva chan-= 
dogye vakyakdravrttikarabhyam sampradéyah [Dvivepin’s text reads sampradadyam]/ atah 
samasritah/tatha ca vakyam parinimas tu syaéd dadhyddivad iti vigitam; the vrttikara 
must be the same as Ramanuja’s bhasyakara; for the synonymy of vrtti and bhasya see 
above. 

74, I take it that the quotation by Bhaskara explains the meaning of the word 
vikara-; according to Sarvajfiatman, the Vakyakara first describes vikara still in terms 
of the first bhimi, or parinamavada, before developing the meaning in terms of the 
-second bhimi, or vivartavada. The fact that three different authors tried to make use 
of the same passage of an ancient gloss is too remarkable to go uncommented. One 
would suggest that Sarvajiiatman endeavoured to challenge Bhaskara’s claim and forced 
his own interpretation of two didactic stages on the Vakya text, while Ramanuja again 
corrected Sarvajfiatman by bringing out the full force of Dramida’s comments. This is 
a guess, but there is nothing in the chronology to conflict with it; besides, tacit references 
by one author to another are far more numerous than one would suspect at a first glance. 

75. See my translation and note ad Fr. XV; obscurity must have been the rule 
and may account for the divergency of interpretation. 

76. ChUpBh. Intr. and 3, 8, 10; §. Mandukya KBh. 2, 32; cf. also Anandagiri’s 
Tarkasamgraha and Tripathi’s (not conclusive) remarks p. XVI; KuppuswaMI is cer- 
tainly right to consider the Dravida of the Advaitins identical with the Dramida of the 
Visistadvaitins; Dravida and Dramida are also in Visistadvaita MSS. variants of the 


same name. 
77. Varttika on Sankara’s BAUpBh., 2, 1, 506, included in Appendix §2 as Frag- 


ment XVIb. 
78. Cf. F. O. Scuraper, Neues iiber die Bhagavadyita (Fest-Gabe Garbe “Aus 


Indiens Kultur”), p. 179. 


28 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


It cannot be doubted that both Vakya and Bhasya explained the Chan- 
dogya Upanisad.’84 This is not only borne out by the testimonies of Bhaskara, 
of Sarvajfiatman’s commentators and of Anandagiri, but also by the internal 
evidence of the quotations themselves. All except three of the fragments 
can somehow be connected with Chandogya texts and have been so connected 
by Ramanuja. Apart from Yamuna’s dubious bhasyakrt, there is no evidence 
at all to connect them with the Sutras. I have collected all fragments known 
so far and shown against the corresponding ChUp. texts in Appendix I, § 2. 


A final question might be asked. Is Tanka, who must have been a 
very ancient Master, known in the older literature? The language of his 
very concise Vakya displays an antique sutra-like style; old-fashioned words 
and constructions are the rule. Tanka appears as the first in Yamuna’s list, 
of which the chronological arrangement is borne out by the other names 
mentioned. Although the date of the Sutras is far from fixed, one would 
assign a date to the Vakya not too far removed from Badarayana’s. Of 
course we enter here the realm of speculation, but it may be pointed out 
that Badarayana mentions an Atreya by name as advocating a view to which 
an Audulomi is opposed. It would seem that the occasion of the cryptic 
difference is the interpretation of a Chandogya passage.” Incidentally we 
have good reasons to believe that the Stitrakara, whoever he was or whoever 
they were, tended himself toward dvaitadvaita of a kind.8? We may also 
remark that the Sitrakara’s main concern was with the Chandogya Upanisad. 
BELVALKAR on plausible grounds goes so far as to contend that the original 
Sutras were Chandogya Sitras.8! Though all this is not much evidence, yet 
it is not entirely out of the question that one of the several unknown sages* 
mentioned in the Sutras may have left some vestiges in literature: and we 
would hardly expect these vestiges to be other than incidental and 
ambiguous citations by later successors on the same road. 


It is impossible to fix a date for Brahmanandin Tanka Atreya. Does 
it signify anything that in Yamuna’s list he precedes Bhartrmitra, who accord- 


78a. There is also a tradition that Dramida commented on the BAUp. 

79. BrS. 3, 4, 44-45, which according to R. refers to the ritual accompaniments 
of the daharavidya, ChUp. 8, 1. 

80. I refer to V. S. Guate’s important conclusions in Les Brahma-Sitras.et leur 
cing commentaires (Thesis, Paris 1919), English translation, The Vedanta, A study of 
the Brahma-Sitras, etc., Poona 1926; cf. also Daseupra, II. 

81. S. K. Brtvarxar, Lectures on Vedanta I, p. 141: “There is nothing improbable 
in a “Chandogya” Brahmasttra having in fact formed the nucleus of the present Sitras, 
and been even incorporated therein;” for his arguments see pp. 142 ff. 

82, Atreya, Asmarathya, Audulomi, Kasakrtsna, Karsnajini, Jaimini and Badari; 
note that all the names are patronymics and may refer to families rather than individuals; 
the Atreya family belongs to Samaveda, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 29 


ing to the Prapafcahrdaya would not seem far removed from Sabara? In 
any case it is significant that all Vakya quotations, not only Ramanuja’s but 
also Sarvajnatman’s, SudarSana’s and Venkatanatha’s, are accompanied by 
citations from Dramida’s bhasya, and Bhaskara refers to both simultaneously. 
We may take it that the Bhasya, which seems to have been the most autho- 
ritative commentary on the Chandogya Upanisad before Sankara’s eclipsed 
it, has preserved the Vakya. Dramida’s language is not only so much more 
archaic than Sankara’s but also than Bhartrprapafica’s that a lapse of at least 
three centuries may reasonably be presumed. Besides, whereas Sankara 
attacks Bhartrprapanca, he pays Dramida the compliment, due to venerable 
age, of accepting his interpretation where he can safely do so and passing 
without comment the many passages which he must have found objectionable. 


§3. The views of the ancient Masters: 


The few fragments of Bodhayana’s vrtti are not very informative of his 
views. We may conclude from the way in which he stresses the continuity 
of Karma- and Brahmamimamsa that he accepted the great importance of 
ritual acts as preparatory to the liberating intuition of the Absolute—however 
he may have conceived of it—and adhered somehow to the jnanakarma- 
samuccaya view with its corollaries of the reality of the phenomenal world 
and the validity of the criteria of perception and reason in theology. To 
derive from the fact that Ramanuja professes to follow him — or rather the 
ancient masters as commenting him —the probability that Bodhayana anti- 
cipated in all points his late successor, would seem speculative. The most 
we can say is that the manner in which he was interpreted by his early 
commentators — possibly the mysterious Guhadeva, Kapardi and Bharuci — 
was generally favourable to Ramanuja’s system of unity in difference. 


On Tanka and Dramida we are better informed. Though their anti- 
quity made them venerable alike to such opposites as Sarvajnatman, Bhas- 
kara and Ramanuja, the last two certainly had better claims on them. Tanka 
rejects explicitly the doctrine that God’s body is a mere pedagogic fiction 
and must therefore have affirmed to some extent the reality of the world. 
The relation between God and world— including the empirical soul —is 
expressed in terms reminiscent of dvaitadvaita: it is like that between sea 
and foam: the changing phenomena of the world are no more, but not less, 
than odd and useless products of an accidental commotion on the surface 
of a Being which, remaining undisturbed in its infinite profundity, reabsorbs 
them when calm returns. He adhered to the parinamavada according to 
which Brahman as cause changes into effect like curds change into butter. 
We may conveniently call this dvaitadvaita as long as we are aware of the 
falsification that is implied: the term belongs to a later period and a different 


universe oi discourse. 


30 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


The personal Deity, possessed of a suprasensible body to his soul, is 
the object of our knowledge. Interesting are Tanka’s views on updasana, 
those upanisadic meditations which, originally the mental accompaniments of 
the bodily ritual acts, in the end would supersede the acts themselves. For 
him they are propaedeutic to the beatific vision: upasana is their constant 
rememorization or anusmrti, not once and for all but repeatedly and habi- 
tually, until, fortified by the observance of cumulative restrictions — rang- 
ing from proper nourishment to the suppression of the last relicts of animal 
life-satisfaction and dissatisfaction —, the completely expurgated mind has 
penetrated the sense of tat tvam asi and attains God in identity. 


Dramida appears to have advanced beyond Tanka’s pantheism to a 
more anthropomorphic theism. Aksara and Brahman are for him Bhagavan. 
He quotes the Bhagavadgita. He considers the maya doctrine unscrip- 
tural. He is a realist and is fond of graphic comparisons — oceans jumping 
the shores like rutting rams—, parables and stories. His God is a merciful 
sovereign who, waving the fan of his omnipotence, rules all the worlds as 
a paramount king. 


As they stand the Vakya and Bhasya quotations are the oldest instances 
of commentarial Vedanta texts; and it is important to note that on the whole 
— however much may escape us — they are more favourable to Ramanuja’s 
than to Sankara’s system of Vedanta. 


IlJ. THe VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
1. Its date: 


There can, in my opinion, be no doubt that the Vedarthasamgraha 
was Ramanuja’s philosophical début. It was written prior to the Sribhasya 
which refers to it twice, not to speak now of innumerable tacit references. 
Elsewhere I have tried to demonstrate that the Gitabhasya presupposes the 
Sribhasya®4 and no evidence has so far come up to correct this opinion. 
Another work ascribed to Ramanuja, the Vedantadipa, is also later than the 
Sribhasya to which it refers explicitly.® 


83. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 58, where reference is made to the Ved. explication of the 
Sadvidya (§13ff.), and ib. p. 116, where reference is made to the Ved. discussion of 
God being denoted in sémanddhikaranya sentences with objects of which he is the inner 
Ruler (§§17; 21). 

84. See my Raémdnuja on the Bhagavadgitad, Ch. III. 

85. Benares ed. p. 8 Srutinydyavirodhas tu tesim bhdsye prapancita iti neha pra- 
tanyate / bhasyodito ’dhikaranarthah sasiitravivaranah sukhagrahandya samksepenopanya- 
syate. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 31 


There is, however, a curious problem created by still another abridge- 
ment of the Sribhasya, known as Vedantasara ‘essentials of Vedanta’, not 
to be confused with Sadananda’s well-known advaita manual. SuparsaNa- 
CHARYA maintains®® that the Vedantasara is prior to the Vedarthasamgraha, 
on grounds whose cogency I fail to see. In itself the very existence of a 
second and rather thorough-going abridgement of Ramanuja’s magnum opus, 
side by side with the useful Vedantadipa, is curious enough. That it was 
Ramanuja’s début, as SUDARSANACHARYA suggests, is extremely unlikely. To 
me it is unconceivable that Ramanuja would have put forward his system 
of Visistadvaita for the first time to a highly critical audience of contempo- 
rary vedantins by merely indicating its barest outlines as it is done in the 
- Vedantasara, which is nearer to being a vakya than a bhasya. In the most 
detailed explication to be found in the booklet, that of BrS. 1, 1, 2 janmady 
asya yatah, to which the basic scriptural evidence of SBh. 1, 1, 1 is delegated 
as a more convenient place to deal with it, the bare essentials of Visista- 
dvaita are enumerated without the slightest attempt at convincing presenta- 
tion and plausible argumentation. Read, for instance, toward the end: “all 
vedantins agree that at the time of resorption there persists a subtle differ- 
entiation between, on the one hand, spirit and matter, and the Supreme Being 
on the other hand, a differentiation so subtle that it does not admit of pheno- 
menality;®? for they, too, (i.e., advaitavadins and aupadhikavadins) assume 
that the differentiation (between the three ontological orders), being brought 
about either by nescience or by limiting conditions, has no beginning. But 
our view differs peculiarly in this: whereas the others contradict all scrip- 
ture and reason by maintaining either a brahman that is nescient or a brah- 
man that is limited by conditions, we are guilty of no such contradictions on 
account of the absence (of such doctrines).” This is an extremely tenden- 
tious presentation of the rival views, which can only be understood when 
we have seen RamAanuja’s arguments either in Vedarthasamgraha or in Sri- 
bhasya. We may also note that Ramanuja nowhere uses the term vedantin, 
nor indeed vedanta in the sense of Vedantamimamsa; nor is vyavahdara in 
the sense of “phenomenality” common with Ramanuja; finally, the last sen- 
tence is clearly a recast of the second sanza of the Vedarthasamgraha. 


Similar observations can be made on the majority of the comments in 
the Vedantasara by anyone well-read in RamAnuja; and I think it extremely 
improbable that Ramanuja presented his system to the thinkers of his age 
in such a poor form. If the text was at all composed during Ramanuja’s 
life-time, it will at most have been an authorized epitome by one of his 


86. Upodghdata to his Vedarthasamgraha ed. p. 35. 
87. vyavaharaénarhasiksmabhedah; NarastmHa Ayyangar (Adyar ed, 1953) trans- 
lates ‘subtle and indescribable difference’, 


32 J. A.B. VAN BUITENEN 


pupils. The Vedantadipa seems to be more authentic and its existence has 
indeed some justification in the length and difficulty of the Sribhasya. Yet 
also in this case I find it hard to believe that Ramanuja, who, after a tradi- 
tional life of six score, left but few works in comparison with Sankara, would 
have preferred the clerical and thankless task of abridging his own chef- 
d’oeuvre to the more congenial composition of, for example, commentaries 
on the Upanisads. 


Among the more lyrical works ascribed to Ramanuja, the Gadyatraya 
and Nityagrantha, only the former is found referred to sufficiently often by 
Indian authors to touch lightly upon it here. It may be described loosely as 
a prose-poem, consisting of three unequal parts, Saranagatigadya, Sriranga- 
gadya and Vaikunthagadya. The text has been commented on by the Vedan- 
tadesika who ascribes it to bhasyakaéra Ramanuja, and tradition has it that 
Ramanuja wrote it in his old age. The gadyas may be described more pre- 
cisely as exercises in bhakti as taught by Ramanuja, an endless and repeti- 
tious pondering over and rememorizing of God’s infinite perfections. Large 
portions are repeated over and over again and many passages are practically 
identical with such evocations as the introduction to the Gitabhasya and 
comments ad Gita 9, 34; and they are also strongly reminiscent of Yamuna’s 
hymns. Remarkable is the oft-recurring expression ekdntikatyantikapara- 
bhaktiparajnanaparamabhakti in which the Vedantadesika reads an ascen- 
sion from the desire of having an immediate intuition of a supreme kind 
to the actual attaining to such an intuition and finally the uninterrupted retain- 
ing of it.88 The expression is not known to me from Ramanuja’s other works; 
possibly it is a restatement of the ascension karman — jfiiana —> bhakti, where 
karman, which is essentially aradhana “propitiation” of God, combined with 
the knowledge of the natures of God, spirit and matter, gradually culminates 
in the conscious and loving adoration of God.89 The later distinction be- 
tween a lower bakti of works and a higher bhakti of complete abandon 
(prapatti) does not seem to be known to, or at least accepted by, Ramanuja, 
as we have tried to show elsewhere,” and it is significant that Vedantadesika 
does not explain it in these terms. Though formerly I hesitated, there is 
no valid reason to doubt the authenticity of this little devotional work: 
perhaps modern scholars are too apt to suspect lyrics that are ascribed to 


88. In his Gadyabhasya (Srimad-Vedéntadesika-granthamald, part 4, ed. by Sri 
Kanchi P, B. ANNANGARACHARYAR, Conjeeveram 1940), p. 104: atra parabhaktir uttarot- 
tarasaksatkdrecchatmaki dhih, si ca ya pritir ityddisy iva svabhdvajd, na tv istasadhanat- 
vabuddhija / parajnanam uttarottarasaksatkarah / siksatkrte nirantardénububhisa parama- 
bhaktih; the quotation is VP. 1, 20, 19 ya pritir avivekindim visayesv anapayini / tram 
anusmaratah sa me hrdayan médpasarpatu. 

89. See my Ramanuja, etc., pp. 19 ff. 

90. O. c. pp. 24 ff. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA Te 4 33 


philosophers and to forget that these philosophers were theologians and 
officiating priests. The songs of St. Thomas Aquinas, whom nobody would 
suspect of lyrical aspirations on the basis of his philosophical works, furnish 
an interesting parallel. 


2. Its Sources 
A. SMRTI 


$1, Function of Smrti: 


The scope and authority of smrti texts have been fixed ever since 
Jaimini ruled: “Smrti is to be disregarded whenever it militates against 
Sruti.”9! A propos of this sutra Ramanuja, commenting on Brahmasitra 
2, 1, 1, defines the function of smrti in the following terms: “The Vedanta 
texts aim at establishing complete objects on the basis of apodictical assump- 
tion, which is beyond the scope of all other pramanas, from perception on- 
wards; therefore, those people whose knowledge of scriptural revelation falls 
short stand in need of corroboration of these objects; many smrtis, promul- 
gated by perfectly trustworthy personalities in harmony with the contents 
of the éruti, serve to corroborate them. This corroboration being equal to 
the elucidation of the truths set forth by the scriptures is impossible when- 
ever smrti militates against Sruti in its primary meaning.” In this con- 
nexion, where the authority of the traditional doctrine of Samkhya is con- 
demned, he mentions a number of smrti texts which do fulfil this corrobo- 
rative function: Mahabharata, Bhagavadgita, Manu, Visnupurana, Apastam- 
biyadharmasitra, Daksasmrti, etc., and which fail to do so, Kapilasmrti and 
Brhaspatismrti. 


The same view is stated in the Vedarthasamgraha® with reference to 
the Ramayana text: “Seeing that KuSa and Lava were wise and firmly esta- 
blished in the Vedas, the Lord made them apprehend in order to corrobo- 
rate the Vedas:” for this exactly is the function of epics and puranas. 


Distinction is always made between the Mahabharata and its cele- 
brated episode the Bhagavadgita. On the place of the latter text in Rama- 
nuja’s system the present writer has commented elsewhere in great detail, 
and little need be added here. Noteworthy is that in our text the quota- 
tions from the Visnupurana outnumber those from the Bhagavadgita, while 
in the Sribhasya the latter text appears to play a far more important role. 
There is an ancient Vaisnava tradition that Ramanuja wrote his Gitabhasya 


91. KMS. 1, 1, 3. 
92. Ved. §33, 


V.95 


34 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


in extreme old age, which may signify that the Gita grew in importance for 
Ramanuja in the course of his career. 


Strictly epical citations are mainly from the Mahabharata, especially 
from the Moksadharma which Ramanuja once styles the jnanakanda of the 
great epic, and rarely from the Ramayana. Quotations from the smrtis in 
the stricter sense of the word are chiefly from the cosmological and philo- 
sophical portions of Manusmrti. 


Generally, with the possible exception of the Gita citations, the 
quoted stanzas from other smrtis are incidental, supplementary rather than 
decisive, current quotations of a certain milieu rather than the significant 
fruits of a dedicated study. The references to the Visnupurana, however, 
play a more important réle: it is to this text that Ramanuja turns to enlarge 
upon topics most dear to his heart. 


§2. Visnupurana : 


In comparison with the smrtis that were generally accepted as autho- 
ritative, the epics among which the Bhagavadgita has a privileged position, 
and Manu, the smarta authority of the Puranas was not so widely and com- 
pletely recognized before Ram&nuja’s age. Sankara, for instance, only makes 
sparingly use of corroborative evidence from the Puranas.* 


Ramanuja, however, quotes profusely from the Puranas, or rather 
from one of them, the Vaisnavite Sri-Visnupurana.%* But even he does not 
do so without an attempt at justification. He introduces® a typically puranic 
classification of the puranas into four groups, those promulgated by Brahma 
on a ‘day’ — that is one day of Brahma’s life — when his sattva constituent 
preponderated, those promulgated when rajas preponderated and when tamas 
preponderated, and those promulgated on a day when the gunas were mixed. 
In accordance with the classification only the sattvika puranas are fully 
authoritative, and in case there happen to be conflicts between different 
puranas, the teaching of the better qualified one is decisive.°© The multiple 
authorship of the Puranas exists only in appearance: Brahma himself is the 
auctor intellectualis, on his dictation the sages have compiled their Puranas. 


By far the greater majority of the smrti quotations in the Vedartha- 
samgraha have been taken from the Visnupurana. It is worth noting how 


93. Sankara’s Sutrabhasya quotes the Puranas some 8 times (DrussENn, System of 
Vedanta, p. 31). 

94, Ved. § 94. 

95. §94. 

96. § 94. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 35 


Ramanuja defines” the scope of its authority: “The Vaisnava Purana is 
accepted without dissension by all scholars from the East, North, South and 
West of India as being adequate (paryapta-) in so far as it establishes all 
the dharmas and all the tattvas”. We may assume that in Ramdanuja’s age 
the Visnupurana had gained wide currency and popularity — not necessarily 
only in Vaisnavite circles — as a religious and edifying book in all the Indian 
senses of the words. Interesting is the restriction to “all dharmas and all 
tattvas”: the basic doctrines do not stand in need of corroboration by the 
Visnupurana, they are not smdarta but Srauta. The description of this Puranas 
as a dharma-book is possibly with reference to the huge appendix Visnu- 
dharmottara — which, incidentally, is quoted only once in the Sribhasya%® 
and not at all in the Vedarthasamgraha—, whereas the tattvas refer either 
to the three ontological orders of Supreme Being, soul and matter, or to the 
categories of Samkhya, the influence of which on this popular Purana has 
been very great. 


The strictly metaphysical object of the Visnupurana is described in 
the following terms:%9 it serves the special and exclusive purpose of setting 
forth a certain aspect of Brahman’s essence, that is not a phenomenal pro- 
jection of the Supreme Being, but a particular manifestation of Its essence. 
This aspect of Brahman or, personally, of Narayana who is the Supreme 
Brahman, is Visnu who represents Narayana’s character of omnipresent per- 
vader and saviour-god of incarnations. 


A propos of Ramanuja’s introduction of the Visnupurana a few general 
remarks may be made. Not infrequently Ramanuja is opposed to Sankara 
as the ‘first sectarian commentator’, by which is meant that he was the first 
to introduce into Vedantamimamsa, so far kept pure, external and dete- 
riorating elements which made his system a parochial manifesto rather than 
a universally valid system of thought; or it is said that he fabricated scrip- 
tural evidence, that is to say, made room within Vedanta for a great many 
Srutis and smrtis that Sankara either ignored or delegated to the rank of 
relative truth. It is clear that those who pass these criticisms take Sankara’s 
selection and treatment of scriptures as normative, in other words, believe 
on speculative grounds that Sankara is more right than Ramanuja. 


RamAnuja’s citations of the Visnupurana are only illustrative and cor- 
roborative. His justification of these citations shows clearly that he was 
anxious not to introduce any evidence that would be unacceptable to his fellow 


97. §110. 
98. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 70f. (104, 23-26). 
99, §110. 


36 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Vedantins. It is for all Vedanta that he claims to speak. I doubt whether 
his contemporary Vedantins would have disputed the relevancy of any quota- 
tion he gives, though they might debate his interpretation. No doubt the 
results of his scriptural exegesis are at times picturesque. Yet remarks 
such as Radhakrishnan—a sympathetic describer of Ramanuja’s thought— 
passes: 101 “Ramanuja’s beautiful stories of the other world, which he 
narrates with the confidence of one who had personally assisted at the 
origination of the world, carry no conviction,” are not quite fair in many 
respects. Other-worldly stories never sound convincing to unbelieving ears; 
neither do Sankara’s. Besides, the example is ill chosen: Ramanuja is not 
particularly interested in the circumstances of world origination beyond the 
fact that it is a causal process by which the qualified, subtly embodied God 
as the material cause evolves into the phenomenal world of soul and matter 
constituting a modus of God as the immanent guiding spirit. Finally, if ever 
he indulges in wondrous stories, he is forced to do so by his texts. This is 
exactly the point: he takes his texts seriously. A more comprehensive col- 
lection of Srutis and smrtis could hardly be made. And he takes his texts lite- 
rally. If these texts, the authority of which is the very foundation of orthodox 
metaphysical thought, happen to speak about the golden splendour of God, 
about the supreme immaterial heaven, about angelic beings eternally absorb- 
ed in the contemplation of God’s essence, he accepts them in their literal 
sense. Only then he proceeds to illustrate and supplement them by quota- 
tions from the Visnupurana. If we criticize the results of his exegesis, we 
criticize the authority of his texts and the validity of his exegetical princi- 
ples. We are free to do so; but if we do so in order to pass judgment on 
things metaphysical, we can claim faith, not proof. 


§3. The influence of Paftcaratra Agama: 


It has often been suggested, and indeed taken for granted, that Rama- 
nuja attached great importance to the so-called Agama or Tantra of the 
Paficaratra, that is that class of multitudinous and voluminous texts which 
present themselves since 5th-7th centuries A.D. side by side with the Puranas 
with which they have much in common. They embody the ancient tradition 


100. A comparison with the bhasya of Madhva is instructive; this author, who 
cannot have lived much later than Ramanuja, not only quotes Puranas and Tantras much 
more frequently than sruti, but treats their evidence as decisive for Vedanta; in the first 
adhyaya are quoted such texts as Aditya P. (1); Garuda (3); Naradiya (3); Padma (6); 
Bhag. Tantra (1); Bhag. P. (3); Brhat Samhita (4); Brahmavaivarta (5); Brahmanda 
(6); Mahakaurma (2); Vamana (4); Varaha (3); Vyoma Samhita (1); Skandha (19); 
Harivamsa (1). 

101. Indian Philosophy II, p. 720. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 37 


of Paficaratra, combining a Samkhyan or Samkhya-inspired cosmogony with 
the devotion of Visnu-Narayana. Although ideally treating of metaphysics 
as well, they are for the greater part manuals of Tantric ritual and mantra. 
Their metaphysical doctrines and speculations are, if at all, stated in a 
cosmogonical context.12 A striking feature is the doctrine that the Supreme 
Personal God, quasi-independent of whom his personified Sakti or creative 
potency operates as his active female counterpart, at the beginning of creation 
becomes differentiated into four Vythas or divisions, Vasudeva, Samkarsana, 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha, over whom the perfections and functions of the 
God are distributed and who develop the new universe in several successive 
stages. Although most of the origin of Paficaratra is obscure, it would in 
my opinion not be too speculative to regard this system, at least the cosmo- 
gonical-metaphysical side of it, as a continuous development of pre- 
systematized theistic Samkhya as alluded to or expressed in Upanisads like 
the Chandogya, Sveta$vatara and Katha and in philosophical portions of the 
epic. Extraneous elements may have been absorbed when the personality 
of Visnu became increasingly complex. Esoteric speculations on hidden 
meanings in language, as old as the Brahmanas, may always have formed 
part of it, even though the contents of these speculations—jealously kept 
secret, even now—have changed. The conspicuous ritualistic tendencies 
would also point to ancient associations. One is inclined to think of this 
comprehensive and syncretistic ‘system’ as one of the main channels by 
which the old Brahmanistic spirit continued to flow through the wasteland 
of the Buddhist period, never quite running dry but receiving from under- 
ground tributaries that sprang from distant and unexplored sources. That 
this spirit was able to receive inspiration from the popular beliefs around 
the divine figure of Visnu the visvariipa could find some explanation in the 
fact that of the Vedic gods who in Hinduistic times became prominent Visnu 
was from of old intimately associated with the life-preserving ritual. 


Agama appears to have played an important réle with Ramanuja’s 
precursors who attempted to emancipate their traditional Vaisnavism and 
Bhagavatism. No less a part did it play in post-Ramanuja Visistadvaita. 
Yamuna composed a special prakarana to defend its authority, the Agama- 
pramanya. Venkatanatha the VedantadeSsika wrote a Pancaratraraksa, and 
in the brief but authoritative manual Yatindramatadipika the authority of 
Pafcaratra is stated without question. This often emphatically expressed 
favour of ancient and modern Visistadvaitins for Paficaratra is the main 
reason for the prevailing view that this corpus of mythological, cosmogonical, 


102. I refer to ScuRapzr’s Introduction to Pancaratra, p. 27. 
103. YID VII, p. 45... sripaficaratrégamasya kvacid api vedavirodhabhavat kart- 
sneyena pramanyam. 


38 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ritualistic and occult speculations and practices occupied a priviliged place in 
Ramanuja’s philosophical system. 


We have already seen that Ramanuja, far from being a “sectarian 
commentator fabricating Srutis” actually took the utmost care to avoid any 
parochialism and, when attacking his adversaries and erecting his own school 
on the ruins of their systems, used recognized weapons and tools. When he 
adduces evidence from so venerable a smrti text as the Visnupurana he 
carefully proceeds to define and confine the scope of its authority. We would 
expect, and his adversaries demand, a similar avant-propos before he would 
introduce the Agama in evidence. 


It is however remarkable that neither in the Vedarthasamgraha nor 
in the Sribhasya— except in the utpattyasambhavadhikarana — Ramanuja 
quotes a single pada from the one and a half crore of slokas in which, ac- 
cording to the tradition, the Agama consists. Nor are any of the characteris- 
tic doctrines of this system as much as hinted at. It is true that Ramanuja 
enlarges upon Paficaratra in his comments on Brahmasitras 2, 2, 39-42, but 
even there it should be noted that he does not confess himself a Bhagavata 
or Satvata and that he mainly repeats and restates the arguments adduced 
by Yamuna against Sankara’s and Bhaskara’s controversial explanations. As 
this section of the Sribhasya is our only evidence that Ramanuja admitted 
the Paficaratra at all, we should not interpret its significance too pregnantly. 
We cannot conclude that he regarded those texts, three of which he quotes, 
as authoritative in any other sense than other smrti texts like Manusmrti, 
Mahabharata and Ramayana, each of which is quoted more often than all 
Agamas together. 


The main points of his commentary are 1. Paficaratra does not hold 
that the soul has a beginning;!%° 2. The Vyuhas are the subtle or causal 
phase of the Supreme Being as the material and operative cause;!° 3. Agama 
embodies the Vedic doctrine in an easily comprehensible popular form; 
4, Badarayana the Sutrakara and Vyasa the composer of the Mahabharata 
are identical and therefore cannot deny in one place what they affirm in 
another;!7 5, Paficaratra, in contrast to Samkhya, Yoga and Pasupata, is not 
founded by men but promulgated by God himself.1° 


Taking all positive and negative evidence of all his works together we 
may say that the Agama, albeit recognized in passing as an orthodox system 


104. ScHraper, o.c. p. 14. 

105. Corresponds to Agamapramanya, p. 54, 1. 6 ff. 
106. O.c. 55, 1. 10 ff. 

107. O.c. 54. 

108. O.c, 23 ff.; 42 ff. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 39 


of thought, is not at all utilized as a source of knowledge in its own right 
to corroborate Ramanuja’s system of Vedanta. One reason has been offered: 
Ramanuja addresses himself to all Vedantins and endeavours to support his 
original theses by scriptural evidence that is acceptable to all. Another reason 
is no doubt that he was very little interested in the mechanics of world creation 
and evolution and had no occasion to make use of a class of texts whose 
only contributions to metaphysics were inseparably linked up with cosmo- 
gonical speculations that are of small value in explaining God’s relation to 
the world in harmony with Sruti and reason. Ramanuja’s and indeed 
Vedanta’s main concern is with ontology: only when the ontological relation 
between the supreme Cause and the phenomenal Effect has been established 
cosmology and cosmogony may proceed. Raméanuja’s evident indifference 
toward Paficaradtra should therefore not necessarily be regarded as typical 
of this Vaisnavite philosopher. 


B. DaARSANAS 


§1. Mimamsa: 


That Ramanuja was well-grounded in Purvamimamsa need hardly be 
mentioned. For all Vedantins, however differently they may ultimately con- 
ceive of the relation of the two mimamsas, the First Exegesis is propaedeutic 
to the second. 


Both schools of Karmamimamsa on the basis of Sabarabhasya, the 
Bhatta and the Prabhakara, were known to Ramanuja. But, apart from one 
occasional quotation of Kumarila, his principal, though antagonistic, interest 
is directed to the doctrines of Prabhakara’s school. This is interesting in 
view of the fact that in later time the VisSistadvaitins have come to be 
associated with the Prabhakaras in the same way as the Advaitins were 
associated with the Bhattas, though perhaps not so exclusively. 


a. Sabarasvamin: 


That Ramanuja was familiar with Sabara’s commentary on the 
Karmamimamsasuttras is—if proof were needed—evidenced by several pas- 
sages dealing with fundamental Mimamsaka concepts. Quotations from the 
Vedic scriptures of the karmakanda have generally the form—also abbreviat- 
ed—in which they are cited by Sabara, and though I have taken some pains 
in my notes to identify them in Sruti, it is certain that Ramanuja himself 
knew them from or through Sabara. What Edgerton remarked! can be fully 
applied to the Vedantins as well: “For the most part it is clear that the 


109. Intr. Mimansanyayaprakasa, p. 23. 


40 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


later Mimamsakas limited themselves to the passages used in Sabara- 
svamin’s Bhasya as illustrations of the laws of Jaimini. These were the 
accepted stock in trade of the school and were discussed and worked over 
again and again, obviously with little reference to the original Vedic texts. 
This is the custom of scholasticism everywhere”. This holds good for the 
stock-instances of the various schools, and also, but in a lesser degree, for 
the éruti quotations of the Vedanta schools separately. 


b, Kuméarila: 


The founder of the Bhatta school of Mimamsa is once found quoted 
with approval. The citation is from the Niralambanavadakanda of the Sloka- 
varttika and fits in so neatly with Ramdnuja’s exposure of the advaitin’s 
ultimate nihilism that we are inclined to look for other verbal reminiscences. 
So it would seem probable that Ramanuja’s example of the real vision of 
an imaginary gandharvanagara has been inspired by Kumérila’s mention of 
the same in st. 110 of this kanda. 


c. Prabhdkara: 


It seems very likely that Ram&nuja’s main source of the doctrines 
of Prabhakara was Salikanatha’s Prakaranapancika, though we cannot be 
sure before we have more Prabhakara works available. He quotes half a 
sloka which is found in Salikanatha’s section on vakyarthamatrka (p. 190) 
with a slight variant, and there introduced as usual with dha. That Rama- 
nuja may have quoted directly from Salikandtha’s eventual source is not 
entirely out of the question, but not probable in view of other corresponden- 
ces: from the same section, p. 190, Ram&anuja borrows a casual example 
verbally—with the rare word garbhaddsa “born slave”, misunderstood by 
many copyists—and develops it into a cosmic analogy. Other corresponden- 
ces have been pointed out in my notes to the relative paragraphs of the 
translation. 


§2. Vedanta 
a. Advaita: 


It would seem unquestionable that Ramanuja knew Sankara’s works. 
For the Brahmasitrabhasya this is evidenced clearly by the Sribhdsya where 
the purvapaksa’s that are set aside regularly confom to Sankara’s siddhantas. 
More difficult is it to decide the same on the comparatively scanty evidence 
of the Vedarthasamgraha, but probably § 49-51 are a case in point: it is 
plausible to connect the argumentation of Ramanuja d@ propos of two 
analogies, that of a person dreaming and the stock-instance of the snake in 
the rope, with Sankara’s comments on Brahmasitras 2, 1, 14 (p. 198) yatha 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 41 


suptasya prakrtasya janasya svapna uccadvacan bhavan pasyato niscitam eva 
pratyaksabhimatam vijidnam bhavati ete. 


Ramanuja’s refutation of the advaitin’s interpretation of BAUp. 2, 3, 
6 athata ddego neti netiti may have been evoked either by Sankara’s com- 
mentary ad BrS. 3, 2, 22 or by his comments on the passage in his upanisad- 
bhasya. The fact that Ramanuja quotes BrS. 3, 2, 22 in favour of his own 
exegesis probably means that he refers to Sankara’s view as expressed in 
his sutrabhasya. 


There is at least one clear indication that Ramanuja knew other works 
as well. His polemical explication of the meaning of satyam jndnam anantam 
brahma is no doubt directed against Sankara’s interpretation in his com- 
mentary on the Taittiriya Up. 2, 1, which will be discussed in another con- 
nexion; here the requisite terminological correspondences are clear enough. 
Less obvious is a possible reference to Sankara’s Chandogya Up. Bhasya: 
commenting on the satkaryavada of the sadvidya (6, 2, 2), Ramanuja intro- 
duces a rival theory that contends that the passage katham asatah saj jayeta 
intends mainly to refute the Buddhist nihilist view by way of rejecting the 
asatkaryavada, instead of refuting this last naiyayika theory only. In fact, 
Sankara in his Chandogyabhasya formulates this precise view, but so does 
Mandanamiéra in his Brahmasiddhi1!° However, I have not been able to 
identify unequivocal references to the latter thinker in the Vedarthasam- 
graha;!11 besides, Ramanuja’s subsequent discussion of laksana in tat tvam 
asi as assumed by the rival advaitin would point to Sankara rather than to 
Mandana. 


The question to whom Ramanuja would here refer is of special interest, 
for the purvapaksa is formulated in significant terms: nanu niradhisthana- 
bhramasambhavajiadpandyasatkaryavadanirasah kriyate / tatha hy ekam cid- 
ripam satyam evavidydcchaditam jagadripena vivartata ity avidyasrayat- 
vaya milakaranam satyam ity upagantavyam ity asatkéryavadanirasah. 
Variant readings for avidyachaditam are °Sabalam and °gabalitam. It is 


110. BrSiddhi, p. 20: katham asatah saj jdyeteti ca svayam Sinyatiyd nisedhat / 
bhavo hi yathavad aprakasaméaino *dhyastavidyamanariipah prakasate; sinye tu kvadhya- 
sah, kim prak@satém iti nirbijataiva; the expression nirbijata occurs also in Sankara’s 
ChUpBh.; bija is what Ramanuja calls in this connexion milakarana; the terms are sug- 
gested by ChUp. 6, 8, 6. 

111. Hacker, in his paper Jayantabhatta and Vdcaspatimigra (Schubring Fest- 
schrift, Hamburg 1951), p. 165, n. 4, remarks that SBh. 1, 1, 1 the confutation of advaita 
mainly concerns the monistic doctrine of pratyaksa and may therefore have been inspired 
by Mandana; on closer inspection, however, it appears that R. investigates advaita theory 
on the basis of all three pramanas, and I for one am not convinced that in dealing with 
pratyaksa R. had Mandana in mind, 


Vv. 6 


42 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


difficult to decide whether dcchdditam is a lectio facilior or sabalam an hyper- 
correctness of a copyist inspired by vivartate. The fact that Ramanuja does 
not use the term gabalam elsewhere and that the best MS. reads dcchaditam 
make the latter alternative the more probable one. Both Sabala- (but rather 
méayasabala-) and vivarta- would remind us of Sarvajfiiatman. On the other 
hand neither Mandana nor Sankara use vi-\/vrt and its derivatives in the 
sense of an illusory evolution or causation, which sense is clearly intended 
by Ramanuja. His use of the term is in itself noteworthy: neither Bhaskara 
nor Yamuna use or know it in this sense. Yamuna employs it in an important 
description!!? of the advaita doctrine of God (= impersonal brahman): . .Its 
essence (viz. of pure consciousness) is subject to limiting conditions 
(upadhis): it obtains such perfect qualities as omniscience because it is con- 
ditioned by maya, which undergoes a variety of evolutions that are depen- 
dent on itself (..svaruipam eva.. svddhinavicitravivartasvabhavamayopa- 
hitataya samasadita- [! not adhyasta- or adhyaropita-] -sarvajiyadisampadam 
upahitam abhidadhati). It is evident that for Yamuna vivarta equals pari- 
nama, vikara, etc.: maya, not brahman, is vicitravivartasvabhava. So, though 
there be occasion to connect Ramanuja’s purvapaksin with Sankara ad ChUp. 
6, 2, other arguments, mainly Ramanuja’s special use of vivarta tell against 
direct connexion, so that at most we can say that if Ramanuja referred to 
his august antagonist he already interpreted the later vivartavada into San- 
kara’s doctrine. Besides, there are more associations: it would seem pro- 
bable, as we saw, that Ramanuja consulted the Slokavarttika here. 


Unless certain authors are quoted verbally it is exceedingly difficult 
to identify them in purvapaksins. Moreover, we have to consider the supreme 
probability that Ramanuja addressed himself in the first place to living adver- 
saries of his time and milieu, in whose teachings old advaita doctrines were 
being restated and developed. It will also happen that the references are 
just too vague: Vimuktadtman, on clear terminological grounds identifiable 
in the Sribhdsya,!3 does not emerge in the Vedarthasamgraha, whereas Sali- 
kanadtha, so evidently referred to in the latter text, can only be guessed 
behind the corresponding portions of the Sribhasya. 


b. Bhedabhedavada : 


Bhaskara’s doctrine, as presented here by Ramanuja, that Brahman is 
conditioned by upddhis into becoming the phenomenal world cannot be 
entirely derived from the Brahmasitrabhasya. Though certain drstantas 


112, Atmasiddhi, pp. 4-5. 


113. For brevity’s sake I refer to Hirryanna’s introduction to the Istasiddhi (Baroda 
1933), pp. XI-XII. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 43 


can be identified, they appear much more elaborate and may hail from fol- 
lowers. One instance is curious: Raméanuja avails himself of the analogy 
of space and a space-unit enclosed in, that is conditioned by, a pitcher. This 
analogy had already been given by Sankara and we note that Ramanuja’s 
terminology corresponds more closely to Sankara’s than to Bhaskara’s: 
tasmad yatha ghatakarakaddyaékadsaném mahakasdnanyatvam .. evam asya- 
bhogyabhoktradiprapancajatasya brahmavyatirekenabhava iti drastavyam 
(Brobbecy 14, p. 197). 


Ramanuja’s last argument against the aupadhikavadin’s view that not 
God but his creative potency undergoes modification is no doubt to be con- 
nected with Bhaskara’s commentary ad BrS. 1, 4, 26. 


ce Yamuna: 


The doctrine of Yamuna, Ramanuja’s predecessor and _ teacher’s 
teacher, has not yet been made the subject of a monograph, in spite of the 
fact that his Siddhitraya, in which his doctrine is preserved fragmentarily, 
seems to be of great importance for the history not only of Visistadvaita but 
also of Vedanta as a whole. This is not the place to go into great detail 
and we have to content ourselves for the time being with mentioning a few 
fundamental points. 


His principal tenets can best be described in his own words, taken 
from the beginning of the Atmasiddhi, where he enumerates a great many 
different views that were held by Indian schools of thought before him on 
the cardinal truths. Generally his own opinion concludes the series of theo- 
ries as a preliminary thesis to be demonstrated later on. 


On the nature of the atman, the individual, ‘empirical’ soul, he con- 
-cludes that it is not material and non-spiritual, is not identical with the body, 
or the vital breath, or the manas; nor yet is it unqualified consciousness 
upon which certain qualities are projected by nescience!!4 or by limiting con- 
ditions,5 but that it is a substance qualified by the essential property know- 
ledge. This special knowledge acquires the designation ‘beatitude’, ‘bliss’, 
etc., from the fact that its object is pleasurable, not because it would be 
pleasurable itself.17 This dtman, though self-illuminating, can be the object 
of our knowledge by the pramanas of scriptural revelation, reasoning, intro- 
spective perception: by means of these instruments and sources of 


114. Advaitavada. 

115. Bhaskara’s aupadhikavada. 

116. Gimavisaye ...... asrayinukilyapratilabdhénandasukhadivyapadesabodhavisesa 
evasya svabhavika ity anye, pp. 2-3. 

117. Cf. R.’s exposition, §§ 142-43. 


44 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


knowledge we can come to an immediate apprehension of the Atman so as 
it is, in its essential and categorical difference from everything else, with 
a gradually increasing clarity of cognition which finally culminates in a 
perfect lucidity.8 Although the atman is in itself without magnitude, it 
is localized by the magnitude of the corporeal mass which it pervades in 
its totality, not merely by knowledge or consciousness.1% It is unchanging 
and eternal.!2° In each of the fields of empirical experience, that is in each 
body, the 4tman has a distinct individuality.12! 


The Supreme Spirit, the paramatman, is described as a person, depend- 
ent on whom are the existence and the activity —in all its forms— of the 
three classes of spiritual beings, or A4tmans, and of non-spiritual, material 
entities. This personal God is a mighty ocean of all perfections, primarily 
the six beautiful qualities of knowledge, strength, dominion, heroism, power 
and splendour, which are natural properties, limitless and absolute.!? 


Dascupta, describing Yamuna’s doctrine of the soul on the basis of 
the Atmasiddhi,! comes to the conclusion that “Yamuna’s main contribu- 
tion consists in establishing the self-consciousness of the soul” but “gives 
hardly any new ideas about Isvara and His relation to the souls and world.” 
As the manner in which Ramanuja’s vedantic predecessors conceived of the 
relation between the absolute and the non-absolute is of importance to decide 
his own originality of contribution, we may inquire whether, and if so to 
what extent, Dasgupta’s verdict is just. 


In Atmasiddhi p. 4-5, after summing up the advaitin’s relation brah- 
man —avidy& and the bhedabhedavadin’s relation brahman — upahitabrah- 
man, Yamuna states finally what, by exclusion, should be his own view or 
siddhanta: “granted that there is diversity, yet the relation itself is non- 
difference : it is an intimate connexion definable as that between ama and 
amsin, or has the form of a Sega-Sesin!*4 relation that is characterized by 


118. tathedrso (sc. svayamjyotis-) "py dgamanumdnayogajapratyaksaih svetarasa~ 
kalavilaksanasvabhavyena visadavisadataravisadatamatayantato yathavad aparoksyata iti 
p. 3; cf. R.’s recurring expression visadatamapratyaksatapanna- to describe the vividness 
of knowledge through bhakti. 

119. tath& svatah parimanirahito ’pi vydpyavastuparimitikrtapariccheda iti, vyaptir 
.. svaripeneti, p. 3. 

120. tathé kitastho nitya iti, p. 4. 

121. pratiksetram nanabhita iti, p. 4. 

122. tatha paramdtmavisaye *pi .. anye tu svadhinatrividhacetandicetanasvaripa- 
sthitipravrttibhedam svabhavikaniravadhikatisayajnanabalaisvaryaviryasaktitejahprabhrti- 
sakalakalyinagunamaharnavam purusavisesam isvaram atisthante, p. 5. 

123. Indian Philosophy, III, p. 139 ff. 

124. On Sesa see trsl. notes 3. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 45 


dependence, or again is the relation between possession and possessor that is 
characterized by servant and master.”25 


_ Again, at the end of the Isvarasiddhi, we have a notable reading: 
the entire Universe in its three phases of past, present and future, is for its 
subsistence and resorption dependent on a Being that has a wealth of quali- 
ties, among which the capacity of sustaining and resorbing the Universe, 
because it is of an inconceivably varied and various composition: it may be 
compared to paintings and sculptures which we infer to be exclusively 
dependent for their existence, etc., on an extremely gifted person.”!*6 


The same reading continues: “The Universe, which is described by 
the word vibhiti, stands to the One Being in a relation of object supported, 
object governed and object accessory, because it is His body, comparable 
to the relation between the “I” and its body.’’!27 It is true that this reading 
is not found in the mss. that are mainly utilized by the different editors — 
whose critical principles, incidentally, remain completely mysterious'8—yet 
a comparison with the first quoted passage, found in all mss., renders this 
variant acceptable. 


We may also compare the final stanzas of the Isvarasiddhi: “This 
Universe obeys the command of one person because it is not spiritual: like 
a body. All spiritual beings perform the task under the control of one 
person, as the senses —touch, etc. —, because the task requires the associa- 
tion of a body. The Universe, the topic of our polemic, has one Supreme 
Soul, because he is the soul of spiritual and non-spiritual beings: it forms 
as it were one country with one king.”!2 In other words — which would 


; 125. néanitve saty evaibhedo naméanvayah / amésimsibhavalaksanah samavayah / 
paratantratalaksanah sesasesitvaripah / svasvamibhavobhrtyasvamilaksana iti ca ndnavidha 
vadah; RamManusacuarya in his translation of the Atmasiddhi, Journal, Annamalai Univer- 
sity, connects ndndvidha vadaéh only with this paragraph, suggesting that these views are 
at variance mutually; but rather it sums up the entire section: .. iti kecit.. ityanye .. itare 
.. iti ca, nanavidha vadah. 

126. traikalikam krtsnam jagat tadanugunagaktyadigunaganavadéyattasthitilayakam 
acintyavividhavicitraracanatvat / atikugalaikdyattasthityadikataya pramitacitrapratimadi- 
vat, Isvarasiddhi, p. 79-80 (Chaukh. ed.) 

127. vibhitipadibhidheyam krtsnam ekddheyavidheyasesabhavam / tacchariratvan 
‘macchariravat; RAMANUJACHARYA, 0.c., renders “all things denoted by”, which is not so apt. 

428. Neither Rama Misra Sastri, Chaukhamba Skt. Ser. ed., nor SRINIVASACHARI, 
Journal Annamalai University ed., give an account of their mss and critical methods; 
the Telugu ed. I have been unable to consult. 

129. ekecchinuvidhiyidam acaitanyat svadehavat // ekenadhisthitah karyam kur- 
vate sarvacetanah / dehasambandhasapeksakaryatvat tvagddivat // ekapradhdnapurusam 
vivadadhyasitam jagat / cetanacetanatmatvad ekarajakadesavat // RAMANUJACHARYA’S 
translation differs but is less plausible. 


46 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


seem the most plausible explication of these lines: the material Universe 
is obedient to God’s will, like a man’s body to that of man; the personal 
entities, the cetanas, again perform God’s work under God’s control, work 
that requires bodily action which they provide: but their function is of a 
higher order than that of matter, and they may be likened to the senses 
of the body of God. So the composite Universe in its totality is governed 
by one Supreme Person or Soul who is comparable to the soul of the body 
constituted by spirit and matter. 


DascupTa is certainly right in asserting that it “is almost certain that 
his (Yamuna’s) own attitude did not differ much from the Nyaya attitude”. 
In Iévarasiddhi, p. 75, the arguments of the Mimamsakas against a Nyaya 
view are countered in a karika with atra brimah, which supports the Naiya- 
yikas; elsewhere, however, he attacks the Nyaya proofs for the existence of 
God.139 But Dasgupta’s statement that Yamuna, too, “left the duality of 
the world and Isvara absolutely unresolved” is, as we have seen, too sweep- 
ing. Not less sweeping is the pronouncement that “he is also silent about 
the methods which a person should adopt for procuring his salvation.” 


In Atmasiddhi, p. 5, Yamuna sums up the prevailing views of the 
way in which release is achieved and the final view or siddhdnta is that it 
— paramapurusarthabhita brahmapraptilaksanamoksa “man’s supreme goal 
release, which consists in attaining brahman”—can only be achieved by 
means of the bhakti-yoga, of an exclusive and absolute character, of one 
whose inner faculty has been prepared by both jmana- and karma- yoga.” 


Similarly, in Gitarthasamgraha, st. 32, it reads aikdntyatyantaddsyai- 
karatis tatpadam a&pnuyat “he whose only joy is in perfect and absolute ser- 
vitude will achieve that end (or God’s place)”, an expression patently utilized 
by Ramanuja in his Introduction to Gitabhasya: °aSsesasesataikaratiriipa® 
and throughout the Gadyatraya. 


Finally, in a special study, the Agamapramanya, Yamuna professes in 
emphatical terms his adherence to Paficaratra which describes the relation 
between God and the Universe in terms of the farthest possible reduction 
of difference verging on, but never quite merging in, unity, and the method 
of salvation as that of a most humble and exclusive loving devotion or bhakti. 


We have seen that, on account of the fundamental problématique of 
Vedanta itself, the basic conceptions of the various systems concern the rela- 
tion between the Absolute and the Universe, and that these conceptions can 
best be studied from the commentaries on the drambhanddhikarana which 


130. Atmasiddhi, pp. 75-78. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 47 


summarizes the import of the sadvidya. So also Yamuna’s conception, though 
he did not comment on the Sitras—a task he assigned to Ramanuja. Yet 
he too had to deal with the sadvidya, and he did so at some length in the 
Samvitsiddhi. 


What is the meaning of advitiya? Is it a tatpurusa or a bahuvrihi 
compound? In neither case the existence of the Universe is denied. Skip- 
ping his more ingenious than convincing remarks on a grammatically possible 
tatpurusa and concentrating on the term as a bahuvrihi: he argues that 
advitiya is a visesana, a qualifying adjective, and that therefore it cannot 
be explained thus that nothing else exists but Brahman.!*! The non-existence 
of a second thing cannot qualify Brahman: because it does not exist it is 
not qualifying, unless Brahman be itself non-existent. Consequently the real 
existence of the phenomenal world —the prapafica that consists in spirit and 
non-spirit (cidacinmaya-) — is not denied in this text of non-duality : proved 
by its own pramanas of perception and inference it is further corroborated 
by Sruti. 


For what does our text mean? Brahman has no second, that means 
that there is no one and nothing in past, present and future that can be 
counted his second, i.e., his equal or superior.132. The world, consisting of 
a particle of a division of His manifestation,183 can hardly be called a “second”. 
“Matchless” is the true sense: just as in the phrase: “The king of the Colas 
is a universal monarch who does not find his match in the present world.” 
The uncounted millions of existent beings are but drops in the ocean of 
the majestal manifestation of Visnu, the Paramount Sovereign unaffected 
by suffering, action, evolution, etc., the treasury. of the six divine qualities, 
Visnu whose supernal manifestation is beyond imagination. Who, counting 
the seven seas by his fingers, could count their waves, foam-spots, bubbles 
and drops? If we say there is no second sun in the sky, do we deny by 
the sun its rays? The world with its animate and inanimate beings is just 
vacadrambhana and vikdra: sat is the unchanging radical cause.!%4 The effect 
is not different fom its cause: sparks are not different from the fire from 


131. dvitiyavastundstitvam na brahmano (Chaukh. ed. brahma na) visesanam/, 
asattvan na hy asad brahma bhaven néipi visesanam//tasmat prapaicasadbhava nidvai- 
tasrutibadhitah / svapramanabalat siddhah srutydé capyanumoditah //Samvitsiddhi (Chaukh. 
ed. p. 82). 

132. sama- and abhyadhika-, terms we find repeated by R., Ved. §10; compare 
also Stotraratna, st. 16. 

133. vibhavavythakalamatram; vyiha- is in Paficaratra is fourfold personified pro- 
jection of the Supreme, over which the six divine qualities are “divided”; together the 
four Vyithas form also part of God’s vibhava “projection, manifestation”. 

134. kutastham milakdranam; the radical cause is of course the material cause; 
cf. also supra note 110. 


48 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


which they shoot forth,%> nor the pot from the clay, etc. The element 
derives its power and force from its cause. So, by knowing the one material 
cause we know the Universe.” 


In the light of all this Dascupra’s judgment cannot well stand. On 
the contrary, in his, admittedly mainly polemical, works Yamuna departed 
from a more or less clearly defined conception of Vedantic cosmology and 
eschatology. The relation between the Personal God and the Universe is 
stated in various, mutually complementary ways: as that of amsa and amsin 
—so also sparks of fire —, of Sesa and Sesin, of body and soul: the Universe 
is God’s manifestation, governed, supported and ensouled by Him. These 
terms recall immediately those in which Ramanuja couches his central idea: 
so much so that we are justified in saying that Ramanuja, developed and 
elaborated systematically what Yamuna had already discovered. Yamuna 
did not yet systematize his views nor exhaust the fertile concept of Sarira- 
gariribhava, but it is clear that his thoughts went in the direction of this 
analogy as the basic solution. 


IV. OBSERVATIONS ON RAMANUJA’S EXEGETICAL PRINCIPLES AND METHOD 


The increasing tendency among historians of Indian philosophy to study 
the systems of Indian thought, particularly Vedanta, with special reference 
to and in comparison and juxtaposition with Western philosophies has 
created an unfortunate misunderstanding of the typically theological cha- 
racter of Vedantic speculation as a whole. The reasons are many and 
diverse. On the Indian side this tendency is an interesting cultural pheno- 
menon which may well prove to be of the greatest importance for the future 
of Indian thought in the context of world philosophy. On the Western side 
there is often apparent a certain aversion to theology as such and an 
inability to keep in mind that the soteriology of Vedanta is not ‘philosophic’ 
in purpose, but religious, inspired and borne out by scripture and revelation. 
Vedanta is after all a positive theology based upon scripture. The fact that the 
results of scriptural exegesis do not conform to the conclusions of historical 
philological research does not mean that therefore scripture plays a subordi- 
nate réle, as a handmaiden to the philosopher who cannot hope to put across 
his original views without the authority of revelation, and so makes it fit in 
with his own doctrine. This view fails to take into account the importance 
of the tradition of exegesis, of its method and rules. 


135. From BAUp. 2, 1, 20. 
136. The drsténtas summed up in ChUp. 6, 1, 4-6. 


sew 


assertion of ChUp. 6, 1, 3. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA _ 49 


It is only recently that a studious attempt has been made to describe 
systematically the theological method of Sankara.88 Now that a serious 
beginning has been made, one realizes how far we are still removed from a 
complete and comprehensive study of the theological principles and herme- 
neutical methods of the great Indian commentators, without and within 
Vedanta, and generally of the rules of ancient Indian commentatorial 
industry. When studying the many bhasyas on scriptures and sutras the 
student is surprised at the freedom, and often arbitrariness, with which the 
commentators thought fit to treat their texts. A just appreciation of these 
interpretations will remain difficult: not only are the presuppositions of theolo- 
gical exegesis far removed from, if not actually in conflict with, those of 
philological explication — and ultimately the profane scholar has no criterion 
to evaluate supra-rational significance —, but also the breach in the com- 
mentatorial tradition of the Vedanta before Sankara prevents us to under- 
stand the why and wherefore of interpretations that are taken for granted 
later on.189 


Especially in Ramanuja’s case the loss of ancient vakyas, vrttis and 
bhasyas make themselves gravely felt. He more than Sankara names and 
cites many precursors, of whom only a few are identifiable, and he claims 
that his system is nothing but a systematical elaboration of their views: 
“I have come to the conclusion that this is the central doctrine of the 
Vedanta texts after having made a painstaking study not only of the whole 
mass of all the various Srutis but also of the commentaries that have been 
composed and accepted by judicious thinkers”, 


But even less than Sankara is Ramanuja concerned with describing, 
or even alluding to his exegetical principles, which for him and his con- 
temporaries were doubtless self-evident. We have to gather them from 
his works. In the following sections a few topics have been discussed, 
in so far as relevant to the Vedarthasamgraha, which may contribute a little 
to our understanding of his principles and method. 


138. R.V. pe Smet, The Theological Method of Samkara (thesis Rome, Pontifica 
Universitas Gregoriana, 1953), mimeographed edition with limited circulation; a revised 
edition is under preparation; excerpta and partial French translation Langage et connais- 
sance chez Samkara in Revue philosophique de Louvain, tome 52 (3e série, no. 33), 1954, 
p. 31-74. 

139. This is most clearly shown by the commentaries on the Brahmasutras where 
there is nothing in the text to account alike for the agreement and the disagreement of 
the bhasyakaras. 


Ward, 


50 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


$1. The authority of sabda: 


The authoritative character of Sabda “verbal testimony” is, within 
the pales of orhodox Indian philosophy, one of the fundamental assump- 
tions; for those systems, moreover, which deal especially with metaphysics, 
$abda is the only valid instrument and criterion (pramana) for supra- 
sensible knowledge. We should bear in mind that Sabda is not only human 
and profane language, but also and even primarily, sacred language, the 
revelation of scripture, which, by its self-sufficiency,“ is authoritative in 
its own right. The principle that Sabda—i.e. sacred revelation—can give 
us reliable information about things which, by their very nature, fall out- 
side the scope of the other two fundamental pramanas of sensual perception 
and rational inference, has been developed by the Mimamsakas. The pre- 
cise extent of this authoritativeness has, however, been disputed. 


In order to understand the controversy we have to consider the sup- 
positions of Pirvamimamsa and remember that the authority of sabda im 
the form of scriptural revelation had been taken for granted long before 
the necessary theories had been evolved to account for it and define it. 
Then the very trustworthiness of Sruti, without which the whole fabric of 
ritual would crumble, necessitated the assumption that it did not derive 
from human agency with its implicit fallibility, but must be apauruseya 
“preterhuman”.!41_ This again led to the conclusion that the language of 
the scriptures, and by extension all language— which derives from the 
scriptures—,!42 has not a human but a preterhuman origin: if its trust- 
worthiness be preterhuman, it must be preterhuman itself. In other words, 
it could never have come into being on the strength of a convention or 
agreement to which man was a party;!*° consequently, that peculiar power 
that makes language significative, the power by which words can denote 
meanings and refer to objects, could not be based upon an immemorial 
agreement of human beings that henceforth this word was to denote that 
meaning, but must have been eternally inherent in the words themselves, 
which were not created or invented by man but in their entirety of 
language given at the beginning of creation.‘ 


140. svatahpramanatva-. 

141. I will gladly give up this rendering for a better one; the usual “impersonal” 
is wholly inadequate. 

142. Cf. eg. Ved.§ 21. 

143. The pracina-naiyayikas held that the relation word-object derives from a 
convention initiated by Isvara; the navya-naiyayikas simplified this formulation and stated 
that it derives from convention, 

144. The descripton is, of course, a rationale; the doctrine of the hypostasized 
character of the revealed Word is no doubt a continuation of the ancient speculations 
on the divine progenitrix Vac. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA ol 


Purvamimamsa was primarily concerned with studying and syste- 
matizing the principles governing the ritual with respect to its fruits as 
described in the karmakanda. Accordingly the whole mass of Sruti was 
classified into three categories: 1. those portions which prescribe or enjoin 
the performance of certain rites to secure certain results, vidhi or codana 
“injunction”, comprising nisedha “prohibition”; 2. those portions which ex- 
plain, describe or generally add to the injunctions, arthavada; 3. those por- 
tions which comprise the Vedic mantras that are used in the rite‘ In 
this classification the order of importance is given: the injunction constitutes 
the principal element to which the others are accessory. 


This principal importance of injunction, without which all the rest 
would be purposeless and hence meaningless, was generally recognized. 
Mimamsa as a whole maintains that the non-vidhi portions derive their 
relevancy from their being accessory and supplementary to injunction. It 
follows that purposive signification of scriptural testimony abides, and its 
authoritative validity is vested, in injunction only. 


Among the Mimamsakas the school of Prabhakara went consistently 
a step further. Whereas the Bhattas admitted the authoritative character 
of speech that is pauruseya, ie. human and profane speech, the Prabha- 
karas!46 contended that as a pramdna Sabda is always Sastra, that is to say, 
only the sacred language of revelation is a source of valid knowledge. In 
profane language words refer to objects which generally do not stand in 
need of verbal testimony in order to be validly known and established; 
the objects are established by other pramanas, perception or inference. 
Validly established objects cannot be again validly established by language. 
Even in those cases where there are no other pramanas to establish an 
object and we have to resort to verbal testimony, in other words to rely 
on hear-say, we have not invariably reliable knowledge, because of the 
human factor. Profane speech does not fulfil the necessary condition of 
authority: to be invariably a source of valid knowledge. Consequently 
only astra is pramana stricto sensu. Here Sdstra is to be taken literally: 
scriptural injunction; for inasmuch as language cannot validly establish an 
object already completely established!4’ (parinispannavastu, siddhavastu), 
it must invariably bear on something yet to be established, a task yet to 
be undertaken, an act yet to be performed, ka@rya. The authority of sabda 
and therefore its exclusive significance as a source of valid knowledge, lies 


145. This is RamAnuja’s classification; Mimamsakas often make nisedha into a 
separate category and add némadheya “proper name”, 

146. Jua, Prabhikara Mimamsa, p. 240. 

147. JHa, 0.c., p. 237 ff. 


52 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


in its enjoining a kdrya. Another consequence is that the smallest signifi- 
cative unit of language is the sentence, that is ideally the injunctive 
sentence. 


To illustrate this theory they described the way in which a child 
learns a language. In this description they departed, understandably, from 
the verbal character of language: the verb is the operative word in the 
sentence without which the rest is not effective and significative. As it bears 
on action, the sentence can only be understood by a child when it sees it 
acted upon by its elders.148 


This theory that language is only significative when it is an injunc- 
tion bearing on karya—which does not mean that every significative and 
validly authoritative sentence has to be an injunctive one, but that it can 
be either construed as one or subordinated to one—leads to curious 
consequences when applied to that part of Sruti whose purport is not to 
enjoin acts but to teach knowledge, the jnanakanda. 


The Mimamsaka applying his categories, which had been developed 
and elaborated with exclusive reference to the karmakAnda, to the descrip- 
tive jnanakanda, has only one way open: like all scriptural Sabda it must 
derive its relevancy from the injunction. Accordingly the Bhatta 
subordinates the jmanakanda to the karmakanda as an arthavada of the 
eternity of the soul which is fundamental to the eternal validity of the 
Vedic injunctions. The Prabhakara appears to have taken a different view: 
like all Sabda the Vedanta—i.e. jfanakanda, comprising the Aranyakas and 
the Upanisads—must bear on karya. Brahman however, which is the ob- 
ject of the Vedanta texts, is not a karya but a completely established entity. 
Consequently it was held that “those Vedanta texts that speak of Brahman 
must be regarded as speaking of Brahman as something on which one is 
enjoined to meditate or know (sic), in order to escape the meshes of 
metempsychosis”.149 


This view we find discussed and refuted in Ramanuja’s complicated 
commentary on the samanvayadhikarana, BrS. 1, 1, 4, where it is stated in 
these terms: “Although the Vedanta texts cannot be the means of valid 
knowledge about brahman’s proper form which is completely established, 
yet brahman’s proper form can be established (anew). How? Because 
the Vedanta texts can denote the injunction of meditation”.159 In the same 
connexion we find another Prabhakara view discussed, not mentioned by 


148. JHA, oc, p. 228 ff. 
149. JHA, o.c., p. 62. 
150. SBh. 1, 1, 4 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 53 


Jha, which Sudarganasutri styles nisprapaficikarananiyogavada: “Just be- 
cause they bear on kdarya, the Vedanta texts can bear validly on brahman 
itself. From where do they derive this authority? The object of these 
texts is an injunction by means of the annihilation of phenomenality: an 
injunction to this effect that “one is to render brahman—which, because of 
beginningless ignorance, is conceived as phenomenal—devoid of pheno- 
menality, without second and essentially knowledge.’’15 


To sum up, whereas the Bhattas do not admit that the jfianakanda 
ean deal authoritatively with its object brahman in its own right, the 
Prabhakara allows that it can do so, provided that it be construed as a 
vidhi—or in his terminology—as a niyoga. Leaving aside the second alter- 
nativing the injunction to “dephenomalize” brahman—this goes to say that 
the meditation on, and knowledge of, brahman can be the object of an 
injunction. 


To this construction Sankara took serious exception. In his view, 
brahmajfiana, in virtue of its nature, does not admit of being enjoined at 
all: it can only be evoked by a text:1!5! it cannot initiate any action but only 
remove our consciousness from any other entity but brahman: when this 
consciousness has been removed, then there is no room for any action 
because that would be incompatible.52 The knowledge of brahman puts 
an end to all activity.%3 Knowledge derives only from pramanas and the 
real existence of the object concerned; — not from man’s volition, but simply 
from that which exists really and unchangeably.!*4 


Ramanuja, as far as I can judge, does not express himself so categori- 
cally, at least not in the Vedarthasamgraha. As a matter of fact, to know 
Brahman in Ramanuja’s sense, that is to ascend to knowing the personal 
God through constant loving adoration, is the final stage of one road to 
perfection, leading from the conscientious performance of ritual acts to the 
self-recognition of the individual soul and from there to the love-attainment 
of the Supreme God, whom to serve is the soul’s sole purpose and essence. 
The ritual acts, whichever gods they are dedicated to, are essentially 
propitiations of the one God. To serve God would be imperative indeed, 
it is the paramapurusartha, the supreme end to be achieved; there is noth- 


150a. Same view refuted by Bhaskara ad BrS. 1, 1, 4; for a discussion cf. 
Hirryanna’s paper Prapafica-vilaya-viada—A doctrine of pre-Sankara Vedanta (J. Or. 
Res. Madras, 1927, p. 109 ff). 

151. ChUpBh. 6, 7, 7; in this paragraph 1 have made use of material collected 
by DE Smet, o.c., p. 202 f. 

152. BAUpBh. 1, 4, 7. 

153. BAUpBh. 1, 4, 7. 

154. BrSBh. 2, 2, 21. 


54 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ing in this to militate against the supposedly injunctive character of all 
sruti. 

Ramanuja’s objections are directed first against Prabhakara’s high 
and mighty command! that language can only be significative in enjoining 
actions to be effected. By a few well-selected examples he shows this. A 
child does not learn a language by watching how his elders react to a 
series of words, but by having things named: it is nominal description 
rather than verbal motivation by which he learns how to speak and under- 
stand. A dumb adult, conversant with the language of gestures, can read 
the meaning of a person who instructs his servant, not by word of mouth 
but by gestures, to convey a certain message to another. When the dumb 
man, watching the whole story, hears the servant translate the message 
into worded speech, he knows what the words of the message mean with- 
out seeing any action taken on it.56 Which goes to prove that the signifi- 
cation of the words cannot lie in their relation to an action that is to be 
effected in consequence thereof. On this showing there is no ground what- 
ever to deny that language has the power of denoting a completely establish- 
ed entity, about wnich nothing is to be effected. 


Then Ramanuja proceeds that the arthavada brahmavid apnoti param 
can indeed be construed as a vidhi. He compares this text with such Srutis 
as pratitisthanti ha vai ya eta (ratrir) upayanti/brahmavarcasvino *nnada 
bhavanti ya eta (ratrir) upayanti (Sabara ad KMS. 4, 3, 17 = Paficavimsa 
Br. 23, 2, 4) which is an example of a text which, though being arthavada, 
is yet vidhi and therefore significative: 157 with regard to the rite of ratrisattra 
it is an arthavada, but it is significative for the reward, pratistha, which is the 
phala that cannot be known by any other pramana. Similarly brahmavid 
apnoti param is informative of the fruit, ie. param, the highest Brahman. 
Consequently the phala that is the Supreme Brahman is established and all 
the Srutis and arthavadas which contribute to our knowledge of Brahman’s 
essence and qualities are therefore fully informative. 


Another argument he borrows from Dramida,!*8 who reasons: if the 
arthavadas have the purpose of praising an object that has a function in 
a vidhi, it can only praise this object if it exists. It follows that all arthavadas 
are really significative or informative of the real existence of qualities, so as 
to give rise to the knowledge that the object of the act is praiseworthy. 
Hence follows again that in this very manner all objects known through 


155. rajajna, Ved. $116. 
156. §116, 
157. $117. 
158. §118. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA By) 


mantras and arthavadas are proved to exist. To sum up, arthavadas are 
really significative themselves, not merely laudatory. 


The same question is touched upon in another connexion!? where the 
meaning of the Sruti tad Visnoh paramam padam sada pasyanti stirayah is dis- 
cussed. This Sruti can be read either that those who are siris regard or that 
those who regard are suris. Here a Mimamsaka objects that in either case not 
more than one guna can be enjoined; either the quality of being suris or the 
quality of regarding, not both, otherwise there would be vakyabheda.1© 
Ramanuja points out that the objection is not to the point and demonstrates 
that here there is question of a visistavidhi where more than one quality 
can be enjoined. Here again he upholds that in themselves the mantras are 
informative of the objects or qualities which they describe and he concludes: 
As we have said before, even if we assume that mantras and arthavadas are 
significative only when bearing on an action to be effected their objects 
signified are established; a fortiori when etymological explication proves 
that in fact they bear on established objects in their own right. In this 
manner everything is sound, 


From all this we can conclude that Ramanuja did not want to supersede 
the principles of Puirvamimamsa, as Sankara had done, but to modify them 
with respect to the uttarabhaga, where emphasis is not on vidhi but on 
arthavada, and admit of a fully significative character of these arthavadas. 
He does not exclude the view that, after all, these arthavadas may find their 
significance and purpose in vidhi, but he is obliged to refute the extreme 
views of the Prabhakaras who are not less radical in upholding the autonomy 
of the Parvamimamsa as Sankara is in maintaining the self-sufficiency of 
Uttaramimamsa. For Ramanuja, however, both mimamsas are not different 
$Astras, but constitute one continuous discipline. The substance and objec- 
tive of both inquiries is fundamentally the same: both inquire into the way 
in which brahman is worshipped. But whereas the pirvabhdga describes the 
ritual acts by which God, the Supreme Brahman, is worshipped indirectly 
in His multiple manifestations of the Vedic deities, the uttarabhaga describes 
the way in which God is directly worshipped by an immediate knowledge of 
perfect love. The former is ancillary and propaedeutic to the latter; both 
chapters of the same Sastra cannot, however, be in conflict. 


The reservation which Ramanuja makes—reluctantly enough—for the 
possibility of construing the jfanakanda as injunctive is, it would seem, 
peculiar to the Vedarthasamgraha and has been abandoned in the Sribhasya. 


159. §128. 
160. cf. MNPr. § 33. 
161. vyutpatti- 


56 J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


In the samanvayddhikarana!® Ramanuja states his view in a preliminary 
thesis: “these aggregates of words (sc. Sdstra) which have the power of 
denoting completely established objects that have already been proved by 
the very etymology of the terms, can and do bear completely and 
harmoniously on the Brahman that is the cause of the origination, subsistence 
and annihilation of the entire universe, absolutely opposed to all imperfection, 
eminently possessed of unlimited perfections, and, in essence, boundless and 
incomparable bliss. Thus they serve no purpose conducive to activity or 
inactivity!®8 and therefore do not bear on any other purport. For all pra- 
manas terminate, not in a purpose, but in the knowledge of the objects with 
which they are concerned. Nor is the operation of any pramana determined 
by a purpose: on the contrary, the purpose is determined by the knowledge 
resulting from the pramana. Nor does the fact that the pramana has no 
direct connexion with activity or inactivity mean that it is devoid of all pur- 
pose, for we see that it is related to anyone of the goals of human life.” 


This thesis is meant to reject Kumé§rila’s definition: “Sastra is called 
that (verbal testimony) either eternal (sc. vaidika) or conventional (sc. 
laukika) which sets forth which actions man has to perform or is not to 
perform”.164 According to the Bhatta, the jianakanda is arthavada, setting 
forth the eternity of the Atman of man engaged in ritual acts, without which 
eternity the ritual acts themselves would lack permanence. 


On Ramanuja’s Vedanta thesis follows the Mimamsaka’s (Bhatta’s) 
purvapaksa, in the course of which two apparently Prabhakara views are 
discussed and refuted, the nisprapaicikarananiyogavada or the view that the 
jianakanda enjoins the establishing of a non-phenomenal Brahman, and the 
dhyadnaniyogavada, the view that it enjoins the meditation on Brahman. In 
the course of the discussion of the latter view advaitavada and bhedabheda- 
vada are refuted. The Bhatta’s purvapaksa is then refuted again in the 
Vedantin’s siddhanta, that is to say, the entire argumentation which preceded 
in the course of the Mimamsaka’s discussion is accepted, except the thesis 
that, in as much as the jfianakanda does not terminate in direct purpose, ie., 
describes what is to be done and what not, it has no purpose at all. 


Consequently, Ramanuja’s provisional thesis and his Siddhanta, with 
in between the entire complicated argumentation, go to prove that he no 
longer made the reservation that the jfianakanda could possibly be construed 
as being injunctive. 


162. SBh. 1, 1, 4 

163. pravrtti and nivrtti. 

164, Slokavarttika, Sabdapariccheda st. 4; pravrttir vé nivrttir va nityena krtakena 
ca/pumsim yenopadisyate tac chastram abhidhiyate / / 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA Bl 
§2. All Srutis are equally authoritative : 


We have seen that whereas Sankara refuses to admit the Mimamsa 
category of vidhi into Vedantamimamsa, Ramanuja, in order to save the con- 
tinuity of the First and the Second Inquiries, takes a more conciliatory view 
and, without denying the applicability of a typical Mimamsa construction 
vidhi — arthavada to the jianakanda as well, yet urges the independent infor- 
mativeness of the latter category. 


One of the most striking features of Sankara’s exegetical method is 
the distinction that he introduces between the pure Vedanta texts, which 
set forth the paramG@rthajiiéna, and the far more sizeable texts in which 
definite updsanas are set forth describing the absolute in anthromorphic 
terms and which consequently are vyavahdarika. Dre Smet attempts to 
show!® that this distinction between major and minor texts corresponds to 
that which Purvamimamsa makes between the injunctions, which are prin- 
cipal, and the arthavadas, etc., which are accessory to the principal texts; 
on the strength of this correspondence he suggests that Sankara’s distinction 
was inspired by Jaimini’s. This correspondence, which at a first glance looks 
plausible, breaks however down when we scrutinize it more closely. For 
Sankara the minor texts have a definite propaedeutic function, by preparing 
the mind of the pupil alike by describing magnificent projections of brahman, 
which are first to be contemplated upon, then to be abandoned, and by 
pointing out the underlying unity in the great variety of things with respect 
to their common cause, the Supreme Soul. Ultimately these texts cannot 
lead the student to the final truth by themselves. In other words, in the 
last analysis these minor texts are not at all accessory to the major texts. 
‘Actually the division between major and minor texts reflects that most 
general one between paramartha and vyavahdra, a division far more funda- 
mental than, and not at all related to, that of Purvamimamsa between the 
principal texts and the accessory texts which are relevant with regard to the 
principal ones. 


This division between paramartha and vyavahara is reflected in Sruti 
on two different levels, first in Sruti as a whole in the main division between 
major and minor statements, secondly in the major statements themselves, 
where the terms are distinguished as having their primary sense with regard 
to their empirical concepts and another sense by laksana when they are 
referring to the non-qualified brahman. Ramanuja who does not allow San- 
kara’s distinction between an ‘ideal’ and a ‘practical’ reality, rejects conse- 
quently its twofold reflection in Sruti. 


165. De Smet, o.c., p. 199 ff, 
Vv. 8 


58 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


To Ramanuja, all Srutis are equally authoritative. This position is, 
as far as I can see, not expressly stated but throughout his works taken for 
granted. At one place,!66 for example, he maintains in passing the equal 
authority of the Sruti ChUp. 1, 6, 6 atha ya eso ’ntaraditye hiranmayah puruso 
drsyate — which according to Sankara does not even refer to the paramat- 
man but only to a highly qualified individual soul!67— and of the ‘maha- 
vakya’ satyam jidnam anantam brahma: both Srutis predicate specific quali- 
ties of the personal God, who is the brahman. 


Elsewhere he hints at the vicious circle implicit in the distinction 
between major and minor statements: we decide which texts are major and 
which are minor ultimately on the strength of an insight acquired by the 
study of those texts which later on we shall classify as major. Ramanuja 
exposes the advaitin’s scriptural eclecticism in §$86-87, after he has reconciled 
the various texts, propounding difference, difference-non-difference and non- 
difference, within the conception of a Supreme Being modified by distinct 
but dependent orders of matter and soul. The advaitin objects: tat tvam 
asi, etc., clearly declares identity and it follows that this knowledge of iden- 
tity alone is conducive to release. Ramanuja replies: no, for another Sruti 
(Svet.Up. 3, 9-11) declares that release is obtained in consequence of the 
knowledge of the distinct orders of Supreme Spirit, individual soul and 
matter. The advaitin then exclaims that, since this is obviously in conflict 
with the Sruti he quoted, the other Sruti can only refer to knowledge con- 
ducive of attaining, not the absolute non-differentiated brahman, but the 
relative qualified and not absolutely real brahman. Ramanuja then raises 
the question: why should the former Sruti be more authoritative than the 
latter one? We are not to ignore but to reconcile, as to do he proceeds. 


Incidentally, for the so-called mahdvakyas, which set forth the sole 
reality of the absolute non-qualified brahman, Ramanuja uses the term 
Sodhakavakyas, which I have not been able to trace to an advaita source. It 
is plausible that it has been borrowed from the terminology of a miliew which 
used the term Suddhabrahman to describe the absolutely real non-qualified 
brahman, and we are reminded of this usage with Sarvajfiatman, ete. For 
Ramanuja, of course, these ‘purificatory’ statements are not privileged. They 
deny simply that God is affected by a number of specified imperfections and 
thereby assert that He possesses the opposite perfections. On this point he 
touches in connexion with his interpretation of satyam jfianam anantam 
brahma, to be discussed below. 


166. Ved. § 136. 
167. «BrSBh, 104,021; 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 59 
§3. Laksand: 


The second level on which the distinction ‘ideal’—‘practical’ is reflected 
in Sruti, viz., in the primary and secondary meanings of the terms employed 
with reference to the non-qualified brahman, comes in for a direct discussion 
in a polemical passags, 


This polemic seems to be directed especially against Sankara’s inter- 
pretations ad Taittiriya Up. 2, 1. There it reads: bhdvasdédhano jiana- 
Sabdo, na tu jidnakartr / brahmavisesanatvat satyanantibhyam saha/na hi 
satyatanantata ca jnanakartrtve saty upapadyate. As this passage has been 
misunderstood before,!® a short analysis is indicated. The above quotation 
means: “the term jfdna is a verbal noun with the sense of the root, not the 
agent of jnadna (in other words: jndna “the knowing, knowledge”, not “know- 
ing, knower”), because it serves as an attribute of brahman, together with 
satya and ananta; for if brahman were the agent of knowledge, then it could 
be neither satya nor ananta.” Sankara develops the view that the visesanas 
satya, jnana and ananta have here not an attributive but a definitive func- 
tion!®9 (laksanadrtha). Since a specifying attribute (visesana-) serves 
only to specify members of a same class as distinct from one another (sama- 
najatibhya eva nivartakani visesanaini visesyasya), the terms cannot very 
well have this attributive function in this case, because brahman does not 
belong to any class: but they have a definitive function: definitives dis- 
tinguish the object from all other objects (laksanam tu sarvata eva [sc. nivar- 
takam vigesyasya]). On the other hand, Sankara does not exclude the attri- 
butive function of the terms entirely: visesanarthavattve ’pi satyadinam svar- 
thaparityiga eva/Stnyarthatve hi satyddisabdinadm  visesyaniyantrtva- 
nupapattih / satyadyair arthavattve tu tadviparitadharmavadbhyo visesye- 
bhya brahmano visesyasya niyantrtvam wupapadyate / .. tatranantasabdo 
*ntavattvapratisedhadvarena visesanam / satyajndnasabdau tu svarthasamar- 
panenaiva visesena bhavatah: “even if the terms satya, etc., are taken as attri- 
butes (not as definitions), they do not lose their proper sense. In fact, if they 
had a non-existent object, they could not determine the object to be attributed 
at all. However, while retaining their meaning, they determine brahman as 
their object attributed by distinguishing it from all objects that possess pro- 
perties opposite to those which they denote themselves. .. The term ananta 
is a visSesana of brahman by denying that brahman has a limit; the terms 
satya and jana are visesanas particularly in their own right, just by apply- 


168. Dre Smet, Langage et connaissance chez Samkara, p. 47. 

169. LacomBr, who devotes a few pages to S.’s exposition ad TaittUp. 2, 1 (ASV. 
p. 79 ff), surprisingly mistakes laksana (n) in laksandrtha- for laksanaé (f) and translates 
and argues accordingly. 


60 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ing their own meanings to brahman.” In other words, to the extent in which 
the terms are negative, ie., deny properties of phenomenal objects rather 
than affirm properties of brahman, they are attributable to brahman. But 
how about terms like satya and jndna? They cannot have the same signi- 
ficance for brahman as they have for the phenomenal objects or minds: from 
the point of view of brahman It alone is reality and knowledge and all other 
objects are unreality and nescience. Yet the terms are taken from pheno- 
menal life where they have a definite meaning. So Sankara replies: tathapi 
tadabhasavacakena buddhidharmavisayena jfAadnasabdena tal laksyate na 
ticyate, Sabdapravrttihetujatyadidharmarahitatvat / tatha satyasabdenapi / 
sarvavisesapratyastamitasvarupatvad brahmano bahyasattdsamanyavisayena 
satyasabdena laksyate satyam brahmeti/na tu satyasabdavacyam eva 
brahma: “yet the term jfiana, which (in phenomenal life) has reference to 
a property, sc. knowledge, and which expresses only a phenomenal projec- 
tion of absolute knowledge, can only indicate brahman but not express it 
directly, because brahman is devoid of all properties — like generality, etc. 
—which are the basis of the operation of all speech. Similarly the term 
satya: this term denotes the general concept of external being, but brahman 
being essentially devoid of all differentiations can only indirectly be indi- 
cated in satyam brahma, and cannot be expressed directly by the term satya.” 
This view has been summarized by Sarvajfiatman :17° 


akagadau satyata tavad eka pratyanmatre satyata kacid anya / 
tatsamparkat satyatatra cinyd vyutpanno ’yam satyasabdas tu // 


“the concept of satya when predicated of phenomenal entities —from space 
onwards — has another content than when predicated of that which is abso- 
lutely interior: in the latter case the concept of satya is analogously used, 
whereas the term has its proper meaning in the former.” The question is 
resumed by Madhusidana Sarasvati!7! who comments: na ca — anrtasvaripe 
gabale satyatvayogah, yoge va tato nanrtavyavrttir itt vacyam; Sabale hi 
satyata esaiva yat paramarthasamsargena pratiyamane tasmin satyasabda- 
samgatigrahah /tad uktam Samksepasarirake —akasadau etc., iti / evam 
dnandadipadesv api drastavyam /tathdca katham tesam nanrtadivydavarta- 
katvam ? etena —$uddhad anyatra satyatvadyasambhavatsatyatoadivakyasya 
laksanaya akhandarthatve Suddhe satyatvader abhanat paryayatvam durvaram 
iti— parastam / svariipamatre ’pi na padantaravaiyartham vydavrttibheda- 
bodhanena saphalyad iti coktam ca: (it is said that, when applied to the 
perfect brahman, the words satya, etc., which denote the imperfect brahman 
qualified by reality, etc., have to be taken with laksana). Objection: no 


170. Samksepasariraka 1, 121. 
171. Advaitasiddhi, p. 692 (akhandarthalaksana). 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 61 


reality, etc., can be predicated of the imperfect which is essentially unreal; 
or, if they are applied, it follows that they do not exclude, but imply, the 
unreal. Reply: You cannot say that: in fact, the reality in the imperfect is 
such that the applicability of the term satya “real” (to phenomenal objects) 
is grasped when the imperfect is understood in its relation to the ultimately 
real, This is stated in the Samksepasariraka: “..”. The same can be noted 
in the case of the words like dnanda, etc. So how would these terms not 
exclude the unreal, etc.? This argument takes also care of the objection 
that, inasmuch as no reality, etc., is conceivable in anything but the perfect, 
the terms satya, etc., can only have their absolute sense by laksana, but then, 
since satyatva, etc., are not apparent in the perfect, all such terms are neces- 
sarily synonymous. We may add another rejoinder: even when applied to 
the pure essential simplicity, other words do not lose their significance but 
retain their significance by conveying all the various aspects of exclusion.” 


This view is summed up by Ramanuja ($11) as follows: etacchodakani 
prakaranantaravakyany api satyam jranam anantam brahma (ete.) ityadini 
sarvavisesapratyanikaikakaratam bodhayanti/na caikakarataibodhane ’pi 
padanim parydyata / ekatve *pi vastunah sarvapratyanikakaratvopasthapa- 
nena sarvapadandm arthavattvat: “the purifying statements in other con- 
texts, like satyam, etc., convey an object that is absolutely opposed to differ- 
entiations; yet, even though all words convey its perfect simplicity, they are 
not therefore synonymous: for they all are significant, even though referring 
to the simplicity of an entity, just by establishing its absolute opposition to 
everything else.” But Ramanuja refuses to admit that a number of words 
can refer to a non-differentiated object, even if they be merely apophatic : 
Sodhakavakyany api niravadyam sarvakalyanagunakaram param brahma 
bodhayanti / sarvapratyantkakaratabodhane’pi tattatpratyanikakarataiyam bhe- 
dasyavarjantyatvan na nirvigesatvasiddhih: “the purifying statements, too, 
convey that the supreme brahman is perfect and possessed of perfect qualities: 
for even if they convey that He is essentially opposed to everything else, yet 
necessarily they convey differentiation in that He is essentially opposed to 
each different quality separately.”!” 


Further objections are raised against Sankara’s interpretation of jnana, 
and these objections are fundamental. Knowledge is not an independent 
substance but a property.173 Not only is it logically absurd to maintain an 
objectless and subjectless knowledge, but also grammatically the advaitin 
is at a loss to find a term which could convey a non-differentiated notion. 
Jfiana or its synonym jnapti are nouns of a certain gender and number and 


172. Ved. § 23. 
173. §24 


62 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


take on certain functions, when used in a sentence, which are everything 
but non-differentiated. The occurrence of the substantive noun jnana side 
by side with plain adjectives like satya and ananta is easily explained. More 
than “real” and “limitless”, jana is an essential property of God and may 
be used to describe it, in a way comparable to our “his Majesty, Holiness”, 
etc., which describe persons who are eminently possessed of majesty and 
holiness. Ramanuja does not borrow Yamuna’s argument that the accent 
jfand forbids us to take jfa@na as a noun,!”*@ but takes essentially the same 
position that in this particular connexion jndna cannot mean anything but 


one eminently characterized by knowledge; aptly he refers to the next line 
of the Taittirlya Up. so Snute sarvan kaman saha brahmana vipasciteti and 
BrS. 2, 3, 30-31 where the same problem is discussed with regard to the 


atman. 


The problem of laksand is touched upon immediately afterwards, in 
a discussion of tat tvam asi. Although, as far I as know, Sankara does no- 
where commit himself explicitly on this point, his interpretation on this cele- 


173a. Atmasiddhi, p. 74: satyam jnanam ity atrapi brahmalaksananirdege jnana- 
$abdo na jiaénaméatravacanah / api tu tadvadvacanah, tadvacanatve liti ity adyuddttatva- 
prasakteh / antodattas cayam jnanasabdah / matvarthiyacpratyayantatve tathatvam gha- 
tate, nainyatha ity etat paramatmaniripane “tinipunam upapadisyamah / aitareyakopa- 
nisad api prajianam brahma ity uktva@ sa etena prajhenatmana iti prakrstajnanavantam 
evegvaram dargayati/ tat siddham jfataivayam atma “the word jndna in the text satyam 
jianam, etc., with the function of defining brahman, does not mean ‘only knowledge’, 
but ‘one who possesses knowledge’: for if it were to mean ‘only knowledge’ it should 
have had the accent on the first syllable according to the rule liti, Panini 6, 1, 193; but 
here the word jfdna has the accent on the final syllable. Now it can only be jndnd if the 
last syllable contains suffix ac in the sense of the possessive suffix matu(p), and not 
otherwise. We shall demonstrate this point exhaustively when we discuss the Supreme 
Soul. Incidentally, the Aitareya Up., too, expounds that the Lord is indeed possessed 
of eminent knowledge (prakrsta- explaining pra-) in prajnénam brahma, continuing 
sa etena prajnendtmand. So it is proved that the atman is a knower.” Yamuna’s point 
is an interesting one; it appears that jndna in this Sruti is recited at present as an 
oxytone: either this practice existed in Yamuna’s days already, or the practice then 
(and now) continues the original one: Yamuna is about half-way the age of the text. His 
argument is less acceptable: Panini 5, 2, 127 rules arsaddibhyo ’c in cases of certain 
bodily deficiencies and colours (and similar ones: akrtigano ’yam adds Siddhantakaumudi). 
Oxytonesis of jiand, though as far as I know not attested, is not impossible and would 
point to an agent noun (WACKERNAGEL-DEBRUNNER II 2, § 81, a, B; § 82, c; Wurrney, §1150, g. 
But as Renov notes (Gr. scte §26) “l’accent dans les textes classiques n’est pas noté, 
et rien ne permet d’indiquer avec précision la nature de l’accent dans la période post- 
védique.” The most recent translation of our text (RENov-LEsmmpPLz, Paris 
1948) follows the traditional interpretation “Brahman est réalité, connaissance, 
infinitude.” It should be remarked, however, that the line between personal and 
impersonal, concrete and abstract, was infinitely less sharp for the Upanisadic thinkers 
than it is for us, and either translation cannot help being too clear-cut. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 63 


brated vakya implies laksan@. Most explicit perhaps, is he in Upadeéasa- 
hasri II (padyabhaga), 18, stt. 177-183, where he declares that when we 
establish the sense of tvam by means of positive and negative formula- 
tion,!”4 the sense of the judgment tat tvam asi becomes clear (183). 


vakyartho vyajyate caivam kevalo *hampadarthatah / 
duhkhity etadapohena pratyagatmaviniscayat // 


“thus it appears that the sentence is an identity judgment, for by abstract- 
ing the notion of empirical ego from the complete entity “I”, we establish 
(for the words aham in aham brahmdsmi and tvam in tat tvam asi) the 
meaning of atman.” 


And st. 197: 


tacchabdah pratyagétmarthas tacchabdarthas tvamas tatha / 
duhkhitvapratyagitmatvam vareyatim ubhav api // 


“the word tat has the meaning of interior self, the word tvam has the mean- 
ing of the word tat; both words drop part of their meaning, tvam that of 
empirical ego, tat that of non-self.” 


This last stanza shows that the laksand implied is that of jahad- 
ajahallaksana@. Sureévara,15 in his Naiskarmyasiddhi 2-3 follows Sankara’s 
view as expressed in the UpadeSasahasri very closely, without however 
enlarging on the particular significance of the implicit laksana.1754 Padma- 
pada, in his Pafcapadika 9, 21 (p. 307), is the first to compare the judgment 
tat tvam asi with so ’yam (Vivarana: so ’yam Devadattah), which is the 
stock-instance of jahadajahallaksana. Most explicit of all is Sarvajfiatman, 


174. ie., anvaya and vyatireka, not further explained in the US., occur again in 
Naiskarmyasiddhi II, 8-9 in identical connexion. Hirryanna notes ad 2, 8 (p. 236) not 
very helpfully: “there are two methods of inquiry which may, perhaps, be described 
as ‘method of agreement’ and ‘method of difference’.” Hacker, Untersuchungen, p. 74. 
describes the terms as “Reflexion dariiber, dasz der Inhalt der Worter und des Satzes wohl- 
begriindet and das Gegenteil logisch unmédglich ist.” More precisely: the proposition is 
first considered positively by anvaya, whereby the connexion is realised between that in 
tat which is in tvam and contrariwise; then it is considered negatively by vyatireka, 
whereby that in tvam which is not tat is excluded from tvam and contrariwise. 

175. Hacker, Untersuchungen, p. 75ff. has dealt extensively with Suresvara’s 
exegesis of tat tvam asi in the Naiskarmyasiddhi, but unfortunately has not gone into 
the question of its relation with the US. as quoted here. 

175a. This laksana is meant by Dharmaraja when he states: tasmat tat tvam asiti 
vakya Gcaéryanim (honorific plural=S.) laksanoktir abhyupagamavadena (“by way of 
hypothesis” leaving scope for diverging interpretations) bodhyd, Vedantaparibhasa IV. 


64 . J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Samksepasariraka stt. 1, 149 ff. and Paficaprakriya I, p. 10 sq. . . jahada- 
jahallaksana paroksyasadvitiyasabale vyutpannayos tattvampadayor ekamSsa- 
parityagenamsantare vrttisambhavat so’yam ityaddivakyarthapadayor iva / 
tasmaj jahadajahallaksanayé pratyagatma bodhyate, “the words tat and 
tvam, which have their proper sense respectively for remoteness and for the 
manifold and imperfect, are to be taken with partial laksana, since, by dropping 
part of their meaning, they can function significantly in another part of 
their meaning, like the words in judgments of the type ‘this is he (that)’.” 
He also allows gundvrtti, figurative use, of the type simho devadattah “Deva- 
datta is (like) a lion (in that he is cruel, brave)”. This is the generally 
accepted advaita view until Dharmaraja suggests another solution (Vedanta- 
paribhasa IV). 


Ramanuja takes exception to assuming laksana in “you are it”. Not 
only is there no need at all to resort to laksana in explaining the 
identity of “this here and now” (ayam) and “that there and then” (tat), 
because the differences between the two terms are accounted for by a lapse 
of time and do not as such militate against identity: “This is that Devadatta” 
means nothing but “Our Devadatta here was, at some previous time, some- 
where else, he is the same person who was there at the time”. This polemic, 
irrelevant though it may seem, touches again a fundamenal difference of 
view: for the same drstdnta is an illustration of the so-called indeterminate 
perception, by which an object is perceived without any determinant proper- 
ties, an analogy of the intuition of a non-differentiated brahman. 


De Smet has drawn a comparison between Sankara’s laksanajnadna and 
the knowledge by analogy of the scholastic theology;!"* with some caution we 
may also avail ourselves of the term analogy to explain Ramanuja’s method 
of interpreting the Sruti. We have seen that Ramanuja, by analogy of the 
microcosmic harmony between body and soul, conceived of a macrocosmic 
harmony between the phenomenal world of matter and spirit, and the 
Supreme God who is the soul that animates the world as his body. When 
we refer to a body, we refer simultaneously to the soul, on which the body 
is entirely dependent and apart from which it has no proper existence. Just 
because of this intimate relation between body and soul, judgments are 
possible of the type “I am stout”, by which a property of a body is predicated 
of the self. What is actually said is this: “I, the individual atman, who 
am empiricised by my descent into a body, am stout as far as this body is 
concerned”. This type of judgment can be generalized to that of “I am my 


176. R. V. pe Smet, The correct interpretation of the definitions of the Absolute, 
according to Sankaricérya and Saint Thomas Aquinas (Philosophical Quarterly, 1955, 
XXVII, 4), p. 187 ff. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 65 


body” which means “I am the soul which has taken possession of this body 
and apart from which this body does not exist”. Analogously we can under- 
stand the sdmdnddhikaranyas of the Sruti where the Absolute is described 
and defined by terms that express concepts which in profane linguistic usage 
are considered to be exclusively phenomenal. In tat tvam asi, where tat 
resumes the Deity called sat in the preceding section,!”7 tvam has its full 
significance of “individual 4tman within a body”; but this is not the complete 
significance of the term. Just as the body has no proper existence apart from 
serving the soul, similarly the soul has no proper existence apart from serv- 
ing the Supreme Soul, God, who is immanent in it as the inner Ruler. Just 
as the body terminates in the soul, so the soul.terminates in the inner Soul. 
Consequently all words which describe the body, ultimately refer to the 
soul, and all words which describe the soul ultimately refer to God. This 
reference of words is not due to any significative power in themselves, but 
to the very constitution of the objects which they express. By denoting 
the part they do not imply the whole, but the part itself implies the whole 
compositum of matter animated by individual souls that are internally guided 
by the Supreme Self. 


From this discussion of Ramanuja’s polemics, which for all their abstru- 
sity concern the most fundamental problems, a general idea of his realism 
emerges. He has been called all-too-literal; and so he is. But this literal- 
ness lies at the very root of his hermeneutics. His glorious vision of a God 
who includes the world like the soul includes the body would never allow 
him a method of interpretation by which any term is applicable to God, only 
when all worldly connotations have been carefully excluded from it. To his 
mind such a procedure would detract from God’s glory. He realizes that in 
the end we would be left without any means of knowing Him at all. All 
Scripture is of necessity anthropomorphist ; Sankara and Ramanuja represent 
diametrically opposed views of how to approximate the Absolute in its 
transcendence in spite of the anthropomorphism of Revelation. Whereas for 
Sankara brahman is the Other, and he goes ever farther the way of exclud- 
ing from its concept all that is related to the world, to the point of denying 
the reality of the world in the final analysis, Ramanuja worships a God that 
is verily Supreme and includes in His concept all that is of this world, to 
the point of affirming this world just because it is related to God. Devout 
Vaisnava if ever there was one, his vision can be understood. Visnu, the 
god of incarnations par excellence, who in every age takes personally a hand 
in the direction of the world’s affairs, god of preservation and maintenance, 
who pervades the Universe, the ViSvaripa and omnipresent one, will lead 


177. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 
v.9 


66 i J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


his devotee to a very different conception of Absolute and World from that 
to which Siva would inspire, the god of annihilation, who represents yogic 
renunciation and systematic abnegation. 


§4. Context: 


Ramanuja’s categorical rejection of the two methodological principles 
of Sankara’s exegesis, the distinction of major and minor statements and of 
primary and secondary sense,—a distinction which is ultimately purely 
human and therefore presumptuous to make in preterhuman revelation— 
naturally aggravates the difficulty of interpreting the kaleidoscopic and often 
contradictory teachings of the sacred texts in a satisfying and consistent 
sense. 


In order to arrive at a consistent sense, which is of course given since 
Sruti is not subject to human fallibility, Ramanuja makes an ingenious and 
skillful use of the criterion of prakarana, or context: “We have declared that 
the scriptural statements are no longer in conflict as soon as we have deter- 
mined their true purport correctly.” 


How he applies this criterion of context may be illustrated by a few 
exemplary Srutis which are often quoted by advaitins to prove their own 
views, 


The celebrated vakya of Brhadaranyaka Upanisad (2,3,6): athadta addego 
neti netiti “thus the instruction that it is neither such nor such”, which ac- 
cording to Sankara denies all differentiation of brahman by negating that 
brahman has any form, either embodied or disembodied, takes, according to 
Ramanuja, an entirely different sense when we consider the context to 
which it belongs. Does it really deny the initial statement of 2, 3, 1 dve vava 
brahmano ripe mirtam caivamirtam ca, as Sankara holds?!79 But then, 
what is the point of introducing this admitted falsehood at all, only to deny 
it in the same breath? This is unconceivable. Besides, in the immediate 
sequel the same text affirms that brahman has qualities like satya ete. Clearly 
upakrama, or initial statement, and upasamhara, or concluding statement, are 
in agreement, so that the context is established.!8° Within this context neti 
neti cannot mean to deny differentiation. For the true explication he refers 
to the Brahmasttras (3, 2, 22): prakrtaitavattvam pratisedhati tato braviti 
ca bhiyah “this expression denies that brahman is only so much as has been 


178. Ved. 83 ff. 
179. BrSBh. 3, 2, 22. 


180, The most important of the indications of the coherence of a context. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 67 


set forth here, and affirms consequently that brahman is more than that 
alone”. 


Similarly, only a painstaking scrutiny of the entire sadvidya will help 
us in understanding the true sense of the upasamhara tat tvam asi within 
this context. The context opens with the pratijna or thesis that when the 
adesa—i.e. the directing Person!®!—is known this all is known. This person, 
later on called sat, is described as the universal cause by which we can 
know the world its effect: in sat the world has its material cause (sanmiila) 
and its operative cause (sadayatana). The effectuation of this world with 
all its variety of material objects and conscious spirits takes place by the 
descent of sat into this world by means of the individual atman 
(jivendtmandnupravisya naimaripe vydkaravani). Finally, all has been 
summed up in the complete statement aitadaétmyam idam sarvam tat satyam 
sa atma: tat 'tvam asi, Svetaketo “the entire Universe is ensouled by Him who 
is sat, it is real, for He is the 4tman: so you are He, Svetaketu”: which can 
only mean that you are ensouled by God, so that you are He in so far as 
you are the body to Him, your soul. There can be no question that the 
declaration tat tvam asi only means to say that tvam does not exist as the 
ensouled effect at all: this would militate against the obvious sense of the 
entire prakarana. What is expressed here is not the identity of cause with 
cause, but the relation between God and creature as that between soul and 
body: aitadétmyam idam sarvam, sa atmda. 


These interpretations are comparatively straightforward and simple. 
So to make good his challenge that all superficial contradictions between the 
many Srutis will disappear instantly as soon as we have discovered the true 
purport of them, Ramanuja quotes a few apparently conflicting Srutis: 
“Brahma, Visnu, Rudra and Indra have all been begotten, but not the cause: 
therefore we are to meditate on the cause: Sambhu, the Supreme One who 
enjoys universal paramountcy should be meditated upon in the middle of 
space.”1892 He combines this with a Sruti from SvetUp 3, 9-11 where the 
Supremacy of the great person is declared. Here we have two claims to uni- 
versal paramountcy which we are at a loss to reconcile within one being. 
Yet, replies Ramanuja surprisingly, everything fits in perfectly when we bear 
in mind that Narayana is the Supreme Brahman, and he proceeds to substan- 
tiate this statement. 


As he states elsewhere, we cannot understand the Sruti properly unless 
we consider all the éakhas: they often help us to understand the full signifi- 
cance of certain statements. ChUp. 6 asserts that sat was here alone in the 


180a. AtharvasikhUp.1 
181. See trsl. n. 75. 


68 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


beginning, in other words, is the universal cause. Elsewhere, this sat is 
called brahman, elsewhere dtman, all in the same connexion: sat, brahman 
and dGtman are different designations of the same being. Who is this being? 
We turn to another Sakha: Narayana was here at the beginning. Sat, brah- 
man and atman denote Narayana: it is He who is the first and universal 
cause. We have specified the being who appears as the cause in the 
AtharvasikhUp. 


The same Upanisad describes the Sovereignty of the cause. Do we 
find a similar description of Narayana? He refers to TaittAr. 10, 13 where 
it is said of some personal deity that the sages weave him in the middle of 
the sea (we are reminded of the AtharvasikhUp. where the cause is to be 
meditated upon in the middle of space) and that no one is master to him. 
Who is this deity? The text itself refers us further: it quotes as its context 
adbhyah sambhitah, etc., TaittAr. 3, 13, 2. Here we find that this deity is 
styled “Great Person” and that Hri and Laksmi are his consorts: from which 
it is clear that the Paramount Deity of 10, 13, 1 and the Great Person of 
3, 13, 2 are no one but Narayana. 


The connexion with the Narayananuvaka, TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 is now 
given. This text, inspired by the Purusasukta, concludes that Narayana is 
Brahma, Siva, Indra, Aksara, the supreme, self-sufficient Sovereign. Mean- 
while it has been shown that SvetUp. must be understood within the Maha- 
purusaprakarana of TaittAr. 3, 13, 2. Now it is clear that the originally 
totally unrelated statements between which we suspected contradiction have 
clarified each other and themselves: Sambhu and the Great Person are Nara- 
yana, who is the first and universal cause and who enjoys paramount 
sovereignty. The description of the dissolution of prana and senses into 
the manas and the manas into the supreme object of meditation in 
AtharvasikhUp., is compared with the description in Mahanarayana Up. of 
the dissolution of the Veda into Om and of Om into the A which is Nara- 
yana, who, we may recall, was called Brahma, Siva, Indra, Aksara, that is 
the ensouling principle and cause of them. Yet another statement of the 
AtharvasikhUp., that the cause is to be meditated upon in the middle of space, 
fits into the established context where MahanarUp. 10, 7 reads dahram 
vipapmam varam vesmabhitam ete., which without any doubt is inspired by 
the Daharavidya of ChUp. 8; this will lead Ramanuja to a further discussion 
of the true sense of this Sruti. So we see how each Sruti can and should be 
understood only when all the references, correspondences and parallels have 
been brought out by a subtle analysis. Only then we can pretend to interpret 
the éruti, without resorting to convenient but presumptuous distinctions 
between statements which suit our views and which do not. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 69 


But apart from these detailed interpretations, at what general conclu- 
sions does Ramanuja arrive about the sense of the Scriptures? Can we ex- 
plain them in the sense of a strict monism, denying all qualities of the 
Absolute and reality of the Universe, or of a radical dualism, separating God 
from world and matter from souls, or of difference-non-difference in a 
pantheistic harmony? To a certain extent all these senses are valid, but we 
have to harmonize them within a new conception of the relation between 
Absolute and World. When the Sruti denies qualities of brahman, it denies 
imperfect ones; when the reality of the world is negated, it affirms the utter 
dependence of the World on God. When diversity is denied, the uniqueness 
of God as the unitive inner soul of the diverse Universe is affirmed. When 
diversity is asserted, the wonderful variety of God’s manifestations in the 
Universe of matter and spirit is affirmed. All these senses find their place 
within the fundamental doctrine that the Personal God, who is possessed of 
perfect qualities, is modified by the world of prakrti and purusa, whether in 
subtle or causal state, or gross or effectual state, which constitute the body 
to which He is the Soul. 


fh Beatie ah anette 


bh r 
atins any Foals s vee 


ie eee] 


ad} i Ht: medians nets setitort pol do" S208 a nat 2 ranaP 


’ 


23 Io “wiles baa suiced? 
495. OL. xs bioow 3 ny : 


PART II; TEXT 


EDITORIAL NOTE 


r 


§1. The editio princeps of the Vedarthasamgraha was published by 
TIRUMULACHARYA and VIJAYARAGHAVACHARYA in Telugu character at the 
Sarasvati Bhandar in Madras, in Kaliyuga 4984—= ap. 1882. A new, but 
considerably less satisfactory and critical edition was published by S. Sum. 
P. S. Rama Misra Sastri in the issues of the Pandit (15) 1893, nos. 9-12; 
16; and 17, and reprinted separately Benares 1924. Occasionally a few other 
editions are met with, which are published privately and distributed for 
devotional and charitable purposes and have only a limited circulation. As 
they are not critical, have in fact no claims to scholarly principles and are 
usually hard to obtain, we shall neglect them here. Quite recently another 
edition was brought out by T. K. V. N. SuparsaNacHarya and published at 
Tirupati. All these editions are accompanied by Sudarfanasiri’s commentary 
Tatparyadipika. 


§2. Though the first to be published, over 70 years ago, the Telugu 
edition of Madras is the most, if not the only, critical one that has appeared 
so far. It is based on 13 MSS., 12 of which were privately owned. The 
variant readings are carefully noted and references are given to the num- 
bers indicating the various manuscripts. MS. 13, from the Madras Govern- 
ment Oriental Manuscripts Library, appears to have served as the basis of 
the established text. 8 MSS. are in Grantha character: nos. 1 and 6, both from 
the Sarasvati Bhandar at Triplicane; 2, of Samijachariar of Mysore; 3, of 
Ayyuvayyangar; 4, of Karappangadu Jiyar Swami; 5, of Tiruvali Ayyangar; 
7, of Narasimhachariar; 13, from Madras Government Oriental Manuscripts 
Library. 3 MSS. are in Telugu character : nos. 9, from the Sarasvati Bhandar 
at Melkote; 10, of Astagotram Raghavachariar; 12, of Kunnapakkam Srini- 
vasachari. Finally, 2 MSS. are in Devanagari character: nos. 8, of Mila- 
kalwar; 9, of Bhasyakar, Melkote. The edition, blessed by Yadugiri VJeer, 
is very well printed with few errors. Unfortunately no account is given of 
the critical criteria of the editors. I have gone through all the variants and 
tried to classify the MSS. utilized, while allowing for a reasonable margin 
of error by misprints and omissions. MS. 1 is almost certainly a copy of 
MS. 7, but very much conflated; moreover, the copyist has permitted him- 
self a fair number of ‘improvements’ on the text. MSS. 4 and 5 belong 
together intimately : either one is a copy of the other, or both are extremely 
faithful copies of one prototype. MSS. 3 and 6 are more closely related to 
each other than to any other MS., but 3 shows a gréat number of individual 
variants and seems to be younger. Various relations can be detected be- 
tween other MSS., notably between MSS. 8, 9 and 11, but the exact arrange- 
ment of the material has not become completely clear to me. Since the 


ii VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


Telugu text was based on other material than was at my disposal, I have 
made a point of noting its readings where they differ from those preferred 
by me. 


§3. The Pandit edition is far from being an improvement on the 
editio princeps. In one line the Editor disposes of his MSS. material. He 
states that he has consulted three MSS., one in Grantha script from Madras 
— probably the Government Oriental MSS. Library —, and two in Deva- 
nagari: one from the Satyasarasvati Library in Mysore, which is now the 
Mysore Oriental Research Institute, and another one from a Library called 
Brahmamrtavarsini. The Mysore MS. is no doubt the present manuscript 
D.G. 1776, which has also been collated for the present edition. Although 
the Editor does not state it, it appears from his notes that he has also con- 
sulted the Telugu edition. Only a very few variant readings are noted and 
no references are given. Misprints abound. 


§4. The Tirupati edition, which dates itself 1953 on the title-page, 
was actually made available only towards the end of 1954, when my own 
text had already been established. A great number of variants are entered 
in notes, but one searches in vain for even a plain enumeration of the manu- 
scripts utilized or consulted; the variant readings are simply noted pathan- 
tardni. The references to quotations in text and commentary, esp. Sruti 
quotations, are not always reliable. On the other hand, the book is very 
neatly printed with few errors, and it will be found very useful by those 
who want to consult the Tatparyadtpikad. In an extensive and erudite intro- 
duction the Editor, who is a Sastri in both Vedantas, treats of a number of 
relevant topics from the view-point of Srivaisnavasampradaya, which 
deserves the interest of all who take the tradition of Srivaisnavism into 
consideration. 


§5. With text like the present one the difficulties of establishing 
a critical edition are usually not very great and concern mainly details. The 
text is not very old. It could, by its very character, never be subject to 
the vicissitudes of ancient, popular, devotional and literary texts. It is a 
technical scholastic treatise, whose readers have always been confined to 
comparatively small communities; when their own copies happened to be 
broken or spoiled, they had other copies at hand, or available in libraries 
of temple or monastery. SudarSanasiri’s excellent and extensive com- 
mentary, being generally transmitted along with the commented text, left 
hardly any scope for additional glosses that might find their way into the 
text. On the other hand, the constant repetition of a relatively small num- 
ber of technical terms in consecutive lines led naturally to haplographies, 
whereas also the numerous quotations from éruti and smrti could be added 
to or abbreviated without impairing the argument, Though there are a 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA iii 


considerable number of manuscripts extant, in the main they do not show 
important differences of reading. But, since conflation must have been 
going on constantly, it is often very difficult with texts like the present one 
to classify the manuscripts plausibly and set up an hypothetical stemma 
codicum, except — possibly — by collating painstakingly all manuscripts that 
are available: a procedure not always practicable and not always justified 
by the requirements of the individual texts. Therefore I have had to make 
a selection of manuscripts which would not only suffice to give a presentable 
text but also be representative enough to justify the claim to critical pro- 
cedure. So 6 MSS. from different sources were collated in their entirety 
and another ten in part. Soon it became plain that one Mysore MS., indi- 
cated below Mz, gave the best text and it has therefore been made the basis 
of this edition 


§6. The following MSS. have been collated completely : 


i. a paper MS., deposited at the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Insti- 
tute in Poona, cat. no. 660 of 1884/87; Devanagari, 44 pages 10” < 6”; 13 lines 
per page, 38 aksaras per line; well-written, but carelessly copied: errors and 
haplographies abound. On the first three pages the Sruti ete. quotations are 
indicated by red marks; the colophon gives as the scribe’s name Utkoli from 
Mathura; the MS. is not dated. 


Symbol: P. 


ii. a paper MS. of the Mysore Oriental Research Institute, Mysore; 
cat. no. D.C. 1776; Devanagari; 56 pages 11” x 54”; 10 lines per page, 


86 letters per line; clearly and carefully written; it gives the impression of 
being a faithful copy of its Vorlage; no colophon, no date. 


Symbol: My. 


iii. a palm-leaf MS. of the Mysore Government Oriental Research 
Institute, cat. no. Gr. 878; Grantha script; 45 pages 154%” « 134”; 9 lines per 
page, 86 letters per line; well-written, rather old; hardly any errors; no 
colophon, no date. 


Symbol: Mo. 


iv. a palm-leaf MS., of the Mysore Oriental Research Institute; cat. 
no. A 2409; Telugu character; 51 pages 17” & 12”; 6 lines per page, 74 letters 
per line; beautifully written; young; careful copy, leaving blank space where 
the prototype was obscure; colophon gives as the scribe’s name Nrsimhata- 
tadasa; dated: Monday, in the bright fortnight of the month sravana in the 
year Plava, probably 1841, but not impossibly 1901. 


iv J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Symbol: Ms. 

v. apalm-leaf MS. from the Adyar Library, Adyar; cat. no. 24. D. ae. 
Grantha script; 19 leaves, 172”1%”; 14 lines per page; 85 letters per line; 
no colophon, no date. 


Symbol: Aj. 

vi. a palm-leaf MS. from Adyar Library, Adyar; cat. no. 28 H.5; 
Grantha script; 27 leaves, 194” 12”; 10 lines per page; 80 letters per line; no 
colophon, no date. 


Symbol: Ag. 

§7. After the above manuscripts had been collated completely, a 
number of other MSS. in Mysore, Adyar and Madras were consulted in 
addition. Since the material obtained from them does not contribute signi- 
ficant data on the text as established with the aid of the above manuscripts, 
their variant readings have not been included in the critical apparatus for 
reasons of economy except, at first, an Adyar Grantha MS. indicated Ao. 


§ 8. I have noted the following relations between the six completely 
collated MSS. P and My, derive from a common prototype, of which the 
latter is a more reliable representative; both belong together with MS no. 12 
of the Telugu edition. The three of them constitute one group with Mb. 
Another group is constituted on the one hand by the two Adyar MSS. 
A, and Ags, which are clearly but not too closely related, and on the other 
hand by M3, which stands more apart. This last MS., incidentally, proved 
to be very closely related to Madras Government MSS. Library MS Do 5030, 
but since the testimony of Ms is not of great importance, this relation has 
not been followed up by a complete collation of the Madras manuscript. 
Both groups, which may be indicated as Group A and Group B, are fre- 
quently found to be interrelated, but members of each group have a suffi- 
cient number of variants between them to justify their grouping together. 
Generally the readings of the first group A have been preferred to those 
of B. In a few cases the exclusive testimony of My» has been accepted. 
Sometimes SudarSanasiri’s glosses have helped to settle the reading. 


§ 9. Acknowledgements are due to the following gentlemen: P. K. 
Gode, Curator, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona; H. Devee- 
rappa, Director, Oriental Research Institute, Mysore and Pandits Sri Niga- 
manthacharya and Palhada Thulasi Sreenivasacharya, Mysore; Alain 
Daniélou, Director, Adyar Library, Adyar; Dr. V. Raghavan, Professor of 
Sanskrit, University of Madras; T. Chandrasekharan, M.A., Curator, Gov- 
ernment Oriental Manuscripts Library and Pandit T. A. K. Venkatachari, 
Madras. It is a pleasure here to express my gratitude for the help and 
cooperation which they have extended to me, officially and personally, 


Tine 


Il TereeaqN: | 


Oh BIR )30~ 


Ball eta, Tae o 


[2] <aaataraseaaiaat sara | 
‘fatotaraaeantaray Rene AA: || 2 I 
[2] at Raat Baad daa a- 
eq Teae TATA aL 
atacand sata fad Aeatie \ 
aal Farqnd a fe saa agaala i) 2 1 
[3] sansnfsasreatitiertta aafindsaas: sadarer 
AA FAT ATA TAN ATTA fel AAT RAATO TARTS ATA ATTA ea - 
Saraarfana: | 
[2] sea Sarrarsaratera Papa ecraeegTAMaTR- 46 
Rar AEG aaTeeTaaHAAAT ATA aa AeA SET 


* Ag begins [stad] wargwata aa: Teeth 
7; aeearqanaarsaTaaAAT, tl 
A, adds before fae’ —atiad Paaaat ard Ford aa: | 
M, “aaaraaezta° 
M, “frcerafa° 
T saqearar® 
A “fete? 
M, om. “stasdta® 


CNB Oe Ne 


74 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aR eT HRT TA TAT ATS TA ATTA RATA TAT ATS TAA He TATE 
Ralagaratataaraaagaa sat fe sara, ea 
afa | aaarat aa) a orale fasarerarseae aaa A ae ASTAT 
adit a AAR aaa BF STATA: | TT aa TATRA IE 
qqear feed Faq WaT ATTA: | aad Aatsaaada ara fafafeaia aya 
aad aaa | aafdararfa aa) aaa fagrad ze wala ara: 
Gar aaa faa zearieny | 


[‘3] 


Sfarcaa: aed Faagcarfesafaronraereraraaaae- 


(ea TRH, dae Beas Aesyaed Baa APATATTAT: 
aaa, TAaetaaaes Maes | TA SIVA GATT | 


[&] 


ud faratas areal ga fea eseadan tached: 


Haale «A RaARaeg eared saa fraar- 


av BR wo oN 


A, om, “at 

A; om. °f4&T° 

M,,3, Ag om. TH 

Ag T SlaRAeTET 

M, “3s 

M, “fraearfedacigi—M, TRG, My. feacd—siqaed is the 


reading of VP. 2, 14, 33 here referred to but note that 
SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 81 the same quotation reads freqed 


M, WalaeeaeaeTy 

M, “aastgea” 

M, SSR AeHT and lacuna ending with Faq? 
M, Se PaetareriaaURTATAATAT 

A, aera toreR® 


M,A, om, “start? 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


earetaaea iT: aaleaqaaarsay A weaaaaaaar aera 
fafedaratal ATaTaRT: gedaan zeraatfteeaa | Sra a faa 
MATAR: Ae: TAs RESTART | fare haa aes 
TRUMAN: Toca = feet | 


[Ss] de auanfiacaaonast aariftacadtat fat sae: 
aaa ffasraaaaa aa, ca Regmeaterrenaatt axarearfrarar- 
arfreaoareTashaet, aaaist aad szad a, falas 
waTaaaaed Re wa, aes: ae eiazaen a 
frat | ga: 4 Baa Bea zaanat fae) cata ade sfaafasi- 


1, M,om. °; 

M; lacuna COTARTC oe eseeevonee ATTA 

M, om, Seas feaeary 

M, Aea—T TI 

M, fafas afaad—M, aaeq afar aes TATE 


mee, Tart eft aaa sfaeaa which looks 
like a gloss that was substituted for the original reading 


fafaafaaad. 
6. Ms, ater 
7. T sarerata 
8 
9 


Mz om. “Stata” 
p °sflanaty—M, “stare fet 
10. Mg, om, Wate—A, Varga 
11. Mg, om. @44 Heat 7 and reads instead CANA 
12. P,; Mp “gaiferter” 
13. P,My,9, AaCTAeT 
14. M, 24 a1a° 
15. A,om, tt gut ef 
16- Mg lacuna aad... 27aferay, 


75 


76 


Jo 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aaa, dead faa a aafeaa, aaa SmaI far 


ae a fear areaaa a fer aes am 2 fe—uand 


feasts areas eft anata | 

(2) at Sreaenadaccamrptaatt aardaaearaar aa 
aahrenfaaan dag tat grad a arfasaweaaitoraress Aa 
ATA: | 

(e] Set ataradrsarnes alae: Srrftatactastarateaa- 
ar aaa gendarme aad faa 
afeant 4 aartarieaaeectioraad Aft seats | 

[2°] qa cee seater saftenarraareta | 
THATTA LAA TSAT A AAT TRAMS TA fas AOASAMSAS FE At ATA 


A, Ta We 

PM, aarqesr 

M, Sal 

M, Sata fafa 

M, A, om. g, P SY 

M; A; om. Sater? 

A, lacuna 4 [......] 287 haplogr. 
Mg “alata 

M_ faatyer 

10. A, Arad, M, aad] aera 

Il. A, aTt gateaaatd aiaed—M, Catqatmetes 
12. Mg inserts “eanaftatrafrartaararafty® 
13. T om. “fatfaaa°® 

14. M, om. ‘quant aaa 

15. T atfaserc 

16. M, Tae eae 

17. A, faataeat? 


oP AAA wD & 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


FITCA GAs: aaa: sal: ast: aaa: aeafaer zarfefa: 
at: afuardatscr caorenhiger aasarecarfrartara- 
STAAL TELAT PL Tif aT LL A Hae ATA eT HTT eter FeteTAT- 
TAIRA «ISAT aaa ed aeaT Ta: AT aA 
afaeaat faeeaed | 


[22] ate stsctasres aaa aTea aera 
qa aa wu aan: awat farsaadeat Bzeerda 
aaa ase FIT: ata aaa aedizadarfediafafa asda 
Asidahfastaheaaa fafaarda oferta) taesraarft senor 
TATA AA Mate aa, fond filter “fat, fasraar- 
qari aatarseainaarat aaa | a Aariaaray sara 
qalaat | wash aga: wafaarrelndrengat wararaaaTee ee | 


1. Ms adds aenfast tagcat aay [ChUp.6, 8, 7] 
2. P waHtaa 

3. Ag “faraaea? 

4. Mz Ag “alaaer? 

5. A,om. “TT 

6. Myg. Ayg om. ThRATH 
7. A, fara? —A, Aa” 
8, M, famasfamgea 

9, A, Waaat 

10. My.g om. 3& 

11. Mg inserts “eralafafrs” 


12. Mpg Gaara 
13. PM, add faut fatat as according to SvetUp 6, 19 


14. My oaItaterat 
15. PM, Ag “aIq® 


17 


qo 


78 


Jo 


J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


[22] Fadaa) wafisaa aaa ase feared aga aa 
Tea sale) aaatearcaareasaa) aft aaeara 
aaa GI aa aa Peat 


[23] saa: —Aaad sare Medisega aarezramres eta afequr 
qa war aaraaesfa aacareet gearadtfa | onfeeadsadearem: | 
Tet: TAAL! TI aT sae aft aataearar fradt fsa 
senate | dar a ad Fa:—oenfeart Gearfterfs | sare 
ata smenamat safer edaatar aren maronaeaar srs 
aftarad | ward senfiart secant gears ta ada ada 
fardargaaaasd at aa Rat watige eal ffasereqa- 
Rateantaorid wstaqamnnaaaaaetarat marae fs 
rare ay waft erat aa: | dee face | TAA 
amderaaardad aafiaqeaa eft arodaqeatefseatinaa- 
Rata aercnfas safgard vada ef faa Farad ad dam 


T inserts 3faatt TAT PM, aafaaasfaat 


ay 
. 


Mg; A; om, second Seat: 

M; aaa 

Ag adds ATTN TiaAT AAT from Manu 12, 122. 
Aj. FTAA? 

Mg Ag °HAA°—T °ararae 
M, oa? 

Ag om, °SaIt® 

A, Fafa f—P My.) om. 3tfF 
M, dat for Ta 

Ay werfaatae 

M, “aaatta—fafaasa feat 
M, 3a Wada? 


Ce me IXN AA RP WN 


= = —_ pe 
COI 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


manasa fad earfea ga sft gearerar | ataceee arqaraeia 
are fidee fiftaanaqa: weeaty segqeacqer ara aeeafaar- 
Ta Jet weareahi—wt J wna: | area ala | 


[92] aftariea: grade eff fated sramccmecaaeanftesa- 
MI wade teataraadeancamng oa ae 
at aaa TTeaTAasARahgAt adie adastaaahihe- 
Raa aiRaahae | 


[¢4) asa fifase saat aaereet area 
aafag eerane—aat dea “afta at say fiend ener 
art art ufteaa caffe | wate ect Gata ara 
Maas TATA STE AAA ade 
Taner a aarahafa | aa aoe ace 
aed sears aa Arava wales: | 


A, om. Ug 
M, 3a Titzsara 
A, lacuna—[4@g°°:"*** aa]° 
WACORICG! 
Mg Ayo. “aeafaa® 
P. om. “aot? 
P. afarafearat’, M, fafaafeacauat’, M, afieafercama’ 
Ag afasafeqtaac’; probably 4U4At as an early gloss on 
“feataa” has been interpolated. 
8. Mg A: [eajer® 
. M, ealakeaay 
10. M, dittography of ca 
11. A, om. afew 
12. A, aeqaeraear® 
13, araqeatsta 
14, P famay 


NDAw RYN So 


79 


4o 


80 


9° 


ax 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


[28] da: Sere sa) aeOTATASTATa: Feefs—anra- 
aaa ® aadifafa | aa: east aaafh sea aaeroeaeaa ear 
aaa aay adiearatediamaa | saafata anfafeey | aa cla 
Fae: Tans: | afteae saa: aarneat acata “faa, acie- 
aesaaema gana aaa smacaiaeeaaerat afa- 
aa aetna aa seta ofaaisatate aaa 
afgdlares ofits | 

[ee] amreeroreat Farad at wadlenarta serfada sie- 
qarafafa ef fftaharteany | aata stated saifaad 4 
adeaa 4S Gi Isla | deadesertaTA We Aa Gat Baits Te eT- 
TATRA Cert Raat ag al ay 
saa ata dae aigeeaca faaaeaait agr gaefi aa 
waste wr tadqaa cecefiereaar Saat aaa flaaTAATS- 
ofa area carecatifa | aaa sflaaraai—siee aera 


A -io AN 


nf sermaslaardaea aeaeifasta: laeaaaiaea aaa 
aaa araafife a aeafa | wigs wafi—starear J Fa: 


M, A, Fa: WA 

T. Aare 

P Mz om. 3° fae 

M; drops—uaaata 

M, stfgalaare 

AT. insert —fafefafe 

P M,.9, SIGF—M, adds “eTHATeaTITAals 
My.g Tease” 

M, A; 3a 

10. P waela for eaa TAA : haplography 
11, M, qWreqTaEy 

12,5 i Om. 4 

13. M, om. om waft 


we errIy ANE YN 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


TE TERaTReTTE: | ae ae) | 
fie atkaa sara taagenftdenah aeqtifa serra arf 
wafer | wat Sar ager uae: wast: eft zat sar ane fret au 
Fe 12 gearas: ad saltseeeiarhrarac often: arear ST 
aga siaaraeraaedse aa frarfsiaageaal fararearaed- 
aaa are Zhe | 


[¢¢] wa ahahaha aeoraraarafafiaaraaraar- 
afaaarearae at a (GeHet: SAAT: Bal: IST: Parag: aerfasr 
gaiear) Aer ofa aanoaarkeeaaeaas ad aaefata 
aa weal aarrnada aaffa ofa aaa wa: @ waar 
ae aaa at ara lata aaafe ase aera 
ofaara axaadifa “sfiafaats sodas | 

[¢@] wae wale | taareafae aafifa Faas 
ward ffasr aa saat alata Ware: sea aera 
sfaaieaties: | ae serena fareertoratta aetae: fare 


1. Pom. Waa 

2, Mz om. aafi— 

3. Mg om. @eatee' aT 

4, Msom. aaea® 

5. all MSS. consulted by me, except one Madras. MS. 


(R4949) om. this citation which may have been original. 
M, completes the citation ataafa ECE Tel 
M, °aaaT 
NW ABSICECILCH 
all MSS, except Mz, omit shaft 
10, > P afer, M, A, “afer 
AL, M; om, Aq: 


so Cfo ND 


81 


44 


82 


qo 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aq | emia Aga: aaaewsa:—acad Fe ai FaAgaHATaTAT 
arfiat wafer | adnan a care ATER SaT AT aE: 
AA SAAT Aaa Targets GAT AAA: STARTS: AaAT 
wat sara aa are adiefafa ferray aad aeRay| 4 
area RSAaaATSHaT AAA A Se aera ade a sTeATAARaT arate 
aa sacra ga al sara sfiaaaadiata saa za 
qaaarany | aa: wae Prafagegar aerial wart aazred- 
Sarfehiaa eff arafafa arated sfaricaa sara aear- 
fafeay | 


@ aN 


[Ro] waafifét aeaaal stad—afafa a: 94 “teenfaerseaar 
meta: @ Waa WATS: TAT: | Saeeafafe etea- 
aaa aeaatoaarag efi) ada sflacaaranfaea aed 
aaa aaa fae wife: aaraaaarecaale srararfa- 
RUOITTTA SA TAA ARAL | TA A Aas SOT dneTTT- 


a4 peat frat fafaarare | afafa a ada aa sflaraaifendat 


P M, “Here? 

M,.3. Tom. aaa 

M, A, Hd: 

M, °xtsta—T @4: ase: 
P. My aatfa® 

P M, add gafteafasseaae: 
T amrafaacrsazaat 

M, “HaAaEs? 


oe) caer es SS 


M; om. °a%s° A, T. aaHerI? 


My “SY AFT, Ay. SPT TT, T °SH TATe’—I prefer 
“Sit on textual grounds 


oom 
S 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


eatanateaae | ata safaifiaataaferata acai gat: 
qaaahient | aa Fraaa Afard daar a 
HT ATATATT | 

[22] Raatara: Gea: aa carat: ad slant Aaa 
ffi a waa aque a Rasy adaaig qeansag aeaw- 
TAM Aed | salt AeA THAT aeaifAaaT Aa 
AAS Vater TATA raaaahrs a safe | 

arad warfeaezrat aaah sgeafealar ard | Aa aa 
Teal abrslaea Waa ATH SAL] ATS caracaot leas 
da atfiar: Gear: eed ASTHd: WOTAEA Tara iat IATA: TATA 
iwBaagranta aeaanit aed) ara a gale: 
gaa | vata afan: a4 atest: qeaTeeartartearaated | afar 
TI a4 Ae Viaagerga Wa aa wIaiaET Ay 
TATATAT TATA SAT: | aE AS:— 


Ag aatefa 


i 

2. M, safax 

3. Mg Ayo, AACA and om. °am® 
AON oni. Gite i sta? 

5. Mg Ag Tom. Feateaay 

6. T °afraiat 

7. P.MgA, om. at 

8. T Faq: 

9, “A,om. wet °° STA 


10. T °atareaa 

ll. A, arraaaifa 

12. A, inserts 3qleqqFa® 
13. M, eatata aati 

14, APM, aaealga 


83 


Jo 


84 


qo 


es 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aati J a aA Hat a TTT | 


qa] waa wade AT II 
fa | dem: serarht saretifa arad | ae A Aaa: — 

WT SIF AGM SAM A AAT | 

qaysery wayal Fadia FH a: Il 
efi | afaa—aataesret sat aarqaraeratefa | qatdiequaeaft- 
ery aah A Tae: | 


[22] wd argeoeaaed sora | Aas aaa adel aTaAT- 
qafar wafa | aaa aaeenaeada daranda aad aaa 
qa | za Zed ase afar sada aaa | 

[23] araearaaralt frat aaaearrqorat & aa arazatea | 
Ta aTaAaash aaa Arearasiaara fafaars- 
argtats: | 

[22] a 4 aman Bafa sfaariea fates aaa 
fettad | Aaa | aeafeqrnieea fF sada aerate afeoreatea | 


T om, affatee vaiat— 

A, Wart 

Ag @4 Fa’ 

Ay maat® 

M, Banned a4 aae, drops following up to aa%eat® 
Ajo om. I 

Ags, Ela 

My Ag “atRaTAA—A, “HRA —T Araaaea 
Tom, 4 

A, om, Fa 

PM,” freqa® 


oe ea ee Se Se kt be. 


— — 
— 
° . 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


TATE | FATE GAHAN: Ta | aTaaTE- 
afaara 4 ae eft | stata wo Seaatt feta + srazata sale | 


qafaqnarad eft Fa: aaa: SIPC RIDE Wa ate 
fafiaa aad arafat aac a) fgraeat Sa fasrftarferke- 
saad | TR Tae sass 
Wa | wa wear areraasaeta aa ofaareata | 
caffe gare wat: armen ffraaeteIARa Tea 
ATTA | 


[24] aedat araaaara wanda: | | asd Faae zfaac | 
aq asafaa a gla eta areatarereadaedl ger: oda safata 
4 dmeataadaaiedaedl, aa: aravarfiatar dad) ae 
quafgegenaredataaar sdifad sea cf gareft cea: ~aeTATaTIeN- 
qaqa wera se ofa ef Axataq| asa sage zeal 
waned a feat | TT | Ce AaadafRargadaeaT a 


bh. | P M, interpolate the following passage taken from 
Ramanuja’s Vedantadipa on Brahmasttra 2, 3, 30. 
MagIatalaeaa weafas crater: \ aa ago farPzat a: age: 
aaaa—efe aaa UA Magra ay wa efa aaafesaa | 
M, ferrafidt sate 

A, drops 4—T inserts 7 § 

A; om. aaa 

T om. °anfg° 

A, om. “Sqr” 

M, 42 

A, om. Rt yT° 

Az om. 49 

P M,, Towser 


i 


— 
Ss 


85 


86 


J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

fieg: | areacfufelar dfeatefeaeadt | adr aaacaratiarga- 
qafaaaaaafaaaaesa | Pagar areves aftea: | zaay- 
afta gat casas | whet ofada fatrzafterr | 
SAMA Wale: | Faratdahaen saeeatadahacn aaa 
fT, | 

[28]  wanarft serena ae Aan sflareaatfaaar sftar- 
amaahesiaf sfuar) aa aia gee ara 
afiat | aaeila sera + arararfiencoars:—fasafatafrarat 
Teaaaafeat af: aaa & ae: | araairaraas- 
qiarenfi: | canairgquenies aarti a sed | SR 
& daa ag cia waders steerage | afgeh 
afaaraaeants FAT: | 

9) aft aaeadenrkasaaacaaa 8 aeTaeer- 
cae were ffaaraegaaaareat fafa seq: TAT | 
fafaaia zenfeaearg taffeta fafeqaatda aa TRARTA- 


Mg Ag insert Tat afar? 
A, afera 

T om, “aafeatar 

A, STATA? 

M staan 

PM, 3 A; om. fe 

T CauqeTe 

M, aTfeay 

My °altarraqaea” 

10. T completes 39124 

ll. M, affg 

12, PM,om,@ and read @ 3AM 


oe eA DAR wD & 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


aatefitaaaar ara: | zara Aaacaaaaraaeaaa | safaseaetor 
CARAT AH AAA aTAATISTAG ATT ATA | 


[¢] aa era—arenfifafaart eeinarat staf eteq: sare 
Raed | wafaea saordtaara | a4: astern aaaTaA: 
aa fated | aay fatig Rady arqaanaaked aise aa waa 
faga 2fa | Saday | Sa seta dara fafzer agafaarn fieera | afa- 
APRSatht at | ashi afazaa aeaqqerad | safasaaeior “fasts 
THA | TW Baaraa sa wats: wage: Harare: Hareaceradeaar- 
‘ae Read | sea a fesdearaa: | aa:faeracracea- 
faarere fafeta a aa | Saqaraeeraaa fe wa: aa-fafee=ad | 


[2°] waaed aed aaa aata Farad Da afaeratara: 
duafa | a f& waeetsanaa watered | aa wa fe wag 


— 
. 


PM, “afaaare 
P 4a: for Use; 

P M, °adferacare, 
M; Ay T fraet 
Mz; om, 7& 

A, om. PANT AAT, 
PM, °afaaeara, 
A, Cong fieat® 

M, aifaae 

10. A, om. “feraty® 
11. P Myo, tat? 
12. M, sararate 

13, Mz, om, fé 


oo AAW PR YW N 


87 


Je 


88 


ye 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


cotartargarsd | aaa arefatadasae safer eerfeater far: | 
aan aa faded aa od | aternteqaraa & aa 
aaa |) waa aaa af astarfrfiad a a aafagrai 
wade waafanfanitaaafaarnrfatre aa vale | 

20] aa: Srarfirarat a aarfa Samia fafaarraegfata: | 
ffaaccamaastt affaaa ag oda | aeaar afiaera arsafata 
Giana Ames: | eqderaareras ara tafaeraM- 
matt aderaaa aaefifa sda. fediafesery da dear 
Rareaagisae sdiat | dere Tae 
fomaaaearra Fdeeseraratata edtarercan: ataaers 
saad | wa vase we fraraaeio ara es sa 
aor dena: ceca Gia) sara daeagaca 
mrqremata a arcanatate: | 


M, wea 

M, afaaaa 

M, om. sfa— 

M, om. sarferarat 
P reads THVT 

T sdlaaqqa: 

A, om, “89° 

M, A, aaa 

T om. “ate? 

10. PM, “satay 

ll. PM,, A, “frat 
12. M, A, fase ara® 
13. P Felyeat—M, qaraeay 
14. M, Fafeagratre?— 


— 
: 


ee NDA wR wD 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


ivy 


[32] afta fafaarraccartar aesarat seal carers: ae: 
aeafarerd eff agar A aear Pasar ef ame ART ay 
qT afta aalale aaa | ATA TILT T- 
werd aa asa aaaeaquatadel afeaadifa Saagrad | wa 
fafama a4 fad vada Sfaaseararearadhed aaa 
ag | aaa ofa aerated Faafeafaad 
aaifgeandemraats asafa aa zeredisa faafaa: | ara wer 
fearrer ftden; arsft wedt Sed | ara aT eaaEroTeaa 
TaRATY | fosetorafsaran: aaa AA AaeaaIATA: | TeRMT- 
aerate wa after seals areal cra eaTT: | 
aarft daa a AAAs ATTA TATTOO ATTA 
gaaed Vaeaaragaaeasadaal fafa: | ara faaseg fifrera 
eft qararaat: ITPA: | 

[22] aft + aaa aaa aeaiea ae fered 
afta Ja aes aesiankeera: aafies: |r| waei- 


PM, ase: Aa: 

Mz; om. a 

P sfaaaa 

M, fawarnfasraeatar” 

PM, aaa afeate 

P fay: 

P om. arnicerafate 

Mp aftata—M, A, afeaaat shaaat 
Ag walt 

10. Ag om. aaa 

11. Pom. °alai°—A, Cesta aaTAAT corrected into “#ateat— 


oO PANDA AR YN 


128 PiMypome a 
13. M, A, °esratararerarea” 


89 


Je 


a 


90 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Rarahatere rae Ade: BAM: FATT FART 
afehaaatt fraraafraata sa | waft cerca a aed | 
[223] aaa dea anitetaediaies acinar 
rafgdafiadat a aararfittasndaardiar: at fart fitter 
eff adtaa eff Feat | aaroaaengafeaeae aa 
CRAM AAS TATA AeA AAat ZERIT FAST 
Aa TIS FeO Fa aes aTahaers | cer Tare 
fafa | oa eft arefaers: | eae soe aarafrent fat axerat 
4 aafal vara ae ammaeiansena | wafers 
Aa: AAS Aaisar Hale | aaa TTT eae HAT asa 
aastt aaeanaae aqet aa: aaa a es eafediaqe- 
aftr faraft | aaafigwaea aa: | waa ea: TAA 
arama sta maaeoa aca sfaneaa) at ala: | 
ea Ae seo ffitaaareararats satiate, 


P om. “atife 

P Mz, atfa® 

M; om. Salad sf 
T waar 

A, aaTRI— 
A, T om. 4 

M, “ofafrefiai 
A, om, Tato — 
M, “faareor°— 
10. M, waea— 
11. PM, saqfea— 
12. A, 7a 

13. M, “stated? 

14. M, Sartore 


we OPN AAR WN 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


wea aaa a aaa afterei—fe 
fet ES eae ardiad aad feagieificy waar desde 
qaqaegaet wea | Fa aa Ta @ aa ardiad sarge feaga- 
‘iro aaet facie a: aerafieaaari areata aaread 8a 
ATITE a Fa: aafieanaa afer sh: | aa: ata aaa 
aeligeareay zarrafaarn aa: ofaaritar: | vachaateare tsar 
SIS Weal A TAI | AAa ARH: TaOTATARTIATAT sft | ATS- 
fares: | areata rarer, areca safafiaar a, fafier- 
Tara aed qa: wae: aeaer fsa wa 
sfaartear: | 


[32] aal aranroraasicdt Faaq wa waradaqay 
aimee fad—ad ag aed alee) 
add saftanet: | adaeafi—aaaea: aartafa | aaa 
SUAAAIAGAT HAMA: | AMT He Tad safes Barna | Aa 
safeata aerate sree: | 


[a4] wed waft | waa HO ReRTETRAaT aT 
figzad zaaara aaa ofafiaeafia| acareae 4 


A, om. “9° 

A, adds aaife 

M, om. J*s¢%—upto...... faaatfa (haplography) 
P. om. A@ Fai—upto...... q: (haplography) 
M, FAT TI 

M, A, om. Ha alate 

P aactaey 

M, Aqq 

M, A, Falfeae°—A, Feacraies 

T wareay A, °art— 

M, “ale 


Om Cone te Oy Viet Wo 


— — 
— © 
. . 


ol 


20 


Jo 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


deat | an & Afar: area Br za 
caadad «fl FIOM: HA FIRST AAT STAT 
aft aad | waaaafa goed faeaa sf Aq) | wreTATaeT- 
aaa zordaRata: aifaraeanaarraesste IR eeTTE- 
PAAR SOAR SAM GAT TATA | 


[28] fa eters: fad | aa 
ah fagt wetarareariad aTAIOT add zara ASAT 
quasar iene: | aaa | afar aaa 
TRA wae cenasanr| waa farerwadaaa 
cerzara | ae f& Aaaradra: Tear eras Feiss Ta 
CARs FMeTIATeTaesg, FA g slsa- 


A, 224 for #a 


— 
. 


M, A, T AReaa for saad 
M, “wWaaeg? 

M, aeata? 

PM, om. 4 and insert 4 after Sf 
M, efa Fa 

T atret 

P SII 

M, aaxft° haplography 

M, “faatg® 

M, “faaRtafed—T °faararas 
P. om, S¥guredea hata 

M, “aft g 

PM, “sara? 


= =e = = —= = 
AR wN FS 


M, om. ¢ 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


SCCM ICOM IC CCC CMERCOILICCHD ET ICU MCR CC ICI! 
waa J aera: | 


[30] araheaft aa saqad aa, aad) adarieg 
Ta aAaravoaqahasg aay ataeanraaaraaa es aes aa 
fafare aanfiefiaa eff gata | 


[2¢] sara area afa adifa sear fra esaa efa Aa | 
feaa Fftiaa ef ane | Baa aan wa qa Sara Ala qalaal- 
a: Tt: aaisfi faftera efi Aaa | awl, MIATA aa BIA 
qfaea gaeiea “faigage | sarearfe cee eaeset aefifa “rar | 
eee Fiat: | dara: ata agft—saaaad f sfaiata 
aa aft a Ha ef) wear aa awe aa soa ae 
Anas aah dara weaaaaacaaa a wale 
Fafa, wa waraearaar afafiera ea Gary: | 


M, om, Wale farny 


— 
. 


M, VarerTaTAy 

T °fafarsefratay 

M, om. &fa aga 

T om, Fal 

M, 2a for Fact 

M, om. fara 

P A, fread 

P ftaq—M, fairey 
P. M,., om. =alare 
A, 74 Ga” 

Pom. 4 ae 

M, om. aalfegrrmra 
M, °qat W—T gaa: 


por anwar YN 


= Fe Se SS = 
Be NFS 


93 


94 


Jo 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


[3°] Fe aa featariear arareafata wa sea fa 
Td | wargaa ade aal aetna cia amdacmaracanfae- 
AACA SR ef aasadfeat: A oH waft aeceller- 
TMT Wahi + vaca | wala alata fate- 
fa a afaatt sam: afazmeatttaarh arsit wear ead | 


[eo] afta ffagaaaa aa carorfearfaariataced 
aaa ada a sed) fata ar sera | ae 
CAAA THT er Ca ST | TBI 
qala at fa a a cararshenfatrtes eft afeaartiatier | alas 
sarfaratartea eta carenrafitfaaar fears fare atl saeerers- 
aaa eat TI S| Sart fear fafaareeasdie Aa) aearacaearat 
afr a fafa ara cade waa sae: aeafaa- 
ala TF | 


M, T om. sgt afa 

M, adds “afead: aagqz: 
M, om. “Sau 

M, faded for feafaz—T difag 
P M, fataa: asta 

M, T °Haraatstt 

P adds “eqeqeq® 

P. om, U4 

PM, “feratfta for fautfea 
10. P °faaeat— 

11. T adds °a-et a1 

12. M, saraqaraearg 

13. A, T aerate 


po eI DAP YN > 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
[22] aq a wadrsht fanaa sage: | a a aa 
Ta: | ta a caraeraar aaa | 
aera a SAAR | al Aaa BATA 
art: | fararaaaaaah wade st ze aacarenarargr- 
areas ATT; TREToHla: | 


[22] satead—enradl  aenerfiarfeeraraftfadrenaoraraz 
PATHBHOSEA eM Marae eaaaaTe - 
qq aTTeACI TEE = aetertavaterrar- 
AISA HAA TAS aTaea aarp - 
faRaTT ARAMA alt Sei, Tea RETTTAT SAT 
HATTATA LSA AAAS AAT TAT aS fella aes aA ae 


— 
. 


Al Om, t= 

P M, ala” 

M, om. €@” 

M, om. VaraaaAATHI—A, Tagaytay 
A, Walatsay 

P. M,.. A, FORT” 

M, inserts ConerferaTaTaS 


P inserts aT” 


re Ue a Cake 2) 


allexcept M, 3a A— 
M, om. area ts 
M, om. Waatreadraraia 


— — 
= oO 
. . 


A, om. F4STaz° 


— 
= 


95 


Yo 


96 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Jane era OPM aaa eaTAT Tare ora aoa eae eg AT 
qe “Ad apgTrestaers fe a aeate | 
aah waa aaa ETAT —— 
ay arasaaris a afer Sra eae | 


4 aifaal geal Sah AAT Ta FT | 
at: aati qari HeeaTsat Tea II 


STA: OITA: WATAAAT A: | 
ar areaaarea faeeaa saz: | 
ae A 4d Ga A BISA AT: | 
40 wa Ff faa SAS TATA: II 
seamaared Worateaaes | 
ater ache aq aera I 
ao wg fe srarargaratt aaa: | 
aor f zat walad fad arae II 
4 2ff | gore fe wa fa ama Ad walter: | 


1, T Carfafira® 

2. M,A,T om, °ats°— 

3. M, a7a°— 

4. M, Carertqarearee® 

5. A, “aedaleay 

6. P.M, A, Stata 

7; P.M, A,.., om. sft— 

8. Pom, weoreqr af BeTEI— 
9, M,.,A, om. { 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


WAT RAT A— 


Ue wears Ww salir etead | 
A WTSSST: ATTY | 
MIDLER EIPGRIRE GEN 
umaeoecarearta fiat Beare: 
WANT AeTaear Aa aTAThala | 
HATA AGeta AAT: II 

qa TeqraTal eaaaraaateaa: | 
USAIST ATT AIA GANA: | 
UGTAAAS UA saATHAAAT | 
anMeated fara a IFA II 
HVgedienaa Ber a afar: aforaVNd: I 
Algal Teaeaq Aerete FATAT II 


zaife | aAaatfi— 


ratfaant aaaaoflaraaolaers | 


rama | arraertarit—— 


SA CLARE det a 


AATAAATA Sea: GAT AAT | 


M, afera 

T fact for aa 

M, om, Qt “aI 
M, om. Solaiaaoitzarg— 

M, A, om. faut: otal AaI— 
A, M, om. FAT Fal 


97 


20 


ah 


98 


Ge 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aft | srmertarft—g: orfra: aa wa gerraeate | aa orf ger 
me TATA: GH adie: | orfora eft asftareraaaarae: | 
[23] ag 4 fata | aa ga ofteqq | sera | waa- 
QUITS Aas aes sao cess Fart 
fart a gaat aafad ofteay | waded dart wa aeafifa santa 
mya dase at angered | cHeanrsafada fata: 
aalea: gated | alder Afra fatraaasaarsfaa aearaenrr- 
aa ef Tala: | aes aati aio aeafiearatar: 
waa: | da tarftercararftara vadife fase: | aarna— 
afta aadaiear adiar afer |) 
way aasate: a afear sa aaa | 
CR IRCIRIGICCCAG CII IOI thE | 
aa fatftaara afte: aasafiar | 
aay WS aA aa II 
aff | aaa erdtae ae shdareaar dart flard a ata 
[22] aff aroftara afar acer. 
eeaTeTAS Tara feasts sea | -A AT 


M, om. ¥: 
all except A, aagel® Pom. aq JaIqa 
P ware? 


T 4 for g 

M, om. °eq° 

P M, add °stasatat:— 
P drops aft 


eo ee oe 


M, om. W7a 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


fear aetaiears: enfefa aaa fiends aq) aararaleasti 
feareraiea | AAT AMIS 
qUNATS BM | aa Meaanafaata ca | 


[o4] wa waaatt fet——onta att sfaaa, festfarttcertir 
ada aerate am fsitaaa | aa att ae: At 
Aaa Aaa | sea aera eerraarnaactat Astizata| aaa 
qataasia fears ef aan aaacaaiina saa aa- 
ation a afeqarcafaatt ait advasiarae a fearerare- 
afer adiariar faeareariit, aa sfanaa feared gta aie a 
faa a a shag: | aera I acd ae: eave afrarragiaa 
4 saradeamaaaeat ada agafiaat a afiaar’ a 
faearaar: wate afeetiaaraa aearea afa fasta: | 


[9a] afta ta ar faenfate: a a atetifa fasta | 
Taga fads faRanrerfasertiaars Fa) afar 
fdata aa agraal feed ar aidaeat a faa) sacar 


P om. fazat 

M, om. Waatn fremt [zata? 
A, SATA 

A, 7a for TA— 

P inserts at fastta® 

M, Staagiats for Aka? — 
A, om. 4 

M, adds “stlarmaagaat 
P M, om. 4 

P om. 4I—M, reads @ aT 
P FeTeqe 


CPA AhM a YY 


— — 
= © 
ts 5 


99 


1 


100 


Go 


a4 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


gaan + fza ed | aaa Sfraonrafatrehata Aaraseareaaaa 
aft: ert | target fade azarae gfe waza ead | 

[90] fea fadegrmeratarararafadt tafe aay | 
Radner eas id afirarta wate feta saree 
aRaareaateta ta | fades saalatimad aaerceafatar- 
amt fearecatprren far feaata aarretae frac ane 
aq | saneardiaralt gataeataarfaaoraaeacrasiciaa | 


[o¢] aft a Reareecativacttaraarta FISe STAT | 
seared gM At) da fae fadaqaaareadarse: | 
rare wala Aa | seo faded of aa fe eeqmaTes | 
aad Jamar a faders fea | afaad- 
APRA Tat Fears | wer fe saa fear sA- 
aaa daa | seamed oft fafeeraa| sae frevafae 
wqdt BETA a adeaTAA ads TAL | ATARI TITAPARTAS 
wdla wa oa: fala: ar | Radaaerae A amaaieataata 


M, om. frau ela qaqa 7 haplography 


P M, axdeaq 
P “fatta® 

M, om. 47 

P M, 7a for Ti— 
A, FARAH — 
P “RTA— 

P om. 4 

10. PM, aaaafaae 
11, PM, °SqarTe— 
12. PM,, A, om. 


ee A Awe wy 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


aad Heat ae fsa taetdwenda Seaheararearsea fara 
WITT F SAHA AAAT ISI | 


[2°] aft = faetefadafiataasrdt a srafafa fatert- 
a | Feat Fa | cer aaafaern aera ercresaraaaA- 
aan a duatt| dar & searwsraalt aqata 4 cea 
way aad eft aaa aad | wae ada taherda 
gaan wah a ay zaguseay aid eft aa afl aad wyataa 
ara at vale wi a a aad | Sasa: sade & wala 
feet zat wae sraftfe | fddaarmer atatcarasttita- 
aaa a aaa af aeaasd=ad é-d afé soafqadtaearear- 


A,,, cada fear 

PM, “fratat— 

P om, HAASTAPHAAL, 
M, 47° 

M, fafaawee°— 

P. M, fatataa 

M, A, aater°— 

PM, °altrseay, 

T om. 4, adds 4 before aT 7 
M, om, “ala°—T aa ata 
M, sats” 

PT fea frago— 

P M, A, wga— 

M, “Hae 

A, seaa— 

A, om, @d 


oP ADA wR YY 


a 
Sees ae DS a 9 O 


101 


Jo 


102 


Jo 


a 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Gadi saa aaa S|) areeqeraaaanafiaretnes ears 
ftarfeamarad | fea aearearearat 4 cater aaa | Brraqeareed- 
DAIS A IAT THATTAAT | 

[yo] ag 4 ett afta ada eacaqararaara eae fa 
aa afa qarafiafiesr) agzarft aqaadta | faq| eacadernaa 
arsft eacq eff ara afa gadarfiafeea eta a afeafears: | 

[42] aarderma asf ec ef sata aati 
Jaa aiartafeaaca faeareratt areaatedia aafe araafe aa adr 
qa farsa qaraaaraesaee ahaa | deaH | wWeaaa aca 
fafa ata cart arfsaara | et aiaqearafata Sa) ated 
gata aati wares earl | seers g ASAT 
aa fie: | aaa aacafiitagteareataa aaa 
FATAALA gaa aA ta aaa: | 

wfarissaara are aeazarfet: | Efe | 

[42] aft a omaee ce feared Fa oat aaa | 
yaa aqecaraarfaigearsett manda sare asa- 
fafa Aq) Fa ao aa aaaaradaraaa ama) sarfehe 


P aqda— 

T both times gatfe°— 

M, A, “arf? 

M,,,,, om. Sf¢—M, afaasnay? 
M, A,,, aafadla 

P AGMH— Ay TTYARA 

A, om. aa 

PM,’ A, t8974a 

A, SUarareray 

A, frtalay 


oO PANDA WR YD 


— 
= 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


areata Tealats Aa) ea qadaa Fao wd araadticeadys- 
FVarSaIaaa Tea aE: | 


[43] sreareraarfeyadansstszera eamasa feared eaa- 
Tae TL | Met J saaraasaaalaraaeraraca ew 
aireraeerag eT aadeeaneataae | - 
Rue rararaata + aenaelara: | aareReaaaksaars- 
Maas AeA alae aay yA TyI- 
Taaaeta  afaattafiaraneane baer hameqeaada- 
qead | 

[42] fet g ca sorftaaeafaimaraacrgarareaeaar- 
arfrdaniatattanr: @t rar weela wag: | aaaTeareMarfahetra- 
Ada: wa fread | 

[44] aur serarare: aera Here we aeETTHAT 
SU - TAM TO aT ara arsaakeaa Heart a daa TRI aAes- 
aafsastiara drat aqaed ot aati a daa eff Ba) Aazaaa | 
Pramas Fae hesararaaraa Tea: AAT zfa 
AMUN SASITATSRA UT CAL | | ASAAMTRTATS RN SPRATATAIAT- 


Pe MeO. ase? 

M, A,,, Tom. “au? 

P M,., place 7 before fata: 
M, A,,3 T THAT 

M, A, T Ua a oT 

PM, “areqa— 

M,,., Talat: Tss°— 

M, om. aaa, reads °alz#4 
M,., afte? 

A, °alatg— 


SSS A SE lS gh SINE le aa 


— 
S 


103 


4° 


A 


104 


a | 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 
ceufgeaa ea “Sa ararmemea ceetea sefeernqaart 
iat at 4 canara ef aggre sea tarfaadrafsaa- 
aaa waft damgaaarsatare samara: AM AT aA 
earafata ara: Teale | 

[48] eater aateastifeaaserageatt saa 
eared ef Aq) a aaadencwintedgmeararareae aaa 
Te FT TAMIA aashieerea ad | AAA T aaa ANG 
Tatas Garena sf aaoqafsaarseanaa Ts | 

[4°] aE wet aatrratguratifeaaaearaT 
qa A Ree | aatarzcartareaearit saa 
efa f Afgan: | adres Haar TTT — 

qaartifezararear sara Fz | 
waaa Aaaa Sar aenrfet: Sar: | ele | 

amas: | Sarfterdsdr qaratefa Betsdar: | a a HATET- 

feaer Usa | da aTHaTeHATeTaTMalit Aarht Sitaa ela 


M, aH 

P om. 4, reads 3euaer Yeaifaqa 
M,,, T dat Atatar aad 

A, om. U4, reads Carer — 

M, “fexye og” 

P M, Saaeafexa® 

M, “Aarafray— 

M, “fae aT? 

P avgqratiersy” 

10. Pom, Wqrqat 

11. PM, om. waft 

12. T prints stad afe [Rat aaltea: ea] afa [sfa—eaaagzad 
ear: ] afexaitt etc, 


po PIA DA wR WD Oo 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


afta dsasmarceaeacaeazatt sad eft seaaaeret 
aaneaigartartiezartt area eff eragead - tar Sarftar: ear 
afa | gar afar) cafataaonneartarmt aad aera 
sad | alfeatsdt eae era harararernaaratoraeste 


aarIaT Ta Tagen rsa wads savas Feat fafa - 


afataaraaimdanary safer cafe hearardad da eff 
weal Tae aed | Beorargwmaraharaafatad 1 faa 
Ta A aa: anaes sf Aa) A afecad | fe aaaforeat | 
SI FATS Ha | Saasht weaafioarsasicia wa | 

[xe] adiasft ga slaraoitaaqace apgararaea 4 agra 
wate aaa wear clara ame wz | 
Uaaeh vata | Sat: BR geaeateareAsaratera ef fF aaa 
aad fat) car aaakwensrenifanrazemi aa 
aie sar qed waka, wd aastanagerers alameda er | 


[49] Tetiakierraansss a7 BORA Be 
qatar: ae: aedacrasaagorae sf Aq 


M, catftaaaat 

M,,,, A, om. J 

M, AaeaATAT 

P 4a4—for Ta. 

P M,,, sfanlcafar 

A, Sal 

M, at aati 

M, om. sarane 

P quageana, aastara 
M, “xuata? 

P °feaa? 

M, T cat? 

PM, atatryraa’—A, atvaTy’ 


ome oe) a Os Ne 


— 
No SY gee ae 


105 


qo 


a4 


106 


Go 


J. A.B. VAN BUITENEN 


Ga A THAT TH BATT: Fe waresaast SATNTL FAHA | 
preerdearraaara | greet saafesarfaa Faq) wea era: | THI 
aaa Aad faardadin geal Aaa seat | aa Faqe- 
eared FAEIegeeaMeaare Satie 
Md: WMwAsaTsA agetas earfefa aaah wd 
Aaa: | sakhagaea wreafsaartaoaaaast Saas | 


[go] aarfgearrsa “Sate zt Sq) armarsf afe ade 
THA | Pa Set Wass ees aa: | aaa g 
Taeatat + afer: | aga ffsedaaannfeaera goo: 
gtaarfedt watt | ara 3 geage | 


[a¢] aft tae dig fraritaa fezara deadiae | 


qe defeat af ae afaaaa: | aftaad aff dea a ara ef | 
vaftaene saree Sue fF calea greagarsagiaa Fes: | 


PM, “Rte: 

M, °HeqHeat® 

M, taaiztt—aA, °datata 

PM, °g:faraq 

M, om. aft 

P °agalaar’ 

T wea 

M, “atfiraa: 

PM, “alate 

P. om. Safar: +: wea fata: 
PM, “Aaa° for “yaa? 

T 44 Fag: 

A, T, insert 4tgat f& 

P Fetg for Tis 

M,,,. add TH aga TAT and TA Maaaal wea: 
M, om, 41% aaftaq—P om, 4 


—- 
ee ey A 


5 eee eel el | 
DAAROK 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


oN 


[82] Sera aay RTA AraTa zfl Aq) ardsosa 
wae aft as greet agmasag: | aca a ordeal asia 
faa sega: wa arash ra scatter ca | sreareaeqdera- 
TH At: THRs waa ws waa 
TATA TA A GIA aay THieaaraeafaaerls TaaareHy | 


[a2] arsafafe af: sareraraaalt edie afeaa| ota a 
Massa aga Ae squad | aaa wa aegay fralala saereahe- 
aa: | aa aga Haswaened: Sea a ddeqad | aa daa agar 
Ae: AA AaaTteTa Hale | 

[ae] Sa wa aearre seat a Reardtarfeatar free: | 
Taide age: sear aaaela deena: 
qari Faatdars | seraftoradra Gears: | 


[a4] a: gficat fagegfiear aeatr a oft a ae ae oft 
ad a: sfetacay aaa tr gq areas: | & areal fasarea- 


P at for al? 

P M, add 791 aIAe—P, 7 HE—M, om. 4 
M, adds afé aa! GSt, om. 4 
P WaRt:—T saga: 

P M, om. 

M, “Stalaeraat 

PoM snl. 4+ 

A, “aga vata 

P aq a 

P M, add Ha 4 4 

M, om. lal: 

Pom, CF i— 

M, om, 4 eafees SET: 


SO Oo eee Pet ED Te 


eet 
Yo NY —& © 


107 


qe 


108 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aise TATAT ag aT A a STATA aAaS OTT SATEATAA- 

aeaga: | a: Teint dara afdt alt a afdt a Azerfe—ats- 

aed dare a amat a Aga aa dea ae: 

mt a wea Fe - UT aatareacrearaeagrear fear Ba caT area: | 
4 gf Gul aaa aaa ward zat oferasa | adres: fiers eee 

aaashraraette | sea: ae: area SAAT Gale | ART atara- 

Mead | dhe aa aa aa aad a aaa | aaa ofa 

vane | gamer Sftart wear qeeararaaafa | are are 

HRA a war ae eh Glad aaa | Peat Pearat Saaaaaraaay agai 
a0 ay feat arr) saraaasafeatie: | stat grasdtetefterfaearie- 

afadeerent:— 

mea at F ee F agaaes II 
afafrasad tq ara + Ft | 
| qa ase daa aad F eV: II 
94 BEATA Teha aataraatera: | 
ary ae ate dffaer 
ae: Bafa Zt F II 

CIEE ECO DCCC CEES CC Celt MM co Me 0 eee 
aaah aaasiktaraars ae aifor gf saz 
aa lanier aleniteira Gast arearadaht aes aan 


° 


RQ 


M, om. atait 

M, water? 

PA, “teeangrrary 
A, Weta 7 

M, aeqarr° 

M, saver aalt 


Dunk © Ww = 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
oa aaah: aarniacrigeds: eaartemat aarti. 
flat) arararfiawd “f& gar: Gear: cargagedarieeay | aa Wa- 
Rata Bea | aar  arafafa ararafiawd afeeata wraret 
aaa aa aaa | alata’ a Aaraararfavrsaa sfiat- 
raat aealt aarmamatead aaaIt aI | Zacy IAT aTAT- 
aiawreraan: Garrat A aT | 


[a8] wagth wala) aaanafrafeaderearaea fafa 
TITAS A Ge A aga: | aa Aas Bal Asa 
Ferma: eta was | Teac aaa ATTA ATT fea- 
a damn fafgeasraratearatate | 


[a9] aga dumetn saedreid sifigita 2 4 
FA | aarafafeer « qaeerearaaatey SHAT | 
FaI— FM VeMSeegTA = EBAT | AG A Wee: 
SIA TAIT aeaifaneey ze: | azar ast areca) aay 
Taka AAA ATI FA Sy aTATaTfa- 
SE at | 


. M,om. f 

P om. aa: 

P aaa aat°—M, A, om. I—A, fa AL TATA! 
PM, °Sat 

M, cetaat 

PM, A,., add aft Sa before 384d . 


— 


D wP WY DP 


7. M, “aaaRer° 


109 


Yo 


44 


116 


b ke) 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aaa AT “Sa Sf Aad zeaTTAa Saad 
AAC sa: Goafaatior aged alata: ta TAT, Aeadaa: gvarfa- 
ar ea oa Zarfeearfeadeot Aare Sree: arararfa- 
aoa fiat ZEA | 

[g¢] saat:—arfeat gor at get at a aarat: | aT eA 
faart off Raroaea ae agama aaaseearea darararfi- 
aad ofa oat | ae yaar wage sar hreafageard 
Taam aa aad eft fa: | wala BaEAe 
adel aa fae aaa aeragr ca) aaaiar ca 
doesecaifadiad eta aeararifiawata saad gH | aeaded Gaeta 
HASTA aaa TAT | 

[ge] oa: safiqermead aaa Parte er agar yaaa 
AAVetardeaenqaa saan Haat aa aerate 


M, aa 

P. om. @@ afa-"-' Ua 

M, &fet aera 

M, 2at Slat for taza 

PM, @agdt for Taeet 

M, srasaafats—_M, Feat FAT for Goma ter 

P gufaydaraedat eq eare°—M, eae zenfe 
AUT Rot ATAT° 

T sey at Dut at 

9 M, fafad for afar 

10. allexcept M, T read qe5s24 

11, M, T aaeqfe® 

12. P “fexqracear® 

13. M, °aasarfe® 

14, P a4 #H—P M, om. aft 


I DAP wD = 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


aU at fia waldafara aatarmqoaaa | 
aed aaa ae Preae: TAaTEIAaT aera 
HATHA | 

[vo] ag a ae Fam: etn afore ‘ffaaraiaaa- 
sheararcags Pata) sata ofaaesrarsnreaatara 
aa aaa aa AIA AST aaa  Hfsarlsay | 
SMa FT ARoaTIaAT | Haag | 

[92] eatzad—astaes segeeror array | | aaa 
fascinates ae aafieara ara eft feat | arts 
aReva sSarranmargeaa dasa sortase 4 
anaala eres Aa-sarfarewad aAgqIwead WanaaTa- 
RAAF Aas: | 


[oR] war sadwerrfear Bfaft: sfearfear— 
aaaat aaueecot adh oat aaaedh aeaTA | 
aay A FIAMSald TAA BATA: | 


M, A,.,. AAMAS 

P Wwe 

M, eater 

M, T fafearcfreqaata’ —T°osafrata® 

P °sfaata? 

A, afr eaaa A, MAASTVEa TAT 
P, om. a ftorrarereeaey: + seers Ma] afore? 
M,., “TA—P. om, AA Carat ; 
P M, aeacata° 

A, HHaegrTa? 

A, “safesfarafeatt— 

P M, om. BBAeeeeevars seq; 


SE) ICES. GE et eel il Bada 


— — 
yr 


111 


qo 


14 


112 


J, A.B. VAN BUITENEN 


efi safagerrstad seat | sera asd feataafterear 
Aaa des: Ara I cad ara g atarafa safata wet 
frarrerafafe a aetafa) alereaadt at aft aaa a | 
wafia vala— 


ZOEaT | 


gata get “sa fagaardt carafe | 
arta qoiata Ae safterars tI 
afiaitsaey arg: @ aa afeea | 
went sda AF frat cafe 1 


—anaftaaeat sata fate A arg | 


fata wernel aad aaa se II 
ald earnaeey ash ga: Fa: | 
aaa Ta: Gad SRA II 


[98] Gt a vaddlawtkardaheeds arena 
Ms TaRRIS TT: | TeTTSaISA aaa gers 
area: | waeatgenreroratt aay wary || aaTE— 


— — 
—_ © 
e . 


NS ASA at a a ale gi atl Bg 


P M, add gurfen—aA,., add ahaaatadifa 4 
PM, afaaa 


M, om. afa 4q—M, om. &fa 

M, T om. walt 

M; om. aa 

M, A, Tom: line 12; 

M, zalfeat 

PA,., Ta ata 

T prints [safe] asetsft [sea] 

P M, add °9t aHa—A, CAT ETAIE—M,., gE 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
aaa AURA FEI: IS UT | 
a Uy aaa aaa RAAT II 
efi wa: dafisnrdfird cara sarerereekt Pere: carat 
aaa: | tata slasareifiad oearaft 3 seareaasia ad 
ATS: TA fara faa: aaaeaRTa: aeaeT Ta | 
[ese] aaa aft areorder gar wate aqqarasrenrataettsta 
a Caf arias wasefires aafi | aed arenfearnae- 
CARMIATH ASIAN FA ATOR, STATA A Tea: | ATA 
SMPTE aa alae, AaRMTTEeTA Ta 
wa: BeRgead | wih ATA TAT — 
STATA: BOT BTA: | Sha 
[o4] aardtacivaeaaesafageratta:  —- Tea aAAHIT- 
fafrecafeid carat seat aded | Sflarerarfareatqorgreqad | 


a tauqpafagest Fanqearfesataaonatarront sharers 


qaarerarittr sarah sea adea | aeneaael Prafageaa: TATH- 
MAA THEA TATA dea GA ATAHT: ASAT: | 


M, om. °safa° 

P M, om. ta—A, Bag 

P M, om. 4 

T ara: 

P M,., “aeatsti 

PM,., TEU ST 

M, Aj-g- OM. EY oreo FANT 


Soe tie TER cot Shedd ate 


SGeE 
vgn 
So 9 9 
A ae 
a 4 " 
Nas 
° 
| 
< 
mP 
e 


113° 


a4 


114. 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN. 


[oa] wate aration: vafraaetarrerrar feaegiat- 
maa: Sahara” | aaa faegear afica s—areirtereat 
aaa fara sac a - ayaa cerca: are 
fafa dread | vada & sfarea: eaiedaea: | wala WaT: aa 
mat AST | 

fee] dare afeinm: - af Sar aaaaraafea at Far aaa wa 
AA | wae aeatarae vada: | ca Sar ae 
fafae:, dea aed 4 fasta Sar genie) ear gaat | cargcaratar- 


aificenrmar fia ata ad aaa vaca a4 


qo 


faradiet: | dar a terftrart staif— 
aa: BH aaarat feet aa arat | 
area f& Tae: afcET | 
BTA BI Ta TAT AT RAAA | 
Feat aaeda Fa: | 


M, A, om. 4 

M, faatsofaatnta: for fraegiaieqa: 

P M, cm. 4 

P M, dittography of @qqaI—-P M,., om. 7 after Aaa" 
M, 3#lt: for AAT: 

M, ag 

all om. 3f@ 

A, 4-44: for ae; 

P. om, F fasta fea ag 

M, fafaze for fifaza 


oe fF nN HA FY N = 


S 


-VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 115 


cardi watt “fe aaa aardrafafreaaatfiomtarsag | ea1- 
cfrarfeaer saat ata Sfetarerargafaea are caraearottia: fe ate | 
qa 4A ara Ta:— 

sarfsart aasracfiararofaars | 

cara rary ard Jet WA II 4 
| wet: Serecataaar saat sarfaart faeaea—eofata sera: 
HMAAMA ATH TeTTATea AAs cars Tena 
eet: — ar: sift: — erties: anacwafeorcs:, Perea 
TIAL ATAHST FAT: | 

wat aaeeafa aredrser TeTTAAA | a 

Sea WL ATA TT AAT I! 
gf | ch—Aar zed: | saber wea aa: ade Fafa aal- 
aaa sfearaearaaa: wear ft araameecaae aaa 
Wada: | ww A Aa 


M, om. fe—A, 3 for f& 
P M, A, aaadte? 
P M, om. varaert 
PM, A,., T. om. le 


P om. safaatt 


0 Oo NDA WH BB WH 
< 
° 
8 
4 
= 
4 
= 
q 


M, safeagea 
PM, aff weq:—T. om. aff 


= — 
— 
Sry gees 


116 


qo 


a4 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ay aster MaearAOTaeAATA | 

amare fea ante FU 
af | figeamergaemifeecreraet dared ua arr 
sam wala | 

[ee] wt wereeay — sara: eardshrartea- 

FORA: Ged: TART era eareraHA RNa AATTAT:, HATLR- 
eradaatatacey os faeredtdcal fraser areata 
wera sacs: arrears sfirad | | taaT 
dae Tasha asad gif aed qaadat earfeae- 
‘eager ast ari sfaa, wat aera was 
aaa Aaa, wT aT SaelaaeaaaaaT TSA 
frretarrchteareta feta heer een ea TOT As TTA a RR 


STA MAEM TANT, ATTN ATG TeaTIa feraTaafet TeTTOe | 


[ss] aar— 
fala WATAATAT ATARATSAS: | 
TAA Tal THdet A ATTA: | 


eft caladeincreararnaea sal sea: | sarsrafaacha 
Shad Tat SAHA | 


A, om. wate 

M, om. “ara? 

M, “ARG for “Ag 

P om. FAT SAT 

A, Uai for vast 

M, wraesfaafa A, TCT 

P “faasieta [aataor ss Saegsra] Tat 
M,., A, “3184 for x4 —M, om. Sarr? 
M, nae? for “Tq? 


sage ety Pid DAR age Pia ond mom 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 117 


faarfaados arent wh efeat | 
af Sa aq a ofica: anafira: | 


281 tafteaquenenatdazea: wertadt afeisi 3 
qftsar: | TamaHfaeaa geese TATA TATE TAATA- 
AAT GATATHIe GRAedifa aaahaar saw | afeeare— 4 


Z24 ofa: at Att ars fad a 
Ratt fe at aa carseat t fea: 


fi | faaii—tafiafatareeiendsded aetorafted aera 
arg Matreagraraaa aaa: | 


[co] aera waxsrdatea afarsa atarne4 ye 
q datatt: wearers 3 atenteraty 
sfaarad eft Taras | 


[ee] Sat aor gore am art ewer | 
maa A aed aaa ated F 11 


all except P A, om. 2ft 
M, A,., om. this line. 
P M, om. &ftt | 
P adds “safafaafa°—M, adds °asfacitorafaate® 
P M,., eater? 


Eee ee ow UN ee 2 Nr 


T °gueniieg 


~118 


¥e 


— J. A. B. VAN’ BUITENEN 
gf carat: THE Raaatdaienreaara araerafaraur 
aT Fah Aas | Aa: Gear eT faa serfeafater | 

ma aafad aa sTCTHALAAT | 

meant aatarht a ae “Aeaafea: | 

qa acer Faris ea H ATA II 
eff adaharmeaaaReae | dare— 

feaefic aeavctiae fexat aT | 
ti—sadaPeaneiaed eager set at adaeta 
oar Boras fares: fea 


sefaee: | afeeare— 


waa aft AAT ATA Ola AAT | 

afar wait ea aa fearela Il 
a’ | safagats wa afaRafahegacract ils TIZIT 
fife ARs srearararedat wa | Td aetiedig g + gated 


M, wast — 

P om. S%i—M, om. wafa 
A, om. “stif@°-—T garfafa: 
P ag aaqay 


P aaife for ate 
M, vaiatt 
. M, om. staat 
P “sry 44—M, svaleata 
10. PM,om, aff 
11. M, Smaart a: 
12, Pw ag aen—M, eagrita— 
13. M,., A,om. J 


©oONINA NF WH = 
ae) 
°o 
3 
4 
ai 
ap 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA~ 


Tae Het ssa est aarctarafeadrsls aaaafaenrfeerar-- 
GATRATTONIT: AAA: TATA: FeaTTAT areraviy freee 


ad fedacdara: petlagememdan: dzaigacataer: wa aria 
a aq fied geri wa aeaat wa aafereafitta ca 
carfaed | | 


[¢2] saeatita narrate aca CRATE 


aera waren; fsuraraeit: wade fq ged) aaa 


qua: aaghsidiaa wea waafraeaea fafa 


eral Taare Ft eshte aeqarrararizira- 
faecal 7 FHA: | AaTh— 

AHA: CANTATA AAA TAT: | 

HANSA AATACT BAA ATaMHa: II 

wafea aaet Ae Tas aarcorar tl Zfa 


waawh wai—eataraisediat aaatarat aa ea aha 


migaardiarareastita 7 frag gar serait afgasrdtatias 


_M, afar | 
| M, A, om. arm: mel 
" PM,., taste? 

A, om. aqeaige ee gelat 

P M, om. @alaraatt:—M, A, “ata 

P aqqad for + aa ee 

T aeaaet 

M, afreaaattat: 

A, afrectetat 

A, °RR% for Carat | 

M, om. gii— 

M, om. Wae—M, Taasfe waar’. 


oe IAW YN 


a a 
SL eed 


» 


4 


120 


Ge 


44% 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


marrorantaesn ead, wad seach? waft ada 
aang aafata | sat faoraccarftegch aaa: | dere — 

WTSAHETA ST AT ATA: | 

Aaa Aaa HOOT STA: II 
afd | 

[¢2]  ataararfarcasfatrareatadaceneaattaareaa- 

Raq aa &—saroneacraftearsh raaftorarteraca freer fa feret a fB- 
seat aenttstatear: geen acha—fad Reet fara fatoart 
foes fifa aed ferrfierfear: | fat arraed wale are ace- 
sftaufe | ae arifta feaa—aat: a aaa 4 ze ara Teafa— 
wy wa wad —dae ea & Aofaerear arara- 
fant: afta aad 4aa:| a: eat: aad—aa aaa aT: 
waiter wart frre fit arr Serhraaar—as fa SR faa: 
genai—areaten | ft fasafatar fisaeisiiare: aaa: 
wedaed gf aaa taaand eat ofafier Axaanear- 
Da Tata Va TTR ATTA ATT Tea 
gat | a4 aad wa aserfi—taeaig wi—um: wager 


M, A,., om. U4 

M, om. aa 

M,., “AaTtT 

P °sareate® 

PM, A,., om, TAT ee AE 
P om. Shara, eeeree eer fet 

M, wera 

M,., T. om, 3aat 


Se eee OS a 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


fan sama seas sara ofc aed a alana srr) 


waar Start a Aaa As Aftare a aeaT— sara TST: 
asafi—afa faertat—atrad fraaegi—arfacont wea Heat GF 
Saat Tet FT Sad—ages aaft aera cenlsar aa; aaeaeAa AI 
ea hracaflared aT Aa: aI rat Wes Aas Har | Sed: Tw: ATT 
Saat Fale — ey a Ta: ae wee atta: TER 
qe as: athens aereas alti—aenat ati—ae zag: atk— 
ferent Tae aaatiwa ase saat waa ade azafa 
parte | 

[22] aaa aaa aeaafterna aa date 
an aretiay | afd 3—atersar: cetera sear: | 
Reloararar adage crater: | TATA aaa ae: 
aa cata aa Baad afeafs aterwaar waren aaarafeae- 
fafa atta) ara feanaraaardaaaeaonroTaa te 


A, Tadd #144 Aa: 
all except A, T om. aad RraAzay 


Pom, 7a aa: welfare 

M, A, om. gulfe 

M, om. Farat At,—adds gale 

T afae 

A, T aaa 

M, T “feta 

T vata 

M, Saas TE 

P M, A, om. @a° before #eat°—P A, om, ator? 
P om, “Auta” 


wo onan vA fF Ww NY 
s . . e . e . . . 


— = 
Vee So 


121- 


§e 


122 


4¥o 


J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


TAIT aAes gieaq | waraeaaraarle a 
TAMTIT CARIN AT Tiara aaah, aatareer aatertafeata- 
mega fara fifa cies wa aa; aaa 
TU aeeITA a SIH Resale sate a aaaeATeAaT- 
fea | Crate aera AAT faa eae SAAT: | 

[es] TH a GaAT aT AAT aT MAHA aT Aaledae: ASAT: 
aafaa waft | aaa “Aad aafsag | adalat Goat aaat- 
qatar: aafsa: | tata aa ardataehagegrent ararcarafera- 


ffi “saad | afaaasaaae a aeaaacanadara 
Wz; aataa: | 


[¢8] ag 4 aranfa Aakal ce aaea iaaasiada qa 
THIS Tat | Fae) Ta Halt | var qE- 
MaTaad ar Aa aeaaifot gq aa: YaacasraTeay- 


P “qiit—om, 4 aaeqeeqa 
M, eared faarag 

PM, sqnieay for sarfiaq 
M, om. 4<° 


M, om. GHA a feray 

M,., A, om, “aeg? 

M, adds Barvteal aafaat 

M, om, “taal” 

M, adds fat raat fata ott AIR [sic] 
P om, WW upto TIF? 

M, 30% for Sate —geat for Heat 

M, garaaa® 


ee a ae 
ae, 
S 
oO 
4 
zs 
4 


S- —=|- —_—|= _| 
ee 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 123 


eda TATHAT SBISTAaAa carafe Raga w- 
WTAMAAATTAT | 


[co] tararafatrareaararamaennlatara tergareaatata 
Al | PAIN TaesaeoreaaERld Hea wal | 


Uda waa | gFalegewfars aafaysa aarfasy fatal 


gia | waafatra eff Aq) aeqaiffetonafeaa we sar: aéaa4 
TERS aaa aft aetafeaat | ata sracafata 
awa Tae fia: | tralian ware fifaedr- 
tear Cada TA: TRA: 
asia eae aaa fsa seas: qasaanewh: | War art Aftare ae 
aaa Ae west TE aad fara: 
ea:, deEsaeaanentRoagaaceacarieaea aad 
varanasi WATATTeAT Ae aeTe: 


ee 
oP = Ss 


Co NDA PR wY HD 


M, zaatsatera 

M, adds sfa teraaeada maaan Ba 
P om. faaa af 

M, °feaarea® 

A, Sarat: SHIT, 

M, arafata 

M,., A, T a4: for fara: 

M, “aasit°—Paat sqafeaatqcar? 
M, “24° for ata? 

M, saealac 

P M, add 41444 A—P om. WA 
A, “Fae for “STG 

T aay 


124 


Jeo 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ar, waisted eet | arate ieetar- 
FIAT Wa Fafa Teas: |) 


[¢¢] wanda agar aa amt apmeorita: netiea- 
Rigen Garay | Tah TRA GAT TTAATAA A | ASAT 
a sferacin ferfiaed aaa - aafi afadr a faacad que aera 
AwraaTAa Fact Asa ef aarfi ayota Saar greaa efa | afar: - 
afgeane: | a fgacad got aaeraaad@—aveaurcranfeaeara- 
Toot Saari salt cetharhes za afaa a Ra aaa 
tad Had-eaeesasaraneseaes Ha PaSqaayT 
Rfassmearnaaar Tae tar aega: aearsaiea cares 
dorfafarwararead | sa: agua aa aarft oreafafe afeereexfeaar- 
fara Ta: | 


1. P tara CF 

2. PM,., A, gos 

Son Ae ey OTe afar: 

4. PM, @fasr? 

5. M, interpolates afaaifas: afadt—P M, frapaaortet sag 


3 [sra° in 7. 
P om. Tal up to “Fat 


6 
7. M, 4a—M, A, om. ae 
8. PM, om. BATS 

9. M, att 

10. M, aaa 

11. = T gota 

12. PM, ager 

13. M, A, “gor? 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


[¢9] Fa 4 ade Sed: TeTTaaT afar a aa AA | 
ud 7 ofa ffaeareamafiant 4 cad | a: age safest: 
a Ud gaia gale aes: | a aT ead) aafacsafaTd 
wae fea: cara areas ae aaftaad sea | dara aad-oy 
wa arg aa areata ¢ aay sae sfaiale | wr carers ae areata 
a and fatadifa | erage agers 3 | 


[Qo] waread - ata Saami feokear: safeerfrart 
cafe wa safifasfioftet ameta daa afaeoa aaa 
ward: seared a fant gaeaiftearafeaa: dearaarfta- 
afte: assaf ata ged | wa galore: ceaardta 
Med | Ad: AAI | erage: ansad g attra 4 
AAMT | A Ta BIA faarsarsHKey Taaed ofa sta: ata aaa 
Rea ea HATeAM Taal | a: gaelars Hifaaet cadet 
mii ats zaraatla FIA Tag Male waa | wT aT — 

at aaazerat asrat fifa | 
aarfa afeart a a argrartea ¢ It 


Paw fen 
M, A, Tom, aM, read yat F 
P °ainarfeaa? 

M, om. ferafa° 

M, Wars TZ? 

M, om. a4—M, sfareat aasa° 
M, aalaarer: 

T mH 

M, om. “fasa—P “arerfarry 
T afaaatg® 

T atfaarasata® 


Con se oes Snes sy bo ee 


— — 
= © 
° : 


125 


Go 


44 


126 


14 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 
UAT UAACARAST AA: | 
AMAA AAT ATAAT II 


UME (eI: BURA ATTA | 
farranaaaararadcaa arfay tl fa | 


[92] ast caer: geiraay facteraqadaaefonsrsaiy- 
TaATIRR: Wyeast FarsTalssay- 
cafe caren imaareaaT Tea Aa a HCE SATA ATA - 
SIGUE CIC GIOVE Com UI CE GECCe Ca CCC nite 
framatdetatteahertoe AACE AOTC SATS ATA 
ea HHT RATATAT TL TER aA AIT TAT ATT - 
AT festa Te HTS eA TAT TS fe aa TTA Ta AT 
EATS TET TAS ATO TATA TO | aah Taqettaeazar- 
araie: Saar afiaarrcnranararaRearres Zhe | UAT. 
PATRAS: | SIT A ata: | 


fiat wat a adr az 
afta ag dial aaa II 


A, aa 

M, saeettaara? 

M,., A, “taanf? 

M, om. “g89°—P M, A, om. °atcfaeq® 
M, “waa” 

PM, A,., T om. “azaa® 

P A, om. “f° 

M, om, “aTaz® 


me i A a a ole a a 


P M, om. “aT: 
M, A, wamerat® 


— 
S 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


git | carftarteds Raat Gait alert Parreta a 
aimed araead | aa A 


AT ASH FAR AM EMA ATAA: | 
qafiaafasra dd waafaear tI 


eft | aaa fagrad gz safe area: ce waa fat | a owt fae 
wared wafea | wafiarerfe oe) a are a aeat aq wa Ag ae 
wadlanfa | Aaaeieoea eartarfiteasy | fafeearfaaes cearfesareatc | 
dea ead gat farafe—ararear cada Seay a Pea a sear 
Fat | waar aya aad wae ae Raya a arfifa fe 
MUTA AAa Sad + tas Aca a Haas Fase Afisara | 


[<2] wash wala - asd gagdarafafeadarereararte ar 
qal aa aaa “Aeafiaraar ffaatat aga da wad a: 
ger eta | aah wTaaT — 
| THT: TR: TA AAA SHIVA | 
WIA SAAT ARTSTAAAATSTT | 
We Fe A Arad AE A TAT I 
aaa arafasrarfa arareaaarhe aaa: | 
aat at avatar sre feat aearaea II 


T °qaeqr? 

M, A,., T om. Fee ee qt az 
P om. “als 

Tadaq 

M, sfereat? 

T aaafaae 

T Wage: 


cee oe 6 fe 


127 


45 


128 


+4 


J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


eft) daacdt at aa wa afendy feed zee: | cafenett faeieera- 
Raa sRoRAEAaT Tafa | aT Ta Sa TOT 
aoftar wadifa da wad eff saa: | waifraarengmaareraras: 
imeeVlaaaEsTelaaT = Tt] | aa ATACT 
TA — 

ANAT AAA FHIT IW: FATA | 

COTTA TA AAA TTT: I 
eff | fifaeaiqaroraramassadit: Rae: Fea: BAAS wa 

aati: fate aa raft aa II 

ma: safari Aa aad aaz | 

aaHoy aa fate faeafa area: 
gfe | aairftananftaaactaery oe | 

[93] ‘ararmegafieqetarniaareRoaefatiahreaftadtaga - 

TATA AMAA fa eae aa SA TM: | AAT ATA 
TTATITAenaermskoy aaa sarees: aE 
ie: | Aaraehaaratt quasar Te aaa 


M, om. aza-at 

T wa: 

M,A, T taat° for “aaear® 

P caTaaafeaa—M, “Fay 

P amagt°—M, waar?’ —T ataraqa® 
P M, “afas° 

M,., A, “Taafamafere® 

P M, om, °ag° 

M, om. ary? 

M, A,., fracafaret 


Pr rr AAR wD = 


— 
= 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


AT ATA: PA AA BAT FETA: | 
ware fener: Fa ater ar: Brat: I 


efa| wera aata Iai araer queda sea 
aE CHIDEIOI GICLEE (oP ral 
(<?] aah ae 
GaN: ATRARIAA UAARATAARAT | 
eft | atfisenen: datot: aera: heater: aRregrar 
Sit Beqarssa GACT ATA ATSTS ITA A AAR TTT- 
Rwy earfeyaaa sao faa sft ArHa— 


afeeret F Fah GeoT AAT IAT | 
TA TA FT Mees aeTSIT aA [I 


sft) fags 


aa: Rarer are TAA Tae | 
UIA A Aes Aaviy faz: I 


afeaay A Hedy AreTeaais ee: | 
ccaa anriftar afieata at ae II 
COU AE: | rr | 


T aenefae 

P adds aqay: 

M, om. Sat: 

M, om. Ag 

M, om. 4 

T arfeaseay 

M, faaedt for after 

A, T add fagorg afeatg 4 


Sea oy SS SO 


129 


qe 


130: J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


gare | wae wala - aifaasargeorantt tafe aaaien 
Safas: Sehr: | wt wTzaT— 
— @ aafta afteat ar fafa fag at ga: | 
ad safisah ati: areata: 1 

aft | ar menot faearfa gaat & Agia ofeoirfa ae eft aa: | manirsfi 
waa Waa AT Aa Wad | araracqerg afeaey aria 
gor ae rear at oeeaefaars af arfeaaresata geet 
me ders guofmaad aia aaorfatatata 
fasraa fet | 


40 aadiat Ha Fy aTada A 


Ss 


RAAT Wa TA SA Ta zy | 
Gaaalel AqaT AAATSATAAA = II 


ata a fafa a arate aaa | 

aed Aral ay aft gfe: at et artery 
94 AMT THA HT ATH FT | 
waar she: at aa asta I 
sent aaa ar Acad aAATaAT | 
aamieaniaia ats: ar at aad || 


afd | 
Qo SARITA aT: MATAR alfeT geroTAS SROTETAT: | 
qa A 
TAT FI Ga za: | 
r UE: Vara wT: fFaraz: | 
lt | 


1, T arama 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 131 


(<4) sale acaratig wenhesy afi Aq) ae 
famrafara: Gaaare: | sat Ad fegaqeee-siot safe ae arora 
qed Tala were arlidad savlast aafad, wafers at 
caged, + Hei, HO I s:, aera: Gea: ATA a 
Tare Tae farreraracia + sarrsfta wfaad- sat ca eet RA y 
feaetreaad got Gein aay - aay ata azarae a CaRacsaea 
wafed, AIC Tararfiafeqa— 

aalaaaisia: AAATSTA: | 
Tea F Tateeaata: fea: | 


yet daea fear a afta aa aafeea wa Haz: | 40 
qaat aufiga oat a aeMaesAT Feat 


carte aera: at wats a gata ofaarfed, dare sorafaara: | 
[28] Saetaa— 


qafaaemaraaeararsatear: | 
Aa: ABT Efe ses ATT | a4 


M, SAT for SI—A, Soa for AT 
PM, aaled, A, aad 
P M, om. aga-4 


Row Noe 


PM, A,., om. 4 FITI—M, om. A—M, reads AHIR for 4 
AIT 

M, om. #4 salatsfea 

M, om. FEIT 

M, om, SS 

A, om, Seprees tater 

M, om. 4 a 

10, P R4aeIy 


Om ID 


132 


go 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


TATA Fd: - Fat ar sari aarft sad, “Aa svar sfatea, 
aorta, aeiarea asa siseniart saad | 7a 
Teas | ae aaa retleaarigdiafata 
MATA APIs KAKO aesect Hales 
TAMA | Bataet:—aa at zeaaaay aredifefa avarde Aaeeca 
sfanfea: | ada aesecaifafed atearaa) aataeieaar arated 
STAT aT gave wa ardiarafeaa fea asescraiaahea 
PT | AMT A AIR Ua eA ATA ards aa AAT AR 
ararafael + agate apararieamarorarfat: aeeateran warfrdtiaa 
afa fiafiad | 


[99] aaa: wae aaa aaediere—Saws a fda a wat 
ghd | oa al Faq aa aA wea: || a den fase 


P om, a 

M, “Seqqcrarcare 

M, om. °smraraat fia? 

PM, afaiei—m, afar 

P om, Fel alreereeeeora ay | 

A, om. AAASTAT 

M, T ‘aifafed 

A, om, T4I—M, adds aeaaeta aieat al 
M, om. ale 


ee ae ee on ge 


10. M, A, om. aa 4 


Its Apom: ta") 8 “faat°—M,,., Tom, @ aaa and add 


12. M, A, om. °attey® 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


ee a aga ate made, ear adi oaaaritand a 
wt fagwared waedifa aan sfc, 4 aeaat sala 
qareat “feaft 4 faaa ef a ofaftes, aga: dad wal caerfata 
‘Aaa Ta | ase meet dad wala deaea a 
aay Tafa araata | 


[.¢] saat arraoraars sofa: | aeeaftt cafes a 
war a fata: Sa: drsav: aa: aufefa adaramg werfanaatra- 
ae RATATAT fF: RATATAT ATA SRTATS TT ATTEN 
wa sgsa dalfafime aa aaa afar aeauat aera 
a afar sakreaeiraraarranrcan ata a sfaaeay | zt a 
are Hamaacashraannaafataacast a feed | 


[90] aftararat sfiatee aaerarearatarae sar araar- 
vag aafaarcnfa oeerfesoenfe fafiad | aa: st aafa ae 
RUA Te aa TATA as at fades 
ata waa aden atta nae art eae 


[goo] ofa fata a at safe’ a aaa aac 
ofaqrar | aa wa aaedca: atar: ayaa a ef arraea 


. OM, fataefi—Aa, T om. 4 


1 

2. PM, aaa TaTai—M, aaTaaTia 
3, P aeat and adds wales Wy" 

4. Pom. @ fata: qa 

5. M, °atlare® 

6. M, A, 395 

7. PM, add ae aalanat aacarat 


8, Pom. sfanet?:-aaemeat-M, Caanfaatea°-M, om. °CH° 
9, M,A, add Wa°—M,., WHA 
10. A, T om, aft 4 


133 


44 


134 


q4 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


qa ayes ead fadiad | wa a cee FT J 
aq eff aterstaradaaretasearaga | aa aT 
De CU Cece RC OPUBICCICR CoCMmn (CURE ICT 
wa sfarata apireaicattaerdt arora Sa fata a gerd | 


[202] waft aay acaefien genase dad oda 
ce salt aerate araeafea faPrararefiar a sararsita afd 
maar - waracafenfaalt ot afta Saft sar gevatiia we 
arediedt: | aofard - qaqa | cared - waaay) | aaearfta- 
waa Feared caer a aredleas: | aerar- 
oftar + sararsfea afafafa genaeaea sett sare fafvatata aer- 
TRA We A Aad ela Vw | 


[202] ae aa: | ae cement ata fafe- 
arfergafa ara: oar fadsaaafa yevqrersaaegat aerate 
wera Ft afta. aarat arate fafad get gett aa 
adda dara sfaeaq | ad: geraradararat adr agaeat 
gered Tareas a cageeras wales, A satarfiahhe 


M, “alea 
T eaqeafafa°—o, aacaaea 
P M, A, Ita 
A, om. ataegt 
M, aeatfa 
M, “fiat 
M, adds HOUNARA. FAAS 
- M, adds. ay TeyS 
A, om. Ug . 
P. M,., add Java aaeala, 


— 
2 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
qerdareasaceaa aeavaaed wart atanywdeds | aearena- 
Tanftarat feat) gereia safes frageafaa xtrad 
Raa gatiearfear arava | ger wa frasatitaa gaara aalt— 
Med FHT: Gea Faas fa | Sea ae a aa wahea wy 
hae cafe aa Az | ) 


[2°38] faa a aeat aaate femaaratiadraaea yeqar- 
NUMA Taser satis saHaTaeaT=a- 
aa Hea Tiaares arVStl aA aa A TATA | Se: 
qa tases sala: sora See: | sae St sefatare: | orate 
aq: aaa aia da: | soarstanrefaarera: arHaranrt Sa: | 
TA OTT HATTA F: WY area: a tq Hear zfs aaa sasaHla- 
 GICICIRZ REC CIC CIGECARC CIC Um A to Aa DB 
aT — 

BE BAA WT: WA: TSI | 
AT: Wat Teafaraalet TAT UI 
HATOTARTT STA cesses eee l 


M, 2auqa” 

M, om, Wad 

T afafer 

M, waatzaae 

M, om. St: 

P M, om. 4 

M, om. Hat: 874° 

P M, om. sft 

PM, om. ART 

M, om. 

A, “Tae M, “HSI 
A,om. A7TaaT 


pe aESN ES Semmes pt 


= = ee 
pote aS 


34 


136 


Zo 


94 


J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


eff | ot efd aad a ad: | aaret taal arta a 1 araerTaRaTaTe 
rata areas seals 4 GET | adr qevisaRaT aaa aaa - 
SHAT ATA Wa Hear ela FSA | 


[oe] aaa weet tafife Facarafeeresfarater 
ATA Gat SaaS Hoa | era ofaarieata waa 
ey aaareag Halt weca dad acawaraa eft aeaeea Wee 
qaeaateh aaa feta | ataat aa aPrearareaccaaratata 
prcaarad Kas: | afratattssars erRarleqeaaar aera 
amfanaad | afarramiaeda 1 aafitatatea aarerroeaat 
qT way | agakearaikara aaah get gost aaa qeu- 
Sfraruameataeadecdey aga faftarfaaafearnaraeca 
WTA Wea dat: caraeerseea Hf | 
FTI WHAM FRIST ATR: GAS AATST- 
AUGUSTA Fad salsa aS waa 
He are | 


M, & if A—P M, om. 4 before afa:—PM, read ac: 
A, om. 4eat 

PM, om. “av? 

M, om. sofaaz 

M, “axasfangaag aay 
M, aay array 

A, aaea sit 

T weqanag 

PM, ata” 

10. PM, 7am 

li, M, om, ata” 

12. A, om. sfamaad yeqresre 
13. My Jearatel for FeqTeeqeg 
14. PM, A, aesmefaaa 


ee Tigh Su ME a al © Saas 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


[go%] aaa afetara oRerate | array - qetisieraad- 
wana: fe aaa fad aaeteea agra fafrarfaacafata arfea ararear aea- 
ATHMANAAUSSTA | AT | FATT ARTE 
AaAHAETT THUS aHeTEa ofa afeaearar: 
area sf aBAUStaecIMaieactaes §  fateahita 
quyeTaaaqereTes wafatareacaastattaeara aftr 
aaa sala aa ates | 


[208] tag wale - fe daa fad aarceafice are afe- 
dT Tt: GE Pag Varner ga fara 
ef oftart eff | aa a araaarara—afaaahta arearcer fe | 
araed Sf FIAT: | AIEATTCHATEAT TOT zea: | Cae wahi—acag- 
aerate Afaenegqaaeadls 1 aa dfraaaaeaaaate- 
aifaaaarsatcaaeores daancacte fattarfaacatata | aaTte— 
a A ZAM aEeta aan GIT erty AAT 
walle | 


M, om. f& qa SHIT 

P °areq® 

M, CoaramemogoTngT: [ees] sfefrare tera 
M, om. TAFT 


M,., TA for TA 
P M, afeaa 

P M, qaag 
PM, “aaatet 

M, [aaa] TeaTE 
M, ata 


Neo} own fon MN tk WwW NO — 
> 
(e) 
B 
A 
ga 
a 
a 
‘Y 


— — 
ec 
. e ° 


137 


44% 


138 


44 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


[Qo] 4: ga: ae Saarafiarean aaa facoieacaqz- 
TRAM RATA Te Ma: a aT Ta: 
Vea AISI ATTA FT: | ao Seat Sa TT 
aad Sia Wea, ITT Pasa sda: Wea AaNT 
eRe VSAM:, Fal a ACT Fay aTaaT ANTA- 
aT AVA TUSAeSSAae: | 


[go¢] afeyearaty aman wa waa ofaqaa ea 
Tava | Aaa Veo aaa sah aedrsearracat oa 
TATTAME HA Ae AA | AAeeaT qe aasaalals qaetit 
naar: sora: | air serzare— 


TATA A Taperatea: | 
Aa: wae Ba A ad aarad {I 


zat | aa ameraaea agen: | aera ade fiefgea 
AMT BT: TATA at Ter: aN gaara | 
aesemt wer: Teeter Gata | aa zzqeaa | 
aaa J Tala afcaRentarsetied arate aqatzer: 
TUT Wer: waa ale afeTaftaar | 


1, A, ise 

2. M, om. CAL BAT +s terevee ea (haplography) 

3. M, ataaaeis—gadt [eee] eAearaare: [sere] aie? 

4. M, °altraaay:—secunda manu “aaa tat 

5. A, om. “sat? 

6. M, “salt for “area 

7. M, interpolates q4qattor esa Ray | qaeasay Ta STITT 


afeaaaat fretrararequfanaparefagegac: 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 139 


sma qareeta mea A aaa st | aed a Aaeadare 
AM te TAE— 
TMA AA TA sex Saar: | 
ait | wee aaa at Sat waa areranirsearmaaratea Efe 
aor qaa— m 
FIAT ATaa Areata: | 
qareaeatesat a aA Hea: II 
sf | aaa— 
wal at quae SMTA BTAT | 
aaafaatearal afeedereareeat I 90 
aff | aeatrenaarafraaraataaaay aaa afiderareaaes: | 


[208] fafadrararated Fe sarc) Aaara Ta ey: | WATTS aa:— 
safia—ofaseeragnraeente acheter | ata ate 
ardizanaedaa—aead ag at saeefa—aa ad aaa ga order 
aaa feag:—aarategania weaa—ead tot ARR Raa: 94 
gene i—a qe Gara Tea aa aeeeT:—ae ararfa feta —aae aft 


M, om. Fe eeeoagita 

M, “afezat: secunda manu Ufxa": 

M,., A, om. 4 

P om, dat 

M, aaat 

M, “ata? 

PM, om. g¢ 

PM, read A@ a for T{—A, om. Te"""""" aaa fe 


wae oy SS Ny oS 


(140 


he 


4“ 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 
TEMA Wat Si aE Fa HEAT: a: aT 
waa faa careers araerars | 


[ego] serqig 7 atietresamartats waratea- 
Wad | wy AAKI— 


Ha; Bes aa WTAE | 

Feat a areata dar gfe favre II 
gta ys}— 

MUTA ATeTaTAeaeAy FATA | 
sate a 4afa— 

aya: fia tay aertarfa saa: | 

TSAISH VE ATARI SAA || 
eA 3) meatmaoranaase: ardadaaeazerariada 
qMMMaMAe ad F Guo TATE aa eft sasaTart 
saad | daar late aT facorr: TERTS RAAT 
TASeUT aR TTA aA | FIT aa— 


P weqq 

PM, “SeTSUTAT M, °SRTFT, secunda manu WAM 
P M, om. afa 

P M, #a 

A, 14—P M, aafet 

A, om. %94:"*""** aft a 

P afastta® 

M, om. 4 


Soe eee ie Nhe Te 


M, f% 45° secunda manu f%q¥—before eft 
M, om, Sqqqy 


— 
4 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 141 


Safa AAT SAlaT saeATAHRALaTTT | 
gears St TATE I 


CATA A SATA: WAAL: | 
facta a “aey Aaredy a lad Ul 


ihe ins 


eff | adagaaray aa: Tea: ATTA ala Fe: | AT AAT 
gfiy faenamaeiearnariaa saat ARTETRRAS For 
I — 

aszeare wg ag AAT aa STA | 

Ta WA AMT AeaTT afacata | 


qeqa A SW SAAAIATERA | 4° 
Haadiaa aa saacafa 7a a Il 


sft | we aa fafait sa 


fest: aarmagd arava a ferry 

feyaraatal sTarset STs a: II 

OR: TTT IAs TATA RAT: | a4 
A CUIC CEERI EMICCIOKEa 

sqaafarrat sforafssrh: | 

afaa: Ted TG a: aerate Haey II 

adaral aaa A qawAfa A aa: | 

aa: a aaeala fate: aaa 1 Qo 


—— 


1. M, ®a for aay 
2. M, om. °ag? 
3. M, afee 


142 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


dea wa faasaaaeas | 
raed a aa canara fez II 


RCCRCEEEGMIEZROciccE el 
TH Tere Feet a faz II 


4 a aaqarata fares sa adi: | 
slasher Tae ASAT ARTS II 


TATA AHISA aS: | 
SOME ATMAaSeE: ParaaraIseTSASAy | 


FIERA CUCIECIER CILMI FUME TICEe 
qo GU: WITT AHS A wa Hanes: aled waar |I 


a Saar cafsaufiedissrmereg: Taz: | 

GAA: AACA GAMA: TATA: || 

aad Ft aaart Bs Wt asta | 

aed ACA A AAT ATT SASHA || 
1 gf camden sea | 


[222] oral aatitr qeometactaraa Fa) seat a 
aTEAERTA | sala Resreaaararearcetta: | 


P M, aea 

M, 489d: 

M, A,., dalead 

M, Mage MS 

M, A, “at: for 9am: 
M, om. “fasta? — 
M, 3A for aq 

T wagon? 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
[ee] aafafi— 


aeaacanatt salen frat | 
a dat afd warts wa sara: I 


eft faafaard sfiad | Aadaa | wa wy sada eff aaréaeq dae 
waaersaaes faded | aa a ef gatata Aaorfe— 


ae] asia aad fay: Tea a ofa = | 

Seat Ard deal az AAT: II 
eft a agdaafad samt ex a dealt deri a anofafee ade 
RUINS: aes ari 
fad | Tame: qlee aaltcfrariartete frre | 
wa Tq eam Siow fraeaala Sead | aaenaradaeaa}— 

Geearaaal ART AAMT TA A | 

CAAA FSI ( ASNT | 

q uq wager faeay adrseaa: | 

UNH SAT TITHE || 


a UT Oy: FF waa a wa Teale | ead FT| 
rere eaafaaeraar aay awa: || aha | 


[223] aa aarifiawaige taffesqacee Fra 
PPA TAMER FAT: TIPU SAAST a wy AIA 
car fraredr aarsera eft aanarataat | a Ta aa: TEAePTaT facopta 
aq amfefa sfiara aararen frawdr adrsera eff taew: | adrar- 
arama feet aarsora ge: | anf tama 3 ete het | 


1. PM, add aafarnftra® 
2. M, om, fayfa®......saret? 
3. PM,., faaect 


143 


ah 


20 


144 


Jo 


hs! 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Tag Wald | aenerenfi we seni Paonia aaa 
fiaraaiara ear afer wa | waa aeava facor: | aTeAT- 
aataraaratenteaery aa SesTaa: 
qaiv: | atagerdat dearer eae aa: Tae TESA 
Afsana Seo aia wir tarferaaare eta A Wesel YATAA- 
sa GAT | Ser Sarfsetoraareeals a oredr Se eft AERA — 


A AaaTaeTAT SATS WATCH: | 


efa afanfta: | afia—asraara aga faraed—ae di: asrafra 
ata | wart aarcaratesaatt adcnataprsafartorred- 
ata aleaed Aaa | Se I Beat: Ba 
wats Besa aaa fcfaaasearet sarley 
AGTH FN Tad, Tata Yaad PRIMA 
gem arfa agasea fla-dlaaratea stadt: | 


[222] atafafaesnittrarisrsa = 4d:—salaa 
qfiqresragrraieaieda: saree: WAIST eI 


M, aaarete? 

P yaaa” 

M, “waarg® 

Mo; Ay, Onl. 4 

M, A, T “Sasra® 

PM, Safe FAL M, om, CATA. TASHA 

M, A, fart 

M, °ailagadt 

M, om. aga aif 

M, interpolates after 4:—3seq fafrafatradinatagerer wat 


yar seatfe agefa sfaatefad aatfa sctaseaafafe taken 
from Vedantadipa ad Br S. 1, 1, 1 ad finem. 


11, M, T zarfete: 


ea Re el a a 


— 
S 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 145 


Ps THe: AAA FISH ATI — ae: 
qed — eae ead —__satal—_aareaaaad—eaaa aa 
TASATATAT azaleas sa Gan: aaa facartes | 


[224] ara a aa— 


maudaraa: faaagfatar: sat: | 4 
aq wz aaslal ag Alaa II 
dat SA Aa 


gid Fa THAT | aA ae: TEI afgazer 
A AQT: 


waa TA AT: Ta Ga ATT: FHA: | Yo 
afgae: a gett orm gala ated I 


afa amfeans | aa a aes guat waratdiat daar 
WeTaMed aaa “fellas | 


[228] salt sfaema—ara wera fear 
Aaa TAT a) SETA Bete aTITTTA- a4 


1. M.,., T Ita 

M, Soaate7: 

PM, aaraa sfatata 
T om. 4 

P waz 

PM, “sare 

M, @ dad 

M, Wee 


emer he OU se NO 


146 


Jo 


J. A, B, VAN BUITENEN 


TORE + Ha yrwarcaed wa seas: | A offers Teal 
mea: sarfafa | saad | WadaaTAeTAE Wa Vea TRA 
art adeatate fel carat | Rreaay zee areas 
| aa &-sahreesereasas ave: fea efa Gazer area Stee: 
afrasgat sadism ave: feat eft wed age | TaTeeraeriaat 
Taras: TeEgeaasht aera saat awe: ad sae 
Wer wT weal sree efl saree faa sone | 
aa arerarsafia alard aTgeisd AAMATSA Bada a ay zfA 
mafignsfafi: get: aa: aatgear Rea oa aa Fee: fafeaete 
qeanly aleaa Iegate pr devig aati zexraagea fea: 
aT: CIITA ATS TAHA se RAT aa 
gases were sf Gre: flea: arrears waaht aa 
aT Sash) wala anata daakermt a 
qatar + Sri saat wa qafaftertetat 
fafaarat: | aa: oftfera ath ger area 
AST SHOT AIA ATH A TIAA | 


15 Di 1 Om. 

2. PM,A, aaa: 

3. PM, A, om. 4 and place it before W=3:—A, T fastaa° 
4. A, aaaseaty— M,,.,. A, “atataariene 

5. M, x45a0 

6. PM, A, agfeafiegta 

7. PM, gat yata 

8. PM, A, “sfefr 

9. T Gaara: 
10. P steatalfct 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


[229] aff a aig uq aquiteg | aardarareaqae- 
fraiakorianeada = canifiaafareanifeaareaate- 
BPC EeEOILUR GC ICCC? IEC CIC CE REC OUICC UGC MECC MICU coll 
qmnfe—aarana wiiea adrreatsanaiffnaseoraneca 
rane: zat— ana we Rerieea saa sda waeT 
afgarot a aa aratvarfiidad fad vale | aaaiata sven “Wega 
TARA FT aaa a faPaqaray | 


[ee¢] waa aff aendaratar aes agate: a fafiar- 
aaa fiat ata | aire shamed - aot ea sa eft gaits 
CRY ATCHATTART AI aA ATG aaa ea faeatera Sa | Tash Aafi— 
Tat GAATSAIN «SAAT AAAI: AIRE ATTA ATE BTN 
cael qaraeaa: Batt caeagsyareala | qs seeaafea 4 
me AMT oEETA TNAgada aaa | sada fear ad 
AAAATaaTA Bat: AST: | 


[29e] aft a aearaadariete: fe wee aa aH 
aturata eee A Aa) fed eaeaT| aafae Hada 
qaEUeatala Aq | FereaaeaaT: Ha: SISTA ATA | Feel saT 


M, om. “aate® 

M, adds after H— Zia TAA AeAETS 
P M, aaarat? 

A, T 3a: 

M, A, om. aegay 

M, om. Sah 

M, “aateafa’ M,., “maria 

P M, afaee° 

A, waa 


ee LR TS 


147 


4o 


148 


Ah 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


afasaraatt ger: aaaeeaatifa Aq) aa aleata Fae | 
aad Wl wwe wagaafea | zxorfarrca fae: ewe a) aa 
Taare: ema asa ararfafaaaar gata: | dar fe- 
rata adic raaeaadnfaeea Waa | ad Waa: | 
Tart same asacafacdnate: sdiadt sata sad 
aa: Sada ger efa aeafaet sfear | aes aadarasraarfaete 
aged wa feat a ead) aeta-zeatga yeadaedt | 
dq agra Fa) Fa) gousas qafieasia | 
qa FVTES sawiat| wa: gala wert yeaa 
aq aaa | 


aq a Gamat gacafatarar: gearaxear ZET| Aaa | ATT 
qe ganmenhtae 9 amt f& gacelaas: | aaa 
gafie waft) cafe ga after) sd csaearreraecar 
dfaatacier wala | aa Taeadraeqaeas: | ast &F—saieave 
TAT: erage: sae: eetorakaaRA =z arsaer: | 


— 


A, afa 4a 

M,., “lfc 

P ZaleA:—M, FAA: 
P faatgat 

PM, szad 


M,., GUIMNAHS for FETATHS 


i 


M, om. aairas 


ne 


M, alarare 
10. M, eaetonfeafat 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


a iftaedtatahtadasdiaaaiia aaiomaata | aaraft- 
Reena adarst afaafiea aetoraRaeder wat | atwararerag- 
FEAAA: | 


[22°] Aa: gaatesRean: fearersheat aged orarfirer: 
aReata | goer faded & fare Ferma facade a 
ada | aan asidwa are frarfaftwar aiaraiceattearentor 
taaraaaaead wala | aa aed aides sad arr: araaaia 
add Saas Serax T Rares | ae 
ofa & ara geass adtad | rere earersa areaatha- 
‘aot Farmed Racanqaa Jere | aa atareanite acs | aati 
STeAITTE Ta Seraraaaa Be Peeters aaa sage 
vi faves | Cast vafa-—aneneararatarearalaeaaaaaas fa 
mara faar fra harder dla | aa SETA 
Sq | ad: Peraraiaft fatrarea catia | aa wa agTat ara 
gal asain agmeead | op agaay 
Tea: Gad efi TRIER “tay a aTaaTaleala | Tararft aaaal- 


PM, om. HART rrr “afar 

M, °adofeafat 

PM, A, om. aff 

PM, A, “soar at frateqaReat aa aAe 
P eafaseanaraaafarr rare 

PM, A, °ateada 

T om. °aa° 

P feataeeatara® 

P aa sifa° 

P M,., A, Ta 


eo PN DAP YN > 


— 
= 


149 


14 


Je 


a 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


aaa aaa tales aaa eee ATA 
feat) settee sat aenaat oda a aa 
soe | gatas aaraarfteare aaa zefeerarsadad saaT- 
aia: | war fara geraged aacraed fara gases 
aeai aaa: Saad | alat afear asderieg fassht fart 
aanfefaeahaea seam faraearaned aiad | aacaie- 
anf aarttermancrataanies fearfaferaraactiar | afera- 
qreawagardaed ead | waaiar aarswantts saeae A 
zat | 


[222] afc aid agewatata aa fae ata ‘fe 
a ara ane | ara safe daft ae: | aafadaad aati 
Qa) wa ae areata fahad walt | wade fad wea 
yaaa arate Sa) ssa wear aafa| sata fF 
fared | wea atari Ba) featifeaaa) af 
misma Aq qe saan fe aes | F AST- 


M, wratfaaie® 

M,., 7dlta 

M, A, “fafaa—m,,., A, “fafta?—M, om. afseafataor 
M, 38 aera, 

PM, & faad 

M, A, om. fe 2947 

P adds. wa fé 

P M,., om. aaa fe 

P M, om. sfaraisacay aa fe 


OS ann wf oN oe 


— 
_ 


_ VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


fava: sere ft gate wa) sata fe ada ‘gaatfiara: | 
CUA AAAA ASA eAaAT BA TRI | AT: Gt: AH | THepeadlesay 
AMAIA Wasa aes sas | 


[222] wa iad gesfagrrferaraesarareaaata 
mead | vadttarmartaaressariesaaa Adare eaearta- 
mea a wae ata: caeaftla alana dae Faz: Sha eases 
at wae: ofa arene) aad car acaafreiiaa 
TUaAA: ATATAAT AAT | 


[223] af a ear aideney ears 
quot eaararieaarat fersafaenioed aeararaaed aar- 
qraa | aaa aed agar a gea a Sa) 
farmaraisht a sea ga fe eataraafiaa: |) & 7 arafag 
aaa aaa: Fad | sa AGA care Tse 
AAA VMI aasies oS asa Faq 
yenaaarad | waar dafe | a fart off aga aa 


P om. 29° 

M, adds 9: sfraaeal Stell 

P aa aera” 

M, Rife aeafrdacedt aaa, 
P aqaar—T maT? 

M, aaaeg7: 

P M, om. aq BIT Ai fa 
P wd: aleq 

P om. “faxta® 

10. P “arta? 

lig A coat © fé (haplography) 
12, Pai forag 

13. A, om. T=ORqA 

14, P adds wadlfa 


per aN YN 


151 


44 


152 


ab} 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


art aaa Rasa aaa saa sel Faa- 
arid fhad | go: aoareraa fe farsa | aari— 


ay aaa a: eatin TAT | 


aft | wary adigafift aq cag: afefs a aaa aa 


eae THAT TTA Tat TeaHeT a Sa | 


[¢2e] fe = fear ened fefaqaartad | 
aaa Aa) arse: | fasrafafiaenit 
fe Rare: | ae era areracafaenifaet aorafsett “armfe- 
fear a wit Aq) sarrecafasieaafaagaafa: | aa: aah 
ula: aT waa FS zardifa Aafaer aca) aare- 
aefiastear sierra: & sated felts a tarse 
wort maeaaa ef) aedaesa satatadarehitark- 
Cage Taina TATA wad aTG- 
eairatata, a & aaficciadaert wer sada: | 
wr 4 Af—eerad asa sre st eat fale gare aT | 


M, A, 9% 

all read & @ for 4° which is the original reading 
P, wadtaae? 

M, om. qaqet 

P M, afazt° 

P M, normalize “fazer 

M, stearate 

P M,., om. aft areaater 

P afiatatiafa—mn,,., eres freee 

M, om, SBIoereereseeees aha ftter 


— 


PP AA A PY hn 


ia 
= 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


cemdtatd ameafaerieaied = oaaizad | af faafa— z-atfa- 
qemrfraaeaardateraar odie aerate: TARA: AH 
fafa waa etea | aaa aft:—aanedarpie gaa 
qi: ata: FHRTUaseneraa Baaat ae sla arf 
fda: | aftagttaraiaa arescaiersataare-acarl- 
MEATS ART eft | aah ATAAT— 

at a at at aq a: aeenfaatieste | 

qs dara wet aaa eases II 


qT qa AM FRAT | 

aad A dd: arateaaa fafearhe ar eta | 
at at aghidraeeantarcaificaaana ana: att 
oftaer: | 

we & aaqaarat aa A IIT | 
zane | sata Af aanerat sarar Feet: | aT a 

garafasaa fet aacarareaa | 

F. eqaaaeaia afd) Aas | 

> avafaemal aarraaae Il 

AA 


sft | afteraguitg aida Akg aaifir aatfor aerate, Gee: 
aha: Feats we carla aa aa Tae | 


M, adds gealfeaaten” 
P M, om. gut? 

M, sft: 

T om. 2fa after THT 
M, qa! for Ta 


A Fw NY 


153 


qo 


4 


154 


Yo 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


waa f& aaaie wast adat anadearetaaeaiet aT 
aMerecaraaaanant aart earner saat a at: aaa aafea | 
age aa ae v=afa Zaftera: | agefart aa, aa ware 
Ay 2 A AD + AN . las q 
sarqeqaeinaead, st: aad Weafi—ea: qaed neal aa Fas: | 
wees wa: wieaarafsanfeadtat arniseara 
Cam Hala | wae ATAGT— 


FAN ATA AIS THAT | 


ef | aMiaenfaeaareraragemaaetdanis §aattet | wafer, 
a uq afieftaneardia fear gars aacargraa 
Hletad a Tas | wa a Ufa fesre: srsaqt: aaetar waa) aa 
Sarah SATII: Fa Tas gaara 
feerearshiaadite a fePaqiras | aah sea cee BSAA 
darren aes: | Aaadaaesiaet aaa | feeraeg aSeare 
meaat aatea | 


M,., Wat Taaki—P aegt aaa 
M, “aifaaaraere 

T “afeaarzar® 

P adds “alat aimetat 

PM, waite? 

PM, “sufi 

PM, rete 

A, om. aft 

PM, A, “alt gf AT 

M, “afacta aga T of 


oe PIN DAR YY 


— 
= 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


[224] aft a aria: adeqaer at fara aay Saareraaenat 
dan Hed aT aTefaaraaraa ata | aaet Aaarewa wR 
aril aga after caer aala Ba aaron a ct als aaa 
arattt | aa negate: aft ea eff aearaaaranfadorarfa- 
mea | des | feat ame: wearer aaa ca 
TAA: | ATS aan aaa AAA 
PAM Tae tages f& ehRaat) da 
Wa: aft: demaar eaer anne: arsenite areas 
qmaree Rquaaa ae: Hea Gaeery | walaeaacs 
ara ard azaeger: eat salifa aad eager sad | ae 
MAMAIAaA Aes | arfearssfasa fea wateaay fear 
4 Fad: Batter gar cart a aaETsEhMEraaa waa | oH 
aarreaara—_aal asa war wafa—eia ae wet waft—aforeatata: cad 
vet gat areneiaeza aeqatafa waa:—aefa | wae ar ware 
maa mf qataegaal fydt faea:—uae at waver seared aft 
aadr aqua: seated asad tar edt fiatrsarrar gereactafrar: aa: 
afea | aa afterca—arasar safe aageet: aafea Ga a Hadlarar 


M,., T aareat 

M,,., Boats 

PM, afafa 

P om. “at? 

A, aarta 

M, om. alfa: 

P waHead 

P Yat Aa, 

A,., om. 47 Ta aa wala 
PM, 94 sealer 


oe PAAA RYN 


— 
= 


_ 155 


Yo 


15 


156 


So 


ht 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


serra: daar za daftaftd seed | adtaedaca SA ors 
a saad at eRe | tearaargafaat ara HreoaTes aeraTeaaa Paes 
aa eld 7 | 


[exg]  qeAeraraeaaacaaar ie fae anata areca 
aoe gard a ana waa) wargaa agmeafe 
fd aatgad tan a gradient aanfaqaarathiag-arht 44 
4 Hala | wath ATaaT— 


Fad Be TH A GH STAT THAT: | 
sorta He FA TAgaaAgea fara— 

Hf aati sath daa 
eff de wT: asta alaraat a sfaarI— 


4 % wate faeaaafastea araar: | 
agarastaaed se7ed shh was: UI 


y qaqa arafisa A saz | 
aaaaacieaieate AAA: UI 


P M, aaal cada faate°—M, aaegi—A, aaRt 
M, awarata” 

P M, #8 for ala 

M,., om. 4 

PM, eaarars for F ATT 

M,., A, vaaa 

T “qa 

M, waeatafere 

M, 4a for frata 

M, aa%4°—M, om, 84a 


ee aS ee Se 


ae 
S 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


eff eraraafaa: saree Aadtarkaier galt arararedraaaargTee- 
sanlanfrararaar wfaairat— 


TE (EIA: RUSANT ATAATAL | 
frorasaraarargeaa ary tl 


argdi arfiarvar aet seafa seat | 
aTaaTeaa Beas sar aeIaAt Ta aha 


aaa GET FATT STITT: | 
AGATA a AAA TAIT II 


efi a éagaafaat aad oe aH) aaa FAOSTAT 
qfafa taarfiartisharar: Zar: SAAT sat ag tarfefa waar 
fafa dafafasia: | 


(220) aaa We TaN area esAATA ae 
TT IDHIRE RC CIRC DED GOcICEdIGEI nic Cenc WNVC KCK CIC tce 
ware faafagearaava tararaeaetieorerds afeaaneaTla - 
ferent fewer AAT AT FTAA PAT TOT Ta 
waaattoraatraa saat freargerncaaa aI AAT - 


PM, saw 

P Haat for AAA 

P om. 4° 

P aya 

PM, wa wa 

PM, A, om. “afi? and “ala? 
M, A, JUTTAT 

M, “am ; adds qaarnaeara 
M, A, “Hearne 


pam Court eco en homes Oe $s 7 


Jo 


a4 


158 


she} 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


eeeeeeeey Fete ft Feat aera at eT eae faa AT SAT ATA 
Rai aaa cea: Baa: led | AaTeHa FEI eT ed 
aif aaa: We | a asec fewra: Gee: | TS AT 
aeard qosdiataafaon | a a wilsedera aTareRaeras Feay aaTAAT- 
sear fwag:—adraa gf adda Agen gaa zaa:—eaa fa 
sf figa: yeqefi—fagigenttea:—iedaeen fageda 
maU—taeriedaa faded a4 cerpeleameraratcet 
qf@frar aradatadledaararaaen Srditlededraar fagiear- 
wrdiea: waraa: sre’ area: | ARTA: GeTHeT: | ATRTRTTAT 
TAHA GAGA: AIT: TA: TATA SATA | ATES ATT 
aT: | SRA Saray Poet | dar a wets gest | steer: ae 
cg Gal ad GE: | IIIS TS: TW | Aaa fia 
quo aaa: TTA | aT Ae fafa gerat RA AL) Arseresa: TA 
An | aed Ad ae wT ee TAL TA Slafaerfeataatafadr- 
SARA: | 

(92c]  afgeotr: aed cafe ta facut: weet rem: TRH IE Gar GRafea 
qe fi aad cane: ogg: Bar aedifs aadt | 3 
aeard Gar Tedifa taeaiee:, AF wat Gala Go aa eft ar | Saaaas- 


P om. “t48q° 

M, adds ward ed fewaAAT 
M, om. qa ay: 

M, om. aaeriledlaal frees 
P om. Calet oot RISA 

M, A, om. Uae: 

P M, om. Ta SAL 

M,.; Gea: Val Wafer 

P & 4 for Hat 


Pe NAA RYN 


‘' VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


rane a aaa AL) 7) soaaraae aalars qed Heflas | 
wate—aged earners a Fata feet sft | aa 
qaasaaNS saeaafat wa goat araaa aaqofaters 
aa feftad amare aft: ear zeae feo: qeaenarord ofeare- 
adie a afte: | aoe: fanonaaa: Reread sarey 
fafigura cea at aa 4arasatansraated 
mama & aia: | fharreragifeqnirard ar | 
SMTA Ta | Ages a taarer- 
SI HCCCUMICHLEICUCCM ICCC UUC EM EC OBZIGC RCS CCL CHEE 
aaagae: | ae sarees | war caedieanadatraca 
fafa: afeasqegia | asaarana eat: waaaslt freaedtaea | 
fa ga: fagargeta area qufifte efi cag | 


aq ara alge: aed caffe oes qeasezrecarftetiad | 
aaemted fare wi cefieneeratmatard | ATL | aaa 
THT: TA, AAC WA AA, A aeaTMaA: KA aaa, a az fad 
yet net aaafeney aaeaeia carl afgeoir: cet cafe 


P om. STMACAT 8+ RTA 

M, a° for tta°—eI—M, adds °arearszeat 
P M, om. AIeTT? A, om. sa fSsata 
Aviom, tala tsseceeseees 


NAG Gad A daa 


M,,., A,-, om. WHT BI A—are these two definitions 
interpolated ? 


6. M, aal°—M, Haz? for THR 
7. M, A,om. ata: A, sataafe® 
8. <A, om. HA 


159 


40 


sgt 


160 


I) 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN |. 
satéhtara | oat wei cafafa fetoraalt wei oe fra le 
4 aaa aad | ae irend afta: aaresraa sft | 
[229] waaw wala - afer ceaameca fatad, &h- 

aaaagnmaed, earaer | | ager: ae 4g aT Tara 
qa za Wears | 

aifeeraney fafaa sade | 

WIA WH Is FATT AeA Ul 
saa TH aaa | 

anentied foarey wt Ie | 
maa aTaeny | Aorta aera RATEEeA fact | 
ae FAT TTT Td | Ara GATTI RH IEA | 
aaa aTaarfeMaes Tea | «| aaaHaafafarraeararhe- 


Se 


PM, “frets 

P om. Bag 

P M, ataeaa 

PM, THe 

M,,, Tfafa and om. aa Taft GA: 
PM, IWaery 

M, ate for AT 

M, “fagn” 

A, om. °a=a° 


P A, fafa? 


Neo aes SONS Cy ee 0! RD ee 


— 
—= © 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 161 


aTaenetat | a et aeat: seat safer zfs maar gore 
IGNEIR ERC CICK UCR RC CRU REICLICCICg 


[220] amaechitrardt aan trae eft Aa 


afar aadarear ddiar afatteaa | 

yal aasae: ar afar aq aaa II ae 
aaa aa aera AAMT, | 

aal faaacara 


FCCC ECC 


Ary 


[222] erat wraenrfarae gana | aaa we: 
quam eft wastes arin saiead Fae GSAT | FAT a0 
font sata fad wat aad—aedet: | ada 
PaaS Wea: Tefiaieeras wad | Aaretd 
qed qeraneant ae: weareaaft aweta Ga safer | 
PAV GAGISAASMATSA | SS: aaa eaateaTeTeAT: 
meg aerceaat jemd Ateaisarad | a wad 94 
wa) a aa fated get eA ar aat wa aaa 
qed WAST aa | set RA aaa 
MAMMAAMTASM AVS FT RAAT: | aA Ta 


1. M,A,., “Tafa M,., THAT 

2. M, om. 

3. PM, om. & 

4. M, safer 

5. M, Geaaag, 

6. M,,, A, om, Tat A AMAT—M, om. war 
Ta Plom Seton see Conc 

8. M, eafeagarsst°—om, 4 


162 


90 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


area: aa tar, aaa: SaaS A geo cares a a wa ara sea | 
afore, fareaay sigaia: dfaead fated oafearft ferear— 
wafaa:, fageaa:—egfeefier:, sigata:—arafecarared wareafea- 
Sarafger: wei od Gar tard: afiesa zee: | 


[2a] wast otsaeraidiat aa aetaan ardife@a sra- 
TPTA CAPACI aaea || AIA 
aasaraa | walt aeaooEeaarea aaa aataaa area ae 
Tea Hania dal gaa aa sf 
aaa a aat TAATAI | saeaearafiar zacda 
qe EEE Sea 44 fafa 


140 35 


BA Fad SMT TRIAS areal aaa afaarfear | ear: TAT 


1. Tafa aaa 

2. Pom, afaeade sata: 

3. PM, “faatar? 

4. M, om. at?" * Cara 

5. PM, “fagtata 

6. M, Wa: for Al—adds after At FATA AMS TaRIs- 

dart TAs agi 

7. M, A, om, “am? 

8. M, om, “at°—A, om. Waa ie 
9, PM, A, xara 
10. M, aaa 


11. PM, A, aadtet°—M, A, watat 
12. PM, A, “Sorrarate® 

13, Agom: aq 

14. M, areata 

15. M,., Maat for Aaat 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


FATA AHA: | BIA Fla BAT: | FART Ta Sacra: 
eafiaat 2 aad a aeat—fear zeae: | ae verre 
qt: Tada ant fecafarasald aati 
aaredead | aaa zaqy Aazacannfey “fag facfaaca- 
qay aio Rasa daeqram fafe safe) ct 
qT ATTA | Slee Aca RRaeroraferot 
ane aaeeafeafassaaate aa acla aaa ef | 


[233] sfteraquardatideortaraat sad— 
at t Harfaat eer Aeg aftfeat | 
ASIST AAASAA Fa: UI 

afi adden seed sflaaratai— 
SAAT AEA TATA BATA: | 
wafer AeA: WAT AAT UI 
ATA: TWAT AAT AR AH TSTAT: | 
Aaa Fats: aad a: Il 


ARE ICHCCICHICECGUPGICECE @| 
HAST MET AA TOUT: UI 
fader aod Ast: aa: Fars: UI 


P a@i—M, Faaedy—M, Falfear 
P om. farcay 

P M, om. aed 

P faeafa for aia 

A, om. “87° 

M, om. agtaserata 

P aftarare 

P A, 334:—M,., A; Ae: 

M,. T. 4M for as: 


CP AAARYN Se 


163 


4¢@ 


164 J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Aagtraqeo}— 

ara: AHAaa za aa sfafear: | 
aay RIAISVET II 
Wa Aq AeA aaa Efe: II 

4 ECCHIMCUCIGIMECUIEEGCICGIA 
at wand oad STAT UI 
dat aeed agra a ara | 
Auitegedt § area II 
walfeat: eat aaa aria FA 


haw + 


* ati dat ent ag waa ge: | 
TVagAeAas Bel a afead: aoaea: | 


HEM 7— 
fet raAat A cada arTaTATAA | 
Tes TH WA AAT ae Get AAA: ATS II 
94 HIS: T GA A A HBA TTF: | 
gid | Wea AM Sra qantas acha-—arcagataearea 


[a2] asennad caaceaitas: aaa 
aca = TeireneagigTeareaaRaltapeteaeineratan: 


A, T. satfareorgarit 
PM, fé 2. 

A, om. this line 
M, “34a: 

P M, om. “sta@® 


yoke pe 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


Gusee: Ta: gerarnage: seeRaeMs: Hapa: aaaiahatea- 
qreatleeren awa: CLT AAA RAT ARTS THT Fe STAT 
Ta Fea: warmaapisheaaeen: fsa: sag 
PST TTGTS: AM ARMlAAA sre allaqSwe HGRA HEH- 
IRM: «| _ agar areas 
SHA Saale aaa Alea AAA wa awleara Taq RA TANTATAAT - 
qseeahearaalat: uemasa: qametarfraacaaraeeaey- 
FARAH: FRAT AAAS aaa: Gera Tel 
zed | aa fifeeneeataaeadian Meares: carer aha: 
TARA ASAT: WATT I Fa ATTA SaTPAT | agalaeargq— 
a uy aaa searaitle saat aAT—a wy qq: grey ofa 
raed | dela ToT: sae aft aea:—aseatrent sw 
erie aeaet cea —_fiaa: wei fea fd arreat fia) ofa 
Paarmaterearaaataatear: | 


[24] aad geene—fewra: ger zea zt 
Tt: Aaleaz: METH TATE | Ta A SIT. 
Reale aaa afiftga—eraga RITE aaa 
equa: Ways aE fa qaqa BA, Ba ardiPaarca:- 


1. M, ca: zarata° 
2. My Ayes T 24¢—M; T om. 7 

3. PM, A, interchange (aa PrPt: and CATT rere Gero, 
4. Miss, A, Tera 

5. Mas, 88%: T. 2a: 

6. PM, om. a4@ aait 

7. PM, A, om, Gtqey 

8. T. om. 4% before &4 


1% 


166 


14 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


mma afacarefa | war aTATaa: Wet war: Seca fceTeET- 
dareaizati et ae sea Reereerraes: | aeaeTet 
Tae — aaa assy Sa aT AF AAA el AAT SRA ATA HA- 
aa Tad, A AW wad alls ara aaa GF sla Ad:, 7A BIA 
zac eayafeead, aaradarls fe aad, Ales ara:—aarend 
ger wear are: weenfefa Teahicars ara zeTieAr 
fur sf aerearsesgead , 1 qaea fararara sqsad, SAR 
aera sft | aa ararearaoracahicaarhk rasea tare 
it FATA Tana Ges hreante hicarear aaa aT A TAT: 
TART: Fears aa ef sat | ATR TAT eos I— 
dia o vetia Ge}—eer waa qea:—ane: Rae Ge: 
Ts zea isles Feanea da aia | wae 
aaran—amaaate & arate | 

[228] waa wafi—aa ae aranaed sala fear 
TARA aA Sa A aSaeat Far a: 
aaa: aaa—aove afelaaa aad anual qaacar a—ada 
wang aa aa ara aafid faardienfafitarfarfiaardetara 


T saarata® 

T CHa Borer 

M, om, al 

P M, om. aifeaoer GATS 
P. om. &9° 

M, “alga 

P M,,5, Aig, om. UF 

T. om. Wat 


See eo oe ee ND 


PM, om. aaa 


— 
= 


Ms, om, dal F: 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


COT: aA: | cara Peake ie zIal MATT ATA 
VAT: TATA sifiazreTetTAT She | 


[229] aan: sant Adarand aaaqaafegaisd aa 
aftaata araatea | oTaTot a aaraidlafiarg aera dat sa | 
mised eakart: canes:, aa a agudtaaFzarni 
gfekarsaaate: arifat aa aecentt araaake: arial | a a 
eeeeaaiadde Tere aaRals aH Ta) saTadarafas- 
ast daatagensrra | aft dager aft aatttr ararst stazar 
ql Ward | aa tacafeaecaearag aay | AT a wal Ge aT 
dad Wad | Tareas aA ASeslt “ahargasa araHa- 
ath: arta | adseardtat senate rear dra 
Mss STH AA HATATAAT UI 


[e3¢] aq APezaeserent daa arf dase aps- 
aaa faiad, fegreatete sead—aor sradaeaiiad yarenearfe- 
arate aa aadaeaae: aediscaafaatesas: | wa afe wed 
sopfare fester ad—aay | zeae: daett arersaara 


1, P. aafargarea® for afaeza° 

2. PM, seafiadafaeg—mM, shafare az? 

3. Mg ateararata 

4. T, aan: 

5. PMys, Ai Fa4 

6. PM, aadtiamae 

7. T. siteate® 

8. PM, A,g om. 4g A°°"""" up to Ua, in line 10; Mg omits the 
same portion but adds it on separate leaf secunda manu, 


167 


vee 


168 


44 


J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


wa yardiat g dare fae cea dace araaren afesrneaate fata: | 
wy gd saa aeoes ahaa Ra 
afer Fett | 


[23%] aa anal cadsrarat dafatrarancda arzazearht- 
TIMgaOaA sa qeagfeqased Weta: wea squad | arg 
ae: Tapas: TAT eae A Fat zq 
ed | wader Fareed fad a aaqateromaaaderror 
ata maRat wear ada waa | aragaifaaror fever 
SAU Fal I aaaaaar sacar aded | Ft a freaware- 
FAS FT: CATIA TARTAR anes F ara- 
afd | Taye eae Maat) FTA 
TAAAASMEA RAC UATET: TH: ae aed “Aes 
tat wear eraaaare wareofiferagons a az: | Strate 
Teal Aaa TAIT ae: West as | Ga 
afte wa da ara: Tease aTAaala sad: saaTIAT | 


1. T.om. aq 

2. M, afa aeqeq 

3. P. om. 7% before FACI°—M, om, “Ha° 

4, Mgom. “at&t°'*up to Safad? in line 6 —Ag3 misses 
one palm-leaf and has a lacuna upto p. 170, line 16 wafta 
P My», A, om. Ta° 

M, om. 4 

M, om. “aeTeT® 

P Myo, Ay aenmoraatst 

P M, om. fafas 

10. Miom. aarq° 

AL, Mg SSeateqTate 


eee) oe 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 169 


Saas west cease ada aT: | aaa 
FIST A LATA: | 


[eee] 


cafieryuraaadasacaa: Waar ANT 


ait fifaetaeris: aoarheaitsiRsaqaaarae: aaa 
Taha: aa Aenasaae rar 4 
FMA Sua aaa far aaa ae aa AA 
aa efa sfaanftaq) aa afead aa—taneahie ai—amata 


Ata — 


maya Farah aedrset sorafey | 
eoN WL TOG AA AAA II qo 


wardift aaa a art era aay Srar Sraarerertt = | 
TASMANIA TH ad say Caalya Ta || 

Ff ATT TISHTRTATHIT: TTT: 

AGUA FG: Tat agat FS TaTaAa: 

amet att & ea J agaraza | 94 
aft: BIT: FaTaedt aa: Alara: [I 


sardift feosaarit facoaarfs feof fear | 
qa: Basa a wa aa aalea sari a fara |) 


SCC ICIGUCE RUC ECR ECCE Wee; aa aaTart sear httiaa 
ef arma | aeadned ot aa ata aerate afta decarfrafe- 26 


E. 
2. 
Sh 


M3; om. °qz¢? 
T CSOT: 
M3 dal 4 Alta: Ga agai 


170 


4e 


an 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

ered aan a ara eta far cera 
GEKA AEA Ber ag a aasaiaca fea afaahafecler- 
wees: He Ties aati areca oe waTAATa- 
fead aaat aerarafasd | afeé aeraaaet aeg aaa safcarec- 
afrdiad | aaa wa gereca aad) dt a safagedt 
CATARACT | aera: Tea THe geretear faa: | 
asad Fe eit seas - caer aearaad - aaa aa 
warnad fed amet a ead ahem a fd ahead aaa 
aad a aeaete Gath anal Ae AHA | 


[222] seer arariraaaaqanaaataae erat 
sTarearafararfaaahaaraaaaa tars areata | ARG 
qe Tifaaaet add 1 ffta sae ca) aga ad sfaftaat- 
RAL Ba a Tafaarraret garaieachafa eta: | Aa | Ba aTA- 
faaio aarafiqead a wa aaa: Faq | 


[222] Gah watt - fash gaesareTeraToh | 
aft 4 farartiafaetatt aa waa) aa a fasaferio fafa aa 
gaa saaatiad deri saa gd, achat ceraieat aaeaa | 
dia gaara | wives Raced aacafiitna 


Pe. aeiseee ies Fel 
T. aga 
. M, afer for eaftaa 


1 

2 

3 

4, Mg, stasfager 

Si Old 

6. M,. A,. “TtHaTRag 
7. T. afgraarag 
gS. M, aaifaitne 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 


a: aldaaaet | saoreaqafiarfias feat af) ara wae 
aad | PaaS TaeIa aa Gar | afeente—wwi 4 
a—w aaa wearedi adie aca gaffe aa zear adi 
wadi@: | ayet:; «da aaTafaarfaede: aeenfi gd 
wala | geaecarfaetd | aa ae arafeay wate a adi wade: | 
ded we raises — fTaeearara 
nererdaaartaaaeaaeareetes: «= aaatiararaa:  31- 
aattdataargidaaranaatiariaatiaatd wat qatar ATI 
mate | 


[223] aq weramdaedsaatiataagatiaqd walt | 
adaeeraesy | am fe aiaaa Aaa ease zed, 
Gas Sade | Sfea— 

aq Wat Sa aaMTHa Te | 
qT A— 

Bar aafeerearar awa shasta | 
efi | afarafamceitmaceot atrentaraagtadg | aa 
f—att & aaaresrtaowateerd aaa odiad | aaaretata 
darftot Seif: | ararfiarar arerazaiia geaverdifa: | fae 
Tera haere | Tart aaa 


1. P. “Gatd—A, FACAISI: AT 

2. PM,» om. “T° 

a. Pom, arate? 

4. Msg, Ag, T. CaRacraleey? 

5. PM, “faaradt aq A, aIays ae 
6. M, afaafa: for aatfa: 

7. M, “feaaratarea’ 


171 


qe 


a 


172 


et 


J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


am ah 3 were | ararcrkearrayersesaeet aa 
anfiay | aaeet ¢ akeefieat aa] aa Teds 
eer | aarafaararfiar aga qeqssdta: | ara ATAAATSAS 
aft wraamararea starr | ofa Reactant afar: aererarraararea 
a dla | sa: feecnaadoenfarmatarasatarisht sana 
Tae sea: | aa: Hata erat gases | 
wa wa qaaeranfeaad F ayeTeg ta Wa gaa | sae feaa- 
qvahaatiterd 4 - % Fa aa - aaa Aa- ae TATA Fala AA: | 
Tawa HAA aa: Gai gaan: sanded area 
WAT RATT A— 


amends a ages Raa | 
TAEAT TATA FAACAMTAN Fy | 
AWA A ARIST TAAH FA: II 


FUL AIHAAAN ARTA ART HA! | STAT «oa RaeaT: | 
Tae Tahigeaa seas vadiaeraet sfaora, wa- 
Raat get a eqateyaore— 

aaa fad al Gaeta saa | 

ata BWA Fa: TaTaTaA A TAA II 

waasareaa ae 4 a faaearaas | 


P M, adds. °artat geataar® 

Az, T. Sfaafeat 

P M, T. eaaeqfrarat 

P Mg, Aj3, om. @ AM--My om. Waal Fat 
M, aca 

P, WT for A—M, om. 4 

M, “saawi—A, <aaaeit 


MAAR YY > 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 173 


git Gas:aasea TIS TGA: HHA A aCGeSTHIL | sa: TAlaaTA 
aaa tae: 


[222] Fe ad qe cad ages we 
aaalfiarararcatates aft eat Tata) Far aaeeieaa- 
marae aaiagarl| a at: ade: aadteu a 4 
AAUMAIM MAM: Sea: TNT UH UA | aa ATA 


at a aseafraren ufparia aad | 
FT TOGA AT FETS II 


ediaaa akweat dar aafaararfa waaaa fagraa ze vafi—aa az 
fea wadiertey Aeaaecariefiaa sam) adas at aa waz 46 
RaroTataT aya sf anaar aufiaa sdiad | acti flaca: | ae 
wmaeaariaan fasted @ ta aad: Fae: | aah aTAaT— 


far f€ arfarsaane @ a aa fa: | 


gia | aaaapeatada aed atadl araarfsarara | aes aTaaT 
saad Aare alae a4 


M, °oafaftaratat—M, om. “atr° 
M, om. Aeaiat 

PM, A, aa aa: 

Pom. g 

T fafs: 

M, aafag for Fa Az 

M, Uden Aafa for THEA WAAAT 

P M, om. “9° 

aTTSTAAT 


Oe oy la UP: CDS 


Si 


174 ett. J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


a deat Ae eure a aga waft Hats | 
Waa FT Tal a aarearay araeread Tas UI 


TAT MATA AIT Feared Geafe—ararceafi—araraieas: | 
VIA SIM AIT TAHA | afnar Talay was aawTAy | 


a [ge] areata alate free: | 
TATA: Adil Hal ACTAGAE: | 


lata waTasagararaatka Fartaa|SY: BATA: II 


1. A, aftazate 


P. adds the colophon AgImIgedtqal satormercwat 
MATA Uae fasta | 
Aaah ahs wera 
AR (for AHA) THA TATA AeA: | 
sealfesraagufrata frst 
gale Tafraaead Ta aq: 9 tl 


qfodtacialtjat za Ferase: | 
ATMNATA AT TA FTI: 

M, adds FASTEN: Wa 4Vvq 
AMUMTPTA AT fet gorse 1 
TYE qvoe Degfit 9. 

M, adds, 
datad aaad slatted 
Waal GATT TAT | 
gat at cfafta yoraata, 
a a-ate afarfacadtg a: 
saree seat are trarafa-garaz 1 
afaecraqeaneta Fada: 


| MUA TST Ta: II 


PART III: TRANSLATION. 


CONTENTS OF THE VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 
I, INTRODUCTION 


Invocation of Visnu. 

Dedication to Yamuna. 

Ramanuja states his own position. 

Summary statement of the meaning of the Veda. 
Definition of the individual soul. 

Definition of the Supreme Soul as the inner Ruler, 
The Advaitin’s position stated. 

Bhaskara’s bhedabheda position stated. 
Yadavaprakasa’s bhedabheda position stated. 


II. REFUTATION OF RIVAL VEDANTA VIEWS 


(i) Advaitavada. 


§ 10. 


oh 
§ 13. 
§§ 13-21. 
§§ 13-14. 


§ 15. 
§ 16. 


§ 17. 
§ 18. 
§ 19. 
§ 20. 
§ 21. 
§ 22. 


§ 23. 


A. Contrary to the evidence of the Scriptures 


Chandogya Up. 6, 2: expounds that Brahman is the creator and 
possesses various qualities. 

Objection: the tenor of ChUp. 6, 2 is clearly non-dualistic. 
The promissory assertion proves that there is an ‘all’ to know. 
Exegesis of ChUp. 6. 

The meaning of ddesSa and the consequent meaning of the 
pratijna. 

The meaning of the drstanta. 

ChUp. 6, 2, 1 states that Brahman is the universal cause: the 
true meaning of sad eva. 

Brahman ensouls the jiva which ensouls matter: all words 
denote Brahman ultimately. 

Brahman as the Universal soul; the meaning of tat tvam asi 
suggested. 

The sense of aitadadtmya; the meaning of tat tvam asi established. 
The meaning of ‘tat tvam asi developed. 

Objection to Brahman as denoted by all words; restatement. 
Siddhanta of ChUp. 6: the Universe ensouled by Brahman is 
real. 

Initial statement on the meaning of the ‘mahdvakyani’: they do 
not prove an undifferentiated Brahman, 


178 


§ 24, 
§ 52. 
§ 26. 
S27 
§ 28, 
§ 29. 
§ 30. 
§ 31. 
§§ 32-33. 
§ 34. 
§ 35. 
§ 36. 
§ 37. 


§ 38. 
§ 39. 


§ 40. 
§ 41, 


§ 42. 
§ 43. 


§ 44. 
§ 45. 
§ 46. 
8 47. 
§ 48. 
§ 49. 


§ 50, 


J. A, B, VAN BUITENEN 


Objection: Brahman is undifferentiated knowledge; refutation: 
Brahman is not knowledge but knower. ; 

The Advaitin’s view of the relation between perception and. 
need for laksand. 

The meaning of the simanddhikaranya construction. 

Language cannot be a pramana for a non-differentiated entity. 
No word can denote an entity without qualities. 

The Advaita view of svayamprakdasatva involves a contradiction. 
Perception cannot prove a non-differentiated entity; indetermi- 
nate perception perceives difference of a generic nature; the 
bhedabheda view of double essence untenable. 

ChUp. 6, 1, 4 explained: the meaning of the expression 
vacarambhana. 

The tenor of ChUp. 6 restated in outline — the identity of the 
material and operative cause — qualities implied in ChUp. 6, 
2nd 

ChUp. 6 denies the asatkaryavada; the relation cause-effect. 
The effect as a new entity is inconceivable. 

The Advaitin’s suggestion that ChUp. 6 denies the “baseless error’ 
of the Buddhists is rejected and turned against him. 

The qualities denoted by the ‘mahavakyani’. 

The meaning of neti neti and neha naénasti kimcana. 
Conclusion: éruti does nowhere refer to a non-differentiated 
entity. 


B. Contrary to the evidence of Reason 


The view that knowledge is Brahman’s essence and yet is 
obscured by Nescience is untenable. 

Objection: the Advaitin turns the same argument against 
Ramanuja. 

Summary of Ramanuja’s views. 

Knowledge is not the essence but an essential property, not 
excluding the possibility of obscuration. 

The theory of Nescience involves Brahman Himself in 
Nescience. 

The Advaitin’s view that all is unreal disproves the ekajivavada, 
Nescience can never be terminated. 

The terminating knowledge can never be terminated itself. 
The terminating knowledge must have Brahman’s essence for 
its agent. 

Sruti being different from Brahman and hence unreal cannot 
validly bear on Brahman. 

The Advaitin’s analogy of the dream invalidated, 


§ 51. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 179 


Like the Sinyavadin the mithyavadin has no pramana to prove 
his point. 


§52. The Advaitin’s view of the relation between perception and 


§ 53. 


scripture rejected. 
The true relation explaine 


(ii) Bhdskara’s bhedébhedavada. 


§ 54. 
§ 55. 
§ 56. 


§ 57. 


Summary condemnation of the upddhi theory as conflicting 
with Scripture. 

The analogy of main space and enclosed space stated and 
rejected. 

The analogy of main space locally determined as the auditory 
sense stated and rejected. 

Space is not at all determined as the auditory sense. 


(iii) Yadavaprakasa’s bhedabhedavada. 


§ 58. 


$59. 
§ 60. 
§ 61. 
§ 62. 


§ 63. 
§ 64. 


Summary condemnation of the bhedabheda theory as violating 
Scripture. 

God’s functional identity with the world stated and rejected. 
God’s difference accepted, provided it be in body-soul relation. 
Difference and non-difference are mutually exclusive. 

They cannot properly be stated in terms of generic non- 
difference and individual difference. 

Class is a mode of an individual entity. 

Conclusion. 


III. ELABORATION OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


(i) Brahman is the Cause. 


§ 65. 
§ 66. 
§ 67. 


§ 68. 
§ 69. 


§ 70. 


8§ 71-74. 


All evidence of Scripture shows, by sdémdnadhikaranya, that 
Brahman is modified by the Universe of soul and matter. 
Consequently this Universe of soul and matter being His modus 
is real. 

The objection that an independently existing substance cannot 
be a modifying quality answered. 

Résumé. 

Brahman being the immanent cause is not different from his 
effects. 

Objection: as material cause Brahman must be subject to 
change, which is unscriptural. 

Reply: Brahman is the material cause but only his modus is 
subject to change. 


180 


871. 
§ 72. 


§ 73. 


§ 74. 


J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Purusa or individual soul is not subject to change in its essence. 
Prakrti or matter is eternal and subject to change. — 

The terms prakrti and purusa refer to God in so far as He is 
modified by them. 

Brahman is cause or effect as His modes of matter and soul 
are either in their subtle or in their gross phases. 


(ii) Brahman is Saririn, the Universe is Sarira. 


§ 75. 


§ 76. 


§ 77. 
§ 78. 
§ 79. 
§ 80. 


§ 81. 


$82. 


God can be referred to by finite terms in a way analogous to 
that in which terms of body refer to the soul. 

For God’s relation to the world is analogous to the soul’s rela- 
tion to the body. 

Selected scriptural evidence. 

The central doctrine of the Scriptures comprehensively stated. 
Individual souls are essentially equal to one another. 

These souls are declared to be accessory to and dependent on 
God. 

They overcome samsdara by resorting to God who is modified 
by. diversity. 

God’s essential simplicity is not incompatible with an infinite 
complexity of forms. 


(iii) Harmonious interpretation in these terms of seemingly conflicting 
statements in scripture. 


§ 83. 
§ 84. 
§ 85. 
§ 86. 
§ 87. 


§ 88. 
§ 89. 


§ 90. 
§ 91. 


§ 92. 
§ 93. 


The various scriptural statements do not exclude but comple- 
ment one another. 

The method of primary and harmonious interpretation. 

The harmony is the harmony of soul and modifying form. 

Not the knowledge of exclusive identity but that of inclusive 
unity in difference leads to salvation. 

The objection that this conflicts with such identity statements 
as tat tvam asi refuted and scriptural eclecticism exposed. 
The ancient Masters support this interpretation of the sadvidya. 
The objection that the assumption of an antaryamin denies the 
moral responsibility of the acting person raised. 

And refuted: the antarydmin instigates a person only to those 
acts for which he has a self-created predisposition. 

Bhakti is arrived at by the performance of one’s own dharma 
and of devotional and religious works. 

God is only to be attained through bhakti. 

This is the ancient and traditional teaching of Vedanta, which 
is a norm of orthodoxy. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 181 


(iv) Illustration of the principles of harmonious exegesis. 


8§ 96-102. 


§ 94. 


§ 95. 


§ 96. 
§ 97. 


§ 98. 

§ 99. 
§ 100. 
§ 101. 
§ 102. 
§ 103. 
§ 104. 


§ 105. 
§ 106. 
§ 107. 
§ 108. 


Authority of the Puranas depending on the quality of their age 
of provenance: Puranas glorifying Visnu are sattvika. 
Apparent contradictions in infallible Scripture to be removed 
by correct exegesis: illustration. 

Systematic exposition of the illustration showing Narayana’s 
paramountcy. 

Comparison of texts of different sakhds. 

Narayana’s paramountcy declared in Taittirilya Aranyaka 10, 
PROpentacy lows. 

And elaborated in TaittAr. 10, 11, 1. 

This paramount Narayana is the object of meditation. 

Sambhu- refers to Narayana. 

Mahapurusaprakarana states Narayana’s paramountcy. 
Résumé of the meaning of the texts shown to form one context. 
Meaning of the expression “Sovereign of OM”. 

Divinities declared to be ‘supreme’ as Narayana’s manifesta- 
tions. 

Advaitic explication of the daharavidya untenable. 

It declares that God’s qualities are to be sought after. 

God’s multiple manifestations His sport. 

The sense of a seemingly contrary Atharvasiras passage. 


(v) Miscellaneous discussions. 


(vi) 


§ 109. 
§ 110. 
§ 111. 


§ 112. 
§ 113. 
§ 114. 
$115. 


No difference admissible between material and operative cause. 
Evidence from epic and Visnupurana adduced. 

Divergent puranic versions to be studied in the light of the 
principles of § 94. 

Trimurti a manifestation of God. 

Can a perfect God ensoul an imperfect world? 

The manner in which the Sutras declare God’s paramountcy. 
Brahma is a ksetrajna. 


Refutation of basic theories of the Prabhakaras. 


§ 116. 
§ 117. 


§ 118. 
§ 119. 
§ 120. 
§ 121. 
§ 122. 


Language not primarily understood by the action taken on it. 
Even granted the Prabhakara view, still sabda can bear on 
Brahman. 

Arthavada and mantra not less significative than vidhi. 
Critique of the Prabhakara view of karya. 

And of the doctrine of niyoga. 

The relation principal — accessory. 

This relation stated in terms of God and Universe. 


182 


(vii) 


§ 123. 
§ 124, 


§ 125. 


§ 126. 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN- 


Critique of the Prabhakara theory of niyojya. 

The apturva theory untenable: God is propitiated, and grants 
fruits, through the gods. 

The result is directly, and not per assumption, known from the 
injunction. 

Conclusion: all acts are propitiations of the Supreme God. 


God has a body and qualities. 


§ 127. 
§ 128. 
§ 129. 
§ 130. 
§ 131. 
§ 132. 
§ 133. 
§ 134. 
§ 135. 
§ 136, 


(viii) Veda 


(ix) 


§ 137, 
§ 138. 
§ 139. 
§ 140. 


Bhakti. 


§ 141. 
§ 142, 
§ 143. 
§ 144. 
§ 145, 


Description of God’s qualities and scriptural evidence for it. 
The existence of eternally free souls: the evidence is admissible. 
Three meanings of paramam padam. 

God’s essence is hidden to man because of his karman. 

The immaterial Supreme Heaven of the siris. 

God’s qualities: satyakama and satyasamkalpa. 

Smarta evidence for God’s body. 

Lyrical evocation of Chandogya Up. 1, 1, 6. 

Vakya and Bhasya ad hiranmaya- 

This sruti as definitive as satyam jnanam anantam brahma. 


in its entirety preterhuman and hence veridic. 


Denotativeness inherent in gabda, not conventional. 

Sabda is pramana in its own right. 

Preterhuman origin of Veda. 

Summing-up of the demonstrated scriptural doctrine that God 
is modified by His body the Universe and as such is its 
immanent cause. 


Description of bhakti as an apex-form of loving consciousness. 
Discussion of the beatitude of this absolute love. 
Subservience does not exclude beatitude. 

The Beatific Vision is only possible through bhakti. 
Concluding stanza. 


TRANSLATION 


§1. Homage to the Principal to whom all spiritual! and non-spiritual? 
entities are accessory;? Who reposes on Sesa,* and Who is the treasury of 
immaculate and infinite beautiful qualities :5 Visnu.é 


§2. May the Sage? Ydmuna® prosper: He has dispelled the 
bewildering obscurity of ignorance which, albeit contrary to revelation and 


1. cit- “spiritual order of the Universe, sum-total of individual Atmans,” generally 
said of the evolved product of individualized souls, as against purusa- “the spiritual 
order” in its subtle, ie., causal state (cf. infra §140). I prefer the rendering ‘spiritual’ 
to Turpaut’s ‘sentient’ since strictly speaking sentiency is of matter, not of spirit. 

2. acit- “non-spiritual order, material or physical component of the Universe,” con- 
stituting the corporeal counterpart of cit to which it is subservient. 

3. sesin- “principal element to which other elements are accessory,” especially the 
Supreme in relation to the orders of cit and acit which are sesa “accessory” to him in 
the sense that they are subservient to him, totally and inseparably dependent on him, 
serving his eminence. Cf. infra $122 evamisvaragatatisayadhinecchayopadeyatvam .. 
sarvasya vastunah svariupam. This relation of principal-accessory is the counterpart of 
that of body-soul (Sariragariribhiva) or mode-modified (prakdraprakdribh.) the first esp. 
under the aspect of the Supreme, the latter two under the aspect of the subject orders. 

4. ‘pun’ (rather ‘comparison/equation of the two concepts denoted by one term’) 
on 1. the serpent Ananta-Sesa, 2. the subject orders of cit and acit. It would follow 
from R.’s exposition (§132) of the Supreme’s entourage (Sri, paramavyoman etc.) as 
forming part of His essence (svaripa-) that strictly speaking Ananta too belongs to this 
essence and not to the orders of Sesa. “This ‘pun’ is borrowed from Yamuna, Stotraratna 
39-40 tayad (sc. Sriya) dsinam anantabhogini .. garirabhedais tava sesatém (“servitude”) 
gatair yathocitam Sesa ititare janaih. In the second sense Sesasdyin- means “who resides 
(as the inner atman) in the subservient orders of cit and acit.” 

5. kalyana- (sc. guna-), the Supreme’s six perfections (sadgunyam) jnana, Sakti, 
bala, virya (also dhairya), aisvarya, tejas. R. does not explain himself on the relation of 
these gunas mutually (for traditional definitions see ScurapER, Paftcaratra 32 sqq.; YID. 
vii); originally qualities somehow related to some aspect of the complex diviniy of Visnu 
(virya- “heroism” in his Vedic exploits and avataras, cf. Gonna, Early Visnuism, 118 
sqq.—bala “id.”, cf. also SvetUp. 6, 8 svdbhaviki jnanabalakriya ca; Sakti cf. VP. 6, 7, 60 
sqq.—tejas “solar splendour”) their number was apparently fixed at an early date (cf. 
VP. 6, 5, 79) and, reinterpreted, they played a réle in the Paficaratra doctrine of the 
Vythas, cf. ScHRaprER, o.c., 34. 

6. Visnu- name rarely used by R. for the Supreme (invariably named Narayana) 
here employed for the double purpose of stating at the outset R.’s Vaisnava persuasion 
and of suggesting God’s all-pervasiveness: visnu- = vydpin/vydpaka-, cf. e.g. GBH. 11, 
24 (rt. vis-) or/and his entering into the subject orders as their inner Ruler (antaryd- 
min-) (rt. vis- cf. ChUp. 6, 3, 2-3). This mangala sums up the fundamentals of R.’s 
doctrine. 

7. muni- invariably defined dtmanananasila-, enlarged on SBh. 4, 4, 46 (Th. 710) 
idam ca maunam Ssravanapratisthdrthin mananad arthantarabhitam upaisanilambanasya 
punah punah samsilanam tadbhavandripam “this mauna (‘muni-hood’) is something dif- 
ferent from mere reflection on the basis of scriptural instruction: it is the repeated men- 
tal representation of the very object of worshipful meditation itself, so that it grows 
upon the mind.” 

8. Yamuna (dravidicé Atavanpar), teachers’s teacher of R., attacks in his Siddhi- 
traya the theses of Sankara and Buaskara, On R.’s relation cf. Introd. III, 


184 ge J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


reason, has spread all over the world: such errors? as the view that the 
Supreme Brahman, being nescient and afflicted with misconceptions, is impli- 
cated in samsara; or that the Supreme Brahman is liable to adventitious 
limiting adjuncts” that are different from itself,1 and as such is subject to 
karman; or that the Supreme Brahman itself is the abode of imperfection. 


§3. The only meaning which is to be found in the most important 
part of the whole body of Srutis,!®> which set forth what is blissful for the 
entire Universe, is as follows :14 True knowledge of the individual soul!® and 
of the Supreme Spirit,!® applied to the obligations imposed!’ by the various 
dharmas pertaining to each stage and station of life,!8 are to precede pious 
and humble acts of devotion for and meditation on the Supreme Spirit—acts 
held extremely dear!® by the devotee—that ultimately result in the attain- 
ment of the Supreme Spirit. 


$4. In truth, all declarations of the Vedanta are meant to set forth the 
knowledge of the proper form and nature” of the individual soul which are 


9. Resp. the advaitin’s and the two types (Bhaskara and Yddavaprakasa) of bheda- 
bhedavadin’s positions, summarized and refuted below. 

10. upddhi- “non-essential element or factor adjoined to the pure form (svaripa-) 
of an entity which is thereby delimited and conditioned. 

11. para- “other”, showing the insoluble dualism ultimately fundamental to bhe- 
dabhedavada. 

12. asubha- or heya-, opp. of kalyana-, “imperfect, affected by the various limi- 
tations etc., due to karman to which souls are subject. 

13. i.e, the upanisads or Vedanta. 

14. This sums up the three stages of the one road from transmigration in bondage 
(samsara-) to the ultimate attainment of perfect bliss; corresponds completely to the three 
paths—jndna, karma, bhakti—of the Gita as interpreted by R. See my Raméanuja ete. 
Intr. 19 sqq. > 

15. jivatman—“the individualized atman in natural conjunction with (samsrta- 
“created jointly with’, generally “related to, having a relation”) the body.” 

16. paramatman—“God as the atman beyond the individual atman, as the atman’s 
inner atman,” connoting both God’s transcendence and immanence. 

17. itikartavyatd, for the meaning of this term, cf. MNPr. $126. dhydna- “con- 
templation inspired by love” synonymous with bhakti- and upasand-; arcana- esp. “wor- 
ship of God’s image”. 

18. Station and stage of life = varnasrama: varna- “social order founded on reli- 
gious law” rather than “(sociological) class”—dsrama— the ideal life-periods of brahma- 
cdrin—“boy initiated into religiously founded society”; grhastha—‘“pater familias, keeper 
of the fire’—vanaprastha—‘retired from public life’—samnydsin “retired from all social 
and marital life.” 

19. R. frequently emphasizes the fact that the loving devotion to God is an act 
which in itself is extremely dear to the devotee and, as an entirely disinterested mental 
act, is its own reward. Cf. Ved. § 141-144, 

20. svarupa- “proper form” (where ‘form’ is the principle of individuality, cf. ndma- 
rupa-), free from adventitious adjuncts but (for R.) possessed of essential properties; 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 185 


different from the body;2! the proper form and nature of the Supreme Spirit 
who is the inner Ruler” of the soul; the worship of the Supreme Spirit; and 
the apprehension of Brahman as perfect boundless bliss which presupposes 
the revelation of the proper form of the soul that results from the worship 
of the Supreme Spirit.2 By setting forth all this the declarations of the 
Vedanta serve to remove the danger of rebirth which is inevitable since it 
results from the misconception™ of the individual soul that it is identi- 
cal itself with that one of the four types of bodies—sc. gods, from 
Brahma onwards, — men — animals — inanimate beings —, into which it has 


entered by the impulsion of the continuous flow of good or evil karman 
amassed during ageless ignorance,” 


svabhiva- “this essential form in the process of heing and becoming with and through 
its essential qualities.” 

21. Note R.’s definition of body: yasya cetanasya yad dravyam sarvatmand svarthe 
niyantum dharayitum ca gakyam tacchesataikasvaripam ca tat tasya Sartram iti sarira- 
laksanam dstheyam SBh. 2, 1, 9; cf. Lacompz, ASV. 108 sqq.; Proceedings, All-India Conf,, 
1946. 

22. antaryamin- “God as the immanent principle directing and guiding the soul 
in its actions in the same way as the soul directs the body;” term from Antaryami- 
brahmana (BAUp. 3, 7, 22) in the maédhyamdina recension, which reads ya dtmani tisthann 
antaro ’tmanah, etc.; on this difference cf. SBh. 1, 4, 27; 2, 3, 19. 

23. For it is by dedicating all actions to God (BhG. 18, 46) and devoting himself 
entirely to God (cf. GBh. 2, 61 sqq.) that a person is able to shed the bonds of karman 
and realize, ie., recognize, his soul for what it is in essence. 

24. abhimdna- “misconception (lit. “prejudice, bias, self-centred opinion’) that 
the aloof Atman is identical with the body which, with the psychological functions of 
ahamkara “subjectifier”, constitutes the empirical ego that is mistaken for the atman. 
Cf. also K. C. Varapacuari’s paper on abhimédna in Réménuja’s Theory of Knowledge.— 
There has never been a paradisiac period before the “Fall” (jnanabhramsa, pafcaratric 
term); samsara has existed from all eternity; for the corresponding eternity of souls 
that are never implicated in samsara, the nityas or siris, cf. infra §128—For the way 
in which the atman’s unlimited knowledge is contracted (samkucita-) to the scope of 
a body-bound soul, see infra. 

25. Sharply to be distinguished from Sankara’s avidyé (always rendered 
*nescience”), R.’s “ignorance” is a real factor which is not some undefinable shadow 
of the absolute but a concrete lack of knowledge in the samsaric being of the funda- 
mental autonomy of its individual atman as a spiritual entity of unlimited knowledge 
subject to the supreme Spirit. As the advaitin takes knowledge as the essence, nescience 
takes on a completely different, ultimately inexplicable character; whereas for R. who 
considers knowledge a property of a substance (dharmabhitajnina-) ignorance has its 
limited and definable scope of action. On this point see infra § 43. Besides, whereas 
the cessation of nescience, however conceived, is for the advaitin equal to the summum 
bonum, the self-realisation/self-recognition of the individual atman in the Samkhyan 
sense is for R., although doubtless release, but the next step to the supreme goal of 
attaining God. 


~V, 24 


186 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Such declarations are met with in Srutis like “Thou art That, this 
soul is Brahman,2” He who, although residing in the soul, is different from 
that soul, whom the soul does not know, whose body is the soul, and who 
directs the soul from within, He is the immortal inner Ruler of thy soul,?8 
He is the inner soul of all beings, free from all evil, the divine and sole God 
Narayana, *tis He whom the Brahmans aspire to know by repeating the 
Vedas, by sacrifice, charity, mortification and fasting,2° he that knows Brah- 
man attains the Most-High,! he that knows this is immortal: there is no 
other way to tread,”32 and so on and so forth. 


§5. The proper form of the soul is free from all various differentia- 
tions consisting in the distinctions that are brought about by the natural 
evolution? of prakrti into the bodies of gods, men, etc. In essence it 
is only characterized by knowledge and beatitude. When these differentia- 
tions of god, man, etc.,— which have been brought about by the karman of 
the soul—have vanished* there persists a differentiation in its proper form*; 
it is beyond the power of expression and can only be known by the soul 
itself, So the soul can only be defined as essentially knowledge;36 and this 
essential nature is common to all souls.37 


26. tat tvam asi ChUp. 6, 9, 4, etc. 

27. ayam adtma brahma MandUp. 2. 

28. yd dtmani tisthann ete. BAUp. 3, 7, 22 (Madhyamdina recension) 

29. sa esa sarvabhitantaratma SubalUp. 7. 

30. tam etam veddinuvacanena etc. BAUp. 4, 4, 22. 

31. brahmavid apnoti param TaittUp. 2, 1 

32, SvetUp. 3, 8. 

33. parinima- “the effectuation of an entity which has the same degree of being 
as its material cause” (cf. e.g. the definition in Vedantaparibhasa I parinémo naimopddé-~ 
na°sama’sattakakarydpattih); on the parinamavada see Intr. I. 

34. §S. is unquestionably right in quoting as R.’s references the Slokas ekasvaripa- 
bhedo hi bahyakarmavrtiprajah/devadibhede ’padhvaste nasty evavarno hi sah//VP. 2, 
14, 33 “the differentiation in the actually undifferentiated proper form has its origin in 
the obscuration caused by karman that is extrinsic to the proper form; so when those 
differentiations of god etc. have disappeared, there is no obscuration left,” (also quoted 
SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 81 in similar context), and pratyastamitabhedam yat sattimatram agoca- 
ram/vacasimaitmasamvedyam taj jnainam brahmasamjnitam // VP. 6, 7, 53 (where brahma- 
=tma-), discussed in detail SBh, 1, 1, 1, p. 69 sqq. and explained in my paper The 
Subhésrayaprakarana etc. 

35. svaripabheda- “essentially distinct as an individual, having essentially distinct 
individualities.” 

36. jndnasvaripamityetavannirdesyam cannot be taken to mean that that the atman 
is pure knowledge, but that the knowledge characteristic for the atman is a svaripani- 
ripanadharma “an attribute describing the proper form,” cf. infra § 43; the tenet that 
jiaina is an attribute, not the essence, is fundamental to R.’s doctrine—SuDARSANACHARI 
in his ed., traces jnanasvariipam to VP. 1, 4, 40, but this st. refers to the Supreme Spirit. 
I would rather connect it with 6, 7, 53 yat sattimatram taj jranam brahmasamijnitam, 
interpreted SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 69 dtmanah svariipam jitinasattaikalaksanam. 

37. R, endorses the Samkhya view that there is an infinite number of Atmans which 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 187 


§6. The proper form of the inner Ruler is as follows: He is the sole 
cause of the cessation of samsara, which itself consists in the origination, 
subsistence and dissolution of the phenomenal world’ constituted by the 
above spiritual and non-spiritual entities. His proper form is therefore dis- 
tinct from all entities other than Himself, since He is absolutely opposed to 
all evil and comprises solely infinite perfection. His beautiful qualities are 
immeasurable, perfect and innumerable. He is known in the entire Veda 
under the various designations of Soul of all3® the Supreme Brah~ 
man,*° Supreme Glory,*1 Supreme Principle“? Supreme Spirit,8 Real 
Being,“ etc.,—all of which denote the Venerable Lord‘ Narayana,*® the 
Supreme Person.47 The Srutis are meant to set forth his manifestation,** so 
they expound the universal dominion of the Supreme Spirit as the inner 
Soul of the totality of spiritual and non-spiritual entities by expressions like 
His power,*® His portion,°° His manifestation! His form,°? His body, His 
shape, etc., and by sémdnddhikaranya* constructions. 


although mutually distinguished, all have the same generic structure (dkdra-) of un- 
restricted knowledge. 

38. prapanca—is the completely evolved phenomenal Universe of matter ensouled 
by spirit in the gross (sthila-) phase of effect. 

39. sarvdtma SvetUP. 3, 21. 

40. param brahma TaittUp. 2, 12 

41. param jyotih ChUp. 8, 3, 4. 

42. param tattvam ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 

43. paramatma BAUp. 3, 1, 1. 

44, sat ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 

45. bhagavdn, for the meaning of the term cf. the discussion JRAS 1910-12; cf. also 
R.’s quotation of VP. 6, 5, 73 sqq. infra. 

46. ndardyana- for R. the name of the Supreme Personal being par excellence, one 
aspect of whom is denoted by Visnu as the all-pervading supporter of the Universe, cf. 
infra §§ 99 ff. 

47. purusottama-, term frequently used in the Gita denotes the Supreme as a spiri- 
tual being transcending the purusa or order of individuals souls constituting his higher 
prakrti (the oft-cited passage Gita 7, 4, sq.). 

48. vaibhava- “the totality of God’s vibhittis, his divine manifestation in the pheno- 
menal world of matter and spirit.” 

49, Sakti- : parasya saktir vividhaiva sriiyate SvetUp. 6, 8. 

50. amsa- : mamaivdmso jivaloke G. 15, 7; cf. MaitrUp. 5, 2. 

51. vibhiti- : G. 10, 7 etc. PrasnUp. 5, 4. 

52. ripa- :.ekam ripam bahudhd yah karoti KathUp. 5, 12. 

53. sarira- : Antaryamibrahmana BAUp. 3, 7, 3-22. 

54, tanu- : tasyaisa dtma vivrnute taniim svdm KathUp. 2, 23. 

55. sdmanddhikaranya- grammatical term: community of case relation of two or 
more words; logical: coordination of the two (or more) terms in a judgment: the lotus is 
blue ete. Term defined (infra § 26) bhinnapravrttinimittiném Ssabdinéim ekasminn arthe 
urttih “the bearing on one sense of more words with different reasons for their application”. 
The stock-example is the ‘mahavakya’ tattvamasi discussed in detail infra § 20 


188 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

§7. While attempting to explain these sémdnddhikaranya construc- 
tions, etc., which in fact only propound Brahman’s manifestation, some phi- 
losophers contend** that Brahman is nothing but non-differentiated know- 
ledge. Although it is eternally released and by its very nature self- 
illuminating, it is identical with the individual soul; this identity is con- 
cluded from sémanadhikaranya constructions such as Thou art That. Ac- 
cordingly Brahman Itself is nescient and as such may be in bondage as well 
as released. The entire Universe, with its infinite variety of Sovereign Lord, 
submissive souls etc., is false, for it is different from pure non-differentiated 
spirituality. The distinction that one soul is in bondage and the other soul 
is released cannot be made at all. It is false that some souls have attained 
release before: only one single body has an indwelling soul and all other 
bodies have no souls at all; but which body that is cannot be positively 
determined. The preceptor who imparts knowledge is false, the person who 
has correct knowledge of the Sastra®” is also false. All this is to be gathered 
from the Sastra, which is false itself. 


§8. Others®® occupy a different position and hold that Brahman, 
though having all perfections like freedom from evil etc.,59 is—because of 
the conception of identity—afflicted with some sort of adjunct, so that He 
may be alternatively in bondage or in released state and is consequently 
the abode of evolution which takes the form of various imperfections. 


§ 9. Others® again, describing the exact nature of the conception of 
identity, maintain that Brahman — ocean of incomparable and immeasurable 
noble qualities which belong to its nature—is in essence at once distinct 
and indistinct with regard to all spiritual beings — divine, human, animal, 
inanimate, infernal, celestial and released, and thus the abode of evolution 
in the form of all kind of imperfections proper to ether, etc. 


II 


§10. Philosopher who have pondered over the true meaning of 
the sSruti have pointed out a number of errors in the first school which 
cannot be explained away.®! As a matter of fact, the Sruti passage from 
“It wished: I be many; I will multiply” to “all these creatures, my dear son, 


56. Summary of advaita school. 

57. pramata. 

58. Summary. of the BuasKxara school of bhedabhedavada. 

59. apahatapaipma etc. ChUp. 8, 7, 1. 

60. Summary of the Yapavaprakasa school of bhedabhedavada. ; 
61. Here starts R.’s refutation of advaitavada: first it is shown that the doctrine of 
absolute non-duality is contradicted by Sruti, §§ 10-39. 
a 62. tad aiksata bahu syam prajayeyeti ChUp. 6, 2, 3—sanmilah somyemah etc. 
ChUp. 6, 8, 43 this entire context is the theme of §$ 10-22. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 189. 


have their roots in real being; therein they have their abode and their 
foundation,” expounds that the origination, subsistence and resorption etc. 
of the world are due to the will of Brahman, to whom the word It, indi- 
cative of the topic under discussion, refers. 


Besides, all the perfect attributes which according to other contexts 
belong to Brahman, those multitudes of immeasurable, perfect and in- 
numerable perfections like omniscience, omnipotence, universal sovereignty, 
his being modified by all, unequalled and unsurpassed, having all 
desires materialized and every will realized,®* and being all-illuminat- 
ing, as well as his absolute freedom from evil as is proved by 
countless expressions like He, who is free from sin,™ etc.,—all those perfec- 
tions are done with in this school. 


§11. — But, it may be objected, at the very beginning this Sruti as- 
serts, by stating that knowledge of all can be had through knowledge of one,® 
that only the cause has reality. By adducing the instance of the clay® it 
shows that the One, being the cause, is real whereas all transformations 
have no reality. In the Sruti my dear son, this real being was alone in the 
beginning and without a second,* all distinctions, whether homogeneous or 
heterogeneous, are denied reality, and it is set forth that Brahman, to 
whom this “real being” refers, is non-differentiated. In other contexts the 
so-called purifying statements® do also declare that Brahman is absolutely 
opposed to all distinction: e.g. Brahman is truth, knowledge, infinite,®® He 
is whole, inactive, unqualified,“ He is knowledge and bliss," ete. 
Our conception of the essential simplicity of Brahman does not imply that 
these words are all synonymous: even when applied to the simplicity of an 
entity all words retain their peculiar meanings inasmuch as they establish 
the absolute opposition of that entity to all distinctions.” 


63. satyakdma- (explained infra §132) and satyasamkalpa- from ChUp. 8, 7, 1. 

64, apahatapipma ChUp. 8, 7, 1. 

65. ie. .. ddegsam .. yena .. avijiitam vijndtam ChUp. 6, 1, 3. 

66. ie. yatha somyaikena mrtpindena etc. ChUp. 6, 1, 5. 

67. sadeva somyedamagra dsidekamevadvitiyam ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 

68. sodhakini vakydni, Ssruti statements like the ones summed up below (niskalam 
‘niskriyam etc.) which, acc. to the advaitin, purify the Supreme Brahman of all differen- 
tiating qualities, and, acc. to R., of all imperfect qualities. 

69. satyam alennanaten brahma TaittUp. 2, 1; see infra §§ 28, 3 f. 

70. R. must have had in mind SvetUp. 6, 19 niskalam niskriyam sdntam picapadyom 
niraijanam; cf. also AdhyatmUp. 62 nirgunam niskriyam suksmam etc. 

71. cf. BAUp. 4, 9, 3 vijidnam anandam brahma. 

72. ie., no quality can be attributed to Brahman. In other words: the above terms 
niskala etc. do not express perfect qualities as R. would have it, but deny for Brahman 
each quality negatively denoted by them, Cf. Sankara TaittUpBh. 2, 1, visesanadrthavattve 
‘mi satyddinim svarthaparityaya eva...... satyidyair arthavative tu tadviparitadharma- 


190 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§12. —My reply to this is: No! If everything is false, then it 
cannot be reasonably held that all can be known when the One is known, 
for the simple reason that there is no “all” to know.” Or else it would 
follow that truth and falsity are identical. On the other hand, the assertion 
that we can know all by knowing the One is only tenable in case that “all” 
has reality of its own by having the One for its soul. 


§13. The true meaning of our Sruti is this: “He said to Svetaketu: 
‘Stabdho ’sy uta tam ddesam apraksyah’,’* that is ‘you seem to be an ac- 
complished scholar; now, have you questioned your teachers about the 
ddesa?’ ddesa- means “he who exercizes ddesa”; this Gdesa is synonymous 
with prasdsana- “command”;” in agreement with the Sruti it is by the com- 
mand’ of that imperishable being, O Gargi, that the sun and the moon 
stand apart;’® similarly in Manu’s expression: sarvesim prasdsitaram™ “the 
Commander of all”. In the context under discussion it is propounded, by 
the use of the words ekam eva,’8 that He is also the material cause. And 
since the word advitiyam denies that there was another operator”? as well, 
it is thereby declared that that sole One is also the operative cause. 


Therefore the sentence runs like this: ‘Have you asked about that 
Commander, who is also the material cause of the world, by whom, when 
heard-of, known and realized, the unheard- of is heard-of, the unknown is 


vadbhyo visesyebhyo brahmano visesyasya niyantrivam upapadyate; for a discussion see 
Intr. IV. 

73. The assertion (pratijnd, term from BrS. 1, 4, 23) that there is someone or some- 
thing (for R. the personal ddeSa-) yena (sc. vijidtena) avijidtam vijndtam presupposes 
the reality of that which is vijidtam, ie. the effected Universe (by analogy of the 
example yathaikena mrtpindena sarvam mrnmayam vijnatam syadt). This very text poses 
the satkaryavada (cf. 6, 2, 2 katham asatah saj jdyeta) so that here the identity is urged 
of the first cause and the effected Universe. If the advaitin holds that the Universe is 
‘false’ (mithya&) as against brahman ‘true’ (satyam) there are two alternatives 1. there is 
no assertion at all but mere tautology: if the one is known the one is known; 2. if 
that is not accepted this means that the false is equated with the true. 

74. ChUp. 6, 1, 3. 

75. ddisyate ’nenetyddesah/ddesah prasdsanam: ddega in the sense of ddestr- with 
internal object ddesa- = prasdsana- “command”; cf. SBh. 1, 4, 23, p. 385 in the same con- 
nexion ddisyate prasisyate ’nenetyddesgah .... sidhakatamatvena karta vivaksitah / tama- 
destiram apraksyah etc. , 

76. etasya va aksarasya prasasane etc. BAUp. 3, 8, 9. 

77. Manu 12, 122, 

78. In sadeva somyedam agra asid ekam evddvitiyam, acc, to R. (infra §33) to 
be construed idam < prapaficam > agre sad dsit “the Universe was at the beginning real”; 
consequently ekam eva states that there is only one material cause and advitiyam that 
there was no second, that is efficient or operative, cause; cf, $Bh. 2, 1, 15 p. 441 in the 
same connexion sarvasaktitvenddhisthaitrantardsahatayaddvitiyam ca. 

79. On adhisthdtr cf, my remarks Intr. I. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 191 


known and the unrealized is realized?” The meaning which the father has 
in mind is this: “Have you heard of Brahman, who is the cause of the 
origination, subsistence and resorption etc. of the entire Universe and who 
is an ocean of noble qualities without end such as omniscience and the 
power of having all his desires materialized and his every will realized?” 
The father bears tacitly in mind the knowledge that the entire Universe, 
as it is an effect, is known by the knowledge of Brahman Himself whose 
body is constituted by spiritual and non-spiritual entities in subtle state 
in which they are cause, just because He is the universal cause — it being 
said that the cause is the effect in all its variety of configurations;®° and 
remaining silent about this knowledge he asks his son: .... by whom the 
unheard-of is heard-of, the unknown is known and 'the unrealized is realized. 


The son does not know the particular knowledge his father has in 
mind, viz. the knowledge that the One is the cause of all entities. Still he 
understands that when two entities are different the knowledge of one pro- 
duces no knowledge of the other. So he raises the objection: Sir, how can 
such an Gdega be?8! 


§14. When this objection is put to him, the father imparts to his 
son the knowledge that he has in mind and he declares that all is known 
when the One is known: the One whose proper form is purely knowledge, 
bliss and perfection, whose greatness is immeasurable, who possesses bound- 
less, unequalled and countless perfections, e.g. the power of having his 
every will realized, and who essentially is not subject to transformations: 82 
that is, the Supreme Brahman Himself, whose body is constituted by spiri- 
tual and non-spiritual entities in subtle state, ie. not individualized by 
names and forms, This is the One who, by his own free will and for the 


80. In R.’s Samkhyan cosmogony the phenomenal world of matter and spirit evolves 
out of causal substances in which the physical and spiritual orders are contained in a 
subtle state, the atmans as purusa, yet still mutually distinguishable, not merged in a 
primeval spirit, and in matter as prakrti, an amorphous mass not yet individualized by 
names-and-forms. 

81. katham nu bhagavah sa addeso bhavatiti ChUp. 6, 1, 4. 

82. vikdra—general name for the ‘alterations’ (for R. without the pejorative con- 
notation often going with the term) that are brought about in an material object in the 
process of evolution, and in the knowledge of a spiritual entity in the process of ‘egoti- 
zation’ (here the pejorative value is evident), viz. the contraction of his originally and 
essentially unlimited knowledge; cf. SBh. 2, 3, 18 svariipinyathdbhavaripavikarah: viya- 
dader acetanasya yadrso ’nyathabhivo na tadrso jivasya/ .. cidamsasya ca karmaphala- 
visesabhoktrtvaya tudanuripajnanavikasaripavikdro bhavati. The Supreme Being is 
free from either vikdra of essence or vikdra of property. 


192 ; J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


sake of his own sport,® constitutes with a portion®* of Himself the peculiar 
structure of the world with all its infinite variety of animate and inanimate 
beings in which it consists. 


§15. With a view to explain this point that the One—as described 
above — when known makes everything known, the father adduces an 
example drawn from common experience in order to illustrate that cause 
and effect are not different from each other: yathai somyaikena mrtpindena 
sarvam mrnmayam vijnatam sydd vacérambhanam vikéro namadheyam 
mrttikety eva satyam,® that means: “a single substance of clay can be 
transformed into various structures, conditions and forms — jug, bowl etce.— 
so that within itself it includes diverse practical purposes. Yet, although 
it may assume diverse denominations, it is an established fact that it remains 
the same substance clay and does not become another substance for it 
remains differentiated by the structural peculiarities®® of clay. So it is 
possible through the knowledge of one lump of clay to know all that is 


differentiated by the same structural peculiarities of clay — jugs, bowls and 
the like.” 


§16. The son does not know that Brahman is the sole cause of the 
entire Universe, so he asks: Sir, you must tell me what that is.87 Then 
the father expounds that Brahman Himself, the omniscient and omnipotent, 
is the universal cause: he says: sad eva somyedam agra dsid ekam evdd- 
vitiyam. Here the word idam denotes “the world”; agra- means “the time 
before creation”; and with sad eva it is declared that during that time before 
creation the world was essentially sat. He means to say that at the very 
time of its creation the world was still non-differentiated: so in ekam eva 
he states that the world that was in the state of sat was at that time not yet 


83. lila: the important conception of God’s sport is best understood by its opposite 
karman-. It contains a free action (an action not resulting from a preceding action in an 
endless retrogressive succession) performed to no purpose at all: no purpose that of 
necessity would result in new phalas for the agent to enjoy or to suffer. Hence it is 
compared to the literally inconsequential playfulness of a child (cf. VP. 1, 2, 18, quoted 
infra § 42). In creating, sustaining and resorbing the world God has no cause to effectuate 
and no end to achieve. 

84. amsa- 

85. ChUp. 6, 1, 4. 

86. samsthana- “generic structure of an entity by which it can be classified under 
a group with a class-name”; cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 32 tévataiva gotvddijitivyavaharopapatter 
atirekavade "pi samsthdnasya sampratipannatvadc ca samsthinam eva jatih / samsthinam 
nima svdsddharanaripam iti yathdvastusamsthanam anusamdheyam, See LacomBe, ASV, 
97-98; StyHa, Indian Psychology: Perception, p. 49 f. 

87. bhagavamstv eva me tad bravitu ChUp. 6, 1, 7, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA » 193 


differentiated into names-and-forms.88 By this same exposition it is made 
clear that sat is the material cause of the world; now the word advitiyam 


denies that there was still another cause, or an operative cause, different 
from that material cause. 


§17-a. Then the father proceeds to develop in a lucid manner what 
he had tacitly borne in mind before in the passage: Have you asked about 
that ddesa by whom the unheard-of is heard-of etc., namely that the Com- 
mander or Operator Himself is the material cause. So he says: “That sat, 
which Itself is at once the material and the operative cause of the world, 
tad aiksata bahu sydém prajadyeyeti”: that means: “That Supreme Brahman, 
denoted by the word tad, who is omniscient and omnipotent and has his 
every will realized and all his desires materialized, decided nonetheless, for 
the sake of his own sport: “I be many in the form of a world composed 
of an infinite variety of spiritual and non-spiritual beings; to that purpose 
I will multiply.” He then created the primordial elements — ether etc.8? — 
out of a single portion of Himself. Then again this Supreme Deity, denoted 
by the name sat, aiksata hantaham imas tisro devatah anena jivenit- 
maninupravisya naimaripe vydkaravaniti:9! by using the expression anena 
jivendtmand he declares that the living soul is itself ensouled by Brahman 
and points out that all non-spiritual matter becomes padartha®? when the 


88. namariipa- “principle of individuality of an entity that evolves out of its 
subtle into its gross state.’ For the history of this interesting term I refer to MARYLA 
Faix’s—often speculative—account in Namaripa and Dharmarupa. 

89. Note that R. has creation start with dkdsa or viyat “ethereal space”, the first of 
the 5 ‘classical’ elements of matter (mahabhiténi), whereas the pre-Samkhyan or proto- 
Samkhyan process described in ChUp. 6, knows only three elements, tejas, dpas and anna 
resp. (tat tejo ’srjate etc. 6, 2, 3) cf. my remarks Intr. I. Though R. does not explain 
himself there is no doubt that he, as S. suggests, takes tejas- ‘pradarSanartham’ “by way 
of illustrative instance” (cf. also Renov, Terminologie s.v.) denoting implicitly all or 
some other terms and concepts of the series to which it belongs (for a few examples 
taken from GBh. see my Raémédnuja etc. 37). In the SBh., in the viyadadhikarana (2, 3, 
1 sqq.) this interpretation is enlarged upon. §S. in ChUpBh. 6, 2, 3 explains similarly. 
Ss remark éribhisye mahadaderapi pradarganairtham ityuktam refers to SBh. 2, 3, 14 
mahadddikaryanimapi tattadanantaravastusarirakah sa eva purusottamah kdranam, so 
that the tejas of ChUp. not only implies the two preceding mahabhitani (akdsa- and 
vayu-) but also the preceding evolution of the functions mahat, ahamkéara etc. 

90. ie. the sat of 6,2, 1 sad eva somya ete. 

91. ChUp. 6, 3, 2. 

92. Only after Brahman has entered with the embodied soul (jivétman- supra 
note 15) into the “three deities” (=the three elements tejas-, apas, anna-) =5 maha- 
bhitani — prakrti) the final stage of creation has been reached: the prakrti with the 
ensouled spirit is particularized in objects with class-names: padartha- “the object 
denoted by the name,” “class” “rubric of existent entities”, that is, prakrti has become 
the empirical world of discourse, 


V. 25, 


194 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


living soul ensouled by Brahman enters into it, and that then all substance 
assumes: name.*3 


b. In other words: the individual soul is itself ensouled by Brahman, 
for the soul is a modification of Brahman because it constitutes His body, 
as appears from another Sruti: .... whose body is the soul etc. The non- 
spiritual entities™ in the generic structures of a god, a man etc. are modifi- 
cations of this same individual soul—which is a modification of Brahman him- 
self—because they constitute the soul’s body. Consequently all these entities 
are ultimately ensouled by Brahman. Hence follows that all words which have 
a definite denotative value owing to the combination of the radical element®> 
with a suffix, e.g. god, man, yaksa, raéksasa, cow, game, fowl, tree, creeper, 
wood, rock, grass, jug, cloth etc., actually denote the entire composite 
entity: the body, the individual soul represented by it,97 and finally the 
inner Ruler of that soul, the Supreme Person in whom that entity termi- 
nates. All words denote this entire compositum by merely denoting the 
material mass which has a certain generic structure that is commonly known 
as being denoted by a certain word. 


§ 18. Then the father sets forth in some detail that sat is the material 
cause, the operative cause, the substratum, the controller and the principal® 
of the entire phenomenal world of spiritual and non-spiritual entities: 
sanmulah somyemah prajah sadéyatanah satpratisthah®® etc. Thereafter the 
father proceeds to declare that because of the relation cause-effect, etc., 
the entire Universe being ensouled by Brahman is real. aitadétmyam 
idam sarvam tat satyam. Finally the assertion that Brahman is the soul 
of all as He is the soul of the entire Universe, that this entire Universe 
constitutes His body and that He therefore, as He is modified by the in- 
dividual soul, can be denoted by the word tvam, this assertion is now sum- 
med up and applied to one specific individual soul in the statement tat 
tvam asi,100 


93. R. describes padartha- here as nimabhaj-. 

94. vastu- most general term for “thing”, often a totality: acidvastu- / cidvastu- 
“sum-total of non-spiritual / spiritual entities”, 

95. prakrti- “verbal and nominal radical element” cf, Renov, Terminologie s.v. 

96. pratyaya- “verbal and nominal affix (case-ending, personal ending, verbal 
present tense affix), cf. RENOU, o.c., s.v. 

97. tadabhimanijiva- for this use cf. Sribhasya 4, 2 20 kalagsabdah kalabhimani- 
devatativahikaparah ~ Gitabhasya 8, 23 atra kalagabdo .. kalabhimanidevatabhiyastaya 
mar°gopalaksandarthah. 

98. sesin- supra note 3. 

99. ChUp. 6, 8, 4; sat as the material cause is mila; as operative cause dyatana 
(apparently from 4-YAT- “making efforts, exerting energy”), 

100, ChUp. 6, 8, 7, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 195 


§19. In other words, in the above statement aitaditmyam idam 
sarvam tat satyam!® the words idam sarvam refer to the phenomenal world 
of spiritual and non-spiritual entities. Thus is declared that esa, or “He”, 
is the soul of this phenomenal world, so that this Sruti sets forth that 
Brahman ensouls the evolved phenomenal world. 


Now the question calls for consideration whether Brahman ensouls 
the world in a soul-body relation, or is essentially identical with the world.1% 
When it is supposed that Brahman is essentially identical with the world, 
this would mean that Brahman’s perfections, such as we gathered from the 
beginning of the context tad aiksata bahu sydém prajdyeyeti: for instance 
that He is satyasamkalpa,™ are thereby sublated. Besides, we have already 
learnt particularly from another Sruti that He ensouls the world by consti- 
tuting the soul of the world as a body, sc. from antahpravistah Sasté jana- 
nam sarvatma, i.e. “having entered into all mankind as its soul in the 
form of its controller,” and consequently sarvadtméa “the soul of all who form 
his body.” Similarly also the Sruti ya Gtmani etc.°’ The passage under 
discussion, anena jivendtmané etc., tells us the same, as we have already 
pointed out. 


Therefore, since all spiritual and non-spiritual entities constitute 
Brahman’s body, Brahman being thus embodied and modified by all, 
is denoted by all words. Hence the sdémédnddhikaranya construction tat 
tvam denotes Brahman as “the One who is modified by the individual soul 
inasmuch as this soul constitutes his body’. 


§ 20. When this is said the sense of the statement tat tvam asi beomes 
clear. tvam means “you, ie. you that were previously held to be no more 
than the operator of a certain body are in reality a modification of the 
Supreme Spirit because you constitute his body, and therefore you termi- 
nate in this Supreme Spirit [and are incapable of separate existence and 
activity’”]1°8, Hence tvam denotes only the inner Ruler of tvam as differentiat- 


101. ChUp. 6, 8, 7. 

102. esa in aitadatmya-. 

103. The word aitaddétmya- admits of two interpretations: “whose ‘essence’ is that” 
and “whose ‘soul’ is that”: the Universe has Brahman for its essence, ie. Br. is identical 
with the world; or: it has Him for its soul, ie., Br. ensouls the world as the atman 
ensouls the body. 

105. This satyasamkalpatva (supra note 63) “the quality of having His every will 
realized” is exclusively the attribute of the omnipotent Creator who is not subject to 
the limitations and conditions of the created world; it is what Dramida (Appendix Fr. XV) 
styles a daivata guna. 

106. TaittAr, 3, 11. 

107. BAUp. 3, 7, 22 (M.). 

108. manuscript Mz adds here an important expression which may Re etenaly 
be explained here: prthaksthitipravrttyanarha- “incapable of subsisting and working inde- 


196 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ed by the mode tvam. Since Brahman is the soul of the embodied in- 
dividual soul (cf. the Sruti anena jivenditmandnupravisya, nimaripe vydkara- 
vani) 199 He has the same name as that individual soul. It follows that both 
words tat and tvam, coordinated in a siémanddhikaranya construction, denote 
that one Brahman. The word tat refers to Brahman as the One who is 
the cause of the world, the abode of all perfections, the immaculate and 
untransmutable!!° One; whereas tvam refers to that same Brahman under 
the aspect of inner Ruler of the individual soul as being modified by the 
embodied soul. So it is said that the words tat and tvam both apply to the 
same Brahman but under different aspects.14! And in this manner all the 
various perfections of Brahman, e.g. that he is the perfect, untransformed 
abode of all beautiful qualities and the universal cause, are preserved and 
no one is sublated. 


§ 21. Laymen!? who have not received the instruction of the Vedanta 
do not see that all padadrthas and all individual souls are ensouled by 
Brahman, and they think that the full meaning of all words is completely 
exhausted by the various padarthas they denote, which, however, form only 
part of their full significance. Now that they have heard what the Vedanta 
declares they know that Brahman is the soul of everything because it is 
His effect and He is its inner Ruler and that every word denotes Brahman 
as modified by everything. 


But, it is objected, would that not mean that the original meaning!3 
of words like cow etc. as denoting specific padarthas is sublated? 


No: When we elucidated the Sruti némariipe vydkaravani we had 
occasion to say that all words denote the Supreme Spirit only in so far 
He is differentiated by the non-spiritual matter and the individual soul. 
Uninstructed laymen might think when they utter a certain word that the 


pendently”, also prthaksiddhyanarha- “incapable of functioning independently (of a sub- 
stratum)”, is said of a quality in relation to its substance and consequently, since the 
individual soul constitutes a prakdra of the Supreme, also of the soul in relation to 
its Lord. 

109. ChUp. 6, 2, 3. 

110. niravadya-; this upanisadic term (SvetUp. 6, 19), here specified nirvikarya-, 
is very frequently used by R. to describe God’s absolute freedom from all imperfection, 
equivalent to another frequent expression samastaheyapratyanika- “opposed to all imper~ 
fection”. —nirvikdrya—: only the Supreme Being is in no sense subject to vikaras, 
neither in His essence, like prakrti, nor in His attribute, like the atman; cf. supra note 82 
and the passages quoted there. 

111. Cf. the definition of sémanadhikaranya quoted supra note 55. 

112, Here the suggestion of §17 that all language ultimately denotes the Supreme 
is taken up and developed in a polemical manner. 

113. vyutpatti- “analytical explication of a word as deriving from a certain root 
with a certain meaning”. i 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 197 


meaning of that word terminates completely in the material component of 
the entity denoted, which after all is only part of its full significance, and 
they would think so because the Supreme Spirit, who is the principal com- 
ponent of its meaning, is beyond the empirical means of knowledge.!!4 
Only when the instruction of the Vedanta is imparted, the proper significance 
of a word is presented in full measure. 


In this way all Vedic words denote their proper meanings but as 
terminating in the Supreme Spirit. All words are Vedic:1!5 the Supreme 
Brahman has extracted them from the Veda and, after having created all 
the corresponding objects as He did before, applied these words as names 
to those objects, which terminate in the Supreme Spirit, as He did before.!!6 
So Manu says: “In the beginning He created the various names and func- 
tions and peculiar samsthds of all things out of the words of the Veda.’’!7 
samsthd- has here the meaning of samsthdna- “generic structure” or rupa- 
“form”.—And the Venerable Parasaral® declares: “In the beginning He 
made the name-and-form of beings— gods, etc.—and the variety of 
duties out of the words of the Veda”.8—And the Sruti: st&rydcandra- 
masau dhata yathaptrvam akalpayat!® “after having created the sun etc. 
as before He gave them names as before.” 


§ 22. In this manner a detailed’ exposition is given!! of the doctrine 
that Brahman and the world are not different from each other, which 
demonstrates that all is known when the One is known. The demonstration 
that all is an effect of Brahman furnishes proof that that all has reality of 
itself in so far as it is ensouled by Brahman and not otherwise. Hence it 


114. pratyaksddyaparicchedya- “not circumscribable by perception and inference:” 
the two pramanas of empirical knowlege; only the third (for R. also the last) pramana, 
viz. Sabda “verbal, i.e., scriptural testimony,” can give any information on things metem- 
pirical; see Intr. IV. 

115. ‘This implies that, the Vedas being apauruseya- “not of human origin”, the 
capacity of all language to denote meanings is not based on convention (samketa-) but 
on an inherent metaphysical potency in language in itself. The important point will be 
discussed infra § 137. 

116. Viz., at the beginning of each new kalpa when the Vedas are newly promul- 
gated by Brahma. Note that, although here the Supreme Brahman is said to be the 
promulgator, the traditional view that Brahma Caturmukha has this function is not 
necessarily denied: God works creation through His mode Brahma, just as he works 
the world’s sustenance through Visnu and its annihilation through Sambhu, cf. infra § 112. 

117. Manusmrti 1, 21 sarvesim tu sa namani. 

118. The promulgator of the Visnupurana, father of Vyasa Dvaipayana. 

119. VP. 1, 5, 64 nama riipam ca bhitinam. 

120.8 RV 05 9051. 

121. Viz., by ChUp. 6, 1, 3 as explained above. 


198 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


is declared: tat satyam “that is real”,!?? just as in the illustrative example 
every transmutation of clay is real because it remains essentially clay. 


$23. The so-called purifying Srutis! elucidate also a Supreme 
Brahman that is perfect and a treasury of all beautiful qualities. Even 
when they tell that Brahman is the opposite of everything they do not prove 
that Brahman is a non-differentiated entity:!24 for if He is the opposite of 
differentiated entities differentiation is necessarily implied. 


§24. But, it is objected, if it is stated that Brahman is nothing 
but knowledge,!*> then we can be positive that Brahman is pure and non- 
differentiated knowledge. 


Certainly not, for words which denote properties that describe the 
proper form of an entity may also refer to the proper form of that entity 
itself by means of that attribute, just like the names cow etc. do.1% For 
this reason the Author of the Sutras declares: tadgunasdratvat tad- 


122, ChUp. 6, 8, 7 aitadétmyam sarvam idam/ tat satyam/sa-dtma. R. makes tat 
resume sarvam idam, so that the interpretation runs: “all this (the phenomenal world 
of cit and acit) is ensouled by Him: hence that (world) is real, He being the atman; 
whereas Sankara makes tat satyam refer to the ensouling atman: yena cdtmandtmavat 
sarvam idam jagat/tad eva sadikhyam karanam satyam paraméarthasat (ChUpBh. 6, 
8, 7), and: sanmdtratvam ca satyatvam tat satyam iti srutyantarat (TaittUpBh. 2, 1). 


123. Here R.’s explanation of the godhakavakyas is taken up after the provisional 
Suggestions of §§ 11-12, 


124, Against the advaitin’s contention that these apophatic Srutis assert an unquali- 
fied absolute by denying its qualifiedness by the various qualities negated, R. poses his 
view that the several negations of imperfect qualities imply as many affirmations of per- 
fect qualities. 

125. This is the jndna of TaittUp. 2, 1 satyam jranam anantam brahma. 


126. In other words: the co-ordination jndnam brahma in satyam jnanam anantarr 
brahma ‘is of the same category as those of satyam brahma and anantam brahma. Jnana 
here is a distinguishing attribute (vigesana-) of brahman: so jnanam brahma means 
“Br. is distinguished by the attribute jiana” and not “Br. is jnana”. Jnana is a property 
(dharma-) that describes the proper form (svarupaniripanadharma- “an essential pro- 
perty”), so it may stand for that proper form itself—Ramanuja’s drstanta gavadisabdavat 
requires some elucidation. Cow is a class name and hence the word gauh describes a 
property common to all the individuals of the bovine genus; a broken-horned individual 
is a cow, but the relation is unilateral, not reciprocal: not every cow is broken-horned: 
similarly, not all knowledge is Brahman, for individual atmans are also knowledge. This 
same drstanta is developed SBh. 2, 3, 30: tathd ca khandadayo yavatsvariipabhavigotva- 
didharmasabdena gaur iti vyapadisyamand drsyante / svariwpanadharmatvad ity arthah 
“So we know from experience that individual cows, broken-horned individuals etc., are 
designated “cow” as a word denoting the property of bovinity which covers their proper 
form completely: that is to say, because it is a property describing the proper form,” 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 199 


vyapadesah prajnavat,2? ydvadatmabhdavitvac ca na dosah.*? Brahman’s 
proper form is designated by knowledge as its defining attribute, but it is 
not mere knowledge itself. 


But how do we know this? 


From the Sruti which asserts that He is a knower—eg. yah 
sarvajnah sarvavit,29 and this can be gathered from hundreds of Srutis, cf. 
pardsya saktir vividhaiva Sriyate svabhadviki jnanabalakriyad ca) vijna- 
tadram are kena vijdniyad'*! ete.—; from the fact that knowledge is a pro- 
perty and not a substance, and from the fact that it cannot be logically 
established that a mere property is a substance. Hence follows that words 
like truth, knowledge and the like declare that Brahman is differentiated 
by, for instance, knowledge in the proper sense of the word. When we 
disregard the proper sense of the two words tat and tvam and we make 
them out to be proof that the proper form of an entity is non-differentiated, 
we sacrifice their primary meanings. 


§ 25. But when it is a positively established fact that two different 
words bear upon one identical object, then it is sound to assume laksand, as for 
example in the sentence so ’yam Devadattah. In so’yam the word sa refers 
to a person in connection with a different place and a different time, while 
the word ayam refers to a person connected with a near-by place or the 
present time. The co-ordination of both words denotes identity. But it is 
impossible to refer to one and the same person as if he were simultaneously 
connected with incompatible places or durations. So we contend that the 
two words are only meant to establish mere proper form and that this 
proper form is one in itself. 


This is not true.%3 In the given illustration so’yam Devadattah 
there is not even a semblance of laksané because there is no contradiction 


127. BrS. 2, 3, “because that is (the atman’s) defining property, the (atman) is 
designated by that property (namely) as having knowledge.” 

128. BrS. 2, 3, 30 “(this use of the term jfdna as a designation) is not objection- 
able, also because (jidina) is entirely co-existent with the atman” Some MSS. 
and the Pt. ed. interpolate a gloss which is identical with R.’s gloss on this 
sutra in Vedantadipa—Acc. to S., the reference to the later sitra serves to avoid the 
objection of laksand: jatigunayor vyaktiguniparyantatvasya loke pratyaksasiddhatvat tad- 
vacigabdandm tatparyantatvam Gsritam. 

129. MundUp. 1, 1, 1 “who is omniscient, all-knowing.” 

130. SvetUp. 6, 8 “His paramount power, so is revealed, is manifold, and natural 
to Him are knowledge, strength and activity.” 

131. BAUp. 2, 4, 14. 

132. This paragraph seems to be directed against §.’s interpretation ad TaittUp, 
2, 1; for a detailed discussion; see Intr. chapter IV. 

133. Same argument in SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 21; for a detailed discussion see Intr. IV. 
—R. denies the applicability of the drstanta so ’yém Devadattah which, acc, to the advaitin 


200 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


at all. It is not at all contradictory that one and the same person is involved 
in two different actions, one past and one present: in the past he was in 
a remote place, at present he is in a near-by place. So the declaration of 
the identity of a person involved in two actions, past and present, contains 
no contradiction, for the contradiction in his presence in two different 
places is solved by the difference in time. 


Even if we assume laksand, we can never apply it to both terms of a 
judgment, for a contradiction in terms is already solved by one term with 
laksand. Here, as we have said there is no laksané at all, for there is no 
contradiction when a person who in the past was connected with one place 
is at present connected with another place. 


§ 26. Similarly in our passage it is declared that there is nothing 
contradictory in that the Supreme Brahman, who is the cause of the world, 
is also the soul of the individual soul inasmuch as he is its inner Ruler. 
Just as the identity of two beings is conceived with the aid of sdmandadhi- 
karanya (when we leave out those ‘beings’ there is identity of mere proper 
form, but that is not the meaning of sémanddhikaranya; for, according to 
the experts, sémanddhikaranya is the application to one object of several 
words in different functions) we have accordingly declared that both beings 
are identical. But we may not decide on a meaning of a summarizing state- 
ment that is contrary to the sense of the preceding section which it is to 
summarize.%4 For in the preceding paragraphs, the Srutis tad aiksata bahu 


(following the Naiyayikas), is an identity judgment and predicates no attribute to the 
subject. The Devadatta of ‘here and now’ cannot be wholly identical with the Devadatta 
of. “then and there” because then and there he had other attributes than here and now. 
So the identification: this particular D. = that particular D. is contradictory. Here we 
have to drop from the word “this” (ayam) the notion of proximateness, from “that” (sa) 
that of remoteness and retain their simple demonstrative value.—R.’s interpretation can 
be summarized: “this D. was that D.”, so that all differences between “this” and “that” 
(here and now/ there and then) are accounted for by the difference in time. 

In SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 110 R. resumes this question: tattvamasyddivakyesu simanddhi- 
karanyam na nirvisesavastvaikyaparam ete. .. so yam devadatta ity atrapi na laksana / 
,. desabhedavirodhas ca kalabhedena parihrtah / 

134. The “canons of exegesis” of Mimamsa are summed up in the Sloka upakramo- 
pasamhirdv abhydso *pirvaté phalam/arthavadopapatti ca lingam tatparyaniscaye// 
“initial and concluding statements, repetition, novel element of teaching, reward, des- 
cription and argumentation are the characteristics by which the right interpretation is 
determined.” Most important are upakrama and upasamhara: the latter may never be 
in conflict with the former in order to establish the ekavakyaté of a context. The upa- 
krama of ChUp. 6 is tad aiksata bahu syam (6, 2, 3, developing 6, 2, 1 sadeva somyedam), 
the upasamhdra tat tvam asi. If this samanadhikaranya is taken in the advaitin’s sense 
it would mean that Brahman is identical with the embodied soul (jiva). in its essence; 
which would make Br, liable to the jiva’s characteristic nescience etc, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA ; 201 


syam etc., it was asserted that Brahman is the sole universal cause and that 
he has all his desires materialized: contradictory to this would be to declare 
that Brahman is the substratum of nescience etc. 


. § 27. Furthermore,*> speech can never be a pramana to prove a non- 
differentiated thing; for speech derives its character of pramadna from the 
peculiar nature of the words and sentences in which it consists. The nature 
of a word is to signify the peculiar difference of the object to which it 
corresponds; that of a sentence to signify the peculiar difference of a com- 
plex of such differentiated objects. It follows that speech can never signify 
a non-differentiated object. Words like ‘non-different” etc. signify an 
object — which we have already found to be differentiated by a specific 
difference — by denying that it has any of the differentiating features found 
in other objects. Otherwise such words would signify nothing at all, for a word 
implies numerous differences in the object signified by its radical element 
and affix, and a sentence signifies numerous complexes of such padarthas. 


§ 28. But, it may be objected, we have not said that speech is a 
pramana for a non-differentiated self-illuminating entity, for something that 
is self-evident stands in need of no praména. So all differentiations which 
arise from superimpositions,™6 e.g. that it is a knower etc., are altogether 
discarded by all words. When all differentiations have disappeared the mere 
being remains by itself, undetermined, self-illuminating. 


That is not true, for by what word do you then denote that entity 
in such a way that all differentiations of superimpossition disappear? 


By the word “pure knowledge” 137 


No! That word too refers to a differentiated substance; for by its 
radical element and affix it implies difference. The root JNA in the sense 
of “to be conscious (of)”1°8 tells us that it has an object and a subject and 
that it is a specific action with a specific nature which distinguishes it from 
other actions. The affix tells us that it has gender, number etc. This 
nature does also persist in the case of a self-evident, self-realized object: 
were it free from all difference then there would be no realization at all. 


135. Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 28, the passage Sabdasya tu visesena savisesa eva vastuny 
abhidhdnasdmarthyam/ .. na nirvisesavastuni Sabdah pramanvam / 

136. adhydsa- “superimposition” defined by S$. BrSBh. intr. as smrtiripah paratra 
purvadrstivabhasah “superimposition is the projection of something that has been 
perceived before elsewhere on something else, and is therefore derived from recollection.” 

137. jnaptimdtra- see following note. 

138. JNA avabodhana iti: so $. jninam jnaptir avabodhah (TaittUpBh, 2, 1); 
avabodhana- “being awake to, alive to, aware of, conscious of,” 


V. 26 


202 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


We say that knowledge is self-evident or self-realized by virtue of its own 
nature, viz. the nature of realizing or proving something else.1%9 


§ 29. —Brahman’s proper form itself illuminates everything always. 
— But then it is impossible to attribute to it any properties that are foreign 
to it: when the proper form of a rope appears as such, then it is impossible 
to attribute to it the property of being a snake. That is why you have to 
assume an obscuring Nescience. Consequently the object of the clearing 
knowledge of the Sastra can only be a hidden part in Brahman :™° otherwise 
the clearing knowledge would clear nothing at all: for the supposed nature 
of snake is sublated by the illumination of the nature of rope as different 
from the substratum of the original error. When there is one differentia- 
tion denoted by a word for that entity of pure knowledge, that differentia- 
tion must be a distinguishing feature of Brahman.441 Then it follows that 
Brahman is differentiated by all the differentiating features expounded by 
all Srutis.142 


§30. All this proves that the criteriologist have no criterion that in 
any way demonstrates the existence of a non-differentiated entity.43 Even 
in the case of an indeterminate perception! the perceived entity is recog- 
nized as differentiated; for otherwise it would be impossible to have, in the 


139. anyasadhanasvabhavataya—S, remarks jndtur visayavyavaharahetutaya hi 
svayamprakisatvam tvayd sidhitam “you arrive at the notion of the self-illuminating 
character (of knowledge) because it is the ground for the knower to act upon its object” 
and he adds svasambandhéd arthdntare tadvyavahdrahetutvam hi svayamprakésatva- 
numdinahetuh /evam nirvisesatve svayamprakasatvanupapattir ukta “the ground on 
which you conclude to this self-illuminating character is this that (knowledge) is the 
ground for activity in another matter which therefore stands in relation to itself; con- 
sequently the Author states that the notion of svayamprakasa cannot logically be estab- 
lished for an entity that is non-differentiated.” This is borrowed from §Bh. get Bee a lan oes 
apt tu sarvam sddhayanty anubhitih (the term is Vimuktatman’s, Istasiddhi 1) svayam 
eva _ siddhyati/prayogas  ca/anubhitir ananyaddhinasvadharmavyavahara/svasamban- 
dhad arthaintare taddharmavyavaharahetutvat etc; the point which R. wants to make is 
that knowledge can only be proved to be svatahsiddha, if it is, not anyatahsiddha, but 
anyasddhana; hence, far from being unqualified, it is essentially qualified by this very 
nature of proving other entities. 

140. As S. comments: there can be no obscuration unless there is something to be 
obscured. It would follow then that the advaitin’s assertion that Brahman is svayam- 
prakdga cannot be logically maintained in his paksa. : 

141. If Brahman can be known, he must have the property (differentiating attri- 
bute) of being knowable. 

142. If one differentiation of Brahman propounded in the Sruti, viz. that of being 
knowable, is accepted of Brahman, all other differentiations propounded of Brahman 
must also be accepted. 

143. Neither gabda nor pratyaksa can prove an undifferentiated entity, nor, 
a fortiori, can anumana that departs from pratyaksa, 

144, nirvikalpakapratyaksa, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 203 


case of a determinate perception, the cognition in so ’yam of an entity differ- 
entiated by a previously apprehended modification.1% From the fact that 
generic character like bovinity, etc. is a particular structural feature of an 
entity it follows that already at the indeterminate stage an entity is appre- 
hended in this way: this entity is so with such structural differentiae.46 In 
the case of a second and subsequent cognitions we recognize that these 
generic differentiae belong to more than one entity. From the second and 
subsequent cognitions we learn that the padartha called ‘modification by 


145. In so ’yam the word sah points to a definite object perceived before, not to a 
mere indeterminate blur: the very recognition “this is that” proves that “that” had a 
distinguishing feature which allowed it of being recognized later on as “this” and nothing 
else, or, as stated in SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 29, of being cognized at all: nirvikalpakam nama 
kenacid visesena viyuktasya grahanam na sarvavisesarahitasya / tathaibhitasya kadacid 
api grahanddarsanat / 

146. SBh. 1. c. is more elaborate: kenacid visesenedam ittham iti hi sarvd pratitir 
upajayate trikonasisnidisamsthina visesena vind kasyacid api padarthasya grahandiyogit / 
ato nirvikalpakam ekajatiyadravyesu prathamapindagrahanam trikona- n. is “triangular 
cow’s head”, not adject. to sdisnd, as THIBAUT and LacomBr translate; sdsndé “dew-lap” 
is the laksana of gotva. This definition is often found bizarre in comparison with the 
Western one “horned, cloven-footed, ruminant etc.”, but it is an obvious and practical 
one: it has no doubt its origin in the need for defining a cow not so much from other 
corniferous and ruminant mammals as from the very similar buffalo with which the 
cow is herded together and from which it is mainly distinguished by its dew-lap. 

NB. R.’s theory of indeterminate perception conflicts with that held by the Naiyayi- 
kas. Acc. to the latter (and to the Buddhists who recognize the indeterminate perception 
as the only possible one) in indeterminate perception an object is seen without any quali- 
ties, a mere blur of which it can only be said that it is “something”. Annambhatta (TS. 
§ 42) defines: nisprakdrakam jianam nirvikalpakam, yathedam kimeit [but cf. Jayanta- 
bhatta, Nyayamafijari, p. 73, discussing Bhartrhari’s Vakyapadiya 1, 124: na ca nirvikal- 
pakasamaye yat kimcid idam ityddisimainyasabdollekhah ko ’pi kaiscid anubhiyate tas- 
tham laksanam ity evam asambhavadosanirakarandrtham avyapadesyapadam iti] and com- 
ments (TD) visesanavisesyasambandhainavagahi jnanam ityarthah “nirvikalpaka is that 
cognition which is without prakdra, i. determinant feature distinguishing it from other 
cognitions”, comm. “that is to say, cognition which comprehends no relation between the 
qualifying and the qualifiable,” as distinct from determinate perception which does com- 
prehend the relation between qualifying features—name, class etec-—and the object quali- 
fied. Similarly the advaitin: nirvikalpakam tu samsargadnavagahi jnainam (VedP.) but with 
his own example: yatha so ’yam devadattas tattvamasityadivakyajnanam. R. argues: 
indeterminate perception must apprehend an object with some distinguishing feature: 
for if the indeterminate perception is followed by a determinate one—when the dimly 
perceived object draws near and is perceived for what it is with all its peculiarities— 
we recognize it as such: “this is that same object”. So we must originally have perceived 
a differentiating feature to recognize it by. The identification “this is that” presupposes 
a common feature to both terms sufficiently peculiar to warrant an identification. The 
Naiyayika reasons: we cannot know a cow before we know what makes a cow (sc. its 
gotva-), so unless we know its generic peculiarities we cannot know it for a cow. We 
know beforehand its generic peculiarities by repeated observation of cows. So the 


204 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


generic structure’ is the differentiating feature of more than one entity as 
it applies to more than one. On the strength of this observation it is said 
that second and subsequent cognitions are determinate. 


From this appears that the assumption!4”? that one and the same 
padartha has a double essence according to its being at once different and 
non-different should be rejected as self-contradictory. The generic struc- 
ture itself is a paddrtha different from the entity that has this structure; 
because it is a modification of it, it is incapable of functioning separately 


simple “this”—perception we have at the indeterminate stage combines with our recollec- 
tion of the generic peculiarities, and the simple perception combined with the recollection 
produces the knowledge of the relation: “this is a cow”. R. replies: how do we arrive 
at our knowledge of these generic peculiarities in the first place? Knowledge of the 
individual precedes that of the class: we perceive a cow, ie. a member of the class cow, 
when we see repeated in that individual the features previously perceived in another 
animal. So R. goes beyond the “recollection of gotva” which the Naiyayika combines 
with the indeterminate “this” to produce the determinate or complex “perception” ‘this 
cow’: this view fails to account for the origin of the very perception of gotva. So R. 
poses that the indeterminate perception is the first complete perception of a previously 
unknown object, e.g. a cow: never having seen a cow before we perceive it neither as 
a member of a class, nor yet as an individual: hence R.’s use in Ved. and SBh. of the 
vague word pinda- “mass, object” which strictly cannot be equated with vyakti- (as 
ABHYANKAR does in his Notes, followed by Lacomse, Note 306) “individual member of a 
class”, for at that stage its individual peculiarities are no more perceived than its generic 
differentiae (which presuppose class). Determinate becomes our perception when we 
see our second and third cows: we recognize the same features and see that they are 
characteristic not of one animal but a number of them: generic features. R. defines 
SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 29 ato nirvikalpakam ekajatiyesu prathamapindagrahanam “indeterminate 
is our perception when we see the first object of a class of objects.” So YID. I, p. 9 
nirvikalpakam nama gunasamsthanddivisistaprathamapindagrahanam. This view of nir- 
vikalpaka is substantially that of the Prabhakaras whereas the advaitin follows the 
Bhatta; cf. Prakaranapaficika p. 54-55, esp. tasmat sdmanyavisesau dve'vastuni pratipadya- 
manam pratyaksam prathamam u<pa>padyate, kimtu vastvantaranusamdhanasinyataya 
simanyavisesaripata na pratiyate “consequently, in the first instance, the (indeterminate) 
perception proves to establish both generic and individual peculiarities, although, failing 
the accompanying comparison of another entity (of the same class), these generic features 
and individual peculiarities are not yet recognized as such,” etc.; savikalpakam tu tat- 
prsthabhavi te eva vastuni sdmanyavisesdtmand pratipadyate “the determinate perception, 
on the other hand, following on the indeterminate one, apprehends both sAamanya and 
viSesa as such”, See Jua, Prabhakara Mimamsa, p. 157 sqq.; Kupruswamt, Indian Logic, 
p. 168-69. 

147. bhedabheda view, to be refuted in greater detail infra §$ 54ff; they reason 
thus: one substance may have two “modes of being” (dvydtmakatva); it may be modified 
and it may be non-modified. The modifying feature has no real being of its own: it 
cannot exist apart from its substance. So the modified substance, the substance con- 
joined with its mode, has an essence of its own. Then the substance may be devoid of 
modes that are extrinsic to it: so it has another essence of pure entity (svariipa). So 
one substance has two essence, one including and one excluding its mode, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 205 


and for the same reason it is not separately apprehensible. But all this 
does not prove that that entity has a double essence. 


§ 31. Moreover, if the adherent of the doctrine that a non-differen- 
tiated entity exists contends that in the case of a self-evident entity the 
differentiations brought about by superimposition are denied by all words, 
he should tell us which these words are. 


—The Sruti vacérambhanam vikdro naimadheyam mrttikety eva 
satyam}48 for one. This Sruti tells us that only the pure entity, which in 
the given context is implicitly designated as the cause,!49 is real and every- 


thing else unreal, because transformation and denomination are merely 
vacarambhana.19 


— This proves nothing. After it has been asserted that when one is 
known all becomes known, this illustration is adduced for him who thinks 
it impossible to have knowledge of one through knowledge of another: it 
shows that when one and the same entity exists as name-and-form by virtue 
of a differentiation in its condition by transformation, etc. — which differen- 
tiation is absolutely real—, then that entity, when known, remains the same 
entity also if it have another configuration different from the first one. It is this 
view for which the above illustration is furnished and no denial of all differ- 
entiation can be read in it.©! In vacirambhanam the word vaécé means ‘on 
account of vyavahdra or practical purpose” and arambhana is “that which is 
taken hold of”. The name of clay in the condition of clod is one thing and 
its practical purpose is another.52 That same clay in the condition of jug, 
bowl, etc., has different names and different practical purposes; nevertheless 
it is that same clay which in every transformation is ‘for various practical 
purposes taken hold of’ by various generic structures and denominations. 
And it is concluded that that is eva satyam “the same remains real”. Thus 


148. ChUp. 6, 1, 4. 

149. Viz. sat of ChUp. 6, 2. 

150. Cf. S. ad Brs. 2, 1, 14 (=R. 2, 1, 15) tadananyatvam Grambhanasabdadibhyah 
etc. 

151. ie., from being sikgma- “subtle”, matter is transformed (as a vikara in the 
causal process of parinama) into being sthiila- “gross”, constituting particularized 
entities. 

152. For R. the effect is another phase (avastha) of the cause; vikdra- is esp. the 
product of the process of parinama viewed under the aspect of its relation to the cause 
from which it developed. 

153. This interpretation is detailed in SBh. 2, 1, 15 as follows: drabhyata alabhyate 
spréyata ity Grambhanam/krtyalyuto bahulam (Panini 3, 3, 13) iti karmani lyut / vaca 
vakyapurvakena vyavaharena [S (TatpD) ad vyavaharena (Ved.): prayojanataya hetu- 
tvam ityarthah] hetunety arthah/ghatenodakam aharetyddivakpurvako hy udakdharana- 
divyavaharah / 


206 . J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


the possibility of knowledge of one thing through this knowledge of another 
thing is illustrated. No entity is being denied reality in this éruti, but the 
very sense stated above is further enlarged upon. 


§ 32. Besides, if it were alleged by the Sruti yendSrutam Srutam that 
everything different from Brahman is unreal, the example yatha somyaikena 
mrpindena would fail to illustrate the point.154 


— But the point is another one. The lack of reality of the transfor- 
mations of clay — jug, bowl, etc.—, comparable to the falsity of the snake 
in the rope, etc.,> is not proved for Svetaketu, who is eager to learn, by 
another pramana and the ratiocination.% It is this point that our passage 
means to prove. 


— No, you cannot possibly assume that, for that violates the charac- 
ter of an example introduced by yatha.157 


§ 33. But in the Sruti sad eva somyedam agra asid ekam evddvitiyam}8 
it is obvious that both emphatical particles sad eva and ekam eva and the 
emphatical advitiyam deny all homogeneous and heterogeneous differentia- 
tions exceeding pure being.19 


This is not true. First he had illustrated with an example that the 
knowledge of one entity (which can have two modes of being, that of cause 
and that of effect) when having one mode of being, will give rise to the 
knowledge that it remains that same entity, even though it have another 
mode of being. Then, in order to propound that Brahman is the universal 
cause — which Svetaketu does not yet know — he begins sad eva somyedam. 
In this passage, to be construed idam agre sad evasid, the word agra- denotes 


154. sadhyavikala-; sidhya- “probandum”, ie., the assertion that we may know 
all by knowing one. The obvious sense of the drstanta is that there is a causal process 
of parindma by which a lump of clay is transformed into clay jugs: which means that 
these clay jugs, etc, are as real as the lump of clay; so the instance cannot illustrate 
the irreality of the “all to be known”. 

155. The erroneous cognition of a snake where there is only a coiled rope is 
the stock-example of the falsity of our cognition of diversity in the Universe where 
there is nothing but the One self-identical Brahman. The ‘metamorphosis’ of the rope 
into snake is an instance of vivarta (cf. infra §§ 36; 49). 

156. The advaitin is made to suggest that where both sensorial evidence and 
ratiocination fail to prove the falsity of the world, the sentence yatha ete. is a statement 
of scriptural authority (Sabdapramana) which proves this falsity apodictically—The other 
pramana is the pratyaksa, ratiocination (yukti) stands for anumanapramana; cf. S. pra- 
tyaksena bddhddarsandn mithyatvasiddhih/vydvartamanatvadiyukter dbhasatvéc ca na 
mithydtvasiddhih. 

157. yathd introduces a statement of analogy, not a final assertion. 

158. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 

159. “This (Universe contained in its cause) was sat at the beginning. “S. explains 
sat as sattamatram, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 207 


a specific time, and idam}® refers to the phenomenal world. Of this world 
denoted by idam he says that it exercises an action, viz., the action of being 
real, and that it is a really being substance. The words ekam eva deny 
that this was already transformed into a variety of names-and-forms.!*! When 
this has been declared, it is set forth that the world has a material cause 
which is sat. The fact that the omniscient Brahman is a material cause 
for something else does not contradict His omnipotence: for even in the 
view that He is associated with something different from Himself as its 
operator, He remains essentially different from everything else. Therefore 
the word advittyam negates, on the ground of Brahman’s omnipotence, the 
existence of a separate operator. 


There are a number of Srutis, like ours, which first declare that 
Brahman is the material cause and afterwards that He is also the operative 
cause. Other Srutis first admit that Brahman is the operative cause and 
then raise the question: if Brahman is different from everything else, then 
how can He be the material cause, etc., as well? — and then, by reasoning 
from Brahman’s omnipotence, solve the apparent contradiction and assert 
that the same Brahman is the material cause and all subsidiary causes as 
well. In the Sruti kim svid vanam ka wu sa vrksa Gsid yato dyadvaprthivi 
nistataksur manisino manasaé prcchated u tad yad adhyatisthad bhuvandni 
dharayan'® it is first imagined that, if Brahman be the material cause, this 
would contradict our inference from general observation : 16 but subsequently 
this seeming contradiction is solved by Brahman’s categorical difference from 
everything else in existence: brahma vanam brahma sa vrksa Gsid yato 
nistataksur manisino manasa vibravimi vah brahmadhyatisthad bhuvanani 
dhaérayan.164 


160. It (idam) is a substance because real being (sat) can be predicated of it. 

161. It was not yet manifested as a plurality but abode in a single mass. 

162. TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6 “What was the wood, or which was the tree, out of which 
they fashioned heaven and earth? Ask this with your minds, O wise, that which super- 
vises and supports the worlds.” In this éruti, it is assumed, the material cause (vana-, 
wvrksa-) is distinguished from the operative cause or adhisthatr (sc. tad yad adhyatisthat) ; 
I have translated accordingly. 

163. sdmanyato drstam “knowledge by inference from general observations 
explained by Vatsyayana (Bhasya ad NS. 1, 1, 5) vrajyapiirvakam anyatra drstasyan- 
yatra darganam iti/tatha cadityayasya /tasmad asty apratyaksapy ddityasya vrajyeti/ 
“We see an object in another place than we saw it in before when it has moved; so 
we conclude the same for the sun (though we have not seen it move); so, albeit unper- 
ceived, we know that the sun moves.” Similarly, it is observed generally, that no 
material cause is simultaneously the operative cause as well, so that we might be led 
to infer the same for Brahman. But since Brahman is categorically different from every- 
thing else (sarvavilaksana-), this general observation has no validity as to Him. 

164. TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6: “Brahman is the wood, and Br. is the tree, out of which 
they fashioned heaven and earth: I tell you with the mind, O wise, that it is Brahman 
that supervises and supports the worlds”. (cf. supra note 162), 


208 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


To resume. In the passage under discussion the words agra, etc., 
show therefore that there are a number of differentiations in Brahman Him- 
self. There is no word to be found in it that voices a negation of differen- 
tiations such as you are pleased to assume. On the contrary the existence 
of a time-differentiation shows clearly that Brahman is the cause and the 
world his effect: dsit denotes a specific action; then there are His modes of 
being the material as well as the operative cause of the world; then again 
His quality of omnipotence as proved by the denial of difference between 
material and operative: thus differentiations, unsuspected before, are ex- 
pounded by thousands! 


§ 34. Since this Sruti means to teach that the relation between cause 
and effect is one based upon substantial reality, it gives the lie to the asat- 
karyavada doctrine as voiced in asad evedam agra Gsid, etc.,1® by counter- 
ing it with the question: “How could that really be so, my son!” ie., there 
is no ground whatever for the origination of an entity that did not exist 
before. That is what he says in katham asatah saj jayeta: ie., an entity 
that has originated from asat remains essentially asat, in the same way as 
an entity —a jug, etc.—that has originated from clay remains essentially 
clay. The origination of an existent entity is by definition its conjunction 
with a variety of modes or phases of being, and this conjunction is the ground 
that it may have a variety of practical purposes.1® 


§ 35. In other words, it is declared that one and the same entity 
that is a cause becomes an effect when entering upon another mode of being. 
The point which is sought to establish hereby is this that knowledge of all 
can be had through knowledge of one. But this point cannot be proved in 
the asatkaryavada!® theory, for according to this theory an effect—called 
avayavini®8 because it has several causes: nimitta, samavdyin, asamava- 
yin, etc. — originates as a completely different entity. Hence it is impos- 


165. ChUp. 6, 2, 1 tad dhaika Ghuh—asad evedam agra asid, etc. R. will discuss 
this Sruti presently. 

166. vyavahdra- cf. supra note 153a. 

167. The asatkdryavadda (the doctrine that the effect is not contained in its cause 
but originates as a new entity) is summed up neatly in Annambhatta’s definition of an 
effect (TS. §39): karyam pragabhivapratiyogi “the effect is the counter-entity of its 
own antecedent non-existence,” ie., originates unprecedented. 

168. “Composite, having members,” sc. the various causes. 

169. Cf. Annambhatta’s definition (TS. § 40): karanam trividham samavaiyyasam- 
avayinimittabhedavat / yatsamavetam karyam utpadyate tat samavayikadranam / yatha tan- 
tavah patasya patasca svagatariipddeh / karyena karanena vd sahaikasminn arthe sama- 
vetatve sati yat kdranam tad asamavayikéranam / yathaé tantusamyogah patasya tantu- 
ripam pataripasya / tadubhayabhinnam nimittakéranam / yatha turivemadikam patasya / 
I refer to Athalye’s and Foucher’s discussions of these passages, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 209 


sible anyhow that the effect is known when the cause is known, inasmuch 
as the effect is an entity completely different from the entity that is its cause, 


But, it may be put forward, what are the grounds on which you re- 
ject such a different entity that is avayavin? 


First the fact that, as even our adversary who maintains that the 
effect originates as a new entity must agree!”°—the different name, practical 
purpose etc., which apply to the identical entity, prove that a different 
phase has been entered upon by the cause; and secondly the fact that we do 
not see another entity appear at all. Hence it is said that the effect is nothing 
but the cause in another phase, and that is what our Sruti declares, 


§ 36. But is the asatkaéryavada not rejected just to show that there 
can be no error without a substratum?!”! For one and the same being which 
alone is real in the form of spirituality, evolves into the form of the pheno- 
menal world when it is obscured by Nescience.!”2 If Nescience is to have a 


170. For neither the Naiyayikas-Vaisesikas hold that the effect originates ex nihilo. 
AS R. declares GBh. 2, 27 utpattivinasidayah  sato dravyasydvasthavisesith / tantupra- 
bhrtini dravyani santy eva racanaivisesayuktani patadiny ucyante/asatkdryavadindpy eta- 
vad evopalabhyate / nahi tatra tantusamsthanavisesatirekena dravydntaram pratiyate / 
karakavydpadrandmantarabhajanavyavaharavisesanam etivataivopapatter na ca dravy~ 
antarakalpana yukta / 

171. niradhisthadnabhramaisambhava-; the erroneous cognition of a snake presup- 
poses the existence of a real object (in casu, a rope) on which this false cognition is 
projected or superimposed. Similarly the false cognition of the phenomenal world 
presupposes the existence of a real substratum or adhisthina. The Madhyamika Bud- 
Ghist, professing the falsity of the world of cognized phenomena, denies that this falsity 
is projected or superimposed on something real: so they recognize the possibility of 
falsity projected on a void: niradhisthana / niralambana. 

172. ekam cidrupam satyam evavidyacchaditam jagadriipena vivartate: this sen- 
tence sums up the ontologico-cosmogonical doctrine of advaitavada: there is one entity, 
pure consciousness or spirituality, which alone is real. This one real entity ‘unrolls’ 
itself, or develops, into the world when it is obscured by Nescience, Hence follows that, 
if this Nescience is to have a substratum, the real itself must be its ultimate cause: for, 
as S. remarks (borrowing his argument from R. §§ 46-47, note 218), if the substratum 
were not real in itself, it would stand in need of a substratum itself, and so ad infinitum, 
The vivartavada is an attempt to account for the phenomenal world without sacrificing 
the unchangeability of the absolute. Vivarta is both the process and the product of the 
development of the absolute and real into the finite and non-real, in other words, the 
transition into an effect that has not the same degree of being as its material cause 
(vivarto nama upaddanavisamasattikakaryapattih Dharmaraja’s definition, Ved. P. II, § 85, 
in contradistinction to parinama, the transition of a cause into an effect with the same 
degree of being: parindmo nama upadinasamasattakakarydpattih). This process of 
vivarta has its origin in the obscuration of the absolute by Nescience, its opposite, Strict- 
ly, avidyd itself is the vivarta, and the phenomenal world the parinama of avidya, If 
the Advaitin wants to have ChUp. 6, 2, 1 confute the Madhyamika doctrine, his interpre- 
tation should run like this; katham asatah saj jayeta “how can an ‘existent’ being derive 


Viral 


210 J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


substratum, we must assume that the Real itself is its ultimate cause. Which 
proves that the asatkdryavada theory is untenable. 


This is not true. What is actually declared is this that that theory 
is untenable because the assertion and the illustration that all is known 
when one is known can only have any bearing at all on the topic if the 
satkarya point of view is adopted. For that matter, in your own position 
the theory that an error without a substratum is impossible does not admit 
of proof itself.173 Your doctrine leads to this conclusion: When one holds 
that the defect inherent in a spiritual being is real and that this defect is a 
real basis for errors to arise, then, being oneself afflicted with that defect, 
one is proved to have a vision of a phantom, say a fairy-tale castle, which in 
itself is unreal. But when one holds that this defect is unreal and therefore 
is no real basis for errors to arise, one is proved to have that illusion all the 
same, because of its very basis being unreal! Actually in your position an 
error without a substratum is not at all impossible. 


§ 37. We have already pointed out that Brahman is declared to be 
differentiated by all the qualities ascribed to him: for even the so-called 
purifying statements, satyam jnadnam anantam brahma, anando brahma etc., 
do not contradict the assertion that one denoted object may be qualified by 
a number of qualities which are established by sémanadhikaranya!™ construc- 
tions and by the original sense of the terms. 


from nothing?” The Advaitin and Madhyamika concur in that this ‘existent’ being of the 
phenomenal world is ultimately unreal. Where they differ is the reality of its ultimate 
ground, accepted by the former, rejected by the latter. Sankara (ChUpBh.) states that 
the above Sruti attacks the Vainasikas or Nihilist Buddhists: it is against this interpre- 
tation that R. raises his objection; but cf. my remarks Intr. IIL. 


173. The advaitin derives the illusion of plurality—unreal without doubt—from avi- 
dya or Nescience, about whose unreality he is less sure: he describes it as neither real 
nor unreal (sadasadanirvacaniya-). As R. will explain later, this leaves three possibili- 
ties: it is not sat, therefore asat; not asat, therefore sat; neither sat nor asat, therefore 
both asat and sat. Suppose we have an illusion: it must derive either from a real or 
from an unreal defect. If this defect is real, our illusion is proved, however unreal its 
content may be. If this defect is unreal, our illusion is still established (upapanna) be- 
cause it cannot have risen from a defect that is non-existent. So in the latter case we 
are left with a demonstrable illusion for which we cannot account. Consequently the 
advaitin, unable to define the defect properly, implicitly admits the possibility of the 
niradhisthénabhrama which he professes to deny 


174. samanadhikaranya shows a distinct peculiarity in the one entity denoted: 
the stock-example nila utpalah is “a lotus that is blue and thus distinguished from white 
and red ones.” The sense of a word established by grammatical analysis into root 
(dhatu), stem (pratipadika) and declined form (pada) shows again a number of peculiari- 
ties proper to the concept denoted: it may have a gender, be singular, dual or plural, 
govern or be governed in case relation etc., supra § 28, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 211 


§ 38. But the Sruti athata ddego neti neti!’ is obviously a negation all 
the way round. 


I would ask: exactly what does it negate? 


The entire phenomenal world which consists of incorporated and 


unincorporated beings according to the Sruti dve vava brahmano ripe mirtam 
caivamurtam ca.176 


But, considering the maxim: Better keep from touching mud than 
wash it off,!77 it seems hardly appropriate first to teach that all that was not 
suspected before to be Brahman’s form is actually His form and then in the 
same breath to deny that same teaching. Let us see what the negation really 
means. The Author of the Sutras himself declares: for it denies that Brahman 
is only so much as has been said and asserts that He is more than that:1"8 so 
since immediately afterwards in atha némadheyam satyasya satyam iti prana 
vai satyam tesam esa satyam1”9 a host of qualities like satya etc. is propound- 
ed, the preceding neti neti denies merely that Brahman is only so much: 
Brahman is much more than has been stated before. This is the meaning of 
the above sutra. 


§ 39. But the Sruti neha nanasti kimcana®? clearly denies that there 
is variety. 


Here too it is declared later on, in sarvasya vas? sarvasyesanah,!*! 
that Brahman is satyasamkalpa and sovereign Lord respectively. Hence what 
is actually denied is not what you think but: a variety that would not be 
ensouled by Brahman: that alone is the opposite of what is declared in the 
assertion that the Lord has all entities, spiritual as well as non-spiritual, for 
his body and that therefore, as the Lord of all and as being modified by all, 
He exists as the sole One. In all Srutis of this description there is nowhere 


175. BAUp. 2, 3, 6 “so now the teaching ‘it is not such nor such’”. 

176. BAUp. 2, 3, 1 “verily Brahman has two forms, one embodied and one disem~ 
bodied;” cf. S ad BrS. 3, 2, 22 kim ayam pratisedho (sc. neti neti) rupe (sc. miirtam 
caivamirtam ca) ripavaccobhayar api pratisedhati . . . dvau caitau pratisedhau, dvirne- 
tisabdaprayogat. 

177. praksalanaddhi pankasya dirad asparsanam varam a popular maxim (nyédya): 
quoted twice in Vimuktatman’s Istasiddhi (pp. 25; 215); to be found in Hitopadesa I, 185, 
where the first half reads: dharmartham yasya vittehi varam tasya nirihata. 

178. BrS. 3, 2, 22 prakrtaitavattvam hi pratisedhati tato braviti ca bhuyah. ~ + 

179. BAUp. 4, 3, 6 “so, the name of the real is the real: thus the real is verily the 
vital airs and the possessor of them is the real.” 

180. BAUp. 6, 4, 19 “there is no variety here of any kind.” 

181. BAUp. 6, 4, 22 “the ruler of all, the lord of all.” 


212. J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


a word to be found which in unmistakable terms denies that Brahman is 
differentiated.18? 


$40. Furthermore, you cannot interpret like this: Brahman who in 
reality is mere non-differentiated knowledge finds nonetheless variety in 
Himself when his own proper form is obscured by obscuring nescience. 
Obscuration is by definition the negation of illumination; so, since you do not 
admit that illumination is a property of, and exceeding, the proper form itself, 
it would follow that illumination is the proper form so that actually the proper 
form itself would disappear! To say that knowledge — synonymous with 
illumination—is permanent and that illumination is obscured by nescience, 
means either that the illumination is prevented from originating, or that 
existing illumination is terminated. Either alternative would mean that, since 
no illumination can originate, the proper form has ceased to exist. 


—But illumination remains permanent and untransformed. 


—Then what you say boils down to this: even though there be 
nescience, there is nothing hidden in Brahman: hence follows that He finds 
variety in Himself. Now this makes no sense to honest people.182@ 


§ 41. —But even you must agree!®3 that the proper form of the soul 
is knowledge and that the soul is self-illuminating. Now, when the soul is 
erroneously identified!®4 with the proper form of its body, god etc., we must 
necessarily resort to assuming that the illumination of its proper form is 
obscured, inasmuch as no other formation!®> can be superimposed on the soul 
proper when the soul’s proper form is known. Besides, the error that you 
have pointed out applies to only one soul in our case, whereas in your case, 
since you assume an infinite number of souls, you have to solve it for all 
souls, 


182. This concluding statement rounds off the first part of R.’s refutation of advai- 
tavada, which is, according to the programmatic stanza (§ 2) srutinydyapeta- “in conflict 
alike with sruti and reason.” It has now been shown that the Scriptures lend no sup- 
port to advaita, R. will now demonstrate that its theses cannot stand the test of rational 
criticism. 

182a. satso anirvacaniyam: a pun on the repetitious sadasadanirvacaniya- with which 
the advaitin describes his mayd@ or avidyd. 

183. Both R, and S. hold that the atman is essentially knowledge, but where S. 
defines the essence as knowledge, R. regards knowledge as the essential property of a 
substance; and where S. accepts.only one atman that is at once identical with Brahman, 
R. admits an infinite plurality of individual atmans subordinated to the Supreme Brahman. 

184. abhimédna, see supra note § 24. 

185. dkdra- “configuration, characteristic form”. The atman is, acc. to R. jnrdnai-~ 
kakara~ (~ jidnasvaripa-); by the process of abhimana “présumption (Renou)” the 
atman is erroneously identified with the empirical ego of a given body: the body’s adkara 
is superimposed on it; now, this superimposition is only conceivable if the proper form 
is not evident as such—The term adhydsa supra note 136 belongs particularly to the 
advaitin’s terminology; R. avoids using it. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 213 


§42. The reply to this objection is this. The Supreme Brahman 
is by nature such that his proper form is absolutely opposed to imperfection 
and is solely constituted by infinite knowledge and bliss. He is an ocean 
of noble qualities!8—unlimited, unsurpassed and immeasurable—which are 
proper to his nature. His mode of being is that He is modified by all 
creatures, for his body is constituted by all entities because he is the inner 
Ruler of all entities: firstly the non-spiritual entities which enable the spiritual 
entities to attain the supreme salutary Goal, which are liable to evolutions of 
infinite variety and which are the objects of experiences for the spiritual 
entities—and secondly, the spiritual entities themselves which are of an 
infinite variety, either bond or released: the sum-total of these entities consti- 
tutes a particle of Brahman and forms the material for his sport. They 
constitute his infinite, universal supernal manifestation which is not affected 
by the evolutions!8’ that are brought about by Time, whose proper form 
comprises countless divisions, from the smallest to the highest units!8§ and 
which is the operative cause of all evolutions of the Universe: origination, 
subsistence, resorption etc. It is this Brahman who is the object of our 
knowledge, that is knowledge imparted by the Veda. This Veda consists of 
numberless branches arranging themselves according to the part they belong 
to, Rg-, Yajur-, Sama- and Atharvaveda, whose established doctrines have 
been transmitted in an uninterrupted series of studies,1® itihdsa, purana, 
dharmasastra etc. which are all founded on the Veda, consisting in vidhi,1% 
arthavada!™ and mantra,!%2 and which are instituted by a great number of 
sages who were capable of immediate presentation of Brahman, such as the 
venerable Dvaipayana, ParaSara, Valmiki, Manu, Yajfiavalkya,!%? Gautama,!4 


186. udadraguna-, synonymous with kalydnaguna-, supra note 5. 

187. parinadma- 

188. nimesakasthakalamuhurtaparardhaparyanta-; nimesa- “instant”: 15 nimesas 
make one kasthd: 30 kasthas 1 kala; 30 kalas 1 muhurta: 30 muhurtas one natural day 
(cf. VP. 1, 3, 8-9); parardha- “half the duration of Brahma’s life; cosmic life so far 
lapsed” VP. 1, 3, 26-28. To this passage cf. VP. 4, 1, 84 kalimuhirtidimayas ca kalo na 
yadvibhiteh parinimahetuh. S. adds that Time, though effecting evolution in matter, 
is subject to evolution itself: nimesa etc. are the various products. There is no evidence 
that R. subscribed to the Paficaratra conception of akhandakdla- “impartite Time” cf. 
Scuraperr, Paficaratra p. 66; repeated YID V, p. 77; def. ib. akhandah kalo nityah karyah 
punar anityah (sc. kalah). 

189. patha- “lit. recital” the oral traditions of the Vedic schools; the idea is that 
these texts do only repeat, in a more comprehensible form, what from all eternity had 
been formulated in the Veda. 

190. vidhi- “injunction.” 

191. arthavada- “exegetical portion.” 

192. mantra- “Vedic stanza used in ritual.” 

493. Author of Yajhyavalkyasmrti. 

194, Author of Gautamiyadharmasastra, 


214 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Apastambal® ete. Now we recognize Brahman as the object of our know- 
ledge and the Veda as the pramana of our knowledge: could we then be 
unable to reach a proved conclusion? As the venerable Dvaipayana declares 
in the Mahabharata: .... who knows that I, unborn and undying, am the 
world’s sovereign lord.1% Two orders of entities are in this world, a transi- 
tory and an imperishable one: the transitory comprises all elements, the 
imperishable one is called kitastha. But there is another higher person 
that is called the Supreme Spirit, who is the eternal Lord who penetrates 
and supports the entire Universe.% ‘And He matures the time; no time is 
there, there is the Lord alone. Those, my dear, are the evolutions of the 
realm of the Supreme Spirit. You should reflect on this that this entire 
transcient Universe, evolving from the unevolved to the last differentiations 
and owning a wealth of developments, is Hari’s sport.198 For in Krsna alone 
is the rise and decline of the worlds, and for Krsna exist all these beings 
animate and inanimate. Here krsnasya hi krte “for Krsna” means that 
the Universe is an accessory to Krsna.2 The venerable ParaSara too 
declares: “The word Bhagavat is used for the pure Supreme Brahman in 
his infinite manifestation as the first universal cause2 The word Bhagavat 
connotes all his perfections, knowledge, power, strength, sovereignty, forti- 
tude and glory, without any imperfect quality etc.2°? Thus this word Bhagavat 
is a master-word applicable to none but Vasudeva who is the Supreme 
Brahman. This term, whose object, expression and signification are so 
worthy, applies directly only to Him, and to others only indirectly. That 
Supreme Order called Visnu is thus qualified; it is immaculate, real, 
pervasive, perennial and free from all imperfections.2° And Time, compris- 
ing minute, hour etc., is no cause of any evolution in His manifestation.2%6 
Hear the exploits of Him that sports like a child.207 Manu, too, says: ....the 
Commander of all, subtler than the subtle208. ., Yajnavalkya, too: the puri- 
fication of the ksetrajiia by knowledge of God is deemed the highest. And 


195. Eponym of Apastambiyadharmasitra, 

196. BhG. 10, 3 yo mam ajam. 

197. BhG. 15, 16-17 dvaév imau purusau. 

198. MBh. 12, 25, 9, ka@lam sa pacate. 

199. MBh. 2, 38, 23 Krsna eva hi lokanam. 

200. Same interpretation GBh. 4, 4; on Sesa- supra note 3 and infra § 122. 
201. VP. 6, 5, 72 suddhe mahavibhityakhye. 

202. VP. 6, 5, 79 jndnasaktibalaisvarya-. 

203. VP. 6, 5, 76 evam esa mahdéabdo. 

204. VP. 6, 5, 77 tatra pijyapadarthokti- 

205. VP. 1, 22, 53 evamprakaram alam. 

206. VP. 4, 1, 84 kalaémuhirtadi- 

207. VP. 1, 2, 18 kridato balakasyeva. 

208. Manusmrti 12, 122; the Vulgate reads anyadmsam anorapi. 
209. Yajhavalkyasmrti 3, 34 ksetrajiasyesvarajnanad visuddhih parama& mata. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 215 


Apastamba declares: pith praninah sarva eva guhdsayasya,2" i.e. “all breath- 
ing beings constitute the par “town” or “body’11 of Him whose dwelling- 
place is secret: the Supreme Spirit”; praninah?!2 means “the composite beings 
of matter ensouled by the individual soul.” 


§ 43. But what is the use of this pathos? The objection is still not 
refuted ! 


We reply: once we agree upon this we have refuted your entire 
objection by asserting that contraction and expansion of consciousness,2!8 
which is a dharma of the soul that belongs to its very nature, are supremely 
real inasmuch as they are caused by karman. For you, however, illumina- 
tion is not a dharma but the proper form itself: so contraction and expansion 
of it cannot reasonably be admitted. Factors like karman,2!4 which bring 
about the obscuration, are the cause that illumination cannot originate. If 
you assume that nescience is the obscuring factor, then the illumination, 
which is the proper form, is annihilated, as we have pointed out before. 
For us, on the other hand, the illumination of knowledge, which is an eternal 
dharma of the proper form, is contracted by karman that takes on the form 
of ignorance. Owing to that contraction the identification2!5 of the soul with 
the proper form of its body, god ete., is brought about. This is the difference 
between our views. As has been said: ignorance, also called karman, is 
considered to be the third power by which the power which is the individual 
soul that is in everyone is frustrated and has its share of all the sufferings 
of samsdra which have too long a life. And in proportion that this power 
called individual soul is obscured by the ignorance it works in all beings in 
different degrees.16 Which shows that ignorance, or the karman of the 


individual souls, causes the knowledge, which is a dharma proper to them, 
to contract and expand. 


210. Apastambiyadharmasttra 1, 8, 22, 4 puh praninah sarva eva guhdsayasya; the 
reading sarvaguhasayasya of some MSS., adopted by Sudarsanachari, is, as follows from 
R.’s own interpretation and Biihler’s edition, to be rejected. 

211. S. quotes ‘the Naighantukas’ (= Halayudha, Abhidhanaratnamala 2, 355) 
angam vapur varsma puram pratikam. 

212. pranin-, synonymous with Sartrin “soul in the body.” 

213. caitanya- “spirituality” (<cetana- “spiritual being”; advaitic term rarely 
used by R.), synonymous with jnana- or prakdsga-; for a systematic account of the theory 
of dharmabhitajnaina- see YID chapter VII. 

214. Other factors are, acc. to S., vaésané “residue of former impressions creating 
habits of thought and practice” and the prakrti with its three constituent gunas. 

215. abhimdana. 

216. VP. 6, 7, 61-63; for R.’s apterpretation of this VP. context I may refer to 
my paper The Subhdsrayaprakarana ete. 


216 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§44, Furthermore, on the authority of the Srutis and on the strength 
of the doctrine of identity, you have to#!7 resort to an obscuring nescience 
that is a deficiency which causes Brahman’s proper form to disappear. 
Inasmuch as this nescience itself is false, it requires another deficiency that 
gives rise to the very notion of nescience, just as the phenomenal world 
requires a deficiency giving rise to the very notion of phenomenal world, viz. 
the nescience. Therefore, considering that nescience itself cannot be the 
ultimate cause of false notions, Brahman Itself must be the ultimate cause 
of false notions: since it has no beginning this nescience must have been 
false from all eternity: so it must from all eternity have been falsely conceiv- 
ed by Brahman; and since it cannot be admitted that the deficiency that 
gives rise to the false notion of nescience is ultimately real itself, therefore 
Brahman Itself is the ultimate cause of the false notion of nescience, this means 
that Brahman being eternal we would never get rid of nescience and so 
never be released.?18 


§ 45. On the same grounds”!9 we reject the theory: that there is only 
one body with one soul and the other bodies have no soul, just as the bodies we 
see in our dreams have no souls: in a dream only the dreamer’s body has 
a soul and all the various and endless bodies that appear during the dream 
have no souls at all, because they are only the products of the imagination 
of that single one, so that their souls are false.22° Now we say,22! since Brahman 


217, “Have to” because the advaitin identifies the proper form with the obscured 
knowledge. 

218. Since the advaitin considers the avidya to be “illusory” (mithyaripa-), ie. 
to have no ultimate reality of its own, he must derive whatever reality it has from a 
source or basis (adhisthdna-) that is real, just as he, in order to explain the ‘illusory’ 
phenomenal world, resorts to avidya as the source of this illusion. This source of the 
deficiency avidya, which therefore must itself be deficient, must be real and not illu- 
sory in its turn: otherwise there would be anavastha “regressus ad inifinitum”, every 
unreal deficiency deriving from a preceding one. This real source or substratum can 
be no one but Brahman. Avidya is admittedly unreal from all eternity, so Brahman 
must have had this Nescience from all eternity. Now, the advaitin cannot allow the 
eternal co-existence of truth and untruth; it follows that in the final analysis he allows 
only for untruth: untruth, falsity etc. is the ultimate reality, 

219. Viz. that all except Brahman is illusory (S.). 

220. ekajivavada; Appaya Diksita, SiddhantaleSasamgraha, 2, 2, 32 describes this 
theory in very similar terms and images: eko jivah, tena caikam eva Sariram sajivam, 
anyadni svapnadrstasarirdniva nirjivani, tadajninakalpitam jagat, tasya svapnadarsanavat 
yavadavidyam sarvo vyavaharah; baddhamuktavyavasthapi nasti jivasyaikatvat; suka- 
muktyadikam api svapnapurusantaramuktyadikam iva kalpitam; atra ca sambhavitasakala- 
$ankadpankapraksalanam svapnadrstantasaliladhadrayaiva kartavyam iti. 

221. R.’s argument is: acc. to the advaita only Brahman is real and everything 
else illusory; consequently all bodies are unreal and there exists no proper jiva existent 
in a body. Granted that the bodies and souls that we dream about are illusory, the 
advaitin cannot even maintain that there is an embodied dreamer; the embodied dreamer 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 217 


only imagines the existence of souls different from his own proper form and 
further only imagines that there are any bodies at all, the real existence of 
an embodied soul in one single body is as false as the body itself, so it 
follows that all bodies are false and the existence of souls in those bodies is 
false too. Hence there is no difference between one body and the real 
existence of a soul in it. But for us when we awake from our dream the 
personal body of the dreamer and the real existence of a soul in it are not 
sublated whereas the other bodies and the indwelling souls of our dream are 
sublated. It follows that they are all false and that only the personal body 
with its indwelling soul has any reality at all: that is the difference we 
make, 


§46. Further we must inquire now how the nescience ceases to 
exists, and what that cessation is after all.? 


—The knowledge of identity puts an end to it, and this cessation is 
of such a kind that it is contrary to inexplicable. 


Then we contend: something is contrary to inexplicable means some- 
thing is explicable:223 it must be either real, or unreal, or both, there 
is no other alternative. When it is held to be different from Brahman, then 
the nescience cannot yet have ceased to exist.224 When it is held that 
Brahman Itself is the cessation, then it should have ceased before, because 
that follows from the knowledge of the Vedanta which teaches that Brahman 


is also illusory. The bodies and souls that the (illusory) dreamer dreams about are 
illusory in the second degree, but the illusory dreamer is no more real than the phan- 
toms of his dream. So, in the final analysis, there is no difference at all between the 
existence of any body and the existence therein of any soul, whether they are illusory 
in the first or in the second degree. So the entire instance is inappropriate: appropriate 
is it when the reality of the dreamer and his body is accepted: only then the illusoriness 
of the dream’s bodies and souls can be defined by the reality of the dreamer’s body and 
soul. 

222. S. notes that kidrgi in the question is used pejoratively (ksepartha), as it well 
may be: to it correspond in the reply the words anirvacaniyapratyanikékdra, which to 
R.’s realistic mind is an exceedingly clumsy way of expressing oneself. 

223. Anything not inexplicable (anirvacantyapratyanika) is therefore explicable: 
it must be explained either as real, or as unreal, or as both. If the cessation is unreal, 
there is nothing to discuss. If it is real, two alternatives present themselves: it is either 
different from, or identical with Brahman: 1. if it is different, then duality must persist 
ultimately and Nescience, responsible for duality, has therefore not ceased; 2. if it is 
identical with Brahman, Nescience has ceased from all eternity, so that Nescience does 
not appear at all. If the cessation is both real and unreal, Nescience is non-existent 
on both counts. 

224, Being different from Brahman it is ‘false’ (belonging to the realm of Nes- 
cience), and consequently its annihilation is false; so, if Nescience is annihilated, it must 
still be there to account for the traces of duality left by its own annihilation, 


V. 28 


218 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


was originally non-differentiated. So your theory that the knowledge of 
identity as such means cessation of nescience and that without it there is 
samsara is invalidated. 


$47. Moreover, the question must be raised: considering that the 
terminating knowledge itself is also false, who terminates that terminating 
knowledge in its turn? 


—After having put an end to all difference other than itself the termi- 
nating knowledge vanishes by itself because its nature is but momentary, even 
as a fire in a forest or a counter-poison terminate themselves. 


No! The terminating knowledge is different from Brahman. There- 
fore its proper form, and its origination and annihilation are false. Hence 
follows that the nescience persists in the form of its annihilation.25 So it 
remains to be said what puts an end to the notion that that knowledge has 
been annulled. A forest fire etc. too have of necessity a series of successive 
developments that are contrary to their initial phase of being. 


§ 48. Furthermore, of what kind is the subject of the knowledge which 
denies everything that is different from Brahman as pure consciousness? 


—He has the form of superimposition. 


No, for then he is to be denied by, and consequently the object of, 
the terminating knowledge so that he cannot be its subject. 


—Brahman’s proper form then. 


Then we have two alternatives: is Brahman’s proper form in its 
pure form the subject of the terminating knowledge or in its superimposed 
form? If£ it is swperimposed, than this superimposition and another nescience 
from which it derives will persist because they themselves are not the objects 
of the terminating knowledge. If still another knowledge is assumed to put 
an end to them, there will be a regressus ad infinitum, because this knowledge 
will also have the triple character of all knowledge. For if it lacks this 
triple character?”° all knowledge ceases to be knowledge at all, since know- 
ledge is of some subject and has the form of a definite validity for a definite 
object. So if it lacks this triple character of all knowledge, your terminating 
knowledge is no more terminating than a knowledge constituting a proper 
form. When you assume that the subject of knowledge is Brahman’s proper 


225. As S. remarks: to be annihilated is, by definition, to enter on a phase of 
being opposed to former phases; it is not completely nothing: na tu dravyabhavah. 

226. The ‘triple character’ (triripatva), or the three constituent factors of all 
knowledge are 1. jnatr “the subject of knowing”; 2. jndna- “the act of knowing”; 3, 
jneya- “the object of knowing”. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 219 


form in pure form, then you adopt our point of view. It is ridiculous to say 
that the proper form of the terminating knowledge as well as the person that 
exercises this knowledge are to be numbered among the objects that they 
themselves terminate: not less ridiculous, in fact, than if in the case of an 
action of cutting wood, when it is said: “Devadatta cuts everything but the 
earth,” this would be taken to mean that the person cutting and the cutting 
activity itself are to be reckoned among the things that are cut!?47 


§ 49. Further, we should inquire into another question: what source 
gives rise to that knowledge of identity which puts an end to all diversity? 


—That source is the Sruti. 


That is impossible: for the Sruti being different from Brahman is 
a product of the imagination of nescience and can therefore never act as the 
source of knowledge that sublates the phenomenal world. For a certain 
erroneous notion that springs from a faulty cause, for example that a rope 
is a snake, is not sublated by the cognition that it is no snake but a rope, if 
that cognition too springs from a faulty cause. Suppose that when we have 
that notion of snake and are consequently afraid of it, a certain confused 
person comes along and assures us that it is only a rope and not a snake: then, 
if we knew that that person is confused, his assurance would not sublate 
our notion that the rope is a snake and our fear would not vanish.?% 
Similarly, a man who has effective knowledge””9 knows at the very time when 
he hears the Sruti that the Sruti too is founded on error, since it is different 
from Brahman. Besides, if a man with knowledge were told that the terminat- 
ing knowledge and the Sastra in which that knowledge is assembled can be 
sublated themselves, then he would instantly conclude: “Oh, but then there 
is no reality in the termination of the phenomenal world,” and he would 
know that the phenomenal world is real, in the same way as he would know, 
when a man appearing in his dream had told him that his father had died, 
that his father was still alive in reality. Besides, the statements tat tvam asi 
etc. would not229 sublate the phenomenal world”*! because they are founded on 
error, just as the sublating assurance of the confused person to the effect that 
there was only a rope and no snake would not be sublating at all. 


227, Same comparison SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 125 where TuwauT renders bhiitalavyatirik- 
tam “everything on the surface of the earth”, instead of “everything different from the 
earth itself:” to bhatala- corresponds Brahman, the act of knowing sublates everything 
different from Brahman. Lacombe translates “tout ce qui dépassait la surface de la terre”, 
which is not very clear. 

228. Same argument and comparison SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 54. 

229. prayojakajnanavatah. 

230. ie., even if the laksita sense of tat tvam asi is admitted. 

231. As represented by tvam, the embodied atman. 


220 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§50. But, in point of fact, would it not be more like this: when 
we are afraid of something in a dream but we realize while dreaming that 
it is only a dream, then our previous fear vanishes, as is a matter of common 
experience: in the same manner this could be possible in our case too. 


That is not true, for it is also a matter of common experience that 
our fear does not cease, even though we realize while dreaming that is all 
a dream; so that does not make any difference. 


§51. You say that while we hear the sruti we realize that it is all 
a dream. But what you actually say is this: the Sastra, although it is false 
because it is a product of an erring imagination, expounds that Brahman 
has no second; and because later on it appears that the Sastra cannot validly 
bear upon a Brahman that is so as the Sdstra asserts, it follows that this 
Brahman is proved. This is improper reasoning, for the assertion that all 
is nil sublates itself too. 


—But this assertion itself is found on error. 


Then you say yourself that the assertion that Brahman has no 
second is also founded on error. The only difference is that the invalidity 
of the assertion itself that all is nil appears later on. So, he who holds the 
view that all is nil and he who holds the view that all entities different 
from Brahman are false do not recognize the reality of the pramanas that 
prove their own points; therefore the really competent declare that their 
views have no title to philosophy at all: Philosophy marches always on as long 
as philosophers have real means of knowledge; but the philosophy of the 
Sunyavadin has no title since it has no means.222 


§ 52. Moreover which pramdna proves that the phenomenal world 
as apprehended by perception is false? 


—As perception can by other means be proved to derive from a defi- 
ciency, the non-deficient scripture, being not so proved by other means, sub- 
lates perception. 


Then I ask: what deficiency can give rise to a perception that has 
infinite diversity for its object? 


—Perception is produced by a deficiency arising from beginningless 
vdsanas™4 of diversity etc. 


232. Kumiarila, Slokavarttika, Niralambanavada, st. 128 ed; the half gloka here 
translated follows (129 ab): adhikdro ’nupaéyatvan na vade Sinyavadinah, where upaya 
= pramanda, 

233. Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1. 

234, Residues of mental impressions, creating a mentality and habits. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 221 


But then the Sastra is produced by that same deficiency, so percep- 
tion and Sastra cannot stand in the relation of thing sublated and thing sub- 
lating since they derive from the same deficiency. 


§53. Perception apprehends the padarthas which have definite gene- 
ric structures, e.g. of a human being, connected with the elements ether, 
wind etc. and with the sense-objects sound, touch etc. deriving from these 
elements. The Sastra, on the other hand, is concerned with the proper form 
of Brahman as modified by endless differentiating features, like his being 
the immanent soul in all creatures and his being real, with the various 
methods of worshipping Him, wpdsana etc., and with the specific fruits that 
are obtained by His Grace which follows attainment of him, and with the 
specific eradication of the fundamental causes giving rise to things dis- 
pleasing Him,—in a word, objects beyond the scope of perception. Hence 
follows that there can be no contradiction between Sastra and perception. 
Anyone who maintains the superior authority of Sastra qualified by 
numerous qualities, such as being the established doctrine transmitted by 
beginningless and endless uninterrupted studies etc., must necessarily 
recognize the reality of perception. 


But enough of refuting this web of false doctrines and faulty reason- 
ing that is swept away like reed by the forceful wind of hundreds of 
$rutis in succession. We have done with it! 


§54. The second school? assumes that there is no other entity 
existing but a Brahman conditioned by adjuncts.¥* It follows that where 
there is a natural admixture of adjuncts to Brahman all defects inherent 
in adjuncts will be found in Brahman Himself. That means that all srutis 
which set forth that Brahman is free from all defects, e.g. that there is no 
imperfection in Him,?3’ are discarded. 


§55. But the idea is rather like this: a space-unit contained in a 
jug is of another character than the main space,”*® since only the former is 


935 Bhaskara’s bhedabhedavada, more precisely aupadhikavada: doctrine that 
Brahman, conditioned by real upadhis, constitutes the phenomenal world. 

236. upadhi- adjunct, ie. an accidental factor added to an entity, subjecting it 
to restrictions and delimitations which condition its mode of being without impairing 
its essence”. 

237. apahatapapma, ChUp. 8, 7, 1. 

238. dkaga- “space/ether,” first of the mahabhitani, conceived as a material ele- 
ment that is spatially unlimited: it is held to be eka- “indivisibly one” and vibhu- “om- 
nipresent”. Space may be adjoined to by a jug which has a finite measure of capacity; 
although this jug with the space contained therein delimits the space to a finite extent, 
it does not, to the mind of the aupadhikavadin, affect its unlimitedness, The comparison, 


222 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


limited, and both spaces are different from each other. The properties, positive 
and negative,™® inherent in these space-units do not affect the main space 
because the main space is not so particularized. Similarly, the defects 
inherent in the embodied soul, which is set apart and determined by diver- 
sity brought about by adjuncts, do not affect the Supreme Brahman, i.e. 
the Brahman that is not subjected to adjuncts. 


This proves nothing. It is not possible to cut the indivisible main 
space off from the jug etc. for it cannot be divided up; so that the jug 
remains connected with the main space itself.249 Similarly it would follow 
that since Brahman cannot be cut off, He would remain connected with the 
adjuncts in his entirety. 


—But the particular place in space connected with the jug differs 
from all other places in space.241 


From the fact that the main space remains connected with the jug 
in varying places it follows that, when the jug moves about, any place 
without any restriction can be connected with the jug. So, since the 
adjunct is in a comparable way conjoined with Brahman without any 
constant restriction to a definite place, it would follow that it can move 
about in varying places in Him, and if it does so, varying places in Brahman 
would alternately be connected with the adjunct and disconnected: that 
would mean that the whole of Brahman could be conjoined with the adjunct 


although, as far as I can see, not developed by Bhaskara in this way, is found in his 
Brahmasttrabhasya, eg. 2, 3, 43 (p. 141) katham punar niravayavasya paramatmano 
*méah sambhavati / agamat tavad avagamyate yathagneh ksudra visphulinga iti drstanta 
iti pranayanadt / yatha caikasasya parthivadhisthanavacchinnam karnacchidram ca: “but 
how is it possible that the Supreme Spirit, who is indivisible, has an amsa?—This is 
learnt from the Scriptures: it is demonstrated in the illustrative instance “just as tiny 
sparks spring up out of a fire, similarly all pranas, all worlds, all gods, all creatures 
spring from this atman” (BAUp. 2, 1, 20), just as from space (a part) is delimited by a 
substratum like a clay jug, and (the space contained in) the cavity in the ear”. Also ile 
4, 21 (p. 81) samyag cha bhavan asti bhedo ’py anadikdlapravrttavidyaikarmopadhyavac- 
chedad améo hi parasyayam jivo naima yathaigner visphulingah, yathikdsasya parthivddya- 
dhisténopadhyavacchinnas chidrapradesah tadamSasabdagrahanasaktyapeksa, ete. 

239. guna and dosga. 

240. In other words: the finite character of the space enclosed in a jug cannot be 
separated from the main space: the main space contains the finitized extent so that, in 
its entirety, the main space is restricted: it can never transcend this extent. 

241, The point which the aupadhikavadin wants to make is that the finitized ex- 
tent of main space, though concededly never disconnected from the main space, yet 
derives from its isolated finiteness a distinct individuality marking it off from main space: 
essentially the enclosed space remains space. 

242, R. retorts that each and every part of space can be delimited by a jug, so 
that space is forever alternating between limitedness and unlimitedness. Applied to 
Brahman this consequence is absurd, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 223 


and that every moment He would be bond and released! People in their 
right minds laugh at this. 


§56. The one indivisible space is the auditory sense but nevertheless 
space is only partially defined as a sense:*43 similarly Brahman too can be 
shown to be partially defined. 


It is not reasonable to say that, since a definite place in space if 
connected with a certain room in the ear that has been prepared by a 
special sort of wind takes on the function of sense,244 therefore space itself 
is partially defined as a sense, although that place is infinitely variable.2* 
The bodies of all beings move freely without any restriction through space: 
therefore they are all connected with all and sundry places in space. So, 
if applied to our topic, it would rather follow that there is endless variation 
in and no constant restriction to the places in Brahman that are connected 
with adjuncts. 


$57. —JI£ we assume that space is the auditory sense by its proper 
form, we can likewise state that space is partially defined as a sense.™6 


But actually space is not the auditory sense at all. For the 
Vaidikas declare: the eleven senses evolve out of the vaikarika ahamkara.2*" 


243. The argument is that only that part of space contained in the aural cavity 
is the auditory sense. This argument is essentially the same one as that put forward 
above: even though akaéa be partially defined as a sense (which R. does not admit), 
there is no spatially fixed part for it: any part of space may take on this function. 

244, The Naiyayika theory of sound holds that srotra- “auditory organ” is that 
extent of space that is delimited by the aural cavity (karnasaskulyavacchinnam), The 
organ of hearing therefore cannot move out to find its object (as the organ of seeing 
goes out to find its object), since outside the aural cavity it is plain Akasa, not srotra. 
So the space inside the ear (Srotra) receives the sound. R’s expression vadyuvisesasam- 
skrta is explained by S. uccdranaprayatnajanitavayuvisesasamyogasamskrta- “prepared. 
by the contact with a particular current of air produced by the energy of producing 
sounds.” 

245. R.’s objection is that all space must be definable as $rotra since space is indi- 
visible: any part of space may happen to be contained in an aural cavity, so all space 
must have this function. 

246. This argument is more urgent: the aupadhikavadin concedes that all space is 
essentially Srotra, either in potentiality, or, in definite parts of it, in actuality. But, 
if applied to Brahman this would mean that Brahman is essentially identical with the 
finite conditioned entities: aupadhikavada becomes. pantheism, implicating the Absolute 
in the conditions of the finite. 

247. However primitive these ancient Samkhyan views may appear, their intro- 
duction here is very apt: while, to the very end, arguing by analogy of the drstanta 
supplied by his opponent, R. proves that a scrutiny of the drstanta itself 
puts his adversary in the wrong.—The 11 senses are the manas- “co-ordinating organ of 
sensorial impressions”, the 5 sensorial and the 5 motorial senses (buddhindriya and 
karmendriya). 


224 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


The venerable Parasara says likewise: taijasinindriyany ahur deva vaikari- 
ka dasa, ekddasam manag catra deva vaikdrikah smrtah;*8 i.e. aham- 
kara is triple: vaikdrika, taijasa and bhitadi; respectively it is sattvika, 
rajasa and tadmasa. After having declared that the order of creation 
is such that the elements, space, etc., evolve out of the tamasa 
form of ahamkara, viz. the bhitddi, he alludes to the rival view that 
the eleven senses evolve out of the taijasa or rdjasa form of ahamkara. 
Then he states his own view, namely that the vaikdrika indriyas evolve out 
of the sattvika ahamkara: devé vaikarikah smrtah, where devah means “the 
senses”.49 In the Mahabharata it is declared that the bhitas nourish the 
ahamkarika indriyas.>° Even if it were true that the senses evolve out of 
the bhitas, the senses of the purusa would — since they are transformation 
of the elements akaSa, etc.—become distinct and peculiar evolved products of 
these elements,?>! in the same manner as the body. Similarly, it cannot 


248. VP. 1, 2, 46-47 “some contend that the indriyas derive from the taijasa 
form of ahamkara, (but) the ten senses, and manas as the eleventh, are (in fact) pro- 
ducts of its vaikdrika form: hence the senses are known as vaikdrika.”..There is some 
discrepancy between the various interpretations of the commentaries. Citsukha and 
Visnucitta explain devah as indriyadni (C. devah divyanti vyavaharanty ebhir iti deva indri- 
yani; V. indriydném devasabdavacyatvam tadadhisthatrdevatabhiprayena); Sridhara and 
Dattatreya as the superintending deities, referring to BhP. 2, 5, 30 digvatarkapraceto’svi- 
vahnindropendramitrakah (ka- = Prajapati). The Visistadvaitin V. is the only one who 
interprets like R. svapaksam dha-atra deva etc.; the others have the ten indriyas derive 
from taijasa, and only manas from vaikérika, explaining the plural vaikdrikah as the 
superintending deities of manas.—R.’s interpretation corresponds to that of Pajficaratra, 
cf, ScHRapER, Pancaratra, p. 76. 

249. The order of evolution described in VP. 1, 2, 34 is as is shown here: Pradhana 
— Mahattatva > Ahamkara; 


Ahamkara 
| 

(1) tamasa = bhitdadi (2) rajasa = taijasa (3) sattvika = vaikdrika 

| | | 
tanmatras bhitas buddhindriya karmendr, 
sabda akasa srotra ———> vak 
sparsa vayu tvak ——> karau 
rupa tejas caksuh ——— padau 
rasa ambhamsi jihva) => upastha 
gandha samghata nasika ——— payu 


00. Reference is to MBh. 12, 194, 5 ff. and similar texts. 

251, Yet, being products of the bhiitas, the senses can be distinguished from them: 
they are not the elements itself, but their products (srotra < dkaa). It is not clear exact- 
ly which stand R. takes: if 4kASa is not Srotra, then what is Srotra? “Nayant aucune 
idée du dispositif de l’oreille interne, les VaiSesika-Naiyayika ont localisé lorgane de 
Yaudition dans le pavillion; et, comme ils n’y apercevaient rien de spécial, au creux de 
la conque .. qui percevait le son: il s’ensuit que dans ce cas particulier Vorgane du sens 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 225 


be refuted that Brahman, being not cut off, nor divisible, nor transformed, 
would inevitably have without any restriction the defects of conjunction with 
adjuncts of infinite evil. Now, philosophers who know the scriptures do not 
think much of this: it is a theory of the very credulous! Assuming that 
Brahman’s essence is subject to evolution, they sublate the Srutis that de- 
clare that He is untransformed.*>2 And when they say that Brahman itself 
remains untransformed and that it is Its creative potency that is involved 
in evolution,2528 then we raise the question: is this potency an evolved pro- 
duct of Brahman, or is it identical with Brahman? Whichever alternative 
is adopted, the assumption would remain necessary that Brahman’s essence 
is subject to evolution. 


§58. The third school®53 assumes that the individual soul and 
Brahman are different-non-different: it follows that Brahman is identical 
with soul and that in the same way as Saubhari® is different from 
himself and the Lord is different from His own incarnations, everyone is 
different from the Lord. This leads consequently to the conclusion that 
the defects inherent in the jivas are also His. 


In other words: the view that God Himself constitutes, in His essence, 
the various creatures gods, men, brutes, plants etc., declares that God is 
identical with these creatures in essence. Such being the case, all defects 
like happiness, unhappiness etc. that go with the soul, also go with the 


se confond pour eux avec la substance dont il pergoit la qualité” Foucher, TS. p. 76. 
Insisting on some sort of a difference between auditory sense and space, comparable to 
that between body and component elements, R. seems to suggest that the auditory sense 
is vested in an organ of the body rather than identical with an indefinite and variably 
localized part of space. 

252. Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 113 bheddbhedavade tu brahmany evopadhisamsargat tat- 
prayuktajivagatadosa brahmany eva praduh syur iti nirastanikhiladosagunatmabhiavopa- 
desi hi virodhad eva parityaktah syuh / svabhivikabheddbhedavade ’pi brahmanah svata 
eva jivabhavabhyupagamaid gunavaddosas ca svabhavikd bhaveyur iti nirdosabrahmata- 
ditmyopadesaviruddha eva. A detailed refutation is given in SBhyds 14: 

252a. Cf, Bhaskara, BrSBh. 1, 4, 25. 

253. School of Yadavaprakasa, S. sums up the difference between Bhaskara and 
Yadava: acidbrahmanos tu sarvasya brahmatmakatvasruteh, nirmalatvadisruter wpaddhyan- 
tardbhyupagame ’navasthanacca bhedabhedau svabhivikiv abhyupagatau bhaskaramate 
/ yadavaprakasamate tu muktav api bhedanirdesgasruter jivabrahmanos ca svabhavikiv 
abhimatév iti bhida. 

254, Saubhari, mythical person, reputed to possess 50 bodies at once to satisfy his 
50 wives(drsyate hi saubhariprabhrtiniém Saktimatam yugapad anekasarirapratipattih, 
SBh. 1, 3, 26), of which he was the sole jiva (saubhariprabhrtisu hy dtmaikatvendneka- 
gariraprayuktasukhadipratisamdhinam ekasya drsyate, ib. 2, 1, 15 p. 434); for the story 
see VP. 4, 2, 66-133; BhP. 9, 6, 38-55. The purpose of saubharibhedavat as well of sva- 
vatdrabhedavat is to exemplify identity in the guise of plurality: in spite of the seeming 
difference there is but identity: God is the individual soul, 


V. 29 


226 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Lord, just as all actions, e.g. the fetching of water, that go with the jug, 
bowl etc. which originate from a single lump of clay, also go with that lump 
of clay itself. 


§ 59. — But is it not rather like this: in the same way as a substance 
of clay by itself, when it has no function in the various generic structures 
of jug, bowl etc., has other effects as well: similarly the Lord by Himself, 
when He does not function as the soul of god, man, animal etc., is possessed 
of omniscience and of all perfections like the power of having his every 
will realized. 


True. You say that one and the same Lord possesses all sorts of 
perfections in one part of Himself and all sorts of imperfections in another 
part of Himself. This is the logical consequence of the fact that two 
different parts do not make two different Lords. 


— But both parts are well distinct?®5 from each other. 


What do you gain by that? For if the same Lord is in one part 
eternally miserable you cannot say properly that He is happy in another 
part. The Lord would be comparable to Devadatta who has one hand 
anointed with sandal-paste and adorned with bracelets and rings, and 
his other hand hit by a hammer and hurting with hell-fire ! 


We may say that this bhedabheda doctrine is worse even than the 
doctrine that Brahman is nescient:2§ for it contends that immeasurable 
misery is ultimately real and that it can never be overcome because there 
is no end to beings implicated in samsara.257 


§ 60. —But the part ‘embodied soul’ in Him is different from Himself. 


Then you are walking on my road, But when the relationship 
between Lord and soul is described in terms of identity in essence, then it 
is logically unsound to maintain difference; whereas it is sound when this 
identity is stated in the terms of a body-soul relation.258 Contrary to you 
we can declare that the Lord’s qualities are universal, including his 
Sovereignty over all worlds etc.; and the simanddhikaranya thus retains its 
proper sense. 


§61. Further, we say that one and the same entity cannot possibly 
be different and non-different at once, because that is a contradiction in 


255. vyavasthita- “delimited one from the other.” 
256. i.e., advaitavedanta. 


257. Since God is identical with the jiva in bondage, bondage is henceforth 
inescapable. 


258. R.’s solution of ‘difference in union’. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 227 


terms. If a jug is different from a cloth, than the one cannot exist in the 
other; only if there is no difference one can exist in the other. But that in 
the same place and at the same time one and the same entity does at once 
exist and not exist in another entity is a contradiction in terms. 


§ 62. —But one entity can at once exist in another entity in so far 
as it is class and not exist in so far as it is individual.?°9 


If there is no difference between the class ‘ox’ and the individual 
‘hornless ox’, it follows that the individual ‘hornless ox’ also exists in the 
individual ‘broken-horned ox’. If class and individual are different and 
non-different, there are two cases at once: first, if the individual ‘broken- 
horned ox’ is not different from the class ‘ox’, the broken-horned ox exists 
in the hornless ox; second, if they are different, the class does not exist at 
all in the individual, just as the class ‘buffalo’ does not exist in an individual 
horse.269 This contradiction is plainly insoluble. Class ete. constitute the 
generic structure”! of a given thing and are consequently modifications of 
that thing; hence, as we have said before,?62 the modifying attribute and the 
modified thing are different paddarthas, the modifying attribute has no 
separate function and cannot be separately apprehended,?6? and the same 
generic structure can appear as modification in more than one thing. 


§63. The judgment “this is he” is founded upon identity of mode, 
in the same manner as is the judgment: “this one is a man-with-a-stick.”264 
And this very modification, of class etc., is declared to be the differentiation 
of a given thing. The possession of such a differentiating attribute furnishes 
the ground on which we treat a thing as different.26° This modification is 
at once the ground for acting upon the difference and for acting on the 
thing itself, in the same way as awareness: just as the being aware 


259. That is to say: two entities are non-different inasmuch as they belong to 
the same class and share the same generic differentiae, whereas at the same time they 
are different in so far as they differ in individual characteristics; cf. Bhaskara, BrSBh. 
Tiss 

260. R. considers this statement under the two aspects by which the dvydtmakatva 
(supra note 147) in bhinndbhinnatva can be viewed; abhinnatva and bhinnabhinnatva; 
the third aspect of bhinnatva conflicts too self-evidently with the alleged dvydtmakatva 
to bear mention. I have interpreted this extremely concise passage with the aid of S.; 
SRINIVASACHARI’S interpretation (Bheddbheda p. 211) differs. For a very detailed refu- 
tation cf. Vacaspati’s Bhamati on Sankara’s BrSBh. 1, 1, 4; cf. also SBh, 1, 1, 4. 

261. samsthina- see supra note 86. 

262. Supra § 30. 

263. prthaganupalambha- 

264. S. comments: so ’yam iti buddhir anuvrttavisayavyavaharanvita buddhis 
tajjatiyatvabuddhir ayam api gauh iti buddhir ity arthah; in the second case ayam api 
dandi, the stick (danda-) is the prakara, 

265. vyavahdarahetu- 


228 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


of a given thing furnishes at once the ground for our acting on that thing 
and for acting upon the awareness?® itself, 


§64. In consequence of these reasons all theories that perception 
apprehends mere being and does not apprehend difference are rejected,267 
firstly because only an entity that has a definite generic structure — class 
etc. — is apprehended by perception; secondly because this class ete. taking 
on the form of generic structure furnishes the ground for treating it as 
different in regard to its correlative. That it is a fallacy to assume evolution 
in proper form has already been pointed out.268 


III 


§65, All the srutis—e.g. He who residing in the earth is different 
from the earth, whom the earth does not know, whose body is the earth, 
who directs the earth from within, He is thy soul, the immortal inner 
Ruler.269 He who residing in the soul is different from the soul, whom the 
soul does not know, whose body is the soul, who directs the soul from 
within, He is thy soul, the immortal inner Ruler;279 He who lives within the 
earth, whose body is the earth, whom the earth does not know, etc....who 
lives within the aksara, whose body is the aksara, whom the aksara does 
not know....who lives within death, whose body is death, whom death does 
not know—He is the One who is the immanent soul of all beings, who is 
without any evil, the divine unique God Narayana;2™ Two birds, inseparable 
companions, have alighted on the same tree. One of them eats the sweet 
berry; the other looks on without eating;2”2 The commander of men, who 
has entered within them, the soul of all;?73 after having created it, He entered 
into it; having entered it It became present and yonder, true and untrue;2"4 
By way of this living soul....;2 When he knows the soul from the mover, 
then he attains with It immortality;?"6 when the enjoyer knows the enjoyed 
and the mover —all three of them are declared to be the triple Brahman;27 


266. samvedana- 

267. By his theory of dvyatmakatva the bhedabhedavadin postulates the possibility 
of apprehending the “pure thing” (vastusvariipa-) apart from its differentiations and 
attributes. Of this view R. has disposed supra § 30, 

268. Supra § 57. 

269. BAUp. 3, 7, 3. 

270, BAUp. 3, 7, 22 (Madhyamdina). 

271. SubalUp. 7 antahsarire nihito guhaiydm ajo yasya prthivi gariram yah prthi- 
vim samcaran (in this order throughout) ete, 

272. MundUp. 3, 1, 1. 

273, TaittAr, 3, 11. 

274, TaittUp. 2, 6. 

275. ChUp. 6, 3, 2. 

276. SvetUp. 1, 6. 

277. SvetUp, 1, 12, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 229 


He that eternal, spiritual and unique grants the desires of the eternal spiritual 
and plural;278 the Lord of the gunas, Lord of matter and soul;?” There are two 
unborn ones, knowing and not knowing, sovereign and not sovereign;*®°—all 
these Srutis and hundreds more, as well as the declarations of Valmiki, 
ParaSara and Dvaipadyana, foremost of Vedic scholars, corroborating the 
evidence of the Srutis, such as the entire world is thy body, the earth is thy 
fortitude;81 whatsoever is created by all living creatures in the production 
of all that can be created, O Brahman, that all is verily Hari’s body;?8? I am 
the soul, O Gudakeésa, that is the resting-place of all beings;?8 having en- 
tered into and residing within the heart of all I am the source of 
remembrance, knowledge and surmise;?84—all these Srutis and smrtis pro- 
pound that Brahman Himself is modified by all spiritual and non-spiritual 
entities; (1) since it is learnt from them that the Supreme Brahman is the 
soul of all and that all entities, spiritual and non-spiritual, constitute his 
body; (2) since the body is a padartha?®5 only by virtue of its function of 
modifying the being it embodies; and (3) since, although body and embodied 
being have different properties, they are not confused with each other. 
This doctrine of a Brahman modified by all spirit and non-spirit 
they propound by the use of sdamdanddhikaranya constructions etc., 
taken in their primary sense, which set forth Brahman’s supernal 
manifestation28? by declaring that Brahman is embodied by all. For 
simanadhikaranya is the application of two terms to connote one meaning 
under the aspects of two modifications. In our interpretation it retains its 
primary meaning. So in the sdmdanddhikaranya of tat and tvam 
in tat tvam asi288 the word tat refers to the perfect Brahman who is the 
universal cause and the possessor of all perfections; whereas the word tvam, 
which is used predicatively of spiritual entities, refers to Brahman 
as being qualified by the individual soul, or as embodied by that soul, exist- 
ing as the inner Ruler of the soul that constitutes His body. When taken 


278. KathUp. 2, 2 (5), 13 = SvetUp. 6, 13. 

279. SvetUp. 6, 16. 

280. SvetUp. 1, 9. 

281. Ramayana, 6, 120, 26. 

282. VP. 1, 22, 38. 

283. BhG. 10, 20. 

284, BhG. 15, 15. 

285. i.e., exists as a describable magnitude with a definite function, 

286. S. explains: kdsthasya rumayds ca dharmabhede saty eva kasthasya samsar- 
gaprayuktam lavanatvam dréyate: evam dharmabhede ’pi samsargaprayukto yah 
samkaras tasya Sarirasaririnor asambhavad ity arthah. 

287. vaibhava- “totality of the phenomenal manifestations (vibhiti) of the divine 
Personality.” 

288. ChUp. 6, 8, 7. 


230 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


in the sense that the other schools adopt the sémdnadhikaranya proper 
would be violated and Brahman made imperfect. 


§66. In other words, the declaration that Brahman is such proves 
the reality—in subtle and gross phase alike—of the phenomenal world, 
consisting in a plurality of spiritual and non-spiritual entities, as the mode 
denoted by the word such. Thus the full meaning of the passage bahu 
sydm prajayeyeti”® is exhausted: the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual 
entities exists conditionally as the generic structure2® of this same Lord 
who has several generic structures, being either cause or effect. 


§ 67. — However, it is a matter of common knowledge that only class 
and property are modifications of a substance in the form of its generic and 
specific structure, so that they alone can have the attributive function denot- 
ed by the word such, and not the substance itself. So it is improper to 
contend that a paddrtha capable of independent function is merely, as an 
attributive ‘such,’ a modification of the Lord. 


Not less common is the knowledge that a substance, too, eg. a 
stick, an ear-ring etc., serves to modify another substance. 


— But then we see that a possessive suffix?®! is required to make an 
independent substance like a stick etc. into a mode of another substance: 
danda — dandin, kundala —kundalin etc. Therefore it is against reason, if 
by means of sémanddhikaranya a spiritual or non-spiritual entity that is a 


substance of the same order as an ox is declared to be a modification of 
the Lord. 


I reply: it is common usage in Vedic as well as in profane speech 
to call, by sdmdandadhikaranya, certain substances, forming complexes of 
elements —ox, horse, man, god etc. — the modes of spiritual beings, gods etc., 
namely as their bodies: for example “Devadatta is born a man because of his 
good karman; Yajfadatta is born a cow because of his bad karman; another 
spiritual being is born a god because of his exceedingly good karman,” etc. 


§ 68. What we mean is this: we are not concerned about whether 
class, or property, or substance may constitute a mode. When a certain 
entity serves as a distinctive feature for a certain substance, then we can 
properly say, by means of a saméandadhikaranya construction coordinating 
that entity with that substance, that it has no function apart from that 


289. ChUp. 6, 2, 3. 
' 290. samsthéna-. 


291. matvarthiyapratyaya- “suffix with the sense exemplified by matu(p) °mant= / 
mat-,” ‘Panini 5, 2, 94 tad asydsty asminn “that is of /in this,” 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 231 


substance and therefore constitutes a mode of it.292 And if a substance that 
may have a separate function is in some place at some time wanted as a 


mode for another substance, then it has a possessive suffix; and that is all 
the difference there is. 


So, since the sum-total of all entities, animate and inanimate, consti- 
tute the Lord’s body, their proper forms have real existence as the modes 
of the Lord. Such being the case, the Lord, who is the entity modified by 
all these entities, is denoted by the various words that denote these entities. 
Therefore these entities can appropriately be terms in sdmédnddhikaranya 
with Him. All this we have already expounded in detail when we elucidat- 
ed the Sruti on the separation by name-and-form.2%3 


§ 69. Consequently, Brahman Himself is also all effects, since He 
has the generic structure of being modified by all things: prakrti, purusa, 
mahat, ahamkara, tanmatra, elements and senses,?%4 the Egg of Brahma 
consisting in fourteen worlds that derive from the above entities,?® and the 
gods, men, brutes,” plants etc. that live within that universe. So by know- 
ing solely that Brahman is the cause we know all. In this manner it is 
established very well that knowledge of all can be had through knowledge 
of one. At the same time it is stated, on the strength of the causal relation ete. 
established hereby,?97 that the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual enti- 
ties is ensouled by the Supreme Brahman inasmuch as it modifies Him. 


292, ie. all the material objects and their ensouling spiritual principles (jiva-) 
are in essence nothing but a mode of the Supreme Being. In the same way as the name 
of a body may conveniently be used to refer to the spiritual principle residing in it 
(e.g. devadatto manusyo jatah, where Devadatta = jiva and manusya- is the body.), 
so the Supreme Being may be denoted by the name of the jiva (e.g. tat tvam asi). 


293. ChUp. 6, 2, 3, supra § 17. 


294. Samkhyan terms: purusa- “spiritual order”, prakrti- “natura naturans” > 
mahat, first evolution = buddhi- “cognitive faculty” > ahamkdara “subjectifying organ, 
ego-factor” from which on the one hand evolve the tanméatras “rudimentals” (sabda- 
etc.) > elements (bhita-, akaSa etc.), and on the other hand the senses with their co- 
ordinator manas (I follow the account of Visnupurana, 1, 2 to which R. evidently sub- 
scribes), 

295. Puranic cosmological conception of a universe built up in layers of 1. sub- 
terraneous, 2. terrestrial, 3. celestial worlds hierarchically ordered: (1) Patala, Mahatala, 
Talatala, Rasatala, Sutala, Atala, inhabited by subhuman beings and/or souls in tor- 
ment; 2. Bharloka “earth”; 3. Bhuvarloka, inhabited by superhuman beings; Svarloka, 
suprasolar heaven, also Indraloka; Maharloka; Janarloka; Taparloka; Satya- or Brah- 
maloka. 

296. For an explication of the term tiryazic- in this sense cf. VP. 1, 5, 22 

* 297. S. explains karyakdranabhavasabdena sanmiilah satpratisthah (ChUp. 6, 8, 6) 
ity asyartho vivaksitah. 


232 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§ 70. — But does the negation, expressed in the Srutis that declare 
that Brahman is untransmuted and irreproachable,?8 not deny that in his 
proper form the Supreme Brahman is the substratum of evolution? In 
prakrtis ca, pratinadrstanténuparodhat?? the Author of the Sutras declares 
that, by virtue of the assertion that knowledge of all can be had through 
knowledge of one and on the strength of the adduced instance of the clay 
and its effects, the Supreme Person is the material cause of the world. But 
being the material cause means being the substratum of evolution. Now 
how can this be established? 


§71. The reply is as follows. It has been said that the pheno- 
menal world animated by souls does equally constitute the material cause. 
Contrary to the assumption that the Lord suffers evolution in the form of 
individual soul, is the assertion naétmda, Sruter nityatvac ca tabhyah:° the 
notion that Brahman is cruel and partial is refuted by the assertion — based 
upon the above assumption that the souls have no beginning — that it is 
the karman of all the various embodied souls that causes cruelty and 
partiality: vaisamyanairghrnye, na: sdpeksatvat2°! In na: karmavibhaigad 
iti cen; nandditvdd upapadyate capy upalabhyate ca3°2 the Author declares 
that the contingency of obtainment of what is not due to karman and the 
loss of what is due to karmarn would only occur if the embodied souls were 
not eternal.3% 


§72. The Srutis declare also that prakrti is without beginning. In 
ajam ekdm lohitasuklakrsnam bahvim prajaim janayantim saripam/ajo hy eko 
jusamano *nusete jahaty enaém bhuktabhogam ajo ’nyah® e.a. it is shown 


298. Both terms nirvikdra- (-karya-) niravadya- express particularly the Abso- 
lute Principle’s absolute freedom from the conditions and limitations of the ‘transformed’ 
effect. 

299. BrS, 1, 4, 23 “[Brahman is] the material cause, since [thus] there is no dis- 
agreement with the assertion (ChUp. 6, 1, 3) and the illustration (ChUp. eg ca 

300. BrS. 2, 3, 18 “The individual soul [does] not [originate, as follows] from 
the Scriptures and from [its actual] eternity [proved] by those [Scriptures].” 

301. BrS. 2, 1, 34 “[If it be objected that this means that] partiality and cruelty 
[are proper to Brahman, then I reply] no, since [karman] is taken into consideration.” 

302, BrS. 2, 1, 35 “If it be objected that this is not so, because there is no 
distinction of karman, [then I reply that it follows from the fact that] the Aatman is 
without beginning: it is established and apprehended.” 

303. In other words: the very eternity of the Atman enables a perfect justice in 
retribution to be worked. Whatever befalls to a soul is due to its karman: there is no 
arbitrary end put to its existence which would subject it to only part of what is right- 
fully coming to it. SBh. 2, 1, 35 repeats the same words tathanabhyupagame *krtabhyupa~ 
gamakrtaviprandsaprasangah, 

304. MahaNarUp. 9, 2 “With the one uncreated (matter) that has form, and that 
produces effects of various kinds, one uncreated (soul) joins itself to enjoy it, whereas 
another uncreated (soul) goes free from it when it has ceased to enjoy it”, = SvetUp, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 233 


that both prakrti and purusa are unborn. The Srutis out of this the Master 
of maya created this entire Universe and the other component was tied 
by the ma&ya,2% and you are to know that the maya is prakrti and the Master 
of maya the Sovereign Lord? show that it is the prakrti that is the 
substratum of transformation in its proper form2°7 Compare also the sruti 
the Cow without beginning and without end, she is the genetrix that brings 
the beings into being;3% and the smrti be sure that prakrti as well as purusa 
are both without beginning, and that transmutations and gunas alike are 
the products of prakrti2 Earth, water, fire, wind, ether, manas, buddhi 
and ahamkara are the eight components of my prakrti3!° Know, however, 
that I have still another prakrti which is of a higher order than the former, 
a prakrti that is constituted by the embodied souls, on which this material 
world is dependent, O Arjuna3!! Taking my material from my own prakrti 
I create again and again;3!2 and under my guidance the prakrti with its 
animate and inanimate beings is brought forth? 


§ 73. Therefore, since the prakrti too constitutes the Lord’s body, 
the term prakrti denotes the Lord—who is the prakrti’s soul—as being 
modified by prakrti. Likewise the term purusa denotes the Lord — who is 
the purusa’s soul—as being modified by purusa. Consequently the Lord 
is also the soul of the transformations of both prakrti and purusa. So the 
smrti declares: Visnu is the evolved as well as the unevolved, purusa and 
time; the same Sovereign Lord is alike that which moves?!4 and that which 
is moved, O Brahman3!5 It follows that only that part in the Supreme 


4,5 (reads prajah srjyamandém) where no doubt (cf. next stanza dvd suparna sayujad etc.) 
a play is intended on aja “she-goat” with red, white and black kinds, and aja- “he-goat”’, 
Red white and black products of the primeval causal matter are the fire (tejas-), 
water (dpas) and earth (anna-), the three pre- or proto-Samkhyan elements of ChUp, 
6, 2, 3; cf. Intr. chap. I. 

305. SvetUp. 4, 9 asmdn mayi srjate, and cf. R.’s exegesis SBh. 1, 4, 27. 

306, SvetUp. 4, 10 maydm tu prakrtim vidyat. 

307. As distinct from the Atman which suffers the transformations (vikdra-) of 
contraction (samkoca-) and expansion (vikdsa-) not in its proper form or essence 
(svaripa-) but in its attribute knowledge. 

308. MantrUp. 5; this stanza, continuing sitasita ca rakta ca sarvakamadugha vibhuh, 
is evidently inspired by SvetUp. 4, 5 above, 

309. BhG. 13, 19. 

310. BhG. 7, 4. 

311. BhG., 7, 5. 

312, BhG. 9, 8. 

313. BhG. 9, 10. 

314, ie. “sets in motion (pravartayati), creates”. 

315. VP. 1, 2, 18; the “evolved” (vyakta-) is the subtle primeval matter manifested 
in the gross creation as name-and-form, the ‘unevolved” (avyakta-) this subtle matter 
before this manifestation; Time as the nimittakarana operating on prakrti, the upadana- 
karana, cf, supra note 188. 


Vv. 30 


234 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


‘Spirit — modified by prakrti—that is constituted by prakrti is at all sub- 
ject to transformations; that part in Him that is the substratum of this 
modification is not subject to them. Likewise all the obstacles of spiritual 
life?!6 belong to that part in the Supreme Spirit, modified by individual soul, 
that is constituted by the individual soul; that part in Him that is the 
substratum of the modification ‘individual soul’ is the Controller, ir- 
reproachable,*!” possessed of all perfections and the power of having his 
every will realized.318 


§ 74. Such being the case, the Lord has the mode of being of cause 
on the one hand and on the other hand that of effect, viz. the Universe 
of which He is the material cause. So there is no difference between cause 
and effect,°!9 and consequently no Sruti is contradicted. Thus Brahman has 
the mode of being of cause when his body is constituted by prakrti and 
purusa in their subtle phase®2? (i. the phase in which they are not 
yet subject to division by name-and-form: in this phase the Universe is in 
the state of resorption), and Brahman has the mode of being of effect when 
his body is constituted by the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual enti- 
ties in their gross phase (i.e. in which composite prakrti and purusa are 
divided by name-and-form into isolated entities: this passage of Brahman 
into his gross phase is the creation of the Universe). So the venerable 
Parasara declares: He is the cause of the unborn prakrti and purusa which 
are effects,221 


§75. This is the reason why all terms that denote prakrti and purusa 
— modes of the Lord — whether in their subtle or in their gross phase, denote 


316. apurusdrtha- “that which is not, or obstructs, the attainment of the puru- 
.sarthas “goals of human endeavour”, esp. paramapurusartha- “release”; in this connexion 
the obstructing factors are contraction and expansion of knowledge (samkoca-, vikdsa-), 
the vikaras to which the soul in samsara is subject.—Cf. SBh. 1, 4, 27 tat-(sc. brahma-)- 
prakérabhutaksetrajnagatas capurusarthaih: ksetrajia is esp. the individual soul in the 
‘transmigratory process of undergoing the results of its former acts. 

317. In the invariable sense of “free from transformations (vikdras)”. 

318. satyasamkalpatva-, divine attribute par excellence. 

319. This non-difference, it should be noted, is unilateral: the effect, participating 
in the immanent cause is not “something else (anya-,) something new” as the Naiyayikas 
contend, but materially the same as the cause and hence indiscerptibly connected; the 
cause, however, is completely independent of and different from the effect: there is no 
reciprocal non-difference, no identity. 

320. Note that prakrti and purusa are especially used to denote matter and spirit 
at the pre-manifest stage as undifferentiated “principles”. This undifferentiated subtlety 
does not, on the one hand, reduce matter to a primordial chaos, nor on the other hand 
‘affect the fundamental individuality of the Atmans mutually: they preserve their in- 
-dividuality as monads (anu-) while in ‘gross creation’ they are not so much individualized 


-8s particularized, or empiricized, by the bodies with which they are identified, 
321. VP. 1, 9, 37, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 239 


in their primary sense the Supreme Spirit as being differentiated by the 
modes they constitute: in the very same manner as the terms god, man 
ete. denote the individual souls incorporated by the bodies god, man etc. 
To put it differently: in the same manner as the terms god, man etc. in 
their primary sense denote the embodied soul that is their modified 
substratum, since the diverse evolved products of prakrti— such as god, 
man ete.—are paddrthas only in so far as they are modifications of the 
embodied soul:322 thus all terms denoting any spiritual and non-spiritual 
entity denote in their primary senses the Supreme Spirit, since that entity 
denoted modifies the Supreme Spirit by constituting his body. 


§76. The relation between soul and body means the relation 
between substratum and dependent entity incapable of functioning sepa- 
rately, between? transcendent controller and thing controlled, between 
principal and accessory**4 In this relation the one term is called atman or 
“soul” because this is the one who obtains®5 an object since he is in all 
respects the substratum, the controller and the principal; the other term is 
called body, i.e. form, because it is a modification*** that is inseparably con- 
nected since it is in all respects dependent entity, thing controlled and acces- 
sory. For such is the relation between the individual soul and its body. 
Consequently, inasmuch as all constitute the body of the Supreme Spirit, He 
can be denoted by all terms. 


§77. This is declared by a host of Srutis: sarve veda yat 
padam dmananti227 sarve veda yatraikam bhavanti 38 i.e. “since they 
denote the sole One, they denote only one single sense;” eko devo 
bahudhaé nivistah,29 sahaiva santam na vijdinanti devah®° etc., where 
devah means “the senses”,3%! i., “the senses—terminating in the 


322. Cf. supra note 285. 

323. prthaksiddhyanarhadharadheyabhdva, esp. the relation between attribute and 
subject, or mode and modified substance (prakdraprakaribhava-). 

324, Sesasesibhdva-, this relation will be explained infra § 121. 

325. dpnotitydtma; an old etymology possibly inspired by the early occurrence of 
a prakrt form appa; cf. Sankara ad AitUp. 1, 1: atméa apnoter atter atater va, and Ananda- 
giri who in his vyakyA quotes the stanza: yac capnoti yad ddatte yac catti visayan tha/yae 
cisya samtato bhavas/asmad atmeti giyate //. 

326. prakdrabhiitam ity akdrah Sartram; not a facile play on words: R. tries to 
bring out the etymological significance of both words: “something built on a basis” 
pointing at the utter dependence of “mode” or “form” on an inner ensouling principle. 

327. KathUp. 4, 15 “the word that all the Vedas cite”. 

328. CittyUp. 11, 1 “in whom all the Vedas become one”. 

329. CittyUp. 14, 1 “the one God residing in many places”. 

330. CittyUp. 11, 4 “the divinities do not know Him with whom they exist”, 

331. Cf, R.’s interpretation of VP. 1, 2, 46-47, supra note 248, 


236 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


manas*8? of gods, men etc. have no knowledge of Him who having 
entered into themselves as their inner soul by being their immanent 
Ruler, remains with them.” So, likewise, the pronouncements of the puranas: 
natah sma sarvavacasdém pratistha yatra sasvati:333 for the basis of a word 
is in the object denoted. kdrydéném karanam pirvam vacasém vacyam 
uttamam4 vedais ca sarvair aham eva vedyah etc.**5 “all these terms denote 
only the immanent Ruler modified by body and soul:” for compare the éruti 
Well, by entering the three deities by way of their living soul I will separate 
name and form. 5% Similarly Manu’s word: prasdsitaram sarvesim aniyamsam 
aniyasim/rukmabham svapnadhigamyam vidyat tam purusam param,337 i.e. 
“the prasdsitr or “controller’?%8 of all, having entered into them, sc. as their 
inner Ruler, is subtler than the individual souls (aniyaémsah “Souls” who are 
subtler because they pervade®? all non-spiritual entities), sc. because He 
pervades? them in their turn; rukmabha- “having the appearance of the 
sun”; svapnadhigamya-*4! “to be arrived at by cognition similar to a dream”, 


332. “The eleventh sense”, the co-ordinating organ of sensual impressions. 

333. VP. 1, 4, 23 ab; the stanza continues tam ddyantam agesasya jagatah paramam 
prabhum // “we bow for the paramount Lord, the beginning and the end of the entire 
Universe, in whom is the perennial basis of all words.” : 

334, JitStotra 1, 7a “the prime cause of the effects, the supreme object denoted 
by the words”; the second half runs: yoganam paramam siddhim paramam te 
padam viduh; according to Dr V. Raghavan from Madras, in a personal communication, 
the Jitantastotra—a very popular hymn among South-Indian Vaisnavas—is assigned in 
MSS to the Astakgarikalpa of Paficaratragama. 

335. BhG. 15, 4. 

336. ChUp. 6, 3, 2. 

337. Manusmrti 12, 122; Vulgate reads anor api. 

338. niyantr-, signifying God’s direction of the soul as its immanent atman; note 
that Kulluka gives the same interpretation: prasdsitdram niyantaram brahmddistamba-~ 
paryantasya cetandcetanasya. 

339. vydpakatayad; because the soul cannot rightly be said to be ‘invariably 
concomitant’ with the body in the Nyaya sense, it follows that the word vydapaka- is 
used in a more literal sense cf. GBh. 2, 17 vydpakatvena niratisayasiksmatvad dtmano 
vindsanarhasya tadvyatirikto na kascit padartho vindsam kartum arhati, tadvydpyataya 
tasmat sthilatvat etc. 

340. God as Visnu the Pervader, 

341. Cf. Kulluka: svapnadhigamyam drstdnto *yam, svapnadhisadrsajnranagrahyam / 
yatha svapnadhis caksunadibahyendriyoparame manomatrena janyata evam datmadhir 
api—R., however, evidently takes as the tertium comparationis the extraordinary 
vividness of the images of our dreams, The anudhydna- “contemplation” is an apex state 
of consciousness in which there is complete immediate presentation of the beloved God, 
cultivated and at last attained by the uninterrupted rememorization of His perfections. 
It is synonymous with the dhruvaénusmrti- SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 9-10, described seyam smrtir 
darsanaripa pratipadita / darsanarupata ca pratyaksapattih / ...... atah siksitkdraripda 
smrtih smaryamanatyarthapriyatvena svayam atyarthapriya/ ...... evamripa dhruvanu-< 
smrtir eva bhaktisabdenabhidhiyate, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 237 


i.e. apprehensible only by contemplation in a state of extremely lucid percep- 
tion. enam eke vadanty agnim maruto “nye prajdpatim/indram eke pare 
pranam apare brahma sasvatam:*# eke sc. “some Vedas”: i.e. inasmuch as 
the Supreme Brahman has, as described above, entered into everything as 
the prasasitr or immanent Ruler, the terms agni etc. denote Him as adequately 
as the term “eternal Brahman”. Similarly another smrti: ye yajanti pitrn 
devan brahmandan sahutasanan/sarvabhiténtaratmainam Visnum eva yajanti 
te:43 i.e. the terms pitr, god, brahman, fire denote, by denoting themselves, 
simultaneously Visnu Himself as their immanent soul. 


$78. This is the central meaning of all Sastras: the individual souls 
are as such essentially uncontracted,44 unlimited and perfect knowledge” 
But they are enveloped346 by ignorance in the form of karman. So they are 
subject to contraction of knowledge proportionate to their karman, and they 
enter into bodies of various kinds and classes, from Brahma to tuft of grass. 
Their range of knowledge is now confined to that which their various bodies 
encompass. So these souls are led to identify themselves with their various 
bodies and to perform acts that follow from this identification. Consequently 
they enter the continuous surge of samsara, in this form that they ex- 
perience®47 the pleasure and pain correlated with these acts. As it is im- 
possible for them to release themselves from this samsara without resorting 
to the Venerable Lord,*48 therefore, to serve this purpose, the sastras start 


342, Manusmrti 12, 123; the Vulgate reads in a etam, in b manum anye; “some 
(Vedas) call him Agni, some the Maruts, others Prajapati, yet others Indra or Life, 
others again call him the eternal Brahman”. 

343, Daksasmrti? “Those who worship the ancestors, the gods, the Brahmans and 
the fire [so R.; rather “the brahmans who keep the sacrificial fires”], worship really 
Visnu, the immanent atman in all creatures”. 

344, asamkucita- “not contracted to the limited scope of empirical ego”. 

345. Note, again, that knowledge is the essential property of the atman and so 
may stand for the essence itself. 

346. vestita-, term taken from VP. 6, 7, 61-62 avidya karmasamjnanyd trtiya saktir 
isyate / yaya ksetrajnasaktih sa vestita nrpa sarvaga. 

347. wpabhoga- term esp. used for the experiencing (suffering / enjoying) of the 
fruits of karman by the ksetrajna. 

348. bhagavatprapattim antarena. S. remarks that this is said bhaktiyoganisthasyapi 
nispattyartham tadangatvena prapattir apeksitatvat prapattinisthasya svatantratayo- 
piyatvdc ca “because the one who devotes himself to bhaktiyoga stands also in need of 
prapatti as a propaedeusis to perfect his bhakti, and also because prapatti by itself, 
independent (of bhakti) is a means for the one who is devoted to prapatti”. Elsewhere 
(Réimanuja on the Bhagavadgité, p. 24 ff). I have tried to show that R. does not 
consider prapatti a separate—let alone superior—‘discipline’ from bhakti, but rather a 
propaedeusis to bhakti, or even identical with it; S. inclines—though here at least not 
too overtly—to the later view that prapatti alone (svatantrataya) is a means of release. 
Considering, however, the evidence of the Ved. I see no reason to change my opinion 
about the position of prapatti in Ramanuja’s doctrine, 


238 J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


with setting forth the equality of all those souls: they are equal because; 
when they are free from the differentiations god, man etc., they all have 
the self-same form of knowledge. Then the Sastras declare that that proper 
form of the soul is itself ensouled by the Venerable Lord, because it is the 
soul’s sole proper form and essence*? to be accessory to its principal. This 
stated, they propound subsequently the proper form of the Lord: He is cate- 
gorically different from everything else as He is in absolute opposition to 
imperfection and solely comprises perfection; He is the abode of innumerable 
numbers of beautiful qualities, boundless and absolute; He is the soul im- 
manent in everything, because each and every spiritual and non-spiritual 
entity is brought into existence by His will. Then the Sastras conclude by 
expounding that worshipping Him, as well as obtaining the necessaries for 
this worship, is the means of attaining Him. 


§79. So is said in nirvaénamaya eviyam &tma jnanamayo ’malah/duh- 
khajnanamala dharmah prakrtes te na caétmanah:%9 i.e. inasmuch as they 
derive from karman resulting from the natural conjunction of soul with 
matter, the properties summed up do not belong to the proper form of the 
soul, What is said is this: by distinguishing between that which has got and 
that which has not,3*! we learn that these properties belong to matter ex- 
clusively. Likewise in vidydvinayasampanne brahmane gavi hastini/suni 
caiva Svapake ca panditéh samadarsinah,3*!4 i.e. panditah are they whose in- 
tellects* discriminate the proper form of the soul from the prakrti in the 
form of god, man, animal, inanimate things with which it is conjoined; they 
are samadarSinah, i.e. by knowing the real nature of the soul, viz. that it is 
separate from the differentiated forms of that prakrti, they see that the soul 
that exists in any of these infinitely diversified configurations has the same 
form as all other souls.53 So the pronouncement ihaiva tair jitah sargo 


349. °ekarasa®; rasa- is here taken in the double meaning of “essence” and 
“ecstasy”, corresponding to °ekasvariipa/-svabhava’ (e.g. GBh. 18, 54) and °ekarati® 
(GBh. Intr. asesasesataikarati-): serving God as His sesa by the loving representation 
of bhakti is as such a source of extreme joy, as R. repeatedly declares, 

350. VP. 6, 7, 22 “this @tman is full of beatitude and knowledge and it is pure; 
the properties of unhappiness, ignorance and impurity are proper to the prakrti, not 
to the atman”; on nirvaénamaya- cf. R. GBh. 2, 72 ad brahmanirvanam: nirvanamayanr 
brahma = sukhaikaténam atmanam.—Gita Press ed. has the less apt reading °ajndnamaya 
dharmah. 

351. priptipraptavivekena, S, anvayavyatirekdbhyam ity arthah: discriminating by 
means of positive and negative arrangement of terms; cf. Foucher, TS. p. 132-34. 

35la. BhG. 5. 18 “wise men see the same in a Brahmin accomplished in know- 
ledge and self-discipline, in a cow, an elephant, a dog and a dog-eater”, 

352, buddhi-; cf. R. GBh. 5, 18 panditah = dtmayathatmyavido “knowing the 
essentials of the atman”, 

353. Cf. GBh. 5, 18 indnaikakarataya sarvatra samadarsinah/visamakaras ty 
prakrter natmanah /atma tu sarvatra jMinaikdkarataya sama iti pasyantity arthah, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 239 


yesam samye sthitam manah/nirdosam hi samam brahma tasmad brahmani 
te sthitah354 where nirdosa- means “free from the defect of natural conjunc- 
tion with differentiated forms of prakrti, such as gods etc.”: thus any mem- 
ber of the order of souls is, when abiding in its proper form, equal to any 
other member, because it has the common form of knowledge as nirvana.?°* 


§80. Sruti, smrti, itihdsa and purana propound by using terms like 
His body,3°* His embodiment®*’ etc. and by saéméanddhikaranya that this soul 
described above is essentially accessory?’ to the Lord, controlled by Him and 
dependent on Him. This we have already set forth above. 


§ 81. In the smrti daivi hy esd gunamayt mama maya duratyaya/mam 
eva ye prapadyante mayam etim taranti te59 it is declared that that release 
of the above soul from the samsara in the form of its natural conjunction 
with prakrti, which is due to karman and consists in various gunas, is im- 
possible without resorting to the Lord. The same is established on the 
strength of Srutis like no other path is there for him to tread.3® In the 
smrti: In an unevolved form do I pervade this entire Universe: **! all creatures 
depend on Me but I do not depend on them. At the same time they do not 
rest on Me: behold my miraculous power !36 the Lord explains the diversity 
of the forms of His sovereignty by His omnipotence. Likewise He says: 
vistabhyaham idam krtsnam ekaméena sthito jagat>® i.e. “having entered into 
the world — which is of an infinitely varied, miraculous character — as its 


354, BhG. 5, 19 “Those who have already here on earth overcome the conjunction 
have their minds focused on equality; for, if free from defect, the atmans are equal:” 
sarga- in this (Ved.) connexion is doubiiees to be taken as samsarga- (GBh. sarga- = 
samsara-); note that R. here interprets brahma as atmavastu- “the order of atman” 
(neuter °vastu- corresponding with the neuter of brahma) as in GBh. 5, 19; on the 
equation brahman = atman (ie. individual atman), cf. my Ramanuja ete., p. 34-35. 


355. nirvdna- in the above sense “beatitude” (VP. 6, 7, 22). 

356. Sarira-, e.g. Antaryamibrahmana, BAh. p. 3, 7, 3-22. 

357. tanu-, eg. KathUp. 2, 23. 

358. sesa-. 

359. BhG. 7, 14 “for that divine Magic of Mine, constituted by gunas, is hard to 
overcome: those alone who resort to Me overcome that Magic”: on R.’s interpretation of 
this stanza see my Rdmanuja etc. p. 25 f. 

360. TaittAr. 3, 13, 1 tam evam vidvdn amrta tha bhavati / ninyah pantha ayandiya 
vidyate; note that acc.toR. the word for knowing (vedana-), sc. in vidvdn, is synonymous 
with updsana- or bhakti-. 

361. BhG. 9, 4; R. GBh. explains avyaktamurtina as aprakasitasvaripena 
mayantaryaming. 

362. BhG. 9, 5ab. 

363. BhG. 10, 42 “supporting this universe I constitute the world with a etna 
portion of myself”, 


240 J, A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


immanent soul with an infinitesimal particle?®4 of Myself, I keep supporting 
it entirely by My will and I remain, while in this form possessing an infinite 
supernal manifestation, the abode of boundless perfect qualities as I am 
supremely miraculous.” The same He says in: ekatve sati nanatvam nanatve 
sati caikata/acintyam brahmano riipam kas tad veditum arhati3® i.e. “while 
remaining one by being its sole controller, He enters the Universe as the 
soul immanent in the various spiritual and non-spiritual entities; having a 
variety of modifications in the forms of these entities and instigating a 
variety of activities He partakes of variety Himself...’ Having thus, with an 
infinitesimal particle of Himself, entered into the Universe with all its 
wonders and variety as its immanent soul and vistabhya5® i.e. though abiding 
in variety, the Sovereign Lord of lords, the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme 
Person, Narayana, whose hosts of perfections are boundless, unsurpassed and 
innumerable — who is the perfectly miraculous One —who appears like a 
blue cloud — who has long eyes so spotless as a lotus leaf — who is radiant 
with the splendour of thousands of suns—, the One in the Supreme Heaven 
revealed by Srutis such as yo veda nihitam guhayam parame vyoman** tad 
aksare parame vyoman%® etc., remains nonetheless essentially one. 


§ 82. For any other entity but Brahman it is impossible to have 
another form, nature and power added to its own form, nature and power.°69 
But this Supreme Brahman, being categorically different from all enti- 
ties, has all natures and all powers. Therefore it is not contradictory that 
this one being has an infinite and wonderful variety of forms and still retains 
His uniformity in this infinite and immeasurable diversity. So the fear lest 
there be contradiction in so far as He would be similar to a mere common 
entity is not justified. As has been said: Saktayah sarvabhavanam 
acintyajndnagocarah/yato *to brahmanas tas tu sargadya bhavasaktayah // 
bhavanti tapasém Srestha pavakasya yathosnata: 379 in other words: it is not 
fit to think that a certain power observed in one single being exclusively 


364. ayutémsena “myriadth portion” has become in GBh. ad 10, 42 even 
ayutayutimsena, 

365. ? “in unity there is diversity and unity is in diversity: who is able 
to know Brahman’s inconceivable form?” 

366. From BhG. 10, 42 cited above, forming part of the context of érutis and 
smrtis expounding the Universe’s utter dependence on God. 

367. TaittUp. 2, 1, 1 “who knows that which is laid down in the inner- 
most of the Supreme Heaven”, 

368. MahanarUp. 1, 2 “that is in the indestructible Supreme Heaven”, 

369. S. comments: nahi dahasakto ‘gnir jddyajananasaktah. 

370. VP. 1, 3, 2-3 “the potencies of all entities transcend all except inconceivable 
knowledge: for these potencies, like fieriness in fire, rise from Brahman’s creation 
O most excellent of ascetics!” 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 241 


among all other beings, such as fire, water etc., is also to be found in another 
being that is categorically different from the former one: for instance the 
power of brightness, heat etc. found in fire is not to be found in water, which 
is categorically different from fire. Similarly it is not fit to infer that 
Brahman is similar to any other being in anything: He is categorically 
different from any other. What is meant hereby is: hence follows that 
Brahman possesses an infinite variety of powers. So it says: With Thee, 
Most Eminent One, whose form is this greatly miraculous world, with Thee, 
greatest of miracles, I am united, O Krsna2” 


§ 83. I have arrived at the exclusion that this is the doctrine of the 
scriptures after a painstaking study not only of the endless number of all 
the various Srutis, but also of the commentaries on them which have been 
accepted by judicious scholars. It is like this: several Srutis declare that 
creation and resorption—which are not empirically known by other 
pramanas and which are diversified by a continual succession of a plurality 
of elements whose developments are unlimited — are the doing of Brahman. 
Some Srutis, e.g. niravadyam niranjanam;?? vijndnam;3? dnandam;*™ nirvi- 
karam;3® niskalam niskriyam Santam;?® nirgunam®” etc., assert that Brahman 
is unqualified and essentially knowledge. Other Srutis, eg. neha nasti 
kimcana mrtyoh sa mrtyum apnoti ya tha naneva pasyati;37® yatra tv asya 
sarvam atmaivabhit tat kena kam pasyet tat kena kam vijantyat” deny that 
there is diversity. But other Srutis, like yah sarvajnah sarvavit;3®° yasya 
jianamayam tapah;*8! sarvani rupdm vicitya dhiro nimani krtvaibhivadan 
yad dste;382 sarve nimesa jajnire vidyutah purusad adhi;**° apahatapapma 


ial, Nee ey IRE ac 

372. SvetUp. 6, 19 niskalam niskriyam saintam niravadyam niranjanam: “without 
parts, without action, tranquil, irreproachable and immaculate”. 

373. TaittUp. 3, 5, 1 vijtdnam brahma “Brahman is knowledge”. 

374. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

375. YogasikhUp. nirvikdram nirdsrayam “without causal transformations, not 
deriving from any cause”. 

376. SvetUp. 6, 19 cited above note 372. 

377, MantrUp. 2 antah pasyanti sattvasthad nirgunam gunagahvare “they who are 
in sattva see, deep down in the gunas, the One without gunas”. 

378. BAUp. 4, 4, 19 “there is here no diversity whatever, he that sees diversity 
here will meet with death after his death”. 

379. BAUp. 4, 5, 15 “but when the atman is all of him, then whom does he know 
and how?” 

380. MundUp. 1, 1, 9 “who is omniscient, all-knowing”. 

381. Not identified. 

382. CittyUp. 12, 7 “that which the sage, after pondering over all its forms and 
giving them names, keeps saluting”. 

383. MahanarUp. 1, 8 “all flashes of lightning spring from above the Person”, 


V 31 


242 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


vijaro vimrtyur visoko vijaghatso *pipdsah satyakamah satyasamkalpah,3*4 
negate only all those qualities that are held by everyone to be evil, and they 
declare that Brahman has an infinite number of beautiful qualities: that He 
is omniscient and omnipotent, that He has separated all according to name- 
and-form,°85 and that He is the substratum of all.—Other Srutis, like sarvam 
khalv idam brahma tajjalaniti286 aitadatmyam idam sarvam;?8" ekah san bahu- 
dha vicarah,388 first expound that the universe in all its diversity is created 
by Brahman and then declare that both Brahman and Universe are identical. 
Other srutis, e.g., prthag Gtmanam preritéram ca matva;*89 bhokta bhogyam 
preritaram ca matva;? prajapatir akamayate prajah srjeyeti,"1 patim visva- 
syatmesvaram Ssasvatam sivam acyutam;% tam isvardnim paramam mahe- 
Svaram tam devatinim paramam ca daivatam;* sarvasya vasi sarvasyesa- 
nah,propound that Brahman is different from all, that all is subject to 
Brahman’s sovereignty and is accessory to Brahman, and that the Lord is 
the master.—Others again like antahpravistah Sdsté janéném sarvatma;3% 
esa ta dtmantaryamy amrtah 2% yasya prthivi Sariram .. yasyapah gariram .. 
yasya tejah sariram, etc.; yasyavyaktam éfariram .... yasyaksaram Sariram 
r++ Yasya mrtyuh Sariram .... yasyatma Sariram ....,397 point out the body- 


384. ChUp. 8, 7, 1 “exempt from defect, unaging, undying, without sorrow and 
hunger and thirst, having every will realized and all desires materialized.” 

385. Viz. ChUp. 6, 3, 2 seyam devataiksata- hantaham imés tisro devata anena 
jiwenatmaninupravisya nimaripe vydkaravaniti, 

386. ChUp. 3. 14. 1 “all this is verily Brahman: the tranquil one meditates (on 
all things) as having their beginning and end in It.” R. follows Sankara’s interpretation of 
tajjalan as taj-ja-la~ ChUpBh. tasmad brahmano jatam tejobannadikramena (cf. 6, 23) 
sarvam /atas tajjam/tatha tenaiva jananakramena pratilomataya tasminn eva brahmani 
liyate tadétmataya Slisyata iti tallam, in SBh, 1, 2, 1 (p. 137) tajjalan iti hetutah sarvam 
khalv idam brahmeti prasiddhavan nirdesat / brahmano jatatvad (= taj-ja-) brahmani 
linatvdd (= tal-la-) brahmaddhinajivanatvaéec (= tad-ana < AN “to - breathe, live”) ca 
hetor brahmatmakam sarvam khalv idam jagad iti, ete. 

387. ChUp. 6, 8, 7 “all this has That for its soul”. 

388. CittyUp. 11, 1 “though unique, manifold reflection”, 

389. SvetUp. 1, 6 “knowing the Atman and the actuator to be different”. 

390. Svet Up. 1, 12 “knowing the enjoyer, the enjoyed and the actuator”. 

391. Not identified. “The lord of creatures desired: may I beget offspring”. 

392. MahanarUp. 9, 6 “Lord of all, ruler of the soul, the everlasting, auspicious 
Unfallen One”, 

393. SvetUp. 6, 7 “Him, paramount lord of the lords, supreme deity of all divi- 
nities”, 

394. BAUp. 4, 4, 22 “ruler of all, lord of all”. 

395. TaittAr, 3, 11 “the instructor of men entered within, the soul of all”. 

265 BAUD St Gaed on eho. ae the inner Ruler, the immortal One”. 

397. SubalUp. 7, 1; the text runs: antahsarire nihito guhdyam aja eko nityo yasya 
prthivi sartram yah prthivim antare samecaran yam prthivi na veda/yasyaipah 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 243 


soul relationship that exists between Brahman and the sum-total of entities 
other than Brahman. 


§ 84. We have to interpret all these Srutis in such a manner that 
there is no contradiction between their statements, however diverse, and 
that their primary sense is not sacrificed. And we have done so.—The srutis 
expounding an untransformed Brahman have their primary sense because 
they deny that His proper form is subject to evolution.*%8 Those declaring 
that He is unqualified are to be taken as denying that He is associated with 
the evil qualities mentioned in the context.39 Those that deny diversity aré 
justly preserved because they signify that Brahman is modified by all in- 
asmuch as He is the inner soul of all:4° for the sum-total of spiritual and 
non-spiritual entities forms a mode of Brahman by constituting his body. The 
passages which declare that He is different from all modes, master and lord 
of all, and the possessor of all perfections and the power of having all his 
desires materialized and his every will realized,“ etc., are justly retained 
by accepting just that. Statements that He is mere knowledge and bliss are 
preserved because they set forth that the defining property of Brahman’s pro- 
per form, different from all, substratum of all perfections, lord of all, master 
of all, basis of all, cause of the origination, subsistence and resorption of all, 
irreproachable and untransformed, all-ensouling — that this defining property 
is knowledge’? in the form of bliss? in absolute opposition to imperfection,*%* 
and that therefore his proper form, being self-illuminating, is nothing but 
knowledge.4%° Similarly well-founded are the declarations of identity as they 


gartram etc., and concludes: yasya mrtyuh sariram yo mrtyum antare samcaran 
yam mrtyur na_ veda/sa esa sarvabhitadntardtmapahatapipma divyo deva_ eko 
narayanah. The Vulgate does not contain the clause yasydtmda, etc. 


398. In other words, they point to Brahman as the absolutely transcendent prin- 
ciple from which change may come forth but which itself is not subject to any change 
whatever. 

399. i.e., the contexts like ChUp. 8, 7, 1 and others citied above; cf. also SBh. 1, 
1, 1, (Th. p. 78ff.). 

400. ie., Brahman is the unitive principle underneath all diversity which clothes 
Him rather than involves Himself: as the inner Ruler He is strictly identical with 
Himself. 

401. ChUp. 8, 7, 1 satyakamah satyasamkalpah. 

402. Brahman is not knowledge, but is essentially characterized by it; knowledge 
being His essential property may, if this proviso be well understood, denote His essence. 


403. Brahman’s knowledge being eminently knowledge of His own perfection may 
be considered under the aspect of (rupa- “form”) perfect bliss. 

404. mala-, for the more usual heya-. 

405. svaprakagataya jrdnam api svaripam eva: in Brahman’s absolute self-com- 
prehension the three elements of all knowledge: subject — action — object of knowing, 
are in perfect unity, 


244 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


establish that the sémdnddhikaranya constructions have their primary mean- 
ing in a body-soul relationship.*% 


§ 85. Such being the case, the question arises: what is the sense to be 
concluded from the Veda that is herewith established? That there is no 
difference,4%” or that there is difference,*®? or that there is a double essence, 
being at once different and non-different?* 


All of them are established, because each can be concluded from the 
Vedanta. Non-difference is established in the sense that Brahman is modi- 
fied by all because all constitute his body. Both difference and non-differ- 
ence are established in the sense that the sole Brahman, being modified by 
the variety of spiritual and non-spiriual entities, abides in variety. There is 
difference inasmuch as the non-spiritual order, the spiritual order and the 
Lord have categorically different proper forms and natures and are never 
confused. 


§ 86. But are we not to understand that the knowledge of identity 
as declared in tat tvam asi Svetaketo,*!® tasya tavad eva ciram,*" is the means 
by which Release — that is man’s supreme End — is attained? 


No, that is not so. Let us consider the sruti prthag adtmanam pre- 
ritiram ca matva justas tatas tendmrtatvam eti,4!2 that means: “after having 
acquired the knowledge that the soul and its Mover, i.e., the inner Ruler, 
are separate from each other, one attains tatas, i.e., in consequence of this 
very knowledge that they are separate, the immortality by the favour of that 
Supreme Spirit. So we have rather to understand that the means by which 
we can attain immortality in person is the knowledge that the soul and its 
Controller exist separately. 


406. ie., the identity viewed in the first place as a relation between various aspects 
of one entity: the person denoted by “thou” is indeed the Supreme Being denoted by 
“that” as viewed under the aspect of the inner Ruler contained in term-and-entity “thou”, 

407. The opinion of the Advaitin. 

408. The opinion of the later Dvaitins, esp. Madhva and his school, to whose pre- 
cursors, possibly under influence of SAamkhya dualism, Ramanuja may refer. 

409. The opinion of the bhedabhedavadins; for dvydtmakatd, cf. supra §30. 

410. ChUp. 6, 8, 7. 

411. ChUp. 6, 14, 2 tasya taivad eva ciram yavan na vimoksya atha sampatsya iti 

“it will take him some time before he will have freed himself: then he shall succeed”. 
$., ChUpBh. comments: ato brahmavido jivanddiprayojandbhave’pi pravrttaphalanim 
iraheneon avasyam eva phalopabhogah sydd iti muktesuvat tasya tavad eva ciram iti 
yuktam evoktam iti. 

412. Svet Up. 1, 12 “knowing the atman and the SenIavor: to be different one attains 
consequently by His favour the immortality”, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 245 


§ 87. — But as this view is incompatible with the assertion that both 
are identical, we are compelled to assume that this knowledge works only 
the attainment of the qualified, not absolutely real Brahman. 


Why then could not the opposite be true,4#3 on the authority of our 
éruti that only by means of the knowledge that both are separate we can 
attain immortality in person? 


In other words: when two equally valid views are seemingly contra- 
dictory, we have to discover for both a common connotation in which they 
do not contradict each other. 


— But how can they possibly be reconciled? 


The word tvam refers to Brahman as modified by the embodied 
soul, for this embodied soul is a mode of the Supreme Brahman — who is 
the inner Ruler — because it constitutes the body of Him as inner Ruler. 
The meaning of your Sruti is that this is the knowledge to be acquired. 
Whereas the meaning of our Sruti is this: it must be realized that the 
Supreme Spirit — who is the soul of the embodied soul, exists separately 
from that embodied soul because He is free from all defects and possesses 
immeasurable, unsurpassed and innumerable beautiful qualities, such as 
that of having his every will realized, etc. The éruti bhoktaé bhogyam preri- 
tdram ca matva means that we are to know the Supreme Brahman’s three 
modes of being: 


1. The natural properties of the order of bhogya, or object: that it 
is non-spiritual, absolutely real4!4 and always the substratum of transfor- 


mations; 


2. the natural properties of the bhoktr, or subject, ie., the embodied 
soul: that, in spite of its being in essence unimpaired,* uncircumscribable 
knowledge and bliss, it is susceptible to various degrees of contraction and 
expansion due to ignorance in the form of ageless karman; that it is naturally 


413. Here R. turns the tables on the advaitin by assuming the same intransigence 
of interpretation: but where the advaitin on the strength of a few citations (moreover, 
according to R., misquoted and misrepresented) rejects all other érutis, R. proceeds to 
reconcile the differences which the advaitin, just by taking his obstinate stand, had exag- 
gerated and, it is true, grossly overrated. 

414. paraméartha-: this in fundamental opposition to the advaitin who does not 
admit the ultimate reality of inanimate matter. — bhogya- “object of the soul’s pheno- 
menal activities” describes the inanimate matter as having no function apart from, and 
being completely subservient to, the order of souls. 

415. For the soul as such is not subject to transformations, only his property 


knowledge is. 


246 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


conjoined with the non-spiritual order which is its object; and that it is 
capable of release through worship of the Supreme Spirit; etc. 


3. The mode of being of the inner Ruler of the above subject and 
object, and, in essence, the abode of immeasurable virtues. 


§ 88. As has been explained by the competent early Aacadryas* in their 
commentaries, the object of worshipful meditation in the so-called sadvidya 
tat tvam asi is Brahman as qualified by qualities. The Author of the Vakya 
declares: yuktam tadgunakopasanad,*!” and Dramidacarya when treating of 
the distinctions between the vidyas*!8 comments as follows: yady api saccitto 
na nirbhugnadaivatam gunaganam manasdnudhavet tathapy antargunam eva 
devatam bhajata iti tatrapi sagunaiva devata prapyate, that means: 
“although a person who is saccitta, i.e. wholly concentrated on the sadvidyd, 
does not rememorize immediately —- as he would when concentrating on the 
daharavidyaé — the multitude of qualities like freedom from sin which are 
distinct from pure godhead*!® yet the Deity is also worshipped for anyone of 
His qualities that are exclusively His as the Supreme Deity — e.g. that of 
being the universal cause? —, because all beautiful qualities are inherent 
in His proper form, so that in the sadvidya too He is actually worshipped as 
being distinguished by all the beautiful qualities inherent in His proper form: 
therefore in the sadvidyd, too, the end to be attained is the qualified Brahman: 
thus are sadvidyad and daharavidyd distinguished.” 


§ 89. — However, it has been declared that the Supreme Spirit is the 
inner Ruler of all creatures and that all are subject to His ruling. If this 
is true, then there is strictly speaking no one who can be a qualified subject 


416. The purvacaryas who are actually quoted by Ramanuja in Ved. and SBh, are 
the authors of the Dramidabhasya, of the Vrtti and of the Vakya; I refer to Intr. II 
and Appendix. 

417. “This is appropriate, on account of the worship of Him as being possessed 
of these gunas”, also quoted SBh, 1, 1, 1, p. 79; the quotation probably refers to the 
daharavidya where ChUp. 8, 7, 1 a number of properties qualifying the Supreme Soul 
are enumerated, 

418. Selected portions of the principal Upanisads, constituting a special knowledge 
and meditation of one of the aspects of the Supreme Being. For a complete list see 
that appended to A. Govindacarya’s Sri Bhagavad-Gita with Ramanuja’s commentary 
in English (Madras 1898), The daharavidya has its name from’ ChUp. 08, dy od 
atha yad idam asmin brahmapure daharam pundarikam vesma daharo ’sminn antaraka- 
Sah /tasmin yad antastad anvestavyam tad vava vijijnasitavyam; the sadvidyd from ChUp; 
6, 2, 1 sad eva somyedam agra Gsid, etc. 

419. R. explains nirbhugnadaivatam (attributive to gunaganam) “that by which 
godhead is altered” (nirbhugna- “bent awry”) by gunaganam daivataid vibhaktam: for my 
translation, see Appendix § 2, Fragment XV. i 

420, Since according to ChUp. 6, 2, 3 the creation proceeds from sat, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 247 


of the instructions of injunctions and prohibitions.42! For only someone who 
is able, by his own mental disposition, to be active or to be inactive can be 
really a qualified subject of injunctions and prohibitions of the kind: ‘you 
are to do this’, ‘you are not to do that’. But there is no one like him. The 
directing Supreme Spirit is the one who ultimately causes everyone to be 
active in every activity: that is His ascendancy over each and everyone, so 
is declared. And this is also attested in the éruti: “Him He incites to right- 
eous action whom He wishes to guide upward beyond the world, and him 
He incites to unrighteous action whom He wishes to bring down, Now, 
would this not mean that there is cruelty in God because He incites to good 
and evil actions arbitrarily? 


§90. —The reply to this is as follows. The Supreme Spirit has 
bestowed equally upon all spiritual beings all that is required for activity or 
inactivity, for instance the capacity of spirituality, the capacity of activity, 
etc. So as to enable them to accomplish this, He has become their substratum 
and has entered into them as the principal to whom they are accessory, 
directing them by consenting. The spiritual being, whose capacities are so 
dependent on Him, performs of his own accord certain acts or refrains of 
his own accord from certain acts. But while observing the soul in its doings 
the Supreme Spirit Himself takes no sides. Therefore all is sound. Besides, 
it depends on every individual case whether He will cause good acts or evil 
acts to be performed: it is not an invariable rule that He will always cause 
one or the other in every case. When someone of his own accord has been 
active before in an extremely good action, then the Venerable Lord is pleased 
with him and by granting him a mental disposition for good actions helps 
him to be so active. When, however, someone has indulged in extremely 
inauspicious actions, then the Venerable Lord incites him to wicked activities 
by giving him a wicked disposition. So the Venerable Lord Himself has 
declared: “When people are always well-disposed and worship Me, I am 
pleased and I bestow on them a disposition by which they may attain Me. 
To show them My mercy I dispel —immanent in their souls — the darkness 
of their ignorance with the radiant torch of knowledge.4?? But the hostile, 
wicked, unholy criminals I cast away forever in demoniac forms of existence 
in their samsdaras.’’4*4 


421. In other words, the person who acts or acts not is no longer a free agent: 
the responsibility for his actions is transferred to the directing inner Ruler. 

422, KauésUp. 3, 8 esa eva (Vulgate: esa hy evainam) sddhu karma karayati tam 
yam bhyo lokebhya unninisati, esa eva (: esa u evainam) asddhu karma kérayati tam 
yam adho ninisati. 

423. BhG. 10, 10-11. 

424. BhG. 11, 19. 


248 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§91. When a person has caused the mass of evil karman, amassed 
during all his previous existences, to melt away by amassing unequalled 
good karman;—when he has become wholly dedicated to God as a 
result of his taking refuge at His lotus-like feet—when he has acquired 
the moral qualities sama, dama, tapas, Sauca, ksama, arjava, bha- 
yabhayasthanaviveka, dayd, ahimsa, etc.*#° and nourishes them by 
exercizing them daily and applying to them his preceding know- 
ledge of the true nature of the ontological orders gathered from 
the Sastras and corroborated by the teachings of the true aAcaryas, — when 
he devotes himself to the accomplishment of periodical and occasional acts 
corresponding to his station and stage of life, as the forms*® in which he is 
to worship the Supreme Person and avoids what is forbidden; — 
when he throws himself altogether*? at the lotus-like feet of the 
Supreme Person;—when the darkness concealing his innermost self 
is dispelled by the grace of the Supreme Person who, supremely 
compassionate as He is, is pleased with the uninterrupted acts of 
worship that are dictated by the devotee’s bhakti in glorification,*28 remem- 
brance,*?? homage, salutation,#! mortification,“? exaltation,“* the listening 
to the description of His perfections and narrating them himself, meditation,**4 


425. The so-called atmagunas enumerated BhG. 10, 4-5: buddhir jnanam asam- 
mohah ksama satyam damah gamah /sukham duhkham bhévo ’bhivo bhayam caébhayam 
eva ca//ahimsd samata tustis tapo dainam yaso ’yagah...... ; and BhG. 18, 42 samo 
damas tapah saucam ksGntir drjavam eva ca/jndénam vijnénam Gstikyam brahma- 
karmasvabhavajam. R, explains GBh. ad 10, 4-5: samo ’ntahkaranasya tatha (i.e. anartha- 
visayebhyo) niyamanam; damo bahyakaranaéndm anarthavisayebhyo niyamanam; ad 18, 42 
tapo bhoganiyamanariipah sadstrasiddhakayaklesah; saucam Sastriyakarmayogyata; ksantih 
(=ksama) paraih pidyamanasyapi avikrtacittata; arjavam paresu manoriipam bahya- 
cestiprakasanam; bhaydbhayasthanaviveka- “well distinguishing when fear and when 
fearlessness is indicated”, S. explains: bhagavadupacérabhirutvam bhayasthanavivekah 
“anxious care in the service of God”, and tadraksakatvadhyavasadyadina nirbhayatvam 
abhayasthanavivekah “fearlessness in resolving to protect Him etc. (i.e. His image etc.)”; 
daya “compassion” S. paraduhkhdsahisnutvam; ahimsa “inoffensiveness” R. GBh, 10, 5 
ahimsa paraduhkhahetutvam. 

426. vesa- “disguise”. 

427. i. “with all that is his” °nyastaétmatmiyasya, 

428. stuti-; S. gunakathanam bandikrtyam va. 

429. smrti- “pondering over God’s perfections and representing them incessantly 
to oneself”, 

430. namaskrti-, 

431. vandana-. 

432. yatana- “self-sacrifice”, which S., in harmony with the temple atmosphere 
ileeey by sacs and vandana, explains as bhagavadudyanadikaranam. 

33. kirtana- S. bhagavannémocecaranam, probably alludi ewe 
names (MBh. 13, 433) a litany very popular aay valent Pat at NR ME cae 

434, anudhydna- cf. Bh, 1, 1, 1, p. 11-12, J 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 249 


adoration and prostration, etc.; — then will he be able to attain the Supreme 
Person by virtue of his bhakti, which takes on the form of contemplation in 
the highest degree of lucid perception,*® directed to none but Him, uninter- 
rupted, pre-eminent and held preciously dear. This has been declared by 
that most eminent Guru, the venerable Yamundcarya himself: wbhayapari- 
karmitasvantasyaikantikatyantikabhaktiyogalabhyah,“* that means: “.... by 
someone whose inner faculty has been prepared by karmayoga and jnana- 
yoga.” Similarly the sruti: “He that has a clear insight in vidya and avidya will 
first conquer death by avidya and then gain immortality by vidya,’**7 where 
avidyad438 stands for the above-mentioned moral conduct according to one’s 
station and stage of life ete., and vidya for the meditation in the form of 
bhakti. Likewise: “He that resorts to knowledge performs thereby a great 
deal of sacrifices; when he makes the brahmavidya his foundation, he will 
conquer death by avidya.”39 In the passage: “He that knows this becomes 
immortal here and now: no other path is there for him to tread; those who 
know Him become immortal;44! he that knows Brahman attains the Most- 
High;#42 He who knows the Most-High, who knows Brahman becomes Brah- 
man himself,4%4 the verb to know is equivalent to “to meditate”, for it has 
the sense of DHY AI., “to meditate”,“8 in the passage nididhyasitavyah, etc.44 


What this “meditation” is is specified by another Sruti: “This soul can 
not be grassped by explication, nor by mere knowledge, nor by great erudi-~ 
tion: he alone whom God Himself elects can attain Him: He singles his soul 
out to serve as His body.“ That implies that He can only be grasped by 


435. visadatamapratyaksatapanna’. 

436. Atmasiddhi (in Siddhitraya), stated as the siddhanta in an enumeration of 
the various views taken of the manner in which God can be attained: “Release is only 
to be attained by the exclusive bhakti discipline of one whose inner faculty has been 
trained by both”; refer to my remarks Chapt. III. 

437. I8Up. 11 vidyém cavidyim ca yas tad vedobhayam saha / avidyaya mrtyum 
tirtva vidyaydmrtam asnute. 

438. ie., avidyd in the sense of karman, as R. often takes the term; here karman 
esp. as preparatory and ancillary to the “discipline of loving comprehension” or bhakti. 

439. VP. 6, 6, 12. 

440, TaittAr. 3, 1, 13. 

441, MahanarUp. 1, 11. 

442, TaittUp. 2, 1, 1. 

442a. 2? so yo ha vai tat param veda brahma veda brahma bhavatt. 

443, Cf. SBh. 1, 1, 1, pp. 8-19; GBh. 18, 65. 

444, nididhydsitavyah in BAUp. 4, 5, 6 atma va are drastavyah srotavyo mantavyo 
nididhasitavyo maitreyi / dtmani khalv are drste srute mate vijnata idam sarvam viditam; 
cf, SBh. 4, 1, 1 ad this sruti: dhydéyatina vedanam abhidhiyate / dhyinam ca cintanam / 
cintanam ca smrtisamtatiripam na smrtimatram / upastir apt tadekarthah / ekagracit- 
tavrttinairantarye prayogadarsanat. 

445, MundUp. 3, 2, 3 nayam dtma pravacanena labhyo na medhaya na bahund 
Srutena/ yam evaisa vrnute tena labhyas tasyaisa atma vrnute tanum svam. 


V. 32 


250 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


meditation that takes the form of bhakti, not merely by knowing, for na 
medhaya excludes mere knowledge. 


§ 92. In other words, when an aspirant to release is wholly devoted to 
meditation in the form of knowledge of the kind enjoined by the Vedanta 
and when an oceanic feeling of perfect love for that meditation itself engulfs 
him, then by virtue of that love is he able to grasp the Supreme Person. This 
has been declared by the Venerable Lord: “that Supreme Person, O Partha, 
can be grasped by exclusive bhakti.4° By exclusive bhakti, O Arjuna, can 
I be known and beheld and entered so as I really am.47 When a person 
knows Me through bhakti for what I am and who I am in reality, then he 
knows Me thereby (tatas) in reality and he enters Me immediately,’ ie., 
immediately thereafter he enters Me tatas “thereby” sc. by virtue of his 
bhakti. 


Bhakti is a kind of knowledge that is so excellent, precious and 
exclusive that it robs everything else of its interest.“49 Now, he that has 
acquired this knowledge is elected by the Supreme Person, and so he can 
grasp Him. This is the full meaning of the Sruti cited above.*° It is through 
bhaktiyoga, furthered at first by karmayoga that is daily intensified in the 
above way and subsequently by jfianayoga, that such knowledge in the form 
of supreme bhakti arises.*! So the venerable ParaSara says: “A person 
who acts according to his station and stage of life propitiates the Supreme 
Person Visnu: there is no other way of satisfying Him.” And the Supreme 
Person who, while remaining the Supreme Brahman, had descended to the 
earth in order to rescue the entire Universe,** Himself has declared: “Listen 
how a man who keeps to his own task will find the highest achievement: 
by worshipping Me, from Whom all beings proceed and Who pervades this 
entire world, in his own task, man finds the supreme achievement:”*4 He is 
attainable only by bhakti that has matured in the described manner. 


§ 93. This ‘path’ which is shown in all the srutis whose meaning is 
very lucidly explained by the ancient commentaries composed by Bodha- 


446. BhG. 8, 22. 

447. BhG, 11, 54. 

448. BhG. 18, 55. 

449, svetaravaitrsnydvaha’. 

450. MundUp. 3, 2, 3. 

451. Cf. my Raéméanuja etc., Introduction Ch. IV. 

452. VP. 3, 8, 9. 

453. Cf. GBh, Intr.....svam eva ripam tatsajdtiyasamsthanam svasvabhdvam 
ajahad eva kurvams tesu tesu lokesv avatirydvatirya, and SBh, 1, 3, 2. 

454, BhG, 18, 45 cd. 46, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 251 


yana,455 Tanka,*® Dramida,4*7 Guhadeva, Kapardi, Bharuci etc., and accepted 
by all who are competent to judge, is only to be arrived at by bhakti that 
has developed along the above lines. And herewith the Carvakas,*® the 
Buddhists, Vaisesikas,°9 Naiyayikas,4©° Jainas,*®! and the followers of Kapila*® 
and Patafijali#6? are condemned alike, those who are outside the pale of the 
Veda together with those who derive their heterodoxies from the Veda.‘ 
For doctrines derived from the Veda may present a completely reverse 
notion of things: Manu himself equates them with the heresies outside the 
Veda: “Heresies outside the Veda and traditional heterodoxies alike are 
all held to be fruitless after death for they are founded on tamas.”45 This 
means that those whose natural guna is the highest sattva, untouched by rajas 
and tamas, have a truly Vedic interest, and true insight in the real meaning 
of the Veda. 


. §94. It has been declared in the MAatsyapurana that the kalpas or 
world-ages are samkirnah sattvikas caiva rajasds tamasas tatha:**? after 
these periods of Brahma have been described, namely that some are mixed, 
some mainly of sattva, some mainly of rajas and some mainly of 'tamas con- 
stituents, it is declared that Brahm&a—who is compounded of all three con- 
stituents sattva, rajas and tamas—glorifies, in puranas that are uttered in 
any-one of the above ages, those component elements of the world which 
themselves are again compounded of the same set of constituents: “Brahma 
has of old glorified in a purana uttered in a certain age the particular deity 
determined by the predominant constituent of the age.’ And specifically: 


455. Held to be the author of the Vrtti which R. occasionally quotes (SBh, 1, 1, 10; 
teeter la synt; 15.3, 02) 5 see, Inte, II and Appendix. 
456. Considered to be the author of the Vakya quoted in Ved. and SBh. (1, 1, 1; 
1, 3, 13); also mentioned by Yamuna who enumerates him among the false teachers; 
cf. Intr. II and Appendix. 


457, Dramidabhasya’s author; cf. Intr. II and Appendix. 
458. Materialists and hedonists, followers of Carvaka. 
459. aulukya-, after the founder Uluka. 

- 460. dadksapada-, after the founder Aksapada or Gautama. 
461. ksapanaka- “religious mendicant, esp. Jaina”. 
462. Kapila was the founder of the Samkhya system. 
463, Patahjali was the founder of the Yoga system. 


464. Note that R. considers the Samkhya to be rejected in toto; with this, no 
doubt mainly polemical, statement cf. the more conciliant view in the utpattyasambha- 
vadhikarana SBh. 2, 2, 43. 

465. Manu 12, 95. 

466. vaidiki rucih. 

467. Matsya or Matsya Purana 290, 13 ab, 
468, Matsya P. 290, 15, 


202- J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


In timasa ages the glory of Agni and Siva is sung, in rajasa ages it is held 
that it is the superior glory of Brahma,” and in the sattvika ages is it the 
superior glory of Hari: in those ages the votaries accomplished in Yoga will 
achieve their supreme end; in mixed ages that of Sarasvati.. .”471 


In other words, since Brahma is the primeval ksetrajia or embodied 
soul, sattva will be predominant in some of his days, rajas in others and tamas 
in others again. For as the Venerable Lord has said: “There is no being on 
earth or in heaven or among the gods that is free from the three prakrti-born 
gunas.”’472 On the authority of the Sruti: “He who creates Brahma in the 
beginning and bestows on him the Vedas..”47? we learn also that Brahma 
too is a ksetrajna*"* as he is created and subject to the Sastras. 


So when there is contradiction between puranas which Brahma has 
revealed on days when sattva prevailed, and puranas revealed on other days 
when other gunas prevailed, then the purana that was revealed on a sattvika 
day contains the truth and another that contradicts the former contains no 
truth: so Brahma himself has declared on a day when he was in sattva him- 
self,47> so that the puranas could decisively be discriminated. This is how 
the above citation is to be understood. 


The Venerable Lord Himself has said what the effects of sattva, etc., 
are: “From sattva springs knowledge, from rajas greed, and from tamas in- 
dolence, bewilderment and ignorance.*"® The cognitive faculty!” is sattvika 
when it knows activity and inactivity,4"? duty and non-duty, fear and safety, 
bondage and release, When the cognitive faculty has no exact knowledge 
of dharma and adharma, duty and non-duty, then it is rajasa. And when 
it, completely obscured, mistakes adharma for dharma, and has reverse know- 
ledge of all things, then this faculty is témasa,”’479 


469. Matsya P. 290, 14 cd, 

A470. Matsya P. 290, 14 ef. 

471. Matsya P. 290, 15 (additional Ssloka), 

472, BhG. 18, 40. 

473, SvetUp. 6, 18, yo brahmdnam vidadhati pirvam yo vai vedimésca prahinoti 
tasmai. 

474. ie, an individual soul in, and limited by a body, be it divine. 

475. It may be remarked however that Matsya P, has no such pretensions and that 
other puranas at times classify it as tamasa; ef, Adidevananda’s note, YID., p. 181, 29, 

476, BhG. 14, 17, 

477. buddhi-, expl. GBh. 18, 29 vivekapiirvakanigcayaripam jidnam “knowledge 
based on discrimination and taking the form of decision”, 

478. GBh. 18, 30 pravrtti: abhyudayasidhanabhito dharmah; nivrtti: moksa- 
sidhanabhiito dharmah. 

479. BhG.. 18, 30-32, 


+ a hinge 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 293 


All the compilers of puranas have compiled their puranas after Brahma 
himself had told them all the contents. This is said in: “I will narrate the 
story exactly like the venerable Grandfather, who sprang from the Lotus, has 
revealed it when he was questioned by the eminent sage Daksa and 
others,’’489 


§ 95. — But how can the words of the Veda contradict one another 
if they are not of human origin?“ 


—We have said before that they do not contradict one another when 
their true purport has been determined correctly. 


For instance the érutis: “After*®? the nasal sound has ceased,483 the 
vital air with the senses in the manas should be concentrated in the Supreme 
Spirit, and one should meditate on the Sovereign and so meditate further on 
all this. Brahma, Visnu, Rudra and Indra have all been begotten;....not 
the cause:....the cause alone should be meditated.84 Sambhu,‘®> the 
Supreme Sovereign enjoying universal sovereignty, should be meditated upon 
as abiding in the centre of space.” “Higher than Whom there is nothing; smaller 
or larger than Whom there is no one; like a tree He alone stands steadfast 
in the sky. This Person fills the entire world. Therefore that which is most 
supreme, that is formless and without defect. Those who know that become 
immortal, but the others find only misery. Having all faces, heads and necks, 
dwelling inside all beings, pervading all, this auspicous Venerable Lord is 
therefore omnipresent;*8> when there was darkness, and neither day, nor night, 
nor being nor non-being, then the auspicious One was there, alone, That 
is the imperishable One, that is Savitr’s coveted gift, and from that has arisen 
the ancient knowledge;”**" etc., etc.: *f these Srutis seem contradictory, then 
I remind you that the Supreme Brahman is Narayana, as has been declared 
before. Then how could there be contradiction? 


480, VP. 1, 2, 8. 
481, apauruseya-; acc, to the view taken by the Mimamsakas, both purva and 


uttara, the Veda is not a creation of man and thus open to error, but eternally conceived 
by the Supreme Being and in each age ‘viewed’ by inspired seers, cf, Intr, IV, 

482, AtharvasikhUp. 2. 

483. néddante, ie. the anunasika of the pranava OM. 

484, R. abbreviates; the passage runs: brahmavisnurudrendrés te samprastiyante 
sarvani cendriyani saha bhitair; na kdranam karananam dhyata: karanam tu dhyeyah 
etc. 

485, gambhu is acc. to R. to be taken not as the well-known auspicious name of 
Siva but literally as the “beneficial One”, as will be shown. 

486. SvetUp. 3, 9-11. 

487, SvetUp. 4, 18 yada tamah tan na diva ete, 


204 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§ 96. But this is too little—The Vedas with their angas,#88 corrobo- 
rated by the glosses of the foremost of Vedic scholars and by ratiocination, 
proclaim that Brahman is the cause of the world’s birth, etc.: “From Him 
is its birth, etc.;”489 “That, from which these creatures issue, by which they 
live when born, to which they return when departing, that you are to inquire 
into: that is Brahman;”4° which tells us that Brahman is the cause of the 
world’s birth, etc. We are told the same by the very contexts that treat of 
the world’s creation and resorption. From: “In the beginning, my dear son, 
sat was alone and without second,”4%! we learn that Brahman, denoted by the 
word sat is the supreme cause because He is the material and operative 
cause**? of the world and its immanent Ruler. This very sense is in another 
sakha conveyed with the word Brahman in lieu of sat: “Brahman verily was 
here alone in the beginning,”43 so that we know that the word sat denotes 
Brahman. The same sense we find again in another Saka; “the Soul verily 
was here alone in the beginning,”4%4 so that we know that the words sat and 
Brahman denote the Soul. Similarly in another Sakha: “Narayana was here 
alone, not Brahma, not Siva, nor heaven and earth, nor the constellations,”49 
which is decisive proof that Narayana is denoted by all the words for supreme 
cause, like sat, Brahman, the Soul, etc. 


$97. In the passage: 4° “Him, whom the sages weave in the middle of 
the sea, .... Him one cannot apprehend as vertical or horizontal or in be- 
tween. No one is master to Him and His alone is great fame. His form is 
not to be beheld, and no one can see Him with his eyes: the wise conceive 
Him with their minds in their hearts: they who know Him so become im- 
mortal,” His absolute superiority is propounded; and it is denied that there 
is anything superior to Him in the passage: “No one is master to Him.” 
Immediately thereafter the quotation in: adbhyah sambhuto hiranyagarbha 
ity astau,*” connects the above passage as one coherent context with the 
text beginning: adbhyah sambhitah,4°8 where the so-called mahapurusa con- 


488. The auxiliary sciences siksa, chandas, v akarana, nir iyoti 

489. BrS. 1, 1, 2 janmady asya yatah, ih i Pein ee ne 
490. TaittUp. 3, 1. 

491. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 

492. cf. supra §§ 32-33. 

493. BAUp. 1, 4, 1. 

494, AitUp, 1, 1. 

495. MahUp. 1. 


496. TaittAr. 10, 1, 3 yam antah samudre kavayo vayanti .... nainam urdhvam na 
tiryancam na madhye parijagrabhat etc. 


497. astau, ie. eight rks RV. 10, 121, 1: hiranya bhah i Stasi 
jatah patir eka dsit, ff , ryagarohah sam avartatagre bhitasya 


498. TaittAr, 3, 13, 2, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 205 


text: 499 “Hri and Laksmi are His consorts,> elucidates that all this bears 
on Narayana alone. 


This sense is further enlarged upon in the Narayana section,°”! from 
sahasrasirsam devam onwards, concluding with: “He is Brahma, He is Siva 
and Indra,5°2 He is Aksara, He the Supreme self-sufficient Sovereign.” Here- 
with first all the words which in all the different S4khas denote the Supreme 
Entity —aksara, Siva, Sambhu, parabrahman, parajyotis, paratattua, parda- 
yana, paramatman, etc. — with all the qualities inherent in them, are applied 
to Narayana, then it is asserted that all things collectively that are different 
from Him are dependent on Him, pervaded by Him, supported by Him, con- 
trolled by Him, accessory to Him and ensouled by Him; and finally it is 
declared that Brahma and Siva are likewise manifestations of Him, because 
they are of the same order as Indra and the like. This entire text serves 
only to expound who is the Supreme Entity; it enjoins nothing else. 


$99. Other texts, eg., “He that knows Brahman attains the Most- 
High” 5928 enjoin that the Supreme Brahman — who is absolutely superior 
to all, as witness our text above®™3 — should be worshipped by upasana,>™ etc. 
So the declaration pranam manasi saha karanaih,® etc. first summarizes 
all the transformations together — of senses, vital air, etc. — as contained in 
the Supreme Brahman as the universal cause, and then enjoins: one should 
meditate on the Supreme Spirit as the Lord of all,5°S i.e., the meditation on 
Narayana®? who is the Supreme Brahman. 


$100. In “the Lord of all’’28 and “no one is master to Him” it is 
declared that He is the sovereign over all: so the text enjoins in: “Sambhu, 
the sovereign Lord, enjoying universal sovereignty, should be meditated 


499. Name derived from the stanza vediham etam purusam mahaintam. 

500. ie. TaittAr. 3, 13, 2 hris ca te laksmis ca patnyau. 

501. TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 sahasrasiysam devam visvaksam visvasambhuvam / visvam 
naérayanam devam aksaram paraman prabhum /sa brahma sa Ssivah sendrah so *ksarah 
paramah svarat; cf. AtharvasikhUp. 2. 

502, sendrah, irregular sandhi for sa indrah. 

502a. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

503. SvetUp. 3, 9 yasmat param naparam asti, or TaittAr. 10, 1, 3 na tasyese 
kaScana. oo a 

504. One is reminded of the synonymy of vedana (in brahmavid-) and upadsana. 

505. above AtharvasikhUp. 2. 

506. viz. in karanam tu dhyeyah sarvaigvaryasampannah sarvesvarah, etc. 

507. As connected with TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 Narayananuvaka. 

508. MahanarUp. 9, 3=TaittAr. 10, 11, 1 patim visvasya, continuing atmesvaram 
gdsvatam sivam acyutam. 


256 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


upon in the centre of space,’5°9 that Narayana—who is the supreme cause 
and is denoted by the word Sambhu—is to be the object of our meditation. 
Since the text: “who is the object of meditation?.. The cause is the object 
of meditation,’>!° propounds that not the effect is the right object of medi- 
tation but only the cause, therefore the Narayana section—which declares 
only who is the supreme cause—asserts that Narayana Himself is the sup- 
reme cause and that the word sambhu rightly denotes Him. The invention 
of other meanings contradictory to that given above is not justified in an 
assertion that enjoins that only the cause is the right object of meditation. 


§ 101. The contention in “that which is more supreme than Him,’>14 
that something would. be known that is higher than that Person is belied by: 
“higher than whom there is nothing, subtler or larger than whom there is 
no one,” i.e. than whom nothing whatever is higher—no thing different from 
that Person is in any respect higher than Him; antyas—means “subtle” and 
jyayas—“the Lord of all”: for He is the Lord of all because He pervades them 
all’!?—i.e. nothing different from Him is subtler or more sovereign: this 
denies that anybody different from this Person is superior to Him, and that 
means that it is refuted that any superiority can be attributed to anyone but 
Him. 


§ 102. So, what is the meaning of our text? In the beginning of the 
context under discussion it was asserted—in “when he knows Him, he passes 
beyond death: no other way is there for him to tread”*—that knowledge 
of the Person is the cause of immortality, and that there is no way but this 
very way of knowledge. Later on, in the concluding passage “than whom 
nothing is higher .. this Person fills the entire world,’>!* it is declared that 
the Person is superior to all. Finally, the assertion that knowledge is the 
cause of immortality and that there is no other way is wound up with the 
reason for it, which is given in the concluding statement: “therefore—sc. 
since that Personal Entity is most supreme—that <Personal Entity> is 
most supreme: that is without form and without defect: they who know 
this become immortal, but the others find only misery.’*15 This must be the 


509. TaittAr. 10, 11, 1. 

510. Rihdrrehik Ub; 1: bhagavan kim ddau prayuktam dhyanam dhydyitavyam “- 
tad dhydnam ko va dhyat&é kas ca dhyeya iti, 

511. SvetUp. 3, 10, 

512. This is to be seen in connexion with the Narayananuvaka: tat sarvarn vyapyd 
nirayanah sthitah, and: patim visvasya. 

513. SvetUp. 6, 15 where the borrowal ndnyah pantha vidyate ’yandéya shows the 
connection with TaittAr. 3, 13, 1. 

514, SvetUp. 3, 9. 

515. SvetUp. 3, 10. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 207 


sense,*!6 otherwise the two assertions made in the opening text would be in 
conflict with the last one, 


The text $asvatam Sivam acyutam etc. has told us already that this 
Person may be denoted by the word Siva, viz. because He possesses the 
quality of purity. So our text declares immediately that this Person may be 
denoted by Siva, for: “the great sovereign Person stirs every being into life.” 
And in the manner described all the rest—‘“there was neither being nor 
non-being, only the siva was there alone” etc.—can be deduced, 


§ 103. Moreover, this Person—with whom no equal or superior can 
co-exist, as witness the above text “no one is master to Him—is first declared 
to be—cf. in the same section “subtler than the subtle”’>!8—the sovereign 
of the Om syllable, which is the matrix of the Vedas it is its beginning and end, 
inasmuch as He is denoted by the A that constitutes the radical element of 
Om.519 Then, after this declaration is made, it is said that this Person is 
to be worshipped as dwelling in the space contained within the Little Lotus.>”° 


The meaning is as follows: the Om syllable is the matrix of the entire 
Veda, and the A is the matrix of the Om syllable. The Veda—a transforma- 
tion of the Om syllable—is dissolved in the Om which is its own matrix, and 
the Om being a transformation of the A is dissolved in the A which is its 
own matrix. Now, the One who is the para of, (ie. the object denoted by) 
the A which is the matrix of the Om,2! that One is the sovereign Lord. 
Consequently, the Narayana who is denoted by the A which is the matrix 
of all denotative words, and who is the matrix of all the objects denoted by 
those words, is the sovereign Lord: this is the meaning. As the Venerable 
Lord has said: “I ami the origin and the dissolution of the entire Universe: 
there is nothing more supreme than I am.°* I am the A among the letters 
etc.523 On the authority of the Sruti “the A is Brahman’ ,*4 and “the A is 


516. The first that by knowing Him one obtains immortality; the second that there 
is no other way than by knowing Him. 

517. SvetUp. 3, 12. 

518. SvetUp. 3, 10: This reference to His subtlety is made to facilitate the transi- 
tion to the discussion of the OM syllable, which, as will be shown, is the subtlest entity 
to which the entire Veda can be reduced. 

519, For this passage cf, MahanarUp. 10, 8 yo vedidau prokto vedante ca pratisthi- 
tah / tasya prakrtilinasya yah parah sa mahesvarah. 

520. MahanarUp. 10, 7 dahram vipapmam varam vesmabhitam yat pundarikam 
puramadhyastham / tatrapi dahram gaganam vigsokam tasminn anyat tad updsitavyam; with 
which compare the daharavidya, ChUp. 8, 1, 1. 

521. MahanarUp. 10, 8 cited above: tasya prakrtilinasya yah parah sa mahesvarah. 

522. BhG. 7, 6cd-7ab. 

523. BhG. 10, 33. 

524, AitA. 2, 3, 8 (ad finem) a iti brahma, 


V. 33 


258 wie ac. J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


the entire language,’®2 it is very clear that the A is the matrix of all 
denotative words and that Brahman is the matrix of all things denoted by 
words. Therefore, the assertion that Brahman is denoted by the A proves 
that Narayana, who is denoted by the A, is the sovereign Lord. 


§ 104. The Narayana section, which with sahasrastrsam devam etc.,°"5 
means to set forth who is the sole Supreme Entity, propounds in detail that 
He is superior to all. This Supreme Entity, dealt with by that text exclusively, 
is also in all other texts which deal with other topics understood by one 
word or the other and is to be regarded as that same Supreme Entity: thus 
the decision of the Author of the Sitras in Sdstradrstyaé tuipadeso vamadeva- 
vat.527 The fact that this very Supreme Entity is in some text to be under- 
stood by the words Brahma, Siva and the like, does not mean that the mere 
divinities Brahma, Siva etc., are ‘supreme’ themselves, for the section that 
deals exclusively with the topic declares explicitly that they form only a 
manifestation of Him inasmuch as they are on an equal footing with Indra 
and the like.5?8 Similarly in some texts the Supreme Brahman is referred to 
by the words akasa,5?9 prana° etc., which does not mean that the element 
space, or the vital air etc., are imagined to be ‘supreme’. 


$105. —But here an objection may be raised. In the text: “In 
this town of Brahman there is a little lotus that is a dwelling-place: inside 
there is a ‘tiny space: that which is inside that space, that should be sought 
after, that indeed should be inquired into,*! the word space, serves to denote 
the material cause of the world, and it is declared that some sort of entity 
that dwells in that space should be sought after. But, since we hear in the 
Sruti that space effects names-and-forms**? and we see in the Purusasikta533 
that the purusa or Person is the agent of the effecting of names-and-forms, 


525. AitAr. 2, 3, 6 (ad finem) akdro vai sarva vak. 

526. TaittAr, 10, 11, 1 = MahanarUp. al IPP 3 Ee 

527. BrS. 1, 1, 31 “this instruction [is made possible] by a true view taken of 
the Scriptures, [viz.] that it is a case like Vamadeva’s”. SBh. 1, 1, 31R. interprets: 
This instruction of Indra that he is the object of meditation is to be understood from 
the Scriptures which state that, as the inner Ruler, God ensouls all entities: so these 
entities are He, in the same way as Vamadeva. Similarly in our text the Supreme 
Entity can, on this principle, be expressed by a great many terms which ultimately denote 
the inner Ruler within them. 

528. viz. sa brahma sa sivah sendrah so *ksarah. 
’ 529. e.g. ChUp. 1, 9, 1 asya lokasya ka gatir ity akdga ity uvaca; cf. BrS. and SBh. 
hale PRE 
; 530. e.g. ChUp. 1, 11, 4-5 prastotar ya devaté prastavam anvayatta....katama sa 
devateti prana iti hovdca, cf. BrS. and SBh. i pes ene 

531. ChUp, 8, 1, 1, the daharavidya, with which compare MahanarUp. 10, 7 quoted 
supra note 520. 

532. ChUp. 8, 14, 1 dka@o vai nima naimaripayor nirvahita, 

533. RV. 10, 90, 6ff. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 299 


we understand that the One whom we are to revere as the object of the 
commended inbuiry must be another than that Person who is synonymous 
with space.**4—This kind of objection is only raised by people who have not 
studied the Veda and have not seen the Sastras. For the Sruti itself 
disposes of this objection there and then, and so does the Author of the Vakya. 
The Sruti reads: “What is there to be found in that tiny space within the 
lotus that is ‘to be sought after and inquired into?’ and in reply to this 
objection the Sruti first asserts in “Not less vast than the main space is that 
tiny space contained in the heart,’>** that there are no limits to the vastness 
of the Supreme Person, here denoted by the word space, and that He sup- 
ports the entire Universe because He is the cause of the entire Universe,°*! 
then, in “All desires are contained therein,’>*®—i.e., “in Him are the eight 
qualities, culminating in satyasamkalpa,**° contained as in a treasury—the 
$ruti wants to make it clear with the words apahatapipmd ... satyakaémah**® 
that the Supreme Person as well as these eight qualities are to be inquired 
into separately, and so states that “that which is in Him should be sought 
after;”41 so the Sruti itself refutes the entire objection. 


§ 106. In other words: the objection raised with “what is there to be 
found that should be sought after” is refuted by the statement that in Him 
there reside his nature of being creator, substratum, controller and principal 
of the entire world, as well as his qualities apahatapapma etc. Therefore the 
Author of the Vakya declares: tasmin yad antar iti kamavyapadesah “the 
words “that which is therein” refer to His desires;” desire means: desired 
objects; ie., the qualities of being apahatapapma etc. In other words: the 
Supreme Brahman, denoted by the words “tiny space”, who creates, sustains 
and dissolves the entire Universe: that which is contained within that Supreme 
Brahman—sc. His immeasurable transcendence and his eight qualities of 
being free from sin etc.,— should both be the objects of inquiry. 


So the text continues: “Those who, here on earth, come to know the 
Spirit and the actualized desires shall find their desires fulfilled in all the 
worlds,”>42 


534, This objection seems to be inspired by Sankara’s ChUpBh. 8, 1, 1 antarakasa 
akasikhyam brahma/dkago vai nama iti vaksyati, ff. 
535. ChUp. 8, 1, 2. 
536. ChUp. 7, 1, 3 yavdn va ayam Gkasas tavdn eso ’ntarhrdaya akasah. 
537. ChUp. 8, 1, 3 sarvam tad asmin saméhitam iti. 
538. ChUp. 8, 1, 5 asmin kdémah samahitah. 
539. sc. those summed up 8, 1, 5. 
540. ChUp. 8, 1, 1. 
541. ChUp. 8, 1, 1. 
542, ChUp. 8, 1, 6 atha ya ihétmanam anuvidya vrajanty etams ca satyan kamin 
tesim sarvesu lokesu ‘kimacaro bhavati, 


260 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§ 107. We have to understand that when Visnu®# — who is the Sup- 
reme Entity as declared in the text (which deals with this topic exclusively). 
that only the cause is the right object of meditation — enters into an effect, 
then this entering into an effect is a voluntary descent of Him, so as to help 
the world, just for his sport: thereby He completes the number of entities 
of certain categories which are his own effects. So, as a matter of sport, the 
Supreme One becomes Upendra,™* completing thereby the number of divini- 
ties. Likewise the Supreme Brahman has voluntarily descended into the 
shape of Dasaratha’s son Rama, thereby completing the number of kings of 
the Solar Dynasty. Similarly the Venerable Lord has voluntarily descended 
in the House of Vasudeva, to incarnate Himself in Krsna in order to support 
the world, thereby completing the number of scions of the Lunar Dynasty. 


§ 108. We have explained before that it is Narayana whom the con- 
texts that deal with creation and resorption declare to be the supreme cause. 
If in the Atharvasiras Upanisad Rudra enlarges upon his own universal 
sovereignty,°* then this is true—as witness so’ntardd antaram pravisat — 
in so far as the Supreme Spirit has entered into him: this is made clear by 
the Sruti itself.°“6 The author of the Sutras declares in Sdstradrstya tipadeso 
vaimadevavat that this is the meaning of statements of this type; like that of 
Prahlada for example: “Because the Infinite One is omnipresent, I am He. 
All is from me, I am all, all is in me everlasting, etc.”*47 Here the ground 
that justifies this type of statement is mentioned: the ground is that the 
Infinite One is omnipresent: the Supreme Spirit is omnipresent as the imma- 
nent soul of all spiritual and non-spiritual entities which constitute his own 
body. So we have said®§ that all words denote the Supreme Spirit Himself 
as embodied by ail entities. Hence the word “I” denotes the Supreme Spirit as 
the substance modified by a mode of which He himself is the soul. The Author 


543. The Supreme Being is here referred to by His name Visnu (rather denoting 
an aspect of the total divine personality Narayana,), because this name figures in the 
AtharvasikhUp.; rightly S. comments: atha brahmavisnurudrendras te sarve samprasit= 
yanta iti visnoh karyatvasravandt paratvavaikalyasankdm vyudasyati. It would appear 
from this paragraph that to R. Visnu would primarily denote the God as the God of 
incarnations: the etymology vis-, always present to his mind, would favour this view. 

544. For the story of Krsna and the cows and Krsna’s consecration by Indra with 
the name Upendra, cf, Harivamsa ch. 75 and VP. 5, 12, esp. 12-15. 

545. AtharvasirUp. 1 deva ha vai svargam lokam ayams te rudram aprechan ko 
bhavan iti/so *bravid aham ekah prathamam dsid vartémi ca bhavisyami ca nainyah 
kascin matto vyatirikta iti/so ’ntarad antaram pravisad digo vyantaram pravisat (S, 
reads disas cdntaram samprdavisat). 

546. “He has entered within from elsewhere”: S: garinid antarasya pranader apy- 
antaram jiwam pravisat. 

547, VP. 1, 19, 85, 

048, Supra, §17, 


= 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 261 


of the Vakya expresses the same in the terms of meditation on God under 
the aspect of the ego: “One may grasp Him as ‘Oneself’, for each has in Him 
his completion: 549 i.e., it is the Supreme Spirit—either in condition of effect 
or of cause—who ensouls the body constituted by spiritual and non-spiritual 
matter in gross or subtle form respectively: this is so because everyone 
and everything is completed in Him. The same declares the Author of 
the Sitras in: “But as ‘the self: this they accept for so have the texts under- 
stand them.”55° So, again, in the Mahabharata in the Brahmariidrasamvada, 
where Brahma tells Rudra: “He is the immanent soul of you and me and 
whoever else has a body:5*! ie., the sovereign Lord Narayana exists as the 
immanent soul in Rudra, Brahma and all embodied beings. Likewise in the 
same epic: “Visnu is the soul of the venerable Bhava whose might is immense. 
Therefore the sovereign Lord suffers the bow to be drawn’”;*? again in “those 
two chief gods, who are believed to have sprung from His serenity and from 
His wrath, work creation and destruction when He has shown them the 
way,’ i.e, Narayana, existing as their immanent soul, shows Brahma and 
Rudra the way so that they can work creation and resorption respectively. 


§ 109. Those who profess that there is difference between the opera- 
tive and the material cause are heterodox,*** for they contradict the sutras 
which have been composed by an orthodox follower of the Veda, for example: 
“from Whom the birth etc., of this proceed, “He is the material cause, for 
that is in harmony with the promise and the instance;”*6 and moreover they 
contradict all the hosts of Srutis such as for example; “In the beginning, my 
dear son, this was sat: it was alone and without second," that reflected: I 
be many: I will multiply;* the forest was Brahman and the tree was Brah- 
man out of which they build heaven and earth: Brahman underlies the 


549, dtmety eva tu grhniydt sarvasya tannispatteh, cf. Appendix § 2, Fr. XI. 

550. BrS. 4, 1, 3 dtmeti tipagacchanti grahyanti ca; cf. SBh.: The sages look upon 
God as the all-ensouling principle, for this is taught by a number of texts like the 
Antaryamibrahmana. 

551. MBh. 12, 353 ff. (Calc, Ed. 13743) which reads mamdntaradtma tava ca. 

552, MBh. 8, 1503cd-1504ab (C. reading Visnus céitma@); in the context Visnu 
enters the bow. 

553. MBh. 12, 343, 19 (C. 12146, reading °ddesita°): Brahma is sprung from His 
serenity (prasdda), Rudra from His wrath. 

554, vedabahya- “outside the Veda, not accepting the authority of the Vedic texts.” 

555. BrS. 1, 1, 2 janmady asya yatah. 

556. BrS. 1, 4, 23 prakrtis ca pratijnadrstantinuparodhat; the pratijia is the pro- 
missory assertion ChUp.6, 1, 3 uta tam ddegam apraksyah...yendsrutam Ssrutam, etc.; the 
drstanta the instance of the clay 6, 1, 5; the sutra refers to 6, 2 where the creation of 
the world out of sat is taught. 

557. ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 

558. ChUp. 6, 2, 3, 


262 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


worlds supporting it;*°9 all the flashes of lightning spring forth from over 
that Person;*®® no one is master to Him and His alone is great fame;**! there 
is no diversity whatever here;*® ruler of all, sovereign over all;*® this Per- 
son is all that was and that shall be, the sovereign of immortality;>*4 no other 
path is there for him to tread,” 


§110. The epics and puranas tell us in the contexts treating of the 
subsistence and resorption of the world that this is the Supreme Entity. For 
instance the Mahabharata: “Who has created this entire world, animate and 
inanimate? And to whom shall it return? Tell us that, Grandfather: to 
which Brahma replies: “Narayana, who is embodied by the world, the soul 
of the infinite, the One everlasting, etc.”°6? and also: “rsis, pitrs, gods, the 
great elements, the minerals: the entire world, animate and inanimate, 
springs from Naréyana.’’>68 


Likewise is set forth in the Visnupurana which is accepted without 
dissension by all instructed persons from the East, North, South and West 
as adequate in so far as it establishes all the laws and all the categories. 
We learn from the Sutra: “from whom the birth etc., of this proceed,”5” 
that Brahman is the cause of the birth etc. of the world. Now the Visnu- 
purana, which first raises the question: “What has caused the world to be 
born etc.?” and then gives the answer: “It has originated from Visnu,’57 
serves only to expound a certain aspect of Brahman’s proper form: this is 
the consensus of all. 


This text then reads: “The prakrti, comprising the evolved and the 
unevolved, of which I have told you, and the purusa will both dissolve in the 
Supreme Spirit. This Supreme Spirit, who is the substratum of all and the 
paramount sovereign, is sung in the Vedas and Vedantas by the name of 
Visnu”:°" i.e. all texts in all the Vedas and Upanisads proclaim that He alone 


559. TaittBr. 2, 8, 9, 6. 

560. MahanarUp, 1, 8 = TaittAr. 10, 1, 3. 

561. TaittAr. 10, 1, 3. 

562. BAUp. 4, 4, 19. 

563. BAUp. 4, 4, 22. 

564. RV. 10, 90, 2 purusa evedam Sarvam yad bhitam yac ca bhavyam / utamy= 
tatvasyesano, 

565. TaittAr. 3, 13, 1. 

566. MBh. 12, 182, 1. 

567. MBh, 12, 182, 12. 

568. MBh, 12, 7074 (C). 

569, tattva- 

S10..qBrs.d, 1. 2 

DILARVE, 151581, 

572, VP. 6, 4, 39-40, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 263 


is the supreme cause. In the same manner as, among all Srutis, the Narayana 
section serves only to set forth a certain aspect of the Supreme Brahman’s 
proper form, so the Visnupurana only sets forth a certain aspect of Him. 
Beginning with the question: “What is the Supreme Brahman?” in: “I wish 
to hear from you who know the dharma how ‘the world was and how it will 
be again, what is the stuff that the world is made of and whence it comes 
with all its animate and inanimate creatures, how and where it was when 
it was dissolved and whither it will return to be dissolved,’> the Visnu- 
purana serves only to establish decisively a certain aspect of the Supreme 
Brahman’s proper form. This appears from: “The world has originated from 
Visnu and in Him it subsists. He is the One who sustains and annihilates 
the world, and He is the worlds He is ‘the paramount sovereign, supreme, 
existing as the Supreme Spirit, without any particularizing attributes like 
form, colour ete. He is free from decay and destruction, from evolution, 
birth and growth, so that it can only be said of Him that He always is. He 
is in everything and everything dwells in Him: that is why the wise call Him 
Vasudeva. That Brahman is supreme, eternal, unborn, undying, imperish- 
able, essentially simple, and always perfect as no imperfection is in It. This 
Brahman takes on completely the form of purusa and that of Time as the 
proper form of the evolved and the unevolved.”>> “He transcends, O Sage, 
the matter constituted by all beings and the ‘transformations natural to it 
and the imperfections inherent in it like its gunas, etc. He is the universal 
Spirit, transcending all obscurations, and He covers all that is between 
heaven and earth. All beautiful qualities are inherent in his nature and He 
supports the sum-total of creation with a fraction of his omnipotence. The 
vast body He has assumed is in harmony with His pleasure and taken on by 
his own wish, and in that body He works the fulfilment of what is salutary 
to the entire Universe. Comprising the beautiful qualities of glory, force, 
sovereignty, transcendent knowledge, fortitude, might etc, He is chiefer 
than the chiefest and none of the afflictions etc. affect Him the paramount 
sovereign. The Lord’s form encompasses all beings in their singleness and 
in their totality, unevolved and manifest. He is the universal Lord who 
espies all and knows all, omnipotent and hence called Paramount Sovereign. 
That by which this Supreme God, free from imperfections, pure, immaculate 
and simple, is known or seen or understood, that is true knowledge; all that 
is different from this knowledge is declared to be ignorance.”*"6 


Bisa VE wie 4-5. 
ye) ide ae ae 
Be VES in 2110914 
576. VP. 6, 5, 83-87. 


264 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§111. All other puradnas which give a diverging version should be so 
interpreted that they are not in conflict with the above one. Their divergence 
should be understood by considering the way in which each of them had its 
origin. If they are totally incompatible, then they are to be neglected because 
they must have had their origin in another guna than sattva.°”’ 


§ 112. —However, does not this very Visnupurana you quoted above 
tell us that the members of the trimarti®?® are equal? See the passage: 
“The one venerable Lord Janardana assumes the names of Brahma, Visnu 
and Siva to create, sustain and destroy.”579 —No, that is not true, The clause 
“the one Janardana” establishes the fact that the entire phenomenal world, 
constituted by Brahma, Visnu, Siva, etc., is ensouled by Janardana alone. 
This passage clarifies what has already been stated in “He is the world”®*° 
by declaring that “as the Creator the transcendent God creates Himself, as 
Visnu He protects Himself and what is under his protection, and as the Des- 
troyer He destroys Himself at the end.’’>®!_ Here Brahma as the creator, the 
created beings, the destroyer and the destroyed beings are all referred to 
simultaneously, so that, when it is subsequently asserted that Visnu ensouls 
all and everything, this assertion shows us the peculiar distinction between 
creator and destroyer as manifestations of Janardana on the one hand and 
created and destroyed beings on the other hand. The words Janardana and 
Visnu. being synonymous it follows that the manifestation comprises Brah- 
ma, Visnu and Siva together as a class. Hence it is said that the Supreme 
Entity exists, by his own choice and for the sake of his own sport, within the 
manifestation: as is voiced immediately afterwards in: “Earth, water, fire, 
wind, ether, all senses and the inner faculty constitute the world called 
purusa, As the imperishable One is the immanent soul of all beings and is 
embodied by all, therefore the creation etc. localized in these beings are 
ultimately useful to Him alone. So Visnu, most excellent, beneficent and 
benevolent, is embodied by all in the various modes of Brahma etc., in which 
He is creating and created, protecting, consuming and protected.”582 


§ 113. —A doubt may arise here: how is it possible that Brahman, 
who is irreproachable, untransformed and endowed with all perfections, can 
ensoul a phenomenal world that is partly evil, as the sémanddhikaranya con- 
structions would have us believe? 


577. Supra, § 94. 

578. “Trinity” of Brahma, Visnu and Siva, constituting the three personified aspects 
cf one supreme and transcendent Deity. 

579. VP. 1, 2, 66. 

580; VE, 13k. 

581, VP. 1, 2, 67. 

582, VP. 1, 2, 68-69, 


~~ 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 205 


—This doubt is conclusively disposed of by the text itself, which proves 
its contention with: “inasmuch as the imperishable One is the immanent 
soul of all beings and embodied by all’*83 for having asserted that Visnu 
Himself, the paramount sovereign and the Supreme Brahman, is the entire 
Universe, the text demonstrates this assertion by giving its ground: “because 
the imperishable One is the immanent soul of all beings and embodied by 
all: ’5®4 ie. because the imperishable One is this by all embodied immanent 


soul of all beings; later on the text will declare that “all this is in truth Hari’s 
body.” 


In other words: there is no contradiction in that Visnu, the Supreme 
Brahman, is imperishable and yet ensouls the world in so far as all constitute 
His body: for this defines the respective natures of body and soul from each 
other. The descent of the sovereign Lord Visnu thus described into animals, 
men and gods—like Brahma etc.—dwelling among the countless subservient 
entities that make up the phenomenal world, this descent, which is voluntary 
and serves as a refuge in which the different classes may foregather, has 
already been mentioned above. That those beings, Brahma etc., are all 
subject to karman as they belong to the three bhdvands,5®° and that the ven- 
erable Lord Vasudeva, who is the Supreme Brahman, descends among gods 
etc., by his own free will and in his own proper form to succour the entire 
Universe is most clearly declared in the sixth book of the Visnupurana in 
the chapter on S$ubhasraya.5** That his body in his incarnation as a god etc., 
is not of the stuff common bodies are made of is put forward in the Maha- 
bharata as well: “the body of this Supreme Spirit has not the common struc- 
ture of being built up by the various elements,”*8” and in the Sruti: “Unborn 
though He remains, He is born variously: the wise know his origin.”=88 The 
meaning is this: for Brahma and the like, who are subject to karman, it is 


583. VP. 1, 2, 68. 

584. VP. 1, 22, 38. 

585. bhdvand, term from VP. 6, 7, 47 ff, where it has approximately the sense 
of “creative potency manifesting itself in three successive ontological orders (bhava-), 
that of Brahman, the creator, Karman, the creation, and Brahmakarman, the mediators 
of creation Sanandana, etc. As it is stated that Hiranyagarbha and the gods belong to 
creation (50-51), R. quotes the bhdvandtraya as proof that Brahma and the gods are 
ksetrajfias and as such subject to karman. For a detailed discussion of the meaning of 
the term bhavana both in VP. and with R., I refer to my paper The Subhasrayaprakarana 
Visnupurana 6, 7 and the meaning of bhavand, Adyar Library Bulletin (Adyar 1955), XIX, 
1-2, p. 3 ff. 

586. VP. 6, 7, 47ff.; for R.’s interpretation of this section I refer to the paper 
quoted in the preceding note. 

687. MBh. ? na bhitasamghasamsthino deho ’sya paramatmanah, 

588. TaittAr. 3, 13, 3. 

V. 34 


266 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


inevitable—however much it may be adverse to them—that they are born 
by gaining entrance in a body of a god etc., which is a particular generic 
structure built up by combined elements evolved out of prakrti and which 
corresponds to their various karman. The sovereign Venerable Lord, how- 
ever, who has his every will realized, does not suffer births in the way of 
the above creatures, whose births are tainted by imperfection: still He is 
born in many ways—as a god etc.—but by his own free will and in his own 
proper form which is unsurpassingly good, and in order to succour the world. 
And the wise, i.e., the foremost sages, know his bahudha& yonim, i.e., the 
multiple origin of this sovereign Lord who nonetheless does not suffer im- 


perfect births. 

§ 114. Of the doubt, voiced in the sutra: “there would be something 
higher, because of the mention of bridge, measure, relation and difference” ,5® 
that there would be someone elso who is superior to the Supreme Brahman— 
who was already declared to be the operative as well as the material cause of 
this entire Universe in the sutras: “from whom the birth etc., of this 
proceed, and matter, for that is in harmony with the promise and the 
instance”**1_the Author of the Sutras himself disposes with “no, because 
of resemblance,°% it serves the idea, even as the quarter,>% because of the 
difference in place as in the case of light etc.,594 since it is possible,® it is 
thus, since other views are belied,5% therefore his omnipresence, as follows 
from the mention of extent etc.’’597 

§ 115. Similarly*®? we learn from the Manavadharmasastra, the text: “Dis- 
persing the darkness He made his appearance,® wishing to create his various 
progeny; in the beginning He brought forth water and therein He discharged 
his seed,® and therein rose Brahma of himself,’ that Brahma is an em- 


589. BrS. 3, 2, 30. 

BE abies, Us al, As 

591. BrS, 1, 4, 23, “matter” in the sense of material cause. 
592. BrS. 3, 2, 31. ; 
593. BrS. 3, 2, 32. 

594, BrS. 3, 2, 33. 

595. BrS. 3, 2, 34. 

596. BrS. 3, 2, 35. 


597. BrS. 3, 2, 36. 

598. The sutras quoted are exegetical pronouncements on texts in the Chandogya 
Up. which might suggest that there is something beyond Brahman, or that Brahman is 
not absolutely perfect. For the exact interpretation of the cryptic sutras I refer to 
R.’s commentary in the Sribhasya. 

599. Manusmrti 1, 6, d [svayambhir bhagavan avyakto] pradur dsit tamonudah. 

600. Manusmrti 1, 8 [so’bhidhaya sarinit svat] sisrksur vividhih prajah / apa eva 
sasarjddau tisu viryam apdsrjat. The Vulgate reads bijam (so Kullika: Saktiripam) 
avasrjat, 

601, Manusmrti 1, 9 c tasmifi jajte svayam brahma [sarvalokapitimahah], 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 267 


bodied soul; for he is said to have been born. The same follows from the 
passage: “the waters were his first course: so He is known as Narayana,® 
and the purusa He created is reputed in the world to be Brahma,® for here 
explicit mention is made of the names of the Supreme Person as the creator 
and of Brahma as his creature respectively. In the same manner the Visnu- 
purana concludes definitely that Hiranyagarbha etc. are embodied souls, 
viz., by the assertion that they are incapable of being Subhadsraya or pure 


object, inasmuch as they are impure—which follows from their connexion 
with the three bhavands. 


$116. There is a school® that contends: we must say that the whole 
body of language, as appearing in the form of injunction, exegesis and for- 
mula ® is a source of knowledge only in so far as language denotes things 
to do6S As we cannot understand what is the power of signification of lan- 
guage unless by the purposeful action taken upon it,6°7 and as this purposeful 
action has its origin in a purposive idea of a thing to do, it follows that the 
Veda can only bear upon things to do, and language can be no source of 
knowledge about a thing that is completed. 


—To this we reply: what does this high and mighty command mean 
that we must understand that language is capable of denoting meanings 
only and exclusively bearing upon practical activities resulting from the 


602. VP. 1, 4, 6 ayanam tasya tah pirvam tena nirayanah smrtah; it would seem 
that R. (or an early copyist) got his quotations mixed; the Manusmrti text expected 
here reads, almost identically, ta yad asydyanam, etc. (1, 11 ab). 

603. Manusmrti 1, 11 cd tadvisrstah so puruso loke brahmeti kirtyate. 

604. The school of the Prabhakaras among the Mimamsakas who maintain a num- 
ber of views diverging from those of the Bhattas, or followers of Kumarila Bhatta, 
which have become normative. This discussion of fundamental tenets of the Prabhakaras 
follows generally the same lines as the one at the end of SBh. 1, 1, 1, but is much more 
detailed and indispensable for a right understanding of the concise SBh. passages. 

605. Resp. vidhi, arthavada and mantra. 

606. karya; I adopt Lacombe’s translation (La doctrine, etc.) “chose @ faire” 
which suggests the dynamism of the peremptory injunction (grammatically expressed 
by the forms of the imperative, potential, etc.) and at the same time implies the exigen- 
cies of action in profane life as well. 

607. The idea is that we, learning our language in childhood, do not know the 
meaning of sentences and words before we have seen them enacted; cf. Jua, Prabhakara 
Mimamsa, pp. 235 ff.; see below. 

608. The Veda is the source of all language and contains all language. 

609. i.e., does no longer require a conation, an action taken upon it, because it 
is parinispanna “perfectly complete”. As Brahman is by definition and of necessity a 
perfectly complete entity which is in no state of becoming itself by outside action taken 
upon it, it would follow that the Veda cannot give significant information about Brahman. 


268 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


speech of an actuating agency?®9 It is perfectly easy to understand the 
denotative power of speech as bearing upon established things too! Suppose 
a person A sends a person B to inform Devadatta that the stick is standing 
in the inner room. A does not tell him by word of mouth but employs a 
gesture of the hand. If B wants to tell that to Devadatta, he will use spoken 
language to the effect: “The stick is in the inner room.” Now another per- 
son C keeps him company; C knows what that original manual gesture sig- 
nifies, as a dumb man would, but he had no knowledge before of significative 
language, nevertheless, he knows now what sense the sentence: “The stick is 
in the inner room,” conveys, as he has witnessed how it was used. What is 
difficult about this?61 


Similarly the father, mother etc., teach a child by degrees how to 
speak; first they point again and again with their finger at various persons 
and objects while using the words for them: “That is father, that is mother, 
uncle, a man, an animal, the moon, a snake.” The child observes that when 
the same words are used afterwards a certain idea about their objects pre- 
sents itself to him. So gradually the child concludes that the application 


610, The Prabhakara view that language (Sabda) has an inherent denoting capa- 
city, ie., the potency of denoting objects by itself, metaphysically, and not by virtue 
cf a human convention, is not denied by Ram&nuja; what he calls into question is the 
assumed necessity that this denotativeness is only restricted to imperative, etc., sentences 
enjoining things to be done. 

611. It is interesting to remark that R. appears not to have been satisfied with 
this example: in SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 127 he changed it: prakaranantarenapi gabddrthasamban- 
dhéva dharanam susakam/kenacit purusena hastacestadiné pita te sukham Gsta iti devadat- 
tdya jnapayeti presitah kascit tajjhapane pravrttah pita te sukham Gsta iti Sabdam pra- 
yunkte / parsvastho ’nyo vydpitsur mikavac cestivisesajnas tajjnapane pravrttam imam 
jnatvanugatas tajjnaipandya prayuktam imam gabdam Srutvdyam sabdas tadarthabuddhi- 
hetur iti niscinoti karydrtha eva vyutpattir iti nibandho nirnibandhanah: indeed, the 
Prabhakara might consider the example sidhyavikala. Devadatta on obtaining this infor- 
mation that the stick is in the inner room might quite conceivably act upon it and 
retrieve the stick and by his action show the dumb person the meaning of the sentence. 
In other words, the sentence can be construed as an injunction, so that R. has not really 
made his point. The SBh. example “your father is keeping well” does not admit of 
any construction as a kdrya. 

612. tair eva gabdais tesv arthesu svdtmanas ca buddhyutpattim drstva; the con- 
struction is succinct but precise; on the basis of our text we can restore a better SBh. 
reading: the parallel SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 127, line 9 should be read with MSS. BC tair eva 
Sabdais tesva arthesu svdtmanim buddhyutpattim drstva, instead of svdtmand adopted 
by Abhyankar and translated by Thibaut (? “those words of themselves give rise...”) 
and Lacombe (“ils, [sc. les enfants,] se rendent progressivement compte que tel ou 
tel mot fait naitre de lui-méme [en leur esprit] la notion de tel ou tel object”). The 
correct translation there too is “(the children) observe that these words create in them 
an impression of those various objects”: a buddhyutpatti of themselves, created by the 
words, about their objects, 


et or 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 269 


of these words to those objects — preceded by the indication with 
the finger — is based upon a definite power of denotation that is 
restricted to those objects only, because the words have as yet only 
been associated with those and no other objects and because the child does 
not know of any person who fixes their conventional meanings.®!3 When 
his parents teach him again and tell him that the meaning of this and that 
word is so and so, the child learns the meanings of all words and is then able 
to use the language’s entire stock of vocables. In the same way he knows that 
all words have their proper meanings and that particular combinations of 
words denote certain kinds of natural associations of simple objects.*4# Hence 
follows that the insistence upon words having meaning only for things to 
do is baseless.645 Consequently, from the fact that language can be under- 
stood to have the power of denoting an object that is established it follows 
that all the words of the Vedanta do denote Brahman, the cause of the 
Universe the possessor of all perfections, as defined above. 


$117. But let us suppose that words have meaning only for things 
to do*6 Even then the words of the Vedanta would fully denote everything, 
be it that then everything would be denoted only because it subserves the 
purpose of a thing to do by being the reward that specifies the qualified 
subiect®!? of the thing to do—viz., meditation—: in the same way as the 
arthavadas, or exegetical Vedic texts,®8 denote ‘heaven’619—a particular 
locality not associated with suffering—or the ‘firm foundation’®° that is the 


613. samketayitr- . 

614. This section corresponds almost verbally to SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 127, line 3 ff. 

615. Same expression SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 128: nirbandho nirnibandhanah; nirbandha- 
“insistence, obstinacy (in the teeth of contrary evidence)” 

616. This is argued on the basis of the typically Prabhakara theory of anvitabhi- 
dhana, according to which a statement derives its significance from the context (of the 
injunction), as opposed to Kumiarila’s theory of abhihitanvaya according to which “words 
themselves can express their separate meanings by the function of abhidha or denota- 
tion”, (COWELL, Sarvadarganasamgraha, p. 202, note, quoted by Jha). Ramanuja’s 
argument runs: the Vedanta enjoins the knowing of (“knowing” of course in R.’s sense 
of upadsana) Brahman: in the context of this injunction Brahman is the fruit or reward 
of this kérya (brahmavid apnoti param) and is as such significant. 

617. adhikarin- “possessing the qualities that authorize one to perform and benefit 
by ritual, etc., actions. 

618. On Prabhakara’s views on the function of Arthavada, see JHA, pp. 296 ff. 
where it is stated that “the arthavada, is as much Veda as the vidhi [purely injunctive 
portions] itself, as it also, like the vidhi, expresses the kdryata or performability [i.e., the 
being a thing to do] of certain acts”. 

619. Cf. in the injunction svargakdmo jyotistomena yajeta. (ApS. S. 10, 2, 1). 

620, pratisthd, reference is to PVBr. 23, 2, 4 prati tisthanti ha vai ya eta ratrir 
upayanti / brahmavarcasvino *nnida bhavanti ya eta ratrir upayanti, quoted by Sabara, 
bhasya ad Parvamimamsa Sutras 4, 3, 17, which reads ha v4, etc., and omits ratrir, 


270 J. A. B, VAN BUITENEN 


reward of nocturnal sattras, or the relation of means and end that exists 
between reviling a Brahmin and a fine of one hundred gold. pieces,®#4 


So the text “He that knows Brahman attains the Most-High’®2 would 
teach the attainment of Brahman, viz. as the reward that specifies the quali- 
fied subject to the thing to do in worshipping Brahman, and would be equi- 
valent to: “He who aspires to attain the Most-High should know Brahman:” 
the proper form and the properties of Brahman, which in this text are under- 
stood to be the end to be attained, would be established because they sub- 
serve the purpose of the thing to do; this would include all His properties— 
of being creator, destroyer, substratum, immanent soul etc., of the world—, 
so nothing would be disproved anyway. 


§ 118. Such being the case, all the objects included in mantras and 
arthavadas that are not incompatible and are unprecedented® are establish- 
ed because they subserve, or are accessory to, the vidhis or injunctions. So 
it is declared in Dramida’s commentary, from “on the strength of the Sruti 
rnam hi vai jayate” onwards: “the text has the function of praising the 
cutting; however, no praise is possible if the object be non-existent: 64 in 
other words: the entire division of exegetical texts or arthavada, which in 
a thousand ways describes the previously unknown qualities of yaga etc., as 
propitiations of deities, gives in a thousand ways rise to the knowledge®5 
that the object of the act is praiseworthy, whereas no such knowledge would 
arise if these arthavadas did not exist. Hence follows that they inform us 
of the real existence of qualities, so as to give rise to the knowledge that the 
object of the act is praiseworthy. Hence follows again that in this very 
manner all the objects, known through mantras and arthavadas, are proved 
to exist. 


§ 119. Further, those who maintain that the texts bear only on things 
to do should tell us how they define a ‘thing to do’. 


—It is that which comes into existence on the existence of an opera- 
tion and is the aim of that operation.6%6 


621. TaittS. 2, 6, 10, 2. 

622. TaittUp. 2, 1, 1. 

623. apurva-. 

624. cf, Appendix § 2, Fr. III. 

625. It would seem that the point which R, makes here would not be disputed 
by Prabhakara, as far as Jha’s evidence goes: at the most he would dispute the deno- 
tativeness or expressiveness of those arthavadas which cannot be connected with a 
vidhi or injunction. 

626. kdryatva: krtibhavabhavita krtyuddesyata ca; krti “operation” but not yet 
materialized, still conative: “volition” is another approximate rendering; cf. JHa, p. 336 

“the karya by its very nature is something brought about by krti, or operation; and 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 271 


—Then the question arises: what is this ‘aim of operation’? 


—The aim or objective of operation is that in view of which, or to 
which end, the operation takes place.®7 


—Then define what is the ‘object envisioned by operation’, taking 
operation as a human activity.® 


—The aim or objective of an operation is that desirous of which man 
enters upon an operation.®9 


—Well, then the aim, or the thing aimed at by the operation, is iden- 
tical with the thing desired by man.®° 


Or if you think that a desired object has two aspects: that of 
being present as the object of desire, and that of actuating a person, and 
say®! that the latter aspect, that of actuating a person, alone constitutes 
the aim of operation is wasted effort due to bias in favour of your own view. 
For actually the very fact that the object, which is thus understood to be the 
object of desire, cannot be realized unless an effort is made, actuates a per- 
son, for all activity starts thence. When a person understands, after the 
desire has arisen, that he cannot realize his desire unless he makes an effort, 
the desire to be active arises and in consequence thereof he is active. This 
is the view that the experts take. It follows that in reality one’s action has 


this operation is none other than the exertion [prayatna] of the agent.” So it is rightly 
said that karya comes into existence on the preceding existence of an operation. It is 
moreover that at which the operation aims: uddesya. Lacombe, note 974, remarks “pour 
Ramanuja, cette notion est identique a la précédente [ie., kdrya, v.B.]; on peut la 
désigner comme la “fin de l’action” par opposition a la “fin de lagent”, la fin de l’action 
n’étant que’ un moyen de la fin de l’agent;” but the Prabhakara view is the exact oppo- 
site of this: in fact the goal of the agent is itself subordinated to the goal of the action: 
see below. 

627. yad adhikrtya krtir vartate; in SBh., 1. c., the same is expressed more con- 
cisely: krtyuddesyatvam krtikarmatvam “the krtyuddeéga is the object of the operation”. 

628. adhikara- 

629. SBh. lc. krtikarmatvam (= krtyuddesyatvam) ca krtya praptum istatamatvam 
“the object of the operation is that which is most desired to be obtained by the opera- 
tion”. 

630. istatvam krtyuddesyatvam; thus the definition is reached that a karya is the 
object of desire. 

631. As the Prabhakara does: the reward—e.g., heaven —is only of secondary 
importance in itself, as a reward: its main function is to specify the adhikarin as one 
who is svargakama “desirous of heaven” and on whom the kdrya is incumbent. Con- 
sistently reasoned from this premisse it follows that the kdrya is ultimately its own end, 
or, in more moral terms (the appropriateness of which may, however, be questioned) 
“duty for duty’s sake”: I refer to Hirrvanna’s intereseing paper The doctrine of niyoga 
J. Or. Res., Madras Vol. XV, Part II (1946). 


272 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


no other aim or objective than gaining for oneself, as a result of one’s own 
efforts, the object of one’s desire; how can you fail to see this? 


—Or you may say: the reason why an object is desired is that it is agree- 
able to a person. The objective of an operation is that which is agreeable to 
a person. — I reply: No; pleasure is synonymous with that which is agree- 
able to a person, and suffering with what is disagreeable; so nothing that 
is not pleasure can be agreeable. But do we not see that cessation of suffer- 
ing, although it is not positive pleasure, is yet agreeable to a person? 


—No! For pleasure and suffering are to be discriminated as follows: 
pleasure is that which is agreeable to oneself — suffering is that which is 
disagreeable to oneself, The former of the two, pleasure or what is agreeable, 
is desirable, and the latter, pleasure or what is disagreeable, is undesirable. 
So, since we cannot bear suffering, its cessation becomes also desirable: con- 
sequently, because it is similarly desirable we mistake it for similarly 
agreeable, 


So a person who is naturally conjoined with prakrti, and hence im- 
plicated in samsara, may be in three conditions: he may be in contact with 
something agreeable; or with something disagreeable; or he may rest in his 
proper form. The last condition, that of resting in his proper form, implies 
cessation of contact alike with something disagreeable and with something 
agreeable. Therefore when a person is suffering something disagreeable it 
is likewise desirable for him to rest in his proper form, and, because that is 
like pleasure in that it is also desirable, he mistakes it for being also agreeable, 


§120. Therefore, competent criteriologists laugh at one who main- 
tains that the niyoga,®* or mandate, is in itself agreeable, for agreeableness 
has only the form of pleasure. We understand that a mandate derives its 
mandatory, permanent and unprecedented character only from its function 
of leading up to a certain objective that is desired. 


In the mandate: svargakémo yajeta the radical action®3 becomes dif. 
ferent from the optative mood as the thing to do, since this is positively 
intended as the means of realizing heaven inasmuch as the word svargakama 
is mentioned in direct connection with it. 


Don’t say that in yajeta the niyoga is primarily understood to be its 
own principal factor and that from the connected mention of svargakama 
follows that the niyoga is agreeable to the realization of heaven in order to 


632. The usual term of the Prabhakaras for karya. 
633. kriyd, “the verbal action as such”: the kriya of YAJ- is yajana- “the act of 
worshipping (by sacrifices)”, whereas the kaérya of the verb is formed by suffixes, 


hippi esp, 
the linadi suffixes of the optative/potential mood, ete, r 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 273 


ensure its own realization.®84 In yajeta it is rather understood that the radi- 
cal meaning can only be realized through the exertion of a person. The con- 
nected mention of svargakdéma compels us to assume that something else 
than the radical meaning is mandatory, permanent and unprecedented, ete.: 
and this puts a definite restriction to what we are to take as the means of 
realizing heaven. The optative etc. forms denote as the thing to do only 
a means of realizing heaven which can be construed with the person denoted. 
by the collocated word svargakéma. This explication, which is the most 
natural one, is also violated. 


In other words: immediately when we hear a text consisting in words 
that are intimately interconnected, we understand that the meaning of one 
word is to be consistently connected with the thing denoted by the other 
directly connected word. Therefore—since the realizing means is to be 
so construed that it bears upon the sense of the whole text—it is as contra- 
dictory and hence untenable for this means to have no further significant 
bearing as it is for the radical action itself. 


Therefore, in sentences like: “There is a cottage on the Ganges,” we 


take it that the word Ganges denotes as its meaning “a certain entity that 
can be dwelt on.” Primarily, of course, the word Ganges denotes the whole 
entity “Ganges”: but the quality of being drinkable —a quality proper to 
the entity denoted by the word Ganges as a whole — is not directly in keep- 
ing with the sense of the sentence as a whole. So here too: when we hear 
only the word yajeta, we remember it simply as a thing to do, without further 
significant bearing: but when we have to bring it in keeping with the sense 
of the text as a whole, this simple self-contained significance remains no 
longer. 


— But at the moment we hear a word that denotes a thing to do, we 
understand it primarily as a thing to do, with no other significance. 


634. The svarga has the principal function of qualifying the niyojya or the person 
prompted by the mandate; the object to be realized (sidhya) by the niyoga is not pri- 
marily the svarga but the niyoga itself. Cf, Prakaranapafcika, p. 190 nanu niyogasya 
kamyamanaphalasédhanatvabhyupagamat phalasyaiva pradhényat tasyaiva vakyarthatvam 
ity ata aha — atmasiddhyanukilasya niyojyasya prasiddhaye/kurvat (text kurvan) svarga- 
dikam api pradhanam karyam eva nah // ete. “To meet the objection that, since it is 
understood that the mandate is the means of realizing the desired result, therefore the 
result itself is the principal and consequently the sentence bears on that, he (Prabha- 
kara?) says: ‘(The mention of svargakama, etc., serves only) to make known the 
prompted person who is agreeable (to performing the niyoga) because it serves his 
personal ends; for us the principal is the karya itself which also brings akout such 


> 


results as svarga, etc. , 


Vy. 35 


274 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


— That does not rhyme either: for in the case of a mandate like 
“Fetch the cow” we understand that the action of fetching the cow — 
involving suffering itself —is a thing to do only in so far as it serves as a 
means of realizing a certain desired result. Hence it is contrary to all 
human experience that the niyoga or mandate itself would be agreeable to 
man, and one who maintains that the mandate is agreeable to man is belied 
by his own experience. 


In the case of mandates like: “One desirous of rain should sacrifice 
with the kariri,’®5 one will not, when the mandate has been realized, 
experience the mandate itself as agreeable, because the operative cause of 
realizing rain is different from rain itself. Even though the rain is not 
invariably realized in one’s present life, yet, in the very absence of such an 
invariable rule, one has necessarily to assume that the mandate itself has 
been realized, and in that mandate no one experiences any pleasure synony- 
mous with agreeableness. In the manner here described there is no other 
objective of operation than the desired object that is to be realized by the 
operation. 


§ 121. —But®6 the objective of operation is the principal to which the 
operation itself is accessory. 


— Then tell us what makes this principal and what the accessory ? 


— The accessory is that which is correlated with the thing to do, and 
being the principal means being correlated with that accessory. 


— Then you say no more than that the principal is the same as the 
thing to do; but what we are concerned with is, what makes a thing to do? 


—An accessory is that which admits of being invariably con- 
comitant with an operation taking place in view of the other term. 


— Then how do you define the relation “in view of the other term”? 
For that is what we are concerned with. 


635. karirya vrstikd@mo yajeta; kdrirt is a sacrifice in which the karira plant (the 
thorny Capparis Aphylla) figures; the only source to which I have been able to trace 
this sruti is a quotation by the commentator ad Atreyisakhiya Kandanukrama of Taitt, 
Veda, 3, 17: kalpe.... karirividhih, explained: kalpe—sitre (reference is probably to 
Asv&SrS. 2, 13 varsakdmestih karirth) divakirtyény ucyante ... karirividhih: karirir ya 
(sic, read kdrirya) vrstikdmo yajeti (read yajeteti), in A, WEBER, Indische Studien, 3, 
p. 373 ff., esp. 394, 


636. This paragraph corresponds to SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 129; on Sesah in the ritualistic 
sense of KMS. 3, 1, 2 Sesah pararthatyat “one constituent is accessory when it is sub< 
seryient to another”, 


-VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 275 


— The object envisioned is that which is to be realized by the thing 
‘intended. 


— What is the “thing intended” ? 
— The purpose of the operation. 


— But I have already replied that the final purpose of the operation is 
the same as the purpose for which he started operating: and its content is his 
desire, to gain which he has to resort to operating. Actually the relation 
between principal and accessory is in any situation as follows: the accessory 
is in essence that which admits of application to, or which has its use for, 
another term inasmuch as it serves to support the transcending importance 
intrinsic to that other term that constitutes the principal. To illustrate: 
the ydga has its use, and so have the exertions required therefor, inasmuch 
as they serve to bring about the desired result; and everything else has 
its use, if, and in so far as, it serves to realize the yaga. 


§ 122. Similarly, it is the essence of born slaves that they have their 
use in so far as they support the transcending importance of particular 
persons.®37_ In the same manner, all entities—comprising spiritual and non- 
spiritual beings, eternal and non-eternal—have essentially only their use 
inasmuch as they support the transcendence of the Lord. Thus everyone 
and everything is accessory to the Lord and the Lord is principal to all: 
as has been declared in Srutis like “the Master of all, the Lord of all, the 
Patron of the universe, etc.” Your sense, to wit that the thing to do is the 
principal factor that is to be realized through operation, can only appeal 
to the credulous. 


§ 123. Moreover,*8 in the mandate svargakamo yajeta, and similar 
mandates, the word svargakéma designates the particular agent that is 


637, Ramanuja borrows here no doubt from Prakaranapajicika, p. 190 yathatmana 
eva samvidadhinah svami garbhadasasyopakaroti tath& niyogo ’pi niyojyasyeti na pra- 
dhanyapadapracyutih “just as a master benefits a born slave by making use of him for 
his own purposes, so the niyoga benefits the niyojya: but this does not mean that the 
niyoga looses its status of principal term”. Noteworthy is the turn which Ramanuja 
gives to this metaphor by lifting the relation master-slave to a cosmic plane where it 
represents the relation God-universe. The same metaphor is utilized in SBh. loc. cit. 
put in an altogether different sense and wording: pradhanas tu bhrtyapose "pi svoddesena 
pravartata iti cen na, bhrtyo pi pradhdnapose svoddegenaiva pravartate “don’t say that 
the principal serves his own purposes even by maintaining his servant, for the servant 
too serves his own purposes in maintaining the principal”. 

638. Ramanuja questions here the propriety of introducing the notion of niyojya; 
ace, to the Prabhakara the niyojya is the one who knows that the karya is his to do, 
and is distinguishable from the agent: the latter is agent of acting, the other of knowing; 
the personal ending of the verb indicates the niyojya in a general way, the word 


276 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


denoted by the termination of the verb. Now, how do we arrive at the 
view that this word against the rules of grammar designates the particular 
niyojya, or the person prompted by the mandate ? 


—It is impossible that a person qualified by svarga as the objective 
to be realized is construed as the agent of an action that is not a means of 
realizing svarga.®39 


— But neither can he be construed as the niyojya, or the person 
prompted by the mandate, if that mandate is not the means of realiz- 
ing svarga: which decides that it is a means of realizing svarga.540 
But at this decision, that it is a means of realizing svarga, we can only 
arrive when the injunctive text has established with what kind of agent 
the action is to be construed. To illustrate: when it is said that “he who 
wants a meal must go to Devadatta’s house,” it follows, from the simple 
fact that one hears that he who wants a meal is the agent of the action of 
going to Devadatta’s house, that now one also knows something one did 
not know before: namely that the action of going to Devadatta’s house is 
the means of obtaining a meal. The same is the case here.*41. Would it 
be proper to imagine that one who is said to be the agent of one action is 


svargakama specifies him. R. argues that this procedure is ungrammatical: the personal 
ending refers to the kartr who is specified as svargakama. 

639. The Prabhakara argues that one cannot at the same time be related to the 
sddhya —i.e., the svarga—and to the sidhana —i.e., the action of sacrificing —. The 
verbal form yajeta, constituting the karya, does as such not at all require a peculiarly 
specified agent svargakadma: the agent is already expressed by the personal ending; in 
the niyojya both the agent and the svargakama are united. 

640. Ramanuja replies that the niyojya, that is the prospective agent who desirous 
of svarga knows the karya to be his, cannot be construed with the personal ending either, 
unless—and that is the point —the karya is primarily the means of realizing svarga 
and not itself. This reverts the order of the Prabhakara: the mere injunction is 
indifferent unless its purpose is given; that purpose is given in svargakama; consequently 
karya primarily subserves svarga. Otherwise neither the niyojya nor the agent svarga- 
kama can be construed with yajeta. So the connexion of the kartr or agent is primarily 
given in the injunction itself. 

641. Agency in one act does not imply agency in another act; acc. to the Pra- 
bhakara, the niyojya is in the first place the agent of knowing that the karya is his 
task and in the second place and consequently the kartr. But this “agency of know- 
ing” is merely presumed, not given in the injunction, so that the notion of niyojya 
has no title to take precedence over that of kartr; so the varttika quoted Prakarana- 
pancika, p, 182: tathdapi svasambandhikaryaboddhrtvenaivinvayo varnaniya iti niyojya- 
samarpakatvam evasriyata ity evam api kim ity dha—niyojyah ... budhyate (text: bud- 
dhyate): “yet the construction (of the svargakama with the kar a) is to be described 
as his being the knower of the karya as related to himself: so (the word svargakama) 
é taken as conveying the niyojya. He explains how this is in the stanza: “the niyojya, 
etc,’ 


m wad gipar 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 217 


the agent of another action? That is what you do: for you imagine that 
the one who is—in yajeta—said to be the agent of ydaga, or sacrifice, is 
the agent of buddhi, or knowing. In fact, just the imagined assumption 
that he is the agent of knowing makes him the niyojya, or the person 
prompted by the mandate: for you say: “the niyojya is he who knows that 
the thing to do is his to do.” 


— But he must first know before he can sacrifice. 


— That means that if Devadatta, who is said to be the agent of 
cooking in “Devadatta must cook,” first goes somewhere in order to cook, 
he must first go somewhere else before he is able to cook. Is it proper 
to imagine that he is the agent of going ?6 


§124. Further, why do you assume that the apurva, as denoted by 
the optative etc. verbal forms, is something permanent 7° 


— Because otherwise the collocation of the word svargakaéma would not 
be accounted for. 


— In what sense would it not be accounted for? 


— Svargakéma is someone who desires to realize svarga. If the ac- 
tion of yaga etc. would be ephemeral, then it would not enable the svarga- 
kama to achieve the realization of heaven since that will take place at 
another time. 


— Then it is only not accounted for the people who have not a ghost 
of an idea of the final conclusions of the Vedanta. Those who do know 
their Veda hold that the sovereign Lord, the venerable Narayana, grants 
any desired result when He is propitiated with any ritual act. For instance, 
Dramidacarya, the foremost of the authorities on the Veda, declares: %* 


642. The Prabhakara’s contention that the agency of knowing ‘corresponds’ to, or 
‘suits’ the agency of sacrificing is not helpful: if Devadatta has to go somewhere in 
order to be able to perform the duty of cooking enjoined on him in devadattah pacet, 
we may say that his going to cook ‘suits’ his actual cooking, but this agency of going 
is nowhere given in the simple injunction that he is to cook: that is our presumption. 

643. apurva- is in the first place the codana, vidhi, itself: KMS. 2, 1, 5 codand 
punar drambhah, and Sabarabhasya ad loc. codanety apiurvam brimah, etc. Sabara 
defines ad 1, 1, 2 kriyaéyah pravartakam vacanam. According to the Prabhakara the 
codana is “unprecedented” because it is known from no other source than itself: 
kriyddibhinnam yat karyam vedyam mandintarair na tat / ato manintarapurvam apurvam 
ity giyate. (Prakaranapaficika, p. 187). In the second place it is the codand’s own 
suprasensible effectiveness that persists as something permanent (sthayy eva kimceit) 
after the kdrya has been completed until its result will materialize, 

644. For a literal translation see Appendix, 


278 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


phalasambibhatsaya hi karmabhir dtmainam piprisantiti sa prito ‘lam phala- 
yeti Sdstramaryddad. That is to say: since they want to obtain the results 
they desire, they want to propitiate, with acts like sacrifice, charity etc., 
the Supreme Spirit, the venerable Lord Vasudeva, through the intermediary 
of deities like Indra etc. whose inner Ruler He is and by whose names He 
may consequently be denoted: for when He has been propitiated with 
those acts, He grants the results they desire-—Similarly the Sruti: istapirtam 
bahudha jatam jayamanam visvam bibharti bhuvanasya nabhih®—ista- 
purtam®¢ means “the ritual act enjoined by all Srutis and smrtis:” so visvam 
bibharti “the Supreme Person ‘bears’ for Himself, ie. accepts for Himself 
all these ritual acts which are understood to be associated with deities like 
Indra, Agni, Varuna etc., whose immanent soul He is;” for He is bhuvanasya 
nabhih, i.e. the supporter of the world comprising the classes of brahmins, 
ksatriyas etc: He is called nabhih, or navel, since He by granting the 
diverse results of the various acts, is as such the bearer of the Universe.— 
The same éruti declares that He is denoted by the names of the deities Agni, 
Vayu and the like, because He is their immanent soul: “that is Agni, that 
is Vayu, the sun and the moon’*’_The Venerable Lord puts it thus: “If any 
votary wishes to worship with faith any body, then I make that faith of him 
unshakable. Inspired by that faith he aspires to worship it, and in result 
he will obtain his desires, which I shall grant him.48 “Any body” here 
means that the particular deities etc. constitute the bodies of the Venerable 
Lord who exists as their inner Ruler.—Again: “For I am the one who 
enjoy all sacrifices, and I am the patron,’®9 where patron®9 means: “the 
bestower of all results.’”—So also: “Thou, comprising all gods, art the One 
who always receivest the sacrifices, O Acyuta !’’61 “Those men who, intent 
on their proper tasks, propitiate Thee, O Lord, will surpass that illusion 
entirely to their souls’ release,652 


In Vedas, epics and purdnas it is set forth at length that all acts are 
propitiations of the sovereign Lord and that the Supreme Person, when duly 
propitiated with all these acts, grants their diverse results that are desired. 
In this very manner, therefore, all érutis set forth that the omnipotent, 


645, MahanarUp. 1, 6 = TaittAr. 6, 1, 6. 

646. R. distinguishes between ista- as Srauta and purta- as smdarta acts. 

647, MahanarUp. 1, 7= TaittAr. 6, 1, 7: tad evdgnis tad vayus tat siiryas tad u 
candramah / tad eva sukram amrtam tad brahma tad apah sa prajapatih, 

648. BhG. 7, 21-22, 

649. BhG. 9, 24, 

650. prabhu- “one who has power”. 

651. VP. 5, 20, 97; Gité Press ed. has the expletive ‘cintya for the preferable 
nityam, 

652. VP. 5, 30, 16, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 279 


omniscient and sovereign Venerable Lord is the One who enjoys—as the 
inner Ruler of the deities Indra etc.—all the acts mentioned in the Veda, 
ydga, dina, homa® etc., and that He is the One who grants all the results: 
for instance, the Sruti caturhotiro yatra sampadam gacchanti devaih,®* i.e, 
“in whom—se. in the Supreme Spirit as the inner Ruler within the gods— 
the caturhotrs—sc. the sacrifices—come to coincide with the gods—sc. come 
to be associated with the gods.” In other words: the gods, Indra etc., by 
existing as the bodies of the Supreme Spirit who is their inner Ruler, are 
associated with yaga etc. Or as the Venerable Lord has put it: “the enjoyer 
of sacrifice and austerities, the sovereign lord of all worlds. 


To conclude, the ritual acts have the form of propitiations of the 
Supreme Spirit who is the inner Ruler of the deities Agni and the like. He 
alone grants the results that are coveted. So what is the point of assuming 
or imagining that an aptrva is denoted, which strays far from the path of 
etymological explication?®® 


— But, granting this, what sense then have we to assume for the opta- 
tive etc. verbal forms ? 


__YAJ has the sense of “worship of the gods”; hence ydga- and other 
derivatives are propitiations of the deities. The optative ete. verbal suffixes 
denote that this ydga in its radical meaning®’ is—as appears from etymologi- 
cal explication—the object to be realized by the activity of an agent. In this 
way everything is sound. The terminations which denote agents connote that 
the radical sense of the word is modified by the connection with the activity 
of an agent; other affixes denote the present, past and other tenses; whereas 
the optative affixes indicate that the verbal action is the object to be realized 
by the activity of an agent. 


$125. Moreover, the very texts that enjoin the various acts first 
enjoin that a definite act be performed by an agent who is desirous of its 
effect, and then they say that that act has the form of propitiation of a deity 
and that through the intermediary of that deity the effect of that act will be 
realized: e.g. a text like “One desirous of prosperity must sacrifice a white 


653. ydga- general term for sacrifice, homa particular sacrifice by pouring the 
substance out in fire, cf. KMS. 4, 2, 27-28. 

654. TaittAr, 3, 11, 2; caturhotr, name of a recital during the new and full moon 
rites, denotes by extension the rites themselves, 

655. BhG. 5, 29. 

656. That the apurva or codand, i.e., the verbal affixes of the potential, ete., moods 
(linadi), should persist as their own eventual effectiveness is an assumption that is at 
best metagrammatical. 

657. prakrtyartha-, 


280 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


he-goat that is destined for Vayu: for Vayu is the nimblest of the deities. 
On account of its destination, it runs up to Vayu himself. He leads him ta 
prosperity: 68 here we find nothing that could disprove the realization of 
the result. Consequently it is unreasonable to say that the knowledge that 
the acts are means of realizing their results is merely based upon assump- 
tion,659 


I mean this: the subsiduary text that supplements the injunction®®? 
tells us what modification of the yaga as a means of realizing the result is 
required by the injunction. For instance the injunction: “Therefore one 
must not revile a Brahmin.”®! In the subsidiary text supplementing this 
injunction which prohibits reviling we are told that the prohibited act of 
reviling is a means of realizing a fine of one hundred gold pieces, and we 
accept this as part of the prohibitive injunction because it subserves the 
purpose of it. So in the injunction under discussion again we learn from 
the subsiduary text that the ydga, as it is enjoined to be performed by one 
who has a definite desire, is thereby modified as a means of realizing the 
svarga that is desired. Why disregard this and then smuggle in again this 
yaga as a means of realizing a result by merely assuming that it is? “Hiding 
his gold treasure in his house, he goes begging with poor people for a poor 
man’s meal,”662 is a maxim that fits you admirably! Nor is it an invisible 
factor®8 that makes the reviling a means of being fined one hundred gold 
pieces. When a person performs the recommended acts, fails to perform the 
enjoined acts and performs the censured acts, all his pleasures and sufferings 
are due to the favour and disfavour of the Supreme Person. 


There are all sorts of Srutis which declare this: “For He alone brings 
bliss®4 ,,,, then he finds peace .... no peace befalls him. In fear of Him 


658. TaittS. 2, 1, 1 vayavyam svetam dlabheta bhitikdmah / vayur vai ksepistha 
devata /vayum eva svena bhagadheyenopa dhavati / sa evainam bhiitim gamayati, quoted 
also ApSrS. 19, 16, 3. 

659. aupaddniki, S. explains upddanapramanasidha vidhyaksepasiddhetyarthah 
“proved by the means of assumption, i.e., by implied suggestion of the injunction”, 

660. vdkyasesa- 

661. TaittS. 2, 6, 10, 2. 

662, A proverb (nydya) according to S. built on hiranyanidhim nihitam aksetrajna 
uparyupart samcaranto na vindeyuh (ChUp. 8, 3, 2) which makes the citation in this 
connexion subtly insulting. 

663. adrsta- “includes the transcendental effect produced upon some material thing 
by a ritual treatment of it which produces no visible effect upon it.” It includes the 
apurva but this “exists of itself, and is not a function of any material or other object” 
(Epcerton, MNPr. p. 279, s.v. apirva-), 

664. TaittUp. 2, 7 esa hy evdnandayati. 

665. TaittUp. 2,7 (... yadad hy evaisa ekasminn adrsye *bhayam pratistham vin- 
date) atha so ’bhayam gato bhavati, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA poe eames 


By anne 


the wind blows, the sun rises and run Agni and Indra and finally Death.6% 
In obedience to the commandment of Him the imperishable One, O Gargj; 
sun and moon stand apart®®? .... in obedience to His commandment, O Gargi, 
men praise the liberal, the gods the sacrificer, and the pitrs are entitled to 
the darvi.”668 As declared in the Dramidabhasya: “In obedience to His 
command the wind blows, the rivers flow; by Him the oceans have been 
confined and they spring like rams as if they were rutting,” and “for being 
dependent on His will the world neither falls nor bursts asunder. When 
the Venerable Lord knows that someone follows His commandments, then 
He makes him prosper in His mercy, for He knows and is capable of acting.’ 


§ 126. When a person performs the enjoined acts such as the worship- 
ping of the Supreme Person—which presupposes true knowledge of Him — 
then, by His favour, he finds happiness culminating in the attainment of Him, 
and security,®” according to his qualification. But when he does not perform 
the enjoined acts of worshipping Him etc., preceded by true knowledge of 
Him, and performs censured acts, then he will find immense suffering, which 
presupposes failure to attain Him, and insecurity. As the Venerable Lord 
has said: “Perform acts constantly: for acts are better than knowledge”: 
herewith He enjoins that acts must be performed after knowledge has been 
acquired.®71 Then in “having dedicated all acts to Me”®’? He sets forth that 
the acts are propitiations of Himself and that the souls are under His con- 
trol, Then He continues: “The men who always follow what I have taught 
here, faithfully and without muttering, will find release through acts. But 
those who mutter against it and refuse to follow my teaching, are ignorant of 
any knowledge, lost and devoid of understanding: be sure of that,§79 so as 
to praise those who obey His commandment and to condemn those who do 
not. Then He repeats that they who do not keep to His command have a 


Ore 


666 TaittUp. 2, 8 bhisismad vatah pavate / bhisodeti siiryah / bhisismad agnis cen-= 
dras ca/ mrtyur dhavati paficamah. 

667. BAUp. 3, 8, 9. 

668. BAUp. 3, 8, 9 ad finem. 

669. Cf. Appendix, 

670. abhaya-. 

671. BhG. 3, 8; R.’s interpretation in GBh. ad loc. differs: atah karmayoge ’py 
atmano *kartrtvabhdvanaydtmaydthatmyadnusamdhaénam antarbhitam (after which two 
more arguments for karmayoga’s superiority to jfanayoga are given): “consequently kar- 
mayoga itself contains an essential knowledge of the atman because it entails the realiza- 
tion that the Atman itself is not the agent of karman” (cf. my Raimdnuja, etc., p. 20-21); 
ep. also the GBh. explication: niyatam vyaiptam, prakrtisamsrstena hi vydptam (karma), 
an which cf. my Ramanuja, etc., ad loc, 

672. BhG. 3, 30. 

672a. BhG. 3, 31, 

V. 36 


282 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


demoniac disposition, and finally He declares their ultimate downfall in: 
“T hurl these hostile, cruel, despicable and criminal men incessantly into 
demoniac forms of existence in their samsdras. Reduced to demons, con- 
fused, and in life after life failing to attain Me, they will gradually go down 
to the nethermost limit.”673 While He describes the eternal place that the 
followers of His command will reach in: “He that always performs acts 
while resorting to Me will attain by My favour for ever the eternal place.”674 
In order to prevent that all those people who have not studied the Vedanta 
should lack faith in acts, emphatical declarations are made in the devatadhika- 
rana.®"5 However, the final conclusion of those who know the Veda is that 
all Sastras constitute one astra only. 


§ 127. There are thousands of Srutis that declare that this Supreme 
Brahman Narayana has a proper form of undefinable knowledge and beati- 
tude in the purest form; He has immeasurable, innumerable, all-surpassing 
beautiful qualities, such as knowledge, power, strength, sovereignty, fortitude, 
glory etc.; the sum-total of spiritual and non-spiritual entities different from 
Himself are actuated by an act of His will; He possesses one invariable 
divine form that is in accordance with His pleasure and in harmony with 
Himself; He has an infinite variety of unsurpassed beautiful ornaments that 
suit His form, and immeasurable, endless and marvelous weapons of all kinds 
that are equal to His power;®® He has a Consort®’? who suits His pleasure 
and who is in harmony with Him, possessing an immeasurable eminence of 
proper form, qualities, supernal power, ascendancy and character; He has 
an infinite entourage of attendants and necessaries,®"8 suitable to Him, the 
knowledge, actions etc. of whom are perfect and whose qualities are limit- 
less; He has an infinite glorious manifestation, such as is fitting to Him, 
comprising all objects and all means of experience; He has a divine residence, 
the proper form and nature of which are beyond the ken of thought and 
the power of expression: all this and so forth is everlasting and irreproachable. 


This is declared in the srutis: “I know that Great Person who has 
the colour of the sun, beyond matter;79 that golden Person within the 


673. BhG,. 16, 19-20 

674. BhG. 18, 56. 

675. KMS, 9, 1, 9. 

676. Cf. the astrabhisanddhydya, VP. 1, 22, 

677. Sri-, hence the typically Sri-Vaisnava appellation Sriyah patih with which 
opens the GBh, intr. which is an elaboration of this Ved. paragraph. 

678. The attendants are such superior beings as Ananta-Sesa, Garuda, Visvaksena, 
etc., etc. (YID. 9, p. 134); under paricchada- S. mentions kalicikaprabhrtayah “Ladle, etc, 
(?)”; the attendants are according to GBh, intr. siris, on which see below. 

679. SvetUp. 3, 7 vedaham etam purusam, ete, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 283 


sun®80, ,,.His eyes are like a many-coloured lotus;®*! that is the space within 
the heart: therein is this Person, manomaya-, immortal, golden: manomaya- 
means “to be grasped by the pure mind only’;®8 — “all the flashes of lightning 
spring forth from over this Person: sc. “from over this sun-coloured 
Person;” nilatoyadamadhyastha vidyullekheva bhasvara,*? sc. “like a flash of 
lightning that has a dark cloud within: 6 that bundle of flames that burn 
within the space in the heart of the Little Lotus and whose proper form is 
the Supreme Spirit appearing as the dark spot within those flames, blazes 
forth like a flash of lightning that has a dark cloud within itself; — “open to 
the mind, embodied in the vital airs, radiant, having all desires materialized 
and every will realized, soul of the space, who has all acts,®87 all desires, all 
scents, all juices, encompassing all this, voiceless, unconcerned;®8 His 
saffron-coloured garment;®® etc., etc. 


The same meaning is conveyed by hundreds of Srutis, such as: “Visnu’s 
Consort, Mistress of the world;®° Hri and Laksmi are. Thy spouses;®! the 
siiris regard always that supreme place of Visnu;%? lying beyond matter;%8 
that is one, unevolved, infinite, complete, primordial, beyond matter; he 
that knows the treasure contained in the innermost Supreme Heaven;® who 
watches in the Supreme Heaven;®* that is what is and what shall be, that 
is in the imperishable Supreme Heaven.” 


680. ChUp. 1, 6, 6 ya eso ’ntar aditye, ete. 

681. ChUp. 1, 6, 7 tasya yatha kapydsam, etc., on the interpretation of which ef, 
infra §§ 134 ff. 

682. TaittUp. 1, 6, 1 sa ya eso ‘ntar hrdaya, etc. 

683. Cf. MundUp. 3, 1, 8: na caksusa grhyate napi vaca manasa tu visuddhena. 

684. MahanarUp. 1, 6 = TaittAr. 6, 1, 6. 

685. MahanarUp. 3, 12 nilatoyadamadhyastha, etc. 

686. madhyasthanilatoyada; S. explains that the compound is a bahuvrihi with 
irregular position of the first member (purvanipdta) peculiar to chandas usage; R. inter- 
prets the obvious tatpurusa comp. in this way to harmonize this sruti with the others 
cited. 

687. S. explains sarvakarman- as “the One whose effect is the Universe”. 

688. ChUp. 3, 14. 2 manomayah pranasarirah; no doubt here manomaya is to be 
taken in the sense of “comprehensible by the mind”, , 

689. BAUp. 2, 3, 6 (tasya haitasya purusasya rapam) yathé maharajanam vasah, 

690. TaittS. 4, 4, 12, 5 tasyesdna, etc. 

691. TaittAr. 3, 18, 1 hris ca te, ete. 

692. SubalUp. 6 tad visnoh paramam padam, ete. 

693. TaittS. 2, 2, 12, 5 ksayantam, etc. 

694, MahanarUp. 1, 5 yad ekam avyaktam, ete. 

695. TaittUp. 2, 1 yo veda nihitam, ete. 

696. RV. 10, 129, 7 yo *syadhyksah parame vyoman. 

697. RV. 10, 90, 2 tad eva bhiitam u bhavyamé, etc., cf. MahanarUp. 1, 2, 


284 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 

§ 128. On the authority of the statement in the Sruti tad Visnoh para- 
mam padam that the stiris always regard the supreme residence of Visnu the 
Supreme Brahman, we know that there is a class of beings of perfect 


knowledge who have the gift of regarding at all times. The specification of 
the statement is either that those who are siris regard it, or that those who 


regard it are suris, _ 
—But in neither case more than one guna can be enjoined, 


— That is not true here, because all gunas have not been established: ®8 
the supreme residence that is qualified by all gunas is enjoined; as witness the 
Sutra: “When the gunas are not laid down by another sentence, the Sacrifice 
as well as its Accessories are enjoined by the same statement; because 
of their being mixed up in the Injunctive word, but not when the act is set 
forth by another statement.”69 Even as in the injunction of an act, e.g. yad 
agneyo ’stakapdlo .... bhavati,?° an act is enjoined that is qualified by all 
guras or accessories because neither act nor gunas have yet been established: 
similarly our Sruti propounds the supreme residence of Visnu that has not 
yet been established as being always regarded by the stris: so there is no 
contradiction, According to the Mimamsakas, the mantras which are kara- 
nas,’°! which allude to something that is being acted,’ which have the form 


698. KMS. 1, 4, 9; the problem is as follows: in the above declaration, however 
read, two different statements are found: they see that supreme place, and: they are 
suris, by which different gunas are ‘enjoined’; now in the case where the karman “act” 
has already been established by another declaration, another subsiduary declaration may 
describe only one guna, since otherwise there is vakyabheda “syntactical discontinuity”: 
prapte karmany anekavidhéne vakyabhedaépatteh (MNPr. § 33, which quotes Kumirila, 
TantrV. 2, 2, 6 ab. praépte karmani naneko vidhdtum Sakyate gunah “when the acts has 
been established elsewhere not more than one guna can be enjoined”), There is another 
case, which R. envisages, where more than one guna is allowed, viz. in a visistavidhi 
“injunction of an act as being further specified”, (MNPr. $12) for which the quoted 
KMSitra provides, 


699, KMS, 1, 4, 9. 


700. yad dgneyo ’stékapalo (’mdvasyim paurnamdsyam cadcyuto) bhavati (suvar- 
gasya lokasyabhijityai), adduced as ‘an instance in case by Sabara ad 1, 4, 9, to whose 
commentary I may refer; the reference is TaittS, 2, 6, 33, 


701. karanamantrah, explained by S. homadisddhanataya vihitah “enjoined as the 
means for homa. etc., rites”, 


102. kriyamandnuvaddinah, expl. by S.: barhir devasadanam dami ttyddayah; cf, 
MNPr. § 92 tad dhi barhih samskdradvardpirvasambandhiti mantrasya sadmarthyat tadar- 
thatve sati nainarthakyam prasajyate, ete., “inasmuch as the mantra, by virtue of its own 
denotative potency, is related to the apirva by means of the preparation of barhis and 


is thus significant, no insignificance can be imputed to it”, ete.; the text is MaitrS, as re 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 285 


of stotra’3 and gastra,?4 which are applied to japa etc.,”°° which are recited in 
context?® or not recited in context,77 all denote their proper sense, if not 
contradictory and not yet established, in the same way as the brahmanas.’ 
A stotra is a description of gunas found in the gunin which is to be realized 
by mantras that are sung; Sastra is a description of gunas to be found in 
the gunin which is to be realized by mantras that are not sung. The declara- 
tion which the mantras that elucidate their meanings in application make 
about the particular gunas — neither yet established nor contradictory — that 
are to be found in deities etc. are in agreement with that application. 


The above Sruti?3 does not apply to persons who are released because 
it would not be proper to say of them that they always regard.”? Nor does 
it apply to the continuous flow of released souls as a whole, for that would 
stultify the $ruti because it tells us in sada pasyanti that it applies to each 
agent separately.7!!_ We have said before that even if we assume that mantras 
and arthavadas have meanings only for a thing to do their meanings are 
established: so a fortiori when etymological explication proves that they have 
in fact bearing upon an established thing in their own right. In this manner 
everything is sound.”? 


— But in the assertion tad Visnoh paramam padam the words paramant 
padam. denote the proper form-of the Supreme One, for we cannot detect a 
difference between this éruti and Srutis like: “the Supreme ‘pada’, free from 
all imperfection, that has the name of Visnu.”™8 


— That is not true, for in Srutis like: “lying beyond matter;’4 “that 
is in the imperishable Supreme Heaven;”™5 “who watches in the Supreme 


103, S.: gdnavisistamantroccarana- “recital of mantras by chanting”. 

704. S.: ganarahitam ekasrutiripoccarana- “recital (of mantras), without chanting 
as one sruti”. 

705. S.: ie., japa and adhyayana, the former being recital in a low voice, the 
letter in a loud voice. 

706. As e.g., the mantra barhir devasadanam dami is recited in the context of the 
darsapurnamasa ritual; cf, MNPr. § 92; on prakarana- as a criterion (pramana) for decid- 
ing the function of subsiduaries (anga-/sesa-, among which mantra is included), cf. 
MNPr. §§ 116 ff. 

707. On mantras recited out of context, cf, MNPr. §§94f., and §§$248ff. 

708. ie., the vidhi-, brahmana- par excellence, : 

709. ic., tad visnoh paramam padam sada pasyanti siirayah. 

710. For before they were released they did not see. 

711. For cf, the sequel: tad viprdso vipanyavo jigrvdmsah samindhate, explained 
below, |... 
‘ 712, Cf. supra. 

713. VP. 1, 22, 53. 
714. TaittS. 2; 2, ‘12, 5. 
715. TaittUp. 2, 1, 


286 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Heaven;’7!6 “who knows that which is laid down in the innermost Supreme 
Heaven,’7!7 only a Supreme place is indicated, and in “that Supreme pada of 
Visnu’’78 it is designated that there is difference between one and the other. 
So by this very text we learn from the specification “the Supreme ‘pada’ that 
has the name of Visnu” that there is yet another supreme ‘pada’ different 
from this one, but it is declared that it is this ‘pada’ or ‘place’ that is always 
regarded by the suris. 


§ 129. —JIn other words: in some texts the words paramam padam 
refer to a supreme place, in other texts they refer to the proper form of the 
soul as separated from prakrti; and in other texts again they refer to the pro- 
per form of the Venerable Lord Himself. The Supreme Place is referred to 
in “The siris regard always the paramam padam of Visnu.” The proper form 
of the soul separated from prakrti is referred to in: “During creation, 
subsistence and resorption the prakrti exists on in a triple form according 
to the activity of the three gunas; but its paramam padam is beyond gunas 
and great.”719 Finally the proper form of the Venerable Lord is referred to 
in “The paramam padam, free from all imperfection, that has the name of 
Visnu.”70 The words paramam padam can refer to all three because they 
constitute the highest attainable end. 


— But how can all three of them be the highest attainable end ? 


— The proper form of the Venerable Lord is the supreme pada, because 
that is the highest attainable end in its own right. The other two are 
supreme ‘padas’ inasmuch as they are implied in the attainment of the Lord. 
The realization of the proper form of the soul released from all bonds of 
karman is implied in the attainment of the Lord:7! this on the authority of 
the instruction imparted by the Sruti “those desires are real but they are 
concealed by the unreal,’?22 which, by using the word “unreal” declares that 
the hosts of perfections of the Lord are concealed by one’s personal karman. 


§ 130. — But how do you make out that this concealment in the form 
of the “unreal” is due to the karman of the embodied soul? 


716. RV. 10, 129, 7, 

717. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

718. i., the Supreme Residerice. 

719, VP. 1, 22, 41. 

720. VP. 1, 22, 53. : 

721, Or, to put it differently: the essence of God cannot be attained, ie., intui- 
tionally realized, unless the soul’s essence has been recognized: dtmavalokana- is a pro= 
paedeusis to the attainment of God: cf. my Raémdnuja, etc. Intr. IV, 

722, ChUp, 8, 3, 1 ta ime satyah kama anrtapidhanah, 


‘ 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 287 


—On the authority of the assertion: “Ignorance, otherwise called 
karman, is regarded as another potency by which the ubiquitous potency of 
the embodied soul is enveloped, and it meets all the sufferings of samsdra 
in endless succession because it is concealed by that ignorance,'*3 etc,” 


$131. That the attainment of the Supreme Place, too, is implied in the 
attainment of the Venerable Lord is clear enough: in the sruti “lying beyond 
rajas”?4 the word rajas denotes the prakrti characterized by the three gunas: 
for rajds has no proper existence alone and isolated from the other gunas. 
The sense of the text is consequently: “Him who lies, i.e. dwells, in a definite 
place beyond this our prakrti” characterized by the three gunas. So we know 
by this that the dwelling-place of Visnu must be beyond the matter that is 
governed by gunas and that constitutes the embodied soul’s field of ex- 
perience. In the text “I know that great person who has the colour of the 
sun, beyond tamas,”7?5 the same prakrti is denoted by the word tamas. Since 
tamas alone has no proper existence either, this text forms one coherent 
context with the text reading “lying beyond rajas’”; so we gather this sense: 
“T know that great person, of the colour of the sun, who dwells beyond 
tamas.” 


The éruti “who knows Brahman—who is real, knowledge and infinite— 
laid down in the innermost Supreme Heaven: that is in the imperishable 
Supreme Heaven”?s tells us that the word “Supreme Heaven” denote that 
Supreme Place as having an untransformed form. So since the clause “the 
‘imperishable Supreme Heaven” asserts that this place is imperishable, the 
words “Supreme Heaven” cannot denote celestial bodies like the sun ete. 
because those are perishable. Texts such as “where the ancient gods have 
found the fulfilment of their ends,” “where the first-born rsis of olden times??? 
etc.” tell us that they are the suris. Similarly the Sruti tad vipraiso vipanyavo 
jagrvamsah samindhate Visnor yat paramam padam: 78 viprasah, i.e., “intelli- 
gent beings’—vipanyavah “devoted to glorification’ —jagrvamsah “of unim- 
paired knowledge”—the meaning being that those intelligent beings of unim- 
paired knowledge and incessantly glorifying that Supreme Place of Visnu 
blaze forth. 


723. VP. 6, 7, 61-62. 

724, TaittS. 2, 2, 12, 5. 

725, SvetUp. 3, 7. 

726. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

727. RV. 10, 90, 16 yatra purve sidhyah santi devah ? yatrarsayah prathamaja ye 
puranah. 

728, SubalUp. 6, 


288 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


§ 132. In the same way as the hosts of beautiful qualities—knowledge, 
strength, sovereignty etc.—in the text “this was sat in the beginning, my dear 
son,” so these attendants, this place etc. are implied in the proper form of 
the Supreme Brahman.”9 Therefore, since they, too, are comprised by the 
beautiful qualities; since in the Sruti “this was sat in the beginning” the word 
this encompasses the phenomenal world of objects of experience conjoined 
with the order of experiencing beings that are subject to karman; and since 
the former attendants are however not included among the beings subject 
to karman because they “regard always” according to the Sruti “the saris 
regard always”: therefore the text from apahatapapma to apipasah720 negates 
first the imperfect nature proper to the prakrti—constituted by the three 
gunas—that furnishes the means of His own sport, and the imperfect nature 
proper to the ordinary prakrti-conjoined purusa; and then, with satyakamah, 
it asserts the reality of the sum-total of His own objects and means of ex- 
perience. Satyakdéma- means “He whose kamas, i.e. the objects of desire, are 
real.” Therefore the meaning is: the objects and means of His experience 
that the Supreme Brahman desires for Himself are real or eternal. The 
word satya- signifies that, whereas an entity that is the means of another’s 
sport, is liable to transformation and therefore, albeit real in so far as capable 
of connexion with pramanas, yet unreal in so far as impermanent, the siris 
etc. on the contrary are permanent. Satyasamkalpa- asserts, that although 
these objects and means of experience etc. be eternal, unsurpassed and end- 
less, an infinite number of new entities owe their realization to His will 
alone. So satyasamkalpa- declares that the differences in proper form, condi- 
tion and activity of these means of experience and means of His sport, spiritual 


and non-spiritual, permanent and non-permanent, are entirely dependent on 
His volition. 


§ 133. This same sense is stated in epics and puranas, which corro- 
borate the Vedas as witness this passage: “Seeing that both were intelligent 
and firmly established in the Vedas, the Lord made them apprehend, in order 
to corroborate the Vedas.731 For example it reads in the Holy Ramayana, 
thus composed to support the Veda, as follows: “That great Yogin, the ancient 
Supreme Spirit, is in his evolved phase without beginning, middle and end, 
great beyond the great,732 beyond matter: He is the creator, who bears the 
Conch-shell, Disc and Club: on His chest is the Srivatsa curl; He has Sri for 
ever as His consort; He is invincible, eternal and immutable.?733 “Various 


729, ChUp. 6, 2, 1. 
730, ChUp. 8, 1, 5. 


, 731.. Ram. 1, 4, 6 tau tu medhavinau drstva, ete.; the two persons are KuSa and 
ava, 


732, The great (mahat) here will have the sense of mahattattva, 
733, Ram. 6, 1, 4, 14-15, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 289 


arrows and a long-drawn bow accompany the descendant of Kakutstha; all 
the individuals follow suit.734 With body and with entourage he enters the 
glory of Visnu.’5 


In the Holy Visnupurana: “That multiplicity of forms comprising all 
the forms in which all these potencies have their seats constitutes another 
vast form of Hari. Brahman is incorporate, Hari encompasses™” the entire 
Brahman. Sri, Visnu’s faithful consort, the Mother of the world is eternal 
herself, and she is omnipresent even as Visnu Himself is.38 When He is god, 
she assumes a divine body, when He is man she assumes a human body: she 
makes her own body agree with that of Visnu.”39 “The Yogins who in per- 
fect concentration constantly meditate upon Brahman possess that supreme 
place which the siris regard.” “ .... whose manifestation is not subject to the 
evolutions that are caused by Time consisting of kala, muhirta ete.” 


And in the Mahabharata: “Go to the divine residence, O Lord, un- 
decaying, unthinkable, unknowable, primordial, which is to be known from 
the revelations, and protect us, your votaries, by incarnating yourself in every 
age with your own body.™! Time gets ripe, and there is no time, there is the 
Lord alone." 


The Author of the Sutras declares that the Supreme Brahman has 
form in the sutra “within, on account of the instruction of His properties.”™ 


§ 134. He who is always gloriously visible’ is the pre-eminent Person 
who dwells within the orb of the sun. His splendour is like that of a colossal 
mountain of molten gold’46 and His brilliance that of the rays of hundreds 
of thousands of suns. His long eyes are spotless like the petals of a lotus’ 
which, sprouting forth from deep water on a soft stalk, blossoms in the rays 


734. Ram. 7, 109, 7; Vulgate reads in c tathayudhdni te. 

735. Ram. 7, 110, 13ab; Vulgate reads in c sahinujah. 

736. VP. 6, 7, 70; mahat in the sense of the tattva, and by extension “Universe”. 

737. VP. 1, 22, 63 cd. 

738. VP. 1, 9, 145. 

739. VP. 1, 8, 39; Gita Press ed. reads in b yoganiscaye, in c tesam tu, in d yat tat. 

740. VP. 4, 1, 84 ab. 

741, MBh. 12, 5, 27. 

742. MBh. 12, 191, 9 ab (Poona cr ed). 

743. BrS. 1, 1, 21 antas taddharmopadesat, referring to ChUp. 1, 1, 6, on the basis 
of which R. will now give a description of the Divine Person. 

744, daridrsyate, intensive built on drsyate of ChUp. 1, 6, 6. 

745. 1, 6, 6: antar dditye. 

746. 1, 6, 6: hiranmayah. 

747, 1, 6, 7: pundarikam evam aksini, 


Vy. 37 


290 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


of the sun.748 His eyes’? and His forehead and His nose are beautiful, His 
coral-like lips smile graciously, and His soft cheeks are beaming. His neck 
is as delicately shaped as a conch-shell and His bud-like divine ears, beauti- 
fully formed, hang down on His stalwart shoulders. His arms are thick, 
round and long and He is adorned with fingers that are reddened by nails 
of a most becoming reddish tinge. His body, with its slender waist and 
broad chest, is well-proportioned in all parts, and His shape is of an 
unutterably divine form. His colour is pleasing. His feet are as beautiful 
as budding lotuses. He wears a yellow robe that suits Him and He is adorned 
with immeasurable, marvelous, endless and divine ornaments—a spotless 
diadem, earrings, necklaces, the Kaustubha gem, bracelets, anklets, belt ete.— 
and with Conch, Disc, Club, Sword, the Bow Sarnga, the curl Srivatsa and the 
garland Vanamala.™ He attracts eye and thought alike of all by the measure- 
less and boundless beauty that is His. He overflows the entire creation of 
animate and inanimate beings with the nectar of His comeliness. His youth 
is exceedingly wonderful, unimaginable and eternal. He is as delicately 
tender as blossoming flowers, He perfumes the infinite space between the 
cardinal points with the odour of holiness. His profound majesty is for 
ever encompassing the entire Universe. He looks upon the hosts of His 
devotees with loving eyes, filled with compassion and affection. His sport 
is to evolve, sustain and dissolve all the worlds. All evil is foreign to Him— 
He is the treasury of all beautiful qualities and He is essentially different 
from all other entities. He is the Supreme Spirit, the Supreme Brahman, 
Narayana. This is the sense to be read in ‘on account of the instruction of 
his properties,”5! He rules all the worlds—all His desires,752 ‘He igs beyond 
all impurities,753 ete. His properties are declared in the texts: ‘the ruler of 
all, the sovereign of all,754 free from imperfection, unaging,....whose every 


748. According to S., who substantiates this statement by quotations, R. here 
describes what is called kapydsa (1, 6, 7) in three ways: conformably to the three explica- 
tions of this disputed term allowed by the Vakyakara (see Appendix §2, Fr. XIII); 
respectively gambhirémbhahsamudbhita-, borrowed from Dramida (< kam “water”, api, 
asa “ground, soil”); suwmrsttandla- (< kapi [< kam pibati] “stalk”; dsa [yasminn dste] 
“seat”); ravikaravikdsita- (<kapi [<kam pibati] “sun”, dsa [tendsyate ksipyate vikd- 
syate] “expansion, blowing”). 

749. In the sequel R. has been inspired by VP. 6, 7, 80 ff. 

750. I refer to VP. 1, 22 on Visnu’s ornaments and weapons. 

751. BrS. 1, 1, 21 antas taddharmopadesat, 

752. MahUp. ? 

753. ChUp. 1, 6, 7. 

754. BAUp. 4, 4, 22, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 291 


will is realized,™5 ‘supreme beyond all, eternal, universal, Narayana, Hari, 1536 
“Lord of all, sovereign of the souls,”"*" ete. 


$135. The Author of the Vakya declares all this in: “The Sruti “the 
golden person is regarded”? teaches that the One who is knowing is within 
everything, because we learn that He is the Lord of the world and the 
desires, and also because He is beyond sin” etc. The same author, after 
having stated the prima facie view that the Supreme Person would have 
assumed form to favour His worshipper: “If it be said that His form is 
temporarily assumed by his sovereign power, in order to favour their 
thoughts,” subsequently denies that His form is not eternal: “That body is 
beyond sensual perception and only apprehensible by the internal faculty, 
for this has been declared:”*® ie. even as the qualities of knowledge etc. 
have been stated to constitute the proper form of the Supreme Brahman, in 
the same manner His form belongs to His proper form, for the scriptures 
declare that His proper form is such. 


The same has been commented upon by the Author of the Bhasya: 
“The form of the creator of all is His by nature; however, it cannot be 
grasped by the eye, it can only be apprehended by the untroubled mind which 
has another means; this on account of the sruti: “He is not grasped by the 
eye, nor by speech, but by purified thought.” For a deity that is formless 
cannot be declared to have form, for the Sastra asserts things so as they are: 
“saffron-coloured garment,”’®° “I know that great person who has the 
colour of the sun, beyond matter;””6! and because another context declares 
that He is a witness,” etc. [Vakya] “The word hiranmaya- is used, because of 
similarity of form, just as “moon-faced”;” [Bhasya] here the suffix -maya- 
has not the sense of “being a product of” because the soul is not subject to 
beginning.” Even as we learn from the mention of an infinitude of beautiful 
qualities that the Supreme Brahman is modified by measureless beautiful 
qualities, in the same way we know by the mention of “.... that person who 
has the colour of the sun,” etc. that the Supreme Person Narayana, who is 
the Supreme Brahman, has a perfectly beautiful shape which is in accordance 
with His pleasure and in harmony with Himself. Since the texts: “Visnu’s 
consort, Mistress of this world,’ “Hri and Laksmi are Thy consorts,’"® “the 


755. ChUp. 8, 1, 5. 

756. MahanarUp. 11, 2. 

757. MahanarUp. 11, 3. 

758. Reference is to ChUp. 8, 1, 6 and 8, 2. 
759. Viz. MundUp. 3, 1, 8. ' 

760. BAUp. 2, 3, 6. 

761. SvetUp. 3, 7. 

762, TaittS. 4, 4, 12, 5. 


292 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


siris regard always,’ “beyond matter,’ “lying beyond this matter,” ete. 
refer to consorts, attendants, a residence etc., we know also that they actually 
exist: as the Author of the Bhasya declared: “for the sdstra asserts things 
so as they are.” 


§ 136. In other words: even as the text “Brahman, who is real, know- 
ledge, eternal”764 declares that the proper form of the Supreme Spirit is 
essentially different from everything else inasmuch as it is antagonistic to all 
evil and comprises only boundless bliss, and inasmuch as it is undefinable— 
even as, further, the texts “Who is omniscient, all-knowing,’ “His supreme 
potency is diverse, His knowledge, power and works are proper to His 
nature," “everything derives its light from this luminary, all this is luminous 
by His luminosity,”76’ ete. declare that His qualities which are unsurpassed 
and innumerable are essentially different from everything else—in the same 
manner the text “who has the colour of the sun,’ etc. declares that His form, 
attendants, residence etc. are essentially different from everything else, are 
proper to Him exclusively and have an inexplicable proper form and nature. 


$137. If the Vedas are pramana, then they denote the sum-total of 
unprecedented and compatible meanings, classified under vidhi, arthavada 
and mantra, so as they are in reality. That the Vedas are pramana is stated 
in the sutra. “Meaning is inherent in the word.’’768 Even as the power of heat 
is inherent in fire etc., and even as the power of originating particular cog- 
nitions is inherent in the senses of vision ete., in the same way the power 
of denotation is inherent in language.” It is not right to say that the deno- 
tativeness of language is based on convention, as is that of the language of 
gestures. In the very absence of any knowledge about a person or persons 
who fixed the convention, although there is no break in the beginningless 
transmission of the notion (of the denotative character of language), the 
originally conventional meanings would have been known as such either 
directly or traditionally. Nor is it right to imagine that the denotativeness 
of language is as conventional as that of words like Devadatta etc., for with 
words of that type the convention is known either directly or traditionally. 
With words like cow, inasmuch as no convention is known, although there 


763; VaittAr.. 3, 13,71; 

764. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

765. MundUp. 2, 2, 7 yah sarvajnah sarvavit. 

766. SvetUp. 6, 8 pardsya sgaktir vividhaiva. 

767. MundUp. 2, 3, 10/SvetUp. 6, 14 tam eva bhantam. 

768. KMS. 1, 1, 5 autpattikas tu gabdasyarthena sambandhah. 

769. This theory of the originality of language is the one generally adhered to 
by the ancient systems, though the (ancient) Naiyayikas formulate it thus that the 
denotativeness of language is a convention established by God himself, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 293 


is no break in the beginningless transmission of the notion of denotativeness, 
the power of denotation is inherent. Hence follows that we must assume 
that the cognitive power of language is inherent in it just as the power of 
heat is inherent in fire and the power of cognition in the senses of vision etc. 


§ 138. — However, if the denotative power of language is inherent 
in it as it is in the senses, then why is it necessary for a word, in order to 
be denotative, that its relation to its denotation is apprehended? 


—We reply: it is as with the mark-of-inference’” in logic: just as 
marks like smoke have invariably a definite relation with the thing marked, 
fire etc., and so give rise to the cognition that there is fire, so language has 
also an invariable relation with the denotation and so gives rise to a certain 
cognition. 


— But then language, being the inferential mark of denotation, would 
be Inference and not a pramana in its own right. 


—No: the relation between word and meaning is that between means 
and object of cognition. Smoke etc., have another relation: via an inter- 
mediate stage of knowledge of that relation they give rise to a definite cog- 
nition, that is the difference. 


Summing up, inasmuch as we see that a word has the power of de- 
noting a meaning when the relation between both is apprehended, and inas- 
much we have no knowledge of any convention, although there is no break 
in the beginningless transmission of our notion of the denotativeness of 
language, therefore we conclude that the power of denotation is inherent in 
the word itself. 


$139. So, denotative combinations of simple words are to be called 
contextual language.”71 There where the word-order in speaking derives 
from human cognition’? we speak of human language. But there where the 
word-order in speaking always derives from the mental impression’? left 
by the previous word-order in an endless retrogressive chain we call them 


770. linga-; I refer to Tarkasamgraha, Buddhikanda § 48 with Athalye’s notes. 
771. vakyasabda- “language consisting in propositions and phrases in which a 
number of single words (padas) are coordinated and subordinated to a vakyartha”; on 
padasamghata- cf. Sabarasvamin’s definition samhatyartham abhidadhati padini (KMSBh. 
14). 
Bai? ie ie. the construction of sentences and phrases as representing a certain train 
of thought traceable to human experience. 
773, samskara-. 


294 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


preterhuman™ and we say that the Vedas are preterhuman. That which 
makes the Vedas preterhuman and eternal is that it is spoken in exactly 
the same precise order that has been remembered by the mental impressions 
left by previous orders in an endless retrogressive chain. And these Vedas 
—congeries of syllables, each of which has its definite place in a regular 
order from the beginning onwards—continue in an infinite number of 
branches differing according to the Veda—Rg-, Yajur-, Sama- or Atharva- 
Veda — to which they belong. And these Vedas, in the form of vidhi, artha- 
vada and mantra, denote the proper form of Narayana, who is the Supreme 
Brahman, and the manner in which He is to be propitiated, and finally the 
particular results that follow when He is propitiated. The entire body of 
language called Veda, which gives rise to the knowledge of the Supreme 
Person, of His proper form, of the propitiation of Him, and of the fruit 
thereof, is eternal. Since the Vedas are endless and difficult to understand, 
the great rsis have been ordered by the Supreme Person to transmit the 
sense of the Veda in every age in order to help all the worlds, and they 
have composed the dharmasastras, epics and puranas which are founded on 
vidhi, arthavada and mantra.” The profane words are extracted as before 
from the vocabulary of the Vedas and are applied, as before, to certain 
objects as their names,’’6 and their usage is fixed by tradition, 


— However, if all the words denoting meanings are ultimately Vedic, 
is it proper then to define them separately as belonging either to the hymns 
or to profane parlance??77 


—In the Vedas the same words have their appointed place in that 
regular order only and are there alone used, whereas the words used else- 
where are used differently, so we commit no error. 


§140. Thus it is set forth that Narayana — who is the Supreme Brah- 
man—to be known from the Vedas with their subsiduaries, corroborated 
by epics, puranas and dharmasastras, is antagonistic to all evil and essentially 


774. apauruseya-; the sentences of the Veda do not represent a train of thought 
traceable to human experience: a sentence like svargakamo yajeta can only have a 
preterhuman origin since its contents cannot be derived from human knowledge: hence 
it is “unprecedented”. All such sentences together form a huge frame of interdependen- 
ces in which elements are comprehensible from within but never from without. 

, “75. S. suggests a distinction between the dharmasastras as continuing and sup- 
porting the purvabhaga—pre-upanisad Veda—and the epics and puranas supporting the 
Upanisads. 

776. S. refers justly to VP. 1, 5, 63, quoted by R. supra §21 in a similar 
connexion, 
os 777. Resp. chandas- and bhdsa; for references see ReENnov, Terminologie, s.v, 

$=, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 295 


different from everything else. His proper form is purely boundless know- 
ledge and bliss. He is a treasury of hosts of natural, innumerable beautiful 
qualities. All spiritual and non-spiritual entities, in all the varieties of 
proper form, modes of existence and activities, obey His volition. The proper 
form and nature of His infinite supernal manifestation’”® are undefinable. 
The means of His sport are constituted by the phenomenal world consisting 
of an infinite variety of spiritual and non-spiritual entities. In the Srutis?”9 
“all this is verily Brahman, all this is ensouled by Him....Thow art That, 
Svetaketu,”®° some call Him Agni, others the Maruts, others Prajadpati, others 
Indra, others the vital air, others the eternal Brahman,’®! the splendours 
and brightnesses that are in the world; the world, the world-protectors and 
the three Vedas; the three fires and five oblations: the Son of Devaki is 
all and all the gods,’ You are the sacrifice, You are the vasat, You are the 
Om syllable,783 You are Rtadhaéman, the ancient Vasu of the Vasus, Pra- 
jaipati,784 the entire world is Thy body and the earth is Thy fortitude; fire, 
wrath, grace, soma is Thine, O Thou who art adorned with the Srivatsa;785 
Visnu is the luminaries, Visnu is the woods, Visnu is the lands, Visnu is 
the mountains and spaces, He is the rivers and the oceans, He is all what 
and what is not, O great priest:’7®6 in all these Srutis all words used in 
sdmanddhikaranya declare that Brahman is modified by all because all 
constitute His body, as I have said before. 


The Supreme Brahman, whose every will is true, wills, of His own 
accord, that He be modified by the many. He then, of His own accord, 
divides the subtle elemental matter in the form of the totality of non-spiritual 
entities from the multitudinous hosts of experiencing entities, which were 
both dissolved in himself hitherto, and creates out of the subtle elemental 
matter the primeval elements, introduces into them as their souls the expe- 
riencing entities, creates the entire Universe out of these primeval elements 
controlled by spiritual souls in mutual conjunction, and then of His own 
accord enters into them as their immanent soul’? and exists on as the 


778. mahdvibhiti- 

779. ChUp. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv idam brahma. 

780. ChUp. 6, 8, 7 aitadatmyam idam sarvam (tat satyam sa atma) tat tvam asi 
Svetaketo. 

781. Manu 12, 123 where the vulgate reads manum anye for maruto ’nye. 

782. MBh.? 

783. Ram. 6, 120, 20. 

784. Ram. 6, 120, 7. 

785, Ram. 6, 120, 26. 

786. VP. 2, 12, 38. 

787. ChUp. 6, 2, 3. 


296 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


Supreme Spirit whose body is formed by all, and is thus modified by the 
many. This subtle matter of the primeval elements is called by the name 
of prakrti, and all the experiencing entities are in their totality denoted by 
the name purusa. Both prakrti and purusa constitute modes of the Supreme 
Spirit because they constitute the Supreme Spirit’s body. Hence the Supreme 
Spirit Himself can be denoted by the words prakrti and purusa. All this, 
which has been expounded before, is elucidated by the Sruti: “He willed: 
I be many: I will multiply; having created that, He entered into that; when 
He had entered into that it was present and yonder, it was explained and un- 
explained, an abode and not an abode, knowledge and not knowledge, true 
and false; and it was real.788 


§141. We have already declared that the means of attaining Brah- 
man is a superior bhakti in the form of rememorization staggered to a state 
of extremely lucid perception, which is immeasurably and overwhelmingly 
dear to the devotee. It is achieved by complete devotion of bhakti which 
is furthered by the performance of one’s proper acts preceded by know- 
ledge of the orders of reality as learnt from the Sastra.789 The word bhakti 
has the sense of a kind of love, and this love again that of a certain kind of 
knowledge. 


— However, according to people in the world love has no other sense 
than that of pleasure, and pleasure that is to be realized by a certain kind 
of knowledge is a different thing altogether. 


—No, for whatever kind of knowledge is said to lead to pleasure is 
pleasure itself. 


§ 142. In other words: cognitions with a content fall either under 
pleasure or suffering, or the state of neither pleasure nor suffering, and they 
become one or the other of these three according to their content or object. If 
knowledge particularized by a particular object excites pleasure, it is held dear 
accordingly. The cognition that has that pleasurable object is pleasure itself, 
and we do not notice any different thing: particularly because this cogni- 
tion leads to the practical behaviour of being happy. The capacity of par- 
ticularizing such a pleasurable cognition is but relative and impermanent 
in any object different from Brahman, but in Brahman Itself it is absolute 
and permanent: it is said that “Brahman is bliss.”79° Since knowledge is 
pleasurable if its object is pleasurable, Brahman is pleasurable as such. 


788. TaittUp. 2, 6. 

789. i.e. the discriminatory knowledge of the ontological orders of prakrti, purusa 
and God. 

790. TaittUp. 3, 6 dnando brahma, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 297 


This is declared in: “He is pleasure: He that obtains this pleasure becomes 
happy,79! i.e., Brahman being pleasure one is happy when one has attained 
Brahman. The Supreme Person, being in His own right and of His own 
accord boundless and absolute bliss, becomes bliss to another too, because 
there is no differentiation in that He is beatitudinous.7 So the meaning 
of our text is: He that has Brahman as the object of his knowledge becomes 
happy. When it is realized that the soul stands in a relation of subservience 
to the Supreme Brahman because this Supreme Brahman — treasury of hosts 
of innumerable absolute and immeasurable beautiful qualities, irreproach- 
able, possessing an infinite supernal manifestation — ocean of immeasurable 
and absolute goodness, beauty and love —is the Principal to which the soul 


is accessory or subservient, then the Supreme Brahman who is thus an object 
of absolute love leads the soul to Himself. 


§ 143. — However, this would mean in other words that the soul’s 
absolute subservience itself is immeasurable and absolute happiness: but 
this is contradicted by all experience, for we see that literally all spiritual 
beings have one great wish: to be completely independent; compared with 
that, dependence means suffering. And there is the smrti: “All dependence 


means suffering,”3 and in the same line: “Service is called a dog’s way, so 
try to avoid it.”’74 


This attitude reveals the misconceived identification’® of body and 
soul by those who have not learnt that the soul is essentially different from 
the body. For the body, which, as a matter of fact, is a mass in which quali- 
ties, such as the generic structure of man, etc., subsist, is held to be inde- 
pendent and they who are bond to samsara think that the body is the ‘I’.7% 
Whatever misconception one has of one’s own soul, one holds the end of life 
to agree with that. What is pleasure is differently determined according 
to the body for which the soul is mistaken — lion, tiger, boar, man, yaksa, 
raksas, pisdca, god, danava, male, female, etc. — and these different pleasures 
are mutually incompatible. So everything is judged by whatever aim of 
life corresponds to the mistaken identity of the soul. The proper form of 
the soul has, however, knowledge for its one and only form, and is essen- 
tially different from the body, god, etc., and the soul’s essence is that it is 


791, TaittUp. 2, 7, raso vai sah / raso hy evayam labdhvanandi bhavati. 

792. God is beatitudinous in self-contemplation: being his own object; if as such 
he is another’s object there is no difference in his being a beatitudinous object. 

793. Manusmrti 6, 160 a sarvam paravasam duhkham (sarvam atmavasam 
sukham). 

794, Manusmrti 6, 4. 

795.. abhimana-. 

796. ie. the self, soul or atman is confused with empirical ego, 


V. 38 


298 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


subservient to Another. When this conception of the soul as it really is 
has been formed the end of life is held to be that which is in accordance 
with that. The smrti: “The soul is pure knowledge”™ declares that the 
soul’s only form is knowledge. From numerous Srutis of the kind of “the 
Master of all’’?°8 we know that the soul’s sole form is to be subservient to 
the Supreme Spirit. Therefore the wishful misconception of independence 
must be regarded as an erroneous cognition due to karman, just as the wishful 
misconception that the soul is identical with the body of a lion, tiger, etc. 
Consequently it is also due to karman that objects other than the Supreme 
Person are pleasurable. Therefore they are slight and impermanent, while 
the Supreme Person is happiness in Himself, so that this happiness is per- 
manent, immeasurable and absolute —on the authority of the Sruti: “Brah- 
man is joy, Brahman is space;? Brahman is bliss;°° Brahman is real, know- 
ledge, infinite.”801 No other entity other than Brahman is essentially happi- 
ness, and if it happens to be pleasurable, it is impermanent because it is due 
to karman: this has been declared by the venerable Paraéara: “sinful kar- 
man and auspicious karman are called hell or heaven; one and the same 
thing may lead to suffering, pleasure and jealousy and wrath: so for what 
reason has that thing that character?’8 ie., what makes an entity that is 
completely or enduringly pleasure, pain, etc., just that entity? This exclusive 
character is due to good and evil karman. After showing the want of consis- 
tency when we consider a number of persons, in that the pleasure of one is the 
suffering of another, he says that that same inconsistency holds also in one 
and the same person: “That which led to joy now leads again to pain, and 
what led to wrath now leads to peace,8% ie., that any thing is markedly 
pleasure or pain is due to the effects of karman, not to the proper form of 
that thing itself; hence it disappears when an end is put to karman. 


§144. The smrti that you just quoted “all dependence means suffer- 
ing’’®5 declares as a matter of fact that, since there is no mutual relationship 
of principal and subservient terms with entities that are different from the 
Supreme Person, any subservience to something different from Him is suffer- 
ing. In “service is called a dog’s way’’8 it is stated that obedience to one 
who is not worth it is a dog’s way. According to the text: “For He alone 


797. VP. 6, 7, 22. 

798. MahanarUp. 9, 3. 

799. ChUp. 4, 10, 5 (praéno brahma) kam brahma kham brahma (iti), 
800. TaittUp. 3, 6. 

801. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

802. VP. 4, 6, 44 cd. 

803. VP. 4, 6, 45. 

804. VP. 4, 6, 46-47. 

805. Manusmrti 6, 160. 

806. Manusmrti 6, 4, 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 299 


should be worshipped by all always in all stages of life,”® only the Supreme 
Person is worthy of the obedience of all those who know what the true 
nature of the soul is. As the Venerable Lord put it: “When a man serves 
Me through unerring devotion to bhakti, he will pass beyond the gunas and 
become Brahman.”8 This service in the form of bhakti is denoted by the 
word for “knowing” in the Srutis: “He that knows Brahman attains the 
Most-High8 “He that knows this, becomes immortal,8!° knowing Brahman 
he becomes Brahman,’8!! etc. From the specifying text: “He whom He 
chooses may attain Him,’®!2 we understand from the clause: “whom He 
chooses” that one must be elected and that the most beloved one is elected. 
The most beloved of the Lord is he in whom boundless and absolute love for 
the Lord has been inspired: this is stated by the Lord in: “For I am exceed- 
ingly beloved of the knower and he is beloved by Me.’’8!3 Therefore it is 
knowledge which has risen to superior bhakti that is really the means of 
attaining the Lord, as the lord Dvaipayana declares in the Moksadharma by 
way of comment upon all the Upanisads: “His form is not to be beheld and 
no one perceives Him with the eye, only he who has concentrated on his 
soul espies— by bhakti and discrimination8¥4— the proper form of know- 
_ ledge in this life,”®15 ie., after having realized one’s own soul by discrimina- 
tion, one sees the Supreme Spirit by bhakti, sc. one has immediate presenta- 
tion of Him, attains Him: this follows because the meaning is the same as 
in the text: “...but by exclusive bhakti can I...”816 Since bhakti is taken 
as a form of cognition, everything is established. 


§ 145. Considering that there must be people who are at once pro- 
found enough and without professional jealousy and who know how to dis- 
criminate between what is of the essence and what not, I have written for 
them this Summary of the Meaning of the Veda.3"7 


807. MBh.? 

808. BhG. 14, 26. 

809. TaittUp. 2, 1. 

810. TaittAr. 3, 1, 3. 

811. MundUp. 3, 2, 9 (so yo ha vai tat paramam) brahma veda brahmaiva bhavati. 

812. MundUp. 3, 2, 3. 

813. BhG. 7, 17. 

814. dhrti- “discrimination” as according to R.. GBh. ad 6, 25 where he glosses 
buddhya dhrtigrhitaya by vivekavisayayd. 

815. MBh. 12, 230, 68 cd—69 ab (Kumbhakonam ed.). 

816. BhG. 11, 54 bhaktyé tv ananyaya gakya aham evamvidho *rjuna/jraitum 
drastum ca tattvena pravestum ca paramtapa // 

817. Inspired by Yamuna? cf, Agamapramanya stt. 2-3 ye *mi kecana matsarat 
sarvasya durménaséréd narah / gambhirém gunasilinim api giram nindanti nindantu te // 
sadrdsaravicdrakausaladasdpare pare *yasthitah / santah santy anastydvo *pi bahavah 
gamsanti ye madgiram // 


oT 

Ss. : : 

Px Lapharg ee 

we 1 

: =n - pal) 

; > tr. gg SOM" «ven? : ee pn 

tue wes cae : 

A 2 cS erv> + €. 

i 

te J io 2 

. — a - ‘ - > * 

a. a = . Sa 

es bell 

=... x ‘ 

ie a ad 


~ 
é 
ns DS 
i cam 
* ® 
i 
e + 
, ‘ 
i 5, 
‘ ie evn 
. a | ° - 


APPENDIX 


§1. Fragments from Bodhayana’s Vrtti. 


II. 


ina 


IV. 


V. 39 


vrttat karmadhigamad anantaram brahmavividisa — 

“immediately after knowledge of karman has been acquired does 
the desire of knowing brahman arise.” 

=quoted SBh. 1 1,1, °p. 2. 


On idem, following on Fragment I— 

samhitam etac charirakam Jaiminiyena sodasalaksaneneti Sastraika- 
tvasiddhih — 

“since this Sariraka forms one volume with Jaimini’s Sutras in 16 
Chapters, it is proved that both constitute one and the same Sastra.” 
quoted: is len pea. 


On jyotisaé in BrS. 1, 4, 13 (14) jyotisaikesam asaty anne — 
jagadvyadparavarjam samano jyotisa — 

(“the atman is) equal to Light when free from involvement in the 
world’s activities.” 

— quoted 1, 1, 1, p. 79. 


ad BrS. 1, 1, 10 gatisamanyat — 

sata somya tadad sampanno bhavatiti sampattyasampattibhyam etad 
avasiyate — 

“in the text ‘(when a person sleeps) then, my son, he is joined 
with the Existent’? (ChUp. 6, 8, 1) that is decided on the strength of 
joining and disjoining” — Apparently in the same connexion the 
Vrtti quotes BAUp. 4, 3, 21 prajnenatmana parisvaktah ‘ (thus, when 
this person is) embraced by the conscient soul (he knows nothing 
inside or outside)’. 

— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 10. 


ad BrS. 1, 2, 1, sarvatra prasiddhopadesat — 

sarvam khalv asti sarvadtma brahmesah — 

“Brahman is ‘verily everything’ (= ChUp. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv 
idam brahma), ‘the soul of all’ (=SvetUp. 3, 21), ‘the Lord’ 
(= SvetUp. 3, 7 tam tam jnatvamrta bhavanti) .” 

— quoted SBh. 1, 2, 1. 


302 
VI. 


VIL. 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ad BrS. 1, 3, 7 (8) bhumda samprasddad adhy upadesat — 

bhima tv eveti bhuma brahma naémadiparamparayatmana urdhvam 
asyopadesat — 

“according to the text ‘(one should try to know) that bhima (“vast 
one”)’ Brahman is bhiima, for the instruction thereof is, in the 
preceding part, of the atman by the series beginning with nama etc.” 
In other words, ChUp. 7, 2, 3 (and the preceding 7, 1, 3 ff.) bears 
on the atman, for the satya of 7, 15, 5 can be connected with the 
satya of 8, 3 which explicitly bears on the atman; note that brahman 
is interchangeable with atman. 

— quoted SBh. 1, 3, 7. 


ad BrS. 1, 3, 30 (31) ff. madhvddisv asambhavad anadhikaram 
Jaiminih/jyotisi bhdvaic ca/bhavam tu Badarayano ’sti hi— 

asti hi madhvddisu sambhavo brahmana eva sarvatra nicayyatvat — 
“it is possible that (the gods are qualified for) the madhuvidya ete. 
for Brahman is to be sought for in everything.” 

— quoted SBh. 1, 3, 32. 


§2. Vakya and Dramidabhasya. 


A. Fragments possibly from BAUp.Bhasya of Dramida. 


if, 


be 


IIa. 


(Unconnected) phalasambibhatsaya karmabhir atmanam piprisanti 
sa prito ‘lam phalaya iti $dstramaryadé — 

“If they, motivated by the desire to be provided with the fruits, are 
anxious to please the atman with acts, then, when he is pleased, 
he suffices to bestow those fruits — thus disposes scripture.” 
—SBh. 2, 2, 3 has the variant phalavidhitsaya “motivated by the 
desire to ordain those fruits”: lectio facilior for °bibhats°. 

— quoted Ved. §124; SBh. 2, 2, 3. 


ad BAUp. 3, 8, 9 etasya va aksarasya prasasane gargi suryacandra- 
masau vidhrtau tisthatah ete.; cf. also TaittUp. 2, 8— 

asyajnayd dhavati vayuh/nadyah sravanti/tena krtastmano jalasayah 
samada iva mesavisarpitam kurvanti — 

“At his behest the wind runs, the rivers flow; the oceans, shown 
their limits by him, jump crazily like (rutting) rams.” 

—quoted Ved. § 124, 


Apparently same context as II — 

tatsamkalpanibandhana hime loka na cyavante na sphutante / 
svasdsandnuvartinam jndtva karunyat sa bhagavan vardhayeta 
vidvan karmadaksah — 


Ti. 


IV. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 303 


“For all these worlds, being supported by his will, do not collapse, 
nor do they fly apart. When he knows that one follows his com- 
mand then, mercifully, the Venerable Lord, who knows, who is 
equal to the task, will make one prosper.” 

—cf. BAUp. quoted in II; for the second half compare Soy 20: 

— quoted Ved. § 124. 


Unconnected. 

Bh. rnam ha vai jayata iti Sruter.... yady api avaddnastutiparam 
vakyam tathapi nasata stutir upapadyate. 

“On account of the éruti: “There shall indeed be debt ....”, even 


though the statement be meant (only) to praise the offering, yet 
there can be no praise if the object is non-existent.” 

— Reference is to SatBr. 1, 7, 2, 1-6, ending tad avadinam nama; in 
the context avadana has the general sense of offering, to cover both 
yaga and homa. It is clear that Dramida argues that the arthavada 
must establish the objects referred to, even though it have the 
function of praising the object, for without object no praise: in 
other words, arthavada portions are not less significant than pure 
vidhi portions. 


— quoted Ved. § 118. 
Fragments from ChUpVakya and Bhasya. 


(Unconnected) — 


V. upanisannatvad upanisat — Bh. gahane hiyam vidya samni- 
vista — Vamanatika gahane brahmany wpanisanna — 

“The term upanisat derives from the fact that it is put down.” 
“For this meditation is contained in the mysterious One.” 

“It is put down in the mysterious, i.e. the brahman.” 

— quoted Venkatanatha, Tattvatika I, p. 34. 


ad ChUp. 1, 6, 6 hiranmayah puruso drsyate — 

V. hiranmaya iti ripasamanyac candramukhavat — 

Bh. na mayad atra vikéram adaya prayujyate / anarabhyatvad 
atmanah — 

“ ‘Golden’ is used because of similarity of colour; it is a comparison 
of the type candramukha “moon-like face”. 

“The suffix °maya- is here not used in the sense of modification: 
that would not agree with the fact that the atman is not caused,” 
— quoted Ved. §135; TatpD. p. 156, 


304 


VI. 


VII. 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


ad ChUp. 1, 6, 6 atha ya eso ’ntardditye hiranmayah puruso 
V. hiranmayah puruso drsyata iti prajfiah sarvantarah syat / 
lokakémavyapadesat tathodayat papmanim — 

“In the text ‘the golden person is seen’ it is the conscient One, 
entered into all who is meant: this follows from the fact that the 
world’s desire is mentioned and that he transcends the evil things.” 
— “the world’s desire” cf. ChUp. 1, 7, 6 sa esa ye caitasmad arvaiico 
lokas tesiém ceste manusyakamanam ca; “he transcends all evil ac- 
cording to 1, 6, 7; that he enters everything is expressed in 1, 7.” 
— quoted Ved. § 135. 


In the same connexion the objection and reply — 

V. syat tad ripam krtakam anugrahartham / taccetasadm aisvaryat / 
rupam vatindriyam antahkaranapratyaksanirdesat — 

— “Could it be that that body [or: his body] is artificial, meant as 
a favour (ie, to favour meditation)? For he has power over their 
minds.” 

—“Rather is it suprasensible, for it is said that it is evident to the 
inner faculty.” 

—that there is a purvapaksa — so Dramida — follows from initial 
syadt; va in the sense of viparyaya, cf. BrS. 2, 2, 41; krtaka- 
“artificial, make-believe, illusory.” 

Bh. na va méyamitram / anjasaiva visvasrjo ripam/tat tu na 
caksusa grahyam / manasa tv akalusena sidhanantaravata grhyate — 
na caksusa grhyate napi vacé manasa tu visuddhena iti Sruteh / na 
hy aripaya devataya rupam wpadisyate / yathabhitavadi hi 
Sdstram / méharajanam vasah — vedaham etam purusam mahaintam 
ddityavarnam tamasah parastéd iti prakaranantaranirdeéac ca 
saksinah — 

“No, the body is not made of maya: the body of the Creator of all 
can only be natural. It can however not be grasped by the eye; 
but it is grasped by the mind which, when freed from impurity, 
disposes of another means of perception: this follows from the gruti: 
“It is not grasped by the eye, nor by the word, but by the mind 
if pure.” For scripture will not teach that a disembodied deity 
possesses a body: scripture states things just as they are. Other 
contexts also set forth that he is a witness (i.e. embodied person): 
“(that Person has a body like) a saffron-coloured garment” “I know 
that great Person, with the colour of the sun, beyond darkness.” 
— the Srutis are respectively MundUp. 3, 1, 8; BAUp. 2, 3, 6 and 
SvetUp. 3, 7. 

— quoted Ved. § 135, 


VIII. 


IX. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 305 


ad ChUp. 1, 6, 7 kapydsam pundarikam — 

[S. remarks that the Vakyakara enumerates 6 possible meanings of 
kapydsam, and rejects three: 1. ddityamandalam, 2. markata- 
prstham, 3. %sadvikdsitam; and accepts three 1.] ddityaksiptam 
grimattvat “(splendour) emitted by the sun, for (the lotus) is 
resplendent” [2. naldsanam, 3. jalabhuvam.] 

Bh. comments on second set of three with - 

gambhirdmbhah .... “deep water.” 

—cf. Ramanuja’s description gambhiraémbhahsamudbhita-sumrsta- 


nélaravikaravikdsita-, corresponding to the acceptable renderings 3, 
2 and 1. 


— quoted TatpD. p. 326. 


V. sakrt pratyayam kuryéc chabdarthasya krtatvat praydjddivat / 
siddham tipadsanasabdat — 

“One should conceive this idea just once, because thereby the sense 
of the scripture has already been accomplished completely, as in the 
case of the Praydja’s etc.” “No, (what has been said, viz. that it is 
repetitive) is proved by the use of the word updsana.” 

—R. interprets both sentences as purvapaksa and siddhanta, as 
would also follow the Vakyakara’s definition of abhydsa. This 
quotation most probably precedes in order that on updsana (see X). 
— The meaning of the purvapaksin’s reference is this: the praydja’s 
are a group of accessory sacrifices in the darSapurnamasa rites; to 
them correspond 6 pradhdnaydgas, so that it would follow that to 
each pradhdnayaga a praydja is to be joined, but according to tantra 
(the rule by which an accessory is to be performed only once for an 
entire group of principals) the praydja is performed only once; 
tantra is defined by Sabarasvamin KMS. 11, 1, 1 tatra yat sakrt 
krtam bahtinaim upakaroti tat tantram ity ucyate. 

— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 9 


ad Ch. Up. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv idam brahma tajjalan iti Santa 
upasita — 

V. vedanam upasanam syat /tadvisaye Sravanat /upaisanam sydd 
dhruvanusmrtir / darsanaic ca — 

“Meditating would be knowing: for this follows from the Srutis on 
this topic. Meditating then would be constant rememorization also, 
for it is representing visually.” 

— connexion with ChUp. uncertain; so is their suggested coherence. 
The term dhruvénusmrti is derived from ChUp. 7, 26, 2 (infra). 
The suggested sense of darsandc is according to Ramanuja’s expli- 


306 


aly 


All. 


XIII. 


J. A.B. VAN BUITENEN 


cation, but not certain. No comment of Dramida. 
— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, pp. 9 and 10. 


ad ChUp. 3, 14, 1 sarvam khalv idam brahma.... yathakratur 
asmiml loke puruso bhavati tathetah pretya bhavati — 

V. atmetyeva tu grhniyat / sarvasya tannispatteh — 

“One must only realize that (all this) is the atman; (then he 
becomes that which is thought) for all is fulfilled in the dtman.” 
— connexion uncertain but probable; no comment of Dramida. 

— quoted Ved. §.108; SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 18; p. 116 (partly). 


V. parinamas tu sydd dadhydadivat — 

“there is an inner causal change, as in the case of curds turning 
into butter, etc.” 

— Most probably in connexion with the sadvidya ChUp. 6, 1, 4 and 
explaining the word vikdra-; cf. Intr. Chapter IV, ref. is to ChUp. 6, 6, 
—No comments of Dramida quoted, but it is stated that the author 
of the vrtti on the Vakya, doubtless identical with the bhdsya, 
adheres to the same view. 

— quoted Bhaskara, BrS. 1, 4, 25. 


ad ChUp. 7, 26, 2 ahdarasuddhau sattvasuddhih / sattvasuddhau 
dhruva smrtih / smrtilambhe sarvagranthinam vipramoksah — 

V. tallabdhir vivekavimokabhyasakriyakalyananavasidanuddhar- 
sebhyah sambhavan nirvacanic ca/.... jatyasrayanimittadustad 
annat kayasuddhir vivekah / vimokah kaméanabhisvangah / aram- 
bhanasamsilanam punahpunar abhydsah / pancamahdayajnadyanus- 
thanam Saktitah kriya / satyadrjavadayddanadhimsanabhidhyah kalya- 
nani / desakalavaisamyaic chokavastvadyanusmrtes ca tajjanyam 
dainyam abhdsvaratvam manaso ’vasadah / tadviparyayo ’nava- 
sddah /tadviparyayajé tustir uddharsah / tadviparyayajo ’nud- 
dharsah — 

—“That dtman is attained by distinction, detachment, exercise, 
rite, moral virtues, non-despondency, non-contentment: for this 
agrees (with the Sruti) and is also explicitly stated. Distinction is 
purity of body through nourishment that is pure in kind, provenance, 
and without [spoiling] accidents. Detachment is ceasing to long for 
desired things. Exercise is repeated meditation on the arambhana- 
Sruti. Rite is to capacity performing of the five major sacrifices ete. 
The moral virtues are veridicity, honesty, compassionateness, 
generosity, non-offensiveness, freedom from desires. Despondency 
is the misery, the dullness of mind caused by the vicissitudes in 
space and time and by the memory of painful things etc.; its opposite 


XIV. 


XV. 


XVI. 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 307 


is non-despondency. Contentment is the satisfaction caused by the 
opposites of the above; non-contentment is caused by the opposite 
of satisfaction.” 

— Connexion with this ChUp. passage in its entirety uncertain; Bh. 
has commented on the passage and given references to corresponding 
érutis. R. mentions one reference to BhG. explicitly: tadbhava- 
bhavitah BhG. 7, 26 ad abhydasa. 

— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, pp. 11-2. 


ad ChUp. 8, 1, 1 tasmin yad antas tad anvestavyam tad vava 
V. tasmin yad antar iti kimavyapadesah — 

“In the clause ‘that which is therein’ reference is made to the 
desires.” 

— quoted Ved. $106; SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 80. 


ad ChUp. 8, 1, 1 (daharavidya) — 

V. yuktam / tadgunakopasanat — 

“(Also with regard to the sadvidya) it is appropriate; for medita- 
tion is on an object that has those qualities” — 

Bh. yady api saccitto na nirbhugnadaivatam gunagaram manasanu- 
dhavet tathapy antarguném eva devatam bhajate — 

“Although one, when meditating on the sadvidyad, does not pursue 
with one’s thought the multitude of qualities that are negative and 
divine, still one lovingly approaches the Deity as having inner 
qualities.” 

— Dramida’s comment probably not directly on this Vakya, cf. 
Ramanuja: vydkhydtam ca Dramidacaryena vidyavikalpam vadata. 
— Rendering of Dr. not certain; R. differs. I take it that nirbhugna 
refers to the qualities of the Daharavidya apahatapdpma etc., which 
are negative, and daivata to the qualities satyakamah satya- 
samkalpah, which are strictly divine. That the passage was obscure 
to early philosophers is proved by Sarvajfiatman’s diverging inter- 
pretation (infra). 

—quoted Ved. § 88; SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 79. 


ad ChUp. 8, 1, 6 ya thdtmanam anuvidya vrajanty etams ca satyan 
kamams tesim sarvesu lokesu kamacaro bhavati — 

Bh. devatisdyujyad asarirasyapi devatavat sarvarthasiddhih syat — 
“Because (the soul) will be united with the deity, therefore, though 
being without a body, it will find all its ends accomplished, as if 
it were the deity itself.” 


308 


XVII. 


XVUI. 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


— connexion uncertain, but suggested by R’s quotation of the éruti 
in the immediate sequel. 
— quoted SBh. 1, 1, 1, p. 79. 


ad ChUp. 8, 12, 1.... dtto vai sasgarirah priyadpriyabhyam / na vai 
sasartrasya satah priydpriyayor apahatir asti/asariram vava 
santam na priyapriye sprsatah — 
Bh. yathaé loke raja pracuradandastike ghore ’narthasamkate ’pi 
pradese vartamano *pi vyajanadyavadhitadeho dosair na sprsyate 
*bhipretams ca lokan punar api palayisyati bhogéms ca gandhadin 
visvajanabhogyan dhdarayati tathdsau lokesgvaro bhramatsva- 
sdmarthyacamaro dosair na sprsyate raksati ca lokan brahmalokadin 
bhogams ca visvajanopabhogyan dharayati — 

“Just as a king on earth who, though living in a place teeming with 
mosquitoes and infested with horrible beasts of prey, yet keeping 
his body clean with ointments etc. is not touched by infections and 
will time and again protect the beloved countries and support the 
objects of experience, smell etc., that are within everybody’s reach 
to enjoy, similarly He, the king of the worlds, waving the fan of his 
omnipotence, is not touched by defects and protects the worlds 
from the Brahmaloka onwards, and supports the objects of 
experience that are to be enjoyed by all mankind.” 

— If R.’s reference is right, the passage patently attacks the view that 
the Sruti referred to declares that the Supreme Being has no body. 
— quoted SBh. 2, 1, 14. 


C. Indirect evidence from quotations. 


Sarvajhatman’s references in Samksepasariraka III, 217 ff.2 
— dtreyavikyam api samvyavahadramatram 

karyam samastam iti nah kathayimbabhiva / 
satkadryavadavisayo na hi dosaraésir 

mayamaye bhavitum utsahate virodhat // 217 // 
kanddadarsanasamasrayadosarasir 

duran nirasta tha samvyavaharamatram / 
vedantabhimikusalo munir atrivamsyas 

tenaha kéryam iha samvyavaharamatram // 218 // 
sasthaprapathakanibaddham udiritam yat 

tat satyam eva khalu satyasamasrayatvat / 


1. For the translation see Intr. Ch. It, p.. 35. 


xXTXa. 


XIXb. 


V. 40 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 309 


tatraiva yat punar uvaca samudraphena- 

drstintapurvakam ado vyavahéradystya // 219 //. 
pirvam vikaram upavarnya SsanaihSanais tad- 

drstim visrjya nikatam parigrhya tasmat / 
sarvam vikaram atha samvyavahdramatram 

advaitam eva pariraksati vakyakarah // 220 // 
antargunad bhagavati paradevateti 

pratyagguneti bhagavan api Bhasyakarah / 
Gha sma yat tad tha nirgunavade. 

samgacchate na tu punah sagunapravade // 221 // 


Bhaskara, Brahmasutrabhasya 1, 1, 3 ad finem gives as an example 
of true knowledge to be gained from “false” instruction a parable 
that is substantially identical with one quoted by Suresvara and 
ascribed to Dramida (see b.): 

—drsyate ca loke mithydvisaya upadesas tativajndnarthaparah- 
yatha kila kascid rajaputras taskarair Gniya nisddarajdiya niveditas 
tena casau putratvena parigrhito mlecchacarabhiratir evaste / tam 
rajamantrt tatrdgatya mlecchajdtyanugunam evacaram kamcid 
anuvarnya pascddbhite rajaputro ’si na mlecchaputra iti grahite 
samastamlecchacaram hitva svaripam eva pratipadyate. 

“In profane experience, too, it is found that an instruction dealing 
with something false leads to knowledge of the truth; as, for exam- 
ple: a certain prince was abducted by robbers, and brought to a 
Nisdda chieftain; and, adopted by the chieftain as his son, the prince 
lived contentedly as a barbarian. Then a minister of the king came 
there and observed how the prince followed a way of life that was 
typical of the barbarian race; after some time when the minister 
had made him understand that he was the son of a king, not of 
a barbarian, he abandoned the barbarian way of life and knew his 
true self.” 

— Dvivedin’s edition om. dniya after taskarair and bhiite after pascad, 
both restored from Madras Govt. MSS. Library R. 6123. 

—kila at the beginning and iti at the end would indicate that the 
story is a quotation; none of 6 MSS consulted, however, add any- 
thing in support. 


Suregvara’s story of the prince reared by hunters, BAUpBhasya- 
varttika 2, 1, 506 ff. Anandagiri ad 506 introduces the akhyayika 
with: tattvamddivakyam aikyaparam tacchesah Srstyadivakyam ity 
atra Dravidaicaryapranitim akhydyikam avatdrayati — 
dcaksate tatraé caitra kecid akhyadyikam subham / 
yathabhilasitartho ’yam yathé sambhavyate sphutah /'/ 506 // 


310 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 
yatha hi kascit prag asic cakravartino suto yuva / 
vyddhiyogopaghataider unmattah samapadyata // 507 // 
dhvastarajabhimanah san mugdho vanam upeyivan / 
vyddhaih parigrhitas ca vyddho ’smity abhimanyate // 508 // 
tatkarma tadalamkarah kalena mahatabhavat / 
dhvastarajatvasamskaro vasan sabarasadmani // 509 // 
Subhausadhyupayogac ca svasthadhth samajayata / 
svasvabhavanurodhac ca vyaddhebhyo vyutthitatmadhih //510 // 
tacchilartipakarmabhyo vydvrttadhisanah svatah / 
kevalasmrtyabhavac ca na vyidhatvam jahaty asau // 511 // 
tajjatikarmasambandhatattvavit tatpituh sakha // 512 // 
pravrttya karmana jatya cakravartyucitais tatha / 
laksanai rajaputratvam yatha kaéscit prabodhayet // 513 // 
labdhamatrasmrtih so ’tha rajismity avabodhatah / 
badhitva svam asambodham hitvaé vyidhatvam Gtmanah // 514 // 
rajyabhisekam Gpnoti prapya simhasanam pituh / 
avaptardjastinutvat tatpraptau napi cestate // 515 // 
mohadhyastétmavyddhatvan mohadhvamsatirekatah / 
rajaputratvasampraptau nanyat kimcid apeksate // 516 // 
yatha tathayam brahmaiva brahmasambodhamatratah / 
buddhindriyasariradiv Gtmatvam pratipedivan // 517 // 


[“In support of the view that the assertion “Thou art that” states 
identity and that the passages dealing with creation etc. (ChUp. 6, 2, 1 ff.) 
are subordinate to that assertion, he introduces a parable that has been 
composed by Dravidacarya.”] 


“In this connexion some tell a beautiful tale to bring out clearly the 
meaning which is intended here. 


Formerly there was a young prince, the son of an emperor, and, due 
to an infection of some disease, he went mad. Having lost the notion that 
he was a king, he made for the woods in his bewilderment. He was adopted 
by hunters and thought that he was a hunter himself: and for a long time 
he acted and dressed as they did, living in a tribal settlement without 
any memory of his royal status. Then, by the beneficial use of medicinal 
herbs, his mind was cured and, in accordance with his real nature, his self- 
esteem rose beyond the level of hunters. Still, although his mind turned 
away from their habits, appearance and activities, he did not give up the 
hunters’ way of life for his memory alone had not yet returned. By some 
report a friend of his father’s, who knew what his status and duties 
were in reality, got to know him and approached him without guile: and 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 311 


as he himself had concluded from the other’s carriage, acts, nobility and the 
marks of imperial stature, he told him that he was a prince. By knowing 
that he was a prince his memory was restored: his ignorance about himself 
was superseded and he gave up what was of the hunter in himself. Having 
arrived at his father’s throne he underwent the ceremony of the royal 
consecration, and when he had been restored as a prince he deviated from 
his position never more. Having regained his princely status by the mere 
difference that the disappearance of his illusion made (for it was illusion that 
his notion of being a hunter was suggested to his real self), he had nothing 
left to desire. Likewise this person, who is really Brahman, is led by his 
mere unconsciousness of Brahman to attribute to his mind, senses, body etc. 


XIXc. The same story is referred to in Samkhyasitra 4, 1 rajaputravat tat- 
tvopadesat “on account of the instruction about the true nature, as 
in the case of the royal prince” and described by Vijnanabhiksu, 
Samkhyapravacanabhasya ad loc. 

—atreyam dakhydyika-kascid rajaputro gandarksajanmana puran 
nihsaritah gabarena kenacit posito *ham Sabara ity abhimanyamana 
aste / tam jivantam jnatva kascid amatyah prabodhayati na tvam 
gabaro rajaputro’ siti / sa yatha jhatity eva candalabhimanam 
tyaktva tattvikam rajabhivam evalambate rajaham asmiti, evam 
COU aes 

—“The story about this is as follows: a certain royal prince was 
abducted from his town by a bear and reared by a tribesman and 
he lived in the mistaken conviction that he himself was a tribesman. 
Having discovered that the prince was alive a minister revealed to 
him that he was not a tribesman but a royal prince. And even as 
he gave up at once his notion that he was an outcaste and was 
restored to his true nature of royalty with the true knowledge: “T 
am a king,” in a like manner etc...” 

— gandarksa is further unknown; it is either a bear characterized 
by heavy jowls, or a rhinoceros (ganda), the latter meaning being 
less plausible. 


Loi Ae ial rr 


4 
<= 


s «f 
F , Boe, bry Wh tAS 734, hepa = 


INDEX I 


NOTABLE SANSKRIT TERMS 


amSa 44; 48; 187; 192 asa 290 

amsin 44; 48 asat 3 ff. 

akhandakala 213 asamkucita 237 

anga 285 asatkaryavada 41; 208 
acit 183 ahamkara 193; 224; 231 
acidvastu 194 ahimsa 248 

aja 9; 253 akara 187; 212 

aja 9; 253 akasa 193; 221; 223 ff.; 231 
animan 11 atman 10; 12; passim; 235 
anu 234 atmaguna 248 

adrsta 280 atmamananasila 183 
advitiya 9; 11; 47; 190 atmavastu 239 
advaitavada 188 atmavalokana 286 
adhikara 271 adesa 67; 190 
adhikarin 269 adestr 190 

adhisthatr 9; 11; 190; 207 adharadheyabhava 235 
adhisthana 11; 209; 216 apas 7; 193; 233 
adhyayana 285 abhu 5; 10 

adhyasa 201; 212 a-YAT 11; 194 
anavastha 216 ayatana 11; 194 
anirvacaniyapratyanika 217 arambhana 11; 12 
anudhyana 236; 248 arambhanadhikarana 4; 46 
anumana 206 arjava 248 

antaryamin 185 asrama 184 

anna 7; 9; 193; 231 Asa 290 

anyatahsiddha 202 itikartavyata 184 
anyasadhana 202 istapurta 278 

anvaya 63 utpattyasambhavadhikarana 38 
anvitabhidhana 269 udaraguna 213 
apahatapapman 188 uddesya 270f. 

api 290 upakrama 66; 200 
apurusartha 234 upapanna 210 

apurva 270; 277; 279; 280 upasamhara 66; 200 
apauruseya 50; 196; 253; 294 upastha 224 

appa 235 upadanakarana 233 
abhaya 281 upadhi 15; 42; 184; 221 
abhimana 185; 212; 215; 297 upasana 57; 239; 252 
abhihitanvaya 269 ekajivavada 216 
abhyupagamavada 63 ekarati 238 

ambhamsi 224 ekarasa 238 

arthavada 51; 54f. 57; 213; 267 ekavakyata 200 
avastha 205 ekasvabhava 238 
avidya 44; 185; 209f.; 216; 249 aitadatmya 195 
avyakta 233 aisvarya 183 


asubha 184 aupadanaka 280 


314 J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


kapi 290 tattva 35; 216 

kapyasa 290 tanu 137; 239 

kam 290 tantra 20 

kara 224 tanmatra 224; 231 

karanamantra 284 tapas 9; 10; 248 

karira 274 tamasa 224; 252 

karman 16; 32; 184; 249 tiryane 231 

karmayoga 281 tejas 7; 9; 183; 193; 224; 233 

karmendriya 223 taijasa 224 

kalacika 282 trikona 203 

kalyanaguna 183; 184; 213 tvac 224 

kastha 213 dama 248 

karya 51ff.; 267 ff.; daya 248 

karyata 269 daharavidya 26; 38; 68; 246; 258 

karyatva 270 daivata 246 

kidrgsa 217 dvyatmakataé/tva 204; 227; 228; 244 

kirtana 248 dharma 35; 198 

krti 270 f. dharmabhutajfana 185, 215 

krtyuddesya 279 ff. dhatu 210 

kriyamananuvadin 284 dhrti 299 

kriya 272 dhairya 183 

ksama 248 dhyananiyogavada 56 

ksanti 248 namaskrti 248 

ksetrajfia 265 namarupa 184; 193 

ksepartha 217 narayana 184; 187; 260 

gandha 224 nasika 224 

guna 55 nityah 185 

gunavrtti 64 nimittakarana 233 

grhastha 184 nimesa 213 

gotva 203 niyantr 236 

gauh 20; 198 niyoga 53; 272 f£.; 

caksus 224 niyojya 273 ff. 

caturhotr 279 niradhisthana 209 

cit 183 niradhisthanabhrama 209 

cidvastu 194 niravadya 196; 232 

cetana 215 niralambana 209 

caitanya 215 nirbhugna 27; 246 

codana 51; 277; 279 nirvana 239 

chandas 294 nirvanamaya 238 

japa 285 nirvikalpaka 202; 204 

jahadajahallaksana 63 nirvikar(y)a 196; 232 

jihva 224 nivrtti 252 

jiva 200; 231 nisprapancikarananiyogavada 53; 56 

jivatman 184; 193 nyaya 211; 280 

jaatr 218 pada 210; 293 

jana 32; 59ff.; 61f; 183f.; 198; 215; 218; padasamghata 293 
passim padartha 193 

jnanabhramsa 185 para 184 

jhanasvarupa 186; 212 parajyotis 187 

jnapti 61; 201 paratattva 187 

jneya 218 parabrahma 187 


tajjalan 242 paramapurusartha 53; 234 


paramavyoman 183 
paramatman 184; 187 
paramartha 57; 245 
parardha 213 

parinama 15; 17; 26; 186; 209 
parinamavada 26; 186 
parinispanna 51; 267 

patha 213 

padau 224 

payu 224 

purusa 183; 231 
purusottama 187 
purusartha 234 
prthaksiddhyanarha 196; 235 
prthaksthitipravrttyanarha 195 
prthaganupalambha 227 
prakarana 66 ff. 

prakara 196; 203; 227 
prakaraprakaribhava 183; 235 
prakasa 215 

prakrti 193; 196; 215; 231; 233 
prakrti (2) 194 
prakrtyartha 279 

pratijna 67; 190 

pratistha 12; 54; 269 
pratyaksa 202; 206 
pratyaksadyaparicchedya 197 
pratyaya 194 

pradhana 224 

prapanca 187 

prapatti 237 

prabhu 278 

pramatr 188 

pramana 197; 206; 220 
pravrtti 252 

prasasana 190 

pranin 215 

bala 183 

buddhi 231; 238; 252 
buddhindriya 223 
buddhyutpatti 268 
brahmacarin 184 

brahman passim; 239 
brahmana 285 
bhakti 184; 237; 239 passim 
bhaktiyoga 237; 249 
bhagavan 18 

bhava 265 

bhavana 265 

bhavanatraya 265 

bhasa 294 

bhasya 24; 31 


VEDARTHASAMGRAHA 315 


bhinnabhinnatva 227 
bhuta 224; 231 
bhutadi 224 

bhutala 219 
bhedabhedavada 42; 188 
bhogya 245 
mat/mant 230 
matu(p) 62; 230 
matvarthiyapratyaya 230 
manas 5; 223f.; 231 
manusya 231 
manomaya 283 
mantra 51; 55; 213; 267 
mala 243 

mahat 193; 231; 288 f. 
mahattattva 224; 283 
mahabhuta 193; 221 
mahasala 7 

mithya 190; 216 
muni 183 

muhurta 213 

mula 194 

mauna 183 

YAJ 272 

yajana 272 

yatana 248 

yatha 206 

yaga 279 

yukti 206 

rasa 224; 238 

rajasa 224 

rupa 7; 187; 224; 243 
laksana 59; 203 
laksana 59 ff.; 200 
laksanartha 59 
laksita 219 

linadi 272 

linga 293 

lila 192 

vana 11; 207 
vanaprastha 184 
vandana 248 

varna 184 
varnasrama 184 
vastu 194 
vastusvarupa 228 
vakya 24 ff.; 31 
vakyabheda 55; 284 
vakyasabda 293 
vakyasesa 280 
vakyartha 293 

vac 11ff.; 224 


316 


vayu 193; 224 
vasana 215; 220 


vikara 17; 47; 191; 196; 205; 233; 234 


vikasa 233 f. 


vidhi 51 ff.; 57; 213; 267; 277; 285 


vibhu 221 

viyat 193 
viyadadhikarana 193 
vivarta 15; 42; 206; 209 
vivartavada 26; 42 
VIS 260 

visistavidhi 55; 284 
visesana 59; 198 
visesanartha 59 
visnu 183; 260 
virya 183 

vrksa 11; 207 

vrtti 24 

vedana 239; 255 
vedabahya 261 

vesa 248 

vestita 237 
vaikarika 224 
vaibhava 187; 229 
vyakta 233 
vyatireka 63 
vyavasthita 226 
vyavahara 31; 37; 208 
vyavaharahetu 227 
vyapaka 183; 236 
vyapin 183 
vyutpatti 196 

Sakti 183; 187 

Sabda 50 ff.; 224; 268 
Sabdapramana 50 ff. 
Sabdadvaita 15 
Sama 248 

Sarira 187; 239 
Sarirasariribhava 183 
Sastra 285 


Sesa 17; 44; 48; 183; 239 


SesaSayin 183 

Sesin 44; 48; 183; 198 
Sodhanavakya 58; 198 
Sauca 248 

Srotra 223 ff, 


J. A. B. VAN BUITENEN 


sadgunya 183 
samvedana 228 

samsarga 239 

samsara 239 

samsrsta 184 

samskara 293 

samsthana 192; 227; 230 
samketa 196 

samketayitr 269 
samkucita 185 

samkoca 233 f. 

samghata 224 

sat 3 ff.; 67; 187; 193; 207 
satkaranavada 18 
satkaryavada 18; 25; 190 
satya 14; 61; 190 
satyakama 189 

satyatva 61 
satyasamkalpa 189; 195; 234 
sadasadanirvacaniya 210 
sadvidya 3 ff. 

samnyasin 184 
samastaheyapratyanika 196 
sarga 239 

sattvika 224 

sadhana 276 

sadhya 206; 273; 276 
sadhyavikala 206 
samanadhikaranya 65; 187; 200 
samanyatodrsta 207 
sasna 203 

suksma 205 

suri 185 

stuti 248 

stotra 285 

sthiila 205 

sparsa 224 

smrti 248 

svabhava 185 
svayamprakasa 202 
svarupa 183 f.; 204; 233 
SvarUpanirupanadharma 186; 198 
Svarga 273 ff. 
svargakama 269; 273 ff. 
heya 184; 234 

homa 279 


INDEX I 


ANCIENT INDIAN AUTHORS REFERRED TO OUTSIDE THE TEXT 


Annambhatta 203; 208; 293 
Anandagiri 19; 27; 235 
Appaya Diksita 216 

Atreya (= Tanka qv.) 25f. 
Atreya (=Tanka) 28 
Upavarsa 19; 20-24 

Audulomi 28 

Kapardi 18; 29; 251 

Kumarila 39; 40; 56; 220; 267; 284 
Kuresa 23 

Kullika 236 

Krtakotikavi 23 

Guhadeva 18; 29; 261 

Jaimini 21; 33; 39; 57 
Tanka 18, 24-30; 251; 290 
Tankacarya 27 

Devasvamin 22f. 

Dramida 18; 24-30; 54; 195; 251; 290 
Dravida 27 

Dharmaraja 63 f.; 209 
Nrsimhasramin 25 

Padmapada 21; 63 
Prapaficahrdayakara 20; 22 f. 
Prabhakara 39-51; 270 
Badarayana 15; 21; 24; 28; 38 
Bodhayana 18-24; 29; 250 
Brahmadatta 23; 25 
Brahmanandin (Tanka) 25; 28 
Bhartrprapafica 25; 29 
Bhartrmitra 28 


Bhartrhari 25 

Bhavadasa 22 

Bharuci 18; 29; 251 

Bhaskara 15f.; 19f.; 23; 25-27; 29; 38; 42; 
43; 183; 188; 221 ff. 

Mandanamisra 41f. 

Madhusudana Sarasvati 26; 60 

Madhva 1; 23; 36; 244 

Yamuna 15; 24-27; 37f.; 42-48; 62; 183; 249; 
299 

Yadavaprakasa 188 

Ramananda 19 

Ramanuja 4; 11; 15 passim 

Vacaspati 217 

Vimuktatman 42; 202; 211 

Venkathanatha 20; 23; 29; 32; 37 

Vedantadesika, see pr. 

Vyasa 38; 197 

Sankara 15£; 18-21; 23; 25; 29; 35f.; 38; 
40-42; 49; 53; 57; 59f.; 62-56; 183; 188; 
199; 201; passim 

Sabarasvamin 19f.; 22f.; 39; 284; 293 

Salikanatha 40; 42; 204; 273; 275; 276; 277 

Srinivasa 37; 213; 215 

Srivatsankamisra 24 

Sarvajhatman 25f.; 29; 42; 58; 60; 63 

Sudarsanasuri 23; 29; 63; passim 

Suresvara 21; 27; 63 

Hamsayogin 27 


ADDENDUM 


The emendation proposed in Introduction, note 73 (sampraddyah / atah samisritah 
for Dvivepr1n’s impossible sampraddyamatah) is to be rejected in favour of the reading 
sampradéydgatah found in the oldest MS of Bhaskara’s Brahmasitrabhasya, the palm- 
leaf grantha, R 6123 of the Madras Government Sanskrit Manuscripts Library; 5 other 
MSS consulted have Dviveptn’s lectio. The passage now reads: “This [sc. parinaéma- 
paksah], being the traditional view-point, has been adopted by the Authors of the 
Vakya and the Vrtti on the Chandogya”, 


p. 73, n. 
81, 
95, 


99, 
101, 
105, 
120, 
133, 
158, 


Ot 


A2 

yasyatma sariram 

malapratyanikanantajhananandaikasvaripam svabhavikanavadhikatisaya- 
parimito... 

sariram 

eva hi brahmavyatiriktatvena 

yatha karyantaranvitam 

delete danda 

add danda after svarad iti 

add danda before manomayah 


e 


Date Due 


PK3861 .R3 LO50=. 
Ramanuja, Founder of the sect. 
Ramanuja's Vedarthasamgraha. 


R3 1 


Ramana, 1077-1 


i) 


Ht 


ill iwi 


0240 
NIVERSETY® 


eetetets 


reas 


yrs 


= 
co 


teers 


ae 


Cape 


rierh 


ah 


eee tee: 


ee 


Sten 
axe 


Seereres 
+ 
7 


ee 


TAT sr 
ei Tt 


+) 


a 


stdidisraty 


: He | 
i sriiiesees Hine 
: ca 
rate igtenehg ; 

ta f t 

t te fis 
a HE a 
i aa i i 


Saree 


sa 


7} 
TH 


a s : 
the! i rid 


ete 
eet 


i 
ait 


tr 
ete 


tyagsts 


ee 
f i i 


aintets! 


Be rary 
4+ + + 
er 
+ ee tet yt 
seketerrteaseat 
tie i: 
= 
ante +: eerie 
_ 74 we rat 
rer perer.rer pietot 
. = ~ 
eat 4 Meshes 
; ratte 
‘ fi 
= 4 Rr 
ers ysex 
Sree iy 
eS 


tS 
ward 


aes 
i ; ‘ tina 
Naat risieiteith it gi alice 


if te a af 


ory 


= m wa. 
Soprespriarerarnenrnk 
cor btitsesqeaprsess 


ares 


